An Etymological Dictionary of the English Language
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Internet Archive <https://archive.org/details/etymologicaldict0000unse_h1z8>. Public domain.

pa EACLE NINES DNL LNA ATE TEP AT a LTO AOE a OA OF LO EDEL Rin NLL ALIS LOO A COATES


& Ceade betes Obie 4


Ca gas
Seer eae:
: nents 7: Go spaltaat 2 senses


ee ett


shes FE ty eh


isi.


Ha
4
%
3]
y
E
::
tts
3
a
i
;
i
13
3
nh
2


Setahishes Ss iat


PAPE LS.


ses


ea


aa a A da tat


—
ethene as CUNT pares


A ei Re Bib ase SE lt his eh oe


ew ee


Sees Eros
Sy in
renreke
aa
oe


Co RiGee Se ie eS SOY CLE Ne HPS SEO ee en


This book is a gift to


Southern Evangelical Seminary


From
Dr. William E. Nix


mm LY MOLOGIGAL DICTIONARY


OF THE


ENGLISH ,LANGUAGE


HENRY FROWDE, M.A.
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK
TORONTO AND MELBOURNE


AN


foe MOLOGICAL DICTIONARY


Osh DeLee


ENGLISH LANGUAGE


BY THE


Pe eevee TER W. SKEAT, Litt. D, D€.L., LL.D., Ps.D., FBA


ELRINGTON AND BOSWORTH PROFESSOR OF ANGLO-SAXON IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE
AND FELLOW OF CHRIST’S COLLEGE


NEW EDITION REVISED AND ENLARGED


‘Step after step the ladder is ascended.’
GEORGE HERBERT, /Jacula Prudentum,


‘Labour with what zeal we will,
\ Something still remains undone.’
LoncFELLow, Szrds of Passage.


OXFORD
ws) THE CLARENDON PRESS
IgIo


: This is the property of
southern Evangelical Seminary ,
3000 Tilley Morris RA., Matthews, NC 28105


OXFORD
PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
BY HORACE HART, M.A.
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY


Cone HAN LS,


PAGE

REFACE TO THE NEW AND REVISED EDITION . ; ‘ ‘ ss (0 ae

PREFACE TO THE First EDITION  . : . : ‘ < ° 2 viii

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. - 3 ; ‘ . SV ae

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EprTIon . : e : ; ‘ : xvii
BRIEF NOTES (REVISED) UPON THE LANGUAGES CITED IN THE DICTIONARY . : xviii |

_ CANONS FOR ETYMOLOGY . 2 : ; : : ; oat

i “List OF BOOKS CONSULTED . ; : : ; : . ° 2 XXX

vi EY TO THE GENERAL PLAN ; : ; : . : : xlii
BMP OR OF ETYMOLOGIES 2 28, . eh oa
APPENDIX: I. LisT OF PREFIXES : 5 : : 732. "

“a | De SURETXES to, a ; ; : ‘ , 736

III. List of Homonyms . : d : . . tty 731

IV. List oF DOUBLETS : ; , ; k : . 748

V. LIsT OF INDOGERMANIC ROOTS ne : ; . . 754

ae DISTRIBUTION OF WORDS ACCORDING TO THE LANGUAGES FROM
| _ WHICH THEY ARE DERIVED : eee : 4 76L
- : s ; e : 2 : 777


a) oe ee


PREFACE TO THE NEW AND REVISED EDITION


IT is now more than’a quarter of a century since the first edition of the present work was
published. It was hardly possible for me to ascertain, at that date, that the time of its publication
was not a very favourable one; it would, perhaps, have been better to have deferred its appearance for
a few years, owing to the great advances that were being made, just at that period, in the methods
of comparative philology. _The whole system of estimating the vowel-sounds has ‘since been com-
pletely reconsidered, and the history of their phonetic values, in particular, is now regarded in a very
different light.

The chief writers on philology of that period, notably Curtius, Fick, Schleicher, and Vanicek
agreed in the view, now known to be erroneous, that the primitive Indogermanic language had but
three short primary vowels, viz. a,7, and ~. This strange theory (for such we should now consider it)
arose from the fact that the short primary vowels really were reduced to these three both in Gothic,
which was justly regarded as being, wpow the whole, the most primitive of the Teutonic (or Germanic)
languages, and in Sanskrit, which was likewise known to possess many characteristics of extreme
antiquity. But it is now recognized that more than half of the Indogermanic languages retain
a primitive ¢, whilst just half of them retain a primitive 0; so that the number of primary short vowels
was really five, viz. a, e,7,0,u. The primitive form corresponding to the Gk. -re, L. -que, Skt. cha,
signifying ‘and, must have been *que, rather than *gwa, because the Skt. c# is a palatal sound, due to
the palatal vowel ¢, which once followed it. In other words, the Skt. cha was once *che.

The advance due to the following up of this discovery (for it was nothing less) has been very
considerable. The whole subject has been thoroughly revised, and the results are fully exhibited in
the Comparative Grammar of the Indogermanic Languages by Karl Brugmann; as well as in the
special German, Dutch, and Danish Etymological Dictionaries by Kluge, Franck, and Falk and Torp
respectively. It is needless to add that the same correct principles have been adopted in the
New English Dictionary.

Owing to the large number of corrections which the use of the newer method renders imperative,
I took the opportunity, in 1901, of printing an entirely new edition of my Concise Etymological
Dictionary, first issued in 1882, and partially corrected in four later editions ; the result being that the
edition of 1901 entirely supersedes all that preceded it.

The time has now arrived when it has become absolutely necessary, in the same way, to reprint
my larger Dictionary also. Alterations have now been made, more or less, in almost every article
except such as are of the simplest character.

Not only have the methods of comparative philology been greatly improved, but many valuable
works on special subjects have appeared in recent years, as, for example, those by Kluge, Franck,
Falk, Prellwitz, Bréal, Walde, Uhlenbeck, Godefroy, Hatzfeld, and others ; not one of these was avail-
able in 1879-82. Above all, I have been much assisted by the admirable articles in the New English
Dictionary, from the beginning of A down to Ph. For the latter part of the alphabet, I have mainly
consulted the Century Dictionary, the editors of which, by the way, of course had access to the second
edition of the present work.


viii PREFACE TO THE NEW AND REVISED EDITION


The number of words dealt with has been considerably increased, and (exclusive of cross-references
and the like) stands approximately thus:—A, 882; B, 865; C, 1434; D, 845; E, 575; F Gao.
G, 518; H, 517; I, 724; J, 145; K, 108; L, 527; M, 782; N, 242; O, 376; P, 1231; Q, 104;
R, 648; S, 1555; T, 821; U, 92; V, 265; W, 319; X, 2; Y, 45; Z, 25. The greatest number of -
these begins with S ; after which follow, in order, C, P, A, B, D, T, M,I, R, F, E, L, G, H, 07 Waa
N, J, K, Q, U, Y, Z, X. Total number, 14,286.

I beg leave to refer the reader, for further information, to the former Prefaces here reprinted, the
Brief Notes at p. xviii, the List of Books consulted, and the Key to the General Plan.

I am under obligation to a large number of correspondents and friends. In particular, I desire to
mention the names of the Rev. A. L. Mayhew, of Oxford, who gave me so much assistance when
revising my Concise Dictionary, and of P. Giles, M.A., of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, University
Reader in Comparative Philology. My second daughter, Clara L. Skeat, has verified nearly all the
references given in the third edition, and has in many ways rendered me efficient help.


CAMBRIDGE, April 30, 1909.


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


THE present work was undertaken with the intention of furnishing students with materials for
a more scientific study of English etymology than is commonly to be found in previous works upon
the subject. It is not intended to be always authoritative, nor are the conclusions arrived at to be
accepted as final. It is rather intended as a guide to future writers, showing them in some cases what
ought certainly to be accepted, and in other cases, it may be, what to avoid. The idea of it arose out
of my own wants. I could find no single book containing the facts about a given word which it most
concerns a student to know, whilst, at the same time, there exist numerous books containing informa-
tion too important to be omitted. Thus Richardson’s Dictionary is an admirable store-house of
quotations illustrating such words as are of no great antiquity in the language, and his selected
examples are the more valuable from the fact that he in general adds the exact reference}, Todd’s
Johnson likewise contains numerous well-chosen quotations, but perhaps no greater mistake was ever
made than that of citing from authors like ‘Dryden’ or ‘Addison’ at large, without the slightest hint
as to the whereabouts of the context. But in both of these works the etymology is commonly of the
poorest description ; and it would probably be difficult to find a worse philologist than Richardson, who
adopted many suggestions from Horne Tooke without inquiry, and was capable of saying that hod is
‘perhaps hoved, hov'd, hod, past part. of heafan to heave.’ It is easily ascertained that the AS. for
heave is hebban, and that, being a strong verb, its past participle did not originally end in -ed,

It would be tedious to mention the numerous other books which help to throw such light on the
history of words as is necessary for the right investigation of their etymology. The great defect of
most of them is that they do not carry back that history far enough, and are very weak in the highly
important Middle-English period. But the publications of the Camden Society, of the Early English


* I have verified a large number of these. Where I could not Chaucer are often utterly wrong, the numbers being frequently
conveniently do so, I have added ‘(R.)’ in parentheses at the end misprinted.
of the reference. I found, to my surprise, that the references to


wie 5


‘PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION ix


Text Society, and of many other printing clubs, have lately materially advanced our knowledge, and
have rendered possible such excellent books of reference as are exemplified in Stratmann’s Old
English Dictionary and in the still more admirable but (as yet) incomplete ‘ Worterbuch’ by Eduard
Matzner. In particular, the study of phonetics, as applied to Early English pronunciation by Mr. Ellis
and Mr. Sweet, and carefully carried out by nearly all students of Early English in Germany, has
almost revolutionized the study of etymology as hitherto pursued in England. We can no longer
consent to disregard vowel-sounds as if they formed no essential part of the word, which seems to have
been the old doctrine ; indeed, the idea is by no means yet discarded even by those who ought to
know better.

On the other hand, we have, in Eduard Miiller’s Etymologisches Worterbuch der Englischen
Sprache 1, an excellent collection of etymologies and cognate words, but without any illustrations
of the use or history of words, or any indication of the period when they first came into use. We
have also Webster’s Dictionary, with the etymologies as revised by Dr. Mahn, a very useful and
comprehensive volume; but the plan of the work does not allow of much explanation of a purely
philological character.

It is many years since a new and comprehensive dictionary was first planned by the Philological
Society, and we have now good hope that, under the able editorship of Dr. Murray, some portion of
this great work may ere long see the light. For the illustration of the history of words, this will be
all-important, and the etymologies will, I believe, be briefly but sufficiently indicated. It was chiefly
with the hope of assisting in this national work, that, many years ago, I began collecting materials and
making notes upon points relating to etymology. The result of such work, in a modified form,
and with very large additions, is here offered to the reader. My object has been to clear the way for
the improvement of the etymologies by a previous discussion of all the more important words,
executed on a plan so far differing from that which will be adopted by Dr. Murray as not to interfere
with his labours, but rather, as far as possible, to assist them. It will, accordingly, be found that
I have studied brevity by refraining from any detailed account of the changes of meaning of words,
except where absolutely necessary for purely etymological purposes. The numerous very curious and
highly interesting examples of words which, especially in later times, took up new meanings will not,
in general, be found here ; and the definitions of words are only given in a very brief and bald manner,
only the more usual senses being indicated. On the other hand, I have sometimes permitted myself
to indulge in comments, discussions, and even suggestions and speculations, which would be out of
place in a dictionary of the usual character. Some of these, where the results are right, will, I hope,
save much future discussion and investigation ; whilst others, where the results prove to be wrong, can
be avoided and rejected. In one respect I have attempted considerably more than is usually done by
the writers of works upon English etymology. I have endeavoured, where possible, to trace back
words to their Aryan roots, by availing myself of the latest works upon comparative philology. In
doing this, I have especially endeavoured to link one word with another, and the reader will find
a perfect network of cross-references enabling him to collect all the forms of any given word of which
various forms exist; so that many of the principal words in the Aryan languages can be thus traced.
Instead of considering English as an isolated language, as is sometimes actually done, I endeavour, in
every case, to exhibit its relation to cognate tongues; and as, by this process, considerable light is
thrown upon English by Latin and Greek, so also, at the same time, considerable light is thrown upon
Latin and Greek by Anglo-Saxon and Icelandic. Thus, whilst under the word Jdcte will be found


1 It is surprising that this book is*not better known. If the  E. Miiller for their guide, they might have doubled their accuracy
writers of some of the current ‘ Etymological’ Dictionaries had taken and halved their labour.


x _ PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


a mention of the cognate Latin fizdere, conversely, under the word fissure, is given a cross-reference to
bite. In both cases, reference is also made to the root BHID ; and, by referring to this root (no. 240,
on p. 738), some further account of it will be found, with further examples of allied words. It is only
by thus comparing all the Aryan languages together, and by considering them as one harmonious
whole, that we can get a clear conception of the original forms ; a conception which must precede all
theory as to how those forms came to be invented’. Another great advantage of the comparative
method is that, though the present work is nominally one on Zxglish etymology, it is equally explicit,
as far as it has occasion to deal with them, with regard to the related words in other languages; and
may be taken as a guide to the etymology of many of the leading words in Latin and Greek, and to
all the more important words in the various Scandinavian and Teutonic tongues.

I have chiefly been guided throughout by the results of my own experience. Much use of many
dictionaries has shown me the exact points where an inquirer is often baffled, and I have especially
addressed myself to the task of solving difficulties and passing beyond obstacles. Not inconsiderable
has been the trouble of verifying references, A few examples will put this in a clear light.

Richardson has numerous references (to take a single case) to the Romaunt of the Rose. He
probably used some edition in which the lines are not numbered ; at any rate, he never gives an exact
reference to it. The few references to it in Tyrwhitt’s Glossary and in Stratmann do not help us very
greatly. To find a particular word in this poem of 7,700 lines is often troublesome ; but, in every case
where I wanted the quotation, I have found and noted it. I can recall several half-hours spent in this
particular work.

Another not very hopeful book in which to find one’s place, is the Faerie Queene. References to
this are usually given to the book and canto, and of these one or other is (in Richardson) occasionally
incorrect ; in every case, I have added the number of the stanza.

One very remarkable fact about Richardson’s dictionary is that, in many cases, references are
given only to obscure and late authors, when all the while the word occurs in Shakespeare. By
keeping Dr. Schmidt’s comprehensive Shakespeare Lexicon’ always open before me, this fault has
been easily remedied. |

To pass on to matters more purely etymological. I have constantly been troubled with the
vagueness and inaccuracy of words quoted, in various books, as specimens of Old English or foreign
languages. The spelling of ‘ Anglo-Saxon’ in some books is often simply outrageous. Accents are
put in or left out at pleasure ; impossible combinations of letters are given ; the number of syllables is
disregarded ; and grammatical terminations have to take their chance. Words taken from Ettmiiller
are spelt with ¢@ and @; words taken from Bosworth are spelt with @ and ¢*, without any hint that
the @ and @ of the former answer to @ and @ in the latter. I do not wish to give examples of these
things ; they are so abundant that they may easily be found by the curious. In many cases, writers
of ‘etymological’ dictionaries do not trouble to learn even the alphabets of the languages cited from,
or the most elementary grammatical facts. I have met with supposed Welsh words spelt with a v,
with Swedish words spelt with @, with Danish infinitives ending in -a4, with Icelandic infinitives in
-an, and so on; the only languages correctly spelt being Latin and Greek, and commonly French
and German. It is clearly assumed, and probably with safety, that most readers will not detect
misspellings beyond this limited range.


"I refrain from discussing theories of language in this work, ° Sic; printers often make @ do duty for @. I suspect that & is
contenting myself with providing materials for aiding in such seldom provided for.
discussion. * Todd’s Johnson, s.v. Boll, has ‘Su. Goth. bulma, Dan, bulner,


? To save time, I have seldom verified Dr. Schmidt’s references, Here bulna is the Swedish infinitive, whilst bulner is the first person
believing them to be, in general, correct. I have seldom so trusted of the present tense. Similar jumbles abound,
any other book.


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION xi


But this was not a matter which troubled me long. At avery early stage of my studies, I per-
ceived clearly enough, that the spelling given by some authorities is not necessarily to be taken as
the true one ; and it was then easy to make allowances for possible errors, and to refer to some book
with reasonable spellings, such as E. Miiller, or Mahn’s Webster, or Wedgwood. A little research
revealed far more curious pieces of information than the citing of words in impossible or mistaken
spellings, Statements abound which it is difficult to account for except on the supposition that it
must once have been usual to manufacture words for the express purpose of deriving others from them.
To take an example, I open Todd’s Johnson at random, and find that under do/ster is cited ‘ Gothic
bolster, a heap of hay.’ Now the fragments of Gothic that have reached us are very precious but very
insufficient, and they certainly contain no such word as dolster. Neither is dolster a Gothic spelling.
Ffolster is represented in Gothic by hulistr, so that bolster might, possibly, be du/istr. In any case, as
the word certainly does not occur, it can only be a pure invention, due to some blunder ; the explana-
tion ‘a heap of hay’ is a happy and graphic touch, regarded in the light of a fiction, but is out of place
in a work of reference. ,

A mistake of this nature would not greatly matter if such instances were rare; but the extra-
ordinary part of the matter is that they are extremely common, owing probably to the trust reposed
by former writers in such etymologists as Skinner and Junius, men who did good work in their day,
but whose statements require careful verification in this nineteenth century. What Skinner was
capable of, I have shown in my introduction to the reprint of Ray’s Glossary published for the English
Dialect Society. It is sufficient to say that the net result is this; that words cited in etymological
dictionaries (with very few exceptions) cannot be accepted without verification. Not only do we find
puzzling misspellings, but we find actual fictions; words are said to be ‘ Anglo-Saxon’ that are not to
be found in the existing texts ; ‘Gothic’ words are constructed for the mere purpose of ‘ etymology ;’
Icelandic words have meanings assigned to them which are incredible or misleading; and so on
Of tne rest:

Another source of trouble is that, when real words are cited, they are wrongly explained. Thus,
in Todd’s Johnson, we find a derivation of dond from AS. ‘ dond, bound.’ Now dond is not strictly
Anglo-Saxon, but an Early English form, signifying ‘a band,’ and is not a past participle at all; the
AS. for ‘bound’ being gedunden. The error is easily traced; Dr. Bosworth cites ‘ donzd, bound,
ligatus’ from Somner’s Dictionary,whence it was also copied into Lye’s Dictionary in the form: ‘dond,
ligatus, obligatus, dowd.’ Where Somner found it, is a mystery indeed, as it is absurd on the face of
it. We should take a man to be a very poor German scholar who imagined that dand, in German, is
a past participle; but when the same mistake is made by Somner, we find that it is copied by Lye,
copied by Bosworth (who, however, marks it as Somner’s), copied into Todd’s Johnson, amplified by
Richardson into the misleading statement that ‘ dovd is the past tense! and past participle of the verb
to did, and has doubtless been copied by numerous other writers who have wished to come at their
etymologies with the least trouble to themselves. It is precisely this continual reproduction of errors
which so disgraces many English works, and renders investigation so difficult.

But when I had grasped the facts that spellings are often false, that words can be invented,
and that explanations are often wrong, I found that worse remained behind. The science of phi-
lology is comparatively modern, so that our earlier writers had no means of ascertaining principles
that are now well established, and, instead of proceeding by rule, had to go blindly by guesswork, thus
sowing crops of errors which have sprung up and multiplied till it requires very careful investigation


1 Bond is a form of the past tense.in Middle English, and indeed the sb. bord is itself derived from the ‘second grade’ found in the
AS. pt. t. band ; but bond is certainly not ‘the past participle.’


xli PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


to enable a modern writer to avoid all the pitfalls prepared for him by the false suggestions which he
meets with at every turn. Many derivations that have been long current and are even generally
accepted will not be found in this volume, for the plain reason that I have found them to be false;
I think I may at any rate believe myself to be profoundly versed in most of the old fables of this
character, and I shall only say, briefly, that the reader need not assume me to be ignorant of them
because I do not mention them. The most extraordinary fact about comparative philology is that,
whilst its principles are well understood by numerous students in Germany and America, they are far
from being well known in England, so that it is easy to meet even with classical scholars who have
no notion what ‘Grimm’s law’ really means, and who are entirely at a loss to understand why the
English care has no connexion with the Latin cura, nor the English wole with the Greek dos, nor
the French charité with the Greek xdpis. Yet for the understanding of these things nothing more is
needed than a knowledge of the relative values of the letters of the English, Latin, and Greek
alphabets. A knowledge of these alphabets is strangely neglected at our public schools; whereas
a few hours carefully devoted to each would save scholars from innumerable blunders, and a boy of
sixteen who understood them would be far more than a match, in matters of etymology, for a man
of fifty who did not. In particular, some knowledge of the vowel-sounds is essential. Modern
philology will, in future, turn more and more upon phonetics; and the truth now confined to a very
few will at last become general, that the vowel is commonly the very life, the most essential part of the
word, and that, just as pre-scientific etymologists frequently went wrong because they considered the
consonants as being of small consequence and the vowels of none\at all, the scientific student of
the present day may hope to go right, if he considers the consonants as being of great consequence
and the vowels as all-important.

The foregoing remarks are, I think, sufficient to show my reasons for undertaking the work, and
the nature of some of the difficulties which I have endeavoured to encounter or remove. I now
proceed to state explicitly what the reader may expect to find.

Each article begins with a word, the etymology of which is to be sought. When there are one or
more words w7th the same spelling, a number is added, for the sake of distinction in the case of future
reference. ‘This is a great convenience when such words are cited in the ‘ List of Aryan Roots’ and in
the various indexes at the end of the volume, besides saving trouble in making cross-references.

After the word comes a brief definition, merely as a mark whereby to identify the word.

Next follows an exact statement of the actual (or probable) language whence the word is taken,
with an account of the channel or channels through which it reached us. Thus the word ‘ Canopy’ is
marked ‘(F.—Ital—L.—Gk.), to be read as ‘French, from Italian, from Latin, from Greek a
that is to say, the word is ultimately Greek, whence it was borrowed, first by Latin, secondly by
Italian (from the Latin), thirdly by French (from the Italian), and lastly by English (from French).


The endeavour to distinguish the exact history of each word in this manner conduces greatly to care


and attention, and does much to render the etymology correct. I am not aware that any attempt of
the kind has previously been made, except very partially ; the usual method, of offering a heap of
more or less related words in one confused jumble, is much to be deprecated, and is often misleading 1.

After the exact statement of the source, follow a few quotations. These are intended to indicate
the period at which the word was borrowed, or else the usual Middle-English forms. When the word


is not a very old one, I have given one or two of the earliest quotations which I have been able to


find, though I have here preferred quotations from well-known authors to somewhat earlier ones from


* In Webster’s dictionary, the etymology of canopy is well and Span. and Port. curso, Lat. cursus,’ &c. Here the Latin form
sufficiently given, but many articles are very confused. Thus Course should have followed the French. ‘With the Prov., Ital., Span.,
is derived from ‘ F, cours, course, Proy. cors, corsa, Ital. corso, corsa, and Port. forms we have absolutely nothing to do.


I hel
at


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION Xlii


more obscure writers. These quotations are intended to exemplify the history of the form of the
word, and are frequently of great chronological utility; though it is commonly sufficient to indicate
the period of the world’s first use within half a century. By way of example, I may observe that
canon is not derived from F. cazon, but appears in King At‘lfred, and was taken immediately from the
Latin. I give the reference under Canon, to AElfred’s translation of Beda, b. iv. c. 24, adding ‘ Bos-
worth’ at the end. This means that I took the reference from Bosworth’s Dictionary, and had not, at
the moment, the means of verifying the quotation (I now find it is quite correct, occurring on p. 598
of Smith’s edition, at 1.13). When no indication of the authority for the quotation is given, it com-
monly means that I have verified it myself; except in the case of Shakespeare, where I have
usually trusted to Dr. Schmidt.

A chief feature of the present work, and one which has entailed enormous labour, is that, when-
ever I cite old forms or foreign words, from which any given English word is derived or with which it
is connected, I have actually verified the spellings and significations of these words by help of the
dictionaries of which a list is given in the ‘ Key to the General Plan’ immediately preceding the letter
A. Ihave done this in order to avoid two common errors; (1) that of misspelling the words cited },
and (2) that of misinterpreting them. The exact source or edition whence every word is copied is,
in every case, precisely indicated, it being understood that, when no author is specified, the word
is taken from the book mentioned in the ‘Key.’ Thus every statement made may be easily verified,
and I can assure those who have had no experience in such investigations that.this is no small matter.
I have frequently found that some authors manipulate the meanings of words to suit their own con-
venience, when not tied down in this manner; and, not wishing to commit the like mistake, which
approaches too nearly to dishonesty to be wittingly indulged in, I have endeavoured by this means to
remove the temptation of being led to swerve from the truth in this particular. Yet it may easily be
that fancy has sometimes led me astray in places where there is room for some speculation, and
I must therefore beg the reader, whenever he has any doubts, to verify the statements for himself (as,
in general, he easily may), and he will then see the nature of the premises from which the conclusions
have been drawn. In many instances it will be found that the meanings are given, for the sake
of brevity, less fully than they might have been, and that the arguments for a particular view are often
far stronger than they are represented to be.

The materials collected by the Philological Society will doubtless decide many debatable points,
and will definitely confirm or refute, in many cases, the results here arrived at. It is, perhaps, proper
to point out that French words are more often cited from Cotgrave than in their modern forms.
Very few good words have been borrowed by us from French at a late period, so that modern French
is not of much use to an English etymologist. In particular, I have intentionally disregarded the
modern French accentuation. To derive our word recreation from the F. récréation gives a false
impression ; for it was certainly borrowed from French before the accents were added.

In the case of verbs and substantives (or other mutually related words), considerable pains have
been taken to ascertain and to point out whether the verb has been formed from the substantive,
or whether, conversely, the substantive is derived from the verb. This often makes a good deal
of difference to the etymology. Thus, when Richardson derives the adj. fw// from the verb to fi/,
he reverses the fact, and shows that he was entirely innocent of any knowledge of the relative value
of the Anglo-Saxon vowels. Similar mistakes are common even in treating of Greek and Latin.
Thus, when Richardson says that the Latin /adorare is ‘ of uncertain etymology, he must have meant
the remark to apply to the sb. dabor. The etymology of /aborare is obvious, viz. from that substantive.


1 With all this care, mistakes creep in; see the Errata, But I feel sure that they are not very numerous.


XIV PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


The numerous cross-references will enable the student, in many cases, to trace back words to
the Aryan root, and will frequently lead to additional information. Whenever a word has a ‘ doublet,’
i.e. appears in a varying form, a note is made of the fact at the end of the article ; and a complete
list of these will be found in the Appendix. i

The Appendix contains a list of Prefixes, a general account of Suffixes, a List of Aryan Roots,
and Lists of Homonyms and Doublets. Besides these, I have attempted to give lists showing the
Distribution of the Sources of English. As these lists are far more comprehensive than any which
I have been able to find in other books, and are subdivided into classes in a much stricter manner than
has ever yet been attempted, I may crave some indulgence for the errors in them.

From the nature of the work, I have been unable to obtain much assistance in it. The
mechanical process of preparing the copy for press, and the subsequent revision of proofs, have
entailed upon me no inconsiderable amount of labour; and the constant shifting from one language
to another has required patience and attention. The result is that a few annoying oversights have
occasionally crept in, due mostly to a brief lack of attention on the part of eye or brain. In again
going over the whole work for the purpose of making an epitome of it, I have noticed some of
these errors, and a list of them is given in the Errata. Other errors have been kindly pointed
out to me, which are also noted in the Addenda; and I beg leave to thank those who have rendered
me such good service. I may also remark that letters have reached me which cannot be turned
.to any good account, and it is sometimes surprising that a few correspondents should be so eager
to manifest their entire ignorance of all philological principles. Such cases are, however, exceptional,
and Iam very anxious to receive, and to make use of, all reasonable suggestions. The experience
gained in writing the first ‘part’ of the book, from A—D, proved of much service; and I believe
that errors are fewer near the end than near the beginning. Whereas I was at first inclined to
trust too much to Brachet’s Etymological French Dictionary, I now believe that Scheler is a better
guide, and that I might have consulted Littré even more frequently than I have done. Near the
beginning of the work, I had no copy of Littré of my own, nor of Palsgrave, nor of some other
very useful books ; but experience soon showed what books were most necessary to be added to
my very limited collection. In the study of English etymology, it often happens that instantaneous
reference to some rather unexpected source is almost an absolute necessity, and it is somewhat
difficult to make provision for such a call within the space of one small room. This is the real
reason why some references to what may, to some students, be very familiar works, have been
taken at second-hand. I have merely made the best use I could of the materials nearest at hand.
But for this, the work would have been more often interrupted, and time would have been wasted
which could ill be spared.

It is also proper to state that with many articles Iam not satisfied. Those that presented no
difficulty, and took up but little time, are probably the best and most certain. In very difficult cases,
my usual rule has been not to spend more than three hours over one word. During that time, I made
the best I could of it, and then let it go’. I hope it may be understood that my object in making
this and other similar statements regarding my difficulties is merely to enable the reader to consult the
book with the greater safety, and to enable him to form his own opinion as to how far it is to be
trusted. My honest opinion is that those whose philological knowledge is but small may safely
accept the results here given, since they may else do worse; whilst advanced students will receive
them with that caution which so difficult a study soon renders habitual.

One remark concerning the printing of the book is worth making. It is common for writers to


[' This refers to the first preparation of the copy for the first edition. There has been much verification and further research since then. |


es


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION XV


throw the blame of errors upon the printers, and there is in this a certain amount of truth in some
instances. But illegible writing should also receive its fair portion of blame; and it is only just to
place the fact on record, that I have frequently received from the press a first rough proof of a sheet
of this work, abounding in words taken from a great many languages, in which not a single printer's
error occurred of any kind whatever; and many others in which the errors were very trivial and
unimportant, and seldom extended to the actual spelling.

I am particularly obliged to those who have kindly given me hints or corrections ; Mr. Sweet’s
account of the word /eft, and his correction for the word d/ess, have been very acceptable, and I much
regret that his extremely valuable collection of the eavfest English vocabularies and other records is
not yet published, as it will certainly yield valuable information. I am also indebted for some useful
hints to Professor Cowell, and to the late Mr. Henry Nicol, whose knowledge of early French
phonology was almost unrivalled. Also to Dr. Stratmann, and the Rev. A. L. Mayhew, of Oxford,
for several corrections ; to Professor Potwin, of Hudson, Ohio; to Dr. J. N. Gronland, of Stockholm,
for some notes upon Swedish ; to Dr. Murray, the Rev. O. W. Tancock, and the Rev. D. Silvan
Evans, for various. notes ; and to several other correspondents who have kindly taken a practical
interest in the work.

In some portions of the Appendix I have received very acceptable assistance. The preparation
of the lists showing the Distribution of Words was entirely the work of others; I have done little
more than revise them. For the word-lists from A—Literature, I am indebted to Miss Mantle, of
Girton College; and for the lists from Litharge—Reduplicate, to A. P. Allsopp, Esq., of Trinity
College, Cambridge. The rest was prepared by my eldest daughter, who also prepared the numerous
examples of English words given in the List of Aryan Roots, and the List of Doublets. To Miss F.
Whitehead I am indebted for the List of Homonyms.

To all the above-named and to other well-wishers I express my sincere thanks.

But I cannot take leave of a work which has closely occupied my time during the past four years
without expressing the hope that it may prove of service, not only to students of comparative
philology and of early English, but to all who are interested in the origin, history, and development
of the noble language which is the common inheritance of all English-speaking peoples. It is to be
expected that, owing to the increased attention which of late years has been given to the study of
languages, many of the conclusions at which I have arrived may require important modification
or even entire change ; but I nevertheless trust that the use of this volume may tend, on the whole,
to the suppression of such guesswork as entirely ignores all rules. I trust that it may, at the same
time, tend to strengthen the belief that, as in all other studies, true results are only to be obtained by
reasonable inferences from careful observations, and that the laws which regulate the development
of language, though frequently complicated by the interference of one word with another, often
present the most surprising examples of regularity. The speech of man is, in fact, influenced by
physical laws, or in other words, by the working of divine power. It is therefore possible to pursue the
study of language in a spirit of reverence similar to that in which we study what are called the works
of nature ; and by aid of that spirit we may gladly perceive a new meaning in the sublime line of our
poet Coleridge, that

‘Earth, with her thousand voices, praises God.’


CAMBRIDGE, Sefz. 29, 1881.


PREPAC ETO SEO Or) eae


IN a work which, like the present undertaking, covers so much ground and deals with so many
languages, it is very difficult to secure complete accuracy ; it can, perhaps, at best be only aimed at.
Several errors have been detected by myself, and kind friends have pointed out others. New facts are
continually being brought to light; for the science of philology is, at this time, still rapidly progressive.
Fortunately, everything tends in the direction of closer accuracy and greater certainty, and we may
hope that the number of doubtful points will steadily diminish.

In particular, I am obliged to Mr. H. Wedgwood for his publication entitled ‘ Contested
Etymologies in the Dictionary of the Rev. W. W. Skeat ; London, Triibner and Co., 1882.’ I have
carefully read this book, and have taken from it several useful hints. In reconsidering the etymo-
logies of the words which he treats, I have, in some cases, adopted his views either wholly or in
part. In a few instances, he does not really contest what I have said, but notices something that
I have left unsaid. For example, I omitted to state that he was the first person to point out the
etymology of waxion ; unfortunately, I did not observe his article on the subject, and had to redis-
cover the etymology for myself, with the same result. Hence the number of points on which we differ
is now considerably reduced ; and I think a further reduction might have been made if he could have
seen his way, in like manner, to adopting views from me. I think that some of the etymologies
of which he treats cannot fairly be said to be ‘ contested’; for there are cases in which he is opposed,
not only to myself, but to every one else. Thus, with regard to the word avoid, he would have us
derive the F. vudde (or vide), empty, from OHG. wt rather than from the Lat. uzduus; to which
I would reply that, in a matter of /vench etymology, most scholars are quite content to accept the
etymology given by Littré, Scheler, and Diez, in a case wherein they are all agreed and see no
difficulty in the matter’.

The List of Errata and Addenda, as given in the first edition, has been almost entirely
rewritten. Most of the Errata (especially where they arose from misprints) have been corrected in
the body of the work; and I am particularly obliged to Mr. C. E. Doble for several minute cor-
rections, and for his kindness in closely regarding the accentuation of Greek words. The number
of Additional Words in the present Addenda is about two hundred, whereas the list of Additional
Words in the first edition is little more than fifty. I am much obliged to Mr. Charles Sweet for
suggesting several useful additions, and especially for sending me some explanations of several
legal terms, such as assart, barrator, escrow, essoin, and the like. I think that some of the best
etymologies in the volume may be found in these additional articles, and I hope the reader will
kindly remember to consult this supplement, commencing at p. 777, before concluding that he has
seen all that I have to say upon any word he may be seeking for. Of course this supplement
remains incomplete ; there are literally no bounds to the English language.

I also gladly take the opportunity of gratefully acknowledging the assistance of the Rev. A. i
Mayhew, who not only sent me a large number of suggestions, but has much assisted me by
reading the proof-sheets of the Addenda. I also beg leave to thank here the numerous correspon-
dents who have kindly corrected individual words.


[? But both solutions are now rejected. }


na


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION Xvil


I have also made some use of the curious book on Folk-Etymology by the Rev. A. S. Palmer,
which is full of erudition and contains a large number of most useful and exact references. The
author is not quite sound as to the quantity of the Anglo-Saxon vowels, and has, in some instances,
attempted to connect words that are really unrelated ; thus, under Hatter, he connects AS. hét,
hot, with Goth. /atis, hate. In many places I think the plan of his book has led him into multi-
plying unduly the number of ‘ corruptions’; so that caution is needful in consulting the book.

At the time of writing this, we are anxiously expecting the issue of the first part of Dr. Murray’s
great and comprehensive English Dictionary, founded on the materials collected by the Philological
Society ; and I suppose it is hardly necessary to add that, if any of my results as to the etymology of
such words as he has discussed are found not to agree with his, I at once submit to his careful
induction from better materials and to the results of the assistance his work has received from many
scholars. I have already had the benefit of some kindly assistance from him, as for example, in the
case of the words adjust, admiral, agnatl, allay, alloy, almanack, and almond.

Every day’s experience helps to show how great and how difficult is the task of presenting
results in a form such as modern scientific criticism will accept. Every slip is a lesson in humility,
showing how much remains to be learnt. At the same time, I cannot close these few words of preface
without hearty thanks to the many students, in many parts of the world, who have cheered me with
kindly words and have found my endeavours helpful.


CAMBRIDGE, December 21, 1883,


PRoerACh sO. DAE TRIRD 'DETION


IN this Third Edition a few changes have been made in cases where the etymology previously
given was certainly wrong. More might have been made if the spare time at my disposal had
sufficed for making a more careful revision of the work.


CAMBRIDGE, Wovember 18, 1897.


BRIEF: NOTES, UPON “THE (LANSUAGES CITE: aay
Pi De uO ING aa


ENGLISH. Words marked (E.) are pure English, and form the true basis of the language. They can
commonly be traced back for about a thousand years, but their true origin is altogether pre-historic and of
great antiquity. Many of them, such as father, mother, &c., have corresponding cognate forms in Sanskrit,
Greek, and Latin. ‘These forms are collateral, and the true method of comparison is by placing them side by
side. Thus /a/her is no more ‘derived’ from the Sanskrit pf@ than the Skt. pz/a@ is ‘derived’ from the
English father. Both are descended from a common Indo-germanic type, and that is all. Sometimes Sanskrit
is said to be an ‘elder sister’ to English; the word ‘elder’ would be better omitted. Sanskrit has doubtless
suffered less change, but even twin sisters are not always precisely alike, and, in the course of many years, one may
come to look younger than the other. The symbol + is particularly used to call attention to collateral descent,
as distinct from borrowing or derivation. English forms belonging to the ‘Middle-English’ period are marked
‘ME, This period extends, roughly speaking, from about 1200 to 1460, both these dates being arbitrarily
chosen. Middle-English consisted of three dialects, Northern, Midland, and Southern; the dialect depends
upon the author cited. The spellings of the ‘ME.’ words are usually given in the actual forms found in the
editions referred to, not always in the theoretical forms as given by Stratmann, though these are, etymologically,
more correct. Those who possess Stratmann’s Dictionary will do well to. consult it.

Words belonging to English of an earlier date than about 1150 or 1200 are marked ‘ AS’, i.e. Anglo-
Saxon. Some have asked why they have not been marked as ‘OE.’, i.e. Oldest English. Against this,
there are two reasons. The first is, that ‘OE.’ would be read as ‘Old English,’ and this term has been used
so vaguely, and has so often been made to include ‘ME.’ as well, that it has ceased to be distinctive, and
has become comparatively useless. ‘The second and more important reason is that, unfortunately, Oldest English
and Anglo-Saxon are not coextensive. The former consisted, in all probability, of three main dialects, but the
remains of two of these are very scanty. Of Old Northern, we have little left beyond the Northumbrian
versions of the Gospels and the glosses in the Durham Ritual: of Old Midland (or Mercian) we possess the Rush-
worth gloss to St. Matthew’s Gospel, the important ‘ Corpus Glossary,’ and the glosses to the ‘Vespasian Psalter’
(see Sweet’s Oldest English Texts); but of Old Southern, or, strictly, of the old dialect of Wessex, the remains are
fairly abundant, and these are commonly called Anglo-Saxon. It is therefore proper to use ‘ AS.’ to denote this
definite dialect, which, after all, represents only the speech of a particular por/ion of England. The term is well
established and may therefore be kept ; else it is not a particularly happy one, since the Wessex dialect was distinct.
from the Northern or Anglian dialect, and ‘ Anglo-Saxon’ must, for philological purposes, be taken to mean Old
English in which Anglian is not necessarily included. Our modern English is mainly Mercian.

Anglo-Saxon cannot be properly understood without some knowledge of its phonology, and English etymology
cannot be fairly made out without some notion of the gradations of the Anglo-Saxon vowel-system. For these
things, the student must consult Sweet’s Anglo-Saxon Reader and the Grammars by Sievers and Wright. Only
a few brief hints can be given here.

SHORT VOWELS: 4, &, €, 2, 0, U, y.

Lone vowEts: 4, #, é, 7, 0, u, 9.

DirHtHoncs: éa, answering to Goth. aw; 0, Goth. 7z; also (in early MSS.) ze and ie.

Brraxincs. The vowel a@ commonly becomes ea when preceded by g, c, or sc, or when followed by
1, r, h, succeeded by a consonant, or by x. Similarly e or 7 may become eo. The most usual vowel-change is that
produced by the occurrence of 7 (which often disappeared afterwards) in the following syllable. This ‘mutation ’
changes the vowels in row (1) below to the corresponding vowels in row (2) below.

(Da, hen) aeeea: C0, Ve OM uee ah Cae &0.
(2) 7G, ty I, 1G, By AADC Mg so Be, ey yp cen vn eaeeagn

These two rows should be learnt by heart, as a knowledge of them is required at almost every turn. Note

that @ usually arises from an original Idg. (Indo-germanic) o7 or a7; é0 from Idg. ew; and éa from an Idg. ow or au.


BRIEF NOTES UPON THE LANGUAGES CITED IN THE DICTIONARY xix


Modern E. // is represented by AS. p or %, used indifferently in the MSS.; see note to Th (p. 638).

Strong verbs are of great importance, and originated many derivatives ; these derivatives can be compared
with the form of the past tense singular, of the past tense plural, or of the past participle, as well as with that of the
infinitive mood. It is therefore necessary to ascertain all these leading forms or ‘ gradations.’ Ex.: dzmdan, to bind;
pt. t. s. dand, pl. dbundon, pp. bunden. The sb. dand or bond exhibits the same‘ grade’ as the pt. t. s.; whilst the sb.
bund-le exhibits that of the pp.

Examples of the ‘ principal parts’ of the seven Strong Conjugations are these.

1. Sc?nan, to shine; pt. t. scan, pl. scznon, pp. scinen. Base sKeEt.
. Béodan, to bid; pt. t. béad, pl. budon, pp. boden. Base nrup = / BHEUDH.
. Bindan, to bind; pt. t. band, pl. dundon; pp. dunden. Base nenp = 1 BHENDH.
. Beran, to bear; pt. t. ber, pl. déron; pp. doren. Base ser =  BHER.
. Metan, to mete; pt. t. met, pl. méton; pp. meten. Base mer = ¥ MED.
. Faran, to fare; pt. t. for, pl. foron, pp. faren. Base FAR = Por, from V7 PER,
7. Feallan, to fall; pt. t. féoll, pl. féollon ; pp. feallen. Base rar = / SPHAL.

Strong verbs are often attended by secondary or causal verbs; other secondary verbs are formed from sub-
stantives. Many of these ended originally in -jan ; the 7 of this suffix often disappears, causing gemination of the
preceding consonant. Thus we have Jeccan, to thatch (for *Aac-jan); diddan, to pray (for *bed-jan); secgan, to say
(for *sag-jan) ; sellan, to give, sell (for *sal-jan) ; dyppan, to dip (for *dup-jan); settan, to set (for *satjan). With
a few exceptions, these are weak verbs, with pt. t. in -ode, -de (-/e), and pp. in -od, -d (-?).

Authorities: Grein, Ettmiiller, Somner, Bosworth, Leo, Clark Hall, Sweet, Wright’s Vocabularies, Napier’s
Glosses ; also the grammars by Sievers and Wright, and Mayhew’s Old English Phonology. For many particulars
concerning the ‘native element’ in English, see my Principles of English Etymology, Series I.

OLD LOW GERMAN. Denoted by ‘OLowG.’ This is a term which I have employed for want of
a better. It is meant to include a not very large class of words, the preczse origin of which is wrapped in some
obscurity. If not precisely English, they come very near it. The chief difficulty about them is that the time
of their introduction into English is uncertain. Either they belong to Old Friesian, and were introduced by
the Friesians who came over to England with the Saxons, or to some form of Old Dutch or Old Saxon, and
may have been introduced from Holland, possibly even in the fourteenth century, when it was not uncommon for
Flemings to come here; or indeed, directly, from Hamburg and the other Hanseatic towns. Some of them
may yet be found in Anglo-Saxon. I call them Old Low German because they clearly belong to some Old Low German
dialect ; and I put them in a class together in order to call attention to them, in the hope that their early history


Norn BR Ww WN


may receive further elucidation,
DUTCH. The introduction into English of Dutch words is somewhat important, yet seems to have received


but little attention. I am convinced that the influence of Dutch upon English has been much underrated,
and a closer attention to this question might throw some light even upon English history. I think I may
take the credit of being the first to point this out with sufficient distinctness, History tells us that our
relations with,the Netherlands have often been rather close. We read of Flemish mercenary soldiers being
employed by the Normans, and of Flemish settlements in Wales, ‘where (says old Fabyan, I know not with
what truth) they remayned a longe whyle, but after, they sprad all Englande ouer.’ We may recall the
alliance between Edward III and the free towns of Flanders; and the importation by Edward of Flemish
weavers. The wool used by the cloth-workers of the Low Countries grew on the backs of English sheep ;
and other close relations between us and our nearly related neighbours grew out of the brewing-trade, the
invention of printing, and the reformation of religion. Caxton spent thirty years in Flanders (where the first
English book was printed), and translated the Low German version of Reynard the Fox. Tyndale settled at
Antwerp to print his New Testament, and was strangled at Vilvorde. But there was a still closer contact in
the time of Elizabeth. Very instructive is Gascoigne’s poem on the Fruits of War, where he describes his
experiences in Holland; and every one knows that Zutphen saw the death of the beloved Sir Philip Sidney.
As to the introduction of cant words from Holland, see Beaumont and Fletcher’s play entitled ‘The Beggar’s
Bush’ After Antwerp had been captured by the Duke of Parma, ‘a third of the merchants and manufacturers
of the ruined city,’ says Mr. Green, ‘are said to have found a refuge on the banks of the Thames.’ All this
cannot but have affected our language, and it ought to be accepted, as tolerably certain, that during the
fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries, particularly the last, several Dutch and Low German words were


b2


x BRIEF NOTES UPON THE LANGUAGES ‘CITED IN THE DICTIONARY


introduced into England; and it would be curious to enquire whether, during the same period, several English
words did not, in like manner, find currency in the Netherlands. The words which I have collected, as being
presumably Dutch, are deserving of special attention. /
For the pronunciation of Dutch, see Sweet’s Handbook of Phonetics. It is to be noted that the English
oo in boor exactly represents the Dutch oe in der (the same word). Also, that the Dutch sch is very different


from the German sound, and is Englished by se or sk, as in landscape, formerly landskip. The audacity with,


which English has turned the Dutch wz in éruzn (brown) into 6700-27 is an amazing instance of the influence
of spelling upon speech. V and zg are common, where English has f and s. The symbol 7 is used for
double z, and was formerly written y; it is now pronounced like E. 7 in wie. The standard Old Low
German /2 appears as d; thus, whilst ‘Aa‘ch is English, deck is Dutch. OJ appears as ou, as in oud, old,
goud, gold, houden, to hold. D between two vowels sometimes disappears, as in weer (for *weder), a wether.
The language abounds with frequentative verbs in -eren and -e/en, and with diminutive substantives in -ye (also
-He, -pye, -elje), a suffix which has been substituted for the obsolete diminutive suffix -en.

Authorities : Oudemans, Kilian, Hexham, Sewel, Ten Kate, Calisch; dictionary-printed by Tauchnitz.

For some account of the Dutch element in English, see my Principles of English Etymology, Series I,
ch. xxiv.

OLD FRIESIC. Closely allied to Anglo-Saxon; some English words are rather Friesian than Saxon.

Authorities: Richthofen; also (for modern North Friesic) Outzen ; (for modern East Friesic) Koolman.

OLD SAXON. The old dialect of Westphalia, and closely allied to Old Dutch. Authority: Heyne.

LOW GERMAN. This name is here especially given to an excellent vocabulary of a Low German dialect,
in the work commonly known as the Bremen Worterbuch. Other authorities: Liibben, Berghaus, Woeste, &c.

SCANDINAVIAN. By this name I denote the Old Norse, introduced into England by the Danes
and Northmen who, in the early period of our history, came over to England in great numbers. Often driven
back, they continually returned, and on many occasions made good their footing and remained here. Their
language is now best represented by Icelandic, owing to the curious fact that, ever since the first colonisation
of Iceland by the Northmen about a.p. 874, the language of the settlers has been preserved with but slight
changes. Hence, instead of its appearing strange that English words should be borrowed from Icelandic,
it must be remembered that this name represents, for philological purposes, the language of those Northmen,
who, settling in England, became ancestors of some of the very best men amongst us; and as they settled
chiefly in Northumbria and East Anglia, parts of England not strictly represented by Anglo-Saxon, ‘ Icelandic’
or ‘Old Norse’ (as it is also called) has come to be, it may almost be said, English of the English. In
some cases, I derive ‘Scandinavian’ words from Swedish, Danish, or Norwegian; but no more is meant
by this than that the Swedish, Danish, or Norwegian words are the best representatives of the ‘Old Norse’
that I could find. The number of words actually borrowed from what (in the modern sense) is strictly Swedish
or strictly Danish is but small, and they have been duly noted.


Icelandic. Vowels, as in Anglo-Saxon, are both short and long, the long vowels being here marked —


with a mark of length, as a, é, &c. To the usual vowels are added 6, and the diphthongs au, ey, e”; also x,
which is written both for # and a, strictly of different origin; also ja, 7a, 70, 70, jz. Among the consonants are 6,
the voiced #4 (as in E. shou), and p, the voiceless zh (as in E. hin). D was at one time written both for d and 6.
P, x, and d come at the end of the alphabet. There is now no w. The AS. w and Aw appear as v and
ho. ‘The most usual vowel-change is that which is caused by the occurrence of z (expressed or understood) in
the following syllable; this changes the vowels in row (1) below into the corresponding vowels in row (2) below.

(1) IDS RGS 5,584: | bee, 1 a Nae poem ele

(2) 25 22) By DG) By 2e Neh aD:

Assimilation is common; thus dd stands for dd, or for Goth. zd (= AS. rd); kk, for nk; WU, for Ir or Ib ;
nn, for np, nd, or nr; it, for dt, ht, kt, nt, ndt, tp. Initial sk should be particularly noticed, as many E. words
beginning with sc or sk are of Scand. origin; the AS. se being represented by E. sh. Very remarkable is
the loss of uv in initial vv = AS. wr; the same loss occurring in modern English. Infinitives end in -a or
ya; verbs in ya, with very few exceptions, are weak, with pp. ending in -d, -dr, -/, -ir, &c.; whereas strong
verbs have the pp. in -zvm.

I subjoin examples of the ‘ principal parts’ of the seven Strong Conjugations.

1. Shima, to shine ; pt. t. s. skedn, pl. skenu; pp. skininn,


BRIEF NOTES UPON THE LANGUAGES CITED IN THE DICTIONARY Xxi


. Bjoda, to bid; pt. t. s. daud, pl. dudu; pp. dodznn.
. Binda, to bind; pt. t. s. da/¢ [for *and], pl. bundu; pp. dundinn.
. Bera, to bear; pt. t. s. dar, pl. daru ; pp. dorinn.
. Meta, to value [mete out]; pt.t. s. ma/, pl. matu; pp. metinn.
. Fara, to fare; pt. t. s. for, pl. foru; pp. farznn.
7. Falla, to fall; pt. t. s. fell, pl. fellu; pp. fallinn.

Authorities: Cleasby and Vigfusson, Egilsson, Mébius, Noreen; also (for Norwegian), Aasen, Ross.

Swedish. To the usual vowels add a, d, ¢, which are placed at the end of the alphabet. Diphthongs
do not occur, except in foreign words. Qv occurs where English has gv. The Old Swedish w (= AS. w)
is now v. The Icelandic and AS. initial p (= /A) is replaced by 4, as in Danish, not by d, as in Dutch;
and our language bears some traces of this peculiarity, as, e.g. in the word hustngs (for husthings), and again
in the word “ght or faut (Icel. Jétir).

Assimilation occurs in some words, as in finna (for *finda), to find, dricka (for *drinka), to drink; but
it is less common than in Icelandic.

Infinitives end in -a; past participles of strong verbs in -ez; weak verbs make the p. t. in -ade, -de, or
-4e, and the pp. in -ad, -d, or -7.

Authorities: Ihre (Middle Swedish, also called Suio-Gothic, with explanations in Latin) ; Widegren ; Oman;
Bjorkman ; Tauchnitz dictionary; Rietz (Swedish dialects, a valuable book, written in Swedish).

For some account of the Scandinavian element in English, see my Principles of English Etymology,
Series I, ch. xxiii.

Danish. To the usual vowels add x and 0, which are placed at the end of the alphabet. The symbol
é is also written and printed as o with a slanting stroke drawn through it; thus ¢. Qv is used by Ferrall
where English has gu; but is replaced by &v in Larsen, and in Aasen’s Norwegian dictionary. V is used
where English has w. The Icelandic and AS. initial p (#2) is replaced by 4 as in Swedish; not by d, as in
Dutch. Assimilation occurs in some words, as in drzkke, to drink, but is still less common than in Swedish.
Thus the Icel. fizna, Swed. jinna, to find, is finde in Danish. JJand (for *mann), a man, is a remarkable
form. We should particularly notice that final 2, 4 4, and_/ sometimes becomes g, d, 4, and v respectively ;
as in Jog, a book, rag-e, to rake, /ag-e, to take; ged, a goat, dzd-e, to bite, grad-e, to weep (Lowland Scotch
greet); reb, a rope, grib-e, to grip or gripe, kuzb-e, to nip; /2, life, kuzv, knife, vzv, wife. Infinitives end in -e; the
past participles of strong verbs once ended in -ev, but these old forms are not common, being replaced by
later forms in -ef or -/, throughout the active voice.

Authorities: Ferrall and Repp’s Dictionary; Larsen’s Dictionary; Molbech (dialects); Kalkar (Middle
Danish); Falk and Torp (etymological).

Norwegian. Closely allied to Danish.

Authority: Aasen’s Dictionary of Norwegian dialects (written in Danish), with Ross’s supplement.

GOTHIC. The Gothic alphabet, chiefly borrowed from Greek, has been variously transliterated into
Roman characters. I have followed the system used in my Meeso-Gothic Dictionary, which I still prefer.
It is the same as that used by Massmann, except that I put w for his v, Aw for his &v, and Aw for his hv,
thus turning all his v’s into w’s, as every true Englishman ought to do. Stamm has the same system as Mass-
mann, with the addition of p for ¢h (needless), and g for fw, which is not pleasant to the eye; so that he
writes gap for kwath (i.e. quoth). 7 corresponds to the E. y. One peculiarity of Gothic must be particularly
noted. As the alphabet was partly imitated from Greek, its author used gg and gh (like Gk. yy, yx) to repre-
sent mg and mk; as in /uggo, tongue, drigkan, to drink. The Gothic vowel-system is particularly simple and
clear, and deserving of special attention, as being the best standard with which to compare the vowel-systems
of other Teutonic languages. The primary vowels are a, z, ~, always short, and @ 0, always long. Original
Germanic @ usually appears as ¢ (or as az before r, 4, hw), and Germanic é as wz (or as au before r, 2); thus
AS. efan, to eat, is Goth. ztan; AS. beran, to bear, is Goth. datran; AS. geoc, a yoke, is Goth. yuk; and AS,
word, a word, is Goth. waurd. The diphthongs are az, au, e7, and zu; the two former being distinguished,
theoretically, into az and dz, au and du.

I subjoin examples of the ‘principal parts’ of the seven Strong Conjugations.

1. Skeinan, to shine; pt. t. s. skazm, pl. (1 p.) skemum ; pp. skznans.
2. Biudan, to bid; pt. t. s. dauth, pl. budum; pp. dudans.


No Fk WwW N


xxii BRIEF NOTES UPON THE LANGUAGES CITED IN THE DICTIONARY


. Bindan, to bind; pt. t. s. dand, pl. bundum ; pp. bundans.
. Bairan, to bear; pt. t. s. dar, pl. bérum; pp. baurans.
. Mitan, to mete ; pt. t. s. mat, pl. méfum; pp. mitans.
. Faran, to fare; pt. t. s. for, pl. forum; pp. farans.
7. Haldan, to hold; pt. t. s. hazhald, pl. hathaldum; pp. haldans.

OLD HIGH GERMAN. Some remarks upon Old High German are given in the next paragraph
(concerning German), but I shall here subjoin, for comparison, examples of the ‘principal parts’ of the OHG.
Strong Verbs.

1. Scinan, to shine; pt. t. s. scezz, pl. scinun; pp. giscinan.

2. Botan, to bid, offer; pt. t.s. d0/, pl. dutun; pp. gibotan.
. Bintan, to bind ; pt. t. s. dant, pl. duntun; pp. gibuntan.
. Beran, to bear; pt. t. s. dar, pl. darun; pp. geboran.
. Mezzan, to mete; pt. t. s. maz, pl. mazun; pp. gimezzan.
. Faran, to go; pt.t. s. fuor, pl. fuorun; pp. gifaran.

7. fallan, to fall; pt. t. s. fal, pl. fiallun; pp. gifallan.
If we now compare all the examples of the vowel-gradations as exhibited in the principal parts of the strong
verbs, as seen in Anglo-Saxon, Icelandic, Gothic, and Old High German, respectively, it becomes easy to
compile a list of the comparative values of their vowels and diphthongs. In the following table, the first
column exhibits the (theoretical) values of the original Teutonic vowels, the second column the Gothic, and
so on. Lines 1, 2, 3 are due to the first conjugation, by omitting the gradation of the pt. t. plural; lines
4, 5, © are similarly due to the second conjugation; lines 7, 8, 9 to the fhird; 10, 11, 12, to the fourth;
13, 14, to the first two grades of the ji/#2; and 15, 16, to the first two grades of the szx‘A. Line 17 is due
to comparing the past tense plurals in conjugations 4 and 5. Line 18 depends upon such instances as that
of the AS. d/éwan, to bloom as a flower, in which the 6 is an original Indo-germanic long vowel, as shown by
the cognate Latin fldrére, to flourish.


Nor & w


Non - W


TABLE OF THE USUAL EQUIVALENCE OF VOWEL-SouNDS.


TEuT. Gotu. | Icer. | OHG. AS. Geo |) Lats, 1) pe:
I (EI) I ei i i i et i EI
2 Al ai ei ei a ot? | ce, G, I} Ol
3 I i i i i t i I
4 EU iu jo io ere) ev a EU
5 AU au au 6 éa ov a OF Hu.
6 O (U) u, au ) ) 0 (u) v u U
7) CEN) IN in in in in ev en, in| EN
8 an Fan an an ov on ON
9 UN un un un un av, a en n
fe) ER air er er er (eor) ep er ER
II AR ar ar ar zr (ear) op or OR
12. | OR (UR) aur or or or (ur) | ap,pa| or r
ee E ae e e e € € E
I4. A a a a 2/8, 0 o (u) O
15) A a a a a (2, ea) a a as
16. O re) 6 uo fe) a, a A


BRIEF NOTES UPON THE LANGUAGES CITED IN THE DICTIONARY _ xxiii


It will be noticed that Greek and Latin equivalents are given in the above scheme. Corresponding to the
‘gradations’ in the six Teutonic conjugations of strong verbs we may note similar examples in Greek; viz. as
follows.

. meiOw; perf. t. wé-roida; 2 aorist é-mbov.

€-hevoopuat; perf. t. ei-Ay-Aovba; 2 aorist 7-vOov.

. tev, future tense ; révos, sb.; perf. pass. rérapat.

. d€pxoua ; perf. t. dé-dopxa ; 2 aorist €-dpaxov.

. mérouat; morn, sb. Cf. L. segui, v., soczus, sb.

. ayw; whence orpar-nyds, sb. Cf. L. agere; whence ambages, sb.

It is interesting to note that the E. words ear, hear, berry, are the same as Goth. ausd, hausjan, basi, showing
that in such words the E. 7 is due to original s.

Authorities for Gothic: Gabelentz and Lobe, Diefenbach, Schulze, Massmann, Stamm, Uhlenbeck.

For examples of English words cognate with Greek and Latin, see my Primer of Classical and English
Philology.

For an account of the phonology of Gothic, see Prof. Wright’s Primer of the Gothic language.

GERMAN. Properly called High-German, to distinguish it from the other Teutonic dialects, which belong
to Low-German. ‘This, of all Teutonic languages, is the furthest removed from English, and the one from
which fewest words are directly borrowed, though there is a very general popular notion (due to the utter want
of philological training so common amongst us) that the contrary is the case. A knowledge of German is
often the sole idea by which an Englishman regulates his ‘derivations’ of Teutonic words; and he is better
pleased if he can find the German equivalent of an English word than by any /rue account of the same
word, however clearly expressed. Yet it is well established, by Grimm’s law of sound-shiftings, that the German
and English consonantal systems are very different. Owing to the replacement of the Old High German £ by
the Mod. G, 4, and other changes, English and German now approach each other more nearly than Grimm’s
law suggests; but we may still observe the following very striking differences in the dental consonants.

English, d 7 th.

German. / 2(ss) .d.

These changes are best remembered by help of the words day, sooth, foot, thorn, German fag, zahn, fuss, dorn ;
and the further comparison of these with the other Teutonic forms is not a little instructive.


Nn fw Nd


Teutonic type DaAGoz TANTH FOT THORNOZ, THORNUZ.

Anglo-Saxon dxg 160 Sit porn,

Old Friesic det toth Sot thorn.

Old Saxon dag tand Sot thorn.

Low German dag tin Soot dorn.

Dutch dag tand voet doorn.

Icelandic dag-r tonn fot-r porn, :
i Swedish dag tand Jot torne. .

Danish dag tand Sod torn.

Gothic dag-s tunthu-s Sotu-s thaurnu-s.

German lag zahn Juss dorn.


The number of words in English that are borrowed directly from German is quite insignificant, and they
are nearly all of late introduction. It is more to the purpose to remember that there are, nevertheless, a con-
siderable number of German words that were borrowed zzdrrectly, viz. through the French.

Authorities: Schade, Kluge, Fligel, E. Miiller. There is a good MHG. Dictionary by Lexer, another
by Benecke, Miiller, and Zarncke; and many more. For an account of the phonology, see Prof. Wright's
Old High German Primer, and his German Grammar.

FRENCH. The influence of French upon English is too well known to require comment. But the method
of derivation of French words from Latin or German is often very difficult, and requires the greatest care.
There are numerous French words in quite common use, such as azse, ease, “rancher, to cut, which have never
yet been clearly solved; and the solution of many others is highly doubtful. Latin words often undergo the
most curious transformations, as may be seen by consulting Brachet’s or Darmesteter’s or Schwan’s Historical


xxiv BRIEF NOTES UPON THE LANGUAGES CITED IN THE DICTIONARY


Grammar. What are called ‘learned’ words, such as modzle, which is merely a Latin word with a French
ending, present no difficulty; but the ‘popular’ words in use since the first formation of the language, are
distinguished by three peculiarities: (1) the continuance of the tonic accent, (2) the suppression of thé short
vowel, (3) the loss of the medial consonant. The last two peculiarities tend to disguise the origin, and require
much attention. Thus, in the Latin donc/atfem, the short vowel 7, near the middle of the word, is suppressed ;
whence F. Jonté, E. bounty, And again, in the Latin “gare, to bind, the medial consonant g, standing between
two vowels, is lost, producing the F. der, whence E. /adde.

The result is a great tendency to compression, of which an extraordinary but well-known example is the
Late Latin sx/aficum, reduced to edage by the suppression of the short vowel z, and again to eage, aage by
the loss of the medial consonant d; hence F. dge, E. age.

One other peculiarity is too important to be passed over. With rare exceptions, the substantives (as in
all the Romance languages) are formed from the accusative case of the Latin, so that it is commonly a mere
absurdity to cite the Latin nominative, when the form of the accusative is absolutely necessary to show how
the French word arose. On this account, the form of the accusative is usually given, as in the case of cau/zon,
from L. cau/zonem, and in numberless other instances.

French may be considered as being a wholly unoriginal language, founded on debased Latin; but it must
at the same time be remembered that, as history teaches us, a certain part of the language is necessarily of Celtic
origin, and another part is necessarily Frankish, that is, Old High German. It has also borrowed words freely
from Old Low German dialects, from Scandinavian (due to the Normans), and in later times, from Italian,
Spanish, &c., and even from English and many entirely foreign languages.

Authorities: Cotgrave, Palsgrave, Littré, Scheler, Diez, Hatzfeld, Brachet, Burguy, Roquefort, Bartsch, &c.
See also my Principles of English Etymology, Series Il; especially chapter vi, for the phonology of Anglo-
French, and chapters x and xi for the phonology of Central (or Parisian) French.

OTHER ROMANCE LANGUAGES. The other Romance languages, i.e. languages of Latin origin,
are Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Provencal, Romansch, and Wallachian. English contains words borrowed from
the first four of these, but there is not much in them that needs special remark. The Italian and Spanish forms
are often useful for comparison with (and consequent restoration of) the crushed and abbreviated Old French
forms. Italian is remarkable for assimilation, as in ammirare (for admzrare), to admire, dfto (for dicto), a saying,
whence E. défo. Spanish, on the other hand, dislikes assimilation, and carefully avoids double consonants ;
the only consonants that can be doubled are c, x, 7, besides //, which is sounded as E. / followed by_y consonant,
and is not considered as a double letter. The Spanish 7% is sounded as E. x followed by_y consonant, and occurs
in duefia, Englished as duenna. Spanish is also remarkable as containing many Arabic (Moorish) words, some
of which have found their way into English. The Italian infinitives commonly end in -are, -ere, -cre, with
corresponding past participles in -a/o, -u/o, -zfo0. Spanish infinitives commonly end in -ar, -er, -zr, with corre-
sponding past participles in -ado, -zdo, -7do. In all the Romance languages, substantives are most commonly
formed, as in French, from the Latin accusative. See further in my Principles of English Etymology, Series II;
ch. xiv (on the Italian element); ch. xv (on the Spanish element) ; and ch. xvi (on the Portuguese element).

CELTIC. Words of Celtic origin are marked ‘(C.)’. This was formerly a particularly slippery subject
to deal with, for want of definite information as to its older foris in a conveniently accessible arrangement; but
the contribution by Whitley Stokes to the 4th edition of Fick’s Vergleichende Wérterbuch is now of great
assistance, and Macbain’s Etymological Dictionary of Gaelic is also very useful. That English has borrowed
a few words from Celtic cannot be doubted, but we must take care not to multiply the number of these
unduly. Again, ‘Celtic’ is merely a general term, and in itself means nothing definite, just as ‘Teutonic’ and
‘Romance’ are general terms. To prove that a word is Celtic, we must first show that the word is borrowed from
one of the Celtic languages, as Irish, Gaelic, Welsh, Cornish, or Breton, or that it is of a form which, by the help
of these languages, can be fairly presumed to have existed in the Celtic of an early period. The chief difficulty
lies in the fact that Welsh, Irish, Cornish, and Gaelic have all borrowed English words at various periods, and
Gaelic has certainly also borrowed some words from Scandinavian, as history tells us must have been the case.
We gain, however, some assistance by comparing all the languages of this class together, and again, by comparing
them with Latin, Greek, Sanskrit, &c., since the Celtic consonants often agree with these, and at the same time
differ from Teutonic. Thus the word dard is Celtic, since it only appears in Welsh, Irish, and Gaelic; and
again, the word dowz (2), a fortified hill, is Celtic, because it may be compared with the AS. /#m, a Celtic d answer-


BRIEF NOTES UPON THE LANGUAGES CITED IN THE DICTIONARY XXV


ing to AS. 4 On the other hand, the W. Aofio, to hover, is nothing but the common ME. oven, to tarry, to
hover, which appears to be of native E. origin. The Lectures on Welsh Philology by Prof. Sir John Rhys give a clear
and satisfactory account of the values of Irish and Welsh letters as compared with other Indo-germanic languages.

Some Celtic words have come to us through French, for which assistance is commonly to be had from Breton.
A few words in other Teutonic languages besides English are probably of Celtic origin.

RUSSIAN. This language belongs to the Slavonic branch of the Aryan languages, and, though the words
borrowed from it are very few, it is frequently of assistance in comparative philology, as exhibiting a modern form
of language allied to the Old Church Slavonic. My principal business here is to explain the system of translitera-
tion which I have adopted, as it is one which I made out for my own convenience, with the object of avoiding the
use of diacritical marks. The following is the Russian alphabet, with the Roman letters which I use to represent
it. It is sufficient to give the small letters only.


Russian betters ay 0. BT om) 66. HK SB in 1 K TM on
Rompnmuotorneme amen Vy Cad e¢) J. Zo ised ko ff m nn 0. p
Russian Letters: m & Hb & 9 0 Ff 6 VY

2


Roman Letters: shch Hie) ler Gai, Maat opls ax


This transliteration is not the best possible, but it will suffice to enable any one to verify the words cited in this work
by comparing them with a Russian dictionary. It is necessary to add one or two remarks.

The symbol only occurs at the end of a word or syllable, and only when that word or syllable ends in a con-
sonant; it is not sounded, but throws a greater stress upon the consonant, much as if it were doubled; I denote
it therefore merely by an apostrophe. The symbol 5 most commonly occurs at the end of a word or syllable, and
may be treated, in general, as a mute letter, like the final e in French. 9 only occurs at the beginning of words,
and is not common. e may be represented by e at the beginning of a word, or otherwise by 4 if necessary, since
it cannot then be confused with 9. It is to be particularly noted that 7 is to have its /rench value, not the English ;
seeing that a has just the sound of the French /, it is here so written. um and i are distinguished by the way in which
they occur; ie can be written 7@, to distinguish it from ze=%. 0, which is rare, can be written ZA, to distinguish
it from qd), orf; the sound is allone. By 24, Russ. x, I mean the German guttural ch, which comes very near to
the sound of the letter; but the combinations /s, ch, sh, shch are all as in English. 1, or wz, somewhat resembles
the French ouz. The combinations ze, 7v, za, are to be read with zas English y, i.e. yea, you, yaa. V, or y,
pronounced as E. ¢e, is of slight consequence, being rare. I do not recommend the scheme for general use,
but only give it as the one which I have used.

The Russian and Slavonic consonants agree with Sanskrit, Greek, and Latin rather than with Teutonic. The
same may be said of Lithuanian, which is a very well preserved language, and often of great use in comparative
philology. The infinitive mood of Russian regular verbs ends in -a/e, -za/e, -dete, -dfe, -ofe, -ute, all with final
mute ¢; that of some irregular verbs in -che, or -#. In Lithuanian, the characteristic suffix of the infinitive is -/.

The best authority is the Comparative Etymological Dictionary of the Slavonic Languages by F. Miklosich.

SANSKRIT. In transliterating Sanskrit words, I follow the scheme given in Benfey’s Dictionary, with
slight modifications. For ¥ I print ¢, as in Benfey and Uhlenbeck, instead of s, as in Monier Williams’s Grammar.
There is this advantage about the symbol ¢, viz. that it reminds the student that this sibilant is due to an original &.
I also follow Uhlenbeck in printing 7 (instead of 77, as in Benfey) for 4%; but retain sf for ¥, which Uhlenbeck
denotes by s. I also follow him in writing # for % (Benfey’s 7). He also employs ¢ and c/ for Benfey’s ch and
chh ; but I have not adopted these two changes,

Thus the complete alphabet is represented by a, @, 7,2, u, a, 7,7, J, 2 at, 6, au; gutturals, 4, kh, g, gh, 2;
palatals, ch, chh, 7, jh, #%; cerebrals, ¢, th, d, dh, n; dentals, 7, th, d, dh, n; labials, p, ph, 6, bh, m; semivowels,
y, r, 4, v; sibilants, ¢, sh, s; aspirate, 2 Add the nasal symbol m, and the final aspirate, Z.

It is sometimes objected that the symbols ch, chh, are rather clumsy, especially when occurring as chchh ;
but as they are perfectly definite and cannot be mistaken, the mere appearance to the eye cannot much matter.
Some write ¢ and ch, and consequently cch instead of chchh; but what is gained in appearance is lost in
distinctness ; since @ is certainly our ch, whilst ¢ gives the notion of E. ¢ in caz.

The scientific order in which the letters of the Sanskrit alphabet is arranged should be observed.

There are a few points about the values of the Sanskrit letters too important to be omitted. The following
short notes will be found useful.


xxvi BRIEF NOTES UPON THE LANGUAGES CITED IN THE DICTIONARY


The Skt. 7 is a sonant, and is perfectly distinct from 7. Thus 7ch, to shine, is distinct from rzch, to leave,
Other languages sometimes preserve a better form than Skt.; thus the / AG, to drive, gives Lat. ag-ere, Gk. dy-ew,
and (by regular change from g to ’) Icelandic ak-a; but the Skt. is a, a weakened form in which the g has been
palatalised.

The chief difficulty in comparing the values of the consonants in different Indo-germanic languages lies in
dealing with the guttural sounds. It has been ascertained that there are actually ¢hree distinct sets of gutturals, dis-
tinguished by difference of treatment in some of the languages belonging tothe family. They are called by Brugmann
the palatals, the pure velars, and the labio-velars; and by others the palatal, middle, and labialised velar gutturals. I dis-
tinguish the first set by the symbols GH, G, K ; the second, by G(w)H, G(w), Q ; and the third, by GwH, Gw, Qw.

It is not a little remarkable that, in Greek, Latin, and Celtic (all of which keep the original £-sound in the word
for ‘hundred,’ as Greek ékardv, L. centum, Welsh cant) the middle gutturals are treated exactly like the palatals;
whilst, on the contrary, in Sanskrit, Persian, Lithuanian, and Slavonic (all of which have an s-sound in the same
word, as Skt. ¢a/am, Pers. sad, Lith. sz¢mtas, Russ. s/o) the middle gutturals are treated like the labialised velars.
Teutonic belongs to the former set, and goes with Greek, Latin, and Celtic. We may roughly characterise the two
sets as Western and Eastern respectively.

Dental Series. The easiest series to deal with is that of the dentals; so it will be taken first. It will
be noticed that the Germanic languages shz/t an original DH, D, or T to D, T, and TH respectively. This
is called ‘ consonantal sound-shifting,’ or simply ‘sound-shifting’; otherwise known as ‘ Grimm’s Law.’

Labial Series. In the same way, the Germanic languages shift an original BH, B, or P, to B, P, F

- respectively ; by the same Law. The following table exhibits the results.


UsuaL CoRRESPONDENCES OF DENTAL AND LABIAL SounpDs.


nae Seri Stave) Larrea Gr, Lat: Trisu. GoTH. AS Tervur.
DH dh d d 6 f (d, b) d d d D
D d d d 8 d, 1 d t t i
bade t t t r t bth |) th jd\: Pb fale ane
| BH | bh b b @ | f,h(b) | b(m) b b B
| B b b b B b b p p P
| P 7 p x ETT ovat F


The Skt. dh answers to Lat. finitially ; the d, 6 only occur medially. The Irish // is an aspirated /, not the
E. “4. The AS. pis only a symbol for the sound of #/, as in E. ‘horn. The appearance of L. / for dis remarkable’;
thus L. Zimgua represents an older dingua; and as L. d corresponds to AS. /, it is cognate with E. songue. The
Skt. 42 corresponds to L. / or 4 initially ; medially, to 6. The Gothic [4] and Gothic and AS. [d] within square
brackets are due to what is known as ‘ Verner’s Law’; the ¢4 became d, and the / became 4 whenever the vowel
next preceding these consonants did zo/, according to the original Indo-germanic system of accentuation, bear the
principal accent of the word. See Wright’s Gothic Primer, § r19.

Guttural Series. The usual correspondence of guttural sounds in the principal Indo-germanic languages is
here given. It has been explained above that there are three sets of gutturals. Observe the identity of treatment in
the second and third sets of rows to the left of the dark line, and in the first and second sets to the right of it.


Ine. SKT, | Suave | LrrayGK: Bar IRISH. Gotu. INS, Tut.
GH h Z x h, g g eee g G
G j Z y g g k Cc K
K ¢ S SZ k c c h [g] h[g] H
G(w)H | gh, h | g,:2, z g x h, g g g g G
Ee RO es at rene A y g g k C K
Q Ken ik, Cre}, -K K c c h [g] h [g] H
GwH |} gh,h | g,2,z g p, 9, x| f, gu, u, g g tf g g Gw
Gw 2) 12,2, 2 g 8B, Oo y| gu,u,¢g b kw, k cw, c Q
Qw kehihk, cy ki lain x qu, c @ hw, h[g] |} hw, h[g] | Hw


en 5


BRIEF NOTES UPON THE LANGUAGES CITED IN THE DICTIONARY = xxvii


Authorities: Benfey, Macdonell, Uhlenbeck, for Sanskrit; Prellwitz, Vaniéek, Liddell and Scott, for Greek ;
Walde, Bréal, Vaniéek, Lewis and Short, for Latin; Miklosich, for Slavonic; and for comparative philology,
Brugmann, Fick, Stokes-Fick, Uhlenbeck, Kluge, Franck, and others. Cf. Giles, Manual of Comparative
Philology, 2nd ed., 1go1.

NON-ARYAN LANGUAGES : HEBREW. The Hebrew words in English are not very numerous,
whilst at the same time they are tolerably well known, and the corresponding Hebrew words can, in general,
be easily found. I have therefore contented myself with denoting the alphabet Jdeth, gimel, daleth, &c. by
6, g, a, h, v, 2, kh, t, y, k, 1, m, n, s,‘, p, ts, 9, 7, sh or s, 4 This gives the same symbol for samech and sim, but
this difficulty is avoided by making a note of the few instances in which samech occurs; in other cases, s7z
is meant. So also with #e/# and /au; unless the contrary is said, faz is meant. This might have been avoided,
had the words been more numerous, by the use of s and / for samech and “e‘h. I put 4h for cheth, to denote that the
sound is guttural, not E. ch. I denote ayzm by the mark‘. The other letters can be readily understood. The
vowels are denoted by 4, ¢, 2, 0, u, @, @, 7, 0, u.

ARABIC. The Arabic alphabet is important, being also used for Persian, Turkish, Hindustani, and
Malay. But as the letters are variously transliterated in various works, it seemed to be the simplest plan to use
the spellings given in Richardson’s Arabic and Persian Dictionary (with very slight modifications), or in Marsden’s
Malay Dictionary; and, in order to prevent any mistake, to give, in every instance, the number of the page
in Richardson or Marsden, or the number of the column in Palmer’s Persian Dictionary; so that, if in any
instance, it is desired to verify the word cited, it can readily be done. Richardson’s system is rather vague,
as he uses ¢ to represent and b (and also the occasional i); alsos to represent & (» and ..»; also 4 for
c and x; 2 for 352 and b; & for and w; and he denotes ayim by the Arabic character. I have got
rid of one ambiguity by using g (instead of &) for 5; and for ayiz I have put the mark ‘,as in Palmer’s
Persian Dictionary. In other cases, the reader can easily tell which 4 s, 4%, or zg is meant, if it happens
to be an zvztal letter (when it is the most important), by observing the number of the page (or column) given
in the reference to Richardson’s or Palmer’s Dictionary. Thus in Richardson’s Dictionary, pp. 349-477 contain
3 pp. 960-981 contain b; pp. 477-487 contain \; pp. 795-868 contain Qo; pp. 924-948 contain (»;
pp. 548-588 contain ¢ ; pp. 1660-1700 contain x; pp. 705-712 contain 3; pp. 764-794 contain ;; pp. 949-960
contain 6; and pp. 981-984 contain b. In Palmer’s Dictionary, the same letters are distinguished as /
(coll. 121-159); f (coll. 408-416); § (coll. 160, 161); s (coll. 331-371); $ (coll. 396-405); & (coll. 191-207) ;
h (coll. 692-712); 2 (coll. 283-287); 2 (coll. 314-330); 2 (coll. 405-408); and 2 (coll. 416-418). Palmer
gives the complete alphabet in the form a [d@, 7, &c.], 4, f, 4, 5,7, ch, &, kh, d, 2, r, 2, 2h, 5, sh, §, 2, 4, 3,5, gh, f, &
[which I have written as 7], &, g, 7, m,n, w, h, y. It deserves to be added that Turkish has an additional letter
saghir niin, which I denote by %, occurring in the word _ye7iz, which helps to form the E. word janzsary.

In words derived from Hindi, Hindustani, Chinese, &c., I give the page of the dictionary where the
word may be found, or a reference to some authority. See, in particular, the List of Books referred to, at
D xxx:


CANONS POR, BY Y¥Y NOLOGY


In the course of the work, I have been led to adopt the following canons, which merely express
well-known principles, and are nothing new. Still, in the form of definite statements, they are worth giving.

1. Before attempting an etymology, ascertain the earliest form and use of the word; and observe chronology.

2. Observe history and geography; borrowings are due to actual contact.

3. Observe phonetic laws, especially those which regulate the mutual relation of consonants in the various
Indogermanic languages, at the same time comparing the vowel-sounds.

4. In comparing two words, A and B, belonging to the same language, of which A contains the lesser
number of syllables, A must be taken to be the more original word, unless we -have evidence of contraction
or other corruption.

5. In comparing two words, A and B, belonging to the same language and consisting of the same
number of syllables, the older form can usually be distinguished by observing the sound of the principal vowel.

6. Strong verbs, in the Teutonic languages, and the so-called ‘irregular verbs’ in Latin, are commonly
to be considered as primary, other related forms being taken from them.

7. The whole of a word, and not a portion only, ought to be reasonably accounted for; and, in
tracing changes of form, any infringement of phonetic laws is to be regarded with suspicion.

8. Mere resemblances of form and apparent connexion in sense between languages which have different
phonetic laws or no necessary connexion are commonly a delusion, and are not to be regarded.

9. When words in two different languages are more nearly alike than the ordinary phonetic laws would
allow, there is a strong probability that one language has borrowed the word from the other. Truly cognate
words ought not to be 400 much alike.

10. It is useless to offer an explanation of an English word which will not a/so explain all the cognate forms.

These principles, and other similar ones well known to comparative philologists, I have tried to observe.
Where I have not done so, there is a chance of a mistake. Corrections can only be made by a more strict
observance of the above canons.

A few examples will make the matter clearer.

1. The word szrloin or sirlomm is often said to be derived from the fact that the Jocz was knighted as
Str Loin by Charles II, or (according to Richardson) by James I. Chronology makes short work of this
statement ; the word being in use long before James I was born. It is one of those unscrupulous inventions
with which English ‘etymology’ abounds, and which many people admire because they are ‘so clever.’ The
number of those who literally prefer a story about a word to a more prosaic account of it, is only too large.

As to the necessity for ascertaining the oldest form and use of a word, there cannot be two opinions.
Yet this primary and all-important rule is continually disregarded, and men are found to rush into ‘ etymologies’
without the slightest attempt at investigation or any knowledge of the history of the language, and think
nothing of deriving words which exist in Anglo-Saxon from German or Italian. They merely ‘think it
over, and take up with the first fancy that comes to hand, which they expect to be ‘ obvious’ to others because
they were themselves incapable of doing better; which is a poor argument indeed. It would be easy to cite
some specimens which I have noted, but it is hardly necessary}. I will rather relate my experience, viz. that
I have frequently set out to find the etymology of a word without any preconceived ideas about it, and usually found
that, by the time its earliest use and sense had been fairly traced, the etymology presented itself unasked.

2. The history of a nation generally accounts for the constituent parts of its language. When an early
English word is compared with Hebrew or Coptic, as used to be done in the old editions of Webster’s
dictionary, history is set at defiance; and it was a good deed to clear the later editions of all such rubbish.
As to geography, there must always be an intelligible geographical contact between races that are supposed
to have borrowed words from one another; and this is particularly true of olden times, when travelling
was less common. Old French did not borrow words from Portugal, nor did Old English borrow words
from Prussia, much less from Finnish or Esthonian or Coptic, &c., &c. Yet there are people who still
remain persuaded that WAztsunday is derived, of all things, from the German Pfingséen.

3. Few delusions are more common than the comparison of L. c#ra with E. care, of Gk. édos with


* I cite a few of these in my Principles of English Etymology, Series II, ch. xxv—‘On some False Etymologies.’


|


CANONS FOR ETYMOLOGY Xxx


E. whole, and of Gk. xdpis with E. charity. I dare say I myself believed in these things for many years,
owing to that utter want of any approach to any philological training, for which England in general has
long been so remarkable. Yet a very slight (but honest) attempt at understanding the English, the Latin,
and the Greek alphabets soon shows these notions to be untenable. The E. care, AS. cearu, meant
originally sorrow, which is only a secondary meaning of the Latin word; it never meant, originally, attention
or painstaking. But this is not the point at present under consideration. Phonetically, the AS. ¢ and the
L. c, when used initially, do not correspond ; for where Latin writes c at the beginning of a word, AS. has A, as in
L. cél-dre, related to AS. hel-an, to hide. Again, the AS. ea, before r following, stands for original a, cearu,
answering to an older caru. But the L. c#ra, Old Latin covra, is spelt with a long @, originally a diphthong,
which cannot answer exactly to an original a2. It remains that these words both contain the letter y in common,
which is not denied; but this is a slight ground for the supposed equivalence of words of which the primary
senses were different. The fact of the equivalence of L. ¢ to AS. 4, is commonly known as being due
to Grimm’s law. The popular notions about ‘Grimm’s law’ are extremely vague. Many imagine
that Grimm made the law not many years ago, since which time Latin and Anglo-Saxon have been bound
to obey it. But the word Jaw is then strangely misapprehended; it is only a law in the sense of an
observed fact. Latin and Anglo-Saxon were thus differentiated in times preceding the earliest record of the
latter, and the difference might have been observed in the eighth century if any one had had the wits to
observe it. When the difference has once been perceived, and all other AS. and Latin equivalent words
are seen to follow it, we cannot consent to es/adlish an exception to the rule in order to compare a single (supposed)
pair of words which do not agree in the vowel-sound, and did not originally mean the same thing.

As to the Gk. édos, the aspirate (as usual) represents an original s, so that édos answers to SKt. sarva-, all,
L. saluus, safe, unhurt. But the AS. 2a/ (which is the old spelling of zv/o/e) has for its initial letter an 4, answering
to Gk. x. As to xdpis, the initial letter is x, a guttural sound answering to Lat. # or f, and it is, in fact, allied
to L. horiari. But in charity, the ch is French, due to a peculiar pronunciation of the Latin c, and the F. chariéé is
of course due to the L. acc. carifatem, whence also Ital. carzfafe or cari/a, Span. caridad, all from L. caérus, with
long a When we put xdpus and carus side by side, we find that the initial letters are different, that the vowels are
different, and that, just as in the case of cearu and cura, the sole resemblance is, that they both contain the letter 7!
{t is not worth while to pursue the subject further. Those who are confirmed in their prejudices and have
no guide but the ear (which they neglect to train), will remain of the same opinion still; but some beginners
may perhaps take heed, and if they do, will see matters in a new light. To all who have acquired any philological
knowledge, these things are wearisome.

4. Suppose we take two Latin words such as ca@riéas and carus, The former has a stem ¢ar-7-/a/- ; the latter
has a stem cdr-o-, which may very easily turn into cdr-z-. | We are perfectly confident that the adjective came first
into existence, and that the sb. was made out of it by adding a suffix; and this we can tell by a glance at the words,
by the very form of them. It is a rule in all Indogermanic languages that words started from monosyllabic roots or
bases, and were built up by supplying new suffixes at the end; and, the greater the number of suffixes, the later the
formation. When apparent exceptions to this law present themselves, they require especial attention; but as long
as the law is followed, it is all in the natural course of things. Simple as this canon seems, it is frequently not
observed; the consequence being that a word A is said to be derived from B, whereas B is its own offspring.
The result is a reasoning in a circle, as it is called ; we go round and round, but there is no progress upward and
backward, which is the direction in which we should travel. Thus Richardson derives chine from ‘ F. echzne, and
this from ‘ F. echiner, to chine, divide, or break the back of (Cotgrave), probably from the AS. czzan, to chine,
chink, or rive.’ From the absurdity of deriving the ‘F. echzner’ from the ‘AS. c:man’ he might have been saved
at the outset, by remembering that, instead of echzme being derived from the verb echzner, it is obvious that echzner,
to break the back of, is derived from echzne, the back, as Cotgrave certainly meant us to understand ; see eschzne,
eschiner in Cotgrave’s Dictionary. Putting eschzne and eschiner side by side, the shorter form is the more original.

5. This canon, requiring us to compare vowel-sounds, is a little more difficult, but it is extremely important.
In many dictionaries it is utterly neglected, whereas the information to be obtained from vowels is often extremely
certain ; and few things are more beautifully regular than the occasionally complex, yet often decisive manner in
which, especially in the Teutonic languages, one vowel-sound is educed from another. The very fact that the
AS. @ is a modification of 6 tells us at once that /edan, to feed, is a derivation of fod, food; and that to derive food
from /eed is simply impossible. In the same way the vowel e in the verb to se¢ owes its very existence to the
vowel a in the past tense of the verb to sz#; and so on in countless instances.

The other canons require no particular comment.


BOOKS REFERRED TO IN THE DICTIONARY


Tue following is a list of the principal books referred to in the Dictionary, with a statement, in most instances,


of the editions which I have actually used.


The abbreviation ‘E.E.T.S.’ signifies the Early English Text Society ; and ‘E.D.S.,’ the English Dialect Society.
The date within square brackets at the end of a notice refers to the probable date of composziion of a poem


or other work; or to its first appearance in print.


Aasen; see Norwegian.

Abbott’s Shakespearian Grammar. Third Edition, 1870.

Acosta, Joseph d’, The Naturall and Morall Historie of the East
and West Indies; tr. by E. G[rimstone]; London, 1604. 4to.

Ady, T., Discovery of Witches. 1661.

félfred, King, tr. of Boethius, De Consolatione Philosophiae, ed.
S. Fox, 1864. [ab. 880-go00.]

tr. of Beda’s Ecclesiastical History, ed. Whelock, 1644.

tr. of Beda’s Ecclesiastical History, ed. J. Smith, 1722. Also

ed. T. Miller, E.E.T.S., 1890, 1898.

tr. of Gregory’s Pastoral Care, ed. Sweet ; E.E.T.S., 1871.

Version of the history of the world by Orosius ; ed. J. Bosworth,
London, 1859. [ab. 880-900.] Also ed. Sweet, E.E.T.S., 1883.

fElfred’s Metres; see Grein.

fEélfric, Lives of Saints; ed. W. W. Skeat; 2 vols.; E.E.T.S,, 1881-
1900.

fElfric on the Old Testament ; see Grein, Bibliothek der A. Prosa.

Ailfric’s Glossary, pr. in Wright’s Vocabularies; see Wright, T.
[ab. 975.] Also, in Somner’s Anglo-Saxon Dictionary.

félfric’s Grammar ; ed. J. Zupitza, Berlin, 1880. [ab. 975.]

fElfric’s Homilies ; ed. Thorpe (Atl fric Society). [ab. 975.]

Alexander and Dindimus; ed. Skeat. E.E.T.S., extra series, 1878.
{ab. 1350. |

Alexander, The Wars of; ed. W. W. Skeat. E.E.T-.S., 1886.

Algonkin.—Cuoq; Lexique de la langue Algonquine. Montreal,
1886.

Alisaunder, Kyng; see Weber’s Metrical Romances. [after 1300.]

Alliterative Poems; ed. Morris; E.E.T.S., 1864; reprinted, 1869.
[ab. 1360. }

Altenglische Dichtungen des MS. Harl. 2253; ed. Dr. K. Béddeker.
Berlin, 1878. 8vo.

Altenglische Legenden; ed. Dr. Carl Horstmann. Paderborn, 1875.

Altmark, dialect of; see Low German dialects.

Amadas, Sir; see Robson.

Ancren Riwle; ed. Jas. Morton. Camden Soc., 1873. [ab. 1230.]

Anglia; Zeitschrift fiir Englische Philologie; herausg. von R. P.
Wicker. Hallea/S. 1878 and following years.

Anglo-French.—A Rough List of English Words found in
Anglo-French; by the Rev. W. W. Skeat. (Phil. Soc. Trans-
actions, 1883.) Reprinted, with many additions, in Notes on
Eng. Etymology, by W. W. Skeat, 1901 ; pp. 353-470.

Annals of Burton ; pr. in Annales Monastici, ed. Luard (Record

Series), 1864, pp. 446-453. [1258.]

Edw. Conf.= Life of Edward the Confessor, ed. Luard (Record

Series), 1858. [12th century.]

French Chronicle of London, ed. Aungier (Camden Soc.),
London, 1844. [ab. 1350.]

——- Geoffrey Gaimar’s Chronicle, ed. T. Wright (Caxton Soc.),
1850. [ab. 1150.

—— Havelok.—Lai d’Havelok ; pr. in the same vol. as the preceding.
[f2th century. |

Langtoft’s Chronicle, ed. T. Wright (Record Series), 2 vols.
London, 1866-8. [ab. 1307.]

—— Laws of William I; pr. in Ancient Laws and Institutes of
England, ed. B. Thorpe; vol. i. p. 466.

ae Albus, ed. H. T. Riley (Record Series), 1859. [Before
1419.

—— Liber Custumarum, pr. in Munimenta Gildhalliz, vol. ii; ed.
HI. T. Riley (Record Series), 1860. [1270 to 1400.]

—— St. Nicholas, by Maistre Wace; ed. Delius; Bonn, 1850. [12th
century. |


Anglo-French.—Philippe de Thaun, Bestiary and Livre des
Creatures; pr. in Wright’s Popular Treatises on Science, 1841,
[12th century. ]

Political Songs of England, ed. T. Wright (Camden Soc,),

London, 1839.

Royal Wills, ed. J. Nichols; 1780. See Nichols, J.

Statutes of the Realm, pr. by command of Geo, III in 1810.

First Volume.

Vie de St. Auban, ed. R. Atkinson ; London, 1876.

Year-Books of Edward I, ed. A. J. Horwood (Record Series).
Vols. I to 3. Dates: vol. i, 1292~—3; vol. ii, 1302-3; vol. iil,
1304-5.

A much fuller list of A.F. works is given in Notes on Eng.
Etymology (as above).
Anglo-Saxon.—Ettmiiller, L., Lexicon Anglo-Saxonicum ; Qued-
linburg and Leipzig, 1851. See also Bosworth, Grein, Leo, Loth,

Lye, March, Somner, Sweet, Wright.

Anglo-Saxon and Early English Psalter; ed. J. Stevenson. Surtees
Soc., 1843-7. 2 vols.

Anglo-Saxon Chronicle ; ed. B. Thorpe; 2 vols. 1861. (Rolls Series.)

—— ed. C. Plummer and J. Earle. Oxford, 1892-9. 2 vols.

Anglo-Saxon Glosses ; see Voc. ; and see O.E. Texts.

Anglo-Saxon Gospels, The Gospel of St. Matthew, in Anglo-
Saxon and Northumbrian Versions, ed. W. W. Skeat, Cambridge,
1887.—St. Mark, 1871.—St. Luke, 1874.—St. John, 1878.

Annual Register ; commenced in 1758. London. 8vo.

Anstey, C.; The New Bath Guide. (First ed. in 1766.)

Antiquarian Repertory; a Miscellany. London, 1775-84. 4to.
4 vols.

Anturs of Arthur; see Robson. [ab. 1440. |

Arabic.—A Dictionary, Persian, Arabic, and English. By
J. Richardson ; new edition, by F. Johnson. London, 1829.

Arber.—English Reprints, ed. E, Arber; various dates,

Arber, E., An English Garner, vols. i to vii; 1877-1883.


Amold’s Chronicle; reprinted from the First Edition, with the .


additions included in the Second. London, 1811. [1502. ]

Ascham, Roger; Toxophilus, ed. Arber, 1868. [1545. ]

The Scholemaster, ed. Arber, 1870. [1570.]

Ash, J., Dictionary of the English Language; 2 vols., 1775.

Assumption of Mary; see Horn.

Atkinson, Rev. J. C., Glossary of the Cleveland Dialect. London,
1868.

Austin, T.; Two fifteenth-century Cookery Books (ab, 1430 and
1450). E.E.T.S., 1888.

Australian English; A Dictionary of Australasian Words, Phrases,
and Usages ; by Prof. E. E. Morris. London, 1898.

A. V.=Authorized Version; see Bible.

Avowing of Arthur; see Robson.

Awdelay’s Fraternity of Vagabonds,ed. Viles and Furnivall; E.E.T.S.,
1869 ; see Harman’s Caveat. (1560-1565. ]


Awntyrs of Arthure; see Scottish Alliterative Poems, and Three


Metrical Romances. 5
Ayenbite of Inwyt, or Remorse of Conscience, by Dan Michel of
Northgate; ed. R. Morris, E.E.T.S., 1866. [1340.]
Babees Book; ed. F. J. Furnivall, E.E.T.S., 1868. [15th cent. ]
Bacon, Lord, Advancement of Learning, ed. W. Aldis Wright ;
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1869. [1605.] An early edition by
G. Wats, Oxford; 1640, folio.
Essays; ed. S. W. Singer, London, 1857. Also (including
Colours of Good and Evil), ed. W. Aldis Wright, London, 1871.
(1597-]


BOOKS REFERRED TO IN THE DICTIONARY


Bacon, Lord, Life of Henry VII, ed. J. R. Lumby, 1876. [1621.]

Natural History, or Sylva Sylvarum, Fifth Ed., 1639. [1627.]

Bailey, N., Universal Etymological English Dictionary, Seventh
Edition, 1735.

English Dictionary, Vol. ii, Second Edition, 1731.

Bale, John, Kynge Johan, a Play; Camden Soc., 1838. [ab. 1552. ]

Barbour’s Bruce; ed. W. W. Skeat, E.E.T.S., 1870-1877. [1375.]

Barclay’s Ship of Fools, ed. Jamieson; Edinburgh, 1874. 2 vols.
[ 1509.

Berieioys Surnames.—Our English Surnames, by C. W. Bardsley;
London, n.d. Third edition, 1884.

Baret; John, Alvearie or Quadruple Dictionary, London, 1580.

Barnes, R., Workes of, pr. by John Day; see Tyndall.

Bartsch, K., Chrestomathie Provengale; Elberfeld, 1875.

Chrestomathie de l’Ancien Francais; Leipzig, 1875.

La Langue et la Littérature Francaises . . . précédés d’une
Grammaire de l’Ancien Francais, par A. Homing. Paris, 1887.
Basilicon Doron, by King JamesI; repr. in A Miscellany, ed. H.

Morley; Loadon, 1888. [1603.]

Basque.—Larramendi, M. de, Diccionario trilingue Castellano,
Bascuence, y Latin. San Sebastian, 1853.

Bavarian.—Bayerisches Worterbuch, von J. A. Schmeller, Four
Parts, Stuttgart, 1827-1837.

Beaumont and Fletcher, Works of; ed..G. Darley.
[ 1606-1616. ]

Beckmann, J., History of Inventions; tr. by W. Johnston.
London, 1846. 2 vols.

Becon, T., Works; ed. Rev. J. Ayre, M.A. Parker Soc.
First collected ed. 1563-4.

Beda; see A‘lfred.

De Temporibus Rationum; see Wright, T.

Be Domes Dege, ed. J. R. Lumby, E.E.T.S., 1876.

Beket, Thomas, Life of; by Robert of Gloucester ; ed. W. H. Black.
Percy Soc. 1845. [ab. 1300.]

Benfey ; see Sanskrit.

Beowulf; ed. B. Thorpe, Oxford and London, 1855.
1857. Ed. A. J. Wyatt, 1894.

Berghaus, H.; see Low German dialects (Saxon).

Berners ; see Froissart.

Beryn, The Tale of, ed. F. J. Furnivall; Chaucer Society, 1876.

Bestiary ; see Old English Miscellany. [ab. 1250-1300. ]

Beves of Hamtoun, ed. Turnbull, Edinburgh, 1838 (cited by Strat-
mann.) [ab.1320-1330?] Also,ed. Prof. E, Kolbing. E.E.T-S.,
extra series, 1885-6, 1894.

Bevis.—Der Anglonormannische Boeve de Haumtone;
Stimming. 1899.

Bewick, T.; History of Quadrupeds. (First ed., 1790.)

Bible, English; Authorized Version, 1611.

Imprinted at London by Jhon Day, 1551.
Biblesworth (for Bibbesworth), Walter de, the treatise of; pr. in
Wright’s Vocabularies, First Series, pp. 142-174. [ab. 1300.]
Biblia Sacra Vulgatz CEditionis. Auctoritate edita. Parisiis,

1872.

Birch, W. de Gray; Cartularium Saxonicum (Charters relating to
Anglo-Saxon History). London, 1885-93. 3 vols. 8vo.
Black Book of the Admiralty; ed. Sir T. Twiss. Vols.

1871-6. (Rolls Series.)

Blackstone’s Commentaries (cited in Richardson, and Todd’s John-
son). [1764-1768.]

Blickling Homilies; ed. R. Morris, E.E.T.S., 1874-6. [10th cent. ]

Blount’s Law Dictionary.—Nomo-aefikon; a Law-Dictionary, by
Tho. Blount. Second Edition. London, 1691

Blount, T., Glossographia., 1674.

Body and Soul, the Debate of the; printed in the Latin Poems of
Walter Mapes, ed. T. Wright; Camden Soc., London, 1841.
(See also the reprint in Matzner’s Altenglische Sprachproben, pp.
90-103.) [13th century. ]

Boethius, Chaucer’s translation of, ed. R. Morris, E.E.T.S., 1878.
(ab. 1380.] And see A#lfred and Chaucer.

Bohn’s Lowndes.—The Bibliographer’s Manual of English Litera-
ture, by W. T. Lowndes; New Edition, by H. G. Bohn, 1857.
Boke of St. Albans; first printedin 1486, [Fac-simile reprint, 1881. ]
Contains a Book on Hawking, a Book on Hunting (by Dame
Julians Barnes), and a Book on Coat-Armour.

Book of Quintessence; ed. F. J. Furnivall.
[1460-70. |

Borde, Andrew, The Fyrst Boke of the Introduction of Knowledge,
&c. [1547.] Also, A Dyetary of Helth. [1542.] Ed. F. J.
Furnivall, E.E.T.S., extra series, 1870.

Breviarie of Health. (First ed. 1547.)

Boswell, J., Life of Johnson; ed. J. W. Croker, 1876. [1791.]


2 vols.


1859.


New ed.,


1843-4.


Ed. Grein,


ed. A.


I-4.


B.E.T.S. 1866.


XXXi


Bosworth and Toller—An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary based on the
MS. collections of the late J. Bosworth, D.D.; edited and en-
larged by T. Northcote Toller, M.A. Oxford, 1882, &c.

Boutell’s Heraldry; ed. S. T. Aveling. London, 1873.

Boyle, Robert, Works. First ed. 1744; 5. vols.
Richardson.)

Bozon.—Les Contes Moralisés de N. Bozon; ed. Miss L. Toulmin
Smith and P. Meyer; Paris, 1889. (Anglo-French.)

Brachet, A., Etymological French Dictionary, tr. by G. W. Kitchin,
1873.

—— Historical Grammar of the French Language; enlarged by
P. Toynbee, M.A. Oxford, 1896. 8vo.

Brand, John, M.A.—Observations on Popular Antiquities. Arranged
and revised, with additions, by H. Ellis. Republished, in Bohn’s
Antiquarian Library, post 8vo, 1848. 3 vols.

Bray.—See French dialects.

Brazil.—Historia Naturalis Brasiliz; by Piso, Marcgraf, and de
Laet. Amsterdam, 1648.

Brazilian.—Cf. Vocabulario Rioplatense razonado, por D. D.
Granada. Montevideo, 1890.

Brazilian Language, The; by A. Cavalcanti, Rio Janeiro, 1883.

Bréal ; see Latin.

Bremen Worterbuch.—Versuch eines bremisch-niedersachsischen W6r-
terbuchs, herausgegeben von der bremischen deutschen Gesellschaft,
5 vols. Bremen, 1767.

Brende, J., tr. of Quintius Curtius, 1561 (cited by Richardson).

Breton.—Dictionnaire Breton-Frangais, par J.F.M.M.A. Le Goni-
dec; Angouléme, 1821.

Breton, Nicholas (1545 ?-1626?); Works, ed. Grosart (Chertsey
Library), 1877.

Britten and Holland.—A Dictionary of English Plant-names; by
J. Britten and R. Holland. E.D.S. 1886.

Britton; the French Text, with an E. translation, introduction and
notes; by F. M. Nichols, M.A. Oxford, 1865. 2 vols. 8vo.
(Anglo-French.)

Brockett, J. T., A Glossary of North Country Words, Third Edition.
2vols. Newcastle, 1846.

Browne, Sir Thomas, Works of, ed. S. Wilkin, 4 vols., 1852.
Bohn’s Standard Library.) [1640-1680. }

Browne, W., Britannia’s Pastorals, see English Poets. [ 1613-1616. |

Bruce: see Barbour.

Brugmann.—Elements of the Comparative Grammar of the Indo-
Germanic Languages. Vol. i, tr. by Joseph Wright, Ph.D.
London, 1888, Vols. 2-4, with Index; tr. by R. S. Conway and
W.H.D. Rouse. London, 1891-5.

Brugmann, K.; Grundriss der vergleichenden Grammatik der indo-
germanischen Sprachen. Strassburg, 1886-1900. 5 vols.

Brugmann, K., and B. Delbriick; Grundriss der vergleichenden
Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen. Zweite Bearbeitung.
Vol. 1. Strassburg, 1897.

Brunne, Robert of, Handlyng Synne; ed, F. J. Fuinivall; Rox-
burghe Club, 1862. [1303.]

Buffon’s Natural History abridged. London, 1792. 2 vols.

Bullein’s Dialogue against the Fever Pestilence; ed. M. and A. H.
Bullen. E.E.T.S., extra series, 1888. [1578. ]

Bullinger, H., Works; ed. Rev. T. Harding. Parker Soc., 1849-
52. 4vols. 8vo.

Burguy’s Glossaire.—In tome iii. of Grammaire de la Langue D’Oil,
par G. F. Burguy; 2me édition, Berlin and Paris, 1870.

Burke, Select Works, ed. E. J. Payne, vol. i, 1876. [1774-1776. }

Burne, Charlotte S., Shropshire Folk-lore. London, 1883.

Burnet, Bp., History of his own time. London, 1724-34, folio.
2 vols. (Several editions. Cited by Richardson.)

Burns, R., Poems, Songs, and Letters, the Globe Edition, 1868.
[1786-1796.]

Burton, Robert, Anatomy of Melancholy (cited in Richardson, and
Todd’s Johnson). [1621.]

Bury Wills, ed. S. Tymms, Camden Soc. 1850. [15th cent.]

Butler, Jos., Bp. of Durham; The Analogy of Religion. (Works,
in 1807.

Butler’s a (including Hudibras), ed. Robert Beil.
London, 1855. [Hudibras, 1663-1678. ]

Hnudibras ; parts 1 and 2; ed. A. Milnes. London, 1881.

Byron, Poems, Dramas, &c. 8 vols. London: J. Murray, 1853.

Czedmon, ed. B. Thorpe. Published by the Society of Antiquaries,
London, 1832.

Campbell, T., Poetical Works of. A new ed. London, 1853.

Carey, H., Chrononhotonthologos; repr. in Burlesque Plays, ed. H.
Morley. London, 1885.

Caribbean.—Dictionnaire Caraibe-Frangois; par le R. P. Raymond
Breton. Auxerre, 1665.


(Cited by


(in


3 vols.


XXxli


Castle off Loue. An Early English Translation of an Old French
Poem, by Robert Grosseteste, bp. of Lincoln; ed. R. F. Wey-
mouth. (Published for the Philological Society.) [1370?]

Catholicon Anglicum; ed. S. J. Herrtage; E.X.T.S. ° 1881.
[1483.]

Cavendish, G., Life of Thomas Wolsey, Cardinal; ed. F. S. Ellis.
London, 1893 (Kelmscott Press). Written in 1557.

Caxton, W., tr. of Reynard the Fox, ed. Arber, 1878. [1481. ]

Caxton’s Blanchardyn and Eglantine; ed. Dr. Leon Kellner.
E.E.T.S., extra series. 1890. [ab. 1489. ]

Dictes and Sayengis of Philosophirs, by Lord Rivers ; pr. by

Caxton in 1477. [Fac-simile edition. ]

Eneydos; ed. W. T. Culley and F. J. Furnivall. E.E.T.S.,

extra series. 1890. [1490.]

Godeffroy of Boloyne; ed. Mary N. Colvin, Ph.D. E.E.T.S.,

extra series. 1893. [1481.]

The Golden Legend; pr. in 1483. Reprint by F. S. Ellis and
W. Morris. London, 1892. 3 vols.

— The Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye. Exact reprint by
H. O. Sommer, Ph.D. London, 1894. 2 vols. [ab. 1474. |

Centlivre, Mrs. S.; Plays. 1761. 12mo. 3 vols.

Century Dictionary of the English Language, The.
and London, 1889-91. In six vols.

Chalmers; see English Poets.

Chambers’s Etymological Dictionary of the English Language, ed.
J. Donald, 1871.

Chambers, R.; The Book of Days, A Miscellany of Popular Anti-
quities. 2 vols. London and Edinburgh, 1864.

Chanson de Roland, La; Texte, &c., par L. Gautier. Tours, 188r.
(Early 11th cent.)

Chapman, George, Plays, ed. R. H. Shepherd, 1874. [1598-
1634.]

Translation of Homer, ed. R. H. Shepherd, 1875. (In this
edition the lines are not numbered; a far better edition is that by
Hooper.) [1598.]

Chaucer.—The Workes of Geffray Chaucer. (First collected
Edition by W. Thynne, 1532.) Facsimile reproduction. Oxford
(1904). Second ed. 1542. Third ed. (ab. 1550).

— Chaucers Woorkes, with diuers Addicions; newlie prynted by
Jhon Kyngston, 1561. [Fourth ed., by J. Stowe.] Contains the
first edition of the Court of Love; also the Testament of Love.

The Complete Works of Geoffrey Chaucer. Ed. by the Rey.
W. W. Skeat, Litt.D. Oxford, 1894. Six vols. 8vo.

—— Chaucer Society, publications of the.

— Canterbury Tales: Six-text edition, ed. F, J. Furnivall.
(Chaucer Society.)

ed. Tyrwhitt.—A reprint of Tyrwhitt’s edition of the Canter-

bury Tales, with his notes and glossary; to which were added

(by the publisher) reprints of Chaucer’s Minor Poems, &c. Lon-

don, E. Moxon, 1855; first printed, 1843. [1369-1400. ]

tr. of Boethius; ed. Morris, E.E.T.S., extra series, 1868.

[ab. 1380. ]

Treatise on the Astrolabe; ed. Skeat, Chaucer Society and
E.E.T\S., extra series, 1872. [1391.]

Chaucer’s Dream. A late poem, not by Chaucer ; printed by Moxon
with Chaucer’s Works. [15th cent. ]

Chaucerian and Other Pieces. Ed. by the Rev. W. W. Skeat, Litt.D.
Oxferd, 1897.

Chester Whitsun Plays; ed. T. Wright. Shakespeare Soc. nos. 17
and 35; 1843 and 1847.

Chinese.—-A Syllabic Dictionary of the Chinese Language. By
S. W. Williams. Shanghai, 1874.

-—— Chinese-English Dictionary of the Amoy vernacular. By the
Rey. C. Douglas, 1873.

Christ’s Own Complaint ; see Political, Religious, and Love Poems.

Churchill’s Collection of Voyages and Travels. London, 1704,
folio. 4 vols. (Another ed. 1732.)

Clare, John; Poems. Second edition, London, 1820. Another ed.
1821. 2 vols.

Clarendon, Earl of. History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in
England. Oxford, 1826. 8vo. 8vols. (Many other editions.)

Clavigero’s History of Mexico; tr. by C. Cullen. London, 1787.
4to. 2 vols.

Cockayne, O., Leechdoms, Wortcunning, and Starcraft of Early
England. (Record Series.) 1864-1866. 3 vols.

— - The Shrine. London, 1864. (Contains several pieces in
Anglo-Saxon. )

Cockeram, H.—The English Dictionarie. By H.C.Gent. 7th ed.
London, 1642. 8vo. (First ed. 1632.)

Codex Diplomaticus ; see Kemble.

Coles, E., an English Dictionary, 1684.


New York


BOOKS REFERRED TO IN THE DICTIONARY


Collins, W.; Poems. See English Poets, }

Complaynte of Scotlande. ke-edited by James A. H. Murray,
E.E.T.S., extra series, 1872, 1873. [1549.]

Congreve, W., Plays; see Wycherley. [Died 1729.]

Cookery Books; see Austin.

Cooper, T., Thesaurus Linguz Romane et Britannice, 1565.

Cooper’s Report on Rymer’s Foedera. Appendix A (first vol.).
Appendix B. C. D. (second vol.). App. B contains the AS.
Glosses to Prudentius.

Coptic.—Lexicon Lingue Coptice. By A. Peyron. Turin, 1835.

Corblet ; see French dialects (Picard).

Cornish.—Lexicon Cornu-Britannicum; by R. Williams. Llan-
dovery and London, 1865.

Coryat, T.—Coryat’s Crudities hastily gobled vp, &c. London,
1611. 4to.

Gotoravel French and English Dictionary, composed by Mr.
Randle Cotgrave; with another in English and French; ed. J.
Howell. London, pr. by Wm. Hunt, in Pye-corner, 1660.

Cotton, C., Poems; see English Poets.

Court of Love; a late poem first printed with Chaucer’s Works,
1561. [15th or 16th cent.] See Chaucerian Pieces.

Coventry Mysteries, ed. J. O. Halliwell. Shakespeare Society,
1841. [ab. 1460.]

Cowel, Dr., The Interpreter of Words and Terms. Augmented
and improved. London, 1701.

Cowley, A., Works of, London, 1688.
English Poets.

Cowley’s Prose Works; ed. Rev. J. R. Lumby. Cambridge, 1887.
(For Poems, see English Poets.)

Cowper, W., the Poetical Works of; ed. R. A. Wilmott. London,
1866. [1782-1799. |

Cranmer, T., Works. Parker Soc. 1844-6. 2 vols.

Cursor Mundi: ed. Dr. R. Morris, E.E.T.S., Parts i-vi, 1874-92.
[ab. 1300. }

Curtius, G., Greek Etymology; tr. by Wilkins and England. 2 vols.
1876.

Dahnert ; see Low German dialects (Pomeranian).

Dampier’s Voyages, an. 1681 (cited by Richardson).
Voyage, 1699; 2 vols.

Daniel, S., Civil Wars; see English Poets. [1595.]

Danish.—Molbech, C., Dansk Ordbog ; Kidbenhavn, 1859.

Ferrall og Repps dansk-engelske Ordbog, gjennemseet og

rettet af W. Mariboe ; Kjobenhayn, 1861. (When ‘Dan.’ alone

is cited, this book or the next is meant.)

A Dictionary of the Dano-Norwegian and English Languages,

by A. Larsen. 3rd ed. Copenhagen, 1897.

A New Practical and Easy method of Learning the Danish
Language; by H. Lund. Second Edition, London, 1860.

Danish, Middle.—Ordbog til det zldre Danske Sprog (1300-
1700) af Otto Kalkar. Kcebenhayn. 1881-1907. (In 4 vols.)

Danish dialects.—Det Danske Folkesprog i Sonderjylland
[South Jutland]; ved Johannes Kok. Kobenhavn, 1863-7.
2 vols.

—— Bidrag til en Ordbog over Jyske Almuesmal; af H. F. Feil-
berg. Kjobenhavn, 1886—. Vol. 1; A-H. Vol. 2; LP.
Parts 24-31; R-St.

Dansk Dialect-Lexicon; ved C. Molbech.

1841.

Etymological Dictionary ; see Falk.

Dayvenant, Sir W., Poems; see English Poets.

Davies, J., Antique .. Wallicz et Latinz Dictionarium Duplex.
A Welsh-Latin Dict. London, 1632. Fol.

Davies, T. Lewis O., M.A.; A Supplementary English Glossary.
London, 1881. 8vo.

De Bo; see Flemish.

Decorde ; see French dialects (Bray).

Degrevant, Sir; see Thornton Romances.

Dekker, T., The Dramatic Works of. London, 1873. 4 vols.
8yvo.

The Seven Deadly Sins of London (1606); ed. Arber,
1879.

——- Five Plays; ed. E. Rhys. London, 1887. (Mermaid Series.)

Delfortrie; see Flemish.

Denham, Sir John; see English Poets.

Derby, Earl of, Expeditions to Prussia and the Holy Land in 1390-1
and 1392-3; ed. Lucy Toulmin Smith. Camden Soc. 1894.

Derham, W., Physico-Theology. First ed. 1713; best ed. 1798.
8vo. 2 vols.

Destruction of Troy; see Gest Hystoriale.

Devic, M., Dictionnaire étymologique de tous les mots d’origine
Orientale ; in the Supplement to Littré’s French Dictionary.


[1633-1667.] And see


A New


Kidbenhavn,


j


BOOKS REFERRED TO IN THE DICTIONARY


D’Hombres; see French dialects (Languedoc).

Dictes of the Philosophirs ; see Caxton.

Dictionary of the Bible, ed. W. Smith. Concise edition, by W. Aldis
Wright, 1865.

Dictionary of National Biography. London, 1885~. 8vo.

Diez, F., Etymologisches Worterbuch der Romanischen Sprachen.
Fourth Edition. Bonn, 1878.

Digby Mysteries——Ancient Mysteries from the Digby MSS.; Edin-
burgh, 1835 (cited by Stratmann). [ab. 1430?] Adso, The
Digby Plays, ed. F,. J. Fumivall, E.E.T.S., extra series.
1896.

Saige Robert. A Select Collection of Old English Plays, ori-
ginally published by R, D. Fourth Edition, By W. Carew
Hazlitt. London, 1874-6. 8vo. 15 vols. [16th cent.]

Donne, J., Poems; see English Poets.

Douglas, Gavin, Works of; ed, J. Small. 4 vols. Edinburgh, 1874.
(1501-1513. |

Drama, The Ancient British; (containing many of the plays in
Dodsley’s Collection). London, 1810. royal 8vo. 3 vols.

—— The Modern British; containing plays by Beaumont and
Fletcher, Mrs. Centlivre, Congreve, Dryden, Farquhar, Fielding,
Foote, Ford, Garrick, Jonson, Lillo, Massinger, Otway, Stecle,
Vanbrugh, Wycherley, Young, &c. London, 1811, royal 8vo.
5 vols.

Drant, T.; translations from Horace. Satires, 1566; Art of Poetry,
Epistles, and Satires, 1567.

Drayton.—Poems of Michael Drayton; see English Poets.

Drummond, W., Poems; see English Poets.

Dryden, J., Poetical Works, London, 1851. [Died 1701.]

The Works of; ed. W. Scott. London, 1808. 18 vols,

tr. of Virgil; reprint by F. Warne and Co.; n.d.

Du Bois; see French dialects (Norman).

Ducange.—Glossarium Mediz et Infimz Latinitatis, conditum a
Carolo du Fresne Domino Du Cange..cum Supplementis. ..
Editio Nova..aL, Favre. Niort et Londres, 1884-7. In ten
vols.

Lexicon Manuale ad Scriptores Mediz et Infimz Latinitatis,
ex glossariis C. D. D. Ducangii et aliorum in compendium
accuratissime redactum. Par W.-H. Maigne D’Arnis. Publié
par M. L’Abbé Migne. Paris, 1866, (A compendium in one
volume.)

Duméril; see French dialects (Norman).

Dunbar, W., Poems; ed. J. Small and W. Gregor.
Scottish Text Soc. 1883-93.

Durham Ritual.—Rituale Ecclesize Dunelmensis, Ed. J. Stevenson.
Surtees Soc. 1840. (I give a large number of corrections in my
Collation with the MS. ; in Phil. Soc, Trans. 1877-9; pp. 49*-72*.

Dutch.—A Large Dictionary, English and Dutch, by W. Sewel.
Fifth Edition. Amsterdam, 1754.

—— A large Netherdutch and English Dictionarie, by H. Hexham.
Rotterdam, 1658.

— Kilian, C., Old Dutch Dictionary. Utrecht, 1777.

—— Oudemans, A. C., Old Dutch Dictionary, 7 parts, 1869-80.

—— Ten Kate, L., Aenleiding tot de Kennisse van het verhevene
Deel der Nederduitsche Sprake. 2 vols. Amsterdam, 1723.

A New Pocket-Dictionary of the English and Dutch Lan-

guages. Leipzig} C. Tauchnitz. (When only ‘ Du.’ is cited, this

book or the next is meant. )

Nederlandsch-Engelsch en Engelsch-Nederlandsch Woorden-

boek; door I. M. Calisch. Tiel, 1875. 2 vols.

Etymological Dictionary ; see Franck.

Dutch dialect.—Worterbuch der Groningeschen Mundart; by
H. Molema. Norden and Leipzig, 1888.

Du Wes, An Introductorie for to lerne to rede, to pronounce, and
to speke French trewly; by Giles Du Wes. Printed together
with Palsgrave’s French Dictionary. See Palsgrave.

Dyer, J., Poems; see English Poets.

E.D.D.—English Dialect Dictionary, ed. Prof. Wright.
1898-1905. 6 vols.

Earl of Derby’s Accounts; see Derby.

Earle, J.; Handbook to the Land Charters and other Saxonic Docu-
ments. Oxford. 1888.

Micro-cosmographie; 1628, (In Arber’s Reprints.)

—— Two Saxon Chronicles; see Anglo-Saxon Chronicle,

Earliest English Prose Psalter ; ed. Dr. K. D. Buelbring.
1891.

Early English Homilies ; ed. Dr. Richard Morris; E.E.T.S., First
Series, 1867 ; Second Series, 1873. [13th century. ]

Early English Poems and Lives of Saints; ed. F. J. Furnivall.
Phil, Soc. 1862.

Early English Popular Poetry.—Remains of the Early Popular


Svo.


In § parts.


Oxford,


E.E.T.S.


XXxlil


Poetry of England; by W. Carew Hazlitt.
4 vols,

Early English Psalter—Anglo-Saxon and Early English Psalter,
ed. J. Stevenson. 2 vols. (Surtees Society.) 1843-1847.

Early E, Wills—The Fifty Earliest English Wills; ed, F. J.
Furnivall. E.E.T.S, 1882. [1387-1454.]

Eastwood and Wright’s Bible Wordbook.—A Glossary of Old
English Bible Words, by J. Eastwood and W. Aldis Wright.
London, 1866.

Eden, R., The First Three English Books on America; ed. E. Arber.
Birmingham, 1885. [1511 21555.

Edmondston, T., Glossary of the Shetland and Orkney Dialect.
Phil. Soc. 1866.

E.D.S.=English Dialect Society, publications of the. (Including
Ray’s Collections, Pegge’s Kenticisms and Derbicisms, Whitby
Glossary, Mid-Yorkshire Glossary, Holderness Glossary, Glossaries
of words in use in Cheshire, Cumberland, Hants, Lancs., Leics.,
Lincs., Northumberland, Somersets., Surrey, Swaledale, War-
wicks., Wilts., Worcs. &c., Bird-names, Plant-names, Old
Farming Words, Turner’s Names of Plants, Fitzherbert’s Hus-
bandry, Tusser’s Husbandry, &c.)

E.E.T.S.—Early English Text Society’s publications. See A®lfred,
fElfric, Alexander, Alliterative Poems, Ayenbite, Barbour, Be
Domes Dege, Blickling Homilies, Bullein, Catholicon, Caxton,
Chaucer, Complaint of Scotland, Cursor Mundi, Early English
Homilies, Ellis, English Gilds, Fisher, Floriz, Gawayn, Genesis,
Gregory, Hali Meidenhad, Hayelok, Joseph, King Horn, Knight
of la Tour, Lancelot, Legends of the Holy Rood, Levins, Lynde-
say, Morte Arthure, Myrc, Myrour of Our Lady, Old Eng. Mis-
cellany, Palladius, Partenay, Piers Plowman, Political, St. Juliana,
Seinte Marharete, Troybook, Will. of Palerne, &c,

Egilsson; see Icelandic.

Eglamour, Sir; see Thornton Romances,

Ellis, A. J., Early English Pronunciation, E.E.T.S., extra series,
1867, 1869, 1871, 1874, 1889.

Ellis, Sir H.; Original Letters illustrative of English History.
Three Series. London, 1824-46. cr. 8vo. 11 vols.

Elyot, Sir T., The Castel of Helthe; ed. 1539. [1533.]

—— The Gouernor. (Black-letter Edition ; no title-page.) [1531.]

The Boke named The Gouernour; from the first ed. of 1531;


London, 1864-6.


ed. H. H. S. Croft, M.A. London, 1883. 2 vols.
Emaré, Romance of; see Ritson.
ed, Edith Rickert, Ph.D. E.E.T.S. 1906.


Engelmann et Dozy, Glossaire des mots Espagnols et Portugais
tirés de ’Arabe. Second Edition, Paris, 1869.

Englische Studien. Heilbronn; from 1877 onwards.

English Cyclopedia, conducted by Charles Knight.
Three Supplements and Index.

English Dialect Society’s publications. (References to these are
marked E.D.S.) See E.D.S. and E.D.D. above.

English Garner, An; ed. E. Arber. Birmingham, 1877-83.
I-7.

English Gilds, ed. Toulmin Smith. E.E.T.S., 1870. [1389-1450. ]

English Poets, from Chaucer to Cowper, ed. A. Chalmers. London,
1810. 21 vols.

Epinal Glossary; see O.E. Texts.

Etheredge, Sir G., Works of; ed. A. W. Verity. London, 1888.
8vo.

Ettmiiller ; see Anglo-Saxon.

Evans, A. B, and S.; Leicestershire Words. E.D.S. 1881,

Evelyn, John, Diary of; ed. W. Bray. (Reprint by F. Warne; n. d.)
[ 1620-1706. ] ‘

Parallel of Ancient and Modern Architecture.

Sylva. First ed. 1664. 4to. (Many editions.)

Excerpta Historica. London, 1831. 8vo.

Exeter Book.—Codex Exoniensis ; a Collection of AS, Poetry. Ed.
B. Thorpe. London, 1842. (And see Grein.)

Exmoor Scolding and Courtship; E.D.S. 1879.

Fabyan’s Chronicles of England and France, ed. Henry Ellis,
London, 1811. 4to. [1516.]

Faire Em., a play; see Shakespeare Apocrypha.

Fairfax, tr. of Tasso; ed. R. A. Willmott, 1858.
spoilt in the editing.) [1600.]

Fairholt, F, W., Costume in England.
Dillon, F.S.A. London, 1885. 8vo.

Falconer’s Shipwreck ; see English Poets.

Falk, H. og A. Torp; Etymologisk Ordbog over det Norske og det
Danske Sprog. Kristiania, 1903-6. 2 vols.

Farquhar, G., Plays; see Drama, The Modem British ; also in the
Mermaid Series ; and see Wycherley.

Feilberg ; see Danish dialects.


22 vols., with


Vols.


1669.


(Modernized and


3rd ed. ; by the Hon. H. A.
2 vols.


XXX1V


Ferrex and Porrex ; see Sackville ; and Drama, Ancient British.
Ferumbras, Sir; ed. S. J. Herrtage. E.E.T.S., extra series, 1879.
Fick, A., Ver gleichendes Worterbuch der Indogermanischen Sprachen,


sprachgeschichtlich angeordnet. Third Edition, 3 vols, Got-
tingen, 1874. And see Stokes-Fick.

Fisher, Bp. J., English Works of; ed. J. E. B. Mayor. E. E. T.S.,
extra series. 1876. (Died 1535. ]

Fitzherbert, Book of Husbandry ; ed. W. W.Skeat. E.D.S. 1882.


[1534.] (Written by John F., not by Sir Anthony, as stated in the


Preface.)
Flemish.—Mémoire sur les Analogies des Langues Flamande,
Allemande, et Anglaise; par E.-J. Delfortrie. Bruxelles, 1858.
West-Flemish Dictionary ; by L.—L. De Bo. Gent, 1892.
Fletcher, John, Plays ; see Beaumont.
Phineas, Poems of; see English Poets. [1633.]
Lumby. E. E. T. S., 1866. [End


Florio; see Italian.

Floriz and Blancheflour; ed. J. R.
of 13th cent. |

Flower and the Leaf; see Chaucerian Pieces.

Fliigel ; see German.

Foote, Sam., Dramatic Works of. London, n. d.
Drama, Modern British, vol. v.

Forby.—The Vocabulary of East Anglia, by the late Rev. Robert
Forby. 2 vols. London, 1830.

Ford, John, Plays; ed. W. Gifford. London, 1827. 8vo. 2 vols.

Foxe, John, Acts and Monuments of these latter and perillous
Dayes, touching Matters of the Church, &c.; first ed. in 1563,
folio. Generally known as Foxe’s Book of Martyrs.

Frampton, J., loyfull Newes out of the newe founde worlde, 1577.
London. 4to. Tr.from the Spanish of Monardes.

Franck, Dr. Ji; Etymologisch Woordenboek der Nederlandsche
Taal. ’s—Gravenhage, 1892.

French; see Bartsch, Brachet, Burguy, Cotgrave, Roquefort,
Schwan, Vie deSeint Auban. (When only ‘ F.’ is cited, the refer-
ence is either to Hatzfeld, or to Hamilton and Legros.) ‘MF.
refers to Cotgrave.

Dictionnaire International Frangais-Anglais, par MM. H.

Hamilton et E. Legros. Paris, 1872.

Dictionnaire Général de la Langue Frangaise; par MM. A.

Hatzfeld, A. Darmesteter, et A. Thomas. Paris (undated;

commenced in 1871). 2 vols. (Referred to as ‘ Hatzfeld *.)

Littré, E., Dictionnaire de la Langue Frangaise. 4 vols.; with

supplement (see Devic). Paris, 1877.

Scheler, A., Dictionnaire d’Etymologie Francaise; par A.
Scheler. Nouvelle édition. Bruxelles et Londres, 1873.

French, Old.—Dictionnaire de L’Ancienne Langue Francaise et de
tous ses Dialectes du Ix® au xV® siecle; par F. Godefroy. Paris,
1881-1902. 10 vols. (with Supplement).

French dialects.—Berry: Vocabulaire du
amateur du vieux Langage. Paris, 1842.

Bourgogne: Vocabulaire .. du dialecte..

Bourgogne; par Mignard. Paris, 1870.

Bray: Dictionnaire du Patois du Pays de Bray; par Abbé

J.-E. Decorde. Paris, 1852.

Gascon: Dictionnaire Gascon-Frangais; par C. Moncaut.

Paris, 1863.

Haut-Maine: Vocabulaire du Haut-Maine; par C. R. de
M[ontesson]. Paris, 1859.

—— Ille-et-Vilaine: Glossaire Patois du département d’Ille-et-
Vilaine ; par Ad. Orain. Paris, 1886.

Languedoc: Dictionnaire du patois du Bas-Limousin (Corréze)

et des environs de Tulle; par M. Nic. Béronie. Tulle, n. d.

: Dictionnaire Languedocien-Frangais par M. D’Hombres
et G. Charvet. Alais, 1884.

—— Lyons: Dictionnaire du Patois Forézien ;
Lyon, 1863.

Dictionnaire étymologique du patois Lyonnais ;

du Puitspelu. Lyon, 1887-90

la Meuse: Glossaire abrégé du Patois de la Meuse; par H.


2 vols. And see


Berry; par wun


de la Province de


_—


par L.-P. Graz.
par N.


——


Labourasse. Arcis-sur-l’Aube, 1887.
-—— Norman: Glossaire du Patois Normand; par M. Louis du
Bois, Caen, 1856.


—: Glossaire du Normand; par le Héricher. Paris (no
date). 2 vols.

: Glossaire du Patois Normand ;
Alfred Dumeéril. Caen, 1849.
Dictionnaire de Patois Normand; par Henri Moisy.
Caen 1887.

Glossaire comparatif Anglo-Normand ;
Moisy. Caen, 1895.

Dictionnaire du Patois Normand en usage dans le


par MM. Edélestand et


par Henri


BOOKS REFERRED TO IN THE DICTIONARY


département de l’Eure ; par MM. Robin, Le Prevost, A. Passy, et
de Blosseville. Fvreux, 1879.

French dialects.—Guernsey: Dictionnaire Franco-Normand ; ou
recueil des Mots particuliers au dialecte de Guernesey ; ‘par
G. Métivier. London, 1870.

Picard: Glossaire Etymologique et Comparatif du Patois
Picard, ancien et moderne; par l’Abbé Jules Corblet. Paris,
1851.

ata OR Dictionnaire Rouchi-Francais; par G. A. I. Hécart.
(Troisiéme édition.) Valenciennes, 1834.

Verdun.— Dictionnaire du langage populaire Verduno-Chalon- 7

nais (Saéne-et-Loire); par F. Fertiault. Paris, 1896. :

Walloon: Dictionnaire de la langue Wallonne; par Grand-

gagnage. Liege, 1847.

: Dictionnaire Wallon-Francais ;

iéme édition, Liege, 1843. 2 vols.

Dictionnaire du Wallon du Mons;
(Deuxiéme edition.) Paris, 1870.

Friesic.—A ltfriesisches Wortevbnale von K. von Richthofen ; Got-
tingen, 1840,

Glossarium der friesischen Sprache, besonders in nordfriesischer :

Mundart, von N. Outzen. Kopenhagen, 1837. |

Koolman, J., ten Doorkaat, Worterbuch der Ostfriesischen
Sprache. Norden, 1879-84. 3 vols.

Frith: see Tyndall. e

Froissart, tr. by Lord Berners. (Cited by Richardson.) [1523-25. ] :


par L.Remacle. Denux- f


par J. Sigart.


Fryer, John. A New Account of East India, &c. London,
1698. fol.

Fuller, T., A Pisgah Light of Palestine. (Reprint.) London,
1869. 8vo. [1650.]


—— The Church History of Britain.

—— The History of the Worthies of England.

—— Holy and Profane State. New edition.
[1642. ]

Gaelic.—A Dictionary of the Gaelic Language, by Macleod and
Dewar; Glasgow, 1839.

— An Etymological Dictionary of the Gaelic Language.
A. Macbain, M.A. Inverness, 1896.

Gallée; see Low German, Old ; under Low German dialects,

Gamelyn, the Tale of. In Wright’ s edition of Chaucer’s Canterbury


(First ed. 1655-6.)
(First ed. 1662.)
London, 1841. 8vo.


By


Tales. Also ed. W. W, Skeat. 2nd ed. Oxford, 1893. [14th
cent. |

Gamester, The Compleat. London, 1674. 12mo. And London,
1680,


Gammer Gurton’s Needle; see Drama, Ancient British, vol. 1.

Garcilasso de la Vega; Royal Commentaries of Peru; tr. by Sir P.
Rycaut. London, 1688. fol.

Garlande, John de, Dictionarius; pr. in Wright’s Vocabularies, First
Series, pp. 120-138. [13th cent. ]

Garrick, D., Plays ; see Drama, Modern British.

Gascoigne, G., Works of; ed. W. C. Hazlitt, 1869. [Died 1577.]

Gawayn and the Green Knight; an alliterative Romance-Poem, ed. q
Dr. Richard Morris, E.E.T.S., 1864; reprinted, 1869. [ab. 1360, J 4

Gay, J., Poems of ; see English Poets. [Died 1732. ] ’

Gazophylacium Anglicanum. London, 1689. 8vo.

Generydes, A Romance ; ed. W. Aldis Wright. E.E.T.S., 1873 and
1878. [ab. 1440. ] q

Genesis and Exodus, The Story of; ed. Dr. Richard Morris,
E.E.T.S., 1865. [1250-1300 ?)

Gentleman’s Magazine. London, 1731-1858. 8vo.

Gerarde, J.; The Herbal, or general History of Plants.
in 1597-)

German.—Altdentsches Worterbuch ; von Oskar Schade. (2nd ed.)
Halle a. S. 1872-82.

Dictionary, by Fliigel; ed. Feiling, Heimann, and Oxenford.
London, 1861. (When only ‘ G.’ is cited, this book is meant.)
—— F.L. K. Weigand, Deutsches Worterbuch. Third ed. 2 vols.

Giessen, 1878.

—— F. Kluge, Etymologisches Worterbuch der deutschen Sprache.
(Fifth ed.) Strassburg, 1894.

German dialects.—Thiiringer Sprachschatz ; von Dr. L, Hertel.
Weimar, 1895. (Central Germany.)

—— Westerwald: Westerwdldisches Idiotikon; von K. C. L.
Schmidt, Hadamar und Herbom, 1800. (Nassau.)

Gest Hystoriale of the Destruction of Troy ; an alliterative Romance,
ed. G. A. Panton and D. Donaldson, E.E.T.S., 1869 and 1874.
[ab. 1390.]

Gesta Romanorum, English Version of; ed. S. J. Herrtage, E.E.T.S.,
extra series, 1879. [15th cent. ]

Gibbon, E.; The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire. Illustrated Edition. London, n.d. 2 vols.


205 vols.
(First ed.


BOOKS REFERRED TO IN


Gifford, G., A Dialogue of Witches and Witchcraft. London, 1603; |


ed. T. Wright, Percy Soc., 1842.

Glossary of Architecture. Oxford, 1840.

Glossary to Prudentius ; see Cooper.

Glossographia Anglicana Nova. London, 1719.

Godefroy ; see French, Old.

Golden Booke (cited by Richardson), This is the Life of Marcus
Aurelius, tr. by Lord Berners ; of which I have a black-letter copy,
without a title-page. [First ed. 1534.]

Golding, Arthur, tr. of Ovid’s Metamorphoses.
(First complete ed. in 1567.)

Goldsmith, O., Works of; ed. P. Cunningham.
8vo. 4 vols.

Gosson, Stephen, The Schoole of Abuse; ed. E. Arber, 1868. [1579. |

Gothic.—A Meceso-Gothic Glossary; by W. W.Skeat. London, 1868.

— Ulfilas; Text, Grammatik und Worterbuch; ed. Dr. M. Heyne.
(7th ed.) Paderborn, 1878.

Etymological Dictionary ; see Uhlenbeck.

Gower, John, The Complete Works of (English, French, and Latin) ;
ed. G. C. Macaulay, M.A. Oxford, 1899-1902. 8vo. 4 vols.
Gower’s Confessio Amantis; ed. Dr. Reinhold Pauli. London,

1857. 3 vols. [1393.]

Granada ; see Brazilian.

Gray, T., Poems of; see English Poets.

Greek.—Liddell and Scott’s Greek-English Lexicon, 1849.

Etymological Dictionary; see Prellwitz.

Greene, R.—The Dramatic and Poetical Works of Rob. Greene and
Geo, Peele; ed. Rev. A. Dyce. London, 1883. 8vo.

Gregor, Rev. W., The Dialect of Banffshire. Phil. Soc., 1866.

Gregory’s Pastoral Care, King Alfred’s West-Saxon Version of; ed.
H. Sweet, M.A. E.E.T.S., 1871-2.

Grein, C. W. M., Bibliothek der Angelsichsischen Poesie. Gottingen,
1857, 1858. 2 vols.

Sprachschatz der Angelsichsischen Dichter. Cassel and Got-

tingen, 1861. 2 vols. (A concordance to Anglo-Saxon poetry.)

Bibliothek der Angelsdchsischen Prosa, 1872. (Contains the
Pentateuch, Joshua, Judges, Job, in Anglo-Saxon.)

Grey, Life of Lord; ed.SirP.deM. Grey Egerton, Camden Soc., 1847.

Grimm, J., Deutsche Grammatik. In 4 parts. Second edition.
G6ottingen, 1822-37. (Witha Register (Index) by K. G. Andresen,
1865.

PE. Remnaivs, ed. Rev. W. Nicholson, M.A. Parker Soc., 1843.

Grose, F., A Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue. [Slang
Dictionary.] London, 1785. $8vo.

A Provincial Glossary. London, 1790. 8vo. (First ed. in 1787.)

Guillim, John, A Display of Heraldry. 4th ed. London, 1660.

Guthlac.—The Anglo-Saxon version of the Life of St. Guthlac; ed.
C. W. Goodwin, M.A. London, 1848.

Guy of Warwick; ed. Prof. J. Zupitza, E.E.T.S., 1883, 1887, 1891.

Hakluyt, R., The Principal Navigations, Voiages, &c. of the English
Nation. London, 1588, 1589, 1600. fol. 3 vols. in 2.

Haldeman, S. S., Affixes of English Words. Philadelphia, 1865.

Hales, J. W., Longer English Poems. London, 1872.


8vo.


London, 1603.
London, 1855.


, Hali Meidenhad, an Alliterative Homily of the 12th century; ed.


O. Cockayne, M.A. E.E.T.S., 1866. a 1220. }

Hall, Fitzedward, Modern English. London, 1873. - 8vo.

on English Adjectives in -able, with special reference to
Reliable. London, 1877. 8vo.

Hall, J. (Bp.), Satires in Six Books, Oxford, 1753. [1597, 1598.]

Contemplations on the Old and New Testaments. Reprint.
1860. [1612-15.]

Halle, Edw.; Hali’s Chronicle; reprinted. London, 1809.
4to. [1548, 1550.]

Halliwell, J, O., A Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words.
Fifth edition. London, 1865. 2 vols.

Hamilton ; see French.

Hampole, Richard Rolle de, English Prose Treatises; ed. Geo. G.
Perry; M.A. E.E.T\S., 1866.  [ab. 1340.]

Pricke of Conscience; a Northumbrian Poem; ed. R. Morris

(Philological Society), London, 1863. [1340.]

The Psalter; with a translation and exposition in English by
Rk. Rolle of Hampole; ed. Rev. H.R. Bramley. Oxford, 1884.
Hardyng’s Chronicle; ed. H. Ellis. London, 1812. royal 4to. [1543.]

Harington, Sir J., tr. of Ariosto; see English Poets.

Harman’s Caveat; printed with the Fraternitye of Vacabondes, by
John Awdeley; ed. E. Viles and F. J. Furnivall, E.E.T\S., extra
series, 1869. [1567.]

Harrison, W., A Description of England (Second and Third Books) ;
ed. F. J. Furnivall. (New Shakspere Society), 1878. [1577.]
Hatton Correspondence (1601-1704); ed. E.M. Thompson. (Cam-

den Soc.) 1878. 2 vols.


royal


THE DICTIONARY


Havelok the Dane; ed. W. W. Skeat and Sir F. Madden. E.E.T.S.,
extra series, 1868. [ab. 1280. ]

Hawes, Stephen, The Pastime of Pleasure; reprinted from the
edition of 1555; ed. T. Wright. Percy Soc., 1845.

Hawkesworth, J., An Account of the Voyages .. by Commodore
Byron, Capt. Wallis, Capt. Carteret, and Capt. Cook. London,
1773. 4to. 3 vols.

Haydn’s Dictionary of Dates; Thirteenth Edition, by B. Vincent.
London, 1868.

Hazlitt ; see Early English Popular Poetry ; and see Gascoigne.

Hazlitt, W. C.; reprint of Dodsley’s Collection of Old Plays.
1874-76. 15 vols. [16th cent.]

Hearne, Th. ; see his glossary to Rob. of Gloucester.

Hebrew.—Lexicon Hebraicum et Chaldaicum; edidit E. F. Leo-
pold. Lipsize, 1872.

Hebrdaisches und Chaldaisches Handworterbuch iiber das Alte
Testament ; von W. Gesenius. Leipzig, 1883. (Ninth edition.)

Heécart; see French dialects (Rouchi).

Héliand ; see Old Saxon.

Henry VII, The Statutes of; in exact facsimile, from the very rare
original, printed by Caxton in 1489; ed. J. Rae. London, 1869.

Henrysoun, R., Complaint and Testament of Creseide ; pr. with
Chaucer’s Works. [15th cent.] See Chaucerian Pieces; also
Ancient Scottish Poems, Edinburgh, 1770; and Sibbald’s Scottish
Poetry.

Henslow, G.; see Medical Works.

Herbert, George, Poems of; ed. R. A. Willmott.
[Died 1633. ]

Herbert, Sir T., Travels. Third edition. London, 1665.

Héricher, le; see French dialects (Norman).

Herrick, R., Poetical Works of; ed. W. Carew Hazlitt.
1869. 2 vols. 8vo.

Hertel, L.; see German dialects (Thiiringen).

Hexham ; see Dutch.

Heyne, M. See Old Saxon and Gothic.

Heywood, T., The Dramatic Works of, London, 1874. 6 vols.

Hickes, G., Linguarum veterum Septentrionalinm Thesaurus. Oxford,
1703-5. 3vols. .

Higden.—Polychronicon Ranulphi Higden, with Trevisa’s transla-
tion. (Rolls Series.) Vols. i and ii ed. by Churchill Babington,
B.D. Vols. iii-ix by the Rev. J. Rawson Lumby, 1865-86.
See Trevisa.

Hindi, Hindustani.—Bate, J. D., A Dictionary of the Hindee
Language. SBenares, 1875.

Fallon, S. W., Hindustani and English Dictionary.

1879.


XXXV


London, 1859.


London,


Benares,


Forbes, D., Hindustani Dictionary. London, 1848. New
edition, 1859.
Hist. Nat. Brasiliz ; see Brazil.
Hoccleve, T., Minor Poems; ed. F. J. Furnivall. E. E. T.S.,


extra series, 1892.

—— Letter of Cupid ; see Chaucerian Pieces.

—— Regement of Princes; ed. F. J. Furnivall.
[1412.]

—— To the Lordes and Knightes of the Garter; see Chaucerian
Pieces.

Hole, C., A Brief Biographical Dictionary, 1865.
Holinshed, Ralph, Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
London, 1807-8. 4to. 6vols. (Reprint; first ed., 1577-87.)
Holland, Philemon, tr. of Pliny’s Natural History. London, 1634.
fol. 2 vols.

tr. of Ammianus Marcellinus ; 1609. (Cited by Richardson.)

tr. of Plutarch’s Morals; 1603. (Cited by Richardson.)

Holland, Sir R., The Buke of the Howlat; see Scottish Alliterative
Poems,

Homilies appointed to be read in Churches.
London, 1852.

Hone, Wm., Every-Day Book. London, 1825-7. 8vo. 2 vols.

Hooker, R., The Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity, Eight Bookes.
(First ed. in 1594.)

Horn.—Kyng Horn, Floriz and Blancheflour, &c. ; ed. Rev. J. Raw-
son Lumby. E.E.T.S., 1866.

Horn, Paul; see Persian,

Horne Tooke; see Tooke.

Horstmann, Dr. C., Altenglische Legenden.

Neue Folge. Heilbronn, 1881.

Sammlung Altenglischer Legenden. Heilbronn, 1878.

Howard, Sir R., The Committee ; a play (1665); see Drama, mod.
British ; vol. 3.

Howell, J., Epistole Ho-Elianz, Familiar Letters.
4 vols. in one. 1678.


[ 1402. |
B.. Bale S35) 1807;


(Reprint.) S.P.C.K.,


Paderborn, 1875.


Fifth edition,


C2


BOOKS REFERRED TO


Howell, J., Instructions for Forreine Travell (1642) ; ed. Arber, 1868.

Huloet, R., Abecedarium Anglo-Latinum. London, 1552.

Hungarian.—Dankovsky, G., Magyricee Linguze Lexicon. Pres-
burg, 1833.

Icelandic.—An Icelandic-English Dictionary, based on the MS.
collections of the late R. Cleasby; by G. Vigfusson. Oxford,
1874. With an Appendix containing a list of words etymologi-
cally connected with Icelandic, by W. W. Skeat, 1876.

Egilsson, S., Lexicon Poeticum antiquee Linguze Septentriona-

lis. Hafnize, 1860.

Mobius, T., Altnordisches Glossar.

Thre ; see Swedish.

Irish.—An Irish-English Dictionary, by E. O’Reilly ; with a sup-
plement by J. O’Donovan. Dublin, 1864.

Irische Texte mit Wérterbuch; von E. Windisch. Leipzig, 1880.
(Old Irish.)

Isidore, St., Works of; in Migne’s Cursus Patrologicus.

Isumbras, Romance of; see Thornton Romances.

Italian.—Florio, John. A Worlde of Wordes, or most copious and
exact Dictionarie in Italian and Englisk. London, 1598. (First
edition. )

Florio, J. Queen Anna’s New Worlde of Wordes, or Dictionarie

of the Italian and English tongues. London, 1611.

Italian and English Dictionary, by J. Florio; and English and
Italian Dictionary, by G. Torriano ; ed. J. D[avies], M.D. London,
1688.

—— Italian-English and English-Italian Dictionary, by Jos. Baretti.
Eighth edition. London, 1831. 2 vols.

—— Italian and English Dictionary, by IF. C. Meadows; Fifteenth
edition. London, 1857. [When ‘Ital.’ is cited without further
notice, this book is meant. ]

Twain (or Ywaine) and Gawin; see Ritson.

Jackson, Georgina F., Shropshire Word-book. London, 1879-81.

Jago, R., Poems of; see English Poets.

Jamieson’s Scottish Dictionary. A new edition, ed. J. Longmuir
and D. Donaldson. Paisley, 1879-87. 4to. 4 vols.and Supplement.

Johns, Rev. C. A., Flowers of the Field. Fourth edition. London,
praC.K., n. d.

Johnson’s Dictionary of the English Language; ed. by the Rey. H. J.
Todd. London, 1827. 4to. 3 vols.

Johnson, Dr. Sam., A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland,
1775. Included (as a Tour to the Hebrides) in Boswell’s Life of
Johnson, ed, Right Hon. J. W. Croker, new ed., 1876.

Johnson, S., the Rambler. (Cited by Richardson.)
2vols. 1767 and 1779; 4 vols.] And see Boswell.

Jonson, Ben, Works of; ed. W. Gifford. (Reprint.) London, 1860.
[Died 1637. |

ae Man in his Humour; ed. H. B. Wheatley, 1877. [ab.

1598. i

Joseph of Arimathie, or the Holy Grail ; ed. W. W. Skeat. E.E.T.S.,
1871. [ab. 1350.]

Joye, G., The Exposicion of Daniel the Prophete.
(two editions), 16mo. (First pr. at Geneva, 1545.)

ohare St. ; ed. Cockayne and Brock. E.E.T.S., 1872. [Early 13th
cent,

Kalkar ; see Danish, Middle.

Kemble, J. M.,Codex Diplomaticus A‘viSaxonici. English Historical
Soc. 1839-48. 5 vols.

Salomon and Saturn. Afélfric Soc., 1848.

Kersey, J., English Dictionary. 1715.

Kilian ; see Dutch.

King Horn; ed. J. R. Lumby. E.E.T.S., 1866.

King, W., Poems of; see English Poets.

King of Tars; see Ritson.

Kingis Quair, The; by King James I of Scotland; ed. Rev. W. W.
Skeat. S.T.S., 1884.

Kluge; see German.

Knight of la Tour-Landry, The Book of the; ed. T. Wright.
E.E.T.S., 1868. [ab. 1440.]

Knox, J., The Works of; ed. D. Laing.
8vo. 6 vols.

Koch, C. F., Historische Grammatik der Englischen Sprache.
Weimar, 1863 ; Cassel and Gottingen, 1865, 1869. 3 vols.

Kok ; see Danish dialects.

Koolman ; see Friesic.


Korting, G., Lateinisch-Romanisches Worterbuch. Second edition.
Paderborn, 1901.


Kotzebue, Otto von, A New Voyage round the World. London,
1830. 2 vols. 12mo.

La Belle Dame sans Merci; see Chaucerian Pieces.

Labourasse ; see French dialects, 1a Meuse.


XXXVI


Leipzig, 1866.


[1750-2 ;


London, 1550


[ Before 1300. |


Edinburgh, 1846-56.


IN THE DICTIONARY


Lady Alimony ; in Dodsley’s Old Plays, vol. 14.
Lai le Freine ; see Weber.


Laing, D., Select Remains of the Ancient Popular Poetry of Scotland. |


New ed. by J. Small. Edinburgh, 1885. 8vo.

Lancelot of the Laik; ed. W. W. Skeat. E.E.T-.S., 1865.
century. |

Lanfrank’s Science of Cirurgie; ed. R. v. Fleischhacker, Ph.D.
Part I; text. E.E.T.S., 1894. [Ab. 1400. ]

Langtoft.—Peter Langtoft’s Chronicle, as illustrated and improved
by Robert of Brunne; ed. Thomas Hearne, M.A. Oxford, 1725.
2 vols. Reprinted, London, 1810. [ab. 1338. ]

Languedoc; see French dialects.

Larramendi; see Basque.

Larsen ; see Danish.

Latimer, H., Seven Sermons before Edward VI; ed. E. Arber, 1869.
[1549.]

Latin.—A Latin-English Dictionary, by J. T. White and J. E.
Riddle. Fifth edition. London, 1876.

—— A Latin Dictionary, by C. T. Lewis and C. Short.
1880.

Dictionnaire étymologique latin, par MM. Bréal et A. Bailly.

Paris, 1885.

Lateinisches etymologisches Worterbuch, von Dr. Alois Walde.
Heidelberg, 1906.

Laws of Ina; see Thorpe, Ancient Laws.

Layamon’s Brut; ed. Sir F. Madden. (Society of Antiquaries.)
1847. 3 vols. [ab. 1200. ]

Lee, F.G., Glossary of Liturgical and Ecclesiastical Terms. London,
1877. 8vo.

Leechdoms, &c. ; see Cockayne.

Legend of St. Catherine; The Life of St. Catherine, ed. Dr. Einenkel.
E.E.T.S., 1884.

Legend of St. Christopher; see Early E. Poems,

Legendary, The Early South-English, or Lives of Saints; ed. Dr. C.
Horstmann. E.E.T.S., 1887.

Legends of the Holy Rood; ed. Dr. Richard Morris. E.E.T.S., 1871.


Oxford,


| Legends of the Saints in the Scottish Dialect; ed. W. M. Metcalfe.


Parts I-V. S.T.S., 1887-95.

Le Gonidec ; see Breton.

Leo, H., Angelsichsisches Glossar; Halle, 1872.

Leslie’s History of Scotland, tr. by Father J. Dalrymple; ed. Rev.
Father E. G. Cody, O.S.B. S.T.S., 1884-95. In 4 parts.

Levins, Manipulus Vocabulorum; ed. H. B. Wheatley. E.E.T.S.,
1867. [1570.]

Lewis, or Lewis and Short ; see Latin.

Lex Salica, the ten texts; ed. J. H. Hessels; with notes on the
Frankish words by Prof. H. Kern. London, 1880. 4to.

Libell of Englishe Policye; ed. R. Pauli. Leipzig, 1878. [1436.]

Liber Albus; ed. H. T. Riley, vol. i. Rolls Series, 1859.

Liber Cure Cocorum ; ed. R. Morris. Phil. Soc., 1862.

Liber Custumarum; ed. H. T. Riley. In two parts.
1860.

Liber Scintillarum; ed. E. Rhodes, B.A. E.E.T.S., 1889.

Liddell and Scott ; see Greek.

Liden, E., Studien zur altindischen und vergleichenden Sprach-
geschichte. Upsala, 1897.

Lindisfame MS. ; see Anglo-Saxon Gospels.

Lithuanian.—W orterbuch der Littauischen Sprache, von G. H. F.
Nesselmann. Konigsberg, 1851.

Littré ; see French.

Locke, J., An Essay concerning the human Understanding. First
complete ed., 1694. (Many editions.)

Longfellow, H. W., Poems of. London, 1855.

Loth, J., Etymologische angelszechsisch-englische Grammatik.
Elberfeld, 1870.

Low German.—See Bremen Worterbuch ; and see below.

Low German dialects.—Altmark : W6rterbuch der altmarkisch-
plattdeutschen Mundart; von J. F. Danneil. Salzwedel, 1859.
(N. of Prussian Saxony.)

—— Bremen: see under Bremen.

Gottingen: Worterbuch der niederdeutschen Mundart . der

Fiirstenthiimer Gottingen und Grubenhagen ; von G. Schambach.

Hannover, 1858.

Hamburg: Idioticon Hamburgense; by Mich. Richey. Ham-

burgi, 1743.

Kurhessen : Idiotikon von Kurhessen; von Dr. A. F. C. Vilmar.

Marburg, 1868.

Pomeranian: Platt-deutsches Worterbuch nach der alten und

neuen Pommerschen und Riigischen Mundart; von J. C. Dahnert.

Stralsund, 1781.

Saxon: Der Sprachschatz der Sassen; von Dr. H. Berghaus.


Rolls Series,


[15th -


BOOKS REFERRED TO IN THE DICTIONARY


Vol. 1, A-H. Vol. 2, I-N. Vol. 3 (unfinished), O-Paddeln.
Brandenburg, 1880.

Low German dialects.—Strassburg: Worterbuch der Strass-
burger Mundart; von C. Schmidt. Strassburg, 1896.

Westphalian: Worterbuch der Westfalischen Mundart; von F.
Woeste. Norden und Leipzig, 1882.

—— Middle Low German. Mittelniederdentsches Handworter-
buch, von A. Liibben. Norden und Leipzig, 1888.

— Old Low German,—Vorstudien zu einem Altniederdeutschen
Worterbuche, von J. H. Gallée. Leiden, 1903.

Low Latin.—See Ducange.

Lowndes ; see Bohn’s Lowndes.

Liibben ; see Low German, Middle.

Lybeaus Disconus ; see Ritson.

Lydgate, J., The Storie of Thebes; printed at the end of Chaucer’s
Woorkes, with diuers Addicions. London, 1561. [ab. 1430.]
Assembly (or Banquet) of Gods; ed. Prof. O. L. Triggs, M.A.

E.E.T.S., 1896.

Complaint of the Black Knight, The Flour of Curtesye, &c. ;

see Chaucerian Pieces.

Fall of Princes ; entitled (by Pynson, in 1494) The Boke called

de John Bochas descriuinge the Falle of Princis, &c: London;

pr. by J. Wayland. 1558.

Sege of Troye; pr. with the titlh—The Auncient Historie...

of the warres betwixte the Grecians and the Troyans, &c.;...

newly imprinted, 1555. [First pr. by Pynson, 1513, fol. ]

Temple of Glass; ed. Dr. J. Schick. E.E.T.S.; extra series,

1891.

eee Poems; ed. J. O. Halliwell. Percy Soc., 1840.

Lye, E., and O. Manning; Dictionarium Saxonico-et-Gothico-
Latinum. London, 1772. 2 vols.

Lyly, J., Euphues; ed. E. Arber, 1868. [1579, 1580. ]

Lyly, or Lilly, Dramatic Works of; ed. F. W. Fairholt.
1856. 2 vols.

Lyndesay, Sir D., Works of. E.E.T.S., 1865, 1866, 1868. [1552, &c. |

Lyte’s Dodoens, A Niewe Herball, or Historie of Plantes, translated
[from Rembert Dodoens] by Hy. Lyte. First ed., 1578, fol.
Also 1586, 4to; 1595, 4to.

Macbain; see Gaelic.

Macdonell ; see Sanskrit.

Macklin, C., Love a la Mode; see Drama, Modern British. [1760.]

Mahn, K. A. F., Etymologische Untersuchungen, &c. Berlin, 1863.

Malay.—Marsden, W.; A Dictionary of the Malayan Language.
London, 1812.

Pijnappel, J., Maleisch-HollandschWoordenboek. Amsterdam,

1875.

Phe Malayan Words in English; by C. P. G. Scott.
Haven, Ct., U.S.A., 1897.

Malayalim.—Bailey, Kev. B., A Dictionary of Malayalim and
English; Cottayam, 1846. Another by Rey. H. Gundert ;
Mangalore, 1871-2.

Malory, Sir T., Le Morte Darthur; pr. by Caxton.
by H. O. Sommer, Ph.D. London, 1889-91. 2 vols.
Morte Darthur. The Globe Edition, London, 1868.

And see Morte Arthure.

Mandeville; seé ‘Maundeville.

Manlove, E., The Liberties and Customes of the Lead Mines, &c. ;
apoem. E.D.S., Ser. B, Gloss. VIII, 1874. [1653.]

Manwood, J., Treatise and Discourse of the Lawes of the Forest.
(First ed., London, 1744.)

Mapes, Walter, The Latin Poems attributed to; ed. T. Wright.
Camden Soc., 1841.

March, F. A., A Comparative Grammar of the Anglo-Saxon
Language. London, 1870.

Marco Polo.—The Book of Ser Marco Polo, newly translated and
ed. by Col. H. Yule, C.B. London, 1871. 2 vols.

Marharete ; see Seinte.

Marie de France; Die Lais der Marie de France, herausgegeben von
K. Warnke. Halle, 1885. (In Norman French.)

Marlowe’s Works; ed. Lt.-Col. F. Cunningham, London, 1870.
[Died 1593.]

Marsden ; see Malay.

Marsh, G. P., Lectures on the English Language; ed. Dr. W. Smith.
London, 1862. [The Student’s Manual of the English Language. ]

Marston, J.. Works of ; ed. J. O. Halliwell. London, 1856. 3 vols.
8vo.

Mason, W., Poems of; see English Poets.

Massinger.—The Plays of Philip Massinger ; ed. Lt.-Col. F. Cunning-
ham. London, 1868. [Died 1640. ]
Mather, I., Remarkable Providences, &c.
London, 1856. (Orig. edition, 1684.)


London,


New


Exact reprint
(1485. ]
[1469.]


With pref. by G. Offor.


XXXVil


Matzner.—Englische Grammatik, von E. Matzner.
1860-5.

Altenglische Sprachproben, nebst einem Worterbuche; ed. E.
Matzner. Erster Band, Sprachproben; Berlin, 1867-9. Zweiter
Band [unfinished] ; Berlin, 1872-6.

Maundeyille-—The Voiage and Travaile of Sir John Maundeville,
Knt.; London, E. Lumley, 1839; reprinted by J. O. Halliwell in
1866. [1356.]

Meadows ; see Italian and Spanish.

Medical Works of the Fourteenth Century; by the Rev. Prof. G.
Henslow, M.A., F.L.S. London, 1899. 8vo.

Merlin, The Romance of; ed. H. B. Wheatley. E.E.T.S., 1865-99.

Metcalfe ; see Legends of the Saints,

Métivier ; see French dialects (Guernsey).

Metres of Boethius; pr. with A‘lfred, tr. of Boethius, q. v. ; and by Grein.

Metrical Homilies; Eng. Met. Homilies, ed. J. Small, M.A. Edin-
burgh, 1862.

Mexican.—Clavigero’s History of Mexico; tr. from the Italian by
C. Cullen. London, 1787. 2 vols.

—— Dictionnaire de la langue Nahuatl ou Mexicaine; par Rémi
Siméon. Paris, 1885.

—— Grammaire de la langue Nahuatl ou Mexicaine ; ed. Rémi
Siméon. Paris, 1875. [Written by Olmos in 1547. ]

Middleton, T., Plays; ed. H. Ellis. 2 vols. 1887-90. (Mermaid
Series. )

Miklosich ; see Slavonic.

Milton.—The Poetical Works of John Milton, with a life of the
author, and Verbal Index by C. Dexter Cleveland. New edition,
London, 1865. [Died 1674.]

Areopagitica; ed. J. W. Hales. Oxford, 1874. [1644.]

Minot, L., poems of; pr. in Political Poems and Songs relating to
English History, vol. i.; ed. T. Wright (Rolls Series). London,
1859. [1352.] Also ed. J. Hall; Oxford, 1887.

Minsheu, J., The Guide into the Tongues. Second edition.
1627. And see Spanish.

Mirror for Magistrates, in five parts; ed. Jos. Hazlewood. London,
1815. 4to. 3 vols, [First ed. 1559.]

Mobius; see Icelandic.

Molbech; see Danish dialects.

Molema, H.; see Dutch dialect.

Moller; see Swedish dialects.

Moncaut; see French dialects (Gascon).

Mone, B., Quellen und Forschungen zur Geschichte der teutschen
Literatur und Sprache. Leipzig, 1830. 8vo.

Monk of Evesham, The Revelation to the. Reprint by E. Arber;
no. 18. [1482.]

Monlau, Dr. E. P. F.; Diccionario Etimoldgico de la Lengua
Castellana. Segunda edicion. Madrid, 1881.

Montgomerie, A., The Poems of; ed. J. Cranstoun, LL.D. S.T.S.,
1885-7.

Moore, T., Poetical Works of. London, 1854.

More, Sir T., Works of; printed in 1557. [Died 1535. ]

tr. of Sir T. More’s Utopia, by R. Robinson, 1551 ; Second
edition, 1556; ed. E. Arber, 1869. [1551.]

Morris, E. E. ; see Australian.

Morris, R., Historical Outlines of English Accidence. London, 1872.

Morte Arthure (an alliterative poem); ed. E. Brock. E.E.T.S, Re-
print, 1871. [ab. 1440.] The First edition, by the Rey. G. G.
Perry, appeared in 1865, And see Malory.

Moryson, Fynes, An Itinerary. London, 1617. fol.

Miiller, E., Etymologisches Worterbuch der englischen Sprache.
In two parts. Second edition. Cothen, 1879.

Miiller, F. Max, Lectures on the Science of Language.
edition. London, 1875. 2 vols.

Selected Essays. London, 1881. 2 vols.

Murphy, A., Plays; see Drama, Modern British. [1756-76. |

Murray, [Sir] J. A. H.; see Complaynte.

Myrc’s Duties of a Parish Priest ; ed. E. Peacock. E.E.T.S., 1868.
[ab. 1420. ]

Myrour of Our Lady; ed. J. H. Blunt. E.E.T\S., extra series, 1873.
[1530.]

Napier’s Glosses; Old English Glosses, ed. A. S. Napier, M.A.,
Ph.D. Oxford, 1900.

Nares, R.; A Glossary to the Works of English Authors, particularly
Shakespeare and his contemporaries. New edition, by Halliwell
and Wright. London, 1859. 2 vols.

Naval Accounts and Inventories; ed. M. Oppenheim. Pr. for the
Navy Records Soc., 1896. [1485-8 and 1495-7. |

N.E.D.—A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles; ed.
[Sir] J. A. H. Murray, H. Bradley, and W. A. Craigie. 1884-.
A-Piper ; Q-Rib. :

63


3, parts. Berlin,


London,


Eighth


XXXViil


Neckam, A., De Utensilibus; pr. in Wright’s Vocabularies, First
Series, pp. 96-119. [12th cent. ]

Nesselmann; see Lithuanian.

Neuman ; see Spanish.

Newton’s Birds; A Dictionary of Birds, by Prof. A. Newton.
London, 1893-6.

Nichols, J., A Collection of all the Wills, now known to be extant,
of the kings and queens of England, to that of Henry VII. exclu-
sive. London, 1780. (Cited as ‘Royal Wills’.)

Nicolas; see Testamenta Vetusta.

Noreen, Altislandische und altnorwegische Grammatik, von A. Noreen.
(2nd ed.) Halle, 1892.

Norman; see French dialects.

North, R., Examen. London, 1740.

North, Sir T., tr. of Plutarch, 1612.

Northumberland Household Book; see Antiquarian Repertory.

Norwegian.—Aasen, Ivar; Norsk Ordbog med Dansk Forklaring.
Christiania, 1873.

Norsk Ordbog, af H. Ross. Christiania, 1895.

Notes on English Etymology, by the Rev. W. W. Skeat, Litt.D.
Oxford, 1901.

Notes and Queries (published weekly). First Series, 1850-5;
second, 1856-61; third, 1862-67 ; fourth, 1868-73; fifth, 1874-9 ;
&c


(Cited at second-hand.)


Nottingham Records; Records of the Borough of Nottingham; ed.
W. H. Stevenson. London, 1882-1900. 5 vols. [Vol. 1;
1155-1399.]

Occleve ; see Hoccleve.

Octavian, the Emperor; ed. J. O. Halliwell.

Octovian ; see Weber.

O. E. Texts.—The Oldest English Texts; ed. H. Sweet, M.A.
E.E.T.S. London, 1885.

Ogilvie, The Imperial Dictionary of the English Language, by
J. Ogilvie, LL.D. New ed., by C. Annandale. London, 1883.


Percy Soc., 1844.


8vo. vols,
O'Hara; Midas, a play; see Drama, Mod. British. [1764.]
Old English Homilies ; see Early English Homilies.
Old English Miscellany; ed. Dr. R. Morris. E.E.T.S., 1872.


Old English Plays; see Dodsley.

Old Saxon.—Héliand; mit ausfiihrlichem Glossar herausgegeben ;
von M. Heyne. Paderborn, 1866.

Kleinere altniederdeutsche Denkmaler; mit ausfiihrlichem
Glossar herausgegeben; von M. Heyne. Paderborn, 1866.

Oliphant, T. L. K., Old and Middle English. London, 1878.

Oman; Swedish-English Dictionary, 1897.

Ordinances and Regulations, &c.; A Collection of Ordinances and
Regulations for the Government of the Royal Household, made
in divers Reigns. 1790. 4to. (Cited in Halliwell’s Dict. ; see

p: 956.)

O'Reilly ; see Irish.

Original Letters, &c. ; see Ellis.


Ormulum ; ed. R. M. White. Oxford, 1852. 2 vols. [1220-50.]
Orosius ; see A‘lfred.
Otway, T., The Works of. London, 1768. 3 vols.


Oudemans; see Dutch.

Outzen ; see Friesic.

Owl and Nightingale, ed. Thos. Wright; Percy Soc., 1843.
by Dr. F. H. Stratmann; Krefeld, 1868. [ab. 1300.]

Oxford Helps to the Study of the Bible.—Helps to the Study of the


Re-ed.


Bible. Oxford, n. d.
Palladius on Husbandrie; in English; ed. B. Lodge. E.E.T.S.,1872,
1877. [ab. 1420,]


Palmer, E. H.; see Persian.

Palmer, Rey. A. Smythe, Folk-etymology. London, 1882. 8vo.

Leaves from a Word-hunter’s Notebook. London, 1876.

Palmer, Rev. W., Origines Liturgicee. Oxford, 1832. 8vo. 2 vols.

Palsgrave.—Lesclaircissement de la Langue Francoyse, par Maistre
Jehan Palsgrave, 1530. Together with An Introductorie for to
lerne to speke French trewly; by G. Du Wes. [Reprint, Paris, 1852.]

Pardonere and Tapster; introducing the Tale of Beryn. See Beryn.

Parker Society Publications. (The excellent Index has been of much
service.)

Parlement of the Thre Ages, The; also Winnere and Wastoure ;
ed. I. Gollancz, M.A. Roxburge Club, 1897.

Parliament Rolls; Parliamentorum Rotuli. (Edw. I—Hen. VII.)
1765. fol. 6 vols,

Partenay, Romance of; ed. W. W. Skeat, E.E.T.S., 1866. [ab.
1500-20. |

Paston Letters; ed. J. Gairdner.
[ 1422-1500. |

Peacham, H., The Gentleman’s Exercise.


London, 1872-5. 3 vols.


London, 1634. 4to.


BOOKS REFERRED TO IN THE DICTIONARY


Peacock, E., A Glossary of Words used in the Wapentakes of
Manley and Corringham, Lincolnshire. E.D.S., 1877.

Peele, G.; see Greene.

Pegge, S., LL.D., An Alphabet of Kenticisms; printed in Series C,
Part III, of the E.D.S. publications, ed. W. W. Skeat, 1876.

Anonymiana. London, 1809. 8vo.

Derbicisms ; ed. W. W. Skeat. E.D.S. 1896.

Pegge, S., Jun., Curialia, or an Historical Account of some Branches
of the Royal Household. London, 1782. 4to.

Pepys, S., Memoirs of, comprising his Diary, &c.; ed. Richard Lord
Braybrooke. (Reprint.) London, F. Warne, n. d. [1659-69. ]

Perceval, Sir; see Thornton Romances. [ab. 1440. ]

Percy Folio MS.; ed. J. W. Hales and F. J. Furmivall. London,
1867-8. 3 vols.

Percy, T.; Reliques of Ancient English Poetry; reprint, ed. R. A.
Willmott. London, 1857.

Persian.—A Concise Dictionary of the Persian Language; by
E. H. Palmer. London, 1876.

A Dictionary, Persian, Arabic, and English. By J. Richardson;

new edition, by F. Johnson. London, 1829.

Grundriss der neupersischen Etymologie; von Paul Horn.

Strassburg, 1893.

Vullers, J. A., Lexicon Persico-Latinum.
2 vols.

—— Old.—Die altpersischen Keilinschriften.
Leipzig, 1862. i

Peruvian.—Vocabulario de la lengua de Peru; by D. Gongalez.
La Ciudad de los Reyes. [Lima?] 1608.

Phaer, T., and Twyne, T.; tr. of Virgil’s Aineid. London, 1583.
4to. (The first edition.)

Philip de Thaun ; see Wright, T., Popular Treatises.

Philips, J., Cider, and other Poems ; see English Poets.

Phillips, E., The New World of Words. London, 1706. fol.

Phil. Soc.—Transactions of the Philological Society.

Picard.—Glossaire du Patois Picard, par Abbé Jules Corblet.
Paris, 1851.

Pierce the Ploughman’s Crede, about 1394 A.D.; ed. W. W. Skeat.
E.E.T.S., 1867. [1394.]

Piers Plowman. The Vision of William concerning Piers the Plow-
man; ed. W. W. Skeat. A-text (earliest version) ; B-text (second
version) ; C-text (latest version). E.E.T.S., 1867, 1869, 1873.
Notes and Glossary, 1877-84. [1362-1400. |

Pilgrim’s Sea Voyage; ed. F. J. Furnivall (with the Stacions of
Rome). E.E.T.S., 1867.

Pineda; see Spanish,

Pistyll of Susan; see Scottish Alliterative Poems.

Poems and Lives of Saints; ed. F. J. Furnivall. Phil. Soc. Berlin,
1862. [ab. 1300. ]

Polish.—Nouveau Dictionnaire Portatif Frangais-Polonais et Polo-
nais-Frangais; par J. A. E. Schmidt. Leipzig, 1847.

Political Poems and Songs relating to English History; ed. Thos.
Wright. (Rolls Series.) 1851-61. 2 vols.

Political, Religious, and Love Poems; ed. F. J. Furnivall. E.E.T.S., —
1866.

Political Songs; ed. T. Wright. Camden Soc.,1839. [1264-1327.]

Pope, A., Works of; ed. H. F. Cary. London, 1849. [Died 1744.]

Concordance to the Works of; by E. Abbott. London,
1875.

Portuguese.—Novo Diccionario Portatil das linguas Portugueza
e Ingleza, resumido do diccionario de Vieyra; nova edicdo por
J. P. Aillaud. Paris, 1857. 2 vols.

—— A Grammar of the Portuguese Language; by A. Vieyra.
Twelfth edition. London, 1858.

Prellwitz, Dr. W., Etymologisches Worterbuch der Griechischen


Bonn, 1855-67.
By F. Spiegel.


Sprache. (2nd ed.) Gottingen, 1905.

Prescott, W. H., History of the Conquest of Peru. 7th ed. London,
1854. 8vo.

—— History of the Conquest of Mexico. th ed. London,
1854. 8vo.


Pricke of Conscience ; see Hampole.

Prior, R. C. A., On the Popular Names of British Plants.
edition. London, 1879.

Prior, M., Poems of; see English Poets. [Died 1721.]

Prompt. Parv.=Promptorium Parvulorum sive Clericorum Dictiona-
rius Anglo-Latinus Princeps, auctore fratre Galfrido Grammatico
dicto, circa A.D. MCCCCXL. Ed. A. Way, Camden Soc., 1843, 1853,
and 1865. [1440.]

Provencal.—Lexique Roman, by M. Raynouard. Paris, 1836,
5 vols. _

Dictionnaire Provengal-Frangais.

Provence, n.d. 2 vols.


Third


Par F. Mistral. Aix-en-


BOOKS REFERRED TO IN THE DICTIONARY


Proverbs of Hendyng ; see Altenglische Dichtungen.

Prynne, W., Histriomastix. London, 1633. 4to.

The Soveraigne Power of Parliaments. London, 1643.

Puitspelu ; see French dialects (Lyonnais).

Purchas, S., His Pilgrimage.... Third ed., 1617.

Puttenham, G., The Arte of English Poesie, 1589.
prints. London, 1869.

Queene Elizabethes Achademy, &c.; ed. F. J. Furnivall.
extra series, 1869.

Ramsay’s Poems (cited by Jamieson).

Ratis Raving; ed. Rev. J. R. Lumby, M.A. E.E.T.S., 1870.

Rauf Coilyear; see Scottish Allit. Poems.

Ray, John; A Collection of English Words not generally used. Ed.
W. W. Skeat. E.D.S., 1874. [1674-91.]

Raynouard ; see Provencal.

Red Book of the Exchequer ; ed. W. D. Selby. (Rolls Series.)

Reliquize Antique; ed. Wright and Halliwell. 1841-3. 2 vols.

Remacle ; see French dialects (Walloon). ;

Return from Parnassus; ed. E. Arber. 1870. [1606.]

Reynard the Fox.—Willems Gedicht van den vos Reinaerde ; ed.
E. Martin. Paderborn, 1874. 8vo.

Rhys, J., Lectures in Welsh Philology. London, 1877.

Richard Coer de Lion; see Weber.

Richardson; see Arabic ; and see Persian.

Richardson, C., A Dictionary of the English Language.
1863. 4to. 2 vols.

Richard the Redeles; printed with the C-text of Piers the Plowman,
pp- 469-521. See Preface iv, in the same volume, pp. ciii-cxxiv.

Richey ; see Low German dialects (Hamburg).

Richthofen ; see Friesic.

Rietz ; see Swedish.

Riley.—Liber Albus: The White Book of the city of London ; tr.
by H. T. Riley, M.A. London, 1861.

Riley’s Memorials of London. London, 1868.

Ritson’s Metrical Romances.—Ancient Engleish (sic) Metrical Roman-
ceés (sic); ed. by Joseph Ritson. London, 1802. 3 vols. Vol.i
contains Ywaine and Gawin; Launfal. Vol. ii contains Lybeaus
Disconus; King! Horn; King of Tars; Emare; Sir Orpheo;
Chronicle of England. Vol. iil contains Le bone Florence ; Erle
of Tolous ; Squyre of Lowe Degre; Knight of Curtesy.

Robert of Brunne, Handlyng Synne; ed. F. J, Furnivall (Roxburghe
Club), 1862. [1303.] And see Langtoft.

Robert of Gloucester’s Chronicle ; ed. T. Hearne. Oxford, 1724.
2 vols. Reprinted, London, 1810. [ab. 1298.]

ed. W. Aldis Wright. (Rolls Series.) 1887.

Robin ; see French dialects (Norman).

Robinson, F. K., A Glossary of Words used in the neighbourhood
of Whitby. E.D.S., 1875-6.

Robson, J.—Three Early English Metrical Romances; ed. J. R.
Camden Soc., 1842.

Rochester, Earl of; see English Poets.

Rock, D., The Church of our Fathers.

Roland ; see Chanson.

Rolland’s Court of Venus; ed. Rev. W. Gregor. S.T.S., 1883-4.

Romance of PRartenay ; ed. Rev. W. W. Skeat.. E.E.T.S., 1866.

Roman de la Kose; ed. M. Méon. Paris, 1813. 4 vols.

Romania (for Romance Philology); ed. P. Meyer and G, Paris.
From 1872.

Romaunsch,.—Retoromanisches Worterbuch, Surselvisch-Deutsch ;
von P, B. Carigiet. Bonn and Chur, 1882.

Romaunt of the Rose.—An English translation of the French Roman
de La Rose ; Part A, Il. 1-1705, by Chaucer. Part B, in Northern
dialect. Part C, from 1. 5811 to end.

Roquefort, J. B. B., Glossaire de la Langue Romane.
2 vols. With Supplement, 1820.

Roy, W., Rede Me and be not Wrothe; ed. E. Arber, 1871. [1528. ]

Royal Wills ; see Nichols, J.

Rule of St. Benet.—Die Winteney-Version der Regula S. Benedicti ;
von Dr. M. M. A. Schroer. Halle a. S., 1888.

Rushworth MS.; see Anglo-Saxon Gospels.

Russell, J., Book of Nurture; see Babees Book.

Russian.—New parallel Dictionaries of the Russian, French, Ger-
man, and English Languages, in four parts; ed. Ch. Ph. Reiff.
First Part, Russian-English; Fourth Part, English-Russian.
Third edition. Carlsruhe, St. Petersburg, Leipzig, and Paris, 1876.

Sackville, Th., Works of; ed. R. W. Sackville-West. London,
1859. 8vo.

St. Benet, Rule of; ed. Schroer. Halle a. S., 1888.

St. Brandan ; ed. T. Wright. Percy Soc., 1844.

St. Catherine ; see Legend.

St. Christopher; see Legend.


4to.


fol.
In Arber’s Re-


E.E.T.S.,


London,


2 vols.


London, 1849-52. 3 vols.


Paris, 1808.


XXxix


St. Cuthbert ; ed. Rev. J.T. Fowler. Surtees Soc., 1889-91. [1450.]
St. Erkenwald ; see Horstmann, Altengl. Legenden, Neue Folge.
St. Juliana; ed. Cockayne and Brock. E.E.T.S., 1872. [1200-50?]
St. Margaret ; see Seinte.
St. Veronica; ed. C. W. Goodwin. 1851. (With St. Andrew.)
Salomon and Saturn.—Anglo-Saxon Dialogues of Salomon and
Saturn; ed. J. M. Kemble. (/£lfric Society), 1845, 1847, 1848.
Sandys, G., A Relation of a Journey an. dom. 1610. Third edition.
1632.

Sanskrit. — Sanskrit-English Dictionary; by T. Benfey, 1866.
[ When ‘Skt.’ only is cited, this book is meant. ]

Sanskrit Dictionary; by Bohtlingk and Roth, 7 parts. St. Petersburg,
1855-75-

Sanskrit-English Dictionary; by A. A. Macdonell, M.A., Ph.D.
London, 1893.

Schade; see German.

Schambach ; see Low German dialects (Gottingen).

Scheler; see French.

Schleicher, A., Indogermanische Chrestomathie.

Schmeller ; see Bavarian Dictionary.

Schmid, Dr. R., Die Gesetze der Angelsachsen.

Schmidt, A.; see Shakespeare.

Schwan, Dr. E., Grammatik des Altfranzdsischen.
1898.

Scott.—The Select Poetry of Sir Walter Scott, Bart. 6vols. Edin-


Weimar, 1869.
Leipzig, 1858.
3rd ed. Leipzig,


burgh, 1849. Waverley Novels; Edinburgh, 1854-63. 25 vols.
[Died 1832.]

Scott, C. P. G.; see Malay.

Scottish Alliterative Poems; ed. F. J. Amours. Part I. S.T.S.,


1891-2.
Seinte Marharete; ed. O. Cockayne. E.E.T.S., 1866. [1200-50.]
Selden, J., Table-talk ; ed. E. Arber. London, 1868. [1689.]
Selden’s Notes on Drayton; see Drayton, in English Poets, vol. iv.
Select Charters, &c. By W. Stubbs, M.A. Oxford.
Seven Sages.—The Seven Sages, in English Verse ; ed. Thos. Wright.
London (Percy Society), 1845. [ab. 1420.]
The Seuyn Sages(another copy). Printed in vol. iii of Weber’s
Metrical Romances. See Weber.
Sewel; see Dutch.
Shadwell, T., Dramatic Works. London, 1720, 12mo. 4 vols.
Shakespeare.—The Globe Edition; ed. by W. G. Clark and W. Aldis


Wright. Cambridge and London, 1864. [Died 1616.]
—— Shakespeare Lexicon; by A. Schmidt. Berlin and London,
1875.


Shakespeare Apocrypha; ed. C. F. Tucker Brooke. Oxford, 1908.

Shakespeare’s Plutarch; being a selection from North’s Plutarch,
By W. W. Skeat. London, 1875.

Sharp, T., A Dissertation on Pageants. Coventry, 1825.

Shelley, P. B., Poetical Works. London, 1840.

Shenstone; see English Poets.

Sheridan, R. B., Works. London, 1875. 8vo.

Sherwood, index to Cotgrave’s F. Dict.; see French.

Shirley, J., Dramatic Works and Poems; ed. A. Dyce.
1833. 8vo. 6 vols.

Shoreham, W., Poems of; ed. T. Wright. Percy Soc., 1849. Also
ed. Dr. M. Konrath. E.E.T.S., extra series, 1902-3.

Shrine, The; see Cockayne.

Sidney, Sir P., Apology for Poetrie; ed. E. Arber, 1868. [1595.]

Sievers, E., Angelsachsische Grammatik. 3rded. Halle, 1898.

Sigart; see French dialects (Walloon).

Sinonima Bartolomei; ed. J. L. G. Mowat.

Sir Bevis, &c.; see Bevis, &c.

Skeat, W. W., Notes on English Etymology. Oxford, rgor.

Principles of English Etymology. Series I, 2nd ed. Series II.
Oxford, 1891-2.

Skelton’s Poetical Works ; ed. Rey. A. Dyce. London, 1843. 2 vols.
[Died 1529.]

Skinner, S., Etymologicon Lingue Anglicane. London, 1671. [The
chief source of the etymologies in Johnson’s Dictionary. ]

Slang Dictionary ; London, 1874.

Slavonic.—Etymologisches Worterbuch der Slavischen Sprachen,
von Franz Miklosich. Wien, 1886. §8vo.

Smith, Capt. John, Works; ed. Arber.
[1608-31.]

Smith, W.—A Concise Bible Dictionary ; ed. by Wm. Smith, B.D. .
London, 1865.

Smith, Toulmin, English Gilds. E.E.T.S., 1870. [1389-1450. ]

Somervile, W. ; see English Poets.

Somner, W., Dictionarium Saxonico-Latino-Anglicum. Oxford, 1659-

Songs and Carols; ed. T. Wright. London, 1847. [ab. 1470.]

South-English Legendary; ed. C. Horstmann. E.E.T.S., 1887.


4to.


London,


Oxford, 1882. 4to.


1884.


Birmingham,


xl


Sowdone of Babylone; ed. Dr. Hausknecht. E.E.T.S., extra series,
1881.

Spanish.—Minsheu, J., A Dictionary in Spanish and English.
London, 1623.

Pineda, P., A New Dictionary, Spanish and English, and
English and Spanish. London, 1740. fol.

——- Spanish and English Dictionary; by F. C. Meadows.
edition. London, 1856.

Spanish and English Dictionary, originally compiled by
Neuman and Baretti; by M.Seoane, M.D. New edition. London,
1862. 2 vols. And see Monlau.

Specimens of Early English, Part I, A.D. 1150-1300; by the
Rev. R. Morris, LL.D. 2nded. Oxford, 1885.

—- Part Il, a.p. 1298-1393; by Dr. Morris and the Rev. W. W.
Skeat. New edition, revised for the third time. Oxford, 1894.
Specimens of English Literature, A.D. 1394-1579; by the Rev.

W. W. Skeat. Oxford, 1871. Fifth edition, 1890.

Specimens of Lyric Poetry written in England in the reign of
Edward I; ed. T. Wright. (Percy Society), 1842.

Spectator, The; ed. H. Morley, n.d. [1711-14.]


Eighth


Spelman, J., Psalterium Davidis Latino-Saxonicum vetus. London,
1640. [A Latin Psalter, with A.S. glosses. }
Spenser.—The Complete Works of Edmund Spenser. The Globe


Edition, ed. by R. Morris, with memoir by J. W. Hales. London,
1869. (Shep. Kal., 1579; Fairy Queen, 1590-6. |

Spiegel, F.; see Persian, Old

Spurrell ; see Welsh.

Squyre of Low Degree; see Ritson.

Stacions of Rome, &c. ; ed. F. J. Furnivall. E.E.T.S., 1867.

Stanford Dictionary (The) of Anglicised Words and Phrases; ed.
C. A. M. Fennell, D.Litt. Cambridge, 1892.

Stanyhurst, R., tr. of Virgil’s AEneid, books i-iv, 1582; ed. E. Arber,


1880, [1582.]

Statutes of Henry VII. In exact facsimile; ed. J. Rae. London,
1869. [Pr. by Caxton in 1489. |

Statutes of the Realm; vol. i. Pr. by command of Geo. III in
mero. fol,

Stedman, Capt. J. G., Narrative . . . of Surinam. London, 1796.
ACO 2 VOlS:


Sterne, L., Works of. London, 1802. 7 vols. [Died 1768.]

Stokes-Fick, Vergleichendes Worterbuch der indog. Sprachen, von
August Fick. 4th ed. Part 2 (by Whitley Stokes). Gottingen,
1894.

Stow, J., A Survey of London, written in the year 1598.
edition, by W. J. Thoms. London, 1842.

Stratmann.—A Middle-English Dictionary, by F. H. Stratmann.
New ed., by H. Bradley. Oxford, 1891.

Streitberg, Dr. W., Urgermanische Grammatik. Heidelberg, 1896.

Strutt, J., Manners, &c., of the Inhabitants of England. London,
1774-6. 4to. 3 vols.

—— The Sports and Pastimes, &c.

S.T.S.—Scottish Text Society.

Surrey, Lord; see Tottel. Also, ed. R. Bell. London, n. d.

Swainson, Rey. C., Provincial Names of British Birds. E.D.S., 1885.

Swedish.—Pocket-dictionary of the English and Swedish languages.
Leipzig, C. Tauchnitz, n.d. And see Oman.

Thre, J., Glossarium Suiogothicum. 2 vols., folio. Upsal. 1769.

ia och Engelskt Lexicon, af G. Widegren. Stockholm,
1788.

Swedish dialects.—Ordbok 6fver Hallindska Landskaps-MaAlet,
samlad af . Moller. Lund, 1858. (South Sweden.)

—— Svenskt Dialekt-Lexicon ; Ordbok 6fver Svenska allmoge-
spraket, af J. KE. Rietz. Lund, 1867.

Sweet, H., An Anglo-Saxon Reader. Oxford, 1876. 7th ed. 1894.

A History of English Sounds. Oxford, 1888. 8vo. And see
félfred and Oldest English Texts.

Swift, Jonathan; see English Poets.

Swinburne, H., Travels through Spain in 1775 and 1776, London,
1779-

Tatar.—Courteille, P. de, Dictionnaire Turk-Oriental. Paris, 1870.

Tatler.—The Tatler and Guardian ; complete in one volume. [Re-
print.] London, 1877. [1709-13.]

Taylor, Bp. Jeremy; A Course of Sermons.
2 vols.

Taylor, I., Words and Places.

Ten Kate; see Dutch.

‘Tennyson, Alfred Lord, Works of. London, 1892. 8vo.

Testamenta Eboracensia. Surtees Soc., 1836, 1855. 2 vols.

Testamenta Vetusta; ed. Sir N, H. Nicolas. London, 1826. Royal
8yo. 2 vols.

Testament of Love; by Th. Usk. See Chaucerian Pieces. [ab. 1387.]


New


(Reprint.) London, 1876.


London, 1828. 8vyo.


Third edition. London, 1873.


BOOKS REFERRED TO IN THE DICTIONARY


Thomson, Jas.; see English Poets.

Thornton Romances; ed. J. O. Halliwell. (Contains the romances
of Perceval, Isumbras, Eglamour, and Degrevant.) Camden Soc..,
London, 1844. [ab. 1440. ]

Thorpe, B., Ancient Laws and Institutes of England. London, 1840.
2 vols. :

Codex Exoniensis. A Collection of A. S. Poetry; ed. by
B. Thorpe. London, 1842.

— Diplomatarium Avi Saxonici. A Collection of English
Charters, from A.D. 605 to the reign of William the Conqueror.
London, 1865. “

Liber Psalmorum; cum paraphrasi Anglo-Saxonica.
1835. 8vo.

Three Early English Metrical Romances; see Robson.

Thurneysen, R., Keltoromanisches. (On Celtic Etymologies in
Diez.) Halle, 1884.

Thwaites, E., Heptateuchus, Liber Job, et Evangelium Nicodemi,
Anglo-Saxonice, &c. London, 1698. (See Grein.)

Toller; see Bosworth.

Tooke, John Horne, Diversions of Purley; ed. R. Taylor, 1857.

Torrent of Portugal; ed. Halliwell, London, 1842 ; re-ed. E. Adam,
Ph.D.  E.E.LS%, 18872

Torriano; see Italian.

Tottel’s Miscellany. Songs and Sonettes by Henry Howard, Earl
of Surrey, Sir Thomas Wyatt, the elder, &c.; ed. E. Arber.
London, 1870. [First printed in 1557. |

Tourneur, Cyril, The Plays and Poems of; ed. J. Churton Collins.
London, 1878. 8vo. 2 vols.

Towneley Mysteries ; printed for the Surtees Society. London, 1836.
[ab. 1450.] Also ed. G. England and A. W. Pollard. E.E.T.S.,
extra series, 1897.

Toynbee; see Brachet.

Trench, R. C., English Past and Present. Fourth edition. London,
1859. Ninth edition, 1875.

On the Study of Words.

Mayhew. London, 1888.

A Select Glossary. Fourth edition. London, 1873.

Trevisa, John of, tr. of Higden’s Polychronicon; printed in the
edition of Higden’s Polychronicon in the Rolls Series. [1387. ]
See Higden.

Tristan; ed. F. Michel. Londres, 1835. 2 vols.

Tristrem, Sir; ed. G. B. M°Neill. S.T.S., 1885-6.

Troy-book ; see Gest Historiale.

Turbervile’s Poems; see English Poets. [Died 1594 ?]

Turkish.—Zenker, J. T., Dictionnaire Turc-Arabe-Persan. 2 vols.
Leipzig, 1866-76.

Turner, W., The Names of Herbes; ed. J. Britten. E.D.S., 1881.

1548. |

ae T., Fiue hundred Pointes of Good Husbandrie; the edition
of 1580, collated with those of 1573 and 1577; ed. W. Payne and
S. J. Herrtage. E.D.S. London, 1878.

Two Fifteenth-century Cookery Books; ed. T. Austin.
1888.

Two Noble Kinsmen ; by Shakespeare (?) and Fletcher; ed. Skeat.
Cambridge, 1875.

Tyndall—The Whole Workes of W. Tyndall, John Frith, and
Doctor Barnes, pr. by John Daye, 1572. [Tyndall died in 1536. ]

Udall, N., Roister Doister (a play); ed. E. Arber, 1869. [ab. 1553. |

tr. of the Paraphrase of Erasmus ypon the newe Testamente.

London, 1548-9.

tr. of the Apophthegmes of Erasmus. Boston, 1877. [1532]

Uhlenbeck, Dr. C. C., Etymologisches Worterbuch der altindischen
Sprache. Amsterdam, 1898-9.

— Etymologisches Worterbuch der Gotischen Sprache.
Amsterdam, 1900.

Unton Inventories; ed. J. G. Nichols.
Society. 1841. sm. 4to.

Utopia ; see More.

Vanbrugh’s Plays; see Wycherley.

Vaniéek, A., Griechisch-Lateinisches Etymologisches Worterbuch.
Leipzig, 1877. 2 vols.

Vespasian Psalter. (A Latin Psalter with an Old Mercian Gloss;
in O.E. Texts, q.v.)

Vie de Saint Gile, La; ed. G. Paris. Paris, 1881.

Vie de Seint Auban; a poem in Norman French; ed. R. Atkinson.
London, 1876. ‘

Vieyra ; see Portuguese.

Vigfusson ; see Icelandic.

Voc.—Anglo-Saxon and Old English Vocabularies, by T. Wright.
2nd ed.; ed. R. P. Wiilcker. London, 1884. 2 vols.

Vulgate, the ; see Biblia.


Oxford,


Twentieth edition; ed. Rev. A. L.


EE.TS.,


and ed.


Berkshire Ashmolean


BOOKS REFERRED TO IN THE DICTIONARY


Vullers ; see Persian.

Wadington, Wm. of, Manuel des Pechiez ; ed. F. J. Furnivall, 1862.

Walde, Dr. A., Lateinisches Etymologisches Worterbuch. Heidel-
berg, 1906,

Wallace.—The Wallace, by Henry the Minstrel; ed. J. Jamieson, D.D.


Edinburgh, 1820. Also, ed. J. Moir. S.T.S., 1884-9.  [ab.
1460. |
Wallachian.—Walachisch-dentsches Worterbuch ; von A. Isser.


Kronstadt, 1850. (The same as Roumanian.)

Dictionnaire d’étymologie Daco-Romane; par A. de Cihac.
Frankfort, 1870.

Waller, E., Poems; ed. R. Bell.
Poets.

Walloon; see French dialects.

Wanley, H., Catalogue of A. S. MSS.; pr. in vol. iii of Hickes’s
Thesaurus ; see Hickes.

Warburton, W., The Divine Legation of Moses demonstrated.
(First ed. 1737-8. Cited by Richardson.)

Warner, W., Albion’s England; see English Poets.

Wars of Alexander; see Alexander.


London, n.d. And see English


Warton, T., History of English Poetry. London, 1840. 8vo.
3 vols. Also ed. W. C. Hazlitt, London, 1871. 8vo. 4 vols.

Way; see Prompt. Parv.

Webbe, E., Travels; ed. E. Arber. 1868. [1590.]

Weber’s Metrical Romances. 3 vols. London, 1810. Vol. i
contains King Alisaunder; Sir Cleges; Lai le Freine. Vol. ii


contains Richard Coer de Lion ; Ipomydon; Amis and Amiloun.
Vol. iii contains Seuyn Sages; Octouian; Sir Amadas; Hunting
of the Hare.

Webster, J., Works of; ed. A. Dyce; new edition.
[1607-61. |

Webster, N., International Dictionary of the English Language; ed.
N. Porter. Springfield, Mass., 18098.
Wedgwood, H., A Dictionary of English Etymology.
edition, London, 1872. Third edition, London, 1878.
Contested Etymologies in the Dictionary of the Rev. W. W.
Skeat. London, 1882.

Weigand; see German.

Welsh.—A Dictionary of the Welsh Language, by W. Spurrell.
Second edition. Carmarthen, 1859.

Whitby Glossary; see E.D.S.

Whitehead, W., Poems; see English Poets.

Wiat, Sir T. ; see Tottel’s Miscellany.

Widegren ; see Swedish.

William of Palerne ; ed. W. W. Skeat.
[ab. 1360. ]

William of Shoreham, The Religious Poems of; ed. Thos. Wright.
(Percy Society.) 1849. [ab. 1325?]. And see Shoreham.

Williams ; see Cornish.

Wills and Inventories .


1835.


London, 1857.


Second


E.E.T.S., extra series, 1867.


. of the Northera Counties. Surtees Soc.,


xli


Wilson, H. H., A Glossary of Judicial and Revenue Terms, from
various Indian languages. London, 1855.

Windisch ; see Irish.

Winner and Wastoure ; see Parlement.


Winzet’s [Winyet’s] Works; ed. Rev. J. K. Hewison. S.T.S.,
1887-8, 1890-1. __

Woeste ; see Low German dialects (Westphalian).

Worcester, J. E., A Dictionary of the English Language. London


(1859).
Wordsworth, W., Poetical Works. London, 1854.
Wotton, Sir H., Reliquize Wottonianz. 4th ed. London, 1685.
[First ed. 1651. ]
Wright, T., Homes of Other Days. London, 1871.
Popular Treatises on Science. London, 1841, Contains
fElfric’s tr. of Beda, De Temporibus Rationum ; Philip de Thaun,
Livre des Creatures and Bestiary ; and M. E, Fragment on Popular
Science.


Specimens of Lyric Poetry (temp. Edw. I). Percy Soc.,
1842,
Vocabularies. (First Series.) Liverpool, 1857. (Second


Series.) Liverpool, 1873. And see Voc.

Wiilcker’s Glossaries ; see Voc.

Wulfstan; ed. A. Napier. Part I. Berlin, 1883.

Wyatt, Sir T.; see Tottel’s Miscellany.

Wycherley, Congreve, Vanbrugh, and Farquhar, Dramatic Works
of. London, 1840. 8vo.

Wyclif, English Works of, hitherto unprinted; ed, F. D. Matthew.
E.E.T.S., 1880.

Select English Works of John Wyclif; ed. T. Arnold. Oxford,

1869-71. 3 vols. [Died 1384.]

The Holy Bible, in the earliest English Versions made by
John Wycliffe and his followers; ed. Rev. J. Forshall and
Sir F. Madden. Oxford, 1850. 4 vols. (With a Glossary.) [ab.
1382-8. }

Wycliffite Glossary.—A Glossary to the Wycliffite Versions of the
Bible (above). (Sometimes met with separately.)

Wyntown, Andrew of, The Orygynale Cronykil of Scotland; ed. D.
Laing. Edinburgh, 1872-9. 3 vols.

York Plays; ed. Lucy Toulmin Smith. Oxford, 1885. 8vo.

York Wills.—Wills and Inventories . . . of the counties of York,
Westmoreland, and Lancashire; ed. Rev. J. Raine. Surtees Soc.,
1853.

Young, E., The Complaint, or Night Thoughts.
[Died 1765.] And see English Poets.

Yule, Col. H., and A. C. Burnell;


London, 1817.


Hobson-Jobson; being a


Glossary of Anglo-Indian Colloquial Words and Phrases, Lon-
don, 1886. 8vo.

Zambaldi, F., Vocabolario Etimologico Italiano. Citta di Castello,
1889.


Zenker; see Turkish.


KEY: FO “THE GENERAL «PLAN OF “THE. ETYMOLOGI@
DICTIONARY


Eacu article is arranged, as far as seemed advisable, according to a uniform scheme, and the following details
will explain the nature of the information to be found in this work.

§ 1. The words selected. The Word-list contains all the primary words of most frequent occurrence in
modern literature; and, when their derivatives are included, supplies a tolerably complete vocabulary of the
language. I have been largely guided in the choice by the work known as the Student’s English Dictionary,
by John Ogilvie, as edited by Charles Annandale (1895). A few unusual words have been included on account
of their occurrence in familiar passages of standard authors.

§ 2. The Definitions. These are given in the briefest possible form, chiefly for the purpose of identifying
the word and showing the part of speech.

§ 3. The Language. The language to which each word belongs is distinctly marked in every case by
means of letters within marks of parenthesis immediately following the definition, In the case of words derived
from French, a note is (in general) also made as to whether the French word is of Latin, Celtic, German, or Scan-
dinavian origin. The symbol ‘—’ signifies ‘derived from.’ Thus the remark ‘(F.—L.)’ signifies ‘a word
introduced into English from /ench, the French word itself being of Las origin.’ The letters used are to
be read as follows.

Arab. = Arabic. AF. = Anglo-French. C. = Celtic, used as a general term for Irish, Gaelic, Welsh,
Breton, Cornish, &c. E. = English. F-= French: G. = German. Gk. = Greek. Li. or nate
Latin. Scand. = Scandinavian, used as a general term for Icelandic, Swedish, Danish, &c. Skt. =Sanskrit.
W. = Welsh.

For other abbreviations, see § 8 below.

§ 4. The History. Next follows a brief account of the history of the word, showing (approximately) the time
of its introduction into the language ; or, if a native word, the Middle-English form or forms of it, with a few quo-
tations and references. This is an important feature of the work, and (I believe) to some extent a newone. In
attempting thus, as it were, to da/e each word, I must premise that I often cite Shakespeare in preference to a
slightly earlier writer whose writings are less familiar ; that an attempt has nevertheless been made to indicate the
date within (at least) a century; and lastly, that in some cases I may have failed to do this, owing to imperfect
information or knowledge. In general, sufficient is said, in a very brief space, to es/ablish the earlier uses of each
word, so as to clear the way for a correct notion of its origin.

§ 5. The References. A large number of the references are from Richardson’s Dictionary, denoted by the
symbol ‘(R.).’ Some from Todd’s Johnson, sometimes cited merely as ‘Todd’ Many from Stratmann’s Old
English Dictionary, or the still better (but unfinished) work by Méatzner; these are all ‘ME.,’ i.e. Middle-
English forms. Many others are due to my own reading. I have, in very many instances, given exac/ references,
often at the expenditure of much time and trouble. Thus Richardson cites ‘The Romaunt of the Rose’ at large,
but I have given, in almost every case, the exact number of the line. Similarly, he cites the Fairy Queen merely
by the dock and canto, omitting the s/anza. Inexact quotations are comparatively valueless, as they cannot be
verified, and may be false.

For a complete list of authorities, with dates, see p. xxx (above).

§ 6. The Etymology. Except in a few cases where the etymology is verbally described, the account of it _
begins with the symbol —, which is always to be read as ‘ directly derived from,’ or ‘borrowed from,’ wherever
it occurs. A succession of these symbols occurs whenever the etymology is traced back through another lan-
guage. The order is always backward, from old to still older forms.

§ 7. Cognate Forms, Cognate forms are frequently introduced by way of further illustration, though
they form, strictly speaking, no part of the direct history of the etymology. But they frequently throw so much
light upon the word that it has always been usual to cite them; though no error is more common than to mis-
take a word that is merely cognaée with, or allied to, the English one for the very original of it! For example,


KEY TO THE GENERAL PLAN OF THE ETYMOLOGICAL DICTIONARY xhiii


many people will quote the German word acker as if it accounted for, or is the original of the English acre,
whereas it is (like the Lat. ager, or the Icelandic akr) merely a parallel form. It is remarkable that many
beginners are accustomed to cite German words in particular (probably as being the only continental-Teutonic
idiom with which they are acquainted) in order to account for English words; the fact being that no Teutonic
language has contributed so little to our own tongue, which is, in the main, a Zow-German dialect as dis-
tinguished from that Azgh-German one to which the specific name ‘German’ is commonly applied. In order
to guard the learner from this error of confusing cogna/e words with such as are immediately concerned with the
etymology, the symbol 4 is used to mark off such words. This symbol is, in every case, to be read as ‘not
derived from, but cognate with.’ The symbol has, in fact, its usual algebraical value, i.e. plus, or additional ;
and indicates additional information to be obtained from the comparison of cognate forms.

§ 8. Symbols and Etymological References. The symbols used are such as to furnish, 7 every case,
an exact reference to some authority. Thus the symbol ‘Ital.’ does not mean merely Italian, but that the word
has actually been verified by myself (and may be verified by any one else) as occurring in Meadows’s Italian
Dictionary. This is an important point, as it is common to cite foreign words at random, without the slightest
hint as to where they may be found; a habit which leads to false spellings and even to gross blunders. - And, in
order that the student may the more easily verify these words (as well as to curb myself from citing words of
unusual occurrence), I have expressly preferred to use common and cheap dictionaries, or such as came most
readily to hand, except where I refer dy name to such excellent books as Rietz’s Svenskt Dialekt-Lexicon. The
following is a list of these symbols, with their exact significations.

AS.—Anglo-Saxon, or Wessex English in its earliest form. The references are to Grein, Bosworth, or Lye;
as cited; or to some AS. work, as cited. All these words are au/horized, unless the given form is marked by an
asterisk preceding it, to denote that it is theoretical.

Bret.—Breton ; as in Le Gonidec’s Dictionary, ed. 1821.

Corn.—Cornish ; as in Williams’s Dictionary, ed. 1865.

Dan.—Danish ; as in Ferrall and Repp’s Dictionary, ed. 1861, or in Larsen (1897).

Du.—Dutch ; as in the Tauchnitz stereotyped edition, or in Calisch (1875).

E.—Modern English ; see Webster’s English Dictionary, ed. Goodrich and Porter ; or the Century Dictionary ;
and see N:E.D. ,

ME.— Middle English; i.e. English from about a.p. 1200 to about a.p. 1500. See § 5 above.

¥F.—French, as in the Dict. by Hamilton and Legros. The reference ‘ Cot.’ is to Cotgrave’s French Dic-
tionary, ed. 1660; also denoted by MF. (Middle French). Wherever OF. (= Old French) occurs, the reference is
to Burguy’s Glossaire, unless the contrary be expressly stated, in which case it is (in general) to Godefroy, or to
Roquefort.

Gael.—Gaelic; as in Macleod and Dewar’s Dictionary, ed. 1839.

G.—German; as in Fliigel’s Dictionary, ed. 1861.

Gk.—Greek ; as in Liddell and Scott’s Lexicon, ed. 1849.

Goth. —Moeso-Gothic ; 3 asin Stamm’s Ulfilas, ed. 1878.

Heb. Hebrew ; as in Leopold’s small Hebrew Dictionary, ed. 1872; or in Gesenius (1883).

Icel.—lIcelandic ; as in Cleasby and Vigfusson’s Icelandic Dictionary, ed. 1874.

Ir. or Irish.—Irish; as in O’Reilly’s Dictionary, ed. 1864.

Ital.—Italian ; as in Meadows’s Dictionary, ed. 1857.

L. or Lat.—Latin ; as in Lewis and Short’s Dictionary, ed. 1880.

Low Lat.—Low Latin ; as in Ducange, ed. Favre; 1884.

ME.—Middle-English; see the line following E. above.

MHG.—Middle High German ; as in Wackernagel’s Worterbuch, ed. 1861; or Schade; see OHG. below.

N.E.D.—A New English Dictionary, on Historical Principles ; Oxford, 1888-,

OF.—Old French; as in Godefroy, or in Burguy’s Glossaire, ed. 1870.

OHG.—Old High German ; chiefly from Schade, 2nd ed., 1872-82.

Pers.—Persian ; as in Palmer’s Persian Dictionary, ed. 1876.

Port.—Portuguese ; as in Vieyra’s Dictionary, ed, 1857.

Prov.—Provengal ; as in Raynouard’s Lexique Roman (so called).

Russ.—Russian ; as in Reiff’s Dict. of Russian, German, English, and French, ed. 1876.


xliv KEY TO THE GENERAL PLAN OF THE ETYMOLOGICAL DICTIONARY


Skt.—Sanskrit; as in Benfey’s Dictionary, ed. 1866.

Span.—Spanish ; as in Meadows’s Dictionary, ed. 1856; or in Neuman, 1862.

Swed.—Swedish; as in the Tauchnitz stereotyped edition; or in Oman, 1897; or Widegren, 1788.

‘W.—Welsh; as in Spurrell’s Dictionary, ed. 186r.

For a complete list of authorities, see p. xxx. The above includes only such as have been used too
frequently to admit of special reference to them by name.

Other abbreviations.—Such abbreviations as ‘adj.’ = adjective, ‘pl.’ = plural, and the like, will be readily


understood. JI may particularly mention the following. Cf. = confer, i.e. compare. pt. t. = past tense.
pp. = past participle. q. Vv. = quod vide, i.e. which see. s. v. = sub verbo, i.e, under the word in question.
tr. = translation, or translated. b.(or bk.) = book. c. (or ch., or cap.) = chapter; sometimes = canto. 1. = line
Ss. = section. st. = stanza. A.V. = Authorized Version of the Bible (1611).


§9. The Roots. In some cases, the words have been traced back to their original Indogermanic roots.
This has only been attempted, for the most part, in cases where the subject scarcely admits of a doubt ; it being
unadvisable to hazard too many guesses, in the present state of our knowledge. .The root is denoted by the
symbol ¥, to be read as ‘root.’ I have here most often referred to Brugmann, Uhlenbeck, Prellwitz, or Kluge.

§ 10, Derivatives. The symbol ‘Der., i.e. Derivatives, is used to introduce forms derived from the primary
word, or from the same source. For an account of the various suffixes, see Morris’s Historical Outlines of
English Accidence, and Haldemann’s Affixes to English Words; or, for the purpose of comparative philology,
consult Brugmann.

§ 11. Cross-references. These frequently afford additional information, and are mostly introduced to.save
repetition of an explanation.


CORRIGENDA


BAROUCHE, 1.1. For (G.—Ital.) read (G.—Ital.—L.)

DEFINE, 1. 7. Insert a comma after dé.

EDUCATES, 1. 1. Insert a comma after to cultivate.

FLOTSAM, 1.1. For (AF.—E.) and L.) read (AF.—E. and L.)

JAUNT; at the endofl.5, For id. read Rom.

TRACE (1), 1.9. For *tractiare read *tractiare.

WARKH (1) ; at the end. For Weir (1) and Worth read Weir and Worth (1).


*,* For some other corrections see the Supplement ; pp. 777-780.


a


A


A, the indef. article; see An.

A.-, prefix, has at least twelve different values in English. a. Repre-
sentative words are (1) adown; (2) afoot; (3) along; (4) arise;
(5) achieve; (6) avert; (7) amend; (8) alas; (9) abyss; (10) ado;
(11) aware; (12) avast. B. The full form of these values may be
represented by of-, on-, and-, d-, ad-, ab-, ex-, he-, an-, at-, ge-, houd.
y. This may be illustrated by means of the examples given; cf. (1)
AS. ofdiine; (2) on foot; (3) AS. andlang ; (4) AS. d-risan; (5) verb
fromF. a chef, L.ad caput; (6) L. duertere, for abuertere; (7) F.amender,
from L. émendare, for exmendare; (8) F. hélas, where hé is inter-
jectional; (9) Gk. &Buvaoos, for dv-Bvacos; (10) for at do, i.e. to do;
(11) for ME. ywar, AS. gewer; (12) avast, Dutch houd vast, hold
fast. These prefixes are discussed at greater length under the head-
ings Of, On, Along, Arise, Ad-, Ab- (1), Ex-, Alas, Un- (1),
At, Aware, Avast; each being given in its proper place in this
Dictionary. 4 Prefix a (5) really has two values: (a) French, as in
avalanche; (b) Latin, asin astringent; but the source is the same, viz.
L. ad. Similarly, prefix a (6) really has two values; (a) French, as
in ME. a-soilen, now spelt assoil ; (b) Latin, as in avert, avocation ; the
source being L. ab. > In words discussed below, the prefix has its
numberassigned inaccordance with the above scheme, where necessary.

AARDVARK, the S. African ground-hog, (Cape Du.) Lit.
‘earth-hog.’ From Du. aard-, for aarde, earth; and vark, for varken,
ahog. See Karth and Farrow.

AB-, prefix, (L.)° L. ad, short form a-; sometimes extended to abs-.
Cognate with Skt. apa, away, from; Gk. dd; Goth. af; AS.of; G.
ab; seeOf. Hence numerous compounds, as ab-use, a-vert, abs-tract,
&c. In French, it becomes a- or av-; see Assoil, Advantage.

ABACK, backwards. (E.) ME. abak; as in ‘And worthi to
be put abak;’ Gower, C. A. i. 295 (bk. ili. 481). For on bak, as in
‘Sir Thopas drough on bak ful fast ;? Chaucer, C. T., B 2017, in
the Harleian MS.,where other MSS. have abak. — AS. onbec; Matt.iv.
10. ‘Thus the prefix is a- (2); for oz. See On and Back.

ABACUS, a calculating frame; upper member of the capital of
a column, (L.—Gk.) See Trevisa, tr. of Higden, vii. 69. L. abacus,
= Gk. dBag (gen. aBaxos), a slab for reckoning on.

. ABAF'T, onthe aft, behind. (E.) a. From the prefix a- (2), for on,
and -baft, which is contracted from bi-aft, i.e. by aft. Thus abaft is
for on by aft, i.e. in that which lies towards the after part. B. -ba/ft
is ME, baft, Allit. Poems, C.148 ; the fuller form is biaft, with which
cf. ‘He let biaften the more del’ =he left behind the greater part ;
Genesis and Exodus, 3377. ME. biaften is from AS. beeftan, com-
pounded of be, by, and eftan, behind; Grein,i.53. See By and Aft.

ABANDON, to forsake, give up. (F.—Low L.—OHG.) ME.
abandounen. ‘Bot thai, that can thame abandoune Till ded’=
but they, that gave themselves up to death; Barbour’s Bruce, ed.
Skeat, xvii. 642. —F. abandonner,to give up. —F. & bandon, at liberty,
at one’s disposal; orig. ‘in the power of;’ discussed in Brachet,
Etym. F. Dict.—F. 4, prep., and bandon, control, jurisdiction. = L. ad,
to; and Low L. bandum, a feudal term (also spelt baxnum) signify-
ing an order, decree; see Ban. @ The F. 4 bandomis lit. ¢ by procla-
mation,’ and thus has the double sense (1) ‘ under control,’ and (2) ‘at
one’s discretion, by permission.’ The former is obsolete in modern
English; but occurs frequently in ME. See Glossary to the Bruce;
cand cf. ‘habben. abandun,’ to have at one’s will, O. Eng. Homilies, ed.
Morris, i.189,1.24. Der. abandon-ed, lit. given up; abandon-ment.

ABASH, to bring low. (F.—L.) Shak. has ‘abase our sight so
low;’ 2 Hen. VI, i. 2.15. Cf.‘So to abesse his realte ;? Gower,
C. A, i. 111 (bk. i. 2063). From a- (5), for F.a-, L. ad, and Base;
in imitation of OF. abaissier, abessier, MF. abaisser, abbaisser, ‘to
debase, abase, abate, humble;’ Cotgrave.—Late L. abassare, to
lower.—L. ad, to; and Late L. bassare, to lower, from Late L.

_ bassus, low. See Base. Der. abase-ment, A. V., Ecclus. xx. I1.
@ It is extremely probable that some confusion has taken place
between this word and to abash; for in Middle E. (in the Northern
dialect) we find abaist with the sense of abashed or dismayed. See
examples under abasex in Matzner’s Worterbuch; and see N. E. D.

ABASH, to confuse with shame. (F.) ME. abaschen, abaischen,
abaissen, abasen, &c. ‘I abasshe, or am amased of any thynge;’ Pals-
grave. *Thei weren abaischid with a greet stonying ;’ Wyclif, Mk. v. |


Z


ABDICATE


42. ‘He was abasched and agast ;’ K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1. 224. —
OF. esbaiss-, stem of pres. part. of esbair, to astonish (see note below);
mod. F. ébakir.= OF. es- (L. ex, out, extremely); and bair, bahir, to
express astonishment, an imitative verb formed from the interjection
bah! of astonishment. Cf. prov. E. bo, boh, interj., a sudden cry to
cause fright; Gk. Bodew, L. bore, to shout out. 4 The final -sk
is to be thus accounted for. French verbs in -ir are of two forms,
those which (like venir) follow the Latin inflexions, and those which
(like fleurir) sometimes add -iss- to the root. See Brachet’s Hist.
French Grammar, ed. Toynbee, § 581. This -iss- is imitated from
the L. -ese-, -isc-, seen in ‘inchoative’ verbs, such as flor-esco, trem-
isco, and appears in many parts of the French verb, which is con-
jugated to a great degree as if its infinitive were *fleurissir instead of
fleurir. B. An excellent example is seen in dbeir, to obey, which
would similarly have, as it were, a secondary form *dbeissir; and,
corresponding to these forms, we have in English not only ¢o obey,
but the obsolete form obeysche, obesche, as in ‘the wynd and the see
obeschen to hym;’ Wyclif, Mk. iv. 40. yy. Easier examples appear
in E. abolish, banish, cherish, demolish, embellish, establish, finish, flour-
ish, furbish, furnish, garnish, languish, nourish, polish, punish, all from
French verbs in-ir. 5. We also have examples like admonish, dimin-
ish, replenish, evidently from French sources, in which the termination
is due to analogy; these are discussed in their proper places, @ It
is probable that the word to abask has been to some extent confused
with to abase. See Abase. Der. bash-ful (for abash-ful); abash-ment.

ABATE, to beat down. (F.—L.) ME. abaten. ‘To abate the
bost of that breme duke;’ Will. of Palerne, 1141. ‘Thow... abatest
alle tyranne;’ K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber, l. 7499.—OF. abaire, to
beat down. — Late L. abbattere; see Brachet.=L. ad, to; and battere,
popular form of battwere, to beat. Der. abate-ment, Hamlet, iv. 7.
121; abat-is (below), and F. abatt-oir, a public slaughter-house.
@ Often contracted to bate, q.v.

ABATIS, ABATTIS, a military defence made of felled trees.
(F.—L.) Spelt abatis in Todd’s Johnson.—F. abatis; OF. abateis
(Hatzfeld).—OF. abatre, to beat down (above).

ABBESS, fem. of abbot. (F. —L.—Gk.—Syriac.) ME. abbesse, Rob.
of Glouce. p. 370, 1. 7624; Early E. Poems, ed. Furnivall, p. 70, 1. 165.
= AF, abbesse; earlier OF. abaesse; see abbesse in Hatzfeld.=—L. ab-
batissa, fem. in -issa from abbat-, stem of abbas, an abbot. See Abbot.

ABBEY, a religious house. (F.—L.—Gk.—Syriac.) ME. ab-
beye, abbaye. ‘Abbeye, abbatia’ [misprinted abbacia]; Prompt. Parv.
Spelt abbet in the Metrical Life of St. Dunstan, 1. 39.—AF. abbeie,
abeie, f.; OF. abeie, abaie; Bartsch’s Chrestomathie.—Late L. ab-
batia.— Late L. abbat-, stem of abbas. See Abbot.

ABBOT, the father (or head) of an abbey. (L.—Gk.—Syriac.)
ME. abbot, abbod. ‘ Abbott, abbas;’ Prompt. Pary. Spelt abbod,
Ancren Riwle, p. 314. AS. abbod, abbad; /Elfric’s homily on the
Old Test. begins with the words ‘/Elfric abbod.’ = L. abbdiem, abbadem,
acc. of abbas, father, — Late Gr. dBBas (gen. dBBar-os, dBBa5-os) ; see
Ducange. = Syriac abba, father ; see Romans, vili. 15; Galat. iv. 6.
@ The restoration of the ¢ (for d in AS.) was due to a knowledge of
the L. form; cf. OF. abez (=abets, pl.), Chanson de Roland, 2955.

ABBREVIATEH, to shorten. (L.) Fabyan has abrezyatyd in the
sense of abridged; Henry III, an. 26, ed. 1811, p. 333. Elyot has
‘an abbreuiate, called of the Grekes and Latines ep:toma;’ The
Governor, b. iii. c. 25.—L. abbreuiare (pp. abbreuidtus), to shorten,
in Rom. ix. 28 (Vulgate).—L. ad, to; and breuis, short. See
Brief and Abridge. Der. abbreviat-ion, -or. Doublet, abridge.
@ Here adbreuidre would at once become abbreuidre ; cf. Ital. abbo-
nare, to improve, abbassare, to lower, abbellare, to embellish, where
the prefix is plainly ad. ¢ The formation of verbs in -a¢e in Eng-
lish is curious; a good example is create, equivalent to L. creare ;
but it does not follow that createwas necessarily formed from the pp.
creatus. Such verbs in -ate can be formed directly from L. verbs in
-dre, by mere analogy with others. All that was necessary was to
initiate such a habit of formation. This habit began with words like ad-
vocate, which was originally a pp. used as.a sb., and, secondarily, was
used as a verb by the common English habit of creating verbs from sbs.

ABDICATE, lit.to renounce. (L.) In Levins, A.D. 1570; and
used by Bishop Hall, in his Contemplations, N.T., b. iv. cont. 6.


B


2 ABDOMEN


§ 2.—L. abdicdt-us, pp. of abdicare (see note to Abbreviate). —
L. ab, from; and dicdre, to proclaim. Dicare is allied to dicere, to
say; see Diction. Der. abdicat-ion.

ABDOMEN, the lower part of the belly. (L.) Defined as ‘the
fat which is about the belly;’ Coles, ed. 1684. Der. abdomin-al,

ABDUCE, to lead away. (L.) Not old, and not usual. Used
by Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 20. § 4; where some edd.
have adduce. More common is the derivative abduction, used by
Blackstone, Comment. b. iv. c. 15, and a common law-term, = L.
abdiicere, to lead away. —L. ab, from, away; and décere, to lead. See
Duke. Der. abduct, abduct-ion, abduct-or; cf. the pp. abductus.

ABED, in bed. (E.) Shakespeare has abed, As You Like It, ii.
2. 6, and elsewhere; ME. a-bedde, Chaucer, Troil.i.g15. The prefix
a- stands foroz. ‘Thu restest the on bedde’ =thou restest thee abed ;
Layamon, ii. 372.

ABELE, the white poplar. (Du.—F.—L.) In Kersey (1708). Du.
abeel.—OF, abel, aubel (aubel in Godefroy).—Late L. albellum, acc.
of albelius, white poplar; Duc.—L. alb-us, white. See Alb.

ABERRATION, a wandering. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674.—L,. aberratidnem, acc. of aberratio.mL. aberrare, to wander
from.—L. ab, away; and errdre,to wander. See Err.

ABET, to incite. (F.—Scand.) Used by Shak. Com. of Errors,
ii. 2. 172. ME. abetten, Sir Ferumbras, ]. 5816 (ab. 1380). [Cf.
ME. abet, sb., meaning ‘instigation;’ Chaucer, Troilus, ii. 357.]
—OF-. abeter, to deceive, also to incite (Godefroy); AF. and OF.
abet, instigation, deceit.—OF. a- <L. ad, to; and beter, to bait.
Cf. ‘ Nus ours, quant il est bien betes’ =No bear, when he is well
baited; Rom. Rose, 10168. OF. bezer is from Icel. betta, to bait,
chase with dogs, set dogs on; lit. ‘to make to bite;’ causal verb
from bita, to bite. See Bait; and see Bet. Der. abetment, AF.
abettement ; abett-or, Shak. Lucrece, 886.

ABEYANCH, expectation, suspension. (F.—L.) <A law term;
used by Littleton, and in Blackstone’s Commentaries; see Cowel’s
Law Dict., and Todd’s Johnson.—A.F. abéiance, as in the phrase
‘droit en abéiance,’ a right in abeyance, or which is suspended; OF.
abeance, expectation; see Godefroy.—F. prefix a- (<L. ad); and
beance, expectation (Godefroy) ; allied to OF. béant, gaping, pres. pt.
of obs. verb béer (mod. F. bayer), to gape, to expect anxiously. = L. ad;
and badire, to gape, to open the mouth, used by Isidore of Seville ;
see Brachet, s.v. bayer. The word badare is probably imitative.

ABHOR, to shrink from with terror. (L.) Shak. has it frequently.
It occurs in Lord Surrey’s translation of Virgil, b. ii. 1. 16; cf. ‘ quan-
quam animus meminisse horret;’ Aen.ii.12. Caxton has abhorryng,
Troy Book, leaf 20, 1. 11.—L. abhorrére, to shrink from.—L. ab,
from; and horrére, to bristle (with fear). See Horrid. Der.
abhorr-ent, abhorr-ence.

ABIDE (1), to wait for. (E.) ME. abiden, Chaucer, C. T.,
E 757, 1106; and in common use. AS. abidan, Grein, i, 12.—AS.
prefix d-; and bidan, to bide. Cf. Goth. usbeidan, to expect. See Bide.
Der. abid-ing ; abode, formed by gradation, from the 2nd grade bad,

ABIDE (2), to suffer for a thing. (E.) a. We find in Shak.
‘lest thou abide it deare;’ Mids. Nt. Dream, iii. 2. 175 ; where the first
quarto has aby. The latter is correct; the verb in the phrase ‘to abide
it’ being a mere corruption, due to confusion with abide (1). B. The
ME. form is abyen, as in ‘That thou shalt with this launcegay Abyen
it ful soure;’ Chaucer, C.T., B 2011 (1. 13751). This verb abyen is
also spelt abuggen and abiggen, and is common in Middle E.; see
examples in Matzner and Stratmann. Its pt: tense is aboughte, and
we still preserve it, in a reversed form, in the modern ¢o buy off
y- Hence ‘lest thou abide it dear’ signifies ‘lest thou have to bwy it
off dearly,’ i.e. lest thou have to pay dearly for it.— AS. dbyegan, to
pay for. ‘Gif friman wid fries mannes wif geliged, his wergelde
dbicge’=If a free man lie with a freeman’s wife, let him pay for it
with his wergeld ; Laws of King A‘thelbirht, 31; in Thorpe’s Ancient
Laws, i. 10.—AS. a-, prefix; and AS. bycgan, to buy. See Buy.

ABIGATL, a waiting-woman. (Heb.) See T.L.O. Davies, Suppl.
Glossary. From the character Abigail in Beaumont and Fletcher’s
Scornful Woman. See 1 Sam. xxy.

ABILITY ; see Able. :

ABJECT, mean; lit. cast away. (L.) Shak. has it several times,
and once the subst. abjécts; Rich. III, i. 1. 106. It was formerly used
also asaverb. ‘ Almightie God abiected Saul, that he shulde no more
reigne ouer Israhel;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. ii. c. i. § 3.—L.
abiectus, cast away, pp. of abicere, to cast away.—L. ab, from, away;
and iacere, to cast. Cf. Jet (1). Der. abdject-ly, abject-ion, abject-ness,
abjects (pl. sb.).

ABJURE, to forswear. (L.) Sir T. More has abiure, Works,
p- 214b. Cotgrave has ‘abjurer, to abjure, forswear, deny with
an oath.’ = L. abitrare, to deny. —L. ab, from; and iirare, to swear,
from ius (gen. iuris), law, right. = In several words of this kind,
it is almost impossible to say whether they we-e derived from Lat.


ABOUT


immediately, or through the French. It makes no ultimate difference,
Der. abjur-at-ion.

ABLATIVE, taking away. (F.—L.) ME. ablatyfe, Reliq. Ant. ii.
14,1. 19.—F. ablatif, ‘the ablative case,’ Cot.—L. ablatiuus, the name
of a case.—L. ab, from ; and /atum, to bear, used as active supine of
fero, but from a different root. Latum is from an older form datum,
supine of éollere, to lift, take away. Co-radicate words are /olerate and
the ME. ¢hole, to endure. See Tolerate. @ ‘ We learn from a
fragment of Czesar’s work, De Analogid, that he was the inventor of
the term ablative in Latin. The word never occurs before ;? Max
Miiller, Lectures, i. 118 (8th edit.).

ABLAZE, on iire. (E.) For on blaze, i.e. in a blaze. ‘Al on
blase ;? Gower, C. A. ii. 244 (bk. v. 3510). The AS. and ME. on
commonly has the sense of in. See Abed and Blaze.

ABLE, having power; skilful. (f.—L.) ME. able, Chaucer,
Prol. 584.—OF. able (Godefroy), able; F. habile, ‘able, . . active ;’
Cot. —L. habilis, easy to handle, active.—L. habére, to have, to hold,
B. The spelling hable is also found, as, e.g. in Sir Thomas More,
Dialogue concerning Heresies, b.iii.c.16; Works, p. 245 a; habilitie,
R. Ascham, The Schoolmaster, ed. 1570, leaf 19 (ed. Arber, p. 63).
Der. abl-y, abil-i-ty (from L. acc..habilitatem, from habilitas).

ABLUTION, a washing. (F.—L.) Used by Bp. Taylor (R.)
ME. ablucioun, Chaucer, C.T., G 856. = F. ablution, — L.acc. ablitionem.
= L. abluere, to wash away.—L. ab, away; and were, to wash. Cf.
L. laudre, to wash; see Lave.

ABNEGATEH, to deny. (L.) Used by Dr. Johnson, s. v. abjure.
Minsheu (1627) has abnegation.=L. abnegat-us, pp. of abnegare, to
deny.—L. ab, from, away; and negare, to deny. See Negation.
Der. abnegat-ion.

ABNORMAL, irregular. (F.—L.—Gk.) Modern; and very
corrupt (N.E.D.). Made by popular etymology, as if from L. ab,
from, and norma, rule (see Normal); but really from F. anormal
(Hatzfeld). — Med. L. anormdalis, by-form of anormalus (Duc.), a cor-
ruption of andmalus (whence F. anomal). = Gk. dvwpados, uneven ; see
Anomaly. @ An anomalous word.

ABOARD, on board. (E.) For on board. ‘And stood on borde
baroun and knyght To help kyng Rychard for to fyght;’ Richard
Coer de Lion, 2543; in Weber, Met. Romances.

ABODE, a dwelling. (E.) The ME. abood almost always has
the sense of ‘delay’ or ‘abiding;’ see Chaucer, C. T. 967 (A 965).
Also North E. abad, Barbour’s Bruce, i. 142. A verbal sb. from
abide, with the same stem-vowel as abdad, the pt. t. of that verb. See
Abide (1). For the modern sense, see John, xiv. 23.

ABOLISH, to annul. (F.—L.) Caxton has the pp. abolysshed,
Eneydos, ch. xxvi (p. 92, 1.32). Hall, Henry VIII, an. 28. § 8, has
the unnecessary spelling abholish, just as abominate was once written
abhominate. =’. aboliss-, from inf. abolir; (for the ending -sh see re-
marks on Abash.) = L. abolesc-ere, inceptive form of abolére, to annul.
@ The etymology of abolére is not clear; Fick (ii. 47) compares it
with Gk. dméAAvva, to destroy; see Prellwitz, s.v. 0AeOpos. Breal
derives ab-olére from ab and “olére as in ad-olére, as if it meant ‘to
check the growth.’ See Adolescent. Der. abol-it-ion, abol-it-ion-ist.

ABOMINATE, to hate. (L.) The verb is in Levins, A.D. 15703


spelt abhominate, p. 41, 1. 30 [not noted in N.E.D, before 1644]. -


Wyclif has abhominable, Titus i. 16; abhominable, Gower, C. A. 1.
2633 ili. 204 (bk. ii. 3107; bk. vii. 3337)-—L. abdminat-us, pp. of
abominari, to dislike; lit. to turn away from a thing that is of ill
omen; (for the ending -a/e, see note to Abbreviate.)—L. ab, from;
and dmin-, for Gmen, a portent. See Omen. Der. abomin-able,
abomin-at-ion.

ABORIGINES, indigenous inhabitants. (L.) ‘Calling them
aborigines and airéx@oves;’ Selden’s notes to Drayton’s Polyolbion,
song 8, note 2.—L. aborigines, the ancestors of the Romans, the
nation which, previous to historical record, drove out the Siculi
(Lewis and Short). Coined from L. ab origine, where origine is the
abl. of L. origo; see Origin. Cf. Virgil, Ain. i. 642.. Der.
aborigin-al.

ABORTION, an untimely birth. (L.) Abortion occurs in Min-
sheu, ed. 1627; and in Hakewill’s Apology, p. 317 (R.). Shak. has
abortive, L. L. L. i, 1. 104.—L. acc. abortidnem, from abortio; cf.
abortus, pp. of aboriri, to fail.=L. ab, from, away; and oriri, to
arise, grow. See Orient. From the same stem, abort-ive, -ly, -ness.

ABOUND, to overflow, to be plentiful. (F.—L.) ME. abounden,
Wyclif, 2 Cor. ix. 8. Also spelt kabounden, as in Chaucer’s tr. of
Boethius, b. ii: pr. 4, 1. 62.—OF. (and F.) abonder.—L. abundare,
to overflow.—L. ab; and unddre, to flow in waves, from unda, a
wave. See Undulate. Der. abund-ance, q.v.; abund-ant (habundant
in Ch. C. T., E 59); abund-ant-ly.

ABOUT, around, concerning. (E.) ME. abuten, Ormulum, 4087 ;
later, abouten, aboute. AS. dbitan; as in ‘a&biitan pone munt’=
around the mountain, Exod. xix. 12. a. Here the prefix d- is short


ABOVE .


for an-, another form of oz; and we accordingly find also the form
onbiitan, Genesis li. 11. [A commoner AS. form was ymbittan, but
here the pre‘x is different, viz. ymb, about, corresponding to G. um. ]
B. The word bizan is itself a compound of be, by, and aan, outward.
Thus the word is resolved into on-be-titan, on (that which is) by (the)
' outside. y. Again aan, outward, outside, is an adverb formed from
the prep. a, out. See On, By, and Out. The words abaft and
above have been similarly resolved into on-by-aft and on-by-ove(r).
See Abaft, Above. 4 Similar forms are found in Old Friesic,
where abefta is deducible from an-bi-efta; abuppa (above), from an-
bi-uppa ; and abita (about), from an-bi-ita.

ABOVE, over. (E.) ME. abufen, Ormulum, 6438; later, aboven,
above, AS. abifan, AS. Chron. an. 1090. — AS. az, on; be, by; and
ufan, upward; the full form be-wfaz actually occurs in the Laws of
fE&thelstan, iv. 4; in Thorpe, i. 224. See About. The word ufan
is equivalent to the cognate G. oben, which is allied to Ey over.
On, By, and Over. Cf. Du. boven, above.

ABRADE,to scrape off. (L.) In Bailey, vol.ii.ed-1731 (an earlier
notice in N.E.D. under 1677).—L. abradere, to scrape off, pp. abri-
sus.=L. ab, off; and rddere, to scrape. See Rase. Der. abrase,
pp- in Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s Revels, Act v. sc. 3, descr. of Apheleia ;
abras-ion, in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.

ABREAST, side by side. (E.) In Shak. Hen. V, iv. 6.17. The
prefix is for ax, ME. form of on; cf. abed, asleep, &c.

ABRIDGE, to shorten. (F.—L.) ME. abrege, Hampole, Pricke
of Conscience, 4571; also abregge, Chaucer, C. T. 3001 (A 2999).
— OF. abrevier (Godefroy); also abregier, abrigier.—L. abbreuiare, to
shorten. Der. abridge-ment, Lucrece, 1198. Doublet, abbreviate, q. v.

ABROACH, TO SET, to broach. ee K.and F.) ME.
sette abroche, Gower, C. A. ii. 183; (bk. v. 1677). For setten on
broche ; cf. the phrase “to set on fire.’ From E, on; and OF. broche,
a spit, spigot. See Broach. Set abroach is a translation of AF. mis
abroche, Liber Custumarum, p. 304.

ABROAD, spread out. (E.) ME. abrood, Chaucer, C. T., F 441;
abrod, Rob. of Glouc. p. 542, 1.11228. For on brood, or on brod. ‘‘Vhe
bavme thurghe his brayn all ox brod ran;’ Destruction of Troy, 8780.
ME. brod, brood is the mod. E. broad. See Broad.

ABROGATEH, to repeal. (L.) In Shak. L. L. L. iv. 2. 55.
Earlier, in Hall, Ed. IV, an. 9. § 23. —L. abrogiit-us, pp. of abrogare,
to repeal alaw; (for the ending -ate, see note on Abbreviate.) —L.
ab, off, away; and rogare, to ask, to proposealaw. See Rogation.
Der. abrogat-ion, from F. abrogation, Cot.

ABRUPT, broken off, short, rough. (L.) Shak. r Hen. VI, ii. 3
30.—L, abruptus, broken off, pp. of abrumpere, to break off.—L. ab;
and rumpere,to break. See Rupture. Der. abrupi-ly, abrupt-ness ;
abrupt, sb., as in Milton, P. L. ii. 409.

ABS-, prefix; sometimes used instead of ab before c and ¢; asin abs-
cond, abs-tain.—L. abs-, prefix. Cf. Gk. dy, allied to amd, from.

ABSCESS, a sore. (L.) In Kersey, ed. 1715.—L. abscessus, a
going away, a gathering of humours into one.—L. abscédere, to go
away; pp. abscessus.—L. abs, away; cédere, to go. See Cede.

ABSCIND, to cut off. (L.) Bp. Taylor has the sb. abscission,
Sermons, series ii. s.13.§ 12. The verb occurs in Johnson’s Rambler,
NO. go. § gel. abscindere, to cut off.—L. ab, off; and scindere, to cut.
Scindere is allied to Gk. cyifew, Skt. chhid, to cut; see Schism.
Der. absciss-a, from the L. fem. pp.; absctss-ion, from the pp.
absctssus.

ABSCOND, to hide from, go into hiding. (L.) “In Blackstone,
Comment. b. iv. c. 24. —L. abscondere, to hide.—L. abs, away; and
condere, to lay up, to hide, which is from L. con-=cum, together,
and -dere, to put; from the weak grade (dha) of Y DHE, to put,
place; Brugm. i. § 589. See Do.

ABSEN'T, being away. (F.—L.) In Wyclif, Philip. i. 27; where
it is taken directly from L.; but the later examples represent F.
absent, —L. absentem, acc. case of absens, absent, pres. pt. of abesse, to
be away.=—L. ab, away, and *sens, being, which is a better division
of the word than abs-ens; cf. pre-sens, present. See Present. Der.
absence, in Chaucer, C. T., A 1239, from F. absence, L. absentia; absent,
v., absent-er, absent-ee, absent: ly.

ABSOLUTE, unrestrained ,complete. (L.) Chaucer has absolut ;
tr. of Boethius, b. iii, pr. Io, 1. 20. — absolitus, pp. of absoluere, to
set free. See Absolve.

ABSOLVE, to set free.- (L.) In Shak. Henry VIII, iii. 1. 50.
The sb. absoluciun is in the Ancren Riwle, p. 346. [The ME. form
of the verb was assoile, taken from the OF .] — L. absoluere, to set free. =
L. ab; and solwere, to loosen. See Solve. Der. absolute, from the
pp: absolitus; whence absolut-ion, absolut-ory.

ABSORB, to suck up, imbibe. (L.) Sir T. More has absorpt as
a past participle, Works, p. 267 c. Caxton has absorbed, Eneydos,
ch. xxvii. (p. 104, 1. 31). —L. absorbére, to suck up. = L. ab, off, away;
and sorbére, to suck up. +Gk. fopéev, to sup up. Brugm. ii. § 801.


| r Tim. iv. 3.


See |


ACANTHUS 3


Der. absorb-able, absorb-ent ;
pp. absorptus.
ABSTAIN, to refrain from, (F.=— —L.) ME, absteynen ;


also absorpt-ion, absorpt-ive ; cf, the


Wyclif,
The sb. abstinence occurs in the Ancren Riwle, Pp. 340.
From abstien-, tonic stem of MF. abstenir, variant used in place of
OF. astenir, to abstain; cf. mod. F. abstenir. = L.abstinére, to abstain. =
L. abs, from; and tenére, to hold. See Tenable. Der. abstin-ent,
abstin-ence, from L. abstin-ére; and abstent-ion; cf. the pp: abstent-us.

ABSTEMIOUS, temperate. (L.) In Shak. Temp. iv. 53. The
suffix -ous is formed on a F, model. = L. abstémius, temperate, refrain-
ing from strong drink.—L. abs, from; and *témum, strong drink,
a word only preserved in its derivatives #2 metum, strong drink, and
témulentus, drunken. Cf. Skt. tam, to be breathless, originally, to
choke; taémyati, he is exhausted, is beside himself. Der. abstemious-
ness, abstemious-ly.

ABSTENTION; see under Abstain.

ABSTRACT, a summary; as a verb, to separate, draw away
from. (L.) Shak. has the sb. abstract, All’s Well, iv. 3. 99. The
pp- abstracted is in Milton, P. L. ix. 463. A still older form is
abstracte used as a pp., in the later translation of Higden, Polychron.
vol. i. p. 21, lower text (ab. 1450), 1. 9; misdated 1387 in N.E.D.
—L. abstractus, withdrawn, separated, pp. of abstrahere, to draw away.
=L. abs, from; and ¢rakere, to draw. See Trace, Tract. Der.
abstract-ed, ahstract-ion, abstract-ive.

ABSTRUSH, difficult, out of the way. (L.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627; and Milton, P. L. vili. 40.—L. abstrisus, concealed, difficult,
pp. of abstrudere, to thrust aside, to conceal. —L. abs, away; and
triudere, to thrust. Cf. Intrude; and see Threaten. Der. ab-
struse-ly, abstruse-ness.

ABSURD, ridiculous. (L.) In Shak. 1 Hen. VI, v. 4. 137.—L.
absurdus, contrary to reason, inharmonious.=L. ab, away; and
surdus, indistinct, harsh-sounding ; also, deaf. Perhaps absurdus was,
originally, a mere intensive of swrdus, in the sense of harsh-sounding.
See Surd. Der. absurd-ity, F. absurdite, Cot.; absurd-ness.

ABUNDANCE, plenty. (F.—L.) ME. aboundance, Wyclif,
Luke xii. 15.—OF. abondance. = L. abundantia, plenty. = L. abundant-,
stem of the pres. pt. of abunddre, to abound. See Abound.
ABUSE, to use amiss. (F.—L.) ME. abusen; the pp. abused,
spelt abwsyt, occurs in the Scottish romance of Lancelot of the Laik,
1.1207. ‘I abuse or misse order a thing;’ Palsgrave. Chaucer has
the sb. abusion, Troilus, iv. 990.— OF. abuser, to use amiss.=— L.
abiisus, pp. of abiti, to abuse, mis-use.—L. ab, from (here, amiss) ;
and ati, touse. See Use. Der. abus-ive, F. abusif, Cot.; abus-ive-
1eSS.

ABUT, to project towards, to border on, be close upon. (F.—G.)
Shak. speaks of England and France as being ‘two mighty monarchies
Whose high, upreared, and abutting fronts The perilous narrow ocean
parts asunder;’ Prol. to Hen. V, 1.21. ‘The southe hede therof
abuttyth vppon the wey; Bury Wills, p. 52; an. 1479. =OF. abouter
(Godefroy), to fix bounds, to abut upon, also spelt abuder; mod. F,
abouter, to join end to end.—OF. a, prefix < L. ad, to, at; and bout,
an end, allied to F. bouter, OF. Homer! buter, to push, thrust, but, nls
to Place 5 ; see Butt (1). Der. abut-ment, which is that which bears
the ‘thrust’ of an arch; cf. buttress, a support ; but see Buttress.

ABY, to pay for; see Abide (2).

ABYSS, a bottomless gulf. (L.—Gk.) Very frequent in Milton,
P. Liia21, cc. Spenser has abysse, Teares of the Muses, 1. 260. —
TE. abyssus, a bottomless gulf, borrowed from Grinch: aBuooos,
bottomless.—Gk. d-, negative prefix; and Bvocds, depth, akin to
Buds and Bados, depth; and Baévs, deep. Cf. Bathos. Der.
abys-m, Temp. i. 2. 50; abys-m-al. 4 The etymology of abysm is
traced ‘by Brachet, s. v. ‘abime. It is from OF. abisme; from a Late
L. *abyssimus, a superlative form, denoting the lowest depth.

ACACIA, a kind of tree. (Gk. ) ‘The Egyptian thorne acacia ;’
Holland, tr. of Pliny, bk. xiii. c.g. Described by Dioscorides as a
useful astringent thorn, yielding a white transparent gum; a descrip-
tion which applies to the gum-arabic trees of Egypt. =—L. acacia,
borrowed from Gk.=—Gk. dxaxia, the thorny Egyptian acacia. = Gk.
dkis, a point, thorn. See Acute. Brugm. ii. § 52. 4
ACADEMY, a school, a society, (F.—L. eG) Shak. has
academe, L. L. L. i. 1.13; pl. academes, iv. 3. 303; and Milton speaks
of ‘the olive grove of Academe, Plato’s retirement ;’ P. R. iv. 244.
[This form is more directly from the Latin. ] Greene has académy ,
Friar Bacon, sc. ii.37. Burton says ‘affliction is a school or academy ;”
Anat. of Melancholy, p . 717 (Todd’s Johnson). =F. académie. = L.
académia, borrowed ion Gk.=— Gk. dxadjpea, a gymnasium near
Athens where Plato taught, so named from the hero Akadémus.
Der. academ-ic, acaden:-ic~ al, academ-ic-ian.

ACAJOU, the cashew-nut; see Cashew-nut.
ACANTHUS, a plant famous in Greece for its elegant leaves.


| (L.—Gk.) In Milton, P,L, iv. 696.—L. acanthus. — Gk. axavdos, the


BY


4 ACATALECTIC


plant brank-ursine. = Gk. dxav6a, a thorn, prickle. Gk. a«-, in dxis,
a point, barb. See Acute.

ACATALECTIC, not catalectic. (Gk.) Formed with Gk. prefix
a-, not, from Catalectic, q.v.

ACCEDE, to come to terms, agree to. (L.) The verb is rare in
early use; but the sb. access is common in Shak. and Milton. In
ME. we have accesse in the sense of a sudden accession of fever or
ague, a fever-fit; as in Lydgate’s Complaint of the Black Knight,
1. 136 ;.Chaucer, Troil. ii. 1315. This isa French use of the word. = L.
accédere, to come towards, assent to; also spelt adcédere; pp.accessus. =
L, ad, to; and cédere, to come, go, yield. See Cede. Der. access,
access-ary, access-ible, access-ion, acce-s-or-y ; all from the pp. accessus.

ACCELERATE, to hasten. (L.) ‘To accelerate and spede his
iorney ;’ Hall, Hen. VI, an. 31,1. 29.—L. accelerare, to hasten; (for
the ending -ate, seenoteon Abbreviate.)=L. ac-(=ad); andcelerare,
to hasten, from celer, quick. See Celerity. Der. accelerat-ion,
accelerat-ive, -or.

ACCENT, a tone. (F.—L.) Shak. L. L. L. iv. 2. 124; and in
Sidney, Apol. for Poetrie, ed. Arber, p. 71, 1. 2.—F. accent, Cot.—
L. accentum, acc. of accentus, an accent.=L. ac-, for ad, to; and cantus,
a singing, from canere, to sing (pp. cantus), See Canorous. Der.
accent-u-al, accent-u-ate, accent-u-at-ion.

ACCEPT, to receive. (F.—L.) ME. accepten, Wyclif, Rom. iv. 6. —
F. accepter. — L. acceptare, to receive; a frequentative form. = L. accept-
us, pp. Of accipere, to receive.—L, ac-, for ad, to; and capere, to take.
See Capable. Der. accept-able, accept-able-ness, accept-at-ion, accept-
ance, accepi-er.

ACCESS, ACCESSARY ; sce Accede.

ACCIDENT, a chance event. (F.—L.) In Chaucer, C. T. 8483
(E607). =F. accident. —L. accident-, stem of accidens, happening, pres.
pt.of accidere,tohappen. = L. ac-,for ad; and cadere,to fall. SeeChance,
Der. accident-al; also accidence (French; from L. accident-ia).

ACCLAIM, to shout at. (L.) In Milton four times, but only as
BesOusbscls, i, 520; ili.'307;- x..455; BP. R. i, 235) The word
acclaiming is used by Bishop Hall, Contemplations, N.T., b. iv. c. 25.
§ 4. [The word is formed on a French model (cf. claim from OF.
claimer), but from the Latin.]=—L. acclamdre, to cry out at.=L. ac-,
for ad, at; and climare, to cry out, exclaim. See Claim. Der.
acclam-al-ion; cf. acclamat-us, pp. of L. acclamare.

ACCLIMATIZE, to adapt to a new climate. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Modern. Formed with suffix -ize (F. -iser, Gk. -cGev) from F. ac-
climat-er, to adapt to a climate.—F. a- (L. ad), to; and climat, a
climate; see Climate.

ACCLIVITY, an upward slope. (L.) Used by Ray, On the
Creation (R.) = L. acc. accliuitatem, from nom. accliuitds, a steepness ;
whence acclivity is formed in imitation of a F. model: the suffix -ty
answers to F, -/é, from L. -tatem.—L. ac-, for ad, at; and -cliuitas,
a slope, a word which does not occur except in compounds; from L.
cliuus, a hill, sloping ground; properly, sloping. From 4/KLEI, to
lean, slope; whence also L. inclindre, to incline, Gk. eAivev, to lean,
and E. lean. See Lean (1), Incline, Declivity.

ACCOLADE, thedubbing ofaknight. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘Accollade,
a clipping about the neck, which was formerly the way of dubbing
knights;’ Phillips (1658). =F. accollade (Cot.), an embrace round the
neck; then a salutation, light tap with a sword in dubbing a knight.
— Ital. accollata, fem, of pp. of accollare, to embrace about the neck
(Florio). —L. ac-, for ad, to, about; and collum, the neck ; see Collar.

ACCOMMODATE, to adapt, suit, provide with. (L.) Shak.
Lear, iv. 6. 81. Spelt accomodate in Palsgrave.—L. accommodare, to
fit, adapt ; (for the ending -a/e, see note on Abbreviate.) =L. ac-, for
ad, to; and commodare, to fit, from commodus, fit, commodious. See
Commodious and Mode, Der. accommod-at-ion, accommod-at-ing.

ACCOMPANY, to attend. (F.—L.) Caxton has the ptr it.
acompanyed in his Troy-book, leaf 104, 1, 11.— OF. acompaigner, to
associate with.—F.a, for L. ad, to, beside; and OF. compaignier,
compaigner, cumpagner, to associate with, from compaing, a com-
panion. See Company. Der. accompani-ment.

ACCOMPLICE, an associate, esp. in crime. (F,—L.) Shak.
1 Hen. VI, v. 2. 9. An extension (by prefixing either F. a or L. ac-
=ad, or the E. indef. article) of the older form complice, which occurs
in Baret (1580).—F, complice, ‘a complice, confederate, companion in
a lewd action;’ Cot.—L. acc. complicem, from nom. complex, an
accomplice, lit. interwoven. =L.com-, for cum, together ; and plicare,
to fold. See Complex.

ACCOMPLISH, to complete. (F.—L.) ME. accomplicen, in
Chaucer’s Tale of Melibeus (B 2322).—OF. acomplis-, a stem of
acomplir, to complete; (for the ending -isk, see note to Abash.) =
L. ad, to; and complére, to fulfil, complete. See Complete. Der,
accomplish-able, accomplish-ed, accomplish-ment.

ACCOMPT, an archaic form of Account, q. v,

ACCORD, to grant; to agree, (F.—L.). ME, acorden, to agree;


‘customed ;’ Hall, Hen. V, an. 5. § 6.


ACCUSTOM


Chaucer, C. T., B 2137; andstill earlier, viz. in Rob. of Glouc. p. 309,
1. 6319; K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1. 148.—OF. acorder, to agree.
= Late L. accordare, to agree, used in much the same way as L. con-
cordare, and similarly formed. =L. ac-, for ad, to, i.e. in agreement
with ; and cord-, stem of cor, the heart. Cf. E. concord, discord. The
L. cor is cognate with E. Heart, q.v. Der. accord, sb., Chaucer,
C. T., C 253 accord-ance, accord-ing, according-ly, accord-ant, accord-
ant-ly; also accord-ion, from its pleasing sound; invented in 1829.

ACCOST, to address. (F.—L.) Shak. Tw. Nt. i. 3. 52, which
see. Spenser has accoste, i.e. border upon; F. Q. v. 11. 42.—F. ac-
coster, ‘to accoast, or join side to side;’ Cot.—Late L. accostare,
which occurs in the Acta Sanctorum, iii. Apr. 523 (Brachet). —L. ac-,
for ad; and costa, a rib; so that accostare means to join side to side,
in accordance with Cotgrave’s explanation. See Coast.

ACCOUNT, to reckon, value. (F.—L.) ME. acompten, acounten.
In Gower, C. A. iii. 298 (bk. viii. yor), we find acompteth written,
but it rhymes with svrmonteth. The pl. sb. acountes, i.e. accounts,
occurs in Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 135.—OF. aconter or
acompter (Godefroy); the two forms being still preserved in F.
compter and conter, which are doublets. F. a, prefix, for L. ad; and
conter, or compter, to count, from L. computare, to compute, count. See
Count. Der. account, sb., account-able, account-able-ness, account-ant.

ACCOUTRE, to equip. (F.—L.?) Shak. has accoutred, Jul.
Cees.i. 2. 105.— MF. accoutrer, accoustrer. Cotgrave gives both forms,
and explains accoustrer by ‘to cloath, dress, apparell, attire, array,
deck, trim.’ Marked by Brachet ‘origin unknown.’ B. But a likely
guess is that which connects it with the OF. costre, coustre, nom. case
of OF. costor, coustor (Godefroy), the sacristan of a church. One of
the sacristan’s duties was to have charge of the sacred vestments,
whence the notion of dressing may have arisen. The OF. costre
represents the Late L. custor, just as OF. costor represents the acc.
custorem. Ducange (ed. Favre) quotes the Late L. custor, glossed by
edituus; and it isa variant of L. eustés, which was also used in the
same sense of ‘sacristan.’ See Custody. @ Cf. G. kiister, a sa-
cristan, vestry-keeper; from the same Late L. custor. Der. accoutre-
ment, Merry Wives, iv. 2. 5.

ACCREDIT, to give credit to. (F.—L.) Not in early use;
added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. In Cowper, Letter 43 (R.) =F.
accréditer, to accredit; formed from F. a, to, and the sb. crédit,
credit. See Credit, Creed.

ACCRETION, an increase. (L.) In Sir T. Browne, Vulgar
Errors, b. ii. c. I. § 13.—L. acc. accrétidnem, from nom. accrétio; cf.
L. accrét-us, pp. of accrescere, to grow, increase. L. ac- for ad, to;
and crescere, to grow. See Crescent. Der. accret-ive ; and see accrue.

ACCRUE, to grow to, to come to in the way of increase.
(F.—L.) Spenser, F. Q. iv. 6. 18, has both decrewed, decreased,
and accrewed, increased or gathered, Holinshed, Chron. iii. 1135, has
“new accrewes of soldiers,’ where accrew is a sb. MF. accrué, f., ‘a
growth, increase, augmentation ;’? Cot. Orig. fem. of MF. ‘ accreu,
growne, increased, enlarged, augmented, amplified;’ Cot. [The E.
word must have been borrowed from the sb., and turned into a verb. ]—
MF. accroistre (Cotgrave), now accroitre, to increase, enlarge; of
which accreu (accru) is the pp.—L. accrescere, to enlarge. = L. ac-, for
ad, to; and crescere, to grow. Seeabove. @ The AF. acru, accrued,

p., occurs in the Year-books of Edw. I, iii. 415. Der. crew, q. v.

ACCUMULATE, to amass. (L.) In Othello, iii. 3. 370; Hall
has accumulated; Wen. VII, an. 16. § 1.—L. accumuldt-us, pp. of
accumulare, to amass; (for the ending -aze, see note to Abbreviate.)
=L. ac-, forad, to; and cumulire, to heap up, from cumulus, a heap.
See Cumulate. Der. accumulat-ion, accumulat-ive, -or,

ACCURATE, exact. (L.) In Sherwood’s index to Cotgrave,
Used by Bishop Taylor, Artificial Handsomeness, p. 19; Todd. —L.
accuratus, studied ; pp. of acciirare, to take pains with. — L. ac-, for ad ;
and ciirare, to take care, from ciira, care. See Cure. Der. accurate-
ness, accurate-ly; also accur-acy, answering (nearly) to L. accuratio.

ACCURSED, cursed, wicked. (E.) The spelling with a double
c is false, and due to the frequency of the use of ac-=L, ad as a
prefix. ME, acorsien, acursien. ‘Ye schule .. . acursi alle fiztinge ;’
Owl and Nightingale, 1703 ; acorce, Rob. of Glouc. p. 296, 1. 5993.
— AS. G-, intens. prefix; and cursian, to curse. See Curse.

ACCUSKE, to lay to one’s charge. (F.—L.) Chaucer has accused,
accusinge, and accusors, all in the same passage ; see his tr. of Boe-
thius, b. i. pr. 4, ll. 80-84. ‘The pt. t. acusede is in the Life of
Beket, 1. 369.— OF. acuser, F. accuser.—L. acciisire, to criminate, lay
to one’s charge. = L. ac-, for ad, to; and caussa, a suit at law, a cause.
See Cause. Der. accus-able, accus-at-ion, accus-at-ory, accus-er, accus-
at-ive (the name of the case expressing the subject governed by a trans~
itive verb).

ACCUSTOM, to render familiar. (F.—L.) ‘He was euer ac-
[The sb. acustomaunce, custom,
occurs in Chaucer's Hous of Fame, l, 28.]—OF, acostumer (F. ac-


ACE


coutumer), to accustom.=—F. prefix a, for L. ad; and OF. costume,
coustume, coustome, a custom, Late L. costima, custom, from L. con-
suélidinem (> costudne, costumne), acc. of consuétiido, custom. See
Custom. Sa ee na

ACE, the ‘ one’ of cards or dice. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. as, Chaucer,
C. T. 14579 (B 3851).—OF. as, an ace.—L. ds, a unit.—Gk, ds,
said to be the Tarentine form of Gk. «fs, one.

ACEPHALOUS, without a head. (Gk.) In Bailey’s Dict., ed.
1731.—Gk. d«épad-os, without a head; with suffix -ous.—Gk. d-,
privative ; and xepadn, the head.

ACERBITY, bitterness. (F.—L.) . Used by Bacon, On Amend-
ing the Laws; Works, vol. ii. p. 542 (R.) =F. acerbité, ‘ acerbitie,
sharpnesse, sourenesse 3” Cot.—L. acerbititem, acc. of acerbitis, bit-
terness. = L. acerbus, bitter.—L. acer, sharp, acrid. See Acrid.

ACETOUS, of the nature of vinegar, sour. (F.—L.) Used by
Boyle; quoted in Johnson.—F. acéteux, ‘sourish;? Cot.—Late L.
acé/osus, vinegar-like. = L. acétwm, vinegar. = L. acére, to be sour; cf.
acidus, sour. See Acid. . Der. (from L. acét-um) acet-ic, acet-ate.

ACHE, to throb with pain; as a sb., a severe pain. (E.) The
spelling ache is non-phonetic, and chiefly due to the attempt to
connect it with the Gk. dyos, which is wholly unconnected with it.
In old authors the spelling ake is common both for the verb and the
sb. Strictly, ake represented the verb only, whilst ache (pronounced
nearly as mod. EF. archer) represented the form of the sb. in the
Southern and Midland dialects of Middle English. Hence Shak. has
‘When your head did but ake,’ K..John, iv. 1. 41; and ‘ Fill all thy
bones with ach-es, make thee .roar,’ Temp. i. 2. 370. The sb. form
is really obsolete, and the verbal form is used both for sb. and verb.
Cf. ‘Ake, or ache, or akynge, dolor;’ Prompt. Parv, B. The ME.
aken, to ache, was a strong verb, forming its past tense as ook, ok,
pl. ooke, oke, oken, “She saide her hede oke’ [better spelt ook, pron.
awk]; The Knight of La Tour, ed. Wright, p. 8. *Thauh alle my
fyngres oken;’ P, Plowman, C. xx. 159. From AS. acan (pt. t. dc),
strong verb, to ache; from the same root as L. ag-ere, to drive; see
Agent. Cf. Icel. aka (pt. t. dt), to drive. 4 The ME. ache, sb.,
a pain, is regularly formed from AS. @ce, sb., a pain; which is
derived from the strong verb acan,

ACHIEVE, to accomplish. (F.—L.) ME. acheuen=acheven.
Chaucer has. ‘ achewed and performed ;’ tr. of Boethius, b. i. pr. 4,
1, 141. —OF. aciever, to.accomplish, Formed from the phrase venir
a chef or venir a chief, to come to the end or arrive at one’s object. =
Late L. ad caput uenire, to come to a head (Brachet). See Chief.
Der. achievement, Hen. V, iii. 5. 60; also hatchment, q. v. .

ACHROMATIC, colourless. (Gk.) Modern and scientific.

Formed with suffix -ic from Gk. dy pmpar-os, colourless. — Gk. d-, pri-
vative ;,and yxpwpar-, stem of xp@pa, colour. See Chromatic.
‘ACID, sour, sharp. (L.) Bacon speaks of ‘a cold and acide
Tuyce;’ Nat. Hist. § 644.—L. acidus, sour.—4/AK, to pierce ; cf.
Skt. ag, to pervade; E. to egg on. See Hgg, verb. Der. acid-ity,
acid-ify, acid-ul-ate (from L, acid-ul-us, subacid), acid-ul-at-ed,
acid-ul-ous.
. ACKNOWLEDGE, to confess, own the knowledge. of. (E.)
Common in Shakespeare; cf. ME. knowlechen, to acknowledge.
a, The prefixed a- is due to the curious fact that there was a ME.
verb aknowen with the same sense; ex. ‘To mee wold shee neuer
aknow That any man for any meede Neighed her body,’ Merline, gor,
in Percy Folio MS., i. 450. This aknowen is the AS. oncndwan, to
perceive, Hence the prefixed a- stands for AS. on. B,. The verb
knowlechen is common, as e.g. in Wyclif; ‘he knowelechide and denyede
not, and he knoulechide for 1 am not Christ ;’ John,i. 20. It appears
early in the thirteenth century, in Hali Meidenhad, p. 9; Legend of
St. Katharine, l, 1352. And hence was formed the sb. knowleche, now
spelt knowledge.. See Knowledge. Der. acknowledg-ment, a hybrid
form, with F. suffix; in Hen. V, iv. 8. 124.

ACME, the highest point. (Gk.) Altogether a Greek word, and
written in Gk. characters by Ben Jonson, Discoveries, sect. headed
Scriptorum Catalogus. = Gk. dnp, edge. —4/AK, to pierce.

ACOLYTE, a servitor. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) ME. acolite, Polit.
Songs, ed. Wright, p. 329; AF. acolyle. Cotgrave has ‘ Acolyle,
Accolite, he that ministers to the priest while he sacrifices or saies
mass.’ = Late L. acolythus, borrowed from Gk. — Gk. d«édovdos,
a follower. Gk. d-, with (akin to Skt. sa-, with); and «éAevOos, a
road, way (with gradation of ev to ov); so that) dxéAovOos meant
originally ‘a travelling companion.” The Gk. xéAevOos is cognate
with L. callis, a path; see Prellwitz.

ACONITE, monk’s hood; poison. (F.—L.—Gk.) Occurs in
Ben Jonson, Sejanus, Act iii. sc.3.1.29. [It may have been borrowed
from the Latin, or through the French.] = F. aconit, aconilum, ‘a most
venemous herb, of two principall kinds, viz, Libbards-bane and Wolf-
bane ;’ Cot. —L. aconitum, Gk. dxdvirov, a plant like monk’s-hood ;
Pliny, Nat. Hist. bk. xxvii.c. 3. 4 Pliny says it is so called because


ACROSTIC 5


it grew év dxdvais, on ‘ steep sharp rocks’ (Liddell and Scott). = Gk.
axovn, a whetstone, hone. —4/AK, to pierce; Prellwitz.

ACORN, the fruit of the oak. (E.) Chaucer speaks of ‘acornes
of okes;’ tr. of Boethius, b. ii, met. 5, 1.6. AS. @cern, ecirn; pl.
@cernu, which occurs in the AS. version of Gen. xliii. 11, where the
exact meaning is not clear, though it is applied to some kind of fruit,
Lit. ‘fruit of the field;’ from AS. ecer, a field; see Acre. 4 Icel.
akarn, an. acorn; Dan. agern; Goth. akrana-, fruit, in the comp.
akrana-laus, fruitless. 4] The suffix -ern has been changed to -orn;
from a notion that e@cern meant an oak-corn; but it is remarkable
that acorn is related, etymologically, neither to oak nor to corn. B.
If it be remembered that acre should rather be spelt acer or aker (the
latter is common in ME,), and that acorn should rather be acern or
akern, it will be seen that akern is derived from aker much in the
same way as silvern from silver, or wooden from wood, y- The.cognate
languages help here. The Icel. akarn is derived from akr, a field, not
from eik, oak, Danish has agern, an acorn, from ager, a field; Goth.
akrana-, fruit, is from-akrs, a field. 8. Thus the original sense of
the AS, neut. pl. ecirnw or ecernu was simply ‘fruits of the field,’
understanding ‘ field’ in the sense of wild open country; cf. Gk. d-ypés,
a field, the country, and dypios, wild. ¢. Hence Chaucer’s expression
‘acornes of okes’ is correct, not tautological.

ACOTYLEDON, without a seed-lobe. (Gk.)
negative prefix; and Cotyledon, q. v.

ACOUSTIC, relating to sound. (Gk.) In Coles’s Dict., ed. 1684.
= Gk, dxovorixés, relating ta hearing (or sound).—Gk. dove, to
hear. Der. acoustic-al, acoustic-s.

ACQUAINT, to render known, to make aware. (F.—L.) ME.
aqueynten, earlier acoinien, akointen. ‘Aqueyntyn, or to make know-
leche, no/ifico ;? Prompt. Parv. ‘Wel akointed mid ou’= well ac-
quainted with. you; Ancren Riwle, p. 218.—OF. acointer, acointier,
to acquaint with, to advise.—Late L. adcognitare, to make known;
see Brachet.—L. adcognitum, accognitum, pp. of accognoscere, to recog-
nise (Tertullian). —L. ad, to; and cognitus, known, pp. of cognoscere, to
know, which is compounded of co-, for cum, with, and gnoscere (com-
monly spelt noscere), to know, cognate with E. know. See Quaint and
Know. Der. acquaint-ance, in Chaucer, C. T., A 2453 acquaint-
ance-ship.

ACQUIESCEH, to rest satisfied. (L.) Used by Ben Jonson, New
Inn, Act iv.sc. 3 (Lady F.) — L. acguiescere, to rest, repose in. = L. ac-, for
ad; and quiescere, to rest, from guiés, rest. See Quiet. Der. acquiesc-
ence, acquiesc-ent.

ACQUIRE, to get, obtain. (L.) Used by Hall, Hen. VIII, an,
37. § 18.—L. acquirere, to obtain. = L. ac-, for ad; and guerere, to seek,
See Query. Der. acquir-able, acquire-ment ; also acquisit-ion (Temp.
iv. I..13), acquisit-ive, acquisit-ive-ness ; cf. acquisitus, pp. of acquirere.

ACQUIT, to set at rest, set free, &c. (F.—L.) ME. acwiten,
aquyten, to set free, perform a promise. ‘ Uorto acwiten ut his fere’=
to release his companion, Ancren Riwle, p. 394; ‘wan it aguited be”
= when it shall be repaid; Rob. of Glouc. p. 565, 1. 11881.—OF.
aquiter, to settle a claim. = Late L. acguiétare, to settle a claim; see
Brachet. = L. ac-, for ad; and guiétare, a verb formed from L. guiétus,
discharged, free. See Quit. Der. acquitt-al, acquitt-ance.

ACRE, a field. (E.) ME. aker. The pl. akres occurs in Rob. of
Brunne’s tr. of P. Langtoft, ed. Hearne, p. 115. AS. @cer, a field.
OF ries. ekker ; OSax. akkar; Du. akker ; Icel. akr; Swed. dker; Dan.
ager; Goth. akrs; OHG. achar, G. acker. + L. ager; Gk. dypds; Skt.
ajra-s. Teut. type *akroz; Idg. type *agros. Brugm. i, § 175.
Perhaps originally ‘a chase’ or hunting-ground (cf. Gk. a@ypa, the
chase) ; later sense ‘a pasture;’ from 4/AG, to drive; L. ag-ere, Gk,
dy-ew, Skt. aj, to drive. See Act. 4 The spelling acre is AF.3;
see Year-books of Edw. I. ‘Der. acre-age.

ACRID, bitter, pungent, tart. (L.) Not in early use. Bacon has
acrimony, Nat. Hist. sect. 639. There is no good authority for the
form acrid, which has been made (apparently in imitation of acid)
by adding -d to acri-, stem of L. acer, sharp; from 4/AK, to pierce.
Der. acrid-ness; acri-mony, acri-moni-ous, from L. dcrimonia, sharp-
ness. Co-radicate words are. acid, .acerbity, and many others.

ACROBAT, a tumbler. (F.—Gk.) Modern. Borrowed from F,
acrobate,=— Gk. dxpdéBaros, lit. walking on tip-toe. = Gk. d«po-v, a point,
neut. of depos, pointed; and Bards, verbal adj. of Baivey, to walk,
which is cognate with E.come. See Acrid and Come. Der. acrobat-ic.

ACROPOLIS, a citadel. (Gk.) Borrowed from Gk. d«pdroAts,
a citadel, lit. the upper city.=Gk. d«po-s, pointed, highest, upper;
and méXus, a city. For d«pos, see Acrid, For 7édus, see Police.

ACROSS, cross-wise. (E. and Scand.) Surrey, in his Complaint
of Absence, ]. 22, has ‘armes acrosse” Formed from the common
prefix a (short for az,a later form of AS. on), and cross; so that
across is for on-cross, like abed for on bed, Thus the prefix is English;
but cross is Scand, See Cross.

ACROSTIC, a short poem in which the letters beginning the lines


From Gk. ds,


6 ACT


‘spell a word. (Gk.) Better acrostich; cf. distich. Ben Jonson has
Acrostichs ; Underwoods, Ixi. 39. From Gk. d«poorixis, an acrostic. =
Gk. d«po-s, pointed, also first ; and orixos, a row, order, line. —/AK,
to pierce; and *stigh, weak grade of 4/STEIGH, to climb, march,
whence Gk. verb oreixev, to march in order. See Acrid and
Stirrup.

-. ACT, a deed. (F.—L.) ME. act, pl. actes. The pl. actes occurs
in Chaucer’s Pardoner’s Tale, C. T. 12508 (C 574).—F. acte.—L.
acta, pl. of actum, an act, thing done, neut. of pp. actus, done. —L,
agere, to do, lit. to drive. + Gk. dye, to drive; Icel. aka, to drive ;
Skt..aj, to drive. 4/AG, to drive; Brugm.i. §175. Der. act, verb,
whence act-ing; also act-ion, act-ion-able, act-ive, act-iv-ity, act-or,
act-r-ess; also act-ual (L. actudilis), act-ual-ity; also act-wary (L.
actuarius) ; also act-u-ate (from Late L. actudre, to perform, put in
action). From the same root are exact, react, and a large number of
other words, such as acre, &c. See Agent.

ACTINIC, pertaining to the sun-rays. (Gk.) Modern, From
Gk, detiv-, stem of deris, a ray; with suffix -ic. So also actin-ism,
actino-meter.

ACUMEN, keenness of perception. (L.) It occurs in Selden’s
Table-Talk, art. Liturgy. Borrowed from L. aciimen, sharpness. =
4/ AK, to pierce; whence the verb ac-u-ere, to sharpen, ac-ii-men,
sharpness, ac-z-s, a needle, with added uw. Brugm.i.§ 177. Der.
acumin-ated, i.e. pointed, from the stem aciimin-.

ACUTE, sharp. (L.) Shak. L.L. L. iii. 67.—L. actitus, sharp ;
properly pp. of verb acuwere, to sharpen. From the stem ac-u-; from
AK, to pierce. See Acumen. Der. acute-ly, acute-ness.

. AD-, prefix; corresponding to L. ad, to, cognate with E. at. See
At. @ The L. ad often changes its last letter by assimilation;
becoming ac- before c, af- before f, ag- before g, al- before /, an- before
n, ap- before p, ar- before r, as- before s, at- before ¢. Ex. ac-cord,
af-fect, ag-gregate, al-lude, an-nex, ap-pear, ar-rest, as-sist, at-test.

- ADAGE, a saying, proverb. (F.—L.) Used by Hall, Edw. IV,
an. 9. § 17; andin Macb.1. 7. 45.—F. adage, ‘an adage, proverb, old-
said saw, witty saying ;’ Cot.—L. adagium, a proverb. =L. ad, to;
and -agium, a saying, related to the verb Gio, I say.

- ADAGIO, slowly; in music. (Ital.) Ital. ad agio, at leisure; lit.
at ease.’

ADAMANT, a diamond. (F.—L.—Gk.) Adamaunt in Wyclif,
Ezek. iii. 9 ; adamant, Chaucer, C.T. 1992 (A 1990). [It first occurs
in the phrase ‘adamantines stan ;’? Hali Meidenhad, p. 37. The sense
in Mid.E. is both ‘diamond’ and ‘magnet.’] = OF. adamant (a ‘learned’
form).—L. adamanta, acc. of adamas, a very hard stone or metal. =
Gk, adapas, gen. dddyayros, a very hard metal, lit. ‘unconquerable.’ =
Gk, d-, privative; and Saude, to conquer, tame, cognate with E.
tame. See Tame. Der. adamant-ine, Jer. xvii. 1; from L. ada-
mantinus, Gk. adapyavtivos. Doublet, diamond.

ADAPT, to fit, make suitable. (L.) In Ben Jonson’s Discoveries ;
§ cxxvili. 4.—L,. adaptire, to fit to.—L. ad, to; and aptare, to fit, from
apt-us, fit. See Apt. Der. adapt-able, adapt-at-ion (F. adaptation,
Cot.) ; adapt-abil-ity.

ADD, to put together, sum up. (L.) ME. adden. Wyclif has
addide, Luke, xix. 11, Chaucer has added, Prol. to C. T. 501 (A 499).
—L. addere, to add.—L. ad, to; and -dere, to put, place; see Ab-
second. Der. add-endum, pl. add-enda, neut. of add-endus, fut. part.
pass. of L. addere; also addit-ion, Antony, v. 2. 164; addit-ion-al ;
cf. the pp. addit-us,

ADDER, a viper. (E.)) ME. addere, P. Plowman, B. xviii. 352;
and again, in P. Plowman, C. xxi. 381, we find ‘in persone of an addere,’
where other MSS. have a naddere and a neddere. The word addere is
identical with zaddere, and the two forms are used interchangeably
in ME. [There are several similar instances of the loss of initial 2 in
English, as in the case of auger, umpire, orange, &c.; see note on N.]
AS, nédre, néddre, an adder, snake; Grein, ii. 275. + Du. adder, a
viper, OS. nadra; G. natter, OHG. natara. Teut. type n@dron-, fem. ;
Sievers, § 276. Allied (by gradation) to Icel. nadr, Goth. nadrs, masc.
Also to Olr, nathir, W. neidr, a snake; and perhaps to L. matrix, a
water-snake. See Stokes-Fick, p. 189. @ Wholly unconnected
with AS. attor, ator, poison.

_ ADDICT, to give oneself up to. (L.) Addicted occurs in Grafton’s
Chronicles, Hen. VII, an. 5 (R.).—L. addict-us, pp. of addicere, to
adjudge, assign.—L. ad, to; and dicere, to say, proclaim. See Dic-
tion. Der. addict-ed-ness.

, ADDLE, ADDLED, rotten, unproductive; unsound. (E.) Shak.
has ‘an addle egg ;’ Troilus, i. 2.145. Here addle was afterwards
lengthened to addled, which occurs in Cowper, Pairing-time Antici-
pated. We find ade eye, i.e. ‘ addle egg,’ in The Owl and Nightin-
gale, 133. Here adel is due to an attributive use of the ME. sb. adel,
filth; so that adel-ey was lit. ‘filth-egg,’= Late L. dum urine, urine-
egg, mistaken form of L. duum tirinum, wind-egg ; which was due to
Gk. ovpioy wor, wind-egg, unproductive egg. ME, adel orig. meant


ADJUTANT


‘mud,’ or ‘filth;’ from AS. adela, mud (Grein). -Cf. Low G. adel,
a puddle. See N.E.D.

ADDRESS, to direct oneself to, (F.—L.). ME. adressen. ‘And
therupon him hath adresced;’ Gower, C. A. ii. 295 (bk. v. 5021). —
F. adresser, to address.= F.a-, for L. ad; and dresser, to direct, dress.
See Dress. Der. address, sb., Samson Agonistes, 731.

ADDUCEH, to bring forward, cite. (L.) Bp. Taylor has adduction
and adductive; Of the Reai Presence, § 11. 37; cf. L. adduct-us, pp. of
addiicere, to lead to.—L. ad, to; and dicere, to lead. See Duke.
Der. adduc-ible; also adduct-ion, adduct-ive.

ADEPT, a proficient. (L.) ‘Adepts, or Adeptists, the obtaining
sons of art, who are said to have found out the grand elixir, com-
monly called the philosopher’s stone ;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.—L.
adeptus, one who has attained proficiency; properly pp. of adipisci,
to attain, reach to.—L. ad, to; and apisci, to reach. The form ap-isct
is related to apere, to fasten, join, whence aptus, fit. See Apt.

ADEQUATE, equal to, sufficient. (L.) It occurs in Coles’s Dict.
(1684) ; and in Johnson’s Rambler, No. 17. § 3.—L. adaeguatus, made
equal to, pp. of adaequare, to make equal to.—L. ad, to; and aeguare,
to make equal, from aeguus, equal. See Equal. Der. adequate-ly,
adequacy.

ADHERE, to stick fast to. (L.) The phrase be adherand to occurs
in The Test. of Love, bk. i. c. 9. 103; and Sir T. More has adherentes,
Works, p. 222 d.—L. adkaerzre, to stick to.—L.ad, to; and haerére,
to stick, pp. haesus.—4/GHAIS, to stick ; whence also Lith. gaisz-t,
to linger. Brugm. i. § 627 (1). Der. adher-ence, adher-ent; also
adhes-ive, adhes-ion, from pp. adhaesus.

ADIEU, farewell. (F.—L.) Written a dieu, Gower, C. A.i. 251 (bk.
ii, 2739).—F. & diew, (I commit you) to God.—L. ad deum, to God.

ADIPOSE, fatty. (L.) Bailey (1735) has adipous. — Late L. adi-
posus, fatty. —L. adip-, stem of adeps, sb., fat.

ADIT, access to a mine. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss. (1681). —L.
adit-us, approach.—L aditwm, supine of adire, to go to.—L. ad, to;
and ire, to go. \

ADJACENT, near to. (L.) It occurs in Lydgate’s Siege of
Thebes, pt. 1 (R.); see Chaucer’s Works, ed. 1561, fol. 360 back,
col. 1: ‘Adiacent vnto this countree.’=L. adiacent-, base of adiacens,
pres. pt. of adiacére, to lie near.—L. ad, to, near; and iacére, to lie.
Iacére is allied to iacere, to throw. See Jet (1). Der. adjacenc-y.

ADJECT, to add to. (L.) Unusual. Fuller has adjecting ;
General Worthies, c. 24. [The derivative adjective (F. adjectif) is
common as a grammatical term, and occurs in P. Plowman, C. iv.
338.]—L. adiectus, pp. of adicere, to lay or put near.—L. ad, near;
and iacere, to throw, put. See Jet. Der. adject-ion, adject-ive, -iv-al.

ADJOIN, to lie next to. (F.—L.) Occurs in Sir T. More’s Works,
p- 40b. ME. aioynen; the pp. aioynet occurs in The Destruction of
Troy, 1135.— OF, ajoin-,a stem of ajoindre, to adjoin. = L. adiungere,
tojointo; pp. adiunctus.—L.ad,to; andiungere,tojoin. See Join.
Der. adjunct, adjunct-ive; both from pp. adiunctus.

ADJOURN, to postpone till another day. (F.—L.) ME. aiornen
(ajornen), to fix a day, Rob. of Brunne’s tr. of P. Langtoft, p. 309. —
OF. ajorner, ajurner, properly to draw near to day, to dawn; cf.
Late L. adiornare, to appoint a day, to adjourn (Ducange). = OF. a-,
for L. ad; and Late L. jurnus (Ital. giorno), a day, from L. diurnys,
adj., daily, a derivative of diés,a day. See jour in Brachet; and see
Journey, Journal. Der. adjourn-ment.

ADJUDGE, to decide with respect to, assign. (F.—L.) ME.
adiugen (=adjugen), or better aiugen( = ajugen); Fabyan, an. 1211-12,
p- 319; Grafton, Hen.IJ,an.9(R.). Chaucer has aiuged, tr. of Boethius,
bk. i. pr. 4,1. 72.— OF. ajuger, to decide. = OF. a-, for L. ad; and

juger, to judge. See Judge. 4 Since the F. juger is from the
L, itidicare, this word has its doublet in adjudicate.

ADJUDICATEH, to adjudge. (L.) Seeabove. Der. adjudicat-
ion, which occurs in Blount’s Law Dict., ed. 1691.

ADJUNCT, an attendant; Shak. L. L.L. iv. 3. 314. See Adjoin.

ADJURE, to charge on oath. (L.) It occurs in the Bible of
1539, 1 Sam. xiv. 28. Chaucer, Pers. Tale, De Ira (I 603), has ‘thilke
horrible swering of adiuracion and coniuracion. =L. aditrdre, to
swear to; in Late L., to put to an oath.—L. ad, to; and zurdre, to
swear. See Abjure. Der. adjurat-ion.

ADJUST, to settle, make right. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave; who
has ‘ ajuster, to adjust, place justly ;’ as if from L. ad, to, and zustus,
exact. See Just. But this use was due to a misunderstanding of
MF. adjouster, ‘to adjoine or put unto, also, as ajuster ;’ Cot.—OF.
ajoster, ajuster, ajouster (mod. F. ajouter), to arrange, lit. to put side
by side. —Late L. adiuxtire, to put side by side, arrange. = L. ad, to,
by; and iwxta, nearto. See Joust. Der. adjust-able; adjust-ment.

ADJUTANT, lit. assistant. (L.) Richardson cites a passage
from Shaw’s translation of Bacon, Of Julius Czesar. Adjutors occurs
in Drayton’s Barons’ Wars, bk. iv. st. 11 ; and ‘Adjuting to his com-
panee’ in Ben Jonson, King’s Entertainment at Welbeck. =L. aditit-


rah) Sie


ADMINISTER


antem, acc. of adititans, assisting, pres. pt. of adititare, to assist ; fre-
quentative form of adiuudre, to assist.—L. ad, to; and iuudre, to
assist, pp. zitus. See Aid. Der. adjutanc-y; and (from the vb.
adiutdre) adjut-or, adjute.

ADMINISTER, to minister to. (F.—L.) Administred occurs in
The Testament of Love, bk. i. 8. 81; and administracion in the same,
bk. ii. 10. 43. ME. aministren, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iv. pr. 6. 62.
=OF. aministrer.—L. administrire, to minister to.—L. ad, to; and
ministrare, to minister. See Minister. Der. administrat-ion, ad-
ministrat-ive, administrat-or ; all from L. administrare.
ADMIRAL, the commander of a fleet. (F.— Arabic.) See
Trench’s Select Glossary, which shows that the term was often ap-
plied to the leading vessel in a fleet, called in North’s Plutarch the
‘admiral-galley,’ i.e. galley of the admiral. Thus Milton speaks of
‘the mast Of some great ammiral;’ P. L.i. 294. ME. admiral, ad-
mirel, admirail (Layamon, iii. 103), also amiral, amirail. Rob. of
Glouc. has amirail, p. 429, 1. 8460.—OF. amirail, amiral; also found
as amiré.— Arabic amir, a prince, an ‘emir;’ see Rich. Dict., p. 171.
The suffix -al (as if from L. -dlis) was really due to the frequent use
of the Arab. al in phrases, such as amir-u’l umara, prince of princes
(Rich. Dict.), amir-al-bahr, prince of the sea, &c., see N.E.D. And
see Emir. Popular etymology confused the am- with F, am- from L.
adm-, and thus produced forms with adm-; it also turned the Arab.
al into Late L. -ald-us, OF. -ald, -aud. In King Horn, |. 89, admirald
rhymes with bald, bold ; and in numerous passages in ME., amiral or
amirail means no more than ‘ prince,’ or ‘chief.’ Der. admiral-ty.

ADMIRE, to wonder at. (F.—L.) Shak. has ‘admir’d disorder ;’
Macb. iii. 4. 110.—F. admirer, ‘to wonder, admire, marvel at ;’ Cot.
=L. admirari, to wonder at.—L. ad, at; and mirar?, to wonder.
Mirari is from the adj. mi-rus, wonderful; from 4/SMEI, to smile
at; whence also Gk. peddew, to smile, Skt. sm, to smile, smera,
smiling, and E. smirk and smile; Brugm. i. § 389; Prellwitz. See
Smile. Der. admir-able, admir-at-ion, admir-er, admir-ing-ly.

ADMIT, to permit to enter. (L.) Fabyan has admytted, admys-
syon; Hen. III,an.1260-1, p.347; cf. Palsgrave, p. 417.—L. admittere,
lit. to send to.—L. ad, to; and mittere, to send, pp. missus. See
Missile. Der. admitt-ance, admitt-able; also admiss-ion, admiss-ible,
admiss-ibil-ity, from pp. admissus.

ADMONISH, to wam. (F.—L.) ME. amonesten, so that ad-

monish has taken the place of the older form amonest. ‘I amoneste,
or warme;’ Wyclif, 1 Cor. iv. 14 (earlier text). ‘This figure amon-
esteth thee ;’ Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. vy. met. 5.1.14. ‘ He amonesteth
[advises] pees;’ Chaucer, Tale of Melibeus (B 2484). The sb.
amonestement is in an Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 28.—OF.
amonester (F. admonester), ‘to admonish, Cot. = Late L. admonestare,
a new formation from L. admonére, to advise. —L. ad, to; and monére,
to advise. See Monition. Der. admonit-ion, admonit-ive, admonit-
ory; cf. the pp. admonitus.
‘A-DO, to-do, trouble. (E.) ME. at do, todo. ‘ We have othere
thinges at do ;’ ‘Towneley Mysteries (Surtees Soc.), p. 181; and again,
‘With that prynce... Must we have at do;’ id. p. 237. In course
of time the phrase at do was shortened to ado, in one word, and
regarded as a substantive. ‘Ado, or grete bysynesse, sollicitudo ;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 7. 4] The prep. a¢ is found thus prefixed to other
infinitives, as at ga, to go; Seuyn Sages, ed. Weber, 3017; ‘That es
at say,’ that is to, say; Halliwell’s Dict. s.v. af, “See Matzner, Engl.
Gram. li. 2. 58. This idiom was properly peculiar to Northern
English, and is of Scandinavian origin; for the sign of the infinitive
is at in Icelandic, and a¢t in Swedish.

ADOBE, an unburnt brick dried in the sun. (Span.) Modern. =
Span. adobe, an unbaked brick; Minsheu (1623) has: adobe de barro,
mortar, clay.=Span. adobar, ‘to mend, to botch, to daube;” Min-
sheu. = Span. a, for L. ad; and -dober = OF .douber,to dub. See Dub.

ADOLESCENT, growing up. (L.) Rich. quotes adolescence
from Howell, bk. iii. letter 9 (dated 1647); and adolescencie occurs in
Sir T. Elyot’s Governour, b. ii. c. 4. § 1.—L. adolescentem, acc. of
adolescens, pres. pt. of adolescere, to grow up.=—L. ad, to, up; and
*olescere, to grow, the inceptive form of *olére, to grow; which is allied
to alere, to nourish.—4/AL, to nourish; whence also Icel. a/a, to
produce, nourish, and Goth. alan, to nourish. See Aliment.. Der.
adolescence; and see adult. -

ADOPT, to choose or take to oneself. (L.) Adopt occurs in Hall,
Hen, VII, an. 7. § 6; and Othello, i. 3. 191. The sb/ adopcioun 1s in
Wyclif, Romans, viii. 15; and in the Ayenbite of Inwyt, pp. 1o1,
102, 146,—L. adoptare, to adopt, choose. —L. ad, to; and optare, to
wish. See Option. Der. adopt-ive, adopt-ion.

-ADORE, to worship. (L.) See Levins, Manip. Vocabulorum,
p- 174; adored is in Surrey’s Virgil, tr. of A‘n. ii. 720; 1. 922 of the
KE, version. [The ME. adouren in The Legends of the Holy Rood,
p- 163, was probably taken from the OF. aourer, with an insertion of d. }
= L. adorare, lit. to pray to.—L. ad,to; and drare, to pray, from 6s,


ADVERB 7


gen. dris, the mouth; cf. Skt. dsya-, the mouth. See Oral. Der.
ador-at-ion, ador-er, ador-atle, ador-able-ness, ador-ing-ly.

ADORN, to deck. (L.) Chaucer has adorneth, Troilus, iii. 2.—
L. adornare, to deck. = L.ad, to, on; and ornare, to deck. See Orna-
ment. Der. adorn-ing, adorn-ment.

ADOWN, downwards. (E.) ME. adune, Havelok, 2735; very
common. AS. of-diine, lit. off the down or hill.= AS. of, off, from;
and dine, dat. of diin,a down, hill. See Down; and A- (1), prefix.

ADRIFT, floating at random. (E.) In Milton, P. L. xi. 832.
For on drift; as afloat for on float, ashore for on shore, See Afloat
and Drift.

ADROIT, dexterous. (F.—L.) Used by Evelyn, The State of
France (R.); Butler, Hudibras, ili. 1, 365.—F. adroit, ‘handsome,
nimble, wheem, ready or quick about;’ Cotgrave.=—F. a droit, lit.
rightfully, rightly; from a, to, towards (L. ad); and droit, right.
The F. droit is from L. directum, right, justice (in Late L.), neut. of
directus, direct. See Direct. Der. adroit-ly, adroit-ness.

ADSCITITIOUS; see Ascititious.

ADULATION, flattery. (F.—L.) In Shak. Henry V, iv. 1. 271.
ME. adulacioun, Lydgate, Ballad of Good Counsel, 61.—F. adulation,
‘adulation, flattery, fawning,’ &c.; Cotgrave. = L. aditlatidnem, acc. of
adilatio, flattery. —L. adilari, to flatter, fawn, pp. adiilatus. Hence
also adulate, adulator.

ADULT, one grown up. (L.; or F.—L.) Spelt adulve in Sir T.
Elyot, the Governour, b. ii. c. 1. § 2. [Perhaps through the French,
as Cotgrave has ‘ Adulte, grown to full age.’] = L. adultus, grown up,

p. of adolescere, to grow up. See Adolescent.

ADULTERATE, to corrupt. (L.) Sir T. More, Works, p.636 h,
has adulterate asa past participle; Shak. has it bothas adj. and verb;
Hamlet, i. v. 42; K. John, iii. 1. 56.—L. adulterat-us, pp. of adul-
terare,to commit adultery, to corrupt, falsify; cf. L. adulter, an adul-
terer, a debaser of money. f. L. ad-ulterare was orig. ‘ to change ;’
from L. prefix ad, and alterare, to alter; see Alter. (Bréal.) Der.
adulterat-ion; also (from L. adulterium) the words adulter-y, Winter’s
Tale, ili. 2.15; adulter-er, adulter-ess; and (from I.. adulter) adulter-
ous, adulter-ine. ‘The AF. adulterie occurs in the Year-books of
Edw. I, 1292-3, p. 183.

ADUMBRATEH, to shadow forth. (L.) Adumbrations occurs in
Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, book iii. c. 26. § 2.—L. adumbrire, to
cast shadow over. =—L. ad, to, towards, over; and umbrare, to cast
a shadow, from umbra,a shadow. Der. adumbrant (from pres. pt.
adumbrans), adumbrat-ion.

ADVANCH, to go forward. (F.—L.) [The modern spelling is
not good; the inserted d is due to the odd mistake of supposing that,
in the old form avance, the prefix is a- and represents the L. ad. The
truth is, that the prefix is av-, and represents the L.ab. The inserted
d came in about A.D. 1500, and is found in the Works of Sir T. More,
who has aduauncement, p. 1369 g- The older spelling is invariably
without the d.] ME. avancen, avauncen. Chaucer has ‘ avaunsed and
forthered,’ tr. of Boethius, b. ii. pr. 4, 1. 48. The word is common,
and occurs in the Ancren Riwle, p. 156.—OF. avancer (F. avancer),
to go before. OF. and F. avant, before.— Late L. ab ante, also writ-
ten abante, before (Brachet).—L. ab, from; ante, before. See Ante-,
and Van. Der. advance-ment, ME. auauncement, Rob. of Glouc.
p- 312, 1. 6388; and see below.

ADVANTAGE, profit. (F.—L.) Properly a state of forward-
ness or advance. [The d is a mistaken insertion, as in advance (see
above); and the ME. form is avantage or avauntage.| ‘ Avantage,
proventus, emolumentum;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 17. Hampole has avan-
tage, Pricke of Conscience, 1. 1012; and it 1s common. OF. and F.
avantage, formed with suffix -age from prep. avant, before. See Ad-
vance. Der. advantage-ous, advantage-ous-ness.

ADVENT, approach. (L.) ME. aduent, Rob. of Glouc. p. 463,
1.9510; Ancren Riwle, p. 70.—L. aduentus, a coming to, approach.
=L. aduent-us, pp. of aduenire, to come to.—L. ad, to; and uenire, to
come, cognate with E, come. See Come. Der. advent-u-al, advent-
it-i-ous; adventure (below).

ADVENTURE, an accident, enterprise. (F.—L.) [The older
spelling is aventure, the F. prefix a- having been afterwards replaced
by the corresponding L, prefix ad-.}_ Sir ‘IT. More, Works, p. 761 e,
has aduenture as averb. ‘The old form aventure is often cut down to
auntre. Rob. of Glouc. has the sb. aunter at p. 65 (1. 1482). The
sb. auenture, i.e. occurrence, is in the Ancren Riwle, p. 340.—OF.
aventure, fem., an adventure. = Late L. aduentira, fem.sb., analogous
to L. sbs. in -‘ara; see Roby’s Lat. Gram., 3rd ed., pt. i. § 893.
Formed as if from L. aduentiir-us, fut. part. of aduenire, to come to,
happen. =L. ad, to; and wenire, to come, cognate with E. come. See
Come. Der. adventure, vb., adventur-er, adventur-ous, adventur-ous-
ness; also per-adventure.

ADVERB, a part of speech. (F.—L.) In Ben Jonson, Eng.
Grammar, ch, xxi; and in Palsgrave, p. 798. Used to qualify a verb;


8 ADVERSE


and adapted from F. adverbe (in Sherwood’s index to Cotgrave).—L,
aduerbium.=L. ad, to; and uerbum,a verb, a word. See Verb. Der.
adverb-ial, adverb-ial-ly.

ADVERSE, opposed to. (F:—L.) ME. .aduerse. Gower has
‘“Whan he fortune fint [finds] adverse;’ C. A. ii. 116 (bk. iv. 3403).
Aduersite, i.e. adversity, occurs in the Ancren Riwle, p. 194. Chaucer
has aduersarie, an adversary, C. T. 14596 (B 3868).—OF. advers,
generally avers, adverse to.—L. aduersus, turned towards, contrary,
opposed to; pp. of aduertere, to turn towards.—L. ad, to; and zert-
ere, to turn. See Verse. Der. advers-ary, advers-at-ive, adverse-ness,
advers-ity. See below. ;

ADVERT, to turn to, regard. (L.) Aduert occurs in Lydgate,
Beware of Doubleness, 1. 45; and in The Court of Love, ]. 150, writ-
ten after A.D. 1500.—L. aduertere, to turn towards; see above. Der.
advert-ent, advertence, advert-enc-y.


ADVERTISE, to inform, warn. (F.—L.) Fabyan has aduert-


ysed, Hist. c. 84. § 2.—MF. advertiss-, lengthened stem of advertir |.


(OF. avertir). Cotgrave has ‘ Advertir, to inform, certifie, advertise,
warn, admonish.’ = Late L. aduertire, used in place of L. aduertere, to
turn towards, advert to. See Advert. [Thus advertise is really a
doublet of advert.] Der. advertis-er, advertis-ing ; also advertise-ment,
in Caxton, Troy-book, leaf 122,1. 8, from MF. advertissement, which
see in Cotgrave,

ADVICE, counsel. (F.=—L.) Sir T. More, Works, p. 11 a, has
aduisedly, Fabyan has aduyce, Hen. III, an. 46. § 5. Cotgrave has
‘ Advis, m., advise, opinion, counsell, sentence, judgment,’ &c. B.
But in ME. and OF. there is generally nod. Rob. of Glouc. has auys,
p- 144 (1. 3042).—OF. avis, an opinion ; really a compounded word,
standing for a vis, lit. according to my opinion, or ‘as it seems’ to me;
which would correspond to a L. form ad uisum. = L. ad, according to;
and wtsum, that which has seemed best, pp. neuter of wdére, to see;
from 4/ WEID, to know. See Wit. Der. advise (MF. adviser) ;
advis-able, advis-able-ness, advis-ed, advis-ed-ness, advis-er. See below.

ADVISH, to counsel. (F.—L.) The form advise is from MF.
adviser,a form given by Cotgrave, and explained to mean ‘ to advise,
marke, heed, consider of,’ &c. B. But in ME., as in OF., the usual
form is without the d; avised occurs in Gower, C. A. i. 5 (prol. 65).
The pt. t. avisede occurs in Rob. of Glouc. p. 558 (1. 11694) ; and the
sb. auys (i.e. advice) in the same, p. 144 (1. 3042). —OF. aviser, to
have an opinion. = OF, avis, opinion ; see above.

ADVOCATE, one called on to plead. (L.) ‘ Be myn adudcat in
that heyé place;’? Chaucer, Sec. Nun’s Ta., G 68.—L. aduociitus, a.
common forensic term for a pleader, advocate, one ‘called to’ the bar.
[Cf. also MF. aduocat, ‘an aduocate,’ Cot.J|=L.ad,to; wocatus, called,
pp- of wocare, to call. See Voice. Der. advocate, verb; advocate-
ship; advocac-y (MF. advocat-ie, which see in Cotgrave) ; also advowee,
advowson, for which see below.

ADVOWSON, the right of presentation to a benefice. (F.—L.)
Occurs in the Statute of Westminster, an. 13 Edw. I,c.5; see Blount’s
Law Dictionary. From AF. advoeson, older form avoeson, Stat. of
Realm, i. 293; and see Godefroy. ‘The sense is patronage, and the
corresponding term in Law L. is aduocatio (see Blount), because the
patron was called aduocdtus, or in OF. avoue, MF, advoué (Cotgrave),
now spelt avowee or advowee in English. Hence advowson is derived
from L. aduocdtidnem, acc. of aduocatio, and advowee is derived from
L. aduocatus. See Advocate.

ADZBE, a cooper’s axe. (E.) ME. adse; the pl. adses occurs in
Palladius on Husbandrie, bk. i. 1. 1161; adese, Wyclif, Isaiah xliy.
13. AS. adesa, an axe or hatchet; Ailfric’s Glossary, Voc. 141. 29;
Beda, Hist. Eccl. iv. 3; Grein, p. 1.

ASDILE, a magistrate in Rome, a municipal officer. (L.) In
Shak. Cor. iii. 1. 173.—L. edilis, a magistrate who had the charge
of temples, &c.—L. edés, aedés, a building. See Edify.

48GIS, a shield. (L.—Gk.) First used by Rowe in 1704 (N.E.D.).
—L. egis, aegis. Gk. aiyis, the shield of Zeus or Pallas.
-AERIAL, airy, high, lofty. (L.—Gk.) Milton has aérial, also
written aéreal, P. L. iii. 445, v. 548, vil. 442; also aéry, P. L. i. 430,
775. Formed, apparently in imitation of ethereal (P. L. i. 45, 285,
&c.), from L. aérius, dwelling in the air.—L, aér, the air.=Gk. dnp,
air, See Air. Der. From the same L. sb. we have aér-ate, aér-ify.
@ From Gk. ayp we have the Gk. prefix depo-, relative to air, appear-
ing in English as aero-. Hence aero-lite, an air-stone, from Gk. AdOos.
a stone; aero-naut, F. aéronaute,a sailer or sailor in the air, from
Gk. vavrns (L. nauta) a sailor, which is from Gk. vais, a ship; aero-
static, for which see Static, &c.; aer-ate.

AERUGINOUS, rusty, as copper. (L.) In Phillips (1658). —
L. eriginosus, rusty.—L. eriigo (gen. @rigin-is), verdigris.—L. er-,
from @s, aes, brass (L. ae, rather than @),

AERY, lit. an eagle’s nest; also, a brood of eagles or hawks. (F.)
“And like an eagle o’er his aery (orig: ayerie) towers;’ K. John, v. 2.
149. ‘ There is an aery (orig. ayrie) of young children ;’ Hamlet, ii.


AFFIANCE


2.354. From Med. L. aeria, aria, Latinised form of F. aire; Cotgrave
has ‘Aire, m. an airie or nest of hawkes.’ Cf. Late L. Grea, a nest of
a bird of prey; of which we find an example in Ducange. ‘Aues
rapaces ... exspectant se inuicem aliquando prope nidum suum con-
suetum, quia quibusdam area dicitur ;’ Fridericus II, de Venat. lib.
es) B. The word aive is marked as masculine in Cotgrave,
whereas F. aire, L. Grea, in the ordinary sense of ‘ floor,’ is feminine.
It is probable that the Late L. area is quite a distinct word from the
classical L. area; and some derive F. aire from L. dirium, a hall, a
court, or from agrum, acc. of ager, a field, See Korting, § 828. The
OF. aie was both m. and f.; the former would correspond to L.


atrium, the latter to Géria, pl. taken as fem, sing. The mod. F. airer, -


to make a nest, represents OF. aairier, adairier; see Godefroy, 4] The
E. word was sometimes connected with ME. ey, an egg, as if the word
meant an egg'-ery; hence it came to be spelt eyrie or eyry, and to be
misinterpreted accordingly. ;

AESTHETIC, tasteful, refined; relating to perception. (Gk.)
Modern, Formed from Gk. aio@nrixés, perceptive. = Gk. aicbeaGar,
to perceive. =—4/AW ; see Brugmann, ii. § 841. 4 The word was
really introduced from German, the G. word being formed from Greek.
‘His Vorschule der /Esthetik (Introduction to A%sthetics);’ Carlyle,
Essay on Richter, in Edinb. Rev., June, 1827, p. 183; Essays, i. 8
(pop. edition). Cf. Baumgarten’s Msthetica, 1750. Der. e@sthetic-s,
@sthetic-al,


AFAR, at a distance. (E.) For ox far or-of far, Either expres-


sion would become o far, and then a-far; and both are found; but,


by analogy, the former corresponds better with the modern use; cf.
abed, asleep, &c. Stratmann gives of feor, O. E. Homilies, i. 247;
a fer, Gower, C. A.i. 314 (bk. iii, 1039); on ferum, Gawain, 1575;
o ferrum, Minot, vii. 70. See Far. 4 Apparently, of/feor became
ofer, and was refashioned as on fer, which became a fer. :

AFFABLE, easy to be addressed. (F.—L.) Milton has affable,
P. L. vii. 415 viii.648. =F. affable, ‘affable, gentle, curteous, gracious in
words, of a friendly conversation, easily spoken to by, willingly giving
ear to others ;’ Cot. —L. affabilis, easy to be spoken to.—L. af-, for
ad, to; and fari, to speak. See Fable. Der. affabl-y, affabil-ity,
in Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, bk. i. c. 3. § 3 (F. affabilité=L,
affabilitatem, acc. of affabilitas).

AFFATR, business, (F.—L.) ME. affere, afere, effer; the pl.
afferes is in P. Plowman, C. vii. 152. Commonest in Northern Eng-
lish; spelt effer in Barbour’s Bruce, vii, 30.— OF. afaire, afeire (and
properly so written with one /), business; merely the phrase a faire,
to do, used as a substantive, like ado in English for at do; see Ado,
OF. faire=L. facere; see below.

AFFECT, to act upon, (F.—L.) In Shak. it means to love,
tolike; Gent. of Ver. iii. 1.82; Antony, i. 3. 71, &c. The sb. affection
(formerly affeccioun) is in much earlier use, and common in Chaucer.
— MF. affecter, ‘to affect, fancy ;’ Cot. —L. affectare, to apply oneself
to; frequentative form of afficere, to aim at, treat.—L. af-, for ad;
and facere,to do, act. See Fact. Der. affect-ed, affect-ed-ness, affect-
ing’, affect-at-ion, affect-ion, affect-ion-ate, affect-jon-ate-ly. Of these,
affectation occurs in Ben Jonson, Discoveries, sect. cxx. headed
Periodi, &c. Also dis-affect.


AFFEER, to assess, confirm. (F.—L.) Rare; but it occurs in ©


Macbeth, iv. 3. 34; ‘the title is affeer'd.’ Blount, in his Law
Dictionary, explains Affeerers as ‘ those that are appointed in court-
leets upon oath, to settle and moderate the fines of such as have com-
mitted faults arbitrarily punishable. B. Blount first suggests an
impossible derivation from F. affier, but afterwards adds the right one,
saying, ‘I find in the Customary of Normandy, cap. 20, this word
affeurer, which the Latin interpreter expresseth by ¢axare, that is, to
set the price of a thing, which etymology seems to me the best.’ =
AF. aferer, OF. afeurer, to fix the price of things officially; Godefroy
(s. v. aforer).— Late L. afforare, to fix the price of a thing ; Ducange.
=—L. af-, forad; and forum, or forus, both of which are used synony-
mously in Late L. in the sense of ‘ price;’ the OF. form of the sb.
being fuer or feur, which see in Godefroy. The classical L. is forum,
meaning ‘a market-place,’ also ‘an assize;’ and is also (rarely) written
forus. Allied to L. forés, and E. door; Brugmann, i. § 360. See
Door. @= The change from L.o to AF. and E. ee is clearly seen
in L. bovem, OF. buef, AF. béf, E. beef. The Late L. equivalent of
affeerer is affordior.

AFFIANCEH, trust, marriage-contract. (F.—L.) [The verb affy
is perhaps obsolete. It means to trust, confide, Titus Andron. i. 1. 475
also to betroth, Tam, of Shrew, iv. 4. 49.] Both affie and affiance
occur in Rob. of Brunne’s tr. of P. Langtoft, pp. 87, 155. 1, The
verb is from OF. affier, to trust in, also spelt afier; which is from a-,
for L. ad, and fier, formed from Late L. fidadre, a late form from L.
fidus, faithful, allied to fides, faith, and fidere, to trust. 2. The sb,
is from OF, afiance, which is compounded of a-, for L. ad, and fiance,
formed from Late L. fidantia, a pledge, security; which is from the


AFFIDAVIT


same jidare, pres. pt. fidans, of which the stem is ftdant-. Thus both
are allied to L. fidere, to trust. See Faith, Der. affiance, verb;
affianc-ed.

AFFIDAVIT, an oath. (L.) Properly the Late L. affidavit =
he made oath, 3 p.s. perf. of affidare, to make oath, pledge. = L. af-,
for ad; and Late L. fiddre, to pledge, from fidus, faithful, See above.

AFFILIATION, assignment of a child to its father. (F.—L.)
The verb affiliate seems to be later than the sb., and the sb. does not
appear to be in early use, though the corresponding terms in French
and Latin may long have been in use in the law courts. = F, affiliation,
explained by Cotgrave as ‘adoption, or an adopting.’ = Law L. affilia-
tidnem, acc. of affiliatio, ‘an assigning a son to ;’ Ducange.— Late L.
affilidre, to adopt; cf, the pp. affiliatus. = L.af-, for ad, to; and filius,
ason. See Filial.

AFFINITY, nearness of kin, connexion. (F.—L.) Fabyan has
affynite, c. 134; affynyte is in Rob. of Brunne, Handling Synne,
1, 7379. —F. affinité, ‘affinity, kindred, allyance, nearness;’ Cot.—L.
affinitatem,acc. of affinitds, nearness. = L. aff inis, near, bordering upon.
= L. af-, for ad, near; and finis,a boundary. See Final.

AFFIRM, to assert strongly. (F.—L.) ME. affermen; Chaucer
has affermed; C.T. 2351 (A 2349). It occurs earlier, in Rob. of
Brunne’s tr. of P. Langtoft, p. 316.—OF. afermer, to fix, secure. =
OF. a-, for L, ad; and L.jirmare, to make firm, from firmus, firm. See
Firm. {4 The word has been assimilated to the L. spelling, but
was not taken immediately from L. Der. affirm-able, affirm-at-ion,
affirm-at-ive, affirm-at-tve-ly.

AFFIX, to fasten, join on to. (F.—L.) ‘To affyxe the desyres;’
Caxton, Golden Legend; The Ascension, § 6. [Not from L. directly,
but from French, the spelling being afterwards accommodated to L. }
ME. affichen. Gower has ‘Ther wol thei al here love affiche,
thyming with riche; C. A. ii. 211 (bk. v. 2520). Wyclif has afficchede
(printed affitchede), 4 Kings, xviii. 16.—OF. ajicher, to fix to.—OF.
a-, for L. ad; and ficher, to fix, from Late L. *figicare (an unauthenti-
cated form) developed from L, figere, to fix. See Fix. Der. affix, sb.

AFFLICT, to harass. (L.) Sir T. More has afflicteth, Works,
p- 1080 g. [The pp. aflyghkt occurs in Octovian, 1, 191; and the
pt. t. aflihte in Gower, C. A. i. 327 (bk. ili. 1422); these are from OF.
aflit (fem. aflite), pp. of affire, to afflict. The sb. afffiction occurs
early, in Rob. of Brunne’s tr. of Langtoft, p. 202.) —L. afflictus, pp.
of affligere, to strike to the ground.—L. af, for ad, to, i.e. to the
ground ; and fligere, to dash, strike, pp. flictus. From the same root
are con-flict, in-flict, pro-flig-ate. Der. afflict-ion (L. acc. afflict-idnem,
from pp. afflictus) ; also afflict-ive.

AFFLUENCEH, profusion, wealth. (F.—L.) It occurs in Wot-
ton’s Reliquize, art. A Parallel ; and in his Life of Buckingham in the
same collection (R.). Also in Caxton’s.Eneydos, ch. vi. p. 26.—F.
affluence, ‘ affluence, plenty, store, flowing, fulness, abundance ;’ Cot.
=L. affuentia, abundance.—L. affluere, to flow'to, abound. =—L. af,
for ad; and fluere, to flow. See Fluent. Der. affluent (from L.
affiuentem, acc. of affluens, pres. pt. of affluere); afflux, given by Cot-
grave as being also a French word (from L. affluxus, pp. of affluere).

AFFORD, to supply, produce. (E.) This word should have but
onef, The double fis due to a supposed analogy with words that
begin with af in Latin, where af- is for adf-; but the word is not
Latin, and the prefix is not ad-. Besides this, the pronunciation has
been changed,at the end. Rightly, it should be aforth, but the ch
has changed as in other words; cf. murther, now murder, further,
provincially furder. From ME. aforthen, to afford, suffice, provide.
‘And here and there, as that my litell witte Aforthe may [i. e. may
suffice], I thinké translate it;’ Hoccleve, Regement of Princes, 1.
2113. ‘And thereof was Peres proude, and put hem to werke, And
yaf hem mete as he myghte aforth [i.e. could afford or provide], and
mesurable huyre’ [hire]; P. Plowman, B. vi. 200. B. In this word,
as in aware, q. v., the prefix a- is substituted for the AS. prefix ge-,
which in ME. became ye-, later y- or i-, and iforth easily passed into
aforth, owing to the atonic nature of the syllable. We find the forms
yeforthian and iforthien in the 12th century. Ex. ‘thenne he iseye
thet he ne mahte na mare yeforthian’ =when he saw that he could
afford no more; Old Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, 1st series, p. 31;
‘do thine elmesse of thon thet thu maht dforthien’ =do thine alms of
that which thou mayest afford, id. p. 37.— AS. ge-fordian (where the
ge- is a mere prefix that is often dropped), or fordian, to further,
promote, accomplish, provide, afford. ‘Hwile man) swa haued be-
haten to faren to Rome, and he ne muge hit /ordian’ =whatever man
has promised [vowed] to go to Rome, and may not accomplish it;
AS. Chron. ed. Thorpe, an. 675, later interpolation; see footnote on
p- 58. ‘pa wes gefordad pin fegere weorc’=then was accomplished
thy fair work (Grein) ; ‘ heefde gefordod, pet he his frean gehét’ =had
performed that which he promised his lord; Grein, i. 401.— AS. ge-,
prefix (of slight value); and fordiaz, to promote, forward, produce,
cause to come forth, from AS. ford, forth, forward. See Forth.


AFTERMOST 9


AFFRAY, to frighten; AFRAID, frightened. (F.—L. and
Teut.) Shak. has the verb, Romeo, iii. 5. 33. It occurs early. Rob.
of Brunne, in his translation of P. Langtoft, p. 174, has ‘it affraied
the Sarazins’=it frightened the Saracens; and ‘ther-of had many
affray’ = thereof many had terror, where affray is a sb. OF, effreier,
effraier, esfreer, to frighten, Late L. ex-fridire, to break the king’s
peace, to cause an affray or fray; hence, to disturb, frighten. —L. ex,
intensive prefix; and OHG. fridu (G. friede), peace. See Romania,
1878, vii.121. Der. affray, sb., also shortened to fray; afraid, orig.
affrayed, pp. of affray.

AFFREIGHTMENT, the act of hiring a ship for the trans-
portation of goods. (F.—L. and G.) Still in use. Blount gives
affrettamentum, with a reference to Pat. 11 Hen. IV. par. 1. m. 12,
which represents an OF. affretement, the same word as mod. F.
affréetement, the hiring of a ship (Littré). Formed with suffix -ment
from OF. affreter (mod. F. affréter), to hire a ship (Littré), =L. af-,
for ad, prefix; and F, fret, ‘the fraught or fraight of a ship, also the
hire that’s paid for a ship, or for the fraught thereof ;’ Cotgrave.
This fret is of G. origin; see further under Fraught, Freight.

AFFRIGHOHT, to frighten. (E.) The double / is modern, and a
mistake, The prefix is AS. d-. A transitive verb in Shak. Mids, Nt.
Dream, v. 142, &c. A late formation; from ME. afright, which was
teally a pp., and was lengthened to affright-ed by mistake, as in
Othello, v. 2.99. Cf. ME. afright, in Chaucer, Nun’s Priest’s Tale,
1.75. AS. Gfyrht (contracted form of afyrht-ed), pp. of Ayrhtan, to
terrify; Grein,i. 19. Cf. ‘pa weardas w&ron dGfyrhte,’ the guards
were affrighé (frightened); Matt. xxviii. 4.—AS. a-, prefix, with in-
tensive force; and fyrhtan, to terrify, from AS. /yrhto, fright, terror.
See Fright. Der. affright-ed-ly.

AFFRONT, to insult, lit. to stand front to front. (F.—L.) The
double f was originally a single one, the prefix being the F.a. ME.
afronten, afrounten, to insult. ‘ That afrontede me foule’ = who foully
insulted me; P. Plowman, C. xxiii. 5. The inf. afrounti occurs in
the Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 229.—OF. afronter, to confront, oppose
face to face; also, to slap in the face.— OF. a, to, against; and frout,
the front; so that a front answers to L. ad frontem; cf. Late L. af-
frontare, to strike against. L. ad; and frontem, acc. case of frons, the
forehead. See Front. Der. affront, sb.

AFF, to trust in; see Affiance.

AFLOAT, for oz float. (E.) ‘Now er alle oz flote’ =now are all
afloat; Rob. of Brunne’s tr. of P. Langtoft, p. 169. So also on flot,
afloat, in Barbour’s Bruce, ed. Skeat, xiv. 359.

AFOOT, for on foot. (E.) ‘The way-ferande frekez on fote and on
hors’=the wayfaring men, afoot and on horse; Allit. Poems, ed.
Morris, B. 79. We still say ‘to go on foot.’

AFORE, before, in front; for oz fore. (E.) ME. afore, aforn.
‘As it is afore seid,’ Book of Quinte Essence, ed. Furnivall, p. 12;
aforn, Rom. Rose, 3952. AS. onforan, adv. in front, Grein, il. 344.
There is also an AS. form @é/foran, prep., Grein, i. 61. See Fore.
Der. afore-said, afore-hand, afore-time.

AFRAID; for affrayed, pp. of affray; see Affray.

AFREET, AFRIT, an evil demon. (Arab.) In Southey, Tha-
laba, bk. xii. st. 19.—Arab. ‘ifrit, a giant, demon, spectre; Rich.
Dict. p. 1016.

AFRESH, anew. (E.) Sir T. More, Works, p. 1390 c; Shak.
Tam, Shrew, i. 1. 143. Either for on fresh or of fresh. Perhaps the
latter, by analogy with anew, q. v.

AFT, AFTER, behind. (E.) Comparison with abaft shows
that aft is shortened from AS. @eftaz, ady., behind. After answers to
AS, @fter, both prep. and adv.; Grein, 1. 53, 54.--Icel. aptan (pron.
aflan), ady. and prep. behind; aptr, aftr, aptan, backwards; aftr,
back, in composition; Dan. and Swed. efter, prep. and ady. behind,
after; Du. achter, prep. and adv. behind; OHG. aftar, prep. and
ady. behind. 4 In English, there has, no doubt, been a feeling that
after was formed from aft; but we can only compare the AS. forms
aftor and eftan. B. Of these, eftan is cognate with Goth. aftana,
from behind, from afta, behind; and af-ta is from Goth. af, off, away,
with an orig. superl. suffix -ta (Idg. -/o),sas in Gk. 7p@-ro-s, first. y-
After is a comparative form, to be divided as after. The -ter is the
suffix which appears in the Gk. comparative form dma-rép-w, further
off. The positive form af- corresponds to Skt. apa, Gk. dm, L. ab,
Goth. af, AS. of, E. of and off. See Of. Der. after-crop, after-most
(q.v.), after-noon, after-piece, after-ward,after-wards (q.v.),ab-aft (q.v.).

AFTERMATH, a second crop of mown grass. (E.) In Hol-
land, tr. of Pliny, b.xvii.c.8. Math= AS. md, a mowing; Kemble,
Cod. Dipl. ii. 400; allied to Mow and to Mead (2), q.v. Cf. G,
mahd, a mowing; xachmahd, aftermath.

AFTERMOST, hindmost. (E.) ‘The suffix -mos¢ in such words
as utmost is a double superlative ending, and not the word most;’
Morris, Outlines of Eng. Accidence, p. 110. ME. eftemeste, Early
Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, ii, 23, AS. eftemest, eftemyst, last, used


10 AFTERWARD


by “£lfric and Alfred (Bosworth). + Goth. aftwmists, the last; also
aftuma, the last, which is a shorter form, showing that aftum-ists is
formed regularly by the use of the suffix -ists (E. -est). @ The division
of aftuma is into af and -tu-ma (see explanation of aft), where af is the
Goth. af, E. of, and -tw-ma is the same as the L. -tw-mus in OL. op-tu-
mus, best, and the Skt. -¢a-ma-, a double superl. termination. Thus
aftermost is for aftemest, i.e. af-te-m-est, superl. of af=of, off. See Aft.

AFTERWARD, AFTERWARDS, subsequently. (E.)
ME. afterward, Ormulum, 14793; efter-ward, Ayenbite of Inwyt,
p. 24. The adverbial suffix -s, ME. -es (originally a gen. sing. suffix)
was added at a later time. Shakespeare has both forms; and the
earliest example of the lengthened form occurs about A.D. 1300, in
the form afferwardes; St. Brandan, 1, 10 (N.E.D.). AS. efterweard, adj.
behind, Grein, i. 55.—AS. efter, behind; and weard, answering to E.
-ward, towards. See After and Towards.

AGA, AGHA, a chief officer; in Turkey. (Turk.) ‘Tanizaries
... commanded by their Aga;’ Sandys, Travels, 1632, p. 48.— Turk.
agha, master.

AGAIN, asecond time; AGAINST, in opposition to.(E.) ME.
(North.) ogain, again ; (South.) ayein, ayen, aye, onyain, generally
written with 3 for y, and very common both as an adverb and prepo-
sition. Also in the (North.) forms ogaines, againes; (South.) ayaines,
ayens, onyenes, generally written with 3 for y. B. Ata later period
an excrescent ¢ (common after s) was added to the latter, as in
whilst from the older form whiles, or in the provincial Eng. wumst for
once; and in betwix-t, amongs-t. Ayenst- occurs in Maundeville’s
Travels, p. 220; and ayeynest in Chaucer’s Boethius, bk. i. pr. 3. 51
(MS. Addit. 10340); itis hardly olderthan A.D.1350. y. The final -es
in ayaines is the adverbial suffix -es, originally marking a gen. singu-
lar. The form ayeines occurs in Old Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 7 ;
onyenes isin the Ormulum, 1. 249; it is hardly older than A.D. 1200,
though the word /0-gegnes or togénes is common at an early period.
AS. ongegn, ongéan, against, again, prep. and ady. Grein, il. 344.4
OSax. angegin, prep. and ady. again, against; Icel.2 gegn, against ;
Dan. igen, ady. again; Swed. igen, adv. again; OHG. ingagene, inge-
gine (mod. G. entgegen, where the ¢ appears to be merely excrescent).
@ Hence the prefix is plainly the AS. and mod. E. on, generally used
in the sense of ix. The simple form géan occurs in Czdmon, ed.
Thorpe, p. 62, 1. 5 (ed. Grein, 1009); ‘he him géan pingade’ =he
addressed him again, or in return; cf. Icel. gegn, G. gegen, contrary
to. AS. ovgéan seems thus to mean ‘in opposition to.’ The orig.
sense seems to have been ‘in a direct line with;’ hence, over against,
opposite; cf. prov. E. gain, direct, straight, Icel. gegn, direct (said
of a path); the orig. Teut. type being apparently *gaginoz, adj. Cf.
Gk. xixdvw, *«ixnut, light upon, I meet with. 4 The prefix again-
is very common in Mid. Eng., and enters into numerous compounds
in which it frequently answers to L. re- or red-; ex. ayenbite=again-
biting, i.e. re-morse; ayenbuyen, = buy back, i.e. red-eem. Nearly all
these compounds-are obsolete. The chief remaining one is ME.
ayein-seien, now shortened to gain-say.

AGALLOCHUM:; see Aloes-wood, under Aloe.

AGAPH, on the gape. (E.) In Milton, P.L. v. 357; for on gape;
cf. ‘ow the broad grin.’ See Abed; and see Gape.

AGARIC, a kind of fungus. (F.—L.—Gk.) Turner has agarike;
Names of Herbes, p. 9.—F. agaric, ‘agarick, a white and soft mush-
rome;’ Cot.=L. agaricum.=Gk. dyapixdy, a tree-fungus.

AGATE, a kind of stone. (F.—L.-Gk.) Shak. L.L. L. ii. 236.
[Perhaps confused with gagate or gagates, i.e. jet, in Middle English;
see Spec. of Eng., ed. Morris and Skeat, sect. xviii. A. 30, and gagate
in Halliwell.|—MF. agate, spelt agathe in Cotgrave. —L. achdtes, an
agate (see Gower, C. A. iii. 130, bk. vii. 1362) ; borrowed from Gk.
axarns, an agate; which, according to Pliny, 37. 10, was so called
because first found near the river Achates in Sicily. For the ME.
gagate, see Jet.

AGE, period of time, maturity of life. (F.-—L.) ‘A gode clerk
wele in age;’ Rob. of Brunne, tr. of P. Langtoft, p..114.—OF. aage,
age; fuller form, edage (11th century).—Late L. *etdticum, a form
which is not found, but the ending -aticum is very common ; for the
changes, see age in Brachet.—L. etdtem, acc. of etis, age; which is
a contraction from an older form euitds, formed by suffixing -tas to
the stem @ui-; from euum, life, period, age.4-Gk. aiwy (for aifwv),
a period; Goth, aiws, a period, time, age; Skt. dyws, life. Brugm.
ii. § 112. Der. age, v.; ag-ed. (See Max Miiller, Lectures, i. 337,
li. 274, 8th ed.) And see Aye.

AGENT, one who performs or does, a factor. (L.) Shak. Macb.
iil. 2. 53.—L. agentem, acc. of agens, pres, pt. of agere, to do, drive,
conduct; pp. actus.+-Gk. dye, to conduct ; Icel. aka, to drive; Skt.
aj,to drive.—4/AG, to drive, conduct. See Brugm. i. 175. Der.
agency, from Late L. agentia, a faculty of doing, cf. F. agencer, to
arrange, which see in Brachet; also (from L. pp. actus) act, act-ion,
&c. See Act. Also, from the same root, ag-ile, ag-ility; see Agile.


{


AGILE


' Also, from the same root, ag-itate, ag-itation, ag-itator; see Agitate.


Also, from the same root, ag-ony, ant-ag-onist; see Agony. Also
amb-ig-uous, q.v.; aS well as co-ag-wlate, co-g-ent, co-g-itate, counter-
act, en-act, essay, ex-act, examine, ex-ig-ent, prod-ig-al, trans-act.

AGGLOMERATE, to mass together. (L.) In Coles’s Dict.
(1684). Used by Thomson, Autumn, 766.—L. agglomeratus, pp. of
agglomerare, to form into a mass, to wind into a ball. —L. ad, to,
together (which becomes ag- before g); and glomerare, to wind into
a ball, from glomer-, decl. stem of glomus, a clue of thread (for
winding), a thick bush, orig. a mass; related to L. globus, a globe,
a ball. See Globe. Der, agglomeration, ;

AGGLUTINATE, to glue together. (L.) Agglutinated occurs
in Sir T. Browne, Vulgar Errors, b. ii. c. 1. § 14.—L. agglitindtus,
pp. of agglitinare, to glue together. = L. ad (> ag- before g); gliti-
nare, to fasten with glue, from gliiten (decl. stem gliitin-), glue. See
Glue. Der. agglutinat-ion, agglutinat-ive,

AGGRANDISE, to make great. (F.—L.) Young has aggrand-
ize, Night Thoughts, Nt. 6, 1. 111.—F. aggrandiss-, extended stem
of aggrandir, which Cotgrave explains by ‘to greaten, angment, en-
large,’ &e. The older form of the verb was agrandir, with one g,, as in
mod. F.; the double g is due to analogy with L. words beginning with
agg-.=—OF.a,to (for L. ad) ; and grandir, L. grandire, to increase, from
grandis, great. See Grand. Der. aggrandise-ment, in Blount’s
Gloss.

AGGRAVATE, lit. to make heavy, to burden. (L.) Shak.
Rich. II, i.1. 43. Spelt agravate in Palsgrave, p. 418. =—L. aggra-
uditus, pp. of aggraudre, to add to a load.—L. ad (> ag- before g);
grauare, to load, make heavy, from grauis, heavy. See Grave.
Der. aggravat-ion. @ Nearly a doublet of aggrieve.

AGGREGATE, to collect together. (L.) Aggregate occurs in
Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. iii. c. 23. § 7. [ME. has the
form aggreggen, from the F. agréger (which see in Brachet); it
occurs in Chaucer’s Melibeus (B 2477). ] = L.aggregat-us, pp. of aggre-
gare, to collect into a flock.—L. ad (> ag- before g); gregare, to
collect a flock, from grex (stem greg-),a flock. See Gregarious.
Der. aggregate, pp. as adj. or sb.; aggregate-ly, aggregat-ion.

AGGRESS, to attack. (F.—L.) Prior has ‘aggressing France;’
Ode to Qu. Anne, st. 14.—F. aggresser, ‘to assail, assault, set on ;’
Cot.—Late L. aggressare.— L. aggressus, pp. of aggredior, Lassail. =
L. ad (> ag- before g); gradior, I walk, go, from gradus, a step.
See Grade. Der.aggress-ion, ag gress-zve, aggress-ive-ness, aggress-or.

AGGRIEVE, to bear heavily upon. (F.—L.) ME. agreuen;
whence agreued, Chaucer, C. T. 2059 (A 2057); Rob. of Brunne, tr.
of Langtoft, p. 323.—OF. agrever, to overwhelm.—OF. a, to; and
grever, to burden, injure. =L. ad, to; graudre, to weigh down, from
grauis, heavy. See Grave. @ Aggrieve is thus nearly a doublet of
aggravate,

AGHAST, struck with horror. (E.) Misspelt, and often misin-
terpreted. Rightly spelt agast. [Appearing as agazed in Shak.
1 Hen. VI, i. 1. 126, ‘ All the whole army stood agazed on him ;’
evidently with the notion that it is connected with gaze.) Shake-
speare did not write this line, as he rightly has gas¢ed for ‘frightened’
in Lear, ii. 1. 57; a word which is often now misspelt ghasted. 1,
ME. agasten, to terrify, of which the pp. is both agasted and agast;
and examples of the latter are numerous. See Matzner, Altenglische
Sprachproben (Worterbuch), ii. 41. In Wyclif’s Bible, Luke xxiv.
37, we have ‘ Thei, troublid and agast, where one MS. has agasted.
‘He was abasched and agast;’ K. Alisaunder, .ed. Weter, 1. 224.
‘So sore agast was Emelye;’ Chaucer, C. T. 2343 (A 2241). ‘ What
may hit be That meagasteth in my dreme?’ Leg. of Good Wom, Dido,
248. ‘The deouel schal 3et agestex ham’ =the devil shall yet terrify
them; Ancren’Riwle, p.212. 2. Thesimple form gasten also occurs.
‘Gaste crowen from his corn’=to frighten crows from his corn;
P. Plowman, A. vii. 129.—AS. intensive prefix d-; and g@stan, to ter-
rify, hence, to frighten by torture, torment; ‘hie g&ston godes cempan
garé and ligé’ = they tortured God’s champions with spear and flame 5
Juliana, 17; Grein, i. 374. The vowel-change in AS. gé@stan, EE.
gesten, later gasten, is Just parallel to that in AS. /éstan, EE. lesten,
mod. E. last. The final ¢in the base gés-t- answers to Idg. -d-, which
appears to be anaddition to the root. B. Hence the root is an AS.
g@s-, answering to Goth. gais-, to terrify, which appears in the com-
pound ws-gaisjan, to make afraid. See Brugmann, 1. § 816 (2); and
see Ghastly. @ With the form agazed compare: ‘the were so sore
agased’=they were so sorely terrified; Chester Plays, ed. T, Wright,
li. 85.

AGILE, active. (F.—L.) Shak. has agile once ;. Romeo, ili. 1,
171.—F. agile, which Cotgrave explains by ‘nimble, agile, active,’
&c.—L, agilis, nimble, lit. moveable, easily ‘driven about; formed
with suffix -ilis from agere, to drive.—4/AG, to drive. See Agent.
Der. agil-ity, from F. agilité (Cotgrave); from L. agilitatem, acc.
of agilitas. F ; f


AGIO


AGIO, difference of value in exchanging money. (Ital.) In Bailey,
yol. ii (1731). Ital. agio, ease, convenience. :
-AGISTMENT, the pasturage of cattle by agreement. (F.—L.)
See Halliwell; Blount gives a reference for the word, anno 6 Hen. VI.
eap. 5, and instances the verb to agis¢ and the sbs. agistor, agistage.
All the terms are Law French. The F. verb agister occurs in the
Year-Books of Edw. IJ, vol. iii. 231; agistement in the same, iii. 23 ;
and agistours, pl. in the Statutes of the Realm, vol. i. p. 161, an. 1311.
The sbs. are from the vb. agister, lit. to assign a resting-place or
lodging. =F. a (L. ad), to; and OF. giste, ‘a bed, couch, lodging,
place to lie on or to rest in,’ Cotgrave. This OF. giste=mod. E.
joist; see Joist,

AGITATH, to stir violently. (L.) Shak. has agitation, Macb. v.
I,12. Agitate is used by Cotgrave to translate F. agiter.—L. agit-
Glus, pp. of agitire, to agitate; which is the frequentative of agere,
to drive. See Agent. Der. agitat-ion, agitat-or.

AGLET, a tag of a lace; a spangle. (F.—L.) Spenser has aygw-
let, F. Q. ii. 3.26. Sir T. More aglet, Works, p. 675 h. ‘Agglot, or an
aglet to lace wyth-alle;’ -Prompt. Parv.=—F. aiguidlette, a point (Cot-
grave), dimin. of aiguille, a needle; formed by adding the dimin.
fem. suffix -ette,— Late L. acticula, for acicula, dimin. of L. acus, a
needle. —4/AK, to pierce. See Acid, Acme.

AGN AIL, a corn on the foot (obsolete); ‘a ‘hang-nail.’ (E.) Much
turns on the definition. In Ash’s Dictionary, we find it to be ‘the
disease called a witlow (sic)’; but in Todd’s Johnson it is ‘a disease
of the nails ; a whitlow; an inflammation round the nails ;’ without
any citation or authority. The latter definition proves that the de-
finer was thinking of the provincial E. hangzails, more correctly ang-
nails, explained by Halliwell to be ‘small pieces of partially separated
skin about the roots of the finger-nails ;’ an explanation due to a per-
verted meaning (by popular etymology) of AS. angnegl, of which
the orig. sense seems to have been a corn on the foot, a compressed,
painful, round-headed excrescence fixed in the flesh like an iron nail ;
see E,D. D. and N.E.D., s.v. agnail. Cf. A.S. Leechdoms, ii. 81,
§ 34. B. The old word agzail really meant a swelling ora corn, It
means ‘a corn’ in Rider’s Dictionary, A.D. 1640 (Webster); especially
used of a corn on the foot. Palsgrave has ‘ agnayle upon ones too;’
and in MS. Med. Linc. fol. 300 is a receipt ‘for agnayls one [on]
mans fete or womans’ (Halliwell). The fuller form is angnail; see
E.D.D. \y. The sense was much perverted; partly (perhaps) by
confusion with MF, angonailles, which Cotgrave explains by ‘ botches,
pockie bumps, or sores ;’ partly by comparison with late Gk. mapo-
vuxia, late L. paronychia (Pliny, xxi. 20), as if the reference were to
a sore beside the finger-nail ; but chiefly by losing sight of the original
sense of ‘iron nail’ or ‘spike.’ The etymology is from AS. ang-,
painful, compressed, as in ang-sum, narrow, hard ; and xegl, an (iron)
nail,spike. See Anger, Anguish, and Nail. E. Miller cites, as
cognate words, OHG. uwagnagel, prov. G. anneglen, einneglen, O. Fries.
ongneil, ogneil.

AGNATEH, allied; as sb.,a kinsman. (L.) ‘ Agnation, kindred;’
Phillips (1658).—L. agndt-us, allied; pp. of agnasci=ad-gnasci.—L.,
ad, to; nasci, earlier form gnasci, to be born. See Natal.

AGNOSTIC, one who disclaims knowledge of what is behind
material phenomena. (Gk.) First used in 1869 (N.E.D.). From
Gk. d-, negative prefix; and Gnostic.

AGO, AGONG, gone away, past. (E.) [Distinct from ygo, the
old pp. ofgo.] ME.ago, agon, agoon; common, and used by Chaucer,
C.T., A1782. This is the pp. of the verb agén, to go away, pass
by. ‘Thus we find ‘ pis worldes wele al agoth’ =this world’s wealth
all passes away; Reliquize Antique, i. 160.—AS. adgan, to pass away
(not uncommon) ; Grein, i. 20.—AS. d-, prefix, away; and gan, to
go. See Go. Cf. G. ergehen, to come to pass; Goth. us-gaggan,
to go forth.

AGOG, in eagerness; hence, eager. (F.) Well known as occur-
ring in Cowper’s John Gilpin; ‘all agog,’i.e. alleager. Gog signi-
fies eagerness, desire; and is so used by Beaumont and Fletcher:
“you have put me into such a gog of going, I would not stay for all
the world;” Wit Without Money, iii.1; neartheend. To ‘set agog’
is to put in eagerness, to make one eager or anxious to do a thing.
A-gog, for on gog, is an adaptation of the F. phrase en gogues (Littré),
lit. ‘in mirth.’ Cotgrave has es/re en ses gogues, ‘ to be frolick, ...in
a veine of mirth.’ Cf. Norm. dial. ex gogwe, mirthful, goguer, to be
mirthful (Moisy). The origin of OF. gogue, mirth, diversion, is un-
known. (Perhaps cf. Breton gége, trickery, raillery.)

AGONY, great pain. (F.—L.—Gk.) The use of agonie by
Gower, C. A. i. 74 (bk. i. 968) shows that the word was not derived
directly from Gk., but from French. Wyclif employs agonye in Luke
xxii. 43, where the Vulgate has ‘factus in agonia.’=T’. agonie (Cot-
grave).—L. agénia, borrowed from Gk. dywvia, agony; orig. a con-
test, wrestling, struggle.—Gk. dywy, (1) an assembly, (2) an arena
for combatants, (3) a’contest, wrestle. — Gk. aye, to drive, lead. =


AIL


WAG, to drive. See Agent, Der. agonise, from F. agoniser, ‘to
grieve extreamly, to be much perplexed’ (Cotgrave) ; whence agonis-
ing, agonis-ing-ly; Agonistes, directly from Gk. dyaorns, a champion.
Also ant-ayon-ist, ant-agon-istic, ant-agon-ism.

AGOUTT, a rodent animal, of the guinea-pig family. (F.—Span.
—Brazil.) Spelt agouty in Bailey, vol. ii. (1731).—F. agouti. — Span.
aguti.— Brazil. acuti, aguti; Hist. Nat. Brasiliz, ii, 224.

AGRAFFE, a kind of clasp. (F.—OHG.) In Scott, Ivanhoe,
ch. 8.—F, agrafe, also agraphe (Cot.), a hook, clasp; agrafer, to
clasp. The verb is from F. a, for L. ad, to; and MHG. krapfe, OHG.
crapo, chrapfo, a hook, which is allied to E. cramp.

AGRARIAN, pertaining to land. (L.) ‘The Agrarian Law;’
Phillips (1658).—L. agrdri-us, pertaining to land; with suffix -an
(L. -anus).—L. agr-, for ager, field; with suffix -drius. See Acre.

AGREE, to accord. (F.—L). ME, agreén, to assent. ‘ That
.-. Ye wolde somtyme freendly on mesee And thanne agreén that I
may ben he ;’ Chaucer, Troilus, iii, 131. Chaucer also has agreablely,
graciously, tr. of Boethius, bk. ii. pr. 4. 92, whence mod. E. agree-
ably. = OF. agreer, to receive favourably ; a verb made up from the
phrase @ gre,—OF. @ gre, favourably, according to one’s pleasure ;
composed of prep. @, according to (L. ad), and gre, also gret, greit,
pleasure, from L. neuter grdtum, an obligation, favour; from grdatus,
pleasing.. See Grateful. Der. agree-able (F.), agree-able-ness,
agree-ment; also dis-agree, dis-agree-able, dis-agree-ment. E

AGRICULTURE, the art of cultivating fields. (L.) Used by
Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, bk. vi.c. 3. § 7. L. agricultira (Cicero),
=L. agrit, gen. of ager, a field; cultura, culture. Ager is cognate
with E. acre; cultura is from L. colere, to till,-pp. cult-us. See Acre
and Culture. Der. agricultur-al, agricultur-tst.

AGRIMONY, a plant. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME, agremoine, egre-
moine, Chaucer, C. T. 16268 (G 800).—MF. agrimoine, aigremoime,
‘agrimony, or-egrimony ;’ Cot.— Late L. agrimonia, corruption of L.
argemonia, a plant, Pliny, xxv. 9 (Lewis). We also find L. argemdné,
Pliny, xxvi. 9, answering to a.Gk. dpyepwrn.

AGROUND, on the ground. (E.) For oz ground. ‘On grounde
and on lofte,’ i.e. aground and aloft; Piers Plowman, A. i. 88; the
B-text reads ‘ agrounde and aloft,’ i. go.

AGUE, a fever-fit, (F.—L.) ME. agu, ague. Spelt agu in Rich.
Coer de Lion, ed. Weber, 1. 3046. ‘Brennyng agues,’ P. Plowman,
B. xx. 83. ‘Agwe, sekenes, acuta, querquera;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 8.
‘A fever terciane Or an agu;’ Chaucer, C. T. 14965 (B 4149). —OF.
ague, sharp, acute, fem. of agu (mod. F. aigu).—L. acuta, fem. of
aciitus, acute. The explanation is found in Ducange, who speaks
of ‘febris actita,’ a violent fever; the Prompt. Pary. gives L. acita as
the equivalent of ME. agwe. 4/AK, tobe sharp. See Acute.

AFL! an interjection. (F.—L.) Not in AS.‘ He bleynte and cryde
a! As though he stongen were unto the herte,’ Chaucer, C. T. 1080
(A 1078). In the r2th century we find a wah or a wey, i.e. ah! woe!
See Old Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris,i.25,29. —OF. a, interjection. = L.
ah, interjection.+Gr. d, int.; Skt. a, int.; Icel. @, ai, int.; OHG.a,
int. ; Lithuanian a, a d, int. See Fick,i. 4. We also find ME.a ka!
asin Towneley Myst. p. 214. This is formed by combining a with
ha! Matzner remarks that aha! in Mid. English denotes satisfaction
orirony. See Ha!

AHEAD, in front. (E.) Prob. for on head, where on signifies in,
as common in ME; cf. afoot, abed, &c. Used by Milton, on the
Doctrine of Divorce (R.); and Dryden, Ain., bk. v. 1.206. See Head.

AHOY, interj. esp. used in hailing a boat. (E.) The prefixed.a-
is here a mere interjectional addition, to give the word more force;
and oy! is a natural exclamation, which occurs in P. Plowman, C. 1x.
123; where the B-text has Aow! and the A-text has key! Cf.mod. E. fi /

AT, a three-toed sloth. (Brazil.) Brazil. ai, a kind of sloth; Hist.
Nat. Brasiliz, ii. 221. Named from its cry.

AID, to help. (F.—L.) Palsgrave has: ‘I ayde orhelpe;’ p. 419.
-OF, aider, to aid.—L. adviitare, to aid, in Late L. aziitare, after-
wards shortened to aitare; see Brachet. Advitare is the frequent.
form of ad:uudre, to assist. =L.ad, to; and iwuare, to help, pp. :atus.
Cf. Brugm, ii. § 583. See Adjutant. Der. ad, sb. ; also F. aide-
de-camp, lit. one who aids in the field. From the same root, adjutant.

AIGRETTH, a tuft of feathers (ong. those of the egret) ; a spray
of gems. (F.-OHG.) ‘ Aigrettes by Omrahs worn, Wrought of rare
gems ;’ Scott, Vision of Don Roderick, 1i. 31.—F. aigrette, the lesser
white heron; see Egret.

AIL, to feel pain; to give pain. (E.) ME. eden, rarely ailen. ‘ What
eyleth thee ?? Chaucer,C.T., A 1081. Spelt e3/en, Ormulum, 4767. AS.
eglan, to trouble, pain; Grein, i. 222. From AS. egle, troublesome,
hostile.-+-Goth. agian, only in the comp. us-ag/jan, to distress, to weary
out, Luke, xviii. 5 ; from aglus, difficult, hard ; cf.ag/6,anguish ; aglitha,
tribulation. Froma stem ag-, with Idg.adj. suffix -lw- ; see Brugmann,
ii. § 107. The stem ag- appears in Icel. ag-i, mod. E.awe, and in AS.
eg'-esa, awe, terror, distress, eg-sian, to frighten; also in Goth. ag-zs,


dl


12 AIM


fright, af-ag-jan, to terrify; also in Gk. dx-os, distress, pain. See Awe.
Der. ail-ment, in Kersey, a hybrid compound, with F. suffix. _

_ AIM, to endeavour after. (F.—L.) ME. amen, aimen, eimen, to
guess at, to estimate, to intend. ‘No mon vpon mold might ayme
thenumber;’ Will. of Palerne, 1596, 3819, 3875. Wyclif has eymeth,
Levit. xxvii. 8. ‘Gessyn or amyn, estimo, arbitror;’ Prompt. Parv.
p. 190. ‘I ayme, I mente or gesse to hyt a thynge;’ Palsgrave.
‘After the mesure and eymyng [L.zestimationem ] of the synne;’ Wycl.
Levit. v. 18; cf. xxvii. 2, 8.—OF. aesmer, to estimate; prob. confused
with esmer (without a-, prefix). [Cotgrave has ‘esmer, to aime, or
levell at; to make an offer to strike, to purpose, determine, intend ;’
also ‘ esme, an aime, or levell taken; also, a purpose, intention, deter-
mination.’] The s was dropped in English before m just as in blame,
from OF. blasmer, emerald from OF. esmeralde, ammell (i.e. en-amel/)
from OF. esmail (translated by Cotgrave, ‘ammell or enammell’), &c.
The OF. esmer=L. e@stimare, but OF. aesmer =, adestimare ; yet
they may have been confused. There was also a form eesmer, by-form
of aesmer. See examples in Godefroy... ad-; and e@stimare, to esti-
mate. See Hstimate. Der. aim, sb., aim-less.

AIR (1), the atmosphere, &c. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. air, eir. Spelt
ayr in Mandeville’s Travels, p. 312; eyre in Chaucer, C. T., G 767
(Can. Yeom. Tale). =F. air, air. =—L. der, air.—Gk. anp, air, mist ;
allied to dnps, I blow; see Prellwitz. Cf. Skt. va, to blow, and E.
wind, q.v. Der. air, verb, air-y, air-less, air-gun, &c.

ATR (2), demeanour; tune; anaffected manner. (F.—L.—Gk.)
As in the phrase ‘to give oneself airs,’ &c. ‘ His very air ;’ Shak.
Wint. Tale, v. 1. 128.—F. air, mien, tune (see Cot.). Affected by
Ital. aria, ‘a looke, ...atune;’ Florio.—L. deria, fem. of derius,
adj. formed from Gér.— Gk. dnp, air. See Air (1).

AIRT, a point of the compass. (Gael.) In Burns, I love my Jean,
1.1; ME. art, Blind Harry, Wallace, i. 309. — Gael. aird, a quarter or
point of the compass. Cf. O. Irish aird, a point, limit, Some com-
pare Gk. dp5is, a point.

AISLE, the wing of.a church. (F.—L.) Spelt aisle in Gray’s
Elegy and by Addison; see Richardson. Spelt ele in 1370; ell in
1410; also dle, isle.m F. aile,a wing. = L. ala, a wing ; the long a being
due to contraction. It is no doubt contracted from *axla or *acsla,
whence the dimin. axilla, a wing; see Cicero, Orat. 45.153; Brugm.
i. § 490. The proper meaning of *acsla is rather ‘ shoulder-blade’ or
“shoulder;’ cf. G. achsel. It is a diminutive of L. axis, a word bor-
rowed by us from that language. See Axisand Axle. (Max Miiller
quotes the passage from Cicero; see his Lectures, ii. 309, 8th ed.)
@ The word ais/e was confused with Late L. ascella, a form of axilla ;
with F. isle (L.izsula), to which word it owes its present pronunciation ;
and even with E. alley; see N.E.D. Thespelling is a cross between
aile and isle, :

AIT, a small island. (E.) ME. eit, eit; Layamon, 1117, 23873.
From *éget, by-form of yget, AF. form of AS. iggad, igeod, an island,
from AS. ig, O.Merce. ég, island; see Hyotand Island. The form
yget occurs in Kemble, Cod. Dipl. v. 17, 1. 30.

AITCH-BONE, the rump-bone. (Hybrid; F.—L. and E.)
Miss Baker, in her Northamp. Gloss., gives ‘ aitch-bone, the extreme
end of a rump of beef, cut obliquely.’ It also appears as edge-bone
(Webster), ice-bone (Forby), zache-bone (Carr’s Craven Glossary). All
the forms are corruptions of nache-bone, i.e. rump-bone. The nache
is ‘the point of the rnmp;’ Old Country Words, E.D.S.,p.97. We
find zache also in Fitzherbert’s Husbandry (Glossary); and zack ir
G, Markham’s Husbandry (Of Oxen). The earliest example I have
found is hach-boon, Book of St. Albans, leaf f 3, back, 1.8; A.D. 1486.
=—OF. nache, sing. of naches, the buttocks (Godefroy). = Late L. nati-
eas, acc. of natice, buttocks; not in Ducange, but cited by Roquefort.
Dimin, of L. zatés, pl. of natis, the rump. Allied to Gk. v@rov, the
back. 4 Dr. Murray draws my attention to the fact that Mr. Nicol
obtained this etymology (independently) in 1878; see Minutes of
Meetings of Phil. Soc. Feb. 1, 1878.

AJAR, on the turn; only used of a door or window. (E.) A cor-
ruption of a-char, which again stands for on char, i.e. on the turn;
from ME. char, a turn.

‘Quhairby the day was dawin, weil I knew;...
Ane schot-wyndo vnschet a lytill on char,
Persawit the mornyng bla, wan, and har.’
G. Douglas, tr. of Virgil; Prol. to Book vii. 129.

It means ‘I undid a shot-window, a little ajar. The ME. char was
earlier spelt cherre, as in the Ancren Riwle, pp. 36, 408; it is not
tmcommon; see Stratmann.—AS. on cerre, on cyrre, on the turn;
where cerre is the dat. case of cerr, a turn, turning, time, period; cf. AS.
cerran, cirran, cyrran, to turn; Grein, i. 156,161, 180.4-OHG. chérren
(G. kehren), to turn,

AKIMBO, ina bent position. (Scand.?) Inthe Tale of Beryn,ed.Fur-
nivall, oddly spelt in kenebowe ; ‘The host ..set his hond ix kenebowe ;’
1, 1838 (1.1105 in Urry). Cotgrave, s.v. Arcade, has ‘to set his hands


ALB


a-kenbow. Dryden uses kimbo as an adj. in the sense of ‘bent,’
‘curved.’ ‘The 4imbo handles seem with bears-foot carved;’ Virgil,
Ecl. 3. a. It is clear that ix kenebowe, lit. in a sharp curve, is a cor=
ruption, because kexe in ME. is not used to denote ‘sharp’ in such
a context. Also iz is here a translation of the older form oz, of which
a is a shortened form (through the intermediate form az). B. Cf. prove
E, a-kingbow, akimbow, in E. D. D., s. v. kingbow, which suggests
that it arose from Icel. 2 keng, ‘into a crook;” with the E. bow neede
lessly added. Here keng is the acc. of kengr, a crook, twist, kink, Cf
Icel. kengboginn, bent into a crook. See Kink,

AKIN, of kin. (E.) For of kin; ‘near of kin’ and ‘near akin’ are
equivalent expressions. A- for of occurs in Adown, q.v.

ALABASTER, a kind of soft marble. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Ala-
baster, a stone;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 8. Wyclif has ‘a boxe of alabastre’
in Mark xiv. 3, borrowed from the Vulgate word alabastrum.=OF.
alabastre (F. albdire).—L. alabastrum, alabaster, alabaster. = Gk. GAd-
Baotpos, dAdBaorpov, alabaster, more properly written dAaBaoros.
Said to be derived from Alabastron, the name of a town in Egypt;
see Pliny, Nat. Hist. 36. 8, 37. 10. Another suggestion is to derive
the Gk. forms from Arab. al-basrah; where basrah means ‘ whitish
stones, earth out of which they dig stones, also the city of Bassora ;”
Rich. Dict. p. 275. (Zeitschrift der deutschen Morgenlandischen
Gesellschaft, xxv. 528.)

ALACK, interjection. (E.) Very common in Shakespeare; Temp.
i. 2, 1513; L.L. L. ii. 186, &c. From ME. a, ah! interjection;
and lak, signifying loss, failure, defect, misfortune. ‘God in the
gospel grymly repreueth Alle that Jakkex any lyf, and Jakkes han
hem-selue’ = God grimly reproves all that blame anybody, and
have faults themselves; P. Plowman, B. x. 262. Thus alack
would mean ‘ah! failure’ or ‘ah! a loss;’ and alackaday would
stand for ‘ah! lack on (the) day,’ i.e. ah! a loss to-day! It is
almost always used to express failure. Cf. alack the day! Shak.
Pass. Pilgrim, 227. In modern English Jack seldom has this sense,
but merely expresses ‘ want.’ {

ALACRITY, briskness. (L.) Sir T. More has alacritie, Works,
p-75 b. [The word must have been borrowed directly from the Latin,
the termination being determined by analogy with such words as
bounty (from OF. bonte, bontet, L. acc. bonitatem). This we know be-
cause the MF. form was alaigreté, which see in Cotgrave; the form
alacrité being modern.|—L. acc. alacritaiem, from nom. alacritas,
briskness. —L. alacer, brisk. Perhaps from 4/EL, to drive, Fick, i.
500; he compares Gk. éAavvev, éAdev, to drive. @ The Ital. allegro
is likewise from L. alacer.

ALARM, a call to arms. (F.—Ital.—L.) ME. alarme, used in-
terjectionally, to call men to arms. ‘ Alarme! Alarme! quath that
lord;’ P. Plowman, C. xxiii. 92. —F. alarme, a call to arms, Cot-
grave gives ‘Alarme, an alarum.’ Brachet says that the word alarme
was first introduced into French in the 16th century, but this must be
a mistake, as it occurs in the Glossary to Bartsch’s Crestomathie, and
came to England before 1400. The form, however, is not French, as
the OF. form was as armes; and we actually find as armesin Alisaunder,
ed. Weber, 3674. It was obviously borrowed from Italian, and may
have become generally known in the crusades. = Ital. al? arme,to arms!
a contracted form of alle arme, where alle stands for a Je, lit. ‘ to the,’
and arme is the pl. of arma, a weapon, not now used in the singular.
The corresponding Latin words would be ad illa arma, but it is re-
markable that the L. pl. arma is neuter, whilst the Ital. pl. arme is
feminine. Ducange, however, notes a Late L. sing. arma, ofthe feminine
gender ; and thus Ital. all’arme answers to Late L. ad illas armas. See
Arms, Der.alarm-ist. @ Alarm is a doublet of alarum, q.v.

ALARUM, a call to arms; aloud sound. (F.—Ital.—L.) ME,
alarom ; mention is made of a ‘loude alarom’ in Allit. Poems, ed.
Morris, B. 1207. The o is no real part of the word, but due to the
strong trilling of the preceding r. Similarly in Havelok the Dane,
the word arm is twice written arum, ll. 1982, 2408; harm is written
harum, and corn is written koren. Thus alarom is really the word
alarm, which see above.

ALAS, an interjection, expressing sorrow. (F.—L.) ME. alas,
allas, Occursin Rob. of Glouc. p. 125, 1. 2670; Havelok, l. 1878. —
OF. alas, interjection. [The mod. F. has only #élas, formed with
inter). hé in place of the interj. a, the second member Jas being
often used as an interjection in OF. without either prefix. ]—OF. a, ah!
and das / wretched (that I am)! Cf. Ital. aki lasso (or lassa), ah}!
wretched (that lam)!—L. ak! interj. and Jassus, fatigued, miserable.
See Brugm. i. § 197, where he supposes Jassus to stand for *lad-tus, and
compares it with Goth. dats, which is the E. late, See Late. ;

ALB, a white priestly vestment. (F.—L.) ME. albe, Rob. of
Brunne’s tr. of Langtoft, p. 319; and in O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris,
ii, 163. —OF. albe, an alb.= Late L. alba, an alb; fem. of L. albus,
white. Cf. Gk. dAdds, a white rash; OHG. elbiz, a swan; see
Brugm, i, § 481. Cf. album, albumen.


ie?


ALBACORE


ALBACORE, a kind of tunny. (Port.—Arab.?) ‘The fish which
is called aldocore;’ Hakluyt, Voy. ii. pt. 2. p. 100.— Port. albacor,
albacora (Span. albacora),. Said to be of Arab. origin (N. E. D.).

ALBATROSS, a: large sea-bird. (Port.—Span.—Arab.—Gk.)
The word occurs in Hawkesworth’s Voyages, A.D. 1773 (Todd’s
Johnson). ‘The name albatross is a word apparently corrupted by
Dampier (died 1712] from the Portuguese alcatraz, which was applied
by the early navigators of that nation to cormorants and other sea-
birds ;? Eng. Cyclopedia. [Dampier, Voy. i. 531, has algatrosses ;
N. E.D.) And Drayton has alcatraz, in his poem named The Owl. =
Portuguese alcatraz,asea fowl; Span. alcatraz,a pelican. Variant of
Port. alcatruz, a bucket, Span. arcaduz, M.Span. alcaduz (Minsheu),
a bucket on a water-wheel. = Arab. al-gadiis, the same (Dozy). [Simi-
larly, Arab. sagqa, a water-carrier, a pelican, because it carries water in
its pouch (Devic; supp. to Littré).] Finally, Arab. gadis is from
Gk. «ddos, a jar, cask.

ALBEIT, although it may be. (E.) ME. al be it, Cursor Mundi,
4978. From ME. al, in the sense ‘although;’ be, subj. mood, pres.
t.; and it,

ALBINO, a human being with skin and hair abnormally white, and
pink eyes. (Span.—L.) Applied to some negroes by the Portuguese
(1777; N.E.D.); but the word is rather Spanish.—Span. albino,
‘born with very white hair and a white skin;’ Pineda. = L. alb-us,
white; with suffix -izvs. See Alb.

ALBUM, a white book. (L.)
albus, white. See Alb.

ALBUMEN, white of eggs. (L.) Merely borrowed from L.
albimen Oui, the white of an egg, rarely used. More commonly
album Oui. From L. albus, white (whence albii-men, lit. whiteness).
See Alb. Der. albumin-ous.

ALCAYDE, a judge. See Cadi.

ALCHEMY, the science of transmutation of metals. (F.—Arab.
—Gk.) Chaucer has alkamistre, an alchemist; C.T.,G1204. The
usual ME. forms of the word are alkenamye and alconomye; P. Plow-
man, A. xi. 157; Gower, C.A. ii. 89 (bk. iv. 2612); where the mistaken
suffix -onomye is imitated from that of astr-onomye. =OF. alchemie, ar-
quemie; see arquemie in Roquefort.— Arab. al-kim2a; in Freytag, iv.
75 b, Rich. Dict. p. 1224; a word from no Arabic root, but composed
of the Arabic def. article al, prefixed to the late Gk. xnpeta, i.e. ‘trans-
mutation’ of gold and silver, occurring about A.D. 300 (N.E. D.).
—Late Gk. xnpela, transmutation of metals, alchemy, chemistry,
a word of uncertain origin, which was confused with Gk. xupeia, a
mingling, from Gk. xéev, to pour (root xev), cognate with fundere.
See Chemist. See N.E.D.; and Devic.

ALCOHOL, pure spirit. (Low L.—Arabic.) From Low L. alco-
hol, the original signification of which is a fine, impalpable powder.
‘If the same salt shall be reduced into alcohol, as the chymists speak,
or an impalpable powder, the particles and intercepted spaces will be
extremely lessened ;’ Boyle (in Todd’s Johnson). = Arab. alkofl, com-
pounded of a/, the definite article, and ko//, the (very fine) powder of
antimony, used to paint the eyebrows with ; from kafala, to stain the
eyes; cf. Heb. kakhal (the same), Gesenius, p.376. And see T. L.O.
Davies, Supplementary Glossary. See Richardson’s Dict. p. 1173; cf.
kuhl,collyrium; Palmer’s Pers. Dict.col. 484. The extension of mean-
ing from ‘ fine powder’ to ‘ rectified spirit’ is European, not Arabic.
Der. alcohol-ic, alcohol-ize.

ALCORAN ;'see KORAN. (AI is the Arabic def. article.)

ALCOVE, a recess, anarbour, (F.—Span.— Arabic.) ‘The Ladies
stood within the alcove ;’ Burnet, Hist. of His Own Time, an. 1688
(R.) =F. aleéve, a word introduced in the 16th century from Spanish.
= Span. alcoba, a recess ina room ; ‘aclose room for a bed;’ Minsheu
(1623).— Arab. al, def. article, and gobbak, a vaulted space or tent;
Freytag, iii. 388. a; gubbah, a vault, arch, dome; Palmer’s Pers. Dict.
col. 467. See Alcova in Diez, whose explanation is quite satisfactory.
@ Not to be confused with E. cove.

ALDER, a kind of tree. (E.) Chaucer has alder, C.T. 2923 (Kn.
Ta. 2063). ‘ Aldyr-ire or oryelle tre, alnus;’ Prompt. Pary. p.g. [The
letter-d is, however, excrescent, as in alder-first for aller-jirst, i.e. first of
all; or as in alder-liefest, used by Shakespeare for aller-liefest. Hence
the older form is aller.] ‘Coupet de aunne, of allerne;’? Wright’s
Vocabularies, i. 171; 13th century. — AS. alr, an alder-tree = L. alnus;
fElfric’s Glossary, Nomina Arborum ; also alor, aler.4-Du. els, alder;
elzen, aldern; elzen-boom, alder tree; Icel. dlr, an alder); Swed. al;
Dan. elle, el; OHG. elira, erila, erla; MUG. erle; G.erle; prov. G.
eller, else; Span. aliso (from Gothic). Teut.types *aluz-, *aliz-. Allied
to L. alnus; Lithuanian alksnis (with excrescent £), an alder-tree;
Church-Slavonic jelikha, an alder-tree ; Russian olékha, Perhaps allied
to Elm.

ALDER., prefix, of all. (E.) As in alder-liefest, dearest of all,
2 Hen. VI,i. 1. 28. For ME. aller, alre,O. Merc. a/ra, AS. ealra, gen.
pl. of al, eal, all; see ALL. -


L. album, a tablet, neuter of


ALIGHT 13


ALDERMAN, a chief officer in the corporation of a town. (E.)
ME. aldermon, alderman. ‘Princeps, aldermon;’ Wright's Vocabu-
laries, 538; 12th century. Spelt aldermon in Layamon, i. 60. =
O. Merc. and Northumbrian aldormon, used to explain centurio in Mark,
xv. 39, and occurring in many other passages in the Northumbrian
glosses; West-Saxon ealdor-man, a chief. See Turner’s Hist. of
the Anglo-Saxons, bk. viii. c. 7.— AS. ealdor, aldor, a chief (Grein, i.
241); and man,aman, Allied to O. Fries. aldirmon, a chief; alder,
aparent; G.eltern, parents; L. al-tor, a bringer up, from alere, to
nourish. E, old is from the same root; see Old.

ALE, a kind of beer. (E.) ME. ale, Reliquie Antique, i. 177;
Layamon, ii. 604. AS. ealu, Grein, i. 244 (gen. alop) ; stem *alut.4Icel.
ol; Swed. 61; Dan. 61; Lithuanian alus, a kind of beer; Church-Sla-
vonic olu, beer. 4 See Fick, iii.57. [The nature of the connexion
with Gaelic and Irish ol, drink, is not clear.] Der. brid-al, i.e. bride-
ale; ale-stake (Chaucer), ale-house, ale-wife, ale-conner (see Con),

ALEMBIC, a vessel formerly used for distilling. (F.—Span.—
Arab.—Gk.) Also limbeck, as in Shak. Macb. i. 7. 67, but that is a
docked form. Chaucer has the pl. alembykes, C.T., G794.—F. alam-
bique, ‘a limbeck, a stillatory;” Cot.—Span. alambigue.— Arab. al-
anbig; where al is the definite article, and anbig (pron. ambiq) is
‘a still,’ adapted from the Greek. = Gk. dyfix-, stem of duBig, a cup,
goblet, used by Dioscorides to mean the cap of a still.

ALERT, on the watch. (F.—Ital.—L.) Alertness, Spectator, no.
566. ‘The prince, finding his rutters [knights] alerz, as the Italians
say,’ &c.; Sir R. Williams, Actions of the Low Countries, 1618, p. 27
(R.).—F. alerte, formerly allerte, and in Montaigne and Rabelais
a Verte, & Vherte, on the watch; originally a military term, borrowed
from Italian in the 16th century (Brachet).—Ital. al/’erta, on the
watch ; properly in the phrase stare all’erta, to be on one’s guard. =
Ital. alla (for a Ja), at the, on the; and erta, fem. of adj. erto, erect. =
L. ad, prep., at; i/lam, fem. accus. of ille, he ; and érectam, fem. accus.
of @rectus, erect. See Hreet. 4 The phrase ‘on the alert’ contains
a reduplication; it means ‘ on-the-at-the-erect.’ Der. alert-ness.

ALGEBRA, calculation by symbols, (Low L.—Arab.) It occurs
in Ben Jonson, ‘The Alchemist, i. 1. 38. Brachet (s.v. algébre) terms
algebra a medieval scientific Latin form; and Prof. De Morgan, in
Notes and Queries, 3 S. ii. 319, cites a Latin poem of the 13th century
in which ‘ computation’ is oddly called ‘ludus algebre almucgrabale-
que. $B. This phrase is a corruption of Arab. al jabr wa al mogabalah,
lit. the putting-together-of-parts and the equation, to which the near-
est equivalent English phrase is ‘ restoration and reduction.’ -y. In
Palmer’s Pers. Dictionary, col. 165, we find ‘ Arabic jabr, power, vio-
lence ; restoration, setting a bone; reducing fractions to integers in
Arithmetic ; aljabr wa lmuqdabalah, algebra.’ = Arab, jabara, to set or
re-unite a bone, to bind together, to consolidate. Mugabalah is lit.
‘comparison ;’ from the root gabala, he approached; Rich. Dict., pp.
494, 1114, 1465. Der. algebra-ic, algebra-ic-al, algebra-ist.

ALGUAZIL, a police-officer. (Span.—Arab.) In Beaum. and
Fletcher, Span. Curate, v. 2.—Span. alguacil, a police-officer; spelt
alguazil in Minshew’s Dict., 1623. — Arab. al, def.art., the; and wazir,
a vizier, officer, lieutenant. Cf. Port. alvasil. See Vizier.

ALGUM, the name ofatree; sandal-wood. (Heb,—Skt.) Called
algum in 2 Chron. ii. 8, ix. 10, IL; corrupted to almug in 1 Kings, x.
11, 12.—Heb. algummim; or (transposed) almugim. A foreign word
in Hebrew, and borrowed from some Indo-germanic source, being
found in Sanskrit as valguka, sandal-wood. ‘This valguka, which
points back to a more original form valgw [for the syllable -ka is a
suffix], might easily have been corrupted by Phenician and Jewish
sailors into algwm, a form, as we know, still further corrupted, at least
in one passage of the Old Testament, into almug. Sandal-wood is
found indigenous in India only, and there chiefly on the coast of
Malabar;’ Max Miiller, Lectures, i. 232, 8th ed.

ALIAS, otherwise. (L.) Law Latin; alias, otherwise; from alius,
another. From the same root as E. else. See Alien and Else.

ALIBI, in another place. (L.) Law Latin alibi, in another


| place, elsewhere. = L. ali-us, another; for the suffix, cf. L. z-d:, there,


u-bi, where. See above.

ALIEN, strange; a stranger. (F.—L.) We find ‘an aliene
knyght;’ K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1. 3919. Wyclif has alyems, i.e.
strangers, Matt. xvii. 24; also ‘an alien womman,’ Ecclus. xi. 36.
‘Aliens suld sone fond our heritage to wynne;’ Rob. of Brunne, tr. of
Langtoft, p.141. = OF. alien, allien, astranger (Roquefort). — L.aliénus,
a stranger; or as adj., strange. = L. alivs, another (stem ali-, whence
ali-enus is formed). + Gk. dAAos, another; Goth, aljis (stem aljo-),
other; Old Irish az/e, another, Brugm.i. § 175. See Else. Der.
alien-able, alien-ate, alien-at-ion ; cf. al-ter, al-ter-nate, al-ter-c-at-ion.

ALIGHT, (1) to descend from; (2) to light upon. (E.) 1. ME.
alighten, alihten, particularly used of getting off a horse. ‘ Heo letten
alle tha horsmen i than wude alihten’ =they caused all the horsemen
to alight in the wood; Layamon, iii, 58,59. 2, Also ME. alighten,


14 ALIGN |


alihten ; as in ‘ur louerd an erthe alighte her’ = our Lord alighted
here upon earth; Rob. of Glouc., p.1.468,1.9589. B. The two senses of
the word seem at first to show that the prefix a- has not the same force
in both cases; but both go back to AS. aliktan, to get down,in A‘lfric’s
Grammar, De Quarta Conj. § iii; where we find ‘ Dissilio, of alihte ;”
so that the prefix is the AS. intensive prefix a-; see A- (4). The
simple form Jihktan, to alight (from horseback), occurs in the Death of
Byrhtnoth, ed. Grein, 1. 23. [|The radical sense of liktan is to render
light, to remove a burden from.] =O. Merc. Jiht, Northumbrian /éht,
West-Saxon /éoht, light (i.e. unheavy) ; see AS. Gospels, Matt. xi. 30.
See Light (3).

ALIGN; see Aline.

ALIKH, similar. (E.) ME. alike, alyke, adj. and adv. ‘ Alyke or
euynlyke, equalis; alyke, or lyke yn lykenes, similis;’ Prompt. Parv.
p-10, Also olike, Gen. and Exodus, ed. Morris, l. 2024. a. The forms
alike, olike, are short for anlike, onlike; the adverbial form retains the
final e, but the adj. is properly without it. B. The adj. form azlik is
also written anlich, as in ‘ thet is him anlich’ =that is like him; Ayen-
bite of Inwyt, p.186. y. The prefix is therefore a- or o-, short for an-
or on-, and corresponding to AS. on-.=—AS. onlic, adj. like, Grein, ii.
348; also written anlic, Grein, i. 8.—AS. on, prep. on, upon; and Jic,
like. Cf, also Icel. d-likr, the form cognate with AS. on-lic; which was
doubtless confused with it (N. E. D.). © The fullest form appears in
the Gothic ady. analeikd, in like manner. See Like and On.

ALIMENT, food. (¥.—L.) Milton has alimental, P. L. v. 424;
Bacon has ‘medicine and aliment,’ Nat. Hist. sect. 66.—F. aliment,
‘food, sustenance, nourishment ;? Cot. —L. alimentum, food; formed
with suffix -mentum from alere, to nourish. [This suffixis due toa com-
bination of the Idg. suffixes -men and -to, on which see Brugmann. |=
L. alere, to nourish.-Goth. alan, to nourish; Icel. ala, to nourish,
support. Cf. Old Irish aldram, nourishment.=—4/AL, to nourish. See
Brugm.i. § 490. Der. aliment-al, aliment-ary, aliment-at-ion ; cf. also
alimony (from L. aliménia, sustenance, which from stem aJi-, with
suffixes -mdn- and -ja%). @ From the same root a/- we have also
adolescent, ad-ult, old, elder, alder; also altitude, alto, coalesce, exalt,
haughty, hautbois, proletarian.

ALINE, ALIGN, torangeinaline. (F.—L.) First usedin 1693
(N.E.D.). From F. aligner, to range in a line. =F. a ligne, into line.
—L. ad, to; linea,aline. See Line. 94 Aline is the better spell-
ing for the E. word.

ALIQUOT, proportionate. (F.—L.) Borrowed from F. aliquote, as
in partie aliquote, a proportional part. = Late L. aliquota, fem. of aliquo-
tus, an adj. made from L. aliquot, indef. indecl. numeral, § several ;’
which is from ali-ws, other, some, and guot, how many.

ALIVE, in life. (E.) A contraction of the ME. phrase ox live, in
life, where on signifies 7, and dive or lyue (livé, lyvé) is the dat. case of
lyf, life. ‘Yfhe haue wyt and his oz lywe’ =if he has wit, and is alive ;
Seven Sages, ed. Wright, 1. 56. — AS. on life, alive, Grein, ii. 184; where
ee : the preposition, and life is dat. case of lif, life. See On and

ife.

ALKALI, a salt. (Arabic.) Chaucer has alkaly, C. T., G 810. —
Arab. al qali; where al is the def. article, and gali is the name given
to the ‘calcined ashes’ of the plant glass-wort (Salicornia), which
abounds insoda. 4] By some, gali is derived from the Ar. verb galay,
to fry, hence, to calcine (Rich. Dict. p. 1146); Palmer’s Pers. Dict.
gives ‘qali, alkali,’ and ‘ galiyah, a fricassee, curry;’ col. 474. Der.
alkali-ne, alkal-escent, alkal-oid, alkali-fy.

ALL, every one of. (E.) ME. al, in the singular, and alle (disyl-
labic) in the plural; the mod. E. is the latter, with the loss of final e.
Chaucer has al a,i.e. the whole of, in the phrase ‘al a companye,’ C. T.,
G 996; also at al, i.e. wholly, C. T., C 633. The plural alle is very
common.= AS, eal, sing., ealle, plural; but the mod. E. follows the
O.Merc. form alle; see Matt.y. 15 (Rushworth gloss).+-Icel. ad/r,sing.,
allir, pl.; Swed. all, pl. alle; Dan. al, pl. alle; Du. al, alle; OHG. al,
aller ; Goth, alls, allat. Teut. type*alnoz. Allied to Irish and Gael.uile,
all, every, whole; fromIdg.type*oljos ; Stokes-Fick, p. 52. Brugmann
(ii.§ 66) takes Teut. *alnoz as from Teut. *alan- (Goth. alan), to grow
up, to increase; allied to L. al-ere, to nourish. As if all=full, com-
plete. € When all is used as a prefix, it was formerly spelt with
only one J, a habit still preserved in a few words. The AS. form of
the prefix is eal-, O.Merc. al-, Icel. al-, Gothic ala-, Hence al-mighty,
al-most, al-one, al-so, al-though, al-together, al-ways; and ME. al-gates,
i.e. always. This prefix is now written all in later formations, as all-
powerful, &c. In all-hallows, i.e.all saints, the donble / is correct, as de-
noting the plural. @s> In the phrase all to-brake, Judges, ix. 53, there
isan ambiguity. The proper spelling, in earlier English, would be al
tobrak, where al is an adverb, signifying ‘utterly,’ and zobrak the 3 p.s.
pt. t. of the verb tobreken, to break in pieces; so that al éobrak: mean
‘utterly brake in pieces.’ The verb fobreken iscommon; cf. ‘ A1 is to-
broken thilke regioun;’ Chaucer, C.T.,A 2757 (Harl. MS.). B. There
was a large number of similar verbs, such as ¢obresten, to burst in twain,


|


ALLEY


tocleouen, to cleave in twain, ¢odelex, to divide in twain, &c.; see
Stratmann’s OE. Dict. pp. 611-616, -y. Again, al was used before
other prefixes besides /o; as ‘he was al awondred ;’ Will. of Palerne,.
1.8723 and again ‘al biwepedforwo;’ id.661. 6. But about A.D. 1500,
this idiom became misunderstood, so that the /o was often joined to al
(misspelt al/), producing a form all-to, which was used as an intensive
prefix to verbs, yet written apart from them, as in ‘we be fallen into
the dirt, and be all-to dirtied;’ Latimer, Remains, p. 397. See the
article on adl to in Eastwood and Wright's Bible Wordbook. 3B. The
gen. pl. of AS. eal was ealra, in later English written aller, and some-
times alder, with an inserted excrescent d. Hence Shakespeare’s
alderliefest is for allerliefest, i.e. dearest of all; 2 Hen. VI, i. 1. 28,
See Almighty, Almost, Alone, Already, Also, Although,
Altogether, Always, As, Withal; also Hallowmass.

ALLAY, to assuage. (E.) The history of this word proves that
the orig. E. verb has been confused with four other verbs of Romance
origin; for the full history, see N. E.D. The orig. source is seen in
ME. aleyen, alaien, to put down ; as in ‘ unbileue, pat is aiware aleid,
unbelief, that is everywhere put down; OE. Homilies, ii. 11. The
stem of ME. aleyen is due to AS. dleg-, stem of the 2nd and 3rd persons
sing. pres. of AS. alecgan, to put down, which also produced ME. aleg-
gen, to lay aside. AS. d-, prefix; and lecgan, to lay; see A- (4) and
Lay (1). 4@ But confused with ME. aleggen, to alleviate, which is
really no more than a (French) doublet of (the Latin) alleviate, q.v.
Cf. ‘ Aleggyn, or to softe, or relese peyne, allevio ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 9.
And further confused with an obs. vb. aleye, to allege, and with old
forms of E. alloy.

ALLEGE, toaffirm, (F.—L.) ME. aleggen, alegen, to affirm. ‘A-
leg gyn awtowrs, allego;’ Prompt. Parv. p.g. ‘ Thei wol alleggen also,
and by the gospel preuen;’ P, Plowman, b. xi. 88. In form, the ME.
alegen answers to AI’. alegier, aligier = OF. esligier, ‘to clear’ at law
(see Godefroy) ; from AF. a-=OF. es- (L. ex-), and ligier, to contend,
from L, litigdre, to contend, to litigate; see Litigate. B. This AF.
alegier was Latinised (wrongly) as adlégiare (Ducange), and was
treated as if allied to MF. alleguer, ‘to alleadge, to urge, or produce
reasons;’ Cot.; from L. allégare, to send, despatch; also to bring
forward, mention.—L. al-, for ad; and légadre, to send, appoint ;
from Jég-, stem of dex, law. See Legal. @ The MF, alleguer (if
uninfluenced by the AF. alegzer) would have produced an E. form
alleague. Der. alleg-at-ion, from F. allégation, L, acc. allégatidnem
(correctly). ;

ALLEGIANCE, the duty of a subject to his lord. (F.—OHG.)


| Fabyan has allezeaunce, cap. 207.§ 5. The older form is with one J.


‘Of alegeaunce now lerneth a lesson other tweyne;’ Richard the
Redeles, i. 9. Spelt alegeawns in Wyntown, vii. 8.14. Formed by pre-
fixing a- (=F. a-, L. ad-) to the word legeaunce, borrowed from the
OF. ligeance, ligance, homage. Of these forms, ligance was due to an
imaginary connexion with L. ligdre, to bind ; but ligeance was derived
from OF. lige, liege; with suffix -ance (= L. -antia). Of Germanic
origin; see Liege.

ALLEGORY, akind of parable. (L.—Gk.) The pl. allegories
occurs in Tyndal’s Prol. to Leviticus, and Sir T. More’s Works, p.
1o4ia. ME. allegorie, Wyclif, Gal.iv.24 (earlier version). [Cf. MF.
allegorie, anallegory ; Cot. | —L.allégoria, borrowed from Greek, in thé
Vulgate version of Galat. iv. 24.— Gk. dAAnyopia, a description of one
thing under the image of another; cf. dAAnyopeiv, to speak so as to
imply something else. = Gk. dAAo-, stem of dAdos, another; and dyop-,
as in dyopevev, to speak, dyopd, a public assembly, allied to dyetpev,
to assemble. The prefix 4 appears to answer to Skt. sa, together, and
-yelpev implies a base yep-, with which L. grex, a flock, is connected ;
Brugmann, i. § 633. Der. allegor-ic, allegor-ic-al, allegor-ic-al-ly, alle-
gor-ise, allegor-ist.

ALLEGRO, lively, brisk. (Ital.—L.) In Milton’s L’Allegro,
P =/o, the Ital. def. article, from L, ile, he (acc. illum). The Ital. alle-
gro, brisk, is from L. *alécrum, substituted for alacrem, acc. of alacer,
brisk. See Alacrity. Der. allegr-etio,

ALLELUIA, ALLELUJAG, an expression of praise. (L.—
Gk.—Heb.) L. alleliia; Rev. xix. 6.—Gk. dAAndrovia; Rev. xix. 6.
Better hallelujah. — Heb. halelu jah, praise ye Jehovah. — Heb. halela,
praise ye, from halal, to shine, which in one ‘ voice’ signifies ‘ praise; ’
and jak, Jah, Jehovah. ae

ALLEVIATEH, to lighten. (L.) Used by Bp. Hall, Balm of
Gilead, c. 1. § 2. Formed as if from alleuiatus, pp. of Late L. alle-
uiare, to alleviate ; seenoteon Abbreviate. = L.alleudre, to lighten,
which passed into the occasional form alleuidre, as in Isaiah, ix. I
(Vulgate).—L. al-, for ad; and leudre, to lift up, to lighten, from
lenis, light, cognate with Gk. éAaxvs, small. Der. alleviat-ion.

ALLEY, a walk. (F.-L.) ME. aley, alley. ‘So longe aboute
the aleyes is he goon;’ Chaucer, C. T. 10198 (E 2324).—OF. alee, a
gallery; a participial substantive. OF. alee, pp. fem. of aler, to go;


}mod, I. aller, @ The etymology of F. aller, much and long dis-


ALLIANCE


cussed, remains unknown. The Prov. equivalent is anar, allied to
Ital. andare, to go. ;

ALLIANCE, ALLIES. See Ally.

ALLIGATION, a rule in arithmetic. (L.) Phillips (ed. 1658)
has ‘Alligation, a binding unto.’ The verb alligate, to bind together,
is hardly in use; Rich. shows that it occurs in Hale’s Origin of Man-
kind (1677), pp. 305, 334. The sb. is formed, with suffix -¢ion (F.-tion,
L. acc. -/i6nem) from L. alligare, to bind together.—L. al-, for ad;
and ligare, to bind. See Ligament.

ALLIGATOR, a crocodile, (Span.—L.) Properly it merely means
‘the lizard. In Shak. Romeo, v. 1. 43. A mere corruption from the
Spanish. Called ‘a monstrous legarto or crocodile’ by J. Hortop in
1591; Eng. Garner, ed. Arber, vy. 314. [The F.alligator is borrowed
from English.] —Span. el lagarto, the lizard, a name esp. given to the
American crocodile, or cayman. ‘In Hawkins’s Voyage, he speaks of
these under the name of alagartoes ;” Wedgwood. =L. ille, he (whence
Ital. i, Span. el, the); and Jacertus (more commonly Lacerta), a lizard.
See Lizard.

ALLITERATION, repetition of initial letters. (L.) The well-
known line ‘ For apt alliteration’s artful aid’ occurs in Churchill’s
Prophecy of Famine; 1.86. The stem alliterat- is formed as if from
the pp. of a L. verb *allitterare, which, however, did not exist. This
verb is put together as if from L. ad litteram, i.e. according to the
letter. Thus the word is a mere modern invention. See Letter.
Der. A verb, to alliterate (found in 1816), and an adj., alliterat-ive
(found in 1764), have been invented to match the sb.

ALLOCATE, to place or set aside. (L.) Burke, On the Popery
Laws, uses allocate in the sense of ‘ to set aside,’ by way of maintenance
for children. [On the suffix -a/e, see Abbreviate.]—Late L. allo-
catus, pp. of allocare, to allot; see Ducange.=L. al-, for ad; and lo-
care, to place, from locus, a place. See Locus. Der. allocat-ion.

Allocate is a doublet of allow, to assign. See Allow (1).

ALLOCUTION, an address. (L.) Spelt adlocution by Sir G.
Wheler in 1689 (R.). Borrowed from Latin; with F. suffix -ion<L.
acc. ending -idnem.=—L., allocutio, adlociitio, an address.—L. ad, to;
and Joctitio, a speaking, allied to lociitus, pp. of logui, to speak; see
Loquacious.

ALLODIAL, not held of a superior; used of land. (L.—Teut.)
Englished from Late L. allddialis, an adj. connected with the sb.
allodium. ‘The writers on this subject define allddium to be every
man’s own land, which he possesseth merely in his own right, without
owing any rent or service to any superior ;” Blackstone, Comment.
DiC. 7- a. The word allddium is ‘Merovingian Latin ;’ Brachet
(s. v. alleux). It is also spelt alaudum, alaudium, alidium, alidum,
alédis (Lex Salica), and.means a free inheritance, as distinguished
from beneficiun:, a grant for the owner's life-time only. B. The word
appears as alleu in French, which Brachet derives from O. Frankish
alod (see Schade), meaning ‘ entire property,’ or ‘entirely one’s pro-
perty;’ where al- is related to E. all, and éd signifies ‘ property’ or
‘wealth.’ This O. Frank. dd is cognate with OHG. ds, AS. éad, Icel.
audr, wealth; originally ‘a thing granted,’ as it is derived from a strong
verb of which the Teut. type is *audan-, to grant, represented by AS.
éadan (pt. t. od), to grant. Cf. Goth. auda-hafts, blessed.

ALLOPATHY, an employment of medicines to produce an effect
different to those produced by disease ; as opposed to homeopathy,
q-v. (Gk.) Modern. Formed from Gk. dAdo-, for dAAos, another;
and -na0«a, allied to ma0os, suffering, from mafeiy, maoxewv, to suffer.
See Pathos. Der. allopath-ic, allopath-ist.

ALLOT, to assign a portion or lot to. (Hybrid; AF.—L. and E.)
A hybrid compound; formed by prefixing the AF. or OF. a- (for L. ad)
to the English word Jo¢. AF. aloter, Year-book of Edw. I (1304-5),
p-337- Cotgrave gives MF. ‘Allotir, to divide or part, to allot ;’ also
‘Allotement, a parting, dividing ; an allotting’, or laying out, unto every
one his part.’ [It is likely that the F. word was borrowed from the
English in this case.}] Shak. not only has allot, but even allottery, As
You Like It, i. 1. 77; and allotted occurs much earlier, viz. in Lord
Surrey’s translation of the 2nd bk. of the A£neid, 1. 554 (or 1. 722 of
the-E. version). See Lot. Der. allot-ment, allott-ery.

ALLOW (1), to assign, grant as a portion or allowance. (F.—L.)
1, Properly distinct from allow in the sense of ‘to approve of,’ ‘to
praise,’ which is the common sense in old writers; see Luke, xi. 48.
Shakespeare has both verbs, and the senses run into one another so
that it is not always easy to distinguish between them in every case;
indeed, they were often confused, which produced new senses; see
N.E.D. Perhaps a good instance is in the Merch. of Ven. iv. 1. 303,
‘the law allows it, i.e. assigns itto you. 2. This verb is rare in early
use, and Shakespeare is an early authority for it when it was becoming
very common.=F. allouer, formerly alouer, ‘to let out to hire, to
appoint or set down a proportion for expence, or for any other em-
ployment ;’ Cot. = Law L. allocare, to admit a thing as proved, to
place, to use, expend, consume ;.see Ducange. [Blount, in his Law


ALMOST 15


Dict., gives allocation as a term used in the exchequer to signify ‘an
allowance made upon an account.’] See Allocate. Der. allow-able,
allow-able-ness, allow-abl-y, allow-ance. Doublet, allocate.

ALLOW (2), to praise, highly approve of. (F.—L.) Sometimes
confused with the preceding; now nearly obsolete, though common
in early authors, and in earlier use than the former. See Luke, xi. 4S.
ME. alouen. Chaucer rhymes ‘I allow the’ =I praise thee, with the sb.
youthé, youth; C. T. 10988 (F 676).—OF. alouer, later allouer, ‘to
allow, advow [i.e. advocate}, to approve, like well of;? Cot.—L.
allaudare, adlaudare, to applaud. =L. ad, to; and laudare, to praise.
See Laud.

ALLOY, a due proportion in mixing metals. (F.—L.) [The verb
to alloy is made from the substantive, which was formerly spelt alay
or allay, though wholly unconnected with the verb allay, to assuage. |
ME. sb. alay ; Chaucer has the pl. alayes, C.T. 9043 (E1167). The
sing. alay is in P. Plowman, B. xv. 342; the pp. alayed, alloyed, is in
P. Plowman, C. xviii. 79. AF. and OF. alai, alei, admixture or com-
bination (of metals); a sb. due to the v. aleier, to combine. = L. alli-
gare, to combine or join together.—L. al-, for ad, to; and ligare, to
bind. See Ligament. In later Central F., the forms alei, aleier,
became a/loi, aloier, and were then confused with the phrase @ Joi, from
L. adlégem, according to law; and this false etymology was commonly
accepted. The form alay, sb., occurs in the Statutes of the Realm,
i. 140 (A.D. 1300). Cf. Span. and Port. ligar, to tie, bind, to allay
or alloy; from L. ligare.

ALLUDEH, to hint at. (L.) Used by Sir T. More, Works, p. 860 a.
= L. allidere, to laugh at, allude to.—L. al-, for ad; and ludere, to
play, pp. Jusus. See Inudicrous. Der. allus-ion, allus-ive, allus-
ive-ly; from pp. allusus.

ALLURE, to tempt bya bait. (F.—L.andG.) Sir T. More has
alewre, Works, p. 1276 c [marked 1274].—AF. alurer (Wright’s
Vocab, i. 151), OF. aleurrer, to entice to a lure (Godefroy). From
F, & leurre, to the lure or bait; a word of Germanic origin. See Lure.
Der. allure-ment.

ALLUSION, ALLUSIVE. See Allude.

ALLUVIAL, washed down; applied to soil. (L.) Not in early
use; the sb. now used in connexion with it is alluvium, prop. the
neuter of the L. adj. al/waius, alluvial. In older works the sb. is alluvion,
as in Blackstone, Comment. b. ii. c. 16, and in three other quotations
in Richardson. — MF. and F. alluvion, a washing up, an inundation ;
Cot.—L. alluuidnem, acc. case of alluuio, a washing up of earth, an
alluvial formation.—L. al-, for ad, to, in addition; and ZJuere, to
wash. From the same root, ab-lu-tion, di-luv-ial,

ALLY, to bind together. (F.—L.) ME. alien, with one l. ‘Alied
to the emperour ;’ Rob. of Glouc. p. 65, 1. 1499. [The sb. aliance,
alliance, occurs at p. 89, 1. 1985. It is spelt alliaunce in Gower, C. A.
i. 199 (bk. ii. 1184).] —OF. alier, to bindto. —OF. a, to; and lier, to
bind. =L. ad; and ligare,to bind. See Ligament. Der. ally, sb.,
one bound, pl. allies; alli-ance. From the same root, allig-ation, q. Vv.

ALMANAC, ALMANACK, a calendar. (F.—LateL.) Spelt
almanac by Blackstone, Comment. b. iii. c. 22; almenak in Chaucer.
On the Astrolabe, prol. 1. 67.—F. almanach, ‘an almanack, or pro-
gnostication ;’ Cot.—Late L. almanach, almanac, The form almanac
occurs in Roger Bacon, Opus Majus, xv (A.D.1267). The origin of
the word is wholly unknown; Dozy decides that it is zo¢ Arabic, as
is often said; and the Gk. and L. origins sometimes assigned to it have
to be manipulated and misspelt in order to suit the case; see N. FE. D.

ALMIGHTY, all-powerful. (E.) In very early use. O. Merc.
almehtig; AS, ealmihtig, Grein, i. 244; elmihtig, id. 57. See Might.
On the spelling with one J, see All. Der. almighti-ness.

ALMOND, akind of fruit. (-F.—L.—Gk.) ‘As for almonds, they
are of the nature of nuts;’ Holland’s Pliny, bk.xv.c, 22. Wyclif has
almaundis, almonds, Gen. xliii. 11; almaunder, an almond-tree, Eccles.
xii. 5 (where the Vulgate has amygdalus). {The /is an inserted letter,
owing to confusion of initial a with the Arab. def. art. al in the Span.
forms.]=OF. almandre, almande; also amandele, amendele (nearer to
the Latin). Cf.Span.almendra. Cotgrave has ‘Amande, an almond.’
=— L.amygdala, amygdalum,an almond; whence (as traced by Brachet)
the forims *amygdala, *amy’dala, *amyndala (with excrescent 2 before
d), and next OF. amendele, amende, later amande.—Gk. dpuvyddadn,
duvydadov, analmond. Origin unknown.

ALMONER, a distributer of alms. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt al-
moygners by Sir T. More, Works, p. 235 h. ME. aumoner, Cursor
Mundi, 15219. —OF. almosnier, aumosnier, a distributer of alms; forms
in which the s was soon dropped, as in F. awmone from OF. almosne,
alms. =—OF. almosne, alms; with the suthx -ier of the agent. — Folk-
L. *alimosina, for L. eleémosyna; see Alms.

ALMOST, nearly. (E.) Chaucer has almost, C. T. 9275 (E1401).
Also ME. almast, almest; the latter is especially common. ‘He is
almest dead ;’ Layamon, ii. 387 (later text), AS. ealmést, elmest ;
thus in the AS. Chron. an. 1091, we have ‘seo scipfyrde .. . elmést


16 ALMS


carmlice forfor’= the fleet for the most part (or nearly all of it)
miserably perished. = AS. eal-, prefix, completely; and mést, the most.
@ The sense is, accordingly, ‘quite the greatest part,’ or in other
words ‘nearly all.’ Hence it came to mean ‘ nearly,’ in a more general
use and sense. For the spelling with one /, see All.

ALMS, relief given to the poor. (L.—Gk.) ME. almesse, later
almes. Wyclif has almes, Luke, xi. 41. For almesse, see OE. Homilies,
ii. 29, 1.35. Still earlier, we have the AS. forms elmesse and almesse,
a word of threesyllables. [Thus e/mes-se first became almes-se ; and
then, dropping the final syllable (-se), appeared as almes, in two sylla-
bles ; still Jater, it became alms. The AS. elmesse is from the Folk-L.
*alimosina (whence OF. almosne, Ital. limosina) ; for the eccles. Latin
eleémosyna, borrowed from Greek; the result being that the word has
been reduced from six syllables to one.| = Gk. éAenuoavyn, compassion,
and hence, alms. —Gk. éAenuwy, pitiful. — Gk. éAeciv, to pity; from
éAeos, pity. Der. alms-house. From the same root, almoner, q.v.
@ The word alms is properly singular; hence the expression ‘asked
an alms;’ Acts, iii. 3.

ALMUG, the name of a tree; see Algum.

ALOB, the name of a plant. (L.—Gk.) ‘Aloe is an herbe which
hath the resemblance of the sea-onion,’ &c.; Holland’s Pliny, bk. xxvii.
c. 4. Cotgrave has ‘Aloés, the herb aloes, sea-houseleeke, sea-aigreen ;
also, the bitter juyce thereof congealed, and used in purgations.’ In
like manner we still speak of ‘ bitter aloes;’? and Wyclif has aloes,
John, xix. 39, where the Vulgate has aloes, really the gen. case of the
L. aloé, used by Pliny, and borrowed from the Gk. dAdyn, the name of
the plant, used by Plutarch, and in John, xix. 39; where the. AS.
version has alewan. | Der. aloes-wood; a name given to a totally
different plant, the agallochum, because one kind (the Aguilaria
Agallocha, natural order of Thymeleacee) yields a bitter secretion. The
_ word agallochum is of Skt. origin; cf. Skt. agurz, aloes-wood ; whence
also Heb. masc. pl. ahalim, ahaléth, aloes-wood or ‘lign-aloes,’? Numb.
xxiv. 6. See Aloes and Eaglewood in Yule.

ALOFT, in the air. (Scand.) 1. Foro lofte. In P. Plowman,
B. i. go, we find ‘ agrounde and aloft ;’ but in the same poem, A. i. 88,
the reading is ‘on grounde and on Jofte.’ 2. On lofte signifies ‘in the
air, i.e. on high. The AS. prep. on frequently means ‘in;’ and is
here used to translate the Icel. a, which is really the same word.
3. The phrase is, strictly, Scandinavian, viz. Icel. @ Jopt, aloft, in the
air (the Icel. -p¢ being sounded like the E. -/t, to which it answers).
The Icel. lopt = AS. ly/t, the air; whence ME. J:/t, the air, still pre-
served in prov. E. and used by Burns in his Winter Night, 1. 4. Cf,
G. luft, the air; Goth. Juftus, the air. See Loft, Lift.

ALONE, quite by oneself. (E.) ME. al one, written apart, and
even with a word intervening between them. Ex. ‘al himself one’ =
himself alone; Will. of Palerne, 3316. [The al is also frequently
omitted. Ex. ‘left was he one,’ he was left alone, id. 211.] The ME.
alis mod. E. all; but the spelling with one/ is correct. See All and
One. Cf. Du. all-een, G. all-ein, alone. 4 The word one was (in
late ME.) pronounced own, rhyming with bone; and was frequently
spelt oon. The ME. one was disyllabic (pron. awn-y, later owz), the
e representing AS.-a in the word dna, a secondary form from AS. an,
one; see examples of dva in the sense of ‘alone’ in Grein, i. 31, 32.
The pronunciation as own is retained in al-one, at-one, on-ly. Der.
lone (with loss of a-); lonely.

ALONG (1), lengthwise of. (E.) [The prefix here is very un-
usual, as the a- in this case arose from the AS. and-; see A- (3), pre-
fix; andsee Answer.] ME. along, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 769;
earlier anlong, Layamon, i. 7. AS. andlang, along, prep. governing
a genitive; ‘andlang pees wéstenes’=along the waste, Joshua, viii.
16.40. Fries. ondlinga, prep. with gen. case; as in ‘ ondlinga thes
reggis’ =along the back (Richtofen) ; G. entlang, prep. with gen. or
dat. when preceding its substantive. PB. The AS. prefix and- is cog-
nate with O. Fries. ond-, OHG, ant- (G. ent-), Goth. and-, anda-, L.
ante, Gk. dvti, Skt. anti, over against, close to. The 2nd syllable is
the AS. adj. lang, long. The sense is ‘ over against in length.’ See
Anti- and Long.

ALONG (2), in the phr. along of or along on. (E.) This is not
quite the same word as along (1), but differs in the prefix. We find
“It’s all "long on you,’ Prol. to the Return to Parnassus (1606).
Chaucer has: ‘wheron it was long ;’? C.T. 16398 (G 930); and again:
‘Som seide it was Jong on the fyr-making,’ id. 16390. Gower has:
‘How al is on miself along ;’ C. A. ii, 22 (bk. iv. 624). Here along
is a corruption of slong, and long is ilong without the initial 7. This
prefix z- is the usual ME. form of the AS. prefix ge-, and along an-
swers, accordingly, to AS. gelang, as pointed out by Todd in his ed.
of Johnson’s Dict. Moreover, the very form i/ong (used with on)
occurs in Layamon, 15502.—AS. gelang, gelong, as in on 0am ge-
long, along of that, because of that, A‘lfred, tr. of Orosius, bk. iv.
c. 10, § 9.—AS. ge-, prefix; and Jang, long. @ Precisely the same
corruption of the prefix occurs in Aware, q.v.


ALTERCATION


ALOOF, away, at a distance. (E. and Du.) 1. Spelt aloofe in
Surrey’s Virgil, bk. iv, 1. 90 of E. version; aloufe in Sir T. More’s
Works, p. 759g. The latter says, ‘ But surely this anker lyeth too
farre aloufe fro thys shyppe, and hath neuer a cable to fasten her to
it.” This suggests a nautical origin for the phrase. 2. The diphthong
ou signifies the ow in soup, pronounced like the Du. oe, so that louf
at once suggests Du. /oe/, and as many nautical terms are borrowed
from that language, we may the more readily accept this. Cf. E.
sloop from Du. sloep. 3. The prefix a- stands for oz, by analogy with
a large number of other words, such as abed, afoot, asleep, aground;
so that aloof is for on loof, and had originally the same sense as the
equivalent Du. phrase ¢e loef, i.e. to windward. Compare also Joef
houden, to keep the luff or weather-gage; de loef afwinnen, to gain the
luff, &c. So too, Danish holde luven, to keep the luff or the wind;
have luven, to have the weather-gage ;. tage luven fra en, to take the
luff from one, to get to windward of one. Our phrase ‘to hold aloof’
is equivalent to the Du. loef houden (Dan. holde luven), and signifies
lit. ‘to keep to the windward.’ 4 The tendency of the ship being to
drift on to the leeward vessel or rock, the steersman can only hold
aloof (i.e. keep or remain so) by keeping the head of the ship away.
Hence to hold aloof came to signify, generally, to keep away from,
or not to approach. The quotation from Sir T. More furnishes a
good example. He is speaking ofaship which has drifted to leeward
of its anchorage, so that the said place of anchorage lies ‘too farre
aloufe,’ i.e. too much to windward; so that the ship cannot easily re-
turn to it. Similar phrases occur in Swedish; so that the term is of
Scandinavian as well as of Dutch use; but it came to us from the
Dutch more immediately. See further under Luff.

ALOUD, loudly. (E.) Chiefly in the phrase ‘to cry aloud.” ME,
aloude, P. Plowm. C. vii. 23. By analogy with abed, asleep, afoot, &c.,
the prefix must be on; and loude is the adj. loud, used as a sb.; cf.
alow, ahigh. See Loud.

ALP, ahigh mountain. (L.) Milton has alp, P.L. ii.620; Samson,
628. ME. Alpes, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 173. We generally say
‘the Alps.’ Milton merely borrowed from Latin. L. Alpes, pl. the
Alps; said to be of Celtic origin. ‘Gallorum lingua alti montes Alpes
uocantur ;’ Servius, ad Verg. Georg. iii. 474 ; cited by Curtius, i. 364.
B. Even granting it to be Celtic, it may still be true that L. Alpes is
connected with L. albus, white, spelt alpus in the Sabine form, with
reference to the snowy tops of such mountains. See Stokes-Fick,
p. 21. Der. alp-ine.

ALPACA, the Peruvian sheep. (Span.—Peruvian.) Borrowed by
us from Span. alpaca, a Span. rendering of the Peruvian name ; made by
prefixing al-(for Arab, al, def. article) to thenative Peruvian name paco,

ALPHABET, the letters of a language. (Late L.—Gk.—Phe-
nician.) Used by Shak. Titus And. iii. 2. 44.—Late L. alphabétum.
= Gk. dAga, Bj7a, the names of a and B (aand b), the first two letters
of the Gk. alphabet. From Phcenician names represented by Heb.
aleph, an ox, also the name of the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet ;
and béth, a house, also the name of the second letter of the same.
Der. alphabet-ic, alphabet-ic-al, alphabet-ic-al-ly.

ALREADY, quite ready; hence, sooner than expected. (E.)
Rich. shows that Udal (on Luke, c. 1. v. 13) uses ‘ already looked.
for’ in the modern sense; but Gower, Prol. to C. A. i. 18 (1. 424) has
al redy |badly spelt alZ ready in Richardson] as separate words. Al
as an adverb, with the sense of ‘ quite,’ is common in Mid. English.
[So al clene= quite entirely, wholly, Rob. of Glouc. p. 407 (1. 8419) ;
see Matzner’s Altengl. Worterbuch, p. 57.] The spelling with one Z
is correct; see All. And see Ready.

ALSO, in like manner. (E.) Formerly frequently written al so,
separately ; where al isan adverb, meaning ‘entirely ;’ see Already,
and All. —OMerc. al swa, AS. eal swa, ealswa, just so, likewise, Matt.
xxi, 30, where the later Hatton MS. has allswa. See So. @ As is
a contracted form of also; see As.

ALTAR, a place for sacrifices. (L.) [Frequently written awfer in
Mid. Eng., from the O. French awter; so spelt in Wyclif, Acts, xvii.
23, Gen. viii. 20.] Rob. of Brunne, p. 79, has the spelling altere ; it:
occurs much.earlier, in the Ormulum, 1. 1061. AS. altar; dat,
altare, Matt. v. 24. —L.altdre, an altar, a high place. —L. altus, high.
See Altitude. bal

ALTER, to make otherwise. (L.) Altered occurs in Tyndall’s
Works, ed. 1572, p. 456, col. 1; and in Chaucer, Troil. iii. 1778.
[Perhaps through the F, alzerer, given by Cotgrave, and explained by
‘to alter, change, vary ;’ but it may have been taken directly from:
Late L.]— Late L. alterare, to make otherwise, to change; Ducange.
=L. alter, other. —L. al-, of the same source with alius, another, and
Gk, daAdAos, other; with suffix -¢er (as in w-ter, neu-ter), an old com~
parative ending answering to E. -ther,. Gk. -repo-, Skt. -tara-, Idg.
-tero-. See Alien. Der. alter-able, alter-at-ion, alter-at-ive,

ALTERCATION, a dispute. (F.—L.) ME. altercacioun ;
Chaucer, C. T. 9347 (E 1473). OF, altercation, for which see Littré.


ALTERNATE


It is also given by Cotgrave, and explained by ‘altercation, brabling,
brawling,’ &c.=—L. allercdtidnem, acc. of altercditio, a dispute. = L.
altercari, to dispute. — L. alter, another ; from the notion of speaking
alternately. See above, and see below.

ALTERNATE, adj. by turns, (L.) Milton has alternate,
P.L. v.657; and even coins altern, P. L, vii. 348. —L. alterndtus, pp.
of alternire, to do by turns. —L. alternus, alternate, reciprocal. = L.
alter, another; with sufhx -vo- (Brugm. ii. § 66). See Alter. Der.
alternat-ion, alternat-ive; also the vb. to alternate (Levins).

ALTHOUGH, however. (E.) ME. al thagh, al thah, al though;
Mandeville’s Travels, p. 266; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, A. 878.
From al, adverb, in the sense of ‘even;’ and though. B. We even
find al used alone with the sense ‘although,’ as in ‘Al telle I noght as
now his observances ;’ Chaucer, C, T. 2266 (A 2264). y. On the
spelling with one /, see All. And see Though.

ALTITUDE, height. (F.—L.) It occurs frequently near the end
of Chaucer’s Treatise on the Astrolabe, to translate L. altitiido. = OF.
(and F.)- altitude. —L. altitido, height.—L. altus, high. Altus was
originally the pp. of al-ere, to nourish,.and meant ‘ well nourished ;’
hence, grown up, tall, high.

ALTO, a high voice. (Ital.—L.) Modern. —Ital. alto, high. =
L. altus, high. Der. alto-relievo, high relief; Ital. alto rilievo; see
Relief.

ALTOGETHER, completely. (E.) Used by Sir T. More, Works,
p-914b. ME, altogedere, Ancren Riwle, p. 320. Formed by pre-
fixing ME. al, adv. ‘ wholly,’ to together. See All and Together.

ALTRUISM, regard for others. (F.—Ital.—L.; with Gk. suffix.)
F. aliruisme, a word due to A. Comte (d. 1857). Coined (with the
Greek suffix -ism) from Ital. alérui, another, others. —Ital. aliruz; from
altro, nom. sing. masc. ; altra,nom, sing. fem. ; al¢ri,nom. pl.; which,
when preceded by any preposition, is changed into altrui for both
genders. and numbers (Meadows). = L. alteri huic, to this other; where
altert is the dat. of alter, another. See Alter. Der. altru-ist-ic, adj.

ALUM, a mineral salt. (F.—L.) ME. alum, Allit. Poems, ed.
Morris, B. 1035; alom, Mandeville’s Travels, p. 99; and used by
Chaucer, C. T. 16281 (G 813).—OF. alum (mod. F. alun), alum ;
Roquefort. —L. alimen, alum, used by Vitruvius and others; of un-
known origin. Der. alumin-a, alumin-ous, alumin-ium; all directly
from L. alumin-, the stem of alumen.

ALVEOLAR, pertaining to the sockets of the teeth. (L.) Modern.
= L. alveolus, a small channel; dimin. of alweus, a cavity, a channel.

ALWAY, ALWAYS, for ever. (E.) Chaucer has alway, al-
ways, Prol. 275 ; sometimes written al way. 1, In O. Eng. Misc., ed.
Morris, p. 148, 1. 54, we find alne way, where alne is the accus. case
masc., AS, ealne. The usual AS. form is ealne weg, where both words
are in the acc. sing.; Grein, ii.655. This form became successively
alne way, al way, and alway. 2. In Hali Meidenhad, p. 27, 1. 22, we
find alles weis, where both words are in the gen. sing. This occa-
sional use of the gen. sing., and the common habit of using the gen. sing.
suffix -es as an adverbial suffix, have produced the second form always.
Both forms are thus accounted for. See All and Way.

AM, the first pers. sing. pres. of the verb to be. (E.) O.Northum-
brian am, O. Merc. eam, AS. eom, Iam. The full form of the word
is shown bythe Idg. type *es-mi, whence also Skt. asm, Gk. eipi, Goth.
im, Icel. em, I am; compounded of the 4/ES, to be, and the suffix
-mi, perhaps related to E. me. See further under Are,

AMADAVAT, a bird; see Avadavat.

AMADOU, a tinder prepared from a fungus. (F.—Prov.—L.)
Modern. = F’. amadou. = Prov. amadou, O. Prov. amador, lit. ‘a lover ;’
also tinder, from its catching fire quickly.—L. améatérem, acc. of
amator, a lover; from amdre, to love (Hatzfeld; Mistral).

AMAIN, with full power. (E.) Used by Turberville, To his Ab-
sent Friend, st. 7. Asin other words, such as abed, afoot, aground,
asleep, the prefix is the AS. on, later an, latest a, signifying ‘in’ or
‘with,’ prefixed to the dat. case of the sb, The usual AS. phrase is,
however, not on m@egene, but ealle megene, with all strength; Grein,
ii. 217. See On, and Main, sb. strength.

AMALGAM, 2 compound of mercury with another metal, a mix-
ture. (F.—Gk.) [The restriction in sense to a mixture containing
mercury is perhaps unoriginal ; it is probable that the word properly
meant ‘a pasty mixture,’ and at last ‘a mixture of a metal with mer-
cury.’] Chaucer has amalgaming,C.T., G 771. =F. amalgame, which
Cotgrave explains by ‘a mixture, or incorporation of quicksilver with
other metals ;’ Late L. amalgama. fB. Generally taken to be a per-
version (perhaps with prefixed a-, for Arab. al, def. art.) of L. malag-
ma, a mollifying poultice or plaster. = Gk. wdAayya, an emollient;
also a poultice, plaster, or any soft material. —Gk. paddooev, to
soften (for *paddk-yev).—Gk. padaxds, soft; cf. Mallow. Der.
amalgam-ate, amalgam-at-ion.

AMANUENSIS, one who writes to dictation. (L.) In Burton’s
-Anat. of Melancholy; Dem. to the Reader; ed..1827, 1.17. Bor-


AMBIDEXTROUS Tf


rowed from L. dmanuensis, a scribe who writes to dictation, used by
Suetonius. —L, @ mani, by hand; with suffix -ensis, signifying ‘ be-
longing to,’ as in castrensis, belonging to the camp, from castra, a
camp. See Manual.

AMARANTH, an everlasting flower. (I..—Gk.) An error for
amarant; perhaps by confusion with -anthus, Gk. dvOos, a flower.
Milton has amarant, P.L. iii. 352; and amarantine, P.L. xi. 78. The
pl. amaraunz (with z=?s) is in Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1470; in
which case it is not from the Gk. directly, but from L. amarantus. =
Gk. duapaytos, unfading ; or, as sb., the unfading flower, amaranth.
(Cf. Gk. duapay7ivos, made of amaranth.]=Gk. 4-, privative; and
papaivey (for *papav-yew), to wither.—4/MER, to grind down.
Der. amaranth-ine. Perhaps allied to Mar.

AMASS, to heapup. (F.—L.—Gk.) Used by Surrey, on Eccles.
c. 3; 1. 3 from end.—F. amasser, ‘to pile, heap, gather ;’ Cot. =F.
@ masse, to a mass; so that amasser is ‘to put into a mass,’ =L. ad,
to; and massam, acc. of massa,a mass. [Curtius remarks concerning
this word (ii. 326) that the Latin ss in the middle of a word answers
to Gk. ¢.] = Gk. pa¢a, paca, a barley-cake ; lit. a kneaded lump. —Gk.
pagoew (base pay-), toknead. Cf. way-is,a cake. See Mass (1).

AMATORY, loving. (L.) Milton has amatorious, Answer to Eikon
Basilike ; amatory is used by Bp. Bramhall (died 1663) in a work
against Hobbes (Todd).=—L. amatérius, loving. —L. amator, a lover
(acc, amatorem, whence the F. amateur, now used in English). =L.
amare, to love, with suffix -tor denoting the agent. Der. from the
same L. verb, ama-teur (above), amat-ive, amat-ive-ness, Amatory is
practically a doublet of Amorous, q.v.

AMAZE, to astound. (E.) Formerly written amase. The word
amased, meaning ‘ bewildered, infatuated,’ occurs three times in the
Ancren Riwle, pp. 270, 284, 288. AS. dmasian, pp. dmasod; Wulf-
stan’s Hom. p. 137, |. 23. The prefix is the intensive AS. @; thus
to amase is ‘to confound utterly.’ We also find the compound form
bimased, Ancren Riwle, p. 270. See Maze, Der. amaz-ed, amaz-ed-
ness, amaz-ing, amaz-ing-ly, amaze-ment.

AMAZON, a female warrior. (Gk.) They were said to cut off the
right breast in order to use the bow more efficiently ; a story due toa
popular etymology of a foreign word. Shak. has Amazon, Mids, N. D.
li. I. 703 and Amazonian, Cor. ii. 2. 95.—Gk. duatwy, pl. duatoves,
one of a warlike nation of women in Scythia. Explained as if from
Gk. a-, privative; and pads, the breast. Der. Amazon-ian.

AMBASSADOR, a messenger. (F.—Ital.—Late L.—C.) Udal,
on Math. c. 28, v. 19, has ambassadour. Also written embassadour ;
Chaucer, Troil.iv.145. Chaucer has embassadrye, an embassy, C.T.
4053 (B 233).—F. ambassadeur, ‘embassadour ;’ Cot. =F. ambassade,
anembassy. a. Of this word Brachet says: ‘not found in French be-
fore the 14th century, and shown to be foreign by its ending -ade (un-
known in OF., which has -ée for -ade).’? Hatzfeld derives it from Ital.
ambasciata; cf. Late L. ambassiata (Ducange). From Late L. am-
baxiare, ambactiare [to relate, announce], formed from ambactia, a
very common term in the Salic Law, meaning ‘a mission, embassy.’
= Late L. ambactus, a servant, especially one who is sent on a mes-
sage; used once by Cesar, de Bello Gallico, vi. 15. B. This is ex-
pressly said, by Festus, to be a word of Gaulish origin; and it is now
accepted as Celtic, with the lit. sense of ‘one driven about,’ a slave ;
a pp. formation from the prefix embi, or ambi, about; and the Celtic
root ag-, to drive, cognate with L. agere, to drive. The verb appears
in O. Irish as imm-agim, I drive about, I send about ; and the derived
sb. is represented in Welsh by amaeth, a husbandman. See Brug-
mann, ii. § 79; Stokes-Fick, p.34. 4 The OHG. ambaht, a servant,
whence G. amé, is merely borrowed from Celtic (Kluge). Der. am-
bassadr-ess. See Embassy.

AMBER, a fossilresin; ambergris. (F.—Span.— Arab.) The resin
is named from its resemblance to ambergris, a waxlike substance due
to the sperm-whale, also called amber in early writers. — ME. aumbre,
Prompt. Parv. 1. In Holland’s Pliny, b, xxxvii. c. 3, the word means
the fossil] amber. 2. When Beaumont and Fletcher use the word
amber’d in the sense of ‘scented’ (Custom of the Country, iii. 2. 6),
they must refer to ambergris. = ¥.ambre, ‘amber,’ Cot.—Span.ambar.
= Arab. ‘amber, ambergris, a perfume; Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 433 ;
‘ambar, ambergris, a rich perfume and cordial; Rich. Dict. p. 1031.
@ Ambergris is the same word, with addition of F. gris, signifying
‘gray.’ In Milton, P.R. ii. 344, it is called grisamber. The F. gris
is a word of German origin, from OHG. gris, gray, used of the hair ;
cf. G. greis, hoary.

AMBI-, AMB,, prefix. (L.) L. ambi-, about; cf. Gk. dui, on
both sides, whence E. amphi-, prefix. Related to L. ambo, Gk. dugw,
both. Cf. AS. ymb, Irish im, about; Skt. abhi, towards.

AMBIDEXTROUS, using both hands. (L.) Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. iv..c. 5, § 10, has ‘ ambidexterous, or right-handed on
both sides.’ He also uses ambidexters as a plural sb. —L. ambidexter,
using both hands equally ; not used in classical Latin, and only given

C


18 AMBIENT


by Ducange with a metaphorical sense, viz. as applied to one who is ].


equally ready to deal with spiritual and temporal business. —L.
ambi-, generally shortened to amb-; and dexter, the right hand. See
Ambi- and Dexterous.

AMBIENT, going about. (L.) Used by Milton, P. L. vi. 481. —
L. ambient-, going about. — L. amb- (shortened form of ambi-), about ;
and iens, going, pres. pt. of ire, to go. 1. On the prefix see Ambi-.
2. The verb ire is from 4/ EI, to go; cf. Skt. and Zend i, to go.

AMBIGUOUS, doubtful. (L.) Sir T. Elyot has ambiguous, The
Governour, bk. iii. c. 4, § 4. The sb. ambiguite (printed anbiguite)
occurs in the Tale of Beryn, ed. Furnivall, 2577. (The adj. is formed
with the suffix -ovs, which properly represents the F. -ewx, and L.
-dsus, but is also frequently used in place of L. -ws merely; cf. pious,
sonorous, &c., from L. pius, sondrus.)=—L. ambiguus, doubtful ; lit.
driving about.<L. ambigere, to drive about, go round about.=—L.
amb- =ambi-, about ; and agere, to drive. On the prefix, see Ambi-,
Andsee Agent, Der. ambiguous-ly; also ambigu-it-y, from L, acc.
ambiguititem, nom. ambiguitas, doubt.

AMBITION, seeking for preferment. (F.—L.) Spelt ambition by
Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. iii. c. 16. § 1; ambicioun in Wyclif,
Acts, xxv. 23 (earlier version), Ambicion also occurs in the Ayenbite
of Inwyt, pp. 17, 22.—F. ambition, given by Cotgrave.—L. ambi-
tionem, acc. of ambitio, a going round; esp. used of the canvassing
for votes at Rome. —L. ambire, supine ambitum, to go round, solicit.
[Note that L. ambi/io and ambitus retain the short ¢ of the supine ¢/am
of ire, the simple verb. |= L. ambi-, amb-, prefix, about; and 7re, to
go. See Ambi-and Ambient. Der. ambiti-ous, ambiti-ous-ly.

AMBULE, to go ata pace between a walk anda trot. (F.—L.) We
find ‘ fat palfray amblant,’ i.e. ambling ; King Alisaunder, ed. Weber,
1, 3462; and see Gower, C. A. i. 210 (bk. ii. 1506). Chaucer has
‘wel ambling,’ C. T. 8265 (E 388); and ‘it gooth an ambel’ =it goes
at an easy pace, said of a horse, C. T. 13815 (B 2075); and he calls
a lady’s horse an ambler, Prol. to C. T. 471 (A 469).—O.F. ambler,
to go at an easy pace. —L. ambulare, to walk. See Ambulation.
Der. ambl-er, pre-amble.

AMBROSIA, food of the gods. (Gk.) In Milton, P. L. v. 57;
he frequently uses the adj. ambrosial. = Gk. auBpocia, the food of the
gods ; fem, of adj. duBpécros. — Gk. duBpdatos, a lengthened form (with
suffix -yo) of duBpor-os, immortal, = Gk. d-~Bpotos, where a- is the nega-
tive prefix, and pBpords is for *uporés, lit. ‘dead,’ earlier form of the
word which was afterwards spelt Bpords. See Mortal. J The Gk.
apBportos has its exact counterpart in Skt. a-mrta-s, immortal, used in
the neuter to denote the beverage of the gods. Southey misspells this
word amreeta; see his Curse of Kehama, canto xxiv. 9, and note on
‘the amreeta, or drink of immortality.’ Der. ambrosi-al, ambrosi-an.

AMBRY, AUMBRY, a cupboard. (F.—L.) a. Nares re-
marks that ambry is a corruption of almonry, but this remark only
applies to a particular street in Westminster so called. The word in
the sense of ‘ cupboard’ has a different origin. B. The word is now
almost obsolete, except provincially ; it is spelt auwmbrie by Tusser,
Five Hundred Points, E. D.S., § 75.2 (p. 167). ME. awmery, awme-
bry, Prompt. Pary. Earlier almary, P. Plowman, C. xvii.88. Clearly
a corruption of OF. armarie, a repository for arms (Burguy), which
easily passed into almarie (as in Roman de Rou, 4565), a’m’rie, and
thence into ambry, with the usual excrescent 6 after m. The OF .armarie
became later armaire, armoire; Cotgrave gives both these forms, and
explains them by ‘a cupboord, ambrie, little press ; any hole, box con-
trived in, or against, a wall,’ &c. Hence ambry is a doublet of armory;
and both are to be referred to Late L. armaria, a chest or cupboard,
esp. a bookcase. Another form is armarium, esp. used to denote a
repository for arms, which is plainly the original sense, = L.arma,arms.
SeeArms, It is remarkable that, as the ambry ina church was
sometimes used asa place of deposit for alms, it was popularly connected
with alms instead of arms, and looked upon as convertible with almonry.

AMBULATION, walking about. (L.) Used by Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. iii.c. 1. § 4; but uncommon. Of the adj. ambulatory
Rich. gives five examples, one from Bp. Taylor’s Great Exemplar,
pt. iii. s. 13. Formed with F. suffix -tion, but really directly from
Latin. = L. acc. ambulatidnem, from nom. ambuldtio, a walking about ;
from ambulare, to walk about.—L. amb-, about (see Ambi-); and


-ulare, allied to Gk. dA-dopar, I wander, roam; dA-y, a wandering
(Prellwitz). Der. ambula-tory (from L. ambulare, with suffix -tor-ius).
From the same root, amble, per-ambulate, pre-amble. See Amble,
Also F. ambul-ance, a movable hospital, now adopted into English.
AMBUSCADBH, an ambush. (Span.—Late L.) Often spelt am-
buscado ; see Ben Jonson, Every Man in his Humour, ed. Wheatley,
ii. 4.16, and the note. Dryden has ambuscade, tr. of Aineid, vi. 698 ;
Richardson, by a misprint, attributes the word to Spenser.—Span.
emboscada, an ambuscade. Span. embuscado, placed in ambush, pp. of
emboscar, to set in ambush. = Late L. imboscare; see Ambush.
AMBUSH, a hiding in a wood. (F.—LateL.) In Shakespeare,


AMETHYST


Meas. for Meas, i. 3.41. A corruption of an older embush or enbush,
which was originally a verb, signifying ‘to set in ambush.’ Rob. of
Brunne, in his tr. of P. Langtoft, has enbussement, p. 187, bussement,
p- 242; also the pp. exbussed, set in ambush, p. 187, as well as the
shortened form bussed on the same page. In all these cases, ss stands
for sk, as in Rob. of Gloucester. Gower has embuisshed, embuisschement,
C. A. i. 260, iii, 208 (bk. ii. 3007, bk. vii. 3476). —OF. embuscher,
embuissier, to set in ambush. = Late L. imboscare, to set in ambush, lit.
‘to set in a bush,’ still preserved in Ital. imboscare, = L. in-, in (which
becomes im- before 6); and Late L. boscus, a bush, wood, thicket,
whence OF, bos, mod. F. bois. See Bush. Der. ambush-ment; and
see above.

AMEER, a commander; see Emir,

AMELIORATEH, to better. (F.—L.) Notinearlyuse. Formed
with suffix -ate; on which see Abbreviate.—MF. ameliorer, to
better, improve; see Cotgrave. =F. prefix a- = L, ad; and MF, me-
liorer, to make better, also given by Cotgrave. = L. ad, to; and Late L.
meliorare, to make better (Ducange), from melior, better. See Me-
liorate. Der. ameliorat-ion.

AMEN, so be it. (L.—Gk.—Heb.) Used in the Vulgate version
of Matt. vi. 13, &c.—Gk. ayy, verily. — Heb. amén, ady. verily, so
be it; from adj. amén, firm, true, faithful; from vb. aman, to sustain,
support, found, fix, orig. ‘to be firm.’ i

AMENABLE, easy to lead. (F.—L.) Spelt amesnable by Spenser,
View of the State of Ireland (R.); but the s is superfluous; printed
ameanable in the Globe edition, p. 622, col. 2,1. 1. Formed, with
the common F, suffix -able, from the F, verb. =F. amener, ‘ to bring or
lead unto;’ Cot. Burguy gives the OF. spellings as amener and
amenier.—T', a-, prefix (L. ad); and F. mener, to conduct, to drive,
Late L. minare, to conduct, to lead from place to place ; also, to expel,
drive out, chase away; Ducange. The Late L. minare is from L.
minari, to threaten, from L. mine, threats. See Menace, Der.
amen-abl-y. From the same root, de-mean (1), q. V-

AMEND, to‘free from faults. (F.—L.) ME. amenden, to better,
repair ; Chaucer, C. T. 10511 (F 197); Ancren Riwle, p. 420, Hence
amendement, Gower, C. A. ii. 373 (bk. v. 7153). —OF. amender (mod.
F. amender), to amend, better.—L. @mendare, to free from fault,
correct. [For the unusual change from e to a, see Brachet’s Hist.
Grammar, sect. 685. xi.]—=L. €é=ex, out, away from; and mendum,
or menda, a blemish, fault. On the prefix ex, see Ex-, Der. amend-
able, amend-ment ; also amends, q.v. And see Mend,

AMENDS, reparation. (F.—L.) ME. pl. amendes, amendis,
common in the phr. ¢o maken amendes, to make amends; Will. of

Palerne, 3919 ; Ayenbite of Inwyt, pp. 113, 148.—AF. amendes, Liber
Custumarum, p. 223; pl. of OF. amende, reparation, satisfaction, a
penalty by way of recompense.=OF. amender, to amend. See
Amend.

AMENITY, pleasantness. (F.—L.) The adj. amen, pleasant,
occurs in Lancelot of the Laik, ed. Skeat, 1. 999; spelt amene in a
quotation from Lydgate in Halliwell. Sir T, Browne has amenity,
Vulg. Errors, b. vii. c. 6. § 3. —MF. amenité, ‘ amenity, pleasantness ;’
Cot.—=L. acc. amoenititem, from nom. amoenitds, pleasantness, = L.
amoenus, pleasant; allied to amare, to love. See Amorous.

AMERCEH, to fine, (F.—L.) ME. amercien, amercen, to fine,
mulct. ‘And thowgh ye mowe amercy hem, late [let] mercy be tax-
oure ;’ P. Plowman, B. vi. 40. ‘Amercyn in a corte or lete, amercio ;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 11.—AF. amercier, to fine; not used in OF; see
Year-books of Edw. I, 1338-9, p. 5. The Late L. form is amerciare,
to fine (Ducange) ; observe the citation of amercio above. Due to
the OF, phrase a merci, at the mercy of (the court); whence estre a
merci, to be at the mercy of, and estre amercié, to be at the mercy of,
to be fined; and hence amercier, actively, to fine; see Britton. L. ad
mercédem, orig. ‘fora reward;’ but L. mercés had acquired many other
senses ; as, hire, wages; also reward, in the sense of punishment; also
detriment, cost, trouble, pains. In late times, it acquired also the
sense of ‘ mercy, pity,’ as noted by Ducange, s. v. Merces. See further
under Mercy. @ The etymology has been confused by Blount,
in his Law Dictionary, s. v. Amerciament, and by other writers, who
have supposed the F, merci to be connected with L. misericordia (with
which it has no connexion whatever), and who have strained their
definitions and explanations accordingly. Der. amerce-ment, amercia-
ment; the latter being a Latinised form.

AMETHYST, a precious stone. (L.—Gk.} ‘As for the amethyst,
as well the herb as the stone of that name, they who think that both
the one and the other is (sic) so called because they withstand drunken-
nesse, miscount themselves, and are deceived ;’ Holland, tr.of Plutarch’s
Morals, p. 560. Boyle, Works, vol. i. p. 513, uses the adj. amethystine.
= L. amethystus, used by Pliny, 37.9. [ Note: directly from the Latin,
the F. form being ametiste in Cotgrave. However, the form amaitiste,
from the Old French, is found in the 13th century ; OE. Miscellany,
ed. Morris, p. 98, 1. 171.]—Gk. dpeédvoros, sb, a remedy against


AMIABLE


drunkenness ; an amethyst, from its supposed virtue in that way. =
Gk. dpuévoros, adj. not drunken. = Gk. d-, privative ; and pedvev, to
be drunken, from pé6u, strong drink, wine, cognate with E. mead.
See Mead (1). Der. amethyst-ine.

AMIABLE, friendly; worthy of love. (F.—L.) ‘She was so ami-
able and free ;’ Rom. Rose, 1226. ‘The amiable tonge is the tree of lyf;’
Chaucer, Pers. Tale, De Ira (I 629).—OF. amiable, friendly ; also
lovable, by confusion with aimable (L. amabilis).—L. amicabilis,
friendly, amicable. = L. amica-re, to make friendly; with suffix -bilis,
used in forming adjectives from verbs. =—L. amicus, a friend; prop. an
adj., friendly, loving. —L. amdre, to love. See Amorous. Der.
amiable-ness, amiabl-y; amiabil-i-ty, formed by analogy with amicability,
&c. Amicability and amiability are doublets.

AMICABLE, friendly. (L.) In Levins, ed. 1570, Used by
Bp. Taylor, Peacemaker (R.); he uses amicableness in the same work.
[Formed with suffix -ble as if French, but really from Latin.]=L.
amicabilis, friendly; whence the OF, amiable. Thus amicable and
amiable are doublets. See Amiable. Der. amicabl-y, amicable-ness.

AMICE (1), a rectangular piece of white linen, variously worn by
priests. (F.—L.) ME. amyse, Wyclif, Isa. xxii. 17 (where the Latin
has amictum) ; also amyte, Wyclif, Heb. i. 12 (earlier version). —OF.
amis, amit (Burguy).—L. amictus, a covering (amit being from the
acc. amiclum).=—L. amictus, pp. of amicire, to throw round. —L. am-
(amb-), around; and iacere, to cast. Cf. MF. amict, ‘an amict, or
amice; part of a massing priest’s habit ;’ Cot.

AMICE (2), a hood for pilgrims, &c. (F.—Span.—Teut.?) ‘Came
forth, with pilgrim steps, in amice gray;’ Milton, P. R. iv. 427.
Confused with amice (1), but really from OF. aumuce (F. aumusse),
‘an ornament of furre worne by canons,’ Cot.; also ‘a furred hood ;’
see Fairholt’s Glossary, s. v. almuce.—Span. almucio, ‘an ornament
of furrs, worn by canons,’ Pineda ; where al is the Arab. def. article. =
G. miilse, a cap (cf. Lowl. Sc. mutch). @ But some think that G.
miitse is from Late L. almucia. Cf. Ital. mozzetta, a rochet (Torriano);
Port. murca, a garment lined with fur worn by canons.’

AMID, AMIDST, in the middle of. (E.) Amidst is common in
Milton, P. L. i. 791; &c. Healso uses amid. Shak. also has both
forms. a. Amidst is not. found in earlier English, and the final ¢ is
merely excrescent (as often afters), as in whilst, amongst, from the
older forms whiles, amonges. B. The ME. forms are amiddes, P. Plow-
man, B. xili. 82; iz middes, Pricke of Conscience, 2938; amidde,
Ayenbyte of Inwyt, p. 143; on midden, OF. Homilies, i.87. y. Of
these, the correct type is the earliest, viz. o midden; whence on-midde,
a-midde were formed by the usual loss of final z, and the change of
on to a, as in abed, afoot, asleep. 8. The form amiddes was produced
by adding the adverbial suffix -s, properly the sign of a gen. case, but
commonly used to form adverbs. — AS. on middan, in the middle; see
examples in Grein, il. 249, s. v. midde. Here on is the prep. (mod.
E. oz), used, as often elsewhere, with the sense of ‘in ;’ and middan
is the dat. case of midde, sb. the middle, orig. the nom. fem. of the
adj. mid or midd, middle, cognate with L. medius. See Middle.

AMISS, adv. wrongly. (Scand.) a. In later authors awkwardly
used as asb.; thus ‘urge not my amiss ;’ Shak. Sonn. 151. But pro-
perly an adverb, as in § That he ne dooth or seith somtyme amis ;’
Chaucer, C.T, 11092 (F 780). The mistake was due to the fact
that misse, without a-, meant ‘ an error’ in early times, as will appear.
B. Amiss stands for ME. on misse, lit. in error, where ox (from AS. ov)
has the usual sen$e of ‘ in,’ and passes into the form a-, as in so many
other cases; ef. abed, afoot, asleep. y. ME. amis or on misse may
have been taken immediately from the Icel. phrase & mis, amiss ; from
Icel. @ (=AS. oz) and mis, adv., wrongly. Or we may explain misse
as the dat. case from nom. misse, a disyilabic word, not used as a sb.
in AS., but borrowed from the Icel. missa, a loss; also used with the
notion of ‘error’ in composition, as in Icel. ms-taka, to take in error,
whence E. mistake. The ME. misse hence acquired the sense of
‘guilt,’ ‘offence,’ as in‘to mende my misse,’ to repair my error;
Will. of Palerne, 532. See Miss.

AMITY, friendship. (F.—L.) Udal, Pref. to St. Marke (near the
end);has amytie. Skelton has amyté, Why Come Ye Nat to Courte, 371.

—F, amitié, explained by Cotgrave to mean ‘ amity, friendship,’ &c. ;
OF. amiste, amisted, amistied | = Span. amistad, Ital. amista (for amis-
tate) ].—Late L. *amicitatem, acc. of *amicitas, friendship, a vulgar
form, not recorded by Ducange, but formed by analogy with mendi-
citas from mendicus, antiquitas from antiquus.—L. amicus, friendly. =
L. amare, to love. See Amiable, Amorous. It is impossible
to derive the old Romance forms from L. amicitia.

AMMONTA, an alkali. (L.—Gk.—Egypt.) A modem word,
adopted as a contraction of sal ammodniac, L. sal amméniacum, rock-
salt ; common in old chemical treatises, and still more so in treatises
on alchemy. [Chaucer speaks of sal armoniak, C.'T., G 798, 824;
but this is a false form.]—Gk. dpoviaxov, sal ammoniac, rock-salt ;
Dioscorides.— Gk. dupwmds, Libyan.—Gk. dupay, the Libyan Zeus-


AMPHIBRACH 19.


‘Ammon; known to be an Egyptian word; Herodotus, ii. 42; and


Smith, Dict. of the Bible, s.v. Amon. It is said that sal ammoniac was
first obtained near the temple of Jupiter Ammon,

AMMONITE, a kind of fossil shell. (Gk.—Egypt.) Modern;
first in 1758, Formed by adding the suffix -i/e to the name Ammon.
The fossil is sometimes called by the L. name of cornu Ammonis, the
horn of Ammon, because it much resembles a closely twisted ram’s
horn, and was fancifully likened to the horns of Jupiter Ammon, who
was represented as a man with the horns of aram. See above.

AMMUNITION, store for defence. (F.—L.) Used by Bacon,
Advice to Sir G. Villiers (R.); and by Milton, Samson, 1277. From
MF. amunition, a soldiers’ corruption of munition,‘ victuals for an army,’
Cot.; due to substituting ?’amunition for la munition (Littré). = L. acc.
minitionem, from miinitio, a defence, a defending. —L, minire, to de-
fend. See Munition.

AMNESTY, a pardon of offenders; lit. a forgetting of offences.
(F.—L.—Gk.) Used in the L. form amnestia by Howell, b. iii.
letter 6 (1647). Barrow has amnesty, vol. iii. serm. 41.—F. amuestie,
which Cotgrave explains by ‘forgetfulness of things past.’=L. am-
néstia, a Latinised form of the Gk. word, [Ducange gives amuescia,
but this is an error; for ¢ is constantly mistaken for c in MSS., and
frequently so printed.] — Gk. durvnoria, a forgetfulness, esp. of wrong;
hence, an amnesty.—Gk. duvnoros, forgotten, unremembered. = Gk.
d-, privative ; and pydoua:, Il remember; from a stem mnda, by grada-
tion from a root men; cf. L.me-min-i, 1 remember. = 4/MEN, to think;
cf. Skt. man, to think. :

AMONG, AMONGST, amidst. (E.) a. The form amongst, like
amidst, is not very old, and has assumed an additional final ¢, such as
is often added after s; cf. whilst, amidst, from the older forms whiles,
amiddes, Amongist occurs in Torrent of Portugal, 1. 2027 [2127];
but I suppose it does not occur earlier than the fifteenth century.
B. The usual form is amonges, as in P. Plowman, B. v. 129; amonge
is also common, id. v. 169. Earlier, the commonest form is among,
Ancren Riwle, p. 158. y. Amonges is formed by adding the usual
adverbial suffix -es, properly a genitive form, and amonge by adding
the adverbial suffix -e, also common, properly a dative form.=AS.
onmang, prep. among, Levit. xxiv. 10; the forms on gemang (John, iy.
31) and gemang (Mark, ili. 3) also occur, the last of the three being
commonest. B. Thus the prefix is AS. oz, and the full form oxmang’,
used as a preposition. Like most prepositions, it originated with a
substantive, viz. AS. (ge)mang, a crowd, assembly, lit. a mixture; so
that on mang(e) or on gemang(e) meant ‘in a crowd.’ Allied to AS.
mengan, mengan, to mix; Grein, ii. 231. See Mingle.

AMOROUS, full of love. (F.—L.) Gower has amorous, C. A.
i. 89 (bk. i. 1414); it also occurs in the Romaunt of the Rose, 83. —
OF. amoros, mod. F. amoureux. — Late L. amoérésus, full of love; Du-
cange. Formed with the common L, suffix -dsws from amdr-, stem of
amor, love. —L.amdare,tolove. Der.amorous-ly, amorous-ness. Also F.
amour, love (now used in Eng.), from L. amdrem, acc. case of amor, love.

AMORPHOUS, formless, (Gk.) In Bailey (1731). Formed
from Gk. 4-, privative; and Gk. poppy, shape, form.

AMORT, inanimate, spiritless. (F.—L.) ‘ What, all amort?’ Shak.
1 Hen. VI, iii. 2.124. From F. @ la mort, to the death; turned into
E. all amort, as if amort were the F. @ mort. —L. ad, to; illam, acc.
fem. of ille, he; mortem, acc. of mors, death. See Mortal.

AMOUNT, to mount upto. (F.—L.) ME. amounten, 1o mount
up to, come up to, esp. in reckoning, Chaucer, C. T. 3899, 4989
(A 3901, B 569); Rob. of Glouc. p. 497, 1.10214. Amuntet, ascends,
Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 28. — OF. amonter, to amount to.
= OF. a mont, towards or toa mountain, to a large heap. [The adv.
amont is also common, in the sense of ‘uphill,’ ‘upward,’ and is formed
by joining @ with mont.]—L. ad montem, lit. to a mountain; where
montem is the acc. case of mons, a mountain. See Mount, Moun-
tain. Der. amount, sb.

AMPERSAND, a corruption of ‘ and per se, and,’ the old way of
spelling and naming the character & ; i.e. ‘& byitself=and.’ (Hybrid;
E., L., and E.) Common in E. dialects. So, in ME., we have A per
se, A by itself; Henrysoun, Test. of Creseide, 78.

AMPHI-, prefix. (Gk.) The strict sense is ‘on both sides.’ = Gk.
dupi, on both sides; also, around.-L. ambi, amb-, on both sides,
around; see Ambi-, where other cognate forms are given, Der.


amphi-bious, amphi-brach, amphi-theatre.


AMPHIBIOUS, living both on land and in water. (Gk.) In
Sir T. Browne’s Vulg. Errors, bk. iii. c. 13. § 8. From amphibi-a,
pl., amphibious animals; with suffix -ovs.—Gk,. appiBios, living a
double life, i.e. both on land and water. = Gk. dpi, here used in the
sense of ‘double ;’ and Bios, life. See Amphi- and Biology.

AMPHIBRACH, a foot in prosody. (Gk.) Puttenham has
amphibrachus ; Eng. Poesie, bk. ii. c. 13 (14). A name given, in
prosody, to a foot composed ofa short syllable on each side of a long
one (u—v).—Gk. dupiBpaxus, the same.—Gk. dupi, on both sides ;

C2


20 AMPHISBAINA


and Bpaxvs, short; cognate with L. breuis, short, whence EK. brief.
See Amphi- and Brief.

AMPHISBZENA, a fabled serpent, with a head at each end, and
able to proceed in either direction. (L.—Gk.) In Milton, P. L. x.
524.—L. amphisbena, = Gk. dupicBava, — Gk. dupis, both ways; and
Baivey, to go.

AMPHITHEATRE, an oval theatre. (Gk.) Puttenham has the
pl. amphitheaters; Eng. Poesie, bk. i. c. 17. From Gk. duqe8éatpov,
a theatre with seats all round the arena. [Properly neuter from
dudiOéaTpos, i.e. seeing all round.]|—Gk. dui, on both sides; and
0éarpov, a theatre, place for seeing shows, from Gk. @edopat, I see.

AMPHORA, a two-handled jar. (L.—Gk.) A glas clepid am-
phora;’ Book of Quinte Essence, ab. 1465, ed. Furnivall, p. 5.1. 4.—
L. amphora. —Gk. duopeds, short for dupipopevs, a two-handled jar.
—Gk. dui, on both sides; popevs, a bearer, from épev, to bear.
See Amphi- and Bear (1).

AMPLE, full, large. (F.—L.) Used by Hall, Hen, VIII, an. 31.
§ 23; Shak. K. Lear, i. 1. 82. [Fox and Udal use the obsolete de-
rivative ampliate, and Burnet has ampliation ; from L. ampliire, to
augment. ] =F. ample, which Cotgrave explains by ‘ full, ample, wide,
large,’ &c.—L. amplus, large, spacious. Bréal derives L. amplus from
am-, amb-, prefix, ‘about ;” and -plus, as in du-plus, double (Gk. &-
mAds). See Ambi- and Double. Der. ampli-tude; ampli-fy, K.
Lear, v. 3. 206 (F. amplifier, from L. amplificire) ; ampli-fic-at-ion ;
see amplifier and amplification in Cotgrave. Also ampl-y, ample-ness.

AMPUTATE, to cut off round about, prune. (L.) Sir T. Browne
has amputation, Vulg. Errors, b. iv. c. 5. § 1. On the suffix -ate, see
Abbreviate. —L. amputire, to cut off round about, pp. amputatus.
=L. am-, short for amb-, ambi-, round about (see Ambi-) ; and L.
putare, to cleanse, also to lop or prune trees, from L. putus, pure,
clean; from the same root as Pure, q.v. Der. amputat-ion.

AMUCK, AMOK, a term applied to mad rage. (Malay.) Only
in phr. ‘to run amuck,’ where amuck is all one word; yet Dryden has
“runs an Indian muck,’ Hind and Panther, iii. 1188. To run amuck=
to run about in a mad rage. = Malay amuq, ‘rushing in a state of frenzy
to the commission of indiscriminate murder ;’ Marsden, Malay Dict.

AMULET, a charm against evil. (F.—L.) Used by Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 5, part 3. —F. amulette, ‘a counter-charm ;’ Cot.
= L. amulétum, a talisman, esp. one hung round the neck (Pliny). The
suggestion that this is a word of Arabic origin is now commonly
abandoned.

AMUSE, to engage, divert. (F.—L.) Miltonhasamus’d,P.L.vi.581,
623 ; and see Cowley, To the Royal Soc., 1. 20. —F. amuser, ‘to amuse,
to make to muse or think of; wonder or gaze at; to put intoa dump;
to stay, hold, or delay from going forward by discourse, questions, or
any other amusements ;’ Cot. F.a-, prefix (L. ad), at; and OF. muser,
to stare, gaze fixedly, like a simpleton, whence E. muse, verb, used by
Chaucer, C. T., B 1033. See Muse, v. Der. amus-ing, amus-ing-ly,
amuse-ment ; also amus-ive, used in Thomson’s Seasons, Spring, 216.

AMY GDALOID, almond-shaped. (Gk.) See Almond.

AN, A, the indef. article. (E.) The final 2 is occasionally pre-
served before a consonant in Layamon’s Brut, which begins with the
words ‘Az preost wes on leoden, where the later text has ‘A prest
was in londe.’ This shows that the loss of x before a consonant was
taking place about A.D. 1200.—AS. dm, often used as the indef.
article ; see examples in Grein, i. 30; but properly having the sense
of ‘ one,’ being the very word from which mod. E. one is derived. An
and a represent the unstressed forms of oxe. See One.

AN-, A-, negative prefix. (Gk.) Gk. dy-, d-, negative prefix.
Cognate with the Skt. an-, a-, L. in-, G. and E. un-, Olrish an-, all
negative prefixes. Brugm.i. § 432. See Un-. The form an- occurs
in several words in English, e.g. an-archy, an-ecdote, an-eroid, an-odyne,
an-omaly, an-onymous.. The form a- is still commoner; e. g. a-byss,
a-chromatic, a~-maranth, a-sylum, a-symplote, a-tom.

AN, if. (E.) See And.

ANA-, AN.-, prefix. (Gk.) It appears as an- in an-eurism, a kind
of tumour. The usual form is ana-, as in ana-logy, ana-baptist. From
Gk. dvd, upon, on, up; also back, again; it has the same form ana
in Gothic, and is cognate with E. on. See On.

ANA, ANNA, the sixteenth part of a rupee. (Hindustani.) Hind.
dna (written anda in Skt.), the sixteenth of a rupee, commonly, but
incorrectly, written anna. Also used as a measure, to express a
sixteenth part ofa thing; H. H. Wilson, Gloss. of Indian Terms, p. 24.
Given as dna; Forbes, Hind. Dict.

ANABAPTIST, one who baptises again. (Gk.) Used by Sir T.
More, Works, p. 656g. Formed by prefixing the Gk. avd, again, to


baptist. See Ana- and Baptist. So also ana-baptism. @q The
sect of Anabaptists arose in Germany about 1521 (Haydn).
ANACHRONISM, an error in chronology. (Gk.) Used by


Walpole; Anecd. of Painting, vol. i.c.2.§32. From Gk.dvaypovicpds,


ANATOMY


M . * eye ° ‘ > '
ava, up, sometimes used in composition in the sense of ‘ backwards;


and xpévos, time. See Ana- and Chronic.

ANACONDA, a large serpent. (Cingalese.) Now used of a S.
American boa, but previously applied to a large snake in Ceylon; see
the account in Yule; whose etymology, however, is incorrect. The
true Sinhalese (Cingalese) word is henakandaya, a name at first applied
to the whip-snake, and transferred to some large serpents by mistake.
From hena, ‘lightning,’ and kanda, ‘stem;’ with suffix -ya@. See N.
and Q., 8 S. xii. 123; 9 S. viii. 80.

AN AEMTA, bloodlessness. (L.—Gk.) Modern. A Latinised form
of Gk.dva:pia,want of blood. = Gk.dv-, negative prefix; and aiua, blood..

AN ASTHETIC, adj., rendering persons insensible to pain.
(Gk.) Modern. Formed by prefixing the Gk. dv-, cognate with E.
un-, negative prefix, to Gk. aia@y71«ds, perceptive, full of perception.
See Atsthetics. Also used as a Sb.

ANAGRAM, a change in a word due to transposition of letters.
(F.—L.—Gk.) Ben Jonson, in his Masque of Hymen, speaks of
‘IUNO, whose great name Is UNIO in the anxagram,’ =F. anagramme
(Cotgrave). = L. *anagramma, borrowed from Gk. = Gk, dvaypappa, an
anagram. = Gk. dvd, up, which is also used in a distributive sense ; and
ypaupua, a written character, letter, from Gk. ypapey, to write, origin-
ally to cut, scratch marks; allied to E. carve. See Graphic. Der.
anagramm-at-ic-al, anagramm-at-ic-al-ly, anagramm-at-ist. q Ex-
amples of anagrams. Gk. ’Apawvén, Arsinoe, transposed to tov “Hpas,
Hera’s violet. L. Galenus, Galen, transposed to angelus, an angel.
E. Fokn Bunyan, who transposed his name to Nu hony in a B!

ANALOGY, proportion, correspondence. (F.—L.—Gk.) Tyndal
has analogie, Works, p. 473; so in Elyot, The Governour, b. ii. c. 4.
§ 2,— } .analogie; Cot. —L.analogia. = Gk. dvadoyia, equality of ratios,
correspondence, analogy. = Gk. ava, up, upon, throughout; and -Aoyia,
made by adding the suffix -ya@ (= Gk. -ca) to the stem of Ady-os, a word,
a statement, account, proportion, from the second grade (Aoy-) of Gk.
A€y-erv, to speak. See Logie. Der. analog-ic-al, analog-ic-al-ly,
analog-ise, analog-ism, analog-ist, analog-ous ; also analogue (F. ana-
logue, prop. an adj. signifying analogous, from Gk. adj. dvadoyos,
proportionate, conformable). j

ANALYSE, to resolve into parts. (F.—Gk.) Sir T. Browne,
Hydriotaphia, c. 3. § 18, says, ‘ what the sun compoundeth, fire ana-
lyzeth, not transmuteth.’ Ben Jonson has analytic, Poetaster, A. v.
sc. I. 134. Analysts occurs in Kirke’s Argument to Spenser’s Shep.
Kal. § 2.. Cotgrave gives no related word in French, and perhaps
the F. analyser is later. Most likely the word analytic was borrowed
directly from the Gk. dvadvurixds, and the verb to analyse may easily
have been formed directly from the F. sb. analyse, or Late L. analysis,
i.e. Gk. dvaAvois, a loosening, resolving. Gk. dvadvev, to loosen,
undo, resolve. —Gk, dva, back; and Avev, to loosen. See Lose.
Der. analys-t; also (from analytic) analytic-al, analytic-al-ly.

ANANWAS, the pine-apple. (Port.— Brazil.) Thomson has anana,
with wrong form and accent; Summer, 685.— Port. ananas; Vieyra,
p- 284 (Span. ananas, Pineda). — Guarani anand, the name of the fruit ;.
that of the plant is za@za; in La Plata, both fruit and plant are called
anand (Granada). J ~The Peruv. name was achupalla.

ANAPEST, ANAP ASST, the name of a foot in prosody. (L.—
Gk.) In Puttenham, Eng. Poesie, bk. ii. c.13 (14).—L. anapestus. = Gk.
avanaoros, struck back, rebounding ; because the foot is the reverse of
a dactyl. — Gk. dvamatew, to strike back or again. —Gk.dva; and maiev,
to strike. 4 An anapest is marked uu -, the reverse of the dactyl,.
Or -—uvw. 2

ANARCHY, want of. government in a state. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Milton has anarch, P. L. it. 988; and anarchy, P. L. ii. 896.—F.
anarchie, ‘an anarchy, a commonwealth without a head or governour ;’
Cot.—L. anarchia.—Gk. dvapxia, a being dvapxos, without head or
chief; from Gk. dv- (E. un-) and dpxés, a ruler, from Gk. dpxewv, to
rule, to be the first. See Arch-. Der. anarch-ic, anarch-ic-al,
anarch-ism, anarch-ist. .

ANATHEMA, a curse. (L.—Gk.) Bacon, Essay on Goodness,
refers to anathema as used by St. Paul. —L. anathema, in the Vulgate
version of Rom. ix. 3.—Gk. dvadeya, lit. a thing devoted; hence, a
thing devoted to evil, accursed. —Gk. dvatiOny, I devote. — Gk. ava,
up; and ri@nu, I lay, place, put. Cf. Theme. Der. anathemat-ise:
(from stem dvadeyar- of sb. dvd0eua) in Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, ed.
1665, p. 348; from MF. anathematiser, Cot. :

ANATOMY, the art of dissection. (F.—L.—Gk.) Anatomy, in
old writers, commonly means ‘a skeleton,’ as being a thing on which
anatomy has been performed ; see Shak. Com. Errors, v. 238. Gas-
coigne has a poem on The Anatomye of a Lover. =F. anatomie, ‘ana-
tomy; a section of, and looking into, all parts of the body; also, an
anatomy, or carkass cut up;’ Cot.—L. anatomia.—Gk. dvaropia, of
which a more classical form is dvaropun, dissection. — Gk, dvarépveiv;,
to cut up, cut open. —Gk. dvd, up; and réuvew (second grade top-),


an anachronism.=Gk. dvaxpovi(ev, to refer.to a.wrong time.—Gk. | to cut. See Tome. Der. anatomeic-al, anatom-ise, anatom-ist.


ANCESTOR


ANCESTOR, a predecessor, forefather. (F:—L.) ME. ancessour,
ancestre, auncestre. Chaucer has auncestres, C. T. 6742 (D 1160).
Ancestree, Rob. of Brunne’s tr. of Langtoft, p. 9; ancessoure, id. p. 1773
from OF, ancestre, nom, and ancessour, acc., ofthesamesb.  B. Thus
OF. ancestre represents L. antecessor, nom.; and OF. ancessour is from
antecessorem, acc. case of antecessor, a fore-goer. = L. ante, before ; and
cédere, pp.cessus, to go. See Cede. Der. ancestr-al, ancestr-y, ancestr-ess,

ANCHOR, a hooked iron instrument for holding a ship inits place.
(L.—Gk.) ME. anker, Havelok, 521. AS. ancor, Grein, i. 3.—L.
ancora; sometimes illspelt azchora, which is imitated in the mod. E.
form.=Gk. d&y«upa, an anchor; Max Miiller, Lectures, i. 108, note ;
8thed. Orig.a bent hook, and allied to Gk. dyxwv, a bend; also to
Skt. afich, to bend. From 4/ANQ, to bend, curve; Brugm. i. § 633.
See Angle, a hook. Der. anchor, verb, anchor-age.

ANCHORET, ANCHORITH, a recluse, hermit. (F.—Late
L.—Gk.) The former is the better spelling. ME. has the form avcre,
which is rather common, and used by Wyclif, Langland, and others;
esp. in the phrase Ancren Riwle, i.e. the rule of (female) anchorets,
the title of a work written early in the 13th century. Shak. has anchor,
Hamlet, iii. 2. 229. This ME. word is modified from AS. ancra, or
ancer, a hermit. B. The AS. ancer-lif, i.e. ‘ hermit-life,’ is used to
translate the L. wita anachOrética in Beda’s Eccl. Hist. iv. 28; and the
word ancer is no native word, but.a mere adaptation of Late L. ana-
choréta,ahermit,recluse. ‘y. The more modern form anchoret, which
occurs in Burton’s Anat. of Melan., pt. I. s. 2. m. 2. subs. 6. § 3, is
from the French. — MF. anachorete, m. ‘the hermit called an ankrosse
[corruption of ankress, a female anker or anchoret | or anchorite ;’ Cot.
= Late L. anachéréta, a recluse. = Gk. dvaywpnrns, a recluse, lit. one
who has retired from the world. = Gk. dvaxwpety, to retire. — Gk. ava,
back; and xwpéev, ywpeiy, to withdraw, make room, from xpos,
space, room; related to xwpis, asunder, apart, and to x7pos, bereft,
‘Lhe form of the root is GHE, GHO, See Prellwitz. —

ANCHOVY, a small fish. (Span.) Formerly written anchove.
Shak. has anchoues, 1 Hen. LV, ii. 4. 588 (qu. of 1596). Burton,
-Anatomy of Melancholy, speaks of ‘ sausages, anxchoves, tobacco, ca-
veare;’ p. 106, ed. 1827.—Span. (and Port.) axchova. J Kemoter
origin uncertain. Mahn (in Webster) says ‘a word of Iberian origin,
lit. a dried or pickled fish, from Biscayan antzua, anchua, anchuva,
dry.’ I find the Basque forms anchoa, dnchua, dnchova, signifying
‘anchovy,’ in the Dict. Francois-Basque by M.-H.-L. Fabre. Again,
in the Diccionaria Trilingue del padre Manuel de Larramendi, in
Spanish, Basque, and Latin, I find: ‘Seco, aplicado a los pechos de
la muger, antzua, antzutua, L. siccus,’ i.e. dry, applied to a woman’s
breasts; Basque antzua, antzutua, L. siccus. Perhaps Mahn’s suggestion
is correct.

ANCIENT (1), old. (F.—L.) Skelton has aunciently, Works, ed.
Dyce, i. 7. The ME. form is auncyen, Mandeville, p. 93; thus the
final ¢ is excrescent, as in tyrant.—OF. ancien (mod. F, ancien), old;
cognate with Ital. anziano, Span. anciano.—Late L. antidnus, old;
Ducange. Formed, with L. suffix -anus, from L. ante, before. See
Ante-. Der. ancient-ly, ancient-ness.

ANCIENT (2), a banner, standard-bearer. (F.—L.) In Shak.
1 Hen. 1V, iv. 2.34; cf. Oth. i. 1. 33. The form of the word is due
to confusion with ancient (1), but it really represents the MF. enseigze,
m. ‘an ensigne, auncient, standard-bearer,’ Cot.; closely related to
MF, enseigne, f., an ensign, standard.. This explains the twofold
sense. See Ensign.

ANCILLARY, subservient. (L.) In Blackstone, Comment. iii. 7.
§ 19. —L. ancillar-is, belonging to a maid-servant. = L. ancilla, a maid,
dimin. of ancula, a fem. dimin. of early L. ancus (f. anca),a servant.

ANCLE; see Ankle.

AND, copulative conjunction. (E.) Common from the earliest
times. AS. and, also written ond; by-form, end.+4-O. Fries. ande, and,
an; end, en; Du. en; Icel. enda, if, even if, moreover (rather differently
used, but the same word or closely related); OHG. anti, enti, inti, unti;
mod. G. und. Teut. types, *andi, conj., *anda, prep.; see N.E.D.
The latter is the same as the AS. prefix azd- (occurring in along
and answer) and the Gothic prefix and-, which answer to the Gk.
avra, over against, and are clearly related to the L. anée, before,
Gk, dvti, over against, Skt. antz, a Vedic form, equivalent to Gk.
dvti, over against ; (see antika, vicinity, in Benfey’s Skt. Dict. p. 28.)
This sense of ‘ over against’ is fairly well preserved in G. entgegen,
and in the AS. andswarian, E. an-swer; and from this sense to
its use as a copulative conjunction is aneasy step. See Answer. 2.
The use of and to mean ‘if’ arose from a peculiar use of the conjunc-
tion, and is prob. independent of Icel. exda, if, but parallel in develop-
ment. It occurs in Havelok; as: ‘Andthou wile my conseyl tro, Ful
wel shal ich with the do;’ i.e. if you will trust my counsel, I willdo
very well by you; 1. 2862. 3. In order to differentiate the senses, i.e.
to mark off the two meanings of azd more readily, it became at last
usual to drop the final d when the word was used in the sense of ‘if ;’


ANGEL 21


a use very common in Skakespeare. Thus Shakespeare’s an is nothing
but another use of the common word and. When the force of az grew
misty, it was reduplicated by the addition of ‘if;’ so that an #, really
meaning ‘if-if,’ is of common occurrence. Neither is there anything
remarkable in the use of avd if as another spelling of an if; and it has
been preserved in this form in a well-known passage in the Bible:
‘But and if, Matt. xxiv. 48. 4. Ifthe Skt. anti is allied to anta-s,
‘end,’ there is an etymological connexion with end. See Hind.

ANDANTEH, slow, slowly, (Ital.) A musicalterm. Borrowed from
Ttal. andante, adj. going; sb. a moderate movement. It is properly
the pres. part. of the verb andare, to go; which is of unknown origin.

ANDIRON, a kitchen firedog. (F.—L.?) The ME. forms are
numerous, as anderne, aunderne, aundirne, aundire, awndyern, &c. In the
Prompt. Parv. p.19, we have ‘ Awnderne, awndyryn, awndyrn, andena,
ipoporgium.’ In Wright’s Vocabularies, vol. i. p- 171, we have
Aundyrnes, les chenes;’ and at p. 197, ‘ Awndyren, andena.’ [It is
clear that tlie ending -iroz is a corruption, upon English soil, in order
to give the word some sort of sense.] The form aundyre comes very
near to the original French. — OF. andier (mod. F. dandier, i.e. l’andier,
the article being prefixed as in Jierre, ivy, from L. hedera), a fire-dog.
@ The remoter originis obscure; but it may be noted that the Late L.
forms are numerous, viz. andasium, a fire-dog, prop for supporting the
logs, and, with the same sense, andedus, andena (quoted above in the
extract from the Prompt. Parv.), anderius. The F. form corresponds
with the last of these; with andena cf. OF. andein and the mod.
Burgundian azdain, an anditon (Mignard), The form andasium
corresponds to Span. andas, a frame or bier on which to carry a
person; cf. Portuguese andas, ‘a bier, or rather, the two poles be-
longing to it,’ Vieyra; also Port. andor, ‘a bier to carry images in
a procession, a sort ofsedan;’ id. Possibly related to L. amitem, acc.
of ames, a pole, esp. a pole for bearing a litter (Lewis). See Korting,
§ 595. 2. No certain origin of this word has been given. We may,
however, easily see that the E. zrox formed, originally, no part of it.
We can guess, perhaps, how it came to be added, viz. by confusion
with the AS. brand-isen, lit. ‘a brand-iron,’ which had the same mean-
ing, and became, at a later time, not only bronxdiron but brondyre.

ANECDOTE, a story in private life. (F.—L.—Gk.) Used by
Sterne, Serm. 5. § 24. ‘ Anecdots, treatises or pieces that never were pub-
lished ;’ Glossographia Anglicana Nova, ed. 1719.—F. anecdote, f.,
not in Cotgrave. —Gk. dvéxdora, neut. pl. (used as fem. sing.), from
avéxdoros, unpublished ; so that our word means properly ‘an unpub-
lished story,’ ‘a piece of gossip among friends.’ = Gk. dv- (E. un-) ;
and éx5oros, given out, from é#, out, and di5wj, I give; from the
same root as E. Donation, q.v. Der. anecdot-al, anecdot-ic-al.

ANEMONE, the name ofa flower. (Gk.) In Thomson, Spring,
536. It means the ‘ wind-flower ;’ in Greek dvepwyy, the accent in E.
being now placed on e instead of 0. —Gk. dveyos, the wind. From
the same root as. Animate, q.v. Cf. anemo-meter, an instrument for
measuring the wind s velocity.

ANENT, regarding, near to, beside. (E.) Nearly obsolete, except
in Northern English. ME. anent, anende, anendes, anentis, &c. [The
forms anendes, anentis, were made by adding the suffix -es, -is, orig.
the sign of a gen. case, but frequently used as an adverbial suffix; for
anentes, see Cursor Mundi,1. 26957.] Anent is a contraction of anefent,
or onefent, which occurs in the Ancren Riwle, p. 164, as another read-
ing for anonde. In this form, the ¢ is excrescent, as commonly after
(cf. tyrant, ancient), and the true form is anefen or onefen. — AS. on-efen,
prep. near; sometimes written ov-emn, by contraction; Grein, i. 218,
225.—AS. on, prep. in, and efen, even, equal; so that on-efen meant
originally ‘onan equality with,’ or ‘even with.” See Even. @ The
cognate G. neben, beside, is similarly derived from G. in, in, and eben,
even; and, to complete the analogy, was sometimes spelt nebent. See
Matzner, Worterbuch; Stratmann, s. v. anefen; Koch, Engl. Gramm.
y. ii. p. 389.

ANEROID, dry; without liquid mercury; applied to a baro-
meter. (Gk.) Modern. = Gk. d-, privative; ynpd-s, wet ; and €(6-os, form.
Gk. vnpds is from vaev, to flow.

ANEURISM, ANEURYSM, a morbid dilatation of the coats
of an artery. (Gk.) Formed as if from aneurisma, false form of aneu-
rysma, a Latinised form of Gk. dvedpyopa, a widening. — Gk. dy-, for
dvd, up; and edpivev, to widen, from edpus, wide.Skt. uru-s, large,
wide. Cf. MF. aneurzsme in Cotgrave.

ANEW, newly. (E.) A shortening of ME. of-newe, used by Chau-
cer, C. T., E938. Cf. adown for AS. ofdiine. Here cfis the AS. of,
prep., and newe is our mod. E. new; the final -e being an adverbial


suffix, as usual.


ANGEL, a divine messenger. (F.—L.—Gk.) [In very early use.
AS. engel, engel, an angel ; Grein, i. 227 ; borrowed from L. angelus.]
But the modern pronunciation is due to the OF. angele, from L. acc.
angelum.=Gk. dyyeAos, lit. a messenger; hence, an angel. Cf. ay-
‘yapos, a mounted courier, which is an old Persian word ; also Skt.


22 ANGER


aiigira-s, a messenger from the gods to men (Macdonell). Der. axgel-
ac, angel-ic-al, angel-ic-al-ly; also angelic-a, a plant.

ANGER, hot displeasure due to a sense of injury. (Scand.) In
ME. the word is more passive in its use, and denotes ‘ affliction,’
“trouble,’ ‘sore vexation.’ ‘If he thole here anger and wa’=if he
suffer here affliction and woe; Hampole’s Pricke of Conscience, 3517.
—Icel. angr, grief, sorrow; Dan. anger, compunction, regret ; Swed.
anger, compunction, regret.-+-Lat. angor, a strangling, bodily torture;
also mental torture, anguish ; from angere, to strangle. Cf. AS. ange,
oppressed, sad; Gk. dyxev, to strangle; Skt. azhas, pain ; all from
4 ANGH, to choke, oppress.. See Brugm. i. § 178. Der. angr-y,
angr-i-ly; from the same root, anguish, anxious ; also quinsy, q.V.;
and L. angina.

ANGINA, severe suffering. (L.) Borrowed from L. angina,
quinsy, lit. ‘a choking,’ from angere, to strangle. See above.

ANGLE (1), a bend, acorner. (F.—L.) Chaucer has angles, C.T.,
F 230; also angle, as a term of astrology (L. angulus), id. 263.—OF.
angle (mod. F. angle), anangle. = L. angulum, acc. of angulus, an angle.
Cf. Gk. dyxvAos, crooked. From the same root as the next word.
Der. angul-ar, angul-ar-ly, angul-ar-i-ty ; all from the L. angul-dris,
adj., from angulus.

ANGLE (2), a fishing-hook. (E.) In very early use. AS. angel,
a fish-hook, Matt. xvii. 27; spelt ongul in the Northumbrian version.
+lcel. dngull, Dan, angel, a fishing-hook; G. angel, dimin. of
OHG. ango, a prickle, fish-hook. Cf. L. uneus, a hook, Gk. 6yxos ;
aya, a bend; ayxvpa, a bent hook, whence E. anchor; Skt. azich,
to bend. =4/ANQ, to bend, curve; Fick, i. 6. From the same root
comes the word above ; also Anchor, q.v. Der. angle, vb., angl-er,
angl-ing.

ANGRY, i.e. anger-y; Chaucer, C.T. 12893 (C 959); see Anger.

ANGUISH, oppression; great pain. (F.—L.) ME. anguts, an-
guise, angoise, &c. Spelt anguys in Pricke of Conscience, 2240; an-
guisse, Rob. of Glouc. p. 177, 1. 3687 5 anguise, Ancren Riwle, p. 178.
— OF, anguisse, angoisse, mod. I. angoisse, f., anguish.—L. angustia,
narrowness, poverty, perplexity.—L. angustus, narrow.—L. angere,
to stifle, choke, strangle.+Gk. dyyxeiv, to strangle. —4/ANGH, to
choke. See Anger, from the same root.

AN-HUNGERED, very hungry. (E.) In Matt. xii. 1. Itisa
variant of a-hungred, and this, of a/yngred; see P. Plowman, B. x. 59.
All from AS. of-hyngred, very hungry, pp. of of-hyngrian, to be very
hungry. = AS. of-, very; and hyngrian, to hunger, from Aungor, hunger.
See Of, Off, and Hunger.

ANHYDROUS, waterless. (Gk.) Modern. — Gk. dvvdpos, water-
less. — Gk. dv-, neg. prefix; and véwp, water; with suffix -ows added.
See Hydra.

ANTILE, old-woman-like. (L.) Used by Walpole, Catalogue of
Engravers ; Sterne, Serm. 21. § 19, has anility. Notin early use. —L.
anilis, like an old woman. =—L. anus, an old woman, Cf.OHG. ana,
a grandmother.

ANILINE, a liquid which furnishes a number of dyes. (F.—
Span. — Arab. — Pers. —Skt.) Modern. Formed with suffix -ine (I. -ine,
L. -inus) from anil, a shrub from which the W. Indian indigo is made.
‘Anil ..is akind of thing to dye blue withal ;” Eng. Garner, ed. Arber,
vi. 18 (ab. 1586).—F. anil, anil.—Span. azil, ‘azure, skie colour;’
Minsheu, p. 25, 1. 12.— Arab. an-nil, for al nil; where al is the def.
art., and nil is borrowed from Pers. nil, the indigo plant. =—Skt, nidi,
the indigo plant; from zila-s, blue, See Lilac, Nylghau.

ANIMADVERT, to criticise, censure. (L.) Lit. ‘to turn the
mind to.’ In Glossographia Anglicana Nova, ed. 1719. —L. anim-
aduertere, to turn the mind to, pp. animaduersus.—L. anim-us, the
mind; ad, to; and wzertere, toturn. For roots, se Animate and
Verse. Der. animadvers-ion, in Ben Jonson’s Discoveries, sect. 123.

ANIMAL, a living creature, (L.) In Hamlet, ii. 2. 320; used
as an adj., Chaucer, C. T., A 2749.—L. animal, a breathing creature.
—L. anima, breath. See below. Der. animal-ism, animal-cule.

ANIMATE, to endue with life. (L.) Used by Hall, Edw. IV,
an. 8. § 5.—L. animatus, pp. of animdre, to give life to.—L. anima,
breath, life. —4/AN, to breathe; which appears not only in the Skt.
an, to breathe, blow, live; Gk. dveyos, wind; but also in Goth.
us-anan, to breathe out, expire, Mark xv. 37, 39; and in Icel. anda,
to breathe, dud, breath, whence Lowland Scotch aynd, breath, Der.
animat-ed, animat-ion,

ANIMOSITY, vehemence of passion, hostility. (F.—L.) Bp.
Hall, Letter of Apology, has the pl. animosities; so in Bacon, Adv.
of Learning, ii, xxiii. 48.—F, animosité, ‘animosity, stoutness ;’ Cot. —
L. acc. animosititem, from nom. animdsitds, ardour, vehemence. — L.
animésus, full of spirit. — L.animus, mind , courage. Gk.dvepos, breath,
wind. —4/AN, to breathe. See Animate, @ The L. animus is
now used as an FE. word.

ANISE, a medicinal herb. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Matt. xxiii. 23, the
Wycliffite versions have both aneseand anete, In Wright's Lyric Poetry,


ANNIVERSARY


p- 26, we find anys; and in Wright’s Vocabularies, i. 227, is: ‘Hoc
anisium, avys.’ = F.anis, anise; see Cotgrave. = L. anisum, also anéthum
(whence Wyclif’s anete).— Gk. duaoy, dynoov, usually avnOor, anise,
dill. Perhaps named from its scent; cf. dv-euos, a breath of air
(Prellwitz). Der. aniseed (for anise-seed). :

ANKER, a liquid measure of 8 to 10 gallons. (Du.—Late L.)
Mentioned in Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1731, as in use at Amsterdam.
— Du. anker, the same; cf. Swed. ankare; G. anker. Probably from
Late L. anceria, a keg, a small vat.

ANKLE, the joint between leg and foot. (E.) ME. ancle, Chaucer,
C. T. 1662 (A 1660). [Also anclowe, Ellis’s Specimens, i. 279. AS.
ancléow, ankle, Alfric’s Gloss., Voc. 160. 21 ; which is the origin of
ME. anclowe.| But the mod. E. form answers to OF ries. ankel; Dan.
and Swed. ankel; Icel. 6kkla (for énkla); Du. enkel; OHG. anchala,
anchla, enchila, the ankle; mod. G, enkel. [On the other hand, the
AS. ancléow answers to OF ries. anklefy Du. enklaauw. The Du. klaauw
means ‘ claw,’ and the AS. cléow seems to point to the same word,
but these endings are probably mere adaptations in the respective
languages, to give the words a more obvious etymology. | B. The
word is clearly a diminutive, formed with suffix -el from a stem ank-.
Indeed, the OHG. has the shorter form ancha, meaning leg, ankle.
The root is the same as that of Skt. azguli-s, a finger, avga-m, a limb.
Der. ankle-joint, ankl-et (ornament for the ankle).

ANNA; see Ana.

ANNALS, a relation of events year by year. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Cor. v.6.114. Grafton speaks of ‘short notes in maner of annales ;”
Ep.to SirW. Cecil. = F. annales,s. pl. fem.‘ annales, annual chronicles ;’
Cot. —L. annilés, pl. adj.; for libri annalés, yearly books or chronicles ;
from nom. sing. ann-dlis, yearly. —L. annus, a year. Prob. allied to
Goth. athn, n., a year; Brugm. ii. § 66. Perhaps from AT, to
move on; cf. Skt. at, to go, wander. Der. annal-ist.

ANNATEHS, first-fruits paid to the pope. (F.—L.) ‘These
cardinals .. haye the Annat of Benefices to support their greatness ;’
Howell, Famil. Letters, 1678, vol. i. let. 38 (Sept., 1621).— F. annate,
‘the first-fruits of a benefice; the profit of a whole year after the re-
move, or death, of the incumbent;’ Cot. Late L. annata; Duc. =—L.
annus, a year.

ANNEAL, to temper by heat. ((1) E.; (2) F.—L.) Two distinct
words seem to have been confused. 1. The word was originally
applied to metals, in which case it was English, and denoted rather
the fusing of metals than the tempering process by gradual cooling.
This is the ME. anelen, to inflame, kindle, heat, melt, burn. Gower,
C. A. iii. 96 (bk. vii. 337), speaks of a meteoric stone, which the fire
‘hath aneled {| melted] Lich unto slym, which is congeled.’ Wyclif,
Isa. xvi. 7 has ‘ anelid tyil’ as a translation of L. cocti lateris. It also
means simply ‘to burn’ or ‘inflame.’ Thus, in OE. Homilies, ed.
Morris, i. 219, the word seraphim is explained to mean ‘ birninde other
anhelend’ [better spelt anelend| = burning or kindling; and again, at
p- 97, it is said that the Holy Ghost ‘ onealde eorthlichen monnan
heortan’ = inflamed earthly men’s hearts. — AS. on@lan, to burn, kindle,
Grein, ii. 339 ; a compound verb. — AS. oz, prefix (answering to mod,
E. prep. ov); and @an, to burn, Grein, i. 55. Cf. Icel. eldr, Swed.
eld, Dan. ild, fire ; corresponding to AS. led, fire, a derivative of élan,
to burn. 2. But in the fifteenth century, a similar word was intro-
duced from the French, having particular reference to the fixing of
colours upon glass by means of heat. This is the late ME. anelen, to
enamel glass. ‘Thus Palsgrave has ‘I aneel a potte of erthe or suche
lyke with a coloure, je plomme.’ [The word was also applied to the
enamelling of metal, and is perhaps meant in the entry in the Prompt.
Parv. at p. 11; ‘Avelyn or enelyn metalle, or other lyke.’] The initial
a- is either the French prefix a- (L. ad), or may have been merely due
to the influence of the native word.—OF. neeler, to enamel; orig. to
paint in black upon gold or silver. — Late L. sugellire, to blacken. =
L. nigellus, blackish; dimin. of niger, black. See Diez, s. v. niello.
@ There is yet a ¢hird word not unlike these two, which appears in
‘unaneled,’ i.e. not having received extreme unction: Hamlet, i. 5.77.
This is from AS, onelan, to put oil upon; from AS, on, prefix, and
ele, oil; see Oil.

ANNEX, to fasten or unite to. (F.—L.) The pp. annexed occurs
in the Romaunt of the Rose, 4811. — 1°. annexer, ‘to annex, knit, linke,
joyn;’ Cot.—L. annexus, pp. of annectere, to knit or bind to,—L, ad,
to (> an- before x); and nectere, to bind. Der. annex-at-ion.

ANNIHILATE, to reduce to nothing. (L.) Hall, Edw,1V,an.r,
has adnihilate; Bacon, Nat. Hist. sect. 100, has annihilated, Formed
with suffix -ate, on which see Abbreviate. —L. annihilatus, pp. of
annihilare, to reduce to nothing. = L.ad, to (>an- before n); and xthil,
nihilum, nothing, Der. annihilat-ion.

ANNIVERSARY, the annual commemoration ofan event. (L.)
Fabyan, an. 1368-9,speaks of ‘an annyuersarye yerely to be kept.’ The
pl. anneuersaries occurs in the Ancren Riwle, p. 22. It is properly an
adjective, and so used by Bp. Hall, On the Obser, of Christ’s Nativity,


ANNOTATE


where he speaks of an ‘anniversary memorial.’?=—L. anniuersarius,
returning yearly. = L. anni-, for anno-, from annus, a year; and wertere,
to turn, pp. versus. See Annals and Verse.

ANNOTATE, to make notes upon. (L.) Richardson remarks that
the verb is very rare; Foxe uses annotations in his Life of Tyndal, in
Tyndal’s Works (1572), fol. Bi, last line. Formed with the suffix -ate,
on which see Abbreviate. = L. annotatus, pp. of annotare, to make
notes.—L. ad, to (> an- before 7) ; and notare, to mark, from zola, a
mark, See Note. Der. anzotat-or, annotat-ion.

ANNOUNCE, to make known to. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave. Milton
has announc’t, P. R. iv. 504. [Chaucer has annunciat, C. T, 14021
(B 3205); but this is directly from L. pp. amnuncidtus.| =F. annoncer,
*to announce;” Cot.—L, annunciare, annuntiadre, to announce; pp.
annuntidtus. = L, ad (> an- before x) ; and nuntiare, to report, give a
message, from uuntius,a messenger. See Nuncio. Der. announce-
ment; and, directly from L., annunciate; also annunciat-ion.

ANN OY, to hurt, vex, trouble. (F.—L.) ME. anoien, anuien (with
one 2, correctly), to vex, trouble. See King Alisaunder, ed. Weber,
ll. 876, 1287, 4158; Havelok, 1735; Chaucer (Glossary). .[The sb.
anot, anoy was also in very common use; see Romaunt of the Rose,
4404; Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 267, &c.; but is now obsolete, and its
place to some extent supplied by annoyance and the F. ennui.]—OF.
anoier, anuier, to annoy, trouble; from the OF. sb. anoi, anui (mod.
F, ennui), annoyance, vexation, chagrin; cognate with mod. Prov. enodi,
Span. enojo, OVenetian inodio.—L. in odid, lit. in hatred, which was
used in the phrase i odid habui, lit. I had in hatred, i.e. I was sick
and tired of, occurring in the Glosses of Cassel temp. Charles the Great ;
see Brachet and Diez. Other phrases were L. in odid esse and in odid
uenire, both meaning to incur hatred, and used by Cicero; see Att. ii.
21,2. Odid isthe abl. of odium, hatred. See the account in Diez.
See Odium and Noisome. Der. annoy-ance (Chaucer); from OF.
anoiance, a derivative of vb. anoier.

ANNUAL, yearly. (F.—L.) ME. annuel, an anniversary mass
for the dead, is a special use of the word; see P. Plowman’s Crede,
1. 414; Chaucer, C.T., G 1012, on which see my note, or that to
Tyrwhitt’s Chaucer, C. T. 16480.—F. annuel, annual, yearly; Cot.
=L. annudlis, yearly ; formed with suffix -alis from stem annw-. — L.
annus,a year. See Annal. 4 It will be observed that the spelling
was changed from annuel to annual to bring it nearer to the Latin ;
but the word really came to us through French. Der. annual-ly.
From the same source ? annu-i-ty, ME. annuitee, Hoccleve, de Regim.
Princ, 821, from AF. annuité (unknown in OF.; but see Year-books
of Edw. I, 1304-5, p. 179); and the more modern annu-it-ant.

ANNUL, to nullify, abolish. (F.—L.) The pp. anulled occurs
in T. Usk, Test. of Love, iii. 2. 81.— AF. annuller, Stat. Realm, i.
367 (1361); OF. anuller, MF. annuller, given by Cotgrave.=—L. an-
nullire, to annul. =L. ad (>an- before x); and L. nullus, none, a
contraction from ze wllus, not any. See Null, Der. annul-ment.

ANNULAR, like a ring. (L.) Ray, On the Creation, p. 2, has
both annular and annulary (R.) = L. annularis, like a ring ; formed
with suffix -dris from stem annul- (for annulo-).—L. annulus, a ring ;
earlier form dnulus, dimin. of a@uus, a rounding, a circular form, an
iron ring (Lewis). Cf. Olrish dune, a little ring; Stokes-Fick, p. 16.
Also Skt. akna-s, bent; afch, to bend. From the same source (L.
annulus) we have annul-at-ed, annul-et, annul-ose.

ANNUNCIATION, ANNUNCIATE; see Announce,

ANODYNE#E; a drug to allay pain. (L.—Gk.) Used by Bp.
Taylor, Epistle Dedicatory to Serm. to the Irish Parl., 1661 (R.)
Also in Pope, Moral Essays, ii. 111. Cotgrave gives ‘ remedes ano-
dins, medicines which, by procuring sleep, take from a patient all
sence of pain.’ But the spelling anodyne is Latin. — Late L. anddynus,
a drug relieving pain; Ducange.— Gk. dvwduvos, adj. free from pain ;
whence pdappaxov dyvwSuvoy, a drug to relieve pain. Gk. dy-, nega-
tive prefix; and é5vv7, pain. Curtius, i. 300, refers 65vvn to the verb
é€5-ewv, to eat, as if it were ‘a gnawing ;’ rightly. See Hat.

ANOINT, to smear with ointment. (F.—L.) Wyclif has anoyn-
tidist, Acts, iv. 27, from ME. verb anointen or anoynien; see Prompt.
Parv. p. 12. Chaucer has anoint as a past participle, Prol. 199. It
is clear that anoint was orig. a past-participial form, but was after-
wards lengthened into anointed, thus suggesting the infin. anointen.
Both forms, anoynt and anoynted, occur in the Wycliffite Bible, Gen. 1.
3; Numb, vi. 15. All the forms are also written with initial e, viz.
enoint, enointed, enointen.—OF, enoint, anointed, pp. of enoindre, to
anoint. — OF. en- (L. in-, upon, on); and oindre, to smear, anoint, from
L. ungere, to smear, pp. unctus. See Ointment, Unction.

ANOMALY, deviation from rule. (Gk.) Used by SirT. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 15. § 5. Cotgrave’s French Dict. gives only the
adj. axomal, inequal; so that the sb. was taken from L. azdmalia, or
directly from the Gk.—Gk. dvwpadia, irregularity, unevenness. —
Gk. dv@pados, uneven.—Gk. dv-, negative prefix, and dyuadds, even.
The Gk, éduadds is formed with suffix -aA- from éy-, base of spuds,


ANTEPENULTIMA


one and the same, joint, common; closely related to E. same,
Same. Der. anxomal-ous.

ANON, immediately. (E.) In early use. ME. anon, anoon, onan,
anan, Rob, of Glouc. has anon, p.6; 1.134. The earliest ME. forms
are anon, Ancren Riwle, p. 14; anan, Ormulum, 225. The a is con-
vertible with o in either syllable; but in the latter syllable the vowel
was long.= AS. on Gn, lit. in one moment (answering to MHG. ix
ein), but in AS. generally signifying ‘once for all;’ see examples in
Grein, i. 31, sect. 8.—AS. on (mod. E. ov), often used with the sense
of ‘in;’ and AS. dz, old form of ‘one.? See On and One.

ANONYMOUS, nameless. (Gk.) In Phillips’ Dict. (1658).
Formed directly from Gk., by substituting -ovs for Gk. suffix -os, just
as it is often substituted for the L. suffix -ws.— Gk. dyvwvupos, name-
less. — Gk. dy-, neg. prefix; and évoya, ASolic dvuya,a name. See
Onomatopeeia. Der. anonymous-ly.

ANOTHER, i.e. one another, (E.) Merely the words an and
other written together. In Mid. Eng. they were written apart.
‘ Hauelok thouthe al az other,’ Havelok thought quite another thing ;
Havelok, 1395. See An and Other.

ANSERINE, goose-like. (L.) Not in early use; first in 1839
(N.E. D.).—L. anserinus, belonging to a goose,—L. anser, a goose,
cognate with E, goose, See Goose.

ANSWHER, to reply to. (E.) The verb is from the sb. The lit.
sense is ‘to make a (sworn) reply in opposition to,’ orig. used, no
doubt, in trials bylaw. ME. andswerien, Layamon, ii. 518. AS. and-
swarian, andswerian, to reply to; from andswaru, sb., a reply.— AS.
and-, in opposition to, cognate with Gk. dvri (see Anti-) ; and swar-,
base of swerian, to swear; see Swear. Der. answer-able, answer-
abl-y. @ The prefix ant- in G. antworten, to answer, is cognate with
the AS. prefix and- in the E. word.

ANT, a small insect; the emmet. (E.) Ant is a contraction from
AS. &mette (L. formica), an emmet; AtIf, Gloss., Nomina. Insecto-
rum; so that ant and emmet are doublets. The form émette became,
by the ordinary phonetic changes in English, amette, amte, ante, ant;
of these amte occurs in Wyclif, Prov. vi. 6. 4 Examples of the
change of m to x before ¢ occur in Hants as a shortened form of
Hamptonshire (see Matzner, Engl. Gram, i. 123); also in E. aunt from
L. amita. See Emmet, Der. ant-hill, -eater.

ANTAGONIST, an opponent. (Late L.—Gk.) Ben Jonson
has antagonistic, Magnetic Lady, ili. 4 (Compass, 10th speech) ;
Milton has antagonist, P. L, ii. 509. — Late L. antagonista (or directly
from the Gk.).—Gk. dvraywmorns, an adversary, opponent. =Gk.
avraywviCopat, I struggle against. Gk. dv7-, for av7i, against; and
ayuviCoua, I struggle, from dywy, astruggle. See Agony. Der.
antagonist-ic, antagonist-ic-al-ly ; also antagonism, from Gk, avtayw-
vigpa, a struggle with another.

ANTARCTIC, southern; opposite to the arctic. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Marlowe, Faustus, i, 3. 3; Milton, P. L. ix. 79. ME. antartik,
Chaucer, Astrolabe, ii. 25. 7.— OF. antartique ; Cotgrave has ‘ Antar-
tique, the circle in the sphere called the South, or Aztartick pole.’ =L,
antarcticus, southern. = Gk. évrapxtixds, southern, — Gk. avr- for avi,
against; and dpxrixds, arctic, northern, See Arctic.

ANTE-, prefix, before. (L.) Occurs in words taken from Latin,
e.g. ante-cedent, ante-date, ante-diluvian, &c.—L. ante, before; of
which an older form seems to have been andi, as in anti-cipare; Brugm.
i. § 84. The prefix anti- is cognate; see Anti-, prefix.

ANTECEDENT, going before. (L.) Used by Sir T. More,
Works, p. 1115, last line. Used as a (Latin) logical term by T. Usk,
Test. of Love, ii. 5. 12.—L. antecédentem, acc. case of antecédens, going
before. —L, ante, before; and cédens, going, pres. pt. of cédere, to go;
see Cede. Der. antecedent-ly; also antecedence (with F. suffix -ence).
And see Ancestor,

ANTEDATE, to date before. (L.) Used by Massinger in the
sense of ‘anticipate;” Duke of Milan, i. 3(Sforza, speech 9). Formed
by prefixing L. axte, before, to date, q.v.

ANTEDILUVIAN, before the flood. (L.) Used by Sir T.
Browne, Vulg. Errors, bk. vii.c.3. § 2. A coined word; from L. ante,
before, and diluui-um, a deluge ; with adj. suffix-an. See Deluge.

ANTELOPE, a deer-like quadruped. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Spenser,
F.Q. i. 6. 26. Pl. antelopis, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p, 6, 1. 1.—OF.
antelop (Godefroy; Hatzfeld). = Late L. antalopus. = Late Gk. dv@ador-,
stem of dvOadwy (gen. dvOadomos), used by Eustathius (flor. circa 330),
Hexaém., p. 36 (Webster’s Dict.). The‘ antelope’ was orig, a fabulous
and nondescript animal; so that the orig. meaning of dv@4Awi is not
known ; neither do we know whence Eustathius took it. See N. E. D.
@ Mod. F, antilope (from E.); AF. antelope (1415), Riley, Mem. of
London, p. 613.

ANTENNA, the feelers of insects. (L.) Modern and scientific ;
see N.E. D. Borrowed from L. antenna, pl. of antenna, properly ‘the

ard of a sail.” Remoter origin uncertain.


ANTEPENULTIMA, the last syllable but two. (L.) Used


23


See


24 ANTERIOR


in prosody; sometimes shortened to antepenult,—L. antepénultima,
also antepaenultima, fem. adj. (with syd/aba understood), the last
syllable but two. =L. ante, before ; and paenultima, fem. adj., the last
syllable but one: from paene, almost, and altima, fem. of wltimus,
last. See Ultimate. Der. antepenultim-ate.

ANTERIOR, before, more in front. (L.) Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. iii. c. 15. § 3, has anteriour (better anterior) ; Cotgrave has
anterior, s.v. Anterieur. The word is borrowed directly from L.
anterior, more in front, compar. adj. from ante, before. See Ante-.

ANTHEM, a musical composition, sung responsively. (L. —Gk.)
In very early use. ME. antem, antym; cf. ‘antym, antiphona;’
Prompt. Parv. p.12. Chaucer has antem, C.T., B 1850. Antem is
a contraction from an older form anéefn ; ‘ biginneth thesne antefne’ =
begin this anthem, Ancren Riwle, p. 34. AS. antefn, an anthem ;
AS. tr. of Beda, Eccl. Hist. i. 25, ed. Smith ; spelt ontemn, ed. Miller.
This AS. antefn is a mere reduction from the Latin. Late L. amii-
phona, an anthem; see Ducange. This form arose from considering
the Gk. neut. pl. to be a fem. sing. —Gk. dvripwva, pl. of dvTipwrov,
an anthem; properly neut. of adj. dvripwvos, sounding in response
to. Aristotle has dyripwvor, ‘an accord in the octave ;’ so that dvti-
gpwva meant ‘musicalaccords.’ [Thus there is no need for the asser-
tion that the authem was named from its being sung by choristers
alternately, half the choir on one side responding to the half on the
other side. |= Gk. dvri, over against; and dwn, voice. Anthem is a
doublet of antiphon, q.v.

ANTHER, the part of the stamen of a flower which contains the
pollen. (F.—L.—Gk.) Phillips(1706) has: ‘Azthera,the yellow seeds
in the middle of a rose.’ = ME. anthere, ‘the yellow tuft in the middle of
arose; Cot. Adapted from L. anthéra,a medicine composed of flowers
(Lewis). Borrowed from Gk. dv@npa, fem. of av@npds, adj. flowery,
blooming. = Gk. dv6«ty, to bloom; av@os, a young bud or sprout. The
Gk. dv@os is cognate with Skt. andhas, n., herb, sacrificial food. See
Prellwitz.

ANTHOLOGY, a collection of choice poems. (Gk.) Several
Gk. collections of poems were so called; hence the extension of the
name. Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iv. c. 9. § 2, refers to ‘the
Greek Anthology. = Gk. dv@oAoyia, a flower-gathering, a collection of
choice poems.=Gk. dv@oAdyos, adj. flower-gathering. — Gk, dv@o-, for
av0os, a flower; and Aéyev, to collect. See Anthser and Legend.

ANTHRACITH, akind of hard coal. (Gk.) Modern; first in
1812. Suggested by Gk. dv@paxitns, adj. resembling coals; formed
with suffix -.7ys, expressing resemblance, from dv@pax-, stem of Gk.
dv@pag, coal, charcoal, also a carbuncle, precious stone. Cf. L. anthra-
citis, a kind of carbuncle, Pliny, bk. xxxvii. c. 7 (see Holland’s
translation).

ANTHROPOLOGY, the natural history of man. (Gk.) ‘An-
thropology, a speaking or discoursing of men;’ Blount’s Gloss. —Gk.
dvO@pwro-, for avOpwros,a man; and -Aoyia, a discourse, from Aé€y-ev,
to speak. Der. (from anthropo-), anthropo-id, from Gk. «i6-os, form ;
anthropo-mor phic, from Gk. popp-n, form. And see below.

ANTHROPOPH AGI, cannibals. (L.—Gk.) Used by Shak.
‘Oth. i, 3. 144.. Lit. ‘men-eaters.’ A Latinised plural of Gk. dv@pw-
nopayos, adj. man-eating. = Gk. dv@pwro-s, a man ; and payeiy, to eat.
The form dv@pwmos is of doubtful origin ; payeiy is from 4/ BHAG,
to distribute (as a portion) ; cf. Skt. bhaksh, to eat, devour. Brugm.
i, § 183. Der. anthropophag-y.

ANTI-, ANT., prefix, against. (Gk.) Occurs in words taken from
Gk., as antidote, antipathy, &c. In anticipate, the prefix is for the
L. ante, In ant-agonist, ant-arctic, it is shortened to ant-.—Gk. dv7i,
against, over against.4-Skt. anti, over against; a Vedic form and
perhaps allied to Skt. anta-s, end, boundary, also proximity, cognate
with E, end, q.v. 4 This Gk. prefix is cognate with the AS. and-,
appearing in mod. E. along and answer, q.v. Also with Goth, and-;
and with G. ant-, as seen in antworten, to answer.

ANTIC, fanciful, odd; as sb., a trick. (Ital.—L.) Orig. an ad-
jective, and used with the sense of ‘grotesque.’ Hall, HenryVIII, an. 12.
§12, has: ‘a fountayne..ingrayled with anticke woorkes.’ Floriohas:
‘ Grottesca, a kinde of rugged vnpolished painters worke, anticke worke.’
Cotgrave gives, s.v. Antique, ‘taillé a antiques, cut with anticks, or
with antick-works; but this usage is from Italian. =TItal. antico, ‘an-
cient, anticke, old ;’ Florio. L. antiguus, old. See Antique (which
is the F. form).

ANTICHRIST, the great opponent of Christ. (L.—Gk.) L.An-
tichristus.— Gk. dvtixpioros ; 1 John, ii. 18. From Gk. dy7i, against ;
and xpioros, Christ. See Anti- and Christ. Der. antichrist-ian.

ANTICIPATE, to take before the time, forestall. (L.) Used by
Hall, Henry VI, an. 38. § 4; Shak. Oth. ii. 1.76. Formed with suffix
-ate (on which see Abbreviate), from L. anticitare, to take before-
hand, prevent; pp. anticipa/us. — L. anti -, old form of ante, beforehand;
and capere, totake. See Ante-and Capable. Der. anticipat-zon,
anticipat-ory.


ANTITYPE |


ANTICLIMAX, the opposite of a climax. (Gk.) Compounded
of Anti-, against; and Climax. eae

ANTIDOTE, a medicine given asa remedy. (F.—L.—Gk.) Used
by Shak. Macb. v. 3. 43.—F. antidote, m., given by Cotgrave. —L. an-
tidotum, neut. (and antidotus, fem.), an antidote, remedy.—Gk. dvri-
doros, adj. given asa remedy ; whence, as sb., avridororv, neut., an anti-
dote, and dyrtidoros, fem., the same (Liddell and Scott).—Gk. dvi,
against ; and dords, given, from weak grade 60- allied to di5wyu, I give;
with suffix -ros. See Anti- and Dose. Der. antidot-al, antidot-ic-al.

ANTIMONY, the name of a metal. (Late L.—Arab.) In Sir T.
Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p. 317; first known in 1477 (N.E. D.).
Englished from Late L. antiménium (11th cent.) ; Ducange. Origin
uncertain; but Devic traces it to Arab. zthmid, uthmud,.‘a stone from
which antimony is prepared ;’ Rich. Dict. p. 21, col. 1. _ Der. anti-
mon-ial.

ANTINOMIAN, one who denies the obligation of moral law.
(Gk.) ‘Tillotson, vol. ii. ser. 50, speaks of ‘the Antinomian doctrine.’
Milton, Doctrine and Discipline of, Divorce, b. ii. c. 3, uses the sb.
antinomie. .The suffix -an is adjectival, from L. -dnus. ‘The word is
from Gk, dvtivopia, an ambiguity in the law, explained as if from Gk.
avri, against, and vépos, law, which is from the verb véyecy, to deal
out, also to pasture. See Anti- and Nomad.

ANTIPATHY, a feeling against another. (L.—Gk.) Used by
Bacon, Nat. Hist. sect. 479. Fuller has antipathetical, Worthies of
Lincolnshire. Either from F. antipathie, explained as‘ antipathy’ by
Cotgrave; or directly from L. antipathia (Pliny).—Gk. dvrirddea,
an antipathy, lit. ‘a suffering against.’ — Gk. dvri, against; and 7a@-
«iv, to suffer. See Anti-and Pathos. Der. antipath-et-ic, antipath-
et-ic-al,

ANTIPHON, an anthem. (L.—Gk.) Milton has the pl. azti-
phonies, Areopagitica, ed. Hales, p. 12. The book containing the
antiphons was called an antiphoner, a word used by Chaucer, C. T.,
B 1709. — Late L. antiphona, representing a fem. sing. instead ofa neut.
plural. = Gk. dvrigwya, pl. of dvripwvoy, an anthem ; properly neut. of
adj. dvripwvos, sounding in response to; but Aristotle used avripwvor
to mean ‘an accord in the octave,’ whence the sense of concord. —
Gk. dvr, contrary, over against (see Anti-)3 and gwy7, voice, allied
to oni, 1 speak, say. See Phonetic. Axtiphon is a doublet of
anthem, q. Vv.

ANTIPHRASIS, the use of words in a sense opposed to their
meaning. (L.—Gk.) In Puttenham, Eng. Poesie, bk. ili.c. 18 ; p. 201,
sidenote, ed. Arber. — Late L. antiphrasis. = Gk. dvrippaats, lit.a contra-
diction; also the use of words in a sense opposed to their literal
meaning. = Gk. dvrippacev,to express by negation (in sarcasm). = Gk.
dvti, against, contrary; and pace, to speak. See Anti- and
Phrase. Der. antiphras-t-ic-al.

ANTIPODES, men whose feet are opposite to ours. (L.—Gk.)


' Shak. Mid. Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 55 ; Holland’s tr. of Pliny, b.ii.c.65. Also


in Trevisa, tr. of Higden, 1i. 205. —L. antipodes; a borrowed word. =
Gk. dvrimodes, pl., men with feet opposite to us; from nom. sing.
avtinous.= Gk. dvi, opposite to, against; and mous, a foot, cognate
with E. foot. See Anti- and Foot. Der. antipod-al.

ANTIQUE, old. (F.—L.) Shak. has ‘the antique world;’ As


You Like It, ii. 3. 57.—_F. antique; Cot.—Lat. antaqguus, old; also .


written anticus, and formed with suffix -cws from anti, old form of ante,
before, just as L. posticus, behind, is formed from post, after. Brugm.
ii.§86. See Ante-. Der. autiqu-it-y (Hamlet, iv.5.104), antigu-ate,
antiqu-at-ed, ant'qu-ar-y, antiqu-ar-i-an, anliqu-ar-i-an-ism, @] Antique
isa doublet of aztic, which follows the Italian spelling. See Antic.
ANTISEPTIC, counteracting putrefaction. (Gk.) Modern.
Formed from Gk. dy7i, against; and onmrix-ds, putrefying, from
onnr-os, decayed, rotten, verbal adj. from ome, to make rotten.
ANTISTROPHE, a kind of choral song. (L.—Gk.) In Milton,
Introd. to Samson. = L. antistrophé. = Gk. avtiotpopy, a return of a
chorus, answering to a preceding orpop7, or strophe.— Gk. dvi, over
against; and ozpop7, a verse or stanza, ht. ‘a turning,’ from the
movement ofthe chorus ; from the verb orpépey, to turn. See Anti-
and Strophe. tek.
ANTITHESIS, a contrast, opposition. (Gk.) Used by Bp.
Taylor, Dissuasive from Popery, bk. i. pt. ii.s. 1 (R.) — Gk. dvri@eas,
an opposition, a setting opposite. — Gk. dv7i, over against ; and @éars,
a setting, placing, from Oe-, weak grade allied to 7/@nyu, I place. See
Anti- and Thesis. Der. antithet-ic, antithet-ic-al, antithet-ic-al-ly;
from Gk. dvridetixds, adj. ‘
ANTITYPE, that which answers to the type. (Gk.) Bp. Taylor,
Of the Real Presence, s. 12. § 28, speaks of ‘type and antitype.” The
word is due to the occurrence of the Gk. dvritumoy (A.V. ‘figure”)
in 1 Pet. iii. 21, and the pl. dvrivuma (A. V. ‘ figures’) in Heb, ix. 24.
This sb. dvrirumoy is the neut, of adj. dvritumos, formed according to
a model, responding as an impression to a blow given to a stamp. =
Gk. dyri, over against; and tu7os, a blow,, also a.stamp, pattern,


—


ANTLER


APOLOGY


25


type, allied to rumrew, to strike. See Anti- and Type. Der. | APH,akind of monkey. (E.) ME. ape, King Alisaunder, ed. Weber,


autityp-ic-al.

ANTLER, the branch ofa stag’s hom. (F.—L.) Like most terms
of the chase, this is of F. origin. The oldest E. form is awntelere, occur-
ting in Twety’s treatise on Hunting, pr. in Reliquize Antique, i. 151.
= OF. antoillier (Dict. de Trévoux), an antler. = Folk-L. acc. *ant(e)-
ocularem (ramum), branch placed before the eye; cf. G. augen-sprosse,
a brow-antler (lit. eye-sprout).—L. ante, before ; and ocudws, the eye.
See Hatzfeld, s.v. andouillier (the mod. F. form); and see Romania,


iv. 349.

ANUS, the lower orifice of the bowels. (L.) In Phillips’ Dict.
(4706). Borrowed from L. anus.

ANVIL, an iron block on which smiths hammer their work into
shape. (E.) Anvil is for anvild or anvilt, a. final d (for ¢) having
dropped off. We find anvelde in Palsgrave (1530). In Wright's
Vocabularies, i. 180, isthe entry ‘anfeld, incus.’ In Chaucer’s Book
of the Duchess, 1165, we find anvel’.— AS. anfilte, explained by L.
incus, Elf. Glos., Voc. 141. 23; OMerc. onfilti, Corpus Gloss. 1072
(Sweet). = AS. on-, prefix, often written az-, answeringto mod. E. on;
and (probably) *feltan (see below), causal of *fealtan, to infix, redu-
plicating verb cognate with OHG. *falzan, MHG. valzen, to infix,
inlay, whence G. falz,a groove. 4 Some derive it from oz and fealdan,
to fold; however, the OHG. anafalz,:an-anvil, is not derived from
ana, on, and faldan, to fold, but from ava and the MHG. vailzen
(above), which is allied to L. pellere, to drive. ‘Cf. L. inciis, an anvil,
from iz, on, and ciidere, to strike; and note the AS. gloss: ‘Cudo,
percutio, anfilte, Voc. 217. 5; which authorises the form *feltan
(filtan) as postulated above. See Felt. 4 In Napier’s glosses, 11.
67, we find anfealte onsmédre, showing the by-form avfealt, fem. sb.,
an anvil, with the same gradation as the OFIG. anafalz, and strongly
confirming the above etymology. See Kluge, s.v. Falz; Schade,

Se Leen
ANXIOUS, distressed, oppressed, much troubled. (L.) In Milton,
P.L. viii. 185. Sir T, More, Works, p. 197 ¢, has anxyete. [The sb.
was perhaps taken from F. anxieté, given by Cotgrave, and explained
by ‘anxietie;’ but the adj. must have been taken directly from Latin,
with the change of -ws into -ows as in other cases, e. g. pious, amphibious,
barbarous.] = L. anxius, anxious, distressed. L. angere, to choke,
‘strangle. + Gk. dyyeuw, to strangle. —4/ANGH, to choke, oppress ;
Brugm. i. § 178. Der. anxious-ly, anxious-ness ; also anxi-e-ty, from
F. anxieté, L. acc. anxietatem: From the same root we have anger,
anguish, L. angina, and even guinsy.

ANY, indef. pronoun; some one. (E.) An indeterminate deriva-
tive of one. The ME. forms are numerous, as @ni}, eni, ani, oni,
‘eni, &c.; @nig is in OE. Homilies, i. 219. AS. @xig, formed with
suffix -ig (cf. greed-y from AS. gréd-ig) from the numeral az, one.+
Du. eenitg, any; from een,one. Cf. G. einiger, any one; from ein, one.
See One. Der. any-thing, any-wise.

AORIST, a name for two of the past tenses of a Greek verb. (Gk.)
‘In Phillips (1658), = Gk. ddpioTos, lit. ‘indefinite.’ = Gk. d-, neg. prefix;
and dpi¢ev, to define, limit; see Horizon.

AORTA, the great artery rising up from the left ventricle of the
heart. (Late L.—Gk.) . In Burton, Anat. of Melancholy, i. 1. 2. 3;
ed. 18247, p. 26. Late L. aorta; borrowed directly from Gk. dopr7,
the aorta. = Gk. deipev, to raise up; pass. deipecOar, to rise up. See
Prellwitz, p. 4.\.

APACE, at a great pace. (Hybrid; E.and F.) Marlow has ‘gallop
apace ;’ Edw, II, A. iv. sc. 3, 1.12. At an earlier period the word was
written as two words, a pas, as in Chaucer, C. T., F 388: ‘And forth
she walketh esily a pas.’ [It is also to be remarked that the phrase
has partly changed its meaning. In Chaucer, both here and in other
passages, it means ‘at a foot-pace,’ and was originally used of men
or horses when proceeding at no great speed.] The phrase is com-
posed of a, for on, i.e. at; and the ME. pas, mod. E. pace, a word of
F. origin. See A- (2) and Paces. ;

APART, aside. (F.—L.) T.Usk speaks of the ‘fyve sondrye wittes,
eueriche apartto his own doing;’ Testament of Love, iii. 6. 51. The
phrase is borrowed from the I. @ part, which Cotgrave gives, and |
explains by ‘ apart, alone, singly.’ = L. ad partem, to the one part or
side, apart. — L.ad, to: and partem, acc. case of pars, a part. See Part.

APARTMENT, a separate room, (F.—Ital.—L.) In Dryden,
tr. of Virgil, AZn. ii. 675.—F. appartement.—Ital. appartamento, a
separation, Florio; an apartment, Torriano. = Ital. appartare, to with-
draw apart, id.; also (formerly) apartare.—Ital. a parte, apart. See
above.

APATHY, want of feeling. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Holland’s Plutarch,
p: 62, we have the pl. apathies; he seems to use it as if it were a new
word in English.: Pope has apathy, Essay on Man, ii. 101. —F. apathie
(Hatzfeld). —L. apathia (Gellius). = Gk. da0eca, apathy, insensibility. |
“=Gk. d-, neg. prefix; and ma@ety, to suffer. See Pathos. Der.
apath-et-ic. ‘ Sara ae


4344; Ancren Riwle, p. 248. AS. apa, Alf. Glos., Nomina Ferarum.
+ Du. aap; Icel. api; Swed. apa; G. affe; Teut. type *apon-, mi
Prob. borrowed from a non-Teut. source. @ ORuss. opica (Miklo-
sich), is borrowed from Teut. Der. ap-ish, ap-ish-ly, ap-ish-ness.

APEPSIA, lack of digestion. (Gk.) Phillips (1658) has apepsie.
— Gk. devia, indigestion. — Gk. d-, neg. prefix; and rémrev, to digest,
allied to Gk. mem-rds, cooked, and méacey, to cook. See Cook.

APERIENT, a purgative. (L.) The word signifies, literally,
‘opening.’ Used by Bacon, Nat. Hist. sect. 961.—L. aperient-, stem
of aperiens, pres. pt. of aperire, to cpen. (Perhaps from ap-, old form
of ab-, away; and.-wer- = Lith. wer- in werti, to move (to or fro);
whence Lith. at-werii, to open. See Brugm. i. § 361.) From same
source, aperture, L. apertura, from aperire (pp. apert-us).

APEX, the summit, top. (L.) Used by Ben Jonson, King James’s
Entertainment; description of a Flamen.=—L. apex, summit. Origin
uncertain,

APH-.-, prefix. See Apo-, prefix.

APH A@&RESIS, the taking away of a letter or syllable from the
beginning of a word, (L.—Gk.) In Cotgrave, s. v. Aphairese. — Late
L. apheresis. = Gk. dpaipeois, a taking away.—Gk. dpaipeiv, to take
away.= Gk. amd, from (> d- before an aspirate) ; and aipeiy, to take.
See Heresy.

APHELION, the point in a planet’s orbit furthest fom the sun.
(Gk.) Scientific. Spelt apheliam in Blount’s Gloss. (1681). Coined
from Gk. a@-, for a7é, from; and #Avos, the sun. See Solar.

APHIS, one of a family of minute and destructive insects. (Gk.?)
Aname due to Linnzeus; with pl. aphides. Of unknown etymology;
but probably the pl. aphides represents Gk. dpedeis, pl. of dperdns,
‘unsparing, hence voracious; from which a sing. aphis was evolved.
From Gk. d-, neg. prefix; and eidupar, I spare.

APHORISM, a definition, brief saying. (F.—Gk.) Aphorisms is
in Bacon, Adv. of Learning, i..5. 4; spelt aphorismes, Sir T. Elyot,
Castel of Helth, b. iii. c. 1; p.54. Perhaps mediately, through the
French. Cf. ‘Aphorisme, m., aphorisme or generall rule in physick ;’
Cot.=—Gk. dpopucpos, a definition, a short pithy sentence. — Gk. ddo-
piCev, to define, mark off. Gk. dd, from, off (> d@- before an aspi-
rate); and épicew, to divide, limit; from épos, a boundary. See
Horizon. Der. aphoris-t-ic, aphoris-t-ic-al, aphoris-t-ic-al-ly.

APIARY, a place for keeping bees. (L.) Used by Evelyn; Diary,
July 13, 1654. Formed, with suffix -y for -iwm, from L. apiarium, a
place for bees, neut. of apiarius, of or belonging to bees. The masc.
apidrius means ‘a keeper of bees.’ = L. apis, a bee.

APIECE, in aseparate share. (Hybrid; E.and F.) Often written
a-piece; Shak. Merry Wives, i. 1. 160. For a piece (two words) ;
meaning ‘ for one piece.’ Here a is the indef. article. See Piece.

APO,-, prefix, off. (Gk.) Gk. did, off, from. Cognate with E. of,
off. See Of, Off: Der. apo-calypse, S&cc.; see below. @ Since
and becomes d@- before an aspirate, it appears also in aph-eresis,
aph-(h)elion, and aph-orism. ;

APOCALYPSE, a revelation. (L.—Gk.) A name given to the
last book of the Bible. ME. apocalips, used by Wyclif. = L. apocalypsis,
Rev. i. 1 (Vulgate version). —Gk. dmoxaduyis, Rev. i. 1; lit. ‘an un-
covering.’ = Gk. dmoxaAvmrecy, to uncover. = Gk. amd, off (cognate with
E. of); and caddvnrev, to cover. Cf. Gk. kadvBn, a hut, cabin, cell,
cover; Kadid,acot. Allied to Calyx and Cell. Der. apocalyp-t-ic,
apocalyp-t-ic-al.

APOCOPEH, a cutting off of a letter or syllable at the end of a
word. (L.—Gk.) In Palsgrave, p. 402, 1.1. A grammatical term ;
L. apocopé, borrowed from Gk. dmoxonn, a cutting off.—Gk. dad, off
(see Apo-); and «émrev, to hew, cut. Brugm. i. § 645.

APOCRYPHA, certain books of the Old Testament. (Gk.) ‘ The
other [bookes] folowynge, which are called apocripha (because they
were wont to be reade, not.openly and in common, but as it were in
secrete and aparte) are neyther founde.in the Hebrue norin the Chalde;’
Bible, 1539; Pref. to Apocrypha. The word means ‘things hidden;’
hence, unauthentic. — Gk. doxpuga, things hidden, neut. pl.. of amd-
kpupos, hidden. = Gk, dmoxpunrewv, to hide away. = Gk. d70, off, away
(see Apo-); and xpumrew, to hide. See Crypt. Der. apocryph-al.

APOGEE, the point in the moon’s orbit furthest from the earth.
(F.—L.—Gk.) Scientific. Apoge in Cockeram (1624). F. apogée
(Cot.).— Late L. apogeum.—Gk. dréyaor, neut. of dadyaos, adj.,
away from earth. Gk. dad, away; and 77, earth.

APOLOGUEH, a fable, story. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627. Used by Bp. Taylor, vol. i. ser. 25. § 9. =F. apologue, m., which
Cotgrave explains by ‘a pretty and significant fable or tale, wherein


‘bruit beasts, or dumb things, are famed to speak.’ = L. apologum, acc.


of apologus. = Gk. dmédoyos, a story, fable.— Gk. dad, off; and Aoy-,
second grade of Aéyew, to speak, See Apo- and Logic. ©
APOLOGY, a defence, excuse. (L.—Gk.) SirT.More, Works,


I p. 932 a, speaks of ‘the booke that is called mine apology.’. [He


26 APOPHTHEGM


probably Englished it from the L. apologia, used by St. Jerome, rather
than from the Gk. immediately.]— Gk. dmoAoyia, a speech made in
one’s defence. = Gk. dmé, off (see Apo-); and Aé€yeiv, to speak; see
Logic. Der. apolog-ise, apolog-ist ; apolog-et-ic (Gk. dmoAoynrikés,
fit for a defence), apologet-ic-al, apolog-et-ic-al-ly. And see above.

. APOPHTHEGM, APOTHEGM, a terse saying. (Gk.) Bacon
wrote a collection of apophthegms, so entitled. Udall’s tr. of Erasmus’
Apophthegmes is dated 1542. The word is sometimes shortened to
apothegm. = Gk. drop0eypa, a thing uttered ; also, a terse saying, apo-
phthegm.=—Gk. dropOéyyouat, I speak out my mind plainly. Gk.
aré, off, out (see Apo-); and p@éyyouat, I cry out, cry aloud, utter.
From the same root are di-phthong,, mono-phthong.

APOPLEXY, a sudden deprivation of motion by a shock to the
system. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) Chaucer, in 1. 21 of The Nun’s-Priest’s
Tale, has the form poplexye; like his potecarie for apothecary. = F. apo-
plexie (Cot.).— Late L. apopléxia, also spelt popléxia; see the latter in
Ducange.=—Gk. dmomAngia, stupor, apoplexy. —Gk. dronAjocewv, to
cripple by a stroke. = Gk. d7é, off (see Apo-) ; and rAnacew, to strike.
See Plague. Der. apoplec-t-ic.

APOSTASY, APOSTACY, a desertion of one’s principles
or line of conduct. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) In rather early use. ME.
apostasie, Wyclif's Works, ii. 51.—F. apostasie, ‘an apostasie ;” Cot.
—Late L. apostasia ; Ducange.—Gk. dmooraoia, a later form of d7é-
oraats, a defection, revolt, lit. ‘a standing away from.’ —Gk. d7é, off,
from (see Apo-); and o7aats, a standing, from o7a-, base allied to
tornpu, I place, set. See Statics. And see below.

APOSTATE, one who renounces his belief. (F. — Late L. —Gk.)
The sb. apostate occurs in the Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 19, and is often
spelt apostata (the Late L. form), as in P. Plowman, B. i. 104, and
indeed very much later, viz. in Massinger’s Virgin Martyr, A. iv.
sc. 3.1. 62.—OF. apostate, later apostat, as given by Cotgrave, and
explained ‘an apostata.’ = Late L. apostata (also a common form in
English). — Gk. droorarns, a deserter, apostate. = Gk. dé ; and ota-,
base allied to €ornv, I placed myself, icrnu, I place, set; see above.
Der. apostat-ise. 4 The L. form apostata occurs even in AS.

APOSTEME, an abscess ; now Imposthume, q.y.

APOSTLE, one sent to preach the gospel ; especially applied to
the earliest disciples of Christ. (L.—Gk.) Wyclif has apostle, Rom.
i.1, The initial a was often dropped in ME.,as in posteles, P. Plowman,
B. vi. 151. The earlier writers use apostel, as in OE. Homilies,
i.117. The AS. form was apfostol, Matt. x. 2.—L. apostolus.— Gk.
dnodatodos, an apostle; Matt. x. 2, &c. Lit. ‘one who is sent away.’
— Gk. dmooréAdew, to send away.—Gk. dad (see Apo-) ; and o7eA-
Aew, to send. See Stole. Der. afostle-ship ; also apostol-ic, apostol-
ic-al, apostol-ic-al-ly, apostol-ate ; from L. apostolus.

APOSTROPHE, a mark showing that a word is contracted ;
also an address to the dead or absent. (L.—Gk.) Ben Jonson, Engl.
Gram, b. ii. c. 1, calls the mark an apostrophus ; Shak. apostropha,
L.L.L. iv. 2.123. These are Latinised forms; the usual L. form
is apostrophe. Palsgrave has: ‘the fygure called Apostrophe ;’ p. xix.
1. 2.—Gk. dnoorpogy, a turning away; dmdotpogos, the mark called
an apostrophe; [from which the mod. E. form should have been
apostroph.| *Amoorpodn also signifies a figure in rhetoric, in which
the orator turns away from the rest to address one only, or from all
present to address the absent.—Gk. dmé, away (see Apo-); and
otpepey, totum. See Strophe. Der. apostroph-ise.

APOTHECARY, a seller of drugs. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) Lit.
‘the keeper of a store-house or repository.’ ME. apothecarie, Chaucer,
C. T., Prol. 425 ; sometimes shortened to pothecarie or potecarie, id.,
C 852.—OF. apotecaire.— Late L. apothécarius, apotécdrius ; Wright’s
Vocabularies, i. 129.—L. apothéca, a storehouse.—Gk. dmoOjen, a
storehouse, in which anything is laid up or put away. —Gk. dé, away
(see Apo-) ; and 7i-67-~1, I place, put. See Thesis,

APOTHEGM. See Apophthegm.

APOTHEOSIS, deification. (L.—Gk.) Quotations (without re-
ferences) from South and Garth occur in Todd’s Johnson. Bacon has
it, Adv. of Learning, i. vii. 1.—L. apothedsis, — Gk. dmo0éwors, deifica-
tion. — Gk. dmoedw, I deify; lit. ‘set aside as a god.’ Gk. dé (see
Apo-); and @é0s, a god. See Theism.

APPAL, to terrify, dismay. (F.—L.) The present sense is modern.
The ME, appallen meant ‘to become pale,’ or ‘to make pale’ or
‘feeble. Thus Palsgrave has: ‘I appale ones colour, Je appalis ;’
and ‘I appalle, as drinke dothe or wyne, whan it leseth his colour
or ale whan it hath stande longe, Je appalys.’? Chaucer has appalled,
made pale, C. T., F 365 (10679). Gower has ‘ myn hed appalleth,’
my head becomes pale, C. A. ii. 107; bk. iv. 3160.—OF, apailir,
apalir, appalir, to wax pale; also, to make pale (Cot.). = OF.a-, prefix;
pale, palle, pale. —L. ad,to: and pallidus, pale. See Pale (2), Pall (2).

APPANAGE, APANAGE, provision for a dependent ; esp.
used of lands set apart as a provision for younger sons. (F.—L.) A
French law term, Cotgrave gives ‘ Appanage, Appennage, the portion


APPLAUD


of a younger brother in France; the lands, dukedomes, counties, or
countries assigned by the king unto his younger sons, or brethren, for
their entertainment; also, any portion of land or money delivered
unto a sonne, daughter, or kinsman, in lieu of his future right of
succession to the whole, which he renounces upon the receit thereof ;
or, the lands and lordships given by a father unto his younger sonne,
and to his heires for ever, a child’s part.’
in feudal law meant any pension or alimentation; Brachet. ‘The
Late L. forms apan&gium, appanagium are merely Latinised from the
French.] B. Formed with F. suffix -age (L. -aicum), from OF.
apaner, to nourish, lit. to supply with bread, written apandre in Late
L.; Ducange. = L. ap- (for ad), to, for; and pan-is, bread. See Pantry.


APPARATUS, preparation, provision, gear. (L.) Used by Hale, °


Origin of Mankind, p. 366. Borrowed from L. apparitus, prepara-
tion; cf. apparitus, pp. of appardre, to prepare for.—L. ad, to, for
(>ap- before p); and pardre, to make ready. See Prepare.

APPAREL, to clothe, dress. (F.—L.) The ME. aparailen, to
make ready, occurs in An Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 26.
[The sb. is ME, apparel, appareil; Wyclif, 1 Macc. ix. 35,52; 2 Macc.
xii. 14.=OF. aparail, apareil, apparel, dress.]— OF. aparailler, to
dress, to apparel. —OF, a, prefix (L. ad) ; and pareiller, parailler, to
assort, to put like things together with like, to arrange, from pareil,
parail, like, similar; mod. F. pareil. B. The adj. pareil is from
Late L. pariculum, acc. of pariculus, like, similar, found in old
medieval documents: ‘hoc sunt pariculas cosas,’ Lex Salica;
Brachet.—L. fari-, stem of par, equal; with suffixes -cw- and -lo-,
both diminutive. See Par, Pair, Peer. Der. apparel, sb.

APPARENT, APPARITION; see Appear,

APPEAL, to call upon, have recourse to. ('.—L.) ME. appelen,
apelen. Gower, C. A. ili. 192, has appele as a verb, and appeel asa
sb. (bk. vii. 3171, 3175). The sb. apel, appeal, occurs in Rob. of
Glouc., p. 473, 1. 9705.—OF. apeler, to invoke, call upon, accuse ;
spelt with one p because the prefix was a, the OF. form of L. ad. =L.
appellare, to address, call upon; also spelt adpellare; a secondary
form from L. appellere, adpellere, to drive to, bring to, incline towards.
—L. ad, to; and pellere, to drive. See Impel. Der. appeal, sb.,
appeal-able; appell-ant, MF. appell-ant, pres. pt. of appeller; and
(from L. appellire), appell-ate, appell-at-ion, appell-at-ive.

APPEAR, to become visible, come forth visibly. (F.—L.) ME.
apperen, aperen ; spelt appiere, P. Plowman, B. iii, 113 ; pt. t. aperede,
O. Eng, Misc., ed. Morris, p. 27.—OF.-aper-, tonic stem (as in pres,
subj. apere) of aparoir, to appear. — L. apparére, to appear. = L. ad, to
(which becomes ap- before p); and parére, to appear, come in sight,
which is also written parrére. Der. appear-ance; and (from L.
apparére) appar-ent, appar-ent-ly, appar-ent-ness, appar-it-ion, appar-
it-or. The phrase heir apparaunt =heir apparent, is in Gower, C. A.
i. 203 (bk. ii. 1320).

APPEASE, to pacify, quiet. (F.—L.) ME. apaisen, apesen,
appesen, ‘Cacus apaysede the wratthes of Evander; ” Chaucer, tr. of
Boethius, b. iv. met. 7, 1. 36. Gower has appesed, C. A. i. 341 (bk.
iii. 1849).—AF. apeser, apeiser, OF . apeser, mod. F. apaiser, to pacify,
bring to a peace. = OF. a peis, a pais, to a peace.—L. ad pacem, toa


peace.—L. ad, to; and pacem, acc. of pax, peace. See Peace and


Pacify. Der. appeas-able.

APPELLANT, &c.; see Appeal.

APPEND, to add afterwards. (F.—L.) Now used in the sense
‘to hang one thing on to another;’ from I’. appendre, the same,—L.
appendere, to suspend on.—L. ap-, for ad, to; and pendere, to hang.
B. But formerly intransitive, and lit. ‘to hang on to something else,’
to depend upon, belong to; the ME. appenden, apenden always has
this intransitive sense. ‘Telle me to whom, madame, that tresore
appendeth,’ i.e. belongs; P. Plowman, B.i.45.—OF. apendre, to depend
on, belong to, be attached to, lit. ‘ hang on to.’ — Late L. appendere, for
L. appendére, to hang to or upon.—L. ap-, for ad, to; and pendere,
tohang. See Pendant. Der. append-age (F.), append-ix (L.).

APPERTAIN, to belong to. (F.—L.) ME. apertenen, aperteinen ;
Chaucer, C. T., G 785; tr. of Boethius, b. iii. pr. 4. 25.—OF.
apartein-, a stem of the verb apartenir (mod. F. appartenir), to pertain
to.—OF, a, prefix (L. ad); and OF. partenir, to pertain, from L.
perlinére, to pertain, a compound of L. per, through, thoroughly, and
tenere, to hold. See Pertain. Der. appurten-ance (OF. apurten-
aunse, apartenance), appurten-ant.

APPETITE, strong natural desire for a thing. (F.—L.) ME.
appetyt, Chaucer, C. T., B 3390; Maundevile’s Travels, p. 157.—
OF. appetit.—L. appetitus, an appetite, lit. ‘a flying upon,’ or ‘ assault
upon,’ = L,. appetere, to fly to, to attack. —L. ad-, to (> ap- before p);
and petere, to fly, rush swiftly, seek swiftly. —4/PET, to fall, fly. Cf.
Gk. mér-opa, I fly; Brugm.i.§ 116. See Petition, Der. appet-ise;
Milton appet-ence, desire, P. L. xi. 610.

APPLAUD, to praise by clapping hands. (L.) Shak. Macb.
y. 3. 53. Directly from L. applaudere, pp. applausus. The L. applau-


(Mod. F. apanage, which.


APPLE


dere means ‘ to clap the hands together.’=L. ad, to, together (>ap-
before ~); and plaudere, to strike, clap, also spelt plodere (whence
i. ex-plode). See Explode. Der. applause, Shak. Cor. i. 9. 64;
applaus-ive, from L. pp. applausus.

APPLE, the fruit of the apple-tree. (E.) The apple of the eye
(Deut. xxxii. Io) is properly the pupil (see N. E. D.); but was some-
times used of the eye-ball, from its round shape; see Catholicon
Anglicum, p. 11, note 5. ME. appel, appil; spelt appell in the Or-
mulum, 8118. - AS. epl, eppel; Grein, i. 58. OFries. appel. 4+ Du.
appel, apple, ball, eye-ball ; Icel. epli; Swed. dple, apple; Dan. eble;
OHG. aphol, aphul, G. apfel; Irish abhal, Gael. ubhal, W. afal, Bret.
aval, Cf.also Russ. jabloko, Lithuanian obolys, &c. Origin unknown.
Some connect it with Abella in Campania; cf. Verg. A‘n. vii. 740.
This is not satisfactory.

APPLY, to fix the mind on; to appropriate to. (F.—L.) ME.
applyen. ‘Applyyn, applico, oppono ;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 13. It occurs
in the Wycl. Bible, Numb. xvi. 5, &c.— OF. aplier (s.v. aploier, Gode-
froy). = L. applictre, to join to, attach; turn or direct towards, apply
to; pp. applicatus. = L. ad, to (>ap- before p) ; and plicdre, to fold or
lay together, twine together. See Ply. Der. appli-able, appli-ance ;
and (from L. applicdre), applica-ble, applic-ant, applic-at-ion.

APPOGGIATURA, a grace-note or passing tone prefixed as a
support to an essential note of a melody. (Ital.—L.and Gk.) Modern;
in music. = Ital. appoggiatura, lit. a support. = Ital. appoggiare, to lean
upon. = L. ap-, for ad, to, upon; poggio, a place to lean on. —L. ad,
to; podiun:, an elevated place, balcony, from Gk. médd.oy, lit. ‘little
foot,’ a footstool, gallery to sit in, &c.; from Gk. 7o0d-, as in 7é6-a,
acc. of movs, foot. See Foot and Pew.

APPOINT, to fix, settle, equip. (F.—L.) ME. appointen, apointen;
* apointed in the newe mone;’ Gower, C. A. ii. 265 (bk. v. 4115). —
OF. apointer, to prepare, arrange, settle, fix.— Late L. appunctare, to
Tepair, appoint, settle a dispute; Ducange.=—L. ad-, to (> ap- before
p); and Late L. punctare, to mark by a prick, from punetus, pp. of
pungere, to prick, pt. t. pupug?; the orig. L. root pug- being preserved
in the reduplicated perfect tense. See Point. @ In some senses,

OF. apointer was from the phrase a point, L. ad punctum. Der. appoint-
ment; Merry Wives, il. 2. 272.

APPORTION, to portion out. (F.—L.) Used by Bp. Taylor,
Of Repentance, c. 3. s. 6 (R.) =F. apportioner, ‘to apportion, to give
a portion, or child’s part ;? Cot. Formed by prefixing F. a- (which
in later times was written ap- before p, in imitation of the L. prefix
ap-, the form taken by ad- before p) to the F. verb portionner, ‘to
apportion, part, share, deal,’ Cot.; from F. portion, a portion, from
L. portidnem, acc. of portio, a portion, share. See Portion. Der.
apportion-ment.

APPOSITEH, suitable. (L.) [The ME. verb. apfosen was used in
the special sense of ‘to put questions to,’ ‘to examine by questions ;’
but this was really another form of opposen, ‘to argue against,’ and is
preserved as pose; see Pose (2).] Bacon speaks of ‘ready and apposite
answers ;” Life of Henry VII, ed. Lumby, p. 111, 1. 22.—L. appositus,
adj. suitable; orig. pp. of apponere, to place or put to, join, annex
to.—L. ad, to (>ap- before p); and pdnere, to place, put. See
Position. Der. apposite-ly, apposite-ness, apposit-ion.

APPRAISE, to set a price on, to value. (F.—L.) Sometimes spelt
apprize, as in Bp. Hall’s Account of Himself, quoted by Richardson.
The ME. forms (with one ~) apreisen, apraisen, signify to value, to
esteem highly, as in ‘ Hur enparel was apraysut with princes of my3te’
= her apparel was highly prized by mighty princes; Anturs of Arthur,
st. 29. In P. Plowman, B. v. 334, the simple verb preised occurs with
the sense of ‘ appraised.’— OF, a, prefix (L.ad); and preiser, preisier,
prisier, to appreciate, value, set a price on; the compound being
suggested by OF. aprisier, to appraise, appreciate (Godefroy). The
verb preiser is from OF. preis, a price, value, L. pretium, a price. See
Price. 4 The E. words price and praise being doublets, the words
apprize, in the sense of to ‘value,’ and appraise are also doublets. To
apprize in the sense ‘to inform’ is a different word; see Apprize.
Der. apprais-er, appraise-ment. And see below.

APPRECIATE, to set a just value on. (L.) Richardson gives
a quotation from Bp. Hall containing the sb. appreciation. Fuller has
it also; Pisgah Sight, b. ii.c. 12, § 47. Gibbon uses appreciate, Rom.
Empire, c. 44. § 5 (from end), Formed from L. appretiitus, pp. of
appretiire, to value at a price. [The spelling with ¢ instead of ¢ is
due to the fact that the sb. appreciation seems to have been in earlier
use than the verb, and was borrowed directly from F. appreciation,
which Cotgrave explains by ‘a praising or prizing; a rating, valuation,
or estimation of.”] The L. appretidre is a made up word, from L. ad
(becoming ap- before p) and pretium, a price. See Price; and see
Appraise above. Der. appreciat-ion; apprecia-ble, apprecia-bly.

APPREHEND, to lay hold of, to understand ; to fear. (L.) Hall,
Henry IV, an. 1. §12, has apprehended in the sense of attached, taken
prisoner. = L. apprehendere, to lay hold of, seize. — L. ad, to (becoming


APRICOT a7


ap- before p) ; and prehendere, to seize, pp. prehensus. See Prehen-
sile. Der. apprehens-ion, apprehens-ible, apprehens-ive, apprehens-ive-
ness; from L. pp. apprehensus. And see below.

APPRENTICE, a learner of a trade. (F.—L.) ‘Apparailled
hym as apprentice ;’ P. Plowman, B. ii. 214, in MS. W.; see the foot-
note; other MSS. read a frentice in this passage. [The forms apprentice
and prentice were used indifferently in ME., and can be so used still ;
the syllable a- was easily confused with the indef. article.]—OF.
aprentis, nom. case of aprentif; see Supp. to Godefroy, p. 156. The
forms aprentis, aprentif represent Folk-L. types *apprenditivus, nom.,
and *apprenditivum, acc.; from a Late L. *apprenditus, used as a new
pp: of L. apprendere, short form of apprehendere, to lay hold of. See
Apprehend. See F. apprenti in Hatzfeld; cf. Gascon aprentis,
Span. and Port. aprendiz. Der. apprentice-ship.

APPRIZE, APPRISE, to inform, teach. (F.—L.) ‘You must
be extremely well apprized, that,’ &c.; Spectator, no. 518 (1712).
Formed from MF. apprendre (Palsgrave, p. 606, s.v. lerne), pp. appris,
‘taught, instructed,’ Cot.; by analogy with comprise, surprise, from F.
comprendre, surprendre. From Late L. apprendere, to learn; contr.
form of apprehendere, to apprehend, lay hold of. See Apprehend.

APPROACH, to draw near to. (F.—L.) ME. approchen, apro-
chen; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 8; Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. i.
pr. 1, 1. 31. —OF. aprochier, to approach, draw near to. = L. appropiare,
to draw near to; in the Vulgate version of Exod. iii. 5.—L. ad, to
(becoming ap- before p); and propius, comp. of prope, near, which
appears again in E. prop-inquity. Der. approach-able.

APPROBATION; see Approve.

APPROPRIATEH, adj. fit, suitable; v. to take to oneself'as one’s
own. (L.) The sb. apropriacioun is in Gower, C. A. i. 240; bk. il.
2396. The pp. appropriated is in the Bible of 1539, 3rd Esdras, c. 6
(Richardson). Tyndal, Works, p. 66, col. 1, has appropriate as an
adjective, adopted from L. pp. appropriatus. [This is how most of
our verbs in -a/e were formed ; first came the pp. form in -ate, used as
an adj., from L. pp. in -@us; also used with the sense of a pp., which
at once suggested a verb in -ate.|— L. appropridtus, pp. of appropriare,
to make one’s own. = L. ad, to (becoming ap- before p); and proprius,
one’s own; whence E. Proper, q.v. Der. appropriate-ly, appropriate-
ness, appropriat-ion.

APPROVE, to commend; sometimes, to prove. (F.—L.) ME.
approuen, appreuen (with uw for v). Chaucer has ‘approwed in coun-
seilling ;’ C. T., B 2345.—OF. aprover, to approve of (Godefroy) ;
mod. F. approuver. = L. approbire, to commend ; pp. approbatus. = L.
ad, to (becoming ap- before p); and probdre, to test, try; to approve,
esteem as good, from probus, good. See Prove. Der. approv-ing-ly,
approv-able, approv-al; also approbat-ion, ME. approbac-ion (Gower,
C. A. ii. 86; bk. iv. 2519), from L. approbatio.

APPROXIMATE, adj. near to; v. to bring orcome near to. (L.)
Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 21. § 9, has approximate as an
adjective ; hence was formed the verb; see note on Appropriate. —
L. approximatus, pp. of approximdre, to draw near to. = L. ad, to (be-
coming ap- before p) ; and proximus, very near, superlative adj. formed
from prope,near. See Approach. Der.approximate-ly,approximat-ion.

APPURTENANCEH, in P, Plowman, B. ii. 103 (MS. W); see
Appertain.

APRICOT, a kind of plum. (F.—Port.—Arab.—Gk.—L.)
[Formerly spelt apricock, Shak. Mids, Nt. Dr. iii. 1. 169; Rich. II, iil.
4. 29; from the Port. albricoque, an apricot.] Cotgrave has abricot, of
which apricoét is a corruption, We also find abricot in Phillips’ Dict.,
1658. = F.abricot, which Cotgrave explains by ‘the abricot, or apricock
plum.’ = Port. albricogue, an apricot; the F. word having been intro-
duced from Portuguese; see Brachet. Cf. Span. albaricoque, Ital. alber-
cocca. B. These words are traced, in Webster and Littré, back to the
Arabic al-bargiig (Rich. Dict. p. 263), where al is the Arabic def.
article, and the word bargqiig is no true Arabic word, but a corruption
of the Mid. Gk. mpaixdxcov, Dioscorides, i. 165 (see Sophocles’ Lexicon) ;
pl. mpoxd«ca, borrowed from the L. precogua, apricots, neut. pl. of
precoquus, another form of precox, lit. precocious, early-ripe. [They
were also called armenia, i.e. Armenian fruit.] ‘They were considered
as a kind of peach (peaches were called persica in Latin) which ripened
sooner than other peaches; and hencethe name. ‘ Maturescunt estate
precocia intra triginta annos reperta et primo denariis singulis uenun-
data ;’ Pliny, Nat. Hist. xv. 12 ; which Holland translates: ‘the abri-
cocts are ready to be eaten in summer; these have not bin known full
30 yeares, and at their first comming up, were sold for Roman deniers
apeece.’ ‘ Vilia maternis fueramus precogua ramis Nunc in adoptiuis
persica cara sumus ;’ Martial, 13. 46. The L. precox, early-ripe, 1s
from pre, beforehand, and coguere, to ripen, to cook, See Preco-
cious. @ The word thus came to us in a very roundabout way,
viz. from L. to Gk.; then to Arab.; then to Port.; then to French,
whence we borrowed apricot, having previously borrowed the older
form apricock from the Portuguese directly,


28 APRIL


APRIL, the name of the fourth month. (F.—L.) ME. Aprille,
April; Chaucer, C. T. Prol. 1; also Averil [Averil], Rob. of Glouc.
p- 500; 1. rog10. ‘This older form is French; the word was after-
wards conformed to Latin spelling. —OF. Avril. =L. Aprilis, April;
said to be so called because the earth then opens to produce new
fruits. —L. aperire, to open. See Ap2rient.

APRON, a cloth worn in front to protect the dress. (F.—L.) In

the Bible of 1539, Gen. iii. 7. Formerly spelt apron or naprun, so
that an initial x has been lost. ‘ Naprun or barm-clothe, Jimas ;’
Prompt. Pary. p. 351. ‘ Hir xapron feirand white i-wassh;’ Prol.
to Tale of Beryn, 1. 33.—OF. naperon, a large cloth (Roquefort) ;
naperon, natron, a napkin (Godefroy). Formed with suffix -r-
(appearing in OF. nape-r-ie, a place for keeping cloths), and suffix
-on (answering to Ital. -ove), from OF. nape, a cloth; mod. F. nappe,
a cloth, table-cloth.—L. mappa, a cloth; with change of m to , as
in L, matta, F. natte, L. mespilum, F. néflee See Map. @ On the
loss of 7 in mapron, see remarks prefixed to the letter N.
. APROPOS, to the purpose. (f.—L.) Mere French; viz. @ propos,
to the purpose, lit. with reference to what is proposed. —L. ad
propositum, to the purpose.= L. ad, to; and prédpositum, a thing pro-
posed, neut. of propositus, proposed, pp. of proponere, to propose. See
Propose and Purpose.

APSE, an arched recess at the E. end of a church. (L.—Gk.)
Modern and architectural; a corruption of apsis, which has been
longer in use in astronomy, in which it is applied to the turning-
points of a planet’s orbit, when it is nearest to or farthest from the
sun. The astronomical term is also now often written apse. —L.
apsis, gen. written absis, a bow, turn; pl. apsides.— Gk. aiis, dipis, a
fastening, felloe of a wheel, curve, bow, arch, vault. —Gk. drew, to
fasten, bind.

APT, fit, liable, ready. (L.) ‘ Flowring today, tomorowe apt to
faile ;’ Lord Surrey, Frailtie of Beautie. First used in 1398 (N.E. D.)
—L. aptus, fit, fitted; properly pp. of obsolete verb apere, to fasten,
join together, but used in L. as the pp. of apisci, to reach, seize, get.
Der. apt-ly, apt-ness, apt-i-tude; also ad-apt, q.v., ad-ebt, q.v.

APTERYX, a New Zealand bird; the kiwi. (Gk.) Lit. ‘ wing-
less ;’ because it has only rudimentary wings. = Gk. da-, neg. prefix;
and mrépugé, a wing, from mr-, weak grade of mér-opat, I fly.

. AQUATIC, pertaining to water. (L.) Used by Ray, On the
Creation. Spelt aguatygue, Caxton, Eneydos, c. xxiv, p. go, l. 2.
Holland has aguaticall, Plutarch, p. 692 (K.). [Sir T. Browne has
aqueous, Vulgar Errors, bk. ii. c. 1.§ 6. Cotgrave has aqueduct, both
as F. and E.|=L. agudticus, pertaining to water.—L. agua, water.+-

Goth. ahkwa, water; OHG. aha, MHG. ahe, water (obsolete);
AS. éa, a stream ; Icel. @, Dan. aa, Swed. a, stream. From L. agua
are also derived agua-fortis, i.e. strong water, by the addition of fortis,
strong ; agud-rium, Aqud-rius, aque-ous ;, aque-duct, from aque, gen.
of aqua, water, and ductus, a duct.

AQUILINE, pertaining to or like an eagle. (L.; or F.—L.)
“His nose was aguiline;? Dryden, Palamon and Arcite, 1. 1350.
Perhaps from L. direct; but Cotgrave gives F. aguilin, of an eagle,
like an eagle, with the example ‘ nez aguilin, a hawkenose, a nose
like an eagle.’—L. aguilinus, belonging to an eagle.—L. aguila, an
eagle. See Eagle.

ARABESQUE, Arabic, applied to designs. (F.—Ital.— Arab.)
In Swinburne’s Travels through Spain, lett. 31, qu.in Todd’s Johnson,
‘we find ‘interwoven with the arabesque foliages.’ = F. Arabesque,which
Cotgrave explains by ‘ Arabian-like ; also sb. f., rebesk-worke, a small
and curious flourishing ;’ where rebesk is a corruption of the very word
in question. Ital, Arabesco, Arabian, Arab. ‘arab, Arabia; Rich.
Dict., p. 1090, The ending -esco in Italian answers to E. -ish. Der. From


the name of the same country we have also Arab, Arab-ian, Arab-ic. |


_.ARABLE, fit for tillage. (F.—L.) North. speaks of ‘arable
land;’ Plutarch, p. 189 (K.). ‘Land arable;’ Tusser, Januaries


Wusbandrie, st. 52.—F. arable, explained by Cotgrave as ‘earable,
ploughable, tillable.’ = L. ardbilis, that can be ploughed. = L. ardre, to


plough. See Ear (3),


-ARAUCARTA, a genus of coniferous trees. (S. America.) So


called from Arauco, the name of a province to the S. of Chili.
ARBALEST, another form of Arblast, q. v.


ii. 90g. “As arbiter of war and peace ;’ Ben Jonson, The Gipsies
(Captain). [Some derivatives, borrowed from the French, are in


much earlier use, viz. the fem. form arbytres (i.e. arbitress), Ayenbite


of Inwyt, p. 1543; arbitrour, Wyclif, 3 Esdras, viii. 26 3 arbitré, arbi-
tree (L. arbitrium, choice), Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. v. pr. 3. 1. 12;
arbitracion, Chaucer’s Tale of Melibeus (B 2943) ; arbitratour, Hall,


Henry VI, an. 43 arbitrement, Shak. Tw. Nt. iii. 4. 286.] —L. arbiter,


a witness, judge, umpire; lit.‘ one who comes to look on, B. This
curious word is compounded of ar-and-biter. Here ar- is a dialectal
variation of L. ad, to, as in ar-cessere (Corssen, Ausspr. i. 2. 239);


if


ARCH.


and -biter means ‘a comer,’ from the weak grade of bétere (also
baetere and bitere), to come, used by Pacuvius and Plautus. The root
of bétere is perhaps *g(w)é- (cf. Lettish gai-ta, a going) ; see Brugm.
i. §§ 587 (7), 663. Der. arbitr-ess; see also below.

ARBITRARY, depending on the will; despotic. (L.) In Mil-
ton, P. L. ii. 334.—L. arbitrarius, arbitrary, uncertain ; lit. ‘what is
done by arbitration,’ with reference to the discretion of the umpire. =
L. arbitrire, to act as umpire. = L. arbitro-, stem of arbiter, an umpire.
See further under Arbiter, Der. arbitrari-ly, arbitrari-ness; and see
below.

ARBITRATE, to act as umpire. (L.) Shak. Macb. v. 4. 20.
He also has arbitrator, Troilus, iv. 5. 2253; which appears as arbi-
tratour (F. arbitrateur, Cotgrave) in Hall, Henry VI, an.4; Chaucer
has arbitracioun (F. arbilration), Tale of Melibeus, C. T., B 2943.
Formed with suffix -ate (see Appropriate) from L. arbitrare, to
act as arbiter, to be umpire (above). Der. arbitrat-or, arbitrat-ion ;
also arbitra-ment (F., from L. arbitrare). And see above.

ARBLAST, ARBALEST, a steel cross-bow. (F.—L. and Gk.)
Obsolete. ME. arblaste, dat., Rob. of.Glouc. p. 377, 1. 7735; AS.
Chron. (MS. D.), an. 1079. —AF. arblast, OF. arbaleste (F. arbaléte).
=L. arcuballista, a ‘ ballista’ furnished with a bow.—L. areu-, for
arcus, a bow ; and ballista, a machine for throwing stones, from Gk.
BadA-ew, to throw, with suffix -ista, Gk. -to7ns.

ARBOREOUS, belonging to trees. (L.) Used by Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 6, § 20. [Milton has arborets, i.e. groves (L. ar-
borétum, a place planted with trees), P. L. ix. 437; and the same
word occurs in Spenser, F. Q. ii. 6. 12; but we now use the L. ar-
borétum in full.]—L. arboreus, of or belonging to trees, with the
change of -zs into -ous, as in piows, strenuous. L. arbor, a tree. Der.
(from the same source) arbor-et, arbor-elum, arbor-escent ; also arbori-
culture, arbori-cultur-ist,

ARBOUR, a bower made of branches of trees. (F.—L.; but
altered.) Milton hasarbour, P. L. v. 378, ix. 216; arbours,iv.626. Shak.
refers to an arbor within an orchard; 2 Hen. 1V, v. 3. 2. In Sidney’s
Arcadia, bk. i, is described ‘a fine close arbor, [made] of trees whose
branches so lovingly interbraced one the other.’ In Sir T. More’s
Works, p. 177 e, we read of ‘sitting in an arber,’ which was in ‘the
gardine.’ a. There is no doubt that this word is, however, a later
form of herber, or erber, a small lawn or herb-garden, which lost its
initial & quite regularly; it is the ME. herbere, erbere, a garden of
herbs or flowers, OF. herbier, L. herbarium. B. This latter word,
being of F. origin, had the initial A weak, and sometimes silent, so
that it was also spelt erbare, as in the Prompt. Parv. p. 140, where we
find ‘ Eréare, herbariun), viridarium, viridale.’ Cf. ‘ Herbes he tok
in an herber;’? K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 331. ‘I entred in that
erber grene;’ Allit. Poems, A 38. And see P. Plowman, B. xvi. 13-15.
y. This occasioned a loss of & in herbere, and at the same time sug-
gested a connexion with L. arbor, a tree; the result being further
forced on by the fact that the ME. herbere was used not only to signify
‘a garden of herbs,’ but also ‘a garden of fruit-trees’ or orchard.
8. The L. herbarium is from herba, aherb. See Herb. & See this
explained in the Romance of Thomas of Erceldoune, ed. J. A. H.
Murray, note tol. 177; and see N.E.D. Mr. Way, in his note to
the Prompt. Parv., p. 140, is incorrect as to the certainty of arbour
being a corruption of harbour, with which it has no connexion.

ARC, a segment of a circle. (F.—L.) Chaucer has ark, Man of
Law’s Prologue, ]. 2; and frequently in his Treatise on the Astrolabe.
In the latter, pt. ii. sect. 9, 1. 2, it is also spelt arch, with ch for k;
see Arch (1); cf. ditch, dyke. OF. arc, an arc.—L. arcum, acc. of
arcus, an arc, a bow. See Arrow. Der, arc-ade, q.v.; and see
Arch, Archer. '

ARCADH, awalkarched over. (F.—Ital.—L.) Popehas arcades,
Moral Essays, Ep. iv. 35.—F. arcade, which Cotgrave explains by
‘an arch, an half circle.’—Ital. arcata, lit. arched; fem. of pp. of
arcare, to bend, arch. Ital. arco, a bow.—L. arcum, acc. of arcus, a
bow. See Are. (See Hatzfeld, Etym. Dict. pref. p. 22.)

ARCANA: see Ark. .

ARCH (1), a construction of stone or wood, &c., in a curved or
vaulted form, (F.—L.) ‘Arch yna walle, arcus;’ Prompt. Parv. p.14


ee, | ‘An arche of marbel ;’ Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 215.— OF. arche, fem.
ARBITER, an umpire, judge of a dispute. (L.) In Miltor, P. L.


sb, an arch, arcade (Godefroy). = Late L. arca, an ark, chest ; but also
improperly used with the sense of ‘ arch,’ by confusion with L, arcus,
a bow (Ducange). See Are. 4 Hence the Court of Arches, ‘ origin-
ally held in the arches of Bow Church—St. Mary de Arcubus—the
crypt of which was used by Wren to supportthe present superstructure ;?
I. Taylor, Words and Places. And see Todd’s Johnson. Der. arch-
ing, arch-ed.

ARCH (2), chief; in later use, clever, cunning, roguish, waggish,
sly. (L.—Gk.) ‘Dogget ... spoke his request with so arch a leer ;’
Tatler, no. 193 (1710). ‘The most arch act of piteous massacre ;’
Rich. III, iv. 3. 2. ‘An heretic, an arch one,’ i.e. an arch-heretic;


ARCH


Hen. VIII, ili. 2.102. ‘ Byends...a very arch fellow, a downright
hypocrite ;’ Bunyan, Pilg. Progress (Greatheart, in part ii), This
curious adj. arose solely out of the use of the prefix arch-, which came
to be used as a separate word. See Arch-. Der. arch-ly, arch-ness.

ARCH., chief; almost solely used as a prefix. (L.—Gk.) Shak.
has ‘my worthy arch and patron,’ Lear, ii. r. 61; whence the use of
arch, adj.,as above. In arch-bishop, we have a word in very early use;
AS. erce-bisceop, arce-bisceop (Bosworth), B. Thus arch- is to be
rightly regarded as descended from AS. arce-, erce-, erce-, which was
borrowed from L. archi- (in archi-episcopus), and this again from Gk.
dpxe- in dpxtenioxonos, an archbishop.= Gk. dpxés, chief; dpxecv, to be
first ; cf.dpxy,beginning. 4 The form ofthe prefix being once fixed, it
was used for other words ; it occurs also in OF ., as in OF. arche-diacre,
archdeacon. Der. arch-bishop, arch-deacon, arch-duke, arch-duchy, &c.
@ In the word arch-angel, the ch remained hard (ask) in the Romance
languages, on account of the a following; cf. Ital. arcangelo, Span.
arcangel.

ARCH OLOGY, the science of antiquities. (Gk.) See
archaiology in Todd’s Johnson, Made up from Gk. dpyato-s, ancient,
and suffix -logy (Gk. -Aoyia), from Gk. Adyos, discourse; cf. Aoy-,
second grade of Aeyew, to speak. See Archaic. Der. archeolog-ist.

ARCHAIC, old, antique, primitive. (Gk.) Spelt archaick ;
added by Todd to: Johnson’s Dict. (1827). From Gk. dpxaixds,
primitive, antique. —Gk. apxatos, old, ancient, lit. ‘from the begin-
ning.’ Gk. dpx7n, beginning.

ARCHAISM, an antiquated phrase. (Gk.) In Todd’s Johnson,
with a quotation dated 1643. From Gk. dpyxaiopds, an archaism. =
Gk. dpxaifeyv, to speak antiquatedly.—Gk. dpxatos, old. — Gk. dpxi,
beginning. See above.

‘ARCHER, a bowman. (F.—L.) In early use. Used by Rob. of
Glouc., p. 199 (1. 4096); and still earlier, in King Alisaunder, ed.
Weber, |. 6344.—AF. archer, Gaimar, 2814; OF. archier, an archer.
—Late L.arcarius. Formed with L, suffix -drius from L.arc-us,a bow.
See Are. Der. arch-er-y.

ARCHETYPES, the original type. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) Used by
Pp. Hall, The Peacemaker, s. 23.—F. archetype, ‘a principall type,
figure, forme; the chief pattern, mould, modell, example, or sample,
whereby a thing is framed ;’ Cot. —L. archetypum, the original pattern.
— Gk. dpxérumov, a pattern, model; neut. of dpxérumos, stamped as a
model. = Gk. dpye-, another form of dpyi-, prefix (see Archi-); and
Tu7-, as in TUmrev, to beat, stamp. See Type. Der. archetyp-al.
-ARCHI,, chief; used as a prefix. (L.—Gk.) The older E. form
is arch-, which (as explained under Arch-) was a modification of AS.
arce-, from L. archi-. The form archi- is of later use, and borrowed
from the L. directly. — Gk. dpxi-, prefix.. See Arch-, Der. archi-
episcopal, archi-episcopy, archi-diaconal. q In the word arch-angel,
the final z of the prefix is dropped before the vowel following. In the
word arche-type, the prefix takes the form arche-; see Archetype.
The same prefix also forms part of the words archi-mandrite, archi-
pelago, archi-tect, archi-trave, which see below.

ARCHIMANDRITE, the superior of a monastery or convent,
in the Greek Church. (L.—Gk.) ‘Archimandrite, an abbot, prior,
or chief of an hermitage ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—Late L. archi-
mandrita, a chief or principal of monks, an abbot; Apollinaris
Sidonius, Ep. 8. 14 (Lewis). —Late Gk. dpy:pavdpizrns, the same. =
Gk. dpxu-, chief (see Archi-); avdpa, an enclosed space, fold, (in
late Gk.) a monastery; see Madrigal.

ARCHIPELAGO, chief sea, i.e. AZgean Sea. (Ital.—Gk.)
‘Archipelagus, or Archipelago;’ Phillips (1706). — Ital. arcipelago,
modified to archipelago by the substitution of the more familiar Gk,
prefix archi-(see Archi-) for the Ital. form arci-.—Gk. dpxe-, prefix,
signifying ‘ chief;” and méAayos,a sea. 4 The Ital. arcipelago occurs
as early as 1268; see N. E. D.

- ARCHITECT, a designer of buildings. (F.—L.—Gk.) Lit.
‘a chief builder.’ Used by Shak, Tit. Andr. v. 3.122; Milton, P. L.i.
732.—F. architecte, an architect; Cotgrave.—L. architectus, a form
in use as well as architectOn, which is the older and more correct one,
and borrowed from Gk:—Gk. dpxitéxrwy, a chief builder or chief
artificer. — Gk. dpyi-, chief (see Archi-); andréxrwy,a builder, closely
allied to réxvy, art. See Technical, Texture. Der. architect-ure,
architect-ur-al.

ARCHITRAVE, the part of an entablature resting immediately
onthe column. (F.—Ital.— Hybrid of Gk. and L.) Used by Milton,
P. L. i. 715 ; and by Ben Jonson, The New Inn, iii. 2 (Lovel). Evelyn,
On Architecture, remarks: ‘the Greeks named that epistiliwm which
we from a mungril compound of two languages (dpx7-trabs, or rather
from arcus and trabs) called architrave.” His second derivation is wrong ;
the first is nearly right:. His observation that it is ‘a mungril com-
pound’ is just. Lit. it means ‘chief beam.’ = F. architrave, ‘the archi-
trave (of pillars, or stonework) ; the reason-peece or master-beam (in
buildings of timber);’ Cot.—Ital. architrave (Torriano) ; arcotrave


AREFACTION 29


(Florio), chief beam. Gk. cpxi-, prefix, chief, adopted into L, as
archi-; and L. acc. trabem, a beam, from the nom. ¢rads,.a beam. Cf.
Gk. rpapné, a spear-shaft, a beam.

ARCHIVES, s. pl. (1) the place where public records are kept;
(2) the public records. (F.—L.—Gk.) The former is the true sense.
The sing. is rare, but Holland has ‘archive or register ;’ Plutarch,
p- 116 (R.).—F. archives, archifs, ‘a place wherein all the records, &c.
[are] kept in chests and boxes ;’ Cot.—L. archiwum (archivum), also
archium, the archives.—Gk. dpxetoy, a public building, residence of
the magistrates. — Gk. dpy7, a beginning, a magistracy.

ARCTIC, northern. (F¥.—L.—Gk.) In Marlowe’s Edw. II, A. i.
sc. I, 1.16. Milton has arctick, P. L. ii. 710. Chaucer has artik,
Astrolabe, i. 14. 6.—F. arctique, northern, northerly; Cot.=L. areticus,
northern. = Gk. dp«ritds, near ‘ the bear,’ northern. = Gk. dperos, a bear;
esp. the Great Bear, a constellation situate not far from the northern
pole of the heavens. L. wrsus, a bear; Irish art, W. arth; Skt.
rksha-s; Pers. khirs,abear. See Brugm.i. § 920. Allied to Ursine.
Der. ant-arctic, q.v.

ARDENT, burning, fiery. (F.—L.) Chaucer has ‘the most ar-
daunt love of his wyf;’ tr. of Boethius, b. iii, met. 12. 1. 10. The
spelling has, at a later time, been conformed to Latin. = OF. ardant,
burning, pres. pt. of ardoir, to burn. L. ardére, to burn. Allied to dri-
dus, dry (Bréal); see Arid. Der. ardent-ly, ardenc-y; ardour, empest,
iv. 56 (OF. ardor, L. acc. ardérem, from nom. ardor, a burning).

ARDUOUS, difficult to perform. (L.) In Pope, Essay on Criti-
cism, 1.95. Not in early use. Formed by change of L. -us into -ous,
by analogy with pious, &c.—L. arduus, steep, difficult, high. + Irish,
Gaelic, Cornish, and Manx ard, high, lofty; Icel. 6rdugr, erect. Brugm.
i. § 360. Der. arduous-ly, arduous-ness.

ARH, the pres. pl. of the verb substantive. (Northern E.) The
whole of the present tense of the verb substantive is from the same
root, viz. ES, to be. I here discuss each person separately. The
singular is I am, thou art, he is; pl. we, ye, they are.

AM is found in the Northumbrian glosses of the Gospels, Luke, xxii.
33, and frequently elsewhere. The Wessex form is eom. These stand
for es-m, the s having been assimilated to m, and then dropped. Here
es is the root, and -m is short for -mz; the Idg. type being *es-mi. [The
Northumbrian retains this -m in other instances, as in geséo-m, I see,
Mark, viii. 24; dda-m, I do, Mark, xi. 33; béo-m, I be, Mark, ix. 19.]
B. The original Idg. type *esm is further represented by the Skt. as-mi,
Zend ah-mi, Gk, ei-i, L. s-u-m (for *es-(«)-mi), Lithuan. es-mi, Goth.
i-m, Icel.e-m, Swed. dr (fores, dropping the suffix), Dan.er, OIrish a-m.
It is the only word in English in which the old suffix -mi appears.
See Brugm. ii. § 976.

ART. This is the OMerc. eard, erd ; cf. ONorthumbrian ard (Luke,
iv. 34), and the AS. (Wessex) eart (with ¢ due to the -¢ in scea/-t, shalt,
&c.). The Icel. form is er-t, Olcel. es-¢; and E. and Icel. are the only
languages which have this -s, B. The orig. Idg. types were *es-i,
*es-si; cf. Skt. as-t, Zend a-hi, Doric Gk. éo-oi (Attic e), L. és,
Lithuan. es-s?, Goth. i-s (or is), Swed. Gr, Dan. er. See Brugm. ii. § 984.

IS. This is the same in Northumbrian and Wessex, viz. zs, as at
present. f. The orig. Idg. type was *es-1i; cf. Skt. as-¢i, Zend ash-ti,
Gk. éo-7i, L. es-t, Lith. es-ti, Goth. is-¢, Icel. er, Swed. &r, Dan. er,
G. is-t, The English form has lost the suffix, preserving only is, as
a weakened form of 4/ES. So also Olrish zs.

ARE. This is the OMerc. earun, ONorthumbrian aron (Matt. v. 14)
as distinguished from AS. (Wessex) sizdon; but the forms sizdon and
sint are also found in Northumbrian. All three persons are alike in
Old English; but the Icel. has er-um, er-u0, er-u. B. The gen. Idg.
type of the 3rd pers. plu. was *es-enti ; whence Skt. s-anti, Gk. eic-iv,
L. s-unt, Goth. s-ind, G. s-ind, Icel. er-u (for *es-~), Swed. dr-e (for
*ds-e), Dan. er-e (for *es-e), ONorthumb. ar-oz (for *as-on), ME. ar-en,
later are, AS. s-ind(on). In the AS. s-indon, the -on is a later suffix,
peculiar to English. y. Thus E. are is short for aren, and stands
for the *es-ex of the primitive *es-endi, whilst the AS. sizd stands for
the *s-ent of the same primitive form. See Brugm. ii. § 1017.

The /ES, to be, appears in Skt. as, to be, Gk. é¢- of Doric éo-01,
L. es-se, to be, G. s-eiz, to be, and in various parts of the verb in
various languages, but chiefly in the present tense. @ For other
parts of the verb, see Be, Was.

AREA, a large space. (L.) Used by Dryden, Ded. to Span.
Fryar (R.).—L. area, an open space, piece of level ground.

ARECA, a genus of palms, of which one species produces the
areca-nut, which the natives roll up with a little lime in the leaves of
the betel, and chew. (Port.—Canarese.) Port. areca. From the
Karnata (Canarese) adike, areca-nut; Wilson, Indian Terms, p. 7.
Cf. Malayalam adekka, Tamil adaikay ; from adai, denoting close
arrangement of the cluster, and Adv, nut, fruit. The accent is on the
initial ain all the languages; see N. E. D. The cerebral d has been
replaced by r.

AREFACTION, a drying, making dry. (L.) Used by Bacon,.


30 ARENA


ARMS


Adv. of Leaming, b. ii. 8. 3; ed. Wright, p. 124, ]. 14. A coined | F. aristocratie, ‘an aristocracy; the government of nobles, or of some


word, from L. drefacere, to make dry. = L. aré-re, to be dry (cf. aridus,
dry); and facere, to make, See Arid. Der. By adding -fy (F.
-fier) to make, to the stem are-, dry, the verb arefy has also been
made; it is used by Bacon, Nat. Hist. sect. 294.

ARENA, a space for disputants or combatants. (L.) It occurs in
Hakewill, Apologie (1630), p. 396. ‘The arena or pit;’ Gibbon,
Hist. c. Ixxi. § 10.—L. aréna, sand; hence, a sanded space for
gladiators in the amphitheatre. Older form haréna; cf. Sabine
fasena, sand. Der. arena-ce-ous, i.e. sandy.

AREOPAGUS, Mars’ hill; the supreme court at Athens. (L.—
Gk.) From L. aréopagus, which occurs in the Vulgate version of
Acts, xvii. 22, where the A. V. has ‘ Mars’ hill.’ = Gk.’Apesmayos, a
form which occurs in no good author (Liddell and Scott) ; more
commonly ”Apecos ma-yos, which is the form used in Acts, xvii. 22.—
Gk.” Apecos, of or belonging to”Apns, the Gk. god of war; and mayo,
arock, mountain peak, hill. Der. Areopag-ite, Areopag-tit-ic-a (Milton’s
treatise).

ARETE, a sharp ascending ridge ofa rock. (F.—L.) Chiefly with
reference to French Switzerland.=—F. aréte; OF. areste.—L. arista, an
ear of corn, fishbone or spine; hence (in F.) a ridge, sharp edge.
See Arris.

ARGENT, white, in heraldry; silvery. (F.—L.) In Marlowe,
Massacre at Paris, i. 6. 2; as an heraldic term, much earlier. =F.
argent, silver ; also, ‘argent in blason;’ Cot.—L. argentum, silver ;
of which the old Oscan form was aragetom; connected with argilla,
white clay. Cf. Gk. dpyvpos, silver; connected with dpyés, white ;
Skt. arjuna-s, white; Oltish argat, W. ariant, silver.—4/ARG, to
shine. Brugm. i. §§ 529,604. Der. argent-ine (F. argentin, Cotgrave ;
Late L. argentinus).

ARGILLACHOUS, clayey. (L.) In Bailey (1731).—L. argil-
laceus, clayey; with -ows for -vs.— L. argilla, white clay.4-Gk. dpy.dos,
white clay.—4/ARG, to shine. See Argent.

ARGONAUT, one who sailed in the ship Argo. (L.—Gk.) In
Spenser, I’. Q. iv. 1.23; and see Trevisa, tr. of Higden,ii. 405. L.argo-
nauta, one who sailed in the Argo. —Gk. ’Apyovav’rns, an Argonaut.
= Gk. ’Apyw, the name of Jason’s ship (meaning ‘ the swift ;’ from
cpyos, swift) ; and vavrys, a ship-man, sailor, from vais, aship. Der.
Argonaut-ic.

ARGOSY, a merchant-vessel. (Dalmatian.) In Shak. Mer. of
Ven. i. 1.93; on which Clark and Wright note: ‘ Argosy denotes a
large vessel, gen. a merchant-ship, more rarely a ship of war. The
word has been supposed to be a corruption of Ragosie, ‘‘a ship of
Ragusa;”’’ and this is correct. B. The etymology of this word has
been set at rest by Mr. Tancock, in N. and Q.6.S.iv. 490. See The
Present State of the Ottoman Empire, by Sir Paul Ricaut, 1675, c. 14,
p- 119 ; Lewis Roberts’s Marchants Map of Commerce, 1638, c. 237,
where he speaks of the great ships ‘ vulgarly called Argoses, properly
Rhaguses;’ and especially the earlier quotation about ‘ Ragusyes,
Ilulks, Caravels, and other foreign rich laden ships,’ in The Petty Navy
Royal, by Dr. John Dee, 1577, pr. in Arber’s English Garner, ii. 67.
See also Wedgwood (Contested Etymologies) ; Palmer (Folk-Etymo-
logy). [The OF. argousin is unrelated; see Palmer, Brachet.] Ragusa
is a port in Dalmatia, on the E. coast of the Gulf of Venice.

ARGUE, to make clear, prove by argument. (F.—L.) ‘ Aristotle
and other moo to argue I taughte;’ P. Plowman, B. x. 174.—OF.
arguer.— Late L. argitare (L. argitar?), frequentative of arguere, to
prove, make clear; cf. argitus, clear. Perhaps allied to Gk. dpyés,
white, bright. See Argent. Der. argu-ment, Chaucer, C.T. 11198
(F 886) ; argument-at-ion, argument-at-ive, argument-at-ive-ly, argu-
ment-at-ive-ness,

ARID, dry, parched. (L.) Not in early use; Rich. quotes from
Swift’s Battle of the Books, and Cowper’s Homer’s Iliad, bk. xii.
Aridity is in Phillips (1658). It was probably taken immediately
from L, aridus, dry.—L. Grére, to bedry. Cf. Skt. dsa-s, dust. Der.
arid-it-y, arid-ness; and see Arefaction, Ashes.

ARIGHT, in the right way. (E.) We find in Layamon, 1. 17631,
‘zer he mihte fusen a riht,’ i.e. ere he might proceed aright. Thea
is (as usual) for an, ME. form of AS, on, often used in the sense of
‘in.’ Thus aright is for ‘on right,’ i.e. in right; right being a
substantive. Cf. abed, asleep, afoot, &c. See Right.

ARISE, to rise up. (E.) ME. arisen, Old Eng. Homilies, i. 49;
very common. AS. drisan, to arise; Grein, i. 38.—AS. a-, and
risan, to rise. @[ Cf. Goth. ur-reisan, to arise, Matt. viii. 15, where
ur- is the prefix which commonly appears in Gothic as us-, but be-
comes ur- before a following r. But we cannot equate the AS. prefix
a- to Goth. zs, which is related to G. wr-, er-, AS. or-. See Rise.

ARISTOCRACY, a government of the best men; a government
by a privileged order; the nobility. (Gk.) In Ben Jonson, The Fox,
iv. 1 (Lady P.). Holland speaks of ‘ an aristocracy, or regiment [i.e.
government] of wise and noble senate;’ Plutarch, p. 276 (R.). Cf.


few of the greatest men in a state;’ Cot. [But the word may have
been taken directly from Gk.]— Gk. dpuoroxparia, the rule of the best-
born or nobles.—Gk. dpyoro-, for dporos, best ; and xpareiv, to be
strong, to rule, govern. B. The Gk. dpioros, best, is a superlative
from a form dp-, proper, good, which appears in dp-ern, excellence.
The Gk. «parety, to be strong, is from x«patus, strong, cognate with
E. hard. See Arm (1) and Hard. Der. aristocrat-ic, aristocrat-ic-al,
aristocrat-ic-al-ly, and even aristocrat (not a very good form) ; all from
the Gk. stem dpiaroxpat-.

ARITHMETIC, the science of numbers. (F.—L.—Gk.) [In
ME. we find the OF. form arsmetike, Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris,
792; further altered to arsmetrik, Chaucer, C.T. 1900 (A. 1898) ;
these are from OF. arismetique (see Hatzfeld) ; adapted from Prov.
arismetica, from L. arithmética. At a later period the word was
conformed to the Gk.] We find arithmetick in Holland’s Pliny (con-
cerning Pamphilius), b. xxxv. c. 10 (ii. 537); and in Shak. Troil. i.
2. 123.—F. arithmétique, explained as ‘arithmetick’ by Cotgrave. =
L. arithmética.= Gk. dpiOuntien, the science of numbers, fem. of
dp.6untixés, belonging to numbers. = Gk. dp:Oué-exv, to number. — Gk.
apiOuos, number, reckoning. See Prellwitz. @[ The ME. arsmetrik
was popularly supposed to represent L. ars metrica, metrical art!
Der. arithmetic-al, arithmetic-al-ly, arithmetic-ian.

ARK, a chest, or box; alarge floating vessel. (L.) In very early
use asa Bible word. In the AS. version of Gen. vi.15, it is spelt arc.
cf. Goth. arka, Icel. érk (from Latin). —L. arca, Gen. vi. 15 (Vulgate) ;
cf. L. arcére, to keep.-Gk. dpxeiv, to keep off, suffice ; dpxos, safe,
certain. Der. arcana, L. neut. pl., things kept secret, secrets; from
L. arcadnus, hidden, from arcére, to keep, enclose.

ARM (1), sb., the limb extending from the shoulder to the hand.
(E.) ME. arm, Layamon, iii. 207; also earm, erm. O. Northum-
brian arm, Luke i. 51; AS. earm, Grein i. 248.4Du. arm; Icel.
armr 3; Dan. and Swed. arm; Goth. arms; G. arm. Cf. also L.
armus, the shoulder; artus, a limb; Gk. dppds, joint, shoulder ;
Russ. ramo, shoulder; Pers. arm, upper arm; Skt. irma-s, arm ;
cf. Gk. dpOpov, a joint, limb. All from 4/AR, to fit, join; ex-
pressive of the articulation of the limb, and its motion from the Joint.
See Curtius, i. 424; Prellwitz, p. 29; Brugm. i. § 524. Der. arm-
let, arm-ful, arm-less, arm-pit. From the same root are ar-istocracy,
ar-ithmetic, ar-ticle, ar-t, q.v.

ARM (2), vb., to furnish with weapons. (F.—L.) ME. armen, to
arm; Rob. of Glouc. p. 63 (. 1446); Layamon, 1. 15313.—OF,
armer, to arm.=L. armare, to furnish with weapons.—L. arma,
weapons. See Arms. Der. arma-da, arma-dillo, arma-ment, armour,
army; all from L. arma-re; see these words. Armistice is from L.
arma, s. pl.; see below.

ARMADA, an ‘armed?’ fleet ; a large fleet. (Span.—L.) Well
known in the time of Elizabeth. Camden speaks of the ‘ great ar-
mada ;’ Elizabeth, an. 1588. Often ill written armado, as in Shak.
K. John, iii. 4. 2. —Span. armada, a fleet; fem. of armado, armed,
pp: of armar, to arm, equip.—L. armare, to arm. See Arm (2).
Doublet, army, q.v.

ARMADIBLLO, an animal with a bony shell. (Span.—L.) ‘A
beast called by the Spaniards armadilla ;’ Hakluyt, Voy. iii. 650, A
Brazilian quadruped ; lit. ‘the little armed one,’ because of its pro-
tecting shell. —Span. armadillo, dimin. with suffix -illo, from armado,
armed, pp. of armar, to arm.=—L. armare, toarm. See Arm (2).

ARMAMENT, armed forces; equipment. (L.) In Pope’s
Tliad, xx. 152. Direct from L. armamentum, gen. used in pl.
armdmenta, tackling. =L. armdre, to arm; with sufhx -mentum. See
Arm (2).

ARMATURH, formerly used in the sense of armour, now
chiefly of a ‘protector’ fora magnet. (F.—L.) ‘Armature, armour;
also, skill in arms;’ Bailey (1735).—F. armature (Hatzfeld).—L.
armatura; see Armour. Doublet, armour.

ARMISTICE, a short cessation of hostilities. (F.—L.) In
Glossographia Anglica Nova (1707); and in Smollet’s Hist. of Eng-
land, an. 1748.—F. armustice, a cessation of hostilities.—Late L.
*armustitium, a coined word, not in the dictionaries; but the right form
for producing F. armistice, Ital. armistizio, and Span. armisticio; cf.
L. solstitium, whence E. solstice. L. armi-, for arma, arms, weapons ;
and -stitiwm, for -statium (as in sol-stitium) from statum, supine of séare,
to stand, cognate with E. stand. See Arms and Stand.

ARMOUR, defensive arms or dress. (F.—L.) ME.armour, cor-
rupt form of the earlier armure. Pl. armures, K. Alisaunder, 937.
Rob. of Glouc. has armure, p. 397 (1. 8195).—OF. armure, armeire.
= L. armatira, armour; from armare,to arm. See Arm (2). Der.
armour-er, armour-y; also armorial (F. armorial, belonging to arms;
Cotgrave). Doublet, armature.

ARMS, sb. pl., weapons. (F.—L.) ME. armes, Havelok, 2925;
Ancren Riwle, p. 60.—OF. armes, pl.; sing. arme.=L. arma, neut.


ARMY


pl., arms, weapons, lit. ‘fittings,’ equipments. Cf. Gk. dppeva, the
tackling of a ship, tools of a workman.—4/AR, to fit, join. See


Arm (1). Der. arm (1), verb; also arm-i-stice, q. v.


ARMY, a large armed body of men. (F.—L.) In Chaucer’s
C. T. Prol. 60, many MSS. read armee, but the word is very rare
at so early a time. It is spelt army in Fabyan’s Chron. c. 42.—
OF. armee, fem. of arme, pp. of armer, to arm. =—L. armare, to arm,
of which the fem. pp. is armata, whence Span. armada. Doublet,
armada, q.V-

ARNICA, a medicine prepared from Arnica montana, or Mountain
Tobacco. (L.—Gk.?) Mod. L. arnica; of uncertain origin. First
used in 1753 (N.E. D.); cf. F. arnica, also arnique (1752). Supposed
to be a corruption of L. ptarmica, Gk. rrapyuxn, a plant that caused
sneezing ; from mrapyvupa, I sneeze (Hatzfeld),

AROINT THEE! begone! (E.) ‘ Aroint thee, witch!’ Macbeth,
i. 3.6. Usually explained by ‘avaunt!’ The lit. sense seems to be
‘make room,’ or ‘get out of the way.’ The prefix is the AS. ge-, as
in Aware, q.v. Prov. E. roynt ta (North), rynt thee, roynt thee, get
out of the way (Cheshire) ; rynt you, witch, get out of the way, witch
(Ray). AS. rym 0a, gerym di, make thou room; see Luke, xiv. 9;
from ryman, or geryman, to make room; from rim, adj. roomy, wide.
See E. D. D., s.v. roint, rim, rime; E. Dial. Gram. § 178.


_ AROMA, a sweet smell. (L.—Gk.) The sb. is modern in the


sense of ‘scent ;’ but ME. aromat (from OF. aromat, F. aromate) was
in early use, meaning ‘spice;’ see Ancren Riwle, p. 376, where the
pl. is aromaz (=aromats). The adj. aromatic is found rather early.
Maundeyvile has ‘ aromatyk thinges ;’ c. xvi. p. 174.—Late L. ardma,
borrowed from Gk. — Gk. dpwpa, a spice, a sweet herb, Der. aroma-
t-ic, aroma-t-ise, from the Gk. stem dpwyar-.

AROUND, prep. and aGv., on all sides of, on every side. (Hybrid;
FE. and F.) Spenser has arownd, F.Q.i. 10.54. ME. around, Life
of Beket, ed. Black, 1. 2052. The prefix is the E.a-, in its commonest
use as short for az, the ME. form of AS. prep. oz; so that a-round is
for on round, i.e. in a round or circle. Rouwnd is from OF. roond, rond,
L. rotundus. Cf. abed, asleep. See Round.

AROUSE, torouse up. (Hybrid; E.and Scand.) In Shak. 2 Hen.
VI, iv. 1. 3. The prefix is a needless addition ; no doubt meant to be
intensive, and imitated from that in arise, which is from the AS. @-;
see Arise. And see Rouse.

ARPEGGIO, the employment of notes of a chord in rapid suc-
cession instead of simultaneously. (Ital.—Teut.) In Bailey (1735).
— Ital. arpeggiare, to play upon the harp. —Ital. arpa, a harp; a word
of Teut. origin. See Harp.

ARQUEBUS, HARQUEBUS, a kind of gun. (F.—MDu.)
Used by Nicholas Breton, an Elizabethan poet, in A Farewell to
Town (R.). Spelt hargabushe, Tottell’s Misc., ed. Arber, p. 173
(1557).—F. arquebuse, ‘an harquebuse, caleever, or hand-gun ;’ Cot.
He also gives the spelling harguebuse ; cf. Walloon harkibuse, in Dict.
de Ja langue Wallonne, by Grandgagnage, i. 266, 278, qu. by Diez,
who traces the word. [A corrupt form; cf. Ital. archibuso (Torriano),
variant of archibugio, ‘a harquebuse,’ Florio; also written arcobugio
(id.). The Ital. form is doubly corrupt, being due to a popular ety-
mology from arco, a bow, and bugio, a hole (referring to the barrel). |
= MDnu. *hakebusse, haeckbusse, ‘an arquebusse, Hexham; Du. haak-
buss. — MDu. hake, haeck, Du.haak, a hook,clasp,and MDu. busse, Du.
bus, a gun-barrel, gun; exactly parallel to G. hakenbiichse, an arque-
buse, from aken} a hook, and biichse, a gun-barrel, gun. B. The word
means ‘ gun with a hook,’ alluding to the hook which was cast with
the piece, by which it was fastened to the ‘ carriage;’ but the name
was afterwards applied to other kinds of portable fire-arms, so that
the original kind was renamed arguebuse &@ croc, arquebus with a hook,
as in Cotgrave. Other E. forms were hackbush and hackbut, See
Hackbut; also Hook and Bush (2).

ARRACK, an ardent spirit used in the East. (F.—Arab.) Better
spelt arak or arac, as in Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, pp. 45,
241, 328.—OF. arack (Supp. to Godefroy); A.D. 1519.— Arab. ‘araq,
juice, the more literal signification being ‘sweat ;’ in allusion to its
production by distillation. In Palmer's Pers. Dict. col. 425, is the
entry: ‘Arab. ‘arag, Juice, essence, sweat; distilled spirit.’ = Arab.
‘araqa, he sweated. See Arrackin Yule. 4 Sometimes shortened
to Rack.

ARRAIGN, to call to account, put on one’s trial. (F.—L.) ME.
arainen, areinen, arenen (with oner). ‘He arayned hym ful runyschly,
what raysoun he hade,’” &c.; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, C. 191. —AF.
aresner, arener, arreiner; OF. araisnier, arainier, araignier, to speak
to, discourse with ; also, to cite, arraign. = OF. a-, prefix (L. ad); and
raisnier, resnier, rainier, to reason, speak, plead, from raison, reson,
reason, advice, account; from L. acc. ratidnem, from nom. ratio,
reason. See Reason. 4 The Late L. form of arraign is arration-
Gre; similarly the Late L. dératidnare, to reason out, decide, pro-
duced the now obsolete darraign, to decide, esp. used of deciding by


ARRIVE 31


combat or fighting out a quarrel ; see Chaucer, Kn. Ta. 773; C.T.,
A 1631. Der. arraign-ment.

ARRANGE, to range, set ina rank. (F.-OHG.) ME. arayn-
gen, as in‘ he araynged his men ;’ Berners, Froissart, c. 325; orig.
spelt with one r.—OF. arengier, to put into arank, arrange. =OF. a-,
prefix (L. ad, to): and rengier, renger, to range, put in a rank (F.
ranger, Littré); from OF. renc, mod. F. rang, a rank, file, orig. a
ring or circle of people; from OHG. hrinc, mod. G. ring, a ring,
esp. a ring or circle of people; cognate with E. ring. See Rank,
Ring. Der. arrangement.

ARRANT, knavish, mischievous, notoriously bad. (F.—L.) Ar-
rant is a later spelling of errant, and was first used in the phrase theef
erraunt, a roving outlaw or notorious robber, which occurs in Chaucer:
‘an outlawe or a theef erraunt;’ C.T. 17173 (H 224). Hence it
was extended to other ill-doers, with the sense of ‘notorious,’ or
‘out-and-out.’ ‘An erraunt usurer;’ P. Plowman, C. vii. 307;
‘errant traytours,’ Orig. Letters, ed. Ellis, 11. 105 (A.D. 1539); ‘ er-
rant theues’ and ‘erraunt theefe;* Lever, Sermons (1550), ed. Arber,
p- 66. In Holinshed’s (really Stanihurst’s) Desc. of Ireland, repr.
1808, p. 68, we find: ‘[they] gad and range from house to house like
arrant knights of the round table;’ where ‘ arrant knights’ = knights
errant; cf. ‘knight errawnt’ in Malory’s Morte Arthur, bk. iv. c. 25,
1. 23. Chapman, in Byron’s Tragedy, A. v. sc. 1 (Byron) has:
‘As this extravagant and errant rogue.’ =OF. errant, pres. pt. of
errer, eirer, to wander. = Late L. iterdre, to travel. —L. iter, a journey.
@ It sometimes represents the pres. pt. of L. errare, to wander. See
Errant, Err.

ARRAS, tapestry. (F.—L.—C.) InShak. Haml.iv.1.9. ‘Riche
Aresse or tapestrie ;’ Elyot, The Governor, bk. iii. c. 2. § 3. The
AF. arras occurs in 1376, Royal Wills, p. 72; and in 1392, id.
p- 1323 cf. ‘ peces of arras,’ in 1447, id. p. 283. So named from Arras,
in Artois, N. of France, where it was first made.—L. *A¢rabates, for
Atrebates, a people of Artois; Ceesar, B. G., ii. 4. Of Celtic origin.
— Celtic *atreb-, whence W. athref, a domain, district. —Celt. prefix
ad- (Olrish ad-), at (cognate with L. ad, E. at) ; and OWelsh treb, W.
tref,a house. Stokes-Fick, pp. 10, 137.

ARRAY, to set in order, get ready. (F.—L. and Scand.) ME.
arraien, araien, to array ; Chaucer, Kn. Ta. 1188 (A 2046) ; Rob. of
Glouc. p. 36 (J. 841, note). —AF. arayer, OF. araier, aroier (areér in
Godefroy), to array, prepare, arrange. = Romanic type *arrédare (=
Ital. arredare), to array, prepare. B. Formed by prefixing ar- (imita-
tion of the L. prefix ar-, the form assumed by ad, to, before a follow-
ing r) to the Low G. réde, ready (Bremen Wort. iii. 452), OFries.
rede, ready; cf. AS. r@de, OHG. reiti, ready. See further under
Ready. @ Note also Scottish graithe, to make ready, graith, ready,
graith, apparatus, words directly borrowed from Icel. greida, to equip,
greidr, ready, and greid?, arrangement ; in which g- (=ge-) is a prefix.
Hence to array, to graithe, and to make ready, are three equivalent
expressions containing the same root. Der. array, sb.; the same
root occurs in curry, vb.; see Curry (1).

ARREARS, debts unpaid and still due. (F.—L.) The ME. arere
is mostly an adverb, signifying backward, in the rear; e.g. ‘Somme
tyme aside, and somme tyme arrere’ =sometimes on one side, and
sometimes backward; P. Plowman, B. v. 354. It is more commonly
spelt arere (with one r), or a rere (in two words), id. C. vii. 405.— OF.
arere, ariere (arrere in Godefroy), backward. =L. ad, towards ; and
retro, behind. [Similarly OF. deriere (mod. F. derriére) is from L. dé,
from, and retro, backward; and we ourselves use the word rear still. |
See Rear ; and see arrié¢re in Hatzfeld. 4 What we now express
by arrears is expressed in ME. by arrerages or arerages, a sb, pl.
formed from ME. arere by the addition of the F. suffix -age, For
examples of arrearages, see N.E. D.; and cf. P. Plowman, C. xii.
297. The mod. E. arrear, sb., arose from the ME, phrase zz arere, by
dropping 77.

ARREST, to stop, to seize. (F.—L.) ME. arresten, or commonly
aresten ; Chaucer, Pro]. 829 (A 827).—OF. arester, to stay (mod. F.
arréter).=— 1, ad, to (which becomes a in OF.) ; and restare, to stay,
remain, stop, compounded of re-, back, and stare, to stand, remain,
cognate with E. staxd. See Re- and Stand; and see Rest (2).

ARRIS, a ridge, the edge formed by the angular contact of two
plane (or curved) surfaces. (F.—L.) ‘Burford stone . . carries a
finer arris than that at Heddington;’ Plot’s Oxfordsh. (1677),p.75.—
OF. areste; F. aréte. See Aréte.

ARRIVE, to come to a place, reach it, (F.—L.) Gen. followed
by afin modern E.; but see Milton, P. L. ii. 409; Shak. Jul. Cees. i.
2,110. ME. aryuen, ariuen (u for v); Rob. of Glouc. p. 18, 1. 415.
— OF. ariver, arriver.— Late L.*adripare, to come to the shore, spelt
arripare in a oth cent. text, and arribare in an 11th cent. chartulary;
Brachet. See the note also in Brachet, showing that it was originally
a seaman’s term. L. ad ripam, towards the shore.—L. ad, to; and
ripa, shore, bank. The orig. sense of L. ripa was ‘a rift, a break ;”


32 ARENA


cf. Gx. épinvy, a broken cliff; Icel. rifa, whence E. rive. See Rive.
Der. arriv-al, spelt arivaile in Gower, C. A. ii. 4; bk. iv. 94.

' ARROGATE, to lay claim to, assume. (L.) Used by Barnes,
Works, p. 371, col. 1. The sb. arrogance is much older; Chaucer,
C. T. 6694 (D 1112) ; so isthe adj. arrogant, C. T. Persones Tale, De
Superbia (I 396). Formed with suff. -ate (see Abbreviate) from
L. arrogire, to ask of, to adopt, attribute to, add to; pp. arrogitus.

-L. ad, to (>ar- before r); and rogdre, toask. See Rogation.
Der. arrogat-ion; also (from L. arrogd-re, pres. pt. acc. arrogant-em)
arrogant, arrogant-ly, arrogance, arroganc-y.

ARROW, a missile shot from a bow. (E.) ME. arewe, arwe (with
one r); Chaucer, Prol. 107; Ancren Riwle, pp. 60, 62. AS. arewe,
AS. Chron. an. 1083 (Laud MS.); older form arwe, Thorpe’s Anc.
Laws, ii. 212, § 28. Teut. type *arhwon-, weak fem. Another form
is earh, Grein, i. 248; Teut. type *arhwom, neut.+Icel. dr, an arrow,
pl. orvar ; Teut. type *arkwi, strong fem. Cf. also Goth. arhwazna,
f., an arrow, a dart, Eph. vi. 16; allied to L. arcus, a bow; Brugm.
i. § 241 (b). Der. arrow-y, arrow-root. See Arc.

ARROW-ROOT, a farinaceous substance, made from the
tubers of the Maranta Arundinacea, and other plants. (E.) From
arrow and root. ‘The E. name of this preparation is derived from
the use to which the Indians of S. America were accustomed to apply
the juice extracted from another species of Maranta—the Maranta
galanga, which was employed as an antidote to the poison in which
the arrows of hostile tribes were dipped ;”? Eng. Cyclopzedia, Arts and
Sciences, s. v. Arrow-root. Observe the L. name, ‘Maranta arundi-
nacea.’ The account in N.E. D. is similar, with a reference to Sir
Hans Sloane, Catal. Plant. Jamaica, 122.

ARSE, the buttocks. (E.) ME. ars, ers; P. Plowman, B.v. 175,
and footnote. AS. ers, ears; Bosworth.4Du. aars; Icel. ars, Swed.
and Dan. ars; MHG. ars; mod. G. arsch. Teut. type *arsoz.4-Gk.
éppos, the rump ; Idg. type *orsos (Prellwitz).

ARSENAL, a magazine for naval stores, &c. (Ital.—Span.—
Arab.) Holland speaks of ‘ that very place where now the arsenall
and shipdocks are ;’ Livy, p. 106; and see Ben Jonson, The Fox, iv.
1 (Sir P.); Milton, P.R. iv. 270. [Rather from Ital. than from F.
arcenal, which Cotgrave, following the F. spelling, explains by ‘an
Arcenaill,’|=—MItal. arsenale, ‘a storehouse for munition’ (Florio); ef.
Ital. arzana, an arsenal, darsena, a wet dock. —MSpan. ataragana, ‘a
dock where ships are made or amended; a storehouse for munition,’
Minsheu; Span. atarazana, atarazanal. [The varying forms are due
to the word being foreign, viz. Arabic. The final -/ is merely formative,
and no part of the original word. The Span. atarazana (with a- for
Arab. al, the, def. art.) and Ital. darsena are the best forms.]— Arab.
dar a¢-gind'ah, house of construction. Arab. dar, house; ag¢-, for al,
the; gind'ah, art, trade, construction. See Devic; and Rich. Dict. 646,
943. The two words together signify ‘a house of art or construction,’
“a place for making things.’ Mr. Wedgwood says: ‘Ibn Khaldoun
quotes an order of the Caliph Abdalmelic to build at Tunis a dar-
cina‘a for the construction of everything necessary for the equipment
and armament of vessels. Pedro de Alcala translates atarazana by the
Arab. dir a-cina‘a; see Engelmann and Dozy.’

ARSENIC, a poisonous mineral. (Gk. — Arab.— Pers.) Chaucer
speaks of arsenik, C.T.,G 798. It was one of the four ‘spirits’ in
alchemy. = L. arsenicum.=— Gk. dpoevicdv, orpiment, yellow arsenic, a
name occurring in Dioscorides, 5. 121. [This Gk. word lit. means
‘male;’ in allusion to the extraordinary alchemical fancy that some
metals were of different sexes. Gold, e.g. also called Sol, the sun,
was masculine, whilst silver, also called Juna, the moon, was feminine.
But these fables arose out of popular etymology, the Gk. name being
really borrowed.]=— Arab. az-zernikh ; from az-, for al, the, def. art.,
and zernikh, orpiment, borrowed from Pers. zerxi, orpiment, yellow
arsenic, which is from Pers. zar, gold. See Devic, p. 4; Rich. Dict.,
p. 774. And see Gold. Der. arsenic-al.

ARSIS, the place of a stressed syllable in English verse. (Gk.)
The sense has varied; see N.E.D. ‘Arsis, a raising or lifting up ;’
Phillips (1706). = Gk. dpots, a raising. = Gk. atpeiv, to raise.

ARSON, the crime of burning houses. (F.—L.) Old Law French;
see Blackstone’s Comment. b. iv. c. 16.—OF. arson, arsun, incen-
diarism ; Late L. acc. type *arsién-em. = L. ardére, to burn; pp. arsus.
See Ardent.

ART (1), 2 p.s. pres. of the verb substantive. (E.) OMerc. eard,
erd; ONorthumbrian ard, later art; AS. eart. The ar- stands for
es-, from 4/ES, to be; and the -¢, ONorthumb. -0, is a suffix. See
further under Are.

ART (2), skill, contrivance, method. (F.—L.) ME. art; Rob. of
Brunne, tr. of P. Langtoft, p. 336; and in Floriz and Blauncheflur, ed.


Lumby, 1. 521.—OF-. art, skill.<L. acc. artem; from nom. ars, skill. |


Perhaps from 4/AR, to fit (Bréal). See Article. Der. art-ful,


art-ful-ness, art-ist, art-tst-ic, art-ist-ic-al, art-ist-ic-al-ly, art-less, art-,


dess-ly, art-less-ness ; also art-ifice, art-illery, art-isan, which see.


AS


ARTERY, a tube or pipe conveying blood from the heart. (L.—
Gk.) Shak. L. L. L. iv. 3. 306. ME. aréerie, Lanfrank, Cirurgie,
ii. 5; p- 162, 1,17.—L. artéria, the windpipe ; also, an artery. [The
F. form is artere, which is shorter than the E., and consequently the
E. word is not from French.|]=—Gk. dprnpia, an artery; but orig. the
windpipe. Perhaps connected with dopry, the aorta (Prellwitz). See
Aorta. Der. arteri-al, arteri-al-ise.

ARTESIAN, adj., applied to a well. (F.—L.—C.) These wells
are made by boring till the water is found; and the adj. is properly
applied to such as are produced by boring through an impermeable
stratum, in such a way that the water, when found, overflows at the
outlet. Englished from F. Artésien, of or belonging to Artois, a pro-
vince in the N. of France, where the wells were in use in the eighteenth
century and earlier. Artois is from L. Atrebatensem, acc. of Atreba-
tensis, adj. formed from L. Atrebat-es; see further under Arras. See
Eng. Cycl. s.v. Artesian well. ;

ARTHRITIS, pain in the joints, gout. (Gk.) In Kersey (1708).
— Gk. dpOpitis.— Gk. dpOpov, a joint; allied to L. artus, a joint; see
Article.

ARTICHOKE, an esculent plant; Cynara Scolymus. (Ital.—
Span.—Arab.) ‘A artochocke, cynara;’ Levins, 159. 5. Holland
has the odd spelling artichoux for the plural; Pliny, b. xx. c. 23. [He
seems to have been thinking of F. choux, cabbage.] The pl. artichokes
occurs in 1537, in the Privy Purse Expenses of the Princess Mary, ed.
Madden, p. 33.— Ital. articiocco, an artichoke (Diez) ; cf. F. artichaut,
spelt artichault by Cotgrave, and explained by him as ‘an artichock.’
A corrupt form. Florio gives the spellings archiciocco, archicioffo ;
also carciocco, carcioffo.—MSpan. alcarchofa (Minsheu) ; whence Span.
alcachofa, Port. alcachofra.— Arab. al harshaf, an artichoke; Rich.
Pers. Dict. p. 562. 4 The pretended Arab. ar‘gi shauki, cited by
Diez, is a mere modern corruption from Italian.

ARTICLE, asmall item; a part of speech. (F.—L.) ME. article,
Ayenbite of Inwyt, pp. 11,12.—F. article, ‘an article; a head, prin-
cipall clause, title or point of a matter;. . also, a joint or knuckle;’
Cot.=L. articulum, ace. of articulus, a joint, knuckle, member of a
sentence, an article in grammar; the lit. sense being ‘a little joint.’
Formed, by help of suffixes -cw-lo-, from L. artus, a joint, a limb.=
/ AR, to fit; Prellwitz (s.v. dpapiskw). See Max Miiller, Lect. i.
104 (8thed.). See Arm. Der. article, verb. And see below.

ARTICULATE, adj., jointed, fitted; also, distinct, clear. (L.)
Speech is articulate when distinctly divided into joints, i.e. into words
and syllables ; not jumbled together. = L. articuldtus, distinct, articu-
late; pp. of articulire, to supply with joints, or divide by joints,
chiefly applied to articulate speaking.—L. articulus, a little joint
(above). Der. articulate, verb ; articulate-ly, articulat-ion.

ARTIFICH, a contrivance. (F.—L.) Gower has artificiers, C. A.
iii. 1423 bk. vii. 1691. Shak. has artificer, K. John, iv. 2. 201; and
artificial, Romeo,i. 1.146. Artifice is in Milton, P. L. ix. 39.—F.
artifice, skill, cunning, workmanship; Cot. = L.artificium, a craft, handi-
craft.—L. artific-, stem of artifex,a workman.=L. arti-, for ars, art;
and facere, to make, the stem fac- being altered to fic- in compounds.
See Art and Fact. Der. artijici-al, artifici-al-ly; also artific-er.

ARTILLERY, gunnery; great weapons of war. (F.—L.)


Milton, P. L. ii. 715 ; Shak. K. John, ii. 403. Chaucer, C.T., B 2523, |


in his Tale of Melibeus, speaks of ‘castelles, and other maner edifices,
and armure, and artelleries.’ = OF. artillerie, machines or equipment
of war; see quotation in Roquefort s. v. artillement. ‘The word was
used to include crossbows, bows, &c., before the invention of gun-
powder. = OF .artiller,to fortify, equip; Roquefort. — Late L. *artillare,
to make machines; a verb inferred from the word artillator, a maker
of machines, given by Ducange. = L. art-, stem of ars, art. See Art.
We also find Late L. arzillidtor, answering to an older form *articu-
lator, from Late L. articula, articulum, art, artifice, derivatives of ars,
art (not from artus, a joint); see Ducange. Der. artiller-ist.
ARTISAN, a workman. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 16743 and in Marlowe, Faustus, i. 1. 53.—F. artisan, an artisan,
mechanic. = Ital. artigiano, a workman ; whence it was introduced into
F. in the 16th century ; Brachet. B. This corresponds, according
to Diez, to a late L. form *artitianus (not found), formed in its turn
from L. artitus, cunning, artful (see Ducange), which is from arti-,
decl. stem ofars,art. See Art. 4 Rabelais has artizan (Hatzfeld) ;
if here the z=¢s, the F. word may have been taken immediately from
L., and not through Italian.
ARUM, the cuckoo-pint, or wake-robin. (L.—Gk.) In Turner,
Names of Herbes,1548 (E.D.S.), p.15.=—L.arum, aron, — Gk.dpov,arum.
AS, adverb and conjunction. (E.) ME. as, als, alse, also, alswa; and
al so, al swa, written separately. That these are all one and the same
word has been proved by Sir F. Madden, in remarks upon Havelok,and
is a familiar fact to all who are acquainted with Middle English. In
other words, as is a contracted form of also. B. The successive


1 spellings are: AS. eal swa, Grein, i. 239; al swa, Layamon, 1. 70; al


ASAFCTIDA, ASSAFCETIDA


ASP, ASPIC 33


so, Seven Sages, 569, ed. Weber; alse, P. Plowman, A. v: 144; als, | axes. See asken, in the (Southern) Ancren Riwle, p. 2143 and askes


id. B. v. 230 (where als means ‘also’); als manye as = as many as,
Mandeville’s Travels, p. 209. The AS. eal sw& means both “ just so’
and ‘just as.’. See Also.

ASAFCETIDA, ASSAFCETIDA, a medicinal gum. (Hybrid;
Pers.and L.) Spelt azafedida, Arnold’s Chron. (1502), ed, 1811, p.234.
A juice made chiefly from the Ferula Narthex, an umbelliferous plant,
growing inPersia. The Persian name is @zd, ‘mastic,’ Rich. Dict. p.65.
The L. fetida, stinking, refers to its offensive smell. See Fetid.

ASBESTOS, a fibrous mineral. (Gk.) In Holland’s Pliny, b.xxxvii.
c. 103 ii.624. Written asbeston, ‘Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 187. So
called because it is incombustible. = Gk. daBeoros, incombustible; lit.
‘unquenchable.’ = Gk. a-, negative prefix ; and -cfeords, quenchable,
from oBévvvpu, I quench, extinguish. See Brugm.i. § 653, and Prell-
witz, as to this curious verb. Der. asbest-ine, ad}.

ASCEND, to climb, mount up. (L.) Chaucer has ascenstoun and
ascended, C. T. 14861, 14863 (B 4045, 4047). [There is a F. sb.
ascension, but the OF. ascendre is rare and obsolete; the E. verb was
probably suggested by the Vulgate.]—L. ascendere, to climb up to,
ascend ; pp. ascensus,— L. ad-, to (reduced to a- before sc); and scan-
dere,to climb. See Sean. Der. ascendent, Chaucer, Prol. 417, from
L. pres. pt.; also ascendant, as in Drayton, Legend of T, Cromwell,
1. 399, from F. pres. pt.; ascendenc-y; ascens-ion, cf. L. pp. ascensus ;
ascent (Shak.), coined to pair off with descent, the latter being a true
F. word.

ASCERTAIN, to make certain, determine. (F.—L.) Thesisan
idle addition to the word, and should never have been inserted. Yet
the spelling ascertayn occurs in Fabyan, c.177, § 6. Bale has assar-
tened; Image, pt. i. ME. acertainen; ‘For now I am acértainéd
throughly ;” Flower and Leaf, 568.—OF. acertainer, variant of acer-
tener (Godefroy). Cotgrave has ‘ acertener, to certifie, ascertaine, as-
sure. B. Acertener is a coined word, made up of F. prefix a- (L. ad),
and the adj. certain, certain, sure. See Certain. Der. ascertain-able.

ASCETIC, adj. often used as sb., one who is rigidly self-denying
in religious observances; a strict hermit. (Gk.) Gibbon speaks of
“the ascetics ;” Hist. c. 37, § 2. In the Life of Bp. Burnet, c. 13, we
find: ‘he entered into such an ascetic course. The adjective was
‘applied by the Greek fathers to those who exercised themselves in,
who employed themselves in, who devoted themselves to, the contem-
plation of divine things: and for that purpose, separated themselves
from all intercourse with the world;’ Richardson. = Gk. do“nrkés, in-
dustrious, lit. given to exercise; applied to hermits, who strictly exer-
cised themselves in religious devotion. Gk. do«n77s, one who exercises
an art, esp. applied to an athlete. — Gk. doxeiv, to work, adorn, practise,
exercise; also, to mortify the body, in Ecclesiastical writers. Root
unknown. Der. ascetic-ism.

ASCIDIAN, a term applied to some tunicate molluscs; and to
pitcher-shaped leafy appendages, in botany. (Gk.) Modern; lit.
‘pitcher-like.’ = Gk. doxidiov, dimin. of dcxds,a leathern bag,wine-skin.

ASCITITIOUS, ADSCITITIOUS, supplemental, incidental.
(L.) Littleused. ‘Adscititious, added, borrowed;’ Kersey’s Dict. ‘Homer
has been reckoned an ascititious name, from some accident of his life ;’
Pope, qu. in Todd’s Johnson. Coined, as if from L. *asci¢itins (not
used), from ascitus, received, derived from others, not innate; pp. of
asciscere, to take in, admit, receive from without, also written adsciscere.
=L. ad, to; and sciscere, to learn, find out, accept, which is formed
from sci-re, to know, by the addition of the ending -scere, common in
forming ‘inchoative’ or ‘inceptive’ verbs in Latin, See Science.

ASCRIBE, to attribute, impute. (L.) It occurs in the Lamenta-
tion of Mary Magdeleine, 1. 254; a poem later than Chaucer, but some-
times printed with his works. —L. ascribere, to write down to one’s
account ; pp. ascriptus.— L. ad, to (which becomes a- before sc) ; and
seribere, to write. See Seribe. Der. ascrib-able, ascript-ion.

ASH, the name ofa tree. (E.) ME. asch, esch, assch; Chaucer,
C. T. 2924 (A 2922). ‘Esche, tre, fraxinus;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 143.
AS. esc, Grein, i. 58.-+ Du. esch; Icel. askr; Dan. and Swed. ask;
OHG. ase; MHG.asch; G.esche. Teut.type*askiz. Cf. Russ. iasene,
Lith. zsis, ash. Der. ash-en, adj.

ASHAMED, pp. as adj., affected by shame. (E.) ME. aschamed,
often written a-schamed. ‘Aschamyd, or made ashamyd, verecundatus ;’
Prompt. Pary. p. 15. But we also find ME. ofschamed, ashamed ;
Shoreham’s Poems, p. 160; of-chamed, Owl and Nightingale, 1. 932.
Hence, in this instance, we may consider the prefix a- as equivalent
to of-, as it is in the case of the word adown, q.v. This would point
back to the AS. form ofsceamod, which occurs in AZlfric, Lives of Saints,

2.178. PB. Orit may represent AS. dsceamod, with prefix d-; whilst
sceamod is the pp. of sceamian, to shame, from sceamu, shame. See
Shame.

ASHES, the dust or relics of what is burnt. (E.) The pl. of ash,
which is little used. ME. asche, axe, aske,a disyllabic word, the usual
pl. being aschen, axen, asken, but in Northern and Midland E, askes,


in Hampole’s Pricke of Conscience, 424. AS. @sce, axe, asce; pl.
@scan, axan, Grein, i. 10, 11, 58.4-Du. asch; Icel. aska; Swed. aska ;
Dan. aske; Goth. azgo, sing., asgon, pl.; Luke, x. 13; OHG.asga, asca;
MHG., asche, esche; G. asche. Teut. types *askon-, *azgon-, fem. ;
perhaps for *as(¢)kon-, *az(d)godn-; and allied to Gk. d¢-ev, to dry
up, parch, L. dr-ére, to be dry, Skt. dsa-s, ashes, dust (Macdonell).
Der, ash-y; Ash-Wednesday, so called from the sprinkling of ashes on
the heads of penitents, the L. name being diés cinerum.

ASHLAR, ASHLER, a facing made of squared stones. (F.—L.)
‘In countries where stone is scarce, ashler principally consists of thin
slabs of stone used to face the brick and rubble walls of buildings ;’
Eng. Cycl. s. v. Ashler. Again, Ashlering is used in masonry to
signify ‘the act of bedding in mortar the ashler above described ;” id.
It is also used in carpentry ‘to signify the short upright pieces of wood
placed in the roof of a house to cut off the acute angle between the
joists of the floor and the rafters; almost all the garrets in London
are built in this way ;” id, B. The clue to understanding the word
is to remember that the use of wood preceded that of stone. From
OF. aiseler, Livre des Rois, iii. 6 (see aisselier in Hatzfeld), a cross-
piece used to bind together two pieces of timber; extended from OF.
aiselle, aissele (aisselle in Cotgrave), f., ‘a little boord, or shingle of
wood ;’ Cotgrave.=L. axilla, dimin. of axis, an axis, also a board, a
plank. See Axis. 4 The thin square slabs of stone were likened
to the wooden shingles that preceded them. The Scot. spellings are
estler, aislair, Jamieson quotes ‘houses biggit a’ with estler stane’ =
houses all built with squared stone, from Ramsay’s Poems, i.60. And
again, he quotes from Abp. Hamilton’s Catechism, fol. 5a: ‘A mason
can nocht hew ane euin aislair without directioun of his rewill’ = cannot
hew a straight ashlar without drawing a line with his rule to guide him,

ASHORE, on shore. (E.) Shak. has om shore, Temp. v. 219,
where we might say ashore. Thus a- is short for ax, ME. form of on.
So also in a-bed, a-sleep, &c.

ASIDE, to one side, on one side. (E.) For on side. Wyclif has
asydis-hond in Gal. li, 2, but on sidis hond in Mark, iv. 34 (earlier ver-
sion), ‘he expounyde to his disciplis alle thingis on sidis hond, or by
hem-self.’ See above.

ASININE; see Ass.

ASK, to seek an answer, to request. (E.) ME. asken, aschen, axien,
&c. Asken is in Ancren Riwle, p. 338. Axien in Layamon, i. 307.
AS. dscian, ahsian, Gesian, Grein, i. 14,24, 40. The form Gesian is
not uncommon ; whence mod. prov. E. ax, as a variant of ask. The
AS. dscian produced ME. ashen, now lost; the surviving form ask was
orig. Northern. + Du. eischen, to demand, require ; Swed. dska, to ask,
demand ; Dan. eske, todemand; OHG. eiscdn, eisgdn ; MHG. eischen ;
mod. G. heischen, to ask. ‘Teut. types *aiskon, *aiskojan. All related
to Skt. ichchha, a wish, desire, éshana-, a wish, ésh, to search; Gk. idrns,
wish, will; Lith. jészkdzz, Russ. iskate, to seek. The root is seen in Skt.
ish, to desire, wish; from 4/EIS, toseek, wish; Brugm.i. § 619, ii. § 676;
Prellwitz. The Icel. eskja does not mean ‘to ask,’ but ‘to wish ;’
and is not related to ask, but to wish; see Wish.

ASKAWNCH, obliquely. (Ital.—L.?) Sir T. Wyatt, in his Satire
Of the Meane and Sure Estate, 1. 52, says: ‘ For, as she lookt a scance,
Under a stole she spied two stemyng eyes;’ &c. Wealso find a scanche,
explained by de travers, en lorgnant, i.e. obliquely ; Palsgrave’s French
Dict. p. 831. Origin uncertain; but perhaps related to Ital.-scansare,
‘to go aslope or a-sconce or askew, to go sidelin;’ Florio. This verb
is derived from Ital. s- (for L.ex), and (according to Diez) L. campsare,
to turn round a place, bend round it; cf. Gk. xapmrew, to bend.
Paretti’s Ital. Dict. (1831) has di scancio, adv. slanting, aslope; scancio,
adj. oblique; but this appears in Torriano (1688) as schiancio,
‘athwart ;’ apparently from a Teut. source allied to E. slazt.

ASKEW, awry. (OLow G.) ‘But he on it lookt scornefully
askew ;’ Spenser, F. Q. iii. 10. 29. As usual, the prefix a- stands for
an, ME. form of oz, and askew means ‘on the skew.’ Hexham ex-
plains MDu. scheef by ‘askew, awry.’ See Skew.

ASLANT, on the slant, obliquely. (Scand.) A-slonfe occurs in the
Prompt. Parv. p. 6, as equivalent to acyde (aside) and to the L. obligué,
obliquely. It stands for oz slonte, on the slant, a form which occurs
in the Anturs of Arthur, st. xlviii. 6; cf. abed, afoot, asleep. It appears
as o slante in the Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 2254. Cf. Swed. dial.
adj. slant, slippery (Rietz). See Slant.

ASLEEP, in a sleep. (E.) For ‘on sleep;’ a- being short for az,
ME. form of on. ‘David .. fell on sleep ;’ Acts, xiii. 36. See Sleep.

ASLOPH, on a slope, slopingly. (E.) For ‘on slope,’ as in many
other instances; see above. In the Romaunt of the Rose, 1. 4464, a
slope occurs in the sense of ‘awry.’ See Slope.

ASP, ASPIC, a venomous serpent. (F.—L.—Gk.) Shak. has
aspick, Antony, v. 2. 296, 354; and Palsgrave has aspycke. Gower
speaks of ‘A serpent, which that aspidis Is cleped ;’ C. A. i. 575 bk. i.
463. The form aspic is French; Cotgrave gives: ‘Aspic, the serpent


D


34 ASPARAGUS


called an aspe.’ The form asp is also French; see Brachet, who notes,
s. V. aspic, that there was an OF. form aspe, which existed as a doublet
of the Provencal aspic ; both of them being from L. acc. aspidem, from
nom. aspis, The false form in Gower is due to his supposing that, as
aspides is the nom. pl., it would follow that aspidis would be the nom.
singular. — Gk. domis, gen. domidos, an asp. @ Hatzfeld gives the
Proy. form as aspit, which might easily be misread aspic. The mod.
Prov. form is aspit, from L. acc. aspidem.

ASPARAGUS, a garden vegetable. (L.—Gk.—Pers.?) For-
merly written sperage; Holland’s Pliny, bk. xix. c. 8; ii, 27. Also
sparage or sparagus; thus Cotgrave explains F. asperge by ‘ the herb
sparage or sparagus.’ But these are mere corruptions of the L. word.
= L.asparagus. = Gk.dondparyos, Atticdopapayos, asparagus. Curtius,
ii. I10, compares it with the Zend ¢gparegha, a prong, and the Lith.
spurgas, a shoot, sprout, and thinks it was a word borrowed from the
Persian. Ifso, the orig. sense was ‘sprout.’ Brugm. i. § 525.

ASPECT, view, appearance, look. (L.) In old authors, often as-
péct : ‘In thin aspéct ben alle liche ;’ Gower, C. A. i. 143; bk. i. 3009.
Chaucer, Treatise on the Astrolabe, pt. ii. 4. 31, uses aspectes in the
old astrological sense, of the ‘aspects’ of planets. [Probably from L.
directly. Whilst known in English in the 14th century, the F. aspect
does not seem to be older than the 15th; see Littré.]—L. aspectus,
look. = L. aspectus, pp. of aspicere, to behold, see. = L. ad, to, at (> a-
before sp); and specere, to look, cognate with E. spy. See Spy.

ASPEN, ASP, a kind of poplar, with tremulous leaves. (E.) The
form aspen (more usual) is properly adjectival, like gold-en, wood-en,
and the sb. is asp. The tree is still called the asp in Herefordshire,
and in the S. and W. of England it is called aps. The phrase ‘lyk an
aspen leef,’ in Chaucer, C. T. 7249 (D 1667), is correct, as aspen is there
anadjective. ME. asp,aspe,espe. Chaucerhasasp,C. T. 2923(A 2921).
‘Aspe tre, Espe tre;’ Prompt. Parv. pp. 15,143. AS. espe, also eps;
Bosworth. + Du. esp, sb., espen, adj.; Icel. dsp ; Dan. and Swed. asp;
G. espe, dspe (OHG. aspa; MHG. aspe). See Fick, iii. 29, who adds
Lettish apsa, Lithuanian apuszis; Polish and Russ. osina. Origin un-
known.

ASPERITY, roughness, harshness. (F.—L.) Asperite,SirT. More,
Works, p. 1218c. Chaucer has asprenesse, tr. of Boethius, b. iv. pr. 4,
l. 106. The contracted OF. form asprete occurs in Ancren Riwle,
p- 354, as an E. word. =OF. asperiteit, later asperité, roughness. = L.
acc. asperitatem; nom. asperitas, roughness.—L. asper, rough, See
Brugm. i. § 760.

ASPERSE, to cast calumny upon. (L.) Milton, P. L. ix. 296.
Formed from L. aspersus, the pp. of aspergere, to besprinkle; also,
to bespatter.—L. ad, to (> a- before sp); and spargere, to sprinkle,
scatter. See Sparse. Der. aspers-ion, Tempest, iv. 1. 18.

ASPHALT, ASPHALTUM, a bituminons substance. (Late L.
= Gk.) ‘Blazingcressets fed Withnaphthaand asphaltus;’ Milton, P. L.
1,728,729. Aspalt occurs in Mandeville’s Travels, p. 100, and aspaltoun
in Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1038.—Late L. asphaltum; Higden,
Polychron. i. 116.—Gk. dopadros, dopadroy, asphalt, bitumen, Of
foreign origin. Der. asphalt-ic; Milton, P. L. i. 411.

ASPHODEL, a plant of the lily kind. (Gk.) In Milton, P. L.
ix. 1040.—Gk. dopddeAos, a plant of the lily kind. In English, the
word has been corrupted into daffodil ; see Daffodil.

ASPHYXTA, suspended animation, suffocation. (Gk.) In Kersey,
ed. 1708. — Gk. dopufia, a stopping of the pulse; ef. dopuxros, with-
out pulsation. — Gk. d-, privative; and opv(ew, to throb, pulsate; cf.
opuypés, pulsation; G. pochen, to throb. Der. asphyxi-ate.

ASPIRE, to pant after,toaim ateagerly.(F. — L.) Generally followed
by ¢o or unto. ‘If we shal. . desyrously aspyre vnto that countreye
of heauen with all our whole heartes ;’ Udal, 1 Peter, c. 3. vv. 21, 22.
—F.aspirer, ‘to breathe, . . also to desire, covet, aime at, aspire unto;’
Cot.—L. aspirdre, to breathe towards, to seek to attain. = L. ad, to,
towards (> a- before sp); and spirdre, to breathe, blow. Cf. E. spirit.
Der. asfir-ing’, aspir-ing-ly, aspir-ant, aspir-ate (vb., to pronounce with
a full breathing), aspirate, sb., aspirat-ion.

ASS, a well-known quadruped of the genus Equus; a dolt. (C.—L.
—Semitic.) ME. asse; Ancren Riwle, p. 32. AS. assa, Grein, i. 10.
The origin of the word is uncertain; and the extent to which one
language has borrowed it from another is not clear; the Icel. asni,
e. g., is merely the L. asinus contracted. The AS. assa was probably
borrowed from Olrish assan (Stokes, p. 24); and this from L. asinus.
The Celtic Janguages have W. asyn, Corn. asen, Bret. azen, Irish and
Gael. asal, Manx essyl (Williams) ; all probably from Latin. Cf. Du.
ezel, an ass, also, a dolt, blockhead, G.esel, Dan. esel, esel, Goth. asilus,
Lith. asilas, Polish osiel, Icel. asni, Swed. dsna; all from L. asinus or
asellus. Cf. also Gk. évos, Most likely the word is of Semitic origin ;
cf, Arab. atan, Heb. adthén, she-ass. Der. asin-ine, from Latin.
-ASSAFCETIDA: see Asafoetida.

ASSAGAT, ASSEGAI. (Port.—Moorish.) Spelt azaguay in
Sir T. Herbert, Travels (1665), p, 23. A word (like fetish) introduced


ASSESS


into Africa by the Portuguese. — Port. azagaia, a dart, javelin. For
az-zaghayah; from az-,foral, the Arab.def. article, and Berber zaghayah,
the native name of a Berber weapon adopted by the Moors (whence
F. zagaie); see Devic. See Lancegay.

ASSATI, to leap or spring upon, to attack. (F.—L.) In early use,
ME. assailen, asailen; Ancren Riwle, pp. 246, 252,362.—OF. assaillir,
asaillir (Chanson de Roland), to attack; cf. L. assilire. = OF. a-,
prefix (L.ad, > as- before s); and saillir, sallir, to leap, rush forward,
from L. salire, to leap, rush forth. See Salient. Der. assail-able,
assail-ant ; also assault (OF. asalt (Littré), from L. ad, to, and saltus,
a leap; from saltus, pp. of salire, to leap); whence assault, verb.

ASSART, the offence of grubbing up trees, and so destroying the
coverts of a forest. (F.—L.) See Blount, Nomo-Lexicon; Manwood,
Forest Laws, &c. The word is due to AF. assartir (Britton), F. es-
sarter, ‘to make glades in a wood, to grub up, or clear a ground of
bushes, shrubs, thorns, &c.;’ Cot.—Late L. exsartare, to grub up,
occurring an. 1233 (Ducange); also spelt exartare.—L. ex, out,
thoroughly; and Late L. sartare, to grub up, occurring an. 1202
(Ducange). Sartdre (=*saritare) is the frequentative of L. sarrire,
sarire, to weed, grub up weeds (whence also sar-culum, a hoe); see
essartin Diez. Cf. Gk. caipev, to sweep, odpos,a besom. The L.
pl. exsarta, weeded lands, occurs in Liber Custumarum, p. 660.

ASSASSIN, a secret murderer. (F.—Arabic.) Milton has as-
sassin-like, P. L. xi. 2193 and assassinated, Sams. Agon. 1109.=—F.
assassin, given by Cotgrave, who also gives assassiner, to slay, kill,
and assassinat, sb., a murther. [‘ Assassin, which is assacis in Join-
ville, in the 13th cent., and in late L. hassessin, is the name of a well-
known sect in Palestine which flourished in the 13th century, the Has-
chischin, drinkers ofhaschisch, an intoxicating drink, a decoction ofhemp.
The Scheik Haschischin, known by the name of the Old Man of the
Mountain, roused his followers’ spirits by help of this drink, and sent
them to stab his enemies, esp. the leading Crusaders ;’ Brachet. See
the whole account.]— Arab. /ashish, an intoxicating preparation of
Cannabis indica ;.Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 199; Rich. Dict. p. 569;
whence the adj. Lashishi, hashashi; pl. Lashashin, i.e. ‘hashish-eaters ;’
so that assassin is a pl. form (Devic). Der. assassin-ate, assassin-at-ion,
Macb.1. 7.2.

ASSAULT; see under Assail.

ASSAY, sb., examination, test, trial; chiefly used of the trial of
metal or of weights. (F.—L.) In the sense of ‘attempt’ it is gene-
rally spelt essay in mod. E.; see Acts, ix. 26, xvi. 7; Heb. xi. 29.
Chaucer uses assay to denote the ‘trial of an experiment;” C. T., G
1249, 1338. Gower uses assay for ‘an attempt,’ C. A. i. 68; bk. i.
791. [The form assay came in through the use of the OF. verb asaier
as another spelling of essaier, to judge of a thing, derived from the sb.
essai, a trial.]—OF. essai, a trial. L. exagium, a weighing, a trial of
exact weight. See Essay, a better spelling. Cf. amend =emend.
Der. assay, verb; assay-er.

ASSEMBLE, to bring together, collect. (F.—L.) ME. assemblen,
asemblen; Will. of Palerne, 1120, 1288. Chaucer has ‘to asemble
moneye;’ tr. of Boethius, b.iii. pr. 8.1.5. The sb. asemblaye, as-
sembly, is in K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1. 3473.— OF. assembler,
asembler, to assemble, approach, come together, often with the sense
of ‘ to engage in battle,’ as frequently in Barbour’s Bruce. — Late L.
assimulare, to collect, bring together into one place; different from
classical L. assimulare, to pretend, feign.=L. ad, to; and simul, to-
gether; so that Late L. assimulare is ‘to bring together ;’ the L. ad
becoming as- before s, as usual. [The class. L. assimulare is from ad,
to, and similis, like; and similis is from the same source as simul. |
B. The L. simul and similis are from the same source as E. same, Gk.
dua, at the same time, Skt. sam, with, together with. See Similar.
Der. assembl-y, assembl-age. From the same source are similar, simu-
late, assimilate.

ASSENT, to comply, agree, yield. (F.—L.) ME. assenten ; Chau-
cer, C. T., 4761, 8052 (B 342, E176). ‘They assentyn, by on assent,’
i.e. they assent with one consent; K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1.1480. —
OF. assentir, to consent, acquiesce. = L. assentire, to assent to, approve,
consent.=— L. ad, to (> as- before s); and sentire, to feel; pp. sensus.
See Sense. Der. assent, sb., in early use; Hampole, Pricke of
Conscience, 8391 ; assent-at-ion.

ASSERT, to affirm, declare positively. (L.) In Milton, P. L.i. 25.
Sir T. More has assertation, Works, p. 141 €; and assercion, p.473 €.
The E. word is formed from the L. pp. assertus.—L. asserere, to add
to, take to one’s self, claim, assert. —L. ad, to (> as- before s); and
serere, to join or bind together, connect, to range in a row. See
Series. Der. assert-ion, -ive.

ASSESS, to fix a rate or tax. (F.—L.) ‘I will make such satis-
faction, as it shall please you to assess it at ;” North’s Plutarch, p. 12;
repr. in ‘ Shakespeare’s Plutarch,’ ed. Skeat, p. 289. Hall has assesse-
ment, Hen. VIII, an. 24 (end).=—OF. assesser (Godefroy).—Late L.
assessare; cf. Law L. assessor, one whose duty it was to assess, i.e. to


ASSETS.


adjust,and fix the amount of, the public taxes; ‘qui tributa pereequat
vel imponit ;” Ducange. [The title of assessor was also given to a
judge’s assistant, in accordance with the etymological meaning, viz.
*one who sits beside’ another. ] —L. assessus, pp. of assidére, to sit be-
side, to be assessor to a judge. = L. ad, to, near (> as- before s); and
sedére, to sit, cognate with E. sit. See Sit. Der. assess-ment; assessor
(above). And see assize.

ASSETS, effects of a deceased or insolvent debtor, &c. (F.—L.)
So called because sufficient ‘to discharge that burden, which is cast
upon the heir, in satisfying the testator’s debts or legacies;” Blount’s
Law Dict. In early use in a different form. ‘ And if it sufficith not
for aseth ;’ P. Plowman, C. xx. 203, where another reading is asse¢z,
B. xvii. 237; see my note on the passage, Notes to P. Plowman, p. 390.
In the Romaunt of the Rose, 5600, the E. asseth is used to translate the
F. assez. B. The final -ts is an orthographical device for representing
the sound of OF. z, which was sounded as ¢s; cf. F. avez with L. habétis,
shortened to ’abe?’s, and cf. F. assez with L. ad satis, shortened to a’ sa?’s.
= L. ad satis, up to what is enough; from ad, to, and satis, enough.
See Satisfy, Satiate. 4 It will be observed that assets was ori-
ginally an adverb, then used adjectively, and lastly a substantive. It
is, etymologically, in the singular, like alms, riches, eaves, &c.; but
it was treated as a plural, and in modern use has a sing. asset.

ASSEVERATE, to declare seriously, affirm. (L.) Bp. Jewell
has asseveration, Defence of the Apology, p. 61. The verb to assever
was sometimes used. The verb asseverate is formed, like others in -ate,
from the pp. of the L. verb. = L. asseuératus, pp. of asseuérare, to speak
in earnest.mL. ad. to (> as- before s); and seuérus, adj., earnest,
serious. See Severe. Der. asseverat-ion.

ASSIBILATION, pronunciation with a hissing sound. (L.)
Modern. Formed from the L. vb. asstbilare; from as- (for ad), to,
and stbildre, to hiss; see Sibilant.

ASSIDUOUES, constant in application, diligent. (L.) In Milton,
P.L. xi. 310. Dryden has ‘ assiduous care ;’ tr. of Virgil, Georg. iii.
463. Englished by putting -ows for L. -ws, as in abstemious, &c. = L.
assiduus, sitting down to, applying closely to, constant, unremitted.
— L. assidére, to sit at or near.=L. ad, to, near (> as- before s); and
sedére, to sit, cognate with E. sit. See Sit. Der. assiduous-ly, assidu-
ous-ness; also assidu-i-ty, from L. acc. assiduitdtem, nom. assiduitas,
formed from the adj. assiduus.

ASSIGN, to mark out to one, to allot, &c. (F.—L.) ME. assignen,
asignen ; Rob. of Glouc. p. 502, 1. 10321.— OF. assigner, to assign. =
L. assignare, to affix a seal to, to appoint, ascribe, attribute, consign.
—L. ad, to (> as- before s); and signadre, to mark.—L. signum, a
mark. See Sign. Der. assign-able, assign-at-ion, assign-er, assign-
ment (spelt assignement, Gower, C. A. ii. 373, bk. v. 7154); assign-ee

from Law French assigné, pp. of assigner).

ASSIMILATE, to make similar to, to become similar to. (L.)
Bacon has assimilating and assimilateth; Nat. Hist. sect. 899. Sir T.
Browne has assimilable and assimilation ; Vulg. Errors, bk. vii. c. 19.
§ last; bk. iii. c. 21. § 9. Formed, like other verbs in -ate, from the
pp. of the L. verb. = L. assimilare, also assimulare, to make like. = L. ad,
to (> as- before s) ; and similis, like. See Similar. Der. assimil-
at-ion, assimilat-ive. And see assemble.

ASSIST, to stand by, to help. (F.—L.) ‘Be at our hand, and
frendly vs assist ;’ Surrey, Virgil, En. bk. iv. 1. 772.—F. assister, to
assist, help, defend; Cot.—L. assistere, to step to, approach, stand at,
stand by, assist.#L. ad, to (> as- before s); and sistere, to place, to
stand, from sfare, to stand, which is cognate with E. stand. See
Stand. Der. assist-ant, adj., Hamlet, i. 3.3; sb., id. ii. 2. 1663 assist-
ance, Macbeth, ili. 1. 124.

ASSIZE, (1) a session of a court of justice; (2) a fixed quantity
or dimension. (F.—L.) In mod. E. mostly in the pl. assizes; the use
in the second sense is almost obsolete, but in ME. we read of ‘the
assise of bread,’ &c. It is still, however, preserved in the contracted
form size; cf. sizings. See Size. ME. assise, in both senses. (1)
‘For to loke domes and asise;”? Rob. of Glouc. p. 53, 1. 1230. (2)
‘To don trewleche the assys to the sellere and to the byggere [buyer];
Eng. Guilds, ed. T. Smith, p. 359. [We also find ME. verb assisez,
to appoint ; Gower, C. A. i. 181; bk. ii. 636. But the verb is derived
from the sb.] = OF. asise, assise, sitting at table ; also, a tax, impost;
see Godefroy. Orig. the pp. fem. of the OF. verb asseoir, to sit at
table, also to place, provide. = L. assidére, to sit at or near, to act as
assessor to a judge (in Late L., to impose a tax) ; pp. assessus. —L. ad,
to, near (> as- before s); and sedére, to sit, cognate with E. sit. See
Sit. Der. assize, verb, to assess; assiz-er. And see assess.

ASSOCIATE, a companion. (L.) Properly a past participle.
Cf. ‘yf he intend to be associate with me in blisse ;’ Udal, S. Mark,
viii. 34 ; where we should now rather use associated. A mere sb. in
Shak. Hamlet, iv. 3. 47.—L. associatus, joined with in company ; pp.
of associare, to join, unite. L. ad, to (> as- before s); and soczare, to
join, associate, from socivs, a companion, lit. a follower, from sequ?, to


ASTERN- 35


follow} cf. soga, cloak, from tegere, to cover, procus, a wooer, from
preciri, to pray. See Sequence. Der. associate, verb ; associat-ion.

ASSOIL, to absolve, acquit. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F.Q. i. 10.
52, li. 5.19, &c. Lowland Sc. assoilyie, often miswritten assoilzie
(with z for 3=y). ME. assoilen, P. Plowman, B. prol. 70, 3. 40, &e.;
and the pp. asoiled in OEng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 32, 1. i"
We find Anglo-French assole, pres. sing. subj. Liber Custumarum,
199; but the pp. is spelt assolz, Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 275.
= OF. assoile, asoile, pres. s. subj. of assoudre (Godefroy); the same
as absouldre, ‘to absolve,’ Cot.—L. absoluere, to absolve. See Ab-
solve, of which assoil is merely a doublet. 4 Especially common
in the. pres. subj. or imperative, as in the phrase ‘ God assoil you,’
and the like; hence the form.

ASSONANT, adj., applied to a (certain) resemblance of sounds.
(Span. —L.) [Chiefly used in prosody, esp.in discussing Spanish poetry,
in which assonance, or a correspondence of vowel-sounds only, is a
marked feature. Thus the words beholding, rosebud, boldly, are said
to be assonanf, all having the accented vowel o in common in the
penultimate syllable. So, in Spanish, are the words crueles, tienes,
fuerte, teme.|—Span. assonante, ‘an assonant, in Span. verse ;’? Pineda
(1740); now spelt asonante.  L. assonantem, acc. of assonans, sounding
like. Assonans is the pres. pt. of assonare, to respond to. —L. ad, to
(> as- before s); and sondre, to sound, from soxuws, sound. See
Sound. Der. assonance.

ASSORT, to sort, dispose, arrange; to be companion with.
(F.—L.) Not much used formerly. =F’. assortir, ‘ to sort, assort, suit,
match, equall ;’ Cot.; occurring as early as 1457 (Hatzfeld) ; cf. Late
L. assortare. =F. prefix as-, imitated from L. as- (the form assumed
by ad, to, before s); and sb. sorte, ‘sort, manner, form, fashion,
kind ;’ Cot. Thus assortir is to put together things of like kind.
The sb. sorte (like Ital. sorta, a sort, kind, species) represents a Folk-L.
*sorta, from L. sort-, stem of sors, alot. See Sort. Der. assori-
ment (cf. F. assortiment).

ASSUAGE, to soften, allay, abate, subside. (F.—L.) ME.
assuagen, asuagen, aswagen. ‘His wrath forto asuage;’ Rob. of
Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 300.—OF. assouagier, asoagier, to soften,
appease, assuage, console ; a word of which the Provencal forms are
assuaviar, asuaviar. Formed (as if from a L. verb *assuduidre, to
sweeten) from the OF. prefix a- (L. ad), and L. suauis, sweet. See
Suave. Der. assuage-ment.

ASSUASIVE, softening, soothing. (L.) Pope, in his Ode on
St. Cecilia’s day, ]. 25, has the line: ‘ Music her soft, asswasive voice
applies ;” and the word has been used also by Johnson and Warton
in a similar way; see Todd’s Johnson. This queer word seems to
have been meant to be connected with the verb to asswage, and to have
been confused with persuasive at the same time. It is a mistaken
formation, as if from a non-existent L. *assuadére, from ad and suadére.
See Persuasive.

ASSUME, to take to one’s self, to appropriate; take for granted.
(L.) The derived sb. assumption was in use in the 13th century as
applied to the Assumption of the Virgin Mary. It is spelt assumciun
in the Ancren Riwle, p.412. The use of the verb is later. It is used
by Hall, Hen. VII, an. 2. § 5; and in Hamlet, i. 2.244. —L. assiimere,
to take to one’s self; pp. assumptus. —L. ad, to (>as- before s); and
siumere, to take. B. The L. samere is a compound verb, from
some prefix connected with sub, and emere, to take, buy. See Brugm.
i. § 240. The same root occurs in Redeem. Der. assum-ing,
assumpt-ion, assumpt-ive, assumpt-ive-ly.

ASSURE, to make sure, insure, make confident. (F.—L.) Chau-
cer has ‘ assureth vs,’ C. T. 7969 (E 93), and assurance, C. T. 4761
(B 431). OF. asetirer, assetirer, to make secure, assure, warrant. =
OF. prefix a- (L. ad, to); and adj. seiir, secure, from L. séctrus,
secure, sure. See Sure. Der. assur-ed, assur-ed-ly, assur-ed-ness,
assur-ance.

ASTER, the name of a genus of flowers. (L.—Gk.) In Kersey
(1708). A botanical name, from L. aster, Gk. dornp, a star; from the
star-like shape of the flowers. See Asterisk, Asterism, Asteroid.

ASTERISK, a little star used in printing, thus *. (L.—Gk.)
Spelt aszerisgue in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. asteriscus. — Gk.
dorepickos, a little star, also an asterisk*, used for distinguishing
fine passages in MSS. (Liddell and Scott). Formed, with dimin.
suffix -ccxos, from dorep-, base of dornp, a star, a word cognate with
E. star. See Star. > An asterisk is sometimes called a star.

ASTERISM, a constellation, a cluster of stars. (Gk.) In Dray-
ton, Barons’ Wars, b. vi. st. 31. A coined word, made by adding
the Gk. suffix -.cpos (E. -ism) to the stem dorép- of the Gk. do77p,
a star.

ASTERN, on the stern, behind. (E.) Sir F. Drake, in The
World Encompassed, 1578, has: ‘ Having left this strait a stern.’ It
stands for on stern; see abed, afoot, asleep, and other words in which
the prefix a- stands for an, ME. form of on.


D2


36 ASTEROID


ASTEROID, aterm applied to the minor planets situate between


the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. (Gk.) Modern, and astronomical.
Properly an adj., signifying ‘star-like,’ or ‘star-shaped.’ = Gk. dorepo-
evdys, star-like. Gk. dorepo-, for dornp, a star (cognate with E.
Star, q.v.); and ¢75-os, form, figure. Der. asteroid-al.

ASTHMA, a difficulty in breathing. (Gk.) In Phillips (1658).
= Gk, do@ya, short-drawn breath, panting. = Gk..da¢ev, to breathe
out, breathe through the mouth; allied to anu, I blow.--Goth.
waian, to blow; Skt. va, to blow. See Wind. Der. asthmat-ic,
asthmat-ic-al, from Gk, adj. doOparirds.

ASTIR, on the stir. (E.) Foron stir, ‘The host wes all on steir’
=the army was all astir; Barbour’s Bruce, ed. Skeat, vii. 344. * Var
on steir,’ i.e. they were on the move, id. xix. 577. See Stir.

ASTONISH, to astound, amaze. (F.—L.) The addition of the
suffix -ish (as in extinguish) is due to analogy. Rich. quotes ‘ Be
astonyshed, O ye heauens,’ from the Bible of 1539, Jerem. ii, 12; and
“astonishment hathe taken me,’ from the Geneva Bible, 1540-57,
Jerem. viii. 21. Palsgrave has: ‘I astonisshe, 1 amase one, Jestonne.’
2. The suffix -ish is here added to the ME. asfon-, for astonen, as in:
“uour strokes of thondre, that astoneth thane zeneyere,’ four strokes
of thunder that astound the sinner; Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 130. The
same ME. astonen was the origin of mod. E. astound, See further
under Astound. Der. astonish-ment, astonish-ing.

ASTOUND, to astonish, amaze, (F.—L.) <Astound and astonish
are both deducible from the ME. astonen, also found as astonien (whence
a later form ¢o asfony). Astonish occurs in Shakespeare, and as early
as in Palsgrave (1530). Astound is in Milton, Comus, 210, and
astounded in the same, P. L, i. 281. It is remarkable that Milton also
uses both astonish’d, P. L. i. 266, and astonied, P. L. ix. 890. Cf.
‘Astonynge or astoynynge, Stupefactio ;’ also ‘Astoynyn, or brese werkys,
quatio, quasso ;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 16. ‘Hit astonieth yit my thought;’
Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, 1174. ‘The folc that stod theraboute ful adoun
for drede, And leye [misprinted seye] ther as hi were astoned and as hi
were dede;’ St, Margarete, 291, 292. ‘Yif he be slowe and astoned and
lache, he liveth as an asse;’ Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iv. pr. 3. 1. 82.
B. The form astound probably arose from ME. astoned, pp. of astonen;
for which see under Astonish.—OF. estoner (mod. F. é¢onner), to
amaze.— Late L. type *extondre, to thunder out.—L. ex, out; and
tonare, to thunder. Cf. L. attonare, to thunder at, astound; with prefix
at- for L. ad, at. See Ex-, prefix, and Thunder, @q The
word may have been influenced by the native verb ¢o stun. See
Stun.

ASTRAL, belonging to the stars; starry. (L.—Gk.) Seldom used.
Rich, quotes from Boyle’s Works, vol, v. p. 161. —L.astrdlis, belonging
to the stars.—L. astrum, a star.— Gk. dorpor, a star.

ASTRAY, out of the right way. (E. and F.—L.) ‘His poeple
goth aboute astray ;’ Gower, C. A, iii, 175 ; bk. vii. 2679. ‘They goa
straye and speake lyes;’ Bible, 1539, Ps. lviti. 3. For on stray (cf. abed,
asleep). ‘Mony a steid Fleand on stray ;’ Barbour’s Bruce, 13. 195.
See Stray.

ASTRICTION, a binding or constriction. (L.) It occursin Bacon,
Nat. Hist. sect. 342; and astringe in the same, sect. 714, The verb
to astrict is in Hall, Hen. VI, an. 37.—L. acc. astrictidnem, from nom.
astrictio, a drawing together, contracting ; cf. astrictus, pp. of astrin-
gere, to bind or draw closely together. See Astringe.

ASTRIDE, on the stride. (E.) In Butler, Hudibras, pt. i. c. ii.
1. 390. For ox stride, like afoot for on foot.

ASTRINGH, to draw closely together. (L.) In Bacon (see
Astriction); now almost obsolete; we should say ‘acts as an as-
tringent.’ Astringent is in Holland’s Pliny, bk. xxiv. c. 13. § 2.—L.
astringere, pp. astrictus, to bind or draw closely together. — L. ad, to,
closely (> a- before st) ; and stringere, to bind closely. See Strin-
gent. Der. astring-ent, astring-enc-y ; astriction, q. V.

ASTROLOGY, the knowledge of the stars, (F. —L.—Gk.) Orig.
practical astronomy; later, astromancy, a pretended and exploded
science. In Chaucer, Treat. on the Astrolabe, Prol. 1. 70 (or 75).—
I, astrologie.=—L. astrologia, used to denote ‘astronomy’ also.—Gk.
darpodoyia, astronomy. = Gk, dorpo-, for dorpoy, a star, cognate with
E. Star, q.v.; and Aeyew, to speak about, whence -Aoyia, allied to
Adyos, a discourse. Der. astrolog-ic-al, astrolog-ic-al-ly, astrolog-er.

ASTRONOMY, the science of the stars, (F.—L.—Gk.) In
early use. ME. astronomie, Layamon, ii. 598.—OF. astronomie.=L.
astronomia, = Gk, dorpovopia.— Gk. dorpo-, for darpov, a star, cognate
with E. Star, q.v.; and véyev, to distribute, dispense, whence -vopia,
allied to véuos, law. See Nomad. Der. astronom-ic-al, astronom-
ic-al-ly, astronom-er,

ASTUTE, crafty, sagacious. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
[Cotgrave has MF. astw?, ‘astute, crafty.’ ]—L, astédus, crafty, cunning.
—L. astus, craft, craftiness. Der. astute-ly, astute-ness.


ASUNDER, apart. (E.) For on suader, a form which occurs in


Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1. 3909; in 1. 116, we haye the form |


ATOMY


o sunder. AS. onsundran, adv. ‘And ledde hi sylfe onsundran’ =
and led them apart by themselves; Mark, ix. 2. See Sunder.

ASYLUM, a place of refuge. (L.—Gk.) ‘A sanctuarie... asylum;’
Holland’s Livy, p. 7.—L. asylum, a sanctuary, place of refuge. = Gk.
dovAov, an asylum; neut.of adj.davAos, safe from violence, unharmed. =
Gk. d-, negative prefix ; and ovAy, a right of seizure, cvAdw, I despoil
an enemy.

ASYMPTOTEH, a line which, though continually approaching a
curve, never meets it within a finite distance. (Gk.) Geometrical.
In Phillips, ed. 1706. Barrow, in his Math. Lectures, lect. 9, has
‘asymptotical lines.’ Gk, dovprrwros, not falling together.—Gk. 4-,
negative prefix; ody, together (> ovp before 7) ; and mrwrdés, falling,
apt to fall, a derivative of mire, to fall (perf. tense 7é-m7wxa). The
Gk. wimrecv (Dor. aorist €-rer-ov), is from 4/PET, to fly, to fall. Cf.
L. im-pet-us. Brugm. i. § 116. Der. asymptot-ic-al.

AT, prep. denoting nearness. (E.) Inearliest use. AS. e/, Grein,
i. 59.4Icel. at; Dan. ad; Swed. at; Goth. at; OHG. az (obsolete) ;
L. ad, which enters largely into English. See Ad-.

ATABAL, a kettle-drum. (Span.—Arab.) In Dryden, Don Se-
bastian, Act I. sc.1. Cf. ‘attabalies, which are a kind of drummes;’
Hakluyt, Voy. iii. 480, —Span.azabal, a kettle-drum.= Arab. at-, for
al, the; zabl,a drum. See Tabour.

ATAGHAN,. See Yataghan.

ATAXY, ATAXTA, irregularity of the animal functions. (Gk.)
Ataxia in Kersey (1708).— Gk. dragia, want of order. — Gk. a-, neg.
prefix; and rdagis, order, from taccew, to arrange. See Tactics.

ATHEISM, disbelief in the existence of God. (Gk.) Bacon has
an essay ‘Of Atheism.’ Milton has atheist, P. L. i. 495; and atheous,
P. R..i. 487. All are coined words from the Gk. d@eos, denying the
gods, a word introduced into Latin by Cicero in the form atheos. = Gk.
d-, neg. prefix; and Oeds,a god. See Theism. Der. atheous, athe-
ism, athe-ist, athe-ist-ic, athe-ist-ic-al.

ATHIRST, very thirsty. (E.) Athirst, now an adj., is properly a
pp.; and the prefix a- was originally of. The ME. forms are ofthurst,
ofthyrst, corrupted sometimes to athurst, and sometimes to afurst. See
P. Plowman, B. x. 59; also King Horn, ed. Lumby, 1120, Ancren
Riwle, p. 240, where the form is ofthurst. This form is contracted
from ofthursted = made exceedingly thirsty. AS. offyrsted, very
thirsty, Grein, ii. 321; pp. of ofJyrstan.—AS. of-, intensive prefix,
signifying ‘very;’ and Ayrstan, to thirst; Grein, ii.614. See Thirst.

ATHLETH, a contender for victory ina contest; a vigorous person.
(Gk.) Bacon speaks of the ‘art of activity, which is called athletic;’
Ady. of Learning, II. 10. 1; ed. Wright, p. 133. We should now say
athletics. The L.form athleta occurs in 1528 (N.E.D.).=L. athléta. =
Gk. d0AnrTns, a combatant, contender in athletic games. = Gk. a0Actv, to
contend.— Gk. d@Aos, a contest, contracted from deOAos; dOAov, the
prize of a contest, contracted from de@Aov. See Wed. Der. athlet-ic,
athlet-ics.

ATHW ART, across. (E.and Scand.) Orig. an adverb, as in Shak,
Meas. i. 3. 30; later a prep., as in L. L. L. iv. 3.135. Azhirt, across,
occurs in the Romance of Partenay, ed. Skeat, 1. 169. It stands for
on thirt, on thwert; see Thwart.

ATLAS, a collection of maps. (Gk.) Named after Atlas, a Greek


demi-god who was said to bear the world on his shoulders, and whose |


figure used to be given on the title-page of atlases. Cf. Shak. 3 Hen.
VI, v. 1. 36. “A7Aas (gen. “ArAavTos) probably means ‘ bearer’ or
‘sustainer,’ from the 4/ TEL, to bear, sustain, which appears in Gk.
TAjvat, to endure, L. follere, to lift, and ¢olerare, to endure; see Prell-
witz. See Tolerate. Der. Adlantes, in arch., figures of men used
instead of columns or pilasters (Phillips, ed. 1706), from the Gk. form
for the pl. of Atlas; also A/lant-ic, the name of the ocean (Milton,
Comus, 97), with reference to Mount Atlas, in the N.W. of Africa.

ATMOSPHERE, the sphere of air round the earth. (Gk.) In
Phillips (1658); and in Pope’s Dunciad, iv. 423. A coined word ;
from Gk. drpo- for druds, vapour; and opatpa, a sphere. See
Sphere. Der. atmospher-vc, atmospher-ic-al.

ATOLL, a group of coral islands forming a ring. (Maldive Islands.)
‘We derive the expression from the Maldive Islands . . where the
form of the word is atolu. It is prob. connected with the Singhalese
prep. dzl, inside ;’ Yule.

ATOM, a very small particle. (F.—L.—Gk.) Cudworth, in his.
Intellectual System, p. 26, speaks of atoms, atomists, and ‘ atomical
physiology.’ Milton has atom, P. L. viii. 18.—F. atome, a mote in
the sun ; Coigrave. = L. atomum, acc. of atomus, an atom. = Gk. dropos,
sb. fem., an indivisible particle; dropos, adj., indivisible. = Gk. 4-,
neg. prefix; and roy-, 2nd grade of réuvety, to cut, divide. See Tome.
Der. atom-ic, atom-ic-al, atom-ist. :

ATOMY (1), an atom. (L.—Gk.) Shak. has: ‘it is as easy to
count atomies,’ As You Like It, iii. 2.245. From L. atomi, pl. of
atomus, an atom; by adding the E. pl. suffix -es. See Atom.

ATOMY (2), a skeleton, (F.—L.—Gk.) Short for anatomy,


ATONE


which was resolved into an atomy; 2 Hen. IV, v. 4. 33. And see
E.D. D. See Anatomy.

ATONE, to set at one; to reconcile. (E.) Made up of the two
words at and one; so that atone means to ‘set at one.’ a. The in-
teresting point is that an old pronunciation of ove is here preserved ;
and there are at least two other similar instances, viz. in alone (ME. al
oon), and on-ly(ME.oon-ly).. B. The use of atone arose from the frequent
use of ME. at oon (also written at ov) in the phrases ‘ be at oon’ = to
agree, and ‘set at oon,’ i.e. to set at one, to make to agree, to recon-
cile. Examples are: ‘ Hii made certein couenaunt that hii were
al at on’ = were all agreed; Rob. of Glouc. p. 113 (1. 2451). ‘Sone
they were at one, with wille at on assent’= they were soon agreed,
with will in one concord; Rob. of Brunne, tr. of P. Langtoft, p. 220.
‘If gentil men, or othere of hir contree Were wrothe, she wolde bringen
hem atoon ;’ Chaucer, C. T., E 437, where the two words are run into
one in the Ellesmere MS., as printed. They are similarly run together
in a much earlier passage: ‘Aton he was wip pe king;’ King Horn,
ed. Lumby, 925. y. Particularly note the following from Tyndal:
‘Where thou seest bate or strife betwen person and person, . . leaue
nothing vnsought, to set them at one;’ Works, p. 193, col. 2. ‘One
God, one Mediatour, that is to say, aduocate, intercessor, or an alone-
maker, between God and man;’ Works, p. 158. ‘One mediatour
Christ, . . and by that word vnderstand an attonemaker, a peacemaker;’
id. p. 431 (Remarks on the Testament of M. W. Tracie). ‘Hauyng
more regarde to their olde variaunce then their newe attonement ;’
Sir T. More, Works, p. 41 c (written in 1513, pr. in 1557). See
also the same, p. 40 f (qu. in Richardson), ‘And like as he made
the Jewes and the Gentiles at one betwene themselfes, euen so he
made them bothe at one with God, that there should be nothing to
breake the attonement, but that the thynges in heauen and the thinges
in earth, should be ioined together as it wer into oxe body;’ Udal,
Eph. ii. 16. ‘Attonement, a louing againe after a breache or falling
out ;’ Baret, Alvearie,s.v. ‘So beene they both at one;’ Spenser,
B, Qili. 1.29: See also Shak. Rich. JT, i, 1. 202; Oth. iva.t. 244;
Ant. ii, 2.102; Cymb. i. 4. 42; Timon, v. 4. 58; As You Like It,
v. 4. 116; Cor. iv. 6. 72; also atonement, Merry Wives, i. I. 333
2 Hen. IV, iv. 1.221; Rich. III, i. 3. 36. Also Ben Jonson, Epiccene,
Act iv. sc. 2 (Truewit to La Foole) ;.Massinger, Duke of Milan, Act
Ivy. sc. 3 (Pescara); Milton, P, L. iii. 234. . Bp. Hall.says: ‘Ye...
set such discord ’twixt agreeing parts Which never can be sef at one-
ment more ;’ Sat. iii. 7. And Dryden: ‘If not atton’d, yet seemingly
at peace ;” Aurungzebe, Act iii. The word atonement came into use
soon after A.D. 1500. 8. The simple verb oxen, to unite, pp. oned,
occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 7550 (B 1968). N.B. This E. idiom was
perhaps translated from AF, ‘Il ne peusent estre a un,’ they could not
be at one, could not agree; Le Livre de Reis de Angleterre (Rolls
Series), p. 220. 4] It is to be added that the phrase at¢ once was for
a long period written as oe word, spelt atones, or quite as often attones,
attonis, or attonys. See examples in Gloss. to Specimens of English
from 1394 to 1579, ed. Skeat. By introducing the sound of w into once
(wunce), we have again made at once into two words. Der. atone-
ment.

ATRABILIOUS, melancholy. (L.) Kersey (1708) has: ‘ Atra
bilis, black choler;’ a L. translation of Gk. peAayxoaia, black bile.
=—L. tra bili-s, black bile; with suffix -ows.

ATROCITY, extreme cruelty. (F.—L.) The adj. atrocious, an
ill-formed word, apparently founded on the F. adj. atroce, heinous, is
not known before 1669. It occurs in Thomson’s Liberty, ii. 305. But
atrocity is much older, and occurs, spelt atrocyte, in Sir T. More’s
Works, p.1294f (N.E.D.). =F. atrocité, ‘atrocity,'great cruelty ;’ Cot-
grave.=—L. acc. alrécilatem, from nom. atrocitas, cruelty. — L. atroci-,
from atrox, cruel; more lit. horrible, frightful. oot unknown; cf.
ater, black, dark, malicious. From the same source, a/roci-ous,
atroci-ous-ly, atroci-ous-ness.

ATROPHY, a wasting away ofthe body. (F.—L.—Gk.) Medi-
cal. It means lit. ‘want of nourishment.’ Milton has; ‘ pining atro-
phy;? P.L. xi. 486. ‘Holland writes of ‘no benefit or nutriment of
meat, which they cail in Greek atropha;’ Pliny, bk. xxii.c. 25; 11.143 c.
=F. atrephie; Cot.<L. atrophia. — Gk. dérpopia, want of food, hunger,
atrophy. —Gk. d-, neg. prefix; and tpépev, to nourish (perf. t. 7é-
Tpop-a); allied to Gk. Opéupa, a nursling.

ATTACH, to take and hold fast; to apprehend. (F.—Teut.)
ME. attachen, to take prisoner, arrest, much in use as’a law term.
‘ Attache tho tyrauntz,’ apprehend those cruel men; P. Plowman, B.
ii. 199.— OF. atachier, F. attacher, to attach, fasten; cf. F. détacher,
to detach, unfasten, which is obviously from the same root. . As
Diez remarks, the root is to be found in the word which appears in
English as tack, with the signification of ‘ peg’ or ‘small nail ;’ so that
to attach is to fasten with a tack or nail, whilst to detach is to unfasten
what has been but loosely held together by suchanail. The prefix is
the OF. prep. a,to=L. ad; and -tacher is probably from the Low G.


ATTIRE 37


takk, or EFries. takke; see Tack. Der, attach-able, attach-ment,
attach-é (F. pp.). Doublet, attack.

ATTACK, to assault. (F.—Ital.—Teut.) Rich. remarks that
it is not an old word in the language. The verb occurs in Milton,
Sams. Agonistes, 1113.—F, atsaquer, explained by Cotgrave as ‘to
assault, or set on;” he does not use the work attack. Attaguer was
borrowed from Ital. attaccare, ‘to fasten, to ioyne; atdaccar battaglia,
to ioyne battell;’ Florio.—L. ad, to (><at- before 4); and Low G.
takk, a tine, pointed thing; see Tack and Attach. Hence attack
and attach are doublets. Der. attack, sb.

ATTAIN, to reach to, obtain. (F.—L.) ME. atainen, atteinen;
‘they wenen to afezme to thilke good that they desiren;’ Chaucer, tr.
of Boethius, b. iv. pr. 2. 1. 192.—OF. ateign-, pres. stem of ateindre,
ataindre, to reach to, attain; also to punish, accuse, convict (ataindre
in Godefroy). —Folk-L, *attangere ; for L. attingere, to touch upon,
to attain. —L. ad, to(>at- before ¢); and tangere, to touch. See
Tangent. Der. attain-able, attain-able-ness, attain-ment; also attainder,
from asubstantival use of OF. infin. ateizdre (above), in the sense ‘to
convict.’ Also attaint (below).

ATTAINT, to convict. (F.—L.) The similarity in sound be-
tween atfaint and taint has led, probably, to some false law; see the
remarks about it in Blount’s Law Dictionary. But etymologically,
and without regard to imported senses, to attaint is to convict, and
attainder is conviction. As a fact, attaint is a verb that has been
made out of a past participle, viz. the pp. of the verb to attain, used
in a technical sense inlaw. The Prompt. Parv. has: ‘ Az¢teyntyn, con-
vinco;’ p.16. Palsgrave even has ‘ I at/eynt, I hyt or touche a thyng,’
i.e. attain it. In the r4th century, we find ME. atteynt, atteint, ateynt
in the sense of ‘convicted,’ and the verb at/eyn in the sense of ‘ con-
vict.” § And justise of the lond of falsnes was atteynt’ = and the justice
administered in the land was convicted of falseness; Rob. of Brunne,
tr. of Langtoft, p. 246. ‘To reprove tham at the last day, And to
atteyntham, i.e. to convictthem; Hampole, Prick of Conscience, 5331.
Cf. P. Plowman, C. xxiii. 162.—OF. ateint, ataint, pp. of ateindre, to
attain (above). 4 The sense was affected by confusion with taint
@NED.)s

ATTAR OF ROSKHS, perfumed oil ofroses. (Arabic.) Often
called, less correctly, ‘otto of roses.’ Byron has ‘atar-gul, ottar of
roses ;’ note to Bryde of Abydos, i. 10. From Arab. “itr, perfume ;
from ‘atira, he smelt sweetly. See Richardson’s Arab. Dict. p. 1014;
and ofto in Yule.

ATTEMPHER, to temper, qualify. (F.—L.) Now little used. ME.
atlempren, atempren. ‘ Alempreth the lusty houres of the firste somer
sesoun ;” Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. i. met. 2.— OF. atemprer (F. at-
tremper), to modify. — OF. a, to (L.ad); and ¢emprer, to temper, from
L. temperare, to moderate, control. See Temper.

ATTEMPT, to try, endeavour, (F.—L.) ‘For to attempt his
fansie by request ;’ Surrey, tr. of Afneid, bk. iv. 1.142. [Notin Gower,
C.A. i. 287.] —OF. atempter, to undertake ; Roquefort. The simple
verb tempter was also spelt tenter, tanter; Burguy. Hence atempter
is a Latinised form of an older atenter, which appears as attenter in
the Supp. to Godefroy. —L. attentare, often altemptire, to attempt. —
L. ad (becoming at- before t); and dentare, to try, endeavour; so that
‘attempt’ is to ‘try at.” See Tempt. Der. attempt, sb.

ATTEND, to wait upon, to heed. (F.—L.) ‘The Carthage lords
did on the quene aéttend;’ Surrey, Virgil, Ain. b. iv.1.171. The sbs.
attencioun and attendance occur in Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. it. pr.
1,l.2; C. T. 6515 (D933).—OF. atendre, to wait.—L. attendere, pp.
attentus, to stretch towards, think upon, give heed to.—L. af-, for ad,
to; and sendere, to stretch. See Tend (1). Der. altend-ance, attend-
ant; and, from L. pp. attentus, we have attent, adj. (2 Chron. vi. 40, vii.
15)3 cf. attent-ion, attent-ive, attent-ive-ly, attent-ive-ness.

ATTENUATE, to make thin. (L.) It occurs in Elyot, Castel of
Health, bk. ii.c. 7. § 6; Bacon, Nat. Hist. sect. 299. Formed, like
other words in -ade, from a past participle. L. attenudtus, thin, pp.
of attenudre, to make thin. —L. ad- ( > at- before ¢) ; and denudre, to
make thin, from ¢enwis, thin. See Thin. Der. attenwat-ion.

ATTEST, to bear witness to. (L.) In Shak. Hen. V, iii. 1. 22.—
L. attestar?, to bear witness to; pp. a/testatus.— L. ad (> at- before ¢);
and ¢estari, to be witness, from ées/is, a witness. See Testify. Der.
attest-at-ion,

ATTIC, a low-built top story of a house, or a room in the same.
(F.—L.—Gk.) ‘A term in architecture, comprehending the whole of
a plain or decorated parapet wall, terminating the upper part of the
facade of an edifice;’ Eng. Cyclopedia, s.v. ‘ Adtick, in arch., a kind
of order, after the manner of the city of Athens; in our buildings, a
small order placed upon another that is much greater ;’ Kersey’s Dict.,
ed. 1708.—F. attigue, upper part of a building ; so called as belonging
to the Attic order of architecture.—L. Adticus.— Gk. ’Arrixds, Attic,
Athenian. ;

ATTIRE, apparel, dress; vb., to adorn, dress. (F.) In early


ATTITUDE


use. a. Thesb. is ME. atyr, atir (with one 2), and is derived from
the verb. ‘ Mid his fourti cnihtes and hire hors and hire atyr’ =with
his forty knights and their horses and their apparel; Layamon, |. 3275
(later text). In William of Palerne, 1. 1725, it is spelt ¢yr; in 1.1147,
it is atir. B. The verb is ME. atyren, atiren (mostly with one 2).
‘Hii . . . newe knightes made And armede and atired hem’ = they
made new knights and armed and equipped them; Rob. of Glouc.
p- 547,1.11370. The sb. appears as atir, atyr in AF. (Godefroy), but
not, apparently, in continental French. y. From OF. atzrier, atierer
(atirer in Godefroy), to arrange, set in order, equip, adorn. OF. a
(from L. ad, to) and fiere, tire (tire in Godefroy), f., a row, rank,
order ; cognate with OProv. ¢iera, a row (Bartsch). Whether this is
the same word as mod. E. tier, is doubtful; and the remoter origin
of this OF. tiere still remains undecided. See Tier. Diez would
connect it with OHG. ziarz, G. zier, ornament; see Diez, ed. 1878,
p- 687; Korting, §9464. 4 As the prefix a- was unaccented, it was
often thrown off in English, as in the well-known text: ‘she painted
her face, and tired her head ;’ 2 Kings, ix. 30. The sb. Zire, a head-
dress, is common in the Bible (Isaiah, iii. 18; Ezek. xxiv. 17, 23;
Judith, x. 3, xvi. 8). See Tire (2) and (3).

ATTITUDE, position, posture. (Ital.—L.) ‘’Tis the business
ofa painter in his choice of attitudes to foresee the effect and harmony
of the lights and shadows;” Dryden, Dufresnoy, sect. 4. This, being
aword connected with the painter’s art, came from Italy. = Ital. attz-
tudine, aptness, skill, attitude. = L. aptitudinem, acc. of aptitido, apti-
tude. See Apt. @ Ital. assimilates ptinto tt. Der. attitud-in-al,
attitud-in-ise. Doublet, aptitude.

ATTORNEY, an agent appointed to act in the ‘turn’ of another.
(F.—L. and Gk.) ME. attourné, aturneye, ‘ Aturneye, suffectus, at-
turnatus;’ Prompt. Parv. p.17. ‘Aztourneis in cuntre thei geten silver
fornoht;’ Polit. Songs, p. 339. —OF. atorné, pp. of atorner, to direct,
turn, prepare, arrange or ordain.= OF. a, to (L. ad); and torner, to
turn, from /orzare, to turn, esp. to turn in a lathe (of Gk. origin).
See Turn. Der. atiorney-ship.

ATTRACT, to draw to, allure. (L.) Used by Grafton, Rich. III,
an. 2. Shak. has attract, Tw. Nt. ii. 4. 89; attraction, Timon, iv. 3.
439; attractive, Haml. iii. 2.117. Formed, like convict, from a past
participle. = L. attractus, pp. of attrahere, to draw to, attract. —L. ad
(>at- before ¢) ; andtrahere,todraw. See Trace (1). Der. attract-
able, attract-ib-il-it-y, attract-ion, attract-ive, attract-ive-ly, attract-ive-
ness.

ATTRIBUTE, a quality ascribed to a person or thing; as vb., to
assign, ascribe. (L.) Formed, like attract, from a past participle. The
sb. is in Shak. Merch. iv. 1. 191; the verb in Sir T. More, Works,
p-1121d.—L. attributus, pp. of attribuere, to assign. = L. ad, to (>at-
before #); and ¢ribuere, to give, bestow. See Tribute. Der.
attribut-able, attribut-ion, attribut-ive.

ATTRITION, a wearing by friction. (F.—L.) Formerly in use
in a theological sense, as expressing sorrow for sin without shrift; after
shrift, such sorrow became contrition; see Tyndal, Works, p. 148,
col. 2; Chaucer, Troil. i. 557. [Perhaps from Latin directly.]—F.
attrition, ‘a rubbing, fretting, wearing ;’ Cotgrave.—L. acc. attri-
tidnem, from nom. attritio, a rubbing, wearing away; allied to L.
attritus, rubbed away, pp. of. atterere.—L. ad (> at- before ¢); and
terere, torub. See Trite.

ATTUNE, to make to harmonise, put in tune. (Hybrid; L. and
Gk.) Accoined word, In Spenser, F. Q. i.12.7. Made by prefixing
L. ad (which in composition becomes aé- before #) to the sb. tune, so
that attwne is to ‘ bring to a like tune or tone. See Tune.

AUBURN, reddish brown. (F.—L.) ME. auburne, awburne. ‘Aw-
burne coloure, citrinus;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 17. Thus the old sense
was ‘citron-coloured’ or light yellow. The modern meaning was
probably due to some confusion in the popular mind with the word
brown; indeed Hall,’ in his Satires, bk. iii. Sat. 5, speaks of ‘abron
locks,’ which perhaps suggested this.—OF. alborne, auborne, blond
(Godefroy). [Cf. Ital. alburno, of which one of the old meanings,
given by Torriano, is ‘ that whitish colour of women’s hair called an
aburn colour.’ |—Late L. alburnus, whitish, light-coloured; Du-
cange. Cf. L. alburnum, the sap-wood, or inner bark of trees (Pliny).
=L. albus, white. See Alb.

AUCTION, a public sale to the highest bidder. (L.) A ‘sale
by auction’ is a sale by ‘increase of price,’ till the article is knocked
down to the highest bidder. Auction occurs in Kersey (1708) ; and
in Pope, Moral Essays, iii. 119.—L. auctidnem, acc. of auctio,a sale
by auction, lit. an ‘increase ;’ allied to L. auctus, pp. of augére, to
increase. See Eke. Der. auction-eer.

AUDACIOUS, bold, impudent. (F.—L.) Ben Jonson has
‘ audacious ornaments ;’ The Silent Woman, A. ii. sc. 3.. Bacon has
audacitie, Nat. Hist. sect. 943.—F. audacieux, ‘bold, stout, hardy,
.. audacious,’ &c.; Cot. Formed as if from a L. form *audacidsus,
which again is from L. auddci-, from audax, bold, daring. =L, audére,


38


AURICULAR


to be bold, to dare. Der. audacious-ly, audacious-ness ; also audacity,
from L. acc. auddcitatem, nom. audacitas, boldness.
AUDIENCE, hearing, an assembly of listeners. (F.—L.) In
Chaucer, C. T. 5093 (B 673); and tr. of Boethius, b. ii. pr. 7, 1. 80:
Sir T. More has audible, Works, p. 1259 c.—F. audience, ‘an audi-
ence or hearing ;’ Cot. —L. audientia, attention, hearing. =L. audire,
pp- auditus, to hear. For *auiz-dire; cf. Gk. aicéc0a1, to perceive
(for *dFro-Oe0ar) ; Brugm. i. § 240. Der. From L. audire, to hear,
we have also audi-ble, audi-ble-ness, audi-bly. From the pp. auditus,
we have audit (Kersey, 1708, cf. L. auditus, sb., a hearing); cf. also
audit-or (spelt audjtour in Gower, C. A.ii. 191, bk. v. 1919), audit-or-y,


_audit-or-ship.


AUGER, a centre-bit, a tool for boring holes. (E.) ‘ An augoure,
terebrum ;’ Levins, 222. 38. A corruption of nauger. Like adder,
and some other words, it has lost an initialz. It is spelt nauger in
Wright’s Vol. of Vocabularies, 1st Series, p. 170. In Halliwell’s
Dict. we find: ‘ Navegor, an auger, a carpenter’s tool. This word
occurs in an inventory dated A.D. 1301, and in Nominale MS.’ AS.
nafugar, nafogar, an auger, ‘ foratorium uel terebellum ;’ Wright’s
Voc. 408. 39 ; early spelling zabogar, id. 44.11. It means, literally,
a nave-piercer, being used for boring the hole in the centre of a wheel
for the axle to pass through.—AS. nafu, nabu, the nave of a wheel
(see Nave (1)); and gar, a piercer, that which gores (see Gore
(3))-+Du. avegaar (for xavegaar) ; Icel. nafarr; Dan. naver ; Swed.
nafvare; OHG. nabager. Cf. Du. naafboor, an auger, from zaaf,
nave, and boren, to bore.

AUGHT, a whit, anything. (E.) Very variously spelt in ME.,
which has awikt, eawiht, eawt, ewt, aht, aght, aught, ouht, ought, out,
oht, oght. * Vif he awiht delan wule’=if he will give aught; O. Eng.
Homilies, i. 103. AS. awiht, aught, Grein, i. 48; lit. ‘e’er a whit,’
or ‘anything whatever. = AS. a, ever; and wiht, a wight, creature,
thing, whit. See Aye and Whit.

AUGMENT, to increase. (F.—L.) ‘My sorowes to augment ;’
Remedie of Love (15th cent.), anon. poem in old editions of Chaucer’s
Works, st. 13; and see Rom. Rose, 5597.—F. augmenter, ‘to aug-
ment, increase ;? Cot.—L. augmentare, to enlarge, pp. augmentatus.
— L. augmentum, an increase, augment. = L. aug-ére, to increase; with
suffix -mentum. See Auction. Der. augment-able, augment-at-ion,
augment-at-ive, The sb. augment is (etymologically) more original
than the verb.

AUGUR, a soothsayer, a diviner by the flight and cries of birds.
(L.) Gower has augurre, C. A. ii. 82 ; bk. iv. 2404. Chaucer has
augurie, Troil. v. 380.—L. augur, a priest at Rome, who foretold
events, and interpreted the will of the gods from the flight and sing-
ing of birds. Hence it is usual to derive augur from auis,a bird. If
it be right, the etym.is from awi-, for auis,a bird, and -gzwr, telling,‘ gur
being connected with garrire, garrulus, and the Skt. gar or gr, to
shout ;’ Max Miiller, Lect. on Science of Lang. ii. 266 (8th ed.). Cf.
L. au-ceps, a bird-catcher. Der. augur-y (OF. augurie, L. augur-ium),
augur-al, augur-ship; also in-augurate,q.v. And see Auspice.

AUGUST, adj., venerable. (L.) Dryden, Virgil, Ain. i. 825, has:
‘ August in visage, and serenely bright.’—L. augustus, honoured,
venerable. Cf. Skt. djas, strength; Brugm. i. § 213. Allied to
Auction, Der. August, the 8th month, named after Augustus (i.e.
the honoured) Czesar; August-an, august-ly, august-ness.

AUK, a sea-bird. (Scand.) Given by Edmondston as an Orkney
word, and by Ray as Northern. —Swed. alka, an auk: Icel. alka,
alka: Dan. alke (see Falk and Torp). Hence L. alca, a Latinised
form.

AUNT, a father’s or mother’s sister. (F.—L.) ME. aunte, Rob.
of Glouc. p. 37,1. 871. —OF. ante, aunte (mod. Norman ante, corrupted
to zante in mod. F.).—L. amita, a father’s sister. Cf. Icel. amma,
a grandmother, OHG. amma, mother, mamma; the mod. G. amme
means ‘nurse.’ @ For the change of m to m before ¢, see Ant.

AUREATE, golden. (L.) Formerly avreat, a word first used by
Lydgate, as in A Balade in Commendation of Our Lady, 1. 13; and
common in some of the older Scotch poets. ‘The aureat fanys,’ the
golden streamers; G. Douglas, Prol. to Ain. bk, xii. 1. 47.—Late L.
aureatus, golden; a corrupted form due to confusion with azre-
us, golden, adj. The correct form is L. auratus, gilded, pp. of
aurare, to gild,a verb not in use. = L. aurum, gold; old form, ausum.
Cf. Lith. awksas, gold. Der. From L. aurum we have aur-elia (Ital.
aurelia), the gold-coloured chrysalis of an insect ; auz-e-ola, aur-e-ole,
the halo of golden glory in paintings (spelt awriole in Hali Meidenhad,
p- 23, from. L. cordna aureola, Exod. xxv. 25, Vulgate); aur-ic,
golden; aur-iferous, gold-producing, from L. ferre, to produce,
cognate with E. bear; also or (3), oriflamme, oriole, dory.

AURICULAR, told in the ear, secret. (L.) Well known in the
phrase ‘ auricular confession.’ Udal speaks of it, Reuel. of St. John,
c. 21. vv. 21-27; and Grafton, K. John, an. 14; cf. Shak. K. Lear,
i. 2..99.— Late L. auricularis, in the phr. auricularis confessio, secret


0


AUROCHS


confession. = L. auricula, the lobe of the ear; double dimin. from the
stem awri- of L, auris, the ear. See Har (1). Der. From L. auricula
we have auricle, the outer ear; pl. auricles, two ear-like cavities of
the heart ; auricula, the ‘ bear’s ear,’ a kind of primrose, named from
the shape of its leaves, Thomson, Spring, 536; auricul-ar, auricul-
ar-ly, auricul-ate. From L. auris we have auri-form, aur-ist.

AUROCHS, the European bison. (G.) Properly the name of an
extinct wild ox.=G. aurochs; MHG. trohkse.—=MUHG. ur, cognate
with AS. ar, an aurochs (whence L. iirus) ; and OHG. ohso, G. ochse,
cognate with E. Ox.

AURORA, the dawn. (L.) In Shak. Romeo, i. 1. 142.—L.
aurora, the dawn, the goddess of the dawn; which stands for an older
form *dusdsa.4-Gk. ws, AZolic atws, Attic €ws, dawn, for pre-
historic *avows ; Skt. ushis, dawn. Brugmann, i. § 930. See Hast.
Cf. Aurora-borealis, i.e. northern dawn or dawn-like halo; from L.
Boreas, the North wind.

AUSCULTATION, a listening. (L.) First used in 1634
(N. E. D.); now chiefly medical, applied to the use of the stetho-
scope. = L. auscullatidnem, acc. of auscultatio, a listening; from auscul-
are, to listen.—L. *aus-, base of auris (for *ausis), the ear ; and
-cultare, as in oc-cultare, to hide; see Occult. See Auricular and
Ear (1).

AUSPICH, a prognostic, prosperous lead, fayour, patronage.
(F.—L.) Used by Dryden in the sense of ‘patronage;’ Annus
Mirabilis, st. 288 ; and see‘ The Auspices’ in Introd. to Ben Jonson’s
Masque of Hymen. Shak. has auspicious, Temp. i. 2.182; v.314.—
F. auspice, ‘a sign, token... of things by the flight of birds; also,
fortune, lucke, or a luckie beginning of matters;” Cote L. auspicium,
a watching of birds for the purpose of augury. A contraction of
*auispicium. = L. aui-, stem of auts,a bird; and spicere, specere, to spy,
look into, cognate with E. spy. See Aviary and Species. Der.
pl. auspices; and (from L. auspictum), auspici-ous, auspici-ous-ly, aus-

7ct-OUS-NESS,

AUSTERE, harsh, rough, severe. (F.—L.—Gk.) In early use.
‘He was fulle austere ;’ Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 54.—
OF. austere, which Cotgrave explains by ‘austere, severe, stern,’ &c.
= L. austérus, harsh, tart, sour to the taste; also, severe, rigorous.
=—Gk. atornpds, making the tongue dry, harsh.—Gk. atos, dry,
withered, parched, sere; ave.v, Attic avew,to parch,dry. See Sere.
Der. austere-ly, austere-ness, auster-i-ty.

AUSTRAL, southern. (L.; or F.—L.) The use of L. Auster
for the South wind occurs in Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. ii. met. 3,
1. 9. Theadj. australe isin Cockeram (1642); ME. austral (N.E.D.).
[Perhaps directly from Latin.J—F. azstrale, southerly; Cot.—L.
Australis, southerly. L. Azuster, the South wind. It probably meant
‘burning.’ See Aurora. Der. Austral-ia, Austral-ian, Austral-asia
(from Asia), Austral-asian.

AUTHENTIC, original, genuine. (F.—L.—Gk.) In early use.
ME. autentik, autentique, auctentyke. Spelt auctentyke in Hampole,
Pricke of Conscience, 7116.—OF. awtentique, auctentique, later au-
thentique, which is the form in Cotgrave, who explains it by ‘ authen-
tick, authenticall, of good authority ;’ the E. and F. words having
been alike modified by reference to the original Greek. = L. authen-
ticus, original, written by the author’s own hand. =—Gk. addevrixds,
authentic, vouched for, warranted.=Gk. ai’0évrns, one who does
things with his,own hand; the same as atro-éyrns, a murderer
(Sophocles). — Gk. at76-s, himself, which became av6- before an as-
pirate; and évr-, connected (by gradation) with L. son¢-, stem of
sons, guilty, and with E, sin; see Sin. Der. authentic-al, authentic-
al-ly, authentic-ate, authentic-at-ion, authentic-i-ty. Cf. effendi.

AUTHOR, the originator of a book or work. (F.—L.) ME.
autor, autour, auctor, auctour; Chaucer, C. T. go17 (E1141). The
pl. autors is in K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 4519. For the spelling
authour, see Rom. Rose, 1. 7. OF. auteur, auctor, auctour (Supp. to
Godefroy, p. 241).—L. auctorem, acc. of auctor, an originator, lit.
“one who makes a thing to grow.’=L. augére, pp. auct-us, to make
to grow. See Auction. Der. author-ess, author-ship, author-i-ty,
author-i-tat-ive, author-i-tat-ive-ly, author-ise (spelt auctorize in Gower,
C. A. iii. 134, bk. vii. 1480) ; author-is-at-ion. @] The form authour,
for autour, was at first a mere scribal variant ; but this newer spelling
affected the pronunciation, and at last established the present sound.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY, a life ofa man written by himself. (Gk.)
Modern. Made by prefixing auto-, from Gk. adro-, stem of airs,
self, to biography, q.v. Der. .autobiograph-ic, -graph-ic-al, -graph-er.

AUTOCRACY, self-derived power, absolute and despotic govern-
ment by one man. (Gk.) Spelt audocrasie in Phillips (1658) ; auto-
crasy in South’s Sermons, vol. viii. ser. 10 (R.) ; see Todd.—Gk. av-
Toxpare.a, absolute government. = Gk. avro-, stem of avrds, self; and
-«pareva (in compounds), from «paréev, to rule, which is from xparvs,
strong, cognate with E. Hard. Der. autocrat (Gk. abroxparns), auto-
crat-ic-al.


AVARICE 39


AUTO-DA-FE, a judgment of the Inquisition ; also, the execution
of such judgment, when the decree or sentence is read to the victims.
(Port.—L.) Lit. ‘act of faith.’ = Port. auto, action, decree; da, for
de a, of the; fé, faith. [The Span. form is auto de fé: without the
Span. art. /a= Port. art. a.J}—L. actum, acc. of actus, act, deed; dé, pre-
position ; il/a, fem. of idle, he; jidem, acc. of fides, faith. See Act
and Faith. Worcester’s Dict. has the following note: ‘as the details
of an auto-da-fe were first made familiar to the English public in an
account of the Inquisition at Goa (a Port. colony in the E. Indies),
published in the 17th [18th] century, the Port. form of the phrase has
generally prevailed in E. literature.’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates, has;
‘20 persons perish at an auto-da-fe, at Goa, A.D. 1717; Malagrida,
a Jesuit, burnt at Lisbon, 1761.’

AUTOGRAPH, something in one’s own handwriting. (F.—L.—
Gk.) Used by Anthony 4 Wood to denote an original MS.; see the
quotation in Richardson from his Athenze Oxonienses.—Spelt auto-
graphum in Kersey (1708).—F. autographe, ‘written with his own
hand ;’ Cot. —L.autographus, adj. ; autographum, sb.—Gk. aitéypa-
gos, written with one’s ownhand; avréypa¢or, an original. = Gk. aito-,
stem of avrds, self; and ypapev, to write. Der. autograph-ic, auto-
graph-y.

AUTOMATON, a self-moving machine. (Gk.) In Beaum. and
Fletcher, Bloody Brother, iv. 1 (Latorch); and in Boyle’s Works,
vol. v. p. 251. Browne, in his Vulg. Errors, b. v. c. 18, § I, uses the
adj. automatous.— Gk. abtéparov, neut. of avréyaros, self-moving. =
Gk. avro-, stem of adtos, self; and -pards, allied to Skt. matas,
thought, considered, known, pp. of man, to think; see Benfey, s. v.
man.=— 4/MEN, to think. Brugm. i. § 387. See Mind. Der. pl.
automatons or automata; automat-ic, automat-ic-al, automat-ic-al-ly,

AUTONOMY, self-government. (Gk.) In Cockeram (1623).—
Gk. avrovopia, independence. = Gk. airédvopos, free, living by one’s
own laws.= Gk. airo-, stem of ards, self; and vou-, 2nd grade of
véuopat, I sway, middle voice of véyw, I distribute. See Nomad.
Der. autonom-ous, from Gk. abrdvopos.

AUTOPSY, personal inspection. (Gk.) Used by Ray, On the
Creation ; and by Cudworth, Intellectual System, p. 160 (R.)— Gk.
avroyia, a seeing with one’s own eyes.—Gk. airo-, stem of airds,
self; and dys, sight. See Optic. Der. autoptic-al (Phillips, 1658).

AUTUMN, the harvest time of the year. (F.—L.) Spelt autompne
in Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. i. met. 2,1. 17.—OF. autompne (Hatz-
feld).—L. autumnum, acc. of autumnus, auctumnus, autumn. By some
connected with augére (pp. auctus), to increase, as being the season of
produce. Der. autumn-al.

AUXILIARY, adj., helping; sb., a helper. (L.) Holland, Livy,
P- 433, speaks of ‘ auxiliarie or aid souldiers lightly armed.’ — L. auxi-
lidrius, auxiliaris, assisting, aiding. —L. auxilium, help, assistance. =
L. augére, to increase. See Auction.

AVADAVAT, a finch-like E. Indian bird. (Arab. and Pers.) ‘A
corruption of amaduvad, the name by which the bird is known to
Anglo-Indians, and under which it was figured, in 1735, by Albin,
Suppl. Nat. Hist. Birds, pl. 77, p.. 72. Jerdon (Birds of India, ii. 361)
says that Blyth has shown that this word took its origin from the city
of Ahmedabad, whence the bird used to be imported into Europe in
numbers.’—A. Newton, in N. and Q. 6S. ii. 198. Ahmedabad is near
the Gulf of Cambay, on the W. coast of Hindostan ; and its name is
derived from Ahmed, a proper name, and the Pers. abad, city. Ahmed
is from Arab, akmad, very laudable, Rich. Dict. p. 33; from the root
hamada, he praised; see Mohammedan. For Pers. abdd, see
Horn, § 4.

AVAIL, to be of value or use. (F.—L.) ME. auailen (u for v).
‘Avaylyn or profytyn;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 17. Spelt awail, Cursor
Mundi, l. 90. Hampole has availes, Pricke of Conscience, 1. 3587.
The compound verb was not used in the French of the continent ; it
was made by prefixing the OF. a (=L. ad, to) to the OF. vail, 1 p.
pr. s. of valoir, to be of use, from L. walére, to be strong. Der. avail-
able, avail-abl-y. The simple form appears in valiant, q.v.

AVALANCHE, a fall of snow. (F.—L.) Modern. In Cole-
ridge’s Hymn in the Vale of Chamouni, and in Byron’s Manfred, Act
i.sc. 2.1.77.—F. avalanche, a descent of snow into the valley; given
by Cotgrave in the form avallanche, ‘a great falling or sinking down,
as of earth, &c.’ =F. avaler, which in mod. F. means ‘ to swallow,’ but
Cotgrave also gives, s.v. avadler, the senses ‘ to let, put, cast, lay, fell
down, to let fall down.’=F. aval, downward; common in OF .as opposed
to amont, upward (L. ad montem, towards the hill). —OF, a val, from
L. ad uallem, towards the valley ; hence, downward. See Valley.

AVARICH, greediness after wealth. (F.—L.) ME. awarice (was
v); used by Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. ii. pr. 5, 1. 11; Wyclif,
1 Kings, viii. 3.—OF. avarisce, avarice.—L. audritia, avarice. —L.
auarus, greedy ; cf. L. auidus, greedy. —L. auére, to wish, desire. Cf.
Skt. av, to be pleased, to desire. Der. avarici-ous, avarici-ous-ly,
avarici-ouseness,


40 AVAST .


AVAST, hold fast, stop. (Dutch or Span.) ‘Avast, stop, hold, or
stay;’ Kersey (1708). It occurs in Poor Jack, a sea-song by C. Dib-
din, died A.D. 1814. 1. Perhaps from Du. how vast, hold fast. . How,
short for howd, is the imp. s. of houden, cognate with E. hold. Vast is
cognate with E. fast. 2. Otherwise it may be from Span. abaséo, ‘as
much as need, enough, sufficiently,’ Minsheu; the Span. b being taken
asanE.v. Pineda, inhis Eng.-Span. vocabulary, has: ‘ Avast, basta.’
Cf. Port. abasta, it is enough; mod. Proy. abasfo (sea-term), it is
enough (Mistral) ; Ital. bas¢a, it is enough.

AVATAR, the descent of a Hindu deity in an incarnate form.
(Sanskrit.) Modern, ‘The Irish Avatar ;’ a poem by Byron. An
English modification of Skt. avatara-s, m., descent. Skt. ava, down ;
and ty, tar, to pass over.

AVAUNT, begone! (F.—L.) In Shak. Mer. Wives, i. 3. go, &c.;
Skelton, against Garnesche, iv. 112. — AF. avaunt, OF. avant, forward!
on!=L. ab ante. See Advance.

AVE, hail! (L.) As mostly used, it is short for Avé, Maria, i.e.
hail, Mary! alluding to St. Luke, i. 28, where the Vulgate version
has: ‘Ave gratia plena.’ Spenser Englishes the phrase by Ave-Mary,
F, Q.i. 1.35. Cf. Chaucer, ABC, 104.—L. aué! hail! imp. sing. of
auére, to fare well.

AVENGE, to take vengeance for an injury. (F.—L.) ‘This
sinne of ire...is wikked wil fo be auenged by word or by dede;’
Chaucer, Pers. Tale, De Ira (I 535).—OF. avengier, to.avenge (Bur-
guy). = OF. a, prefix (L. ad, to); and vengier, to revenge, take ven-
geance, from L. windicdre, to lay claim to; also, to punish, revenge.
See Vindicate.

AVENS, name of a flower. (F.) AF. avence, explained by hare-
fot, hare-foot; Voc. 555. 6. Also OF. avence; med. L. avencia,
avantia, Origin unknown.

AVENUE, an approach, esp. an alley shaded by trees forming
the approach to a house. (F.—L.) Spelt advenxe in Holland’s Livy,
p- 413, but avenue at p. 657 (R.)—F. avenue, also spelt advenue by
Cotgrave, and explained by ‘an access, passage, or entry unto a
place.’ Itis the fem. pp. of the verb avenir or advenir (Cotgrave),
used in the Latin sense of ‘to come to.’—L. aduenire, to come to.=
L. ad; and wenire, to come, cognate with E. come, q.v.

AVER, to affirm to be true. (F.—L.) In Shak. Cymb.v. 5. 203.
= F, averer, ‘to aver, avouch, verifie, witness ;’ Cotgrave.—Late L.
auérare, aduérare, to prove a thing to be true; Ducange. <A coined
word, from L. ad, prep. to, and uérum, truth, a true thing, neut. of
uérus, true. See Verity. Der. aver-ment; in Blackstone, Comment.
De iv. C. 26.

AVERAGE, a medial or equalised estimate of a series or number
of things; an arithmetical mean. (F.) See the N.E.D. for the
numerous senses at different dates. Thus it meant (1) a duty, tax,
impost; (2) an extra charge on goods above the freight; (3) expense
or loss to owners, due to damage at sea; (4) the mode of incidence
of such loss, estimated proportionally; (5) the distribution of the
aggregate inequalities of a number of things, with a view to equalise
them, a medial estimate; (6) the arithmetical mean thus obtained.
B. It first occurs, with the sense of duty, tax, or custom, in Arnold’s
Chron. (1502), p. 180: ‘ And ouer that alle manere of grauntis . . .
of your custumes or subsidyes or average.’ And, in sense 2, in the
same, p. 112: ‘And ouer that to pai or doo pay all maner auevays ;’
with a somewhat different spelling. ‘y. The spelling average seems
to be English only, and substituted for avaries, a pl. formed from I’.
avarie (below); and perhaps Arnold’s spelling averays points back to
the same form.=—F. avarie, damage, injury to goods, extraordinary
expenses for goods (see Hatzfeld) ; Cot. has avaris (for avaries, pl.?),
“decay of wares or merchandise; . . the charges of the carriage . .
thereof.’ Cognate forms are Span. averia, haberia, ‘the custom paid
for goods that are exported’ (Pineda); Port. avaria; Ital. avaria,
“an account made by the crew of a ship of the loss they have had at
sea’ (Baretti) ; Late L. avaria, averia. Orig. a Mediterranean mari-
time term, signifying ‘duty charged on goods’ (G. P. Marsh, in
N. E.D.), Origin unknown; but perhaps from MSpan. averes, haveres,
“goods, wealth, substance’ (Minsheu), haberes, ‘substance, wealth,
or riches’ (Pineda) ; which is from the infin. aver, to have, spelt haber
(Pineda), used substantively, like F. avoir, and Ital. hauere, ‘to have...
also wealth, riches, goods’ (Florio), @ Not from Arab. ‘avar,
damage, which is merely borrowed from Ital. avaria, in a late sense.
N.B, The form average may very well have been due to confusion
with another E. word average, now usually represented by arriage in
the phrase ‘ arriage and carriage,’ the sense of which was some kind
of service due by tenants to the feudal superior, and derived from OF.
average, an ill-coined term due, apparently, to OF. ovre, work (L.
opera), and confused with aver, which meant property or cattle. See
the whole account in N.E.D., where this difhcult word is fully
discussed. dD ¢

AVERT, to turn aside. (L.) ‘I averte, I tourne away a.thyng ;’


AVOUCH .


Palsgrave, French Dict. (1530).—L. duertere, to turn away. —L, a,
short form of ab, abs, away, from; and zertere,totum. See Verse.
Der. (From L. auersus, pp. of auertere) averse, Milton, P. L. ii. 763,
averse-ly, averse-ness, avers-ion. @] The F. avertir=L. aduertere, and
is therefore a different word.

AVIARY, a place for keeping birds. (L.) ‘ For aviaries, I like
them not ;’ Bacon, Essay 46; Of Gardens. —L, auidrium, a place for
birds; neut. of adj. auidrius, belonging to birds.—L, aui-, stem of
auis, a bird. Cf. Gk. derds, aierds (for *aiferds), an eagle; Brugm.
i. § 205 (3).

AVIDITY, greediness, eagerness. (F.—L.) In Phillips (1658).
The pl.. avidities is in Boyle’s Works, ii. 317.—F. avidité, ¢ greedi-
nesse, covetousnesse, extreame lust, ardent affection, eager desire ;”
Cotgrave (who has not ‘ avidity’ as an English word). = L. acc. aui-
ditatem, from nom. auiditis, eagerness. L. auidus, greedy, desirous.
= L. auére, to crave. See Avarice.

AVOCATION, pursuit, employment, business. (L.) ‘Avocation,
a calling away ;’ Phillips (1658). Used by Dryden (‘Todd’s Johnson);
also in Boyle, Occas, Reflections, s. 2, med.6. Not found in French,
but formed with the common F, suffix -tion (L. acc. -tidnem), from L,
duocatio, a calling away. of the attention, a diverting of the thoughts;
hence, a diversion, amusement. It is in this sense that Boyle uses it..
He says: ‘In the time of health, visits, businesses, cards, and I know
not how many other avocations, which they justly stile diversions, do
succeed one another so thick, that in the day there is no time left for
the distracted person to converse with his awn thoughts.’ Dryden (in
Todd’s Johnson) speaks of the ‘avocations of business.’ —L. duocare, to
call away; pp. duocdtus.—L. a, for ab, away; and wocare, to call. See
Vocal, £. The word has gradually changed its meaning from ‘di-
versions’ to ‘necessary employments,’ by confusion with OF. avocation,
advocation, which sometimes meant a profession (Godefroy), and is
derived from L. aduocdtio, with prefix ad-. .

AVOCET, AVOSET, a wading bird. (F.—Ital.) In a tr. of
Buffon, 17923 ii. P20.— 1. avocette, Ital. avosetta, ‘a ftowle like a
storke;’ Florio. Prof.. Newton (Dict. of Birds) says it is Ferrarese,
and by some is considered to be a derivative of L. auis, a bird (un-
likely). ‘The Ital. word is also spelt avoserta (Florio).

AVOID, to get out of the way of, to shun. (F.—L.) ME. auoiden
(u for v), auoyden, ‘Auoyden, evacuo, devacuo ; avoydyd, evacuatus;’
Promp. Pary. p. 19. In ME. it-is generally transitive, meaning (1) to
empty, (2) to remove, (3) to go away from; but also intransitive,
meaning (1) to g0 away, (2) to flee, escape. Of these, the true original
sense is ‘to empty,’ as in ‘avoyd thou thi trencheze’ = empty your plate,
Babees Book, p. 23. In Eccles. xiii. 6 (xiii. 5 in A. V.) the Vulgate
version has: ‘Si habes, conuiuet tecum, et euacuabit te;’ where the
A.V. has: ‘Ifthou have anything, he will live with thee, yea, ke will
make thee bare;’ but Wyclif has: ‘ He shal lyue with thee and auoide
thee out,’ equivalent to the modern slang expression ‘ he will clean you
out,’ B. It is obvious that the word is closely connected with the
adj. void, empty, as stated in I. Miiller. Often used like the F. éviler,
with which it cannot, etymologically, have any connexion; though it
gradually acquired a similar sense. Thus Cotgrave gives: ‘Euler, to
avoid, eschew, shun, shrink from.’ And Shak., though he has ‘ avoid


the house’ (Cor. iv. 5. 25), and ‘how may I avoid [get rid of] the wife —


I chose’ (Troil. ii. 265), often uses it in the sense of ‘shun’ (Merry.
Wives, ii. 2. 289, &c.). In Palsgrave’s French Dict., we have: ‘ Never
have to do with hym, if thou mayst avoyde hym (escheuer or euiter).’
y. Chaucer uses only the simple form vo/den, and in senses that are all
connected with the adj. vo/d. 6. ‘The prefix a- (in AF. avoider, Gode-
froy) is a corruption .of OF. es- (L. ex, out), as in abash, q.v.; this
prefix was extremely common in OF., and Godefroy gives the forms
esuuidier, esveudier, evuider, to empty out; compounded of es-, prefix,
and vuidier, voidier, to empty, make void, from OF ,vuit, vuide (F. vide),
empty. See Void. Der. avoid-able, avoid-ance. q In a word,
avoid = evoid; just as amend = emend,

AVOIRDUPOIS, a particular way of estimating weights, viz. by’
a pound of 16 0z. (F.—L.) Shak. uses avoirdupois (spelt haber-de-pois
in old edd.) in 2 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 277 simply with the sense of ‘weight.’
His use of de (for du) is correct; we find avoir de pois, lit. ‘ goods of
weight,’ in the Statutes of the Realm, i. 159 (1311); aver de poys
in the same, 156 (1309); avoir de peise in Early E. Poems, ed. Furni-.
yall, p. 154, st. 11 (ab. 1308).. From AF. aveir de peis, ‘ goods. of
weight,’ i.e. heavy articles.—L. Aabére, to have, whence F. avoir, to.
have, also as sb., wealth, goods; dé, of; and L. pensum, that which.
is weighed out, from pensus, pp. of pendere, to weigh. ‘The spelling
poisis correct; the word is misspelt poids in mod.F. trom a false notion:
of a connexion with L. pondus, weight; see Poise. re

AVOUCH, to declare, confess. (F.—L.) ME. avouchen, Gower,:
C. A. i. 295, in Pauli’s edition; but the right. reading is vouche; bk.-
iii. 486. -Sometimes. in the sense ‘to. make good,’ ‘maintain,’ or.

_ ‘answer for it,?as in Macb. iii. 1.120. Grafton has avouchment in the,


AVOW


sense of ‘maintenance,’ K. John, an. 14. Cf. ME. vouchen, used by
Chaucer in the phrase vouchen sauf, to vouchsafe, C. T. 11355, 11885
(F 1043, 1581).—OF. avochier, to call upon (Godefroy); a more
‘learned’ form of the popular OF. avoer, avouer, representing L. ad-
uocare, to call to, or summon (a witness).—L. ad, to; and uocdre, to
call. See Avow (1) and Vouchsafe. Doublets, advocate, avow (1).
AVOW (1), to acknowledge, affirm, vouch for, declare oneself.
(F.—L.) ME. avouen, avowen, Gower, iii. 191; bk. vii. 3163*; Chaucer,
C.T., G642. ‘I avowe, I warrant or make good;’ Palsgrave. Shak.
Troil.i. 3. 271. — OF. avoer, avouer.— L. aduocare, to call upon; LateL.
to call on as patron or client, to acknowledge, recognise. — L. ad, to;
vocire, to call. See Avouch, Advocate. Der. avow-ry. .
- AVOW (2), to bind with a vow, to vow. (F.—L.) Obsolete; but
easily confused with avow (1); the sb. avow, vow, occurs in ‘I make
mine avow,’ Sir W. Scott, Fair Maid of Perth, iii.45 (N. E. D.); ch. 25
(near the end). ‘I avowe, I make God a vowe;’ Palsgrave. ME.
avowen, Chaucer, Anelida, 355.— OF. avouer.— OF. a (for L. ad, to) ;
and vouer, from Late L. vdtare, to vow, from L. uétum, a vow. See


ow.

AVULSION, a forcible tearing away. (L.) In Phillips(1658). =
L. auulsidn-em, acc. of duulsio, a tearing away ; cf. L. auuls-us, pp. of
auellere, to pluck away.—L. a, from; and uellere, to pluck. .

AWAIT, to wait for. (F.—OHG.) ‘In early use. ME. awaiten,
to wait for; also, to lie in wait for. ‘Me awaiteth ou’= people
lie in wait for you; Ancren Riwle, p. 174. — OF. awaitier, an
older and Northern form of OF. agaitier, to lie in wait for, watch for
(Godefroy). = OF. prefix a-(L. ad); and OF. waitier, gaitier (mod.F.
guetter) to watch, from OHG. wahktén, to watch (mod. G. wachten).
This is a denominative verb from the sb. wahta, a watch, whence OF.
waite, a sentinel, preserved in the E. wait, as used in the phrase ‘ the
Christmas waits. See Wait.

-AWAKE, to rouse from sleep; to cease sleeping. (E.) In ME.
we find both awaken, strong verb, answering to mod. E. awake, strong
verb; and awaken, a weak verb, which accounts for the pt.t. and pp.
awaked as used by Shakespeare (Timon, 11. 2. 21) and others. ‘ Thze
awoc Brutus’ = then Brutus awoke, Layamon, i. 53. Two AS. verbs
are here confused; awacian, weak verb, and onwecnan, with a weak
pres. t., but strong pt.t. onwdc, pp.onwacen. The prefix is AS. G- or on-.
See Wake. Cf. G. erwachen, OHG. irwachén, weak verb, to awake.
Der. awake, adj., as used in Milton, ‘ere well awake, P. L. i. 334.
This was originally a past. participle, viz. the ME. awake, short for
awaken, AS. onwacen, pp. of onwecndn (above). And see below.

AW AKEN, to awake. (E.) Strictly speaking, this is an intran-
sitive verb only, and never used transitively till after 1500; it is thus
distinguished from awake, which was used in both senses; and it is
slightly different in origin. ME. awakenen, awaknen. ‘1 awakned there-
with;’ P. Plowman, B. xix. 478.— AS. awacnan, Gwacnian, to awake;
Grein, i. 46, 473 also onwacnian, id. ii. 353 3 easily confused with on-
wecnan, which was.a strong verb. In the suffix, the former z is forma-
tive, and conspicuous in both Mceso-Gothic and Scandinavian,in which
languages it is used to form verbs that are intransitive or reflexive.
Thus the verb awakez is essentially intransitive,and should be so used;
but the ME. suffix -7-e7, -ze was easily confused with the late transitive
suffix -ez in such words as s/rengthen,

AWARD, to adjudge, determine, grant, assign. (F.—OLowG.)
‘This I awarde \= thus I decide, Chaucer, C. T. 12136 (C 202). —AF.
awarder, OF . eswarder, esgarder, to examine, to adjudge after examina-
tion; see esgarder in Godefroy. = OF. prefix es-, from L. ex, out; and
OF. warder, old spelling of garder, to observe, regard, guard. [The
word is thus a hybrid; for, while the prefix is Latin, the rest is OLowG. ]
From OLow G, *wardén (OSax. wardon, G. warten), to regard, look
at, guard. See Ward. Der. award, sb., Chaucer, C. T., I 483.

AWARE, adj., informed of, in a watchful state. (E.) In this parti-
cular word, the prefix a- has an unusual origin; it is a corruption
of ME. prefix z-, or y-, which again is a reduction of AS. ge-. The
spelling aware occurs in Early E, Poems, ed. Fumivall, p. 16, 1. 9,
but is very rare, the usual spelling being iwar, ywar, or iwer; see
Layamon, ll, 7261, 7581; Ancren Riwle, p. 104; Owl and Nightin-
gale, 1. 147; P. Plowman, B. i. 42; Rob. of Glouc. p. 168, 1. 3503;
Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 100. AS. gewer, aware; AS. Chron. 914 (MS.
D.), 1095 (Laud MS.) ; in which the addition of AS. ge- as a prefix
makes no appreciable difference. Gewer is thus equivalent to wer,
aware, cautious, Grein, ii. 649; where we find ‘wes thu wer’= be
thou aware. Cf. also G. gewakr werden, to be aware; where gewahr
is from OHG. giwar, gawar, from the prefix gi- (AS. ge-) and war,
cognate with AS. wer. See Wary.

, AWAY, out of the way, absent. (E.) The proper sense is ‘ on
the way,’ though now often used as if it meant ‘off (or out of) the
way. To ‘go away’ meant ‘to go on one’s way. ME. awet, owei,
O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 21; spelt oway in Hampole, Pricke
of Conscience, 2269.— AS. onweg, away, Grein, il. 354; from AS.


AWNING 41


on, on, and weg, way. See Way. It was sometimes spelt aweg,
Grein, i. 47; but the prefix a- is probably the same as on.

AWH, fear. (Scand.) ME. a3é, a3zhé, awé, properly a disyllabic
word; Ormulum, 7185. [Another form is ME. e32, eghé, eyé, also
disyllabic, Ormulum, 4481; from AS. ege. We also meet with AS.
6ga, fear, dread. Both words occur in the same passage: ‘ And béo
eower ege and oga ofer ealle nitenu’ =and let the fear of youand the
dread of you be over all animals, Gen. ix. 2. Both can be referred
to a common base ag-, to dread.]=—Icel. agi, awe, terror; Dan. ave,
check, control, restraint ; ave, to control.--OHG. egiso, terror; Goth.
agis, fear, anguish. Further related to Irish eagal, fear, terror; Gk.
axos, anguish, affliction. Brugm. i. § 124 (3). Der. aw-ful, aw-ful-ly,
aw-ful-ness. @ The final e in awe, now quite unnecessary, records
the fact that the word was once disyllabic.

AWKWARD, clumsy. (Hybrid; Scand. and E.) a. The modem
sense of ‘clumsy’ is seldom found in old authors; though it means
this or something very near it in ‘ ridiculous and awkward action ;’
Shak. Troil. i. 3. 149. We also find: ‘’tis no sinister nor no awkward
claim,’ Hen. V, ii. 4. 85 ; and again, ‘ by awkward wind,’ i.e. by an
adverse wind, 2 Hen. VI, iii. 2.83 ; and again, ‘ awkward casualties,’
i.e. adverse chances, Per. v. 1.94. . In tracing the word back-
wards, its use as an adjective disappears; it was, originally, an ad-
verb, like forward, backward, onward. Its sense was ‘transversely,’
‘sideways,’ especially used with regard toa back-handed stroke with
asword. ‘Ashe glaid by, awkwart he couth hym ta’=as he glided
by, he took him a back-handed stroke; Wallace, iii. 175. ‘The world
thai all awkeward sett’ =they turn the world topsy-turvy, Hampole,
Pricke of Conscience, 1541. sy. The suffix -ward, as in onward,
forward, means ‘in the direction of,’ ‘ towards,’ like the cognate L.
uersus. ‘Vhe prefix awk is the ME. awk, auk, adj., signifying ‘ con-
trary,’ hence ‘wrong.’ ‘Awke or angry, contrarius, bilosus, per-
versus. Awke or wronge, sinister. Awkely or wrawely [angrily],
perverse, contrarie, bilose;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 18. Palsgrave has:
‘auke stroke, revers.’ Auk is a contraction of Icel. dfug-, like hawk
from AS. hafoc.—Icel. dfigr, dfugr, afigr, often contracted to éfgu,
éfgir in old writers, adj. turning the wrong way, back foremost; as
in ‘éfgum vapnum,’ with the butt-end of a weapon ; ‘ vid hendi dfgri,’
with the back of the hand; see examples in Cleasby and Vigfusson.
Cf. the expression afu-lic geflit, gloss to L. peruersa contentio, in
Prol. to St. Matthew, p. 2, 1. 12 (Lindisfarne MS.). 8. Here 6f-
stands for af, from; and -ug- is a suffix. Cognate forms appear in
Swed. a/vig, cross, wrong, O. Sax. aduh, perverse, evil (from af, from,
and suffix -zh); in OHG. apuh, MHG. ebich, turned away, perverse,
evil (from OHG. ap =G. ab, off, from, and suffix -wh, or from OHG.
apa, off, and suffix -2, cognate with L. gue). Thusthe sense of awk is
‘turned away;’ from Icel. af, cognate with E. of, off, Gk. dzo.
Cf. Skt. apaka-s, adj., coming from afar; from apa, off. Der. awk-
ward-lv, awkward-ness.

AWL, a pointed instrument for piercing holes in leather. (E.)
Spelt aule in Shak, Jul. Czesar, i. 1. 25; Exod. xxi. 6 (1611). ME.
an alle; Wyclif, Exod. xxi. 6; later version, a zal. Also el, Ancren
Riwle, p. 324. AS. @l, al; dat. ele, Exod. xxi. 6; ale, Levit. xxv. Io.
+Icel. alr, anawl; OHG. ala, G. ahle; Du.aal. Teut. types *aloz,
ala. Cf. Skt. dra, anawl. J Distinct from ME. avzle, flesh-hook,
Ancren Riwle, 212; AS. awel, grappling-hook, trident, Voc. 7. 6;
awul, Voc. 127.10. (W.A. Craigie, Phil. Soc. Trans. 1906; p. 261).

AWN, abeard of corn or grass. (Scand.) ME. awn. ‘ Hecarista,
anawn,i.e. anawn;’ Wright’s Vocabularies, i. 233. An older (13th-
century) form agune appears at p. 155 of the same volume. [AS.
egnan, pl., awns; Corpus Glos. ; whence prov. E, aiz, awn.]=Icel.
ogn, chaff, a husk; Dan. avne, chaff; Swed. agz, pl. agnar, husks.+
Goth. ahana, chaff; Luke, in. 17; OHG. agana, MHG. agene, agen,
chaff. Cf. Gk. dxvat, pl., chaff; OL. agua, a straw. Brugm. i.
§ 729. @ Finnish akana, awn, is borrowed from O. Teutonic (Streit-
berg). In some parts of England (e.g. Essex) beards of barley are
called ails; here ail is from AS. eg/,a beard of corn, a prickle, mote,
Luke, vi. 41, 42; which is allied to Kar (2).

AWNING, a cover spread out, usually of canvas, to defend those
under it from the sun. (OF. ? or Low G.?) The earliest quotation
is dated 1630, from Capt. Smith's Works, ed. Arber, p. 957: ‘ Wee
did hang an awning (which is an old saile) to. . trees to shadow us
from the sunne;’? N. E.D. Italso occurs in Sir T. Herbert’s Travels,
p- 7, in Todd’s Johnson: ‘Our ship became sulphureous, no decks,
no awnings, nor invention possible, being able to refresh us.’ Four
editions of this work appeared, viz. in 1634, 1638, 1665, and 1667 ;
in the ed. of 1665, the ref. is to p. 8. The proper sense seems to be
‘a sail or tarpauling spread above the deck of a ship, to keep off the
heat of the sun.” Origin doubtful; perhaps suggested by OF. auvan,
auvant, mod. F. auvent, which Cotgrave explains by ‘a penthouse of
cloth before a shop-window.’ Cf. Prov. anvan, Late L. antevanna,
auvanna, avanna; which seems to be from L. ante, before, and


4.2 AWORK |


uannus, f.,a fan. Or from Low G. havenung, ashelter (Brem. Wort.,
p- 607) ; also spelt havening (Berghaus) ; cf. Dan. havne, to put into
harbour, from havn, a haven. See prov. E. haun,a haven (E. D. D.).
So also Liibben gives Low G. havenen, to seek a haven, and haveninge,
a haven; but the connexion is not made out.

AWORK, at work. (E.) Used by Shak., only in the phr. ‘ to set
a-work;’ 2 Hen. IV, iv. 3. 1243; Troil. v. 10. 38; Haml. ii. 2. 510;
K. Lear, iii. 5. 8. Also in Chaucer: ‘I sette hem so a werke, by my
fay ;’ C.T. 5797 (D 215). Here a probably stands for an, ME
form of AS. on; as in so many other instances. Cf. abed, asleep, &c.
The phrase ‘ he fell on sleep’ is similar in construction. See Work.

AWRY, obliquely, distortedly, sideways. (E.) In Shak. Tam,
Shr. iv. 1.150. ME. awrie (better awry), Romaunt of the Rose, 291.
Awry is properly an adverb, and compounded of ov and wry ; cf. abed,
asleep, &c. ‘Owthir all evin, or on wry’ =either all even or awry;
Barbour’s Bruce, 4. 705. PB. The lit. sense is ‘on the twist ;’ and
thus wry is, in this phrase, a sb., though no instance of its use as a sb.
occurs elsewhere. We may conclude that it is the adj. wry (cf. ‘wry
nose,’ ‘ wry neck’) used substantively to form the phrase. See Wry.

AXE, AX, an implement for cutting trees. (E.) ME. ax, eax,
ex; also axe, exe. Spelt ax, Havelok, 1894; Layamon, i. 196.
AS. eax, ex; older forms acus, ecus (Sweet). In Luke, iii. 9, the
AS. version has ex, where the Northumbrian glosses have the fuller
forms acasa, acase.+Icel. 6x, xi; Swed. yxa; Dan. 6xe; Goth. akwisi;
OHG. acchus, MHG. ackes, mod. G. axt (with excrescent ¢); OSax.
acus, Du. aaks. Cf. also L. ascia (for acsia?), an axe, mattock, trowel;
Gk. dgivn, an axe. Brugmann, i. § 992.

AXIL, the upper angle between a leaf or petiole and the stem. (L.)
First in 1794 (N. E. D.)—L. axilla, lit. armpit; dimin. of *acsla >
ala, a wing; see Aisle. Der. axill-ary.

AXIOM, a self-evident truth. (L.—Gk.) In Burton, Anat. of
Melan. ed. 1827, i. 316; and in Locke, On the Human Understanding,
bk. iv. c. 7. Spelt axiomaes, pl., Lyly, Euphues, ed. Arber, p. 1co. =
L. axidma.= Gk. déiwpa, gen. agwwparos, worth, quality, resolve, deci-
sion ; in science, that which is assumed as the basis of demonstration,
an assumption. — Gk. dgérdw, I deem worthy, esteem. — Gk. a@fvos, worthy,
lit. ‘weighing as much as.’ = Gk. aye, to lead, drive, also ‘to weigh
as much.’ — 4/AG, to drive. See Agent. Der. From the stem
agiwpar-, axiomat-ic, -iceal, -ic-al-ly.

AXIS, the axle on which a body revolves. (L.) In Pope, Essay
on Man, iii. 313. Also in Complaint of Scotland, ed. Murray, c. vi;
p- 48, 1. 27. [In earlier writers, the word used is generally axle, or
axletree, as in Marlowe's Faustus, A. ii. sc. 2.]—L. axis, an axletree,
axis.+Gk. dfwy, an axle; Skt. aksha-s, an axle, wheel, cart. Cf. also
OHG. ahsa, G. achse, an axle; AS. eax, an axle, Grein, i. 250; Du.
as; Russ. os’; Lith. aszis. [Curtius, i. 479, considers the Gk. stem
ag- as a secondary form from ay-, to drive. Benfey likewise connects
Skt. akska-s with Skt. aj, to drive.]—4/AG, to drive. Der. axi-al.
Axle is the diminutive form, but a Scand. word; see Axle.

AXLE, the axis on which a wheel turns. (Scand.) ME. axel, exel,
which is common in the compound axeliree; the latter is in Gower,
C. A. i. 320 (bk. iii. 1209), and see Prompt. Pary. p. 20. [The simple
word axel generally means ‘shoulder’ in early writers. ‘He hit berd
on his eaxlun’= he bears it on his shoulders; OE. Homilies, ed.
Morris, i. 245. ‘On his ex/e’= on his shoulder; Layamon, i. 96.
This is an allied native word; from AS. eax/, the shoulder,
Grein, i. 250.]=Icel. dxu/l, an axis; Swed. and Dan. axel, axle,
axle-tree. The Icel. dxull, m., answers to Teut. type *ahsuloz, m.,
dimin. of *ahsd, f., as in AS. eax, f., axis; see Axis. Cf. W. echel,
axle. B. Cf. Icel. dx/, shoulder-joint, AS. eaxl, f., shoulder, G.
achsel, f., Teut. type *ahsuld, f.; from base *ahs-, as in *ahsi (above).
The explanation is, no doubt, that the shoulder-joint is the axis on
which the arm turns. Der. axle-tree, Icel. dxul-tré; where tree has
the meaning of ‘ block,’ or ‘ piece of wood.’

AXOLOTHL, 2 Mexican batrachian reptile. (Mex.) From Mex.
axolotl, lit. ‘servant of the water.’— Mex. a-, for ail, water; and
xolot?, a servant. From a story in Mex. mythology; see my Notes
on Etymology, p. 333.

AY! interjection of surprise. (E.) Distinct from aye, yes; see
below. ME. ey, interjection. ‘Why ryse ye so rathe? ey! ben’-
dic’te;” Chaucer, C. T. 3766 (A 3768); cf. 1. 10165 (E 2291). A
natural exclamation. The phrase ‘ay me!’ is certainly French,
viz. the OF. aymi, ah! forme; Burguy. Cf. Ital. akimé, alas for me!
Span. ay di mi! alas for me! Gk. oiuot, woe’s me! See also Ah!

AY, AYE, yea, yes. (E.) In Shak. frequently ; Temp. i. 2. 268,
&c.; always spelt Z in old editions. The use of ay, aye, or J with
the above sense is not found in early authors. We may conclude
that aye is a peculiar use of aye, ever; used affirmatively. See Aye.
Perhaps influenced by Yea. @ Orit may be a peculiar use of
the pers. pron. J, as the old edd. indicate.
~AYAH, a native waiting-maid, in India.


(Port. —'L.) “The


BABE


spelling answers more nearly to the Span. aya, a governess, fem. of
ayo, a tutor, but the word was certainly introduced into India by the
Portuguese ; the final 4 is an E. addition. — Port. aia, a nurse, gover-
ness; fem. of aio, a tutor of a young nobleman. Origin uncertain;
Diez imagines it to be of Germanic origin; Wackernagel (with greater
probability) suggests L. auia, by-form of aua, a grandmother, allied
to auus, a grandfather. See Unele. Minsheu’s Span, Dict. (1623)
has aya, ‘a nurse, schoolmistresse.’

AYE, adv., ever, always. (Scand.) The phr. ‘for ay’ occurs in
Iwain and Gawain, l. 1510; in Ritson’s Met. Romances, vol. i. We
also. find ‘ay withouten ende,’ Li Beaus Disconus, 1. 531, in Ritson’s
M. R.,, vol. ii. [Also ‘a buten ende,’ Ancren Riwle, p. 396; where
a == AS. a.]—Icel. ez, ever. AS. a, aye, ever, always; Grein, i. 113
used in various phrases, such as @ ford, & on worlda ford, & to worulde,
&c. Italso appears in the longer forms awa, dwo, Grein, i. 46, of
which @ is merely a contraction. It is an adverbial use of a substan-
tive which meant ‘a long time,’ as shown by Goth. aiw, ever, an
adverb formed from the sb. aiws, time, an age, a long period, eternity,
Luke, i. yo. Cf. L. euum, an age; Gk. aiwy, an age, aiei, dei, ever,
always, aye; Skt. éva-s, course, conduct. See Age.

AYE-AYE, a squirrel-likenocturnal animal. (F.— Malagasy.) F.
aye-aye; Supp. to Littré. Malagasy ai’ay’; supposed to be named
from its cry; Richardson’s Malag. Dict.

AZALEA, a genus of shrubby plants. (Gk.) From Gk. d(adéa,
fem. of d(adéos, dry, parched ; perhaps from growing in dry places. =
Gk. d(-ev, to dry up.

AZIMUTH, an arc of the horizon intercepted between the meridian
of the place and a vertical circle passing through any celestial body.
(Arabic.) Briefly, azimuthal circles are great circles passing through
the zenith; whereas circles of declination pass through the foles.
‘ These same strykes [strokes] or diuisiouns ben cleped [called] Azi-
muthz; and they deuyden the Orisonte of thyn astrolabie in 24 deui-
siouns;’ Chaucer, tr. on Astrolabe, ed. Skeat, pt. i.sect. 19. Properly,
azimuth is a plural form, being equivalent to Arabic assamiit, i.e. ways,
or points (or quarters) of the horizon; from al samt, sing., the way,
or point (or quarter) of the horizon, or the arc from a particular
point in the horizon to the zenith; cf. Arab. ‘samt, a road, way,
quarter, direction ;’ Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 360. Cf. samt, ‘ travel-
ling, a way, tract, quarter; samtw’r’ras, the zenith; as-samt, the azi-
muth;’ Rich, Dict. p. 848. From the same Arabic word is derived
the E. zenith. See Zenith.

AZOTEH, nitrogen. (F.—Gk.) The name given by Lavoisier (d.
1794) to nitrogen gas; because destructive to animal life.—F. azote
(an ill-coined word; Littré).—Gk. d-, negative prefix; and (wr-, as
in (wrixds, fit for preserving life. — Gk. (w-7, life; (aw, I live. From
the same root we have Gk. Bios, life, L. wiuere, to live; also E. quick,
vivid, vital, &c.; as also zoo-logy. See Zoology.

AZURE, adj., of a bright blue colour. (F.—Arab.— Pers.) ME.
asur, Joseph of Arimathie, ed. Skeat, ll. 195, 198. ‘Clad in asure;’
Chaucer, Queen Anelida, 1. 330.—AF. asur; OF. azur, azure; a cor-
rupted form. [So also Ital. azzurro, Span. azul, azur, Port. azul.] =
Late L. asur, azurum; also lazur, an azure-coloured stone, known
also as lapis lazuli; also, the colour itself. — Arab, /ajward, lapis lazuli,
azure; Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 509.— Pers. lijuward, ‘lapis lazuli, —
a blue colour;’ Rich. Dict. p.1251. So called from the mines of
Lajward, situate in Turkestan; see Marco Polo’s Travels, ed. Yule.
The initial 7 was no doubt dropped, because it was supposed to be the
def. article (F. 7’, Span. el, Ital. 27, Arab. al). So Diez and Devic.


B


BAA, to bleat like a sheep. (E.) Chapman uses baaing in his tr.
of Homer, Iliad, bk. iv. 1. 463; see quotation in Richardson s. v. bleat.
Shak. has the verb to ba, Cor. ii. 1. 12, and the sb. baa, Two Gent. i. 1.
98. An imitative word, and may be considered as English. Cf. G. ba,
the bleating of sheep. Der. baa, s.

BABBLE, to gossip, prate. (E.) ME. babelen, to prate; Ancren
Riwle, p. roo (ab, 1230); to mumble, say repeatedly, P. Plowman,
B.v. 8. Though not recorded in A.-S. MSS., it may be considered as
an English word; cf. EFries. babbelen, babbeln, to babble. +4 Du. bab-
belen, to chatter; Dan. bable, to babble; Icel. babbla; G. pappeln ; also
bappeln, bappern, to babble; Grimm’s Dict. B. The suffix -le is
frequentative, and the verb means‘ to keep on saying ba ba,’ syllables
imitative of the efforts ofa child to speak. Cf. F. babiller, to chatter.
Der. babble, sb., babble-ment, babbl-ing, babbl-er, A. V. Acts, xvii. 18.
Palsgrave has ‘ Babler, babillart.’

BABBH, an infant; (formerly) a doll. (E.) ME. babe, Gower, C. A,


BABIRUSA, BABIROUSSA


i. 290; bk. iii. 320; bab, Towneley Myst. p. 149; the full form being
baban, Ancren Riwle, p. 234. (ab. 1230); and even Levins has; ‘Bab-
bon, pupus,’ 163.12. Probably formed from the infantine sound ba,
rath r than borrowed from Celtic. The similar forms in Celtic, viz.
Welsh, Gael., Irish, Corn. baban are all late, and some may even have
been borrowed from English. Cf. Mid. Swed. and Swed. dial. babe,
little one. Cf. babble (above). Baby isa diminutive form; like Jassie
from lass. Der. bab-y, baby-ish, baby-hood.

BABIRUSA, BABIROUSSA, a kind of wild hog. (Malay.)
‘The Babiroussa, or Indian hog;’ tr. of Buffon (1792). — Malay babi
risa, hog like a deer; from riisa, deer, and babi, hog (Yule).

BABOON, a large ape. (F. or Late L.) Probably borrowed, in
its present form, from F’, babouin, OF . babouin (H.). The form bavian
in the Two Noble Kinsmen, iii. 5, is from Du. baviaan. Other spell-
ings, babion, babian, may be modifications of ME. babewin; Mandeville’s
Travels, ed, Halliwell, p. 210; Prompt. Parv. p. 20; cf. Chaucer,
H.F. 1189. The last is either from OF. babouin or represents the Late
L. babewynus, ‘In an English inventory of 1295, in Ducange, we
read—“ Imago B, V. . . . cum pede quadrato stante super quatuor
paruosbabewynos;” and the verb bebuinare signified, in the 13th century,
to paint grotesque figures in MSS.;’ Brachet. Remoter origin un-
certain; but Hatzfeld regards babouin as formed from F’, baboue, MF.
babou ; Cot. has faire la babou, ‘to make a mow at,’ to grimace.
Cf. mod. Prov. babau, a bugbear, Allied to F. babine, ‘the lip ofa
beast,’ Cot. Prob, of Germ. origin; from bab, or ba ba, the root of
babble. See Babe, Babble; of imitative origin.

BACCHANAL, a worshipper of Bacchus. (L.—Gk.) Properly,
an adjective. ‘Unto whom [Bacchus] we yearely celebrated the feast
bacchanal;’ Nicolls, Thucydides, p. 50 (R.) ‘The Egyptian Baccha-
nals,’ i,e, revels, Shak, Ant. ii. 7. 110. * The tipsy Bacchanals,’ i.e.
revellers, Mids, Nt. Dr. v. 48.—L. Bacchindlis, adj., devoted to Bac-
chus, = L. Bacchus, the god of wine,— Gk, Bd«xos, the god of wine.
Also named “Iaxxos, and said to be so named from the shouting of
worshippers at his festival. = Gk. layev, to shout; a verb apparently
formed by onomatopceia, to express an interjectional lay! Cf. Echo.
Der. Bacchanal-ian.

BACHELOR, a young knight, a young unmarried man. (F.—
Late L.) ME, bacheler, Chaucer, Prol, 80; Rob. of Glouc. (1297) pp.
77, 228, 453.— OF. bacheler.— Late L. baccaliris, allied to baccaldrius,
a farm-servant. Etym, unknown, and much disputed. For con-
jectures, see Diez, s.v. baccalare; Godefroy, s. v. bachelle; Korting,
§ 1134. Not from Celtic type *bekkos, small (Thurneysen),

BACILLUS, a genus of microscopic vegetable organisms, (L.)
First in 1883; pl. bacilli:—Late L. bacillus, a little rod (from the
shape); dimin, of baculus, variant of baculum, a stick. See Bacte-
rium.

BACK, a part of the body. (E.) ME. bak, Ch. Book Duch. 957.
AS. bec (in common use):-+OSax. and Icel. bak, Teut. type *bak-om,
neut, B. ME, derivatives are: bacbon, backbone ; bacbiten, to back-
bite (P. Plowman, B, ii. 80); bacward, backward (Layamon, ii. 578).
Der. back-bite, back-bit-er, back-bit-ing, back-bone, back-side, back-slide,
back-slid-er, back-slid-ing, back-ward, back-wards, back-ward-ness.

BACKGAMMON, a kind of game. (E.) Spelt baggammon
in Howell’s Letters, vol. ii. letter 68, dated Nov. 30, 1635. A quota-
tion from Swift in Johnson’s Dict. has the spelling backgammon, It
is backgammon in, Butler’s Hudibras, c. iii, pt. 2,1. 1062. The game
seems to have been much the same as that formerly called ‘tables.’
B. The etym. given by Strutt (Sports and Pastimes, b. iv. c. 2. § 16)
is probably correct. ‘The words are perfectly Saxon, as bec, and
gamen, that is, Back-Game ; because the pieces are sometimes taken
up and obliged to go back, i.e. re-enter.’ See Back and Gam-
mon (2). Cf. Du. verkeeren, to turn, change; verkeerd, reverse ;
verkeer-bord, a backgammon-board.

BACON, swine’s flesh, cured for eating, (F.-OHG.) ME.
bacoun, bacon, Chaucer, C.T. 5799 (D 217). —OF, bacon. — Low L,
acc. bacdnem, from nom, baco; from a Teutonic source.—OHG.
bahho, bacho, MHG., bache, hinder part or piece, ham, bacon, ‘Teut,
type *bakon-, m.; allied to Teut. *bakom, the back; see Back,

BACTERIUM, a genus of microscopic vegetable organisms, a
disease-germ. (L.—Gk.) Pl. bacteria. First in 1847.—L. *bacté-
rium; L. form of Gk. Baxrjpiov, a little rod (from the shape) ;
dimin. of Badxrpoy, a stick. Allied to L. baculum, a stick. See
Bacillus.

' BAD, evil, wicked. (E.) -ME. badde, Ch. C. T., A 3155; Chaucer
also has badder, i.e. worse, C. T. 10538 (F 224). Not in use
much earlier in English.. Rob. of Glouc, (in 1297) has badde, evil,
p- 108, 1. 173 and we find never on badde, not one bad, King Alis.

2118; this is perhaps the earliest instance, [The Pers. bad, wicked,
has a remarkable resemblance to the Eng. word, but was unknown to
‘Rob. of Glouc. The Pehlevi form vat (Horn, § 187) shows that the
words are unrelated.] Most scholars now believe the word to be


BAIL 43


English. Zupitza explains the ME. badde as shortened from AS.
beddel, an hermaphrodite, used contemptuously, like its derivative
bedling', an effeminate fellow ; whence proy. FE. badling, a worthless
person. Sarrasin refers it to AS. b@ded, constrained, gebéded, op-
pressed (cf. mad, from AS. (ge)m@ded) ; allied to Lith. béda, ill-luck
sorrow. Der. bad-ly, bad-ness,

BADGE, a mark of distinction. (F.) It occurs in Spenser,
F.Q.i.1.2. The Prompt. Parv. has: ‘Bage, or bagge, or badge,
of armys, banidium,’ — AF. bage, Royal Wills, p. 68 (A.D. 1376) ;
OF. bage, a badge (Godefroy), A.D. 1465; cf. Late L. bagea, bagia,
*signum, insigne quoddam;’ Ducange. Of unknown origin.

BADGER, the name of an animal. (F.) Formerly bageard, as
in Sir T. More, Works, p. 1183 g; but the final d is there excrescent.
In ME., the animal had three familiar names, viz. the brock, the gray,
and the bawson, but was not called the badger till the 16th century ;
cf, a bauson or a badger ;’ Fitzherbert’s Husbandry, § 71. B. The
name is a sort of nickname, the true sense being the animal marked
with a badge, in allusion to the white mark on its face ; so also bauson
is from the OF. bausan, pie-bald (N. FE. D.).

BADINAGE, jesting talk, (F.—Prov.—L.) In Coles’s Dict.
(1684); also in Phillips, ed, 1658.—F. badinage, jesting talk, =F.
badiner, to jest.— TF, badin, sportive, orig. foolish, silly, ‘ gaping.’ =
Prov. badar, to gape. — Late L. badire, to gape (Isidore). Probably
an imitative word; from the syllable ba, denoting the opening of the
mouth. Cf. babble, q. v.

BAFFLE, to foil, disgrace. (F.—MHG.) See Spenser, F. Q. v.
3.37. The history ofthe word is recorded by Hall, Chron. Hen. VIII,
anno 5, Richardson and N.E.D, quote the passage to show
that to baffull is ‘a great reproche among the Scottes, and is used
when a man is openly periured, and then they make of hym an image
paynted reuersed, with hys heles vpwarde, with hys name, wonderyng,
cryenge, and blowing out of [i.e, at] hym with hornes, in the moost
despitefull manner they can.’ ‘The word is here confused with
Lowland Scotch bauchle, to treat. contemptuously ; see the poem of
Wallace, ed, Jamieson, viii. 724. For change of ch to ff, cf. tough,
rough, &c. B. Bauchleis averb, formed by suffix -e, from adj. bauch,
weak, poor, jaded, &c. This was probably borrowed from Icel. bag’,
uneasy, poor, or the related sb. bagr,astruggle; from which is formed,
in Icelandic, the vb. begja, to push, or metaphorically, to treat harshly.
Fick (iii, 198) connects this Icel. bdgr, a struggle, with MHG,
baigen, OHG., pagan, to strive, to brawl, y. But the I. bagle seems to
be more directly derived from F. beffler, to deceive, mock (Cot.), or
F. bafouer, ME, baffouer, ‘to baffle, revile, disgrace; ’ which are allied
to Ital. beffare, ‘ to flout, scoffe’ (Florio), from beffa, a scoff; and to
Norman F’, baffer, to slap in the face, Prov. bafa, a scoff, Prob. from
MHG., beffen, to scold ; cf. G. baffen, Du. baffen, to bark, yelp ; of
imitative origin, like Du. paf, a pop, a box on the ear. Cf. further
Proy. E, baff, a blow, a suppressed bark (of a dog); baf’, to strike ;
baff, adj., useless, worthless ; baffle, to annoy; &c.

BAG, a flexible case. (Scand.) ME, bagge, P. Plowman, B. prol.
41; Ancren Riwle, p. 168 (ab. 1230). —Icel. baggi, a bag; Norw.
and MSwed. bagge. Remoter originunknown. Der, bag, vb., bag-gy,
bag-prpe (Chaucer, C, T. 567, A 565), bag-piper.

BAGATELLE, a trifle; a game, (F.—Ital.—Teut.) ‘ Trifles
and bagatels ;’ Howell, vol. ii. letter 21, dated Aug. 1, 1633. =F. baga-
telle, a trifle ; introduced in the 16th cent. from Ital. bagatella, a trifle
(Brachet)., Diez thinks it is from the same root as baggage. Baga-
tella he takes to be the dimin, of Parmesan bagata, a little property ;
and this to be formed from the Lombard baga, a wine-skin, allied to
E, bag. See Baggage (1), Bag.

BAGGAGE (1), travellers’ luggage, (F.—Scand.) ME. bag-
gage, bagage; occurring in Lydgate’s Hors, Sheep, and Goose, 1. 109;
in Chaucer’s Dream, by an anonymous author,1.1555; and in Hall,
Chron. Rich. III, an. 3. § 4 from end.—OF. bagage, a collection of
bundles, from OF, bague, a bundle. = Norw. bagge, Icel. baggi, a bag ;
see Bag. And cf. Lombard baga, a wine-skin, a bag.

BAGGAGE (2), a worthless woman, (I*.—Scand.) A peculiar
use of the word above (see N.E.D.); but probably influenced by
F. bagasse. Cotgrave explains bagasse by ‘a baggage, quean, jyll,
punke, flirt.” Burguy gives the forms baiasse, bajasse, bagasse, a
chambermaid, light woman. Cf. Ital. bagascia, a worthless woman.
B. Etym. doubtful, but probably derived, like baggage (1), from OF,
bague, a bundle.

BAIL (1), security; to secure. (F.—L.) Shak. has both sb. and
verb; Meas, iii. 2.77, 85. a. Bail asa verb is from the AF, bailler,
introduced as a law-term, occurring in the Statutes of the Realm,
p- 132 (1299).— OF, bailler, to keep in custody, = L, baivlare, to carry
about or take charge of a child,—L. baiulus, a porter, a carrier.
Root bad-; cf. Gk. Baordtev, to carry. Brugm. i. § 759. B. Bail
asa substantive is the OF. bail, safe keeping, security; whence ‘to be
bail.” This is the verbal sb, from OF, bailler,


Ry


BAIL


BAIL (2), a bucket. (F.—Late L.) See Bale (3).

BAILIFF, a deputy, one entrusted with control. (F.—L.)
Chaucer has bailif; Prol. 603; also in Polit. Songs, ed. Wright,
p.149, l. 16 (temp. Edw. II). — OF, baillif; AF. baillif, Stat. of Realm,
p. 27 (1275).— Late L. baiulivum, acc.—L. baiulare. See Bail (1).

BAILIWICK, the jurisdiction ofa bailiff. (F.andE.) Fabyan
speaks of ‘ the offyce of ballywycke ;” Rich. II, p. 528, ed. 1811, A
hybrid word; from OF. baillie, government; and ME. wike, AS. wice,
an office, duty, function; see wike (2) in Stratmann. See Bail (1).
2. Also used to denote the district under his jurisdiction ; apparently
from AS. wic, an abode; see Wick (2).

BAILS, small cross-bars used in the game of cricket. (F.—L.?)
The history of the word is obscure. Roquefort gives OF. bailles, in
the sense of barricade, palisade, with a quotation from Froissart : ‘I]
fit charpenter des bail/es et les asseoir au travers de la rue;’ which I
suppose to mean, he caused sticks to be cut and set across the street.
Godefroy says that ‘in the arrondissement of Vervains and of
Avesnes, bail is the name of a horizontal piece of wood fixed upon
two stakes.’ Perhaps from L. acc. baculum, a stick, rod (baille<
bacula, pl. form), used in many senses.

BAIRN, a child. (E.) ME. barn, P. Plowman, A. ii.3. AS.
bearn, Grein, i. 103.4+Icel. barn, a child; Swed. and Dan. barn;
Goth. barn. Teut. type *bar-nom, neut. sb. ; lit. ‘that which is born;’
from bar, 2nd grade of beran, to bear, with suffix -no-. See Bear (1).

BAIT, to make to bite, to feed. (Scand.) ME. baiten, to feed,
Chaucer, Troilus, i. 192. ‘And shoten on him, so don on bere
Dogges, that wolden him to-tere, Thanne men doth the bere beyte’ =
and rushed upon him like dogs at a bear, that would tear him in
twain, when people cause the bear to be baited ; Havelok, 1838. To
bait a bear is to make the dogs bitehim. To bait a horse is to make
him eat.—TIcel. beita, to make to bite, the causal of Icel. bita (pt. t.
beit), to bite ; Swed. beta, to pasture; Dan. bede. See Bite. Der.
bait, sb., i.e. an enticement to bite.

BAIZE, a coarse woollen stuff. (F.—L.) Spelt bays, Arnold’s
Chron. (1502), ed. 1811, p. 235. An error for bayes, which is a
plural form ; viz. the pl. fem. of the MF. baye.— MF, ‘baye, a lie, fib,

- a cozening trick, or tale; also, a berry; also, the cloth called
bayes, &c.; Cotgrave (who here confuses three distinct words) ; cf.
F. bai, bay-coloured. . That the -ze is no part of the original
word, and that the word is closely connected with bay, i.e. bay-
coloured, reddish brown, is clear by comparison. Cf. Du. baai,
baize ; Swed. boi, bays, baize (Tauchnitz) ; Dan. bai, baize. Also
Span. bayo, bay, bayeta, baize; Port. baio, bay, baeta, baize; Ital.
bajo, bay, chesnut-coloured ; bajetta, baize. See Bay (1).

BAKE, to cook by heat. (E.) ME. baken, Chaucer, Prol. 384.
AS. bacan, pt. t. bdc, pp. bacen ; Levit. xxvi. 26; Exod. xii. 39.4-Du.
bakken; Icel. baka; Swed. baka; Dan. bage; OHG. pachan, MHG.
bachen, G. backen. Allied to Gk. gwyev, to roast; see Brugm. i.
§ 165.—4/BHOG, to roast. @ Notconnected with Skt. pach, which
is allied to E. cook, q.v. Der. bak-er, bak-ing, bak-er-y, bake-house.

BAKSHISH, BACKSHEESH, a present, small gratuity.
(Pers.) Pers. bakhshish, a present, gratuity, drink-money; Rich. Dict.
p- 247 ; also bakhchish, id., and in Palmer, Pers. Dict. col. 72. Cf.
Pers. baksh, part, share, bakhshidan, to give, bestow; bakhshah, bakhshi,
a portion. From Zend bakhsh, to distribute ; Horn, § 186. Cf. Skt.
bhaj, to divide; Fick, i. 381.
- BALANCH, a weighing-machine. (F.—L.) Shak. has balance,
Mids. Nt. Dr. v. 324; the pl. form used by him is also balance,
Merch. iv.1.255. ME. balance, Ayenbite of Inwyt, pp. 30, 91 (1340).
=F. balance, fem. ‘a ballance, a pair of weights or ballances ;? Cot.
—L. type *bilancia; from L. acc. bilancem, nom. bilanx, having two
scales; see Brachet.—L. bi-, double (for bis, twice); and lanx, a
Bee? dish, scale of a balance. See Fick, i. 748. Der. balance,
verb.

BALAS-RUBY, a variety of ruby, of a pale rose-red colour.
(F.—Low L,—Arab.— Pers.) Formerly also balais, balays; spelt
baleys in the Expeditions of Henry, Earl of Derby (Camden Soc.
1894), p. 287, 1.25. Palsgrave has ‘ balays, a precious stone, bale.’
Cotgrave explains MF. balay as ‘a balleis ruby.’ =F. balais, a balas-
ruby (Littré) ; OF. balais, balai (id.); MF. balay, balé, as above. =
Low L, balascius, balascus, balasius, balassus, balagius, a balas-ruby
{Ducange). Cf, Ital. balascio, Span. balax.— Arab. balakhsh, a ruby
(given by Devic, Supp. to Littré, q.v.)— Pers. badakhshi, a ruby; so
called because found at Badakhsh, or Badakhshan, ‘the name of a
country between India and Khurasan from whence they bring rubies;’
Rich. Dict. p. 249. Badakhshan lies to the N. of the river Amoo
(Oxus), and to the E. ofa line drawn from Samarcand to Cabul; see
Black’s Atlas. The change from d to J is precisely the change found
in L. lacrima for *dacrima, Cf. Malagasy with Madagascar.

BALCONY, a platform outside a window. (Ital.—Teut.) Milton
has balcone’s (sic) as a plural; Areopagitica (1644), ed. Hales,


44


BALE


p- 24. ‘The penult is long with Sherburne (1618-1702), and with
Jenyns (1704-87), and in Cowper’s John Gilpin ; Swift has it short ;
see Richardson;’ Hales.—Ital. balcone, an outjutting corner of a
house, also spelt balco (Florio). Ital. palco or palcone, a stage, scaf-
fold, also occurs. |B. Hence Diez well suggests a derivation from
OHG, balcho, palcho, a scaffold, cognate with Eng. balk, a beam,
rafter. See Balk(1). Theterm. -one is the usual Ital. augmentative
suffix; cf. ballcon.

BALD, deprived of hair. (C.) ME. balled, ballid, a disyllable ;
P. Plowman, B. xx. 183. Chaucer has: ‘ His heed was balled, that
schoon as any glas;’ Prol. 198. The final -d thus stands for -ed, like
the-ed in spotted, and serves to form an adj. fromasb. ‘ The original
meaning seems to have been (1) shining (2) white, as a bald-faced
stag;’ note in Morris’s Glossary. A bald-faced stag is one with a
white streak on its face; cf. Welsh bal, adj., having a white streak on
the forehead, said of a horse; bali, whiteness in the forehead of a
horse. Cf. also Gk. padaxpés, bald-headed; padapés, having a spot
of white, said of a dog, padrds, white, padnpcs, shining. = Gael. and
Irish bal or ball, a spot, mark, speckle (whence the adj. ballach,
spotted, speckled) ; Bret. bal, a white mark on an animal’s face; cf.
Welsh bali, whiteness in a horse’s forehead. B. Cf. also Lith. baltas,
white, baltz, to be white; Gk. padidés, white (as above), Skt. bhala-m,
lustre. See Prellwitz, and Stokes-Fick, p. 164. @ We also find
MDan. and Dan. dial. beldet, bald, Swed. dial. balloter, ballet, bald.
Der. bald-ness (ME, ballednesse or ballidnesse, Wyclif, Levit. xili. 42)
bald-head-ed. ;

BALDACHIN (with bal- as in bald or as in balcony, and ch as k),
a canopy over an altar, throne, &c. (F.—Ital.—Arab.) Orig. the
name of the stuff employed. F. baldaquin.—Ital. baldacchino, a
canopy, tester; orig. hangings or tapestry made at Bagdad. = Ital.
Baldacco, Bagdad. = Arab. Baghdad, Bagdad.

BALDERDASH, poor stuff. (Scand.?) Generally used now to
signify weak talk, poor poetry, &c. But it was formerly used also of
adulterated or thih potations, or of frothy water; and, as a verb, to
adulterate drink so as to weaken it. ‘It is against my freehold, my
inheritance, . . To drink such balderdash, or bonny-clabber;’ Ben
Jonson, New Inn, Act i; see the whole passage. ‘ Mine is such a
drench of balderdash ;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Woman’s Prize, iv. 5.
‘What have you filled us here, balderdash?’ Chapman, May-day,
iii. 4. ‘Can wine or brandy receive any sanction by being balder-
dashed with two or three sorts of simple waters?’ Mandeville, on
Hypochond. Dis. 1730, p. 279 (Todd’s Johnson). B. To dash is, in
one sense, to mix wine with water (see N.E.D.), and this accounts for
the latter part of the word. Dash is Scandinavian; and we may
therefore look to Scandinavian for the other part of the word. We
find Dan. balder, noise, clatter; Norw. bjaldra, to speak indistinctly
(Ross) ; Icel. baldrast, balirast, to make aclatter. The Dan. daske is
to slap, to flap; and dask is a slap, a dash. Hence balderdash may
have been compounded (like slap-dash) to express a hasty or un-
meaning noise, a confused sound ; secondarily, a ‘ hodge-podge,’ as
in Halliwell; and generally, any mixture. Cf. prov. E. balder, to
use coarse language; balderdash, filthy talk, weak drink; see
E.D.D. (Uncertain.)

BALDRIC, BALDRICK, a girdle, belt. (F.-MHG.—L.)
ME, baudrik, bawdrik, Chaucer, Prol. 116; bawderyke, Prompt. Pary.
p. 27; also baudry (ab. 1300), King Alis. 4698. An/J appears in
Palsgrave’s baldrike; and Shak. has baldrick, Much Ado, i. 1. 244.—
OF. *baldric, not found; cf. OF. baldred, baldrei, given by Godefroy ;
and cf. Low L. baldringus in Ducange.—MHG. balderich, a girdle
(Schade) ; formed with suffixes -er and -ik, from bald-, for OHG.
balz, palz, a belt.—L. balteus,a belt. See Belt.

BALE (1), a package. (F.—MHG.) ‘ Bale of spycery, or other
lyke, bulga ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 22. Also spelt balle, as in ‘a balle
bokrom,’ a bale of buckram, Arnold’s Chron. ed. 1811, p. 206. Cf.
AF. bale, a bale, Stat. Realm, i. 218 (ab. 1284).—OF.and MF. bale,
a ball; also, a pack, as of merchandise ; Cot. Low L. bala, a round
bundle, package. Merely an adaptation of MHG. baile, a ball,
sphere, round body, See Ball (2).

BALE (2), evil. (E.) Shak. has baile (1st folio), Cor. i. 1. 167 ;
and baleful, Romeo, ii. 3. 8. ME. bale, Havelok, 327 (and very
common); balu, Layamon, 1455, 2597. AS. balu, bealu, bealo,
Grein, i. Iot.4-OSax. balu, Icel. b6l, misfortune; OHG. balo, de-
struction; lost in mod. G. The gen. of OMerc. balu (neut.) is
balwes; and the Teut. type is *bal-wom, neuter; orig. neuter of Teut.
*balwoz, adj., evil (like L. malum from malus). Cf. Goth. balwa-
wesei, wickedness. Allied, to Russ. bole, pain, sorrow, OCh. Slav.
boli, sickness, Der. bale-ful, bale-ful-ly.

BALE (3), to empty water out of a ship. (F.—Late L.) Not in
ME. A better spelling is bail. We find: ‘having freed our ship
thereof [of water} with baling ;’ Hackluyt’s Voyages, v. ii. pt.ii.p. 109.
It means to empty by means of bails, i. e. buckets. = F. baille (naut.),


BALE-FIRE


a bucket; whence also Du. balie, a tub.—Late L. *bacula, dimin. of
baca, bacca, a vessel for water, also a small boat (whence also Du.
bak, a bowl, pail); see Basin. Korting, § 1136.
-BALE-FIRE, a blazing fire; esp. of a funeral pyre. (E.) From
bale and fire. ME. bale meant ‘a blazing fire,’ or burning pile; also,
a funeral pyre. ‘Ina bale of fijr;’? P..Plowman’s Crede, 667. AS.
bal, fire, Beowulf, 23233 bél-fyr, id. 3144.+Icel. ba, a great fire; cf.
Gk. adds, shining, bright, Lith. baltas, white; Skt. bkala-m, lustre.
@ Distinct from Baal, which is Semitic.

BALK (1), a beam; a ridge, a division of land. (E.) Not much
in use except in prov. E.; common in old authors. ME. balke,
‘Balke in a howse, trabs ;’ ‘Balke of a londe eryd, porca;’ Prompt.
Parv. p. 22; balkes, rafters, Chaucer, C. T. 3626; ‘baulke of lond,
separaison ;’ Palsgrave. AS. balca, a heap; in the phr. ‘on balcan
lecgan’=to lay in heaps, Boeth, xvi. 2; which explains Shak.
‘balked, laid in heaps, 1 Hen. IV, i. 1. 61.4-OSaxon balko, a beam,
Heliand, 1. 1708; Du. balk, a beam, rafter, bar ; Icel. balkr, a parti-
tion; Swed. balk, a beam, partition; G. balken, a beam, rafter;
OHG. balcho, Teut. type *balkon-; a bar, weak mase. B. Further
allied to Icel. bjalki, Swed. bjalke, Dan. bjelke, a beam, Teut. type
*belkon-;: and to AS. bolca, a plank for a ship’s gang-way, Teut. type
*balkon-. Perhaps further allied to Gk. gaAayé, a round bar of wood.
See Phalanx.

BALK (2), to hinder, (E.) Shak. has balked, Tw. Nt. iii. 2. 26.
‘ Balkyn or ouerskyppyn, omitto;’ Prompt. Parv. And again, ‘ Balkyn,
or to make a balke yn a londe, porco ;’ Prompt. Pary. p.22. <A balk
also means a bar, a beam, see above; and to balk means to bar one’s
way, hence to foil; cf. Icel. balkr, a beam of wood, also a piece of
wood laid across a door; also, a fence. Hence the vb. is derived
from Balk (1).

BALL (1), a dance. (F.—Late L.) Used by Dryden, tr. of Lucre-
tius, b. ii. 1. 29, Chapman and Shirley wrote a play called 7he Ball,
licensed in 1632.—F. bal, a dance; from OF. baler, to dance. = Late
L. ballare, to dance (Lewis). Prob. suggested by Gk. BaddAi¢ev, to
dance; which is possibly connected with Gk. BdAAev, to throw. See
Ballet, Ballad.

BALL (2), a spherical body. (Scand.) ME. balle, King Alisaun-
der, 6481 ; Layamon, ii. 307, 616.—Icel. bél/r, a ball, globe, gen.
bailar; Swed. ball, Dan. bold. Teut. type *balluz.4-MHG. balle,
OHG. pallo, a ball, sphere. Perhaps allied to L. follis, an inflated
ball. From the same source, ball-oon, ball-ot.

BALLAD, a sort of song. (F.—Prov.—Low L.) ME. balade,
Ch., L. G. W. 270; Gower, C. A. i. 134.—OF. balade, F. ballade, of
which Brachet-says that it ‘came, in the 14th century, from the Pro-
vencal balada.’ Balada seems to have meant a dancing song, and is
clearly derived from Late L. (and Ital.) ballare,todance. See Ball (1).
@ In some authors the form ballat or ballet occurs ; in this case, the
word follows the Ital. spelling ballata, ‘a dancing song,’ from Ital.
ballare, to dance. See ballats and ballatry in Milton’s Areopagitica ;
ed. Hales, pp. 8; 24.

BALLAST, a load to steady a ship. (Dutch—Scand.?) Bal-
lasting occurs in Cymbeline, iii. 6. 78; balast or ballast in Hackluyt’s
Voyages, i. 5943 il. pt. ii. 173; Palsgrave (1530) has balast.— Du.
ballast, ballast; ballasten, to ballast, (Many of our sea-terms are
Dutch.) Cf. also Dan. ballast, ballast; ballaste, to ballast ; also spelt
baglast, baglaste; Swed. barlast; MDan. barlast, B. The latter
syllable is, as all\agree, the Du., Dan., and Swed. Jast, a burden, a
word also used in English in the phr. ‘ a Jas¢ of herrings ;’ see Last
(4). The former syllable is disputed; but perhaps we may rely upon
the Swed. and MDan. form bar-last, i.e. ‘ bare (mere) load ;? whence
ballast by assimilation. In this view, the first syllable is cognate with
E. bare. (The Dan. bag means ‘behind, at the back, in the rear;’
and we may conclude that baglast was so called because stowed more
in the after part of the ship than in front, so as to tilt up the bows;
seeBack. But this form was probably due to popular etymology. |
C. Another etymology is given in the Worterbuch der Ostfriesischen
Sprache, by J. ten D. Koolman. The EFriesic word is also bal-
last, and may be explained as compounded of bal (the same word
with E. bale, evil), and last, a load. In this case ballast = bale-load,
i.e. useless load, unprofitable lading. This view is possible, yet not
convincing ; it does not account for the MDan. barlast, which is prob.
the oldest and most correct form, And it is not clear that EFries.
bal can mean ‘useless’; it is rather ‘evil’ or ‘harmful.’

BALLET, a sort of dance. (F.—Ital.—Late L.) First used by
Dryden, Essay on Dram. Poesie (1668); ed. T. Arnold, p. 61.—F.
ballet, a little dance.—TItal. balletto, dimin. of ballo, a dance. Ital.
ballare, to dance. See Ball (1).

BALLOON, a large spherical bag. (F.—OHG.) Formerly
balowne, baloon: see quotations in Richardson from Burton, Anat. of
Melancholy, pt. ii. sec. 2, m. 4, and Eastward Ho, Acti. sc. 1. In both
instances it means a ball used ina game resembling football; and this


BANANA 45


form was borrowed from the Ital. ballone, ‘a great ball, a ballone, a
footeball,’ Florio; augment. of balla, a ball. The modern E. word
is from F. ballon, augment. of F. baile, a ball. See Ball (2),
¢a~ The game of baloon is better known by the Italian name pallone,
which Diez says is from the OHG. form palla, pallo, an earlier form
of G. ball, a ball.

BALLOT, a mode of voting, for which little balls were used ; also,
to vote by ballot. (Ital -OHG.) ‘ They would never take their balls
to ballot [vote] against him;’ North’s Plutarch, p: 927 (R.) — Ital. bal-
lotta, a little ball used in voting ; whence ballottare, ‘to cast lots with
bullets, as they vsein Venice;’ Florio. Ballotta is a dimin. of baila,
a ball.. [Hence also F. ballotter, to cast lots (Cotgrave) ;ballote,
balotte, a little ball used in voting (Cotgrave), a word used by Mon-
taigne (Brachet).] See Ball (2).

BALM, an aromatic plant. (F.—L.—Gk.—Arab.) The spelling
has been modified so as to bring it nearer to balsam; the spelling
balm occurs in Chapman’s Homer, Iliad, b. xvi. 624, but the
ME. form is baume or bawme; Chaucer, Ho, of Fame, 1686 ; spelt
bame, Ancren Riwle (ab. 1230), p. 1643 spelt balsme, Gower, C. A,
ili. 315. The derivative exbawmen occurs in P. Plowman, B. xvii. 70.
— OF. basme.—L, balsamum.= Gk. BadAoapov, the fragrant resin of
the balsam-tree; cf. BadAcapos, a balsam-tree. Of Semitic origin;
from Arab. basham, the name ofa fragrant shrub; Rich. Dict. p. 273;
cf. Heb. basam, balsam; see Gesenius. Der, balm-y. Doublet,
balsam.

- BALSAM, an aromatic plant (Timon, iii. 5.110), See Balm.

BALUSTER, a rail of a staircase, a small column. (F.—Ital. —
L.—Gk.) Evelyn (Of Architecture) speaks of ‘rails and balusters ;’
Dryden has ballustred, i. e. provided with balusters, Art of Poetry,
cantoi. 1.54; Mason has balustrade, English Garden, b. ii. 351.—F.
balustre; Cotgraye has: ‘Balustres, ballisters, little, round, and short
pillars, ranked on the outside of cloisters, terraces;’ &c. Healso has:
‘Balustre, Balauste, the blossome, or flower of the wild pomgranet
tree.’ = Ital. balaustro, a baluster, small pillar; so called from a fancied
similarity in form to that of the calyx of the pomegranate flower. =
Ital. balausto, balausta, balaustra, the flower of the wild pomegranate
tree. = L, balaustium.—Gk. Badavorioy, the flower of the wild pome-
granate ; Dioscorides.

BALUSTRADE, a rowof balusters. (F.—Ital.—L.—Gk.) In
Eyelyn’s Diary, Nov. 19,1644. Borrowed from F. balustrade. = Ital.
balaustrata, furnished with balusters, as if pp. of a verb balaustrare, to
furnish with balusters. See Baluster.

BAMBOO, a sort of woody Indian reed. (Malay—Canarese.)
‘ They raise their houses upon arches or posts of bamboos, that be
large reeds;’ Sir T. Herbert, Travels (1665), p. 378. — Malay bambi,
the name of the plant ; Marsden’s Malay Dict., p. 47; but not ori-
ginal. H. H. Wilson thinks it is from the Canarese banbu. See
bamboo in Yule.

BAMBOOZLE, to trick, cajole. (F.?—Ital.?) The quotations
point to the original sense as being to cajole by confusing the senses,
to confuse, to obfuscate. It occurs in Arbuthnot, Hist. of John Bull,
part iii. ch. 6, who talks of ‘a sort of fellows that they call banterers
and bamboozlers, that play such tricks.’ Inthe Tatler, no. 31 (1709), is
the remark: “ But, sir, I perceive this is to you all bamboozling,’ i.e.
unintelligible trickery; and in-no. 230, bamboozle is noted as a new
word. The word to bam, i.e. to cheat, is, apparently, a contraction
of it, and not the original. ‘The statement that it is a Gipsy word
wants proof;’ N.E.D. But it may well have been suggested by F..
bambocher, ‘to be on the lark, to play pranks ;’ Hamilton. =F. bam-
boche, ‘a puppet ... spree, pranks ;’ id.—Ital. bamboccio, a child,
simpleton ; augment. of bambo, ‘a foolish fellow,’ Florio; which is
prob. of imitative origin. Cf. E. babble, and Gk. BauBaivear, to
stammer.

BAN, a proclamation; pl. BANNS, (E.) ME. ban, Rob. of
Gloue. p. 188, 1. 3881. Cf. ME. bannien, bannen, to prohibit, curse ;
Layamon, i. 344; Gower, C.A. ii. 96 ; bk. iv. 2834. [Though the
Low L. bannum and OF, ban are found (both being derived from the
OHG. strong vb. bannan, or pannan, tosummon) the word may well be
E., the G. word being cognate; the influence of OF. bax was only
partial.] AS. gebann, a proclamation, in A‘lfric’s Hom.i. 30. Cf. ‘pa
hét se cyng dbannan tt ealne péodscipe’ =then the king commanded to
order out (assemble) all the population ; AS. Chron. A.D. 1006.-4-Du.
ban, excommunication 3 bannen, to exile; Icel. and Swed. bann, a ban ;
banna, to chide; Dan. band, a ban; bande,to curse. All froma Teut.
strong verb *bannan- (conj. 7), to proclaim. B. Brugmann (i. § 559)
connects bax with L. fama, fari, from 4/BHA, to-speak. Cf. Skt.
bhan, to speak, related to bhdsh, to speak; Gk. pyui, I say. See
Bandit, Banish, Abandon. 4 Hence pl. banzs, spelt banes in
Sir T. More, Works, p. 434 g3 cf. ‘Bane of mariage,’ Prompt. Parv.

BANANA, the plantain tree, of the genus Musa. (Port.—W.
African.) Noticed by Dampier in 1686; Voyages, i. 316 (Yule).


46 BAND


The pl. bonanas occurs as early as 1599 in J. Davis, Voyages (Hak-
luyt Soc.), p. 138. Borrowed from Port. (or Span.) banana, the fruit
of the plantain or banana-tree ; the tree itself is called in Spanish
banano. The name is said by early Port. writers to have come from
Guinea; see Yule. So also in Voyages (1745), ii. 336.

BAND (1), also BOND, a fastening, ligature. (Scand.) ME.
bond, band, Prompt. Parv. p. 43; Ormulum, 19821.—Icel. band;
Swed. band; Dan. baand.4+-OFriesic band; Du. band, a bond, tie;
G. band; OHG. pant. Teut. type *bandom, neut.; from band, 2nd
grade of bind-an-, to bind. Further allied to AS. bend, Goth. bandi,
a band. Also to Skt. bandha-s, a binding, tie, fetter; from Skt. bhand,
to bind. See Bind. But orig. unconnected with bondage, q.v.. Der.
band-age, band-box. N.B. The band-box was orig. made for the bands
or ruffs of the 17th cent.; see Fairholt, Gloss., p. 26, 1. 1.

BAND (2), a company of men. (F.—G.) Not found in this
sense in ME, Shak. has: ‘the sergeant of the band;’ Com. of
Errors, iv. 3. 30; also banding as a pres. pt., 1 Hen. VI, ili. 1. 81.—
F. ‘bande, a band; also, a band, a company of souldiers, a troop, or
crue ;’ Cot. [whence mod. G. bande, a gang, set.]—G. band, a band,
tie; cf. Low L. banda,a gang. Allied to Low L. bandum, a banner.
See further under Banner. Der. band, vb.; band-ed, band-ing,
band-master; and see bandy.

BANDANNA, a silk handkerchief with white spots. (Hind. —
Skt.) ‘ Waving his yellow bandanna;’ Thackeray, Newcomes, ch.
4. — Hind. bandhnit, ‘a mode of dyeing, in which the cloth is tied in
various places, to prevent the parts tied from receiving the dye...
a kind of silk cloth;’ Forbes. Cf. Hind. bandhna, to tie, bind. =
Skt. bandh, to bind.

BANDICOOT, a large Indian rat. (Telugu.) Telugu pandi-
kokku, lit. pig-rat (Yule). —Tel. pandi, hog; kokku, rat (Brown).

BANDIT, a robber; prop. an outlaw. (Ital.—Teut.) Bandite
occurs in Comus, 1. 426, and banditto in Shak. 2 Hen. VI, iv. 1.135.
Borrowed from Ital. bandito, outlawed, pp. of bandire, to proscribe.
— Low L. bandire, to proclaim; formed (with excrescent d) from
bannire, with the same sense. = Low L. bannum, a proclamation; of
Teut. origin. See Ban, Banish.

BANDOG, a large dog, held ina band or tied up. (Scand. and
E.) For band-dog. Sir T. More, Works, p. 586 c, has bandedogges.
Prompt. Parv. p. 43, has ‘Bondogge, or bonde dogge, Molosus;’ and
Way, in a note, quotes ‘A bande doge, Molosus;’ Cath. Angl. So
also: ‘Hic molosus, a banddogge, Wright’s Vocab. i. 187; also spelt
bonddoge, id. p. 251. ‘A bandogge, canis catenarius’=a chained
dog ; Levins, Manip. Vocab. col. 157. Hexham has: ‘een bandt-
hondt, a banndogge.’ See Band (1) and Dog.

BANDOLEER, BANDOLIER, a shoulder-belt; now used
for cartridges. (F.—Span.—Teut.) ‘Six musketts with bandileares;’
Unton Invent. (1596); p. 3. From MF. bandouillere, ‘a musketiers
bandoleer, Cot. ; F. bandouliére, Span. bandolera, a bandoleer; from
banda, a sash, band. Of Teut. origin; see Band (1).

BANDY, to beat to and fro, to contend. (F.—G.) Shak. has
bandy, to contend, Tit, And, i. 312; but the older sense is to beat to
and fro, as in Romeo, ii. 5.14. It was a term used at tennis, and
was formerly also spelt band, as in ‘To band the ball;’ G. Turbervile,
To his Friend P., Of Courting and Tenys (ab. 1570?). The chief
difficulty is to account for the final -y, though we have a similar
suffix in parley, One sense of bandy was a particular stroke at tennis,
perhaps from MF. bandé, lit. ‘struck.’ = MF. ‘ bander, to bind, fasten
with strings ; also, to bandie, at tennis; Cotgrave. He also gives:
“Touer a bander et a racler contre, to bandy against, at tennis; and,
by metaphor, to pursue with all insolency, rigour, extremity.’ Also:
‘Se bander contre, to bandie or oppose himselfe against, with his
whole power; or to joine in league with others against.’ Also: § Ils
se bandent a faire un entreprise, they are plot[t]ing a conspiracy to-
gether.’ B. The word is therefore the same as that which appears as
band, in the phrase ‘to band together.’ The F. bander is derived
from bande, sb.; from the G. band, a band, tie; see Band (2).

BANDY-LEGGED, crook-legged. (F.andE.) Swift (in
1727) has: ‘Your bandy leg, or crooked nose ;’ Furniture of a
Woman’s Mind, 1. 22. The prefix bandy is merely borrowed from
the MF. bande, bent, spoken of a bow. Bande is the pp. of F. bander,
explained by Cotgrave as ‘to bend a bow; also, to bind,.. . tie with
bands.’ He has here inverted the order; the right sense is (1) to
string a bow; and (2) to bend it in stringing it. G. band, a band. =
G. band, 2nd grade of binden, to bind. See Bind. 4 Observe that
bande is the F. equivalent of bent, because bend is also derived from
bind. See Bend.

BANE, harm, destruction. (E.) ME. bane, Chaucer, C. T. 1099
(A 1097). AS. bana, a murderer.+4Icel. bani, death, a slayer; Dan.
and Swed. bane, death. Teut. type *banon-, masc. Cf. Goth. banja,
a wound. Perhaps allied to Olrish ben-im, I strike, Bret. ben-a, to
cut, Stokes-Fick, p.167. Der. bane-ful, bane-ful-ly,


BANNERET


BANG (1), to beat violently. (Scand.) Shak. has bang’d, Tw.
Night, iii. 2. 24.—Icel. banga, Dan. banke, to beat; cf. Icel. bang, a
hammering ; Dan. bank, a beating. Note also MSwed. bengel, G.
bengel, a cudgel (lit. ‘bang-er’); MDan. barge, to make a noise,
bang, noise, uproar.

BANG (2), BHANG, a narcotic drug. (Port.—Hind.—Skt.)
Formerly bangue (see Yule). = Port. bangue; cf. ‘they call it in
Portuguese banga ;’ Capt. Knox (A.D. 1681), in Arber’s Eng. Garner,
i.402.— Hind. bhang, hemp (Cannabis sativus) ; Forbes; cf. Pers. bang,
an inebriating draught, hashish ; Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 93.—Skt.
bhanga, hemp; the drug being made from the wild hemp.

BANGLE, a kind of bracelet. (Hind.) ‘The ankles and wrists
ornamented with large rings or bazgles;’ Archzeologia, vol. viii. p. 256,
an. 1787 (Davies). From Hindustani bangyi, fem. ‘a bracelet, an
ornament for the wrist ; corruptly, a bangle ;’ Wilson, Gloss. of Indian
Terms, p. 59; Forbes, p. 88.

BANIAN, a tree; see Banyan.

BANISH, to outlaw, proscribe. (F.-OHG.) ME. banishen,
Chaucer, Kn. Tale, 1727 (A 1725).—OF. ban-ir, bann-ir (with suffix
-ish due to the -iss- which occurs in conjugating a F. verb of that form;
answering to the L. inchoative. suffix -isc-, -esc-).— Low L. bannire,
to proscribe; from a Teutonic source.mOHG. bannan, pannan, to
summon; a strong verb, See Ban. Der. banish-ment,

BANISTERS, staircase railings. (F. —Ital.—L.—Gk.) ‘Thump-
ing the banisters all the way;’ Sheridan, The Rivals, ii. 1 (Fag). A
corruption of balusters; see Baluster.

BANJO, a six-stringed musical instrument. (Ital. —Gk.) A negro


corruption of bandore, which occurs in Minsheu’s Dict. (1627). Again,


bandore is for bandora, described in Queene Elizabethes Achademy, ed.
Furnivall, p. 111; Chappell’s Popular Music, i. 224, ii. 776. Also
written pandore: ‘The cythron, the pandore, and the theorbo strike ;’
Drayton, Polyolbion, song 4.—Ital. pandora, pandura, ‘a musical
instrument with three strings, a kit, a croude, a rebecke;’ Florio. =
Gk. ravdotpa, mavSoupis, also pav5oupa, a musical instrument with three
strings (Liddell and Scott). Notatrue Gk. word; Chappell says the
Greeks borrowed it from the ancient Egyptians. 4 Mandolin, q.v.,
is from the same source.

BANK (1), a mound of earth. (Scand.) ME. banke, P. Plowman,
B. v. 5213 bankes in Ormulum, 9210.—OScand. *banke, orig. form of
Icel. bakki, ridge, eminence, bank of a river; cf. Jutland banke (Feil-
berg),Dan. bakke, Swed. backe, bank ; whence also Norman F. banque,
a bank. Teut. stem *bankon-, m.4-OHG. panch, a bank; also, a
bench. Notealso AS, 2d-banca, lit. ‘ heel-bench,’ as a gloss to sponda ;
Voc. 280. 12. Oldest sense ridge or shelf; hence bench, table. See
Bench.

BANK (2), a place for depositing money. (F.—Ital.—G.) Bank
is in Udall, on Luke, c. xix. 23.—F. banque, a money-changer’s table
or bench; Cot.— Ital. banca, f., a bench; also banco, m. ‘a bench, a
marchants banke,’ Florio. MHG. banc, a bench, table. See Bench;
and see above. Der. bank-er, q.v.; bank-rupt, q.v.; bank-rupt-cy.

BANKER, a money-changer. (F.; with E. suffix.) Banker
occurs in Sir T. More, Works, p. 1385 h. It is formed from bank,
with E. suffix -er. Cf. F. banguier, ‘a banker ;’ Cot.

BANKRUPT, one unable to pay just debts. (F.—Ital.) ME.
bankeroupie, Sir T. More, Works, p. 881 f. An earlier sense was
‘bankruptcy;? N.E.D, The word has been modified by a know-
ledge of its relation to the L. ruptus, but was originally French rather
than Latin. The true French word, too, was banquerouttier (Cotgrave),
formed from bangueroutie, f., which properly meant ‘a breaking or
becoming bankrupt;’ i.e. bankruptcy. The latter was introduced
into French in the 16th cent. from Ital. banca rotta (Brachet).— Ital.
banca, a bank, bench; rotta, broken. MHG. banc, a bench; and L.
rupta, f. of ruptus, broken, pp. of rumpere, to break. See Bank (2),
and Bench; alsoRupture. 4 The usual account, that a bank-
rupt person had his bench (i.e. money-table) broken, is unauthorized
and needless. Cf. Late L. ruptus,a bankrupt (A.D. 1334) in Ducange.
It was the man that was ‘ broken.’

BANWER, a flag, ensign. (F.—Teut.) ME. banere, Ancren
Riwle (1230), p. 300; AF. banere, Stat. Realm, i. 185 (1322).—OF.
banere, baniere; cf. Prov. bandiera.— Low L. type *bandaria, f. (the
form bandéria occurs), a banner. Low L. bandum, a standard; with
suffix -dria. From a Teut. (Langobardic) source; ‘uexillum, quod
bandum appellant ;’ Paulus, De gestis Langob. i. 20; cf. Goth. bandwa,
bandwé, a sign, token. Teut. *band, 2nd grade of *bindan-, to bind.
See Bind.

BANNERET, a knight of a higher class, under the rank of
a baron. (F.—Teut.) AF. baneret, Le Prince Noir, l. 193 (ab. 1386) ;
F, banneret, which Cotgrave explains as ‘a Banneret, or Knight ban-
neret, a title, the priviledge whereof was to have a banner of his own
for his people to march and serve under,’ &c. Spelt banret by Stani-
hurst, in Holinshed’s Desc. of Ireland, ed. 1808; vi. 57. From a


BANNOCK


Lat. type *baneratus, i.e. provided with a banner.=—OF. banere, a
banner: see above.

BANNOCK, a kind of flat cake. (C.—L.?) Lowland Se. ban-
nock; AS. bannuc; Napier, OE. Glosses. — Gael. bonnach, a cake.
Prob. not a Celtic word, but due to L. panicium, a baked cake. —L.
panis, bread. Cf. Pantry.

BANNS, a proclamation of marriage. (E.) The plural of Ban, q.v.

BANQUET, a feast. (F.—Ital.—G.) Banquet, vb., occurs in
Hall’s Chron. Henry V, an. 2 (1809), p. 57. The more usual old
form is banket; as in Fisher’s Works, ed. Mayor (E. E. T.S.), p. 294.
=F. banquet, which Cotgrave explains as ‘a banket; also a feast,’ &c.
‘The word has reference to the table on which the feast is spread. =
Ital. banchetto, dimin. of banco, orig.a bench. (Florio has banchettare,
‘to banquet.’)—MHG. banc, a bench, a table. See Bank (1),
Bench.

BANSHEE, a female spirit supposed to warn families of a death,
(Irish.) ‘ In certain places the death of people is supposed to be fore-
told by the cries and shrieks of benshi, or the Fairies wife ;’ Pennant,
Tour in Scotland, 1769, p. 205 (Jamieson). — Gael. beanshith, a ban-
shee ; lit. fairy-woman (Macleod, p. 627); from Irish bean sidhe, Or.
ben side, ‘woman of the fairies;’ see Macbain, p. 293. The Gael. and
Ir. bean = Olrish ben, is cognate with E. gueanx. Windisch has OIr.
ban-side; where ban- is for ben (in composition) ; and side isa pl.
form, meaning $ fairies.’

BANTAM, a kind of fowl. (Java.) The bantam fowl is said to
have been brought from Bantam, the name of a place in Java, at the
western extremity of the island.

BANTER, to mock or jeer at; mockery. (E.?) ‘When wit
hath any mixture of raillery, it is but calling it banter, and the work
is done. This polite word of theirs was first borrowed from the bullies
in White Friars, then fell among the footmen, and at last retired to
the pedants; but if this bantering, as they call it, be so despicable a
thing,’ &c.; Swift, Tale ofa Tub; Author’s Apology. Banterer occurs
A.D. 1709, in the Tatler, no. 12. Origin unknown ; apparently slang.
Davies (Supplem. Gloss.) gives an earlier quotation: ‘ Occasions given
to all men to talk what they please, especially the banterers of Oxford
(a set of scholars so called, some M.A.), who make it their employ-
ment to talk at a venture, lye, and prate what nonsense they please ;’
A. Wood, Life, Sept. 6, 1678. Prob. picked up from some E, dia-
lect; cf. prov. E. bant, vigour; bant, to conquer, haggle; banter, to
cheapen, haggle, tease, taunt (E.D.D.) Perhaps we may compare
Schmeller’s Bavarian Dict. (col. 248) : ‘ bdndeln (pron. banteln). used
jocularly or ironically, to be busy about a bandage (called bant?), fig.
to intrigue ;’ see the whole article.

BANTLING, an infant, a brat. (G.) Occurs in Drayton’s Pasto-
rals, ecl. 7, st. 17; where Cupid is called the ‘wanton bantling’ of
Venus. Apparently confused with band, as if forband-ling, one wrapped
in swaddling-bands; but really an adaptation of G. bankling (with the
same sense as Low G. bankert), an illegitimate child; from G. bank,
a bench; i.e. ‘a child begotten on a bench, not in the marriage-bed;’
see Bankert in Brem. Worterbuch. And see Bastard.

BANYAN, a kind of tree. (Port.—Skt.) Sir T. Herbert, in de-
scribing the religion of ‘the Bannyans’ of India, proceeds to speak of
‘the bannyan trees,’ which were esteemed as sacred; ed. 1665, p. 51;
see also p.123. The bannyans were merchants, and the bannyan-trees
(an English, not, a native, term) were used as a sort of market-place,
and are (J am told) stillso used. At first applied to a particular tree;
see Yule. = Port. banzan, a trader.—Gujarati vannio, one of the trading
oe Ae H. Wilson, p. 541). «Skt. vari, banzj, a merchant (Benfey,

. 625).

BAOBAB, a kind of large tree. (W. African.) In Arber’s Eng.
Garner, i. 441. The native name; in Senegal.

BAPTIZE, v. to christen by dipping. (F.—L.—Gk.) Formerly
baptise was the commoner form; itoccurs in Rob. of Glouc., p. 86;
1, 1918. [The sb. baptiste occurs in the Ancten Riwle, p. 160;
and baptisme in Gower, C. A.i. 189; bk. ii. 899.] = OF. baptiser. = L.
baptizare.= Gk. Banrifay; from Banrav, to dip. From a root
GwEBH ; whence also Icel. kwefja, to dip, quench. Brugm. i. § 677;
Prellwitz. Der. baptist (Gk. Bamrorns, a dipper); baptism (Gk.
Banricpa, a dipping); and baptist-er-y.

BAR, a rail, a stiff rod. (F.) ME. barre, Chaucer, C. T., A 1075;
Havelok, 1794. — OF. barre. = Late L. barra, a bar (of unknown origin;
whence also Port., Span., and Ital. barra). A connexion with Bret.
barr, a branch, seems possible. . Cf. Stokes-Fick, pp. 172-3. Der.
barricade, q.v., barrier, q.v.; barrister, q.v.; prob. barrel, q.v.; and
see embarrass.

BARB (1), the hook on the point ofan arrow. (F.—L.) Merely
an adaptation of the L. barba, a beard. Cotgrave has: ‘ Barbelé,
bearded ; also, full of snags, snips, jags, notches ; whence flesche bar-
belée, a bearded or barbed arrow. =F, barbe.=L. barba, the beard.
See Barbel, Barber, and Beard.


BARD


BARB (2), a Barbary horse. (F.—Barbary). So in Glossographia
Anglicana; 1719. Cotgrave has: ‘Barbe, a Barbery horse.’ Named
from the country.

BARBAROUS, uncivilized. (L.—Gk.) ME. barbar, barbarik, a
barbarian ; Wyclif’s earlier version, Col. iii. 11, 1 Cor. xiv. 11. After-
wards barbarous, in closer imitation of the Latin. —L. barbarus. —Gk.
BapBapos, foreign; cf. L. balbus, stammering. B. The name was
applied by Greeks to foreigners to express the strange sound of their
language; see Curtius,i. 362; Fick,i.684. Der. barbar-ian, barbar-ic,
barbar-it-y, barbar-ise, barbar-ism, barbar-ous-ness,

BARBECUE, a frame-work of sticks supported on posts; orig.
used for sleeping on or for meat meant to be smoke-dried. (Span. —
Hayti.) Hence the verb barbecue, to smoke-dry, to broil. ‘They. .
barbacue their game and fish in the smoke ;’ Stedman, Surinam, i. 406.
= Span. barbacoa, a scaffold raised above the ground; Pineda. = Hayti
barbacoa, a raised wooden framework ; Notes on E. Etym. p. 347.

BARBED, accoutred ; said of a horse. (F.—Scand. ?) Shak. has:
‘barbed steeds;’ Rich. III, i. 1.10. Also spelt barded, the older form;
it occurs in Berners’ tr. of Froissart, vol. i, c. 41. Cotgrave has:
‘Bardé, m. -ée, f. barbed, or trapped as a great horse.’=F. barde,
horse-armour ; but explained in Cot. as ‘a long saddle for an ass or
moyle’ [mule]. Referred by Diez to Icel. bard, a brim of a helmet;
also, the beak or armed prow of a ship of war; from which sense it
might have been transferred so as to be used of horses furnished with
spiked plates on their foreheads. Cf. also Icel. bard, a shield.

But Devic refers F. barde, pack-saddle, Span. albarda, to Arab. bar-
da‘at, a pack-saddle. However, this may be a different word. See
Korting, § 1237. (Uncertain.)

BARBELL, a kind of fish. (F.—L.) ‘Barbylle fysche, barbell fisshe,
barbyllus;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 24.— OF. barbel, F. barbeau, Cotgrave
has both forms, and defines barbeau as ‘the river barbell. . . also, a
little beard.’ = L. acc. barbellum, from barbellus, dimin. of barbus, a
barbel; cf. barbula, a little beard, dimin. of barba,a beard. 4 The
fish is so called because it is furnished, near the mouth, with four
barbels or beard-like appendages (Webster). See Barb (1).

BARBER, one who shaves the beard. (F.—L.) ME. barbour,
Chaucer, C. T., A 2025 (Kn. Ta.) —OF. barbeor, barbier, a barber. —
F, barbe, the beard, with suffix of agent.—L. barba, the beard; which
is cognate with E. beard; Brugm.i. § 972. See Beard. BB. ME.
and AF. barbour, OF. barbeor, answer to a L. type *barbatorem, acc. ;
OF. barbier to Late L. type barbarium, acc.

BARBERRY, BERBERRY, a shrub. (F.—L.) Cotgrave
has: ‘ Berberis, the barbarie-tree.’ The Eng. word is borrowed from
French, which accounts for the loss of final s. The ME. barbaryn
(Prompt. Parv.) is adjectival. = Late L. berberis, the name of the shrub,
also spelt barbaris, as in Prompt. Parv. Origin wholly unknown; the
Arab. barbaris (often cited) is not a true Arab. word. The name bar-
baryn-tre (Prompt. Parv.) answers to OF. barbarin, ‘ foreign ;’ and an
ultimate derivation from Gk. BapBapixds or BapBapos, foreign, does not
seem impossible. The Span. berberis, Ital. berberi, afford no help.
Mandeville has barbarynes (to translate F. berberis); c. ii. p. 14. ‘ Ber-
beri, fructus, berberynes ;? Wright, Voc. 568. 4. @ This is an ex-
cellent example of accommodated spelling; the change of the two final
syllables into berry makes them significant ; but the word cannot claim
three r’s.

BARBICAN, an outwork of a fort. (F.—Arab. and Pers.) ME.
barbican, King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1. 1591; Gawain and the Grene
Knight, ed. Morris, 1.793. John de Garlande has ‘antemuralia, bar-
bycons ;’ and ‘ propugnacula, Gallice barbaquenne ;’ Wright’s Voce. i.
pp- 130, 131.—OF. barbacan; also barbecan, barbicant, barbechant ;
‘Antemuralia, barbechant ;’ also ‘ Les creneaux ou barbicants ;’? Gode-
froy. Cf. Low L. barbacana, an outwork ; a word of unknown origin.
[Not AS.]  @ Brachet says that it was adopted from Arabic barbak-
khaneh, a rampart, a word which is not in Richardson’s Arab. and Pers.
Dict., and which appears to have been coined for the occasion. Diez
derives it from Pers. bala-khkdnah, upper chamber, which is far from
satisfactory. For conjectures, see Devic, and Korting, § 1168. B.
L. barba cana, ‘gray beard,’ is exactly the mod. Prov. barbocano, a
barbican; and this may very well be a ‘ popular etymology,’ due to
trying to make sense of the Eastern name bab-khanah, ‘ gate-house,’
a term written on a barbican at Cawnpore; see Yule’s account. If
this be right, the derivation is from Arab. bab, a gate, and Pers.
khanah, a house.

BARCAROLLE, a boatman’s song. (F.—Ital.—Late L.) In
Moore, National Airs, no. 10, 1. 17.—F. barcarolle. — Venetian bar-
carola; fem. of barcarolo, a waterman (Baretti), Ital. barcaruolo.—
Ital. barca, a boat; see Bark (1).

BARD (1), a poet. (C.) Bard occurs in Sir R. Holland’s Houlate,
ll. 795,822,825. Selden speaks of ‘bardi:k impostures;’ On Drayton’s
Polyolbion ; Introduction. Borrowed from the Celtic; Irish bard,
Gael. bard, a poet ; so too W. bardd, Com, bardh, Bret. barz.


47


48 BARD ;


Celtic type *bardos, which probably meant ‘ speaker ;’ cf. Gk. ppacew
(for ppas-yew), to speak. Der. bard-ic.

BARD (2), armour for a horse ; see Barbed.

BARE, naked. (E.) ME. bar, bare, Owl and Nightingale, 547.
AS. ber, bare, Grein, 1. 77. +Icel. berr, bare, naked ; OHG. par (G.
bar), bare; Du. baar. ‘Teut.type *bazoz; allied to Lith. basas, bare-
footed; OSlav. bosz, Russ. bosoi, barefooted. Idg. type *bhosos. Der.
bare-ness, bare-faced, bare-headed, bare-footed.

BARGAIN, to chaffer. (F.) ME. bargayn, sb., Chaucer, Prol.
282; Robert of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 270. —OF. bargaigner, to
chaffer. = Late L. barcdniare, to change about, shift, shuffle. Origin
uncertain; Diez and Burguy refer the Late L. form, without hesita-
tion, to Late L. barca, a barque or boat for merchandise, but fail to
explain the latter portion of the word. See below.

BARGE, a sort of boat. (F.—LateL.) ME. barge, Chaucer, Prol.
410; Robert of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 169. — OF. barge. = Late L.
barga, apparently a variant of barca, for which see Bark (1). B. Diez
derives barge from a Late Lat. type *barica, a supposed dimin. from
L. baris, a flat Egyptian row-boat (Propertius).—Gk. Bapis, a flat
Egyptian row-boat ; perhaps of Egyptian origin; Mahn cites a Coptic
bari, a small boat, given by Peyron. See below.

BARK (1), BARQUE, a sort of ship. (F.—Itai.—Late L.)
These are probably varieties of the same word as the above. Hackluyt
has ‘small barkes,’ Voyages, vol. ii. part i, p. 227; and Fabyan’s
Chronicles, ed. 1811, p. 286, has ‘smalle caruyles [caravels] and
barkys;’ clearly borrowed from F. barque. Cotgrave has ‘ Barque, a
barke, little ship, great boat.’ Ital. barca, ‘a boat, a lighter’ Florio.
= Late L. barca, a small ship or boat (Paulinus Nolanus, ab. 400).
@ Thurneysen thinks that L. barca may be of Celtic origin, from
Olrish bare; but the borrowing was more probably in the other
direction.

BARK (2), the rind of a tree. (Scand.) ME. barke, P. Plowman,
B. xi. 251; bark, Legends of Holy Rood, p. 68. —Swed. bark, rind;
Dan. bark; Icel. borkr (stem bark-).4-MDu. borcke, barcke, ‘ the bark
of a tree, or a crust,’ Hexham; LowG, borke. Teut. type *barkuz.

BARK (3), to yelp as a dog. (E.) ME. berke, Will. of Palerne,
ed. Skeat, 1. 355 the pp. borken is in Ch., tr. of Boethius, b. i. pr. 5,
l. 1. AS. beorcan, Grein, i. 106; strong verb, pt. t. bearc, pp. borcen;
cf. Icel. weak verb berkja, to bark, to bluster. B. Prob. of imita-
tive origin; and somewhat similar to AS. brecan, to break, to crack,
to snap, used of a sudden noise; cf. the cognate L. fragor, a crash.
We find AS. brecan in the sense of ‘ to roar,’ Grein, i. 1373 cf. Icel.
braka, to creak as timber does. See Break. Similarly Skt. bark, to
roar as an elephart; Swed. bréka, to bleat.

BARLEY, akind of grain. (E.) ME. barlich, barli, Wycl. Exod.
ix. 31; barli3, Ormulum, 15511. AS. berlic, AS. Chron., an, 1124;
‘to berlice crofte,’ to the barley-croft ; Cod, Dipl. vi. 79, an. 966.
Ber- may be compared with Icel. barr, n., barley, and is allied to AS.
bere, cognate with Goth. *baris, only found in the adj. bariz-eins,
made of barley. The suffix -ltc signifies ‘like ;’ so that barley orig.
meant ‘ of the bear-kind,’ where bear is the Lowl. Scotch form of AS.
bere,m. ‘The AS. ber-, bere, are further allied to L. far, corn; and
even to OSlav. brashino, food, Servian brashno, meal; see Miklosich,
p- 19, col. 1, s. v. borshino; Uhlenbeck, Goth. Wort.; Brugm, i. § 180.
See Farina.

BARM (1), yeast. (E.) ME. berm, Chaucer, C.T. 16281 (G 813).
AS, beorma, m., Luke, xiii. 21. 4 Swed. bdrma; Dan. barme, dregs,
lees; G. bdrme, yeast. ‘Teut. type *bermon-; cf. L. fermentum, yeast;
from feruére, to boil. See Ferment,

BARM (2), the lap. (E.) Nearly obsolete; ME. barm, barme,
Prompt. Parv. p. 25. AS, bearm, m., the lap, bosom; Grein, i. 103.4
Icel. barmr; Swed. and Dan. barm; Goth. barms; OHG. barm, parm.
Tent. type *barmoz, m.; from bar, 2nd grade of ber-an-, to bear; whence
also Finnish parmas, barm. See Bear,

BARN, a place for storing grain, (E.) ME. berne, Chaucer, C. T.
12996 (B1256). AS. bern, Luke, iii. 17; a contracted form of ber-ern,
which occurs in the Old Northumbrian version of the same passage;
which glosses L. ‘aream’ by ‘ber-ern vel bere-flor.”. A compound
word; from AS. bere, barley, and ern, ern, a house or place for storing,
which enters into many other compounds; see Grein, i. 228. The
form erz stands, by metathesis, for *ran(n), and is cognate with Icel,
rann, Goth, razn, Teut. type *razzom,n.a house, abode. See Ran-
sack, Barton, Barley. Der. barn-door.

BARNACLE (1), a species of goose. (F.—LateL.) ‘A barnacle,
bird, chelonalops ;’ Levins, 6. 2. Dimin. of ME. bernake; ‘bernakes,
foules liche to wylde gees ;’ Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 335; where
Caxton’s version has bernacles.— MF. bernaque, ‘the fowle called a
barnacle ;’ Cot. = Late L. berndaca, in Giraldus Cambrensis (ab. 1175).
Ducange has ‘ Bernaca, aves aucis palustribus similes,’ with by-forms
bernecela, berneche, berneste, and berniche. B. The history of the
word is very. obscure; but see the account in Max Miiller’s Lectures


BARREL _


on the Science of Language, 8th ed. ii. 602. His theory is that the
birds were Irish ones, i.e. aves Hibernice or Hibernicule ; that the first
syllable was dropped, as in Low L. bernagium for hybernagium, &c.;
and that the word was afterwards applied to the shell-fish from which
the barnacle-goose was imagined to be produced. See Barnacle (2).

BARNACLE (2), a sort of small shell-fish. (F.—Late L.)
Spelt bernacles by Sir T, Browne, Vulg. Errors, bk. iii.c. 28. § 17. The
same word as the above, according to an extraordinary popular belief.
Hence it would appear to be beside the question to explain the word
as from the L. perndcula, dimin. of perna; see this discussed in Max
Miiller, Lect. on the Science of Language, 8th ed. ii. 584. [Cf. Lat.
perna, used by Pliny, Nat. Hist. 32.55: ‘Appellantur et perne conch-
arum generis, circa Pontias insulas frequentissimee. Stant velut suillo
crure longe in arena defixee, hiantesque, qua limpitudo est, pedali non
minus spatio, cibum venantur.’ From Gk. wépva, lit. a ham.]  B.
The Gael. and Irish bairneach, a limpet, W. brenig, are perhaps from
ME, bernake (Macbain). But Stokes (p. 162) derives these from a
form barenn (?), a rock.

BARNACLES, spectacles; orig. irons put on the noses of horses
to keep them quiet. (F.) ‘Barzacles, an instrument set on the nose
of unruly horses,’ Baret; and see Levins. Hence the more modern
jocular use in the sense of spectacles; first in 1571 (N. E.D.) Bar-
nacle (which occurs in Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 353) is a dimin. of
ME. bernak, explained by L. ‘chamus’ in Prompt. Parv. = OF. bernac,
gloss to camum, in A. Neckam (ab, 1200); Wright, Voc. i. 100, 1. 3.
Origin unknown. See the word discussed in Max Miiller, Lect. on the
Science of Language, 8th ed. ii. 583; but the solution there offered is
untenable. See notes in the Eng. Dial. Dict.

BAROMETER, an instrument for measuring the weight of the
air. (Gk.) Notin early use. Due to Boyle, in 1665 (N.E.D.) It
occurs also in Glanvill, Ess. 3 (R.) Boyle (in 1665) has barometrical ;
Works, vol. ii. p. 798; and so Johnson, Rambler, no. 117. Coined
from the Gk. = Gk. Bapo-, for Bapos, weight; and pérpoy, a measure.
The Gk. fapus, heavy, is allied to L. grauis, heavy; Curtius, i. 77;
Brugm. i. § 665. See Grave and Metre. Der. barometr-ic-al.

BARON, a title of dignity. (F.—L.) ME. baron, Rob. of Glouc.
p- 125,1. 2669 (see Koch, Eng. Gram. iii.154); barwn, Old Eng. Homi-
lies, ed. Morris, ii. 35.—F. baron (AF. barun, Vie de St. Auban, ed.
Atkinson, 1.134, and note tol. 301). B. The final -on is the accus.
suffix, and the nom. form is OF. ber; both ber and baron meaning,
originally, merely ‘man’ or ‘husband. Diez quotes from Ray-
nouard the Or:ovencal phrase—‘lo bar non es creat per la femna,
mas la femna per lo baro’ = the man was not created for the woman,
but the woman for the man. = Late L. baro (gen. barénis),a man; the
same word as L. baro, a simpleton (Cicero). Korting says that suffi-
cient proof of this identification is given by Settegast, in Roman,
Forschungen, i. 240. Hence also Prov. bar (acc. bard); Span.
varon, Port. vardon, a man. Der. baron-age, baron-y, baron-et,
baron-et-cy.

BAROUCHE, a sort of carriage. (G.—Ital.) The word is not
properly French; but G. barutsche modified so as to present a French
appearance. The German word is borrowed from Ital. baroccio, com-
monly (and more correctly) spelt béroccio,a chariot. B. Originally,


biroccio meant a two-wheeled car, from L. birotus, two-wheeled ; with .


the ending modified so as to resemble Ital. carroccio, a carriage, from
carro,a car. = L., bi-, double; and rota,a wheel; see Rotary. 4 The
F. form is brouvette, a dimin. of *berowe, standing for L. birotum.

BARRACKS, soldiers’ lodgings. (F.—Ital.) A modern word ;
Rich. quotes from Swift’s Letters and Blackstone, Comment. bk. i.
c.13. The earliest quotation in N. E. D. is dated 1685; but it occurs
at least seven years earlier. ‘Monmouth writes from Ostend in 1678:
“Many men ill... which they attribute to. . . damp lodging of men
in the Barraques;”’ Sir S. D. Scott, The British Army, iii. 399.—F.
baraque, a barrack, spelt barrague in Supp. to Godefroy ; introduced
in the 16th century from Ital. baracca, f., a tent (Brachet), which
Torriano (1688) explains as ‘a shed made of boards.’ Diez derives
baracca from Ital. barra, a bar. See Bar.

BARRATOR, one who excites to quarrels and suits-at-law. (F.)
Speltbarrator,barater,in Blount’s Nomo-Lexicon ; baratowrein Prompt.
Pary. p. 115; see Way’s note. The pl. barratours, deceivers, is in the
F, text of Mandeville, Tray. p. 160, note f. From ME. barat, fraud,
Ayenbite of Inwyt, pp. 39, 61, 82; barete, strife, R. Manning, tr. of
Langtoft, p. 274; baret, Ancren Riwle, p.172. The AF, pl. barettours
occurs in the Stat. of the Realm, i. 364, an. 1361; and AF. barat, de-
ceit, in Life of Edw. Confessor, ed. Luard, 1. 36. —F. barat, ‘cheating,
deceit, guile, also a barter ;’ Cotgrave. See Barter. But the sense
has certainly been influenced by Icel. baratza, strife.

BARREL, a wooden cask. (F,) ME. barel, Chaucer, C. T.,
B 3083 (ed. Tyrw..13899). Spelt barell, King Alisaunder, ed. Weber,
1. 28. = OF. daril,.a barrel. . B. Brachet says ‘origin unknown;’
Diez and Scheler suppose the derivation to be from OF. barre, a bar;


BARREN


as if the barrel were looked upon as composed of bars or staves. [The
Celtic forms are borrowed from English.] Cf. Barricade.

BARREN, sterile. (F.) ME. bareyn, Chaucer, C. T., A 1977;
barain, Ancren Riwle, p. 158.—OF. baraine, baraigne, brehaigne (F.
bréhaigne, all fem. forms), barren. Etym. unknown; the usual
guess is, from Breton brec’han, sterile; but this is merely borrowed
from French (Thurneysen).

BARRICADE, a hastily made fortification; also, as a verb, to
fortify hastily. (F.—Span.) ‘The bridge, the further end whereof
was barricaded with barrells ;’ Hackluyt, Voyages, vol. ii. pt. ii. p. 142.
=F. barricade, f., in Cotgrave barriquade, which he explains as ‘a barri-
cado, a defence of barrels, timber, pales, earth, or stones, heaped up,
or closed together,’ &c. B. The F. verb was barriquer, formed
directly from barrigue, a large barrel. But the F. sb. is clearly a mere
borrowing from the Span. barricada, f., wrongly Englished as barri-
cado; and this (supposed) Span. form appears in English also; e.g.
‘they . . . baricadoed up their way ;’ Hackluyt, Voyages, iii. 568.
The Span. barricada is formed as a pp. froma vb. barricare, which is
from barrica, a barrel. Probably from Span. barra, a bar. See Bar;
and cf. Barrel.

BARRIER, a boundary. (F.—Late L.) ME. barrere, in Lydgate,
Siege of Thebes, pt. iii. 1. 223; barere in E. E. Allit. Poems, B 1239.
= OF. barrere, Godefroy (s.v. bassein) ; F. barriére, a barrier. OF,
barrer, to bar up.—OF. barre, a bar. See Bar.

BARRISTER, one who pleads at the bar. (F.; with E. suffix.)
In Holland, Plutarch, p. 138. First found as barrester ab. 1545
(N.E.D.). Formed from the sb. bar, with suffixes -ést- and -er; or,
more probably, from ME. barre with suffix -ster.. Spelman cites a 16th
cent. L. barrasterius, prob. from E. See Bar.

BARROW (1), a burial-mound. (E.) Sherwood, in his index to
Cotgrave, has: ‘A barrow, a hillock, monceau de terre.” ME. bergh
(v. r. berwe), a hill, P. Plowman, C. viii. 227. ‘ Hul vel beoruh,’ i.e.
a hill or barrow, Wright’s Vocab. i. 92.—AS. beorge (OMerc. berge),
dat. of beork, beorg, (1) a hill, (2) a grave-mound; Grein, i. 106. +
OSax., Du., G. berg, a hill. Teut. type *bergoz, m. Further allied
to Skt. brhant-, great, Pers. burz, high, Irish bri, W. bre, a hill; and
to Borough.

BARROW (2),a wheelbarrow. (E.) ME. barow, barowe, Prompt.
Parv. pp. 25, 105; barewe, Beket, 1. 899 (ab. 1300). AS. bearwe, in
comp. meox-bearwe, manure-barrow ; Voc. 3360. 8. — AS. bar- (ber),
2nd grade of the verb beran, to bear, carry; so that the signification
is ‘avehicle.’ Cf. EFries. barfe, a barrow; Low G. barve (Berghaus).
See Bear, Beir.

BARTER, to traffic. (F.—C.?) ME. bartryn, to chaffer; Prompt.
Parv. = OF. bareter, barater; Cotgrave has ‘ Barater, to cheat, couzen,
beguile . . . also, to truck, scourse, barter, exchange ;’ and Godefroy
records the contracted form ‘on barta,’ with the sense ‘ barter,’ in
1373. — OF. sb. barat, which Cotgrave explains by ‘ cheating, deceit;
also a barter, &c.’ Prob. of Celtic origin; cf. Olrish mrath, brath,
treachery, W. brad, treachery, Gael. brath, betrayal; Irish and Gael,
bradach, thievish ; Stokes-Fick, p.220. B. The suggestion of Diez,
connecting barat with the Gk. mpdocesy, to do, is valueless. [Another
meaning of baret in ME. is ‘strife ;’ from Icel. baratéa, strife. ]

BARTISAN, a battlemented parapet. (F.—Teut.) A mistaken
form due to Sir W. Scott. In Marmion, vi. 2. 21; &c. Dueto ME.
bretasing ; the Catholicon Anglicum has: ‘Bretasynge, propugnaculum,’
This is the mod.\E. brattic-ing; see Brattice. —

BARTON, a courtyard, manor; used in provincial English and in
place-names and surnames. (E.) A compound word; from AS. bere-
tin, which occurs as a gloss for L. aream in the Lindisfarne MS.,
Matt. iii. 12. From AS. bere, barley; and /um, a town, enclosure.
See Barley, Barn, and Town. \

BARYTES, older form of baryfa, protoxide of barium, a heavy
earth. (Gk.) Modern. So named from its weight.—Gk. Bapurns,
weight. = Gk. Bapv-s, heavy; cognate with L. grauis. See Grave.
Der. baryt-a, protoxide of barium, barytes being then used to mean
sulphate of barium; bari-um, a newer coinage from Gk. Bapds

N.E.D.).

BARYTONEH, a grave tone, a deep tone; used of a male voice.
(Ital.—Gk.) Also spelt baritone. An Italian musical term, = Ital.
baritono, a baritone. = Gk. Bapu-s, heavy (hence deep); and Tévos, tone.
See above; andsee Grave and Tone.

BASALT, a kind of rock. (L.) Formerly basa/tes, asin Holland’s
Pliny (1634), b. xxxvi. c. 7.—L. basaltes, a dark and very hard species
of marble in Ethiopia; an African word. Pliny, Nat. Hist. 36. 73 cf.
Strabo, 17, p. 818 (Lewis). -

BASE (1), low, humble. (F.—L.) ME. bass, Gower, C. A. i. 98
(bk, i. 1. 1678); base, Sir T. More, Works, p. 361 d.—F. bas, m., basse,
fem.— Late L. bassus, B. Diez regards bassus as a genuine Latin
word, meaning ‘stout, fat’ rather than ‘short, low;’ he says, and truly,
that Bassus was a L. personal name at an early period. Der. base-ness,


BASKET 49


base-minded, 8&c.; a-base, a-base-ment ; de-base; base-ment (F. sou-basse-
ment, Ital. bassamento, lit. abasement). And see Bass (1).

BASE (2), a foundation. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. bas, baas; Chaucer,
on the Astrolabie, ed. Skeat, ii. 41. 2; ii. 43. 2.—F. base. —L. basis, =
Gk. Baows, a going, a pedestal. For *Bd-rs; cf. Skt. ga-ti-s, a going,
From Gk. fa-, allied to Bay- in Baivey (for *Bav-yav), to go; from
the same root as E. come. See Come. Der. base-less, base-line.
Doublet, basis.

BASEMENT, lowest floor ofa building. (F.—Ital.—L.) Appears
in F. as soubassement, formerly sousbassement; a word made in the


“16th cent., from sows, under, and bassement, borrowed from Ital. bas-


samento, of which the lit. sense is ‘ abasement’ (Brachet, Torriano).
Thus it belongs to the adj. base, not to the sb. See Base (1).

BASENET, a light helmet; see Basnet.

BASHAW, the same as Pasha, which see. (Pers.) Marlowe has
basso, 1 Tamerlane, iii. 1.1. Cf. F. bachat, ‘a Bassa, a chief com-
mander under the great Turk ;’ Cot.

BASHFUL, shy. (F. and E.) In Tempest, iii. 1.81. From
the verb to bash (Nares, ed. 1876), to be ashamed, which is short for
abash; with the suffix -ful. See Abash.

BASIL (1), a kind of plant. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Basil, herb, basilica ;?
Levins, 124. 7. Spelt basil in Cotgrave. It is short for basilic, the
last syllable being dropped.=—F. basilic, ‘the herb basill;’ Cot.—L.
basilicum, neut. of basilicus, royal. Gk. BactAucds, royal; from Gk.
Bao.revs, a king. @ The G. name kénigskraut, i.e. king’s wort,
records the same notion. :

BASIL (2), a bevelled edge; see Bezel.

BASIL (3), the hide of a sheep tanned. (F.—Span.— Arab.)
Halliwell gives bassell lether, mentioned in the Brit. Bibliographer, by
Sir E. Bridges (1810), ii. 399. The form is corrupt, / being put for 2;
Johnson observes that a better spelling is basen. The Anglo-French
form is bazene, bazeyne, Liber Custumarum, pp. 83, 84; also bazain,
bazein, Gloss. to Liber Albus. OF. basanne, given by Palsgrave as
the equivalent of a ‘schepskynne towed,’ i.e. a tawed sheep-skin;
bazane, Cotgrave ; mod. F. basane, f.—Span. badana, a dressed sheep-
skin, = Arab, b:tanat, the [inner] lining of a garment; Rich. Dict.
p. 276; because basil-leather was used for lining leathern garments. =
Arab, root batana, to cover, hide (Freytag). Cf. Arab. ban, the belly,
interior part, Rich. Dict. p. 277; Heb. beten (spelt with zeth), the belly.
See Littré ; also Devic, Supplement to Littré; and Engelmann.

BASILICA,a palace,a large hall. (L.—Gk.) L. basilica (sc.domus,
house), royal; fem. of basilicus, royal. — Gk. BaotAuKy (sc.oT0d),a public
building with colonnades, a church; fem. of BaowArxés, royal. = Gk.
Baowrevs, a king. See below.

BASILISK, a kind of lizard or snake. (L.—Gk.) ‘The serpent
called a basiliske ;’ Holland’s Pliny, bk. viii. c. 21. Also in E. E.
Psalter (ab. 1300), Ps. xc. (xci.) 13.—L. basiliscus; same ref.—Gk.
BaotAioxos, royal; from a white spot, resembling a crown, on the head
(Pliny). —Gk. Baoidevs, a king; of doubtful origin.

BASIN, a hollow circular vessel. (F.—Late L.) ME. bacin, basin;
Seven Sages, ed. Weber, 1. 2242; (used in the sense of helmet) King
Alisaunder, 1. 2333.— OF. bacin (F. bassin, m.) ; alluded to by Gregory
of Tours, who cites it as a word of rustic use; ‘ paterze quas vulgo
bacchinon vocant.’ Romanic type *baccinum (whence also Ital. bacino,
Span. bacin) ; from Late L. bacca, a water-vessel (Isidore). Hence
also Du. bak, a tray, trough, Dan. bakke, a tray. Der. basn-et, q.v.

BASIS, a foundation. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. Macb. iv. 3. 32;
Beaum. and Fletcher, Valentinian, iv. 4. See Base (2).

BASK, to lie exposed to warmth. (Scand.) ME. baske. Pals-
grave has—‘T baske, I bathe in water or any lycour, f. It is
certainly formed, like busk, from an Old Scand. source, the -sk being
reflexive. The only question is whether it means ‘ to bake oneself’
or ‘to bathe oneself.’ All evidence shows that it is certainly the
latter. y. Chaucer uses bathe hire, i.e. bathe herself, in the sense of
bask ; Nonne Prestes Tale, 1. 447 ; and see Gower, C. A. i. 290 (bk.
iii. ll. 312-15); andthe quotation above. 6. The derivation is then
from an OScand. *badask (for baa sik), to bathe oneself, now re-
presented by Icel. badast, to bathe oneself, with the common change
of final -sk to -st. For loss of 8, cf. or for other. See Bath, and
Busk.

BASKET, a vessel made of flexible materials. (F.) ME: basket;
Chaucer, C. T., 12379 (C. 445). Sometimes said to be Celtic; but
W. basged, a basket, Corn. basced, Irish basceid, Gael. bascaid, are
merely borrowed from English; and the oft-quoted Celto-L.
bascauda (Martial, Juvenal) gave rise to OF. bachoe, bachoue, a basket
(Godefroy, Cotgrave), which greatly differs in form. B. Certainly
French; the AF. form basket (with the characteristic AF. pl. baskes)
appears in A. Neckam (ab: 1200) ; see Wright’s Voc. i. 98,6; III, 2.
The suffix -ef is also usually French. But no such word has been
recorded in O. French of the continent; unless we may consider the
OF. baste, a basket, noted by Godefroy, to be allied to it. . y. The

K


50 BASNET


AF, word may have been suggested by E. bast ; ef. prov. E. bass, bast,
also a mat, hassock, basket made of matting ; bastik, a basket.

BASNET, BASSENET, BASSINET, a kind of light helmet.
(F.—Late L.) Spelt bassene¢ in Halliwell, who gives several ex-
amples ; basene¢t in Spenser, F. Q. vi. 1. 31. ME. basinet, Rich.
Cuer de Lion, 403; bacynet, id. 5266; basnet, King Alisaunder,
2234.—OF. bacinet (Burguy, Roquefort) ; spelt bassinet in Cot., who
explains it by ‘a small bason, also a head-peece.” Dimin. of OF.
bacin, a basin; see Basin.

BASS (1), the lowest part in a musical composition, (F.—L.)
Shak. has base, generally printed bass; Tam. of Shrew, iii. 1. 46.
Cotgrave has: ‘ Basse, contre, the base part in music.” Sherwood has:
¢ The base in musick, basse, basse-contre.’ =F. basse, fem. of bas, low;
cf. Ital. basso, which has influenced the spelling, but not the sound.
See Base (1). Der. bass-relief (Ital. bassorilievo).

BASS (2), BARSE; names of a fish. (E.) These are, radically,
thesame word. Wemake little real difference in sound between words
like pass and parse. ‘A barse, fishe, ¢incha ;’ Levins, 33. 13. ME.
bace, a fish; Prompt. Parv. p. 20; see Way’s note. AS. bers, lupus
vel scardo; Voc. 180. 26.4+-Du. baars, a perch; G. bars, barsch, a
perch. Orig. applied to the perch, and named from its prickles.
From *bars, 2nd grade of Teut. root *bers, whence also Bristle,
q-v. Cf. Skt. bkrshi-, pointed.

BASSOON, a deep-toned musical instrument. (F.—L.) Not in
early use. In Bailey’s Dict., ed. 1735. Borrowed from F. basson, a
bassoon; formed, with augmentative suffix -on, from basse, bass.
See Bass (1), Base (1).

BAST, the inner bark of the lime-tree, or matting made of it. (E.)
ME. bast; ‘ Hectilia, baste-tre,’ Vocab. 647. 11. AS. best, a lime-
tree; Vocab. 51, 2. Cf. Icel., Swed., Dan., Du., G. bast, bast.
@> Sometimes corrupted to bass; see Basket.

BASTARD, a child of parents not married; illegitimate, false.
(F.—LateL.) ‘ Willam bastard,’ i.e. William the Conqueror; Rob.
of Glouc. p. 295 (1. 5970).—OF. bastard, bastart, of which the ety-
mology has been much disputed. B. The ending -ard is common in
OF. (and even in English, cf. cow-ard, drunk-ard, the E. suffix having
been borrowed from French). This suffix is certainly OHG., viz.
the OHG. -hart, hard, first used as a suffix in proper names, such
as Regin-hart (whence E. reynard), Eber-hart (whence E. Everard).
In French words this suffix assumed first an intensive, and secondly,
a sinister sense ; see examples in Pref. to Brachet’s Etym. F. Dict.
sect. 196. y. It is now ascertained that OF. bastard meant ‘a son
of a bast’ (not of a bed), where bast is the mod. F . bdt, a pack-saddle,
from Late L. bastum, a pack-saddle. See Ducange, who quotes:
‘ Sagma, sella quam vulgus bastum vocat, super quo componuntur
sarcinee.’ Brachet refers to M. G. Paris, Histoire poétique de Charle-
magne, p. 441, for furtherinformation. The phrase jils de bast, ‘pack-
saddle child,’ was quite common; see Bast in Godefroy. Cf. ‘thei
[though] he were abast ibore,’ i.e. born on bast; Rob. of Glouc.
p- 516 (1. 10629). 4 The word was very widely spread after the
time of William I, on account of his exploits, and found its way into
nearly all the Celtic dialects, and into Icelandic. Scheler quotes
OF. coitr-art, a bastard, lit. ‘son of a coitre or quilt,’ and G. bank-art,
“son of a bench;’ see Bantling.

BASTSE (1), vb., to beat, strike. (Scand.) We find ‘ basting and
bear-baiting;’ Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 1,1.36, Also ‘he has basted me;’
Ben Jonson, Every Man, iv. 4.—Swed. dial. basta, to strike, to beat
(Rietz, p. 25, col. 2); cf. basta, a beating (ibid.), MDan. bastig, adj.,
beating, striking; perhaps an extension from Swed. basa, to strike,
beat, flog. Cf. Dan. baske, prov. E. bash, to beat.

BASTE (2), to pour fat over meat. (F.—Late L.) It occurs in
Palsgrave, p. 442 ; in Gammer Gurton’s Needle, i. 1; and in Shak.,
Com. Errors, ii. 2. 59. ‘To baste, linire;’ Levins, 36. 22. It
appears to be only a particular use of OF. bastiv, to build; for in Du
Wez, Supp. to Palsgrave, p. 938, we find these entries: ‘To buylde,
baatir (sic; for bastir); ‘To cast butter upon rost, bastir.’ See
Bastile.

BASTE (3), to sew slightly. (F.-OHG.) ME. basten, bastyn ;
Prompt. Parv. p. 26; Rom, of the Rose, 1. 104. —OF. bastir, F. batir,
to baste, which is distinct (according to Littré and Hatzfeld) from
batir, to build. —MHG, bestan (for *bastjan), to bind. —OHG. bast,
the inner bark of the lime-tree. So also Dan. baste, to tie, to bind
with bast, to pinion; from Dan. bast, bast. See Bast.

BASTILE, a fortress, (F.—Prov.—LateL.) Chiefly used of the
bastile in Paris. — OF. bastille, a building. —Provy. bastida, the same,
with change of suffix (Hatzfeld).— Late Lat. bastire, to build ; whence
OF. basiir, to build. Usually referred to the same root as Baton, q.v.

BASTINADO, a sound beating; to beat. (Span.—Late L.)
Shak. has bastinado as a sb. ; K. John, ii, 463.—Span. bastonada, a
beating with a stick. —Span. baston, a stick, staff, baton. See Baton.


BASTION, part of a fortification, (F.—Ital.—Prov,—Late L.) |


BATTER


In Howell, bk. i. letter 42 ; and in Goldsmith, Citizen of the World


(R.) =F. bastion, introduced in the 16th century from Ital. bastione
(Brachet) ; which is the augmentative of Ital. bastia, a building, fort,
rampart. = Prov. bastia, bastida, the same. Late L. bastire, to build.
See Bastile,

BAT (1), a short cudgel. (E.) ME. baite, Prompt. Pary. p. 26;
botte, Ancren Riwle, p. 366; Layamon, 21593. AS. batt; in Napier’s
Glosses. Cf. Irish bata, bat, a staff. Prob. allied to Batter (1).
Der. bat-let (with dimin, suffix -let = -el-et), a small bat for beating
washed clothes; Shak., As You Like It, ii. 4. 49. Also bat, verb;
Prompt. Parv,

BAT (2), a winged mammal. (Scand.) Corrupted from ME,
bakke. ‘The Prompt. Pary. has ‘ Bakke, flyinge best [beast], vesper-
tlio.” Wyclif (in some MSS.) has backe, Levit. xi. 19.— Dan. bakke,
only used in the comp. aftenbakke, evening-bat. For change ofk tot,
cf. apricot for apricock, B. There is also an older form blakke, seen in
Icel. ledrblaka =a ‘leather-flapper,’ a bat.—Icel. blaka, to flutter,
flap. The equivalence of the forms is clearly shown by MSwed.
natt-backa, lit. ‘night-bat;’ as compared with Swed. dial. natt-blakka
and natt-batta. The form blak, a bat, occurs evenin ME., viz. in Rob.
Brunne, Handl. Synne, 1. 11863, but is recorded neither by Strat-
mann nor intheN.E.D. Cf. also MDan. natbakka, a bat. @] The
AS. word is hréremiis, whence prov. Eng. reremouse, rearmouse.

BATCH, a quantity of bread. (E.) <A batch is what is baked at
once; hence, generally, a quantity, a collection. ME. bacche;
‘bahche, or bakynge, or batche, pistura;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 21. Here
batche is a later substitution for an older bacche, due to an AS, form
*becce ; clearly a derivative of AS, bac-an, to bake. See Bake.

BATE (1), to abate, diminish, (F.—L.) Shak. has bate, to beat
down, diminish, remit, &c.; in many passages. We find too: ‘Batyn,
or abaten of weyte or mesure, subtraho;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 26. ME.
bate, R. Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 338. Merely a contraction of
abate, borrowed from OF. abatre, to beat down. See Abate.

BATH (2), strife, (F.—L.) Shak. has ‘breeds no bate;’ 2 Hen.
IV, ii. 4. 2713 also bate-breeding, Ven. and Adonis, 655. ‘ Batyn,
or make debate, jurgor;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 26. ME. bat, bate, Cov.
Myst. p. 12; Gawain and the Grene Knight, 1.1461. It is agreed
that bate is a mere contraction of the common old word debaée, used
in precisely the same sense; borrowed from the OF. debat, strife;
a derivative of battre, to beat. See Batter (1).

BATH, a place for washing in. (E.) ME. baJ, Ormulum, 18044.
AS. b@0 (Grein). + Icel. bad; OHG. bad, pad; MSwed. bad (Thre) ;
Du., Dan. bad. Teut. type *ba-dom, neut. The OHG. appears to
have a still older source in the OHG. vb. *bajan, baihen, to warm
(G, biéhen, to foment).

BATHE, to use a bath. (E.) The AS. badian, to bathe, is a
derivative from bed, a bath; not vice versa. Der. bask.

BATHOS, lit. depth. (Gk.) Ludicrously applied to a descent
from the elevated to the mean in poetry or oratory. See the allusion,
in a note to Appendix I to Pope’s Dunciad, to A Treatise of the
Bathos, or Art of Sinking in Poetry.—Gk, Ba0os, depth; cf. Gk,
Badus, deep.

BATON, BATOON, a cudgel. (F.—Late L.) Spelt baztoon in
Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p. 149; batune in Phillips’ Dict.,
ed. 1658; battoone in Davenant, Long Vacation in London, |. 9.—F.
baton, acudgel. = OF. baston. = Late L. acc. basténem, from basto, astick;
of unknown origin. Diez suggests a connexion with Gk. Baoracew,
to support. Doublet, batten (2).

BATTALION, a body of armed men. (F.—Ital.—Late L.)
Milton has it; P.L. i. 569.—_F. bataillon, introduced, says Brachet,
in the 16th cent. from Ital. battaglione; which was formed from Ital,
battaglia, a battle, by adding the augment. suffix -one. See Battle.

BATTEN (1), to grow fat; to fatten. (Scand.) Shak. has batten,
to feed gluttonously (intransitive), Hamlet, iii. 4.67; but Milton has
‘battening our flocks,’ Lycidas, 1. 29. Strictly, it is intransitive. =
Icel. batna, to grow better, recover; as distinguished from beta,
trans., to improve, make better.4-Goth. gabatnan, to profit, avail,
Mark, vii. 11, intrans.; as distinguished from bd¢jan, trans., to avail,
Mark, viii. 36. Both Icel, batna and Goth. gabatnan are formed
from the Teut. base BAT, good, preserved in the E, better and best,
See Better. @ Cf. also Du. baten, to yield profit; baat, profit.

BATTEN (2), a wooden rod. (F.—LateL.) ‘ Batten, a scantling
of wood, 2, 3, or 4 in. [or 7] broad, seldom above 1 thick, and the
length unlimited ;’ Moxon; in Todd’s Johnson. Hence, to batten
down, to fasten down with battens. A mere variant of batton or baton.
See Baton.

BATTER (1), to beat. (F.—L.) ME. bateren, batren, P. Plow-
man, B. iii. 198; formed with frequentative suffix -er from a base
bat-.—F. batire, to beat.=L. battere, a popular form of battuere, to
beat. See Battle. Der. batter (2), batter-y, batter-ing-ram.

BATTER (2), a compound of eggs, flour, and milk. (F.—L.)


BATTERY


ME. batowre, Prompt. Parv., p. 27; bature, Catholicon. = OF. bature,
a beating. = OF. battre, to beat. See above.
beaten up together ; Wedgwood. So, too, Span. batido, batter, is the

. of batir, to beat.

BATTERY, a beating; a place for cannon; a number of
cannon in position. (F.—L.) See Twelfth Night, iv. 1. 36; Hen. V,
iii, 3.7. Cotgrave has : ‘ Baterie (also Batterie), a beating ; a battery ;
a platform for battery.’ =F. battre, to beat. See Batter (1). @ The
AF. baterie (legal term) occurs in the Stat. of the Realm, i. 48 (an.
1278).

‘RATTLE, a combat. (F.—L.) ME. bataille, bataile, Chaucer,
Leg. of Good Wom. 1631 ; King Horn, 574.— OF. dataille, meaning
both (1) a fight, (2) a battalion. — Folk-L. battalia, neut. pl. (turned
into a fem. sing.), fights; Late L. battwalia, neut. pl. of adj. battudlis,
fighting. = L. battuere, to beat. Der. battal-ion, q. Vv.

BATTLEDOOR, a bat with a thin handle. (South F.—
L.) ‘Batyldoure, a wasshynge betylle, i.e. a bat for beating
clothes whilst being washed, Prompt. Parv. p. 27. a. A corrupted
form ; borrowed from the Provencal (South French) batedor, meaning
exactly a washing-beetle, a bat for clothes; cf. Span. batidor, the
same. [The English held Bordeaux till 1451.] Once imported into
English, the first two syllables were easily corrupted into batile, a
dimin. of bat, leaving -door meaningless. Cf. crayfish. Note prov.
E. battling-stone, a stone on which wet linen was beaten to cleanse it ;
attling-stick or batlet, a battledoor for washing. | B. Formed from
Prov. batre, Span. batir, to beat; the suffix -dor in Span. and Prov.
answers to the L. acc. suffix -tOrem, as in amda-torem, acc. of amd@-tor,
a lover. See Batter (1).

BATTLEMENT, a parapet for fortification. (F.) ME. batel-
ment, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1459. ‘ Batylment of a walle, pro-
pugnaculum;’ Promp. Parv. p.27. As if from an OF. *bataillement,
formed from the verb bataillier, bateillier, to fortify, to furnish with
battlements, called in OF. batailles, a peculiar use of the pl. of bazaille,
a battle (Godefroy) ; see Battle. Thus ‘ mur bataillé,’ an embattled
wall, occurs in the Rom. dela Rose, 1. 131; cf. Chaucer’s translation,
1.139. But probably confused with a later OF. batillement (Godefroy),
a redoubt, formed from OF. bastiller, to fortify. See Battle and
Bastile ; and see Embattle.

BAUBLE (1), a fool’s mace. (F.) This seems to be the same as
bauble, a plaything. Palsgrave has: ‘ Bable for a foole, marotte.’
‘As he that with his babil pleide ;’ Gower, C. A. ili. 224: bk. vii.
3955-— OF. baubel, babel, a child’s plaything (Godefroy) ; perhaps
connected with MItal. babbola, a toy (Florio), and with L. babulus, a
fool. Cf. E. Babble. . Prob. a distinct word from ME, babdulle,
bable, ‘ Librilla, pegma,’ in Prompt. Parv. p. 20. As to this bable,
see Way’s note in Prompt. Parv., showing that /ibrilla means a stick
with a thong, for weighing meat, or for use asa sling; and pegma
means a stick with a weight suspended from it, for inflicting blows
with. Perhaps so called from the wagging or swinging motion with
which it was employed ; from the verb‘ bablyn, or babelyn, or waveryn,
librillo;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 20. We also find, at the same reference,
* babelynge, or wauerynge, vacillacio, librillacio.” Were this verb still
in use, we might equate it to proy. E. bobble, to bob up and down,
formed, as many frequentatives are, by adding the suffix -le. It is
prob. imitative. See Bob.

BAUBLE (2), a plaything. (F.) Shak. has bauble in the sense
of a trifle, a uséless plaything, Tam. Shrew, iv. 3. 82. —OF. baudel,
a plaything (Godefroy) ; also spelt babel. See Bauble (1) above.

BAVIN, a faggot. (F.) Prov. E. bavin, a faggot, brushwood ;
hence, as adj., soon kindled and burnt out, r Hen. IV, iii. 2. 61.
‘Bauen, great fagottes;’ Palsgrave (1530).—OF. baffe, a faggot,
bundle (Godefroy, Roquefort). Remoter origin unknown.

BAWD, a lewd person. (F.—G.) ME. baude, Chaucer, C. T.
6936 (D 1354); P. Plowman, B. ili. 128. Butit is a contracted form ;
the full form being bawdstrot, P. Plowm. A. iii. 42 (another MS. has
bawde).=— OF. *baldestrot, *baudestrot, found only in the later form
baudetrot, as a gloss to L. pronuba, a bride-woman.=—OHG., bald,
bold, gay, lively (cognate with E. bold); and MHG, strotzen, to
strut about, to be puffed up (cognate with E. strut). See Bold.
Der. bawd-y, bawd-i-ness ; baud-r-y [distinct from OF. bauderie, balde-
rie, vivacity]; see below.

BAWDY, lewd. (F.—G.) Merely formed as an adj. from
bawd; see above. 4 But the ME. baudy, dirty, used of clothes, in
Chaucer and P. Plowman, is a different word, and may be of Celtic
origin. Cf. W. bawaidd, dirty; baw, dirt. ‘The two words, having
something of the same meaning, were easily assimilated in form.

BAWL, to shout. (Scand.) Sir T. More has ‘ yalping [yelping]
and. balling ;’ Works, p. 1254 c. Cf. ‘Baffynge or bawlynge of
howndys;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 20. —Swed. bola, tolow ; MDan. dole,
to low; mod. Icel. baula, to low; Icel. bal, a cow. Of imitative
origin.-+ Low G, bolen, to bawl (Berghaus).


BE-


BAY (1), a reddish brown. (F.—L.)


51


ME. bay ; ‘a stede bay,”


So called from being | a bay horse; Chaucer, C. T. 2159 (A 2157).— OF. bai.=—L. badius,


bay-coloured, in Varro. Cf. Gael. and Irish buidhe, OlIrish buide,
yellow. Der. bay-ard (a bay-horse) ; baize, q.v.

BAY (2), a kind of laurel-tree; prop. a berry-tree. (F.—L.) ‘The
roiall lawrel is a very tal and big tree, with leaues also as large in
proportion, and the baies or berries (bacce) that it beareth are nothing
{not at all] sharp, biting, and vnpleasant in tast ;? Holland’s Pliny,
b. xv.c.30. ‘Bay, frute, bacca;’ Prompt. Parv.=—F. baie, a berry. =
L, baca (less correctly bacca), a berry. @] Cf. AF.‘ bayes de lorer =
bacce lauri;’ Alphita.

BAY (3), an inlet of the sea. (F.—L.) Bay occurs in Surrey, tr.
of the Aineid, bk. ii. 31; ME. baye, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 57.—
F. baie, an inlet.=L. baia, in Isidore of Seville; see Brachet and
Ducange. Der. bay-salt.

BAY (4), an opening in a wall, esp. the space between two
columns ; a division in a barn. (F.—L.) In Meas. for Meas, ii. I.
255. ‘Heye houses withinne the halle. ... So brod bilde in a bay;’
Allit. Poems, B. 1392.—F. baie (for bade) ; AF. baee, a gap in a wall,
P. de Thaun, Livre des Creatures, 38; pp. fem. of OF. baer, MF.
bayer, to gape. Cf, Ital. badare, ‘to delay, to gape idly,’ Florio.=
Late L. baddre, to gape. Sometimes confused with Bay (3).

BAY (5), to bark as a dog. (F.—L.) ‘ The dogge wolde bay ;*
Berners’ Froissart, vol. ii. c. 171. ‘ Braches bayed,’ hounds bayed ;
Gawain and Grene Knight, 1142. [Also common in the derived
form; ME. abayen, K. Alisaunder, 3882; from OF. abaier, MF.
‘ abbayer, to bark or bay at;’ Cot.; F. aboyer.}—OF. a (L. ad), and
baier, to yelp (Godefroy); cf. MItal. baiare, ‘to barke,’ Florio;
answering to a Late L. type *badiare, (Hatzfeld), prob. from badare,
to gape. See Bay (4).

BAY (6), in phr. at day. (F.—L.) ‘He folowed the chace ofan
hert, and... broughte hym toa bay ;? Fabyan, Chron. c. 127. Here
‘to a bay’ is really a corruption of ‘to abay;’ cf. ‘Wher hy hym
myghte, so hound adaye, . . . bygile’ =where they might, like a hound
at bay, beguile him; King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 3882; see also
abay in N. E. D.; and see further below. = OF. abai, pl. abais ; F. abois,
abbois. Cotgrave says—‘a stag is said rendre les abbois when, weary
of running, he turns upon the hounds, and holds them at, or puts them
to, a bay.’ The same is also expressed by the phrase étre aux abois;
see aboi in Brachet. The original sense of OF. abaz is the bark of a
dog. Cotgrave has ‘ Abbay, the barking or baying of dogs ;’ ‘ Abbois,
barkings, bayings ;’ forthe OF, abai, abaier, see abot, aboyer in Littré.
See Bay (5), to bark.

BAYADEREH, a Hindoo dancing-girl. (F.—Port.—Late L.)
Spelt balliadera (1598); bayadere (1826). —F. dayadére. — Port. baila-
deira, a dancing gitl.= Port. bailar, to dance. See Ball (2).

BAYARD, a horse; orig. a bay horse. (F.—L.) See Bay (1).

BAYONET, a dagger at the end of a gun. (F.) Used by Burke;
Select Works, ed. E, J. Payne, i. 111, 1. 15. Introduced in the 17th
century, from F. batonnette, formerly bayonette, which at first meant
a short flat dagger. So called from Bayonne, in France, where such
daggers were first made; see bayonette in Cotgrave, and see Hatz-
feld. The bayonet was used at Killiecrankie in 1689, and at Mar-
saglia by the French, in 1693. See Haydn, Dict. of Dates,

BAY-WINDOW, a window within a recess. (Hybrid; F. and
Scand.) ‘Within a bay-window;’ Court of Love, 1058; ‘With
bay-windowes;” Assembly of Ladies, 163. From Bay (4) and
Window. The modern bow-window, i.e. window with a curved
or bowed outline, is an independent word.

BAZAAR, a market. (Pers.) Spelt buzzar by Sir T. Herbert, in
his Travels, where he speaks of ‘the great buzzar or market;’ ed.
1665, p. 41.— Pers. bizar, a market. See Palmer's Pers. Dict. col.
65; Horn, § 166.

BDELLIUM, a precious substance. (L.—Gk.—Skt.?) In Gen.
ii. 12, it is joined with ‘gold’ and ‘onyx-stone;’ in Numb. xi. 7,
manna is likened to it in colour. In Holland’s Pliny, xii. 9, it is the
gum of a tree, or the palm-tree that yields it, Borassus flabelliformis
(Lewis) ; and Pliny also calls it maldacon. = L. bdellium.=— Gk, B5éA-
voy; also BS€AAa. Other forms are BdoAx6v, padedAxov (whence L.
maldacon) ; which Lassen derives from a supposed Skt. *madalaka,
from Skt. mada-s, m., musk. The Gk. BdoAxév corresponds to the
Heb. béddlakh, which see in Gesenius, Heb. Lex. 8th ed., p. 93-

BE.-, prefix. (E.) AS. be-, prefix; in very common use. It some-
times implies ‘to make,’ as in be-foul, to make. foul. ‘It some-
times serves to locate the act, and sometimes intensifies ;’ Affixes of
English Words, by S. S. Haldeman, p. 49. Behead means to deprive
of the head; beset, to set upon, attack; besiege, to sit by or around,
to invest with an army; bemire, to cover with mire. Cf. becalm, be-
dim, bedeck, bedrop; also become, befall, i.e. to come upon, to fall
upon. Also used as a prefix of prepositions; as in before, between.


. Beside=by the side of. Below=by low, on the lower side of; so also


E %


52 BE


beneath, on the nether side of. The AS. be- or bi- (ME. be-, bi-) is a
weak or unstressed form of the prep. bi, E. by. See By.

BE, to exist. (E.) ME. been, Prompt. Parv. 30. AS. béon, to be
(passim).4-Du. ben, I am; G, bin, I am; Irish bu, was; Russian
buite, to be; bu-du, I shall be; L. fore, pt. t. fui; Gk. pvev, aor.
épuv ; Skt. bhi, to be. —4/BHENU, to exist. See also Are, Was.

BEACH, a shore; esp. of the sea. (E.) Orig. a ridge of shingle,
or shingle. Not foundin early authors. ‘The pibbles on the hungry
beach ;’ Cor. v. 3. 58. ‘A barre of beach or peeble-stones ;’ Hack-
luyt, Voyages, i. 355. Etym. doubtful, but perhaps the same as proy.
E. bache, a river, also a sandbank or ridge by a river (E. D. D.);
ME. bache. From AS. bece, dat. of bec, a valley; cf. ‘of pam diopan
bece;’ Birch, Cart. Sax. iii. 344, 646; to pam bece, id. iii. 52; to
gisles bece, id. ii. 167. Der. beach, verb; beach-y, 2 Hen. IV, iii. 1. 50.

BEACON, a sign, signal. (E.) ME. bekene, P. Plowman, B. xvii.
262. AS. béacen, a sign, signal, standard (Grein); also spelt bécn.+-
OSax. bokan; MHG. bouchen: OHG. poukhan, a sign. Teut. type
*bauknom, neut. See Beck, Beckon.

BEAD, a perforated ball, used for counting prayers. (E.) The
old sense is ‘a prayer;’ and the bead was so called because used for
counting prayers; and not vice versa. ME. bede, a bead; Chaucer,
Prol.159. ‘Thanne he hauede his bede seyd’= when he had said his
prayer; Havelok, 1385. AS. bed-, in comp., a prayer; gen. used in
the form gebed (cf. G. gebet), Grein, i. 376.4-Du. bede, an entreaty,
Tequest; gebed,a prayer; G. bitle,a request; gebet, a prayer, request.
These are derived words from the verb; viz. AS. biddan, Du. bidden,
OHG. pitian (G. bitten), to pray. Cf. Goth. bida, a prayer ; bidjan,
to pray. See Bid (1). Der. bead-roll, spelt beadroule in Tyndal’s
Works, p. 102, col. 2, ed. 1572; beads-man, Two Gent. of Verona,
TA ear tels
_BEADLE, properly, one who proclaims. (F.—Teut.) ME. bedei,
P. Plowman, B. ii. 109; bedele, Cursor Mundi, 11006.—OF. bedel, a
herald; F. bedeau, ‘a beadle,’ Cot. = MHG. biitel, OHG. butil, a pro-
claimer ; but Latinised as bidellus (E. bedell), as if from OHG. bitel,
one who asks. —OHG. but-, weak grade of biotan, to proclaim,
cognate with AS, béodan, whence AS. bydel, a herald; see Bid (2).

BEAGLE, a small dog, for hunting hares. (F.—L.?) ME. be-
gele; Hall's Chron. Hen. VI, an. 28. § 3; begle, Squire of Low
Degree, 771. Of uncertain origin. The index to Cotgrave has
‘Beagle, petite chienne.’ Cf. ‘Begle, canicula;’ Levins, 53, 43. It
would seem to bean AF. fem.sb. Dr. Murray compares it with OF.
beegueulle, a noisy importunate person, lit. ‘open mouth;’ Late L.
badata gula; see Bay (4).

‘BEAK, a bill, point. (F.—C.) ME. beke, Chaucer, Leg. of Good
Wom., 148; bec, Bestiary, 58 (ab. 1220).—F. bec. Low L. beccus,
quoted by Suetonius as of Gaulish origin (Brachet) ; and Thurneysen
suggests a connexion with Irish bacc, W. bach, a crook, a hook.

BEAKER, a sort of cup. (Scand.—L.—Gk.) ME. byker, biker;
Prompt. Parv. p. 35. Way notes that the word occurs as early as
A.D. 1348. —Icel. bikarr, a cup.+-Du. beker ; G. becher; Ital. bicchiere.
B. It appears in Late L. as bicdrium, a wine-cup ; a word formed from
Gk. Bixos, an earthen wine-vessel, whence also the dimin. forms Bixiov,
Bixidiov, y. The Gk. Bixos is of Eastern origin (Liddell). Doublet,
pitcher.

BEAM (1), a piece of timber. (E.) ME. beem, bem, beam; Ch.
C. T., B 4362 (1.15178); Layamon, 2848. AS. béam, a tree; Grein,
p- 105.-- OHG. boum, G. baum, a tree; Du. boom. Cf. also Icel.
badmr, a tree; Goth. bagms, a tree.

BEAM (2), a ray of light. (E.) A particular use of the word
above. The ‘pillar of fire’? mentioned in Exodus is called in AS.
poetry dyrnende béam, the burning beam; Grein, p. 105. Der. beam-y,
beam-less.

BEAN, a kind of plant. (E.) ME. bene, Chaucer, C. T. 3770
(A 3772). AS. béan (Lye, Bosworth).+4+Du. boon ; Icel. baun; OHG.
pona; G.bohne. Teut. type *baund, fem.

BEAR (1), to carry. (E.) ME. beren, bere, P. Plowman, B. ii. 80.
AS. beran (Grein). 4 Goth. bairan; OHG, beran; cognate with L.
Ferre; Gk. pépew; Skt. bhy, to bear; Olrish ber-im, I bear; Russ.
brate, to take, carry; Pers. burdan, to bear. = 4/BHER, to carry.
Der. bear-able, bear-er, bear-ing; barrow (2), bier, birth, bore (3),
burden (1); and cf. berth.

BEAR (2), an animal. (E.) ME. bere, Chaucer, C. T., A 1640.
AS. bera, usus (Grein). + Du. beer; Icel. bera, bjorn; OHG. pero,
bero, G. bir. _Teut. type *beron-, masc. Further allied to Russ. ber-
in ber-loga, a bear’s lair or den; Skt. bhallas (for *bhar-las), a bear.
Named from its colour. Cf. Lith. béras, brown (Kluge).

BEARD, hair on the chin. (E.) ME. berde, berd; Chaucer, Prol.
332. AS. beard, Grein, i, 102.4+ Du. baard; G. bart. Teut. type
*bardoz, m. Allied to Russ. boroda; Lith. barzda; L. barba, the
beard; from Idg. type *bhardha, fem. Brugm.i.§ 972. Der. beard-
ed, beard-less. Oo as Pe


BECKON


BEAST, an animal. (F.—L.) ME. beste, Chaucer, C. T. 1978 (A.
1976); beaste, Old Eng. Homilies, i. 277.—OF. beste (F. béte).— L.
bestia, an animal. Der. beast-like, beast-ly, ME. beestli, Wyclif, 1 Cor.
xy. 44, to tr. L. animale ; beast-li-ness, best-i-al (L. bestidlis), best-i-al-
i-ty, best-i-al-ise.

BEAT, to strike. (E.) ME. beten, bete, P. Plowman, B. xiv. 19.
AS. béatan, to beat; Grein, i. 106.+4-Icel. bauta, to beat; OHG. pazan,.
MHG., bozen, to beat. Teut. type *bautan-. Der. beat, sb., beat-er,.
beetle (2). @ The resemblance to F. battre, L. batuere, is accidental.

BEATIF'Y, to make blessed. (F.—L.) Bp. Taylor has ‘beatified
spirits ;” vol. i. ser. 8.— MF, beatifier, ‘to beatifie; to make blessed,
sacred, or happy ;’ Cot.—L. beatificare, to make happy.=L. beati-,.
for bedtus, happy; and facere, to make, the stem fac- becoming /ic- in
composition. Bedtus is a pp. of bedre, to make happy, to bless. Der..
beatific, Milton, P. L. i. 684, beatific-al, beatific-al-ly, beatific-at-ion.

BEATITUDE, happiness. (F.—L.) Used by Ben Jonson,,
Eupheme, ix. 137; Milton, P. L. ili. 62.—MF. beatitude, ‘beatitude,
happiness ;’ Cot.—L. bedtitidinem, acc. from nom. bedtitudo, happi-
ness. L. beatus, happy.—L. bedre, to bless. See Beatify.

BEAU, a fine, dressy man. (F.—L.) Sir Cloudesley Shovel is re-
presented on his tomb ‘by the figure of a beaw ;’ Spectator, no. 26; cf.
ME. beau, adj., as in beau sir, Ch., H. Fame, 643.—F. beau, comely
(Cotgrave) ; OF. bel.= L. bellum, acc. of bellus, fine, fair; supposed to:
be a contracted form of *bendus, dimin. of *benus, related by gradation
to bonus, good; cf. L. bene, well. See Bounty. Der. From the F-.
fem. form belle (L. bella) we have E. belle.

BEAUTY, faimess. (F.—L.) ME. beauté, Chaucer, C. T. 2387
(A 2385).—OF. biaude, beltet.— Late L. acc. bellitatem; from nom.
bellitas, fairness. = L, belli-, for bellus, fair, with suffix -tat-, signifying
state or condition. See Beau. Der. beaute-ous (bewteous in Sir T.
More, Works, p. 2 g), beaute-ous-ly, beaute-ous-ness, beauti-ful, Shak.
Sonnet 106, beauti-ful-ly, beauti-fy.

BEAVER (1), an animal. (E.) ME. bever, in comp. bever-hat,
Chaucer, Prol. 272. AS,defer, gloss to fiber; ALlfric’s Gloss. (Nomina
Ferarum).-+ Du. bever; Icel. bjorr; Dan. bever; Swed. bafver; G.
biber; Russian bobr’?; Lith, bebrus; L. fiber. Cf. Skt. babhru-s, (1)
brown, (2) a large ichneumon, Teut. type *bebruz, m.; Idg. type
*bhebhrus, reduplicated derivative of *bkru-s, brown, tawny. Brugm.
i. § 566. See Brown.

BEAVER (2), the lower (movable) part ofa helmet. (F.) Shak.
has beaver, Hamlet, i. 2. 230. Spelt baviere before 1490 (N. E. D.).
—F. baviére, meaning ‘the bever of an helmet ;’ and, primarily, a
child’s ‘bib, mocket, or mocketer, to put before the bosome of a slaver-
ing child;’ Cot. Thus, the lower part of the helmet was named from
a fancied resemblance to a child’s bib. = F. baver, to foam, froth, slaver;
Cot. =F. bave, foam, froth, slaver, drivell; Cot. Perhaps imitative ;
from the movement of the lips; cf. Bret. babouz, slaver. @ The
derivation from Ital. bevere, to drink, is quite unfounded. The spelling
beaver is due to confusion with ‘ beaver hat.’

BEAVER (3), BEVER, a potation, short intermediate repast.
(F.—L.) ‘Arete. What, at yourdever, gallants?’ Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s
Revels, Activ. ME. beuer (= bever), ‘drinkinge tyme, Biberrium ;”
Prompt. Parv.=— AF. deivre, a drink, Gaimar’s Chron. 1. 5868; pl.
beveres, id. 1. 5994. Merely the substantival use of OF. bevre, to
drink, = L. bibere, to drink. See Beverage. For similar examples
of infin. moods as sbs., cf. leisure, pleasure, attainder, remainder.
@ Quite distinct from beaver (2). It is still in use; Clare speaks of
‘the bevering hour,’ in his Harvest Morning, st. 7.

BECALM, to make calm. (Hybrid; E. and F.) Becalmed is in
Hackluyt’s Voyages, vol. ii. pt. 2. p. 168 ; and in Mirror for Magis-
trates, p. 196 (R.) Formed by prefixing E. be- to calm, a word of
F. origin. See Be- and Calm,

BECAUSE, for the reason that. (Hybrid; E. and F.) Formerly
written bi cause, P. Plowman, B. iii. 99; also be cause and by cause.
Be, bi, and by are all early forms of the prep. by. Cause is of F. origin.
See By and Cause.

BECHANCE, to befall, happen. (Hybrid; E.and¥F.) In Shak.
Merch. i. 1. 38. From be-, prefix, q. v., and chance, q. v.

BECK (1), a nod or sign; and, as a vb. to make a sign. (E.) The
ME. bek, sb., is not common in early writers; beck occurs in Surrey’s.
tr. of Virgil, Aineid, iv. 346; and bek in Wyclif, Job, xxvi. 11 (1st.
version). It is clearly formed from the verb, which is older, and occurs
in Chaucer, C. T. 12330 (C 396). The verb, again, is not an original
word, but was suggested by the bek- of ME. beknen, to beckon; cf.
‘ beknynge, or a bek;’ Prompt. Parv. See Beckon.

BECK (2), a stream. (Scand.) ME. bek, Prompt. Parv. p. 29;
Legends of Holy Rood, p. 82,1. 742. [Not E., but Scandinavian. ]—
Icel. bekkr, a stream, brook; Swed. bdck, a brook; Dan. bak. Teut.
type *bakkiz,m.; allied to Teut. type *bakiz, whence Du. beek, G. bach.

BECKON, to make a sign. (E.) ME. becnen,Ormulum, 223. AS.

| bécnian, béacnian (also biecnan), to signify by a sign. AS. béacen, a


BECOME


sign, with the addition of the suffix -taz, used to form verbs from sbs,
See Beacon and Beck.

BECOME, to attain to a state; to suit. (E.) ME. becumen,
bicumen; as, ‘and bicomen hise men’ =and became his servants, Have-
lok, 1. 2257; ‘it bicumeth him swithe wel’=it becomes (suits) him
very well, O. Eng. Bestiary, ed. Morris, 1. 738. See the large collection
of examples in Matzner, p. 224,s. v. bicumen. AS. becuman, to arrive,
happen, turn out, befal (whence the sense of ‘suit’ was later developed),
Grein, i. 81; bicuman, i. 113. 4+ Goth, bikwiman, to come upon one,
to befal; 1 Thes. v. 3; OHG. piquéman, MHG. bekomen, to happen,
befal, reach, &c.; whence mod. G. bequem, fit, apt, suitable, con-
venient. B. A compound of prefix be-, and AS. cuman, to come.
See Come. Der. becom-ing, becom-ing-ly.

BED, a couch to sleep on. (E.) ME. bed, Chaucer, Prol. 295 (A
293). AS. bed, bedd.4 Du. bed; Goth. badi, a bed; OHG. petti, G.
bett, a bed. Teut. type *badjom,n. Der. bed, verb; bedd-ing, Ch.,
C. T., A 1616; bed-ridden, q.v.; bed-stead, q. v.; bed-chamber (Shak.
Cymb. i. 6. 196), bed-clothes (All’s Well, iv. 3. 287), bed-fellow (Temp.
ii. 2. 42), bed-hangings (2 Hen. IV, ii. 1.158), bed-presser (1 Hen. IV,
ii. 4. 268), bed-right (Temp. iv. 96), bed-room (Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 2. 51),
bed-time (Mids. Nt. Dr. v. 34), bed-work (Troil. i. 3. 205).

BEDABBLE, BEDAUB, BEDAZZLE. From the E. prefix
be-, and dabble, daub, dazzle, q.v. : Shak. has bedabbled, Mids. Nt. Dr.
iii. 2. 4433; bedaubed, Rom. iii. 2. 55; bedazzled, Tam. Shrew, iv. 5. 46.
.BEDELL; see remarks upon Beadle (above).

BEDEW, to cover with dew. (E.) Spenser has bedeawd, F. Q.
i,12.16. It occurs in the Ayenbite of Inwyt: ‘bedeaweth the herte ;’
». 116. From be-, prefix, q.v.; and dew, q.v.

BEDIGHT, to array. (E.) ‘That derely were bydy3th;’ Sir
Degrevant, 648. From be-, prefix, q.v.; and dight, q. v.

BEDIM, to make dim. (E.) In Shak. Temp. v. 1. 41.
prefix, q.v.; and dim, q.v.

BEDIZEN, to deck out. (E.) Not in early use. The quotations
in Richardson and N. E. D. show that the earlier word was the simple
form dizen, from which bedizen was formed by help of the common
prefix be-, like bedeck from deck. See Dizen.

BEDLAM, a hospital for lunatics. (Place-name; Heb.) Acorrup-
tion of Bethlehem. ‘ Bethlehem hospital, so called from having been
originally [in 1247] the hospital of St. Mary of Bethlehem, [a hospital
for lunatics in 1402, and} a royal foundation for the reception of
lunatics, incorporated by Henry VIII in 1547;’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates.
ME. bedlem, as in the phrase ‘in bedlem and in babiloyne’ = in Beth-
Jehem and Babylon; P. Plowman, B. v. 534; according to three MSS.,
where other MSS. read bethleem. Cf. Cursor Mundi, 11561. The
literal sense is ‘house of bread.” Der. bedlam-ite.

BEDOUIN, a wandering Arab. (F.—Arab.) Modern; yet we
find 2 ME. bedoyne, Mandeville, ch. 5, p. 35. Borrowed from F.
bédouin, properly a pl. form, answering to Arab. badawin, pl. of
badawiy, wild, rude, wandering, as the Arabs in the desert. = Arab.
badw, a desert; also, departing for the desert, leading a wandering
life. — Arab. root badawa, he went into the desert; see Rich. Dict.,

p- 251, 252; and Devic.

BEDRIDDEN, confined to one’s bed. (E.) ME. bedreden, used
in the plural; P. Plowman, A. viii. 85 ; bedrede, sing. Chaucer, C. T.
7351 (D 1769). AS. bedrida, bedreda, glossed by paraliticus; Voc.
1YO2u% 54T. 20, and see Ailfric’s Hom. i. 472.—AS. bed, a bed, and
rida, a knight, a rider; thus the sense is a bed-rider, a term for a
disabled man. The AS. rid-a, a rider, is from rid-, weak grade of
ridan, to ride. The ME. form was shortened to bedred, bedrid ; after
which -dex was added, under the impression that the form ought to
representa pp. We find the sing. bedreden as early as in Hampole,
Prick of Conse. 808. B. There is a term of similar import, spelt
bedderedig in the Bremen Worterbuch, i. 65; from Low-G. bedde, a
bed, and redig, riding. We find also ME. bedlawer for ‘one who lies
in bed,’ which is said, in the Prompt. Parv. p. 28, to be 4 synonym
for bedridden. See Prompt. Pary. p. 28, note 4.

BEDSTEAD, the frame of a bed. (E.) ME. bedstede, Prompt.
Parv. p. 28.—AS. bed, a bed; and stede, a place, stead, station. So
called from its firmness and stability; cf. ME. stede-fast, i.e. stead-
fast. See Bed and Stead.

BEE, an insect. (E.) ME. bee, pl. bees and been, both of which
occur in Chaucer, C. T. 10518, 10296 (F 204, E 2422). AS. béo, bi,
Grein, p. 109; early form, bio.4-Du. bi ; OHG. pra. Cf. G. diene,
Trish beach, a bee.

BEECH, a kind of tree. (E.) ME. beech, Chaucer, C. T. 2925
(A. 2923). AS. déce, gloss to fagus, Voc. 268. 36. Earlier bdece ;
Sweet, O. E. Texts. Cf. AS. béc-tréow, beech-tree; Napier’s Glosses,
23. 30; also the adj. bécen, E. beechen, as in ‘ Faginus, bécen,’ Voc.
137.22. The AS. béce, weak fem., represents a Teut. type *bok-j6n
(with mutation of 6 to 2); allied to Teut. type *bok-a, str. fem.,
whence AS, bac, a beech-tree; see Book. Further allied to Du. |


From be-,


BEFALL 53


beuk; G. buche (OHG. puohha); L. faigus; Gk. pyys. These
forms point to an orig. Idg. type *bhagos, meaning a tree with escu-
lent fruit ; cf. Gk. payety, to eat. Der. beech-en, adj. (= AS. bécen).

BEEF, an ox; the flesh of an ox. (F.—L.) ME. beof, Polit.
Songs, p- 334, 1. 235 (temp. Edw. II) ; beef, Chaucer, C. T. 7335
(D 1753).— AF. bef, an ox, Year-books of Edw. I, 1292-3, p. 245 3
OF. boef, buef.—L. acc. bouvem, an ox ; nom. bds; an Oscan form.
Gael. b6,a cow; AS. ci, a cow. Thus the word beef is co-radicate
with cow. See Cow. Der. beef-eater, q.v.

BEEF-EATER, a yeoman of the guard. (Hybrid; F. and E.)
‘Pensioners and beefeaters’ [of Charles II.], Argument against a
Standing Army, ed. 1697, p. 16; qu. in N. and Q. 5 S. viii. 398.
Also in The Spectator, no. 625 (1714); and as early as 1610, in
Histriomastix, ili, 1.99. An eater of beef; but why this designation
was given them is not recorded. 4f In Todd’s Johnson is the follow-
ing notable passage. ‘From beef and eat, because the commons is
beef when on waiting. Mr. Steevens derives it thus. Beefeater may
come from beaufetier, one who attends at the side-board, which was
anciently placed in a beaufet. The business of the beefeaters was,
and perhaps is still, to attend the king at meals. This derivation is
corroborated by the circumstance of the beefeaters having a hasp
suspended to their belts forthe reception of keys.’ This extraordinary
guess has met with extraordinary favour, having been quoted in
Mrs. Markham’s History of England, and thus taught to young
children. It is also quoted in Max Miiller’s Lectures, 8th ed. ii. 582,
but with the substitution of buffetier for beaufetier, and buffet is ex-
plained as ‘a table near the door of the dining-hall.’ There is not
the faintest tittle of evidence for the derivation beyond the ‘hasp
suspended to their belts.’ Ido not find beaufetier or buffetier, but I
find in Cotgrave that buffeteurs de vin were ‘ such carmen or boatmen
as steal wine out of the vessels they have in charge, and afterwards
fill them up with water.’ Mr. Steevens does not tell us what a
beaufet is, nor how a sideboard was ‘anciently placed in’ it. On
this point, see Buffet, sb. When the F. buffetier can be found, with
the sense of ‘ waiter at a side-board’ in reasonably old French, or
when the E. beefeater can be found spelt differently from its present
spelling in a book earlier than the time of Mr. Steevens, it will be
sufficient time to discuss the question further. Meanwhile, we may
note that Ben Jonson uses eater in the sense of ‘servant,’ as in
‘Where are all my eaters?’ Silent Woman, iii. 2. Also, that the
expression ‘ powderbeef Iubber’ occurs in the sense of ‘ man-servant,’
where powder-beef certainly means salt-beef; see ‘ Powder, to salt,’ in
Nares. A rich man is spoken of as having ‘ confidence of [in] so
many powdrebeefe lubbers as he fedde at home;’ Chaloner, transla-
tion of Prayse of Follie, 2nd edit. 1577, G v. (1st ed. in 1549). See
Notes and Queries, 5 S. viii. 57; 6S. vi. 491. Cf. bread-winner, a
sb. of similar formation; and particularly, AS. haf-éta, a domestic
servant, lit. ‘loaf-eater ;” so that the ideais very old. Also pie-crust-
eater, in Dekker’s Shoemaker’s Holiday, in Works (1873), i. 62;
beef-eating slaves, Eng. Garner, ed. Arber, i. 339 (1681); and see
Tatler, no. 148.

BEER, a kind of drink. (E.) ME. bere, Prompt. Parv. p. 313
ber, King Horn, ed. Lumby, 1. 1112. AS. béor, beer, Grein, i. 112.
+Dnu. bier; Icel. bjarr; G. bier (OHG. dior). Origin unknown.

BEESTINGS; see Biestings.

BEET, a plant. (L.) ME. bere, in a vol. of Vocabularies, ed.
T. Wright, p. 190. AS. béte, gen. bétan, fem. sb., in Cockayne’s
Leechdoms ; but certainly borrowed from L, béta, used by Pliny.

BEETLE (1), an insect. (E.) Prov. E. bittle. ME. bityl, Prompt.
Parv. p. 37. AS. bitela, bitula; as in ‘ Mordiculus, bitela, Voc. 122.
8; *Blattis, bitulum, Sweet, O. E. Texts.— AS. biz-, weak grade of
bitan, to bite; with suffix -el of the agent. Thus beetle means ‘the
biting insect ;’ cf. ‘ Mordiculus, bitela,’ showing that the word was
understood in that sense. See Bite and Bitter.

BEETLE (2), 2 heavy mallet. (E.) ME. betylle, Prompt. Parv.
P- 343 bettles, pl. Ancren Riwle, p. 188. AS. bytel, bytl ; Judges, iv.
21; answering to OWessex *bietel, OMerc. *bétel; cf. Low G,
bétel. Teut. type *bautiloz, ‘a beater, from *bautan- (AS. béatan),
to beat; with regular mutation. See Beat. Der. beetle-headed,
Tam. Shrew, iv. I. 161, i.e. with a head like a log, like a block-
head, dull.

BEETLE (3), to jut out and hang over. (E.) ‘The summit of
the cliff That beetles o’er his base into the sea;’ Hamlet, i. 4. 71.
Apparently coined by Shakespeare. By whomsoever coined, the idea
was adopted from the ME. bitelbrowed, beetle-browed, having pro-
minent brows, as in P. Plowman, B. v. 190; also spelt bitterbrowed,
id., footnote. The reference seems to be to the bectle (N.E.D.). Cf.
F. sourcils de hanneton (Hatzfeld). See Beetle (1). Der. beetl-ing ;
cf. beetle-browed, which is really the older expression.

BEFALL, to happen. (E.) ME. befallen, bifailen, in common
use; Havelok, 2981. AS. befeallan, Grein, i. 83.4+OSax. bifallan ;


BS BEFOOL


OF ries. difalla; Du. bevallen, to please; OHG. bifallan. From be-,
prefix, and fall; see Be- and Fall. @ This is one of the original
verbs on which so many others beginning with be- were modelled.
BEFOOL, to make a fool of. (E. and F.) ME. befolen, Gower,
‘C.A. iii, 236 (b. vii. 4293). —E. prefix be-, and ME. fol, a fool; see


Fool.

BEFORE, prep., in front of; adv., in front. (E.) ME. bifore,
before, biforen, beforen; in common use ; spelt biforen, Layamon, iii.
131. AS. beforan, biforan, prep. and ady., Grein, i. 83, 84, I15.—
AS. be-, bi-, prefix, see Be-or By; and foran, before, prep. and adv.,
Grein, i. 315. AS. foran isa longer form (-an being a suffix) from
fore, prep. and adv., before, for; Grein, i. 321. See Fore, For.
Cf. OSax. biforan, before; MHG. bevor, bevore ; OHG. bifora, before.
See below.

BEFOREHAND, previously. (E.) In early use as an adverb.
ME, biuorenhond, Ancren Riwle, p. 212; from ME. biuoren, before,
and hond, hand. See Before and Hand.

BEG, to ask for alms, (F.) Cf. ME, beggar, beggere, a beggar.
In the Ancren Riwle, p. 168, we read: ‘ Hit is beggares rihte uorte
{ for to] beren bagge on bac.’ The word is French, or rather Anglo-
French. The AF. begger, to beg, occurs in Peter Langtoft, ed.
Wright, i. 248. It was evolved from the sb. beggare, found in the
Ancren Riwle, as above; or from the equivalent OF. begard, begart,
a name given to an order of lay brothers in the Low Countries in the
13th century ; and it was soon adopted by many who were mere idle
mendicants. The masc. form Begard seems to have imitated that of
the female order of Begwines; the suffix -ard, -art, being masculine,
as in dot-ard. See the examples of Begger in the Rom. of the Rose,
C. 7256, 7282, and the note. See Beguine. 4 The derivative
beguigner likewise meant to beg; Britton, i. 22. § 15 (vol. i. p. 93).
Der. (from beggar), beg, verb ; also beggar-ly, beggar-li-ness, beggar-y.

BEGET, to generate, produce. (E.) ME. bigiten, begeten, (1) to
obtain, acquire; (2) to beget. ‘To 6c3iten mine rihte’=to obtain
my tight; Layamon, i. 405. ‘Thus wes Marlin bijeten’=thus was
Merlin begotten ; Layamon, ii. 237. AS. begitan, bigitan, to acquire;
Grein, i. 86, 115.— AS. be-, bi-, prefix; and gitan, to get. The
Southern form would have been beyet; see Get. Sotoo OSax. bigetan,
to seize, get; and Goth. bigitan, to find. Der. begett-er.

BEGIN, to commence. (E.) ME. beginnen, biginnen, in common
use. AS, beginnan, Grein, i. 86 (though the form onginnan, with the
same signification, is far more common), From the prefix be-, and
AS. ginnan, to begin. Cf. Du. and G. beginnen, to begin. See
Gin (1). Der. beginn-er, beginn-ing.

BEGONEH, pp. beset. (E.) In phr. woe-begone, i.e. affected or
oppressed with woe, beset with grief. ‘The orig. phrase was him
was wo begon, i.e. to him woe had closed round; but already in
Chaucer we find the later construction in He was wo begon;’ N.E.D.
Wel bigon occurs in the Rom. of the Rose, 1. 580, apparently in the
sense of ‘ glad ;” lit. well surrounded or beset. It is the pp. of ME.
begon, to beset ; cf. ‘wo pe bigo,’ woe come upon thee, Reliq. Antiq.
ii, 273.— AS. bigdn, began, orig. to go about, Grein, i. 115. From
prefix be-, bi-, and AS. gdm, to go. Cf. Du. begaan, concerned,
affected. gm In the phrase ‘ begone!’ we really use ¢wo words; it
should be written ‘be gone!’ See Go.

BEGONTA, a plant. (F.) Named by Plumier, a French bota-
nist, (1646-1704), after Michel Begon, a French promoter of botany
(1638-1710). See N.E. D.

BEGUILE, to deceive, amuse. (Hybrid; E. and F.) ME.
digilen, to beguile, Ancren Riwle, p. 330.—E. prefix be-, bi- (AS. be-,
bi-) ; and ME, gylen, gilen, to deceive. ‘As theigh he gyled were’
=as if he were beguiled; Will. of Palerne, 689.—OF. guiler, to
deceive.—OF. guile, guile, deceit. See Guile. Der. beguil-ing,
beguil-ing-ly, beguil-er.

BEGUINE, one of a class of religious devotees. (F.) The word
is rather French than English; and, though we find a Low-Latin
form beguinus, it was chiefly used as a feminine noun, viz. F. béeguine,
Low L. beghina, The béguines belonged to a religious order in
Flanders, who, without taking regular vows of obedience, lived a
somewhat similar life to that of the begging friars, and dwelt together
in houses called béguinages. They were ‘first established at Liége,
and afterwards at Nivelle, in 1207, some say 1226. The Grand
Beguinage of Bruges was the most extensive ;’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates.
B, Another set of ‘ religious’ were called Begardi; and it has been
clearly ascertained that both names were derived from the surname
(or nickname) of a certain Lambert Bégue or le Begue (the stammerer),
a priest of Li¢ge, who founded the order of Beguines in the rath
century. See Ducange, who quotes an annal of 1180, s.v. Beghardi.
Cf. Walloon bégui, to stammer, in the dialect of Namur; Picard
béguer; equivalent to F. bégayer. With the fem. form Beguine cf.
hero-ine ; with the masc. form Beghard, Begard, cf. reyn-ard.’ See also


Beggar and Biggen.


BEHOLD |


BEGUM, in the E. Indies, a lady of the highest rank. (Pers. =
Turk. and Arab.) Rich. Pers. Dict. p. 284, gives Pers. begum, a
queen, lady of rank; also queen-mother, respectable matron; spelt
bigamatp. 310. ‘Queen mother’ seems to be the orig. sense, as Devic
thinks that the word is compounded of Turk. beg or bey, a bey, gover-
nor, and Arab. 2m or umm, mother ; hence ‘ governor’s mother.’ The
Arab. umm, mother, is in Rich. Dict. p. 162. And see Bey. Yule
(p. §9) explains it from Eastern Turki bigam, a fem. formation from
beg. @ Another derivative of bey is the title beglerbeg, given to the
governor of a province ; see Massinger, Renegado, iii. 4. In Sandys’
Travels (1632), we read of ‘the Beglerbegs, the name signifying a lord
of lords;” p. 47. This explanation is correct; beglér or beylér
signifying lords, and beg or bey,a lord. See Bey.

BEHALF, interest, benefit. (E.) In ME., only in the phrase ix,
on (or vppon) bihalue, or behalue. Chaucer has: ‘on my bihalue’
(w=v), Troil. and Cress. ii. 1458. So also: ‘in themperours bihelue’
=on the emperor’s behalf ; Seven Sages, ed. Weber, 325. Here ox
my bihalue is a substitution for the AS. on healfe, on the side of (see
exx, in Grein, i. 53), blended with a second common phrase be healfe,
by the side of (same tef.).  B. The AS. healf, lit. half, is constantly
used in the sense of ‘side;’ and even now the best paraphrase of ‘ in
my behalf’ is ‘on my side.’ That this explanation is correct can
easily be traced by the examples in Matzner’s Old Eng. Dict., which
shows that bikalven was in common use as a prep. and adv. before the
sb. behalf came into use at all. See Layamon, vol. i. p. 349; ii. 585
iii. 65, 114, &c. The prefix be- is the unstressed form of the prep.
by. See Half.

BEHAVE, to conduct oneself. (E.) Shak. has behave, refl., to
conduct oneself, 2 Hen. VI, iv. 3. 5; and intr. but not refl., Oth. iv.
2.108. Rare in early authors, but the phr. ‘to lerne hur to behave
hur among men’ =to teach her to behave herself amongst men, occurs
in Le Bone Florence of Rome, 1.1567, in Ritson’s Metrical Romances,
vol. iii. It is a mere compound of the verb ¢o have with the AS. and
ME. prefix be-. [There was an AS. behebban, to detain ; but behave
was formed independently of it.] @] E. behave oneself answers to
G, sich behaben.

BEHAVIOUR, conduct. (E., with F. suffix.) Spelt behavoure,
Levins, 222. 45. Formed, abnormally, from the verb éo behave, q.v.
The curious suffix is best accounted for by supposing a confusion with
the Tudor E. havour, haviour, due to AF. aveir, F. avoir, used sub-
stantively, a word which not only meant ‘wealth’ or ‘ possessions,’
but also ‘ability ;” see Cotgrave. And see Haviour in Croft’s Gloss.
to Elyot’s Governour. It must be remembered (1) that behaviour was
often shortened to haviour, as in Shakespeare; and (2) that havings,
at least in Lowland Scotch, had the double meaning of (a) possessions,
and (6) carriage, behaviour. See Jamieson’s Scot. Dict.

BEHEAD, to cut off the head. (E.) ME. bihefden, biheafden,
bihafden. ‘Heo us wulle bihafdi’=they will behead us, Layamon,
iii. 45. Later, spelt bizeden; ‘he bihedide Joon,’ he beheaded John;
Wyclif, Matt. xiv. 10. AS. behéafdian, to behead; Matt. xiv. 1o.—
AS. be-, prefix, lit. ‘ by,’ with a privative force; and héafod, head.
See Head. Cf. Du. onthoofden, G. enthaupten, to behead.

BEHEMOTH, a hippopotamus. (Heb.—Egypt.) See Job, xl.
15.— Heb. behkémdth, apparently a plural, signifying ‘beasts;’ but
here used to denote ‘great beast;’ as if from sing. béhémih, a
beast. But it is thought that this is merely a Heb. popular etymo-
logy; and that the word is really adapted from the Egypt. p-ehe-mau,
* water-ox,’ a hippopotamus; see Gesenius, 8th ed. p. 94.

BEHEST, a command, (E.) ME. beheste, biheste, commonly used
in the sense of ‘a promise;” Chaucer, C. T. 4461 (B 41) ; and con-
nected with the verb bihote, behote, to promise, Chaucer, C. T. 1856
(A 1854). From de-, prefix, and hest. Cf. AS. beh@s, a vow, behat,
a promise, behatan, to promise. ‘ He fela behésa behét,’ he made
many promises; AS. Chron., anno 1093. The final ¢ is excrescent.
See Hest.

BEHIND, after. (E.) ME. behinde, bihinde. bihinden, after, at the
back of, afterwards; Chaucer, C. T. 4847 (B 427). AS. behindan,
adv. and prep., afterwards, after, Grein, i. 87. From AS. prefix be-;
and hindan, ady., behind, at the back, Grein, ii. 76. Cf. OSax. bi-
hindan, advy., behind; Heliand, 1. 3660. See Hind, Der. behind-
hand, not in early use; made in imitation of before-hand, q.v. It
occurs in Shak. Winter’s Tale, v. 1. 151.

BEHOLD, to see, watch, observe. (E.) ME. biholden, beholden,
biholde, beholde, to see, observe, to bind by obligation ; in common
use. [The last sense appears only in the pp. beholden; ‘ beholdyn, or
bowndyn, obligor, teneor ;? Prompt. Parv. p. 28. Shak. wrongly has
beholding for the pp. beholden, as in Merry Wives, i. I. 283.| AS.
behealdan, to hold, possess, guard, observe, see ; Grein, i. 87.4-OF ries,
bihalda, to keep; OSax. bihaldan, tokeep ; Du. behouden, to preserve,
keep; G. behalten, to keep. From AS. prefix be-, and healdan, to


| hold. See Bée- and Hold. [Cf. L. éweor, I see, keep; E. guard,


BEHOOF


as compared with regard, &c.] Der. behold-er ; also pp. behold-en,
corrupted to behold-ing.

BEHOOF, advantage. (E.) Almost invariably found in ME. in
the dat. case behoue, bihoue [u written for v], with the prep. éo pre-
ceding it; as in ‘¢o ancren bthowe,’ for the use of anchoresses, Ancren
Riwle, p. 90. AS. behdf, advantage, in Napier’s Glosses; also in the
comp. behGflic ; see bihdflic is, gloss to L. oportet in Luke, xviii. 1, in
the Lindisfarne MS. (Northumbrian dialect). Cf. OFries. behdf,
bthof.4+Du. behoef, commonly in the phr. ten behoeve van, for the ad-
vantage of; Swed. behof, want, need; Dan. behov, need; G. behuf,
behoof. B. The be- is a prefix; cf. Swed. héfvas, to beseem. All
from Teut. type *hdf, second grade of *haf-, as in Goth. haf-jan, AS.
hebban, to heave; see Heave. From the4/KAP, to hold, contain ;
cf. L. capax, containing, capere, to seize, orig. to contain, hold, grasp.
See Brugm. i. § 635. sy. The development of ideas is accordingly
(1) to seize, hold fast, retain, (2) to fit for one’s use, to make
serviceable. Der. behove (below).

BEHOVE, to become, befit. (E.) ME. bihoven, behoven (writ-
ten bihowen, behouen in MSS.) ; commonly as impers. verb, bihoveth,
behoveth, Chaucer, Troil. iv. 1004; pt. t. bihouede, Ancren Riwle,
p- 394. AS. bihdfian, behofian, to need, be necessary ; Grein,i. 87, 116.
Cf, OF ries. bihovia, to behove.4 Du. behoeven, to be necessary, to be-
hove; Swed. behéfva; Dan. behive. B. The forms of these verbs
show that they are derivatives from the sb. (above). Also, the be- is
a mere prefix. The simple verb appears only in the Icel. Zefa, to
behove; Swed. héfvas, to beseem. See Behoof.

BELABOUR, to ply vigorously, beat soundly. (Hybrid ;.E. and
F.—L.) ‘He... belaboured Jubellius with a cudgel ;’ North’s Plutarch,
p- 964.—E. prefix be-, q.v.; and labour, q. v.

BELAY, to fasten a rope. (Du.) To belay isto fasten a rope by
laying it round and round a couple of pins. This use was prob. sug-
gested by Du. beleggen, to cover, to overlay, to border, to lace,
garnish with fringe, &c. ; and, as a naut. term, to belay. From prefix
be- (the same as E. prefix be-), and leggen, to lay, place, cognate with
E. lay. See Lay (1). 4 There was also a native E. word to belay,
a compound of be- and Jay, but it meant ‘ to besiege’ or ‘ beleaguer’
a castle ; see Spenser, Sonnet 14. See Beleaguer.

BELCHG, to eructate. (E.) ME. belken, belke, Towneley Myst.
p- 314. The sb. bolke is found, in the dat. case, in P. Plowman, B.
vy. 3973; and the vb. bolken, Prompt. Parv. p. 43. AS. bealcan, Ps.
xviii. 2; commoner in the derived form bealcettan, Ps. xliv. 1; Ps.
cxvili. 1713 also belcan, belcettan (Grein). Cf. Du. balken, to bray,
Du. bulken, Low G. bolken, to low, bellow, roar; Hamburg bélcken,
to low; opbolcken, to belch up (Richey). Allied to Bellow.

BELDAM, an old woman. (F.—L.) Ironically used for beldame,
i. e. fair lady, in which sense it occurs in Spenser, F. Q. iii. 2.43. Cf.
‘beldame, meregrant ;’ Palsgrave. =F. belle, fair; dame, lady.=L,
bella, fair; domina, lady. Hence beldam is a doublet of belladonna.

BELEAGUER, to besiege. (Du.) ‘In defence of beleaguer’d
truth ;’ Milton, Areop. ed. Hales, p. 46. We also find the verb to
beleague; as in ‘beseiging and beleaguing of cities;’ Holland’s
Plutarch, p. 319 (R.); but this is a less correct form. = Du. belegeren,
to besiege; from prefix be- (as in E.), and leger, a bed, a camp, army
in encampment; which is from leggen, to lay, place, cognate with
E. Jay. [Thus the true E. word is belay; see Note to belay. The Du.
leger is E. lair. |4G. belagern, to besiege; lager, a camp; legen, to
lay; Swell. beliigra, to besiege; ldéger, a camp; lagga, to lay. See
Lair, Lay (1).

BELEMNITE, a kind of fossil. (Gk.) In Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. ii. c. 5. s. 10. So called because shaped like the head of
a dart.— Gk. BeAepvirns, a kind of stone, belemnite. — Gk. BéAepvor,
a dart, missile, — Gk. BadAecy, to cast, throw ; also to fall.Skt. gal,
to drop, distil, fall; Brugm. i. § 653.

BELFRY, properly, a guard-tower. (F.—G.) Owing to a cor-
ruption, the word is now only used for ‘a tower for bells.’ Spelt
belfroy, Caxton, Godefroy of Boloyne, ch. 153 (p. 227, 1. 12). Cor-
rupted from ME. berfray, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1187 ; berfrey,
King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 2777.— ONorth F. berfrei, berfreit ; OF.
berfroi, berfroit (also belefrot) ; cf. Guernsey belfré (Métivier).— MHG,
bercfrit, berchfrit, a. protecting tower.—MHG. berc, protection (from
bergen, to protect); and MHG. jfride, OHG. fridu (G. friede), a
place of security (allied to OHG. fri, cognate with E. free). B. The
mod. G. friede means only ‘ peace,’ but OHG. fridu meant also ‘a
place of security,’ and even ‘a tower;’ so that bercfrit meant ‘a
protecting tower’ or ‘guard-tower.’ @ The term was first applied
to the towers upon wheels, so much used in the siege of towns.
Even the OF. bierfrois is used with the sense of ‘belfry;’ as in
‘campanile, quod bierfrois dicitur;’? (dated 1226); in Pertz, Monu-
menta Germaniae, Legg. ii. 257.

BELIE, to tell liesabout. (E.) Much Ado, iv. 1.148. ‘ To belye
the truth;’ Tyndal, Works, p. 105, 1. 2. ME. bilien, bilizen; the


BELTANE


pp. bilowen occurs in P. Plowman, B, ii. 22, and in the Ancren Riwle,
p- 68.—AS. be-, prefix; and Jéogan, to lic. See Lie (2).

BELIEVE, to have faith in. (E.) ME. beleve, Ayenbite of Inwyt,
p. 151; EE. bilefde, pt. t. of bilefen, Layamon, 28536*. The prefix is
AS. be- or bi-, substituted for the earlier prefix ge-.—OMerc. geléfan,
AS. ge-ljfan, gelifan (Grein, i. 424), to believe.4-Goth. galaubjan, to
believe, to esteem as valuable; from galaubs, valuable, allied to Goth.
liubs, dear, equivalent to AS. léof, Eng, lief: OHG. galaupjan, to
believe ; whence G. glauben. See Lief. Here AS. léof represents
a Teut. type *lewb-oz; and from the 2nd grade (Jaub) we have the
verb *laubjan- ; which gives (by mutation) the AS, -liefan, -lyfan,
OMerc. -léfan. Der. belief (ME. bileue, O. Eng. Homilies, i. 187),
believ-able, believ-er.

BELL, a hollow metallic vessel for making a loud noise. (E.)
ME, belle, a bell; Prompt. Parv. p. 30; Layamon, 29441. AS.
belles; Voc. 198. 8. Cf. EFries. belle, a bell, Du. bel. AS. bellan, to
bellow, make a loud sound (Grein).° From Idg. 4/BHELS, to
resound ; whence also Skt. bhash, to bark, Lith. balsas, voice, G.
bellen, to bark (Uhlenbeck). See Bellow.

BELLADONNA, deadly nightshade. (Ital.—L.) Various rea-
sons have been given for the name; perhaps due to the use of it by
ladies to give expression to the eyes, the pupils of which it expands,
= Ital. bella donna, a fair lady. = L. bella domina, a fair lady. Bella is
the fem. of bellus, handsome; see Beau. Domina is the fem. of
dominus, a lord; see Don, sb. Doublet, beldam.

BELLE, a fair lady. (F.—L.) In Pope, Rape of the Lock, i.
8; Fletcher, Beggar’s Bush, iv. 4.—F. belle, fem. of beau, fair, goodly.
See Beldam and Beau.

BELLIGERENT, carrying on war. (L.) For belligerant. In
Sterne, Tristram Shandy, vol. vi. c. 31.—L. belligerant-, stem of
belligerans, waging war.=—L. belli-, for bello-, stem of bellum, war;
and gerere, to carry. (1) L. bellum stands for OL. duellum; see
Duel. (2) L. gerere, pp. gestus, appears in E. jest; see Jest.
BELLOW, to make a loud noise. (E.) Gower uses belwinge with
reference to the noise made by a bull; C. A. iii. 203 (b. vii. 3322).
From ME, belwen. ‘As loude as belweth wind in helle;’ Chaucer,
Ho. of Fame, iii. 713. We also find ME. bellen; as in ‘ bellyng as
a bole’ [bull], Will. of Palerne, 1891; from AS. bellan, to make a
loud noise, Grein, i. 89.4-OHG. pellan, bellan, to make a loud noise.
Of imitative origin. B. The suffix -ow is due to the g in the derived
AS. form bylgean, to bellow, Martyr. 17 Jan. (in Cockayne’s Shrine,
p- 52); cf. Icel. belja, to bellow. And see Bell.

BELLOWS, an implement for blowing. (Scand.) ME. below, a
bag, used in the special sense of ‘bellows.’ The pl. belowes was also
used in the same sense. ‘ Belowe, or belows, follis;’ Prompt. Parv.

. 30. The numerous examples in Matzner, s.v. bali, show that
bellows is the pl. of below, a bag, from Icel. belgr, a bag. Another
ME. form is beli, bely, bellows, as in Ch. C. T., 1 3513; where Tyr-
whitt reads belows. This ME. beli is from AS. belig,abag. Cf. G.
blasebalg =a blow-bag, a pair of bellows. See Belly.

BELLY, the lower part of the human trunk. (E.) ME. bely,
pl. belies; also bali, pl. balies; P. Plowman, B. prol. 41, A. prol. 41.
AS. belg, belig, a bag, used, e.g. in the comp. béan-belgas, husks or
shells of beans, Luke xv. 16 (Lindisfarne text) ; Aa beligas, the bags,
Matt. ix. 17 (Rushworth text).4-Du. balg, the belly ; Swed. balg,
belly, bellows; Dan. be/g, shell, husk, belly; Icel. belgr, a bag;
Goth. balgs, a bag. Teut. type *balgiz,m. From balg, 2nd grade of
the Teut. root *belg-,as in AS. belg-an, orig. ‘to swell out.’ Cf. Irish
bolg, bag, belly; bolgaim, I swell; W. bol, belly. From 4/BHELGH,
to swell. 4 Bellows is from the pl. of the cognate Scand. form.

BELONG, to pertain to. (E.) ME. belongen, Gower, C. A. i.
12, 121, ii. 351 (prol. 259, i. 2345, v. 6624); Ayenbite of Inwyt,
ed. Morris, p. 12, 1.15. Not found in AS., which has only the
simple verb dangian, to long after, to crave for; Grein, ii. 157.
But cf. Du. belangen, to concern; wat belangt, as far as concerns, as
for; belangende, concerning ; EFries. belangen, to reach, attain to.
See Long (1).

BELOVED, much loved. (E.) ME. beloved, Gower, C. A. i. 106
(i. 1920). Itis the pp. of ME. bilufien, biluvien, to love greatly ; spelt
biluuien in Layamon, i. 39.— AS. prefix be-, bi-, here used intensively ;
and AS. lufian, to love. See Love. @ The ME. biluven also
means ‘to please;’ O. Eng. Homilies, i. 257; cf. Du. believen, to please.

BELOW, beneath. (E.) ME. bilooghe, adv., beneath, Allit.
Poems, ed. Morris, B. 116. Compounded of prep. bi, be, by; and
loogh, low, low. See Low (1).

BELT, a girdle. (L.) ME. belt; Chaucer, C. T. 3927 (A 3929)-
AS. belt, Voc. 192. 155 cf. Icel. bel#i; Irish and Gaelic balt, a belt,
aborder. All from L. balteus, a belt.

BELTANE, the first of May ; old May-day. (C.) ‘At Beltane;’
Peblis to the Play (ab. 1550).— Gael. bealliuinn, May-day ; Irish
bealteine, Olrish bel-tene (Windisch). Lit. ‘ blaze-kindling ;’ from an


55


56 BELVEDERE


old custom. Celtic type *belo-te(p)nia ; where bélo- is allied to AS.
bél, a blaze, and -te(p)nia is from *tepnos, type of Olrish ¢en, fire.
B. The AS. b2/ is further allied to Lith. bal-tas, white, Gk. pad-tos,
bright, Skt. bkala(m), lustre. The Olrish ten is allied to L. sep-ére,
to be warm. ‘Two need-fires were lighted on Beltane among the
Gael, between which they drove their cattle for purification and good
luck ;’ Macbain. See Stokes-Fick, pp. 125, 164.

BELVEDERE, BELVIDERE, a prospect-tower. (F.—Ital.
—L.) ‘Palaces and belvederes;’ Webster, Devil’s Law-case, i. I. 9.
—F. belvédére (Hatzfeld).— Ital. belvedere, ‘a place of a faire prospect;’
Florio. = L. bellus, fair; uidére, to see.

BEMOAN, to moan for, sorrow for. (E.) The latter vowel has
been changed, as in moan. ME. bimenen, to bemoan ; O, E. Homilies,
j.13. AS. biménan; Grein, i. 117.—AS. bi-, prefix; and mézan, to
moan. See Moan.

BENCH, a long seat or table. (E.) ME. benche, Chaucer, C. T.,
47355 (D 1773). AS. benc (Grein).--Du. bank, a bench, form, pew,
shelf; also, a bank for money; Icel. bekkr (for *benkr), a bench ;
Swed. bank, Dan. benk, a bench, form, pew ; G. bank, a bench; a bank
for money; Pomeran. benk. Teut. type *bankiz. See Bank, of
which bench is a doublet. Der. bench-er.

BEND (1), to bow, curve. (E.) ME. benden, bende ; ‘ bende bowys,
tendo,’ Prompt. Parv. p. 30. AS. bendan, to bend; Grein, i. 90;
allied to AS. bend, a bond (Teut. type *bandiz). From band, 2nd
grade of AS. bindan, to bind. See Bind.+Icel. benda ; Swed. banda,
to stretch, to strain. 4 Bend means to strain a bow by fastening the
band or string. The vowel eis a mutation of a; so that bendan is
for *bandjan. Cf. bend=a band; Gower, C. A. iii. 11; bk. vi. 296;
F. bander un arc, to bend a bow, to string it.

BEND (2), a slanting band, in heraldry; one of the nine ordi-
naries. (F.—G.) Spelt bexde in Book of St. Albans (1486), pt. ii,
leafe 1. Perhaps orig. E. (see above), but modified by OF. bende,
which was a modification of bande. The Anglo-French bende, in the
heraldic sense, occurs in Langtoft’s Chron. ii. 434. Cotgrave gives
bende, the same as bande; and assigns ‘a bend in armory’ as being
one meaning of bande; see Band (2). The ME. bende also meant
a fillet; see Cath. Anglicum, p. 27, note 7.

BENEATH, below. (E.) ME. benethe, Gower, C.A. i. 35;
prol. 931; bineoden, Ancren Riwle, p. 390. AS. beneodan, prep.,
below; Grein, i. 91.4+-Du. beneden, adv. and prep. From AS. prefix
be-, by; and neodan, adv., below; Grein, ii. 290. Here -az is an
adverbial suffix, and zeod-=xid-, seen in AS. nider, adv., below, and
nidera, nether, lower. See Nether.

BENEDICTION, blessing. (F.—L.) Shak. has both benedic-
zion and benison ; the former is really a ‘learned’ or Latin form, and
the latter was in earlier use in English. See Benison. Caxton has
benediction, Golden Legend, St. Nicholas, § 7.

BENEFACTOR, a doer of good to another. (L.) Benefactor
in North’s Plutarch, p. 735 ; benefactour in Tyndal’s Works, p. 216,
col. 1; but the word was not French. = L. benefactor, a doer of good.
—L. bene, well; and factor, a doer, from facere, pp. factus, to do.
Der. benefact-ion, benefact-ress.

BENEFICE, a church preferment. (F.—L.) ME, benefice,
Chaucer, Prol. 291. F. benefice (Cot.)—Late L. beneficium, a grant
of an estate; L. beneficium, a kindness, lit. well-doing. = L. benefacere,
to benefit.=L. bene, well; and facere, to do. See Beneficium in
Ducange. From L. benefacere we have also benefic-ence, benefic-ent,
benefic-i-al, benefic-i-al-ly, benefic-i-ary ; and see benefit.

BENEFIT, a favour. (F.—L.) Rich. quotes from Elyot’s
Governour, bk. ii. c. 8. § 2: ‘And that vertue [benevolence] . . is
called than beneficence; and the deed, vulgarly named a good tourne,
may be called a benefite’ ME. bienfet, which occurs with the sense of
‘good action’ in P. Plowman, B. v. 621; Gower,C. A. iii. 187 ; bk. vii.
3029.—OF. bienfait (F. bienfait), a benefit. —L. benefactum, a kind-
ness conferred. = L. bene, well; and factum, done, pp. of facere, to do.
@ The word has been modified so as to make it more like Latin,
with the odd result that bene- is Latin, and -f¢t (for -fait) is French!
The spelling benefet occurs in Wyclif’s Bible, Ecclus. xxix. 9.

BENEVOLENCE, an act of kindness, charity. (F.—L.) In
Hoccleve, Orison to the Virgin, ]. 10. ‘He reysed therby notable
summes of money, the whiche way of the leuyinge of this money was
after named a benyuolence ;’ Fabyan, Edw. IV, an. 1475. =F. bene-
volence, ‘a well-willing, or good will; a favour, kindnesse, benevolence ;’
Cot.— L. beneuolentia, kindness. L. beneuolus, kind; also spelt
beniuolus; cf. uolent-, stem of wolens, willing. L. beni-, from benus,
by-form of bonus, good ; and uolo, [wish. See Voluntary. Der.
From the same source, benevolent, benevolent-ly,

BENIGHTED, overtaken by nightfall. (E.) In Dryden’s
Eleonora, 1.57. Pp. of the verb benight. ‘Now jealousie no more
benights her face ;’ Davenant, Gondibert, bk. iii. c. 5. st. 16. Coined
by prefixing the verbal prefix be- to the sb. night,


BERTH


BENIGN, affable, kind. (F.—L.) Chaucer has benigne, C. T.
4599 (B 179).—OF. benigne (F. bénin).—L. benignus, kind, a con-
tracted form of *benigenus ; from beni-, for benus, by-form of bonus,
good; and -genus, born (as in indigenus), from the verb genere, old
form of gignere, to beget: from 4/GEN, to beget. Der. benign-ly,
benign-ant, benign-ant-ly, benign-i-ly.

BENISON, blessing. (F.—L.) Shak. has benison, Macb. ii. 4.
40; Chaucer has it also,C. T. 9239 (E1365). Spelt beneysun, Havelok,
1723.—OF. beneison, beneigon (Godefroy).—L. acc. benedictidnem,
from nom. benedictio; cf. benedictus, pp. of benedicere, (1) to use words
of good omen, (2) to bless.—L. bene, well; and dicere, to speak.
Doublet, benediction,

BENT-GRASS, a coarse kind of grass. (E.) ‘Hoc gramen,
bent;’ Wright’s Vocabularies, i. 191. AS. beonet, as in Beonet-léah,
mod. E. Bent-ley, in Kemble’s Index. Cf. prov. E. bennet (E. D. D.)
EFries. bente.4+-OHG. binuz, pinuz, MHG. binez, binz, G. binse, bent-
grass, coarse grass growing in wet places. Teut. type *binut.

BENUMB, to make numb. (E.) Written benwm by Turberville ;
Pyndara’s Answere, st. 40. Benum is properly not an infin., but a past
part. of the verb benim ; and hence Gower has: ‘ But altogedre him is _
benome The pouer bothe of hond and fot’ = he is deprived of the power ;
C. A. iii. 2; bk. vi. 36. And Palsgrave has: ‘benombe of ones
lymbes;”’ p. 306. Lit. ‘taken away;’ from AS. be-, bi-, prefix,
“away ;’ and numen, pp. of niman, to take. See Numb.

BENZOIN, a resinous substance. (F.—Span.—Ital.— Arab.)
Spelt benzoine in Lingua, iv. 3, in Old Plays, ed. Hazlitt, ix. 419
(1607). Called also gum benzoin, and (by a singular popular etymo-
logy) gum Benjamin. Phillips (1706) calls it ‘benjamin or benzoin,’ =
F. benjoin, ‘the aromaticall gumme, called benjamin or benzoin ;’
Cotgrave. The z seems to be a F. addition; Cotgrave also notes
that benjoin Frangais meant ‘the hearbe maisterwort, or false pelli-
tory of Spain;’ showing that bexjoin was not a F. word, but Spanish.
— Span. benjui, ‘benjamin or benzoin, gum-resin;’ Neuman. = Ital.
bengivi (Torriano) ; also benzoino. Shown by Engelmann and Dozy
(and approved by Devic) to be a corruption (dropping the first syl-
lable) of the Arab. name for benzoin, which was /uban jawi, lit. Javanese
frankincense. Perhaps /u- was confused with the Ital. def. art.Jo. The
Arab, luban means frankincense, benzoin; Rich. Dict. p. 1256;
whilst jaw2 means belonging to Java, Javanese. Benzoin really comes
from Sumatra, but Devic says that the Arabs regarded Java asa name
for that island also; and it is called ‘ Java minor’ by Marco Polo.
With Arab. luban, cf. Heb. levdnah, frankincense, from the root
lavan, to be white (whence Gk. AiBavos).

BEQUEATH, to dispose of property by will. (E.) ME. byguethe,
Chaucer, C. T. 2770 (A 2768). AS. be-cwedan, bi-cwedan, to say,
declare, affirm; Grein, i. 82, 113. From prefix be- or bi-, and AS.
cwedan, to say. See Quoth.

BEQUEST, a bequeathing ; a thing bequeathed. (E.) ME.
biqueste, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 86; but very rare. The
usual form is biguidé, byguidé, bequidé (trisyllabic), as in Rob. of
Glouc., pp. 381, 384, ll. 7826, 7887; which is from prefix be-, and AS.
cwide, a saying, opinion, declaration, Grein,i. 176; cf. AS. bicwedan,
to declare. See Bequeath. B. But bigqueste is a by-form of biguiste
(P. Plowman, C. ix. 94); formed with added -t, -/e, from AS. be-,
prefix, and cwiss (in ge-cwis), a saying. This sb. cwiss represents a
Teut. type *kwessiz, Idg. *g(w)ettis, formed (with suffix -#-) from Idg.
base *g(w)et, whence AS. cwed-an, to say (Sievers, A. S. Gr. § 232) ;
and becwiss is thus a regular derivative of becwedan, to bequeath.

BEREAVE, to deprive of. (E.) ME. bireue, bereue (u for v),
Chaucer, C. T. 7653 (D 2071). AS. biréajian, beréajian; Grein, i. 92,
118.—AS. be-, prefix; and réafian, to rob. See Reave. Der.
bereft, short for bireued (u for v), the pp. of bireuen; bereave-ment.

BERGAMOT, a variety of pear. (F.—Ital.—Turk.) F. berga-
motte, in Cotgrave, explained as ‘a yellow peare, with a hard rind,
good for perry; also, the delicate Italian small peare, called the
Bergamotte peare.’ = Ital. bergamotta, bergamot pear, ‘a kind of excel-
lent pears, come out of Turky;’ Torriano.—Turk. beg-armidi,
‘prince’s pear.’ = Turk. beg, a prince; armid, a pear. @ Another
bergamot, the name of an essence, is from the Ital. place-name, Ber- +
gamo, in Lombardy.

BERGOMASK, rustic. (Ital.) ‘A bergomask dance ;* Shak,
Mid. Nt. Dr. v. 360. Explained by Nares as a rustic dance by the”
clownish people of Bergamo. More correctly Bergamask. = Ital. ber-
gamasca, ‘a kind of dance ;’ Baretti. = Ital. Bergamo (in Lombardy).

BERRY, a small round or ovate fruit. (E.) ME. berye, berie
(with one r), Chaucer, prol. 207. AS. berige, berge, Deut. xxiii. 24 ;
where the stem of the word is ber-, for bes-, which is for bas-.4-Du.
bes, bezie, a berry; Icel. ber; Swed. bar, Dan. ber; G. beere, OHG.
pert; Goth. bast, a berry. Cf. Skt. bhas, to eat ; the sense seems to
have been ‘edible fruit.’ Der. goose-berry, &c.

BERTH, a secure position. (E.) It is applied (1) to convenient


BERYL


sea-room, or the place where a ship lies when at anchor or at a
wharf; (2) to a place in a ship to stow things in, or to sleep in; (3)
to a comfortable official position. B. The orig. sense was perhaps
“suitable position;’ cf. prov. E. berth, a good foothold, a secure
grasp. Better spelt burth (but cf. E. stern from AS. styrne, &c.) ;
formed with suffix -zk (as in bir-th, dear-th) from AS. byr-, as in ge-
byrian, to suit, ge-byr-e, opportunity, exde-byrd, arrangement, order.
From Teut. *bur-, weak grade of ber-an, to bear. Cognate with
EFries. bart, good time or position, Du. beurt, Norw. byrt, Swed. bord,
a course, turn; Low G. bort, as in in der bort liggen, to lie in a good
berth (as a ship). Cf. G. gebiihren, to suit; &c.

BERYL, a precious stone. (L.—Gk.—Skt.) In the Bible (A.V.),
Rey. xxi. 20. Spelt berid in An Old English Miscellany, ed. Morris,
p. 98, 1.174. — L. béryllus, a beryl. — Gk. Bypuados ; cf. Arab. billaur or
valli, crystal; a word given in Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. g1.—Skt.
vaidirya (Prakrit veltriya), orig. beryl, brought from Vidura in S.
India. See Yule, and Max Miiller, Selected Essays, 1881, ii. 352;
Bohtlingk, Dict. p. 1392.

BESANT, BEZANT, a golden circular figure, in heraldry.
(F.—L.—Gk.) Intended to represent a golden coin of Byzantium.
ME. besant, Gower, C. A. ii. 191; bk. v. 1930; Wycliffe, Matt. xxv.
24.—AF. besant, Roll of Caerlaverock, p. 27; MF. and F. besant,
“an ancient gold coin;’ Cot.—Late L. byzantium, acc. of byzantius, a
besant, coin of Byzantium. L. Byzantium.— Gk. Bufayriov, the old
name of Constantinople.

BESEECH, to ask. (E.). ME. biseche, beseche, Gower, C. A. i.
115; bk. i. 2174; but also biseke, beseke, biseken, Chaucer, Knightes
Tale, 1. 60. From the prefix be-, and ME. sechen, seken, to seek
({seken being, usually, the Northern form, and sechen Southern). Cf.
Du. bezoeken, G. besuchen, to visit ; Swed. besdka, Dan. besdge, to visit,
go tosee. See Seek.
¢ BESEEM, to be becoming. (E.) ME. bisemen, besemen. ‘ Be-
cemyn, decet ;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 27. ‘ Wel bisemed pe’ =it well be-
seems thee; St. Juliana, p. 55. From the prefix be-, bi-; and the
ME. semen, to seem. See Seem.
- BESET, to set about, surround, perplex. (E.) ME. bisetten, be-
setten, especially used of surrounding crowns, &c. with precious
stones. ‘ With gold and riche stones Bese¢t;’ Gower, C. A. i. 127;
bk. i. 2537. Biset, i.e. surrounded, Ancren Riwle, p. 378. AS. biset-
tan, to surround; Grein, i. 119.-4-Du. bezetten, to occupy, invest (a
town); Dan. besette, to fill, occupy ; Swed. besdtta, to beset, plant,
hedge about, people, garrison (a fort) ; Goth. bisatjan, to set round
(a thing); G. besetzen, to occupy, garrison, trim, beset. From prefix
be-, bi-, and AS. settan, to set. See Be- and Set.

BESHREW, to imprecate a curse on. (E.) ME. bischrewen ;
Chaucer, C. T. 6426, 6427 (D 844, 845). Wyclif uses beshrewith to
translate L. deprauat, Prov. x. 9; A.V.‘ perverteth. Formed by
prefixing be- to the sb. shrew; cf. bestow. See Be- and Shrew.

BESIDKH, prep., by the side of; BESIDES, adv., moreover. (E.)
ME. biszde, bisiden, bisides, all three forms being used both as prep. and
adverb. ‘ His daungers him bisydes;’ Chaucer, C. T. prol. 402. ‘ Bi-
sides Scotlonde ’=towards Scotland, said of the Roman wall built as
a defence against the Scots; Layamon, ii. 6. AS. be sidan, used as
two distinct words; where be means ‘ by,’ and sidan is the dat. sing.
of side,a side. 4 The more correct form is beside; besides is a later
development, due to the habit of using the suffix -es to form adverbs ;
the use of besides as a preposition is, strictly, incorrect, but is as old as
the 13th century.

BESIEGE, to lay siege to. (Hybrid; E. and F.) ME. bisegen,
besegen. ‘To bisegé pis castel;’ Rob. of Glouc. p. 399; 1. 8242.
Formed by prefixing be- or bi- to the ME. verb segen, formed from
the ME. sb. sege,a siege. See Be- and Siege. Der. besieg-er.

BESOM, a broom. (E.) ME. besum; as in‘ Hec scopa,a besum ;’
Wright’s Vocabularies, i. 235, 276. Also besme, besowme, Prompt.
Parv. p. 33. AS. besma; Luke, xi. 25; Mat. xii. 44.4+-MDnu. bessem,
Oudemans; Du. bezem, a broom; OHG. pésamo, MHG. béseme, G.
besen, a broom, arod. Teut. type *bes-mon-, m.

BESOT, to make sottish. (E.) Shak. has besotted, infatuated,
Troil. ii. 2.143. From verbal prefix be-, and sof, q. v.

BESPEAK, to speak to; to order or engage for a future time.
(E.) Shak. has bespoke, Errors, ili. 2.176. ME, bispeken. ‘And
byspekith al his deth ;? King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 94. AS. besprecan,
to speak to, tell, complain, accuse; Orosius, i, 10; ed. Sweet, p. 48,
1,18. [For the dropping of r, see Speak.]=AS. be-, prefix ; and
sprecan, to speak. CfoOHG. bispracha, detraction.

BEST : see Better.

BESTEAD (1), to assist, avail. (E.) ‘ How little yon bested, Or
fill the fixed mind;’ Milton, Il Penseroso, 3. A late formation ;
from AS. and ME, be-, and stead, a verb due to stead, sb., a place;
see Shak. Temp. i. 2. 165. See Stead.

BESTEAD (2), situated, beset. (Scand.) A verb only used in


BETRAY 57


the past participle. ‘Bestead, or wytheholdyn yn wele or wo, de-
tentus ;” Prompt. Parv. p. 33. ME. bistad, bestad, pp. of a verb bi-
steden, besteden, to situate, to place under certain circumstances.
Spelt bistaded in St. Marherete, p. 3. Of Scand. origin. Cf. especially
Dan. bestede, to place, to inter, to bury; with pp. bested, used as our
E. bestead, as in vere ilde bestedt, to be ill bestead, to be badly off ;
vere bestedt i Nod, to be in distress, to be badly off. Similarly is used
Icel. staddr, circumstanced, the pp. of stedja, to stop, fix, appoint;
also Swed. stadd, circumstanced ; vara stadd i fara, to be in danger;
whence ME. bestad, Cursor Mundi, 5254; ‘sore bestad,’ Spenser,
F.Q. vi. 1. 4. The Icel. stedja is from stadr, a place. See Be- and.
Stead.

BESTIAL, beast-like. (F.—L.) In Rom. of the Rose, 6716. —F.
bestial. = L. bestidlis, beast-like. —L. bestia, a beast. See Beast.

BESTOW, to place, locate, &c. (E.) ME. bistowen, bestowen,
to place, occupy, employ, give in marriage; Chaucer, Troilus, i.
967; C.T. 3979, 5695 (A 3981, D113). From the prefix be-, and
ME. stowe, a place; hence it means ‘to put into a place.’ See Be-
and Stow. Der. bestow-er, bestow-al.

BESTREW, to strew over. (E.) In Temp. iv. 1. 20. ME.
bistrewen, Old Eng. Homilies, p. 5.—AS. be- or bi-, prefix; and
streowian, to strew. See Strew.

BESTRIDE, to stride over. (E.) In Shak. Cor. iv. 5.124. ME.
bistriden, Layamon, iii. 118. AS. bestridan; /Elfric, Hom. ii. 136. —
AS. be-, prefix; and stridan, to stride. See Stride.

BET, a wager; to wager. (F.—Scand.) Shak. has it both as sb.
and verb; Hen. V, ii. 1.99; Haml. v. 2.170, It is a mere contraction
of abet, formerly used both as a sb, and a verb. See Abet. Phillips
(1706) has: ‘Abet, to encourage, egg, or set on; to maintain, up-
hold, or back.’ Cf. ‘The meede of thy mischalenge and aber;’
Spenser, F. Q. iv. 3. 11. The verb occurs as early as in Ascham,
Toxophilus, 1545, ed. Arber, p. 19: ‘ready to laye and bet with
[against] him.’

BETAKE, to enter on, take to. (Hybrid; E. axd Scand.) ME.
bitaken, which was chiefly used in the sense of ‘to entrust, deliver,
hand over to.’ ‘Heo sculled eow pat lond bitaken ’=they shall give
you the land; Layamon, i. 266. Hence ‘to commit;’ asin: ‘Ich
bitake min soule God’ =I commit my soul to God; Rob. of Glouc.
p- 475; 1.9772. From AS. prefix be- or bi-; and ME. ¢aken, which
is a Scand, word, from Icel. taka, to take, deliver. No doubt the
sense was influenced by the (really different) AS. be/€can, to assign,
Grein, i.9g5. See Be-, Take, and Teach.

BETEEM, to think fit, grant, permit. (E.) In the sense of
‘grant;’ Shak. M.N.D.i.1.131; of ‘ permit,’ Hamlet, i. 2.141. From
an AS. form *beteman, *betiman, to befit, to suit; cf. Friesic bytema
(Hettema), to befit, Low G. betemen (Liibben). From E. prefix be-,
and AS. *teman, OSax. teman, EFries. temen, G. ziemen, to suit.

BETEL, a species of pepper. (Port.—Malayalam.) Mentioned in
1681; see Arber’s Eng. Garner, i. 414; and in 1585 (N.E.D.).—
Port. betel, betele.— Malayal. vettila, i.e. veru+ila, ‘simple or mere
leaf’ (Yule). 4 Used of the leaf (é/a) which is chewed with the
dried areca-nut.

BETHINK, to think on, call to mind. (E.) ME. bithenchen,
bithenken, bithinken; Layamon, il. 531. AS. bifencan, to consider,
think about; Grein, i, 121,—AS. bi-, prefix; and Jencan, to think ;
see Think.+Du. and G. bedenken, to consider; Dan. betenke, to
consider ; Swed. betdnka, to consider.

BETIDG, to happen to, befall. (E.) ME. bitiden, Ancren Riwle,
p- 278.—ME. prefix bi- or be-, and ME. tiden, to happen; which
is from AS. tidan, to happen (Bosworth), from éid, a tide, time, hour.
See Tide.

BETIMES, in good time. (E.) Formerly betime ; the final s is
due to the habit of adding s or -es to form adverbs ; cf. whiles from
while, afterwards lengthened to whilst ; besides from beside; &c. ‘Bi
so thow go bifyme’ = provided that thou go betimes; P. Plowman,
B. v. 647.< AS. be or bi, by; and ¢ima, time. See Time.

BETOKEN, to signify. (E.) ME. bitacnen, bitocnen, bitokenen ;
Ormulum, 1717. Just as in the case of believe, q. v., the prefix be-
has been substituted for the original prefix ge-. AS. getacnian, to
betoken, signify; Grein, i. 462.—AS. ge-, prefix; and den, a token ;
Grein, iil. 520. See Token. 4 Observe that the final -en is for -7,
where the z is a real part of the word, not the ME. infinitive ending.
Cf. Du. beteeken-en, Dan. betegn-e, Swed. beteckn-a, G. bezeichn-en, to
denote.

BETONY, a plant. (F.—Late L.) Spelt betayne, Voc. 568. 13 ;
betony, id. 711. 19; the AF. form was beteine, id. 554. 13.—OF. be-
toine (Supp. to Godefroy). —Late L. befonia, Voc. 711. 19; for vetto-
nica, betonica, a plant discovered by a Spanish tribe named Ve/dones;
Pliny, bk. xxv. c. 8.

BETRAY, to act as traitor. (E. and F.) ME. bitraien, betraien,
Chaucer, Troil. v. 1247. It appears early, e.g. in Rob. of Glouc.


58 BETROTH


p- 454, |. 9325; in King Horn, ed. Lumby, 1271; and in O. Eng.
Misc., ed. Morris, p. 40, 1. 104. From the E. prefix be-; and the
ME. traien, to betray, of F. origin. [This hybrid compound may
have been suggested by bewray,q.v.]  B. The ME. ¢raien is from
OF. trair (F. trahir); which is from L. ¢radere, to deliver. See
Tradition. Der. betray-er, betray-al.

BETROTH, to affiance. (E.) ME. hitreuthien, to betroth;
occurs thrice in Shoreham’s Poems, ed. Wright (Percy Society), pp.
66, 70. Subsequently assimilated to Troth. Made by prefixing
the verbal prefix bi- or be- to the sb. treuthe, or treowthe; which 1s
from AS. tréowd, troth, truth; Grein, ii. 552. See Troth, Truth.
Der. betroth-al, betroth-ment.

BETTER, BEST. (E.) 1. The ME. forms are, for the com-
parative, both bet (Chaucer, prol. 242) and bettre (Chaucer, prol. 256).
The former is commonly adverbial, like L. medius; the latter ad-
jectival, L. melior. AS. bet, ady.; betera, adj.; Grein, i. 95.-4-Goth.
batiza, adj., better; froma base BAT, good. 2. Again, best is short for
AS. betst:(Grein, i. 96), which is an obvious contraction of bet-ist.+
Goth. batista, best ; from the same base BAT. Some compare it
with Skt. bhadra-s, excellent; bhand, to be fortunate, or to make
fortunate; but wrongly (Uhienbeck). 4 The Gothic forms have
been given above, as being the clearest. The other forms of better
are: Du. beter, adj. and adv. ; Icel. betri, adj., betr, adv. ; Dan. bedre;
Swed. battre; G. besser. Other forms of best are: Du. and G. best;
Icel. beztr, adj., bezt, ady.; Dan. bedst; Swed. bast. See also
Batten (1), Boot (1).

BETWEEN, inthe middle of. (E.) ME. bitwene, Rob. of Glouc.
p- 371, 1. 7654; Gower, C.A. i. 9; prol. 189; AS. be-twéonan,
earlier be-iwéonum, Grein, i. 96.—AS. be, prep., by; and ¢wéonum,
dat. pl. of ¢wéon, double, twain, as in ‘bi s&m ¢wéonum,’ between two
seas; Grein, li. 557. B. Twéon is an adj. allied to AS. twa, two;
and ¢wéonum answers to Goth. dweihnaim, dat. pl. of tweihnai, two
each. Cf. L. bini; also G. zwischen, between, from zwei, two.
See Two.

BETWIXT, between. (E.) Formed (with excrescent ¢) from
ME. betwixe, bitwixe, Chaucer, C.T., A 2132. AS. betweox, betweohs,
betweoh, Grein, i. 96. From be, by; and *‘wih, answering to dweth-
in Goth. tweth-nai, two each; alliedto AS. twa,two. A similar word
is OFriesic bitwischa, for bitwiska, between; from bi, by, and éwisk,
twiska, between, which is allied to twa, two. Cf. G. zwischen, be-
tween, from OHG. zwisc, zwiski, two-fold; allied to OHG. zwis,
twice and G. zwei, two. See Two.

BEVEL, sloping ; to slope, slant. (F.) Shak. has: ‘I may be
straight, though they themselves be bevel,’ i.e. crooked ; Sonnet 121.
Cotgrave has: ‘ Buveau, m.a kind of squire [carpenter’s rule] or
squire-like instrument, having moveable and compasse branches; or,
the one branch compasse and the other straight: some callit a bevell.’
Now, as F, -eau stands for OF, -el, it is clear that E. bevel represents
an OF, *buvel, or more probably *bevel, which is not, however, to be
found ; though béeveau, buveau occur in Hatzfeld, s.v. biveau. Godefroy
cites a verb bever, ‘biaiser,’ to slope. We find, too, the Span. baivel,
a bevel, accented on the e. The etym. of the OF. word is unknown.

BEVER, a potation ; see Beaver (3) above.

BEVERAGE, drink. (F.—L.) Shak. has beverage, Winter’s
Tale, i. 2. 346; and see Mandeville’s Travels, ch. xii. p. 141. Cot-
grave has: ‘Bruvage, Breuvage, drinke, beverage. —OF, bevrage,
drink (Supp. to Godefroy) ; with which cf. OF. beverie, the action
of drinking. OF. bevre, boivre (see beivre in Supp. to Godefroy), to
drink ; with OF. suffix -age, equiv. to L. -aticum. = L. bibere, to drink.
q Cf. Ital. beveraggio, drink ; Span. brebage, drink.

BEVY, a company, esp. of ladies. (F.—L.) Spenser has:
‘this bevie of Ladies bright;’ Shep. Kal. April, 118. On which
E. K. has the note: ‘ Bevie; a beavie of ladyes is spoken figuratively
for a company or troupe; the terme is taken of larkes. For they say
a bevie of larkes, even as a covey of partridge, or an eye of pheasaunts.’
Spelt bewe (=beve) in Skelton, Garl. of Laurel, 771 ; and in the Book
of St. Albans (1486), leaf £6: ‘A beuy of Ladies, A bexy of Roos
(toes), A beuy of Quaylis.’—F. bevée, which Mr. Wedgwood cites,
and explains as ‘a brood, flock, of quails, larks, roebucks, thence
applied to a company of ladies generally ;’ cf. ‘ Bevee des heyrouns,’
a bevy of herons ; Wright’s Vocab. i. 151. Florio’s Ital. Dict. has:
« Beva, a beauie’ [bevy]; and mod. Ital. beva means ‘a drink.’
B. Origin uncertain; but the Ital. points to the original sense as
being a company for drinking, from OF. bevre, Ital. bevere, to drink.
Cf. Ital. beverare, to water cattle (Torriano). See Beverage.

BEWAIL, to wail for, lament. (E. and Scand.) ME. biweilen,
bewailen ; K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 4393. From the prefix be-; and
ME. wailen, to wail, of Scand. origin. See Wail.

BEWARE, to be wary, to be cautious. (E.) | This is now written
as one word, and considered as a verb; yet it is nothing but the two
words be ware run together; the word ware being here an adjective,


BEZOAR


viz. the ME. war, for which the longer term wary has been substituted
in mod. E. ‘Be war therfor’=therefore be wary, Chaucer, C. 7.
4539 (Bir19). ‘Aha! felawes! bethware of swiche a lape!’=aha!
sirs, beware (lit. be ye-wary) of such a jest; Chaucer, C. T., 13369
(B 1629). The latter phrase cannot be mistaken ; since beth is the
imperative plural of the verb. So also: ‘ Whi nolden hii be war?’
Polit. Songs, p. 217. Cf. AS. wer, adj., wary, cautious. See Wary.

BEWILDER, to perplex. (E.) Dryden has the pp. bewilder'd ;
tr. of Lucretius, bk. ii. l. rr. Made by prefixing be- to the proy. Eng.
wildern, a wilderness, shortened to wilder by the influence of the
longer form wilderness, which would naturally be supposed as com-
pounded of wilder- and -ness, whereas it is rather compounded of
wildern- and -ness, and should, etymologically, be spelt with double
For examples of wildern, a wilderness, see Halliwell’s Dictionary,
and Layamon’s Brut, 1.1238. B. Thus bewilder (for bewildern) is ‘to
lead into a wilderness,’ which is just the way in which it was first
used. Dryden has: ‘ Bewilder’d in the maze of life’ (as above) ; and
Addison, Cato, i. 1. 49, has: ‘Puzzled in mazes, ... Lost and be-
wildered in the fruitless search.’ ‘y. There is thus no reason for
supposing it other than a purely native word, though other languages
possess words somewhat similar. Cf. Du. verwilderen, to grow wild,
verwilderd, uncultivated ; Dan. forvilde, to lead astray, bewilder, per-
plex; passive forvildes, to go astray, lose one’s way ; Swed. forvilla,
to puzzle, confound; Icel. vidir, bewildered, astray; villa, to bewilder,
@ The Scandinavian words show that the peculiar sense of E. bewilder
has a trace of Scandinavian influence. See Wilderness. Der.
bewlder-ment (modern).

BEWITCH, to charm with witchcraft. (E.) ME. biwicchen,
bewicchen; spelt biwucehed (unusual) in Layamon, ii. 597, where the
later MS. has zwicched. From prefix be- or b:-; and AS. wiccian, to
be a witch, to use witchcraft, in Thorpe’s Ancient Laws of England,
ii. 2'74, sect. 39, from AS. wicce, f.,a witch. See Witch. Der, be-
wi'ch-ment, bewitch-er-y.

BEWRAY, to disclose; properly, to accuse. (E.) In A.V.
Matt. xxvi. 73; and, for numerous examples, see Eastwood and
Wright’s Bible Wordbook. ME. bewraien, biwreyen; Chaucer has
biwreye, to disclose, reveal, C. T. 6530 (D 948), and also the simple
verb wreye in the same sense, C. T. 3503. — Prefix be-, and AS. wrégan
(for *wrdg-ian), to accuse; ‘agunnon hine wrégan,’ they began to
accuse him, Luke, xxiii. 2. So also OFries. biwrdgia, to accuse.
Cf. Icel. regja (orig. vregja), to slander, defame ; Swed. réja, to dis-
cover, betray; Goth. wrdhjan, to accuse ; G. riigen, to censure. These
are denom. verbs, formed from asb. which appears as Goth. wrdhs, an
accusation; Icel. rdg,a slander; cf. G.ruge,censure. Fick, ili. 310.
Perhaps allied to AS. wearg, a criminal, Goth. gawargjau, to
condemn.

BEY, a governor. (Turkish.) ‘The By... in their language a
Duke;’ Hakluyt, Voy. ii. pt. 1. p. 168.—Turk. bég (pron. nearly as
E. bay), a lord, a prince; Rich. Dict., p. 310. Cf. Persian ‘baig, a
lord; a Mogul title ;” Palmer’s Pers, Dict. col. 102.

BEYOND, on the farther side of. (E.) ME. beyonde, biyonde,
beyeonden ; Maundeville’s Travels, pp. 1, 142, 314. AS. begeondan,
Matt. iv. 25.—AS. be-, and geond, giond, prep., across, beyond; with
ady. suffix -ax. See geond in Grein, i. 497; and cf. AS. be-geonan,
beyond ; Sweet, O. E. Texts, p. 535. And see Yon, Yonder.

BEZEL, the sloping edge ofa chisel; the sloping facets of a cut
gem; the part of a ring in which the stone is set, and which holds it
in. (F.—L.?) Also spelt basi/. It occurs in Cotgrave’s Dict., who
explains F. biseau by ‘a bezle, bezling, or scuing [i. e. skewing]; such
a slopenesse, or slope forme, as is in the point of an iron leayer,
chizle, &c.’ The E. basil is generally used of the sloping edge to
which a chisel is ground; the application to the ring relates to the
sloping edge or rim of metal round the stone. The I’. biseaw had an
older spelling bisel (noted by Roquefort), from which E. bezel and
basil are corruptions.— OF. bisel, which Roquefort explains by ‘en
pente; angle imperceptible ;’ the true sense being, apparently, ‘a
sloping edge;’ cf. Span. bise? (accented on e), a basil, bezel; the
edge of a looking-glass, or crystal plate. [Looking-glasses some-
times have a slanted border, so as to be thin at the edge.] B. Origin
unknown ; perhaps (as Diez remarks) it contains the L. bis, double.
KGrting, § 1356, Supp., suggests *biais-el ; see Bias. ;

EZIQUE, a game at cards. (F.—Pers.?) Spelt bazique in
Macmillan’s Mag., Dec. 1861, p. 138. An error for F. besigue, also
spelt bésy (Littré). The former is prob. from Pers, bazichah, sport, a
game ; the latter may be the Pers. baz?, play. Pers. bazidan, to play.
Cf. Pers. bazigar, a juggler, which perhaps suggested the form be-
sigue. (Doubtful.)

BEZOAR, a kind of stone. (F.—Port.—Arab.—Pers.) Bezoar-
stone is in Ben Jonson, Every Man out of his Humour, v. 4.— MF,
bezoar, 16th cent. spelling of F. bézoard, according to Brachet. Cot-
grave has: ‘ Bezoard, a Beazar stone.’= Port. bezoar; see Brachet,


BEZONIAN


who remarks that the word was introduced from India by the Portu-
guese; and cf. Span. bezaar in Pineda. — Arab. badzahr (with b for p).

— Pers. tad-zahr, the bezoar-stone, also called zahr-dara ; Palmer’s
Pers. Dict. coll. 105, 328. So called because it was a supposed anti-
dote against poison. = Pers. pad, expelling ; and zahr, poison ; Rich.
Dict. pp. 228, 315, 790. And see Yule; and Horn, § 273.

BEZONTAN, a beggarly fellow. (F.—Ital.) In 2 Hen. IV, v.
3.118. Formerly bisonian; formed with suffix -(2)az from F. bisogne,
spelt bisongne in Cotgrave, ‘a filthie knave ... bisonian.’— Ital.
bisogni, pl., ‘new-levied souldiers such as come... needy to the
wars;’ Torriano.=TItal. bisogno, want; of doubtful origin.

BI-, prefix. (L.) Generally Latin; in bias, it is ¥., but still from
L. =L. bi-, prefix=dui-; cf. L. bellum for duellum,=L. duo, two. Cf.
Gk. 8:-, prefix, from dvw, two; Skt. dvi-, prefix, from dva, two; AS. twi-,
prefix, from twa, two. See Fick, i. 625. See Two. In L. di-ni,
two each, bi- is for bis, twice. @ In ME, the prefix bi- occurs as
another spelling of the prefix be-; see Be-.

BIAS, an inclination to one side, a slope. (F.—L.) Spelt bazs.in
Holland’s Pliny, bk. xxvii. c. 4 (on the Aloe, 1. 2.) =F. diais, a slant,
a slope.—L. acc. bifacem, used by Isidore of Seville in the sense of
squinting, of one who looks sidelong. 4 This is not wholly satis-
factory ; but see P. Toynbee, Hist. Gr. § 273.

BIB, a cloth on an infant’s breast. (L.) Used by Beaum. and
Fletcher, The Captain, iii. 5. It must have meant a cloth for im-
bibing moisture, borrowed, half jocularly, from the ME. bibben, to
tipple, imbibe, used by Chaucer, C. T. 4160 (A 4162): ‘This miller
hath so wisly bibbed ale.’ This, again, must have been borrowed
directly from L. bibere, to drink, and may be imagined to have been
also used jocularly by those familiar with a little monkish Latin.
Hence wine-bibber, Luke, vii. 34, where the Vulgate has bibens uinum.
+Skt. pibami, I drink; Olrish ibim, for *pibim, I drink. Der. from
the same source; bibb-er, bib-ul-ous.

BIBLBE, the sacred book. (F.—L.—Gk.—Egypt.) ME. bible,
byble ; Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii. 244; P. Plowman, B. x. 318. =F.
bible. = Late L. biblia, fem. sing.; for L. biblia, neut. pl. = Gk. BiBAia,
a collection of writings, pl. of B:BAtoy, alittle book; dimin. of BiBios,
a book. = Gk. BuBdos, the Egyptian papyrus, whence paper was first
made; hence a book. Of Egypt. origin; cf. Paper. Der. bibl-ic-al.

BIBLIOGRAPHY, the description of books. (Gk.) Modern.
From Gk. B:Bdjio-, for BiBAtov, a book; and ypapev, to write. See
Bible. Der. bibliograph-ic-al ; and from the same source, biblio-
graph-er.

° "BIBLIOLATRY, book-worship. (Gk.) Used by Byrom,
Upon the Bp. of Gloucester’s Doctrine of Grace (R.) From Gk.
BiBrio-, for BiBriov, a book; and Aarpeia, service; see Idolatry.

BIBLIOMANTA, a passion for books. (Gk.) Modern, From
Gk. BiBrio-, for BiBAliov, a book ; and E. mania, also of Gk. origin;
see Mania. Der. bibliomania-c.

BICH, a pale blue colour; green bice isa pale green. (F.) The
true sense is ‘grayish.’ Borrowed from F. bis, fem. bise, which
Cotgrave explains as ‘brown, duskie, blackish.’ He gives too:
* Roche bise, a hard, and blewish rocke, or quarrey, of stone.’ Cf. F.
bis blanc, whitey-brown; OF. azur bis, grayish blue; vert bis, grayish
green. Spelt byse in Skelton, Garlande of Laurell, 1. 1158. The
word is found also in Italian as bigio, grayish. Origin unknown ;
see Diez, \

BICKER, to skirmish. (E. or F.) ME. bikere, P. Plowman, B.
xx. 78 ; biker, sb., a skirmish, Rob. of Glouc. p. 538; 1. 11147; but
it is most commonly a verb. Apparently formed, with frequentative
suffix -er, from the verb biken, to thrust with a pointed weapon, King
Alisaunder, 2337; which may be a variant of ME. beken, to peck ;
from OF. bequer, to strike with the beak (see Beak), or from AS.
becca, a pickaxe. Cf. Du. bikken, to notch a mill-stone; EFries.
bikkern, to hack, gnaw, from bikken, to hack, bikke, a pickaxe.

BICYCLE, a two-wheeled velocipede. (Hybrid; L. and Gk.) A
hybrid substitute for ¢wo-wheel; in use since 1868. Coined from Bi-
and Cycle.

BID (1), to pray. (E.) [Bid, to pray, is nearly obsolete; but used
in what is really a reduplicated phrase, viz. ‘a bidding prayer.’ To
‘bid beads’ was, originally, to ‘ pray prayers.’ . See Bead.] ME.
bidden, to pray, P. Plowman, B. vii. 81. AS. biddan, to pray (in
common use) of conj. 5; pt. t. bed, pp. beden.4-Du. bidden, to pray ;
OHG. pittan, G. bitten, to pray, request. These/are strong verbs, and
so are Icel. bidja, Swed. bedja, Dan. bede, to pray, beg, and Goth.
bidjan, to pray, ask, notwithstanding the weak form of the infinitive.
Teut. type *bedjan-. @ It has been suggested that. the Teut. *bed-
jan- (2nd grade *bad) was a new strong verb substituted for *beidan-
(and grade *baid), from the Idg. root BHEIDH, to which we may
refer Gk. meiOev, and L. fides, but not bid (2). Brugm. i. § 589;
li. § 890. See Bide.

BID (2), to command. (E.) [Closely connected as this word


BIGOT 59


appears to be with E. bid, to pray, it is certainly from a different root,
and can be traced more easily. It has been assimilated to bid in
spelling, but should rather have taken the form bede.] ME. bede,
Chaucer, C. T. 8236 (E360). AS. béodan, to command (common) of
conj. 2; pt. t. béad, pp. boden.4-Du. bieden, to offer; Icel. bj50a; G.
bieten; Goth. biudan, only in comp. ana-biudan, to command, faur-
biudan, to forbid. Allied to Skt. bodhaya, to cause to know, in-
form, causal of budh, to awake, understand; Gk. mevOopua, nuv-
Oavopat, I enquire, learn, understand. ‘Teut. type *beudan-; from the
root BHEUDH, to awake, observe ; Fick, i. 162; Brugm. i. § 213.
@ Confused in E. with bid (1). Der. bidd-er, bidd-ing.

BIDE, to await, wait. (E.) ME. bide, P. Plowman, B. xviii. 307.
AS. bidan, Grein, i, 122; of conj. 1; pt. t. bad, pp. biden.4-Du.
beiden ; Icel. bida ; Swed. bida; Dan. bie; Goth. beidan ; OHG. pitan
(prov. G, beiten). Teut. type *betdan-; from the root BHEIDH ; cf.
L. fid-ere, to trust. Brugm.i. § 202. See also Abide.

BIENNIAL, lasting two years. (L.) ‘The Duke is there but
biennial ;’ Howell, Letters, vol. i. let. 41 (1621).—L. bienndlis, the
same as biennis, adj., for two years. [The second z in biennial is due
to confusion with the sb. biennium, a space of two years.|—L. bi-,
two, double; and anndlis, lasting fora year, which becomes -enndlis
in composition. —L. annus, a year. See Annual. Der. biennial-ly.

BIER, a frame on which a dead body is borne. (E.) ME. beere,
Prompt. Parv. p. 323 bere, Layamon,19481. AS. bér, Grein, i. 78.
— AS, bér-, 3rd grade of beran, to bear.4+Du. baar; OHG. bara (G.
bahre); allied to Icel. barar, fem. pl.; and to L. fer-e-trum; Gk.
épetpov. See Bear (1). The present spelling is due to F. diére, a bier.

BIESTINGS, BEESTINGS, the first milk given by a cow
after calving. (E.) Very common in provincial English, in a great
number of differing forms, such as biskins, bistins, &c. AS. bysting,
byst (for *biest), thick milk ; from AS, béos¢, first milk after calving.
We find, in Voc. 127. 35, and 129. 2, ‘ byst, bysting’, Bicce meolc ’ = biest,
biestings, thick milk.4Du. diest, biestings; G. béestmilch, biestings.
All from a Teut. base *beust-.

BIFFIN, a large rosy winter apple. (F.—L.; with E. suffix.)
Proy. E. beefin; Suffolk. Ihave also heard them called beefing apples
(correctly). ‘As red as a beefen from her own orchard;’ Godwin,
Caleb Williams (1794), p.63. Leefing refers to the beef-like colour,
From beef; with suffix -ing (N.E.D.). See Beef.

BIFURCATED, two-pronged. (L.) Pennant, British Zoology,
has ‘a large bifurcated tooth;’ Richardson. Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. ii. c. 6. § 2, has the sb. bifurcation. Late L. bifurciitus, pp.
of bifurcari, to part in two directions. — L. bifurcus, two-pronged. = L,
bi-, double ; and furca, a fork, prong, See Fork.

BIG, large. (Scand.) ME. big, Chaucer, Prol. 546; Havelok,
17743 bigg’, ‘rich, well-furnished,’ Prick of Conscience, ed. Morris,
1460; see also Minot’s Poems, Edward at La Hogue, 1. 83. Being
used by. Minot and Hampole, it was probably at first a Northern
word, and of Scandinavian origin; cf. A‘gelric Bigga, Kemble, C. D.,
vi. 191. B. Allied to prov. E, bug, fine, bog, boastful; so that the
base is byg-, mutated from bug-, weak grade of Teut. *beugan-, to
bow or bend ; see Bow (1); from the notion of swelling out. Cf.
Norw. bugge, a strong man (prov. E. a big bug’); Dan. bugne, to
bulge; also Swed. dial. bog?, (1) a bend, (2) strength.

BIGAMY, a double marriage. (F.—L. and Gk.) ‘ Bigamie is
. . twie-wifing ;” Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, i. 449.—F. biga-
mie.=L, bigamia. ‘ Bigamy (bigamia),..is used for an impediment
to bea clerk, Anno 4 Edw, I. 5;’ Blount’s Law Dictionary. A hybrid
compound ; from L. prefix bi-, twice, q.v., and Gk. -yayia, from
ydpmos, marriage; imitated from Gk. d:yauia, a double marriage,
which is from Gk. &-, twice, and a form -yayia, derived from yapos,
marriage. The Gk. yduos, marriage, is from ya-, weak grade of
GEN, to beget. Brugm. i. § 437 (2). Der. bigam-ist.

BIGGIN, BIGGEN, a night-cap. (F.) In Shak. 2 Hen. IV,
iv. 5. 27.—MF. beguin, ‘a biggin fora child;’ Cot. He also gives
beguiner, to put on a biggin. Palsgrave has: ‘ Biggayne, a woman
that lyveth chaste;’ and ‘ Byggen, for a chyldes heed;’ for both
words he gives F. beguine. Doubtless named from a resemblance to
the caps worn by the nuns called Béguines, who, as Cotgrave remarks,
‘commonly be allold, orwell in years.’ See Beguine. {] Biggin
also occurs as a spelling of piggin.

BIGHT, a coil of a rope; a bay. (E.) ME. byght, a bend; Gawain
and the Grene Knight, 1. 1349. AS. byht, as in weteres byht, a bight
(bay) of water; Grein, i. 151. Cf. Dan, and Swed. bug?t, used in
both senses, viz. (1) the bight of a rope; and(2) a bay; also G. bucht,
abay.  B. The AS. byhe (for *buhtiz) is from AS. bug-, weakest
grade of biig-an, to bend; with mutation of u to y. See Bow (1).

BIGOT, an obstinate devotee to a particular creed, a hypocrite.


(F.) In Blount’s Gloss. (1636) we find: ‘Bigot, an hypocrite, &c.:’


as in Cotgrave.=F. bigot, which Cotgrave explains thus: ‘An old
Norman word (signifying as much as de par Dieu, or our for God’s


60 BIJOU


sake [he means by God] and signifying) an hypocrite, or one that
seemeth much more holy than he is; also, a scrupulous or supersti-
tious fellow.’ a. The word occurs in Wace’s Roman du Rou, ii. 71,
where we find: ‘Mult ont Franceis Normanz laidiz E de mefaiz e de
mediz, Sovent lor dient reproviers, E claiment bigoz e draschiers,’ i.e.
the French have much insulted the Normans, both with evil deeds
and evil words, and often speak reproaches of them, and call them
‘bigots and dreg-drinkers (Diez); see Drachier in Godefroy. Roque-
fort quotes further from the Roman du Rou, fol. 228, in which the
word occurs again: ‘Sovent dient, Sire, por coi Ne tolez la terre as
bigos ;’ i.e. they often said, Sire, wherefore do you not take away
the land from these barbarians? B. The origin of the word is un-
known. The old supposition that it isa corruption of by God, which
is an English phrase, is mere ‘ popular etymology,’ and inconsistent
with the facts. Bigot occurs already in the 12th century, ‘in the
romance of Girart de Roussillon, as the proper name of some people,
apparently of the south of Gaul;’ N.E.D. It is not, however, a
corruption of Visigoth, as has been absurdly suggested. ‘ Hue le
Bigot’ occurs in Wace, Roman de Rou, I. 8571. Mr. Wedgwood’s
guess that it arose in the 13th century is disproved at once by the fact
that Wace died before A.D. 1200. y. At the same time, it is very
likely that this old term of derision may have been confused with the
term beguin, which was especially used of religious devotees. See
Beguin. And it is a fact that the name was applied to some of
these orders; some Begutte of the order of St. Augustine are men-
tioned in a charter of A.D. 1518; and in another document, given by
Ducange, we find: ‘ Beghardus et Beguina et Beguita sunt viri et
mulieres tertii ordinis;’ and again Bigutte are mentioned, in a charter
of A.D. 1499. This transference of the nickname to members of these
religious orders explains the modern use of the term. Der. bigot-ry.

BIJOU, a trinket, jewel. (F.—C.) Modern; and mere French. =
F. bijou. Perhaps of Celtic origin; cf. Breton bizou (Corn, bisow), a
ring with a stone. = Bret. biz, W. bys, a finger ; Stokes-Fick, p. 175.

BILATERAL, having two sides. (L.) From L. bi-, double:
and lateralis, adj., lateral. = L. later-, decl. stem of latus, a side.

BILBERRY, a whortleberry. (Scand. and E.) ‘ As blue as Dil-
berry; Shak. Merry Wives, v.5. 49. This form is due to the Jutland
bylleber (Feilberg), Dan. bélleber, the bilberry ; where ber isa berry.
Cf. MDan. bélle, a boss, protuberance (Kalkar); perhaps allied to
Boil (2); from *bul-, weak grade of Teut. *bewl-, toswell; cf. Goth.
uf-bauljan, toswell up. We also find Swed. dial. béljon, béljen, bélen,
pl. bilberries. 4 In the North of England we find bleaberry or
blaeberry, i.e. a berry of a dark, livid colour ; cf. our phrase ‘to beat
black and blue.’ Blae is the Icel. blar, dark, livid, Dan. blaa, Swed.
bid, dark-blue; whence Icel. blaber, Dan. blaaber, Swed. blabar, a
blaeberry. See Blue. Hence both bdil- and blae- are Scandinavian ;
but -berry is English.

BILBO, a sword; BILBOES, fetters. (Span.) Shak. has both
bilbo, Merry Wives, i. 1. 165, and bilboes, Hamlet, v. 2.6. Both
words are derived from Bilboa or Bilbao in Spain, ‘ which was famous,
as early as the time of Pliny, for the manufacture of iron and steel.’
Several bilboes (fetters) were found among the spoils of the Spanish
Armada, and are still to be seen in the Tower of London. Seenote
by Clark and Wright to Hamlet, v. 2. 6.

BILE (1), a secretion from the liver. (F.—L.) In Kersey’s Dict.,
ed. 1708. —F. bile, which Cotgrave explains by ‘ choller, gall,’ &c. =
L. bilis, bile, anger. L. bilis is for *bislis; Brugm. i. § 877; cf. W.
bustl, Bret. bestl, bile; Stokes-Fick, p. 175. Der. bili-ar-y, bili-ous.

BILE (2), a boil; Shak. Cor. i. 4. 31. (E.) ME. byle, Prompt.
Parv. See Boil (2).

BILGE, the belly of a ship or cask. (F.—C.) It means the pro-
tuberant part of a cask or of a ship’s bottom, i.e. the belly, and is
merely another form of bulge, adapted from OF. boulge, mod. F.
douge, which still means ‘ bilge’ of a cask, &c. B. Hence the vb. /o
bilge, said of a ship, which begins to leak ; but it occurs still earlier
in a transitive sense, to stave in a ship’s bottom. ‘This verb éo bilge
is also written to bulge; see examples in Richardson, s.v. bulge; and
Kersey’s Dict., s.v. bilged. y. Bilge-water is water which enters
a ship when lying on her bilge, and becomes offensive. See Bulge.

BILL (1), a chopper; a halberd; sword. (E.) ME. dil, sword,
halberd, Layamon, i. 74; ‘Bylle of a mattoke, ligo, marra;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 36. AS. bil, bill, a sword, axe, Grein, i. 116.4
OSax. bil, OHG, bill, n. Tent. type *biljom, neut. Cf. G. bille, fem.
a pick-axe. Cf. Skt. bil, bhil, to break, to divide, Benfey, p. 633;
which is probably related to Skt. bhid, to cleave. See Bite.

BILL (2), a bird’s beak. (E.) ME. bile, Owl and Nightingale,
79. AS. bile; Voc. 318. 13. Teut. type *biliz? Allied to Bill (1).

BILL (3), a writing, account. (F.—L.) ME. bDille, a letter,
writing; Chaucer, C. T. 9811 (E 1937).—AF. bille, Polit. Songs,
p- 231, 1. 11 ; found in F. in the dimin. d//let, — Late L. billa, a writing,
with dimin. billéta; bulléta is also found, with the same meaning,


BINOMIAL


and is the dimin. of L. bulla. B. It is certain that billa is a corruption
of L. bulla, meaning ‘a writing,’ ‘a schedule’ in medieval times; but
esp. and properly ‘a sealed writing ;’ from the classical L. bulla, a stud,
knob; later, a round seal. See Bull(2), Bullet, Bulletin.

BILLET (1), a note, ticket. (F.—L.) Shak. has the vb. zo
billet, to direct to one’s quarters by means of a ticket; to quarter;
Cor. iv. 3. 48. Spelt dylet, Prompt. Parv.—AF. billeite, f., Stat.
Realm, i. 338 (1353); cf. F. billet, m.; dimin. of AF. bille, a ticket,
note, writing. See Bill (3). We sometimes use billet-doux for
‘love-letter ;’ see Pope, Rape of the Lock, i. 118, 138. It is mere
French, and means, literally, ‘sweet letter ;’ from F. billet, letter, and
doux (L. dulcis), sweet.

BILLET (2), a log of wood, block. (F.) In Shak. Measure,
iv. 3. 58. Spelt bylet, Prompt. Parv. =F. billette, ‘a billet of wood;
also, a little bowle;’ Cot. Cf. F. billot, <a billet, block, or log of
wood;’ id. Dimin. of F. bille, a log of wood; in Cotgrave, ‘a
young stock of atree to graft on.’ This F. bile corresponds to Med.
L. billa, billus, a branch, trunk of a tree; of unknown origin.

BILLIARDS, a game with balls. (F.) Shak. has billiards,
Ant. and Cleop. ii. 5. 3.—F. billard, billart, ‘a short and thick trun-
cheon, or cudgell, . . a billard, or the-stick wherewith we touch the
ball at billyards ;’ Cot. He also has: ‘Biller, to play at billyards;’
and ‘bille, a small bowl or billyard ball; also, a young stock of
a tree to graft on ;” but these may be two distinct words. Formed, by
suffix -ard, from F. bille, signifying a ‘billyard ball,’ as explained by
Cotgrave, and answering to Ital, biglia, ‘a billiard ball’ (Baretti);
which Diez derives from MHG. bickel, a pick-axe, also a die to play
with; which is doubtful. Korting, § 1367.

BILLION, a million of millions. (F.—L.) From F. billion, 6a
million of millions;’? Cot. A coined word, to express ‘a double mil-
lion;’ from L. bi-, double; and -illion, the latter part of the word
million. So also trillion, to express ‘a treble million,’ or a million
times a billion. 4 The mod. F, billion now means ‘a thousand
millions.’ .

BILLOW, a wave. (Scand.) Not in very early use. It occurs in
Gascoigne’s Jocasta, Act iii. chorus, 1. 24.—Icel. bylgja, a billow ;
Swed. bélja; Dan. bélge.4-MHG. bulge, a billow, alsoa bag; OHG.
pulga. The Icel. bylgja has mutation of « to y; and is derived from
bulg-, weak stem of the root which appears in AS. belgan, to swell,
esp. to swell with anger; a billow means ‘a swell, ‘a swelling
wave. Cf. Prov. G. (Hamburg) biilgen, a billow (Richey). From
4/ BHELGH, to swell; see Belly. Der. billow-y.

BIN, a chest for wine, corn, &c. (C.) ME. binne, bynne, Chaucer,
C. T. 595 (A 593). AS. binn, a manger, Luke, ii. 7, 16.4-Du. ben,
a basket ; G. benne, a sort of basket. Said to be ultimately of Celtic
origin; cf. F. banne, a tilt of a cart, from L, benna, a car of osier,
body of a cart, noticed by Festus as a word of Gaulish origin. And
cf. W. ben, a cart. Celtic type *benni: Stokes-Fick, p. 168.
q Sometimes confused with bing, which is a distinct word.

BINARY, twofold. (L.) In Holland’s Plutarch, p. 665.—L.
binarius, consisting oftwo things. = L. bizi, two each. = L. bi-, double,
for bis, twice. See Bi-, prefix.

BIND, to fasten, tie. (E.) ME. binden, Chaucer, C. T. 4082.
AS. bindan, pt. t. band, pp. bunden; Grein,i.117.4-Du. binden; Icel.
and Swed. binda; Dan. binde; OHG. pintan, G. binden; Goth.
bindan. Teut. type *bindan-, for *bendan-; cf. Skt. bandh, to bind ;
/ BHENDH. Erugm.i. § 124. Der. bind-ing, binder, book-binder,
bind-weed ; also bundle, bend.

BING, a heap of corn; provincial. (Scand.) Surrey has ‘ bing of
corn’ for ‘ heap of corn,’ in his translation of Virgil, Book iv. 1. 529.
=Icel. bingr, a heap; Swed. binge, a heap. Allied to Bunk.
@ Distinct from E, bin, though sometimes confused with it. Dan.
bing came to mean ‘bin.’ See Bin.

BINNACLE, a box for a ship's compass. (MSpan.—L.)
Modern ; a singular corruption of the older form bittacle, due to con-
fusion with biz, a chest. Only the form bit/acle appears in Todd’s
Johnson, as copied from Kersey’s Dict., viz. ‘a frame of timber in the
steerage of a ship where the compass is placed.’ Spelt bittakle in
Phillips (1658). — MSpan. bitacula (Minsheu) ; Port. bitacola ; Span.
bitacora. Cf. F. habitacle, a binnacle; prop. an abode.— L. habita-
culum, a little dwelling, whence the Port. and Span. are derived by.
loss of the initial syllable.—L. habitare, to dwell; frequentative of
habére, to have. See Habit. @] The ‘habitaculum’ seems to have
been originally a sheltered place for the steersman. The earliest E.
quotation has the spelling bitakle; Naval Accounts for 1485,ed. A. Op-
penheim, p. 56.

BINOCULAR, suited for two eyes; having two eyes. (L.)
‘Most animals are binocular ;> Derham, Phys. Theol. (1713), bk. viii.
c. 3, note a. Coined from bin- for L. bint, two each; and oculus, an
eye. See Binary and Ocular.

BINOMIAL, consisting of two ‘terms’ or parts. (L.) Mathe-


BIOGRAPHY


matical. = Late L. bindmi-us, for L. bindminis, having two names. = L.
bi-, prefix, double; and xdmen, a name, denomination. It should
rather have been binominal.

BIOGRAPHY, an account of a life. (Gk.) In Johnson’s Ram-
bler, no. 60. Langhorne, in the Life of Plutarch, has biographer and
biographical. = Late Gk. Bioypagia, a writing of lives ; Duc. = Gk. Bio-,
for Bios, life; and ypapev, to write. Gk. Bios is allied to E. quick,
living; see Quick. And see Carve. Der. biograph-er, bio-
graph-ic-al.

BIOLOGY, the science of life. (Gk.) Modern. Lit. a ‘discourse
on life.’= Gk. Bio-, for Bios, life; and-Aoyia, from Adyos, a discourse.
See above ; and see Logic. Der. biolog-ic-al.

BIPARTITE, divided in two parts. (L.) | Used by Cudworth,
Intellectual System; Pref. p. 1.—L. bipartitus, pp. of bipartire, to
divide into two parts.=L. bi-, double; and partire, to divide, from
part-, stem of pars, a part. See Bi- and Part.

BIPED, two-footed ; an animal with two feet. (L.) ‘A... biped
beast ;? Byrom, an Epistle. Also in Sir T. Browne’s Vulg. Errors,
b, iii.c. 4. s. 8. The adj. is sometimes bipedal. —L. biped-, stem of
bipés, havingt wo feet ; from bi-, double, and pés, a foot. 4 So too
Gk. 8érrous, two-footed, from &-, double, and 7ovs, a foot. See Bi-
and Foot, with which és is cognate.

BIRCH, a tree. (E.) In North of England, birk; which is Scan-
dinavian. ME. birche, Chaucer, C.T. 2921. AS. birce, wk. f. (Bos-
worth) ; also beore, str. f.-+Du. berk ; Icel. bjork ; Swed. bjork; Dan.
birk; G. birke. Teut. types *berkjon-, f.; and *berka, f. Cf. Lith.
berzas; Russ. bereza; Skt. bhirja-s, a kind of birch, the leaves or
bark of which were used for writing on (Benfey). Allied to Skt.
bhraj, to shine ; with reference to the whiteness of the bark. Cf. L.
Jraxinus, ash. See Bright. Der. birch-en, adj.; cf. gold-en.

BIRD, a feathered flying animal. (E.) ME. brid; very rarely
byrde, which has been formed from brid by shifting the letter r; pl.
briddes, Chaucer, C. T. 2931 (A 2929). AS. brid, bridd, a bird; but
especially the young of birds; as in earnes brid, the young one of an
eagle, Grein, i. 142. The manner in which it is used in early
writers suggests the idea that it was considered as ‘a thing bred ;’ but
it can hardly be connected with AS. brédan, to breed, as the Teut. type
would be *bridjoz or *bredjoz. Der. bird-bolt, bird-cage, bird-call,
bird-catcher, bird-lime, bird’s-eye, &c.

BIRETTA, a clerical cap. (Ital.—L.—Gk.) Spelt berretta in
Hall’s Sat. iv. 7. 52, ed. 1598. — Ital. berretta (Baretti) ; beretta (‘Tor-
tiano), a cap; cf. Late L. birrétum, orig. a scarlet cap.=—Late L.
birrus, burrus, reddish; see Bureau.

BIRTH, a being born. (Scand.) ME. birthe, Chaucer, C. T. 4612
(B 192). Of Scand. origin. —Olcel. byrd, fem., quoted by Noreen,
Gr. § 327 (cognate with Dan. byrd); the usual Icel. form is burdr, m.
Teut. type burdiz, f.; from *bur-, weak grade of *beran- (AS. beran),
to bear. Cf. also AS. ge-byrd; OHG. kapurt, G. geburt ; Goth. ga-
baurths, a birth; Skt. bhrtis, f., nourishment; Irish breith, birth.=
4/BHER, to bear. Der. birth-day, -place, -mark, -right.

BISCUIT, a kind of cake, baked hard. (F.—L.) In Shak., As
You Like It, ii. 7. 39. ‘ Byscute brede, bis coctus ;’ Prompt. Parv. =
F. biscuit, a bisket, bisket-bread;’ Cot.—F. bis, twice; and cuit,
cooked ; because formerly prepared by being twice baked. (Cuitis the
pp: of euire, to cook.) — L. bis coctus, where coctus is the pp. of coguere,
to cook. See Cook.

BISECT, to divide intotwo equal parts. (L.) In Barrow’s Math.
Lectures, Lect. 15. Coined from L. b:-, twice, and sectwm, supine of
secare, to cut. See Bi- and Section. Der. bisect-ion.

BISHOP, an ecclesiastical overseer. (L.—Gk.) ME. bisshop,
Chaucer, C. T., B253. AS. biscop, in common use; borrowed from
L. episcopus. = Gk, énicxomos, an overseer, overlooker. = Gk. émi, upon ;
and oxomds, one that watches, from oxom-, 2nd grade of oxer-, as in
oxém-Topat, I spy, overlook. Brugm. i. § 1000. Der. bishop-ric;
where -ric is AS, rice, dominion, Grein, ii. 376; cf. G. reich,a kingdom;
and see Rich.

BISMUTH, a reddish-white metal. (G.) In Kersey’s Dict., ed.
1708. Coles (1684) has Bismutum or Wismuth. Spelt wisemute,
Harrison’s Hist. of England, bk. ii. ch. 11; ed. Furnivall, p.76. It
is chiefly found at Schneeburg in Saxony. The F. bismuth, like the
E. word, is borrowed from German; and this word is one of the
very few German words in English.—G. bismuth, bismuth; more
commonly wismut, also spelt wissmut, wissmuth; of these, wissmut
first occurs, in Georg Agricola (died in 1555), who also has the L.
form bisemutum (Weigand). Origin unknown.

BISON, a large quadruped. (F.or L.—Gk.—Teut.) In Minsheu,
ed. 1627. Also in Cotgrave, q.v.. Either from F. bison (Cot.) or
from L, bisox (Pliny).—Gk. Biowy, the wild bull, bison; Pausanias,
ed. Bekker, 10. 13 (about A.D. 160). Borrowed from Teutonic ; cf.
AS. wesend, a wild ox, Bosworth; Icel. visundr, the bison-ox; OHG.
wisunt, G. wisent, a bison. @ The word is Teutonic rather than


BITTS


Greek, and only borrowed by the latter.
Schade.

BISSEXTILE, a name for leap-year. (L.) In Holland’s Pliny,
bk, xviii. c. 25.— Late L. bissextilis annus, the bissextile year, leap-
year.= L, bissextus, in phr. bissextus digs, an intercalary day, so called
because the intercalated day (formerly an extra day after Feb. 24)
was likewise called the sixth day before the calends of March
(March 1); so that there were two days of the same name. =L. bis,
twice; and sex, six.

BISSON, purblind. (E.) Shak. has bisson, Cor. ii. 1.70; and, in
the sense of ‘ blinding,’ Hamlet, ii. 2.529. ME. bisen, bisne, purblind,
blind ; Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, ll. 472, 2822. OE. bisene,
pl., blind, Matt. ix. 27, in the Northumb. version, as a gloss upon
L, caeci. B. Perhaps derived from the prefix di-, be-, with a privative
sense, as in E, be-head, and the AS. sb. sien, syn, sin, power of seeing,
sight, allied to Goth, siuzs, OSax. siun, Icel. sj5n, syn, Dan. syn, sight;
so that bi-séne might mean ‘ sightless.’

BISTRE, adark brown colour. (F.—G.?) ‘ Bister, Bistre, a colour
made of the soot of chimneys boiled;’ Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1731.
=F’. bistre; of uncertain origin. Perhaps from G. biester, meaning
(1) bistre, (2) dark, dismal, gloomy (in prov. G.); Fliigel. It seems
reasonable to connect these. Cf. also Du. bijster, confused, troubled,
at a loss; Pomeran. biister, bewildered, dark. [Dan. bister, grim,
fierce, Swed. bister, fierce, angry, grim, Icel. distr, angry, knitting
the brows, may be unrelated. |
BIT (1), a small piece, a mouthful. (E.) ME. bite, in phr. bite
bredess=a bit of bread, Ormulum, 8640. AS. dita, weak m., a bit, a
morsel, John, xiii. 27; from AS. bit-, weak grade of bitan, to bite.4-
Du. beet, a bite, also, a bit, morsel; Icel. bit7, a bit; Swed. bit;
Dan. bid; G. bissen, a bit. Teut. type *biton-,m. See Bite.

BIT (2), a curb for a horse. (E.) ME. bitt, bytt. ‘ Bytt of a
brydylle, Zupatum;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 37. AS. bite, strong m., a bite.
Teut. type *bitiz, m.; closely allied to the preceding. Cf. AS. bitol,
dimin., as a gloss to frenum in Ps. xxxi. 12 (Spelman).4Du. gebit ;
Icel. bitill (dimin.); Swed. bett; Dan. bid; G. gebiss. Compare
these forms with those in the article above.

BITCH, a female dog. (E.) ME. biche, bicche, Wright’s Vocab.
i. 187. AS. bicce (Bosworth).+-Icel. bikkja; MDan. bikke ; allied to
Icel. grey-baka, a bitch (Noreen).

BITE, to cleave, chiefly with the teeth. (E.) ME. bite, biten, pt. t.
bot, boot, P. Plowman, B. v. 84. AS. bitan; pt. t. bat, pp. biten.
Grein, i. 123.-4-Du. dijten, to bite; Icel. bita; Swed, dita; Dan. bide ;
OHG., pizan; G. beissen; Goth. beitan, Tent. type *beitan-, pt. t.
*bait, pp. *bitanoz. Allied to L. findere, pt. t. fidi, to cleave; Skt.
bhid, to break, divide, cleave. =4/BHEID, tocleave. Der. bite, sb. ;
bit, bit-er, bit-ing ; bitt-er, q.v.; bait, q.v-

BITTER, obnoxious to the taste. (E.) ME. biter, Ayenbite of
Inwyt, p.82. AS, biter, bitor, bitter, Grein, i. 120.4+Dnu. bitter ; Icel.
bitr ; Swed. and Dan. bitter; OHG. pittar (G. bitter) ; Goth. baitrs
(rather an exceptional form), B. The word orig. meant ‘sharp’
or ‘ biting;’ and is derived from AS. bit-, weak grade of bitan, to
bite. Goth. baitrs is from bait-, second grade of bitan. See Bite.
Der. bitter-ly, bitter-ness, bitter-s; also bitter-sweet, Prompt. Parv.


61
See OHG. wisunt in


P- 37:

BITTERN, a bird of the heron tribe. (F.—Late L.) ME. d:tore,
bytoure, Chaucer, C. T. 6554 (D 972).—F. butor, ‘a bittor ;” Cot. ;
whence Low L. butdrius, a bittern. Prob. named from its cry; ef.
L. biitire, bubere, to cry like a bittern ; whence also L. bitio, said to
mean a bittern, though it is a variant of biiteo, a buzzard. See
Boom (1). £B. The mod. L. name botaurus is due to a fanciful
derivation from L. bds taurus; taurus being used by Pliny, b. x. c. 42,
fora bird that bellows like an ox, which is supposed to be the bittern.
q@ On the suffixed -z see Mitzner, i.177; and see Marten. We
actually find viserne for visor; Three Met. Romances, ed. Robson,


p- 15.

BITTS, a naval term. (Scand.) The ditts are two strong posts
standing up on deck to which cables are fastened. [The F. term is
bittes, but this may have been taken from English.] The word is pro-
perly Scand., and the E. form contracted ; in fact, the oldest form is
beetes (1593); in Arber’s Eng. Garner, v. 509. Prob. suggested by
Swed. beting, a bitt (naut. term); cf. betingsbult, a bitt-pin ; Dan.
beding, a slip, bitts; bedingsbolt, a bitt-bolt; bedingskne, a bitt-knee ;
&e. {It has found its way into Du. and G.; cf. Du. beting,
betinghout, a bitt; G. biting, a bitt; batingholzer, bitts.] B. The
word probably arose from the use of a noose or tether for pasturing
horses, or, in other words, for baiting them. Cf. Swed. beta, to pasture
a horse ; whence betingsbult, as if a pin for tethering a horse while at
pasture. Cf. Icel. beiting, grazing; beita, to graze cattle, also, to
yoke horses to a vehicle. See Bait. 4 The word bait is Scand.,
showing that the Du. and G. words are borrowed. The E. word, on
the other hand, may be native; cf. AS. ge-b#te, a bridle, b#tan, to


62 BITUMEN


rein in; b&ting, a rope for fastening; all from bé-, mutation of bat-,
2nd stem of bitan, to bite.

BITUMEN, mineral pitch. (L.) Milton has bituminous; P. L.
x. 562. [Shak. has the pp. bitwmed, Peric. iii. 1. 72,—F. bitume (Cot-
grave).]— L. bitiimen, gen. bitimin-is, mineral pitch ; used by Virgil,
Geor. ili. 451. Der. bitumin-ous, bitumin-ate.

BIVALVBE, a shell or seed-vessel with two valves. (F.—L.) In
Johnson’s Dict.—F. bivalve, bivalve; both. adj. and sb.=—L. 7-,
double; and walua, the leaf of a folding-door; gen. used in the pl.
ualue, folding-doors. See Valve.

BIVOUAGC, a watch, guard; especially, an encampment for the
night without.tents. (F.—G.) Oddly spelt ‘biowac or bihovac,’ in
Phillips, ed. 1706. Borrowed from F. bivowac, also spelt bikouac,
biouac, in Richelieu (1680); see Hatzfeld. = G. beiwache, a guard, a
keeping watch; introduced into F. at the time of the Thirty Years’
War, 1618-1648 (Brachet).—G. bei, by, near; and wachen, to watch;
words cognate with E. by and watch respectively. B. Or rather, from
the Swiss beiwacht (in Stalder, ed. 1812, ii. 426), a term ‘ used in
Aargau and Zurich to denote the patrol of citizens (Schaar-wache)
added (bei-gegeben) to assist the ordinary town-watch by night at any
time of special commotion. This remaining of a large body of men
under arms all night explains the original sense of bivowac;’ N. E.D.
Cf. Diez, s. v. bivac, p. 525.

BIZARRE, odd, strange. (F.—Span.) In Dryden, Pref. to
Maiden Queen. Merely borrowed from F. bizarre, strange, capri-
cious. ‘It originally meant valiant, intrepid; then angry, headlong;
lastly strange, capricious ;’ Brachet.—Span. bizarro, valiant, gallant,
high-spirited. In Mahn’s Webster, the word issaid to be ‘ of Basque-
Iberian origin;’ i. e. from Basque bizarra,a beard, ‘The transference
of sense would be like that in Span. hombre de bigote, a man of spirit,
usually referred to bigote,a moustache. But this is certainly risky.
4 Hatzfeld notes that F. bizarre was also spelt bigearre (see Cot-
grave), and that its sense was influenced by F. bigarrer, to diversify.
See Korting, § 1446.

BLAB, to tell tales. (E.) Often a sb.; Milton has: ‘avoided as
a blab;’ Sams. Agon. 495; but also blabbing ; Comus, 138. ME.
blabbe, a tell-tale; see Prompt. Parv. p. 37, and Chaucer, Troil. iii.
300 (v.r. Jabbe). ‘The verb more often occurs in early authors in the
form blabber, ME. blaberen; see Prompt. Parv. p. 37. ‘I blaber, as a
chylde dothe or [ere] he can speke;’ Palsgrave. ‘I blaberde;’ P.
Plowman, A.v. 8. All are (like dabble) imitative verbs, and may be
considered as E. Similar are Dan. blabbre, to babble, to gabble; an
Old Norse form blabbra is cited by Rietz; Swed. dial. bladdra, blaffra,
to prattle, Rietz; G. plappern, to blab, babble, prate; Gael. blabaran,
a stammerer, stutterer ; blabkdach, babbling, garrulous; plabair, a
babbler; MDu. Jabben, to babble; Dan. dial. blaffre, to babble.
See Bleb, Blob, Blubber,.

BLACK, swarthy, dark. (E.) ME. blak, Chaucer, C. T. 2132
(A 2130). AS. blac, blec, black, Grein, i.124. Cf. AS. blac, Icel.
blek, ink; Dan. blek, sb.,ink ; Swed. bldck, ink, bldcka, to smear with
ink; Swed. dial. blaga, to smear with smut (Rietz). So also OHG.
blach, ink. @ Origin obscure; connexion with Du. blaken, to burn,
scorch, is uncertain; so also that with L. fagrare, Gk. pdéyev. Con-
nexion with bleak is probable; see N. E.D., and Noreen, Gr. § 149
(2); andOHG. blah in Schade. Der. black, sb. ; black-ly, black-ish,
black-ness, black-en ; also blackamoor (spelt blackmoor in Beaum. and
Fletcher, Mons. Thomas, v. 2), black-ball, black-berry, black-bird,
black-cock, black-friar, black-guard, q.v., black-ing, black-lead, black-
letier, black-mail, black-rod, black-smith, black-thorn, &c.

BLACKGUARD, a term of reproach. (Hybrid; E. and F.)
From black and guard, q.vy. A name given to scullions, turnspits,
and the lowest kitchen menials, from the dirty work done by them.
In the Accounts of St. Margaret, Westminster, p. 10, under the date

1532, we find: ‘item, received for iiij. torches of the black guard,
viijd. ;’ see Brand’s Popular Antiquities, ed. Ellis, ii. 316. In Like
Will to Like (1568), pr. in Dodsley’s Old Plays, ed. Hazlitt, iii. 323,
we find: ‘ Thou art served as Harry Hangman, captain of the black
guard. ‘They are taken for no better than rakehells, or the devil’s
blacke guarde ;’ Stanihurst, Descr. of Ireland, ed. 1808, vi.68. ‘A
lamentable case, that the devil’s black guard should be God’s
soldiers ;’ Fuller, Holy War, bk. i. c. 12. ‘Close unto the front
of the chariot marcheth all the sort of weavers and embroderers; next
unto whom goeth the black guard and kitchenry;’ Holland, Am-
mianus, p.12, ‘A lousy slave, that within this twenty years rode
with the black guard in the Duke’s carriage, ’mongst spits and
dripping-pans ;’ Webster, The White Devil, A.i. See Trench’s Select
Glossary.

BLADDER, a vesicle in animals. (E.) ME. dbladdre, Chaucer,
C.T. 15907 (G 439). AS. blédre, f., a blister; Orosius, i. 7;
bléddre, a bladder, A. S. Leechdoms,i. 360. Teut. type dlé-dron-, f.,
from the verbal root *blé-, to blow out, and suffix -drdn- cognate with


BLATANT


Gk. -rpa, -tpov.+Icel. bladra, a bladder, a watery swelling ; Swed.
bladdra, a bubble, blister, bladder; Dan. blere, a bladder, blister ;
Du. dlaar, a bladder, blister; cf. Du. blaas, a bladder, bubble, lit. a
thing blown, from blazenx, to blow; OHG. blatara (G. blatter), a
bladder. Cf. AS. bldwan, to blow; L. flare, to blow. See Blow (1).
Der. bladder-y.

BLADES, a leaf; flat part of a sword. (E.) ME. blade (of a sword),
Chaucer, Prol. 620 (A 618). AS. bled, n., a leaf ; Grein, i. 125.4
Tcel. blad, a leaf; Swed., Dan., and Du. blad, a leaf, blade; OHG.
plat, G. blatt. B. Teut. type *bla-dom, neut., with the sense of ‘ full
blown,’ ‘ flourishing ;” a pp. form (with suffix -dé- = Idg. -éd-) from
the weak grade of 4/BHLO. See Blow (2).

BLAEBERRY, BLEABERRY, a bilberry. (Scand. and E.)
“A blabery ;? Catholicon Angl. (1483). From North E. blae, livid,
dark ; and berry, The form dae is from Icel. b/a-r, livid; see under
Blue. Cf. Icel. blaber, a blaeberry ; Swed. blébdr ; Dan. blaaber.

BLAIN, a pustule. (E.) ME. dblein, bleyn; Promp. Parv. p. 39 ;
Wyclif, Job, ii. 7. AS. blegen, a boil, pustule; Liber Medicinalis,
i. 58, in A. S. Leechdoms, ii. 128.4Du. blein; Dan. blegn, a blain,

imple.

PBLAME, to censure. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. blame, Chaucer, C. T.,
E 76; blamen, Ancren Riwle, p. 64.—OF. blasmer, to blame. —L.
blasphémare, used in the sense ‘to blame’ by Gregory of Tours
(Brachet).—Gk. BAacpnpeiv, to speak ill. Blame is a doublet of
blaspheme; see Blaspheme. Der. blam-able, blam-abl-y, blam-able-
ness; blame, sb.; blame-less, blame-less-ly, blame-less-ness.

BLANCH (1), vb., to whiten. (F.—OHG.) Sir T. Elyot has
blanched, whitened; Castle of Helth, bk. il. c. 7 (Of Wallnuttes) ;
and see Prompt. Pary. From ME. blanche, white, Gower, C. A. iii. 9 ;
bk. vi. 239. =F. blanchir, to whiten, from blanc, white. See Blank.

BLANCH (2), vb., to blench. (E.) Sometimes used for blench,
See Blench.

BLAND, gentle, mild, affable. (L.) [The ME. verb blanden, to
flatter (Shoreham’s Poems, p. 59), is obsolete ; we now use blandish.]
The adj. blandis in Milton, P. L. v. 5; taken rather from L. directly
than from F., which only used the verb; see Cotgrave.=L. blandus,
caressing, agreeable, pleasing. Brugm. i. § 413 (9). Der. bland-ly,
bland-ness ; also blandish, q.v.

BLANDISG, to flatter. (F.—L.) In rather early use. ME.
blandisen, to flatter; Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, bk. ii. pr. 1, 1. 20. —
OF. blandir, to flatter, pres. part. blandis-ant (whence also the sb.
blandissement).—L. blandiri, to caress.—L. blandus, gentle. See
Bland. Der. blandish-ment.

BLANK, void; orig. pale. (F.—-OHG.) Milton has ‘the blanc
moon ;’ P.L. x. 656. ME. blanke, Prompt. Pary.=—F. blanc, white.
= OHG. blanch, planch, shining. Nasalised from OHG. blah, shining;
cf. Gk. pAdy-eos, flaming, shining, from ¢Aéy-ev, to shine. See
Blink. Der. blank-ness; also blanch, q.v.; and blank-et, q.v.

BLANKET, a coarse woollen cover. (F.—OHG.) Originally
of a white colour. ME. blanket, as in ‘whit blanket,’ Life of Beket,
ed, W. H. Black, 1. 1167; and see Prompt. Parv. p. 38.—AF.
blanket (F. blanchet), Stat. Realm, i. 381 (1363); formed by adding
the dimin. suffix -e¢ to F. blanc, white.—OHG. blanch planch white.
See Blank. Der. blanket-ing.

BLARE, to roar, make a loud noise. (E.) Generally used of a
trumpet ; ‘the trumpet blared;’ or, ‘the trumpet’s blare. Cf. ME.
blorien, bloren, to weep; prov. E. blare, to make a loud noise (bleat,
bray). Of imitative origin. Cf. Du. blaren, Low G. blarren, to bleat;
MHG., bléren (G. pliirren), to bleat, to blubber. Cf. MDu. blaser,
a trumpeter; Oudemans. See further under Blaze (2).

BLASON 3; see Blazon (1) and (2).

BLASPHEME, to speak injuriously. (L.—Gk.) Shak. has dlas-
pheme, Meas. for Meas. i. 4.38. ME. blasfemen; Wyclif, Mark, ii. 7.
= L. blasphémare. — Gk. BAaopnpety, to speak ill of. = Gk. BAdopnpos,
adj., evil-speaking. B. The first syllable is supposed to be for*BaAaBes-,
i.e. hurtful, allied to BAdB-n, hurt; the latter syllables are due to
pnut, I say. Blaspheme is a doublet of blame. See Blame and
Fame. Der. blasphem-y (ME. blasphemie, Ancren Riwle, p. 198 ;
a F, form of L. blasphémia, from Gk. Bdacpnpia); blasphem-er,
blasphem-ous, blasphem-ous-ly. Brugm. i. § 744.

BLAST, a blowing. (E.) ME. blast, Chaucer, Troilus, ii. 1387 ;
King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 2571. AS. dl&st, m., a blowing, Grein,
i. 126; (distinct from blest, a blaze, a flame.)-+-Icel. blastr,a breath,
blast of a trumpet; OHG. blast. Formed with Idg. suffix -to- from
the Teut. base of Blaze (2). So also Swed. blast, wind, from 5/as-a,
to blow. Cf. OMerc. bl#s-belg, bellows; Corp. Glos. 910. Der.
blast, vb.

BLATANT, noisy, roaring. (E.) Best known from Spenser’s
‘blatant beast;’ F.Q. vi. 12 (heading); also blatiant, id. vi. 1. 7,
The suffix -azt is a fanciful imitation of the pres. part. suffix in French.
Cf. prov. E. blate, to bellow, to roar; blate, noise (E.D.D.). Of


BLAY


imitative origin. Cf. bleat; and Gk. mapdrd(ew (base pdad-), to
bluster, splutter.

BLAY, a bleak (small fish). (E.) Cotgrave has F. able, ‘ a blay,
or bleak, fish.’ AS. bl#ge.4-Du. blei; G. bleithe. Allied to Bleak (2).

BLAZE (1), a flame; to flame. (E.) ME. dlase, a flame, P.
Plowman, B. xvii. 212; blasen, to blaze, id. B. xvii. 232. AS. blase,
dlase, a torch, John, xvili. 3; also a flame; in comp. dé#l-blese, a
bright light, Grein, 1. 77. Teut. type *blasdn-, f. We also find
AS. bles ; ‘ facula, bles,’ Mone, Quellen, 402. 61. Cf. MHG. dias,
a torch; also G. bldsse, Icel. blest, Swed. bias, a ‘ blaze’ or white
mark on a horse (orin E., on a tree). See Notes on E. Etym., p. 9.

BLAZE (2), to spread far and wide; to proclaim. (Scand.) ‘Began
to blaze abroad the matter;’ Mark, i. 45. ME, blasen, used by
Chaucer to express the loud sounding of a trumpet; Ho. of Fame,
iii. 711.—Icel. blasa, to blow, to blow a trumpet, to sound an alarm;
Swed. blasa, to blow, to sound; Dan. blése, to blow a trumpet; Du.
blazen, to blow, to blow a trumpet; G. blasen, Teut. type *blésan-;
as also in Goth. uf-blésan, to puff up. Extended from *b/%-, as in
G. blahen, to puff up, and in AS. bld-wan, to blow. See Blow (1),
Blast. Cf. Blazon (1) and Blare.

BLAZON (1), a proclamation ; to proclaim. (Scand.) Shak. has
blason, a proclamation, Hamlet, i. 5. 21 ; atrumpeting forth, Sonnet
106; also, to trumpet forth, to praise, Romeo, ii. 6. 26. This word
is a corruption of blaze, in the sense of to blaze abroad, to proclaim.
The final z is due to confusion with blazon in the purely heraldic
sense; see below. 4] Blazon, to proclaim, from ME. blasen, is from
a Scand. source, see Blaze (2); whilst the heraldic word is French,
but from a Teutonic source ; see below.

BLAZON (2), to pourtray armorial bearings; an heraldic term.
(F.—Teut.?) ME. blason, blasoun, a shield; Gawain and Grene
Knight, 1. 828.—F. blason, ‘a coat of arms; in the 11th century a
buckler, a shield; then a shield with a coat of arms of a knight
painted on it; lastly, towards the fifteenth century, the coats of arms
themselves ;’ Brachet (who gives it as of Teutonic origin). B. [Burguy
remarks that the Provencal blezd had at an early period the sense of
glory, fame; just as the Span. blason means honour, glory, as well as
blazonry ; cf. Span. blasonar, to blazon, also, to boast, brag of.] But
the earliest sense, both in F. and E., is simply ‘shield ;’ and the re-
ference may be to its brightness or to bright marks on it ; cf. Icel. dlesi,
Swed.. blus, a ‘blaze’ or white mark on a horse. There is thus,
perhaps, a connexion with Blaze (1). Korting, § 1460. 4 Notice
‘blasyn, or dyscry armys, describo;’ and ‘blasynge of armys, de-
seripcio;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 38. Shields probably bore distinctive
marks of some kind or other at a very early period. Der. blazon-ry.

BLEABERRY, a bilberry; see Blaeberry.

-BLEACH, vb., to whiten. (E.) ME. blechen, to bleach, Ancren
Riwle, p. 324,1.1. AS. bl¥can; Alfred, tr. of Beda, ed. Smith, i.
1.1. 20.— AS. blac; see Bleak (1).4Icel. bletkja; Dan. blege ; Swed.

leka ; Du. bleeken; G. bleichen. Teut. type *blaikjan-. From the
adj. bleak, wan, pale (below). Der. bleach-er, bleach-er-y, bleach-ing.

BLEAK (1), pale, exposed. (Scand.) ME. bleyke, ‘ pallidus ;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 39; blezk, Havelok, 470.—Icel. bleikr, pale, wan ;
Dan. bleg; Swed. blek, pale, wan.+AS. blac; Du. bleek, pale; OHG.
pleih, pale; G, bleich. Teut. type *blaikoz; from *blaik, 2nd grade
of *ble:kan- (AS. blican), to shine. Cf. Slavonic base *dlig-, as in
blisk-, for *blig-sk-, to shine; Miklosich. Der. bleak, sb., see below;
bleach, q.¥.\

BLEAK (2), a kind of fish. (Scand.) Spelt bleek about A.D.
1613; Eng. Garner, ed. Arber, i. 157; bleke in Palsgrave (1530).
Named from its bleak or pale colour. See above. Cf. Low G. bleken,
a bleak. . Cf. Blay.

BLEAR ONE’S EYE, to deceive. (E.) This is closely con-
nected with blear-eyed. Shak, has ‘ bleared thine eye’ =dimmed thine
eye, deceived ; Tam. Shrew, v. 1.120. So too in Chaucer, and in
P. Plowman, B. prol. 74. B. The sense of blear here is to ‘dim,’ as
with weeping. See Blear-eyed.

. BLEAR-EYED, dim-sighted. (E.) ME. ‘ blereyed, lippus ;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 39;  dblere-nyed, P. Plowman, B. xvii. 324.
Cognate with Low G. bleer-oged, having weak and inflamed eyes,
variant of blarr-oged, the same; from blarren (Pomeran. blaren), to
blubber. See Blare.

BLEAT, to make a noise likeasheep. (E.) ME, dleten, used also
ofa kid; Wyclif, Tobit,ii.21. AS. blétan, to bleat, said of a sheep,
fe\fric’s Gram., ed. Zupitza, p. 129; OMerc. /blétan, Corp. Glos.
282.4+Du. blaten, to bleat; OHG. plazan, to bleat. Teut. type
*blétan-. Cf. Russ. blejate, to bleat; L. flére, to weep.

BLEB, a small bubble or blister. (E.), We also find the form
blob, in the same sense. Rich. quotes blebs from More, Songs of the
Soul, conclusion. Jamieson gives: ‘Brukis, bylis, blobbis, and
blisteris ;’ qu. from Roul’s Cursing, Gl. Compl. p. 330. The more


usual form is blubber, ME, blober ; ‘blober upon water, bowteillis,’


BLINDMAN’S BUFF


Palsgrave. ‘ Blobure, blobyr, burbulium, Prompt. Parv. p. 40. ‘ At
his mouthe a blubber stode of fome’ [foam]; Test. of Creseide, by
R. Henrysoun, 1. 192 (Thynne’s edition). B. By comparing blobber,
or blubber, with bubble, having the same meaning, we see the pro-
bability that they are imitative, from the action of forming a bubble
with the lips. See also Blubber, Blab, Blob.

BLEED, to lose blood. (E.) ME. blede, P. Plowman, B. xix. 103.
AS. blédan, to bleed (Grein).— AS. bléd, blood. See Blood. 4 The
change of vowel is regular; the AS. é is the mutation of 6. Cf. feet,
geese, from foot, goose ; also deem from doom.

BLEMISH, a stain; to stain. (F.—Scand.?) ME. blemisshen ;
Prompt. Pary. ‘I blemysshe, 1 hynder or hurte the beautye of a per-
son;’ Palsgrave.—OF, blesmir, blemir, pres. part. blemis-ant, to
wound, soil, stain; with suffix -ish, as usual in E. verbs from F. verbs
in -ir,— OF. blesme, bleme, wan, pale. Origin uncertain; if the s in
blesme is unoriginal, it may be (as Diez says) from Icel. blaimi, a bluish
or livid colour. = Icel. blar, livid, bluish ; cognate with E. blue. The
orig. sense, in that case, may have been to render livid, to beat black
and blue. See Blue. 4 The Icel. b/ami is in the Supp.to Vigfusson;
Aasen gives Norw. blaame, a bluish colour, and Kalkar has MDan.
blam, the mark of a bruise, p. 230.

BLENCH, to shrink from, start from, flinch. (E.) [Sometimes
spelt blanch in old authors ; though a different word from blanch, to
whiten.] ME. blenche, to turn aside, P. Plowman, B. v. 589. AS.
blencan, to deceive; Grein, i. 127.+4-Icel. blekkja (for *blenkja), to im-
pose upon. Origin doubtful; but apparently a causal form of blink;
thus to blench meant originally to ‘ make to blink,’ to impose upon ;
but it was confused with blink, as if it meant to wink, and hence to
flinch. See Blink. @ Cf. drench, the causal of drink.

BLEND, to mix together. (Scand.) ME. blenden, Towneley Mys-
teries, p. 2253 pp. blent, Sir Gawain and the Grene Knight, 1. 1610.
From the stem of the pres. t. (1 p. blend, 3 p. blendr) of Icel. blanda,
to mix; Swed. blanda; Dan. blande.+ Goth. blandan sik, to mix one-
self with, communicate with; OHG. plantan, blantan,to mix. B. The
Goth. blandan is a str. vb. of the 7th conjugation. @ The AS,
blendam means to make blind, Grein, i. 127. See Blind.

BLESS, orig. to consecrate. (E.) ME. bdlessen, Chaucer, C. T.,
E 553, 12403 bletsetjen, Layamon, 32157. AS. blétsian, to bless
(Grein) ; blédsian, Vespasian Psalter, iii. 9, v. 13; ONorthumb.
bloedsia, Matt. xxiii. 39, Jo. viii. 48; Durham Ritual, p. 117. These
forms point to a Teut. type *blddison, to redden with blood, from ddd,
blood. See Blood. ‘In heathen time it was no doubt primarily
used in the sense of consecrating the altar by sprinkling it with the
blood of the sacrifice ;” H. Sweet, in Anglia, ili. 1. 156 (whose solu-
tion I here give). This is generally accepted. Der. bdless-ing,
bles;-ed, blessed-ness.

BLIGHT, to blast ; mildew. (E.) The history of the word is very
obscure; as a verb, blight occurs in The Spectator, no. 457. Cot-
grave has: ‘Brulure, blight, brant-corn (an herb) ;’ where ‘blight’
means ‘smut in wheat ;’ though it seems to be confused with the
herb named blite. |B. The word has not been traced, and can only
be guessed at. Perhaps it answers to an AS. *bliht, OMerc. *bleht,
and so to Icel. blettr, a spot, stain; just as E. right answers to AS.
riht, OMerc. ret, and Icel. réttr (for *rettr). If so, we may
refer it to »BHLEG, Gk. #dAéy-ew, to burn; just as right
is from 4/REG. f Comparison with AS. blecda, in Sweet’s O. E.
Texts, p. 548, is not quite safe, because blecdaisa gloss to L. uitiligo;
and though this L. word is by Sweet translated by ‘blight,’ the
proper sense of it is a tetter, or cutaneous eruption (Lewis).

BLIND, deprived of sight. (E.) ME. blind, blynd, Prompt. Parv.
p- 40. AS. blind, Grein, i. 128.4-Du. blind; Icel. blindr ; Swed. and
Dan. blind; OHG. plint, G. blind. Teut. type *blindoz; from an Idg.
base *bhlendh-; whence also Lith. blesti-s, to become dim (as the sun),
Brugm. i. § 493. Der. blind-fold.

BLINDFOLD, to make blind. (E.) From ME. verb blind-
Jolden, Tyndale’s tr. of Lu. xxii. 64. This ME. blindfolden is a cor-
ruption of blindfelden, to blindfold, whence blyndefelde, used by Pals-
grave; and, again, blindfelden (with excrescent d) is for an earlier
form blindfellen, Ancren Riwle, p. 106.— AS. blind, blind; and fyllan,
to fell, to strike. Thus it meant ‘to strike blind.’ See Fell (1).
@ The popular form had reference to folding a bandage over the eyes.

BLINDMAN’S BUFF. (E.) ‘To play at blindman-buff;’
Randolph, Works, p. 394 (1651), ed. Hazlitt (cited by Palmer). Itis
mentioned earlier, in the Prol. to The Return from Parnassus (1606).
And, in 1598, Florio explains Ital. minda by ‘a play called hoodman
blind, blind hob, or blindman buffe.’ Here buff is the F. buffe, ‘a
buffet, blow, cuffe, box, whirret, on the eare,’ &c.; Cotgrave. From
OF. bufe (a word widely spread) ; see further under Buff(2). The
explanation is given by Wedgwood as follows:—‘ In West Flanders
buf is a thump ; buffen, to thump, buf spelen, a game which is essen-
tially blindman’s buff without the bandaging of the eyes. One


63


64 BLINK


player is made the butt of all the others, whose aim is to strike him
on the back without his catching them. When he catches the boy
who gave him the last buffet, he is released and the other takes his
place. See De Bo, West-Flemish Dict.’ See also Koolman, East-
Frisian Dict., who quotes the phrase dat geid up'n blinden buf, that is
done (lit. goes) at hap-hazard (lit. at blind buff). And see buf in
Diez.

BLINK, to wink, glance; a glance. (Scand.) Shak. has ‘a blinking
idiot ;’ M. of Ven. ii. 9. 543 also ‘to blink (look) through;’ Mid.
Nt. Dr. v. 178. Probably of Scand. origin; cf. Norw. blinka, to
blink with the eyes, blink, a glimpse ; MDan. blinkéjet, with blinking
eyes (Kalkar). ME. blenken, commonly ‘to shine, to glance;’
Gawain and the Grene Knight, ed. Morris, 799, 2315. ‘The AS.
blencan meant ‘ to deceive’ (perhaps ‘to cause to blink’). Allied to
AS. blanc, white (as in blanca, a white horse) ; see Blank. Cf. also
Du. blinken, Low G, blenken, to shine.

BLISS, happiness. (E.) ME. dlis, Chaucer, C. T. Group B, 33.
AS. blis, bliss (Grein) ; a contraction from AS. blids or blids, happiness,
Grein, i, 130.—AS. blide, happy. See Blithe.4OSax. blizza, blid-
sea, happiness. Teut. type *b/2dsia, f., for *blid-ua; the suffix being
-tia,as in L. leti-tia. The sense was influenced by bless, which is
unrelated. Der. bliss-ful, bliss-ful-ly, bliss-ful-ness.

BLITE, a plant-name. (L.—Gk.) In Turner’s Herbal (1551). =
L. blitum.— Gk. Bdritov, a kind of pot-herb.

BLISTER, a little bladder on the skin. (F.—Teut.) ME. blister,
in The Flower and The Leaf, wrongly ascribed to Chaucer, 1. 408.
Also blester, as in Cursor Mundi, 6011.—OF. blestre, ‘tumeur ;’
Godefroy. Of Teut. origin; from Icel. blastr (dat. bléstri), the blast
of a trumpet, the blowing of a bellows; also, aswelling, mortification
(in a medical sense). So also Norw. blaaster, a blast, a kind of
tumour ; cf. Swed. bldsa, a bladder, a blister. The root appears in
Du. blazen, Icel. blasa, Swed. bldsa, to blow. See Blast, Blaze (2).
Der. blister, verb.

BLITHE, adj., happy. (E.) ME. blithe, Chaucer, Prol. 846;
Havelok, 651. AS. dlide, sweet, happy; Grein, i. 130.4-Icel. blidr ;
Swed., Dan. blid; Du. blijde; OSax. blidi, bright (said of the sky),
glad, happy; Goth. bleiths, merciful, kind; OHG. blidi, glad. Teut.
types *bleithoz, *bleithjoz. Der. blithe-ly, blithe-ness, blithe-some, blithe-
some-ness.

BLOAT, to swell. (Scand.) Not in early authors. The history
of the word is obscure. ‘ The bloat king’ in Hamlet, iii. 4. 182, is
an editorial alteration of ‘the blowt king;’ it means ‘effeminate’
rather than bloated. We find ‘ bloat him up with praise’ in the Prol.
to Dryden’s Circe, 1. 25 ; but it is not certain that the word is correctly
used. However, bloated is now taken to mean ‘ puffed out,’ ‘swollen,’
perhaps owing to a fancied connexion with blow; but the ME. form
was blout, soft (hence puffy, swollen), Havelok, 1910. B. The word
is connected with the Icel. blotna, to become soft, to lose courage;
blautr, soft, effeminate, imbecile ; cf. Swed. blét, soft, pulpy; also
Swed. dléta, to steep, macerate, sop; Dan. dlod, soft, mellow.
{ These words are not to be confused with Du. bloot, naked, G. bloss.]
The Swedish also has the phrases lagga i blot, to lay in a sop, to
soak ; blétna, to soften, melt, relent; blotfisk,a soaked fish. The last
is connected with E. bloater. See Bloater. yy. Further allied
to Icel. blaudr, soft; AS. bléap, G. blode, weak. Cf. Gk. pavi-dw,
I become soft or flabby. See Fluid.

BLOATER, a prepared herring. (Scand.) ‘I have more smoke
in my mouth than Would dlote a hundred herrings;’ Beaum. and
Fletcher, Isl. Princess, ii. 5. ‘Why, you stink like so many dloat-
herrings, newly taken out of the chimney ;’ Ben Jonson, Masque of
Augurs, 17th speech. There can hardly be a doubt that Mr. Wedg-
wood’s suggestion is correct. He compares Swed. bdlot-fisk, soaked
fish, from dblota, to soak, steep. Cf. also Icel. blautr fiskr, fresh fish,
as opposed to hardr jiskr, hard, or dried fish; whereon Mr. Vigfusson
notes that the Swedish usage is different, blétfisk meaning ‘ soaked
fish.’ Thus a dloater is a cured fish, a prepared fish. They were
formerly ‘steeped for a time in brine before smoking ;’ N.E.D.
See Bloat.

BLOB, a bubble (Levins) ; see Bleb.


BLOW


blonde is a beautiful girl of light complexion. = F. ‘blond, m., blonde, f.,
light yellow, straw-coloured, flaxen; also, in hawkes or stags, bright
tawney, or deer-coloured;’ Cot. Origin unknown. f. Referred
by Diez to Icel. blandinn, mixed; cf. AS. blonden-feax, with hair of
mingled colour, gray-haired. But the Late L. form is blundus (whence
also Span. blondo, Ital. biondo), prob. of Teut. origin, and allied to
Skt. bradh-na-s, reddish, pale yellow (Kluge). Cf. OSlav. bronii,
white.

BLOOD, gore. (E.) ME. bdlod, blood, Chaucer, C.T. 1548 (A
1546). AS. bléd(Grein).-+- Du. bloed; Icel. b160; Swed. blod; Goth.
bloth; OHG. pluot; G. blut. Teut. type *bld-dém, neut. Doubtfully
referred to the root of Blow (2), blood being considered as the symbol
of flourishing life; cf. L. fldrére, to flourish; see Curtius, i. 375.
Der. blood-hound, blood-shed, blood-stone, blood-y, blood-i-ly, blood-i-
ness; also bleed, q.v.

BLOOM, a flower, blossom. (Scand.) ME. blome, Havelok, 63:
but not found in AS.—Icel. blém, n., blomi, m., a blossom, flower;
Swed. blomma; Dan. blomme. Cf. OSax. blémo (Heliand); Du.
bloem; OHG. bluomo, m., bluoma (G. blume),f.; Goth. blima, a
flower. Teut. type *bld-mon-, m., from *bl6-, to blow, flourish; cf.
L. flé-s, a flower, flé-rére, to flourish. The E. form of the root is
blow; see Blow (2). | The truly E. word is blossom, q.v.; the
corresponding AS. bléma, ‘a bloom,’ is mod. E. bloom, but only in the
secondary sense of ‘a mass of hammered iron.’

BLOSSOM, a bud, small flower. (E.) ME. dlosme, blossum ;
Prompt. Pary. p.41. But the older form is blostme, Owl and Night-
ingale, 437; so that a ¢ has been dropped. AS. 61dstma [misprinted
béstma], Grein, i. 131.4-Du. bloesem, a blossom; cf. MHG. bluost, a
blossom. $B. Formed, by adding the suffixes -¢ and -ma, to the base
blos- (cf. L. flor-ére, for *flds-ére) ; extended from 6/0- in AS. blowan,
to flourish, bloom. 4 When the Idg. suffix -mon- (>AS. -ma,
Icel. -mz) alone is added, we have the Icel. blami, E. bloom. When
the suffix -¢ alone is added, we have the MHG. dluost. See Blow,
to flourish; and see Bloom.

BLOT (1), aspot,to spot. (F.—Teut.) ME. blot, blotie, sb., blotten,
vb. ‘Blotte ypon a boke, oblitum: Blottyn bokys, oblitero;’ Prompt.
Pary. p. 41.—MF. blotter, ‘to blot, stain, blemish, defile ;’ Cot.
Apparently from MF, dlotte, also bloutre, ‘a clod, or clot of earth ;*
Cot. The sameas OF. bloustre, blotte, bloutre, a clot of earth turned
up by the plough-share, Roquefort; see bloste in Godefroy. See
Blotch.

BLOT (2), at backgammon. (Du.) A d/o¢ at backgammon is an
exposed piece. The expression ‘made a blot,’ with reference to the
game of tables, occurs in Dryden, Wild Gallant, i, 3. It corresponds,
as Mr. Wedgwood well points out, to the Dan. blot, bare, naked; cf.
the phrase give sig blot, to lay oneself open, to commit or expose one-
self. Cf. Swed. blott, naked ; blotta, to lay oneself open. Du. bloot,
naked ; blooéstellen, to expose. Calisch, in his Du. Dict., has: ‘ik
kan niet spelen zonder mij bloot te geven (at chess, draughts, &c.),
I cannot play without unguarding myself.’ The word is Dutch;
from which the Dan. and Swed. forms were perhaps borrowed ; the
cognate G. word is bloss ; which see in Kluge.

BLOTCH, a pustule, a blot. (F.—Teut.) The sense ‘ pustule’”
is the older. Drayton has: ‘their blotch’d and blister’d bodies ;’
Moses, bk. ii. 328.—OF. bloche, ‘tumeur;’ Godefroy, s. v. bloste,
also bloustre. Prob. of Teut. origin; cf. MDu. bluyster, a blister;
Hexham. See Diez.

BLOUSE, a loose outer garment. (F.)
smock-frock. Of unknown origin.

BLOW (1), to puff. (E.) ME. blowen; in Northern writers,
blaw; very common; Chaucer, Prol. 567 (A 565). AS. dlawan,
Grein.+-OHG. dblahan, G. blahen, to puff up, to swell.4L. flare, to
blow.=4/BHLE, to blow; Brugmann, ii. §664. 4 The number
of connected words in various languages is large. In English we have
bladder, blast, blaze (to proclaim), blazon, blare (of a trumpet), blister,
&c.; also flatulent, inflate.

BLOW (2), to bloom, flourish as a flower. (E.) ME. blowe, Rob.
of Glouc. ed Hearne, p. 352, 1.7232. AS. bléwan, to bloom, Grein,
i. 131.4+-Du. bloeijen, to bloom; OHG. bluojan (G. bliithen). Cf. L.


Modern. = F. blouse, a


BLOCK, a large piece of wood. (F.—G.) ME. blok, Legends of | florére, Fick, iii. 222; thus flourish is co-radicate with blow. See


the Holy Rood, ed. Morris, p. 141,1. 314. [W. ploc,a block; Gael.
ploc, a round mass, large clod, bludgeon with a large head, block,
stump of a tree; Irish floc, a plug, bung ; are all borrowed from E.;
Macbain.]—F. bloc, ‘a gross, great, or generality ; the whole of, or
a heap of divers wares hudled together ; also, a block or log;’ Cot-
grave. — MHG., bloch, a block. The word is widely spread ; we find
Du. blok, Dan. blok, Swed. block, OF ries. block. Perhaps related to
balk (Kluge). Der. block-ade, block-house, block-head, block-tin.
BLOND, fair of complexion. (F.) In Evelyn’s Diary, July 25,
1683. Caxton has blounde (N. E.D.). Not in Johnson. Blonde-lace
is a fine kind of silken lace, formerly of the colour of raw silk; a


Bloom, Blossom, Blood, Blade.
to flourish, are flourish, flour, flower.

BLOW (3), a stroke, hit. (E.) ME. blowe; ‘blowe on the cheke,
jouee; blowe with ones fyst, sufflet ;’ Palsgrave. The AS. form does
not appear; but we find MDnu. blauwwen, pt. t. blau, to strike, Kilian ;
and Du. blouwen, to dress flax. [The MDu. word is native and
genuine, as the strong pt. t. blaw, i.e. struck, occurs ina quotation
given by Oudemans. ]4G. blduen, to beat with a beetle; cf. blduel, a
beetle; OHG. bliuwen, to beat; Goth. bliggwan, to beat. Teut. type
*bliwwan-, or *bleuwan-, to strike. The history of the word is
obscure. Almost the earliest quotation is ‘He gat a blaw,’ Wallace,


From the same root BHLO,


BLUBBER


i. 348 (ab. 1470). It looks as if the Du. word had been borrowed,
and made to coincide in form with Blow (1).

- BLUBBER, a bubble; fat; to bubble or swell up; to weep
copiously. (E.) Of imitative origin ; thus (1) blubber, ME. blober, a
bubble, spelt blobure in Prompt. Parv., is an extension of bled or blob,
a blister ; see extracts s. v. bleb. (2) The fat of the whale consists of
bladder-like cells filled with oil. (3) A blubber-lipped person is one
with swollen lips; also spelt blobber-lipped, and in the Digby Mysteries,
p: 107 (ed. Furnivall, p. 90), blabyrlypped; so that it was probably
more or less confused with blabber, q.v. (4) To blubber, to weep, is
ME. bloberen. Palsgrave has: ‘I blober, 1 wepe, je pleure.’ But the
older meaning is to bubble, as in: ‘The borne [bourn] blubred
therinne, as hit boyled hade ;’ Gawain and the Green Knight, I. 2174.
Cf, EFries. blubber, a bubble, a blob of fat; blubbern, to bubble. See
Bleb, Blob.

BLUDGEON, a thick cudgel. (F.?) Rarely used ; but given in
Johnson’s Dictionary. It has a short history ; the N. E. D. says it
occurs in Bailey’s Dict., ed. 1730; but it is not in ed. 1731. The
Corn. blogon (with g as/),a bludgeon, occurs in the Corn. miracle-play
De Origine Mundi, 1. 2709 (14th cent. ?); see Phil. Soc. Trans. 1869,
p. 148; prob. taken from EF. It is prob. of F. origin. Godefroy has
bloquet, bloichet, as dimin. of bloc, a block of wood. This suggests a
form *blochon as a possible source, likewise from bloc,

BLUE, a colour. (F.—OHG.) ME. blew, bleu; Chaucer, C.T.,
F 644; Rom. Rose, 1578.—AF. blu, bleu, blew; OF. bleu, blue. =
OHG. blao, blue, livid; G. blau.4Icel. blair, Swed. b/d, Dan. dlaa,
livid [whence ME. blo, livid, P. Plowm. B. iii. 97]; also AS. blaw
(O. E. Texts, p. 588). Teut. type *bl@woz. Cognate with L. flauus,
yellow.. With the sense ‘ livid? compare the phr. ‘to beat black and
blue.” See Notes on E. Etym., p. 11. Der. blu-ish, blue-bell, blue-
bottle.

BLUFF (1), downright, rude. (Dutch?) Not in early authors.
Rich. cites ‘a remarkable bluffness of face’ from The World, no. §8;
and the phrase ‘a bluff point,’ i.e. a steep headland, now shortened
to ‘a bluff,’ from Cook’s Voyages, bk. iv. c. 6. B. Origin uncertain ;
but a sailor’s word, and prob. corrupted from Dutch. Cf. MDu. dlaf,
flat, broad; blaffaert, one having a flat broad face; also, a boaster,
a libertine; Oudemans. And Mr. Wedgwood quotes from Kilian
the phrases ‘ blaf aensight, facies plana et ampla; blaf van voorhooft,
fronto,’ i.e. having a broad forehead, though Hexham says ‘the flat
of a forehead.’ y. If the MDu. dlaffaert, having a flat broad face, is
the same word as when it has the sense of ‘ boaster,’ we can tell the
root. The mod. Du. blaffer, a boaster, signifies literally a barker,
yelper, noisy fellow; from blaffex, to bark, toyelp. See below.

BLUFF (2), to impose upon by a boastful demeanour, to cow by
bragging. (Low G.) Modern; and partly a cant word. Perhaps the
same as ‘ bluffe, to blind-fold,’ in Ray’s N. Country Words (1691).
Cf. Low G. bluffen, to bluff; verbluffen, to confuse; Bremen Wort.
(1767); EFries. bluffen, to bellow, also to bluff; allied to MDn.
blaffen, to mock (Hexham); EFries. blaffen, to bark, yelp. Of
imitative origin. See Bluff (1).

BLUNDER, to flounder, to act stupidly. (Scand.) ME. blondren,
to pore over a thing, as in ‘ we blondren euer and pouren in the fyr,’
Chaucer, C. T. 16138 (G670). ‘Blondrynge and hasty ;’ Trevisa, ii.
169. ‘I blonder, je perturbe; Palsgrave’s F. Dict. Norw. blundra, to
close the eyes. Formed, with frequentative suffix -ra (for -era),
from Icel. blunda, to doze, slumber; so that it meant ‘to keep
dozing,’ to be sleepy and stupid. Cf. Swed. blunda, to shut the eyes ;
Dan, blunde, to nap; Jutland blunde, to doze, to blink, We find also
Icel. blundr, Dan. and Swed. blund, a doze, a nap. The sense of
‘confusion.’ suggests a relationship to Blend, Blind.

BLUNDERBUSS, a short gun. (Hybrid; F.—L. and Du.)
Used by Pope, Dunciad, iii. 150. For blanterbuss ; see quot. (dated
1617) for ‘ harquesbusse, plantier-busse, alias blanter-busse, and mus-
quettoon ;’ Sir D. Scott, The Brit. Army, i. 405. This is from Du.
planten, as in het geschut planten, ‘to plant ordnance,’ Hexham; and
Du. bus (below). Plantenis from F. planter, L. plantire; see Plant.
B. But doubtless confused with Du. doxderbus, a blunderbuss ;: which
should rather have been turned into thunderbuss.— Du. donder, thun-
der; and bus, a gun, orig. a box, a gun-barrel; cf. G. donnerbiichse,
a blunderbuss; from donzer, thunder, and biichse, a box, gun-barrel,
gun. Thus it meant ‘ ¢hunder-box ;’ see Thunder and Box (1).
See Palmer, Folk-Etymology.

BLUNT, not sharp. (E.) ME. blunt (of edge), Prompt. Parv.
‘p. 41; ‘ blont, nat sharpe ;’ Palsgrave’s F. Dict. . ‘ Unnwis mann iss
blunnt and blind;’ Ormulum, 16954. Cf. also ‘ Blunderer, or blunt
‘warkere [worker], hebefactor, hebeficus;’ Prompt. Parv. Origin
unknown; but perhaps for *blund, from the weak grade allied to
‘Goth. blandan, to mix ; which see in Uhlenbeck. Allied, perhaps, to
‘Icel. blunda, to doze; so that the orig. sense is ‘sleepy, dull.’ See
-~Blunder, Blend, Blind. Der. blunt-ly, blunt-ness. _ .


BOAT 65


BLUR, to stain; a stain. (Scand.) Shak. has both sb. and verb;
Lucrece, 222, 522. Levins has both: ‘A dlirre, deceptio;’ and ‘to
blirre, fallere.’ Blur is (1) to dim; (2) metaphorically, to delude.
Of uncertain origin ; cf. Swed. dial. blura, to blink, partially close the
eyes ; Swed. dial. blira, to blink ; blirra fojr augu, to quiver (be dim)
before the eyes, as in a haze caused by heat; Bavar. plerr, a mist
before the eyes. Distinct from blear, but perhaps confused with it.

BLURT, to utter rashly. (E.) Shak. has blurt at, to deride, Per.
iv. 3. 34. We commonly say ‘to blurt out,’ to utter suddenly and
inconsiderately. The Scot. form is blirt, meaning ‘to make a noise
in weeping,’ esp. in the phr. to blirt and greet, i.e. to burst out crying;
Jamieson. This shows that it is of imitative origin, and allied to
blare, to make a loud noise. Cf. Swed. dial. blurra, to speak fast
and confusedly. See ‘Bloryyn or wepyn, or bleren, ploro, fleo,’ in
Prompt. Parv. p. 40. The orig. sense of blurt is to blow violently.
See Blare, Bluster.

BLUSH, to grow red in the face. (E.) ME. bluschen, blusshen, to
glow ; ‘ blusshit the sun,’ the sun shone out ; Destruction of Troy, ed,
Panton and Donaldson, 1. 4665. AS. blyscan, only found in the gloss:
‘Rutilare, blyscan, Mone, Quellen, p. 3553; cf. ablisian (=d-blysian),
to blush, Levit. xxvi. 41. Allied to Du. blozen, to blush ; Hamburg
bliisen, to blush (Richey); Dan. blusse, to blaze, flame, burn in the
face; Swed. blossa, to blaze. B. All these are verbs formed from a
sb., viz. AS. dlys, in comp. bé/-blys, a fire-blaze (whence blysige, a
torch); Du. blos,.a blush; Dan. blus, a blaze, a torch; Swed. dloss,
atorch. All from *blus-, weak grade ofa Teut. root *bleus, to glow.
Hence also Low G. bleustern, to glow.

BLUSTHER, to blow noisily; toswagger. (E.) Shak. has bluster-
ing, tempestuous, said of weather, Lucrece, 115. Palsgrave has: ‘1
bluster, Ze souffle ;’ and ‘This wynde blustereth.’ It was doubtless
associated with blast, but is probably a native word, as blusterous,
blusterly, &c., are found in many dialects.. Cf. EFries. dliistern, to
be tempestuous (esp. of wind) ; dbliister, bliiser, a breeze; bliisen, to
blow hard ; dbliise, a wind ; Hamburg bleuster, a roaring fire (Richey).
Of imitative origin; cf. Blurt.

BOA, a large snake. (L.) A term borrowed from Latin. In
Cockeram’s Dict., pt. iii. (1623). The pl. boe occurs in Pliny, Nat,
Hist. viii. 14, where it means serpents of immense size. Prob. allied
to L. bds, an ox, in allusion to the size of the reptile.

BOAR, a quadruped. (E.) ME. bore, boor, P. Plowman, B. xi:
333- AS. bar, AElfric’s Glossary, Nomina Ferarum. + Du. beer;
OHG. per, MHG. bér, a boar. ‘Teut. type *bairoz, m.

BOARD (1), a table, a plank. (E.) ME. bord, a table, Chaucer,
C.T.,E 3. AS. bord,a board, the side of a ship, a shield (Grein).4
Du. bord, board, shelf; Icel. bord, plank, side of a ship; Goth.
-baurd, in comp. fotu-baurd, foot-board, footstool. Allied to AS.
bred, Du. berd, G. brett,a board. Teut. types *bard-om,n. ; *bred-om, n.
@ In the phrases ‘ star-board,’ ‘ lar-board,’ ‘ over board,’ and perhaps
in ‘on board,’ the sense of ‘side of a ship’ is intended; but it is
merely a different use of the same word; and not derived from F.
bord, although this has reinforced the E. usage. The F. bord itself
is of Teut. origin. We also find bord in Gaelic, Irish, Welsh, and
Cornish; all borrowed from E. Der. board, to live at table;
board-ing-house, board-ing-school ; also board-ing, a covering of boards.

BOARD (2), vb., to go on board a ship ; also to accost. (F.—
Teut.) Though the sb. board is E., the verb is borrowed from F.,
and does not appear in ME. It is common in Shak, in both senses ;
bord, to accost, is in Spenser, F. Q. ii. 2. 5, ii. 4. 24, &c.; see boord
in Nares. ‘At length herself bordeth Aineas thus;’ Surrey, tr. of
Gneid, iv. 304 (1. 395 of the E.version). ‘I bordeashyppe or suche
lyke, Faborde vne nauire, Palsgrave. Short for abord, which occurs
in Cotgravye.—F. aborder, ‘to approach, accoast, abboord, boord, or
lay aboord ;’ Cot.—F. a, to (< L. ad); and bord, edge, brim, side
of a ship, from Icel. bord, Du. boord, board, side of a ship; see
Board (1).

BOAST, a vaunt. (F.—Scand.) ME. bos, vain-glory; Will. of
Palerne, ed. Skeat, 1141. The oldest sense is, ‘ clamour, noise.’
‘ Now ariseth cry and boost;’ King Alisaunder, 5290. [The phonology
shows (see N.E.D.) that boast represents AF. bost].—AF. bost, a
boast ; Wright’s Vocab. i. 161, 1. 12; as is more clearly shown in
MS. Gg. 1. 1, fol. 287, back, col.1, in the Camb. Univ. Library. Of
Scand. origin ; from a Norw. base baust-, represented by Norw. bausta,
to act with violence (Ross). Cf. bausten, bold and reckless (id.) ;
baus, proud, blustering (id.) ; allied to Norw. baust, boastfully, bausa,
to bounce out, &c.; further allied to EFries. bisex, to be boisterous;
see Boisterous. Der. boast-er, boast-ful, boast-ful-ly, boast-ful-ness,
boast-ing’, boast-ing-ly.

BOAT, 2 small ship. (E.) ME. boof, Wyclif, Mark, iv. r. AS.
bat, Grein, p. 76. Teut. type *baitoz,m. A word peculiar to E.;
whence Icel. baér, Swed. bat, Du. boot, are directly or indirectly


| borrowed. Der. boat-swain (below).


K


66 BOAT-SWAIN


BOAT-SW ALN, an officerin a ship who has charge of thesails,
rigging, &c. (E.and Scand.) The earliest quotation in the N. E. D.
gives the spelling bote-swayn (ab. 1450). But it occurs as bat-swegen in
late AS., in the Leofric Missal, fol. 1, back; see Earle, A.S, Charters,
p- 254, 1.5. Here bat is the AS. form of boat; but swegen represents
ONorse *sweinn, Icel. sveinn, a servant, a lad; the AS. cognate form
being swin. See Swain,

BOB, to jerk about, to knock. (E.) ‘ Against her lips I bob;’
Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 493 ‘beaten, bobbed, and thumped ;’ Rich. III,
Vv. 3. 334. Bobet, a cuff, a blow, occurs in the Prompt. Parv, Usually
assumed to be of imitative origin. Cf. Swed. dial. bobba, to knock
against. @] ‘A bob of cherys,’ i.e. a cluster of cherries, Towneley
Mysteries, p. 118, may be explained from Gael. babag, a cluster; or
from the verb bob, to move like a thing hanging down.

BOBBIN, a wooden pin on which thread is wound; round tape.
(F.) Holland has ‘spindles or bobins ;’ Plutarch, p. 994.—F. ‘b0-
bine, a quil for a spinning wheele; also, a skane or hanke of gold or
silver thread ;’ Cot. Origin unknown.

BOBOLINK, an American singing bird. (Imitative.) At first
called Bob Lincoln, or Bob o’Lincoln; see N.E.D. A free imitation
of the bird’s cry.

BODE, to foreshow, announce. (E.) ME. boden, Gower, C.A. i.
153; bk. i. 3282. bodien, Layamon, 23290. AS. bodian, to announce,
Grein, i. 131.— AS. bod, a message, Grein; cf. boda, a messenger, id.
Cf. Icel. boda, to announce; bod, a bid. From AS, bod-, weak grade
of AS. béodan, to command, bid. See Bid (2).

BODICE#, stays for women. (E.) Bodice is a corruption of bodies,
like pence for pennies; it was orig, used asa pl. Hence, in Johnson’s
Life of Pope: ‘he was invested in bodice made of stiff canvass ;’ ed.
18543 iii. 46. Marston has ‘a pair of bodies toa woman’s petticote;’
Malcontent, iii. 1. And Mr. Wedgwood quotes, from Sherwood’s
Dictionary (appended to Cotgrave, edd, 1632, 1660): ‘A woman’s
bodies, or a pair of bodies; corset, corpset.’ See Body.

BODKIN, orig. a small dagger. (F.?—Du.?) ME. boydekin
(trisyllable), a dagger; Chaucer, C. T., B 3892, 3897. In Chaucer,
C. T., A 3960, MS. Cm. has boytekyn. Origin unknown. I merely
suggest that it may come from an OF, form *boitequin (AF. *beite-
quin). Cf. MDu, beytelken, ‘a small beetle,’ Hexham. For the
MDn. bey/el also meant ‘a punce to engrave with,’ Hexham ; the
same as mod. Du. beitel, a chisel; so that beytelken also meant ‘a
small chisel’ or ‘small punch.’ See beitel in Franck. Cf. Low G,
botel, a kind of chisel, Berghaus; Norw. beitel, a chisel.

BODY, the material frame of man orany animal. (E.) ME, bodi,
Owl and Nightingale, 73; Layamon, 4908. AS. bodig, body.+
OHG. potah; MUG. botech, Of unknown origin. @ The Gael.
bodhaig is unrelated (Macbain). Der. bodi-ly, bodi-less, bodice.

BOER, a Dutch colonist in S. Africa, (Du.) Du. boer, cognate
with EK. boor ; sce Boor.

BOG, a piece of soft ground; a quagmire. (C.) ‘A great bog or
marish ;’ North’s Plutarch, p. 480. Alsoin Dunbar, Of James Dog,
1], 15 (1505). ‘Nouther busk ne bog;’ Henrysoun, Wolf and
Wedder, |. 77.—TIrish bogach, a morass; lit. softish ; -ach being the
adjectival termination, so that bogach is formed from bog, soft, tender,
penetrable; Olrish boce, soft. Gacl. bogan, a quagmire; cf. Gael.
bog, soft, moist, tender. From Celtic type *bukkos, soft; for *bug-
nos, allied to Skt. bhug-nas, bent, pp. of bhuj, to bow, bend. From
the weak grade *bhug of 4/BHEUG or BHEUGH. See Bow (1).
See Stokes-Fick, p. 180.

BOGGARD, BOGGART, a spectre. (C.; with F. suffix.)
Levins has; ‘A boggarde, spectrum.’ From bog, variant of Bug (1) ;
with suffix -art, -ard (I*, -ard as in OF. bastard). See below.

BOGGLEH, to start aside, swerve for fear. (C.?) Shak. has it,
All’s Well, v. 3. 232. Origin unknown; but there is a presumption
that it is connected with Prov. Eng. boggle, a ghost, Scotch bogle, a
spectre ; from the notion of scaring or terrifying, and then, passively,
of being scared. Cf. W. bwg, a goblin; bwgwl, a threat; bwgwth, to
scare ; bygylu, to threaten; bygylus, intimidating, scaring. Cf, bug
in bug-bear. See Bug (1),

BOHEA, a kind of tea. (Chinese.) In Somervile, The Incurious
Bencher, 1. 28; Pope, Rape of the Lock, 1. 620. So named from the
Bohea hills. ‘The Bou-y teha (Bohea tea) takes its name from a
mountain called Bou-y, situated in the province of Fo-kien;’ Engl.
Cycl. sv. Tea. Also called Wu-i Hills, or Bu-i in the Fo-kien
dialect, Cf. bd-i-té, Bohea tea; Douglas, Dict. of Amoy dialect.
Fo-hien is Fukian in Black’s Atlas, on the S. EF. coast of China.

BOIL (1), vb., to bubble up. (F.—L.). ME. boile, boilen; also
“hoyle, buyle, to break forth or boil, Exod. xvi. 20, Hab, iii. 16;’
Wyclif’s Bible (Glossary).— OF, boillir, to boil. — L. bullire, to bubble.
-L, bulla, a bubble. See Bull (2), Der, boil-er.

BOIL (2), a small tumour. (E.) Spelt byle in Shak. Cor. i. 4. 31


(1623). MI, bile, byle, buile, P, Plowman, B. xx, 83. AS. dyl, Voc.


BOMBARD


245. 153 pl. bylas, Voc. 199. 25. Cf. Du. buil, a boil; G. beule,
MHG., biule, OHG. billa. All from Teut. base *ba/-, weakened
grade of Teut. root *veul-, to swell ; whence also Goth. wf-bauljan,
to puff up, Icel. beyla,a hump. Orig. sense ‘a swelling,’

BOISTEROUS, wild, unruly, rough. (F.—Scand.) Shak. has
boisterous, frequently. But it is an extended form. ME. boistous,
Chaucer, C. T. 17160 (H 211); also boystows=rudis ; Prompt. Parv.
p. 42. The forms are numerous, and the senses various; see N.E.D.
Just as E. cloister is from L. claustrum, so the AF. boist- is from
Norw. baust-; for which see under Boast. From the weaker grade
bast- we have EFries. bisterig, boisterous (as wind), buster, a storm,
from bisen, to be noisy or stormy; Jutland busten, harsh.

BOLD, daring. (E.) ME. bold, bald; P. Plowman, A. iv. 94;
B. iv. 107. AS. beald, bald, Grein, i. 101 ; also balJ- (in comp.; O. E.
Texts, p. 293).+Icel. ballr; MDu. bald (Oudemans), whence Du.
bout ; Goth. balths, bold, in derived adv. balthaba, boldly; OHG.
pald. ‘Teut. type *balthoz. Der. bold-ly, bold-ness ; also bawd, q.v.

BOLE, the stem of atree. (Scand.) ME. bole, Allit. Poems, ed.
Morris, B. 622.—Icel. bolr, bulr, the trunk of a tree; Swed. bal, a
trunk, body; Dan. bul, trunk, stump, log; G. bohle, a plank, board.
Prob, allied to Gk. pdA-ayé, a log, trunk (Kluge). See Balk (1).
Der. bul-wark.

BOLERO, a lively Spanish dance. (Span.—L.?) ‘She mingles
in the gay bolero;’ Byron, orig. draught of Song to Inez; Childe
Harold, c. 1 (notes).—Span. bolero, a lively dance ; also, the dancer
of it. Applied as anadj. to a child who runs from school ; and prob.
allied to bola, a bowl, the game of bowls; cf. escurrir la bola, to run
away. = L. bulla, a bubble, a ball; see Bowl] (1).

BOLLED, swollen. (Scand.) In the A. V.; Exod. ix. 31. Pp. of
ME. bollen, to swell ; which occurs in bolle}, P. Plowman, A. vy. 99;
and in the sb. bolling, swelling, P. Plowman, B. vi. 218, A. vii. 204.
A more orig. form of the pp. is bolned, whence the various readings
bolnif, bolnyth, for bolle, in the first passage. Dan. bulne, to swell ;
Swed. bulna, to swell’, Icel. bolgna; inchoative forms from bolg-,
weak grade of Teut. *belgan-, to swell, whence Icel. belgja, to inflate.
Cf. AS. belg-an (pp. bolgen), to swell with anger. See Bellows,
Billow.

BOLSTER, a sort of pillow. (E.) ME. bolster, Prompt. Parv.
p. 43. AS. bolster; Grein.+Icel. bolstr; OHG. polstar (Stratmann,
Schade). In Dutch, bolster is both a pillow, and a shell or husk. B. The
suffix may be compared with that in hol-ster; see it discussed in
Koch, Eng]. Grammatik, iii. 46. Teut. type *bul-stroz, from Teut.
*bul-, weak grade of *beul-, to puff up; see Boil (2). See Franck.

BOLT, a stout pin, of iron, &c.; an arrow for a cross-bow. (E.)
ME. bolt, a straight rod, Chaucer, C. T. 3264. AS. bolt, a cross-bow
bolt ; cf. ‘ Catapultas, speru, boltas;’ Voc. 508. 14 (Late L. cata-
pulta meant a bolt as well as a catapult).-MDu. bolt, a bolt for
shooting, a kind of arrow (Oudemans), whence Du. bout, a bolt,
in all senses; OHG, folz, whence G. bolzen, a bolt; MSwed. buié.
Teut. type *boltoz,m. Origin unknown.

BOLT, BOULT, to sift meal. (F.—L.—Gk.) | Shak. has bolt,
Winter’s Tale, iv. 4. 375; also bolter, a sieve, 1 Henry IV, iii. 3. 81.
ME. bulted (written bull/edd) occurs in the Ormulum, 1. 992. Pals-
grave has: ‘I boulte meale in a boulter, Ie bulte.’—OF. buleter
(Supp. to Godefroy) ; later bulter (Palsgrave) ; bluter, to boult meal
(Cotgrave) ; mod. F. bluter. B. In OF. we also find buletel, a sieve
(Supp. to Godefroy), also spelt buretel (Littré), showing that bulefer
isa corruption of *bureter ; cf. Ital. burattello, a bolter ; see proofs in
Burguy and Brachet. *Bureter meant ‘to sift through a kind of
cloth ;’ Florio has Ital. burattino, ‘a kinde of stuffe called Burato ;
also a boulter ; buratto, a boulter or sieve.’ y. The OF. *bureter is
thus derivable from OF. (and F.) bure, a coarse woollen cloth; Late
L. burra (the same).—L. burrus, reddish (from its colour).—Gk.
nuppés, reddish. Gk. mip, fire. See Bureau.

BOLUS, a large pill. (L.—Gk.) In Phillips, ed. 1706; and
Coles (1684). Phillips also explains it as a clod of earth, lump of
metal, &c.— Late L. balus (not L. bolus), which is merely a Latinised
form of Gk. B@Aos, a clod, lump of earth, a lump (generally).
@ Cotgrave has bolus as a F. word.

BOMB, a shell for cannon. (F.—Span.—L.—Gk.) In Kersey’s
Dict., ed. 1708; and in Evelyn’s Diary, Mar. 16, 1687. In older
writers, it is called a bumbard or bombard. See Bombard. =F.
bombe, a bomb. Span. bomba; Minsheu (1623) has ‘ bomba de fuego,
a ball of wilde-fire.’—L. bombus, a humming noise.—Gk, Bdp-
Bos, a humming or buzzing noise; perhaps onomatopoetic. See
Boom (1).

BOMBARD, to attack with bombs. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘To
Bombard or Bomb, to shoot bombs into a place;’ also ‘ Bombard, a
kind of great gun ;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. In older authors, it is
a sb., meaning a cannon or great gun (as in Caxton, tr. of Reynard,
c. 25), and, jacularly, a large drinking vessel ; see Shak. Temp. ii. 2.


-_*


BOMBARDIER


21. —F. bombarde, ‘a bumbard, or murthering piece;’ Cot.— Late L.

_ bombarda, orig. a kind of catapult.—L. bombus, a humming noise

‘(above). 4] Cf. ME. bombard, a trumpet; Gower, C. A. iii. 358;
bk, vill. 2482. Der. bombard-ment, bombard-ier, q. v.

BOMBARDIER. (F.—L.—Gk.) Cotgrave has: ‘ Bombardier,

‘a bumbardier, or gunner that useth to discharge murthering peeces *

-and; more generally, any gunner.” See Bombard.

BOMBAST, originally, cotton-wadding; hence padding, affected
language. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Bombast, the cotton-plant growing in
Asia; also, a sort of cotton or fustian; also, affected language ;’

-Kersey’s Dict. (1708). ‘White Bumbast [cotton] cloth ;” Hakluyt,
Voy. ii. pt. 1. 222. —OF. bombace, cotton (Godefroy) ; with added ¢.
=—Late L. bombacem, acc. of bombax, cotton; a corruption of L.
bombyx.— Gk. BopBvé, silk, cotton; orig.a silkworm. Cf. ‘to talk

-fustian.’ Der. bombast-ic; and see below.

- BOMBAZINE, BOMBASINE, a fabric, of silk and
worsted. (F.—L.—Gk.) Borrowed from F, bombasinz, which Cot-
grave explains by ‘the stuffe bumbasine, or any kind of stuffe that’s
made of cotton, or of cotton and linnen,’ = Late L. bombdcinus, made
of the stuff called ‘ bombax.’ = Late L. bombax, cotton ; a corruption
of L. bombyx, a silk-worm, silk, fine cotton. — Gk. BéuBvé, a silk-worm,
silk, cotton. See above.

BOND, atie. (Scand.) In Chaucer, C. T. 3096 (A 3094), where it
rhymes with kond=hand. A mere variation of bard; just as Chaucer
has lond, hond, for land, hand. See Band (1). Der. bond-ed, bonds-
man; but not (in the first instance) boxd-man, nor bond-age ; see
Bondage.

BONDAGE, tenure ofa cottar; service of a cottar; servitude. (F.
—Scand.) ME. bondage, servitude, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p.
71,—AF.tondage, explained by Roquefort as ‘vilaine tenue,’i.e.a tenure
‘of a lower character= Low L. bondagium, a kind of tenure, as in ‘de
toto tenemento, quod de ipso tenet in bondagio ;’ Monast. Anglic.

2 par. fol. 609 a, qu. in Blount’s Nomo-lexicon. A holder under
this tenure was called a bondman, or in earlier times bonde [AF.
bunde, as in Statutes of the Realm, i. 211], AS. bonda, which merely
meant a boor, a householder. B. That the word bondage has been
connected from early times with the word bond, and the verb to bind,
is certain ; hence its sinister sense of ‘servitude.’ y. It is equally
certain that this etymology is wholly false, the AS. bénda having
been borrowed from Icel. béxdi, a husbandman, a short form of biandi,
a tiller of the soil; from Icel. baa, totill; so that AS. bénda is allied
in sense and origin to E. boor. See Boor.

. BOWE, a separate part of theskeleton. (E.) ME. boon, Chaucer,
Prol. 546. AS. ban, Grein.+Du. been; Icel. bein ; Swed. ben; Dan.
been; OHG. pein, bein. Teut. type *bainom, neut. Der. bon-y;
bon-fire, q. Vv.

' BONFIRE, a fire to celebrate festivals, &c. (E.) ‘Fabyan
(continued) has: ‘ they sang Te Deum, and made bonefires ;’ Queene
Marie, an. 1555. Several other quotations in R. show the same
spelling. B. The origin, from bone and fre, is certain, but was ob-
‘scured by the regular shortening of the stressed vowel, as in know-
ledge, Monday, &c.; whence arose numerous futile guesses. sy. The
Lowland Scotch is banefire, in Acts of James VI (Jamieson) ; and
the Catholicon Anglicum (1483) has: ‘ A banefire, ignis ossium.’
This makes it ‘bone-fire,’ as being the only form that agrees with the
evidence} and this explanation leaves the whole word native English,
instead of making it a clumsy hybrid. 4] Note the following pas-
sage. ‘The English nuns at Lisbon do pretend that they have both
the arms of Thomas Becket; and yet Pope Paul the Third .. . piti-
fully complains of the cruelty of K. Hen. 8 for causing all the bones
of Becket to be burnt, and the ashes scattered in the winds; ... and
how his arms should escape that bone-fire is very strange;’ The
Romish Horseleech, 1674, p. 82. See also my Notes on E. Etymo-
logy, p. 13. It is remarkable that the Picard equivalent of bonfire is
fu dos (Corblet). Cf. bonefire in E. D. D.

BONITO, a fish of the tunny kind. (Span. or Port.=L.) De-

“scribed in Eng. Garner, ed. Arber, v. 133 (ab.1565). ‘A bonitoe-fish;’
Minsheu (1627).—Span. bonito, ‘a fish called a tunnie ;? Minsheu’s
Span. Dict. (1623); whence, probably, Arab. baynis, ‘the fish called
bonito;’ Rich. Dict. p. 312. [Here the final s of baynis is not the
usual s, but the 4th letter of the alphabet which, according to Palmer,
is properly sounded as E. ¢& in both.) B. Yule says the name is
Portuguese; from Port. bonito, fine. The Span. bonito also means
“fine;’ dimin. of Span. bueno, good. L. bonum, acc. of bonus, good ;
see Bounty. @ The Arab. name is adapted from Spanish or
Portuguese.


BONNET, a cap. (F.—Low L.—Hind.?) ‘Lynnen bonnettes


‘vpon their heades;’ Bible, 1551, Ezek. xliv. 18; and so in A. V. |


“ME. bonet; written bonat in Barbour, Bruce, ix. 506 (but rhyming
with sez).— OF. boner, bonnet, the name of a stuff, of which caps were


made (stressed on the. latter syllable); F. bonnet, a cap; Cot..


BOOR 67


[Brachet says it was originally the name of a stuff; ‘there were robes
de bonnet ; the phrase chapel de bonnet [cap of stuff] is several times
found ; this was abridged into ux bonnet.’ Cf. E. ‘a beaver’ for ‘2
beaver hat.’]—Low L. bonnéta, the name of a stuff, mentioned a.p.

1300. Origin unknown. Perhaps of Indian origin; cf. Hind. banat,
woollen cloth, broad cloth (Forbes).

BONNY, handsome, fair; blithe. (F.—L.?) Shak. has ‘ blithe
and bonny;’ Much Ado, ii. 3. 69; also, ‘the bonny beast;’ 2 Hen. VI,
v.2.12. Levins has: ‘ Bonye, scitus, facetus,’ 102. 32. A compari-
son of the word with such others as bellibone, bonibell, bonilasse (all
in Spenser, Shep. Kal. August), suggests a connexion with F. bonne,
fair, fem. of box, good; from L, bonus, good. The ME. bonie (in
King Alisaunder, 1. 3903) is less easily connected with OF. bone, fem.
of box; but the suffix is prob. E. -y (AS. -ig). Cf. jolly, in which
F. final -i is written as E. -y. Der. bonni-ly. See Bounty.

BONZE, a Japanese priest. (Port.—Japanese—Chinese.) Spelt
bonzee in Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, pp. 393, 394 (directly from
Jap. bonzt).— Port. bonzo, a bonze.— Japan. bonzi or bonzé.— Chin.
Jan seng, ‘a religious person;’? Yule. (Sir T. Wade also regards it
as the Japan. form of fan seng.)

BOOBY, a stupid fellow. (Span.—L.) In Beaum. and Fletcher,
Hum. Lieutenant, iii. 7.9. In Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p.
II, we find; ‘ At which time some boobyes pearcht upon the yard-arm
of our ship, and suffered our men to take them, an animal so very
simple as becomes a proverb.” [The F. bowbie, in the Supplement to
the Dict. de l’ Académie, is only used of the bird, and may have been
borrowed from English. The name probably arose among the Spanish
sailors, ] Span. bobo, a blockhead, dolt; a word in very common use,
with numerous derivatives, such as bobon, a great blockhead, bobote,
a simpleton, &c.; cf. Port. b0b0, a mimic, buffoon. [Related to F.
baube, stuttering (Cotgrave), and to OF. baubi, foolish, orig. pp. of
baubir, to mock at.)—L. balbus, stammering, lisping, inarticulate.
(Cf. Span. bobear, to talk foolishly, bobada, silly speech. ]4+-Gk. Bap-
Bapos, lit. inarticulate. See Barbarous.

BOOK, a volume; a written composition. (E.) ME. book, Chau-
cer, C. T., B 190. AS. bc, Grein, i. 134.4+-Du. boek; Icel. bak;
Swed. bok; Dan. bog; OHG. buoh, MHG, buoch, G..buch. B. A
peculiar use of AS. bdc, a beech-tree (Grein, i. 134); because the
original books were written on beechen boards or bark. The Icel.
bokstafr properly meant ‘a beech-twig,’ but afterwards ‘a letter.’ So,
in German, we have OHG. puocha, buocha, MHG. buoche, a beech-
tree, as compared with OHG. buok, MHG. buoch, a book. The mod.
G. forms are buche, beech; buch, a book. Cf. Goth. bédka, a letter;
pl. bdkds, a writing. AS. bdc, a ‘charter, occurs A.D. 808 (O.E.
Texts). See Beech. Der. book-ish, book-keeping, book-case, book-worm.

BOOM (1), vb., to hum, buzz. (E.) ME. bommen, to hum. ‘I
bomme as a bombyll bee [i.e. bumble-bee] dothe or any flye;’ Pals-
grave. Not recorded in A.S.; cf. Du. bommen, to give out a hollow
sound, to sound likean empty barrel. The MDu. bommen meant ‘to
sound a drum or tabor;”’ and MDu. bom meant ‘a tabor,’ Oudemans.
Allied to bump, to make a noise like a bittern, which is the Welsh
form; see Bump (2). 4 That the word begins with 4 both in O.
Low G. and in Latin (which has the form bombus, a humming), is
due to the fact that it is imitative. See Bomb.

BOOM (2), a beam or pole. (Dutch.) Boom occurs in Kersey
(1708) ; and in North’s Examen (R.) —Du. boom, a beam, pole, tree.
+E. beam. See Beam. Many of our sea-terms are Dutch. Der.


jib-boom, spanker-boom,


BOOMERANG, an Australian missile weapon. (Australian.)
See quotations in E, E. Morris, Austral English. Given as the native
name at Port Jackson in 1827; derived from buma, to strike (with
suffix -arang), by J. Fraser, Aborigines of New S. Wales, p. 69.

BOON, a petition, favour. (Scand.) ME. bone, boone, Chaucer,
C. T. 2271 (A 2269); and in the Ancren Riwle, p. 28.—Icel. bén, a
petition; Dan. and Swed. béz,a petition. AS. bén, a petition; whence
bene in Wordsworth. [Note that the vowel shows the word to be
Scandinavian in form, not A.S.] Teut. type *bdniz, f. B. Fick
connects it with the root baz, appearing in our E. ban ; iii. 201. See
Ban. y. The sense of ‘ favour’ is somewhat late, and points toa
confusion with F. bon, L. bonus, good. 8, In the phrase ‘a boon
companion,’ the word is wholly the F. don.

BOOR, a peasant, tiller of the soil. (Dutch.) In Shak. Merry
Wives, iv. 5.1; and Beaum. and Fletcher, Beggars’ Bush, iii. 1.—
Du. boer (pronounced boor), a peasant, lit. ‘a tiller of the soil;’ see
the quotations in R., esp. the quotation from Sir W. Temple.=— Du.
bouwen, to till. B. In Mid. Eng. the termis very rare, but it is found,
spelt boweer, in Lydgate, Chorle and Bird, st. 51 ; and it forms a part
of the word neigh-bour, showing that it was once an English word as
well as a Dutch one. Cf. AS. gebir (rare, but found in the Laws of
Ine, § 6), a tiller of the soil; AS. dian, to till, cultivate; OHG.
biwan, to cultivate (whence G. bauer, a peasant, a boor); Goth.

F 2


68 BOOT


bauan, to cultivate; all closely related to the word be. From 4/BHEU,'


to dwell; Fick, i. 161; Benfey, s.v. bhi; Streitberg, § 90. See Be.
Der. boor-ish, boor-ish-ly, boor-ish-ness.

BOOT (1), a covering for the leg and foot. (F,— Late L.) Chaucer
has botes, Prol. 203, 275.—OF. bote, botte, a boot.—Late L. botta, a
boot ; also spelt bofa; cf. Span. and Port. dota. [In Eng. the word
is even extended to mean the luggage-box of a coach; cf. F. botte (5)
in Littré, and see N.E.D.] The old boots were often large and
ample, covering the whole of the lower part of the leg. 4 A con-
nexion between boot and buit is sometimes assumed, but they are now
known to be distinct ; boot = Late L. botta; buit=Late L. butia,

BOOT (2), advantage, profit. (E.) Chiefly preserved in the adj.
boodless, profitless. ME. bote, boofe, common in early authors ; the phr.
to bote is in Langtoft, p. 163, &c. AS. bat, Grein,i. 135 ; whence AS.
bétan, to amend, help.4 Du. doe/e, penitence ; boeten, to mend, kindle,
atone for; Icel. bd¢ (bati), advantage, cure, beta, to mend, improve ;
Dan. bod, amendment, béde, to mend; Swed. bot, remedy, cure, bota,
to fine, mulct; Goth. bd/a, profit, bdtjan, to profit; OHG. puoza,
buoza, G. busse, atonement, G. biissen, to atone for. (In all these the
sb. is older than the verb.) Teut. type *bd¢a, fem.; from *bdt-,
second grade of *bat-; cf. Icel. bati, advantage; and see Better.
Der. boot-less, boot-less-ly, boot-less-ness. The phrase ¢o boot means
‘in addition,’ lit. ‘for an advantage;’ it is not a verb, as Bailey
oddly supposes ; and, in fact, the allied verb takes the form #o beet,
still used in Scotland in the sense of ‘to mend a fire’ (AS, bétan, to
help, to kindle).

BOOTH, a slight building. (Scand.) ME. bothe, in comp. tol-
bothe, a toll-house, Wyclif, St. Matt. ix. 9; also boJe, which seems to
occur first in the Ormulum, 1. 15817.—MDan. both (Kalkar) ;
Jutland bod (locally pronounced buwa0), Feilberg ; Dan. bod ; cf. Icel.
bud, a booth, shop; Swed. bod.4+G. bude, a booth, stall. Teut. type
*bi-tha, fem.; from *bi-, to dwell, as in Icel. bi-a; see Boor.
B. Further related to Irish and Gael. both, bothan, a hut, W. béd,
a residence; Lith. buta, butlas, a house. [But W. bwth, a booth,
Gael. buth, a shop, are from E.] Cf. Skt. bhavana-m, a house,
a place to be in, from bhu, to dwell, be.

BOOTY, prey, spoil. (F.—Low G.) Not in very early use. One
of the earlier examples is in Hall’s Chron. Henry VIII, an. 14. § 49,
where it is spelt botie. Palsgrave has boty, to translate F. butin.
Caxton has both botye and butyz in his Boke of Chesse, bk. ii. ch. 4;
‘ Alle the butyz and gayne,’ Troy-book, If. 277, back. Formed (with
loss of 7, as in haughty) from F. butin, ‘a booty, prey, or spoyle
taken ;’ Cot. [The E..oois due to the influence of boot (2).]—MDu.
biite, Du. buit, booty, spoil, prize ; buit maken, to get booty, take in
war ; cf. Icel. byti, Swed. byte, Dan. bytte, exchange, barter, booty,
spoil. Allied to Celtic *boudi-, as in Irish buaid, victory, W. budd,
gain, profit. Stokes-Fick, p.175. [The G. beute, booty, is merely
borrowed from Low G., as shown by its unaltered form.) f Cot-
grave’s explanation of budiner as ‘to prey, get booty, make spoil of,
to bootehale,’ clearly shows how the Eng. spelling was affected by
confusion with boot, advantage, profit.

BORAGE, a plant with rough leaves. (F,—Arab.) ME. borage,
Liber Cure Cocorum, ed. Morris, p. 47; also bourage, as in Cot-
grave, who gives: ‘Bourroche, Bourrache, bourage. =F. bourrache;
OF. borrace (Hatzfeld); cf. Late L. borrago, a name supposed to
refer to its rough leayes, as if from Late L. borra, burra, rough hair,
whence F. bourre, Ital. borra. But now (as in Hatzfeld) thought to
be from (unauthorised) Arab, abi rashh, a sudorific plant; from aba,
a father (hence, producing), and rashhk, sweating, as in Rich. Dict.,
Pp: 734. Cf. Span. borraja, ‘bourage;’ Minsheu. (Littré; who
thinks the Low L. borrago to be taken from the F.)

BORAX, biborate of soda; of a whitish colour. (Low L.—Arab.
—Pers.) Cotgrave gives borax, borrais, and boras as the French
spellings, with the sense ‘ borax, or green earth; a hard and shining
minerall.’ Borax is a Low Latin spelling ; Ducange also gives the
form boracum, The latter is the more correct form, and taken directly
from the Arabic.— Arab. birag (better barag), borax; Rich. Arab.
Dict. p. 295.— Pers. biirah, borax (Vullers). See Devic.

BORDER, an edge. (F.—Low L.—Teut.) ME. bordure, Chaucer,
tr. of Boethius, bk. i. pr. 1, 1. 22.—F. bordure (Cotgrave); OF.
bordetre (Supp. to Godefroy) ; cf. Span. bordadura. = Low L, borda-
tura, an edging.= Low L, bordare (Ital. bordare, Span. bordar, F.
border), to edge.—Du. boord, border, edge, brim, bank; which is
cognate with AS. bord in some of its senses. See Board. Der.
border, vb.; border-er.

BORE (1), to perforate. (E.) ME. borien, Ayenbite of Inwyt,
p- 66. AS. borian, Bosworth, with a ref. to élfric’s Glossary; he
also quotes ‘ wyrm pe borad treow,’ a worm that perforates wood.
Du. boren, to bore, pierce; Icel. bora; Swed. borra; Dan. bore;
OHG. pordn (G. bohren). Teut. Type *borén, to perforate; from
*boroz, sb., a bore, gimlet, as seen in AS. bor, Icel. borr, Swed. borr,


BOTCH


Dan. bor, a bore, gimlet.4-L. fordre, to bore; Gk. pap-, in pap-ayé,
a ravine, pap-vyé, the pharynx, gullet; Brugm. i. § 510.—4/BHER,
to cut. Thus bore is co-radicate with perforate and pharynx. Der.
bor-er.

BORE (2), to worry, vex. (E.) Merely a metaphorical use of
bore, to perforate. Shak. has it in the sense, to overreach, trip up:
‘at this instant, He bores me with some trick ;’ Hen. VIII, i. 1. 128.
Cf. § Baffled and bored;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Span. Curate, iv. 5.

BORE (3), a tidal surge in ariver. (Scand.) Used by Burke, On
a Regicide Peace, letters 3 and 4(R.). An old proy. E. word, of
Scand. origin. ME. se-bare, sea-billow, surge ; E. Metr. Hom., ed.
Small, p. 135, 1. 24.—Icel. bara, a billow caused by wind; Norw.
baara, a billow, swell in the sea; Du. baar, a billow, also a bier;
EFries. bar; Low G. bare. Lit. ‘a thing borne along;’ all from
Teut. *bér-, 3rd grade of beran-, to bear. See Bier. Doublet, bier.

BOREAS, the north wind. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. Troil. i. 3. 38.
— L. Boreas, the north wind.—Gk. Bopéas, Boppas, the north wind.
B. Perhaps it meant, originally, the ‘mountain-wind ;’ cf. Ital. zra-
montana, mountain-wind. Cf. OSlay. and Russ. gora, Skt. giri-s,a
mountain ; Curtius, i. 434. Der. borea-l,

BOROUGH, a town. (E.) ME. burgh, borgh, P. Plowman,
B. vi. 308 ; also borwe, in the sense ‘ a place of shelter’ (cf. E. burrow),
Will. of Palerne, 1. 1889 ; bur3e, burie, borwe, borewe, Layamon, 2168,
3553, 9888. AS. burh, burg, Grein, i. 147; forming byrig in the
gen. and dat. sing., whence the mod. E. bury in the sense ‘ town.”
+Du. burg ; Icel. borg, a fort, castle; Swed. and Dan. borg, a fort,
castle; Goth. baurgs, a town; OHG. purc (G. burg), a castle.
B. Teut. type *burgs, f.; from *burg-, weak grade of *bergan-, AS,
beorgan, to defend, protect, Grein, i. 107; Goth. bairgan, to hide,
preserve, keep.—4/BHERGH, to protect. Benfey (p. 635) suggests
a connexion with Skt. brhan, large. See below; and see Burgess,
Barrow (1).

BORROW, to receive money on trust. (E.) ME. borwen,
Chaucer, C. T. 4525 (B 105). AS. borgian, to borrow, Matt. v. 42
(by usual change of AS. g to ME. w); the lit. meaning being ‘to
give a pledge.’—AS. borg, a pledge, more frequently spelt bork in
the nom. case; common in the AS. laws.+ Du. borg, a pledge, bail,
security; MHG. and G. borg, security. (Merely a borrowed word
in Icelandic, and perhaps also in Swed. and Danish.) From borg- ~
=*burg-, weak grade of *bergan-, to protect ; cf. AS. borgen, pp. of
AS. beorgan, to protect, secure. See Borough. Der. borrow-er.

BOSH, nonsense; foolish talk, (Turkish.) From Turk. bosh, ©
empty, worthless ; introduced by Jas. Morier, in his novel of Ayesha,
1834; where he explains bosh by ‘ nothing.’

BOSKY, bushy. (Late L.) In Milton, Comus, 313. From Late
L. boscus, a bush; see Bush.

BOSOM, a part of the body. (E.) ME. bosom, Chaucer, C.T.
7575 (D 1993). AS. bdsm, Grein, 1. 134.4-Du. boezem; OHG. puos-
am; G. busen. Origin unknown. The Teut. type is b0s-moz, m.,
from Idg. root *bhas. Hence it may mean ‘ swelling,’ from Skt. root
*bhas, to puff, swell, whence bhas-tra, bag, sack, pouch; see babhastz
(2) in Uhlenbeck.

BOSS, a knob. (F.—OHG.) ME. ‘bos(se) of abocler’ (buckler)
Chaucer, C. T. 3266.—F. bosse, a hump; OF. boce; cf. Prov. bossa ;
Ital. bozza, a swelling. B. It has been supposed that (just as E.
bump means (1) to strike, and (2) a hump, a swelling, with other
similar instances) the root of the word is to be found in the OHG.
bozan, to strike, beat; cognate with E. beat. See Beat, and see
further under Botch (2). Doublet, botch (2).

BOTANY, the science that treats of plants. (F.—Gk.) ‘ Botanical,
belonging to herbs;’ Coles(1682). The sb. bo/anyis formed by analogy,
being derived from the F. adj. botanique, a form which appears in
Cotgrave, and is explained by ‘ herball, of, or belonging to herbs, or
skill in herbs.’ The mod. F. botanique is both adj, and sb. Thus.
botany is short for ‘ botanic science.’ = Gk. Botavixds, botanical, adj.,
formed from Boravn,a herb, plant. Gk. Boone, to feed (stem Bo-);
cf. Bordv, a grazing animal. Der. botanic, botanic-al, botanic-al-ly,.
botan-ist, botan-ise.

BOTARGO, a cake made of the roe of the sea-mullet. (Ital.—
Arab.) ‘Sturgion, mullit, caviare, and butéargo;’ Capt. Smith,
Works, ed. Arber, p. 240 (1614-15).—Ital. botargo, ‘a kind of salt
meate made of fish vsed in Italy in Lent ;’ Florio. — Arab. butarkhah ;
the same (Devic). The Arab. word is thought to be composed of the
Coptic indef. art. bu, and the Gk. rapixos, dried fish (Journal des.
Savants, Jan. 1848, p. 45).

BOTCH (1), to patch; a patch. (E.) Wyclif has bocchyn, to
mend, 2 Chron. xxxiv. Io. Prob. a native word, but not found in
A.S. Oudemans gives a parallel form botsen (mod. Du. boésen), to
strike ; with its variant budsex, meaning both (1) to strike or beat,
and (2) to repair. The notion of repairing in a rough manner
follows from that of fastening by beating. So also MDu, butsen,.


BOTCH


botsen, ‘to push or to smite;’ botsen, boetsen, ‘to clout or patch;’
Hexham. Der. botch-er, botch-y.

BOTCH (2), a swelling. (F.—G.) Used by Milton, ‘botches and
blains;’ P. L. xii. 180. The Prompt. Parv. has: ‘ Bohche, botche,
sore; ulcus.’ Here tch is for cch or ch. The spelling bocches is in
P. Plowman, B. xx. 83.—O. North F. boche, a botch, a boil; Norm.
dial. boche (Moisy); Picard boche; for OF. boce, a swelling; thus
botch is a doublet of boss. See Boss. 4 Oudemans gives butse as
M. Du. for a boil, or a swelling, with the excellent example in an old
proverb: ‘ Naar den val de butse’ =as is the tumble, so is the botch.

BOTH, two together, (Scand.) Not formed from AS. 6a Ja, lit.
“ both the,’ but borrowed from the Scandinavian; cf. Lowland Scotch
baith ; spelt baZe and befe in Havelok, 1680, 2543. = Icel. badir (ba-dir),
adj. pron. dual; neut. b@di, badi; Swed. bada; Dan, baade; cf. G.
beide, both. B. AS.has only the shorter form ba, both ; cognate with
Goth. bai, both; cf. -bo in L. am-bo; -¢w in Gk. dy-pw; and -bhaiu
in Skt. «-bkdu, both. See Fick,i, 18. sy. The Icel. -dir is for Jeir,
they, the; so that bo-th (=o the) was orig. two words; cf. Goth. ba
po skipa, both the ships; Luke, v. 7. See Noreen, Gr. § 122. For
numerous examples of various forms of the word, see Koch, Engl.
Gram. ii. 197.

BOTHER, to harass; an embarrassment. (E.?) There is no
proof that the word is of any great antiquity in English. It first
occurs in the writings of Irishmen, viz. T. Sheridan, Swift, and Sterne
(N.E.D.). It may be a mere variant of pother, which is, at any rate,
an older word. See further under Pother.

BOTS, BOTTS, small worms found in the intestines of horses.
(E.?) Shak. has bots, 1 Hen. IV, ii. 1. 11. Fitzherbert thas boftes
(Husbandry, § 102); whence Gael, botws, a belly-worm, is borrowed.
The Sc. form is bats, pl. Cf. WFlem. botse, a thick worm (De Bo).

BOTTLE (1), a hollow vessel. (F.—Late L.) ME. botel; Chaucer,
C.T. 7513 (D 1931).—OF-. boteille, botele (Supp. to Godefroy) ;. cf.
AF. butuille, a bottle (note to Vie de Seint Auban, ed. Atkinson,
1. 677).—Late L. buticula, butticula, double dimin. of Late L. buttis,
butta, a cask, butt. See Butt (2).

BOTTLE (2), a bundle of hay. (F.-OHG.) ME. botel, Chaucer,
C€.T. 16963 (H 14).—OF. botel; cf. ‘botelle, botte de foin ou de
paille;’ Roquefort. A dimin. of F. botte, a bundle of hay, &c.—
OHG. bdzo, pdzo, a bundle of flax.—OHG. bdzan, pézan, to beat,
cognate with E. beat; perhaps from the beating of flax. See Beat.

‘BOTTOM, the lower part, foundation. (E.) ME. botym, botum,
botun, bottome; also bothome; see Prompt. Parv. p. 45; bothem,
Gawain and the Grene Knight, ed. Morris, l. 2145. AS. botm, Grein,
P- 133-4+Du. bodem; Icel. botn; Swed. botten; Dan. bund; OHG.
podam (G. boden).+-L. fundus; Gk. rv0uqv ; Skt. (Vedic) budhna-s,
depth, ground; Benfey, p. 634; Fick, iii. 214; Brugm. i. §§ 103,
704. B. The word appears also in Celtic; cf. Irish bonz, the sole of
the foot ; Gaelic born, sole, foundation, bottom ; W. bor, stem, base,
stock. Der. bottom-less, bottom-ry. From the same root, fund-ament.

BOUDOTIR, a small private room, esp. foralady. (F.) Modern,
and mere French.=F. bowdoir; lit. a place to sulk in. =F, bouder, to
sulk. Root uncertain; but perhaps from the same source as E. powt,
verb, Cf. Limousin fa las boudos, to pout; fa de pots, to grimace
(Mistral).

BOUGH, a branch of a tree. (E.) ME. bough, Chaucer, C. T.
1982 (A ee AS. bog, boh, Grein, i. 134. [The sense is peculiar
to English; the original sense of AS. bég was ‘an arm;”’ esp. the
“shoulder of an animal.’]+4Icel. bégr, the shoulder of an animal;
Dan. boug, bov, the shoulder of a quadruped ; also, the bow of a
ship; Swed. bog, shoulder, bow of aship; OHG. puac, buog (G. bug’),
the shoulder of an animal ; bow of a ship.4-Gk. mjxus, the fore-arm;
Skt. bahus, the arm. Teut.type*boguz; Idg. type *bhaghus. Brugm.
i. § 184. See Bow (4). é‘

BOUGHT, s., the bight of a rope, &c.; see Bout, Bight.

BOULDER, a large round stone. (Scand.) Marked by Jamieson
as a Perthshire word ; chiefly used in Scotland and the N. of England.
ME. bulder-ston, Havelok, 1790. Mr. Wedgwood says: ‘Swed. dial.
bullersten, the larger kind of pebbles, in contrast to klappersteen, the
small ones. From Swed. bullra, E. dial. bolder, to make aloud noise,
to thunder.’ Klappersteen means ‘a stone that claps or rattles.’ See
his article ; and see Rietz. B. But I may add that the excrescent d
occurs in Danish; cf. Dan. buldre, to roar, to rattle ; bulder, crash,
uproar, turmoil. (Danish puts /d for ZI, as in falde, to fall.) So also
E.Fries. bullern, to rumble; buller-wagen, a waggon that rumbles
through the streets; Du. balderen, to roar (as cannon). All these


verbs are frequentative ; from budl- (asin MHG. bullen, to roar), weak |


grade of Teut. *bellan-, to roar. See Bell, Bellow, Bull (1).
BOULEVARD, a promenade, with rows of trees. (F.—Teut.)
Well known in Paris; orig. a promenade laid out on a demolished
fortification. — MF. bowlevert, bouleverd, boulever, ‘a bulwark ;” Cot.
= Du. bolwerk ; see Bulwark.


BOUSE, BOOSE, BOUZE, BOOZE 69

BOULT, to sift meal ; see Bolt (2).

BOUNCE, to jump up quickly. (E.) ME. bunsen, bounsen, to
strike suddenly, beat ; Ancren Riwle, p. 188. Soalso Low G., bunsen,
to beat, knock, esp. used of knocking at a door; Bremen Worterbuch,
i. 164; Du. bonzen, to bounce, throw; Norw. bunsa, to bounce up
(Ross), B. The word is clearly connected with bounce, a blow, bump,
used also as an interjection, as in 2 Hen. IV, iii. 2. 304. Cf. Du.
bons, a bounce, thump; Swed. dial. bums, immediately (Rietz); G.
bumps, bounce, as in bumps ging die Thiir=bounce went the door;
Icel. bops, bump! imitating the sound ofa fall. The word is pro-
bably imitative, and intended to represent the sound of a blow. See
Bump (1).

BOUND (1), to leap. (F.—L.—Gk.) Shak. has bound, All’s
Well, ii. 3. 314.—F. bondir, to bound, rebound, &c.; but orig. to,
resound, make a loud resounding noise; see Brachet.—L. bombitare,
to resound, hum, buzz; whence Folk-L. *bombitire. =L. bombus, a
humming sound. = Gk, BopuBos, a humming sound. See Boom (1).

BOUND (2), a boundary, limit. (F,—C.?) ME. bounde, Chaucer,
C. T. 7922 (E 46); earliest form bunné, Layamon, 1313.—OF. bonne,
a limit, boundary, also spelt bonde; AF. bounde; also sometimes
spelt bodne (which see in Burguy and in the Supp. to Godefroy).—
Late L. bodina, bonna, a bound, limit. Origin uncertain; some
suggest a Celtic origin; from Bret. boden, a clump of trees (which
might mark a boundary); cf. Bret. béd,a tuft. The Late L. bonna
answers well to Bret. boxw, a boundary, occurring in the compound
men-bonn, a boundary-stone; but this would separate bodina from.
bonna (yet the OF. bodue meant ‘ boundary-stone ;’ Godefroy, Supp.).
The suggestion of Thurneysen (p. 91) does not help us. 4[ We may
note that bound is a doublet of bourn, a boundary. See Bourn (1).
Der. bound, vb., bound-ary, bound-less.

BOUND (3), ready to go. (Scand.) In the particular phrase ‘the
ship is bound for Cadiz,’ the word bound means ‘ ready to go;’ formed,
by excrescent d, from ME. boun, ready to go. ‘She was boun to go;’
Chaucer, C. T. 11807 (F 1503). ‘The maister schipman made him
boun And goth him out;’ Gower, C.A. iii. 3223; bk. viii. 1407.
‘Whan he sauh that Roberd ... to wend was alle bone;’ Langtoft,
p. 99.—Icel. biuinn, prepared, ready, pp. of vb. bua, to till, to get
ready ; Norw. buen; from the same root as Boor, q. v.

BOUNDED, pp., as in ‘ bounden duty.’ (E.) The old pp. of the
verb to bind. See Bind. -

BOUNTY, goodness, liberality. (F.—L.) Chaucer has lountee,
C. T., B 1647, E157, 415.—OF. bonté, bonteit, goodness. L. acc.
bonitaitem, from nom. bonitds, goodness.—L. bonus, good; Old L.
duonus, good; perhaps allied to Vedic Skt. duvas, honour; Brugmann,
ii. § 67. Der. bountiful, bounti-ful-ness, bounte-ous, bounte-ous-ness.

BOUQUET, a nosegay. (F.—Late L.) In Todd’s Johnson
(1831). Mere French. =F. bouquet, ‘a nosegay or posie of flowers ;’
Cotgrave. — OF. (Norm. and Picard) bosquet, properly ‘ a little wood’
(Supp. to Godefroy) ; the dimin. of OF. bos, F. bois, a wood ; Brachet
quotes from Mme. de Sévigné, who uses bouquet in the old sense. =
Late L. boscum, buscum, acc. of boscus, buscus,a wood. See Bush,
@ The lit. sense of ‘little bush’ makes sense still.

BOURD, a jest; to jest; obsolete. (F.) Used by Holinshed,
Drayton, &c.; see Nares. ME. bourde, boorde. ‘ Boorde, or game,
ludus, jocus ;” Prompt. Parv. p. 44. The verb is used by Chaucer,
C.T. 12712 (C 778).—OF. bourde, a game; bourder, to play. Of
unknown origin. Diez took OF. bourder to be a contraction of
OF. bohorder, to tourney, joust with lances, hence to amuse oneself;
but this is no longer accepted.

BOURGEON ; see Burgeon.

BOURN (1),a boundary. (F.) Well known from Shak. Hamlet,
ili, 1.79; K. Lear, iv. 6. 57.—F. ‘borne, a bound, limit, meere,
march; the end ar furthest compass of a thing;’ Cot. From OF,
bodne, 2 bourn, limit, bound, boundary (Supp. to Godefroy). Thus
bourn is a doublet of bound. See Bound (2).

BOURN, BURN (2), a stream. (E.) ‘Come o’er the bourn,
Bessy, to me;’ K. Lear, iii. 6.27. ME, bourne, P. Plowman, prol.
1, 8. AS. burna, a stream, fountain; Grein, i. 149.4Du. bron, a
spring ; Icel. brunnr, a spring, fountain, well; Swed. brunn, a well;
Dan. brénd; Goth. brunna, aspring, well; OHG. prunno (G.brunnen),
a-spring, well. Some think the Goth. brunna is from brinnan, to
burn; see Uhlenbeck, and Stokes-Fick, p. 172. The connexion is
seen in the comparison of a bubbling well to boiling water ; and is
remarkably exemplified in the words well and ¢orrent, q.v. See
Burn.

BOUSE, BOOSE, BOUZE, BOOZE, todrink deeply. (Dutch.)
ME. bousen, Satire on Kildare, 1. 45; in E. E, Poems, ed. Furnivall,
p- 154. Spenser has: ‘a bouzing-can’=a drinking vessel; F. Q. i.
4.22. Cotgrave uses bouse to translate F. boire.-ODu. *bisen, MDu.
buisen, buysen, to drink deeply ; Oudemans. Cf. MDu. buize, buyse,
a drinking-vessel with two handles (Oudemans) ; clearly the same


70 BOUT


word as the modern Du. bwis, a tube, pipe, conduit, channel. Cf.] N.E. D. So called because it fastens the weather-edge of a square:


also OF. buse, buise, a conduit ; G. bausen, to bouse. }

BOUT, a spell (of work), &c.; properly, a turn, turning, bending.
(Low G.) Formerly bought; Milton has bout, L’Allegro, 139;
Spenser has bought, F.Q. i. 1.153 i. 11,11. Palsgrave (1530) has:
‘Bought of the arme.’ Levins has: ‘ Bought, plica, ambages,’ 217.
31.— Low G. bugt, a bend, turn; also, a gulf, bay, bight (as a naut.
term); Norw. bugt, EFries. bugt, bucht, a turn; cf.Icel. bugda,a bend,a
serpent’s coil (the sense in which Spenser uses bought). Allfrom Teut.
*bug-, weaker grade of *biigan-, to bow. See Bow (1) and Bight.
@ Wedgwood suggests the possibility that ‘in the expressions of
a drinking-bout, a bout of fair or foul weather, we have to do
with a different word. Cotgrave gives: ‘par boutées, by fits,
or pushes, not all at once, eftsoons, now and then;’ which just
answers to E. by bouts. As bouiée is merely the fem. pp. of bouter,
to thrust, to butt, it would seem that such a bout is a bult, i.e. a thrust.
Cf, Span. bofe, a thrust, Ital. botta, a blowe, a stroake, a time,’
Florio. Wedgwood further remarks that ‘the Du. bot or bofte, a
stroke or blow (ictus, impulsus—Kilian), as well as the nasalised
bonte, is used in the dialect of West Flanders exactly as E. bout. Een
bot regen, eene botte wind, vorst: a bout of rain, wind, frost. By
botten ; by bouts or intervals. ene botte, or bonte goed, nat, droog,
weder : a bout of good, wet, dry weather. De kinkhoest is bij bonten:
the chincough comes in fits ;’ see De Bo, West Flem. Dict. So also
Koolman, in his East Fries. Dict., gives the form bot, as in elk bot
went ragend, every time that it rains. But this is accidental, and
only accounts for a form bof, not bout (which means a turn).

BOW (1), vb., to bend. (E.) ME. bugen, buwen, bogen, bowen.
‘ Bowyn, flecto, curvo;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 46. Very common. AS.
biigan, to bend (gen. intransitive), Grein, i. 149.-4-Du. buigen, to bend
(both trans. and intrans.). Teut. *bagan-, to bow; also *beugan-, as
in Goth. biugan (tr. and intr.) ; OHG. piogan, G. beugen. Allied to
L. fugere, to turn to flight, give way ; Gk. petyeiv, to Hee ; Skt. bhuj, to
bend.=4/BHEUGH, to bend, to turn aside. Also in the form
BHEUG; Brugm. i. §§ 658, 701. Der. bow (a weapon), bow-man,
bow-yer (=bow-er, bow-maker), bow-string, bow-window, &c.; also
bight, bought, bout.

BOW (2), a bend. (E.) ‘From the bowe [bend] of the ryuer of
Humber anon to the ryuer of Teyse ’ [Tees]; Trevisa, tr. of Higden,
' ii. 87. From the verb above.

BOW (3), a weapon to shoot with. (E.) Chaucer has bowe,
Prol. 108. AS. boga; Grein, i. 132.4-Du. boog; Icel. bogi; Swed.
bage; Dan. bue; OHG. pogo, bogo; G. bogen. Teut. type *bug-on-,
m.; from *bug-, weak grade of *beugan-, to bend; see Bow (1).
Der. bow-yer (Palsgrave, and Prompt. Parv.).

BOW (4), as a naut. term, the ‘bow’ of a ship. (Scand.) In
Kersey (1658); and see quotation under Bowline.—Icel. bégr ;
Dan, bov, Swed. bog; the ‘shoulder’ of a ship; the same word as
the bough, or ‘arm’ of a tree. So also MDu. boech, Low G., boog.
See Bough. 4 Not from Bow (1). Der. bow-line, bow-sprit.

BOWEL, intestine. (F.—L.) ME. bowele, Gower, C. A. ii. 265 ;
bk. v. 4137. —OF. boele, f., Godefroy; and boel, m., Godef. Supp.,
mod. F. boyau.—L. botellum, acc. of botellus, a sausage, also, intes-
tine; dimin. of botulus, a sausage.

BOWER, an arbour. (E.) ME. bour, Chaucer, C. T. 3367.
AS. bir, a chamber; often, a lady’s apartment; Grein, i. 150,-4-Icel.
bur, a chamber, also, a larder, pantry, store-room; Swed. bur, a
cage; Dan. buur, a cage; MHG. bir, a house, a chamber, a cage
(see quotation in E. Miiller). PB. The orig. sense is a dwelling-place,
a place to be in; from AS. bian, to dwell. Teut. types *ba-rom, n.,
*bu-roz,m. See Boor. Der. bower-y; bur-ly, q.v.; byre, q.V-

BOWIE-KNIFE, a large knife, esp. in America. (Personal
name.) Mentioned by Dickens, in 1842; Amer. Notes, ed. 1850,
p- 32. Named from Col. Jas. Bowie.

BOWL (1), a round ball of wood for a game. (F.—L.) The
Prompt. Parv. has : ‘ Bowle, bolus;’ p. 46; and again: ‘ Bowlyn, or
pley wythe bowlys, bolo.’ Spelt boule in Lydgate and Hoccleve. The
spelling with ow points to the old sound of ow (as in soup), and
shows that, in zhis sense, the word is French.—F. ‘bowle, a bowle, to
play with ;’ Cot.—L. bulla, a bubble, astud ; later, a metal ball affixed
to a papal bull, &c. See Bowl (2), Bull (2), and Boil (1). Der.
bowl, vb. ; bowl-er, bowl-ing-green.

BOWL (2), adrinking-vessel. (E.) The spelling has been assimi-
lated to that of Bowl, a ball to play with; but the word is English.
ME. bolle, P. Plowman, B. v. 369; pl. bollen, Layamon, ii. 406. AS,
bolla, abow1; Grein, i. 132.4-Icel. bolli, a bowl ; OHG. bolla, MHG.
bolle, a bowl. B. Teut. type *bullon-, for *bul-non-, m.3 from *bul-,
weak grade of *beul-, to swell; cf. Goth. uf-bauljan, to puff up.
Called bow! from its rounded shape. See Bolster.

BOWLDER;; see Boulder.

BOWLINE, naut. term. (E.) Often wrongly defined; see


BRACH


sail to the ship’s bow; but the word is now usually wrongly pro-
nounced, and associated with bow (1). So also in the case of bow-
sprit. ME. boulyne, Rob. of Brunne, in notes to Layamon, iii. 395.
‘Hale the bowelyne!’ Pilgrim’s Sea Voyage, ed. Furnivall, 1. 25.
From bow (4) and line; cf. Norw. and Swed. boglina, bowline, from
bog, bow of a ship; Du. boeglijn, from boeg, bow of a ship. See
Bow (4) and Line.

BOW-WINDOW, a bowed window. (E.) At one time dis-
credited in literature, because it was often asserted to be an incorrect
form of bay-window, a word used by Shak. Yet itis a distinct word, and
not a mere corruption of it. (1) A bay-window is a window forming
a recess in the room ; see Bay (3). (2) A bow-window is a specific
kind of bay-window, viz. one of semi-circular form. The etymology
is from bow (2), a bend.

BOX (1), the name of a tree. (L.—Gk.) ME. box-tree, Chaucer,
C. T, 1304 (A 1302). AS. box, Cockayne’s Leechdoms, iii. 315.
(Not a native word.) —L. buxus, a box-tree. — Gk. mvgos, the box-tree,
See below.

BOX (2), a case to put things in, a chest. (L.—Gk.) ME. box,
Chaucer, C. T. 4392 (A.4390). AS. box; Matt. xxvii. 7, (Nota native
word.) =—L. buxum, anything made of box-wood; Late L. buwis, a
box.=—L. buxus, box-tree; from Gk. mvfos (above); cf. Gk. mvfis, a
case of box-wood. See Box (1). Thus box is closely allied to pyx,
q.v. Qf Hence flow a great many meanings in English; such as (1)
a chest; (2) a box atthe theatre ; (3) a shooting-box ; (4) a Christmas
box ; (5) a seat in the front of a coach (with a box under it formerly) ;
&c. N.B. The orig. Christmas-box was an actual box of earthen-
ware, in which apprentices collected pence from customers at
Christmas; it was then broken to get at the contents; Brand, Pop.
Antiq. ed. Ellis, i. 494.

BOX (3). (L.—Gk.) Inthe phr. ‘ to box the compass,’ the word
is applied to going round the compass-box, naming all the points in
order. From Box (2).

BOX (4), to fight with fists; a blow. (E.) ‘ Box, or buffet;
alapa, Prompt. Parv. p. 46; ‘many a blody box ;’ Chaucer, Good
Women, 1388. The vb. is from the sb., which seems to have been
imitative of the sound ofa blow. Cf. Low G. baaks, a beating,
a blow; baaksen, to strike. Also NFries. bakke, Silt bokke, a
blow (Outzen); MHG. buc, a blow; EFries. baken, béken, Du.
beuken, Low G. boken (Liibben), to beat ; WFlem. bokken, to hit
hard. [Du. and G, boxen are from E.] Der. box-er.

BOY, a youngster. (E.) ME. boy, Havelok, 1899; sometimes
used in a derogatory sense, like knave. Notin AS.; but preserved
in East Friesic boi, boy, a boy; Koolman, p. 215. Cf. Du. boef, a
knave, a villain; MDu. boef, a boy, youngling (Oudemans) ; Icel.
bofi, aknave, a rogue.--MHG, buobe (G. bube); Bavarian bueb, bua,
bui,a boy. Cf. AS. Bdfa, a personal name; Pomeran. bowe, a boy.
Der. boy-ish, boy-ish-ly, boy-ish-ness, boy-hood. @ The Gael. boban, a
term of affection for a boy, bobug, a fellow, a boy, a term of affection
or familiarity, are words that have no relation here, but belong to
E. babe. See Babe.

BOYCOTT, to combine with others in refusing to have dealings
with a certain person. (E.) From the treatment accorded to Capt.
Boycott, of Lough Mask House, co. Mayo, Ireland, in Dec. 1880.

BRABBULE, to quarrel; a quarrel. (E.) Shak. has brabdle,
a quarrel, Tw. Nt. v.68; and brabbler, a quarrelsome fellow, K. John,
v. 2.162. An imitative word, like babble, blab. Cf. Du. brabbelen,
to confound, to stammer; whence brabbelaar, a stammerer, brabbel-
taal, nonsensical discourse; brabbeling, stammering, confusion.
Compare Blab, and Babble. Der. brabbl-er.

BRACE, that which holds firmly, a clasp, cramp ; to hold firmly.
(F.—L.—Gk.) ‘A drum is ready brac’d;’ K. John, v. 2. 169.
‘ Brace of a balke, uncus;’ Prompt. Parv.—OF. brace, brasse, fem.,
originally the twoarms (Bartsch) ; then a measure of five feet, formed
by the extended arms; see Godefroy and Cotgrave.—L. brachia, pl.
of brachium, the arm; treated as a fem. sing.—Gk. Bpaxiwy, the
arm. See below. Der. brace, vb., to tighten, orig. to hold fast ;
brace-let, em-brace.

BRACELET, an ornament for the wrist or arm. (F.—L.—Gk.)
‘Ispie a bracelet bounde about mine arme;’ Gascoigne, Dan Bartholo-
mewe’s Dolorous Discourses, 1]. 237 (p. 117).— 1. bracelet (Cot.) ;
dimin. of OF. bracel, an armlet (Godefroy). —L, brachidle, an armlet
(see Brachet, s.v. bracelet).—L. brichium, the arm.—Gk. Bpaxiwy,
thearm. Cf. Irish brac, W. braich, Bret. bréach, the arm; from L,

BRACH, a kind ofhunting-dog. (F.—G.) Shak. has brach, Lear,
iii. 6. 72, &c. ME, brache, Gawain and the Grene Knight, ed.
Morris, 1. 1142; shortened from AF. bracket (Supp. to Godefroy) ;
OF. braquet. Dimin. of OF. brac (acc. bracon ; see Littré), a hunting-
dog, hound.=OHG. bracco, MHG. bracke (G. bracke), a dog who


hunts by the scent. B. The origin of OHG. bracco is unknown;


:


BRACK, BRACKISH


some take it to be from the root. seen in L. frigriare, to emit an
odour; but this is only a guess. y. There isa remarkable similarity
in sound and sense to ME. rache, akind of dog; cf. Icel. rakki, a dog,
a lapdog ; MSwed. racka, a bitch, which can hardly be disconnected
from MSwed. racka, to run; but the resemblance seems to be acci-
dental.

BRACK, BRACKISH, somewhat salt, said of water. (Dutch.)
*Water...so salt and brackish as no man can drink it;’ North’s
Plutarch, p. 471 (R.); cf. brackishness in the same work, p. 610.
Gawain Douglas (ed. Small, ii. 237) has brake = brackish, to translate
salsos, Aineid v..237.— Du. brak, brackish, briny ; no doubt the same
word that Kilian spells brack, and explains as ‘fit to be thrown
away ;” Oudemans, i. 802. According to Franck, it may well be
a later spelling of MDu. wrack; Hexham has: ‘ wrack, or brack,
brack, or saltish ;” also ‘ wracke, shipwrack ;’ and cf. Du. wraken, to
reject, blame. — Du. wrak, orig. 2nd grade of wreken, to wreak, orig.
to drive. See Wreck, Wreak. [So also Du. wrang, sour, is
allied to wringen, to wring; Franck.] Der. brackish-ness.

BRACKEN, fern. (E.) ME. braken, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris,
B.1675. ‘A brakan, filix; a brakanbuske, filicarium;’ Cath. Angl.
AS. braccan, pl.; Kemble, C. D.v. 277; Cockayne, Leechdoms, iii. 315.
Cf. Swed. dial. brakne (Rietz) ; Swed. briiken, fern; Dan. bregze, fern.
Cf. also Icel. burkni, fern. Compare the shorter form brake, often
used as synonymous with fern; thus, in the Prompt. Parv. p. 47, we
have ‘ Brake, herbe, or ferme (sic; for ferne), Filix;’ also ‘ Brakebushe,
or fernebrake, Filicetum, filicarium ;’ and see Way’s note. See also
Brake (2).

BRACKET, a kind of corbel, a support consisting of two pieces
of wood or iron joined at anangle; &c. (F.—Span.—C.) A technical
word, Earliest spelling bragget. Baret (1580) has: ‘a bragget orstaie
cut out of stone or timber..to beare up the sommer [beam] or other
part.’ Coles (1684) has: ‘ brackets, braggets, pieces supporting the
ship’s gallery.” Minsheu (1627) has: ‘ bragget, acorbell.’ Cotgrave
has: ‘ Brague, a kind of mortaise, or joining of peeces together ;’ and
‘ Braguette, ‘a cod-piece,’ i.e. the front part of a pair of breeches.
= Span. bragueta, the same; also, ‘a projecting mould in architecture.’
Cf. MF. bragues, breeches; Span. bragas, breeches; from the notion
of a fork.—L. brace, breeches; said to be of Celtic origin. Cf. OF.
bracon, branch or fork of a tree, also a bracket, support, joist ; allied
to MItal. bragont, ‘ great breeches ;” Florio.

BRACKISH; see Brack (above).

BRACT, a small leaf or scale on a flower-stalk. (L.) A modern
botanical term.—L. bractea, a thin plate or leaf of metal. Der.
bractea-l, immediately from the L. form.

BRAD, a thin, long nail. (Scand.) ME. brod, spelt brode in
Prompt. Parv. p. 53, where it is explained as ‘a hedlese nayle.’ = Icel.
broddr, a spike ; Swed. brodd, a frost-nail; Dan. brodde, a frost-nail.
+ AS. brord, a spike or spire or blade of grass, which see in Bosworth;
and the second r in brord stands for an older z. Teut. type *brozdoz,
aspike. Further allied to O. Irish brot, Irish and Gael. brod, W. brath,
a sting. (Stokes-Fick, p. 173.) And see Broider.

BRAEH, a steep bank, lit. ‘brow’ of a hill. (Scand.) ‘ Ye banks
and braes 0’ bonie Doon;’ Burns, Songs. ‘ Under ane bra;’ Barbour,
Bruce, iv. 372.—Icel. brd, f., an eye-lid; whence the sense ‘ brow,’
and brow of a hill.4+OSax. brawa, braha, f., OHG. brawa, f., G.
augenbraue, eye-brow. Cf. also AS. bréw, bréaw, m., eye-lid;
MDu. brauwen, eye-brows, brauwe, ‘the edge of any thing;’ Hexham.
Distinct from Brow (1), q.v.

BRAG, to boast; a boast. (Scand) [The sb. braggart in Shak.
(Much Ado, y. 1. 91, 189, &c.) =F. ‘bragard, gay, gallant,... brag-
gard ;’ Cotgrave. But the older form is braggere, P. Plowman, A. vii.
142 (B. vi. 156), and the vb. to brag is to be regarded rather as
Scand. than French.]—MDan. brage, to crack, also to speak great
words (Kalkar); Norw. braka, to snap, also to prate, chatter (Ross) ;
Icel. braka, to creak. Cf. Jutland brag, a noise (Feilberg); AS.
gebrec, a crash, noise. From Teut. *brak-, 2nd stem of *brekan-, to
break; cf.L.frag-or,noise. Hencealso MF. braguer, ‘to flaunt, brag;’
Cot. Soalso to crack is‘to boast;’ Jamieson’s Scot. Dict. See Break
and Bray (2). Der.bragg-er, bragg-art, bragg-adocio (a word coined
by-Spenser; see F. Q. ii.3).

BRAGGET, a kind of mead. (Welsh.) ME. bragat, brageft,
Chaucer, C. T. 3261.—W. bragot, a kind of mead; Corn. bregaud,
bragot, a liquor made of ale, honey, and spices; receipts for making
it are given in Wright’s Prov. E. Dict.; Irish bracat, malt liquor. .
From W. brag, malt; Gael. braich, malt, lit. fermented grain; Irish
braich, Olrish mraich, malt. See Stokes-Fick, p. 220. gq. The
Lowland Scottish bragwort is a corrupt form, due to an attempt to
explain the Welsh suffix -ot.

BRAHMIN, BRAHMAN, a person of the upper caste among
Hindoos. (Skt.) Spelt brachman in Ben Jonson, The Fortunate
Isles. But the word appears early in Middle English. ‘We were


BRAND 71


in Bragmanie bred,’ we were born in Brahman-land; Romance of
Alexander and Dindimus, 175. In the Latin original, the men are
called Bragmanni,i.e. Brahmans. The country is called ‘ Bramande;’
King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 5916.—Skt. brahman-, base of brahma,
m., a brahman, holy man; cf. also Skt. brahman-, base of brahma, n.,
I, a prayer; 2. the practice of austere devotion. ... 7. the brahmanical
caste; 8. the divine cause and essence of the world, the unknown god.

BRAID (1), to weave, entwine. (E.) ME, breiden, braiden.
‘ Breyde lacys, necto, /orqueo;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 49. AS. bregdan,
brédan, to brandish, weave; Grein, i. 138.+4Icel. bregda, to brandish,
turn about, change, braid, start, cease, &c.; EFries. breiden, to
knit; OHG. brettan, MHG. bretten, to draw, weave, braid. Teut.
type *bregdan-, pt.t. *bragd. Der. broided, q.v.

BRAID (2), full of deceit. (E.) In All’s Well, iv. 2. 73, braid
is used in the sense. of braided, i.e. full of braids or tricks. From
ME. braid, trick, deceit; AS. bregd, deceit. From Teut. * bragd,
and grade of *bregdan- (above).

BRAIL, a kind of ligature. (F.—C.) ‘Hale in the brayles;’
Reliq. Antiq. i. 2; 1. 33. A drail was a thong of leather to tie up
a hawk’s wing. Used asa nautical term, brails are small ropes fastened
to the edges of sails, to assist in furling them. Borrowed from OF.
braiel, a cincture, orig.a cincture for fastening up breeches. = Late L.
bracale, a breech-girdle.—L. brace, breeches. See Breeches.

BRAIN, the convoluted mass of nervous substance within the skull.
(E.) ME. brayne, Prompt. Parv. p. 47; brain, Layamon, 1468. AS,
bregen, bregen (Bosworth). + Du. brew; OFries. brein; Low G.
briigen, Some connect it with Gk. Bpexpds, Bpéyya, the upper part
of the head; see Prellwitz. Der. brain-pan, AS. bregenpanne, in
Napier’s Glosses ; brainless.

BRAISE, to stew in a closed pan. (F.—Scand.) First in 1799.
Properly, to stew with a charcoal fire above and below. =F. braiser ;
from braise, live cinders; see Breeze (3).

BRAKE (1), a machine for breaking hemp; a name for various
mechanical contrivances, (MDu.) ME, brake, explained by ‘pinsella,
vibra, rastellum;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 47, note 3. Cf. ‘bowes of brake,’
cross-bows worked with a winch, P. Plowman, C. xxi. 293. One of
the meanings is ‘a contrivance for confining refractory horses ;’ con-
necting it at once with MDnu. brake, a clog or fetter for the neck;
braecke, ‘a brake to beate flax,’ Hexham; braake, an instrument for
holding by the nose (Oudemans). Cf. Low G. brake, an instrument
for breaking flax; braken, to break flax; Bremen Worterbuch, i. 132.
Thus the word is MDu., from which source also comes the F.
‘ braquer, to brake hempe ;’ Cotgrave. Comparison of Du. braak, a
breach, breaking, with Du. vlasbraak, a flax-brake, shows that braken,
to break flax, is from brak, 2nd grade of Du. breken, to break.
See Break.

BRAKE (2), a bush, thicket; esp. of fern. (E.) Shak. has ‘haw-
thom-brake;’ M. Nt. Dr. iii. 1. 4, and 77.‘ Brakebushe or fernebrake,
filicetum ;’? Prompt. Parv. AS. brac (2), f. (2); we find fearnbraca, acc.
pl. (2), in Birch, Cart. Saxon. ii. 295. Cf. EFries. brak, thick bush,
underwood. + Low G. ‘ Brake, weidenbusch’= willow-bush, in the
Bremen Worterbuch, i. 131. The notion seems to be allied to that
of ‘ broken’ ground, with the over-growth that springs from it. Cf.
OHG. bracha, MHG. brache, land broken up, but unsown. It may
then be referred to the prolific 4f/BHREG, to break. See Break,
Brook. See also Bracken.

BRAMBLE, a rough prickly shrub. (E.) ME. brembil, Wyclif,
Ecclus. xliii. 21. AS. brémel, brembel; Gloss. to Cockayne’s Leech-
doms, vol. iii. The second 6 is excrescent, and the vowel has been
shortened. ‘Teut. type *brémiloz, m., dimin. of Teut. type *breémoz,
m., whence mod. E. broom. Cf. Du. braam, a blackberry; braambosch,
a bramble-bush; Swed. brom-bir, a blackberry; Dan. bramber, a
blackberry ; G. brombeere, a blackberry; brombeerstrauch, a bramble-
bush, Here G. brdm- answers to OHG. brama, f., a bramble; Teut.
type *brémdn-; closely allied to the type above. And see Broom.

BRAN, the husk of a grain of wheat. (F.—C.) ME. bran,
Wright’s Vocab. i. 201; brex, Chaucer, C. T., A 4053.—OF. bran,
bren. — Bret. brenn, bran. Soin Thurneysen; and Stokes-Fick, p. 172;
cf. MItal. brenna, ‘branne,’ Florio; also Norm. dial. bran, bran
(Duméril). 4] W. bran, Irish bran, are from E.; but the Bret. word
may be of true Celtic origin,

BRANCH, a bough of a tree. (F.—Late L.) ME. branche, Rob.
of Glouc., p. 193, 1. 3985.—F. branche, a branch.= Late L. branca,
the claw ofa bird or paw ofa beast of prey. 4 See Diez, who suggests
that the Late L. branca is probably a very old word in vulgar Latin,
as shown by the Ital. derivatives brancare, to grip, brancicare, to
grope; and by the Wallachian form brdncd, a forefoot; cf. also
MSpan. branca,a paw (Minsheu) ; OProv. branca,a branch; Walloon
branke, a branch. Der. branch, vb., branch-let, branch-y, branch-less.

BRAND, a burning piece of wood; a mark made by fire; a sword.
(E.) ME. brond, burning wood, Chaucer, C. T., A 2338; a sword,


72 BRAND-


Will. of Palerne, 1. 1244. AS. brand, brond, a burning, a sword; Grein,
i. 135.-4-Icel. brandr, a fire-brand, a sword-blade (from its flashing) ;
Du. brand, a burning, fuel (cf. MDu. brand, a sword; Oudemans) ;
Swed. and Dan. brand, a fire-brand, fire; OHG. brant, a brand, a sword.
[The sense is (1) a burning ; (2) a fire-brand; (3) a sword-blade, from
its brightness.] ._B.. From Teut. *brann, 2nd grade of *brennan-, to
burn. See Burn.

BRAND- or BRANT-, asa prefix. (Scand.) Inbrant-fox, a
kind of Swedish fox, for which the Swedish name is brandraf. Also in
brentgoose or brandgoose, Swed. brandgds. The names were probably
at first conferred from some notion of redness or brownness, or the
colour of burnt wood, &c. The word seems to be the same as
Brand, q. v. B. The redstart (i.e. red-tail) is sometimes called the
brantail, i. e. the burnt tail; where the colour meant is of course red.
y. The prefix is probably of Scandinavian origin. See Brindled:

BRANDISH, to.shake a sword, &c. (F.—Scand.) In Shak.
Macb. i. 2.17; &c. ME. braundisen, to brandish a sword; Will. of
Palerne, 3294, 2322.—F. brandir (pres. pt. brandissant), to cast or
hurl with violence, to shake, to brandish; Cot.— AF. brand, a sword,
properly a Norman F. form; it occurs in Vie de St. Auban, ed. At-
kinson, ll. 1234, 1303, 1499, 1838. Of Scandinavian origin; from
Icel. brandr; see Brand. fB. The more usual OF. brant answers to
the OHG. form.

BRANDY, an ardent spirit. (Dutch.) Formerly called brandy-

wine, brand-wine, from the former of which brandy was formed by
dropping the last syllable. Brand-wine occurs in Beaum. and Fletcher,
Beggar's Bush, ili. 1. — Du. brandewijn, brandy ; lit. burnt wine ; some-
times written brandiwijn.— Du. brandt, gebrandt (full form gebrandet),
burnt; and wijn, wine. B. The Dutch branden, lit. to burn, also
means to distil, whence Du. brander, a distiller, branderij, a distillery ;
hence the sense is really. ‘distilled wine,’ brandy having been originally
obtained from wine by distillation.
‘BRANKS, an iron instrument used for the punishment of scolds,
fastened in the month. (E.) Described in Jamieson’s Dict.; hence the
Lowland Sc. brank means to bridle, restrain. From the E. branks
were borrowed Gael. brangus, brangas (formerly spelt brancas), an
instrument used for punishing petty offenders, a sort of pillory; Gael.
brang, a horse’s halter; Irish brancas, a halter. The form brank is
probably due to a Celtic pron. of the E. word, of which the original
form must have been prang (pl. prangs) ; whence both mod. E. prong
and mod. E. pang, which see.+Du. pranger, pinchers, barnacle, iron
collar; G. pranger, a pillory. B. The root appears in Du. prangen,
to pinch; cf. Goth. ana-praggan, to harass, worry (with gg sounded
as ng). For the Gaelic br<E. pr in some cases, cf. Gael. brodail,
proud, from E. proud (Macbain) ; and see Brass.

BRAN-NEW, new from the fire. (E.) A corruption of brand-
new, which occurs in Ross’s Helenore, in Jamieson and Richardson.
The variation brezt-new occurs in Burns’s Tam O'Shanter: ‘ Nae co-
tillon brent-new frae France.’ Kilian gives Mid. Dutch brandnieuw,
and we still find Du. vonkelnieuw, lit. spark-new, from vonkel, a spark
of fire. . The brand is the fire, and brand-new, equivalent to jire-new
(Shak.), is that which is fresh and bright, as being newly come from
the forge and fire;’ Trench, English Past and Present, Lect. viii. See
Brand.

_BRANT,., prefix; see Brand.-. -

BRASIER, BRAZIER, a panto hold coals. (F.—Scand.)
The former spelling is better; see Johnson's Dict. [Evidently formed
from F. braise, live coals, embers. Cotgrave gives braisier, but only
in the same sense as mod. F. braise.|—F. braisier, a vessel for receiv-
ing braise when quenched (Littré). = F. braise, live coals. — Swed. brasa,
fire; Norw. bras, flame. See Brass and Braze (1).

BRASS, a mixed metal, (E.) ME. bras (L. es), Prompt. Parv.
p- 47; Chaucer, Prol. 366. AS. bres, A‘lfric’s Grammar, ed. Zupitza,
p- 15.-+Icel. bras, solder (cited by Wedgwood, but not in Cleasby and
Vigfusson’s Dictionary). Cf. Gael. prois, brass, pot-metal ; Irish pras,
brass; W. pres, brass; all borrowed words. Perhaps allied to Icel.
brasa, 1o harden by fire; Swed. brasa, to flame; Dan. brase, to fry;
Norw. brasa, to flame, also to solder. Cf. Swed. brasa, fire. Der.
brass-y, braz-en (ME. brasen, P. Plowman, C. xxi. 293=AS. bresen,
fE\f. Gram., as above), braz-ier ; also braze (2), verb, q.v.; and cf.
brasier (above).

BRASSART, the piece of armour on the upper part of the arm.
(F.—L.—Gk.) Also brassard. =F. brassart (Cot.); brassard (Littré) ;
also brassal (Cot.). Formed with suffix -ard (-art) from F. bras, arm.
= L. brachium, arm.—Gk. Bpaxiwy, arm.

BRAT (1), a cloak, rough mantle. (C.) Usnally a rag, clout, also,
a child’s apron or pinafore. Chaucer has brat for a coarse cloak, a
ragged mantle, C, T. 16349 (ed. Tyrwhitt); some MSS, have bak,
meaning a cloth to cover the back, as in P. Plowman.= Gael. brat, a
mantle, cloak, apron, rag; brat-speilidh, a swaddling-cloth; Irish bra¢,
a cloak, mantle, veil; bratog, a rag; Olrish brat, a rough cloak; cf.


BRAZE


W. brethyn, woollen cloth. (W. brat is from E.) ° See Stokes-Fick,
p- 182, @ The O. Northumbrian bratt, a cloak, a gloss to pallium
in Matt. v. 40, was borrowed from the Celtic.

BRAT (2), a child; esp. ‘a beggar’s brat.’ (C.?) In Shak. Com.
Errors, iv. 4. 39. Perhaps ‘a rag;’ and the same as Brat (1).

BRATTICH, a fence of boards in a mine. (F.—Teut.?) ME.
brétage, bretasce, brutaske (with numerous other spellings), a parapet,
battlement, outwork, &c.; Rob. of Glouc., p. 536; 1. 11095. ‘Betrax,
bretasce, bretays of a walle, propugnaculum ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 50.—
OF, bretesche, a small wooden outwork, &c. ; Prov. bertresca, Ital.
bertesca. A difficult word; prob. formed from G. brett, a plank.
Korting, § 1564. See Board (1).

BRAVADO, a vain boast. (Span.) It occurs in Burton, Anat. of
Melancholy, To the Reader; ed. 1845, p. 35 (see Todd). An E, sub-
stitution for bravada.—Span. bravada, a bravado, boast, vain ostenta-
tion. — Span. bravo, brave, valiant ; also, fierce; cognate with F. brave.
See Brave. ;

BRAVE, showy, valiant. (F.—Ital.) Shak. has brave, valiant,
splendid ; brave, vb., to defy, make fine; brave, sb., defiance ; bravery,
display of valour, finery; see Schmidt’s Shak. Lexicon. =F. ‘ brave,
brave, gay, fine, .. proud, braggard,.. . valiant, hardy,’ &c.; Cot.
— Ital. bravo, brave, fine, also a boaster (Florio), Cf. Span. and Port.
bravo; Prov. brau. Of unknown origin; for unsatisfactory sugges-
tions, see KGrting, § 1226. The Lowland Scottish form is braw.
Der. brav-ery ; also bravo, bravado, which see below and above.

BRAVO, a daring villain, a bandit. (Ital.) ‘No bravoes
here profess the bloody trade ;’ Gay, Trivia, bk. iii. 1. 151.—TItal.
bravo, brave, valiant; as a sb., a cut-throat, villain; whence also the
F, brave. See Brave. B. The word bravo! well done! is the same
word, used in the vocative case.

BRAWL (1), to quarrel, roar. (E.?) ME. braw/e, to quarrel.
‘ Brawlere, litigator ; brawlyn, litigo, jurgo;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 48.
Braulyng, P. Plowman, B. xv. 233. Apparently a native word, of
imitative origin ; cf. prov. G. (Kurhessen) brallen, to cry out lustily ;
Du. brallen, to brag, boast; Dan. bralle, to jabber, chatter; G. prahlen,
to boast, brag, bluster; EFries. pralen, to talk loudly, boast; NF ries,
prale (the same). Even G. briillen, to roar, bellow, is of a similar
character. Der. brawl-er, brawl-ing.

BRAW1I (2), a sort of dance. (F.—Scand.) In Shak. Love’s La.
Lo. iii. 9, we have ‘a French brawl.’ Sir T. Elyot mentions ‘ the
braule;’? The Governour, bk. i. c. 22. § 43 see the dance described
in the note in Croft's ed., i. 242. It is a corruption of the F. branle,
MF, bransle, explained by Cot. as ‘a totter, swing, shake, shocke,
&c.; also a brawle or daunce, wherein many men and women, hold-
ing by the hands; sometimés in a ring, and otherwhiles at length, move
all together.—F. bransler, to totter, shake, reel, stagger, waver,
tremble (Cot.); now spelt branler. Contracted from OF. brandeler, to
shake, agitate; and Cotgrave gives brandiller, to wag, shake, swing,
totter; as well as brandif, brandishing, shaking, flourishing, lively.
All from OF. brandir, to totter, tremble (Godefroy); a neuter use of
brandir, to shake, brandish. KGrting, § 1545. See Brandish.

BRAWN, muscle ; boar’s flesh. (F.—OHG.) ME. braun, muscle,
Chaucer, Prol. 546; braun, boar’s flesh, P. Plowman, B. xiii. 63, g1.
— OF. braon, a slice of flesh (Provengal bradon).—OHG. brito, prato,
braton, acc. of MHG, brite, a piece of flesh (for roasting), —-OHG,.
pratan (G. braten), to roast, broil.-AS. brédan, to roast. Teut.
root *bréd-. QJ The restriction of the word to the flesh of the
boar is accidental; the original sense is merely ‘muscle,’ as seen in
the derived adj. © Der. brawn-y, muscular; Shak. Venus, 625. Cf.
Breath.

BRAY (1), to bruise, pound. (F.—Teut.) ME. brayen, brayin;
‘brayyn, or stampyn in a mortere, fero;’ Prompt. Parv. p, 47. —OF.
breier (F. broyer); Roquefort.—OSax. brekan, to break; cognate with
AS. brecan, to break. See Break.

BRAY (2), to make a loud noise, as an ass. (F.—C.) ME. brayen,
brayin; ‘brayyn in sownde, barrio;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 47. Palsgrave
has: ‘I braye as deere doth, or any other beest, Ze brays.’ —OF.
braire. = Low, L. bragire, to bray, bragdare, to cry as a child, squall.
From a Celtic root; cf. Gael. bragh, a burst, explosion ; cognate with
L. frag-or, noise, crash; and thus related to L. frangere and E, break
(Thurheysen, p. 92). See Break.

BRAZE (1), to harden. (F.—Scand.) Shak. has brazed, hard-
ened, Hamlet, iii. 4.37; Lear, i. 1.11. Generally explained to mean
‘hardened like brass;’ but it may mean simply ‘hardened.’ Cotgrave
says that  braser l’argent’ is to re-pass silver a little over hot embers
(sur la braise).—OF, braser, to burn, pass through fire (Godefroy) ;
F. braser, to solder; Roquefort has; ‘ Braser, souder le fer.’ = Icel.
brasa, to harden by fire; Norw. brasa, to solder; Dan. brase, to
fry; Jutland brase, to roast. See Brass, and see below.

BRAZE (2), to ornament with brass. (E.) Used by Chapman,
Homer’s Odys. xv, 113. In this sense, the verb is a mere derivative


ee


BREACH


of the sb. brass, We find: ‘aero, ic brasige;’ /Elfric’s Gr., ed.
Zupitzasp. 216, 1. 07.

-BREACH, a fracture. (E.) ME. éreche, a fracture, Gower, C. A.
n. 138; bk.v. 332. AS. brece, which appears in the compound Ala/-
gebrece, a fragment of a loaf, bit of bread; Grein, ii. 80. The more
usual form is AS. brice = bryce, breaking; in the phr. ‘on hlafes brice,’
in the breaking of bread, Luke xxiv. 35; where bryce represents a
Teut. type *brukiz, from the weak grade of *brekan-, to break (AS.
brecan). Cf. OFries. breké,a breaking (a common word) ; EFries. brek,
a breaking. 4 ME. breche is also partly from OF. breche (F. bréche),
a fracture. = G. brechen, to break. See Break.

BREAD, food made from grain. (E.) ME. breed, bred, Chaucer,
Prol. 343. AS. bréad, Grein, i. 140.4-Du. brood; Icel. braud; Swed.
and Dan. bréd; OHG. prot (G. brod).. B. Not found in Gothic. The
orig. name for ‘bread’ was Joaf (AS. hlaf); the sense of bread was
orig. ‘a fragment,’ bit, or broken piece; cf. ONorthumb., bréad, a
bit, morsel, John xili. 27; pl. bréadru, ‘ frusta panis,’ in the Blickling
Glosses. Teut. type *braudos, neut. (-os-stem). Cf. L. fru-s-tum,
a fragment.

‘BREADTH, wideness. (E.) Thisisamodern form. It occurs in
Lord Berners’ tr. of.Froissart, spelt bredethe, vol. i. c. 131 (R.). B. In
older authors the form is brede, as in Chaucer, C. T. 1972 (A 1970).
AS, brédu; Grein,i.137. y. Other languages agree with the old, not
with the modern form; cf. Goth. braidei, Icel. breidd, G. breite; all
from Teut. *braidoz, broad. The Dutch is breedte. See Broad.

BREAK, to fracture, snap. (E.) ME. breke, Chaucer, Prol. 551.
AS, brecan; Grein, i. 137.4+Du. breken; Goth. brikan; OHG. prechan
(G. brechen).+-L. frangere, to break. Teut. type *brekan-, strong vb.;
pt. t. *brak, pp. *brokanoz. From the 2nd grade we have Icel.
braka, to creak ; Swed. braka, to crack. Idg. 4/BHREG, to break
with a noise. §] The original sense is ‘to break with a snap;”’ cf.
L. fragor, a crash; Gael. bragh,.a burst, explosion. Der. breach,
q.v. ; break-age, break-er, break-fast, break-water, brake (1).
-BREAM, a fish. (F.—OHG.) ME. breem, Chaucer, Prol. 350. —
OF. bresme (EF. bréme).— MHG. brahsem, G. brassen, a bream (Kluge).
-+-Du. brasem,a bream. Perhaps related to MHG. breh-en, to glitter.
@ E. brasse, a kind of perch, is not from Du. or Low G., but from
AS. bers; see Bass (2).

BREAST, the upper part of the front of the body. (E.) ME. brese,
Chaucer, Prol. 115. AS. bréost; Grein, i. 141.-4-I cel. brjdst; Swed.
brost; Dan. bryst; Teut. type *breustom, n.4+-Goth. brusts, pl. ; G. brust;
Du. borst ; Teut. stem *brust- (with weak grade). Origin unknown.
Der. breast, verb; breast-plate, breast-work; bressomer.

BREATH, air respired. (E:) ME. breeth, breth; dat. case breethe,
brethe, Chaucer, Prol. 5. AS. br#@0, breath, odour; Genesis, viii. 21.4
OHG. pradam; G. brodem, broden, brodel, steam, vapour, exhalation;
Fliigel’s G. Dict. Breath may have been likened to steam; prob.
from the Teut. root *bré-, to heat; see Brawn and Brood. Further
relations uncertain. Der. breathe, breath-less.

BREECH, the hinder part of the body. (E.) ME. brech, breech,
properly the breeches or breeks, or covering of the breech; in
Chaucer, C. T. 12882 (C 948), the word breech means the breeches,
not the breech. Thus the present word is a mere development of
AS. brée, the breeches, pl. of brdc. Phillips (1658) notes: ‘ Breetch
{a term in Gunnery) the aftermost part ofa gun.’ .See Breeches.

BREECHES, BREEKS, a garment for the thighs. (E.)
ME. ‘breche, or breke, braccze, plur.;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 48; and see
Way’s note. Breeches is a double plural, the form breek being itself
plural; as feet from foot, so is breek from brook. AS. brdc, sing., bréc,
plural (Bosworth).4Du. broek, a pair of breeches; Icel. brdk, pl.
brekr, breeches; MHG. bruoch, breeches. All from a. Teut. base
*brok- (pl. *brokiz). Cf. L. brace, clothing for the legs, said to be of
Celtic origin ; prob. from Celtic *brag-n-, and cognate with the Teut.
form. See Brogues.

BREED, to produce, engender. (E.) ME. breden, P. Plowman,
B. xi. 339. AS. brédan, to nourish, cherish, keep warm (= L. fouére),
in a gloss; Voc. 403. 39. /Elfric, Hom. ii. 10, has: ‘hi brédad heora
bréd, they nourish their brood.—AS. bréd, a brood (with mutation
of d to é).4Du. broeden, to hatch, from broed, a brood; G. briilen,
to hatch, from brut, a brood. See Brood. Der. breed-er, breed-ing.

BREEZE (1), a gadfly. (E.) Well known in Shak. Troil. i. 3. 48;
Ant. and Cleop. iii. 10. 14.. Cotgrave has: ‘ Oestre Iunonique, a gad-
bee, horse-fly, dun-fly, brimsey, brizze.” ME. brese;) Prompt. Parv.
p.49. AS. briosa; Voc. 7. 20; 49.42. The form drimsey is a dis-
tinct. word; from. Norw. brims, Dan. brems, a gadfly; cf. MDnu.
bremme, bremse, G. bremse, OHG. bremo; all from Teut. *brem-, as
in OHG. breman- (pt. t. bram), to hum, cognate with L. fremere, to
murmur.+Skt. bkramara-s, a large black bee; from Skt. bhram, to
whirl, applied originally to ‘the flying about and humming of insects;’
Benfey, p. 670. See Fick, i. 702.

BREEZE .(2), a strong wind, (F.) Brachet says that the F. drzse,


BRIDAL 73


a breeze, was introduced into French from English towards the end
of the 17th century. This can hardly be the case. The quotations
in N.E.D. show that the E. word was at first spelt brize or brise, as in
Hakluyt’s Voyages, iii, 661; and in Sir F. Drake’s The Worlde
Encompassed. ‘The earliest is ab. 1565, in Arber’s Eng. Garner, v.
121: ‘the brise .. which is the north-east wind.’ This shows that
the E. word was borrowed from French, since brize is a French spell-
ing. PB. Again, Cotgrave notes that brize is used by Rabelais (died
1553) instead of bise or bize, signifying the north wind.+Span. brisa,
the N. E. wind; Port. briza, the N.E. wind; Ital. brezza, a cold wind.
Remoter origin unknown. Der. breez-y.

BREEZE (3), cinders. (F.—Scand.) Breeze is a name given, in
London, to ashes and cinders used instead of coal for brick-burning.
In Ash’s Dict.1775. Also spelt braize (N.E.D.).—MF. breze (Cot.) ;
F. braise, live cinders. —Swed. brasa, fire; see Brasier.

BRENT-GOOSE, the same as BRANT-GOOSE;
Brand.-.

BRESSOMER, for BREAST-SUMMER, a ‘summer’ or
beam extending horizontally over a wide opening, to support a wall
above. (Hybrid; E. and F.—Late L.—Gk.) Cotgrave has: ‘ Contre-
frontail, the brow-piece, or upmost post of a door; a haunse, or breast-
summer. See Breast and Summer (2).

BREVE, a short note, in music. (F.—L.) [As a fact, it is now
a long note; and, the old long note being now disused, has become
the longest note now used.] Formerly also brief; Florio has: ‘ breue,
a briefe in musike. = MF. brief (F. bref), brief, short.—L. breuis,
short. Breve is a doublet of brief, q.v. Der. From the L. breuis
we also have brev-et, lit. a short document, which passed into English
from F. brevet, which Cotgrave explains by ‘a briefe, note, breviate,
little writing,’ &c. Also brev-i-ar-y, brev-i-er, brev-i-ty ; semi-breve.
See Brief.

BREW, toconcoct. (E.) ME. brew, pt. t., P: Plowman, B. v. 219;
brewe, infin., Seven Sages, ed. Wright, 1. 1490. AS. bréowan; of
which the pp. gebrowen occurs in A‘lfred’s Orosius, ed. Sweet, p. 20,
1. 19.4-Du. browwen; OHG. brinwan (G. brauen); Icel. brugga;
Swed. brygga; Dan. brygge. [Cf. L. défrutum, new wine fermented
or boiled down; Thracian fptroy, a kind of beer.]—4/BHREU, to
decoct. Brugm. i. §§ 373, 727. Der. brew-er, brew-house, brew-er-y.

BREWIS, BROWIS, pottage; see Brose.

BRIAR, BRIER, a prickly shrub. (E.) ME. brere, Chaucer, C. T.
9699 (E 1825). OMerc. brér, Grein, i. 140; AS. brembel-brer, Voc.
269. 38. 4 ME. brere has become briar just as ME. frere has become
friar. Der. briar-y.

BRIAR-ROOT, for pipes. (Hybrid; F. and E.) The root is that
of the white heath; and briar is here a popular corruption of F.
bruyére, heath. See N.E.D.

BRIBE, an undue present, for corrupt purposes. (F.) ME. bribe,
brybe; Chaucer, C. T. 6960 (D 1378). — OF. bribe, a present, gift, but
esp. ‘a peece, lumpe, or cantill of bread, given unto a begger ;’ Cot.
[Cf. bribours, i.e. vagabonds, rascals, spoilers of the dead, P. Plow-
man, C. xxiii. 263.] Allied to OF. briber, to beg; Span. briba, idle-
ness, bribar, to loiter about; Ital. birba, fraud; birbante, a vagabond.
Origin unknown ; not Celtic (Thurneysen), Der. bribe, verb; brib-er,
brib-er-y. 1

BRICK, a lump of baked clay. (F.—O. Low G.) In Fabyan’s
Chron. Edw. 1V, an. 1476-7; and in the Bible of 1551, Exod. cap.v.
Spelt brigue, Nicoll’s Thucydides, p. 64 (R.).—F. brique, a brick; also
a fragment, a bit, as in prov. F. brigue de pain, a bit of bread (Brachet).
=—MDu. brick, bricke, a bit, fragment, piece; whence also Walloon
briquet, a large slice of bread. = Du. breken, to break, cognate with E.
break.’ See Break. Der. brick-bat, q. v.; brick-kiln, brick-lay-er.

BRICKBAT, a piece of a broken brick. (F. and E.) Used by
Bacon; see Todd’s Johnson. From brick and bat. Here bat is a
rough lump; it is merely the ordinary word bat peculiarly used.
See Bat.

BRIDE, a woman newly married. (E.) ME. bride, bryde, Prompt.
Parv. p. 50. Older spelling, brude; Layamon, 1. 294. AS. oryd;
Grein, i. 147.4 Du. braid; Icel. bridr; Swed. and Dan. brud; Goth.
bruths; OHG. pri (G. braut). Teutonic type *bridiz, f. Perhaps
from an Idg. type *mri-ti-, bespoken, promised; cf. Zend. mraomi,
Skt. bravimi, 1 speak; Uhlenbeck, s.v. bruths; Brugm. i. §§ 387, 401;
and cf. Celtic root *mri, I say; Stokes-Fick, p. 221. Der. brid-al,
q. v., bride-groom, q. Vv.

BRIDAL, a wedding ; lit. bride-ale, or bride-feast. (E.) ME.
bridale, bruydale, P. Plowman, B. ii. 433; bridale, Ormulum, 14003.
Composed of bride and ale; the latter being a common name for a
feast. (There were leet-ales, scot-ales, church-ales, clerk-ales, bid-ales,
and bride-ales. See Brand’s Pop. Antiquities.) The comp. bryd-ealo
occurs in the A.S. Chron. (MS. D,), under the date 1076. @ It is
spelt bride-ale in Ben Jonson, Silent Woman, ii. 4; but bridall in
Shak, Oth. iii. 4.151. See Bride and Ale,


see


74 BRIDEGROOM


BRIDEGROOM, a man newly married. (E.) Tyndal has
bridegrome ; John, iii. 29. But the form is corrupt, due to confusion
of grome, a groom, with gome, a man. In older authors, the spelling
is without the r; we find bredgome in the Ayenbite of Inwyt, ed.
Morris, p. 233, written A.D. 1340; so that the change took place be-
tween that time and A.p. 1525. AS. bryd-guma; Grein, i. 147.4-Du.
bruidegom ; Icel. brid gumi; Swed. brudgum; Dan. brudgom; OHG.
britigomo (G. bradutigam). B. The latter part of the word appears
also in Goth. guma, a man, cognate with L. homo, aman. See Bride,
Homage.

BRIDGE, a structure built across a river. (E.) ME. brigge,
Chaucer, C. T. 3920 (A 3922); brig, Minot’s Poems, vii. 78; brugge,
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1187; brugg, Rob. of Glouc.. p. 401
(1.8285). AS. brycg, bricg (acc. bricge) ; Grein, i. 145 ;+Icel. bryggja,
Swed. brygga, Dan. brygge, a pier; Du. brug; OHG. prucca, G.
briicke. Teut. type *brugja, fem. Further allied to Icel. bri, a bridge;
Dan. bro, a bridge, pavement; MSwed. bro, a bridge, a paved way.
Perhaps allied to Russ. brevno, a beam, joist. Stokes-Fick, p. 184.

BRIDLE, a restraint for horses. (E.) ME. bridel, Ancren Riwle,
p. 74. AS. bridel, Grein, i. 142; for an earlier *brigdel; cf. AS.
brigdils, a bridle, O. E. Texts, p. 44, 1.127. The stem is *bregd-il-s-,
from bregd-an, to pull, to twitch; see Braid. Parallel to G. ziig-el,
from zieh-en, to draw.4Du. breidel; OHG. priddel, bridel, brittil ;
MHG. britel; the F. bride being borrowed from this MHG. bridel.
“| Similarly, the OHG. Orittil is from OHG, brettan, cognate with
AS. bregdan, to puli, weave, braid.

BRIEF (1), short. (F.—L.) Spelt briefin Barnes’ Works, p. 347,
col. 1, last line. In older English we find bref, breef, P. Plowman,
C. xxiii. 327; with the dimin. brevet (brevet), sb., P. Plowman, C. i.
72.—OF. brief (so spelt in Cotgrave); mod. F. bref. —L. breuis, short.
+Gk. Bpayvs, short. Der. brief-ly. And see below.

BRIEF (2), a letter, &c. (F.—L.) Cotgrave has: ‘ Brief, m.
a writ, or brief; a short mandamus, injunction, commission, &c.’
From the adj. above. Der. brie/-less.

BRIER; see Briar.

BRIG, aship. See Brigantine.

BRIGADE, a body of troops. (F.—Ital.) Milton has brigads,
P. L. ii. 532.—F. ‘ brigade, a troop, crue, or company ;’ Cot. —Ital.
brigata, a troop, band, company. Ital. brigare, to quarrel, fight.
See Brigand. Der. brigad-ier.

BRIGAND, a robber, pirate. (F.—Ital.) ME. bregaund, Morte
Arthure, 2096. Borrowed from F. brigand, an armed foot-soldier,
which see in Cotgrave; who also gives ‘ Brigander, to rob;’ and
‘ Brigandage, a robbing, theeverie.’—Ital. brigante, a busybody,
intriguer ; and, in a bad sense, a robber, pirate. — Ital. brigante, pres.
part. of the verb brigare, to strive after.— Ital. briga, strife, quarrel,
trouble, business; which see in Diez. | No connexion with W.
brigant, a highlander, from brig, a hill-top. Der. brigand-age ; and
see below.

BRIGANDINE, a kind of armour. (F.—Ital.) Brigandine,
a kind of coat of mail, occurs in Jerem.xlvi. 4, li. 3, A.V.; see Wright’s
Bible Word-book. =F. brigandine, ‘a fashion of ancient armour, con-
sisting of many jointed and skale-like plates;’ Cot. So called be-
cause worn by brigands or robbers; see Brigand. { The Ital.
form is brigantina, a coat of mail.

BRIGANTINE, BRIG, a two-masted ship. (F.—Ital.) Brig
is merely short for brigantine. Cotgrave has the latter, to translate
the F. brigantin, which he describes, = F. brigantin. Ital. brigantino,
a pirate-ship. —Ital. brigante, an industrious, intriguing man; also,
a robber, brigand. See Brigand.

BRIGHT, clear, shining. (E.) ME. bright, Chaucer, C. T. 1064
(A 1062). AS. berht, beorht (in common use).+-OS. berht, beraht
(Heliand) ; Goth. bairhts ; Icel. bjartr ; OHG. péraht, MHG. berht,
shining. Teut. type*berh-toz, shining. Cf. W. berth, fair; Gk. pepx-ds,
white; Skt. bhargas, light. Der. bright-ly, bright-ness, bright-en,

BRILL, a fish; Rhombus vulgaris. (E.) Spelt prylle and brell in
1481-90 (N.E.D.). Of unknown origin; but Kalkar, in his M. Dan.
Dict., s.v. butte, cites the G. pl. pfellen or pfrillen, showing that the
Low G. form was prob. prille. Cf. Bavar. pfrille, a very small fish
(Schmeller), Other E. forms were pearl, perl. Kalkar gives prille-
mad, dainty meat, allied to prille, to poke, apparently with reference
to its firmness; cf. Low G. prall, firm and fleshy, as e.g., a man’s
calf. The prill may have been named from the firmness of the flesh.
“1 Quite distinct from the Cornish brilli, mackerel; where bril- stands
for brithel, a mackerel, formed by the dimin. suffix -e/ from Corn.
brith, streaked, variegated, pied, speckled. [So in Irish and Gaelic,
breac means both ‘spotted’ and ‘a trout;’ and in Manx, brack means
both ‘trout’ and ‘ mackerel.’]

BRILLIANT, shining. (F.—L.—Gk.—Skt.) Not in early use.
Dryden has brilliant, sb., meaning ‘a gem;’ Character of a Good
Parson, last line but one. =F. brillant, glittering, pres. pt. of briller,


BRITTLE


‘to glitter, sparkle.=Late L. *beryllare (an unauthorised form), to


sparkle like a precious stone or beryl (Brachet).—Late L. berillus,
beryllus, a gem, an eye-glass; see Diefenbach, Glossarium Latino-
Germanicum ; cf, berillus, an eye-glass, brillum, an eye-glass, in Du-
cange. ] This etymology is rendered certain by the fact that the
G. brille, spectacles, is clearly a corruption of beryllus, a beryl; see
Max Miiller, Lectures on the Science of Language, ii. 583; 8th ed.
1875. See Beryl.

BRIM, edge, margin. (E.) ME. brim, brym, brimme, margin of
a river, lake, or sea; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, A. 1011, B. 365. AS.
brymme (for *brimme?), a brim, border, margin. [The AS. brim,
surf, sea, is prob. a’different word.] Allied to Swed. bram, border,
edge; MDan. bremme, bremme (Kalkar); Dan. brem; MDu. breme;
G. gebrame, border, verbramen, to border. Cf.Icel. barmr, brim, Per-
haps related to Barm (2). Cf. Brink. Der. brim-ful, brimm-er.

BRIMSTONE, sulphur. (E.) Lit. ‘burn-stone.” ME. brimston,
brymston; bremstoon, brimstoon, Chaucer, Prol. 631 (A 629); also bren-
stoon, Wyclif, Gen. xix. 24; Deut. xxix. 23; cf. Icel. brennisteinn,
brimstone. — ME. bren-, burning (from the vb. brennen, to burn); and
stoon,astone. B. So also the Icel. brennisteinn is from Icel. brenna, to
burn, and steinn, a stone. See Burn and Stone.

BRINDLED, BRINDED, streaked, spotted. (Scand.) Shak.
has ‘ brinded cat;’ Macb. iv. 1. 1; brindled being an extended quasi-
diminutive form. ME. drended; as in ‘a grete brended flye,’ in the
Book of St. Albans, ed. 1496, p. 28; see N.E.D. Formed from brend,.
the pp. of brennen, to burn, the sense being ‘ branded.’ Cf. prov. E.
branded, brindled; also Icel. brénd-, in the comp. brondoéter, brindled,
said of a cow, Cleasby and Vigfusson’s Dict. App. p. 772. We also
find Icel. brand-kroséttr, brindled-brown with a white cross on the
forehead ; brandr, a brand, flame, firebrand, sword; brenna, to burn.,
{| Thus brinded is little more than another form of branded; the letterz
appears again in Brimstone, q.v. And see Brand and Burn.

BRINE, pickle, salt water. (E.) ME. brine, bryne, Prompt. Parv.,
p. 51. AS. bryne (for brine), salt liquor, AZlf. Gloss.; Voc. 128. 40.
+MDnu. brijn, brijne, pickle, sea-water (Oudemans); whence Du.)
brijn, brine, pickle. Der. brin-y.

BRING, to fetch. (E.) ME. bringen (common) ; pt. t. broughie.
AS. bringan, pp. brungen (rare), Grein, i, 143; brengan, pt. t.
brohte, pp. brodht ; the former being the strong and original form.
+ Du. brengen; Goth. briggan (with gg sounded as xg), pt. t. brahta;
OHG. pringan (G. bringen). Teut. type *brangjan-, pt. t. *branx-ta>
*briih-ta (whence AS. brengan); from a strong type *brengan- (whence
AS. bringan).

BRINK, margin; but properly, a slope. (Scand.) ME. brink,
edge of a pit, Chaucer, C. T. 9275 (E 1401) ; brenk, a shore, Wyclif,,
John, xxi. 4. ‘ Bi the se-brinke;” King Horn, 141.—ONorse *brenka,y
Icel. brekka, a slope, also a crest of a hill,a hill; allied to Low G. brink,
sward at the edge of a field; a grassy hill (Liibben); Westphal.
brink, edge of a hill. Cf. Brim.

BRIONY ; a variant of Bryony, q.v.

BRISK, nimble, lively, smart, trim. (F.—Ital.) Not in early
authors; used by Shak. and Milton. Apparently the same as Lowl.
Sc. bruisk, brisk (ab. 1560); N.E.D. =F. brusque, ‘ brisk, lively, quick,
rash, harsh;’ Cot.—Ital. brusco, tart, harsh. See Brusque. Der.
brisk-ly, brisk-ness. Doublet, brusque.

BRISKET, part of the breast-piece of meat. (F.—Scand.) Ben
Jonson has brisket-bone ; Sad Shepherd, i. 2: ‘ The brisket-bone, upon
the spoon Of which a little gristle grows.’ ME. brusket, Voc. 704. 8.
=OF. brischet, a form given by Brachet, s. v. brechet, but brusche¢ in
Littré; however, Cotgrave has: ‘ Brichet, m. the brisket, or breast-
piece ;’ also ‘ Bruchet, m. the craw-bone, or merry-thought of a bird;’
F, brechet, [Bret. bruched, the breast, is from OF. bruchet.| The
Guernsey bruquet (Métivier) gives *brusket as the oldest type, as in
ME. = Dan. brusk, Swed. brosk, MSwed. bryske (Ihre, s.v. brusk), Icel.
brjosk, gristle; cf. Norw. brjosk, gristle, brjoskutt, gristly. See Ben
Jonson (as above). So Kluge, s.v. brausche; but the connexion with
brausche is dark. With Dan. brus-k cf. AS. brysan, to bruise, hence,
to crush. See Bruise.

BRISTLE, a stiff hair. (E.) ME. bristle, berstle, Chaucer, Prol.
556. AS. byrst, a bristle, Herbarium, 52; in A.S. Leechdoms, i. 156;
with dimin. suffix -el.4-Du. borstel, a bristle. Cf. Icel. burst, a bristle;
Swed. borst, a bristle; G. borste, a bristle. The AS. byrs#, fem., and
Icel. burst, answer to Teut. types from the base *burs-t-; from Teut.
*burs-, weak grade of *bers-=Idg. *bhers-, to bristle; cf. Skt. sahasra-
bhrshti, having a thousand points; Benfey, p. 666. Cf. Stokes-Fick,
p- 172-3. Der. bristle, verb; bristl-y, bristl-i-ness,

BRITTLE, fragile. (E.) ME. britel, brotel, brutel; Chaucer has
brotel, Leg. of Good Women, Lucr. 206. Answering to an AS. type
*brytel =Teut. *brut-iloz, adj.; from brut-, weak grade of AS. bréotan,
to break; Grein, i. 142.4-Icel. brjdta, to break, destroy ; Swed. bryla,
Dan. bryde, to break. So that the sense was ‘fragile.’ @ Cf. the


rt


BRITZKA, BRITSKA


form bricilz, used by Spenser, F. Q. iv. 10. 39, obviously from AS.
brecan, to break; the L. fragilis (EK. fragile, frail) being from the
same root as brickle.

BRITZKA, BRITSKA, a kind of open carriage, (Polish.)
First in 1832. — Pol. bryczka (with cz=E. ch), ‘a light long travelling
wagon ;’ dimin. of bryka, a goods-wagon (N.E.D.).

BROACH, to tap liquor. (F.—L.) The ME. phrase is setten on
broche, to set a-broach, to tap, Babees Boke, ed. Furnivall, p. 266.
Imitated from the F. mettre en broche, to tap a barrel, viz. by piercing
it; cf. F.‘brocher, to broach, to spit;’ Cot.—F. ‘ broche, a broach,
spit;’ Cot. See Brooch, Abroach,

BROAD, adj., wide. (E.) ME. brod, brood, Chaucer, Prol. 155.
AS. brad, Grein, i. 136.4-Du. breed; Icel. bredr; Swed. and Dan.
bred; Goth. braids; OHG. preit (G. breit), Teut. type *braidoz. Der.
broad-ly, broad-ness, broad-en, broad-side ; also breadth, q. v.

BROCADE, a variegated silk stuff. (Span.—L.) ‘Brocado, a cloth
of gold or silver ;’ Blount. A ‘brocade waistcoat’ is mentioned in the
Spectator, no. 15.—Span. brocado, sb., brocade; also pp., brocaded,
embroidered with gold; which explains the use of brocade as an
adjective. Brocado is properly the pp. of a verb *brocar, which no
doubt meant ‘ to embroider,’ answering to F. brocher, which Cotgrave
explains by ‘ to broach, to spit ; also, to stitch grossely, to set or sowe
with great stitches,’ der. from F. broche, explained by ‘a broach, or
spit ; also, a great stitch.’ [The Span. broca, a reel for silk, a drill, has
lost the required sense.] See Brooch. Der. brocade, verb; brocad-ed.

BROCCOLI, BROCOLT, a vegetable resembling cauliflower.
(Ital. —L.) Pope has brocoli, Horace’s Sat., ii. 2. 138. Properly,
the word is plural, and means ‘ sprouts.’= Ital. broccoli, sprouts, pl. of
broccolo, a sprout ; dimin. from brocco, a skewer, also, a shoot, stalk.
Brocco is allied to F. broche, a spit, also a brooch. See Brooch.

BROCHURE, a pamphlet. (F.—L.) Mere French. F. brochure,
a few printed leaves stitched together.—F. brocher, to stitch. See
Brocade.

BROCK, a badger. (C.) Used by Ben Jonson, The Fox, i. 1;
Sad Shepherd, Act ii. sc. 1. ME. brock, P. Plowman, B. vi. 31; cf.
Prompt. Parv. p. 53. AS. broc, a badger (Bosworth), but the word is of
slight authority, and borrowed from Celtic. W. broch; Corn. broch;
Bret. broch; Irish, Gaelic, and Manx broc, a badger. B. It is most
probable, as Mr. Wedgwood suggests, that the animal was named
from his white-streaked face; just as a trout is, in Gaelic, called
breac, i.e. spotted, and a mackerel is, in Cornish, called brithill, i.e.
variegated ; see note under Brill. If so, cf. Gk. popsés, white, gray ;
and E. gray, a badger. Hence also Gael. brocach, speckled in the
face, grayish, as a badger ; brucach, spotted, freckled, speckled, parti-
cularly in the face. See Stokes-Fick, p. 185.

BROCKET, a red deer two years old. (F.—L.) ‘The hert. . the
secunde yere [is] a broket;’ Reliq. Antique, i. 151. A corruption of
F. brocart. Cotgrave has: ‘ Brocart, m.a two year old deere ; which
if it be a red deere, we call a brocket; if a fallow, a pricket; also a
kinde of swift stagge, which hath but one small branch growing out
of the stemme of his horne.’ So named from having but one tine to
his horn. F. broche, ‘a broach, spit ;’ also, a tusk of a wild boar;
hence, a tine of a stag’s horn; see Cotgrave. See Brooch.

BROGUES, stout, coarse shoes. (C.—E.) In Shak. Cymb. iv.
2. 214.—Gael. and Irish brog, a shoe; MlIrish brdcc.— AS. broc,
breeches; or from Icel. brdk. (Not really Celtic.) See Breeches.

BROIDER, to adorn with needlework. (F.—Teut.) In the Bible,
A. V., Ezek. xvi. 10. This form of the word was due to confusion
with the totally different word to broid, a variant of braid, due to AS.
brogden, pp. of bregdan; see Braid. And note that AS, brogden
regularly became brouden in ME., but was altered to broiden by con-
fusion with braid (ME. breiden). In 1 Tim. ii. 19, broidered is actually
used with the sense of braided! See Broider in Eastwood and Wright’s
Bible Wordbook. An older spelling of broider is broder; thus we find
‘a spoyle of dyuerse coloures with brodered workes’ in the Bible of
1551, Judges, v. 30. It is also spelt broudered or browdered; Henry-
soun, Test. of Cresseid, 417.—F. ‘border, to imbroyder,’ Cotgrave [a
word wholly distinct from border, also in Cotgrave with the ex-
planation ‘to border, gard, welt,’ &c.]. The same as OF. brosder,
brouder, to embroider (Godefroy, and Supp.); cf. Late L. brosdus,
brusdus, embroidered work (Ducange). Apparently from Teut.*broza-,
a point, whence AS. brord, Icel. broddr, a spike. See Brad.

BROIL (1), to fry, roast over hot coals. (F.—Teut. ?) ME. broilen.
* Brolyyn, or broylyn, ustulo, ustillo, torreo;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 53.
See Chaucer, Prol.. 385. [Cf. also brulen, E. E. Prose Psalter, cxx.
(cxxi.) 5; before 1350.|—AF. bro:ller (Bozon) ; OF . brutllir, to broil,
intrans. (in Godefroy). Of unknown origin; cf. OF. bruir, to roast;
perhaps from MHG. briiejen, to scald; see Brood.

BROIL (2), a disturbance, tumult. (F.) Occurs in Shak. 1 Hen.
VI, i. 1.53; iii. r.92. Spelt brewl/ in Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol.
ii.c. 140. =F, brouiller, explained by Cotgrave by ‘to jumble, trouble,


BROOK-LIME


75


‘disorder, confound, marre by mingling together; to huddle, tumble,


shuffle things ill-favouredly ; to make a troublesome hotch-potch ; to
make a hurry, or great hurbyburly.’ Allied to Ital. brogiiare, to dis-
turb, broglio, confusion ; whence E. imbroglio, Of unknown origin.

BROKER, an agent, a middle-man in transactions of trade. (F.—
L.) ME. broker, brocour, P. Plowman, B. y. 130, 248. We also find
brocage =commission on a sale, P. Plowman, B. ii. 87.. The oath of,
the brokers in London is given in Liber Albus, ed. Riley, p. 315. Their
business was ‘to bring the buyer and seller together, and lawfully
witness the bargain between them ;’ for which they were allowed a
commission on the sale, called a brocage, or, in later times, brokerage.
The ME. brocour also meant a retail-dealer, cf. P. Plowman, C. vii.
95, and answers to AF’. brocour, a broker, Liber Albus, p. 400; and to:
ONorth F. brokeor, accus. of brokiere, which Godefroy (s. v. brocheor)
explains by ‘celui qui vend du vin az broc,’ i.e. by the jugful. = Late L.
broccaitor, one who broaches wine. Late L, broccare, to broach. = Late,
L. brocca, broca, a pointed stick, a spike. See Broach, Brooch.
Hence also AF. abrocour, a broker, Stat. Realm, i. 103 (1285);
Late L. abrocarius, Liber Albus, p. 269. And cf. Walloon abroki, to
set abroach. ;

BROMINE, a non-metallic chemical element. (Gk.) Modern;
since 1826, Named from its ill odour. Formed, with the suffix -ine,
from Gk. Bp@p-os, a stink,

BRONCHIAL, relating to the bronchie or bronchia. (Gk.) The
bronchie are the ramifications of the windpipe, passing into the lungs.
Bronchi@ is in use; but the more correct form is bronchia, neut.
plural. —Gk. Bpdyxua, neut. pl., the bronchia, or ramifications of the
windpipe. = Gk. Bpdyxos, the windpipe, trachea. Cf. Gk. Bpayxua,
neut. pl., the gills of fishes; Bpayxos, a gill, also, a sore throat, and
(as an adjective) hoarse.

BRONCHITIS, inflammation of the bronchial membrane. (L.
—Gk.) <A coined L. form bronchitis, made from Gk. Bpdyxos, the
windpipe. See above.

BRONZE, an alloy of copper with tin, &c. (F.—Ital.—L.) Not
in early use. In Pope, Dunciad, il. 10; iii. 199.—T'. bronze, introd.
in 16th cent. from Ital. bronzo (Brachet). Ital. bronzo, bronze ; bron-
zino, made of bronze (z=dz). It has been shown, by M. Berthelot
(Introduction a la Chimie des Anciens, pp. 275-9), that the Ital.
bronzino=L, Brundusinum, i.e. belonging to Brundusium (Brindisi),
in S. Italy, where bronze mirrors were made. Pliny has ¢s Brundu-
sinum, Nat. Hist. xxxiii. 9, xxxiv. 17 (Athenaeum, Dec. 30, 1893).
See Notes on E. Etym., p. 18.

BROOCH, an ornament fastened with a pin. (F.—L.) So named
from its being fastened with a pin, ME. broche, a pin, peg, spit,
Prompt. Parv. p. 52; also a jewel, ornament, id.; cf. Chaucer, Prol.
160; Ancren Riwle, p. 420.—OF. broche, F. broche, a spit; also the
tusk of a boar (Cotgrave).—Late L. brocca, a pointed stick ; broca,
a tooth, sharp point; from L. broceus, projecting, like teeth (Plautus).

BROOD, progeny, offspring, young; a family. (E.) ME. brod,
Owl and Nightingale, 518, 1631; Rob. of Glouc. p. 70; 1. 1595.
AS. bréd, a brood (rare); ‘hi brédad heora bréd,’ they nourish their
brood; /Elfric, Hom. ii. 10.4-Du. broed, a brood, hatch; MHG,
bruot, that which is hatched, also heat; whence G. brut, a brood,
Teut. stem *brd-3-. B. The primary meaning is that which is hatched,
or produced by means of warmth ; from the verbal base *brd-, pre-
served in G. brii-hen, to scald (orig. to heat), Du. broe-iex, to brood,
to hatch. This base *brd- is related by gradation to *bré-(bré-), to
roast ; for which see Brawn. Der. brood, vb.; breed, q.v.

BROOK (1), to endure, put up with. (E.) ME. brouke, which
almost invariably had the sense of ‘to use,’ or ‘to enjoy ;” Chaucer,
C. T. 10182 (E 2308), P. Plowman, B. xi. 117; Havelok, 1743.
AS. briican, to use, enjoy, Grein, i. 144.4Du. gebruiken, to use; Icel.
briika, to use; Goth. brukjan, to make use of; OHG. prithhan (G.
brauchen), to use, enjoy. Allied to L. frui, to enjoy; cf. L. friges,
fructus, fruit; Skt. bhwj, to gat and drink, to enjoy, which probably
stands for an older form bhruj; Benfey, p. 656.—4/BHREUG, to
enjoy, use. Brugmann, i. § 111. Brook is co-radicate with /ruit, q.v.

BROOK (2), a small stream. (E.) ME. brook, Chaucer, C. T.
3920 (A. 3922). AS, brdc, brooc, Grein, i. 144.-4-Du. broek, a marsh,
a pool; Low G. brook, low land, broken up by marshes; OHG. pruoch
(G. bruch), a marsh, bog. SB. Even in proy. Eng. we find: ‘ Brooks,
low, marshy, or moory ground;’ Pegge’s Kenticisms (E. D.S.); at
Cambridge, we have Brook-lands, i.e. low-lying, marshy ground. The
G. bruch also means ‘rupture;’ and the notion in brook is that of,
broken ground or of water breaking up or forcing its way to the sur-
face; from Teut. *brdk-, a variant (by gradation) of *brek-, the root
of break, q.v. Der. brook-let.

BROOK-LIME, a plant. (E.) ME. brok-lemke, Med. Wks.
of the fourteenth century, ed. Henslow, p. 29, 1. 2.—AS. broc, a
brook; and hkleomoc, brook-lime. Cf. Low G. lémek, lémke, brook-
lime (Schambach),


76 ~ BROOM


‘BROOM, the name ofa plant; a besom. (E.) ME. brom, broom, the
plant; Wyclif, Jerem. xvii. 6. AS, brdm, broom, Gloss. to Cockayne’s
eechdoms.+Du. brem, broom, furze; Low G. braam, broom; G.
brom-, in brom-beere, a bramble-berry. Teut. type *bré@moz. B. The
confusion in old names of plants is very great; broom and bramble
are closely related, the latter being, etymologically, the diminutive of
broom; cf. Du.-braam-bosch, a bramble-bush. See Bramble.

BROSE, BREWIS, a kind of broth or pottage. (F.—MHG.)
Brose is a later form of browis or brewis, for which see Nares and
Richardson. In Prompt. Parv. we find: ‘ Browesse, browes, Adipatum;’
and see Way’s note, where browyce is cited from Lydgate. — OF. brouez,
broez, nom. case of brovet, broet, soup made with broth of meat (see
Supp. to Godefroy); dimin. of OF, bro (Hatzfeld, s.v. brouet), also
spelt brex, pottage (Roquefort), Late L. brodum, gravy, broth.
MHG., brod, broth; cognate with E. broth. J It is no doubt because
brewis sounded like a plural, and because it has been confused with
broth, that in proy. Eng. (e.g. Cambs.) broth is often alluded to as
‘they’ or ‘them.’ See Broth and Brew.

BROTH, a kind of soup. (E.) -ME. broth, Rob, of Glouc. p. 528,
1. 10857. AS. brod (to translate L. its), Bosworth.+Icel. brod; OHG.
prod, brod. Teut. type *brodom, n.; from *bro-, *bru-, weak grade

of *breu-, as in AS, bréowan,; to brew. And see Stokes-Fick, p. 172.
See Brew and Brose.

BROTHEL, a house of ill fame. (E.; confused with F.—Teut.)
[Originally quite distinct from ME. bordel (=Ital. bordello),] The
quotations from Bale (Votaries, pt. ii), and Dryden (Mac Flecknoe,
1, 70) in Richardson, show that the old term was brothel-house (as in
Much Ado, i. 1, 256), i.e. a house for brothels or prostitutes; for the
ME. brothel was a person, not.a place. ‘Thus Gower speaks of ‘A
brothel, which Micheas hihte’ =a brothel, whose name was Micheas;
G. A. iii. 173 (bk. vii. 2595); and see P. Plowman, Crede, 772. Cf.
“A brothelrie, lenocinium;’ Levins, 103, 34. We also find ME.
brethel, a wretch, bretheling, a beggarly fellow. From the same root
are the AS, abroden, degenerate, base; and the past tense abrudon,
they failed, A.S. Chron. an. 1004. The last forms are from AS. brod-,
brud-, weak grade of -bréodan, to ruin, destroy, occurring in the comp.
abréod§an, with the same sense. Thus. brofh-el orig. meant ‘a lost’
creature; like L. perditus. B. But, of course, a confusion between
brothel-house and the ME, bordel, used in the same sense, was inevit-
able. Chaucer has bordel in his Persones Tale, § 885; and Wyclif
even has bordelhous, Ezek. xvi. 24, showing that the confusion was
already then completed; though he also has bordelrie =a brothel, in
Num. xxv. 8, which is a French form. OF. bordel, a hut; dimin. of
borde, a hut, cot, shed made of boards; Cot. MDu. (and Du.) bord,
a plank. See Board.

BROTHER, a son of the same parents. (E.) ME. brother,
Chaucer, Prol. 529. AS. brddor, Grein, p. 144.4+Du. broeder ; Icel.
brovir; Goth. bréthar; Swed. broder; Dan. broder; OHG. pruoder
(G. bruder).+-Gael. and Irish brathair; W. brawd, pl. brodyr; Russian
brat’; L. frater; Gk. pparnp; Church-Slavonic bratru; Zend brata;
Pers. biradar; Skt. bhraty; Teut. type *brother ; Idg. type *bhrdter.
Brugmann, i. § §55. Der. brother-hood, brother-like, brother-ly.

BROUGHAM, a kind of carriage. (Personal name.) Date 1839.
Named after the first Lord Brougham, born 1778. .

BROW, the eye-brow; edge of a hill. (E.) ME. browe, Prompt.
Parv. p. 53. AS. bri, pl. briia, Grein, i. 144.41 cel. briin, eye-brow;
Dan, bryn; Lith. bruwis; Russian brove; Gk. dppus, eye-brow; Pers.
abrii; Skt. bhrii, eye-brow. ] Quite a distinct word from AS. brew,
Du. braauw (in comp. wenk-braauw, an eye-brow), G. braue. Der.
brow-beal, to beat by frowning; Holland’s Plutarch, p. 107.

BROWN, the name of a darkish colour. (E.) ME. broun,
Chaucer, Prol. 207. AS. briin, Grein, i. 145.44Du. bruin, brown,
bay; Icel. briinn; Swed. brun; Dan. bruun; G. braun; Lith. brunas.
Cf. Gk. ppivos,a toad; Skt. ba-bhru(s), tawny. Brugmann, i. § 109.
Der. brown-ish, brun-ette, burn-el, burn-ish, Doublet, bruin.

‘BROW2ZE, to nibble; said of cattle. (F.—-MHG.) Occurs in
Shak. Wint. Tale, iii. 3. 69; Antony, i. 4. 66; Cymb. iii. 6. 38;
spelt brouze in Spenser, Shep. Kal. May, 179; brouse, Fitzherbert,
Husb., § 131.—MPF. brouser, ‘to brouze, knap, nibble off leaves, buds,
&c.’ A by-form of MF, brouster, also brouter, explained by Cotgrave
by ‘to brouze, to nip, or nibble off the sprigs, buds, barke, &c. of
plants ;” a sense still retained in prov. Eng. brut (Kent, Surrey),
which keeps the ¢ whilst dropping the s.— MF.  broust, a sprig, ten-
drell, bud, a yong branch or shoot;’ Cot.—MHG. broz, a bud
(Graff, ili. 369); Bavarian bross, brosst, a bud (Schmeller). —OHG.
broz-, bruz-, weak grade of briozan, to break, also, to break into bud;
which is cognate with AS. bréotan, to break; see Brittle.

BRUIN, a bear. (Dutch.) In the old epic poem of Reynard the
Fox, the bear is named ‘ brown,’ from his colour; the Dutch version
spells it brain, which is the Dutch form of the word ‘brown.’ The
proper pronunciation of the word involves a peculiar diphthong ap-


BUBBLE


proaching the broad romic (ou) ; but we always pronounce it broo-in,
disregarding the Dutch pronunciation. See Brown.

BRUISE, to pound, crush, injure. (E.; partly F.) ME. brusen,
Joseph of Arimathie, ed. Skeat, 1. 501 ; but more commonly spelt
brissen or brisen, Wyclif’s Bible, Deut. ix. 3; also brosen, id. Num-
bers, xxii. 25. In the S. Eng. Legendary, 295. 58, we find the pt. t.
to-bruysde, representing AS. ¢0-brysde, pt. of 20-brysan ; which shows
that E. bruise represents AS. brysan, to bruise, occurring in Be
Domes Dege, ed. Lumby, 1. 49; cf. Matt. xxi. 44. B. But it seems
to have been confused with OF. bruiser, bruser, brisier, to break;
forms which Diez would separate ; but wrongly, as Matzner says.
See brisier in Supp. to Godefroy. Of uncertain origin; cf. Olrish
briss-im, I break, allied to AS. berstan, to burst. 7

BRUIT, a rumour; to announce noisily. (F.—L.) Occurs in
Shak. Macb. v. 7.22. ‘The kinge herde the bruyt,’ Caxton, Hist. of
Troye, leaf 112, 1. 6.—F. ‘ bruit, a bruit, a great sound or noise, a
rumbling, clamor,’ &c.; Cot.—F. bruire, to make a noise, roar.
Scheler derives F. bruire from L. riigire, to roar; the prefixed 6 may
have been due to imitative alteration ; cf. G. bridlen, to roar. And
F, bruit =Late L. briigitus, a clamour (Ducange); cf. L. rugitus, a
roaring.

BRUNETTE, a girl witha dark complexion. (F.—G.) Mere
French; but it occurs in the Spectator, No. 396. [The older E.
equivalent is ‘nut-brown,’ as in the Ballad of The Nut-brown Maid. }
=F. brunette, explained by Cotgrave as ‘a nut-browne girle.’ =F,
brunet, masc. adj., brunette, fem. adj., brownish ; Cot. Formed, with
dimin. suffix -e¢, from F, brun, brown. = MHG. brun, brown; cognate
with E. brown, q. v.

BRUNT, the shock of an onset. (Scand.) Chiefly used in the
phr. brunt of battle, the shock of battle, as in Shak. Cor. ii. 2, 104.
However, Butler has : ‘the heavy brunt of cannon-ball ;’ Hudibras,
pt. i. c. 2, 1.872. ME. brunt, bront, * Brunt, insultus, impetus ; ’
Prompt. Parv. p. 54. ‘The oldest sense is ‘ smart blow,’ as in E, E,
Allit. Poems, A. 174. ‘ Partly imitative; cf. dint, prov. E. dunt,
a blow, thump. Partly suggested by MDan. brund, heat, lust, Norw.
brund, lust, heat (of animals in pairing-time). Allied to Icel. bruna,
to advance with the speed of fire, said of a standard in the heat of
battle, of ships advancing under full sail, &c.; Icel. bruni, burning,
heat, passion, from brenna, to burn; cognate with E. burn, See
Burn.

BRUSH, an implement for cleaning clothes ; cf. brushwood, under-
wood, (F.—Teut.?) ME, brusshe, in the phrase ‘ wyped it with a
brusshe ;’ P. Plowman, B. xiii. 460; also: ‘ Brusche, bruscus,’ i.e.
brush-wood, Prompt. Parv. —OF. broce, brosse, brushwood, small
wood; F. brosse, a bush, bushy ground, brush (Cotgrave) ; cf. Ital.
brusca. ‘ling or heath to make brushes with:’ Florio,—Late L.
bruscia, a thicket. ‘Derived by Diez from OHG. bursta, G. borste, a
bristle ; but perhaps influenced by Celtic (Thurneysen, p. 51). Cf. F.
broussailles, brush-wood, and note the double sense of E. broom. Der.
brush-wood.

BRUSQUE, rough in manner. (F.—Ital.) Spelt brusk by Sir
Henry Wotton, d. 1639 (R.). He speaks of giving ‘a brusk welcome’
=a rough one; Reliq. Wotton., p. 582.—F. brusque, rude ; intro-
duced in 16th cent. from Ital. brusco (Brachet).— Ital. brusco, sharp,
tart, sour, applied to fruits and wine. B. Of unknown origin ; Diez
suggests a corruption of OHG. bruttisc, brutish, brutal, which is un-
convincing. Ferrari (says Diez) derives it from the L. labruscus, the
Ital. dropping the first syllable. This is ingenious; the L. labruscus
was an adj. applied to a wild vine and wild grape. @ The notion of
connecting brisk with brusque appears in Cotgrave; it seems to be
right; see Brisk.

BRUTE, a dumb animal. (F.—L.) Shak. has brute as an adj.,
Hamlet, iii. 2. 110; and other quotations in Richardson show that
it was at first an adj., as in the phr. ‘a brute beast.’ Cf. ‘alle brute
beestis ;? Book of Quinte Essence, ed. Furnivall, p. 11 (ab. 1460-70).
=F. brut, masc., brute, fem. adj., in Cotgrave, signifying ‘ foul,
ragged, shapeless,’ &c.—L. britus, stupid. Der. brui-al, brut-al-i-ty,
brut-al-ise, brut-ish, brut-ish-ness.

BRYONY, a kind of plant. (L.—Gk.) In Levins ; also in Ben
Jonson, Masques ; The Vision of Delight. —L. brydnia,—Gk. Bpuwvia,
also Bpuwyn.— Gk. Bpvew, to teem, swell, grow luxuriantly.

BUBBLE, a small bladder of water. (E.) Shak. has the sb.,
As You Like It, ii. 7. 1525; also as a vb., ‘to rise in bubbles,’ Macb,
iv. 1.11. Spelt boble, Castel of Helth, leaf 84, back. Not found much:
earlier in English. Cf. EFries. bubbel, a bubble. [Palsgrave has:
‘ Burble in the water, bubedte,’ and the same form occurs in the Prompt.
Parv. p. 56; but this is probably a somewhat different word, and from
a different source; cf. Du, borrel, a bubble.) + Swed. bubbla, a bubble;
Dan. boble, a bubble; to bubble; Du. bobbel, a bubble ; bobbelen, to
bubble; Low G. bubbel, sb. ; bubbeln, vb. B. The form of the word
is clearly a diminutive; and it is to be regarded as the dimin, of a


ee


BUCCANIER


form bob or bub, of imitative origin ; cf. prov. E. bob, a knob ; parallel
to blob, a bubble. See Blob, Bleb.

BUCCANITIER, a pirate. (F.—West-Indian.) Modern. Bor-
rowed from F. boucanier, a buccanier, pirate. =F, bowcaner, to smoke-
dry ; or, according to Cotgrave, ‘to broyle or scorch on a woodden
gridiron.’ F. boucan, ‘a woodden gridiron, whereon the cannibals
broile pieces of men, and other flesh;’ Cot. B. The word boucan is
said to be a F. spelling of a Tupi (Brazilian) word, and to mean ‘a
frame on which meat is smoke-dried.’. Mr. Wedgwood says: ‘ The
natives of Florida, says Laudonniere (Hist. de la Floride, Pref. a.p.
1586, in Marsh), ‘‘ mangent leurs viandes rosties sur les charbons et
boucanées, c'est a dire quasi cuictes 4 la fumée.” In Hakluyt’s trans-
lation, “dressed in the smoake, which in their language they call
boucaned ;” Voyages, iii. 307. Hence those who established them-
selves in the islands for the purpose of smoking meat were called
buccaniers.’ Mr. Trumbull says :—‘ Jean de Lery (Voyage fait en la
Terre du Brésil, 1578, p. 153) describes the construction and use, by
the Tupinambas, of ‘‘ the great wooden grilles, called in their language
boucan, garnished with meats... drying slowly over fire.” ’

BUCK (1), a male deer, goat, &c. (E.) ME. bukke, Chaucer,
C. T. 3387. AS. bucca, a he-goat, Levit. iv. 23. + Du. bok, a he-
goat; Icel. bukkr ; Swed. bock, a buck, a he-goat; Dan. buk, a he-
goat, ram, buck; OHG. jock (G. bock), a buck, he-goat, battering-
ram. Cf. also W. bwch, a buck; bwehk gafr, a he-goat; Gael. boc,
a buck, he-goat; Irish boc, a he-goat. Brugmann, i. § 800. The
Celtic type is *bukkos ; Stokes-Fick, p. 179.

BUCK (2), to wash linen, to steep clothes in lye. (E.) Shak. has
buck-basket, a basket for washing linen, Merry Wives, iii. 3.2. ME.
bouken,to wash linen; P. Plowman, B. xiy. 19; as if from an AS. *bacian,
not found; but regularly formed from AS. bic, a pitcher (prov. E.
bouk, a pail, tub). The ME. bouken had the special sense of ‘to steep
in lye,’ to buck-wash; so also Swed. byka, Dan. byge, MDu. buiken,
G. beuchen, OF. buer, to buck-wash. See Bucket. Der. buck-
basket.

BUCKET, a kind of pail. (E.) ME, boket, Chaucer, Kn. Tale,
675 (A 1533); AF. boket (Bozon) ; cf. Guernsey bouquet (Meétivier).
Formed with AF, dimin, suffix -et from AS. bic, a pitcher, glossed
by ‘lagena,’ and occurring also in Judges, vii. 20 (Bosworth), Cf.
Trish buicead, a bucket, Gael. bucaid, a bucket ; both borrowed from E.

BUCKLE, a kind of fastening; to fasten. (F.—L.) The sb.
bokeling occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 2505 (A 2503). —OF. bocle (F.
boucle), the boss of a shield, a ring; from the latter of which senses
‘buckle’ has been evolved. —Late L. buccula, meaning (1) a part of
the helmet covering the cheek, a visor; (2) a shield; (3) a boss of
a shield; (4) a buckle, The original sense of L. buccula was the
cheek; dimin. of bucca, the cheek.

BUCKLER, a kind of shield. (F.—L.) Chaucer has bokeler,
Prol. 112; the pl. boceleris occurs in King Alisaunder, ed. Weber,
1190, —OF. bucler (¥. bouclier); so named from the bocle, bucle, or
boss in the centre. See Buckle.

BUCKRAM, a coarse cloth. (F.) ME. bokeram, cloth; Prompt.
Parv. p. 42; also in 1326 (N. and Q. 8S. i. 128.)—OF. boucaran (F.
bougran), a coarse kind of cloth (Roquefort) ; boguerant (Hatzfeld) ;
Late L. boquerannus, buckram ; also (in Italy) Late L. bachiranus, for
Ital. buchirano, late Ital. bucherame, Origin uncertain; perhaps from
Bokhara, in Tartary (Hatzfeld).

BUCKWHEAT, the name of a plant. (E.) In Coles’s Dict.
(1684); Turner, Names of Herbes, p. 35, E.D.S.(1548). The Poly-
gonum fagopyrum. The word buckwheat means beech-wheat, so called
from the resemblance in shape between its seeds and the mast of the
beech-tree. The same resemblance is hinted at in the term fago-
pyrum, from L. fagus, the beech-tree. The form buck for beech is E.
Anglian, from AS. béc, beech. See Tusser’s Husbandry. Du. boek-
weit; G. buchweizen, See Beech, Book. ;

BUCOLIC, pastoral. (L.—Gk.) Elyot has bucolickes; the Govern-
our, bk. i. c. 10 § 8, Skelton has ‘ bucolycall relations ;’? Garlande of
Laurell, 1. 327.—L, bicolicus, pastoral.—Gk. BovxoAikds, pastoral. =
Gk. Bouvxddos, a cow-herd.—Gk. Bov-, for Bots, an ox; KoA-, second
grade of xeA-, in xéAAev, to drive.Olrish and Gael. buachaill, W.
bugail, cow-herd ; Stokes-Fick, p. 178.

BUD, a germ; to sprout. (E.) The Prompt. Parv., p. 54, has:
* Budde of a tre, Gemma,’ and: ‘ Buddun as trees, Gemmo.’ The word
does not appear earlier in ME.; but may have been an E. word.
The corresponding AS. form is *budda, m., or *budde, f.; the latter
exactly answers to MHG. butte, prov. G. (Strassburg) butt, Bavar.
butte, mod, G. hage-butte, fruit of the dog-rose, taken as the type ofa
bud from its shape and bright colour. Hence Du, bot, a bud, eye,
shoot; botten, to bud, sprout out; OF. boton, a button, a bud; AF.
boton, a hip (Vocab. 556.7); Norm. dial. bout, a bud, bouter, to bud
(Robin) ; the F. words being of Teutonic origin. Cf. also Swed. dial.
bodda opp, to become leafy (as trees or bushes), boddoter, full of


BUFFOON Bi


leaves. See Notes on E. Etymology, pp. 20, 476. See Button and
Butt (1).

BUDGE (1), to stir, move from one’s place. (F.—L.) Shak. has
budge, to stir, Haml. iil, 4. 18.—F. bouger, to stir; cf. Prov. bolegar,
to disturb oneself; answering to Ital. bulicare, to bubble up. Formed,
as a frequentative, from L, bullire, to boil. See Boil. B. This deriva-
tion is made clearer by the facts that the Span. budlir means not only
‘to boil,’ but ‘to be busy, to bestir oneself,’ also ‘to move from place
to place ;’ whilst the deriv. adj. budlictoso means ‘ brisk, active, busy.”
So also Port. bulir, to move, stir, be active ; buligoso, restless.

BUDGE (2),a kind of fur. (F.) Milton has: ‘those budge doctors
of the Stoic fur;’ Comus, 707; alluding to the lambskin fur worn by
some who took degrees, and still worn at Cambridge by bachelors of
arts. Halliwell has: ‘dudge, lambskin with the wool dressed out-
wards ; often worn on the edges of capes, as gowns of bachelors of
arts are still made. See Fairholt’s Pageants, i. 66; Strutt, ii. 102;
Thynne’s Debate, p. 32; Pierce Penniless, p. 11.? Cotgrave has:
‘ Agnelin, lambs-fur, budge.’ Palsgrave has bouge furre. Cf. AF.
boge, fur; Stat. Realm, i. 380 (1363). Apparently from OF, boge,
(Burguy), bouge, a bag made of skin. Another sense of budge is ‘a
bag or sack;’ and a third, ‘a kind of water-cask;’ Halliwell. These
ideas are connected by the idea of ‘skin of an animal;’ which served
for a bag, a water-skin, orfor ornamental purposes. When budge has
the sense of ‘bag,’ its dimin. is budget. See turther under Budget,
below. @ The connexion is not quite certain. Dr. Murray suggests
OF. bochet, bouchet, a young kid.

BUDGET, a leathern bag. (F.—C.) Shak. has budget (old edd.
bowget), Wint. Tale, iv. 3. 20. Palsgrave has bougette.—F. ‘ bougette,
a little coffer, or trunk of wood, covered with leather; ... also, a
little male, pouch, or budget ;’ Cot. A dimin. of F. ‘ bouge, a budget,
wallet, or great pouch;’ id.; cf. OF. boulge (Roquefort).—L. bulga,
a little (skin) bag; according to Festus, a word of Gaulish origin
(Brachet).—Olrish bog’, bolc,a bag; W. bol, the belly. Allied to
Belly.

BUFF (1), in Blindman’s buff. (F.—Teut.) Formerly blind-
man-buff, a game; in which boys used to buffet one (who was blinded)
on the back, without being caught, if possible. From OF. bufe, F.
buffe, a buffet, blow. = Low G. buff, puf, a blow (Liibben); EFries.
buf, buff, a blow. See Buffet (1).

BUFF (2), the skin of a buffalo; a pale yellow colour. (F.—L.—
Gk.) Buffis a contraction of buffe, or buffle, from F. buffie, a buffalo.
‘ Buff, a sort of thick tanned leather;’ Kersey. ‘ Buff} Buffle, or
Buffalo, a wild beast like an ox;’ id. ‘The term was applied to
the skin of the buffalo dressed soft, buff-leather, and then to the
yellowish colour of leather so dressed ;’ Wedgwood. See Buffalo.

BUFFALO, a kind of wild ox. (Port. or Ital. —L.—Gk.) The
pl. buffollos occurs in Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p. 43. The
sing. buffalo is in Ben Jonson, Discoveries, Of the magnitude of any
fable; § 133. Borrowed from Port. bufalo, or Ital. buffalo; in early
books of travel. (But the term was not really new in English; the
Tudor Eng. already had the form duffle, borrowed from the French.
Cotgrave has: ‘ Bufle, m. the buffe, bugle, bugle, or wild oxe; also,
the skin or neck of a buffe.”]—L. bifalus, used by Fortunatus, a
secondary form of”bibalus, a buffalo.—Gk. BovBados, a bufialo ;
Polyb. xii. 3, 5. Not a true Gk. word; apparently suggested by Skt.
gavala-s, a buffalo (Macdonell) ; which is allied to Skt. gaus, a cow,
and to Gk. Bods, E. cow. See Cow (1).

BUFFER (1), a foolish fellow. (F.) Jamieson has ‘ buffer, a
foolish fellow.’ The ME. buffer means ‘a stutterer.” ‘The tunge of
bufferes [Lat. balborum] swiftli shal speke and pleynly;’ Wycl., Isaiah,
xxxii. 4. Lydgate has buffard, a foolish fellow; Minor Poems, p. 32.
From ME. baer, to stammer.=OF, bufer, to puff out the cheeks,
&c. See Buffet (1), Buffoon., £. The word is, no doubt, partly
imitative ; to represent indistinct talk; cf. Babble.

BUFFER (2), a cushion, with springs, used to deaden con-
cussion. (F.) Buffer is lit. a striker; from ME. buffen, to strike;
prov. Eng. buff, to strike, used by Ben Jonson (see Nares). = OF, bufer,
buffer, to strike. See Buffet (1).

BUFFET (1), a blow; to strike. (F.) ME. buffet, boffet, a blow;
esp. a blow on the cheek or face; Wycl., John, xix. 3. Also buffeten,
bofeten, translated by L. colaphizo, Prompt. Parv.p. 41. Also bufelung,
a buffeting, Old Eng. Homilies, i. 207.— OF. bufet, a blow, esp. on
the cheek. —OF, bufe, a blow, esp. on the cheek; bufer, buffer, to-
strike; also, to puff out the cheeks.—Low G. buff, puf, a blow
(Liibben) ; of imitative origin; like EFries. buf, buff, pu/, a blow,
Du. bof, G. puff, MUG. buf, puf. From the sound; see Buff (1).

BUFFET (2), a side-board. (F.) Used by Pope, Moral Essays
(Ep. to Boyle), 1. 153; Sat. ii. 5.—F. ‘ buffet, a court cupboord, or
high-standing cupboord; also, a cupboord of plate;’ Cot. Origin
unknown.


BUFFOON, a jester. (F.) Holland speaks of ‘buffoons, pleasants,.


78 BUG, BUGBEAR

and gesters;’ tr. of Plutarch, p. 487. Pronounced differ, Ben Jonson,
Every Man, ii. 3. 8. For the suffix, cf. ball-oon.—¥. bouffon, which
Cotgrave explains as ‘a buffoon, jester, sycophant,’ &c.— TF’. bouffer, to
puff. Cf. Span. bufa, a scoffing, laughing at; equiv. to Ital. buffa, a
trick, jest; which is connected with Ital. buffare, to joke, jest; orig.
to puff out the cheeks, in allusion to the grimacing of jesters, which
was a principal part of their business. Of imitative origin. See
Buffer (1). Der. buffoon-ery.

BUG (1), BUGBEAR, a terrifying spectre. (C.) Fairfax speaks
of children being frightened by ‘strange bug-beares;’ tr. of Tasso,
Gier. Lib. bk. xiii. st. 18. Here bug-bear means a spectre in the
shape of a bear. The word bug was used alone, as in Shak. Tam.
Shrew, i. 2. 211; and Wyclif has bugge in the sense of ‘ scare-crow,’
L.formido, Baruch,vi.69. Shak. himselfalso has bugbear,Troil. iv. 2. 34.
=—W. bwg, a hobgoblin, spectre; bwgan,a spectre; Gael. (and Irish)
bocan, a spectre, apparition, terrifying object. B. Probably connected
further with Lithuanian baugis, terrific, frightful, bugdi, to frighten,
which Fick further connects with L. fuga, flight, fugare, to put to
flight, and Skt. bhuj, to bow, bend, turn aside, cognate with E. bow,
to bend. See Bow (1). Brugmann, i. § yor. And see below.

BUG (2), an insect. (E.) Apparently a particular application of
the Tudor-English bug, an apparition, scarecrow, object of terror; as
if equivalent to ‘ disgusting creature.’ But rather, a modification, due
to association with bug (1), of AS. budda, a beetle; cf. AS. scearn-
budda, a dung-beetle, Voc. 543. 10, prov. E. sharn-bug (Kent).

BUGABOO, a spectre. (C.) In Lloyd's Chit-chat (R.). It is
the word bug, with the addition of W. bw, an interjection of threaten-
ing, Gael. bo, an interjection used to frighten children, our ‘boh!’

BUGLE (1), a wild ox; a horn. (F.—L.) Bugle in the sense of
‘horn’ is an abbreviation of bugle-horn, used by Chaucer, C, T. 11565
(F 1253). It means the horn of the bugle, or wild ox. Halliwell
has: ‘Bugle, a buffalo; see King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 5112;
Maundeville’s Travels, p. 269; Topsell’s Beasts, p. 54; Holinshed,
Hist. of Scotland, p. 16.’ Perhaps bugle was confused with bwuffie or
buffalo (see Buffalo), but etymologically it is a different word. =
OF. bugle, a wild ox (whence, by the way, F. beugler, to bellow). =
L. baculum, acc. of biculus, a bullock, young ox (Columella); a dimin.
of L. bs, cognate with E. cow. See Cow.

' BUGLE (2), akind of ornament. (F.—L.?) ‘A gyrdle.. Embost
with buegle;’ Spenser, Shep. Kal. Feb. 66. Bugles are tube-shaped
glass beads, or fine glass pipes, sewn on to a woman's dress by way
of omament. [Mr. Wedgwood quotes from Muratori, showing that
some sort of ornaments, called in Low Latin bugoli, were worn in the
hair by the ladies of Piacenza in A.D. 1388. These were pads, to
support the hair, and have nothing to do with the present word.]
From a fancied resemblance to a bugle-horn; see N.E.D., s.v. bugle,
a horn, where a quotation is given dated 1615, in which bugle seems
to mean ‘a tube.’ Cf. ‘Bugle, a little blacke horne;’? Cockeram (1623).

BUGLE (3), a plant; Aiuga reptans. (F.—Late L.) ME. bugle,
Medical Werkes of 14th Cent., ed. Henslow, p. 172.—F. bugle.
— Late L. bugula (Hatzteld); cf. L. bigillo, (perhaps) bugle. 4] We
find AF. bucle as a plant-name, Wright’s Voc. i. 162 (spelt bugle in
MS. Camb. Gg. 1. 1); this suggests Late L. bicula, ‘ pascua,’ in
Ducange; as if ‘ pasture-flower.’

BUGLOSS, a plant. (F.—L.—Gk.) Mentioned in Sir T. Elyot’s
‘Castle of Helth, b. ili. ch. 12; p. 70.—F. buglosse.—L. biiglossa ;
also bigldssus.—Gk. Bov-yAwooos, ox-tongue; from the shape and
roughness of the leaves. = Gk. Bod-s, ox; yA@oo-a, tongue. See Cow (1).

BUILD, to construct a house. (E.) ME. bulden, Layamon, 2656;
bilden, Coventry Mysteries, p. 203; also buylden, P. Plowman, B, xii.
228; and belden, P. Plowman, Crede, 706. The spellings bielde,
-beelde, in Wyclif’s Bible, Gen. xi. 8, 3 Kings, xi. 7, show that the
ME. vowel was long; and, in fact, «wi is the regular representative
(in Southern E. of the 13th c.) of AS. y. The vowel was again
shortened by the influence of the final dentals in builded and built,
pt. t. and pp.—Late AS. byldan, lengthened to byldan in Norman
pronunciation (cf. E. mild from AS. mild, &c.). — AS. bold, a dwelling ;
with regular mutation from o (Tent. u) toy. ‘pé wes bold gebyld,
for thee was a dwelling built; The Grave (in Thorpe, Analecta,
p. 142). Sievers shows that bold is for *bol-}-, altered form of *bof-1
>boil, a dwelling; from Teut. *bu-Jlo- (*bu-fro-); from Teut. *bw-,
weaker grade of ba- in biian, to dwell, and Idg. suffix *-tro. Closely
allied to Booth, q.v. §] The vowel was still long in the 16th
century. We find beelde rhyming with feelde (field) in Higgins, Mirror
for Magistrates, Severus, st. 21.

BULB, a round root, &c. (F.—L.—Gk.) Not in early use. In
Holland’s Plutarch, p. 577; and bulbous is in Holland’s Pliny, bk.
xix. c. 43 vol. ii. p. 13; also dulbes in the same, p. 18 (last line). =
F. bulbe.—L. bulbus.= Gk. BoABos, a bulbous root, an onion. Der.
-bulb, verb; bulb-ed, bulb-ous.

BULBUL, a nightingale. (Pers.) In Byron, Bride of Abydos,


BULLETIN


i. 10.—Pers. bulbul, a bird with a melodious voice, resembling the
nightingale. Of imitative origin : bzl-bul.

BULGE, to swell out. (F.—C.) This word, in the sense of ‘to
swell out,’ is rare except in modern writers. The earlier sense was
to stave in the bulge (or bilge), i.e. the bottom of a ship. Blount
has: ‘ Bulged (or Bilged), a Sea-Term: a ship is said to be bulged
when she strikes on a rock, anchor, or the like,’ &c. From E. bulge,
(1) a wallet, obs.; (2) a hump, obs.; (3) a protuberance; (4) the
bottom of a ship’s hull. OF. boulge, bouge, f.,a budget, wallet, Cot.;
m. a swelling, boss, belly, Cot.—L. bulga, a skin-bag (Gaulish). See
Budget and Belly. Der. bilge, sb., bilge-water. 4 The F. change
of gender raises a difficulty; but see Scheler.

BULK (1), magnitude, size. (Scand.) ME. bolke,a heap, Prompt.
Parv. p. 43. Icel. bulki, a heap (earlier bulki, Noreen, § 196); biilkas?,
to be bulky; Dan. bulk, a lump, clod; bulket, lumpy; Swed. dial.
bullk, a knob, bunch; bullkug, bunchy, protuberant (Rietz) ; MSwed.
bolk, a heap (Ihre); Norw. bulk, a boss. B. The Swed. dial. words
are connected with Swed. dial. buljna, to bulge; Swed. bulna, to
swell. The original idea in bulk is ‘a swelling ;’ cf. the adj. bulky.
See Bolled. Der. bulk-y, bulk-i-ness.

BULK (2), the trunk of the body. (Du.) Used by Shak. Hamlet,
ii. 1. 95.—MDnu. bulcke, thorax; Kilian. (Prob. confused with Icel.
bukr, the trunk of the body; Swed. buk, the belly; Dan. bug, the
belly ; Du. buik, G. bauch, the belly.) Perhaps allied to Bulk (1).

BULK (3), a stall of a shop, a projecting frame for the display of
goods. (Scand.) In Shak. Cor, il. 1. 226; Oth. v. 1. 1. Halliwell
has: ‘ Bulk, the stall'of a shop;’ with references. He also notes
that the Lincolnshire bulkar means (1) a beam; and (2) the front of
a butcher’s shop where meat is laid. Dan. dial. bulk, a half-wall, a
partition; MDan. bulk, a balk (Kalkar) ; NFries. bulk, balk. A form,
with the weak grade (wz), parallel to E. balk, Icel. balkr, a beam,
rafter, also a partition. The native E. word balk generally means
arafter, and does not give the right vowel. Florio translates the Ital.
balco or balcone (from OHG. balcho) as ‘ the bulk or stall of a shop,’

BULK-HEAD, a partition in a ship made with boards, form-
ing apartments. (Scand. and E.) Nautical. Spelt bulke-hedde in
1496; Naval Accounts, ed. Oppenheim, p. 168. Had it been of
native origin, the form would have been balk-head, from balk, a beam.
The change of vowel points to the MDan. bulk (above).

BULL (1), a male bovine quadruped. (E.) ME, bole, bule,
Chaucer, C. T. 2141 (A 2139)3 bule, Ormulum, 990. Not found in
AS., though occurring in the Ormulum, and in Layamon in comp.
bule-hude, bull-hide; yet the dimin. bulluc, a bull-ock, little bull,
really occurs (Bosworth) ; and AS. Bulan, as if from a nom. bula,
occurs in place-names (Kemble’s Index). Cf. EFries. bulle.4-MDu.
bolle, a bull (Kilian); Du. bul; Icel. boli, a bull; Westphal. and G,
bulle; Lith. bullus. Prob. ‘the bellower;’ from *bul-, weak grade of
AS. bellan, to bellow. Cf. MHG. bullen, to roar. See Bellow.
Der. bull-dog, bull-finch, &c.; dimin. bull-ock, AS. bulluc.

BULL (2), a papaledict. (L.) In early use. ME. budle, a papal
bull; P. Plowman, B. prol. 69; Rob. of Glouc. p. 473; 1. 9719. —L.
bulla, a stud, knob ; later, a leaden seal, such as was affixed to an edict ;
hence the name was transferred to the edict itself. See Bowl (1).
Der. From the same source: bull-et, q.v., bull-et-in, q.v. QJ The
use of bul/ in the sense of ‘ blunder’ is a different word; from OF.
boler, bouler, to deceive (Godefroy).

BULLACE, wild plum. (F.—L.) Bacon has the pl. bullises;
Essay on Gardens. ‘ Bolas frute, pepulum ;” and ‘ Bolas tre, pepu-
lus;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 423 bolds (accented on a), Rom. Rose, 1377.
—OF. beldce, blosse, a bullace (Supp. to Godefroy); also written
pelosse (pl. pelosses) in Cotgrave. = Romanic type *pilotija, for Late L.
*pilottea, lit. § pellet-like.’— Late L. pilota, a pellet, ball.=L. pila, a
ball. See Pellet, and Pill (1). Notes on E. Etym. p. 23. B. The
OF. beloce, belloce, ‘espéce de prunes,’ is given by Roquefort ; and
Cotgrave has: ‘ Bellocier, a bullace-tree, or wilde plum-tree.’ Cf.
Breton bolos (from OF. beloce), also polos (from OF. *peloce, plosse ;
Gael. bulaistear, from ME. bolas-tre, a bullace-tree. Also Walloon
bilok, bulok, a bullace; from North F. Puitspelu (on the patois of
Lyons) has : ‘ Pelossi, pelosse, OF. beloce, Suisse belossa, Norm. beloche,
Jura pelosse, pelousse,’ all meaning ‘ bullace.’

BULLET, a ball for a gun. (F.—L.) In Shak. K. John, ii. 227,
412.—F. boulet, ‘a bullet;’ Cot. A dimin. of F. boule, a ball.—L.
bulla, a stud, knob; a bubble. See Bull (2).

BULLETIN, a brief public announcement. (F.—Ital.—L.)
Burke speaks of ‘ the pithy and sententious brevity of these bulletins ;’
Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs (R.)=—F. bulletin, ‘a bill,
ticket, a billet in a lottery;’ Cot.—Ital. bulletino, a safe conduct,
pass, ticket.. Formed, with the dimin. suffix -ino, from bulletta, a
passport, a lottery-ticket ; which again is formed, with the dimin.
suffix -et/a, from bulla, a seal, a pope’s letter. = L. bulla, a seal; later,
a pope’s letter. See Bull (2). } > Sian


BULLION


| BULLION, uncoined metal. (F.—L.) Spelt bolion in Arnold’s
Chron., ed. 1811, p. 229 ; bollyox in 1586, in Orig. Letters, ed. Ellis,
li. 305.—F. bouillon, a boiling ; also a certain measure or weight
(Godefroy, and Supp.).— Late L. bullidnem, ace. of bullio, a mass of
gold cr silver ; also written bullidna.—L. bullire, to boil ; see Boil
(1). For the history, see N. E.D. @ The mod. F. word is dillon;
which Littré derives from F, bille, a log; and F. billon seems to have
been confused to some extent with the E. word.

- BULLY, a noisy rough fellow; to bluster. (Du.) Shak. has
bully for ‘a brisk dashing fellow;’ Merry Wives, i. 3. 6, 11, &c.;
Schmidt. Also budly-rook in a similar sense, Merry Wives, i. 3. 2;
ll, I. 200. But the earliest sense was ‘ sweet-heart;’ see N.E.D.
Cf. Hen. V, iv. 1. 48. Apparently from Du. boel, a lover ; borrowed
from G.—MHG. buole, a lover; G. buhle. The later sense was a
swaggering gallant ; lastly, a tyrannical coward who intimidates the
weak. Perhaps influenced by Du. bud, a bull, also a clown, insolent
fellow; Du. bulderen, Low G. buillern, to bluster.

BULRUSH, a tall rush. (E.) ME. bolroysche, Voc. 786. 40;
‘bulrysche, Prompt. Pary., p. 244, col. 2. Perhaps from its stout
stem ; cf. Shetland bulwand, a bulrush. = Dan. bul, stem, trunk; and
E. rush. See Bole and Rush (2) ; also Bulwark (below). B. Or
bull may mean ‘large,’ with reference to a bull; cf. bull-daisy, &c.
(Britten).

BULWARK, a rampart. (Scand.) In Shak. Hamlet, iii. 4. 38.
‘Fagottes for bolewerckes:’ Excerpta Historica, p. 52 (anno 1419) ;
nearly the earliest quotation known. ‘ Barbycans and also bulworkes
huge ;’ Lydgate, Siege of Troy, b.ii. ch. 11 ; ed. 1555, fol. F g, col.
2.—MDan. bulvirke,a bulwark; Swed. bolverk. Cf. Du. bolwerk,whence
G. bollwerk. Corrupted in F. to boulevarde, from the Du. or G. form.
Kilian explains bol-werck, or block-werck by ‘ propugnaculum, agger,
vallum ;” showing that bol is equivalent to block, i.e. a log of wood.
[ The Dan. bulverk is commonly said to have been borrowed from Du.;
but Kalkar gives MDan. bulvirke as known in 1461, and the Scand.
languages explain the word better; the Du. bol is not commonly
used for ‘log,’ nor is G. béh/e anything more than ‘a board, plank.’
B. From Dan. bul,a stem, stump, log of a tree; MDan. virke, work ;
cf. Icel. budr, bolr, the bole or trunk of a tree, and virki, work. y. Thus
the word stands for bole-work, and means a fort made of the stumps
of felled trees. See Bole. @ The G. bollwerk, as formerly used in
the sense of ‘mangonel,’ is a different word; from MHG., bolz, to
throw ; see Kluge.

BUM, buttocks. (E.) Used by Shak. Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 53. A
word probably meaning ‘ protuberance,’ and connected with such
words as bump, a swelling, bumb, a pimple (Florio, s. v. guosi).

BUM-BAILIFF, an under bailiff. (E. and F.) In Shak.
Twelfth Nt. iii. 4.194. Blackstone (bk. i. c. g) says it is a corruption
of bound-bailiff, which is a guess; for there is no such word. B. Todd
quotes from a Tract at the end of Fulke’s Defence of the English
translations of the Bible, 1583, p. 33: ‘ These quarrels . . are more
meet for the bum-courts than for the schools of divinity. In this say-
ing, ifthe term of bumcourts seem too light, I yield unto the censure
of grave and godly men.’ He also quotes the expression ‘constables,
-tithing-men, bailiffs, bumme or shoulder-marshals’ from Gayton’s
Notes on Don Quixote, bk. ii. c. 2, He accordingly suggests that
the term arose from the bailiff or pursuer catching a man ‘ by the
hinder part of his garment ;’ and he is probably right.

BUMBLE-BEE, a bee that hums. (E.) The verb bumble is a
frequentative of boom. Cf. MDu. bommelen, to buzz, hum (Oude-
mans); Bremen bummeln, to sound; EFries. bummen, to resound ;
Du. bommen, to sound hollow (like an empty barrel). See Boom (1)
and Bump (2). @@ As both boom and hum signify ‘ to buzz,’ the
insect is called, indifferently, a bumble-bee or a humble-bee.

BUMBOAT, a boat used for taking out provisions to a ship. (E.)
From bum and boat; for the orig. sense was a scavenger’s boat, em-
ployed to remove ‘filth’ from ships lying in the Thames, as pre-
scribed by the Trinity House Bye Laws of 1685. See N. E. D.

BUMP (1), to thump, beat; a blow, bunch, knob. (E.) Cotgrave
has: ‘ Adot, a blow, bumpe, or thump;’ also: ‘ Baculer, to bump. .
with a bat.’ Shak. has bump, a knob, Rom. i. 3. 53. Of imitative
origin ; cf. MDan. bumpe, to strike with the fist. So also W. pwmp,
a round mass, a lump; pwmpio, to thump, bang. In this case, and
some other similar ones, the original word is the verb, signifying ‘ to
strike ;’ next, the sb. signifying ‘blow;’ and lastly, the visible effect
of the blow, the ‘bump’ raised by it. Allied to Bunch, q.v.

BUMP (2), to make a noise like a bittern. (E.) ‘And as a bittour
bumps within a reed:’ Dryden, Wife of Bath’s Tale, 1. 194; where
Chaucer has bumbleth, C. T. 6554 (D 972). Imitative; a variant of
Boom (1); and cf. Bumblebee. So also W. bwmp, a hollow
sound ; aderyn y bwmp, a bittern; Gk. BdéuBos, a humming, buzzing.

BUMPER, a full glass, esp. when drunk.as a toast. (E.) Dryden
has bumpers in his Epistle to Sir G. Etherege, 1. 46.. Apparently


BUNION 79
suggested by bump, a swelling, with the notion of fulness, so that
a bumper generally means ‘a glass filled to the brim.’ Cf. thumping,
with the sense of ‘ large.’

BUMPKIN, a thick-headed fellow. (Du.) Used by Dryden,
who talks of ‘the country bumpkin, Juvenal, Sat. 3, 1. 295. The
index to Cotgrave says that the F. for bumkin is chicambault; and
Cot. has: ‘ Chicambault,m. The luffe-block, a long and thick piece


of wood, whereunto the fore-saile and sprit-saile are fastencd, when


a ship goes by the wind.’ I think it probable that bumkin (then pro-
nounced nearly as boomkin) is the dimin. of boom, formed by adding
to boom (a Dutch word) the Dutch dimin. ending -ken ; so that the
form boomken, explained by Hexham as ‘a little tree,’ might also signify
‘a small boom,’ or ‘ luff-block;” and metaphorically, a blockhead,
a wooden-pated fellow; perhaps originally a piece of nautical slang.
The Dutch suffix -kex is hardly used now, but was once in use freely,
particularly in Brabant; see Ten Kate, ii. 73 ; it answers exactly to
the E. suffix -kin, which took its place.

BUN, a sort of cake. (F.—Scand.) Skelton has bun in the sense
of a kind of loaf given to horses ; ed. Dyce, i. 15. ME. bunne, Prompt.
Paryv. =O. prov. F. bugne, a name given at Lyons to a kind of fritters
(Burguy, Puitspelu) ; a variation of F. bigne, a swelling rising from a
blow (Burguy). B. These F. words are represented by the mod. F,
dimin. beignet, a fritter; the connexion is established by Cotgrave,
who gives the dimin, forms as bugnet and bignet, with this explana-
tion : ‘ Bignets, little round loaves, or lumps made of fine meale, oile,
or butter, and raisons; buns, Lenten loaves; also, flat fritters made
like small pancakes.’ So also Minsheu’s Span. Dict. has: ‘ busiuelos,
pancakes, cobloaves, buns.’ And Torriano has Ital. ‘bugna, bugno,
bugnone, any round knob or bunch, a bile or blain.. The word pro-
bably came to us from the S. of France; cf. Proy. bougno, a swelling,
bougneto, also buegno, a fritter. See Notes on E. Etymol. p. 25. y.
Perhaps of Scandinavian origin; see Bunion.

BUNCH, a knob, a cluster. (E.?) ME. bunche, Debate of the
Body and Soul, Vernon MS., 1. 344; where the copy printed in Matz-
ner has bulche, 1. 370. From ME. bunchen, to beat; P. Plowman, A.
prol. 71; B. prol. 74. Of imitative origin; a parallel formation to
Bump ; cf. Low G. bunk, a bone that sticks out, a bump; Du. donk,
a mass of flesh. Andcf. Bunk, Bungle. B. The notion of ‘ bunch-
ing out’ is due to ‘striking,’ as in other cases, the swelling being
caused by the blow; see Bump (1). Cf. Du. bonken, to beat, be-
labour. Der. bunch-y.

BUNDLE, something bound up, a package. (E.) ME. bundel
(ill-spelt buxdelle), Prompt. Parv. p. 55. A dimin., by adding suffix
-el, of bund, a bundle, a thing bound up; the plural bunda, bundles,
occurs as a gloss of L. fasciculos in the Lind. MS. in Matt. xiii. 30.4
Du. bondel, a bundle; G. biindel, a dimin. of bund, a bundle, bunch,
truss. From bund-, weak grade of AS. bindan, to bind. See Bind.

BUNG, a plug for a hole in a cask. (Du.—L.) ME. bunge,
Prompt. Parv. p. 55. ‘ Bung of a tonne or pype, bordel ;’ Palsgrave.
=MDu. bonge, ‘the bung of a barrill,) Hexham; a dialectal
variant of MDu. *bonde, whence MDu. bonne, a bung, stopple, for
which Ondemans gives two quotations; hence mod. Du. bom, a bung
(Franck). Hence also F. bonde, of which Palsgrave has the dimin.
bondel, cited above. Cotgrave explains bonde by ‘a bung or stopple ;
also, a sluice, a floodgate.’ B. This MDu. *bonde (preserved in F.
bonde) is cognate with Alsatian bunde, Swiss punt (see Weigand, s.v.
Spund, ii. 785). —L. puncta, an orifice; orig. fem. of punctus, pp. of
pungere, to prick. Cf. W. bwng, an orifice, also a bung; from E.
bung, which also means ‘bung-hole.’ See G. Spund, a bung, an
orifice, in Kluge; in which the s (from F. es-, L. ex) was prefixed.

BUNGALOW, a Bengal thatched house. (Hind.) Spelt buzgio,
Murphy, The Upholsterer, ii. 3 (1758). In Rich. Pers. Dict., p. 293,
we find: § Pers. bangalah, of or belonging to Bengal; a bungalow.’
From the name Bengal. Forbes gives Hind. bangla, m. a kind of
thatched house (p.88); Wilson gives the Bengali form as bangla (p. 59).

BUNGLE, to mend clumsily. (Scand.) Shak. has bungle, Hen. V,
ii. 2. 115; Sir T. More has bungler, Works, p. 1089 c. Prob. from
bung-, weak grade of an old Teut. str. vb. *bing-an-, to strike, pt. t.
*bang ; cf. MDnu. bing-el, ‘a cudgill,’ Hexham; prov. E. bang, a strong
pole, and bang, to beat; G. bengel, a cudgel; see EFries. bingeln in
Koolman. f. This is rendered probable by comparison with Swed.
dial. bangla, to work ineffectually (Rietz); Norw. bunka, to work by
fits and starts (Ross). Ihre gives MSwed. bunga, to strike, and Rietz
gives bonka and bunka as variants of Swed. dial. banka, to strike. See
Bang. Der. bungl-er. ‘

BUNION, a painful swelling on the foot. (Ital.—Teut.) Not in
early use. Rich. quotes bunians from Rowe’s Imitations of Horace,
bk. iii. ode 9; written, perhaps, about A.D. 1718; the footnote
(in Eng. Poets, ix. 472) says that it was ‘ Jacob’s term for his corns,
so that we owe the word to J. Tonson, the book-seller, who may very
well have known the Ital. form. =Ital. bugnone, bugno, any round


20 ~ _BUINEE


knob or bunch, a boil or blain; cf. OF. bugne, bune, buigne, a swell-
ing (Burguy) ; F. bigne, a bump, knob, rising, or swelling after a
knock (Cotgrave).—Icel. bunga, an elevation, convexity; Norw.
bunga,a round swelling, a bump (Ross) ; OHG. bungo, a lump (cited
by Diez). Allied to Skt. bahu-s, thick, Gk. maxvs; Brugmann, Kurze
Vergl. Gram. § 194. B. The prov. Eng. bunny, a swelling after a
blow, in Forby’s East-Anglian Dialect, is from the OF. bugne. See
Bun. @ The Ital. bugnone is from Ital. bugno, the same as the OF.
bugne; with the addition of the Ital. augmentative suffix -one.

BUNK, a wooden case or box, serving for a seat by day and a bed
by night; one of a series of berths arranged in tiers. (Scand.) A
nautical term; and to be compared with the MSwed. bunke, which
Thre defines as ‘tabulatum navis, quo czeli injuriz defenduntur a
vectoribus et mercibus.’ He adds a quotation, viz. ‘Gretter giorde sier
grof under bunka’ =Gretter made for himself a bed under the board-
ing or planking [if that be the right rendering of ‘sub tabulato’]. The
ordinary sense of MSwed. bunke is a pile, a heap, orig. something pro-
minent; Icel. bunki; allied to E. bunch. Cf. M Dan. bunke, room for cargo.

BUNT, the belly or hollow of a sail; a nautical term. (Scand.—
MHG.)‘ Bunt, the hollowness allowed in making sails ;? Coles (1684).
Also in Kersey’s Dict. a. Wedgwood explains it from Dan. bundt,
Swed. bunt, a bundle, a bunch; and so Webster; cf. EFries. bund,
bunt, a bundle, packing. If so, the root is the verb to bind. Cf.
Norw. bunta, to pack, pack tight (Ross). From MHG, bunt, a
bundle. =OHG. bunt-, weak grade of bintan, to bind. B. But the
sense agrees better with that of a different Scand. word, answering
to E. bow, a bend; cf. Dan. bug, a belly; bug paa Seil, a bunt; bug-
gaarding, a bunt-line ; bug-ine, bowline; bug-spryd, bowsprit ; bugne,
to bend; de bugnende Seil, the bellying sails or canvas; Swed. buk pa
ett segel, the bunt of asail; bugning, flexure.

BUNTING (1), the name of a bird. (Scand. ?) ME. bunting, bount-
ing; also buntyle, badly written for buntel. ‘Buntynge, byrde, pratellus;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 56. ‘A bounting ;’ Lyric Poems, ed. Wright, p. 40.
‘Hic pratellus, a buntyle;’ Wright’s Vocab, i. 221. Cf. Lowland
Scotch buntlin, a bunting. Origin unknown. As.the bird has ‘a clumsy
figure’ (Newton), we may compare Lowl. Sc. buntin, short and thick,
plump, prov. E. bunty, short and stout; perhaps from Norw. bunta,
stout and compact (Ross).

BUNTING (2), a thin woollen stuff, of which ships’ flags are
made. (E.?) In Johnson’s Dict.; and first found in 1742 (N.E.D.). [The
suggestion of a connexion with High G. bunt, variegated, is unlikely,
though the word is now found in Dutch as bont.] Mr. Wedgwood says:
“To bunt in Somerset is to bolt meal, whence bunting, bolting-cloth,
the loose open cloth used for sifting flour, and now more generally
known as the material of which flags are made.’ And he has noted
that F. étamine means (1) a bolting-cloth, (2) bunting. The E. D.D.
has bunt, to sift, to bolt, and bunting, a kind of cloth of which sieves
are made (which seems decisive). The verb bunt, to bolt flour, is
ME. bonten, to sift, and occurs in the Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 93.

BU OY, a floating piece of wood fastened down. (Du.—L.) It occurs
(spelt bwoy) in Hakluyt’s Voyages, vol. iii. p. 411. Spelt boy in Pals-
grave. Borrowed, as many sea-terms are, from the Dutch. = Du. boei,
a buoy; also, a shackle, fetter. [The same word as OF. boie, buie, a
fetter; Godefroy. |— Late L. boia, a fetter, a clog. . [‘ Raynouard, Lex.
Rom. ii. 232, quotes “jubet compedibus constringi, quos rustica lingua
boias vocat.” Plautus has it in a pun, Capt. iv. 2. 109, ‘*.. Boius est;
boiam terit;”’ note to Vie de Seint Auban, |. 680, ed. Atkinson; q. v. |
—L. boia, pl. a collar for the neck, orig. made of leather. Sometimes
derived from L, bds, an ox, and said to have meant orig. ‘a collar made
of leather ;’ like Gk. Boevs, Béecos from Bods. QJ A buoy is so called
because chained to its place, like a clog chained to a prisoner’s leg.
Cf. ‘In presoune, fetterit with boyis, sittand;’ Barbour’s Bruce, ed.
Skeat, x. 763. The mod. F. bouée, a buoy, is a modification of MF.
boyée, ‘a boy,’ in Palsgrave, and means ‘chained down,’ being the f. pp.
of a verb boier, to chain. Der. buoy-ant (Span. boyante); buoy-anc-y.

BUR, BURDOCK;; see Burr.

BURBOT, a fish of the genus Lota. (F.—L.—Gk.) The pl. borbottus
occurs in Relig. Antique, i. 85 (ab. 1475). — F. bourbotfe (also barbote),
—F. bourbetter, ‘to wallow in mud;’ Cot.—F. bourbe, mud. = Late L.
borba, mud (Ducange).— Gk. BépBopos, mud.

BURDEN (1), BURTHEN, a load carried. (E.) ME. birpene,
Hayelok, 807; altered to birden by Norman influence; spelt birdin
in Cursor Mundi, 6830 (Cotton MS.). AS. byrden, a load (Grein).
+OSax, burdinnia. Teut. type *burthinnja, extension of *bur-th- with
suffix -innja. Allied to Icel. byrdr, byrdi; Swed. bérda; Dan. byrde;
Goth. baurthei; OHG, burdi, burdin; MHG. and G, biirde. All from
Teut. *bur-, weak grade of *ber-an-, to bear; with varying suffixes.
‘Further allied to Gk. pépros, a burden.—4/BHER, to bear. See
Bear. Der. burden-some.

BURDEN (2), the refrain ofa song. (F.—Late L.) The same word
-as-bourdon, the drone of a bagpipe or the bass in music. ME. burdoun,


BURIAL


Chaucer, Prol. 673.—F. bourdon, ‘a drone or dorre-bee; also, the
humming or buzzing of bees; also, the drone of a bagpipe ;’ Cot. =
Late L. burddnem, acc. of burdo, a drone or non-working bee, which
is probably an imitative word, from the buzzing sound made by the
insect; bur- being another form of buzz, q.v.; cf. Lowl. Sc. birr, to
whiz. The ME. bourdon also means a pilgrim’s staff, which is
another meaning of the F. bourdox. The Late L, burdo also means
(1) anass, mule, (2) a long organ-pipe. Diez thinks the ‘ organ-pipe”
was so named from resembling a ‘staff,’ which he derives from burdo
in the sense of ‘mule.’ But burdo, an ass, may be a distinct word. °

BURDOCK ; see Burr. :

BUREAU, an office for business. (F.—L.—Gk.?) Used by Swift
and Burke; see Richardson.—F. bureau, a desk, writing-table, so
called because covered with baize. Cotgrave has: ‘ Bureau, a thick
and course cloath, of a brown russet or darke-mingled colour; also,
the table that’s within a court of audit or of audience (belike, because
it is usually covered with a carpet of that cloth) ; also the court itself.’
And.see Brachet, who quotes from Boileau, vétu de simple bureau. —
OF. burel, coarse woollen stuff, russet-coloured. = OF. buire (F. bure),
reddish-brown.—L. burrus, fiery-red (Fick, ii. 154).<Gk. muppés,
flame-coloured.—Gk. wip, fire. See Fire. f Chaucer has ‘bore
men,’ i.e. men roughly clad, men of small account (C.T. B 3145) ;
where borel is from the OF. burel above. Der. bureau-cracy; see
Aristocracy. : 58s :

BURGANET, BURGONET, a helmet. (F.—Late L.) See
Shak. Ant. and Cleop. i. 5. 24.—F. bourguignotte,‘a Burganet, Hufkin,
or Spanish Murrion’ [morion, helmet]; Cot. So called because first
used by the Burgundians. =F. Bourgogne, Burgundy. = Late L. Bur-
gundia; cf. ‘Bourguignon, a Burgonian, one of Burgundy ;’ Cot. B. So,
in Spanish, we have borgovtofa, a sort of helmet; a la Burgofiota, after
the Burgundy fashion ; Borgo#a, Burgundy wine. And, in Italian,
borgognone, borgognotta, a burganet, helmet.

BURGEON, a bud; to bud. (F.— Teut.) ME. borioune (printed
borjoune),a bud; Arthur and Merlin, p.65 (Halliwell’s Dict.) ; burion
(printed burjon), Cursor Mundi, 10735. ‘Gramino, to borioune (printed
borionne) or kyrnell;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 276, note 3.—F. bourgeon,
a young bud; Cot.; OF. borion =borjon (Hatzfeld). B. Diez cites a
shorter form in the Languedoc boure, a bud, the eye of a shoot (mod.
Prov. bourro, bouro, a bud) ; and he supposes the word to have been
formed from the. MHG. buren, OHG. purjan, to raise, pushup. Ifso,
we are at once led to MHG. bor, OHG. por, an elevation, whence is
formed the word in-por, upwards, in common use as G. empor; cf. G.
emporung’, an insurrection, i.e. a breaking forth. Allied to Du. beuren,
to lift up. From Teut. *bur-, weak grade of *beran-, to bear.

BURGESS, a citizen. (F.—-MHG.) ME. burgeys, Chaucer, Prol.
369; Havelok, 1328; pl.burgeises, Ancren Riwle, p.168.—OF.burgeis,
acitizen. — Late L. burgensis, adj., belonging to a city. — Late L. burgus,
a small fort (Vegetius).— MHG. burc, a fort (G. burg); cognate with
E. borough. See Borough.

BURGHER, a citizen. (Du.) In Gascoigne, Fruites of Warre,
st. 14.—Du. burger, a citizen.— Du. burg, a city; cognate with E.
borough. See Borough.

BURGLAR, a housebreaker, thief. (AF.—E.) Dogberry mis-
uses burglary, Much Ado, iv. 2.52. Florio [ed. 1680, not in ed. 1611]
interprets Ital. grancelli by ‘roguing beggars, bourglairs.’ Burglar is
an AF. law term; spelt burger in Fitzherbert’s Graunde Abridgement,
268 b} burglour in a tr. of Fitzherbert’s New Bk. Justyces, 125 b. The
Late L. forms are burgulator, burglator, burgitor, all with the sense of
house-breaker. All are founded on AS. burh, a borough, whence ME.
bur gh-breche, ‘breach of a borough. See N.E.D, Der. burglar-y,
burglar-i-ous.

BURGOMASTER, a chief magistrate of a town. (Du.) In
1 Hen. IV, ii. 1.84. ‘Euery of the foresayd cities sent one of their
bur gomasters vnto the towne of Hage in Holland;’ Hakluyt, Voyages,
i. 157.— Du. burgemeester, a burgomaster; whence it has been cor-
rupted by assimilating burge- to burgo-, for Late L. burgus, a town
(Latinised form of borough or burgh), whilst meester is spelt in the E.
fashion. Du. burg, a borough, cognate with E. borough, q.v.; and
meester, a master (OF. meistre), for which see Master, ;

BURGONET, a helmet; see Burganet.

BURIAL, a grave; the act of burying. (E.) ME, buriel, a graves
Trevisa, ii. 27 ; biriel,a tomb, Wycl., Matt. xxvii. 60. But the form is
corrupt; the older Eng. has buriels, which is a singular, not a plural
substantive, in spite ofits apparent plural form. ‘Beryels, sepulchrum ;?
Wright’s Vocab. i. 178. ‘An buryels,’ i.e. a tomb ; Rob. of Glouc.,
p- 204; l. 4184. AS. byrgels, a sepulchre; Gen. xxiii. 9; the com-
moner form being byrgen, Gen. xxiii. 3. Formed, with suffix -els, from
AS. byrg-an,to bury. See Bury. 4 Other examples of the suffix -els
or -else occur in AS.; e.g. fetels, a bag, Josh. ix. 4; rédelse, a riddle,
Numb. xii. 8. The suffix -al in E. buri-al is due to association with
Suner-al, 8c... ; fe pes d i


- BURIN


> BURIN, an engraver’s tool. (F.—Ital.—G.) In Bailey, vol. ii.
(1731). Borrowed from F. burin; a word borrowed from Ital. borino
(Brachet). Probably formed from MHG. boren (OHG. pordn, G.
bohren), to bore; cognate with E. bore. See Bore (1).

BURKE, to murder by suffocation, to stifle. (E.) From the name
of Burke, an Irishman who committed murders by suffocation; exe-
cuted at Edinburgh, Jan. 28, 1829. The name Burke (L. de Burgo)
is due to an AF. pronunciation of AS. burh, a borough.

BURL, to pick knots and loose threads from cloth; in cloth-making.
(F.—Late L.) To burl is to pick off burls or knots in cloth, the word
being properly a sb. Halliwell has: ‘ Bure, a knot, or bump; see
Topsell’s Hist. Beasts, p. 250 [220, ed. 1658]. Also, to take away the
knots orimpure parts from wool or cloth. “‘ Desquamare vestes, to burle
clothe;” Elyot. Cf. Herrick’s Works, ii. 15.’ ME. burle, a knot in
cloth; see Prompt. Parv. p.56.—OF, bourle, a tuft of wool, dimin. of
bourre (Godefroy); cf. Prov. F. bouril, bourril, a flock or end of thread
which disfigures cloth, cited by Mr. Wedgwood as a Languedoc word;
spelt bourri, bourril in Mistral. =F. bourre,expl. by Cotgrave as ‘flocks,
or locks of wool, hair, &c. serving to stuff saddles, balls, and such like
things.’ = Late L. burra, a woollen pad (Ducange); cf. L. burre, trifles;
Late L. reburrus, rough.

BURLESQUE, comic, ironical. (F.—Ital.—L.) Dryden
speaks of ‘the dull burlesque ;? Art of Poetry, canto i. 1. 81. It is
properly an adjective, as in Blount’s Gloss. =F, burlesque, introd. in
16th cent. from the Ital. (Brachet).—Ital. burlesco, ludicrous. = Ital.
burla, a trick, waggery, fun, banter. B. Diez suggests that burla is a
dimin. from L. burra, used by Ausonius in the sense of a jest, though
the proper sense is rough hair. This supposition seems to explain
also the Span. bor/a, a tassel, tuft, as compared with Span. borra,
goat’s hair. See Burl.

BURLY, large, corpulent, huge. (E.) ME. burely, Perceval, 269 ;
borlic, large, ample, Bestiary, 605 ; burliche, Morte Arthur, ed. Brock,
586, 2190. The same as Shetland doorly, stout ; Prov. E. bowerly,
comely, well made, stout. Cf.‘ great and bowerly images,’ in Udall’s
tr. of Erasmus’ Apophthegmes (1542), p. 184 b. This shows clearly
that the AS. form must have been *bar-lic, in which the « was
shortened before r/, as in mod. E. Dunstan, AS. Diin-stin. Thus the
orig. sense was ‘suitable for a bower’ or lady’s chamber; hence
handsome, goodly, &c. Cf. ME. burmaiden, a‘ bower-maid.’ (Athe-
nzum, Mar. 24, 1894, p. 250; Notes on E. Etym. p. 26.) See
Bower.

BURN (1), toset on fire. (E.) ME. bernen, Ancren Riwle, p. 306;
allied to brennen, Chaucer, C. T. 2333 (A 2331). There are two
types. a. intrans. AS. byrnan, to burn; Grein, i. 153; also beornan,
p- 109; a strong verb, pt. t. bearn, bran, pp. bornen.4+Olcel. brinna ;
Goth. brinnan ; Teut. type *brenn-an-; cf. AS. bryn-e, flame. . trans.
AS, bernan, weak verb (Grein, i. 77).4-Icel. brenna, Dan. brende,
Swed. branna ; G. brennen; Teut. type *brannjan-, causal of the former.

BURN (2), a brook. See Bourn (2).

BURNET, a plant. (F.-OHG.) A name given chiefly to the
Poterium Sanguisorba and Sanguisorba officinalis; see E.D.S. Plant-
Names, and Prior. Prior says the name was given to the Poterium
because of its brown flowers. The flowers of the Sanguisorba are of
a deep purple-brown colour. The word occurs in MS. Sloane 2457,
fol. 6 (see Halliwell) as synonymous with pimpernel, but Mr. Britten
remarks that the poterium is meant. It also occurs in Late L. as
burneta, Relig. Antiq. i. 37, so that it is doubtless French. Cf. ME.
burnet, dark brown; O. E. Hom. ii. 163. Also AF. burnete, burnet
(Alphita). OF. brunete, given by Godefroy as the name of a flower,
now unknown; but it is clearly our burnet. Also spelt brunette, and
the same word with OF. brunette, also burnette, a kind of dark brown
cloth, also a brunette. See further under Brunette.

BURNISH, to polish. (F.-OHG.) Shak. has burnished,
Merch. Ven. ii. 1.2; ME. burnist, Gawain and Grene Knight, ed.
Morris, 212; cf. burned, Chaucer, C. T. 1985 (A 1983).—OF.
burnir, brunir, to embrown, to polish; pres. pt. burnis-ant (whence
the E. suffix -ish). —OHG. briinen (<*brunjan), to embrown, also to
make bright, to polish. —OHG. briin, brown; cognate with AS. brin,
brown. See Brown. Der. burnish-er.

BURNOUSE, an upper cloak worn by Arabs. (F.—Arab.) In
G. Eliot, Daniel Deronda, ch. xi. Dryden describes Almeyda as
having ‘ her face veiled with a barnus;’ Don Sebastian, A. i.—F.
burnous.=— Arab. burnus, a kind of high-crowned cap, worn formerly
in Barbary and Spain; whence Span. albornoz, a kind of cloak with
a hood; Rich. Dict. p. 265; Devic.

BURR, BUR, a rough envelope of the seeds of plants, as in the
burdock. (E.) ME. burre, tr. by ‘lappa, glis;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 56;
cf. borre, a hoarseness or roughness in the throat, P. Plowman, C. xx.
306. In Cockayne’s A. S. Leechdoms, iii. 316, we find: ‘Burr, pl.
burres, burr, burrs, Arctium lappa; Gl. Rawlinson, c. 6073 Gl.
Sloane, 5.’ NFriesic burre, borre, a burr. -++ Swed. borre, 2 sea-


BUSKIN 81


hedgehog, sea-urchin; Zardborre, a burdock; Dan. borre, burdock.
From Teut. base *burz-, for *burs-, weak grade of Teut. root *bers-,
to bristle. See Bristle. Der. burr (or perhaps of imitative origin),
a roughness in the throat, hoarseness ; bur-dock.

BURROW, a shelter for rabbits. (E.) ME. borwgh, a den, cave,
lurking-place; ‘ Fast byside the borwgh there the barn was inne’?=
close beside the burrow where the child was; William of Palerne,
1.9. Inthe Prompt. Parv. p. 56, we find: ‘ Burwhe, burwth [burwch?]
burwe, burrowe, town; burgus. Thus burrow is a mere variation of
borough. B. The provincial Eng. burrow, a shelter, is the same word;
from burg-, weak grade of AS. beorgan, to protect. See Borough.
Der. burrow, verb.

BURSAR, a purse-keeper, treasurer. (Late L.—Gk.) Wood, in
his Athenze Oxonienses, says that Hales was ‘bursar of his college’
(R.). The pl. bursers is in Harrison, Descr. of England, b. ii. ch. 3;
ed. Furnivall, p. 82.— Late L. bursarius, a treasurer. = Late L. bursa,
a purse, with suffix -drius, denoting the agent. = Gk. Bupaa, a hide,
skin; of which purses were made. See Purse. Der. bursar-ship.

BURST, to break asunder, break forth. (E.) ME. bersten, bresten,
Chaucer, C. T. 1982 (A 1980) ; P. Plowman, A. vii. 165. AS. berstan,
pt. t. berst, pp. borsten; Grein, i. 92.4-Du. bersten, to burst asunder;
Icel. bresta; Swed. brista ; Dan. briste; OHG. préstan, MHG. bresten
(G. bersten).4+Gael. bris, to break; Irish brisaim, Olrish briss-im,
I break. Teut. type *brest-an-, pt. t. *brast.

BURTHEN;; see Burden (1).

BURY (1), to hide in the ground, to inter. (E.) ME. buryen,
P. Plowman, B, xi. 66. AS. byrgan, byrigan, Grein, i. 152; from
*burg-, weak grade of AS. beorgan, to protect, to hide; for which
see Borough. Der. bduri-al, q.v.

BURY (2), a town; asin Canterbury. (E.) A variant of borough,
due to the peculiar declension of AS. burh, which changes to the form
byrig in the dat. sing., after the prep. e¢, at. See Borough.

BUS, a shortened form of omnibus (ab. 1832). (L.) The pl.
omnibtisses, with the third syllable more stressed than at present, was
shortened to bdisses ; whence the sing. buss or bus. See Omnibus.

BUSH (1), a thicket. (Late L.) a Bush answers to an AS.
*bysc, whence Warde-busc, wibdi-busce, Birch, Cart. Sax. iii. 638, i. 35;
cf. Bissey, Bussey, old forms of Bushey, Herts. ME. bush, Chaucer,
C. T. 1519 (A 1517); busch, busk, P. Plowman, B. xi. 336; busk, Will.
of Palerne, 3069; Gen. and Exodus, 2779. B. The form busk is of
Scand. origin; cf. Dan. busk, a bush, shrub; Swed. buske, a bush.
Cf. also Du. bosch, a wood, forest; OHG. buse (G. busch). All from
Late L. boscus, a bush; a word of unknown origin ; whence also Ital.
bosco, F. bois. Boscus occurs in the Laws of Cnut, De Foresta, § 28.
Der. bush-y, bush-i-ness.

BUSH (2), the metal box in which an axle of a machine works.
(Dutch—L.—Gk.) Technical. Miss Jackson (Shropsh. Word-book)
quotes ‘one paire of bushes’ from an inventory of 1625.—MDu.
busse; Du. bus, a box; here the equivalent of the E. box, which is
similarly used. — Late L. buxis, a box.=—Gk. mufis, a box. = Gk. mvéos,
box-wood, box-tree. See Box (1). Doublet, pyx,

BUSHEL, a measure. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME, bushel, Chaucer,
C. T. 4091 (A 4093) ; Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 331, 1. 165, p.
341, 1. 393 (ab. 1330).—AF. bussel; Britton, i. 189; OF. boissel ;
Burguy, s. ve boiste; Godefroy, Supp. = Late L. boissellus, buscellus, a.
bushel ; also spelt buste//us. = Late L. buxida (>OF. boiste, F. boite),
the acc. case of buxis, a box.— Gk. mugis, a box. See above.

BUSK (1), to get oneself ready. (Scand.) ME. buske, busken,
P. Plowman, B. ix. 133 ; Cursor Mundi, 11585.—Icel. buask, to get
oneself ready ; see Cleasby and Vigfusson’s Icel. Dict. pp. 87, col. 1,
and 88, col. 1; Dasent, Burnt Njal, pref. xvi, note. It stands for
bita-sk, where bia is to prepare, and -sk is for sik (cf. G. sich), oneself.
The nent. sense of bia is to live, dwell ; from 4/ BHEU, to be. See
Boor, and cf. Bask.

BUSK (2), a support for a woman’s stays. (F.) Busk now means
a piece of whalebone or stiffening for the front of a pair of stays;
but was originally applied to the whole of the stays. —MF. busque ;
Cotgrave has: ‘ Busque, ...a buske, or buste;’ mod. F, busc. Of
uncertain origin; cf. also MF. buc, ‘a buske, plated body, or other
quilted thing, worn to make, or keep, the body straight ;’ Cot. Cf.
¥’. buse in Supp. to Godefroy.

BUSKIN, a kind of legging. (F.—Ital.—L.—Gk.) Shak. has
buskin’d, Mids. Nt. Dr.ii. 1. 71. Cotgrave has: ‘ Brodequin, a buskin.’
Palsgrave has: ‘ Buskyng, brodequin ;’ and (at p. 907, col. 3), we
find: ‘The buskyns, des brouseguins ;’ among the articles of women’s
attire. =OF. bouseguin, occurring in 1483 (Godefroy, Supp., s. v-
brodequin), also brousequin, brosequin, brosquin (id.). [The form brode-
quin may have arisen from confusion with F. broder, OF. brosdcr
(Hatzfeld).] Origin disputed; but zo¢ from Dutch, the MDu. brose-
ken (Sewel) having been borrowed from F. (Franck). Perhaps from
Mital. borzachino, pl. borzachini, ‘ buskins, fine bootes,’ Florio; who

G


82 ~ BUSS:


also gives borzachinetti, ‘little buskins, little cheuerell [i.e. kid]


purses,’ The last sense suggests a possible derivation from MItal.
borza, variant of borsa, a purse, a bag (F. bourse) ; see Purse. Hence
we might also derive Span. borcegui, a buskin, the x reappearing in
borceguin-ero, a buskin-maker. @ The Ital. borsa (like MF. bourse)
may have had the sense of leather case; cf. Gk. Bupoa, a hide. Cf.
‘ij, tunicam de buskyns, et i. togam viridem;’ York Wills (1471);
iii. 188.

BUSS (1), a kiss; to kiss. (E.) Used by Shak. K. John, iii. 4.
35. Thesb. busse is inSpenser, F. Q. iii. 10. 46, Buss is of imitative
origin; cf. Lith. buez-oti, to kiss; Bavarian bussen, to kiss; Schmeller,
Webster refers to Luther as an authority for bus in the sense of a kiss;
cf. Swed. dial. pussa, to kiss; puss, a kiss (Rietz). Also Span. buz,
akiss; Gael. bus, W. bus, mouth, lip, snout. 4 In ME., the form
is bass, Cf. ‘Thus they kiss and bass;’ Calisto and Melibcea, in Old
Plays, ed. Hazlitt, i. 74; basse, a kiss, Court of Love, 1. 797 ; ‘I basse
or kysse a person;’ Palsgrave. This is from F, baiser, to kiss; or
from L. basiare, to kiss, basium, a kiss.

BUSS (2), a herring-boat. (F.) In Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Lang-
toft, pp. 149, 153, 158, 169.—OF, busse, buse, buce, a sort of barge;
cf. also Du. buis, a herring-boat ; Late L. bussa, a kind of a larger
boat. In the A.S. Chron, an. 1066, we find butse-carlas, barge-men.
The origin of the word is unknown.

BUST, the upper part of the human figure, (F.—Ital.) Used by
Cotgrave; who explains buste by ‘a bust, the... quilted body of
a doublet; also, the whole bulk or body of a man from his face to
his middle.’ = F. buste, introduced in 16th century from Ital. (Brachet).
=Ital. busto, bust, human body, stays; cf. bustino, bodice, corset,
slight stays. — Late L. bustum, the trunk of the body, the body with-
out the head. f. Etym. uncertain. ‘Diez connects it with Late L.
busta, a small box, from L. acc. buxida; see Box (2). Compare the
E. names chest and trunk. Others connect it with Late L. busta, or


busca, a log of wood, OF. busche, F. biiche, allied to Late L. boscus; |


for which see Bush (1). See Korting, §§ 1602, 1666.

BUSTARD, a kind of bird. (F.—L.) ‘A bustard, buteo, picus;’
Levins, 30. 12. Used by Cotgrave, who has: ‘ Bistarde, a bustard,’
Spelt bustarde, Book of St. Alban’s, fol. d 3, back. [Sherwood’s
Eng. and Fr. Dictionary, appended to Cotgrave, has : ‘ A bustard, or
bistard, bistard, outarde, houtarde, oustarde, houstarde, hostarde ;’
whence houstarde has been copied into Todd’s Johnson as boustarde !]
We thus see that it is a corruption of OF. bistarde, possibly due to
confusion with the OF. variant oustarde.—L. auis tarda, a slow bird,
Pliny has: ‘proximze iis sunt, quas Hispania aves tardas appellat,
Grecia wridas ;’ Nat. Hist.x. 22. £8. Thus bistarde is for avis-tarde
with the a dropped ; so in Portuguese the bird is called both abetarda
and betarda. ‘The mod. F. has made avis tarda into outarde; cf. the
form oustarde quoted above; also Prov. austarda, Span. avutarda,
Ital. ottarda. {J Thus Diez, who is clearly right. At the same time,
the L. avis tarda is an absurd name, as the bird is very swift. It
looks like a popular perversion of Gk. wri5-, stem of wris (above),
which is a true Gk. word.

BUSTLE (1), to stir about quickly, to scurry. (Scand.) Shak,
has bustle, to be active, Rich. III, i, 1. 152. ‘ Bustelyng forth as
bestes,’ wandering blindly like beasts; Piers Plowman, A. vi. 4. A
frequentative ; cf. Icel. bustla, to splash about as a fish. = Norw. busta,
to be violent ; busa, to rush forward headlong (Ross). Cf. EFries.
basen, to be noisy or violent ; Swed. busa pd en, to rush upon one.
Also Low G. buus, bounce! biistern, to wander about ; er biistert wat
herum, he bustles about (Bremen); Swed. bésta, to bustle, work
(Bjorkman); Low G. (Kurhessen) bosseln, busseln, to bustle about
(Vilmar).

BUSTLE (2), a pad beneath a woman’s skirt. (Scand.) Probably
from buskle, vb., in its earliest sense ‘to prepare, equip;’ so that the
sense is ‘equipment.’ Cf, busk, to attire, accoutre, dress, of which it is
the frequentative. The N.E.D. quotes—‘ Buskel thyself [prepare
thyself] and make thee bowne’ [ready]; Bradford, Wks., p. 445.

BUSY, active. (E.) ME. bisy, Chaucer, Prol. 321. AS. disig,
bysig, busy, Grein, i. 153 ; cf. bisgu, bysgu, labour, bisgian, to employ,
fatigue.4+Du. bezig, busy, active ; bezigheid, business, occupation ;
bezigen, to use, employ; Low G. besich (Liibben) ; EFries. basig,
busy. Cf. Norw. base, to toil (Larsen). Der. busi-ness, busy-body,
@ We find ONorthumb. bisignesse, solicitude, anxiety, in the Lindis-
farne MS.; Table of Contents of St. Matthew, no. xx; ed. Skeat,
p. 17,1. 10. The AS. form is bisig rather than bysig.

BUT (1), adv., prep. and conj., except. (E.) ME. bute, Havelok,
85; biten, Layamon, |. 23. AS. biitan, conj. except: prep. besides,
without; contr. from be-utan, Grein, i. 150. The full form dbittan is
frequently found in the Heliand, e.g. in 1. 2188; and even bititan
that, unless, 1. 2775. B. Be=by; atan=outward, outside; bistan=
‘by the outside,’ and so ‘ beyond,’ ‘except.’ The form di/an is ad-
verbial ; from a, out.4-Du. bziten, except.


q All the uses. of but |


BUTTON


are from the same source; the distinction attempted by Horne
Tooke is unfounded. The form be for by is also seen in the word
be-yond, a word of similar formation. See further under Out.

BUT (2), tostrike; a but-end; acask. See Butt (1) and Butt (2).

BUTCHER, a slaughterer of animals. (F.—OHG.) ME. bocher,
P. Plowman, B. prol. 218; King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1. 2832. —
OF, bocher, originally one who kills he-goats.— OF. boc (F. bouc), a
he-goat,—OHG, bok (G. bock), a he-goat; allied to E, buck. See
Buck, Der, butcher, verb; butcher-y.

BUTLER, one who attends to bottles. (F.—Late L.) ME.
boteler, botler, Wyclif, Gen. xl. 1, 2 ; boteler (3 syll.), Chaucer, C. T.
15140 (B 4324).—AF. butuiller, a butler, Vie de St. Auban, ed.
Atkinson, 1. 677 ; and see note. AF. butuille, a bottle ; OF. doezlle.
See Bottle. Der. buttery, a corrupted word; q. v.

BUTT (1), a push, a thrust; to thrust. (F.—O. LowG.) [The
senses of the sb, may be referred back to the verb, just as the F. bout
depends on bowzer (Brachet).] ME. butten, to push, strike, Ormulum,
1. 2810; Havelok, 1916, 2322.—OF. bofer, to push, butt, thrust,
strike ; of which the AF. form was buter, Vie de Saint Auban, 534.
—OFrankish *bdtan, corresponding to MDu. booten, to beat,
MHG. bézen, to strike, beat ; cognate with AS. béatan. See Beat.
Der. In the sense of ‘a butt to shoot at,’ or ‘a rising ground, a knoll,’
we have borrowed the F. butte, which see in Cotgrave and Hatzfeld,
Cf. F. but, a mark; buter, to strike ; from the same root as before.

BUTT (2), a large barrel. (F.—Late L.) In Levins, 195. 13. ‘A
Butte of Malmesey ;’ Sir T. More, Hist. Rich, III. § 4. Not E. [The
AS. byt (Voc. 123. 29), occurring in the pl. byta in Matt, ix. 17, and
the dat. sing. bytte, Psalm xxxii, 7, produced an ME. bitte, for which
see bit (3), sb., in N.E.D.; cf. Icel. bytta, a pail, a small tub.] Our
modern word is really French. OF, boute; F. botte, which Cotgrave
explains as ‘ the vessel which we calla butt.’ Cf. also OF. bote, in the
Supp. to Godefroy. — Late L. butis, buttis,a cask. See Bottle.

BUTT (3), athick end, as ofa gun. (E.) Prob. an E. word, though
not found early; see Buttock. ME. but; ‘the but of his spere ;?
Malory, Morte Arthur, bk. x. ch. 2; leaf 208,1.25. Cf. EFries. but,
NFries. butt, thick, stumpy. Also Icel. dbuttr, short, biitr, a log;
Dan. but, Swed. butt, stumpy, surly ; Low G. butt, stump, butt, a thick
end; Du. bof, blunt, dull; prov. G, butzig, stumpy; Swed. but,
MHG. buize, a lump, clod.

BUTT (4), a kind of flat fish, (E.) ME. butte, Havelok, 759.
EFries. but, Allied to Swed. butta, aturbot; MDan. butte, Low G,
butt, Du. bot, a butt, flounder. Prob. allied to Butt (3).

BUTTER, a substance obtained from milk by churning. (L.—
Gk.) ME, botere, Wyclif, Gen. xviii. 8; butere, Havelok, 643. AS.
butere (Bosworth) ; a borrowed word. =—L. bityrum.—Gk. Bovrupor ;
as if from Bov-, for Bods, an ox, and Tupds, cheese; but it is perhaps of
Scythian origin ; cf. Herodotus, iv. 2. @ The similarity of E. butter
to G. butter is simply due to the word being borrowed, not native.
Der. butter-cup; also butter-fly, q.v.

BUTTERFLY, an insect. (Hybrid; Gk. and E.) AS. buttor-
fléoge, in AElfric’s Glossary, ed. Somner, Nomina Insectorum. = AS,
buter-, butter; and fizoge, a fly.4-Du. botervlieg ; G. butterfliege,
a butterfly; cf. butter-vogel (butter-fowl, i.e. butter-bird), a large


white moth. B. It has amused many to devise guesses to explain the .


name. Kilian gives a M. Du. name of the insect as boter-schijte,
showing that its excrement was regarded as resembling butter; and
this guess is better than others in so far as it rests on some evidence.
It was also a popular belief that butterflies stole milk and cream; cf,
G. molken-dieb, milk-thief, butterfly, and see Schmetterling in Kluge.

BUTTERY, a place for provisions, esp. liquors. (F.—Late L.)
Shak, has buttery, Tam. Shrew, Ind. i. 102; ‘ bring your hand to the
buttery-bar, and let it drink ;’ Tw. Night, i. 3. 74. [The principal
thing given out at the buttery-bar was (and is) beer; the buttery-bar is
a small ledge on the top of the half-door (or buttery-hatch) on which
to rest tankards. But as butter was (and is) also kept in butéertes, the
word was easily corrupted into its present form.] B. It is, however,
from ME. boterye (Prompt. Parv.), shortened from ME, botelerie, i.e.
a builery, or place for bottles. In Rob. of Glouc. p. 191, we read that
‘Bedwer the boteler’ (i.e, Bedivere the butler) took some men to
serve in ‘the botelery.? So, too, we find: ‘ Hec botelaria, botelary ;’
Voc. 670. 16.—OF. boteillerie (Supp. to Godefroy); F. bowteillerie,
‘a cupboord, or table to set bottles on; also, a cupboord or house to
keep bottles in ;’ Cotgrave.— OF. bofeille, a bottle. See Bottle.

BUTTOCK, the rump. (E.) Chaucer has buttok, C. T. 3801 (A
3803). It is also spelt bottoke, and botok; Voc. 677.17; 750.7. It is
adimin. of bué¢, an end; with the E. suffix -ock, properly expressing
diminution, as in budl-ock. See Butt (3).

BUTTON, a small round knob. (F.—O. Low G.?) ME. boton,
P. Plowman, B. xv. 121; bofoun, Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 239
(ab. 1325); corrupted to bothum, a bud, Romaunt. of the Rose,
1, 1721.— OF, boton, a bud, a button; F. bouton, ‘a button, a bud;’


BUTTRESS


Cot.— OF. boter, F. bouter, ‘to thrust, push forward; also, to bud ;’
Cot. See Butt (1). But Isuspect that OF, bouter, to bud, may
have been different in origin from OF, boter, bouter, to thrust ; and
may have been suggested by MHG. butte; for which see Bud.

BUTTRESS, a support; in architecture. (F.—LowG.) Bale uses
butrasse to mean a support; Apology, p.155. ME. boteras, Prompt.
Parv.; whence boterased, buttressed, P. Plowman, B. v. 598. Orig.
a pl. form, as if for *boterets, — OF. bouterez (with z=is), pl. of bouteret,
a prop, support (Godefroy). = OF, bouter, to thrust, push; see Butt
(1), Cotgrave also has: ‘ Boutant, m, a buttress, or shorepost,’ from
the same verb. Der. buttress, vb. ab

BUTTY, a companion or partner in any work. (F.—Low G.)
This is a proy. E. word, used in several dialects (Halliwell). A butty-
gang is ‘a gang of men to whom a portion of the work in the con-
struction of railways, &c., is let, the proceeds of the work ‘being
equally divided amongst them, something extra being allowed to the
head man ;’ Ogilvie’s Dict. I make a note here that the etymology
is clearly pointed out in Palsgrave, who gives: ‘ Boty-felowe, parsom-
ner, for which read parsonnier, i.e. partner. Just below he has:
*Boty, that man [read men] of warre take, butin.’ Hence boty-felowe
is booty-fellow, a partner or sharer in booty taken, and butty-gang is a
gang of men who share equally. The shortening of the vowel oo to
z is familiar to us in the words blood, ‘flood; the use of butty for
butty-fellow easily followed, when the etymology was lost sight of.
See Booty.

BUXOM, healthy; formerly, good-humoured, gracious; orig.
obedient. (E.) Shak. has buxom, lively, brisk, Hen. V, iii. 6. 27.
Gower has boxom, buxom, obedient, C. A. ii. 221 (bk. v. 1. 2807). In
the Ancren Riwle, p. 356, it is spelt buksum.— AS. bigan, to bow,
bend, whence a stem bih- (for bug-); with the suffix -swm, like, asin
E. win-some, i.e. joy-like, joyous ; see March’s A. S. Grammar, sect.
229. The actual word bihsum does not appear in A.S: (as far as we
know), but iscommon in Early English, occurring in O.E. Homilies,
i. 57 (ab. 1175); and there is no doubt about the etymology. Hence
the original sense is ‘pliable, obedient.’4-Du. buigzaam, flexible,
tractable, submissive; similarly formed from buigex, to bow, bend;
G. biegsam, flexible ; from biegen, to bend. See Bow (1).

BUY, to purchase. (E.) ME. buggen, biggen, beyen, byen; also
(S. Western) buyen, E. Eng. Poems, ed. Furnivall, p. 120, 1. 6;
whence the mod. E. spelling. The stem buy- is from byg-, a stem
occurring in the 3 p.s. present and in the imper. sing. of the A.S.
verb. See Sweet, N. E. Gr. § 1293. The ME. infin. is commonly
buggen, asin the Ancren Riwle, p. 362. AS. byegan, to buy, Grein, i.
151.4 Goth. bugjan, to buy; OSax. buggean. Root unknown, Der.
ME. abyen, whence abide(2). Der. buy-er.

BUZZ, to hum. (E.) Shak. has buzz, to hum, Merch. Ven. iii, 2.
182 ; also buzz, a whisper, K. Lear, i. 4. 348. Sir T. More speaks of
the buzzyng of bees; Works, p. 208 g. It is a directly imitative word;
and much the sameas the Lowland Sc. birr, to make a whirring noise,
used by Douglas, and occurring in Burns, Tam Samson’s Elegy,
st. 7. Cf. also Sc. bysse, to hiss like hot iron in water (Douglas’s
Virgil), and bizz, to hiss, Ferguson’s Poems, ii. 16. So also Ital.
buzzicare, to whisper, buzz, hum.

BUZZARD, an inferior kind of falcon, (F.—L.) Spelt bosarde in
the Romaunt of the Rose, 1. 4033; also busard, K. Alisaunder,
1. 3049.— OF. busard, ‘a buzzard ;’ Cotgrave. OF. buse, a buzzard,
with suffix -ard ; on which see N.E.D. B. The OF. buse (Supp. to
Godefroy) represents a Low L. type *butia, representing L. buteo, used
by Pliny for a sparrow-hawk. Cf. Gascon busoc, a buzzard (Mon-
caut); mod. Prov. buso, busac, Limousin busard (Mistral). The
buzzard still retains its old Latin name; the common buzzard is
Buteo vulgaris,

BY, beside, near; by means of, &c. (E.) ME. bi, AS. bi, big;
Grein, i. 121, 122. [The form big even appears in composition, as
in big-leofa, sustenance, something to live by; but the usual form in
composition is be, as in beset.) -- OFries. and OSax. bi; Du. dij;
OHG. bi, pt; MHG. bi; G. bei; Goth. bi. Related to L. am-bi-,
Gk. du-gi, Skt. a-bhi. Der. by-name, by-word, by-way. (But not
by-law, q.v.) From by, prep. (as in by twos) came the phr. by and by,
in order, hence, directly, soon, in due course; also bye, as m cricket.

BY-LAW, a law affecting a township. (Scand.) Often explained
as being derived from the prep. dy, as if the law were ‘a subordinate
law ;” a definition which suits late usages of the word, and probably
expresses a common mistake. Bacon has: ‘ bylaws, or ordinances of
corporations;’ Hen. VII, p. 215 (R.), or ed. Lumby, p. 196, 1. ro.
B. Blount, in his Law Dict., shows that the word was formerly
written birlaw or burlaw; and Jamieson, s. v. burlaw, shows that a
birlaw-court was one in which every proprietor of a freedom had
a vote, and was got up amongst neighbours. ‘Laws of burlaw ar
maid and determined be consent of neichtbors ;’ Skene (in Jamieson).
There were also burlaw-men, whose name was corrupted into barley-


CABOOSE 83


| men. = Icel. be-r, by-r, a village (gen. bejar, byjar, whence bir-); cf.


bajar-log, a town-law (Icel. Dict. s.v. ber); MSwed. bylag; from
by, a village, and Jag, law; Dan. bylov, municipal law; from by, a
town, and lov, law. ‘y. The Icel. ber or byr, a town, village, is allied
to bua, to dwell, co-radicate with AS, ban, to till, cultivate, whence
E. bower. See Bower. @ The prefix dy- in this word is identical
with the suffix -by so common in Eng. place-names, esp. in Yorkshire
and Lincolnshire, such as Whitby, Grimsby, Scrooby, Derby, The
ME. bi, a town, occurs in the Cursor Mundi, ed. Morris, pp. 1210, 1216,

YY RE, a cow-house. (E.) It is Lowland Scotch and North. E,
Jamieson quotes ‘ of bern [barn] or of byre,’ from Gawain and Gola-
gros, i. 3. The word is explained by AS, byre, a hut; Voc. 32. 11;
185.15. This is a derivative (with mutation of @ to y) from AS. bar,
a bower. The allied E. bower came to be restricted to the sense of a
‘lady’s chamber’ in most ME. writers, See Bower.


&


CAB (1), an abbreviation of cabriolet, q.v. (F.—Ital.—L.)

CAB (2), a Hebrew measure; 2 Kings, vi. 25. (Heb.) From Heb.
gab, the 18th part of an ephah, The lit. sense is ‘hollow’ or ‘concave;’
Concise Dict. of the Bible; s.v. Weights. Cf. Heb, gabab, to form
in the shape of a vault. See Alcove.

CABAL, a party of conspirators; also, a plot. (F.—Late L.—
Heb.) Ben Jonson uses it to mean ‘a secret:’ ‘ The measuring of the
temple; a cabal Found out but lately ;’ Staple of News, iii. 1. Bp.
Bull, vol. i. ser. 3, speaks of the ‘ancient caba/a or tradition ;’ here he
uses the Hebrew form. Dryden has: ‘When each, by curs’d cabals of
women, strove To draw th’ indulgent king to partial love;’ Aureng-
zebe, i. 1. 19. He also uses caballing, i.e. conspiring, as a present
participle; Art of Poetry, canto iv. 1. 972.—F. cabale, ‘the Jewes
Caball, or a hidden science of divine mysteries which, the Rabbies
affirme, was revealed and delivered together with the [divine] law ;’
Cotgrave.=—Late L. cabbala.—Heb. gabbalah, reception, mysterious
doctrine received ; from the verb gabal, to take or teceive; (in Piel)
gibbél, to adopt a doctrine. 4 The cabinet of 1671 was called the
cabal, because the initial letters of the names of its members formed
the word, viz. Clifford, Arlington, Buckingham, Ashley, Lauderdale ;
but the word was in use earlier, and this was a mere coincidence.
Der. cabal, verb; cabal-ist, a mystic, cabal-ist-ic.

CABBAGE (1), a vegetable with a large head. (F.—L.) In
Shak. Merry Wives, i. 1.124. Spelt cabages in Ben Jonson, The
Fox, ii. 1; cabbages in Holland’s Pliny, bk. xix. c. 4. ME. caboge,
caboche ; Two Cookery-Books, ed. Austin, pp. 6, 69.—F. (Picard)
caboche, lit.‘ great head;’ cf. Picard cabus, F . ‘choux cabus,a cabbidge ;’
Cot. He also gives ‘Cabusser, to cabbidge; to growto ahead.’ Formed,
with an augmentative suffix, from L. cap-ut, a head; cf. Ital. capocchia,
head of a nail, capoccia, a large head; also capuccio, a little head.
See Capital (1).

CABBAGE (2), to steal. (F.—Prov.—Late L.—L.) In Johnson’s
Dict. =F. cabasser, to put into a basket; see Cot. =F, cabas, a basket.
So also Norman F. cabasser, to steal, from cabas, deceit; and see Supp.
to Godefroy. = Prov. cabas.—Late L. cabatium, a basket (Ducange ;
an. 1243).—L. type *capaceum, for L. capdcevz, containing; see
Capacious. So Hatafeld.

CABER, a pole, spar. (C.—L.) ‘A cabyr or a spar;’ Douglas,
tr. of Virgil (cf. Ain. xii. 293).—Gael. cabar.—L. type *cafrio, a
rafter; Late L. capro; see Chevron. (Macbain.)

CABIN, a little room, a hut.: (F.—Prov.—Late L.) ME. caban,
cabane. ‘Caban, lytylle howse;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 57. ‘Creptest into
a caban;’ P. Plowman, A. iil. 184.—F. cabane.=Proy. cabana. =
Late L. capanna, a hut (Isidore). | The W. cabaz is from ME.
cabane. Der. cabin-et, from the French.

CABLE, astrong rope. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. cable, cabel,
kabel; pl. kablen, Layamon, i. 57; where the later text has cables. —
OF. cable (F. cable), given in Cotgrave; but it must have been in
early use, having found its way into Swedish, Danish, &c.— Late L.
caplum, a cable, in Isidore of Seville; also spelt capulum, Lit. a strong
(holding) rope; a halter (for cattle). —L. capere, to take hold of; cf.
L. capulus, a handle, haft, hilt of a sword. See Capable. f

CABOOSE, the cook’s cabin on board ship. (Dutch.) First given
by Falconer, in 1769. Sometimes spelt camboose, which is from the
F. form cambuse. Like many sea-terms, it is Dutch.—MDu. kabuys,
‘the cooking, or kitchin-roome in:a ship;’ Hexham (1658); Du.
kombuis, a cook’s room, caboose; or ‘the chimney in a ship,’ Sewel.
Hence also Dan. kabys, Swed. kabysa, a caboose. Of unknown origin;
perhaps short for *kaban-huys, ‘ cabin-house ;’ from MDnu, aban, a
cabin, and kuys, a house. This would also give cambuse.

G%


84, CABRIOLET


. CABRIOLET, a one-horse carriage, better known by the abbre-
viation cab. (F.—L.) Mere French.=F. cabriolet, a cab; dimin. of
cabriole, a caper, a leap of a goat; named from the supposed lightness
of the carriage. The older spelling of cabriole is capriole, used by
Montaigne (Brachet).—Ital. capriola, a caper, the leap of a kid. =
Ital. caprio, the wild-goat.=L. caprum, acc. of caper, a goat; cf.
L. caprea, a kind of wild she-goat. See Caper.  ‘Cabriolets were,
in honour of his Majesty’s birthday, introduced to the public (of
London] this morning;’ Gent. Maga. 1823, April 23; p. 463.
George IV (b. Aug. 12) kept his birthday on St. George’s day.

CACAO, the name of a tree. (Span.—Mexican.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674, we find: ‘Chocolate, a kind of compound drink,
which we have from the Indians; the principal ingredient is a fruit
called cacao, which is about the bigness of a great black fig. See a
Treatise of it, printed by Jo. Okes, 1640.’ ‘ [They] lade backe againe
the cacao ;? Hakluyt, Voy. iii. 457 (atbottom). Span. cacao. = Mexican
cacauatl, the name of the tree whence chocolate is made. See Notes on
E. Etym., p. 331. @ The cacao-tree, Theobroma cacao, is a totally
different tree from the cocoa-nut tree, though the accidental similarity
of the names has caused great confusion. See Cocoa.

- CACHALOT, a genus of whales, having teeth in the lower jaw.
(F.) Spelt cachelot in 1747.—F. cachalot (the same). Supposed to
be connected with Gascon cachaou, a large tooth (Moncaut). Mistral
compares the ending -alot with mod. Prov. alot, a kind of tunny.
@ Korting, § 2022, gives a different etymology, ultimately from L.
catulus, a whelp.

CACHINNATION, loud laughter. (L.) In Bishop Gauden’s
Anti-Baal-Berith, 1661, p. 68 (Todd’s Johnson). And in Cockeram
(1623). Borrowed from Latin, with the F. suffix -tion.—L. cachinna-
tidnem, acc. of cachinnatzo, loud laughter.—L. cachinnare, to laugh
aloud; an imitative word. The Gk. form is xaxa¢ev. See Cackle.

CACHUCHA, a lively Spanish dance. (Span.) Span. cachucha;
whence F., cachucha in Hatzfeld.

CACIQUE, CAZIQUE, a W. Indian prince or chief. (Span.
—W. Indian.) A name given to a chief of some W. Indian tribes.
In Minsheu, ed. 1627. First in R. Eden, Books on America, ed.
Arber, p. 223 (1555).—Span. cacigue, ‘an Indian prince;’ Minsheu,
Span. Dict. (1623). From the old language of Hayti; see Notes on
E. Etym., p. 346.

CACK, to goto stool. (L.). ME. cakken. ‘Cakken, or fyystyn,
caco;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 58. Found also in Dutch and Danish, but
all are borrowed from the Latin. =L. cacdre.4-Gk. xaxnév ; which
is from the sb. #axen, dung. Cf. W. cach, Olrish cacc, Skt. eakam, dung.

CACKULE, to make a noise likea goose. (E.) Inearly use. ‘The
hen...necon buten kakelen,’ the hen can only cackle; Ancren Riwle,
p- 66. A frequentative of a primitive cakken; ‘the goose may cakke’
(pr. calke); Polit. Poems, ed.Furnivall, p. 16. See Notes on E. Etym.
+Du. kakelen, to chatter, gabble; Swed. kackla, to cackle, gaggle;
Dan. kagle; G. gackeln, gakeln, gackern, to cackle, gaggle, chatter.
B. The termination -Je has a frequentative force. The stem cack-
(i.e. kak) is imitative, like quack; cf. gag- in prov. E. gaggle, to
cackle, and gob- or gab- in gobble, to make a noise like a turkey, and


gabble. Cf, AS. ceahhetan, to laugh loudly, Beda, v. 12; G. hichern,
to giggle. From the Teutonic base KAK, to laugh, cackle; Fick,
ili. 39. 4 Observe the three varieties of this imitative root, viz.


(1) KAK, as in cackle; (2) KIK, as in the nasalised chink in chin-
cough, i.e. kink-cough or chink-cough; and (3) KUK, as in cough
and chuckle. All refer to convulsive movements of the throat,

CACOETHES, an ill habit. (L.—Gk.) Chiefly in the phrase
cacoethes scribendi (Juvenal, Sat. vii. 52); cited by Addison, Spec-
tator, no. 582.—L. cacoéthes,— Gk. xaxénGes, an evil habit, neut. of
xaxonOns, ill-disposed.— Gk. xaxé-, for xakéds,evil; and 700s, charac-
ter, habit; see Ethic.

CACOPHONY, a harsh, disagreeable sound. (Gk.) ‘ Caco-
phonies of all kinds ;’ Pope, To Swift, April 2, 1733 (R.)—Gk. xaxo-
govia, a disagreeable sound.—Gk, xaxdpwvos, harsh. Gk. xaxd-,
for xaxds, bad; and ¢wy-n, sound, voice. Der. cacophonous; from
the Gk. adj. caxdpwvos directly.

CACTUS, a prickly plant. (L.—Gk.) In Topsell, Fourfooted
Beasts (1607), p. 102.—L. cactus,—Gk. xaxros, a prickly plant
found in Sicily.

CAD, a low fellow. (F.—Gascon.—Late L.—L.) Short for Sc.
cadie, an errand boy; also,a low fellow; Burns, Author’s Earnest Cry
and Prayer, st, 19. See Jamieson ; and Notes on E. Etym.; also caddie
in E. D. D:, which shows that caddie is for cadet. See Cadet.

CADAVEROUDUS, corpse-like. (L.) In Hammond’s Works, vol.
iy. p. 529; Sir T. Browne, Rel. Medici, i. § 38.—L. cadauerdsus,
corpse-like. = L. cadduer, a corpse.=L. cadere, to fall, fall as a dead
man. Similarly, Gk. m7@ya, a corpse, is connected with minrey,
to fall. See Cadence.

CADDIS, a kind of worsted lace or tape. (F.) In Winter's


CADUCOUS


Tale, iv. 4. 208. ME. cadas, ‘bombicinium ;’ Prompt. Parv.=AF..


cadace, Langtoft’s Chron., ii. 428; MF. cadarce, ‘the coursest part
of silke, whereof sleave is made;’ Cot.; also OF. cadis (Froissart,
in Godefroy), Cf. Span. cadarzo, coarse, entangled silk; Port.
cadarco, a coarse silk. Origin unknown; perhaps Eastern. Der.
caddis-worm; perhaps from the appearance of the case of the larva, ~

CADDY, a small box for holding tea. (Malay.) ‘The key of
the caddy;’ Letter from Cowper to Lady Hesketh, Jan. 19, 1793.
The sense has somewhat changed, and the spelling also. It properly
means ‘a packet of tea of a certain weight,’ and the better spelling
is catly. An original package of tea, less than a half-chest, is.
called in the trade a ‘‘ box,” *‘caddy,” or “ catty.” This latter is a
Malay word; ‘‘ kati, a catty or weight, equal to 14 1b. avoirdupois.’”
In many dictionaries, catty is described as the Chinese pound;’
R. W. W., in Notes and Queries, 3S. x. 323. At the same reference
I myself gave the following information. ‘The following curious
passage in a lately-published work is worth notice. ‘‘ The standard
currency of Borneo is brass guns. This is not a figure of speech, nor
do I mean small pistols, or blunderbusses, but real cannon, five to ten
feet long, and heavy in proportion. The metal is estimated at so
much a picul, and articles are bought and sold, and change given, by
means of this awkward coinage. The picul contains 100 catties, each
of which weighs about 1} English pounds. There is one advantage
about this currency; it is not easily stolen.”—F. Boyle, Adventures.
among the Dyaks, p. 100. To the word catties the author subjoins a
footnote as follows; ‘*Tea purchased in small quantities is frequently
enclosed in boxes containing one catty. I offer a diffident suggestion.
that this may possibly be the derivation of our familiar tea-caddy.”
I may add that the use of this weight is not confined to Borneo ; it.
is used also in China, and is (as I am informed) the only weight in
use in Japan.’= Malay katz, a catty, or weight of which one hundred
make a pikul of 133% pounds avoirdupois, and therefore equal to 21}
oz. or 1} pound; it contains 16 tail; Marsden’s Malay Dict. p. 253.
See Catty.

CADBH, a barrel or cask. (L.—Gk.—Heb.) ‘A cade of herrings ;
2 Hen. VI, iv, 2. 36. ‘Cade of herynge, or othyr lyke, cada, lacista;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 57.—L. cadus, a barrel, wine-vessel, cask; cf. F.
cade, app. a late word.=—Gk. #da60s, a pail, jar, cask, wine-vessel. —
Heb. kad, a pail (Prellwitz).

CADENCE, a falling; a fall of the voice. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘The
golden cadence of poesy;’ Shak. L. L. L. iv. 2. 126. ‘In ryme, or,
elles in cadence ;’? Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, ii. 115.—F. cadence, ‘a ca-
dence, a just falling, round going, of words;’ Cot.—Ital. cadenza. =
Late L. cadentia, a falling. —L. cadere (pres. part. cadens, gen. caden-
tis), to fall.4-Skt. gad, to fall. Der. from the same source ; cadent,
K, Lear, i. 4. 307; cadenza, Ital. form of F. cadence. Doublet,
chance, q. V.

CADET, a younger son, young military student. (F.—Gascon.—
Late L.—L.) ‘The cadet of an antient and noble family ;’ Wood's.
Athenze Oxonienses (R.). ‘The cadet of a very ancient family ;’
Tatler, no. 256 [not 265].—F. cadet, ‘a younger brother among
gentlemen;’ a Poitou word; Cot. The Gascon form is capdet (Hatz-
feld), corresponding to Prov. capdel, formed from Late L, capitellum,
‘a little head.’ The eldest son was called caput, the ‘head’ of the
family; the second, the capitellum, or ‘lesser head.’—L, caput, the
head. See Capital, Der. cad, q. v.; cadet-ship,

CADGER, an itinerant dealer, a hawker. (F.?) Henrysoun has.
cadgear, Moral Fables, p. 66 (N.E.D.) From ME. caggen, to bind,
to fasten, to carry a pack, to hawk; see Stratmann, N. E. D., and
E. D. D. Prob. from ME. cachen, to seize, fasten ; see Catch.

CADI, a judge. (Arab.) ‘The graunde Cady ;’ E. Webbe, Travels.
(1590), ed. Arber, p. 33.—Arab. gad?, qazi, a cadi or cazi, a judge,
civil, criminal, and ecclesiastic; Rich, Dict. p. 1109; Palmer, p. 464.
The third letter is 2, which Devic transliterates by d, B. Hence
was formed (by prefixing the Arab, article a/, and inserting 7) the
Span. alcalde, a judge, which appears occasionally in E. literature ;'
itis spelt alcade in An Eng. Garner, vi. 14 (ab. 1586). The inserted
1, says Devic, arose from an emphatic pronunciation of the Arabic’


Ue.

CADMIUM, a blueish white metal. (L.—Gk.) From cadmia,
cadmia.—= Gk. cadpia, cadpeia, calamine, cadmia ; lit. ‘Cadmean earth.’
Cadmea was the citadel of the Bceotian Thebes. ;

CADUCEUS, the herald’s wand of Mercury. (L.—Gk.) In Shak.
Troil. ii, 3. 14.—L, cidiiceus; also cddiiceum, orig. neut. adj. (sc.
scéptrum).— Gk. (Doric) xapvxiov, (Attic) anpvxeov, a herald’s wand,
as borne by Hermes.— Gk. «npu«-, for xjpug, a herald.4-Skt. karu-s,
a singer; cf. L. car-men, a song.

CADUCOUBS, falling early, said of leaves or flowers. (L.) Fisher
even uses the adj. caduke, i.e. transitory; Seven Psalms, Ps. cii.
p. 196 (E.E.T.S.); which is also in an E. version of Palladius on:


CHSURA


Husbandry, bk. xii. st. 20.—L. cadiic-us, easily falling; with suffix’
-ous.—L. cadere, to fall. See Cadence.

- CASSURA, a pause ina verse. (L.) In Phillips (1678).=—L.
cesira, a pause in a verse; lit. a cutting off.—L. cesus, pp. of cedere,
to cut. ‘
‘CAFTAN, a Turkish garment. (Turk.) ‘A caftan or a close
coat;” Hakluyt, Voy. i. 497 (1598).— Turk. gaftan, a dress..

CAGE, an enclosure for keeping birds and animals. (F.-—L.) In
early use. ‘Ase untowe brid ine cage ’=like an untrained bird in a
cage ; Ancren Riwle, p. 102.—OF. cage (F. cage), a cage. = Late L.
cavea, for L. cauea, a hollow place, den, cave, cage for birds. [See
the letter-changes explained in Schwan].—L. cauus, hollow. See
Cave... :

CAIMAN, the same as Cayman, q. v.

CAIQUE, a kind of boat. (F.—Turk.) ‘Many a light caique;’
Byron, Childe Harold, c. ii. st. 88.—_F. caique. —Turk. gaig, a boat.

CAIRN, a pile of stones. (C.) In Scott, Lady of the Lake, c. v.
st. 14, where it rhymes with ‘stern.’. Spelt cairne, Montgomerie, Fly-
ting, 1..401. Particularly used of a pile of stones raised on the top
of a hill, or set up as a landmark ; applied by us to a pile raised by
artificial means. It seemsto have come to us from the Gaelic in par-
ticular. B.:The form carn (a rock)-is common to Gaelic, Irish,
Welsh, Manx, Cornish, and Breton; the’sense is, in general, ‘a pile
of stones,’ and it was chiefly used of a pile of stones raised over a
grave. Cf. Gk. xpavads, rocky. Der. cairn-gorm, a yellow gem ;
from Cairn-gorm (blue cairn), in the Scot. Highlands. See Crag.

. CAISSON, a large chest or case. (F.—Prov.—L.) In Bailey
(1721). —F.. caisson, augmentative of caisse, a case. = Prov. caissa. = L.
capsa; see Case (2).

- CAITIFF, a mean fellow, wretch. (F.—L.) It formerly meant
‘a captive. ME. caitif,a captive, a miserable wretch. ‘ Caytif to
cruel king Agamemnon’=captive to the cruel king A. ; Chaucer,
Troil. iii. 382.—ONorth. F. caitif, a captive, a poor or wretched man;
OF. chaitif, now spelt chétif, which see in Hatzfeld. Late L. acc.
captivum, from L. captiuus, a captive, prisoner; but used in Late L.
in the sense of ‘mean,’ or ‘poor-looking.’=L. captus, pp. of capere, to
take, seize. See Capable. Doublet, captive.

- CAJOLE, to allure, coax, deceive by flattery. (F.) In Burnet,
Hist. Reformation, an. 15223. and in Pepys, Diary, Mar. 17, 1662-3.
=F. cajoler, MF. cageoler, ‘to prattle or jangle, like a jay in a cage;
to babble or prate much, to little purpose ;” Cot. Prob. ofimitative
origin; cf. F. caqueter, ‘to prattle;’ Cot. Der. cajol-er, cajol-er-y.
‘-CAJUPUT, CAJEPUT (with j as y), a tree yielding an oil.
(Malay.) ‘On hinges oil’d with cajeput;’ Hood, Ode to Mr. Mal-
thus (1. 9 from end).—Malay haiyw putzh, lit. ‘ white wood.’ = Malay
kayu, wood ; putih, white.

: CAKE, a small mass of dough baked, &c. (Scand.) In prov. E.
cake means ‘ a small round loaf ;,” see Chaucer, C.T. 4092 (A 4094).
In early use. Spelt cake in Hali Meidenhad, ed. Cockayne, p. 37,
last line. —Icel. and Swed. kaka, a cake; found in MSwedish; see
dhre; Dan. kage; NFries. kak, kag. Teut. stem *kakon-, fem.; from
Teut. base *kak-, of which the strong grade is *#0k-, whence prov. E.
cookie, Du. koek, a cake, dumpling, G. kuchen, a cake, tart.

CALABASH, a vessel made of the shell of a dried gourd. (F.—

Span.—Arab.—Pers.) ‘ Calabash, a species of cucurbita;’ Ash’s
Dict. 1775. ‘Calabashes, or Gourd-shells;’ Dampier, A New Voy-
age, i.153. In Arber’s Eng, Garner, vii. 359 (1689). =F. calebasse.
Cotgrave has: © Callabasse,a great gourd ; also, a bottle made there-
of, —Span. calabaza, a pumpion, calabash; cf. Span. calabaza vina-
tera, a bottle-gourd for wine.—Arab.-Pers. kharbuz, a melon, a
cucumber; lit. ‘ass-gourd,’ i.e. coarse gourd.—Pers. khar, ass
(hence, coarse); buzah, odoriferous fruit. Cf. Skt. khara-s, an ass ;
Pers, bi, odour. See Richardson’s Arab. Dict. ed. 1829, pp. 603, 270.
Der. calabash-tree, a tree whence dried shells of fruit are procured.
‘ CALAMANCO, a woollen stuff. (Late L.) Florio (1598) ex-
plains Ital. tesserino by ‘ calimanco,” We also find Du. kalamink, F.
calmande, MF. calamande, G, kalmank (Weigand), mod. Span, cala-
maco. From Late L.; see the forms in Ducange, s. v. camelaucum.
Of unknown origin.

CALAMINT, a herb. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. calament (N.E.D.);
also calamynt, Prompt. Parv.MF. calament.—Late L. calamentum,
Voce. 557. 17; also calamintha. —Gk. kadapivén, calamint.

CALAMITY, a great misfortune. (F.—L.) In Shak. K. John,
iii, 4.60. And earlier, in Calvin, Four Godly Sermons, ser. 2.—F,
ealamité, calamity ; Cot.—L. acc. calamitatem, from nom, calamitas,
a calamity, misfortune. Cf. in-columis, unharmed. Der. calamit-ous.
-CATASH, a sort of travelling carriage. (F.—G.—Slavonic.)
“¥rom ladies hurried in caleches ;’ Hudibras, pt. iii. c. 2, 871.—_F,
caléche, a barouche, carriage.—G., halesche, a calash. Polish kolaska,
a small carriage, dimin. of kolasa, a carriage. Cf. Russ. koliaska, a
calash, carriage. So called from being furnished with wheels ; from


CALENTURE 85


Russ. kolo,a wheel. From Idg. *gol, 2nd grade of 4/QEL, to drive;
see Pole (2). Brugmann, i. § 652. B. The same word calash also
came to mean (1) the hood of a carriage, and (2) a hood for a lady’s
head, of similar shape. ’

CALCAREOUS, like or containing chalk or lime.’ (L.) Better
spelt calcarious, as in a quotation from Swinburne, Spain, Let. 29, in
Richardson. = L. caledri-us, pertaining to lime; with suffix -ous.—L.
calc-, stem of calx, lime, See Calx. Der. (from calc-) calc-ium, a
chemical element, the basis of lime.

CALCEOLARIA, a flower; a genus of Scrophulariacee. (L.)
Coined from L. calceolus, a small shoe, dimin. of calceus, ashoe.—L.
calc-, stem of calx, the heel. So called because the flower has some
resemblance to a broad-toed slipper.

CALCINE, to reduce to a calx or chalky powder by heat. (F,—
L.) Chaucer has calcening, C. T., Group G, 771. Better spelt cal-
cining ; we find calcinacioun in C. T., G804. [Perhaps from Latin
directly.] =F. calciner, ‘to calcinate, burne to dust by fire any metall
or minerall ;’ Cot.—Late L. calcindre, to reduce to acalx; common
in medieval treatises on alchemy. = L, calc-, stem of calx, stone, lime;
used in alchemy of the remains of minerals after being subjected to
great heat. See Calx. Der. ca/cin-at-ion, from the Late L. vb.

CALCULATE, to reckon. (L.) In Shak. 2 Hen. VI, iv. 1. 34.
This is a Latin form, fromthe L. pp. calculatus. [The older form is
the ME. calculen; see Chaucer, C. T. 11596 (F 1284).—F. calculer,
to reckon.J=L. calculdre, to reckon by help of small pebbles;
pp: calculatus. = L. calculus, a pebble ; dimin. of cal (stem calc-),a
stone ; whence also E, chalk. See Calx. Der. calcula-ble, calculat-
ion, calculat-ive, calculat-or; also calculus, from the L. sb.

CALDRON, CAULDRON, a large kettle. (F.—L.) ME.
caldron; Gower, C. A. ii. 266; bk. v. 4141. But more commonly
caudron ; Seven Sages, ed. Wright, 1, 1231; Legends of the Holy
Rood, ed. Morris, p. 60.—North F. (Picard) cauderon, for OF.
chauderon ; mod. F. chaudron. The OF. word caldaru, a cauldron,
occurs in the very old Glossaire de Cassel; Bartsch, Chrestomathie
Frangaise, col. 2, 1.19. Cf. Ital. calderone, a vessel for hot water.
Formed, with an augmentative suffix -on (Ital. -one) from L. caldar-,
as in caldaria, a hot bath, also a caldron (i Sam. ii. 14, Vulgate) ;
cf. L. caldarium, a cauldron, properly neuter of caldarius, adj., that
serves for heating ; calddria being the feminine. —L, caldus, hot; con-
tracted form of calidus, hot.mL. calére, to be hot. See Caloric,
Chaldron. € The Span. form calderon gave name to the great
Spanish author.

CALEFACTION, a making warm, (L.) In Cockeram (1642),
=L. acc. calefactién-em; nom. calefactio, a making warm. =L.. cale-
Jacere, to warm (pp. calefactus), = L. cale- (as in calére, to glow); and
facere, to make; cf. L. calidus, hot. See Caldron. Der. (from
calefact-us), calefact-or, -or-y.

CALENDAR, an almanac. (L.) Inearly use; spelt halender in
Layamon, i. 308.—L. calenddrium, an account-book of interest kept
by money-changers, so called because interest became due on the
calends (or first day) of each month; in later times, a calendar.—L.
calenda,. sb. pl., a name given to the first day of each month. The
origin of the name is obscure; but it is agreed that the verbal root is
the old verb caldre, to proclaim. See Bréal. It is cognate with Gk.
kadciy, to summon.=—4/ KAL, to shout; see Prellwitz. Allied to
Hale (2).

CALENDER (1), a machine for pressing and smoothing cloth.
(F.—Late L.—Gk.) Best known from the occurrence of the word in
Cowper's. John Gilpin, where it is applied to a ‘calender-er, or
person who calenders cloth, and where a more correct form would be
calendrer. In Bailey’s Dict., ed. 1731, vol. ii, I find: ‘ To calender,
to press, smooth, and set a gloss upon linnen, &c. ; also the engine
itself’ B. The word is French, The verb appears in Cotgrave, who
has: *Calendrer, to sleeke, smooth, plane, or polish linnen cloth, &c.’
The F. sb. (from which the verb was formed) is calandre ; of which
Godefroy’s Supp. gives an example in 1483.—Late L. celendra, ex-
plained in Ducange by: ‘instrumentum quo poliuntur panni ;
[French] calandre.’ y. This Late L. celendra is, probably, a corrup-
tion of L. cylindrus, a cylinder, roller; the name being given to the
machine because a roller was contained in it, and (probably later)
sometimes two rollers in contact.— Gk, «vAw5pos, a cylinder. See
Cylinder. Der. calender, verb; calendr-er, or calend-er, sb.

CALENDER (2), a kind of wandering monk. (F.—Pers.) ‘In
the habit of kalenders or friars;’ Sir T. Herbert, Trav. (1665), p. 63.
=F. calender.—Pers. galandar, a kind of Muhammadan monk, who
abandons everything and retires from the world; Rich. Dict. p. 1145.

CALENDS, the first day of the month in the Roman calendar;
see Calendar. (L.) Inearly use. AS. calend; Grein, i. 154.

CALENTURE, a feverous madness. (F.—Span.—L.) In Mas-
singer, Fatal Dowry, iii. 1 (Charalois).—F. calenture.—Span. calen~
tura.—L. calent-, stem of pr. pt. of calére, to be hot. See Caldron,


86 CALF


CALF, the young of the cow, &c. (E.) ME. half, calf; some-
times kelf. Spelt ke/f/in Ancren Riwle, p. 136; the pl. calveren is in
Maundeville’s Travels, p. 105. AS. cealf; pl. cealfas, calfru, or cal-
feru; Grein, i. 158.4-Du. kalf; Icel. kalfr; Swed. kalf; Dan. kalv;
Goth. kalbd ; G.kalb. B. Probably related to Skt. garbha-s, a fcetus,
embryo; see Brugmann, i. §656. Der. calve,q.v. | The calf of
the leg, Icel. #alfi (whence also Ir. and Gael. calpa) is closely
related; being likened to the fcetus. Cf. Gaulish L. galba, great-
béllied ; and Swed. ben-kalf, calf of the leg, from ben, leg. See notes
on E, Etym.; and-see Cave in.

CALIBER, CALIBRE, the size of the bore ofa gun. (F.—Ital.
—Arab.) The form calibre is closer to the French, and more usual.
Caliber occurs in Reid’s Inquiry, c. 6. s. 19 (R.) Neither form ap-
pears to be old; calibre occurs in 1567 and 1588 (N.E.D.). Wealso
find the spellings caliver and caliper in Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.=F.
calibre, occurring in 1478, is said to have been introduced from Ital.
calibro; Hatzfeld. Cotgrave has: ‘Calibre, a quality, state, or
degree ;’ also: ‘ Qualibre, the bore of a gun, or size of the bore, &c.
Il n'est pas de mon qualibre, he is not of my quality, ranke, or humour,
he is not a fit companion for me.’ =Ital. calibro, colibro, ‘an instru-
ment that gunners vse, to measure the heighth of any piece or bullet;
also, the heighth or bore of any piece;’ Florio (ed. 1611). B. Of
uncertain origin. Mahn suggests L. gua libra, of what weight, applied
to the bore of a gun as determined by the weight (and consequent size)
of the bullet. See Librate. yy. Diez suggests a more likely origin,
viz. Arab. kalib, a form, mould, model; cf. Pers. kalab, a mould from
which anything is made; Rich. Dict. pp. 1110, 1111. So Devic.
Der. calipers, q.v. ; also caliver, q. v.

CALICO, cotton-cloth. (East Indian.) Spelt callico in Drayton,
Edw. IV to Mrs. Shore ;, callicoe in Robinson Crusoe, ed. J. W. Clark,
1866, p. 124; pl. callicoes, Spectator, no. 292. Hakluyt speaks of
Calicut cloth (N.E.D.). Named from Calicut, on the Malabar coast,
whence it was first imported.

CALIF, CALIPH,a title assumed by the successors of Mahomet.
(F.—Arab.) Spelt caliphe in Gower, C.A. i. 245; b. ii. 2549 ; califfe,
Maundeyille’s Trav. p. 36.—F. calife, a successor of the prophet. =
Arab. khalifah, lit. a successor; Richardson, p. 626.— Arab. khalafa,
to succeed; id. p. 622, s. v. khilafat, succeeding. Der. caliph-ship,
caliph-ate,

CALIGRAPHY, CALLIGRAPHY, good hand-writing.
(Gk.) Wood, in his Athenze Oxonienses, uses the word when re-
ferring to the works of Peter Bales (not Bale, as in Richardson).
Spelt calligraphy; Prideaux, Connection, pt. i. b. v.s. 5; halligraphy,
Ben Jonson, Magnetic Lady, iii. 4.—Gk. madAcypagia, beautiful writ-
ing. =Gk. «adAdu-, for “dAA-os, beauty, from adds, beautiful, fair;
and ypapeww, to write. For Gk. ypapev, see Carve.

CALIPASH, the upper shell or carapace of a turtle. (F.—Span.)
‘ The calapatch and calapee, i. e. the back and breast shells’ [of a turtle] ;
Arber's Eng. Garner, vii. 358. Prob. a variant of Carapace, q. v.

CALIPER, the lower shell of the turtle; see above. Only

known in English; apparently coined to match calipash; ending
perhaps suggested by cap-a-pee, in which pee means ‘ foot.’ Spelt
callapee by W. Dampier, A New Voyage, i. 106.
_CALIPERS, compasses of a certain kind. (F.—Ital.—Arab.)
Compasses for measuring the diameter of cylindrical bodies are called
calipers; a contraction of caliber-compasses. See Callipers in Kersey’s
Dict. ed. 1715. From caliber, the size of a bore; q.v.

CALISTHENICS, CALLISTHENTCS, graceful exercises.

(Gk.) Modern. A coined word.—Gk. «addAobevns, adorned with
strength. Gk. KaAAi-, for “dAA-os, beauty, from «adds, beautiful,
fair ; and oGevos, strength, allied to Icel. stinnr, AS. stid, stiff, strong
(Prellwitz). Der. calisthenic, adj.
-CALIVER, a sort of musket. (F.—Jtal.—Arab.) In Shak.
1 Hen. IV, iv. 2. 21. The name was given from some peculiarity in
the size of the bore. It is a mere corruption of caliber,q.v. ‘ Caliver
or Caliper, the bigness, or rather the diameter of a piece of ordinance
or any other firearms at the bore or mouth;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.

CALK, CAULK, to stop up the seams of a ship. (F.—L.) The
sb. calkers occurs in the A.V. Ezek. xxvii. 9; the marg. note has:
‘strengtheners, or stoppers of chinks.? The ME. cauken signifies ‘to
tread ;’ P. Plowman, C. xv, 162; xiv. 171. The spelling with 2 was
probably adopted to assimilate the word more closely to the orig,
Lat. OF. cauguer, to tread; also, to tent a wound, i.e. to insert
a roll. of lint in it, to prevent its healing too quickly; Cotgrave.=L,
calcdre, to tread, trample, press grapes, tread down, tread in, press
close, (The notion in ca/k is that of forcing in by great pressure.) —
L. calx (stem calc-), the heel.

CALKIN, the turned down end of a horse-shoe. (F.—L.) The
pl. calkins occurs in The Two Noble Kinsmen, v. 4. 55. ‘Cawkons of
horse-shone;’ Relig. Antique, i. 83.—OF. calcain, the heel; Gode-
froy. = L.calcaneum,the heel. = L. calc-,forcalx, heel; withsuffix-aneum.


CALTHROP, CALTRAP


CALL, to cry aloud. (Scand.) ME. callen, Havelok, 2899. AS.
ceallian, to call, Grein, i. 158; OMerc. callian, as in hilde-calla, a
herald, lit. a ‘ war-caller,’ Grein, ii. 73. Borrowed from Icel. and
Swed. kalla, to call. Cf. Dan. kalde, to call; Du. kallen, to talk,
chatter; OHG. challdn, MHG. kallen. Teut. type *kallon or *kallo-
jan, weak verb; cf. W. galw,to call, Russ. golos’, voice, sound. See
Brugm. i. § 639; Benfey, p. 270; Fick,i.72. Der. call-er; call-ing,
sb., an occupation, that to which one is called.

CALLET, CALLAT, a worthless woman. (F.—Low L.—
Low G.) In Oth. iv. 2.121. Origin doubtful ; but it fairly answers
to F, caillette, a gossip, chatterer ; ‘ personne qui a du babil et point
de consistance,’ Supp. to Godefroy, Lit. ‘little quail ;’ dimin. of
caille, a quail, also a woman. Littré gives caille coiffée, femme
galante, See Quail.
“CALLIGRAPHY; see Caligraphy.

CALLIPERS; see Calipers.

CALLISTHENICS; see Calisthenics.

CALLOUS, hard, indurated. (F.—L.) Callous occurs in Hol-
land’s Pliny, bk. xvi. c. 31 ; and callosity in the same, bk. xvi. c. 7.—
F. calleux, ‘hard, or thick-skinned, by much labouring ;’ Cot.—L,
callésus, hard or thick-skinned, callous. = L. callus, callum, hard skin ;
callére, to have a hard skin. Der. callos-ity (from L. acc. callos-
itatem, hardness of skin) ; also callous-ly, callous-ness.

CALLOW, unfledged, said of young birds; also bald. (L.) See
Milton, P. L. vii. 420. ME. calu, calugh, calewe. ‘ Calugh was his
heuede [head] ;’ King Alisaunder, 5950. AS. calu, bald; Grein, i.
155.4+Du. kaal, bald, bare, naked, leafless ; Swed. kal, bald, bare ;
G. kahl; cf. MDu. kaluwe. Teut. type *kalwoz; an early borrowing
from L. caluus, bald. Brugmann, i. § 529 (3)-

CALM, tranquil, quiet; as sb., repose. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) ME.
calm, Gower, C. A. iii. 230; b. vii. 4113. —F. calme, ‘calm, still;’ Cot.
He does not give it as a substantive, but in mod. F. it is both adj.
and sb., and the sb. calme is found as early as 1529 (Hatzfeld),
as if borrowed from Ital. calma. B. The is no real part of the
word, though appearing in Ital., Span., and Portuguese ; it seems to
have been inserted, as Diez suggests, through the influence of the L.
calor, heat, the notions of ‘ heat’ and ‘rest’ being easily brought to-
gether. y. The mod. Provencal chaume signifies ‘the time when
the flocks rest ;’ cf. F. chémer, formerly chaumer, to rest, to be with-
out work ; see chémer in Hatzfeld. 8. Derived from Late L. cauma,
the heat of the sun (Job, xxx. 30; Vulgate); on which Maigne
D’Arnis remarks, in his epitome of Ducange, that it answers to the
Languedoc caumas or calimas, excessive heat. — Gk. xadpa, great heat.
= Gk, «aiev,to burn. See Korting, § 2032. Der. calm-ly, calm-ness.

CALOMEL, a preparation of mercury. (Gk.) Explained in
Chambers’s Dict. as ‘the white sublimate of mercury, got by the
application of heat to a mixture of mercury and corrosive sublimate,
which is black.’ The sense is ‘a fair product from a black substance ;’
and the word is coined from #ado-, for Gk. xaddés, fair, and péA-as,
black, for which see Melancholy. 4 The etymology seems cer-
tain; but the reasons for it are unsatisfactory. See Littré and Hatzfeld.

CALORIC, the supposed principle of heat. (F.—L.) A modern
word, but now obsolescent ; formed from the L. calor, heat, by the
addition of the suffix -ic. The F. form is calorique (an. 1792), and
we borrowed it from them in that form ; but it comes to the same
thing. See Caldron.

CALORIFIC, having the power to heat. (L.) Boyle speaks
of ‘calorifick agents ;? Works, vol. ii. p. 594.—L. calorificus, making
hot, heating. = L. calérz-, for calor, heat; and ic-us, a suffix due to
the verb facere, to make. Der. calorific-at-ion.

CALOYER, a Greek monk. (F.—Ital.—Gk.). ‘How name ye
yon lone caloyer ?’ Byron, The Giaour, 1. 786. =F. caloyer (Hatzfeld).
Ital. caloiero (N.E.D.)=Mod. Gk. saddynpos, venerable. — Gk.
Kado-, for Kadds, fair ; and -ynpos, aged, allied to yfpas, old age.

CALTHROP, CALTRAP, a star-thistle, a ball with spikes
for annoying cavalry. (L. and Teut.) Calthrop is gen. used to
denote a ball stuck with four spikes, so arranged that one of them
points upwards while the other three rest on the ground, ‘ Cal-
trappe, chaussetrappe;’ Palsgrave. ‘Tribulus marinus, calketrappe,
sea-pistel;’ Relig. Antiq. i. 37. ME. kalketrappe, P. Plowman, C.
xxi, 296. AS. calcetreppe, star-thistle, A.S. Leechdoms, iii. 316 ;
cf. calcatrippe, Voc. 298. 30. The most likely solution of this diffi-
cult word is to derive it from L. calci-, decl. stem of calx, the heel,
anda Latinised form of the Teutonic word ¢rap. Florio gives MItal.
calcatrippa, star-thistle, where calca- is plainly supposed to be allied
to calcare, to tread, the form of the Ital. word being slightly altered
in order to suggest this sense. See further under Calk and Trap.
Hatzfeld derives F. chausse- (in F. chausse-trape) from L. calceare, to
shoe, from calceus, ashoe; but this also goes backto L. calx. It either
meant ‘heel-trap,’ or ‘trap whereon one treads.’ See my note to
P. Plowman, C, xxi. 296; also Catholicon Anglicum, p. 52, note 3.,


CALUMET


CALUMET, a kind of pipe for tobaceo, (F.—L.— Gk.) ‘Smoked
the calumet, the Peace-pipe;’ Longfellow, Song of Hiawatha, c. 1. —
Norman F. calumet, the stem of a herb, a pipe (Littré); a dimin.
form, allied to OF. chalemel, F. chalumeau, ‘ the stem of an herbe; also
a wheaten or oaten straw, or a pipe made thereof;’ Cot. These
words, like E. shawm, are from L. calamus; see Shawm.

CALUMNY, slander, false accusation. (F.—L.) Shak. has
calumny, Meas. ii. 4. 159; also calumniate, Troil. iii. 3. 1743 and
calumnious, All’s Well, i. 3. 61.—F. calomnie, ‘a calumnie ;’ Cot. =
L. calumnia, false accusation.—L, calui, caluere, to deceive. Der.
calumni-ous, calumni-ous-ly; also calumniate (from L. calumniatus,
pp. of calumniari, to slander); whence calumniat-or, calumniat-ion,
Doublet, challenge, q. v.

CALVE, to produce a-calf. (E.) ME. caluen (u for v); ‘the cow
caluyde;’ Wyclif, Job, xxi. 10. AS. cealfian, Elfric, Hom. ii. 300.
= AS. cealf, a calf. See Calf. The verb appears in the Du. kalven,
Dan. kalve, Swed. kalfva, G. kalben, to calve; all derivatives from
the sb. And see Cave in,

CALX, the substance left after a metal has been subjected to great
heat. (L.) In Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.. A word used in the old
treatises on alchemy; now nearly superseded by the term oxide. Cf.
‘With the calce of egg-shells;” Ben Jonson, Alchemist, A. ii. (Face).
Merely borrowed from Latin. —L. calx,; stone, limestone, lime (stem
cale-), Cf, Gk, xadré, rubble. Der. calc-ine, q. v.; calceareous,
q. v.; calc-ium; calc-ul-us ; cal-cul-ate, q. v.

CALYX, the outer envelope in which the flower is enclosed while
yet in the bud. (L.—Gk.) A botanical term. ‘ Calyx, the cup of the
flower in any plant;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715; showing that he con-
fused it (as usual) with L. calix, a cup; for which see Chalice. = L.
calyx, a case or covering, bud, calyx of a flower.—Gk. xaAvé, a case,
covering, calyx of.a flower.+Skt. kalika, a bud,—4/ KEL, to cover,
hide, conceal (L. cél-Gre) ; from which come, in English, the words
helm. (2), q.v., hell, hole, and helmet.

CAM, a projecting part of a wheel, cog. (Du.) A technical term;
fully explained in Webster’s Dict. and in N.E.D.—Du. kam, a comb,
alsoa cog; see Calisch and Kilian. Cf. Low G. kamm, Dan. am, a
comb, ridge; hencea ridge on a wheel; Dan. kamhjul, a cog-wheel;
G. kamm, a comb, a cog of a wheel. See Comb.

CAMBRIC, a kind of fine white linen. (Flanders.) In Shak.
Wint. Tale, iv. 4. 208. Cotgrave gives: ‘ Cambray, ou Toile de Cam-
bray, cambricke.’ From Kamerijk (F. Cambray), a town in Flanders,
where it was first made. Sewel has: ‘ Kameriks-doek, chambric,
lawn.’

CAMEL, the name of a quadruped. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) Spelt
camaille in Chaucer, C. T. 9072 (E1196). The pl. camelis is in King
Alisaunder,.854. The ME. forms are camel, cameil, camail, chamel,
chamail, &c. [The form camel, in the Old Northumbrian glosses of
S. Mark, i. 6, is directly from L. camélus.]—OF. chamel, ONorth.
F. camel. — L. camélus.— Gk. kapndos.— Heb. gimal.4Arab. jamal;
Palmer’s Pers. Dict., col. 173. Der. camelo-pard, q. v.

CAMELLIA, a genus of plants.. (Personal name.) The Camellia
Faponica is sometimes called the ‘ Japan rose.” The name was given by
Linnzus (died 1778), in honour of George Joseph Kamel (or Camel-
lus), a Moravian Jesuit, who travelled in Asia and wrote a history of
plants of the island of Luzon; Encycl. Brit. gth ed.

CAMELOPARD, the giraffe. (L.—Heb. andGk.) Spelt camelo-
pardalis and camelopardus in Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715, and in Bailey,
vol. ii, ed. 1731. Shortened to resemble F. camélopard, the giraffe. =
L. camélopardalis.—Gk. xapndondpSadis, a giraffe. Gk. xapnro-,
for xapndos, a camel; mapSadris, a pard. See Camel and Pard,

CAMEO, a precious stone, carved in relief. (Ital.) The word
occurs as caméo in Darwin’s Botanical Garden, canto ii: 310, [The
F. spelling camaiew is sometimes found in Eng. books, and occurs in
Bailey’s Dict. vol. ii. ed. 1731. The extraordinary form kaadmau
occurs in Matthew Paris, vi. 387 (Rec. Ser.).]—Ital. cammeo, a
cameo; Late L. cammeus, a cameo; also spelt camahutus; cf. F.
camaieu, B. Etym. unknown; see the discussion of it in Diez, s. v.
cammeo; and in Mahn, Etymologische Untersuchungen, Berlin,
1863, p. 73. Mahn suggests that cammeus is an adj. from camma,
a Late L. version of a G.*camme, a form due to G, pronunciation of
OF. game, a gem (Lat. gemma), for which Roquefort gives a quota-
tion. In the same way camahutus might be due to a German form
of the same F, game and to F. haute, high. But the Span. is camafeo.
See KGrting, § 2359; Schade, OHG. Dict. p. 1341.

CAMERA, a box, chamber, &c. (L.—Gk.) Chiefly used as an
abbreviation of L. camera obsciira, i.e. dark chamber, the name of
what was once an optical toy, but now of great service in photography.
See Chamber, of which it is the orig. form. Der. camerated, from
a L. form camerdatus, formed into chambers; aterm in architecture. -

CAMLET, a sort of cloth. (F.—Arab.) Camlet is short for came-
lot; which occurs in Sir T, Browne’s Vulg. Errors, bk. v. c. 15. § 3.—F,


CAN 87


camelot, which Cotgrave explains by ‘ chamlet, also Lisle grogram.’
It seems to have been popularly understood as being made of camel's
hair. Cf. ‘For camelot, the camel ful of hare’ [hair]; King James I,
King’s Quair, st.157. But it doubtless represents the Arab. khamlat,
khamelat, explained as ‘ camelot, silk and camel’s hair; also, all silk
or velvet ;’ Rich. Dict. p.628. Cf. khaml, ‘the skirts or laps of a gar-
ment, a carpet with a long pile, a cushion on a saddle ;’ ibid, It thus
appears that camel’s hair was sometimes used for making it, so that
confusion was easy. See Marco Polo, ed. Yule, i. 248.

CAMOMILE; see Chamomile,

CAMP, the ground occupied by an army; the army itself. (F.—L.)
Common in Shakespeare. Also used as a verb; All’s Well, iii. 4,
14; and in the Bible of 1561, Exod. xix. 2, The proper sense is
‘the field’ which is occupied by the army; as in ‘the gate of the
camp was open;’? North’s Plutarch, Life of M. Brutus; see Shake-
speare’s Plutarch, ed. Skeat, p. 147 ; cf. Antony and Cleopatra, iv. 8.
33. [Perhaps taken directly from Latin.]=F. camp, ‘a camp; an
hoast, or army lodged; a field;’ Cot.—L. campus, a field. See
Brugm. i. § 563. Der. camp, verb, en-camp-ment, camp-estr-al, q. v.,
camp-aign, q.v. J It is remarkable that camp in Middle English
never has the modern sense, but is only used in the sense of ‘ fight’
or ‘battle.’ Cf. ‘alle the kene mene [men] of kampe,’ i.e. all the
keen fighting-men ; Allit, Morte Arthure, 3702 ; cf.1.3671. Andsee
Layamon, i. 180, 185, 336; ii. 162. This is the AS. camp, a battle;
camp-sted, a battle-ground. Allied words are the Du., Dan.and Swed.
kamp, Icel. kapp, G. kampf, all signifying ‘ battle.’ Teut. type * kKampoz.
Notwithstanding the wide spread of the word in this sense, it is cer-
tainly non-Teutonic, and borrowed from L. campus, in Late L,
‘a battle” See also Champion and Campaign.

CAMPAGNOL, the short-tailed field-mouse. (F.—L.)
Modern; from F. campagne, country; see below. And see Vole.

CAMPAIGN, a large field; the period during which an army
keeps the field. (F.—Ital.—L.) The word occurs in Burnet, Hist.
of his Own Time, an. 1666. And see Campaign in Blount’s Gloss,
— MF. campaigne, an open field given in Cotgrave as a variation of
campagne, which he explains by ‘a plaine field, large plain.’ = Ital,
campagna, a field, a campaign.—L. campdnia, a plain, preserved in
the name Campania, formerly given to the level country near Naples.
=—L. campus, a field. See Camp. Der. campaign-er. @f Shak.
uses champaign (old edd. champion), K. Lear, i. 1. 65, for ‘a large
tract of land.’ This is from the OF. champagne, the standard form;
the form campagne having been borrowed (as above).

CAMPANIFORM, bell-shaped. (Late L.) ‘ Campaniformis,
a term apply’d by herbalists, to any flower that is shap’d like a bell ;”
Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. From Late L. campana, a bell; and L,
forma, form. Der. From the same Late L. campana are Ital, cam-
panile, a bell-tower ; also campan-ul-a, campan-ul-ate, campan-o-logy.

CAMPESTRAL, growing in fields. (L.) Modern, and rare,
The form campestrian is in Bailey’s Dict. vol. ii. ed. 1731. Formed
from L, campestr-is, growing in a field, or belonging to a field, by
adding the suffix -al,—L. campus, a field. See Camp.

CAMPHOR, a whitish crystalline substance, mostly obtained
from some kinds of laurel. (F.—Late L.—Arab,—Malay.) Spelt
camphire in the Song of Solomon, i. 14 (A. V.); and camfor in 1392-3
in the Earl of Derby’s Expeditions, ed. Lucy T, Smith, p. 164.
Massinger speaks of camphire-balls; The Guardian, iii. I.—F,
camphre, ‘the gumme tearmed camphire ;’ Cot. [The seems to have
been inserted to make the word easier to pronounce in English. ]
= Late L, camphora, camphor; to the form of which the mod. E.
camphor has been assimilated. B, A word of Eastern origin. Cf,
Skt. Aarpira-m, camphor (Benfey, p. 164); Arabic aftr, camphor,
Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 480. y. All from Malay kapir, lit. chalk ;
the full form being Bariis kapur, i,e. chalk of Barous, a place on the
W. coast of Sumatra; see J. Pijnappel’s Malay-Dutch Dict. p. 74.
‘ Kapir barus, the camphor of Sumatra and Java, called also native
camphor, as distinguished from that of Japan or kapiir tohori, which
undergoes a process before it is brought to our shops;’ Marsden,
Malay Dict. p. 249; where we also find ‘ kapir, lime.’

CAMPION, a flower of the genus Lychnis, (F.—L.) First in
1576. Lyte describes the rose campion, and the white campion; tr. of
Dodoens, bk. ii. ch, 9 and ch. 10, Origin uncertain; but prob. a
variant of North F. campagne, just as champion is of champaign.
Tusser has ‘ the champion or open countrie’ in the title to his book on
Husbandry (1580), Thus campion = field flower. — L. camp-us, a plain.

CAN (1), I am able. (E.) a, The AS, cunnan, to know, to know
how to do, to be able, forms its present tense thus: ic can (or cann),
pu canst (or const), he can (or cann); plural, for all persons, cunnon.
The Mceso-Goth. #unnan, to know, forms its, present tense thus: &
kann, thu kant, is kann; pl. weis kunnum, jus kunnuth, eis kunnun,
B. The verb is one of those which (like the Gk. oléa, I know) use as.
a present tense what is really an old preterite form, from which again,


88 CAN


a second weak preterite is formed. ‘The same peculiarity is common |


to all the cognate Teutonic verbs, viz. Du. kunnen, to be able; Icel.
kunna, to know, to be able ; Swed. kunna, to know, to be able; Dan.
kunde, to know, to be able; OHG,. chunnan, MHG. kunnen, G.
kénnen, to be able. y. The past tense is Could. Here the 7 is in-
serted in modern English by analogy with would and should, in which
the J is radical. The ME. form is coudé, a disyllable; the AS. form
is ciiSe. The lengthened w occasioned loss of 1; céde stands for
*cunde (pronounced koonthe, with oo as in foot, and th as in breathe). The
loss of the x has obscured the-relation to cax. ‘The 2 reappears in
Gothic, where the past tense is kuntha; cf. Du. konde, I could; Icel.
kunna (for kunda, by assimilation) ; Swed..and Dan. kunde; OHG.
honda, G. konnte. Whence it appears that the English alone has lost
the x. y. The past participle is Couth. This is only preserved, in
mod, Eng., in the form zncouth, of which the original sense was
‘unknown.’ The AS. form is cud, for *cund, the x being preserved
in the Goth. kunths, known. See Uncouth. Allied to ken (Icel.
henna) and know (AS. cnawan). The Idg. form of the root is GEN ;
Brugmann,i.§ 600. See Know and Ken. -

CAN (2), a drinking-vessel. (E.) ME. canne. ‘There weren set
sixe stonun cannes;’ Wyclif, John, ii. 6. AS. canne, as a gloss to L.
crater ; ZElf. Gloss. ed. Somner, p. 60; Voc. 122. 32.4-Du. kan,
a pot, mug; Icel. kanna, a can, tankard, mug; also, a measure ;
Swed. hanna, a tankard, a measure of about 3 quarts; Dan. kande;
OHG. chann, MHG. and G. kanne, a can, tankard, mug, jug, pot.
@ It thus appears to bea true Teutonic word; Teut. type *kanndn, f.
Some think that it was borrowed from L. canna, Gk. kavyn, a reed;
but the sense:is hardly close enough ; whilst caztharus differs in form.
Der. cannikin, dimin. ; spelt canykyn, Barclay, Ship of Fools, ii. 261;
canakin, Oth. ii. 3. 71.

CANAL, a conduit for water. (F.—L.) ‘The walls, the woods,
and long candls reply ;’ Pope, Rape of the Lock, iii. 100. And in
Bacon; Nat. Hist. §§ 30, 138.—F. canal, ‘a channell, kennell, furrow,
gutter ;’ Cot.—L. candlis, a channel, trench, canal, conduit; also,
a splint, reed-pipe. [ Perhaps the accent on the latter syllable in
E. was partly due to a familiarity with Du. kanaal, itself borrowed
from I'rench. See also Channel, Kennel.

CANARY; a bird; a wine; a dance. (Span.—L.) The dance
is mentioned in Shak. All’s Well, ii. 1. 77; so is the wine, Merry
Wives, ili. 2.89. Gascoigne speaks of ‘ Canara birds ;’ Complaint of
Philomene, 1. 33. All are named from the Canaries or Canary
Islands. These take their name from Canaria, which is the largest
island of the group. ‘ Grand Canary is almost as broad as long, the
diameter being about fifty miles ;’ Sir T. Herbert, Travels, ed. 1665,
p- 3.—Span. (Gran) Canaria. = L. Canaria (insula), isle abounding in
large dogs (Pliny, vi. 32).—L. canaria, fem. of canarius, pertaining to
dogs. —L. can-is, a dog; see Canine.

CANCEL, to obliterate. (F.—L.) Originally, to obliterate
a deed by drawing lines over it in the form of lattice-work (L. can-
celli) ; afterwards, to obliterate in any way. Spelt cancell in the
Mirrour for Magistrates, p. 632 (R.).—F. canceler, ‘to cancell, cross,
raze ;’ Cot.— Law L. cancellare, to draw lines across a deed.= L. can-
eellus, a grating ; gen. in pl. cancelli, railings, lattice-work ; dimin. of
cancer, pl. cancri, in the sense of ‘lattice-work.’ Der. cancell-at-ed,
marked with cross-lines, from L. pp. cancelléius; from the same
source, chancel, chancery, chancellor, which see.

CANCER, a crab, a corroding tumour. (L.) The tumour was
named from the notion that the swollen veins round it were like a
crab’s limbs (Galen). Cancer occurs as the name of a zodiacal sign
in Chaucer, Merchant's Tale, 1. 643.—L. cancer, a crab; ‘gen. cancri.
+Gk. xapsivos, a crab; Skt. karkata-s, a crab; also the sign Cancer
of the zodiac. f.So named from its hard shell; cf. Skt. Aarkara-s,
hard. Brugmann, i. § 464. Der. cancer-ous, cancri-form, cancer-ate,
cancer-at-ion; and see Canker, i

CANDELABRUM,;; see under Candle.

CANDID, lit. white; fair; sincere. (F.—L.) Drydenuses candid
to mean ‘white;’ tr. of Ovid, Metam. xv. 1.60. Camden has candidly;
Elizabeth, an. 1598 (R.). Shak. has candidatus for candidate; Titus
Andron. i. 185. Ben Jonson has candor, Epigram 123.—F. candide,
‘white, fair, bright, orient, &c.; also, upright, sincere, innocent;’
Cot.—L. candidus,lit. shining, bright. L. candére, to shine, be bright.
= L. *candere, to set on fire; only in ac-cendere, in-cendere.+-Skt. chand,
to shine.=4/SQEND, to shine. Brugm. i. §§ 456, 818 (2). Der.
candidate, q. v.; candour, lit. brightness, from F. candeur, which from
L. candorem, acc.‘case of candor, brightness; also candid-ly, candid-ness.
From L. candére we also have candle, incense, incendiary, which see.

CANDIDATE, one who offers himself to be elected to an office.
(L.) Shak. has: ‘ Be candidatus then and put it on;’ Titus, i. 185;
where the allusion is to the white robe worn by a candidate for office
among the Romans, = L, candidatus, white-robed ; a candidate for an
office. = L. candidus, white. See Candid. . .. eorer


CANNIBAL


CANDLE, a kind of artificial light. (L.) In very early use.
AS. candel, a candle, Grein, i. 155.—L. candéla, a candle, taper.—
L. candére, to glow.—L. *candere, to set on fire; see further under
Candid, Der. Candle-mas (Feb. 2), A.S. Chron., an. 1014, with
which cf. Christ-mas,q.v.; candleestick (Trevisa, i.223), AS. candel-sticca,
Birch, Cart. Saxon., iii. 3663 candélabrum, a L. word, from L. candéla;
also chandel-ier, q. v.; chandl-er, q. v.; cannel-coal, q. v.
CANDOUR: see under Candid.

CANDY, crystallised sugar; as a verb, to sugar, to crystallise.
(F.—Ital.—Arab.—Skt.) In old authors, it is usually a verb. Shak.
has both sb. and verb, 1 Hen. IV,i.3. 251; Hamlet, iii. 2. 65; Temp.
ii, I. 279. The comp. sugar-candy is the oldest form; see Liber Cure
Cocorum, p. 7.—F. sucre candi, sugar-candy; whence se candir, ‘to
candie, or grow candide, as sugar after boyling;’ Cotgrave. [Here
Cotgrave should rather have written candied; there is no connexion
with L. candidus, white, as he easily might have imagined. ]— Ital.
candire, to candy; candi, candy; zucchero candi, sugar-candy.= Arabic
and Persian gand, sugar, sugar-candy; Richardson’s Arab. Dict. p. 11493
Arab. gandat, sugar-candy, id.; gandi, sugared, made of sugar; id.
p- 1150.—Skt. khanda-s, a piece, part; also, powdered sugar
(Macdonell); cf. khandava-s, a kind of sweetmeat.

CANDYTUFT, a plant, of the genus Iberis. (Hybrid.) First in
Evelyn (1664). From Candy and. tuft; where Candy refers to the
island of Candia (or Crete), whence the plant came; and see Tuft,

CANE, a reed, a stick. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.cane,canne. ‘Reedes,
that ben cannes ;’ Maundeville, p. 189; see also pp. 190, 199. ‘Cane,
canna;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 191.—F. canne, a cane. = L, canna, a cane,
reed. = Gk. xavva, kavvn, a cane, reed. B. Perhaps cane is an Oriental
word ultimately; cf. Heb. ganek, a reed; Arab. ganah, a cane;
Richardson’s Dict. p. 1148. If so, the L. and Gk. words are both
borrowed ones. Der, cane, verb; can-y, Milton, P. L. iii. 4393 can-
ister, q.V.; also cann-on, q. V.; can-on, q.v.

CANINE, pertaining to a dog. (L.) In the Spectator, no. 2093
and in Cockeram (1623).—L. caninus, canine.= L. canis, a dog; cog-
nate with E. hound. See Hound.

CANISTER, a case, or box, often of tin. (L.—Gk.) Originally,
a basket made of reed or cane. Spelt cannisters in Dryden's Virgil,
bk. i. 981, to translate ‘ Cereremque canistris Expediunt ;’ Ain. i. 7ol.
— L. canistrum, a basket made of twisted reed.—Gk. xavaorpoy, a
wicker-basket ; properly, a basket of reed.— Gk. «avy, a rarer form
of kavyn, kavva, a reed, cane. See Cane.

CANKER, something that corrodes. (F.—L.) £ Canker, sekeness,
cancer ;\ Prompt. Parv. p. 60; it occurs very early, in Ancren Riwle,
p- 330, where it is spelt cancre, as in ONorth. F. [AS. cancer,
Leechdoms, ii. 110.]—ONorth, F. cancre (F. chancre).—L. cancrum,
ace. of cancer, a crab, a cancer. See Cancer, Der. canker-ous,
canker-worm (A. V.).

CANNEL-COAL, acoal that burns brightly. (L.axd E.) First
in 1538 (N.E.D.). Provincial Eng. cannel,a candle,and coal. ‘ Cannle,
a candle; cannle-coal, or kennle-coal,so called because it burns with-
out smoke like a candle;’ F. K. Robinson, Whitby Glossary, And
see E. D. D.

CANNIBAL, one who eats human-flesh. (Span. —W, Indian.)
A corrupt form; it should rather be caribal. ‘The Caribes I learned
to be man-eaters or canibals, and great enemies to the islanders of
Trinidad;*? Hakluyt, Voyages, vol. iii. p. 576; a passage imitated
in Robinson Crusoe, ed. J. W. Clark, 1866, p. 126. See Shak.
Oth. i. 3. 143.—Span. canibal, a cannibal, savage ; a variant of Caribal,
a Carib, a form used by Columbus; see Trench, Study of Words.
B. ‘This word being ill understood, the spelling canibal prevailed in
Spanish, from the notion that the cannibals had appetites like a dog ;
cf. Span. canino, canine, voracious, greedy. As the word canibal was
unmeaning in English, a second 2 was introduced to make the first
vowel short, either owing to stress, or from some notion that it
ought to be shortened, y. The word Canibal occurs in the following
quotation from Herrera’s Descripcion, de las Indias Occidentales,
vol. i. p. 11. col. 1, given in Todd’s Johnson. ‘Las Islas qui estan
desde Ja Isla de San Juan de Porto rico al oriente de ella, para la costa


‘de Tierra-Firme, se llamaron los Canibales por los muchos Caribes,
' comedores de carne humana, que truvo en ellas, i segun se interpreta
en su lengua Canibal, quiere decir “hombre valiente,” porque por


tales eran tenidos de jos otros Indios.’ I.e. ‘the islands lying next
to the island of San Juan de Porto-rico [now called Porto Rico] to


| the East of it, and extending towards the coast of the continent.
[of South America] are called Canibales because of the many Caribs,


eaters of human flesh, that are found in them, and according to the
interpretation of their language Canibal is as much as to say “‘ valiant
man,” because they were held to be such by the other Indians.’ This
hardly sufficiently recognises the fact that Canibal and Carib (as.
well as Caliban) are mere variants of one andthe same word; but we


| learn. that the West Indian word Carib meant, in the language of the.


CANNON:


natives, ‘a valiant man.’ Other testimony is to the same effect; and
it is well ascertained that cannibal is equivalent to Carib or Caribbean,
and that the native sense of the word is ‘a valiant man,’ widely differ-
ent from that which Europeans have given it. The familiar expression
‘king of the cannibal islands’ really means ‘king of the Caribbean
islands.’ Der. cannibal-ism.

CANNON (1), a large gun, (F.—Ital.—L.—Gk.) | Frequent
in Shak.; K. John, ii, 210, &c. And in Hakluyt, Voyages, vol. iii.
p- 217.—F canon, ‘a law, rule, decree, ordnance, canon of the law;...
also, the gunne tearmed a cannon; also, the barrell of any gunne,’
&c.; Cot.—Ital. cannone, ‘a canon or piece or ordnance, the barrell
_of any gun, . . acanon, arule;’ Florio. Thus cannon is a doublet
of canon, q.v. See Trench, Study of Words. B. The spelling with
two 2's may have been adopted to create a distinction between the two
uses of the word, the present word taking the double x of Ital. cannone.
The sense ‘gun-barrel’ is older than that of ‘gun,’ and the Ital.
cannone is the augmentative of Ital. canna, a pipe, a cane. —L. canna;
see Cane. Der. cannon-ade, cannon-eer.

CANNON (2), a particular stroke at billiards. (F.—Span.) A
perversion of carrom or carom, shortened form of carambole; see
Hoyle’s Games, Billiards, law 9 (1779).—F. carambole, the red ball
at billiards; cf. F. caramboler, (1) to touch the red ball, (2) to touch
two other balls with one’s own.=—Span. carambola, a manner of
playing at billiards, a device, trick. Origin unknown.

CANOE, a boat made of a trunk of a tree, &c. (Span.— W. Indian.)
Formerly canoa, as spelt in Hakluyt’s Voyages, iii. 646. = Span. canoa,
an Indian boat. It is ascertained to be a native West Indian term for
‘boat ;’ and properly, a word belonging to the old language of Hayti.
See R. Eden, Books on America, ed. Arber, p.66; Noteson E. Etym.
p- 346. Spelt canaca by R. Breton, in his Dict. Caraibe-Frangois (1665).

CANON (1), a rule, ordinance. (L.—Gk.) ME. canon, canoun;
Chaucer, Treatise on the Astrolabe, ed. Skeat, prol. 68; C. T., Group
C, 890, AS. canon; Beda, Eccl. Hist. (A. S. version), iv. 24; Bos-
worth.—L. canon, a rule.—Gk. xavwv, a straight rod, a rule in the
sense of ‘carpenter’s rule;’ also, a rule or model, a standard of
right. = Gk. xavn, a rarer form of xavvn, a (straight) cane, reed. See
Cane. Der. canon (2), one who lives according to a canon, q. Vv. ;
canon-ic, canon-ic-al, canon-ic-al-ly, canon-ist, canon-ic-ity, canon-ise
(Gower, C.A. i. 254; b. ii. 2821), canon-is-at-ion, canon-ry. Doublet,
cannon (1), q. Vv.

CANON (2), a dignitary of the church. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
canun, Layamon, il. 598, 1. 24289; canoun, id. (later text), ]. 24288.
—ONorthF. canonie (Littré, s. v. chanoine); the pl. canunies occurs
in the Chanson du Roland, 2956. — Late L. canonicum, acc. of canonicus,
adj., one on the church-roll or list, and so in receipt of church-
funds, = L. canon, the church-roll or list, See Hatch, Bampton Lec-
tures, p. 202. See Canon (1). N.B. The Span. cafion, a deep
ravine, lit. a tube, is the same word as F. canon; see Cannon (1).

CANOPY, a covering overhead, (F.—Ital.—L,—Gk.) Should
be conopy ; but the spelling caxopé occurs in Italian, whence it found
its way into French as canapé, a form cited by Diez, and thence into
English ; the proper OF. form is conopé, In Shak. Sonn. 125, In
Bible of 1551, Judith, xiii. 9; retained in the A. V. Spelt canopé in
Wyclif. Cf. MF. conopée, ‘a canopy, a tent, or pavilion;’ Cot.=—L.
conopéeum, used in Judith, xiii, 10 (Vulgate).—Gk. cavwrewy, kwvw-
metov, an Egyptian bed with musquito-curtains. —Gk. cwvwm-, stem of
nove, a gnat, niosquito ; lit. ‘ cone-faced,’ or a creature with a cone-
shaped head, from the shape of its head. —Gk.- x@v-os, a cone; and
ap, face, appearance, from Gk, 4/ OM, to see=Idg. 4/ OQ, to see.
See Cone and Optic. Der. canopy, verb.

.CANOROUS, tuneful, (L.) In Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors,
b. vil. c. 14. § §.—L. candrus, singing, musical.=.L, canere, to sing.
See Cant (1).

CANT (1), to sing in a whining way; to talk hypocritically.
(L.) Applied at first, probably, to the whining tone of beggars, with
some allusion to chanting ; used derisively. ‘ Drinking, lying, cog-
ging, canting ;? Ford, The Sun’s Darling, Act i.sc.1. ‘¢ A rogue, A
very canter I, sir, one that maunds Upon the pad;’ Ben Jonson,
Staple of News, Act ii. - L. cantare, to sing (whence Picard and Wal-
loon canter, to sing) ; frequentative of canere, to sing; from the same
root as E. hen, q.v.=—4/KAN, to sound. Brugmann, i. § 181.
Der. cant, sb.; cant-er, From the same source, can-orous, q, V-3
cant-icle, q. v.; cant-o, q.v. 4 ‘ What was it, prose or ryme, metre
or verse? I trowe it was cantum, for I herde you synge;’ Caxton,
Reynard the Fox, c. 27; ed. Arber, p. 63. In Harman’s Caveat,
p- 84, to cante, i.e. to speak, is given as a cant word, Cf. Walloon
canter, to sing (Sigart) ; and see Cant inthe E.D.D. Der. cant-er,
cant-ing ; also cant-ata, Ital. cantata, a poetical composition set to
music; from the fem. of the pp. of L. cantare, to sing.

‘CANT (2), an edge, corner; as verb, to tilt or incline, (Dutch—
L,—Gk.) The sb, is nearly obsolete; we find ‘in a cant’=‘in a


CAOUTCHOUC


comer, in Ben Jonson, Coronation Entertainment; Works, ed.
Gifford, vi. 445 (Nares); see the description of Irene in the same,
ed. 1860, p. 531. The verb means ‘to turn upon an edge,’ hence,
to tilt, incline ; said of a cask. The verb is derived from the sb. =
Du. kant, a border, edge, side, brink, margin, corner.4-Dan. and
Swed, kant, a border, edge, margin; cf. Dan. kantre, to cant, upset,
capsize; G. kante,a corner. All from LateL. cantus, a corner ; which
is prob. from L. canthus (pronounced as cantus) <Gk. xav6os, the
corner of the eye, felloe of a wheel. Korting, § 1851. Der. cant-een,

-v.3 de-cant-er.

CANTEEN, a vessel for liquors used by soldiers. (F.—Ital. —
L.—Gk.) Firstin1744(N.E.D.). The spelling is phonetic, imitating.
the F. 7 by the mod. E. ee.—F. cantine, a canteen; introduced from
Ital. in the 17th century; Hatzfeld.—Ital. cantina, a cellar, cave,
grotto, cavern ; cf. Ital. candinetta, a small cellar, ice-pail, cooler. =
Ital. canto, a side, part, corner, angle ; whence cantina as a diminu-
tive, i.e. ‘a little corner.’= Late L. cantus, a corner. See Cant(2).

CANTER, an easy gallop. (E.place-name.) An abbreviation for
Canterbury gallop, a name given to an easy gallop; from the ambling
pace at which pilgrims rode to Canterbury. ‘In Sampson’s Fair
Maid of Clifton (1633), he who personates the hobby-horse speaks
of his smooth ambles and Canterbury paces;’ Todd’s Johnson.
‘ Boileau’s Pegasus has all his paces. The Pegasus of Pope, like
a Kentish post-horse, is always on the Canterbury;’ Dennis on the
Prelim, to the Dunciad (Nares). Wealso have ‘ Canterbury bells.’
Der. canter, verb,

CANTICHLE, a little song. (L.) ‘And wrot an canticle,’ said of
Moses; Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, ]. 4124.—L. canticulum,
a little song ; dimin. of L. canticum, a song.=—L. cantus, a song; cf,
cantus, pp. of canere, to sing. See Cant (1).

CANTILEVER, a kind of bracket, projecting from a wall to
support a balcony or the like. (F.) Pineda’s Span. Dict., s. v. can,
a dog, adds: ‘in architecture, the end of timber or stone jutting out
of a wall, on which in old buildings the beams used to rest, called
cantilevers.’ Possibly from cantle, a corner, and lever. The sup-
port could be obtained by letting one end of a lever into a canéle
(projection or nook) in a wall, and the other into a notch in a hori-
zontal beam above. The MDu. kanteel-hout, ‘a roofe-beame,’ in
flexham (lit. cantle-wood) is parallel. See below.

CANTLE, a small piece. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. 1 Hen. IV,
iii. 1. 100. ME, cantel, Chaucer, C. T., 3010 (A 3008). —ONorthF.
cantel (mod. F. chanteau), a piece, corner, bit; see Littré, s. vy.
chanteau. The same as Late L. cantellus, a piece; formed with dimin,
suffix -ellus from Late L. cantus, a corner. See Cant (2).

CANTO, a division of a poem. (Ital.—L.) Shak. has cantons,
Tw. Nt. i. 5. 289, which is a difficult form to account for. The
more correct form cantion (directly from L. cantio, a ballad) occurs
near the beginning of the Glosse to Spenser’s Shep. Kal., October. =
Ital. canto, a singing, chant, section of a poem.—L. acc. cantum,
asong. See Canticle.

CANTON, a small division of a country. (F.—Ital.—L.—Gk.)
Sir T. Browne uses cantons for ‘ corners ;’ Religio Medici, pt. i. s. 15.
In Heraldry, a canton is a small division in the corner of a shield ; so
used in Ben Jonson, Staple of News, A. iy. (Piedmantle). And see
Cotgrave.—F. canton, ‘a corner or crosseway, in a street; also, a
canion, or hundred ;’ Cot. [Cf. Span. canton, a corner, part of an
escutcheon, canton. ]— Ital. cantone, a nook, angle; also,a corporation,
township (Torriano).—Late L. canténum, canto, a region, province.
Origin doubtful; the heraldic canton, F. canton, Ital. cantone, is from
Ital. canto, an edge. See Cant (2). Der. canton, verb; canton-al,
canton-ment. Cf. se cantonner, ‘to sever themselves from the rest of
their fellowes ;’ Cotgrave.

CANVAS, a coarse hempen cloth. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. canevas ;
a trisyllable in Chaucer, C. T. 16407 (G 939).—ONorthF. canevas.
— Late L. caxabdcius, hempen cloth, canvas.—L, cannabis, hemp. =
Gk. xavvaBis, hemp, cognate with E. hemp, q.v. J It is supposed
that the Greek word was borrowed from the East; Curtius, 1. 173.
Cf. Pers. kanab, hemp; Rich. Dict. p. 1208; Skt. gaza-m, hemp.
Der. canvass, verb; q. v.

CANVASS, to discuss, solicit votes. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak.
‘to take to task ;’ 1 Hen. VI, i. 3. 36. Spelt danvas in Palsgrave.
Merely derived from the sb. canvas, the orig. meaning being ‘to sift
through canvas.’ Similarly, Cotgrave explains the MI’. canabasser by
‘to canvas, or curiously to examine, search or sift out the depth of
a matter.’ See above.

CANZONET, =a little song. (Ital.—L.) In Shak. L.L.L.iv. 2.124,
=Ital. canzonetta, a little song ; dimin. of canzone, a hymn; cf. can-
zona, a song, ballad.=—L. cantidnem, acc. of cantio, a song ; whence
also F. chanson, a song, used by Shak. Hamlet, ii. 2. 438. —L. cantare,
to sing; frequentative of canere, to sing. See Cant (1). k

CAOUTCHOUG, india rubber. (F.—Caribbean.) Modem,


89


90 . CAP


Borrowed from F. caoutchouc, from a Caribbean word which is spelt
cauchuc in the Cyclop. Metropolitana, g. v. This word, used at Quito,
belongs to the idiom of the Indians of the province of Mainas, and
signifies ‘juice of a tree. La Condamine calls it cahuchu. See Notes
on E, Etym. pp. 30, 3I.

CAP, a covering for the head; a cover. (Late L.) In early use.
AS. ceppe, as a gloss to Late L. planéta, a chasuble; Af®lfric’s Glos-
sary; Voc. 124. 31.— Late L. cappa, a cape, a cope ; see capparius in
Ducange. [The words cap, cape, cope were all the same originally. ]
This Late L. cappa, a cap, occurs in a document of the year 660
(Diez) ; and is spelt cappa by Isidore of Seville, 19. 31. 3, who says:
© Cappa, quia capitis ornamentum est ;’ a popular etymology. But
the true origin is unknown. Perhaps the derivation from L. capere,
to contain, suggested by Papias, may be right. See Cape, Cope.
@ For cap-a-pie, cap-a-pee, i.e. from head to foot (from F, cap, head,
a, to, and OF, pie, AF. pee, foot) see Cape (2).

CAPABLE, having ability. (F.—L.) In Shak. Troil. iii. 3. 310.
=F. capable, ‘capable, sufficient ;* Cot.—Late L. capabilis, lit. com-
prehensible, a word used in the Arian controversy. B. The meaning
afterwards shifted to ‘able to hold,’ one of the senses assigned by
Cotgrave to F.capable. This would be due to the influence of L. capax,
capacious, the word to which capabilis was probably indebted for its
second a and its irregular formation from capere.—L. capere, to hold,
contain.—4/ QAP, tohold; Brugm. i. § 635. Der. capabil-ity, See
Heave.

CAPACIOUS, able to hold or contain. (L.) _ Used by Sir W.
Ralegh, Hist. of the World, bk. i.c.6. Shak. expresses the same idea
by capable, Ill formed, as if from a F. capacieux or L. capactosus ; but
there are no such words, and the real source is the declensional stem
capact- of the L. adj. capax, able to contain. L. capere, to contain,
hold; cognate with E. heave, q. v. Der. capacious-ly, capacious-ness ;
and (from L. capax, gen. capici-s) capaci-t-ate, capaci-ty. From the
L. capere we also have cap-able, cat-er. Also conceive, deceive, receive,
&c. Also captious, captivate, captive, captor, capture; anticipate, eman-
cipate, participate; acceptable, conception, deception, except, intercept, pre-
cept, receipt, receptacle, susceptible; incipient, recipient; occupy; prince,
principal; and all words nearly related to these.

CAPARISON, the trappings of a horse. (I. —Span. — Late L.)
In Shak. Cor. i. 9. 12.— MF. caparasson, ‘a caparison ;* Cot. Span.
caparazon, a caparison, a cover for a saddle or coach; formed as an
augmentative from Med. L. caparo, a cowl (cf. E. chaperon). — Late L.
capa, acloak, cape. See Cape (1). Der. caparison, verb; Rich, III,
v. 3. 289.

CAPE (1), a covering for the shoulders, (F.—Span. —Late L.)
In Shak. Tam. Shrew, iv. 3. 140. [ME. cape, in Layamon, ii. 122, is
the modern cope.] —MF. cape, ‘a short and sleevelesse cloake ;’ Cot.
=Span. capa, a cape, cloak. — Late L. capa, for which see Ducange ;
see also Cap and Cope. Baret, s.v. Cape, has: ‘a Spanishe
cape. J The word, being an ecclesiastical one, has spread widely ;
from the Late L. céga are derived not only OF. cape, but also Proy.,
Span., and Port. capa, Icel. hapa (whence E. cope), Swed. kdpa, Dan.
kaabe. Der. cap-arison, q. v.; and see chapel, chaperon, chaplet.

CAPE (2), a headland. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Shak. Oth. ii. 1.1;
Chaucer, Prol. 408.—F. cap, ‘a promontory, cape;’ Cot. = Ital. capo,
ahead; a headland, cape. —L. caput,a head. 4] In the phr.cap-d-pié,
i.e. head to foot, the ‘cap’ is the F. cap here spoken of.

CAPER (1), to dance about. (Ital.—L.) In Shak. Temp. v. 238.
The word was merely shortened from the older form capreoll, used by
Sir P. Sidney in his translation of Ps, 114, quoted by Richardson;
‘Hillocks, why cafreold ye, as wanton by their dammes We capreoll
see the lusty lambs?’ = Ital. capriolare,.to caper, leap about as goats
or kids. = Ital. capriola, ‘a caperin dancing;’ Florio; from Ital. capra,
a she-goat.—L. capra, a she-goat; caper (stem capro-), a he-goat.
Cf. Gk. xampos, a boar; Curtius, i. 174.4-AS. heer, a he-goat; Icel.
hafr. Der. caper, sb.; capriole, q.v., and cf. cabriolet, cab,

CAPER (2), the flower-bud of the caper-bush, used for pickling.
(F.—L.—Gk.) There is a quibble on the word in Shak. Tw. Nt.
i, 3. 129. Sir T. Elyot has capers; Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 7.
=— MF. capre, cappre, a caper, Cot.; mod. F. capre. —L. capparis, =
Gk, xannapis, the caper-plant; also its fruit. Perhaps Eastern; cf.
Arab, kabar, capers; Richardson’s Arab. Dict. p. 1167.

CAPERCAILZIE, a species of grouse. (Gael.) The z is here
no z, but a modern printer’s way of representing the old 3, much better
represented by y; thus the word ‘is really capercailyie. [Similarly
Menzies stands for Menyies, and Dalziel for Dalyiel.| ‘ The capercal3e,
« + horse of the forest ;’ J. Dalrymple, tr. of Leslie’s Hist. Scot. p. 39.
See Newton, Dict. of Birds; and the article on the capercali, capercally,
or capercailyie, in the Engl. Cycl., div. Nat. History. Gael. capull-
coille, the great cock of the wood; more literally, the horse of the
wood, = Gael. capull,-a horse, from L. caballus (cf, E. cavalier); and
coille or-coill, a wood, a forest, cognate with E.. Holt.


CAPRIOLE


' CAPIBARA, a large rodent quadruped. (Brazil.) The native


name in Brazil. ‘ Capy-bara ... Porcus est fluviatilis ;’ Hist. Nat.
Brasiliz, 1648; vol. ii. p.. 230. See Cavy.


CAPILLARY, relating to or like hair. (L.) ‘Capillary file


ments ;’ Derham, Physico-Theology, b. iv.c. 12 (R.); and in Blount’

(1656). —L. capilldris, relating to hair.—L. capillus, hair; but esp. the
hair of the head; from the same source as L. capu/, the head; the
base cap- being common to both words (Bréal). ,

CAPITAL (1), relating to the head; chief. (F.—L.) ‘Eddren
capitalen’ =veins in the head, where capitalen is used as a pl. adj. ;:
Ancren Riwle, p. 258.—F. capital, ‘ chiefe, capitall;’? Cotgrave (and
in early use).—L. capitalis, relating to the head.—L. caput (stem:
capit-), the head. Allied to Skt. Aapala(m), skull; AS. hafela, head.
Brugm. i. § 641. Der. capital, sb., which see below. And see’
Capitol.

CAPITAL (2), wealth, stock of money. (F.—L.) Not in early
use; later than 1600 (N.E. D.). =F. capital, ‘ wealth, worth, a stocke,
a man’s principal, or chiefe substance ;’ Cotgrave.— Late L. capitale,
wealth, stock; properly neuter of adj. capitalis, chief; see above.
Der. capital-ist, capital-ise. See Cattle.

CAPITAL (3), the head of a pillar. (LateL., or F.—L.) ‘The
pilers .. With harlas and capitale’=with fillet and capital; Land
of Cokayne, 1. 69. — Late L. capitellum, the head of a column or pillar;
a dimin. from L. caput (stem capit-),a head. Or from ONorthF.
capitel (Picard capiteau, F. chapiteaun); the same. Doublets, chapiter,
chapter.

CAPITATION, a tax on every head. (F.—L.) In Sir T.
Browne, Vulg. Errors, bk. vii.c. 11. § I.—F. capitation, ‘head-silver,
pole-money ; a subsidy, tax, or tribute paid by the pole’ [i.e. poll];.
Cot. = Late L. capitationem, acc. of capitatio,a capitation-tax. — L. caput
(stem capit-), a head.

CAPITOL, the temple of Jupiter, at Rome. (L.) The temple
was situate on the Mons Capitolinus, named from the Capitolium, or
temple of Jupiter, whence E. capitol is derived. In Shak. Cor. i. 1,
49, &c. ‘The temple is said to have been called the Capitolium,
because a human head (caput) was discovered in digging the founda-
tions ;’ Smith’s Classical Dictionary. For whatever reason, the
etymology seems to be from the L. caput, gen. capit-is (above).

CAPITULAR, relating to a cathedral chapter. (L.) Properly
an adj., but gen. used as a sb., meaning ‘the body of the statutes of.
a chapter.’ ‘The capitular of Charles the Great joyns dicing and
drunkenness together ;’ Bp. Taylor, Rule of Conscience, bk. iv. c. 1
(R.). Late L. capituldris, relating to a capitulum, in its various senses ;
whence neut. capztulare, a writing divided into chapters; capitulare
instittitum, a monastic rule; and sb. capituldrium, a book of decrees,
whence the E. capitulary, a more correct form, asa sb., than capilular.
— Late L. capitulum, a chapter of a book; a cathedral chapter; dimin,
from L. caput, the head, See Chapter.

CAPITULATS, to submit upon certain conditions, (L.) See
Trench, Select Glossary. It properly means, to arrange conditions,
and esp. of surrender; as in ‘to capitulate and conferre wyth them
touchynge the estate of the cytie, the beste that they could, so that
their parsones [persons] might be saued ;’ Nicolls, tr. of Thucydides,
p- 219(R.). See Shak. Cor, v. 3.82. — Late L. capitulatus, pp. of capi-
tulare, to divide into chapters, hence, to propose terms.—Late L.
capitulum, a chapter (above), Der. capitulat-ion. .

CAPON,a young cock castrated. (L.—Gk.) Inveryearly use. AS..
capun, as a gloss to ‘ gallinaceus;’ Ailfric’s Glossary, ed. Somner,
Nomina Avium, = L. caponem, acc. of capo, acapon. = Gk. camwv,acapon,

CAPOTEH, a long cloak or mantle. (F.—Late L.) ‘In our rough
capote;’ Byron, Siege of Corinth, ]. 10.—F. capote, f.; from capot, m.,
a mantle. —F. cape, a cape; see Cape (1).

CAPRICKH, a whim, sudden leap of the mind. (F.—Ital.—L.) The
word is now always spelt like the F. caprice, but we often find, in
earlier writers, the Italian form. Thus Shak. has capriccio, All’s
Well, ii. 3.310; and Butler has the pl. capriches to rhyme with witches ;
Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 1. 1, 18,—F. caprice, ‘humour, caprichio, giddy
thought ;’ Cot.—Ital, capriccio, a caprice, whim; whence the word
was introduced into French in the 16th century (Brachet). . B. De-
rived by Diez from Ital. caprio, a goat, as if it were ‘a frisk of a
kid;’ but this is not quite sure. Cf, capriole (below), which seems to
be an analogous formation, Kérting, § 1891. See Caper (1)..

CAPRICORN, the name of a zodiacal sign. (L.) Lit. Sa
horned goat.’ In Chaucer, Treatise on the Astrolabe, pt. 1. sect. 17.
= L. capricornus, in the Norman-French treatise of P. de Thaun, in
Pop. Treatises on Science, ed. Wright, 1. 196. —L. capri-, for capro-,
stem of caper, a goat; and cornu,a horn. See Caper (1) and Horn.

CAPRIOLE, a peculiar frisk of a horse. (F.—Ital.—L.) Not
common. Merely F. cafriole, ‘a caper in dancing ; also the capriole,
sault, or goats leap, done by a horse ;’ Cot.=Ital. capriola, the leap
of akid.—L. capra, a she-goat. See Caper (1). i —..4


CAPSICUM


CAPSICUM, a genus of tropical plants, with hot pungent cap-
sules and seeds. (L.) ‘The Indian capsicum;’ Bradley, Fam. Dict.
Il. s. v. sallet (1725); N.E.D. A coined word, and incorrect. Prob.
formed from L. capsa, a case ; with reference to the capsules.

CAPSIZE, to upset, overturn. (Span.?—L.) First in Dibdin
(1788). Perhaps a nautical corruption of Span. capuzar, to sink; as
in capuzar un bajel, to sink a ship by the head; or of mod. Prov. cabus-
sado, the act of diving, an upset (Mistral); apparently derivatives of
L. caput, the head. (A guess.)

CAPSTAN, a machine for winding upa cable. (Prov.—L.) ME.
capstan, Allit. Poems, B. 418. ‘The weighing of anchors by the
capstan is also new ;’ Ralegh, Essays (in Todd’s Johnson). = Prov.
cabestan (whence MF, cabestan, ‘the capstane of a ship ;’ Cot.) ; cog-
nate with Span. cabrestante, a capstan, engine to raise weights; also
spelt cabestrante.—L. capistrare, to fasten with a halter, muzzle, tie
up; pres. part. capistrans (stem capistrant-), whence the Span. cabe-
strante. Cf. also Span. cabestrage, cattle-drivers’ money, also a halter,
answering to Low L. capistragium, money for halters. —L. capistrum
(Span. cabestro), a halter.=L. capere, to hold. See Capacious.
@ Sometimes derived from cabra, a goat, engine to cast stones, and
estante, explained by ‘standing,’ i.e. upright; but the conjecture
(though adopted by KOrting) is untenable and needless; the shifting
of r appears plainly in Port. cabresto, a halter, also (as a nautical
term) cables belonging to the bowsprit, allied to cabrestante, capstan.
So also Prov. cabestran (as well as cabestan), from cabestre, a halter.
See N. E. D.

CAPSULE, a seed-vessel of a plant. (F.—L.) ‘The little
cases or capsules which contain the seed ;? Derham, Physico-Theology,
bk. x. note r (R.). Sir T. Browne has capsulary; Vulg. Errors, b.
iii. c.27. § 3.—F. capsule, ‘a little chest or coffer;’ Cot. —L. capsula,
a small chest; dimin. of capsa, a chest, repository. See Case (2).
Der. capsul-ar, capsul-ar-y.

CAPTAIN, a head officer. (F.—L.) ME. capitain, capitein,
captain. Spelt capitein, Gower, C. A. i. 360 (iii. 2421) ; capitain,
Chaucer, C. T., H230.—OF. capitaine (14th cent., Supp. to Godefroy).
— Late L. capitaneus, capitanus, a leader of soldiers, captain; formed,
by help of suffix -aneus, -Gnus, from stem capit- of L. caput, the head ;
Der. captain-cy. Doublet, chieftain, q. v.

CAPTIOUS, critical, disposed to cavil. (F.—L.) ‘They...
moued unto Him this capeious question; why (quoth they) do Johns
disciples and the Phariseis ofttimes fast, and thy disciples not fast at
alle?’ Udal, on S. Mark, cap..ii. v. 18.—F. captieux, ‘ captious, cavil-
ling, too curious ;’ Cot. = LL. captidsus, sophistical, critical. = L. captio,
a taking, sophistical argument ; allied to capt-us, pp. of capere, to hold.
See Capacious. Der. captious-ness.

CAPTIVE, a prisoner. (F.—L.) In Hakluyt, Voyages, i.

149; as a verb, to capture, in Sir I. More’s Works, p. 279 c.
Generally expressed by its doublet caitiff in Middle-English. =F.
captif (£. captive). =L. captiuus, a captive. —L. captus, pp. of capere, to
hold, take, catch, seize.—4/ QAP, to hold. See Caitiff. Der.
captiv-i-ty, captiv-ate, captiv-at-ing; and from L. capt-, capt-or, capt-ure,
capt-ious.
-CAPUCHIN, a hooded friar; a hood. (F.—Ital.—Late L.)
Order established in 1525-8. Cotgrave has capicin in his explanation
of F. capucin, but this is, no doubt, a misprint, since the spelling
capucine occurs twice immediately below. — MF. capuchin (F. capucin),
‘a capicin [read capucin] frier; of S. Frances order; weares neither
shirt, nor breeches;’ Cot. [He also has: ‘ Capuchon, a capuche,
a monk’s cowle, or hood ; also, the hood of a cloake.’] —Ital. cappu-
cino, a capuchin monk, small cowl; the monk being named from the
‘small cowl’ which hewore. Dimin. of Ital. cappuccio, acowl, hood
worn over the head..—Ital.cappa,acape. SeeCape(1),Cap. 4 The
form is capuchin both in Picard (Corblet) and in Walloon (Sigart),

CAPYBARA; see Capibara (above).

CAR, a wheeled vehicle. (F.—C.) In Shak. Sonnet 7, &c. He
also has carman, Meas. ii. 1. 269. ME. carre, Maundeville’s Travels,
p- 130.—ONorthF. carre; in Ducange, s. v. Marcellum.— Late L.
carra; allied to carrus, a kind of four-wheeled carriage, which Cesar
first saw in Gaul; a Celtic word.—Bret. karr, a chariot; W. car,
a raft, frame, drag; OGael. cdr, a cart, car, or raft for carrying
things on ; Irish carr, a cart, dray, waggon. [Whencealso G. karre,
acart, barrow.] . Allied to L. currus, a chariot, and currere, to
trun; the L. and Celt. ¢ being the same letter etymologically.
Brugm. i. § 516; Stokes-Fick, p. 72. Der. There are numerous
derivatives ; see career, cargo, cark, carry, cart, charge, chariot.
-CARABINE;; see Carbine.

-CARACAT,, a feline quadruped resembling a lynx. (F.—Turk.)
In a tr. of Buffon (1792), i. 195.—F. caracal.— Turk. gara(h), black ;
gulag, ear. Named from its black ears. :

-CARACOLE, a half-turn made by a horseman. (F.—Span.)
‘Caracol, with horsemen, is an oblique piste, or. tread, traced out in


CARBON


semi-rounds, changing from one ‘hand to another, without observing
a regular ground;’ Bailey’s Dict. ed. 2 (1731), vol. ii, Also in
Blount (1656).—F. caracol, ‘a snail; whence, faire le caracol, [for]
souldiers to cast themselves into a round or ring;’ Cot. Mod. F.
caracole, a gambol; introduced from Span. in the 16th cent.
(Brachet). Span. caraco/, a snail, a winding stair-case, a wheeling
about; caracol marino, a periwinkle. Applied to a snail-shell from
its spiral shape. B. Perhaps Celtic. Cf. Gael. carach, meandering,
whirling, circling, winding, turning ; car, a twist, turn, revolution ;
Irish car, a twist, turn, cor, circular motion, Korting, § 1918. 3

CARAFE, a glass water-bottle. (F.—Span.—Arab.) Modern. =
F. carafe.—Span. garrafa, a cooler, vessel to cool wines in.— Arab,
ghiraf, draughts of water; Arab. root gharafa, to draw water. (So
Dozy and Devic; some identify it with carboy ; see Carboy.)

CARAPACE, the upper shell of a tortoise. (F.—Span.) Modern,
=F. carapace.—Span. carapacho (Hatzfeld), But the Span. Dict,
has only carapuza, variant of caperuza, a hood.

CARAT, a certain light weight. (F.—Ital.—Arab.—Gk.) Gene-
tally a weight of 4 grains. In Shak. Com. Err. iv. 1. 28.—F. carat, ‘a
carrat ; among goldsmiths and mintmen is the third part of an ounce,
among jewellers or stone-cutters, but the 19 part ;? Cot.—TItal. carato.
[Cf. O. Port. guirate, a small weight, a carat; cited by Diez.]— Arab,
girrat, a carat, the 24th part of an ounce, 4 barley-corns; also, a
bean or pea-shell, a pod, husk; Richardson’s Arab. Dict. p. 1122.
Gk. xepariov, the fruit of the locust tree ; also (like L. siligua), a
weight, the carat; the lit. sense being ‘a little horn.’—Gk. «épas,
(stem xepar-),ahorn; alliedtoE. Horn. @ The locust-tree, carob-
tree, or St. John’s-bread-tree is the Ceratonia siliqua; ‘The seeds,
which are nearly of the weight of a carat, have been thought to have
been the origin of that ancient money-weight ;’ Engl. Cycl., div. Nat.
Hist. s. y. Ceratonia ; aname which preserves the two former syllables
of the Gk. xepar-cov, See Carob, which is, however, unrelated.

CARAVAN, a company of traders or travellers, (F.—Pers.) In
Milton, P. L. vii. 428. Spelt carovan in Hakluyt, Voy. ii. pt. 1. 203.
=F. caravane, ‘a convoy of souldiers, for the safety of merchants
that travell by land ;’ Cot.=— Pers. karwan, a caravan; Richardson’s
Arab. Dict. p. 1182.

CARAVANSARY, an inn for travellers. (Pers.) Occurs in
the Spectator, no. 289.— Pers. karwan-saray, a public building for
caravans ; Richardson’s Arab. Dict. p. 1182. — Pers. karwan, a cara-
van ; and saray, a palace, public edifice, inn; id. p. 821 (Horn, § 727).

CARAVEL, CARVEL, a kind of ship. (F.—Ital.—Gk.)
R. Eden, Three Books on America, ed. Arber, p. 45, has: ‘A
Carauel or Caruel, a kynde of shyppes.’ =F. caravelle, ‘a caryell ;’
Cot. Ital. caravella, ‘a kynde of ship called a caravell;’ Florio.
Dimin. from Gk. «dpaBos, a kind of light ship (Liddell). Cf. also
Span. carabela, dimin. of caraba, f., formerly carabo, m., in Minsheu ;
from Late L. carabus ; from Gk. xapaBos, as before.

CARAWAY, CARRAWAY, an umbelliferous plant. (Span.
—Arab.) ME. carawey, E. of Derby’s Expeditions, ed. L. T. Smith,
p- 19, 1. 7 (1390). Spelt caroway in Cotgrave, s. v. carvi.—Span.
alcarahueya, a caraway ; where al is merely the Arab. def. article. =
Arab. karwiyd-a, karawiyd-a, karawiya-a, carraway-seeds or plant ;
Richardson’s Arab. Dict. p. 1183. Cf. Gk. xdpoy, xapos, cumin; L,
careum, MItal. caro, F. carvi (i.e. caraway); Liddell and Scott.
@ The Arabic word may be ultimately derived from the Greek one;
it is so with carat,

CARBINE, a short light musket. (F.) Also spelt carabine or
carabin; and, in Tudor English, it means (not a gun, but) a man
armed with a carbine, a musketeer. In this sense, the pl. carabins is
in Knolles’ Hist. of Turks, 1186, IK (Nares) ; and carbine.in Beaum,
and Fletcher, Wit without Money, v. 1.—F. carabin, m., ‘a carbine,
or curbeene; an arquebuzier, armed with a murrian and breast-plate
and serving on horse-back ;’ Cot. [Mod.F. carabine, fem., intro-
duced from Ital. carabina, a small gun, in the 16th century (Brachet),
is derived from carabin as used by Cotgrave.] Corrupted from OF,
calabrien, calabrin, a carbineer, a sort of light-armed soldier; Roque-
fort, Ducange. B. Of uncertain origin ; Ducange derives it from Late
L, Calabrinus, a Calabrian; from Calabria in SE. Italy. y. Diez
derives OF. calabrin from Proy. calabre, a war-engine used in besieg-
ing towns.—Late L. chadabula, a war-engine for throwing stones ;
whence calabre is derived by the change of d into / (as in OLatin
dingua, whence L. lingua) and by the common change of final -/a to
-re.=Gk. xaraBoAn, overthrow, destruction. —Gk. xataBaddAcv, to
throw down, strike down, esp. used of striking down with missiles. =
Gk. xard, down; BdddAew, to cast. But the unborrowed OF. form
corresponding to Prov. calabre is chaable, derived immediately from
chadabula. Korting, § 2004. Der. carbin-eer.

CARBON, charcoal. (F.—L.) A. modern chemical word. =F,
carbone; first in 1787. = L.acc. carbonem, from nom. carbo, a coal, Der.
carbon-i-fer-ous, carbon-ac-e-ous, carbon-ic, carbon-tse ; and see below. _


91


92 CARBOLIC


CARBOLIC, in carbolic acid, an alcohol containing’ carbon.
(L.) A coined word; from -carb-, for carbon, with the suffix -ol- of
alcoh-ol; and the suffix -ic. »

CARBONADO, broiled meat. (Span.—L.) Properly ‘a rasher.’
Cotgrave, s.v. carbonade, explains it by ‘a carbonadoe, a rasher on the
coales.’ Used by Shak. Cor. iv. 5. 199.—Span. carbonada, meat
broiled on a gridiron; as if a fem. pp. from a verb *carbonar, to
broil. —Span. carbon, charcoal, coal. —L. acc. carbonem, coal (above).
Der. carbonado, verb.; K. Lear, ii, 2. 41.

CARBOY, a large globular bottle of glass, protected by basket-
fork. (Pers.) Modern; in Webster, Worcester, and Brande. = Pers.
garabah, a large flagon; Rich. Dict. p. 1121, which is perhaps of
Arab. origin. Cf. Pers. and Arab. girbah, a water-skin, water-bottle,
Rich. Dict. p. 1123; Palmer’s Dict. col. 469; and Yule.
-CARBUNCGLE, a gem, a boil; a live coal. (L.) ME. carbuncle,
Gower, C. A. i. §7; bk. i. 466. [Also charbucle, Havelok, 2145 ;
from OF. charboucle.] The sense is, properly, ‘a glowing coal;’
hence ‘an inflamed sore, or boil;’ ‘a bright glowing gem.’ = L. car-
bunculus, 1.a small coal; 2.a gem; 3.a boil. For *carbdni-c-ul-us,
double dimin. from L. carbo (stem carbén-), a coal, sometimes, a live
coal. See Carbon. Der. carbuncul-ar, carbuncl-ed.
-CARBURET, a compound containing carbon. (L.) Coined from
carb-, shortened form of carbon; see Carbon.

‘CARCAJOU, the American wolverene. (F.—N. Amer. Indian.)
F. carcajou; supposed to be of N. American Indian origin.

CARCANET, a collar of jewels. (F.—G.) In Shak. Com.
Errors, iii. 1. 4. Formed as a dim., with suffix -et, from F. carcan,
‘a carkanet, or collar of gold, &c.;’ Cot.; OF. carcan, carchant, a
collar, esp. of jewels; Supp. to Godefroy. — OHG. querca, the throat ;
ef. Icel. kverka-, in composition, the throat, kuerk, s.f., the angle
under the chin. So also OFris, kwerka, querka, to choke, throttle ;
and: cf. Lith. gerkle, the throat. Brugm. i. § 653. 4 The dimin.
form carcan-et does not appear in OF rench, as we should expect.

CARCASE, CARCASS, a dead body. (F.—Ital.) [ME. car-
cays, carkeys. Spelt carcays in Hampole, Pricke of Conscience, 874.
“ Carkeys, corpus, cadaver ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 62. AF. carcois. = Late
L. carcosium,| Themod.E. form is from MF. carquasse, in Cotgrave,
who explains it by ‘a carkasse, or dead corps.” Mod.F. carcasse, intro-
duced from Ital. in the 16th cent. (Brachet). —Ital. carcassa, a kind of
bomb, a shell (a carcase being a shell); cf. Port. carcassa, a carcase.
Of unknown origin. The suggestions in Diez are unsatisfactory.

CARD (1), a piece of pasteboard. (F.—Ital.—Gk.) - Used by
Shak. in the sense of chart; Macb.i. 3.17; alsoa playing-card, Tam.
Shrew, ii. 407. In the latter sense it is in Sir T. Elyot, The Go-
vernour, bk. i. c. 26; and in the Paston Letters, iii. 314 (ab. 1484).
A corruption of carte; cf. chart.—F. carte, ‘a paper, a card ;’ Cot.=—
Ital. carta. = L. (late) carta, earlier charia, paper, a piece of paper. =
Gk. xaprn, also xaprns, a leaf of papyrus. Doublet, chart, q.v.
Der. card-board.
~CARD (2), an instrument for combing wool; as verb, to comb
wool. (F.—L.) The sb. is the original word, but is rare. ME. carde,
sb.; carden, vb. ‘Carde, wommanys instrument, cardus, discerpi-
culum ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 62. ‘ Cardyn wolle, carpo;’ ibid. The pp.
carded occurs in P. Plowman, B. x. 18.—F. carde; Cotgrave gives
the pl. ‘cardes, cards for wooll.’? He also gives ‘Carder de laine, to
card wooll.’=—Late L. cardus, L. carduus, a thistle, used for carding
wool.

CARDAMOM, a kind of spice. (L.—Gk.) R. Eden, Three
Books on America (ed. Arber), at p. 15, 1. 5, has: ‘spyces..as
ginger, . . cardamome,’ &c.—L. cardamémum.—Gk. kapdapwpor. =
Gk. xapdap-oy, cress ; and duwpov, an Indian spice-plant. (Short for
cardamamomum, like idolatry for idololatry.)

‘CARDIAC, pertaining to the heart. (F.—L.—Gk.) Holland
speaks of ‘the cardiacke passion,’ i.e. palpitation of the heart ; tr. of
Pliny, bk. xxiii. c. 1 (vol. ii. p.153).—F. cardiaque. —L. cardiacus. =
Gk. xapdiaxés, adj. from xapdia, heart; see Heart.

~ CARDINAL, adj., principal, chief; sb., a dignitary of the church.
(L.) As adj. we find ‘cardinale vertues;’ P. Plowman, B. xix. 313.
‘The sb. is much older in E., and occurs in Layamon, iii. 182.—L.
cardinalis, principal, chief, cardinal; orig. ‘relating to the hinge of
a door.’ = L. cardin-, stem of cardo, a hinge.

~CARDOON, a plant like an artichoke. (F.—Prov.—L.) In Cot-
grave, to translate F. cardon.—Prov. cardon (Hatzfeld); Gascon
cardoun (Moncaut). Formed, with augmentative suffix, from Med.
L. card-us, for L. carduus, a thistle.

‘CARE, anxiety, heedfulness. (E.) ME. care, Layamon, iii, 145.
The usual sense is ‘anxiety, sorrow.” AS. caru, cearu, sorrow, care,
Grein, i. 158; whence AS. cearian, to care for.4-OSax. kara, sorrow;
karon, to sorrow, lament; Goth. kara, sorrow; karén, to sorrow;
OHG, chara, lament; OHG. chardn, to lament. Teut. type, *kara,
fem., sorrow. Der. care-ful, care-ful-ly, care-ful-ness, care-less, care-


TOOARK


less-ly, care-less-ness; also char-y, g.v. [| Wholly unconnected with
L. cura, with which it is often confounded. : :

CAREEN, to lay.a ship on her side. (F.—L.) ‘A crazy rotten
vessel, ... as it were new careened;’ Sir T. Herbert,. Travels, 1665,
p- 244. Used absolutely, as in ‘we careen’d at the Marias;’ in
Dampier, Voyages, vol. ii. c. 13 (R.). Cook uses it with an accusative
case, as ‘in-order to careen her;’ First Voyage, b. ii. c. 6. (R.). It
was once written carine. ‘To lie aside until carined;* Otia Sacra
(Poems, 1648), p. 162; Todd’s Johnson. Lit. ‘to clean the keel.’ =
MF. carine, ‘the keele of a ship ;’ Cot.; also spelt caréne. = L. carina,
the keel of a ship; also, a nut-shell. From 4/ KAR, implying
‘hardness ;’ cf. Gk. xapvoy, a. nut, kernel; Skt. karaka-s, a cocoa-
nut (Curtius). See Cancer. Der. careen-age.

CAREER, a race, race-course. (F.—Late L.—C.) Shak. Much
Ado, ii. 3.250. — F. carriere, ‘an highway, rode, or streete (Languedoc) ;
also, a careere on horseback; and, more generally, any exercise or place
fot exercise on horse-backe; as an horse-race, or a place for horses
to run in; and their course, running, or full speed therein ;’ Cot. —
Late L. carraria (via), a road for cars. = Late L. carra,a car; see Car.

CARESS, to fondle, embrace. (F.—Ital.—L.) The sb. is in
Milton, P. L. viii. 56. The verb is in Burnet, Own Time, an. 1671
(R.).— F. caresse, ‘s.f. a cheering, cherishing;’ and caresser, ‘to
cherish, hug, make much of;’. Cot. The sb. is the original, and in-
troduced from Ital. in the 16th cent. (Brachet).—TItal. carezza, a
caress, endearment, fondness. — Late L. cdriiia, dearness, value. — L.
carus, dear, worthy, beloved. Cf. Irish cara, a friend; caraim, I love ;.
W. caru, to love. From the same root, charity, q.v.

CARFAX, a place where four ways meet. (F.—L.) I enter this
because of the well-known example of carfax at Oxford, which has
puzzled many. ME. carfoukes, a place where four streets. met; it
occurs in this sense in the Romance of Partenay, ed. Skeat, 1. 1819,
where the French original has carrefourg. The form carfax occurs.
in the Prompt. Parv. p. 62, col. 2,1..1, as the Eng. of L. guadrivium ;
quarfoxe is in Caxton’s Golden Legend, St. Nicholas, § 12.—AF.
carfeux, Liber Albus, p. 465; OF. carrefourgs, pl. of carrefourg ;
cf. ‘compitum, carfourc;’ Catholicon Abbreviatum (1497).— Late
L. guadrifurcum, acc. of quadrifurcus, adj., four-forked.—L. guadri-,
from quatuor, four; and furca,a fork. See Four and Fork.

CARGO, a freight. (Span.—Late L.—C.) ‘With a good cargo
of Latin and Greek ;’ Spectator, no. 494.—Span. cargo, also carga,
a burthen, freight, load; cf. Span. cargare, to load, freight.— Late L.
carricare, to load, lade. See Charge. @ Perhaps a Gascon form ;
as Gase. cargo, f.= Span. carga.

CARIBOU, the N. American reindeer. (F.—American Indian).
From Canadian F. caribou; of Amer. Indian origin. :

CARICATURE, an exaggerated drawing. (Ital.—Late L.—C.)
‘Those burlesque pictures, which the Italians call caracatura’s ;’
Spectator no. 537. —Ital. caricatura, a satirical picture ; so called from
being overloaded or ‘ overcharged’ with exaggeration. — Ital. caricare,
to load, burden, charge, blame. — Late L. carricére,toloadacar. See
Cargo. Der. caricature, verb; caricatur-ist.

CARIES, rottenness of a bone. (L.) Modern and medical..
Merely L. -cariés, rottenness. Cf. Gk. «npaivey, to harm, Der,
cari-ous.

CARILLON, a set of bells, or the melody played upon them.
(F.—L.). In Rees, Cyclopedia (1803, 1819).—F. carillon, a chime ;
OF. careignon, quarreignon, quarignon (Godefroy).—Late L. type
*quatrinidnem, from nom. *quatrinio, orig. a chime on four bells; like
Prov. zrinho, from Late L. trinio, a chime on three bells (Hatzfeld).
From L, quattuor, four; see Four. (See trinion in Ducange.) .

CARK, solicitude, anxiety. (F.—L.—C.) In Spenser, F. Q.i. 1:
44. ME. cark (spelt carke), Monk of Evesham, ed. Arber, p..78, b. 12;
Cursor Mundi, l. 20790 (Northern dialect ; another MS. has charge) ;
Gamelyn, 1. 760. [Somner gives AS. carc, care, but it is wholly
unauthorised; the word being really French.) The true solution
of this word (first given by myself in 1882) is to be found in the
Anglo-French word kark, a burden, weight, cargo, which is nothing
but the Norman form of F, charge, as is also evident from the
Cursor Mundi, ll.» 20790, .23994, 24233. This form kark occurs
in the Liber Albus, ed. H. T. Riley, p. 224; :and is, corroborated
by the occurrence of the verb sorkarker for sorcharger in the Sta-
tutes of the Realm, vol. i. p. 26, A.D. 1275; 80 also descarkere,
to unload, Lib. Albus (Gloss.). Hence cark meant, originally, a
weight, load; but came to be used particularly of ‘a load of care.”
The W. carc, anxiety, solicitude, is the E. word borrowed; cf. Bret.
karg, a load, burden (from French); though the ultimate root is Cel-
tic. The Late L. carcare, to load, occurs in the Liber Albus (iii.
380). Cark is thus a doublet of charge; see Charge. Cotgrave
gives F. charge, sb., ‘a load, burthen, fardle, also a charge, hinder-
ance, or cause of extraordinary expence ;* &c. I may add that we
even find kark, or karke, a load, in English ; for in Arnold’s Chron.


CARLINE


1502 (ed. 1811), p. 99, we find mention of ‘a-karke of peper’ and a
‘kark of gynger.’ Der. cark, verb, spelt carke in Palsgrave, whence
the phr. ‘cark-ing care ;’ in the Cursor Mundi, we find ‘ carkid (also
charked) wit care,’ ll. .23994, 24870.

CARLINE, usually carline thistle, a kind .of thistle. (F.—Late
L.—G.) In Lyte, tr. of Dodoens, bk. iv. c.67; he says: ‘now they
call it Carlina or Carolina, bicause of.Charlemaine emperor of the
Romanes, ynto whom an angell first shewed this thistle, as they say,
when his armie was striken with the pestilence.’ (So also in Du-
cange).—F. carline.—L. Carolina, fem. of Carolinus, pertaining to
Carolus. —G. Karl, name of the emperor.

-CARMINATIVE, expelling wind from the body. (F.—L.) In

the Tatler, no. 224, § 8 (Sept. 14, 1710). —F. carminatif, ‘ wind-void-

ing ;’ Cot-—L. carminat-us, pp. of carminare, to card wool; hence, to

expel. —L. carmin-, stem of carmen, acard for wool. = L. carere, to card,
Not from L. carmen, a song; see Notes on E, Etym., p. 31.

CARMINE, a crimson colour, obtained from the cochineal insect
originally. (Span.— Arab. —Skt.) ‘ Carmine, a red colour, very vivid,
made of the cochineal mastique;’ Bailey’s Dict. vol. ii; 2nd ed. 1731.
— F. carmin (Hatzfeld) ; or from Span. carmin, carmine, a contracted
form of Span. carmesin, crimson, carmine. Span. carmesi, adj., crim-
son ; sb. cochineal powder. = Arab. girmizi, crimson ; girmiz, crimson;
girmiz i firengi,cochineal; Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 470. =—Skt. kymi(s),
a worm, the cochineal insect. Brugm.i. § 418. See Crimson.

CARNAGE, slaughter. (F.—L.) In Holland’s Plutarch, p. 371
(R.); Milton, P. L. x. 268.—F. carnage, ‘flesh-time, the season
wherein it is lawfull to eate flesh (Picardy) ; also, a slaughter, butch-
erie;’ Cot.—Late L. carnaticum, a kind of tribute of animals; cf.
carnatum, the time when it is lawful to eat flesh (whence the notion
of a great slaughter of animals easily arose).—L. caro (stem carz-),
flesh. Brugm. i. § 515.

CARNAL, fleshly. (L.) See Coventry Mysteries, p. 194; Sir
T. More’s Works, p.1 d; Sir T. Elyot, the Governour, bk. iii. c. 18;
Henry’s Wallace, b. xi. 1.1348. = L. carndlis, fleshly, carnal. = L. carn-,
base-of caro, flesh (above). Der. carnal-ly, carnal-ist, carnal-i-ty; and
see carnage, carnation, carnival, carnivorous, also incarnation, carrion.

CARNATION (1), flesh colour, pink. (F.—L.) See Hen. V,
ii. 3. 35; Wint. Ta. iv. 4. 82.—F. carnation, carnation colour; omitted
by Cotgraye, but noted in Supp. to Godefroy. Cf. Ital. carnagione,
‘the hew of ones skin and flesh, also fleshinesse’ (Florio). = L. car-
nationem, acc. of carndatio, fleshiness.—L. carn-, base of caro, flesh.
See Carnal.

CARNATION (2), the name ofa flower. (F.—L.) The orig. name
seems to have been coronation, as in Spenser, Sheph. Cal., April, 138;
from the flowers being ‘ dented or toothed like to a littall crownet’
(Lyte). See the account in N.E.D. It was then contracted to
cornation, and confused with carnation. See Coronation and
Carnation (1).

CARNELIAN, another form of Cornelian, q. v.

CARNIVAL, the feast held just before Lent. (F.—Ital.—L.) The
spelling is a mistaken one; it should rather be carnaval, carneval, or
carnoval. ‘Our carnivals and Shrove-Tuesdays;’ Hobbes, Of the
kingdom of darkness, c, 45 (R.). ‘ The carnival of Venice;’ Addison,
On Italy, Venice (R.). Itis rightly spelt carnaval in Blount’s Glosso-
graphia, ed. 1674.—F. carnaval, Shrovetide; Cot. Introduced from
Ital. in the 16th cent. (Brachet). Ital. carnovale, carnevale, orig. the
eve of Ash Wednesday ; later, the last three days before Lent. = Late L.
carnelevamen, carnelevarium, carnilevaria, a removal of meat, Shrove-
tide; also spelt carnelevale in a document dated 1130, in Carpentier’s
supplement to Ducange, Afterwards shortened from carnelevidle to
carnevale, a change promoted by a popular etymology which resolved
the word into Ital. carne, flesh, and vale, farewell, as if the sense were
‘farewell! O flesh.’ [Not ‘farewell éo flesh,’ as Lord Byron attempts
to explain it.]—L. carne-m, acc. of caro, flesh and Jevire, to remove,
whence -levar-ium, a removal, taking away, -levale, i.e. removing,
taking away, and. /evamen; the latter being the true L. form, with a
difference of sense. See Carnal and Lever, @ As carnelevimen
might also mean ‘solace of the flesh,’ the word was often completely
misunderstood and misapplied; and the sense was altered from ‘a
time of fasting’ to ‘a time of feasting.’ Hence the word is often
wrongly explained; see N.E.D.

CARNIVOROUS, flesh-eating. (L.) In Ray, On the Crea-
tion, pt.i. Also in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. carniuor-us, feeding
on flesh; with suffix-ows.—L. carni-, declensional stem of caro, flesh ;
and wordre, to devour. See Carnal and Voracious.

CAROB-TREE,, the locust-tree. (F.—Arab.) ‘A carobe tree;’
Turner, Names of Herbes, s. v. Siligua (1548). — MF. carobe, carrobe,
‘the carob; also a small weight (among mintmen and goldsmiths)
making but the 24 part of an ounce;’ Cot.—Arab. zharriub, Pers.
kharnub, bean-pods; see Richardson’s Arab, Dict. p. 608. Cf.
Carat. ; : ‘ RAT :


CARP 93


CAROCHE, a kind of coach. (F.—Ital.—Late L.—C.) Obso-
lete ; but the present sense of carriage was brought about by confu-
sion with it. ‘The great carock,’ Ben Jonson, Devil is an Ass, iv. 1
(Lady T.). Stow, in his Annals, 1615 ; p. 857, says that the ‘ordinary
use of caroches’ began about A.D. 1605; Dekker, in his Seven Deadly
Sinnes, 1606, ed. Arber, p. 20, mentions ‘the Grand Signiors Caroach.’
=F, carroche, ‘a caroache;’ Cot.; given as a variant of carosse or
earozze, ‘a carosse or caroach;’ Cot. Caroche is a Walloon form
(Sigart),—Ital, carroccia, carrozza, ‘a caroce, a coche, a chariot ;’”
Florio. Extended from Ital. carro, ‘a cart, chariot,’ Florio. =L,
carrus, a car; which is of Celtic origin. See Car.

CAROL, a kind of song; orig. a dance. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Faire is
carole of maide gent ;” King Alisaunder, 1. 1845.—OF. carole, orig,
a sort of dance; later carolle, ‘a sort of dance wherein many dance
together; also, a carroll, or Christmas song ;’ Cot. Godefroy (s.v,
carole) cites Swiss Rom. coraula, a round dance ; also, a dance-song. =
L. choraula, by-form of choraulés (Gk. xopavAns), a flute-player, who
accompanied with a flute the chorus-dance.—Gk. xop-és, a chorus,
round-dance; and avAds, a flute, from dnt, I blow. See Chorus,
So Korting, § 2145.

CAROTID, related to the two great arteries of the neck. (Gk.)
‘ The carotid, vertebral, and splenick arteries ;’ Ray, On the Creation
(Todd). ‘ Carotid Arteries, certain arteries belonging to the brain;
so called because, when stopt, they immediately incline the person to
sleep;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715 = Gk. xapwrides, s. pl. the two great
arteries of the neck; with respect to which the ancients believed that
compression of them would cause drowsiness. = Gk, xapdw, I plunge
into heavy sleep, I stupefy.—Gk. «dpos, heavy sleep, torpor,

CAROUSEH, a drinking-bout. (F.—G.) Orig. an adverb meaning
‘completely,’ or ‘all out,’ i.e. ‘to the bottom,’ used of drinking.
Whence the phrase, ‘to quaff carouse,’ to drink deeply. ‘Robin, here’s
a carouse to good king Edward’s self;’ George a Greene, Old Plays,
iii, 51 (Nares) ; see Peele’s Works, ed. Dyce, p. 267. ‘ The tippling
sottes at midnight which ¢o guaffe carowse do use, Wil hate thee if at
any time to pledge them thou refuse ;’ Drant’s Horace, ep. to Lollius.
(See Horat. Epist. i. 18. 91. Drant died A.D. 1578.) ‘ He in that
forrest did death’s cup carowse, i.e. drink up; Mirror for Magistrates,
p. 646. ‘Then drink they all around, both men and women; and
sometimes they carowse for the victory very filthily and drunkenly ;’
Hakluyt, Voyages, i. 96. Also spelt garowse. ‘Some of our captains
garoused of his wine till they were reasonably pliant ;’ also, ‘And are
themselves . . . the greatest garousers and drunkards of the world ;”
Raleigh, Discovery of Guiana; Hakluyt Soc., p. 64; cf. Hakluyt,
Voy. iii. 648, where the form is harousers,—F. carous, ‘a carousse of
drinke ;’ Cotgrave. He also gives: ‘Carousser, to quaffe, swill, '
carousse it.’ = G. garaus, adv., also used as a sb. to mean ‘ finishing
stroke ;’ as in ‘einer Sache das garaus machen, to put an end to a
thing ;’ Fliigel’s Dict. The G. garaus signifies literally ‘right out,”
and was specially used of emptying a bumper to any one’s health,
a custom which became so notorious that the word made its way not
only into French and English, but even into Spanish; cf. Span. caraos,
‘drinking a full bumper to one’s health;’ Meadows. —G, gar, adv.
completely (OHG. faro, allied to E. yare, which see); and aus,
prep. out, cognate with E. out. 4 Similarly, the phr. allaus was some.
times used, from the G. al aus, i.e. all out, in exactly the same con-
nexion; and this phrase likewise found its way into French. Cotgrave
gives: ‘Alluz, all out; or a carouse fully drunk up.’ It even found
its way into English. Thus Beaum. and Fletcher: ‘Why, give’s some
wine then, this will fit us all; Here’s to you still, my captain’s friend!
All out!’ Beggar’s Bush, Act ii. sc. 3. Der. carouse, verb; also
carous-al, in one sense of it, but not always; see below.

CAROUSAL, a drinking-bout; Carousel, a pageant. (1. F.—
G.; 2. F.—Ital.) 1. The form carousal is now generally under-
stood as being a mere derivative of the verb ¢o carouse, and would
be so used, 2, But in old authors we find cdrousél (generally so
accented and spelt) used to mean a sort of pageant in which some
form of chariot-race formed a principal part. ‘This game, these
carousels Ascanius taught, And, building Alba, to the Latins brought;’
Dryden’s Virgil, Ain. v. 777, where the Latin text (v. 596) has certa-
mina, And see the long quotation from Dryden's pref. to Albian and
Albanius in Richardson. =F, carrousel, a tilt, carousel, tilting-match.
=Ital. carosello (variant garosello), a festival, a tournament. The
form carosello is not given in Baretti, but is cited by Diez and Tor-
riano. Torriano gives.caroselle or caleselle, which he explains by ‘a
kind of sport or game used in Italy at Shrovetide.’ Diez connects
carosello with Ital. carrozza (s,v.carriera); see Caroche. So Korting,
§ 1973.

CARP (1), a fresh-water fish, (F,—Late L.—Teut.?) ‘ Carpe,
fysche, carpus.’ Prompt. Parv, p. 62.—F. carpe.—Late L. carpa;
which occurs as early as the fifth century, being found in Cassiodorus,
lib. xii. ep, 4: ‘Destinet carpam Danubius;’ quoted by Brachet..


94 CARP


Hence also Span. carpa, Ital. carpione. B. But prob. of Teut. origin,
being found in most Teut. languages; cf. Du. karper; Icel. karfi (?) ;
Dan. karpe; Swed. karp; G. karpfen; OHG. charpho. Whence also
Russ. karp’, Lith. karpa.

CARP (2), to cavil at. (Scand.) In Shak. Much Ado, iii. 1. 71;
K. Lear, i. 4. 222. a. There can be little doubt that the peculiar use
of carp, in a bad sense, is due to its supposed connexion with the L.
carpere, to pluck, to calumniate. At the same time, it is equally cer-
tain that the ME. carpen is frequently used, as noted by Trench in
his Select Glossary, without any such sinister sense. Very frequently,
it merely means ‘to say,’ as in ¢o karpe the sothe, to tell the truth;
Will. of Palerne, 503, 655, 2804. It occurs rather early, ‘ Hwen
thou art on eise, carpe toward Ihesu, and seie thise wordes’ = when
thou art at ease, speak to Jesus, and say these words; Old Eng.
Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 287. B, The word is Scandinavian, and had
originally somewhat of a sinister sense, but rather significant of
‘boasting’ or ‘ prattling’ than implying any malicious intent, a use
of the word which is remarkably absent from Middle English; see the
26 examples of it in Miatzner’s Worterbuch.—Icel. karpa, to boast,
brag; Swed. dial. karpa, to brag, boast, clatter, wrangle, rant;
more frequently spelt garpa (Rietz) ; cf. garper, a contentious man, a
prattler, great talker. y. We may also note Swed. dial. karper, brisk,
eager, industrious (Rietz); Icel. garpr, a warlike man, a bravo, a
virago; MSwed. garp, a warlike, active man; also, a boaster
(Ihre). Der. carp-er.

CARPEL, the cell of a pistil or fruit, (F.—Gk.) First used
by Lindley in 1835.—F. carpelle; a dimin. form coined from Gk,
xapr-os, fruit. See Harvest.

CARPENTER, a maker of wooden articles. (F.—L.—C.) In
eatly use. ME. carpenter, Chaucer, C..T. 3189 ; Rob. of Glouc. p. 537,
1. 11103; Legends of the Holy Rood, ed. Morris, p. 30, 1. 155. —
ONorthF. carpentier (mod. F. charpentier), a worker in timber. = Late
L. carpentarius, a carpenter. — Late L. carpentare, to work in timber;
with especial reference to the making of carriages. L. carpentum, a
carriage, chariot, used by Livy; a word (like car) of Celtic origin.
Cf. Gael. and Irish carbad, Oltish carpat, a carriage, chariot, litter,
bier; W. cerbyd, a chariot; OBret. cerpit. Stokes-Fick, p. 71.
Probably allied to L. corbis, a basket, with reference to ‘the basket
character of the body of these chariots ;? Macbain. ‘Der. carpentr-y.

CARPET, a thick covering for floors. (F.—L.) ‘A carpet, tapes,
-etis;’ Levins (A.D. 1570). ‘A ladyes carpet; Hall, Edw. IV,
an. xiv. § 6. ‘A carpet,’ an. 1284; J.E.T. Rogers, Hist. of Prices,
ii. 536; N. and Q.7 S. iii. 152.—OF. carpite, a carpet, sort of cloth ;
Supp. to Godefroy. — Late L. carpita, a kind of thick cloth or anything

;made of such cloth; allied to Late L. carpia, lint; cf. mod. F.
charpie, lint.—L. carpere, to pluck, pull in* pieces (lint being made
from rags pulled to pieces, and carpet (probably) from shreds) ; also
tocrop, gather, Cf.Gk. xapmés, what is gathered, fruit; also E. harvest,

-v. Brugm. i. § 631.

CARPUS, the wrist. (L.—Gk.) In Phillips (1706).—L. carpus.
= Gk. xaprés, the wrist; allied to E. whirl. See Whirl,

CARRACK, a ship of burden. (F.) In Shak. Oth.i. 2.50. ME.
caracke, Squyr of Low Degre, 1.819. [We also find carryk (Voc.
570. 35), which comes nearer to Late L. carrica, a ship of burden.] —
OF. carraque (Roquefort); spelt carrake by Froissart (Godefroy,
Supp. p. 427). —Late L. carraca, a ship of burden; also spelt carrica.
B. Etym. unknown; but perhaps connected with carricdre, to lade a
car.—L. carrus,a car. See Car, @ The Du. kraak, a carrack,
is merely borrowed from F. (Franck).

CARRIOLE, a small open car for oneperson. (F. —Ital.—L.—C.)
Modern. =F. carriole, = Ital. carriola, also carriuola, ‘a wheele-barrow,
«+a kinde of chair couered, vsed in Italie for to carrie men vp and
downe by porters ;’ Florio. Ital. carro, ‘a cart ;’ Florio. =L. carrus,
acar; see Car.

CARRION, putrefying flesh, a carcase. (F.—L.) In early use.
ME. caroigne, careyne, a carcase; Chaucer, C. T. 2015 (A 2013);
spelt charoine, Ancren Riwle, p. 84.—OF. caroigne, charoigne, a car-
case; mod. Norm. dial. carogne.—Late L. carénia, a carcase.—L.
caro, flesh. See Carnal.

CARRONADE, a sort of cannon. (Scotland.) So called from
Carron, in Stirlingshire, Scotland, where there are some celebrated
iron works, ‘The articles [there] manufactured are machinery, agri-
cultural implements, cannon, carronades, which take their name from
this place, &c.;’ Engl. Cycl. s.v. Stirlingshire.

CARROT, an edible root. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘A carote, pastinaca ;’
Levins (A.D. 1570). ‘ Their savoury parsnip next, and carrot, pleasing
food ;’ Drayton’s Polyolbion, s. 20, 1. 49.—MF, carote, carrote, the
carrot, Cot.; mod. F. carotte.—L. caréta, used by Apicius. (Apicius
is probably an assumed name, and the date of the author's treatise
uncertain.) — Gk. «apwrdy, a carrot (Liddell). —Gk. “apa, a head ; cf.
kepadwrdv, headed, said of garlic, &c. Der. carrot-y.


CASCADE


CARROUSEL; see under Carousal (2).

CARRY, to convey on a car, (F.—Late L.—C.) ME. carien,
with one r; Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii. 190.—ONorthF. carier, to
carry, transport in a car, Picard carrier (Late L. carricdre). —OF. car,
a cart, car (L, carrus). See Car. Der. carri-age, formerly cariage,
with oner, Prompt. Parv. p.62; see Trench, Select Glossary. @ A
modern sense of carriage, viz. vehicle, is prob. partly due to associa-
tion with Caroche, q.v.

CART, a two-wheeled vehicle. (Scand.) In early use. ME,
karte, carte; Ormulum, 54. Chaucer has carter, C. T. 7122 (D 1540).
(AS. cret, by the common metathesis of r; pl. cratu, chariots, A. S.
version of Gen. ].9. Cf. ‘ veredus, crete-hors,’ i.e. cart-horse; Alf.
Gloss.; Voc. 108. 24.] From Icel. Rartr, a cart; whence, probably,
Picard carti, a cart. @ The W. cart, Gael. and Irish cairt, are
from E. Der. cart, v.; cart-age, cart-er.

CARTE, a paper, a card, bill of fare. (F.—L.—Gk.) Modern,
and mere French. Compare the phrase carte blanche. ‘ Carte blanche,
a blank paper, seldom used but in this phrase, to send one a carte
blanche, signed, to fill up with what conditions he pleases;’ Bailey’s
Dict. vol. ii. ed. 1731.—F. carte, acard. See further under Card (1),
of which car/eis a doublet. Der. cart-el (F. cartel, from Ital. cartello),
the dimin. form; cart-oon (F.carton, from Ital. cartone), the augmenta-
tive form; also cartridge, cartulary, which see. Cartel is spelt chartel
in Ben Jonson, Every Man in his Humour, i. 5. Cartoon is spelt carton
in the Spectator, no. 226. For cartouche, see Cartridge.

CARTILAGE, gristle. (F.—L.) In Boyle’s Works, vi. 735, and
in Blount’s Gloss.; Ray has the adj. cart:lagineous (sic), On the
Creation, pt. i. (R.)—F, cartilage, gristle; Cot.—L, cartilaginem,
ace. of cartilago, gristle; of unknown origin. (Perhaps cf. E. hard.)
Der. cartilag-in-ous.

CARTOON ; see under Carte.

CARTRIDGE, CARTOUCHE, a paper case for the charge of
a gun. (F.—Ital.—L.—Gk.) ‘Cartridge is a corruption of cartrage,
a form which appears in Dryden’s Annus Mirabilis, st. 149 (altered to
cartridge in the Clar. Press ed. of Selections from Dryden). A still
older form was cartage, itself a corruption of cartouche, the true F.
form. Cf. ‘their cartrage or ca[r]touche boxes;’ Dampier, A New
Voyage (1699) ; i. 231.—F. cartouche, ‘ the cornet of paper whereinto
Apothecaries and Grocers put the parcels they retail; also, a cartouch,
or full charge for a pistoll, put up within a little paper, to be the
readier for use;” Cot. 2, A tablet for an ornament, or to receive an
inscription, formed like a scroll, was also called a cartouche, in archi-
tecture; and Cot. also gives: ‘Cartoche, [the same] as Cartouche;
also, a cartridge or roll, in architecture.’ This shows that the cor-
rupt form cartridge (apparently made up, by popular etymology,
from the F. carte, a card, and the E. ridge, used for edge or projec-
tion) was then already in use. — Ital. cartoccio, a roll of paper, a cart-
ridge.=Ital. carta, paper.—L. charta (Late L. carta), paper. = Gk.
xaptn, xaptns, a leaf of papyrus. See Carte, Card,

CARTULARY, a register-book of a monastery. (Late L.—
Gk.) ‘I may, by this one, show my reader the form ofall those car-
tularies, by which such devout Saxon princes endowed their sacred
structures ;’ Weever, Anc. Fun. Mon., xiv. 99 (in Todd’s Johnson).
Also in Bailey’s Dict. vol. ii. ed. 1731.—Late L. cartuldrium, also
chartuldrium, a register.—Late L. chartula, a document; dimin. of
L. charta, a paper, charter (above). See Charter.

CARUCATEH, a measure of land. (L.—C.) It varied according to
the soil; properly, as much as could be tilled with one plough (and
a team of 8 oxen) in a year. Englished from Late L. cariicata, car-
racata, in Domesday Book; a fem, pp. from carriicare, to plough. =
Late L. carriica, a plough; L. carrica, a four-wheeled travelling
coach; (later, a wheel-plough, in the Salic Law).—L. carrus, a car 3;
see Car.

CARVE, to cut. (E.) ME. kerven, keruen (u for v); Layamon,


i. 250. AS. ceorfan, Grein, i. 159.4Du. kerven; G. kerben, to notch,
jag, indent. Teut. type *kerfan, pt. t. *karf, pt. pl. *kurbum, pp.
*hLorbanoz. From the 2nd stem are Dan. karva, Swed. karfva, to


notch. B. The word is co-radicate with Gk. ypapew. See Graphic,
Brugmann, i. § 791. Der, carv-er.

CARVEL; the same as Caravel, q.v.

CARYATIDES, female figures in architecture, used instead of
columns as supporters. (Gk.) In Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. Some-
times written Caryates, which is the Latin form, being the pl. of adj.
Carydatis, i.e. belonging to the village of Caryz in Laconia, Cary-
Gtides is the Gk. form, signifying the same thing. — Gk. Kapuarides,
s. pl., women of Caryz.

CASCADE, a waterfall. (F.—Ital.—L.) Not given in Cotgrave.
Used by Addison, in describing the Teverone (Todd’s Johnson) ; and
in Anson’s Voyages, bk. ii.c. 1. ‘Artificial cascades;’ Evelyn, Diary,
Oct. 8, 1641.—F. cascade, introduced from Ital. in the 16th century,
according to Brachet; but perhaps later. Ital. cascata, a waterfall ;


CASE


‘formed as a regular fem. pp. from cascare, to fall; which is formed
from L. casare, to totter, to be about to fall, by help of the suffix -ic-, so
that cascare is for *casicare. B. L. casare is a secondary verb; from
caisum, supine of cadere, to fall. See Chance,

CASE (1), that which happens; an event, &. (F.—L.) In
early use. ME, cas, seldom case; it often means ‘ circumstance,’ as
in Rob. of Glouc. p. 9, 1. 205; also ‘chance,’ id. p. 528, 1, 10871.
— OF, cas, mod.F. cas.—L. casum, ace. of casus, a fall, accident,
case.—L, casus, pp. of cadere, to fall. See Chance. Der. casu-al,
-casu-al-ly, casu-ist, casu-ist-ic, casu-ist-ic-al, casu-ist-ry; all from the
declensional stem casu- of L. casus. Casual occurs in Chaucer, Tro.
cand Cress. iv. 419. Casuist is in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674,

CASE (2), a receptacle, cover. (F.—L.) ME, cass, kace; spelt
cass, Barbour, Bruce, xx. 304. ‘ Kace, or casse for pynnys, capcella ;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 269.—ONorthF. casse, ‘a box, case, or chest;’
Cot. (mod.F. chasse). —L. capsa, a receptacle, chest, box, cover. —L.
capere, to receive, contain, hold. See Capable. Der. case, verb;
cash, q.v.3 also en-case, casement. Doublet, chase (3), q.v.

CASEMATHE, a bomb-proof chamber. (F.—Ital.) Originally, a
bomb-proof chamber, furnished with embrazures; later, an embrazure.
‘ Casemate, a loop-hole in a fortified wall to shoot out at; or, in for-
tification, a place in a ditch, out of which to plague the assailants ;’
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ‘Secure your casamates;’ Ben Jonson,
Staple of News, i. 1.—F. casemate, ‘a casemate, a loop, or loop-hole,
in a fortified wall;’ Cot. = Ital. casamatta, ‘a casamat, or a slaughter-
house, and is a place built low vnder the wall or bulwarcke, not
arriuing vnto the height of the ditch, seruing to skoure the ditch,
annoying the enemie when he entreth into the ditch to skale the wall;’
Florio. = Ital. casa, a house; and matta, fem. of adj. matto, mad, fool-
ish, but also used nearly in the sense of E. ‘dummy;’ whilst the
Sicilian mattu, according to Diez, means dim, dark. Hence the
sense is dummy-chamber, or dark chamber. Cf. Ital. carromatto,
‘a block carriage, sometimes used to spare field-carriages ;? Torriano.
.—L. casa, a cottage; and Late L. mattus, sad, foolish, dull, lit.
check-mated, for the origin of which see Checkmate. See Karting,
§§ 1979, 5996. And see Casino.

CASEMENT, a frame of a window. (F.—L.) <A casement is a
small part of an old-fashioned window, opening by hinges, the rest of
the window being fixed; also applied to the whole window, It occurs
in Shak. Merry Wives, i. 4. 2. We also find ‘casement, a concave
moulding,’ in Halliwell’s Dict.; cf. Gwilt’s Architecture, § 2531.
B. In the latter case, the word is equivalent to enchasement, from the
verb to enchase; cf. the verb to chase, in the sense ‘to engrave, adorn,’
which is short for exchase. Observe, too, that enchase is a doublet of
encase; see Enchase. y. The difference is merely one of dialect ;
ONorthF. casse being the same as OF. chasse, mod.F. chdsse; from L.
capsa; see Case (2) ; and, just as casement in the sense of ‘moulding’ is
connected with enchase, so casement in the sense of window, or rather
* window-frame,’ is connected with encase. 6. In other words, case-
ment is short for encasement; and was formed from the MF, encasser,
‘to case, or inchest, to make up in, or put up into, a case or chest ;’
Cot. Cf. MF. enchassiller, ‘to set in, to enclose, compass, bind, hold
in with a wooden frame;’ id. Also enchasser en or, ‘to enchace, or
set in gold;’ also ‘enchassement, an enchacing or enchacement ;’ and
‘enchasseure, an enchacement, an enchacing, or setting in;’ id. «. Gode-
froy has OF, enchassement, enchacement, a frame; and the ONorthF.
form of enchassement would have been encassement, from which casement
followed easily by the loss of the prefix. Similarly, Shak. has case for
encase, Com. Err, ii. 1. 85. Both case and the suffix -men¢ are of L.
origin. See Encase and Case (2), The Ital. casamento, a large
house, is quite a different word. Observe a similar loss of the first
syllable in fence, for defence, censer for incenser, &c.

CASERN, a lodging for soldiers, barrack. (F.—Prov.—L.) Phillips

(1706) has casern, a lodgment raised between the rampart and houses
of a fortified town, for the soldiers.—F. caserne.—Prov. cazerna.
Perhaps from L. qguaterna, a lodging or watch-house for four sol-
diers.—L. guattuor, four; see Four. See Korting, § 7647; and
Hatzfeld.
. CASH (1), coin or money. (F.—Ital.—L.) Soin Shak. Hen. V,ii. 1,
120. But the original sense is ‘a chest,’ or ‘a till,’ i.e. the box in
which the ready money was kept; afterwards transferred to the money
itself. ‘So as this bank is properly a general cash [i.e. till, money-
box], where every man lodges his money;’ Sir W. Temple, On the
United Provinces, c, 2 (R.). And see the quotation from Cotgrave
below. = F. casse, ‘a box, case, or chest, to carry or keep weares [wares |
in; also, a merchant’s cash or counter ;’ &c.—Ital. cassa, ‘a chest ...
a merchant’s cash or counter ;’ Florio.—L. capsa,a chest. Thus cash
is a doublet of Case (2), q.v. Der. cash-ier, sb.; but see cashier,
vb., below.


Cashmere, q.v.; and distinct from Kersey, q.v.


~ CASSOCK 95


kasu, a small coin, money.—Skt. karsha-s, a weight, abt. 180 grains
Troy. See Yule, and H. H. Wilson’s Glossary.

CASHEW-NUT, the nut of a W. and E, Indian tree. (F.—
Brazil.) In Dampier’s Voyages, iii. 68 (1703), Cashew is an E. form
of acajou. =F. acajou. = Brazil. acaju (Yule, s.v. Cashew) or acait, in
the Hist. Nat. Brasilize (1648), vol. ii. p. 94; which is the fruit of the
tree named acaiaba (F. acajaba).

CASHIER, v., to dismiss from service. (Du.—F.—L.) [Quite
unconnected with cashier, sb., which is simply formed from cash.] In
Shak. Merry Wives, i. 3.6. [Occasionally also written cask; from
F. casser, directly. ‘ He cashed the old souldiers and supplied their
roumes with yong beginners ;’ Golding, Justine, fol. 63 (R.). And
the pp. cashed, for cashiered, occurs in a Letter of The Earl of Leicester,
dated 1585; Nares, ed. Wright and Halliwell. Also spelt cass. ‘But
when the Lacedzemonians saw their armies cassed ;’ North’s Plutarch,
180 E; quoted in Nares, s. v. casse, q.V-] = Du. cusséren, ‘to casheere ;’
Hexham. =F, casser, ‘to breake, burst, .. . quash asunder, also to casse,
casseere, discharge ;’ Cot.—L. guassdre, to shatter, frequentative of
quatere, to shake (which in Late L. annexed the senses of L. cassdre,
to bring to nothing, to annul, discharge; used by Sidonius and Cas-
siodorus ; from L. cassus, empty, void; of uncertain origin), Korting,
§§ 1988, 7645. 4 It is easy to explain the suffix, The form casseere
has been already quoted from Cotgrave; this is really the Du. casseren,
to cast off, break, discard. ‘This Du. cass-eren is nothing but the F,
casser with the Du. suffix -erez, used in forming Du. verbs from Ro-
mance ones. So also G. -iren, as in zsoliren, to isolate, from F. isoler.

CASHMERE, a soft wool. (India.) Esp. applied to a rich kind
of soft woollen shawl; so called from the country of Cashmere, which
lies close under the Himalayan Mountains, on the S. side of them.
Also a name given to the stuff of which they are made, and to imita-
tions of it. See Cassimere.

CASINO, a public room for music or dancing. (Ital.—L.) Modern.
= Ital. casino, a summer-house, country-box ; dimin. of casa, a house.
= L. casa, a cottage.

CASK, a barrel or tub for wine, &c. (Span.—L.) ‘The caske will
haue a taste for evermore With that wherewith it seasoned was before ;”
Mirror for Magistrates, p. 193 (R.).—Span. casco, a skull, sherd, coat
(of an onion) ; a cask; helmet; casque; cf. Span. cascara, peel, rind,
hull; Port. casca, rind. See Casque, of which cask is a doublet.
@ Imported from Spain, together with the wine.

CASKET, a little chest or coffer, (F.—L.) In Shak. Mer. of Ven.i,’
2.100. Earlier; ‘the two shyrtys that wer in my casket;’ Paston
Letters, iii. 7 (1471); and as early as 1467. It looks like a dimin. of
cask, in the sense of ‘ chest ;’ as in ‘A jewel, locked into the wofullest
cask ;’ 2 Hen, VI, iii. 2. 409; but this cask is not found before 1593.
The form is anomalous, and must be regarded as a corrupt substitu-
tion for F. cassette, ‘a small casket, chest, cabinet,’ &c.; Cot. A dimin.
form. = F. casse,a box, case, or chest. = L.capsa,a chest. See Case (2).
@ The objection in N. E. D. that F. cassette dates from the 16th century
is founded on a mistake. See Supp. to Godefroy, who gives the form
guacete in 1348; much earlier than examples of E. casket,

CASQUE, a helmet. (F.—Span.—L.) In Shak. Rich. II, i. 3.81.
— F. casque, ‘the. head-piece tearmed a casque, or casket;’ Cot.=
Span. casco, ‘a caske or burganet, a tile-shard ;” Minsheu, The Span.
has also cascara, peel, rind, shell (cf. Port. casca, bark, rind of trees) ;
and these words, with numerous others, appear to be all derivatives
from the very common Span. verb cascar, to burst, break open, crush ;
formed (as if from L. *guass-ic-are) from an extension of L, guassare,
which also gives F.casser, to break. See Quash. Doublet, cask, q. v.

CASSATION, abrogation. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave.—F, cassation,
“a cassation, a quashing, cassing, breaking ;’ Cot.—Late L. acc. cas-
satiOnem. — Late L. cassare, for L. quassare, to quash; see Quash.

CASSAVA, a plant; also called mandioc. (Hayti.) In Eden’s
First Three Books on America, ed. Arber, pp. 159, 168, 175, 215, the
Hayti name is given as cazabbi. In the tr. of Acosta by E. G., bk. iv.
c. 17, it is cagavi.

CASSTIA, a species of laurel. (L.—Gk.—Heb.) Exod. xxx. 24;
Psalm xly. 8 (A.V.), where the Vulgate has casia.—L. casia, cassia, =
Gk. xacia, a spice of the nature of cinnamon. = Heb. geési'dth, in Ps.
xly. 8, a pl. form from a fem. getsi‘dh, cassia-bark ; from the root
gatsa‘, to cut away; because the bark is cut or peeled off. See Gesenius.

CASSIMERE, a twilled cloth of fine wool. (India,) Also spelt
hkerseymere in Webster. These terms are nothing but corruptions of
Cashmere is
spelt Cassimer in Herbert’s Travels, 1665, p. 70.


. CASSINO, a game at cards; the same word as Casino.


CASSOCK, a kind of vestment. (F.—Ital.—L.) Sometimes ‘a
military cloak ;’? All’s Well, iv. 3. 192.—F. casaque, ‘a cassock, long


coat ;’ Cot.— Ital. casacca, a great coat, surtout. Apparently formed


CASH (2),a coin of low value in India and China. (Tamil—Skt.) | from Ital. casa, properly ‘a house ;’ hence ‘a covering,’ used in a half
Spelt cash (1699), Dampier, Voy. II. 1. 4. 72 (N.E.D.).—Tamil | jocular’sense. Cf. Ital. casaccia, a large ugly old house. Indeed, Florio


CASSOLET


gives casacca as meaning ‘an habitation or dwelling ; also, a cassocke
or long coate;’ as if from L, casa, a cottage. See Casino. And see
Chasuble, a word of similar origin; which renders this account of
cassock probable. Cf. Korting, § 1978.

CASSOLET, CASSOLETTE, a vessel in which perfumes are
burnt. (F.—Span.—Arab,) ‘In cassolets and silver urns;” Moore,
Lalla Rookh, Tale J, pt. 2, 1. 67.—F. cassolette.—Span. cazoleta, a
pan; dimin. of cazuela, an earthen pan; from cazo, a sauce-pan, an
iron ladle (Hatzfeld). — Arab. kas, a cup, a bowl; kasa(z), a cup,
plate, saucer (Devic).

CASSOW ARY, a bird like an ostrich. (Malay.) ‘ Cassowary
or Emeu, a large fowl, with feathers resembling camel’s hair;’ Ker-
sey’s Dict.ed. 1715. First in 1611; N. E.D.=—Malay kasuwari; also
suwari; C. P.G.Scott, p.125. ‘The cassowary is a bird which was
first brought into Europe by the Dutch, from Java, in the East Indies,
in which part of the world it is only to be found;’ Eng. tr. of Buf-
fon’s Nat. Hist., ii. 9; London, 1792.

CAST, to throw. (Scand.) In early use, and one of the most
characteristic of the Scand. words in English. ME. casten, kesten;
St. Marharete, ed. Cockayne, pp. 4, 7; Havelok, ll. 1784, 210T. =
Tcel. kasta, to throw; Swed. kasfa; Dan. kaste. B. The orig. sense
was probably to ‘throw into a heap,’ or ‘heap up;’ cf. Swed. dial.
kas, Icel. késtr, kos, a pile, heap; L. con-gerere,to heap together, pp.
con-gestus. Der. cast, sb.; cast-er, cast-ing,, cast-away, out-cast. Also
castor, as in pepper-castor ; a variant of caster.

CASTANETS, instruments composed of two small, concave
shells of ivory or hard wood, loosely fastened together by a ribbon
passing over the thumb, and made to snap together by beating one
of them with the middle finger. (F.—Span.—L.—Gk.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. Spelt castanietas in Dryden, Ind. Emperor, iv. 3.—
F. castagnettes, pl., ‘finger-knackers, wherewith players make a pretty
noise in some kind of daunces;’ Cot.—Span. castafielas, castanets ;
pl. of castafeta ; so called (according to Pineda and Monlan) because
the castanet is shaped like a piece of the shell of a chestnut. (Some
think the sound of the castanet resembled the cracking of roasted
chestnuts.) — Span. casta#a, a chestnut. L. castanea, the chestnut-
tree.— Gk. xactavoy, a chestnut; see Chestnut.

CASTE, a breed, race. (Port.—L.) ‘ Of two castes;’ Hakluyt,
Voy. ili. 659. Sir T. Herbert, speaking of men of various occupa-
tions in India, says: ‘These never marry out of their own casts;’
Travels, ed. 1665, p. 53. ‘ Four casts or sorts of men;’ Lord’s Dis-
covery of the Banians [of India], 1630, p. 3 (Todd). Chiefly used
in speaking of classes of men in India. = Port. casta, a race, stock;
a name given by the Portuguese to classes of men in India, = Port.
casta, adj. fem., chaste, pure, in allusion to purity of breed; from
masc. casto.—L, castum, acc. of castus, chaste. See Chaste.

CASTIGATE, to chastise, chasten. (L.) In Shak. Timon, iv.
3. 240.—L, castigdius, pp. of castigiire, to chasten. ‘The lit. sense is
“to keep chaste’ or ‘keep pure.’ = L. castus, chaste, pure. See Chaste.
Der. castigat-ion, castigat-or. Doublet, chastise.

CASTLE, a fortified house. by; also F,—L.) In very early
use. AS. castel, used to render L. castellum in Matt. xxi. 2.—L. cas-
tellum, dimin, of castrum, a camp, fortified place. 2. ME. castel ;
Chaucer, C. T., 11159 (F 847).—ONorthF. castel (OF. chastel,
F. chitteau), a fort. =L. castellum, a fort. Brugmann,i.§ 754. Der.
castell-at-ed, castell-an.

CASTOR, a beaver; a hat. (L.—Gk.) ‘Castor, the beaver; or
a fine sort of hat made of its fur;’ Kersey’s Dict. 1715. In Dray-
ton’s Polyolbion, s. vi. 1.4, Mere Latin. =L. castor.—Gk, xactwp,
a beaver. fB. Of Eastern origin. Cf. Skt. kastiri, musk; Pers.
khaz, a beaver. Der. castor-o1l, q. V.

CASTOR- OIL, a medicinal oil. (L.—Gk.; and F.—L.—Gk.)
Named from some confusion with castoreum. ‘ Castoreum, a medicine
made of the liquor contained in the little bags that are next the
beaver’s groin;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. See above. q But
really a vegetable production. The castor-oil plant, or palma-Christz,
is Ricinus communis,  -

CASTRATE, to geld, to cut so as to render imperfect. (L.) ‘Ye
castrate [mortify} the desires of the flesh;’ Martin, Marriage of Priests,
1554, Y i, b (Todd's Johnson). See also the Spectator, no.179.—L,
pastratus, pp. of castrare. Cf. Skt. castri, a knife; Gk, xeagev, to
cleave (Prellwitz). Der. castrat-ion.

CASUAL, CASUIST; see Case (1),

CAT, a domestic animal. (E.) ME, kat, cat, Ancren Riwle, p.
102; AS. cat, catt, Wright’s Vocab. i. 23, 78. + Du. kat; Icel. hottr ;
Dan. kat; Swed. katt; G. kater, katze. 4+ W. cath; Irish and Gael.
cat; Bret. kaz; Late L. calus. 4+ Russian kot’, koshka. 4+ Arab. gilt;
Richardson's Dict. p. 1136; Turkish kedi. B. Origin and history
of the ppread of the word alike obscure. Der, cat-call ; cat-hin, q.v.;
kitt-en, q.v.; cat-er-waul, q. y.; also caterpillar, q. V.


CATA., prefix; generally ‘down.’ (Gk.) Gk. «ara-, prefix; Gk,


96


CATECHISE


nard, prep. down, downward ; hence, incomposition, also ‘thoroughly,’
or ‘ completely.’ * Der. cata-clysm, cata-comb, &c.

CATACLYSM, a deluge. (Gk.) In Hale, Origin of Mankind,
p- 217 (R.). And in Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674.—Gk. xaraxAvopos,
a dashing over, a flood, deluge.Gk. xaraxAvfev, to dash over, to
deluge. — Gk. «ard, downward; and «Av(ev, to wash or dash (said
of waves). Cf. L. cluere, to cleanse ; ie klutrs, pure. — 4/KLEU.
to wash; see Prellwitz; Brugm. i. § 4

CATACOMB, a grotto for nae Ga —Ital.—LateL.) In Ad-
dison’s Italy, on Naples ; ; and in the Tatler, no. 129. And in Ker-
sey’s Dict.,1715.—F. catacombe. — Ital. catacomba, a sepulchral vault.
—Late L. catacumbay chiefly applied to the Catacombs at Rome;
where catacumba is a nom. evolved out of an older catacumbas, an
unexplained place-name. Cf. ‘In loco qui dicitur catacumbas ;’ St.
Gregory. See early references in N. E. D. ‘On pzere stOwe cata-
cumbe ;’ The Shrine, ed. Cockayne, p. 55.

CATAFALQUE, a stage or platform, chiefly used at funerals.
(F.—Ital.) Evelyn has the Ital. form catafalco, Diary, Oct. 8, 1641.
=F, catafalque. = Ital. catafalco; of unknown origin. See Scaffold.

CATALEPSY, a sudden seizure. (Gk.) Spelt catalepsis in Kersey,
ed. 1715; catalepsie in Phillips, ed, 1658. A medical term.—Gk.
KaTaAniis, a grasping, seizing. —Gk. xara, down; and AapBavey,
to seize.

CATALOGUE, a list set down in order. (F.—Late L.—Gk.)
In Shak. All’s Well, i. 3.149. —F. catalogue, ‘a catalogue, list, rowl,
register,’ &c.; Cot. = Late L. catalogus.— Gk. katddoyos, a counting
up; enrolment. = Gk. xara, down, fully; and Aoy-, second grade of
A€yerv, to say, tell. See Logic.

CATAMARAN, a sort of raft made of logs. (Tamil.) ‘They

call them catamarans;’ Dampier, A New Voyage (1699), i. 143.
Given asa Deccan word in Forbes’ Hindustani Dict. ed. 1850, p. 2803
‘katmaran, a raft, a float, commonly called a catamaran. The word
is originally Tamul, and signifies in that language tied logs.” = Tamil,
kattu, binding ; maram, wood (Yule); see H. H. Wilson, pp. 270, 331.

CATAPLASM, a kind of poultice. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) In
Hamlet, iv. 7. 144. = F. cataplasme, ‘a cataplasme, or poultis; a soft,
or moyst plaister ;’ Cot. = L. cataplasma.— Gk. KOTATAAG HA, a plaster,
poultice. « Gk. katanAdocev, to spread over. = Gk. «ara, down, over;
and mAdooev, to mould, bring into shape. See Plaster,

CATAPUL'T, a machine for throwing stones. (Late L.~Gk.)
In Holland’s Pliny, bk. vii. c. 56 (R.).—Late L. catapulta, a war-
engine for throwing stones. — Gk. saraméAr7s, the same.— Gk. kara,
down; and mdAAewv, to brandish, swing, also, to hurl a missile.

CATARACT, a waterfall. (L.—Gk.) In King Lear, iii. 2, 2.
ME. cateracte (rare), Towneley Mysteries, pp. 29, 32.—L. cataracta,
in Gen. vii. 11 (Vulgate).—Gk. satappaxrys, as sb., a waterfall; as
adj., broken, rushing down. B. Wedgwood derives this from Gk,
Katapdooev, to dash down, fall down headlong; but this is not
quite clear. Littré takes the same view. yy. Others connect it with
KaTappnyvu pe (root Fpay), I break down; of which the aorist pass.
Kareppa ‘yy was esp. used of waterfalls ‘or storms, in the sense of

‘ rushing down.’ The latter verb is a comp. from «ard, down, and
pnyvum, I break.

CATARRH, a fluid discharge from the mucous membrane; a
cold. (Gk.) In Shak. Troilus, v. 1. 22. Spelt catarre, Sir T. Rive
Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 17. —Late L. catarrhus, a Latinised form
from the Gk. _karappoos, a catarrh, lit. a flowing down.—Gk. «ara,
down; and few, I flow. See Rheum.

CATASTROPHE, an upset, great calamity, end. (Gk.) In
Shakti: iv. 1. 77.—Gk. KaTacTpopn, an overthrowing, sudden
turn. Gk. sara, down, over; and o7pépery, to turn. See Strophe.

CATCH, to lay hold of, seize. (F.—L.) ME. cachen, cacchen, in
yery common and early use. In Layamon, ili. 266.—ONorthF.
cachier,a (Picard) variant of OF. chacier, to chase. [Cf. Ital. cacciare,
to hunt, chase; Span. cazar, to chase, hunt.]=—Late L. *captidre, an
assumed late form of captdre, to catch; the sb. captia, a chase, is
given in Ducange. = L. captdre, to try to catch, chase; a frequentative
form from L. capere, to take, lay hold of, hold, contain. See
Capacious. @ The ME. pt. t. cau3te (E, caught) imitated lau3te,
pt. t. of ME. lacchen, to catch. Der. catch-word, catch-penny, catch-
poll. Doublet, chase, :
CATCHPOLE, a sheriff’s officer. (F.—L.) ME. cachepol,.
Old Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 97, 1. 30; Late L. chassipullus, lit.

‘chase-fowl.’ = ONorthF. cachier, to catch (above); and OF. fol,
poul, fowl, cock; see Poult.

CATCHUP, CATSUP, the same as Ketchup, q. v.

CATE, a dainty; see Cates.

CATECHISE, to instruct by questions, (L. —Gk. ) Used of oral
instruction, because it means ‘to din into one’s ears.’ In Shak. Much
Ado, iv. 1. 79.—Late L. catéchizare, to catechise; an ecclesiastical
word. = Gk: «arnxiCey, to catechise, to instruct; a lengthened form


CATECHU


of «aTnxéewv, to din into one’s ears, impress upon one; lit. ‘to din
down.’ = Gk. «ar-a, down; and 7x«tv, to sound, #xos, a ringing in
the ears. See Echo. Dez. catechis-er; catechism (Late L. caté-
chismus); catechist (Gk. xatnxioTns) ; catechist-ic, catechist-ic-al ; catechet-
ic (from Gk. xarnxnrys, an instructor), catechet-ic-al, catechet-ic-al-ly ;
catechumen (Gk. katnxovpevos, one who is being instructed).

CATECHU, an astringent extract from the wood of several
species of acacia, &c. (Malay.) See Yule.—Malay kachu. Also
called cachou (F. cachou) and cutch; Canarese kachu, Tamil kashu.

CATEGORY, a leading class or order. (Gk.) ‘The distribution
of things into certain tribes, which we call categories or predicaments;’
Bacon, Adv. of Learning, bk. ii. sect. xiv. subject 7:— Gk. xarnyopia,
an accusation; but in logic, a predicament, class.— Gk. xatnyopeiy,
to accuse. — Gk. «ard, down, against; and *dyopety, with the sense of
ayopevew,to declaim, to address an assembly, from dyopa, an assembly.
Cf. Gk. dyeipeay (for *d-yep-yerv), to assemble; allied to L. grex, a
flock. See Gregarious, Brugm. i. § 633. Der. categor-ic-al,
categor-ic-al-ly.

CATENARY, belonging to a chain. (L.) Chiefly in the math.
phr. a catfenary curve, which is the curve in which a chain hangs when
supported only at the ends. Formed from L. catén-a, a chain, with
suffix -adrius. See Chain.

CATER, to buy provisions, provide food. (F.—L.) Originally a
sb. and used as we now use the word caterer, wherein the ending -er
of the agent is unnecessarily reduplicated. So used by Sir T. Wyat,
Satire i. 1. 26. To cater means ‘to act as a cater, i.e. a buyer. The
old spelling of the sb. is catour, ‘I am oure catour, and bere oure
aller purs’=I am ¢he buyer for us, and bear the purse for us all;
Gamelyn, 1. 321. ‘Catour of a gentylmans house, despensier ;’
Palsgrave. PB. Again, catour is a shortened form of acatour, by loss
of initial a.’ Acatour is formed (by adding the OF. suffix -our of the
agent) from ONorthF, acater (OF. achater, F. acheter), to buy. [Cf
acat, achat, a buying, a purchase; a word used by Chaucer, Prol. 571. |
= Late L. accaptdre, to purchase, in a charter of A.D. 1000 (Brachet,
s. v. acheter). A frequentative of accipere, to receive, but sometimes
‘to buy.’ =—L. ad, to (> ac- before c); and capere, to take. See
Capacious. Der. cafer-er; see above.

CATERAN, a Highland soldier or robber. (Gaelic.) In
Waverley, c. xv, Sir W. Scott defines caterans as being ‘ robbers from
the Highlands ;’ see also Jamieson. = Late L. cateranus, due to Gael.
ceathairnz, yeomanry, lit. common people.’? From Gael. ceatharn,
Trish cethern, Olrish ceithern, a troop; allied to L. caterua, a troop ;
Macbain. See Kern.

CATER-COUSIN, a remote relation, good friend. (F.—L.) We
find ‘ Ca‘er-cousin, quatre-cousin, remote relation, misapplied by Gobbo
to persons who peaceably feed together; Merch. Ven. ii. 2. 1393’
Schmidt, Shak. Lexicon. ‘ Quater-cosins, fourth or last cosins, good
friends ;’ Coles (1684). But the form quwater-cousin (with the ex-
planation) seems to have been invented by Skinner (1671); and turns
out to be baseless. It is more probable that cater is from cater, to
provide food (as above); and that cater-cowsins are cousins who feed
(or are catered for) together. So N.E.D. And so Nares, who has:
‘ Cater-cousins, friends so familiar that they eat together.” Sce Cater
and Cousin.

CATERPILLAR, a kind of grub. (F.) In Shak. Rich. II, ii. 3.
165. Used also by Sir Jo. Cheeke, Hurt of Sedition (R.) Spelt
catyrpel, Prompt. Parv! p- 63; to which the suffix -ar or -er of the
agent was afterwards added; so as to assimilate it to piller, i.e. one
who pills, or robs or spoils. Palsgrave has: ‘caterpyllar worme,
chattepeleuse.’ The ME. catyrpel is a corruption of ONorthF. catepelose ;
cf. chatepeloce in Godefroy; and Norm, dial. carpleuse, catepleuse, a
caterpillar(Robin). Cotgrave has: ‘ Chatepeleuse, a corne-devouring
mite, or weevell.” B. A fanciful name, meaning literally ‘ hairy she-
cat,’ applied primarily to the hairy caterpillar. —OF. chate, a she-cat,
fem. of chat (Cotgrave) ; and felose, orig. equivalent to Ital. peloso,
hairy, from L. pildsus, hairy, which again is from L. pilus,a hair. See
Cat and Pile (4).

CATERWAUL, to cry asacat.(E.) ME. caterwawen. Chaucer
has ‘ gon a caterwawed’=go a-caterwauling (the pp. -ed being used
with the force of the -ing of the (so-called) verbal substantive, by an
idiom explained in my note on blakzberyed in Chaucer); C. T., 5936
(D 354). Formed from cat, and the verb waw, to make a noise like
a cat, with the addition of -/ to give the verb a frequentative force.
‘Where cats do waule;’ Return from Parnassus, v. 4. Cf. Low G.
hatterwaulen, to caterwaul (Schambach). The word waw is imitative ;
cf, wail, q.v.

CATES, provisions. (F.—L.) In Baret’s Alveary, 1580, we find :
*A Cater, a steward, a manciple, a provider of cates, . . . qui emit
opsonia.’ Again: ‘the Cater buyeth very dere cates;’ Worman’s
Vulgaria. Thus the cates were the provisions bought by the cater,
or, a8 we now say, the caterer, and were thence so called. Cate is


CAUL 97


a shortened form of acate, sb.; just as cater is of aca‘er or acatour ¢
see Chaucer, Prol. 568 (Camb. MS.). See further under Cater. We
may note that Ben Jonson uses the full form acates, Staple of News,
Act ii, sc, 1,1. 16; Sad Shepherd, Act i, sc. 2,1. 40. Shak. has cates,
Tam. Shrew., ii. I. 190.

CATGUT, the dried and twisted intestines (chiefly of sheep) used
for the strings of violins, &c. (E.) Lit. ‘gut of a cat;’ though it is
not known that such were used. ‘Tunes played upon cat’s guts;’
Middleton, Women beware Women, iii. 2. Cf. Du. kattedarm, cat-
gut ; from darm, gut. See Notes on E. Etymology.

CATHARTIC, purgative, lit. cleansing. (Gk.) Cathartical and
catharticks occur in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ‘ Cathartics or purga=
tives of the soul,’ Spectator, no. 507.—Gk. xa@aprixés, purgative.
— Gk, xadaipew, fut. kadap-%, to cleanse, purify. Gk. xaOapés, clean,

ure. Der. cathartic, sb. 3 cathartic-al.

CATHEDRAL, a church with a bishop’s throne. (L.— Gk.)
Properly an adj., being an abbreviation for cathedral church. ‘In
the cathedral church of Westminster ;’ 2 Hen. VI, i. 2. 37- ‘Chyrche
cathedral ;” Rob. of Glouc., p. 282, 1. 5715.—Late L. cathedrilis,
adj.; whence cathedrdlis ecclésia, a cathedral church. = L. cathedra, a
raised seat; with adj. suffix -d/is. — Gk. «a0é5pa, a seat, bench, pulpit. —
Gk. xara, down (> xa0- before an aspirate), and édpa, a seat, chair ;
cf. €50s, a seat.—Gk. €Coua: (root €5), I sit. The Gk. root hed is
cognate with E. sit. See Sit.

CATHOLIC, universal. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt catholyke; Sir
T. Elyot, The Governour, bk. iii. c. 23. § 2.—F. catholique, ‘ catholick,
universall;’ Cot.—L. catholicus, used by Tertullian, ady. Marc. ii. 17.
= Gk. xa9odcés, universal, general; formed with suffix -1-«- from
Gk. «a90A-ov, ady., on the whole, in general.—Gk. #a9’ 6Aov, where
xa’ is for kara (on account of the following aspirate), and dAov is the
gen. case of dAos, whole, governed by the prep. xara, according to;
lit. ‘according to the whole,’ or ‘on the whole” The Gk. 6Aos is
cognate with Skt. sarva-s, all. Der. catholic-i-ty, catholic-ism.

CATKIN, a loose spike of flowers resembling a cat’s tail. (Du.)
Used in botany ; and borrowed by Lyte from Dutch; see Lyte, tr. of
Dodoens, b. vi. c. 58: ‘ catkens of Hasell.’ Cotgrave has: ‘Chations,
the catkins, cat-tailes, aglet-like blowings, or bloomings of nut-trees,
&e.’ Called kattekens in MDutch; see katten, kattekens, the blossom
of the spikes of nuts and hazels, Oudemans; kattzken, a young cat,
Hexham. =—MDnu. katte, cat; with dim. suffix -kex. See Cat.

CATOPTRIC, relating to optical reflexion. (Gk.) A scientific
term; spelt catoptrick in Phillips (1658). Bailey has ‘ catoptrical
telescope’ for reflecting telescope ; vol. ii. ed. 1731. —Gk. katomrpirés,
reflexive. — Gk. xéromrpov, a mirror. Gk. xat-4, downward, inward;
and 6m-rTo-pa, I see ; with suffix -rpov, of the instrument. See Optics.
Der. catop-trics, sb. pl.

CATTLE, live stock; collectively. (F.—L.) Inearly use. Properly
‘capital,’ or ‘chattel,’ i.e. property, without necessary reference to
live stock. The ME. words catel and chatel are mere variants of one
and the same word, and alike mean ‘ property.’ Spelt cate/, Havelok,
225; Layamon, iii. 232, later text. Spelt chatel, Old Eng. Homilies,
i. 271; chetel, Ancren Riwle, p. 224.—ONorthF. catel, OF. chatel. =
Late L. capitale, also captale, capital, property, goods; neut. sb.
formed from adj. capitalis. [Whence Late L. uiuum capitale, i.e. live
stock, cattle. Capitdle also meant the ‘capital’ or principal of a
debt. |—L. capitalis, excellent, capital ; lit. belonging to the head. =
L. caput (decl. stem capit-), the head; see Capital (2). 4 Hence it
appears that capital is the Latin form, and cat:le, chattel are the
North and Central French forms, of the same word. From chattel
is formed a pl. chaé¢els, in more common use than the singular.

CATTY, a weight ; see under Caddy.

CAUCUS, a name applied to a private meeting of the representa-
tives of a political party. (American Indian?) We first hear of
a caucus-club in 1763. The origin of the name is obscure; but
Dr. Trumbull (Proc. Amer. Philol. Association, 1872) shows the
probability of its being an adaptation of an Algonkin word meaning
to speak, counsel, incite; whence aw-kaw-asu, a counsellor. * Their
elders, called caweawwassoughes:” Capt. Smith’s Works, ed. Arber,
Pp. 3473 cf. p. 377.

CAUDAL, belonging to the tail. (L.) ‘The caudal fin;’ Pen-
nant’s Zoology, The Cuvier Ray (R.) Cf. ‘ caudate stars,’ i.e. tailed
stars, comets; Fairfax’s Tasso, xiv. 44. Formed by suffix -al (as if
from a L. *caudalis), from L. caud-a, a tail.

CAUDLE, a warm drink for the sick. (F.—L.) In Shak. L. L. L.
iv. 3. 174. ‘A caudel, potio;’ Levins, col. 56 (A.D. 1570). But
found much earlier, viz. in Rob. of Glouc. p. 561, 1. 11767.—
ONorthF, caudel, OF. chaudel, a sort of warm drink,—OF. ckaud,
formerly chald, hot; with adj. suffix -el, properly dimin., as in L.
-ellus.— Late L. caldus, hot, a contr. form of calidus; Quinctilian;
is 6. 19,

CAUL, a net, covering, esp. for the head. (F.). ME. calle, halle.

H


98 CAULDRON


‘Reticula, a lytell nette or halle;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 270, note I.
Chaucer, C. T. 6600 (D 1018). And see Polit. Songs, ed. Wright,
p- 258 (1327).—OF. cale, ‘a kinde of little cap;’ Cot. Of unknown
origin. Cf. ‘ kelle, reticulum ;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 270.

CAULDRON; see Caldron.

CAULIFLOWER, a variety of the cabbage. (F.—L.) Spelt
collyflory in Cotgrave, who gives: ‘Chow, the herb cole, or coleworts.
Choux fleuris, fleurs, et floris, the collyflory, or Cypres colewort.’
Thus the word is made up of the ONorthF. col (OF. chol), whence
colly; and jlory, for OF. flori, pp. of OF. florir (F. fleurir), to
flourish; the sense being ‘flowered cabbage.’ 1. ‘The ONorthF.
col (OF. chol, in Supp. to Godefroy) is from L. caulem, acc. of cazlis,
a cabbage, orig. the stalk or stem of a plant, cognate with Gk. xavdds,
a stalk, stem, cabbage; see Cole. [From the L. caulis was thus
formed OF. chol, whence mod. F. chou, a cabbage. ‘The corruption
of col to colly was probably due to an attempt to bring the word
nearer to the original L. cawlis, an attempt which has been fully
carried out in the modern spelling cawli-.] 2. The F. floris or fleuris
is the pl. of flewri, the pp. of the verb fleurir, to flourish; from L.

florére, to flourish. See Flourish. We have also modified this
element so as to substitute the sb. eur (E. flower) for the pp. pl. of
the verb. The spelling colliflower occurs in Sir T. Herbert's Travels,
1665, p. 400.

CAULK; see Calk.

CAUSE, that which produces an effect. (F.—L.) In early use.
So spelt in the Ancren Riwle, p. 316.—OF. and F. cause.—L. causa,
a cause; better spelt caussa. Der. caus-al, caus-al-i-ty, caus-at-ion,
caus-at-ive, cause-less, And see ac-cuse, ex-cuse, re-cus-ant.

CAUSEW AY, araised way, a paved way. (F.—L.) A compound
word; formerly causey-way; the word way being added to ME.
causé, causies later causey, as in Milton, P. L. x. 415; and in Berners’ tr,
of Froissart, vol.i.c. 413 (R.) Still earlier, cawsé occurs in Barbour’s
Bruce, ed. Skeat, xviii. 128,140; spelt cawsee, xviii. 146. —ONorthF.
caucié, OF. chaucié (mod. F. chaussée, Prov. causada, Span. calzada).
= Late L. calcidta, short for calciata uia,a causeway. — Late L. calciitus,
pp. of calciare, to make a roadway by treading it down; from L.
calcare, to tread. L. calx (stem calc-), the heel. See Caulk,

CAUSTIC, burning, corrosive, severe. (L.—Gk.) Properly an
adjective ; often used as a sb., as in ‘your hottest causticks;’ Ben
Jonson, Elegy on Lady Pawlet, 1. 54.—L. cawsticus, burning. = Gk.
kavoTtKos, burning. Gk. Kaley, fut. xavo-w, to burn. Der. caustic,
sb. ; caustic-i-/y; and see cazterise.

CAUTERISE, to burn with caustic, (F.--Late L.—Gk.) The
pp- cauterized is in Holland’s Pliny, bk. xxxvi. c. 7.—MF. cau-
terizer, ‘to cauterize, seare, burne;’ Cotgrave.—Late L. cautérizare,
also found as caiiteridre, to cauterise, sear. — Gk. xaurypiacey, to sear.
= Gk. xavtnpioy, xavtnp,a branding-iron. = Gk. xaiew,to burn (above).
Der. cauteris-at-ion, cauteris-m; also cautery (from Gk. cavTnpiov).

CAUTION, carefulness, heed. (F.—L.) ME. caucion, Rob. of
Glouc. p. 506, 1. 10418. Spelt kaucyon, K, Alisaunder, 2811. —
OF. caution.= L, cautidnem, acc. of cautio, a security; occurring in
Luke, xvi. 6 (Vulgate) where Wyclif has caucioun; cf. cautus, pp. of
cauére, totake heed. Allied to Skt. kavi-s, wise. And see Show.
Brugm. i. § 635. Der. caution-ar-y; also cautious (expanded from
L. cautus, heedful), cautious-ly, cautious-ness; and see caveat.

CAVALCADEH, a train of men on horseback. (F.—Ital.—L.)
In Dryden, Palamon and Arcite, 1. 1817.—F. cavalcade, ‘a riding of
horse ;’ Cotgrave. Introduced from Ital. in the 16th century. = Ital.
cavalcata, a troop of horsemen. = Ital. cavalcare (pp. cavalcato, fem. pp.
cavalcata), to ride.=IJtal. cavallo, a horse.—L. caballus, a horse. Cf.
Gk. xaBadAns, a horse, nag; also W. ceffyl, a horse, Gael. capull, a
mare, Icel. kapall, a nag; all from Latin. See below.

CAVALIER, a knight, horseman. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Shak.
Hen. V, ili. chor. 24. =F. cavalier, ‘a horseman, cavalier ;’ Cotgrave. =
Ital. cavaliere,a horseman.—L. caballarium, acc. of caballarius, the
same. =L. caballus, a horse (above). Der. cavalier, adj. ; cavalier-ly,
Doublet, chevalier, q. v.

CAVALRY, atroop of horse. (F.—Ital.—L.) Spelt cavallerie
in Holland’s Ammianus, p. 181 (R.)—MEF. cavallerie, in Cotgrave,
who explains it by ‘horsemanship, also, horsemen.’ = Ital. cavalleria,
knighthood; also cavalry. = Ital. cavaliere,a chevalier, knight (above).
Doublet, chivalry, q.v.

CAVE, a hollow place, den. (F.—L.) In early use; see Genesis
and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1137.—OF. cave, a cave; Folk-L. cava.—=
L. cauus, hollow. Cf. Gk. xvap, a cavity, a hollow.=4/KEU, to
swell, to hollow out. Der. cav-i-ty; cav-ern (L. cauerna), cavern-ous.
From the same root, con-cave, ex-cav-ate; cage, q. V.

CAVE IN. (E.) First noted, as a literary phrase, in America, in
1796; but borrowed from proy. E. calve, or calve in, found in many
dialects, esp. in Linc. and East Anglia; see E. D. D. Influenced by
association with cave, as if the ground were hollow. Wedgwood


CRIL,) CIEL


shows that cave is here a corruption of calve (the pronunciation of
cave being formerly much the same as that of the modern pronuncia-
tion of calve). ‘Properly to calve in, as it is still pronounced in
Lincolnshire. It is said of a steep bank of earth at which men are
digging, when a portion of the wall of earth separates and falls in
upon them, the falling portion being compared to a cow dropping
her calf’ He then cites ‘the rock calved in upon him;’ N. and Q.
48. xii. 166; also‘ Tak heed, lads, there’s a caufa-comin’ ;’ Peacock’s
Linc. Gloss, E. D. S. s.v. cauf. He suggests that the word was
introduced by Dutch navvies (which is unnecessary, as it may well
be native), and adds: ‘ This explanation of the expression is rendered
certain by the W. Flanders inkalven, used in exactly the same sense.
De gracht kalft in, the ditch caves in.—De Bo, W. Flem. Dict.’ But
the phrase also occurs in E. Friesic; and Koolman cites. kalfen, to
calve as a cow, also to fall in, asin de slotskante kalfd in, the brink
of the ditch caves in; and further, kalferen in E. Friesic means (1) to
cave in, (2) to skip like a calf. Cf. Du. uit-kalven, to fall or shoot
out, said of the sides of a cutting or the like. In Northamptonsh.,
when the earth is expected to fall, it is commonly said, ‘ we shall
have a calf;’ EK. D. D., s.v. Calve. See Calf.

CAVEAT, a notice given, a caution. (L.) ‘And gave him also
a special caveat ;’ Bacon’s life of Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 85. From
the L. cazeat, let him beware. = L. cauére, to beware, take heed. See
Caution.

CAVIARE, the roe of the sturgeon, pressed and salted; as a
relish. (F.—Ital.) In Shak. Hamlet, ii. 2. 457; see the article on it
in Nares.—F. caviar, formerly also spelt cavial (Hatzfeld).— Ital.
caviaro, in Florio, who explains it by ‘a kinde of salt meate made of
the roes of fishes, vsed in Italie;’ also spelt caviale. Of unknown
origin; the Turk. khavyar, given as the equivalent of E. caviare in
Redhouse’s Eng.-Turkish Dictionary, is borrowed from Italian. [It
is made in Russia; but the Russian name is zkra. ]

CAVIL, to raise empty objections. (F.—L.) Spelt cauyll (u for
v), in Udal, on St. Mark, c. 2. vv. 6-12; cauil, Levins, 126. 47.
The sb. cavillation occurs early; spelt cauillacioun (u for v), Chaucer,
C. T. 7718 (D 2136).—MF. caviller, ‘to cavill, wrangle, reason
crossely;’ Cot.—L. cauilldri, to banter.—L. cauilla a jeering,
cavilling. Der. cavill-er.

CAVY, CAVEY, a rodent quadruped. (F.—Carib.) ‘The
long-nosed cavy;’ Stedman’s Surinam, ii. 153.—F. cavié (Littré) ;
a modification of cabiai, the Caribbean name in French Guiana
(N.E. D.) ; allied to Brazil. capibara, q.v. Cf. cavia cobaya, a kind
of rabbit ; Hist. Brasilize, p. 224.

CAW, to make a noise like a crow. (E.) Shak. Mid. Nt. Dr.
iii. 2. 22, The word is merely imitative, and may be classed as
English. Cf. Du. kaauw,a jackdaw, Dan. kaa, Swed. kaja, a jack-
daw ; all from imitation of the cry of the bird. See Chough.

CAYENNE, the name of a pepper. (Brazil.) Cayenne is a later
spelling, due to a popular etymology ; early spellings are caydn, kian,
chian, &c. *’Tis Chian pepper indeed;’? Garrick, A Peep behind the
Curtain, A.i(1767).. From the Tupi (Brazilian) kyynha; N.E.D.

CAYMAN, CAIMAN, an American alligator. (Caribbean.)
‘Lezards or Caymans;’ E. G., tr. of Acosta (1604), bk. iii. c. 15,
p- 165. (There are three islands called Cayman to the S. of Cuba.)
Span. cayman, caiman; F. caiman. = Galibi (Mainland Carib) cayman,
in Martini’s Dict.; Carib. acdyouman, Dict. F.-Carib by P. R.
Breton (1661), p. 13, col. 1. Not acayowiman, as in Littré.

CHASE, to give over, stop, end. (F.—L.) ME. cessen, P. Plowman,
B. vi. 181; vii. 117; iv. 1.—F. cesser. — L, cessare, to loiter, go slowly,
cease; frequent. of cédere (pp. cessus), to go away, yield, give place.
See Cede. Der. cease-less, cease-less-ly; also cessat-ion (from L.
cessiitionem, acc. of cessitio, a tarrying; cf. cessitus, pp. of cessare).

CEDAR, a large fine tree. (L.—Gk.) In very early use. AS.
ceder-béam, a cedar-tree; Atlfric’s Homilies, ed. Thorpe, ii. 578.—
L. cedrus.— Gk. xé5pos. Der. cedar-n; Milton, Comus, ggo.

CEDEH, to give up, to yield. (L.) A late word, in the transitive
use; not in Pope’s poems. It occursin Drummond’s Travels (1754),
p- 256 (Todd). [Probably directly from the L. rather than from F.
céder.|=L, cédere, pp. cessus, to yield. Der. cess-ion. 4 From the
L. cédere we have many derivatives; such as cease, accede, concede,
exceed, intercede, precede, proceed, recede, secede, succeed, and their deriva-
tives. Also antecedent, decease, abscess, ancestor, predecessor, &C. —

CHEDILLA,. mark under the letter ¢ (¢), to indicate that it
has the sound of s, z, or th, not k. (Span.—Ital.—Gk.) In Minsheu,
Span. Gram. (1623), p. 6, The symbol was derived from the sign
for z.—Span. ¢edilla (Pineda). —Ital. zediglia (Diez).— Gk. (yra, z.

CEIL, CIEL, to line the inner roof ofa room. (F.—L.) Older
form syle. ‘And the greater house he syled with fyre-tree ;” Bible,
1551, 2 Chron. iii. 5 (R.) Also spelt see (Minshen) ; and ciel, as in
most modern Bibles. ME. ceelen; as in ‘ Ceelyn wythe syllure, celo;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 65; and see p. 452. ‘The sb. is seeling in North’s


CELANDINE


Plutarch, p. 36; and ceeling in Milton, P. L. xi. 743 (R.) See cieled,
cieling in the Bible Wordbook, by Eastwood and Wright. B. The
verb to ciel, seile, or syle is closely connected with the sbs. celure or
selure, and syle or cyll, a canopy, as in: ‘The chammer was hanged
of [with] red and of blew, and in it was a cyll of state of cloth of
gold;’ Fyancells of Margaret, dau. of K, Hen. VII, to Jas. of
Scotland (R.) The verb to syle meant to canopy, to hang with
canopies, as in: ‘ All the tente within was sy/ed wyth clothe of gold
and blewe veluet ;’ Hall, Hen. VIII, an. 5, § 30. y. The word was
afterwards extended so as to include the notion of covering with
side-hangings, and even to that of providing with wainscoting.
Cotgraye has: ‘ Plancher, a boorded floor; also, a seeling of boords.’
It seems to be connected with the idea of canopy, and with L.
caelum, used in the sense of cieling in the 13th century; Way’s note
to Prompt. Parv. p.65.—MF., ciel, pl. ciels, which Cotgrave explains
by: ‘a canopy for. .a bed; also, the canopie that is carried over a
prince. as he walks in state; also, the inner roofe [i.e. ceiling] of
a room of state.’ [This word is precisely the same as the F. cie/,
heaven, pl. ciewx; though there is a difference of usage. The Ital.
cielo also means (1) heaven, (2) a canopy, (3) a cieling; see Florio;
and Minsheu explains Span. cielo as ‘the heaven, the skie, the tester
of a bed.’]=—L. caelum, heaven, a vault; a ‘genuine Lat. word, not
to be written with oe;’ Curtius, i. 193. @ The derivation appears
to be tolerably certain, but many efforts have been made to render it
confused. The word has no connexion with E. sill; nor with E. seal ;
nor with F. siller, to seel up the eyes of a hawk (from L. cilium, an
eyelid) ; nor with L. célare, to hide; nor with AS. pil, a plank. Yet
all these have been needlessly mixed up with it by various writers.
It has, however, certainly been influenced by the L. celare, to emboss,
which is the word intended by the entry ‘celo’ in the Prompt.
Parvulorum; and it was confused with the sb. celure (selure, syllure),
from a F. form due to the Late L. celatira, a vaulted roof, a
derivative of that verb. And perhaps, in Late L., celire was meant
to be a derivative of celum. See celum in Ducange, misspelt celum
in the latest edition (1883). The other words are not at all to
be considered. Der. ceil-ing.

CELANDINE, a plant; swallow-wort. (F.—LateL.—Gk.) Orig.
the greater celandine. It occurs in Cotgrave. It is spelt cellandyne in
Palsgrave. But Gower has celidoine, C. A. iii. 131, bk. vii. 1. 1370.
=F, celidoine, ‘the herbe celandine, tetter-wort, swallow-wort ;’ also
spelt chelidoine by Cotgrave.—=Late L. chelidonium (the botanical
name).=— Gk, yeAvddmov, swallow-wort; neut. from yxeAcddvos, adj.,
relating to swallows.—Gk. yeAdwv (stem yeddov-), a swallow.
@ The x before d is intrusive, like x before g in messenger, for
messager.

CELEBRATE, to render famous, honour. (L.) In Shak. Temp.
iv. 84. Chaucer has the adj. celebrable, noted, in his tr. of Boethius,
b. il. pr. 9. 48; b. iv. met. 7. 20.—L. celebratus, pp. of celebrare, to
frequent ; also, to solemnise, honour. =—L. celeber, frequented, popu-
lous ;. also written celebris. Der. celebrat-ion; celebri-ty (from L.
celebri-tas, sb., from the adj. celebris).

CELERITY, quickness, speed. (F.—L.) In Shak. Meas. vy.
399.—F. celerité, ‘ celerity, speedinesse ;’ Cotgtave.—L. celeritatem,
ace. of celeritis, speed.—L. celer, quick. + Gk. «éAns, a run-
ner.—4/QEL, to drive; Brugm. i. § 633; cf. Skt. kal, to drive,
urgé on. \

CHLERY, a vegetable; regarded as a kind of parsley. (F.—Ital.
—L.—Gk.) In Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.— F, céleri, introduced from
prov. Ital. seleri, a Piedmontese word (Brachet); where r must stand
for an older ~; cf. MItal. seleni, pl. of seleno, parsley (Florio). —L.
selinon, parsley.—Gk. odor, a kind of parsley. See Parsley.
@ Wild celery was formerly called smallage (for small ache); from
I’. ache, representing apia, pl. form of L. apium, parsley. The form
seleno is Venetian (Diez); mod. Ital. sedano.

CELESTIAL, heavenly. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. ii. 2. 122;
and in Gower, C. A. iii. 301, b. viii. 780.—OF. celestiel, ‘ celestiall,
heavenly;’ Cot. Formed with suffix -e/ (as if from a L. form in
-alis), from caelesti-, the declensional stem of L. caelestis, heavenly. =
L. caelum, heaven. See Ceil.

CELIBATEH, pertaining to a single life. (L.) Now sometimes
as sb., ‘one who is single ;’ formerly an adj. ‘ pertaining to a single
life.” And, when first used, a sb. signifying ‘the single state,’ which
is the true sense. Bp. Taylor speaks of ‘the purities of celibate,’ i.e.
of a single life; Rule of Consciénce, bk. iii. c. 4 (R.)— L. caelibatus, sb.
celibacy.—L. caelebs (stem caelib-), adj. single, unmarried. Der.
celibac-y (as if for *caelibatia).

CELL, a small room, small dwelling-place. (L.) In early use.
ME. celle, Ancren Riwle, p. 152.—L. cella, a cell, small room, hut.
Cf. Gk. eadrd, a hut; L. célare, to hide; and E. hel-m; see Helm
(2).—4/KEL, to hide. Der. cell-ul-ar; also cell-ar (ME. celer,
Wyclif, Luke, xii. 24, from OF’ celier, L. cellirium), cell-ar-age.


CENTENNIAL 99


CELT (1), a name orig. given to the Gauls. (C.) From L. pl.
Celte, Celts. The word prob. means ‘warriors ;” cf. Lith. kalti, to
iRise L. per-cellere, to strike through, AS. hild, Icel. hildr, war

Rhys).

CELT (2), 2 primitive chisel or axe. (Late L.) . Not used before
1700; and due to Late L. *celtis, the assumed nom. of the abl. celze
(with a chisel) in the Vulgate version of Job, xix. 24. But this
reading seems to be due to some error, and no such word is known
in good Latin. Cf. celtem, glossed chisel ; Wright’s Vocab. i. 118.

CEMENT, a strong kind of mortar, or glue. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Cor. iv. 6. 85; and Tyndal’s Works (1572), p. 6, col. 2. Chaucer
has cementinge, C. T., 16285 (G 817).—OF. cement, ‘cement ;’ Cot-
grave.—L. caementum, a rough stone, rubble, chippings of stone;
apparently for *caedmentum.—L, caedere, to cut. Brugm. i, § 587.
Der. cement, vb. ; cement-at-ion.

CEMETERY, a burial-ground. (L.—Gk.) In Bp. Taylor’s Holy
Dying, s. 8. § 6 (R.) Spelt cemitory, Will of Hen. VI; Royal Wills,
p- 298.—Late L. cemétérium.—Gk. xoimnrnpiov, a sleeping-room,
sleeping-place, cemetery.—Gk. xocuaw, I lull to sleep; in pass.,
to fall asleep, sleep. The lit. sense is ‘I put to bed, the verb being
the causal from xetuar, I lie down.

CENOBITE, COFNOBITE, a monk who lives socially. (L.—
Gk.) ‘The monks were divided into two classes, the cwnobites, who
lived under a common, and regular, discipline; and the anachorets
{anchorites], who indulged their unsocial independent fanaticism ;’
Gibbon, History, c. 37. § 13. Bp. Taylor has the adj. cenobitick ;
Lib. of Prophesying, s. 5 (R.) —L. cenobita, a member of a (social)
fraternity; used by St. Jerome.—L. canobium, a convent, monastery
(St. Jerome). — Gk. xorvoBiov, a convent; neut. of adj. xowdfios, living
socially.=Gk. xo.vo-, for ko.wwds, common; and Bios, life.

CENOTAPH, an empty memorial tomb. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘An
honorarie tomb, which the Greeks call cenotaphium ;’? Holland’s Sue-
tonius, p. 153 (R.) Dryden has cezotaph, tr. of Ovid, Metam. bk. xii.
l. 3.—MF. cenxotaphe; Cotgrave.—L. cenotaphium.—Gk. evoraguor,
an empty tomb.—Gk. xevo-, for xevds, empty ; and Ta@-os, a tomb.

CENSER, a vase for burning incense in. (F.—L.) Chaucer has
sencer, and pres. pt. sensing, C. T. 3342, 3343 (A 3340, 3341). In
P. Plowman, C. xxii. 86, the word sezse occurs (in some MSS. cense),
with the meaning ‘incense.’ The word is a familiar contraction
for ‘incenser,’ and is taken from the French.—OF. censier, senser
(Godefroy) ; shortened from OF. encensier, F. encensoir, ‘a censer, or
perfuming-pan ;” Cot. Late L. incensirium, incensorium, a censer. =
Late L. incensum, incense, lit. ‘that which is burnt.’ = L, incensus, pp.
of incendere, to kindle, burn. = L. iz, in, upon; and *candere, to burn;
cf. candére, to glow. See Candle.

CENSOR, one who revises or censures. (L.) In Shak. Cor. ii.
3. 252; and North’s Plutarch, Life of Paulus AXmilius, ed. 1631, p.
265 (Rich. says p. 221).—L. censor, a taxer, valuer, assessor, censor,
critic.—L. censére, to give an opinion-or account, to tax, appraise.
Cf. Skt. gams, to praise, report, say; Benfey, p. 924. Der. censor-i-
al, censor-ship, censor-i-ous, censor-i-ous-ly, censor-i-ous-ness. From L.
censere are also derived census (L. census, a register); and censure (L.
censura, an opinion), used by Shak. As You Like It, iv. 1. 7;. whence
censure, verb, censur-a-ble, censur-a-ble-ness, censur-a-bl-y.

CENT, a hundred, as in ‘per cent.’ (L.) In America, the hun-
dredth part of a dollar. Gascoigne has ‘por cento,’ Steel Glas,
1. 783; an odd phrase, since gor is Spanish, and cen/o Italian. The


‘phrase per cent stands for L. per centum, i.e. ‘for a hundred;” from


L. per, for, and centum, a hundred, cognate with AS. hund, a
hundred. See Hundred. Der. cent-age, in phr. per centage;
and see centenary, centennial, centesimal, centigrade, centipede, centuple,
centurion, century.

CENTAUR, a monster, half man, half horse. (L.—Gk.) Spelt
Centauros in Chaucer, C. T., Group B, 3289 ; where he is translating
from Boethius, who wrote: ‘ Ille Centawros domuit superbos;’ De
Cons. Phil. lib. iv. met. 7. And see Mid. Nt. Dream, v. 44.—L.
Centaurus, = Gk. Kévravpos, a Centaur; which some compare with
Skt. gandharvas, a demi-god. Der. centaur-y, q. v-

CENTAURY, the name of a plant. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
centaurie, Chaucer, C. T. 14969 (B 4153); cenlorye (Alphita).—AF.
centorye, id.=mL. centauréa, centauréum, centaury.—Gk. Kevtavpecr,
centaury; neut. of Kevravpecos, belonging to the Centaurs; said to
be named from the Centaur Chiron.

CENTENARY, relating to a hundred. (L.) ‘ Centenary, that
which contains a hundred years, or a hundred pound weight ;’
Blount’s Gloss., 1674. Often used for centennial, but by mistake. =
L. centénarius, relating to a hundred, containing a hundred (of what-
ever kind). —L. cen/énus, a hundred (used distributively).—L. centum,
a hundred. See Cent. Der. cen-tenari-an.

CENTENNIAL, happening once in a century. (L.) Modern.
On her centennial day ;’ Mason, Palinodia, x. (R.) A coined word,

H 2


100 CENTESIMAL


made in imitation of biennial, &c., from L. cent-vm, a hundred, and
annus, a year; with change of a to e as in biennial.

CENTESIMAL, hundredth. (L.) Modern; in phr. ‘ centesimal
part,’ &c.—L. centésim-us, hundredth, with suffix -al (L. -dlis).—L.
centum, a hundred. See Cent.

CENTIGRADH, haying one hundred degrees. (L.) Chiefly
used of the ‘ centigrade thermometer,’ invented by Celsius, who died
A.D. 1744.—L. centi-, for centum, a hundred ; and grad-us, a degree.

CENTIPEDE, CENTIPED, with a hundred feet. (F.—L.)
Used as sb., ‘an insect with a hundred (i.e. numerous) feet.’ In
Bailey’s Dict., ed. 1731, vol. ii. —F. centipede. —L. centipeda, a many-
footed insect. —L. centi-, for centum, a hundred; and gés (stem ped-),
afoot. See Cent and Foot.

CENTO, ‘a composition formed by joining scraps from other
authors;’ Johnson. (L.) In Camden’s Remains, 1614, p. 14.—L.
cento, a patch-work garment, acento. Cf. Gk. «évtpwy, patch-work,
Skt. kanthai, a patched cloth.

CENTRE, CENTER, the middle point, middle. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Chaucer has the pl. centres, C. T. 11589 (F 1277).—F. centre. —L.
centrum.—Gk. k&ytpov, a spike, prick, goad, centre. —Gk. xevréw,
I prick, goad on. Cf. W. cethr, a spike. Der. centr-al, centr-al-ly,
centr-al-ise, centr-al-is-at-ion, centr-ic-al, centr-ic-al-ly.

CENTRIFUGAL, flying from the centre. (L.) Maclaurin, in
his Philosophical Discoveries of Newton, bk. ii. c. 1, uses both centri-
Jugal and centripetal.—L. centri-, for centro-, stem of centrum, the
centre ; and fug-ere, to fly from. See Centre and Fugitive.

CENTRIPETAL, tending to a centre. (L.) See above.=L.
centri-, from centrum, a centre; and pet-ere, to seek, fly to.

CHNTUPLBE, hundred-fold. (F.—L.) In Massinger, Unnatural
Combat, Act i. sc. I (near the end), we have: ‘I wish his strength
were centuple, his skill equal, &c.—F. centuple (Hatzfeld).—Late L.
centuplum, acc. of centuplus (Luke, viii. 8).—L. centu-, for centum, a
hundred ; and suffix -plus, for which see Double. And see Cent.

CENTURION, a captain of a hundred. (L.) In Wyclif, Matt.
vili, 8, where the Vulgate version has centurio.—L. centurio, a
centurion ; the z being added to assimilate the word to others in -ion
(from French). —L. centuria (below).

CENTURY, a sum of a hundred; a hundred years. (F.—L.)
In Shak. Cymb. iv. 2. 391.—F. centurie, ‘a century, or hundred of;’
Cot.—L. centuria, a body of a hundred men, &c.—L. centum, a
hundred. See Cent.

CEPHALICGC, relating to the head. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Cephalique,
belonging to, or good for the head;”’ Blount’s Gloss., 1674.—MF.
cephalique, of, or belonging to the head; Cot. — L. cephalic-us, relating
to the head. = Gk. xepadixéds, for the head. Gk. xedad-7, the head ;
with suffix -1-«-os, Brugm. i. § 740.

CERAMIC, relating to pottery. (Gk.) Modern.
Johnson.=Gk. xepapin-ds, adj. Gk. xépap-os, potter’s earth.
xepdvvuju (fut. cepdow), I mix.

CERE, to cover with wax. (L.) Chiefly used of dipping linen
cloth in melted wax, to be used as a shroud. The shroud was called
a cerecloth or cerement. The former was often written searc/oth,
wrongly. ‘Then was the bodye bowelled [i. e. disembowelled], em-
bawmed [enbalmed], and cered, i.e. shrouded in cerecloth; Hall,
Hen. VIII, an. 5; with reference to King James IV of Scotland.
‘To ceare, cerare;” Levins, 209. 33. ‘She sered that body with
specery, With wyrgin waxe;’ Squire of Lowe Degree, 1.687. ‘ A bag
of a cerecloth;’ Wyatt, To the King, 7 Jan.1540. Shak. has cerecloth,
Merch. ii. 7. 51; cerements, Hamlet, i. 4. 48.—L. cérare, to wax.—L.
céra, wax; whence W. cwyr, Corn. coir, Irish and Gael. ceir, wax.+
Gk. «knpos, wax; Curtius, 1.183. Der. cere-cloth, cere-ment.

CEREAL, relating to com. (L.) Relating to Ceres, the goddess
of corn and tillage. ‘Cereal, pertaining to Ceres or bread-corn,
to sustenance or food;’ Bailey's Dict. ed. 1731, vol. ii. Sir T.
Browne has ‘ cerealious grains;’ Misc. Tracts (1686), vol. i. p. 16.—L.
ceredlis, relating to corn, L. Ceres, the goddess of corn and produce.
Der. cereals, s. pl.

CEREBRAL, relating to the brain. (F.—L.) Modern; not in
Johnson, but added by Todd.—F. cérébral; coined by suffixing -al
to stem of L. cerebr-um, the brain. The former part of cerebrum (for
*ceres-rom) is allied to Gk. xapa, the head; cf. Skt. gira-s, Pers. sar,
the head; also ME. hernes, brains, Havelok, 1. 1808 ; Lowland Scotch
hairns ot harns, brains. Brugm. i. §§ 619, 875.

CERECLOTH, CHREMENT, waxed cloth; see Cere.

CEREMONY, an outward rite. (F.—L.) ME. ceremonie,
Chaucer, C. T. 10829 (F 515).—OF. ceremonie, ‘a ceremony, a rite ;’
Cot.—L. caerimonia, a ceremony; also cérimonia. Cf. Skt. harman,
action, work, a religious action, arite. Der. ceremoni-al, ceremoni-al-
. ly, ceremoni-ous, ceremoni-ous-ly, ceremoni-ous-nesse
CERIPH, the same as Serif, q.v.

CERTAIN, sure, settled, fixed. (F.—L.) ME. certein, certeyn ;


Not in Todd’s
Cf.


CHAFER, COCK-CHAFER


Chaucer, C. T. 3494; Rob. of Glouc. p. 52, 1. 1207.—OF. ceréein,.
certain.=L. cert-us, determined; with suffix -auus (F. -ain)..
B. Closely connected with L. cernere, to sift, discriminate; Gk. xpive.v,
to separate, decide, «p:rés, select; Irish ceart, right; Prellwitz. Der.
certain-ly, certain-ty; also certi-fy, q.v.

CERTIFY, to assure, make certain. (F.—L.) ME. certifien,
Hampole, Pr. of Conscience, 6546; Gower, C. A. i. 192; b. ii. 963.—
OF. certefier, certifier.— Late L. certificire, pp. certificatus, to certify.
—L. certi-, for certus, certain; and facere, to make, where fac- becomes
jic- in forming derivatives. See Certain and Fact. Der. certificate,
Arnold’s Chron., p. 230; certificat-ion (cf. L. pp. certificalus).

CERULEAN, azure, blue. (L.) Spenser has ‘cerule stream ;’ tr.
of Virgil’s Gnat, 1. 163. The term. -az seems to be a later E. addition.
We also find: ‘ Ceruleous, of a blue, azure colour, like the sky;”
Bailey’s Dict. vol. ii (1731).—L. caeruleus, caerulus, blue, bluish; also
sea-green. PB. Probably caerulus is for *caelulus, i.e. sky-coloured ;
from L. caelum, the sky; Brugm. i. § 483 b; see Celestial.

CERUSH, white!ead. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Chaucer, C.T. prol. 630.
= OF, ceruse (Supp. to Godefroy) ; ‘ceruse, or white lead ;’ Cot.—
L. cérussa, white lead ; connected with L. céra, wax; but represent-
ing Gk. *«npotdooa, contracted from *xnpéecoa, fem. of *xnpdes, waxy.
— Gk. «npds, wax. See Cere.

CERVICAL, belonging to the neck. (F.—L.) In Kersey’s Dict.,
ond ed. 1715.— FF. cervical, ‘belonging to the nape;’ Cot.—L. ceruiz.
(stem ceruic-), the neck, with suffix -al; cf. L. ceruical, a bolster.

CERVINE, relating to a hart. (L.) ‘ Cervine, belonging to an
hart, of the colour of an hart, tawny;’ Blount’s Glossographia, 1674.
= L. ceruinus, belonging to a hart.=—L. ceruus, a hart; see Hart.

CESS, an assessment, levy; also measure. (F.—L.) Spelt cesse by
Spenser, View of the State of Ireland, Globe ed. p. 643, col. 2. He
also has cessors, id. p. 648, col. 1. Cf. ‘out of all cesse,’ i.e. measure ;.
1 Hen. IV, ii. 1. 8. Thesevare mere abbreviations of assess and
assessors. See ASSESS.

CESSATION, discontinuance. (F.—L.) ‘ Withowte cessacion ;”
Coventry Myst. p. 107. =F’. cessation, ‘cessation, ceasing ;’ Cotgrave.
—L. cessdtidnem, acc. of cessdtio, a ceasing. See Cease.

CESSION, a yielding up. (F.—L.) ‘By the cession of
Maestricht ;? Sir W. Temple, ‘lo the Lord Treasurer, Sept. 1678
(R.) ME, cessyone; Prompt. Parv. =F. cession, ‘ yeelding up;’ Cot. =
L. cessionem, acc. of cessio, a ceding; cf. L. cessus, pp. of cédere, to cede.
See Cede.

CESS-POOL, a pool for drains to drain into. (Hybrid; L. and FE.)
Also spelt sess-pool; both forms are in Halliwell, and in Webster. In
Brockett's Glossary of North-Country Words, ed. 1846, we find: ‘Sess-
pool, an excavation in the ground for receiving foul water. I do not
find the word in any dictionary, though it is in use by architects; see
Laing’s Custom-house Plans. Szs-pool occurs in Forster on Atmo-
spheric Phenomena.’ Cess-pool occurs in 1782, in Phil. Soc. Trans.
Ixxii. 364 (N. E. D.). B. Origin uncertain; N. E. D. suggests secess-
pool; from L, sécessus, ‘the draught,’ Matt. xv. 17 (Vulgate); cf.
sécessus, ‘latrina;’ Ducange. Cf. Ital. cesso, a privy (Torriano), from
the same L. sécessus, which is formed from sécess-um, supine of sécédere,
lit. to secede, hence, to retire; see Secede. y. But rather, for
recess-pool, as the following quotation suggests :—‘ I have, in my yard,
what you usually see in most farmers’ yards, two recesses or pools, as.
reservoirs of dung and water;’ Museum Rusticum (1764); il. 73.

CEHSURA; see CAHSURA.

CETACEOUS, of the whale kind. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Cetaceous fishes;”
Ray, On the Creation, pt. i. A coined word, from L, céus, a large
fish, a whale.= Gk. «770s, a sea-monster, large fish.


CH


CHABLIS, a white wine. (F.) From Chablis, 12 mi. E. of Auxerre,
dep. Yonne, France. Mentioned in Oldham, Paraphrase of Horace,.
bk. i. ode 31 (ab. 1678).

CHAFE#, to warm by friction, to vex. (F.—L.) The orig. sense was
simply ‘to warm;’ secondly, to inflame, fret, vex; and, intransitively,
to rage; see Schmidt, Shak. Lex. ME. chaufen,to warm. ‘Charcole
to chaufen the kny3te, Anturs of Arthur, st. 35. ‘He... was chaujid’
with win’ (incaluisset mero) ; Wyclif, Esther, i. 10.—OF. chaufer
(F. chauffer), to warm; cf. Prov, calfar, to warm; answering to Folk-
L. *calefare (Hatzfeld); for L. calefacere, to make warm. =—L. cale-,
from calére,to glow; and facere, tomake. See Caldron. Der. chafe-
wax, chaff-wax, an officer who prepared wax for sealing documents;
also chaf-er, chaf-ing-dish, both in Palsgrave.


CHAFER, COCK-CHAFER, a kind of beetle. (E.) In.


CHAFF


Trevisa, tr. of Higden, ii. 211 (where the text has harneties, and the
Lat. has scarab@i), MS. a has cheaffers,and Caxton has chauers. AS.
cefer (O. Eng. Texts, ed. Sweet); also ceafor. ‘ Bruchus, ceafor ;’
fElfric’s Gloss. (De Nominibus Insectorum), And again, ceafar is
a gloss to bruchus in Ps. civ. 34 (Vulgate), where the A. V. has
“caterpillars;’ Ps. cv. 34. [The AS. cea- becomes cha-, as in AS. cealc,
E, chalk.\4-Du. kever; G. kafer. Prob. from Teut. *kaf, 2nd grade
of Teut. *kef-, to gnaw; see Jowl.

CHAFF, the husk of grain. (E.) ME. chaf, Layamon, iii. 172; caf,
chaf, Cursor Mundi, 25248. AS. ceaf (later version chef), Luke, iii.
17.4+Du. kaf; Low G, kaff. |] The vulgar English ‘to chaff’ is
a mere corruption of the verb to chafe, q.v. The spelling chaff keeps
up an old pronunciation of the verb, So also chaff-wax, for chafe-wax.

CHAFFHR, to buy, to haggle, bargain. (E.) The verb is formed
from the sb., which originally meant ‘a bargaining.’ The verb is ME.
chaffare, Chaucer, C. T. 4559 (B 139). The sb. is ME. chaffare,
Gower, C. A. ii. 278 (b. v. 4522); and this is a later form of the older
chapfare, occurring in the Ayenbite of Inwyt, ed. Morris, pp. 35, 44,
45. B. Chapfare is a compound of chap and fare, i.e. of AS. céap,
a bargain, a price, Gen. xli. 56; and AS. faru, a journey (Grein),
afterwards used in the sense of ‘ procedure, business.’ Thus the word
meant ‘a price-business.’ See Cheap, Chapman, and Fare.

CHAFFINCH, the name of a bird. (E.) ‘ Chaffinch, a bird so
called because it delights in chaff;’ Kersey’s Dict. 2nd ed. 1715. This
is quite correct; the word is simply compounded of chaff and jinch.
It often ‘frequents our barndoors and homesteads ;’ Eng. Cycl. s.v.
Chaffinch. Spelt cafinche, Levins, 134. 423 chaffinch, Baret (1580) ;
caffynche, Prompt. Parv.

CHAGRIN, vexation, ill-humour. (F.) ‘Chagrin, care, melan-
choly;’ Coles’ Dict. (1684). In Pope, Rape of the Lock, c. iv. 1.77.
—F. chagrin, ‘carke, melancholy, care, thought;’ Cotgrave. Origin
unknown; Hatzfeld. B. Diez, however, connects it with F. chagrin,
answering to E. shagreen, a rough substance sometimes used for
tasping wood; hence taken as the type of corroding care. [Cf. Ital.
‘limare, to file; to fret or gnaw;’ Florio.] Diez also cites the
Genoese sagrina, to gnaw; sagrindse, to consume oneself with anger.
See Shagreen, which is spelt chagriz in Bailey’s Dict. vol. ii. ed.
1731. From Turk. saghri, shagreen; given as ‘ Pers.’ in Rich. Dict.,
p- 833. See Korting, § 8265. 4 In North’s Examen, 1740, p. 394,
he tells us that certain plotters ‘take into familiarity thoughts which,
before, had made their skin run into a chagrin.’

CHAIN, a series of links. (F.—L.) Inearly use. ME. chaine,
cheine; Chaucer, C. T. 2990 (A 2988); Wyclif, Acts, xii. 6.—OF.
chaéne, chaine. = L. caténa (by the loss of ¢). Der. chain, verb, chign-on
(=chain-on) ; and see catenary.

CHATR, a movable seat. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. chaiere, chaere,
chaier, chaire; spelt chaiere, Gower, C. A. ii. 201 (b. v. 2214) 3 chaere,
King Horn, ed. Lumby, 1. 1261; Rob. of Glouc. p. 321, 1. 6559.—
OF. chaiere, chaere, a chair (F. chaire, a pulpit, modified to chaise, a
chair). —L. cathedra, a raised seat, bishop’s throne (by loss of tk, and
change of dr to r; see Brachet).—Gk. xa0é5pa, a seat, chair, pulpit.
See Cathedral. Der. chaise, q.v.; and note that cathedral is pro-
perly an adj., belonging to the sb. chair.

CHAISE, a light carriage. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Cook’s Voyages,
vol. li. bk. ii. c. 10. ‘ Chaise, a kind of light open chariot with one
horse ;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.—F. chaise, a Parisian corruption of
I’, chaire, orig. a‘seat, pulpit.. ‘They of Parys..saye.. chaize for
chayre;’ Palsgrave, p. 34. Thus chaise is a doublet of chair; for the
change of sense, cf. sedan-chair. See Chair. Der. chay,a chaise; as
if chaise were plural: Foote, The Maid of Bath, A. i. Sc. 1. 1. 13.

CHALCEDONY, a variety of quartz. (L.—Gk.) [ME. calsy-
doyne, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, A. 1003; with reference to Rev.
xxi. 19. Also calcydone, An Old Eng. Misc., ed. Mortis, p. 98, 1. 171.
‘These are French forms, but our mod. E. word is from the Latin.] =
L. chalcédonius, in Rev. xxi. 19 (Vulgate). — Gk. yadk«ndwv, Rev.
xxi. 19. Of doubtful origin; see Schade, O. H. G. Dict., p. 1363.

CHALDRON, a coal-measure; 36 bushels. (F.—L.) Spelt
chaldron in Phillips, 1658; chaldron and chalder in Coles, 1684.—F.
chaudron, a caldron; with restored 1. B. The word merely expresses
a vessel of a large size, and hence, a capacious measure. From OF,
chaldron; see Caldron.

CHALET, a Swiss hut. (F.—L.) In Byron, Manfred, A.i. sc. 2
(near the end).—F. chalet (a Swiss word). Prob. from Late L. *casa-
fetta, dimin. of casella, a little house (Ducange). This is a dimin. of
L. casa, a cottage. Cf. Casino.

CHALICH#H, a cup; a communion-cup. (F.—L.) ‘And stele the
chalice ;’ Chaucer, Pers. Tale, De Luxuria (I 879). Spelt calice in
O. Eng, Homilies, 2nd Ser. p. 91; and caliz in Havelok, 1. 187. [We
also find AS. calic, Matt. xxvi. 28; taken directly from the Latin.]—
OF. chalice (Marie de France, Yonec, 192); usually calice.—L. calicem,

acc. of calix, a cup, goblet (stem calic-).-Gk. «Arg, a drinking-cup;


CHAMP


Skt. kalaga-s, a cup, water-pot. Allied to calyx, but not the same
word. Der. chalic-ed; Cymb. ii. 3. 24.

CHALK, carbonate of lime. (L.) ME. chalk, Chaucer, C. T.
Group G, 1222. AS. cealc, Orosius, vi. 32.—L. cal (stem calc-),
lime. [The G. halk, Du., Dan. and Swed. kalk are all borrowed from
Latin.] See Calx. Der. chalk-y, chalk-i-ness,

CHALLENGE, a claim; a defiance. (F.—L.) ME. chalenge,
calenge; often in the sense of ‘a claim.’ ‘Chalaunge, or cleyme, vendi-
cacio;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 68. It also means ‘accusation ;’ Wyclif,
Gen. xliii, 18; Cursor Mundi, 6714. [The verb, though derived
from the sb., was really in earlier use in English; as in ‘to calangy
.. the kinedom’=to claim the kingdom; Rob. of Glouc. p. 451,
1. 9247; and in ‘hwar of kalenges tu me’=for what do you reprove
me; Ancren Riwle, p. 54. Cf. Exod. xxii. 9 (A.V.).] —AF. chalenge,
OF. chalonge, calonge, calenge, a dispute; properly ‘an accusation.’
— L. calumnia, a false accusation. — L. calui, caluere,to deceive. Der.
challenge, verb. Doublet, calumny, q.v.

CHALYBEATE, water containing iron. (L.—Gk.) Properly
an adj. signifying ‘ belonging to steel,’ as explained in Kersey’s Dict.
and ed. 1715; he adds that ‘ chalybeate medicines are medicines pre-
pared with steel.’ ‘Chalybeate, of the quality ofsteel ;’ Phillips (1658).
A coined word, formed from L. chalybs (stem chalyb-), steel. = Gk.
x4Auyp (stem xaAvB-), steel; so called from Gk. XaAvBes, the nation
of the Chalybes in Pontus, who prepared it. Milton has: ‘ Chalybean-
tempered steel;’ Sams. Agonistes, 1. 133.

CHAMADEH, a summons to.a parley. (F.—Port.—L.) Not com-
mon. In the phr. ‘to beat a chamade;’ i.e. on the drum. First in
1684.—F. chan:ade.— Port. chamada, a parley; from chamar, to sum-
mon, call. —L. claimare, to call.

CHAMBER, a room, a hall. (F.—L.—Gk.) The bis excrescent.
In early use. ME. chaumbre, chambre, chamber ; ‘i chaumbre’ =in the
chamber, O. Eng. Homilfes, i. 285.— OF. chambre; cf. Prov. cambra.
— L. camera, a chamber, a vault ; older spelling camara. —Gk. xapdpa,
a vault, covered wagon. Cf. Skt. kmar, to be crooked. = 4/ KAM, to
cover over; cf. Icel. hamr, a covering, Goth. af-kamén, to unclothe.
Der. chamber-ed, chamber-ing (Rom. xiii. 13) ; also chamber-lain, q.v.

CHAMBERLAIN, one who has the care of rooms: (F.—
L.—Gk.; with G. suffix.) ME. chaumberlein, Florizand Blauncheflur,
ed. Lumby, 1. 18. [The form chaumberling in the Ancren Riwle,
p- 410, is an accommodation, yet comes nearer the O.H.G. form.] =
OF. chambrelenc, later chamberlain; a hybrid word, made up from
OF. chambre, a chamber, and the termination of the OHG. chamer-
ling, MUG. kemerlinc. B. This OHG. word is composed of OHG.
chamera, a chamber, merely borrowed from L. camera; and the suffix
-ling or -linc, answering to the E. suffix -ling in hireling. Der.
chamber-lain-ship.

CHAMELEON, a kind of lizard. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. Two
Gent. of Ver. ii. 1. 178. ME. camelion, Gower, C. A. i. 1333 b. 1.
2698. = L. chameleon. — Gk. xapaAéwy, a chameleon, lit. ground-lion
or earth-lion, i.e. dwarf lion. = Gk. yayai, on the ground (a word
related to L. Aumi, on the ground, and to L. humilis, humble); and
Aé€wv,a lion. The prefix xapa-, when used of plants, signifies ‘ creep-
ing ;’ also ‘low,’ or ‘dwarf;’? see Chamomile, And see Humble
and Lion.

CHAMFER, a slight furrow cut in wood or stone, for ornament ;
a bevelling off of a square edge. (F.—L.) The former use is per-
haps obsolete. Holland, tr. of Pliny, bk. xv. c. 18 (p. 442 i) has
‘a white rift or chamfre. =F. chanfrein; MF. chanfrain, ‘a chanfer-
ing, or a channell, furrow;” Cot.—OF. chanfraindre, to bevel off ; in
the pp. chanfraint (Godefroy). = OF. chant, an edge, corner (Supp. to
Godefroy, and Hatzfeld); and OF. fraindre, to break ; hence ‘ to re-
move the corner or edge.’ = Late L. canthum, acc. of canthus, the corner
of the eye (Gk. xavOos); and L. frangere, to break. See Cant (2);
and see Chanfrein in Scheler. Der. chamfer, vb.

CHAMOIS, a kind of goat. (F.—G.) See Deut. xiv. 5, where
it translates the Heb. zemer. =F. chamois, ‘a wilde goat, or shamois ;
also, the skin thereof dressed, and called ordinarily Shamois leather ;’
Cot. A word of Swiss origin (Brachet) ; cf. Ital. camoscio (Baretti),
camoceia, camozza, ‘a chamoy or chamoise,’ Florio; Romaunsch
camutsch (Carigiet). Corrupted from some dialectal pronunciation of
MHG. gamz, or *gamuz,a chamois (mod.G. gemse). Korting, § 4148.

CHAMOMILE, CAMOMILE, a kind of plant. (F. —Late L.—
Gk.) In Shak. 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4.441. ME. camamyle; Prompt. Parv.
= AF. camamille (Alphita),—Late L. camomilla.— Gk. xapaipnrov,
lit. earth-apple ; so called from the apple-like scent of its flower;
Pliny, xxii. 21.—Gk. yapai, on the earth (answering to L. kumi,
whence humilis, humble); and pAov, an apple, L. malum. See
Humble; and see Chameleon. :

CHAMP, to eat noisily. (E.) ‘The palfrey .. on the fomy bit
of golde with teeth he champes;’ Phaer’s Virgil, bk. iv. 146. The
older form is cham for chamm, and the p is merely excrescent. ‘It


101


102 CHAMPAGNE


must be chammed, i.e. chewed till soft ; Sir T. More, Works, p. 241 h.
© Chamming or drinking ;? Tyndal’s Works, p. 316, col. 2. Palsgrave
has both chamme and champe. Prob. of imitative origin; cf. Swed.
dial. kdmsa, to chew with difficulty, champ (Rietz); Norw. k/amsa,
to chew. Note also Gk, yayeai, jaws; Skt. jambha-s, a jaw, tooth.

CHAMPAGNE, a kind of wine. (F.—L.) So named from
Champagne in France, which, lit., signifies ‘a plain ;’ see below.

CHAMPAIGN, open country. (F.—L.) In Shak. King Lear,
1.1.65; Deut. xi. 30 (A. V.); also spelt champion (corruptly), Spenser,
F. Q. vi. 4. 26; but champain, id. vii. 6. 54.—F. champaigne, Picard
campaigne, ‘a plaine field;” Cot.—L. campinia, a plain. For the
rest, see Campaign, of which it is a doublet.

CHAMPION, a warrior, fighting man. (F.—L.) In very early
use. Spelt champiun, Ancren Riwle, p. 236.—OF. champiun, champion,
North F. campion, a champion. — Late L. campidnem, acc. of campio,
a champion, combatant in a duel. —Late L. campus, a duel, battle,
war, combat; a peculiar use of L. campus, a field, esp. a field of
battle. See Camp. | We still have Champion and Campion as
proper names; we also have Kemp, from AS. cempa, a champion.
Der. champion-ship.

CHAMPAK, a tree. (Hind.—Skt.) ‘The champak odours fail ;’
Shelley, Lines to an Indian Air, 11. — Hind. champak. =—Skt.champaka-s,
a tree, the Michelia champaca of Linnzeus (Benfey),

CHANCE, what befals, an event. (F.—L.) ME. chaunce. ‘That
swych a chaunce myght hym befalle;’ Rob. of Brunne, Handlyng
Synne, 1. 5632 (A.D. 1303).—OF. chaance (Roquefort); more
commonly cheance, chance.— Late L. cadentia, that which falls out,
esp. that which falls out favourably, as used in dice-playing (Brachet).
—L. cadens (stem cadent-), falling, pres. part. of cadere, to fall. See
Cadenee, of which chance is a doublet. Der. chance, verb (1 Cor.
XV. 37) 3 mis-chance, chance-comer, &c.

CHANCEL, the east end of a church. (F.—L.) So called, be-
cause formerly fenced off by a latticed screen. ME. chancell, chanser ;
Barbour’s Bruce, ed. Skeat, v. 348, 356.—OF. chancel, an enclosure ;
esp. one defended by a screen of lattice-work.— Late L. cancellus, a
latticed window; a screen of lattice-work ; a chancel; L. cancellus, a
grating ; chiefly used in pl. cancelli, lattice-work. See further under
Cancel. Der. chancell-or, q.v.; chance-ry (for chancel-ry), q.v.

CHANCELLOR, a director of chancery. (F.—L.) In early
use. ME. chaunceler, chaunseler; spelt chaunselere, King Alisaunder,
1. 1810.— OF. chancelier, North F. cancelier.— Late L. cancellarius, a
chancellor; orig. an officer who had care of records, and who stood
near the screen of lattice-work or of cross-bars which fenced off the
judgment-seat ; whence his name.=—L. cancellus, a grating; pl. can-
celli, lattice-work. See Chancel and Cancel. 4 For a full
account, see cancellirius in Ducange. Der. chancery, q.v.

CHANCERY, a high court of judicature. (F.—L.) ME.
chancerye, P. Plowman, B. prol. 93. An older and fuller spelling is
chancelerie or chancellerie, as in Gower, C. A. ii. 191, b. v. 1921;
Life of Beket, ed. Black, 359. [Hence chancery is short for chancelry. |
= OF. chancelerie (Supp. to Godefroy), ‘a chancery court, the chan-
cery, seale office, or court of every parliament ;’ Cot. = Late L. cancel-
laria, orig. a place where public records were kept ; the record-room
of a chancellor. — Late L. cancellarius, a chancellor (above).

CHANDLER, a candle-seller; CHANDELIER, a candle-
holder. (F.—L.) Doublets; i.e. two forms of one word, made
different in appearance in order to denote different things. The
former is the older sezse, and came at last to mean ‘ dealer;’ whence
corn-chandler, a dealer in corn; see N.E.D. See Candelere in
Prompt. Pary. p. 60, explained by (1) L. candelarius, a candle-maker,
and by (2) L. candelabra, a candle-holder; also ‘ Chawndelere, céri-
rius, id. p. 713 chaundeler, a chandler; Eng. Gilds, p. 18; chandler,
Leyins.— OF. chandelier, a chandler, a candlestick. = Late L. candéla-
rius, a chandler; *candélarium, for candélaria, a candle-stick. = L,
candéla, a candle. See Candle.

CHANGE, to alter, make different. (F.—L.) ME. chaungen,
changen. The pt. t. changede occurs in the later text of Layamon’s
Brut, 1. 3791. Chaungen, Ancien Riwle, p. 6.—OF. changier, to
change; later, changer.— Late L. cambiare, to change, in the Lex
Salica.—L. cambire, to exchange; Charisius. Cf. Late L. cambium,
an exchange. Remoter origin unknown; cf. Korting, § 1777;
Stokes-Fick, p, 79. Der. change, sb., change-able, change-abl-y,
change-able-ness, change-ful, change-less ; change-ling (a hybrid word,
with E. suffix), Mids. Nt. Dream, ii. 1. 230.

CHANNEL, the bed of a stream. (F.—L.) ME. chanel, canel,
chanelle, ‘ Canel, or chanelle, canalis ;’ Prompt. Pary. p.60. Chanel,
Trevisa, i. 133, 1353; canel, Wyclif’s Works, ed. Amold, ii. 335. —
OF. chanel, North F. canel, a canal; see Supp. to Godefroy. =—L.
canailem, acc. of canilis, a canal. See Canal, of which it is a
doublet. Also Kennel (2).


CHANT, to intone, recite in song. (F.—L.) ME. chaunten,


CHAPS, CHOPS


chanter, Chaucer, C. T. 9724 (E 1850).—OF. (and mod. F.) chanter;
to sing. = L. cantare, to sing; frequentative of canere, to sing. See
Cant (1), of which it is a doublet; and see Hen. Der. chant-er,
in early use=ME. chauntour, Trevisa, ii. 349; chant-ry =ME. chaun-
terie, Chaucer, C. T. prol. 510; chant-i-cleer, i.e. clear-singing = ME.
chaunte-cleer ; Chaucer, Nun’s Pres. Tale, 1. 29.

CIZAOS, a confused mass. (L.—Gk.) See Chaos in Trench, Select
Glossary. In Shak. Romeo, i. 1.185; Spenser, F. Q. iv. 9. 23.—L,
chaor.—Gk. xaos, empty space, chaos, abyss; lit. ‘a cleft.’= Gk.
4/XA, to gape; whence xaoxev,to gape. SeeChasm. Der. chao-
t-ic, a coined adj., arbitrarily formed ; in Bailey’s Dict. vol. ii (1731).

CHAP (1), to cleave, crack. (E.) ME. chappen, to cut; hence,
intransitively, to gape open like a wound made by a cut. See
Jer. xiv. 4 (A. V.) Anon her hedes wer off chappyd’=at once
their heads were chopped off; Rich. Cuer de Lion, ed. Weber,
4550. Cf. EFrics. kappen, to cut; NFries. kappe, to cut, lop. Not
found in AS. + MDu. kappen, to chop, cut, hew, mince; Low G,
kappen, to cut off; Swed. kappa, to cut; Dan. kappe,to cut. Cf. Chop.
Der. chap, a cleft; cf. ‘it cureth clifts and chaps ;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny,
bk. xxiii. c. 4 (p. 161 d).

CHAP (2), a fellow; CHAPMAN, a merchant. (E.) Chap is
merely a familiar abbreviation of chapman, orig. a merchant, later a
pedlar, higgler; explained by Kersey (1715) as ‘a buyer, a customer.’
See 2 Chron. ix. 14. ME. chapman, a merchant, Chaucer, Man of
Law’s Tale, 1. 2; P. Plowman, B. v. 34, 233, 331. AS. céapman, a
merchant ; spelt ciepe-mon, Laws of Ine, sect. 25; Ancient Laws, ed.
Thorpe, i. 118.— AS, céap, trade; and mann, a man; Grein, i. 159.
Cf. Icel. haupmadr, G. kaufmann, a merchant. See Cheap.

CHAPH, a metal plate protecting the point of a scabbard, &c.
(F.—Late L.) ‘ Chape of a schethe;’? Prompt. Parv.—F. chape, ‘a
cope, also the chape, or locket of a scabbard ;” Cot. Late L. capa,
a cope, cape; hence a cover, chape. See Cape (1).

CHAPEL, a sanctuary; an oratory; a lesser church. (F.—L.)
ME. chapele, chapelle;, Layamon’s Brut, 1. 26140 (later text) ; St. Mar-
herete, p. 20.—OF. chapele, F. chapelle.— Late L. cappella, ‘which
from the 7th cent. has had the sense of a chapel; orig. a [cappella,
less correctly] capella was the sanctuary in which was preserved the
capa or cope of St. Martin, and thence it was expanded to mean any
sanctuary containing relics;’ Brachet.—Late L. cappa, capa, a cope;
a hooded cloak, in Isidore of Seville. See Cape, Cap. Der. chapel-
ry; chapl-ain= ME. chapelein (fem. chapeleyne, Chaucer, C. T. prol.
164), from “Late L. cappellanus; chapl-ain-cy. § The pp appears in
Ital. cappella, and is required by the F. form, since L. pp > F. p, but
L.p>F¥.v. In Late Latin, cappa, a cap, and cpa, a cape, were soon
confused.

CHAPERON, lit. a kind of hood or cap. (F.—L.) Chiefly used
in the secondary sense of ‘ protector,’ esp. one who protects a young
lady. Modern; first in 1720; though ME. chaperon occurs, with
the sense of ‘hood.’ ‘To chaperon, an affected word, of very recent
introduction into our language, to denote a gentleman attending a
lady in a publick assembly ;’ Todd’s Johnson. Seldom now applied
to a gentleman. =F. chaperon, ‘a hood, or French hood for a woman ;
also, any hood, bonnet, or letice cap;’ Cot. An augmentative form
from F, chape, a cope. See Chaplet.

CHAPITER, the capital of a column. (F.—L.) See Exod. xxxvi.
38 ; I Kings, vii. 16; Amos, ix. 1; Zeph. ii. 14(A.V.) ‘ The chapiter
of the piller;’ Holinshed’s Chron. p. 1006, co]. 2. ‘ Capitulum,
chapytur;” Voc. 670. 4.—OF. chapitre, usually a chapter of a
book, but representing L. capitulum, which also means ‘a chapiter’
(Vitruvius). Dimin. from L. caput (stem capit-), the head.

CHAPLAIN; see under Chapel.

CHAPLET, a garland, wreath; rosary. (F.—L.) ME. chapelet,
a garland, wreath; Gower, C. A. 11. 370; b. y. 7c66.— OF. chapelet,
a little head-dress, a wreath. ‘The chapelet de roses, a chaplet of
roses placed on the statues of the Virgin (shortly called a rosaire, or
rosary), came later to mean a sort of chain, intended for counting
prayers, made of threaded beads, which at first were made to re-
semble the roses in the Madonna’s chaplets;’ Brachet.—OF. chapel,
a head-dress, hat ; with dimin. suffix -e7.— OF. chape, a cope, hooded
cloak ; with dimin. suffix -/ (for -el).— Late L. capa, a hooded cloak,
See Cape (1).

CHAPMAN;; see under Chap (2).

CHAPS, CHOPS, the jaws. (E.) In Shak. Macb. i. 2. 22, The
sing. appears in the compounds chapfallen, i.e. with shrunken jaw,
or dropped jaw, Hamlet, v. 1. 212; chapless, without the (lower) jaw.
Hamlet, v. 1.97. Of disputed origin; but the double form, and the
late appearance of the sb., show that it is a mere derivative of the
verb chap, chop, to cut, hack. Cf. prov. E. chap, to mash; chapper,
an instrument for mashing potatoes; chop, to break small, pulverise,
chop, sb., food for horses, of chopped hay, &c. See Chap (1),
@ Possibly suggested by prov. E. chaff, chaft, the jaw; which is from


Wy eee


CHAPTER


Icel. kjapir (pron. kjaftr), Swed. kiift, the jaw ; but this supposition is
not necessary.

CHAPTER, a division of a book; a synod or corporation of the
clergy of a cathedral church. (F.—L.) Short for chapiter, q.v.
ME. chapitre, in very early use. The pl. cheapitres, in the sense of
chapters of a book, occurs in the Ancren Riwle, p.14. The comp.
chapitre-hous (spelt chaptire-hous) occurs in Piers Ploughman’s Crede,
ed. Skeat, 1. 199; and (spelt chapitelhous) in P. Plowman, B. v. 174;
the sense being ‘ chapter-house.’=—OF. chapitre (mod. F. chapitre), a
variant of an older form chapitle; Brachet.—L. capitulum, a chapter
of a book, section ; in late L., a synod. A dimin. (with suffix -a-) of
L. caput (stem capit-), the head.

CHAR (1), to turn to charceal. (E.) In Boyle’s Works, v. ii.
p- 141, we read: ‘ His profession .. did put him upon finding a way
of charring sea-coal, wherein it is in about three hours. . brought
to charcoal ; of which haying .. made him take out some pieces, . . I
found them upon breaking to appear well charr'd’ (R.) First found
in 1679, in Plot’s Staffordsh., p. 128 (ed. 1686): ‘ They have a way
of charring it [coal], if I may so speak without a solecisme, in all
particulars the same as they doe wood.’ It thus appears to be a
back-formation from char-coal, which is in much earlier use; see
Charcoal.

CHAR (2), a turn of work. (E.) Also chare; ‘and does the
meanest chares;” Ant. and Cleop.iv. 15. 75; cf. v. 2,231. Also
chewre, as in: ‘Here’s two chewres chewr'd, i.e. two jobs done,
Beaumont and Fletcher, Love’s Cure, iii. 2. Also chore, a prov. E.
form which is also a modern Americanism. Cf. mod. E. ‘to go
a-charing ;” and see my note to The Two Noble Kinsmen, iii. 2. 21;
and see Nares. ME. cherr, chearr, cher, char; of which Matzner
gives abundant examples. It means: (1) a time or turn; Ancren
Riwle, p. 408; (2) a turning about, Bestiary, 643 (in Old Eng. Misc.
ed. Morris); (3) amovement; Body and Soule, 158 (in Matzner’s
Sprachproben) ; (4) a piece or turn of work, Polit. Songs, ed. Wright,
p- 341; Towneley Myst. p. 106. AS. cierr, cyrr, a turn, space of
time, period; Grein, i. 180; whence cierran, cyrran, to turn; id.
AS. cierr (also cerr) answers to a Teut. type * karriz, * karziz. Hence
it is difficult to connect it with Du. keer, a turn, time, circuit, or
with G. kehren, to turn, which seem to be from an unrelated stem
*kair-; see Franck. Der. char-woman.

CHAR (3), a kind of fish. (C.) The belly is of a red colour;
whence its name. ‘ Chare, a kind of fish;” Kersey’s Dict. 2nd ed.,
1715. ‘Chare, a kinde of fish, which breeds most peculiarly in
Winandermere in Lancashire ;’ Phillips, World of Words, ed. 1658.
[The W. name is ¢orgoch, i.e. red-bellied ; from tor, belly, and coch,
red.} Of Celtic origin; cf. (obsolete) Gael. ceara, red, blood-
coloured, from cear, blood; Irish cear, sb., blood, adj. red, ruddy.
(Doubtful).

CHARACTER, an engraved mark, sign, letter. (L.—Gk.) In
Shak. Meas. iv. 2. 208; and, as a verb, As You Like It, iii. 2. 6.
{Shak. also has charact, Meas. vy. 56; which answers to the common
ME. caract, carect, Wyclif, Rev. xx. 4; from OF. caracte, recorded
in Godefroy as a variant of characte. This is merely a clipped form
of the same word.]=L. charactér, a sign or mark engraven.=Gk.
xXapkaTnp, an engraved or stamped mark.=—Gk. yapaooew (= xapak-
yey), to furrow, to scratch, engrave. Brugmann, i. § 605 (3) Der.
character-ise, character-ist-ic, character-ist-ic-al-ly. 2

CHARADE;\a sort of riddle. (F.—Prov.) Modern; and bor-
rowed from F. charade, a word introduced into French from Provengal
in the 18th century; Brachet. Hatzfeld gives the Prov. form as
charrado, orig. ‘talk ;’ from the verb charra, to talk. Cf. Languedoc
charado, grumbling, from chara, to grumble (D’Hombres). Cf. also
Span. charrada, ‘a speech or action of a clown;’ from Span. (and
Port.) charro, a churl, peasant. See also Korting, § 1919.

CHARCOAL, the solid residue obtained from the imperfect
combustion of wood, &c. (E.) ME. charcole, Gawain and Gr. Knt.,
76,875; and Prompt. Pary. B. The mod. vb. char, to burn partially,
is evolved from the comp. char-coal; but this is not against a prob.
derivation of the comp. from the old verb char, to turn; as no other
origin seems possible. For the sense, cf. ‘Then Nestor broiled
them on the cole-turn’d wood;’ Chapman’s Odyssey, b. iii. 621.
And: ‘ Though the whole world ¢urz to coal ;* G. Herbert’s Poems;
Vertue. ME. cherren, to turn, represents AS. cierran, to turn; see
Char (2). And see Coal. @ The spelling charecole occurs ab.
1400, in Henslow’s Med. Werkes, p. 135. 20.

CHARGE, lit. to load, burden. (F.—L.—C.) ME. chargen,
to load, to impose a command, ‘The folk of the contree taken
camayles [camels], ...and ckargen hem,’ i.e. lade them; Maunde-
ville’s Travels, p. 301. ‘Chargede thre hondred ssipes;* Rob. of
Glouc. p.13, 1.294. = OF. (and F.) charger, to load. = Late L.carricdre,
to load a car, used by St. Jerome; later, carcdre (Brachet).—L.
¢arrus,acar. See Car. Der. charge, sb.; charge-able, charge-able-


CHASE 103


ness, charge-ab!-y, charg-er (that which bears a load, a dish, Mat. xiv.
8; also a horse for making an onset). See Charge, Charger in the
Bible Word-book. Also cark, cargo,

CHARIOT, a sort of carriage. (F.—L.—C.) In Shak. Hen. V,
iii, 5. 54; and in Trevisa, tr. of Higden, ii. 341. Cf. ME. charett,
Maundeville’s Travels, p. 241. And in Exod. xiv. 6, the A.V. of
1611 has charet.—¥., chariot, ‘a chariot, or waggon;’ also charette,
‘a chariot, or waggon;’ Cot. Extended from OF. char, a car.—L.
carrus,acar. See Car. Der. chariot-eer.

CHARITY, love, almsgiving. (F.—L.) In early use. ME.
charité, Old Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 57, 1. 41.—OF. charitet,
chariteit,—L, cdrititem, acc. of caritis, dearness.—L, carus, dear.
See Caress. Der. charit-able, charit-abl-y, charit-able-ness. @[ The
Gk. xapis, favour, is wholly unconnected with this word.

CHARLATAN, a pretender, a quack. (F.—Ital.) ‘Quacks and
charlatans ;’ Tatler, no. 240; and in Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors,
i. 3. § r1.—F. charlatan, ‘a mountebank, a cousening drug-seller,.. a
tatler, babler, foolish prater;’ Cot. Introduced from Ital. in the
16th century; Brachet.—Ital. ciarlatano, ‘a mountibanke, pratler,
babler;” Florio.<Ital. ciarlare, to prattle.—Ital. ciarla, ‘a tittle-
tattle;’ Florio. An onomatopeeic word ; cf. E. chirp. Der. charlatan-
ry, charlatan-ism.

CHARLOCK, a kind of wild mustard. (E.) Provincial E. kerlock,
corrupted to kedlock, kellock, &c, ME. carlok. ‘Carlok, herbe,
eruca;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 62; and see Wright’s Vocab. i. 265. AS,
cerlic, Gloss. to Cockayne’s Leechdoms, vol. iii; also cyrlic. Of un-
known origin.

CHARM (1), a song,a spell. (F.—L.) ME. charme; King Alis-
aunder, ed, Weber, 1. 81; charmen, verb; id. 1. 342.—OF. charme,
an enchantment.—L. carmen, a song. Cf. Gk. «ypvé, a herald.
Brugm. i. § 633. Der. charm, verb; charm-ing, charm-ing-ly;
charm-er.

CHARM (2),a blended noise of voices. (E.) ‘With charm of earliest
birds;’ Milton, P..L. iv. 642. Earlier cherme; Palsgrave, p. 617.
ME. chirm; AS. cirm, Matt. xxv. 6 (Rushworth MS.) ; Corpus Gloss.
925. Of imitative origin; cf. Irish and Gael. gairm, W. garm, an
outcry. See Slogan.

CHARNEL, containing carcases. (F.—L.) Milton has: ‘ charnel
vaults and sepulchres;’ Comus, 471. Usually in comp. charnel-
house (Macb. iii. 4. 71), where charnel is properly an adj.; but we
also find ME. charnel as a sb., in the sense of ‘ charnel-house.’
‘ Undre the cloystre of the chirche . . is the charnel of the Innocentes,
where here [their] bones ly3n’ [lie]; Maundeville’s Tray. p. 70.—
OF. charnel, adj. carnal ; charnel, sb. a cemetery. = L. carndlis, carnal ;
Late L. carnfile, a grave-yard, See Carnal.

CHARQUI, jerked beef; see Jerked Beef.

CHART, a paper, card, map. (L.—Gk.) Richardson quotes
from Skelton, Garl. of Laurell, 1. 503, for this word; but the word
is hardly so old; chart in that passage is a misreading Aor charter ;
see Dyce’s edition. However ‘charts and maps’ is in North’s
Plutarch (1580), p. 307 (R.); and ‘ figures and chartis,’ i.e. drawings
and maps, occurs in klyot’s Governour (1531), bk. i. ch. 8. § 3.—F.
charte, a paper, card; Cot.—L. charta,a paper. — Gk. xaptn, xapTns,
a sheet of paper. See Card (1). Der. chart-er, q.v.; also chart-ist,
chart-ism, words much in use A.D. 1838 and 1848.

CHARTER, a document granting privileges. (F.—L.—Gk.)
In early use, ME. chartre; see Rob. of Gloue. p. 277, 1. 5603; also
cartre, id. p. 77, 1.1736. Chartre in Havelok, 1. 676.—OF. chartre,
cartre, a charter. — Late L. chartula, dimin. of charta (above).

CHARTULARY, aset of charters. (Late L.—Gk.) The pl.
chartularies is in Wood, Athen. Oxonienses, ii. 697 (1691). — Late L.
chartularium, a collection of charters. Late L. chartula (above).

CHARWOMAN;; see under Char (1).

CHARY, careful, cautious. (.) See Nares. ME. chari, full cf
care; hence (sometimes) sad, ‘ For turrtle ledeth chari3 lif’? = for the
turtle leads a mournful life; Ormulum, 1. 1274. (Not often used.)
AS. cearig, full of care, sad; Grein, i. 158.—AS. cearu, caru, care ;
id.4+G, karg, sparing; OHG. charag, from chara, care; MDu.
karigh, niggardly; EFries. karig, sparing. @ Thus chary is the
adj. of care, and partakes of its double sense, viz. (1) sorrow, (2)
heedfulness ; the former of these being the older sense. See Care.
Der. chari-ly, chari-ness.

CHASE (1), to hunt after, pursue. (F.—L.) ME. chasen, chacen ;
Will. of Palerne, 1207; Maundeville’s Tray. p. 3.—OF. chacier,
Picard cachicr, to chase. Chase is a doublet of catch; see further
under Catch. Der. chase, sb.

CHASE (2), to enchase, emboss. (F.—L.)
with rosys;’ Fifty E. E. Wills, ed. Furnivall, p. 110. 10.
short for exchase, q.v.

CHASE (3), a printer's frame for type. (F.—L.) Merely a doublet
of case. F, chasse, a shrine. = L. capsa, a box, case. See Case (2)+


‘A cuppe, chased
Chase is


104 ‘CHASE


CHASE (4), the cavity of a gun-barrel ; a groove. (F.—L.) ‘ Chase
ofa gun, the whole bore ;’ Todd’s Johnson. =F. chas, a needle’s eye ;
orig. an enclosure.—Late L. capswm, n. an enclosure; parallel form
to capsa, f. a case. See Case (2).

CHASM, a yawning gulf. (L.—Gk.) ‘The chasms of thought ;’

Spectator, no. 471.—L. chasma, an opening.— Gk. xacpa,an opening,
yawning ; cf. xaoxew, to gape. See Chaos.
- CHASTE, clean, pure, modest. (F.—L.) In early use. Chaste
and _chasteté (chastity) both occur at p. 368 of the Ancren Riwle. =
OF. chaste, caste.—L. castus, chaste, pure.-+-Skt. gishfa-s, disciplined ;
pp: of gas, to teach, govern, punish. Brugmann, i. § 193. Der.
chaste-ness, chaste-ly; chast-i-ty; also chast-en, chast-ise; see below.
And see caste. '

CHASTEN, to make pure, to correct. (F.—L.) ME. chastien,
chasten, often written chasty in the infinitive (Southern dialect). [The
final -en may have been suggested by the free use of the old disyl-
labic form chasty.]—OF. chastier, castier, to chasten, castigate. —L.
castigare, to castigate, make pure.—L. castus, chaste. Der. chasten-
ing ; also chast-ise. Doublet, castigate, q.v.; and see chastise.

CHASTISH, to castigate, punish. (F.—L.) ME. chastisen.

“To chastysen shrewes;’ Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, bk. iv. pr. 4. 59.
‘God hath me chastyst;’ An Old Eng. Miscellany, p. 222. An
extension of ME. chastien, to chasten, by the addition of the ME.
suffix -isen, L. -izire. See Chasten. Der. chastise-ment, Ayenb.
of Inwyt, p. 17; formed from chastise in imitation of ME. chastiement
(Ancren ‘Riwle, p. 72), chastiment (Cursor Mundi, 26004), which is
a derivative of ME. chastien, to chasten.
‘ CHASUBLE, an upper priestly vestment. (F.—L.) ME. chesible,
P. Plowman, B. vi. 12.—F. chasuble, which Cotgrave explains as
‘a chasuble.’ [The ME. chesible points to an OF. chasible.|— Late L.
*casupula, later casubla, casubula, Ducange; also casibula; dimin.
forms equivalent to Late L. casula, used by Isidore of Seville to mean
‘a mantle,’ and explained by Ducange to mean ‘a chasuble.’ The
L. casula means properly a little cottage or house; being a dimin. of
casa, a house, cottage. Cf. Ital. casipola, casupola, a little house.

CHAT, CHATTER, to talk, talk idly, (E.) The form chat
(though really nearer the primitive) is rare in Middle English, and
‘came into modern use only as a familiar abbreviation of ME. chateren
(with one¢), It first occurs in the York Mysteries, xxxiii. 3 (ab. 1440).
ME. chateren, cheateren, to chatter; witl a dimin. form chiteren, in
very early use. ‘ Sparuwe is a cheaterinde brid, cheatered euer ant
chirmed ’=the sparrow is a chattering bird; it ever chatters and
chirps; Ancren Riwle, p. 152. ‘As eny swalwe chitering ina berne’
{barn}; Chaucer, C. T. 3258 (Harl. MS.). The word is imitative,
and the ending -er (ME, -eren) has a frequentative force. The form
chatter is parallel to EFries. kwattern, Du. kwetleren, to chatter, to
warble; and chiteren to Scot. guhitter, to twitter, Dan. kvidre,
Swed. guittra, to chirp. Der. chatter-er, chatter-ing ; chatt-y.

CHATEAU, acastle. (F.—L.) ‘Fine chateaux in air;’ Cowper,
Sonnet to W. Hayley (1793).— Mod. F. chateau; OF. chastel.—L.
‘cas/ellum. A doublet of Castle, q.v.

CHATELAINE. (F.—L.) A derivative of F. chateau is
chdtelaine, used instead of chaine chatelaine, 2 chain to which keys, &c.
are suspended, orig. a chain to which a castellan’s keys were fastened
(Hatzfeld). Here chdtelaine is fem. of chdtelain, adj.; from Late L.
castella@us, adj. L. castellum, a castle.

CHATTELS, goods, property. (F.—L.) Used also in the
singular in old authors. ME. chatel (with one 7), a mere variant of
ME. catel, cattle, goods, property. ‘Aihwer with chatel mon mai
luue cheape’ = everywhere with chattels may one buy love; Old Eng.
Homilies, i. 271. See further under Cattle, its doublet.

CHATTER; see Chat.

CHAW, verb, to chew; see Chew,

CHAWDROVJ, entrails of a beast. (F.—L.) In Macb. iv. 1. 33.
The r is intrusive, and due to confusion with F. chaudron, a caldron.
ME. chaudoun, a dish containing entrails; see N. E.D. OF. chaudun,
also caudun, caldun (Godefroy).—Late L. *caldiinum, variant of
caldiina, entrails, [Cf. G. kaldaunen, entrails.| Probably from L.
caldus, for calidus, warm (F. chaud). See Caldron.

CHAWS, s. pl., another spelling of jaws; in the A. V.of the Bible,
Ezek. xxix. 43 xxxviil. 4. So also in Udal’s Erasmus, Hohn, fol. 73;
Holland’s Pliny, b. xxiii. c. 2 (end). A by-form of jaw, due to asso-
ciation with the verb to chew or chaw. See Jaw.

CHEAP, at alow price. (E.) Never used as an adj. in the earlier
periods. The ME. chep, cheap, cheep was a sb., signifying ‘ barter,’
or price.’ Hence the expression god chep or good cheap; a good price ;
used to mean cheap, in imitation of the F. phr. box marché. ‘ Trico-
lonius .... Makth the corn good chep or-dere;’ Gower, C. A. ii.
108, 169; b. v. 1239. A similar phrase is so liht cheap,’ i.e. so
small a price; Ancren Riwle, p. 398. We have the simple sb. in the
phrase ‘hire cheap wes the wrse,’ i.e. her value was the worse [less] ;


CHECKER, CHEQUER


Layamon, i. 17. AS. céap, price; Grein, i. 159; whence the verb .
céapian, to cheapen, to buy.+ Du. koop, a bargain, purchase; goed-
koop, cheap, lit. ‘ good cheap ;’ koopen, to buy ; Icel. kaup, a bargain ;
illt kaup, a bad bargain; gott kaup, a good bargain; kaupa, to buy;
Swed. kop, a bargain, price, purchase; képa, to buy; Dan. hidb, a
purchase; kidbe, to buy ; Goth. kaupon, to traffic, trade, Lu. xix. 13 ;
OHG. choufon, MHG. koufen, G. kaufen, to buy; G. kauf,a purchase.
@ Curtius (i. 174) holds that all these words, however widely spread
in the Teutonic tongues, must be borrowed from Latin ; so that OHG.
choufo, a huckster, is merely the L. caupo, a huckster. But this is
now held to be unlikely (Kluge, Franck), Der. cheap-ly, cheap-ness,
cheap-en ; also chap-man, q. V.

CHEAT, to defraud, deceive. (F.—L.) The verb is formed from
the ME. chete, an escheat; to cheat was to seize upon a thing as
escheated. . The want of scruple on the part of the escheator, and the
feelings with which his proceedings were regarded, may be readily
imagined. ‘The verb, in the modern sense, first occurs in Shakespeare,
who uses it several times, esp. with the prep. of, with relation to the
thing of which the speaker is defrauded. ‘We are merely cheated cf
our lives ;? Temp. i. 1. 593. ‘hath cheated me of the island,’ id, iii. 2.
493 ‘cheats the poor maid of that;’ K. John, ii. 572; ‘cheated of
feature ;’ Rich. 1II, i. 1.19. In Merry Wives, i. 3. 77, Shak. uses
cheaters in the very sense of ‘escheators,’ but he probably rather in-
tended .a quibble than was conscious of the etymology. PB. The ME.
chete, as a contraction of achete, variant of eschete, was in rather early
use. ‘Chete for the lorde, caducum, confiscarium, fisca;’ Prompt.
Parv. p. 73. ‘The kynge...seide..I lese many chetes,’ i.e. I lose
many escheats; P. Plowman, B. iv. 175, where some MSS. have
eschetes. Hence were formed the verb cheten, to confiscate, and the
sb. cheting, confiscation. ‘ Chetyx, confiscor, fisco ;” Prompt. Parv.
p- 73. * Chetynge, confiscacio;’ id. For further information see Es-
cheat, of which cheat is a doublet. The intermediate form appears
in ‘ Achedyn, confiscor;’ Prompt. Parv. p.6. 4 See further remarks
on the word in Trench’s Select Glossary, He gives a clear example
of the serious use of cheater with the sense of escheatour. We also
find a description of some rogues called cheatours in Awdelay’s Fra-
ternitye of Vacabonds, ed. Furnivall, pp. 7, 8; but there is nothing
to connect these with the cant word chee, a thing, of which so many
examples occur in Harman’s Caveat, and which Mr, Wedgwood
guesses to be the origin of our word cheat. On the contrary, the
word cheat seems to have descended in the world; see the extract
from Greene’s Michel Mumchance, his Discoverie of the Art of
Cheating, quoted in Todd’s Johnson, where he says that gamesters
call themselves cheaters ; ‘ borrowing the term from our lawyers, with
whom all such casuals as fall to the lord at the holding of his leets,
as waifes, straies, and such like, be called chetes, and are accustumably
said to be escheated to the lord's use.’

CHECK, a sudden stop, a repulse. (F.— Arab.—Pers.) ME, chek,
found (perhaps for the first time, but in a transferred sense) in. Rob.
of Brunne’s tr. of Peter Langtoft. He has: ‘ for they did that chek’ =
because they occasioned that delay, p. 151; see also pp. 100, 225.
Chaucer has chek as an interjection, meaning ‘check!’ as used in
the game of chess: ‘Therwith Fortuné seyde ‘‘chek here!” And
“mate” in myd poynt of the chekkere,’ i.e. thereupon Fortune said
‘check! here!’ and ‘mate’ in the middle of the chessboard; Book
of the Duchesse, 658. B. The word was clearly taken from the
game of chess, according to the received opinion. [The game is
mentioned earlier, in the Romance of King Alisaunder, ed. Weber,
1. 2096.]. The orig. sense of the interj. check! was ‘king!’ i.e. mind
your king, your king is in danger. — OF. eschec, eschac, which Cotgrave
explains by ‘a check at chess-play;’ pl. esches, the game of chess.
[The initial e is dropped in English, as in stable from OF. estable,
and in chess, q.v.]—Arab. shag, lit. ‘king;’ which is merely an
Arab. pron. of Pers. shah (Devic). = Pers. shah, a king, the principal
piece in the game of chess; Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 374; whence
also shih mat, check-mate, from shah, the king, and mat, he is dead,
id. col. 518; the sense of check-mate being ‘ the king is dead.’ Der.
check, verb; check-mate; check-er, g.v.3 chess, q.vV.3 exchequer, q.v.;
cheque, for check, @ The Arab. pron. of the Pers. word gave rise to
Late L. scaccus ; whence Ital. scacco; Span. jague; Port. xaque, check!
(also shah); Icel. skdk, G. schach; 8&c. The game was denoted
by the pl.; Late L. scacci, Ital. scacchi, F, echecs, OF, esches, See
Chess.

CHECKER, CHEQUER, to mark with squares. (F.—
Arab.— Pers.) The term checky in heraldry means that the shield
is marked out into squares like a. chess-board. To checker in like
manner is ‘to mark out like a chessboard ;’ hence, to mark with
cross-lines; and, generally, to variegate. The verb is derived from
the ME. chekker, cheker, or chekere, a chess-board; used by Rob. of
Glouc. p. 192, 1. 3965; Chaucer, Book of the Duchesse, 660. The
word is still used in the plural form 7'he Checkers, not uncommon ag


CHECKERS, CHEQUERS


the name of an inn; see below. —OF. eschekier, a chess-board; also
an exchequer. = Late L. scaccirium, orig. a chess-board ; from secacci,
chess. See Check, and Exchequer.

CHECKERS, CHEQUERS, the game of draughts. (F.—
Arab.—Pers.) Sometimes so called, because played on a checkered
board, or chessboard. As the sign of an inn, we find mention of
the ‘Cheker of the hope,’ i.e. the chequers on [or with] the hoop,
in the Prologue to the Tale of Beryn, l. 14; and Canning, in his
Needy Knife-grinder, makes mention of ‘The Chequers.’ See Lar-
wood, Hist. of Sign-boards, p. 488; and see above.

CHECKMATE; see Check.

CHEEK, the side of the face. (E.) ME. cheke; also cheoke,
as spelt in the Ancren Riwle, pp. 70, 106, 156. OMerc. céce (O. EK.
Texts); AS. céace, the cheek; of which the pl. céacan occurs as a
floss to maxillais, Ps. xxxi. 12. We also find the Northumb. and
Midland forms ceica, ceke, as glosses to maxilla in Matt. v. 39.4-Du.
kaak, the jaw, the cheek; Swed. kak, jaw, kakben, cheek-bone,
MSwed. and OFries. keke; NFries. keek; EFries. kake. Teut. type
*h®kon-, f. :

CHEEP, to twitter shrilly, like young birds or mice. (E.) Levins
(1570) has: ‘To cheepe, pipilare.’ Of imitative origin; cf. pipe.

CHEER, mien; entertainment. (F.—L.—Gk.?) ME. chere, com-
monly meaning ‘the face;’ hence, mien, look, demeanour; cf. the
phr. ‘be of good cheer,’ and ‘look cheerful.’ ‘With glad chere’ =
with pleasant mien; Hali Meidenhad, ed. Cockayne, p. 33. ‘ Maketh
drupie chere’ =makes drooping cheer, looks sad; Ancren Riwle, p. 88.
= OF. chere, chiere, the face, look. Late L. cara, a face, countenance,
used by Corippus, a 6th-cent. poet, in his Paneg. ad Justinum
(Brachet). Cf. Span. and Port. cara, face (not Ital.). Relationship
to Gk. «apa, head, is doubtful. Der. cheer-ful, cheer-ful-ly, cheer-ful-
ness; cheer-less, cheer-less-ness ; cheer-y, cheer-i-ness.

CHEESE, the curd of milk, coagulated. (L.) ME. chese,
Ilavelok, 643; O.Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 53. OMere. cése,
AS. cyse (for earlier *ciese< *céasz, with i-mutation); prehistoric OE.
*c@si-< *cisioz, The pl. césas (cysas in some MSS.) occurs in the
Laws of Ine, sect. 70; in Thorpe’s Ancient Laws, i. 146.—L. caseus,
cheese; whence also Irish cais, Gael. caise, W. caws, Corn. caus, cés ;
Du. kaas, G. kaise. Der. chees-y.

CHEETAH, CHEETA, a leopard used for the chase.
(Hind.—Skt.) Spelt chittah in 1781; Phil. Trans., 1xxi. 2 (N.E.D.).—
Hind. chita, m. a leopard or panther (Forbes).—Skt. chitraka(s),
m. the cheeta (Benfey).—Skt. chitra(s), spotted, variegated; orig.
visible. Skt. chit, to perceive. Cf. Chintz.

CHEMISE, a lady’s shift. (F.—Late L.) ‘ Hire chemise smal
and hwit ;’ Reliquize Antique, ed. Halliwell and Wright, i. 129 ; also
in O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, 2nd Ser. p. 162.—F. chemise. — Late
L. camisia, a shirt, a thin dress; whence also Olrish caimmse, shirt ;
Arab, gamis, shirt. Of unknown origin; hardly from Teutonic,
"but rather of classical origin, and allied to Chamber; cf. AS. ham,
a shirt (O. E. Texts), G. hemd; Goth, af-hamén, to unclothe. Der.
chemis-e'te.

CHEMIST, CHY MIST, a modern ‘ alchemist.’ (F. —L. —Gk.)
‘The double spelling (chemist, chymist) is due to the double spell-
ing alchemy, alchymy. ‘ Alchymist (alchymista) one that useth or
is skilled in that art, a chymist;’ Blount’s Glossographia, 1681.
‘Chymist is merely short for alchymist, and chemist for alchemist; see
quotations in Trénch’s Select Glossary. ‘For she a chymist was and
Nature’s secrets knew And from amongst the lead she antimony drew;’
Drayton’s Polyolbion, s, 26, 1. 374. [Antimony was a substance
‘used in alchemy.| Dropping the a/-, which is the Arabic article, we
have reverted to the Gk. xnycia, chemistry. Cf. Span. quimista, for
clquimista. See further under Alchemy. Der. chemistry; and,
from the same source, chem-ic, chem-ic-al.

CHEQUE. A modern spelling of check, from a connexion (which
is real) with the word exchequer. For the etymology, sce Check.

CHEQUER, CHEQUERS; see Checker, Checkers.

CHERISH, to fondle, take care of. (F.—I.) ME. cherischen,
chericen ; whence the sb. cherissing, cherishing, P. Plowman, B. iv. 117.
Spelt cherisch, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 128.—OF. cheris-, stem
of pres. pt. of cherir (mod. F. chérir, pres. pt. chériss-ant), to hold dear,
cherish. — OF. (and F.) cher, dear. — L. cdrus, dear.. See Caress.

CHEROOT, a kind of cigar. (Tamil.) Spelt cheroot in 1759
(Yule).— Tamil shurudtu, a roll (of tobacco). Ly

CHERRY, a well-known stone-fruit. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. chery,
chiri (with one r). ‘Ripe chiries manye;’ P. Plowman, B. vi. 296;
A, vii, 281, Cheri or chiri was a mistake for cheris or chiris, the
final s being mistaken for the pl. inflection ; the same error occurs in
several other words, notably in pea as shortened from pease (L. pisum).
Cherise is a NorthF. modification of OF. cerise; representing a
Folk-L. *ceresia, *ceresea. = L. cerasus, a cherry-tree ; whence also the
AS. cyrs. [We find the entry ‘Cerasus, ¢yrs-treow,’ in /Elfric’s


CHEVIN, CHEVEN 105


Glossary, Nomina Arborum.]=Gk. #épacos, a cherry-tree; see
Curtius, 1. 181, who ignores the usual story that the tree came from
Cerasos, a city in Pontus; cf. Pliny, bk. xv.c. 25. Prellwitz connects
k€pacos with xpdveia, a cornel-tree, and L. cornus; see Cornel.

CHERT, a kind of quartz, also called horn-stone. (E.?) ‘Flint
is most commonly found in form of nodules; but ’tis sometimes found
in thin strate, when ’tis called chert;’ Woodward, qu. in Todd’s
Johnson (no reference). Woodward the geologist died A.D. 1728.
First in Plot’s Staffordshire (1679) ; ‘beds of chirts’ p. 124 (1686).
The word was probably taken up from provincial English. ‘ Churty,
[of] rocky soil; mineral; Kent; Hlalliwell’s Dict. ‘ Chirt, sb.
(Durh. Derb. Nott.) a hard, flinty, stratified white or black substance;
E.D.D. Of unknown origin, Cf. Swed. dial. kar¢, a pebble; Irish
ceart, a pebble.

CHERUB, a celestial spirit. (Heb.) ‘And he stegh ouer
Cherubin, and flegh thar’ =and He ascended over the cherubim, and
flew there; Metrical English Psalter (ab. A.D. 1300), Ps. xviii. 11,
where the Vulgate has: ‘et ascendit super cherubim. The Heb. pl.
is cherubim, but our Bibles wrongly have cherubims in many passages.
The usual ME. form was cherubin, sing., as in Chaucer, Prol. 624;
with pl. cherubins.— Heb. h’raub, k’riv, pl. k’riivim (the initial letter
being kaph), a mystic figure. Origin unknown; see Cherub in
Smith’s Concise Dict. of the Bible. Discussed by Cheyne,
Isaiah (1881), ii. 272, who connects Heb. #’riv with the Assyrian
kirubu, a synonym for the steer-god [winged human-headed bull], the:
winged guardian at the entrance of the Assyrian palaces. Of non-
Semitic, perhaps Accadian origin; see Encycl. Brit. s.v. Babylon, —
A.L.M. Der. cherub-ic.

CHERVIL, the name of a plant. (L.—Gk.) ME. cheruelle.
The pl. cherzelles is in P. Plowman, B. vi. 296. AS. cerfille. The
entry ‘ cerefolium, cerfille’ is in A‘lfric’s Glossary (Nomina Herba-
rum). —L. cherephylla, pl. of cherephyllum (Columella) ; cf. cerefolium
(Pliny, 19. 8. 54).—Gk. yapepuAdor, chervil ; lit. ‘pleasant leaf.’ =
Gk. yaip-ev, to rejoice; and pvAAov, aleaf. The Gk. xaipew is from
“GHER, whence also E. yearn; and pvAAov is cognate with L.
folium. See Yearn (1) and Foliage.

CHESS, the game of the kings. (F.—Arab.—Pers.) ME. ches,
King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1. 2096; Chaucer, Book of the
Duchesse, 1.652. Equivalent to checks, i.e. ‘kings.’ Grammatically,
chess is the pl. of check. OF. esches, chess, pl. of eschec, check! lit.


‘a king’ (c¢ being dropped before tinal s; Godefroy, iii. 380). See
further under Check.
CHEST, a box; upper part of the trunk of the body. (L.—Gk.)


ME. cheste, chiste. Spelt chiste, Havelok, 222; also kiste, Havelok,
2018, Also found without the final e, in the forms chest, chist, kist.
AS. cest (O. E. Texts) ; cyste, as a tr. of Lat. Jocudum in Luke vii. 14.
The Northumb. gloss has ceiste; the later AS. version has cheste.—
L. cista, a chest, box.— Gk. xiarn, a chest, a box. @] The G. kiste,
Du: hist, &c. are all borrowed forms.

CHESTNUT, CHESNUT, the name of atree. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Checnut is short for chestnut, and the latter is short for chesten-nut.
The tree is properly chesten simply, the fruit being the chesten-nut.
ME. chestein, chesten, chastein, castany, &c. ‘Medlers, ploumes,
peres, chesteynes;’? Rom. of the Rose, 1375. ‘Grete forestes of
chesteynes ;’ Maundeville’s Trav. p. 307; chasteyn, Chaucer, C. T.
2924 (A 2922).—OF. chastaigne (F. chdtaigne).—L. castanea, the
chestnut-tree.— Gk. xdoravov, a chestnut ; gen. in pl. eaorava, chest-
nuts; also called s#apva Kaortavata, from Kdorava [Castana] or
Kao@avaia, the name of a city in Pontus where they abounded. Or
from Armen. kaskeni, a chestnut-tree ; from kask, a chestnut (Kluge) ;
in which case the place was named from the tree.

CHEV AL-DE-FRISE, an obstruction with spikes. (F.) Gen.
in pl. chevaux-de-frise. First in 1688. The word is a military
term, and mere French.—F. cheval de Frise, lit. a horse of Friesland,
a jocular name for the contrivance; employed by Frisians in the
17th century. The form ‘Chevaux de Frise’ is given in Kersey’s
Dict. ed. 1715. See below.

CHEVALIER, a knight, cavalier. (F.—L.) A doublet of
cavalier, In Shak. K. John, ii. 287.—F. chevalier, a hotseman;
Cotgrave.—F. cheval, a horse.=L. caballus, a horse, nag. See
Cavalier, and Chivalry.

CHEVERIL, kid leather. (F.—L.) £ Cheveril, roebuck-leather,
symbol’ of flexibility, Tw, Nt. iii.) 1. 133 Hen: VIII. ii. 3. 32;
Komeo, ii. 4. 87;’ Schmidt, Shak. Lex. ‘ Cheuerell lether, cheuer-
otin;’ Palsgrave. AF. cheveril, cheverel; Liber Custumarum, 83,
306.—O8. chevrel (F. chevreau), a kid; cf. char de chevrel, kid-skin,
in Supp. to Godefroy. Dimin. of OF. cheure, F. chévre, fem., a goat,
kid. —L. capram, acc. of capra, a she-goat. See Caper (1).

CHEVIN, CHEVEN, the fish usually called a chub. (F.—L.)
The Book of St. Albans (1486) mentions the cheuen; fol. f 7, back.
=F, chevanne (Hatzfeld); (MF. cheviniau, Cot.) ; OF, chevesne,


106 CHEVRON


chevinel, chevenel (Godefroy). Of uncertain form; but clearly con-
nected with F. chef, head; fromits broad blunt head; cf. L. capito, the
name of a similar fish; also Ital. cavedine, ‘the chieven,’ Torriano.
See Chief.

CHEVRON, an honourable ordinary in heraldry, in the shape of
a reversed V. (F.—L.) ME. cheneron, Book of St. Albans, pt. li.
fol.f 1, back. Usually said to represent two rafters of the roof of
a house; I think it must, in heraldry, rather have had reference to
the (gable-like) peak of a saddle, as there is nothing highly honour-
able in a house-roof.—OF. chevron, ‘a kid, a chevron of timber in
building, a rafter, or sparre ;? Cot. Augmentative form of OF. chevure,
‘a she-goat,’ id.=L. capra,a she-goat; see Caper (1). In the
same way the L. capreolus meant a prop or support of timber.

CHEW, CHAW, to bruise with the teeth. (E.) Spelt chawe
in Levins. ME. chewen; Chaucer, C. T. 3690; Ormulum, 1. 1241.
AS. céowan, Levit. xi. 3; pt. t. c€aw, pp. cowen. 4+ Du. kaauwen, to
chew, masticate, OHG. kinwan, MHG. kiuwen, G. kauen, to chew.
Teut. type *kewwan-. Cf. Russ. jevate, to chew. See Brugmann,
see ene

CHIBOUK, a Turkish pipe, for smoking. (F.—Turk.) Spelt
chibouque, Byron, Corsair, il. 2; Bride of Abydos, i. 8. — F. chibouque. —
Turk. chibig, a stick, tube, pipe; Devic (Supp. to Littré); chybik,
chubik, a pipe; Zenker’s Turk. Dict. p. 349.

CHICANERY, mean deception. (F.) We formerly find also
chicane, both as sb. and verb. ‘That spirit of chicane and injustice ;’
Burnet, Hist. of Own Time, an. 1696. ‘ Many who choose to chi-
cane;’ Burke, on Economical Reform. Of F. origin. Cotgrave has:
“Chicanerie, wrangling, pettifogging;”’ also ‘ Chicaner, to wrangle,
or pettifog it’ B. Brachet says: ‘Before being used for sharp
practice in lawsuits, it meant a dispute in games, particularly in the
game of the mall; and, originally, it meant the game ofthe mall: in
this sense chicane represents a form *zicanum, which is from the me-
dieval Gk. r¢(vedvioy, a word of Byzantine origin.’ y. This Late Gk.
word is apparently borrowed from Pers. chaugan, a club used in the
game of ‘ polo;’ Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 189; Rich. Dict. p. 545,
col. 2. 4] Diez supposes the word to be connected with OF. chic,
little (cf. ‘de chic a@ chic, from little to little’? in Cotgrave); and
derives it from L. ciccwm, that which is of little worth, whence mod.
F. chiche, niggardly. See an article on Chic in N. and Q. 5 S. viii. 261;
and see Chigo. Devic declares in favour of the Pers. origin.

CHICKEN, the young of the fowl. (E.) The form chick is a
mere abbreviation of chicken, not the older form. ME. chiken, sing.
“Chekyn, pullus ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 74. The pl. chiknes is in Chau-
cer, Pro]. 382 (A 380). AS. cicen; of which the pl. cicenz, chickens,
occurs in Matt. xxiii. 37, This form is from an earlier *ciuctn. 4+ Du.
kieken, kuiken, a chicken; Low G. hiiken; cf. G. kiichlein, a chicken,
Icel. kjtklingr, Swed. kyckling ; related to Cock, which is from the
weak grade *kuk-; see Cock (1). Sievers, 2nd ed. § 165 ; Noreen,
§§ 143, 252. Der. chick-ling, dimin. (cf. Icel. kjuklingr) ; chicken-
hearted, chicken-pox ; chick-weed (Levins).

CHICORY, a plant; succory. (F.—L.—Gk.) Not in very
early use. Formerly cicorie; Sir T. Elyot has ‘ cykorie or suckorie ;’
Castel of Helth, b.ii.c. 8; fol. 23. —F. chichorée, cichorée, ‘ succorie ;”
Cot.—L. cichorium, succory.—Gk. xwpiov; also xeywpn; also as
neut. pl. «xopia, e«xopeia, succory. The form succory is more corrupt.
See Succory.

CHIDE, to scold; also, to quarrel. (E.) ME. chiden; in Old
Ing. Homilies, i. 113. AS. cidan, to chide, brawl, Exod. xxi. 18;
Luke, iv. 35, where the pt. t. cidde occurs. 4 There do not seem to
be cognate forms. ‘The verbis weak ; the pt. t. chode (Gen. xxxi. 36)
is a new formation, by analogy with rode.

CHIEF, adj. head, principal; sb.a leader. (F.—L.) Properly
asb., but early used as an adj. ME. chef, chief. Rob. of Glouc.
has chef, sb., p. 212, 1. 4316; chef, adj., p. 231, 1. 4758. — OF. chef,
chief, the head, —L. type *capum (cf. Ital. capo).—L. caput, the head.
Der. chie/-ly; chief-tain, q.v.; also ker-chief, q.v.; cf. cape (2),
capital, &c.

CHLEFTATN, a head man; leader. (F.—L.) A doublet of
captain. In early use. ME. cheuetein, chiftain, &c. Spelt cheuetein,
Layamon, i. 251 (later text),—_OF. chevetain; also chevetaine, a
chieftain. —Late L. capitinus, capitdneus, a captain. —L. caput (stem
cafit-), the head. See above; and see Captain. Der. chieftain-ship.

CHIFFONIER, an ornamental cupboard. (F.) Modern; first
in 1806. Lit. ‘a place to put rags in.’ =F. chiffonnier, a rag-picker ;
also, a piece of furniture, a chiffonier (Hamilton and Legros),=—F.
chiffon, a rag; an augmentative form (with suffix -on) from chiffe,
a tag, a piece of flimsy stuff; explained by Cotgrave as ‘a clout, old
Tagge, over-worn or off-cast piece of stuffe.’ (Origin unknown. Cf.
Korting, § 2123.)

CHIGNON, an arrangement of hair in a large coil at the back
of the head. (F.—L.) First in 1783.—F. chignon, properly the


CHIMPANZEE


back of the neck, lit. a little chain, from the projections of the verte-
brae (Littré); variant of F. chaznon, der. from chaéue, chain, with
suffix -on; see Chain. See Cotgrave, s.v. chainon. ;

CHIGO, CHIGOH, a kind of small flea; also called jigger.
(Span.—L.—Gk.) In the W. Indies and S. America. Prob,
a negro corruption of Span. chico, small; since the F. name chique is
also deducible from the same form. = L. ciccum, acc. of ciccus, the thin
membrane round the grains of a pomegranate, something worthless,
a trifle. Gk. «i«xos, a fruit-husk.

CHILBLAITIN, a blain caused by cold. (E.) Lit. ‘ chill-blain,’
i.e. cold-sore, sore caused by cold. In Holland’s Pliny, ii. 76, 1. 6
(b. xx. c. 22). See Chill and Blain.

CHILD, a son or daughter, a descendant. (E.) ME. child, very
early; also cild. Spelt child, Layamon, i. 13; cild, O. Eng.
Homilies, i. 227, AS. cild; Grein, i. 160. Teut. type *kilthom, n.
Allied to Goth. kilthei, the womb, éz-kilthd, a pregnant woman.
@ Distinct from Du. and G. kind,a child. But Skt. jathara- (for
*jalthara-) may be related; so also Dan. kuld, Swed. hull, a litter
(of animals). Cf. Kilt. Der. child-ish, child-ish-ness, child-like,
child-less ; child-bed ; child-hood= AS. cild-had, Grein, i. 160.

CHILIAD, the number 1000. (Gk.) Used by H. More to mean
‘a period of a thousand years ;’ Defence of Moral Cabbala, c. 2 (R.) =
Gk. yuArds (stem yuAra5-), 2 thousand, in the aggregate. — Gk. yiAvor, p!.
a thousand ; Lesbian xéAAvoz, which is an older form (see Prellwitz).

CHILL, a sudden coldness; cold. (E.) Properly a sb. ‘ Chil,
cold, algidus,’ and ‘To chil with cold, algere’ occur in Levins, col.
123, ll. 46, 28. Earlier than this, it is commonly a sb. only; but the
pp. child (i.e. chilled) occurs in P. Plowman, C. xviii. 49. ME. chil
sb., Trevisa, i. 51; but more commonly chele, O. Eng. Homilies, i.
33; Layamon, iii. 237. AS. cele, great cold; O. E, Texts; Grein,
i.157. Also ciele; ‘ Frigus, ciele,’ Voc. 495.28. Teut. type *kaliz;
from *kalan-, to be cold, as in AS. calan, Icel. kala, to freeze. See
Cool. Cf. also Du. kil, chilly; hillen, to be chilled; L. gelu,
frost; gelidus, cold, Der. chill-y, chill-ness, chill-i-ness, chil-blain ;
and see gelid.

CHILLI, red pepper. (Span.—Mex.) Spelt chili in Thackeray,
Vanity Fair, c. iii. Span. chile, red pepper. = Mex. chilli, red pepper.
@ Not from Chili, in S. America,

CHIME, a harmonious sound, (F.—L.—Gk.) Palsgrave has:
‘chyme of belles.’ ‘Vhe word has lost ab; itstands for chimbe. ME..
chimbe, chymbe. ‘His chymbe-belle {i.e. chime-bell] he doth rynge ;’
K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1852. The true old sense is ‘cymbal.’ In
the Cursor Mundi, ed. Morris, 1. 12193, the Trin. MS. has: ‘As a
chymbe or a brasen belle’ (with evident reference to 1 Cor. xiil. 1) ;
where the Gottingen MS. has chime, and the Cotton MS. has chim.
Chimbe or chymbe is from OF. chimble or chymble, a dialectic form of
OF. cimble, cymble, or from a form without the 7; Godefroy gives
both cymble and cymbe with the sense of ‘cymbal ;’ also chinbe (for
chimbe) withthe same sense. — L. cymbalum, a cymbal.=—Gk. «vpBaror,
acymbal, SeefurtherunderCymbal, €@ Perhaps the ME. chyme-
belle was a popular form for chymbale, a variant of cymbale in
Cotgrave; yet we actually find a Late L. cimba, a dinner-bell, in
the Chronicle of Abingdon, ed. Stevenson ; doubtless from L. cym-
balum. Der. chime, verb. é

CHIMA5RA, CHIMERA, a fabulous monster. (L.—Gk.)
In Milton, P. L. ii. 628. Spelt chimera in Trevisa, tr. of Higden, ii.
371.—<L. chimera, a monster.—Gk. xima:pa, a she-goat; also, a
monster, with lion’s head, serpent’s tail, and goat’s body; Iliad, vi.
181.—Gk. xipapos, a he-goat.4Icel. gymbr, a ewe-lamb of a year
old; whence prov. Eng. gimmer or gimmer-lamb; Curtius, 1. 249.
Der. chimer-ic-al, chimer-ic-al-ly,

CHIMER, CHIMERE, a long loose robe. (F.—Span.)
Variously used; Barbour has chemer, chemeir, of a bishop’s coat-
armour; Bruce, xvi. 580. Dryden has ‘a slight cymar,’ of a woman’s
robe; Cymon, 100,.—F. chamarre, ‘a loose and light gowne ;’ Cot.
=—Span. chamarra, zamarra, a shepherd’s dress, of sheepskin. Of
unknown origin (of Basque). The Sardinian acciamarra (in Diez),
if for *al-ciamarra, suggests an Arabic origin.

CHIMNEY, a fire-place, a flue. (F.—L.—Gk.) Formerly, ‘a
fire-place ;’ see Shak. Cymb. ii. 4.80. ‘A chambre with a chymneye ;’
P. Plowman, B. x. 98.—AF. chimenee, Liber Albus, p. 333; OF.
cheminée, ‘a chimney ;’ Cotgrave.—Late L. camindta, lit. ‘ provided
with a chimney;’ hence ‘a room with a chimney ;’ and, later, the
chimney itself.—L. caminus, a hearth, furnace, forge, stove, flue. —
Gk. «dpuves, an oven, furnace. Perhaps allied to xapdpa, a vaulted
chamber; see Chamber, Der. chimmney-piece, chimney-shaft. ;

CHIMPANZEE, a kind of ape. (African.) In a translation
of Buffon’s Nat. Hist., published in London in 1792, vol. i. p. 324,
there is a mention of ‘ the orang-outangs, which he [ M. de la Brosse]
calls guimpeazes.’ [La Broess has quimpezé.] From the native name
in Angola, W, Africa; see N. E,, D, The Bantu form is hampenzi ;


CHIN


N. and Q., 9 S. viii. 341. I am informed that the Fantee name of
the animal is akatsia or akatshia.

CHIN, part of the lower jaw. (E.) ME. chin, Layamon, i. 348;
1. 8148. AS. cin; we find ‘mentum, ciz’ in AElfric’s Gloss. ed.
Somner, p. 70, col. 2.44Du. kin; Icel. kinn, the cheek; Dan. kind;
Swed. kind, the cheek, kindbdge, cheekbone, but also jawbone;
Goth. kimnus, the cheek; Matt. v. 39; O.H.G. chinni, G. kinn, the
cheek.+L. gena, the cheek; Gk. yévus, the chin, the jaw; Skt. hanu-s,
the jaw; Olrish gin, mouth; W. gén, jaw, chin.

CHINA, porcelain-ware. (China.) Shak. has ‘china dishes ;’
Meas. ii. 1. 97; see Pope, Moral Essays, ii. 268; Rape of the Lock,
ii, 106. ‘China, or China-ware, a fine sort of earthen ware made in
those parts’ [i.e. in China]; Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. Named from
the country. Der. Chinese, a native of China. Milton, P. L. iii. 438,
has the pl. Chineses, correctly. The final -se has come to be regarded
as a plural; and we now say Chinese in the plural. Hence, as a
‘singular’ development, the phrase ‘ that heathen Chinee.’ Cf. cherry,
pea, sherry, shay (for chaise), &c.

CHINCHILLA, a small rodent quadruped. (Span.—L.) ‘ Chin-
chilles, like squirrels ;’ E.G., tr. of Acosta, bk. iv. c. 38. —Span. chin-
chilla; dimin. of chinche, a bug, from an erroneous notion that it had
a fetid smell.—L. cimicem, acc. of cimex, a bug.

CHINCHONA. See Cinchona below.

CHINCOUGH, the whooping-cough. (E.) ‘No, it shall ne’er
be said in our country Thou diedst 0’ the chin-cough ;’ Beaum. and
Fletcher; Bonduca, 1. 2. It stands for chink-cough, a form found in
W. Yorkshire; proy. Eng. and Scot. kink-cough or kink-host, where
host means ‘a cough.’ Cf. Scot. kink, to labour for breath in a severe
fit of coughing; Jamieson. It is an E. word, as shown by ‘cincung,
cachinnatio’ in a Glossary, pr. in Wright’s Vocab. i. 50, col. 2; which
shows that kink was also used of a loud fit of laughter. Kink is a
nasalised form of a root *kik-, appearing in G. keich-en, to gasp,
pant. Cf. Du. kinkhoest, the chincough, whooping-cough; M.
Du. kiechhoest, kickhoest, the same (Kilian); Swed. kikhosta, the
chincough; sik-na, to gasp, to pant; Dan. kighoste, the whooping-
cough. See Chink (2).

CHINE, the spine, backbone. (F.—O.H.G.) ‘Me byhynde, at
my chyne, Smotest me with thy spere;’ K. Alisaunder, l. 3977.—
OF. eschine (mod. F, échine), the spine. —OHG., skina, a needle,
a prickle (>G. schiene, a splint); see Diez. B. A similar change (or
rather extension) of meaning is seen in the L. spina, a thorn, spine,
back-bone. Kdérting, § 8783. Cf. Shin.

CHINK (1), a cleft, crevice, split. (E.) ‘May shine through every
chinke ;’ Ben Jonson; Ode to James, Earl of Desmond, 1.16. And
see Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 1.66. Formed, with an added #, probably
expressive of diminution (as in prov. E. chin-kie, the chin), from the
base of ME. chine, a chink; cf. prov. Eng. chine, a rift in a cliff
(Isle of Wight). ‘In the chyne of a ston-wal;’ Wyclif, Song of
Solomon, ii. 14.—AS. cinu, a chink, crack; /Elfric’s Hom. ii. 154. —
AS. cin-, weak grade of cinan, to split, crack (intransitively), to
chap ; ‘ eal fdcinen,’ i.e. chapped all over, /Elfric’s Hom. i. 336.4 Du.
keen, a cleft; also, a germ; MDu. kene, a split, rift; kenen, to shoot
up, asa plant, bud. Cf. G. keimen, to germinate; keim,a bud. B.
The notion is that a chine signified originally a crack in the ground
caused by the germination of seeds; and the connexion is clear
between the AS. cinu, a rift, cleft, crack, and the Goth. keinan, to
spring up as a plant, Mark, iv. 27; wskeinan, to spring up, Luke, viii.
8; uskeian, to produce, Luke, viii. 6. Teut. root *kei-, whence also
AS. ci-d,a germ, shoot. See Chit (2).

CHINK (2), to jingle; ajingling sound; money. (E.) In Shak.
chinks means ‘money,’ jocularly; Romeo, i. 5. 119. Cf. ‘he chinks
his purse;” Pope, Dunciad, ii. 197. An imitative word, of which
jingle may be said to be the frequentative. See Jingle. Cf. EFries.
kinken, to ring (astrong verb). A similar word is Clink, q. v.

CHINTZ, parti-coloured cotton cloth. (Hind.—Skt.) In Pope,
Moral Essays, i. 248; ii. 170. Formerly chints, pl. of chint (N.E. D.).
‘ Two new pieces of chints ;’ W. Dampier, New Voy. i. 517.— Hind.
chhinf, spotted cotton cloth; cf. chhinta, a spot ; chhintnd, to sprinkle.
More elementary forms appear in chhit, chintz, also, a spot; chhitki,
a small spot, speck; chhifnd, to scatter, sprinkle. Chintz is accord-
ingly so named from the variegated patterns which appear upon it.
For the above words, see Duncan Forbes, Hindustani-Eng. Dict.,
p: 120. Thesimpler form chhif appears in Du. sits, G. zitz, chintz;
and is derived from Skt. chifra-s, spotted, orig. visible, clear; from
chit, to perceive. See Cheeta.

CHIP, to chop a little at a time. (E.) The dimin. of chop. ME.
chippen, chyppen. ‘1 chyppe breed, je chappelle du payn; I chyppe
wodde, je coepelle;’ Palsgrave. The sb. chip is a derivative from
the verb, yet it happens to occur rather earlier; ME, chippe, a chip,
Chaucer, C. T. 3746 (A 3748); spelt chip, Rob. of Brunne’s tr. of
Langtoft, p.g1. For the change of vowel from chop (older form chap),


CHLORINE


cf, clink with clank, click with clack. Lye cites for-cyppud (presumably
for for-cippod) from a gloss to Canticum Ezechiee, where another
gloss (in Sweet, O. E. Texts, p. 402, last line) has forcorfen as a gloss
to praecisa. EFries. kippen, to cut. B.Cf. G. kippen, to clip money;
Low G. kippen, to cut away; MDu. kppen, to hatch chickens (i.e.
to chip eggs) Hexham; MSwed. hppa, as a variant of MSwed,
kappa, to chop; Ihre (s.v. kappa). See Chop. Der. chip, sb.

CHIROGRAPHY, handwriting, (Gk.) ‘Chirograph (chiro-
graphum), a sign manual, a bill of ones hand, an obligation or hand-
writing ;’ Blount’s Glossographia, ed. 1674. [The term chirography
is, however, rather formed directly from the Gk. than from the Late
L. chirographum, a contract, indenture, or deed.] — Gk. xetpoypagety,
to write with the hand. = Gk, xeipo-, for xeip, the hand ; and ypagev,
to write. The Gk. xeip is cognate with O. Lat. hiv, the hand; cf.
Skt. 27, to seize; Curtius, i. 247. Der. chirograph-er, chirograph-ic,
chirograph-ist; from the same Gk. xetpo- we have also chiro-logy,
chiro-mancy, chiro-podist ; also chir-urgeon, q. Vv.

CHIRP, to make a noise as a bird. (E.) Sometimes extended to
chirrup, by the trilling of ther. ME. chirpen, whence the sb. chirp-
inge. ‘Chyrpynge, or claterynge, chirkinge or chaterynge of byrdys,
garritus;? Prompt. Parv. p. 76. ‘To churpe, pipilare;’ Levins,
p-191. This ME. chirpen is a mere variant of ME. chirken. Chaucer
has: ‘And chirketh as asparwe;’ C.T.7386(D 1804). We also find
the form chirmen. ‘Sparuwe cheatered euer ant chirmed’ =the sparrow
ever chatters and chirms; Ancren Riwle, p. 152. B. These forms,
chir-p, chir-k, chir-m, are connected with the form chir-, or rather kir,
which is an imitative word, intended to express the continual chatter-
ing and chirping of birds; cf. Du. kirren, to coo.

CHIRURGEON, asurgeon. (F.—L.—Gk.) Now always written
surgeon, q.v. Shak. has chirurgeon-ly, surgeon-like, Temp. 11. 1. 140,
ME. cirurgian, Rob. of Glouc. p. 566; 1. 11925.—OF. cirurgien;
F. chirurgien, ‘a surgeon;’ Cotgrave. = OF. cirurgie; F. chirurgie, sur-
gery.— Late L. chirurgia. = Gk.xepoupyia, a working with the hands,
handicraft, art ; esp. the art of surgery (to which it is now restricted).
= Gk. yelpo-, for xetp, the hand; and épyew, to work, cognate with
E. work, gq. v. On Gk. xeip, see Chirography. Fiom the same
source we have chirurg-ic, chirurg-ic-al, words now superseded by
surgical. @[ The vowel wis due to Gk. ov, and this again to the
coalescence of o and «.

CHISEL, a sharp cutting tool. (F.—L.) ME. chisel, chysel;
Prompt. Parv. p. 76; Shoreham’s Poems, p.137. Other spellings are
scheselle, sceselle, in Wright’s Vocab. i. 276.—AF, chisel, A. Neckam,
in Wrt. Vocab. i. 118, 1. 8; ONorthF. chisel, OF. cisel, mod. F.
ciseau. Cotgrave gives the verb ciseler, ‘to carve, or grave with a
chisell; also, to clip or cut with sizars.’—Late L, cisellum, acc. of
cisellus, forceps (Ducange) ; but lit. ‘a cutting instrument;’ cf. Ital.
cesello, chisel, answering to L. type *cesellum; also L. cis-drium, a
cutting instrument.=—L. -cis-wm, for ces-wm, supine of cedere, to cut
(cf. E. con-cise, pre-cise). See Ceesura. And see Scissors. Der.
chisel, verb.

CHIT (1), young of a beast, whelp, cub; also a child, brat. (E.)
‘There hadde diches the yrchoun, and nurshede out litle chittes ;’
Wyclif, Isa. xxxiv. 15, where the Vulgate has: ‘ibi habuit foueam
ericius, et enutriuit catulos ;’ so that chit here means ‘ the young one’
of a hedgehog. In modern times associated with Chit (2), as when
applied to ‘a slip’ of a girl, and the like. Another form of kit,
whence kitten. Cf. E. hit-ling. Icel. ket-lingr, a kitten; prov. E.
chit, a cat (E.D.D.). See Kitten.

CHIT (2), a shoot or sprout. (K.) Halliwell gives: ‘Chit, to
germinate; the first sprouts of anything are called ch-ts.’ Holland,
tr. of Pliny, bk. xiii. ch. 4, has ‘the root or chit beginneth first to put
forth.’ Apparently a later substitute for ME. chithe, from AS. cid, a
germ, sptig, sprout; Grein, i. 161. Cf. Goth. wskeian, to produce as
a shoot, from a Teut. root *kei-, to sprout, whence *ki-thoz, m., as
in AS. cid, OSax. #10, OHG. kidi, Bavarian keid (Schmeller), a
young shoot. See Chink (1).

CHITTERLINGS, small intestines. (E.) Levins (1570) has
chitterling, chyttering, ‘omasum.’ See E.D.D. Cf. Low G. hut, G.
kuttel, entrails; Du. kuit, spawn.

CHIVALRY, knighthood. (F.—L.) ME. chivalrie, chivalerye.
In K. Alisaunder, 1. 1496, we have‘ with al his faire chivalrie >=with
all his fair company of knights; such being commonly the older
meaning. =—OF. chevalerie, horsemanship, knighthood. —OF. cheval,
a horse.—L. caballus, a horse. See Cavalry. Der. chivalr-ic,
chivalr-ous (ME. chivalerous, Gower, C. A. i. 89), chivalr-ous-ly.

CHIVE, a small onion. (F.—L.) Palsgrave has: “Chyve, an
herbe, cive.’ = Norm. dial. chive (Moisy); F. ezve, ‘a scallion, or unset
leek; ’ Cot.—L. cepa, an onion.

CHLORINE, a pale green gas. (Gk.) | Modern. Named from
its colour. The gas was discovered in 1774; the name was conferred
on it by Sir H. Davy in 1810; Engl. Cyclopedia, From Gk. xAapos,


107


108 CHOCOLATE


pale green; cf. Gk. yAdén, verdure, grass; xAdos, green colour; Skt.
hari-, green, yellow. Allied to Yellow, q. v. Der. chlor-ic,
chlor-ide, chlor-ite; also chloro-form, where the latter element has
reference to formic acid, an acid originally obtained from red ants;
from L. formica, an ant.

CHOCOLATE, a paste made froin cacao. (Span. — Mexican.)
First in E. G., tr. of Acosta, 1604, p. 271 (bk. iv.c. 22); also in Pope,
Rape of the Lock, ii. 135 ; Spectator, no. 54. R. also quotes from
Dampier’s Voyages, an, 1682 [ed. 1699, i. 60] about the Spaniards
making chocolate from the cacao-nut. Todd says that it was also
called chocolata at first, and termed ‘an Indian drink;’ for which he
refers to Anthony Wood’s Athenz Oxonienses, ed. 1692, vol. ii.
col. 416.—Span. chocolate, chocolate. Mexican chocolatl, chocolate
(Siméon). Wholly unconnected with the word cacao, of which the
Mex. name is cacauatl, Prescott confuses them.

CHOICE, a selection. (F.—Teut.) Not English, so that the
connexion with the verb to choose is but remote. ME. chois, choys,
Rob. of Glouc. p. 111, 1. 173 1. 2415.—OF. chois, choice. —OF.
choisir, to choose; ONorthF. coisir, B. Of Teut. origin. Goth.
kausjan, to prove, test; causal of kiwsan, to choose. See Choose.

CHOIR, a band of singers; part ofachurch. (F.—L.—Gk.) Also
spelt guire. The choir of a church is so called because the choir of
singers usually sat there. In the former sense, we find the spellings
queir, quer; Barbour’s Bruce, xx. 293 (1. 287 in Pinkerton’s edition).
We also find ‘Queere, chorus;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 420. Quire is in
Shak. Hen. VIII, iv. 1.90; but it is altered to choir in modern re-
prints. The spellings guere, quire resemble those of frere, frier (friar) ;
choir is pedantic, and our prayer-books have guwire still. = OF. cuer
(Littré) ; MF. choeur, ‘the quire of a church; also, a round, ring, or
troop of singers;’ Cotgrave.—L. chorum, acc. of chorus,a band of
singers. —Gk. xopés, a dance in a ring, a band of dancers and singers;
see Prellwitz. Doublet, chorus ; whence chor-al, chor-al-ly, chor-i-ster,
See Chorus.

CHOKE, to throttle, strangle. (E.) ‘Thus doth S. Ambrose
choke our sophisters ;’ Frith’s Works, p. 130, col. 1. ‘ Chekenyd or
qwerkenyd, chowked or querkened, suffocatus, strangulatus ;’ Prompt.
Parv., p. 72. The form cheke, to choke, occurs in Rob. of Brunne,
Handling Synne, 1. 3192; see Stratmann, s. v. cheoken, p. 114. [Cf.
chese as another form of choose.) An E. word; Somner gives ‘ aceo-
cod, suffocatus,’ but without a reference; yet d-céocod occurs in
fElfric, Hom. i. 216. We also find AS. a-céocung, to translate L.
vaminatio, which the glossator hardly seems to have understood;
see Voc.179. 1. Thus the AS. form was céocian, whence ME. chéken,
regularly; also (by change of céo- to ced-, as in the case of E. choose}
an ME. choken, later choken (with short 0, as in chock-ful) and subse-
quent regularlengthening. ‘The Teut. base is *kewk. Perhaps chuck-le
and Icel. kok, ‘ the gullet,’ may be related. Der. choke-ful.

CHOLER, the bile; anger. (F.—L.—Gk.) The & is a 16th
century insertion, due to a knowledge of the source of the word.
ME. colere, bile; Gower, C. A. iii. 100; bk. vii. 1. 459. The adj.
colerik is in Chaucer’s Prol. 587.— OF. colere, which in Cotgrave is
also written cholere, and explained by ‘choler, anger, . . also the
complexion or humour tearmed choler.’=—L. cholera, bile; also,
cholera, or a bilious complaint (Pliny).— Gk. yoAépa, cholera; yoAn,
bile ; x0Aos, bile, also wrath, anger. The Gk. yoAy is cognate with
L. fel, and E. gall. See Gall (1). Der. choler-ic. Doublet, cholera,
as shown.

CHOOSE, to pick out, select. (E.) ME. cheosen, chesen, chusen ;
of which chesen is the most usual. Spelt chws in the imperative, St.
Marharete, 1. 103; cheosen, Layamon, ii. 210. AS. céosan (pt. t.
céas), later form cedsan, to choose; Grein, i. 160, AS. céosan gave
ME. chésen regularly; the E. choose is from cedsan (with ed for é0).+
Du. kiezen; G. hiesen; Icel. kjdsa; Goth. kiusan, to choose, also to
prove, test. Teut. type *keusan-, pt. t. *kaus. Further allied to L.
gus-lare, to taste; Gk. yevouar, I taste; Skt. jush, to relish, enjoy
—4/ GEUS, to choose, taste. Brugmann, i. § 602. From the same
root, choice, q. v.; also gust (2), dis-gust.

CHOP (1), to cut suddenly, strike off. (E.) ME. choppen, to cut
up, strike off. ‘ Thei choppen alle the body in smale peces ;’ Maunde-
ville’s Travels, p. 201. The imperative chop occurs in P. Plowman,
A. iii. 253. A later form of Chap (1), q. v. Der. chop, sb.; chopp-er.

CHOP (2), to barter, exchange. (K.) A variant of chap, to
barter; due to the fact that chap, to cut, was also pronounced as
chop. Further, this verb 40 chap seems to have been made out of
chap-man, sb., a merchant. See Chapman. Hence also the phr.
“to chop and change ;’ we say also, ‘ the wind chops,’ i.e. changes,
veers.

CHOPINE, a high-heeled shoe. (F.—Span.—L.) In Hamlet,
ii. 2. 447. An error for chapine.— MF. chopine, chappin; Cotgrave has
‘chappins, choppins, a kinde of high slippers for low women;’ OF,
chapin, Godefroy. = Span. chapin, a clog with a cork sole; and see


CHROME


chapin in Minsheu. —Span. chapa, the same as E. chape ; see Chape.
See Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 36.

CHOPS, the jaws, cheeks; see Chaps.

CHORD, astring of a musical instrument. (L.—Gk:) Thesame
word as cord, which spelling is generally reserved for the sense ‘a
thin rope.’ Milton has chords, P. L. xi. §61. In old edd. of Shak.,
it is spelt cord. L. chorda.— Gk. xopd7y, the string of a musical in-
strument. See further under Cord.

CHORUS, a company of singers. (L.—Gk.) In Milton, P. L.
vii. 275.—L. chorus.— Gk. xopds. See further under Choir.

CHOUGH, a bird of the crow family. (E.) ME. chough, in
Chaucer, Parl. Foules, 345. ‘ The crowesand the choughes ;’ Maunde-
ville, p. 59. The pl. choghen occurs about 1305, in E. E. Poems, ed.
Furnivall, p. 76,1. 185. Not found in AS., which has the form ceo;
we find ‘Gracculus vel monedula, ceo ;’ AElf. Gloss., Nomina Avium ;
and in O. E. Texts we find the strange forms ciae, chyae. ‘The various
names imitate its cry; somewhat similar are NFries. kauke, a chough;
Du. kaaww, a chough, jackdaw ; Dan. kaa, ajackdaw ; Swed. kaja, a
jackdaw. Wealso find AF. chowwe, a chough, in Wright’s Vocab.
1.145, 1. 16; and even OF. choe, choue, kauwe (Godefroy).

CHOUSKH, to cheat; orig. a cheat. (Ital.—Turkish.) Now a
slang word ; but i:s history is known. It was orig.a sb. Ben Jonson
has chiaus in the sense of a Turk,’ with the implied sense of ‘a cheat.’
In his Alchemist, Act i. sc. 1, Dapper says: ‘ What do you think of
me, That I am a chiaus? Face. What’s that? Dapper. The Turk
was [i.e. who was] here: As one would say, do you think I am a
Turk?’ ‘The allusion is to a Turkish chiaws, or interpreter, who, in
1609, defrauded some Turkish merchants resident in England of
£4000; a fraud which was notorious at the time. See Richard-
son, Trench’s Select Glossary, and Gifford’s Ben Jonson, iv. 27. Gif-
ford copied the story (without acknowledgment) from W. R. Chet-
wood, Memoirs of Ben Jonson, 1756; p. 15 (N. & Q.9 S. v. 25).
The pl. chouses occurs in Ford’s Lady's Trial, ii. 2; and the pp.
chous’d in Butler’s Hudibras, pt.'ii. c. 3. 1. toro (ed. Bell, ii, 53). —
Ital. ciaus, an officer of thé great Turk (Florio, 1611).— Turk. chawush,
explained as meaning ‘a sergeant, a lictor; any officer that precedes
a magistrate or other great man ; a herald, a pursuivant, a messenger ;
the head ofa, caravan ;’ Richardson’s Pers. Dict. p. 534.

CHRISM, holy unction, holy oil. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Anoynted
with the holye crisme ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 377 c. It occurs also
in Gen. and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1. 2458. Hence chrisome-child, a
child wearing a chrisome-cloth, or cloth with which a child, after bap-
tism and holy unction, was covered. [The o is merely inserted for
facility of pronunciation.] The spelling crisme or chrisme is due to
a knowledge of the Greek source. It was formerly also spelt creme
or creyme, as in William of Shoreham’s Poems, De Baptismo, 1. 144 (in
Spec. of Eng., ed. Morris and Skeat). = OF. cresme, chresme, explained
by Cotgrave as ‘ the crisome, or oyle wherewith a baptised child is
annointed.’ = Late L. chrisma, sacred oil.—Gk. xptopa, an unguent.
=- Gk. ypiw, I graze, rub, besmear, anoint. Der. chrism-al; chrisome-
cloth, chrisome-child.

CHRIST, theanointed one. (L.—Gk.) L. Christus, = Gk. Xpiords,
anointed. Gk. ypiw, I rub, anoint. See Chrism. Hence AS.
crist, Christ; AS. cristen, a Christian (Boethius, cap. i), afterwards
altered to Christian to agree with L. Christianus ; also AS. cristnian,
to christen, where the suffix -ian is active, so that the word is equiva-
lent to cristen-ian, i.e. to make a Christian; also AS. cristen-dém,
cristenan-dom, Christendom, Christianity, the Christian world; Boe-
thius, cap. i. ‘These words were introduced in very early times, and
were always spelt without any h after the c. The h is now inserted,
to agree with the Greek. Der. Christ-ian (formerly ‘cristen, as ex-
plained above) ; Christen-dom (i.e. Christian-dom, as shown) ; Chris-
tian-like, Christian-ly, Christian-ity, Christian-ise; christen (AS. crist-
nian, explained above) ; Christ-mas, for which see below. The mod.
E, long 7 is due to F. influence.

CHRISTMAS, the birth-day of Christ. (Hybrid; Gk. and L.)
ME. cristesmesse, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 213; cristermas, Gawain,
1. 985 ; cristemasse, Chaucer, C. T., Group B, 1. 126. AS. cristes
messe, Chron. an. 1021 (MS. D). From AS. crist, i.e. Christ ; and
AS. masse (ME, messe), a mass, festival. See Mass (2). Der.
Christ mas-box ; see Box (2).


CHROMATIC, lit. relating to colours. (Gk.) Holland hasthe _


expression ‘never yet to this day did the tragedy use chromatick
music nor rhyme ;’ Plutarch, p. 1022. And Dryden speaks of ‘ the
third part of painting, which is chromatigue or colouring ;’ Parallel
bet. Poetry and Painting (near the end).—Gk. xpwparids, suited for
colour.—Gk. xpwyar-, stem of xp@pa, colour: closely related to Gk.
xpés, skin, covering, xpord, surface; and allicd to xpiew, to rub over.
Der. chromatics.

CHROME, the same as Chromium, a metal. (Gk.) Its com-
pounds are remarkable for the beauty of their colours; hence the


CHRONICLE


name, given in 1797 (N. E. D.). The word is coined from Gk.
xpapa, colour. See above. Der. chrom-ic.

CHRONICLE, a record of the times. (F.— L.—Gk.) ME. cronicle
(always without h after c); Trevisa, ii. 77; Prompt. Pary. p. 104.
The pp. cronyculd, i.e. chronicled, occurs in Sir Eglamour, 1339.
The sb. cronicler also occurs, Prompt. Parv.— AF. cronicle, Gaimar,
9543; with unoriginal 7; we also find ME. cronique or cronike, a word
frequently used by Gower in his C. A., ll. ror, 817, &c. =OF. cron-
ique, pl. croniques, ‘ chronicles, annals ;’ Cotgrave. = Late L. chronica,
a catalogue, description (Ducange) ; a sing. sb., formed (mistakenly)
from the Gk. plural.—Gk. xpowsed, sb. pl. annals. Gk. xpovirds,
relating to time (mod. E. chronic). —Gk. xpovos, time. Der.
chronicl-er ; from the same source, chron-ic, chron-ic-al ; also chrono-
logy, chrono-meter, for which see below.

CHRONOLOGY, the science of dates. (Gk.) Raleigh speaks
of ‘a chronological table;’ Hist. of the World, b. il. c. 22. s. 11.
Kither from F. chronologie (Cotgrave), or directly from the Gk.
xpovoroyia, chronology.—Gk. xpévo-, for xpdvos, time ; and -Aoyia,
from Adyos, discourse, from Aeyev, to speak. Der. chronolog-ic,
chronolog-ic-al, chronolog-ic-al-ly, chronolog-er, chronolog-ist.

CHRONOMETER, an instrument for measuring time. (Gk.)
‘Chronometrum or Chronoscopium perpendiculum, a pendulum to mea-
sure time with ;’ Kersey’s Dict. 2nd ed. 1715.—Gk. xpdvo-, stem of
xpovos, time; and peérpoy, a measure.

CHRYSALIS, a form taken by some insects. (Gk.) Given in
Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1731.—Gk. xpuoaaddis, the gold-coloured
sheath of butter-flies, a chrysalis; called in Late L. aurélia (from
aurum, gold). —Gk. xpva-ds, gold. Prob. of Semitic origin; cf. Heb.
hariits, gold. The pl. is properly chrysalides.

CHRYSANTHEMUM, a flower. (L.—Gk.) In Lyte’s
Dodoens, bk. ii. c. 30.—L. chr¥santhemum.—Gk. xpuodvOepov,
a marigold.—Gk. xpuo-ds, gold; dv@euov, a bloom, from avGeiv, to
bloom, related to dv@os, a flower, a bud.

CHRYSOLITH, a stone of a yellow colour, (F'.—L.—Gk.)
ME. crysolyt, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, A. 1009; with ref. to
Rev. xxi. 20.—OF.  crisolit.—L. chrysolithus (Vulgate). —Gk.
xpucddrrdos, Rev. xxi. 20; lit. ‘a gold stone.=—Gk. xpuad-,. for
xpuads, gold; and AéGos, a stone.

CHRYSOPRASE, a kind of stone. (L.—Gk.) ME. cryso-
pase [sic], Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, A. 1013; crisopace [sic], An
Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 98, 1. 174; with ref. to Rev. xxi.
20.—L. chrysoprasus (Vulgate).—Gk. yxpuvodmpacos, Rev. xxi. 20;
a precious stone of a yellow-green colour, and named, with reference
to its colour, from Gk. ypua6-s, gold, and mpagor, a leek.

CHUB, a small but fat fish. (E.) ‘ A chubbe, bruscum ;’ Levins,
Manip. Vocab. col. 181, 1. 29. [Sometimes said to be named from
its large head, but it is rather its body which is thick and fat.
Besides, the resemblance to AS. cop, which signifies ‘top, summit ’
rather than ‘head,’ is but slight.] B. Not to be separated from the
adj. chubby, i.e. fat; nor (perhaps) from the ME, chuffy, fat and
fleshy ; see Prompt. Parv. p. 77, note 1. Marston even speaks of a
‘ chub-faced fop ;’ Antonio’s Revenge, A. iv. sc. I. y. The word is,
doubtless, English, though the characteristic ch has not been ex-
plained. The prov. E. chub, a log of wood (E.D.D.), may be com-
pared with proy. Swed. (and Swed.) kubb, a block, log of a tree;
Icel. tré-kumbr, tré-kubbr, a log of a tree, a chump; Norw. kubbe, a
log. These words are further allied to prov. Swed. kabba, kubba, to
lop, Norw. kubba, to lop. Even more remarkable are Swed. dial.
kubbug, chubby, fat, plump; Norw. kubben, stumpy. See Chump.
@ The word chub does not appear to have been in early use; we
commonly find the fish described as ‘ the chevin,’ which is a French
term. Cotgrave gives ‘Cheviniau, a chevin,’-a word apparently
derived from chef, the head, and properly applied rather to the ‘ bull-
head’ or ‘ miller’s-thumb,’ by which names Florio explains the Ital.
capitone, derived from L. capito, large-headed, from L. caput, the
head. Der. chubb-y (see explanation above) ; chubb-i-ness.

CHUCK (1), to strike gently; to toss. (F.—O. Low Ger.) We
use the phrase ‘to chuck under the chin.’ Sherwood, in his Index to
Cotgrave, writes ‘a chocke under the chinne.’ Chuck, to toss, was
also formerly chock, as shown by a quotation from Turberville’s
Epitaph on Master Win Drowned (R., s.v. Chock). Imitative ; but
prob. suggested by F. choguer, ‘to give a shock ;’ Cotgrave. —Du.
schokken, to jolt, shake ; schok, a shock, bounce, jolt; allied to E. shock
and shake. See Shock. Der. chuck-farthing, i.e. toss-farthing ;
Sterne, Tristr. Shandy, c..10.

CHUCK (2), to cluck as a hen. (E.) A variant of cluck. Chaucer
has chuk for the sound made by a cock, when he had found a grain
of com; C. T.15180 (B-4364). The word is clearly imitative, like
Cluck. Der. chuck-le, in the sense of ‘cluck;’ also in the sense
‘to fondle ;’ both of which senses appear in Dryden, as cited by Todd.
Cf. Norw. kukla, to chuckle, to cluck as a hen (Ross).


CICATRICE 109


CHUCK (3), a chicken; Shak. L.L. L.v. 1, 117, &c. (E.) Merely
a variant of chicken, q.v. Cf. Icel. Ajuklingr, a chicken.

CHUCKLE, to laugh in the throat. (E.) ‘ Chuckle, to laugh by
fits ;? Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. The suffix -/e gives it a frequentative
force. The sense now refers to suppressed laughter; as if related to
choke more immediately than to chuck. See Choke, Chuck (2).

CHUM, a familiar companion. (F.—L.) The N.E.D. quotes
‘ my chum Mr. Hody’ from Creech, Dedication to tr. of Theocritus,
in 1684. This is the earliest instance. Origin uncertain. [Some say
it is a ‘ corruption’ of chamber-fellow, which seems incredible ; and
the Bremen Worterb. identifies it with Low G. kumgaan, (often short-
ened to kump), a familiar companion (from French), which does not.
seem to be possible.] Cf. prov. E. chummy, a chimney-sweep (which
is from chimney); E.D.D. Surely for chimney-fellow, i.e. fireside
companion (chimney = fireplace). .Cf. Brand, Pop. Antiq. ii. 452; i. 232;
and see Phil. Soc. Trans., 1902, p. 656.

CHUMP, a log of wood. (E.) ‘ Chump, a thick and short log, or
block of wood;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. A late formation; prob.
affected by chop, clump, &c. Common in dialects. Cf. Norw.
kump, a round eminence, a lump (Ross) ; also Icel. kumbr, as seen
in ¢ré-kumbr,a tree-chump,alog. Cf. Icel. kumbr, equivalent to kubbr,
a chopping; from kubba,to chop. See Chub. Der. chump-end,
i.e. thick end.

CHURCH, the Lord’s house. (Gk.) In very early use. ME. chirche,
chireche, cherche ; also (in Northern dialects), kirk, kirke. ‘ Chireche is
holi godes hus, . . .. and is cleped on boc kiriaka i. dominicalis;’ the
church is God’s holy house, and is called in the book kiriaka, i.e.
dominical; O. Eng. Hom. ii. 23. AS. cirice, circe; the pl. ciricean
occurs in Gregory’s Liber Pastoralis, tr. by A‘lfred ; ed. Sweet, p. 5 ;
and see O. EF. Texts. Cf. OSax. kerika, kirika; Du. kerk; Dan. kirke ;
Swed. kyrka; Icel. kirkja; OHG. chiricha, MHG. kirche, G. kirche.
B. But all these are borrowed from Gk. xupiaxov, a church ; neut. of
adj. xupiaxds, belonging to the Lord, from Gk. «épros, the Lord; cr
(rather) from Gk. «upeaxd, pl., treated as a fem. sing. (as in other
cases). Kvpios orig. signified ‘mighty ;’ from Gk. xvpos, might,
strength. Cf. Skt. gura-s, a hero; Zend ¢ura, strong. Brugm.i.
§ 474. §[ The etym. has been doubted, on account of the rareness
of the Gk. word «vpiaxdy ; but see the discussion in N. E. D.; and
consider the high probability that the word must be Greek. Der.
church-man; church-warden (see warden) ; church-yard (see yard).

CHURL, a countryman, clown. (E.) ME. cherl, cheorl ; spelt
cherl, Ormulum, 14788. AS. ceorl, a churl; also ‘husband,’ as in
John, iv. 18. + Du. herel, a clown, fellow ; Dan. and Swed. karl,a
man; Icel. karl, amale, man (whence Scot. carle, a fellow) ; OHG.
charal, G. karl, a man, a male (whence Charles). Teut. type *kariloz ;
whence Finnish arilas, an old man ; Streitberg, §97. Cf. Gk. yép-ov,
anold man. Der. churl-ish, churl-ish-ly.

CHURN, a vessel for making butter. (E.) ME. chirne, chyrne.
‘ Chyrne, vesselle, cimbia, cumbia. Chyrne botyr, cumo ;’ Prompt.
Parv. p. 76. AS. cyrin; earlier form cirim (printed cirm), Corpus
Gloss., 1.1866. ‘Sinum, cyrin;’ Voc. 280, 32. 4 Icel. kirna, a churn ;
Swed. kéirna, M. Swed. kerna, Dan. kierne, a churn. Further rela-
tions doubtful. Der. churn, verb ; cf. Swed. karna, M. Swed. kerna,
Dan. kierne, Du. kernen, to churn.

CHUTNEY, CHUTNY, a kind of hot relish. (Hind.)
Thackeray, Vanity Fair, c. lix. § 6.—Hind. chatni (Forbes, Yule).

CHYLE, juice, milky fluid. (F.—L.—Gk.) A white fluid, due
to a mixture of food with intestinal juices; a medical term. In
Sherwood’s Index to Cotgrave we have: ‘the Chylus, chyle, chile ;’
so that it was at first called by the Latin name, which was afterwards
shortened to the F. form chyle (given by Cotgrave), for convenience.
Both F. chyle and L. chylus are from the Gk. xudds, juice, moisture. —
Gk. xéw (for xéF-w), I pour.—4/GHEU, to pour; whence also FE.
gush, q.v. Der. chyl-ous, chyl-ac-e-ous.

CHYME,, juice, liquid pulp. (L.—Gk.) ‘Chymus, any kind
of juice, esp. that of meat after the second digestion ;’ Kersey’s Dict.,
and ed. 1715. Afterwards shortened to chyme, for convenience ;
chymus being the L. form.—Gk. xupds, juice, liquid, chyme.=Gk.

éw, I pour. See Chyle. Der. chym-ous.

CHYMIST, CHYMISTRY ; see Chemist.


Gl CZ


CICATRICH, the scar of a wound. (F.—L.) In Shak. Hamil.
iv. 3. 62.—F. cicatrice, ‘a cicatrice, a skarre;’ Cot.=—L. cicatricem,.
acc. of cicdirix,a scar, Der. cicatrise, verb; from MF. cicatrizer,.
‘to cicatrize ;’ Cot,


In


110 CICERONE


CIRCUMSCRIBE


CICERONE, a guide who explains. (Ital.—L.) Used by Shen- | CIPHER, the figure o in arithmetic. (F.—Span.—Arab.) ME.


stone, died 1763 (Todd). First found in 1726.—Ital. cicerone, a
guide, lit. a Cicero.—L. Cicerdnem, acc. of Cicero, the celebrated
orttor. Der. From the same name, Ciceron-ian,

CID, a title of Ruy Diaz, the national hero of Spain. (Span. — Arab.)
Span. Cid.— Arab. sayyid, a lord, prince; Rich. Dict. p. 864.

CIDER, a drink made from apples. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) There
is no reason why it should have been restricted to apples, as it merely
means ‘strong drink.’ ME. sicer, cyder, syder. In Chaucer, C. T.,
Group B, 3245, some MSS. have ciser, others siser, sythir, cyder ; the
allusion is to Judges, xiii. 7: ‘cave ne uinum bibas, nec siceram.’
Sicer is here the L. form, and cider the F. form. =F. cidre, cider ; OF.
sisre, sisdre, cisdre (Supp. to Godefroy, s.v. Cidre).— L. sicera, strong
drink. = Gk. oixepa, strong drink. = Heb. shkékar, strong drink. = Heb.
shikar, to be intoxicated. Cf. Arab. sukr, sakr, drunkenness ; Rich.
Dict. p. 838. @] L. sicera became sis’ra; whence OF. sisre, later
sisdre, with excrescent d; later ci’dre (with loss of s). The Walla-
chian ¢zighir, cider, preserves the guttural.

CIELING, CIEL; see Ceil.

CIGAR, a small roll of tobacco. (Span.) ‘Give me a cigar!’
Byron, The Island, c. ii. st. 19. Spelt segar in Twiss’s Travels
through Spain, A.D. 1773 (Todd).—Span. cigarro, a cigar. Com-
monly supposed to be derived from cigarra, a grass-hopper; from a
fanciful resemblance to the insect’s body. (Monlau.)

CILIARY, pertaining to the eyelids or eyelashes. (L.) In
Johnson’s Dict., with a quotation from Ray. Formed as if from
L. *cilitris, adj. ; f-om cilium, the eyelid.

CIMETER: see Scimetar.

CINCHONA, Peruvian bark. (Spanish.) Named by Linnzus,
in 1742, after the countess of Chinchon, wife of the governor of Peru,
cured by it A.D. 1638. Hence the name should have been Chinchona.
Chinchon is a small town in New Castile (Pineda); and lies to the
I.S.E. of Madrid. J Distinct from quinine, q.v.

CINCTUREH, a girdle, belt. (L.) In Milton, P. L. ix. 1117.
{Not in Shakespeare, though sometimes inserted in K. John, iv. 3.
155.|—L. cinctira, a girdle. —L. cingere, pp. cinctus, to gird.

CINDER, the refuse of a burnt coal. (E.) ME. sinder, sindyr,
cyndir, cyndyr. ‘Syndyr of smythys colys, casma;’ Prompt. Parv.
p- 456; ‘Cyndyr of the smythys fyre, casuma;’ id. p. 78. AS. sinder,
scoria, dross of iron; cf. ‘Scorium, syzder;’ Wright's Vocab. i. 86;
“scoria, sinder;’? O.E. Texts, p. 95,1. 1808. NFries. sinder, slag.
+Icel. sizdr, slag or dross from a forge; Dan. sinder, sinner, a spark
of ignited iron; also, a cinder; Swed. sizder, slag, dross; G. sinter,
dross of iron, scale. [The Icel. verb sindra, to glow or throw out
sparks, is a derivative from simdr, not vice versa; and therefore does
not help forward the etymology.] 4 The spelling cinder has super-
seded szder, through confusion with the F. cendre (with excrescent @),
which is a wholly unconnected word, from the L. acc. cinerem, accus.
of cinis, dust. The F. cendre would have given us cender, just as
I’. genre has given us gender. See below. The correct spelling
sinder (in use from the 8th century to the 16th) is not likely to be
restored. Der. cinder-y.

CINERARY, relating to the ashes of the dead. (L.) Not in
Johnson. Modern; seldom used except in the expression ‘ cinerary
um,’ i.e. an urn for enclosing the ashes of the dead. [The word is
wholly unconnected with cinder (see above), and never used with
reference to common cinders.]—L. cizerdrius, relating to the ashes
of the dead. =—L. cinis (decl. stem ciner-), dust or ashes of the dead.
+Gk. xévs, dust. Brugm. i. § 84. Der. cinerar-ia, a flower; so
named from the ash-coloured down on the leaves.

CINNABAR, CINOPER, red sulphuret of mercury. (L.—
Gk.—Pers.) Spelt cyxoper; Wyclif, Jerem. xxii. 14. ‘ Cinnaber or
Cinoper (cinnabaris), vermillion, or red lead, is either natural or
artificial;” Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—Late L. cinnabaris, the
Latinised name.—Gk. «wvaBag, cinnabar, vermilion; a dye called
‘dragon’s blood’ (Liddell and Scott). Of oriental origin. Cf. Pers.
zinjarf, zingifrah, zinjafr, red lead, vermilion, cinnabar; Richard-
son’s Dict. p. 784. Distinct from sixople, q. v.

CINNAMON, the name of a spice. (L.—Gk.—Heb.) In the
Bible, Exod. xxx. 23, where the Vulgate has cinnamodmum, Also in
Rey. xviii. 13, where the Gk. has «wdywpov. Both are from the
Heb. ginnadmon, cinnamon; a word of non-Semitic origin; cf. Malay
kiiyu mdnis, sweet wood, cinnamon; from kayu, wood, manis, sweet
(Gesenius). 4] In ME., cinnamon was called canel, from the OF.
canelle, which Cotgrave explains by ‘our modern cannell or canna-
mon;’ where ‘cannamon’ is a misprint for ‘cinnamon.’ This canelle
is a dimin. of OF. cane, cane. See Cane.

CINQUE, the number five. (F.—L.) Formerly used in dice-
play. See cing in Chaucer, C. T., Group C, 1. 653.—F. cing. =—L.
quingue, five; cognate with E. jive, q.v. Der. cingue-foil (see foil) ;
cingue-pace, Much Ado, ii. I. 77; see Nares.


siphre, Richard the Redeles, ed. Skeat, iv. 53.—OF. ci/re (mod. I’.
chiffre, which see in Brachet). — Span. cifra, denoting ‘nothing.’ = Arab.
sifr, a cipher; Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 402 (the initial letter being
sad); lit. ‘an empty thing;’ from Arab. s‘fr, adj. empty. — Arab,
root safara, to be empty; Rich. Dict. p. 937. (A translation of Skt.
cinyam, a cipher, neut. of ¢giinya-, empty.) Cipher is a doublet of
zero,q.v. Der. cipher, verb; de-cipher, from L. dé, in the verbal sense
of un-; cf. MF. dechiffrer, to decypher ;’ Cot.

CIRCENSIAN ; see under Circus.

CIRCLB, a ring, in various senses. (F.—L.) In very early use.
‘Feower circulas;’ i.e. four circles, A. S. Chron. A.D. 1104; where
circulas is the pl. of AS. cireul. [The spelling circle is due to the
influence of AF. and F. cercle.J—L. circudus, a circle, small ring,
dimin. of circus, a circle, a ring; cognate with KE. ring, q.v.4-Gk.
Kpikos, kipkos, a ring; AS. hring, a ring, circle. See Ring (1).
Der. circle, verb; circl-et, circul-ar, circul-ar-ly, circul-ar-i-ty, circul-ate,
circul-at-ion, circul-at-or, circul-at-or-y; and see circuit, circum-, circus,

CIRCUIT, a revolving, revolution, orbit. (F.—L.) Spelt eir-
cuite, Golden Boke, c. 36 (R.); circuit, Chaucer, C. T., 1889 (A 1887).

—F. circuit, ‘a circuit, compasse, going about ;’ Cot.—L. circuitus,
a going about.=L. circuitus, circumitus, pp. of cireumire, to go round,
go about. = L. circum, around (see Circum-); and ire, to go.—4/ EI,
to go; cf. Skt. 7, to go. Der. circuit-ous, circuit-ous-ly.

CIRCUM., prefix, around, round about. (L.) Found in ME.
circum-stance, Ancren Riwle, p. 316; and in other words, —L. cir-
cum, around, about. Orig. the accus. of cireus,a circle. See Cireus,
Circle. For compounds, see below.

CIRCUMAMBIENT, going round about. (L.) In Blount’s
Gloss. (1681). Sir T. Browne has cirewmambiency, Vulg, Errors, b. ii.
c. I. § 13.—L. circum, around; and ambientem, acc. of ambiens, sur-
rounding. See Ambient.

CIRCUMAMBULATE, to walk round. (L.) In Blount's
Gloss. (1674).—L. circum, around; and ambuldtus, pp. of ambuldre,
to walk. See Ambulation.

CIRCUMCISE, to cut around. (L.)  ‘ Circumeised he was;’
Gen. and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1200. The ME. also used the form
circumcide, Wyclif, Gen. xvii. 11; Josh. v. 2. The latter is, strictly,
the more correct form.—L. circumcidere, to cut around; pp. ¢ir-
cumcisus.—L. circum, around; and cedere (pt. t. ce-cid-i), to cut.
See Ceesura. Der. circumecis-ion; from the pp. stem.

CIRCUMFERENCE, the boundary of a circle. (L.) ‘The
cercle and the circumference ;? Gower, C. A. iii. go; b. vil. 188. —
L. circumferentia, the boundary of a circle; by substituting the F.
suffix -ce for the L. -¢ia,— L. circumferent-, stem of circumferens, pres.
pt. of circumferre, to carry round. =L. circum, around; and Jerre, to
carry, bear, cognate with E. bear, q.v. Der. circumferenti-al.

CIRCUMFLEX, lit.a bending round. (L.) ‘ Accent circonflex,
a circumflex accent ;’ Sherwood’s Index to Cotgrave. Cotgrave him-
self explains the F. accent circonflex by ‘ the bowed accent.’ = L. syllaba
circumflexa, a syllable marked with a circumflex. — L. circumflexus, pp.
of circumflectere, to bend round.—L,. circum, around; and flectere, to
bend. See Flexible. Der. From the same source, circumflect, vb.

CIRCUMFLUENT, flowing around. (L.) In Pope’s tr. of
the Odyssey, i. 230. [Milton has circumfluous, P. L. vii. 270; from
L. adj. circumfluus, flowing around.]—L. circumfluwent-, stem of cir-
cumfluens, pres. pt. of circumfluere, to flow round. = L. circum, around;
and fluere, to flow. See Fluid.

CIRCUMFUSE, to pour around. (L.) Ben Jonson has ‘cir-
cumfused light,’ in An Elegy on Lady Jane Pawlet ; and see Milton,
P.L. vi. 778. — L. circumfiisus, pp. of circumfundere, to pour around
(the L. pp. being made, as often, into an FE. infinitive mood).—L.
circum, around; and fundere, to pour. See Fuse (1).

CIRCUMJACENT, lying round or near. (L.) In Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 1. § 3.—L. circumiacent-, stem of circumiacens,
pres. pt. of circumiacére, to lie near or round. =L. circum, around ;
and iacére, to lie, properly ‘to lie where thrown,’ a secondary verb
formed from iacere, to throw. See Jet (1).

CIRCUMLOCUTION, round-about speech. (L.) In Udal,
prol. to Ephesians, fol. 125; and Wilson’s Arte of Rhetorique,


p- 178 (R.)=L. circumlociitidnem, acc. of circumlocitio, a periphrasis. |


Cf. L. etreumlociitus, pp. of circumlogut, to speak in a round-about way.
=—L. circum, around; and logui, to speak. See Loquacious.
Der. circumlocut-or-y. :

CIRCUMNAVIGATE, to sail round. (L.) In Fuller’s
Worthies of Suffolk (R.)=—L. circumniuigare, pp. -gitus, to sail
round. =L,. circum, around; and nauigare, to sail, from naui-s, a ship.
See Navigable. Der. circumnavigat-or, -ion.

CIRCUMSCRIBE, to draw a line round. (L.) Sir ‘T. More
has circumscribed, Works, p. 121 h. Chaucer has the form circum


| scrive, Troil. and Cres. v. 1865.—L. circumscribere, pp. -scriptus, to


CIRCUMSPECT


‘write or draw around, to confine, limit.—L. cireum, around; and
scribere, to write. See Scribe. Der. circumscript-ion.

CIRCUMSPECT, prudent, wise. (L.) ‘Ful circumspecte and
wise ;’. Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 15. Sir T. Elyot has circuwm-
spection, The Governour, b. i. c. 24.—L. circumspectus, prudent; orig.
the pp. of circumspicere, to look around.—L. circum, around; and
specere, to look. See Spy. Der. circumspect-ly, -ness, -ion.

CIRCUMSTANCH, detail, event. (F.—L.) Inearlyuse. ME.
circumstaunce, Ancren Riwle, p. 316.— AF. circumstance, Will. Wading-
ton, 1. 10359. —L. circumstantia, lit. ‘a standing around,’ a surround-
ing; also, a circumstance, attribute, quality. (But the L. word was
assimilated to F.; the F. form is circonstance.) — L. circumstant-, stem
of circumstans, pres. pt. of circumstdre, to stand round, surround. = L.
circum, around; and stare, to stand, cognate with E. stand. See
Stand. Der. circumstant-i-al, -i-al-ly, -i-ate.

CIRCUMVALLATION, a continuous rampart. (L.) ‘The
lines.of circumvallation; Evelyn’s Diary, Aug.3,1641; Tatler,no.175.
Formed from a L. acc.*cireumuallationem, from asupposed sb. *circum-
uallitio, regularly formed from the verb circumuallare (pp. -uallatus),
to surround witha rampart. —L. circum, around ; and uallare, to make
arampart, from uallum, arampart; whence also E. wall. See Wall.

CIRCUMVENT, to delude, deceive. (L.) ‘1 was thereby cir-
cumuented ;’ Barnes’ Works, p. 222;.col. 2. Formed, like verbs in
-ate, from the pp. of the L. verb.—L. circumuentus, pp. of circum-
wenire, to come round, surround, encompass, deceive, delude. —L.
circum, around; and uenire, to come, cognate with E. come, q. v.
Der. circumvent-ion, -ive.

CIRCUMVOLVE, to surround. (L.) ‘All these [spheres] cir-
cumvolve one another like pearls or onyons ;’ Herbert’s Travels, 1665,
p- 345.—L. circumuoluere, to surround; lit. to roll round.—L. cir-
cum, around; and uoluere, to roll. See Revolve, and Volute.
Der. circumvolut-ion, like pp. uoliitus.

CIRCUS, a circular theatre. (L.) ‘ Circus, a circle, or rundle, a
ring; also a sort of large building, rais’d by the ancient Romans, for
shews, games, &c.;’ Kersey’s Dict. 2nd ed.1715. Also in Dryden,
tr. of Ovid’s Art of Love, b. i. 1. 159.—L. circus, a place for games,
lit. a ring, circle.4-Gk. sxpixos, xipxos,a ring; AS. hring,a ring. See
Ring, Circle. Der. circ-le, q.v.; also circensian, with reference to
games held in the Circus maximus at Rome, from circ-ensis, adj.

CIRRUS, a tuft of hair; fleecy cloud; tendril. (L.) In Kersey’s
Dict. 2nd ed. 1715; explained as ‘a tuft or lock of hair curled;’ he
also explains cirri as having the sense of tendrils, but without using
the term ‘tendril.? Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, has the adj. cirrous,
“belonging to curled hair.’ —L. cirrus, curled hair.

CISSOID, a certain curve of the second order, (Gk.) Lit. ‘ivy-
like; because the cusp resembles the re-entrant angles of an ivy-leaf.
= Gk, mocoeb-n5, ivy-like. —Gk. xicod-s, ivy ; and €6-os, form.

CIST, a chest, a sort of tomb. (L.—Gk.) Sometimes used in
modern works on antiquities, to describe a kind of stone tomb. The
true E. word is chest, which is a doublet of cist. L. cista, a chest. —
Gk, «iorn, a chest. See Chest; and see below.

CISTERN, a reservoir for water. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. cisterne ;
Maundeville’s Trav. pp. 47, 106; Wyclif, Gen. xxxvii. 24, Deut. vi.
1t.—OF, cisterne.—L. cisterna, a reservoir for water; extended from
L. cista, a chest, box; see above. Cf. cav-ern.

CISTUS, a flower; the rock-rose. (L.—Gk.) Spelt cisthus in
Turner's Names of Herbes (1548).—L. cistus.— Gk. nioros, KioOos.

CIT, short for ‘citizen,’ q.v. (F.—L.) Used by Dryden, Prologue
to Albion and Albanius, 1. 43; Pope, Sat. of Donne, iv. 144.

CITADEL, a fortress in a city. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Milton,
P.L.i. 773; Shak. Oth. ii. 1.94, 211.—F. citadelle, ‘a citadell, strong
fort;’ Cot.—Ital. cittadella, a small town; dimin. of cittade, cittate
(mod. Ital. cit/d) a citys L. ciuitaitem, acc. of ciuitis, a city.—L.
ciui-, for ciuis, a citizen ; with suffix -tas. See City.

CITE, to summon, to quote. (F.—L.) The sb. citation (ME.
citacion) is in early use, and occurs in Rob. of Glouc. p. 473; 1.9718.
The pp. cited is in Sir T. More, Works, p. 254 f.—F. citer, ‘to cite,
summon,...to alledge as a text;’ Cot.—L. citdre, pp. citdtus, to
cause to move, excite, summon; frequentative of ciére, cire, to rouse,
excite.+-Gk. xiw, I go; xivvpat, I hasten. Der. citat-ion; also ex-
cite, in-cite, re-cite,

CITHERN, CITTERN, a sort of guitar, (L.—Gk.) Spelt
cithern, 1 Macc. iv. 54 (A. V.); cittern, Shak. L. L. L. v. 2.614. The
same as ME. gyterne, P. Plowman, B. xiii. 233; from OF. guiterne.
The x is merely excrescent, as in ME. gyter-ne. It is even found in
AS. in the form cytere, as a gloss to L. cithara in Ps. lvi. 11; Spel-
man’s A.S. Psalter. —L. cithara.— Gk. «0apa, a kind of lyre or lute.
Doublet, guitar, q. v.

CITIZEN, an inhabitant ofa city. (F.—L.) ME. citesein, citizein,
citesain. ‘A oman citeseyn;’ Wyclif, Acts, xxii. 28; citezein, Chaucer,
Ho. of Fame, ii. 422. The forms cifesein, citezein are Anglo-French;


CLAM lll


the introduction of s or z was perhaps suggested by denizen. The
AF, pl. citezeins occurs in Liber Albus, p. 268. Hence citizen stands
for the AF. citizein. OF. citeain (cf. mod. F. citoyen), formed from
sb. cite, a city, by help of the suffix -ain < L. -anus,— OF. cite, F. cité,
acity. See City.

CITRON, the name of a fruit. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Milton, P. L.
v.22. Palsgrave has: ‘ Citron frute, citron; Citron tree, citronnier ;’
p- 205. (Cf. ME. citir, Prompt. Parv. p. 78, directly from L. citrus. ]
—F. citron, ‘a citron, pome-citron;’ Cot.— Late L. citrdnem, acc. of
citro, a citron; an augmentative form.—L. citrus, an orange-tree,
citron-tree ; whence Gk. xitpoy, a citron. Apparently a variant of
L. cedrus, a cedar, and thence transferred to denote an African tree
(citrus) with wood fragrant like that of the cedar; and finally to
the citron-tree.— Gk. «é5pos, a cedar; see Cedar. Brugmann, i.
§ 764. Der. citr-ine, Chaucer, C. T., 2169 (A 2167); citr-ic; c.tr-in-
at-ion, id., C. T..16284 (G 816). @ Sitron-ade, a conserve of citrons,
occurs in the Earl of Derby’s Expeditions (C.S.), p. 228; an. 1393.

CITY, a state, town, community. (F.—L.) In early use. ME.
cité, Ancren Riwle, p. 228.—OF. cite, F . cité, acity. — Late L. civ’tatem,
an abbreviated form of L. cZuitatem, acc. of ciuitas, a community, orig.
the quality of citizenship. L. ciwi-s, a citizen. B. Closely related to
Goth. heiwa-, a house; see Brugm. i. § 609. See Hind (2). Der.
citizen, q.v., citadel, q.v. ; and see civic, civil.

CIVE, CHIVE,.a sort of garlic or leek. (F.—L.) ‘ Chives, or
Cives, a small sort of onion ;’ also ‘ Cives, a sort of wild leeks, whose
leaves are us’d for’sallet-furniture;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. The
pl. of citve.—F,. cive, ‘a scallion, or unset leek ;’ Cot. = L. caepa, cépa,
céfe, an onion. 4 The form chive represents an ONorthF. chive.

CIVET, a perfume obtained from the civet-cat. (F.— Late Gk. —
Arab.) In Shak. Much Ado, ili. 2. 50; As You Like It, iii. 2. 66,
69. —F. civette, ‘civet, also the beast that breeds it, a civet-cat;’ Cot.
Cf. Ital. zibetto; from the medieval Gk. (amwétiov.— Arab. zabad, as
in Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 317; or zubad, as in Rich. Dict. p. 767.
(The initial letter is zaiz.)

CIVIC, belonging to a citizen. (L.) ‘A ctvick chaplet ;’ Holland’s
Pliny, b. xvi. c. 4.—L. ciuicus, belonging to a citizen.—L. ciwis,
a citizen. See City.

CIVIL, relating to a community. (L.) ‘ Ciwile warre;’ Udal,
Matt. c. 10, fol. 663; ciuilytye is in Sir T. More’s Works, p. 951 h.=
L. ciwilis, belonging to citizens.—L. ciuis, a citizen. Der. civil-ly,
civil-i-ty ; civil-ise, Dryden, Stanzas on Oliver Cromwell, st. 17 ; civil-
is-at-ion ; civil-i-an, Wyclif’s Works, ed. Amold, i. 32, 1. 22. And
see City.

CLACHAN, a small village with a church. (Gael.) In Leslie’s
Hist. of Scotland (1595), i. 14, 1. 22 (S.T.S.).— Gael. clachan, (1) a
circle of stones; (2) asmall rude church; (3) a small village with
achurch. So also Irish clachan, a hamlet, from Olrish cloch, a stone.

CLACK, to make a sudden, sharp noise. (E.) ME. clacken, clakken.
‘ Thi bile [bill of an owl] is stif and scharp and hoked . . Tharmid
[therewith ] thu clackes oft and longe;? Ow! and Nightingale, ll. 79-81.
Of AS. origin, though only represented by the pt. t. cleacode, with the
sense ‘he hurried ;’ lfric, Saints’ Lives, xxiii. 493. EFries. klakken.
+Dnu. klak, a crack; klakken, to clack, to crack (cf. Du. klakkebos, a
cracker,a popgun); Icel. kaka, to twitter as a swallow, to chatter as
apie, to wrangle; MHG. hlac, a crack, break, noise; cf. also F. claquer.
B. Evidently a variant of Crack, q.v. ; cf. also Swed. kuaka, to crack,
make a noise. Note the analogies; as clink: clank:: click: clack; and
again, as clack: crack :: kka¢ew: pacer. Cf. clap, clatter; also Gk.
yAaCer, to sing aloud, Irish glag-an, the clapper of a mill.

CLAD, a form of the pp. of the verb to Clothe, q.v.

CLAIM, to call out for, demand. (F.—L.) ME. clamen, claimen,
cleimen, to call for; Will. of Palerne, 4481 ; P. Plowman, B. xviii.
327.— OF. claim-, accented stem of clamer (claimer) to call for, cry
out.—L. clamdre, to call out; a secondary verb, formed from the base
cal- appearing in L. calare, to cry out, publish, and in the Gk. xadeiy,
to convoke, summon. Similarly, in Greek, we have «Ajjots, a call,
«dntevw, Isummon. =—4/KAL, to make a noise, cry out; whence also
Trish cailech, W. ceiliog, a cock; Stokes-Fick, p. 73. Der. claim-able,
claim-ant; and, from the same source, clam-our, clam-or-ous, &c.; see
clamour.

CLAM (1), to adhere, as a viscous substance. (E.) Dryden has:
‘A chilling sweat, a damp of jealousy Hangs on my brows, and clams
upon my limbs;’ Amphitryon, Act iii (R.) [This word is not to be
confused with clem, to pinch, starve, as in Richardson. See clam and
clem distinguished in Atkinson’s Cleveland Glossary ; and see Clamp. ]
The verb is due to confusion of ME. clam, sticky (see Clammy) with
ME. clemen, AS.cl#man, to smear, from AS. clam, clay (also a plaster),
Exod. i. 14; ef. prov. Eng. cloam, earthenware, clomer,a potter. The
AS. claim corresponds to a West Germanic form *k/ai-moz, m., from
a Teutonic root *#lei, which is also the base of clay. See Clay.

CLAM (2),a kind ofclamp or vice. (E.) Closely allied to clamp.


112 CLAMBER


AS. clamm, clomm, a bond, fetter; Grein, i. 161. Ience applied to
various bivalve shell-fish, which shut tightly together.

CLAMBER, to climb with hands and feet. (Scand.) In Shak.
Cor. ii. 1. 226. The b is sometimes absent, giving a form clamer.
The form clamer’d up occurs in Harrington’s Orlando, b. xix. st. 20
(R.); also in Palsgrave’s Dict.; for quotation, see Clasp. ME.
clameren ; ‘clameryn, repto ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 79; but we find clam-
brede up in Altenglische Legenden, ed. Horstmann, 1875; p. 194,
1. 400 (about 1300). [Another ME. clambren meant ‘to mass closely
together ;? see examples in Matzner, e.g. Gawain and the Grene
Knight, ll. 801, 1722; from Icel. klambra, to pinch closely together, to
clamp, Dan. klamre, to grasp, grip firmly ; cf. G. klammern,to clamp,
clasp, fasten together.] . But in the sense of ‘climb,’ clamb-er is a
frequentative formed from clamb, pt. t. stem of AS. climban, to climb.
Similar formations are Low G. (Bremen) klempern, to clamber, Low
G. klemmern (Berghaus), NF ries. klemre, to clamber. See Climb.

CLAMMY, moist and sticky, viscous. (E.) ‘ Clammzy as breed is,
nat through baken;’ Palsgrave. Earliest form claymy (see N.E.D.),
perhaps from AS. claim, clay (prov. E. cloam); but confused with an
adj. clam, sticky, with which cf. EFries. and Du. Alam, Dan. klam,
Westphal. klamm, clammy, moist. And see Clam (1), Clamp.

CLAMOUR, an outcry, calling out. (F.-—L.) ME. clamour,
Chaucer, C. T. 6471 (D 889).—OF. clamur, clamour.=—L. clamérem,
acc. of clamor, an outcry. = L. clamdre, to cry out. See Claim. Der.
clamor-ous, clamor-ous-ly, clamor-ous-ness.

CLAMP, to fasten tightly; a clasp. (Du.) ‘And they were
ioyned close both beneth, and also aboue, with clampes ;’ Bible, ed.
1551, Exod. xxxvi. 29. ‘ Clamp, in joyners work, a particular manner
of letting boards one into another;’ Kersey. [Not in early use,
though the AS. clom, a bond, is a related word.] — Du. k/amp, a clamp,
cleat, heap; klampen, to clamp, grapple. Cf. Dan. klampe, to clamp,
to cleat; klamme,a clamp, a cramp, cramp-iron; Swed. klamp,a cleat;
Icel. klémbr, a smith’s vice, a clamp; G. klampe,a clamp. B. All
from Teut. *klamp, 2nd grade of *klempan-, *klimpan-, as seen in the
MHG. klimp/fen, to press tightly together. Related on the one hand,
to E. clip, and on the other, to E. cramp; also to E. climb and clamber.
y. Compare also the form clam, signifying ‘a bond,’ represented by
AS, clom, a bond, which occurs in the AS, Chron. an. 942. Hence, by
vowel-change, Swed. k/amma, to squeeze, wring, Dan. klemme, to pinch,
Du. and G. klemmen, to pinch, prov. Eng. clem, to pinch with hunger.

CLAN, a tribe of families. (Gaelic.) Milton has clans, pl., P. L.

ii. gor. And see Leslie, Hist. of Scotland, i. 56, 1. 2 (S, T.S.).—
Gael. clann, offspring, children, descendants. + Irish cland, clann, chil-
dren, descendants; a tribe, clan; W. plant, children. @ Usually
regarded as borrowed from L. planta, a sprout ; but perhaps Celtic.
See Macbain; and Stokes-Fick, p. 63. Der. clann-ish, -ly, -ness;
clan-ship, clans-man.
_ CLANDESTINE, concealed, secret, sly. (F.—L.) Fuller speaks
of a ‘clandestine marriage ;’ Holy State, b. iii. c. 22, maxim 2.—F.
clandestin, ‘clandestine, close ;’ Cot.—L. clandestinus, secret. Allied
to clam, secretly; see Vanitek, p. 1093. From the weak grade of
x KEL, to hide; see Helm (1). Der. clandestine-ly.

CLANG, to make a sharp, ringing sound. (L.) Assb., the sound
of a trumpet; Shak. Tam. Shrew, i. 2. 207. We also find clangor,
3 Hen. VI, ii. 3. 18. The vb. clang occurs in ‘the clanging horns ;’
Somervile, The Chase, ii. 187. —L. clangere, to make a loud sound, to
resound ; whence sb. clangor, a loud noise. + Gk. kAayy7, a clang,
twang, scream, loud noise; allied to «Ade (fut. xAdyéw), to clash,
clang, make a din. An imitative word. See Fick, i. 534, 538, 540.
Der. clang-or ; and see clank.

CLANK, to make a ringing sound. (E.) ‘He falls! his armour
clanks against the ground ;’ Cowley, Davideis, b. iv. 590. ‘ What
clanks were heard,in German skies afar ;’ Dryden, tr. of Virgil, Georg.
bk. i. 638 (where the original has ‘armorum sonitum,’ 1. 474). The
word is prob. E., and related to clink ; see E. D. D., and cf. clack with
click, B. Otherwise,it was borrowed from Du. klank, a ringing sound ;
cf. Du. Alonk, pt. t. of klinken, to clink. Cf. Pomer. klank, a ringing
sound; and see Clang. The word is imitative; see Clink.

CLAP, to strike together rather noisily. (E.) Very common in
Shak. LL. LU. L. y. 2. 107, &c.; and in Chaucer, C. T.; 7163, 7166,
(D 1581, 1584), &c. ‘He... clapte him on the crune’ (crown of
the head); Havelok, 1.1814. |The AS. clepp-etan, to palpitate, is a
secondary form; Voc. 473. Fries. klappen. + Icel. klappa, to pat,
stroke, clap the hands; Swed. #lappa, to clap, knock, stroke, pat ;
Dan. klappe, to clap, pat, throb; Du. klappen, to clap, smack, prate,
blab; MHG. klaffen, to clap, strike together, prate, babble. Cf. Gael.
clabar, a mill-clapper, clack; clabaire, a loud talker (from E.). An
imitative word, allied to clatter, q. v., and clack, q.v. Der. clapp-er,
clap-trap, clap-dish.

CLARET, orig. a light red wine.


(F.—L.) Properly a ‘clear’


CLAVICLE


form claré, clarry (from L. cldratum). ‘Claret, wyne, claretum ;”
Prompt. Parv. p. 79. Spelt claret‘, Allit. Morte Arthur, ed. Brock,
1. 200; [also claré, Havelok, 1. 1728; clarré, Chaucer, C. T., 1473
(A 1471).] AF. claret, Charlemagne, 1. 585; OF. clairet, claret; see
Cotgrave; Late L. clarétum, a sweet mixed wine, clarified with honey,
&c.—L. clairus, clear, clarified, bright. See Clear.

CLARIFY, to make clear and bright. (F.—L.) ME. clari-
fien, sometimes ‘to glorify,’ as in Wyclif, John, xii. 28, where the
Vulgate has clarifica. OF. clarifier, to make bright. =—L. clarificarc,
to make clear or bright, to render famous, glorify.—L. clari-, for
clarus, clear, bright, glorious; and -ficire, to make, for facere, to
make, in forming compounds. See Clear and Fact. Der. clarifi-
er, clarific-at-ion. See below.

CLARION, a clear-sounding horn. (F.—L.) ME. clarioun,
claryoun ; Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iil. 150.— OF. claron, clairon (Supp-
to Godefroy); and prob. *clarion; the mod. F. is clairon. —Late L.
claridnem, acc. of clario, a clarion; so named from its c’ear ringing
sound, = L. clari-= claro-, for clarus, clear. See Clear. Der. clarion-
et, clarin-ette, dimin. forms.

CLARY, a labiate plant; wild sage. (Late L.) Turner, Names
of Herbes (1548), explains Orminum as clarie, and gives the L. name
as sclarea; which Lyte (tr. of Dodoens), bk. ii. c. 79, spells scarlea.
The AS. form is slarige, slarege; see Cockayne’s A.S. Leechdoms,
ili. 345. From the Late L. sclarea, in Turner (as above) ; this form
being supported by AS. slarige. Little is known as to this obscure
word, which lost its initial sin E. Cf. Gk. oAnpos, dry.

CLASH, a loud noise; to make a loud noise. (K.) This seems
to be an Eng. variant of clack; cf. EFries. klatsen, to crack a whip;
and compare smash with smack; crash with crack; hash with hack.
‘He let the speare fall, .. . and the heed of the speare made a great
classhe on the bright chapewe [hat] of steel;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart,
vol. ii. c. 186. See Clack. The word is imitative; cf. Dan. ask,
a smack (Larsen). Also Low G. klattsch (Berghaus), Du. klets, G.
klatsch, a clash; from the base ‘lat in Clatter, q. v.

CLASP, to grasp firmly, fasten together. (E.) ME. claspen,
clapsen (the ps and sp being convertible as in other words ; cf. prov. E.
waps,a wasp). Spelt clapsed, clapsud, clasped in Chaucer, C. T. prol.
275 (Six-text print). ‘I clamer [clamber] or clymme up upon a tree
... that I may claspe bytwene my legges and myn armes ;’ Palsgrave,
s.v. clamer. The form clap-s-en is an extension of a base claz-, to
embrace, of which we find traces in prov. E. clep, a clasp (E.D. D.),
G. klaf-ter, a fathom, Lith. g/éb-ys, an armful; cf. also AS. clyppan,
to embrace, grasp, ME. cluppen, clippen, to embrace; and the form
may have been influenced by that of grasp. Cf. also clamp, to hold
tightly. See Clip, Clamp; and observe the connexion of grasp
with grab, grapple.4+-Low G. and Pomeran. Alaspe,a clamp. Der.
clasp-cr, clasp-knife.

CLASS, a rank or order, assembly. (F.—L.) Bp. Hall speaks of
“classes and synods;’ Episcopacy by Divine Right, s. 6 (R.); Blount
has classe, Gloss. (1681); also in ed. 1656, s.v. Classical. Milton has.
classick, Poem on the New Forcers of Conscience, 1. 7.—F. classe,
‘a rank, order;’ Cot. —L. classem, acc. of classis, a class, assembly of
people, an army, fleet. — 4/KAL, to cry out, convoke, seen in L. calare,
climare; as explained above,s.v. Claim. 4 Bréal regards classis as
borrowed from Gk. «Afjois, Dor. xAaois ; from the same root. Der.
classic, class-ic-al, class-ic-al-ly, class-ic-al-ness, class-ic-al-i-ty, class-ics ;
also class-i-fy, class-i-fic-at-ion (for the ending -i/y see Clarify).

CLATTER, to make repeated sounds; a rattling noise. (1f.) As
sb.; ME. clater, Towneley Mysteries, p. 190. As verb; ME. clateren,
Chaucer, C. T., 2361 (A 2359). <A frequentative of clat-, a by-form
of clak- (E. clack) ; formed by adding the irequentative suffix -er; hence
clat-er-en, to rattle. Found in AS. in the word clatrung, a clattering,
a rattle, glossed by crepitaculum (Bosworth). Cf. also AS. clador, a
rattle (O. E. Texts); EFries. klattern, to clatter. Du. klater, a rattle;
klateren, to rattle; Low G. hlitern, to rattle. See Clack, Clap.

CLAUSE, a sentence, part of a writing. (F.—L.) In very early
use. ME, clause, Chaucer, Tr. and Cres. ii. 728; Ancren Riwle, p. 46.
—F. clause, ‘a clause, period ;’ Cot.—L. clausa, fem. of pp. clausus,
used in the phr. drdtio clausa, a owing speech, an eloquent period;
hence clawsa was used alone to mean ‘a period, a clause.’ Clausus is
the pp. of claudere, to shut, enclose, close.-—+ OFries. sklita, to shut.
Brugm. i. § 795 g. See Close, and Slot (1). Doublet, close, sb. .

CLAVICLE, the collar-bone. (F.—L.) Sir T. Browne has
‘clavicles or collar-bones;’ Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 1. § 8.—F. clavi-
cules, ‘the kannel-bones, channel-bones, neck-bones, craw-bones, ex-
tending on each side from the bottome of the throat unto the top of
the shoulder;’ Cot.—L. clauicula, lit. a small key, a tendril of a vine;
dimin. of L. clauis, a key, which is allied to Gk. «Anis, a key, «Aci, I
shut; and to Irish clo, a nail, peg, W. cloi, to shut. Stokes-Fick,

. 103; Brugmann, i. § 633. Der. clavicul-ar; and see clef, con-clave;


P
or ‘clarified’ wine, but used rather vaguely. ME. claret; with a by- | also clav-ier, the key-board of a piano or organ.


CLAW


CLAW, the talon of a beast or bird. (E.) ME. claw, clau, clow ;
also clee, cley (from AS, cléa). ‘Claw, or cle of a beste, ungula ;’
Prompt. Pary. p. 80. *Oxé gap o clofenn fot and shaedepp [divides]
hisé clawwes;’ Ormulum, 1224, AS. clawu, Voc. 307. 35; cla, Grein,
i. 162; pl. clawa, clawe, as in ‘clawe todé&lede,’ i.e. divided hoofs,
Levit. xi. 3; also cléa (O.E. Texts) ; cléo, Grein, 1. 163.4-Du. klaauw,
a paw, claw, clutch, talon, weeding-hook; klaauwen, to claw, scratch.
[Cf. Icel. £26, a claw; kla, to scratch; Dan. klo,aclaw; #16, to scratch ;
Swed. klo, a claw; kd, to scratch; G. klaue, a claw, talon.| B. Claw is
related to clew, a ball of thread, q.v.; from a base *klau-, 2nd grade
of * kleu, to draw together ; cf. OHG. kluwi, forceps. See Clew..

CLAY, a tenacious earth. (E.) ME, clai, clei, clay, cley. * What
es man bot herth [earth] and clay;? Hampole, Pricke of Conscience,
l.4t1. AS. clég,in AZlfric’s Gloss.; Voc. 146. 19.4-Dan. kleg, kleg,
clay; Du. klez; G. klei. B. Teut. type *klai-ja, fem.; from *kla?, and
grade of Teut. root *kle/, to stick; cf. AS. cldm (for *klai-moz), earthen-
ware; Gk. yAot-ds, sticky matter. See Cleave (2) and Glue. Der,
clay-ey.

CLAYMORE, a Scottish broadsword. (Gaelic.) Spelt glaymore
by Dr. Johnson, Journey to the Western Islands (Todd) ; but better
claymore, as in Jamieson’s Sc. Dict. = Gael. claidheamh mor, a broad-
sword, lit. ‘ sword-great ;” where the dk is no longer sounded, and
the mh is xv. The sound somewhat resembles that of cli- in cli-ent,
followed by the sound of F. env- in environ. B. The Gael. claidheamh,
a sword, is cognate with W. cleddyf, a sword, Olrish claideb; cf. also
L. clad-es, slaughter, per-cellere, to strike. The Gael. mor, great, is
cognate with W. mawr, great, Irish mor, Corn. maur, Breton méur,
great, AS. mére, illustrious,

CLEAN, pure, free from stain. (E.) ME. clené, clené (disyllabic),
Layamon, i. 376. AS. cléne, cléne, clear, pure, chaste, bright ; Grein,
i. 162.4-OSax. cléni, cleini; OF ries, klén; Du. klein, small; OHG.
chleinit, MHG. kleine, fine, excellent, small; mod. G. klein, small. B.
The original sense seems to have been ‘bright’ or ‘shining’; cf. Irish
gle, shining, pure, clean; Stokes-Fick, p. 119; Brugmann, § 196.
oe ar tlean-ly, clean-li-ness, cleanse (AS, clénsian, Grein,
i, 163).

CLEAR, loud, distinct, shrill, pure. (F.—L.) ME. cler, cleer.
‘On morwe, whan the day was clere;? King Alisaunder, ed. Weber,
1, 1978; cf. Floriz and Blauncheflur, 280. —OF. cler, cleir, clair, pure,
bright. —L. clarus, illustrious, clear, loud. B. Curtius remarks that the
r belongs to the suffix, as in mi-rus, so that the word is cld-rus. It is
probably related to clamare, to cry aloud; see Claim. Cf. Gk.
kXn-Tés, called, chosen; from xadeiv, to call, Der. clear, verb; clear-
ness, clear-ance, clear-ing, clear-ly ; cf. claret, clarify, clarion.

CLEAT, a piece of iron used to strengthen the soles of shoes ; a piece
of wood or iron to fasten ropes to. (E.) The radical sense is ‘clump,’
as applied to a firm and close mass, ME. clete, a wedge, also clite ;
Prompt. Pary. p. 81; (where clote is prob. an error for clete). As if
from AS. *cléat (whence *clyte>clite) ; from a Teut. type *hklautoz,
m.; clearly seen in Du. kloot, a ball, G. klosz, a clod, lump, ball; the
weak grade *klut- appears in Clot, q.v.

CLEAVE (1), strong verb, to split asunder, (E.) The pt. t. is
clave, Ps, \xxviii, 15 (A.V.), sometimes clove; the pp. is cloven, Acts,
ii. 3; sometimes cleft (Micah, i. 4), but the latter is unoriginal. ME,
cleoven, cleven, kleven. ‘Ful wel kan ich kleuen shides;’ Havelok,
1. 917. AS. cléofan (pt. t. cléaf, pp. clofen), Grein, i. 163.4-Du.
klieven; Icel, kljufa (pt. t. klauf, pp. klofinn); Swed. klyfva; Dan.
klove ; OHG, chlioban, G. klieben. Teut. type *kleubdan-, pt. t. *klaub,
pp. *klubanoz. B. Perhaps related to Gk. yAvpev, to hollow out, to
engrave; L. glubere, to peel, From4/GLEUBH ; Brugmann,i. § 762
(1). Der. cleav-age, ecleav-er ; also cleft, q.v. [But not cliff]

CLEAVE (2), weak verb, to stick, adhere. (E.)_ The true pt. t.
is cleaved, pp. cleaved; but by confusion with the word above, the pt.
t. most in use is clave, Ruth, i.14 (A. V.) Writers avoid using the
pp-, perhaps not knowing what it ought to be. However, we find
pt. t. cleaved in Job, xxix. 10; and the pp. cleaved, Job, xxxi. 7. ME.
tleovien, clivien, clevien, cliven, * Al Egipte in his wil clized;’ Genesis
and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1. 2384. ‘Cleouied faste;? Layamon, i. 83.
AS. clifian, cleofian, Grein, i. 163 ; a weak verb, pt. t. clifode, pp. clifod.
+Du. kleven, to adhere, cling; Swed. klibba sig, to stick to; OHG.
chleben, G. kleben, to cleave to. All from Teut. base *k1ib-, weak
grade of Teut. strong verb *fleiban-, pt. t. *klaib, pp. *klibanoz.
Traces of the strong form appear in AS. 60-clifan, to cleave to; cf.
also OHG, kliban, MHG. kliben, to cling to, take root; Icel. £/¢fa, to
climb, viz. by grasping’ the tree; Du. #lijf, ivy. See Climb.
| Observe the complete separation between this word and the pre-
ceding one; all attempts to connect them are fanciful. But we may
admit a connexion between E. cleave (2) and Gk. yAia, yAoia, L.
gluten, glue. See Clay and Glue.

_CLEEKE, a large hook or crook, used by fishermen, and in playing
golf. (E.) From cleek, verb, to clutch or grasp ; a Northern form allied


CLEVER 113


to ME. clechen (pt. t. clahte), to seize firmly, grasp with hands or claws;
Stratmann, p. 121. AS. form (not found) *cla&c(e)an, pt. t. *cl#hte.
Apparently from Teut. base * klai-, *klei- ; see Clay and Cleave
(2); and not related to Clutch.

CLEF, a key, in music. (F.—L.) Formerly also spelt cliff
‘Whom art had never taught cliffs, moods, or notes ;’ Ford, Lover’s
Melancholy, A. i. sc. 1.—F. clef, ‘a key, « .. a cliffe in musick;’
Cot.=—L. clauem, acc. of clauis,a key. See Clavicle.

CLEFT, CLIF'T, a fissure, a crack. (Scand.) Spelt clift, Exod.
xxxiil. 22 (A. V.) ; some copies have cliffs for clifts, Job, xxx.6. ‘Clyff,
elyft, or ryfte, scissura, rima,’ Prompt. Pary. p. 81 ; clifte in Chaucer,
tr. of Boethius, bk. 4. pr. 4,1. 198. And in Cursor Mundi, 19842.
The form cliff is corrupt; the final ¢ distinguishes the word from cliff,
Apparently Scandinavian. = Icel. klujt, a cleft; Swed. klyft, a cave, den,
hole; Dan, kdft, a cleft, chink, crack, crevice. B. The Icel. klu/t is from
the weak grade of kljufa, to cleave, split. See Cleave (1). @ The
mod. spelling cleft is due to the feeling that the word is connected with
cleave, so that the word is now thoroughly English in form, though
originally Scandinavian (unless there was an AS. cly/t).

CLEMATIS, a kind ofcreeping plant. (Gk.) ‘ Clema or Clematis,
a twig, a spray; a shoot, or young branch: among herbalists, it is
more especially applied to several plants that are full of young twigs;’
Kersey’s Dict. 2nd ed. 1715.— Late L. clématis, which is merely the
Gk. word in Latin letters.—Gk. «Anuaris, brushwood, a creeping
plant; dimin. from s#Anpar-, stem of KAjpa, a shoot or twig. = Gk,
kAdey, to break off, to lop or prune. Brugm. ii. § 661.

CLEMENT, mild, merciful. (F.—L.) Rare; in Cymb. v. 4.18;
and in Cath. Angl. (1483).—=F. clement, ‘clement, gentle, mild ;’ Cot.
=L,. clémentem, acc. of clémens, mild. Der. clement-ly, clemenc-y
(clemencie, Gascoigne, i. 52, The Recantation of a Lover, 1.9; from
L. clémentia, mildness),

CLENCEH, to fasten; see Clinch.

CLEPSYDRA, a water-clock. (L.—Gk.) ‘They measured the
hours ..in glasses called clepsydre;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors,
bk. v.c. 18, § 2. —L. clepsydra. = Gk. eAeywipa. — Gk. khew-, for KAénT-
ew, to steal, and ¥Swp, water; from the constant flow of the water.

CLERESTORY. (F.—L.) ‘And all with clere-story lyghtys ;*
Arnold’s Chron. ed. 1811, p. i. ‘ Englasid glittering with many a
clere story ;’ Skelton, Garland of Laurel, 479. It might as well be
spelt clear story, since clere is merely the old spelling of clear. The
pl. cleare stories occurs in the Will of Hen. VI; Nichols, Royal Wills,
p- 303. Socalled because it is a story furnished with windows, rather
than because ‘it rises clear above the adjoining parts of the building,’
as sometimes said. ‘ The ¢riforium, or series of arches between the
nave and clerestory are called le blyndstoris in the life of Bp. Cardmey ;’
Oxford Gloss. p. 573; quoted in Bury Wills, ed. Tymms, note on

. 253. See Clear and Story (2).

CLERGY, the ministry, body of ministers. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
clergie, frequently used in the sense of ‘learning ;’ [like F. clerge,
from Late L. cléricatus, clerkship]; but also with the modern mean-
ing, as: ‘Of the clergie at London... a conseil he made ;’ Rob. of
Glouc. p. 563, 1. 11812.— OF. clergie, formed as if from a Late L.
*cléricia, a form not given in Ducange.—Late L. cléricus, a clerk,
clergyman.—Gk. «Anpixds, belonging to the clergy, clerical. Gk.
kAfpos, a lot, allotment, portion; in eccl. writers, the clergy, because
‘ the Lord is their inheritance,’ Deut. xvili. 2; cf.Gk. trav xAnpov, A.V.
‘ God’s heritage,’ in 1 Pet. v. 3; but more especially Acts i. 17, where
the lit. sense is ‘ the lot of this ministry.’ Moisy has the mod. Norman
clergi, the clergy. Der. clergy-man. ;

CLERK, a clergyman, a scholar. (F.—L.—Gk.) Orig. a
clergyman; ME. clerc, clerk, Ancren Riwle, p. 318. AS. clerc, a priest,
A.S. Chron. an. 963. Either from OF. clerc, or immediately from
L. cléricus, by contraction. — Gk. «Anpixds, belonging to the clergy,
clerical, one of the clergy. See further above. Der. clerk-skip; and,
from the L. cléric-us, we have cleric, cleric-al.

CLEVER, skilful, dexterous. (E.) Rare in early use. ‘As
cleverly as th’ ablest trap ;? Butler, Hudibras, pt. i. c. 1. 1. 398 (first
published A.D. 1663). It is not easier to find an earlier example.
Sir T. Browne cites clever as a Norfolk word, in his Tract VIII
(Works, ed. Wilkins, iv. 205); see my edition of Ray’s Collection of
Eng. Dialectal Words, Eng. Dial. Soc. pp. xv, xvii. The Norfolk
word is commonly pronounced ‘ klay-ur,’ and is used in many various
senses, such as ‘handsome, good-looking, healthy, tall, dexterous,
adroit’ (Nall); also, ‘kind, liberal’ (Wilkin). B. Mr. Wedgwood
ingeniously suggests a connexion with ME. cliver or clivre, a claw,
Owl and Nightingale, ll. 78, 84, 270; in this case ‘clever’ would
have meant originally ‘ ready to seize’ or ‘ quick at seizing,’ and the
connexion would be with Lowl.Scot. clever (to climb), and cleave (2),
to adhere. In accordance with this, the word cliver once occurs (in,
the Bestiary, 1. 221, pr. in An Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris) as an
adj. with the apparent sense of ‘ ready to seize,’ or ‘ expert with the

I


114 CLEW, CLUE


claws ;’ cf. ME, clivers, claws, clutches, from AS. clifer,a claw. So
also, in Dunbar, Fenyeit Freir, 86, we find: ‘Scho was so cleverous of
her cluik,’ she was so skilful to seize in her clutch. The base c/if- is
the same as that of the AS. clif-ian, to cleave to; see Cleave (2).
+ EFries, dliifer, clever; Dan. dial. kléver, klever (Molbech) ;
all for *hlifer, *kliver; the Norw. hliva, to climb, becoming flyve in
Danish. Kalkar has MDan. klever, sprightly, wily; so that the E.
word may be of Scand. origin; cf. Dunbar’s clever-ous. {J It is
remarkable that clever practically took the place of ME. deliver,
nimble, Chaucer, prol. 84. But the words are not connected. Der.
clever-ness.

CLEW, CLUE, a ball of thread. (E.) The orig. sense is fa
mass’ of thread; then a thread in a ball, then a guiding thread in a
maze, or ‘a clue to a mystery;’ from the story of Theseus escaping
from the Cretan Labyrinth by the help of a ball of thread. Thus
Trevisa, ii. 385: ‘3f eny man wente thider yn withoute a clewe of
threde, it were ful harde to fynde a way out.’ Cf. ‘a clue of threde;’
Gower, C. A. ii. 306; b. v. 5343. AS. cliewen, clywen, a ball of
thread; by loss of the final x. We find ‘glomus, clywen ;? AElfric’s
Gloss.,; ed. Somner, Nomina Vasorum. And the dat. cliwene (clie-
wene) occurs in Gregory’s Pastoral, sect. xxxv; ed. Sweet, p. 240.-++
Du, Aluwen, a clew; whence kluwenen, to wind on clews (cf. E. to
clewupasail); OHG. chliuwa, chliuwi, chliwe, MHG.kliuwe, a ball, ball
of thread; MDu. klauwe ; and cf.G.knduel (for *klduel),aclew. Allied
to L. glu-ere, to draw together, glo-mus, a clew; from 4/GLEU (Teut.
*kleu-), to draw together. Cf. Skt. glau-,a lump (Macdonell). See
Claw. Der. clew, verb (Dutch).

CLICK, to make a quick, light sound. (E.) Rather oddly used by
Ben Jonson: ‘ Hath more confirm’d us, than if heart’ning Jove Had,
from his hundred statues, bid us strike, And, at the stroke, click’d all
his marble thumbs ;’ Sejanus, ii. 2. EFries. klikken, An imitative
word, derived, as expressing a slighter sound, from clack, by the
thinning of a to z.. This is clearly shown by the Du. likklak, the
clashing of swords, and klikklakken, to clash together, lit. ‘ to click-
clack.’ See Clack, and Clink.

CLIENT, one who depends on an adviser. (F.—L.) ME. client,
Gower, C. A. i. 284, bk. iii. 160; P. Plowman, C. iv. 396. —F. client,
‘a client or suitor;’ Cot.—L. clientem, acc. of cliens, a client, a de-
pendent ona patron. Cliens represents clwens, one who hears, i.e. one
who listens to advice; pres. pt. of clwere, to hear, listen. The L.
cluere is cognate with Gk. «Avery, to hear, and Skt. ¢ru, to hear. =
a KLEU, to hear; whence also E.Joud. Curtius,i.185. See Loud.
Der. client-ship.

CLIFF, a steep rock, headland. (E.) ME..clif, clef, cleve. Spelt
clif, Layamon, i. 82, where the later text has clef; spelt clewe, id. i. 81
(later text), AS. elif, a rock, headland; Grein, i. 164.+Du. kif, a
brow, cliff; Icel. kif, a cliff; also kei, a ridge of cliffs. We also find
G, klippe ; whence Du. klip, a crag, Dan. klippe, Swed. klippa, a crag,
rock. @ Cf. AS. clif, cliff, with clifian, to cleave to; Icel. kif with
Icel. hlifa (pt. t. kleif), to climb. The connexion is probable.

CLIMACTER, a critical time of life. (F.—Gk.) Used by Sir
T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iv. c. 12. § 18. Now only used in the
derivative adj. climacter-ic, often turned into a sb. ‘This Is the most
certain climacterical year;’ Massinger, The Old Law, Acti.sc. 1. ‘In
the year of his climacteric, sixty-three;’ Sir T. Herbert, Trav. (1665),
pp: 337-8. — MF, climactere, ‘climatericall (sic) ; whencel’anclimactere,
the climatericall year; every 7th, or oth, or the 63 yeare of a man's
life, all very dangerous, but the last, most ;’ Cot. Late L. climactér,
borrowed from Gk.—Gk. «Acwaxrip, a step of a staircase or ladder,
a dangerous period of life.mGk. «Atuag (stem xAipar-), a ladder,
climax; with agential suffix -ryp. See Climax. Der. climacter-ic.

CLIMATE, a region of the earth. (F.—Gk.) See Climate in
Trench, Select Glossary. ME. climat; Chaucer’s treatise on the
Astrolabe, ii. § 39, 1. 18; Maundeville, p. 162; Gower, C. A. i. 8;
prol. 137.—OF. climat (F. climat), a climate. Late L. climat-, stem
of clima. = Gk. kAiva, gen. xA‘paros, a slope, a zone or region of the
earth, climate. = Gk. «Atvew, to lean, slope ; cognate with E. lean. See
Lean (1). Der. climat-ic, climat-ic-al, climat-ise. Doublet, clime.

CLIMAX, the highest degree. (Gk.) Puttenham has clymax ;
Arte of E. Poesie, iii. 19; ed. Arber, p. 217. ‘Climax, a ladder, the
step of a ladder, a stile; in Rhetorick, a figure that proceeds by de-
grees from one thing to another ;’ Kersey's Dict. 2nd ed. 1715.—L.
climax.=— Gk. xAtuag, a ladder, staircase; in rhetoric, a mounting by
degrees to the highest pitch of expression, a climax.— Gk. «Aivew, to
lean, slope, incline; cognate with E. lean. See ean (1).

CLIMB, to ascend by grasping. (E.) Very common. ME,
climben, Layamon,i. 37; pt. t. ‘he clomb,’ Ancren Riwle, p. 354; ‘the
king .. . clam,’ Rob. of Glouc. p. 333. AS. climban, pt. t. clamb, pl.
clumbon ; A.S. Chron. an. 1070. We find also the derivative clymmian,
Grein, i. 164.4-Du. klimmen; OHG. chlimban, MHG. klimmen, to
climb, B. The original sense is ‘to grasp firmly,’ as in climbing


‘CLIQUE


a tree; and the connexion is with Icel. k/ifa, to climb, AS. clifian, to
cleave to. Streitberg, § 203. See.Cleave (2), and Clamber.

CLIME, a tegion of the earth. (Gk.) In Shak. Rich. II, i. 3.
285.—L. clima, a climate.—Gk. «Aiua, a climate. Doublet, climate.
See Climate, 3

CLINCH, CLENCH, to rivet, fasten firmly. (E.) ME. clenchen.
‘Clenchyn, retundo, repando ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 80. ‘I clencheanayle;’
also ‘I clynche nayles;’ Palsgrave. ‘The cros was brede, whon Crist
for us theron was cleynt,’ i.e. fastened ; Legends of the Holy Rood, ed.
Morris, p. 138. The pp. cleynt points to an infin. clenchen, just as the
pp. dreint is from drenchen, to drown. We also find ME. clenken, to
strike smartly, Allit. Morte Arthure, 1, 2113. This is the causal of
clink, a by-form of cling, and means ‘to make to clink,’ to make to
stick fast (see below).++-Du. klinken, to clink, to rivet, klink, a blow,
rivet; Dan. klinke, a latch, rivet, klinke, to clinch, to rivet ; Swed.
hlinka, a latch, also, to rivet; OHG. chlankhan, clenkan, MHG.
hlenken, to knot together, knit, tie; MHG. klinke, a bar, bolt, latch.
Teut. type * klankjan- (> *klenkan, *klinkan), causal of a type *klinkan-
(pt. t. *klank), as seen in EFries. and Low G. kilinken, klingen, to
cling, to become drawn, to shrivel up. See Cling. Cf. ME. clengen,
causal of clingen (Stratmann). Der. clinch-er.

CLING, to adhere closely. (E.) ME. clingen,to become stiff; also,
to adhere together. ‘ In cloddres of blod his her was clunge,’ i.e. his
hair was matted; Legends ofthe Holy Rood, ed. Morris, p.142. AS.
clingan (pt. t. clang, pp. clungen), to shrivel up by contraction, to dry
up; Grein, i. 164. Cf. Dan. klynge, to cluster, klynge, a cluster ; Swed,
kldnge, a tendril, a clasper; OHG. clunga, a clew.

CLINICAL, relating to a bed. (F.—L.—Gk.) Sometimes clinick
occurs, but it is rare; it means one lying in bed; ‘the clizick or sick
person ;’ Bp. Taylor, Sermons, Of the Office Ministerial; see too his
Holy Dying, s. 6. c. 4.—F. clinique, ‘one that is bedrid;’ Cot.—L.
clinicus, a bedrid person (St. Jerome); a physician that visits patients
in bed (Martial). —Gk. «Auwtxds, belonging to a bed; a physician who
visits patients in bed; 4 «Aun, his art.—Gk. xAwn, a bed.=— Gk,
kAwev, to slope, to lie down. See Lean (1).

CLINK, to tinkle, make a ringing noise. (E.) Intrans.: ‘ They
herde a belle clinke ;? Chaucer, C. T., 12598 (C 664). » Also trans. :
‘I shal clinken yow so mery a belle,’ id. 12925 (B 1186). Fries.
klinken ; pt. t. klunk (orig. klank), pp. klunken, to clink.4 Du. klinken,
to sound, tinkle (pt. t. Alonk ; pp. geklonken) ; Dan. klinge, to sound,
jingle, klingre, to jingle (frequentative); Swed. klinga, to ring, clink,
tingle ; Icel. Aling, interj. ting! tang! Alingja, to ring. Clink is the
nasalized form of click, and the thinner form of clank. As click: clack::
clink: clank. Der. clink-er.

CLINKER, a cinder, or hard slag. (Du.) ‘Clinkers, those
bricks that by having much nitre or salt-petre in them (and lying
next the fire in the clamp or kiln) by the violence of the fire, run and
are glazed over;’ Bailey’s Dict. vol. ii. ed. 1731. Evelyn, in his
Diary, Aug. 19, 1641, refers to the clincars, or sun-baked bricks, with
which Amsterdam was paved. Not in early use, but borrowed from
Dutch ; however, the word simply means ‘that which clinks,’ from
the sonorous nature of these hardened bricks, which tinkle on striking
together. MDnu. Alinckaert, ‘a hard and sounding bricke,’ Hexham ;
Du. klinker, that which sounds, a vowel, a hardened brick; from
klinken, to clink ; cf. Dan. klinke, a hard tile. See above.

CLINKER-BUILT, applied to boats in which over-lapping
boards are clinched together with copper nails. (E.) From clinker,
a clinch-nail ; which is from clink, to fasten together by a blow, a
Northern verb of which clinch is the usual form ; see Clinch,

CLINQUANT, glittering. (F.—Du.) In Shak. Hen. VIII,i. 1.
19. Said of spangles; lit. ‘tinkling.’—OF. clinguané (Godefroy) ;
pres. pt. of clinquer, to clink. = Du. klinken, to clink; see Clink.

CLIP (1), to shear, to cut off. (Scand.) ME. clippen, to cut off,
shear off; Ormulum, ll. 1189, 4106, 4142.—Icel. kippa, to clip, cut
the hair; Swed. Alippa, to clip, shear, cut; Dan. Alippe, to clip, shear.
Cf. also NFries. klappe, kleppe, to clip, shear; which suggests a con-
nexion with clap ; with reference to the clicking of the shears. Der.
clipp-er, clipp-ing.

CLIP (2), to embrace, to grip. (E.) In Shak. Coriolanus, i. 6. 29.
ME. clippen, Chaucer, C. T., E 2413; cluppen, Ancren Riwle, p. 424.
AS. clyppan; Grein, i. 164. Teut. type *kluppjan- ; cf. OHG. kluppa,
forceps, tongs; from the weak grade of the Teut. *k/#@p =Idg. *g/eb,
to embrace, as in Lith. gleb-ys, an armful, OHG. Alafter, a cord of
wood.

CLIPPER, a fast horse, a fast ship. (Du.) Modern; modified
from Du. Alepper, a steed. —Du, kleppen, to clap; with reference to
the noise of hoofs. See Clap. Cf. Notes on E. Etym. p. 38.

CLIQUE, a gang, set of persons. (F.—Du.) Modem. From F,
clique, ‘A set, coterie, clique, gang; ’ Hamilton and Legros, French
Dict. And see Hatzfeld.— MF. cliguer, to click, clack, make a noise ;
Cot.— Du. Alikken, toclick, clash ; also, to inform, tell; whence 4lik-


pe


CLOAK, CLOKE


her, a telltale. . [It probably meant a noisy gang, a set of talkers;
cf, F. claqueur, a clapper of hands.| ‘The Du. word is cognate with
E. click, See Click. i

CLOAK, CLOKE, a loose upper garment. (F.—C.) Cloke in
S. Matt. v. 40.(A. V.).° ME. ‘cloke, Chaucer, C, T.. prol.: 157;
Layamon, ii. 122 (later text). — OF. cloke, clogue,also cloche; Godefroy,
s. v. cloche.= Low L. cloca, a bell; also, a horseman’s cape, because
its shape resembled that of a bell; see Chaucer, Prol. 263. See
further under Clock, which is its doublet.

CLOCK, a measurer of time. (F.—C.) ME. clok, clokke,
Chaucer, C. T., 4434 (B14). [Cf AS. clugga, a bell (Lat. campana),
/Elfred’s tr. of Beda, iv. 23 (Bosworth).] The clock was so named
from its striking, and from the bell which gave the sound. ‘ A great
clock put up at Canterbury, A.D. 1292;’.Haydn,; Dict. of Dates. —
AF. cloke, a bell, Gaimar, 1. 2728; ONorthF. clogue, OF. and F.
cloche, a béll; cf. MDu. klocke (Du. Alok), a bell. Low L. clocca, a
bell. B. The origin of the word is disputed, and some difficulty is
caused by its being so widely spread ; still, the Celtic languages give
a clear etymology for it, which is satisfactory. Cf. Irish clog, a bell,
a clock; clogan, a little bell; clogaim, I ring or sound as a bell;
Olrish cloc, a bell; W.and Corn, cloch, a bell. y. In other languages
we find Low L. clocca, cloca, a bell (whence F. cloche), Du. klok, a
bell, clock; Icel. klukka, old form klocka, a bell; Dan. klokke, a bell,
clock ; Swed. klocka, a bell, clock, bell-flower; Du. kok, a clock,
orig. a bell; G. glocke, a bell, clock ; all, apparently, of Celtic origin.
Celtic types *klukkos, *klukka; Stokes-Fick, p. 103. Cf. Gael. clag,
a bell; Gk. «Ad¢ew, toclash. See Clang. Der. clock-work.

CLOD, a lump or mass of earth. (E.) <A parallel form to clot,
which has much the same meaning. ‘Clodde, gleba;’ Prompt. Parv.
p. 83. Pl. cloddes, Palladius on Husbandry, bk. ii. st. 3; bk. xii. st. 2.
[ But, earlier than about A.D. 1400, the usual spelling is clot. ‘The
clottis therof ben gold,’ Lat. glebe illius aurum; Wyclif, Job, xxviii.
6.) But AS. clod- occurs in compounds, as in clod-hamer, a field-
fare; and Clod- in proper names ; cf. W. Flem. #lodde, a ball (as of
tow), De Bo ; Swed. dial, klodd, a lump of snow or clay. ‘Teut. type
*klu-do-, from the weak grade of *kleu-, to stick together. See
Clew, Cloud. Der. clod-hopper (a hopper, or dancer, over clods) ;
clod-poll, clod-pate. 4 Irish and Gael. clod are borrowed from English.

CLOG, a hindrance, impediment. (Scand.) The verb éo clog is
from the sb., not vice versa. The sense of ‘wooden shoe’ is merely
an extension of the notion of block, clump, or clumsy mass. ME,
clogge, as in: ‘ Clogge, truncus, i.e. a block ; Prompt. Parv., p. 83.
£ Clogge, billot ;’ Palsgrave. ‘The final hard g makes a Scand. origin
probable. Cf. Norw. klugu, a hard knotty log of wood (Ross).
“] The Lowl. Sc. clag, a clot, and claggy, covered. with adhesive
mire, were associated with clog to some extent in late uses, but are of
different ‘origin; they appear to «be connected with clay. Der.
clog, verb.

CLOISTER, a place of religious seclusion. (F.—L.) ME. cloister,
cloistre; Chaucer, C. T. prol. 181.—AF. cloister, Langtoft, i. 96;
OF. cloistre (mod. F. clottre). — L. claustrum, a cloister, lit. ‘enclosure.’
=L, claudere, pp. clausus, to shut in, enclose. See Close (1). Der.
cloistr-al, claustr-al, cloister-ed.

CLOKE, old spelling of Cloak, q. v.

CLOSE (1), to shut in, shut, make close. (F.—L.) In early use.
ME. closen; the pt. t. closed, enclosed, occurs in Havelok, 1. 1310.
The verb was formed from the pp. clos of the French verb, or from
other parts of the verb in which the stem clos- occurred ; cf. OF. clos,
pp- of OF. clore, to enclose, shut in.—L. claudere (pp. clausus), to
shut, shut in. See Clause.

CLOSE (2), adj., shut up, confined, narrow. (F.—L.) In Allit.
Poems, ed. Morris, i. 183. Also as sb., ME. clos, cloos, close, an en-
closed place; Rob. of Glouc. p. 7, 1. 154.—OF. clos; see above.
Der. close-ly, close-ness, clos-ure ; clos-et, q. v.

CLOSET, a small room, recess. (F.—L.) ‘The highere closet
of hir hows,’ Wyclif, Tobit, iii. 10; Chaucer, Troil. and Cres, ii.
1215.— OF. closet, in Godefroy, who gives: ¢ Closet, Clozet,s.m., petit
clos, petit enclos,’ A dimin, from OF. odos, an enclosed space, a close,
by affixing the dimin, suffix -et. Clos was orig. the pp. of OF. clore,
to shut, L. claudere; see above. Der. closet, verb.

CLOT, a mass of coagulated matter. (E.) Still in use, and now
somewhat differentiated from clod, though in ME, the senses of the
two words differed but little. ME. clot, clotte; ‘a jclot of eorthe’=
aclod of earth, Ancren Riwle, p. 172. ‘Stony clotées,’ Trevisa, ii.
23, where the Lat. text has ‘globos saxeos.’ The orig. sense is
‘lump.’ AS. clott, clot (rare); ‘Massa, of. clyne vel clottum;’
Haupt’s Zeitschrift, ix. 488 ; ‘massa, clyne, clotte;’ Napier’s OE.
Glosses.-MDu. dlot, ‘a clod of earth,’ Hexham; allied to MDu.
kluyte, a clod of earth,’ id.; and to EFries. klute, klite, a lump;
G, klotz, alog. Teut. type *klut-to-, from the weak grade of Tent.
base *kleut-. See Cleat, Clout, Cluster, Clews


CLOVE 115


CLOTH, a garment, woven material. (E.) ME. cloth, clath;
Ancren Riwle, p. 418; Layamon, ii. 318. AS, clad, a cloth, a
garment ; Grein, i. 162.-4-Du. kleed, clothes, dress ; G. kleid, a dress,
garment. . Origin unknown, but evidently a Teutonic word.
The Icel. 4l@di, Swed. klade, Dan. klede, cloth, do not exactly corre-
spond in form. Der. cloth-es, from AS. cladas, the pl. of clad ;
also clothe, verb, q. v.

CLOTHE, to cover with a cloth. (E.) ME. clathen, clothen,
oleden ; Ormulum, 2710; Havelok, 1138. ‘The pt. t.is both clothede
and cladde, the pp. both clothed and clad. Clad occurs in the
Romaunt of the Rose, 1. 219; and is still in use. ONorthumb. cléden,
pt. t. cl€dde, Matt. xxv. 36; which accounts for the form clad.
Formed from AS. clad, cloth; sce above.4+Du. kleeden, from kleed ;
so also G. hkleiden, from kleid. The Icel. verb was kleda, pt. t.
kleddi, pp. kleddr. Der. cloth-i-er, cloth-ing.

CLOUD, a mass of vapours, (E.) ME. cloud, clowde. Moni
clustered clowde’=many a clustered cloud, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris,
B. 367. The spellings cloyd, clowde, cloud, cloude, clod, occur in the
Cursor Mundi, 2580, 2872. Earlier examples are scarcely to be
found in the same sense, but the word is identical with ME. clad,
a mass of rock, a hill. ‘The hulle was biclosed mid cludes of stone’
=the hill was enclosed with masses of stone; Layamon i. 370, 371.
B. In corroboration of this identification, we may observe (1) that
the sense of ‘ mass of rock ” passed out of use as the newer applica-
tion of the word came in; (2) that both words are sometimes found
with a plural in -ex as well as in -es; and (3) the orig. sense was
simply ‘conglomeration’ or ‘cumulus.’ Indeed, we find . the. ex-
pression ‘clowdys of clay,’ i.e. round masses of clay, Coventry
Mysteries, p. 402.. -y. From AS. clid, properly ‘a round mass,’
used in AS, to mean ‘ a hill’ or ‘ mass of rock,’ but easily transferred
to mean ‘cloud’ at a later period, because the essential idea was
‘mass’ or: ¢ ball,’ and not ‘rock.’ In Orosius, iii. 9. sect. 13 (ed.
Sweet, p. 132. 10), we read of a city that was ‘mid clidum ymb-
weaxen,’ i.e. fortified with masses of rock. 68. The AS. cli-d is con-
nected with the root seen in clew (Teut. root *klew) ; the weaker grade
appearing in clo-d. See Clew, Clod. Der. cloudy, cloud-i-ly, cloud-
i-ness, cloud-less, cloud-let (diminutive). :

CLOUGH, a hollow in a hill-side. (E.) © A clough, or clowgh, is
a kind of breach or valley downe a slope from the side of a hill, where
commonly shragges, and trees doe grow. It is the termination of
Colclough or rather Coldclough, and some other sirnames;’ Ver-
stegan, Restitution of Decayed Intelligence, c.9. ME. clow, clough ;
“Sende him to seche in clif and clow;? Cursor Mundi, Trin. MS.,
1.17590. Also spelt clew, Allit. Morte Arthur, 1639; and (in Scottish)
cleuch, Wallace, iv. 539. The corresponding AS, form would be *cléh,
not yet found; but the parallel OHG. Aah occurs in Klihuelde
(Foerstemann, ii. 371). These answer to Teut. *klanxo-, from klany-,
and grade of a root *klenx, appearing in OHG. cling-o, a torrent,
a gorge (Schade). Cf. Low G. klang, also klinge, a torrent (Scham-
bach); Alinge, a defile, klingende beek, a rushing stream (Berghaus).
From the noise. (Academy, Aug. 31, and Sept. 7, 21, 1889.)

CLOUT, a patch, rag, piece of cloth. (E.) ME. clout, clué; Ancren
Riwle, p. 256. AS. clat; we find ‘commissura, cli/;’ i.e. patch; in
fElfric’s Glossary, ed. Somner, Nomina Vasorum, p. 61. [Hence
were borrowed W. clwt, Corn. clut, a piece, patch, clout; Irish and
Gael. clud, a clout, patch, rag.] Orig. sense, ‘ mass, piece of stuff ;’
Teut. type *li-oz, from Teut. root *kleut, of which the weaker
grade occurs in Clot. Closely allied to Cleat. Der. clout,
verb,

CLOVE (1), a kind of spice. (F.—L.) ‘There is another fruit that
commeth out of India, like vnto pepper-cornes, and it is called clowes ;’
Holland’s Pliny, bk. xii.c. 7. Cotgrave has: ‘ clou de giroffe, a clove.’
ME. clow, clowe; the latter is in Prompt. Parv.; and Chaucer has
clowe gilofre,C.T., 13692 (B 1952). In the 16th cent. it became cloue
(=clove), prob. by the influence of Ital. chiovo, a clove, or by confusion
with clove (2), which was an older word.—F. clou, a nail; whence
clou de girofle, a clove, which resembled a nail. —L. clauwm, acc. of
clauus,anail, SeeCloy. Der. clove-pink. | There is also a weight
called a clove (= 17 pounds of wool) ; see Clove (3).

CLOVE (2), a bulb, or tuber. (E.) ‘A bulb has the power of
propagating itself by developing, in the axils of its scales, new bulbs,
or what gardeners call cloves;’ Lindley, Botany, bk. i. ¢, 2. sect. 2.
ME. clof, cloue, clowe. * Clowe of garlykke, cloue of garlek ;’ Prompt.
Pary. £ A lekes clof;? Guy of Warwick, A 3644. AS. clufu, Leech-
doms, ii. 336; also inthe compounds clufpung, crowfoot, Ranunculus
sceleratus, where cluf means ‘tuber,’ and Jung, poison, from the acrid
principle of the juices; and in clufwyrt, the buttercup, Ranunculus
acris; see Gloss. in Cockayne’s Leechdoms, iii. 319. [I suspect the
cluf-wyrt is rather the Ranunculus bulbosus, or bulbous buttercup; at
any rate cluf-wyrt means ‘bulb-wort.’] The orig. sense of AS, clufu
was one of the small bulbs which make up the whole bulb of garlic,

12


116 CLOVE


&c.: so named from its cleavage. From AS. cluf-, weak grade of
cléofan, to cleave ; see Cleave (1).

CLOVE (3), a denomination of weight. (F.—L.) A clove of
cheese is about 8 lbs.; of wool, about 7 lbs.; Phillips (1706). The
word appears in the Liber Custumarum, where it is spelt clous, pl., in
Anglo-French (p. 63), and clawos, acc. pl., in Latin (p. 107). This
gives the etymology, and shows that it is identical with clove (1); see
note on Clove (1) above. Ducange has clavus lina, a certain weight
or quantity of wool, which he notes as being an Eng. use of the word.
Clavus seems to have meant ‘lump’ as well as ‘nail.’ Cf. Ital. chiova,
‘a kind of great weight in Italy ’ (Torriano).

CLOVER, a kind of trefoil. (E.) ME. claver, clover; spelt
clauer, Allit. Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 1.3241, AS, clafre, O. E. Texts,
p: 47, 1. 375 ;. cl@fre, fem. (gen. cl#fran) , Gloss. to Cockayne’s Leech-
doms, q.v.4+Du. slaver, clover, trefoil; whence Swed. klofver, Dan.
klivers cf. G. klee. B. The suggestion that it is derived from AS.
cléofan, to cleave, because its leaf is three-cleft, is inconsistent with
phonology and impossible.

CLOWN, a clumsy lout, rustic, buffoon. (Scand.) * This lowtish
clown; Sidney’s Arcadia, bk. i, (R.; s.v. Low). ‘To brag upon his
pipe the clowne begoon;’ Turberville, Agaynst the Ielous Heads, st.6.
Not found much earlier, Of Scandinavian origin.—Icel. klunni, a
clumsy, boorish fellow ; cf. Alunnalegr, clumsy; North Friesic £ldnne,
a clown, bumkin (cited by Wedgwood); Swed. dial. Alunn, a log ;
kluns, a hard knob, a clumsy fellow, Rietz; Dan. kunt, a log,a block;
kluntet, blockish, clumsy, awkward. Cf. AS. clyne, a mass, lump,
ball. B. It is probably connected with E. clump, q.v.; cf. Icel. klumba,
a club; Dan. slump, a clump, klumpfod, a club-foot ; Swed. klump,
a lump, Alumpig, clumsy. See Clump, Der. clown-ish (Levins),
-ly, -ness.

CLOY, to glut, satiate, stop up. (F.—L.) In Shak, Rich. II, i. 3.
296; also cloyment, Tw. Nt. ii. 4. 102 ; cloyless, Ant. ii. 1. 25. ‘ Cloyed,
or Accloyed, among farriers, a term used when a horse is pricked with
a nail in shooing;’ Kersey’s Dict. 2nd ed. 1715. Cotgrave has:
‘ Enclouer, to naile, drive in a naile; enclouer artillerie, to cloy a piece
of ordnance; to drive a naile oriron pin, into the touch-hole thereof;’
also: ‘ Encloué, nailed, fastened, pricked, cloyed with a nail;’ also:
‘ Encloyer (obsolete), to ‘cloy, choak, or stop up.’ Hence the etymo-
logy.— MF, cloyer, a by-form of clower (as shown above); Cotgrave
gives: * Clover, to naile; to fasten, join, or set on with nailes,’ The
older form is cloer (Burguy).=— OF. clo, later clou, a nail. = L. clauum,
acc. of clduus, a nail. See Clove (1). Der. cloy-less. Cloy was
frequently used as short for ac-cloy or a-cloy, where the prefix a- repre-
sented F, en-; see encloyer (above).

CLUB (1), a heavy stick, a cudgel. (Scand.) ME. clubbe, clobbe,
Layamon, ii. 216, ili. 35; Havelok, 1. 1927, 2289.—Icel. k/ubba,
klumba, a club; Swed. klubba, a club; klubb,a block, a club; klump,
a lump; Dan, #lub,.a club; klump,aclump, lump; klumpfod, a club-
foot; Alumpfodet, club-footed. Cf. Dan. klunt,alog,a block. PB. The
close connexion of club with clump is apparent; in fact, the Icel.
klubba stands for klumba, by the assimilation so common in that
language (Noreen). See Clump, Der, elub-foot, club-footed.

CLUB (2), an association of persons. (Scand.) Not in very early
use. A good example is in the Dedication to Dryden’s Medal, where
he alludes to the Whigs, and asks them what right they have ‘to meet,
as you daily do, in factious clubs.’ In Sherwood’s Index to Cotgrave,
A.D. 1660, we find: ‘ To clubbe, mettre ou despendre a l’egual d’un
autre.” The word is really the.same as the last, but applied to a
‘clump’ of people. See Rietz, who gives the Swed. dial. #ubb, as
meaning ‘a clump, lump, dumpling, a tightly packed heap of men,
a knoll, a heavy inactive fellow. So we speak of a knot of people,
or a clump of trees. Der. club, verb.

CLUB (3), one of a suit at cards. (Scand.) a. The xame is
a translation of the Span. basfos, i.e. cudgels, clubs ; which is the
Span. name for the suit. Thus the word is the same as Club (1) and
Club (2). B. The figure by which the clubs are denoted on a card is
a trefoil; the F. name being ¢réffe, a trefoil, a club (at cards); cf.
Dan. kldver, clover, a club (at cards); Du. dlaver, clover, trefoil,
a club (at cards).

CLUCK, to call, as a hen does, (E.) ‘When she, poor hen, hath
cluck’d thee to the wars;’ Cor. v. 3. 163; where the old editions have
clock’d. ME. clokken. ‘Clokkyn as hennys;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 83. [Cf.
‘He chukketh,’ said of a cock; Chaucer, C, T., 15188 (B 4372).] AS.
cloccian; Anglia, vill. 309, 1. 26; cf. A.S. Leechdoms, ii. 220, 1. 18.
The mod. E. form may have been influenced by the Danish.4+Dnu.
klokken, to cluck; Dan. klukke, to cluck ; kluk, a clucking ; klukhine,
a clucking hen; G. glucken, to cluck’; gluckhenne, a clucking-hen.
Cf. L. glocire, to cluck, An imitative word; see Clack,

CLUE; see Clew.

CLUMP, a mass, block, cluster of trees. (E.) ‘England, Scotland,
Ireland, and our good confederates the United Provinces, be all in a


CLUTTER


clump together;’ Bacon, Of a War with Spain (R.). The AS, pl.
clymppan, lumps, occurs in AS. Leechdoms, iii. 134, Cf. also AS.
clymp-re, a lump (Grein); EFries, klump, klunt, a lump.4+Du.
klomp, a lump, clog, wooden shoe; cf. k/oné, a clod, lump; Dan.
klump, a clump, lump; klumpe, to clot; cf. kunt, a log, block;
Swed. #lump,a lump; kumpig, lumpy, clumsy; Icel. k/umba, klubba,
a club; G. Alump, a lump, clod, pudding, dumpling; #lumpen, a lump,
mass, heap, cluster; cf. klunker, a clod of dirt. B. Besides these forms,
we find Dan. klimp, a clod of earth; Swed. klimp, a clod, a lump, a
dumpling ; these are directly derived from the root preserved in the
MHG. klimpfen (strong verb, pt. t. klampf), to draw together, press
tightly together, cited by Fick, iii. 51. y. From the same root we
have E. clamp, to fasten together tightly; so that clamp and clump
are variants from the same root. See Clamp; and see Club (1),
a doublet of clump.

CLUMSY, shapeless, awkward, ungainly. (Scand.) *Apt to be
drawn, formed, or moulded... even by clumsy fingers;’ Ray, On.the
Creation, pt. ii, In Ray’s Collection of Provincial Eng, Words we
find: § Clumps, Clumpst, idle, lazy, unhandy, a word of common use:
in Lincolnshire; see Skinuer. This is, I suppose, the same with our
clumzy, in the South, signifying unhandy; clumpst with cold, i.e. be-
nummed;’ and again he has; ‘C/ussumed, adj. “a clussumed hand,”
a clumsie hand; Cheshire.’ a, All these forms are easily explained,
being deducible from the ME. clumsed, benumbed. From this word
were formed (1) clussumed, for clusmed, which again is for c/umsed, by
a change similar to that in clasp from ME. clapsen; (2) clumpst, by
mere contraction; (3) clumps, by loss of final ¢ in the last 5 and (4)
clumsy, with -y for -ed, giving an adjectival form. B. The ME. clumsed,
also spelt clomsed, is the pp. of the verb clumsen or clomsen, to benumb,
also, to feel benumbed. It is passive in the phrase ‘with clumsid
hondis,’ as a translation of ‘dissolutis manibus;’ Wyclif, Jerem..
xlvii. 3; see also Isaiah, xxxv. 3. § He is outher clomsed [stupefied]
or wode’ [mad]; Hampole, Pricke of Conscience, 1, 1651. See fur-
ther in my note to Piers the Plowman, C. xvi. 253, where the intransi-
tive use of the verb occurs, in the sentence: ‘ when thow clomsest for
colde’=when thou becomest numb with cold. «y. Of Scandinavian
origin, Cf. Swed. dial. Alummsen, benumbed with cold, with frozem
hands; spelt also Alumsun, kldumsen, klomsen, klummshdandt (i.e. with
benumbed hands), &c., Rietz, p. 332 ; who also gives krumpen (p. 354)
with the very same sense, but answering in form to the E. cramped.
In Icelandic, 4lumsa means ‘lockjaw.’ 6. It is easily seen that ME,
clumsen is an extension of clum-, weak grade of the root:clam, or cram,
to pinch, whence also E. clamp and cramp, See Clamp, Cramp.
So in Dutch we find dleumsch, chilly, numb with cold; from kleumen,
to be benumbed with cold, which again is allied to klemmen, to pinch,
clinch, oppress (Franck). Cf. prov. E. clem, to pinch with hunger ;
clum, benumbed; also Westphal. verklummen, benumbed ; MDan.
klums, sluggish (Kalkar).

CLUSTER, a bunch, mass, esp. of grapes. (E.) ME, cluster,
clustre, closter; Wyclif, Deut. xxxii. 32, Numb. xiii. 25, Gen. xl. 10,
AS, clyster, cluster; the pl. clystru, clusters, occurs in Gen. xl. 10.-4-
LowG. kluster. Cluster represents a Teut. form *klus-tro-, for *klut-tro-,
from the base Alut- which appears in Clot; so that a cluster means,
a bunch of things adhering closely together, as e.g. in the case of a
cluster of grapes or of bees, From Teut. root *kleut, to mass together;
see Cleat, Clout.

CLUTCH, a claw; to grip, lay hold of. (E.) The verb is ME.
clucchen; ‘to clucche or to clawe;’ P. Plowman, B. xvii. 188, The
sb. is ME. cloche, clouche, cloke; ‘and in his cloches holde;’ P, Plow-
man, B. prol. 1543; ‘his kene clokes,’ Ancren Riwle, p. 130; cf. the
Lowl. Scot. cleuck, cluik, cluke, clook,aclaw ortalon, The oldsb. was
superseded by the verbal form, which answers to AS. *elyccan, to
bend or crook thie fingers; extant in the imp.s. clyce (see Clitch in
N.E.D.), and in the pp. geclyht, written geclihé in the Liber Scintil-
larum, § xxv; p. 99,1. 2. Teut. type *kluk-jan-, (perhaps) ‘to bend
a joint.’

CLUTTER (1), to coagulate, clot. (E.) The cluttered bloud ;’
Holland, Pliny, b. xxi. c. 25. ME, cloteren; the pp. clotered, also
written clothred, occurs in Chaucer, C. T., 2747 (A 2745)» The same
as clotter, the frequentative form of clot; see Clot.

CLUTTER (2),a confusedheap; toheapup.(E.) ‘Whataclutter
there was with huge, over-grown pots, pans, and spits;’ L’Estrange,
in Rich. and Todd’s Johnson. ‘ Which clutters not praises together ;’
Bacon, to K. Jas. I: Sir T. Matthew’s Lett. ed. 1660, p. 32 (Todd).
The same word as Clutter (1); the sense of ‘mass’ suggested that
of ‘confused heap;’ whence, further, that of ‘confused noise ;’ see
below. ,

CLUTTER (3), a noise, a great din. (E.) Notcommon; Rich.
quotes from King, and Todd from Swift; a mere variation of Clatter,
q.v.; affected by Clutter (2). Ihre gives M. Swed. Aluttra, to
quarrel. Cf. EFrigs. k/ofer, a rattle. +8 i ial


CLYSTER


- CLYSTER, an injection into the bowels. (L.—Gk.) The pl.clisters


is in Holland’s Pliny, b. vili. c. 27; the verb clysterize in the same,
b. xx. c. 5; and Massinger has; * Thou stinking clyster-pipe;’ Virgin
Martyr, A. iv. sc. 13 cf, Shak. Oth. ii. 1. 178.—L,. clyster.— Gk.
«AvoTyp, a clyster, a syringe ; «Avoya, a liquid used for washing out,
esp. a clyster, a drench. = Gk. «AuvCev, to wash. Cf. L. cluere, to:purge,
Goth. hlitrs, pure. =4/KLEU, to cleanse. Brugm.i. § 490.

CO., prefix; a short form of con-. See Con-.

‘ COACH, a close carriage. (F.—Hung.) In Shak. Merry Wives, ii,
2. 66.—F. coche, ‘a coach;” Cot.— Hungarian kotsi, kocsi, a, coach,
travelling carriage; whence the word was introduced into many other
languages. See Beckmann’s Hist. of Inventions, tr. in 1846, i. 77;
who says: ‘Stephanus Broderithus says, speaking of 1526; ... ‘he
‘speedily got into one of those light carriages, which (from the name
of the place) we called kotcze.”* The word was used in Hungary
from the reign of king Matthias Corvinus, 1458-90 ; and the ‘coach’
was named from a Hungarian village named Kocs, between Raab and
Buda; see N.E.D. The word coche first appears in E. in 1556.

COADJUTOR, assistant. (L.) Spelt coadiutour, Sir T, Elyot,

Governour, b. ii. c. 10, § 5. —L. co-, for con-, which for cum, together ;
and adiitor, an assistant, allied to adiuttus, pp. of adiuudre, to assist.
See Adjutant. Der. coadjutr-ix, coadjutor-ship.
- COAGULATE, to curdle, congeal. (L.) Shak. has coagulate as
pp.=curdled; ‘coagulate gore;” Hamlet, ii. 2. 484.—L. coagulatus,
pp- of codguldre, to curdle. = L. codgulum, rennet, which causes things
to curdle. = L. co- (for con- or cum, together), and ag-ere, to drive ; (in
Latin, the contracted form cogere is the common form); with suffix
-ul-, having a diminutive force ; so that co-ag-ul-um would mean ‘that
which drives together slightly.’ —4/AG, todrive, See Agent. Der.
coagulat-ion, coagul-able, coagul-ant,

COAITA, the red-faced spider monkey, (Brazil.) Spelt guata in
Stedman’s Surinam, ii. 10. [Sometimes misspelt coaiti.]—Tupi
(Brazilian) coat, cuatd, coaitd (N.E.D.); spelt couatta in Breton,
Dict. Caraibe Francois, 1665; p. 180. 4 Distinct from coaté.

COAL, charcoal; a combustible mineral. (E.). ME. col, Layamon,
1.2366. AS. col, coal; Grein, i. 166.4-Du. kool; Icel. and Swed. kol ;
Dan, kul; OHG. cholo, MHG. kol, G. kohle. The Skt. jval, to blaze,
burn, is probably from the same root; cf. also Olrish gial, coal.
‘Der. coal-y, coal-fish, coal-heaver, &c.; also collier, g.v.; also collied,
i.e. blackened, dark, in Mid. Nt. Dr. i. 1. 145.

COALESCE, to grow together. (L.) Used by Newton (Todd) ;
in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1656; also by Goodwin, Works, v. iii. pt. iii.
p- 345 (R.). KR. doubtless refers to the works of T. Goodwin, 5 vols.,
London, 1681-1703. —L. coalescere, to grow together. — L. co-, for con-
or cum, together; and alescere, to grow, inceptive form of alere, to
nourish. See Aliment. Der. coalescence, coalescent, from coalescent-,
stem of the pres. part. of coalescere; also coalition (used by Burke)
allied to L. coalitus, pp. of coalescere.

COARSE, rough, rude, gross. (F.—L.) In Shak. Henry VIII,
ili. 2. 239. Also spelt course, cowrse; ‘Yea, though the threeds
{threads] be cowrse;’ Gascoigne, Complaint of the Grene Knight,
1.25; cf. ‘Course, vilis, grossus ;” Levins, 224.39. oa. The origin of
coarse is by no means well ascertained ; it seems most likely that it
stands for course, and that course was used as a contracted form of iz
course, meaning ‘in an ordinary manner,’ and hence ‘ordinary,’ or
‘common. The phrase iz course was also used for the modern of
course; Meas.\for Meas. iii. 1.259. B. The examples in the N.E.D.
bear out this view. The phrase ‘Too cors bordeclopes,’ i.e. two coarse
tablecloths. occurs as early as 1424; Early Eng. Wills, p. 56. See
Course. Der. coarse-ly, «ness.

COAST, side, border, country. (F.—L.) ME. coste. ‘Bi thyse
Englissche costes’=throughout these English coasts or borders;
William of Shoreham, De Baptismo, st. 9; about A. D. 1315.—OF.
coste (F. céte), a rib, slope of a hill, shore. L. cos/a, a rib, side. Der.
coast, V., coast-er, coast-wise. From the same source is: ac-cost, q.v.;
also cutlet, q.v., costermonger, q.V.

COAT, a garment, vesture. (F.—G.) ME, cote, kote; K. Ali-
saunder, ed. Weber, 2413.—OF, cote (F. cotte), a coat ; Low L. cota,
cotta, a garment, tunic; cf. Low. L. cottus, a tunic. —MHG. kutte,
hotte, kotze, OHG. chozzo, a coarse mantle; whence also G. kutte,
acowl. Cognate with OSax. cof, with the same sense. See Kluge.
Der. coat, vb., coat-ing.

COATI, COATI-MONDI, a carnivorous mammal. (Brazil.)
Described as. coati or coati-mondi in a tr. of Buffon (1792); i. 183.
The nose is long and flexible, and marked with white.— Tupi
(Brazilian) coati, cuati, cuatim; from cua, a cincture, and 4m, a nose
(im being nasal). The word mondi is said to mean ‘solitary’ (N.E.D.),

COAX, to entice, persuade. (E.) Formerly spelt cokes. *They
‘heither kisse nor cokes them;” Puttenham, Arte of Poesie, lib. i.c. 8;
ed. Arber, p. 36. The word cokes as a sb. meant a simpleton, gull,


dupe. ‘Why, we will make acokes of this wise master;’ Ben Jonson, ,


COCHINEAL


The Devil is an Ass, ii.1. ‘Go, you're a brainless cox, a toy, a fop;”
Beaum, and Fletcher, Wit at Sev. Weapons, iii. r.. History unknown,
@ We may note that Cotgrave seems to have regarded it as equiva-
lent tothe F. cocard, He has: ‘Cocard, a nice doult, quaint goose,
fond: or saucié cokes, proud or forward meacock.’ Under the spelling
coquart, he gives ‘undiscreetly bold, peart, cocket, jolly, cheerful.’
Thus the F. coguart may have suggested cocket, and now answers to
the school-slang cocky, i.e, like a fighting cock. We may also note
OF. coquebert, coquibus, coquidé, all meaning ‘ foolish;’ see Godefroy.

COB (1), a small round hard lump, or knob; a head, (E.) The
senses are numerous; see E.D.D. and N.E.D. In the sense
of small hard lump, the dimin. is cobble, as used im cobble-stones.
As applied to a pony or horse, it seems to mean short and stont.
ME. cob, a head, a person, esp. a great or leading person; the pl.
cobbes is used by Hoccleve, De Regim. Principum, 1. 2806. The verb
to cob or cop, to excel, is allied to AS. copp, a top, summit. Cf.
Du. kop, a head, pate, person, man; G. kopf,the head. Der. cob-web,
q.v.3 cobb-le (2), sb., q.v.

COB (2), to beat, strike. (E.) In sailor's language and provincial
E. Cf. ME. cobben, to fight; Destr. of Troy, ll. 8285, 11025. Also
prov. E. cop, to strike on the head; whence, probably, W. codio, to
strike; cf. W. cob, a bunch, a tuft ; cop, a head, bunch. See Cob (1).

COBALT, a reddish-gray mineral. (G.) One of the few G. words
in English; most of such words are names of minerals. Used by
Woodward, who died A.D. 1728 (Todd). =—G. kobalt, cobalt. B. The
word is a nick-name given by the miners because it was poisonous and
troublesome to them; it is merely another form of G. kobold, a demon,
goblin; and cobalt itself is called kobold in provincial German ; see
Fliigel’s Dict. MHG. kobolt, a demon, sprite; in which the former
element #ob- answers to AS. cof- in cof-godas, household gods,
used to translate L. pendtes; Voc. 189. 10; from AS, cofa, a
chamber. See Cove. (So in Kluge.)

COBBLE (1), to patch up. (E.) ‘He doth but cloute [patch]
and cobbill ;’ Skelton, Why Come Ye Nat to Court, 1. 524. The sb.
cobelere, a cobbler, occurs in P, Plowman, B. vy. 327. Origin doubtful ;
perhaps the same as proy. E. cobdle, to beat; from Cob (2). Der.
cobbl-er.

COBBLE (2), a small round lump. (E.) Chiefly used of round
stones, commonly called cobble-stones. ‘Hic rudus, a cobylstone ;’
Voc. 768. 38. A dimin. of cob, with the suffix -le (for -el). See
Cob (1). Cf. Norw. koppull, a small round stone.

COBLE, a small fishing-boat. (C.) ‘ Codles, or little fishing-boats ;”
Pennant, in Todd’s Johnson. ME. coble, Scot. Legends of Saints, ed.
Metcalfe, xl. (Ninian), 1. 504.—W. ceubal, a ferry-boat, skiff. Cf.
W. ceubren, a hollow tree; ceufad, a canoe. W. ceuo, to excavate,
hollow out; boats being orig. made of hollowed trees. Cf. Breton
kobar, gobar, also kdbal, a coble, small boat ; from the form gébar is
derived the F. gabare, MF. gabarre, ‘a lighter ;’ Cot.

COBRA DE CAPELLO, asnake with a hood. (Port.—L.) In
a tr. of Buffon (1792), ii. 277, it is called ‘cobra di [error for de}
capello, or hooded .serpent.’=Port. cobra, snake; de, of, with;
capello, a hood. = L. colubra, a snake; dé, of, with; cdpellum, acc. of
Late L. capellus, dimin. of Late L. capa, a cape. See Chaplet and
Cape (1).

COBWEB, a spider’s web. (E.) ME. copweb, Trevisa, tr. of
Higden, vii. 343; so also in Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 728; copwebbe in
Palsgrave, and in the Golden Boke, c. 17. Copweb is a shortened
form of attercop-web, from the ME. attercop, a spider. B. In Wyclifs
Bible we find: ‘ The webbis of an attercop,’ Isaiah, lix. 5; and; ‘the
web of attercoppis, Job, viii. 14. The ME, aétercop is from AS,
attorcoppe, a spider, Voc. 121. 28; a word compounded of AS. aior,
poison (Bosworth), and coppe, which perhaps also meant ‘spider ;’
cf. MDu. kop, koppe, ‘a spider,’ or a cob;’ Hexham, The exact
relation to cob (1) is obscure. Cf. Du. spinnekop, a spider ; also,
a spider’s head; WFlem. hoppe, kobbe, a spider (De Bo); West-
phal. kobbenwebbe, a cobweb.

COCA, a shrub, the leaves of which afford a stimulant. (Span.—
Peruv.) In E. G., tr. of Acosta (1604), bk. iv. c. 22; and J. Frampton,
Joyfull Newes (1577), fol. 101, back. —Span. coca.— Peruy,. cuca; of
which form the Span. coca is a corruption (Garcilasso, Comment. of
Peru, bk. viii. c. 15). Der. coca-ine. ‘

COCHINEAL, a scarlet dye-stuff. (F.—Span.—L.—Gk.) Cochi-
neal consists ‘ of the dried bodies of females of the Coccus cacti, an
insect native in Mexico, Central America, &c., and found on several
species of cactus; Webster. [These insects have the appearance of
berries, and were thought to be such; hence the name.} The word.
cochineal. occurs in Beaum. and Fletcher, Beggar’s Bush, i. 3. Cf
“the berrie of cochenile;? Hakluyt’s Voy. iii: 46, 1. 10.—F. cochinille,
—Span. cochinilla, cochineal; cf. Ital. cocciniglia, the same. = L.
coccineus, coccinus (Isaiah, i. 18), of a scarlet colour.—L. coccum, a
berry; also, ‘kermes,’ supposed by the ancients to be a berry. Gk,


ELLY


118 COCK

“«éxkos, a kernel, a berry; esp. the coceus ilicis, or ‘kermes-berry,’
used to dye scarlet. @[ Distinct from Span. cochinilla, a wood-louse,
-dimin. of cochina, a pig (Monlau).

. COCK (1), the male of the domestic fowl. (E.) ME. cok; sce
Chaucer’s Nun’s Priest’s Tale. AS. cocc, Matt. xxvi. 34, 74; and
‘much earlier, in A‘lfred, tr. of Gregory, ed. Sweet, c. 63, p. 459. Of
imitative origin; from the bird’s cry. ‘Cryde anon cok! cok!’;
Chaucer, C. T., B 4467. Cf. Skt. kukkuta-, a cock; Malay kukuk,
crowing of cocks. 4 Soalso OF. coc (F.coq). — Low Lat. cocewm, an
accus, form occurring in the Lex Salica, vii. 16, and of onomato-
poetic: origin (Brachet).—Gk. x«dxxv, the cry of the cuckoo;
also the cry of the cock, since the phrase xoxKoBdas dpyis occurs
to signify a cock; lit. it means ‘the cock-voiced bird,’ or the
bird that cries cock! Cf. Cuckoo. Der. cock-er-el, a little cock,
apparently a double diminutive, ME. cokerel, Prompt. Parv. p. 86;
cock-fight-ing, sometimes contracted to cock-ing; cock-er, one who
keeps fighting-cocks; cock-pit; cock’s-comb, a plant; and see cock-
ade, cock-atrice, coxcomb. The cock, or stop-cock of a barrel, is
probably the same word; cf. G. hahn, a cock, also, a faucet, stop-
cock. See Cock (3), and Chicken,

COCK (2), to stick up abruptly. (E.) We say to cock one’s eye,
one’s hat; or, of a bird, that it cocks up its tail. ‘ [She] spreads and
cocks her tail;’ A. Marvell, Rehearsal Transposed, i. 161 (N.E.D.)
Apparently with reference to the posture of a cock’s head when crow-
ing; or to that of his crest or tail. See Cock (1). So also Gael. coc,
to cock, as in coc do bhoineid, cock your bonnet; cf. Gael. coc-shron,
a cock-nose ; coc-shronach, cock-nosed. Der. cock, sb., in the phrase
‘a cock of the eye,’ &c.

COCK (3), part of the lock of a gun. (E.) ‘ Pistol’s cock is up;’
Hen. V, ii. i. 55. So named from its original shape; from the like-
ness to the head and neck of a cock, Similarly, the G. name is hahn ;
as in the phrase den Hahn spannen, i. e. to cock (a gun).

COCK (4), a small pile of hay, (Scand.) § A cocke of hay ;” Tyn-
dale’s Works, p. 450. Cf. ‘cockers of haruest folkes,’ Rastall,
Statutes; Vagabonds, &c. p. 474 (R.). And see P. Plowman, C. vi.
13, and my note upon it.—Dan. kok, a heap, pile; Dan. dial. kok,
a haycock, at kokke hoet, to cock hay; cf. Icel. kékkr, a lump, a ball.

COCK (5), COCKBOAT, a small boat, (F.—L.—Gk.) The
addition of boa# is superfluous ; see cock in K. Lear, iv. 6, 19. —OF.
cogue, also cogue, a kind of boat (Godefroy); cf. Ital. cocea, Span.
coca, a boat. B. The word also appears in the form cog or cogge, as
in Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 476; Chaucer, Legend of Good Women,
Ypsiphyle, 114. This is the Du. and Dan. hog, Icel. kuggr, a boat;
the same word. sy. The word was very widely spread, and is perhaps
to be referred, as suggested by Diez, to the L. concha, a shell; cf.
also mod. F. coche, a boat, and cogue, a shell. = Gk. «éyx7, a mussel,
cockle-shell; «éyxos, a mussel, cockle, cockle-shell.4-Skt. gankha-,
a conch-shell, See Conch; and see Cockle (1). @ But some
regard the Du. and Scand. forms as Teutonic; from Teut. types
*kukkon-, *kuggon-. It is probable that these types were confused
with derivatives of concha. Cf. Korting, § 2283. Der. cock-swain, by
the addition of swain, q.v.; now gen. spelt coxswain.

COCKADEH, a knot of ribbon ona hat. (F.) ‘Pert infidelity is
wit’s cockade ;? Young’s Nt. Thoughts, Nt. 7, 1. 109 from end. The
a was formerly sounded as aa in baa; and the word is, accordingly,
a corruption of cockard.=F. coguarde, fem. of coquard, ‘foolishly
proud, saucy, presumptuous, malapert, undiscreetly peart, cocket,
jolly, cheerful;” Cotgrave. He also gives: ‘ coguarde, bonnet a la
coquarde, a Spanish cap, -.. any bonnet or cap worne proudly.’
Formed by suffix -ard from F. cog, a cock. See Cock (1).

COCKATOO, a kind of parrot. (Malay.) The pl. is spelt cacatoes,
and the birds are said to be found in the Mauritius; Sir T. Herbert,
Travels, p. 383 (Todd’s Johnson); or ed. 1665, p. 403.— Malay
kakatia, a cockatoo; a word which is doubtless imitative, like our
cock; see Cock (1).. This Malay word is given at p. 84 of Pijnappel’s
Malay-Dutch Dictionary; he also gives the imitative words kakak,
the cackling of hens, p. 75; and kukuk, the crowing of a cock, p. 94.
So also ‘kakatia,a bird of the parrot-kind ;’ Marsden’s Malay Dict.
p- 261. Cf. Skt. kukkwta-,a cock; so named from its cry. See Cock,
Cuckoo.

COCKATRICE, a fabulous serpent hatched from a cock’s egg.
(F.—Late L.—L.) In Shak, Tw. Nt. iii. 4. 215. ME, cocatryse,
kokatrice, Wyclif, Ps. xc. 13; Isa. xi. 8, xiv. 29.—OF. cocatrice,
‘cocatris, an ichneumon, a crocodile; Godefroy. Cf. Span. cocotriz,
a crocodile, Late L. cdcatricem, acc. of cdcdtrix, caucatrix, a croco-
dile, basilisk, cockatrice. B. The form céc&trix is a corruption of
Late L. caledtrix (caucatrix in Ducange), lit. ‘the treader,’ or ‘tracker
out,’ used to translate Gk. ixvedyov.— L. calcare, to tread; see Caulk,


and see Icehneumon. The word being once corrupted, the fable |
that the animal was produced from a cock’s ege was invented to
| shoots; Middleton, The Widow, A. iii. sc. 1. A cockshoot (shortened


account for it.


COCKSHUT TIME


COCKER, to pamper, indulge children. (Scand.) *£ A beardless
boy, a ccckered silken wanton ;’ K. John, v. 1. 70. ‘Neuer had so
cockered us, nor made us so wanton;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 3374;
see Eastwood and Wright’s Bible Word-book, ‘ Cokeryn, carifoveo ;’”
Prompt. Parv. p.85. B. Prob. of Scand. rather than of native origin,
Orig. ‘to cry cok!” as a cock does, repeatedly; the verb being fre-
quentative in form, Hence to call chickens repeatedly, to be ever
feeding them, to pet, pamper, &c, This is borne out by MDan.
kokre, to call often, as a cock or hen does; Norweg,. kokla (1), to
cackle, (2), to cocker, pet; Norw, kokra, to utter monotonous cries,
also to cocker; Norw. kokrebarn,a pet child; kokren, adj., cockering
(Ross). SoalsoMDu. kokelen, ‘to cocker, foster,” Hexham ; whence
F. cogueliner, of which Cotgrave says: ‘cogueliner un enfant, to dandle,
cocker, fondle, pamper, make a wanton of a child.’ The W. cocri, to
fondle, is from E, All from Cock (1).

COCK-EYED, squinting. (E.) See Halliwell, From Cock

ae iquivs
CobKLE (1), a sort of bivalve. (F.—L.—Gk.) In P. Plowman,
C. x. 95, occurs the pl. cockes, with the sense of cockles, the reading
in the Ilchester MS. being cokeles. Thus the ME. form is coke,
dimin. of cok or cock (F. cogue), the orig. sense of which was ‘ shell.’
The word was borrowed from the French coguille, a cockle-shell ;
cf. Ital. cocchiglia, Walloon kokil (Remacle).—Late L. type *coc-
chylia, by-form of conchylia, pl. of conchylium. — Gk. koyxvAov, dimin,
of xoyxn, a mussel, a cockle. See Cock (5), Without the nasal,
we find also L, cochlea, a snail; cf. Gk. xoxAias,a snail with a spiral
shell; #éxAos, a fish with a spiral shell, also a bivalve, a cockle,
See Korting, § 2283. 4 The ME. cockes answers to the pl. of AS.
s&-cocc, a sea-shell, cockle, and of OF. coque.

COCKLE (2), a weed among corm; darnel. (E.) ME. cokkel,
‘Or springen [sprinkle, sow] cokkel in our clene corn;’ Chaucer,
C. T., 12923 (B 1183)... AS. coccel, tares, translating Lat. zizania,
Matt. xiii. 27; whence also Gael. cogal/, tares, the herb cockle;
cogull, the corn-cockle ; Irish cogal.

COCKLE (3), to be uneven, pucker up. (Scand.) ‘It made such
a short cockling sea, . » that I never felt such uncertain jerks in a
ship;’ Dampier, Voyage, an. 1683 (R.). Of Scand. origin; cf,
Norw. koklutt, lumpy, uneven, i.e. cockled up; from Norw. kokle,
a little lump, dim. of tok, a lump. Cf. Swed. dial. Aokkel, dimin, of
koka, a clod.

COCKLOFT, an upper loft, garret. (Hybrid; E. and Scand.)
‘Cocklofts and garrets;’ Dryden, tr. of Juvenal, Sat. iii. 1. 329,
From cock (1) and loft. ‘ Desvan de casa, a garret or cockloft;’ Min-
sheu, Span. Dict. (1623). So in German we find hahnbalken, a roost,
a cock-loft ; and in Danish hanebielkeloft, lit. a cock-balk-loft; ef.
prov. E, hen-loft. It meant originally a place in the rafters where
cocks roosted, hence, a little room among the rafters; called also in
Danish lofthammer, i.e. loft-chamber. See Loft. 4 The W,. coeg-
loft, a garret, is nothing but the E. cockloft borrowed.

COCKNEY, an effeminate person. (E.) ME. cokency, in P. Plow-
man, B. vi. 287; where it means ‘an egg’; so also in the Tourna-
ment of Tottenham in Percy’s Reliques, last stanza. The ME,
cokeney represents coken-ey, lit. ‘egg of cocks,’ from AS. eg, an egg,
where coke is the gen. pl. of cok, a cock, as clerken is of clerk,
This singular name was given particularly to the small misshapen
eggs occasionally laid by fowls; see prov. E. cock’s egg (s.v. cock) in
E.D.D. ‘The small yolkless eggs which hens sometimes lay are
called cock’s eggs, generally in the firm persuasion that the name
states a fact;? C.S. Burne, Shropshire Folk-Lore, p. 229. Cf. Harl,
Miscell. iii. 531. Florio’s Ital. Dict. (1598) has: ‘ Caccherelli,
cacklings of hens; also egs, as we say cockanegs. Hence cockney
was often a term of reproach, and meant a foolish or effeminate
person, or a spoilt child; see Cockney in Halliwell. The ME,
spelling was cokeney or cokenay, which was trisyllabic. ‘I sal been
halde a daf, a cokenay ; Unhardy is unsely, thus men sayth;’ Chaucer,
C. T. 4206 (A 4208). Der. cockney-dom, cockney-ism.

COCKROACH, a kind of beetle. (Span.) ‘ Cockroches, a kind
of insect;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Capt. J. Smith has cacarootch ;
Works, ed. Arber, p. 630 (1624). ‘Called cukreluce in Surinam’ ;
Stedman, i. 194 (1796). ‘ Without question, it is from the Portuguese
caroucha, chafer, beetle, and was introduced into our language by
sailors;? F. Hall, Modern English, 1873, p. 128. But a friend
kindly points out that the E, word is borrowed, not from Port.
caroucha, but from Span. cwcaracha, ‘a wood-louse, a kind of centi-
pede, blatta or short-legged beetle, common aboard of American
ships, a cockroach, Blatta americana, L.;’ Neuman. I think the
Port. caroucha is merely a clipped form of the same word, with loss
of the first syllable. The etymology of cucaracha is obscure.

COCKSHUT TIME, twilight. (E.) In Shak, Rich. II, v. 3,


70. ‘A fine cockshoot evening,’ i.e. a fine evening for using cock-


COCO


‘to cockshot or cockshut) was a glade cut through a wood along which
woodcocks might dart or ‘shoot’ and be caught in nets, esp. at
twilight; see K.D.D. Palsgrave has: ‘Cockesshote to take wod-
cockes with; wolee.” Woodcocks were taken ‘in cockshoote tyme, as
yt is tearmed, which is the twylight, when yt ys no strange thinge
to take a hundred or sixe score in one woodd in twenty-four houres ;’
A. Newton, Dict. of Birds, p. 1044, Prof. Newton adds that ‘ another
MS. speaks of one wood having 13 cockshots.’ From cock, shoot,
and time. Often absurdly referred to the verb ¢o shut, See Phil.
Soc. Trans., 19043 p. 166.

COCO, wrongly COCOA (1), the cocoa-nut palm-tree. (Port.)
‘Give me to drain the cocoa’s milky bowl;’ Thomson, Summer,
1,677. ‘A fruit called cocos’ [at Goa]; Hakluyt, Voy. ii. 2. 101.
{Misspelt cocoa in Johnson’s Dict.]—Port. (and Span.) coco, a
bugbear ; also, a cocoa-nut, cocoa-tree. ‘Called coco by the Portu-
guese in India on account of the monkey-like face at the base of the
nut, from.coco, a bugbear, an ugly mask to frighten children; see
De Barros, Asia, Dec. iii, bk. iii. c. 73” Wedgwood. Cf. Port. fazer
coco, to play at bo-peep; Span. ser un coco, to be an ugly-looking
person ; cocar, to make grimaces; also, guarda el Coco, i.e. see the
bogy; Pineda. Of unknown origin.

COCOA (2), a corrupt form of Cacao, q. v.

COCOON, the case of a chrysalis. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt cocon
in 1699 (N.E.D.).—F. cocon, a cocoon; formed by adding the suffix
~on (gen. augmentative, but sometimes diminutive) to F. cogue, a
shell. From a by-form of L. concha, a shell. Gk. «dyxn, a shell;
see Conch, Cock (5). Der. cocoon-ery.

COCTION, a boiling, decoction. (L.) In Boyle’s Works, vol. ii.
p- 109 (R.). Formed from Latin, by analogy with I. words in -tion.
=L. coctidnem, acc. of coctio, a boiling, digestion; allied to coctus, pp.
of coguere, to cook. See Cook.

COD (1), akind of fish.(E.) In Shak. Othello, ii. 1.156. ‘ Codde,
a fysshe, cableau;’ Palsgrave; cf. ‘ Cabiland, the chevin;’ and
‘ Cabillau, fresh cod;’ Cot. Spelt cod, Statutes of the Realm, i. 356
(A.D. £357). B. Isuppose that this word cod must be the same as
the ME. codde, a bolster; though the resemblance of the fish to a
bolster is but fanciful. It is obvious that Shakespeare knew nothing
of the Linnzan name gadus (Gk, ya6os); nor is any connexion
between cod and gadus possible. See Cod (2), and Cuttle, Der.
cod-ling, q.v.

COD (2), a husk, shell, bag, bolster. (E.) Perhaps obsolete, except
in prov. E, In Shak., in cod-piece, Gent. of Verona, ii. 7. 533 peas-
cod, i.e. pea-shell, husk of a pea, Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 1. 191. ME.
cod, codde; ‘codde of frute, or pese-codde;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 85.
The pl. coddis translates Lat. siliguis, Wyclif, Luke, xv. 16. [Cod
also means pillow, bolster; as in: ‘ A cod, hoc ceruical, hoc puluinar ;’
Cath. Ang.; in this sense it is of Scand. origin.) AS. cod, codd, a
bag; translating Lat. pera in Mark, vi. 8. 4 Icel. koddi, a pillow;
kodri, the scrotum of animals; Swed. kudde, a cushion. Cf. Swed.
dial. kudde, a pod; MDu. kodde, a club (Hexham), also ‘coleus,
testiculus;’ Kilian; Jutland #odde, a pod, the scrotum. AS. codd
answers to a Teut. type *kuddcz, m.; Icel. koddi to *kuddon-, a weak
sb. @ The W. cod, a bag, pouch, was borrowed from English,

CODDLE,, to treat as an invalid, to nurse overmuch, to render
effeminate. (F.—L.) Another sense of coddle (still known in prov.
E.) was to parboil, to stew fruit; thus Dampier says of the guava:
“It bakes aswell as a pear, and it may be coddled, and it makes good
pies;’ A New Voyage, vol. i. c. 8.p. 222. In Beaumont and Fletcher’s
Philaster, A. V.sc. 4, 1. 31, the phrase ‘I’ll have you coddled’ alludes
to ‘Prince Pippin.’ Apparently short for caudle, verb, i.e. to treat
with caudle; see Shak. Timon, iv. 3. 226. See Caudle.

CODE, a digest of laws. (F.—L.) ME. code; as in ‘ Theodocius
his code ;’ Trevisa, tr. of Higden, iii. 255. Pope has the pl. codes,
Sat. vii. 96.—F. code. L, cddicem, acc. of cddex, caudex, a trunk of a
tree; hence, a wooden tablet for writing on, a set of tablets, a book.
f. The orig. form was perhaps *scaudex, connected with *scauda (i.e.
cauda), a tail, and the orig. sense a shoot or spray of a tree, thus con-
necting L. cauda with E. scut, the tail of a hare or rabbit. See Seut.
Der. cod-i-fy, cod-i-fic-at-ion ; also cod-ic-il, q. V.

CODICIL, a supplement to a will. (¥.—L.) Used by War-
burton, Divine Legation, bk. iv. note 22 (R.), It occurs as early as
1417-8, ‘In this codicill;’ Fifty E, Eng. Wills (E.E.T.S.), p. 40.
= MF, codicile, a codicile;’ Cot.—L. cédicillus, a writing-tablet,
a memorial, a codicil to a will.—L. cddic-, stem of cddex, a tablet,
code; with addition of the dimin. suffix -illws. See Code.

CODLING (1), a young cod. (E.) ME. codlyng, ‘ Hic mullus,
a codlyng ;’ Voe. 642. 10. ‘ Codlynge, fysche, morus;’ Prompt.
Parv. p. 85. Formed from cod (1) by help of the dimin, suffix -ling ;
cf. duck-ling.

CODLING (2), CODLIN, a kind of apple. (C.; with E. suffix.)
In Shak. Tw. Nt. i. 5. 167, it means an unripe apple. Bacon men-


COGNISANCE 119


tions guadlins among the July fruits; Essay 46, Of Gardens. Q:adling
is from ME. querdling. ‘ Querdlynge, appulle, Duracenum ;’ Prompt.
Parv. The suffix -ling is E.; but guerd- may be Celtic; from Irish
cueirt, cuirt, an apple-tree. 4 The Irish cueirt is a very old word, as
it was the name of Q in the Ogham alphabet. ‘The names of the
letters are taken from those of trees, as follows: B—beith, birch . .
Q—queirt, apple:’ J. R. Allen, Monumental Hist. of Early Brit,
Church; p. 71; Rhys, Lect..on Welsh Philology, 2nd ed. p. 285.

COEFFICIENT, codperating with; a math, term. (L.) R.
quotes coefficiency from Glanvill, Vanity of Dogmatising, c. 12 (A.D.
1655).—L, co-, for con, i.e. cum, with; and efficient-, stem of efficiens,
pres. part. of efficere, to cause, a verb compounded of prep. ex, out,
and facere, tomake, See Efficient. Der. coefficienc-y,

CCENOBITE; see Cenobite (above).

COEQUATL:; from Co-, q. y.; and Equal, gq. v.

COERCE, to restrain, compel. (L.) Sir T. Elyot has coertion,
The Gouernonr, bk. i. c. 8. § 6. Coerce occurs in Butler, Sat. on Age
of Ch, II., 1. 162.—L. coercére, to compel.—L. co-, for con-, which
for cum, with; and arcére, to enclose, confine, keep off. From the
same root is the L, arca, a chest, whence E. ark. See Ark. Der,
coerc-i-ble, coerc-ive, coerc-ive-ly, coerc-ion,

COEVAL, of the same age. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 168r.
Formed by help of the adj. suffix -al (as in equal) from L, coeu-us,
of the same age. = L.co-, for con-, i.e. cum, together with ; and euum,
anage. See Age.

COFFEE, a decoction of berries of the coffee-tree. (Turk. — Arab.)
© A drink call’d coffa;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. s. 738. ‘He [the Turk]
hath a drink called cauphe;’ Howell, bk. ii. lett. 55 (A.D. 1634).
‘ Their best drink is coffa ;’ Capt. J. Smith, Works, p. 856 (1603). =
Turk. gahveh, coffee.= Arabic gahweh, coffee; Palmer's Pers. Dict,
col. 476; also gahwah or gahwa(t), Rich. Dict. p. 1155.

COFFER, a chest for money. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. cofer, cofre
(with one f). ‘But litel gold in cofre;’ Chaucer, prol. 300. And
see Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, pp. 135, 224, 297.—OF. cofre,
also cofin, a coffer. The learned form is cofin; the like popular
change of 2 to r is seen in E, order, F. ordre, from L, ordinem, Thus
coffer is a doublet of coffin. See Coffin. Der. coffer-dam.

COFFIN, a chest for enclosing a corpse. (F.—L.—Gk.) Origin-
ally any sort of case; it means a pie-crust in Shak. Tit. And. v. 2.
189. . ME. cofiz, coffiz, The pl. cofines is in Rob. of Brunne, tr. of
Langtoft, p. 135.—OF. cofin, a chest, case.—L. cophinum, acc. of
cophinus, a basket. Gk. xdguvos, a basket; Matt. xiv. 20, where the
Vulgate version has cophinos and Wyclif has cofyzs.

COG (1), a tooth on the rim of a wheel. (Scand.) ME. cog, kog.
‘Scariaballum, kog;’ Voc. p. 627. ‘Hoc striabellum, a cog of
a welle,’ id. 725. 7. ‘Cogge of a mylle, scarioballum ;’ Prompt.
Pary. p. 85. And see Owl and Nightingale, 1. 86, [Gael. and Irish
cog’, a mill-cog: W. cocos, cocs, cogs of a wheel, are from E.] Of
Scand. origin. —MDan. hogge, a cog; kogge-hjul, also kagge-hjul,
a cog-wheel (Kalkar); Swed. kugge; MSwed. kugg (Ihre). Der,
cog-wheel.

COG (2), to cheat, trick, delude. (Scand.) Obsolete. Common in
Shak.; see Merry Wives, iii. 1.123. ‘To shake the bones and cog
(cheat with] the craftie dice;’ Turbervile, To his Friend P. Of
Courting, 1. 13. To cog dice was to control their fall, in a cheating
way; as by ‘slyding, cogging, foysting;’ Ascham, Toxophilus, ed.
Arber, p. 54. Very likely, the little finger was used as a cog, being
hitched against the die so as to direct it. The verb is almost certainly
connected with the preceding sb.; cf. MDan. kogge, a cog, Norw,
kogga, to dupe; Swed. kugge, a cog, kugga,to cheat. See Cog (1),

COGENT, powerful, convincing. (L.) In H. More, Immortality
of the Soul, bk. i. c. 4.—L. cdgent-, stem of cdgens, pres. part. of
cogere, to compel. = L. co-, for con, which for cum, with; and agere,
to drive. Brugm.i. § 968. See Agent, Der. cogenc-y.

COGITATE, to think, consider. (L.) Shak. has cogitation,
Wint. Ta. i. 2. 271. But it also occurs very early, being spelt cogt-
taciun in the Ancren Riwle, p. 288.—L. cdgildtus, pp. of cdgitare, to
think, Cdgitare is for *coagitare, i.e. to agitate together in the mind,
=L. co-, for con, which for cum, with, together; and agitare, to
agitate, frequentative of agere, to drive. Brugm. i. § 968. See
Agitate, Agent. Der. cogitat-ion, cogitat-ive.

COGNATE, of the same family, related, akin, (L.) In Howell’s
Letters, bk. iv. lett. 50. Bp. Taylor has cogzation, Rule of Conscience,
bk. ii. c. 23, and see cognacioun in Wyclif, Gen. xxiv. 4.—L. cognatus,
allied by birth, akin.—L. co-, for con, which for cum, together ; and
gnatus, born, old form of natus, pp. of gnasci, later nasci, to be born,
See Natal.

COGNISANCEH, knowledge, 2 badge. (F.—L.) We find
conisantes in the sense of ‘ badges’ (which is probably a scribal error
for conisances) in P. Plowman’s Crede, ed. Skeat, 1. 185 ; also conotse
cance, Gower, C. A. iii. 56 ; bk. vi. 1638. Conisaunce for ‘knowledge’


120 COGNITION


occurs in the Rom. of the Rose, 5559.—OF. conoissance, knowledge ;
at a later time a g was inserted to agree more closely with the Latin ;
see cognoissance in Cotgrave.=OF, conoissant, knowing, pres. pt.
of OF, conoistre, to know.=—L. cognoscere, to know.—L. co-, for
con, i.e. cum, together ; and gzoscere, to know, cognate with E. know.
See Know. Der. From the same F. verb we have cogzis-able,
cognis-ant. Here belongs cognoscente, pl. -ti, a connoisseur, Ital.
cognoscente, from the pres. pt. stem of L. cognoscere.

COGNITION, perception. (L.) In Shak. Troil. v. 2. 63.
Spelt cognicion, Sir T, More, Works, p. 4a.—L. cognitidnem, acc. of
cognitio, a finding out, acquisition of knowledge; cf. cognitus, pp. of
cognoscere, to learn, know. = L. co-, for con, which for cum, together ;
and gnoscere, to know, cognate with E. kxow. See Know.

COGNOMEN, a surname. (L.) Merely Latin, and not in early
use. Cognominal occurs in Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, bk. iii. c.
24. § 3.—L. cogndmen, a surname. —L, co-, for con, i.e. cum, together
with; and xdmen, a name, altered to gndmen by confusion with
gnoscere, to know, which is unrelated. See Noun.

COHABIT, to dwell together with. (L.) In Holland, Suetonius,
p- 132. Barnes has cohabitation, Works, p. 322, col. 1.—L. cohabitare,
to dwell together.—L. co-, for con, i.e. cum, with; and habitare, to
dwell. See Habitation, Habit. Der. cohabit-at-ion.

COHERE, to stick together. (L.) In Shak. Meas. ii, 1. T1.—
L. coherére, to stick together.—L. co-, for con, i.e. cum, together;
and herére, to stick. Cf. Lithuanian gaisz-ti, to delay, tarry. See
Hesitate. Der. coher-ent, coher-ent-ly, coher-ence ; also, like the pp.
cohes-us, we have cohes-ion, cohes-ive, cohes-ive-ness.

COHORT, a band of soldiers. (F.—L.) In Shak. K. Lear, i. 2.
162.—F. cohorte, ‘a cohort, or company... of souldiers ;’ Cot.—
L. cohortem, acc. of cohors, a band of soldiers. The orig. sense of
cohors was an enclosure, a sense still preserved in E. court, which is
a doublet of cohort; see Max Miiller, Lectures, 8th ed. ii. 277. See
Court.

COIF, a cap, cowl. (F.-—MHG.—L.) ME. coif, coife; Polit.
Songs, ed. Wright, p. 329; Wyclif, Exod. xxviii. 40; xxix. 6.—OF.
coife (Supp. to Godetroy) ; spelt coiffe, Cotgrave ; Low L. cofia, acap ;
also spelt cuphia, cofea.mMHG. kuffe, kupfe, OHG. chuppa, chuppha,
a cap worn under the helmet; Teut. stem *kupp-jon-. B. This word
is a derivative of MHG. kopf, OHG. chuph,.a cup, also the head, =
L. cuppa, a cup. Korting, § 5339. See Cup. Der. coiff-ure.

COIGN, a corner. (F.—L.) In Shak. Mach. i. 6. 7.—F. coing,
given by Cotgrave as another spelling of coiz, a corner ; he also gives
the dimin, coignet, a little corner. The spellings coign, coing, were
convertible. —L. cuneum, acc. of cuneus,a wedge. See Coin.

COIL (1), to gather together. (F.—L.) ‘ Coil’d up in a cable;’
Beaum. and Fletcher, Knight of Malta, ii, t.—OF. coillir, cuillir,
cueillir, to collect; whence also E, cull.—L. colligere, to collect. See
Cull, Collect. Der. coil, sb.

COIL (2), a noise, bustle, confusion. (F.—L.) It occurs fre-
quently in Shak.; see Temp. i. 2. 207 ; Much Ado, iii. 3. 100. Orig.
a collection; hence, in prov. E., a hay-cock, heap of hay; also
(through the idea of a collected crowd) confusion, bustle, stir, noise,


&c. ‘ This mortal coil,’ the turmoil of life; Hamlet, iii. 1.67. All
from Coil (1), See E.D.D. and N.E.D. [Gael. coileid, a stir, is
from E.]


COIN, stamped money. (F.—L.) ME. coin, coyn; Chaucer, C. T.,
9044 (E. 1168).—OF. coin, a wedge, a stamp upon a coin, a coin;
so named from its being stamped by means of a wedge. = L. cuneum,
acc. of cuneus,a wedge. A doublet of coign, a corner, q.v. Der.
coin, verb; coin-age, ME. coyngnage, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 49.

COINCIDE, to agree with, fall in with. (L.) In Wollaston,

Relig. of Nature, s. 3 ; the word coincident is in Bp, Taylor, On Re-
pentance, c. 7, s. 5.—L. co-, for.con, i.e. cum, together with; and
incidere, to fall upon, from in, upon, and cadere, to fall. See Ca-
dence. Der. coincid-ent, coincid-ence.
-COTR, the prepared fibre of the husk of cocoa-nut, for making
ropes. (Malayalam.) The true sense is ‘rope.’ ‘Sowed together
with cayro, which is threede made of the huske of cocoes;’ Hakluyt,
Voy. ii. pt. I. p. 251.—Malayalam hayar, rope, cord; from kayaru,
to be twisted (Yule); Tamil kayayu, rope (H. H. Wilson).

COISTREL, COYSTRIL, a mean paltry fellow. (F.—L.)
In Shak. Tw. N. i. 3. 43; Per. iv. 6.176. Used for coustrel, which
was the older form. ‘ Coustrell, that wayteth on a speare, cousteillier ;’
Palsgrave. From this evidence we may also infer that coustre/] was
an E. adaptation of the MF. word cousteillier or coustillier, probably
formed by the dropping of the last syllable and insertion of r after ¢
(as in cart-r-idge), — MF, coustillier, ‘an esquire of the body, an armour-
bearer unto a knight, the servant of a man-at-armes [which explains
Palsgrave’s definition}; also a groom of a stable, a horse-keeper ;’
Cotgrave. The use of the word in the sense of ‘paltry fellow’ is
precisely parallel to the similar use of groom, lackey, hind, &c.


The |


COLLAPSE


lit. sense is one who carries a poniard. = MF. couséille, ‘a kind of long
ponniard, used heretofore by esquires;” Cot. Variant of OF. coustel,
spelt cowsteau in Cotgrave, ‘a knife, or whittle, a sword, or any such
cutting weapon.’ The s is unoriginal; the proper OF. spelling is
coutel or cotel, also cultel.—L. cultellus, a knife; see Cutler,
Cutlass, The Late L. equivalent of coistrel is cultellarius, a soldier
armed with a cutlass (Ducange).

COIT, another spelling of Quoit, q. v.

COITION, a meeting together, copulation. (L.) Used by Sir
T. Browne of the meeting together of magnetised substances ; Vulgar
Errors, bk. ii. c, 2. § 8.—L. acc. coitionem, a meeting together; cf.
L, coitus, pp. of cotre, to come together.—L, co- (for cum), together;
ire, to go, come. ‘

COKE, charred coal. (Scand. ?) ‘Not in early use. Plot, in his
Staffordshire, ed. 1686, p. 128, says: ‘ The coal thus prepared they
call coaks.’ It may be identified with ME. colke, the core of an
apple, the same as prov. E, coke, the core of an apple, also spelt
cowk. ‘Coke, pit-coal or sea-coal charred;’ Coles, Dict. ed. 1684.
‘“Cowks, or cinders;’ E. D.S., Gloss. B. 17.‘ Cowk, the core: it’s
badly burnt lime, it’s nought but cowks;’ Cumberl. Gloss.,
E.D.S. Of doubtful origin. Perhaps allied to MSwed. kok, koka,
Swed. koka, a clod, clot; Norw. kok, a clod, lump (as of earth
or snow).

COLANDER, a strainer. (Prov.—L.) ‘ A colander or strainer 3’
Holland, Plutarch, p. 223. Also in Dryden, tr. of Virgil, Georg. ii.
328; see also his tr. of Ovid, Metam. bk. xii. 1. 588. ‘ Colatorium,
a colyndore;” Voc. 574. 10, [Also spelt cudlender.] A SFrench or
Provencal word.—OProy. *colador (Span. coladur), mod. Prov.
couladou (for *couladour), a small basket used for straining wine from
a cask (Mistral).—L. type *colatérem, acc. of *cdlator, a strainer ;
by-form of L. célatérium, a strainer.—L. cédlare, to strain. = L. colum,
a strainer, colander, sieve. ‘The z is intrusive, as in celandine.

COLCHICUM, a genus of liliaceous plants. (L.— Gk.) Described
as ‘ Mede Saffron’ in Lyte, tr. of Dodoens, bk. iii. c. 35.—L. colchi-
cum.=— Gk, KoAyuxov, meadow saffron; neut. of KoAxixds, Colchian.
= Gk. KoAyis, Colchis ; a country to the E. of the Black Sea.

COLD, without heat, chilled. (E.) ME. cold, cald, kald; Old
Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 251, 283. OMerc. cald; AS, ceald;
Matt. x. 42. + Icel. kaldr; Swed. kall; Dan. kold; Du. koud; Goth.
halds; G. kalt. Teut. type *kal-doz, cold; from *kal-, to be cold,
as in Icel. kal-a, to freeze; with suffix -doz=Gk. -rés. Cf. L. gel-
idus; and see Cool, Chill. Der. cold-ly, cold-ish, cold-ness.

COLE, COLEW ORT, cabbage. (L.) For the syllable -wort,
see Wort. ME. col, caul; spelt cool in Palladius on Husbandry,
bk. ii. st. 32. The comp. kole-plantes is in P. Plowman, B. vi. 288.
AS. cawel, ciul; see numerous examples in Gloss. to Cockayne’s
Leechdoms. Not an E. word.=L. caulis, a stalk, a cabbage. + Gk.
kavdds, astalk; lit.a hollow stem; cf. L. caule, openings; and prob,
allied to E. hollow. See Hollow. @ The numerous related Teu-
tonic words, including G. kohd, are all alike borrowed from the Latin,
Cole is a variant of kail, q.v.; cf. cauliflower, colza,

COLEOPTERA, an order of insects. (Gk.) A modern scientific
term, to express that the insects are ‘sheath-winged.’ =Gk. xoded-s,
koAed-v, a sheath, scabbard; and mrep-ov, a wing. For soAeds, see
Prellwitz. The Gk. mrepéy is from 4/ PET, to fly; see Feather,
Der. coleopter-ous.

COLIBRI, a humming-bird. (F.—Carib.) Ta Churchill’s Collec-
tion of Voyages (1732), v. 650, we find: ‘ Very little birds, by the
French called colibris, but by the English humming-birds,’ This is
in a description of Martinique, one of the French Caribbean islands,
=F. colibri; from Caribbean. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 349.

COLIC, a pain in the bowels. (F.—L.—Gk.) Also spelt cholic;
Shak. Cor. ii. 1.83. Properly an adjective, as in ‘collick paines;’
Holland, Pliny, bk. xxii. c. 25 (Of Millet). ME. colyke; Prompt,
Parv.=—F. colique, adj. ‘of the chollick,’ Cotgrave; also used as sb.
and explained by ‘ the chollick, a painful windinesse in the stomach
or entrailes.=—L,. colicus, affected with colic.—Gk, “wAwucos, better
xoAukds, suffering in the colon.—Gk. «@Aov, better «ddov, the colon,
intestines. See Colon (2),

COLISEUM, a bad spelling of Colosseum ; see Colossus,

COLLABORATOR, a fellow-labourer. (L.) A modern word ;
suggested by F. collaborateur, and formed on a Latin model.—L.
collaborator, a modern coined word, formed by suffixing the ending
-tor to collabora-, for collabdrare, to work together with. = L. col-, for
con- before /, which is for cum, together with ; and /abérare, to labour,
from the sb. labor, See Labour.

COLLAPSE, to shrink together, fall in. (L.) ‘The sb. is in
much later use than the verb, and is omitted in Todd’s Johnson;
Richardson’s three examples give only the pp. collapsed, as in ‘ col-
lapsed state,’ Mirrour for Magistrates, p. 588. This pp. is a transla-
tion into English of the L. collapsus, pp. of collabi, to fall together,


COLLAR


fall in a heap.=L. col-, for con- before 1, which is for cum, with; and
1abi, to glide down, lapse. See Lapse, Der. collapse, sb.

COLLAR, something worn round the neck. (F.—L.) ME. coler,
later coller; Rob. of Glouc. p. 223, 1. 4577; P. Plowman, B. prcl.
162, 169.— AF. coler, Royal Wills, p. 155; OF. colier, later collier,
a collar; see Cotgrave.—L. collare, a band for the neck, collar. —L.
collum, the neck; cognate with Goth. hals, G, hals, AS, heals, the
neck. Brugmann, i. § 662. Der. collar-bone; fromthe same source
is coll-et (F. collet), the part of a ring in which the stone is set, lit.
a little neck. See Collet,

COLLATERAL, side by side, indirect. (L.) In Shak, All’s
Well, i. 1.99. Also in P, Plowman, C, xvii. 136.—Late L. colla-
teralis; Ducange.—L. col-, for con, i.e. cum, with; and Jlaterdlis,
lateral, from Jater-, decl. stem of Jatus, aside, See Lateral, Der.
collateral-ly,

COLLATION, a comparison; formerly, a conference. (F.—L.)
The verb collate, used by Daniel in his Panegyric to the King, was
hardly borrowed from Latin, but rather derived from the sb, collation,
which was in very common use at an early period in several senses,
See Chaucer, C. T., 8201 (E 325); tr. of Boethius, bk. iv. pr. 4. 49.
The common ME, form was collacion.—OF. collacion, collation, a
conference, discourse; Godefroy. = L. collatidnem, acc, of collatio, a
bringing together, conferring ; cf. collatwm, supine in use with the
verb conferre, to bring together, but from a different root.—L. col-,
for con, i.e, cum, together with; and Jatum, supine used with the
verb ferre, to bring. The older form of latum was tlatum, and it
was connected with the verb /ollere, to take, bear away ; so that the
L. tlatus =Gk. tAnros, borne. =4/TEL, to lift, sustain ; whence also
E. tolerate, q.v. Der. collate, collat-or,

COLLEAGUE (1), a coadjutor, partner, (F.—L.) £S. Paule
gaue to Peter hys colleague ;’ Frith, Works, p. 61, col. 1. —MF. col-
degue, ‘a colleague, fellow, or co-partener in office ;’ Cot.—L. colléga,
a partner in office.—L. col-, for con, i.e. cum, together with; and
legere, to choose. See Legend, College, Collect.

COLLEAGUE (2), verb, to join in an alliance. (F.—L.) In
Hamlet, i. 2. 21.—OF. colleguer, colliguer, to colleague with.—L.
colligare, to bind together. —L. col-, for con- or cum, together ; ligare,
to bind. See League (1).

COLLECT, vb., to gather together. (F.—L.) In Shak. K.
John, iv. 2.142. [But the sb. cdllect is in early use, spelt collecte in
the Ancren Riwle, p. 20. This is derived from Late L. collecta, a
collection in money, an assembly for prayer ; used ecclesiastically to
signify a collect; on which see Trench, On the Study of Words.
L. collecta is the fem. of the pp. collectus, gathered together.]—OF.
collecter, to collect money ; Roquefort. = Late L. collectare, to collect
money.—L, codlecta, a collection in money.—L. collecta, fem. of
collectus, gathered together, pp. of colligere, to collect. —L. col-, for
con, 1,e, cum, together; and Jegere, to gather, to read. See Legend.
Der. collect-ion, collect-ive, collect-ive-ly, collect-or, collect-or-ate, collect-
or-ship. From the same source are college, q.y., and colleague (1),
q.v. _Doublets, cull, q. v., coil (1), q. Vs

COLLEEN, a girl. (Irish.) Modern. Irish cailin, a girl; dimin.
of caile, a country-woman. The E, colleen bawn is from Irish cailin
ban, a fair (lit. white) girl.

COLLEGE, an assembly, seminary. (F.—L.) Spelt collage,
Skelton, Garland of Laurel, 1. 403; colledge in Tyndal, Works,
P- 359, col. ¢.—MF. college, ‘a colledge;’ Cot.—L, collégium, a
college, society of persons or colleagues.—L, colléga, a colleague.
See Colleague (1), Der. collegi-an, collegi-ate, both from L.
collegi-um.

COLLET, the part of the ring in which the stone is set. (F.—L.)
Used by Cowley, Upon the Blessed Virgin, 1.11. It also means a
collar.—F. collet, a collar, neck-piece.— I, col, the neck; with suffix
~et.—L. collum, the neck. See Collar.

COLLIDE,, to dash together. (L.) Burton, Anat. of Melancholy,
p- 274, uses both collide and collision (R.)—L. collidere, pp. collisus,
to clash or strike together. — L. col-, for con-, i.e. cum, together; and
ledere, to strike, dash, injure, hurt, See Lesion, Der. collis-ion,
allied to the pp. collis-us,

COLLIE, COLLY, a kind of shepherd’s dog. (E.)  £ Coaly,
Coley, a cur dog;’ Brockett’s Glossary of N. Eng, Words, 1825.
“Coley, a cur-dog; North;’ Grose, Gloss, (1790). Shepherd-dogs
“in the N. of England are called coally dogs ;’ Recreations in Nat.
History, London, 1815. Supposed to be the same word as coaly,
black (like coal) ; from the coal-black hairs. Cf. prov. E. colley, soot,
also to blacken; and see below. Cf. collied, i.e, blackened, in Shak,
Mid. Nt. Dr.i. 1.145; see Colly (1).

COLLIER, a worker in a coal-mine. (E.) ME. colier, coljer ;
spelt also kolier, cholier, William of Palerne, ed. Skeat, 2520, 2523.

Formed from ME, col, coal, by help of the suffix -er, with the inser-

tion of ¢ for convenience of pronunciation, just as in law-yer for law-er,


COLONEL 121


Thus the strict spelling
See further under Coal.


bow-yer for bow-er, saw-yer for saw-er.
should, by analogy, have been col-yer.
Der. collier-y.

COLLIMATE, to adjust a telescope accurately. (L.) Cockeram
has ; ‘ Collimate, to levell, or winke with one eye;’ he means ‘to
aim at.’—L, collimat-us, pp. of collimare, a false form, being a mis-
reading for collinedre, to direct in a straight line, to aim, in some
editions of Cicero, Being mistaken for a real word, it was used by
Kepler (1604).—L. col-, for cum, together, with ; linedre, to make
straight, from Jinxea, a straight line. See Line. Der. collimat-ion.

COLLOCATEH, to place together. (L.) In Hall’s Chron. Rich.
II, an. 3. § 45.—L. collocatus, pp. of collocare, to place together. —L,
col-, for con, i.e. cum, together ; and Jocére, to place, from locus, a place.
See Locus, Der. collocat-ion, Doublet, couch, q.v.

COLLODION, a solution of gun-cotton. (Gk.) Modern.
Named from its glue-like qualities. — Gk. coAAwons, like glue, viscous.
— Gk. «Ada, glue; and suffix -ei5ns, like, from eidos, appearance ;
see Idol,

COLLOP,, a slice of meat. (E.) £ Colloppe, frixatura, carbonacium,
carbonella;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 88, The pl. coloppes is in P. Plow-
man, B. vi. 287. But in the same, C. ix. 309, 4 MSS. out of 6 have
the older spelling colhoppes. A compound word; orig. col-hoppe,
where col- is the ME. col, a coal. In Noreen’s Altschwed. Lesebuch,
Pp- 145, we have: ‘ kol-huppadher . . , adj. roasted in the glow of
the coals; cf. Swed. gléd-hoppad.’ ‘The latter means ‘roasted on
the gledes or glowing coals;’ from gidéd, a glede. Rietz has Swed.
dial. glé-hoppa, glod-hyppja, glo-hyppe, a cake baked on the gledes.
We may conclude that ME. col-hoppe meant ‘a thing baked or fried
on the coals.’ But the form hoppe requires further elucidation. See
Notes on E, Etym., p. 44. A connexion with G. hippe (for hiippe,
formerly hyp), a wafer, seems possible; see Weigand.

COLLOQUY, conversation. (L.) Used by Wood, Athenz Oxo-
nienses (R.) ‘In the midst of this divine colloguy ;’ Spectator, no. 237.
[Burton and others use the corrupt verb to collogue, now obsolete. | —
L. colloguium, a speaking together. = L. collogui, to confer, converse
with. —L. col-, for con-, i.e. cum, together ; and Jogui, tospeak. See
Loquacious. Der. collogui-al, collogui-al-ism.

COLLUDH, to act with others in a fraud. (L.) Not very
common. It occurs in Milton’s Tetrachordon (R.); and Cotgrave
has F. colluder, ‘to collude.’ The sb. collusion 1s commoner ; it is
spelt collucyoun in Skelton, Garland of Laurel, 1.1195; and collustoun
in Chaucer, Lak of Stedfastnesse, 1, 11.—L, colludere, pp. collusus, to
play with, act in collusion with.—L. col-, for con-, i.e. cum, with;
and lidere, to play, See Ludicrous. Der. collus-ion, collus-ive,
collus-ive-ly, collus-ive-ness ; all like the pp. collus-us,

COLLY (1), to blacken, darken, (E.) ‘Brief as the lightning in
the collied night ;? Mid. Nt. Dream, i. 1. 145. ME. colwen; whence
“colwyd, Carbonatus;” Prompt. Pary. From AS. col, a coal; so
that the orig. sense was ‘to begrime with coal-dust;’ see Collie,

COLLY (2), a kind of dog; see Collie.

COLOCYNTH, COLOQUINTIDA, the pulp of the fruit
of a species of cucumber. (Gk.) Cologuintida is in Shak. Othello,
i. 3. 355- ‘Colocynthis, a kind of wild gourd purging phlegm ;’
Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.  Cologuintida stands for colocynthida
(with hard ¢ before y), and is the acc. case of colocynthis (iv
[ii] Kings, iv. 39, Vulgate); this is the Latinised form of Gk.
codokuvGis, the plant colocynth, of which the acc. case is eoAoxur@ida.
The construction of new nominatives from old accusatives was a
common habit in the middle ages. Besides xoAoxuv@is, we find also
koddxuvOos, koAoKiYTH, a round gourd or pumpkin, B. Perhaps for
xodo-kuvOis, from xodo-, large, as in xoAd-kupa, great wave, and
-kuvOrs, from xveiy, to be big (as with child) ; see Prellwitz.

COLON (1), a mark printed thus (:) to mark off a clause ina
sentence. (Gk.) The word occurs in Blount’s Glossographia, ed.
16743; and in Puttenham, Arte of E. Poesie, bk. ii. c. 5 ; ed. Arber,
p- 88. The mark occurs much earlier, viz. in the first English book
ever printed, Caxton’s Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye, ab. 1474;
leaf 250, back, 1. 7.—Gk. #@Aov, a member, limb, clause; the mark
being so called as marking off a limb or clause of a sentence,

COLON (2), part of the intestines. (Gk.) It occurs in Massinger,
Virgin-Martyr, iii. 3 (Hircius, speech 12); and in Coles’s Dict. 1684.
— Gk. «@Aor, a part of the intestines ; more correctly xoAov (Liddell
and Scott). Der. colic, q. v.

COLONEL, the chief commander of a regiment. (F,—Ital.—L.)
It occurs in Milton, Sonnet on When the Assault was intended to
the City. Massinger has colonelship, New Way to pay Old Debts,
Act iii, sc. 2, [Also spelt coronel, Holland’s Pliny, bk. xxil. c. 235
which is the Spanish form of the word, due to substitution of r for
1, a common linguistic change ; whence also the present pronuncia-
tion curnel, An early example is; * Hee was coronell of the foote-
men, thowghe that tearme in those dayes unuzed ;’ Life of Lord Grey


122 COLONNADE


(Camden Soc.), p. 1; written in 1575, and referring to 1544.J—F.
colonel, colonnel; Cotgrave has: ‘ Colonnel, a colonell or coronell,
the commander of a regiment.’ Introduced from Ital. in the 16th
century (Brachet).=Ital. colonello, a colonel; also a little column.
The colonel was so called because he led the little column or company
at the head of theregiment, ‘La campagnie colonelle, ou la colonelle,
est la premiere compagnie d’un regiment d’infanterie;’ Dict. de
Trevoux, cited by Wedgwood. The Ital. colonello is a dimin. of
Ital. colonna, a column,—L. columna, a column, See Column,
Colonnade. Der. colonel-ship, colonel-cy.

COLONNADE, a row of columns, (F.—Ital.—L.) Spelt
colonade (wrongly) in Bailey’s Dict. vol. ii. ed. 1731.—F. colonnade
(not in Cotgrave). = Ital. colonnata, a range of columns. = Ital. colonna,
a column. =—L. columna, a column. See Column.

COLONY, a body of settlers. (F.—L.) The pl. colonyes is in
Spenser, View of the State of Ireland, Globe ed. p. 614, col. 2;
colonye in Wyclif, Acts xvi. 12.—F. colonie, ‘a colony; ’.Cotgrave.
=—L. colénia, a colony.—L. coldnus, a husbandman, colonist.—L.
colere, to till, cultivate land. Colere is for *quelere ; cf. L. in-quilinus,
a sojourner; Brugm. i. § 121. Allied to Gk. méAopar, I am, Skt.
char, to move. Der. coloni-al; also colon-ise, colonis-at-ion, colon-ist.

COLOPHON, an inscription at the end of a book, giving the
name or date. (Gk.) Used by Warton, Hist. of Eng. Poetry, sect.
33, footnote 2.—Late L. colophdn, a Latinised form of the Gk. word.
—Gk. codAopwr, a summit, top, pinnacle; hence, a finishing stroke.
Allied to Gk. xoAwvn, a hill, L. cel-sus, lofty, and E. hol-m and hill.

COLOPHOWNY, a dark-coloured resin obtained from distilling
turpentine. (L.—Gk.) Spelt colophdnia in Coles’s Dict. ed. 1684.
L. colophénia. Named from Colophén, a city of Asia Minor.=Gk.
kodopwv, a summit; see above.

COLOQUINTIDA ; see Colocynth.

COLOSSUS, a gigantic statue. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. Jul. Ces.
i. 2. 136. Particularly used of the statue of Apollo at Rhodes, —L.
colossus. — Gk. koAooods, a great statue. Lit. ‘lofty;’ allied to Gk.
xodwves, a hill, and to Column, Der. coloss-al ; coloss-eum, also
written colisewm, named from its magnitude (Gibbon).

COLOUR, a hue, tint, appearance. (F.—L.) ME. colur, colour.
* Rose red was his colur ;’? K. Horn, ed. Lumby, 1. 16.—OF. colur,
colour (F. couleur),—L. colérem, acc. of color, colour, tint. Der.
colour, verb, colour-able, colour-ing, colour-less.

COLPORTEHUR, a hawker of wares. (F.—L.) Modern, and
mere French. F. colporteur, one who carries things on his neck and
shoulders. =F. colporter, to carry on the neck. =F. col, the neck ; and
porter, to carry.—L. collum, the neck; and portdre, to carry. See
Collar and Porter. Der. colport-age.

COLT, a young animal, young horse, (E.) Applied in the A.V.
(Gen. xxxii. 15, Zech, ix.g) to the male young of the ass and camel.
ME. colt, a young ass; O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 3, 1. 8.
AS. colt, a young camel, a young ass 3 Gen. xxxii. 15.4-Swed. dial.
kullt, a boy, lad; cf. Swed. kull, a brood, a hatch, Dan. kuld, a brood,
Dan. dial. koliring,a lad. Der. coltish.

COLTER;; see Coulter.

COLUMBINE, the name of a plant. (F.—L.) Lit. ‘ dove-like.’
ME. columbine, Lyric Poems, ed. Wright, p. 26; Prompt. Parv.
p- 88.—OF. colombin, dove-like. Cotgrave gives: ‘Colombin, the
herbe colombine; also colombine or dove-colour, or the stuff whereof
’tis made.’ = Late L. columbina, as in ‘ Hec columbina, a columbyne;’
Voc. 710, 35.—L. columbinus, dove-like; fem. columbina. = L. columba,
a dove ; columbus, a male dove. Perhaps borrowed from Gk. #éAup-
Bos, a diver; cf. xoAvpBis, a diver, sea-bird, 4 The calyx and
corolla resemble doves.

COLUMN, a pillar, body of troops. (L.) Also applied to
a perpendicular set of horizontal lines, as when we speak of a column
of figures, or of printed matter. This seems to have been the
earliest use in English. ‘ Columne of a lefe of a boke, columna;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 88.—L. columna, a column, pillar; allied .to L,
columen, a top, height, summit, culmen, the highest point. Cf. also
collis,a hill, celsus, high. See Colophon, Culminate. (4/ QEL).
Der. column-ar ; also colonnade, q.v.

COLURE, one of two great circles on the celestial sphere at
right angles to the equator and to each other. (L.—Gk.) So named
because a part of them was always beneath the horizon in Greece;
the word means clipped, lit. curtailed, docked. Used by Milton,
P. L. ix. 66.—L. colurus, curtailed; also, a colure.— Gk. #ddAoupos,
dock-tailed, stump-tailed, truncated; as sb., a colure.mGk, xoA-,
stem of «dAos, docked, clipped, stunted; and ovpa, a tail.

COLZA OIL, a lamp-oil made from the seeds of a variety of


cabbage. (F.—L. and Du.) See Webster and Loudon ; colza means.


‘ cabbage-seed,’ and should not be used of the cabbage itself. —F.
colza, better spelt colzat, as in Richelet ; borrowed from the Walloon
colza, golza, Rouchi colsa; see, Remacle and Sigart,—Du, koolzaad,


COMEDY


rape-seed, cole seed, lit. cabbage-seed.—Du. kool, cabbage; zaad,
seed (Littré). The Du. fool is not a Teut. word, but borrowed from
L. caulis; Du. zaad is cognate with E. seed. See Cole and Seed,

COM.-, a common prefix ; the form assumed in composition by the
L. prep. cum, with, when followed by b, f, m, or p. See Con-.

COMA, a deep sleep, trance, stupor. (Gk.) ‘Coma, or Coma
somnolentum, a deep sleep;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. Late L. coma,
a Latinised form of Gk. x@ua, a deep sleep; perhaps allied to Gk,
koinaw, Lputtosleep. See Cemetery, Der. comat-ose, comat-ous ;
from kwpar-, stem of k@pa, gen. kwparos.

COMB, a toothed instrument for cleansing hair. (E.) ME.
camb, comb. Spelt camb, Ormulum, 6340. ‘Hoc pecten, combe ;’
Wright’s Vocab. i. 199. Spelt omb, Polit. Songs, ed, Wright, p. 327.
A cock’s crest is another sense of the same word. ‘ Combe, or other
lyke of byrdys;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 88. It also means the crest of
a hill, of a dyke, or of a wave ; as in ‘ the dikes comb ;’ Genesis and
Exodus, ed. Morris, 2564. In honey-comb, the parallel cells seem to
have been likened to the arrangement of teeth inacomb, AS. camb,
a comb, crest; camb helmes, the crest of a helmet; camb on hette, or
on helme, a crest on the hat or helmet ; see the examples in Bosworth.
+Dnu. kam, a comb, crest; Icel. kambr, a comb, crest, ridge; Dan.
kam, a comb, ridge, cam on a wheel; Swed. kam, a comb, crest ;
OHG, kamb, kambo; MHG, kamp, G. kamm, a comb, crest, ridge,
cog ofa wheel. Teut. type *kamboz; Idg. type *gombhos. B. Per-
haps named from the teeth in it; cf. Gk. yougos, a peg, yaupn,
a jaw; Skt. jambha-s, a tooth; Russ, zub’, a tooth. Allied to O,
Church Slav, zobati, toeat. Brugmann, i. § 138. Der. comb, verb,
comb-er.

COMB, COOMB, a dry measure; 4 bushels. (E.) ‘ Coomb or
Comb, a measure of corn containing four bushels;’ Kersey’s Dict.
ed. 1715. ‘<A coeme (or coome) is halfe a quarter;”’ Tusser, Huse
bandrye, § 17, st. 7. AS. cumb, a liquid measure, in Bosworth; see
Birch, Cart. Saxon. i. 380; Cockayne, Leechdoms, iii. 28.4-Du. kom,
a bowl; Low G. kumm, kump; G. kumme, kumpf, a bowl, deep dish.
@ Coomb is the better.form; cumb became ctimb; cf. room from AS.
rum,

COMBAT, to fight, contend, struggle against. (F.—L.) A verb

in Shak. Much Ado, ii. 3. 170; a sb. in Merry Wives, i. 1. 165. He
also has combatant, Rich. II, i. 3, 117.— OF. combatre, ‘to combate,
fight, bicker, battell;’ Cot.—F. com-, from L. com-, for cum, with ;
and F. battre, from *battere, for L. battuere, to beat, strike, fight. See
Batter. Der. combat, sb., combat-ant (F. combatant, pres, part. of
combatre); combat-ive, combat-ive-ness.
_COMBE,, a hollow in a hill-side. (C.) Common in place-names,
as Farncombe, Hascombe, Compton (for Combe-ton). These names
proye the very early use of the word, but the word is not E.; it
was in use in England beforehand, being borrowed from the Celtic
inhabitants of Britain. AS. cumb; see Birch, Cart. Saxon, i. 290,
= W.cwm [pron. koom], a hollow between two hills, a dale, dingle ;
occurring also in place-names, as in Cwm tychan, i.e. little combe;
Corn, cum, a valley or dingle ; more correctly, a valley opening down
wards, from a narrow point; from Celtic type *kumba, a valley.

COMBINE, to join two things together, unite. (L.) In Shak,
K. John, v. 2. 37. ME. combinen, combynen. ‘ Combynyn, or copulyn,
combino, copulo;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 88. Lydgate has the pp. com-
byned, Minor Poems, p. 61.—L. combinare, to combine, unite ; lit,
to join two things together, or to join by two and two.—L. com-,
for cum, together; and binus, pl. bini, two and two. See Binary,
Der. combin-at-ion, Hamlet, ili. 4,.60., |,

COMBUSTION, a burning, burning up. (F.—L.) In Shak,
Mach, ii. 3, 63. Also combustious, adj., Venus and Adonis, 1162.
Sir T. More has combustible, Works, p. 264d. The astrological
term combust was in early use ; Chaucer, Troil. and Cress. iii. 717.—F,
combustion, ‘a combustion, burning, consuming with fire;? Cot.=—L,
combustidnem, acc. of combustio, a burning; cf. combustus, pp. of
combiirere, to burn up.—L. comb-, for cum, together, wholly; and
wrere, pp. ustus, to burn; the insertion of the b being perhaps due
to association with amb-irere.. Der. From the same source, combust-
ible, combust-ible-ness. :

COME, to move towards, draw near..(E.) ME, cumen, comen,
to come; pt.t.Z cam or com, thu come, he cam or com, we, ye, or
thei comen; pp. cumen, comen, come; very common. AS. cuman,
pt. t. cwOm, com, pp. cumen.4-Du. komen; Icel. koma; Dan. komme ;
Swed. komma; Goth, kwiman; OHG. queman, MHG, komen, G.
kommen. +L. uenire (for * guen-ire or * guem-ire); Gk. Baivew, to
come, go (where 8 is for gw); Skt. gam, to come, go.—4/GwEM,
to come, go. Brugm. i. § 431, Der. come-ly, q.v.

COMEDY, a humorous dramatic piece. (F.—L.—Gk.) Shak,
has comedy, Merry Wives, iii. 5. 76; also comedian, Tw. Nt. i. 5. 194.
Spelt commedy, it occurs in Trevisa, i. 315.— OF. comedie, ‘a comedy,
a play ;’ Cotgrave. = L, cémedia,=— Gk. cwpwdia, a comedy, ludicrous


COMELY


spectacle.=Gk. xwpqdds, a comic actor. Gk. xwyo-, for K@pos,
a banquet, a jovial festivity, festal procession; and dodds, a singer,
from deidev, to sing; a comedy was originally a festive spectacle,
with singing and dancing. For the latter part of the word, see Ode.
Der. comedi-an. Closely related is the adj. comic, from L. cémicus,
Gk. xwpurds, belonging to comedy ; whence, later, comic-al (Levins).
. COMELY, becoming, seemly, handsome. (E.) ME. cumlich,
cumelich, comlich, comli, comeliche. Spelt comeliche, Will. of Palerne,
.ed. Skeat, 963, 987; comly, id. 294. Also used as an ady., id. 660;
but in this sense comlyly also occurs; Chaucer, Book of the Duchess,
848. The comparative was comloker, and the superl. comlokest or
comliest. AS. cymlic, comely, Grein, i. 1773 cymlice, adv, id. B.
According to the account in the N. E. D. (from which I dissent), the
AS. cymlic was formerly cymlic (with y), and was allied to AS. cyme
(formerly cyme?), fine, beautiful; which again is allied to OHG.
cumig, weak, tender, and-to OHG, kim, with difficulty (G. kaum).
Thus the orig.sense was ‘like what is weak or tender;’ but the y
was shortened before ml, and the AS. cymlic was associated with AS.
cuman, to come, and so gained the sense of ‘ becoming,’ pleasing,
decorous, ‘y. But we find AS. cymlicor as early as in Beowulf, 1. 38,
where it practically means ‘stronger;’ and the other examples of
AS. cymlic point to a similar reference to beauty or strength. More-
over, we find MDu. komelick, ‘apt, fit, or conveniable,’ Hexham ;
which is connected with komen, to come. Cf. also Become. I see
no reason for connecting comely with OHG. ciimig; but prefer to
connect it with Come. See Phil. Soc. Trans. 1902, p. 658. Der.
comeli-ness.

COMET, a star with a hair-like tail. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. comete,
Rob. of Glouc. pp. 416, 548.—OF. comete, ‘a comet, or blazing
star;’ Cot. It occurs as early as the 12th century (Hatzfeld).—L.
cométa, cométés, a comet. Gk. xounrns, long-haired ; hence, a comet.
— Gk, «dun, the hair of the head; cognate with L. coma, the same.
Der. comet-ar-y. ta The L. coméia occurs frequently in the AS.
Chron. an. 678, and later. But the later form was due to French
influence; cf. AF. comete, Gaimar, 1433.

COMPIT, a confect, a dry sweetmeat. (F.—L.) In Shak. 1 Hen.
IV, iii. 1. 253. Spelt comfitte, Hall's Chron. Henry VIII, an. 13.
Corrupted from conjit, by the change of x to m before. ME. conjite,
so spelt in Babees Book, ed. Furnivall, p. 121, 1. 75; cf. * Confectio,
confyt,’ Voc. 574. 30.—OF. confit, preserved, prepared, lit. ‘steeped,
confected, fully soaked ;? Cotgrave. This word is the pp. of conjire,
‘to preserve, confect, soake;’ id.=—L. conficere, to’ put together,
procure, supply, prepare, manufacture; pp. confectus; whence Late L.
confecte, fruits preserved with sugar (Ducange), OF. confite, f., a
comfit, also conit,m. (the same); Godefroy.—L. con-, for cum, with,
together; and facere,to make. See Fact. Comfit is a doublet of
confect, q.v. Der. comfit-ure ; see Chaucer, C. T., C 862.

COMFORT, to strengthen, encourage, cheer. (F.—L.) See
Comfort in Trench, Select Glossary. Though the verb is the original
of the sb., the latter seems to have been earlier introduced into Eng-
lish. The ME. verb is conforten, later comforten, by the change of
nto m before f. It is used by Chaucer, Troil. and Cress. iv. 722, v.
234, 1395. [The sb. confort is in Chaucer, Prol. 775, 778 (A 773,
776); but occurs much earlier. It is spelt cunfort in O. Eng. Homi-
lies, ed. Morris, i. 185; kunfort in Ancren Riwle, p. 14.]—OF. con-
forter, to comfort ; spelt cunforter in A. F.; see Vie de St. Auban,
ed. Atkinson, 59, 284.—Late L. confortare, to strengthen, fortify ;
Ducange.=L. con-, for cum, together; and fortis, strong. See Fort.
Der. comfort, sb. ; comfort-able, comfort-abl-y, comfort-less.

COMFREY, the name of a plant. (F.—L.) Spelt comfory,
Book of St. Albans, fol. c 6, back, 1.1; confery in the 14th cent.,
Reliquize Antiquze, i. 55; and in Henslow, Medical Werkes, 46. 10.
(See also comfrey in Britten and Holland’s Plant-Names.)=—OF.
cumsirie ; we find ‘ cumfiria, cumfirie, galloc,’ in a vocab. of the 13th
cent., Voc. 555. 4; also OF. cunfirie, confire in Godefroy, Here
cumfirie is the OF. name, galloc the AS. name, and cumfiria, the
Late L. name; the last appears to be merely the OF, name Latin-
ised. We even find the F. form consire in Cotgrave, explained as
‘the herbe comfrey ;’ but this may be an error for confire. [The
mod. F. name is consoude (cf. Span. consuelda, Ital. consolida), derived
from L. consolidaire, from its supposed healing powers.| B. The
OF. cumfirie or cunfirie appears to be a corruption of L, conferua,
comfrey, Pliny, xxvii. 8. [Another Late L. name was confirma ; we
find ‘confirma, galluc,’ in the Durham Glossary, pr. in Cockayne’s
Leechdoms, iii. 301 ; and at p, 162 of vol. i. we learn that the plant
was called confirma or galluc. Halliwell gives ‘ galloc, comfrey.’
Perhaps the change from conferva or confirma to cumpirie was due
to some confusion with F. conjire (L. conjicere), ‘to preserve, confect,
soake, or steep in;’ Cotgrave.] y. If this be right, the derivation
is either from L. conferuére, to heal, grow together, said of broken


limbs (Celsus) ; or from L. confirmdare, to strengthen, from its healing |}


. COMMINGLE 123


powers; see Cockayne’s Leechdoms, i. pref. p. liii, and cf. the Gk.
name ovppurTorv.

COMIC, COMICAL; see under Comedy,

COMITY, urbanity, (L.) Not very common, £Comity, gentle-
ness, courtesie, mildness;’ Blount, Glossographia, ed. 1674. Not
from F,, but directly from L., the suffix -i/y being employed by
analogy with words ending in F. -ité, from L, -itdtem. — L. cOmitatem,
acc. of cOmitas, urbanity.—L. cdmis, friendly, courteous,

COMMA, a mark of punctuation, written thus (,), (L.—Gk.)
‘The shortest pause . . they called comma;’ Puttenham, Arte of EF.
Poesie, bk. iv. c. iv (v); ed. Arber, p. 88. In Hamlet, v. 2. 42.5
L. comma, a separate clause of a sentence.=Gk. «dupa, that which
is struck, a stamp, a clause of a sentence, a comma that marks off
the clause. = Gk. xém-rev, to hew, strike.

COMMAND, to order, enjoin. (F.—L.) ME. commanden,
comanden, Chaucer, C. T., B 4270; Cursor Mundi, 6809.—OF. com-
mander, comander, = Late L. commandare, a new compound, with the
sense of L. mandére, to command ; confused with and partly replacing
L. commenddre, to commend, also (in Late L.) to command. =L,
com-, for eum, together with; mandare, to put into the hands of,
entrust, command, See Mandate, Der. command, sb. ; commands
er, -er-ship ; command-ing, -ing-ly; command-ment (I. commandement),
whence ME. commandement, in O. Eng. Misc., ed. Morris, p. 33, and
command-e-ment, quadrisyllabic, in Spenser, F.Q. i. 3. 93 command-
ant, (F. command-ant, pres. pt. of commander); also command-eer
(Du. kommanderen, to force into military service, from F. commander),
And see Commodore.

COMMEMORATEH, to celebrate with solemnity. (L.) Cockeram
(in 1642) has: ‘ Commemorate, to rehearse or make mention.’=L,.
commemordat-us, pp. of commemordre, to call to mind.—L. com-, for
cum, together; and memordre, to mention, from memor, mindful.
See Memory. Der. commemorat-ion, -ive.

COMMENCES, to begin. (F.—L.) In Shak, Macb. i. 3. 133.
The contracted form comsen (for comencen) occurs frequently in ME. ;
see P. Plowman, B, i. 161, iii. 103. The sb. commencement was in
early use; O. Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 30.— OF. comencer, com-
mencer, commencier (Supp. to Godefroy). [Rightly with one m; cf,
Ital. cominciare.|—L. com-, for cum, together ; initiare, to begin,
from initium, a beginning, See Initiate, Der. commence-ment.

COMMEND, to commit, entrust to, praise. (L.) ‘It shal com-
mende;’ Wyclif, Isaiah x. 28 ; where the Vulgate has commendabit.
=—L. commendare, to entrust, commit to.—L. com-, for cum, with;
and mandare, to put into the hands of; see Command, Der. com-
mend-at-ion (see Kom. Rose, 4887), -able, -abl-y, -able-ness, -at-or-y.

COMMENSURATE, co-extensive, of equal extent. (L.) ‘ Com-
mensurate, of the same or equal measure ;’ Glossographia Anglicana
(1719). Sir T. Brown has it as a verb; ‘ Yet can we not thus com-
mensurate the sphere of Trismegistus ;’ Vulgar Errors, bk, vii. c. 3,
end. =—L. commensuratus, as if the pp. of *commensirare, to measure
in comparison with. = L.com-, for cum, together; mensiirare,tomeasure,
from mensiira,a measure; see Measure. Der. commensurate, adj. ,
-ly, -ness 3 commensur-able, -abl-y, -abil-i-ty.

COMMENT, to make a note upon. (F.—L.) In As You Like
It, ii. 1,65. The pl. sb. commentes is in Sir T. More, Works, p. 152 c;
and in Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, bk. i. c. 14. § 10.—F. com-


|. menter, ‘to comment, to write commentaries, to expound ;’ Cot. =


Late L. commentare, for L. commentari, to reflect upon, consider,
explain. —L. commentus, pp. of comminisci, to devise, invent, design.
=L, com-, for cum, with; and the base -min-, seen in me-muin-i,
a reduplicated perfect of an obsolete verb *men-ere, to call to mind ;
with the inceptive deponent suffix -sci.—4/ MEN, to think ; cf. Skt.
man, to think, Brugmann,i.§ 431. See Mental. Der. comment,
sb., comment-ar-y, comment-at-or,

COMMERCE, trade, traffic. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, iii. I. I1o.
[ Also formerly in use as a verb; see Milton, Il Penseroso, l. 39.) =
F. commerce, m., ‘commerce, intercourse of traffick, familiarity ;’
Cot. =L. commercium, commerce, trade.—L. com-, for cum, with ;
and merc-, for merx, goods, wares, merchandise, with suffix -i-um,
See Merchant, Der. commerci-al, commerci-al-ly; both from L,
commerci-um. 3

COMMINATION, a threatening, denouncing. (F.—L.) ‘The
terrible comminacion and threate;’ Sir T, More, Works, p. 897 f.—F.
commination, ‘a. commination, an extreme or vehement threatning 3”
Cot.—L, commindatidnem, acc. of commindatio, a threatening, menacing ;
cf. commindtus, pp. of comminari, to threaten. = L. com-, for cum, with ;
and mindri, to threaten. See Menace. Der, commina-tor-y, from
L. inf. comminirz.

COMMINGLE, to mix together. (Hybrid; L. and E.) Also
comingle; Shak. has comingled or commingled, Hamlet, ili. 2. 74-
An ill-coined word; made by prefixing the L. co- or com- (for cum,
with) to the E, word mingle, See Mingle; and see Commix.


124 COMMINUTION
COMMINUTION, a reduction to small fragments. (L.) Bacon


has comminution, Nat. Hist. § 799. Sir T. Browne has comminuible,
Vulgar Errors, b. ii. c. 5. § 1. [The verb comminute is later, and
due to the sb.; it occurs in Pennant’s Zoology, The Gilt Head.]
Formed on the model of F. sbs. in -ion, from L. comminiitus, pp. of
comminuere, to break into small pieces; (easily imitated from L.
miniilidnem, acc. of miniitio, a diminishing, allied to minitus, pp. of
minuere, to make smaller).—L. com-, for cum, together; and muinuere,
to make smaller, diminish. See Minute. Der. comminute, verb.

COMMISERATION, a feeling of pity for, compassion. (F.—
L.) In Shak. L. L. L. iv. 1.64. We also find the verb commiserate ;
Drayton, Dudley to Lady Jane Grey,1.98. Bacon has ‘ commiserable
persons ;’ Essay 33, Of Plantations. I’. commiseration, ‘commisera-
tion, compassion ;’? Cot. —L. commiserdtidnem, acc. of commiseratio, a
part of an oration intended to excite pity (Cicero) ; cf. commiseratus,
pp- of commiserari, to endeavour to excite pity.—L. com-, for cum,
with; and miserari, to lament, pity, commiserate, from miser,
wretched, deplorable. See Miserable. Der. from the same
source, commiserate, verb.

COMMISSARY, an officer to whom soniething is entrusted. (L.)
€Specyall commyssaries ;’ Fabyan, ed. Ellis, p. 549. ‘The emperor’s
commisaries answere, made at the diett;’ Burnet, Rec. pt. iii. b. v.


/no. 32 (R.) We also find commisariship in Foxe’s Martyrs, p. 1117,
‘an. 1544 (R.)—Late L. commissdrius, one to whom anything is
‘entrusted (F. commissaire); Ducange.—L. commissus, pp. of com-


mittere, to commit. See Commit,
commissary-ship.

COMMISSION, trust, authority, &c. (F.—L.) In Chaucer,
Prol. 315.—F. commission, ‘a commission, or delegation, a charge,
mandate ;’ Cot.—L. commissidnem, acc. of commissio, the commence-
ment of a play or contest, perpetration; in Late L., a commission,
mandate, charge (Ducange); cf. commissus, pp. of ¢ommittere, to
commit. See Commit. Der. commission-er.

COMMIT, to entrust to, consign, do. (L.) ‘Thanne shul ye
committe the kepyng of your persone to your trewe frendes that been
approued and y-knowe;’ Chaucer, Tale of Melibeus (Six-text),
Group B, 1. 2495.—L. committere, pp. commissus, to send out, begin,
entrust, consign, commit.—L. com-, for cum, with; and mittere, to
send. See Missile. Der. commit-ment, committ-al, committ-ee ;
also (like pp. commussus), commissary, q.v.; and commission, q. Vv.

COMMIX, to mix together. (Hybrid; L. and E.) ‘ Commyxt
with moold and flynt;’ Palladius on Husbandry, bk. ii. st. 21; cf.
bk. ili, st. 3: A coined word; made by prefixing L. com- (for cum,
with) to E. mix. See Mix, and Commingle. Der. commixture,
which is, however, zof a hybrid word, the sb. mixture being of L.
origin, from L, mixtuira or mistira, a mixing, mixture; it occurs in
Shak. L. L. L. v. 2. 296. He also has commixtion (MF. commistion,
Cot.: from L. commistionem, acc. of commistio, a mixing, mixture) ;
but it occurs earlier, spelt comyxtioun, in Trevisa, ii. 159; see Spec.
of Eng. ed. Morris and Skeat, p. 241, 1. 161.

COMMODIOUS, comfortable, useful, fit. (F.—L.) Spelt com-
modiouse in Palladius on Husbandry, bk. ii. st. 22. Englished from
OF. commodieux (Godefroy). — Late L. commodidsus, useful; Ducange.
Formed with suffix -dsws from commodi-, for L. commodus, convenient ;
lit. in good measure.—L. com-, for cum, together; and modus,
measure. See Mode. Der. commodious-ly, commodious-ness; from
the same source, commod-ity; also commode, which is the F. form of
L. commodus.

COMMODORE, the commander of a squadron. (Du.—F.—L.)
* Commodore, a kind of admiral, or commander in chief of a squadron
of ships at sea;” Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. Applied to Anson, who
died A.D. 1762 ; it occurs in Anson’s Voyage, b.i.c.1. First used
in the time of Will. IIT., and spelt commandore (N. E. D.) = Du. com-
mandeur; ‘den Commandeur van een Stadt, the Commandeur of
a Towne;’ (Hexham). This shows that E. commandeur, in the
sense of ‘ commander,’ is as early as 1658. —F. commandeur.—L. acc.
type *commandatorem ; from Late L. commandire; see Command.

COMMON, public, general, usual, vulgar. (F.—L.) ME.
commun, comun, comoun, comon, comune. Spelt commun, Rob. of
Glouc. p. 541, 1. 11215.—OF. commun. —L. commiinis, general. =L.
com-, for cum, with ; and minis, complaisant, obliging, ready to
serve (Plautus). Cf. L. miinus, service. (As if ‘serving each other.’)
Cf. also Lith. mainas, Russ. miena, barter. Brugm. i. § 208. Der.
common-ly, common-ness, common-er, common-al-ty, common-place (see
place), common-weal, common-wealth (see weal, wealth) ; s. pl. commons.
Also, from L. commiinis, we have commun-ion, commun-ist, commun-i-ly ;
and see commune.

COMMOTION, a violent movement. (F.—L.) Spelt com-
mocion ; Sir T. More, Works, p. 43 f.—F. commotion, ‘a commotion,
tumult, stirre;’ Cot. — L. commétidnem, acc. of commatio, a commotion.
= L. com-, for cum, with; and mdtio, motion. See Motion,


Der. commisari-al, commisari-at,


COMPATIBLE


COMMUNE, to converse, talk together. (F.—L.) ME. comunen,
‘With suche hem liketh to comune;’ Gower, C. A. i. 643 bk. i.
1.651. Also communien ; spelt communy, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 102.
“Y ne shal nou3t commune wyth;’ Early E. Prose Psalter, Ps. cx].
(cxli.) 5 ; where the Vulgate has zon communicabo.— OF. communier,
to communicate. — L. commiinicare, to communicate, pp. comminiciitus.
=—L. communis, common. See Common. @ Partly also from OF,
communer, to have in common. Der. From the L. communicare we
also have communicate,a doublet of commune; communicant (pres. part.
form); communicat-ive, -ive-ness, -ion, -or-y; communica-ble, -bl-y.

COMMUTE, to exchange. (L.) In Bp. Taylor, Liberty of Pro-
phesying, s. 19 (R.) The sb. commutation is in Strype’s Records,
no. 23 (R.) The adj. commutative (F. commutatif ) is in Sir T. Elyot,
The Governour, b. ili. c. 1. § 3.—L. commutare, to exchange with. —
L. com-, for cum, with; and miétare, to. change, pp. mutatus. See
Mutable. Der. commut-able, -abil-i-ty, -at-ion, -at-ive, ~at-ive-ly,

COMPACT (1), adj., fastened or put together, close, firm. (F.—L.)
‘ Compacte, as I mought say, of the pure meale or floure;’ Sir T.
Elyot, The Governour, b. i. c. 14. § 5.— MF. compacte, ‘ compacted,
well set, knit, trust [trussed], pight, or joined together ;’” Cot.—L.
compactus, well set, joined together, pp. of compingere, to join or put
together. = L. com-, for cum, with ; and pangere, to fasten, plant, set,
fix, pp. pactus. See Pact. Der. compact, verb; compact-ly, -ed-ly,
-ness, -ed-ness ; and see below.

COMPACT (2), sb., a bargain, agreement. (L.) In Shak. gen.
accented compact, As You Like It, v. 4. 5.—L. compactum, an agree-
ment.—L. compactus, pp. of compacisci, to agree with. = L. com-, for
cum, with ; and pacisci, to covenant, make a bargain; formed from
an old verb pac-ere, with inceptive suffix -sc-z. See Pact.

COMPANY, an assembly, crew, troop. (F.—L.) ME. companie,
companye, in early use; see An Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris,
p- 138, l. 709.—OF, companie, compaignie, compagnie, company,
association (cf. OF, compain, a companion, associate; also OF.
compainon, companion, a companion).—Late L. companiem, acc. of
companiés, a company, a taking of meals together; cf. Late L.
compdnis, victuals eaten along with bread.=—L. com-, for cum, with ;
and panis, bread. See Pantry. Der. compani-on; whence com-
panion-ship, -able, -abl-y, -less ; also ac-company, q. V.

COMPARE, to set things together, in order to examine points of
likeness or difference. (F.—L.) In Shak. K. John, i. 79. Spelt
comper in Barbour, Bruce, i. 403. [The sb. comparison is in early use;
see Chaucer, C. T. Group E. 666, 817 (Clerk’s Tale).]—OF. com-
perer; F. comparer; Cot.—L.comparare, pp. comparatus, to couple
together, to match, compare. = L. compar, like, equal. —L. com-, tor
cum, together; and par, equal. See Par. 4 Distinct from L. com-
pardre, to acquire, a derivative of pardare, to prepare; see compare in
Spenser, F.Q. i. 4. 28, Der. compar-able, comparat-ive, -ive-ly ; also
compar-ison, from F . comparaison (Cotgrave), which from L. compara-
tidnem, acc. of comparatio, a comparing.

COMPARTMENT, a separate division of an enclosed space.
(F.—Ital.—L.) In Florio’s Ital. Dict. (1598). ‘In the midst was
placed a large compartment ;’ Carew, A Masque at Whitehall, an.
1633 (R.)—F. compartiment, ‘a compartement,... a partition;’
Cot.—Ital. compartimento, ‘a compartment, a partition;’ Florio. —
Ital. compartire, Late L. compartire, to divide, partition; Ducange. —
L. com-, for cum, with, together; and partire, to divide, part, share,
from L, parti-, declensional stem of pars, a part. See Part.

COMPASS, a circuit, circle, limit, range. (F.—L.) ME. compas,
cumpas, of which a common meaning was ‘a circle.’ § As the point
in a compas’ =like the centre within a circle; Gower, C.A. ili. 92;
bk. vii. 229. ‘In manere of compas’=like a circle ; Chaucer, C. T.,
A 1889.—F. compas, ‘a compasse, a circle, a round ; also, a paire of
compasses ;’ Cot. Late L. compassus, a circle, circuit; cf. Late L.
compassare, to encompass, to measure a circumference. — L. com-, for
cum, together; and passus, a pace, step, track, or in Late L.a passage,
way, pass, route: whence the sb, compassus, a route that comes
together, or joins itself, a circuit (?). See Pace, Pass. @ But there
is much doubt as to the history of the senses of Late L. compassus and
compassare. Der. compass, verb, Gower, C. A. i. 173, bk. ii. 409;
Polit. Songs, p. 202 (ab. 1308) ; (a pair of) compass-es, an instrument
for drawing circles.

COMPASSION, pity, mercy. (F.—L.) ME. compassioun,
Chaucer, C.T., B 659.—OF. compassion; which Cotgrave translates
by ¢ compassion, pity, mercie.’ = L. compassiOnem, acc. of compassio,
sympathy; cf. compassus, pp. of compati, to suffer together with, to
feel compassion. = L. com-, for cum, together with ; and pati, to suffer.
See Passion. Der. compassion-ate (Tit. Andron. ii, 3.217; Rich. II,
i, 3. 174); compassion-ate-ly, -ate-ness. Shak. has also the verb to
compassion, Tit. Andron. iv. 1,124. And see compat-i-ble.

COMPATIBLE (often followed by WITH), that can bear
with, suitable with or to. (F.—L.) Formerly used without with;


COMPATRIOT


‘not repugnant, but compatible ;’ Sir T, More, Works, p. 485 d.=—F.
compatible, ‘compatible, concurrable; which can abide, or agree
together ;’ Cot.— Late L. compatibilis, used of a benefice which could
be held together with another.—L, compati-, for compati, to suffer
or endure together with; with passive suffix +bilis.—L. com-, for
cum, together with; and pati, tosuffer, Seeabove. Der. compatibl-y ;
compati-bili-ty (F. compatibilité, as if from a L, acc. *compatibilitatem).

COMPATRIOT, of the same country. (F.—L.) ‘One of our
compatriots ;’ Howell’s Letters, b. i, s. 1. letter 15 (1619).—MF,
compatriote, * one’s countryman ;’ Cot.= Late L. compatridta, a com-
patriot (Lewis).—L. com-, for cum, together with; and patridta,
a native, from patria, one’s native soil, fem. of the adj. patrius,
paternal (the subst. terra, land, being understood) ; from L, patri-,
declensional stem of pater, father. See Patriot, @ TheL. patridta
is an imitation of the Gk. marpiwrns, a fellow-countryman ; from Gk,
matpia, a lineage, allied to matnp, father.

COMPERER, a fellow, equal, associate. (F.—L.) ME. comper.
‘ His freend and his compeer ;? Chaucer, C. T. prol, A 670 (672). —
OF. *comper, a word not found, but probably in use as an equivalent
of the L, compar 3 the OF. per (whence E. peer) is very common. =
L. compar, equal; also, an equal, a comrade.—L. com-, for cum,
together with; and par, an equal, a peer. See Peer, @ The F.
compére, a gossip, godfather, is quite a different word; it stands for
L. com-pater, i.e, a godfather.

COMPEL,, to urge, drive on, oblige. (F.—L.) ME. compellen ;
the pp. compelled occurs in Trevisa, i. 247; ii. 159; see Spec. of
English, ed. Morris and Skeat, p. 241, 1. 166.—AF. compeller, Stat.
of the Realm, i, 375 (1362); OF. compeller, — L. compellere, to compel,
lit. to drive together ; pp. compulsus. — L. com-, for cum, together; and
pellere, to drive. See Pulsate, Der. compell-able; also compuls-ion
(K, John, ii. 218) 3 compuls-ive, -ive-ly, -or-y, -or-i-ly, all like the L.
pp- compulsus.

COMPENDIOUS, brief, abbreviated. (F.—L.) In Sir T. Elyot,
The Goyernour, b, ii. c. 2, last section. The adv. compendiously is in
the Romaunt of the Rose, 1, 2346. Adapted from OF. compendieux
(Palsgrave, p, 308).—L. compendidsus, reduced to a small compass,
compendious. = L, compendi-um, an abbreviation, abridgement ; with
suffix -dsus ; the lit, sense of compendium is a saving, sparing from
expense. L. com-, for cum, with ; and pendere, to weigh, to esteem
of value, See Pension, Der. compendious-ly, The L. compendium
is also in use in English,

COMPENSATE, to reward, requite suitably, (L.) § Who are
apt ...to think no truth can compensate the hazard of alterations ;’
Stillingfleet, vol. ii, sermon I (R.) Compensation is in Shak. Temp.
iv. 1, 2. [The ME. form was compensen, uséd by Gower, C. A. i. 365
(bk. iii. 2554), now obsolete: borrowed from F, compenser, from L.
compensare. |=. compensatus, pp. of compensare, to reckon or weigh
one thing against another.—L. com-, for cum, together with; and
pensare, to weigh, frequentative form of pendere, to weigh, pp. pensus.

ee Pension. Der. compens-at-ion, compens-at-or-y.

COMPETE, to vie with another, contend in rivalry. (L.)
Little used till lately, though found as early as 1620 (N. E. D.) Coles
(1684) has competize instead of it, Englished from L, competere
(below). See Petition.

COMPETENT, fit, suitable, sufficient. (F.—L.) *¢ Competente
salarye;’ Gesta Romanorum, ed, Herrtage; c.lxi. p. 257. Also in
Shak. Hamlet, i, 1, 90, Cf. competence, 2 Hen. IV, v. 5. 70; com-
petency, Cor. i. 1. 143.—F. competent, ‘ competent, sufficient, able,
full, convenient ;’ Cot, Properly pres. part. of the F, verb competer,
‘to be sufficient for ;” id.—L. competere, to solicit, to be suitable or
fit. L. com-, for cum, with; and petere, to fly to, seek, Der, com-
petent-ly, competence, competenc-y,

COMPETITOR, one who competes with another, a rival. (L.)
In Shak. Two Gent. ii. 6. 35, [Competition occurs in Bacon, Hist.
of Henry VII, ed, Lumby, p. 8,1. 23. The verb to compete came
into general use later. |= L. competitor, a fellow-candidate for an office.
-—L. com-, for cum, together with; and pefitor, a candidate; cf.
peti-tus, pp. of petere, to fall, fly towards, seek 3; with suffix -tor of the
agent.—4/ PET, to fly, fall; cf. Skt. pat, to fly, Gk. wéropas, I fly;
and see Feather, Pen (1). Der, From the same source, competit-
ive, competit-ion; and see compete, competent,

COMPILE, to get together, collect, compose. (F.—L.) * As I
finde in a bok compiled ;’ Gower, C. A, iii. 48; bk. vi, 1382.—OF.
compiler, of which Cotgrave gives the pp. compilé, which he explains
by ‘compiled, heaped together ;’ but the word is quite distinct from
pile, a pillar or heap.—L. compilare, pp. compildtus, to plunder,
pillage, rob; so that the word had at first a sinister meaning. =L.
com-, for cum, with; and pilare, only with the sense ‘ to thrust,’
perhaps allied to L. pilum, a javelin; see Pile (3). [Not the same
word as pildre, to deprive of hair.| Der. compil-er ; also compilation,
from F compilation, which from L. compilatidnem, acc. of compilatio,


COMPLINE 125


_COMPLACENT, gratified; lit. pleasing. (L.) Complacence is
in Milton, P. L. ili. 2763 viii. 433. Complacent first appears about
1767: ‘with complacent smile;’ Jago, Edgehill, bk. iv. ]. 104.—L.
complacent-, stem of complacens, pres. pt. of complacére, to please. = L.
com-, for cum, with; and placére, to please. See Please, Der.
complacent-ly, complacence, complacenc-y. Doublet, complaisant, q. V.

COMPLAIN, to lament, express grief, accuse. (F,—L.) In
Chaucer, C. T, 6340 (D 758); Troil. and Cress. iv. 1170. —OF, com-
plaign-, a stem of complaindre, ‘to plaine, complaine;’ Cot. Late
L, complangere, to bewail.—L. com-, for cum, with ; and plangere, to
bewail. See Plaint, Der. complain-ant (for complaignant, F. pres.
part.), complaint (F. past part.),

COMPLAISANT, pleasing, obliging. (F.—L.) Used by
Cowley, on Echo, st. 2.—F, complaisant, * obsequious, observant,
soothing, and thereby pleasing; ’ Cotgrave, Pres. pt, of verb com=
plaire, to please. = L. complacére, to please. Complaisant is a doublet
of complacent, q.v. Der. complaisance, in Dryden, Kind Keeper, iy. 1.

COMPLEMENT, that which completes; full number, (L.)
‘The complement of the sentence following ;’? Sir T. More, Works,
P- 954 b.—L. complémentum, that which serves tocomplete, Formed
with suffix -mentum from the verb complé-re, to complete. See
Complete. Der. complement-al, used by Prynne, Sovereign Power
of Parliaments, pt. i.; but in old books it is often another spelling
of complimental; see Shak. Troil, iii. 1. 42, ] Complement is a
doublet of (Ital.) compliment; the distinction in spelling is of late
date. See complement in Schmidt, Shak. Lexicon, See Compli-
ment.

COMPLETE, perfect, full, accomplished. (L.) The verb is
formed from the adjective. ‘The fourthe day compleet fro none to
none ;’ Chaucer, C. T, 9767 (E 1893).—L. complétus, pp. of com-
plere, to fulfil, fill up.—L. com-, for cum, with, together; and plére,
to fill, See Plenary. Der. complete, verb; complete-ly, -ness, com-
plet-ion; also complement, q.v.; compliment, q.v. Complete, verb, is
a doublet of comply, q.v.; and see compline.

COMPLEX, intricate, difficult. (L.) In Locke, Of Human
Understanding, b. ii, c. 12.—L, complexus, entwined round, hence,
intricate; pp. of complecti, to embrace.=—L. com-, for cum, together;
and plectere, to plait, allied to plicdre, to twine, whence E. plait.
See Plait. Der. complex-i-ty; and see complex-ion, complic-ate,
complic-ity.

COMPLEXION, texture, outward appearance. (F.—L.) ‘Of
his complexion he was sanguin;’ Chaucer, C.T., A 333.—OF,
(and mod. F.) complexion, complexion, appearance. = L. complexidnent,
acc. of complexio, a comprehending ; in Late L., a habit of the body,
complexion; cf. complexus, pp. of complecti, to embrace, twine
around.=L. com-, for cum, with; and plectere, to plait (above).
Der. complexion-ed, -al.

COMPLIANCE, COMPLIANT; see Comply,

COMPLICATHE, to render complex. (L.) Complicate was
originally used as an adj., as in: ‘though they are complicate in fact,
yet are they separate and distinct in right;’ Bacon, Of a War with
Spain (R.) Milton has complicated, P.L. x. 523.—L. complicatus,
pp. of complicare, to plait together, entangle.—L. com-, for cum,
together ; and plicare, to fold. Cf, Complex, Der, complic-at-ion ;
and see complicity.

COMPLICITY, the state of being an accomplice. (F.—L.)
‘ Complicity, a consenting or partnership in evil;’ Blount’s Glosso-
graphia, ed. 1674. [Not much used formerly; but complice, i.e.
accomplice, was common, though now less in use; see Shak. Rich. I,
ii. 3. 165.) —F. complicite, ‘a conspiracy, a bad confederacy ;’ Cot.
=F. complice, ‘a complice, confederate, companion in a lewd action;’
Cot.—L. complicem, acc. of complex, adj., confederate with, lit. inter-
woven.—L, com-, for cum, together, and plicdre, to fold, See
Accomplice and Plait. j

COMPLIMENT, compliance, courtesy. (F. —Ital.—Span.—L.)
Often spelt complement in old edd.; see Shak. Merry Wives, iv. 2. 5 5
Tw. Nt. iii. 1, 110 (where the First Folio has complement in both
places) ; and editors systematically make the same alteration in other
books.=—F, compliment, introduced in the 16th cent. from Ital.
(Brachet). Ital. complimento, compliment, civility. Formed, by help
of the suffix -mento, from the verb compli-re, to fill up, fulfil, suit. =
MSpan. complir, to fit, to furnish, See Comply. Complement
is the Lat, spelling of the same word. Der, compliment, verb; com-
pliment-ar-y. Compliment is also a doublet of compliance ; see Comply.

COMPLINE, the last church-service of the day. (F.—L.)
ME. complin, Chaucer, C.T., 4169 (A 4171); Cursor Mundi, 25609..
Complin is an adj. form (cf, culver-in, flor-in), as in complin song.
The phr. compling (for complin) song is in Douglas’s tr. of Virgil.
Prol. to bk. xiii. 1. 35. The sb. is complie, or cumplie, Ancren Riwle,
p- 24.—OF. complie (mod. F. complies, which is the plural of complie).
=Late L. compléta, compline; the fem. of L. complétus, completes


126 COMPLOT


See Complete. f Compléta (sc. hora) ; because it completed the
‘hours’ of the daily service.

COMPLOT, a conspiracy. See Plot (1).

COMPLY, to yield, assent, agree, accord. (Ital. —Span.—L.) In
Shak. to comply with is to be courteous or formal ; Hamlet, ii. 2. 3995
vy. 2.195. Cf. Oth. i. 3. 264. Milton has comply, Sams. Agon. 1408 ;
also compliant, P. L. iv. 332; compliance, P. L, viii. 603. [The word
is closely connected with compliment, and may even have been formed
by striking off the suffix of that word (see Skinner). It has no doubt
been much influenced by ply and pliant, but is of quite a different
origin. It is not of French, but of Italian origin.] Ital. complire, to
fill up, to fulfil, to suit ; also ‘to use or accomplish all complements ;’
Florio. —MSpan. complir, now cumplir, ‘to fit, furnish, accomplish,’
Minsheu; the true Ital. form being compire.—L. complére, to fill up,
complete. See Complete. ¢- Thus comply is really a doublet of
complete. Der. compli-ant, compli-ance; false formations, imitating

pliant, appliance.

COMPONENT, composing. (L.) Sometimes used as a sb.,
but generally as an adjective, with the sb. part. ‘The components of
judgments;* Digby, Of Man’s Soul, c. 10, § Io (A.D. 1645).—L.
component-, stem of compdnens, pres. part. of componere, to compose.
See Compound (1).

COMPORT, to agree, suit, behave. (F.—L.) ‘Comports not with
what is infinite;’ Daniel, A Defence of Rhyme, § 8, ed. 1603 (R.)
Spenser has comportance, i.e. behaviour, F.Q. ii. 1. 29. —F. comporter,
to endure, beare, suffer;’Cotgrave. He also gives ‘se comporter,
to carry, bear, behave, maintaine or sustaine himselfe.’—Late L.
comportare, to behave; L. comportare, to carry or bring together. =
L. com-, for cum, with; and portare, to carry. See Port (1).

COMPOSE, to compound, make up, arrange, soothe. (F.—L.
and Gk.) In Shak, Temp. iii. 1. 9 ; and somewhat earlier. ‘ [He]
composed and made a lampe;’ Caxton, Troy-book, leaf 206, -back.
[Cf ME. compounen; to compose; Chaucer's tr. of Boethius, bk. iii.
met. 9. 6,]—F. composer, ‘ to compound, make, frame, dispose, order,
digest ;? Cot.=<F. com-, from L. com-, for cum, with; and poser, to
place, pose. See Pose. B. Not derived from L. componere, though
used in the same sense, but from L. com- and pausare, which is quite
distinct from ponere. Der. compos-er ; compos-ed, -ed-ly, -ed-ness ;
compos-ure; and see below. And see Compound (1).

COMPOSITION, an agreement, a composing. (F.—L.) ‘ By
forward and by composicioun ;’ Chaucer, C.T., A 848.—F. com-
position, ‘a composition, making, framing, &c.; Cot.—L. com-
positidnem, acc. of compositio, a putting together; cf. compositus, pp.
of componere, to put together, compose. See Compound (1).
Der. Hence also composit-or, composite; compost.

COMPOST, a mixture, composition, manure. (F.—L.) ‘ Com-
postes and confites’=condiments and comfits ; Babees Boke, ed.
Furnivall, p. 121, 1. 75. Shak. has compost, Hamlet, iii. 4. 151 ;
and composture, Timon, iv. 3. 444.—OF. composte, f., ‘a condiment,
or composition, « . « also pickle;’ Cot. Also OF. compost, m. a
mixture (Godefroy).—L. compositus, mixed, pp. of compénere, to
eompose. See below. Thus compost is a doublet of composite ;
see above.

COMPOUND (1), to compose, ‘mix, settle. (L.) The d is
merely excrescent. ME. componen, compounen; componeth is in Gower,
C. A. iii. 138; bk. vii. 1590. Chaucer has compounen, tr. of Boethius,
bk. iii. met. 9. 6.—L. compdnere, to compose.—L. com-, for cum,
together; and ponere, to put, lay; a contraction of po-sinere, lit. ‘to
set behind;’ whence the old pt. t. postuz, Plautus, Pseudolus, v. 1. 35.
See Site. Brugm. i. § 240. Der. compound, adj., short for com-
poun-ed, pp. of ME. compounen (above) ; whence compound, sb. ;-and
see compose,

COMPOUND (2), the enclosure in which an Anglo-Indian house
or factory stands. (Malay.) See the discussion and exx. in Yule. —
Malay kampong, ‘an enclosure, « « « a fenced village; a collection
of buildings;’ Marsden (1812).

COMPREHEND, to seize, grasp. (L.) ME. comprehenden,
Chaucer, C. T. 10537 (F 223).—L. comprehendere, to grasp.—L.
com-, for cum, with; and prehendere, to seize. B. Prehendere is com-
pounded of L. pre, beforehand, and hendere, to seize, get, an obsolete
verb cognate with Gk. yavddaveyv and with E. get. See Prehensile,
Get. Der. comprehens-ive, -ly, -ness; comprehens-ible, -ibl-y, -ible-ness,
-ibil-i-ty, -ion; alllike comprehens-us, pp. of comprehendere. Doublet,
comprise.

COMPRESS, to press together. (F.—L.) Used by Ralegh, Hist.
of the World, b. i. c. 2. s. 7 (R.) Not in Shak. ‘With his chekys
compressyd;’ Monk of Evesham, ed. Arber, p. 23. —OF. compresser
(Godefroy); not in Cotgrave. [The sb. compress in the sense of
‘bandage’ is also French. Cotgrave gives : ‘ Compresse, a boulster,
pillow, or fold of linnen, to bind up, or lay on, a wound.’)—L. com-
pressare, to oppress; Tertullian. = L. com-, for cum, with; and pressdre,


CONCEDE


to press; which from pressus, pp. of premere, to press. See Press (1).
Der. compress, sb.; compress-ible, -ibil-i-ty, -ion, -ive. _-

COMPRISE, to comprehend. (F.—L.) ‘ The substance of the
hole sentence is herin comprised;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Governour,
b. ic. 13,§ 10. The pt.t. comprisit occtrs in The King’s Quair,
st. 28.—OF. (and F.) compris, also comprins. Burguy gives the form
compris as well. as: comprins; but Cotgrave only gives the latter,
which he explains by ‘comprised, comprehended.’ Compris is the
shorter-form of comprins, old: pp. of F. comprendre, to comprehend.
—L. comprehendere, to comprehend, Thus comprise is a doublet of
comprehend, q.v. Der. compris-al.

COMPROMISE, a settlement by concessions. (F.—L.) Shak.
has both sb. and verb; Merry Wives, i. 1.33; Merch.i. 3.79. Pals-
grave has the sb. compromyse.—F.. compromis, m., ‘a compromise,
mutuall promise of adversaries to refer their differences unto arbitre-
ment;’ Cot. Properly pp. of F. compromettre, ‘to compromit, or
put unto compromise;’ Cot.—L. comprémittere, to make a mutual
promise.—L, com-, for cum, together ; and promittere, to promise. See
Promise. Der. compromise, verb (formerly also to compromit).

COMPTROLLER, another spelling of controller ; see Control.

COMPULSION, COMPULSIVE; see Compel.

COMPUNCTION, remorse. (F.—L.) ‘ Have ye compuncecioun ;”
Wyclif, Ps. iv. 5; where the Vulgate version has compungimini.=—OF.
compunction, ‘compunction, remorse;’ Cot.— Late L. compunctionem,
ace. of compunctio (Lewis) ; cf. L. compunctus, pp. of compungi, to feel
remorse, pass. of compungere, to prick, sting. —L. com-, for cum, with ;
and pungere, to prick. See Pungent. Der. compuncti-ous.

COMPUTE, to calculate, reckon. (L.) ‘Sir T. Browne has com-
puters, Vulg. Errors, b. vi. c. 4. § 43 computists, id, b. vi. c. 8. § 175
computable, id. b. iv. c. 12. § 23. Shak.has computation, Com. Errors,
ii. 2. 4; Milton, compute, P. Ly iii. 580. —L. computire, to compute. =
L. com-, for cum, together ; and putare, to think, settle, adjust. B. The
primary notion of pulare was to make clean, ‘then to bring to clean-
ness, to make clear, and according to a genuinely Roman conception,
to reckon, to think\(cp. I reckon, a favourite expression with the
Americans for I suppose);’ Curtius, i. 349. —4/PEU, to purify; see
Pure. Der. comput-at-ion, comput-able. Doublet, count (2), q.V-

COMRADE, a companion. (F.—Span.—L.) InShak. Hamlet, i.
3. 65. [lather introduced by a blending of the Span. and F’. forms
than through the French only; the MF. camerade was only used,
according to Cotgrave, to signify ‘a chamberfull, a company that
belongs to, or is ever lodged in, one chamber, tent, [or] cabin.’
And the F. camarade was also taken from the Spanish ; see Brachet.
Besides, the spelling camrado occurs in Marmyon’s Fine Companion,
1633; see Nares’s Glossary, ed. Halliwell and Wright.]—Span.
camarada, a company, society; also, a partner, comrade; [Minsheu
has Span, camarada, ‘a comerade or cabbin-mate souldier;’] cama-
radas de navio, ship-mates,—Span. camara, a chamber, cabin, = L.
camara, camera, achamber. See Chamber.

CON (1), to peruse, scan, observe closely. (E.) - ME. cunnien, to
test, examine. Of Jesus on the cross, when the vinegar was offered
to him, it is said: ‘he smeihte and cunnede therof’=he took a smack
of it and fasted it, i.e. to see what it was like; Ancren Riwle, p. 114.—
AS. cunnian, to test, try, examine into ; Grein, i171. B. A secondary
verb, formed from AS, cunnan, to know; it signifies accordingly ‘ to
try to know ;’ and may be regarded as the desiderative of to know. See
Can. Der. ale-conner, i.e. ale-tester (obsolete); conn-ing-tower, a
tower for observation.

CON (2), used in the phrase pro and con; short for L. contra,
against; prd meaning ‘ for;’ so that the phr. means ‘ for and against.’

CON.-, a very common prefix; for com-, a form of L. cum, with.
The form con- is used when the following letter is c, d, g, j, 2, 9) 5; 4;
or v;-and sometimes before 7. Before 6, /, m, p, the form is com-;
before J, col-; before r, cor-. See Com-.

CONCATENATE, to link together. (L.) An unusual word ; con-
catenation is in Bp. Beveridge’s Sermons, vol i. ser. 38. ‘Seek the
consonancy and concatenation of truth;’ Ben Jonson, Discoveries ;
section headed Note domini Sti. Albani, &c.—L. concaténatus, pp.
of concaténare, to chain together, connect, = L. con-, for cum, together ;
and caténadre, to chain, from caténa, a chain. See Chain. Der.
concatenat-ion.

CONCAVE, hollow, arched. (F.—L.) Shak. Jul. Cees. i. 1. 52.
=OF. concave (Hatzfeld).—L. concauus, hollow.—L. con-, for cum,
with; and cauus, hollow. See Cave. Der. concav-ity.

CONCEAL, to hide, disguise. (F.—L.) ME. concelen, Gower,
C. A. ii, 2823 bk. v. 4635.— OF. conceler (Godefroy).—L. concélare,
to conceal. —L. con-, for cum, together, wholly ; and célare, to hide.
= 4/KEL, to hide, whence also oc-cul-t, cell, domi-cile, cl-andestine ;
cognate with Teutonic 4/HEL, whence E. hell, hall, hole, hull, holster,
&c. Der. conceal-ment, conceal-able.

‘Which is not


' CONCEDES, to cede, grant, surrender. (L:)


CONCEIT


conceded ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, bk. i. c. 4. § 6.—L. coxcédere,
pp. concessus, to retire, yield, grant.—L. con-, for cum, together,
wholly; and cédere, to cede, grants See Cede. Der. comcess-ion,
-ive, -or-y; like L. pp. concessus.

CONCEIT, a conception, idea, notion, vanity. (F.={L.) ME,
conceipt, conceit, conseit, conseyt. * Allas, conceyfes wronge!’ Chaucer,
Troil. and Cress, iii. 804. Gower has conceite, C. A. i. 73 prol. 113.
Formed, by analogy with deceit, as if from an OF. form *conceite, from
L. concepta, f. [There isno OF. or.AF. conceite, but Godefroy has
deceite, and AF. deceyte is in the Statutes of the Realm,i. 34 (1275).]
= L. concepta, fem. of conceptus, pp. of concipere, to conceive. See
Conceive. Der. conceit-ed, -ed-ly, -ed-ness; cf. conception.

- CONCEIVE, to be pregnant, take in, think. (F.—L.) ME.
conceiuen, conceuen; With « for v. ‘ This preyere... conceues [con-
ceives, contains] alle the gode that a man schuld aske of God ;’
Wyclif’s Works, ed. Arnold, iii. 442.— OF. conceiv-, a stem of concever,
concevoir, to conceive. L. concipere, to conceive, pp. conceptus. = L.
con-, for cum, together, wholly ; and capgere, totake, hold. See Capable.
Der, conceiv-able, -abl-y, -able-ness ; concept-ion, q.V.3 conceit, q. Vv.
‘-CONCENTRE, to tend or bring to a centre. (F.—L.) ‘Two
natures ... have been concentred into one hypostasis ;’ Bp. Taylor,
vol. ii. ser. 1 (R.) Chaucer has concentrik; On the Astrolabe, i.
17.33 1.16. 6. Concentre is now supplanted by the (Latin) form
concentrate, =F. concentrer, ‘to joine in one center ;’ Cot.—F. con-
(from L, con-, for cum, together) ; and centre,a centre. See Centre.
Der. concentr-ic, concentrate (a coined word), concentrat-ive, -ion.

CONCEPTION, the act of conceiving; a notion, (F.—L.)
ME, concepcion; Cursor Mundi, 220.—F. conception. L. concept-
idnem, acc. of conceptio; cf. conceptus, pp. of concipere, to conceive.
See Conceive.

. CONCERN, to regard, belong to. (F.—L.) ‘Such points as
concerne our wealth ;” Frith’s Works, p. 46, col, 2.—F. concerner, ‘ to
‘concerne, touch, import, appertaine, or belong to;’ Cot.—L. con-
cernere, to mix, mingle; in Late L. to refer to, regard ; Ducange. =
L. con-, for cum, together; and cernere, to separate, sift, decree,
observe. L. cernere is cognate with Gk. «pivew, to separate, decide ;
Lith. skir-ti,.to separate.—4/SKER, to separate; Brugmann, ii.
§ 612. Der. concern-ed, -ed-ly, -ed-ness, -ing, -ment.

CONCERT, to. plan with others, arrange. (F.—Ital.—L.)
[ Often confused in old writers with consort, a word of different origin.
Thus Spenser: ‘For all that pleasing is to living eare Was there
consorted in one harmonee;’ F.Q.ii. 12. 70. See Consort.) ‘ Will
any one persuade me that this was not .. . a concerted affair?’ Tatler,
no. 171.—F.. concerter, ‘to consort, or agree together; ’ Cot. — Ital.
concertare, ‘to agree or tune together, accord together, to sing or
play in consort ;’ Florio. B. Formed from L. concertare, to dispute,
contend, vie with, orig. a word of almost opposite meaning; but the
Span. concertar meant to bargain, and (hence) to agree, covenant,
come to terms; also, to settle, to harmonize, and even to tune
musical instruments (see Minsheu and Neuman). Baretti (Ital. Dict.,

1831) gives to concertare only the senses ‘to concert, to contrive, to
bring to pass;’ with the sb. concerto, concert, harmony. y. From L.
con-,-for cum, together ; and certare, to contend, vie with, orig. ‘to
decide by contest,’ frequent. of cernere, to decide (Bréal). See
Concern. Der. concert, sb., concerto (Ital.), concert-ina.

‘ CONCESSION, CONCESSIVE;; sce Concede.

CONCH, a marine shell. (L.—Gk.) ‘Adds orient pearls which
from the conchs he drew ;’ Dryden, Ovid’s Metam. x. 39 (Pygmaleon).
= L. concha, a shell.— Gk. xéyxn (also Kdyyxos), a mussel, cockle-shell.
Skt. gaxkha-, a conch-shell, See Cockle(1). Der. conchi-ferous,
shell-bearing, from L. ferre, to bear; concho-idal, conch-like, from
Gk. «idos, appearance, form; concho-logy, from Gk. -Aoyia, from
Aéyew, to speak ; concho-log-ist. These forms with prefix concho- are
from the Gk. «éyxo-s, Brugmann, i. § 631.
‘CONCILIATE, to win over. (L.) ‘A philter or plant that
conciliates affection ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulgar Errors; bk. vii. c. YS UE
“To conciliate amitie;’ Joye, Exposition of Daniel, c. 11.—L. cov-
ciliatus, pp. of conciliare, to conciliate, bring together,. unite. —L.
concilium, an assembly, union. See Council. Der. conciliat-ion,
Or, -Ory.

CONCINNITY, harmony, congruity, elegance of expression.
(L.) Spelt concinnitie, meaning ‘harmony;’ Sir T. Elyot, The
Governour, i. 20 (near the end).—L. acc. concinnitatem, skilful
adjustment ; from concinnus, skilfully adjusted. Der, concinnous, adj.,
from L. concinn-us, with suffix -ous.

CONCISE, cut short, brief. (F.-L.) Used by Drayton, Moses
his Birth and Miracles, b. ii. 161. ‘The concise style;’ Ben Jonson,
Discoveries; sect. headed De Stylo: Tacitus. [Perhaps taken directly
from Latin.]—F. concis, m. concise, f. ‘ concise, briefe, short, succinct,
compendious; ’ Cot.—L. concisus, brief; pp. of concidere, to hew in
pieces, cut down, cut short, abridge.—L. con-, for cum, with; and


-CONDEMN


cedere,to cut. See Casura. Der. concise-ly, -ness; also concis-ion
(Philipp. iii. 2), from L. concisio, a cutting to pieces, dividing.

CONCLAVE, an assembly, esp. of cardinals. (F.—L.) In early
use. ME. conclave, Gower, C.A., i..254; bk. ii, 2812.—F. conclave,
‘a conclave, closet,’ &c.; Cot.—L. concliue, a room, chamber; in
Late L., the place of assembly of the cardinals, or the assembly itself.
Orig. a locked up place. = L. con-, for cum, together; and clauis, a key.
See Clef.

CONCLUDE, to end, decide, infer. (L.) {And shortly to con
cluden al his wo;’ Chaucer, C.T., 1360 (A 1358).—L. conclidere,
pp. conclisus, to-shut up, close, end.—L. con-, for cum, together ; and
claudere, to shut. .See Clause. Der. conclus-ion, -ive, -ive-ly, -ive-
ness ; like pp. conclus-us.

CONCOCT, to digest, prepare, mature. (L.) ‘Naturall heate
concocteth or boyleth;’ Sir I. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. ch. 1.—
L. concoctus, pp. of concoquere, to boil together, digest. —L. con-, for
cum, with ; and coguere, to cook. See Cook. Der. concoct-ion, in
Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iv. c. I. § I.

CONCOMITANT, accompanying. (L.) ‘The waiting-maids
Or the concomitants of it, are his patience,’ &c.; Ben Jonson, New
Inn, A. iv. sc. 3. § Without any concomitant degree of duty or obedi-
ence;’? Hammond,. Works, iv..657 (R.). Formed from concomitant-,
stem of pres. part. of concomitari, to accompany. ‘The pp. concomit-
atus, accompanied, occurs in Plautus.—L. con-, for cum,.together;
and comitar2, to accompany, from comit-, stem of comes, a companion.
See Count (1). Der. concomitant-ly; hence also concomitance (in
Cotgrave), and concomitanc-y..

CONCORD, amity, union, unity of heart. (F.—L.) ‘ Concorde,
concord ;’ Palsgrave’s F. Dict. 1530; ME. concord, Chaucer, C. T.
goos5 (E1129). [The ME. verb concorden, to agree, is in Chaucer,
Troil. and Cress. iii. 1752.) =F. concorde, L. concordia. —L. concord-,
stem of concors, concordant, agreeing. —L. con-, for cum, together ;
and cord-, stem of cor, the heart. See Cordial, and Heart. Der.
concordant, q.v.; also concordat, q.v.

CONCORDANT, agreeing. (F.—L.) ‘£ Concordant discords;’
Mirror for Magistrates, p. 556 (R.).—F. concordant, pres. pt. of con-
corder, to agree.=L. concordare, to agree.—L. -concord-, stem of
concors, agreeing. See above. Der. concord-ant-ly; concord-ance
(AF. concordance, Bozon, p. 160).

CONCORDAT, a convention. (F.—L.) Borrowed from F.
concordat, ‘an accord, agreement, concordancy,. act of agreement ;’
Cot. (Cf. Ital. concordato, a convention, esp. between the pope and
French kings. ]=—Late L. concordatum, from the pp. of concorddre, to
agree. See above.

CONCOURSE, an assembly. (F.—L.) ‘Great concourse of
people;’ Fabyan, Chron. vol. i. c. 132.—F. concours ;. Hatzfeld ;
(omitted in Cot.).—L. concursus, a running together.—L, concursus,
pp- of concurrere, to run together. See Concur.

CONCRETE, formed into one mass; used in opposition to
abstract. (L.) ‘ Concrete or gathered into humour superfluous ;’ Sir
T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iv. (R.).—L. concrétus, grown together,
compacted, thick, dense; pp. of concrescere, to grow together.—L.
con-, for cum, together; and crescere, to grow. See Crescent.
Der. concrete, sb..;.concret-ion, ~ive.

CONCUBINE, a paramour. (F.—L.) ME. concubine, Rob. of
Glouc. p. 27; 1. 630.—OF. (and F.) concubine. = L. concubina, a con-
cubine.=L. con-, for cum, together; and cubare, to lie. Cf. L.
-cumbere (perf. -cubui), to bend, in the comp. incumbere, concumbere ;
and perhaps Gk. xugds, bent. Der. concubin-age.

CONCUPISCENCEH, lust, desire. (F.—L.) ME. concupiscence,
Gower, C.A. iii. 267 3. bk. vii. 5223. —F. concupiscence.—L. concup-
iscentia, desire; Tertullian.—L. concupiscere, to long after; inceptive
form of concupere, to long after.—L. con-, for cum, with, wholly;
and cupere, to desire. See Cupid. Der. concupiscent, from L.
concupiscent-, stem of pres. pt. of concupiscere,

CONCUR, to run together, unite, agree. (L.) In Douglas, tr. of
/Eneid, bk. x. ]. 20; and in Shak. Tw. Nt. ili. 4. 73. —L. cocurrere,
to run together, unite, join. L. con-, for cum, together; and currere,
torun. See Current. Der. concurr-ent, -ly; concurr-ence (I. con-
currence), from concurrent-, stem of concurrens, pres. part. of con-
currere; also concourse, q.V. .

CONCUSSION, a violent shock. (F.—L.) ‘Their mutual
concussion ;’ Bp. Taylor, On Orig. Sin, Deus Justificatus. Also in
Caxton’s Eneydos, heading to c. x.—F. concussion, ‘concussion, . . a
joulting, or knocking one against another ;’ Cot.—L. concussidnem,
acc. of concussio, a violent shaking; cf. concussus, pp. of concutere,
to shake together. —L. con-, for cum, together; and guatere, to shake.
See Quash. Der. concuss-ive, from L. pp. concussus.

CONDEMY,, to pronounce to be guilty. (F.—L.) ‘Ye shulden
neuer han condempnyd innocentis;’ Wyclif, Matt. xii. 7; where the
Vulgate has ‘nunquam condemmuassetis innocentes.’ And see Cursor


127


128 CONDENSE


Mundi, 1. 18176. —OF, condemner, condempner (Supp. to Godefroy).
— LL. condemnare, to condemn. =L. con-, for cum, with, wholly; and
damnare, to condemn, damn. See Damn. Der. condemn-able; also
condemnat-ion, -or-y, like L. pp. condemnatus,

CONDENSE, to made dense, compress. (F.—L.) See Milton,
P.L. i. 429, vi. 353, ix. 636.—F. condenser, ‘to thicken, or make
thick;’ Cot.—L. condensare, pp. condensitus, to make thick, press
together.—L. con-, for cum, together; and densare, to thicken, from
densus, dense, thick. See Dense, Der. condens-able, condens-ate,
vb. (Cockeram), -at-ion, -at-ive,

CONDESCEND, to lower oneself, deign, (F.—L.) ME. con-
descenden ; Chaucer, C.T. 10721 (F 407).—F. condescendre, ‘to
condescend, vouchsafe, yield, grant unto;’ Cot.—Late L. con-
descendere, to grant; Ducange.—L. con-, for cum, together; and
descendere, to descend. See Descend. Der. condescend-ing ; con-
descension, Milton, P.L. viii. 649 (Late L. condescensio, indulgence,
condescension, from L. coz- and descensio, a descent).

CONDIGN, well merited. (F.—L.) 6 With a condygne [worthy]
pryce;’ Fabyan, Chron. vol. i. c. 200. ME, condigne, Lydgate,
Minor Poems, p. 136.—F. condigne, ‘ condigne, well-worthy ;’ Cot.
=L. condignus, well-worthy.—L. con-, for cum, with, very; and
dignus, worthy. See Dignity. Der. condign-ly,

CONDIMENT, seasoning, sauce. (F.—L.) ‘Rather for con-
diment , . . than any substantial nutriment;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b, iii. c. 22. § 4.—F. condiment.—L. condimentum, seasoning,
sauce, spice. Formed with suffix -mentum from the verb condire, to
season, spice. Brugmann, i. § 656 (1).

CONDITION, a state, rank, proposal. (F.—L.) ME. condicion,
condition; in rather early use. See Hampole, Pricke of Conscience,
3955; Chaucer, C.T. 1433 (A 1431).—F. condition, OF. condicion,
=—L. conditidnem, acc. of conditio, condicio, a covenant, agreement,
condition. B. The usual reference of this word to the L, condere, to
put together, is wrong; the true L. spelling is condicio, from con-, for
cum, together, and the base dic- seen in indicdre, to point out; closely
telated to condicere, to talk over, agree upon; which is from con-
(cum), together, and dicere, to say, speak (Bréal), See Diction.
Der. condition-ed, -al, -al-ly.

CONDOLE, to lament, grieve with. (L.) ‘In doleful dittie to
condole the same;’ Mirror for Magistrates, p. 783 (R.).—L. con-
dolére, to grieve with. L. con-, for cum, with; and dolére, to grieve.
See Doleful. Der, condol-ence, -ent, condole-ment, condol-at-or-y (an
ill-formed word),

CONDONE, to forgive, pardon. (L.) £Condone, or Condonaie,
to give willingly, to forgive or pardon ;’ Blount’s Glossographia, ed.
1674; ‘Condone, to give;? (Cockeram), 1642.—L. conddnare, to
remit; pp. conddnatus.—L. con-, for cum, together, wholly; and
donare, to give. See Donation. Der. condonat-ion,

CONDOR, a large kind of vulture. (Span.—Peruvian.) § Con-
dor, or Contur, in Peru in America, a strange and monstrous bird ;’
Bailey’s Dict. vol. ii. ed. 1731. Pl. condores; E.G., tr. of Acosta’s
Hist. of the Indies, bk. iv. c. 37 (1604).—Span. condor, corrupted
from Peruvian cuntur. ‘ Garcilasso enumerates among the rapacious
birds those called cuntur, and corruptly by the Spanish cozdor ;’ and
again; ‘many of the clusters of rocks [in Peru] . . are named after
them Cuntur Kahua, Cuntur Palti, and Cuntur Huacana, for example
—names which, in the language of the Incas, are said to signify the
Condor’s Look-out, the Condor’s Roost, and the Condor’s Nest;’
Engl. Cycl. art. Condor ; cf. Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 342.

CONDUCEH, to lead or tend to, help towards. (L.) In the
Romance of Partenay, prol. 206. ‘To conduce [conduct] me to my
ladies presence;’ Wolsey to Henry VIII, an. 1527; in State Papers
(R.).—L. condiicere, to lead to, draw together towards. = L. con-, for
cum, together; and dicere, to lead, See Duke. Der. conduc-ible,
ibl-y, -ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness; and see conduct, conduit.

CONDUCT, escort, guidance, behaviour. (L.) Common in
Shak, both as sb, and verb. ‘The orig. sense is ‘escort ;’ see Mer-
chant of Ven. iv. 1. 148.—Late L. conductus, defence, protection,
guard, escort, &c.; Ducange.—L. conductus, pp. of condiicere, to
bring together, lead to (above). Der. conduct, verb; conduct-ible,
-ibil-i-ly, -ion, -ive, -or, -r-ess, Doublet, conduit, q.v.

CONDUIT, a canal, water-course, (F.—L.) ‘As water, whan
the conduit broken is;’ Chaucer, Leg. of Good Women, Thisbe,
147.—OF. conduit, spelt conduict in Cotgrave, who explains it by
‘a conduit.’—Late L. conductus, a defence, escort; also, a canal,
conduit; Ducange. See Conduct.

CONE, a solid pointed figure on a circular base. (F.—L.—Gk.)
In Milton, P. L. iv. 776.—MF, cone, ‘a cone;’ Cot.—L. conus. — Gk.
x@vos, 2 cone, a peak, peg. + Skt. gana(s), a whet-stone ; cf. L. cds,
a whet-stone. See Hone. Brugmann, i. § 401. Der. con-ic,
con-ics, cono-id (from Gk, x@vo-, for xwvos, and «Sos, form); coni-fer-
ous (from L. céni-, for conus, and ferre, to bear).


CONFLATION


CONEY; see Cony. ;
CONFABULATH, to talk together. (L.) £Confabulate, to
talke, to tell tales,’ Cockeram ; ed. 1642.—L. confabulatus, pp. of
dep. verb confabuldri, to talk together. —L. con-, for cum, together ;
and fabulari, to converse, from fabula, a discourse, a fable. See
Fable. Der. confabulat-ion.

CONFECT, to make up, esp. to make up into confections or
sweetmeats. (L.) ‘Had tasted death in poison strong confected ;”
Mirror for Magistrates, p. 858. Nearly obsolete. Gower has con-
fection, C. A. iii, 233 bk. vi. 654; Chaucer has confecture, C.T.
12796 (C 862).—L. confectus, pp. of conficere, to make up, put
together, Cf. Late L. confecte, sweetmeats, comfits; Ducange.=—L.
con-, for cum, together; and facere, to make, See Fact. Der. con=
Sect, sb., confect-ion, -ion-er, -ion-er-y; also comfit, q.Vv-

CONFEDERATE, leagued together; an associate. (L.) Orig.
used asa pp. ‘ Were confederate to his distruction ;’ Sir T. Elyot,
The Governour, b. iii. c. 8 (end). ME, confederat; Trevisa, tr. of
Higden, ii. 157. —L. confederdtus, united by a covenant, pp. of con-
federare.—L. con-, for cum, together; and federare, to league, from
feder-, for *fedes-, stem of fedus, a league. See Federal, Der.
confederate, verb; confederat-ion, confederac-y.

CONFER, to bestow, consult, (L.) In Shak. Temp. i. 2. 126,
Palsgrave has conferre, p. 493.—L. conferre, to bring together, collect,
bestow.=L. con-, for cum, together; and jerre, to bring, cognate
with E. bear. See Bear (1). 4 Not from F. Der. confer-ence,
from F, conference, ‘a conference, a comparison ;’ Cot.

CONFESS, to acknowledge fully. (F.—L.) ME. confessen ;
P. Plowman, B. xi. 76. —OF. confesser, to confess. = Late L. confessare
(Ducange).—L. confessus, confessed, pp. of confitéri, to confess. —L.
con-, for cum, together, fully; and fatéri, to acknowledge; allied to
L. fari, to speak, fama, fame. Cf. Gk. pa7is,a speech, Brugmann,
i. § 195. See Fame. Der. confess-ed-ly, -ion, -ion-al, -or.

CONFIDE, to trust fully, rely. (L.) Shak, has confident, Merry
Wives, ii. I..1943 confidence, Temp. i. 2. 97. Milton has confide,
P.L. xi. 235.—L. confidere, to trust fully. —L, con-, for cum, with,
fully ; and fidere, to trust, allied to fides, faith, See Faith, Der.
confid-ent, from L. confident-, stem of confidens, pres. pt. of confidere ;
confident-ly, confidence, confident-ial, -ial-ly ; also confidant, confidante,
from F. confidant, masc., confidante, fem., ‘a friend to whom one
trusts ;” Cot.

CONFIGURATION, an external shape, aspect. (F.—L.)
‘The configuration of parts;’ Locke, Human Underst. b. ii. c. 21.—
F. configuration, ‘a likenesse or resemblance of figures ;’ Cot.=L.|
configurationem, acc. of configiiratio, a conformation; Tertullian ;
ef, configiratus, pp. of configirire, to fashion or put together. = L,/
con-, for cum, together; and figurdre, to fashion, from figura, a form,
figure. See Figure.

CONFINE, to limit, bound, imprison. (F.—L.) [The sb. con='
jine (Othello, i. 2. 27) is really formed from the English verb; but
the pl. confines in Romeo, ili, 1. 6, is from OF, confines, pl. f.
(Godefroy), from L. confinia, pl. of confinium, a border.] The old
sense of the verb was ‘to border upon;”’ ef. ‘his kingdom conjineth
with the Red Sea;’ Hackluyt’s Voyages, y. ii. pt. ii. p. 10.—F. cone.
finer, ‘to confine, to abbut, or bound upon; . . to lay out bounds
unto; also, to confine, relegate ;’ Cot.—F. conjin, adj., ‘neer, neigh- '
bour, confining or adjoining unto ;’ id.—L. conftnis, adj., bordering
upon.—L. con-, for cum, together; and finis, a boundary, See
Final. Der. confine, sb. (above); comfine-ment.

CONFIRM, to make firm, assure, (F.—L.) ME. confermen,
rarely confirmen; see Rob, of Glouc. pp. 324, 446, 522, 534; ll.
6628, 9171, 10710, 11028. — OF. confermer (}*. confirmer), to confirm.
=L. confirmare, to strengthen, pp. confirmatus.—L, con-, for cum,
together, wholly; and jfirmire, to make firm, from jirmus, firm,
See Firm. Der. conjirm-able, -at-ion, -at-ive, -at-or-y.

CONFISCATE, to adjudge to be forfeit. (L.) Orig. used as a
pp., Merch. of Ven. iv. 1. 332. ‘Thou art banished from Rome,
and all thy goodes confiscate ;’ Lord Berners, tr. of Golden Book,
Letter iii. 1. 23.—L. confisctitus, pp. of confiscare, to lay by in a coffer
or chest, to confiscate, transfer to the prince’s privy purse.=—L. con-,
for cum, together; and jiscus, a basket, bag, purse, the imperial
treasury. See Fiscal. Der. confiscat-ion, -or, -or-y.

CONFLAGRATION, a great burning, fire. (F.—L.) Milton
has conflagrant, P.L. xii. 548. ‘Fire... whichis called a rupwots,a
combustion, or being farther broken out into flames, a conflagration ;”
Hammond's Works, iv. 593 (R.). [First ed. pub. 1674, 2nd ed,
1684.] Also in Blount (1656). —F. conflagration, ‘a conflagration,
a generall burning ;’ Cot.=L, conflagritidnem, acc. of conflagratio,
a great burning; cf. conflagratus, pp. of conflagrare, to consume by
fire.—L. con-, for cum, together, wholly; and flagrare, to burn. See
Flagrant.

CONFLATION,a blending or fusing of different things, sources,


CONFLICT


or readings. (L.) ‘A conflation of them all;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist.,
§ 225.—L. acc. conflatidnem, a casting in metal (hence, a blending) ;
Jerem. li. 17 (Vulgate); cf. L. conflatus, pp. of conflare, to blow
together, to fuse.—L. con- (for cum), together; and flare, to blow,
cognate with E. blow (1).

CONFLICT, a fight, battle. (L.) [Perhaps from F. conflict,
“a conflict, skirmish ;” Cot. Or immediately from Lat.] ME. con-
jiycte, sb.; Prompt. Parv. Also conflicten, vb., later tr. of Higden,
i. 139. The sb. also occurs in Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. I.
c. I. § 2. Shak. has both sb. and vb.; L.L. L. iv. 3. 369; Lear,
iii. 1. 11.—L. conflictus, a striking together, a fight; cf. L. conflictare,
to strike together, afflict, vex. Comjlictus is the pp., and conflictire
the frequentative, of confligere, to strike together, to fight. = L. con-,
for cum, together; and jligere, to strike. Der. conflict, verb.

CONFLUENT, flowing together. (L.) ‘Where since these
confluent floods;’ Drayton, Polyolbion, s. 20, Shak. has confluence,
Timon, i. 1. 42; conflux, Troil.i. 3. 7. G. Douglas has confluence,
tr. of Virgil, bk. v.c. 11.1. 20.—L. confluent-, stem of confluens, pres.
pt. of confluere, to flow together.—L. con-, for cum, together, and
jiuere, to flow. See Fluent. Der. confluence; also conflux, from
confluxus, pp. of confluere.

CONFORM, to make like, to adapt. (F.—L.) ME. conformen,
Chaucer, C. T. 8422 (E 546; Camb. MS.)=F. conformer, ‘to con-
forme, fit with, fashion as;’ Cot.=—L: conxformare, pp. conformitus,
to fashion as. = L.con-, for cum, together; and formare, to form, fashion.
See Form. Der. conform-able, -abl-y, -at-ion, -er, -ist, -i-ty.

CONFOUND, to pour together, confuse, destroy. (F.—L.)
ME. confounden, Chaucer, Boethius, b. ii. pr. 6. 1. 36. Confund
occurs in the Cursor Mundi, 730.—OF. (and F.) confondre. =L. con-
fundere, pp. confisus, to pour out together, to mingle, perplex, over-
whelm, confound.=L. con-, for cum, together ; and fundere, to pour.
See Fuse (1). Der. confuse, ME. confus, used as a pp. in Chaucer,
C.T. 2232 (A 2230), OF. confus, from the L. pp. confisus; con-
fus-ion, confus-ed-ly. Thus confound is, practically, a doublet of
confuse.

CONFRATERNITY, a brotherhood. (F.—L.) In Holland’s
Plutarch, p. 23 (R.). Coined by prefixing con- (L. cum, with) to
the sb. fraternity. The form confraternitas, a brotherhood, occurs in
Ducange. See Fraternity.

CONFRONT, to stand face to face, oppose. (F.—L.) In Titus
Andron. iv. 4. 3. ‘A noble knight, confronting both the hosts;’
Mirror for Magistrates, p. 597 (R.).—F. confronter, ‘to confront, or
bring face to face;’ Cot. Formed, with a change of meaning, from
the Late L. confrontare, to assign bounds to, confrontari, to be con-
tiguous to, to be near to.—L. con- (cum), together; and front-, stem
of frons, forehead. See Front, Affront.

CONFUSE, CONFUSION: see Confound.

CONFUTE, to prove to be false, disprove, refute. (F.—L.) In
Shak. Meas. v. 100.—F. confuter, ‘to confute, convince, refell, dis-
prove ;’ Cot. [Or perhaps borrowed immediately from Latin.]=L.
confutare, to cool by mixing cold water with hot, to damp, repress,
allay, refute, confute; pp. confitdtus.—L. con-, for cum, together ;
and the stem /at-, seen in fiitis, a water-vessel, a vessel for pouring
from; an extension of the base fi-, seen in fu-di, fi-sus, perf. and
pp- of fundere, to pour.—4/ GHEU, to pour. See Fuse (1),
Refute, Futile. Der. confut-at-ion, -able.

CONGEAL,, to solidify by cold. (F.—L.) ‘Lich unto slime
which is congeled;” Gower, C. A. iii. 96; bk. vii. 338.—OF. con-
geler, ‘to congeale;” Cot.—L. congelare, pp. congelatus, to cause to
freeze together.—L. con-, for cum, together; and gelare, to freeze,
from gelu, frost. See Gelid. Der. congeal-able, -ment ; also congel-
at-ion, Gower, C. A. ii. 86, from F. congelation (Cot.), L. congelatio.

CON GEE, leave to depart, farewell. (F.—L.) Also congé. Spelt
congie in Fabyan’s Chron. c. 2435 congee in Spenser, F.Q. iv. 6. 42.
ME. congeye, P. Plowman, B. xiii. 202. Hence the verb to congie,
Shak. All’s Well, iv. 3. 100 ; a word in use even in the r4th century ;
we find ‘to congey thee for euere,’ i.e. to dismiss thee for ever ; P.
Plowman, B. iii, 173.— F. cozgé, ‘leave, licence, . . discharge, dis-
mission ;’ Cot.; OF. congie, cunge, congiet (Burguy) ; equivalent to
Proveng¢al comjat. = Late L. comiatus, leave, permission (8th century) ;
a corruption of L. commeatus, a passage, travelling, leave of absence,
furlough (Brachet).—L. com-, for cum, together; and medtus, a
going, a course, from meatus, pp. of meadre, to go, pass. See
Permeate. |

CONGENWER, allied in. kin or nature. (L.) In Bailey, vol. ii.
(1731). Merely L. congener, of the same kin.—L. con-, for cum,
with ; and gener-, for *genes-, stem of genus, kin. See Genus.

CONGENTAL, kindred, sympathetic. (L.) In Dryden’s
Dedication of Juvenal, § 3; and in Pope, Dunciad, iv. 448. A
coined word, made by prefixing L. con- (for cum, with) to genial,
from L. genidlis. See Genial. Der. congenial-ly, -i-ty,


CONJOIN 129


CONGENITAL, cognate, born with one. (L.) First found in
1796; made by suffixing -al to the now obsolete word congenite Or
congenit, of similar meaning, used by Bp. Taylor, Rule of Conscience,
b. ii. c. 1, and by Boyle, Works, v. 513 (R.).—L. congenitus, born
with.—L, con-, for cum, with; and genitus, born, pp: of gignere, to
produce, —4/ GEN, to produce. See Generate.

CONGER, a sea-eel. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. 2 Hen. IV, ii. 4.
266. ME. cungyr, Rich. Coer de Lion, 3515.—F. congre, ‘a congar;’
Cot.—L. congrum, acc. of congrus, a sea-eel; cf. also L. conger, a
sea-eel. = Gk. yoyypos, the same.

CONGERIES, a mass of particles. (L.) In Glossographia
Anglicana Nova, 1719 (after congruous). Merely L. congeriés, a
heap. =L, congerere, to heap up, bring together.=L. con-, for cum,
together ; and gerere, to carry, bring: see Gerund. See below.

CONGESTION, accumulation. (F.—L.) Shak. has the verb
congest, Compl. of a Lover, 258. ‘ By congestion of sand, earth, and
such stuff;’ Drayton, Polyolbion, Illustrations of s. 9.—F. congestion
(Hatzfeld).—L. ace. congestidnem, from congestio, a heaping together;
cf. congestus, pp. of congerere, to bring together, heap up. See
above. Der. congest-ive.

CONGLOBE, to form into a globe. (L.) Milton has conglob’d,
P.L. vii. 239; conglobing, vii. 292. —L, conglobare, pp. conglobatus,
to gather into a globe, to conglobate.—L. con-, for cum, together ;
and globus, a globe, round mass, See Globe. Der. conglobate,
conglobat-ion, like L. pp. conglobdtus ; similarly conglobulate, from
L. globulus, a little globe, dimin. of globus.

CONGLOMERATE, gathered into a ball; to gather into a
ball. (L.) Orig. used as a pp., as in Bacon’s Nat. Hist. § 267.—L.
conglomerdtus, pp. of conglomerdre, to wind into a ball or clew, to
heap together.—L. con-, for cum, together ; and glomerdre, to form
into a ball, from glomer-, for *glomes-, stem of glomus, a clew of
thread, a ball; allied to L. globus, a globe. See Globe. Der.
conglomerat-ion.

CONGLUTINATE, to glue together. (L.) Orig. used as a
pp-, as in Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 21. § 2.—L. con-
glitinatus, pp. of conglitinare, to glue together.—L, con-, for cum,
together; and glitinare, to glue, from glitin-, decl. stem of gliten,
glue. See Glue. Der. conglutin-ant, conglutinat-ive, -ion.

CONGOU, a. kind of black tea. (Chinese.) ‘Congou tea;’
Sheridan, School for Scandal, v.1. In the Amoy dialect of Chinese,
called kang-hu té, where kang-hu is lit. ‘work, labour;’ i.e. tea on
which labour has been expended (Douglas). The true Chinese is
kang-fu ch‘a, with the same sense.

CONGRATULATE, to wish all joy to. (L.) In Shak. L.L.L.
y. 1. 93.—L. congratulatus, pp. of congratulari, to wish much joy. =
L. con-, for cum, with, very much; and gratulari, to wish joy,a deponent
verb formed, with suffix -u/-, from grat-us, pleasing. See Grateful.
Der. congratulat-ion, -or-y.

CONGREGATEH, to gather together. (L.) In Shak. Merch. of
Ven. i. 3. 50. Rich. quotes from the State Trials (Sir J. Oldcastle),
showing that congregated was used A.D. 1413. —L. congregdatus, pp. of
congregare, to assemble. = L. con-, for cum, together ; and gregare, to
collect in flocks, from greg-, stem of grex, a flock. See Gregarious.
Der. congregat-ion, -al, -al-ist, -al-ism.

CONGRESS, a meeting together, assembly. (L.) ‘Their con-
gress in the field great Jove withstands;’ Dryden, tr. of A‘neid, x.
616.—L. congressus, a meeting together; also an attack, engagement
in the field (as above).=—L. congressus, pp. of congredi, to meet
together.—L. con-, for cum, together; and gradi, to step, walk, go,
from gradus,a step. See Grade. Der. congress-ive.

CONGREVE, (1) a kind of rocket; (2) a friction-match.
(Personal name.) Both invented by Sir W. Congreve, who died
in 1828. Orig. a place-name.

CONGRUE, to agree, suit. (L.) In Shak. Hamlet, iv. 3. 66.
Hence congruent, apt; L. L. L.i. 2.143 v. 1.97; also in Sir T. Elyot,
The Governour, bk. i. c. 8. § 3.—L. congruere, to agree together,
accord, suit, correspond ; pres. part. congruens (stem congruent-), used
as adj., fit.—L. con-, for cum, together; and -gruere, a verb which
only occurs in the comp. congruere and ingruere, and is of uncertain
meaning and origin. Der. congru-ent, congru-ence, congru-i-ty (ME,
congruite, Gower, C. A. iii. 136; bk. vii. 1531); also congruous (from
L. adj. congruus, suitable), -ly, -ness.

CONIC, CONIFEROUS;; see Cone.

CONJECTURE, a guess, idea. (F.—L.) In Chaucer, C. T.
8281 (E 405).—F. conjecture, ‘a conjecture, or ghesse;’ Cot. —L. con-
iectiira, a guess ; cf. coniect-us, pp. of conicere (=conjicere), to cast or
throw together. —L. con-, for cum, together ; and zacere, to cast, throw.
See Jet (1). Der. conjecture, verb; conjectur-al, -al-ly.

CONJOIN, to join together, unite. (F.—L.) ME. conioignen ;
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iii. pr. ro, 1. 149. [Conioint (conjoint) is
in Gower, C. A. iii. 101; bk. vii. 502. Coniuncioun (conjunction)

K


130 CONJUGAL


in Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, ed. Skeat, ii. 32. 1.]—OF. conjoign-,
a stem of conjoindre (Burguy); still in use.—L. coniungere, pp.
coniunctus, to join together, unite.—L. con-, for cum, together; and
iungere, to join. See Join. Der. conjoint (pp. of F. conjoindre),
-ly ; also conjunct, -ion, -ive, -ive-ly, -ure, like L. pp. coniunctus.

CONJUGAL, relating to marriage. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. L.
iv. 493.—<F. conjugal, ‘ conjugall;’ Cot.—L. coniugalis, relating to
marriage (Tacitus). = L. coniug-em, acc. of coniux, a spouse.=L. con-,
for cum, together; and iug-, as in iugum, a yoke. (4/YEU, to join.)
See Join, Yoke. Der. conjugal-ly, -i-ty.

CONJUGATION, the inflexion of a verb. (L.) [The verb to
conjugate is really formed from the sb. conjugation; it occurs in
Palsgrave, Introd. p. xxxiii.] _ Coniugacyon is in Skelton’s Speke
Parrot, 1.185; and in Palsgrave, p. 399. Formed, in imitation of
F. words in -ion, from L. coniugdtio, a conjugation; used in its
grammatical sense by Priscian. The lit. sense is ‘a binding together.’
Cf. coniugatus, pp. of coniugdre, to unite, connect.—L. con- (cum),
together; iugare, to yoke, from ingum,a yoke. Der. conjugate, vb.;
also conjugate as an adj., from pp. coniugdtus. Cf. conjunct-ion,

CONJUNCTION ; see under Conjoin.

CONJURE, to implore solemnly. (F.—L.) ME. conjuren,
P. Plowman, B. xv. 14.—F. conjurer, ‘to conjure, adjure; also, to
conjure or exorcise a spirit;’ Cot.—L. conitirare, to swear together,
combine by oath; pp. conitrdatus,=L. con-, for cum, together; and
itrare, to swear. See Jury. Der. conjur-or, conjur-er, conjurat-ion,
ta The verb to conjure, i.e. to juggle, is the same word, and refers to
the invocation of spirits. Cf. ‘ Whiles he made céniuryng ;’ King
Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1. 345.

CONNATEH, born with us. (L.) ‘ Those connate principles born
with us into the world;’ South, Sermons, vol. ii. ser. 10 (R.).—L. con-
natus, pp. of connasci, to be born with (another). —L. con- (cum), with;
and zasci, to be born. See Cognate.

CONNATURAL, of the same nature with another. (L.) In
Milton, P. L. x. 246, xi. 529. A coined word, made by prefixing L.
con- (for cum, together with) to the E. word zatural, from L, naturalis,
natural, Probably suggested by OF. connaturel, ‘ connaturall, natural
to all alike;’ Cot. See Nature.

CONNECT, to fasten together, join. (L.) First found in 1537.
Used by Pope, Essay on Man, i. 280, iii. 23, iv. 349. Old writers also
use connex, formed from the L. pp.—L. connectere, to fasten or tie
together; pp. connexus. = L, con-, for cum, together; and nectere,to bind,
tie, knit, join. Der. connect-ed-ly, -or, -ive; also connex-ion (like the
Pp. connexus), a word which is usually misspelt connection. Cotgrave
has : ‘ Connexion, a connexion,’

CONNING-TOWER;; see under Con (1).

CONNIVE, to wink at a fault. (F.—L.) In Shak. Winter’s Tale,
iv. 4. 692.—F. conniver, ‘to winke at, suffer, tollerate;’ Cot. —L.
conniuére, to close the eyes, overlook, connive at.=—L. con-, for cum,
together; and a form *niguere, to wink, whence the perf. tense connixi
and mic-t-dre, to wink with the eyes.4+-Goth. kneiwan, to bow.
Brugmann, i. § 664. Der. conniv-ance; better connivence, as in
Cotgrave.

CONNOISSEUR, a critical judge. (F.—L.) Used by Swift, on
Poetry. And in Bailey, vol. ii (1731).—F. connaisseur, formerly spelt
connoisseur, a critical judge, a knowing one.=OF. connoiss- (F.
connaiss-), a base used in conjugating the OF. verb connoistre (F. con-
naitre), to know.=L. cognoscere, to know fully.—L. co-, for cum,
together, fully; and gnoscere, to know, cognate with E. know. See
Know. Der. connoisseur-ship.

CONNOTEH, to imply, indicate.(L.) ‘To connote, to make known
together ;’ Glossographia Anglicana (1719). Sir T. More has
connotacyon, Works, p. 417, col. 1.—Late L. connotare, to mark in
addition or along with.—L. con- (for cum), together; and xotdre, to
mark, from zofa,a mark. See Note. Der. connotat-ion, like the pp.
connotat-us.

CONNUBIAL, matrimonial, nuptial. (L.) In Milton, P. L. iv.
743.—L. conntibidlis, relating to marriage, = L. con-, for cum, together;
and niibere, to cover, to veil, to marry. See Nuptial.

CONOID, cone-shaped; see Cone,

CONQUER, to subdue, vanquish. (F.—L.) In early use. ME,
conqueren, conquerien or conquery. Spelt conquery, Rob. of Glouc.
p- 200, l. 4115; oddly spelt cuncweari in Hali Meidenhad, ed.
Cockayne, p. 33; about A.D. 1200.—OF. conguerre, cunquerre, to
conquer, = L. conguirere, pp. conquisitus, to seek together, seek after,
go in quest of; in Late Latin, to conquer; Ducange.—L. con-, for
cum, together; and guerere, pp. quesitus, to seek. See Quest,
Query. Der. conquer-able, -or; conquest = ME. conqueste, Gower, C. A.
1, 27 (prol. 709), (AF. congueste, from Late L. conquisita, f. of pp.
conquisitus).

CONSANGUINEOUS, related by blood. (L.) In Shak. Tw.


Nt. ii. 3. 82; also consanguinity, Troil. iv. 2. 103.—L. consanguine-us,


CONSIST Bs


related by blood; with suffix -ows.—L. con-, for cum, together; and
sanguineus, bloody, relating to blood, from sanguin-, decl. stem of
sanguis, blood. See Sanguine. Der. consanguin-i-ty (F. con-
sanguinité, given by Cot.; from L. consanguinitatem, acc. of
consanguinitas, relationship by blood).

CONSCIENCE, consciousness of good or bad. (F.—L.) Inearly
use. Spelt kunscence, Ancren Riwle, p. 228 ; also conscience, p. 306.
= OF, (and F.) conscience. L. conscientia. = L.con-, for cum, together
with; and scientia, knowledge. See Science. Der. conscientious,
from F. conscientieux, ‘ conscientious,’ Cot.; which is from Late L.
conscientiosus. Hence conscientious-ly, -ness. And see conscious,
conscionable.

CONSCION ABLE, governed by conscience. (Coined from L.)
‘Indeed if the minister’s part be rightly discharged, it renders the
people more cozscionable, quiet and easy to be governed ;’ Milton,
Reformation in England, bk. ii(R.). ‘As uprightlie and as conscionablie
as he may possible ;’ Holinshed, Ireland ; Stanihurst to Sir H. Sidney.
An ill-coined word (cf. fashion-able), used as a contraction of con-
scien(ce)-able; the regular formation from the verb conscire, to be
conscious, would have been conscible (cf. L. scibilis), but this would
not have given the sense. Der. conscionabl-y. See above.

CONSCIOUS, aware. (L.). In Dryden, Theodore and Honoria,
202. Englished from L. conscius, aware, by substituting -ous for -us,
as in arduous, egregious. = L. conscire, to be aware of. — L. con-, for cum,
together, fully ; and sctre, to know. See Conscience.

CONSCRIPT, enrolled, registered. (L.) ‘O fathers conscripte,
O happie people ;’ Lord Berners, Golden Boke, Letter rr. § 7. In
later times, used as a sb.—L. conscriptus, enrolled; pp. of conscribere,
to write down together. = L. con-, for cum, together; and scribere, to
write. See Scribe. Der. conscript-ion.

CONSECRATE, to render sacred. (L.) In Barnes, Works,
p- 331, col. r. ME. consecrat, i.e. consecrated, Chaucer, C. T. 14023
(B 3207).—L., consecratus, pp. of consecrare, to render sacred. = L. con-,
for cum, with, wholly; and sacrare, to consecrate, from sacr(o)-, stem
of sacer, sacred. See Sacred. Der. consecrat-or, -ion.

CONSECUTIVE, following in order. (F.—L.) Not in early
use. One of the earliest examples appears to be in Cotgrave (1611),
who translates the F. consecutif (fem. consecutive) by ‘ consecutiue or
consequent ;’ where consequent is the older form. The Late L. conse-
cutivus is not recorded.—L. conseciit-, stem of consectitus, pp. of
consegui, to follow. See Consequent. Der. consecutive-ly; also
consecut-ion, like the pp. conseciitus.

CONSENT, to feel with, agree with, assent to. (F.—L.) ME.
consenten ; spelt kunsenten in Ancren Riwle, p. 272.—OF. (and F.)
consentir.=L, consentire, to accord, assent to.—L. con-, for cum,
together; and sentire, to feel, pp. sensus. See Senss. Der. consent,
sb,3 consent-i-ent, -an-e-ous (L. consentdneus, agreeable, suitable) ;
-aneous-ly, -ness ; also consensus, a L. word.

CONSEQUENT, following upon. (L.) Early used as a sb.
‘ Vengeance is the consequent ;’ Chaucer, Tale of Melibeus, B 2578.
Properly an adj.—L. conseguent-, stem of conseguens, pres. part. of
consegut, to follow. L. con-, for cum, together ; and segui, to follow.
See Second. Der. consequent-ly, -i-al, -i-al-ly; consequence (MF.
consequence, Cot., from L,. consequentia).

CONSERVE, to preserve, retain, pickle (F.-L.) ‘The
poudre in which myn herte, ybrend [burnt], shal torne That preye I
thee, thou take, and it conserve;’ Chaucer, Troilus, vy. 309; and see
C.T. 15855 (G 387).—OF. and F. conserver, to preserve. = L. con-
seruGre.=L. con-, for cum, with, fully; and serudre, to keep, serve.
See Serve. Der. conserve, sb. ; conserv-er, -ant, -able, -at-ton, -at-ive,
-at-ism, -at-or, -at-or-y.

CONSIDER, to deliberate, think over, observe. (F.—L.) ME.
consideren; Chaucer, C. T. 3023 (A 3021). — OF. considerer. = L. con-
siderare, pp. considerdtus, to observe, consider, inspect, orig. to inspect
the stars.—L. con-, together; and sider-, for *sides-, stem of sidus, a
star, a constellation. See Sidereal. Der. conszder-able, -abl-y,
-able-ness ; -ate, -ate-ly, -ate-ness ; -at-ion.

CONSIGN, to transfer, intrust, make over. (F.—L.) ‘My
father hath consigned and confirmed me with his assured testimonie ;’
Tyndal, Works, p. 457; where it seems to mean ‘sealed.’ It also
meant ‘to agree;’ Hen. V, v. 2. 90.—F. consigner, ‘to consigne,
present, exhibit or deliver in hand;’ Cot.—L. consignare, to seal,
attest, warrant, register, record, remark.—L. con-, for cum, with ;
and signare, to mark, sign, from signum, a mark. See Sign. Der.
consign-er, -ee, -ment.

CONSIST, to stand firm, subsist, to be made up of, to agree or
coexist, depend on, (F.—L.) In Shak. Tw. Nt. ii. 3. To.=—F.
consister, ‘to consist, be, rest, reside, abide, to settle, stand still or at
a stay;’ Cot.—L. consistere, to stand together, remain, rest, consist,
exist, depend on.—L. con-, for cum, together; and sistere, to make
to stand, also to stand, the causal of s¢are, to stand. See Stand.


CONSOLE


Der. consist-ent, -ent-ly, -ence, -enc-y; also consist-or-y, from Late L.
consistorium, a place of assembly, an assembly ; consistori-al.

CONSOLE (1), to comfort, cheer. (F.—L.) Shak. has only
consolate, All’s Well, iii. 2.131. Dryden has consol’d, tr. of Juv. Sat.
x. l, 191.—F. consoler, ‘to comfort, cherish, solace ;” Cot.—L. con-
solari, pp. consdlatus, to console. LL. con-, for cum, fully; and sdlari,
to solace. See Solace. Der. consol-able, -at-ion, -at-or-y.

CONSOLE (2), a kind of bracket or corbel,a supporting bracket.
(F.—L.) In Phillips (1706).—F. console, ‘a corbell, a bracket ;’
Cot. Also called consolateur (Cot.) ; and therefore from F. consoler,
to comfort, solace, cherish; see Console (1). 4 Perhaps influenced
by L. consolidare, to strengthen; but see Korting, §§ 2445, 2446.

CONSOLIDATE, to render solid, harden. (L.) Orig. used as’
a past participle. ‘ Wherby knowledge is ratified, and, as I mought
saye, consolidate ;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. iii. c. 26. § I.—
L. consolidatus, pp. of consolidare, to render solid.—L. con-, for cum,
with, wholly; and solidare, to make solid, from solidus, solid, firm.
See Solid. Der. consolidat-ion ; also consols (first found in 1770),
a familiar abbreviation for consolidated annuities.

CONSONANT, agreeable to, suitable. (F.—L.) ‘A con-
fourme [conformable] and consonant ordre;’ Bale, Apologie, fol. 55
(R.). Shak. has coxsonancy, Hamlet, ii. 2. 295.—F. consonant,
“consonant, accordant, harmonious;’ Cot.—L. consonant-, stem of
consonans, pres. pt. of consonare, to sound together with; hence, to
harmonise. = L. con-, for cum, together; and sozare, to sound. See
Sound (3). Der. consonant, sb, (Reliq. Antig. ii. 174); consonant-
ly, consonance.

CONSORT, a fellow, companion, mate, partner. (L.) In Milton,
P.L. iv. 448. [Shak. has consdrt in the sense of company, Two Gent.
of Verona, iv. 1.64; but this is not quite the same word, being from
the verb to consdrt with, itself a derivative of cénsort, sb. Note that
consort was often written for concert in old authors, but the words are
quite distinct, though confused by Richardson. The quotation from
P. Plowman in Richardson is wrong; the right reading is not consort,
but confort, i.e. comfort; P. Plowman, C. vi. 75.]—L. consort-, stem
of consors, one who shares property with others, a brother or sister,
in Late L. a neighbour, also a wife; it occurs in the fem. MF. sb.
consorte in the last sense only.—L. con-, for cum, together; and sort-,
stem of sors, a lot, a share. See Sort; and compare Assort.
Der. consort, verb, Shak., L.L.L. ii. 1. 178.

CONSPICUOUS, very visible. (L.) Frequent in Milton, P. L.
ii. 258, &c. Adapted from L. conspicuus, visible, by the change of
-us into -ows, as in consanguineous, arduous, &c.—=L. conspicere, to see
plainly. —L. con-, for cum, with, thoroughly; and specere, to look,
see. See Species. Der. conspicuous-ly, -ness.

CONSPIRE, to plot, unite for evil. (?.—L.) In Gower, C.A.
i. 81, 82; bk. i. 1173, 1206; Chaucer, C. T. 13495 (B 1755).—F.
conspirer, = L,. conspirare, to blow together, to combine, agree, plot,
conspire.=L. con-, for cum, together; and sfirare, to blow. See
Spirit. Der. conspir-at-or, conspir-ac-y (Chaucer, C. T., B 3889).

CONSTABLE, an officer, peace-officer. (F.—L.) In early use.
ME. constable, conestable; Havelok, 1. 2286, 2366.—OF. conestable
(F. connétable).— L. comes stabuli, lit. ‘ count of the stable,’ a dignitary
of the Roman empire, transferred to the Frankish courts. A docu-
ment of the 8th [oth] century has: ‘comes stabuli quem corrupte
conestabulum appellamus;’ Brachet. [This document is the Chroni-
con Reginonis abbatis Prumiensis (who died in 915); anno 807. }
See Count (1) and Stable. Der. constable-ship; constabul-ar-y,
from Late L. constabularia, the dignity of a constabulus or conestabulus.

CONSTANT, firm, steadfast, fixed. (F.—L.) Constantly is in
Frith’s Works, Life, p..3. Chaucer has the adj. constant, C. T. 8923
(E 1047); and the sb. constance, C. T. 8544, 8876 (E 688, 1000). =
F. constant (Cot.).=L. constant-, stem of constans, constant, firm;
orig. pres. pt. of constare, to stand together.—L. con-, for cum,
together; and stare, to stand, cognate with E. stand, q.v. Der.
constant-ly, constanc-y.

CONSTELLATION, a cluster of stars. (F.—L.) ME. con-
stellacion. In Gower, C.A.i. 21, 55 (prol. 532, and bk. i. 393).—
OF. constellacion, F. constellation. L. constellatidnem, acc. of con-
stellatio, a cluster of stars. — L. con-, for cum, together; and cf. stellat-us,
pp. of stellare, to set with stars, from stella, a star, cognate with E.
star, q.V. :

CONSTERNATION, fright, terror, dismay. (F/—L.) Rich.
quotes the word from Strype, Memorials of Edw. VI, an. 1551. It
was not much used till later.—F. consternation, ‘ consternation,
astonishment, dismay ;’ Cot. = L. consternatiénem, acc. of consterndatio,
fright ; cf. consterndtus, pp. of consterndre, to frighten, collateral form
to consternere, to bestrew, throw down.=L. con-, for cum, together,
wholly; and sternere, to strew. See Stratum.

CONSTIPATE, to cram together, obstruct, render costive. (L.)
Sir T. Elyot has constipations, Castel of Helth, b. iii.c. 7. The verb


CONTAMINATE 131


is in the same, bk. ii. c. 5. —L. constipatus, pp. of constipare, to make
thick, join thickly together. —L. con-, for cum, together; and stipare,
to cram tightly, pack; perhaps connected with stipes, a stem; see
Curtius, i. 264. Der. constipat-ion ; costive,

CONSTITUTE, to appoint, establish, (L.) Gower has the sb.
constitucion, C. A. il. 753; bk. iv. 2206. The verb is later; see
Caxton, Eneydos, c, 28, Sign. Hij, back (p. rog, l. 9, E. E. T.S.);
Bp. Taylor, Holy Living, c. iii. 1. 1.—L. constitiitus, pp. of con-
stituere, to cause to stand together, establish.—L. con-, for cum,
together; and statuere, to place, set, denominative verb from status,
a position. See State. Der. constitu-ent, constitu-enc-y, from L.
stem constituent-, pres. part. Of comnstituere ; also constitut-ion (F.
constitution), whence constitut-ion-al, -al-ly, -al-ist, -al-ism; also
constitut-ive.

CONSTRAIN, to compel, force. (F.—L.) ME. constreinen ;
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b, i. pr. 1.1.9; C.T. 8676 (E 800). —OF.
constreign-,a stem of constreindre, constraindre, to constrain (Godefroy),
later form contraindre, as in Cotgrave.—L. constringere, to bind
together, fetter.—L. con-, for cum, together; and stringere, pp.
strictus, to draw tight. See Strict, Stringent. Der. constrain-
able, constrain-ed-ly ; constraint = ME. constreint, Gower, C. A. iii.
380, bk. viii. 3018 (Old F. pp. of constreindre) ; also constrict, con-
strict-ion, constrict-or, from L, pp. constrictus; also constringe,
constring-ent, from L. constringere.

CONSTRUE, to set in order, explain, translate. (L.) § To con-
strue this clause ;? P. Plowman, B. iy. 150; ef. 1. 145. [Adopted
directly from Lat., not from F. construire.]—L. construere, pp. con-
structus, to heap together, to build, to construe a passage.=L. con-,
for cum, together; and struere, to heap up, pile. See Structure.
Doublet, construct, from L. pp. constructus; whence construct-ion,
construct-ive, -ive-ly.

CONSUBSTANTIAL; see Con-, and Substantial.
CONSUETUDE, custom. (L.) In Wyclif, 1 Kings xx. 25 ;
where the Vulgate has consuétidinem. = L. consuétudo, custom; see
Custom.

CONSUL, a (Roman) chief magistrate. (L.) In Gower, C. A.
iii. 1383; bk. vii. 1598.—L. consul, a consul. Etym. doubtful, but
allied to the verb consulere, to consult, deliberate. See Consult.
Der. consul-ar, -ate, -ship.

CONSULT, to deliberate. (F.—L.) In Merry Wives, ii. 1.
II1.—F, consulter, ‘to consult, deliberate;” Cot.—L. consultire, to
consult; frequent. form of consulere, to consult, consider. Root
uncertain; perhaps allied to sedére, to sit; cf. soliwm, a seat (Bréal).
Der. consultat-ion.

CONSUME, to waste wholly, devour, destroy. (L.) ‘ The lond
be not consumed with myschef;’ Wyclif, Gen. xli. 36; where the
Vulgate has ‘non consumetur terra inopia,’=L. consiimere, pp. con-
sumptus, to consume, lit. to take together or wholly. —L. con-, for
cum, together, wholly; and stimere, to take. The L. sumere is a
compound of *sups, allied to sub, under, up, and emere, to buy, take.
Brugmann, i. § 240. See Redeem, Der. consum-able; also (like
L. pp. consumptus) consumpt-ion, -ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness,
CONSUMMATHEH, exireme, perfect. (L.) Properly a past part.,
as in Shak. Meas. for Meas. v. 383 ; and in Palsgrave, p. 495, col. 2,
1.18. Thence used as a verb, K. John, v. 7. 95.—L. consummdatus,
from consummiare, to bring into one sum, to perfect.—L. con-, for
cum, together; and summa,asum. See Sum. Der. consummate,
verb; consummate-ly, consummat-ion.

CONSUMPTION, CONSUMPTIVE; see Consume.
CONTACT, a close touching, meeting. (L.) Dryden has contact,
Essay on Satire, 184.—L. contactus, a touching. L. contactus, pp.
of contingere, to touch closely.—L. con-, for cum, together; and
tangere, to touch. See Tact, Tangent. And see below.

CONTAGION, transmission of disease by contact. (F.—L.)
In Frith’s Works, p. 115, col. 2. ME. contagioun, Chaucer, C. T.
15540 (G 72).—F. contagion, ‘ contagion, infection ;” Cot.—L. con-
tagionem, acc. of contagio, a touching, hence, contagion.—L. con-,
for cum, with; and zag-, 2nd grade of tag-, as in *tag-tus (> tac-tus),
pp: of tangere, to touch. See Contact. Der. contagi-ous, -ous-ly,
-ous-ness. And see contaminate, contiguous,

CONTAIN, to comprise, include, hold in. (F.—L.) ME. con-
tenen, conteinen; Rob. of Glouc. p. 547, 1. 11373. —OF. contien-, a
tonic stem of contenir (Supp. to Godefroy).=—L. continére, pp. con-
tentus. = L.. con-, for cum, together; and ¢enére,to hold. See Tenable.
Der. contain-able; also content, q.v.; continent, q.v.}3 continue, q.v-
CONTAMINATE, to pollute, corrupt, defile. (L.) In Shak.
J. Ces. iv. 3. 24. Used as a pp., spelt contamynate, in Hall, Chron.,
Hen. VII. an. xi. § 1.—L. contaminatus, pp. of contimindare, to defile. —
L. contimin-, stem of contamen, contagion, which stands for *con-
tagmen.—L, con-, for cum, together; and ¢ag-, as in ¢ac-tus (for
* tag-tus), pp. of tangere, to touch. See Max Miiller, Lectures,

K 2


182 CONTANGO
‘Sth ed. ii, 309. See Contact, Contagion, Der. contami-
nat-i0n.


CONTANGO, the percentage which a buyer of stock pays to
the seller to postpone transfer. (Span.?—L.?) Said to be an arbi-
trary or fortuitous formation from the verb to continue, But it
answers in form to Span. contengo, 1 p. $s. pr. of contener, ‘to refrain,
curb, restrain, repress, check the motion or progress of anything ;’
Neuman.=L. continére, to contain; see Contain. Thus contango
means ‘I check progress,’ i.e. ‘I put it off,

CONTEMN, to despise. (F.—L.) ‘Vice to contemne, in vertue
to rejoyce;’ Lord Surrey, On the Death of Sir T. W., ii. 10.—F.
contemner (Cot.).—L. contemnere, to despise, pp. contemtus or con-
zemptys.— L.-con-, for cum, with, wholly; and temnere, to despise
(of uncertain origin). Der. contempt, from MF. contempt, which
from L. contemptus, scorn, from the L. pp. contemptus; hence con-
dempt-ible, -ibly, -ible-ness ; contemptu-ous, -ly, -ness.

CONTEMPLATH, to consider attentively. (L.) [The sb. con-
templation was in early use; spelt contemplaciun in Ancren Riwle,
p- 142; and derived from OF. contemplacion.] Shak. has contemplate,
3 Hen. VI, ii. 5. 33.—L. contemplatus, pp. of contemplari, to observe,
consider, used orig, of the augurs who observed a ¢templum in the
sky.—L. con-, for cum, together; and templum, a space marked out
in the sky for observation; also, a temple. See Temple; and
compare Consider, a word of similar origin. Der. contemplat-ion,
ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness.

CONTEMPORANEOUS, happening or being at the same
time. (L.) ‘The contemporaneous insurrections ;’ State Trials, Col.
J. Penruddock, an. 1655 (R.).—L. contempordneus, at the same time;
with change of -us to -ous, as in conspicuous, q.v.—L. con-, for cum,
together; and zempor-, for *tempos-, stem of tempus, time. See
Temporal. Der. contemporaneous-ly, -ness. Similarly is formed
contemporary, from L. con- and temporarius, temporary; cf. L. con-
temporare, to be at the same time (Tertullian).

CONTEND, to strive, dispute, fight. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, iv.
1. 7.—F. contendre (by loss of the final -re, which was but slightly
sounded); cf. Vend.=L. contendere, to stretch out, extend, exert,
fight, contend. = L. con-, for cum, with, wholly ; and tendere, to stretch.
See Tend (1). Der. (like L. pp. contentus) content-ion (F. con-
tention), content-ious (F. contentieux), -iows-ly, -ious-ness.

CONTENT, adj. satisfied. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. v. 144. =F.
content, ‘content, satisfied;’ Cot.—L. contentus, content; pp. of
continére, to contain. See Contain. Der. content, verb, from F.


contenter, which from Late L. contentare, to satisfy, make content; }


also content-ed, -ed-ly, -ed-ness; also content, sb., that which is con-
tained ; and content-s, pl.

CONTEST, to call in question, dispute. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Cor. iv. 5. 116.—F. contester, ‘to contest, call or take to witnesse,
make an earnest protestation or complaint unto; also, to brabble,
argue, debate,’ &c.; Cot.—L. contestari, to call to witness. = L. con-,
for cum, together; and ¢estari, to bear witness, from Zestis, a witness.
See Testify. Der. contest, sb.; contest-able.

CONTEXT, a passage connected with part of a sentence quoted.
(L.) See quotation in Richardson from Hammond, Works, ii. 182 ;
and Phillips (1658). Also MF. contexte, ‘a context,’ &c.; Cot.=L.
contextus, a joining together, connexion, order, construction. = L. pp.
contextus, woven together; from contexere, 10 weave together.=—L.
con-, for cum, together; and texere, to weave. See Text. Der.
context-ure ; see texture.

CONTIGUOUDS, adjoining, near. (L.) In Milton, P. L. vi. 828,
vil. 273. Formed from L. contiguus, that may be touched, con-
tiguous, with change of -ws into -ows, as in contemporaneous, &c.
—L. con- (cum), together; and ¢tig-, weakened form of ¢ag-, as in
tac-tus (for */ag-tus), pp. of tangere, to touch. See Contingent.
Der. contiguous-ly, =-ness ; also contigu-i-ty.

CONTINENT, restraining, temperate, virtuous. (F.—L.) Spelt
contynent, Wyclif, Titus, i. 8, where the Vulgate has continentem.—
F. continent, continent, sober, moderate ;’ Cot.—L. continentem, acc.
of continens, pres. pt. of continére, to contain. See Contain, Der.
continent, sb.; continent-ly, continence, continenc-y.

CONTINGENT, dependent on. (L.) Contingent occurs in
T. Usk, Test. of Love, bk, i. c. 4. 1.56; bk. ii. c.9.1.147. He
also has contingence, bk. ii. c. 9.1. 181. Contingency is in Dryden,
Threnodia Augustalis, st. xviii. 1. 494.—L. contingent-, stem of pres.
pt. of contingere, to touch, relate to.—L. con-, for cum, together;
and tangere, to touch, See Tangent. Der. contingent-ly, con-
“ingence, contingenc-y.

CONTINUE, to persist in, extend, prolong. (F.—L.) ME. con-
zinuen, whence ME, pres. part. continuende, Gower, C. A. ii. 18;
bk. iv. 508.—F. continuer; Cot.—L. continudre, to connect, unite,
make continuous.=L. continuus, holding together, continuous. —
LL. continére, to hold together, contain. See Contain. Der. con-


CONTRAVENE


tinu-ed, continu-ed-ly, continu-ance (Gower, C. A. ii. 143 bk. iv. 368) ;
also continu-al, continu-al-ly, words in early use, since we find
cuntinuelement in the Ancren Riwle, p. 142; also continuat-ion, -ive,
-or, from the L. pp. continudtus ; and see below. zh dng

CONTINUOUS, holding together, uninterrupted. CL.) Con-
tinuously is in Cudworth’s Intellectual System, p. 167 (R.).—L.
continuus, holding together; with change of -xs into -ous, as in
contemporaneous, &c.—L. continére, to hold together; see Contain..
Der, continuous-ly ; and, from the same source, continu-i-ty. re

CONTORT, to writhe, twist about. (L.) ‘In wreathes contorted ;”
Drayton, The Moon-calf, 1. 81.—L. contortus, pp. of contorquére, to
turn round, brandish, hurl.—L. con-, for cum, together ; and torguére,
to turn, twist. See Torture. Der. contort-ion. 3

CONTOUR, an outline. (F.—Ital.—L. and Gk.) In Phillips
(1706). Borrowed from F. contour ; Cotgrave explains‘le contour d’une
ville’ by ‘ the compasse, or whole round of territory or ground, lying
next unto and about a towne.’ =Ital. coztorno, a circuit; from con-
tornare, ‘to encircle ;’ Florio.—L. con- (cum), together; and torndre,
to round off, to turn. See Turn.

CONTRA, prefix, against; from L. contra, against. L. contra
was orig. the ablative fem. of an obsolete form * con-t(e)r-us, a com-
parative form from con- (for cum), prep. together; cf. extra, prep.,
from exterus.

CONTRABAND, against law, prohibited. (Span.—Ital.—L.)
© Contraband wares of beauty; Spectator, no. 33. Hakluyt has
‘by Contrabanda;’ Voy. ii. 1. 224, 1. 24.—Span. contrabando, pro-
hibited goods.—Ital. contrabbando, prohibited goods (whence also
F. contrebande). —Ital. contra, against ; and bando, a ban, proclama-
tion. L. contra, against; and Late L. bandum, a ban, proclamation.
See Ban. Der. contraband-ist.

CONTRACT (1) to draw together, shorten. (L.) In Shak.
All’s Well, v. 3.51. Palsgrave has contracte, p. 497.—L. contractus,
pp- of contrahere, to contract, lit. to draw together.—L. con-, for
cum, together ; and ¢rahere, to draw. See Trace. Der. contract-ed,,
-ed-ly, -ed-ness; contract-ible, -ible-ness, -ibil-i-ty; contract-ile, -il-i-ty,
-ion; and see contract (2).

CONTRACT (2), a bargain, agreement, bond. (F.—L.) In
Shak. Temp. ii. 1. 151.— MF. contract, ‘a contract, bargaine, agree-
ment;’ Cot. [Cf. F. contracter, ‘to contract, bargaine;’ id.]—L.
contractum, acc. of contractus, a drawing together; also a compact,
bargain. = L. contractus, drawn together. See Contract (1). Der.
contract, verb, i.e. to make a contract (F. contracter) ; contract-or.

CONTRADICT, to reply to, oppose verbally. (L.) In the
Mirror for Magistrates, p. 850. Sir T. More has contradictory, Works,
p-110ge. T.Usk has contradiccion, Test. of Love, bk. ii. c. 11.1. 116;
and contradictorie, bk. ii. c. 13. 1. 129.—L. contrdadictus, pp. of
contradicere, to speak against.=L. contra, against; and dicere, to
speak. See Diction. Der. contradict-ion, contradict-or-y,

CONTRADISTINGUISH, to distinguish by contrast. (Hy-
brid; L. and F.) Used by Bp. Hall, Episcopacy by Divine Right,
pt. iii. s. 2 (R.). Made up of L. contra, against; and distinguish,.
q.v. Der. contradistinct-ion, -ive.

CONTRALTO. In singing, the part next above the alto.
(Ital.—L.) First found in 1769; contrealt in 1730. Ital. contralto..
= Ital. contra, against (L. contra) ; and alto, the high voice in singing,.
from Ital. alto, high; which from L. altus, high.

CONTRAPUNTAL, relating to counterpoint. (Ital.—L.).
Modern. From Mltal. contrapunto (Ital. contrappunto), counter-
point. Ital. contra (L. contra), over against ; and punto (L. punctum),
a point. See Counterpoint.

CONTRARY, opposite, contradictory, (F.—L.) Formerly
accented contrary. ME. contrarie. Inearly use. In An Early Eng.
Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 30, 1. 1.—AF. contrarie, Year-books of
Edw. I., 1302-3, p. 363; OF. contraire.—L. contrarius, contrary.
Formed from the prep. contra, against. See Contra. Der. contrari-
ly, -ness, -e-ty, -wise.

CONTRAST, to stand in opposition to, to appear by com-.
parison, (F.—L.) The neuter sense of the verb is the orig. one in
Latin; whence the act. sense ‘to put in contrast with. ‘The
figures of the groups... must contrast each other by their several
positions;’? Dryden, A Parallel between Poetry and Painting (R.) ;.
p- 164 (ed. Yonge).—F. contraster, ‘to strive, withstand, contend
against;’ Cot. Late L. contrastare, to stand opposed to, oppose. = L.
contra, against; and stare, to stand. See Stand. Der. contrast, sb.

CONTRAVENE, to oppose, hinder. (F.—L.) ‘ Contravened
the acts of parliament ;’ State Trials, John Ogilvie, an. 1615 (R.) =
MF. contrevenir, ‘to thwart;’ Cot. [Cf. AF. contrevenant, contra-
yening; Statutes of the Realm, i. 104 (1285).]—L. contrduenire, to
break a law; lit. to come against, oppose.—L. contra, against; and
uenire, to come, cognate with E. come, q.v. Der. contravent-ion,.
from the L. pp. contrauentus.


CONTRETEMPS


-CONTRETEMPS, a mishap, a hitch. (F.—L.) In Thackeray,
Vanity Fair, ch. 34 (near the end) ; and see the Stanford Dict.—F,
contre-temps, a mishap, inopportune event.—L. contra, against; and
tempus, time, opportunity.

CONTRIBUTE, to pay a share of a thing. (L.) Accented
edntribute in Milton, P. L. viii. 155. Shak. has contribution, Hen. VILL,
i. 2. 95.—L. contributus, pp. of contribuere, to distribute, to contri-
bute. = L.con-, for cum, together; and tribuere,to pay. See Tribute.
Der. contribut-ion, -ive, -ar-y, -or-¥.

CONTRITE, very penitent, lit. bruised thoroughly. (F.—L.)
Chaucer has contrite and contrition, near the beginning of.the Persones
Tale (I 110, 133).—OF. (and F.) contrit.—L. contritus, thoroughly
bruised; -in Late L., penitent; pp. of conterere.—L. con-, for cum,
together; and ¢erere, to rub, grind, bruise; see Trite. Der. con-
trite-ly, contrit-ion.

CONTRIVE, to hit upon, find ont, plan. (F.—L. and Gk.)
Contrive is a late and altered spelling; ME. controuen, controeuen,
contreuen (where wis for v); 15th cent., contreve, contryve; 16th cent.,
contrive. Spelt controwe, rhyming with reproue (reprove), in the
Romaunt of the Rose, 7547; Gower, C. A. i. 216; bk. il. 1708. —
OF. controver, to find, to imagine, invent; 3 p. Ss. pr. contreuve
(whence ME. controeuen, contreuen); see Godefroy. ‘The pt. t. pl.
controverent occurs in st. g of La Vie de Saint Léger (Bartsch,
Chrestomathie Francaise). = OF. con- (L. con-, for cum) with, wholly ;
and OF. ¢rover, mod. F.. trouver, to find. The OF. trover was
formerly explained from L. zurbare, but was really formed from
Late L. tropadre; for which see Troubadour, Trover. Der.
contriv-ance, contriv-er. @] An old pronunciation of the -treve in
contreve is preserved in retrieve.

CONTROL, restraint, command. (F.—L.) Control is short for
contre-rolle, the old form of counter-roll. The sb. conterroller, i.e.
comptroller or controller, occurs in P. Plowman, C. xii. 298; and see
Controller in Blount’s Law Dictionary. —OF. contre-role, contre-rolle,
a duplicate register, used to verify the official or first roll; see Con-
tréle in Brachet; and see Godefroy (Supplement) and Cotgrave. =
OF. contre, over against; and role, rodle, a roll, from rotulum, acc.
of L. rotulus. See Counter and Roll. Der. control, verb; con-
troll-able, control-ment ; also controller (sometimes spelt comptroller,
but badly), P. Plowman, C. xii. 298; controller-ship.

CONTROVERSY, dispute, variance. (F.—L.) ‘ Controuersy
and varyaunce;’ Fabyan’s Chron. K. John of France, an. 7; ed.
Ellis, p. 505. ME. controuersie, Wyclif, Heb. vi. 16 (earlier text).
[ The verb controvert is a later formation, and of E. growth; there is
no L. controuertere.] = AF. controversye, Langtoft’s Chron., ed. Wright,
1. 434 (1307).—L. contréuersia, a quarrel, dispute.—L. contrauersus,
opposed, controverted.—L. contrd-, masc. or neut. form allied to
fem. contra, against; and wersus, turned, pp. of uertere, to turn.
See Contra and Verse. Der. controversi-al, -al-ly, -al-ist ; also
controvert (see remark above), controvert-ible, -ibl-y.

CONTUMACY, pride, stubbornness, (F.—L.) In Fabyan’s
Chron. King John, an. 7; ed. Ellis, p. 316. Chaucer has contumacie,
C.T., Pers. Tale, I 391. [The L. adj. contumax, contumacious, was
adopted both into French and Middle-English without change, and
may be seen in P. Plowman, C. xiv. 85, in Chaucer’s Pers. Tale
(De Superbia), and in Cotgrave.]—AF. contumacie, Year-books of
Edw. I., 1302-3, p. 367.—L. contumacia, obstinacy, contumacy. —L.
contumax, gen. contumdci-s, stubborn.—L,. con- (cum), very, wholly ;
*tum-ax, adj. formed from tum-ére, to swell with pride. See Tumid.
Der. contumaci-ous, -ous-ly, -ous-ness ; and see below.

CONTUMELY, reproach. (F.—L.) ‘Not to feare the con-
tumelyes of the crosse;’ Barnes, Works, p. 360, col. 1. ME. con-
tumelie, Chaucer, C. T., Pers. Tale, 1 556.— F. contumelie, ‘ contumely,
reproach ;’ Cot.—L. contumélia, misusage, insult, reproach. Prob.
connected with L. contumax; see above. Der. contumeli-ous, -ous-ly,
~OUS-NESS.

CONTUSEH, to bruise severely, crush. (L.) Used by Bacon,
Nat. Hist. § 574.—L. contiisus, pp. of contundere, to bruise severely.
—L. con-, for cum, with, very much; and tundere, to beat, of which
the base is tud-; cf. Skt. ¢ud, to strike, sting (which has lost an
initial s), Goth, stautan, to strike, smite. —4/STEUD, to strike;
Brugmann, i. § 818 (2). Der. contus-ion.

CONUNDRUM. (L.?) ‘I must have my crotchets! And my
conundrums!’ Ben Jonson, The Fox, Act v. sc. 7. It here means a
conceit, device. ‘I begin To have strange conundrums in my head;’
Massinger, Bondman, Act ii. sc. 3. Again, in Ben Jonson’s Masque,
called News from the New World, Factor says: ‘And I have hope
to erect a staple for news ere long, whither all shall be brought, and
thence again vented under the name of Staple News, and not trusted
to your printed conundrums of the Serpent in Sussex, or the witches
bidding the devil to dinner at Derby; news that, when a man sends
them down to the shires where they are said to be done, were never


CONVIVIAL 133


there to be found.’ Here conundrum means a hoax or a canard. In
Ram Alley, iii. 1. 2 (Hazlitt’s Old Plays, x. 313) we find: ‘ We old
men have our crotchets, our conundrums, Our figaries, quirks, and
quibbles, As well as youth.’ Also spelt guonundrum, conuncrum,
conimbrum. Etymology unknown; but doubtless of Latin origin,
originating in a university joke; attributed (in 1645) to Oxford ; see
N.E.D. Cf. quillet, as a corruption of guidlibet. It might thus be
an old term of the schools, purposely perverted, such as *guo-nunc-
rum; like guidnunckery, found in 1804. For the later sense, see
Spectator, no. 61, May 10, 1711.

CONVALESCE, to recover health, grow well. (L.) ‘He
found the queen somewhat convalesced;’ Knox, Hist. Reformation,,
b. v. an. 1566.—L. conualescere, to begin to grow well; an inceptive
form. = L, con-, for cum, together, wholly ; and -walescere, an inceptive
form of walére, to be strong. See Valiant. Der. convalesc-ent,
convalesc-ence.

CONVENE, to assemble. (F.—L.) ‘ Now convened against it ;’
Baker, Charles I, Jan. 19, 1648 (R.). It is properly a neuter verb,
signifying ‘to come together ;’ afterwards made active, in the sense
‘to summon.’ =F, convenir, ‘to assemble, meet, or come together ;’
Cot.=—L. conuenire, pp. conuentus, to come together.—L. con-, for
cum, together; and uenire, to come, cognate with E. come, q.v.
Der. conven-er ; conven-i-ent, q.v.; also convent, q.v., convent-ion, q.v.

CONVENIENT, suitable, commodious. (L.) In early use.
In Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iii. pr. 11, 1. 80.—L. conuenient-, stem.
of conueniens, suitable; orig. pres. pt. of conuentre, to come together,
to suit. See Convene. Der. convenient-ly, convenience,

CONVENT, a monastery or nunnery. (L.) [ME. couent (u for
v), in Chaucer, C. T., B 1827, 1867; from OF. covent; still preserved
in Covent Garden. Convent is the L. form.J—L. conwentus, an
assembly.—L. conuentus, pp. of conuenire, to come together; see
Convene. Der. conventu-al; convent-ic-le (Levins).

CONVENTION, assembly, agreement. (F.—L.) ‘Accordyng
to his promes [promise] and conwencion;’ Hall, Hen. VI, an. 18. § 4.
=F. convention, ‘a covenant, contract;’ Cot.—L. conuentidnem, acc.
of conuentio, a meeting, a compact; cf. conuentus, pp. of conuenire, to
come together; see Convene. Der. convention-al, -al-ly, -al-ism,
-al-i-ty.

CONVERGE, to verge together to a point. (L.) ‘After they
[the rays] have been made to converge by reflexion or refraction ;’
Newton, Optics (Todd). = L. conuergere, to incline together (Isidore).
= L. con-, for cum, together; and wergere, to turn, bend, incline.
See Diverge, and Verge, verb. Der. converg-ent, -ence, -enc-y.

CONVERSE, to associate with, talk. (F.—L.) ME. conuersen
(with w for v) ; the pres. pt. conwersand occurs in the Northern poem
by Hampole, entitled The Pricke of Conscience, 1. 4198.—F. con-
verser; Cotgrave gives: ‘ Converser avec, to converse, or be much
conversant, associate, or keep much company with.’ =L. conuersari,
to live with any one; orig. passive of conuersdre, to turn round, the
frequentative form of conuertere, to turn round. See Convert.
Der. converse, sb.3 convers-at-ion (ME. conuersacion, Ayenbite of
Inwyt, p. 96, from OF. conversacion) ; conversation-al, -al-ist ; convers-
able, -ant ; also conversazione, the Ital. form of conversation.

CONVERT, to change, turn round. (F.—L.) ME. couuerten
(with ~ for v); Hampole, Pricke of Conscience, 4502; Chaucer,
C.T., B 435.—AF. and OF. convertir.—Folk-L. *convertire, for L.
conuertere, to turn round, to change; pp. conuersus.—L. con-, for
cum, together, wholly; and wertere, to turn. See Verse. Der.
convert, sb.; convert-ible, -ibl-y, -ibil-i-ty; also converse, adj., -ly,
convers-ion ; and see converse above.

CONVEX, roundly projecting; opposed to concave. (L.) In
Milton, P. L. ii. 434, iii. 419.—L. conwexus, convex, arched, vaulted ;
properly pp. of L. conuehere, to bring together, hence, to unite by an
arch.= L. con-, for cum, together; and wehere, to carry. See Vehicle.
Der. convex-ly, -ed, -i-ty.

CONVEY, to bring on the way, transmit, impart. (F.—L.)
ME. conueien (with « for v), to accompany, convoy (a doublet of
convey); Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 678, 768.—AF. and ONorth F.
conveier, answering to O. Central F. convoier, to convey, convoy,
conduct, accompany, bring on the way.—Late L. conuiare, to accom-
pany on the way.=L. con-, for cum, together ; and wia, a way, allied
to uehere (above). See Viaduct. Der. convey-able, -ance, -anc-er,
-anc-ing. Doublet, convoy.

CONVINCE, to convict, refute, persuade by argument. (L.)
See Convince in Trench, Select Glossary. Palsgrave has conuynce,
p- 498. ‘All reason did convince ;’ Gascoigne, The Fable of
Philomela, st. 22.—L. conuincere, pp. conuictus, to. overcome by proof,
demonstrate, refute. —L. con-, for cum, with, thoroughly ; and wincere,
to conquer. See Wictor. Der. convinc-ible, -ing-ly; also, (from L.

Pp. conuictus) convict, verb and sb.; convict-ion, -ive.


CONVIVIAL, festive. (L.) Shak. has the verb convive, to feast;


134 CONVOKE


Troilus, iv.5.272. Sir T. Browne has convival, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 25.
§15. The form convivial is used by Denham, Of Old Age, pt. ili. 47.
=L. conuiuidlis, belonging to a feast. Formed, with suffix -dlis,
from L. conwiui-um, a feast.—L. conuiuere, to live or feast with any
one.=L. con-, for cum, with; and wtuere, to live. See Victuals.
Der. convivial-ly, -i-ty.

CONVOKH, to call together. (L.) Used by Sir W. Temple, On
the United Provinces, c. 2. Florio has Ital. convocare, ‘to conuoke.’
[The sb. convocation was in use much earlier, in Trevisa, tr. of Higden,
vii, 111.]—L. conuocare, pp. conuocdius, to call together. —L. con-,
for ‘cum, together; and wocdre, to call. See Vocal, Der.
convoc-at-ion.

CONVOLVE, to writhe about. (L.) In Milton, P. L. vi. 328.
=L. conuoluere, to roll or fold together; pp. conwoliitus. = L. con-, for
cum, together; and woluere, to roll. See Voluble. Der. convolute,
convolut-ed, -ion; also convolv-ul-us, a twining plant, a pure L. word.

CONVOY, to conduct, bring on the way. (F.—L.) ME. coz-
uoien (with uz for v), another form of ME. conueien, to convey ;
common in Barbour’s Bruce. ‘Till convoy him till his cuntre;’
Bruce, v. 195. It is the Central F. form of convey. See Convey.
Der. convoy, sb.

CONVULSBE, to agitate violently. (L.) Convulsion is in Shak.
Tempest, iv. 260. The verb convalse is later; Todd gives a quotation
for it, dated A.D. 1681.—L. conuulsus, pp. of conuellere, to pluck up,
dislocate, convulse. = L. con-, for cum, together, wholly; and wellere,
to pluck. Der. convuls-ion, -ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness.

CONY, CONEY, a rabbit. (F.—L.) ME. coni, conni; also
conig, coning, conyng. ‘ Conies ther were also playinge ;’ Rom. of the
Rose, 1404. ‘Cony, cuniculus,’ Prompt. Parv. p.g0. ‘ Hic cuniculus,
a conyng;’ Vocab. 759. 25.—AF. conil (pl. conis), Stat. of the Realm,
i. 380 (1363); conyn (conin), Lib. Custumarum, p. 305; OF. connil.
=L. cuniculum, acc. of cuniculus, a rabbit. @ Du. konijn, Dan.
kanin, G. kanin-chen, are all of L. origin. The E. word is from the
OF. pl. conis, by dropping s.

COO, to make a noise as a dove. (E.) ‘Coo, to make a noise as
turtles and pigeons do;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. ‘Croo, or Crookel,
to make a noise like a dove or pigeon;’ id. A purely imitative
word, formed from the sound. See Cuckoo.

COOK, to dress food; a dresser of food. (L.) ME. coken, to cook;
P. Plowman, C. xvi. 60; cook, a cook, Chaucer. The verb seems, in
English, to have been made from the sb., which occurs as AS. céc,
Grein, i. 167. The word so closely resembles the Latin that it must
have been borrowed, and is not cognate.—L. coguus, a cook; from
coquere, to cook.4-Gk. méaoew, to cook; Skt. pach, to cook; Russ.
pech(e),to bake, —=4/PEQ; whence L. * pequere, becoming *guequere by
assimilation, and finally coqguere; Gk. *méq-terv, whence méooew. See
Brugmann, i. § 661. @ AS. cdc<Late L. cdcus, for coguus. Der.
cook-er-y = ME. cokerie, Gower, C. A. ii. 83; bk. iv. 2433.

COOL, slightly cold. (E.) ME. col, cole; Rob. of Glouc. p. 131,
1.2775. AS. cdl, cool, Grein, i. 167.4-Du. koel. Teut. type *kdl-uz;
also, with mutation, Dan. kol, kélig, cool, chilly; G. kuhl. From
kol-, 2nd grade of kal-, as in AS. cal-an, Icel. kala, to freeze (pt. t.
kol). See Cold. Der. cool, verb; cool-ly, cool-ness, cool-er ; chill.

COOLIE, COOLY, an East Indian porter. (Hindustani.) The
pl. coolyes occurs in Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p. 78 (head-
line). — Hind. ali, a labourer, porter, cooley ; Hindustani Dict. by
D. Forbes, ed. 1859, p. 309. Prob. from Koli, a tribal name (Yule);
though Wilson would derive it from Tamil #uli, daily hire or wages.

COOMEB, a dry measure; see Comb (2).

COOP, a box or cage for birds, a tub, vat. (L.) Formerly, it also
meant a basket. ME. cupe,a basket. ‘ Cupen he let fulle of flures’
=he caused (men) to fill baskets with flowers; Floriz and Blancheflur,
ed. Lumby, 435; see also ll. 438, 447, 452, 457-—L. ciipa, a tub, vat,
butt, cask; whence also F. cuve. The L. cipa is cognate with Skt.
kiipa-, a pit, well, hollow; Curtius, i. 194. Cf. also Du. kuip, Icel.
kipa, a bowl; also from L. cipa. See Cup and Hive. Der. coop,
verb; coop-er, coop-er-age.

CO-OPERATE, to work together. (L.) Sir T. More has the
pres. part. codperant (a F. form), Works, p. 383 e.— Late L. codperiitus,
pp- of codperari, to work together; Mark, xvi. 20 (Vulgate), —L. co-,
for com, i.e. cum, together; and operari, to work. See Operate.
Der. codperat-or, codperant (pres. pt. of F. codperer, to work together,
from L. codperdri), codperat-ion, -ive.

CO-ORDINATEH, of the same rank or order. (L.) ‘Not sub-
ordinate, but co-ordinate parts;’ Prynne, Treachery of Papists, pt. i.
p- 41 (R.).—L. co-, for com, i.e. cum, together; and ordindatus, pp. of
ordinare, to arrange. See Ordain. Der. codrdinat-ion.

COOT, a sort of water-fowl. (E.) ME. cote, coote. ‘Cote, mergus;’
Voc. 641. 10. ‘Coote, byrde, mergus, fullica;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 95.
Spelt coote in Wyclif, Levit. xi, 16.4-Dnu. koet, a coot; fem. B. From
an AS. form *céte, not found. History unknown.


COPROLITE


COPAIBA, a kind of balsam. (Port.—Brazil.) Spelt copayba in
1712 (N. E. D.) = Port. copaiba (Vieyra; Eng.—Port. Dict.). = Brazil.
copaiba ; Hist. Brasil. (1648); ii. 230. Cf. Span. copayva in Pineda.
The suffix -iba means ‘plant,’ ‘tree.’

COPAL,, a resinous substance. (Span.— Mexican.) ‘Copal, a kind
of white and bright resin, brought from the West Indies;’ Blount’s
Gloss. ed. 1674. ‘ Copall, or Suchicopal;’ E. G., tr. of Acosta, b. iv.
c. 29; also in Frampton, tr. of Monardes, fol. 2. It is a product of
the Rhus copallinum, a native of Mexico; Engl. Cyclopedia. — Span.
copal, copal.= Mexican copalli, resin. ‘The Mexican copalli is a
generic name for resin;’ Clavigero’s Hist. of Mexico, tr. by C. Cullen,
ed. 17873 vol. i. p. 33.

CO-PARCENER, a co-partner. (L. and F.—L.) From L. co-,
for com, i.e. cum, with; and ME. parcener, a partner. We find Anglo-
French parcener, parcenere, Year-books of Edw. I., 1292-3, p. 155;
parceners, pl., id. 45; Stat. Realm, i. 49, an. 1278; Annals of Burton,
pp. 471, 480. Also parcenerie, partnership, Year-books of Edw, I.,
1292-3, p. 45. See Partner.

COPE, (1), a cap, hood, cloak, cape. (Late L.) ME. cape, cope.
‘Hec capa, a cope;’ Voc. 570.16. And see Ancren Riwle, p. 56;
Havelok, 429. Gower has: ‘In kirtles and in copes riche;’ and
again: ‘ Under the cope of heven;’ Conf. Amantis, ii. 46, 102 ; iii.
138. The phrase ‘ cope of heaven’ is still in use in poetry. However
afterwards differentiated, the words cope, cape were the same originally.
Cope represents an AS. *cdpe, f.; cf. Icel. kdpa, a cape; and cf. pope
(from AS. papa).—Late L. capa, a cape. See Cape. Der. cop-ing,
cop-ing-stone, i.e. capping-stone.

COPE (2), to vie with, match. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Hamlet,
ili. 2,60. ME. coupen, to strike, encounter; Destr. of Troy, l. 7231.
= OF. couper, coper ; see further under Coppice.

COPE (3), to buy. (Du.) ME. copen; Lydgate, London Lickpeny,
st. 7, in Spec. of English, ed. Skeat, p. 25. A word introduced into
England by Flemish and Dutch traders.—Du. koopen, to buy, put-
chase; orig. to bargain. Cognate with AS, céapian,to cheapen, from
AS. céap, a bargain. See Cheap.

COPECK, a small Russian coin, worth less than $d.; a hundredth
part of a rouble (Russ.) Spelt copec in 1698 (N. E..D.).— Russ.
kopieika, a copeck ; dimin. of kopeé,a lance. So called from the figure
of Ivan IV, holding a lance (1535). See Rouble.

COPING-STONE;; see under Cope (1).

COPIOUS, ample, plentiful. (F.—L.) ‘A copyous oost,? Wyclif,
1 Maccab. xvi. 5; where the Vulgate has ‘ exercitus copiosus.’ =OF.
copieux, fem. copieuse, ‘copious, abundant ;’ Cot. = L. cdpidsus, plentiful ;
formed with suffix -dsus from L. cdpi-a, plenty. The L. cdpia stands
for *co-opia; from co- (for com, i.e. cum, together, exceedingly), and
the stem op-, seen in ofés, riches, and in in-opia, want. See Opulent.
Der. copious-ly, -ness; and see copy.

COPPER, a reddish metal. (Cyprus.) ME. coper, Chaucer, C. T.
16760 (G 1292). AS. copor.—Late L. cuper; L. cuprum, copper;
a contraction for cuprium @s, i.e. Cyprian brass. See Max Miiller,
Lectures, 8th ed. ii. 257.—Gk. Kumpios, Cyprian; from Kuzpos,
Cyprus, a Greek island on the S. coast of Asia Minor, whence the
Romans obtained copper; Pliny, xxxiv. 2. 4 From the same source
is G. kupfer, Du. koper, F. cuivre, copper. Der. copper-y, copper-
plate; also copperas, q.Vv.

COPPERAS, sulphate of iron. (F.—L.) Formerly applied
also to sulphate of copper, whence the name. ME. coperose. ‘ Coperose,
vitriola;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 91.—OF. coperose, the old spelling of
couperose, which Cotgrave explains by ‘copres,’ i.e. copperas. Cf.
Ital. copparosa, Span. caparrosa, copperas. PB. Diez supposed these
forms to be from L. eupri rosa, lit. copper-tose, a supposition which
he strengthened by the fact that the Greek name for copperas was
xaAKav6os, lit. brass-flower. But this is prob. mere popular etymology;
the Late L. cuprdésa seems to be an ordinary fem. adj. formation
from L. cupr-um.

COPPICH, COPPY, COPSE, a wood of small growth.
(F.—L.—Gk.) Coppy (common in prov. Eng.) and copse are both
corruptions of coppice. Coppice is used by Drayton, The Muses’
Elysium, Nymph. 4. It should rather be spelt copice, with one p. =
OF. copeiz, copeis, cut wood; Godefroy. Hence applied to brushwood
or underwood, frequently cut for fuel, or to a wood kept under by
cutting. [Cf. Late L. copecia, underwood, a coppice. ]= OF. coper, to
cut; F. couper.— OF. cop, formerly colp, a blow, stroke ; F. coup; see
coup in the Supp. to Godefroy. = Late L. colpum, acc. of colpus, a stroke;
from L. colaphus, a blow.= Gk. #éAagos, a blow; a word of uncertain
origin. @ OF. copeiz represents a Late L. type *colpaticium, from
colpare, to strike. Coppy arose from coppice being taken as coppies,

1.; and copse from reducing a supposed pl. *coppis to copse.

COPROLITE, a roundish stone, supposed to consist of fossilised
feeces (Gk.) Modern; in 1829.—Gk. xémpo-, for xémpos, dung; and
Aidos, a stone.


-COPULATE


COPULATS, to couple together. (L.) Used as a pp. by Bacon,
Essay 39, Of Custom.=L. cdpulatus, joined; pp. of cdpuldre,—L.
copula, a band; bond, link; see Couple. Der. copulat-ion, copulat-ive;
and see couple.

COPY, an imitation of an original. (F.—L.) [The orig. signifi-
cation was ‘plenty ;’ and the present sense was due to the multipli-
cation of an original by means of numerous copies.] ME. copy, copie.
‘Copy of a thinge wretyn, copia;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 92. ‘Grete copy
{i.e. abundance] and plente of castelles, of hors, of metal, and of
hony ;’ Trevisa, i. 301.—F*. copie, ‘the copy of a writing; also store,
plenty, abundance of;’ Cot.—L. cdpia, plenty. See Copious. Der.
copy, verb; copi-er, copy-ist, -hold, -right.

COQUETTES, a vain flirt. (I'.—L.—Gk.) ‘The coquet (sic) is
in particular a great mistress of that part of oratory which is called
action ;’ Spectator, no. 247. ‘Affectations of coguetry ;’ id. no. 377.
=F, coguetie, ‘a pratling or proud gossip ;’ Cot. The fem. form of
coguet, the dimin, of cog, meaning ‘a little cock,’ hence vain as a cock,
strutting about; like prov. E. cocky, Cf. ‘cogueter, to swagger or
strowte it, like a cocke on his owne dung-hill;’ Cot.—F. cog, a cock.
See Cock (1). Der. coguet-ry, coquett-ish, -ish-ly, -ish-ness.

COR, a Hebrew measure of capacity. (Heb.) In Wyclif we have
the pl. ‘ coris of whete;’ Luke, xvi. 7; where the Vulgate version has
coros, and the Gk. has xdpous. = Heb, kor, a measure, a round vessel;
allied to karar, to turn round.

CORACLE, a light round wicker boat. (Welsh.) See Southey,
Madoc in Wales, c. xiii, and footnotes. In use in Wales and on the
Severn. Cotgrave explains F. carabe as ‘a corracle, or little round
skiffe.’ = W. corwgl, cwrwgl, a coracle; dimin. of W. corwg, a trunk,
a carcase, cwrwg, a frame, carcase, boat. Cf. Gael. curachan, a coracle,
dimin. of curach, a boat of wicker-work ; Gael. and Irish corrach,
Olrish curach, a boat. Stokes-Fick, p. 93.

CORACOID, beaked like a crow. (Gk.) ‘ Coracoides, a process
of the shoulder-blade;’ Phillips (1706). Medical L. coracotdes. =
Gk. xopaxoedys, like a raven.—=Gk. sopako-, for xépagé, a raven; and
eidos, form.

CORAL, a secretion of certain zoophytes. (F.—L.—Gk.) Chaucer
has coral, Prol. 158.— OF. coral ; see corail in Hatzfeld. = L. corallum,
coral; also spelt corallium.— Gk. kopaddAuov, coral. See Schade, OHG.
Dict., p. 1374. Der. corall-ine; coralli-ferous, i.e. coral-bearing,
from the L. suffix -fer, bearing, from jerre, to bear.

CORBAN, a gift. Hebrew.) In Mark, vii. 11.— Heb. gorban, an
offering to God of any sort, whether bloody or bloodless, but
particularly in fulfilment of a vow; Concise Dict. of the Bible. — Heb.
garav, to draw near, to offer. Cf. Arabic gurban, a sacrifice, victim,
oblation; Rich. Dict. p. 1123.

CORBEL, an architectural ornament. (F.—L.) Orig. an ornament
in architecture, named from the idea of a projecting beak. Cotgrave
translates F’. corbeau by ‘a raven; also, a corbell (in masonry) ;’ and
F. mutules by ‘brackets, corbells, or shouldring pieces.’ ‘Corbell of
aroffe’ [roof]; Prompt. Parv. ‘Chemyneis, corbels ;? Arnold’s Chron.
(1502); ed. 1811, p. 138. [The OF. form of corbeau was corbel, but
there were two distinct words of this form, viz. (1) a little raven, from
L. coruus, a raven, and (2) a little basket.]—OF. corbel, old spelling
of corbeau, a corbel; answering to mod. Ital. corbella, a corbel, a
bracket, given in Torriano’s Dict.; named from a fancied likeness to
a raven’s beak. = Folk-Lat. corbellum, for corvellum, acc. of corvellus,
dimin. of L. coxuus, a raven. Hatzfeld (s.v. corbeau) explains that
the projecting corbel was orig. cut slantwise, so that its profile was
beaklike. See Corvette. 4 Another architectural ornament was
a corbeil (wrongly, corbel), in the form of a basket; from F. corbeille,
L. corbicula, a little basket ; from L. corbis, a basket.

CORBY, a raven. (F.—L.) In Henryson; Dog, Wolf, and
Sheip, 1. 15.—OF. corbin, dimin. of corb, a raven (Godefroy). —L.
coruus, a raven.

CORD, a small rope. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. corde, cord; Cursor
Mundi, 2247.—OF. (and F.) corde.—Late L. corda, a cord; L.
chorda, = Gk. xop6q, the string of a musical instrument ; orig. a string
of gut. See Chord. Doublet, chord, Der. cord, verb; cord-age
(F. cordage), cord-on (F. cord-on) ; also cordelier (F. cordelier, a twist
of rope, also a Gray Friar, who used such a twist, from cordeler, to
twist ropes, which from OF. cordel, dimin. of OF. corde); also
corduroy, q.v.; cord-illera (Span.), a chain of hills.

CORDIAL, hearty, sincere. (F.—L.) Also used asasb. ‘For
gold in phisik is a cordial ;’ Chaucer, C. T., Prol. 443 (or 445).—F.
cordial, m. cordiale, f. ‘cordiall, hearty;” Cot. Cf. ‘Cordiale, the
herbe motherwort, good against the throbbing or excessive beating
of the heart;’ id.—L. cordi-, declensional stem of cor, the heart;
with suffix -alis. See Heart. Der. cordial-ly, -i-ty.

CORDUROY, a thick-ribbed or corded stuff. (F.—L.) Rees’
Cyclop., (s.v. Fustian) speaks of ‘the various cotton stuffs known by
the names of corduroy, &c. Already, in 1748, we find mention of


CORN 135


‘Serges, Duroys, Druggets, Shalloons,’ &c.; Defoe, Tour through
Great Britain, i. 94 (4th ed.). In 1722, the London Gazette
(no. 6089/4) mentions ‘a grey duroy coat.’ Hence it is probable
that corduroy represents F. corde du roi; indeed, it was also called
king’s-cord; see N.E. D.

CORDWAINER, a shoemaker. (F.—a town in Spain.) ‘A
counterfeit earl of Warwick, a cordwainer’s son;’ Bacon, Life of
Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 177, 1. 15. ‘Cordwaner, alutarius;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 92. It orig. meant a worker in cordewan or corde-
wane, i.e. leather of Cordova; thus it is said of Chaucer’s Sir Thopas
that his shoon [shoes] were ‘of Cordewane;’ C. T., B 1922.—OF,
cordoanier, a cordwainer, = OF. cordoan, cordouan, cordewan, Cordovan
leather ; Godefroy. = Late L. cordodnum, Cordovan leather ; Ducange.
= Late L. Cordoa, a spelling of Cordova, in Spain (Lat. Corduba),
which became a Roman colony in B.c. 152. @f ‘ Gallice corduan ;
alio modo dicitur cordubunum, a Corduba, civitate Hispanize, ubi
fiebat primo ;’ J. de Garlande, in Wright, Vocab. i. 125.

CORE, the hard central part of fruit, &c. (F.—L.) ‘Core of
frute, arula;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 93. ‘Take quynces ripe . .. but
kest away the core;’ Palladius on Husbandry, bk. xi. st. 73. —OF.
cor, a horn; also horn (the substance) ; also a corn on the foot, a
callosity; Cotgrave, and Supp. to Godefroy.—L. cornii, a horn,
a horny excrescence. Hollyband (1580) has: ‘ Vz cor, a core in the
feete.’? @ In the 16th century, associated with OF. coer, cuer, MF.
coeur (F. ceur), and used with the sense of ‘ heart.’ Hence Cotgrave
has: ‘ Coeur, a heart . .» also, the core of fruit; also, the queer of
a church,’ &c.; by further confusion with F. cheur.

CORIANDER, the name of a plant. (F.—L.—Gk.) See Exod.
xvi. 31; Numb. xi. 73 where Wyclif has coriandre.—¥F. coriandre,
‘the herb, or seed, coriander ;? Cot.—L. coriandrum; Exod. xvi. 31
(Vulgate version) ; where the d is excrescent, as is so commonly the
case after x.—Gk. koplayvoy, kopiavoy, also xépoy, coriander. B.
Said to be derived from Gk. xdpis, a bug, because the leaves have a
strong and bug-like smell (Weigand) ; but prob. a foreign word.

CORK, the bark of the cork-tree. (Span.—L.) ‘ Corkbarke,
cortex; Corktre, suberies;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 93. ‘The earliest use
of corke was in the sense of a cork shoe or slipper. In 1391, the
Earl of Derby paid 3s. ‘pro uno pare corkes,’ for a pair of cork
shoes; see Earl of Derby’s Expeditions (Camden Soc.), p. g1, 1. 19.
The Acts of Edw. IV (in 1463-4, Act 2, 3, c. 4) have: ‘Botes,
shoen, galoches, or corkes’ (N. E. D.). Adapted from M.Span.
al-corque, ‘a corke shooe, a pantofle;? Minsheu, This seems to be
an Arab. form allied to M.Span. (and Span.) al-cornogue, the cork-
tree; where al is the Arab. def. article, and corn-oque is formed from
L. quern-us (for *quercnus), oaken, adj. from qguercus, an oak ; the tree
being the Quercus Suber. 4 But the bark of the tree was called, in
Spanish, corcho; from L. corticem, acc. of cortex, bark. Hence E.
cork is often derived from Span. corcho, though & from ch seems hardly
possible. Der. cork, verb.

CORMORANT, a voracious sea-bird. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Rich. II, ii. 1. 38. ‘ Cormerawnte, coruus marinus, cormeraudus ;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 93. Chaucer has cormeraunt, Parl. Foules, 1. 362.
= OF. cormarant, prob. for *cormarenc, as in Godefroy (Supp.) ; MF.
cormerant, m., cormerande, f.; Palsgrave.—OF. corp, a crow; and
OF. *marenc, belonging to the sea, from L. mare, sea, with G, suffix
-ing; cf. F. flam-ant, flamingo, OF. flam-enc, with the same suffix ;
see Hatzfeld, Introd. § 142. [Cf. also Port. corvomarinho, Span.
cuervo marino, a cormorant, lit. sea-crow; L. coruus marinus, which
occurs as an equivalent to mergulus (sea-fowl) in the Reichenau
Glosses, of the 8th century.] 4 Another name for the bird is cog-
marant, .‘ sea-cock ;? see Godefroy (Supp.). The late spelling with
o may have been due to Bret. morvran (W. morfran), a cormorant.
The Breton and W. words are derived from Bret. and W. mdr, the
sea, and bran, a crow, by the usual change of 6 into v or f.

CORN (1), grain. (E.) ME. corn, Layamon, i. 166. The pl.
cornes is in Chaucer, C. T., B 3225. AS. corn, Grein, i. 166. + Du.
koren; Icel., Dan., and Swed. korn; Goth. kaurn; G. korn. Teut.
type *kurnom, n.; Idg. type *garnom, corm; whence OSlav. zrtino,
Russ. zerno, corn. Cf. L. granum, grain; and Skt. jarza-, ‘worn
down,’ pp. of ji, to grow old. Doublet, grain. (4/ GER.)
Brugmann, i. § 628. See Grain, Kernel,

CORN (2), an excrescence on the toe or foot. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Romeo, i. 5. 19. Spelt coorze in Prompt. Parv. =F. corne, ‘a horn;

. a hard or horny swelling in the backepart of a horse ;’ Cot. Cf.
OF. corn (F. cor), a hor, horny swelling. —L. cornu, horn, cognate
with E. horn, q.v. Cf. prov. F. (Verdun) corne, a corn on the foot
(Fertiault), Der. corn-e-ows, horny; from the same source are
corned, q.V., cornel, q.V., corner, q.V., cornet, q.V., cornelian, q.V.5
also corni-gerous, horn-bearing, from L. ger-ere, to bear; corni-c-ul-
ate, horn-shaped, horned, from L. corniculatus, horned ; cornu-copia,
q.v. See Core.


136 CORNEA


CORNEA, a horny membrane in the eye. (L.) L. cornea, fem.
of corneus, horny; from cornt, a horn, See Corn (2).

CORNEL, a shrub; also called dogwood, (Du.—L.) ‘ Cornels
and bramble-berries gave the rest;’ Dryden, Ovid’s Metam. bk. i.
1. 136. ‘The cornell tree;’ Lyte, tr. of Dodoens, bk. vi. c. 51.
[Cf. also F, cornille, ‘a cornell-berry;’ Cotgrave; cornillier, ‘the
long cherry, wild cherry, or cornill-tree;’ id. Cornille was also
spelt cornoalle and cornoille; and cornillier was also cornoaller and
cornoiller; id.]—=MDu,. kornelle, ‘the fruit of the cornelle-tree,’
Hexham; cf. MHG. cornelbaum, cornel-tree (Weigand).—Late L.
cornolium, a cornel-tree. = L. cornum, a cornel-berry ; cornus, a cornel-
tree, so called from the hard, horny nature of the wood.=—L. corni,,
horn. Cf. Gk. xpdvea, xpavov,acornel. See Corn (2).

CORNELIAN, a kind of chalcedony. (F.—L.) ME. cor-
neline; Maundeville’s Travels, c. xxvil. p. 275; Palsgrave has
cornalyn, p. 208. Formerly spelt corneline, cornaline, as in Maundeville
and Cotgrave. =F. cornaline, ‘the cornix or cornaline, a flesh-coloured
stone;’ Cotgrave. Cf. Port. cornelina, the cornelian-stone; also
Ital. corpiola, (1) a cornel-berry, (2) a cornelian, prob. so named
because its colour resembles that of the fruit of the cornel-tree
(Schade). — Late L. corniola, cornel-berry; cf. cornolium, cornel,=—L.
corneus, adj. from cornus, a cornel. See above, B. From the Ital.
corniola, a cornelian, came the G. carniol, a cornelian, and the E.
carneol, explained by ‘a precious stone’ in Kersey’s and Bailey’s
Dictionaries. The change from corniol to carneol points to a popular
etymology from L, carneus, fleshy, in allusion to the flesh-like
colour of the stone. And this etymology has even so far prevailed
as to cause cornelian to be spelt carnelian,

CORNER, a horn-like projection, angle. (F.—L.) ME.
corner; Gawayn and the Grene Knight, 1185.— AF. cornere, Liber
Custumarum, p. 150; OF. corniere, ‘a corner;’ Cot.—Late L. cor-
néria, a corner, angle; cf. Late L. corneirus, angular, placed at a
corner. = Late L. corna (OF. corne), a corner, angle. —L. *corna, for
cornua, pl. of cornu, a horn, a projecting point; with change from n,
pl. to fem. sing. (as often). See Corn (2). Der. corner-ed.

CORNET, a little horn; a sort of officer. (F.—L.) ME.
cornet, a horn; Octovian Imperator, ll. 1070, 1190; in Weber’s Met.
Rom, iii. 202, 207. Also a horned head-dress, a flag or standard ;
and then a troop of horse (because accompanied by a cornette or
standard), Shak. 1 Hen. VI, iv. 3. 25; lastly, an officer of such a
troop.= F. cornet, a little horn, dimin, of F. corne, a horn; cornette, f.,
a horned head-dress, a flag, cornet. See above.

CORNICE, a moulding, moulded projection. (F.—Ital.—L.)
In Milton, P. L, i. 716.—MF. cornice, also corniche, ‘the cornish,
or brow of a wall, piller, or other peece of building ;? Cot.; mod.F.
corniche,= Ital. cornice, ‘the ledge wheron they hang tapestrie in
any roome; also, an outietting peece or part of a house or wall;’
Florio, Origin uncertain; by some identified with Late L. corénix,
a square frame. Gk. xopwvis, a wreath, the cornice of a building (?) ;
literally an adj. signifying ‘crooked ;’ and obviously related to L.
coréna,a crown. See Crown. §¥ But Ital. cornice rightly means a
crow; from L. cornicem, acc. of cornix, a crow. Cf. Corbel.

CORNUCOPIA, the horn of plenty. (L.) Ben Jonson has
cornucopia, Every Man, iii. 6. 24; rightly.—L. corn copie, horn of
plenty; from cornu, horn; and cépie, gen. of cdpia, plenty. See
Corn (2) and Copious.

COROLLA, the cup of a flower formed by the petals. (L.) A
scientific term. Not in Johnson.—L. corolla, a little crown; dimin.
of coréna, a crown. See Crown. And see below.

COROLLARY, an additional inference, or deduction. (L.)
“A corolarie or mede of coroune,’ i.e. present of a crown or garland ;
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iii. pr. 10, 1, 101.—L. corollarium, a
present of a garland, a gratuity, additional gift; also an additional
inference ; prop. neuter of corollarius, belonging to a garland.=L,
corolla, a garland; see above.

CORONACH, an outcry; a dirge. (Gael.) In Dunbar, Dance
of the 7 Sins, 1. 112; spelt correnoch. Gael. corranach, a dirge; lit.
‘howling together.’=—Gael. comh- (=L. cum), together; ranaich, a
howling, from ran, to howl; which is from ram, sb.,an outcry. Cf.
Trish coranach, a dirge.

CORONAL, a crown, garland. (F.—L.) In Drayton’s Pas-
torals, Ecl. 3. Properly an adj., signifying ‘of or belonging to a
crown.’ =F, coronal, ‘coronall, crown-like 3’ Cot.—<L, cordndlis,
belonging to a crown. —L. cordna, a crown. See Crown.

; CORONATION, a crowning. (L.) *Corownynge or corona-
cion;’ Prompt. Parv. p.93. [Not a F. word, but formed by analogy
with F, words in -tion.]— Late L. cordnatio, a coined word, from L.
coronare, to crown, pp. cordnatus.— L.cordna,a crown. See Crown.

CORONER, an officer appointed by the crown. (F.—L.)
Also crowner. ‘ Coroners and bailiffs ;’ Stow, King Stephen, an. 1142.
The word coroner occurs in a spurious charter of King Athelstan, to


CORRIDOR


Beverley, dated A.D. 925, but really of the 14th century; see
Diplomatarium /Evi Saxon., ed. Thorpe, p. 181, last line. AF.
coroner, coruner, Statutes of the Realm, i. 28, 29 (1275).—OF.
corone, a crown.—L. coréna, a crown. B. The AF. coroner was
Latinised as cordndrius, i.e. a crown-officer. Thus coroner is
‘a crown-er,’ and the equivalent term crowner (Hamlet, v. 1. 4) is
quite correct.

CORONET, a little crown. (F.—L.) ‘With coronettes upon
theyr heddes;’ Fabyan, Chron. an. 1432. Formed as a dimin., by
help of the suffix -ete (or -ette) from the OF. corone, a crown.=L.
cordna,.a crown. See Crown.

CORPORAL (1), a subordinate officer. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Merry Wives, ii. r. 128. First found in 1579.—MF. corporel,
spelt corporeau in 1562 (Supp. to Godefroy).—Late L. corpordlis,
a captain, a leader of a troop (1405).—L. corpor-, for *corpos-, stem
of corpus, body. 4 Another MF. (and F.) form was caporal, ‘the
corporall of a band of souldiers;’ Cot.—Ital. caporale, a chief, ,
a corporal; whence it was introduced into French in the 16th century
(Brachet) ; cf. Late L. capordlis, a chief, a commander; Ducange.
This form is corrupt, due to association with Ital. capo, the head
(from L. caput); which could never have evolved the syllable -or-.
Cf, also Ital. capoparte, ‘a ringleader,’ Florio; which may easily
have suggested the change. Note Norm. dial. corporal, a corporal
(Moisy). Der. corporal-ship.

CORPORAL (2), belonging to the body. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Meas, iii. 1, 80. ME. corporel, Rom. Rose, 6757.—OF. corporel,
corporal. L. corporalis, bodily.—L. corpor-, for *corpos, stem of
corpus, the body ; with suffix -alis. See Corps. Brugmann, i. § 555.
Der. From the same stem we have corpor-ate, -ate-ly, -at-ion; -e-al
(from L. corporeus, belonging to the body), -e-al-ly, -e-al-i-ty; and
see corps, corpse, corpulent, corpuscle, corset, corslet.

CORPS, CORPSE, CORSH, a body. (F.—L.) Corps, i.e.
a body of men, is mod. French, and not in early use in English. Corse
is a variant of corpse, formed by dropping p; it occurs in An Old Eng.
Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 28,1. 10. Corpse was also in early use;
ME. corps, Chaucer, C. T., 2821 (A 2819); and is derived from
late O.French, in which the ~ was sounded.=—OF. cors, later (14th
cent.) corps, the body. = L. corpus, the body. Der. corp-ul-ent, q.v.;
corpus-c-le, q.v.; corset, corslet.

CORPULENT, stout, fat. (F.—L.) In Shak. 1 Hen. IV, ii.
4. 464. ME. corpulent, Gesta Roman., c. 65, p. 281, 1. 4 (E.E.T-.S.).
=F. corpulent, ‘corpulent, gross;’ Cot.—L. corpulentus, fat.—L.
corpu-s, the body; with suffixes -/- and -ent-. See Corps. Der.
corpulent-ly, corpulence.

CORPUSCLE, a little body, an atom. (L.) A scientific term.
In Derham, Physico-Theology, bk. i. c. 1. note 2 (R.),— L.corpusculum,
an atom, particle; double dimin. from L. corpus, the body, with
suffix -cu-lo-. See Corps. Der. corpuscul-ar.

CORRAL, an enclosure for animals, pen. (Span.—L.) Chiefly
in Span. America and U. S.—Span. corral, a court, pen, enclosure. =’
Span. corro, a circle, a ring of people met to see a show. From the
Span. correre toros, to hold a bull-fight; lit. to run bulls. —L. currere,
torun. Doublet, kraal, q.v.

CORRECT, to put right, punish, reform. (L.) ME. correcten;
Chaucer, C. T. 6242 (D 661).—L. correct-us, pp. of corrigere, to
correct.=—L. cor-, for con- (i.e. cum), with, thoroughly, before r; and
regere, to rule, order. See Regular. Der. correct, adj. (also from
L. correct-us); -ly, -ness, -ion, -ion-al, -ive, -or; also corrig-ible, corrig-
enda (L. corrigenda, things to be corrected, from corrigendus, fut. pass.
part. of corrigere); corregidor, a Span. magistrate, lit, ‘correcter ;’
from Span, corregir, to correct.

CORRELATES, to relate or refer mutually. (L.) In Johnson’s
Dictionary, where it is defined by ‘to have a reciprocal relation, as
father toson.’ Cf. ‘Spiritual things and spiritual men are correlatives,
and cannot in reason be divorced ;’ Spelman, On Tythes, p. 141 (R.).
These are mere coined words, made by prefixing cor-, for con- (i.e.
cum, with) before relate, relative, &c. Ducange gives a Late L.
correlatio, a mutual relation; and Cotgrave has MF. correlatif, ex-
plained by ‘correlative.’ See Relate. Der. correlat-ive, correlat-ion.

CORRESPOND, to answer mutually. (F.—L.) Shak. has cor-
responding, i.e. suitable; Cymb. iii. 3. 31 ; also corresponsive, fitting,
Troil. prol. 18.—OF. (and F.) correspondre (Supp. to Godefroy)..—
Late L. correspondére. ‘These are coined words, made by prefixing
cor- (for con-, i.e. cum, together) to OF. respondre, L. respondére.
Ducange gives a Late L. adv. correspondenter, ‘ at the same time,’ See
Respond. Der. correspond-ing, -ing-ly, -ent, -ent-ly, -ence.

CORRIDOR, agallery. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss. (1656) ;
defined as in Cotgrave (below). ‘The high wall and corridors that
went round it [the amphitheatre] are almost intirely ruined;’ Addison,
On Italy (Todd’s Johnson). Also used as a term in fortification. F.
corridor, ‘a curtaine, in fortification ;’ Cot,=Ital. corridore, ‘a runner,


CORRIE


a swift horse; also a long terrase or gallerie;’ Florio. = Ital. correre,
to run; with suffix -dore, a less usual form of -¢ore, answering to L.
acc. suffix -torem.=—L. currere, to run. See Current.
CORRIBE, a mountain dell or combe. (Gael.) ‘ Fleet foot on the
corrie;’ Scott, Lady of the Lake, iii. 16. — Gael. coire, a cauldron, kettle ;
also, a circular hollow among mountains. W. pair, a cauldron; AS.
hwer, a cauldron. See Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 46; Brugmann,


te § 123.

CORROBORATE, to confirm. (L.) ‘Dothe corroborate the
stomake;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, bk. ii. c. 7 (Of Olyues).
Properly a past part., as in ‘except it be corroborate by custom ;’
Bacon, Essay 39, On Custom. = L. corrdboratus, pp. of corrdborare, to
strengthen. = L. cor-, for con- (i.e. cum, together, wholly) before r; and
roborare, to strengthen, from rdbor-, stem of rdbur, strength. See
Robust. Der. corroborat-ive, -ion, corrobor-ant.

CORRODE, to gnaw away. (F.—L.) In Sherwood’s Index to
Cotgrave; in Florio's Ital. Dict. (1598); and in Donne, To the
Countess of Bedford. [Corrosive was rather a common word in the
sense of ‘a caustic;’ and was frequently corrupted to corsive or corsy;
see Spenser, F. Q. iv. 9. 14.]—F. corroder, to gnaw, bite; Cot.=—L.
corrodereé, pp. corrdsus, to gnaw to pieces. = L. cor-, for con- (i.e. cum,
together, wholly) before r; and rédere, to gnaw. See Rodent. Der.
corrod-ent, -ible, -ibil-i-ty; also (from L. pp. corrdsus) corros-ive, -ive-
ly, -ive-ness, -ion. 3

CORRODY, an allowance for maintenance. (Late L.— F. — Tent.)
See Corody, Corrody, in Blount, Nomolexicon. AF. corodie, Stat. of
the Realm, i. 256 (1327); Late L. corrodium, earlier corrédium.=
AF, conrei, conreit, provision, corrody (Britton). . See further under
Curry (1). =

CORRUGATE, to wrinkle greatly. (L.) In Bacon, Nat. Hist.
§ 964. —L. corriigdtus, pp. of corrigdre, to wrinkle greatly. —L. cor-,
for con- (i.e. cum, together, wholly) before r; and ragare, to wrinkle,
from riiga, a wrinkle, fold, plait. Der. corrugat-ion.

CORRUPT, putrid, debased, defiled. (L.) In Chaucer, C. T.
4939 (B 519); Gower, C. A. i. 217, bk. ii. 1732. Wyclif has cor-
ruptid, 2 Cor. iv. 16.—L. corruptus, pp. of corrumpere, to corrupt,
intensive of rumpere, to break.—L. cor-, for con- (i.e. cum, together,
wholly); and rumpere, to break in pieces, See Rupture. 4 We
also find AF. corupt, Liber Albus, p. 465. Der. corrupt, vb.; corrupt-
ly, ~ness, -er; -ible, -ibl-y, -ibil-i-ty, -ible-ness; corrupt-ion= ME. cor-
rupcion, Gower, C. A.i. 37 (prol. 986), from F. corruption; corrupt-ive.

CORSATR, a pirate, a pirate-vessel. (F.—Ital.—L.) £ Corsair,
a courser, or robber by sea;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.—F. corsaire,
‘a courser, pyrat ;’ Cot.=MlItal. corsaro, ‘a pirate, or rouer by sea;’
Florio (s.v. corsale).— Late L, cursarius, a pirate. —L. cursus, a course.
=—L. cursus, pp. of currere, to run. See Course, Current.
Doublet, hussar, q. v.

CORSE, a dead body. (F.—L.) ME. cors: ‘Thanne wolen the
freres for the cors fihte ;’ Polit. Songs, p. 331, 1. 182 (1307-1327).—
OF. cors.—L. corpus, a body. See Corps.

CORSET, a pair ofstays. (F.—L.) ‘A corsetteofIanyr’ [Dejanira];
Trevisa, tr. of Higden, ii. 361. Cotgrave has: ‘ Corset, a little body,
also a paire of bodies [i.e. bodice] for a woman.’ = OF. cors, a body ;
with dimin. suffix -et. See Corps.

CORSLET, CORSELET, a piece of body-armour. (F.—L.)
Corslet in Shak. Cor. v. 4. 21.—F. corselet, which Cotgrave translates
only by ‘a little body;’ but the special use of it éasily follows. [The
Ital. corsaletto, a cuirass, must have been modified from the F.
corselet and OF. cors, a body, not from the Ital. corpo.]—OF. cors,
a body; with dimin. suffixes -el- and-et. See Corps. Cf. Norm.
dial. corselet, a corset (Moisy).

CORTEGE, a train of attendants. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Evelyn’s
Diary, 1 July, 1679. From F. cortége, a procession. = Ital. corteg gio,
a train, suit, retinue, company.—Ital. corte, a court; from the same
L. source as E, court, q.v.

CORTES, the Span. national assembly. (Span.—L.) Lit.
‘courts.’ —Span. cortes, pl. of corte, a court.=L. acc. cdrtem, a court.

CORTEX, bark. (L.) Modern. L. cortex (stem cortic-), bark.
Der. cortic-al; cortic-ate, cortic-at-ed, i.e. furnished with bark.

CORUNDUM, a crystallised mineral, like a ruby. (Tamil —Skt.)
See Yule.—Tamil kurundam; cf. Hind. kurand (Forbes).—Skt.
kuruvinda(s), a ruby (Benfey).

CORUSCATE, to flash, glitter. (L.) Bacon has coruscation, Nat.
Hist. § 121.—L. coruscdtus, pp. of coruscare, to glitter, vibrate; cf.
coruscus, trembling, vibrating, glittering. Der. corusc-ant, -at-ion.

CORVEE, forced labour. (F.—L.) In Ayenbite of Inwit, p. 38;
where the pl. is printed ¢ornees. = F. corvée, f. ‘a drudging daies worke;’
Cot.—Late L, corrogdata (sc, opera), requisitioned work ; fem. pp. of
corrogare, to exact.—L. cor- (for cum), together, very; and rogare,
toask. See Rogation. >

CORVETTE, a sort of small frigate. (F.—Port.—L.) Known


COSTMARY 137


in 1636; see Todd’s Johnson. =F. corvette. = Port. corveta, a corvette:
Brachet. ‘This is the same as the Span. corveta or corbeta, a corvette.
=L. corbita, a slow-sailing ship of burthen. —L. corbis, a basket. See
Corbel.

CORYMB, a species of inflorescence. (F.—L.—Gk.) F. corymbe.
—L. corymbus. — Gk. xépupBos, a head, cluster. Allied to Gk. xépas,
E. horn. Cf. Skt. g77ga(m), a horn.

COSHER, to feast, to pamper. (Irish.)
y. I. =Irish coisir, a feast.

COSMETIC, that which beautifies. (Gk.) ‘This order of cos-
metick philosophers ;’ Tatler, no. 34.—Gk. xoopnrixés, skilled in
adorning; whence also F, cosmétique, = Gk. koopéw, I adorn, decorate.
= Gk, xdopos, order, ornament. See below.

COSMIC, relating to the world. (Gk.) Modem. From Gk.
koopixds, relating to the world.— Gk. «dcpos, order; also, the world,
universe. Der. cosmic-al, used by Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors,
bk. iv. c. 13. § 23 cosmic-al-ly.

COSMOGONY, the theory of the origin of the universe. (Gk.)
In Warburton, Divine Legation, b. iii. s. 3 (R.). —Gk. cocpoyovia,
origin of the world.—Gk. «écpo-, stem of xdcpos, the world; and
-yov.a, a begetting, from ~yov-, as in yé-yov-a, perf. of yiyvoua, I
become, am produced; where yor- is the second grade of 4/ GEN, to
produce. Der. cosmogon-ist.

COSMOGRAPHY, description of the world. (Gk.) In Sir
T. Elyot, The Governor, bk. i. c. 11. § 6 3 and in Bacon, Life of
Henry VII, ed. Lumby, p. 171.=Gk. xoopoypa¢gia, description of the
world. Gk. «dopo-s, world, universe; and pape, to. describe.
Der. cosmograph-er, -ic, -ic-al.

COSMOLOGY, science of the universe. (Gk.) In Blount
(1656). Formed as if from a Gk. *xoopodoyia; from «dcpo-s, the
world, and Aéyeuv, to speak, tell of. Der. cosmolog-ist, -ic-al.

COSMOPOLITS, a citizen of the world. (Gk.) Used in
Howell’s Letters; b.i.s. 6, let. 60, § 1.—Gk. koopomodirns, a citizen
of the world.=— Gk. xécpo-s, the world; and moAirns, a citizen; see
Politic. Der. cosmopolit-an.

COSSACK, a light-armed S. Russian soldier. (Russ.— Tartar.)
Spelt Cassacke in Hakluyt, Voy. i. 388.—Russ. kozak’, kazak’, a
Cossack; of Tartar origin, Turki guzzag, a vagabond, a predatory
horseman (Yule).

COSSHET, a pet-lamb, a pet. (E.) Spenser has cosset, for cosset-
lamb, a pet-lamb. Prob. for cof-se¢, lit. ‘cot-sitter,’ i.e. living in a
cot, brought up within doors; cf. G. haus-lamm. AF. coscet, cozet,
a cottar; AS. cots€ta (Latinised as cotsetus), by-form of cot-setla, a
cottar; see Schmidt, Gloss. to AS. Laws. Cf. also G. kossat, a
cottager (Weigand) ; Ital. cassiccio, a pet-lamb (Florio), from casa,
a cottage. See Notes on Eng. Etym. p. 46. Der. cosset, vb., to pet.

For ts >ss, cf. boat-swain, bless.

COST, to fetch a certain price. (Du.—F.—L.) ME. costen. In
Chaucer, C. T. 1910 (A 1908); P. Plowman, B. prol. 203.—MDu.
kosten, to cost. = OF. coster, couster (F. coditer), to cost.— L. constare,
to stand together, consist, last, cost. — L. con- (for cum), together; and
stare, to stand. See Constant. 4 The OF. coster should have given
a form coast. Der. cost, sb., -ly, -li-ness.

COSTAL, relating to the ribs. (L.) In Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. iv. c. 10. § 5. Formed, with suffix -al, from L. costa, a
rib. See Coast.

COSTERMONGER, an itinerant fruit-seller. (Hybrid ; F. and
E.) Formerly costerd-monger or costard-monger ; the former spelling
is in Drant’s Horace, where it translates L. pomarius in Sat. ii, 3.
227. It means costard-seller. ‘ Costard, a kind of apple. Costard-
monger, a seller of apples, a fruiterer;’? Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.
Much earlier, we find : ‘Costard, appulle, quirianum;’ Prompt.
Parv. p. 94. ‘ Costardmongar, fruyctier,’ i.e. fruiterer; Palsgrave.
B. The etymology of costard, an apple, is uncertain; but the suffix
-ard is properly OF., so that the word is presumably OF., and related
to OF. coste, a rib, with reference to such apples as had prominent
ribs.—L. costa, a rib, Cf. F. fruit cételé, ribbed fruit ; Hamilton.
y. The word monger is E.; see Ironmonger. 4 There is no
reason for connecting costard with custard. The custard-apple
mentioned in Dampier’s Voyages, an. 1699 (R.) is quite a different
fruit from the ME. coséard,

COSTIVE, constipated. (F.—L.) ‘But, trow, is he loose or
costive of laughter?’ Ben Jonson, The Penates.—OF. costevé, pp.,
constipated (Godefroy),—L. consttpdtus, pp. of constipare, to con-
stipate. See Constipate. Der. costive-ness.

COSTMARY, a plant. (F.—L.—Gk.) Lyte has costemary ; tr.
of Dodoens, bk. ii. c. 76. ME. costmarye, Two Cookery Books, ed.
Austin, p. 110, 1. 4. Compounded of cost and Marye; the latter
referring to St. Mary the Virgin. Cost is F. cost, which Cotgrave
explains by ‘costmary, balsamine, alecoast.’—L. costum, n,=— Gk.
«éoTos, an aromatic root (of a different odoriferous plant). This


In Shirlev St. Patrick,


1388 COSTUME


is of Eastern origin; cf. Skt. rushtha-, Costus speciosus; Arab. qust,
costus; Rich. Dict. p. 1130.

COSTUME, a customary dress. (F.—Ital.—L.) A modern
word; added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. Richardson cites a
quotation from Sir Joshua Reynolds, Dis. 12.—F. costume; a late
form, borrowed from Italian.—Ital. costume; Late L. costiima, con-
tracted from L. acc. consuétiidinem, custom. Costume is a doublet
of custom. See Custom.

COSY, COZY, snug, comfortably sheltered. (Scand.) This
word appears to have been introduced from Lowl. Scotch. We
find: ‘cosie in a hoord,’ Ramsay’s Poems, i. 305 (Jamieson); and
‘cozie i’ the neuk,’ Burns, Holy Fair, st. 20. It seems to be from
Norw. #osa, (0=00), v., to refresh, whence kosa seg, to enjoy oneself ;
whence also koseleg=Dan. hyggelig, which Ferrall translates by
‘comfortable, snug, cozy;’ and hosing, refreshment, recreation
(Aasen). Larsen gives Norw. hoselig, ‘snug, cosy.’ Prob. allied to
Swed. dial. kasa, to warm, kasug, warm.

COT, a small dwelling; COTE, an enclosure. (E.) ‘A Iutel
kot;’ Ancren Riwle, p. 362. Cote, in Havelok, ll. 737, 1141. ‘Hec
casa, casula, a cofe;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 273. AS. cot, cote, a cot,
den; ‘to péofa cote’ =for a den of thieves, Matt. xxi. 13. ‘In cotte
dinum, into thy chamber; Northumbrian gloss to Matt. vi.6. [We
also find AS. cyte, Grein, i. 181.]-4+Du. kot, a cot, cottage; Icel. kot,
a cot, hut; G. koth, a cot (a provincial word); Fliigel’s Dict. [The
W.. cwt, a cot, was borrowed from English.] Der. cott-age (with
F. suffix); cott-ag-er ; cott-ar, cott-er ; cf. also sheep-cote, dove-cote, &c.
Also cot-quean, lit. a hussy (living in) a cot, Romeo, iv. 4.6; see
Quean.

COTERIHBE, a set, company. (F.—Teut.) Mere French. Cot-
grave gives: ‘Coterie, company, society, association of people.’
B. Marked by Brachet as being of unknown origin. Referred in
Diez to F. cote, a quota, share, from L. guwotus, how much, But
Littré rightly connects it with OF. coterie, cotterie, servile tenure,
cottier, a cottar, &c. A coterie (Low L. coteria) was a tenure of
land by cottars who clubbed together.—Low L. cota, a cot; of
Teutonic origin. See Cot.

COTILLON, COTILLION, a dance for eight persons. (F.—
Teut.) It occurs in a note toy. 11 of Gray’s Long Story. =F. cotillon,
lit. a petticoat, as explained by Cotgrave. Formed with suffix
-ill-on from F. cotte, a coat, frock. See Coat.

COTTON (1), a downy substance obtained from a certain plant.
(F.—Span.—Arabic.) ME. cotoun, cotune, cotin (with one ¢). Spelt
cotoun in Mandeville’s Travels, ed. Halliwell, p. 212.—F. coton
(spelt cotton in Cotgrave).—Span. coton, printed cotton, cloth made
of cotton; Span. algodon, cotton, cotton-down (where al is the Arab.
def. art.).— Arab. qutn, qutun, cotton; Richardson’s Dict. p. 1138;
Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 472.

COTTON (2), toagree. (F.—Span.—Arab.) ‘Cotton, to suc-
ceed, to hit, to agree;* Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. ‘To cotton well’
was orig. to form a good nap (to cloth, &c.). Thus Phillips (ed.
1706), s.v. Cottum (sic) has: ‘in making Hats, to cotton well is
when the wooll and other materials work well and imbody toge-
ther.’ From Cotton (1), above. Cf. prov. E. cotton (E.D.D.).

COTYLEDON, the seed-lobe of a plant. (Gk.) Introduced by
Linnzus in a new sense. As an anatomical term, it occurs as
early as 1545. See Phillips. = Gk. xorvAndwy, a cup-shaped hollow.
—Gk. xoTvAn, a hollow, hollow vessel, small cup. Cf. Goth.
hethjo, a chamber (Uhlenbeck). Der. cotyledon-ous.

COUCH, to lay down, set, arrange. (F.—L.) ME. couchen,
cowchen, to lay, place, set. ‘Cowchyn, or leyne thinges togedyr,
colloco;’? Prompt. Pary. p. 96. Occurs frequently in Chaucer; see
C. T. 2163 (A 2161).—OF. coucher, earlier colcher, to place.—L.
collocire, to place together.—L. col- for con- (i.e. cum, together)
before 7; and locdre, to place, from Jocus, a place. See Locus.
Der. couch, sb., ME. couche, Gower, C. A, iii. 315, bk. viii. 1193 ;
couch-ant. Doublet, collocate.

COUCHGRASS, a grass which is troublesome as a weed. (E.)
Here couch is a variant of guitch, which is a palatalised form of
quick, i.e. tenacious of life. See Quick.

COUGH, to make a violent effort of the lungs. (E.) ME.
coughen, cowhen; Chaucer, C. T. 10082 (E 2208). AS. *cohhian;
only found in the deriv. cohhetan, to make a noise. EFries. hkuchen.
+Du. kugchen, to cough; MHG. kichen, G. keuchen, to pant, to
gasp; WFlem. kuffen, to cough (De Bo). B. From an imitative root
*keuh, weak grade *kuh, to gasp; see Chin-cough. Der. cough,
sb. ; chin-cough.

COUGUAR, COUGAR, the puma. (F.—Prazil.) Spelt cou-
guar in atr. of Buffon (1792), 1. 193.—F. couguar (Buffon). From
the Guarani name, given as cuguacu-arana in Hist. Brasil. (1648), ii.


QR
COULD, was able to; see Can.


COUNTERPANE


COULTER, COLTER, the iron blade in front of a plough-
share. (L.) ME. culter, colter; Chaucer, C. T. 3761 (A 3763). AS.
culter, ALlf. Gloss. 8 (Bosworth); a borrowed word.=—L. culter, a
coulter, knife; lit. a striker; cf. L. per-cellere, to strike. Der. From
the same source are cutlass, q.v.; and cutler, q.v.

COUNCIL, an assembly. (F.—L.) In Shak. L. L. L. v. 2. 789.
Often confused with counsel, with which it had originally nothing to
do; council can only be rightly used in the restricted sense of ‘ as-
sembly for deliberation.’ Misspelt counsel in the following quotation.
‘ They shall deliuer you vp to their counsels, and shall scourge you in
their sinagoges or counsel-houses;’ ‘Tyndal, Works, p. 214, col. 2; cf.
conciliis in the Vulgate version of Matt. x. 17.— AF’. councylle, Lang-
toft’s Chron. i. 488; F. concile, a councill, an assembly, session ;”
Cot.—L. concilium, an assembly called together.=—L. con-, for cum,
together; and calare, to summon; see Calends. Der. councill-or,
ME. conseiller, Gower, C. A. iii. 192; bk. vii. 3148.

COUNSEL, consultation, advice, plan. (F.—L.) Quite distinct
from council, q.v. In early use, ME. conseil, cunseil; Havelok,
2862; Rob. of Glouc. p. 412; 1. 8535.—AF. cunseil, Laws of Will. I,
§ 10; OF. conseil,—L. consilium, deliberation.—L. consulere, to
consult. See Consult. Der. counsel, verb; counsell-or.

COUNT (1), a title of rank..(F.—L.) The orig. sense was
‘companion.’ Not in early use, being thrust aside by the E. word
earl; but the fem. form occurs earlier, being spelt cuntesse in the
AS. Chron. A.D. 1140. The derived word counté, a county, occurs
in P. Plowman, B. ii. 85. Shak. has county in the sense of count
frequently ; Merch. of Ven. i. 2. 49.—AF. counte, Polit. Songs,
p. 1273 OF. conte, comte; Cotgrave gives ‘Conte, an earl, and
‘ Comte, a count, an earle.’=L. acc. comitem, a companion, a count;
from nom, comes.—L. com-, for cum, together; and it-um, supine of
ire, to go. Der. count-ess, count-y.

COUNT (2), to enumerate, compute, deem. (F.—L.) ME.
counten; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1731; also 1685.—AF. counter,
cunter, Year-books of Edw. I, 1292-3, pp. 69, 157; OF. cunter,
conter; F. conter.—L. computadre, to compute, reckon. Thus count is
a doublet of compute. See Compute. Der. count, sb.; count-er,
one who counts, anything used for counting, a board on which
money is counted.

COUNTENANCEH, appearance, face. (F.—L.) In early use.
ME. contenaunce, cuntenaunce, countenaunce; P. Plowman, B. prol. 24;
Cursor Mundi, 3368; continaunce, Polit. Songs, p. 216 (temp. Edw. I).
=—OF. contenance, which Cotgrave explains by ‘the countenance,
looke, cheere, visage, favour, gesture, posture, behaviour, carriage.’
—L. continentia, which in Late L. meant ‘gesture, behaviour,
demeanour ;’ Ducange. = L. continent-, stem of pres. part. of continére,
to contain, preserve, maintain; hence, to comport oneself. See
Contain. Der. countenance, vb.; dis-countenance.

COUNTER, in opposition (to), contrary. (F.—L.) ‘This is
counter ;’ Hamlet, iv. 5. 110; ‘a hound that runs counter,’ Com. Errors,
iv. 2. 39. And very common as a prefix.—F. contre, against ;
common as a prefix. L. contra, against; common as a prefix. See
Contra.

COUNTERACT, to act against. (Hybrid; F. and.) Counter-
action occurs in The Kambler, no. 93. Coined from counter and act.
See Counter and Act. Der. counteract-ion, -ive, -ive-ly.

COUNTERBALANCEH, sb., a balance against. (F.—L.) The
sb. counterbalance is in Dryden, Annus Mirabilis (A.D. 1666), st. 12.
From counter and balance. See Counter and Balance. Der.
counterbalance, verb.

COUNTERFEIT, imitated, forged. (F.—L.) ME. counterfeit,
contrefet, Gower, C. A. i. 70, 192; bk. i. 832; ii. 982.—OF. con-
trefait, pp. of contrefaire, to counterfeit, imitate; a word made up of
contre, against, and faire, to make, do.—L. contra, against; and

JSacere, to make. See Counter and Fact. Der. counterfeit, vb.,
ME, counterfeten; whence pp. countrefeted, Chaucer, C. T. 5166
(B 746). ¢#> The same spelling -feit occurs in forfeit, q.v.

COUNTERMAND, to revoke a command given. (F.—L.)
Used by Fabyan, Chron. c. 245, nearend; Palsgrave has contremaunde,
Pp: 497-—F. contremander, ‘to countermand, to recall, or contradict,
a former command;’ Cot. Compounded of contre, against; and
mander, to command, = L. contra, against ; and manddre, to command.
See Mandate. Der. countermand, sb. :

COUNTERPANSE (1), a coverlet fora bed. (F.—L.) A twice
altered form, connected neither with counter nor with pane, but with
quilt and point. The English altered the latter part of the word, and
the French the former. The older E. form is counterpoint, as in
Shak. Tam, Shrew, ii. 353. ‘ Bedsteads with silver feet, imbroidered
coverlets, or counterpoints of purple silk;’ North’s Plutarch, p. 39.
‘On which a tissue counterpane was cast;’ Drayton, The Barons’
Wars, b. vi. st. 43.— MF. contrepoinct, ‘the back stitch or quilting-
stitch ; also a quilt, counterpoint, quilted covering;’ Cot. B. Thus


COUNTERPANE


named, by a mistaken popular etymology, from a fancied connexion
with OF, contrepoincter, ‘to worke the back-stitch,’ id.; which is
from contre, against, and pointe, a bodkin. But Cotgrave also gives
*coutrepointer, to quilt;’ and this is a better form, pointing to the
right origin. [In mod. F. we meet with the still more corrupt form
courtepointe, a counterpane, which see in Hatzfeld.] y. The right
form is coutepointe (Supp. to Godefroy, p. 233), where couze is from
L. culcita, the same as culcitra, a cushion, mattress, pillow, or quilt.
—Late L. culcita puncta, a counterpane; lit. stitched quilt. ‘ Estque
toral lecto quod supra ponitur alto Ornatus causa, quod dicunt culcita
puncta;? Ducange. 8. Thus coutepointe has become courtepointe in
mod. French, but also produced contrepoincte in Middle French,
whence the E. derivative counterpoint, now changed to counterpane.
See Quilt. The fem. pp. puncta is from the verb pungere, to prick ;
see Point. @ The AF. forms are cutepoint, quilt poynt, Royal Wills,
pp: 36, 100 (1360, 1381) ; coilte pointe, Vie de St. Auban.
COUNTERPANSE (2), the counterpart of a deed or writing.
(F.—L.) ‘Read, scribe; give me the counterpane;’ Ben Jonson,
Bart. Fair, Induction. —AF. countrepan, Britton, i. 237; cuntrepan,
Wadington’s Manuel des Peches, 1. 10645. —I*. contre, against ; and
pan, in the sense of ‘a pane, piece, or pannell of a wall,’ Cot.—L.


contra, against; pannum, acc. of pannus, a cloth, patch. See
Counter and Pane.
COUNTERPART, a copy, duplicate. (F.—L.) In Shak.


Sonnet 84. Merely compounded of counter and part.

COUNTERPOINT, the composing of music in parts. (F.—L.)
‘The fresh descant, prychsonge [read prycksonge], counterpoint ;’
Bale on The Revel, 1550, Bb 8 (Todd’s Johnson), = MF. contrepoinct,
‘a ground or plain song, in musick;’ Cot.—F. contre, against; and
poinct (mod. F. point), a point. See Counter and Point. ‘ Counter-
point in its literal and strict sense signifies point against point. Jn the
infancy of harmony, musical notes or signs were simple points or
dots, and in compositions in two or more parts were placed on staves,
over, or against, each other;’ Engl. Cycl. Div. Arts and Sciences,
S.Ve

COUNTERPOISE, the weight in the other scale. (F.—L.)
In Shak. All’s Well, ii. 3.182. —F. contrepois, contrepoids. Cotgrave
gives the former as the more usual spelling, and explains it by
“counterpois, equall weight.” See Counter and Poise. Der.
counter poise, verb.

COUNTERSCARP,, the exterior slope of a ditch. (F.—Ital.—
L. and Teut.) The interior slope is called the scarp. The word is
merely compounded of counter and scarp. ‘ Bulwarks and cownter-
scarps ;’ Sir T, Herbert, Travels, ed. 1665, p. 64; and see Marlowe,
II Tamb. iii. 2.78. ‘ Contrescarpe, a counterscarfe or countermure ;’
Cot. —Ital. contrascarpa.—Ital. contra, over against ; and scarpa, a
scarp. See Counter and Scarp.

COUNTERSIGN, to sign in addition, attest. (F.-L.) ‘It
was countersigned Melford ;’ Lord Clarendon’s Diary, 1688-9 ; Todd’s
Johnson.—F. contresigner, ‘to subsigne;’ Cot.—F. contre, over
against; and signer, to sign. See Counter and Sign. Der.
countersign, sb. (from counter and sign, sb.) ; countersign-at-ure.

COUNTERTENOR, the highest adult male voice. (F.—Ital.
—L.) It occurs in Cotgrave, who has: ‘ Contreteneur, the counter-
tenor part in musick.’ = Ital. contratenore, a countertenor; Florio. =
Ital. contra, against ; and ¢enore,atenor. See Counter and Tenor.

COUN TERVAIL, to avail against, equal. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Romeo, ii. 6. 4. ME. contrevailen, Gower, C. A. i. 28; prol. 728.—
OF. contrevail-, a stem of contrevaloir, to avail against ; see Godefroy.
=-I*. contre, against ; and valoir, to avail.—L. contra, against; and
ualére, to be strong, to avail. See Valiant. Der. countervail, sb.

COUNTESS; see under Count.

COUNTRY, a rural district, region. (F.—L.) In early use.
ME. contré, contree; Layamon’s Brut, i. 54.—OF. contree, country ;
with which cf. Ital. contrada.— Late L. contrata, contrada, country,
region ; an extension of L. contra, over against. B. This extension
of form was explained by Diez as a Germanism, viz. as an imitation
of G. gegend, country, lit. ‘that which is opposite to the view,’ from
gegen, against ; but the imitation arose in the contrary way, the G.
gegend (which is meaningless) having been suggested by the Late L.
contrata, which appears as Ital., Proy., and Roumansch contrada, as
well as F. contrée. y. Contrata is regularly formed, as if a fem. pp.
from a verb *contrdre, to place opposite, from contra, over against.
Der. country-dance, country-man. |

COUNTRY-DANCE, a dance of country-people. (F.—L.
and OHG.) ‘ Heydeguies, a country daunce or rownd;’ E. K., Glosse
to Spenser, Shep. Kal., June, 1. 27. From Country and Dance.
Hence (first used in 1626) the F. contredanse (as if from F. contre,
against) ; but it is a mere perversion of the E. word (Hatzfeld).

COUNTY, an earldom, count’s province, shire. (F.—L.) ME.
counté, countee; P. Plowman, B. ii. 85. See Count (1).


COUVADE 139


COUPLE, a pair, two joined together. (F.—L.) ME. couple,
Gower, C. A. iii. 241; bk. vii. 4437. The verb appears early, viz. in
‘kupled} bode togederes’=couples both together; Ancren Riwle,
p- 78.—OF. cople, later couple, a couple.—L. cdpula, a bond, band;
contracted from *co-ap-ul-a, where -ul- is a dimin. suffix. = L. co-, for
com, i.e. cum, together; and OL. apere, to join, preserved in the pp.
aptus. See Apt. Der. couple, verb, coupl-ing, coupl-et. Doublet,
copula.

COUPON, one of a series of conjoined certificates or tickets.
(F.—L.—Gk.) Modern.—F. coupon, lit. ‘a piece cut off. =F.
couper, to cut, slash; from coup, sb., a blow.=Late L. colpus, for
colaphus, a blow.= Gk. xéAagos,a blow on the ear. See Cope (2).

COURAGE, valour, bravery. (F.—L.) ME. courage, corage;
Chaucer, C. T. prol. 11, 22; King Alisaunder, 3559.—OF. corage,
courage; formed with suffix -age (answering to L. -dticeum) from L.
cor, the heart. See Cordial, and Heart. Der. courage-ous, -ly,
-Il@SSs

COURIER, a runner. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Shak. Macb.i. 7. 23.
— MF. courier, given in Cotgrave as equivalent to courrier, ‘a post,
or a poster.’ = Ital. corriere, lit. ‘runner.’ =TItal. correre, to run.—L.
currere, totun. See Current.

COURSE, a running, track, race. (F.—L.) ME. course, cours;
Hampole, Pricke of Conscience, 4318 ; King Alisaunder, ed. Weber,
1. 288.— OF. cours.—L. cursum, acc. of cursus, a course; from cursus,
pp. of eurrere, torun. See Current. Der. course, yerb; cours-er,
spelt corsour in King Alisaunder, 1. 4056; cours-ing.

COURT (1), a yard, enclosed space, tribunal, royal retinue,
judicial assembly. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. cort, court, curt.
‘Vnto the heye curt he yede’=he went to the high court; Havelok,
1685. It first occurs, spelt curt, in the AS. Chron. A.D. 1154.
Spelt courte, P. Plowman, B. prol. 190.—OF. cort, curt (F. cour), a
court, a yard, a tribunal.—L. acc. cortem, cchortem (nom. cchors),
a hurdle, enclosure, cattle-yard; see Ovid, Fasti, iv. 704; also, a
cohort. = L,. co-, for con-, i.e. cum, together; and hort-, as in hort-us,
a garden, cognate with Gk. xépros, a court-yard; and perhaps with
Yard (1). Der. court-e-ous, q.v.; court-es-an, q.V.; court-es-y, G.V. 5
court-i-er, q.v.; court-ly, -li-ness, -martial, -plaster; also court, verb, q.v.

COURT (2), verb, to woo, seek favour. (F.—L.) In Shak.
L.L.L. v. 2.122. Orig. to practise arts in vogue at court. ‘For
he is practiz’d well in policie, And thereto doth his courting most
applie ;? Spenser, Mother Hubberd’s Tale, 784; see the context.
From the sb. court; see above. Der. court-ship.

COURT CARDS, pictured cards. A corruption of coat cards,
also called coated cards; Fox, Martyrs, p. 919 (R.). ‘ Here’s a trick
of discarded cards of us! We were rank’d with coats, as long as old
master lived;’ Massinger, The Old Law, iii. 1. Coat referred to
the dress of the king, queen, and knave; the king and queen
suggested court. See Nares. See Coat.

COURTEOUS, of courtly manners. (F.—L.) ME. cortais,
cortois, seldom corteous. Spelt corteys, Will. of Palerne, 194, 2704 ;
curteys, 231 3 curteyse, 406, 601. —=OF-. cortois, curtois, curteis, courteous.
= OF. cort, curt, a court; with suffix -eis << L. -ensis. See Court.
Der. courteous-ly, -ness ; also courtes-y, q.V.

COURTESAN, a prostitute. (F.—Ital.—L.) Spelt courtezan,
Shak. K. Lear, iii. 2. 79.—F. courtisane, ‘a lady or waiting-woman
of the court; also, a professed strumpet;’ Cot.; fem, of courtisan,
‘a courtier ;’ id.—Ital. cortegiana, cortesana, ‘a curtezan,’ Florio;
fem. of cortegiano, ‘a courtier;’ id. The latter is for *cortesiano, an
extension of corfese, courteous. =Ital. corte, court. See Court,
Courteous. ™ The ME. cowrtezane occurs with the sense of
‘courtier ;” Paston Letters, let. 7.

COURTESY, politeness. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. cor-
taisie, corteisie, curtesie; spelt kurteisie, Ancren Riwle, p. 7o.—OF.
curteisie, courtesy. = OF. corteis, curteis, courteous, See Courteous.

COURTIER, one who frequents the court. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Hamlet, i. 2.117. ME. courteour, Gower, C.A.i. 89; bk. i. 1410.
From AF. *cortei-er = OF. cortoi-er, to live at court, Godefroy ; with
suffix -our < L. acc. suffix -atérem.=—OF. cort, a court. See Court.

COUSIN, a near relative. (F.—L.) Formerly applied to a
kinsman generally, not in the modern restricted way. ME. cosin,
cousin; Rob. of Glouc. p. 91, 1. 2019; Chaucer, C. T., A 1131; K.
Horn, 1. 1444; spelt kosin, Polit. Songs, p. 343, 1. 429 (ab. 1310). =
OF. cosin, cousin, a cousin. = Late L. cosinus, found in the 7th cent. in
the St. Gall Vocabulary (Brachet). A contraction of L. consobrinus,
the child of a mother’s sister, a cousin, relation; whence also
Roumansch cusrin, a cousin; cf. Ital. cugino.—L. con-, for cum,
together ; and sobrinus, a cousin-german, by the mother’s side.
Sobrinus is for *swesr-inus, belonging to a sister; from L. soror (for
*cqwesor), a sister; cf. Skt. svasy,a sister. Brugmann, i. § 319. See
Sister.

COUVADE, a custom of ‘man child-bed’ practised by some


140 COVE |


primitive races. (F.—Ital.—L.) Modern.—F. cowvade, a brood;
faire la couvade, ‘to sit cowring or skowking within doores ;’ Cot. =
Ital. covata, ‘a covie, a brood;’ Elorio.—Ital. covata, fem. of pp. of
covare, to hatch.=—L. cubare, to lie down. Doublet, covey, q.v.

COVE, a nook, creek, a small bay. (E.) ‘Within secret coves
and noukes;’ Holland, Ammianus, p. 77. ME. couwe (=cove), a den;
Cursor Mundi, 1. 12341. AS. cofa, a chamber, Mercian gloss to
Matt. vi. 6, xxiv. 26; a cave (L. spelunca), N. gloss to John, xi. 38.
+ Icel. kofi, a hut, shed, convent-cell; G. koben, a cabin, pig-sty.
B. Remote origin uncertain ; not to be confused with cave, nor coop,
nor cup, nor alcove, with all of which it has been connected without
reason. Cf. Brugmann, i. § 658 (a). Der. cove, verb, to over-arch.
¢@a The obsolete verb cove, to brood (Richardson) is from quite
another source, viz. Ital. covare, to brood; from L. cubare; see
Covey.

COVENANT, an agreement. (F.—L.) ME. couenant, couenaunt,
covenand (with u for v); often contracted to coxand, as in Barbour’s
Bruce. Spelt cowenaunt, printed covenaunt, K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber,
2036.—OF. convenant, covenant; Godefroy. Formed as a pres. pt.
from convenir, to agree, orig. to meet together, assemble. —L. con-
uenire, to come together. See Convene. Der. covenant, verb;
covenant-er.

COVER, to conceal, hide, spread over. (F.—L.) ME. coueren,
keueren, kiueren (with u for v). Chaucer has couered, C. T. 6172
(D 590).—OF. covrir, couvrir, to cover; cf. Ital. coprire.—L.
cooperire, to cover.—L. co-, for com, i.e. cum, together, wholly ; and
operire, to shut, hide, conceal. B. It is supposed that L. operire, to
shut, is for *op-uerire; cf. Lith. az-wer-iu, I shut, Lith. wartai, doors;
and Oscan acc. veru, a door. See Brugmann, i. § 350. Der. cover-
ing, cover-let, q.v.; also covert, q.v.; ker-chief, g.v.; cur-few, q.V-

COVERLET, a covering for a bed. (F.—L.) ME. coverlite,
couerlite; Wyclif, 4 Kings, viii. 15.—AF. coverlit, Royal Wills,
p- 181 (1399); mod. F. couvrelit, a bed-covering (Littré).—OF.
covrir, to cover; and F. Jit, a bed, from L. lectum, acc. of lectus, a
bed. > Hence the word should rather be coverlit,

COVERT, a place of shelter. (F.—L.) In early use. ‘No
couert mi3t thei cacche’=they could find no shelter; William of
Palerne, 2217.—OF. covert, a covered place; pp. of covrir, to cover.
See Cover. Der. covert, adj.,-ly; covert-ure (Gower, C. A. i. 224).

COVET, to desire eagerly and unlawfully. (F.—L.) ME. coueiten,
coueten (with w for.v). ‘Who so coveyteth al, al leseth,’ who covets
all, loses all; Rob. of Glouc. p. 306.—AF. coveiter, Lai d’Havelok,
1. 695; (F. convoiter, with inserted x), to covet; cf. Ital. cubitare
(for *cupitare),to covet. B. Formed, as if from a L. *cupiditare, from
acc. cupidita-tem, eager desire; which is from cupidus, desirous of. —
L. cupere, to desire. See Cupid. Der. covetous (AF. cuveitus,
Edw. Confessor, 1. 223; OF. covoitus, F. convoiteux); -ly, -ness.
Covetous was in early use, and occurs, spelt couetus, in Floriz and
Blancheflur, ed, Lumby, 1. 355.

COVEY, a brood or hatch of birds. (F.—L.) ‘ Covey of pertry-
chys,’ i.e. partridges; Prompt. Parv. p. 96.—OF. covee, F. couvée, a
covey of partridges; fem. form of the pp. of OF. cover, F. couver, to
hatch, sit, brood. —L. cubdre, to lie down; cf. E. incubate. Cf. Gk.
xine, to bend, xudés, bent.

COVIN, secret agreement, fraud; a law-term. (F.—L.) The
Anglo-French covine occurs in the Stat. of the Realm, i. 162, an. 1311.
The ME. covine, covin, counsel, trick, sleight, is in Chaucer, C. T.
606 (A 604). —OF. covin, m., covine, f., counsel, intention (Godefroy).
—Late L. convenium, a convention, pl. convenia (whence the OF.
fem. form).—L. conuenire, to come together; see Covenant,
Convene. Thus covin=convention.

COW (1), the female of the bull. (E.) ME. cw, cou; pl. hy, hie,
hye; also kin, kuyn, mod. E, kine, due to AS. cyna, gen. pl. The
pl. Ay is in Cursor Mundi, 4564 ; Ain in Will. of Palerne, 244, 480;
kyen in Caxton, Godfrey of Boloyne, ch. 8, 1.15; kie in Golding’s
Ovid, fol. 26. AS. ci, pl. cy, formed by vowel-change; Grein, i. 172.
Teut. stem *4a-, whence also Icel. kyr. Cf. also Du. koe, Swed. and
Dan. ho, G. kuh; from Teut. stem *kd-. Further allied to Olrish
b6, Gael. bo, a cow; W. buw, a cow; L. bas, gen. bouis, an ox;
Gk, Bows, an ox; Pers. gaw, Skt. go- (nom. gaus); Russ. goviado,
oxen. Idg. stems *g(w)du-, *g(w)ow-. See Beef, Kine.

COW (2), to subdue, dishearten, terrify. (Scand.) ‘It hath cow’d
my better part of man;’ Macb. v. 8. 18.—Jcel. kiga, to cow,
tyrannise over; lata kigask, to let oneself be cowed into submission ;
see Cleasby and Vigfusson ; Dan. hue, to bow, coerce, subdue; Swed.
kufva, to check, curb, suppress, subdue. See Cuff (1).

COWARD, a man without courage. (F.—L.) ME. couard, more
often coward; spelt coward in King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1. 2108.
— AF. coward, a coward, Langtoft’s Chron. i. 194; OF. couart, more
usually coart (Supp. to Godefroy), a coward, poltroon ; equivalent to
Ital. codardo. B. Sometimes explained as an animal that drops his


DO:


‘tail; cf. the heraldic expression Jiox couard, a lion with his tail


between his legs. Mr. Wedgwood refers to the fact that a hare was
called coward in the old terms of hunting; ‘le coward, ou le court
cow’ =the hare, in Le Venery de Twety, in Reliquize Antique, i. 153 5
and he thinks that the original sense was ‘ bob-tailed,’ with reference
to the hare in particular. To which may be added, that Coart is the
name of the hare in the French version of Reynard the Fox. Or
again, it may merely mean one who shows his tail, or who turns tail.
y. Whichever be right, there is no doubt that the word was formed
by adding the suffix -ard (Ital. -ardo) to the OF. coe, a tail (Ital.
coda). = OF. coe, a tail; with the suffix -ard, of Teutonic origin. = L.
cauda, a tail; with OHG. suffix -hart, orig. ‘hard.’ See Caudal.
Der. coward, adj., -ly, -li-ness, -ice=ME. cowardis, Gower, C, A.
ii. 66 (OF. coard-ise).

COWER, to crouch, shrink down, squat. (Scand.) ME. couren.
‘“Couren in a cope;’ Polit. Songs, p. 157 (temp. Edw. I), ‘He
koured low;’ William of Palerne, 1. 47; ‘Ye .. . couwardli as
caitifs couren here in meuwe’=ye cowardly cower here in a mew
(or cage) like caitiffs; id. 3336.—Icel. kura, to doze, lie quiet ; Swed.
kura, to doze, to roost, to settle to rest as birds do; Dan. kure, to lie
quiet, rest; Swed. dial. Aura, to sit hunched up. Cf. G. kauern, to
cower.

COWL (1), a monk’s hood, a cap, hood. (L.) ME, cowle.
‘Cowle, munkys abyte [monk’s habit], cucudla, cucullus;’ Prompt.
Pary. p. 97. [Another form covel occurs 5 times in Havelok, ll. 768,
858, 964, 1144, 2904, spelt cowel, cuuel, kowel, and meaning ‘a Coat ;’
from AS, cufle, a cowl (Bosworth) ; the f passing into ME. v.] ME.
cowle is from AS. cugele, cugle, ciile; the last of these occurs in
ZElfric’s Saints’ Lives, c. xxxiii. 1. 237. B. These words are all from
Late L. cuculla, a frock, sometimes a hood; from L. cucullus, a hood.

COWL (2), a vessel carried on a pole. (F.—L.) The pole sup-
porting the vessel was called a cowl-staf?; see Merry Wives, ili. 3. 156.
“Coul, a large wooden tub; formerly, any kind of cup or vessel ;’
Halliwell. ME. cuwel (=cuvel), as in cuuel-staf, a cowl-staff, Gen.
and Exodus, 1. 3710.—=OF. cuvel, later cuveau, ‘a little tub;”’ Cot.
Dimin. of F. cave, ‘an open tub, a fat, or vat;’ id.—L. cpa, a vat,
butt, large cask. Der. cowl-staff; see staff.

COWRY, a small shell used for money. (Hind.—Skt.) ‘ Cowries
(the Cyprea moneta) are used as small coin in many parts of Southern
Asia, and especially on the coast of Guinea in Africa;’ Eng. Cyecl.,
Arts and Sciences, s.v. Cowry. The word is Hindustani, and must
therefore have been carried to the Guinea-coast by the English. =
Hind. kauri, ‘a small shell used as coin; money, fare, hire ;’ Forbes’
Hind. Dict. p. 281.—Skt. kaparda, kapardika, a cowry. See Yule.
H. H. Wilson, at p. 271, cites also Bengali kayi, Guzerathi hori.

COWSLIP, the name of a flower. (E.) In Milton, Comus, 898.
Shak. has both cowslip, Temp. v. 1. 89; and oxlip, Mids. Nt. Dr.
ii. 1. 250. ME. cowslope, cowslop; Prompt. Pary. p. 99. AS. ci-
slyppe, cusloppe; for the former form, see Cockayne’s Leechdoms,
Glossary; the entry ‘britannica, ciisloppe’ is in A‘lfric’s Glossary ;
Voc. 135. 26; cf. 361. 23. B. By the known laws of AS. grammar,
the word must be divided as ci-slyppe or cii-sloppe, where cu means
cow; cf. cii-nille, wild chervil (Leo). The word ox-lip was made to
match it, and therefore stands for ox-slip or ox-slop; cf. prov. E,
bull-slop, a large oxlip, E.D.D., p. 435. The word slyppe or sloppe
means lit. a slop, i.e. a piece of dung. An examination of the AS.
names of plants in Cockayne’s Leechdoms will strengthen the belief
that many of these names were of a very homely character. Cf.
Icel. kii-reki, a primrose, lit. ‘cow-leavings;’ MDan. kodriv, marsh
marigold, lit. ‘ cow-drift.’ See Slop.

COXCOMB, a fool, a fop. (K.) In Shakespeare, it means
(1) a fool’s cap, Merry Wives, v. 5. 146; (2) the head, Tw. Nt.
v. 179, 193, 1953 (3) a fool, Com, Err. iii. 1. 32. ‘Let the foole
goe like a cockescome still;’ Drant’s Horace, Ep. bk. i. To Sczeua.
For cock’s comb, i.e. cock’s crest. See cockscombe in Minsheu (1627),
who explains it. See Cock and Comb.

COXSWAIN, COCKSWAIN, the steersman of a boat.
(Hybrid; F, and Scand.) The spelling coxswain is modern; cock-
swain occurs in Drummond's Travels, p. yo (Todd’s Johnson) ; in
Anson’s Voyage, b. iii. c. 9; and in Cook’s Voyage, vol. i. b. ii. c. 1
(R.). The word is compounded of cock, a boat, and swain; and
means the person in command of a boat, not necessarily the steers-
man, though now commonly so used. See Cock (5) and Swain.

COY (1), modest, bashful, retired. (F.—L.) ‘Coy, or sobyr,
sobrius, modestus ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 86.—OF. coi, earlier guei,
cooit (Godefroy), still, quiet. —Folk-L. *guétum ; acc. of *guétus, for
L, quiétus, quiet, still. —L. guiét-, stem of guiés, rest. See Quiet.
Der. coy-ly, -ness, -ish, -ish-ness. Doublet, quiet.

COY (2), a decoy for wild duck. (Du.—L.) See N.E.D. and
E.D.D.—Dnu. fooi, a cage; MDu. koye (Hexham).—Late L. cavea,
acage. See Cage; of which coy is a doublet.


COYOTE


COYOTE, a prairie-wolf. (Span.—Mexican.) Span. coyote. =
Mexican coyotl, the Mexican wolf; Canis latrans.

COZEN, to flatter, to beguile. (F.—L.) In Shak. Merry Wives,
iv. 2,180, ‘When he had played the cowsining mate with others...
himselfe was beguiled;’ Hakluyt, Voyages, i. 586. Here the
spelling agrees with that of Cousin, q.v. Cozen is, in fact, merely
a verb evolved out of cousin. —F. cousiner, ‘to claime kindred for
advantage, or particular ends; as he, who to save charges in
trayelling, goes from house to house, as cosin to the honour of every
one;’ Cot. Soin mod. F., cousiner is ‘to call cousin, to sponge, to
live upon other people;’ Hamilton and Legros. The change of
meaning from ‘ sponge’ to ‘ beguile’ or ‘cheat’ was easy. Cf. OF.
cosin, a dupe (Godefroy). Der. cozex-age, cozen-er.

CRAB (1), a common shell-fish. (E.) ME. crabbe, Old Eng.
Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 51. AS. crabba, as a gloss to Lat. cancer ;
_ fElfric’s Gloss.; Voc. 180, 41.4Icel. krabbi; Swed. krabba; Dan.

krabbe; Du. krab; G. krabbe. Allied to EFries, and Du. krabben, to
scratch, to claw; also to G. krebs, Du. kreeft, crab. See Crayfish.

CRAB (2), a kind of apple. (E.) ‘Mala maciana, wode-crabbis ;’
MS. Harl. 3388,«qu. in Cockayne’s Leechdoms, Glossary. ‘ Crabbe,
appulle or frute, macianum;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 99. ‘Crabbe, tre,
acerbus, macianus, arbutus;’ id. Cf. prov. E. scrab, a crab-apple,
E.D.D.; and. Swed. dial. skrabba, fruit of the wild apple; also,
anything poor or weak ;' cf. Swed. skrabbig, weakly.

CRABBED, peevish; cramped. (E.) ‘The arwes [arrows] of
thy crabbed eloquence ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 9079 (E1203). Cf. Lowland
Scotch crab, to provoke, in Jamieson; he cites the sentence ‘ thou
hes crabbit and offendit God’ from Abp. Hamiltoun’s Catechisme,
fol. 153 b. ‘ Crabbyd, awke, or wrawe, ceronicus, bilosus, cancerinus ;’
Prompt. Pary. p. 99. B. From the same root as Crab (1), q. v.
Cf. Du. krabben, to scratch; hkribben, to quarrel, to be cross, to be
peevish ; #ribbig, peevish, forward; evidently the equivalent of
crabbed in the sense of peevish. yy. As regards the phrase ‘ to write
a crabbed hand,’ cf. Icel. krab, a crabbed hand, Icel. krabba, to scrawl,
write a crabbed hand; Du. krabbelen, to scribble, scrawl, scrape, a
dimin. form from krabben, to scratch. Thus crabbed, in both senses,
is from the same root. It is remarkable that the Prompt. Paryv.
translates crabbyd by L. cancerinus, from cancer, a crab. Der.
crabbed-ly, -ness.

CRACK, to split suddenly and noisily. (E.) ME. craken, kraken;
Havelok, 1857. ‘Speren chrakeden, spears cracked ; Layamon, iii. 94.
AS. cracian, to crack (Bosworth). ‘Sio eorpe eall cracode,’ the earth
all cracked ; Psalm xly. 3, ed. Thorpe. 4 Du. kraken, to crack, creak ;
krakken, to crack ; krak,a crack; krak, crack!; G. krachen, to crack ;
krach, a crack; Gael. crac, a crack, fissure; cnac, to crack, break,
crash (from E.), B. An imitative word, like creak, croak, crash,
gnash. Cf. Skt. garj, to roar. Der. crack, sb., crack-er ; crack-le, the
frequentative form, signifying ‘to crack often;’ crake, to boast, an
obsolescent word; also crack-n-el, q.v.

CRACKNAEL, a kind of biscuit. (F.—Du.) ‘ Crakenelle, brede,
creputellus, fraginellus ;” Prompt. Parv. p. 100. ‘ Crakenell, cracque-
lin;’ Palsgrave. A curious perversion of F. craguelin, which
Cotgrave explains by ‘cracknell ;’ the E. crak-en-el answering to F.
craq-el-in.= Du. krakeling, a cracknel; formed with dim. suffix -el
and the suffix -ixg from kraken, to crack; from the crisp nature of
the biscuit.

CRADLE, a child’s crib; a frame. (E.)’ ME. cradel, Ancren
Riwle, p. 260. AS. cradol; in comp. cild-cradol, child-cradle;
fElfric’s Homilies, ed. Thorpe, ii. 76. [A true Teutonic word, not
borrowed from Celtic. Irish craidhal, Gael. creathall, a cradle, a
grate, are from English.] Allied to mod. G. kréitze, a basket, given
by Kluge; MHG, kratte, kretze, OHG. cratto, crezzo, a basket
(Schade), On the other hand, Schade regards these G. words as
derived from L. crates, a hurdle; which seems unlikely.

CRAFT, skill, ability, trade. (E.) ME. craft, creft; Layamon,
1.120. AS. creft, Grein, i. 167. + Du. kracht, power; Icel. kraptr,
kraftr, craft, force; Swed. and Dan. kraft, power; G. kraft, power,
energy. f. Formed with suffixed -¢ from Teutonic stem *kraf-; cf.
Icel. krefr, strong, or daring. Perhaps allied to AS. crafian, to
crave, demand; see Crave. Der. craft-y, -i-ly, -i-ness, craft-s-man}
also hand-i-craft, q.v.

CRAG, a rock. (C.) ME. crag, pl. cragges; Hampole, Pricke
of Conscience, 6393; Cursor Mundi, 9885.— W. craig, a rock, crag;
allied to Gael. and Irish creag, a crag. Cf. W. careg, a stone ; Bret.
karrek, a rock in the sea, rock covered with breakers ; Gael. and
Trish carraig, a rock, cliff. From a base *kars, to be rough or
hard ; Stokes-Fick, p.72. Der. cragg-y.

CRAKE, CORNCRAKE, the name of a bird. (E.) Sonamed
from its cry, a kind of grating croak. Cf. ME. craken, to cry, shriek
out. ‘Thus they begyn to crake;’ Pilgrims’ Sea Voyage, 1. 163 see
Stacions of Rome, ed. Furnivall, E. E. T. S. 1867. An imitative


CRANK 141


word, like crack, creak, and croak; and see Crow. @# The Gk.
«peg, Lat. crex, also signifies a sort of land-rail, similarly named from
its cry. Der. corn-crake, Holland The Howlat, ]. 782; night-crake,
Voc. 639. 40.

CRAM, to press close together. (E.) ME. crammen. ‘Fut
crammyd ;’ Wyclif, Hos. xiii. 6. AS. crammian, to stuff. The
entry ‘ farcio, ic crammige’ occurs in Aélfric’s Grammar, De Quarta
Conjugatione. The compound verb undercrammian, to fill under-
neath, occurs in Atlfric’s Homilies, i. 430.[+4Icel. kremja, to squeeze,
bruise; Swed. Arama, to squeeze, press; Dan. kramme, to crumple,
crush.) From cramm-, 2nd grade of the AS. strong verb crimm-an, to
crumble. Cf. OHG. chrimman, MHG. krimmen, to seize with the
claws, G. grimmen, to grip, gripe. Allied to Cramp.

CRAMBO, a name of game; doggerel verse. (L.—Gk.) A
popular variation of L. crambé, cabbage; esp. with reference to L.
crambé repetita, cabbage served up again; hence, a tasteless repeti-
tion; see Juvenal, Sat. vii. 154.—Gk. «pdyBn, cabbage.

CRAMP, a tight restraint, spasmodic contraction. (F.—Teut.)
The verb to cramp is much later than the sb. in English use. ME.
crampe, a cramp, spasm. ‘Crampe,spasmus;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 100,
‘I cacche the crampe;’ P. Plowman, C. vii. 78.—¥. crampe, ‘the
crampe;’ Cot. Cf. F. crampon, ‘a cramp-iron.’=—Du. kramp, a
cramp, spasm. From the 2nd grade of Teut. *krempan-, *krimpan-,
to draw together, as in OHG. krimphan, str. vb. Cf. E. crimp, cramp,
crump-le. Also Swed. kramp, cramp; krampa, a cramp-iron, staple ;
MDan. krampe, cramp ; krampe, a cramp or iron clasp; G. krampf,
cramp; krampen, krampfen, to cramp; Icel. krappr, cramped, strait,
narrow; kreppa, to cramp, to clench; where the pp stands for mp,
by assimilation. Der. cramp-jfish, the torpedo, causing a spasm ;
cramp-iron, a vice, clamp.

CRANBERRY, a kind of sour berry. (Low G.) For crane-
berry; from some fanciful notion. Perhaps ‘ because its slender
stalk has been compared to the long legs and neck of a crane’
(Webster). Not in ME.; first in 1672; from Low G.—Low G.
kraanbere (Berghaus) ; G. kranbeere, explained in Fliigel’s Dict. as
‘a crane-berry, red bilberry.? And, most unequivocally, in Dan.
traneber, a cranberry, Swed. ¢ranbdr, a cranberry, where the word
follows the peculiar forms exhibited in Dan. trane, Swed. trana, a
crane. See Crane, and Berry.

CRANE, a long-legged wading bird. (E.) ‘ Crane, byrde, grus ;”
Prompt. Pary. p. 100. Spelt cron, Layamon, ii. 422. AS. cran; we
find ‘ grus, cranz’ in AElfric’s Glossary, Nomina Avium. + Du. kraan ;
Swed. ¢rana (for krana); Dan. trane (for krane); Icel. trani (for
krani) ; G. kran-ich, a crane. + W. garan, a crane; Corn. and Bret.
garan; Gk. yépavos, a crane. Cf. also L. grus, a crane; Lith.
garnys, a stork. B. The word is usually derived from the bird’s
cry; from 4/ GER, to call, cry out; cf: Gk. ynpvev. B. It is to be
noted, further, that, in the sense of a machine for raising weights, we
have still the same word; see Arnold’s Chronicle, 1502 (ed. 1811,
p- 127). In this sense, we find Gk. yépavos, Dan. and Swed. kran,
Du. kraan, G. krahn; cf. Icel. trana, a framework for supporting
timber. In English, craze also means a bent pipe, or siphon, from
its likeness to the bird’s neck; and cf. F. grue, ‘a crane, also, the
engine so called;’ Cot. Brugmann, i. § 632. Der. crane, vb., to
extend the neck (cf. Westphal. kranen,to make a long neck) ; cran-berry.

CRANIUM, the skull. (L.—Gk.) Medical. Borrowed from
L. cranium, the skull.—Gk. xpaviov, the skull; allied to «apa, xapy-
voy, the head, and to L. cerebrum; cf. also Skt. giras, the head. See
Brugmann, i. §§ 508,619. Der. crani-al, cranio-log-y, cranio-log-ist,
cranio-log-ic-al (from Gk. Adyos, discourse, Aéystv, to speak),

CRANK (1), a bent arm, for turning an axis. (E.) Shak. has.
crank, a winding passage, Cor. i. 1. 1413; also crank, to wind about,
1 Hen. IV, iii. r. 98. Cf. Milton, L’Allegro, 1. 27. ‘Cranke of a
welle;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 100. AS. cranc-, in the comp. cranc-stef;
Anglia, ix. 263, 1.14. Cf. EFries. krunken, bent. From Teut. type
*krank, 2nd grade of *krenkan- (*krinkan-), pt. t. *krank, pp-
*krunkanoz. Cf, AS. crincan, by-form of cring-an, to fall in battle,
orig, ‘to be bent up;”’ Du. Aronkel, a rumple, wrinkle, i.e. little
bend ; kronkelen, to rumple, wrinkle, bend, turn, wind. Hence also
Crinkle, which see. And see Cringe. Der. crank, to twist
about, t Hen. IV, iii. 1. 98; crank-le, to twist about, as in Cotgrave,
S.V. serpeger.

CRANK (2), liable to be upset, said of a boat. (E.) ‘The
Resolution was found to be very crank;’ Cook, Voyage, vol. iii.
b. ic. 1. Allied to Crank (1). Cf. Du. drank, ill, poor ; Walloon
krankier ,to turn aside, shift, krankieu, rickety (said of children), twisty
(said of trees); also Du. krengen, to careen, to bend upon one side in
sailing ; Swed. kranga, to heave down, to heel; hrédngning, a careening,
heeling over ; Dan. krenge, to heave down; also, to lie along, to lurch;
krengning, a lurch. See Cringe. Der. crank-y, crank-ness.

CRANK (3), lively, brisk. (E.) Obsolescent and provincial.


CRANNY


“Crank, brisk, jolly, metry;’ Halliwell. ‘He who was a little
before bedred, and caried lyke a dead karkas on fower mennes
shoulders, was now cranke and lustie;’ Udal, on Mark, c. 2. v. 6.
Ultimately, a very different use of crank (2), from the notion of turning
quickly. Cf. Norw. kring, active, brisk, Dan. dial. kreng, dexterous,
Icel. kringr, easy.

CRANNYY, a rent, chink, crevice. (F.—L.) ME. crany, with
one 2; see Prompt. Parv. p. 100, where crayne or crany is translated
by L. rima, a chink. ‘Crany, cravasse;’ Palsgrave. Formed by
adding the E. dimin. suffix -y to F. cran, a notch; also spelt cren, as
in Cotgrave; or from OF. crenee, a nook (Godefroy). Cf. Ital. crena,
a notch (Florio) ; and perhaps L. créza, a notch, used by Pliny, but
of doubtful authority ; see Korting, § 2591. Der. (from L. créna)
cren-ate, q.v., cren-ell-ate, q.v.

CRANTS, a garland, wreath. (MDu.—G.) In Hamlet, v. 1, 255.
Lowland Scotch crance (Jamieson), The spelling krants is given by
Kilian for the Du. word now spelt Aras, a wreath, garland, chaplet ;
cf. Dan. krands, Swed. krans.—G. kranz, a wreath.

CRAPH, a thin crisp silk stuff. (F.—L.) ‘A saint in crape;’
Pope, Moral Essays, i. 136.—F. crépe, spelt crespe in Cotgrave, who
explains it by ‘cipres, cobweb lawne.’ OF. crespe, ‘curled, frizzled,
crisped, crispe;’ id. = L. crispus, crisped, curled. See Crisp. Thus
crape is a doublet of crisp.

CRAPULOUS, intemperate, sick with drunkenness. (L.—Gk.)
In Bailey and Johnson. Charles Cotton has crapula; Night
Quatrains, 1. 72,.—L. crapuldsus, drunken. —L. crapula, intoxication.
= Gk. xpairdAn, nausea, effect of a surfeit; prob. orig. ‘ giddiness.’
Allied to xpa:mvés, rapid, swift; Lith. kreip-ti, to turn, turn round.

CRARE, a kind of ship. (F.) Shak. has ‘sluggish crare;’ Cymb.
iv. 2. 205 (old edd. care) ; see also craier in Halliwell; cray in Nares.
ME. crayer, Allit. Morte Arthure, 738, 3665.—OF. crater, creer, a
vessell of war (Godefroy) ; apparently a Norman word; Low L.
craiera, creyera. Origin unknown,

CRASH, to break in pieces forcibly, to make a sudden grating
noise. (Scand.?) Shak. has the sb, crash, Hamlet, ii. 2. 498. ‘He
shak’t his head, and crash’t his teeth for ire;’ Fairfax, tr. of Tasso,
bk. vii. st. 42. ‘Craschyn, as tethe, fremo;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 100;
Allit. Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 1. 1109. A mere variant of craze,
and both crash and craze are again variants of crack. Cf. clash, dash;
of imitative origin. Perhaps suggested by Swed. krasa, to crackle ;
sid i kras, to dash to pieces; Dan. krase, to crackle; slaae i kras, to
break to shivers. See Craze, Crack. Der. crash, sb.

CRASIS, the contraction of two vowels into a long vowel or
diphthong. (Gk.) Grammatical. Borrowed from Gk. «pdos, a
mixing, blending.= Gk. xepdvyupt, I mix, blend. See Crater.

CRASS, thick, dense, gross. (L.) ‘Of body somwhat crasse and
corpulent ;’ Hall’s Chron, Hen. VII, an. 21. § 5.—L, crassus, thick,
dense, fat. Der. crass-i-tude; cresset, q.v.

CRATCH, a manger, crib for cattle. (F.-OHG.) ME. eracche,
crecche; used of the manger in which Christ was laid; Cursor Mundi,
112373 spelt crecche, Ancren Riwle, p. 260.—OF. creche (mod. F.
créche), a manger, crib. [The Provencal form is crepcha, and the
Ital. is greppia; all are of OHG. origin. ]—OHG. crippea (whence G.
krippe), a crib; cf. OSax. kribbia, a crib; see the Heliand, ed. Heyne,
1, 382. And see Crib. Der. cratch-cradle, i.e. crib-cradle; often
unmeaningly turned into scratch-cradle.

CRATE, a wicker case for crockery. (MDu.) ‘I have seen a
horse carrying home the harvest on a crate;’ Johnson, Journey to
the Western Islands, Grose (1790) has: ‘crates, panniers for glass
or crockery.’ And see E.D.D. Perhaps from MDu. ratte, Du.
krat, a basket ; cf. MDu. kretse, a wicker pannier (Hexham); OHG.
cratto, a basket. B. Or, otherwise, from L. erdtes, a hurdle ; properly,
of wicker-work. And see Cart, Cradle.

CRATER, the cup or opening of a volcano. (L.—Gk.) Used
by Berkeley, to Arbuthnot, Description of Vesuvius, 1717 (Todd’s
Johnson). ‘Crater, a cup or bowl, a goblet ;’ Bailey, vol. ii. (1731).
=—L. craiér, a bowl; the crater of a volcano. =—Gk. xparnp, a large
bowl in which things were mixed together.—Gk. wepdyvujt, I mix;
from the base xep-. Cf. Skt. gri, to mix.

CRAVAT, a kind of neckcloth. (F.—Austrian). Spelt crabat in
Hudibras, pt. i. c. 3. 1166: ‘Canonical crabat of Smeck.’ But this
is a corrupted spelling. Dryden has: ‘His sword-knot this, his
crdvat that designed;’ Epilogue to the Man of Mode, 1. 23.—F.
cravate, meaning (1) a Croat, Croatian; and (2) a cravat. B. The
history of the word is recorded by Ménage, who lived at the time of
the first introduction of cravats into France, in the year 1636. He
explains that the ornament was worn by the Croates (Croatians), who
were more commonly termed Cravates; and he gives the date (1636)
of its introduction into France, which was due to the dealings the
French had at that time with Germany; it was in the time of the
Thirty Years’ War. See the passage quoted in Brachet, s.v. cravate;


142


CREAM


and in Nares, s.v. crabat. ‘y. Brachet also explains, s.v. corvée, the
insertion, for euphony, of the letter v, whereby Croate became Crovate
or Cravate; a similar striking instance occurs in F. pouvoir, from L.
potére, for potesse. ‘The word is, accordingly, of historic origin; from
the name of Croatia, now a province of Austria. Cf. Cravatts, i.e.
Croatians, which occurs in 1658; see Sir S. D. Scott, The British
Army (1850), iii. ror; also N. and Q. 6S. vi. 113. The name is
of Slavonic origin; cf. Russ. Kroa?’, a Croatian.

CRAVE, to beg earnestly, beseech. (E.) ME. crauen (with u
for v); Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1. 1408. AS. crajfian, to
crave; A. S. Chron. an. 1070; ed. Thorpe, p. 344. Cf. Icel. krefja,
to crave, demand; Swed. krafva, to demand; Dan. reve, to crave,
demand, exact; also Icel. #rafa, a craving,a demand. Der. crav-ing.

CRAVEN, one who is defeated, a recreant. (F.—L.) ME.
crauant (with «for v); also spelt crauand, crauaund. ‘Al ha cneowen
ham crauant and ouercumen’= they all knew them to be craven and
overcome; Legend of St. Katharine,132. ‘Haa! crauaunde knyghte}’
=ha! craven knight; Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 1. 133. B. The
termination in -en is a mistaken one, and makes the word look like a
past participle. The word is really cravant, where -ant is the regular
French form of the present participle. OF. cravant, pres. part. of
craver, by-form of crever, to burst, to break; and hence, to be over-
come. [Cf. Span. guebrar, to fail, to be bankrupt, which is the same
word.]=—L. crepantem, acc. of pres. part. of crepare, to burst. See
further the uses of F. crever; thus, OF. le cuer me creve means ‘ my
heart is breaking ;’ OF. crevé means ‘dead;” and Walloon se krever
de rire is denounced by Remacle as being not a polite phrase. See
Phil. Soc. Trans. 1902, p. 659.

CRAW, the crop, or first stomach of fowls. (E.) ME, crawe;
Wyclif, 4 Kings, vi. 25. ‘Crawe, or crowpe of a byrde or other
fowlys, gabus, vesicula;’ Prompt. Parv. p. tot. [Allied to crag or
craig, the neck.] As if from AS. *craga, the neck (not found);
NFries. krage, neck, craw. Cf. Du. kraag, the neck, collar; G.
kragen, acollar. Also (perhaps) Dan. kro, Swed. krafva, craw.

CRAWFISH; see Crayfish.

CRAWL, to creep along. (Scand.) Spelt crall; Spenser, F. Q.
iii. 3. 26. See Cursor Mundi, 6612. Cf. prov. E. craffle, croffle, to
crawl. =Icel. trafla, to paw, to scrabble with the hands; krafla fram
ur, to crawl out of; Swed. krafla, to grope; Swed. dial. kralla, to
creep on hands and feet; Dan, kravle, to crawl, creep. B. The orig.
base is here Teut. *trab-, signifying ‘to paw’ or ‘seize with the
hands;’ with the frequentative suffix -la; thus giving the sense of
“to grope,’ to feel one’s way as an infant does when crawling along.
Cf. Low G. krabbeln, krawweln, kraulen, to crawl (Schambach).

CRAYFISH, CRAWFISH, a species of crab. (F.—OHG.)
Spelt craifish in Holland, tr. of Pliny, bk. xxxii. c. 7 (p. 439 b). A
mistaken accommodation of ME. crevis or creves, Wars of Alexander,
3864; spelt crevise, Babees Book, ed. Furnivall, p. 158; creveys,
Prompt. Parv.—OF. crevisse, given by Roquefort as another spelling
of OF. escrevisse, mod. F. écrevisse, a crayfish; Hatzfeld also cites
the OF. form crevice.—OHG, crebiz, MHG. krebez, G. krebs, a cray-
fish, crab; allied to G. krabbe, acrab. See Crab (1). a It fol-
lows that the etymological division of the word into syllables is as
crayf-isk; and thus all connexion with jish disappears.

CRAYON, a pencil of coloured chalk. (F.—L.) In Evelyn’s
Diary, Sept. 30, 1644. Borrowed from F. crayon, explained by Cot-
grave as ‘dry-painting, or a painting in dry colours,’ &c. Formed
with suffix -ox from F. craie, chalk.—L. créta, chalk. See Creta-
ceous.

CRAZE, to break, weaken, derange. (Scand.) ME. crasen, to
break, crack. ‘Iam right siker that the pot was crased,’ i.e. cracked ;
Chaucer, C. T., 16402 (G 934). Allied to crash, but nearer to the
original. Swed. krasa, to crackle; slé i kras, to break in pieces.
Ihre also cites Swed. gd i kras, to go to pieces; and the MSwed.
hraslig, easily broken; so also Dan. krase, to crackle. q The F.
écraser is from the same source; the E. verb was (probably) not bor-
rowed from the French, but directly from Scand. ; but the adj. crazy
may have been suggested by the F. pp. écrasé, broken. Der. craz-y,
craz-t-ly, craz-i-ness. Cf. Crash.

CREAK, to make a sharp grating sound. (E.) ME. creken.
‘He cryeth and he creketh;’ Skelton, Colin Clout, 1.19. ‘A crowe
... kreked;’ Fabyan, Chron. vol. i. c. 213. An imitative word, like
Crake and Crack. Cf. EFries. kraken, to creak; as in krakende
wagens, creaking wains (Koolman); OHG. chregén, krekén, to creak;
MDu. freken,‘to creake,’ Hexham; also Du. érekel, a cricket (from
its cry).

CREAM, the oily substance which rises in milk. (F.—L.—Gk.)
ME. creme, crayme. ‘Cowecreme;’ Babees Book, ed. Furnivall, p. 266;
‘crayme of cowe;’ id. 123. Also craym, creem, creyme, P. Plowm.
A. vii. 269; B. vi. 284; C. ix. 306.—OF. cresme, F. créme, cream.
Really the same word as OF. cresme (EF. chréme), chrism.—L. chrisma.


CREASE


=Gk. xpiopa; see Chrism. @ Derived in late times from L.
cremor, by error; whence cremor lactis, and even crema lactis (Du-
cange); but the guess was a wrong one. Der. cream, verb; cream-y,
cream-i-ness. Doublet, chrism.

CREASE (1), a wrinkle, small fold. (F.—L.) Richardson well
remarks that ‘this word so common in speech, is rare in writing.’
He quotes an extract containing it from Swift, Thoughts on Various
Subjects. Also: ‘The creses here are excellent good ; the proportion
of the chin good;’ Sir Gyles Goosecappe (1606), Act ii. sc. 1; a
quotation which seems to refer to a portrait. Phillips (in 1706) has
crease, a fold; and the word is noted by Skinner (1671). But the
earliest spelling is creast. In Lyte’s tr. of Dodoens, bk. vi. c. 40, a
peach-stone is said to be ‘ ful of ereastes [i.e. crests, ridges] and gut-
ters.’ Hence Phillips (in 1658) has ‘ Creast-tile, a roof-tile, which is
made to lay upon the ridge of a house ;? whence prov. E. crease, ‘a
ridge-tile;’? E.D.D. Suggested by OF. cresté, crested ; also, wrinkled
or ruffled, in speaking of the surface of water; the form is Walloon,
which has fress, a crest, a ridge, &c. (Remacle); cf. mod. Prov. crest,
creis,a ridge. Thus crease isa doublet of crest; see Crest. Cf. Notes
on E. Etym. p. 49.  @f For the spelling creast, a crest, see Caxton,
Morte Darthur, bk. v. c. 5. 1. 66.

CREASE (2), CREESH, a Malay dagger. (Malay.) ‘Four
hundred young men, who were privately armed with cryzes;’ Sir
T. Herbert, Travels, ed. 1665; p. 68.— Malay kris or kris, ‘a dagger,
poignard, kris, or creese;’ Marsden’s Malay Dict., 1812, p. 258,

CREATE, to make, produce, form. (L.) Orig. a past part.
‘Whan our lord hadde creat Adam;’ Chaucer, C. T., B 2293.
‘Since Adam was create;’ Gascoigne, Dan Bartholomew, His Last
Will, 1. 3. Cf. K. John, iv. 1. 107.—L. credius, pp. of credre, to
create, make. . Related to Skt. Ay, to make, causal karayami,
I cause to be performed. Brugmann, i. § 641. Der. creat-ion, -ive,
-or; also creat-ure (OF. creature, L. creatura), a sb. in early use, viz.
in Hampole, Pricke of Conscience, 1. 38, King Alisaunder, 6948.

CREED, a belief. (L.) ME. crede, Ancren Riwle, p. 20; and
frequently credo, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 75. An AS. form
creda is given in Lye and Bosworth.=—L. crédo, I believe, the first
word of the Latin version of the Apostles’ and Nicene Creeds ; from
L. crédere, to believe.4-Olrish cretim, I believe; Skt. ¢raddadhami,
I believe; cf. graddha, faith; both from the base grat. Brugmann,
i. § 539. Der. From the L. crédere we have also cred-ence, Gower,
C. A. 1. 249, bk. ii. 2677 (OF. credence, Late L. crédentia, from the
pres. part. crédent-) ; cred-ent, -ent-i-al ; cred-i-ble (Gower, C. A. i. 23),
cred-t-bil-i-ty, -i-ble-ness, -i-bl-y ; also credit (from L. pp. créditus) , credit-
able, -abl-y, -able-ness, -or ; also credulous (L. crédulus, by change of
-us into -ous), -ly, -ness; and credul-i-ty (F. credulité, Englished by
credulity in Cotgrave, from L. acc. crédulitatem, nom. crédulitis).

CREEK, an inlet, cove, nook, bend. (MDu.?) Cf. Du.kreek, acreek;
MDu. kréke (Franck); whence the Tudor E, creke, mod. E. creek, was
probably derived. We also find ME. cryke, Chaucer, C. T. prol. 411;
krike in Havelok, 708. = OF. crigue,a creek, bay (Supp. to Godefroy). =
Swed. dial. Arik, a bend, nook, corner, creek, cove (Rietz) ; Icel. kriki,
a crack, nook; cf. handarkriki, the arm-pit; Dan. dial. krig, a turn,
bend, bending in. B. Possibly W. crig, a crack, crigyll, a ravine, creek,
are from ME. The Swed. dial. armkrik also means the bend of the
arm, elbow (Rietz); but the orig. form and sense are alike obscure.
See Crick. Der. creek-y.

CREEL, a large wicker basket. (F.—L.) - ‘Crelle, baskett ;’
Prompt. Parv. ‘The pl. crelis occurs in Wyntown, Chron. VIII.
xxxvili, 51 (N.E.D.). Lowland Sc. creil.<OF. creil (Lacurne) ;
given also in Ducange, s.v. cleia, to translate L. crates, a hurdle.=
Late L. *craticulum, neuter; just as F. grille is from Late L. craticula.
Dimin. of L. crates, a hurdle. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 51.

CREEP, to crawl, as a snake, &c. (E.) ME. crepen, creopen;
Ancren Riwle, p. 292. AS. créopan, Grein, i. 169. + Du. kruipen, to
creep, crawl; Icel. krjipa; Swed. krypa; Dan. krybe. Teut. type
*kreupan-, pt. t. *kraup, pp. *krupanoz. Der. creep-er.

CREESH, a Malay dagger; see Crease (2).

CREMATION, burning, esp. of the dead, (L.) Used by Sir
T. Browne, Um Burial, c. 1.—L. crematidnem, acc. of crematio, a
burning ; cf. crematus, pp. of cremare, to burn.

CRENATE, notched, said of leaves. (L.) A botanical term.
Formed as if from L. *créndtus, notched (not used), from Late L.
créna (Ital. crena), a notch. See Cranny.

CRENELLATE, to furnish with a parapet, to fortify. (Late
L.—F.—L.) See List of Royal Licences to Crenellate, or Fortify ;
Parker's Eng. Archeologist’s Handbook, p. 233.— Late L. crénellare,
whence F. creneler, ‘to imbattle ;’ Cotgrave.— Late L. crenellus, a
parapet, battlement; [OF. crenel, later creneau, a battlement; dimin.
of OF. cren, cran, a notch]; from Late L. créna, a notch (above).

- CREOLE, one born in the West Indies, but of European or for-
eign blood. (F.—Span.—L.) See the quotations in Todd’s Johnson,


CREVICE


=F. créole.=Span. criollo, a native of America or the W. Indies; a
corrupt word, made by the negroes; said to be a contraction of cria-
dillo, the dimin. of criado, one educated, instructed, or bred up, pp.
of criar, lit. to create, but commonly also to bring up, nurse, breed,
educate, instruct. Hence the sense is ‘a little nursling.’=L. credre,
to create. See Create. @ Cf.Span. criadilla, a worthless servant-
maid, dimin. of criada, a servant-maid.

CREOSOTE, a liquid distilled from wood-tar. (Gk.) Dis-
covered in 1832; so called because it has the quality of preserving
flesh from corruption; lit. ‘flesh-preserver.’—Gk. xpeo-, for xpéas,
flesh (allied to L. caro, flesh); and owr-, shortened from owrnp, a
preserver, from owe, to save, preserve. (Incorrectly formed.)

CREPITATE, to crackle. (L.) Medical.mL. crepitatus, pp.
of crepitare, to crackle, rattle; frequentative of crepare, to rattle.
Der. crepitat-ion. See Crevice.

CREPUSCULAR, pertaining to twilight. (L.) First in 1668.
—L. crepuscul-um, twilight ; with suffix -ar. Allied to Sabine creper,
dark (Varro).

CRESCENT, the increasing moon. (L.) Properly an adj. sig-
nifying ‘increasing ;’ Hamlet, i. 3. 11.—L. crescent-, stem of crescens,
pres. pt. of crescere (pp. crétus), to increase, to grow; an inchoative
verb formed with suffix -sc-, allied to cre-dre, to create, make. See
Create. Der. From the base of pp. crét-us we have the derivatives
ac-cret-ion, con-crete, ‘The Ital. crescendo, increasing, a musical term,
is equivalent to crescent. @ It must be added that the spelling
crescent is an accommodated one. The word was formerly spelt
cressent or cressaunt. We find ‘Cressaunt, lunula’ in the Prompt.
Parv. p. 102. ‘This is not from the Latin immediately, but from OF.
creissaunt, pres. part. of OF. creistre, to grow, from L. crescere. It
comes to the same at last, but makes a difference chronologically.
Cf. ‘a cressant, or halfe moone, croissant ;’? Sherwood’s Index to Cot-

rave; ‘cressent, the newe mone, cressant;’ Palsgrave.

CRESS, the name of several plants of the genus Crucifere. (E.)
ME. cresse, cres; also spelt kerse, kers, carse, by shifting of the letter
r, a common phenomenon in English; cf. mod. E. bird with ME.
brid. ‘Wisdom and witte now is nought worth a carse;”’ P. Plow-
man, B. x. 17, where 4 MSS. read kerse. ‘ Cresse, herbe, nasturtium;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 102. ‘Anger gaynez [avails] the not a cresse ;’
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, i. 343. [‘ Not worth a cress’ or ‘ not worth
a kers’ was a common old proverb, now turned into the meaning-
less ‘not worth a curse.’] AS. cerse, cerse, cress@; see numerous
references in Cockayne’s Leechdoms, iii. 316. Cf. the entry ‘ nas-
turtium, tin-kerse,’ i.e. town-cress, in Atlfric’s Glossary; Voc. 135.
36. + Du. kers, cress; G. kresse, water-cresses ; OHG. cressa (whence
F. cresson, according to Hatzfeld). Teut. type * kras-jon- (Franck) ;
from * kras, 2nd grade of * kres-, as in OHG. cresan, chresan, to creep.
Hence the sense is ‘ creeper.’

CRESSET, an open lamp, placed on a beacon or carried on a
pole. (F.—L.) ‘ Cresset, crucibollum ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 102, ‘A
lyht brennende in a kressette;’ Gower, C. A. ili. 217; bk. vii. 3743.
= OF. cresset, craisset, a cresset. B. A glance at a picture of a
cresset, in Webster’s Dict. or elsewhere, will show that it consisted,
in fact, of an open iron cup at the top of a pole; and the cup was
filled with burning grease or oil; whence the name.—OF, craisse
(F. graisse), grease; Hatzfeld.—Folk L. *crassia, grease; from L.
crassus, thick, dense. So also Walloon cracké, a cresset; from
crache, grease. See Grease, Crass.

CREST, a tuft on a cock’s head, plume, &c. (F.—L.) ME.
creste, crest; Chaucer, C. T. 13834 (B 2096). —OF. creste, ‘a crest,
cop, combe, tuft ;’ Cot.—L. crista, a comb or tuft on a bird’s head,
a crest. Der. crest, verb, crest-less; crest-fallen, i.e. with fallen or
sunken crest, dejected. Doublet, crease (1).

CRETACEOUS, chalky. (L.) It occurs in J. Philips, Cyder,
bk. i. 1. 54 3-first printed in 1708.—L. crétaceus, chalky; by change
of -ws to -ous, as in credulous, &c.—L. créta, chalk; generally
explained to mean Cretan earth, but this is hardly the origin of the
word. See Crayon.

CRETIN, a deformed idiot, chiefly in the Swiss Alps. (F.—L.—
Gk.) First in 1779.—F. crétin, which in Swiss patois means (1)
Christian, (2) a Christian being, one who is not a brute animal
merely.—L. acc. Christianum; from Christus, Christ.—Gk. Xpeords ;
see Christ.

CRETONNE, a kind of stout unglazed cloth. (F.) Modern. =
F. cretonne, a fabric orig. made at Crefon, a village in Normandy
(Hatzfeld).

CREVICE, a crack, cranny. (F.—L.) ME. crevice, but_also
crevace, Spelt creuisse (with u for v), Gawain and the Grene
Knight, ed. Morris, 2183; crevace, Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, ill.
996. —AF. crevace (see quot. in Hatzfeld) ; MF. crevasse, ‘a crevice,
chink, rift, cleft ;? Cot. (Late L. crepatia). — OF. (and F.) crever, ‘to
burst or break asunder, to chink, rive, cleave, or chawn;’ id.—L.


143


144 CREW


crepare, to crackle, rattle; also, to burst asunder; a word possibly
of imitative origin. Doublet, crevasse,

CREW, a company of people. (F.—L.) Formerly crue ;
Gascoigne, The Fruits of Warre, st. 46; ‘If she be one of Cressid’s
crue;’ Turberville, His Love flitted from wonted Troth; st. 15.
Common as a sea-term, ‘a ship’s crew.’ First used in 1455,
Parliament Rolls, v. 297; where 300 men are ‘ ordeigned for a crue
over the ordinary charge’ at Calais. The earliest sense was a rein-
forcement; later, a company sent on an expedition; and lastly, a
company (generally). ‘The Fresh kynge sent soone after into
Scotlande a crewe of Frenshemen, to ayde suche enemyes as kyng
Edwarde there had;’ Fabyan’s Chron. ed. Ellis, p. 444. A crewe
is a corrupt substitution for acrewe, accrewe, or accrue, the obsolete
sb. from which the verb to accrue is derived. Thus Holinshed
(Chron. iii. 1135) has: ‘The towne of Calis and the forts thereabouts
were not supplied with anie new accrewes [reinforcements ] of soldiors.’
—OF. acreue, accrue, s. f. augmentation, reinforcement ; Godefroy.
— OF. acreue, fem. of pp. of acroistre, to augment (Supp. to Godefroy).
—L. accrescere, to increase.—L. ac-, for ad, to, in addition; crescere,
to grow. See Accrue, Accretion.

CREWEL, worsted yarn slackly twisted. (F.—Teut.) In King
Lear, ii. 4.7. Halliwell explains it by ‘fine worsted, formerly much
in use for fringe, garters, &c. The Whitby Gloss. has ‘ creeals or
crules, coloured worsteds for ornamental needle-work, &c.’ Palsgrave
has: ‘Caddas or crule, sayette. The earliest mention of crules is in
Test. Eboracensia, ii. 100 (an. 1444). Generally in the pl. crewels,
prob. at first applied to the hanks or skeins, of which there were
many, of different colours.—OF. escrowelles (de laine), portions of
wool (Godefroy); dimin. of OF. escroe, escroue, a shred. See
Escrow. See Phil. Soc. Trans. 1905; p. 251.

CRIB, a manger, rack, stall, cradle. (E.) ME. crib, cribbe;
Ormulum, 3321; Cursor Mundi, 11237. AS. crib, cryb; Grein,
i. 169. ++ OSax. kribbia; see Cratch; Du. rib, a crib, manger;
OHG., krippha, MHG. hkripfe, G. krippe, a crib, manger. Cf. also
Icel. and Swed. krubba, Dan. krybbe, a crib. Perhaps allied to
MHG. krebe, a basket; but distinct from Du. horf, G. korb, if these
are from L. corbis. Der. crib, verb, to put into a crib, hence, to
confine; also to hide away in a crib, hence, to purloin; from the
latter sense is cribb-age, in which the crib is the secret store of cards.

CRICK, a spasmodic affection of the neck. (E.) ‘ Crykke, seke-
nesse, spasmus;” Prompt. Parv. p. 103. ‘Those also that with a
cricke or cramp have their necks drawne backward ;’ Holland, tr. of
Pliny, b. xx. c. 5. Allied to prov. E. crink, a bend, a crick in the
neck (E.D.D.); which answers to Norw. krenk, a twist, sprain;
which again is allied to crank (1). See Crinkle.

CRICKET (1), a shrill-voiced insect. (F.—Du.}  ‘ Crykhette,
salamandra, crillus;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 103. Spelt crykett, P. Plow-
man, C. xvi. 243.—OF. crequet, criquet, a cricket, Supp. to Godefroy ;
a diminutive form. = OF. criguer, ‘to creake, rattle,’ Cot. ; a word of
Germanic origin, being an attenuated form of F. craquer, ‘to cracke,
creake,’ id. See Creak, Crack. The Germanic word is preserved
in Du. kriek, a cricket, and in the E. creak, sometimes written crick
(N.E.D.); also in the Du. krikkrakken, to crackle, and MDu. kricken,
‘to creake or to crack,’ Hexham. Cf. prov. E. cracket, creaker, a
cricket.

CRICKET (2), a game with bat and ball. (F.—Du.) The word
cricket-ball occurs in The Rambler, no. 30. Cotgrave translates the
F, crosse as ‘a crosier or bishop’s staffe; also a cricket-staffe, or the
crooked staff wherewith boies play at cricket.’ The first mention of
cricket is in 1598; it was a development of the older game of club-
ball, which was played with a crooked stick, and was something like
the modern hockey ; see Eng]. Cycl. Supplement to Arts and Sciences,
col. 653.—OF. criqguet, ‘baton servant de but au jeu de boule’
(Godefroy) ; so that the criquet was practically the wicket. Godefroy
has a quotation of 1478: ‘Le suppliant arriva en ung lieu ou on
jouoit a la boulle, pres d’une atache [vine-stake] ou criquet.’—MDu.
krick, kricke, a crutch (Hexham), Cf. AS. crice, eryce, a crutch, staff.
See Crutch. Der. cricket-er.

CRICOID, adj., applied to the ring-shaped cartilage forming a
part of the larynx. (Gk.) First in 1746.— Mod. L. cricoides, tran-
scription of Gk. xpixoeins, ring-shaped.—Gk. xpixo-, for xpixos or
xipkos, a ring; and «idos, form. See Circus.

CRIME, an offence against law, sin. (F.—L.) ME. crime, cryme;
Chaucer, C. T., D1307.—F. crime, ‘a crime, fault ;? Cot.—L. crimen,
an accusation, charge, fault, offence. Generally connected with L.
cernere, to sift, and the Gk. «pive.v, to separate, decide, whence «pia,
xpipa, a decision. Der. From the stem crimin- of L. crimen, we have
crimin-al, -al-ly, -al-i-ty, -ate, -at-ion, -at-or-y.

CRIMP, to wrinkle, corrugate, make crisp. (E.) Often used in
cookery, as ‘to crimp a skate;’ see N.E.D. The frequentative
crimple, to rumple, wrinkle, occurs in the Prompt. Parv. p. 103. It


CRISP


answers to an AS. *crempan, EFries. krempan, causal derivative of
Cramp. Or to AS. crympan, from the weak grade; cf. ‘Calamis- —
tratis, gecrymptum;’ Voc. 378.26. Cf. Du. krimpen, to shrink, shrivel,

diminish ; Swed. Arympa, to shrink, active and neuter; Dan. krympe

sig sammen, to shrink oneself together; G. krimpen, to crumple, to

shrink cloth. B. The orig. strong verb appears as EFries. and

Du. krimpen, Swed. dial. krimpa, OHG. krimfan; Teut. type

*krempan- (krimpan-), to draw oneself together, to shrink up; pt.

t. *kramp; pp. *“krumpanoz. See Cramp and Crumple. Der.

crimp-le.

CRIMSON, a deep red colour, (F.— Arab. —Skt.) ME, crimosine,
Gascoigne, Steel Glass, 1. 767; crimosin, Berners, tr. of Froissart,
vol. ii. c. 157 (R.); spelt crammysyn, G. Douglas, Prol. to xii Book
of Eneados, 1. 15 ; cremesin, Caxton, Troy-book, leaf 74, 1. 28. —OF.
cramoisin, cramoisi (F. cramoisi) ; see Supp. to Godefroy; cf. Late L.
cramoisinus, crimson. ‘The correct L. form appears in the Late L.
carmesinus, crimson (Span. carmesi, Ital. chermisi); so called from
the kermes or cochineal insect with which it was dyed.— Arab. and
Persian girmisi, crimson; girmiz, crimson; see Palmer’s Pers. Dict.
col. 470.—Skt. kymi(s), a worm, an insect. B. The colour was so
called because produced by the cochineal-insect; see Cochineal.
The Skt. kymi(s) is cognate with Irish cruim and W. pryf, a worm.
Carmine is a doublet of crimson; see Carmine.

CRINGE, to bend, crouch, fawn. (E.) Used by Shak. in the
sense of to distort one’s face; Ant. and Cleop. iii. 13. 100; cf.
crinkle, to wrinkle, which is related to cringe. ME. crengen; ‘he
crengit, he cringed; Holland, The Houlate, 1. 956. A causal
derivative of AS. cringan, crincgan, crincan, to sink in battle, fall,
succumb; Grein, i. 169; and see Sweet’s A.S. Reader. Thus cringe
is a causative of cring, and cring is a by-form of crink, with the sense
of ‘to bend’ or ‘to give way;’ further related to crank. See
Crank (2). Cf. EFries. krengen, to lay on its side, careen (a ship).
Der. crink-le, q.v.

CRINGLE, a ring worked into the bolt-rope of a sail. (Low G.)
‘Cringle, a kindof wrethe or ring wrought into a rope for the
convenience of fastening another rope to it;’ Ash’s Dict., ed. 1775.
In Falconer’s Shipwreck (1762), c. iii. 1. 330.—Low G. kringel, a
ring (Liibben); EFries. kringel. Allied to Icel. kringla, a circle,
orb, disk (hence, simply a circle or ring); cf. kringlottr, circular,
kringar, pl., the pulleys of a drag-net. Cf. kring, ady., around,
kringja, to encircle, surround; Swed. kring, prep., around about;
Du. fring, a circle, circuit, orb, sphere. Allied to Crinkle,
Cringe, and Crank (1). :

CRINITEH, hairy. (L.) ‘How comate, crinite, caudate stars are
framed ;’ Fairfax, tr. of Tasso, bk. xiv. st. 44.—L. crinitus, having
long hair. —L. crini-, for crinis, hair.

CRINKLE, to rumple slightly, wrinkle. (E.) ‘Her face all
bowsy, Comely crynklyd;’ Skelton, Elynour Rummyng, 1.18. Cf.
crincled, full of twists or turnings, Chaucer, Legend of Good Women,
2012. Formed by adding -/e, the common frequentative termination,
to the base crinc- of the AS. strong verb crincan, to give way, bend in,
fallina heap. See Cringe. Thus crink-le is to bend frequently,
to make full of bends or turns.. Cf. Dan. krinkelgange, meanderings
(Larsen). Compare Crimple.

CRINOLINE, a lady's stiff skirt. (F.—L.) Formerly made of |
hair-cloth.—F. crinoline, (1) hair-cloth; (2) crinoline; an artificial
word. =F. crin, hair, esp. horse-hair, from L. crinem, acc. of crinis,
hair; and Jin, flax, hence, thread, from L. linwm, flax. See Crinite
and Linen.

CRIPPLE, one who has not the full use of his limbs. (E.) ME.
crupel, crepel, cripel; see Cursor Mundi, 13106. An AS. word, but
the traces of it are not very distinct; spelt crypel in the Lindisfarne
MS., Luke, v. 24, as a gloss to paralyticus. Lit. ‘a creeper.’— AS.
crup- (with vowel-change from u to y), weak grade of ecréopan, to
creep; see Creep. The suffix -el (for -ilo-) denotes the agent.
Du. kreupel, adj. crippled, lame (cf. kruipelings, creepingly, by
stealth), kruipen, to creep; OFrisian kreppel, a cripple ; Icel. kryppill,
also kryplingr, a cripple; Dan. krébling, a cripple; cf. Dan. krybe, to
creep; G. kriippel, a cripple; cf. MHG. krifen, to creep. B. The
suffix has the same active force as in AS. byd-el, i.e. one who pro-
claims. The AS. créopere, lit. ‘creeper,’ likewise means a cripple ;
fElfric’s Saints’ Lives, vi. 20. Der. cripple, verb.

CRISIS, a decisive point or moment. (Gk.) ‘This hour’s the
very crisis of your fate;’ Dryden, Spanish Friar (Todd’s Johnson) ;
andin Minsheu (1627).=—Gk. «picts, a separating, discerning, decision,
crisis. Gk. «pivey, to decide, separate; allied to L. cernere, to sift.
See Critic. ;

CRISP, wrinkled, curled. (L.) ME. crisp, Wyclif, Judith, xvi. 10.
Also crips, by change of sp to ps, a phenomenon due to the more
frequent converse change of ps into sp, as in aspen, clasp, which see.
Crips is in Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii. 296. In very early use; the


CRISTATE


AS. crisp occurs in the tr. of Beda, v. 2 (near the end).—L. crispus,
curled ; allied to W. crych, rumpled; see Brugmann, i. § 565 (3).
Der. crisp-ly, -ness.

CRISTATH, crested. (L.) First in 1661.—L. cristatus, furnished
with a crest.—L. crista, a crest. See Crest.

CRITIC, a judge, in literature or art. (L.—Gk.) In Shak,
L. L. L. iii. 178.=—L. criticus.=—Gk. «pitucds, able to discern; cf.
Kpitys, a judge. = Gk. pivew, to judge. See Crisis. Der. critic-al
(Oth. ii, 1. 120) 5 -ise, -is-m3; critique (F. critique, from Gk. xperixds).
From the same source is criterion, Gk. xpitnpiov, a test.

CROAK, to make a low hoarse sound. (E.) In Macbeth, i.'5. 40.
Spenser has croking ; Epithalamion, I. 349. From a theoretical AS.
*crdcian, to croak; represented only by its derivative crécetung, a
croaking; the expression hrefena crécetung, the croaking of ravens,
occurs in the Life of St. Guthlac, cap. viii. ed. Goodwin, p. 48.
B. Of imitative origin; allied to crake, creak, crow, which see. Cf.
Swed. kraka, a crow; L. grac-ulus, ajackdaw. Der. croak-er.

CROCHET, lit. a little hook. (F.—Late L.) Modern. Applied
to work done by means of a small hook. =F. crochet, a little crook
or hook; dimin., with suffix -et, from F. croche, variant of croc,
acrook. See Crotchet.

CROCK, a pitcher. (C.) ME. crokke, crok; the dat. case crocke
occurs in the Ancren Riwle, p. 214. AS. crocca, as a gloss to olla in
Ps. lix. 8; ed. Spelman. [OFries. frocha, a pitcher; Du. kruik ;
Icel. krukka; Swed. kruka; Dan. krukke; OHG. chruac, MHG.
kruoc, G. krug.] Yet, notwithstanding the wide spread of the word,
it was probably originally Celtic. = Olrish crocan, Irish crogan, Gael.
crog’,, a pitcher, jar; W. crochan, a pot. + Gk. xpwoods (for *xpax-yds),
a pitcher. Der. crock-er, a potter, now obsolete, but occurring in
Wyclif, Ps. ii. 9; also crock-e-ry, a collective sb., made in imitation
of F. words in -rie; cf. nunnery, spicery.

CROCKET, an architectural ornament. (F.—Late L.) ME.
croket, a roll of hair; R. Brunne, Handlyng Synne, 1. 3208. —AF,
croket, Wm. of Wadington, Manuel des Peches, 1. 3305; NorthF.
form of F. crochet; see Crochet. Doublets, crochet, crotchet,
croquet.

CROCODILE, an alligator. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Hamlet, v. 1.
299.—F. crocodile, ‘a crocodile;’ Cot.—L. crocodilus.—Gk. xpox6d-
de:Aos, a lizard (an Ionic form, Herod. ii. 69); hence, an alligator,
from its resemblance to a lizard. Origin unknown. #7 The ME.
form was cokedrill, King Alisaunder, 5720; from the corrupt Late L.
cocodrillus.

CROCUS, the name of a flower. (L.—Gk.) In Milton, P. L.
iy. 7oI.—L. crocuss—Gk. xpdsos, the crocus; saffron. Cf. Skt.
kunkuma-, saffron. B. Apparently of Semitic origin; cf. Heb.
karkom, saffron; Arab. karkam or kurkum, saffron; Richardson’s
Dict. p. 1181.

CROFT, a small field. (E.) ME. croft, P. Plowman, B. v. 581;
vi. 33. AS. croft, a field; Kemble’s Codex Diplomaticus, 1257 ;
vol. vi. p. 79, 1. 10. + Du. kroft, a hillock; MDu. krochie, crocht, a
field on the downs, high and dry land; also MDu. 4roft, krocht, high
and dry land (Oudemans). [This is quite a different word from the
MDnu: krochte, when used in the sense of crypt; see Crypt.] QJ The
mod. Gael. croit, a croft, small piece of arable ground, is borrowed
from E.

CROMLECH, a structure of large stones, in which a flat stone
Tests upon upright ones. (W.) Merely borrowed from Welsh.—W.
cromleck, an incumbent flagstone; compounded of crom, bending,
bowed (hence, laid across) ; and Jlech, a flat stone, flag-stone.

CRONE, an old woman. (F.—L.) In Chaucer, C. T. 4852
(B 432). Shortened from Picard carone, carrion, an old worn-out
horse (Corblet) ; answering to F. carogne, a contemptuous term for
a woman (Hatzfeld), charogne, carrion. See Carrion. f. Tusser


has crone in the sense of ‘ an old ewe.’=—MDau. hronie, karonie, an old |


sheep. — Picard carone (as above).

CRONWY, an intimate associate. (Gk.?) Jack Cole, . . who

was a great chrony of mine ;’ Pepys, Diary, May 30, 1665 (N.E.D.).
Said by Skinner, in 1671, to be ‘vox academica,’ i.e. university
slang; and Butler (Hudibras, pt. IIT. c. 2. 1. 1269) rhymes cronies
with monies. Perhaps for Gk. xpémos, a ‘long-lasting’ friend. = Gk.
Xpovos, time; see Chronicle.
“CROOK, a hook, bend, bent staff. (Scand.) ME. crak; the pl.
crokes is in the Ancren Riwle, p. 174.—Icel. krokr, a hook, bend,
winding ; Swed. rok, a hook, bend, angle; Dan. krog, a hook,
crook ;/ kroge, to crook, to hook; kroget, crooked. Prob. allied to
OHG, chracho, a crook; from a base *krak, 2nd grade *krok.
Perhaps allied to crank, but without the nasal; cf. crick. @[ The
Gael. crocan, a crook, is from Scand. or E. Der. crook, verb;
crook-ed, -ed-ly, -ed-ness ; also croch-et, q.v.

CROON, to hun, to utter a low, deep sound. (MDu. or Low G.)
Douglas has croyn (L. migére), tr. of Virgil, bk. vi. § 4. 1. 40.—MDu.


CROUCH 145


kronen (Du. kreunen), to groan, murmur (see Franck) ; Low G.
kronen (Liibben). Of imitative origin.

CROP, the top of a plant, the craw of a bird. (E.) ME. croppe,
crop. In Chaucer, prol. 1. 7, ‘the tendre croppes’ means ‘the tender
upper shoots of plants.” To crop off is to take off the top; whence
crop in the sense of what is reaped, a harvest. AS. cropp, crop; as a
gloss to ‘cima;’ Voc. 149.13. We find cropp as a gloss to spica
(ear of corn), Luke, vi. 1; Northumbrian version. In Levit. i. 16,
we have ‘ wurp pone cropp,’ i.e. throw away the bird’s crop. The
orig. sense seems to have been that which sticks up or out, a pro-
tuberance, bunch. + Du. krop, a bird’s crop; kroppen, to cram, to
grow to a round head; G. kroff, a crop, craw; Icel. kroppr, a hunch
or bump on the body ; Swed. kropp, Dan. krop, the trunk of the body.
Cf. Gk. Bpepos ; Brugmann, i. § 421 (7). B. Also in the Celtic
languages; W. cropa, the crop, or craw of a bird (from E.); Gael.
and Irish sgroban, the crop of a bird. Der. crop-full, Milton,
L’Allegro, 1133 crop, verb; crop out, verb, i.e. to bunch ont, stick
out. Doublet, croup (2).

CROQUET, a game with mallets, balls, posts, and hoops. (F.—
Late L.) Noticed in N. and Q. 3S. iv. 349, 439, v- 494 (1863, 1864).
Introduced into Ireland about 1835, and into England in 1852. Of
F. origin. = NormanF. (dialect) croguet, variant of F. crochet, a crook
(Moisy) ; also a hooked stick (Hatzfeld) ; used in some F. dialects
with the sense of hockey-stick (N.E.D.). The N.E.D. refers to Dr.
Prior’s Notes on Croquet (1872). See Crotchet. Doublets,
crochet, crotchet.

CRORE, ten millions (of rupees). (Hind.—Skt.) See Yule. =
Hind. kroy, karoy, ten millions; Wilson, p. 297, col. 2. From the
Prakrit form (kro?) of Skt. ko¢z, highest point, ten millions.

CROSIER, a staff with a curved top. (F.—Late L.) ‘Because
a crosier-staff is best for such a crooked time;’ Gascoigne, Flowers:
Richard Courtop, &c., last line. Spelt crocer, croser, croycer, croyser
in the MSS. of P. Plowman, C. vi. 113. Made by adding the F.
suffix -ier to the sb. croce, also signifying a crosier or bishop’s staff,
P. Plowman, C, xi. 92. The roth line of Chaucer’s Freres Tale
alludes to a bishop catching offenders ‘with his hook.’ Moreover,
crosier (as now used) is practically short for crosier-staff, i.e. the staff
carried. by the ‘crosier’ or crook-bearer.—OF. crossier, one who
carries a crosse (Godefroy). OF. croce, ‘a crosier, a bishop’s staff ;’
Cot.; spelt croce in the Chanson de Roland, 1670. Mod. F. crosse,
a crosier. = Late L. type *croccea; cf. Late L. crocia, crochia, a curved
stick, a bishop’s staff (Ducange).—OF. croc, a crook, hook. =Late
L. croccum, acc. of croccus, a hook. @ The usual derivation from
cross is historically wrong; but, as ME. croce, a crook, and cross
were easily confused, the mistake was often made. Still the fact
remains, that the true shape of the crosier was with a hooked or
curved top; the archbishop’s staff alone bore a cross instead of a
crook, and was of exceptional, not of regular form. See my note to
P. Plowman, C. xi.92. ‘ Many 19th century ecclesiastical antiquaries
have erroneously transferred the name crosier to the cross borne before
an archbishop;’ N.E.D.

CROSS, the instrument of the Passion. (C.—L.) ME. cros, Laya-
mon’s Brut, iii. 261. AS. cros, as in Normannes cros, in Birch, Cart.
Sax. ili. 367 (A.D. 963-984). = Olrish cros; in the glossary to Leabhar
Breac, ed. Atkinson ; [cf. Irish cros, a cross, a hindrance; crosaim,
I cross, stop, hinder ; crosanach, cross, perverse]; Gael. crozs, a cross,
W. croes. All from L. crux, a cross, orig. a gibbet. Der. cross, adj.
transverse, perverse, cross-ly, -ness, -bill, -bow, &c.; cross-ing,, -wise,
-let; also crusade, q.Vv., cruise.

CROTCHET, a term in music; a whim. (F.—Late L.) ME.
crochet ; ‘ crochett of songe;’ Prompt. Parv. The sense of ‘ whim”
seems derived from that of ‘tune’ or ‘air,’ from the arrangement of
crotchets composing the air. ‘Asa good harper stricken far in years
Into whose cunning hands the gout doth fall, All his old crotchets in
his brain he bears, But on his harp plays ill, or not at all;’ Davies,
Immortality of the Soul, § 32.—F.croche¢, ‘a small hooke . . . also,
a quaver in musick;’ Cotgrave; who also has: ‘ Crochue, a quaver
in Musicke, whence il a des crochues en teste, his head is full of
crotchets.’ Dimin. of F. croc, ‘a grapple, or great hooke ;’ id. =
Late L. croccum, acc. of croccus,a hook. Der. crotchet-y. Doublets,
crochet, crocket, croquet. Cf. crosier, crouch.

CROTON, the name of a genus of plants. (Gk.) Modern. —Gk.
kpotwy, a tick, which the seed of the croton resembles (Webster).
Liddell and Scott give xpérwy or xporwy, a dog-louse, tick; also, the
palma Christi or thorn bearing the castor-berry (from the likeness of
this to a tick) whence is produced croton and castor oil. The N.E.D.
gives xporwy, a tick, also the castor-oil plant (Ricinus communis),
taken in botany as the name of an allied genus,

CROUCH, to bend down, squat, cower. (F.—Late L.) ME.
crouchen, to bend down, stoop; ‘thei so lowe crouchen;’ Piers the


| Plowman’s Crede, ed. Skeat, 302; cf. 1. 751.— OF. crochir, to become


L


146 CROUP )


crooked; Godefroy; cf. OF..and F. crochu, crooked, =F. croche, croc,
a hook. = Late L. croccum, acc, of croccus, a hook.

CROUP (1), an inflammatory affection of the larynx. (E.) Low-
land Scotch croup, the disease; also croup, crowp, to croak, to cry
with a hoarse voice, to speak hoarsely; Jamieson. Allied to crope,
which is synonymous. ‘The ropeen of the rauynis gart the crans
crope’ =the croaking of the ravens made the cranes croup ; Complaint
of Scotland, ch. vi. ed. Murray, p. 39. All of imitative origin ; as-
sociated with crow, croak, and also with Sc. roup, AS. hropan, to
cry, call aloud; Grein, ii. 108 ; Icel. hrdpa, to call out; Goth, hrop-
jan, to call out; Du..roepen; G. rufen, to call.

CROUP (2), the hinder parts of a horse, back ofa saddle. (F.—
Teut.) ‘This carter thakketh-his hors upon the croupe;’ Chaucer,
C. T. 7141 (D 1559). OF. (and F.) croupe, the crupper, hind part of
a horse; older spellings were crope, crupe. ‘The orig. sense is a
protuberance, as in croupe d'une montagne, etc.’ (Brachet). [Cf E.
to crop, out. |=Icel..kroppr, a4 hunch or bump on the body; cf. kryppa,
a hunch, hump. Thus croup is a doublet of Crop, q.v. Der.
croup-ier (see'Hatzfeld); also crapper, q.v.

CROW, to make a noise as a cock. (E.) ME. crawen, crowen ;
Wyclif, Lu. xxii. 34. AS. crawan, to crow, pt. t. créow; Lu. xxii.
34, 60. + Du. kraaijen, to crow; hence, to proclaim, publish; G.
krdhen, to crow; both weak verbs. Cf. OSlav. grajati, Lith. groti,
to crow. All of imitative origin. See Max Miiller’s Lectures, 8th
ed. i. 416. | Der. crow, a croaking bird, from AS. crawe, which see
in Ps, cxlvi. 10, ed. Spelman; and cf. OSax. kraia, Du. kraai, G.
krahe, a crow; also crow-bar, a bar with a strong beak like a crow’s;
also crow-foot, a flower, called crow-toe in Milton, Lycidas, 143.

CROWD (1), to push, press, squeeze. (E.) ME, crouden,to push,
Chaucer, 'C. T. 4716 (B 296). AS. *cradan, to crowd, press, push,
pt. t. créad, pp. croden, Grein, i. 168. Cf. AS. eroda, gecrod, a
crowd, throng, id. 169. Also prov. E, (Norfolk) crowd, to push
along in a wheelbarrow. ++ MDu. kruyden, Du. kruijen, to push along
in a wheelbarrow, to drive. 4 The form of the infin. was * cridan,
not * créadan (as in Grein); cf. MDu. kruyden, with uy=AS.a. The
3 p. pres. sing. crydep and the pt. t. créad occur.. Der. crowd, sb.

CROWD (2), a fiddle, violin. (W.) Obsolete. ‘The pipe, the
tabor, and the trembling croud;’ Spencer, Epithalamion, 131. ME.
crowde, Wyclif, Luke, xv. 25, where the Vulgate has chorum; also
spelt crouth, King of Tars, 485.—W. crwth, anything swelling out,
a bulge, trunk, belly, crowd, violin, fiddle (Spurrell). + Gael. cruit,
a harp, violin, cymbal; Olrish crot, a harp ; Celtic type * krot-ta ;
whence Late L.:chrotta. See Macbain; and Rhys, Lect. on W. Phi-
lology, p. 114. Doublet, rote; see Rote (2),

CROWN, a garland, diadem. (F.—L.—Gk.)., _ ME. corone, co-
roune; also in the contracted form crune, croun, by loss of the former
o. The contracted form is common at a very early period ; crune
occurs in Layamon, i..181; Havelok, 1814.—AF. coroune, Liber
Cust., p. 217; OF. corone (F. couronne), a crown. L. coréna, a gar-
land, wreath.=Gk. xopwvn, the curved end of a bow; «opwris, a
wreath, garland; cf. opwyds, curved, bent.. Allied to Gk. kuprdés,
bent, L. curuus; also to Gael. cruiin, round, circular; W. crwn,
round, circular. See Curve. Der. corolla, corollary, coron-al, coron=
-er, coron-et, all from L. coréna. See these words, Also crown, vb.

CRUCIAL, in the manner of a cross; testing, as if by the cross.
(F.—L.) | “Crucial incision, the cutting or lancing of an imposthume
or swelling crosswisé;’ Phillips (1706). =F. crucial,‘ cross-wise, cross-
like ;’ Cot. _ Formed (as if from a L, * crucialis) from cruci-, declen-
sional stem of crux, across. See Cross.

CRUCIBLE, a melting-pot. (Late L.) Spelt crusible in
Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii, c. 1; and Cotgrave translates
FF, creuset by ‘crucible,’ — Late L. crucibulum, crucibolus, a hanging
lamp, also, a melting-pot, Ducange; and see the Theatrum Chemi-
cum. Diefenbach’s Supplement to Ducange gives: ‘Crucibolus, kruse,
kruselin, krug, becher,’ , The suffix -bulum, -bolus answers to L. -bulum
in thiiri-bulum, a censer. B. The prefix eruci- points, to the fact
that the word was connected with L. crus (gen. crucis), a cross; and
the original application was, doubtless to a lamp with four nozzles,
pointing four ways like the arms of a cross, I possess such a lamp,
bought in Italy, and the pattern is common. In the N.E.D., it is
explained as ‘a lamp with crossed wicks, giving four flames;’ but
the wicks do not exactly cross: They point outwards from a common
centre, and each flame is at the end of an arm.

CRUCIFY, to fix on the cross, (F.—L.) ME. crucifien,
Wyclif, Mark, xv. 13. = OF. crucifier, ‘to crucifie, to nail or put to
death on a cross;’ Cot.==L, *crucificare, for crucifigere, to fix on a
cross; pp. crucifixus. L. cruci-, declensional stem of crux, a cross;
and figere, to fix. See Cross and Fix, Der. crucifix, which occurs
early, in the Ancren Riwle, p. 16; crucifix-ion, allied to the L. pp.
crucifixus. From L, cruci- are also formed cruct-ferous, cross-bearing,
from the L. ferre, to bear; and cruci-form.


CRUSE »


CRUDE, raw, unripe. (L.) - The words crude and cruditie occur
in Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth; bk. ii..c..28;, bk. iv. c. 1, Chaucer
has crude, C. T. 16240 (G 772).—L. cridus, raw ; connected with
E. raw. See Raw, Der. crude-ly, -uess; crud-i-ty; and see cruel,
crust, crystal. :

CRUEL, severe, hard-hearted. (F.—L.) ME. cruel, Rob. of
Glouc. p. 417, l. 8615.— OF. cruel, harsh, severe. = L. crudélis, severe,
hard-hearted. From the same root as crude. Der. cruel-ly; cruel-ty,
from OF. cruelte (F. cruauté), from L. acc. crudélitatem.

CRUET, a small pot or jar. (F.—Teut.) ME. eruet ; ‘ waischingis
of cuppis and crwuetis ;’ Wyclif, Mark, vii. 4. And see Prompt. Pary.,
p. 105, and note; Catholicon Anglicum, p. 84, note 4.—AF. cruet;
Royal Wills, p. 26 (1360) ; dimin. of OF. crue, cruie, an earthen pot
(Godefroy).—Low L. kruga, a pitcher. —OHG, kruog, G. krug, a
pitcher. Cf. Du, kruik, a pitcher, a jug.

CRUISH, to traverse the sea. (Du.—L.) ¢A cruise to Manilla ;’
Dampier’s Voyages, an. 1686.—Du. kruisen, to. cross, crucify; also,
to cruise, lit. to traverse backwards and forwards. = Du. kruis, a cross.
=—L. crucem; acc. of crux, a cross, with lengthening of w Thus
cruise merely means to cross, to traverse. See Cross. Der. cruis-er..

CRUMB, a small morsel. (E.) The final } is excrescent. ME,
crume, crome, crumme, cromme. Spelt crume, Ancren Riwle, p. 342.
AS. criima, Matt. xv. 27.44-Du. kruim, crumb, pith ; cf. Du. kruimelen,
to crumble, kruimel, a small crumb; kruimig, kruimelig, crumby,
or crummy; Dan. krumme, a crumb; G. krume, a crumb; cf. G.
kriimelig, crumbling; kriimeln, to crumble. PB. The win criima was
long; cf. prov. E. croom, a crumb, and Du. kruim. . Hence proy. E,
cream, creem, to press, represents OE. *créman=*cryman, formed by
mutation. Der, crumm-y or crumb-y, adj.; erumb-le, verb, cognate
with Du. kruimelen, G. kriimeln.

CRUMPET, a kind of bread-cake. (E.) In Todd’s Johnson,
Wyclif has ‘crompid cake,’ to render L, laganum (Exod. xxix, 23); cf.
prov. E. crumpy cake, crisp cake. For crump-ed, pp. of ME. crumpen,
to curl up; whence E. crumple (below). . Cf. G. kriimpen, krumpen,
to crumple, to curl up; 4rumm, crooked, curved; also AS. crompeht,
wrinkled. @ Orig. a thin (curled up) cake, cooked on a griddle. ,

CRUMPLE, to wrinkle, rumple. (E.) ME. cromplen. ‘My
skinne is withered, and crompled together ;’ Bible, 1551, Job, vii. 5.
‘ Crompled togyther ;’ Palsgrave, p. 309 ; with om for um. B. Crum-
ple is allied to cramp; from the weak grade of the strong verb
krimpen (in EFriesic), pp. krump-en. It signifies ‘to cramp fre-
quently,’ ‘to pinch often;’ hence, to pinch or squeeze into many,
folds or plaits. Cf.AS. crump, crooked; QO. E. Texts, p:8r, 1, 1411.
See Cramp, Crimp.

CRUNCH, to chew with violence, grind with violence and noise.
(E.) Rare in books. . Swift has craunch. ‘She would craunch the
wing of a lark, bones and all, between her teeth ;* Voyage to Brob-
dingnag, ch..3.. An imitative word, and allied to scrunch. Cf.
prov. E. crinch, cranch, to crunch; also Du. schransen, to eat heartily..
q A similar imitative word is ‘ Crunk, to cry like a crane;’ Kersey’s
Dict. ed. 1715. This is the Icel. kriinka, to cry like a raven, to croak.

CRUPPER, the hinder part ofa horse. (F.—Teut.) ME. croper,
King Alisaunder, 1. 3421. Spelt crouper in Spenser, F. Q. iv. 4. 40.
— AF. cropere, OF. cropiere (Supp. to Godefroy) ; MF’. croupiere, as in.
‘croupiere de cheval, a horse-crupper ;’ Cot.—OF. crope (Supp. to.
Godefroy) ; F. croupe, the croup of a horse. See Croup (2). "

CRURAL, belonging to the leg. (L.) ‘Crural, belonging to,
the leggs, knees, or thighs;” Blount’s Glossographia, ed. 1674, —.
L. cruralis, belonging to the shin or leg. = L. criir-, decl. stem of cris,
theshin, shank. '

CRUSADE, an expedition for sake of the cross. (F.—Span.,
—L.) ‘Baldwine archbishop of Canturburie preached the croisad
there ;’ Harrison, Desc. of England (1577-87), bk. iii. ch. 4 (near
the end). ‘A pope of that name [Urban] did first institute the croi-
sado;” Bacon, On an Holy War (R.). Spelt croysado in Blount’s
Glossographia, ed. 1674. ‘ Croisado or Crusade;’ Phillips, 1706.
Hence the word is due to a blending of OF. crotsee, a crusade
(Roquefort) with the Proy. crozada and Span. cruzada,—¥. croisade,
‘an expedition of Christians . . . because every one of them wears
the badge of the cross ;’ Cot.—Span. cruzada (with, « changed to
oi); Late L. eruciata, a marking with the cross; orig. f. pp. of
cruciare, to cross. L.cruci-» decl. stem of crux, a cross, See Cross,
Der. crusad-er. .

CRUSE, a small cup or pot. (Scand. or E.) See 1 Kings, xiv. 3;
2 Kings, ii, 20. ME, cruse, crowse, crouse, ‘ Crowse, or cruse, potte,
amula;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 105. ‘A cruse of this [honey] now putte
in a wyne-stene;’ Palladius on Husbandry, xi. 51. Spelt cruce, id,
xi. 348.—Icel. krus, a pot, tankard; Swed. krus,a mug; Dan. kruus,
a jug, mug. f. Or the word may be English; cf. NFries. krdss,
EFries. krés; also Du. kroes, a cup, pot, crucible; MHG, kriise, an
earthen mug, G. krause, 3


,


CRUSH


CRUSH, to break in pieces, overwhelm. (F.—Tent.) ‘ Cruschyn
or quaschyn, quasso;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 106.—OF. cruisir, croissir,
to crack, break. (Span. erwir, Ital. crosciare). From a Teut. type
*kraustjan, causal form from *kreustan-, Goth. kriustan, to gnash with
the teeth. Cf. Swed. krysta, to squeeze; Dan. kryste, to squeeze,
press ; Icel. kreista, kreysta, to squeeze, pinch, press ; also Swed. krossa,
to crush. B. See Goth. kriustan, to gnash with the teeth, grind the
teeth, Mk. ix. 18; whence Goth. krus¢s, gnashing of teeth, Matt. viii. 12.

CRUST, the rind of bread, or coating of a pie. (F.—L.) ME.
erust, Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 204; Prompt. Pary. p. 106.—OF.
crouste; in Cot.—L. crusta, crust of bread. Cf. Irish cruaidh, hard ;
Gk. xpvos, frost. See Crystal. Der. crust, verb; crust-y [perhaps
a perversion of curst, ill-tempered, which occurs as early as in Cursor
Mundi, 1. 19201] Beaum. and Fletcher, Bloody Brother, iii. 2. 23;
crust-i-ly, -i-ness; -at-ed, -at-ion; also crust-acea, formed with Ly
suffix -Gceus, neuter plural -acea.

CRUTCH, a staff with a cross-piece. (E.) ME. crucche;
Layamon’s Brut, ii. 394. AS. crycc, a crutch, staff, in the AS. tr. of
Beda, iv. 31.4Du. kruk, a crutch ; Swed. krycka, Dan. krykke, a
crutch; G. kriicke, a crutch. B. The base is *kruk, weak grade of
*kreuk (meaning unknown); perhaps allied to G. kriechen, OHG.
kriochan, to creep, creep about; cf. cripple.

CRY, to call aloud, lament, bawl. (F.—L.) ME. crien, cryen;
Rob. of Glouc. p. 401, 1. 8282. The sb. cri is in Havelok, 1. 270,
and in Layamon, ii. 75.—OF. crier, to cry; of which fuller forms
occur in Ital. gridare, Span. gritar, and Port. gritar.—L. quiritare,
to shriek, cry, lament; see Brachet. Lit. ‘to implore the help of the
Quirites’ or Roman citizens (Varro). Der. cry, sb., cri-er.

CRYPT, an underground cell or chapel. (L.—Gk.) ‘Caves under
the ground, called crypte ;’ Homilies, Against Idolatry, pt. iii. See
Crypte in Phillips (1706).—L. crypta, a cave underground, crypt.
=Gk. xpimrn, or xpunTy, a vault, crypt; orig. fem. nom. of «pumrés,
adj. hidden, covered, concealed. Gk. xpimrev, to hide, conceal.
Doublet, grof.

CRYPTOGAMTA, a class of flowers in which fructification is
concealed. (Gk.) A Linnean name (1735). Made up from Gk,
xpumro-, for xpuntds, hidden, and yap-ety, to marry. See Crypt and
Bigamy. Der. cryptogam-ic, -ous; cf. apo-cryph-al.
CRYSTAL, clear glass, a kind of transparent mineral. (F.—L.—
Gk.) In its modern form, it is Latinised; but it was fitst introduced
into English from the French. We find ME. cristal, Floriz and
Blancheflur, ed. Lumby, 274.—OF. cristal, crystal.=—L. crystallum,
crystal; Ps. 147. 6 (Vulgate). —Gk. xpdaraXdXos, clear ice, ice, rock-
crystal. — Gk. «pvotaivey, to freeze. Gk. xpvos, frost. Der. crystall-
ine, -ise, -ts-at-ion; also crystallo-graphy, from Gk. ypapew, to describe.

CUB, a whelp, young animal. (Scand.?) In Shak. Merch. of Ven.
ii. I. 29. Palsgrave has ‘ Cubbe, a yong foxe.’ Of uncertain origin;
but prob. Scand. The Shetland coo, to bring forth young, is applied
to the seal only; from Icel. kobbi, a young seal, Dan. kobbe. The
Dan. kubbe means a block, stump, short log; so also Swed. kubdb.
The sense of ‘lump’ seems common to both words. Rietz (p. 361,
col. 1) gives Swed. kibb, kubbe, kébbe, as playful names for a calf.

CUBE, a solid figure contained by six equal squares, a die. (F.—
L.—Gk.) In Milton, P.L. vi. 552. The word occurs in Cotgrave,
who gives the F. cube, with the explanation ‘a cube, or figure in
geometry, foursquare like a die.’—L. acc. cubum, a cube, «die. = Gk.
xvBos, a cube. Der. cube, verb; cub-ic, -ic-al, -ic-al-ly, -at-wre, cubi-
form ; cuboid, from Gk. kvBoedns, resembling a cube, which from
xvBo-, for xvBos, and €?5-os, form, figure.

CUBEB, the spicy berry of a tropical plant. (F.—Span.— Arab.)
Spelt guybybes, pl., in Mandeville, Trav. c. 5, p. 50; the Lat. text has
cubeba, Spelt cububes, pl., in Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iii. c. 12.
Mentioned, under the Anglo-French form cubibes, pl., in the Liber
Albus, p. 230.—MF. cubebe, pl. cubebes, ‘cubebs, an aromaticall and
Indian fruit ;” Cot.—Span. cubeba, fem. sing.— Arab. kababa(t), pl.
kababah, cubeb, an aromatic; Rich. Dict. p. 1166. See also Devic,
Supp. to Littré.

CUBIT, an old measure of length. (L.) ME. cubite, Wyclif,
Matt. vi. 27.—L. cubitus, Matt. vi. 27; meaning lit. a bend, an elbow ;
hence, the length from the elbow to the middle finger’s end. Cf. L.
cubare, to recline, lie down; see Covey.

CUCKOLD, a man whose wife is unfaithful. (F.—L.) ME.
kokewold, kukwald, kukeweld, cokold. Spelt cokewold, Chaucer, C. T.
3154 (A 3152)3, P. Plowman, B.v.159. ‘Hic zelotopus, a kukwald,’
Wright’s Vocab. i. 217. Spelt kukeweld, Owl and Nightingale, 1542.
B. The word seems to have been modified at the end by confusion


Cf. cokolde in the Coventry Mysteries, p. 120.—OF. cucualt, coucual,
a cuckold (Godefroy).—OF. cucu, F. cowcou, a cuckoo; with the
depreciatory suffix -auit, -al (from G. -wald) ; see Diez, Gram. ii. 346.
The F, coucow also had the secondary sense of cuckold. [The


- CUFF 147


allusions to the comparison between a cuckold and a cuckoo are end-
less; see Shak. L.L.L. v. 2. 920.]—L. cuculum, acc. of cuculus, a
cuckoo. See Cuckoo,

CUCKOO, a bird which cries cuckoo. (F.—L.) ME. coccou,
cukkow, &c, § Hic cuculus, a cocow, cucko;’ Voc. 640. 32, 762. 33.
= OF, cucu, F. coucou.—L. cuculum, acc. of cuculus, a cuckoo. + Gk.
koxKvg, a cuckoo, xoxku, the cry of a cuckoo; Skt. h@hila-, a cuckoo.
All imitative words, from the sound kuku made by the bird; indeed,
the OF. cwcu need not be referred to the L. form, as it is itself imitative.
See Cock, Cockatoo. Der. cuckold, q.v.

CUCUMBER, acreeping plant with ediblefrnit. (L.) ME. cucumer,
later cucumber, with excrescent or inserted b, Spelt cucumer, Wyclif,
Baruch, vi. 69. — L. cucumerem, acc. of cucumis,a cucumber. B. Per-
haps so called because ripened by heat; cf. L. cucuma, a cooking-
kettle, from L. coguere, to cook, bake, ripen. See Cook,

CUD, food chewed by ruminants. (E.) ME. cude, Crmulum, 1237.
In Wyclif, Deut. xiv. 6, where the text has code, three MSS. have
guide, which is a mere variant of the same word. See Quid. AS.
cudu, for cwudu, later form of cwidu; see AS. Leechdoms, vol. ii,
Pp. 54, 56, 66, where hwit cwudu means ‘mastic;’ called hwit cwidu
(gen. cwidwes) at p. 182; hwit cudu, id. iii. 72. Teut. type *kwedwom,
neuter. Cf. Skt. jatu-, resin; Icel. kwada, resin. Orig. sense
‘glutinous substance.’

CUDBEAR, a purple or violet powder, used for dyeing. (E.)
First in 1771. ‘A name devised, from his own Christian name, by
Dr. Cuthbert Gordon, who obtained a patent for this powder;’
N.E.D. From AS. Cipbeorht; compounded of cw#d, well known,
and beorht, bright.

CUDDLE, to embrace closely, fondle. (E.) Rare in books. R.
quotes: ‘They cuddled close all night;’ Somervile, Fab. 11. 1. 9.
‘ Cudlyng of my cowe;’ Burlesque Song, in Reliq. Antique, i. 239.
Probably.a corruption of *couth-le, to be frequently familiar, a
frequentative verb formed with the suffix -/e from the ME. cowth,
well known, familiar; whence also prov. E. cootle, to fondle. We
find kud for cud in Will. of Palerne, ed. Skeat, 1]. 51, 114, 501, &c.
See numerous examples of couth, familiar, loving, in Jamieson’s
Scottish Dict, This adj. cowth was originally a pp. signifying known,
well-known. = AS. cad, known, familiar; used as pp. of cunnan, to
know; cf. Icel. adr, another form of kunnr, familiar; Goth. kunths,
known, pp. of kunnan, to know. Compare further AS. ciidlecan, to
be friendly ; Ailfric’s Saints’ Lives, xxv. 644.

CUDGEL, a thick stick. (E.) In Shak. Merry Wives, ii. 2. 292.
ME. kuggel; Ancren Riwle, p. 292. AS. cycgel, a cudgel; in
Gregory’s Pastoral Care, ed. Sweet, c. 40, p. 297. Perhaps a
‘knobbed’ stick; and allied to Cog.

CUDWEED, a plant of the genus Guaphalium. (E.) ‘ Cotton-
weed or Cudweed, a sort of herb;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. ‘ Cud-
weed, the cotton-weed ;? Halliwell. Turner, in his Names of Herbes
(1548) explains Centunculus by chafweede, ‘in Yorkeshyre cudweede.’
“The common name for the genus Guaphalium ; [so named from] the
plant being administered to cattle that had lost their cud;’ N.E.D.
From Cud and Weed.

CUE (1), a tail, a billiard-rod. (F.—L.) The same word as queue,
q-v. [An actor’s cue is a different word; see below.] Ash’s Dict.
(1775) has ‘ Cue, the tail of a wig.’—OF. ewe (Supp. to Godefroy),
coe (Roquefort) ; mod. F. queue, a tail,—L. coda, cauda, a tail. See
Caudal. @ The F. queue also means a handle, stalk, billiard-cue.
See Hatzfeld.

CUE (2), a direction for an actor’s appearance. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Merry Wives, iii. 3. 39. Sometimes written g or gwin the 16th century,
and said to stand for quando, when. This is the more probable
because.cue or g was previously in use to denote the sum of half a
farthing in college accounts, and signified guadrans, ‘Cue, half a
farthing;’ Minsheu (1627). ‘ Cu, Cwe, halfe a farthynge;’ Prompt.
Parv.; see Way’s note. The sound of cue denotes the Anglicised
pronunciation of the French name of the Latin letter, Hence also
cue, an actor’s part, and the phrase ‘a merry cue.’

CUFF (1), to strike with the open hand. (Scand.) Taming of the
Shrew, ii, 221. ‘I cuffeone;’ Palsgrave, p. 502.—Swed. kuffa, to
thrust, push. Ihre translates it by ‘ verberibus insultare,’ and says it
is the E. cuff; adding that it is the frequentative (!) of the Swed. ku/va,
MSwed. kufwa, to subdue, suppress, cow; see Cow (2); but this is
improbable. Berghaus has kuffen, to hit, cuff, and it is found also in


‘Hamburgh and in Pomeranian (Richey, Dahnert) ; cf. Norw. suffa,
to cuff (Ross). De Bo gives WFlem. koove, koffe, (1) a coif, (2) a box
‘on the ear; which seems to connect it with cuff (2). Der. cuff, sb.

with the ME. suffix -wold occurring in anz-wold, power, dominion. |
or mitten; now used chiefly of the part of the sleeve which covers


CUFF (2), part of the sleeve. (L.?) Formerly it meant a glove


the hand but partially. ME. cuffe, coffe. ‘ Cuffe, glove or meteyne,


or mitten, mitta;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 106, The pl. coffes is in P. Plow-


man, B. vi. 62. The later use occurs in; ‘ Cuffe over ones hande,
L 2


CUIRASS


poignet;’ Palsgrave. B. Origin uncertain; but probably the same
word as cuffie, which occurs in the pl. cuffian, in Kemble’s ed. of the
A.S. Charters, no. 1290, vol. vi. 133, 1. 20, where Leo supposes it to
signify ‘a covering for the head;’ whence, perhaps, a covering for the
hand. Cf. OHG. chuppha, MHG. kupfe, kuppe, kuffe, a coif. See
Coif, and Cuff (1).

CUIRASS, a kind of breast-plate. (F.—Ital.—L.) Orig. made
of leather, whence the name. In Milton, Samson, 132. Also in
Chapman’s tr. of the Iliad, bk. vii. 1. 221.— MF. cuirace, cuirasse (now
cuirasse), ‘a cuirats (sic), armour for the breast and back ;* Cot.
[Introduced from Ital. in the 16th century (Brachet).] = Ital. corazza,
a cuirass; Late L. coratia, coracium, a cuirass, breast-plate. Formed
as if from an adj. *cordaczus, for coridceus, leathern.=L. corium, hide,
leather; whence F, cuir. Der. cuirass-ier.

CUISSES, pl., armour for the thighs. (F.—L.) In Shak. 1 Hen.
IV, iv. 1.105. ME. guyssewes, Gawain and Grene Knight, 578.—
OF. cuissaux, ‘cuisses, armour for the thighs ;’ Cotgrave.=—F. cuisse,
the thigh.—L. coxa, the hip; see Brachet. Brugmann, i. § 609.

CULDEE, one of an old Celtic monkish fraternity. (C.) ‘The
pure Culdees Were Albyn’s earliest priests of God;’ Campbell, Reul-
lura, 1. 5. The note on the line says: ‘The Culdees were the primi-
tive clergy of Scotland, and apparently her only clergy from the 6th
to the 11th century. They were of Irish origin, and their monastery
on the island of Iona, or Icolmkill, was the seminary of Christianity
in North Britain.’ = Olrish céle dé, Irish ceilede, a servant of God, a
Culdee. From Olrish céle, Ir. ceile,a spouse, also a servant; and dé,
gen. of dia, God. See Rhys, Lect. on W. Philology, p. 412. Cf.
Late L. Culdei, Colidei, Culdees; misspelt colidei as if from L. colere
Deum, to worship God.

CULINARY, pertaining to the kitchen. (L.) ‘Our culinary fire;’
Boyle’s Works, i. 523.—L. culindrius, belonging to a kitchen. —L.
culina, a kitchen; cf. coguina, a kitchen, with similar suffix. Culina
is for *coc-slina, from coguere, to cook; Giles, § 188.

CULL, to collect, gather. (F.—L.) ME. cullen. ‘Cullyn owte,
segrego, lego, separo;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 107.—OF. coillir, cuillir,
cueillir, to cull, collect.=L. colligere, to collect. See Collect, of
which cull is a doublet.

CULLENDER, a strainer; see Colander.

CULLION, a mean wretch. (F.—L.) In Shak. Tam. Shrew, iv.
2.20. A coarse word.=F. couillon, couille, Cotgrave; cf. Ital. cog-
lione, coglioni, coglionare; Florio.—L. cdleus. From a like source
(perhaps) is cully, a dupe, or to deceive.

CULLIS (1), a strong broth, boiled and strained. (F.—L.) ME.
colis, Liber Cure Cocorum, p. 20.—OF. coleis, couleis, later coulis,
a cullis,’ Cot. ; substantival use of coleis, later coulis, adj. ‘ gliding,’
Cot. = L. type *cdlaticius; from cdlare, to strain; see Colander.

CULLIS (2), in port-cullis, (F.—L.) The fem. form of the pre-
ceding; see Portcullis.

CULM, a stalk, stem. (L.) Botanical. ‘ Culmus, the stem or stalk
of corn or grass;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.—L. culmus, a stalk; cf.
calamus, a stalk, stem, cognate with E. haulm. See Haulm, Der.
culmi-ferous, stalk-bearing ; from L. ferre, to bear.

CULMINATE, to come to the highest point. (L.) See Milton,
P.L.iii. 617. — Late L. culminat-us, pp. of Late L. culminare (Ducange),
to come to the top.—L. culmin-, decl. stem of culmen, the highest
point of a thing; of which an older form is columen, a top, summit.
See Column. Der. culminat-ion.

CULPABLE, deserving of blame. (F.—L.) ME. culpable, coul-
fable, coupable. Spelt culpable, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 302.
Spelt coupable, P. Plowman, B. xvii. 300.—OF. culpable, colpable, F.
coupable, culpable. = L. culpabilis, blameworthy. = L. culpare,to blame;
with suffix -bilis.—L, culpa, a fault, failure, mistake, error, Der.
culpabl-y ; culpabil-i-ty, from L, culpabilis; and see culprit.

CULPRIT, a criminal. (F.—L.) ‘Then first the culprit answered
to his name ;’ Dryden, Wife of Bath’s Tale, 273. Not orig. a single
word, but due to a fusion of AF. cul- (for culpable, i.e. guilty), and
AF. prist or prest (i.e. ready to prove it), signifying that the clerk of
the crown was'ready to prove the indictment (N.E.D.).

CULTER, a plough-iron ; see Coulter.

CULTIVATE, to till, improve, civilise. (L.) ‘To cultivate...
that friendship ;” Milton, To the Grand Duke of Tuscany (R.). It
occurs also in Blount’s Glossographia, ed. 1656. — Late L. culdivatus,
pp. of cultivare, to till, work at, used A.D. 1446; Ducange, [Hence
also F. cultiver, Span. cultivar, Ital. coltivare.|= Late L. cultivus,
cultivated ; Ducange. Allied to L, cultus, tilled, pp. of colere, to till.
Brugmann, i. §121. See Culture. Der. cultivat-ion, -or.

CULTURE, cultivation. (F.—L.) ‘The culture and profit of
their myndes;’ Sir T. More, Works, p.14d. ME. culture, Palladius
on Husbandry, bk. 1. 1, 21.—F. culture, ‘culture, tillage, husbandry ;’
Cot.=—L. cultura, cultivation; allied to cultus, pp. of colere, to till.
Der. culture, verb,


148


CUPBOARD


CULVER (1), a dove. (E.) Used by Spenser, F. Q. ii. 7. 345
Tears of the Muses, 246. Preserved in the name of the Culver Cliffs,
near Sandown, Isle of Wight. Chaucer has colver, Leg. of Good Women,,
Philom.g92. AS.culfre, translating L.columba, Mark,i.10. B. Thought
to be an E. word, notwithstanding its superficial resemblance to L-
columba. Der. culver-tail, an old word for dove-tail; see Blount’s.
Glossographia, ed. 1674.

CULVER (2), another form of Culverin; see below.

CULVERIN, a sort of cannon. (F.—L.) In Shak. r Hen. IV,
ii. 3.56. Palsgrave has ‘Culveryng, gonne, culuerine.’ A corrupt form
for *culevrin, — OF. coulevrine (Hatzfeld), MF. couleuvrine, ‘a culverin,
the piece of ordnance called so;’ Cot. Fem. form of OF. coulevrin,
‘ adder-like;? id. —OF. couleuvre, an adder; id.—L. colubra, fem. form
of coluber, a serpent, adder ; whence the adj. colubrinus, snake-like,
cunning, wily. 4 It appears that this cannon was so called from its
long, thin shape; some were similarly called serpertina; see Junius,
quoted in Richardson. Other pieces of ordnance were called falcons.

CULVERT, an arched drain under a road. (Du.?) Not in John-
son. First used ab. 1770. Origin unknown. We might expect it to.
be Dutch, in connexion with making of canals, &c. But no such word.
is known in Dutch; though we might imagine a Du. *coul-vaart, to
express the sense, viz. from Du. cowl-, as in coul-age, leakage, coul-ant,
flowing (Calisch), and Du. vaart,a channel, canal, water-course, from
varen, to go; see Fare. B. The Du. coul- is borrowed from F.;
cf. MF. coulouére, ‘a channel, gutter,’ &c.; Cot.—F. cowler, to flow,
trickle. —L. cdlare, to filter.—L. cdlum, a strainer. See Colander.

CUMBER, to encumber, hinder. (F.—Late L.) ME. combren,
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, bk. iii. met. ro. 1. 6; Piers Plowman’s
Crede, 461, 765. ‘The sb. comburment occurs in K. Alisaunder, ed.
Weber, 472. — OF. combrer, to hinder; cf. mod. F. excombre, an im-
pediment. — Late L. cumbrus, a heap, ‘found in several Merovingian
documents, e.g. in the Gesta Regum Francorum, c. 25 ;’ Brachet.
Ducange gives the pl. combri, impediments. Of doubtful origin; some
tefer it to G. kummer, grief, oppression, prov. G. kummer, rubbish.
Others, to L. cumulus, a heap, by change of J to r, not uncommon ;
with inserted 6. See Cumulate. Der. cumbr-ous (i.e. cumber-ous),
-ly, -ness; also cumber-some, by adding the E. suffix -some.

CUMIN, CUMMIN, the name of a plant. (L.—Gk.— Heb.)
ME. comin, King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 6797; also cummin, Wyclif,
St. Matt. xxiii. 23. In the AS. translation we find the forms cymyn,
cymen, and cumin, in the MSS. There is an OF. form comin; see
Bartsch, Chrest. Franc. col. 275, 1. 29. Cotgrave has: ‘ Commin,
cummin.’ Both OF. and AS. forms are from the L. cuminum or-
cyminum in Matt. xxiii. 23.—Gk. xdpivov.— Heb. kammodn, cummin,
Cf. Arab. kammiin, cummin-seed ; Rich. Dict. 1206, 1207.

CUMMERBUND, a waist-band, sash. (Hind.— Pers.) See ex-
amples in Yule.— Hind. kamar-band, a girdle, piece of cloth round
the loins. — Pers. kamar, the waist, the loins; and band, a band.

CUMULATE, to heap together. (L.) ‘All the extremes of worth
and beauty that were cumulated in Camilla;’ Shelton’s Don Quixote,
c. 33. The adj. cumulative is in Bacon, On Learning, by G. Wats,
b. lil. c. 1.— L. cumulatus, pp. of cumulare, to heap up.=L. cumulus,’
aheap. Der. cumulat-ive, -ion ; also ac-cumulate, q.v.

CUNEATE, wedge-shaped. (L.) Modern; botanical. Formed.
with suffix -ate, corresponding to L. -atus, from L. cune-us, a wedge. -
See Coin, Der. From the same source is cuneiform, i.e. wedge-
shaped ; a modern word.

CUNNING (1), skilful, knowing. (E.) ME. cunning, conning;
Northern form cunnand, from Icel. kunnandi, pres. pt. of kunna, to
know. Spelt Aunnynge, P. Plowman, B. xi. 70. Really the pres. pt.
of ME. cunnen, to know, in very common use; Ancren Riwle, p. 280.
= AS. cunnan, to know. See Can (1). Der. cunning-ly.

CUNNING (2), knowledge, skill. (Scand.) ME. cunninge,
Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii. 966. Suggested by Icel. kunnandi,
knowledge, which is derived from kunna, to know, cognate with
AS. cunnan, to know; see Grein,i. 171. @[ The AS. cunnung sig-
nifies temptation, trial. See Can (1).

CUP, a drinking-vessel. (L.) ME. cuppe, Gen. and Exodus, ed.
Morris, 2310. AS. cuppe,a cup. ‘Caupus, vel obba, cuppe;’ Atlfric’s
Gloss. ed. Somner; Nomina Vasorum. [Cf. Du. and Dan. kop, Swed.
kopp, ¥ . coupe, Span. copa, Ital. coppa, a cup; all alike borrowed from
Latin. ]—Late L. cuppa, a cup; variant of L. ciipa, a vat, butt, cask ;
in later times, a drinking-vessel; see Ducange. 4+ Gk. «vmedAov, a cup,
goblet; cf. «vm, a hole, hollow; also Skt. kujpa-, a pit, well, hollow.
Brugmann, i. §930 (4). Der. cup, verb; cup-board, q.v.; cupping-glass,
Beaum, and Fletcher, Bloody Brother, iy. 2. See Coop.

CUPBOARD, a closet with shelves for cups. (Hybrid; L. and
E.) ME. cup-borde, orig. a table for holding cups. ‘And couered
mony a cupborde with clothes ful quite ;’ Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, ’
ii. 1440; see the whole passage. And cf. Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, ’
206. Formed from cup and ME. bord, a table, esp. a table for meals’


CUPEL


‘and various vessels. See Cup and Board. @ The sense of the
word has somewhat changed; it is possible that some may have
taken it to mean cup-hoard, a place for keeping cups; but there was
no such word, and such is no? the true etymology.

CUPEL, a small, shallow, porous, cup-like vessel used in refining
metals. (L.) Spelt coppell in Cotgrave, s. v. coupelle.— Late L. cti-
ella, dimin. of ctipa, a cask. See Cupola, Der. cupell-ate, cupell-
at-ion,

CUPID, the god of love. (L.) In Shak. Merry Wives, ii. 2.141.
‘=L, nom. cupido, desire, passion, Cupid. —L. cupere, to desire. Cf.
Skt. kup, to: become excited. See Covet. Der. cupid-i-ty, q.v.
And, from the same root, con-cup-isc-ence.

CUPIDITY, avarice, covetousness. (F.—L.) Cupiditie, in
Hall’s Chron. Hen. VII, an.11.§ 8. =F. cupidité, ‘cupidity, lust, covet-
ousness;’ Cotgrave.=L. acc. cupiditatem, from nom. cupiditas, desire,
covetousness. = L. cupidus, desirous. — L. cupere, to desire. See above.

CUPOLA, a sort of dome. (Ital.—L.) ‘The ruined Cupola;’
Sandys’ Travels (1632), p. 264. ‘Cupola, or Cuppola,. . an high
tower arched, having but little light ;’ Gazophylacium Anglicanum,
ed. 1689. Spelt cupolo in Blount, Glossographia, edd. 1674, 1681 ;
cupola in Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. — Ital. cupola, a cupola, dome. = L.
etipula, a small cask, a little vault; dimin. of ctipa,a cask,vat. See
Cup.

.CUPREOUS, coppery, like copper. (L.) ‘ Cupreous, of or be-
longing to copper;’ Blount, Glossographia, ed. 1674.—L. cupre-us, of
copper; with suffix -ous.—L. cuprum, copper. See Copper.

CUR, a small dog. (E.) ME. kur, curre. In early use. ‘The
fule kur dogge,’ i.e. the foul cur-dog, Ancren Riwle, p. 290. Cf.
Piers Plowman’s Crede, ed. Skeat, 644. + MDu. korre, a house-dog,
watch-dog, Oudemans; Swed. dial. kurre. B. So named from his
growling; cf. Icel. kurra, to murmur, grumble; Dan. kurre, to coo,
whirr; Swed. kurra, to rumble, to croak; Low G. kurren, to snarl
(Liibben); MDu. korrepot, a grumbler (Oudemans), equivalent to
Du. knorrepot, a grumbler, from Du. kxzorren, to grumble, growl,
snarl, The word is imitative, and the letter R is known to be ‘ the
dog’s letter,” Romeo, ii. 4. 222. Cf. ME. hurren, to make a harsh
noise. ‘Ris the dog’s letter, and hurreth in the sound;’ Ben Jonson,
Eng. Grammar. Der. (perhaps) curmudgeon.

CURACAO, CURACOA, a liqueur. (Span.) So named, ap-
parently, because first made from Curacao oranges. [The usual
spelling, with -oa, is incorrect.]—Span. Curagao, ‘an island off the
coast of Venezuela in South America ;’ Pineda.

CURASSOW, a gallinaceous bird, like a turkey. (Span.) In
a tr. of Buffon (1792); ii. 52. A phonetic spelling of Curagao
(above) ; whence it came

CURARI, another spelling of Wourali, q.v.

.CURATEH, one who has cure of souls. (L.) ME. curat, Chaucer,
C. T. prol. 219. —Late L. ciiratus, a priest, curate; cf. Late L. ciiratus,
adj.; ctiratum beneficium, a benefice with cure of souls pertaining to
it. Formed as a pp., from the sb. cura, a cure. See Cure. Der.
eurac-y. From the L. pp. curatus we have also curat-ive ; also (froin
curare), the sb. cura-tor, a guardian.

_CURB, to check, restrain, lit. to bend. (F.—L.) In Merch. of
Ven. i. 2.26. Curbed=bent. ‘By crooked and curbed lines ;? Hol-
jand, Plutarch, p. 678. ME. courben, to bend; used also intransi-
tively, to bend oneself, bow down. ‘Yet I courbed on my knees;’
P. Plowman, B, ji. 1. Cf. ‘Hir necke is schort, hir shuldres courbe,’
i.e. bend; Gower, C. A. bk. i. 1687. Also ME. corbe, sb.; as in ‘a
strong bitte with a corbe;’ Dictes of the Philosophers (1477); fol.
26, back. OF. (and F.) courber, to bend, crook, bow.—L. curudre,
to bend. =L. curuus, bent, curved. See Curve, Der. curb, sb.,
curb-stone, kerb-stone.

‘CURD, the coagulated part of milk. (E.) ME. curd, more often
crud or crod, by the shifting of rso common in English. ‘A fewe
cruddes and creem;’ P, Plowman, B. vi. 284; spelt croddes, id. C. ix.
306. From AS. crud-, weak grade of criidan, to crowd, to press
together; whence also proy. E. erowd-y, a kind of oatmeal gruel. +
Irish and Gael. gruth, curds. See Stokes-Fick, p.119. See Crowd
(1). Der. curd-y, curd-le.

CURE, care, attention, (F.—L.) ME. cure, Chaucer, C. T. prol.
305; King Alisaunder, 4016,—OF. cure, care. L, ciira, care, atten-
tion, cure. Origin uncertain; the OLat. form was coera or coira, for
*koiza ; Brugmann, i. 874. f It is well to remember that cure is
wholly unconnected with E. care; the similarity of sound and sense
is accidental, In actual speech, care and cure are used in different
ways. Der. cure, verb; cur-able; cure-less; also curate, q.v.; curious,
q.v. And, from the same source, ac-cur-ate, q.v. °
‘CURFEW, a fire-cover; the time for covering fires; the curfew-
bell. (F.—L.) ME. courfew, curfew, curfu. ‘Aboute corfew-tyme ;’
Chaucer, C. T., A 3645. ‘“Curfu, ignitegium;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 110. =
AF. coeverfu, Statutes of the Realm, i. 102 (an. 1285); curfeu, Liber


CURRICLE 149


Albus, p. 369; OF. covre-feu, later couvre-feu, in which latter form it
is given by Roquefort, who explains it as a bell rung at a fixed hour
as a signal for putting out fires. The history is well known; see
Curfew in Eng. Cycl.,div. Arts and Sciences. = OF. covrir, later couvrir,
to cover; and F. few, fire, which is from the L. focum, acc. of focus,
hearth, fire. See Cover and Focus, Der. curfew-bell.

CURIOUS, inquisitive. (F.—L.) ME. curious, busy; Romaunt
of the Rose, 1052.—OF. curios, careful, busy.—L. ciiridsus, careful.
=L. cura, attention. See Cure. Der. curious-ly, -ness ; curios-i-ty
(ME. curiosité, Gower, C. A. iii, 383, bk. viii. 3114), from F. curiosité,
Englished ‘curiosity’ by Cotgrave, from L. acc. curidsitalem. Bacon
uses curiosity to mean ‘elaborate work ;’ Essay 46, On Gardens,

CURL, to twist into ringlets; a ringlet. (Scand.) In English,
the verb seems rather formed from the sb. than wice versa. Gascoigne
has: ‘But curle their locks with bodkins and with braids ;’ Epil. to
the Steel Glas, 1.1142; in Skeat,Spec. of English. Palsgravehas curled,
p- 309. _Wefind another form crw/, due to the shifting of r; cf. cress,
curd, Chaucer has: ¢ With lokkes crulle,’ i.e. with curled or crisped
locks; Prol. $1 ; from the adj. cru, curly. Notin AS.; but cf. EFries.
krulle, krull,krul,acurl. B. The formcwrl isof Scand. origin; cf.Norw.
kurle, a curl; Dan. dial. kurle, a twist in thread; Swed. dial. kurla,
to curl.+Du. krul, a curl; krullen, to curl; MDu. krol, adj. curled;
krollen, to curl, wrinkle, rumple; Dan. frélle, a curl; krélle, to curl;
Swed. krullig, crisp; Swed. dial. krud/a, to curl (Rietz) ; Norw. kurle,
krull, a curl (Aasen); G. krolle. ‘y. The orig. sense is clearly to twist,
or bend; it is allied to EFries. krillen, to bend, turn, wind; Low G,
krellen, to turn; NFries. krall, closely twisted; suggesting a Teut.
base *rellan-, to wind, str. vb.; pt. t. *krall, pp. *krullanoz (Franck),
Der. curl-y, -ing.

CURLEW, an aquatic wading bird. (F.) ME. corlew, curlew,
curlu. Spelt corlew, P. Plowman, C. xvi. 243; corlue, id. B. xiv. 433
curlu, Early E. Psalter, Ps. 104 (105). 38.—OF. courlieus, a curlew
(Godefroy); MF. corlieu, ‘a curlue;’ Cot. He also gives the F.
spellings corlis and courlis. Cf. Ital. chiurlo, a curlew; Span. chorlito,
a curlew, evidently a dimin. form from an older *chorlo, B. An imi-
tative word, from the bird’s cry. Cf. Ital. chiurlare, to howl] like the
horn-owl, Meadows ; also Swed. kurla, to coo (Widegren).

CURMUDGEON, a covetous, stingy fellow. (E.and¥F.?) Spelt
curmudgeon, Ford, The Lady’s Trial, A. v. sc. 1; curmudgin, Hudibras,
pt. ii. c. 2, 1. 497 (Richardson), altered to curmudgeon in Bell’s edition,
1, 220. First found in 1577, spelt curmudgen, in Stanyhurst’s Descr,
of Ireland (in Holinshed,p.to2). [Spelt corne-mudgin (or cornmudgin)
by Holland, to translate the L. frumentarius, a corn-dealer; see Hol-
land’s tr. of Livy, pp. 150, 1104, as cited in Richardson. The latter
passage speaks of fines paid by ‘certain cornmudgins for hourding
up and keeping in their graine.’ This is a forced spelling, and only
tells us that the first syllable is not really a derivative of corn.] The
etymology is wholly unknown, but the form shows that at least the
latter part of the word is of French origin. It has been suggested
that cur- represents E. cur, a dog. Lowland Scotch has murgeon, to
mock, to grumble; also mudgeon, a grimace; see E.D.D. Perhaps
it meant ‘ grumbling cur,’

CURRANT, a Corinth raisin. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Wint.
Tale, iv. 3. 40. Haydn gives 1533 as the date when currant-trees
were brought to England; but the name was also given to the small
dried grapes brought from the Levant and known in England at an
earlier time. ‘In Liber Cure Cocorum [p. 16] called raysyns of cor-
auns, F, raisins de Corinthe, the small dried grapes of the Greek
islands. Then applied to our own sour fruit of somewhat similar
appeatance ;’ Wedgwood. So also we find ‘ roysonys of coraunce ;’
Babees Book, ed. Furnivall, p. 211, last line. =F. ‘ Raisins de Corinthe,
currants, or small raisins;’ Cot. Thus currant is a corruption of
F. Corinthe, Corinth. —L. Corinthus. = Gk. KépivGos. @ Referred to in
1390; ‘proj lb. racemorum de corenc, vj d.;’ Earl of Derby’s Expe-
ditions, Camden Soc., p. 11, 1. 22.

CURRENT, running, flowing. (F.—L.) ME. corrant. ‘Lik
to the corrant fire, that renneth Upon a corde, as thou hast sein,
Whan it with poudre is so besein Of sulphre;’ Gower, C. A. iii. 96;
bk. vii. 352. Afterwards altered to current, to look more like Latin.
—OF,. curant, pres. pt. of OF. curre (more commonly corre), to run.
=L. currere, to run. Prob. for *cursere; and allied to horse.
Brugmann, i. §§ 499, 516. See Horse. Der. current, sb.; -ly,
currenc-y ; curricle,q.v.; and from the same source are cursive,
cursory, g.V. From the same root are concur, incur, occur, recur;
corridor, courier; course, concourse, discourse, intercourse; excursion,
incursion ; courser, precursor ; corsair, 8c.

CURRICLE, a short course; a chaise. (L.) ‘Uponacurricle
in this world depends a Jong course of the next;’ Sir T. Browne,
Christ. Morals, vol. ii. p. 23 (R.). The sense of ‘ chaise’ is late;
see N.E.D.=L. curriculum, a running, a course; also, a light car
(Cicero). Formed as a double diminutive, with suffixes -cu- and -lo-


150 CURRY


from the stem curri-; cf. parti-cu-la, a particle. = L. currere, to run.
See Current. Doublet, curriculum, which is the L. word,
unchanged. Cf. curule.

CURRY (1), to dress leather. (F.—L..and Teut.) ‘Thei curry
kinges,’,i.e. flatter kings, lit. dress them; said ironically ; Piers
Plowman’s Crede, ed. Skeat, 365. ‘Like as he wold coraye his
maystres hors;’ Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 53. The E. verb is
accompanied by the ME. sb. curreie, apparatus, preparation, arma-
ment; K. Alisaunder, 5118.—OF. conreer, correier, to prepare,
arrange, set in order; earliest form conreder (Godefroy); later
couroier; whence the forms conroyer, courroyer, given by Cotgrave,
and explained by ‘to curry, tew, or dress leather.’ = OF. conrei, later
conroy, equipage, gear, preparation of all kinds; earliest form cunreid
(Godefroy). (Formed, like array (OF. arroi), by prefixing a Latin
preposition to a Teutonic word; see Array.|]=—OF. con-, prefix,
from L. con- (for cum), together; and the OF. reid, array, order,
This word answers to Ital. -redo, order, seen in Ital. arredo, array. =
Late L. -rédum, -rédium, seen in the derived arrédium, conrédium,
equipment, furniture, apparatus, gear. B. This -rédium is of Teut.
origin; cf. Swed. reda, order, sb., or, as verb, to set in order; Dan.
rede, order, sb., or as verb, to set in order; Icel. reidi, tackle; also
O. Low G. réde, AS, réde, ready; see Ready. The same root appears
in array and disarray; andin F. désarroi, arroi, corroyer. Der. curri-er.
ir The pbr. to curry favour is a corruption of ME. to curry favel, i.e.
to rub down a fallow-coloured horse. Favell was a common old
name for a horse; and curry favel occurs in Hoccleve, De Regim.
Principum, st. 755, 1.5282. See my note to P. Plowman, C. iii. 6.
CURRY (2), a kind of seasoned dish. (Tamil.) A general term
for seasoned dishes in India, for which there are many recipes. See
Curry in Yule.= Tamil kari, sauce, relish for rice. Yule adds that
the Port. form caril is from the cognate Canarese karil.

CURSE, to imprecate evil upon. (E.) ME. cursien, cursen, corsen.
‘This cursed crone;’ Chaucer, C. T. 4852 (B 432); ‘this cursed
dede ;’ id. 4853 (B 433). The sb. is curs, Chaucer, C. T. Prol. 663.
AS. cursian, A. S. Chron. an. 1137; where the compound pp,
forcursed also occurs. The AS. sb. is curs; Liber Scintillarum,
c.56; p.174, 1.6. B. Remoter origin unknown; perhaps originally
Scandinavian, and due to a particular use of Swed. korsa, Dan. korse,
to make the sign of the cross, from Swed. and Dan. kors, a cross, a
corruption of Icel. #ross, a cross, and derived from Olrish cros; see
Cross. y. The N.E.D. says there is no trace of any connexion;
but Norw. kors, kross, a cross, plague, worry, trouble, comes very
near the sense of a curse; so Du. Arwis, tribulation; slechte kinderen
hebben is een groot kruis, it is a great cross to have bad children; cf.
Dan. dial. korselig, that which one dreads, or crosses oneself against ;
as, korseligt veir, horrible weather, which comes near the sense of
“cursed weather.’ The ultimate connexion seems to me possible.
Indeed, Berghaus gives Low G. krisiitsigen, to curse (lit. to cross).
Note, further, that Windisch gives Olrish ctirsaigim, ‘1 reprehend.’
Der. ac-cursed, curs-ed, curs-er.

CURSIVE, running, flowing. (L.) Modern. Not in Todd’s
Johnson. A mere translation of Late L. eurstvus, cursive, as applied
to handwriting. = L. cursus, pp. of currere, torun. See Current.

CURSORY, running, hasty, superficial. (L.) The odd form
cursorary (other edd. cursenary, curselary) is in Shak. Hen. V, v. 2.77.
‘He discoursed cursorily ;’ Bp. Taylor, Great Exemplar, pt. iii. § 14
(R.).— Late L. cursdrius, chiefly used in the adv. cursdrié, hastily,
quickly. L. cursdri-, declensional stem of cursor, a runner.—L,.
curs-us, pp. of currere, torun. See Current. Der. cursori-ly.

CURT, short, concise. (L.) ‘ Maestro del campo, Peck! his name
is curt;’ Ben Jonson, The New Inn, iii. 1.—L. curtus, docked,
clipped. Cf. Gk. caprdés, chopped. —4/ SKER, to shear, cut ; whence
also E. shear, and Icel. skardr, docked. See Shear. Der. curt-ly,
curt-ness ; curt-ail, q.v.

CURTAIL, to cut short, abridge, dock. (F.—L.) a. Curtail
is a corruption of an older cvirtall, and was orig. accented on the
former syllable ; there is no pretence for saying that it is derived from
the F. court tailler, to cut short, a phrase which does not appear to
have been used ; though it is probable that both E. zail and F. tailler
had some influence on the development of the word. The two
instances in Shakespeare may suffice to show this. ‘I, that am cir-
tail’d. of this fair proportion;’ Rich, II], i. 1. 18. And again:
‘When a Gentleman is dispos’d to sweare, it is not for any standers-
by to curtall his oathes;’ Cymbeline, ii. 1. 12, according to the first
folio; altered to curtail in later editions. B. Cotgrave translates
accourcir by ‘to shorten, abridge, curtall, clip, or cut short;’ and
this may help to show that the French for to curtail was not court
tailler (!), but accourcir. ‘y. The verb was, in fact, derived from the
adj. curtall or curtal, having a docked tail, occurring four times in
Shakespeare, viz. Pilgr. 273; M. Wives, ii. 1. 114; Com. Err. iii. 2.
151; All’s Well, ii. 3. 65.— MF. courtault, courtaut; both forms are


CUSTARD


given by Cotgrave, and explained by ‘a curtall;’ or, as an adj.; by
‘curtall, being curtalled.’ He also gives: ‘ Double courtaut, a strong
curtall, or a horse of middle size between the ordinary curtall, and
horse of service.’ 6. The occurrence of the final /7 in curtall shows
that the word was taken into English before the old form courtault
fell into disuse. Cf. Florio, who gives the Ital. ‘ corta/do, a curtall,
a horse without a taile; cortare, to shorten, to curtall; corta, short,
briefe, curtald.’= OF. court (Ital. corto), short ; with suffix -ault, -alt,
equivalent to Ital. -aldo, Late L. -aldus, of Germanic origin, as in
Regin-ald; from G. walt, O. Low G. wald (Icel. vald), power. See
Hatzfeld’s French Dict. pref. § 138.—L. curtus, docked. See Curt,

CURTAIN, a hanging cloth. (F.—L.) ME. cortin, curtin;
Chaucer, C. T.. 6831 (D 1249). The pp. cortined, furnished with
curtains, is in K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1028.—OF. cortine, curtine,
a curtain. Late L. cortiza, a small court, small enclosure, croft,
rampart or ‘curtain’ of a castle, hanging curtain round a small
enclosure. See Exod. xxvi. 1 (Vulgate).—L. cort-, stem of cérs, a
court; with suffix -ima, fem. of -inus, adj. suffix. See Court (1).
Der. curtain, verb.

CURTILAGE, a court-yard. (F.—L.) ‘All the comedities
(sic) wythyn the seid gardyn and. curtelage ;’ Bury Wills, ed. Tymms,
p- 46, (A.D. 1467).—AF. curtilage, Stat. of the Realm, i. 221,
Formed, with sutfix -age, from OF. cortil, courtil, ‘a back-yard;*
Cot.—Late L. cortile, an enclosure, small yard (Ducange). Dimin.
of Late L. cortis, a court-yard, from L. cdrs. See Court (1). i

CURTLEAXE, a corruption of cutlass; see Cutlass.

CURTSEY, an obeisance; see Courtesy.

CURULE, chiefly in the phr. curule chair, a chair used by the
highest magistrates of Rome. (L.) Butler has ‘curule wit;’
Hudibras, i. I. 715.—L. curiilis, curriilis, applied to equi, horses, and
to sella, the curule chair.—L. currus, a chariot ; see Curricle.

CURVE, adj. crooked; sb. a bent line. (L.) Not in early use,
The ME. form was courbe, whence E. curb, q.v. Blount’s Glosso-
graphia, ed. 1674, has the adjectives curvous and curvilineal, and the
sbs. curvature and curvity. ‘This line thus curve;’ Congreve, An
Impossible Thing, 1. 137.—L. curuus, crooked, bent (base cur-).4-Gk,
xup-Tés, bent. See Crown. Der. curve, verb; curvat-ure, L. cur-
uatura, from curudre, to bend; curvi-linear ; also curvet,q.v. And
see carb.

CURVET, to bound like a horse. (Ital.—L.) The verb is in
Shak. As You Like It, iii. 2. 258; the sb, is in All’s Well, ii. 3. 299.
=—Ital. corvetta, a curvet, leap, bound; corvettare, to curvet, frisk,
[The E. word was orig. corvet, thus Florio has: ‘ Coruet/a, a coruet,
a sault, a prancing or continuall dancing of a horse.’] = MItal. corvare,
old spelling of curvare, ‘to bow, to bende, to stoope, to crouch, to
make crooked ;’ Florio. Thus ¢o curvet meant to crouch or bend
slightly; hence, to prance, frisk.—L. curudre, to bend.=—L. curuus,
bent. See Curve. Der. curvet, sb. (Ital. corvetta). )

CUSHAT, the ring-dove, wood-pigeon. (E.) ‘Cowshot, palum-
bus;’ Nicholson’s Glossarium Northanhymbricum, in Ray’s Collec-
tion, ed. 1691, pp. 139-152. Cowschote; Catholicon Angl. (1483)s
AS. ciisceote, a wild pigeon; Voc. 260. 75 ciscote, EK. E. Texts, p. 85.
For cii-scote, where scote prob. means darter, lit. ‘shooter,’ from scot-,
weak grade of scéotan, to shoot (cf AS. scéota, a kind of trout);
and perhaps c& refers to the coo of the bird. Cf. ‘ Coo, coo, come
now, &c.; Song of the Cushat; in T. Dyer, Folklore, p. 98.

CUSHION, a pillow, soft case for resting on. (F.—L.) The pl.
cuischuns is in Wyclif, 1 Kings, v. 9. Spelt quysshin, Chaucer, Troil.
and Cress. ii. 1229.—OF. cotssiz, a cushion (Supp. to Godefroy) ;
later coussin, ‘a cushion to sit on;’ Cot. [It is supposed that coissiz
was the true form; perhaps it was influenced by OF. come, a quilt.]
= Late L. type *coxinwm, a support for the hip; from coxa, hip, thigh
(like L. cubital, elbow-cushion, from cubitus, elbow). Cf. Ital. cus-
cino, cushion, coscia, hip; Span. cojin, cushion, cwja, hip. See
Romania, 1892, p. 87. 4 The AF. form quissine occurs in A. Neckam
(Wright’s Vocab. i. 100); cf. E. cuisses, q.v. @ The G. hissen,
cushion, is borrowed from one of the Romance forms; cf. Ital. cuczno,
cuscino, Span. coxin, Port. coxim. ;

CUSP, a point, tip. (L.) Not in early use. ‘Full on his cusp
his angry master sate, Conjoin’d with Saturn, baleful both to man ;’”
Dryden, The Duke of Guise, Act iv (R.). It was a term in astrology,
‘No other planet hath so many dignities, Either by himself or in
regard of the cuspes;’ Beaum, and Fletcher, Bloody Brother, iv. 2. —
L. cuspis, a point; gen. cuspid-is, Der. cuspid-ate, cuspid-at-ed. ;

CUSTARD, a composition of milk, eggs, &c. (F.—L.) In Shak.
All’s Well, ii. 5. 41 ; custard-coffin, the upper crust covering a custard ;
Tam. Shrew, iv. 3. 82. The old custard was something widely,
different from what we now call by that name, and could be cut into
squares witha knife. John Russell, in his Boke of Nurture, enumerates
it amongst the ‘ Bake-metes;’ see Babees Boke, ed. Furnivall, p. 147,
1. 492; p. 271, 1.1; p. 273, 1. 21; and esp. the note on 1. 492, at


CUSTODY


.CYME 151


p. 211. It was also spelt custade, id. p. 170, 1.802. B. And there |. CUTTER, a swift sailing vessel. (Scand.) First ‘in1745; from


can. be no reasonable doubt that such is a better spelling, and that
it is, moreover, a corruption of the ME. crustade, a general name for
pies made with crust; see the recipe for crustade ryal quoted in the
Babees Book, p. 211. [A still older spelling is crustate, Liber Cure
Cocorum, ed. Morris, p. 40, derived immediately from L. crustatus. |
= OF, croustade, ‘paté, tourte, chose qui en couvre une autre,’ i.e. a
pasty, tart, crust; Roquefort. Roquefort gives the Prov. form
crustado. Cf. Ital. crostata, ‘a kind of daintie pye;’ Florio.—L.
crustalus, pp. of crustare, to encrust, from crusta, a crust. See Crust.
Der. custard-apple, an apple like custard, haying a soft pulp;
Dampier, Voyage, an. 1699, iii. 33.

CUSTODY, keeping, care, confinement. (L.) Spelt custodye, Sir
T. More, Works, p. 40.—L. custddia,a keeping guard.=—L. custod-,
stem of custos,a guardian; lit. ‘a hider.’—4/ KEUDH, to hide, con-
ceal; whence also Gk. «eve, to hide, and E. hide. See Brugmann,
i. § 699. See Hide (1). Der. custodi-al, custodi-an.

CUSTOM, wont, usage. (F.—L.) ME. custume, custome, costume ;
Chaucer, C. T, 6264 (D 682). Spelt custwme, Old Eng. Homilies, ed.
Morris, ii. 11, 1. 11.— OF. costume, custume, custom (Late L. costuma,
Chartulary of 705); mod. F. coutwme, From a Romanic type *cos-
tumne, prob. for *costudne, shortened from consuctidinem, acc. of the
classical L. consuétido, custom.— L. consuétus, pp. of consuescere, to
accustom; inchoative form of L. *consuére, to be accustomed. = L, con-,
for cum, together, greatly, very; and suére, to be accustomed (Lucr. i.
60), more commonly used in the inchoative form suescere. B. Suére
appears to be derived from L. sus, one’s own, as though it meant ‘to
make one’s own,’ or ‘to have it one’s own way.’ @] Cf. F. amertume,
for L. amaritidinem; F. enclume, for L. inctidinem. Der. custom-ar-y,
-ar-i-ly, -ar-i-ness, -er ; -house ; also ac-custom, q.v.

CUT, to make an incision.. (Scand.) | ME. cutten, kitten, a weak
verb; pt. t. kutte, kitte. The form cwtte, signifying ‘he cut,’ past tense,
occurs in Layamon, i. 349; iii. 228; later text. These appear to be
the earliest passages in which the word occurs. It answers to a late
AS. form *cyttan (for *cut-ian) ; and is of Scand. origin. Cf. Swed.
dial. kuta, kata, kvota, to cut with a knife; kuta, kytti, a knife (Rietz) ;
Icel. kuti, a little knife; Norw. hyttel, kjutul, a knife for barking trees
(Aasen); MSwed. hota, to cut with a knife (Ihre). All (possibly)
due to OF. ‘cout-el, a knife; see Cutlass. Der. cut, sb.; cutt-ing, -er ;
eut~water; cut-purse. .

CUTCHERRY, a court-house, office. (Hind.) ‘The prodigious

labour of cutcherry;* Thackeray, Vanity Fair, ch. 57 (or ch. 22 of
vol. ii). — Hind. kachahri, ‘a hall of justice, town-house, court, a public
office for the receipt of revenue,’ &c.; Forbes.
CUTICLE, the outermost skin. (L.) ‘ Cuticle, the outermost thin
skin ;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715; and in Phillips (1658). The adj. cuti-
éular is in Blount’s Glossographia, ed. 1674. L. .cuticula, the skin ;
double dimin., with suffixes -cw-la-, from cuti-, declensional stem of
cutis, the skin, hide. (Cf. particle from part.) The L. cutis is cognate
with E. hide. See Hide (2). Der. cuticul-ar, from the L. cuticula ;
also cut-an-e-ous, from a barbarous Latin cutdneus, not given inj Du-
cange, but existing also in the F. eutané, skinny, of the skin (Cotgrave),
and in the Ital. and Span. cutaneo, ;

CUTLASS, a sort of sword. (F.—L.) The orig. sense was ‘a
little: knife.” Spelt coutelace, in Dodsley’s Old Plays, ed. Hazlitt, v.
189. Better spelt cutlas, with one s.—F. coutelas, ‘a cuttelas, or
courtelas, or short sword, for a man-at-arms;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. colted-
laccio, ‘a curtelax, or knife;’ Florio. [The Ital. suffix -accio (L.
-Gceum) is a general augmentative one, that can be added at pleasure
to a sb.; thus from libro, a book, is formed Jibraccio, a large ugly
book. So also Ital. coltellaccio means ‘a large ugly knife.’]—OF.
coutel, cultel (Littré),-whence F. couteau, a knife. Cf. Ital. coltello,
a knife, dagger.—L. cultellum, acc. of cultellus, a knife; dimin. of
culter,a ploughshare. See Coulter, @ The F. suffix -as, Ital. -accio,
was suggested by the L. suffix -Gceus; but was so little understood that
it was confused with the E. axe. Hence the word was corrupted to
curtleaxe, as in Shak. As You Like It, i. 3. 119: ‘a gallant curtleaxe
upon my thigh.’ Yet a curtleaxe was a sort of sword!

CUTLER, a maker of knives. (F.—L.) ME. coteler; Geste His-
toryal of the Destruction of Troy, ed. Panton and Donaldson, 1. 1597.
= AF, cofillere, Liber Custumarum, p.185; OF. cotelier; later coute-
lier, as in mod. F.— Late L. cultellarius, (1) a soldier armed with a
knife ;/(2) a cutler,. Formed with suffix -drius from L. cultell-, base
of cultellus, a knife, dimin. of culter, a ploughshare. See Coulter.
Der, cutler-y. >

CUTLET, a slice of meat. (F.—L.) Lit. “a little rib.’ * Cuélets,
a dish made of the short ribs of a neck of .mutton;’ Kersey’s Dict.
ed. 1715. —F. cételette, a cutlet; spelt costelette in Cotgrave, who ex-
plains it by ‘a little rib, side, &c.’ A double diminutive, formed with
suffixes -el- and -ette, from OF. cosée, a rib (Cotgrave). = L. costa, a rib.
See Coast. : é


the verb ¢o cut, to speed (E.D.D.). —Norw. kut-, weak grade of kita
(pt. t. aut), to run, to speed. See Phil. Soc. Trans. 1903, p. 145.

CUTTLE, CUTTLE-FISH, a sort of molluse, (E.). Cotgrave
translates the F. cornet by ‘a sea-cut or euttle-jish;’ and the F. seche
by ‘the sound or cuttlefish. Cuttle occurs in Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 742.
The Prompt. Parv. has both cotul and codull.. Cf. .prov. E. cuddle,
coodle, Corrupted from cuddle by the influence of similar words in
MDu. and H. German. The form cuddle isa legitimate and regular
formation from AS. cudele, the name of the fish. ‘ Sepia, cudele, vel
wase-scite;’ /llfric’s Glossary, ed. Somner, Nomina Piscium. {The
name wase-scite means ooze-shooter, dirt-shooter, from the animal’s
habit of discharging sepia. ]-- MDu. kuttel-visch, a cuttle-fish; Kilian.
But this is rather a High-German form, and borrowed from the G.
kuttel-fisch, a cuttle-fish, 8. The remoter origin is obscuré; the G.
kuttel-fisch is in no way connected with the G. kuttel, bowels, entrails,
y. Perhaps it meant ‘little bag,’ from its shape, or its ink-bag; cf. Low
G, kudel, a purse (Liibben), AS, codd, a bag. See Cod (2). See
Phil. Soc. Trans. 1902, p. 661. .

CYANOGEN, a compound radical (in chemistry), consisting of
nitrogen and carbon. (Gk,) Named by Gay-Lussac (1815) from its
occurring in Prussian blue; N.E.D.=—Gk. «vavo-, for xtavos, a dark
blue mineral ; and -yev-, as yév-os, race, with the idea of ‘ producing,’
Der. (from #vavos), cyan-ide, cyan-ite, cyano-type.

CYCLE, a circle, round of events. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Cycle and epi-
cycle, orb in orb;’ Milton, P. L. viii. 84. And in Sir T. Browne,
Vulgar Errors, b. iv. c.12.§ 10. Older form cikle, Sir T. Elyot, The
Governour, bk. i. c. 25. § 3. =F. cycle, ‘a round, or circle ;*. Cotgrave.
=—L. cyclus, merely a Latinised form of Gk. xv«dos, a circle, cycle. +
Skt. chakra-, a wheel, disc, circle, astronomical figure. Allied to E.
wheel; see Wheel, 4 The word may have been borrowed imme-
diately from Latin, or even from the Greek. Der. cyel-ic, cycl-ic-al3
cycloid, from Gk. «vedAoebns, circular (but technically used with a new
sense), from Gk, xv«do-, for xveXos, and «dos, form, shape; cycloid-
al; cyclone, a coined word of modern invention, from Gk. kuveday,
whirling round, pres. part. of euxAdw, I whirl round, from Gk. «v«Aos,
{Hence the final -e in cyclone is mute, and merely indicates that the
vowel o is long.] Also eyclo-metry, the measuring of circles; see
Metre. Also cyclo-pedia or cyclo-pedia, from Gk, eveAonaibdia, which
should rather (perhaps) be excyclopedia, from Gk. éyxueAomaibeia, used
for éyxvKAvos madeia, the circle of arts and sciences, lit. circular or
complete instruction; der. from éy«v«Acos, circular, and ma:deia, in-
struction ; which is from éy, in, xvAos, a circle, and mats (gen. maidés),
a boy, child. Also epi-cycle, bi-cycle, tri-cycle.

CYCLAMEN, a flower; a genus of Primulacee, (L.—Gk.)
Lyte (tr. of Dodoens, bk. iii. c. 11) has cyclamen, and cyclaminon. =
Late L. cyclamen, for L. cyclaminos, -on. = Gk. xvkAdpivos, -ov, cycla-
men; named from its bulbous roots; from Gk, #v«Aos, a circle.

CYCLOPS, one of arace of one-eyed giants. (L.—Gk.) Douglas,

tr. of Aineid, bk. iii. c. 10, has Ciclopes, for Cyclopes, pl. of Cyclops. =
L. Cyclops, pl. Cyclopes, Virgil, Ain. iii. 644. — Gk. cveAwyp, a one-eyed
giant; Homer, Od. ix. 106; pl. xvedAwres. Lit. ‘round-eyed.’ = Gk.
xvKA(0)-, for KUKAos, a circle; and @y, an eye.
_CYGNET, a young swan, (F.—L.—Gk.). Spelt cignet in old edd.
of Shak. Tro. and Cress, i. 1. 58. Formed as a diminutive, with
suffix -¢, from OF. cigne, a swan; Cot. 1. At first sight it seems to
be from Lat. cygnus, a swan; earlier form cycnus. = Gk. kvxvos, a swan.
2. But the oldest F. form appears as cisne (Littré); cf. Span. cisne,
a swan; and these must be from Late L. cicinus (Diez), a by-form of
eucinus (Brugmann, i. § 950), likewise from xv«vos (as before). B. The
Gk, «vxvos is allied to Skt. gakuna-s, a large bird; L. ciconia, a stork.
See Diez; 4th ed. p. 714.

CYLINDER, a roller-shaped body. (F.-—L.—Gk.) Cilinder is
in Minshen, ed. 1627. [An older form chilyndre is in Chaucer, C. T.
Group B, 1396, where Tyrwhitt reads kalender, C.T.13136. It there
means a cylindrically shaped portable sun-dial.|— MF. cilindre, later
cylindre, the y being introduced to look more like the Latin; both
forms are in Cotgrave.=L, cylindrus, a cylinder.=Gk. xvAwdpos, a
cylinder, lit. a roller. — Gk. #vAivdev, to roll; an extension of xvAiew,
to roll. Cf. Church-Slav. kolo, a wheel. (4/ QEL.) Der. cylindr-ic,
cylindr-ic-al.

CYMBAL, a clashing musical instrument. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
cimbale, cymbale; Wyclif, 2 Kings, vi. 5; Ps. cl. 5.—OF. cimbale, ‘a
cymball;’ Cot.. Later altered to cymbale (also in Cotgrave) to look
more like the Latin. = L. cymbalum, a cymbal; also spelt cymbalon. =
Gk. xvpBadov, a cymbal; named from its hollow, cup-like shape. =
Gk. «ipBos, xvpBn, anything hollow, a cup, basin. + Skt, kumbha-s,
kumbhi, a pot, jar. The form of the root is KEUBH ; Benfey, p. 196:

CYME, a species of inflorescence. (F.—L.—Gk.) Modern.— Fs
cyme ; also.cime, ‘the toppe or knappe of a plant ;’ Cot.—L. cyma.=
Gk. «da, anything swollen, a wave, the young sprout of a cabbage


152 CYNIC


(as in L.).—4/ KEU, to swell; Gk. «ve, to be pregnant. Doublet,
cyma (L. cyma), an ogee moulding of a cornice.

CYNIC, misanthropic; lit. dog-like. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. Jul.
Cees. iv. 3. 133.—L. cynicus, one of the sect of Cynics. — Gk. xuvikds,
dog-like, cynical, a Cynic.—Gk. xuv-, stem of xiov, a dog. +L.
can-is, a dog; Irish ct (gen. con), a dog; Skt. gvan-, a dog; Goth.
hunds, a hound. See. Hound. Der. cynic-al, -al-ly, -ism; and see
cynosure.

CYNOSURE, a centre of attraction. (L.—Gk.) ‘ The cynosure
of neighbouring eyes;’ Milton, L’Allegro, 80.—L. cynosura, the con-
stellation of the Lesser Bear, or rather, the stars composing the tail
of it; the last of the three is the pole-star, whence the sense of
“ guiding-star,’ or centre of interest. Gk. xvvécoupa, a dog’s-tail ;
also, the Cynosure, another name for the Lesser Bear, or, more strictly,
for the tail of it.—Gk. «uvés, dog’s, gen. case of xvwv, a dog; and
ovpa, a tail. See Cynic.

CYPRESS (1), a kind of tree. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. cipres, ci-
presse, cupresse. ‘Ase palme other ase cipres;’ Ayenbite of Inwyt,
p- 131. ‘Leves of cupresse;’ Palladius on Husbandry, b. x. st. 6,
Also called a cipir-ire. ‘Hec cipressus, a cypyr-tre;’ Wright’s Vocab.
i. 228. — OF. cypres, later cypres, explained by Cotgrave as ‘the Cyprus
tree, or Cyprus wood.’ = L, cyparissus; also cupressus.— Gk. kunapiooos,
the cypress. PB. Prob. of Eastern origin; by some supposed to be the
Heb. gopher, gopher-wood, Gen. vi. 14; see Gesenius.

CYPRESS (2), CYPRESS-LAWN, a kind of lawn or crape.
(F.—L.—Gk.) ‘A cipresse [or cypress | not a bosom Hideth my heart;’
Tw. Nt. iii. 1.132. ‘ Cypress black as e’er was crow;’ Wint. Tale,
iv. 4. 221. See note on cypress in Ben Jonson, Every Man in his
Humonr, i. 3.121, ed. Wheatley. PB. Palsgrave explains F. crespe by
“a cypres for a womans necke;’ and Cotgrave has: ‘ Crespe, cipres,
cob-web lawn;’ which seems to show some confusion between cypress
and crape. But in old wills they are kept distinct. Thus, in Testa-
menta Eboracensia, i. 240 (A.D. 1398), we find: ‘unum [velum] de
cypres,’ a cypress veil; ‘ij. flameola de cipres,’ id. i, 289 (A.D. 1402) ;
also ‘ flameolam meam de crispo,’ my crape veil, i. 271 (1400) ; ‘ fla-
meolum de krespe,’ i. 382 (1415). -y. Butthe ME. cipres also meant (1)
a cloth of gold or other valuable material; (2) a valuable satin(N.E.D.).
It is probable that all these were alike named from the island of Cyprus,
whence they were imported. OF. Cipre, Cypre, Cyprus. = L. Cyprum,
acc. of Cyprus. Gk. Kimpos, Cyprus.

CYST, a pouch (in animals) containing morbid matter. (L.—Gk.)
Formerly written cystis. ‘ Cystis, a bladder; also, the bag that con-
tains the matter of an imposthume;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.— Late
L. cystis, merely a Latinised form of the Gk. word.— Gk. «doris, the
bladder, a bag, pouch. Der. cyst-ic.

CZAR, the emperor of Russia. (Russ.—Teut.—L.) ‘ Two czars
are one too many for a throne ;’ Dryden, Hind and Panther, iii. 1278.
= Russian ¢sare (with e mute), a king. OSlav. césari; Miklosich,
p- 28. Borrowed from Teutonic; cf. Goth. kaisar.—L. Cesar.
@ This has been disputed; but see Miklosich. Cf. Matt. xiii. 24,
in Schleicher, Indogermanische Chrestomathie, p. 275 ; where OSlav.
cesarstvo occurs for Russ. tsarstvo, kingdom; &c. ‘Der. czar-ina, with
Ital. suffix -ina, from G. -in, fem. suffix, as in landgravine, margravine,
the Russ. form being ¢saritsa; also czarowitz, from Russ, ¢sarevich’,


the czar’s son.


DAB (1), to strike gently. (E.) ME. dabben. ‘The Flemmisshe

hem dabbeth o the het bare’ =the Flemings strike them on the bare
head; Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 192, The ME. sb. is dabbe.
‘Philot him gaf anothir dabbe’=Philotas gave him another blow;
K, Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1. 2306. Now generally associated with
the notion of striking with something soft and moist, but the orig.
sense is merely to ¢ap. An E, word; of imitative origin, MDu,
dabben, to pinch, to knead, to fumble, to dabble; Oudemans. Cf.
Norw. dabba, to tap with the foot (Ross); prov. G. (Strassburg)
dabbe =G., tappen (C. Schmidt) ; G. tappen, to grope, fumble; prov. G,
tapp, tappe, fist, paw, blow, kick; Fliigel’s Dict. 4 From the G. tappen
we have F. ¢aper, and E. tap. Hence dab and tap are doublets. See
Tap. Der. dab,sb. See Dabble, and Dub.

DAB (2), expert. (E.) The phrase ‘he is a dab hand at it’ means
he is expert at it. Goldsmith has: ‘one writer excels ata plan;...
another is a dab at an index;’ The Bee, no. 1. A word of slang
origin, and perhaps due to dab, vb. (above). It may have been to
some extent confused with the adj. dapper. See Dapper. 4 There
as no evidence connecting it with adept, as some have guessed.


DAGGER


DAB (3), a fish. (E.) A small flat fish; ME. dabbe, Liber Albus,
P- 375; pl. dabys (A.D. 1460), Antiquarian Repository, ii, 211.
Prob. considered as a soft mass dabbed down. See Dab (1). And
cf. prov. G. (Kurhessen) dob, soft, dabberig, soft (Vilmar).

DABBLE, to keep on dabbing. (E.) The frequentative of dab,
with the usual suffixed -le. The word is used by Drayton, Polyolbion,
s. 25, 1. 973 see quotations in Richardson. Cf. ‘dabbled in blood ;’
Shak. Rich. III, i. 4. 54.-—- MDu. dabbelen, to pinch, to knead, to
fumble, to dabble, splash about; formed by the frequentative suffix
-el- from MDu. dabben, with a like sense; Oudemans. See Dab (1).
Cf. Norw. dabla, to dabble in water (Ross) ; Icel. dafla, to dabble ;
WF lem. debbelen, to fumble, handle.

DAB-CHICK, DOB-CHICK:} see Didapper.

DACH, a small river-fish. (F.-—O. Low G.) ‘ Dace or Dare, a small
river-fish ;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. Shak. has dace, 2 Hen. IV,
iii. 2. 356, 1, Another name for the fish is the dart. 2. Dare,
formerly pronounced dahr (daar), is simply the F. dard (=Late L.
acc, dardum), and dart is due to the same source. Cf. ME, dar, Voc.
763. 36. 3. So also dace, formerly darce (Babees Book, ed. Furnivall,
p- 174), answers to the OF. nom. dars or darz, a dart, javelin, for
which Roquefort gives quotations, and Littré cites OF. dars with the
sense of ‘dace.’ The AF. pl. darces occurs in Liber Custumarum,
p- 279. ‘This OF. dars is due to Late L. nom. dardus, a dart, javelin,
of Low G. origin. 4 From this OF. dars is also derived the Breton
darz,a dace; cf. F. dard, ‘a dart, a javelin; ... also, a dace or dare
fish ;? Cotgrave. @4 So named from its quick motion. See Dart.

DACHSHUND, a badger-hound. (G.) From G, dachshund,
badger-hound, See dachs, a badger, in Kluge.

DACOIT, a robber. (Hind.) See Dacoit in Yule. — Hind. dakait,
a robber belonging to an armed gang (Forbes), — Hind, gaka, robbery
by an armed gang (Forbes; H. H. Wilson). Der. dacoit-y, robbery.

DACTYL, the name of a foot, marked —-Uwv. (L.—Gk.)
Puttenham, Arte of Poetrie, ed. Arber, p. 83, speaks of ‘ the Greeke
dactilus;’ this was in A.D. 1589. Dryden speaks of ‘spondees and
dactyls’ in his Account prefixed to Annus Mirabilis. —L. dactylus, a
dactyl, — Gk. SaxrvaAos, a finger, a dactyl; from the three joints of the
finger. See Trench, On the Study of Words, on the sense of dactyl,
Der, dactyl-ic.

DAD, a father. (E.) In Shak. Tw. Nt. iv. 2. 140; K. John,
ii. 467. A child’s word for father. So also EFries. tatte; W. tad,
father; Corn. tat; Bret. tad, tat, father; Irish daid; Gael. daidein,
papa (used by children); Gk. rdra, father; used by youths to their
elders; Skt. sata-, father; ¢a@ta-, dear one; a term of endearment, used
by parents addressing their children, by teachers addressing their
pupils, and by children addressing their parents. A familiar word,
and widely spread. Der. dadd-y, a dimin. form.

DADO, the die, or square part in the middle of the pedestal of a
column, between the base and the cornice ; also, that part of an apart-
ment between the plinth and the impost moulding. (Ital.—L.) So
defined by Gwilt, in Webster; see also Gloss. of Architecture, Oxford,
1840. The word is somewhat old, and occurs in Phillips, ed. 1706,
Like some other architectural terms, it is Italian. Ital. dado, a die,
cube, pedestal; Torriano (1688) has ‘dado, any kind of dye to play.
withall, any cube or square thing.’ The pl. dadi, dice, is in Florio,
from a sing. dado, The same word as Span. dado, OF. det; see
further under Die (2), which is a doublet.

DAFFODIL, a flower of the amaryllis tribe. (F.—L.—Gk.)
The d is no part of the word, but prefixed much in the same way
as the ¢in Ted, for Edward. It is difficult to account for it ; it is just
possible that it is a contraction from E. ¢h’affodill, used by Cotgrave.
At any rate, the ME. form was affodille. ‘ Affodylle, herbe, affodillus,
albucea;’ Prompt. Parv. = OF, asphodile, more commonly affrodille,
‘th’ affodill, or asphodill flower;’ Cotgrave. Cf. ‘ aphrodille, the
affodill, or asphodill flower ;’ id, [Here the French has an inserted
r, which is no real part of the word, and is a mere corruption. It is
clear that the E. word was borrowed from the French before this r
was inserted. We have sure proof of this, in the fact that Cotgrave
gives, not only the forms asphrodille, asphrodile, and affrodille, but
also asphodile, ‘the daffadill.’ The last of these is the oldest.]—L.
asphodelus, borrowed from the Greek.—Gk. dopddedos, asphodel.
See Asphodel. Der. Corrupted forms are daffadilly and daffadown-
dilly, both used by Spenser, Shep. Kal. April, ll. 60, 140. @ See
N.E.D.; and the article by Dr. Murray in Phil, Soc. Proceedings,
Feb. 6, 1880. '

DAFT, foolish. See Deft, below.

DAGGER, a dirk ; short sword for stabbing. (F.) ME. daggere,
Chaucer, C, T. prol. 113. [Connected with the ME. verb daggen,
to pierce,  Derfe dynttys thay dalte with doggone sperys,’ i.e. they
dealt severe blows with piercing spears; Allit. Morte Arthure, ed.
Brock, 1. 3749.. Cf. MDu. duggen, to stab; Oudemans; MDu, dag,
a dagger; id.] =F. dague, a dagger, of unknown origin; and ceraiatl


DAGGLE


neither Celtic nor Germanic; Korting, § 2738. B. It might be better
to take Late L. daga as the source; since OF. dague hardly occurs
before 1397 (see Ducange). Cf. also Ital. and Span. daga, a dagger ;
Port. adaga. The Port. form suggests an Eastern origin; cf. Heb.
dakhah, to strike; or Arab. dahw, driving, thrusting.

DAGGLE, to moisten, wet with dew. (Scand.) So in Sir W.

Scott. ‘The warrior’s very plume, I say, Was daggled by the dashing
spray ;’ Lay of the Last Minstrel, i. 29. Pope uses it in the sense of
to run through mud, lit. to become wet with dew; Prol. to Satires,
1. 225. Palsgrave has: ‘I daggyll, or I dagge a thing with myer ;’
p- 506. It is a frequentative verb, formed from the prov. Eng. dag,
to sprinkle with water; see Atkinson’s Cleveland Glossary. —Swed.
dagg, dew; Icel. digg (gen. daggar), dew. These sbs. are cognate
with E. dew. See Dew. Cf. also Icel. déggva, Dan. bedugge, to
bedew.
.DAGUERROTYPE, a method of taking pictures by photo-
graphy. (Hybrid; F. and Gk.) ‘ Dagwerrotype process, invented by
Daguerre, and published a.p. 1838;’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates.
Formed from Daguwerre, a French personal name (with o added as a
connecting vowel), and E. type, a word of Gk. origin. See Type.

DAHABEEY AH, a large sailing-boat, used by travellers up the
Nile. (Arab.) Lit. ‘ golden ;’ as being like a gilded state barge. =
Arab. dahabiyah, golden ; from dahab, gold; Rich. Dict. p. 712.
(0 =th in that.)

DAHLIA, the name of a flower. (Swedish.) ‘Discovered in
Mexico by Humboldt in 1789, and sent to Prof. Cavanilles, of the
Botanic Garden at Madrid, who [in 1791] named the genus in honour
of the Swedish Professor Dahl;’ Beckmann, Hist. of Inventions
(1846); i. 517. Dahl is a Swedish personal name; the suffix -ia is
botanical Latin.

DAINTY, a delicacy; pleasant to the taste. (F.—L.) ME.
deinté, deintee, generally asa sb.; Ancren Riwle, p. 412. But Chaucer
has: * Ful many a deynté hors hadde he in stable;’ C.T. prol. 168.
This adjectival use is, however, a secondary one, and arose out of
such phrases as ‘to leten deinté’=to consider as pleasant (Ancren
Riwle, p. 412), and ‘to thinken deyntee,’? with the same sense
(2. Plowman, B. xi. 47). —OF. daintie (to be accented daintié), also
deintie, dainte (deintié, dainté), joy, pleasure, also a tit-bit (Godefroy).
—L. acc. dignititem, dignity, worth.=—L. dignus, worthy. See
Dignity. 4 Cotgrave gives the remarkable adj. daiz, explained by
‘dainty, fine, quaint, curious (an old word);’ this is precisely the
popular F, form of L. dignus, the learned form being digne. Cf. dis-
dain, in which -dain again represents L. dignus. Der. dainti-ly,
dainti-ness.

DAIRY, a place for keeping milk to be made into cheese. (Scand.
and F.) ME, daierie, better deyerye, Chaucer, C.T. 597 (or 599). The
Low L. form is dayeria, but this is merely the E, word written in a Latin
fashion. a. The word is hybrid, being made by suffixing the F. -erie
(L. -Gdria) to the ME. deye, a maid, a female-servant, esp. a dairy-
maid; late AS. dége, Thorpe, Diplom. p. 641. Similarly formed
words are butte-ry (=bottle-ry), vin-t-ry, pan-t-ry, laund-ry ; see
Morris, Hist. Outlines of Eng. Accidence, p. 233. B. The ME. deye,
a maid, occurs in Chaucer, Nonne Pr. Tale, 1. 26 (B 4036), and is of
Scand. origin. —Icel. (ONorw.) deigja, a maid, esp. a dairy-maid ;
see note upon the word in Cleasby and Vigfusson; Swed. deja, a
dairymaid. y. However, the still older sense of the word was
‘kneader of dough,’ and it meant at first a woman employed in
baking, a baker-woman, The same maid no doubt made the bread
and attended to the dairy, as is frequently the case to this day in
farm-houses. Teut. type *daig-jon-, f., lit. ‘dough-er ;’ from the Teut.
type *daig-oz, as in the Icel. deig, Swed. deg, dough. The suffix -jon-
had an agential force; cf. Mceso-Gothic verbs in -jan. See further
under Dough; and see Lady.

DATS, a raised floor in a hall. (F.—L.—Gk.) Now used of the
raised floor on which the high table in a hall stands. Properly, it
was the table itself (L. discus). Later, it was used of a canopy over
a seat of state or even of the seat of state itself. ME. deis, deys,
sometimes dais, a high table; Chaucer, Kn. Tale, 1342 (A 2200);
P. Plowman, B. vii. 17, on which see the note. — AF. deis, OF . dois,
dais, a high table in hall. The later sense appears in Cotgrave, who
gives: ‘ Dais, or Daiz, a cloth of estate, canopy, or heaven, that stands
over the heads of princes thrones; also, the whole state, or seat of estate.’
For examples of OF. dois in the sense of ‘table,’ see deés in Supp. to
Godefroy. —L. discum, acc. of discus, a quoit, a plate,'a platter; in
late Latin, a table (Ducange).—Gk. dicxos, a round plate, a quoit.
See Dish, Disc.

“DAISY, the name of a flower. (E.) Lit. day’s eye, or eye of day,
i.e. the sun; from the sun-like appearance of the flower. ME.
dayesye ; explained by Chaucer: ‘ The dayesye, or elles the ye of day,’
Prol. to Legend of Good Women, 184. AS. d@gesége, a daisy, in
MS. Cott. Faustina, A. x. fol. 115 b, printed in Cockayne’s Leech-


DAMSEL 153


doms, iii. 292. AS. deges, day’s, gen. of deg, a day ; and ége, Mercian
form of AS. éage, an eye. See Day and Eye. Der. daisi-ed.

DALE, a low place between hills, vale. (E.) ME. dale, Ormulum,
9203. AS. del (pl. dalu),a valley; Grein,i.185. [As much Scand.
as AS.; the commoner AS. word was denu, used to translate uallis
in Lu, iii. 5; hence mod. E. dean, dene, den; see Den.] + Icel. dalr,
a dale, valley; Dan. dal; Swed. dal; Du. dal; OFries. del; OSax.
dal; Goth, dal; G. thal. Further allied to OSlav. dolz, Russ. dol’,
a dale; cf. Gk. @éAos, a vault. Der. dell; see Dell.

DALLY, to trifle, to fool away time. (F.—Teut.) ME. dalien.
‘Dysours dalye,’ i.e. dicers play; K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 6991.
‘To daly with derely your daynte wordez’ =to play dearly with your
dainty words; Gawayn and the Grene Knight, 1253. Also spelt
daylien, id, 1114.— AF. dalier, to converse, chat, pass the time in
social converse ; see gloss. to N, Bozon, ed. P. Meyer; OF. dallier,
to ‘chaff,’ jest at (Godefroy). Of Teut. origin; cf. Bavar. dalen, to
speak and act as children (Schmeller); mod. G. dahlen, to trifle


| (which see in Kluge). See Notes on E. Etym. p.56. Der. daili-


ance, ME. daliaunce, Gawain and Grene Knight, 1012; AF. daliaunce,
Polit. Songs, p. 320.

DALMATIC, an ecclesiastical vestment. (F.—Dalmatia.) ME.
dalmatyk, Wyntown, Chron. IX. vi. 153 (N.E.D.).=—F. dalmatique,
‘a fashion of a long white gown, .. spotted .. with purple, at first
brought up by the Dalmatian, or Sclavonian priests; also a wide-
sleeved vestment, worn . . by deacons;’ Cot.—L. dalmatica (uestis) ;
fem. of Dalmaticus, belonging to Dalmatia.

DAM (1), an earth-bank for restraining water. (E.) ME. dam,
tr. by Lat. agger; Prompt. Parv. p.113. No doubt an AS. word,
being widely spread; but not recorded. We find, however, the de-
rived verb fordemman, to stop up; AS. Psalter, ed. Spelman, Ps. lvii.
4; OFries. dam, dom, a dam; NFries. dim.+4+ Du. dam, a dam,
mole, bank; whence the verb dammen, to dam; Icel. dammr, a dam;
demma, to dam; Dan. dam, a dam; demme, to dam; Swed. damm,
sb. 3 ddémma, verb; Goth. dammjan, verb, only used in the comp.
faur-dammjan, to stop up; 2 Cor. xi. 10; MHG. tam, G. damm, a
dike. PB. Remoter origin uncertain; prob. allied to Gk. @wpds, a heap,
Geu-dw, 1 constrain. Observe that the E. sb. is older in form than the
verb. Der. dam, vb.

DAM (2), a mother; chiefly applied to animals. (F.—L.) ME.
dam, damme; Wyclif, Deut. xxii. 6; pl. dammes, id. Cf. the A. V.
A mere variation of Dame, q.v.

DAMAGE, harm, injury, loss. (F.—L.) ME. damage, K. Ali-
saunder, 959.— OF. damage, domage (F. dommage), harm (Supp. to
Godefroy); corresponding to the Prov. damnatje,dampnatje, in Bartsch,
Chrestomathie Provengale, 85. 25; 100. 26; 141. 23; cf. F. dame<
L. domina.—Late L. *damnaticum, harm; not actually found; but
cf. Late L. damndticus, condemned to the mines. [The OF. -age
answers to L. -dticum, by rule.]—L. damndt-us, pp. of damnare, to
condemn.—L, damnum, loss. See Damn. Der. damage, verb;
damage-able.

DAMASK, Damascus cloth, figured stuff. (Ital. —Syria.) ME.
damaske. ‘Clothes of ueluet, damaske, and of golde;’ Lydgate, Storie
of Thebes, pt. iii. 1, 2143; ed. 1561, fol. ccclxix, col. 2.—Ital. damasco ;
Late L. Damascus, cloth of Damascus (Ducange).—L. Damascus,
proper name.= Gk. Aayackés.— Heb. dmeseg, damask; Heb. Dam-
meseqg, Damascus, one of the oldest cities in the world, mentioned in
Gen, xiv. 15. Der. Hence also damask-rose, Spenser, Shep. Kal. April,
60; Hakluyt’s Voyages, vol. ii. pt. i. p. 165; damask, verb; damas-
kine, to inlay with gold (F. damasquiner) ; also damson, q.v.

DAME, a lady, mistress. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. dame,
Ancren Riwle, p. 230.—OF. (and F.) dame, a lady.—L. domina, a
lady; fem. form of dominus, a lord. See Don (2), and Dominate.
Der. dam-s-el, q.v. Doublet, dam (2).

DAMN, to condemn. (F.—L.) ME. damnen; commonly also
dampnen, with excrescent p. ‘Dampned was he to deye in that prisoun;’
Chaucer, C. T. 14725 (B 3605).—OF. damner ; frequently dampner,
with excrescent ~.—L. damnare, pp. damndtus, to condemn, fine. =
L. damnum, loss, harm, fine, penalty. Brugmann, i. § 762. Der. damn-
able, -able-ness, -at-ion, -at-or-y ; and see damage.

DAMP, moisture, vapour. (E.) In Shak. Lucrece, 778. The verb
appears as ME. dampen, to choke, suffocate, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris,
ii. 989. Though not found earlier, it can hardly be other than an E.
word; cf. EFries. damp, vapour. [It can hardly be Scandinavian,
the Icel. dampr being a mod. word; see Cleasby and Vigfusson.] +
Du. damp, vapour, steam, smoke ; whence dampen, to steam; Dan.
damp, vapour; whence dampe, to reek ; G. dampf, vapour. Cf. Swed.
damb, dust. From the 2nd grade of Teut. *dempan-, pt. t. *damp, pp-
*dumpanoz; as seen in MHG. dimpfen, timpfen, str. verb, to reek. Cf.
Swed. dial. dimba, str. verb, to reek. See Dumps. Der. damp,
verb; damp, adj.; -ly, -ness. a

DAMSEL, a young unmarried woman, girl, (F.—L.) ME. damo-


154 DAMSON


sel. ‘And ladies, and damoselis;’ K. Alisaunder, 171.=— OF. damoisele
(with many variations of spelling), a girl, damsel; fem. form of OF.
damoisel, a young man, squire, page, retained in mod. F, in the form
damoiseau. = Late L. domicellus, a page, which occurs in the Statutes
of Cluni (Brachet). This is shortened from domnicellus, also domini-
cellus, a regular double diminutive from L. dominus, a lord; made
by help of the suffixes -c- and -el-. See Don (2), and Dominate.
@ For dan=sir (Chaucer), see Dan.

DAMSON, the Damascene plum. (F.—L.—Syria.) ‘ When dam:
sines I gather;’ Spenser, Shep. Kal. April, 152. Bacon has dammasin,
Essay 46, Of Gardens; also ‘the damasin plumme’ Nat. Hist. § 509.
Lydgate has damysyns; Minor Poems, p. 15.—MF. damaisine, ‘a
Damascene, or Damson plum ;’ Cotgrave.=F. Damas, Damascus ;
with fem. suffix -ine.—L. Damascus. See Damask.

DAN, an honourable title; sir. (F.—L.) Spenser speaks of ‘ Dan
Ghaucer ;’ F. Q. iv. 2. 32. Chaucer has ‘dan John;’ C.T., B 3119.
= OF. dan, acc., dans, nom., sir, lord. L.dominum, acc. of dominus,
lord. See Don (2). Der. dam (2), dame, damsel.

DANCE, to trip with measured steps. (F.-OHG.) ME. dauncen,
daunsen ; ‘ Maydens so dauncen,’ K. Alisaunder, 5213.—OF. danser,
dancer (F. danser), to dance.—OHG. danson, to draw, draw along,
as in a round dance; a secondary verb from MHG. dinsen, OHG.
tinsen, thinsen, to draw or drag forcibly, to trail along, draw a sword;
cognate with Goth. ¢hinsan, which only occurs in the compound af-
thinsan, to draw towards one, John, vi. 44, xii. 32. B. Related to
MHG. denen, OHG. thenen, to stretch, stretch out, draw, trail; Goth.
afthanjan, to stretch after; L. tendere, to stretch; see further under
Thin. =—4/ TEN, to stretch. Der. danc-er, danc-ing.
-DANDELION, the name of a flower. (F.—L.) The word
occurs in Cotgrave. The older spelling dent-de-lyon occurs in
G. Douglas, Prol. to xii Book of Afneid, 1. 119; see Skeat, Speci-
mens of English. ME. dent de lyoun, Medical Werkes, ed. Henslow,
p. 91, l. 12.—F. dent de lion, ‘the herbe dandelyon ;’ Cot. [Cf. Span.
diente de leon, dandelion.|] B. The plant is named from its jagged
leaves, the edges of which present rows of teeth. L. dentem, acc. of
dens, a tooth; dé, preposition, of; and lednem, acc. of Jeo, a lion.
See ‘Tooth, and Lion...

DANDLB, to toss a child in ones arms, or fondle it in the lap.
(Low G.)- In Shak. Venus, 562; 2 Hen. VI,i. 3.148. Palsgrave
has:.‘ I dandyll, as a mother or nourryce doth a childe upon their
lappe.’ Another meaning was to play, trifle with. Thus we find:
‘King Henries ambassadors into France having beene dandled [trifled
with, cajoled] by the French during these delusive practises, returned
without other fruite of their labours ;? Speed, Hen. VII, b. ix. c. 20.
s. 28 (R.). Not known before the 16th century. fB. In form, it is a
frequentative verb, made by help of the suffix -le from an O. Low
German base dand-, which appears in the WFlem. dand-eren, to
bounce up and down, like an elastic ball (De Bo). y. Cf. MItal.
dandolare, dondolare,‘ to dandle or dangle, to play the babie or gull;’
Florio; dandola, dondola, ‘a babie [doll], a puppie, ..a kinde of
play at the ball; also, dandling or dangling;’ id. This word is
from the same Low G. root. Perhaps we may also compare MF.
dandiner, to balance or sway the body, or to swagger (Supp. to
Godefroy); and EFries. dindannen, to walk unsteadily, to sway from
side to side (Koolman). And see proy. E. dander, to tremble, shake,
saunter, trifle, in E.D.D.; MHG. tant, G. tand, a trifle, toy.

DANDRIEFF,, scurf on the head. (Scand. ?) Formerly dandruff;
‘the dandruffe or unseemly scales within the haire of head or beard ;’
Holland’s Pliny, b.xx. c. 8.. A compound word; composed of dander
and hurf. Of these, dander is a Yorksh. word, signifying a slight
scurf on the skin (E.D.D.); and hAurf.or urf (at Whitby), or huff
(EAnglia), with the sense. of ‘scurf, is from Icel. hrufa, a scab.
Thus the latter part of the word is of Scand. origin; perhaps the
former was the same. Seé Hurf in E.D.D.; and Notes on E. Etym.,


P- 57-

DANDY, a fop, coxcomb. (Gk.?) The N.E.D. says: ‘In use on
the Scottish border at the end of the 18th century ; and about 1813-9
in vogue in London, for the “exquisite” or “swell” of the period.
Perhaps the full form was Fack-a-dandy, which oceurs from 1659,
and in 18th.c. had a sense which might easily pass into that of dandy,’
Jack o’ Dandy occurs in 1632, which suggests that Dandy was a variant
of the name Andrew (as in Scotland). If so, the word is ‘of Greek
origin. — Gk. ’Avdpéas; from dvbpetos, manly.— Gk. dvnp (gen. dvdpds),
a man.+Skt. nara-s, a man.

DANGER, penalty, risk, insecurity. (F.—L.) On the uses of
this word in early writers, see Trench, Select Glossary, and Richard-
son; and consult Brachet, s.v. danger. ME. daunger, daungere;
Rob. of Glouc. p. 78, 1.1751; Chaucer, C. T. Prol. 663 (or 665).
Still earlier, in the Ancren.Riwle, p. 356; ‘ge polied ofte daunger
of swuche oderhwule pet muhte beon ower prel’=ye sometimes put
up with the arrogance of such an one as might be your thrall. =


DARE


OF. dangier (mod. F. danger), absolute power, irresponsible authority;
hence, power to harm, as in Shak. Merch. of Venice, iv. 1. 180.
The word was also spelt dongier, which rhymes with alongier ina poem
of the 13th century cited in Bartsch, Chrestomathie Frangaise, col.
362, 1. 2; and this helps us out... B. According to Hatzfeld, this.
answers to a Late L. *domniarium, a form not found, but an extension
from dominium, power, for which see Dominion. At any.rate,
dominium is certainly the true source of the word, and was used (like
OF. dongier) to denote the absolute authority of a feudal lord, which
is the idea running through the old uses of F. and E. danger...
Brachet remarks: ‘just as dominus had become domnus in Roman
days, so dominiarium became domniarium, which consonified the ia
(see the rule under abréger and Hist. Gram. p. 65), whence domn-
jarium, whence OF , dongier ; for. m=n, see.changer [from cambiare] ;
for -@rium=-ier see § 198.’ A word similarly formed, and from the
same source, is the E. dungeon. See Dominion, and Dungeon.
Der. danger-ous, -ous-ly, -ous-ness.

DANGLE, to hang loosely, swing about. (Scand.): In Shak,
Rich. II, iii. 4. 29.—Dan. dangle, to dangle, bob; Swed. dial.
dangla, to swing, Rietz; who also cites NFriesic dangel/n from Out-
zen’s Dict. p. 44. Ihre gives MSwed. dengla, dangla; and Aasen
has Norw. dangla. Another form. appears in Swed. dingla, Icel.
dingla, Dan. dingle, to dangle, swing about. B. The suffix -/e is, as
usual, frequentative ; and the verb is the frequentative of dang, 2nd
grade of ding, to strike, throw; so that the sense was to throw about
often, to bob, to swing. See Ding. We even find Low G. dung-
eln, to dangle; from the weak grade dung-. Der. dangl-er.

DANK, moist, damp. (Scand.) In the Allit. Morte Arthure, ed.
Brock, 1. 313, we find ‘the dewe that is daunke;’ and inl. 3750, we
have it as a sb. in the phrase ‘ one the danke of the dewe,’ i.e. in the
moisture of the dew. And cf. ‘Dropis as dew or a danke rayne ;’
Destruction of Troy, 2368. It also occurs as a verb, in Specimens of
Lyric Poetry, ed. Wright; see Specimens of Early Eng. ed. Morris
and Skeat, sect. IV d. 1. 28:°‘ deawes donketh the dounes,’ i.e: dews
moisten the downs.Swed. dial. dank, a moist place in a field,
marshy piece of ground, Rietz; Icel. ddkk, a pit,:pool; where dokk
stands for dink, by the assimilation so common in Icelandic, from
Teut. stem *dank-wo. We also find Swed. dial. danka, to moisten ;
Dan. dial. donke, dynke, to sprinkle linen with water before ironing it;
also MSwed. dunkenhet, moisture, Dan. dial. dunkel, moist; Norw.
dynka, to wet. The forms prove the existence of an obs. Scand. verb
*dinka, to. be wet, pt. t. *dank, pp. *dunkinn. See Notes on E. Etym.;
p- 57. Cf. Damp. ;

DAPPHR, spruce, neat. (Du.) Orig. good, valiant; hence braye,,
fine, spruce. Spenser speaks of his ‘dapper ditties;’ Shep. Kal.
October, 1. 13. ‘ Dapyr, or praty [pretty], elegans;’ Prompt. Parv.
= Du. dapper, valiant, brave, intrepid, bold. + OHG. ¢aphar, heavy,
weighty, (later) valiant; G. ¢apfer, brave. + Ch. Slay. dobrii, good ;
Russ. dobrui, good, excellent. See Brugmann, i. § 563.

DAPPLE, aspot on an animal. (Scand.) ‘As many eyes upon
his body as my gray mare hath dapples;’ Sidney, Arcadia, b. ii. p.
271 (R.). Hence the expression: ‘His stede was al dappel-gray ;”
Chaucer, C. T. 13813 (B 2074).—Icel. depill, a spot, dot; a dog
with spots over the eyes is also called depill; the orig. sense is a
pond, a little pool, from Norw. dape, a pool, in Aasen; Cleasby
and Vigfusson. Cf. Swed. dial. depp, a large pool of water. Also
MDan, duppe, a puddle, a hole where water collects. Der. dapple;
verb; ‘ Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey;’ Much Ado, vs
3. 27; and dappled. @ As Mr. Wedgwood well observes, ‘the re=
semblance of dapple-grey to Icel. apalgrar, or apple-grey, Fr. gris
pommel, is accidental.’ The latter phrase is equivalent to Chaucer’s
pomely-grey, C. T. prol. 616 (or 618). Still, association with apple
may have changed dep- into dap-. :

DARE (1), to be bold, to venture. (E.) a. The verb to dare,
pt. t. dared, pp. dared, is the same word with the auxiliary verb ¢o
dare, pt. t. durst, pp. durst. But the latter keeps to the older forms;
dared is much more modern than durst, and grew up by way of dis-
tinguishing, to some extent, the uses of the verb, B. The present
tense, Z dare, is really an old past tense, so that the third person is
he dare (cf. he shall, he can); but the form he dares is now often used,
and will probably displace the obsolescent he dare, though grammati-
cally as incorrect as he shalls, or he cans. ME. dar, der, dear, I dare;
see Stratmann’s O. E. Dict.’ ‘The pore dar plede,’ i.e. the poor man
dare plead; P. Plowman, B. xiv. 108. Past tense dorsté, durste.
‘For if he yaf, he dorsté make avaunt’=for if he gave, he durst make
the boast; Chaucer, C. T. prol. 227. AS. ic dear (for dearr), I dare ;
pz dearst, thou darest; he dear(r), he dare or dares; wé, gé, or hig
durran, we, ye, or they dare. Past tense, ic dorste, I durst or dared ;
pl. we durston, we durst or dared. ~Infin. durran, to dare; Grein, i.
212.4-Goth. dars, I dare; daursta,I durst; pp. daursts; infin. daurs+
an, to dare; OHG. tar, I dare; torsta, I dared; turran, to dares


DARE


[This verb is distinct from the OHG. durfan, to have need, now |
turned into diirfen, but with the sense of ‘dare.’ In like manner, the
Du. durven, to dare, is related to Icel. purfa, to have need, AS. purf-
an, Goth. paurban, to have need; and must be kept distinct. The
verb requires some care and attention.]+ Gk. dapceiy, to be bold;
Opacvs, bold; Skt. dhysh, to dare. =4/DHERS, to be bold, to dare;
Brugmann, i.§ 502. 4 AS. dearr < *darr < *darz=Goth. dars; cf.
pt. t. dors-te. Der. dar-ing, dar-ing-ly.

DARE (2), a dace; see Dace.

DARK, obscure. (E.) ME. dark, derk, deork; see dearc in Strat-
mann. AS. decrc, Grein, i. 191; base *derk-. The OHG. tarchan-
jan, to hide (answering to WGerm. *dark-n-jan) is from the 2nd
grade *dark- of the same base. Cf. also OSax. der-ne, AS. der-ne,
OHG. tar-ni, secret, dark. See Darn and Tarnish.

DARKILING, adv., in the dark. (F.) In Shak. Mid. Nt.
Dream, ii. 2. 86; Lear, i. 4. 2373; also in ‘goth him-self darkeling ;’
Lord Rivers, Dictes and Sayings (Caxton), fol. 35, 1.7. Formed
from dark by help of the adverbial suffix -ling, which occurs also in
flailing, i.e. flatly, on the ground ; see Halliwell’s Dict. p. 360. It
occurs also in hedling ; ‘heore hors hedlyng mette,’ i.e. their horses
met head to head, King Alisaunder, 1. 2261. B. An example in
older English is seen in the AS. becling, backwards, Grein, i. 76;
and see Morris, Hist. Outlines of Eng. Accidence, sect. 322, Adv.
Suffixes in -long, -ling.

DARKSOME, obscure. (E.) In Shak. Lucrece,379. Palsgrave
has darkesome, p. 309. Formed from dark by help of the suffix -some
(AS. sum); cf. ful-some, blithe-some, win-some, &c.

DARLING, a little dear, a favourite. (E.) ME. deorling, der-
ling, durling; spelt deorling, Ancren Riwle, p. 56. AS. déorling, a
favourite ;. Alfred’s tr. of Boethius, lib. iii. prosa 4. B. Formed
from déor, dear, by help of the suffix -ling, which stands for -/-ing,
where -/ and -ing are both suffixes expressing diminution. Cf. duck-
l-ing, gos-l-ing ; see Morris, Hist. Outlines of Eng. Accidence,
sect. 321. See Dear.

DARN, to mend, patch. (E.) ‘For spinning, weaving, derning,
and drawing up a rent;’ Holland’s Plutarch, p. 783 (R.). This
dern seems to be merely a peculiar use of ME. dernen, to hide, con-
ceal (prob. also to stop up a hole). Related to AS. gedyrnan, which
not only meant ‘to hide, conceal, keep secret,’ but also ‘to stop up
a hole,’ as shown by the gloss: ‘ oppilatum, gedyrned;’? Voc. 461. 7 ;
494.25. So also prov. HK. darn (Aberdeen) means not only ‘ to hide,’
but also ‘ to stop up a hole with straw ;’ E.D.D. -So also Westphalian
stoppen means (1) to stop up; (2) to darn a stocking; Notes on E.
Etym., p. 57. B. AS. gedyrnan is from the adj. dyrne, dierne (Merc.
derne), ‘secret,’ for Teut. *darn-jo- (Sievers, AS. Gr. §§ 159, 299),
whence also OHG. tarni, secret, dark ; see under Dark.

DARNELL, a kind of weed, rye-grass. (F.—Scand. and L.) ME.
darnel, dernel, Wyclif, Matt. xiii. 25, 29. Apparently a F. word.
Mr. Wedgwood cites (from Grandgagnage) the Rouchi darmelle,
darnel (given by Hécart); and compares it with Walloon darnise,
daurnise, tipsy, stunned, giddy (also in Grandgagnage). PB. The
former syllable also appears as dor- in Lowl. Sc. dornel, darnel; and
is explained by Swed. dar-repe, bearded darnel (Oman). This prefix
prob. signifies ‘stupefying;’ cf. MDu. door, foolish (Oudemans),
Swed. ddra, to infatuate, dare, a fool, Dan. daare, a fool, G. thor, a
fool; all of which are from a base *daur-, for *dauz-, *daus-, the
weak grade of which appears in AS. dys-ig, stupid; see Dizzy.
y- The latter syllable is from OF. nelle, neele, nielle, darnel (Godefroy).
—Late L. nigella, a plant, one kind of which has black seeds.=L.
nigellus, blackish; dimin. of niger, black. See Notes on E. Etym.,
p. 59; Lyte, tr. of Dodoens, bk. ii. c. 96, bk. iv. c. 45. At least three
plants have been confused, gith, cockle, and darnel. In Lolium
temulentum, temulentum is represented by dar-, and lolium by -nel,
Cf. MF. yvraye, ‘darnell,’ Cot.; from yure, ‘drunken;’ id.

DART, a javelin. (F.—O.Low G.) ME. dart, Rob. of Brunne, tr.
of Langtoft, p. 178; Chaucer, C.T., A 1564.—OF. dart (mod. F,
dard), a dart; a word of O. Low G, origin. Cf. AS. darod, darad, or
dared, a dart; Swed. dart, a dagger, poniard; Ice]. darradr, a dart ;
cf. OHG. zart, a dart. B. Perhaps from the base dar- of AS. derian,
to harm, injure. @ The Low L. dardus is evidently from an O. Low
German source. Der. dart, verb, and see dace.

DASH, to throw with violence. (Scand.) Orig. to beat, as when
we say that waves dash upon rocks. ME. daschen, dasschen. ‘Into
the cité he con dassche,’ i.e. he rushed, King Alisaunder, 2837 ; and
see Layamon,.i. 62; 1. 1469. —Dan. daske, to slap; Swed. daska, to
beat, to drub; Swed. dial. daska, to slap with the open hand, as one
slaps a child (Rietz.)-- Low G. daschen, to thrash (Berghaus). B. A
shorter form appears in Swed. dial. disa, to strike (Rietz). Der.
dash-ing, i.e, striking ; dash-ing-ly.

.DASTARD, a cowardly fellow. (Scand.; with F. suffix.) ‘ Das¢-.
ard or dullarde, duribuctius;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 114. ‘Dastarde,


DAUPHIN 155


estourdy, butarin;”’ Palsgrave. 1. The suffix is the usual F. -ard, as
in dull-ard, slugg-ard; a suffix of Germanic origin, and related to
Goth. hardus, hard. In many words it takes a bad sense; see Brachet,
Introd. to Etym.. Dict. sect. 196, 2. The stem das¢- answers to E.
dazed, and the ¢ appears to be due to a past participial form. = Icel.
destr, exhausted, breathless, pp. of desa, to groan, lose breath from
exhaustion ; closely related to Icel. dasadr, exhausted, weary, pp. of
dasask, to become exhausted, a reflexive verb standing for dasa-sik, to
daze oneself. Another past participial form is Icel. dasinn, commonly
shortened to dasz, a lazy fellow. Thus the word is to be divided
das-t-ard, where das- is the base, -¢- the past participial form, and
-ard the suffix. The word actually occurs in MDutch without the
#, viz. in MDu. dasaert, daasaardt, a fool (Oudemans) ; and an ME.
dasart, a dullard, occurs once, in Minor Poems of the Vernon MS.
(E.E.T.S.), p. 333. On the other hand, we find Swed. dial. dds¢,
weary (Rietz). See further under Daze. 4 The derivation from
AS. adastrigan, to frighten, is absurd ; I find no such word; it is
recorded by Somner, but is an error for ONorthumb. adustriga, to
curse; Matt. xxvi. 74. “Der. dastard-ly, -li-ness,

DATE (1), an epoch, given point of time. (F.—L.) ME. date;
Allit, Poems, ed. Morris, i. 505. ‘ Date, of scripture, datum ;’ Prompt:
Pary. p. 114.— F. date, the date of letters or evidences; Cotgrave. =
Late L. data, a date. —L. data, neut. pl. of datus, pp. of dare, to give.
In classical Latin, the neut. datum was employed to mark the time
and place of writing, as in the expression datum Rome, given (i.e.
written) at Rome. + Gk. Si-5w-y1, I give; cf. dwrnp, a giver, SoTés,
given; Skt. da-da-mi, I give, from the root da, to give; cf. dair, a
giver; Church Slav. dati, to give; Russ. darite, to give.—4/ DO, to
give. Der. From the L. datus, given, we have also nent. sing. datum,
and neut. pl. data; also dat-ive. And see dose, donation.

DATE (2), the fruit of a palm. (F.—L.—Gk.—Semitic.) ME.
date; Maundeville’s Travels, ch. 5, p. 57. ‘Date, frute, dactilus;’
Prompt. Pary. p. 114.—AF. date, Liber Albus, p. 224; OF. date
(Littré); later F. datte, badly written dacte, a date; both spellings
are in Cotgrave, =L,. dactylus, a date; also, a dactyl.=Gk. daxrvdos,
a date (no doubt assimilated to the Gk. word for ‘finger;’ but of
Eastern origin), From Semitic; cf. Aramaic digla, a palm-tree ;
whence Heb. Diglah, as a proper name, Gen. x. 27; also Arab. dagal,
a kind of palm; Rich, Dict. p. 679.

DAUB, to smear over. (F.—L.) ME. dauben, to smear; used to
translate L. linire, Wyclif, Ezek. xiii. 10, 11; and see note 3 in Prompt.
Parv. p. 114.—OF. dauber, occurring in the sense of ‘ plaster.’ Cf,
AF. daubours, plasterers, Late L. dealbatorés, Liber Custumarum,
pp: 52,99. The earlier form of this OF. verb could only have been
*dalber, from L, dealbare, to whitewash, plaster. [Cf. F. aube from
L. alba (see Alb), and F. dorer from L. deaurare.| |B. This
etymology of dauber is confirmed by Span. jalbegar, to whitewash,
plaster, corresponding to a hypothetical L. derivative “dealbicare.
y. From L. dé, down; and albdare, to whiten, from albus, white. See
Alb. {J The sense of the word has probably to some extent influenced
that of dab, which is of Low G. origin. W. dw, plaster, diwbio, to
daub ; Gael, dob, plaster, dobair, a plasterer; Irish dob, plaster,
dobaim, I plaster, are all borrowed from E, daub.

DAUGHTER, a female child. (E.) ME. doghter, doughter,
douhter, dohter, dowter, &c.; the pl. dohtren occurs in Layamon,
i. 124, 1. 2924; dehtren in O. Eng. Homilies, i. 247; de3ter in. Allit,
Poems, ed. Morris, ii. 270. AS. dohtor, pl. dohtor, dohtra, dohtru,
and dohter ; Grein, i. 195. + Du. dochter; Dan. datter, dotter; Swed.
dotter ; Icel. dottir; Goth. dauhtar ; OHG. tohter, G. tochter. Teut.
type *dohtér ; Idg. type *dhughatér ; whence Lith. dukté, Kuss. doche ;
Gk. Ouvyarnp, Pers. dukhtar, Skt. duhita. B. Lassen’s etymology
from the Skt. duk (for dhugh), to milk—‘ the milker’—is not now
generally accepted.

DAUNT, to frighten, discourage. (F:—L.) ME. daunten, K.
Alisaunder, 1312.— AF. danter (Gaimar, 3201), daunter (Bozon) ;
OF. danter (Roquefort) ; MF. donter (Cotgrave), (of which the last =
mod. F. dompter), written for an older *domter, to tame, subdue,
daunt.—L. domitdre, to subdue; frequentative of domdre, to tame;
which is cognate with E. tame., See Tame. Der. dauntless, -lessness,

DAUPHIN, eldest son of the king of France. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Formerly spelt Daulphin, Fabyan, vol. ii, Car, VII. an. 16 (p. 560);
also Dolphine, Hall, Edw. IV, an. 18. § 1.— OF. daulphin, for dauphin,
a dolphin ; also ‘the Dolphin, or eldest son of France; called so of
Daulphiné, a province given or (as some report it) sold in the year
1349 by Humbert earl thereof to Philippe de Valois, partly on
condition, that for ever the French king’s eldest son should hold it,
during his father’s life, of the empire;’ Cotgrave. Brachet gives the
date as 1343, and explains the name of the province by saying that
the title of Dauphin was peculiar to SE. France. It first appears
A.D. 1140. The origin of it is unknown, though it certainly represents
the L. delphinus. A doublet of dolphin ; see Dolphin. y


DAVIT


DAVIT, a spar used as a crane for hoisting a ship’s anchor clear
of the vessel; one of two supports for ship’s boats. (Heb.) ‘ Davit,
a short piece of timber, us’d to hale up the flook of the anchor, and
to fasten it to the ship’s bow;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. Older
spelling David, a Christian name of Heb. origin. Capt. Smith
(Works, ed. Arber, p. 793, A.D. 1626) has: ‘the block at the Dauid’s
ende.” So also F. davier, formerly daviet, from Daviet, dimin. of OF.
Davi, David; as in ‘davier de barbier, the pinser wherewith he [the
barber] draws or pulls out teeth;” Cotgrave. He also gives: ‘ Davier
d'un pelican, a certain instrument to pick a lock withall; an iron
hook, or cramp-iron for that purpose.’ So also AF. daviot, a davit,
Riley, Memorials of London, p. 370 (1373); E. daviot, Naval
Accounts, p. 49 (1485).

DAW, a jackdaw, bird of the crow family. (E.) In Skelton, Ware
the Hawk, 1. 327. In 1. 322 he uses the compound daw-cocke. The
compound ca-daw, i.e. caw-daw, occurs in the Prompt. Parv. p. 57;
on which see Way’s Note. May be claimed as an E. word, being
certainly of O. Low G. origin. B. A cognate word is traced by
Schmeller, in his Bavarian Dict. col. 494. He says that the
Vocabularius Theutonicus of 1482 gives the forms dach and dula; the
Jatter of these answers to G. dohle, a jackdaw, and is a dimin. form,
for an older *dahele, dimin. of daha. This daha is the O. Low G.
form answering to OHG. taha, MHG. tahe, a daw; whence MHG.
tahele, later dahle, and now spelt dohle. -y. The word, like chough,
is doubtless imitative ; Schmeller gives dah dah as a cry used by
hunters. By a change of the initial letter, we have the imitative E.
word caw; and by uniting these words we have caw-daw, as above.
Cf. also Ital. saccola, ‘a chough, a rooke, a dawe; also a skould, a
pratler; also a rayling or a skoulding;’ Florio. This Ital. word is
plainly derived from Old High German. Der. jack-daw,

DAW DLE, to waste time, to loiter. (Scand.) And dawdle over
a dish of tea ;’ Boswell’s Johnson, June 3, 1781. Of Scand, origin ;
cf. Norw. daudall, indolent (Ross) ; Swed. dial. dédolger, a slothful
man (Rietz); Low G. dédeln, to dawdle (Berghaus); Pomeran. deu-
deln, to waste time. Allied to Norw. daudleg, faint, stupid, lifeless
(lit. deadly) ; and to Icel. daudi, Swed. déd, death. See Death.

DAWEK, transport by relays of horses or bearers; a post. (Hind.)
See Yule. Hind. dak, transport, the post (Forbes). Cf. Skt. drak,
quickly; dra, to run.

DAWN, to become day. (Scand.) ME. dawnen; but the more
usual form is dawen. ‘ Dawyn, idem est quod Dayyn, dawnyn, or dayen,
auroro;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 114. ‘That in his bed ther dawetk him
no day;’ Chaucer, C.T., A 1676; cf.l. 14600 (B 3872). We find
daiening, daigening, daning,=dawning ; Genesis and Exodus, 77,
1808, 3264. . The -z is a suffix, often added to verbs to give them
a neuter or passive signification; cf. Goth. fullxan, to become full,
from fulljan, to fill; Goth. gahailnan, to become whole; and the like.
The ME, word is to be divided as daw-n-en, from the older dawen ;
and the insertion of the was suggested by Swed. and Dan. dagning,
sb., a dawning, a dawn, as if from a verb *dagna, from dag, a day.
y. ME. dawen is the AS. dagian, to dawn; Grein, i. 182; from the
AS, deg, day. So G. tagen, to dawn, from tag, day. See Day.
Der. dawn, sb.

DAY, the time of light. (E.) ME. day, dai, dei; spelt dei in
Layamon, li. 2, 1.10246. AS. deg, pl. dagas. + Du. dag; Dan. and
Swed. dag; Icel. dagr; Goth. dags; G.tag.. Teut. type *dagoz, m.;
allied to Lith. dagas, a hot season, daga, harvest; OPruss. dagis,
summer; Skt. ni-dagha-, the hot season, daha-,a burning, heat. =
4/ DHEGH, to burn, as in Lith. dég-ti, to burn, Skt. dah, to burn.
Thus the orig. sense was ‘hot time” Brugmann, ii. § 60. @ Per-
haps it is well to add that the L. diés, Irish dia, W. dydd, meaning
‘day,’ are from quite a different root, and are wholly unrelated.
Der. dai-ly, day-book, -break, -spring, -star, and other compounds,
Also daisy, q.v.; dawn, q.v.

DAY WOMAN, dairy-woman. (Scand. andE.) In Shak. L. L. L.
i. 2,137. The addition of woman is needless. Day=ME., deye, a
dairy-woman.=ONorw. deigja, a dairy-maid; see Dairy.

DAZE, to stupefy, render stupid. (Scand.) ME. dasen; the pp.
dased (or daswed) is in Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, ii. 150; in the Pricke
of Conscience, 6647; and in Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, i. 1085. The
ME. dasen is also intransitive, in the sense to become stupefied ; see
N.E.D. =Icel. dasa, in the reflexive verb dasask, to daze oneself, to
become weary and exhausted; Swed. dasa, to lie idle; Norw. dasa,
to grow faint; d@sa, to grow faint, be exhausted by cold or wet;
dest, pp. faint, tired out; Dan, dial. dase, to be idle. Cf. Low G.
diisen, dosen, to be listless ; in ’n das’ siin, to be in a daze (Berghaus).
@ Hence also OF, daser, to be dazed. Der. das-t-ard, q.v., and
dazzle, q.v.

DAZZLE, to confuse the sight by strong light. (Scand.; with
E. suffix.) In Shak. Hen. V, i. 2. 279; also intransitively, to be
confused in one’s sight, 3 Hen. VI, ii. 1, 25. ‘I dasyll, as ones eyes


156


DEAR


do for lokyng agaynst the sonne;’ Palsgrave. The frequentative of
daze, formed with the usual suffix -le ; lit. ‘to daze often.’ See Daze,

DE.-, prefix, (1) from L. prep. dé, down, from, away; also (2)
occurring in French words, being the OF. des-, F. dé- in composition 3
in which case it=L. dis-. ‘It is negative and oppositive in destroy,
desuetude, deform, &c. It is intensitive in declare, desolate, desiccate,
&c.;’ Morris, Hist. Outlines of Eng. Accidence ; sect. 326.

DEACON, one of the third order of clergy. (L.—Gk.) ME.
deken ; Chaucer has the compound erchedeken, C.T. 6884 (D 1300).
The pl. dekenes is in Wyclif, 1 Tim. iii. 8. AS. deacon, Exod. iv. 14.
= L. didconus, a deacon. = Gk. d:axovos (with &), a servant; hence, a
deacon. The Ionic form is d:qxovos. ‘From bd and *4-kovos (a<an);
allied to éy-kovéew, Lam quick, éy-xovis, a maid-servant ;’ Prellwitz.
Der. deacon-ess, where the suffix is of F. origin; deacon-ship, where
the suffix is of AS. origin; deacon-ry, with F. suffix -ry (for -rie); also
diacon-ate, -al, formed from L. diacon-us by help of the suffixes -ate
and -al, of L. origin.

DEAD, deprived of life. (E.) ME. deed, ded; Chaucer, C.T.
prol. 148. AS. déad, dead, Grein, i. 189; [where déad is described
as an adjective, rather than as a past participle. And to this day we
distinguish between dead and died, as in the phrases ‘he is dead’ and
‘he has died ;? we never say ‘he has dead.’ But see below. ] + Du.
dood; Dan. déd; Swed. déd; Icel. dawdr; Goth. dauths, dead. B. The
termination -ths in Mceso-Gothic is the special mark of a weak past
participle, and there can be no doubt that dauths was formed with
this participial ending from the stem dau-, second grade of Teut.*deu-}
whence the Gothic diwan,to die. The Teut. type is *daudéz, answer-
ing to Idg. *dhautés, the change from -#ds to -déz being due to Verner’s
Law. And this *dawdoz is the pp. of Teut. *dau-jan, to die, exactly
preserved (with mutation of aw to ey) in Icel. deya, to die. Further
allied to Russ. davite, to strangle. Der. dead-ly (ME. deedli, Wyclif,
Heb. vii. 8); dead-li-ness ; dead-en, -ness; and see Death.

DEAF, dull of hearing. (E.) ME. deef, def, defe ; Chaucer, C. T.,
prol. 446 (or 448). AS, déaf; Grein, i. 190;4Du. doof; Dan. dou;
Swed. dof; Icel. daufr; Goth. daubs; G. taub. B. Teut. type
* dauboz; orig. ‘ obfuscated ;’ and allied to the G. toben, to bluster,
rage, be delirious; also to the Gk. tdpos, smoke, darkness, stupefac-
tion, stupor; and to Tu@ads, ‘ blind.” (4/DHEUBH). Der. deaf-ly,
deaf-ness, deaf-en.

DEAL (1), ashare, division, a quantity. (E.) The sense of ‘ quan-
tity’ arose out of that of ‘share’ or ‘ portion.’ ME. deel, del, Chau-
cer, C. T., A 1825; Kn. Tale, 967. AS. dél, a portion, share;
Grein, i. 186. ++ Du. deel, a portion, share; Dan. deel, a part, portion ;
Swed. del, a part, share; Goth. dails, a part; OHG. teil; G. theil.
Teut. type *dailiz; allied to Lith. dalis, a share; OSlay. déli.
Brugmann, i. § 279 (2). Der. deal, verb; whence deal-er, -ing,
-ings; cf. dole,

DEAL (2), to divide, distribute ; to traffic. (E.) ME. delen,
Chaucer, C.T. prol. 247, where it has the sense of ‘traffic.’ AS.
d#lan, to divide; Grein, i. 186.4-Du. deelen, to divide, share; Dan.
dele; Swed. dela; Icel. deila; Goth. dailjan; OHG. teilan ; G. theilen.
Teut. type *dailjan-, from *dailiz, sb. The form of the verb shows
that it is derived from the sb. See Deal (1).

DEAL (3), a thin plank of timber. (Du.) The word is not E.,
but Dutch. The earliest use of the word is in the Earl of Derby’s
Expeditions, 1390-3 (Camden Soc.), where find deles, boards, fre-
quently ; see p. 359, col. 2, s.v. Wood, ‘A thousand deal-boards to
make huts for the soldiers;’ Clarendon, Civil War, ii. 675 (R.).
In Florio (1598), we find : ‘ Doga, a deale boord to make hogsheads
with.’=Du. deel, fem., deal, board, plank, threshing-floor (distinct
from deel, deal, part, which is neuter). In MDu. the word was di-
syllabic ; Hexham gives deele, ‘a planck, or a board’ (distinct from
deel, deyl, a part). ++ Low G. dele, a board (which in the Bremen Wor-
terbuch is wrongly connected with AS. d#l) ; G.diele, board, plank ;
MUG. dille; OHG. dilla; AS. fille, E. thill. Thus deal (3) is the
same word with Thill, q.v. 4 The use of Du. d for Eng. th
appears again in drill (1), q. v., and in deck,

DEAN, a dignitary in cathedral churches and colleges, (F.—L.)
The orig. sense is ‘a chief of ten.’ ME. den, deen, dene, P. Plow-
man, B, xiii. 65; also found in the comp. pl. suddenes, equivalent
to subdenes, i.e. sub-deans; P. Plowman, B. ii. 172.—OF, deien
(Roquefort) ; mod.F. doyen.=—L. deciinum, acc. of decanus, one set over
ten soldiers; later, one set over ten monks; hence, adean.=—L. decem,
ten; cognate with E. tex, See Decemvir and Ten. Der, dean-
ery, dean-ship; also decan-al, directly from L. decan-us.

DEAR, precious, costly, beloved. (E.) ME. dere, deere; spelt
deore in Layamon, i. 7, 1.143. AS. déore, dyre, Grein, i. 193, 215.
+ Du. dier ; Dan. and Swed. dyr, dear, expensive; Icel. dyrr, dear,
precious; OSax. diuri; OHG, tiuri, MHG. tiure, G. theuer, dear, -
beloved, sacred. Teut. type *dewrjoz. Root unknown, Der. dear-ly,
-ness ; also dar-ling, q.v., dear-th, q. Y.


i Ak


DEARTH


DEARTH, dearness, scarcity. (E.) ME. derthe, P. Plowman,
B. vi. 330; Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 342, Not found in AS.,
but regularly formed from AS. déore, dear; cf. heal-th, leng-th,
warm-th; see Morris, Hist. Outlines of Eng. Accidence, sect. 321.
+ Icel. dyrd, value; hence, glory; OSax. diritha, value; OHG.
tiurida, value, honour. See above.

DEATH, the end of life. (E.) ME. deeth, deth, Chaucer, C. T.,
964 (or 966). We also find the form ded, Havelok, 1687; a Scand.
form still in use in Lincolnshire and elsewhere. AS. déad, Grein, i.
189.+ Du. dood; [Dan. dod; Swed. dod; Icel. daudi]; Goth. dauthus;
G. tod. Teut. type *dau-thuz. See Dead and Die. @ The ME.
form ded is rather Scandinavian than AS.; cf. the Danish and
Swedish forms.

DEBAR, to bar out from, hinder. (F.) In Shak. Sonnet 28.
Earlier, in The Floure of Curtesie, st. 10, by Lydgate; pr. in Chau-
cer’s Works, ed. 1561, fol. ccclviii, back. Made up by prefixing the
OF. des- [=L. dis-] to the E. bar; see Bar. It agrees in sense
neither with Late L. débarrare, to take away a bar, nor with OF.
desbarrer, to unbar (Cotgrave).

DEBARK, to land from a ship. (F.) ‘ Debark (not much used),
to disembark ;’ Ash’s Dict. 1775.—F. débarquer, to land ; spelt des-
barquer in Cotgrave.—F. des- (for L. dis-, away), and F. barque, a
bark, ship. See Bark (1). Der. debark-at-ion, also spelt debarc-at-ion.

DEBASKE, to degrade, lower, abase. (Hybrid.) In Shak. Rich. I],
iii. 3. 127. A mere compound, from L. dé-, down, and base. See
Base. Der. debase-ment, debas-ing, -ing-ly.

DEBATE, to argue, contend. (F.—L.) ‘In which he wol de-
bate;’ Chaucer, C. T. 13797 (B 2058). The ME. sb. debat occurs
in P. Plowman, C. xxii. 251.— OF. debatre (F. débatire), ‘to debate,
argue, discuss;’ Cot.—L. dé-, down; and battere, popular form of
L. batuere, to beat. See Beat, and Batter. Der. debate, sb.,
debat-er, -able.

DEBAUCH, to seduce, corrupt. (F.—L. and Teut.) Only the
pp. debauched is in Shakespeare, and it is generally spelt debosh’d ;
Tempest, iii. 2. 29.— OF. desbaucher (mod. F. débaucher), ‘to debosh,
mar, corrupt, spoyle, viciate, seduce, mislead, make lewd, bring to
disorder, draw from goodness ;’ Cot.— OF. des-, prefix, from L. dis-,
away from; and OF. bauche, of rather uncertain meaning. Cotgrave
has: ‘bauche, a rew [row], rank, lane, or course of stones or bricks in
building.’ See Bauche in Diez, who remarks that, according to Nicot,
it means a plastering of a wall; according to Ménage, a workshop
(apparently in order to suggest an impossible derivation from L.
apothéca). B. The compounds are esbaucher, to rough-hew, frame (Cot-
grave); embaucher, ‘to imploy, occupy, use in business, put unto work’
(id.); and desbaucher. Roquefort explains OF. bauche as a little
house, to make it equivalent to Low L. bugia, a little house. Diez
proposes to explain débaucher by ‘to entice away from a workshop.’
He suggests as the origin either Gael. balc, a balk, boundary, ridge
of earth (which is mere English), or the Icel. balkr, a balk, beam.
y. The latter of these suggestions may be nearly right ; but it may be
better to derive it from OSax. balko, a beam, or OHG. baico, balcho ;
the word bauche had clearly some connexion with building opera-
tions. At this rate, we should have esbaucher, to balk out, i.e. set
up the frame of a building ; embaucher, to balk in, to set to work on
a building ; desbaucher, to dis-balk, to takeaway the frame or the sup-
ports of a building before finished or to leave it incomplete. Cf.
Korting, § 1183. And see OF. desbaucher in Supp. to Godefroy. See
Balk (1).. Der. debauch, sb.; debauch-ee (F. débauché, debauched) ;
debauch-er-y.

DEBENTURE, an acknowledgment of a debt. (L.) Spelt de-
bentur by Lord Bacon, in the old edition of his speech to King James,
touching Purveyors. The passage is thus quoted by Richardson:
‘ Nay, farther, they are grown to that extremity, as is affirmed, though
it be scarce credible, that they will take double poundage, once when
the debenture [old ed. debentur] is made, and again the second time
when the money is paid.’ Blount, in his Law Dict., has: ‘ Debentur,
was, bya Rump-Act in 1649, ordained to be in the nature of a bond
or bill, &c. The form of which debentur, as then used, you may see
in Scobel’s Rump-Acts, Anno 1649, cap. 63.’ Also in the Paston
Letters, i. 364; no. 264 (ab. 1455).—L. débentur, they are due;
‘because these receipts began with the words débentur mihi;’ Web-
ster.—L..débére, to be due. See Debt.

DEBILITATE, to weaken. (L.) The verb occurs in Sir T.
Elyot, Castel of Helth, bk. ii. c. 30; Shak. has debile, i.e. weak,
Cor. i. 9. 48; and debility, As You Like It, ii. 3.51; cf. MF. debili-
ter, ‘to debilitate, weaken, enfeeble;’ Cot.—L. débilitatus, pp. of
débilitare, to weaken. —L. débilis, weak. Prob. from L, dé, away,
not; and -bilis, allied to Skt. bala-, strength; cf. Skt. dur-bala- (for
*dus-bala-), feeble. Brugmann, i. § 553. Der. From the same
source is debility, spelt debilitie, Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii.
c. 10; OF, debilité, from L, débilitatem, acc. of débilitas, weakness,


DECAPITATE 157


DEBONATR, courteous, of good appearance. (F.—L.) In
early use. ME. debonere, Rob. of Glouc. p. 167, l. 3481; Ancren
Riwle, p. 186; also the sb. debonairte, O. Eng. Hom, i. 269, 1. 15.—
AF. debonere, debonaire, adj. affable, Life of Edw. Confessor, 1. 238;
compounded of de bon aire, lit. of a good mien. Here de is L. dé, of;
bon is from L. bonus, good; and aire was asb. (orig. masc.) signifying
place, stock, race, a word of uncertain origin, but perhaps from L.
area, an open space, or L, acc. agrum, field. Korting, § 828.

DEBOUCH, to march out of a narrow pass. (F.—L.) First in
1760. A modern military word (Todd).—F. déboucher, to uncork,
to emerge.=F. dé-, for L. dis-, out, away; and boucher, to stop up
the mouth ; thus déboucher is lit. ‘to unstop.’? From F. bouche, the
mouth; L. bucca, the cheek; also, the mouth,

DEBRIS, broken pieces, rubbish. (F.—L. and C.) First in
1708. Merely French.=F. débris, fragments.<OF. debrisier, to
break in pieces (Godefroy). OF. de-, for L. dé, down; and brisier
(F. briser), to break, of Celtic origin; cf. Gael. bris, to break, Irish
bris-im, I break.

DEBT, a sum of money due. (F.—L.) The introduction of the
6 (never really sounded) was due to a knowledge of the Latin form,
and was a mistake. See Shak. L.L.L. vy. 1. 23. ME. dette, Chau-
cer, C. T. Prol. 280 (or 282); P. Plowman, B. xx. 10. The pl.
dettes and dettur (i.e. debtor) both occur on p. 126 of the Ancren
Riwle.—OF. dette, a debt ; Cot. has both dette and debte.=L. débita,
asum due; fem. of débitus, owed, pp. of débére, to owe. PB. Débére
is for *déhibére, lit.to have away, i.e. to have on loan; from dé, down,
away, and habére, to have. See Habit. Der. debt-or (ME. dettur,
OF. deteur, from L. débitorem, acc. of débitor, a debtor), We also
have debit, from L. débitum.

DEBUT, a first appearance in a play. (F.) Modern, and French.
=— TF. début, a first stroke, a first cast or throw in a game at dice, first
play in a game at bowls; verbal sb. from débuter. The MF. desbuter
meant ‘to repell, to put from the mark he aimed at;’ Cot. The
change of meaning is singular ; the verb seems to have meant (1) to
displace an opponent’s bowl ; and thence (2) to lead in the next bout
(as is usual at bowls). See Notes on E. Etym., p. 63.—OF. des-,
for L. dis-, apart; and bu¢,an aim. See Butt (1).

DECADE, an aggregate of ten (F.—L.—Gk.) The pl. decades is
in the title of ‘ The Decades of the newe worlde,’ by R. Eden (1555).
— F. decade, ‘a decade, the tearme or number of ten years or months ;
also, a tenth, or the number of ten;’ Cot.=—L. decadem, acc. of decas.
— Gk. dexdda, acc. of Sends, a company of ten. = Gk. déxa, ten; cognate
with E. Ten, q. v.

DECADENCE, astate of decay.(F.—L.) In Goldsmith, Citizen
of the World, let. 40,§ 1. Spelt decadens, Complaint of Scotland, ch.
vil. p. 71, l. 1o.—F. décadence, ‘decay, ruin ;’ Cot.—Late L. déca-
dentia, decay.—L. dé, down; and Late L. cadentia, a falling. See
Cadence. Der. decadenc-y; and see decay.

DECAGON, a plane figure of ten sides. (Gk.) So named be-
cause it also has ten angles. A mathematical term; in Phillips’
Dict. ed. 1658. Comp. of Gk. Séxa, ten; and ywvia, a corner, an
angle, allied to yévv, the knee. See Ten and Knee.

DECAHEDRON, a solid figure having ten bases or sides.
(Gk.) A mathematical term. Not in Kersey or Bailey. Comp. of
Gk. déka, ten; and édpa, a base, a seat (with aspirated «), from
€5-os, a seat; from the base fed, cognate with E. sit. See Ten
and Sit.

DECALOGUE, the ten commandments. (F.—L.—Gk.) Writ-
ten decaloge ; Barnes, Epitome of his Works, p. 368, col. 2. Earlier,
in Wyclif, prologue to Romans; p. 299, 1. 23.—F. décalogue; Cot.—
L. decalogus.= Gk. dexadoyos, the decalogue; comp. of Gk. déxa,
ten, and Adyos, a speech, discourse, from Aeyerv, to speak,

DECAMP, to go from a camp, depart quickly. (F.—L.) For-
merly discamp, as in Cotgrave. Decamp occurs in the Tatler, no.
11, and in Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715, who also gives decampment.—F.
décamper ; Cot. gives ‘ descamper, to discampe, to raise or to remove
a camp.’=L. dis-, away; and campus, a field, later a camp (Du-
cange). See Camp.

DECANAL; see under Dean.

DECANT, to pour out wine. (F.—L.andGk.) ‘ Letit stand some
three weeks or a month.., Then decant from it the clear juyce;’
Reliq. Wottonianz, p. 454; from a letter written A.D. 1633. Ker-
sey explains decantation as a chemical term, meaning ‘a pouring off
the clear part of any liquor, by stooping the vessel on one side.’ =F.
décanter, to decant (Span. decantar).—Med. L. décanthare, to pour
out (a word used by alchemists).—L. dé, down, from; and canthus,
the ‘lip’ of a cup, a peculiar use of Gk, xav@os, corner of the eye.
See Hatzfeld, under décanter and canthus. Cf. Hamburg kanten,
upkanten, to tilt a vessel (Richey). Der. decant-er.

DECAPITATE, to behead. (L.) Cotgrave has: ‘ Decapiter, to
decapitate, or behead.’=Late L. décapitatus, pp. of décapitare, to


158 DECASYLLABIC


behead ; Ducange.—L. dé, down, off; and capit-, stem of caput, the |


head. Der. decapitat-ion.

DECASYLLABIC, having ten syllables. (Gk.) Modem.
Coined from Gk. d€xa, ten; and ovAdaBy, a syllable. See Ten, and
Syllable.

DECAY, to fall into ruin. (F.—L.) Surrey uses the verb decaie
actively, in the sense of ‘ wither;’ The Constant Lover Lamenteth.
The sb. decas (=L. décdsus) is in Gower, C. A. i. 32; prol. 837.—
ONorth F, decair (pr. s. subj. decaie), OF. dechaoir, &c., to decay; cf.
Span. decaer.—L. dé, down; and Folk L. cadire, cadére, for L. cadere,
to fall. See Cadence, Der. From the same source is decadence,
q.v.; deciduous, q.v.

DECEHASHE, death. (F.—L.) ME. deces, deses; spelt decess in
Gower, C. A. iii. 243; bk. vii. 1. 4516 ; deses in Rob. of Brunne, tr.
of Langtoft, p. 126.—OF. deces (mod. F. décés), decease. = L. déces-
sum, acc. of décessus, departure, death.—L. décédere, to depart.—L.
dé,.from ; and cédere, to go. See Cede. Der. decease, verb.

DECEIVE, to beguile, cheat. (F.—L.) ME. deceyuen (with
u for vy); P. Plowman, C. xix. 123; Polit. Songs, p. 337, 1. 300.
The sb. deceit is in P. Plowman, C. i. 77.—OF. deceveir, decevoir ;
pr. s. subj. deceive.mL. décipere, pp. déceptus, to take away, deceive.
=—L, dé, from; andcapere,totake. Der. deceiv-er, -able, -abl-y, -able-
ness; also deceit (through French from the L. pp. déceptus), spelt
disseyte in K. Alisaunder, 7705; deceitful, -ful-ly, -ful-ness; also (like
L. déceptus) decept-ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness; deception, q. V.

DECEMBER, the twelfth month. (L.) In Chaucer, On the
Astrolabe, pt. i. § 10,—L. December, the tenth month of the Roman
year, as at first reckoned.—L. decem,ten. See Ten.

DECEMVITR, one of ten magistrates. (L.) In Holland’s Livy,
pp. 109, 127.—L. decemuir, one of the decemuiri, or ten men joined
together in a commission, = L. decem, ten; and ziri, men, pl. of .uir,
a man, which is cognate with AS. wer,a man. Der. decemvir-ate,
from L. decemuirdatus, the office of a decemvir.

DECENNIAL, belonging toten years. (L.) ‘ Decennial, be-
longing to or containing ten years;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674.—L.
decennalis, of ten years; modified to go with biennial. L. decem,
ten; and ann-us, a year, changing to en-us in composition. Der.
From the same source is dec-enn-ary, which see in N.E.D.

DECENT, becoming, modest. (F.—L.) ‘Cumlie and decent ;’
R. Ascham, Scholemaster, ed. Arber, p. 64.—MF. decent, ‘ decent,
seemly;’ Cot.=L. decent-, stem of decens, fitting, pres. pt. of decére,
to become, befit; cf. L. decus, honour, fame. See Decorate. Der.
decent-ly, decenc-y.

‘DECEPTION, act of deceit. (F.—L.) In Berners’ Froissart,
ii. cap. 86; and Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 76.—OF. deception,
‘ deception, deceit ;? Cot.=—L. acc. déceptidnem, from nom. déceptio; cf.
déceptus, pp. of decipere, to deceive. See Deceive.

DECIDE, to determine, settle. (F.—L.) ‘And yit the cause is
noght decided;’ Gower, C. A. i. 153 prol. 334.—OF. decider, ‘to
decide ;’ Cot.—L,. décidere, pp. décisus, lit. to cut off; also, to decide.
=L. dz, from, off; and cedere, to cut. Der. decid-able, -ed; also
decis-ion, -ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness, like pp. décisus.

DECIDUOUS, falling off, not permanent. (L.) In Blount’s
Glossographia, 1674.—L. déciduus, that falls down; with (frequent)
change of -us to -ous, — L. décidere, to fall down. =—L. dé, down; and
cadere, to fall. See Cadence. Der. deciduous-ness.

DECIMAL, relating to tens. (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss. ed.
1674.— OF. decimal, ‘ tything, or belonging to tythe;’ Cot.—Late
L. decimilis, belonging to tithes.=—L,. decima, a tithe; fem. of deci-
mus, tenth. L. decem, ten; cognate with E. ten, See Ten, Der.
decimal-ly.

DECIMATEH, to killevery tenth man. (L.) Shak. has decima-
tion, Tim.v. 4. 31. L. décimatus, pp. of decimare, to take by lot every
tenth man, for punishment.—L, decimus, tenth. See above. Der.
decimat-or, -ion.

.DECIPHER, to uncipher, explain secret writing. (F.—L. and
Arab.) Im Shak. Mer. Wives, v. 2. 10. Imitated from MF. de-
chiffrer, ‘to decypher;’ Cot. From L. dé-, here in the sense of the
verbal un-; and cipher. See Cipher. Der. decipher-able.

DECISION, DECISIVE ; see Decide.

DECK (1), to cover, clothe, adom. (MDu.) In Surrey’s tr. of
fEneid, bk. ii, 1. 316 ; see Spec. of Eng. ed, Skeat, p. 208, Not in
early use, and not English; the AS. decan and gedecan are mythical.
—MDu. decken, to hide; Du. dekken, to cover ; dek, a cover, a ship’s
deck.-Dan. dekke, to cover; dek, a deck; Swed. tacka, to cover;
G. decken, to cover; AS. peccan,to thatch. See Thatch, Der.
deck, sb.; deck-er, three-deck-er, Doublet, thatchs

DECK (2), a pack of cards. (MDu.) In Shak. 3 Hen. VI, v. 1.
44. So called because the cards cover up or hide one another when
piled up ; cf.MDu. decken, ‘to cover, to deck, or to hide’ (Hexham).
See above.


DECOY |


DECLAIM, to declare aloud, advocate loudly. (L.) Wilson
has declame; Arte of.Retorique, p. 158 (R.). Skelton has declama-
cyons, Garlande of Laurell, 326. The reading declamed occurs: in
Chaucer, Troilus, ii. 1247; where old edd. have declared. {Not
found in OF .]—L. déclamdre, to cry aloud, make a speech.=—L. dé,
down, here intensive; and claimare, to cry out. See Claim, Der.
declaim-er, -ant; and (from L. pp. déclamdtus) declamat-ion, -or-y.

DECLARE, to make clear, assert. (F.—L.) ME. declaren ;
Chaucer, Comp. of Mars, 163; Gower, C. A. i. 158; bk..i. 1. 3436.
= OF, declairier (Godefroy), later declarer, ‘ to declare, tell, relate ;’
Cot.—L. déclarare, pp. déclardtus, to make clear, declare. —L. dé-,
i.e. fully; and clarus, clear. See Clear, Der. declarat-ion, -ive,
-ive-ly ; declarat-or-y, -or-i-ly.

DECLENSION, a declining downwards. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Rich. III, iii. 7. 189; and (asa grammat. term) Merry Wives, iv. 1.
76.— OF. declinaison; see index to Cotgrave, which has ; ‘ declension
of a noune, declinaison. de nom.’ =L. acc. déclindtionem, from nom.
déclinitio, declination, declension. ‘Thus declension is a doublet of
declination, See Decline.

DECLINE, to turn aside, avoid, refuse, fail. (F.—L.) ME.
declinen ; ‘hem pat eschuen and declinen fro vices and taken the wey
of vertu ;’ Chaucer, tr. of Boethias, b. iv. pr. 7; 1. 31. —OF.decliner ;
Cot. = L. déclinare, to bend aside from. = L.dé, from, away; and -clinare,
to bend, incline, lean; allied to E. lean. See Lean (1). Der.
declinat-ion, in Chaucer, C. T. 10097 (E 2223), from OF. declination,
L. ace. déclinatiénem; see Declension, Declivity.

DECLIVITY, a descending surface, downward slope. (F. —L.)
Opposed to acclivity, q.v. Given in Blount’s Gloss, ed. 1674.—F:
déclivité.=—L, décliuititem, acc. of décliuitas, a declivity, —L. décliuis,
inclining downwards. = L. dé, down ; and cliuus, a slope, a hill, from
the same root as -climare, to bend, incline. See Decline.

DECOCT, to digest by heat. (L.) In Shak. Hen. V, iii. 5. 205,
cf. “slowe in decoction;’ Sir T.’Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. ch.
18; decoccioune, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 82.—L. décoctus, pp. of
décoquere, to boil down,=L. dé, down; and coguere, to cook. See
Cook. Der. decoct-ion, -ive.

DECOLLATION, a beheading. (F.—L.) ‘The feast of the
decollacion of seynt John Baptist ;’ Fabyan, an. 1349-50; also in Tre-
visa, v. 49. = OF. decollation,‘a beheading : decollation sainct Fean, an
holyday kept the 29 of August ;’ Cot.—Late L. décollationem, acc.
of décollatio; cf. décolldtus, pp. of décollare, to behead. =L. dé, away
from; and collum, the neck. See Collar. Der. Hence the verb
decollate, used by Burke, Introd. to On the Sublime.

DECOMPOSE, to resolve a compound into elements. (F.—L., and
Gk.) Modern. First about 1751 (N.E.D.). Coined by prefixing L.
dé to the hybrid word compose. See Compose; and see note below.

DECOMPOSITION, a decomposing or resolution. (F.—L.)
Modern; first (in this sense) in 17313 Bailey, vol. ii. ed. 1731, has
decomposite, decomposition, and decompound, All are coined words,
made by prefixing the L. dé to composite, &c. See Composite,
Compound. Der. decompos-ite, -it-ion. J Etymologically dis-
tinct from decompose, but much confused with it.

DECORATE, to ornament, adorn. (L.) Hal! has decorated,
Edw. IV, an. 23. § 1. £O noble prynces, in wotshyp decorate ;*
Barclay, Ship of Fools, ed. Jamieson, ii. 16. And see Palsgrave,,
p- 509. [Hall also uses the short form decore (from OF. decorer) ;
Hen. V, an. 2. § 19. The word decorat in Chaucer, tr. of Boethius,
b. iii. pr. 4, is a proper name, L. Decordtus.]=—L. decoratus, pp. of
decoradre, to adorn.—L. decor-, for *decos-, stem of decus, an orna-
ment. See Decorum. Der, decorat-ion, -ive, -or.

DECORUM, decency of conduct. (L.) In Ascham, Schole-
master, ed, Arber, p. 139, 1. 16.—L. decdrum, sb., seemliness, neut.
of decdrus, seemly.—L. decdr-, stem of decor, seemliness ; closely re-
lated to decor-, from decus, ornament, grace.=L. decére, to. befit ;
decet, it befits, seems. Cf. Gk. doxéw, I am valued at, J am of
opinion ; doxet, it seems. Der. We also have decorous (which is from
L. decdrus, seemly); decorous-ly. See Decent. ribs

DECOY, to allure, entice. (Hybrid; L. and Du.—L.), A coined
word, The word decoy-duck, i.e. duck for decoying wild ducks, occurs
in Beaum. and Fletcher, Fair Maid; Act iv. sc. 2 (Clown) ;{ ‘ you are
worse than simple widgeons, and will be drawn into the net, by this
decoy-duck, this tame cheater.’ But Burton, Anat. Melan. ii. 2. 4,
has: *Fowling . » with .’, coy-ducks.’’ Made by prefixing L. dé-,
down, to prov, E. coy, a decoy, which was borrowed from Dn, kooi,
a cage, a decoy, MDu. hoye, also kouwe (Hexham). This is not a
true Du, word, but adapted from Late L. cavea, whence also F. and
E. cage; see Cage. PB. Perbaps the prefixing of de- was due to asso-
ciation with ME. coyen, to quiet ; so that de-coy seemed to. mean ‘ to
quiet down,’ (See Notes on E. Etym., p. 64.) (Cf. accoy, Spenser,
F. Q. iv. 8.593 ‘Coyyn, blandior;’ Prompt, Parv, See Coy, Der.
decoy-duck, -bird. = me ‘


a a ae


DECREASE


_ DECREASE, to grow less, diminish. (F.—L.) Both act. and
neut. in Shak. Tam. Shrew, ii. 119; Sonn. 15. [Gower has the verb
discresen, C. A. ii. 189; from Late L. discrescere.| ‘Thanne begynneth
the ryyere for to wane and to decrece;’ Maundeville, p. 44.—AF.
decreiss-, a stem of decreistre (Bestiary, 919); substituted for OF,
descreiss-, descroiss-,a stem of descroistre,to decrease (Godefroy). — Late
LL. discrescere, for L. décrescere, to decrease (so that the AF. form was
more correct than the OF. form). —L. dis-, for dé-, off, from, away ;
‘and crescere, to grow. See Crescent. Cf. Norm. dial. décreitre, to
decrease (Moisy), Der. decrease, sb. (ME. desores, Gower, C. A, iii.
154; bk. vii. 1. 2054; AF. descrees, Stat. Realm, i. 158; from OF,
stem descreiss-, above) ; decreas-ing-ly; and see decrement,

_ DECREE, a decision, order, law. (F.—L.) In early use.
ME. decree, decre, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 122; Chaucer,
C. T. 17328 (117).—OF. decret, a decree.—L. décrétum, a decree ;
neut. of décrétus, pp. of décernere, to decree, lit, to separate. —L. dé,
away from, and cernere, to sift, separate, decide ; cognate with Gk.
xpivew, to. separate, decide. See Critic. Der. decree, verb; also
decret-al, q.v., -ive, -or-y, from pp. décrétus. Se

. DECREMENT, a decrease. (L.) ‘ Twit me with the decrements
of my pendants;’ Ford, Fancies Chaste, A.i.sc, 2.—L. décrémentum,
a decrease. Formed with suffix -mentum from décré-, occurring in
décréui and décrétus, perf. tense-and pp. of décrescere, to decrease ;
see Decrease.

DECREPIT, broken down with age. (L.)° In Spenser, F, Q. ii.
9. 55; Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. i. ch. 2 (Ages); Henrysoun,
Praise of Age, 1. 2.—L. décrepitus, that makes no noise; hence
creeping about noiselessly like an old man, aged, broken down. —L.
dé, away ; and.crepitus, pp. of crepare, to,crackle.. See Crepitate,
Der. decrepit-ude; also decrepit-ate, -~at-ion,

DECRETAL, a pope’s decree. (L.) In Rob. of Brunne, tr. of
Langtoft, p. 337; P.. Plowman, B. v. 428.—Late L. décrétile, a
pope’s decree; neut. of .décrétalis, adj., containing a decree.=L.
décrétum, a decree. See Decree. y

DECRY, to cry down, condemn. (F.—L.) In Dryden, Prol. to
-Tyrannic Love, |. 4.— OF. descrier, ‘to cry down, or call in, uncurrent
or naughty coin; also, publiquely to discredit, disparage, disgrace ;’
Cot. — OF. des-, L. dis-,. implying the reversal of an act, and here op-
posed to ‘cry up;’ and OF. crier, to cry. See Cry, Der. decri-al.
_DECUPLE, tenfold. (F.—L.) Rare. In Blount’s Gloss. ed.
1674.—MF. décuple, ten times as much; Cot. [Cf. Ital. decuplo,
tenfold.| Formed from L. decuplus (Daniel, i. 20).—L. decem, ten ;
and suffix -plus asin duplus, double; see Ten and Double.
.DECURRENT, extending downwards. (L.) As a botanical
term.—L. décurrent-, stem of décurrens, pres. pt. of décurrere, to run
down.=L, dé, down; and currere, to run, See Current, Der.
decurs-ive, from décursus, pp. of décurrere.

: DECUSSATE, to cross at an acute angle. (L.) ‘ Decussated,
cut_or divided after the form of the letter X, or of St. Andrew’s
Cross, which is called crux decussata;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674. —
L. decussdtus, pp. of decussdre, to cross, put in the form of an X.—
L. decussis, a coin worth 10 as-es, and therefore marked with an X.

—L. dec-em, ten; and assi-, declensional stem of as, an as, ace. See

Ten and Ace. Der. decussat-ion.
- DEDICATE, to consecrate, devote. (L.) Formerly used as a
pp- signifying ‘dedicated.’ ‘In ¢hirche dedicat;’ Chaucer, Pers.
Tale, 2nd; Part of Penitence (I 964).—L. dédicdtus, pp. of dédicare,
to devote.—L. dé, down; and dicare, to proclaim, devote, allied to
dicere, to. say, tell, appoint, orig. to point out. —4/DEIK, to show.
See Token. Der. dedicat-ion, -or-y.
. DEDUCE, to draw from, infer, (L.) In Sir T. More, Works,
p- 461; Tyndall, Works, p. 21, col. 2, 1. 41; Palsgrave, p..509.—L.
dédicere, to lead or bring down. =L, dé, down; and dicere, to lead.
See Duke. Der. deduc-ible, deduce-ment; and see below.
DEDUCT, to draw from, subtract. (L.) ‘For having yet, in
his deducted spright, Some sparks remaining of that heavenly fyre ;’
where it means deduced or ‘ derived;’ Spenser, Hymn of Love, 106.
And in Palsgrave, p. 509.—L. déductus, pp. of dédiicere, to lead or
bring down. See above. Der. deduct-ion, -ive-ly.

DEED, something done, act. (E.) ME. deed, dede; Chaucer,
C. T. prol. 744 (or 742). OMerc. -déd; AS. déd, deed; Grein,
i. 185. + Du. daad ; Dan. daad; Swed. ddd; Icel. dad; Goth. ga-déds,
a deed; cf. missa-déds, a misdeed; OHG. tat, G. that. Teut. type
*dédiz; Idg. type *dhétis; from »4/DHE, to place, put, do. See
Do (1). Der. deed-less, mis-deed.

DEEM, to judge; think, suppose. (E.) ME. demen, Chaucer,
C. T. 1883 (A 1881). AS, déman,to judge, deem. Here the long é is
the mutation of 6; the verb being derived from the sb. ddm, a doom,
judgment. + Du. doemen, to doom; Dan. démme; Swed. déma;
Icel. dema; Goth. gaddmjan; OHG,. tuomian, MHG. tuemen, to
honour, also to judge, doom, Teut. type *ddmjan. All from the sb.


DEFECT 159


See Doom. Der. deem-ster, a judge, ME. demestre, Cursor Mundi,
5586 (Fairfax MS.), used as a masc. sb.; but AS, démestre was a fem.
form, from masc. démere, lit. ‘ deem-er.’

DEEP, extending far downwards, profound. (E.) ME. deep, P.
Plowman, C. i. 17; spelt depe, id. B. prol. 15; deop, id. A. prol. 15.
AS. déop, Grein, i, 191.4-Du. diep; Dan. dyb; Swed. djup; Icel.
dipr; Goth. diups; OHG. tiuf, G. tief, Teut. type *deupoz. Cf.
Lith. dubus, deep, W, dwfn, deep. Brugmann, i. § 566. From the
same source as Dip, which see. Der. deep-ly, -ness, -ex; also depth,
q.v., which compare with Goth. diupitha, Icel. dypt or dypd, and Du,
diepte, depth (the AS. form being déopnes, i.e. deepness) ; depth-less.

DEER, a ruminant quadruped. (E.) Lit. a wild beast, and applied
to all sorts of animals; cf. ‘rats, and mice, and such small deer,’
King Lear, iii. 4. 144. ME. deer, der, deor; spelt der, Ormulum,
1177. AS. deor, a wild animal; Grein, i. 192.4 Du. dier, an animal,
beast ; Dan. dyr (the same); Swed. djur (same); Icel. dyr (same) ;
Goth. dius, a. wild beast; Mark, i. 13; OHG. tor, G. thier. Teut.
type *deuzom. Idg. type *dheusdm, prob. ‘animal;’ from *dheus, to
breathe (Kluge). Brugmann, i. § 539 (2). Der. deer-stalk-er, deer-
stalk-ing (for which see Stalk).

DEF ACH, to disfigure, (F.—L,.) ME. defacen, desfacen, Chaucer,
Ho. of Fame, iii. 74; Gower, C..A. ii. 46; bk. iv. 1, 1322.—OF.
desfacier, MF. desfacer, ‘to efface, deface, raze;’ Cot.—OF. des-,
prefix.<L. dis-, apart, away; and face, a face, from L. faciés, a face.
{Similarly, Ital. sfacciare, to deface (Florio),-is from Ital. prefix s-
<L. dis, and Ital. faccta, a face.] And see Efface. Der. deface-ment.

DEFALCATEH, to lop off, abate, deduct. (L.) _ See Trench,
Select Glossary. Used asa pp. by Sir T. Elyot : ‘yet be nat these
in any parte defalcate of their condigne praises;’ The Governour,
b, ii, ci 10.—Late L. défalcare [also diffalcare, with prefix dif* for
dis-], to abate, deduct, take away. = L. dé, away; and Late L. falcare
(see falcastrare in Ducange), to cut with a sickle, from falc-, stem of
falx, a sickle; see Falchion.. Der, defalcat-ion. :

DEFAME, to destroy fame or reputation. (F,—L.) ME. defame,
diffame, used convertibly, and the same word. Chaucer has both
‘for his defame’ and ‘of his diffame;’ Six-text, Ellesmere MS.,
Group B, 3738, Group E, 730; (C. T. 14466, 8606.) The verb
diffamen is used by Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 321 ; and by
Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii. 491.—OF. defamer, to take away one’s
reputation (Roquefort, who gives a quotation) ; also desfamer, dif-
famer (Godefroy). =—L. diffamare, to spread abroad a report, esp. a
bad report; hence, to slander.—L. dif-, for dis-, apart, away; and
fama,areport. See Fame. Der. defam-at-ion, defam-at-or-y,

DEFAULT, a failing, failure, defect, offence. (F.—L.) ME.
defaute; the / was a later insertion, just as in fault, The pl. defautes,
meaning ‘faults,’ is in the Ancren Riwle, p. 136; Gower has defalte,
C.A. ii, 122; bk. iv. 1.3588. = OF. deffaute, defaute,fem., later defaut, de-
fault, masc.,a default, fault,asinCotgrave. Cf. AT’. defalte, Year-books
of Edw. I, 1392-3, p. 303. —OF. def-<L. dif-, for dis-, apart; and
faute, oldest form falte, a fault (=Ital. falta, a failing), from Late L.
fallita, a deficiency, fem. of *fallitus, a new pp. of L. fallere, to fail.
See Fault. Der. default, verb ; default-er.

DEFEASANCEH, a rendering null and void. (F.—L.) A law
term. . ‘ Defeizance, a condition relating to a deed, ... which being
performed,... the deed is disabled and made void ;’ Blount’s Law
Dict.ed. 1691. Spenser has defeasaunce = defeat; F.Q. i. 12, 12.—AF,
defesaunce (Godefroy), a rendering void. OF, defaisant, deffaisant,
desfaisant, pres. part. of defaire, deffaire, desfaire (Godefroy), to render
void, lit. to undo.—OF. des-<L. dis-, apart, [with the force of E,
verbal wn-]; and faire, to do, from L, facere, to do, See Defeat.
Der. From the like source, defeas-ible.

DEFEAT, to overthrow, frustrate a plan. (F.—L.) The verb is
the original, as far as Eng. is concerned. ME. defeiten, to defeat.
‘To ben defet,’ to be wasted ; Chaucer, Troil. vy. 618. Also defeted,
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. ii. pr. 1.1.7, Formed from the F. pp.
—OF, defait, desfait, pp. of defaire, desfaire, to defeat, undo; see
Cot. and Godefroy. = OF. des-< L. dis-, [with the force of E. verbal
un-]; and faire, to do, from L. facere, to do. See Feat, Fact, For-
feit. Der. defeat, sb.; Hamlet, ii. 2. 598. And see above.

DEFECATEH, to purify from dregs. (L.) Used as a pp. by Sir
T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 21.—L. défecitus, pp. of défecare,
to cleanse from dregs.—L. dé-, away, from; and fec-, stem of fex,
sediment, dregs; of unknown origin. Der. defecat-ion,

DEFECT, an ‘imperfection, want. (L.) [The instance from
Chaucer in R. is wrong; for defect read desert. The ME. word of
like meaning was defaute; see Default.] In Shak. Temp. iii. 1.
44.—L. défectus, a want.—L. défectus, pp. of déficere, to fail; orig.
a trans. verb, to undo, loosen. L. dé, down, from ; and facere, to do.
See Fact. Der. defect-ive, ~ively, -ive-ness; -ion; also (from L.
deficere) deficit, i.e. it is wanting, 3 pers. sing. present; deficient,
from the pres. part. ; deficienc-y. be


160 DEFENCE


DEFENCH, a protection, guard. (F.—L.) ME. defence, K.
Alisaunder, 2615. —OF. -defense.—L. défensa, a defending; Tertul-
lian —L. défensus (fem. défensa), pp. of défendere, to defend; see
below. Der. defence-less, -less-ly, -less-ness ; also (from pp. défensus),
defens-ive, -ive-ly, -ible, -ibl-y, -ibil-i-ty. Also fence, q. v.

DEFEND, to ward off, protect. (F.—L.) In early use. ME.
defenden; defendyng occurs as a sb. in K. Alisaunder, 676.—OF.
defendre.=—L. défendere, to defend.—L. dé, down; and (obsolete)
fendere, to stcike, occurring in the comp. dé-fendere, of-fendere. B.
Fendere is allied to Gk. 6eiveiw, to strike, and Skt. haz, to kill; from
/ GHwEN, to strike. Brugmann, i. § 654. Der. defend-er, defend-
ant (F. pres. pt.); also defence, q.v.; also fence, fender.

DEFER (1), to put off, delay. (F.—L.) ‘Deferred vnto the
yeares of discretion ;’ Tyndall, Works, p. 388, col. 1. ME. differren,
Gower, C. A. i. 262; bk. ii, 1. 3074. [A similar confusion between
the prefixes de- and dif- occurs in defame, q.v.]—OF. differer, ‘to
defer, delay ;’ Cot.—L. differre, to bear different ways ; also, to delay.
—L. dif- < dis-,apart; and ferre, to bear. See Bear (1). Doublet,
differ. @ Distinct from the following.

DEFER (2), to submit or lay before; to submit oneself. (F.—L.)
‘Hereupon the commissioners ... deferred the matter unto the earl
of Northumberland ;’ Bacon, Life of Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 65.
The sb. deference occurs in Dryden, On Satire, § 12.—OF. deferer,
“to charge, accuse, appeach ; deferer & un appel, to admit, allow, or
accept of, to give way unto an appeale;’ Cot.<L. déferre, to bring
down, to bring a thing before one. = L. dé-, down; and ferre, to bear.
See Bear (1). @ Distinct from the above. Der. defer-ence, -enti-al,
~enti-al-ly.

DEFIANCH, DEFICIENT ; see Defy, Defect.

DEFILE (1), to make foul, pollute. (Hybrid; L. and E.) A
clumsy compound, with a L. prefix to an E. base. The force of the
word is due to E. foul, but the form of the word was suggested by
OF. defouler, to trample under foot; so that the ME. defoulen, to
tread down, passed into (or gave way to) a later form defile (occasion-
ally defoil). [We also had befoul and befile.| Both sources must be
taken into account. A. We have (1) ME. defoulen, to tread down.
Rob. of Glouc., describing how King Edmund seized the robber
Liofa, says that he ‘ fram the bord hym drou, And defouled him ynder
him mid hond and mid fote,’ i.e., thrust him down; p. 277, 1. 5620.
Wyclif translates conculcatum est (A. V. ‘was trodden down’) by
was defoulid; Luke, viii. 5. ‘We defoule wip our fet pe fine gold
schene,’ as atranslation of ‘aurum pedibus conculcamus ;’ Alexander
and Dindimus, ed. Skeat, 1027. . This is the OF. defouler, ‘to tread
or trample on;’ Cot. Derived from L. dé-, down; and Late L.
fullare, to full cloth; see Fuller. B. Again, we have (2) ME.
defoulen, to defile, imitated from the former word, but with the
sense of E. foul engrafted on it. Wyclif translates coinguinat (A. V.
“defileth’) by defoulith; Matt. xv. 11. Later, we find defoylyd,
Sir T. More, Works, p. 771 a; afterwards defile, Much Ado, iii. 3. 60.
This change to defile was due to the influence of ME. fylen, the true
E. word for ‘to pollute,’ correctly used as late as in Shak. Macb. iii.
1.65: ‘have I fil’d my mind. This is the AS. fylan, to make foul,
whence the comp. Gfylan, to pollute utterly, in Gregory’s Pastoral,
§ 54, ed. Sweet, p. 421 ; also befylan, to defile; Bosworth. The
verb fylan is regularly formed, by the usual mutation of @ to ¥, from
the adj. ful, foul. See Foul. Der. defilement.

DEFILE (2), to pass along inafile. (F.—L.) ‘ Defile, to march
or go off, file by file; ’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. Hence ‘ Defile, or
Defilee, a straight narrow lane, through which a company of soldiers
can pass only in file;’ id. =F. défler, to file off, defile; an earlier
sense was to unravel, said of thread.=F. dé-< OF. des-, L. dis-,
apart; and filer, to spin threads, from /i/, ‘a thread, . . - also a file,
ranke, order,’ Cot.; from L. filum, a thread. See File (1). Der.
defile, sb., formerly defilee (as above), from F. déflé, pp. of défiler.

DEFINE, to fix the bounds of, describe. (F.—L.) ME. de-
Jinen ; ‘Ihave defyned that blisfulnesse is pe sovereyn good ;’ Chaucer,
tr. of Boethius, b. iii. pr. 2; 1. Cf. diffinicioun, Chaucer, C. T.
5607 (D 25). (The latter is a false form; for definicioun.)—OF.
definer, Romanic variant of definir, ‘to define, conclude, determine
or discuss, precisely to express, fully to describe ;’ Cot.—L. définire,
to limit, settle, define. = L. dé down; and finire, to set a bound, from
L, finis, a bound, end, See Finish, Der. defin-able, -ite, -ite-ly,
-ite-ness, -it-ion, -it-ive, -it-ive-ly,

DEFLAGRATION, a rapid burning. (L.) In Phillips (1706).
From L. acc. defligrationem, a great burning. =L. déflagrare, to
burn down, consume by fire.—L. dé, fully; flagrare, to burn; see
Flagrant.

DEFLECT, to turn aside, swerve aside. (L.) ‘ At some part of
the Azores it [the needle] deflecteth not;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, bk. ii.c. 2,§13. ‘ Deflexure, a bowing or bending ;’ Blount’s
Gloss. ed. 1674.—L. déflectere, to bend aside. L. dé, down, away;


DEGENERATE


and flectere, to bend; pp. flexus. See Flexible. Der. deflect-ion,
deflex-ure.

DEFLOUR, DEFLOWER, to deprive of flowers, to ravish.
(F.—L.) ME. deflouren; Gower, C. A. ii. 322; bk. v. 1. 5812.
Spelt deflowre, Spenser, F.Q. ii. 12. 75. = OF. defleurer, ‘to defloure,
to defile ;’ Cot. Late L. défldrare, to gather flowers, to ravish. —L.
dé, from, away; and flor-, decl. stem of flds,a flower. See Flower.
q Cf. also OF. desflorir, with the same sense (prefix dis-). Observe
the use of floures in the sense of ‘ natural vigour’ or ‘ bloom of youth ;’
Gower, C.A. ii. 267; bk.v.1.4174. Der. deflour-er; also (from pp.
défloratus) deflorate, deflorat-ion.

DEFLUXION, a flow or discharge of humours. (L.) Medical.
‘ Defluxion of salt rheum ;” Howell’s Letters, b. i. sec. 2. let. 1.—L.
acc. défluxionem, from nom. défluxio, a flowing down. =L. dé, down;
and fluxus, pp. of fluere, to flow. See Fluid.

DEFORCE, to deprive by force. (F.—L.) Legal. ‘ Deforsour,
one that overcomes and casts out by force. See the difference be-
tween a deforsour and a disseisor, in Cowel, on this word;’ Blount’s
Gloss. ed. 1674.—OF. deforcier, desforcier, MF. deforcer, ‘to dis-
seise, dispossess, violently take, forcibly pluck from ;’ Cot. Cf. Late
L. difforcidre, to take away by violence; Ducange. = OF. de-, for des-
<L. dis-, apart, away; and force, power, from Late L. fortia, power,
from L. fortis, strong. See Force. Der. deforce-ment ; defors-our
(obsolete).

DEFORM, to disfigure, misshape. (F.—L.) ME. deformen, def-
formen. The pp. defformyd is in Wyclif, 2 Cor. iii. 7. ‘ Deformed
is the figure of my face;’ The Testament of Creseide, 1. 448.—OF.
difformer, to deform (Godefroy) ; with dif- for dis-, in place of de-.—
L. déformare, to deform ; déformis, deformed, ugly.—L. dé, away;
and forma, beauty, form. See Form. Der. deform-i-ty, ME.
deformité, Court of Love, 1169 ; deform-at-ion.

DEFRAUD, to deprive by fraud. (F.—L.) ME. defrauden,
Wyclif, Luke, xix. 8 ; P. Plowman, B. vii. 69.—OF. defrauder, ‘to
defraud ;’ Cot.=L. défraudare, to deprive by fraud. —L. dé, away,
from ; and fraud-, stem of fraus, fraud. See Fraud.

DEFRAY, to pay costs. (F.—L. and G.) In Cotgrave; and see
Spenser, F..Q. i. 5. 42.—MF. defrayer, ‘to defray, to discharge, to
furnish, or bear all the charges of,’ Cot.; OF. desfrayer (Littré).—
OF. des-, for L. dis-, away; and frai, sing. of frais, cost, expense,
now used as a plural sb, Cotgrave also has the form fraiz ( =fraits),
the pl. of a form frait ; and Hatzfeld cites OF. fres, pl. B. The OF.
sing. fre, later frait, frai, is equivalent to Low L. fredum, a fine,
composition, hence, a cost. =OHG. fridu (G. friede), peace; also, a fine
for a breach of the peace. Korting, §§ 3943, 3968. Der. defray-ment.

DEFT, neat, dexterous. (E.) In Chapman, tr. of Homer's Iliad,
b.i.l. 11 from end. The adv. deftly is commoner ; Macb. iv. 1. 68.
ME. dafte, defte, (1) becoming, mild, gentle, (2) innocent, whence
the sense of ‘foolish,’ as in prov. E. daft; Ormulum, 2175, 4610;
Bestiary, 37; cf. dafftelike, fittingly, becomingly, Orm. 1215. AS:
defte, as seen in ge-defie, mild, gentle, meek, Matt. xxi. 5; ge-
deftlice, fitly, seasonably, /Elfred, tr. of Gregory’s Past. Care, ed.
Sweet, p. 97, 1.15; and see 1.17. Cf. also deftan, and ge-deftan,
to prepare, Elf. Hom. i. 212, 362. B. The? is merely a suffix, and
disappears in prov. E. and ME. daff, daffe, a foolish person, P.
Plowman, B. i. 138; formed from the base da/-, to fit, appearing
in AS. ge-daf-en, fit (Grein), the pp. of a lost strong verb *dafan,
to fit, suit. Cf. Du. deftig, grave, respectable, genteel; Low G.
deftig, fit, good, excellent ; Goth. ga-dofs, ga-dobs, fitting, fit, from
ga-daban, to happen, befall, to be fit, All from Teut. base *dad, to
suit; Fick, i. 633, iii. 144. Cf also Dapper. Doublet, daft, in
a sinister sense, as, ‘ dafte, doltishe,’ in Levins. Der. deft-ly, as
above ; deft-ness.

DEFUNCT, deceased, dead. (L.) Lit. ‘having fully performed
the course of life.’ Shak. has defunct, Cymb. iv. 2. 358; defunction,
Hen. V, i. 2. 58 3 defunctive, Phoenix, 1. 14.—L. défunctus, pp. of
défungt, to perform fully. —L. dé, down, off, fully; and fungi, to
perform. See Function. Der. defunct-ive, -ion (above).

DEFY, to renounce allegiance, challenge, brave. (F.—L.) In
early use. ME. defyen, deffien; Chaucer, C. T. 15177 (B 4361). The
sb. defying is in K. Alisaunder, 7275.—MF. defier, ‘to defie, chal-
lenge;’ Cot. Earlier spelling deffier, desfier (Godefroy), with the
sense ‘ to renounce faith.’ = Late L. diffidare, to renounce faith, defy.
=L. dif-, for dis-, apart ; and fidus, faithful, fidere, to trust; allied
to jides, trust, faith. See Faith. Der. defi-ance, ME. defyaunce,
Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 92; defi-er. .

DEGENERATE, having become base. (L.) Always an adj. in
Shak.; see Rich. II, i. 1.144; 11. 1. 262.—L. dégeneratus, degenerated,
pp. of dégenerare.—L. dégener, adj. base, ignoble.—L. dé, down ;
and gener- (for *genes-), stem of genus, race, kind, cognate with E.
kin. See Kin. Der. degenerate, verb; -ly, -ness ; degenerat-ion,
-ive; degenerac-y. - é ' :


DEGLUTITION


DEGLUTITION, the act of swallowing. (F.—L.) ‘Deglutition,
a devouring or swallowing down;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674. —MF.
deglutition; see F, déglutition in Hatzfeld. Coined from L. dé,
down, and glitit-us, pp. of glitire, to swallow. See Glut.

DEGRADH, to lower in rank, debase. (F-—L.) In Sir T. More,
Works, p. 624. ‘That no man schulde be degraded;’ Trevisa, v. 35.
The pp. is spelt degradyt, Barbour, Bruce, i. 175.—OF. degrader,
‘to degrade, or deprive of degree, office, estate, or dignity ;” Cot.—
Late L. dégradare, to deprive of rank.—L. dé, down, away; and
gradus, rank. See Grade. Der. degrad-at-ion; and see degree.

DEGREE, rank, state, position, extent. (F.—L.) In early use.
ME. degre, degree; Chaucer, C.T.g901 (E 2027). The pl. degrez
is in Hali Meidenhad, p. 23, 1. 21.—OF. degre, degret, a degree, step,
rank. Cf. Prov. degrat. ‘This word answers to a type *dégradus ;’
Brachet.—L. dé, down; and gradus, a step, grade. See Degrade.

DEHISCENT, gaping. (L.) <A botanical term. —L. déhiscent-,
stem of déhiscens, pres. pt. of déhiscere, to gape open.—L. dé, down,
fully ; and hiscere, to yawn, gape, inceptive of hiare, to yawn. See
Hiatus. Der. dehiscence.

DEIFY, to account as a god. (F.—L.) ME. deifyen; ‘that they
may noght be deified;’ Gower, C.A. ii. 153; bk. v. 1. 776.—OF.
deifier, ‘to deifie ;’ Cot.—Late L. deijicdre. —L. deificus, accounting
as gods.—L. dei-, nom. deus, God ; and facere, to make, which
becomes jic- in composition. See Deity. Der. (from L. deificus)
deific, deific-al; (like L. pp. deificatus) deificat-ion, Gower, C. A.
ii. 158; bk. v. 1.934.

DEIGN, to condescend, think worthy. (F.—L.) ME. deignen,
deinen; Gower, C. A. iii. 11; bk. vi. 1. 293. Commonly used as a
teflexive verb. ‘Him ne deinede no3t;’ Rob. of Glouc. p. 557,
1.11645. ‘ Deineth hir herte reste; ’ Chaucer, Troil. iii, 1281.—AF.
deigne, Edw. Confessor, 4489; pres. s. of OF. digner, Godefroy. = L.
dignari, to deem worthy.—L. dignus, worthy. See Dignity,
Dainty. Der. dis-dain, q.v.

DEITY, the divinity. (F.—L.) ME. deit#é, Romaunt of the Rose,
5656; Chaucer, C. T. 11359 (F 1047).—OF. deité, a deity. =—L.
deitatem, acc. of deitds, deity.—L. dei-, nom. deus, god; cf. diuus,
godlike. Allied to W. duw, God; Gael. and Ir. diz, God; Gk. dios,
divine; Skt. deva-, a god; daiva-, divine. And see Tuesday.
Der. From the same source, dei-fy, q.v.; also dei-form, dei-st, -sm.

DEJECT, to cast down. (L.) ©‘ Christ detected himself euen vnto
the helles;” Udal, Ephes. c. 4. v. 9.—L. déiectus, pp. of déicere
(déiicere), to cast down, = L. dé, down; and iacere, tocast. See Jet (1).
Der. deject-ed, -ed-ly, -ed-ness, -ion.

DELATE, to accuse (in Scots law); to report. (L.) ‘If a
minister be thus left at liberty to delate sinners from the pulpit ;’
Case of Jas. Thomson, in App. to Boswell’s Johnson.=Late L.
délatare, to accuse; used as frequent. of déferre, to defer.—L. dé,


' fully ; and /at-us, for dlatus, pp. of tollere, to take away. . See Delay.


DELAY, vb., to put off, to linger. (F.—L.) In early use; the
pp. delaied occurs in Rob. of Glouc. p. 513, 1. 10563; the sb. delai
is in Layamon, ii. 308.—OF. delayer, dilater, given as variants of
deleer in Godefroy. It answers in sense to L. dilatdre, to defer, delay,
put off; which would properly give only OF. dileer. B..The L.
dilatare'is from dilatus, deferred, put off. [The pp. dilatus is used as
a pp. of differre, though from a different root.]—L. di-, for dis-,
apart ; and /dtus, borne, carried, for ¢latus, allied to L. tollere, to lift ;
cf. Gk. rAnrés, enduring.=4/TEL, to lift. @] Since dilatus is
used as pp.\of differre, the word delay is equivalent to defer; see
Defer (1). The OF. spelling delaier (with ai) causes a difficulty.
The AF, form deslaier occurs in the Liber Albus, p. 217. Cf.
Gascon delaya, to delay (Moncaut). Der. delay, sb.; OF. delai, sb.,
from the verb, Note AF. -delai, sb., delaier, vb., in the Statutes of
the Realm, pp. 28, 38 (1275).

DELECTABLE, pleasing. (F.—L.) [The usual ME. word was
delitable; see Delight. The quotations in Richardson are mislead-
ing; in the first and second of them, read delitable and delitably. The
occurrence of dilectable in the Romaunt of the Rose, 1440, is due to
Thynne’s edition, and the occurrence of delectable in the only edition
of Mandeville’s Travels, c. 14, p. 155, is suspicious.] - However, we
find dilectable in Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 223; delectable in Caxton’s
Golden Legend, St. Poul first Hermit, § 1; and in the Bible of
1551, 2 Sam. i. 26, where the A. V. has ‘ pleasant.’ Also in Shak.
Rich. II, ii. 3. 7.— OF. delectable, ‘delectable ;’ Cot. (first found in
14th c.)—L. délectabilis, delightful. —L. délectare, pp. délectatus, to
‘delight. See Delight. Der. delectabl-y, delectable-ness, delect-at-ion.

DELEGATE, a chosen deputy. (L.) Cockeram (1642) has:
‘ Delegate, to assigne, to send in commission.’ The sb. occurs in the
State Trials,.an. 1613, Countess of Essex (R.).—L. délégatus, pp. -of
délégare, to send to a place, depute, appoint.—L. dé, from ; and
‘légare, to send, depute, appoint, from /ég-, stem of lex, law. - See
Legate, Legal. Der. delegate, verb; delegat-ion.


DELL 161


DELETE, to erase, blot out. (L.) ‘Studiously ‘deleting the
character of that sacrament;’ T. Fuller, A Pisgah Sight, bk. iii.
sect. 10. § 2.—L, délétus, pp. of délére, to destroy.—L. dé, down,
away; and -/ére, an unused verb closely related to Jinere, to daub,
smear, erase. Cf, the pt. t. déléui with Jéui, pt. t. of linere (Bréal),

DELETERIOUS, hurtful, noxious. (Gk.) Used by Sir T.
Browne, Vulgar Errors, b. iii.c. 7, § 4. ‘Tho’ stored with deletery
med’cines ;”. Butler, Hudibras, pt. i. c. 2, 1. 317.—Late L. délétérius,
noxious (with -ous for -us); merely Latinised from Gk. =—Gk. 5yA7-
THptos, noxious. = Gk. d7AnTHp, a destroyer.—= Gk, d7A€opat, I do a
hurt, I harm, injure.

DELF, a kind of earthenware. (Du.) ‘ Delf, earthenware; counter-
feit China, made at Delft ;’ Johnson. Named from Delft in Holland.
‘Delft, S. Holland, a town founded about.1074; famous for Delft
earthenware, first manufactured here about 1310. The sale of delft
greatly declined after the introduction of potteries into Germany and
England ;” Haydn, Dict. of Dates. B. The -¢ is excrescent ; the old
name of the place was Delf; and it was named from the canal on
which it stood.= WFlem. delf, a canal; De Bo.= WFlem. and Du.
delven, to dig; see Delve. (Franck.)

DELIBERATE, carefully considered. (L.) ‘Of a deliberate
purpose ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 214 f. [There was an earlier
ME. verb deliberen; ‘For which he gan deliberen for the beste;’
Chaucer, Troil. iv. 169.]=—L. déliberatus, pp. of déliberare, to consult.
=L. dé, down, thoroughly ; and Jtbrare, to weigh, from libra, a
balance. See Liibrate. Der. deliberate, verb; -ly, -ness; deliberat-
ion (deliberacioun, Gower, C. A. iii. 352; bk. viii. 1. 2302), -ive, -ive-ly.

DELICATE, alluring, dainty, nice, refined. (L.) ME. delicat,
P. Plowman, C.ix. 279. Chaucer has dedicat, C. T. 14389 (B 3661) ;
delicacie, id. 14397 (B 3669).—L. délicatus, luxurious; cf. délicia,
luxury, pleasure; délicere, to amuse, allure, from dé, away, greatly,
and lacere, to allure, entice. See Delicious. Der. delicate-ly,
-ness, delicac-y.

DELICIOUS, very pleasing, delightful. (F.—L.) ME. deli-
ciouse, King Alisaunder, 38; delicious, Gower, C. A. iii. 243 bk. vi.
1. 671. = OF. delicieus (Godefroy). = Late L. délictdsus, pleasant, choice.
=-L. délicia, pleasure, luxury. See Delicate. Der. delicious-ly,
-ness.

DELIGHT, great pleasure; vb., to please. (F.—L.) A false
spelling. ME. delit, sb.; deliten, verb. Of these, the sb. is found
very early, in O. Eng. Homilies, i. 187, 1. 17, The verb is in
Chaucer, C. T. Group E, 997 (Cler. Tale). [In French, the verb
appears to be the older.]—OF. deliter, earlier deleiter, to delight ;


‘whence delit, earlier deleit, sb. delight.—L. délectare, to delight ;


frequentative of délicere, to allure. —L. dé, fully ; and Jacere, to allure.
See Delectable, Delicate. Der. delight-ful, -ful-ly, -ful-ness,
-some; all hybrid compounds, with E. suffixes.

DELINEATE, to draw, sketch out. (L.) Orig. app. ‘ Desti-
nate to one age or time, drawne, as it were, and delineate in one table; ’
Bacon, On Learning, by G. Wats, b. ii. c. 8 (R.). So also in Edw. IIL.,
A. ii. sc, 2.1. 75.—L. délineatus, pp. of délinedre, to sketch in outline.
=L. dé, down; and lineare, to mark out, from Jinea, a line. See
Iiine. Der. delineat-or, -ion.

DELINQUENT, failing in duty. (L.) Orig. a pres. part., used
as adj. ‘A delinquent person ;’ State Trials, an. 1640; Earl Strafford
(R.). As sb. in Shak. Mach, iii. 6. 12.—L. délinquent-, stem of
délinquens, omitting one’s duty, pres. part. of délinguere, to omit, —L.
dé, away, from; and linguere, to leave. Der. delinguenc-y.

DELIQUESCE, to melt, become liquid. (L.). A chemical term.
=L. déliquescere, to melt, become liquid. —L. dé, down, away ; and
liquescere, to become liquid, inceptive form of Jiguére, to be wet.
See Liquid. . Der. deliquesc-ent, -ence.

DELIRIOUS, wandering in mind, insane. (L.) A coined word,
made from the L. délirium, which: was also adopted into English.
‘Delirium this is call’d, which is mere dotage ;” Ford, Lover’s Melan-
choly, A. iii. sc. 3. The more correct form was delirous. We find
in Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674: ‘Delirium, dotage ;’ and ‘Delirous, that
doteth and swerveth from reason ;’ but in Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715,
the latter word has. become delirious. L. délirium, madness; from
délirus, one that goes out of the furrow in ploughing, hence, crazy,
doting, mad.=L. dé, from; and Jira, a furrow, allied to OHG. Jeisa,
G. g-leis, a track, a rut. Der. delirious-ly, -ness.

DELIVER, to liberate, set free. (F.—L.) ME. deliueren,
deliveren; King Alisaunder, 1319, 31973; Rob. of Glouc., pp. 382,


462; ll. 7836, 9502.—OF. delivrer, to set free. —Late L. déliberare,


to set free. — L. dé, from; and liberare, to free, from liber, free, which
may be connected with libido, pleasure, Jibet, it pleases, and the E.
lief. Brugmann, i. § 102. See Lief. Der. deliver-ance, -er, -y.
DELL, a dale, valley. (E.) ME. delle, Reliquiz Antique, ii. 7
(Stratmann); pl. dellun (=dellen), Anturs of Arthur, st. 4. AS. dell,
n.; Cart. Saxon., ed. Birch, i. 547; ii. 71. 4 MDu. delle (Hexham) ;
M


DELTA


EFries. delle. See Notes on E. Etym., p.65. Teut. type *dal-jom.
A variant of dale. See Dale.

DELTA, the Greek name of the letter d. (Gk.—Phcenician.)
[Hence deltoid. ‘ Deltoides (in anatomy) a triangular muscle which is
inserted to the middle of the shoulder-bone, and is shaped like the
Greek letter A;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. Deltoid is the Gk. 5eAroesdis,
delta-shaped, triangular. Gk. 5€A7a; and e/5os, appearance.] The
Gk, 5éA7a answers to, and was borrowed from, the Heb. daleth, the


162


Phcenician name of the fourth letter of the alphabet. The orig.
sense of daleth was ‘a door of a tent.’
DELUDE, to deceive, cajole. (L.) ME. deluden. ‘That it


deludis the wittes outwardly ;’ Henrysoun, Test. of Creseide, 1. 509.
— L. déliidere, to mock at, banter, deceive; pp. délisus. —L. dé, fully;
and lidere, to play, jest. Der. delus-ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness, -10n, -or-y ;
all from pp. déliisus.

DELUGE, a flood, inundation. (F.—L.) In Lenvoy de Chaucer
a Skogan, l. 14.—OF. deluge, ‘a deluge;’ Cot.—L. diluuium, a
deluge. = L. diluere, to wash away. =L, di, for dis-, apart ; and luere,
to wash, allied to /ave. See Lave.

DELVE, to dig with a spade. (E.) ME. deluen (with u for v),
pt. t. dalf; Rob. of Glouc. pp. 131, 395; ll. 2772, 8134. AS. delfan,
to dig; Grein, i. 187.4-Du., delven, to dig; OHG. bidelban, MHG.
telben, todig. Allied to Russ, dolbite, to hollow out; OPruss, dalp-tan,
a punch. Brugmann, i. §§ 493, 521 (2). Der. delv-er.

DEMAGOGUE, a leader of the people. (F.—Gk.) It occurs
in the Eikon Basilike; and Milton, Ans. to Eikon Basilike, calls it
a ‘goblin word.’ =F. demagogue, a word ‘first hazarded by Bossuet
[died A.D. 1704, 30 years after Milton], and counted so bold a
novelty that for long|?] none ventured to follow him in its use;’
Trench, Eng. Past and Present. Yet it had previously been em-
ployed by Oresme, in the 14th c. (Littré),— Gk. dnuaywyds, a popular
leader. Gk. dny-, base of duos, a country district, also the people ;
and dywyds, leading, from ayew, to lead, which is from 4/ AG, to
drive.

DEMAND, to ask, require. (F.—L.) In Shak. All’s Well, ii.
1, 21; andin Caxton (N.E.D.). [But the sb. demand (ME. demaunde)
was in early use, and occurs in Rob. of Glouc. p. 500, 1. 10285 ;
' Chaucer, C, T. 4892 (B 472).]—OF. demander.—L. démandiare, to
give in charge, entrust; in Late L., to demand (Ducange).=L. dé,
down, wholly; and mandare, to entrust, consign. See Mandate.
Der. demand, sb.; -able, -ant (law French),

DEMARCATION, DEMARKATION, a marking off of
bounds, a limit. (Span.—L. and MHG.) ‘The speculative line of
demarcation;’ Burke, On the Fr. Revolution (R.).—Span. demarca-
cion (see N.E.D.); whence also F. démarcation, in the phr. ligne de
demarcation, a line of demarcation. = L. dé, down; and Span. marcar,
to mark, a word of Germanic origin. See Mark. @ It will be seen
that the sb. démarcation is quite distinct from the F. verb demarquer,
to dis-mark, i.e. to take away a mark. The prefix must be L. dé-,
not L. dis-, or the word is reversed in meaning.

DEMEAN (1), to conduct; ref. to behave. (F.—L.) ME.
demainen, demeinen, demenen; Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, ii. 451.—OF.
demener, to conduct, treat, manage (Godefroy).—OF. de-, from L.
dé, down, fully; and mener, to conduct, control, from Late L. mindre,
to drive cattle, to lead from place to place; L. mindre, to urge, drive
on; minayi, to threaten. See Menace. Der. demean-our, q. v.

DEMEAN (2), to debase, lower. (Hybrid; L. and E.) Perhaps
suggested by Demean (1); but really formed, on the analogy of
debase, from the L. prep. dé, down, and the E, mean, adj. base. See
Mean (2).

DEMEANOUR, behaviour. (F.—L.) A coined word; ME. de-
menure, from demenen, to demean; see Demean (1). ‘L for leude,
D for demenure;’ Remedie of Loue, st. 63; in Chaucer’s Works, ed.
1561, fol. cccxxiiii. Demeanyng occurs in the same stanza, used as
asb. Cf. Spenser, F. Q. iv. Io. 49.

DEMENTED, mad. (L.) The pp. of the old verb demente, to
madden. ‘Which thus seke to demente the symple hartes of the
people ;’ Bale, Apology, fol. 80.—L. démentare, to drive out of one’s
mind (Acts, viii. 11) ; cf. démentia, madness. —L. dé, away from; and
ment-, stem of mens, mind. See Mental.

DEMERIT, ill desert. (F.—L.) In Shak. Macb. iv. 3. 226;
but also used in a good sense, i.e. merit, Cor. i. 1..276,— OF, demerite,
‘desert, merit, deserving; also (the contrary) a disservice, demerit,
misdeed, ill carriage, ill deserving; in which sense it is most com-
monly used at this day;’ Cot.—Late L. démeritum, a fault.—L.
démerére, to deserve (whence the good sense of the word).—L, dé-,
down, fully; and merére, meréri, to deserve. See Merit.

DEMESNE, orig. possession; also a. manor-house, with lands.
(F.—L.) Also written demain, and a doublet of domain. ME.
demein, demeyn, a domain; Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 7;
Chaucer, C. T. 14583 (B 3855).


[The spelling demesne is. false, due,


DEMURE


probably to confusion with OF. mesnee or maisnie, a household; see
Demain in Blount’s Law Dict.]—AF. demeine, Laws of Will. L., § 173
demene, Year-books of Edw. I., 1292-3, p. 5; demesne, id., 1302-3, -
p- 19; OF. demaine, demeine, orig. an adj., specially belonging to;
whence also E. domain. So also Cot. gives: ‘Demain, a demaine, the
same as Domain.’ See Domain.

DEMTI,, a prefix, signifying ‘half. (F.—L.) OF. demi, m. demie,
f, ‘halfe, demy ;’ Cot.—L. dimidium, half.—L. di- =dis-, apart; and
medius, middle. See Medium, Medial. Der. demi-god, demi-
semiquaver, &c. ; also demy, q. v. ‘

DEMIJOHN, a glass vessel with a large body and small neck,
enclosed in wickerwork. (F.) Spelt dame-jeanne in Falconer’s Dict.
of the Marine (1769).—F. damejeanne (Littré). Much disputed ; and
prob, zot of Eastern origin. The F. form seems to be right as it
stands; cf. Span. dama-juana, a demijohn.—F. dame (Span. dama),
lady; and Feanne (Span. Fuana), Jane, Joan. See N.E.D.

DEMISE, transference, decease. (F.—L.) Shak. has the vb.
demise, to bequeath; Rich. III, iv. 4. 247. For the sb., see Blount’s
Law Dict.—OF. demise, also desmise, fem. of desmis, ‘ displaced, de-
posed, ... dismissed, resigned;’ Cot. ‘This is the pp. of OF. des-
mettre, to displace, dismiss. L. dimittere, to send away, dismiss. —L,
di- = dis- (OF. des-), away, apart; and mittere, to send. See Dismiss.
[The sense changed from ‘resigned’ to ‘resigning.’] Der. demise, vb.

DEMOCRACY, popular government. (F.—L.—Gk.) Formerly
written democraty, Milton, Areopagitica, ed. Hales, p. 4.—MF. de-
mocratie, ‘a democratie, popular government;’ Cot.— Med. L. démo-
cratia, = Gk. dnpoxparia, popular government. —Gk. dnyo0-, for Sqpos,
a country-district, also, the people; and xparéw, I am strong, I rule,
from xparos, strength, allied to xparvs, strong, which is cognate with
E. hard. Der. democrat, -ic, -ic-al, -ic-al-ly.

DEMOLISH, to overthrow, destroy. (F.—L.) ‘Were not the
tailor’s wife to be demolish’d;’ Ben Jonson, The New Inn, A. iv. sc,
3. And in Ralegh, Hist. of the World, b. ii. c. 20..s. 2 (R.).—OF.
demoliss-, inchoative stem ofthe verb demolir, ‘to demolish ;’ Cot. =
L. déméliri, pp. démdlitus, rarely démdlire, to pull down, demolish.
= L,. dé, down; and mdlirz, to endeavour, throw, displace, from moles,
a heap, also labour, effort. See Mole (3). Der. demolit-ion.

DEMON, an evil spirit. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Hen. V, ii. 2.
121; and in Trevisa, tr. of Higden, iii. 279. The adj. demoniak is in
Chaucer, C. T. 7874 (D 2292).—OF. demon, ‘a devill, spirit, hob-
goblin;’ Cot. = L. demon, a demon, spirit. — Gk. daiuwr, a god, genius,
spirit; also fate. Perhaps meaning ‘ distributer;’ from daiopa, I
impart (Prellwitz). Der. (from L. stem demoni-) demoni-ac, -ac-al,
-ac-al-ly; also (from Gk. d5atpovo-) demono-latry, i.e. devil-worship,
from Gk. Aarpeia, service; also demono-logy, i.e. discourse about
demons, from Gk. Aéyos, discourse, which from Aeyerv, to say.

DEMONSTRATE, to show, explain fully. (L.) In Shak. Hen.
V, iv. 2. 54. Much earlier are ME. demonstratif, Chaucer, C. T.
7854 (D 2272); demonstracioun, Ch. tr. of Boethius, b. ii. pr. 4.
1, 122; demonstrable, Rom. of Rose, 4688.—L. démonstratus, pp. of
démonstrare, to show fully.=—L. dé, down, fully; and monstrare, to
show. See Monster. Der. demonstrat-ion; also demonstra-ble,
from L. demonstra-bilis ; demonstrat-ive, formerly demonstratif (see
above), from MF. demonstratif (Cotgrave), which from L. démon-
stratiuus ; demonstrative-ly, -ness.

DEMORALISE, to corrupt in morals. (F.—L.) A late word.
First in 1793. Todd cites a quotation, dated 1808.—F. démoraliser,
to demoralise ; Hamilton.—F. dé-, here=OF. des-<L. dis-, apart;
and moraliser, ‘to expound morally;’ Cot. See Moral. Der.
demoralisat-ion,

DEMOTIC, pertaining to the people. (Gk.) Modern. Not in
Todd.=—Gk. Snpotiuds, pertaining to the people. Formed, with
suffix -t-xo-, from SnudTns, acommoner. This is formed, with suffix
-rns (denoting the agent), from d5nyo-, for S7uos, a country-district,
also, the people. Cf. Olrish dam, a retinue. ;

DEMULCENT, soothing. (L.) Modern. The verb demulce
is once used by Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. i. c. 20. § 1.—L. dé-
mulcent-, stem of pres. pt. of démulcére, to stroke down, caress; hence,
to soothe. == L. dé, down; and mulcére, to stroke, allay. Cf. Skt. mrg¢,
to stroke.

DEMUR, to delay, hesitate, object. (F.—L.) ‘If the parties
demurred in our iudgement ;’ Sir T, More, Works, p. 215 h. ME. de-
meoren (eo=F, eu), Ancren Riwle, p. 242.—OF. demeurer, demourer,
‘to abide, stay, tarry;’ Cot.—L, démorari, to retard, delay. —L. dé,
from, fully; and morari, to delay, from mora, hesitation, delay. Der.
demurr-er, -age.

DEMURE, sober, staid, grave. (F.—L.) See Spenser, F. Q. ii.
1.6. [And see Trench, Select Glossary, who points out that the
word was once used in a thoroughly good sense.] Demurely occurs
in La Belle Dame sans Merci, l. 246 ; and demure in Lydgate, Minor
Poems, pp. 19, 29. Coined by prefixing de (for L, dé-, very) to ME.


ha


DEMY


mure, mature, calm, demure, which occurs in Polit. Rel. and Love
Poems, ed. Furnivall, p. 107, 1. 139; Sir J. Holland, The Howlat,
1. 83; &c.—OF. meur (F. mtr), mature.—L, matirus, mature. See
Mature. @ Palsgrave has; ‘Sadly, demeurement; Soberly, sadly,


‘meurement, p. 841. Demeurement=L. dé matira mente.


DEMY, a certain size of paper. (F.—L.) <A printer’s term; an-
other spelling of Demi., q. v.

DEN, a cave, lair of a wild beast. (E.) ME. den; Will. of Palerne,
20. AS. denn, a cave, sleeping-place; L. ‘cubile;’ Grein, i. 187.4
MDu. denne, a den, cave; Kilian. @ Probably closely allied to


ME. dene, a valley, AS. denu, a valley; Grein, i. 187; still preserved


in place-names, as Tenter-den, Rotting-dean,

DENARY, relating to tens. (L.) Modern arithmetic employs
‘the denary scale.’ =—L. déndrius, containing ten.—L. pl. déni ( =dec-
ni), ten by ten. Formed on the base of decem, ten. See Decimal.
Der. Hence denier (below).

DENDROID, resembling a tree. (Gk.) Modern. From Gk.
devipo-, for 5évdpoyv, a tree; and -edys, like, from «dos, form. The
Gk, d€vdpov appears to be a reduplicated form, connected with Gk.
dpis, a tree, an oak, and E, tree; Curtius,i. 295. See Tree. Der.
From the same source is dendro-logy, i.e. a discourse on trees, from
Adyos, a discourse.

DENTAL, DENIER; see Deny.

DENIER, a (former) French coin, the twelfth part of a sou. (F.
—L.) In Shak. Rich. IT], i. 2. 252.—F. denier, ‘the tenth part of
an English penny;’ Cot.—L. dénarium, acc. of déndrius, a Roman
coin worth Io as-es.—L. dén-i, ten by ten, from L. dec-em, ten; and
suffix -drius. See Denary.

DENIZEW, a naturalized citizen, inhabitant. (F.—L.) For-
merly denisen, Udal, Matt. c. 5. v. 5. [The verb to denize or dennize
also occurs. ‘The Irish language was free dennized [naturalized] in
the English pale;’ Holinshed, desc. of Ireland,c.1.] ‘In the Liber
Albus of the City of London the F. deinzein [also denzein, denszein],
the original of the E. word, is constantly opposed to jforeinx, applied
to traders within and without the privileges of the city franchise re-
spectively. Ex. ‘Qe chescun qavera lowe ascun ou ascuns terres ou
tenementz de denszein ou de forein deinz la fraunchise de la citee;”’
p- 448;’ Wedgwood. B. Thus E. denizen is from AF. deinzein, a word
formed by adding the suffix -ein = L. -dnus (cf. OF. vilein =L. uillanus)
to the AF’. deinz, within, which occurs in the above quotation, and is
the word now spelt dans.—L. dé intus, from within; which became
@einz, dens, dens, and finally dans.—L. dé, from; and intus, within;
see Internal. Der. denizen-ship.

DENOMINATH, to designate. (L.) ‘Those places, which were
denominated of angels and saints;’ Hooker (in Todd). =—L. déndmina-
tus, pp. of déndmindre, to name.—L. dé, down; and ndmindre, to
name, from ndmin-, stem of ndmen, a name. See Noun, Name.


Der. denominat-ion (in Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. i. c. 2. § 1;


and in Usk, Test. of Love, bk. ii. c. 9, 1. 162) ; denominat-ion, -al, -al-
ism; denominat-ive, -or.

DENOTH#, to mark, indicate, signify. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, i. 2.
83.— OF. denoter, ‘to denote, shew;’ Cot.—L. dénotare, to mark out.
—L. dé, down; and xofdre, to mark, from ofa, a mark. See Note.

DENOUEMENT, the unravelling of the plot of a story. (F. —
L.) ‘The denouement, as a pedantic disciple of Bossu would call it,
of this poem [The Rape of the Lock] is well conducted ;’ Dr. War-
ton, Ess. on Pope, i. 250 (Todd).—F. dénouement ; formed with suffix
-ment from the verb dénouer, to untie.—F. dé<L. dis-, apart; and
nouer, to tie in a knot, from noue, a knot, which is from L, nédum,
acc. of nddus,a knot. See Node.

DENOUNCE, to announce, threaten. (F.—L.) ME. denounsen.
Wyclif has we denounsiden to translate dénunciabamus; 2 Thess. iii. 10.
= OF. denoncer ; Cot. —L. dénuntiadre,to declare. — L; dé, down, fully;
and nuntidre, to announce, from nuntius, a messenger. See Nuncio.
Der. denounce-ment ; also (like L. pp. dénuntiatus) denunciat-or, -or-y.

DENSE, close, compact. (L.) In Milton, P. L. ii. 948 ; Bacon,
Nat. Hist. § 29.—L. densus, thick, close. 4+ Gk. dacvs, thick. Brug-
mann, i. § 851. Der. dense-ness, dens-i-ty ; also con-dense, q.v.

DENT, a mark of a blow. (E.) A-variant of dint; the orig. sense
was merely ‘a blow.’ ME. dent, dint, dunt. Spelt dent or dint in-
differently in Will. of Palerne, 2757, 3750, 1234, 2784. See further
under Dint. Der. dent, verb. @ Partly confused with dent, an
indentation; from F. dent, a tooth (below).

DENTAL, belonging to the teeth. (L.) ‘The Hebrews have
assigned which letters are labial, which dental, and which guttural ;’
Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 198. Formed with suffix -al (=L. ~alis) from
L. dent-, stem of dens, a tooth, cognate with E. tooth. See Tooth.

DENTATED, furnished with teeth. (L.) ‘ Dentated, having
teeth;’ Bailey, vol. ii.mL. dentaius, toothed; formed with suffix
-dlus, a pp. form, from dent-, stem of dens, a tooth. See Tooth.

DENTICLE, a small tooth. (L.) In Chaucer’s Astrolabe,


DEPONENT 163


pt. i. § 23. ‘ Denticle, a little tooth ;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674.—1.
denti-cu-lus, formed with dimin. suffixes -cu- and -lu-s from denti-, de-
clensional stem of dens, a tooth. See Tooth. Der. denticul-ate,
-at-ion.

DENTIFRICE, tooth-powder. (F.—L.) It occurs in Blount’s
Gloss. ed. 1674; Ben Jonson, Catiline, Act ii. (Sempronia) ; and in
Holland’s Pliny, b. xxviii. c. 11 (end).—MF, and F. dentifrice (Hatz-
feld).—L. dentifricium, tooth-powder; Pliny.—L. denti-, for dens, a
tooth; and fricdre, torub. See Tooth and Friction.

DENTIST, one who attends to teeth. (L.) First about 1760;
not in Johnson. Formed by adding the suffix -ist to L. dent-, stem
of dens, a tooth; see Tooth. Der. dentist-ry.

DENTITION, cutting of teeth. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss. ed.
1674.—L. dentitioOnem, acc. of dentitio, dentition. —L. dentire, to cut
teeth.=L. denti-, declensional stem of dens, a tooth. See Tooth.

DENUDES, to lay bare. (L.) Used by Cotgrave to explain F.
denuer. =. déniidare, to lay bare. = L. dé, down, fully; and xidare,
to make bare, from niidus, bare. See Nude.

DENUNCIATION, a denouncing. (L.) In Shak. Meas. i. 2.
152.—L. dénuntiationem, acc. of dénuntidtio.=L. dénuntiare, denunci-
Gre, to denounce. See Denounce.

DENY, to gainsay, refuse. (F.—L.) Inearly use. ME. denien;
Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 249; Wyclif, Matt. xvi. 24, xxvi.
34.—OF. denier, earlier deneier, denoier, to deny.—L. dénegare, to
deny, —L. dé, fully; and negare, to deny, say no. See Negation.
Der. deni-al, -able,

DEODAND, a thing (formerly) forfeited to the crown, for pious
uses. (AF.—L.) See Blount’s Nomolexicon. Lit. ‘given to God.’
= AF. deodande; Britton, bk. i. c. 2. § 14.—L. Ded, to God, dat.
case of Deus, God; and dandum, to be given, from dare, to give.

DEODAR, an ornamental tree, a sub-species of cedar. (Hind. —
Skt.) See Yule.— Hind. dewdarii, the name of a tree (Forbes) ;
called dewdar in Kashmir (Yule). —Skt. deva-daru, timber of the gods.
—Skt. déva-, a deity (see Tuesday); and daru, a kind of pine (see
Tree).

DEPART, to separate, to part from, quit, die. (F.—L.) Inearly
use. ME. departen; Floriz and Blauncheflur, ed. Lumby, 1. 12;
Chaucer, Troilus, v. 1073.—OF. departir, despartir (Godefroy).—
OF. des- (L. dis-), asunder; and partir, to part, from L. partire, to
part; which is from L. parti-, decl. stem of pars, a part. See Part.
Der. depart-ment, -ure.

DEPEND, to hang, be connected with. (F.—L.) ME. dependen.
‘ The fatal chaunce Of life and death dependeth in balaunce;’ Lyd-
gate, Thebes, pt. iii, sect. headed The Wordes of the worthy Queene
Tocasta, 1. 33. —OF. dependre, ‘ to depend, rely, hang on;’ Cot.—L.
dépendére, to hang down, depend on.—L. dé, down ; and pendére, to
hang. See Pendant. Der. depend-ant (F. pres. pt.), depend-ent
(L. pres. pt.), -ent-ly, -ence, -enc-y.

DEPICT, to picture, represent. (L.) ‘His armes are fairly de-
picted in his chamber;’ Fuller, Worthies, Cambs. (R.). But depict
was orig.a pp. ‘I fond a lyknesse depict upon a wal ;’ Lydgate,
Minor Poems, p. 177; cf. p. 259.—L. dépictus, pp. of dépingere, to
depict. —L. dé, down, fully ; and pingere, to paint. See Paint.

DEPILATORY, removing hair. (L.) ‘The same depilatory
effect ;> Holland, Pliny, b. xxxii. c. 7, ed. 1634, p. 439 d. Formed,
in imitation of MF. depilatoire (which Cotgrave explains by depilatory)
from a Late L. form *dépilatorius, not found, but formed regularly
from L, dépilire, to remove hair.=— L. dé, away; and pilare, to pluck
away hair, from pilus, a hair. See Pile (4).

DEPLETION, a lessening of the blood. (L.) ‘£ Depletion, an
emptying ;’ Blount’s Gloss. 1674. Formed, in imitation of repletion,
as if from a L. acc. *déplétidnem, from nom. *déplétio. [Cf. L. replée-
tio, complétio.| Cf. déplétus, pp. of déplére, to empty.—L. dé, away,
here used negatively; and plére, to fill. See Plenary.

DEPLORE, to lament. (F.—L.; or L.) In Shak. Tw. Nt. iii. 1.
174. See Trench, Select Glossary. [Perhaps directly from Latin.]
= MF. deplorer, ‘to deplore;’ Cot.—L. déplorare, to lament over. =
L. dé, fully; and pldrare, to wail, Allied to E. flood. Brugmann,
i. § 154. Der. deplorable, -abl-y, -able-ness.

DEPLOY, to unfold, open out, extend. (F.—L.) A modern
military term; not in Johnson, but see Todd, who rightly takes it to
be a doublet of display.—F. déployer, to unroll; OF. desployer, to
unfold ;’ Cot. = OF. des-<L. dis-, apart ; and ployer, to fold, from
L. plicare, to fold. See Ply. Doublet, display.

DEPONENT, one who gives evidence. (L.) ‘ The sayde depon-
ent sayeth ;’ Hall, Hen. VIII, an. 6. § 33. Palsgrave has: ‘ verbes
deponentes,’ i.e. deponent verbs ; p. 403. We also find the verb to
depone. * And further, Sprot deponeth ;’ State Trials, Geo. Sprot, an.
1606 (R.).—L. dépdnent-, stem of dépdnens, pres. pt. of déponere, to
lay down, which in Late L. also meant ‘to testify ;’? Ducange.—L.
dé, down; and ponere, to put, place. B. Pdnere is a contracted

M 2


164 DEPOPULATE


verb, standing for posinere, where po- is an old prep., and sinere
means to allow, also to set, put. See Position, Deposit.
.DEPOPULATE, to take away population. (L.) In Shak. Cor.
lil. 1. 264.—L. dépopulatus, pp. of dépopulare, to lay waste.—L. dé,
fully; and populare, to lay waste, in Late L. to deprive of people or
inhabitants, from populus, a people.. See People. Der. depopulat-
ion, -or.

DEPORT, to carry away, remove, behave. (F.—L.) ‘How a
man may bee valued, and deport himselfe ;’ Bacon, Learning, by G.
Wats, b. viii.c. 2. (R.) Milton has deport as sb., in the sense of
deportment; P. L. ix. 389; xi. 666. [The peculiar uses of the word
are French, not Latin.] =OF. deporter, ‘to beare, suffer, endure ; also,
to spare, or exempt from; also to banish: se deporter, to cease, for-
bear,. .. quiet himself, hold his hand ; also to disport, play, recreate
himself ;’ Cot.=—L. déportare, to carry down, remove; with extended
senses in Late Latin.—L. dé, down, away; and portare, to carry.
See Port (1). Der. deportat-ion (L. acc. déportatidnem, from nom.
déportatio, a carrying away); deport-ment (MF. deporte-ment; Cot-
gtave gives the pl. deportemens, which he explains by ‘ deportments,
demeanor’).

DEPOSE, to degrade, disseat from the throne. (F.—L. and Gk.)
In early use. ME, deposen; King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 7822; P.
Plowman, B. xv. 514.—OF. deposer; Cot.— OF. de- < L. dé-, from,
away; and poser, to place, from pausare, to pause; in late L., to
place; Ducange. B. Pausdre, to place, is derived from pausa, sb.,
a pause, from Gk. mavois, a pause; but ponere and pausare were much
confused. See Pose, Pause. Der. depos-able, -al. @| Note that
depose is not derived, like deposit, from L. dépénere, but is partly Gk.
See below.

DEPOSIT, to lay down, intrust. (F.—L.) ‘The fear is deposited
in conscience ;’ Bp. Taylor, Rule of Conscience, b. ii. c. 1. rule 3 (R.).
= MF. depositer, ‘to lay down as a gage, to infeoffe upon trust, to
commit unto the keeping or trust of;’ Cot.—L. dépositum, a thing
laid down, neuter of pp. of déponere. See Deponent. . Der. deposit,
sb., -or; -ar-y, King Lear, ii. 4. 2545 -or-y.

DEPOSITION, a deposing, evidence. (F.—L.) Used by
Cotgrave.— MF. deposition, ‘the deposition of witnesses ;’ Cot.—L.
acc. dépositidnem, from nom. dépositio, a depositing, a deposition ; cf.
dépositus, pp. of déponere, to lay down; see above. 4 Not derived
from the verb to depose; see Depose.

DEPOT, a store, place of deposit. (F.—L.) Modern. In
use in 1794; Todd’s Johnson.=F. dépét, a deposit, a magazine;
Hamilton; OF. depost, ‘a pledge, gage;’ Cot.—L. dépositum, a
thing laid down, neut. of dépositus, pp. of déponere, to lay down.
See Deposit, of which (when a sb.) depot is the doublet.

DEPRAVE, to make worse, corrupt. (F.—L.) ME. deprauen
(with « for v), to defame; P. Plowman, C. iv. 225; see Trench,
Select Gloss.— OF. depraver, ‘to.deprave, mar, viciate;’ Cot.—L.
déprauare, pp. dépraudtus, to make crooked, distort, vitiate.—L,. dé,
down, fully ; and prauus, crooked, misshapen, depraved. Der.
deprav-ed, -ed-ly, -ed-ness, -at-ion, -i-ty.

DEPRECATE, to pray against. (L.) Occurs in the State Trials,
an. 1589; the Earl of Arundel (R.); and in J. Earle, Microcosmo-
graphy, § 64 (end).—L. déprecdtus, pp. of déprecari, to pray against,
pray to remove. = L. dé, away; and precari, to pray, from prec-, stem
of prex, a prayer. See Pray. Der. deprecat-ing-ly, -ion, -ive, -or-y.

DEPRECIATE, to lower the value of. (L.) ‘ Undervalue and
depreciate ;' Cudworth, Intell. System, pref. to Reader (R.).—L.
dépretiatus, pp. of dépretiare, to depreciate.=L. dé, down; and
pretium, price, value.. See Price. Der. depreciat-ion, -ive, -or-y.

DEPREDATE, to plunder, rob, lay waste. (L.) The verb is
tare. Depredatours occurs in Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 492; depredation
in Burnet, Hist. Reformation, an. 1537.—L. dépreditus, pp. of
dépredari, to plunder, pillage.=L. dé, fully; and predari, to rob,
from preda, prey, plunder. See Prey. Der. depredat-ion, -or, -Or-y.

DEPRESS, to lower, let down. (L.) First used in an astrolo-
gical sense ; Lydgate has depressed, Siege of Thebes, pt. i. 1.228. So
Chaucer uses depresstoun ; On the Astrolabe, ed. Skeat, ii. 25. 6.—L.
dépressus, pp. of déprimere, to press down. = L. dé, down ; and premere,
to press. See Press. Der. depress-ion, -ive, -or.

DEPRIVE, to take away property. (F.—L.) ME. depriuen;
Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 222; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris,
i, 449.— OF. depriver.— Late L. dépriuare, to deprive one of office,
degrade. —L. dé, down, fully ; and priudre, to deprive (of which the
pp. privatus means free from office, private), from priuus, single,
peculiar. See Private. Der. deprivat-ion.

DEPTH, deepness. (E.) In the later text of Wyclif, Luke, v. 4;
Gen. i. 2. The word is English, but the usual AS. word is déopnes,
a deepness. + Icel. dypt, dypd; Du. diepte; Goth. diupitha. See

eep.

DEPUTE, to appoint as. agent. (F.—L.) In Shak. ‘Oth. iy. x.


‘in Chaucer; he has imagined it to mean ‘daring action.’


DESCEND


248, But deputacion is in Gower, C. A. iii. 178; bk. vii. 1. 2750. —.
OF. deputer, ‘to depute;’ Cot.—L. députare, to cut off, prune down;
also to impute, to destine; in Late L. to select.—L. dé, down; and
putare, to cleanse, prune, arrange, estimate, think,.—4/ PEU, to
cleanse. See Pure. Der. deputat-ion; also deputy (OF. depute; see
Cotgrave).

DERANGE, to disarrange, disorder. (F.—L. and OHG.) In
late use. Condemned as a Gallicism in 1795, but used by Burke
(Todd).—F. déranger, to disarray ; spelt desranger in Cotgrave. =
OF. des- < L. dis-, apart, here used negatively ; and OF. ranger, to-
tank, range, a word of Germanic origin. See Range. Der.
derange-ment.

DERELICTION, complete abandonment. (L.) Derelict, in the
sense of ‘abandoned,’ is also in use. Dereliction is in Hooker, Eccl.
Polity, b. v. § 17.—L. acc. dérelictidnem, from nom. dérelictio, com-
plete neglect ; cf. dérelictus, pp. of dérelinguere, to forsake utterly:—
L. dé, fully ; and relinquere, to leave. See Relinquish.

DERIDEH, to laugh at, mock. (L.) In Spenser, F. Q. vi. 7. 32.
=L. déridére, pp. dérisus, to mock. =—L. dé, fully, very much; and
ridére,tolaugh. See Risible. Der. derid-er; also deris-ion (Caxton,
Troy-book, leaf 95, 1. 8), -ive, -ive-ly, from pp. dérisus.

DERIVE, to draw from, make to flow from. (F.—L.) _ For the
classical use of the word in English, see Trench, Select Gloss. ME.
deriuen (with w for v), used as a neuter verb by Chaucer, C. T. 3008
(A 3036), but in the usual way in 1. 3040 (A 3038).—OF. deriver,
“to derive, or draw from; also, to drain or dry up;’ Cot.—L,
dériuare, pp. dériuatus, to drain, draw off water.—L. dé, away; and.
riuus,astream. See Rival. Der. deriv-able, -abl-y, -at-ion, -at-ive,,
-at-ive-ly.

DERM, the skin. (Gk.) ‘Derma, the skin of a beast, or of a
man’s body;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Hence derm, for brevity. = Gk..
dépya, the skin.—Gk. dépev, to skin, flay; cognate with E, tear, =
HW DER, to burst, tear. See Tear (1). Der. derm-al ; also epi-dermis,
pachy-derm.

DEROGATE, to take away, detract. (L.) ‘Any thinge...
that should derogate, minish, or hurt his glory and his name ;’ Sir T.
More, Works, p. 1121 c.—L. dérogatus, pp. of dérogare, to repeal
a law, to detract from.=L. dé, away; and rogare, to propose a law,
toask. See Rogation. Der. derogat-ion, -or-y, -or-i-ly.

DERRICK, a kind of crane for raising weights. (Du.) Applied
to a sort of crane from its likeness to a gallows ; and the term derrick
crane had special reference to a once celebrated hangman of the name:
of Derrick, who was employed at Tyburn. He is mentioned in
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, and Mr. Tancock sends me the following
clear example. ‘ The theefe that dyes at Tyburne . . is not halfe so
dangerous . . as the Politick Bankrupt. I would there were a Derick
to hang vp him too;’ T. Dekker, Seven Deadly Sins of London
(1606) ; ed. Arber, p. 17. The name is Dutch; Sewel’s Du. Dict.
(p. 523) gives Diederik, Dierryk, and Dirk as varying forms of the
same name. This name answers to the G. Dietrich, AS. péodric, i.e.
‘ruler of the people.’ The AS. péod is cognate with Goth. thiuda,
people; see Dutch. The suffix -ric answers to Goth. -reiks, as in
Frithareiks, Frederick ; cp. Goth. reiks, adj., chief, mighty, hence
rich; see Rich.

DERRING-DO, desperate courage. (E.) Spenser has: ‘For
ever, who in derring-doe were dreade,’ &c.; Shep. Kal., Oct. 65.
This extraordinary word is due to a total misconception of a phrase
But
Chaucer has: ‘In durring don that longeth to a knight ;’ Troil.
vy. 837; where durring is a sb., meaning ‘daring ;’ and don is the
infin., meaning ‘to do.’ Later authors have blindly adopted Spenser's
error, in total ignorance of ME. grammar. See my Notes on E.
Etym., p. 65.

DERVIS, DERVISH, a Persian monk, ascetic. (Pers.) ‘The
Deruisse, an order of begging friar ;’ Sir T. Herbert, Travels, ed. 1665,
p- 324. ‘An order of Monkes, who are called Dervises;’ Sandys,
Trav. (1532), p. 55.— Pers. darvish, poor, indigent ; a dervish, monk ;
Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 260. So called from their profession of
extreme poverty. Cf. Zend driyu-, poor (Horn).

DESCANT, a variation (in music), a disquisition. (F.—L.)
‘Twenty doctours expounde one text xx. wayes, as children make
descant upon playne song;’ Tyndal’s Works, p. 168; col. 1. Spelt
dyscant, Squire of Low Degree, 1. 790. —ONF. descant, forOF. deschant,
‘descant of musick, also, a psalmody, recantation, or contrary song to
the former ;’ Cot. —OF. des-<L. dis-,apart, separate; and ONF. cant,
for OF. chant, a song; see Burguy, who gives cant, canter as
variants of chant, chanter. From L. cantus, a song; cantare, to sing.
See Chant, and Cant. Der. descant, verb.

DESCEND, to climb down, go down. (F.—L.) ME. descenden,
Rob. of Brunne,. tr. of Langtoft, pp. 134, 243.—OF. descendre, ‘to
descend, go down;’ Cot.=L. déscendere, pp. déscensus, to descend.


DESCRIBE


—L. dé,down; and scandere, toclimb.. SeeSean. Der. descendant
(OF. descendant, descending ; Cot.); descend-ent (L. pres. pt. stem
descendent-) ; descens-ion, descens-ion-al ; descent, Gower, C. A. iii. 207;
bk. vii. 3432 (OF. descente, a sudden fall; formed from descendre by
analogy with the form vente from vendre, and the like).

DESCRIBE, to write down, trace out, give an account of. (L.)
In Shak. Merch. of Ven. i. 2. 40. [But the ME. descriuen was in
early use; see K. Alisaunder, 4553; Chaucer, C. T. 10354 (F 40).
This was a French form, from OF. descrivre.|—L. déscribere, pp.
déscriptus, to copy, draw out, write down. = L. dé, fully ; and scribere,
to write. See Scribe. Der. describ-able, descript-ion (Chaucer,
C.T., Group A, 2053), descript-ive, -ive-ly.

DESCRY, to make out, espy. (F.—L.) In early use. ME.
descryen, discryen. ‘No couthe ther non so muche diserye’ [ badly spelt
discryghe, but rhyming with nygremauncye], i.e. nor could any one
discern so much; King Alisaunder, l. 138.—OF. descrire, a.shorter
spelling of descrivre, to describe; cf. mod. F. décrire. —L. déscribere,
to describe. See Describe. 4 Thus the word is merely a doublet
of describe; but it was not well understood, and we frequently find in
our authors a tendency to confuse it with decry. Cf. ‘ Descryynge,
Descripcio;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 119.

DESECRATEH, to profane. (L.) ‘ Desecrated and prophaned by
human use;’ Bp. Bull, vol. i. ser. 4 (R.).—L. désecratus, pp. of
désecrare, to desecrate.—L..dé, away; and sacrdre, to make sacred,
from sacro-, for sacer, sacred. See Sacred.. Der. desecrat-ion, Bailey,
vol. ii. (1727).

DESERT (1), a waste, wilderness. (F.—L.) Prop. an adj. with
the sense ‘ waste,’ but early used asa sb. ME. desert, K. Alisaunder,
p- 199, 1. 4772; Rob. of Glouc. p. 232, 1. 4785 ; Wyclif, Luke, iii. 4.
= OF. desert, a wilderness; also, as adj. deserted, waste. —L. désertus,
waste, deserted ; pp. of déserere, to desert, abandon, lit. to unbind. =
L, dé, in a negative sense; and serere (pp. sertus), to bind, join. . See
Series. Der. desert, verb; desert-er, -ion.

DESERT (2), merit. (F.—L.) ME. deserte, Rob. of Glouc. p.
253, 1.5059; Gower, C. A. i. 62; bk.i. 614. —OF. deserte, merit ; lit.
a thing deserved ; pp. of deservir, to deserve. See Deserve.

DESERVE, to merit, earn by service. (F.—L.) ME. deseruen
(with w for v), P. Plowman, C. iv. 303 ; Chaucer, C. T. 12150 (C 216).
= OF. deservir.—L. déseruire, to serve devotedly ; in Late L. to de-
serve; Ducange. —L. dé, fully; and seruire, to serve, from seruus, a
slave, servant. See Serve. Der. deserv-ing, -ing-ly, -ed-ly; also
desert (2), q. v.

DESHABILLS, undress, careless dress. (F.—L.) So in Mrs.
Centlivre, Busybody, A. i. sc. 1 (Miranda). But formerly quadri-
syllabic (with final -é); Steele has deshabilé, Spectator, no. 49, § 3.
=F. déshabillé, undress; orig. pp. of déshabiller, to undress. =F. dés-,
OF. des-<L. dis-, apart, used as a negative prefix; and habiller, to
dress. See Habiliment. 4 Now usually dishabille.

DESICCATE, to dry up. (L.) In Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 727.—
L, désiccdtus, pp. of désiccare, to dry up.—L. dé, thoroughly ; and
siceadre, to dry, from siccus, dry. See Sack (3), sb. dry wine. Der.
desiccat-ion.

DESIDERATE, to desire. (L.) Orig. a pp., and so used in
Bacon, On Learning, by G. Wats, b. iv. c. 2 (R.).—L. désideratus,
pp. of désiderare, to long for. Desiderate is a doublet of desire, vb.
See Desire. Der. desideratum, neut. of L. pp., with pl. desiderata.

DESIGN, to mark out, plan. (F.—L.). In Shak. Rich. II, ii. 1.
203. Also as sb., Meas. i. 4. 55.—OF. designer, ‘to denote, signifie,
. . . designe, prescribe ;’ Cot. —L. désignire, pp. désignatus, to mark,
denote. —L. dé, fully; and signare, to mark, from signum, a mark, a
sign. See Sign. Der. design, sb. ; -ed-ly, -er ; also design-ate, -at-ion,
-at-or (like the L. pp. désignétus).

DESIRE, to long for, yearn after. (F.—L.) In early use. ME.
desyren, desiren, K, Alisaunder, 1. 15; P. Plowman, B. xv. 461.
[The sb. desyr is in Chaucer, C. T. 1503 (A 1501).]—OF. desirer,
formerly desirrer (Burguy).—L. désiderare, to long for, esp. to regret,
to miss, f. The orig. sense is obscure, perhaps ‘to note the absence
of the stars,’ hence, to miss, regret ; but there can be little doubt that,
like consider, it is derived from sider-, for *sides-, stem of sidus, a
star. See Consider. Der. desire, sb. ; desir-able, -abl-y, -able-ness ;
-abil-i-ty ; -ous, -ous-ly.

DESIST, to cease from, forbear. (F.—L.) In Shak, Ant. and Cleop.
ii. 7. 86.—OF. desister,‘ to desist, cease, forbear;’ Cot.—L. désistere,
to put away; also, to leave off, desist. = L. dé, away ; and sistere, to
put, place; causal form of stare, to stand, which is cognate with E,
stand. See Stand. F

DESK, a sloping table, flat surface for writing on. (L.) In
Shak. Haml. ii. 2. 136. Earlier, in Fabyan, vol. i. c. 201. § 3.
ME. deske, Prompt. Parv. (A. D. 1440) pp. 120, 299.— Med. L. desca,
a desk (Ducange). Cf. Ital. desco, ‘a desk’ (Florio); from L.
discum, acc. of discus, a disc, table. See.Dish.


DESTITUTE


DESOLATE, solitary. (L.) ME. desolat, Chaucer, C. T. 4551
(B131).—L. désdlatus, forsaken; pp. of désdlare.—L. dé, fully ; and
solare, to make lonely, from sdlus, alone. See Sole, adj. Der.
desolate, verb ; -ly, -ness, desolat-ion. :

DESPAIR, to be without hope. (F.—L.) ME. dispeiren, dis-
peren. ‘He was despeyred ;’ Chaucer, C. T, 11255 (F 943).—OF.
despeir-, tonic stem of desperer, to despair.—L. désperdre, pp. déspéer-
dtus, to have no hope.—L. dé, away; and spérare, to hope, from
spér-, as in OL, spér-es, pl. of spés, hope. Der. despair, sb. ME.
despeir, Chaucer, C. T., A 3474; despair-ing-ly; also (from L. pp.
despérdtus) desperate, Tempest, iii. 3. 104; -Ly, -ness, desperat-ion ; also
desperado, a Spanish word=L. déspératus.

DESPATCH, DISPATCH, to send off quickly. (Span.—L.)
The orig. sense was ‘to dispatch business.’ In Shak. K. John, i. 99;
vy. 7.90; the sb. is also common, as in Cymb. iii. 7.16. The spelling
dispatch is very common, and is also more in accordance with E. analogy
(N.E.D.). First in 1517 (spelt dispached); Palsgrave (1530) has
dispatche, vb., p. 520.—Span, despachar, ‘to dispatch, to ridde out of
the way;’ Minsheu. Cognate with Ital. dispacciare, to dispatch
(Torriano) ; usually spacciare, ‘to dispatch, hasten, speed? (Florio).
=—L. type *dis-pactiare ; from dis-, intensive particle, and * pactiare,
for Late L. pactare, to make an agreement, from L. pactum, an agree-
ment; see Pact. B. Confused by Johnson with F. dépécher, OF.
depescher, obs. E. depeach (N.E.D.). Here pescher answers to a Late
L. pedicare, as in impedicare, to place obstacles in the way. Hence to
depeach=to remove obstacles. Pedicare is formed from L. pedica, a
fetter ; from ped-, stem of pes, a foot; see Impeach. | Dispatch
might have been from Ital., but Ital. generally has the shortened form;
and dispatch seems to have been due to dealings with Spain (ab. 1517).
Der. despatch or dispatch, sb.

DESPERATE, DESPERADO; see Despair.

DESPISE, to contemn. (F.—L.) ME. despisen, dispisen; K.
Alisaunder, 2988; P. Plowman, B. xv. 531.—OF. despis-, stem of
pres. pt., &c., of despire, to despise. L. despicere, to look down on,
scorn.=—L, dé, down; and sfecere, to look. See Spy. Der. despic-
able (from L. despic-ere), -abl-y; also despite, q.v.

' DESPITE, spite, malice, hatred. (F.—L.) ME. despit, dispit ;
K. Alisaunder, 4720; Rob. of Glouc., p. 547; 1. 11376.—OF. despit,
‘despight, spight, anger;’ Cot. —L. déspectus, contempt. = L. déspectus,

. of déspicere, to despise. See Despise. Der. despite, as prep. ;
despite-ful, -ful-ly, -ful-ness. Also ME. dispitous, Chaucer, C. T. 6343,
D 761 (obsolete). Doublet, spite.

DESPOIL, to spoil utterly, plunder. (F.—L.) In early use. ME.
despoilen, Ancren Riwle, p. 148.—OF. despoiller (mod. F. depouiller),
to despoil.—L. despoliare, to plunder.=—L. dé, fully; and spoliare, to
strip, rob, from spolium, spoil, booty. See Spoil.

DESPOND, to lose courage, despair. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
1656. ‘Desponding Peter, sinking in the waves ;’ Dryden, Britannia
Rediviva, 258.—L. despondére, (1) to promise fully, (2) to give up,
lose. —L. dé, (1) fully, (2) away; and spondére, to promise. See
Sponsor. Der. despond-ent (pres. part.), -ent-ly, -ence, -enc-y.

DESPOT, a master, tyrant. (F.—L.—Gk.) Used by Cotgrave.
Dryden has ‘ despotick power ;’ Sigismunda, 599.— OF. despot, MF.
despote, ‘a despote, the chief, or soveraign lord of a country ;’ Cot. =
Late L. despotum, acc. of despotus. = Gk. deomérns, a master. B. The
syllable deo- =*Idg. dems, ‘of a house;’ cf. Skt. dam-pati-, master of
the house.’ The syllable -7o7- is related to Gk. méaus, husband, Skt.
pati-, lord, L. potens, powerful; see Potent. Brugmann, i. § 408.
Der. despotic, -ic-al, -ic-al-ly, -ism.

DESQUAMATION, a scaling off. (L.) A modern medical
term; in Bailey (1735). Regularly allied to L. desquamatus, pp. of
desquaimare, to scale off.—L. dé, away, off; and sguama, a scale.

DESSERT, a service of fruits after dinner. (F.—L.)  ‘ Dessert, the
last course at a feast, consisting of fruits, sweetmeats, &c. ;’ Blount’s
Gloss. ed. 1674.— F. dessert, ‘the last course or service at table;’ Cot.
=F. desservir, ‘to do one ill service; desservir sus table, to take away
the table ;’ Cot. = OF. des- < L. dis-, apart, away ; and F, servir, from
L. seruire, to serve. See Serve.

DESTEMPER:; see Distemper.

DESTINE, to ordain, appoint, doom. (F.—L.) In Shak. Meas.
ii, 4.138. The pp. destaned is in The Wars of Alexander, 1. 518.
[The sb. destiny is in early use; ME. destinee, Chaucer, C. T. 2325
(A 2323).—OF,. destiner, ‘to destinate, ordain ;’ Cot.—L. destinare,
to destine. = L. destina, a support, prop.—L. dé-, down; and *stanare,
to cause to stand, set up, a derivative of s¢are, to stand. Cf. Cretic
oravvw, I set. Brugmann, ii; § 603. See Stand. Der. destin-ate,
destin-at-ion (like L. pp. destindtus) 3 also destiny (ME. destinee, from
OF. destinee<L. destinata, fem. of the same pp.).

DESTITUTE, forsaken, very poor. (L.)
this wys destitut;’ Test. of Creseide, st. 14; Lydgate, Minor Poems,
Pp. 34.—L. destitutus, left alone, pp. of destituere, to set or place


165


‘This fair lady, on.


166 DESTROY


alone.=L. dz, off, away; and statuere, to place, from status, a
position ; cf. status, pp. of stare, to stand; cognate with E. stand.
See Stand. Der. destitut-ion, :

DESTROY, to unbuild, overthrow. (F.—L.) In early use.
The pp. distryed is in King Alisaunder, 1. 130. ME. destroien,
destryen, destruyen; the pt. t. destrude occurs in Rob. of Glouc.,
p. 242, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, has destroied, p. 8; destruc-
tion, Pp. 202.— OF. destruire, to destroy (I. détruire, Ital. distruggere).
— Folk-L, *destriigere (pp. destructus), for L. destruere (pp. destructus),
to pull down, unbuild.—L. dé, with sense of E. verbal w-; and
struere, to build. See Structure. Der. destroy-er; also (like L.
pp: destructus) destruct-ion, -ible, -ibl-y, -ibil-i-ty, -ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness.

DESUETUDE, disuse. (L.) In Howell’s Letters, i. 1. 35 (dated
Aug. 1, 1621).—L. désuetudo, disuse.— L. désuetus, pp. of désuescere,
to grow out of use.—L, dé, with negative force; and suescere,
inceptive form of suére, to be used. See Custom.

DESULTORY, jumping from one thing to another, random.
(L.) ‘Light, desultory, unbalanced minds ;’ Atterbury, vol. iii. ser.
9 (R.). Bp, Taylor has desultorious, Rule of Conscience, b. i. c. 2.—
L. désultorius, belonging to a désultor; hence, inconstant, fickle.
[Tertullian has desultrix uirtus, i.e. inconstant virtue.]—L. désultor,
one who leaps down ; one who leaps from horse to horse; an incon-
stant person; cf, désultus, pp. of désilere, to leap down.—L. dé,
down; and salire, to leap. See Saltation. Der. desultori-ly, -ness.

DETACH, to unfasten, separate. (F.—L. and G.) Orig. a
military term, and not in early use. ‘ Detach (French mil. term), to
send away a party of soldiers upon a particular expedition ;’ Kersey,
ed. 1715.—F. détacher, lit. to unfasten.—F. dé=OF. des-<L. dis-,
apart; and -tacher, to fasten, only in the comp. dé-tacher, at-tacher.
See Attach. Der. detach-ment.

DETAIL, a small part, minute account. (F.—L.) ‘To offer
wrong in detaile ;’ Holland’s Plutarch, p. 306 (R.).—OF. detail, ‘a
peecemealing, also, retaile, small sale, or a selling by parcels;’
Cot.—OF. detailler, ‘to piecemeale, to cut into parcels ;’ Cot.—OF.
de-=1,. dé-, fully; and failler, to cut. See Tailor. Der. detail,
verb. @ The vb. is from the sb. in English; conversely in French.

DETAIN, to hold back, stop. (F.—L.) Detaining is in Sir T.
More, Works, p. 386 e. From OF. detien-, a stem of OF. detenir,
‘to detaine or withholde;’ Cot.—L. détinére, to detain, keep back.
=—L. dé, from, away; and ¢enére, to hold. See Tenable. Der.
detain-er, -ment; detent-ion, q.v. Also detent, sb., a catch preventing
motion of a machine.

DETECT, to expose, discover. (L.) Sir T. More has the pp.
detected; Works, pp. 112 e, 219 c.—L. détectus, pp. of détegere, to
uncover, expose.—L. dé-, with sense of verbal wn-; and tegere, to
cover. See Tegument. Der, detect-ion, -er, -or, -ive.

DETENTION, a withholding. (F.—L.) In Shak. Tim. ii. 2.
39.—MF. detention, ‘a detention, detaining;’ Cot.—L. acc. dé-
tentionem, from nom, détentio; cf. détentus, pp. of détinére, to detain.
See Detain.

DETER, to frighten from, prevent. (L.) Milton has deter, P. L.
ii. 4493 deterr’d, ix.696. It occurs earlier, in Lyly’s Euphues, ed.
Arber, p. 106.—L. déterrére, to frighten from.—L. dé, from; and
terrére, to frighten. See Terror. Der. deterr-ent.

DETERGE, to wipe off. (L.) ‘ Deterge, to rub out ;? Cockeram
(1642).—L. détergere, to wipe off.—L. de, off, away; and ¢ergere,
pp: dersus, to wipe. Der. deterg-ent; also deters-ive, -ion, like pp.
deters-us, |

DETERIORATE, to make or grow worse. (L.) ‘ Deteriorated,
made worse, impaired ;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674.—L. déterioratus,
pp-.of déteriorare, to make worse.—L. déferior, worse. B. The
word stands for dé-ter-ior, in which the first syllable is the prep. dé,
away, from ; and -fer- and -ior are comparative suffixes; cf. in-ter-ior.
Der. deteriorat-ion.

DETERMINE, to fix, bound, limit, end. (F.—L.) ME. de-
terminen, Rom, of the Rose, 6631. Chaucer has determinat, C. T.
7041 (D 1459).—OF. determiner, ‘to determine, conclude, resolve
on, end, finish ;’ Cot.—L. déterminare, pp. déterminatus, to bound,
limit, end.—L. dé, down, fully; and ¢ermindre, to bound, from
terminus,a boundary. See Term. Der. determin-able, -abl-y ; -ate,
~ate-ly, -at-ion, -at-ive, like pp. determinitus; also determin-ed, -ed-ly,
-ant. :

DETEST, to hate intensely, (F.—L.) ¢ He detesteth and abhor-
reth the errours;’ Sir'T. More, Works, p. 422 a. Barnes has detestable,
Works, p. 392, col. 2,—OF. ,detester, ‘to detest, loath ;’ Cot. —L,
détestari, to. imprecate evil by calling the gods to witness, to execrate.
—L. dé, down, fully; and Zestari, to testify, from testis, a witness.
See Testify. Der. detest-able, -abl-y, -able-ness; also -at-ion (like
pp. détestatis).

DETHRONE, to remove from a throne. (F.—L. and Gk.) In
Speed’s Chron. Rich. II, b. ix. c. 13 (R.).— OF. desthroner, ‘to dis-


DEVISE |


thronize, or unthrone;’ Cot.—OF. des-<L. dis-, apart; and OF.
throne, a royal seat, from Late L. thronus, an episcopal seat, from
Gk. Opévos, aseat. See Throne. Der. dethrone-ment.

DETONATE, to explode. (L.) The verb is rather late. The
sb. detonation is older, and in Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.—L. détondtus,
pp. of détonare, to thunder down.=L. dé, down, fully; and ‘onare,
to thunder. See Thunder. Der. detonat-ion.

DETOUR, a winding way. (F.—L. and Gk.) Late; not in John-
son; N.E.D. gives a quotation, dated 1738.—F. détowr, a circuit ;
verbal substantive from détourner, to turn aside, OF. destourner
(Cot.).— OF, des-<L. dis-, apart ; and fourner, to turn, See Turn.

DETRACTION, a taking away from one’s credit. (L.) The
verb detract is in Shak. Temp. ii. 2. 96, and is due to the older sb.
The pres. pt. detractinge is in Barclay, Ship of Fools, ed. Jamieson ;
i. 17. Chaucer has detractioun, or detraccion, Pers. Tale, Six-text,
Group I, 1.614. [So also in 1. 493, the six MSS. have detraccion,
not detracting as in Tyrwhitt.]—L. acc. détractidnem, lit. a taking
away, from nom. détractio; cf. détractus, pp. of détrahere, to take
away, also, to detract, disparage.—L. dé, away; and trahere, to
draw. See Trait. Der. detract, verb; -or.

DETRIMENT, loss, injury. (F.—L.) In Sir T. Elyot, Castel
of Helth, b. ii. c. 3.—OF. detriment, ‘ detriment, loss;’ Cot.—L.


détrimentum, loss, lit. a rubbing away.=—L. détri-, seen in détritus,


pp- of déterere, to rub away; with suffix -mentum.—L. dé, away ; and
terere, torub. See Trite. Der. detriment-al; also (like pp. détritus}
detritus, detrit-ion.

DETRUDBE, to thrust down. (L.) ‘And theim to cast and
detrude sodaynly into continual captiuitie ;’ Hall, Rich. III, an. 3.
(R.).—L. détriidere, pp. détriisus, to thrust down.—L. dé, down; and
triidere, to thrust. E. ¢hrust is from the same root. Der. detrus-ion.

DEUCE (1), a two, at cards or dice. (F.—L.) In Shak. L. L. Le
i. 2.49. Spelt dews, Skelton, Bouge of Courte, 1. 347.—F. deux,
two.—L, duds, acc. of duo, two; cognate with E. two, See Two.

DEUCE (2), an evil spirit, the devil. (F.—L.) ‘ Owe! dewes!
all goes downe!’ O! the deuce! all is lost; York Plays, Play r,
1.92. The orig. sense was exclamatory, signifying ‘Oh! ill-luck!”
because the deuce, or ‘two,’ was a losing throw at dice. Then it
came to be equivalent to ‘the devil!’ It is really the same word as
the preceding. See Academy, Jan. 30, 1892, p. 111; and see
N.E.D. Cf. Low G. de deus! (Bremen Wort.).

DEUTERONOMY, the fifth book of the Pentateuch. (L.—Gk.)
Spelt Deutronomye by Wyclif.—L. Deuteronomium (as in Deut.
xvii. 18); as if ‘a repetition of the law.’=—Gk. Aevtepovdmiov; from
devrepo-s, second, and vépos, law.

DEVASTATE, to lay waste. (L.) A late word; not in Johnson;
but it occurs in Bailey, vol. ii. 1727 (though mot in ed. 1731).
Devastation is in Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674. Instead of devastate, the
form devast was formerly used, and occurs in Ford, Perkin Warbeck,
A, iv. sc. 1. 1. 6.—L. déuastitus, pp. of déuastire, to lay waste.—L.
dé, fully; and wasta@re, to waste, cognate with E. waste. See Waste.
Der. devastat-ion.

DEVELOP, to unroll, unfold, open out. (F.—L. and Teut.)
In Pope, Dunciad, iv. 269. The pp. developed is in Blount’s Gloss.
(1656).—F, développer, to unfold, spelt desveloper in Cotgrave.=— OF.
des-<L. dis-, apart; and -veloper, occurring in F. envelopper, formerly
enveloper, to enwrap, wrap up. See Envelope. Der. develop-ment.

DEVEST, the old form of Divest. (F.—L.) OF. desvestir
(Hatzfeld).—L. dis-, away; and westire, to clothe. See Divest.

DEVIATE, to go out of the way. (L.) ‘But Shadwell never
deviates into sense;’ Dryden, Macflecknoe, |. 20. —L. déuidtus, pp-
of déuidre, to go out of the way.—L. déuius, out. of the way.—L.


dé, away from; wia, way. See Devious. Der. deviat-ion. ME.


deuiacioun, T. Usk, Test. of Love, iii. 1. 6.

DEVICE, a plan, project, opinion. (F.—L.) ME. deuise, deuys
(with w for v); Chaucer, C. T. 816 (or 818). —OF. devis, m., ‘speech,
talke, . . . a device;’ devise, f., ‘a device, poesie, embleme, . . .
invention; also, a division, bound;’ Cot.—Late L. diuisum, diuisa,
a division of goods, bound, mark, device, judgment. See further
under Devise.

DEVIL, an evil spirit. (L.—Gk.) ME. deuil, deouel (with w
for v); spelt dewel, P. Plowman, B. ii. 102.
Grein, i. 191.—L. diabolus, — Gk. 5uaBodos, the slanderer, the devil.
— Gk. d:aBaddAev, to slander, traduce, lit. to throw across. = Gk. 4,
through, across; and BdaAAev, to throw, cast. See Belemnite.
Der. devil-ish, -ish-ly, -ish-ness, -ry.

DEVIOUS, going out of the way. (L.) In Milton, P. L. iii.
489.—L. déuius, going out of the way; with change of -ws to E. -ous,
as in numerous other cases.—L. dé, out of; and uia, a way. See
Viaduct. Der. devious-ly, -ness; also deviate, q. v.


DEVISE, to imagine, contrive, bequeath. (F.—L.) In early use.’
ME. deuisen (with « for v), King Horn, ed. Lumby, 930; Gower,’


AS. déoful, déofol ;°


DEVOID


C. A. i. 19, 313 prol. 464, 822.—OF. deviser, to distinguish, regulate,
bequeath, talk. [Cf. Ital. divisare, to divide, describe, think.]=—OF.


_ devise, a division, project, order, condition. [Cf. Ital. divisa, a divi-


sion, share, choice.] = Late L. divisa, a division of goods, portion of
land, bound, decision, mark, device. —L. diuisa, fem. of diwisus, pp.
of diuidere, to divide. See Divide. Der. devis-er, -or ; device, q. v.

DEVOID, quite void, destitute. (F.—L.) ME. deuoyd, (with
u for v); Rom. of the Rose, 3723. The pp. deuoided, i. e. emptied
out, occurs in the same, 2929; from ME. deuoiden, to empty. —OF.
desvuidier, desvoidier, to empty out (mod. F. dévider).— OF, des-<L.
dis-, apart; and voidier, vuidier, to void, from OF. voide, vuide, f.
(m, vuit), void. See Void.

DEVOIR, duty. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. deuotr, deuer
(with.« for v), Chaucer, C. T. 2600 (A 2598); P. Plowman, C.
xvii. 5.— MF. devoir, OF. deveir, to owe; also, as sb., duty.—L.
débére, to owe. See Debt.

DEVOLVE, to roll onward, transfer, be transferred. (L.) ‘He
did devolve and intrust the supreme authority . . . into the hands of
those persons;’ Clarendon, Civil War, vol. ili. p. 483 (R.). ME.
deuoluen, Palladius, bk. xi. 497.—L. déuoluere, to roll down, bring to.
= L. dé, down; and uoluere, toroll. See Voluble. Der. devolution,
defined as ‘a rolling downe’ in Cockeram ; cf. déwoliit-us, pp.

DEVOTE, to vow, consecrate to a purpose. (L.) Shak. always
uses the pp. devoted, asin Oth. ii. 3. 321. [The sb. devotion was in
quite early use; it is spelt dewociun in the Ancren Riwle, p. 368, and
was derived from Latin through the OF. devotion.]J=L. déudtiis,
devoted; pp. of déwowere, to devote.—L, dé, fully ; and uouére, to
vow. See Vow. Der. devot-ed, -ed-ly, -ed-ness; devot-ee (a coined
word, see Spectator, no. 354) ; devot-ion, -ion-al, -ion-al-ly; and see
devout.

DEVOUR, to consume, eat up. (F.—L.) ME. deuouren (with
u for v); P. Plowman, C. iii. 140; Gower, C.A.i. 64; bk.i. 1. 654.
=OF-. devoure, 1 p.s. pr. of devorer, to devour.=L. déuorare, to
devour.=L. dé, fully; and worare, to consume. See Voracious.
Der. devour-er.

DEVOUT, devoted to religion. (F.—L.) In early use. ME.
deuot (with u for v); Ancren Riwle, p. 376, 1. 3. Spelt devoute in
Gower, C. A. i. 64; bk. i. 1. 669.—OF. devot, devoted; see Gode-
froy. = L. déudtus, pp. devoted. See Devote.

DEW, damp, moisture. (E.) ME. deu, dew; spelt deau, dyau,
Ayenbite of Inwyt, 136, 144. The pl. dewes is in P. Plowman, C.
xviii. 21. AS. déaw, Grein, i. 190.4-Du. dauw; Icel. dogg, gen.
sing. and nom. pl. déggvar; cf. Dan. dug, Swed. dagg ; OHG. tow,
tau; G. thau. Teut. type *dawwo-. B. Perhaps connected with Skt.
dhav, dhav, to run, flow (Fick); and Gk. déew (for *6éFewv), to run
(Prellwitz). Der. dew-y; also dew-lap (Mids. Nt. Dream, ii. 1. 50,
iv. 1. 127); dew-point (modern).

DEXTER, on the right side, right. (L.) A heraldicterm. In
Shak. Troil. iv. 5. 128. He also has dexterity, Haml.i. 2. 157.
Dryden has dexterous, Abs. and Achit. 904.—L. dexter, right, said of
hand or side.+Gk. dSegids, Seirepds, on the right; Skt. dakshiza-, on
the right, on the south (to a man looking eastward) ; OHG. zéso, on
the right; Goth. taihswa, the right hand; Russ. desnitsa, the right
hand; W. deheu, right, southern; Gael. and Irish deas, right, southern.
B. The Skt. dakshina- is from the Skt. daksh, to satisfy, suit, be
strong; cf. Skt. daksha-, clever, able. Brugmann, i. § 598. Der.
dexter-i-ty, -ous, -ous-ly, -ous-ness, dextr-al.

DEY, a governor of Algiers, before the French conquest. (F.—
Turk.) ‘The dey deposed, 5 July, 1830;” Haydn, Dict. of Dates.
—F. dey,—Turk. dai, a maternal uncle. ‘Orig. a maternal uncle,
then a friendly title formerly given to middle-aged or old people,
esp. among the Janizaries; and hence, in Algiers, consecrated at
length to the commanding officer of that corps, who frequently
became afterward pacha or regent of that province; hence the
European misnomer of dey, as applied to the latter ;’ Webster,

DHOW, DOW, akind of ship, a slave-ship. (E. Indian?) See
Dhow in Yule; xot of Arab. origin, Given as dao or dava in
Molesworth’s Marathi Dict. Perhaps from Skt. dhav, to run, flow;
dhavin, running.

DI- (1), prefix; ‘apart.’ (L.) L. di-, shorter form of dis-; see
Dis-.

DI- (2), prefix, signifying ‘ twice’ or ‘double.’ (Gk.) Gk. &-, for
dis, twice. +L. bis, bi-, twice; Skt. duis, dvi-, twice. Connected with
Gk. d0w, L. duo, Skt. dua, E. two. See Two.

DIA-, a common prefix. (Gk.) From Gk, 8&4, through, also,
between, apart ; closely related to dis, twice, and dvo, two. Cf. L.
dis-, apart. ‘ Both the prefixal and the prepositional use of 6:4 are
to be explained by the idea between;’ Curtius, i. 296. See Two.
@ This prefix forms no part of the words diamond, dial, or diary, as
may be seen.

DIABETES, a disease accompanied with excessive discharge of


DIAMOND 167


urine. (Gk.) Medical. In Kersey, ed. 1715. The adj. diabetical is
in Cockeram (1642). —Gk. d:a8qrns, diabetes; orig. a pair of com-
passes, a siphon. = Gk, d:aBaivew, to stand with the legs apart (like
compasses) ; also, to pass through (a siphon).—Gk. da, apart ; and
Baivey, to go, cognate with E. Come, q. v.

DIABOLIC, DIABOLICAL, devilish. (L.—Gk.) Spelt
diabolick, Milton, P. L. ix. 95.—L. diabolicus, devilish. — Gk. 5:aBoAu-
xés, devilish: = Gk. 5:¢Bodos, the devil. See Devil.

DIACHYLON, an adhesive plaister, (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Diachylon,
a plaister;’ Phillips (1658). Spelt diachilon in W. Bullein, Dia-
logue against the Fever (1578), p. 48 (E.E.T.S.).—MF. diaculon,
diachylon; Cot.—Late L. diachylon, a medicament (Lewis).—Gk.
dad xvAdv, a medicine composed of juices ; from da, by means of;
and xvA@y, gen. pl. of xvAds, juice; see Chyle. @ The Gk. &4,
‘consisting of,’ was formerly in much use as a prefix in medicinal
remedies, as dia-codium, dia-pente, &c.

DIACONAL, pertaining to a deacon. (F.—L.—Gk.) From F.
diaconal, which Cotgrave translates by ‘diaconall.?—Late L. dia-
conalis, formed with suffix -alis from L. didcon-us, a deacon. —Gk.
dudkovos, a deacon. See Deacon. Similarly diaconate=F. diaconat,
from L. didcon-dtus, deacon-ship.

DIACRITIC, distinguishing between. (Gk.) ‘ Diacritick points;’
Wallis to Bp. Lloyd (1699), in Nicholson’s Epist. Cor. i. 123
(Todd).— Gk. diaxpitixds, fit for distinguishing. — Gk. 8:4, between;
and xpivey, to distinguish. See Critic. Der. diacritic-al ; used by
Sir W. Jones, Pref. to Pers. Grammar.

DIADEM, a fillet on the head, a crown. (F.—L.—Gk.) In early
use. ME. diademe, Chaucer, C. T, 10357, 10374 (F 43, 60); Becket,
2149 (marked 2049); cf. P. Plowman, B. iii. 286.—OF. diademe ;
Cot. = L. diadéma. = Gk. dia5npa, a band, fillet. — Gk. S:adéw, I bind
round.=—Gk. dd, round, lit. apart; and dé, I bind. Cf. Skt. dd, to
bind ; daman, a garland.=4/DE, to bind ; Brugmann, ii. § 707.

DIAGRESIS, a mark ("*) of separation. (L.—Gk.) In Kersey’s
Dict. ed. 1715.—L. digresis.—Gk. Siaipeors, a dividing. =Gk,
diatpéw, I take apart, divide.=Gk. &-, for 5:4, apart; and aipéw,
Itake. See Heresy.

DIAGNOSIS, a scientific determination of a disease. (Gk.) The
adj. diagnostic was in earlier use than the sb.; it occurs in Blount’s
Gloss. ed. 1674.—Gk. di:ayvwous, a distinguishing ; whence the adj.
diayvworuds, able to distinguish. Gk. 5:4, between; and yvaats,
enquiry, knowledge, from y-yvwoxw, I know, cognate with E. know.
See Know.

DIAGONAL, running across from corner to corner. (F.—L.—
Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674; and in Cotgrave.—F. diagonal,
‘diagonall ;’ Cot.—L. diagéndlis, formed with suffix -alis from a stem
diagon-.—Gk. d:aywv-1os, diagonal.=Gk. 8:4, through, across, be-
tween ; and ywvia, a corner, angle. Der. diagonal-ly.

DIAGRAM, a sketch, figure, plan. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Diagram, a title
of a book, a sentence or decree; also, a figure in geometry; and in
music, it is called a proportion of measures, distinguished by certain
notes ;” Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674; diagramme in Cockeram (1642).
=L. diagramma, a scale, gamut.—Gk. didypaypa, a figure, plan,
gamut, list; lit. that which is marked out by lines. = Gk. d:aypaper,
to mark out by lines, draw out, describe. =Gk. 5:4, through ; and
ypapew, to write.

DIAL, a clock-face, plate for showing the time of day. (L.) In
Shak. Oth. iii. 4. 175. ME. dyal, dial; Lydgate, Minor Poems,
p- 245; Prompt. Parv. p. 120.— Med. L. didlis, relating to a day; cf.
Med. L. didle, as much land as could be ploughed in a day. [The
word journal has passed from an adjectival to a substantival sense in
a similar manner.]=—L. diés, a day. See Diary. Der. dial-ist,
diall-ing.

DIALECT, a variety of a language. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak.
K. Lear, ii. 2. 115.—F. dialecte, ‘a dialect, or propriety of lan-
guage ;’ Cot.—L. dialectos, a manner of speaking. Gk. d:adexTos,
discourse, speech, language, dialect of a district. — Gk. 5:adéyouar, I
discourse; from the act. form d:adéyw, I pick out, choose between. =
Gk. 8:4, between ; and Aéyerv, to choose, speak. 4 From the same
source is dialogue, q.v. Der. dialect-ic, -ics, -ic-ian, -ic-al, -ic-al-ly.

DIALOGUE, a discourse. (F.—L.—Gk.) In early use. ME.
dialoge, Ancren Riwle, p. 230.—OF. dialoge (Hatzfeld), later dia-
logue (Cotgrave).—L. dialogus, a dialogue (Cicero). = Gk. d:aAoyos, a
conversation. = Gk. d:aAéyopat, I discourse (above). Der. dialog-ist,
-ist-ic, -tst-ic-al.

DIAMETER, the line measuring the breadth across or thickness
through. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. diametre, Chaucer, Astrolabe, pt. il.
§ 38. 8.—OF. diametre, ‘a diameter ;’ Cot.—L. diametros,—Gk.
diduerpos, f. a diagonal, a diameter.— Gk. 5:4, through ; and perpetv,
to measure. See Metre. Der. diametr-ic-al, -ic-al-ly.

DIAMOND, 2 hard precious stone. (F.—L.—Gk.) [A doublet
of adamant, and used in the sense of adamant as late as in Milton,


168 DIAPASON


P. L. vi. 364; see Trench, Select Glossary.] ‘ Have herte as hard as


diamaunt ;’ Rom. of the Rose, 4385 ; spelt diamant, P. Plowman, B.
ii, 13.—OF. diamant, ‘a diamond, also, the load-stone, instead of
aymant;’ Cot. [Cf. Ital. and Span. diamante, G. and Du. diamant,
a diamond.] B. Known to be a mere corruption of adamant, OF.
aimant (Hatzfeld); hence Ital. and Span. diamantino, adamantine.
See Adamant.

DIAPASON, a whole octave, harmony. (L.—Gk.) In Shak.
Lucrece, 1132; also in Milton, Ode at a Solemn Music, 1. 23; Dry-
den, Song for St. Cecilia’s Day, 1.15. ME. dyapason, Trevisa, tr. of
Higden, iii. 209.—L. diapasdn, an octave, a concord of a note with
its octave. = Gk. duarac@v, the concord of the first and last notes of
an octave; a contracted form of the phrase dia mac@v xopdav
ovppovia, a concord extending through all the notes; where d.d
means through, and mac@v is the gen. pl. fem. of the adj. mas,
all (stem mayr-). The same stem appears in pan-theism, panto-mime,
&c. See Pantomime.

DIAPER, figured linen cloth. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘In dieper, in
damaske, or in lyne’ [linen]; Spenser, Muiopotmos, 364. ‘Covered
in cloth of gold diapred weel ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 2160 (A 2158).—OF.
diapré, ‘ diaperd or diapred, diversified with flourishes or sundry
figures;” Cot. From the verb diaprer, ‘ to diaper, flourish, diversifie
with flourishings.’ B. Instill earlier French we find diaspre, with the
sense of ‘fine silk cloth,’ often described as blanc (white); see
Godefroy. = Late L. diasprus, adj.; also used as a sb. (as in ‘ tunica
de diaspra alba’); Ducange.—Late Byzantine Gk. diacmpos, pure
white; from od, wholly, and dompos, white (see N.E.D.). @ Not
the same as Ital. diaspro, a jasper. But cf. Prov. diaspres, diaper,
costly cloth (Bartsch); also Late L. asperi, white money (Ducange).

DIAPHANOUS, transparent. (Gk.) ‘ Diaphanous, clear as
crystal, transparent ;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674. Sir T. Browne has
the sb. diaphanity ; Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 1. § 18.—Gk. diapav7s, seen
through, transparent; with -ows for -ns; cf. diapaive, to show
through. = Gk. 5.4, through; and ¢av-, base of faivey, to show. See
Phantom. Der. diaphanous-ly; from the same source, diaphan-i-ty
or diaphane-i-ty.

DIAPHORETIC, causing perspiration. (Gk.)  ‘ Diaphoretick,
that dissolveth, or sends forth humours;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674.
= L. diaphoréticus, sudorific.— Gk. diapopyntixés, promoting perspira-
tion.=Gk. diag¢épnots, perspiration.=Gk. duapopeiy, to carry off,
throw off by perspiration. Gk. dd, through; and gopeiv, to carry,
allied to @éperv, to bear, cognate with E. bear. See Bear (1).

DIAPHRAGM, a dividing membrane, the midriff. (F.—L.—
Gk.) The L. form diaphragma is in Beaum. and Fletcher, Mons.
Thomas, iii. 1. ‘ Diaphragm, . . . the midriff;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed.
1674.—F. diaphragme, ‘the midriffe ;’ Cot.—L. diaphragma,=— Gk.
didppayya, a partition-wall, the midriff; cf. duappayvumu, I divide by
a fence.=Gk. did, between; and ¢pdcow, I fence in, enclose (fut.
ppatw) ; allied to L, farcire, to stuff. See Farce. Der. diaphragmat-
ic, from diapparypar-, stem of duddparyya.

DIARRHGBA, looseness of the bowels. (L.—Gk.) In Kersey’s
Dict. ed. 17153 diarrhea in Cockeram (1642). —L. diarrhea. =Gk.
dudppoa, lit. a flowing through.—Gk, diappeev, to flow through.=
Gk, 8:4, through; and féevv, to flow.—4/ SREU, to flow. Brugmann,
i. § 318. See Stream.

DIARY, a daily record. (L.) ‘He must alwayes have a diary
about him ;’ J. Howell, Instructions for Foreign Travel, sect. iii. § 4;
ed. 1642.—L. didrium, a daily allowance for soldiers; also, a diary.
—L. diés,aday. Brugmann, i. § 223. Der. diar-ist; cf. dial.

DIASTOLE, a dilatation of the heart. (Gk.) In Kersey’s Dict.
ed. 1715; and in Spenser, Globe ed.; p. 709, col. 1, 1. 20.—Gk.
d:agroAn, a drawing asunder; dilatation of the heart. — Gk. diacreAAey,
# put aside.—Gk. da, in the sense of ‘apart;’ and o7réAAav, to
place.

DIATONIC, proceeding by tones. (Gk.) ‘Diatonick Musick keeps
a mean temperature between chromatic and enharmonic, and. may go
for plain song ;” Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674. —Gk. d:arovixds, diatonic;
we find also d:arovos (lit. on the stretch) used in-the same sense. =
Gk. diareivew, to stretch out.—Gk. da, through; and reivev, to
stretch. —4/ TEN, to stretch. See Tone, Der. diatonic-al-ly.

DIATRIBE, an invective discourse. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Diatribe, an
auditory, or place where disputations or exercises are held;’ Blount’s
Gloss. ed. 1674. Also ‘a disputation ;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.—L. dia-
triba, a place for learned disputations, a school; an extension of the
sense of the Gk. d:arpiB7, lit. a wearing away, a waste of time, a
discussion, argument. —Gk. diarpiBev, to rub away, waste, spend
time, discuss. — Gk. 6:4, thoroughly; and rpiBew, to rub (with long .).
Brugmann, ii. § 676.

DIB, to dab lightly, to make small holes in the-ground. (E.) A
lighter form of dab; see N.E.D. and E.D.D. Hence dibber, a dibble;
Pegge, Kenticisms (E.D.S.). Cf. Dab.


DIE


DIBBER, DIBBLE, a tool used for setting plants. (E.)


‘T’ll not put The dibble in earth to set one slip of them;’ Wint. Tale,
iv. 4. 100. ME. debylle, a setting-stick ; Cath. Anglicum, p. 92 (and
note). From the stem dab-; see Dab. And see above.

DICH, the plural of die; see Die (2).

DICKHER, half a score, esp. of hides. (L.) Once common; the
acc. pl. dicras occurs in Domesday Book; see Blount’s Nomolexicon.
From AS. *dicor, not recorded ; but representing Late L. dicora.=—
L. deciiria, a company or set of ten.—L. decem, ten; see Ten. So
also F. dacre, Late L. dacra; Swed. ddcker, ‘a dicker;’ Widegren.

DICOTYLEDON, a plant with two seed-lobes. (Gk.) In Bailey,
vol. ii. (1727,1731). Amod. botan. term; in common use. Coined
from Gk. d:-, double (from dis, twice); and Gk. corvAndwy, a cup-
shaped hollow or cavity.—Gk. xorvAn, anything hollow,a cup. Cf.
L. catinus, a bowl; see Kettle. Der. dicotyledon-ous.

DICTATE, to command, tell what to write. (L.) ‘ Sylla could
not skill of letters, and therefore knew not how to dictate ;’ Bacon,
Ady. of Learning, ed. W. A. Wright, i. 7. 29; p. 66.. Shak, has
dictator ; Cor. li. 2. 93.—L. dictatus, pp. of dictare, to dictate; cf.
‘Sylla nesciuit literas, non potuit dictare, quoted in Bacon, Essay
xy. . Dictaére is the frequentative of dicere, to say; see Diction.
Der. dictat-ion, -or, -or-ship, -or-t-al, -or-i-al-ly.

DICTION, manner of discourse. (F.—L.) In Shak. Haml. vy.
2. 123.—F. diction, ‘a diction, speech, or saying;’ Cot.—L.. acc.
dictionem, from nom. dictio, a saying, speech; cf. dict-, pp. stem of
dicere, to say, also, to appoint; from the same root as dicare, to tell,
publish.+Gk. deixvuju, I show, point out; Skt. dig, to show, pro-
duce; Goth. ga-teihan, to tell, announce; G. zeigen, to point out.—
oy DEIK, to show, point out; Brugmann, i. § 207. Der. diction-ary;
also dictum (neut. sing. of L. pp. dictus), pl. dicta; and see ditto.
Hence also bene-diction, benison, male-diction, malison, contra-diction,
&c. From the same root are indicate, indict, index, avenge, judge,
preach, &c.

DID, pt. t. of do; see Do.

DIDACTIC, instructive. (Gk.) In Bp. Taylor, vol. iii. ser. 10;
also in his Dissuasive from Popery, pt. i.s. 9 (R.).—Gk. d:dax7eK6s,
instructive; cf. 1 Tim. ili. 2.—Gk. dddoxew, to teach ; where dd4-
one =* §-bak-oxev. 4+ L. doc-ére, to teach; cf. disc-ere, to learn.
Allied to doxeivy, to think; Séopat, Ionic for Sé€xoua:, receive.
(4/DEK.) Brugmann,i. § 707. Der. didactic-al, -al-ly.

DIDAPPER, a diving bird, a dabchick. (E.) ‘Doppar, or dy-
doppar, watyr-byrde, mergulus;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 127. For dive-
dapper. ‘Like a dive-dapper peering through a wave;’ Shak. Venus,
86. Compounded of dive (q. v.) and dapper, i.e. a diver, dipper,
plunger, so that the sense of dive occurs twice in the word, according
to a common principle of reduplication in language. [Cf. Derwent-
water = white-water-water.] B. Dapper answers to AS. doppa ; cf. dop-
chicken, the Linc. word for the dab-chick (Halliwell) ; doppers, i.e.
dippers or Anabaptists, used by Ben Jonson in his masque entitled
News from the New World; and the form doppar cited from the
Prompt. Parv. above. The AS. form diife-doppa actually occurs, to
translate the L. pelicanus (Bosworth) ; where -a is an agential suffix,
replaced (later) by -er; and dop-=* dup-, weak grade of * deup-, as
seen in AS. déop, deep. Cf. Swed. doppa, to dip, plunge, immerge.
Hence also dap-chick, for dop-chick, i.e. the diving bird, corrupted. to
dab-chick for ease of pronunciation. See Dip, Deep.

DIDDLE,, to overreach. (E.) Also, to waste time by dawdling ;
see E.D.D. From the base dyd-, as in AS. dyd-rian, to delude;
formed (by vowel-change of w to y) from dud-, weak grade allied to
dauth-, as seen in déad, death; cf. Dawdle. Cf. EFries. dudjen,
bedudjen, to overreach, dudden, to be stupid, doze, dream; Norw.
dudda, to hush to sleep (Ross); Dan. dude, darnel (because it
stupefies) ; Larsen.

DIE (3), to lose life, perish. (Scand.) ME. dien, dyen, dijen,
dejen, deyen. Spelt dejen in Layamon, 31796. Late AS. dé3az, Holy.
Rood-tree, ed. Napier (E.E.T.S., 1894), p. 14, 1. 25; so that the
word may be a native one, after all, [The ordinary AS. word is
steorfan or sweltan; hence it is usual to regard die as Scandinavian. ]
=—Icel. deyja, to die; Swed. dé; Dan. dée. + OSax. déian; MHG.
touwen, to die. Cf. also OFries. deia, deja, to kill; Goth. af-daujan,
to harass, Matt. ix. 36. The Tent. base is *dau ; whence * dau-jan,.
to die (Icel. deyja). Cf. Russ. davite, to strangle. See Death,
Dead.

DIE (2), a small cube used for gaming. (F.—L.) The sing. die
is in Shak, Wint. Tale, iv. 3. 27; he also uses the pl. dice (id.i. 2.
133). Earlier, the sing. is seldom found; but the ME. pl. dys is
common; see Chaucer, C. T, 1240, 11002, 12557 (A 1238, F 690,
C 623). Some MSS. spell the word dees, which is, etymologically,
more correct. OF. det, a die (Burguy), later dé, pl. dez (Cotgrave) ;
cf. Prov. dat, a die (Brachet) ; also Ital. dado, pl. dadi, a die, cube,
pedestal; Span. dado, pl. dados.=— Late L. datum, a thing given or


DIET


decreed; hence applied to a die for casting lots. Orig. neuter of
datus, pp. of dare, to give, let go, give forth, thrust, throw. See
Date (1). Der. die, a stamp, pl. dies; also dice, verb, ME. dycen,
Prompt. Pary. p.121. Doublet, dado.

DIET (1), a prescribed allowance of food. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Of
his diete mesurable was he;’ Chaucer, C. T. 437 (A 435). Cf. ‘And
3if thow diete the thus,’ i.e. diet thyself in this way ; P. Plowman, B.
vi. 270.—OF, diete, ‘ diet, or daily fare; also, a Diet, Parliament;
Cot. —Late L. diéta, dieta, a ration of food.—Gk. diarta, mode of
life ; also, diet. Brugmann, i. § 650. Der. diet-ary, -et-ic.

DIET (2), an assembly, council. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Thus would
your Polish Diet disagree ;’ Dryden, Hind and Panther, ii. 407. It
occurs also in Cotgrave. = OF. diete, ‘diet; also, a Diet, Parliament;’
Cot. = Late L. dieta, a public assembly ; also, a ration of food, diet.
B. The peculiar spelling digta and the suffix -ta leave no doubt that
this word is nothing but a peculiar use of the Gk. Siata, mode of
life, diet. In other words, this word is identical in form with Diet
(1), q.v. y- At the same time, the peculiar sense of the word un-
doubtedly arose from a popular etymology that connected it with the
L. diés, a day, esp. a set day, a day appointed for public business ;
whence, by extension, a meeting for business, an assembly. We
even find digta used to mean ‘a day’s journey ;’” and diéta, ‘a day’s
work,’ or ‘a daily duty ;’ Ducange.

DIFFER, to be distinct, to disagree. (F.—L.) ‘ Dyuerse and
differinge substaunces ;” Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. v. pr. 5; 1.17. Ch.
also has the sb. difference, id. b. v. pr. 6; 1. 157.—OF. differer
(Hatzfeld); F. différer, also with the sense of ‘defer.’ = L. differre,
to carry apart, to differ; also, to defer.—L. dif- (for dis-), apart ;
and ferre, to bear, cognate with E. bear. See Bear (1). Der.
differ-ent (OF. different, from L, pres. part. stem different-), -ent-ly,
-ent-i-al; also differ-ence (OF. difference, from L. differentia).
Doublet, defer.

DIFFICULTY, an obstacle, impediment, hard enterprise. (F.
—L.) [The adj. difficult is in Shak. Oth. iii. 3. 82, but it is some-
what rare in early authors, and was merely developed from the sb.
difficulty, which was a common word and in earlier use.. The ME.
word for ‘difficult? was difficile, occurring in Sir T. Elyot, The
Goyernour, b. i. c. 23.§ 5.] ME. difficultee; Chaucer, C. T. 6854
(D 1272).—OF. difficulté; Cot.=—L. difficultatem, acc. of difficultas,
difficulty, an abbreviated form of *difficilitas.—L. difficilis, hard. = L.
dif-,=dis-, apart; and facilis, easy. See Facile, Faculty. Der.
difficult, -ly.

DIFFIDENT, distrustful, bashful. (L.) In Florio (1598), to
translate Ital. diffidente; and Milton, P. L. viii. 562, ix. 293. Shak.
has.diffidence, K. John, i. 65.—L. diffidentem, acc. of diffidens, pres.
pt. of diffidere, to distrust ; cf. L. diffidentia, distrust. —L. dif- =dis-,
apart, with negative force; and fidere, to trust, allied to fidés, faith.
See Faith. Der. diffident-ly, diffidence; see diffidence in Trench,
Select Glossary.

DIFFRACT, to deflect and break up a beam of light. (L.)
Scientific; not in Johnson.—L. diffract-us, pp. of diffringere, to
break up.—L. dif-, for dis-, apart; and frangere, to break. See
Fraction. Der. diffract-ion, -ive.

DIFFUSE, to shed abroad, pour around, spread, scatter. (L.)
In Shak. Temp. iv. 1.79. Chaucer has diffusioun, Troilus, iii. 296. =
L. diffisus, pp. of diffundere, to shed abroad. —L. dif-=dis-, apart;
and fundere, to pour. See Fuse (1). Der. diffuse, adj.; -ly, -ness,
diffus-ible, -ed, -ed-ly, -ed-ness, -ion, -ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness.

DIG, to turh up earth with a spade. (F.—Du.) ME. diggen.
‘Dikeres and delueres digged up the balkes’=ditchers and delvers
dug up the baulks; P. Plowman, B. vi. 109, where, for digged, the
earlier version (A. vil. 100) has dikeden. [Thus diggen is equivalent
to dikien, to dig.] =F. diguer, to make a dike (15th cent.) ; Littré.
=F. digue, ‘a ditch;’ Cot.— Du. dijk, a dike; cognate with AS. dic,
a dyke, or dike, a ditch. Cf. Swed. dika, to dig a ditch, from dike,
a ditch; Dan. dige, to dig, from dige, a ditch. @ At first a weak
verb ; the strong pt. t. dug is of late invention, the true pt. t. being
digged, which occurs 18 times in the A, V. of the Bible, whereas dug
does not occur init at all. Cf. stuck, late pt. t. of stick, See Dike.
Der. digg-er, digg-ings.

DIGAMMA, a Greek letter representing the sound of E. w. (Gk.)
‘ Digamma, the letter F ;? Cooper’s Thesaurus (1565). Lit. ‘ double
gamma ;’ from its shape (F), which resembled that of a gamma (I)
with a doubled horizontal bar.—Gk. &-, double; and yappa, the
letter g. See Di- (2), and Gamut.

DIGEST, to assimilate food, arrange. (L.) In Shak. L.L.L.


v. 2. 289; Merch. iii. 5. 95. [But digestion is much earlier, viz. in:


Chaucer, C. T. 10661 (F 347); so also digestive, id. 14967 (B 4151);
and digestible, id. 439.) ME. digest, used as a pp.=digested ;
Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 195. —L. digestus, pp. of digerere, to carry
apart, separate, dissolve, digest.=L. di-=dis-, apart; and. gerere, to


DILIGENT 169


epy: See Jest. Der. digest, sb. (L. digestum), -er, -ible, -ion, -ive,
-ibil-i-ty.

DIGHT, prepared, disposed, adorned. (L.) Nearly obsolete.
‘The clouds in thousand liveries dight;’ Milton, L’ All. 62. Dight
is here short for dighted, so that the infinitive also takes the form
dight. ‘ And havea care you dight things handsomely ;’ Beaum. and
Fletcher, Coxcomb, Act iv. sc. 3 (end). ME. dihten, dijten, verb;
the pp. dight is in Chaucer, C.T. 14447 (B 3719). AS. dihtan, to
set in order, dispose, arrange, prescribe, appoint ; Luke, xxii. 29. —
L. dictare, to dictate, prescribe. See Dictate. @ Similarly, the
G. dichten, MHG. tihten, dihten, is borrowed from the same L. verb.

DIGIT, a finger, a figure in arithmetic. (L.) ‘Computable by
digits ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iv. c. 12. § 23.—L. digitus,
a finger, a toe; the sense of ‘figure’ arose from counting on the ©
fingers. 4] Gk. SdxrvAos, a finger, seems to be unrelated. Der.
digit-al, -ate, -at-ed, -at-ion.

DIGNIFY, to make worthy, exalt. (F.—L.) In Shak. Two
Gent. ii. 4. 158.—OF. dignifier, to. dignify (Godefroy); omitted in
Cotgrave, but given in Sherwood’s index to that work.—Late L.
dignificare, to think worthy, lit. to make worthy.—L. digni-, for
digno-, for dignus, worthy ; and -ficdre, a suffix due to facere, to make.
See Dignity and Fact. Der. dignifi-ed.

DIGNITY, worth, rank. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. dig-
netee, dignitee, Chaucer, C. T, 13386 (B 1646); spelt dignete in Hali
Meidenhad, ed. Cockayne, p. 15, 1. 3.—OF. dignité, digniteit.—L.
dignitatem, acc. of dignitds, worth.=L. dignus, worthy ; perhaps
related to decus, esteem, and decet, it is fitting. Brugmann, i. § 762
(3). Der. dignit-ar-y. Doublet, dainty, q.v.

DIGRAPH, a double sign for a single sound. (Gk.) Modern.
Made from Gk. &-, double, and ypapev, to write.

DIGRESS, to step aside, go from the subject. (L.) In Shak.
Romeo, iii. 3.127. [The sb. digression is much older, and occurs in
Thynne’s edition of Chaucer, Troilus, i. 143; the MSS. have
disgressioun.|—L,. digressus, pp. of digredi, to go apart, step aside,
digress. = L. di-=dis-, apart; and gradi, to step; cf. gradus, a step.
See Grade. Der. digress-ion, -ion-al, -ive, -ive-ly.

DIJUDICATE, to judge between two parties, to decide. (L.)
Phillips (1658) has dijudication.=—L. dittidicatus, pp. of diiiidicare, to
decide.—L. di-, apart ; and iidicare, to judge. See Di- (1) and
Judge,

DIKE, a trench, a ditch with its embankment, a bank. (E.) ME.
dik, dyk (also diche, whence the mod. E. ditch). ‘In a dyke falle’=
fall in a ditch (where 2 MSS. have diche); P. Plowman, B. xi. 417.
AS. dic, a dike; ‘hi dulfon ane mycle dic’ =they dug a great dike ;
AS. Chron. an. 1016. + Du. dijk; Icel. diki; Dan. dige; Swed. dike ;
MHG. tich, a marsh, canal; G. teich, a pond, tank; the mod. G.
deich, a dike, being merely borrowed from Low G. Der. dig’, q.v.

DILACERATE, to tear asunder. (L.) Used by Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 6. § 3.—L. dilaceratus, pp. of dilacerare, to
tear apart. = L. di- =dis-, apart; and lacerare, to tear. See Lacerate.
Der. dilacerat-ion,

DILAPIDATHE, to pull down stone buildings, to ruin. (L.) In
Levins, 41. 36. Used by Cotgrave, who translates F. dilapider by
‘to dilapidate, ruin, or pull down stone buildings.’=L. dilapidatus,
pp. of dilapidare, to destroy, lit. to scatter like stones or pelt with
stones; cf. Columella, x. 330.—L. di-=dis-,. apart; and Japid-, stem
of lapis,a stone. See Lapidary. Der. dilapidat-ion.

DILATE, to spread out, enlarge, widen. (F.—L.) ‘In dylating
and declaring of hys conclusion ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 648 h.
[Chaucer has the sb. dilatacioun, C. T. 4652 (B 232).]—OF. dilater,
‘to dilate, widen, inlarge;’ Cot.—L. dilatus, spread abroad ; used
as pp. of differre, but from a different root. = L. di-=dis-, apart ; and
latus, carried, borne, for OLat. dlatus=Gk. tAnrdés, borne, endured.
=4/ TEL, to lift; whence L. follere. Der. dilat-er, -able, -abil-i-ty,
-ion, -or-y, -or-i-ness; also dilat-at-ion (OF. dilatation, which see in
Cotgrave). .

DILEMMA, a perplexity, puzzling situation. (L.—Gk.) In
Cockeram (1642) ; and in Shak. Mer. Wives, iv. 5. 87; All’s Well,
iii. 6. 80.—L. dilemma.—Gk. SiAnupa, a double proposition, an
argument in which one is caught between (diaAapBavera) two
difficulties. —Gk. &:-, twice, double; and Afwpya, an assumption, a
premiss. See Di- (2) and Lemma.

DILETTANTE, a lover of the fine arts. (Ital.—L.) Modern.
The pl. dilettanti occurs in Burke, On a Regicide Peace (Todd).—
Ital. dilettante, pl. dilettanti, a lover of the fine arts; properly pres.
pt. of dilettare, to delight, rejoice.—L. délectdre, to delight. See
Delectable. Der. dilettante-ism.

DILIGENT, industrious. (F.—L.) Chaucer has diligent, C. T.
485 (A 483); and diligence, id. 8071 (E 195). —OF. diligent; Cot.
=L. diligentem, acc. of diligens, careful, diligent, lit. loving; pres.
part. of diligere, to select, to love; lit. to choose between. —L. di-=


170 DILL


dis-, apart, between; and degere, to choose, cognate with Gk. Acyev,
to choose, say. See Legend. Der. diligent-ly, diligence.

DILL, the name of a plant. (E.) ME. dille, dylle. ‘ Dylle, herbe,
anetum ;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 121. AS. dile; ‘myntan and dile and
cymyn’=mint and dill and cummin; Matt. xxiii. 23.44 Du. dille;
Dan. dild; Swed. dill; OHG. tilli, MHG. tille, G. dill.

DILUTE, to wash away, mix with water, weaken. (L.) ‘ Diluted,
alayed, tempered, mingled with water, wet, imperfect;’ Blount’s
Gloss. ed. 1674.—L. dilitus, pp. of diluere, to wash away, mix with
water. =—L. di-=dis-, apart; and were, to wash, cognate with Gk.
Aovewv, to wash. Der. dilute, adj., dilut-ion; from the same source,
dilu-ent, diluv-ium, -ial, -ian; and see deluge.

DIM, obscure, dusky, dark. (E.) ME. dim, dimme; ‘though I
loke dymme ;’ P. Plowman, B.x.179. AS. dim, dark ; Grein, i. 194.
+ Icel. dimmr, dim; MDan. dim; cf. Swed. dimmig, foggy; dimma,
a fog, a mist, haze; MHG. timmer, timber, dark, dim. And cf.
Olrish deim, dark ; deme, darkness. Der. dim-ly, dim-ness.

DIME, a tithe; a tenth of a dollar. (F.—L.) ME. dyme, P.
Plowman, B. xv. 526.—OF. disme, dime.=L, decima, sc. pars, a tenth
part; fem. of decimus, tenth. = L. decem, ten; see Ten. Doublet, tithe.

DIMENSION, measurement, extent. (F.—L.) ‘Without any
dimensions at al;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 1111 g.=—MF, dimension,
‘a dimension, or measuring ;’ Cot.—L. acc. dimensiénem, from nom.
dimensio, a measuring ; cf. dimensus, pp. of dimetirt, to measure off a
part of a thing, to measure out. —L. di-=dis-, apart ; and metiri, to
measure. See Measure.

DIMINISH, to lessen, take from. (F.—L.) ‘To fantasy [fancy]
that giving to the poore is a diminishing of our goods;’ Latimer,
Sixth Ser. on Lord’s Prayer (R.). [Chaucer has diminucion, i.e.
diminution, Troilus, iii. 1335.] A coined word, made by prefixing
di- to the E. minish, in imitation of L. diminuere, to diminish, where
the prefix di- (=L. dis-, apart) is used intensively. See Minish,
Minute. Der. diminish-able; like L. pp. diminiitus are diminut-ion
(OF. diminution, L. acc. diminutidnem), diminut-ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness.

DIMISSORY, giving leave to depart. (L.) ‘Without the
bishop’s dimissory letters presbyters might not go to another dioces;’
Bp. Taylor, Episcopacy Asserted, s. 39 (R.).=—L. dimissérius, giving
leave to go before another judge.—L. dimissus, pp. of dimittere, to
send forth, send away, dismiss.—L. di-, for dis-, away; and mittere,
to send. See Dismiss.

DIMITY, a kind of stout white cotton cloth. (Ital.—L.—Gk.)
‘Dimitty, a fine sort of fustian;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. ‘We do
vse to buy many of their silke quilts, and of their Scamato and
Dimite;’ Hakluyt, Voy. ii. pt. 1. p. 115 (misnumbered 127). =Ital.
dimiti, pl. of dimito, ‘a kind of course cotton or flanell;’ Florio. =
Late L. dimitum (pl. dimita), silk woven with two threads. = Gk.
diperos, made with a double thread.—Gk, di-, double; and piros, a
thread of the weof. 4 Mr. Wedgwood quotes from Muratori (in
Ducange) a passage containing the words ‘ amita, dimita, et trimita,
explained to mean silks woven with one, two, or three threads
respectively. The word thus passed from Gk. into Latin, and thence
into Ital. dimito, which is duly recorded by Florio; and so into
English.

DIMORPHOUES, of two forms. (Gk.) Modern. Gk. diuopd-os,
of two forms ; with suffix -ous.—Gk, d:-, double; popp-7, form; see
Di- (2) and Morphia.

DIMPLE, a small hollow. (E.) In Shak. Wint. Ta. ii. 3. ror.
ME, dympull. ‘Wir chyn full choise was .. with a dympull;’
Destruction of Troy (E.E.T.S.), 1. 3060. Apparently from a base
*dump (with mutation of u to y). It answers in form to G. tiimpel,
dumpfel, a pool; OHG. tumphilo. Cf. Dan. dial. dump, a hollow in
a field; Du, dompelen, to dive. All perhaps allied to Swed. dial.


dimpa, to fall down, to plunge, str. vb. (pt. t. damp, supine dumpid).


If so, the orig. sense of dimple was ‘deep pool;’ thence, a hollow
place. Cf. Lith. dubti, to be hollow (pres. t. dumb-u). See Dingle.

DIN, a loud noise, clamour; to sound. (E.) The sb. is ME, din,
dene, dune; spelt dine, Havelok, 1860; dune, Layamon, i. 43; 1. 1009.
AS, dyn, dyne, noise; Grein, i. 213; dynnan, to make a loud sound;
id, + Icel. dynr, a din; dyzja,to pour, rattle down, like hail or rain;
Swed. daz, a din; dana, to ring; Dan. dén, a rumble, booming;
done, to rumble, boom; Skt. dhuni-, roaring, a torrent; dhvani-, a
sound, din; dhkvan, to sound, roar, buzz. :

DINE, to take dinner, eat. (F.—L.) ME. dinen, dynen: P.
Plowman, B, v. 75; Rob. of Glouc. p. 558. [The sb. is diner (with
one 2), P. Plowman, B. «xiii. 28 ; Rob. of Glouc. p. 561.]—OF.
disner, mod. F. diner, to dine.— Late L. *disjunare, short for *dis-
jejunare, to break one’s fast.—L. dis-, away; and iéindre, to fast,
from iéiiinus, fasting, See Romania, viii. 95; where it is explained
that OF. disner, inf., answers to Late L. type *disjundre, whilst the
Late L. type *disjuino (1 p. s. pr.) produced the OF, desjeune, F.
déjeune, I breakfast. The difference in form is due to the difference


DIP


| in accentuation. Somewhat similar is the formation of F. aider from


L. adiiitare. See Aid. Korting, § 3007. Der. dinner (ME. diner,
from OF. disner, where the infin. is used as a sb.).

DING, to throw violently, beat, urge, ring. (E.) ‘To ding (i.e.
fling) the book a coit’s distance from him;’ Milton, Areopagitica,
ed. Hales, p. 32. ME. dingen, pt. t.dang, dong, pp. dungen. ‘ God-
rich stert up, and on him dong;’ Havyelok, 1147; dungen, id. 227.
Though not found in AS., the word is probably E. rather than
Scand. ; for it is a strong verb, whereas the related Scand. verbs are
but weak. Cf. Icel. dengja, to hammer; Dan. denge, to bang ; Swed.
diinga, to bang, thump, beat. Cf. also MDan. dinge, to blunt. an
edge by beating on it; OHG. tangol,a hammer. Teut. type *dengan-,
pt. t. *dang, pp. *dunganoz. See Dangle, Dung.

DING-DONG, an imitation of the sound of a bell. (E.) In
Shak. Temp. i. 2. 403. A reduplicated form, with varied vowel;
from dong, an imitative word echoing a ringing sound.

DINGHY, DINGEY, a rowing-boat. (Bengali.) From Beng.
dingi, a boat, a wherry (H. H. Wilson) ; and see Yule.

DINGLE, a small dell, little valley. (E.) In Milton, Comus,
312. ME. dingel, a deep hollow, an abyss; ‘ deopre then eni sea-
dingle,? deeper than any sea-pool; O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris,
i. 263. [It thus answers in sense to what appears to have been the
orig. sense of dimple; cf. the variantdimble. ‘Within a gloomie dimble
shee doth dwell, Downe in a pitt, ore-grown with brakes and briars ;’
Ben Jonson, Sad Shepherd, A.ii.sc. 2. ‘And satyrs, that in slades and
gloomy dimbles dwell;’ Drayton, Poly-Olbion, s. 2.1. 190.] B. It is
clearly related to ME. dung, a pool ; ‘so deop dung that ha druneneth
therin,’ so deep a pool that they are drowned therein ; Seinte
Marherete, ed. Cockayne, p. 15, l. 21. Cf. OHG. tunc, an under-
ground cave; Lith. deng-ti, to cover. See Dimple.

DINGO, the native Australian dog. (New S. Wales.) New S.
Wales dingo, written teingo in 1798 (Morris).

DINGY, soiled, dusky, dimmed. (E.) Very rare in books.
‘ Dingy, foul, dirty ; Somersetshire;’ Halliwell. So also ‘dingy, dirty;’
Pegge, Kenticisms (1736). ‘This sense of ‘dirty’ is the original one.
The word really means ‘dung-y’ or ‘soiled with dung.’ The 7 is
due to an AS. y, which is the modification of u, by the usual rule ;
ef. fill, from full: whilst ng has taken the sound of nj. B. This change
from u to i (for y) appears as early as the tenth century; we find
‘stercoratio, dingiung’ =a dunging ; Ailfric’s Vocab., pr. in Voc. 104.
8. y. We can explain the change from ng to nj, by observing that
there was an AS. weak f. dyncge as well as the str. f. dung. Cf.
mixendincgan, acc., lit. mixen-dung ; Anglia, vol. ix. p.261,1. 9; also
AS. gedyngan, weak vb., prov. E. dinge, to soil. And cf. stingy, from
sting. See Dung. Cf. Swed. dyngig, dungy, from dynga, dung.

DINNER;; see under Dine.

DINT, a blow, force. (E.) ME. dint, dunt, dent; spelt dint, Will.
of Palerne, 1234, 2784; dent, id. 2757; dunt, Layamon, 8420. AS.
dynt, a blow; Grein, i. 213. Icel. dyntr, a dint; dynta, to dint ;
Swed. dial. dunt, a stroke; dunia, to strike, to shake. All from a
Teut. base dunt-. See Dent.

DIOCESE, a bishop’s province. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. diocyse,
Chaucer, C. T. 666 (A 664).—OF. diocese, ‘a diocess;” Cot.—L.
diecésis.= Gk, d:0ixnots, housekeeping, administration, a province, a
diocese. — Gk. d:ocnéw, I keep house, conduct, govern.—Gk, &:-= da,
through, throughout ; and oixéw, I inhabit, from olxos, a house, an
abode; cognate with L. uicus, a village (whence E. wick, a town),
and Skt. veea-s, a house. Der. dioces-an.

DIGECIOUS, having male and female flowers on separate plants.
(Gk.) Botanical, From mod. Latin diecia (Linnzus, 1735); Gk.
type *d:oxnia, sb., from *dioxos, adj. having two houses. Gk. &-,
double ; and ofxos, a house. See above.

DIOPTRICS, the science of the refraction of light. (Gk.)
‘ Dioptricks, a part of optics, which treats of the different refractions
of the light, passing thro’ transparent mediums ;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed.
1715.—Gk. 7a diomrpixa, the science of dioptrics.— Gk. diorrpikés,
belonging to the use of the Siorzpa, an optical instrument for taking
heights, &c.— Gk. &-d, through; and 6m-, as in Ionic 6m-w7-a, I have
seen, d-oyvat, I shall see; with agential suffix -rpa, f. Cf. omrnp,
aspy. See Optics. Der. dioptric, -al.

DIORAMA, a scene seen through a small opening. (Gk.)
Modern. A term applied to various optical exhibitions, and to the
building in which they are shown ; first shown in 1823. Coined
from Gk. &-=6:4, through; and Gpaya, a sight, thing seen, from
dpaas, I see; see Wary. Der. dioram-ic.

DIP, to plunge, immerge, dive for a short time. (E.) ME. dippen;
Prick of Conscience, 8044. Also duppen, Trevisa, tr. of Higden,
i, 117. AS. dippan, Exod. xii. 22; dyppan, Levit. iv. 17.4 Dan.
dyppe, to dip, plunge, immerge. Teut. type *dup-jan, causal form
from the base *dup-, weak grade of *deup-, as seen in AS. déop, deep.
See Deep. The second grade is daup-, as seen in Goth. daupjan, to’


DIPHTHERIA.


dip, immerse, baptise, Du. doopen, to baptise, Swed. dépa, to baptise,
G. taufen, OHG. toufan, to baptise. See Deep and Dive. Der.
dip, sb.; dipp-er.

DIPHTHERIA, a throat-disease, accompanied with the forma-
tion of a false membrane. (Gk.) First in 1857. Coined from Gk.
d:pO€pa, leather; from the leathery nature of the membrane formed.
Allied to Gk. deWeiv, to make supple; (hence, to prepare leather).
Cf. L. depsere, to knead, make supple, tan leather. Der. diphther-it-ic.

DIPHTHONG, a union of two vowel sounds in one syllable.
(F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt dipthong in Ben Jonson, Eng. Grammar, ch. 5 ;
and in Sherwood’s Index to Cotgrave, which also gives the MF.
dipthongue.=— MF. dipthongue, ‘ diphthonge;’ Palsgrave (1530).= L.
acc. diphthongum, f.— Gk. dipPoyyos, with two sounds. = Gk. &:- = dis,
double; and p@oyyés, voice, sound, from Gk. p0éyyoua, I utter a
sound, cry out. Cf. Lith, speng-ti, to resound.

DIPLOMA, a document conferring a privilege. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Di-
ploma, a charter of a prince, letters patents, a writ or bull;’ Blount’s
Gloss. ed. 1674. —L. diploma (gen. diplématis), a document conferring
a privilege.= Gk. SimAwpya, lit. anything folded double; a license,
diploma, which seems to have been originally folded double. = Gk.
diA6os, twofold, double. = Gk, &:-=8is, double; and wAdos, with the
sense of E. -fold, respecting which see Double. Der. diplomat-ic
(from the stem diplomat-), -ic-al, -ic-al-ly, -ist, diplomac-y,

DIPSOMANTA, a morbid thirst for stimulants. (Gk.) Modern.
From Gk. dwo-, for dios, thirst ; and pavia, mania,

DIPTERA, an order of insects with two wings. (Gk.) First in
1819. In Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715, we find ‘ Dipteron, in architecture,
a building that has a double wing or isle’ (sic). Coined from Gk.
d.-=8is, double; and mrepdv, a wing, from m7-, weak grade of zer-,
as in mét-opat, I fly. 4/ PET, to fly; see Feather.

DIPTYCH, a double-folding tablet. (L.—Gk.) First in 1622.
‘ Diptychs, folded tables, a pair of writing tables;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.
=Late L. diptycha, pl.=Gk. dimtuvxa, pl. a pair of tablets. —Gk.
dimtuxos, folded, doubled. Gk. &-, for dis, double; and mrux-7, a
fold; cf. also mruxrés, folded, from mrvccey, to fold.

DIR, fearful, terrible. (L.) Shak. has dire, Rich. IT, i. 3. 127;
direful, Temp. i. 2. 263 direness, Macb. v. 5. 14.—L. dirus, dreadful,
horrible. Perhaps allied to Gk. devds, frightful; cf. deAds, frightened,
cowardly ; connected with Séos, fear, d<iSev, to fear. Der. dire-ful,
-ful-ly, -ness- (all hybrid compounds).

DIRECT, straight onward, outspoken, straight. (L.) ME. directe,
Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, ed. Skeat, ii. 35. 11. [He also has the
verb directen ; see Troil. b. v. last stanza but one.]—L. directus,
straight, pp. of dirigere, to straighten, direct.—L. di-, for dis-, apart ;
and regere, to rule, control. See Rector, and Right. Der.
direct-ly, -ness; also direct, vb., -ion, -ive, -or, -or-ate, -or-y, -or-i-al.
Doublet, dress, q:v.; and see dirge.

DIRGE, a funeral song or hymn, lament. (L.) ME. dirige;
‘placebo and dirige;’ P. Plowman, C. iv. 467; and see Ancren
Riwle, p. 22; Prompt. Parv. p. 121. [See note to the line in P. Pl.,
which explains that an antiphon in the office for the dead began
with the words (from Psalm v. 8) ‘dirige, Dominus meus, in con-
spectu tuo uitam meam ;” whence the name.]—L. dirige direct thou,
imperative mood of dirigere, to direct. See Direct.

DIRK, a poniard, a dagger. (Du.?) ‘With a drawn dirk and
bended [cocked] pistol;’ State Trials, Marquis of Argyle, an. 1661
(R.). First found in 1602, spelt dork (N.E.D.). Probably dork is
the same word with Du. do/k, Swed. and Dan. dolk, G. dolch, a
dagger, poniard. This is thought to be a word of Slayonic origin;
cf. Polish ¢alich, a dagger. @ Irish duirc, a poniard, is borrowed
from E.

DIRT, any foul substance, mud, dung. (Scand.) ME. drit, by
the shifting of the letter r so common in English. ‘ Dri¢ and donge’
=dirt and dung; K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 4718; cf. Havelok,
682. —Icel. drit, dirt, excrement of birds; drifa, to void excrement ;
cf. Swed. dial. drifa, with same sense; Rietz.- Du. drijten, with
same sense; cf. MDu. drijt, dirt (Kilian). 4 In AS., we find only
the verb gedritan; it is rare, but occurs in Cockayne’s Leechdoms,
i. 364. Der. dirt-y, dirt-i-ly, dirt-i-ness.

DIS.-, prefix. (L.) 1. From L. dis-, apart; dis and bis are both
forms from an older duis, which is from L. duo, two; cf. Goth. twis-,
apart. Brugmann,i.§ 279. Hence the sense is ‘in two,’ i.e. apart,
away. 2. The Gk. form of the prefix is di-; see Di- (2). 3. The
L. dis- became des- in OF., mod. F. dé-; this appears in several
words, as in de-feat, de-fy, &c., where the prefix must be carefully
distinguished from that due to L. dé. 4. Again, in some cases, dis-
is a late substitution for an older des-, which is the OF. des-; thus
Chaucer has desarmen from the OF. des-armer, in the sense of dis-arm.

DISABLE, to make unable, disqualify. (L.; axd F.—L.) In
Spenser, F. Q. v. 4. 31; and see Trench, Select Glossary. Made by
prefixing L. dis- to able. See Dis- and Able. Der. disabil-i-ty.


DISBAND 171


DISABUSE, to free from abuse, undeceive. (L.; and F.—L.)
In Clarendon, Civil War, vol. i. pref. p. 21 (R.); and in Cotgrave,
s.v. des-abuser, From L. dis- and abuse. See Dis- and Abuse.

DISADVANTAGE, want of advantage, injury. (F.—L.) In
Shak. Cor. i.6. 49. ME. disauauntage, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, ii. 57.
= OF, desavantage (Hatzfeld).—OF. des- < L. dis-, apart; and OF.
oats See Dis- and Advantage. Der. disadvantage-ous,
-ous-ly,

DISAFFECT, to make unfriendly. (L.; and F.—L.) ‘ Disaf-


fected to the king ;’ State Trials, Hy. Sherfield, an. 1632 (R.). From


L. dis- and affect. See Dis-and Affect. Der. disaffected-ly, -ness, -ion.

DISAFFOREST, to deprive of the privilege of forest lands; to
render common. (L.) ‘There was much land disafforested ;? Howell’s
Letters, b. iv. let. 16. § 4. From L. dis-, away; and Law L. affor-
estare, to make into a forest, from af- (for ad) and foresta, a forest.
See Dis- and Forest.

DISAGREE, to be at variance. (F.—L.) In Tyndal, Works,
p- 133, col. 2.— OF. desagreer (Hatzfeld). — OF. des- < L. dis-, apart 3
and OF. agreer. See Dis- and Agree. Der. disagree-able, -abl-y,
-able-ness, -ment. The adj. disagreeable was suggested by OF.
desagreable.

DISALLOW, to refuse to allow. (F.—L.) ME. desallowen, to
refuse to assent to, to dispraise, refuse, reject. ‘Al that is humble he
desalloweth;’? Gower, C. A. i. 833 bk. i. 1237.—OF. desalouer,
desalower, to blame (Godefroy). —OF. des- (L. dis-); and alouer, to
approve of. See Dis- and Allow (2). Der. disallow-able, -ance.

DISANNUL, to annul completely. (L.; and F.—L.) In Shak.
Com. Err.i, 1.145. From L. dis-, apart, here used intensively ; and
annul. See Dis- and Annul. Der. disannul-ment.

DISAPPEAR, to cease to appear, to vanish. (L.; and F.—L.)
In Dryden, On the death of a very Young Gentleman, |. 23; and in
Cockeram (1623). From L. dis-, apart, away; and appear. See
Dis- and Appear. Der. disappear-ance.

DISAPPOINT, tofrustrate whatis appointed. (F.—L.) Shak. has
disappointed in the sense of ‘unfurnished,’ or ‘unready;’ Hamlet, i.
5.77. Ralegh has ‘such disappointment of expectation ;’ Hist. of
World, b. iv. c. 5. s. 11 (R.).—OF. desapointer, ‘to disappoint or
frustrate ;” Cot. OF. des-<L. dis-, apart, away; and OF. apointer,
to appoint. See Appoint. Der. disappoint-ment.

DISAPPROVE, not to approve, to reject. (L.; anzd F.—L.)
‘And disapproves that care;” Milton, Sonn. to Cyriack Skinner.
From L. dis-, away; and approve. See Dis- and Approve. Der.
disapprov-al ; from the same L, source, disapprob-at-ion.

DISARM, to deprive ofarms. (F.—L.) ME. desarmen, Chaucer,
tr. of Boethius, b. i. met. 4; 1. 11.—OF. desarmer, ‘to disarme, or
deprive of weapons ;” Cot.—OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart, away ;
and armer, to arm. See Dis- and Arms. Der. disarm-a-ment,
probablv an error for disarm-ment ; see ‘ desarmement, a disarming ;’
Cot.

DISARRANGE, to disorder. (L.; and F.—L.) Not in early
use; the older word is disarray. ‘The whole of the arrangement, or
rather disarrangement of their military;’ Burke, On the Army Esti-
mates (R.). From L. dis-, apart, away; and arrange. Doubtless
suggested by MF. desarrenger, ‘to unranke, disorder, disarray ;’ Cot.
See Dis- and Arrange. Der. disarrange-ment.

DISARRAY, a want of order. (F.—L. and Teut.) In early use.
ME. disaray, also disray. Thus, in Chaucer, C. T. (Pers. Tale,
Remed. Luxuriz), Group I, 927, we find the readings desray, disray,
and disaray, as being equivalent words; disray occurs yet earlier, in
K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 4353. —AF. *desarrei, OF, desarroi, later
desarroy, ‘ disorder, confusion, disarray;’ Cot. There was also an
AF. form desray, Stat. of the Realm, i. 246 ; OF. desroz, later desroy,
‘disorder, disarray ;’ id.; see Godefroy. B. The former is from OF.
des-, L. dis-, apart, away; and AF. arrei, OF. arroi, compounded of
ar- (standing for L. ad, to) and AF. rei, OF. roi, order. In the latter,
the syllable ar- is omitted. See Dis- and Array. Der. disarray,
verb.

DISASTER, a calamity. (F.—L.) See Shak. Hamlet, i. 1, 118;
All’s Well, i. 1.187. = MF. desas¢re, ‘a disaster, misfortune, calamity’
Cot. OF. des-, for L. dis-, with a sinister sense; and MF. asire, ‘a
star, a planet; also, destiny, fate, fortune, hap;’ Cot., from L. asérum,.
a star; cf. ‘astrum sinistrum, infortunium;’ Ducange. See Astral,
Aster. @ The MF. desastre was suggested by Ital. disastro (Hatz+
feld). Der. disastr-ous, -ous-ly. .

DISAVOW, to disclaim, deny. (F.—L.) . ME. desavowen; P.
Plowman, C. iv, 322. —OF. desavouer, ‘to disadvow, disallow ;’ Cot.
OF, des-, for L. dis-, apart ; and OF. avoer, avouer (Godefroy),
spelt advouer in Cotgrave, ‘to advow, avouch.’? See Dis- and
Avow. Der. disavow-al.

DISBAND, to disperse a band. (F.—L. and Teut.) In Cotgrave.
= OF. desbander, ‘to loosen, unbind, unbend ; also to casse [cashier |


172 DISBELIEVE


or disband ;’ Cot.—OF. des-, for L. dis-, apart; and OF. bander, to
bend a bow, to band together. See Dis- and Band (2). Der.
disband-ment.

DISBELIEVE, to refuse belief to. (L. and E.) In Kersey’s
Dict. ed. 1715; earlier, in Cudworth, Intellectual System, p. 18
(R.). From L. dis-, used negatively ; and E. believe. See Dis- and
Believe. Der. disbeliev-er, disbelief.

DISBURDEN, DISBURTHEN, to free from a burden. (L.
and E.) In Shak. Rich. II, ii. 1. 229. From L. dis-, apart; and E.
burden or burthen. See Dis- and Burden.

DISBURSE, to pay out of a purse. (F.—L. and Gk.) In Shak.
Macb. i. 2.61. Palsgrave has disbourse, p. 517.—OF. desbourser, of
which Cotgrave gives the pp. desboursé, ‘disbursed, laid out of a
purse.’= OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart; and F. bourse, a purse. See
Dis- and Bursar. Der. disburse-ment.

DISC, DISK, a round plate. (L.—Gk.) [In very early use in
the form dish, q.v.] ‘ The disk of Phoebus, when he climbs on high
Appears at first but as a bloodshot eye;’ Dryden, tr. of Ovid, Metam.
xv. 284.—L. discus, a quoit, a plate.=Gk. dicxos, a quoit; from
dixeiv, to cast. Brugmann, i. § 744. Der. disc-ous. See Desk,
Dish.

DISCARD, to throw away useless cards, to reject. (L.; and F.
—L.—Gk.) In Spenser, F. Q. v. 5. 8. Sometimes spelt decard; see
Richardson. From L. dis-, apart; and card. See Dis- and Card.

DISCERN, to distinguish, separate, judge. (F.—L.) ME. dis-
cernen; Chaucer, Troil. b. iii. 1. g.—OF. discerner; Cot.—L. dis-
cernere, to distinguish.—L. dis-, apart; and cernere, to separate,
cognate with Gk. xpivew, to separate. See Critic. Der. discern-er,
-ible, -ibl-y, -ment; see also discreet, discriminate.

DISCHARGE, to free from a charge, unload, acquit. (F.—L.
and C.) Inearly use. ME. deschargen; K. Alisaunder, ed. Weber,
3868. = OF. descharger, ‘to discharge, disburden;’ Cot.—OF. des-,
from L. dis-, apart, away; and charger, to charge, load. See Dis-
and Charge. Der. discharge, sb., discharg-er.

DISCIPLE, a learner, follower. (F.—L.) In early use. In
P. Plowman, B. xiii. 430. Discepline is in Ancren Riwle, p. 294.—
OF. disciple (Supp. to Godefroy). =—L. discipulum, acc. of discipulus, a
learner. = L. discere, to learn; allied to docére,to teach. See Docile.
Der. disciple-ship. From the same source is discipline, from OF. dis-
cipline, L, disciplina; whence also disciplin-able, -ar-i-an, -ar-y.

DISCLAIM, to renounce claim to. (F.—L.) Cotgrave translates
desadvouer by ‘to disadvow, disclaime, refuse.’ = AF. desclamer, Year-
books of Edw. I., 1302-3, p. 83. —OF-. des-, from L. dis-, apart, away;
and F, clamer, from L. climare. See Dis- and Claim. Der- dis-
claim-er.

DISCLOSE, to reveal, unclose, open. (F.—L.) ‘And mihte of
no man be desclosed ;’ Gower, C. A. ii. 262; bk. v. 4030.—OF. des-
clos, disclosed, pp. of desclorre, to unclose; Cotgrave gives ‘secret
desclos, disclosed, revealed.’ —OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart, away;
and OF. clorre, to shut in, from L, claudere, to shut. See Dis- and
Close. Der. disclos-ure.

DISCOLOUR, to spoil the colour of. (F.—L.) Chaucer has
discoloured, C. T. 16132 (G 664).—OF. descolorer, later descoulourer,
as in Cot.—L. dis-, apart, away; and coldrare, to colour, from coldr-,
stem of color, colour. See Dis- and Colour.

DISCOMPIT, to defeat or put to the rout. (F.—L.) In Bar-
bour’s Bruce, xii. 459. [Chaucer has disconfiture, C. T. 1010 (A
1008).J|—OF. desconjit, pp. of desconjire, ‘to discomfit, vanquish,
defeat ;” Cot.; and see Godefroy. [The » before f easily passed
into m, for convenience of pronunciation; the same change occurs in
the word comfort.]—OF. des-, prefix; and confire, to preserve, make
ready.= L. dis-, apart; and conjicere, to finish, preserve. See Dis-
and Comfit. Der. discomfit-ure, from OF. desconfiture; Cot.

DISCOMFORT, to deprive of comfort. (F.—L.) ME. discom-
forten; Kob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 7o.—OF. desconforter ;
Cot. gives ‘se desconforter, to be discomforted.’—OF. des-, prefix,
from L. dis-, apart, away; and conforter, to comfort. See Dis- and
Comfort.

DISCOMMEND, to dispraise. (L.; and F.—L.) In Frith’s
Works, p. 156, col. 2.. From L. dis-, apart; and commend. See
Dis- and Commend.

DISCOMMON, to deprive of the right of common: (L.; and
F.—L.) ‘Whiles thou discommonest thy neighbour’s kyne;’ Bp.
Hall, b. v. sat. 3.1.72. From L. dis-, apart; and common. See
Dis- and Common,

DISCOMPOSEH, to deprive of composure. (L.; and F.—L.
and Gk.) Bacon has discomposed in the sense of ‘removed from a
position;’ Hist. of Hen. VII,ed. Lumby, p. 217, 1. 33.—L. dis-, apart ;
and compose. See Dis- and Compose. Der. discompos-ure.

DISCONCERT, to frustrate a plot, defeat, disturb. (F.—L.)
In Bailey’s Dict. ed. 1731, vol. ii. MF. disconcerter, of which Cot.


DISCRIMINATE


gives the pp. ‘ disconcerté, disordered, confused, set awry.’ = MF. dis


<L. dis-, apart; and concerter, to. concert. See Dis- and Concert.

DISCONNECT, to separate. (L.) Occurs in Burke, On the
French Revolution (R.).—L. dis-, apart; and Connect, q. v.

DISCONSOLATE, without consolation. (L.) ‘And this Spinx,
awaped and amate Stoode al dismaied and disconsolate;’ Lydgate,
Storie of Thebes, pt. i. § 14.—Late L. disconsdlaitus, comfortless. =
L. dis-, apart; and consdlatus, pp. of consélari, to console. See Dis-
and Console. Der. disconsolate-ness.

DISCONTENT, not content, dissatisfied. (L.; and F,.—L.)
‘ That though I died discontent I lived and died a mayde;’ Gascoigne,
Complaint of Philomene, st. 69.—L. dis-, apart; and Content, q. v.
Der. discontent, sb.; discontent, verb; discontent-ed, -ed-ly, -ed-ness,
-ment,

DISCONTINUE, to give up, leave. (F.—L.) In Shak. Merch.
of Ven. iii. 4. 75.—MF. discontinuer, ‘to discontinue, surcease;’
Cot.—L. dis-, apart, used negatively; and continuare, to continue.
See Dis- and Continue. Der. discontinu-ance, -at-ion (MF. dis-
continuation ; Cotgrave).

DISCORD, want of concord. (F.—L.) ME. descord, discord.
Spelt descord [not discord, as in Richardson] in Rob. of Glouc. p.
196; 1. 4039.—OF. descord (Roquefort) ; later discord, Cot.; verbal
sb. from OF. descorder, to quarrel, disagree ; Godefroy. = L. discordare,
to be at variance. = L,. dis-, apart; and cord-, stem of cor, the heart,
cognate with E. Heart, q.v. Der. discord-ant (F. discordant, ex-
plained by Cotgrave to mean ‘discordant, jarring,’ pres. pt. of dis-
corder); discordant-ly, discordance, discordanc-y. @ The special
application of discord and concord to musical sounds is probably due
in some measure to confusion with chord.

DISCOUNT, to make a deduction for ready money payment.
(F.—L.) Formerly spelt discompt. ‘All which the conqueror did
discompt ;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. ii.'c. 3. 1. 1105. ‘ Discount, to count,
or reckon off ;’ Gazophylacium Anglic. ed. 1689.—OF. desconter, to
relate; later descompter, ‘to account back, or make a back reckon-
ing ;’? Cot.—OF. des- < L. dis-, apart, away; and conter, compter,
to count, from computdre, to compute, count. See Dis- and
Count (2). Der. discount, sb.; discount-able.

DISCOUNTENANCH, to abash. (F.—L.) ‘A great taxer
of his people, and discountenancer of his nobility ;’ Bacon, Life of
Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 112.1. 20, ‘ Whom they .. . discounten-
aunce ;’ Spenser, Teares of the Muses, 1. 340. —MF. descontenancer, to
abash ; see Cotgrave.—OF. des- < L. dis-, apart; and contenance,
the countenance. See Dis- and Countenance.

DISCOURAGE, to dishearten. (F.—L.) ‘How th’erle of
Chartres discoraged th’emperour ;’ Caxton, Godfrey of Bologne, ch.
132 (heading). = OF. descourager, ‘ to discourage, dishearten ;’ Cot. =
OF. des- <L. dis-, apart; and courage, courage. See Dis- and
Courage. Der. discourage-ment.

DISCOURSE, a discussion, conversation. (F.—L.) ME. dis-
cours, i. e. reason ; Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. v. pr. 4. 1. 134. —OF.
discours, Cot.=L. discursus, a running about ; also, conversation. =
L. discursus, pp. of discurrere, to run about.=L. dis-, apart; and
currere, to run. See Dis-.and Course. Der. discourse, verb;
also discurs-ion, -ive (like L. pp. discursus).

DISCOURTEOUS, uncourteous. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q.
vi. 3. 34.— OF. discortois, ‘discourteous ;* Cot.—OF. dis-=L. dis-,
apart, here used negatively ; and OF. cortois, corteis, courteous. See
Dis- and Courteous. Der. discourteous-ly; from same source,
discourtes-y,

DISCOVER, to uncover, lay bare, reveal, detect. (F.—L.) ME.
discoueren, Rom. of the Rose, 4402.—OF. descovrir, MF. descouvrir,
‘to discover;’ Cot.— OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart, away; and couvrir,
to cover; see Dis- and Cover. Der. discover-er, -able, -y.

DISCREDIT, want of credit. (L.; and F.—L.) | As sb. in Shak.
Wint. Tale, v. 2. 133; as vb. in Meas, iii. 2. 261. From L. dis-,
apart, here used in a negative sense; and Credit, g. vy. Der. dis-
credit, verb; discredit-able.

DISCREET, wary, prudent. (F.—L.) ME. discret, P. Plowman,
C. vi. 84; Chaucer, C. T. 520 (A.518).—OF. discret, ‘discreet ;’
Cot.=L. discrétus, pp. of discernere, to discern. See Discern.
Der. discreet-ness; discret-ion (Gower, C. A. iii. 156; bk. vii. 2116),
-ion-al, -ion-al-ly, -ion-ar-y, -ion-ar-i-ly ; also discrete (=L. discrétus,
separate), discret-ive, -ive-ly.

DISCREPANT, differing. (F.—L.) In Sir T. More, Works,
p. 262 h. ‘ Discrepant in figure ;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. i.
c.17, 1. 199 (in Spec. of Eng. ed. Skeat.) — MF. discrepant, ‘ discrepant,
different ;’ Cot.—L. discrepantem, acc. of discrepans, pres. pt. of
discrepire, to differ in sound.=L. dis-, apart ; and crepare, to make a
noise, crackle. See Decrepit. Der. discrep-ance, -anc-y.

DISCRIMINATE, to discern, distinguish. (L.) ‘ Discriminate,
to divide, or put a. difference betwixt ;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674. —.


DISCURSIVE


L. discriminatus, pp. of discriminare, to divide, separate.=L. dis-
crimin-, stem of discrimen, a space between, separation.=L. dis-


cernere (pt. t. discré-ui, pp. discré-tus), to discern, separate. See
Discern. Der. discriminat-ion, -ive, -cve-ly.
DISCURSIVE, ‘desultory, digressive. (L.) Used by Ben


Jonson, Hymenzi; The Barriers, 1. 5. See Discourse.

DISCUSS, to examine critically, sift, debate. (L.) Chaucer,
Ass. of Foules, 624, has the pp. discussed. Again, he has ‘ when
that nyght was discussed,’ i.e. driven away; tr. of Boethius, b. i.
met. 3, where the L. has discussa.—L. discussus, pp. of discutere, to
strike or shake asunder; in Late L., to discuss.= L. dis-, apart; and
guatere, to shake. See Quash. Der. discuss-ive, -ion.

DISDAIN, scorn, dislike, haughtiness. (F.—L.) ME. desdeyn,
disdeyn, disdeigne; Chaucer, C. T. 791 (A 789). Gower has des-
deiyneth, C, A.i. 84.—OF. desdein, desdaing, disdain. = OF. desdegnier
(F. dédaigner), to disdain. OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart, here used
in a negative sense; and degnier, to deign, think worthy, from L.
dignari, to deem worthy, dignus, worthy. See Deign. Der. disdain,
verb; disdain-ful, -ful-ly, -~ful-ness.

DISEASE, want of ease, sickness. (F.) ME. disese, want of
ease, grief, vexation; Chaucer, C. T. 10781, 14777 (F 467, B 3961).
= OF. desaise, ‘a sickness, a disease, being ill at ease ;’ Cot.—OF.
des-, from L. dis-, apart; and aise, ease. See Kase. Der. diseas-ed.

DISEMBARK, to land cargo, to land from a ship. (F.) In
Shak. Oth. ii. 1. 210.—MF. desembarquer, ‘ to disembarke, or unload
a ship; also, to land, or go ashore ont of a ship;’ Cot.—OF.
des-, from L. dis-, apart ; and embarquer, to embark. See Embark.
Der. disembark-at-ion.

DISEMBARRASS, to free from embarrassment. (F.) Used by
Bp. Berkeley, To Mr. Thomas Prior, Ex. 7 (Feb. 6, 1726).—MF.
desembarrasser, ‘to unpester, disentangle ;’ Cot.—OF. des-, from L.
dis-, apart ; and embarrasser, to embarrass. See Embarrass.

DISEMBOG UB, to discharge at the mouth, said of a river, to
loose, depart. (Span.—L.). The final -gwe is an error for -que. ‘He
was inforced to disemboque at the mouth of the Amazones ;’? Hakluyt,
Voy. iii. 636. ‘ My poniard Shall disembogue thy soul;’ Massinger,
Maid of Honour, Act ii. sc. 2.—Span. desembocar, to disembogue,
flow into the sea.—Span. des-, from L,. dis-, apart, away ; and em-
bocar, to enter the mouth, from Span. em-, from L. im-, for iz, into,
and boca, the mouth, from L. bucca, cheek, mouth.

DISEMBROIL, to free from broil or confusion. (L. and F.) In
Dryden, Ovid, Met. i. 29.—L. dis-, apart; and F. embrouiller, ‘to
pester, intangle, incumber, intricate, confound;’ Cot. See Embroil.

DISENCHANT, to free from enchantment, (F.—L.) ‘ Can all
these disenchant me?’ Massinger, Unnatural Combat, Act iv. sc. I.—
OF. desenchanter, ‘ to disinchant ;’ Cot. OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart ;
and enchanter, to enchant. See Enchant. Der. disenchant-
ment.

DISENCUMBER, to free, disburden. (F.) ‘I have disincum-
ber’d myself from rhyme ;’ Dryden, pref. to Antony and Cleopatra. =
F. désencombrer; see Hatzfeld. From L. dis-, apart; and En-
cumber,q.v. Der. disencumbr-ance.

DISENGAGE, to free from engagement. (F.) In Kersey’s
Dict. ed. 1715; spelt disingage in Cotgrave.— MF. desengager, ‘to
disingage, ungage, redeem ;’ Cot. —OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart;
and engager, to engage, pledge. See Engage. Der. disengage-
ment,

DISENTHRAL, to free from thraldom, (L. and F. and E.) In
Milton, Ps. iv. 1. 4. From L. dis-, apart ; and Enthral, q. v.

DISENTRANCE, to free from a trance. (L. and F.—L.)
‘Ralpho, by this time disentranc’d;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt.i.c. 3.1. 717.
From L., dis-, apart; and Entrance (2), q. v.

DISFIGURE, to deprive of beauty, deform. (F.—L.) ‘ What
list yow thus yourself to disfigdire?’ Chaucer, Troil. ii. 223. OF.
desfigurer, ‘to disfigure, deforme;” Cot.—OF. des-, from L. dis-,
apart, away ; and jigurer, from L. figiirare, to fashion, form ; from
fgira, figure. See Figure... Der. disfigure-ment.

DISFRANCHISE, to deprive of a franchise. (L. and F.) ‘Sir
Wylliam Fitzwilliam [was] disfraunchysed;’ Fabyan, vol. ii. an.
1509, p. 695. From L, dis-,away; and Franchise, q.v. Der. dis-
Sranchise-ment.

DISGORGE, to vomit, give up prey. (F.—L.) In Shak. As
You Like It, ii. 7. 69; and Caxton, Siege of Troy, leaf 224, 1. 17.—
OF. desgorger, ‘to disgorge, vomit ;’ Cot.—OF. des-, from L. dis-,
apart; and Gorge, q.v. Der. disgorge-ment. /

DISGRACE, dishonour, lack of favour. (F.—L.) In Spenser,
F. Q. v. 4. 23.— MF. disgrace, ‘a disgrace, an ill fortune, hard luck ;’
Cot.—L. dis-, apart; and F. grace, from L. gratia, favour. See
Grace. Der. disgrace-ful, -ful-ly, ~ful-ness.

DISGUISE, to change the appearance of. (F.—L. andG.) . ME.
disgysen. ‘He disgysed him anon;’ K. Alisaunder, 1. 121.—OF.


same source, disjunct-ive, -ive-ly.


DISJUNCTION 173.


desguisier, MF. desguiser, ‘to disguise, to counterfeit ;” Cot.—OF,
des-, from L. dis-, apart; and guise, ‘guise, manner, fashion ;’ Cot.
See Guise. Der. disguis-er, -ment; also disguise, sb.

DISGUST, to cause dislike. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave as a sb., to
translate MF’. desappetit. — MF. desgouster, ‘to distaste, loath, dislike,
abhor;’ Cot.—OF. des-, from L, dis-, apart; and gouster, to taste,
from L. gustare, to taste; from gustus, a tasting. See Gust (2).
Der. disgust, sb.; -ing, -ing-ly.

DISH, a platter. (L.—Gk.) Invery early use. ME. disch, Ancren
Riwle, p. 344. AS. disc,a dish; see Mark, vi. 25, where the Vulgate
has in disco.—L. discus, a disc, quoit, platter. —Gk. Sicxos, a quoit.
B. Disk is a doublet of Disc, q.v.; desk is.a third form of the same
word; and see dais.

DISHABILLE, another form of Deshabille, q.v.

DISHEARTEN, to discourage. (Hybrid; L. and E.) In Shak.
Macb. ii. 3. 37. Coined from L, prefix dis-, apart; and E. hearten,
to put in good heart. See Heart.

DISHEVEL, to disorder the hair. (F.—L.) ‘With. . ., heare
{hair] discheveled;’ Spenser, F. Q. ii. 1. 13. ‘ Dischevele, save his
cappe, he rood al bare;’ Chaucer, C. T. 685 (A 683); where the
form is that of a F. pp.= OF. descheveler, ‘to dischevell: une femme
toute deschevelée, discheveled, with all her haire disorderly falling
about her eares;’ Cot.—OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart; and OF.
chevel (F. cheveu), a hair, from L. capillum, acc. of capillus, a hair.
See Capillary.

DISHONEST, wanting in honesty. (F.—L.) Inthe Romaunt of
the Rose, 3442. Cf. ‘shame, that eschueth al deshonestee;’ Chaucer,
Pers. Tale, Remedium Gulez (I 833).=—OF. deshonneste, ‘ dishonest,
leud, bad;’ Cot.—OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart; and honneste, or
honeste, honest, honourable. See Honest. Der. dishonest-y.

DISHONOUR, lack of honour, shame. (F.—L.) ME. des-
honour, King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 3869.—OF. deshonneur, ‘ dis-
honour, shame;’ Cot.=—OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart; and honneur,
honour. See Honour. Der. dishonour,vb.; dishonour-able, -abl-y, -er.

DISINCLINGE, to incline away from. (L.) ‘Inclined to the
king, or but disinclined to them ;’ Clarendon, Civil War, vol. ii.
p. 20 (R.). From L, dis-, apart, away; and Incline, q.v. Der.
disinclin-at-ion, -ed.

DISINFECT, to free from infection. (L.) In Florio, to translate
Ital. smorbare. Coined from L. dis-, apart; and Infect, q.v. Der.
disinfect-ant.

DISINGENUOUS, not frank. (L.) . Disingenuous is in Dryden,
tr. of Ovid’s Metam., Dedication, § 1. Disingenuity occurs in
Clarendon, Civil War, vol. i. p. 321 (R.). Coined trom L. dis-,
apart; and Ingenuous, q.v. Der. disingenu-ous-ly, -ous-ness, -i-ty.
DISINHERIT, to deprive of heritage. (L.andF.—L.) In Shak,
Rich. III, i. r. 57. Earlier, in Berners, Froissart, vol. i. c. 69 (R.).
[The ME. form was desheriten, Havelok, 2547; this is a better form,
being from OF. desheriter, to disinherit; see Cotgrave.] Coined
from L, dis-, apart; and Inherit, q.v. Der. disinherit-ance, in
imitation of OF. desheritance.

DISINTER, to take out of a grave. (L. and F.—L.) ‘Which a
proper education might have dis¢nterred, and have brought to light ;’
Spectator, no. 215. Coined from L. dis-, apart; and Inter, q.v.
Der. disinter-ment.

DISINTERESTED, free from private interests, impartial.
(F.—L.) <A clumsy form; the old word was disinteress'd, which
was mistaken for a verb, causing a second addition of the suffix -ed.
‘Because all men are not wise and good and disinteress’d;’ Bp.
Taylor, Rule of Conscience, b. ii. c. 3 (R.). This disinteress’d is the
pp. of an obsolete vb. disizteress, for which see N.E.D. _ ‘ Disinteressed
or Disinterested, void of self-interest ;? Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.—MF.
desinteressé, ‘ discharged from, or that hath forgone or lost all interest
in;’ Cot. This isthe pp. of desinteresser, ‘to discharge, to rid from
all interest in;’ id. OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart; and MF. interessé,
‘interessed or touched in;’ id., from L. interesse, to import, concern,
compounded of inter, amongst, and esse, to be. Der. disinterested-ly,
“71€SS.

DISINTHRAL; see Disenthral.

DISJOIN, to separate. (F.—L.) ‘They wolde not disioyne nor
disceuer them from the crowne;’ Berners, Froissart, vol. ii. c. 200
(R.). = OF. desjoign-, pres. stem of desjoindre, ‘ to disjoyne, disunite ;’
Cot. =—L. disiungere, to separate. = L. dis-, apart ; and iungere, to join.
See Join. » And see below.

DISJOINT, to put out of joint. (F.—L.) In Shak. Macb. iii.
2. 16.—OF. desjoinct, ‘ disjoyned, parted;’ Cot. This is the pp. of
OF. desjoindre, to disjoin; see above. Der. disjoint-ed-ness.

DISJUNCTION, a disjoining, disunion. (L.) In Shak. Wint.
Ta. iv. 4. 540.—L. acc. disiunctidnem, from disiunctio, a separation ;
cf. disiunctus, pp. of disiungere, to disjoin. See Disjoin. From the


174 DISK


DISK, another spelling of Dise, q.v.

DISLIKE, not to like, to disapprove of. (L. and E.) In Shak.
Meas. i. 2.18. [A hybrid compound; the old form was mislike.] =
L. dis-, apart; and E. Like, q.v. Der. dislike, sb.

DISLOCATE, to put out of joint. (L.) In Shak. Lear, iv. 2. 65.
— Late L. dislocatus, pp. of dislocare, to remove from its place. —L.


dis-, apart, away; and Jlocare, to place, from locus, a place. See
Locus. Der. dislocat-ion.
DISLODGE, to move from a resting-place. (F.) ‘ Dislodged was


out of mine herte;’ Chaucer’s Dream, 2125 (a poem not by Chaucer,
but belonging to the 15th century). OF. desloger, ‘to dislodge,
remove;’ Cot.—OF. des-, from L. dis-, away; and loger, to lodge.
See Lodge. Der. dislodg-ment.

DISLOYAL, not loyal. (F.—L.) In Shak. Macb. i. 2. 52.
‘ Disloyall Treason ;’ Spenser, F. Q. ii. 7. 22.— MF. desloyal, ‘ dis-
loyall;’ Cot.—OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart; and Joial, loyal. See
Loyal. Der. disloyal-ly, disloyal-ty.

DISMAL, gloomy, dreary, sad. (F.—L.) ‘More fowle than
dismall day ;’ Spenser, F. Q. ii. 7. 26. The oldest use of the word
appears to be in the phrase ‘in the dismal,’ signifying ‘at an unlucky
time ;’ or lit. ‘in the evil days.’ It occurs in Chaucer, Book of the
Duchess, 1206; where the knight, in describing with what perturba-
tion of mind he told his tale of love to his lady, says: ‘I not [know
not] wel how that I began, Ful euel rehersen hit I can; And eek, as
helpe me God withal, I trowe hit was ix the dismal, That was the ten
woundes of Egipte.’ The sense is: ‘I believe it was in an unlucky
time similar to the days of the ten plagues of Egypt.’ The same
phrase—in the dismal—occurs in The Pistil of Swete Susan (Laing’s
Anc. Pop. Poet. of Scotland), 1. 305; and in Polit. Songs, ed. Wright,
p- 303, l. 477. B. When the equivalence of dis-mal to ‘evil days’
was forgotten, the word days was (tautologically) added. Thus
Lydgate has: ‘Her dismale daies, and her fatal houres;’ Storie of
Thebes, pt. iii. (ed. 1561, fol. 370). See further in my note to
Chaucer, Bk, Duch, 1206; Brand, Pop. Antiq., ed. Ellis, ii. 45 ;
Trevisa, tr. of Higden, ii. 329.—AF. dis mal, explained as les mal
jours (evil days) in MS. Glasgow, Q. 9. 13, fol. 100, back ; in a poem
by Rauf de Linham dated 1256; the MS. is described by M. Paul
Meyer in his notes on Glasgow MSS.—OF. dis, pl. of di, a day
(cf, F. Lun-di); and mal, pl., evil.=jL. diés mali, evil days. See
Notes on E. Etym., p. 60.

DISMANT LE, to deprive of furniture, &c. (F.—L.) In Cot-
grave; and in Shak. Wint. Tale, iv. 4.666. ‘Lambert presently took
care so to dismantle the castle [ of Nottingham] that there should be no
more use of it for a garrison; ’ Clarendon, Civil War, vol. iii. p. 192
(R.). — MF. desmanteller, ‘to take a man’s cloak off his back; also,
to dismantle, raze, or beat down the wall of a fortress;’ Cot.—OF.
des-, L. dis-, apart, away; and manteler, ‘to cloak, to cover with a
cloak, to defend;’ id., from MF. mantel, later manteau, a cloak.
See Mantle.

DISMASK, to divest of a mask. (F.) In Shak. L.L.L, v. 2.
296.—MF. desmasquer, ‘to unmaske;’ Cot.—OF. des-, from L. dis-,
away; and F. masquer, to mask. See Mask.

DISMAY, to terrify, discourage. (Hybrid; F.—L. and OHG.)
In early use; in King Alisaunder, 2801. —OF. *desmayer, a form not
found [though Palsgrave has ‘I dismaye, I put a person in fere or
drede, je desmaye, and je esmaye; p. 519] but equivalent to Span.
desmayar, to dismay, dishearten, also, to be discouraged, to lose
heart (cf. Port. desmaier, Ital. smagare). The OF. *desmayer was
supplanted in French by the verb esmayer, to dismay, terrify, strike
powerless. ‘These two verbs are formed in the same way, and only
differ in the forms of the prefixes, which are equivalent respectively
to the L. dis-, apart, and to L. ex, out. Both are hybrid words,
formed, with L. prefixes, from the OHG. magan (G. mégen), to be
able, to have might or power. PB. Hence we have OF. desmayer and
esmayer, to lose power, to faint, fail, be discouraged, in a neuter
sense; afterwards used actively to signify to render powerless with
terror, to astonish, astound, dismay, terrify. y. The OHG. magan
is the same word with AS. magan, and E. may; see May (1). 5. Cf.
also Ital. smagare, formerly dismagare, to lose courage; Florio gives
both spellings, and notes also the active sense ‘to quell,’ i.e. to
dismay. Der. dismay, sb.

DISMEMBER, to tear limb from limb. (F.—L.) In early use.
The pp. demembred (for desmembred) is in Rob. of Glouc. p. 559,
1. 11727. ‘Swereth nat so sinfully, in dismembringe of Crist ;’
Chaucer, Pers. Tale, De Ira (I 591).—OF. desmembrer, ‘to dis-
member;”’ Cot.—OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart ; and membre, a
member, limb. See Member.

DISMISS, to send away, despatch. (L.) In Spenser, F. Q. vii. 7.
59. A coined word; first in the pp. dismissed, Caxton, Jason, p. 80
(N.E.D.); from L. dis-, away, and missus, pp. of mitiere, to send.
Suggested by OF. desmettre, ‘to displace, ... to dismiss;’ Cot.


DISPLAY


¢sr The true L. form is dimittere, without s.
dismiss-al, -ion; and see dimissory.

DISMOUNT, to descend. (F.—L.) In Spenser, Shep. Kal.
May, 315. OF. desmonter, ‘to dismount, . . . to descend;* Cot.—
OF. des-, from L. dis-, away; and monter, to mount, ascend, from
F. mont, a mountain. See Mount.

DISOBEY, to refuse obedience. (F.—L.) ‘Bot therof woll I
disobeie;’ Gower, C. A. i. 86; bk. i.1315. Occleve has disobeye and
disobeyed, Letter of Cupid, stanzas 51 and 55; in Chaucer's Works,
vii. 228.—OF. desobeir, ‘to disobey ;’ Cot.—OF. des-, from L. dis-,
apart; and obeir,to obey. See Obey. Similarly we have disobedient,
disobedience; see Obedient.

DISOBLIGE, to refrain from obliging. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave.
= OF. desobliger, ‘to disoblige;’ Cot. = OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart,
away; and obliger, to oblige. See Oblige. Der. disoblig-ing.

DISORDER, want of order. (F.—L.) ‘Such disordre and con-
fusion;’ Udal, Pref. to 1st Ep. to Corinthians; fol. 44. ‘ By dis-
orderyng of the Frenchemen;’ Berners, Froissart, vol. ii. c. 217 (R.).
— OF. desordre, ‘ disorder ;’ Cot.— OF, des-, from L. dis-, apart; and
ordre, order. See Order. Der. disorder, verb; -ly.

DISOWN, to refuse to own. (Hybrid; L. and E.) ‘To own or
disown books;’ State Trials, Col. John Lilburn, an. 1649 (R.). A
coined word, from L. dis-, apart; and E. Own, q.v.

DISPARAGE, to offer indignity, to lower in rank or estimation.
(F.—L.) ME. desparagen, William of Palerne, 485; disparage,
Chaucer, C. T. 4269 (A 4271).—OF. desparager, ‘to disparage, to
offer unto a man unworthy conditions ;’ Cot. OF. des-, from L. dis-,
apart ; and OF. parage, lineage, rank; id.; from Late L. paraticum,
corruptly pardgium, society, rank, equality of rank ; formed with
suffix -Gticum from L. par, equal. See Peer. Der. disparage-ment.

DISPARITY, inequality. (F.—L.) ‘But the disparity of years
and strength ;’ Massinger, Unnatural Combat, Acti. sc. 1 (near the
end).—F. disparité (Montaigne).—F. dis- (L. dis-), with negative
force; and parité, equality; see Parity. Suggested by L. dispar,
unequal, unlike. See Par.

DISPARK, to render unenclosed. (Hybrid; L.azd E.) In Shak.
Rich. II, iii. 1. 23. Coined from L. dis-, apart; and E. Park, q.v.

DISPASSIONATEH, free from passion. (L.) ‘Wise and dis-
passionate men;’ Clarendon, Civil War, vol. iii. p. 745 (R.). Coined
from L, dis-, apart; and E. Passionate, q.v. Der. dispassionate-ly,

DISPATCH; see Despatch.

DISPEL, to banish, drive away. (L.) In Milton, P. L. i. 530.
‘His rays their poisonous vapours shall dispel ;’ Dryden, Art of
Poetry, 1074 (near end of c. iv).—L. dispellere, to drive away,
disperse. = L. dis-, apart, away; and pellere, to drive. See Pulsate.

DISPENSE, to weigh out, administer. (F.—L.) ‘ Despensinge
and ordeyninge medes to goode men ;’ Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. v.
pr. 6, 1. 212. — OF. dispenser, ‘to dispense with, . . . to distribute ;’
Cot.—L. dispensire, to weigh out, pay, dispense; frequentative form
of dispendere (pp. dispensus), to weigh out, to dispense, distribute,
spend.—L. dis-, apart; and pendere, to weigh; see Spend. Der.
dispens-able, -able-ness, -er, -ar-y; also (like L. pp. dispensatus)
dispensat-ion (ME. dispensacioun, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, ili. 469) ;
-ive, -Or-y.

DISPEOPLE, to empty of people. (F.—L.) ‘Leaue the land
dispeopled and desolate ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 1212 d.—OF. des-
peupler, ‘to dispeople or unpeople;’ Cot.—OF. des-, from L. dis-,
apart; and peupler, to people, from peuple, people. See People.

DISPERSE, to scatter abroad. (L.) ME. dispers, orig. used as
a pp. signifying ‘scattered ‘ Dispers in alle londes oute;’ Gower,
C. A. ii. 185; bk. v. 1729. ‘ Dispers, as schep upon an hell;’ id.
ili. 1753 bk. vii. 1258.—L. dispersus, pp. of dispergere, to scatter
abroad.=L. di-, for dis-, apart; and spargere, to scatter. See
Sparse. Der. dispers-ive, -ion.

DISPIRIT, to dishearten. (L.) ‘ Dispirit, to dishearten, or dis-
courage;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. Written for dis-spirit; coined
from L. dis-, apart; and Spirit, q.v.

DISPLACH, to remove from its place. (F.—L.) In Spenser,
F. Q. vi. 9. 42.— OF. desplacer, ‘to displace, to put from a place ;’
Cot. = OF. des-, from L. dis-, away; and placer, to place, from place,
a place. See Place. Der. displace-ment.

DISPLANT, to remove what is planted. (F.—L.) ‘ Adorio,
You may perceive I seek not to displant you;’ Massinger, The
Guardian, Act i. sc. 1. And in Shak. Rom. iii. 3. 59.—OF. des-
planter,\‘ to displant, or pluck up by the root, to unplant ;’ Cot.—
OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart, away ; and planter, to plant, from plante,
a plant. See Plant.

DISPLAY, to unfold, exhibit. (F.—L.) ‘ Displayed his banere;’
Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 23; Gower, C. A. i, 221; bk. ii.
1835.— AF, despleier, desplayer, OF. desplier, to unfold, exhibit, show.
— OF, des-, from L. dis-, apart; and AF. pleier, OF. plier, ploier, to


See Missile. Der.


DISPLEASE


fold, from L. plictre, to fold. See Ply. Der. display, sb.; display-er.
Doublets, deploy, q. v., splay, q. Vv.

DISPLEASKH, to make not pleased, offend. (F.—L.) ME. dis-
plesen, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, i. 455; Rom. of the Rose, 3101.—
OF. desplaisir, to displease.=OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart, with
negative force; and plaisir, to please. See Please. Der. displeas-
ure, in Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 200.

DISPORT, to sport, make merry. (F.—L.) ME. disporten, to
divert, amuse ; Chaucer, Troil. iii, 1133. [The sb. disport, i.e. sport,
is in Chaucer, C. T. 777 (A 775).|—OF. se desporter, to amuse
oneself, cease from labour (Godefroy); also se deporter, ‘to cease,
forbeare, leave off, give over, quiet himself, hold his hand; also to
disport, play, recreate himself’ (Cotgrave). Cf. Late L. disportus,
diversion ; Ducange.—OF. des-, from L. dis-, away, apart ; and
porter, to carry; whence se desporter, to carry or remove oneself from
one’s work, to give over work, to seek amusement; from L. portare,
to carry. See Port, and Sport.

DISPOSE, to distribute, arrange, adapt. (F.—L. and Gk.) ME.
disposen, to ordain; Chaucer, Troil. iv. 964; Gower, C. A. i. 84;
bk. i. 1253.—OF. disposer, ‘to dispose, arrange, order ;’ Cot.—OF.
dis-, from L. dis-, apart; and OF. oser, to place, of Gk. origin.
See Pose. Der. dispos-er, -able, -al.

DISPOSITION, an arrangement, natural tendency. (F.—L.)
In Chaucer, C. T. 2366 (A 2364).—F. disposition. —L,. acc. disposi-
tidnem, from nom. disposttio, a setting in order; cf. dispositus, pp. of
disponere, to set.in various places.=L. dis-, apart; and pdnere, to

lace. See Position.

DISPOSSESS, to deprive of possession. (F.—L.) In Shak. K.
John, i. 1.131. Earlier, in Bale, Votaries, patt ii (R.).—OF. des-
possesser (Godefroy). Coined from L. dis-, apart, away; and OF.
stem possess-; see Possess. Der. dispossess-ion, -or.

DISPRAISE, to detract from one’s praise. (F.—L.) ‘Whan
Prudence hadde herd hir housbonde auanten hym [boast himself] of
his richesse and of his moneye, dispreysynge the power of hise aduer-
saries ;” Chaucer, C. T. Tale of Melibeus (B 2741); dispraise, Cursor
Mundi, |. 27585.—OF. despreis-, a stem of desprisier (Supp. to
Godefroy), to dispraise.— OF, des-, from L. dis-, apart ; and prisier,
to praise. See Praise. Der. dispraise, sb.

DISPROPORTION, lack of proportion. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Oth. ili. 3. 233. Also as a verb, Temp. v. 290; 3 Hen. VI, iii. 2.
160.—MF. disproportion, ‘a disproportion, an inequality ;’ Cot. =
OF. dis-, from L, dis-, apart ; and proportion, proportion. See Pro-
portion. Der. disproportion, verb; -able, -abl-y; -al, -al-ly; -ate,
-ate-ly, -ate-ness,

DISPROVE, to prove to be false. (F.—L.) ‘Ye, forsoeth
(quod she) and now I wol disprouwe thy first wayes;’ T. Usk;
Testament of Love, b.ii; ch. iv. 135.—OF, des-, L. dis-, apart, away ;
and Prove, q.v. Der. disproof.

DISPUTE, to argue, debate. (F.—L.) ME. disputen, desputen;
‘byzylyche desputede’ =they disputed busily, Ayenbite of Inwit, p. 79,
last line; P. Plowman, B. viii. 20.— OF. desputer.—L. disputare. = L.
dis-, apart, away; and putare, to think, orig. to make clean, clear
up.=4/ PEU, to purify. See Pure. Der. dispute, sb., disput-able,
-abl-y, -able-ness, -ant, -er ; -at-ion, -at-i-ous, -at-i-ous-ly, -at-i-ous-ness,
-at-ive, like L. pp. disputatus.

DISQUALIFY, to deprive of qualification. (F.—L.) ‘Are so
disqualify'd by fate;’ Swift, on Poetry, A Rhapsody, 1733; 1. 39.
Coined from the L. prefix dis-, apart; and Qualify, q.v. Der.
disqualific-at-ion, See Qualification.

DISQUIET, to deprive of quiet, harass. (L.) ‘ Disguieted con-
sciences ;” Bale, Image, pt.i(R.). As sb., Much Ado, ii. 1. 268;
as adj., Tam. of the Shrew, iv. 1.171. Coined from L. prefix dis-,
apart; and Quiet, q.v. Der. disguiet-ude (Tatler, no. 97, § 3).

DISQUISITION, a searching enquiry, investigation. (L.) ‘On
hypothetic dreams and visions Grounds everlasting disguisitions ;’
Butler, Upon the Weakness of Man, ll. 199, 200.—L. disquisitidnem,
acc. of disquisitio, a search into; cf. disquisitus, pp. of disquirere, to
examine. =L. dis-, apart; and gu@rere, to seek. See Query.

DISREGARD, not to regard. (L. and F.) ‘Among those
churches which. . . you have disregarded;’ Milton, Animadversions
upon the Remonstrant’s Defence (R.). A coined word; from L, dis-,
apart, here used negatively; and Regard, q.v. Der. disregard,
sb. ; -ful, -ful-ly.

DISRELISHG, to loathe. (L. and F.—L.) In Shak. Oth. ii. 1.
236. Coined from L. dis-, apart, in a negative sense; and Relish, q.v.

DISREPUTE, want of repute. (L. and F.—L.) Phillips’ Dict.
(ed. 1706) has ‘ disreputation or disrepute.’ ‘The pp. disreputed is used
by Bp. Taylor, Great Exemplar, pt. i. s. 1 (R.). . Coined from L.
dis-, apart; and Repute, q.v. Der. disreput-able, -abl-y.

DISRESPECT, not to respect. (L. and F.—L.) ‘ Let then the
world thy calling disrespect ;? Donne, to Mr. Tilman; 1.35. Coined


DISSOLUTE


from L, dis-, apart; and Respect, q. v.


175


Der. disrespect, sb. 3 -ful,


ful-ly.


DISROBE, to deprive of robes, divest. (L. and F.) In Spenser,
F. Q. 1. 8. 49. Coined from L. dis-, away; and Robe, gq. v.

DISRUPTION, a breaking asunder. (L.) In Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 16. § 6.—L. acc. disruptidnem, from nom. dis-
ruptio, commonly spelt diruptio, a breaking asunder; cf. disruptus,
pp. of disrumpere, dirumpere, to burst apart. L, dis-, di-, apart; and
rumpere, to burst. See Rupture.

DISSATISFY, to displease, (L. and F.—L.) ‘Very much dis-
satisfied and displeased ;’ Camden, Queen Elizabeth, an.1599. Coined
from L, dis-, apart; and Satisfy, q. v. Der. dissatisfaction; see
Satisfaction.

DISSECT, to cut apart, cut up. (L.) ‘Slaughter is now dissected
to the full;’ Drayton, Battle of Agincourt; st. 37 from end.=L.
dissectus, pp. of dissecre, to cut asunder. =L. dis-, apart; and secare,
to cut. See Section. Der. dissect-ion, from F. dissection, given in
Cotgrave both as a F, and Eng. word; dissect-or.

DISSEMBLE, to put a false semblance on, to disguise. (F.—L.)
In Frith’s Works, p. 51, col. 2.—OF. dis-, apart; and sembler, to
seem, appear. Cf. MF. dissimuler, ‘to dissemble;’ Cot.—L. dis-,
apart; and simulare, to pretend; cf. L. dissimulare, to pretend that
athingis not. See Simulate; also Dissimulation.

DISSEMINATE, to scatter abroad, propagate. (L.) In Blount’s
Gloss. ed.1656. And in Bp. Taylor, Of Original Sin, c. vi. s. 1 (R.);
the word dissemination occurs in the same passage. = L. dissémindtus,
pp. of disséminare, to scatter seed.—L. dis-, apart; and sémindre, to


sow, from sémin-, decl. stem of sémen, seed. See Seminal. Der.
disseminat-ion, -or.
DISSENT, to think differently, differ in opinion. (L.) ‘If I


dissente and if I make affray;’ Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 44. ‘There
they vary and dissent from them;’. Tyndal’s Works, p. 445, col. 2.
{The sb. dissension, ME. dissencioun, occurs in Chaucer, Tale of Me-
libeus (B 2881).] —L. dissentire, to differ in opinion. =L. dis-, apart ;
and sentire, to feel, think. See Sense. Der. dissent-er, -i-ent ; also
dissens-ion, like pp. dissensus; cf. OF. dissention, ‘ dissention, strife; Cot.

DISSERTATION, a treatise. (L.) Used by Speed, Edw. VI,
b. ix. c. 22 (R.).=—L. acc. dissertatidnem, from nom. dissertatio, a de-
bate; cf. dissertatus, pp. of dissertare, to debate, frequentative from
disserere, to set asunder, to discuss.—L. dis-, apart; and serere, to
join, bind. See Series. Der. dissertation-al; also dissertat-or, like

. dissertatus.

DISSERVICE, an injury. (F.—L.) Used by Cotgrave to trans-
late F. desservice.= OF. des-, L. dis-, apart; and Service, q. v.

DISSEVER, to part in two, disunite. (F.—L.) ME. disseueren
(with « for v); Allit. Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 1575; ‘So that I
scholde noght dissewere;’ Gower, C. A. ii. 97; bk. iv. 2838.—OF.
dessevrer, ‘to dissever;’ Cot.—OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart; and
sevrer, to sever, from L. séparare. See Sever. Der. dissever-ance.

DISSIDENT, dissenting, not agreeing. (L.) ‘ Our life and man-
ners be dissident from theirs;’ tr. of Sir T. More, Utopia, b. ii. c. 7,
p- 130 (ed. Arber).—L. dissident, stem of dissidens, pres. part. of dis-
sidére, to sit apart, be remote, disagree. = L. dis-, apart; and L. sedére,
to sit, cognate with E. Sit, q. v.

DISSIMILAR, unlike. (F.—L.) ‘Dissimular parts are those
parts of a man’s body which are unlike in nature one to another;’
Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674.—MF. dissimilaire, used with ref. to ‘such
parts of the body as are of sundry substances;’ Cot.— OF. des-, from
L. dis-, apart; and MF. similaire, like. See Similar. Der. dis-
similar-i-ty; and see below.

DISSIMILITUDE, an unlikeness, variety. (L. and F.—L.)
‘When there is such a dissimilitude in nature;’ Barrow’s Sermons,
vy. ii. ser. 10 (R.).—L. dis-, apart ; and Similitude, q.v.; suggested
by L. dissimilitado, unlikeness.

DISSIMULATION, a dissembling. (F.—L.) In Chaucer,
C. T. 7705 (D 2123).—OF. dissimulation (Hatzfeld).—L. dissimula-
tionem, acc. of dissimulatio, a dissembling, like dissimulatus, pp. of
dissimulare, to dissemble. See Dissemble.

DISSIPATE, to disperse, squander. (L.) ‘ Dissipated and re-
solued ;’ Wilson, Arte of Rhetorique, p. 213 (R.).—L. dissipatus,
pp. of dissipare, to disperse.—L. dis-, apart; and obs. sipare, to
throw, appearing also in the compound insipare, to throw into; cf.
Skt. Aship, to throw. Brugmann, i. § 761. Der. dissipation; see
Shak. Lear, i. 2. 161.

DISSOCIATE, to separate from a company. (L.) Orig. used
asapp. ‘Whom I wil not suffre to be dissociate or disseuered from
me;’ Udal, John, c. 14. § 1.—L. dissociatus, pp. of dissociare, to dis-
solve a friendship.=—L. dis-, apart; and sociare, to associate, from
socius, a companion. See Sociable. Der. dissociat-ion.

DISSOLUTE, loose in morals. (L.) See Spenser, F. Q.i. 7. 5¥-
ME. dissolut, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 245.—L. dissoliitus, loose,


DISSOLVE


licentious ; pp. of L. dissoluere, to dissolve; see below. Der. disso-
lute-ly, -ness ; also dissolut-ion, given by Cotgrave both as a F. and E.
word, from L. acc. dissolatidnem.

DISSOLVE, to loosen, melt, annul. (L.) ME. dissoluen; Wy-
clif, 2 Pet. iii. 10; id. Select Works, iii. 68. —L. dissoluere, to loosen.
=L. dis-, apart; and solwere, to loose. See Solve. Der. dissolv-
able, -ent; from the same source, dissolu-ble, -bility ; and see dissolute
above.

DISSONANT, sounding harshly. (F.—L.) ‘This saiyng, to
all curtesie dissonant ;’ The Remedy of Love, st. 67; in Chaucer’s
Works, ed. 1561, fol. 324, col. 1.—OF. dissonant, ‘dissonant ;’ Cot.
=. dissonantem, acc. of dissonans, pres. pt. of dissonare, to be unlike
in sound.=L. dissonus, discordant.=L. dis-, apart; and sonus, a
sound. See Sound, sb. Der. dissonance.

DISSUADE, to persuade from. (F.—L.) In Shak. As You Like
It, i. 2. 170. Earlier, in Bale’s Eng. Votaries, pt. i. (R.).—MF. dis-
suader, ‘to disswade, or dehort from;’ Cot.—L. dissuadére, to dis-
suade. = L. dis-, apart; and suadére, to persuade, pp. swudsus. See
Suasion. Der. dissuas-ion, -ive, -ive-ly, like pp. dissudsus,

DISSYLLABLE, a word of two syllables. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Spelt dissyllabe formerly ; Ben Jonson has ‘ verbes dissyllabes,’ i.e.
dissyllabic verbs, Eng. Gram. ch. vii; and again ‘nouns dissyllabic ’
in the same chapter. — MF. dissyllabe, ‘ of two syllables ;’? Cot.=—L.
disyllabus, of two syllables. — Gk. duavAAaBos, of two syllables. — Gk.
é:-, double ; and avAAaBy, a syllable. See Di- and Syllable. Der.
dissyllab-ic. @ The spelling with double s is unoriginal, but the
error appeared first in the French; the 7 before the final e has been
inserted to bring the spelling nearer to that of syllable. The spelling
dissyllable is in Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674 ; and dissillable in Puttenham,
Arte of Poesie (1589); ed. Arber, p. 128.

DISTAFF, a staff used in spinning. (E.) The distaff is a staff
provided with flax to be spun off. Palsgrave has: ‘I dysyn a dystaffe,
I put the flaxe upon it to spynne.’ ME. distaf, Chaucer, C. T. 3772
(A 3774). ‘Hec colus, a dysestafe;’ 15th cent. Vocabulary, in Voc.
794.14. AS. distef, rare; but we find ‘ Colus, distef’ in a Vocabu-
lary of the 11th century, in Voc. 125. 21. PB. The quotation from
Palsgrave and the spelling dysestafe show that AS. distef=*dis-stef
or *dise-stef. The latter element is our E. Staff, q.v. y. The for-
mer element is remarkably exemplified by the Platt-dentsch diesse,
the bunch of flax on a distaff; Bremen Worterbuch, i. 215, v. 284;
also by the E. Dizen, q.v. Cf. Low G. dise, disene, a bunch of flax
(Liibben), EF ries. dissen; MHG. dehse, a distaff.

DISTAIN, to sully, disgrace. (F.—L.) ME. desteinen. In
Chaucer, Legend of G. Women, 255. ‘ Which with the blod was
of his herte Thurghout destetgned ouer al;’ Gower, C. A. i. 2343; bk.
ii. 2245.—OF. desteign-, a stem of desteindre, ‘to distaine, to dead, or
take away the colour of;’ Cot.=—OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart; and
OF. teindre, from L. tingere, to tinge. See Tinge; and see Stain,
which is an abbreviation of distain (like sport from disport).

DISTANT, remote, far. (F.—L.) In Chaucer, Astrolabe, pt. i.
sect. 17, 1. 32. —OF. distant, ‘ distant, different ;? Cot.—L. distantem,
acc. of distans, pres. pt. of distare, to stand apart, be distant. = L. di-,
for dis-, apart; and stare, to stand, cognate with E. Stand, q.v.
Der. distance, in Rob. of Glouc. pp. 511, 570, Il. 10533, 12018, from
F. distance, L. distantia.

DISTASTE, to make unsavoury, disrelish. (L. and F.—L.) In
Shak. Oth. iii. 3.327. Coined from L. dis-, apart; and Taste, q. v.
Der. distaste, sb. ; -ful, -ful-ly, -ful-ness.

DISTEMPER (1), to derange. the temperament of the body or
mind. (F.—L.) See Trench, Study of Words; there is an allusion
to the Galenical doctrine of the four humours or temperaments.
‘The fourthe is, whan .. the humours in his body ben destempered ;’
Chaucer, Pers. Tale, De Gula (I 826). ‘That distemperes a mon in
body and in soule;’ Wyclif, Select Works, iii. 157.—OF. *destem-
prer, only in the pp. destempré, destrempé, immoderate (Godefroy), —
OF. des-, from L. dis-, apart; and OF. ¢emprer, to temper (mod. F.
tremper), from L. temperare. See Temper. Der. distemper, sb.,
derangement.

DISTEMPER (2), a kind of painting, in which the colours are
tempered, or mixed with thin watery glue. (F.—L.) In Kersey’s
Dict. ed. 1715.—OF. destemprer, later destremper, which Cotgrave
explains by ‘ to soake, steepe, moisten, water, season, or lay in water ;
to soften or allay, by laying in water; to make fluid, liquid, or thin.’
The word is from the same source as the above.

DISTEND, to stretch asunder, swell. (L.) In Milton, P. L.
i. 5723 xi. 880.—L. distendere, pp. distensus, to stretch asunder.— L.
dis-, apart ; and tendere, to stretch. 4/ TEN, to stretch. See Tend.
Der. distens-ible, -ive, -ion, like pp. distensus.

DISTICH, a couple of verses, a couplet. (L.—Gk.) | Spelt
distichon in Holland’s Suetonius, p. 224 (R.) ; distick in the Spectator,


176


DISUSE


1715.—L. distichus, distichon.=Gk. Sicttxov, a couplet ; neut. of
digtixes, having two rows.=—Gk. &-, double; and o7ixos, a row,
rank, allied to oretxew, to go, cognate with AS. stigan, to ascend,
whence E. stirrup and stile.—4/STEIGH, to go, march.

DISTIL, to fall in drops, flow slowly. (F.—L.) . ME. distillen ;
‘That it malice non distilleth;’ Gower, C. A. i. 5; prol. 62.—OF.
distiller, ‘to distill; ’ Cot.—L. distillare, pp. distillatus, the same as
déstillare, to drop or trickle down.=—L. dé, down; and stillare, to
drop, from stilla, a drop. See Still, sb. and vb. Der. distillat-ion,
-or-y, like L. pp. déstillatus; also distill-er, -er-y.

DISTINCT, distinguished. (F.—L.) ‘In other manere been
distinct the speces of glotonye ;” Chaucer, Pers. Tale, De Gula (I 828).
= OF. distinct ; Cot.—L. distinctus, pp. of distinguere, to distinguish.
See below. Der. distinct-ive, -ion.

DISTINGUISH, to set apart, mark off. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Macb. iii. . 96. [The reading in Chaucer’s Boethius, bk. ii. pr. v. 47,
is distingwed, not distinguished.|—OF. distinguer, to distinguish; the
ending -ish seems to have been added by analogy, and cannot be
accounted for in the usual way.=L. distinguere, to distinguish, mark
with a prick; pp. distinctus.—L. di-, for dis-, apart ; and *stinguere,
to prick, cognate with Gk. ori(ev, to prick, and E. stick, vb.
Brugmann, i. § 666. See Instigate, Stigma. . Der. distinguish-
able; also distinct, q.v.

DISTORT, to twist aside, pervert. (L.) First used as a pp.
Spenser, F. Q. v. 12. 36.—L. distortus, distorted, pp. of distorquére. =
L. dis-, apart; and torguére, to twist. See Torsion. Der. distort-ion.

DISTRACT, to harass, confuse. (L.) [ME. destrat, distracted.
‘Thou shalt ben. so destrat by aspre thinges;’ Chaucer, Boethius,
bk. iii. pr. 8. This is a F.form.] But we find also distract as a pp.
‘ Distracte were pei stithly’=they were greatly distracted ; Allit.
Destruction of Troy, 3219. As vb. in Shak. Oth. i. 3. 327; see
Lover’s Complaint, 231.—L. distractus, pp. of distrahere, to pull
asunder, pull different ways.=—L. dis-, apart; and érahere, to draw.
See Trace (1). Der. distract-ed-ly, -ion. Also distraught, an E.
modification of ME, destrat (above).

DISTRALIN, to restrain, seize goods for debt. (F.—L.) The
pp. destreined, i.e. restrained, is in Chaucer, Boethius, bk. ii. pr. 6,
l. 74.— OF. destreign-, pres. t. stem of destraindre, ‘to straine, press,
wring, vex extreamly ; also, to straiten, restrain, or abridge of
liberty ;’ Cot.—L. distringere, to pull asunder.=L. di-, for dis-,
apart ; and stringere, to touch, hurt, compress, strain. See Strain,
verb. Der. distrain-or ; distraint, from OF. destrainte, MF. destraincte,
restraint, fem. form of pp. destrainct (Cotgrave) ; and see Distress,
District.

DISTRESS, great pain, calamity. (F.—L.) In early use.
ME. destresse, Rob. of Glouc. pp. 143, 442; ll. 3010, g111.—OF.
destresse, ‘ distress ;’ Cot.; older spellings destreice, destrece; Godefroy.
Destrece is a verbal sb. from OF. destrecier (Godefroy), corresponding
to a Late L. type *districtidre, to afflict, formed regularly from
districtus, severe, pp. of distringere, to pull asunder, in Late L., to
punish. See Distrain. Der. distress, vb., ME. distresen, Allit.
Poems, ed. Morris, ii. 880; distress-ful, -ful-ly.

DISTRIBUTE, to allot, deal out. (L.) In Spenser, F. Q. i. 10.
39. ‘Whan that is distribute to pouer indigent peple;’ Lord Rivers,
Dictes and Sayings (Caxton), fol. 5, 1. to.—L. distribiitus, pp. of
distribuere, to distribute. = L. dis-, apart ; and ¢ribuere, to give, impart.
See Tribute. Der. distribut-able, -er, -ion, -ive.

DISTRICT, a region. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave. ‘ District is that
territory or circuit, wherein any one has power to distrain ; as a manor
is the lord’s district;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674.—MF. district, ‘a
district, . . the territory within which a lord . . may judge . . the
inhabitants ;? Cot.— Late L. districtus, a district within which a lord
may distrain (distringere potest); Ducange.—L. districtus, pp. 0
distringere. See Distrain.

DISTRUST, want of trust. (Hybrid; L. and E.) Udal has
distrust both as sb. and vb. ; On St. Matthew, capp. 5. 33, and 17. 19.
Coined from L. dis-, apart; and E. Trust, q.v. Der. distrust-ful,
-ful-ly, -ful-ness. ;

DISTURB, to disquiet, interrupt. (F.—L.) In early use. ME.
disturben, distourben ; spelt disturben, Ancren Riwle, p. 162; distourben,
Rob. of Glouc. p. 436, 1. 8985.—OF. destourber, ‘to disturbe;’ Cot.
=L,. disturbire, to drive asunder, disturb.—L. dis-, apart; and
turbare, to disturb, trouble, from ¢urba, a tumult, a crowd. See
Turbid. : Der. disturb-ance, used by Chaucer, Compl. of Mars,
1. 107); disturb-er. @ Borrowed from French, the spelling being
afterwards conformed to the Latin.

DISUNITE, to disjoin, sever. (L.) In Shak. Troil. ii. 3. 109. —
L. distinitus, pp. of disunire; to disjoin.—L. dis-, apart, here used
negatively ; and aire, to unite, from winus,one. See Unite, Unit.
From the same source, disun-ion.


no. 43, and in Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674; distich in Kersey’s Dict. ed. | DISUSE, to give up the use of. (L.and F.—L.) ‘ Disuse, to for-


DISYLLABLE


bear the use of;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 17153; ‘ Disusage or Disuse, a
disusing;’ id. ME. disusen (with v for z). ‘ Dysvsyn or mysse vsyn ;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 123. Barbour has diswsyt, for disusit, pp.; Bruce,
xix. 183. Coined from L. dis-, apart; and Use, q.v. Der. disuse,
sb.; disus-age.

DISYLLABLBE (so spelt in Kersey, ed. 1715); see Dissyllable.

DIT, to stop up. (E.) Barbour has ditt, stopped up; Bruce,
vi. 168. AS. dyttan, to stop up. Teut. type *dut-jan-; from Teut.
*dut-, as in AS, dott, a small lump, clot; Low G. dutte, a plug. See
Dot.

DITCH, a dike, a trench. (E.) ME. diche, P. Plowman, C., xiv.
236, where one MS. has dike. Diche is merely a variant of dike, due
to palatalisation, as in diche for AS. dice, dat. case of dic, a dike. See
Dike. Der. ditch, verb, ME. dichen, Chaucer, C. T, 1890 (A 1888),
from AS. dician ; ditcher, ME. diker, P. Plowman, C. i. 224.

DITHYRAMB, a kind of ancient hymn, (L.—Gk.) ‘ Dithyramb,
a kind of hymn or song in honour of Bacchus who was sumamed
Dithyrambus; and the poets who composed such hymns were called
Dithyrambicks;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674.—L. dithyrambus. — Gk.
5.6vpauBos, a hymn in honour of Bacchus; also, a name of Bacchus,
Origin unknown.

DITTANY, the name of a plant. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Dictamnus
groweth in Cazdy,and ... maye be named in Englishe righte Dittany,
for some cal Lepidium also Dittany;’ Turner, Names of Herbes (1548),
p- 34 (E.D.S.). Also called dittander (Prior). ME. detane, detany,
Voc. 710. 15, 786. 10.—OF. ditain (Godefroy); MF. dictame, ‘the
herb ditany, dittander;” Cot. Also AF. ditaundere, Wright’s Vocab.
i. 140, col. 1.—L. dictamnum, acc. of dictamnum or dictamnus. = Gk.
dikrapvor, Sixrapyvos, also Sixrapov, dixtapos, dittany ; so named from
mount Dicté in Crete, where it grew abundantly.

DITTO, the same as before. (Ital.—L.) ‘ Ditto, the aforesaid or
the same ;’ Phillips’ Dict. ed. 1706. = Ital. ditto, that which has been
said, a word, saying.=L. dictum, a saying; neut. of dictus, pp. of
dicere, to say. See Diction. @ It may be observed that the pp.
of Ital. dire, to say, properly takes the form detto, not ditto.

DITTY, a sort of song. (F.—L.) ME. dité, ditee; Chaucer,
Boethius, bk. iii. pr. 1.1. 2; later dittie, Spenser, Colin Clout, 385;
shortened to ditt, id. F.Q. ii. 6. 13. —OF. diti¢, dite, a kind of poem;
Godefroy. — L, dictatum, a thing dictated for writing, neut. of dictatus,

. of dictére, to dictate. See Dictate.

DIURETIC, tending to excite passage of urine. (F.—L.—Gk.)
In Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 5. § 2. ‘ Diureticalnes,
diuretick quality;’ Bailey; vol. fi. ed. 1731.—MF. diuretique; see
Cotgrave.—L. ditréticus.-Gk. diovpnrixés, promoting urine.—Gk.
diovpéery, to pass urine. = Gk. &:-, for dd, through ; and ovpor, urine.
See Urine.

DIURNAL, daily. (L.) In Lydgate, Complaint of the Black
Knight, 1. 590.—L. diurndlis, daily.—L. diurnus, daily.—L. diés, a
day. A doublet of Journal, q. v.

DIVAN, a council-chamber, sofa. (Pers.) ‘A Diuan, so they
call the Court of Iustice;’ Sandys, Trav. (1632); p.62. In Milton,
P.L. x. 457.—Pers. divan, ‘a tribunal, a steward; a collection of
odes arranged in alphabetical order of rhymes; the Divan i Hafiz is
the most celebrated ;’ Palmer’s Pers. Dict., col. 282. In Richardson,
p. 704, the Pers. form is given as diwdin, the Arab. as daywan,
explained as ‘a royal court, the tribunal of justice or revenue, a
council of state, a senate or divan,’ &c.

DIVARICATE, to fork, diverge. (L.) ‘With two fingers
divaricated, i.e. spread apart; Marvell, Works, ii. 114 (R.). Sir
T. Browne has divarication, Vulg. Errors, b. vi..c. 11, § 4.—L.
diudricat-us, pp. of diudricdre, to spread apart.=—L. di-, for dis-,
apart; and waricare, to spread apart, straddle, from wéricus, straddling,
formed with suffix -cw-s from uari- (=wuaro-), for uarus, bent apart,
straddling, crooked. Der. divaricat-ion.

DIVE, to plunge into water. (E.) ME. diuen, also duuen (with x
for v); spelt dyuenx, P. Plowman, B. xii. 163; duuwen, Ancren Riwle,
p. 282,1. 10. AS. dyfan, to dive, Grein, i. 214; confused with the
strong verb dian (pt. t. déaf, pp. dofen), to dive, id. 213.4 Icel. dyfa,
to dive, to dip. Teut. base *dewb, a secondary form allied to *dewup,
asin E.deep. See Deep, Dip. Der. div-er, div-ing-bell, di-dapper,
i.e. dive-dapper. See Dove.

DIVERGE, to part asunder, tend to spread apart. (L.) ‘ Divergent
or Diverging Rays, in opticks, are those rays which, going from a
point of a visible object, are dispersed, and continually depart one
from another ;’ Phillips’ Dict. ed. 1706.—L. di-, for dis-, apart; and
uergere, to incline, verge, tend. See Verge. Der. diverg-ent, -ence.

DIVERSE, DIVERS, different, various. (F.—L.) ME. divers,
diuerse (with u for v). Spelt divers in An Old Eng. Miscellany, ed.
Morris, p. 35. ‘ Diuerse men diuersé thingés seiden ;” Chaucer, C. T.
4631 (B 211). Spelt divers in the Bible, Mk. viii. 3, &c.— OF. divers,
m. diverse, f, ‘divers, differing, unlike, sundry, repugnant ;’ Cot.—L.


DOCK ae


diuersus, various ; orig. pp. of diuertere, to turn asunder, separate,
divert. See Divert. Der. diverse-ly, divers-i-ty, from ME. and F.
diversité, Chaucer, Troil. v. 1793; divers-i-fy, from F. diversifier, ‘ to
vary, diversifie’ (Cot.), from Late L. diuersificare, which from L.
diuersi- (for diuersus), and -ficare (from facere), to make ; diversificat-
ion, from Late L. pp. diuersificatus,

DIVERT, to turn aside, amuse. (F.—L.) ‘ List nat onysasyde
to dyuerte;’ Lydgate, Storie of Thebes, pt. ii. 1. 1130 (in Spec. of
Eng. ed. Skeat, p. 30).— MF. divertir, ‘to divert, avert, alter, with-
draw ;’ Cot.=—L, diuertere, pp. diuersus, to turn asunder, part, divert.
=—L. di-, for dis-, apart; and wertere, to turn. See Verse. Der.
divers-ion, ‘a turning aside, or driving another way, recreation, or
pastime ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. And see above; also Divorce,

DIVEST, to strip, deprive of. (L.) In Shak. K. Lear, i. 1. 50. —
Late L. diuestire, a late equivalent of L. déuestire, to undress, = L.
di-, for dis-, apart; and westire, to clothe, from westis, clothing. See
Vest and Devest.

DIVIDE, to part asunder. (L.) ME. diuiden, dyuyden (with u
for v), Wyclif, Exod. xiv. 16; also dewyden, Chaucer, On the Astro-
labe, pt. i. § 7.—L. diuidere, pp. diuisus, to divide. —L. di-, for dis-,
apart; and *zddere, a lost verb, prob. ‘to part,’ from the same root
as L. uid-ua, a widow, and E. wid-ow, which see. Der. divid-er, -end;
also (from pp. diutsus) divis-ible, -ibl-y, -ibil-i-ty, -ive, -or, -ion, -ion-al.

DIVINE, godly, sacred. (F.—L.) ‘£A gret deuyn that cleped was
Calkas ;”’ Chaucer, Troil.i. 66. ‘ Thus was the halle ful of divyninge,’
i.e. divining, guessing; id. C. T. 2523 (A 2521).—OF, divin, formerly
also devin (Godefroy), signifying (1) divine, (2) a diviner, augur,
theologian; whence deviner, to divine, predict, guess.=L. diuinus,
divine ; from the same source as diuus, godly, and deus, God. See
Deity. Der. divine-ly, divin-i-ty (ME. diuinité, Gower, C. A. iii. 88 ;
bk. vii. 1223; also divine, verb, divin-er, -at-ion.

DIVISION ; see Divide.

DIVORCE, a dissolution of matriage. (F.—L.) ‘The same
lawe yeueth lybel of departicion because of deworse;’ T. Usk, Testa-
ment of Loue, b. iii. ch. 2.1.14. The pl. deworses is in P. Plowman,
B. ii. 175.— OF. divorce, ‘a divorce ;’ Cot.—L. diuortium, a separa-
tion, divorce. = L. diwortere, another form of divertere, to turn asunder,
separate. See Divert. Der. divorce, verb ; divorc-er, divorce-ment.

DIVULGE, to publish, reveal. (F.—L.) In Shak. Merry Wives,
iii. 2. 43. —F. divulguer, ‘to divulge, publish ;’ Cot. —L. diuulgdre, to
make common, publish abroad. = L. di-, for dis-, apart ; and uulgare,
to make common, from walgus, the common people. See Vulgar.

DIVULSION, a rending asunder. (L.) ‘ Divulsion, or separation
of elements ;’ Holland’s Plutarch, p. 669; also in Blount’s Glosso-
graphia and Kersey. L. diuulsionem, acc. of diuulsio, a plucking
asunder ; like diuulsus, pp. of diuellere, to pluck asunder. =L., di-, for
dis-, apart; and wellere, to pluck. See Convulse.

DIZEWN, to deck out. (E.) Used by Beaum. and Fletcher, in
Monsieur Thomas, iv. 6. 3 and The Pilgrim, iv. 3. Palsgrave has:
‘I dysyn a dystaffe, I put the flaxe upon it to spynne.’ Thus to dizex
was, originally, to furnish a distaff with flax; hence, generally, to
clothe, deck out, &c. PB. Evidently from AS. *dise, for which see
Distaff. Der. be-dizen, q.v.

DIZZY, giddy, confused. (E.) ME. dysy, Pricke of Conscience,
771; dusie, O. Eng. Homilies, i. 117; superl. dusigest, Ancren Riwle,
p. 182. AS. dysig, foolish, silly ; Grein, i. 2145 cf. dysigian, to be
foolish; id. B. From a Teut. base *dus-, appearing also in OHG.
tus-ig, dull, foolish ; Low G. diisig, dizzy. Allied to *diis-, as seen in
Du. duiz-elen, to grow dizzy. Perhaps also to *dwés-, as in AS, dwés,
Du. dwaas, foolish (see Franck); and to Doze. Teut. root *dwes
(*dwas, *dwés, *dus). Der. dizzi-ly, dizzi-ness.

DO, pt. t. DID, pp. DONE, to perform. (E.) ME. dow, pt. t.
dude, dide, pp. don, doon, idon, ydon; see Stratmann’s O. E, Dict.
AS. don, pt. t. dyde, pp. gedén; Grein, i. 199-202.-4-Du. doen, pt. t.
deed, pp. gedaan; OSax. don, dudn, duan, doan, pt. t. deda, pp. giduan ;
OFries. dua, pt. t. dede, pp. gedin; OHG, ton, téan, tuan, MHG.
tuon, duon, G. thun. Teut. stem *dd-. Allied to Gk. ri-Onp,
T set, put, place; Skt. dha, to place, put; Lith. dé-#z, Slav. dé-ti, to
put, to place. =4/DHE, to place, set. Brugmann, i. § 129. Der.
do-ings; a-do, q.v.; don, i.e. do on}; doff, i.e. do off; dup, i.e. do up.
From the same root, doom, q.v., deem, q.v.; also deed, q.v.

DOCILE, teachable, easily managed. (F.—L.) ‘Be brief in what
thou wouldst command, that so The docile mind might soon thy pre-
cepts know;’ Ben Jonson, tr. of Horace, Ars Poet. (335, 336), where
the Lat. text has ‘animi dociles,’ =F. docile, ‘ docible, teachable ; ’
Cot.—L. docilis, teachable.—L. docére, to teach. Der. docil-i-ty.
From the same root, didactic, q.v., disciple, q.v.; also doctor, doctrine,
document, q.v.

DOCK (1), to cut short, curtail. (E.) ‘His top was dokked lyk
a preest biforn ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 592 (A 590). From dock, sb., the
stump of a tail, stump, cut end; cf. ‘dokkyn, or smytyn awey the


DOCK


tayle;’ Prompt. Parv. See prov. E. dock, the solid, fleshy part of
an animal’s tail (E.D.D.). Cf. Low G. dokke, a bunch, a stump,
peg (Berghaus) ; G. docke, a rail, plug, peg (like prov. E. dock, peg
of a top); MHG., tocke, OHG. toccha, a round stick; Icel. dockr, a
short stumpy tail (Haldorsson); EFries. dokke, a bundle, bunch of
flax, hank of yarn. We even find MF. docquer, from Low G.; Pals-
grave has: ‘I scutte, Je docque;’ p. 707. Andcf. WFlem. dokken, to
strike, knock ; MHG., tuc, a blow, stroke. Der. docket.

DOCK (2), a kind of plant. (E.) ME. dokke; Chaucer, Troil. iv.
461. AS. docce, a dock; very common in Cockayne’s ed. of A.S.
Leechdoms; see Glossary in vol. iii.4-MDu. docke (as in docken
bladeren, dock-leaves, Hexham) ; MDan. é&-dokka, water-dock (Kal-
kar).. Cf. also Gael. dogha, a burdock; Irish meacan-dogha, the
great common burdock, where meacan means a tap-rooted plant, as
carrot, parsnip, &c. Der. bur-dock.

DOCK (3), a basin for ships. (Du.) In North’s Plutarch, p. 536
(R.). [G. Douglas has: ‘ Let every barge do prent hyr-self a dok ;’
L. ‘sulcumque sibi premat ipsa carina;’ Aen, x. 296. This answers
to Norw. dokk, a hollow, depression ; and seems to be quite a different
word.] Cotgrave explains F. haute as ‘a dock, to mend or build ships
in. = MDnu. dokke, a harbour; Kilian, Oudemans; whence also Dan.
dokke, Swed. docka, G. docke,a dock. Mod. Du. dok. Der. dock, verb ;
dock-yard. > The history of the word is very obscure. The ME.
dok (in G. Douglas) also resembles prov. E. doke, a hollow, depression,
indentation; Du. deuk, a dent.

DOCKET, a label, list, ticket, abstract. (E.) ‘The docket doth
but signify the king’s pleasure for such a bill to be drawn;’ State
Trials, Abp. Laud, an. 1640 (R.). ‘Mentioned in a docquet;’
Clarendon, Civil War, v. ii. p. 426. Docket is explained as being an
abstract in Blount, Nomolexicon (1691). Apparently allied to the
verb dock, to clip, curtail, hence to make a brief abstract ; cf.‘ doket,
or dockyd;’ Prompt. Parv. See Dock (1). { Docket might well be
a F. form (as *docguez), from MF. docguer, to dock; but no F. docguet
is found. Der. docket, verb.

DOCTOR, a teacher, a physician. (F.—L.) ‘A doctour of
phisik ;’ Chaucer, C. T. Prol. 413 (A 411); spelt doctor, P. Plowman,
C. xii. 96.— OF. doctour.—L. doctorem, acc. of doctor, a teacher. —L.
docére, to teach; with agential suffix -tor. See. Docile. Der. doc-
tor-ate; and see doctrine, document.

DOCTRINE, teaching, learning. (F.—L.) In P. Plowman,
C. xii. 225.—F. doctrine.— L. doctrina, learning. = L. doctor, a teacher ;
sce above. Der. doctrin-al.

DOCUMENT, a paper adduced to prove a thing. (F.—L.)
‘Thus louers with ther moral documents ;’ The Craft of Lovers,
st. I; in Chaucer’s works, ed. 1561, fol. 341.—F. document, ‘a docu-
ment ;’ Cot.=L. documentum, a proof.—L. docére, to teach, with
suffix -mentum; see Docile. Der. document-al, document-ar-y.

DODDER, a kind of twining parasitic plant. (E.) ME. doder;
Voc. 557. 11.4-Dan. dodder ; Swed. dodra; G. dotter, MHG. toter;
OWestphal. doder, Mone, Quellen, p. 287, 1. 44. Orig. meaning
uncertain.

DODECAGON, a plane figure, having 12 equal sides and angles.
(Gk.) In Phillips’ Dict. ed. 1658. Coined from Gk. dw5exa, twelve;
and ywvia, an angle. B. The Greek dwoexa is from dw-, i.e. dv0, two ;
and déxa, ten. See Decagon.

DODECAHEDRON, a solid figure, with 12 equal pentagonal
faces. (Gk.) Spelt dodecaedron in Kersey, ed. 1715. Coined from
Bs bw5exa, twelve; and €5pa, a base. See above, and Decahe-

ron,

DODGE, to go hither and thither, evade, quibble. (E.) ‘Let
there be some dodging casuist with more craft than sincerity ;’ Mil-
ton, Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (R.). Florio (1598) explains
Ital. arrouelare by ‘ to wheele or turne about, to dodge.’ In Gammer
Gurton’s Needle, we find: ‘ dost but dodge,’ i.e. thou dost but quibble;
Hazlitt’s Old Plays, iii. 254 (cf. p. 193). Of uncertain origin. a.
The base seems to be that which appears in the Lowland Scotch dod,
to jog, North Eng. dad, to shake; whence the frequentative forms
seen in North Eng. daddle, doddle, to walk unsteadily, dodder, to
shake, tremble, totter, as also in dadge, or dodge, to walk in a slow
clumsy manner ; dog gle, or dodgel, to totter in walking, &c. (E.D.D.).
B. The orig. sense appears to be ‘to move unsteadily,’ or ‘ to shift
from place to place.’ But the history is very obscure.

DODO, a kind of large bird, now extinct. (Port.—E.?) In Her-
bert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p. 403, is a drawing of a dodo; at p. 402 he
speaks of ‘the dodo, a bird the Dutch call walgh-vogel or dod-eersen,’
which was then found inthe Mauritius. In his second edition, 1638,
he adds: ‘a Portuguize name it is, and has reference to her sim-
plenes.’= Port. doudo, silly, foolish. According to Diez, this Port.
word was borrowed from late ME. dold, stupid; formed from AS.
dol, dull, stupid. See Dold in N.E.D.; and cf. dolt. f Similarly
the booby was named, also by the Portuguese. See the long article


178


- DOLEFUL


on the dodo in the Engl. Cyclopzdia. Walg-vogel in Dutch means
‘nauseous bird ;’ it seems that the sailors killed them so easily that
they were surfeited of them.

DOH, the female of the buck. (C. ?) ME. doo; Wyclif, Prov. vi. 5.
AS. da, translating L. dama in a copy of A£lfric’s Glossary cited by
Lye; cf. ‘damma, vel dammula, da;’ Voc. 320. 35. Cf, Dan. daa, a
deer (from AS. da); daa-hiort, lit. doe-hart, a buck; daa-hind, lit.
doe-hind, a doe. Also Swed. dofhjort, a buck; dofhkind, a doe;
OHG., tamo, m., a buck. B. Perhaps all from L. daéma, a deer;
but the E, form may be Celtic; cf. Irish dam, an ox, dam allaid, a
stag ; Stokes-Fick, p. 142.4+Gk. daudAns, a young steer, Skt. damyas,
a steer, from dam, to tame. See Tame.

DOFF, to take off clothes or a hat. (E.) ‘ And doffing his bright
arms ;’ Spenser, F. Q. vi. 9. 36. ‘Dof bliue pis bere-skin?=doff
quickly this bear-skin ; William of Palerne, 2343. A contraction of
do off, i.e. put off, just as don is of do on, and dup of do up. The ex-
pression is a very old one. ‘ pa hé him of dyde isernbyrnan’ =then he
did off his iron breast-plate; Beowulf, ed. Grein, 671.

DOG, a domestic quadruped. (E.) ME. dogge (2 syllables);
Ancren Riwle, p. 290. AS. docga, in a gloss ; ‘Canum (gen. pl.),
docgena ;’ Cooper’s Report on Rymer’s Foedera, App. B. p. 148;
col. 1 (Record Series). Cf. AS. Doggi-Aorn, Birch, Cart. Saxon. iii.
113; Doggene-ford, Kemble, Cod. Dipl. vi. 231. Hence were bor-
rowed Du. dog, a mastiff; Swed. dogg, a mastiff; Dan. dogge,.a
bull-dog. Root unknown. Der. dog, verb, to track (Shak.); dogg-
ish, -ish-ly, -ish-ness; also dogg-ed, i. e. sullen (Shak. KX. John, iv. 1.
129), -ed-ly, -ed-ness. Also dog-brier, -cart, -day, -fish, -rose, -star ;
dog’ s-ear.

DOG-CHEAP, very cheap. (E.) In Holinshed’s Chron. Eng.
(1587), p. 476: ‘wool was dog-cheape. From dog (above). Cf.
dog-tired, dog-lame, &c.

DOGE, a duke of Venice. (Ital.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss, ed.
1674; and in Evelyn’s Diary (June, 1645).—Ital. doge, a doge,
captain, general ; a provincial form of *doce.—L. ducem, acc. of dux,
a leader. See Duke.

DOGGER, a kind of fishing vessel. (E.) AF. doggere, in an Act
of 31 Edw. III. stat. 3. cap. 1 (1356). [Hence, apparently, Du.
dogger and Icel. dugga were borrowed.| Origin uncertain; perhaps
named, in some way, from E. dog. Cf. MDu. doggen, doggeren, ‘to
dogg one, or, to follow one secretly;’ Hexham. See Notes on
E. Etym., p. 70.

DOGGEREL, wretched poetry. (E.) Orig. an adj.,.and spelt
dogerel. ‘This may wel be rime dogerel, quod he ;’ Chaucer, C. T.
13853 (B 2155). ‘Amid my dogrell rime;’ Gascoigne, Counsel to
Withipoll, 1. 12. Prob. from dog; cf. Dog-cheap.

DOGMA, a definite tenet. (Gk.) ‘This dogma of the world’s
eternity ;’ Cudworth, Intellectual System, p. 251 (R.). Rich. also
quotes the pl. dogmata from Glanvill, Pre-existence of Souls, c. 12, —
Gk. ddypa, that which seems good, an opinion; pl. déyuata.—Gk.
Soxéw, perf. pass. 5€50ypyot, Lam valued at, 1am of opinion. Allied
to L. docére, to teach; see Docile. Der. dogmat-ic, -ic-al, -ic-al-ly,
-ise, ~is-er, -ism, -ist, all from the stem 5dyypar-. ;

DOILY, a small napkin. (Personal name.) Also used as the
name of a woollen stuff. ‘ We should be as weary of one set of
acquaintance, though never so good, as we are of one suit, though
never so fine; a fool, and a doily stuff, would now and then find days
of grace, and be worn for variety ;’ Congreve, Way of the World ;
A. iii. sc. 3. The stores are very low, sir, some doiley petticoats and
manteaus we have, and half a dozen pair of laced shoes;’ Dryden,
Kind Keeper, iv. 1. ‘The famous Doily . . . who raised a fortune
by finding out materials for stuffs, 8&c.; Spectator, no. 283 (1712).
Pegge says that ‘ Doyley kept a Linnen-drapers shop in the Strand,
a little W. of Catharine Street.’ Some say no. 346, Strand, at the
E. corner of Wellington Street. The stuff was named after him,
The name is of French origin; cf. Rich. Coer de Lion, ed. Weber,
1, 1647.

DOIT, a small Dutch coin. (Du.—Scand.) In Shak. Temp. ii. 2.
33.— Du. duit, a doit.—Icel. (ONorse) Aveit, a piece, bit, small coin.
=Icel. *Aveiz, 2nd grade of *Jvita, to cut, a lost verb cognate with
sa die to cut; see Thwite.

DOLE, a small portion. (E.) ME. dole, dale. Spelt dole,
Ancren Riwle, pp. 10, 412; dale, Layamon, 19646, where the later
text has dole. AS. dal, ge-dal, Grein, i. 390; a variant of AS. dé,
a portion. Thus dole is a doublet of deal (1), q.v. 4 The difference
between deal and dole appears to be due to the suffix; dal is from a
type *dailo-; and deal from a type *daili-.

DOLEFUL, sad, miserable. (Hybrid; F. and E.) A hybrid
word, made by suffixing the AS. -ful to ME. doel, deol, duel, dol, del,
of French origin. ‘A deolful ping;’ Layamon, 6901, later text.
The sb. appears in Lowland Scotch as dool; spelt deol in King
Horn, ed. Lumby, 1048; dol in O. Eng. Hom. i. 285, 1. 4.—OF,


DOLL.


doel, duel, dol, mod. F, deuil, grief, mourning (Supp. to Godefroy,
s. v. dueil) ; verbal sb. of OF. doloir, to grieve; cf. L. cordolium, grief
at heart.—L,. dolére, to grieve. Der. doleful-ly, -ness. See con-dole,
and dolour.

DOLL, a child’s puppet. (Gk.) ‘Tl carry you and your doll too,
Miss Margery ;’ Garrick, Miss in her Teens, Act ii. (Fribble).
The same word as Doll, pet name for Dorothy; cf. Doll Tearsheet in
2 Hen. IV. ‘O capitulum lepidissimum, . . O little pretie doll
poll ;* Cooper’s Thesaurus, 1565. So also Sc. doroty, a doll; from
Dorothy, which is a name of Gk. origin. In Johnson’s Dict.

DOLLAR, a silver coin. (Low G.—G.) In Shak. Macb. i. 2. 62.
= Low G. daler, a dollar. Adapted and borrowed from G. thaler, a
dollar. B. The G. zhaler is an abbreviation of oachimsthaler, acoin
so called because first coined from silver obtained from mines in
Foachimsthal (i.e. Joachim’s dale) in Bohemia about A.D. 1518; they
were sometimes called Schlickenthaler, because coined by the counts
of Schlick. The G. ¢hal is cognate with E. dale. Thus dollar=
dale-er. See Dale. The Du. form is daalder.

DOLMAN, a kind of loose jacket. (F.—G.—Hung.—Turk.)
“Clothed with a robe of dollymant crimson;’ Hakluyt, Voy. vol.
ii, pt. 1. p. 113.—F. dolman.=—G. dolman, dollman.= Hung. dolmany.
= Turk. déliman, délamah, a kind of long robe.

DOLMEN, a monument of two (or more) upright stones, with a
flat stone above them, (C.) The French name for a cromlech. =F.
dolmen. [Explained as ‘ stone-table’ by Legonidec; from Bret. #d/,
idol, table (from L. ¢abula) ; and men, a stone.] But rather ‘a stone
with a hole beneath.’—Corn. dolmén, tolmén ; from Corn. doll, toll
(W. twll, a hole) ; and ménx (W. maen),astone. See N.E.D.

DOLOMITE, a kind of rock. (F.) Named, in 1794, after M.
Dolomieu, a French geologist (1750-1801).

DOLOUR, grief, sorrow. (F.—L.) In Shak. Two Gent. iii. 1.
240. ME. dolour, O. Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 212.—OF.
dolour, MF. doleur, ‘ grief, sorrow ;’ Cot.—L. dolérem, acc. of dolor,
grief.—L. dolére, to grieve; see Doleful. Der. dolor-ous, used by
Cotgrave to translate MF. doloureux, from L. adj. dolordsus.

DOLPHIN, a kind of fish. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Spenser, F. Q. iv.
11. 23. ME, dolphyne, Allit. Morte Arthure, 2054. [ME. delfyn,
King Alisaunder, 6576, is immediately from L. delphinus.])—OF.
daulphin, older spelling of dauphin ; Cot. —Folk-L. dalfinum, acc. of
dalfinus, for L. delphinus.— Gk. deAguv-, stem of deApis, a dolphin;
supposed to mean ‘ belly-fish;’ cf. Gk, SeAgvs, womb. See Curtius,
i, 81. Doublet, dauphin.

DOLT, a dull or stupid fellow. (E.) In Shak. Oth. v. 2. 163.
ME. dult, blunt ; ‘ dulte neiles, blunt nails, i. e. instruments of the
Passion; O. Eng. Hom. i. 203; and see Ancren Riwle, p. 292,
where for dulte another reading is dulle. The word is a mere exten-
sion of ME. dul, dull. Cf. Prov. E. dold, stupid, confused (Halli-
well), so that the suffixed -t =-d=-ed ; and dol¢ or dult is for dulled, i.e.
blunted. See Dull. Der. dolt-ish, -ish-ness; dodo. ‘

DOMATHI,, territory, estate. (F.—L.) ‘A domaine and inherit-
ance;’ Holland’s Pliny, b. xiii. c. 3. 1. 4.—MF. domaine, ‘a
demaine’ (sic), Cot. ; OF. demaine, a domain ; also, power; Godefroy.
—Late L. dominicum, neut. of dominicus, with the same sense as
L. dominium, lordship, private property.—L. dominus, a lord; see
Dominate. Doublet, demesne, q. v.

DOME, a hemi-spherical roof. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘ Dome, a town-
house, guild-hall, state-house, meeting-house in a city, from that of
Florence, which is so called. Also, a flat round loover, or open roof
to a steeple, banqueting-house, &c. somewhat resembling the bell of
a great watch;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674.— MF. dome, ‘a town-house,
guild-hall,’ &c. (as above) ; also dosme, ‘a flat-round loover,’ &c. (as
above); Cot. [The spelling dosme is false.]—Ital. duomo, domo, a
cathedral church (house of God).—L. domum, acc. of domus, a house,
a building. (4/DEM.) See Timber. Korting, § 3089.

DOMESTIC, belonging to a house. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Rich. III, ii. 4. 60.—F. domestique, ‘domesticall, housall, of our
houshold;’ Cot.—L. domesticus, belonging to a household. —L.
domus, a house. Der. domestic-al-ly, -ate, -at-ion ; and see domicile,


dome.

DOMICILE, a little house, abode. (F.—L.) ‘One of the
cells, or domicils of the understanding ;’ Bacon, on Learning, by G.
Wats, ii. 12 (R.).—OF. domicile, ‘an house, mansion ;”’ Cot.—L.
domicilium, a habitation. L. domi- (=domo-), for domus, a house ;
and -cilium, possibly allied to cella, a cell; see Dome and Cell.
Der. domicili-ar-y, -ate; from L. domicili-um.

‘ DOMINATE, to rule over. (L.) Shak. has dominator, L. L. L.
i, 1. 2223; Titus, ii. 3.31. [The sb. domination, ME. dominacion, is
in early use; see Chaucer, C. T. 12494 (C 560); from OF. domina-
tion.|—L. dominiitus, pp. of domindri, to be lord. = L. dominus, lord.
+Skt. damana-s, a horse-tamer; from dam, to tame; see Tame.
Der. dominat-ion (F. domination), -ive; domin-ant (F. dominant, pres.


DOR


pt. of dominer,'to govern); and see domineer, dominical, dominion,
domino, domain, demesne, don (2).

DOMINEER, to play the master. (Du.—F.—L.) In Shak.
Tam. Shrew, iii. 2. 226.—MDu. domineren, to feast luxuriously ;
Oudemans.—OF. dominer, ‘to govern, rule . . . domineer, to have
soveraignty ;” Cot.—L. dominari, to be lord; see above. For the
suffix, cf. cash-ier.

DOMINICAL, belonging to our Lord. (F.—L.) In Shak.
L.L. L. v. 2. 44.—MF. dominical; Cot.—Late L. dominicilis, do-
minical.—L, dominicus, belonging to a lord.=L. dominus, a lord; see
Dominate.

DOMINION, lordship. (F.—L.) ‘To haue lordship or do-
minion;’ Lydgate, Storie of Thebes, pt. ii; The Answer of King
Ethiocles.= OF. dominion.=Late L. acc. dominidnem, from nom.
dominio.—L. dominium, lordship.—L. dominus, a lord; see Do-
minate.

DOMINO, a masquerade-garment. (Span.—L.) ‘Domino, a
kind of hood worn by the canons of a cathedral church; also a
mourning-vail for women ;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.—Span. domino, a mas-
querade-dress. Orig. a hood worn by a master.—Span. domine, a
master, a teacher of Latin grammar.—L. dominus, a master; see
Dominate. Der. dominoes, the name of a game; from the phrase
faire domino, to complete (and win) the game; Hatzfeld.

DON (1), to put on clothes. (E.) ‘Don his clothes ;’ Hamlet, iv.
5.52. Acontraction of do on, i.e. put on. * Brutus hehte his beornes
don on hure burnan’= Brutus bade his men do on their breast-plates ;
Layamon, 1700, 1701. See Doff, Dup.

DON (2), sir; a Spanish title. (Span.—L.) In Shak. Two Gent.
1. 3. 39.—Span. don, lit. master, a Spanish title. —L. dominus, a mas-
ter; see Dominate. @ The Span. fem. is duenna, q.v.; donna is
Italian. The word itself is ultimately the same as the ME. daz, as in
‘dan John,’ or ‘dan Thomas’ or ‘dan Albon;’ Chaucer, C. T. 13935
(B 3119). This form is from the OF. dan, acc. of dans=L. dominus.

DONATION, a gift. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. iv. 85.—F. do-
nation, ‘a donation, a present ;’? Cot.—L. acc. dénationem, from nom.
donitio.—L. ddnare, to give.=L. donum,a gift; cognate with Gk.
b@pov, a present, Skt. dana-m, a gift; cf. Skt. da, to give; OSlavon.
da-mi, 1 give; Lith, dz-mi, 1 give.—4/DO, to give. Brugmann, i.
§ 167. Der. From the same source are donat-ive, don-or, don-ee.
From the same root are anecdote, aritidote, condone, pardon, dose,
dower ; also date (1), dative, dado, die (2), &c.

DONJON, the keep of a fortress ; see Dungeon.

DONKEY, a familiar name for an ass. (E.) Common in mod.
E., but rare in E. literature; orig. dialectal. ‘A Donky, or a Dicky.
Anass. Essex and Suff.;’ Gent. Mag. 1793, pt-ii. p.1083. Itseems
at first to have rhymed with monkey, as still in Somersets. a. The
word is a double diminutive, formed with the suffixes -#- and -y (-ey),
the full form of the double suffix appearing in the Lowland Scotch
lass-ickie, a little-little lass; this double suffix is particularly common
in the Banffshire dialect, which has beastikie from beast, horsikie from
horse, &c., as explained in The Dialect of Banffshire, by the Rev.
Walter Gregor, p. 5. B. The stem is dun, a familiar name for a
horse, as used in the common phrase ‘dun is in the mire;’ as to
which see Chaucer, C. T. Mancip. Prol. 1. 5; Shak. Romeo, i. 4. 41.
The name dun was given to a horse or ass in allusion to its colour;
see Dun. @ Similarly was formed dunnock, ME. donek, a hedge-
sparrow, with a single suffix -ock.

DOOM, a judgment, decision. (E.) ME. dom; Havelok, 2487;
and common. AS. dém; Grein, i. 196. + Swed. and Dan. dom; Icel.
domr; Goth. doms; OHG. twom, judgment. Teut. type *démoz, m.
Allied to Gk. 0éus, law; and 7i-0n-yu, I place, set. From 4/ DHE,
to place; cf. Skt. dha, to place, set; L.-dere, asin con-dere ; Lith. de-ti,
to place; OSlavon. dé-zi, to place. Brugmann,i. § 573. Der. deem,
verb; q.v.; doomsday, q.v. Observe that the suffix -dom (AS, -ddm)
is the same word as doom. See Theme, Thesis.

DOOMSDAY-BOOK,a survey of England made by William I.
(E.) So called, popularly, as being a final authority. The etymology
is obvious, viz. from AS. domes deg, the day of judgment or decision ;
cf. ME. domesday, Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii. 194 (1284).

DOOR, an entrance-gate. (E.) ME. dore, Havelok, 1788. AS. dor,
n., duru, f.; Grein, i. 212.-4+ Du. deur; Dan. dor; Swed. dorr; Icel.
dyrr; Goth. daur; OHG. tor, G. thor, thir. Further allied to L.
fores, pl.; Lith. durys, pl.; Olrish dorus, n.; W. drws, m.; Russ.
dver(e); Gk. Ovpa; Skt. dvGr; a door, gate. Root uncertain. Brug-
mann, i. § 462. Der. door-nail (ME. dorenail, Will. of Palerne, 628) ;
door-pin (ME. dorepin, durepin, Gen. and Exodus, 1078); door-ward
(ME. doreward, dureward, Layamon, ii. 317).

DOR, an insect that flies with a great humming noise. (E.) ME.
dore; ‘Crabro, dore;’ Voc. 576. 4. AS. dora; ‘Atticus, dora;’ Voc.
7.30. Lit. ‘buzzer;’ cf, Swed. dial. dorrd, to buzz loudly; Dan.
dure, to roar (Larsen).


179


N 2%


180 DORMANT


DORMANT, sleeping. (F.—L.) ‘ His table-dormant ;’ Chaucer,
C. T. 355 (A 353).—. dormant, pres. pt. of dormir, to sleep. =L.
dormire, to sleep; see Dormitory. Der. dormanc-y.

DORMER-WINDOW, an attic-window. (F. and E.) A
dermer was a sleeping-room. ‘Or to any shop, cellar, . . chamber,
dormer ;’ Chapman, All Fools, Act iy. sc. 1 (Notary). — OF. dormeor,
a dormitory (Godefroy), —L. dormitérium (below).

DORMITORY, a sleeping-chamber. (L.) ‘The dormitorie-
door;’ Holinshed, Desc. of Ireland, c. 3.—L. dormitorium, a sleep-
ing-chamber ; neut. of dormitérius, adj. of or belonging to sleeping. —
L. dormitor,a sleeper. —L.dormire,tosleep. Allied to Russ.dremat(e)
to sleep; also to Gk. dapOavewv, to sleep, Skt. dra, to sleep.

DORMOUSKH, a kind of mouse. (F.—L.; and E.) ‘Laye still
lyke a dormouse, nothynge doynge;’ Hall, Hen. VII, an 7. § 6.
ME. dormows. ‘ Hic sorex, a dormcws;’ Voc. 700. 20; andin Prompt.
Pary. Lit, ‘sleeping-mouse.’ The prefix is dorm (as if dorm-mouse) ;
from prov. E. dorm, to sleep. Cf. Icel., Norw., and Swed. dial. dorma,
to doze. All, apparently, from I. dormir,to sleep; see above. 4 Hal-
liwell gives dorrer, a sleeper; but it has not been found.

DORNICK, a kind of cloth ; obsolete. (Flem.) See Bury Wills,
p-.135. Spelt dorneckes in Palsgrave. Named from Flem. Dornick
(Hexham); better known as F. Yournay (L. Tornacus). See
Cambric.

DORSAL, belonging to the back. (F.—L.) The term ‘dorsal fin’
is used by Pennant, Zool., iii. 32 (1769).—F. dorsal, of or belonging
to the back; Cot.— Late L. dorsalis, belonging to the back.—L. dor-
sum, the back.--Olrish druimm, W. trum, back, ridge.

DORY, a fish. See John Dory.

DOSE, a portion of medicine. (F.—Gk.) ‘Without repeated
doses ;’ Dryden’s tr. of Virgil, Dedication. And used by Cotgrave.
— MF. dose, ‘a dose, the quantity of potion or medicine,’ &c.; Cot. =
Gk. Sédo1s, a giving, a portion given or prescribed. Gk. base 5o-,
allied to didwp, I give; cf. Skt. da, to give. Der. dose, verb. See
Donation.

DOT, a small mark, speck. (E.) Not in early use, and uncommon
in old authors. It occurs in Johnson’s Dict., and the phrase ‘ dotted
lines’ occurs in Burke’s Letters (Todd). Levins (1570) has: ‘A doé,
obstructorium, Cotgrave has: ‘Caillon, a dot, clot, or congealed
lump.’ The only other early trace I can find of it is in Palsgrave,
qu. by Halliwell, who uses dot in the sense of ‘a small lump, or pat.’
Cf, prov. Eng. dot, a small lump, a small child. AS. dott, only in
the sense of ‘ the head of a boil;’ A.S. Leechdoms, iii. 40. Cf. Du.
dot, ‘a little bundle of spoiled wool, thread, silk, or such like, which
is good for nothing;” Sewel; or, ‘a whirled knot, clue, pellet ;’
Calisch. Also Norw. do/t, a tuft, bunch, wisp to stop a hole with ;
Low G, dutte,a plug. See Dit. B. The remoter origin is obscure ; cf.
Swed. dial. dott, a little heap, clump; EFriesic dotte, dot, a clump
(Koolman); NFries. dodd, a clump (Outzen); Norw. dott, a tuft, a
wisp, something to stop up a hole with; Norw. dyéle, AS. dyttan, to
stop up. Rietz (s.v. dota, to stop up) cites Swed. dial. dott, some-
thing soft rolled up, to stop up a hole with. See Dit.

DOTAGE, childishness, foolishness, (E. with F. suffix.) ME.
dotage, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1425. From the verb dote, with
F. suffix -age, answering to L. suffix -aticum. See Dote.

DOTARD, a foolish fellow. (E. with F. suffix.) In Chaucer,

C. T. 5913 (D 331). From the verb dote; with F. suffix -ard, of
OHG. origin. See Dote.
_ DOTE, to be foolish. (E.) In early use. ME. dotien, doten;
Layamon, |. 3294; P. Plowman, A. i. 129; B. i. 138, An Old Low
G. word, Cf.MDu. doten, to dote, mope, Oudemans; Du. dutten, to
take a nap, to mope; dut, a nap, sleep, dotage; Icel. doé/a, to nod
with sleep; MHG, édazen, to keep still, mope. 4 The F. radoter,
OF, re-doler, is of O. Low G., origin, with L. prefix re-. Der. dot-
age, q.v.; dot-ard, q.v.; dott-er-el, a silly bird, Drayton’s Polyolbion,
Ss. 25 (near the end); and Prompt. Pary,

DOUBLE, two-fold. (F.—L.) ME. double, Ancren Riwle, p. 70.
= OF. doble, later double. duplus, double, lit. two-fold.—L. du-,
for duo, two; and -plus, related to -mAos in Gk, d:-1Ads, two-fold. See
Two. Der. double, verb; double-ness; also doublet, q. v., doubloon, q. v.

DOUBLET, an inner garment. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. ii. r.
102. ME. dobbelet, ‘a garment, bigera;’ Prompt. Parv.; see Way’s
note. = OF, double/, ‘a doublet, a jewell, or stone of two peeces joyned
or glued together ;’ Cot. [Here doublet is probably used in a lapi-
dary’s sense, but the word is the same; see Godefroy, and cf. MF,
doublure, lining for a garment.]=—I. double, double; with dim. suffix
-et; see Double,

DOUBLOON, a Spanish coin. (F.—Span.—L.) A Spanish
word, given in Johnson’s Dict. as doublon, which is the F, form. =
Span. doblon, so called because it was the double of a pistole. Span,
doblo, double ; with suffix -on ( = Ital. -one.) —L. duplus ; see Double.

DOUBT, to be uncertain. (F.—L.) ME, douten, commonly in the


DOWLE


sense ‘to fear ;’ Havelok, 1. 708. — OF. douter, later doubler, as in Cot
grave, whence 6 was inserted into the E. word also.—L. dubilare, to
doubt, be of two minds; allied to dubius, doubtful; see Dubious.
Der. doubt, sb.; -er, ful, -ful-ly, -ful-ness, -less, -less-ly.

DOUCEUR, a small present. (F.—L.) A French word, used by
Burke (Todd),—F. douceur, lit. sweetness. — L. dulcdrem, acc. of dul-
cor, sweetness. = L. dulcis, sweet ; see Dulcet.

DOUCHE, a shower-bath, (F.—Ital.—L.) Modern, anda French
word, =I, douche, a douche, a shower-bath, introduced from Ital. in
the 16th cent. (Brachet),—Ital. doccia, a conduit, canal, water-pipe,
spout. Ital. docciare, to pour; formed as if from a Late L. *ductiare,
a derivation of ductus, a leading, in Late L.,a duct, canal; see Duct.

DOUGH, kneaded flour. (E.) ME. dah, dagh, do3, dogh, dow;
spelt doz, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 205; see da} in Stratmann, p. 151.
AS. dah, gen. dages, dough; A. S. Leechdoms, ii. 342, 1. 18.-+- Du.
deeg ; Dan. deig; Swed. deg ; Icel. deig ; Goth. daigs, a kneaded lump.
G. teig. Teut. type *daig-oz,m, B. The sense is ‘a kneaded lump ;’
the root appears in Goth, deigan, digan, to knead, to form out of a
plastic material, Rom. ix. 20; cognate with L. jingere, to form, shape,
mould; also with Skt. dih, to smear.—»/DHEIGH, to mould, to
knead; whence also Gk. retxos, a wall (orig. of earth); and cf.
Paradise. Brugmann,i.§ 604. Der. dough-y. Andsee Figure,
Fiction, Dairy, Lady.

DOUGHTY, able, strong, valiant. (E.) ME. duhti, dohti,
dou}ti; Layamon, 14791; P. Plowman, B.v. 102. AS. dohtig, also,
dyhtig, valiant; Grein, i. 213.—AS, dugan, to be strong, to avail.
Cf. Du. deugen, to be worth; Dan. due, to avail; whence dygtig’, able,.
capable ; Swed. duga, to avail; whence dugtig, able, fit ; Icel. duga,
to avail; whence dygdugr, doughty; Goth. dugan, to avail, suit ;
OHG,. tugan, G. taugen, to be worth; whence G, tiichtig, able.
@ The AS. dugan is prov. E. dow, to be worth something.

DOUSE, to plunge into water, immerse. (Scand.?) ‘TI have
washed my feet in mire or ink, douz’d my carnal affections in all the
vileness of the world; ’ Hammond, Works, iv. 515 (R.). ‘ He was
very often used... to be dowssed [perfundebatur] in water luke-
warme;’ Holland, Suetonius, p. 75 (R.). ‘To swing i th’ air,
or douce in water;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 1.1. 502. Perhaps of
Scand. origin; cf. Norw. dusa, to fall ortopple down, as with a blow
(Aasen); dus (with uz), a push, a blow (id.), Cf. also MSwed. dunsa,
to fall heavily (Ihre); Swed. dial. dunsa, to plump down, fall
clumsily; duns, the noise of a falling body; Rietz. And see
Dowse (1).

DOUT, to extinguish. (E.) In Shak. Hen. V, iv. 2. 11. Dowt
is for do out, i.e. put out. Cf. doff, don, dup, for do off, do on, do up,

DOVE, the name of a bird. (E.) ME. doue, douue, dowue (where
u=v); P. Plowman, B. xv. 393. AS. die, only found in the com-
pound dife-doppa, used to translate L. pelicinus (Bosworth) ; the usual
AS. word was culfra.4+-OSax. diiba (Heliand) ; Goth. dubo ; G. taube,
B. The sense is ‘ diver,’ the form dife being from the verb difan, to:
dive, with the suffix -e denoting the fem. agent, as usual, And see
Dive and Columbine. Der. dove-cot; also dove-tail, q. v.

DOVETAIL, to fasten boards together. (E.) ‘ Dovetaild is
a term among joyners,’ &c.; Blount’s Gloss. From dove and tail ;
from the shape of the fitted ends of the board (<]).

DOWAGER, a widow with a jointure. (.—L.) In Shak,
Mids. N. D. i. 1. 5, 157. Spelt douagier in Palsgrave; Epistle, p. i.
- OF. douagere, sb. f. (Godefroy) ; from douage, a dower. Cf.‘ To
make her dowage [endowment] of so rich a jointure ;’ Merry Devil of
Edmonton (R.). B. Again, the OF. dou-age is from the F. dower, to
endow.=L. détare, to endow. See Dower.

DOWDY, shabbily dressed; as sb., a slattern. (Scand.) ‘ Dido,
a dowdy ;’ Shak. Romeo and Juliet, ii. 4. 43. From ME. dowd, an
ill-dressed person; found as early as 1330 (N.E.D.); cf. prov. E.
dowd, a woman’s cap (E.D.D.).—Icel. diida, to wrap up, swathe ;.
didi, swaddling clothes. Cf. Duds.

DOWEL, a plug for connecting two pieces of wood, &c. (Low G.)
‘The quelis [wheels] ar ioyned with mani a dowle ;’ Cursor Mundi,.
21270.—Low G. dovel, a plug (Liibben); ef. G. dobel, OHG. tubili,
a dowel; EFries. dofel. Allied to Swed. dubb, a plug, peg. Perhaps
influenced by F. doutlle, a socket.

DOWER, an endowment. (F.—L.) ME. dower, Chaucer,
C. T. 8683 (E 807).—OF. doaire, later douaire.— Late L. dotarium, =
L. dotdre, to endow.—L. dat-, stem of dds (gen. dotis), a gift, dowry,
+ Gk. dds, a gift.e4/ DO, to give; cf. Skt. da, to give. Der,
dower-ed, dower-less; dowry (for dower-y) ; and see dowager.

DOWLAS, a coarse kind of linen. (Brittany.) ‘ Britaine [Brit-
tany] where . . Doulas and Lockeram is made ;’ Act 28 Hen, VIII,
c. 4. § 1 (N.E.D.). And in Shak, 1 Hen. IV, iii. 3. 79.— Bret.
Daoulas, SE. of Brest, in Brittany. See Lockram.

DOWLE, a filament of a feather. (F,—L.?) In Shak. Temp,
iii, 3. 65. ME. dowle, Plowman’s Tale, 1272. Perhaps from OF.


Bald


DOWN


doulle, douille, somewhat soft. —L. ductilis ; see Ductile.
see Notes on E. Etym.

DOWN (1), soft plumage. (Scand.) In Gower, C. A. ii. 103, bk.
iv. 3021.—Icel. dtinmn, down; Swed. dun; Dan. duun. Cf. Lith. dujé,
down. Der. down-y; eider-down.

DOWN (2), a hill. (C.) ME. dun, doun; Layamon, 27256;
Ormulum, 14568. AS. din, a hill; Grein, i. 213.—Jrish dun, a for-
tified hill, fort, town ; Gael. dun, a hill, mount, fort ; W. din, a hill-
fort. B. Cognate with AS. zi, a fort, enclosure, town; the AS. ¢
answering to Celtic d by Grimm’s law. See Town. Der. a-down,
q.v.; also down (3),q.v. Also, ‘the downs,’ a famous road-stead
for ships, opposite the North Downs (Kent) ; ‘in the Downes;’ Capt.
J. Smith, Works, p. 90. Stokes-Fick, p. 150. Doublet, dune.

DOWN (3), adv. and prep. in a descending direction. (E. and
C.) The prep. down is a mere corruption, by loss of the initial, of
ME, a-down, which again is for AS. of-diine, i.e. off or from the hill.
The loss of the prefix is of early date; dun (for a-dune) occurs in
Layamon, 6864, in the phrase ‘he dun lei’=he lay down. It will
be observed that this form dun was originally an adverb, not a pre-
position, See Down (2), and Adown. Der. down-cast, -fall,
-hearted, -hill, -right, -ward, -wards. Dunward (downward) occurs
in Layamon, 13106,

DOWSSE (1), to strike in the face. (Scand.) ‘Dowse, a blow on
the chaps;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. ‘ Dowse, to give one a slap on the
chaps;’ Bailey (1735). [Cf. ME. duschen, to strike ; ‘such a dasande
drede dusched to his heart ’=such a dazing dread struck to his heart ;
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1538. Of Scand. origin; cf. Norwegian
dusa, to strike with violence (also to topple down, as from a blow,
Ross); Ger. dial. dusen, tusen, to strike, run against, cited by Rietz
s.v. dust; also MDu. doesen, to beat heavily, strike (Kilian); EFries.
dossen, to strike (Koolman). B. The prov. G. (Altmark) dussen
means ‘to daze one by a blow on the head’ (Danneil); cf. Low G.
dussen, to be dased by a blow on the head. Perhaps allied to
Dizzy and Doze.

DOWSE (2), to plunge into water; see Douse.

DOWSE (3), to extinguish. (E.) A cant term; ‘dowse the glim,’
i.e, extinguish the light. Probably only a particular use of dowse
(1), to strike. Possibly suggested by dout, to extinguish.

DOXOLOGY, an utterance of praise to God. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Doxo-
logy, a song of praise,’ &c.; Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674.—Late L.
doxologia. = Gk. dofodoyia, an ascription of praise.— Gk. dofoAd-yos,
giving praise, — Gk. dogo-, for 5éga, glory; and -Adyos, speaking, from
Aeyev, to speak. Adéa meant originally ‘a notion,’ from doxeiv, to
think, expect ; see Dogma.

DOXY, a disreputable sweetheart. (MDu.) A cant term. In
Shak. Wint. Ta. iv. 3. 2. (Cf. EFries. doktje, dimin. of dokke, a doll.)
Prob. from MDu. docke, a doll. Cf. OHG. toccha, a doll, also a term
of endearment (G. docke).

DOZE, to sleep lightly, slumber. (Scand.) ‘ Dosed with his fumes,
and heavy with his load, They found him snoring in his dark abode;’
Dryden, tr. of Virgil, Ecl. vi. 21. Here dosed means ‘ stupefied,’ ‘ ren-
dered drowsy.’=Swed. dial. dusa, to doze, slumber; Rietz; Dan.
dose, to doze, mope. Cf. Icel. diisa, to doze; Low G. dussen, to be
dizzy. From Teut. base *dus-, whence also dizzy; see Dizzy.

DOZEN, twelve. (F.—L.) ME. dosain; K. Alisaunder, 1. 657.
— OF. dosaine, dozaine; modF. douzaine, a dozen. — OF. doze, modF.
douze, twelve ; with suffix -aine (<L. -éna, as in cent-éna),—L. duo-
decim, twelve, = L. duo, two, cognate with E, two; and decem, ten,
cognate with E. ten. See Two and Ten.

DRAB (1), a low, sluttish woman. (E.) In Shak. Macb. iv. 1. 31.
Palsgrave has: ‘Drabbe, a slutte.’ [Cf. also Irish drabog, a slut,
slattern, Gael. drabag, a slatten; Gael. drabach, dirty, slovenly, dra-
baire, a dirty, slovenly man; all from E.] Not found in AS. Cf.
EFries. drabbe, puddle-water; Du. drabbe, dregs, draff; Low G.
aes to slaver. Allied to Draff. Der. drab, verb; Hamlet,
ii.oT. 120:

DRAB (2), ofa dull brown colour, (F.—Late L.) ‘Drab, adj. (with
clothiers), belonging to a gradation of plain colours betwixt a white
and a dark brown;’ Ash’s Dict. ed. 1775. He also gives: ‘ Drab,
s. (in commerce) a strong kind of cloth, cloth double milled.’ Bailey
(1721) has: ‘Drap, Drab, cloth.” It would appear that drab was
applied to the colour of undyed cloth. =F. drap, cloth: — Late L. acc.
drappum, from nom. drappus, in Charlemagne’s Capitularies (Brachet),
Cf. Lith. drapanos, white linen. See Drape and Trap (2).

DRACHM, a weight; see Dram.

DRAFF, dregs, refuse; hogwash. (E.) ME. draf, Chaucer, C. T.
17346 (I 35); and earlier, in Layamon, 29256. Not found in AS. ;
but may be considered an E. word. + Du. dra/f, swill, hog’s wash;
also drab, draff; Icel. draf, draff, husks; Swed. draf, grains; Dan,
drav, dregs, lees; G. traber, pl. grains, husks. Cf. AS. draf, turbid ;
G. triibe ; Goth. drdbjan, to trouble ; Gk. tpepev, to thicken, curdle,


[A guess ;


DRAMA 181


nourish. Allied to Drab (1), q.v. (Cf. Gael. and Irish drabh,
draff; from E.}

DRAFT, the act of drawing, a draught. (E.) A corruption of
eA te by the usual change of gh to /, as in Jaugh (pron. laaf).
See Draught. Der. draft, verb, drafts-man.

DRAG, to pull forcibly. (Scand.) ME. draggen, Prompt. Parv.
A secondary weak verb, due to draw. — Swed. drag ga, to search with
a grapnel; dragg, a grapnel; cf. Dan. drag, a pull, tug, draught,
haul. = Swed. draga, to draw; Icel. draga, to draw, pull, carry; Dan.
drage, to draw, pull, drag. See Draw.

DRAGGLE, to make or become dirty by drawing along the
ground. (E.) ‘His draggling tail hung in the dirt;’ Hudibras,
pt.i.c. 1.1. 449. The frequentative of drag, by addition of the usual
suffix -le; cf. waggle from wag. See Drag. Doublet, drawl.

DRAGOMAN, an interpreter. (F'.—Ital.—Gk.—Arab.) Spelt
druggerman, Pope, Sat. viii. 83. Sandys has drogermen as a pl.;
Travels (1632), p. 62. [Found very early, spelt drogman, in King
Alisaunder, 1. 3401; from F. drogman.] =F. dragoman, drogman. =
Ital. dragommanno, an interpreter. A word of Eastern origin,
introduced from Constantinople by the Crusaders, who had borrowed
it from the medizeval Gk. dparyoupavos, an interpreter (Brachet).—
Arab. ¢arjumdan (formerly targuman), an interpreter, translator,
dragoman; Palmer’s Pers, Dict. col. 1313; Rich. Dict. p. 388. Cf.
Chaldee targiim, a version, interpretation. See Targum.

DRAGON, a winged serpent. (F,—L.—Gk.) ME. dragun;
Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 24, l. 759.—F. dragon. —L. acc.
draconem, ftom nom. draco, = Gk. dpaxwy, a dragon; lit. ‘seeing one,’
i.e, sharp-sighted one.— Gk. dpax-, weak grade of S5épxopa, I see. =
/ DERK, to see; cf. Skt. dvg, to see. Der. dragon-tish, -et (dimin.
form), -fly ; and see dragoon.

DRAGOON, a kind of light horseman. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘A
captain of dragoons ;’ Spectator, no. 261.—F. dragon, a dragoon,
horse-soldier ; the same word with F. dragon, a dragon, though the
reason for the name has been disputed. —L. acc. dracdnem, from nom,
draco,a dragon, See Dragon. Der. dragonn-ade, a French word.
@ Littré gives 1585 as the date of the first use of dragoons, and
quotes the supposition of Voltaire, that they were so named from
OF. dragon, in the sense of ‘standard;’ but this is unsupported.
The fact is rather, that they were so called because armed with fire-
arms called dragons; and this is strongly supported by the use of E.
dragoon in the sense of a kind of carbine, as early as 1622 (N.E.D.).
And these carbines were so called because they ‘ breathed fire,’ like
the fabulous dragons of old. The dragoons were at first infantry
soldiers, till 1784.

DRAIN, to draw off gradually. (E.) In Shak. Mach, i. 3. 18,
Not found in ME. AS. dréhnigean, dréhnian, drénian; in the phr.
‘ge dréhnigead (var. read. dréhniad, dréniad| pone gnet aweg,’ i.e.
ye drain away the gnat; Matt. xxiii. 24. Also spelt dréahnian, A. S.
Leechdoms, iii. 72 ; orig. sense, ‘to become dry.’= AS. *dréag-=
Teut. *draug-, 2nd grade of Teut. *dreugan-, to be dry; cf. Icel.
draug-r,adrylog. See Dry. Der. drain, sb.; drain-age, drain-er.
See Notes on Eng, Etym., p. 73.

DRAKE, the male of the duck. (E.) ‘As doth the whyte doke
after hir drake;’ Chaucer, C. T. 3576; cf. Havelok, 1241. This ME,
drake answers to AS. *draca, not found, but of the same form as AS.
draca, a dragon, though the latter is merely borrowed from the L.
draco (see Dragon). B. We find a similar equivalence of form in the
Low G. drake, (1) a drake; (2) a kite (Bremen Wort.) ; Low G,
drake, draak, (1) a kite; (2) a drake; (3) a meteor (Berghaus) ;
MDan. drage, (1) a dragon; (2) a drake (Kalkar). Cf. also Swed.
and, a duck, and-drake, a drake (from Low G.); G. enterich, OHG.
anetrecho, MHG. antrache (Schade), for *anut-trahho (Kluge) ; prob.
for anut (AS, ened) duck, and ¢rahho, of unknown meaning, the same
in form as ¢trahho,a dragon. Ihre notes MSwed. drake, a dragon,
a war-ship, and-drake, a drake. Levins (1570) has: ‘drake, birde,
anas;’ and ‘drake, dragon, draco.’ Cf. G. drache, drachen, a dragon,
akite. y. The AS. *draca is probably Teutonic. Perhaps connected
with Icel. draka or drak, a streak; Swed. dial. drakig; Dan. dial.
draget, marked (on the back) with a white stripe.

DRAM, DRACHY, a small weight, small quantity. (F.—L,
—Gk.). In Shak. Timon, v. 1. 1543; Merch. of Ven. iv. 1. 6.
‘Drame, wyghte [weight], drama, dragma;’ Prompt. Pary.= OF.
dragme (Hatzfeld); MF. drame, dragme, drachme, ‘a dram ; the
eighth part of an ounce, or three scruples; also, a handful of ;’ Cot.
=. drachma, borrowed from Gk. dpaxypuy, a handful, a drachma,
used both as a weight and a coin; cf. dpayua, as much as one can
grasp. —Gk. dpaccopa, I grasp. Brugmann, i. § 509. )

DRAMA, a representation of actions. (L.—Gk.) Puttenham
speaks of * enterludes or poemes drammaticke ;’ Arte of Poesie, lib. i.
cap. 17 (heading). Cf. the phrase ‘dramatis personze’ commonly
prefixed to old plays.—L. dréma.—Gk. dSpapa (stem dpayar-), a


182 DRAPE


deed, act, drama.—Gk. 5paw, I do, perform. 4 Lithuanian daraw, I
make, do. Der. (from stem dramat-), dramat-ic, -ic-al, -ic-al-ly, -ise,
-ist; and see drastic. ;

DRAPH, to cover with cloth. (F.—Late L.) Formerly, to
manufacture cloth; ‘that the clothier might drape accordingly as he
might .afford;’ Bacon, Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 74.—F. draper, to
make cloth; Cot.—F. drap, cloth; see Drab (2). Der. drap-er,
occurring in P. Plowman, B. v. 2553 -er-y.

DRASTIC, actively purgative, effective. (Gk.) ‘ Drastica, dras-
tick remedies, i.e. such as operate speedily and effectually ;’ Phillips’
Dict. ed. 1706.— Gk. 8pacr7ikés, drastic, effective ; allied to dpacréos,
verbal adj. of dpaw, I effect; see Drama.

DRAUGHT, also DRAFT, a drawing. (E.) 4A draughte of
wyn ;’ Chaucer, C. T. Prol. 398 (A 396); spelt drakte, Layamon,
29259. Not found in AS., but evidently derived from AS. drag-an,
to draw, drag; see Draw. The suffixed -t appears also in flight
from fly, drift from drive, &c. +4 Du. dragt, a load, burden; from
dragen, to carry; Dan. dragt, a load; Icel. drdattr, a pulling, a
draught (of fishes); from draga, to draw. Der. draught-house (for
withdraught-house, where withdraught =a retreat, place to which one
withdraws) ; draughts-man or drafts-man ; also draughts, a game in
which alternate draughts, i.e. ‘moves,’ are made; Chaucer uses
draughies, in the sense of ‘moves’ at the game of chess, in The Boke
of the Duchesse, 1. 6533; cf. Tale of Beryn, ed. Furnivall, 1779, 1812.

DRAW, to pull along. (E.) ME. drawen; Layamon, i. 57 ;
1.1339. AS. dragan (pt. t..droh) ; cf. law from the older lagu. ‘The
form draw dates from after A.D. 1200. + Du. dragen; Icel. and Swed.
draga, Dan. drage; Goth. dragan; G. tragen, to pull along, carry.
Teut. type *dragan-, pt.t.*drog. Der. draw-back, -bridge, -er, -ers,
-ing ; draw-ing-room (short for withdraw-ing-room, which was used
as late as 1627; see Pegge’s Curialia, pt. i. p. 66); -well; also with-
draw, q.v.; drawl, q.v.; draught, q.v.; dray, q.v.; dredge (1), q. v-

DRAWL, to speak very slowly. (E.) In Shak. Merry Wives,
lil, 1.145. An extension of draw, with the suffix -1, giving a fre-
quentative force. Thus drawl is a doublet of draggle,q.v. Cf. Du.
dralen, to loiter, linger, delay ; similarly formed from dragen, to
carry, endure ; Icel. dralla (< drag-/a), to loiter.

DRAY, a low cart for heavy goods, (E.) The word dray-load
occurs in State Trials, an. 1643 (R.) ; dray-men in Shak. Rich. II,
i. 4. 32. ME. dreye, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, iii. 145. The form
dray agrees with AS. drege, which occurs in AS. drege or dreg-net,
a draw-net, or dredge-net ; Voc. 105. 4.4-Swed. drog,asledge, dray.
It means ‘ that which is drawn along ;’ see Draw.

DREAD, to fear, be afraid. (E.) ME. dreden, P. Plowman, B.
xx. 153. AS. drédan, only found in the compounds on-drédan,
ddrédan, ofdrédan ; of which the first is common. + OSax. dradan,
only in the compound andradan or anddradan, to be afraid; OHG.
tratan, only in the comp. intratan, MHG, entraten, to be afraid.
Teut. type *drédan-. Root unknown. Der. dread, sb.; dread-ful,
Sul-ly, —ful-ness, -less, -less-ly, -less-ness, -naught.

DREAM (1), a vision. (E.) ME. dream, dreem, drem; Havelok,
1284. [Distinct from ME. dream, ‘sound,’ or ‘ music ;’ as in ‘ mid
te dredful dreame of pe englene bemen ’=with the dreadful sound of
the angels’ trumpets, Ancren Riwle, p. 214; AS. dréam, (1) a sweet
sound, music, harmony; (2) joy, glee.] The sense of ‘ vision’ is not
found in the earliest English, but the AS. form must, in this case also,
have been *dréam. 4 OSax. drém, a dream ; OFries. dram, a dream ;
Du. droom ; Icel. draumr; Dan. and Swed. drém; G. traum. Kluge
suggests comparison with G. trug-bild, a phantom. If so, the Teut.
type was *draugmoz, m.; from Teut. *draug, second grade of
*dreugan- (OHG. triogan, G. triigen), to deceive. Cf. Icel. draugr,
a ghost. Also OPers. drauga (Pers. duriigh), a deceit, lie; from the
Idg. root *dhreugh, Brugmann, i. §§ 681, 689. Der. dream, verb,
q-v.; dream-less, dream-y.

DREAM (2), to see a vision. (E.) The verb is derived from
the sb., not vice versa. Cf. G. traiimen, to dream, from sb. traum.

DREARY, DREAR, gloomy, cheerless. (E.) Drear is a late
poetical form, used by Milton (Il Pens. 119), Parnell and Cowper.
It is quite unauthorised, and a false form. ME, dreori, dreri, druri;
spelt dreery, drery, Chaucer, C. T. 8390 (E 514). AS. dréorig, sad,
mournful; originally ‘ bloody,’ or ‘gory,’ as in Beowulf, ed. Grein,
1417, 2789. Formed, with suffix -ig, from AS. dréor, gore, blood;
Grein, i. 205. And again, AS. dréor is from the verb dréosan, to
fall, drip, whence also drizzle, q.v.-+-Icel. dreyrigr, gory; from
dreyri, gore; G. traurig, sad, orig. gory, from OHG. ror, gore. All
from Teut. str. vb. *dreusan- (pt. t. draus, pp. druzanoz), to fall in
drops. See Drizzle, Drowse. Der. dreari-ness, -ly.

DREDGE (1), a drag-net. (E.) Also spelt drudge. ‘ Drudger,
one that fishes for oysters;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674. “ Dredgers,
fishers for oisters;’ Kersey, ed. 1715 ; cf. MF. drege (prob. from E.),
*a kind of fish-net, forbidden to be used except for oysters;’ Cot.


DRILL


The NorthE. form is dreg (see Supp. to Jamieson). It answers to am


AS. form *drecg or *drecge (from *drag-jo-); from AS. drag-an, to


draw. See Draw. Cf. MDu. dregge, ‘adrag;’ Hexham. @ There
is an AS. dreg-net, a draw-net, Voc. 105. 4; but this would give
dray-net ; see Dray.

DREDGE (2), to sprinkle flour on meat, &c. (F.—Late L.—
Gk.) ‘ Burnt figs dreg’d [dredged] with meal and powdered sugar ;’”
Beaum. and Fletcher, Scornful Lady, Act ii. sc. 3. ‘Dredge you a
dish of plovers;’ id. Bloody Brother, Act ii. sc. 2. To dredge is to
sprinkle as in sowing dreg, or mixed corn; thus Holland says that
‘ choler is a miscellane seed, as it were, anda dredge, made of all the
passions of the mind;’ Plutarch, p. 108 (R.). ‘ Dredge or Dreg, oats
and barley mingled togethers’ Kersey, ed. 1715.—OF. dragée,
dragée aux chevaux, ‘ provender of divers sorts of pulse mingled
together; also the course grain called bolymong, French-wheat,
Block-wheat, or Buck-wheat ;? Cot. Cotgrave also gives the older
sense of dragée as ‘a kind of disgestive (sic) powder, usually pre-
scribed unto weak stomachs after meat ;’ this is the mod. F. dragée,
asugar-plum. B. Allied to Ital. treggea, a sugar-plum ; and sup-
posed (by Diez) to be derived from Late L. ¢tragémata. Diez quotes
from Papias: ‘ collibia sunt apud Hebrzeos, quee nos vocamus fragé-
mata vel vilia munuscula, ut cicer frixum,’ &c.—Gk. zpaynyara,
dried fruits, pl. of tpaynua, something nice to eat.—Gk. rphyew
and aor. é-rpay-oy, to gnaw; also to eat dried fruits; allied to
TpwyAn, a hole, a cave (cf. E. trout, troglodyte).

DREGS, lees, sediment. (Scand.) A pl. form, from sing. dreg.
‘Fra fen, ful of dreg ’ = out of a fen full of mire; Northern Met. ver-
sion of Ps. xxxix. 3. ‘Dregges and draffe;’ P. Plowman, B. xix. 397-
=—Icel. dregg, pl. dreggjar, dregs, lees; Swed. dragg, dregs, lees.
B. The theoretical Teut. form is *drag-jon- (Noreen); allied to
OPrussian dragios, dregs; cf. Gk. rapaxn, disorder, Opdcceav, to
trouble, disturb. ] Not allied to G. dreck, dirt, for that is the Icel,
prekkr; nor yet to L. fracés, dregs of oil (Brugm. i. § 417). Der.
dregg-y, -i-ness.

DRENCH, to fill with drink or liquid. (E.) The causal of
* drink ;’ the old sense‘is ‘ to make to drink.’ ME. drenchen, Have-
lok, 561, 583. AS. drencan,to drench, Grein, i. 202; causal of AS,
drincan, to drink.4-Du. drenken, to water a horse; Icel. drekkja, to
drown, swamp ; Swed. drénka, to drown, to steep; G. tranken, to
water, to soak. See Drink. Der. drench, sb.; AS. drenc.

DRESS, to make ready, deck. (F.—L.) ME, dressen; King
Alisaunder, 479.—OF. dresser, drescer, to erect, set up, arrange,
dress.— Late L. type *directiare, not found; but formed from L.
directus, direct, straight, hence just, right,,upright. See Direct,
Der. dress, sb.; -ing, -ing-case, -y; also dress-er (in Palsgrave), a
table on which meat was dressed.

DRIBBLE, to let fall in small drops. (E.) The reading dribling
in Shak. Meas. for Meas. i. 3. 2, may be an error for dribbing.
Dribble is the frequentative of drib, which is a variant of drip. ‘ Lyke
drunkardis that dribbis,’ i.e. drip, slaver; Skelton, Garland of Laurel,
641. Cf. Dan. dial. drible, dreble, to dribble, MDan. drybe, to drip ;
Jutland dribble, to dribble. See Drip. Der. dribbl-er; also dribl-et,
formed with dimin, suffix -ef. Kersey has ‘dribblet (old word), a small
portion, a little sum of money owing.’ > Not the same word as
drivel.

DRIFT, that which is driven. (E.) ‘The dragoun drew him
awaie [departed] with drift of his winges,’ i. e. driving, violent move~
ment ; Alisaunder, frag. A., ed. Skeat, 998. Cf. Cursor Mundi, 496.
Formed with suffix -¢, from drif-, weak grade of AS. drifan, to drive.
+Dau. drift, a drove, flock, course, current, ardour; Icel. drift, dript,
a snow-drift; Swed. drift, impulse, instinct; G. rift, a drove, herd,
pasturage. See Drive. Der. drift, verb3 drift-less, -wood.

DRILL (1), to bore holes, to train soldiers. (Du.) Cotgrave ex-
plains F. trappan as ‘a stone-cutter’s drill, wherewith he bores little
holes in marble.’ Ben Jonson hints at the Dutch origin of the word
in the sense of ‘to train soldiers.’ ‘He that but saw thy curious
captain’s drill Would think no more of Flushing or the Brill;’
Underwoods, Ixii, 1. 29. — MDu. drillen, or trillen, * motitare, nutare,
vacillare, ultro citroque cursitare, gyros agere, gyrare, rotare, volvere,
tornare, terebrare,’ Kilian; mod. Du. drillen, to drill, bore, to turn
round, shake, brandish, to drill, form to arms, to run hither and
thither, to go through the manual exercise. Sewel’s Dutch Dict.
gives drillen, to drill, shake, brandish ; met den piek drillen, to shake
a pike ;. to exercise in the management of arms. B. The orig. sense
is ‘to turn round and round,’ whence (1) to turn men about or drill
them, (2) to turn a pike about, or brandish it. Allied to MHG.
drellen, to turn round (pp. gedrollen), and to Low G. drall, twisted
tight. Teut. type *prellan- (pt, t. *prall), to twist; cf. AS. pearl,
strict.. Der. drill, sb.

DRILL (2), to sow corn in rows. (Low G.) We find an old
word-drill used in the sense of ‘rill.’ ‘So does a thirsty land drink


DRILLING


up all the dew of heaven that wets its face, and the greater shower
makes no torrent, nor digsso muchas a little furrow, that the drils of
the water might pass into rivers, or refresh their neighbour’s weari-
ness ;”’ Bp. Taylor, vol. i. ser. 6 (R.). We also find the verb drill, to
trickle. And water’d with cool rivulets, that drill’d Along the
borders ;’ Sandys, Ecclesiastes, c. ii. B. This verb cannot be sepa-
rated from rill, used in precisely the same sense; as in ‘ Few drops
. - . adowne it ¢rild, i.e. trickled ; Spenser F. Q. ii. 12. 78. In
Chaucer, C. T. 13604 (Group B, 1864), Tyrwhitt prints ¢rilled where
the Ellesmere MS. has ¢rykled ; and it is clear that tril] has the same
sense. It seems to be really the same word as the above, but with a
sense morecommon in Low G. The W. Flem. indrillen means ‘to
drill in,’ to bury grain to a slight depth in the earth (De Bo) ; and
Berghaus notes not only the Low G. verb drillen, but drill-plog
(drill-plough) as used in drill-kultur. Trill is properly the Scand.
form. See Trill (2).

DRILLING, a twilled linen or cotton fabric. (G.—L.) A cor-
tuption of G, drillich, ticking, huckaback. And the G. word is a
corruption from L. érilic-, stem of ¢rilix, having or consisting of three
threads. = L. ¢ri-, from tres, three ; and dicium, a thrum, a thread.

DRINK, to suck in, swallow. (E.) ME. drinken; Chaucer,
C. T. 135. AS. drincan (common).-+-Du. drinken; Icel. drekka (for
drenka=drinka); Swed. dricka; Dan. drikke; Goth. drigkan (for
drinkan) ; G. trinken, Teut. type *drenkan-, pt. t. *drank, pp.
*drunkanoz. Der. drink-able, -er, -offering; and see drunken,
drunkard, drench, drown.

DRIP, to fall in drops. (Scand.) ‘ Dryppe or drope, gutta, stilla,
cadula;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 132. ‘ Dryppyn or droppyn, stillo, gutto ;’
id. ‘Dryppynge, or droppynge, stillacio;’ id. Drip is a secondary
weak verb, closely allied to the sb. drop, and is of Scand. origin. =
Dan. dryppe, to drip; dryp, a drop; cf. Icel. dreypa, to let drop, from
draup, 2nd grade of the strong verb drjuipa, to dtip. The Dan. dryppe
represents a Teut. type *drupjan, from *drup-, weak grade of *dreupan-
as seen in AS. dréopan, strong vb., pp. dropen ; see a-dréopan in Grein ;
OSax. driopan, to drip; pt. t. drép; OHG. triufan, G. triefen, to drip,
trickle; pt. t. ¢rofi See Drop.

DRIVE, to urge on, push forward. (E.) ME. driuen (with u=v),
Chaucer, C. T. 7122 (D1540). AS. drifan, Grein, i. 206. + Du.
drijven; Icel. drifa; Swed. drifva; Dan. drive; Goth. dreiban; OHG.
tripan, MHG, triben, G. treiben. Teut. type *dreiban- (pt. t. *draib,
pp: *dribanoz). Der. drive, sb., driv-er; also drif-t, q.v.; drove, q.v.

DRIVEL, to slaver, speak foolishly. (E.) ME. driuelen, to slaver.
€ Drynken and dryuelen;’ P. Plowman, B. x. 41. ‘Thei don but
dryuele peron ;’ id. x. 11: where the C-text (xii. 9) has dreuwele. This
drevelen answers to AS. dreflian, to drivel or run at the nose; Voc.
161. 34. From the base drab-, whence also Draff. Cf. Low G.
drabbeln, to slaver ; Bremen Worterbuch. Also Swed. drafvel, foolish
talk ; like E. drivel, sb. Der. drivel, sb., drivell-ing, drivell-er.

DRIZZLE, to rain slightly. (E.) ‘These tears, that drizzle from
mine eyes ;’ Marlowe, Edw. II, Act ii. sc. 4.1.18. The old spelling
is drissel or drisel. ‘Through sletie drisling day ;’ Drant’s Horace,
b, ii. Sat. 2. Dris-el means ‘to fall often,’ and is the frequentative of
ME. dresen, to fall, from AS. dréosan, to fall in drops; see Dreary.
Cf. Dan. drysse, to fall in drops; Swed. dial. drésla.

DROLL, strange, odd, causing mirth. (F.—Du.) Shak. has
drollery, ‘Temp. iii. 3. 21; 2 Hen. IV, ii. 1.156. The phr. ‘to play
the drol’ is in Howell's Letters, b. i. s. 1. let. 18 (1620).—MF. drole,
‘a boon companion, merry grig, pleasant wag;” Cot. Also cf. droler,
‘to play the wag,’ id.; drolerie, ‘waggery, good roguery;’ id. [The
early use of drollery shows that we took the word from the French. ]
— Du. drollig, ‘ burlesk, odd ;” Sewel. [The sb. drol, a droll fellow,
is not noticed by Sewel.]=MDu. drol, ‘a juglar;’ Hexham. Cf.
Low G. drullig, droll. Perhaps from the pp. stem droll-; for which
see Drill (1). Korting, § 3115. Der. droll-ish, droll-ery.

DROMEDARY, a kind of camel. (F.—L.—Gk.) In early use.
ME. dromedarie, King Alisaunder, 3407.—OF. dromedaire, ‘a dro-
medary ;’ Cot.—Late L. dromedarius, better spelt dromadarius ; Du-
cange. = L. dromad-, stem of dromas, a dromedary ; with suffix -drius.
— Gk. dpoyad-, stem of Spopds, fast running, speedy.— Gk. dpapeiv, to
run; used as infin. aor. of Tpéxew, to run, but from a different root.
+Skt. dram, to run ; akin to dra, to run.

DRONE (1), to make a deep murmuring sound. (E.) ‘He that
dronis ay as ane bee;” Dunbar, Poems, xv. 8. [Cf. also ME. drou-
nen; ‘he drouned as a dragon, dredefull of noyes;’ Alisaunder, frag.
A., ed. Skeat, 1. 985.] Not found in AS., but an imitative word.
Similar words (but with a different vowel) are Swed, dréna, to low,
bellow, drone ; Dan. drone, to peal, ramble; dron, a rumbling noise;
Goth. drunjus, 2 sound, voice; Rom. x. 183 Icel. drynja, to roar.
Allied to Gk. Opfjvos, a dirge; Skt. dhraz, to sound. See below.

DRONE (2), a non-working bee. (E.) ME. dran, drane; pl.
dranes, Piers Plowman’s Crede, 1.726. AS. dran: AS. Chron. an.


DROWSE, DROWZE 183


/1127. ‘Fucus, drdn;”’ Voc. 121.10; also drén, Voc. 318. 35. The


AS. dram (like EFries. drane) was prob. borrowed from OSax. dran
(cognate with AS. drén). Cf. MHG. treno, a drone; cited by Fick
and Curtius.-Gk. Op@vag, a Laconian drone-bee (Hesychius) ; Gk.
dv-Opnvn, a wild bee. ‘Teut. stems dren-, drén-; cf. drun- in the
article above. Der. dron-ish.

DROOP, to sink, faint, fail. (Scand.) ME. drupen, droupen;
Chaucer, C. T. 107. The pres. part. drupand is in the Cursor
Mundi, 1. 4457.—Icel. driipa, to droop; allied to the strong verb
drjipa, to drip or drop. In mod, Icel., dripa and drjipa are con-
founded ; but dripa is a weak verb, and from the weak grade *driap-.
For the sense, cf. ‘I am ready to drop,’ i.e. I droop. See Drop,
and Drip.

DROP, sb. a small particle of liquid; verb, to let fall small par-
ticles of liquid. (E.) ME. drope, a drop; dropien, droppen, to let
drop. The sb. is in Chaucer, C. T. 131; the verb in C. T. 16048
(G. 580) ; and the vb. is from the sb. AS. dropa, a drop; Grein, i.
207 ; dropian, to drop, Psalter, ed. Thorpe, xliv.10; cf. also dréopian,
to drop, drip, Grein, i. 205.-4-Du. drop, a drop; Icel. dropi, a drop;
Swed. droppe, a drop; Dan. draabe, sb. a drop; vb. to drop; OHG.
tropfo, G. tropfen, a drop; Low G. druppen, a drop. B. All from
Teut. *drup-, weak grade of Teut. *dreupan-, to drop, as seen in AS.
dréopan; see Drip. Andsee Droop. Cf. Olrish drucht, dew.

DROPSY, an unnatural collection of serous fluid in the body.
(F.—L.—Gk.) ME. dropesie, a spelling found in Wyclif, Luke xiv.
2; where the earlier text has ydropesie. See further under Hydropsy.
Der. drops-ic-al.

DROSHKY, DROSKY, a kind of carriage. (Russian.) Mere
Russian. = Russ. drojki, a low four-wheeled carriage. [The 7 sounded
as in French.] Given by Reiff. Dimin. of drogi, a waggon; which
was orig. pl. of droga, a perch (of a carriage).

DROSS, dregs, scum, impure matter, refuse. (E.) ME. dros,
Ancren Riwle, p. 284. AS. drds, Voc. 353. 20; cf. AS. drdsna, an-
swering to Lat. fex, Ps. xxxix. 2, ed. Spelman. Cf. Du. droesem,
dregs; G. drusen, pl., lees, dregs; OHG. truosana, husks of pressed
grapes. And perhaps cf. AS.derstan, dregs ; Westphal. drost, dregs.
Der. dross-y, -t-ness.,

DROUGHT, dryness. (E.) ME. drogte, drougte; Chaucer,
C.T.1.2. In P. Plowman, B. vi. 290, we have drought, but in the
earlier text (A. vii. 275) we find drowhpe. In the Ormulum, 1. 8626,
it is spelt druhhpe. AS. driigad, dryness; Voc. 317. 24.—AS. drig-
ian, to dry; cf. dryge, dry; Grein, i. 207. So also Du. droogte,
drought, from droogen, to dry. See Dry. (J The form drouth or
drougth occurs as late as in Spenser’s Daphnaida, 1. 333; and in
Bacon’s Nat. Hist. § 669; and is still found in proy. English. The
same change from final ¢h to final ¢ has occurred in height, spelt
highth in Milton’s Paradise Lost. Der. drought-y, -i-ness.

DROVE, a number of driven cattle, a herd: (E.) ME. drof, droue
(with «=v); ‘wip [h]is drowe of bestis;’ Will. of Palerne, 181.—
AS. draf; AS. Chron. an. 1016,—AS, draf, 2nd grade of drifan, to
drive. See Drive. Der. drov-er.

DROWN, to be killed by being drenched in water; to kill by
drenching in water. (Scand.) Orig. an intransitive or passive verb, as
particularly denoted by the suffixed -2; cf. the Mceso-Goth. verbs
in -zan, which are of a like character. ‘Shall we give o’er and
drown?’ Tempest, i. 1.42. ‘Alle... drowned [perished] perinne ;’
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 372. ‘Alle pai drowned;’ Cursor
Mundi, 11793; where the Cotton MS. has: ‘Al pai drund” The
form is M. Danish. = MDan., drukne, drougne, droune, drone, to sink,
to. be drowned (Kalkar). B. The -nkn- was preserved in ME,
druncnien, later druncnen, drunknen; the spelling druncnen is in the
Ormulum, 15398 ; drunknen is in Wyclif, Isa. lxiii. 6 ; cf. ONorthumb,
druncnia, to be drowned, to sink ; ‘ongann druncnia’ = began to sink ;
Matt. xiv. 30 (Lindisfarne MS.). Formed, with suffix -ian, from
druncen, lit. drunken, pp. of drincan, to drink. y. Similarly, we find
Swed. drunkna, to be drowned, from drucken, drunken, pp. of dricka,
to drink; and Dan. drukne, to be drowned, from drukken, drunken,
old pp. of drikke, to drink. See Drunken. 4 It may be added
that this will appear more plainly from the Lindisfarne MS., Luke,
xii. 45; where the Lat. inebriari is translated by ‘ druncgnia vel Jette
se druncenig, i.e. to drown or that he may be drunken. Cf. the
numerous forms (without #) of Jutland drukne (Feilberg).. See Notes
on E. Etym., p. 76.

DROWSE, DROW2ZE, to be sluggish. (E.) Formerly drowse ;
Milton, P. L. xi. 131; viii. 289; whence drousie, id, Il Penseroso, 83.
Not found (as yet) in the Mid. Eng. period. AS. driisian, to be
sluggish; ‘lagu drisade’ =the lake lay sluggish; Beowulf, ed, Grein,
1630. The base dris- is a weaker grade of Teut. *dreus-, as seen In
AS. dréosan, to mourn; Grein, i. 206, which is the same as AS.
dréosan, to fall; id. B. So, too, OHG. zrirén, to cast down the
eyes, to mourn (mod. G. ¢rauerz), is related to OHG, ¢riireg, mournful,


184 DRUB


and tothe E. dreary. See Dreary. Cf. Pomeran. druse, slumber.
Der. drowz-y (drowsy in Palsgrave), drowz-i-ness,

DRUB, to beat. (Arab.) In Butler, Hudibras, pt. i. c. 3. 1. 1042.
He also has the sb. drubs, id. pt. iii. c. 3. 1. 209. First introduced
in connexion with the East, and applied to the punishment of the
bastinado. Phillips (1706) has: ‘ Drub, to beat the soles of the feet
with the stick, a punishment used in Turkey.’ Prob. from Arab.
darb (zarb),a beating with a stick; from Arab. root daraba (zaraba),
he beat ; Rich. Dict. p. 952 (N.E.D.). B. Ihre (in 1769) quotes
Swed. drabba, to beat; with the conjecture of Spegel (1645-1714)
that it is from Arab. darab, ‘ percutere, verberari facere.’ Der. drub,
sb.; drubb-ing.

DRUDGHE, to perform menial work. (E.) Shak. has the sb.
drudge, Merch. of Ven. iii. 2.103. ME. druggen; Chaucer has ‘to
drugge and drawe;’ C. T. 1418 (A 1416). [Irish drugaire, a drudger,
drudge, slave, and Irish drugaireachd, drudgery, slavery, are from E. ]
It answers to an AS, *drycgean, not found, but regularly formed from
drug-, weak grade of dréogan, to work, perform, endure (= Teut.
*dreugan-, Goth. driugan, Low]Sc. dree). Cf. Icel. drjtig-virkr, one
who works slowly but surely; Norw. drugga, to go slowly, like one
under a heavy burden (Ross). Der. drudge, sb.; drudg-er-y.

DRUG, a medical ingredient. (F.) ME. drogge, drugge; the pl.
drogges, drugges is in Chaucer, Six-text, A 426; where the Harl.
MS. has dragges, Prol. 1.428. [But dragges and drogges cannot be
the same word; the former is from OF. dragée, discussed s.v.
Dredge (2), q.v.; the latter is OF. drogue.]—OF. (and mod. F.)
drogue,a drug; cf. Ital., Span., and Port. droga,a drug. B. Remoter
origin uncertain; Diez derives it from Du. droog, dry; and Sewel’s
Du. Dict. has: ‘Droogen, gedroogde kruyden en wortels, druggs ;’
but he has prob. confused the F. with the Du. word. The word may
be Eastern. Korting, § 3116, suggests a Slavonic origin, viz. OSlav.
drag, Pol. drogi, costly. Der. drugg-ist,

DRUGGET, a coarse woollen cloth. (F.) ‘And, coarsely clad
in Norwich drugget, came;’ Dryden, Mac Flecknoe, 1]. 33.—MF.
droguet, ‘a kind of stuff that’s half silk, half wooll;’ Cot. Cf. Span.
droguete, A dimin., with suffix -ef, from F. drogue, (1) a. drug;
(2), trash, rubbish, stuff (Hamilton and Legros, French Dict.) ; i.e.
in the latter sense. But it is probable that drogue, trash, is not the
same word as drogue, a drug.

DRUID, a priest of the ancient Britons. (F.—L.—C.) ‘The
British Druyds;’ Howell, Foreign Travel, ed. 1642, sect. 10.—F.
Druide, a Druid.=L. pl. Druides; Cesar, De Bello Gallico, vi. 13.
Of Celtic origin. From Olrish druid-, as in druid, dat. and acc. of
drui, a magician, sorcerer; Irish draoi, druidh, an augur, magician ;
Gael. draot, draoidh, druidh, a magician, sorcerer. Origin undeter-
mined; the attempt to connect it with Irish and Gael. darach, darag,
an oak, is by no means convincing. @ The AS. dry, a magician, is
from British (W. dryw).

DRUM, a cylindrical musical instrument. (Du.) ‘The drummes
crie dub-a-dub ;’ Gascoigne, Flowers ; ed. Hazlitt, vol. i. p. 83, 1. 26.
First found, spelt drome, in 1541 (N.E.D.). Animperfect adaptation
of MDu. tromme, Du. trom, trommel, a drum; trommelen, to drum.
Cf, G. trommel, a drum ; esp. Strassburg drum, a drum (C. Schmidt);
Dan. drum, a booming sound. Der. drum, verb; drum-head, drum-
major, drum-stick. See also Thrum (2).

DRUMBLE, to be sluggish. (Scand.) Shak. has: ‘look how you
drumble ;’ Merry Wives, ili. 3.156. = Norw. drumla, to be half asleep ;
allied to drumba, drumma, to straggle, lag behind (as cattle); see
Ross. Cf. Swed. drumla, to be clumsy, drummel, a blockhead (Oman).

DRUNKARD, one addicted to drinking. (E.; with F. suffix.)
In the A. V., Joel, i. 5; and in the Bible of 1551. Palgrave has
dronkarde. Formed from the base drunk- of the pp. drunken, with the
F. suffix -ard, of OHG. origin, used with an intensive force. This
suffix is of the same origin with E. hard; Brachet, Etym. French Dict.
introd. § 196. 4 The ME. word is dronkelew.

DRUNKEN, DRUNK, inebriated. (E.) ME. dronken,
drunken; Chaucer, C. T. 1264. AS. druncen, pp. of drincan, to
drink, but often used as an adj.; Grein, i. 207; see Drink. Der.
drunken-ness.

DRUPH, a fleshy fruit containing a stone. (F.—L.—Gk.) A
botanical term. Modern; not in Todd’s Johnson. =F. drupe, a drupe,
stone-fruit.=L. driipa, an over-ripe, wrinkled olive (Pliny).—Gk.
dpUmna, an over-ripe olive; perhaps a contraction from, or allied to,
Gk. dputemns, tipened on the tree; [a word which is frequently varied
to Spumer7s, i.e. falling from the tree. ]—Gk. dpis, a tree; and réacey,
to cook, ripen. See Tree and Cook. Der. drup-ac-e-ous, with suffix
= L. -dceus.

DRY, free from moisture. (E.) ME. dru32, OEng. Hom. i. 87,
1. 12; druye, dry3e, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 385 and 412; dreye,
Chaucer, C. T. 8775 (E 899). AS. dryge, drige, Grein, i. 207. Cf.
Du. droog, dry ; G. trocken, dry. Also Icel. draugr, a dry log. All


DUDE


‘from a Teut. root *dreug-, to be dry; cf. AS. dréog-an, to last, endure,


&c. The orig. sense may have been lasting, hard. See Drudge. Der.
dry, vetb; -ly, -ness; -goods, -nurse, -rot, -salter; see also drought.

DRY AD, a nymph of the woods. (L.—Gk.) Milton has Dryad,
P. L. ix. 387; and the pl. Dryades, Comus, 964.—L. Dryad-, stem of
Dryas, a Dryad. = Gk. dpuvad-, stem of Spuds, a nymph of the woods. =
Gk. dpis, a tree; cognate with E. Tree, q.v.

DUAL, consisting of two. (L.) ‘This dualité...is founden in
euery creature ;’ T. Usk, Test of Love, b. ii. ch. 13.1. 30.—L. dudlis,
dual.=—L. duo, two. See Two. Der. dual-ism, dual-i-ty.

DUAN, a canto. (Gaelic.) In Macpherson’s Ossian; and used by
Burns (The Vision).—Gael. duan, a song, canto; Olrish dian; see
Macbain.

DUB, to confer knighthood by a stroke on the shoulder. (E.) ME.
dubben, Havelok, 2042, AS. dubban; ‘dubbade his sunu...to ridere,’
dubbed his son knight ; AS, Chron. an. 1086. B. A much-disputed
word; but, apparently, of Teut. origin; if not native, it may be of
Scand. origin. The statement (in N.E.D.) that there is no such
Germanic verb as dubban, is hardly borne out. The Icel. dubba may be
foreign; but the Teut. forms dib, dab, dob, dub, expressive of light
movements, cannot all be unoriginal. Cf. Norw. dabba, to tap with the
foot (Ross); E. dab; Swed. dial. dabb, a viscous clot; E. a dab; Norw.
dibba, to nod the head, to trip lightly (Ross); Swed. dial. dibb, to
touch lightly; Dan. dobbe, a float (because it bobs); Swed. dial. dobb,
dubb, a float, also (as a verb) to duck or bob under; Norw. dubba, to
nod (Aasen); EFries. dubbe, a blow, dubben, to strike; Low G. dobber,
a buoy; G. tupfen, to dab. The OF. adober, to dub, is therefore cor-
rectly derived by Diez from a Teut. base dub-, to dab or tap. Cf. E.
dub-a-dub (see Drum) ; evidently of imitative origin.

DUBIOUS, doubtful. (L.) In Milton, P.L. i. 104; and in Hall,
Edw. IV, an. 9. § 14. —L. dubidsus, doubtful. — L. dubium, doubt; neut.
of dubius, doubtful, moving in two directions; formed from L. duo,
two. See Two. Der. dubious-ly, -ness.

DUCAL, belonging to a duke. (F.—L.) F. ducal, Cot. = Late L.
ducalis, adj.—L. duc-, stem of dux, a leader; see Duke.

DUCAT, acoin. (K.—Ital.—L.) ‘As fine as ducat in Venise ;’
Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii. 258.—OF. ducat, ‘the coyne termed a
duckat, worth vi s, viii d.;* Cot.—Ital. ducato, a ducat; a duchy. =
Late L. ducdtus, a duchy. B. So called because first coined in the
duchy of Apulia (about A.D. 1140); and, after 1284, they bore the
legend ‘sit tibi, Christe, datus, quem tu regis, iste ducatus.’ See
Duchy.

DUCHESS, the wile of a duke. (F.—L.) Chaucer wrote The
Book of the Duchesse.— OF. duchesse, fem. of duc, a duke; with suffix
-esse=L. -issa=Gk. -toca. See Duke.

DUCHY, a dukedom. (F.—L.) ME. duche; P. Plowman, C.
iv. 245.—F. duché,— Late L. ducatus; formed with suffix -atus from
duc-, stem of dux, a leader. See Duke.

DUCK (1), a bird. (E.) ME. doke, duke; P. Plowman, B. v. 75;
xvii. 62. The word duk-e means ‘ diver;’ the final -e=AS, m. -a,
f. -e, a suffix denoting the agent, as in hunt-a,a hunter. AS. diice,
a duck; see Cart. Saxon., ed. Birch, ii. 162, 1. 3. See below. +
Dan. duk-and, a diver (bird); from duk-=dukke, to dive, and and
(=G. ente),a duck; Swed. dyk-fagel, a diver (bird). See Duck (2).
The short z is due to the following k, as in suck. Der. duck-ling, with
double dimin. suffix -I- and -ing; cf. gos-ling.

DUCK (2), to dive, bob the head down. (E.) ME. duken,
douken; the pres. pt. dowkand, diving, occurs in The Wars of Alexan-
der, 1. 4090; and the pp. duked in the Cursor Mundi, 23203. It
answers to an AS. *diican (pt. t. *déac, pp. *docen), not found. + Du.
duiken, to stoop, dive; Dan. dukke, to duck, plunge; Swed. dyka, to
dive; G. tauchen, to dive. Der. duck (1).

DUCK (3), a pet, darling. (E.) ‘O dainty duck!’ Mids. N. D.
y. 286. Apparently, a transferred sense of Duck (1).

DUCK (4), light canvas. (Du.) Strutt, Manners and Customs, iii.
129, quotes ‘lampas douck’ in a description of a tourney, as early as
2 Henry VIII (1510).—Du. doek, linen cloth, towel, canvas. + Dan.
dug, cloth ; Swed. duk; Icel. dakr, cloth, table-cloth, towel; G. tuch,
cloth; OHG. tuoh, MHG. duoch.

DUCT, a conduit-pipe. (L.) Still spelt ductus in 1715. ‘ Ductus,
a leading, guiding; a conduit-pipe;’ Kersey’s Dict.—L. ductus, a
leading ; cf. ductus, pp. of diicere, to lead. See Duke.

DUCTILE, malleable. (F.—L.) ‘Soft dispositions, which duc-
tile be; Donne, To the Countess of Huntingdon, 1. 27; and see
Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 845.—F. ductile, ‘easie to be hammered;’ Cot. =
L. ductilis, easily led; cf. ductus, pp. of daicere, to lead. See Duke.
Der. ductil-i-ty.

DUDBE, a fop, exquisite. (Low G.) Modern.=G. dude, a foolish
fellow (Grimm); shortened from Low G. duden-dop, duden-kop, a lazy
fellow ; EF ries. dud-kop, a drowsy fellow. Cf. EFries. dudden, to be
drowzy ; see Dawdle. ons ;


DUDGEON


DUDGEON (1), resentment. (F.?) ‘When civil dudgeon first
grew high;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. i. c.1. 1.1. The form endugine is
also found ; see additions to Nares. Origin wholly unknown; though
the form would seem to be French.

DUDGEON (2), the haft of a dagger. (Unknown.) ‘And on thy
blade and dudgeon gouts of blood;’ Macb. ii. 1. 46. See Clark and
Wright, notes to Macbeth; Furness, notes to ditto. The evidence goes
to show that some daggers were called dudgeon-hafled, which Gifford
explains by saying that ‘the wood was gouged out in crooked chan-
nels, like what is now, and perhaps was then, called snail-creeping ;’
note on Jonson’s Works, v. 221. The root of the box-tree was also
called dudgeon, apparently because it was curiously marked; ‘the
root [of box]. .is dudgin and ful of work ;’? Holland’s Pliny, b. xvi.
c. 16; where the context shows the sense to be ‘ crisped damask-wise’
or ‘full of waving.’ .B. In the earliest examples, the sense seems to
be ‘boxwood;’ at any rate, it is a material used by a cutler. A cutler
speaks of ‘ yuery [ivory], dogeon, horn, mapyll, and the toel that be-
longeth to my craft;’ Arnold’s Chron, (1502, repr. 1811), p. 245. In
the York Wills, iii. 96 (Surtees Soc.), we find, in 1439, ‘j dagger, cum
manubrio de dogeon.’ ‘Ronnyn, as dojoun or masere ;’ Prompt. Parv.
p- 436. The earliest is AF. digeon, in 1380; see Riley, Memorials of
London, p.. 439.

DUDS, rags, poor clothes. (Scand.) ME. ‘dudde, clothe, amphi-
bilus ;’ Prompt. Parv. Related to Icel. didi, swaddling clothes; duda,
to swathe, wrap up. Cf. Dowdy. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 78.

DUH, owed as a debt. (F.—L.) ME. dewe. ‘A maner dewe dette’
=a kind of debt due; P. Plowman, C. iv. 307. —OF. deux, masc, dene,
fem. ‘due;’ Cot.; pp. from devoir (spelt debvoir in Cot.), to owe. =
L. debére, to owe. See Debt. Der. du-ly (ME. dueliche, Gower,
C, A. iii. 2453 bk. vil. 4570); also du-ty, q.v.

DUEL, a combat between two. (Ital.—L.) Formerly duello, Shak.
Tw. Nt. iii. 4. 337.— Ital. duello, whence also F. duel. —L, duellum,
lit. a combat between two.—L. duo, two. See Two. @ Cf. L.
bellum<duellum; see Belligerent. Der. dwell-er, -ist, -ing.

DUENNWA, an elderly lady acting as guardian. (Span.—L.) It
occurs in Dryden’s Span. Friar, i. 2; and Mrs. Centlivre’s Busy Body,
ii. 2.—Span. duena, a married lady, duenna.—L. domina, a lady.
@ Thus duenna is the same as donna, q.v.; or dame, q. v.

DUET, a piece of music for two. (Ital.) A musical term. = Ital.
duetto ; in Baretti, Ital. Dict. = Ital. due, two. = L. duo, two. See Two.
For the suffix, cf. quart-ette, quint-elte.

DUFFEL, a kind of coarse woollen cloth. (Du.) ‘ And let it be
of dufil gray;’ Wordsworth, Alice Fell. —Du. duffel, duffel. So
named from Duffel, a town not far from Antwerp.

DUFFER, a stupid person. (Scand.) Prob. the same as Lowl.
Sc. dowfart, formed with the suffix -art(=-ard) from the adj. dow/f,
stupid, lit. ‘deaf.’ —Icel. dauf-r, deaf. See Deaf. Cf. WFlem. den
doofaard (or doovaard) spelen, to pretend to be deaf (De Bo).

DUG, ateat. (E.) In Shak. Romeo, i. 3. 26. ‘Tete, pappe, or
dugge;’ Palsgrave. The exact original is not forthcoming; it can
hardly be allied to Swed. dagga, Dan. degge, to suckle, fondle; or
to Goth. daddjan, to suckle. B. On the other hand, it corresponds to
Skt. duh (for dhugh), to milk ; whence dégha, a milch cow, doha-s,
a milking.

.DUGONG, a swimming mammal, sea-cow. (Malay.) Malay
dayong, a sea-cow; Marsden’s Malay Dict. p. 138.

DUKE, a leader. (F.—L.) ME, duc, duk; Layamon, 1. 86.—OF,
duc, acc. formed from a nom. dux.— L.dux, a leader; allied to dacere,
to lead. —4/ DEUK, to pull, draw; Brugmann, i. § 592. Der. duke-
dom ; and see duc-al, duch-ess, duch-y, duc-at, doge. From L. diicere
we have ad-duce, con-duce, de-duce, in-duce, &c.; also duct, con-duct,
de-duct, in-duct, &c. ’

DULCET, sweet. (F.—L.) In Shak. Mids. N. D. ii. 1.151; and
used by Cotgrave to translate OF .doucet. The spelling was refashioned
after L. dulcis; cf. M. Ital. dolcetto, somewhat sweet (Florio). Formed,
with dimin. suffix -e¢ (with force of E. -isk), from OF. dols, sweet; see
dols in Supp. to Godefroy.—L. dulcts, sweet. See Douceur; and
see below.

_ DULCIMER, a musical instrument. (F.—Span.—L. and Gk.)
In the Bible, A. V., Dan. iii. 5; and in Baret’s Alvearie.=OF.
doulcemer (Roquefort) ; cf. doulcemele in Godefroy. —Span. dulcemele,
a dulcimer; so called from its sweet sound.—L. dulce melos, a sweet
song; dulce.is neut. of dulcis (see above) ; and melos=Gk. peédos, for
which see Melody.

DULL, stupid, foolish, (E.) ME. dul; Chaucer, C. T, 10593
(F 279). [Also as a verb; ‘it dulleth me;’ id. 16561 (G1093).] In
the Ancren Riwle we have ‘ dulle neiles,’ i.e. blunt nails, as a various
reading of ‘dulte neiles;’ see Dolt. Dzull also appears as ME,
dill; answering to a Teut. type *dul-joz. Closely allied to AS. dol,
foolish, stupid ; Grein, i. 194. Cf. Du. dol, G. toll, mad; answering
to Tent. type *dul-oz. All from Tent. *dul, for *dwul, weak grade of


DUNGEON


*dwel-an-, as seenin __. dwelan, to err, to be stupid; see Dwell.
Cf. also AS. ge-dwol-god, a false god; Irish and W. dall, blind.
Brugmann, i. § 375 (6). Der. dull, verb; dul-ly, -ness; dull-sighted,
-witted ; also dull-ard (with suffix as in drunk-ard, q.v.); also dol-t, q.v.

DULSE, an edible species of seaweed. (C.) See Jamieson, E.D.D.,
and N.I-.D. From Irish and Gael. duileasg, dulse. According to
Macleod, it means ‘ water-leaf;’ from Irish and Gael. duille, leaf, and
uise(e), water.

DUMB, silent, unable to speak. (E.) ME. domb, dumb; Chaucer,
C. T. 776 (A774). AS. dumb, mute; Grein, i. 212.44Du. dom, dull,
stupid; Icel. dumbr, dumb; Swed. dumb; Dan. dum, stupid; Goth,
dumbs, dumb ; OHG. tump, G. dumm, mute, stupid. B. The form
dumb, with the orig. sense of ‘stupid,’ is prob. allied to Goth, daubs,
deaf. See further under Deaf. Der. dumb-ly, -ness; dumb-bell, -show;
also dumm-y (=dumb-y). 4 The dumb-bell exercise was called
‘a ringing of the dumb bells;’ which explains the name. See
Spectator, no. 115, § 7.

DUMP (1), an ill-shapen piece. (E.) ‘Dump, a clumsy medal of
metal cast in moist sand; East;’ Halliwell. Cf. the phr. ‘I don’t care
a dump,’ i.e. a piece, bit. Cf. ‘ Dubby, dumpy, short and thick: West;’
Halliwell. The dimin. of dump is dump-ling, q.v. Probably ‘a thing
thrown down in a mass ;’ see Dump (2). Der. dump-y.

DUMP (2), tostrike, fling down. (Scand.?) Cf. ME. dumpen, to
fall down plump; Allit. Poems, C. 362; dump, to beat, strike with
the feet ; to dump about, to move with short steps; Jamieson. Per-
haps associated with Icel. dumpa, to thump; Swed. dial. dumpa, to
make a noise, dance awkwardly ; dompa, to fall down plump, to thump.
Also cf. Du. dompneus, a great nose. The root-verb appears in Swed.
dial. dimpa, to fall down plump, pt.t.damp, supine dumpid (Rietz). Cf.
E.Fries. dumpen, to press down quickly, to duck under water.

DUMPLING, akind of pudding. (E.) ‘A Norfolk dumpling ;’
Massinger, A New Way to Pay, A. ili. sc. 2. A dumpling is properly
a small solid ball of pudding; a dimin. of dump, with double dimin.
suffix -ling (=-l+-ing). See Dump (1).

DUMPS, melancholy,sadness. (Scand.) ‘As onein dolefuldumps;’
Chevy Chase, later version, 1. 198. The sing. is dump, somewhat rare.
‘ He’s in a deep dump now ;” Beaum. and Fletcher, Humourous Lieut.
A. iv.sc.6. Palsgrave has: ‘I dumpe, I fall in a dumpe or musynge
upon thynges.’ The most closely allied word is Swed. dial. dwmpin,
melancholy (Rietz); which is formed as a pp. from Swed. dial. dimba,
to steam, reek; cf. Dan. dump, dull, low. B. Further allied to G.
dumpf, damp, Du. dompig,damp, hazy, misty, Du. dompen, to quench,
extinguish, and to E. damp. Also to EFries. dump, heavy, moist.
Cf. the phr. ‘to damp one’s spirits.” See Damp. Der. dump-ish,
dump-ish-ly, dump-ish-ness.

DUN (1), of a dull brown colour. (C.) ‘ Dunne of hewe;’ Rom.
of Rose, 1213. AS. dunn, dark; whence dunnian, to be darkened;
Alfred’s Boeth. lib. i. met. 5.— Irish and Gael. donn, brown; W. dwn,
dun, dusky, swarthy. Celtic type *donnos. 4 Hence, I suppose, the
river-name Don, Der. don-key, dun-lin.

DUN (2), to urge for payment. (Scand.) ‘I shall be dunning thee
every day;’ Lord Bacon, Apophthegms, no. 288. Cf. ME. dunning,
aloud noise, Prompt. Parv. p. 135.—Icel. duna, to thunder, make a
hollow noise; dynja, to rattle, make a din; koma einum dyn fyrir dyrr,
to make a din before one’s door, take one by surprise; Swed. dana, to
make a noise, to ring. B. These words are cognate with AS. dynian,
to make a din ; and dun is thus related to din, See Din. Der. dun, sb.

DUNCEH, a stupid person. (Propername.) A propername; origi-
nally in the phrase ‘a Duns man.’ ‘A Duns man;’ ‘Tyndall, Works,
p. 88; ‘a great Duns man, so great a preacher ;’ Barnes, Works, p. 232;
cf. p.272. The word was introduced by the Thomists, or disciples of
Thomas Aquinas, in ridicule of the Scotists, or disciples of John Duns
Scotus, schoolman, died A.D. 1308. The Scotch claim him as a native
of Dunse, in Berwickshire. Not to be confused with John Scotus
Erigena, died A.D. 875.

DUNE, a low sand-hill. (F.—Du.—C.) First in1790.—F. dune.
—MDu. dune (Du. duin); cognate with AS. din, a down, of Celtic
origin. See Down (2).

DUNG, excrement. (E.) ME. dung, dong; Chaucer, C. T. 15024
(B 4208).' AS. dung (dat. dunge), Luke, xiii. 8 (Hatton MS.); the
older MSS. have meoxe.4-OFries. dung; Swed. dynga, muck; Dan.
dynge, a heap, hoard, mass; cf. dynge, to heap, to amass; G. dung,
diinger. B. Remoter origin unknown; perhaps from the weak grade
of Ding, to cast, throw down, q.v. Der. dung, vb.; dung-cart, -heap,
-hill; also ding-y, q.v.

DUNGEON, a keep-tower, prison. (F.—L.) The same word as
donjon, a keep-tower of a castle. ‘ Which of the castel was the chief
dongeoun;’ Chaucer, C. T.1059 (A 1057); cf. P. Plowman, B, prol. 15.
= OF .donjon, the keep-tower or chief tower ofa castle; Prov. dompuhon
(Brachet).—Late L. domnidnem, acc. of domunio, a donjon-tower.
Contracted from Late L. dominionem, acc. of dominio, the same as


185


186 DUNIWASSAL


dominium, a principal possession, domain, dominion; so called because
the chief tower. See further under Dominion, Domain.

DUNIWASSALT, a Highland gentleman, a yeoman. (C.) In
Sir W. Scott’s ‘Bonnie Dundee.’ = Gael. duine uasal, a gentleman. =
Gael. duine (W. dyn), a man; and uasal (W. uchel), nobly bom, orig.
“exalted.” See Brugmann, i. § 219 (4).

DUNLTIN, the red-back sandpiper. (E.) See Newton, Dict. of
Birds, on its variation of plumage according to the season. A variant
of dun-ling, lit. ‘the little dun-coloured bird;’ see Dun. Cf. dun-
zxock, a local name for the hedge-sparrow ; and don-key.

DUODECIMO, «a name applied to a book in sheets of 12 leaves.
(L.) ‘ Duodecimo ; a book is said to be ix duodecimo, or in twelves,
when it consists of 12 leaves in a sheet;’ Kersey,-ed. 1715.—L.
duodecimd, abl. case of duodectmus, twelfth. L. duodecim, twelve. —
L. duo, two ; and decem, ten. See Twoand Ten. From same source,
duodecim-al ; duodec-ennial (see decennial); dozen ; and see below.

DUODENUM, the first of the smallintestines. (L.} ‘ Duodenum,
the first of the thin guts, about 12 fingers-breadth long ;’ Kersey, ed.
1715. A late L. anatomical word, formed from L. duodéni, twelve
apiece, a distributive form of duodecinz, twelve. So named from its
length. See above.

DUP, to undo a door. (E.) In Hamlet, iv. 5.53. Lit. to do up,
ive. lift up the latch; and contracted from do up. See Don, Doff.

DUPE, a person easily deceived. (F.) A late word. In Pope,
Dunciad, iv. 502.—F. dupe, a dupe. Origin uncertain. Webster
and Littré say that it is the same as the OF. name for a hoopoe,
because the bird is easily caught. Cotgrave has: ‘ Dupe, f. a whoop,
or hooper; a bird that hath on her head a great crest, or tuft of
feathers, and loves ordure so well, that she nestles in it... This word
dupe is probably (like koopoe) onomatopoetic, and imitative of the
bird’s cry. | Cf. Bret. kouper:k, (1) a hoopoe, (2) a dupe. We
have similar ideas in gull, goose, and booby. Der. dupe, verb.

DUPLICATE, double, two-fold. (L.) ‘Though the number
were duplicate;’ Hall, Hen. VII, an. 6. § 7; Lydgate, Minor Poems,
p. 165.—L. duplictius, pp. of duplicare, to double. = L. duplic-, stem
of duplex, twofold. —L. du-, for duo, two; and plicare, to fold. See
Complex.

DUPLICITY, falsehood. (F.—L.) Lit. doubleness. ‘No false
duplicité;’ Craft of Louers, st. 22; in Chaucer’s Works, ed. 1561,
fol. 341, back. — F. duplicité. — L.acc.duplicitatem, from nom. duplicitas,
doubleness. — L. duplici-, decl. stem of duplex, twofold. See above.

DURANCE, captivity. (F.—L.) Fabyan has duraunce in the sense
of ‘endurance,’ vol. i. c. ro5. The sense ‘imprisonment,’ common
in Shak. (Meas. tii. 1. 67, &c.), comes from that of long sufferance
or long endurance of hardship. Cotgrave explains durer by ‘to dure,
last, continue, indure, abide, remaine, persist; also to sustaine, brook,
suffer.” = OF. durance, duration (Godefroy). OF. durer, to last. See
Dure.

DURATION, length of time. (F.—L.) ME. duracioun,
Chaucer, Ho. Fame, 2114.—OF. duration. = Late L. diiratidnem, acc.
of diratio.— L, diiradre, to last. See Dure.

DURBAR, a hall of audience. (Pers.) In Sir T. Herbert’s
Travels, ed. 1665, p. 103. A Hindustani word, but borrowed from
Persian. = Pers, dar-bar, a prince’s court, levee ; Palmer's Dict. col.
255. Lit. ‘door of admittance.’ — Pers. dar, a door (=E. door), and
bar, admittance ; id. col. 64. 4 The word bar alone is also used in
the sense of court, congress; Rich. Pers. Dict. p. 230.

DURE, to last, endure. (F.—L.) Once in common use, now
nearly obsolete. ME. duren, King Alisaunder, 3276.—OF. (and F.)
durer, ‘to dure, last;’ Cot.=—L. durdare, to last.=L. diirus, hard,
lasting.4-Irish dur, dull, hard, stupid, obstinate, firm, strong; Gael.
diir, the same; W. dur, steel. Cf. Gk. ddvams, force. Der. dur-ing
(orig. pres. pt. of dure), dur-able, -abl-y, -able-ness, -abil-i-ty; and see
duration, duress, durance.

DURESS, hardship, constraint. (F.—L.) ME. duresse; Rom.
of the Rose, 3547; Will. of Palerne, 1114.—OF. duresce, hardship.
=L. dtritia, hardness, harshness, severity. —L. diirus, hard,

DURIAN, a fruit. (Malay.) Malay durian, a fruit with a prickly
tind. — Malay déri, a thorn, a prickle.

DUSK, dull, dark, dim. (Scand.) ‘Duskede his yén two;’ Chaucer,
C. T. 2808 (A 2806). ME. dose, dark, dim; O. Eng. Homilies, i. 25,
1. 16. Also deose; ‘This word is deosk ’=this is a dark saying; Ancren
Riwle, p. 148. Prob. a Northern form (as the st has not become sh),
Cf. AS. dox (for *dose), translating L. flazus ; Voc. 239. 36. Cf. Swed.
dial. duska, to drizzle; dusk, a slight shower; duskug, misty (Rietz);
Norw. dusk, mist. See Notes on E. Etym., p.80. Cf. Skt. dhiisara-,
gray (like dust); see Dust, Der. dusk, sb., dusk-y, dusk-i-ness,
dusk-i-ly.

DUST, fine powder. (E.) ME. dust, Ancren Riwle, p. 122. AS.


DYSENTERY


a Teut. base *dunst- (for *dwuns-z), the x being lost except in G. Cf.


Skt. dhvamis, to fall to pieces (pp. dkvas-ia-) ; dhus-ara-, dust-coloured-
Der. dust-er, dusi-y, dust-i-ness.

DUTCH, belonging to Holland. (G.) Applied in old authors to.
the Germans rather than to the Dutch, who were called Hollanders ;
see Trench, Select Glossary. However, Shak. has it in the usual sense;
All's Well, iv. i. 78. —G. Deutsch, lit. belonging to the people ; MHG.
diut-isk. Here the suffix -isk=E. -ish, and the base diut- is cognate
with Goth. thivda, AS. Jéod, a people, nation. Cf. Irish zvath,a people;
Oscan foxio, a city. Brugmann, i. § 218. See Teutonic.

DUTY, obligatory service. (AF.—L.) Chaucer has dwetee in the
sense of ‘ due debt ;’ C. T. 6934 (D 1352) ; cf. Gower, C. A. iii. 124;
bk. vii. 1160.—AF, dueté, Liber Albus, p. 211. The word appears
to be an AF, coinage, there being no corresponding form in French ;
formed by analogy with words in -ty fromthe OF. deu, dus See Due.
“{ The F. word for duty is devoir (Span. deber, Ital. dovere), i.e. the
infin. mood used asasb. ; hence ME. deuoir, deuer (with u=v), Chaucer,
C. T. 2600 (A 2598). Der. dute-ous, -ly,-ness ; dutiful, -ly, -ness,

DWALE, deadly nightshade. (Scand.) So called because it causes
stupefaction or dulness. ME. dwale, P. Plowman, C. xxiii. 379; on
which see my note. = Dan. dvale, a trance, torpor, stupor, dvale-drik,
a soporific, dwale-drink ; Swed. dwala, a trance. Cf. AS. dwala, an
error, stupefaction. From *dwal, 2nd grade of AS. *dwel-an, to be
torpid, to err; see Dwell.

DWARF, a small deformed man. (E.) The final f is a substitu-
tion for a final guttural sound, written g or gk ; in Lybeaus Disconus,
1. 403, we have the form dwerk. The pl. dwerghes isin Mandeyille’s
Travels, ed. Halliwell, p. 205. AS. dweorg, dwerg, dweorh, a dwarf ;
OMerc. dwerg; OE. Texts.4-Du. dwerg; Icel. dvergr; Swed. and
Dan. dverg; MHG. éwere (also querch), G. zwerg. Teut. type
*dwerg-oz. Der. dwarf-ish, -ish-ness.

DWELL, to delay, linger, abide. (Scand.) ME. dwellen, to delay,
linger; Chaucer, C. T. 2356 (A 2354); to which are allied ME.
dwelen, to be torpid, and dwelien, to err; see Stratmann. [AS.
dwellan (only used in the ‘active sense), to retard, cause to
delay, also, to seduce, lead astray, Grein, i. 213, 394; to which
is allied dwelian, to go astray, err, wander about. The orig. sense is
to mislead, cause to err, whence the intransitive sense of to err, to
wander aimlessly. Causal of AS. dwelan (pt. t. dwal, pp. dwolen), to
be torpid or dull, to err, found only in the pp. gedwolen (Grein); cf.
ge-dwol-god, false god, and duala, error, in the Northumb. version
of S. Matt. xxiv. 24; and the Goth. dwals, foolish. See Dull.]
B. But in the modern sense it is Scand. = Icel. dvelja, to dwell, delay,
tarry, abide ; orig. to hinder; cf. dvél, a short stay ; Swed. dvaljas,
to dwell, lit. to delay oneself; Dan. dvele, to linger; cf.dvale, a trance;
OHG. iwaljan, MHG., twellen, to hinder, delay. See Dwale. Cf.
Skt. dhur, to bend aside, dhiir-ta-, fraudulent. Brugmann, i. § 338.
Der. dwell-er, dwell-ing.

DWINDLE, to waste away. (E.)} In Shak. Macb. i. 3. 23. The
suffix -le is a somewhat late addition, and has rather a diminutive
than the usual frequentative force. The d is excrescent, as common
after 2; cf. sound from ME. soun. ME. dwinen; Rom. of the Rose,
360; Gower, C. A. ii. 117; bk. iv. 3440. AS. dwinan, to dwindle,
languish; Bosworth.-Icel. dvina; Swed. tvina, to dwindle, pine
away; Du. ver-dwijnen, to vanish. All from a Teut. str. vb.
*dweinan-.

DYE, to colour. (E.) ME. deyen, dyen; Chaucer, C. T. 11037
(F 725). Chaucer also has deyer, dyer, a dyer, C. T. prol. 364 (A
362). The sb. dehe, dye, colour, hue, occurs in O. Eng. Miscellany,
ed. Morris, p. 193, l. 20. AS. déagian, to dye; from déah, sb. f., a
dye, colour; of which the Teut. type is *dauga, f. Remoter origin
unknown. Not allied to L. fiicus (<Gk. puxos). Der. dy-er, dye~
ing, -stuffs.

DYKE, a ditch, bank ; see Dike.

DYNAMIC, relating to force. (Gk.) * Dynamicks, the science of
mechanical powers; ’ Todd. =—Gk. dvvayixds, powerful. = Gk. dvvapis,
power. = Gk. duvayar, Iam strong. -Cf. L. darus, hard, lasting; see
Dure. Der. dynamic-s, -al, -al-ly; dynam-ite, because it explodes
with great force; dynamo-meter (i.e. measurer of force, from metre,

. v.) ; and see below.

DYNASTY, lordship, dominion. (F.—L.—Gk.) Applied to
the continued lordship of a race of rulers. ‘The account of the
dynasties ;’? Raleigh, Hist. of the World, b. ii. c. 2. s. 2 (R.).—
F. dynastie. = Late L. dynastia ; Higden, ii. 260. —Gk. duvacreia, lord-
ship. Gk. duvacrns, a lord ; cf. Suvarés, strong, able. = Gk. dvvapa:,
I am strong ; see above. :

DYSENTERY, a disease of the entrails. (L.—Gk.) ‘The
dysenterie or bloody flix;’ Holland’s Pliny, b. xxviii. c. 9.—L-.
dysenteria (Pliny). Gk. ducevrepia, a bowel-complaint. —Gk. 6ve-,


dist, Grein, i, 212.-4Du. duis?, meal-dust ; Icel. dus?, dust ; Dan. dysi, | prefix, with a bad sense (like E. mis-); and évrepoy, pl. évrepa, the
fine flour, meal; OHG, éunst, G. dunst, vapour, fine dust. All from | bowels, from Gk. évrés (=L. intus), within ; from Gk. év (=L. in), ing


DYSPEPSY


@ The prefix dus- is cognate with Skt. dus-, dur-, Irish do-, Goth.
tus-, tuz-, Icel. tor-, OHG. zur-, G. zer-.

DYSPEPSY, indigestion. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Dyspepsia, a difficulty of
digestion ;? Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.—L. dyspepsia. Gk. Svomeia. =
Gk. dvemenros, hard to digest. —Gk. dvc-, prefix, hard (on which see
Dysentery) ; and wérrecv, to soften, cook, digest, cognate with L.
coquere, whence E. cook. See Cook. Der. dyspept-ic (from SvcmenTos).


le


EB-, prefix, out. (L.) In e-vade, e-vince, e-volve, e-bullient, e-dict, &c.
=—L. @, ex, out. See Ex-.

BACH, every one. (E.) ME. eche, ech; Chaucer, C. T. 793 (A 791);
older form elch, Layamon, 9921. AS. #lc, each, Grein,i. 56. Usually
considered as standing for @+ ge +lic, i.e. aye-like or ever-like. + Du.
elk, each; OHG. eogalih; MHG. iegelich, G. jeglicher. See Aye.

EAGER, sharp, keen, desirous. (F.—L.) ME. egre, Chaucer,
C. T. 9075 (E 1199); Rob. of Glouc. p. 80, 1. 1786. —AF. egre; F.
aigre, keen.=L. dcrem, acc. of acer, keen. —4/ AK, to pierce, sharpen.
See Acrid. Der. eager-ly, -ness ; also vin-egar, q.v.

EAGLB, a large bird. (F.—L.) ME. egle, Chaucer, C. T. 10437
(F 123).—AF, egle; OF. aigle, ‘an eagle;’ Cot.—L. aquila, an
eagle; see Aquiline. Der. eagi-et.

EAGRE, a tidal wave or ‘bore’ in a river. (F.?) ‘But like an
eagre rode in triumph o’er the tide;’ Dryden, Threnod. August. 135.
Sir T, Brown has agar, Vulg. Errors, bk. vii. c. 13. § 8. The Latinized
form higra occurs in Will. of Malmesbury, Gest. Pontific. p. 292;
whence Drayton has higre, Polyolbion, song vii. 1. 10. Of unknown
origin; apparently French.

N, EANLING:; see Yean.

BAR (1), the organ of hearing. (E.) ME. ere, Chaucer, C. T.6218
(D 636). AS. éare, Grein, i. 255.4 Du. oor; Icel. eyra; Swed. Gra;
Dan. ore; G. ohr; MHG. dre; OHG. dra; Goth. auso. Teut. type
*auzon-. Cf. also L. auris; Gk. ots; Russ. ucho; Lith. ausis, Olrish 6.
Brugm. i. § 213 (3). Der. ear-ed, -ache, -ring,, -shot, &c.; also ear-wig,
q.v. And from the same root, auricular, q.v.; auscultation, q.v.

BAR (2), a spike, or head, of corn. (E.) ME. er; the dat. ere occurs
in King Alisaunder, 797; see ear in Stratmann. AS. éar, pl. ears of
corn; Northumb. eher, an ear, pl. ehera; Matt. xii. 1.44 Du. aar;
Icel., Dan., and Swed., ax (=ahs); Goth. ahs; OHG. ahir; MHG.
eher; G.dahre. Teut.type *ahoz (*ahiz-) ; cognate with L. acus (gen.
acer-is), chaff; cf. Gk. d«-is, a point, a barb. =4/AK, to pierce. Brug-
mann, i. § 182.

EAR (3), to plough. (E.) In Deut. xxi. 4; 1 Sam. viii. 12; Is.
xxx. 24. ME. erien, P. Plowman, B. vi. 4,5; also eren, Chaucer,
C. T. 888 (A 886). AS. erian, erigan, to plough, Grein, i. 228.4
Icel. erja; MHG. eren, ern; Goth. arjan; Irish araim, I plough; L.
arare; Lith. arti; Russ. orat(e); Gk. dpdw, I plough.—4/ AR, to
plough, ‘In its application to ploughing the 4/AR (always re-
taining too its vowel a) is proper to all the European languages, as
distinguished from the Oriental ;’ Curtius, i.426. Der. ear-ing. See
Arable.

EARL, the Eng. equivalent of count. (E.) ME. er/, Chaucer, C. T.
6739 (D 1157). AS. eorl, a warrior, hero; Grein, i. 260. + Icel. jarl,
older form earl, a warrior, hero; also, as a title; OSax. erl, a man.
Teut. type *erloz. ONorse (runic) erilaR. Der. earl-dom, from ME.
eorldom, Layamon, 11560; AS. Chron. an. 1053; where the suffix is
the AS. dim (=E. doom).

EARLY, in good time. (E.) ME. erly, adv. Chaucer, C. T. 33;
earlich, adj. Ancren Riwle, p. 258. AS. &rlice, adv.; not much used,
as the simple form #r was used instead. The Northumb. adv. arlice
occurs. in. Mark, xvi. 2.— AS. #r, adv. sooner (Grein, i. 69), and Jic,
like; so that early=ere-like. See Ere. Der. earli-ness. | It appears
that the word was originally in use only as an adverb.

EARN, to gain by labour. (E.) ME. ernien, O. Eng. Homilies,
i, 7.1.28, AS. earnian, Grein, i. 249. -+- OHG, arndn; cf. also G.
ernten, to reap, from G, ernte, harvest. Teut. type *az(a)ndjan, to
get the fruits of labour; from the sb. *az(a)na@, Icel. 6xn, labour ;
cf. OHG. aran, Goth. asan-s, a harvest; also Goth. asneis (= AS. esne),
a hireling, labourer, lit. harvest-man. Cf. Russ. oséze, harvest, autumn;
OPrussian assanis, harvest. Brugmann, i.§.903 (c). @ As the form
of the root is AS, it has_nothing to. do with AS. erian, to plough.
Der. earn-ings.

. EARNEST (1), eagerness, seriousness. (E.) Chiefly in the phrase
‘in earnest.’ Also frequently used as an adj., but the ME. ernest is
commonly a sb.; see Chaucer, C. T. 1127, 1128, 3186. AS. eornost ;
on eornest, in earnest, Wulfstan, ed. Napier, p. 163; cf. AS. eornest,


EAVES 187


sb.; a fight, Grein, i. 261; also eorneste, adj. and ady. id. 262.-- Du.
ernst, earnestness, zeal; OHG. ernust, a fight, MHG. ernest, G. ernst,
sb. seriousness. Allied to Goth. arn-iba, safely; cf. Gk. dpyupt, to ex-
cite. See Uhlenbeck, s.v. arniba. Der. earnest, adj., earnest-ly, -ness.

EARNEST (2), a pledge, security. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) In
2 Cor. i. 22; v. 5; Eph.i.14. [The ¢ is excrescent, as commonly
after s; cf. whils-t, amongs-t from ME. whiles, amonges.] ME. ernes,
eernes; Wyclif, 2 Cor. i. 22; v.53; Eph.i.14. (Cf. prov. Eng. arles-
penny, an earnest-penny, where arles=arnes=ernes; Ray. W. ernes,
an earnest, pledge; from E.; Gael. earlas, an earnest, earnest-penny ;
from prov. E. arles.) B. This ME. ernes is a corruption (by association
with sbs. in -7es) of the earlier form erles ; ‘on erles of the eche mede,’
an earnest of the eternal reward; Hali Meidenhad (E. E.T.S.), p.7;
whence also prov. E. arles. yy. The ME. erles answers to an OF. *erles
(< L. *arrhulas), dimin. of OF. erres, pl., signifying ‘an earnest.’ Cf.
MF. arrhes (Cot.). This OF. erres occurs in Rom. Rose, 3418 (ed.
Méon), where the E. version has ‘ ernest,’ 1. 3680.—L. arrhas, acc. of
arrhe, pl. of arrha, shorter form of arrhabo, a pledge. = Gk. dppaBor,
a pledge. This is a modification of the Eastern word, viz. Heb.
‘eravon, a pledge, Gen. xxxviii. 17. This word was introduced by the
Pheenicians into both Greece and Italy.

EARTH, soil, dry land. (E.) ME. eorfe, ere, erthe; Layamon,
27817; P. Plowman, B. vii. 2. AS, eorde, Grein, i. 258. Du. aarde ;
Icel. jord; Dan. and Swed. jord; Goth. airtha; G.erde. B. Teut.
types *ertha, *erthon-, f. Allied to Gk. épa, the earth. Der. earth,
verb, earth-born, -en (ME. erthen, eorthen, Ancren Riwle, p. 388),
-ling, -ly, -li-ness, -y; also earth-quake, -work, &c.

EHARWIG, the name of an insect. (E.) ‘You suffer such ear-
wigs to creep into your ears;”? Chapman, Mons. D’Olive, last scene.
So called because supposed to creep into the ear. AS. éar-wicga ;
Voc. 350. 36. From éare, ear; and wicga, an insect, a beetle, lit.
‘runner,’ for *weg-jon-; from AS. weg-an, to carry, to move, allied to
L. ueh-ere, to carry; see Vehicle, Sievers, AS. Gram., § 247 (b).
See Ear (1).

EASE, quietness, rest. (F.) ME. ese, eise; Rob. of Glouc. p. 42,
1.977; Ancren Riwle, p. 108.—OF. aise, ease. Origin doubtful; but
OF. aisance occurs in the sense of ‘neighbourhood,’ and may repre-
sent the L. adiacentia, ‘things adjacent;’ which may have suggested
OF, aisier, to make convenient, to facilitate, and aise, convenience.
See KGrting, § 215. If so, Ital. agio is not allied. See Adjacent.
Der. ease, verb, eas-y, eas-i-ly, eas-i-ness; also ease-ment, in Udal, on
S. James, c. 5. v. 13; also dis-ease, q.v.

EASEL,, a support for pictures while being painted. (Du.) ‘ Easell,
a frame, upon which the artist placeth his cloth;’ Phillips, ed. 1658.
= Du. ezel, lit. a little ass, an ass. ‘Easel, die Ezel der Schilders,’ i.e.
the painter’s easel; Sewel’s Eng.-Du. Dict. 1754. +4 G. esel, an ass,


easel. These are diminutives, with suffix -e/, from the stem as-, an
ass; see Ass. 4 The word was borrowed from Holland rather than
Germany.


HAST, the quarter of sun-rise. (E.) ME. est, Chaucer, C. T. 4913
(B 493). AS. éast, adv. in the east, Grein, i. 255 ; common in com-
pounds, as in East-Sexa= East Saxons, men of Essex; AS. Chron.
A.D. 449; cf. éastan, from the east, éasterne, eastern, éaste-weard, east-
ward. + Du. oost; Icel. austr; Dan. 6st; Swed. dstax; MHG. dsten,
G. osten, the east; G. ost, east. + L. auréra (=ausdsa), east, dawn ;
Gk. qws, ol. atws, Att. €ws, dawn; Skt. ushds, dawn. Brugmann, i.
§ 218 (4). Der. east-er-ly, east-er-n, east-ward ; also Es-sex (= East-
Saxon); also East-er, q.v.

EASTER, a Christian festival. (E.) ME. ester; whence ester-
dei, Easter day, Ancren Riwle, p. 412. AS. éastre, f.; Luke, xxii.
I; éastor- (in comp.), Grein, i. 256; pl. éastro, éastron, the Easter
festival; Matt. xxvi. 2; Mark, xiv. 1. AS. Eastre, Eostre, the name
of a goddess whose festivities were in April, whence April was called
Easter-monad, Easter-month; Beda, De Temporum Katione, c. xv.
B. The name Eastre is to be referred to the same root as east, with
reference to the increasing light and warmth of the spring-season. She
was, in fact, the dawn-goddess; cf. Lith. auszra, f., dawn; Skt. usra,
f., dawn. See Kast.

BAT, to devour. (E.) ME. eten, Chaucer, C. T. 4349 (A 4351).
AS. efan; pt.t. et, pp. efen; Grein, i. 228.4 Du. eten; Icel. eta;
Swed. ata; Dan. ede; Goth. itan; OHG, ezzan, ezan; MHG. ezzen ;
G. essen. + Ir. and Gael. ith; W. ysu; L. edere; Gk. é5ev; Skt. ad.
A ED, to eat, consume. Der. eat-er, -able; also fret (=for-eat), q.v-

EAVES, the clipt edge of a thatched roof. (E.) A sing. sb.; the
pl. should be eaveses, Also prov. E. oavis (Essex), ME. euese (u=
v)3 pl. eweses, which occurs in P, Plowman, B. xvii. 227. AS. ¢fes,
a clipt edge of thatch, eaves, in the Lambeth Psalter, Ps. ci. 8
(Bosworth) ; whence the verb efesian, to clip, shave, shear, in Levit,
xix. 27. Cf. also oefsung, Corpus Gloss., 474.-4Icel. ups, eaves ;
MSwed. ops ; Swed. dial. uff, eaves (Rietz) ; Goth. ubizwa, a porch ;
John, x. 23; OHG. opasa, MHG, obse, a porch, hall; also, eaves.


188 EBB


[The sense ‘ porch’ is due to the projection of the eaves, forming a
cover.] B. The Teut. type is *obeswa, f. Allied to OHG. ofa, oba,
MUHG. obe, G. oben, above (cf. G. ob-dach, a shelter). See Over.
@ The orig. sense was ‘cover,’ or ‘shelter.’ Der. eaves-dropp-er,
one who stands under the drippings from the eaves, hence, a secret
listener; Rich. III, v. 3. 221; ME. exesdroppers, pl., Lydgate, Ban-
quet of Gods and Goddesses, st.99. Cf. Swed. dial. uffsa-drup, drop-
pings from the eaves (Rietz) ; Icel. upsar-dropi.

EBB, the-reflux of the tide. (E.) ME. ebbe, Chaucer, C. T. 10573
(F 259). AS. ebba, ebb; A®lfred’s Boethius, lib. ii. met..8. Cf. AS.
ebbian, to ebb; AS. Chron. an. 897.4-Du. eb, ebbe, sb. ; ebben, vb.
[whence Dan. ebbe, sb. and vb.; Swed. ebb, sb. ; ebba, vb.]. Perhaps
the Teut. type is *af-jon-, or *ab-jon-, with the sense of ‘ going off ;’
see Off. Der. ebb-tide.

EBONY, a hard wood. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) In Shak. L.L. L.
iv. 3. 247. Spelt ebene in Holland’s Pliny, b. xii. c. 4. [The adj.
ebon is in Milton, L’All. 8; spelt heben, Spenser, F. Q.i. 7. 37.] ME.
eban, ‘tre;’ Prompt. Parv.=OF. ebenus (Hatzfeld) ; MF. ebene, ‘ the
black wood, called heben or ibonie;’ Cot.—L. hebenus, hebenum,
ebenus, ebenum.—Gk. @Bevos; also éBevn.— Heb. hovnim, pl. ebony
wood; Ezek. xxvii. 15. Prob. a non-Semitic word.

EBRIETY, drunkenness. (F.—L.) In Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. ii. c. 6, part 7; bk. v. c. 23, part 16.—F. ébriété, ‘drunken-
ness;’ Cot.—L. acc. ébrietitem, from nom. ébrietas.=L. ébrius,
drunken; of obscure origin. Der. from same source, in-ebriate.
‘EBULLITION, a boiling. (F.—L.). In Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. iv. c. 7, § 5. — OF. ebullition, ‘an ebullition, boyling ;’ Cot.
—L. ébullitionem, acc. of ébullitio; a rare word; cf. ébullitus, pp. of
ébullire, to bubble up.—L. @, out ; and bullire, to bubble, boil. See
Boil. Der. From same verb, ebulli-ent, Young, Nt. Thoughts, viii.
1. 98 from end.

ECARTE, a game at cards. (F.—L. and Gk.) First in 1824.
In Thackeray, Van. Fair, c. xxv. In this game, cards may be dis-
carded and exchanged ; hence the name.=F. écarté, discarded ; pp. of
écarter, to discard,.—L. ex, out, away; and F. carte, Late L. carta,
from Gk. ydptn, a leaf of papyrus; hence a card. See Card (1).

ECCENTRIC, departing from the centre, odd. (F.—L.—Gk.)
In Holland’s Pliny, b. ii. c. 15.—F. eccentrique, ‘ out of the center;
fol eccentrique, an unruly or irregular coxcomb ;’ Cot. = Late L. eccen-
tricus, coined from Gk. éxxevrpos, out of the centre.—Gk. é#, out ;
and xevrpoy, centre. See Centre. Der. eccentric, sb. (Milton, P. L.
iii. 575); -al, -al-ly, -i-ty.

ECCLESIASTIC, belonging to the church. (L.—Gk.) Chaucer
has ecclesiast, sb., C. T. 710 (A 708). Selden, on Drayton’s Poly-
olbion, song 1, note Io, and song 8, note 21, has both ecclesiastic and
ecclesiastical. Late L. ecclesiasticus.— Gk. éxxAnovaotixds, belonging
to the éxxAnoia, i.e. assembly, church.—Gk. éx#AnTos, summoned. =
Gk. étxadew, I call forth, summon. = Gk. é*, out; and xadéw, I call.
See Hale (2). Der. ecclesiast-ic-al.

ECHELON, a particular (diagonal) arrangement of troops. (F.—
L.) First in 1796 (N.E.D.).—F. échelon, a step or rung ofa ladder;
with reference to the successive ranks.—F. échelle, a ladder.—L.
scala, a ladder (Hatzfeld). See Scale (3).

ECHINUS, a sea-urchin. (L.—Gk.) Chaucer has the pl. echines ;
tr. of Boethius, bk. ili. met. 8. —L. echinus. — Gk. éxivos, a hedge-hog,
a sea-urchin. ++ OHG. igil, G. igel, AS. 21, a hedgehog.

’ ECHO, a repeated sound. (L.—Gk.) ME. ecco, Chaucer, C. T.
9065 (E 1189).—L. échd.— Gk. 7)x~w, a sound, echo; cf. #xos, 7x7, a
ringing in the ears, noise. Der. echo, verb; also cat-ech-ise, q. v.

ECLAIRCISSEMENT, a clearing up. (F.—L.) In Dryden,
Marriage a la Mode, v.1.—F. éclaircissement, a clearing up.=F.
éclaircir, to clear up.—F, é-, OF. es-<L. ex, out, fully; and clair,
clear, from L. clirus. See Clear.

ECLAT, a striking effect, applause. (F.—L. and Low G.) First
in 1674 (N. E. D.).—F. éclat, splendour; lit. a bursting out.=—F.
éclater, to burst forth; OF. esclater, to shine; s’esclater, to burst ;
Cot. Of G. origin, though the form is doubtful; perhaps from Late
L. type *exclappitare, formed from L. ex, out, fully, and Low G. hlap-
pen, to clap, make a noise; see Clap. And see Slate (1).

ECLECTIC, lit. choosing out. (Gk.) ‘Horace, who is...
sometimes a Stoic, sometimes an Eclectic;’ Dryden, Discourse on
Satire ; Poet. Works, ed. 1851, p. 374.—Gk. éxAexrixds, selecting ;
an Eclectic. — Gk. éxAéyev, to select.—Gk. é, out; and Aéyev, to
choose. Der. eclectic-al, -al-ly, -ism ; see Eclogue.

ECLIPSE, a:darkening of sun or moon. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
eclipse, often written clips ; P. Plowman, C. xxi: 140, and footnote. —
OF. eclipse, ‘an eclipse;’ Cot. = L. eclipsis. — Gk. éxAeufis, a failure, esp.
of the light of the sun.—Gk. éxAcinev, to leave out, quit, suffer
eclipse. = Gk. éx, out; and Aeiney, to leave. Brugmann,i. § 463. Der.
ecliptic, Gk. éxAermrixds ; see Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, prol. 1. 67.

ECLOGUE, a pastoral poem. (L.—Gk.) In Sidney’s Arcadia,


EERY


b, iii (R.). ‘They be not termed Eclogues, but Zglogues ;’ Spenser,


Argument to Sheph. Kal.; cf. F. églogue, an eclogue. = L. ecloga, a.


pastoral poem.=—Gk. é*Aoyn, a selection; esp. of poems.—Gk.
éxhéye, to select; see Eclectic. | Note the modification of
spelling, due to F. églogue.

ECONOMY, household management. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt
oeconomy in Cotgrave.=— MF. oeconomie, ‘ oeconomy ;’ Cot. = L. eco-
nomia.= Gk. olxovouia, management of a household. Cf. oixovop-
éw, I manage a household.—Gk. oixo-, for oixos, a house, cognate
with L. wicus; and vou-, 2nd grade of véuev, to deal out, whence


‘also E. nomad, q.v. Der. econom-ic (spelt iconomique, Gower, C. A.


iii. 141, bk. vii. 1670); -ic-al, -ic-al-ly, -ist, -ise.

ECSTASY, enthusiasm. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Mer. Ven. iii.
2. 112.— OF. extasie (Godefroy) ; cf. MF. ecstase, ‘an extasie, swoon-
ing, trance ;’ Cot. = Late L. ecstasis, a trance. = Gk. éxaraots, displace-
ment ; also, a trance.= Gk. é«, out; and ordois, a standing, condition,
allied to torn, I place.—4/STA, to stand; see Stand. Cf. the
phrase éf:ordvac gpevay, to drive (one) out of his wits. Der. ecstatic

Gk. éxorarik-ds) ; -al, -al-ly.

ECUMENIC, ECUMENICAL, common to the world,
general. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Oecumenicall, or universall;’ Foxe, Martyrs,
p-. 8 (R.).—Late L. eciimenicus, universal.— Gk. oixouvperds, uni-
versal. Gk. oixoupévn (sc. y7), the inhabited world; fem. of oixovp-
evos, pres. pt. pass. of oixéw, I inhabit. Gk. oixos, a house. Brug-
mann, i. § 611. See Hconomy.

ECZEMA, a skin disease. (Gk.) First in 1753 (N.E.D.).—
Gk. éCeua, a pustule.—Gk. éx(éew, to boil. over.—Gk. ex, out;
¢éev, to boil. See Yeast.

EDDY, a whirling current of water. (E.) In Shak. Lucrece,
1669. ME. ydy (=idy), The Houlate, st. 64. [Either from a lost.
AS. word with the prefix ed-=back; or perhaps modified from the
Scandinavian by changing Icel. ij- to the corresponding AS. ed-.]
Cf. Icel. i8a, an eddy, whirl-pool; ‘0a, to be restless, whirl about ;
Norw. ida; Swed. dial. i0a, idd, an eddy; Dan. dial. ide (Rietz).
B. Formed from AS. ed-, back, again, =Icel. 70-, back. Cf. Goth.
id-, back; OSaxon idug-, back; OHG, it-, ita-, back. Brugmann,
i. § 574. Cf. Iddy stone (now Eddystone), Arber, Eng. Garner, iii.
394 (A.D. 1599). ;

EDGE, the border of a thing. (E.) ME. egge; Ancren Riwle,
p- 60. AS. ecg, f. (gen. dat. acc. ecge), Grein, i. 216.4-Du. egge;
Icel. and Swed. egg; Dan. eg; G. ecke. Teut. type *agja, f. Cf. L.
aciés, Gk. axis, a point; Skt. agri-, an edge, corner, angle. = AK, to
pierce ; cf. Skt. ag, to pervade. Der. edge-tool, -wise, -less, edging ;
egg (2), q.v. k

EDIBLE, eatable. (L.) In Bacon, Nat. Hist. sect. 859.—Late
L. edibilis, eatable.— L. edere, toeat. See Hat.

EDICT, a proclamation, command. (L.) In Shak. Cor. i. 1. 84;
and in Caxton (N.E.D.).—L. édictum, a thing proclaimed.—L.
édictus, pp. of édicere, to proclaim. L. é@, forth; and dicere, to speak.
See Diction. ‘

EDIFY, to build up, instruct. (F.—L.) In Shak. Tw. Nt. v.
298. ME. edifien, P. Plowm. C. xxi. 42.—OF. edifier, ‘to edifie,
build ;’ Cot.=L. edificire, to build.—L. #di-, stem of e@dés, a
building ; and -fc-, for fac-ere, to make. B. The L. @edés orig. meant
‘a fire-place,’ or ‘hearth ;’ cf. Irish aodh, fire. 4/AIDH, to kindle.
Brugmann, i, § 202. Der. edify-ing, edific-at-ion ; edifice, from F.
édifice,‘an edifice’ (Cotgrave), which is from L. edificium, a building;
edile, or edile, from L, edélis, a magistrate who had the care of public
buildings ; edile-ship.

EDITION, publication. (F.—L.) In Shak. Merry Wi. ii. 1. 78.
First in 1551.— OF. edicion (Hatzfeld).—L. éditionem, acc. of éditio,
a publishing; cf. éditus, pp. of édere, to publish, give out.—L. é,
out; and dare, to give.—4/DA, to give. Der. from the same
source, editor (L. éditor), -i-al, -i-al-ly, -ship; also edit, editress,
coined words.

EDUCATE, to cultivate, train, (L.) In Shak. L. L. L. v. 1.
86; also education, As You Like It, i. 1. 22, 72. —L. éducatus, pp. of
éducare, to bring out, educate; allied to édacere, to bring out; see
Educe. Der. educat-or (L. éducator), -ion, -ion-al.

EDUCEH, to bring out. (L.) Not common. In Pope, Ess. on
Man, ii. 175; and earlier, in Glanville’s Essays, ess. 3 (R.).—L.
édiicere, pp. éductus, to bring out.—L. @, out; and ducere, to lead.
See Duct. Der. educ-ible; educt-ion, like pp. éductus.


EEL, a fish. (E.) ME. el (with long e); pl. eles, spelt elys,


Barbour’s Bruce, ii. 577. AS. él, pl. élas; Aélfric’s Colloquy, in
Thorpe’s Analecta, p. 23.44Du. aal; Icel. all; Dan. aal; Swed. dl;
G.aal, Teut.type*éloz. Der. eel-pout; AS, &le-piita, a kind of fish.
EERY, timid; also strange, weird. (E.) ‘I'd rove, and ne’er be
eerie, O;’ Burns; My Ain Kind Dearie, O. ME, ar}, arh, are,
erje, timid; spelt eri in Cursor Mundi, 1. 17685. AS. earg, earh,
timid, cowardly. Cf. Icel. argr, ragr; G. arg, timid ; Du, erg, bad,


a


EFFACE


EFFACEH, to destroy the appearance of. (F.—L.) In Caxton,
Golden Legend, Life of St. James the More, § 8; also in Cot-
grave; and Pope, Moral Essays, i. 166.—F. effacer, ‘to efface,
deface, raze ;” Cot. Lit. ‘to erase a face or appearance,’ =F. ef-=L.
ef-, for ex, out ; and F. face, a face. See Face, Der. efface-ment.

EFFECT, a result, consequence. (F.—L.) ME. effect, Chaucer,
C.T.321 (A 319). — AF effect, Stat. Realm, i.189; MF. effect, ‘an effect,
or work ;’ Cot.=L. effectum, acc. of effectus, an effect.—L. effectus,
pp: of efficere, to effect.— L. ef-=ec- (ex), out; and -ficere, for facere,
to make. See Fact. Der. effectu-al (from decl. stem effectu- of sb.
effectus), -al-ly, -ate ; effect-ive (from pp. effectus), -ive-ly, -ive-ness ;
from same source, effic-ac-y, q.v. 3 effici-ent, q.v.

EFFEMIN ATES, womanish. (L.) In Shak. Rich. III, iii. 7. 211;
as a verb, Gower, C. A. iii. 236; bk. vii. 4304. —L. effémindtus, pp. of
effeminare,to make womanish. = L, ef- =ec- (ex); and fémina,a woman,
See Feminine. Der. effeminate-ly, -ness, effeminac-y.

EFFENDI, sir, master. (Turkish—Gk.) Turk. @fendi, sir (a title).
= Mod. Gk. apévrns, which is from Gk. addévrns, a despotic master,
tuler. See Authentic. .

EFFERVESCEH, to bubble or froth up. (L.) ‘Effervescence, a
boiling over, ... a violent ebullition;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.—L.
efferuescere. = L, ef- =ec- (ew); and feruescere, to begin to boil, inceptive
of feruére, to glow, boil. See Fervent. Der. effervesc-ent, -ence.

EFFETEH, exhausted, (L.) In Burton, Anat. of Melancholy, ii. 4.
I. 53 p- 370 (R.). = L. effetus, effetus, weakened by having brought
forth young.=L, ef-=ec- (ex); and fetus, breeding. See Fetus.

HFFICACY, force, virtue. (L.) InSir T.Elyot, Castle of Health,
b. ii.c. 22, Englished from L, efficdcia, power.—L. efficdci-, from
efficax, efficacious. = L. ef-=ec- (ex) ; ~fic-, from facere, to make; and
suffix -ax. See Effect. Der. efficaci-ous, -ous-ly, -ness. @ The
ME. word for efficacy was efficace, Ancren Riwle, p. 246; from F.
efficace (Cotgrave).

EFFICIENT, causing an effect. (F.—L.) In Tyndal’s Works,
p- 3353 col. I (end). =F. efficient, ‘efficient;’ Cot. — L. efficientem, acc.
of efficiens, pres. pt. of efficere. See Effect. Der. efficient-ly, efficience,
efficienc-y ; also co-efficient.

EFFIGY, a likeness of a man’s figure. (L.) Spelt effigies in Shak.
As You Like It, ii. 7. 193.—L. effigiés, an effigy, image.—L. effig-,
base of effingere, to form. = L, ef-=ec- (ex); and fingere, to form. See
Feign. q Cf. Rae 15th cent. (Hatzfeld).

EFFLORESCENCE, a flowering, eruption on the skin, forma-
tion of a powder. (F.—L.) In Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. vi.
c. 12. § 5.—F. efflorescence; Cot. = L.*efflirescentia, a coined word from
efflorescere, inceptive form of effldrére,to blossom, = L.ef- =ec- (ex) ; and

jlorére, to blossom, from /lér-, stem of lds, a flower. See Flower.

EFFLUENCEH, a flowing out. (L.) In Holland’s Plutarch,
p- 1059; Milton, P. L. ili. 6. Coined from L. effluent-, stem of pres.
pt. of effluere, to flow out.—L. ef- =ec- (ex); and fluere, pp. fluxus, to
flow. See Fluent. Der. from the same verb, efflu-ent ; efflux (from
Pp: effiucus) ; effluvium (L. effluuium).

EFFORT, an exertion of strength. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave; and in
Caxton, Sons of Aymon, c. 24 (p. 527, 1. 21).—F. effort, ‘an effort,
endeavour ;’ Cot. Verbal sb. from F. efforcer, or s’efforcer, ‘to
indeavour;’ Cot.—F. ef-=L. ef-= ec- (ex); and forcer, to force, from
force, sb. See Force.

EFFRONTERY, boldness, hardihood. (F.—L.) In Kersey’s
Dict. ed. 1715.—F. effronterie, ‘impudency;’ Cot.—OF. effronté,
‘ shameless ;’. Cot. Formed with prefix ef-=L. ef-=ec- (ex) from
F. front, the forehead, front. See Front, Affront, Confront.

EFFULGENT, shining forth. (L.) The sb. effulgence is in
Milton, P. L. iii. 388.—L. effulgent-, stem of effulgens, pres. pt. of
effulgére, to shine forth.=L. ef-=ec- (ex); and fulgére, to shine.
See Fulgent. Der. effulgence.

HFFUSBE, to pour forth. (L.) In Shak. 1 Hen. VI, v. 4. 52.
[The sb. effusion is in Occleve, Letter of Cupide, st. 61.]=—L. effusus,
pp. of effundere, to pour forth. —L. ef- =ec- (ex); and fundere, to pour.
See Fuse. Der. effus-ion, -ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness.

EFT, a newt; of which it is a variant. See Newt.

EGG (1), the oval body from which chickens, &c. are hatched.
(Scand.) ME. egg, pl. egges, eggis (from Norse); also ay, ey, pl. eiren
(from AS.). The pl. egges is in P. Plowman, B. xi. 343. [Chaucer
has ey, C. T. 16274 (G 806) ; cf. pl. etren in Ancren Riwle, p. 66. AS.
ég, Grein, i. 55; pl. @gru (whence ezre, and the double pl. ezre-n) ;
Du. ei.]—Icel. egg; Dan. eg; Swed. agg.+-G, ei. Prob. allied to
Trish ugh; Gael. ubh; W. wy; L. ouum; Gk. wv, See Oval.
Brugmann, i. § 309 (2). _ |

EGG (2), to instigate. (Scand.) ME. eggen, Ancren Riwle, p. 146.
—Icel. eggja, to egg on, goad. —Icel. egg, an edge; see Edge.

EGLANTINE, sweetbriar, &c. (F.—L.) In Spenser, Sonnet 26.
ME. eglentine, eglentier, Maundeville, Tray. c. ii. p. 14.—F. eglantine,
formerly aiglantine; another OF, form was aiglantier, given by


ELAND 189


Cotgrave, and explained as ‘an eglantine or sweetbrier tree.’ =OF.
aiglant, aiglent, the same, Godefroy; (whence aiglant-ine, aiglant-ier) ;
for aiglent-.—= Late L. *aculentus, prickly (not recorded), formed (with
suffix -lentus) from acus, a needle. Cf. L. acu-leus, a sting, prickle. See
Agilet.

EGOTIST, a self-opinionated person. (L.) Both egotist and
egotism occur in the Spectator, no. 562. They are coined words,
from L, ego, I, See I, @ Also ego-ism, ego-ist (F. egoisme, egoiste).
Ego-ist is the right form; egotist seems to have been imitated from
words like dramat-ist, where, however, the ¢ is a part of the stem of
the sb. Der. egotist-ic, egotise.

EGREGIOUS, excellent, select. (L.) In Shak. Cymb. v. 5. 210s
— L. égregi-us, chosen out of the flock, excellent; with suffix -ous.—
L.é grege, out of the flock. SeeGregarious. Der. egregious-ly, -ness.

EGRESS, a going out, departure. (L.) In Shak. Merry Wives,
li. I, 225.—L. égressus, a going out.—L. égressus, pp. of égredior,
I go out.—L. @, out; and gradior, 1 go. See Grade.

EGRET, the lesser white heron. (F.—OHG.) In Levins and
Huloet. The Anglo-French egret occurs in the Liber Albus, p. 467.
=OF. egrette, aigrette, ‘a fowl like a heron;’ Cot. Dimin. of
a form *aigre, of which OF. aigron, a heron (Supp. to Godefroy) is
an augmentative form. This aigron is the same as F. héron, OF.
hairon, a heron. *Aigre exactly answers to the OHG. heigir, heiger,
a heron; and egret (for hegr-et) is merely the dimin. of the her-
(=hegr-) in her-on. See Heron.

EKH! interj. of surprise. (E.) ME. ey; Chaucer, C. T. 3766
(A 3768). AS. éa, eh! Grein, i. 63, 250. Cf. F. eh! Du. he! G. ei!
See Ah!

EIDER-DUCK, a kind of sea-duck. (Scand.) Not old; and
not in Johnson, ‘ The eder bolster;’?’ Darwin, Bot. Garden, c. iii.
388. Duck is an English addition. Adapted from Icel. edar, gen. of
@0r, an eider-duck ; where @ is pronounced like E. iin time. Der.
eider-down (wholly Scandinavian); from Icel. gdar-diin, eider-down.
See Norw. ederdun in Falk and Torp.

EIGHT, twice four. (E.) ME. ezghté (with final e), Chaucer,
C.T. 12705 (C771). AS. eahta, Grein, i. 235.4-Du. acht; Icel. atta;
Dan. otte; Swed. dtta; Goth. ahtau; OHG. ahta, MHG. @hte, ahte,
G. acht,+Irish ocht; Gael. ochd; W. wyth; Corn. eath; Bret. eich, eiz;
L. octo; Gk. éx7w; Pers. hasht, Zend ashta, Skt. ashtau. Idg. type,
*okto(u). Der. eighth (for etght-th)=AS. eahtoda; eighty (for eight-
ty) = AS. eahtatig; eighteen (for eight-teen) = AS, eahtatyne; also eighth-
ly, eight-i-eth, eighteen-th.

HISEL, vinegar. (F.—L.) Spelt esile, Hamlet, v. 1. 299. ME.
eisil, Ancren Riwle, p. 404.—OF. aisil, eisil, vinegar. From a L. type
*acétillum, = L. acétum, vinegar.

HISTEDDFOD, a congress of Welsh bards, (W.) First in 1822
(N.E.D.). But it is spelt stethva in Drayton, Polyolb. iv. 179.—
W. eisteddfod, a sitting, session, congress. — W. eistedd, to sit.

EITHER, one of two. (E.) ME. either, eyther, aither, ayther ;
Chaucer, Parl. Foules, 125. AS. @gper, Matt. ix. 17; a contracted
form of @ghweper, Grein, i. 65. Compounded of a+ ge+hweber ;.
where & =aye, ever, ge is a common prefix, and hweper is E. whether;
March, A.S. Gram. sect. 136. Cf. Du.ieder; OHG. éowedar, MHG.
ieweder, G. jeder [without -ge-]. See Ayeand Whether. @ ME.
eyther was confused with ME. outher, E. or; see Or (1).

EJACULATE, to jerk out an utterance. (L.) The sb. ejaculat-
ion is in Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 4. 5.—L. @iaculatus,
pp- of éiaculari, to cast out.—L. é, out; and iacularz, to cast, from
iaculum, a missile, from iacere, to throw. See Jet. Der. ejaculat-ion,
-or-y; and see below.

EJECT, to cast out. (L.) In Shak. Cor. iii. 1. 287.—L. éiectus,
pp. of éicere, to cast out.—L. é, out; and iacere, to cast. See above.
Der. eject-ment, -ion.

EKE (1), to augment. (E.) ME. ekenx, Northern form; the
Southern form is echken; ‘these fooles, that her sorowes eche;’
Chaucer, Troil. i. 705. OMerc. écan, toaugment; AS. iecan; Grein,
i. 229. Teut. type *aukjan-, weak verb; allied to Icel. auwka; Swed.
oka; Dan. dge; Goth. avkan (neuter). Cf. L. augére, to increase;
Skt. djas, strength. Brugmann,i. § 539(2). (4/AWEGw); whence
also auction, augment. Der. eke, con).

EKE (2), also. (E.) ME. ek, eek, eke; Chaucer, C. T. 41. AS.
éac, Grein, i. 251.4-Du. ook; Icel. auk ; Swed. och, and; Dan. og,
and; Goth. awk. All from the Teut. base *auk-, Idg. *aug-.

ELABORATE, laborious, produced with labour. (L.) ‘The
elaborate Muse ;’ Ben Jonson, tr. of Horace’s Art of Poetry, 1. 140.
—L. élaboratus, pp. of élabarare, to labour greatly. = L. @, forth, fully;
and labérare, to work, from labér-, stem of labor, work. See Labour,
Der. elaborate, verb; -ly, -ness, elaborat-ion.

ELAND, a S. African antelope, (Du.—G.—Lith.) Spelt e/an;
Hakluyt, Voy. iii, 104, From Du. eland, an elk. =G. elend. = Lith,
élnis, an elk. Cf, W. elain, a hind; Russ. oléne, a stag. See Elk,


190 ELAPSE


ELAPSE, to glide away. (L.) ‘Elapsed, gone or slipt away ;’ |


Phillips; ed. 1706.—L. élapsus, pp. of élabi, to glide away. =L. é,
away; and /abi, to glide. See Lapse. Der. elapse, sb.

ELASTIC, springing back. (Gk.) Pope has elasticity; Dunciad,
i. 186. Phillips, ed. 1706, has elasticity and elastick. A scientific
word, coined from a Gk, *éAaoruxés, propulsive; from Gk. éA\dw=
édavvw, I drive (fut. éddo-w). Allied to L. alacer. See Alacrity.
Der. elastic-i-ty.

ELATE, lifted up, proud. (L.) ME. elat; Chaucer, C. T. 14173
(B 3357).=—L. élatus, lifted up.—L. @ out, up; and latus=dlatus,
connected with ¢ollere, to lift.=4/ TEL, to lift. Der. elated-ly,
~ness 5 elat-ion.

ELBOW, the bend of the arm. (E.) ME. elbowe; Chaucer, Good
Women, prol. 179. AS. elboga; in Voc. 158. 8; eln-boga, tr. of Beda,
bk. v. c. 3.-4-Du. elleboog ; Icel. alnbogi, élnbogi, dlbogi, olbogi; Dan.
albue; OHG. elinpogo, MHG. elenboge, G, ellenbogen. B. Compounded
of AS. el (=ela < *alin-), cognate with Goth. aleina, a cubit [L. ulna,
the elbow, Gk. wAev7, the elbow]; and boga, a bending, a bow. 1. Of
these, the first set is allied to Skt. aratni-, the elbow; see Ell.
2. The AS. boga is from4/ BHEUG, to bend; see Bow (x). @f Cf.
Swed. armbage, the elbow, lit.arm-bow. Der. elbow, verb; elbow-room.

ELD, old age, antiquity. (E.) Nearly obsolete; but once common.
In Shak. Merry Wives, iv. 4. 36; Meas. iii. 1. 36. ME. elde, Chaucer,
C. T. 2449 (A 2447). OMerc. eldu, old age (O. E. Texts, p. 542),
from OMere. ald, old. Cf. AS. yldo, yldu, antiquity, old age; Grein,
ii. 769; also ald, eldu, eld, id. i. 56, 222.4-Icel. elli; Dan. elde.
Allied to Icel. cld, anage; Goth. alths, anage. See Old.

ELDER (1), older. (E.) The use as a sb. is very old. ME.
elder, eldre; ‘tho londes that his eldres wonnen;’ Rob. of Brunne,
p. 144; cf. P. Plowman, C. x. 214. In AS., the same use occurs in
the Blickling Homilies, p. 195: ‘ ure yldran,’ our elders. OMerc.
eldra (AS. yldra), elder, adj.; compar. of OMerc. ald (AS. eald), old.
See Old. Der. elder-ly, elder-ship.

ELDER (2), the name of a tree. (E.) The dis excrescent; the
right form is eller. ME. eller, P, Plowman, B. i. 68; cf. edlerne treo,
id. A.i.66. AS. ellen, ellern, Cockayne’s Leechdoms, iii. 324; ellern,
Corpus Gloss. 1775. - Low G. elloorn; Bremen Worterbuch, i. 303;
also ellern, elhorn, alhorn (Liibben). J Distinct from alder. There
is nothing to connect it in form with G. holunder.

ELDEST, oldest. (E.) ME. eldest, eldeste. OMerc. eldesta (AS.
yldesta), Grein, i. 239; formed by vowel-change from OMerc. ald
(AS. eald), old. See Old.

BLECAMPANE, a plant. (F.—L.) In Holland, tr. of Pliny,


b. xix. c. 5. § 7; spelt elycampane, Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iii.
c.12. Shortened from F. enule-campane, ‘ the hearbe called helicam-
panig;* Cot.—L. inula campaina; where inula is the L. name for
elecampane in Pliny, as above. At the same time, the substitution
of ele- for F’. enule was due to AS. eolone, eolene (for *iluna, a perversion
of inula) ; Voc. 26. 23; 36. 11. Cf. elena campana, Med. Works of
14th Cent., ed. Henslow, p. 115. B. Campana, fem. of campanus, is a
Late L. form, and perhaps means merely growing in the fields ; cf.
L. campdneus, of or pertaining to the fields (Lewis), though the proper
L. word for this is campestris; see Campestral.

ELECT, chosen. (L.) In Shak. Rich. II, iv. 126; and used by
Caxton (see Trevisa, tr. of Higden, iii. g9, 1. 2).—L. éectus, pp. of
éligere,to choose out.=—L. é, out; and /egere,to choose. See Legend.
Der. elect, verb; elect-ion (OF. election), Rob. of Brunne, p. 208;
election-eer ; elect-ive, -or, -or-al; cf. also eligible, q.v.; elegant, q.v.;
elite, q.v.

ELECTRIC, belonging to electricity. (L.—Gk.) Sir T. Browne
speaks of ‘ electrick bodies ;’ Wulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 4.. Coined from
L. électrum, amber ; from its electrical power when rubbed. —Gk.
jAexTpov, amber; also shining metal; allied to #AéxTwp, gleaming.
Der. electric-al, electric-ian, electric-i-ty, electri-fy, electro-meter ; 8c.

ELECTUARY, a kind of confection. (L.—Gk.) [ME. letuarie,
Chaucer, prol. 428 (A 426).—OF. Jetuaire, lectuaire (Godefroy) ;
MF. electuaire, ‘an electuary; a medicinable composition made of
choice drugs, and of substance between a syrrop and a conserve ;’
Cot.]=—L. électuarium, électérium, an electuary, a medicine that dis-
solves in the mouth; perhaps for *e(c)lictarium; from Gk. éxAekrdv,
an electuary.—Gk. éxAcixev, to lick away. See Lick. The
usual Lat. word is ecligma, Latinised from Gk. é#Aevypa, medicine
that is licked away, from Acixev, to lick.

ELEEMOSYNARY, relating to alms. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Eleemo-
sinary, an almner, or one that gives alms ;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674.
Also used as an adj.; Glanvill, Vanity of Dogmatizing, c. 16 (R.).=
Late L. eleémosynarius, an almoner.=—Gk. éAenuocivn, alms. See
Alms.

ELEGANT, choice, grateful, neat. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave, and
in Milton, P. L. ix. 1018. Shak. has elegancy, L. L. L. iv. 2. 126.
Caxton has ‘elegaunt and fayr;’ Golden Legend, Moses, § 2.—MF.


ELL


elegant, ‘elegant, eloquent ;’ Cot.—L. élegantem, acc. of élegans,
tasteful, neat.—L. é, out; and leg-, base of legere, to choose. See
Elect. Der. elegance, eleganc-y.

ELEGY, a lament, funeral ode. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘An Elegie’ is
the title of a poem by Spenser. —MF. elegie, ‘an elegy ;’ Cot.—L.
elegia. — Gk. édeyeia, an elegy, fem. sing.; but orig. 7a éAcyeia, neut.
pl., an elegiac poem; plur. of éAeyefov, a distich consisting of a hex-
ameter and a pentameter.=Gk. éAeyos, a lament. Der. elegi-ac,
eleg-ist.

ELEMENT, a first principle. (L.) In early use. ‘ The four
elementz ;’ On Popular Science, 1, 120; in Wright’s Popular Treatises


on Science, p. 134.— OF. element (Hatzfeld).—L. elementum, a first ~~


principle. Der. element-al, -al-ly, -ar-y.

ELEPHANT, the largest quadruped. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. oli-
faunt, King Alisaunder, 5293; Lydgate has elyphaunt, Sege of Troye,
bk. ii. c. 11.1. 142. [The AS. form olfend was used to mean ‘a
camel ;’ Mark, i. 6.)—OF. olifant (Roquefort) ; elefant, Philip de
Thaun, Bestiary, 1. 691; also elephant; Cot.—L. elephantem, acc. of
elephas. = Gk. éXé€pavta, acc. of éAépas. Of unknown origin; some
compare Heb. eleph, an ox; see Alphabet. Or from the Semitic
el, def. article, and Skt. zbhas, an elephant. Der. elephant-ine.

ELEVATE, to raise up. (L.) «As many degrees as thy pool
[pole] is elevat;’ Chaucer, Astrolabe, pt. ii. c. 23.—L. éleudtus, pp. of
éleuare, to lift up.—L. @, out, up; and leuare, to make light, lift, from
leuis, light. See Levity. Der. elevat-ion, -or.

ELEVEN, ten and one. (E.) ME. enlenen (with «=v), Layamon,
23364. AS. endlufon, Gen. xxxii. 22; older form endleofan, tr. of
Beda, bk. v. c. 18; ONorthumb. e@llefne, Luke, xxiv. 9. Cf. OFries.
andlova, elleva. + Du. elf; Icel. ellifu; later ellefu; Dan. elleve; Swed.
elfua; Goth. ainlif; OHG. einlif, G. eilf, elf. B. All from a Teut.
base *ainlif, which best appears in the Goth. ain-lif. 1. Here ain=
AS. Gu=one. 2. The suffix -lif is plainly cognate with the suffix
-lika in Lithuanian wénolika, eleven, Fick, ii. 292. And it is probable
that -Jika means ‘remaining ;’cf. L. dinguere (pt. t. ligui), to leave.
Thus the sense is ‘one remaining,’ after ten. Brugmann, ii. § 175.
Cf. twelve; and Lith. zry-lika, thirteen. Der. eleven-th.  .

ELF, a little sprite. (E.) ME. e/f, Chaucer, C. T. 6455 (D 873).
AS. elf, Grein, i. 56.4 Icel. alfr; Dan. aif; Swed. al/; OHG. alp; G.
elf, also alp,a nightmare,incubus. Der. eljin, adj. (=elf-en), Spenser,
F. Q. ii. 10. 71; eljin, sb. (=elf-en, dimin. of elf), id., i. 10. 60; elf-
ish, ME. elvish, Chaucer, C. T. 16219 (G 751); elf-lock. 4 Probably
elfin, sb. is merely a peculiar use of edjin, adj. ; and this again stands
for elf-en, with adj. suffix -ez, as in gold-en; though prob. suggested
by AS. elfen, a female elf, whence ME. elven, an elf, Guy of Warwick,
ed. Turnbull, 3862 (N.E.D.). Doublet, oaf

ELICIT, to draw out, coax out. (L.) Orig. a pp. ‘ Elicite, drawn
out or allured ;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674.—L. élicitus, pp. of élicere,
to draw out.=—L. @, out ; and Jacere, to entice. See Lace.

ELIDH, to strike out. (L.) ‘The strength of their arguments is
elided ;’ Hooker, Eccl. Polity, b. iv. s. 4.—L. élidere, to strike out. —
L. é, out; and Jedere, to dash, hurt. See Lesion. Der. elision, q.v.,
from pp. élisus.

ELIGIBLE, fit:to_be chosen. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave. = MF. eli-
gible, ‘ eligible, to be elected ;* Cot.—Late L. éligibilis ; formed with
suffix -bilis from éligere, to choose. See Elect. Der. eligibl-y,
eligible-ness ; also eligibili-ty, formed from éligibilis.

ELIMINATES, to get rid of. (L.) ‘ Eliminate, to put out or cast
forth of doors; to publish abroad ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L.
éliminatus, pp. of éliminare, lit. to put forth from the threshold. —L.
@, forth; and Jimin-, stem of Jimen, a threshold, allied to limes, a
boundary; see Limit. Der. eliminat-ion.

ELISION, a striking out. (L.). In Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 124.—L.
élisionem, acc. of élisio, a striking out; cf. élisws, pp. of élidere, to
strike out. See Blide.

ELITE, a choice set (in society), (F.—L.) ‘The élite of crowds ;’
Byron, Don Juan, bk. xiii. st. 80.—F. élite.—L. électa, f. of électus,
chosen, pp. of éligere, to choose out. See Elect.

ELIXIR, the philosopher’s stone. (Arab.—Gk.) In Chaucer,
C. T. 16331 (G 863). — Arab. ed iksir, the philosopher’s stone; where
el is the definite article; Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 44. It also meant
a sort of powder (Devic); from Gk. £p-tov, dry powder, or énp-dy,
dry (residuum).

TK, a kind of large deer. (E.) ‘Th’ unwieldy e/k;’ Drayton,
Noah’s Flood. ME. elke, Book of St. Alban’s, fol. D iii, back, 1. 4;
elk, K. James I, King’s Quair, st. 156. An AF. pronunciation of
AS. elh, an elk, Voc. 12. 30; elch, Voc. 51. 36. (So also Burke from
AS. burh, &c.) Cf. Icel. elgr; Swed. elg, an elk; OHG. elaho, MHG.
elch, + Russ. oléne, a stag (cf. Du. eland, an elk); L. alces; Gk. ad«n;
Skt. xshya-s, Vedic yeya-s, a kind of antelope. (History obscure.)

aL, 2 measure of length. (E.) ME. elle, elne; Prompt. Pary.
p-138. AS. edn, a cubit; see Matt, vi, 27, Lu. xii. 25 (Grein, i, 225);


ELLIPSE


eln-gemet, the measure of an.ell (ibid.). + Du. elle, an ell; somewhat
more than 3-4ths of a yard (Sewel) ; Icel. alin, the arm from the elbow
to the tip of the middle-finger ; an ell; Swed. adn, an ell; Dan. alen,
an ell; Goth. aleina,a cubit; OHG. elina, MHG. elne, G: elle, an
ell. + L. ulna, the elbow; also,a cubit; Gk. w#Aévn, the elbow. The
Teut. type is *alina, f. Brugmann, i. § 159. B. Ell=el- in el-bow;
see Elbow.

ELLIPSE, an oval figure. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Ellipsis, a defect; also,
a certain crooked line coming of the byas-cutting of the cone or
cylinder ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. — L. ellipsis, a want, defect ; also,
an ellipse. — Gk. é\Aeulus, a leaving behind, defect, an ellipse of a word;
also the figure called an ellipse, so called because its plane forms with
the base of the cone a less angle than that of the parabola (Liddell).
= Gk. éAAcimewv, to leave in, to come short.—Gk. éA-, for é€v, in; and
Acimev, to leave, cognate with L. linguere. See Eclipse. Der.
elliptic-al, from Gk. é\Aeumrunds, adj. formed from éAAeufis.

ELM, a kind of tree. (E.) ME. elm, Chaucer, C. T. 2924 (A 2922).
AS. elm; Gloss. to Cockayne’s Saxon Leechdoms.+Icel. almr; Dan.
alm, alm; Swed, alm. +L. ulmus; whence G. ulm, Du. olm. Cf. Gael.
leamhan, Mid. Irish lem, elm.

ELOCUTION, clear utterance. (L.) In Ben Jonson, Under-
woods, xxxi. 56; and Hawes, Pastime of Pleasure, c. xi. 1. 1.—L,
élociitionem, from nom. élociitio; cf. élociitus, pp. of élogui, to speak
out.—L, @, out; logui, to speak. See Eloquent. Der. elocution-
ar-y, -ist. i

ELOIGN, ELOIN, to remove and keep at a distance, to with-
draw. (F.—L.) ‘ Eloine, to remove, banish, or send a great way from ;’
Blount’s Nomo-lexicon. Still in use as a law term. Spenser writes
esloyne, F, Q. 1. 4. 20.—OF. esloignier, MF. esloigner (mod. F.
éloigner), ‘to remove, banish, drive, set, put far away, keep aloof;’
Cotgrave. = OF. es-, prefix ; and loing (mod. F. loin), ‘far, a great way
off ;’ Cot.=—L. ex, off, away; longé, adv. afar, from Jongus, adj. long,
far. See Ex- and Long; also Purloin.

ELONGATE, to lengthen. (Late L.) Formerly ‘to remove;’
Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iv. c. 13, § 14.—Late L. élongatus,
pp. of élongare, to remove; a verb coined from L. @, out, off, and
Jongus, long. See Long. Der. elongat-ion.

ELOPE, to run away. (AF.—Scand.) Spelt ellope, Spenser, F. Q.
v. 4. 9.—AF. aloper, to elope; Year-books of Edw. I1I, 1337-8,
p- 587. The AF. prefix a- is prob. for OF. es- (< L. ex, away), as in
abash. B. ME. lopen, to run (Cath. Angl.) is from Icel. Alawpa, to run,
cognate with E. Leap, q.v. Cf. Du. loopen, to run, whence Du.
ontloopen, to escape, with prefix ont-=G. ent-, as in enxtlaufen, to run
away. Der. elope-ment.

ELOQUENT, gifted with good utterance. (F.—L.) ME. eloquent,
Gower, C. A. iii. 85; bk. vii. 375; cf. eloguence, Chaucer, C. T. 10990
(F 678). =OF. eloquent ; Cot. = L. éloguent-, stem of pres. pt. of élogui,
to speak out.—L. é, out; and Jogui, to speak. See Hlocution. Der.
eloguent-ly, eloquence.

ELSE, otherwise. (E.) ME. elles, always an adverb; Chaucer,
C. T. 13867 (B 2129). AS. elles, otherwise, Matt. vi. 1; an adverbial
form, orig. gen. sing. from a stem *aljo-, signifying ‘ other;’ cf. AS.
eleland, a foreign land, Grein, i. 223.-4+ MSwed. dljes, otherwise (Ihre) ;
whence mod. Swed. eljest, with excrescent 4; MHG. alles, elles, other-
wise, an adverb of genitival form. Cf. Goth. aljis, other; L. alias,
otherwise, else, from alius, other. See Alien. Der. else-where.

ELUCIDATE, to make clear. (Late L.) ‘ Elucidate, to make
bright, to manifest ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —Late L. élicidatus,
pp. of élicidare; compounded from L. @, out, very, and liicidus, bright.
See Lucid. Der. elucidat-ion, -or, -ive.

ELUDES, to avoid slily. (L.) In Bp. Taylor, vol. i. ser. 5 (R.);
and Milton, P. L. ix. 158.—L. élidere, pp. élisus, to mock, deceive.
—L. 2, out; and lidere, to play. See Ludicrous. Der. elus-ive,
-ive-ly, -ion, -or-y; from pp. élisus.

ELYSIUM, a heaven. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. Two Gent. ii. 7. 38.
= L. élysium.—Gk, "HAvotov, short for "HAvovoy mediov, the Elysian
field; Homer, Od. 4. 563. Der. Elysi-an.

EM, prefix. (F.—L.) F. em-, from L. im-, for in; before b and p.
Hence em-balm, to anoint with balm; em-bank, to enclose with a bank,
cast up a bank; em-body, to enclose in a body; &c.

EMACIATE, to make thin, (L.) In Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors,
b. vii. c. 13, § 6.—L. émaciatus, pp. of émaciare, to make thin.—L. é,
out, very; and maci-, base of maci-és, leanness; cf. macer, lean. See
Meagre. Der. emaciat-ion.

EMANATE, to flow from. (L.) ‘In all bodily emanations ;’
Bp. Hall, Contemplations, New Test., b. iv. cont. 7. § 19.—L.
émdnatus, pp. of émanare, to flow out.=—L, é@, out; and manare, to
flow. Manare=*madnare, from the base mad- in L. madidus, wet,
madere,tobemoist. Cf. Skt. mad, to be wet,to getdrunk. Brugmann,
i. § 762 (2). Der. emanat-ion, -ive.


EMANCIPATE, to set free. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.


EMBER-DAYS 191


—L. émancipatus, pp. of émancipare, to set free.mL. é, out; and
mancipare, to-transfer property, from mancip-, stem of manceps, one
who acquires property; lit. one who takes it in hand; from man-,
base of manus, the hand; and capere, to take. See Manual and
Capable. Der. emancipat-or, -ion.

EMASCULATE, to deprive of virility. (L.) ‘Which have
emasculated [become emasculate] or turned women;’ Sir T, Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 17, § 2.—L. émasculdtus, pp. of émasculare, to
castrate. —L. é, out of, away; and masculus,male. See Male. Der.
emasculat-ion.

EMBAIM, to anoint with balm. (F.) In Shak. Timon, iv. 3. 30.
Spelt imbalm in Cotgrave. ME, embaumen; Chaucer, Leg. Good
Women, 676; cf. bawmyt, bawlmyt, embalmed, in Barbour’s Bruce,
xx. 286.—OF. embaumer, ‘to imbalm;’ Cot.—OF. em-=en-<L.in;
and baume, balm. See Balm.

EMBANK, to cast up a mound. (Hybrid; F. amd E.) Spelt
imbank in Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1731. Coined from F. em- (L.
im-=in), and E. bank. See Em-and Bank. Der. embank-ment.

EMBARGO, a stoppage of ships. (Span.—Late L.) ‘By laying
an embargo upon all shipping in time of war;’ Blackstone, Comment.
b. i. c. 7.=Span. embargo, an embargo, seizure, arrest; cf. Span.
embargare, to lay onan embargo, arrest ; for Late L. type *imbarricare,
to barin. = L, im-, forin, in; and Late L. barra,a bar. Hence embargo
=a putting of a bar in the way. See Bar, Barricade, Em-
barrass. Der. embargo, verb.

EMBARK, to put or go on board ship. (F.) In Hamlet, i. 3. 1.
=OF. embarquer, ‘to imbark ;’ Cot.—F,. em-< L.im-=in; and F.
bargue, a bark. See Bark (1). Der. embark-at-ion.

EMBARRASS, to perplex. (F.—Span.—Late L.) ‘I saw my
friend a little embarrassed ;’ Spectator, no. 109, § 6.—F. embarrasser,
‘to intricate, pester, intangle, perplex ;’ Cot.—Span. embarazar, to
embarrass. = Span. em- (=L. im-=in); and barra,abar. See Bar,
Embargo. Der. embarrass-ment. J The form barras may be
compared with Prov. barras, barrasso, a large bar (Mistral) ; or with
Span. barras, pl. bars. There was a game called juego de barras
(Minsheu, Span. Dict.). Korting, § 1245.

EMBASSY, the mission of an ambassador. (F.—Late L.—C.)
1. Shak. has embassy, L. L. L. i. 1. 1353 also embassage, Much Ado,
i. 1.282; and embassade (= OF. embassade, Cotgrave), 3 Hen. VI, iv.
3. 32. 2. Latimer has ambassages, Sermon on the Ploughers, 1. 180
(in Skeat’s Specimens), Chaucer has embassadrye, Six-text, B 233.
3. Embassy is a modification of OF. ambassée. = Low L. ambascidta, sb.
(whence also MF. embassade) ; orig. fem. of pp. of ambasciare, to send
on a mission, from ambascia, a mission (of Celtic origin). See further
under Ambassador,

EMBATTLE (1), to furnish with battlements. (F.) ME. em-
battelen, enbattelen; Chaucer, C. T. 14866 (B 4050; Lansdowne MS.).
= OF. em- or en- (= L. im-= in), prefix; and OF. bastiller, to embattle.
See Battlement. {J 1. The simple verb battailen or battalen occurs
early; the pp. battailyt or battalit, i.e. embattled, occurs in Barbour’s
Bruce, ii. 221, iv. 134; and the sb. battalyng, an embattlement, in the
same, iv. 136. 2. Obviously, these words were accommodated to
the spelling of ME. battale (better bataille), a battle; and from the
first a confusion with battle has been common,

EMBATTLE (2), to range in order of battle. (F.—L.). In Shak.
Hen. V, iv. 2.14. ME. embataillen; Gower, C. A. i. 221; bk. ii.
1837.—OF. embataillier, the same (Godefroy). A coined word, from
F. prefix em- (< L. im-, in); and OF. bataiile, a battle, a battalion ;
see Battle.

EMBAY, to enclose in a bay. (F.) In Shak. Oth. ii. 1.18. A
coined word; from F. em- (< L. im-=in); and E. bay, of F. origin.
See Bay (3).

EMBELLISH, to adom. (F.—L.) ME. embelisshen, Chaucer,
Good Women, 1737.—OF. embeliss-, stem of pres. pt. &c. of OF.
embellir, ‘to imbellish, beautifie ;” Cot.—OF. em- (L. im-=in) ; and
bel, fair, beautiful, from L. bellus, well-mannered, fine, handsome.
See Beauty. @ For the suffix -ish, see Abash. Der. embel-
lish-ment.

EMBER-DAYS, fast-days at four seasons of the year. (E.) A
corruption of ME. ymber. ‘The Wednesdai Gospel in ymber weke in
Septembre monethe;’ Wyclif’s Works, ed, Arnold, ii. 203; cf. pp. 205,
207. ‘ Umbridawes’ (another MS. ymbri wikes), i.e. ember-days (or
ember-weeks); Ancren Riwle, p. 70. AS. ymbren, pl. ymbrenu; as in
pa feower ymbrenu, the four ember-days; Wulfstan, ed. Napier, p. 136,
1.17. 1. ‘On pé&re pentecostenes wucan td bam ymbrene’ = in Pentecost
week according to the ymbren, i.e. in due course; rubric to Luke, viii.
40. ‘On &lcum ymbren-festene, = at every ember-fast; Aélfric’s
Homilies, ii. 608. 2. The orig. form of the word is ymb-ryne, and the
orig. sense ‘a running round,’ ‘circuit,’ or ‘ course ;’ compounded of
AS. ymb, ymbe, around, cognate with G. um-, L. ambi-; and ryne, a
running, from rinnan, torun. See Ambi-, prefix,and Run, @ This


EMBER-GOOSE


is the best explanation; for numerous examples and references, see
ymbrenin AS, Dictionary. Ihre rightly distinguishes between MSwed.
ymberdagar, borrowed from AS. and obsolete, and the Swed. zamper-
dagar, corrupted (like G. quatember) from L. quattuor tempora, the
four seasons.

EMBER-GOOSKH, the great northern diver. (Scand.) An Orkney
word; see E.D.D. Spelt imber-goose, Scott, Pirate, c. xxi.— Norw.
imbre, ymmer; Icel. himbrin.

EMBERS, ashes. (E.) The d is excrescent. The ME. forms are
emers, emmeres, eymers, eymbers, equivalent to Lowland Scotch ammeris,
used by G. Douglas to translate L. fawillam in Atneid, vi. 227.
‘ Eymbre, eymery, hote aschys ;’ Prompt. Parv. AS. émergean, pl. of
&merge, f., an ember; A.S. Leechdoms, iii. 30, 1. 18.-Icel. eimyrja,
embers; Dan. emmer, embers ; Swed. -mérja, in comp. ask-mérja, ash-
embers; OHG. eimurja, embers; Bavarian aimern, emmern, pl.,
Schmeller, i. 75. B. Teut. type *aim-uz-jon-, weak fem.; for the
suffix, cf. Goth. juk-uzi (stem juk-uz-ji), allied to juk, a yoke. The
base aim- may be compared with Icel. eim-r, vapour; prov. E. ome

< AS. * fim), vapour; Dan. em, Swed. imma, steam.

EMBEZZLE, to steal slily, filch. (F.—L.) Formerly embesyll or
embesell. ‘I concele, I embesyll a thynge, I kepe a thynge secret ;
L embesyll a thyng, or put it out of the way, Fe substrays; He that
embesylleth a thyng intendeth to steale it if he can convaye [it] clenly;’
Palsgrave’s F. Dict. Spelt embesile in The Lament of Mary Magdalen,
st. 39; pr. in Chaucer’s Works, ed. 1561, fol. 319. ‘The earliest
spellings are enbesel, imbesel, and the sense is not only to filch, but also
to destroy fraudulently, as in ‘the sayd boke . . was enbesylyd, or loste;’
Fabyan, ed. Ellis, p. 293.— AF. enbeseiller, to make away with; Royal
Wills, p. 155 (A. D. 1397); (also AF. beseler, besiler; Notes on E.
Etym., p. 399).—OF. en- (< L. in); and OF. besillier, besiler, to
maltreat, destroy, apparently from OF. bes- (Late L, bis-, used as a
pejorative prefix). Cf. OF. besi/, ill-treatment, torture; and see Bezzle
inthe N.E.D. @f Certainly influenced in the 16th cent., by a supposed
etymology from imbéecill, to weaken, an obs. verb formed from the adj.
imbecile. Der. embezzle-ment.

EMBLAZON, to adorn with heraldic designs. (F.) Shak. has
emblaze, 2 Hen. VI, iv. 10. 76. Spenser has emblazon, F. Q. iv. 10. 55.
Formed from blazon, q.v., with F. prefix em-, from L. im-=in. Cf.
MF. blasonner, ‘to blaze arms;’ Cot. Der. emblazon-ment, emblazon-ry.

EMBLEM, a device. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. All’s Well, ii. 1.
44. ME. embleme, Lydgate, Chorle and Byrde (beginning). OF,
embleme, ‘an embleme ;’ Cot.—L, embléma, a kind of ornament, = Gk.
€u8Anva, akind of movable ornament, athing put on. = Gk. éuBdadrev,
to put in, lay on. —Gk. éu-=éy, in; and BadAew, to cast, throw, put.
See Belemnite. Der. emblemat-ic, from Gk. stem éuBAnpat-; -ic-al.

EMBLEMENTS, the produce of sown lands, crops which a tenant
may cut after the determination of his tenancy. (F.—L.) In Blount’s
Nomo-lexicon; and still in use. Formed with suffix -ment from OF.
emble-er, embla-er, also emblad-er, the same word as mod. F. emblav-er,
‘to sow the ground with corn;’ Cotgrave. See emblaer in Godefroy,
and emblaver in Littré. All these forms are from Late L. imbladare,
to sow with corn. = L.im-, for in, in, prefix; and Late L. bladum (F. blé),
contraction of abladum = L. abldtum, i.e. ‘ (corn) carried away ;’ neut.
of ablatus, taken away; which is from ab, from, away, and ldtus, for
*tlatus, pp. of tollere, to take away. (4/TEL.)

EMBODY, to invest with a body. (Hybrid; F. amd E.) In
Spenser, F. Q. iii. 3.22. Formed from E. body with F. prefix em-, for

.im-=in. Der. embodi-ment.

EMBOLDEN, to make bold. (Hybrid; F. and E.) In Shak.
Timon, ili. 5.3. Formed from E. bold with F. prefix em-, for L. im-
=in; and with E. suffix -en,

EMBOLISM, an insertion of days, &c. to make a period regular.
(F¥.—Gk.) ‘ Embolism, the adding a day or more to a year;’ Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. ME. embolisme, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, iii. 259. —
OF. embolisme, ‘an addition, as of a day or more, unto a year;’ Cot.
— Gk. éuBodropds, an intercalation. = Gk. éu-=év, in; and Béddew, to
cast ; cf. €uBoAn, an insertion. See Emblem. Der. embolism-al.

EMBONPOINT, plumpness of person. (F.—L.) ‘No more
than what the French would call Aimable Embonpoint ;’ Congreve’s
Poems, Doris, st. 4. Mere French.=F. embonpoint, ‘fulness, plump-
ness ;’ Cot. Put for en bon point, in good condition, in good case. =
L. in, in; bon-um, neut. of bonus, good; punctum, point. See In,
Bounty, and Point.

EMBOSOM, to shelter closely. (Hybrid; F. and E.) In Spenser,
F. Q. ii. 4.25. From F. prefix em+=en, for L. in; and E. bosom, q.v.

EMBOSS (1), to adorn with bosses or raised work. (F.) Chaucer
has enbossed; Good Women, 1]. 1200. Cf. King Lear, ii. 4. 227.—
OF. embosser, ‘to swell or arise in bunches;’ Cot. F. em-, from L.
im-=in; and OF. bosse,a boss. See Boss.

EMBOSS (2), to enclose or shelter in a wood. (F.) In Shak.
All’s Well, iii. 6. 107,—=MF. embosquer, to shroud in a wood; Cot. =


192


EMERY:


| F. em-, from L, im-=in; and OF. bosc, a wood (Supp. to Godefroy).
See Bouquet. ;

EMBOUCHURE, a mouth, of a river, &c. (F.—L.) Mere
French; not in Johnson.—F. embouchure, a mouth, opening.=F,
emboucher, to put to the mouth; s’emboucher, to discharge itself (as
a river).—F, em-, from L. im-=in; and F. bouche, the mouth, from L.
bucca. See Debouch and Disembogue.

EMBOWEL, to enclose deeply. (F.—L.) ‘ Deepe emboweled in
the earth ;’ Spenser, F.-Q. vi. 8.15. [Often wrongly put for disem-
bowel; Shak. Rich, III, v. 2. 10.] From F. em-, from L.im-=in; and
bowel, of F. origin, q.v. Der. embowel-ment.

EMBOWER, to place in a bower. (Hybrid; F. and E.) Spenser
has embowering, i.e. sheltering themselves; tr. of Virgil’s Gnat, 225.
Coined from F. em-, from L. im-=in; and E. bower,

EMBRACE, to take in the arms. (F.—L.) In early use. ME.
enbracen, to brace on to the arm (said of a shield), King Alisaunder,
6651 ; cf. Chaucer, C. T. 8288 (E 412). —OF. embracer, to embrace,
seize (Godefroy).— OF. em-, for en, L. in; and brace, the two arms,
from L. brachia, p|. of brachium. See Brace. Der. embrace, sb.

EMBRASURE, an aperture with slant sides. (F.) ‘Embrasure,
an inlargement made on the inside of a gate, door, &c. to give more
light ;’ Phillips, Dict., ed. 1706.—F. embrasure, orig. ‘the skuing,
splaying, or chamfretting of a door or window ;’ Cotgrave.—MF.
embraser (cf. mod. F. ébraser) ‘to skue, or chamfret off the jaumbes
ofa door or window ;’ Cot. 1. The prefix is F. em-=en, from L. in.
2. The rest is MF. braser, ‘to skue, or chamfret ;’ Cot.; of unknown
origin.

EMBROCATION, a fomenting. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) Spelt
embrochation in Holland’s Pliny, b. xx. c. 14, § 1.— MF. embrocation,
‘an embrochation, fomenting;’ Cot. Cf. Late L. embrocatus, pp. of em-
brocare, to pour into a vessel, &c.; cf. Ital. embroccare, to foment. —
Gk. éuBpoxh, a fomentation. = Gk. éuBpéxev, to soak in, to foment.
— Gk. éu-=éy, in; and Bpéxev, to wet, soak.

EMBROIDER, to ornament withneedlework.(F.) ME. embrouden,
embroyden, Chaucer, C. T. 89 (Six-text). [This ME. form produced
a later form embroid; the -er is a needless addition, due to the sb.
embroid-er-y.| Cotgrave gives ‘to imbroyder’ asa translation of OF.
broder.= AF. enbroyder, Stat. Realm, p. 380 (A.D. 1393); OF. prefix
em-=en-, from L, in; and OF. broder, to embroider, or broider. See
Broider. Der. embroider-er, embroider-y (rightly embroid-ery, from
ME. embroid; spelt embrouderie, Gower, C. A. ii. 41; bk. iv. 1175);
embroiderie, Merry Wives, v. 5. 75.

EMBROIL, to entangle in a broil. (F.) See Milton, P. L. ii. 908,
966; Daniel, Civil Wars, bk. v. st. 47.—F. embrouiller, ‘to pester,
intangle, incumber, intricate, confound ;’ Cot. —OF, em-=en-, from L.
in; and F, brouiller, ‘to jumble, &c.’ See Broil(2). Cf. Norm. dial,
embroiller (Moisy). Der. embroil-ment.

EMBRUBE, variant of Imbrue, q. v.

EMBRYO, the rudiment of an organised being. (F.—Gk.)
Formerly also embryon. ‘Though yet an embryon;’ Massinger, The
Picture, Act ii. sc, 2.— MF. embryon ; Cot. — Gk, €uBpvov, the embryo,
foetus. = Gk. éu-=éy, in, within ; and Bpvor, neut. of Bpvwr, pres. pt. of
Bpvev, to be full of a thing, swell with it.

EMENDATION, correction. (L.) In Bp. Taylor, Great Ex-
emplar, p. 3, disc. 18 (R.) ; Webbe, Eng. Poetrie, ed. Arber, p. 95.—
L. émendatio; allied to émendatus, pp. of @émendare, to amend, lit. to
free from fault. —L,. @, out of, hence, free from; and mendum, a fault.
See Amend. Der. emenda-tor, -tor-y; from L. émendare.

EMERALD, a green precious stone. (F.—L.—Gk.—Skt.— Heb.)
ME. emeraude, emerade; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, i. 1005; King
Alisaunder, 7030.— MF, esmeraude, ‘an emerald,’ Cot.; OF. esmer-
alde, esmeraude, esmeragde (Supp. to Godefroy). = L. smaragdum, acc.
of smaragdus, an emerald. = Gk. opapaydos, a kind of emerald. Ex-
plained as a contracted form of *opa-ydpaydos; from Skt. asma, a
stone, and marakata(m), emerald; as if ‘emerald-stone.’ Skt.
marakatam is of Semitic origin. — Heb. bareget, an emerald. — Heb.
baraq, to flash.

EMERGE, to issue, rise from the sea, appear. (L.) In Bacon ;
Learning, by G. Wats, b. ii. c. 13. Milton has emergent, P. L. vii.
286.—L. émergere, to rise out. = L. é, out; and mergere, to dip. See
Merge. Der. emerg-ent, from émergentem, acc. of pres. pt. ;
emergence, emergenc-y 5 emersion, like pp. @mersus.

EMERODS, hemorrhoids. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Bible, A. V.,
1 Sam. v. 63; spelt emorade, Levins; emeroudes, Palsgrave. ME,
emeraudis, pl., Reliq. Antiq. i. 190.—MF. hemorrhoide, pl. hemor-
rhoides; Cot. See Hemorrhoids.

EMERY, a hard mineral. (F.—Ital.—Gk.) Formerly emeril.
‘ Emeril, a hard and sharp stone,’ &c.; Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—
F. émeri; MF. emeril, Cot.; and, still earlier, esmeril (Brachet), = Ital.
smeriglio, emery. — Gk. opApis, also opvpis, emery. Allied to E. smear
(Prellwitz). See Smear.


-EMETIC


“EMETIC, causing vomit. (L.—Gk.) Spelt emetique in Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. emeticus, adj. causing yomit.=—Gk. éperixds,
provoking sickness. — Gk. éuéw, I yomit.L. womere, to vomit. See
Vomit.

EMEU, the same as Emu, which see.

EMIGRATH, to migrate from home. (L.) Emigration is in


Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674; the verb is later.=L. émigratus, pp. of


émigrare.=L. @, away; and migrare, to migrate. See Migrate.
Der. emigrat-ion; also emigrant, from pres. pt. of L. vb.

EMINENT, excellent. (L.) In Shak. All’s Well, i. 2. 43.—L.
éminent-em, acc. of éminens, pres. pt. of éminére, to stand out, project,
excel. =L. 2, out; and *minéré, to jut, project; for which cf. im-
minent, pro-minent. Der. eminence.

EVMIR,a commander. (Arabic.) The pl. emers isin Sandys, Travels
(1632), p. 64, 1. 7.—Arab. amir, a nobleman, prince; Palmer’s Pers.
Dict. col. 51. — Arab. root amara, he commanded ; Chaldee amar, Heb.
amar, he commanded; or told; Rich. Dict. p. 167. See Admiral.

EMIT, to send forth. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L.
émittere, pp. missus, to send out.—L. é, out; and mitdere, to send.
See Missile. Der. emiss-ion, Dryden, Hind and Panther, 1. 647;
emissar-y, Ben Jonson, Underwoods, Of Charis, viii. 1. 17.
EMMET, an ant. (E.) ME. emete, pl. emeten, Beket, 2141;
[also ME. amte, Wyclif, Prov. vi. 6; full form amote, Ayenbite of
Inwyt, p. 141.) AS. #mete, tr. of L. formica; Voc. 121. 26.4G.
ameise, an ant; OHG. G@meiza. Discussed in Kluge. 4 The AS.
#mete became amete (amote) and emete in ME. ‘The former became
amte, ante, E. ant; the latter became E. emmet, which is therefore
a doublet of ant. See Ant.

EMMEW, variant of Enew, q.v.

EMOLLIENT, softening. (F.—L.) Also as a sb. ‘Some
outward emollients;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. sect. 59.— MF. emollient,
‘softening, mollifying;’ Cot.—L. émollient-, stem of pres. pt. of
émollire, to soften.—L. @, out, much; and mollire, to soften, from
mollis, soft. See Mollify.

EMOLUMENT, gain, profit. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave; and in
Holinshed, Descr. of Engl. c. 5 (R.).=OF. emolument, ‘ emolument,
profit ;” Cot.=—L. émolumentum, profit, what is gained by labour. =
L. @-molere, to grind thoroughly.=L. é@, out, thoroughly ; and molere,
to grind. See Molar. The orig. sense of émolumentum may have
been ‘ miller’s toll; Bréal.

EMOTION, agitation of mind. (L.) In Bp. Taylor, Rule of
Conscience, b. iv. c. 1 (R.). Suggested by obs. verb emmove (Spenser,
F. Q. iv. 8. 3).—L. émouére, pp. émdtus, to move away.=—L. é, away;
and mouére, to move. See Move. Der. emotion-al.

EMPALH, to fix ona stake. (F.—L.) Also impale, meaning ‘to
encircle as with pales;’ Troil. v. 7. 5.—MF. empaler, ‘to impale, to
spit ona stake;’ Cot.— OF. em-=en-, for L. in; and MF. pal, ‘a pale,
stake;’ id. See Pale (1). Der. empale-ment.

EMPANEL, to put on a list of jurors. (F.—L.) Also empannel;
Holland, Livy, p. 475. Coined from F. em-=en, from L. in; and
Panel, q.v- @ Better than impannel, Shak. Sonn. 46.

EMPEROR, aruler. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. emperour ;
King Alisaunder, 2719.—OF. empereor (Burguy). = L. imperatérem,
acc, of imperdtor, a commander, = L, imperare, to command. = L. im-=
in, on, over ; and pardre,to make ready, order. See Parade. From
same source, empire, q.v. 3 empress, q.v.

EMPHASIS, stress of voice. (L.—Gk.) Hamlet, v. 1. 278.—
L. emphasis. Gk. €upacis, an appearing, declaration, significance,
emphasis. = Gk. éu-=éy, in; and fdois, an appearance. See Phase.
Der. emphasise; also emphatic, from Gk. adj. éupatutds, expressive ;
emphatic-al, -al-ly, ;

EMPIRE, dominion. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. empire;
King Alisaunder, 1588.— OF. empire. —L. imperium, command;
allied to imperdre, to command. See Emperor.

EMPIRIC, a quack doctor. (F.—L.—Gk.) All’s Well, ii. 1.
125.—MF. empirique, ‘an empirick, a physician, &c.;’ Cot.=—L.
empiricus.=— Gk. éumetpixds, experienced ; also, an Empiric, the name
of a set of physicians; cf. éumerpia, experience; éume.pos, experi-
enced, = Gk. éu-=éy, in; and metpa, a trial, attempt; connected with
mrépos, a way; and with E. fare. See Fare. Der. empiric-al, -ism.

EMPLOY, to occupy, use. (F.—L.) In Shak. L. L. L. iii, 152;
and in Caxton, Golden Legend, Lyf of St. Audegonde, § 1.—OF.
employer, ‘to imploy ;’ Cot.=—L, implicare; in Late L., to employ;
see Implicate, Imply. Der. employ, sb., -er ; -ment, Hamlet, v.

1.77. Doublets, imply, implicate.

EMPORIUM, a mart. (L.—Gk.) In Dryden, Annus Mirab.,
st. 302 ; Holinshed, Desc. of Ireland, p. 148.— L. emporium. =—Gk.
éumdpiov, a mart; neut. of éumdpios, commercial. Gk. éumopia,
commerce ; ¢yu7opos, a passenger, a mérchant.— Gk. éu-=év,in; and
mépos, a way, mopevecOar, to travel, fare. See Fare.


ENCEINTE 193


Dryden, Disc. on Satire, paragraph 10. Coined from F, em-=en,
from L. iz, upon; and Power, q. vy.

EMPRESS, the feminine of emperor. (F.—L.) In very early
use. [Spelt emperice in the AS. Chron. an. 1140] ; emperesse, Gower,
C. A. ili, 363 ; bk. viii. 2612.—OF. emperesse (Godefroy). L, type
*imperatorissa, fem. of L. imperdtor. See Emperor.

EMPRISE, an enterprise. (F.—L.) ME. emprise, Chaucer, C. T.,
A 2540; Cursor Mundi, 9802.—OF. emprise; orig. fem. of empris,
pp. of emprendre, to take in hand, L, im-, for in, in; and prehendere,
to take. See Prehensile.

EMPTY, void. (E.)| The pis excrescent. ME. empti, empty;
Ancren Riwle, p. 156; Chaucer, C. T. 3892 (A 3894). AS. émtig’,
empty, Gen. i. 23 emtig’, idle, Exod. v. 8. An adj. formed with
suffix -7g (=mod. E. -y) from @mta or &metta, leisure; Alfred’s
Boethius, Preface ; also émota (Epinal Gloss. 680). Perhaps this
represents a type *#-mot-jon-, from #-, privative prefix, and mét, a
meeting for business. Der. empty, vb. 3 empti-ness,

EMPYREAL, EMPYREAN, pertaining to elemental fire.
(Gk.) Milton has empyreal as adj., P. L. ii. 430 ; empyrean as sb., id.
771. Both are properly adjectives, coined with suffixes -al and -ax
from the base empyre-, in Latin spelling empyre-, in Gk. éurupar-, in
Late Gk, éumvpacos, adj., which is extended from Gk. éyup-os, exposed
to fire.= Gk. éu-=év, in; and mip, cognate with E. fire. See Fire.
q@ First used in the phr. celum empireum, Caxton, Golden Legend, Of
the Ascencion, § 4; from the neuter of the adj.

EMU, EMEQU, a large bird. (Port.) Formerly applied to the
American ostrich. = Port. ema,anostrich. Remoter origin unknown.
@ There is no proof of its being Arabic ; see Newton, Dict. of Birds.

EMULATE, to try to equal. (L.) Properly an adj., as in
Hamlet, i. 1. 83.—L. emuldtus, pp. of emulari, to try to equal, —L.
emulus, striving to equal. Der. emulat-ion (OF. emulation, Cot-
grave) 3 emulat-or, emulat-ive ; also emulous, in Shak. Troil. iv. 1. 28
(L. e@mulus), -ly.

EMULSION, a milk-like mixture. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave. =
MF. emulsion, ‘ an emulsion, any kind of seed brayed in water, and
strained to the consistence of an almond milk;’ Cot. Formed from,
L. émulsus, pp. of émulgére, to milk out, drain.=L. @, out; and
mulgére, to milk. See Milk.

EN-, prefix; from F. ex, from L. in, in, on; sometimes used to
give a causal force, as in en-able, en-feeble. It becomes em- before 6
and p, as in embalm, employ. In enlighten, en- has supplanted AS. in-.

ENABLE, to make able. (F.—L.) ‘To a-certain you I woll
my-self enable ;? Remedie of Love, st. 28; pr. in Chaucer’s Works,:
ed. 1561, fol. 322, back. Formed from F. prefix ex-, from L. in ;
and Able, q. vy.

ENACT, to perform, decree. (F.—L.) Rich. III, v. 4. 2; and
enacte in Palsgrave. Formed from F. en=L. in; and Act, q.v.:
Der. enact-ment, enact-ive.

ENALLAGE, the substitution of one grammatical form for
another; as, e.g., of sing. for plural. (L.—Gk.) First in 1583:
(N. E. D.) ; not common.=—L. enallagé.—Gk. évaddayn, change ;
allied to évadAdooev, to change.= Gk. év, in; and dAAdooey, to
change, alter, from d@AAos, other, different ; see Alien.

ENAMEL, aglass-like coating. (F.—L.andOHG.) ME. enamayl,
Assemblie of Ladies, st. 77; 1.534. Formed from F. prefix en<L.
in, i.e. upon, above; and amaile, later amel or ammel, a corruption;
of OF. esmail (=Ital. smalto), enamel. Thus Cotgrave renders
esmail by ‘ ammell, or enammell; made of glass and metals ;’ and
Palsgrave has enamell, vb. and ‘ammell, esmael. B. Of Germanic
origin ; cf. OHG. smalzjan, MHG. smelzen, to smelt; Du. smelten,
to smelt. See Smelt. Cf. also O. Low G. smal, butter (Liibben),
G. schmalz, suet, butter; MItal. smaléo, ‘morter, also amell,’ Florio.
y. From Low G. base smait-, allied to OHG. smelzan, to melt, str.
vb. (pt. t. smalz). Der. enamel, verb.

ENAMOUDR, to inflame with love. (F.—L.) The pp. enamoured
isin Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 254.—OF. enamorer (Burguy).
=F. en, from L. in; and F. amour, love. See Amour.

ENCAMP, to form into a camp. (F.—L.) In Henry V, iii. 6.
180. Formed from F. ez, in; and Camp, q.v. Der. encamp-ment.

ENCASE, to put into a case. (F.—L.) ‘Round encasing The
moat of glass;’ Ph. Fletcher, Purple Island, c. v. st. 34.—F. en-
caisser, ‘to put into a case or chest ;’ Cot.=F, en, from L. in; and
MF. caisse, a case, chest. See Case (2).

ENCAUSTIC, burnt in. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Holland’s Pliny,
b. xxxv. c. II, § 2.—F. encaustique, ‘wrought with fire;’? Cot.—L.
encausticus. Gk, éyxavorinds, relating to burning in.—Gk. eryKcates
(fut. éyxatow), I burn in; from éy=ev, in, and saiw, I burn. See
Calm, Ink.

ENCEINTE, pregnant. (F.—L.) F. enceinte, fem, of enceint,
pp. answering to L, incinctus, girt about, of which the fem. incincta


EMPOWER, to give powerto. (F.—L.) ‘You are empowered ;’ | is used of a pregnant woman in Isidore of Seville. = L. incingere, to


O


194 ENCHAIN


gird in, gird about; from iz, and cingere, to gird. See Cincture.
Isidore explains incincta as‘ ungirt ;’ but the Late L. praecincta like-
wise means ‘pregnant.’ The reference seems to be to pressure
against the girdle.

ENCHATN, to bind with chains. (F.—L.) In Shak. Lucr. 934.

ME. encheynen, T. Usk, Test. of Love, bk. ii. c. 6, 1. 4.—OF.
enchainer, ‘to enchain;’ Cot.—OF. en, from L. in; and chaine, a
chain. See Chain.
ENCHANT, to charm by sorcery. (F.—L.) ME. enchaunten ;
P. Plowman, C. xviii. 288.—F. enchanter, ‘to charm, inchant ;’ Cot.
= L. incantare, to repeat a chant.=—L. in; and cantare, to sing,
chant. See Chant. Der. enchant-er; enchant-ment, spelt enchante-
ment in Rob. of Glouc. p. 10, 1. 226; enchant-r-ess.

ENCHASE, to emboss, adorn, enshrine, engrave. (F.—L.) Often
shortened to chase, but enchaseis the better form. In Shak. 2 Hen. VI,
i. 2. 8.— MF. enchasser ; as ‘ enchasser en or, to enchace or set in gold ;’
Cot.=—F, en, from L. im 3 and MF. chasse, ‘a shrine for a relick, also
that thing, or part of a thing, wherein another is exchased, and hence
la chasse d’un raisor, the handle of a rasor;’ Cot. MEF. chasse (F.
chasse) is a doublet of F. caisse ; from L. capsa,a box. See Case (2),
Chase (2), Chase (3).

ENCIRCLE, to enclose in a circle. (F.—L.) In Merry Wives,
iv. 4. 56.—F. ex, from L. in; and F. circle. See Circle.

ENCLINGE, to lean towards. (F.—L.) Often incline, but encline
is more in accordance with etymology. ME. enclinen; Chaucer,
Pers. Tale, Group I, 361.—OF. encliner, ‘to incline;’ Cot.—L.
inclinare, to bend towards ; from in, towards, and clindre, to bend,
cognate with E. lean, See Lean, verb, and see below.

ENCLITIC, a word which leans its accent upon another.
(L.— Gk.) A grammatical term; spelt enclitick in Kersey, ed.1715.—
L. encliticus. = Gk, éyxActikds, lit. enclining.— Gk. éy«divew, to lean
towards, encline.= Gk. éy-=éy, in, upon; and #Aivev, cognate with
E. lean. See Lean (1). And see above.

ENCLOSE, to close in, shut in. (F.—L.) ME. enclosen, Chaucer,
C. T. 8096 (E 220).—OF. enclos, pp. of enclorre, to close in; from
en (from L, in), and clorre (L. claudere), to shut. See Close.

ENCOMIUM, commendation. (L.—Gk.) Spelt excomion in Ben
Jonson, Every Man in his Humour, A. iv. sc. 2. Latinised from Gk.
éyxwpuov, a laudatory ode; neut. of éyxwpmuos, laudatory, full of
revelry. — Gk. éy-=év, in; and «@pos, revelry. See Comic. Der.
encomi-ast (Gk. éyxwpiaotys, a praiser) 3 encomiast-ic.

ENCOMPASS, to surround. (F.—L.) In Rich. III, i. 2. 204.
ME. encumpassen, Early E. Psalter, xvii. 6. Formed from F. en,
from L. ia; and compass. See Compass. Der. encompass-ment,
Hamlet, ii. r. 10.

ENCORE, again. (F.—L.) Mere French ; cf. Ital. ancora, still,
again. =L. hane horam, for in hanc horam, to this hour; hence, still.
See Hour.

ENCOUNTER, to meet in combat. (F.—L.) ‘ Causes encoun-
tringe and flowing togidere;’ Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. v. pr. I,
1. 59.— OF. encontrer, ‘to encounter ;” Cot.—F. en-, from L. in; and
contre, from L. contra, against; cf. Late L. imcontram, against. See
Counter-. Der. encounter, sb.

ENCOURAGE, to embolden. (F.—L.) As You Like It, i. 2.
252; ME. encoragen, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 27.—OF. encoragier
(Godefroy) ; MF. encourager, ‘to hearten;’ Cot. =F. ex, from L. in;
and courage. See Courage. Der. encourage-ment, Rich. III, v. 2.6.

ENCRINITE#, the stone lily, a fossil. (Gk.) Geological. Coined
from Gk. éy, in; and xpivoy, a lily; with suffix -ite=Gk. -iT7s.

ENCROACH, to trespass, intrude. (F.—L. and Teut.) ‘ En-
croaching tyranny ;’ 2 Hen. VI, iv. 1. 96. ME, encrochen, Allit.
Morte Arthure, 1. 1243. Lit. ‘to catch in a hook’ or ‘to hook
away.’ = OF. encrochier, to seize upon (Godefroy). Formed from F.
en, in; and croc, a hook, just as F. accrocher, to hook up, is derived
from F. a4 (<L. ad), and the same word croc, of Germanic origin ; cf.
MDnu. kroke, Icel. krékr, a crook. See Crook. Der. encroach-er,
encroach-ment, Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, To Reader, § 1. @f It is
impossible to derive encroach from OF. encrouer; it is a fuller form.

ENCUMBER, to impede, load. (F.—L.?) Inearly use. ME.
encumbren, encombren ; Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 117; P.
Plowman, C. ii. 192.—OF. enxcombrer, ‘to cumber, incumber;’ Cot.
— Late L. incumbrare, to obstruct. L. im, in; and Late L. cumbrus, an
obstacle. See Cumber. Der. encumbr-ance. @ The ME. sb. was
encombrement, King Alisaunder, 7825.

ENCYCLICAL, lit. circular, (L.—Gk.) ‘An encyclical epistle;’
Bp. Taylor, Dissuas. from Popery, pt. ii. b. ii. s. 2 (R.). Formed
(with Latinised spelling, and suffix -cal) from Gk. éyxv«dc-0s, circular
(said of a letter sent round), successive.=Gk. éy-=éyv, in; and
KUKhos, a ring. See Cycle,

ENCYCLOPASDIA, a comprehensive summary of science.
(L.—Gk.) In Elyot, Governour, bk. i. c. xiii, § 4. Encyclopedie


ENERGY


occurs in Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, To the Reader. § 1; cf. F.
encyclopedie in Cotgrave. Latinised from a coined Gk. *éy«userAomadeia,
a barbarism for éy«v«Avos matdeia, the circle of arts and sciences ; here
éyxvxduos is fem. of éyxvedios (see above); and maidefa means ‘ in-
struction,’ from ma:5-, stem.of mats, a boy. See Pedagogue. Der.
encycloped-ic, encycloped-ist.

END, close, termination. (E.) ME. endé (with final e) ; Chaucer,
C. T. 4565 (B 145). AS. ende (Grein).+ Du. einde; Icel. endi ;
Swed. dnde; Dan. ende; Goth. andeis; G. ende, Teut. type *and-joz.
Cf. OIrish ind, Skt. anta-, end, limit. Der. end, verb; end-less (AS.
endeléas), -ly, -ness; end-wise, -ing. _@ The prefixes ante- (L. ante),
anti- (Gk. dvi), and an- (in an-swer) are connected with this word.

ENDANGER, to place in danger. (F.—L.) In Shak. Two Gent.
v. 4. 133. Coined from F. en, from L. in; and Danger, q.v.

ENDEAR, to make dear. (Hybrid; F. and E.) Shak. has en-
deared, K. John, iv. 2. 228. Coined from F. en, from L. in; and E.
Dear, q.v. Der. exdear-ment, used by Drayton and Bp. Taylor (R.).

ENDEAVOUR, to attempt, try. (F.—L.) 1. The verb Zo en-
deavour grew out of the ME. phrase ‘to do his dever,’ i.e. to do his
duty ;. cf. ‘Do now your devoir’=do your duty, Chaucer, C. T.
2600 (A 2598); and again, ‘And doth nought but his dever’ =and
does nothing but his duty; Will. of Palerne, 474. ‘He sholde en-
deuore hym to seche hem ;’ Caxton, Reynard, ed. Arber, p. 93. Shak.
has endeavour both as sb. and vb.; Temp. ii. 1. 160; Much Ado, ii.
2.31. 2. The prefix en- has a verbal and active force, as in enamour,
encourage, encumber, enforce, engage, words of similar formation. =F.
en-, from L. in, prefix; and ME. devoir, dever, equivalent to OF,
devoir, debvoir,a duty. See Devoir. Der. endeavour, sb.

ENDECA-,, incorrect form of Hendeca-3; which see.

ENDEMIC, peculiar to a people or district. (Gk.) ‘ Endemical,
Endemial, or Endemious Disease, a distemper that affects a great many
in the same country;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.—Gk. évdjyi-os, évdny-os,
native, belonging to a people. = Gk. év, in; and djyos, a people. See
Democracy. Der. also endemi-al, endemic-al.

ENDIVE, a plant. (F.—L.—Gk.—Semitic.) ‘Endyve, herbe, en-
divia;’ Prompt. Parv. =F, endive (cf. Ital. endivia).—L. type *intibea,
f. adj.; from intibus, intubus, endive. Late Gk. €vrvBov. Supposed
to be of Semitic origin; cf. Arab. hindab, endive, Rich. Dict., p. 1691.
Perhaps from Hind, India.

ENDOGEN, a plant that grows from within. (F.—Gk.) The F.
term endogéne belongs to the natural system of De Candolle (1813).
= Gk. évio-, for évdov, within, an extension from év,in ; and yev-, base
of yiyvopuat, Iam born or produced, from 4/ GEN, to produce. See
Genus. Der. endogen-ous.

ENDORSE, to put on the back of. (F.—L.) Modified from
endosse, the older spelling, and (etymologically) more correct; see
Spenser, F. Q. v. 11. 53, where it rhymes with bosse and Josse. But in
Ben Jonson, Underwoods, Ixxi, it rhymes with horse. Palsgrave has ‘I
endosse ;? p. 534.— OF. endosser, ‘to indorse;’ Cot.—F. en, upon;
and dos, the back.—L. in; and dorsum, the back. See Dorsal.

ENDOW, to give a dowry to. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. iii. 4.
21. Hoccleve has endowed; Reg. of Princes, st. 569, 1. 3982.—F. en,
from L. in; and douer, ‘to indue, endow;’ Cot.; from L. ddtare, to
givea dowry. See Dowry. Der. endow-ment, Rich. II, ii. 3. 139.

ENDUE (1), to endow. (F.—L.) Partly another spelling of
endow. ‘Among so manye notable benefites wherewith God hath
alreadie liberally and plentifully exdued us ;’ Sir J. Cheke, The Hurt
of Sedition (R.). ‘Zndwyn (=induen), doto ;’ Prompt. Pary. OF.
enidoer (later endouer), to endow; Burguy. See Hndow. 4 Also
used in senses which confuse it with L. induere. See Indue.

ENDUE (2), to clothe. (L.) The vb. exdue, to endow (cf. Gen.
xxx. 20), is unconnected with L. indwere. But there is another verb
endue, to clothe, which is merely a corruption of indue (1) ; [just con-
trary to indue (2), which is a corruption of endue (1) ; cf. ‘I indue, Ze
endoue;” Palsgrave.] Thus, in Ps. 132.9, we have ‘let thy priests be
clothed with righteousness ;’ in the Vulgate, ‘ sacerdotes tui ixduantur
iustitiam ;’ and hence the versicle in the Morning Prayer: ‘endue
thy ministers with righteousness.’ See Indue (2). @ A third form
endue, from F. enduire, L. induicere, appears to be obsolete.

ENDURE, to last. (F.—L.) ME. enduren, Chaucer, C. T. 2398
(A 2396).—OF. endurer ; compounded of ex, from L. in; and durer,
L. dirdare, to last. See Dure. Der. endur-able, -abl-y, -ance.

ENEMA, an injection, a clyster. (Gk.) In Bailey (1735).—Gk.
éveua, an injection. —Gk. év, in; and é-, weak grade allied to tym
(for *ci-on-y), I send; see Prellwitz.

ENEMY, a foe. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. enemi, King Horn,
ed. Lumby, 952.—OF. enemi,—L. inimicus, unfriendly.—L. in- (=E,
un-), not; and amicus, a friend. See Amicable. Der. from same
source, enmity, q. v.

ENERGY, vigour. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Cotgrave.—MF. energie,
‘energy, effectual operation ;’ Cot. Late L. energia.= Gk. évépyeua,


- ENERVATE


action. — Gk. évepyés, at work, active. = Gk. év,in; and €pyoy, cognate
with E, work. See Work, Der, energetic (Gk. évepynrixds, active) ;
-al, -al-ly.

‘-ENERVATE, to deprive of strength. (L.) ‘For great empires
«. + doe enervate, 8&c.; Bacon, Essay 58.—L. énerudtus, pp. of éner-
uare, to deprive of nerves or sinews, to weaken. =—L. é, out of; and
neruus, a nerve, sinew. See Nerve. Der. enervat-ion.

ENEW, to drive into the water. (F.—L.) Misprinted emmew in
Shak., Meas. iii, 1.91. ‘Youre hawke hath exnewed the fowle into
the Ryuer;’ Book of St. Albans, fol. d. ij.—F. en, in (L. in); and
AF. ewe (F. eau, L. aqua}, water. Cf. QF. enewer, to soak in water
(Godefroy).

HENFEEBLE, to make feeble. (F.—L.) In Shak. Cymb. v. 2. 4.
Earlier, in Sir T, More, Works, p. 892 d.—OF. enfeblir, to enfeeble
(Godefroy). =F. en-, from L, in-, prefix; and AF. feble, feeble. See
Feeble. Der. enfeeble-ment.

HNFEOFF, to invest with a fief. (F.—L. and OHG.) Ini Hen.
IV, iii. 2. 69, Formed by prefixing the F. ex (< L, in) to the sb. fief,
Cf. ME, feffen, to enfeoff, P. Plowman, B. ii. 78, 146; which answers
to OF. fieffer, ‘to infeoffe;’ Cot. See Fief, 4 The peculiar spell-
ing is due to Old (legal) AF., and appears in the Law L. infeoffare,
and feoffitor (Ducange). Der. enfeoff-ment.

ENFILADE, a line or straight passage. (F.—L.) ‘ Enjilade,
a ribble-row of rooms; a.long train of discourse; in the Art of War,
the situation of a post, that it can discover and scour all the length
of a straight line;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. He also has the verb.—F.
enfilade, ‘a suite of rooms, a long string of phrases, raking fire ;’
Hamilton. =F. enjiler, to thread. =F. en, from L. in; and fil, a thread,
from L. filum, athread. See File (1). Der. enjilade, verb.

HNFOLD, to enclose, embrace. (F.—L.; and E.) Formerly also
infold, which is better, as being wholly English. Shak. has infold,
Romeo, iii. 3. 73. From en-, prefix (or iz, as prefix), and fold. See
Fold (1).

ENFORCE, to give force to. (F.—L.) ‘ Thou most enforce thee;’
Chaucer, C, T. 5922 (D 340). — OF. enforcer, to strengthen (Burgny).
- Fen, from L. in, in; and force. See Force. Der. enforce-ment, As
You Like It, ii. 7. 118.

ENFRANCHISKE, to render free. (F.) In L. L. L, iii, rar,
— OF. enfranchiss-, stem of pres. pt. of enfranchir, to free (Godefroy).
=F, en (from L,in), in; and the adj. franc,free. See Franchise. Cf.
OF. franchir, ‘to free, deliver ;’ Cot. Der. enfranchise-ment, K. John,
iv. 2. 52.

ENGAGE, to bind bya pledge. (F.—L. and Teut.) In Othello,
ii. 3. 462. =F. engager, ‘to pawn, impledge, ingage;’ Cot. =F. ex
(from L, in), in; and F. gage,apledge. See Gage (1). Der. engage-
ment, J. Cees, il. I. 307; engag-ing, -ing-ly.

ENGENDER, to breed. (F.—L.) ME. engendren ; Chaucer,
C. T. 6047 (D 465). —OF. engendrer, ‘to ingender;’ Cot. [The d
is excrescent.]—L. ingenerdre,to produce, generate. = L, in; and gene-
rare, to breed ; formed from gener- (for *genes-), stem of genus, a
race, brood. See Genus; and see Gender,

ENGINE, a skilful contrivance. (F.—L.) In-early use. ME.
engin, a contrivance, Floriz, ed. Lumby, 755; often shortened to gin,
ginne, id. 131.—OF, engin, ‘an engine, toole;’ Cot.—L. ingenium,
genius; also, an invention.. See Ingenious. Der. engin-eer,
formerly (and properly) engin-er, Hamlet, iii. 4. 206; engineer-ing.

ENGLISH, (originally) of or belonging to the Angles. (E.) AS.
Englise, Aunglise ; adj. formed by subjoining -ise (-ish) to *Angli-,
orig. stem of AS, Engle, pl., the Angles, one of the Teutonic tribes
who settled in Britain in the fifth century. Cf. England, for AS.
Engla land, ‘land of the Angles.’

ENGRAILED, indented with curved lines; in heraldry. (F.—L.
end Teut.) Spelt exgraylyt in The Book of St. Albans, pt. ii. fol. f 1,
bk. ; engrelede in Allit.. Morte Arthure, 4183.—OF. engresle, pp. of
engresler, to engrail; F. engréler (Hatzfeld).—F. en, in; OF. gres/e,
F. gréle, hail; because the edge or line seems as if indented or
‘pitted’ by the fall of hailstones. The OF. gresle is of doubtful
origin, but may be Teut.; cf. OHG. grioz, grit.

‘ENGRAIN, to dye of a fast colour, (F.—L.) ME. engreynen,
to dye in grain, i.e. of a fast colour; P, Plowman, B. ii. 15. Cf.
MF. engrainer, to dye; in Palsgrave, s.v. grayne, vb. Coined from
F. en, from L. in; and OF. graine, ‘the seed of herbs, &c., also
grain, wherewith cloth is died zz grain; scarlet die, scarlet in graine ;’
Cot, —Late L. griana, the cochineal berry or insect ; a fem. sb. formed
from grdna, pl. of L. granum, grain. See Grain, ©

ENGRAVE, to cut witha graver.' (Hybrid; F. and E.) Spenser
has the pp. engraven, F, Q. iv. 7. 46; so also Shak. Lucr. 203. A
hybrid word ; coined from F. prefix ex (from L, i), and E. grave. See
Grave (1). Der. engrav-er, engrav-ing. J 1. The retention of the
strong pp. engraven shows that the main part of the word is English.
2. But the E. compound was obviously suggested by the OF. engraver,


ENOUGH


‘to engrave,’ (Cot.); der. rom F, ew, and OHG. graban, G. graben,
to dig, engrave, cut, carve.

ENGROSS, to occupy wholly. (F.—L.) The legal sense ‘to
write in large letters’ is the oldest one. ‘ Exgrossed was vp [read it]
as it is well knowe, And enrolled, onely for witnesse In your regis-
ters ;” Lydgate, Siege of Thebes, pt. ii, Knightly answer of Tideus,
1.56. Cf. Rich. IL, iii. 6.2. AF, engrosser, Stat. Realm, i. 379
(A.D. 1363).— AF. ex grosse; where grosse represents Late L. grossa,
large writing (Ducange); cf. MF. grossoyer, ‘to ingross, to write
faire, or in great and fair letters ;’ Cot. See Gross. B. The sense
‘to buy up wholesale’ was from. the phr. en gros, i.e. in large. Der,
engross-ment, 2 Hen. IV, iv. 5. 80.

N GULF, to swallow up in a gulf. (F.—L. and Gk.) In Spenser,


195


F, Q. iii. 2. 32.— MIF. engolfer, ‘to ingulfe;’ Cot.—F. en, from L. |


in; and golfe,a gulf. See Gulf,

ENHANCE, to advance, raise, augment. (F.—L.) ME. enhansen,
P. Plowman, C. xii. 58. AF. enhauncer, to promote; Liber Custu-
marum, p. 219; apparently a corruption of AF. exhaucer, to raise,
id., p. 192; OF, enhaucier, to raise, exalt (Ital. inalzare).—L. in, in,
up; and Late L. altiare, to lift, from altus, high; see Altitude.
@ Hardly from OProv. enxansar, to further, advance; ‘ si vostra valors
m’enansa=if your worth advances me;’ Bartsch, Chrestomathie
Prov. 147, 5.—OProv. enans, before, rather; formed from L. in ante,
just as the Prov. avans is from Lat. ab ante. See Advance. Der.
enhance-ment.

ENIGMA, a riddle. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. L. L. L. iii. 72.—L.
enigma (stem enigmat-).—Gk. aiviypya (stem aiviypar-), a dark say-
ing, riddle. Gk. aiviccopa, I speak in riddles. —Gk. aivos, a tale,
story. Der. enigmat-ic, -ic-al, -ic-al-ly, -ise.

ENJOIN, to order, bid. (F.—L.) ME, enioinen (with i=),
P. Plowman, C. viii. 72.—OF. enjoindre (1 p.s. pres. enjoin-s), ‘to
injoine, ordaine;’ Cot.—L. iniungere, to enjoin. See Injunction,
and Join.

ENJOY, to joy in. (F.—L.) ME. enioten (with i=7), Wyclif,
Colos. iii. 15.— AF. enjoder, Stat. Realm, i. 310 (A.D. 1351). Formed
from F. en, from L. in; and joie, joy. See Joy. Der. enjoy-ment.

ENKINDILEBE, to kindle. (Hybrid; F. and Scand.) In Shak,
K. John, iv. 2. 163. Formed from F. en=L. in; and Kindle, g.v.

ENLACE, to encircle as with a lace, enfold, entangle. (F.—L.)
ME. enlacen; Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, bk. i. met. 4. 1.15.—OF. (and
F.) enlacer, ‘to intangle;’? Cot.—F. ex (from L. ix), in; and lacer,
‘to lace, to bind;’ Cot., from Folk-L. *laciare, for L. laquedre, to
ensnare, from lagueus, a noose. See Lace.

ENLARGE, to make large. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. v. 5. 55-
ME. enlargen, Mandeville, Trav., ch. v, p. 45.—AF. enlarger, Stat.
Realm, i. 398 (A.D. 1377). Formed from F. ex, from L. in; and
Large, q.v. Der. enlarge-ment, Shak. L. L. L. iii. 5.

ENLIGHTEN, to give light to. (Hybrid; F. and E.) In
Shak. Sonnets, 152. From F, en, from L. ix; and E. Lighten,
q-v. Imitated from AS. inlthtan, to illuminate ; Grein, ii. 142.
Der. enlighten-ment.

ENLIST, to enroll. (F.—L. and G.) First in 1698.
son’s Dict., only under the word Lis¢,
F, liste, a list. See List (2). Der. enlist-ment.

ENLIVEN, to put life into. (Hybrid; F. and E.) ‘Lo! of
themselves th’ enlivened chessmen move;’ Cowley, Pind. Odes,
Destiny, 1. 3. From F, en, from L. in; and E. life. See Life,
Live.

ENMITY, hostility. (F.—L.) ME. enmité; Prompt. Parv. p.
140; also enemyté, Wyclif, Select Works, ili, 301.—AF. enemité,
Stat. Realm, i. 290 (A. D. 1340) ; OF. enemistié (Supp. to Godefroy) ;
later inimitié (Cot.).— OF. en-, from L. in-, negative prefix ; and
amisté, amistet, amity. See Amity.

ENNOBULE, to. make noble. (F.—L,.) In Spenser, F. Q. iii. 3. 4.
‘He was ennoblyd;’ Caxton, Golden Legend, Lyf of St. Fraunceis,
§ 38.—OF. ennobdlir, ‘to ennoble ;’ Cot.—F. ex, from L. ix; and F.
noble. See Noble.

ENNUI, annoyance. (F.—L.) In Todd’s Johnson. =F. ennui ;
formerly enui, also anoi (Burguy). See Annoy.

ENORMOUS, great beyond measure. (F.—L.) In King Lear,
ii. 2.176; Milton, P.L.i. 511. Rarely exorm (as in Fairfax’s Tasso,
bk. viii. st. 71), which is a more correct form, the -ous being added
unnecessarily.— MF, enorme, ‘huge, ... enormous ;’ Cot.=—L.
énormis, out of rule, huge.=L. @, out of; and norma, a rule. See
Normal. Der. exormous-ly; from the same source, exorm-t-ty.
MF. enormité, ‘an enormity ;” Cot.

ENOUGH, sufficient. (E.) ME. 3enoh, inoh, inou, inow, enogh ;
pl. inohe, inowe ; see Stratmann. The pl. yrowe (ynough in Tyrwhitt)
is in Chaucer, C. T. 10784 (F 470). AS. genoh, genog, adj.; pl.
gendge, Grein, i. 438 ; allied to.the impers. vb. geneah, it suffices, id.
435-+Goth. gandhs, sufficient ; allied to the impers, verb ganah, it

0%


In John-


From F, ex, from L. in; and |


196 ENOUNCE


suffices, in which ga- 1s a mere prefix, Cf. Icel. gndgr, Dan. nok,
Swed. nok, Du. genoeg, G. genug, enough. Cf, also Skt. nag, to
attain, reach, L. mancisci, to acquire (pp. nac-tus); Idg. base *nak.

ENOUNCEH, to state definitely, to pronounce. (F.—L.) In late
use; first in 1805. Coined, after the analogy of announce, from F.
énoncer, L. énuntiare; see Enunciate. Doublet, enunciate.

ENQUIRE, to search into, ask. (F.—L.) [Properly enquere,
but altered to enquire to make it look more like Latin; and often
further altered to inguire, to make it look still more so.] ME.
engueren; Rob. of Glouc, pp.'373, 508 ; ll. 7675, 10469; in Chaucer,
enguere (rhyming with Jere), C. T. 5049 (B 629).—OF. enquerre
(Burguy), later enquerir (Cot.).—L. inguirere, to seek after, search
into.—L. in; and guerere, to seek. See Inquisition, Inquire.
Der. enquir-y, Meas. for Meas. v. 5 (1st folio ed. ; altered to inguiry
in the Globe Edition) ; exguest, now altered to inguest, but spelt
enqueste in P. Plowman, C. xiv. 85, and derived from OF, enqueste,
‘an inquest ;’ Cot. See Inquest.

ENRAGE, to put in a rage. (F.—L.) In Macbeth, iii. 4. 118.
G. Douglas has the pp. enragit, tr. of Virgil, bk, xiii. c. v. lL. 20.—
OF. enrager, ‘to rage, rave, storme;’ whence enragé, ‘enraged ;’
Cot. [Whence it appears that the verb was originally intransitive,
and meant ‘ to get in a rage.’ |]—F. en, from L. in ; and F. rage. See
Rage.

ENRAPTURE, to fill with rapture. (L.; with F. prefix.)
‘Now the brow We gain enraptured ;’ Dyer, Ruins of Rome, 1
134 (1740). From En-, prefix, and Rapture.

ENRICH, to make rich, (F.—L.) ‘The Lord hath enrychide
me;’ Wyclif, Gen. xxx. 20 (earlier version).—OF. enrichir, ‘to
enrich ;? Cot.=—F, ez, from L. in; and F. riche, rich. See Rich.
Der. enrich-ment.

ENROL, to insert in a roll. (F.—L.) “And [is] enrolled;’
Lydgate, Siege of Thebes; see quotation under Engross.—OF.
enroller, ‘to enroll, register ;’ Cot.—F. ex, from L. in; and OF.
rolle,a roll, See Roll, Der. enrol-ment, Holland’s Livy, p. 1221


(R.).

ENSAMPLE, an example. (F.—L.) In the Bible, 1 Cor, x. 11.
ME. ensample, Rob. of Glouc. p. 35, 1. 819. —AF. ensample, a corrupt
form of OF. essemple, exemple, or example; see Example, This
form occurs in the Statutes of the Realm, i. 104 (A.D. 1285).

ENSCONCEH, to shelter, or to take shelter in. (F.—L.)
therein so enscone’d his secret evil;’ Shak., Lucrece, 1. 1515.
Hin-, prefix, in; and Sconce (1).

ENSHRINE, to put in a shrine. (Hybrid; F. and L.) In
Spenser, Hymn on Beauty, 1. 188, From F. em, from L. in; and
Shrine, q.v.

ENSIGN, a flag. (F.—L.) In Shak. Rich, Il, iv. 94. ME.
enseigne, Chaucer, Rom. Rose, 1. 1200.—OF, enseigne, Roman de la
Rose, 1. 1184; as in Cotgrave, who explains it by ‘a signe,.. .
also an ensigne, standard.’ = Late L. insignia, orig. pl. of L. insigne, a
standard ; neut. of insignis, remarkable; see Insignia. Der. ensign-
cy, -ship.

ENSIDAGE, green fodder preserved in a pit; or the process of
preserving it. (F.—Span.—L.—Gk.) First in 1881 (N.E. D.). =F,
ensilage, ensilage. = I’, ensiler, verb.— Span. ensilar, to preserve grain
in a pit.—Span. en, from L. in, in; and silo, a pit. See Silo,

ENSLAVE, to make a slave of. (Hybrid.) In Milton, P. R.
iii. 75.—F. ex, from L. in; and Slave, q.v. Der. enslave-ment.

ENSNARE, to catch ina snare. (Hybrid; F.and E.) In Shak,
Oth. ii, 1, 170.—F. ex, from L. in; and Snare, q.y.

ENSUE, to follow after. (F.—L.) *Dyuyne vengeaunce ensyewed
sodaynly ;’ Caxton, Golden Legend, St. Stephen, § 6.—AF. ensu-,
as in ensuera, 3 p. fut. of OF. ensivre, to follow ; see Year-books of
Edw. I, 1302-3, p. 49.—Late L. insequere, used for L. insegui, to
follow upon ; from iz, upon, and segui, to follow. See Sue.

ENSURE, to make sure. (F.—L.) In Chaucer, C. T. 12077
(C 143). Compounded from F, en (from L. iz), and OF. séur, sure.
See Assure, and Sure. 4 Generally spelt insure, which is a con-
fusion of languages ; whence insur-ance.

ENTABLATURE, part of a building surmounting the columns.
(F.—L.) Spelt intablature in Cotgrave.—MF. entablature, ‘an
intablature;’ Cot.; an equivalent term to entablement, the mod. F.
form. The OF, entablement meant, more commonly, ‘a pedestal’
or ‘base’ of a column rather than the entablature above. Both sbs.
are formed from Late L. intabulare, orig. to construct an intabulatum
or flooring. = L. iz, upon ; and Late L. tabulare, due to L. tabuldtum,
board-work, a flooring. =L. tabula, a board, plank. See Table.
@ Since entablature simply meant something laid flat or boardwise
upon something else in the course of building, it could be applied to
the part either below or above the columns.

ENTAIL, to bestow asa heritage. (F.—L.) In Shak. 3 Hen. VI,
i, 1, 194, 235 ;.a8 sb., All’s Well, iv, 3.313. 1. The legal sense is


* And
From


ENTOMOLOGY


peculiar ; it was originally ‘ to convert (an estate) into fee tail (Late
L. feudum tallidtum); to settle (land) on a number of persons in
succession, so that it cannot be bequeathed at pleasure by any
one possessor.’ ‘To entayle land, addicere, adoptare heeredes ;’
Levins. =F. en, from L, in, in, upon; and AF, ¢ailer, F. tailler, orig.
to cut, hence to impose a fee upon; from Late L. ¢dleare, talliare, to
cut ;see Tail in Blount’s Nomolexicon. 2. The ME. entailen signifies


‘to cut or carve,’ in an ornamental way ; see Rom. of the Rose, 140; |


P. Plowman’s Crede, ed. Skeat, ll. 167, 200. — OF. entailler, ‘to


intaile, grave, carve, cut in;’ Cot.—F. en, from L. in; and .


tailler, to cut. See Tally. Der. entail-ment.

ENTANGLE, to ensnare, complicate. (Hybrid; F. and Scand.)
In Spenser, Muiopotmos, 387; alsoin Levins. =F. en, from L. im; and
Tangle, q.v. Der. entangle-ment, Spectator, no. 352.

ENTER, to go into. (F.—L.) ME. entren, Rob. of Glouc. p. 47,
1. 1097 ; King Alisaunder, 5782.— OF. entrer, ‘ to enter ;’ Cot.—L..
intrare, to enter, go into.—L, im; and *-trdre, as in pene-trare, to
penetrate, go into; cf. Ski. ¢ara-, a passage, zr, to cross, pass over ;
L. ¢rans, across. See Brugmann, ii. § 579; andsee Term. Der.
entr-ance, Macb. i. 5, 40; entr-y, ME. entree, Chaucer, C. T. 1985
(A 1983), from OF. entree, orig. the fem. of the pp. of F’. entrer.

ENTERIC, pertaining to the intestines. (Gk.) Chiefly in the
phr. ‘enteric fever.’=— Gk. évrepixds, adj., from €vrepoy, an intestine.
A comparative derivative from év, prep., in, Cf. L, interus, inward ;
Skt. antara-, interior. See Interior.

ENTERPRISH, an undertaking. (F.—L.) Palsgrave has enter-.
prise, sb., and entreprise, vb. The sb. is in La Belle Dame sans
Merci, 1. 515. Skelton has it as a verb; ‘ Chaucer, that nobly enter=
prysyd;’ Garland of Laurell, 1. 388.—OF. entreprise (Burguy),
commonly entreprinse, ‘an enterprise ;’ Cot.—OF. entrepris, pp. of
entreprendre, to undertake. = Late L. interprendere, to undertake. = L.
inter, among; and prendere, short for prehendere, to take in hand,
which is from L. pre, before, and (obsolete) hendere, to get, cognate
with Gk. xavdavev, and E. get, See Prehensile and Get, Der.
enterpris-ing. Cf. emprise.

ENTERTAIN, to admit, receive. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q.
i. Io. 32.— OF, entretien-, a stem of entretenir, ‘to intertaine;’ Cot.
=Late L. intertenére, to entertain. —L. inter, among ; and tenére, to
hold. See Tenable, Der. entertain-er, -ing ; -ment, Spenser, F. Q.
1.nO.79 70

ENTHRAL, to enslave. (Hybrid; F. and Scand.) In Mids. Nt.
Dream, i. 1.136. From F. en, from L. in; and E, Thrall, q.v.
Der. enthralment, Milton, P. L. xii. 171.

ENTHRONG, to set onathrone. (F.—L. and Gk.) Shak., Mer.
Ven, iv. 1. 194.— MF. enthroner, ‘to inthronise ;’ Cot, From F, en,
in; and MF. ¢hrone, ‘a throne;’ id. B. Imitated from Late L. in-
thronisare, to enthrone, which is from Gk, év@povigev, to set on a
throne ; from Gk. év, in, on; and @pévos, a throne, See Throne,
Der. enthrone-ment.


ENTHUSIASM, inspiration, zeal. (L.—Gk.) In Holland’s


Plutarch, pp. 932, 1092 (R.); and in Marston, The Fawne, A. ii,


sc. I. [Cf ME. enthusiasme; Cot.]|—Late L. enthiisiasmus,=— Gk.
évOovotacpués, inspirationGk. év@ovo1d(w, I am inspired. Gk,
évOous, contracted form of év@eos, full of the god, inspired. Gk, év,
within ; and 6eds, god, See Theism. Der. enthusiast (Gk. évOov~
o.aoTns) 3 -ic, Dryden, Abs. and Achit. 530; -ic-al, -ic-al-ly.

ENTICH, to tempt, allure. (F.—L.) ME. enticen, entisen; Rob.
of Glouc., p. 235; P. Plowman, C. viii. 91.—OF. enticier, entichier,
to excite, entice (Godefroy). —L. type *inditiare, to kindle, to set on
fire.=—L, in, on; and *titius, for ¢itio, a firebrand. Cf. F. attiser,
Ital. attizzare, to set on fire; from the same sb. Der. entice-ment,
Chaucer, Pers. Tale, Group I, 1. 967.

ENTIRE, whole, complete. (F.—L.) ME. entyre; the ady,
entyreliche, entirely, is in P. Plowman, C, xi. 188,.—OF, entier,.
‘intire ;’ Cot.; cf. Prov. enteir, Ital. intero.—L. integrum, acc. of
integer, whole. See Integer, Der. entire-ly, entire-ness; also
entire-ty, spelt entierty by Bacon (R.), from OF. entiereté (Cot.),
from L. acc. integrititem ; whence entirety and integrity are doublets,.

ENTITLE, to give a title to. (F.—L.) In Shak, L. L. L. y. 2,
822. From F. ex, from L. in; and title. See Title.

ENTITY, existence, real substance. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674. A coined word, with suffix -/y, from L. enti-, decl. stem of
Late L. ens, a thing, a being, formed as if it were the pres. pt. of esse,,
to be.—4/ES, to be. See Essence.

ENTOMB, to put in a tomb, (F.—L. and Gk.) In Spenser,
F.Q. ii. 10. 46.—F, extomber, ‘to intombe ;’ Cot. =F. ex, from L, in,
in; and F. tombe,a tomb, See Tomb. Der. entomb-ment.

ENTOMOLOGY, the science treating of insects. (F.—L.— Gk.)
First in 1776, =F. entymologie (1764). — Mod. L. *entomologia. = Gk.
évropo-, for évrouov, an insect; properly neut. of évroyos, cut into;
so called from the very thin middle part; see Insect. The ending


ENTOZOON


B. The Gk. évropos is from
See Tome.


‘


-logy is from Gk. A€yetv, to discourse,
Gk, év, in; and rop-, second grade of réuvey, to cut.
Der. entomolog-ist, entomolog-ic-al.

-ENTOZOON, a parasitic animal living within another. (Gk.)
Modern and scientific. From Gk. év7é-, for évrdés, within; and (dor,
ananimal. See Zoology.

-ENTRAILS, the inward parts of an animal. (F.—L.) The
sing. entrail is rare ; but answers to ME, entraile, King Alisaunder,
}. 3628.—OF. entraile, entrails; MF. entrailles, pl. ‘the intrals,
intestines ;’ Cot.—Late L. intrdlia, also spelt (more correctly)
intranea, entrails, {For the change from x to J, cf. Boulogne, Bologna,
from L..Bononia.] B. Intrainea is contracted from L, interdnea,
entrails, neut. pl. of interdineus, inward, an adj. formed from inter,
withins See Internal. {] The OF. entraile was a fem. sing., made
from a neut. pl.

‘ENTRANCE (1), ingress; see Enter.

‘ENTRANCE (2), to put into a trance. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Per. iii. 2.94. From F, en, from L. in; and E. trance=F. transe.
See Trance. Der. entrance-ment ; dis-entrance,

ENTRAP, to ensnare. (F.—L. and Teut.) In Spenser, F. Q.
ii, 1. 4.— OF, entraper, ‘to pester; . . also, to intrap;” Cot.—F. en,
from L, in; and OF. trape, a trap, of G. origin. See Trap (1).

ENTREAT, to treat, to beg. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F.Q. i. Io.
y. Chaucer has entreteden, discussed, C. T., B 2466 (Tale of
Melibeus). — AF. entreter, F. Chron, of London, p. 48; OF. extraiter,
to treat of (Godefroy).—F. en, from L. in; and OF. traiter, to
treat, from L, ¢ractare, to handle. See Treat. Der. entreat-y,
K. John, v. 2. 125 5 entreat-ment, Hamlet, i. 3. 122.

ENTRENCH, to cut into, fortify with a trench. (F.) ‘En-
trenched deepe with knife ;’ Spenser, F. Q. iii. 12. 20; ‘In stronge
entrenchments ;’ id. ii, 11.6. A coined word; from F. en, from L. in;
and E, trench, of F. origin. See Trench.
ENTRUST, totrust with. (Hybrid; F.andE.) By analogy with
enlist, enrol, enrapture, entrance, enthrone, we have entrust ; as in
Sir T. Browne, Vulgar Errors, bk. iii.c. 11. § 5. But intrust was also
usual, and is the form in Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715; see Intrust.
ENTWINE, ENTWIST, to twine or twist with. (Hybrid ;
F. and FE.) Milton has entwined, P. L. iv. 174; Shak. has entwist,
Mids. Nt. Dr. iv. 1. 48. Both are formed alike; from F. ex (from
L. in), and the E. words twine and twist. See Twine, Twist.
| ENUCLEATE, to lay open, clearly explain. (L.) Lit. ‘ to get
out the kernel.” In Cockeram (1642), misprinted enuncleate ;
Kersey, in 1658, has enucleation. L. énucledt-us, pp. of énucleare, to
get out a kernel. —L, @, out; and nucleus, kernel.. See Nucleus.

ENUMERATE, to number. (L.) Enumerative occurs in Bp.
Taylor, Holy Dying, c. 5. s. 3, 10. Enumeration is in Phillips
(1658).—L. énumeridtus, pp. of énumerdre, to reckon up.=—L. @, out,
fully ; and numerdre, to number, from xumerus, number. See
umber. Der. enwmerat-ion, -ive.

ENUNCIATEH, to utter. (L.) Enunciatyue occurs in Sir T.
Elyot, The Governour, b. iii. c. 25, § 5.—L. énuncidtus, pp. of énun-
ciare, better énuntiare, to utter.—L, é, out, fully; and nuntidre, to
announce, from nuntius, a messenger. See Announce, Nuncio.
Der. enunciat-ion, -ive, -or-y.

ENVELOP, to wrap in, enfold. (F.—Teut.?) Spelt exvelop in
Spenser, F.Q. ii. 12. 34. ME. envolupen, Chaucer, C. T.12876(C 942).
—OF. envoluper, later enveloper, to wrap round, enfold. — F. en,
from L, in; and OF. voluper, voloper, vloper, to wrap ; from a base
volup-, of uncertain origin, but perhaps Low German. B.. This base
resembles the ME. wlappen, to wrap up, which occurs at least twelve
times in Wyclif’s Bible, and seems to be another form of wrappen,
to wrap. See Wyclif, Numb. iv. 5, 7; Matt. xxvii. 59; Luke, ii. 7,
12; John, xx.7,&c. See Wrap. 4 But the base wlap- is unknown
outside English, and thus does not account for the Romanic form.
Note Walloon ewalpé, to envelop (Remacle) ; Ital. viluppo, a bundle,
inviluppare, to envelope; MItal. goluppare, to wrap. (Florio). Cf,
Develop, Lap (3). Der. envelope, envelope-ment.
‘ENVENOM, to put poison into. (F.—L.) ME. enuenimen
(with w=v); whence enuenimed, King Alisaunder, 5436 ; enueniming,
Chaucer, C. T. 9934 (E 2060). —OF. envenimer, ‘to invenome ;’ Cot.
— OF. en, from L. in; and venim, or venin, poison, from L, uenénum.
See Venom,

‘ENVIRON, to surround. (F.—L.) Spelt exuyrowne in Wyclif,
a Tim, v.-13; pt. t. enuyrounyde, Matt. iv. 23; cf. Gower, C. A.
iii. 973 bk. vii. 373.—OF.. environner, ‘to inviron, encompasse ;’
Cot.—OF, (and F.) environ, round about. OF. ex, from L, in; and
virer, to turn, veer. See Weer. Der. environ-ment; also environs,
from F. environ,

“ENVOY, a messenger, (F.—L.) 1. An improper use of the
word:; it meant ‘a message;’ and the F. for ‘messenger’ was
envoyé, 2, The envoy of a ballad is the ‘ sending’ of it forth, and


EPIGRAM LF


the word is then correctly used; the last stanza of Chaucer’s Ballad
to K. Richard is headed L’envoye. = OF. envoy, ‘a. message, a sending;
also the envoy or conclusion of a ballet [ballad] or sonnet ;’ Cot.
Also. ‘ envoyé, a. special messenger;’ id. OF. envoyer, to send;
formerly enveier (Supp. to Godefroy).—OF. en veie, en voie, on the
way.—L. in uiam, on the way. Cf. Ital. inviare, to send. See
Voyage.. Der. envoyship.

ENVY, emulation, malicious grudging. (F.—L.) In early use.
ME. enuie (with u=v), enuye, enuy; Rob. of Glouc. pp. 122, 287;
ll. 2603, 5824.—OF. envie, ‘envy;? Cot.—L. inuidia, envy. See
Invidious. Der. envy, verb, Wyclif, 1 Cor. xiii. 4; envi-ous, ME.
enuius, Floriz, ed. Lumby, 1. 3563 -ous-ly, -able.

ENWRAP, to wrap in. (Hybrid; F.and E.) In Spenser, F.Q. ii.
3. 273 earlier, in Wyclif, 1 Kings, xv. 6; 4 Kings, ii. 8. Coined
from F. ex, from L. in; and E. Wrap, q. v.

EOCENE, belonging to the lowest division of the tertiary strata.
(Gk.) First used by Lyell (1833).—Gk. 7#H-s, dawn; and xaivés,
new, recent,

EPACT,.a term in astronomy. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) In Holland’s
Plutarch, p. 1051.—MF. epacte, ‘an addition, the epact;’ Cot. —
Late L, epacta. = Gk. éxaxtn (for éraxrds Hpuépa), late fem. of émaxrds,
added, brought in.— Gk. érayewv, to bring to, bring in, supply. =Gk.
éz-, for émt, to; and dye, to lead.=4/ AG, to drive. See Act.

EPAULET, a shoulder-knot. (F.—L.—Gk.) Used by Burke
(R.).—F, épaulette, dimin. from épaule, OF. espaule, and still earlier
espalle, a shoulder. = L. spatula, a blade; in Late L. the shoulder;
see the account of the letter-changes in Brachet. B. Spatula is a
dimin, of spatha, a blade; borrowed from Gk. ond@n, a broad blade.
See Spatula.

EPERGINE, a central ornament for a dinner-table. (F.—Teut.)
Also. spelt epargne in 1779 (N.E.D.); which is more correct.—F.
épargne, lit. ‘economy.’ It seems to have been applied to the
épergne from the manner of its ornamentation; Cotgrave has:
‘taillé d’espargne, cut with sparing work, the. incutting being filled
with enamell, and the work set out, or appearing among it, in gold.’ =
F. épargner, MF. espargner, to spare, save (Ital. sparagnare, in Florio).
Formed, as if from an OHG. *sparanjan. (not found); from OHG,
sparén, to save, spare, cognate with AS. sparian. See Spare.
(Korting, § 8910.) ;

EPHAH, a Hebrew measure. (Heb.—Egyptian.) In Exod. xvi.
36, &c.—Heb. éyphah, a measure; a word of Egyptian origin;
Coptic dpi, a measure; Gesenius, ed. 8. p. 36,

EPHEMERA, flies that live but a day. (Gk.) ‘Certain flyes
that are called ephemera, that live but a day;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist.
§ 697. A neut. pl., afterwards used as a fem. sing. — Gk. épnpepa,
neut. pl. of adj. epnpepos, lasting for a day. Gk. é¢-=€ni, for; and
#épa, a day, of uncertain origin. Der. ephemer-al; ephemeris (Gk.
épnuepis, a.diary).

EPHOD, a part of the priest’s habit. (Heb.), In Exod. xxviii. 4,
&c. = Heb, éphod, a vestment ; from aphad, to put on, clothe.

EPI-, prefix. (Gk.) Gk. émi, upon, to, besides; in epi-cene, epi-
cycle, &c. It becomes ép- before an aspirate, as in eph-emeral ; and
ep- before. a vowel, as in ep-och. Cf. L. ob, to, as in obusam, obire;
Oscan op aie api, moreover ; in composition, near to. Brugmann,
i. § 557 (2).

upio, narrative. (L.—Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674; and
Spectator, no. 267.—L. epicus.—Gk. €m«ds, epic, narrative. Gk,
éxos, a word, narrative, song; allied to L. xox, a voice. See Voice,

EPICENE, of common gender. (L.—Gk.) Epicene is the name
of one, of Ben Jonson’s plays.==L. epicenus, borrowed from Gk,
émixo.vos, common. = Gk. éwi; and xo.vés, common. See Cenobite.

EPICURE, a follower of Epicurus. (L.—Gk.) In Macb. v. 3.
8.—L. Epictirus.—Gk. ’Enixovpos, proper name; lit. ‘assistant.’
Der. epicur-e-an, -e-an-ism..

EPICYCLE, a small circle. with its centre on the circumference
of a larger one. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Milton, P. L. viii. 84. Chaucer
has episicle; Astrolabe, pt. ii. § 35.—F. epicycle (Cot.).— L. epicyclus. =
Gk. émixvedos, an epicyclé.—Gk. éi, upon; and xvsdos, a cycle,


circle. See Cycle.
EPIDEMIC, affecting a people, general. (L.—Gk.) ‘An epi-
demic disease ;’ Bacon, Henry VII, ed. Lumby, p. 13,1. 10. ' Formed


with suffix -ic from L. epidém-us, epidemic; cf. MF. epidimique (Cot.).
=- Gk, éridnuos, among the people, general. —Gk. émi, among; and
djpyos, the people. See Endemic, Demagogue. Der. epidemic-al.
.HPIDERMIS, the cuticle, outer skin. (L.—Gk.) ‘Within the
epidermis ;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 297. —L. epidermis.—Gk. émdeppis,
an upper skin; from émi, upon, and dépya, skin. See Derm.
EPIGLOTTIS, a cartilage protecting the glottis. (Gk.) In Ker-
sey, ed. 1715.—Gk. émyAwrris, Attic form of ém-yAwaais, epiglottis,
—Gk. émi, near; and yA@ooa, the tongue. See Gloss (2), Glottis,
EPIGRAM, a short poem. (F.—L.—Gk.). In Shak. Much Ado,


EPILEPSY


y. 4. 103. Sir T. Elyot has the pl. epigrammata, in The Governour,
bk. i. c. 13. § 7.—F. epigramme, ‘an epigram;’ Cot.—L. epigramma
(stem epigrammat-).—Gk. émiypayzpa, an inscription, epigram. = Gk.
éni, upon; and ypade, to write. See Graphic. Der. epigram-
mat-ic, -ic-al, -ic-al-ly, -ise, -ist. And, from the same verb, epigraph.

HPILEPSY, a convulsive seizure. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Oth.
iv. 1. 51.—MF. epilepsie, ‘the falling sickness ;’ Cot.—L. epilépsia.
=Gk. émAnyia, énidntis, a seizure, epilepsy. —Gk. émAapBavew
(fut. émAnw-opar), to seize upon. Gk. émi, upon; and AapBavev, to
seize. See Cataleptic. Der. epileptic, Gk. émAnmrinds, subject to
epilepsy; K. Lear, ii. 2. 87.

EPILOGUE, a short concluding poem. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak.
Mids. Nt. Dr. v. 360, 362, 369. =F. epilogue, ‘an epilogue ;’ Cot.=
L. epilogus.—Gk. émidoyos, a concluding speech.—Gk. émi, upon;
and Adyos, a speech, from A€éyeu, to speak.

EPIPHANY, Twelfth Day. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Cotgrave; and
in Caxton, The Golden Legend, Fest of the Epiphanie ; and in Lyric
Poetry, ed. Wright, p. 96.—F. epiphanie, ‘ the epiphany ;’ Cot.—L.
epiphania. Gk, émpdvia, manifestation; originally nent. pl. of adj.
émavios, but equivalent to sb. émpavea, appearance, manifestation.
=Gk. émpaivey (fut. émpay-&), to manifest, show forthGk. émi,
to; and ¢aivew, toshow. See Fancy.

HPISCOPAL, belonging toa bishop. (F.—L.—Gk.) InCotgrave,
‘ Epyscopall iurisdiction;’ Caxton, Acts of Hen. VII, fol.a 3, bk.—OF.
episcopal, ‘episcopall;’ Cot. = L. episcopalis, adj. formed from episcopus,
a bishop. = Gk. émicxomos, an over-seer, bishop. See Bishop. Der.
episcopal-i-an; from the same source, episcopate (L. episcopatus) ;
episcopac-y.

EPISODE, a story introduced into another. (Gk.) In the
Spectator, no. 267.— Gk. ére.od5-tov, orig. neut. of émeradd.0s, episodic,
adventitious. — Gk. émi, besides; and eiad6:0s, coming in; which is from
eis, into, and 65és,a way. Der. episodi-al (from émeroddt-0s) ; episod-ic,
-ic-al, -al-ly.

EPISTLB, a letter. (F.—L.—Gk.) In early use. The pl. episélis
isin Wyclif, 2 Cor. x. 10.—OF. epistle, the early form whence epistre
(Cotgrave) was formed by the change of / to r (as in chapter from L.
capitulum) ; F. épitre.=L. epistola (whence also AS. epistol).—Gk.
émoToAn, a message, letter. — Gk. émeoTéAdev, to send to; from émi, to,
and oréAAev, to send, equip. See Stole. Der. epistol-ic, -ar-y; from
L. epistol-a.

EPITAPH, an inscription on a tomb. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak.
Much Ado, iv. 1. 209; ME. epitaphe, epitaffe, Gower, C. A. iii. 326;
bk. vill. 1531.—F, épitaphe; Cot.—L. epitaphium.—Gk. éntragos
Adyos, a funeral oration; where émrdguos signifies ‘ over a tomb,’
funeral. — Gk. éi, upon, over; and tapos, a tomb. See Cenvutaph.

EPITHALAMIUM, a marriage song. (L.—Gk.) See the
Epithalamion by Spenser. = L. epithalamium. = Gk. ém@addmor,a bridal
song ; neut. of ém@aAduos, belonging to a nuptial. Gk. émi, upon,
for; and @dAapos, a bed-room, bride-chamber.

EPITHET, an adjective expressing a quality. (L.—Gk,) InShak.
Oth.i. 1.14. —L. epitheton. = Gk. éiderov, an epithet ; neut. of émiGeros,
added, annexed. = Gk. éni, besides; and the base 0e-, allied to ri@nyu,
I place, set.—4/DHE, to place; see Dow Der. epithet-ic.

EPITOME, an abridgment. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. Cor. v. 3. 68 ;
and in Frith’s Works (1572), p. 97, col. I (written in 1529).—L.
epitomé. = Gk. émroyun, a surface-incision; also, an abridgment. = Gk.
éni, upon; and téwvev, tocut. See Tome. Der. epitom-ise, -ist.

EPOCH, a fixed date. (L.—Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
—Late L. epocha ; Ducange. = Gk. énox7, a stop, check, hindrance,
pause, epoch. = Gk. éréyetv, to hold in, check. Gk. é-=éi, upon ;
and éxewv, to have, hold; cognate with Skt. sak, to bear, undergo,
endure. = 4/SEGH, to hold, check ; Brugmann, i. § 602.

EPODH, a kind of lyric poem, (F.—L.—Gk.) In Ben Jonson,
The Forest, x., last line. — OF. epode; Cot. L. epddos.— Gk. émwdds,
something sung after, an epode. = Gk. ém-=émi, upon, on; and deidev,
adev, to sing. See Ode.

EPONYMOUS, that gives (his) name to anything, esp. to a place.
(Gk.) Used by Grote in 1846.—Gk. émwyupos, given as a name, or
giving a name.—Gk, émi, upon; and évoya (olic évvpa), a name,
See Name.

EQUAL, on a par with, even, just. (L.) Chaucer has both equal
and inegual in his Treatise on the Astrolabe; equally is in the C. T.
+819 (D 2237). [We find also ME. egal, from OF. egal.]—L. equilis,
equal ; formed with suffix -dlis from @quus, equal, just. Der. equal-ly,
-ise, -is-at-ion ; -i-ty, King Lear, i. 1. 5; and see equation, and equity.

EQUANIMITY, evenness of mind. (F.—L.) In Butler, Hudi-
bras, pt. i. c. 3. 1. 1020.—MF. équanimité (Cot.). —L. equanimitatem,
acc. of equanimitas, evenness of mind.—L. eguanimis, kind, mild;
hence; calm.—L. @gu-, for eguus, equal; and animus, mind. See
Equal and Animate.

EQUATION, a statement of equality. (L:) ME. equacion,


198


ERE


Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, prol. 71 (or 76). Palsgrave has equate,
yb. —L. egquatiénem, acc. of egudtio, an equalising ; cf. equdtus, pp.
of equdre, to equalise.—L. eguus, equal. See Equal. Der. equat-or
(Late L. equator, from @guare), Milton, P. L. ili. 617; equa-ble (L.
a@quabilis, from equare); equa-bl-y ; equa-bil-i-ty, spelt equabilitie in
Sir T. Elyot, Governour, b. iii. c. 21. § 2. Also ad-equate. ;

EQUERRY, an officer who has charge of horses. (F.—OHG.)
Properly, it meant ‘a stable,’ and eqguerry really stands for eguerry-man.
It occurs in The Tatler, no. 19. § 2.—F. éecurie, formerly escurie, a
stable, spelt escwyrie in Cotgrave; Low L. sciria, a stable; Ducange.
= OHG. shiura, scura, MHG. schiure, a shed (G. scheuer) ; lit. a cover,
shelter. = 4/SQEU, to cover; see Sky. Brugmann,i. § 109. @ The
spelling eguerry is due to an attempt to connect it with L. eguus, a horse.,
There is, however, a real ultimate connexion with esquire, q.v.

EQUESTRIAN, relating to horsemen. (L.) ‘A certain equestrian
order ;’ Spectator, no. 104. § 1. Formed, with suffix -an, from L.
equestri-, stem of eguester, belonging to horsemen. = L. eques, a horse-
man. = L. eguus,a horse. See Hquine.

EQUI-, prefix, equally. (L.) L. egui-, from eguus, equal; see
Equal. Hence equi-angular, equi-distant, equi-lateral, equi-multple,
all in Kersey, ed. 1715. And see Equilibrium, Hquinox,
Equipoise, Equipollent, Equivalent, Equivocal.

EQUILIBRIUM, an even balancing. (L.) InKersey,ed.1715.
= L. equilibrium, a level position (in balancing). —L. eguilibris, level,
balancing equally. = L. equi-, for equus, equal; and dibrare, to balance,
from libra, a balance. See Equal and Librate.

EQUINE, relating to horses. (L.) First in 1778 (N. E. D.); not
in Todd’s Johnson. = L. equinus, relating to horses. = L. eguus, a horses
+ Gk. immos (dialectally txxos), a horse ; Skt. agva-, ‘a runner,’ a horse;
Pers. asp; Olrish ech; AS.eoh. Idg.type *e#wos.. Brugmann, i. § 116.

EQUINOX, the time of equal day and night. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Oth. ii. 3.129. Chaucer has the adj. eguinowial, C. T. 14862 (B 4046).
— F. équinoxe, spelt equinocce inCotgrave. = L. equinoctium, the equinox,
time of equal day and night. —L. egui-, for equus, equal; and xocti-,
decl. stem of xox, night. See Equal and Night. Der. equinocti-al,
from L. equinocti-um. J Note that the suffix -zox is not the L. nom.
nox, but comes from -noctium.

EQUIP, to fit out, furnish. (F.—Scand.) In Cotgrave; and used
by Dryden, tr. of Ovid, Ceyx, 1. 67. Baret (1580) has esqgueppe. [The
sb. equipage is earlier, in Spenser, Sheph. Kal., Oct. 114; whence
equipage as a verb, F. Q. ii. 9. 17.)_—MF. equiper, ‘to equip, arm;’
also spelt esquiper; Cot.; AF. eskipper, Black Book of the Admiralty,
i. 20. —Icel. skzpa, to arrange, set in order; prob. allied to Icel. skip,
aship. See Ship. Der. equip-age (MF. equipage) ; equip-ment.

EQUIPOISE, an equal weight. (F.—L.) In the Rambler, no. 95
(R.). Coined from egui-=F. equi-=L. egui-, and poise. See Equi-
and Poise.

EQUIPOLLENT, equally powerful. (F.—L.) ‘Thou wilt to
kingeés be eguipolent;’ Lydgate, Ballad of Good Counsel, st. 3; in
Chaucerian Pieces. —OF. equipolent; Cot.—L. eguipollent-, stem of
equipollens, of equal value. —L. egut-, for equus, equal; and pollens,
pres. part. of pollére, to be strong.

EQUITY, justice. (F.—L.) In Shak. K. John, ii. 241; ME,
equité, Gower, C. A. i. 2713 bk. ii. 3327. — OF. eguité, ‘ equity ;’ Cots
= L. equitatem,acc. of equitas, equity ; from equus,equal. See Equal.
Der. equit-able, OF . equitable (Cot.); -abl-y, -able-ness.

EQUIVALENT, of equal worth. (F.—L.) In Shak, Per. v.
I. 92.— MF. equivalent, ‘equivalent;’ Cot.—L. equiualent-, stem of
pres. part. of @guiualére, to be equivalent.<L. egui-, for equus,
equal; and ualére, to be worth. See Equal and Value. Der.
equivalent-ly, equivalence.

EQUIVOCAL, of doubtful sense. (L.) In Shak. Oth. i. 3,
217. Formed, with suffix -al, from L. eguiuoc-us, of doubtful sense.
=L. @qui-, for e@guus, equal (i.e. alternative); and zoc-, base of
uoc-dre, to call. See Equi- and Voice. Der. equivocal-ly, -ness ;
hence also equivoceate (used by Cotgrave to translate MF. eguivoguer),
equivoc-at-ion.

ERA, an epoch, fixed date. (L.) Spelt era in Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674.—L. @ra, an era; derived from a particular use of era, in the
sense of ‘ counters,’ hence, ‘an item of an account,’ which is properly
the pl. of @s, brass, money (Lewis).

ERADICATE, to root up. (L.) Sir T. Browne has eradication,
Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 6. s,8 3 Cockeram (1642) has eradicate.—L.
érddicitus, pp. of éradicare, to root up.—L. é@, out; and radic-, stem
of radix, a root. See Radical, Der. eradicat-ion.

ERASE, to scrape out, efface. (L.) Eras’dis in Butler, Hudibras,
pt. iii.c. 3.1. 214.—L. érasus, pp. of éradere, to scratch out.—L, é@, out ;
and radere,to scrape. See Rase. Der. eras-er, -ion, -ure ; erase-ment.

ERE, before, sooner than. (E.) ME, er, Chaucer, C.T. ro42
(A 1040). AS.#r,soon, before; prep.,conj., and adv. ; Grein,i.69. [Cf
AS, #r-lic, mod. E. early.]4Dnu. eer, ady. sooner; OHG. ér, G. ehery


ERECT )


sooner; Goth. airis, sooner, comp. of air, ady. early, soon. f Orig.
a comparative form ; the positive being found in Goth. air, soon, Icel.
Gr, soon. Cf. Gk. ijpt, early. See Erst.

ERECT, upright. (L.) ME. erect, Chaucer, C. T. 4429 (B 9).—
L. érectus, set up, upright; pp. of érigere, to set up. —L. @, out, up;
and regere, to rule, set. See Regal. Der. erect, vb., -ion.

ERGOT, a diseased transformation of the seed of rye, &c., due to
a fungus, and thought to resemble a cock’s spur. (F.) First in 1683
(N. E. D.).—F. ergot, ‘a cock’s spur, spurred rye, ergot ;? Hamilton.
Cotgrave has both ergot and argot,a cock’s spur; and OF. argot occurs
in the 12th century (Littré), Origin unknown. Connexion with L.
argitus, bright, clear, seems not impossible; cf. L. argitari, to stamp
with the feet, as a fuller. Cotgrave has argofer,to fight with spurs.

ERMINE, an animal of the weasel.tribe. (F.-OHG.) ME.
ermyne, Rob. of Glouc., p. 191, 1. 39493 ermin, Old Eng. Homilies,
ed. Morris, 1st Ser. p. 181, 1. 361.—OF. ermine (F. hermine), ‘the
hate-spot ermelin ;’ Cot. [Cf. Span. armitio, Ital. ermellino, ermine ;
Low L. armelinus, ermine-fur.] AF. hermine, Langtoft, i. 172.
—OHG. harmin, MHG. hermin, ermine-fur; cf. mod. G. ermelin.
B. The forms hermin, hermelin, are extended from OHG. harmo,
MHG. harme, an ermine, corresponding to Lithuanian szarmz, szar-
monys, a weasel (Diez); cf. AS. hearma, the name of some quadruped,
Voc. 118.43 ; MDu. armelijn, ‘anhermin;’ Hexham. @f The deriva-
tion, suggested by Ducange, that ermine is for mais Armenius, Armenian
mouse, which may have been an equivalent term to miis Ponticus, a
Pontic mouse, which may have meant an ermine, is adopted by Littré.

ERODE, to eat away. (F.—L.) In Bacon, Nat. Hist. s. 983. —
MF, eroder, ‘to gnaw off, eat into ;’ Cot.—L. érédere, pp. érdsus, to
gnaw off; from @, off, and rédere, to gnaw. See Rodent. Der.
eros-ion, -ive; cf. L. érdsus.

EROTIC, amorous. (Gk.) ‘This eroticall love;’ Burton, Anat.
of Melancholy, iii. 2. 1, 2; p. 442 (R.).—Gk. épwrixds, relating to
love. = Gk. épw7t-, decl. stem of épws, love; allied to gpapa, I love.

ERR, to stray. (F.—L.) ME. erren, Chaucer, Troilus, b. iv. 1. 302.
= OF. errer, ‘to erre;’ Cot.—L. erradre,to wander; which stands for
an older form *ers-dre. + Goth. airz-jan, to make to err; a causal
form; OHG. irran (for irrjan), to make to err; G. irren, to wander,
go astray; G. irre, astray. Brugmann, i. § 878. Der. err-or, q.v.;
errant, q.Vv.; erratum, q.V.

ERRAND, a message. (E.)) ME. erende, erande, sometimes arende
(always with one r); Layamon, 10057. AS. #rende, a message,
business; Grein, i. 70. Cf. OSax. drundi; Icel. eyrendi, Grendi,
erendi; Swed. drende; Dan. erende; OHG. arunti,a message. Teut.
types uncertain; apparently *érundjom, n., *arundjom, n. Fick (iii.
21, 30) separates this word from Goth. airus, Icel. arr, a messenger,
and connects it with AS. earu, Icel. orr, swift, ready, Skt. arvant-, a
horse. J The initial vowel-sound is still unexplained.

BRRANT, wandering. (F.—L.) ‘Of errant knights;’ Spenser,
F, Q. v. 6. 6.— OF. errant, ‘ errant, wandering ;’ Cot. Pres. pt. of
OF. errer, eirer, edrer, to wander. Late L. iterare, to travel; from
iter, a journey; seeItinerant. { But in some instances (see Troil.
and Cress. i. 3. 9) errant represents the pres. pt. of F. errer, to err,
from L. errare. See Err. Der. errant-ry. Doublet, arrant.

HRRATUM, an error in writing or printing. (L.) Most common
in the pl. errata; Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674. —L. erratum, pl. errata,
an error; neut. of errdtus, pp. of errare. See Err. Der. errat-ic,
from pp. erratus ; whence errat-ic-al, Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors,
b. ii. c. 6.\§ 7, -ic-al-ly. :

ERRONEOUS, faulty. (L.) ‘Erronious doctrine ;’ Life of
Dr. Barnes, ed. 1472, fol. Aaa. iiij.—L. errdne-us, wandering about ;
with suffix -ous.—L. errdne-, for errdni-, decl. stem of erro, a vagrant.
=L.errare. See Err. Der. erroneous-ly, -ness.

ERROR, a fault, mistake. (F.—L.) ME. errour, Gower, C. A.
i, 21; prol. 511,.—OF. errour.—L. errdrem, acc. of error, a mistake,
wandering. =L. errdre. See Err, The spelling errour was altered
to error to be more like the Latin.

ERST, soonest, first. (E.) ME. erst, Chaucer, C. T. 778 (A 776).


AS. @rest, adv. soonest, adj. first, Grein, i. 71; the superl. form of


AS. ér,soon. See Bre.
-BRUBESCENT, blushing. (L.) Rare ; in Bailey, vol. ii (1731).

= L. érubescent-, stem of pres, pt. of érubescere, to grow red.—L. é@,
out, very much; and rubescere, to grow red, inceptive form of rubére,
to be red. See Ruby. Der. erubescence, from MF. erubescence (Cot-
grave); from L. erubescentia, a blushing.

ERUCTATE, to belch out, reject wind. (L.) ‘ Atna in times
past hath eructated such huge gobbets of fire;’ Howell’s Letters,
b. i. s.r. let. 27.—L. éructitus, pp. of éructare, to belch out; from é,
out, and ructare, to belch. Allied to ériigere, to belch (Festus), rugire,
to bellow, and to Gk. épevyeo@ar, to spit out, 7puyov, I bellowed; from
the base REUG, to bellow. Brugmann,i. § 221. Der. eructat-ion.


. ERUDITE, leamed. (L.) ‘A most erudite prince ;’ Sir T. More, |


ESCUTCHEON 199


Works, p. 645 b.=L. éruditus, pp. of érudire, to free from rudeness,
to cultivate, teach; (orig. ‘rough-hewn into shape,’ said of a tree;
Bréal).—L. @, out, from; and rudis, rude, See Rude. Der. erudite-ly,
erudit-ion.

ERUPTION, a bursting out. (L.) In Shak. Haml. i. 1. 69.—
L. acc. éruptidnem, from nom. éruptio, a breaking out.—L. 2, out;
and ruptio, a breaking, allied to ruptus, broken. See Rupture,
Der. erupt-ive.

ERYNGO, the candied root of the sea-holly. (Ital. —L.—Gk.)
In Shak. Merry Wives, v. 5. 23. An incorrect form; from MItal.
eringio, erigne, ‘the weede sea-hollie, also, eringos rootes;’ Florio.
=—L. éryngion.— Gk. jpvyyov, dimin. of Hpvyyos, an eryngo; see
Prellwitz.

ERYSIPELAS, a redness on the skin. (L.—Gk.) Spelt erysipely
(from OF. erystpele) in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —L. erysipelas. = Gk.
épvoimedas (stem épvotmedar-), a redness on the skin.—Gk. épvat-,
allied to épuOpés, red; and méAAa, skin. See Red and Pell. Der;
erysipelat-ous (from the stem).

ESCALADEH, a scaling of walls. (F.—Span.—L.) Florio has
Ital. scalada, ‘an escalado.’ The Span. form scalado (which occurs
in Bacon, Hist. Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 165) has given way to the
F. escalade. =F, escalade, ‘a scalado, a scaling ;’ Cot. Span. escalado,
properly escalada, an escalade; these are the masc. and fem. forms of
the pp. of the verb escalar, to scale, climb. —Span. escala, a ladder. =
L. scala, a ladder. See Scale (3).

ESCAPE, to flee away, evade. (F.—L.) ME. escapen, Chaucer,
C. T. 14650 (B 3922).— ONorth F. escaper, AF. escaper, OF, eschaper
(F. échapper), to escape; lit. ‘to slip out of one’s cape,’ and so to
get away. = L. ex cappa, out of one’s cape or cloak. See Cape (1).
q In Italian, we not only have scappare, to escape, but also incappare,
to ‘in-cape,’ to fall into a snare, to invest with a cape or cope; also
incappucciare, to wrap up in a hood, to mask, Cf. Norm. dial.
écapper, to escape (Moisy). Der. escape-ment; escap-ade, from F.
escapade, orig. an escape, from Ital. scappata, an escape, fem. of
pp: of scappare,to escape. Hence, later, the sense of ‘ breaking away
from restraint.’

ESCARPMENT, a smooth and steep decline. (F.—Ital.—Teut.)
A military term; F. escarpement, Formed from F. escarpe, a scarp ;
with suffix -ment (L. -mentum). The verb is generally scarp rather
than escarp; see Scarp.

ESCHEAT, a forfeiture of property to the lord of the fee. (F.—
L.) ME. eschete, escheyte; ‘I lese menye escheytes’ =I (the king) lose
many escheats; P. Plowman, C. v. 169.—OF. eschete, that which falls
to one, rent ; a f. pp. form from the verb escheoir, to fall to one’s share
(F. échoir).— Late L. excadere, to fall upon, meet (any one), to fall to
one’s share; used A.D. 1229 (Ducange); from L. ex, out, and cadere,
to fall. See Chance. Der. escheat, verb; and see Cheat.

ESCHEW, to shun, avoid. (¥.—OHG.) ME. eschewen, eschiwen ;
P. Plowman, C, ix. 51.—AF. eschuer, Liber Albus, p. 369; OF. es-
chiver, MF, eschever, ‘to shun, eschew, avoid, bend from;’ Cot. and
Godefroy. = OHG., sciukan, MHG., schiuhen (G. scheuen), to frighten ;
also, intr. to fear, shy at.—OHG. *scioh, MHG. schiech, shy ; cognate
with E. shy. Thus eschew and shy (verb) are doublets. See Shy.

ESCORT, a guide, guard. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘ Escort, a convoy ;’
Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1731.— MF. (and F-.) escorte, ‘a guide, con-
voy ;’ Cot.—Ital. scorta, an escort, guide, convoy; fem. of pp. of
scorgere, to see, perceive, guide. Formed as if from L. *excorrigere,
a compound of ex and corrigere, to set right, correct; see Correct,
Der. escort, verb. f Similarly Ital. accorgere, to find out, answers
to a L. *ad-carrigere; see Diez.

ESCRITOIRE, a writing-desk, bureau. (F.—L.) ‘ Captain
Gibbet has made bold. . . with your study and eseritoir ;? Farquhar,
Beaux Stratagem, A. y. sc. 4 (near end).—F. escritoire, now écritoire.
=-L. scriptérium, place for writing. —L. script-us, pp. of scribere, to
write. See Scribe.

ESCROW, a deed delivered on condition, (F.—Teut.) A law
term (Webster); the same word as ME. scroue, scrow, examples of
which are given s.v. Scroll, q.v. It is the orig. word of which
scroll is the diminutive. Cf. AF. escrouwe, Britton, ii. 71.

ESCUAGE, a pecuniary satisfaction in lieu of feudal service. (F.
—L.) In Blackstone, Comment., b. ii. c. 3.— OF. escuage (Godefroy) ;
ef. Littré, s.v. écuage, who quotes from Ducange, s.y. scutaigium,
which is the Low L. form of the word. Formed with suffix -age
from OF, escz, a shield; because escuage was, at first, paid in lieu of
service in the field. See Squire and Escutcheon.

ESCULENT, eatable. (L.) ‘Or any esculent, as the learned
call it;’ Massinger, New Way to Pay, Act iv. sc. 2.—L. esculentus,
fit for eating. —L. esca, food; with suffix -w-lentus (cf. win-o-lentus
from uinum). The L. esca is for *ed-sca ; from L. ed-ere, to eat, cog-
nate with E, eat. See Hat. Brugmann, i. § 753. :

ESCUTCHEON, a painted shield. (F.—L.) Spelt scutchion in


200 ESOPHAGUS


Bacon, Essay 29 (ed. Wright, p. 129) ; scuchin, Spenser, F. Q, iii. 4.
16; scochen, Sir Degrevant, 1.1481 (Thornton, Rom.) ; scochon, Book
of St. Alban’s, pt. il. fol. £8, 1.7. ME. escochon (1480; N.E.D.) ;
AF. escuchon, Royal Wills, p. 67 (1376).—O, North F. escuchon, OF.
escusson, ‘a scutcheon,’ Cot.; answering to a Late L. type *sciitidnem,
from a nom. *scii#io. The form depends upon L. sciitum, a shield,
just as F, escusson does upon OF, escu, a shield. See Esquire. Cf.
Ttal. scudone, a great shield, from scudo, a shield ; but note that the F.
suffix -on has a dimin. force, while the Ital. -one is augmentatiye.

ESOPHAGUS, the food-passage, gullet. (L.— Gk.) Also @sopha-
gus. ‘Oecsophagus, the gullet ;’? Kersey, ed. 1715. Ocvsophagus is a
Latinised form of Gk. oicopayos, the gullet; lit. ‘conveyer of food.’
= Gk. olgo-, allied to ofaw, I shall carry, used as a future from a base
ol-, to carry, which is allied to «%u, 1 shall go; and gay-, base of
ayetv, to eat.

ESOTERIC, inner, secret. (Gk.) ‘Exoteric and esoteric ;? War-
burton, Divine Legation, b. ii. note Bb (R.). —Gk. éowrepixds, inner
(Lucian); a term expanded from Gk. éowrepos, inner, a comparative
form from éow, within, an adv. from és=eis, into, prep. 4 A term
used of those disciples of Pythagoras, &c. who were scientifically
taught, as opposed to those who had more popular views, the exoteric,
See Exoteric.

ESPALI®R, lattice-work for training trees. (F. —Ital. —L.—Gk.)
In Pope, Sat. ii. 147. ‘Espaliers, trees planted in a curious order
against a frame;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.—=MF. espallier, ‘an hedge-rowe
of sundry fruit-trees set close together;’ Cot. —Ital. spalliera, the
back of a chair; an espalier (from its forming a back or support). =
Ital. spalla, a shoulder, top, back.=L. spatula, a blade; in Late L.
ashoulder. See Epaulet,

ESPECIAL, special, particular. (F.—L.) ME. especial, Chaucer,
C. T., B 2356 (Six-text),—OF. especial. = L. specialis, belonging to a
particular kind. —L, speciés,a kind. See Species. Der. especial-ly,
@ Often shortened to special, as in Chaucer, C. T. 1019 (A 1017).

ESPLANADE, a level space. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘ Esplanade,
properly the glacis or slope of the counterscarp; but it is now
chiefly taken for the void space between the glacis of a citadel and
the first houses of,a town;’ Phillips, ed. 1696.—MF, esplanade, ‘a
planing, levelling, evening of ways;’ Cot. Formed from MF, es-
planer, to level, in imitation of Ital. spianata, an esplanade, lit. a
levelled way, from Ital. spianare, to level. L. explaindre, to flatten
out, explain. See Explain.

ESPOUSSH, to give or take as spouse. (F.—L.) In Shak. Hen.
V, ii. 1, 81.— OF. espouser, ‘to espouse, wed; ’ Cot. —OF, espouse, ‘a
spouse, wife;’ id, See Spouse. Der. espous-er; espous-al, ME.
espousaile, Gower, C. A. ii. 322; bk. v. 5815 ; from OF. espousailles,
answering to L. sponsalia, neut, pl., a betrothal, whica is from sponsalis,
adj. formed from sponsa, a betrothed one.

ESPY, to spy, catch sight of. (F.—OHG.) ME. espyen, espien,
Chaucer, C. T. 4744 (B 324); often written aspien, asin P. Plowman,
A. ii, 201. [It occurs as early as in Layamon ; vol. ii. p. 404.]—OF.
espier, to spy.—OHG, spehin, MHG. spehen (mod. G. spahen), to
watch, observe closely.+L. specere, to look; Skt. pag, spag, to spy,
used to form some tenses of dyg, to see.—4/SPEK, to see. Brug-
mann, i. § 551. See Species, Spy. Cf. Norm. dial. espier, to spy.
Der. espion-age, F. espionnage, from MF. espion, a spy (Cotgrave) ;
which is from Ital. spione, a spy, and from the same OHG. verb.
Also espi-al, ME. espiaile, Gower, C. A. iii. 563 bk. vi. 1643.

ESQUIRE, a shield-bearer, gentleman. (F.—L.) In Shak. Mer.
Wives, i. 1.4. Often shortened to squire, ME. squyer, Chaucer, C. T.
prol. 79.—OF. escuyer, ‘an esquire, or squire;’ Cot. (Older form
escuier ; mod. F. écuyer.)— Late L. scutdrius, prop. a shield-bearer. =
L. sciitum (whence OF, escut, escu, mod. F. écu), a shield. = 4/SQEU,
to cover, protect ; see Sky.

ESSART, a variant of Assart, q.v.

ESSAY, an attempt. (F.—L.) See Bacon’s Essays. [Commonly
spelt assay in Mid. English; Barbour has assay, an assault, Bruce,
ix. 604, an effort, ii. 371, and as a verb, ix. 353. See Assay.]
— OF, essai, a trial,—L. exagium, weighing, a trial of weight; cf.
eximen, a weighing, a swarm.=L, ex, out ; and agere, to drive, impel,
move. Der. essay, verb, spelt assay in Shakespeare, and even later ;
essay-ist, Ben Jonson, Discoveries, Ingeniornm Discrimina, not. 6.

ESSENCH, a being, quality. (F.—L.) In Shak. Oth. iv. 1. 16.
= F, essence, ‘an essence ;’ Cot.—L. essentia, a being; formed from
essent-, base of a pres. participial form from esse, to be. = 4/ES, to be ;
cf. Skt. as, to be. See Is. Der. essent-i-al, essent-i-al-ly ; from the
decl. stem essenti-.

ESSOIN, an excuse for not appearing in court. (F.—L, and Teut.)
ME, essoine, Chaucer, Pers. Tale, Introd. § 10 (1164). Spelt essoigne
in AF., Stat. of Realm, i. 49, an. 12783 also essoyne, Year-books of
Edw.I., i. 13; assoyne, ibid. — OF. essoine (also MF, exoine), ‘an essoine,


or excuse ;’ Cot.; OF. essonier, to excuse (Godefroy).— OF, es- (from ,


ETHIC


L. ex, away) ; and Late L. sunnia, excuse, in the Lex Salica, ed. Hessels
and Kern, Gloss. col. 673. From OHG. sunne (for *sundja, Braune,
xiv. 9), lawful excuse. Cf. Goth. sunjén, to excuse oneself, gasunjon,
to justify; from swnja, truth. Cf. also Goth. sunjis, true, which is
allied to Icel. sannr, AS. s60, Skt. satja(s), true. See further under
Sooth, Suttee.

ESTABLISH, to make firm or sure. (F.—L.) ME. establissen,
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. i. pr. 4 (1. 65).—_ OF. establiss-, base of
some parts of the verb establir, to establish.—L. stabilire, to make
firm. = L, stabilis, firm. See Stable, adj. Der. establish-ment, Spenser,
F, Q. v. 11. 35. ] Sometimes stablish ; A.V., James, v. 8.

ESTATE, state, condition, rank, (F.—L.) In earlyuse. ME.
estat, Hali Meidenhad, ed. Cockayne, p. 13, 1. 13; Chaucer, C. T.
928 (A 926).—OF, estat (F. état). —L. statum, acc. of status, a con-
dition. See State. @ Szate is a later spelling.

ESTEEM, to value. (F.—L.) ‘Nothing esteemed of ;’ Spenser,
p- 3, col. 2 (Globe ed.). Palsgrave has esteme.—OF. estimer, ‘to
esteem ;*’ Cot.—L. @stimare, older form @stumare, to value. This
stands for *ais-tumare, to be compared with Goth, ais-tan, to regard ;
and further related to AS. dr, G. ehre, honour. Brugmann, ii. § 692.
See below; and see Aim,

ESTIMATE, valuation, worth. (L.) In Shak. Rich. II, ii. 3. 56.
= L. sb. estimatus, estimation ; from @stimdtus, pp. of @stimare, to
value. SeeHsteem. Der. estimate, verb, in Daniel, Civil Wars, b. iv.
st. 3; also estimation, from MF. estimation, ‘an estimation’ (Cot.),
which from L. acc. @stimdatidnem; also estimable, Merch. of Ven. i. 3.
167, from OF, estimable, from L. e@stimabilis, worthy of esteem;
whence estimabl-y,

ESTOP, to bar, impede, stop up. (F.—L.) See Stop.

ESTOVERS, supplies of various necessaries. (F,—L.?) ‘Common
of estovers, i.e. necessaries, . . is aliberty of taking necessary wood,’
&c.; Blackstone, Comment. b. li. c. 2; b. iii. c. 8. [He erroneously
derives it from estoffer, to stuff, which is a distinct word.]—OF.
estover, provisions; see Stover. The Anglo-F. estover, sb., sus-
tenance, occurs in the Year-books of Edw. I., i.19, 21, 231.

ESTRANGE, to alienate, make strange. (F.—L.) In Shak.
LL. L. v. 2. 213.—OF, estranger, ‘to estrange, alienate ;’ Cot.—
OF. estrange, ‘strange;’ id. See Strange. Der. estrange-ment.

The adj. s¢range was in much earlier use.

ESTREAT, a true copy of an original record. (F.—L.) In
Blount ; he refers us to Fitzherbert, Natura Brevium, foll. 57, 76.
AF. estrete, Stat. of the Realm, i. 32, an. 1275. (In the Lib.
Custumarum, p. 434, we have the L. gen. pl. extractarum.) B. The
lit. sense is ‘extract.’— OF. estrete, fem. of estret, also spelt estrait,
pp. of estraire, to extract (Godefroy).—L. extracta, fem. of pp. of
extrahere; see Extract. Der. estreat, vb., to extract a record, as a
forfeited recognizance, and return to the court of exchequer for
prosecution, also to levy fines under an estreat (Ogilvie). Doublet,
extract,

ESTUARY, the mouth of a tidal river. (L.) ‘From hence we
double the Boulnesse, and come to an estwarie ;’ Holinshed, Descr. of
Britain, c. 14 (R.).—L. @studrium, a creek.=—L. e@studre, to surge,
foam as the tide. —L. @stus, heat, surge, tide; from L. base aid-, to
burn, with suffix -tu-.—4/AIDH, to burn, glow ; whence also Gk.
aidev, to glow. See Ether.

ESURIENT, hungry. (L.) Bailey, vol. ii (1731) has ‘ esurient,
hungering.’=L. ésurient-em, acc. of ésuriens, pres. pt. of ésurtre, to be
hungry; a desiderative verb, formed from és-us, pp. of edere, to eat.
See Hat. 4 Often with special reference to Juvenal, Sat. iii. 78.

ETCH, to engrave by help ofacids. (Du.—G.) ‘ Etching, akind
of graving upon copper with Aqua-fortis ;”? Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
— Du. etsen, to etch (2 borrowed word from German). —G. dizen, to
feed, bait, corrode, etch; a causal form, orig. signifying ‘to make
to eat ;’ Teut. type *at-jan-, causal form of Teut. *et-an- (pt. t. at), to
eat. See Kat. Der. efch-ing.

ETERNAL, everlasting. (F.—L.) ME. eternal, Chaucer, C. T.
15502 (G 34); also written eternel.mOF. eternel.—L. aternidlis,
formed with suffix -alis from @tern-us, everlasting, contracted form
of euiternus. Again, @ui-ternus is formed, with suffix -ternus, indi-
cating quality, from @ui-, for euo-, from euum, age. See Age. Der.
elernal-ly; from same source, eferni-ty=ME. eternilee, Chaucer, tr,
of Boethius, b. v. pr. 6, 1. 8, from F, eternité, which is from L. acc.
eternitatem ; also etern-ise, from OF, eterniser, * to eternize ;’ Cotgrave.
@ The Middle English also had eferne, Chaucer, C. T. 1992 (A.
1990) ;=L. e@eternus,

ETHER, the clear upper air. (L.—Gk.) In Dryden, tr. of Ovid’s
Metamorph. b.i.1. 86. [Milton has ethereal, ethereous, P. L. i. 45, vi.
473. J—L. ether.—Gk. aidnp, upper air; cf. Gk. ai@pa, clear sky, =
Gk, aidev, to burn, glow. —4/AIDH, to burn. Brugmann, i. § 202,
Der. ether-e-al, -e-ous, -e-al-ly, -e-al-ise. And see estuary.


ETHIC, relating to custom. (L.—Gk.) Commonly used as ethics,


ETHNIC


sb. pl. ‘1 will never set politics against ethics ;? Bacon (in Todd’s
Johnson). ME. ethtk, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, iii. 363. —L. éthicus,
moral, ethic. Gk, 7@:«és, moral, ethic.—Gk. 760s, custom, moral
nature; cf. €80s, manner, custom. fB. Allied to Goth. sidus, custom,
manner; G. sitfe, custom; Skt. svadhd, self-will, strength. And cf.
L. suétus, accustomed. ‘y. The Skt. form is easily resolved into sva,
one’s own self (cf. L. sé= Gk. €), and dha, to set, place (Gk. 67-) ; so
that Skt. svadha is ‘a placing of one’s self,’ hence, self-assertion, self-
will, habit. See Prellwitz, and Goth. sidus in Uhlenbeck. Der. ethic-
al, -al-ly, ethic-s.

‘ETHNIC, relating to a nation. (L.—Gk.) In Ben Jonson’s Dis-
coyeries; Veritas proprium hominis. Also in Levins. = L. ethnicus, —
Gk. €@v«és, national. Gk. é@vos, anation. Der. ethnic-al ; ethno-
logy, -graphy (modern words).

ETIOLATE, to blanch plants. (F.—L.) ‘Cellery blanched or
etiolated;’ E. Darwin, Botanic Garden, note to c. 1, 1. 462.—F.
étiol-er, to blanch; with suffix -ate. For Norm. dial. s’étieuler, to
grow into haulm or stalk, like an etiolated plant.—F. ¢fewle, OF.
esteule, a stalk. = Late L. stupula, for stipula, straw. See Stubble.

ETIQUETTE, ceremony. (F.—G.) First in 1750; and mere
French. F. éiquette, f., a label, ticket ; explained by Cotgrave as
‘a token, billet, or ticket, delivered for the benefit or advantage of
him that receives it ;* i.e. a form of introduction. Cf. MF. etiquet, m.,
‘a little note,... esp. such as is stuck up on the gate of a court,’ &c.;
Cot. —G. stecken, to stick, put, set, fix; causal of G. stechen, to pierce.
See Stick, verb. Doublet, ticket.

ETYMON, the true source of a word. (L.—Gk.) In Sir T.
Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p. 242; and earlier, in Holinshed’s
Chron. of Scotland (R.).—L. etymon. = Gk. érupoy, an etymon ; neut.
of érupos, true, real, allied to é€veds, true, real; and to AS. sd0, true.
See Sooth. Der. etymo-logy, spelt ethimologie in The Remedie of
Love, st. 60, pr. in Chaucer’s Works, ed. 1561, fol. 323, back (derived
from F. etymologie, in Cotgrave, L. etymologia, Gk. érupodoyia) ;
etymo-log-ise, spelt ethimologise, id, st. 62; -log-ist ; also -logi-c-al,
-logi-c-al-ly.

EU.-, prefix, well. (Gk.) From Gk. ed, well; properly neut. of
évs, good, for an older form *Feavs, good ; allied to Skt. vasu(s), good
(Prellwitz).

BUCALYPTUS, a gum-tree. (L.—Gk.) First in 1809. Named
by L’héritier in 1788; from the sort of cap which covers the flower
before it opens, Lit. ‘well-covered.’— L. *eucalypitus, representing a
coined Gk. form *ed-xadumros; from ev, well, and xadum7ds, covered,
from kadvmrew, to cover. See Hu- (above).

‘BUCHARIST, the Lord’s supper. (L.—Gk.) Shortened from
eucharistia, explained as ‘thankes-geuing’ in Tyndale’s Works, p. 467,
col.2. Spelt exkaryst, Lydgate, Assembly of Gods, 1.1425. Cotgrave
has: ‘ Eucharistie, the Eucharist.’—L. eucharistia.—Gk. evxapotia,
a giving of thanks, the Eucharist.mGk,. «3, well; and xapiCopa, I
show favour, from xdpis, favour, closely related to yapa, joy, and
xaipew, to rejoice.—4/ GHER, to desire; whence also E. yearn.
See Hu- and Yearn. Der. eucharist-ic, -ic-al.

EULOGY, praise. (L.—Gk.) In Spenser, Tears of the Muses,
1. 372. Shortened from Late L. eulogium, which was itself used at
a later date, in the Tatler, no. 138. [Cf. MF. ewloge.] A form due
to confusing L. élogium, a maxim, inscription, with Gk. evAoyia,
praise, lit. good speaking. = Gk. ed, well ; and Aéyerv, to speak. See
Hy- and Logic. Der. eulog-ise, -ist, -ist-ic-al, -ist-ic-al-ly.

HUNUCH, one who is castrated. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. L.L. L.
iii, 201.—L. euniichus (Terence). —Gk. edvodyos, a eunuch, a cham-
berlain; one who had charge of the sleeping apartments. = Gk. eiv7,
a couch, bed; and éx-, 2nd grade of éxev, to have in charge, hold,


keep.

EUPHEMISM, a softened expression. (Gk.) ‘ Euphemismus, a
figure in rhetorick, whereby a foul harsh word is chang’d into another
that may give no offence ;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715. But spelt
euphemism in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.— Gk. ebpnuiopds, a later word
for evpnpia, the use of words of good omen.—Gk. ed, well; and
nui, 1 speak, from 4/ BHA, tospeak. See Hu-and Fame. Der.
euphem-ist-ic.

EUPHOWNY, a pleasing sound, (Gk.) Eupkony in Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. ‘Euphonia, a graceful sound;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed.
1715.—Gk. evpavia, euphony. —Gk. edpwvos, sweet-voiced. = Gk. 3,
well; and ¢gavy, voice, from4/ BHA, to speak. See HEu- and
Fame. Der. euphon-ic, -ic-al, -i-ous, -i-ous-ly.

EUPHORBIA, a plant, usually called spurge. (L.—Gk.) ‘Inba,
king of Mauritania, found out the herb Euphorbia, which he so called
after the name of his own Physitian Euphorbus;’ Holland, tr. of
Pliny, bk. xxv. c. 7. § 6.—L. Euphorbus.=—Gk. EvopBos, the name
of Juba’s physician (as above) ; lit. ‘ well-fed.’= Gk, ¢t, well, and
pépBev, to feed, nourish.

EUPHRASY, the plant eye-bright. (Gk.) In Milton, P. L.


EVER 201


xi. 414. [Cf. F. euphraise, eye-bright; Cot.] The eye-bright was
called Euphrasia, and was supposed to be beneficial to the eyes. —
Gk, evppacia, delight.—Gk. edppaivew, to delight, cheer ; cf. evppwr,
cheerful. —Gk. d, well; and gpev-, base of ppv, the mind, orig. the
midriff, heart.

EUPHUISM, affectation in speaking. "(Gk.) So named from
a book called Euphues, by John Lyly, first printed in 1579. —Gk.
evpuns, well-grown, goodly, excellent.—Gk. ei, well; and ¢v7,
growth, from ¢vopa, I grow; from4/ BHEU, to be. See Hue and
Be. Der. euphu-ist, -ist-ic.

EUROCLYDON, a tempestuous wind. (Gk.) In Acts, xxvii.
14.— Gk. ebpoxAvdwy, apparently ‘a storm from the East,’ but there
are various readings. As it stands, the word is from ewpo-s, the S. E.
wind (L. Eurus), and «Avéwy, surge, from «Av (ev, to surge, dash as
waves. @ Another reading is evpaxvAwy=Lat. Euro-Aquilo in the
Vulgate; from Eur-us, E, wind, and Aquilo, N. wind.

EUSTACHIAN, used with reference to certain anatomical
structures or organs. (L.—Gk.) So named after a celebrated Ital.
anatomist called Evstachius, who died in 1574.—L. Eustachius.
Suggested by Gk. evorayus, rich in corn. = Gk. ed, well; and ordyus,
an ear of corn, lit. ‘ prickle,’ and allied to E. sting.

EUTHANASIA, easy death. (Gk.) ‘Euthanasie, a happy
death ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—Gk. ev@avacia, an easy death ;
cf, eb@avaros, dying well. Gk. €d, well; and Oavety, to die, on which
see Prellwitz.

EVACUATE, to discharge. (L.) In Sir T. Elyot, Castel of
Helth, b. iii. c. 6.—L. éuacudtus, pp. of éuacudare, to discharge,
empty out.—L. 2, out; and wacwus, empty. See Vacation. Der.
evacuat-ion, -or. ‘

EVADH, to shun, escape from. (F.—L.) In Shak. Oth. i. 1. 13;
cf. evadit in G. Douglas, AEn. bk. ii. c. 7. 1. 102.—F. évader, ‘to
evade;’ Cot.—L,. éuadere, pp. éudsus, to‘escape, get away from, =L.
é, off; and uwadere, to go. See Wade. Der. evas-ion, q.v., like
pp- éudsus ; also evas-ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness.

EVANESCENT, fading away. (L.) In Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii.
ed. 1731.—L, @udnescent-, stem of pres. pt. of éudnescere, to vanish
away.=—L, é away; and wdnescere, to vanish, from zédanus, vain. See
Vanish. Der. evanescence.

EVANGELIST, a writer of a gospel. (F.—L.—Gk.) In early
use. Spelt ewangeliste, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 209.—OF.
evangeliste, ‘an evangelist ;’ Cot.—L. euangelista.— Gk. evayyediorHs.
—Gk. evayyediCopar, I bring good news; cf. evayyeArov, good tidings,
gospel. Gk. ed, well; and dyyeAla, tidings, from dyyedos, a
messenger. See Hu- and Angel. Der. (from Gk. evayyéd-1ov)
evangel-ic, -ic-al, -ic-al-ly, -ic-ism, -ise, -is-at-ion.

EVAPORATE, to fly off in vapour. (L.) The sb. ewaporation is
in Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii.c.22. The verb is in Cotgrave,
to translate F. évaporer.—L. éuapordtus, pp. of éuaporare, to disperse
in vapour. =—L. é@, away; and uapor, vapour. See Vapour. Der.
evaporat-ion, evapora-ble.

EVASION, an excuse. (F.—L.) InSir T. More, Works, p. 693 c.
= OF. evasion (Hatzfeld),—L, éudsidnem, acc. of éudsto (Judith, xiii.
20), an escape; cf, éuasus, pp. of éuadere; see Evade.

EVE, EVEN, the latter part of the day. (E.) ve is short for
even, by loss of final x; evening is from the same source, but is dis-
cussed below separately. ME. ewe, ewen, both in Chaucer, C.T. 4993,
go90 (B 573, E1214); the form ewe occurs even earlier, Owl and
Nightingale, 1. 41; the full form appears as efex, Ormulum, 1105 ;
@fen, Layamon, 26696. AS. fen, éfen, Grein, i. 64.-4-OSax. dband ;
OFries. Gvend ; OHG. adbant, MHG. dbent, G. abend. B. Origin
doubtful ; nor is it known whether these words are allied to Icel.
aptan, Swed. afton, Dan. aften, evening. Cf. Brugmann, i. § 980.
@ Not connected with even, adj. Der. even-song, Chaucer, C. T.
832 (A 830); even-tide, Ancren Riwle, p. 404,=AS. @fen-tid, Grein ;
also even-ing’, q. V.

EVEN, equal, level. (E.) ME. euen, euene ; P. Plowman, C.
xxiii. 270, AS. efen, efx, sometimes contracted to emn, Grein, i.
218.+Du. even; Icel. jafu; Dan. jevn; Swed. jamn; Goth. ibus;
OHG., epan; G. eben. B. The Teut. type is *ebxoz. Root unknown;
perhaps related to E. ebb, Der. even, adv., even-handed, &c., even-ly,
even=ness,

EVENING, eve, the latter end of the day. (E.) ME. euening,
euenynge, Rob. of Glouc. p. 3123 1. 6382. AS. @/nung, Gen. viii. 11;
formed with suffix -vzg (=mod. E. -ing) from &n-ian, to grow
towards evening ; from #fen, even. See Eve. .

EVENT, circumstance, result. (L.) In Shak. L. L. L. i. 1. 245.—
L. éuentus, or uentum, an event.—L, éuentus, pp. of éuenire, to happen.
—L.é-out; and uenire, to come. See Come, Der. event-ful; also
event-u-al, -u-al-ly (from éuentu-s).

EVER, continually. (E.) ME. euer, euere (where u=v), Chaucer,
C. T. 834 (A 832); @fre, Ormulum, 206, AS, @re, Grein, 1. 64.


202 EVERY


Unexplained ; but prob. related to AS. a, awa, ever, Goth. aiw, ever ;
which are based upon the sb. which appears as Goth. aiws, L. euum,
Gk. aiwy, life. See Aye. Der. ever-green, -lasting (Wyclif, Rom.
vi. 22, 23), -lasting-ly, -lasting-ness; ever-more ; also ever-y, q.V- 3
ever-y-where, q.V.3 m-ever, q.V.

EVERY, each one. (E.) Lit. ‘ever-each.? ME. euert (with
u=v) short for eerich, Chaucer, C. T. 1853 (A 1851); other forms
are euere-ile, Havelok, 1330; euere-il, id. 218; ewer-ulc, Layamon,
2378; euer-alc, euer-ech, id. 4599.—AS. @fre, ever; and élc, each
(Scotch ik). See Ever and Hach.

EVERYWHERE, in every place. (E.) It represents ¢wo old
forms. 1. Spelt ewerihwar, Ancren Riwle, p. 200; eauer ihwer,
Legend of St. Katharine, 681. Compounded of euer (AS. @fre), and
ME. ihwar (AS. gehwér, everywhere, Grein, i. 415). In this case
the word is nof compounded of every and where, but of ever and
ywhere, where ywhere= AS. gehwér, a word formed by prefixing AS.
ge to hwér, where. Similarly we find aywhere = everywhere (lit. aye-
where) in Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 228. 2. Commonly regarded
as=every-where, which answers to ME. euery where, euerilk quar,
Cursor Mundi, 5567.

EVVICT, to evince, to dispossess. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.
‘ That this deliverance might be the better evicted,’ i.e. evinced; Bp.
Hall, Contemplations, b. iv. c. xix. sect. 25.—L. ézictus, pp. of
éuincere. See Eivince. Der. evict-ion.

EVIDENT, manifest. (F.—L.) Chaucer has euidently (with x
=v), Treat. on the ‘Astrolabe, pt. ii. sect. 23, rubric; and euidences,
pl. sb., id. prol. 1, 2.-OF. evident, ‘evident;’ Cot.—L. éuident-,
stem of éuidens, visible, pres. pt. of éuidére, to see clearly. —L. é, out,
Clearly; and widére, to see; see Vision. Der. evident-ly, evidence
(OF. evidence).

EVIL, wicked, bad. (E.) ME. evel (with w=v), Ayenbite of
Inwyt, p. 85; also ivel, Havelok, 114; ifel, Ormulum, 1742; vwvel
(for zvel), Ancren Riwle, p. 52. AS. yfel, Grein, ii. 768; whence also
gfel, sb. an evil. + Du. exvel; OHG. upil, G. ubel; Goth. ubils.
Teut. type *ubdiloz, Prob. related to Goth. ufar, AS. ofer, over,
beyond, as going beyond bounds. Cf. also Icel. a, unfriendly,
OHG. uppi, hostile. See Over. @ The ME. evel is properly
Kentish; cf. OFries. evel, evil. Der. evil, sb.; evil-ly; evil-doer, &c.

EVINCHE, to prove beyond doubt. (L.) In Dryden, Hind and
Panther, ii. 190, 233. —L. uincere, to overcome.—L. é, fully ; and
wincere, to conquer. See Victor. 4 Older word, evict, q. v.

EVISCERATE, to disembowel. (L.) In Burton, Anat. of
Melanch. i. 2. 3. 14. —L. éuiscerdtus, pp. of éuiscerare, to disembowel.
=L. 2, out; and wiscera, bowels; see Viscera. Der. eviscerat-ion.

EVOKE, to call out. (L.). It occurs in Cockeram’s Dict. (1st ed.
1623); but was not in common use till later. [The sb. evocation is
in Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, pref. sect. 1; also in Cotgrave, to
translate MF. evocation.|=L. éuocare, to call forth. —L. é, out; and
uocare, to call; allied to uox, voice. See Voice. Der. evocat-ion,
from MF. evocation.

EVOLVE, to disclose, develop. (L.) | In Hale’s Origin of Man-
kind (ed. 1677), p. 31.—L. éuoluere, to unroll.—L. é@, out; and
uoluere, to roll. See Voluble. Der. evolution, in Hale (as above),
Pp. 259; evolution-ar-y, -ist.

EVULSION, a plucking out. (L.) In Sir T. Browne, Cyrus’
Garden, c. 2, § 11.—L. éuulsidnem, acc. of éuulsio; cf. éuulsus, pp. of
éuellere, to pluck out ; from @, out, and uellere. See Convulse.

EWE, a female sheep. (E.) ME. ewe; see Wyclif, Gen. xxi. 28.
AS. ewe, Laws of Ine, § 55 ; also AS. eowu, Gen. xxxii. 14.4+Du. oo7;
Icel. er; MHG. ouwe. Cf. Goth. awistr, a sheepfold ; John, x. 16.
+ Lithuanian avis, a sheep ; Russ. ovtsa, a sheep ; OIrish of ; L. ouis ;
Gk. dis ; Skt. avi-,a sheep, ewe. Brugmann, i. § 158.

,BWER, a water-jug, (F.—L.) In Shak. Tam. Shrew, ii. 350.
ME. ewer, Rob. Manning’s Hist. of England, ed. Furnivall, 1. 11425
(Stratmann).= AF. ewer, Royal Wills, p. 27 (1360) ; OF. aiguier, a
vessel for water (Godefroy). —L. aquarium, a vessel for water.—L.
agua, water (whence AF. ewe, OF. aigue, F. eau). See Aquatic.

EX.-, prefix, signifying ‘out’ or ‘thoroughly.’ (L.) L. ex, out;
cognate with Gk. é¢ or é#, out, and Russ. iz’, out; Lithuan. isz. It
becomes ef- before f, as in ef-fuse. It is shortened to e- before 3, d,
g, 1, m,n, r, and v; as in e-bullient, e-dit, e-gress, e-late, e-manate,
e-normous, e-rode, e-vade. The Gk, form appears in ec-centric, ec-
clesiastic, ec-lectic, ec-logue, ec-lipse, ec-stasy. It takes the form es- in
OF. and Spanish ; cf. es-cape, es-cheat, es-cort, es-planade. In some
words it becomes s-, as in Italian; see s-cald, s-camper.

EXACERBATES, to embitter. (L.) The sb. exacerbation is in
Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 61. —L. exacerbatus, pp. of exacerbare, to irritate ;
from ex, out, thoroughly, and acerbus, bitter. See Acerbity. Der,
exacerbat-ion,

EXACT (1), precise, measured. (L.) In Hamlet, v. 2. 19.—L.
exactus, pp. of exigere, to.drive out, also to weigh out, measure. =L,


EXCHANGE


ex, out; and agere, to drive. See Agent.
and see below.

EXACT (2), to demand, require. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. i.
2. 99. = MF. exacter, ‘to exact, extort; ’ Cot.—Late L. exactdre, in-
tensive of L. exigere (pp. exactus), to exact, lit. to drive out; see
above. Der. exact-ion, from MF. exaction, ‘ exaction ;’ Cot.

EXAGGERATE, to heap up, magnify. (L.) In Cotgrave, to
translate MF. exaggerer.—L. exaggeratus, pp. of exaggerire, to
heap up, amplify. —L. ex; and aggerare, to heap, from agger, a heap,
which is from ag- (for ad, to, together, before g') and gerere, to carry.
See Jest. Der. exaggerat-ion (MF. exaggeration, Cot.); -ive, -or-y.

EXALT, to raise on high. (F.—L.) In Shak. K. Lear, v. 3. 67.,
Lydgate has: ‘ As he that lyst her name so hyghe exalte ;’ Siege of
Troy, bk. i. c. 5 (fol. c 6, col. 2). [The sb. exaltacion is in Chaucer,
C. T. 6284 (D 702); and exaltat (pp.), id. 6286.]—OF. exalier, ‘to
exalt ;’ Cot. —L. exaltdre, to exalt.—L. ex, out; andaltus, high. See
Altitude. Der. exalt-at-ion (OF. exaltation, Cot.) ; -ed, -ed-ness.

EXAMINE, to test, try. (F.—L.) ME. examinen, Chaucer, Tale
of Melibeus (B 2310); Gower, C. A. ii. 11; bk. iv. 293.— OF. ex-,
aminer ; Cot.—L. examindre, to weigh carefully.—L. examen (stem
examin-), the tongue ofa balance; for *exag-men ; cf. exigere, to weigh
out.—L, ex, out; and agere, to drive. See Agent and Exact (1).:
Brugmann, i. § 768. Der. examin-er ; -at-ion (OF. examination, Cot.).

EXAMPLE, a pattern, specimen. (F.—L.) In Shak. Meas. iit.
I. 191. [Earlier form ensample, q.v.]—OF. essample, ensample
(Godefroy), also example (Supp.); later exemple (Cot.).—L. exem-=
plum, a sample, pattern, specimen. = L. eximere, to take out; hence,
to select a specimen; with suffix -Jwm, and inserted -p- (as in exem-
p-tus).—L. ex, out; and emere, to take, procure, buy. Der. exemplar,
exemplify, exempt. Doublets, ensample, sample.

EXARCH, (1) a governor under the Byzantine emperors; (2) a.
patriarch of the Eastern church. (L.—Gk.) First in 1588; cf.
Gibbon, Decline Rom. Empire, c. xlv.—L. exarchus.—Gk. eapxos,
a leader; from égapyxeuv,.to lead. = Gk. éf, out, especially ; apxev, to
begin. See Arch-. Der. exarch-ate (Gibbon).

EXASPERATEH, to provoke. (L.) In Shak. K. Lear, y. r. 60.
Properly a pp.,asin Macb. iii. 6. 38.—L. exasperatus, pp. of exasperare,
to roughen, provoke. = L. ex, much; and asper, rough. See Asperity.,
Der. exasperat-ion, from MF. exasperation, Cot.

EXCAVATION, a hollowing out. (F.—L.) Thesb. excavation
is in Cotgrave, to translate MF. excavation ; the verb excavate occurs
in 1599.—MF. excavation.—L. excaudtidnem, acc. of excaudtio, a
hollowing out; cf. excaudtus, pp. of excaudre, to hollow out. =L. ex,
out : and caudre, to make hollow, from cauus, hollow. See Cave.
Der. excavate, suggested by the L. pp. ; excava-tor.

EXCEED, to go beyond, excel. (F.—L.) ME. exceden; ‘That
he mesure nought excede ;’ Gower, C. A. iii. 157 ; bk. vii. 2155.— OF.
exceder, ‘to exceed ;’ Cot.—L. excédere, pp. excessus, to go out ; from,
ex, out, and cédere, to go. See Cede. Der. exceed-ing (Othello, iii.
3. 258), exceed-ing-ly (id. 372); and see excess.

EXCKHL, to surpass. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. v. 12. 35. [The
sb. excellence and adj. excellent are older; see Chaucer, C, T. 11941,
11944 (C 7, 10). ]— OF, exceller, ‘to excell;’ Cot.—L. excellere, to rise
up ; also, to surpass. = L. ex, out ; and *cellere, to rise up, whence ante=
cellere, percellere, &c.; allied to cel-sus, high, orig. ‘raised’ Cf.
Lith. Rélti, to raise; and see Hill. Brugm. i. § 633. Der. excell-ent
(OF. pres. pt. excellent) ; excell-ence (OF. excellence, from L. excellentiq);
excellent-y.

EXCEPT, to take out, exclude. (F.—L.) See the phrase ‘ excepte
Cryst one’=except Christ alone, P. Plowman, C. xvii. 215. [The
sb. exception is in Lydgate, Complaint of the Black Knight, st. 23.] —.
OF. excepter, ‘ to except;’ Cot. = L. exceptare, frequentative of excipere,
to take out.—L.ex, out; and capere, to take. See Capable. Der.
except, prep.; except-ing ; except-ion (OF. exception, Cot.); -ion-al,
-ion-able, -ive, -or.

EXCERPT, a selected passage. (L.) First in 1638. Both the
verb ¢o excerpt and the verb ¢o excerp were in use. ‘Excerp, to pick
out or choose ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —L. excerptum, an extract,
neut. of excerptus, pp. of excerpere, to select. —L. ex, out ; and carpere,
to pluck, cull. See Harvest.

EXCESS, a going beyond, intemperance. (F.—L.) In Shak.,
L. L. L. v. 2. 73; Gower, C. A. ii. 276; bk. v. 4457.—OF, exces,
‘superfluity, excess ;’ Cot. = L. excessum, acc. of excessus, a going out,
deviation ; from the pp. of excédere; see Excede. Der. excess-ive,
ME. excessif, Gower, C. A. iii. 177; bk. vii. 2722.=OF. excessif,
“excessive ;’ Cot.; excess-ive-ly, -ive-ness.

EXCHANGE, a reciprocal giving and receiving, (F.—L.) ME.
eschaunge, sb.; ‘The Lumbard made non eschaunge ;’ Gower, C. A. i.
10; prol..207. The verb is later ; it occurs in Spenser, F. Q. vii. 6.,
6. The prefix es- was changed to ew- to make the word more like
Latin. OF. eschange, sb.; eschanger, vb., to exchange ; Cot.—OF,


Der. exact-ly, -nesss


EXCHEQUER


es- (<L. ex-), out, away; and change, change. SeeChange. Der.
exchang-er, exchange-able.

EXCHEQUER, a court; formerly a court of revenue. (F.— Arab.
—Pers.) ME. eschekere, a court of revenue, treasury; Rob. of Erunne,
tr. of Langtoft, p. 280. Spelt cheker, P. Plowman, B. prol. 93.—OF.
eschequier, a chess-board; hence the checkered cloth on which
accounts were calculated by means of counters; see Blount’s Law
Dict. and Camden’s Britannia. [See also eschiguier in Cotgrave.] =
OF. eschec, check (at chess); eschecs, esches, chess. See Check,
Checker, Chess. 4 The Low L. form is scaccdrium, meaning
(1) a chess-board, (2) exchequer; from Low L. scacci, chess.

EXCISE (1), a duty or tax. (Du.—F.—L.) ‘The townes of the
Lowe-Countreyes doe cutt upon themselves an ewcise of all thinges,’ &c. ;
Spenser, State of Ireland, Globe ed. p. 669. ‘ Excise, from the Belg.
acciise, tribute ; so called, perhaps, because it is assessed according to
the verdict of the assise (!), or a number of men deputed to that office
by the king;’ Gazophylacium Anglicanum, 1689. ‘ This tribute is paid
in Spain, . . I suppose it is the same with the excise in England and
the Low Countries;’ Bp. Taylor, Rule of Conscience, b. iii. c, 2, R.
9 (R.). B. A misspelling of MDu. aksiis or aksys, spelt accijs in
Hexham, and aksys in Sewel’s Du. Dict., where it is explained to
mean ‘excise.’ Cf. G. accise, excise. The E. spelling accise occurs
in Howell’s Familiar Letters. ‘’Twere cheap living here [in Amster-
dam], were it not for the monstrous accises which are imposed upon
all sorts of commodities ;’ vol. i. let. vii., dated May 1, 1619. Again,
the Du. aksiis (like G. accise) is from OF. acceis, a tax ; found in the
12th c, riming with OF. defeis, from Late L. defensum (N.E.D.; no
teference).—Late L. type *accensum,a payment; allied to Late L.
accensare, to tax.—L. ac- (for ad), to; and census, a tax. See
Census. @ For the sound-change, cf. Du. spijs, food, from Late L.
spensa (for dispensa), a larder, a spence. Der. excise-man.

EXCISE (2), to cut out, (L.) The sb. excis-ion is earlier ; Caxton
has ; ‘the same grete excysion ;’ Eneyd. c. xxi. p. 76,1. 27.—F. exci-
sion. = L, excisiOnem, acc. of excisio, a cutting out. This sb. and E.
excise, vb., are allied to L. excis-us, pp. of excidere, to cut out.—L, ex,
out; and cedere, to cut; see Cesura.

EXCITE, to stir up, rouse, incite. (F.—L.) ME. exctten, Chaucer,
C. T. 16212 (G 744). —OF-. exciter, ‘to excite;’ Cot. —L. excitare, to
call out; frequentative of exciére, to set in motion, call forth. —L. ex,
out; and ciére, to summon; see Cite. Der. excit-er, -ing, -ing-ly ;
-able, -abil-i-ty ; excit-at-ion (OF. excitation, ‘ excitation ;’ Cot.) 5 esecit-
at-ive (OF. excitatif; Cot.) 3 exctte-ment (Hamlet, iv. 4. 58).

EXCLAIM, to cry out. (F.—L.) Both verb and sb. in Shak.
Alls Well, i. 3. 123; Rich. I, i. 2. 2,.—OF. exclamer, ‘to exclaime ;’
Cot.—L. exclamdare; from ex, out, and clamare, to cry aloud. See
Claim. Der. exclam-at-ion (OF. exclamation, ‘an exclamation ;’
Cot.) ; exclam-at-or-y.

EXCLUDE, to shut out. (L.) In Henryson, Test. of Creseide,
st. 19; and in Wyclif, Numb. xii. 15.—L. exclidere, pp. exclisus,
to shut out. =—L. ex, out; and claudere, to shut; see Clause. Der.
exclus-ion, -ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness ; like pp. excliisus.

EXCOGIT ATE, to think out. (L.) In Sir T. Elyot, The Gover-
nour, b. i. c. 23. § 6.—L. excdgitatus, pp. of excdgitire, to think. out.
—L. ex, out; and cégitire, to think; see Cogitate. Der. excogitat-
zon; in the same chap. of The Governonr, § 2.

EXCOMMUNICATE, to put out of Christian communion.
(L.) Properly a pp., as in Shak. K. John, iii. 1. 173, 223. —L. ex-
communicatus, pp. of excommiinicdre, to put out of a community. —L.
ex, out; and commiinicare; see Communicate. Der. excommuni-
cat-ion; Much Ado, iii. 5. 60.

EXCORIATE, to take the skin from. (L.) The pl. sb. excoriat-
ions is in Holland’s Pliny, b. xxiii. c. 3, . The verb is in Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. —L. excoridtus, pp. of excoridre, to strip off skin,
L. ex, off; and corium, skin, hide. See Cuirass. Der. excoriat-ion.

EXCREMENT, animal discharge, dung. (L.) In Sir T. Elyot,
Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 11. See Spenser, F. Q. iv. 11. 35.—L. ex-
crémentum, refuse, ordure. —L, excré-tum, supine of excernere, to sift
out, separate; with suffix -mentum. See Exeretion. _@ In Shak.
L. L. L. v. 1. 109, excrement is from another L. sb. excrémentum, a
derivative of excrescere, to grow out; see below. Der. excrement-al,
-tt-lous.

EXCRESCENCE, an outgrowth. (F.—L.) In Holland’s Pliny,
b. xxii. c, 23; and in Cotgrave.— OF, excrescence, ‘an excrescence; ’
Cot.—L. excrescentia. Allied to L. excrescent-, stem of pres. pt. of
excrescere, to grow out.=—L,. ex, out; and crescere, to grow; see
Crescent. Der. excrescent, from. L. excrescent-, as above.

EXCRETION, a purging, discharge. (F.—L.) In Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c.13, § 1.— MF. excretion, ‘the purging or voiding
of the superfluities ;’ Cot. L. excrét-us, pp. of excernere, to sift out,
separate; with F. suffix -ion, as if from a L. *excrétidnem.—L, ex,
out; and cernere, to sift, separate, cognate. with Gk. xpivev, See


EXFOLIATE 208


Crisis. Der. excrete (rare verb), excret-ive, -or-y, from the pp.
excretus.

EXCRUCIATE, to torture. (L.) In Levins. Properly a pp., as,
in Chapman’s Odyssey, b, x. 1. 332. —L. excruciatus, pp. of excruciare,
to torment greatly.—L. ex, out, very much; and cruciare, to torment
on the cross, from cruci-, decl. stem of crux, across. See Crucify.
Der. excru-ciat-ion.

EXCULPATEH, to free from a charge. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674.—L, exculpatus, pp. of exculpire, to clear of blame.=L. ex,
out of; and culpa, blame. See Culpable. Der. exculpat-ion, -or-y.

EXCURSION, an expedition. (L.) In Holland’s tr. of Livy,
p- 773; Pope, Essay on Criticism, 1. 627.—L. excursiénem, acc. of
excursio, 2 running out; cf. excursus, pp. of excurrere, to run out;
from ex, out, and currere,torun. See Current. Der. excursion-ist ;
also excurs-ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness, from pp. excursus.

EXCUSE, to free from obligation, release. (F.—L.) ME, excusen;
P. Plowman, C. viii. 298. — OF. excuser, — L. exciisare, to release from a
charge. = L. ex, from; and causa, a charge, lit. a cause. See Cause.
Der. excuse, sb. ; excus-able, Gower, C. A.i. 763; bk. i. 1029; -at-or-y.

EXEAT, a permission to go away. (L.) Also, in old plays, as a
stage direction, in place of exit. —L. exeat, let him go ont, from exire,
to go out. See Exit.

EXECRATEH, to curse. (L.) In Cotgrave, to translate F. execrer.
(Shak. has execrable, Titus, v. 3.1773; execration, Troil. ii. 3. 7.]—L.
execrdtus, pp. of execrari, better spelt exsecrdri, to curse greatly. —L.
ex, much; and sacrare, to consecrate, also, to declare accursed, from
sacr-um, neuter of sacer, sacred, also accursed. See Sacred. Der.
execra-ble, execrat-ion.

EXECUTE, to perform. (F.—L.) ME. executen, Chaucer, C. T.,
A1664.—OF. executer; Cot.—L. exectitus, better spelt exseciitus, pp.
of exsequi, to pursue, follow out. = L. ex, out ; and seqgui, to follow ; see
Sue. Der. execut-ion (OF. emecution), Chaucer, C. T. 8398 (E 522) ;
execut-ion-er, Shak. Meas. iv. 2.9; execut-or, P. Plowman, C, vii. 254 3
execul-or-y, -rix, -ive, -ive-ly; and see exequies.

EXEGESIS, exposition, interpretation. (Gk.) Modern. = Gk. é7-
nots, interpretation. = Gk, égnyetoOa, to explain. = Gk. é£, out, fully;
and fyeloOa, to guide; perhaps allied to E, seek. Brugmann, i. § 187.
Der. exeget-ic (Gk. éényntixds), exeget-ic-al, exeget-ic-al-ly.

EXEMPLAR, pattern. (F.—L.) ‘Tho nine crowned be yery
exemplaire Of all honour;’ The Flower and the Leaf, 1. 502.—OF.
exemplaire, ‘a pattern, sample ;’ Cot.—L. exemplarium, a late form of
exemplar, a copy; to which the modern E. exemplar is now conformed.
—L. exemplaris, that serves as a copy. =—L. exemplum, an example,
sample. See Hxample;and Sampler. Der, exemplar-y; Hooker,
Keel. Polity,. b. i..3: 4. § 1.

_ HBXEMPLIFY, to show by example. (F.—L.) A coined word;
in Holland’s Livy, p. 109, who has ‘to exemplijfie and copie out,’
where exemplifie and copie out are synonyms. Lydgate also has exem-
plefye, Siege of Troy, bk. v. c. 35. 1. 20. —OF. *exemplifier ; not found.
— Late L. exemplificare, to copy out ; Ducange. = L, exemplum, a copy 3
and -ficdre (=facere),to make, See Example.

EXEMPT, freed, redeemed. (F.—L.) Shak. has exempé, adj., As
You Like It, ii. 1. 15; verb, All’s Well, ii. 1. 198. The pp. exemted
occurs in 1467, in Eng. Gilds, ed. Toulmin Smith, p. 393, 1.12.—OF.
exempt, ‘exempt, freed,’ Cot.; exempter, ‘to exempt, free;’ id.—L,
exempt-us, pp. of eximere, to take out, deliver, free. See Example.
Der. exempt, verb; -ion, from OF. exemption, ‘exemption ;’ Cot.

EXEQUIES, funeral rites. (F.—L.) In Shak. 1 Hen. VI, iii. 2.
133. ‘ The exeguies of Abner ;’? Wyclif, 2 Sam. iii. 31.— AF’. exsequies,
Stat. Realm, i. 2243 OF. exegues, ‘funerals, or funerall solemnities ;’
Cot. —L. exeguids, exsequias, acc. pl. of exsequie, funeral obsequies, lit.
‘ processions’ or ‘ followings.’ = L. ex, out; and segui, to follow; see
Sequence, and Execute.

EXERCISE, bodily action, training. (F.—L.) ME. exercise,
Chaucer, C. T, 9032 (E 1156).—OF. exercice, ‘exercise ;’ Cot. =—L.
exercitium, exercise. = L. exercitus, pp. of exercére, to drive out of an
enclosure, drive on, keep at work. =—L. ew, out; and arcére, to enclose,
keep off. See Ark, Der. exercise, verb.

EXERGUBE, the small space beneath the base-line of a subject
engraved on a coin, left for the date or engraver’s name. (F.—Gk.)
The final ze is not pronounced, the word being French, It occurs
in Todd’s Johnson, and in works on coins. =F. exergue, used by Vol?
taire, Mceurs, 173 (Littré). So called because lying ‘out of the work,’
not belonging to the subject. Cf. F. hors d’euvre.— Gk, é, out of;
épy-ov, work. See Ex- and Work.

EXERT, to thrust out, put into active use. (L.) ‘The stars...
Exert [thrust out] their heads ;’ Dryden, tr. of Ovid, Metam. b. i. ll.
88, 89.—L. exertus, better spelt exsertus, thrust forth; pp. of exserere.
—L. ex, out; and serere, to join, put together, put; see Series.
Der. exert-ion. 4


EXFOLIATE, to scale off. (L.) Exfoliation is in Burnet, Hist.


EXHALE


of Own Time, an. 1699. ‘ Exfoliate, in surgery, to rise up in leaves or
splinters, as a broken bone does;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.—L. ex-
Joliatus, pp. of exfoliare, to strip off leaves.= L. ex, off; and folium, a
leaf. See Foliage. Der. exfoliat-ion.

EXHALE, to breathe out, emit. (F.—L.) In Shak. Rich. III, i.
2, 58.—F. exhaler, ‘to exhale;’ Cot.— L. exhdlare, pp. exhdlitus, to
breathe out. L. ex, out; and halare, to breathe. Der. exhal-at-ion,
K. John, ii. 4. 153 ; ME. exalacion, Gower, C. A. iii. 95; bk. vii. 330.

EXHAUST, to drain out, tire out. (L.) In Shak. Timon, iv. 3.
119. Used as a pp, in Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, bk. ii. c. 6. § 6.
—L. exhaustus, pp. of exhaurire, to draw out, drink up.—L. ex, out;
and haurire,to draw, drain. Der. exhaust-ed, -er, -ible, -ion, -ive, -less.

EXHIBIT, to show. (L.) Shak. has exhibit, Merry Wives, ii. I.
29; exhibiter, Hen. V, i. 1. 74; exhibition, K. Lear, i. 2. 25.—L. ex-
hibitus, pp. of exhibére, to hold forth, present. = L. ex, out ; and habére,
to have, hold; see Habit. Der. exhibit-er, -or; exhibit-ion (OF.
exhibition, Cot.), -ion-er, -or-y.

.EXHILARATE, to make merry, cheer. (L.—Gk.; with L.
prefix.) Milton has exhilarating, P. L. ix. 1047.—L. exhilaratus, pp. of
exhilarare, to gladden greatly. —L. ex, much; and hilarare, to cheer,
from hilaris, glad; see Hilarious. Der. exhila-rat-ion, Bacon, Nat.
Hist. § 721. :

-EXHORT, to urge strongly. (F.—L.) ME. exhorten, Henryson,
Compl. of Creseide, last stanza.—OF. exhorter.—L. exhortari.=—L.
ex, greatly; and hortari, to urge; see Hortative. Der. exhort-at-ion,
Wyclif, 1 Tim. iv. 13; exhort-at-ive, Levins ; exhort-at-or-y.
EXHUME, to disinter. (L.) First in 1783; even exhumation is
not in Johnson, but was added by Todd, who .omits the verb alto-
gether. Late L. exhumare; Ducange (A.D. 1285). Coined from L.
ex, out; and humus, the ground, In Pliny we find ixkumare, to bury.
See Humble. Der. exhum-at-ion.

EXIGENT, exacting, pressing. (L.) Gen. used as a sb. =neces-
sity; Jul. Cesar, v. 1. 19.—L. exigent-, stem of pres. pt. of exigere,
to exact; see Exact (2). Der. exigence, MF. exigence, ‘exigence ;’
Cot.; exigenc-y.

EXIGUOUS, small, minute. (L.) Cockeram (1623) has exiguity;
exiguous occurs in 1651 (N.E.D.).—L. exigu-us, small; with suffix
-ous for -us, as in ardu-ous, &c.—L. exigere, to weigh strictly, weigh
exactly.—L. ex, fully; and agere, to drive, move forcibly. See
Eixact. Der. exigu-ity, from L. acc. exiguitatem.

EXILE, banishment. (F.—L.) ME. exile, Rob. of Brunne, p. 131,
1.14; exlen, verb, to banish, Chaucer, C. T. 4967 (B547).—OF. exil,
‘an exile, banishment ;’ Cot.—L. exilium, better spelt exsilium, ban-
ishment ; cf. exswl, a banished man, one driven from his native soil.
Prob. from L. ex, out; and sedére, to sit, with change of d to J; cf. consul
(Bréal). Der. exile, verb (OF. exiler, Late L. exilitre); exile, sb.
(imitated from L. exsuwl, but of French form), Cymbeline, i. 1. 166.
EXIST, to continue to be. (L.) In Shak. K. Lear, i. 1. 114.—L.
existere, better spelt exsistere, to come forth, arise, be.—L. ex; and
sistere, to set, place, causal of stare, to stand; see Stand. Der.
exist-ence (OF., in Supp. to Godefroy), Rom. of the Rose, 5549.

EXIT, departure. (L.) In Shak. As You Like It, ii. 7. 141.—L.
exit-us, departure ; from exire, to go out. B. Exit also occurs in old
plays as a stage direction. —L. exit, he goes out, from exire.= L. ex,
out; and ire, to go.=—4/ EI, to go; cf. Skt. i, to go.

EXODUS, a departure. (L.—Gk.) ‘Séo Oder bic ys Exodus ge-
haten,’ the second book is called Exodus; £lfric on the Old Testa-
ment.—L, exodus.— Gk. éfo50s, a going out.Gk. é¢, out, and ddds,
a way, march; cf. Russ. khod’,a march.—4/ SED, to go; cf. Skt.
a-sad, to approach, Russ, khodite, to go. (See Prellwitz.)

EXOGEN, a plant increasing outwardly. (Gk.) Modern and
scientific. Gk. é{w, outside (from éf, out); and yev-, root of yiyvo-
pa, I am born or produced. See Endogen. Der. exogen-ous.

. EXONERATE, to relieve of a burden, acquit. (L.) In Cotgrave,
to translate F, descharger.—L. exoneratus, pp. of exonerare, to dis-
burden. =L. ex, off; and oner-, for *ones-, stem of onus, a load ; see
Onerous. Der. exonerat-ion, -ive.

EXORBITANT, extravagant, (F.—L.) ‘To the exorbitant
waste ;’ Massinger, The Guardian, i. 1. 30. Earlier, in Henrysoun,
The Wolf and the Lamb, 1. 46.=OF. exorbitant, ‘exorbitant ;’ Cot.
= L, exorbitant-, stem of pres. pt. of exorbitare, to fly out of the
track.—L. ex, out; and orbita,a track; see Orbit. Der. exorbitant-
dy, exorbitance.

, EXORCISEH, to adjure, deliver from a devil. (L.—Gk.) Shak,
has exorciser, Cymb. iv. 2. 276; the pl. sb. exorcistis=L. exorcist in
Wyclif, Acts, xix. 13 (earlier text) ; Lydgate has exorcismes, Siege of
‘Thebes, pt. iii (How the bishop Amphiorax fell doune into helle). —
Late L. exorcizare. = Gk. éfopkifev, to drive away by adjuration. =
Gk. é£, away; and dpxi€ey, to adjure, from dpxos, an oath. Der.
exorcis-er, exorcism (Gk, eopxiapds), exorcist (Gk. éfopmoarns).


EXORDIUM, a beginning. (L.) .In Sir T. Elyot, The Governour,


204


EXPLETIVE


bk.i.c..14. § 8; Spectator, no. 303. The pl. exordiums is in Beaum.
and Fletcher, Scornful Lady, i. 1.—L. exordium, a beginning, the
warp of a web.—L. exordiri, to begin, weave.—L. ex, from; and
ordiri, to begin, weave; akin to Order, q.v. Der. exordi-al.

EXOTERIC, external. (Gk.) First in 1662. Opposed to esoteric.
—Gk. éfwrepinds, external. = Gk, éfwrépw, more outward, comp. of
adv. éfw, outward, from éf, out. See Esoteric.

EXOTIC, foreign. (L.—Gk.) ‘Exotic and exquisite;’ Ben
Jonson, Cynthia’s Revels, A. iii. sc. 3. _ Exotical and forraine drugs ;’
Holland’s Pliny, b. xxii. c. 24 (end).—L. exdticus, foreign. —Gk.
éfwrinds, outward, foreign. Gk. éw, adv., outward; from éf, out.
Der. exotic-al.

EXPAND, to spread out. (L.) Milton has expanded, P. L.i. 225;
expanse, id. ii, 1014.—L. expandere, pp. expansus, to spread out.—L.
ex, out; and pandere, to spread, allied to patére; see Patent.
Brugmann, ii. § 69. Der. expanse (L. expansus); expans-ible, -ibl-y,
-ibil-i-ty, -ion, -ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness.

EXPATIATH, to range at large. (L.) In Milton, P. L. i. 744.
—L. expatiatus, pp. of expatiari, better spelt exspatiari, to Wander. =
L. ex, out; and spatiarz, to roam, from spatium, space; see Space.
Der. expatiat-ion, Bacon, On Learning, by G. Wats, b. ii. c. 2 and
Crease

EXPATRIATE, to banish. (L.) Not in Johnson. In Burke,
On the Policy of the Allies (R.).—Late L. expatriatus, pp. of expa-
tridre, to banish; cf. MF. expatrié, ‘ banished ;’ (Cot.).—L. ex, out
of; and patria, one’s native country, from patri-, decl. stem of pater,
a father; see Patriot. Der. expatriat-ion.

EXPECT, to look for. (L.) Gower has expectant, C. A. i. 2163
bk. ii. 1712.—L. expectare, better exspectire, to look for. —L. ex, out;
and spectdre, to look; see Spectacle. Der. expect-ant, -ance, -anc-y;
expect-at-ion (K. John, iv. 2. 7).

EXPECTORATHE, to spit forth. (L.) In Holland’s Pliny, b.
xxiv. Cc. 16.—L. expectoratus, pp. of expectorare, to expel from the
breast.=L. ex, out of; and pector-, for *pectos-, stem of pectus, the
breast; see Pectoral... Der. expectorat-ion, -ive; -ant (from the L.

res. pt.).

"EXPEDITE, to hasten. (L.) In Cotgrave, to translate OF.
expedier; properly a pp., as in ‘ the profitable and expedite service of
Julius ;’ Holland’str. of Ammianus, p. 431 (R.).—L. expeditus, pp. of
expedire, to extricate the foot, release, make ready. —L. ex, out; and
ped-, stem of pés, the foot. See Foot. Der. expedit-ion, Macb. ii. 3.
116; expedit-i-ous, Temp. v. 315; -i-ows-ly; also (from the pres. part.
of L. expedire) expedient, Much Ado, vy, 2. 85; -ly; expedience, Rich. II,
ii. 1.287.

EXPHL, to drive out. (L.) ME. expellen; Chaucer, C. T. 2753
(A 2751).—L. expellere, pp. expulsus, to drive out.—L. ex, out; and
pellere, to drive; see Pulsate. Der. expulse, OF. expulser (Cot.),
from L. expulsare, frequent. of expellere, 1 Hen, VI, iii. 3. 25;
expuls-ion, OF. expulsion, Cymb. li. 1. 65; -ive.

EXPEND, to employ, spend. (L.) In Hamlet, ii. 2.23. [The
sb. expence is in Gower, C. A. iii. 153; bk. vii. 2027.] —L. expendere,
to weigh out, lay out.=—L. ex, out; and pendere, to weigh ; see Poise.
Der. expense, from L. expensa, money spent, fem. of pp. expensus ;
expens-ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness ; also expendit-ure, from Late L. expenditus,
a false form of the pp. expensus. Doublet, spend.

EXPERIENCE, knowledge due to trial (F.—L.) ME.
experience, Chaucer, C. T. 5583 (D 1).—OF. experience.—L. experi-
entia, a proof, trial. L. experient-, stem of pres. pt. of experiri (pp.
expertus), to.try thoroughly.—L. ex; and *periri, to go through, as.
in the pp. perttus and in the compounds experiri, comperiri; see Peril.
Der. experienc-ed, Wint, Ta. i. 2. 392; experi-ment (MF. experiment,
L. experimentum), Alls Well, ii. 1. 1573; -ment-al, -ment-al-ly, -ment-
al-ist; and see Expert.

EXPERT, experienced. (F.—L.) ME. expert, Chaucer, C. T.
4424 (B 4).— OF. expert, ‘expert ;’ Cot.—L. expertus, pp. of experirt ;
see Experience. Der. expert-ly, -ness.

EXPIATEH, to atone for. (L.) In Shak. Sonnet xxii. 4.—L.
expidtus, pp. of expidre, to atone for fully.—L. ex, fully; and pidre,
to propitiate, from pius, devout. See Pious. Der. expiat-or, -or-y,
-ion (OF. expiation, ‘ expiation,’ Cot.) ; expia-ble, Levins, from expia-re.

EXPIRH, to die, end. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. iii. 2. 44.—
OF. expirer, ‘to expire;’ Cot.—L. expirare, better exspirare, to
breathe out, die.—L. ex, out; and spirdre, to breathe, See Spirit.
Der. expir-at-ion, L. L. L. v. 2. 8143 -at-or-y, -a-ble.

EXPLAIN, to make plain, expound. (F.—L.) In Cotgraye;
and Milton, P. L. ii. 518.—MF, explaner, ‘to expound, expresse,
explain ;’ Cot.—L. explanare, to flatten, spread out, explain. = L, ex,
fully ; and plandre, to flatten, from planus, flat, See Plain. Der.
explain-able; also explan-at-ion, -at-or-y, like L. pp. explanat-us.

EXPLETIVE, inserted, used by way of filling up. (L.) As
adj., in Blonnt (1656); as sb., in Pope, Essay on Criticism, 346.—L.


EXPLICATE


EXTRAORDINARY 205.


explétiuus, filling up; cf. MF. expletif (Cotgrave).=L. explétus, pp. of | EXQUISITE, sought out, excellent, nice. (L.) ‘His facound


explére, to fill up.—L. ex, fully; and plére, to fill. See Plenary.
Der. explet-or-y, like pp. explétus.

EXPLICATEH, to explain, unfold. (L.) In Levins; and Dryden,
Religio Laici, 1. 289. —L. explicatus, pp. of explicare, to unfold. =—L.
ex, out; and plicdre, to fold, from plica, a fold. See Ply. Der.
explicat-ion, sive, -or, -or-y; also explica-ble, Levins (from explicd-re) ;
and see Explicit.

EXPHICIT, unfolded, plain, clear. (L.) ‘ Explicite, unfolded,
declared, ended;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —L. explicitus, old pp.
of explicare, to unfold; the later form being explicatus. See above.
Der. explicit-ly, -ness ; and see Exploit.

EXPLODE, to drive away noisily, to burst noisily. (F.—L.) The
old sense is seen in Milton, P. L. xi. 669; cf. ‘ Priority is exploded ;’
Massinger, Emperor of the East, iii, 2.—MF. exploder, ‘ to explode,
publickly to disgrace or drive out, by hissing, or clapping of hands ;’”
Cot. =—L, explodere, pp. explosus, to drive off the stage by clapping. =
L, ex, away ; and plaudere,toapplaud. See Applaud, Plausible.
Der. explos-ion, ‘a casting off or rejecting, a hissing a thing out ;’
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674; -ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness; like pp. expldsus.

EXPLOIT, achievement. (F.—L.) ME. espleit=success; Gower,
C. A, ii. 258; bk. v. 3924. ‘Al the ianglynge [blame]... is rather
cause of esploi¢e than of any hindringe;’ Test. of Love, b.i.c. 5. 1.19.
— OF. esploit, revenue, profit, achievement (Godefroy) ; later exploict,
‘an exploit, act;’ Cot.—L. explicitum, a thing settled, ended, dis-
played ; neut. of explicitus, pp. of explicare. Cf. Late L. explicta,
reyenue, profit. See Explicit.

EXPLORE, to examine thoroughly. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave;
and in Milton, P. L. ii. 632, 971.— MF. explorer, ‘to explore;’ Cot.
= L, explorare, to search out, lit. ‘to make to flow out.’ =L. ex, out;
and. plorare, to make to flow, weep. Cf. im-plore, de-plore. Brug-
mann,i. §154. Der. explor-er, -at-ion (MF. exploration, ‘ exploration,’
Cot.), -at-or-y.

EXPLOSION, EXPLOSIVE; see Explode.

EXPONENT, indicating; also, an index. (L.) First in 1581;
often mathematical. —L. expdnent-, stem of pres. pt. of expdnere, to
expound, indicate; see Expound. Der. exponent-ial.

EXPORT, to send goods out of a country. (L.) ‘They export
honour from a man;’ Bacon, Essay 48, Of Followers. = L. exportire,
to carry away.—L. ex, away; and fortare, to carry; see Port (1).
Der. export, sb.3 export-at-ion, -able.

EXPOSE, to lay open to view. (F.—L. and Gk.) In Spenser,
F, Q. iii. 1. 46. Used by Caxton (N. E. D.). = OF. exposer, ‘to expose,
lay out;? Cot.—OF. ex (=L. ex), out; and OF. poser, to set, place;
see Pose (1). Der. expos-ure, Macb. ii. 3. 133; and see expound.

EXPOSITION, an explanation. (F.—L.) In Gower, C. A.
i, 141; bk. i, 2932.—OF. exposition; Cot.—L. expositidnem, acc. of
expositio,a setting forth ; cf. expositus, pp. of expdnere; see Hxpound.
Der. exposit-or, -or-y; from pp. expositus.

EXPOSTULATEH, to reason earnestly. (L.) ‘Asé, I have no
commission To expostulate the act;’ Massinger, Maid of Honour,
lii. I. 3.—L. expostulatus, pp. of expostuldre, to demand urgently. =
L. ex, fully; and postuldre, to demand. See Postulate. Der.
expostulat-ion, -or, -or-¥,

EXPOUND, to explain. (F.—L.) The d is excrescent, but was
suggested by the form of the F. infinitive. ME. expounen; Chaucer,
C. T. 14162 (B 3346) ; expounden, Gower, C. A. i. 31; prol. 823.—
OF. espondre, to explain (see Godefroy). =—L. expdnere, to set forth,
explain. =—L. ex, out ; and pdnere, to put, set; see Position. Der.
expound-er ; also exposition, q.v. The OF. prefix es- became ex in
English, by analogy with other words beginning with ex.

EXPRESS, exactly stated. (F.—L.) ‘Lo here expres of womman
may ye finde ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 6301 (D 719). Hence ME. expressen,
verb, id. 13406 (B 1666).—OF. expres, ‘ expresse, speciall ;? Cot.—L.
expressus, distinct, plain; pp. of exprimere, to press out.—L. ex, out;
and primere, to press; see Press. Der. express, verb, express-ible, -ive;
-ion (OF. expression, ‘an expression ;’ Cot.), -ion-less.

EXPULSION, EXPULSIVE; see Expel,

EXPUNGE, to efface, blot out. (L.) Ben Jonson has expunged ;
Staple of News, v. 1. 27. ‘ Which our advanced judgements generally
neglect to expunge ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. i. c. 9. § 6. =L.
expungere, to prick out, blot out.—L. ex, out; and pungere, to prick ;
see Pungent. No doubt popularly connected with sponge, with
which it has no real connexion. Some authors use the form expunct,
from the pp. expunctus. Der. expunction, Milton, Areopagitica, ed.
Males, p: 27, 1: 28:

EXPURGATEH, to purify. (L.) Milton hasexpurge; Areopagitica,
ed. Hales, p.10,1.25. The sb. expurgation is in Sir T. Browne, Pref.
to Vulg. Errors, paragraph 7.—L. expurgdtus, pp. of expurgare, to
purge out.—L. ex, out; and purgdre; see Purge. Der, expurgat-ion,
-Or,*Or-yo ‘


toung, and termis exquisyte ;’ Henryson, Test. of Creseide, st. 39; 1. 268.
— L. exquisttus, choice; pp. of exquirere, to search out. = L. ex, out; and
querere, to seek; see Query. Der. exquisite-ly.

EXSEQUIES, the same as Exequies, q.v.

EXTANT, existing. (L.) In Hamlet, iii. 2, 273. —Late L. extant-,
stem of extans, a bad spelling of L, exstans, pres. pt. of exstare, to stand
forth, exist.—L. ex, out; and stare, to stand; see Stand.

EXTASY, EXTATIC; see Ecstasy, Eestatic.

EXTEMPORE, on the spur of the moment. (L.) Shak. has
extempore, Mids. Nt. Dr. i. 2. 70; extemporal, L. L. L. i. 2. 1893
extemporal-ly, Ant. and Cleop. v. 2. 217.—L. ex tempore, at the
moment; where ¢empore is the abl. case of tempus,time; see Temporal.
Der. extempor-al (L.. extempordlis), -an-e-ous, -ise, -ar-y.

EXTEND, to stretch out, enlarge. (L.) ME. extenden, Chaucer,
C. T. 4881 (B 461). —L. extendere, pp. extensus, to stretch out (whence
OF. estendre).—L. ex, out; and ¢endere, to stretch; see Tend. Der.
extent, sb.; extens-ion (OF. extension, ‘an extension ;’ Cot.) ; extens-ible,
-ibil-i-ty, -ive, -ive-ly, -ive-ness (like pp. extensus).

EXTENUATE, to reduce, palliate. (L.) ‘ To extenuate or make
thyn;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 9.—L. extenudtus, pp.
of extenudre, to make thin, reduce. = L. ex, fully ; and ¢enuire, to make
thin, from ¢enwis, thin; see Tenuity. Der. extenuat-ion, 1 Hen. 1V,
ili. 2. 225 -or-y.

EXTERIOR, outward. (F.—L.) Formerly exteriour ; afterwards
Latinised. ‘The exteriour ayre;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii.
c. 24, 1.5. ‘What more exteriour honour can you deuise;’ Barnes,
Works, p. 341, col, 2.— MF. exterieur, ‘exteriour;’ Cot. = L. exteridrem,
acc. of extericr, outward, comp. of exter or exterus, outward. =L. ex,
out; with compar. suffix -tero-.

EXTERMINATE, to drive beyond bounds. (L.) In Cotgrave,
to translate F . exterminer, whence was formed Shakespeare’s extermine,
As You Like It, iii. 5. 89.—L. extermindtus, pp. of extermindare, to
drive beyond the boundaries.—L. ex, out, beyond; and ¢erminus,
a boundary; see Term. Der. exterminat-ion (OF. extermination,
Cot.) ; -or, -or-y.

EXTERNAL, outward. (L.) InShak. K. John, ii. 571. Formed,
with suffix -al, from extern, Oth. i. 1. 63.—L. extern-us, outward,
extended form from exterus; see Exterior. Der. exterzal-ly.

EXTINGUISH, to quench. (L.) In Shak. Lucrece, 313, 1A
false formation, made by adding -ish to L. extingu-ere, by analogy with
properly-formed verbs in -ishk, such as ban-ish, abol-ish, which are of
French origin. 2. The Lat. extinguere is a later spelling of exstinguere,
PPp- extinctus or exstinctus, to put out, quench, kill.—L. ex, out; and
* stinguere, prop. to prick, also to extinguish, quench; orig. ‘to blunt,’
as a weapon (Bréal). Cf. di-stinguish. @[ The OF. word is esteindre,
F. éteindre. Der. extinguish-er, -able ; also (from pp. extinctus) extinct,
Hamlet, i. 3. 118 ; extinct-ed, Oth. ii. 1. 81; extinct-ion (MF. extinction,
‘an extinction ;’ Cot.).

EXTIRPATH, to root out. (L.) Shak. has extirpate, Temp. i. 2.
1253 and extirp (from MF. extirper), Meas. iii. 2. 110. —L. extirpatus,
pp. of extirpare, better spelt exstirpare, to pluck up by the stem.—L.
ex, out; and stirp-s or stirp-es, the stem of a tree.
from MF, extirpation, ‘an extirpation, rooting out;’ Cot.

EXTOL, to exalt, praise. (L.) ‘And was to heaven extold;’
Spenser, F. Q. vii. 7. 37.—L. extollere, to raise up. —L. ex, out; and
tollere, to raise. See Hlate. Der. extol-ment, Hamlet, v. 2. 121.

EX'TORT, to force out by violence. (L.) In Spenser, F. Q. y. 2. 5-
The sb. extortion is in Chaucer, C. T. 7021 (D 1439). =—L. extorius, pp.
of extorquére, lit. to twist out. —L. ex, out; and torguére, to twist; see
Torsion. Der. extort-ion (OF. extorsion) ; -ion-er, -ion-ate, -ion-ar-y.

EXTRA, beyond what is necessary. (L.) The use as an adj, is
modern.—L,. extra, beyond; for exterd=ex extera parte=on the
outside; where extera is the abl. fem. of exter; see Exterior. Also
used as a prefix, as in extra-ordinary, -vagant, &c.

EXTRACT, to draw out. (L.) In Shak. Meas. iii. 2.50. Properly
a pp., as in ‘the very issue extract [=extracted] from that good;”
Holland’s Plutarch, p. 839; cf. p. 1045. —L. extractus, pp. of extrahere,
to draw out.=L. ex, out; and ¢rahere, to draw; see Trace. Der,
extract, sb., extract-ion (OF. extraction, Cot.) ; extract-ive, -or, -ible.


EXTRADITION, a surrender of fugitives. (F.—L.) Modern;


not in Todd.=F. extradition (1798). Coined from L. ex, out; and


Tradition, q. v.


Der. extirpat-ion,:


EXTRAMUNDANE, out of the world. (L.) In Kersey’s Dict., —


ed. 1715.—Late L. extramundanus; coined from extra, beyond, and
mund-us, world; with suffix -dzus, See Extra and Mundane.
EXTRANEOUS, external, unessential. (L.) In Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 7, part 9. —L. extraneus, external ; by change
of -us to -ous, as in arduous, egregious, &c, An extension from L, extra,
beyond. See Extra. Cf. Strange. Der. extraneous-ly.
EXTRAORDINARY, beyond ordinary. (L.) In Shak. Mer,


206 EXTRAVAGANT


Wives, iii. 3. 75.—L. extraordindrius, rare. From the phrase extra
ordinem, outside the (usual) order. See Order. Der. extraordinari-ly,
2 Hen. IV, 1. 2.235.

EXTRAVAGANT, excessive, profuse. (F.—L.) See Shak,
Hamlet, i. 1. 154.—MF. extravagant, ‘extravagant ;’ Cot. Late L.
extravagant-, stem of extravagans; formed from extra and uagans,
pres. pt. of wagari, to wander. See Vague. Der. extravagant-ly;
extravagance (MF, extravagance, ‘an extravagancy,’ Cot.); extrava-
ganc-y, Tw. Nt. ii. 1. 125 extravaganza (Ital. estravaganza).

EXTRAVASATE. (L.) ‘ Extravasate, in surgery, to go out of
its proper vessels, as the blood and humours sometimes do;’ Kersey’s
Dict., ed. 1715. Coined from L. exira, beyond; and wds, a vessel ;
with suffix -ate. See Vase. Der. extravasat-ion.

EXTREME, last, greatest. (F.—L.) Palsgrave has extreme.
Spenser has extremest ; F. Q. ii, 10. 31.— OF. extreme, ‘extreme ;’ Cot.
=—L. extrémus, superl. of exterus, outward; see Exterior, ‘Der.
extrem-i-ty, ME. extremité, Gower, C. A. ii. 85; bk. iv. 2489; from
OF. extremité, which is from L. acc. extrémitdtem.

EXTRICATE, to disentangle. (L.) ‘Which should be extricated;’
Bp. Taylor, Dissuasive from Popery, pt. ii. b. ins. 11. —L. extricatus,
pp. of extricare, to disentangle.—L. ex, out of; and tricex, trifles,
impediments; see Intricate. Der. extricat-ion, extrica-ble.

EXTRINSIC, external. (F.—L.) A false spelling for extrinsec,
by analogy with words ending in -ic. ‘ Astronomy exhibiteth the
extrinsique parts of celestial bodies ;” Bacon, On Learning, by G. Wats,
b. ii. c. 4 (R.). = MF. extrinseque, ‘extrinsecall, outward;’ Cot.—L.
extrinsecus, from without. = L, extrin=*extrim, adverbial form from
exter, outward (see Exterior) ; and secus, beside ; thus extrin-secus =
on the outside, Sec-ws is from the same root as L. sec-undum, according
to, viz., from L. segui, to follow; see Second. And cf. L. interim.
Der. extrinsic-al (formerly extrinsecal, Bp. Taylor, Rule of Conscience,
b. i. c. 2, rule 3, and in Cotgrave, as above); extrinsic-al-ly; and see
intrinsic,

EXTRUDE, to push out. (L.) In Levins, ed. 1570; and in
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. extriidere, pp. extriisus, to thrust forth.
=L. ex, out; and ¢ridere, to thrust ; from the same root as Threat,
q.v. Cf. in-irude. Der. extrus-ion, from pp. extriisus.

EXUBERANT, rich, superabundant. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave;
Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715; Thomson, Spring, 75.—MF. exuberant,
‘exuberant ;’ Cot.— L. exiiberant-, stem of pres. pt. of exiiberiire, to be
luxuriant. —L, ex, very; and aberare, to be fruitful, from aber, fertile ;
allied to aber, an udder, fertility, cognate with E. udder ; see Udder.
Der. exuberance, exuberanc-y; from MF. exuberance, ‘exuberancy;’ Cot.

EXUDE, to distil as sweat. (L.) In Johnson’s Dict.; and first in
1574. Another form is exudate, Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii.
€. 4.§ 5; the sb. exudation is in the same author, Cyrus’ Garden, c. 3.
§ 52. —L. exiidare, better spelt exsiidare, lit. to sweat out. L. ex, out ;
and sidare, to sweat; see Sweat. Der. exud-at-ion.

EXULT, to leap for joy, be glad. (L.) Shak. has exult, Tw. Nt.
ii. 5. 8; exuliation, Wint. Ta. v. 3. 131.—L. exultdre, better spelt
exsultdre, to leap up, exult, frequentative form of exsilere (pp. exsultus),
to spring out.—L, ex, out ; and salire, to leap; see Salient. Der.
exult-ing-ly, -ant, -at-ion.

EXUVIAS, cast skins of animals. (L.) In Kersey’s Dict., ed,
1715.—L. exuuie, things laid aside or put off. —L. exuere, to put off,
strip. Cf. L. ind-uuie, clothes.

EYAS, a nestling, a young hawk. (F.—L.)_ For nias or niais; by
substituting an eyas for a nias, oraniais. ‘An hawke is calde an eyas,’
&c.; Boke of St. Alban’s, fol. Bij. ‘Thou art a niaise;’ Ben Jonson,
The Devilis an Ass, Acti. sc. 3.—F. niais,a nestling; Cot. [Healso
gives niard, whence faulcon niard, ‘a nias faulcon.’| Cf. Ital. nidiace,
or nidaso falcone, ‘an eyase hawk, a young hawk taken out of her nest;’
Torriano. From Late L. type *nidacem, acc. of *nidax, an adj. formed
from nidus, a nest. See Nest.

EYE, the organ of sight. (E.) ME. eye, eize, eighe; pl. eyen, eizen,
eighen, as well as eyes, ei3es; P. Plowman, A. v. 90, B. v. 109, 134.
[| Chaucer uses the form yé, pl. yéz, though the scribes commonly write
it eye, eyen, against the rime. The old sound of ey was that of e7 in
eight, followed by a glide; the final e was aseparate syllable.] OMerc.
ége; AS. éage, pl. éagan, Grein, i. 254.4-Du. oog; Icel. auga; Dan. die;
Swed. dga; Goth. augd; G. auge (OHG. ouga). Teut. type *augon-.
Usually compared with L. oc-ul-us, dimin. of an older *ocus; Gk.
docopa (= dx-yopa), Isee; Lith. akis, an eye; Skt. akshi. Brugmann,
i. § 681. Der. eye, verb, Temp. v. 238; eye-ball, K. John, iii. 4. 30;
eye-bright, used to translate F. euphraise in Cotgrave; eye-brow, ME,
e3e-brewe, Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 239, 1. 8, from Icel. auga-briin,
an eyebrow (see Brow); eye-lash; eye-less; eye-lid, spelt ehe-lid in
-O, Eng. Homilies, i. 265, 1. 5 ; eye-salve, spelt e3he-sallfe in Ormulum,
1, 1852 ; eye-service, A.V. Eph. vi. 6; eye-sight, spelt eihsthde, Ancren
Riwle, p. 58; eye-sore, Tam. Shrew, iii. 2. 1035; eye-tooth; eye-witness,
sA. V. Luke, i. 2. Also dais-y, q.v., wind-ow, q. Vs


FACTION ©


EYELET-HOLE, a hole like a small eye. (F. and E.) For ME,
oilet, Wyclif, Exod. xxvi. 5; with hole added. ME. oile¢ is from OF.
oeillet, ‘ Oeillet, a little eye; also, an oilet-hole;* Cot. Dimin. of
OF. oeil, from L. oculum, ace. of oculus, the eye; see Eye.

EYOT, a little island. (E.) Also spelt ait. ‘ Eyet, an islet;’
Kersey, ed. 1715. ‘ Ait or eyght, a little island in a river;’ id. Spelt
eyt in a charter of Edw. Confessor, Kemble, Cod. Dipl. iv. 211; and
yget in Cod. Dipl. v. 17, 1. 30; with AF. substitution of -et for -od.
From AS. igod, also written igeod; ‘td anum igecde pe is Padmas
geciged’=to an eyot that is called Patmos; A€lfric’s Hom. ed.
Thorpe, i. 58. The shorter AS. form is 7g, still preserved in Shepp-y
and in island. See Island, (See Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 87.)

EYRH, a journey, circuit, (F.—L.) ME. eire. ‘The eire of
justize wende aboute in the londe;’ Rob. of Glouc., p. 517; 1. 10647.
‘Justices in eyre =judiciarii itinerantes ;’ Blount’s Nomolexicon. =
OF. eire, way; as in ‘le eire des feluns perirat’ =the way of the ungodly
shall perish, Ps. i. 7 (in Bartsch, Chrestomathie Frangaise, col. 41,
l. 35).—OF. eirer, to journey, wander about.—Late L. iterdare, to
journey (for L, ttinerare) ; from L. iter, a journey. See Errant.


EYRY, a nest; see Aery.


FABLE, a story, fiction, (F.—L.) ME. fable, Chaucer, C. T.
17342 (1 31).—F. fable. L. fabula, a narrative.—L. fari, to speak,
+Gk. oni, [say ; Skt. bhdsh, tospeak. See Fate. Der, fable, verb;
also (from L, fabula) fabul-ous, Hen. VIII, i. 1. 36; -ous-ly, -ise, -ist.

ABRIC, a structure. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. iv. 151; andin
Caxton, Golden Legend; St. Austin, § 14.—F. fabrigue; Cot.—L.
fabrica, a workshop, art, fabric. = L. fabri- for fabro-, stem of faber,a
workman. = L. *fab-, to fit; with suffix -er (stem -ro) of the agent.
The base *fab, answering to a root DHAB, appears in Lith, dab-inw,
I clean, adorn; Russ. dob-rui, good; Goth. ga-dab-ith, it is fit. See
Dapper. Doublet, forge, sb. q.v.

FABRICATE, to invent. (L.) In Cotgrave, to translate F.
fabriquer,—L. fabricaitus, pp. of fabricari, to construct.—L. fabrica
(above). Der. fabricat-ion, from F. fabrication, ‘a fabrication ;’ Cot.

FABULOUS; see Fable.

FACADE, the face of a building. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘ Facade, the
outside or fore-front of a great building; ’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.
And in Blount’s Gloss. (1656).—MF. facade, ‘the forefront of a
house ;” Cot. = Ital. facciata, the front of a building. = Ital. faccia, the
face. Folk L. facia, for L. faciés, the face ; see Face.

FACH, the front, countenance. (F.—L.) ME. face, Chaucer,
prol. 460; faas, K. Alisaunder, 5661. —F. face. — Folk L. facia, for L.
faciés, the face. Der. face, verb, Macb. i. 2. 20; fac-et, spelt fascet,
Bacon, Ess. 55, Of Honour, from F. dimin. facette; fag-ade, q.v. ;
fac-ing ; faci-al, from L. faci-és; also sur-face.

FACETIOUS, witty. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave.=—F. facétieux, ‘ face-
tious ;’ Cot.—MF. facetie, ‘ witty mirth ;’ id. —L. facétia, wit; com-
moner in the pl. facéti@, which is also used in English. L. facétus,
elegant, courteous ; orig. ‘ of fair appearance ;’ connected with Gk.
pa-os, light. Der. facetious-ly, -ness.

FACILE, easy to do, yielding. (F.—L.) In Shak, Oth. i. 3. 23.
And in Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, bk. i. c. 14. § 2. =F, facile, =
L. facilis, easily done, lit. do-able. = L. fac-ere, to do ; with suffix -ilis.
See Fact. Der. facil-i-ty, Oth. ii. 3. 84, from F. facilite, L. facili-
tdtem, acc. of facilitas ; facil-it-ate, imitated (but with suffix -aze) from
F. faciliter, ‘ to facilitate, make easie ;’ Cot. And see Faculty.

FAC-SIMILE, an exact copy. (L.) First in 1661 (N. E. D.).
From L. fac simile, make (thou) like.=L. fac, imp. s. of facere, to
make; and simile, neut. of similis, like. See Fact and Simile.

FACT, a deed, reality. (L.) Formerly used like mod. E. deed;
Shak. Macb. iii. 6. 103 cf. ‘fact of arms,’ Milton, P. L. ii. 124.—L.
factum,a thing done; neut. of factus, pp. of facere, todo. Allied to
Gk. ridnut, I put, set, and E.do; see Do. Brugmann, i. §§ 129, 193.
Der. factor, Cymb. i. 6. 188, from L. factor, an agent ; fact-or-ship, -or-
age, -or-y, -or-i-al ; also fact-ion, q. v.; also fact-it-i-ous, q. V., feasible,
q.v., feature,q.v. Doublet, feat, q.v. 4 Fromthe same root we have
not only fac-ile, fac-ulty, fac-totum, fash-ion, feat-ure, but many others ;
e.g. af-fair, af-fect, arti-fice, com-fit, con-fect, counter-feit, defeat, de-
fect, dif-fic-ult, effect, for-feit, infect, manu-fact-ure, office, per-fect,
pro-fic-ient, re-fect-ion, sacrifice, suf-fice, sur-feit, 8c.

FACTION, a party, sect. (F.—L.) In Shak. Haml. v. 2. 249.
=F. faction, ‘a faction or sect ;’ Cot.—L. factidnem, acc. of factio, a
doing, working for or against, faction; cf. factus, pp. of facere, to do;
see Fact. Der. facti-ous, Rich, III, i. 3. 128 ; -ous-ly, -ous-ness,


FACTITIOUS


FACTITIOUS, artificial. (L.) ‘Artificial and factitious
gemms ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Err. b. ii. c. 1, § 6.—L. factitius,
better facticius, artificial; with change of -us to -ous, as in arduous,
egregious. L, factus, pp. of facere, to make; see Fact. Der.
factitious-ly.

FACTOTUM, a general agent. (L.) ‘ Factotum here, sir;’ Ben
Jonson, New Inn, ii. 2.—L. fac totum, do (thou) all. —L. fac, imp. s.
of facere, to do; and zdtum, all; see Fact and Total.

FACULTY, facility to act. (F.—L.) ME. faculté, Chaucer,

C. T. 244.—F. faculté; Cot.—L. facultaitem, acc. of facultas, capa-
bility to do, contracted form of facilitas; see Facile.. Brugmann,
i. § 241 (b). Doublet, facility.
FAD, a whim, fancy, pet project. (F.—Prov.—L.) Adopted from
prov. E,; see E. D.D. Merely a shortened form of F. fadaise, ‘ fiddle-
faddle, twaddle, trifle ;’ Hamilton. Cot. has F. fadeses, pl. ‘ follies,
toyes, gulleries;’ and fadas, ‘sottish.’ Miege (1679) has ‘ fadle
[i.e. faddle], fadaises ;’ showing the association. = Prov. fadeza, folly
(Hatzfeld).— Prov. fat (Gascon fad), foolish.eL. fatuum, acc, of
fatuus, foolish. Der. faddle, nonsense.

FADE, to wither, (F.—L.) Gower has faded, C. A. ii. 109 ; bk.
iv. 3208. Cf. ‘That weren pale and fade-hewed ;’ id. i. 1113; bk. i.
2043. [Also written vade, Shak. Pass. Pilgrim, 131, 132 ; from MDnu.
vadden, to fade (from F.).}—OF. fader, vb.; from fade, adj. ‘ un-
savoury, tastlesse ; weak, faint, witlesse ;’ Cot.—L. wapidum, acc. of
uapidus, vapid, tasteless, The change to initial f was prob. due to
confusion with L. fatuus, stupid. Korting, § 3660. Der. fade-less.

FADGE, to turn out, succeed. (Scand.) ‘ How will this fadge ?’
Tw. Nt. ii. 2. 34. It occurs in other obsolete senses, such as to fit, to
suit, agree; and, transitively, to fit up or piece together. It appears
to be a palatalised form due to Norw. faga, to suit, accommodate one-
self to, or Norw. fagga, to cobble up, to wrap up carelessly (Ross).
From Teut. base fag-, whence also OSax. fogian, AS. fégan, to join,
suit, G. fiigen, to join, Du. voegen (see Kluge and Franck) ; and cf.
OHG., gi-fag, content; Goth. fulla-fah-jan, to satisfy. The same
base occurs in Fair (1),

FAGCHS, dregs. (L.) ‘Isent you of his feces there calcined ;’ Ben

Jonson, Alchemist, ii. 1,—L. facés, dregs, pl. of fex (stem fec-) ; of
unknown origin. Der. fec-ul-ent, in Kersey’s Dict., from L. feculentus.
‘FAG, to drudge. (E.) ‘Fag, to fail, grow weary, faint ;’ also,
“to beat, to bang ;’ Ash’s Dict. 1775. ‘To fag, deficere;’ Levins,
Io, 21, ed. 1570. Ofuncertain origin; but prob. a corruption of flag,
to droop; see Todd. See Flag (1). See below.
_FAG-END, a remnant. (E.) ‘ Fag, the fringe at the end of a
piece of cloth, the fringe at the end of a rope ;’ Ash’s Dict. ed. 1775.
‘ Fagg (a sea-term), the fringed end of arope;’ id. ‘ The fag-end of
the world ;’ Massinger, Virgin Martyr, Act ii.sc. 3. Origin unknown.
Perhaps for flag-end =loose end ; see Flag (1), and Fag. ‘Thus, in
the Boke of St. Albans (1486), fol. Bj, we find: ‘ The federis at the
wynges next the body be calde the flagg or the fagg federis.’

FAGGOT, FAGOT, a bundle of sticks. (F.—Scand.) In Shak.
Tit. And. iii. 1.69; 1 Hen. VI, v. 4.56. ME. fagot, Cursor Mundi,
1, 3164.—F. fagot, ‘ a fagot, a bundle of sticks ;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. fagotto,
fangotto, a bundle of sticks ; which was prob. borrowed from French;
the F. fagot being found before 1300, Formed, with dimin. suffix -of,
from Norw. fagg, a bundle (Ross). The Norw. fagg also means a
short, clumsy person ; and prov. E. faggot is likewise used as a depre-
ciatory term, often applied to children and women; whilst we also
find prov. FE, fadge with the precise sense of ‘ bundle.’ The Norw.
Jagga, vb., means to bundle together or to cobble up, and is prob.
related to faga, to suit. See Fadge. B. I feel inclined to connect
Ital. fangotto (if distinct from fagotto) with Icel. fang, an armful,
as in skidar-fang, vidar-fang, an armful of fuel; fanga-hnappr, a
bundle of hay, an armful; from Icel. fa, to fetch, get, grasp; see
Fang. @| The W. ffagod is borrowed from E. Der. faggot, verb.
‘ FAHRENHEIT, the name of a kind of thermometer. (G.) From
the name of a Prussian physicist (1686-1736), inventor of the mer-
curial thermometer. (N.E.D.)

FAIENCH, crockery, pottery. (F.—Ital.) The N. E. D. quotes
* Fayances or earthen-ware’ from a book of rates dated 1714.—F.
Saience, crockery ; so named from Faenza in Italy (near Ravenna),
where much pottery was once made,

FATL, to fall short, be baffled. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. failen,
Layamon, 2938 (later text).—IF. faillir, ‘to faile;’ Cot.—Folk L.
*fallire, for L. fallere, to beguile, elude ; pass. falli, to err, be baffled.
Perhaps allied to AS. feallan, to fall. See Fall, Brugmann,i. § 757.
Der. fail, sb., Wint. Tale, ii. 3.170; fail-ing; fail-ure (substituted for
an earlier failer, from AF, failer, F. faillir, infin. mood used substan-
tively), used by Burke, On the Sublime, pt. iv. § 24 (R.); and see
fallible, fallacy, false, fault, faucet.

AIN, glad, eager. (E.) ME, fayn, Chaucer, C. T. 2709 (‘A 2707);
common, AS, fegen, glad; Grein, i, 269.-4-OSax. fagan, glad ; Icel,


FALLACY 207


Jeginn, glad, Cf. AS. geféon (pt. t. gefeah), torejoice. From Teut,
base *feh-, as in AS. geféon (for *ge-feh-an) ; cf. Goth. fah-cths, joy.
Der. fawn, verb; q.v.

_FAINT, weak, feeble. (F.~L.) In early use. ME. feint, feynt ;
King Alisaunder, 612; Gower, C. A. ii. 5; bk. iv. 118.—OF. feint,
pp. of feindre, to feign; so that the orig. sense is ‘ feigned ;’ see
Bartsch, Chrest. Frangaise, p. 515, 1.3. See Feign. @ Cf. ME.
feintise, signifying (1) faintness, (2) cowardice; Glos. to Will. of
Palerne; P. Plowman, B. v. 5. Der. faint-ly, Shak. Oth. iv. 1.113;
faint-ness, Mids, Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 428 ; faint-hearted, 3 Hen. VI, i. 1. 183;
faint, verb, Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 2. 35.

FATR (1), pleasing, beautiful. (E.) ME. fair, fayr, Chaucer, prol.
575 (A 573); fazer, Ormulum, 6392. AS. feger, Grein, i. 269.4
Icel. fagr ; Dan. Swed. fager ; Goth. fagrs, fit ; used to tr. Gk. etOerov
in Lu. xiv. 35; OHG, fagar. Teut. type *fagroz. Cf. Gk. mnyéds,
firm, strong. Brugmann, vol.i. §§ 200, 701. Andsee Fadge. Der.
Jair-ly, fair-ness.

FATR (2), festival, holiday, market. (F.—L.) ME. feire, fayre;
Chaucer, C. T. 5803 (D 221).—OF. feire; F. foire.—L. feria, a
holiday; in Late L. a fair; commoner in the pl. férie. Férie is for
*fés-i@, feast-days; from the same root as Feast and Festal.
Brugmann, vol. ii. § 66.

FAIRY, asupernatural being. (F.—L.) ME. faerie, fairye, fairy,
‘enchantment ;? P. Plowman, B. prol. 6; Chaucer, C. T. 6441
(D 859). [The modern use of the word is improper; the right word
for the elf being fay. The mistake was made long ago; and fully
established before Shakespeare’s time. |= OF. faerie, enchantment. =
OF. fae (F. fée), a fairy; see Fay. Der. fairy, adj.

FAITH, belief. (F.—L.) ‘The final -th is analogous to the E.
suffix -th, as seen in truth, ruth, wealth, health, and other similar sbs.
B. ME. ferp, feith, feyth; as well as fey. The earliest example of the
spelling feith is in Genesis and Exodus, 1. 2187 (ab. 1250). We find
fayth in the Cursor Mundi, 1. 3405; and fai occurs in the same
poem, ll. 2354 (riming with delay), and 1. 7562 (riming with nai), —
OF. fei, feid, feit.—L. fidem, acc. of fides, faith. 4+ Gk. riots, faith;
melOev, to persuade ; mémoia, I trust... (4f BHEIDH.) Allied to
Bide. Brugmann,i. § 202. 4 The assumption that OF. feit, feid
was at first pronounced as feip, fei, is needless. The AF. fei appears
in Phil, de Thaun, L. des Creatures, 1. 244 (before 1150); I believe
the -th to be a purely E. addition. Der. faith-ful, -ful-ly, -ful-ness 5
-less, -less-ly, -less-ness, From the same root are jid-el-i-ty, af-ji-ance,
con-fide, de-fy, dif-fid-ent, per-fid-y.

FAKIR, a religious mendicant; see Faquir.

FALCHION, a bent sword. (F.—Ital.—Late L.) In Shak.
L.L. L. v. 2. 618. ME. fauchon, P. Plowman, C. xvii. 169; directly
from F. fauchon, ‘a faulchion;’ Cot.—Ital. falcione, a scimetar. =
Late L. falcidnem, acc. of falcio, a sickle-shaped sword, =—L. falci-,
decl. stem of falx,a sickle. Allied to flec-tere, to bend; Brugmann,
i. § 529 (2). @ The word was really taken from the F. fauchon, and
afterwards altered to falchion by the influence of the Ital. form.
Der. from L. falx are also falc-on, de-falc-ate.

FALCON, a bird of prey. (F.—L.) ME. faukon, King Ali-
saunder, 567; faucon, Chaucer, C. T. 10725 (F 411).—AF. faucon,
Stat. of the Realm, i, 293 (1340); OF. faucon, MF. faulcon, ‘a
faulkon;’ Cot.—Late L. falcdnem, acc. of falco, a falcon; so called
from the hooked shape of the claws. ‘ Falcones dicuntur, quorum
digiti pollices in pedibus intro sunt curuati;’ Festus, p. 88; qu. in
White and Riddle. ‘That is, falco is derived from /alc-, stem of falx,
asickle; see above. The / in falcon was inserted in the 15th century.
Der. falcon-er ; falcon-ry, from MF. faulconnerie ‘a faulconry ;’ Cot.

FALDSTOOL, a folding-stool, (F.—Low L.—OHG.) Now
applied to a low desk at which the litany is said; but formerly to a
folding-stool or portable seat. ‘ Faldstool, a stool placed at the S.
side of the altar, at which the kings of England kneel at their coro-
nation ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. He also has: ‘ Faldistory, the
episcopal seat within the chancel.’ [Not E., but borrowed from F.]
= OF. faldestoel (Godefroy). —Low L. faldistolium, also faldistorium
(corruptly), a faldstool,=OHG. faldan (G. falten), to fold ; and stuol
(G. stuhl), a chair, seat, throne. See Fold and Stool. 4 We also
find AS. feldestal, A. S. Leechdoms, vol. i. p. lxii. 1. 3. But had the
word been native, it would have been fold-stool, See Fauteuil.

FALL, to drop down. (E.) ME. fallen, Chancer, C. T. 2664
(A 2662). OMerc. fallan, Matt. x. 29; the AS. form being feallan.
+ Du. vaillen; Icel. falla; Dan. falde (with excrescent d); Swed.
falla; G. fallen. Teut. type *fallan-. Cf. Lith. pilzi, to fall; and
perhaps L. fallere, to deceive, falli, to err. Brugmann, i. § 757-
Der. fall, sb.; be-fall, vb.; and see fell (1), fail.

FALLACY, a deceptive appearance, error in argument. (F. —L.)
In Shak. Errors, ii. 2. 188, Spelt falacye, Caxton, Reynard, c. 28;
ed. Arber, p. 67, 1.10. A manipulated word, due to the addition of
-y to ME. fallace or fallas, in order to bring it nearer to the L. form.


208 FALLIBLE


ME. fallace, fallas; once common; see P. Plowman, C. xii. 22, and
the note; also Gower, C. A. ii. 85; bk. iv. 2509.—F. fallace, ‘a
fallacy ;’ Cot.—L. fallacia, deceit. —L. fallac-, stem of fallax, decep-
tive. = L. fallere, to deceive; see Fail. Der. fallacious, Milton, P. L.
ii. 568 ; -ous-ly, -ous-ness; see below.

FALLIBLBE, liable to error. (L.) In Shak. Meas. iii. 1. 170;
Lydgate, Siege of Troye, bk. i.c.6; fol.D 6. Late L. fallibilis, —L,
fallere, to deceive, falli, to err; see Fail. Der. fallibl-y; fallibili-ty.

FALLOW (1), untilled. (E.) The meaning ‘untilled’ is a mere
development. The orig. sense was (1) ploughed land; (2) ploughed
and harrowed land, left uncropped; and it was at first a sb. ME.
falwe, ploughed land, Havelok, 2509. AS. felging, fallow land
(Corpus gloss. 1385).— AS. fealg-, as in fealg-a, pl., harrows (for
breaking clods); Epinal gloss. 713. Allied to EFries. falgen, Low G.
falgen, to fallow land; OHG. felga,a harrow. Der. fallow, verb.

FALLOW (2), used with reference to colour; pale brownish,
pallid. (E.) ‘His hewe falwe;’ Chaucer, C. T., A 1364. ‘ Falewe
lockes ;’ fallow locks of hair; Layamon, 18449. OMerc. falu; AS.
fealu, pale red, yellowish red; Grein, i. 286.4 Du. vaal ; Icel. folr,
pale; G. fahl, pale, also falb; Lith. palvas. Cf. also L. pallidus ;
Gk. moAtds, gray; Skt. palita-, gray. See Pale. Brugmann, i.
§ 375 (9). Hence fallow deer; Sir T. Elyot has: ‘Dere redde and
falowe ;’ Castel of Helth, bk. ii. c. 12.

FALSE, untrue, deceptive. (F.—L.) ME. fals, Chaucer, C. T.,
A 1580; earlier, in O. Eng. Homilies, rst Ser. p. 185, 1. 16.—OF.
fals (F. faux). =—L. falsus, false; pp. of fallere, to deceive; see Fail.
Der. false-ly, -ness, -hood (spelt falshede in Chaucer, C. T. 16519,
G 1051); fals-i-fy, 1 Hen. IV, i. 2. 235 ; -i-fic-at-ion, -i-fi-er, -i-ty;
also falsetto, from Ital. falsetto, treble; also faucet, q. v.

FALTER, to totter, stammer. (E.) ME. falteren, faltren.
‘Thy limes faltren ay’=thy limbs ever tremble with weakness;
Chaucer, C. T. 5192 (B 772). ‘And nawber faltered ne fel’=and
he neither gave way nor fell; Gawayne and the Grene Knight, 430.
The old sense of to ‘stumble,’ to ‘miss one’s footing,’ occurs late;
‘his legges hath foltred’=the horse’s legs have given way; Sir T.
Elyot, The Governour, b. i. c. 17 (in Spec. of Eng., ed. Skeat, p. 197,
1. 78). Formed from a base falt-, with frequentative suffix -er. Of
obscure origin. Perhaps connected with Icel. refl. verb faltra-sk, to
be cumbered, to be puzzled.

FAME, report, renown. (F.—L.) Inearly use; King Alisaunder,
6385.—F. fame.—L. fama, report.—L. fairi, to speak. See Fate.
Der. fam-ed; fam-ous, Gower, C. A, ii. 366; bk. v. 7125 3 fam-ous-ly.

FAMILY, a household. (L.) In Shak. Oth. i. 1. 84. Spelt
JSamylye in Caxton, Golden Legend ; Moses, § 3 from end. = L. familia,
a household. = L. famulus, a servant ; Oscan famel, a servant (White) ;
cf. Oscan faamat, he dwells. Der. famili-ar (from L. familiaris),
also found in ME. in the form famuler, familier (from OF. familier),
Chaucer, C. T. prol. 215; famili-ar-i-ty, -ar-ise.

FAMINE, severe hunger. (F.—L.) ME. famine, famyne;
Chaucer, C. T. 12385 (C 451).—F. famine. — Late L. *famina, un-
recorded, but evidently a barbarous derivative from L. famés, hunger.
Der. fam-ish, Merch. of Ven. ii. 2.113; formed with suffix -ish by
analogy with langu-ish, demol-ish, and the like, from the base fam- in
OF. a-fam-er, later affamer, to famish. This base fam- is from L.
fam-és, hunger (F. faim).

FAN, an instrument for blowing. (L.) Used by Chaucer to
describe a quintain; C, T. 16991 (H 42). AS. fann; Matt. iii. 12.
Not a native word, but borrowed from Late L. vannus, for L. uannus,
a fan; whence also F. van. See Van (2). Brugmann, i. § 357.
Der. fan, verb ; fann-er, fan-light, -palm.

FANATIC, religiously insane. (F.—L.) ‘ Fanatick Egypt;’
Milton, P. L. i, 480, And in Minsheu (1627).—F. fanatigue, ‘mad,
frantick ;” Cot.—L. fandticus, (1) belonging to a temple, (2) inspired
by a divinity, filled with enthusiasm.—L. fanum, a temple; see
Fane. Der. fanatic-al, -al-ly, -im. @ On this word see a passage
in Fuller, Mixt Contemplations on these Times, § 50 (Trench).

FANCY, imagination, whim. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Temp,
iv. 122; v.59. Acorruption of the fuller form faxtasy, Merry Wives,
v. 5. 55- ME. fantasie, Chaucer, C. T. 6098 (D 516). P. Plowman,
A. prol. 36.—OF. fantasie, ‘the fancy, or fantasie;’ Cot.—Late L.
fantasia, or phantasia. = Gk. pavtacia, a making visible, imagination.
-Gk. gayrafev, to make visible; extended from aivew, to bring
to light, shine; cf. paos, light, ¢ae, he appeared. See Phantom.
Der. fancy, verb; fanci-ful. Doublet, fantasy (obsolete) ; whence
fantastic (Gk. pavtacrixds), -al,-al-ly. From same root, epi-phany, q.v.

FANDANGO, a Spanish dance. (Span.) Dr. Pegge has a note
on it in his Anonymiana, cent. vili. § 30 (1818).—Span. fandango,
‘a dance used in the West Indies;’ Pineda. Source uncertain; said
to be of negro origin. See Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 88.

FANE, a temple. (L.) In Shak. Cor. i. 10. 20.—L. fanum, a
temple; from an earlier form *fasnom; cf. Oscan fisnam, a temple,


FARRIER


allied to L. festus, festive. See Feast. Brugmann, ii. § 66. Der.
fan-at-ic, q. Vv. if

FANFARE, a flourish of trumpets. (F.—Span.) Spelt famphar;
Montgomerie, Misc. Poems, xliii. 4o (c. 1605).—F. fanfare, ‘a
sounding of trumpets; ’ Cot.—Span. /anfarria, bluster, loud vaunting;
a word ofimitative origin. Der. fanfarr-on-ade, from F. fanfarronade,
which from Span. fanfarronada, bluster, boasting; from Span. fan-
farron, blustering, fanfarrear, to hector, bluster, boast.

FANG, a tusk, claw, talon. (E.) _ In Shak. K. John, ii. 353.
ME. fang, a capture; Wallace, xi.1219. So also AS. fang =a taking;
A. S.-Chron. an. 1016. However, the sb. is derived from the verb.
AS. *fohan, to seize, only in use in the contracted form fox, of which
the pt. t. is féng, and the pp. gefangen; the pp. alone survived,
whence an infin, mood fang-(en) was evolved in dialects. Du. vangen,
to catch; Icel. fa, to get, seize, pp. fenginn; fang, a catch of fish,
&c.; Dan. faae, to get; Swed. fa, to get, catch; fang, a catch; Goth.
fihan, to catch; G. fangen, to catch; fang, a catch, also, a fang,
talon. B. All from a Teut. verb *fanhan-, pt. t. *fefang, pp. *fang-
anoz; allied to L. pangere, to fasten, fix. Brugmann, i. § 421.

FANTASY, FANTASTIC; see Fancy.

FANTIGUE, FANTEAGUE, a state of excitement, fit of ill
humour. (F.—L.) Spelt fantigue in 1825. Perhaps suggested by the
F. fanatique, ‘in a frenzie;’ Cot.=—L. fandticus; see Fanatic,
@ For the loss of the second syllable, cf. frantic, frenzy.

FAQUIR, FAKTR, a religious mendicant. (F.—Arab.) ‘Not
there the Fakir’s self will wait ;? Byron, The Giaour; § 11.—F. faguir,
Fakir, — Arab. fagir, one of a religious order of mendicants ; lit. ‘ poor,
indigent ;’ Rich. Dict., p. 1096. See Fakeer in Yule.

FAR, remote. (E.) ME. fer, Chaucer, C. T. 496 (A 494); feor,
Layamon, 543. AS. feor; Grein, i. 289.--Du. ver; Icel. fyarri;
Swed. jjerran, adv. afar; Dan. fjern, adj. and adv. ; G. fern; Goth.
fairra,ady. PB. All allied to Gk. mépav, beyond; Skt. paras, beyond ;
para-, far, distant. SeeFare. Der. far-th-er, far-th-est ; see Farther,

FARCE, akind of comedy. (F.—L.) The orig. sense is ‘ stuffing ;’
hence, a jest inserted into comedies. ‘ These counterfaityng plaiers of
Jarces and mummeries;’ Lord Berners, Golden Book, c. 14. Hence
Ben Jonson speaks of ‘ other men’s jests,... to farce their scenes
withal ;’ Induction to Cynthia’s Revels. =F. farce, ‘a fond and dis-
solute play; ... any stuffing in meats;’ Cot. =F. farcer, to stuff. —L.
farcire, to stuff.+-Gk. ppaocev, to shut in. See Force (2). Der.
farc-ic-al ; and see frequent.

FARCY, a disease of horses, somewhat like glanders. (F. —L.)
‘ Farsye, a sore upon a beast or horse ;’ Huloet (1552). Also called
farcin, and even fashion or fashions. =F. farcin, ‘the farsy in a horse ;”
Cot.—L. farciminum, a disease in horses and other animals.=L,
farci-re, to cram, stuff (above). See Tam. Shrew, ili. 2. 53.

FARDEL,a pack, bundle. (F.—Span.—Arab.) In Shak. Hamlet,
iii. 1.76. ME. fardel, Rom. of the Rose, 5683 ; Cursor Mundi, 5004.
= OF. fardel, the true old form of fardeau, ‘a fardle, burthen, truss,
pack ;’ Cot. Cf Low L. fardellus, a burden, pack, bundle. Fard-el is
adimin. of F. farde, a burden, still in use in the sense of ‘bale of coffee.’
— Span. (and Port.) fardel, fardo, a pack, bundle. B. Origin uncertain;
but prob. from Arabic. Devic (Supp. to Littré) cites Arab. fardah,
a package.

FARE, to travel, speed. (E.) ME. faren, Chaucer, C. T. 10802
(F 488). AS. faran, Grein, i. 264.-4-Du. varen; Icel. and Swed. fara;
Dan. fare; OHG. faran, G. fahren; Goth. faran, to go. Teut. type
*faran- (pt. t. *for).4-Gk. mopevona, I travel, go; mdpos, a way
through ; mepdw, I pass through; L. ex-per-ior, I pass through,
experience; Skt. py, to bring over. 4/ PER, to pass over or through,
Der. fare-well=may you speed well, ME. fare wel, Chaucer, C. T.
2762; and see far, fer-ry; also thorough-fare, a passage through; wel-
Jare, successful journey or state. From the same root are ex-per-ience,
ex-per-iment, port (1), q.v., per-il.

FARINA, ground corn. (L.) The adj. farinaceous is in Sir T.
Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 15. § 2. The sb. occurs in 1707.—L,
farina, meal. = L. far, a kind of grain, spelt; cognate with E. Barley,
q.v. Brugmann, i. § 180. Der. farin-ac-e-ous (L. farindceus).

FARM, ground let for cultivation. (F.—L.) ME. ferme, Chaucer,
C.T. 253. ‘Hesette..[h]islondes¢o ferme ;’ Rob. of Glouc., p. 378,
1.7773. [Cf.also AS. feorm, a feast, entertainment; Luke, xiv. 12,16;
also food, hospitality, property, use; see Grein, i. 293.] AF. ferme,
Stat. Realm, i. 140 (1300).— OF, ferme, a farm; a ferme, on lease. =
Late L. jirma,a feast, a farm, a tribute; also, a lasting oath. = L. firmus,
firm, durable. See Firm, 4 For the curious use of the word, see
jirma in Ducange. Der. farm, verb; -er, -ing’.

FARRAGO, a confused mass. (L.) ‘That collection, or farago
of prophecies ;’ Howell’s Letters, b. iii. let. 22 (1648). —L. farrago,
mixed fodder for cattle, a medley.—L. far, spelt (gen. farr-is). See
Farina. ;

FARRIER, a shoer of horses. (F.—L.) Lit. ‘a worker in iron,’


{


FARROW


Spelt ferrer in Holland’s Pliny, b. xxxiii. c. rr. Cotgrave has:
‘mareschal ferrant, a farrier.’ = OI, ferrier, a farrier (Godefroy). = L.
Jerrarius, a blacksmith, worker in iron.=L. ferrum, iron. See
Ferreous. Der. farrier-y.

FARROW, to produce a litter of pigs. (E.) ‘That thair sow
jerryit wes thar’=that their sow had farrowed, lit. was farrowed ;
Barbour’s Bruce, xvii. 701. Also i-varjed, pp. (from infin. varjen),
Ayenb. of Inwyt, p. 61,1. 29. (Cf. Dan. fare, to farrow.] Formed,
as a verb, from ME. fark, which means (not a litter, but) a single pig.
The word is scarce, but the pl. faren occurs in King Alisaunder, 2441.
AS. fearh, a pig; the pl. fearas occurs in A‘lf. Gloss., ed. Somner,
Nomina Ferarum, explained by ‘ suilli, vel porcelli, vel nefrendes.’ +
Du. varken (dimin.),a pig; OHG. farah, a pig; whence G. dimin.
ferk-el, a pig. +L. porcus, a pig. See Pork.

FARTHER, FARTHEST, more far, most far. (E.) In Shak.
Ant. and Cleop. ii. 1. 31; iii. 2. 26. These forms are due to a mistake,
and to confusion with further, furthest; see Further. Not found
at all early; the ME. forms are fer, ferre, ferrer, and ferrest, ‘Than
walkede I ferrer ;? P. Plowman’s Crede, 207 ; ‘ The jerres¢ in his
parisch ;” Chaucer, C. T. 496 (A 494). Ferther first appears as an
adv.; Cursor Mundi, 6831 (ab. 1300). Ferthest first appears as an
adj.; P. Plowman, B. v. 239 (ab. 1377).

FARTHING, the fourth part of a penny. (E.) ME. ferthing,
ferthynge; P. Plowman, B. iv. 54. AS. feording, férpyng, Matt. v. 26
(Royal and Hatton MSS.) ; older form féordling (Camb. MS.).=—AS.
Jéord-a, fourth; with dimin. suffix -ing or -ling (=-l-ing). Allied to
AS. féower, four. See Four.

FARTHINGALE, FARDINGALBE, a hooped petticoat.
(F.—Span.—L.) In Shak. Two Gent. ii. 7. 51; a corrupt form.=
MF. verdugalle, ‘a vardingall ;’ Cot. Also vertugalle, ‘a vardingale;’
vertugadin, ‘a little vardingale ;’ id. —Span. verdugado, a fardingale ;
so called from its hoops, the literal sense being ‘ provided with hoops.’
= Span. verdugo, a young shoot ofa tree, a rod. = Span. verde, green. =
L. uiridis, green. See Verdant. 4 The derivation from ‘ virtue-
guard’ is a very clumsy invention or else a joke. The word was well
understood; hence the term ‘ his verdugo-ship’ in Ben Jonson, The
Alchemist, iii. 2 (Face).

FASCINATE, to enchant. (L.) ‘ Fascination is ever by the eye;’
Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 944. ‘To fascinate or bewitch;’ id. Essay g, Of
Enyy.=L. jfascindtus, pp. of fascinare, to enchant.=L. fascinum, a
spell. Der. fascinat-ion.

FASCINE, a bundle of rods. (F.—L.) First found ab. 1688 ; and
still a new term in 1711; see Spectator, no. 165. ‘ Fascines, faggots
or bavins;’ Kersey, ed.1715.—F. fascine, ‘a faggot;’ Cot.=L. fascina,
a bundle of sticks. —L. fasci-s,a bundle. Der. From the same source,
fascés, pl. of L. fascis; fasci-c-ul-ate ; fess.

F ASH, to trouble, annoy, vex. (F.—L.) Common in Northern
dialects; see E.D. D:—MF. fascher (F. facher), to displease, vex;
Cot. — Folk L. */fasticare, to show arrogance; from L. fastus, arrogance
(Hatzfeld).

FASHION, the make or cut of a thing. (F.—L.) ME. faciun,
Cursor Mundi, 1. 22322; fasoun, Rom. of the Rose, 551; fassoun,
Dunbar, Thistle and Rose, st. 12.— OF. faceon, fagon, form, shape. =
L. factidnem, acc. of factio,a making. See Faction. Doublet,
faction. Der. fashion, verb, -able, -abl-y.

FAST (1), firm, fixed. (E.) ME. fast, Ormulum, 1602; as adv.
faste, Chaucer, C.T.721 (A719). AS. fest, Grein, i. 271.4-Du. vast ;
Dan. and Swed. fast; Icel. fastr; OHG. vast; G. fest.. Teut. type
*fastoz. Cf, Armenian hast, firm, Brugmann,ii.§ 79. Der. fast,verb
(below) ; fast-en, q.v.; fast-ness,q.v. The phrase ‘ fast asleep’ is
Scandinavian ; Icel. sofa fast, to be fast asleep; see Fast (3).

FAST (2), to abstain from food. (E.) ME. fasten, Wyclif, Matt.
vi. 16. AS. festan, Matt. vi. 16.4-Du. vasten ; Dan. faste; Swed. and
Icel. fasta; Goth. fastan; G. fasten. B. A very early derivative from
Teutonic fast-, firm, in the sense to be firm, observe, be strict. See
Fast (1). Der. fast, sb., fast-er, fast-ing, fast-day.

FAST (3), quick, speedy. (Scand.) Merely a peculiar use of
fast, firm. Chaucer has faste=quickly; C. T. 16150 (G 682). The
peculiar usage is Scandinavian, and arose in the adverb. Cf. Icel.
drekka fast, to drink hard; sofa fast, to be fast asleep ; fylgja fast, to
follow fast ; fastr i verkum, hard at work; leita fast eptir, to urge,
press hard after. The development is through the senses ‘closely,’
‘urgently.” See Fast (1).

FASTEN, to secure. (E.) ME. fastnen, festnen; Chaucer has
festne, prol. 195. AS. festnian, to make firm or fast; Grein, i. 273.
= AS. fest, fast, firm. See Fast (1). Der. fasten-ing. | Observe
that fasten stands for fastn- in AS. festn-ian, so that the -ez is truly
formative, not a sign of the infin. mood or a late addition.

FASTIDIOUS, over-nice. (L.) Orig. in the sense of ‘ causing
disgust,’ or ‘loathsome;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. i. c.g; see
-Trench (Select Glossary). = L. fastididsus, disdainful, disgusting. = L.


FAVOUR 209


fastidium, loathing; for *fastu-tidium.=L. fastus, arrogance; and
twdium, disgust. See Dare and Tedious. 4 ‘Bréal conjectures

(Zeitschrift, xx. 79), I think rightly, that L. fastus (for *farstus) and
fastidium (for *fasti-tidium) belong to this root,’ viz. DHERS, to
dare; Curtius, i. 318. Der. fastidious-ly, -ness.

FASTNESS, a stronghold. (E.) ME. festnes, Metrical Psalter,
xvii. 2. (Spec. of Eng., part ii. p. 25.) ‘The same as ME, fastnesse,
certainty, strength; Wyclif, Gen. xli. 32 (early version). AS. festnes,
festnis, the firmament; Gen. i. 6.—AS. fest, firm; with suffix -nes.
See Fast (1).

FAT (1), stout, gross. (E.) ME. fat, Chaucer, prol. 200, 290. AS.
fet, fett, orig. a pp., contracted from */@ed, fatted, enriched ; Grein,
i. 273.4-OHG. feizi¢t (G. feist), pp. of a Teut. verb * faitjan-, to make
fat, formed from a Tent. adj. * faitoz, fat, which is represented by Icel.
feitr, fat (Swed. fet, Dan. fed). B. Related to Gk. ziwy, mapés, fat ; Skt.
pivan, fat. Der. fat, sb., fatt-y, fatt-i-ness, fat-ness, Rom. of the Rose,
2686 ; fatt-en, where the -en is a late addition, by analogy with fasten,
&c., the true verb being to fat, as in Luke, xv. 23, Chaucer, C. T. 7462
(D 1880) ; fatt-en-er, -en-ing ; fat-ling (=fat-l-ing), Matt. xxii. 4.

FAT (2),a vat. (North E.) Joel, ii. 24, iii. 13. See Vat.

FATEH, destiny. (F.—L.) ME. fate, Chaucer, Troil.v.1552.—OF.
fat, fate; not common (Godefroy). = L. fatwm, what is spoken, fate. = L,
fatus, pp. of fari, to speak. Allied to Gk. ¢nyi (Doric papi), I say.
(4f BHA.) Brugmann, i. § 187. @[ Perhaps E. fate was simply made
from the common OF. fatal (whence ME. fatal, Chaucer, C. T. 4681,
B 261) in order to render L. fatum. Der. fat-al, -ed; fatal-i-ty, -ism;
Jay, q.v.3 fairy, q.v.

FATHER, a male parent. (E.) ME. fader, Chaucer, C. T. 8098
(E 222). [The spelling fader is almost universal in ME. ; father
occurs in the Bible of 1551, and is due to dialectal influence, which
changed -der to -ther.| AS. feder, Matt. vi. 9.4-Du. vader; Dan.
and Swed. fader ; Icel. fadir ; Goth. fadar; G. vater.4-L. pater; Gk.
matnp; Pers. pidar; Skt. pity; Irish athair. Idg.type*pater-. Der.
father, verb; father-hood, -less, -ly; also father-land, imitated from the
Dntch by I. D’Israeli; see his Curiosities of Literature, Hist. of New
Words. But it occurs earlier, in 1623.

FATHOM, a measure of 6 feet. (E.) Properly, the breadth
reached to by the extended arms. ME. fadme, Chaucer, C. T.,
A 2918; uedme, Layamon, 27686. AS. fedm, the space reached by
the extended arms, a grasp, embrace; Grein, i. 268. -+- Du. vadem, a
fathom ; Icel. fadmr, a fathom; Dan. favz, an embrace, fathom ;
Swed. famn, embrace, bosom, arms; G. faden (OHG. fadam), a
fathom, athread. Cf. L. patére, to lie open, extend; patulus, spreading.
See Patent. Der. fathom, vb. (AS. fedman, Grein); fathom-able, -less.

FATIGUE, weariness. (F.—L.) ‘ Fatigue, weariness ;’ Blount’s
Gloss. ed. 1674. ‘Fatigate, to weary ;’ id. (obsolete). — OF. fatigue,
‘weariness;’ Cot.—OF. fatiguer, to weary; id.=L. fatigare, to
weary (whence fatigate, in Shak. Cor. ii. 2,121). Connected with
L. fessus, wearied, fatiscere, to gape open (Bréal) ; and perhaps with
OLat. adfatim, sufficiently. Der. fatigue, verb. ] In French, the
sb. is from the verb ; in E., the reverse.

FATUOUBS, silly. (L.) In Donne, Devotions, ed. 1625, p. 25
(Todd).=—L. fatu-us, silly, feeble; with suffix -ous, for L. -us. Der.

Satu-i-ty ; in-fatu-ate.

FAUCEHS, the upper part of the throat. (L.) L. pl. faucés; of
uncertain origin; but prob. allied to Gk. xaos. See Chaos.

FAUCET, a spigot, vent. (F.—L.) In Wyclif, Job, xxxii. I9.—
OF. (and F.) fausset, ‘a faucet,’ Cot.; also spelt faulset, id. Origin
uncertain; but perhaps from OF. faulser, to falsify, to forge; whence
‘ faulser un escu, to pierce or strike through a shield, to make a breach
into it;’ id.=—L. falsare, to falsify.—L. falsus, false. See False.
@ See OF. falser, to pierce; Supp. to Godefroy.

FAULT, a failing, defect. (F.—L.) ME. faute, with the sense
‘lack,’ Cursor Mundi, 4504.—OF. faute, a fault. The/ is due to the
insertion of J in the 15th century; thus we find ‘for fawite of trust ;’
Lord Rivers, Dictes of Philosophers, pr. by Caxton, fol. 20 b, 1. 4;
and Cotgrave has: ‘ Faulte, a fault.’ [Cf.Span., Port., and Ital. falta,
a defect, want.]=— OF. faute, a fault. = Folk-L. *fallita, a defect ; fem.
of *fallitus, new pp, of L. fallere, to beguile; fallz,to err, See Fail.
Der. fault-y, -i-ly, -i-ness ; fault-less, -less-ly, -less-ness.

FAUN, a rural (Roman) deity. (L.) ME. faun, Chaucer, C. T.
2930 (A 2928).—L. Faunus. Perhaps from L. fauere, to be pro-
pitious ; pp. fautus. See Favour. Der. faun-a.

FAUTEUIL, an arm-chair. (F.—Low L.—G.) Mod. F. fauteuil ;
MF. fauldetueil (Cot.).— Low L. faldistolium. See Faldstool,

FAVOUR, kindliness, grace. (F.—L.) ME. fauour (with w=v),
King Alisaunder, 2844.—OF. favour, F. faveur, ‘fayour;’ Cot.=L.

fauorem, acc. of fauor, favour.—L. fauére, to befriend ; orig. to
venerate. Der. favour, verb; favour-able, P. Plowman, B. iii. 153;
-abl-y, -able-ness ; also favour-ite, Shak. Much Ado, iii, I. 9, orig.
feminine, from OF. favorite, fem, of favorit or favori, favoured (Cot.) ;
P


210 FAWN


: ke : : 1
favour-it-icm. Also favonian, gentle; from Faudnius, the west wind ;


from fau-ére, to favour, Brugmann, i. § 664. i> On the phr. curry
favour, see Curry.

FAWN (1), to cringe to, rejoice servilely over. (E.) ME. faunen,
fauhnen; P. Plowman, B. xv. 295; C. xviii. 31. AS. faknian,
fagnian, to rejoice; variants of fegenian, to fawn; from fegen, fain,
glad.+lIcel. fagna, to rejoice, be fain; fagna einum, to welcome one,
receive with good cheer. See Fain. Der. fawn-er, -ing.

FAWN (2), a young deer. (F.—L.) ME. fawn, Chaucer, Book
of the Duchess, 429.—OF. fan, faon, ‘a fawne,’ Cot.; earlier fedn
(Supp. to Godefroy).— Late L. */étdnem, acc. of *fets, a young one
(not found), an extension of L. fetus, offspring. See Fetus.

FAY, a fairy. (F.—L.) See the ‘Song by two faies’ in Ben
Jonson’s Oberon. = F. fée, a fairy, elf; cf. Port. fada, Ital. fata, a fay.
—Late L. fata, a fairy, ‘in an inscription of Diocletian’s time’
(Brachet); lit. ‘a fate, goddess of destiny.’=L. fata, pl. of fatum,
fate; later used as f. sing. See Fate. Der. fai-ry, q.v.

FEALTY, true service. (F.—L.) ME. feauté, Rob. of Brunne,
tr. of Langtoft, p. 3; feuté, King Alisaunder, 2911. [The spelling
fealty is later in E., though a better form; see feaulté in Cotgrave ;
but AF. fealté occurs in Gaimar, 1. 3719.)—OF. fealté, feelteit,
fidelity. —L. jidélitatem, acc. of fidélitas.. See Fidelity, of which
fealty is a doublet.

FEAR, terror. (E.) ME. fere, P. Plowman, B. xiii. 162; better
spelt feer. AS. /ér,a sudden peril, danger, panic, fear ; Grein, i. 277.
Orig. used of the danger of travelling. AS. fér-, 3rd stem of faran,
to go, travel.+Icel. far, bale, harm, mischief; OHG. fara, var,
treason, danger, fright, whence G. gefahr, danger; Du. gevaar,
danger. Cf. also L. periculum, danger, experior, I go through,
experience; also Gk. mefpa, an attempt, from zepdw, I go through.
= 4/ PER, to pass through, travel; whence E. fare, verb. See Fare
and Peril. Der. fear, verb, often used actively =to frighten, terrify,
as in Shak. Tam. Shrew, i. 2. 211; fear-ful, -ful-ly, -ful-ness; -less,
-less-ly, -less-ness.

FEASIBLE, easy to be done. (F.—L.) ‘’Tis feasible;’ Mas-
singer, Emp. of the East, i. 2. 76. [Also feasable.J}—MF. faisible,
faisable, ‘ feasible, doable ;’ Cot.—F. fais-, as in fais-ant, pres. pt. of
faire, to do.—L. facere, to do. See Fact. Der. feasibl-y, feasible-
ness, feasibil-i-ty.

FEAST, a festival, holiday. (F.—L.) ME. feste; Ancren Riwle,
p- 22.—OF. feste (F. féte).=Late L. festa, fem.—L. festa, lit.
‘festivals ;’ pl. of festum, a feast, orig. neuter of festus, joyful.
Allied to Fair (2). Der. feast, verb; see festal, féte.

FEAT, a deed well done. (F.—L.) ME. feet, feite, faite; P.
Plowman, B. i. 184.—AF. fez, Statutes of the Realm, i. 47 (1278);
OF. (and F.) fait. —L. factum, a deed. See Fact, of which feat is
a doublet; and see feature.

FEATHER, a plume. (E.) ME. fether, Chaucer, C. T. 2146
(A 2144). AS. feder; Grein, i. 278.4Du. veder; Dan. fieder ; Swed.
fidder ; Icel. fjodér; G. feder. + L. penna (for *pet-sna); Gk. mrepdv,
a wing; Skt. patra-, a feather. Teut. type fedrd, f.; Idg. type petra.

= 4/ PET, to fly, fall. See Pen. Der. feather, verb; feather-y.

FEATURE, make, fashion, shape, face. (F.—L.) ME. feture.
Chaucer, C. T. 17070 (H 121).—AF. feture, Havelok, 743; OF.
faiture, fashion.=L. factira, formation, work.=L. facere, to make,
See Fact, Feat. Der. featur-ed, feature-less.

FEBRILE, relating to fever. (F.—L.) Used by Harvey (Todd’s
Johnson).=—F. febrile.=L. *febrilis (not in Lewis’s Dict.), relating to
fever.—L. febris,a fever. Der. febrifuge (F. fébrifuge, L. febrifugia) ;
from L. fugare, to put to flight.

FEBRUARY, the second month. (L.) Englished from L.
Februarius, the month of expiation; named from februa, neut. pl., a
Roman festival of expiation celebrated on the 15th of this month. =
L. februum, purification, a word of Sabine origin ; whence also
februare, to expiate.

FECKLESS, ineffective. (F.—L.; with E. suffix.) Formerly
fectless, and short for effectless; see Effect. ‘A fectless arrogant

conceit of their greatnesse ;’ K. James I., Basilikon Doron, § 17.

FECULENT, relating to feces; see Feces.

FECUNDITY, fertility. (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
ME. fecundité, Palladius on Husbandry, bk. i. st. 9, 1. 57.—OF.
Jecondité (Cot.), with o altered to ~ to bring it nearer Latin.—L.
fécunditatem, acc. of fecunditds, fruitfulness.=—L. fécundus, fruitful ;
from the same source as Fetus, q. vy.

FEDERAL, belonging to a covenant. (F.—L.) In Kersey’s
Dict., ed. 1715. [Wyclif has federed=bound by covenant, Prov.
xvii. 9.]—F. fédéral. Formed as if from L. */ederdlis, from feder-,
for *feedes-, stem of fedus, a treaty, covenant; akin to L. fides, faith;
see Fidelity. Der. feder-ate, from L. federatus, pp. of federare,
to bind by treaty; federat-ive ; also con-federate.

FEE, a grant of land, fief, payment. (F.—OHG. ?)


ME. fee. |


“FELLOW


There are two words of this form; (1) property, cattle, AS. feoh, feo,
which is obsolete; and (2), fief, payment, which alone survives and
is here considered. Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 63, has:
‘ynto tham tuo he gaf Gryffyns /eez,’ i.e. estates, fiefs.
- - Normundie in fe;’ ie. by feudal homage; id. p. 86.—AF. fee;
as in Liber Custumarum, p. 469: ‘come soun droit et soun fee,’ as
his right and his fee; OF. fé, fi, jiu, fieu, fief (see fief in Supp. to
Godefroy).—Late L. fevum, a fief (Ducange). Prob. from OHG.
fehu, payment, wages, a particular use of fehu, property (G. vieh). +
Du. vee, Icel. fé, Dan. fe, Swed, fai, Goth. faihu; L. pecus; Skt. pagu-,
cattle. (4/PEK.) Also cognate with AS, feok, property (above).
Doublet, fief. Der. fee, verb; fee-simple, Chaucer, C. T. 321.
FEEBLE, weak. (F.—L.) ME. feble, Ancren Riwle, p. 54;
Havelok, 323.—AF. feble, Stat. Realm, i. 273; OF. foible, oldest
form jfleble (Godefroy) ; cf. Ital. fevole, feeble, where ¢ is for J, as
usual in Italian. =L. fiébilis, mournful, tearful, doleful.=L. flé-re, to
weep. Brugmann, ii. § 590. Der. /eebl-y, feeble-ness. Doublet,
Sorble.
FEED, to take food. (E.) ME. feden; Chaucer, C.T.146. AS.
fédan; Grein, i. 284. [For fédian, by vowel-change from 4 to é@.]
= AS. fad, food. So also Du. voeden, Icel. feda, Swed. foda, Dan.
fode, Goth. fodjan, OHG. fuotan. ‘Teut. type *fodjan-. See Food.
Der. feed-er. :
FEEL, to perceive by the touch. (E.) ME. felen, Chaucer, C)T.
2807 (A 2805). AS. félan, Grein, i. 285.4-Du. voelen; G. fiihlen;
OHG. fuolan, Teut. type */dljan-; from *fél-, 2nd grade of Teut.
base *fal- ; whence Icel. fal-ma, to grope; cf. AS. fol-m, palm of the
hand, L. pal-ma. Allied to Palm (1). Der. feel-er, -ing.
FREEZE, FEAZE, PHEESH, to drive away. (E.) Properly


to drive away, put to flight ; hence, to worry, fret, punish; see Tam. _


Shrew, Ind. i, 1; Troilus, ii. 3. 215; gloss. to York Mysteries, and
Stratmann. OMerc. fesian, to drive away; Wulfstan, ed. Napier,
p- 162, 1. 18; AS. fystan.--Swed. fdsa, to drive away; Norw. fdysa.
Teut. type *faus-jan-.

FHRIGN, to pretend. (F.—L.) ME. feignen, feynen, feinen, Rob.
of Glouc. p. 336, 1. 6906. —F. feindre, to feign; pres. pt. feign-ant. =
L. fingere, to feign. See Figure. Der. feign-ed-ly, -ed-ness; also
feint (in Kersey, ed. 1715), from F. feinte, fem. of feint, pp. of feindre ;
and see faint, fiction.

FELDSPAR, a kind of mineral. (G.), First in 1757; with the
spelling feldspath. Corrupted from G. feldspath, lit. ‘ field-spar.’ =
G. feld, a field, cognate with E. field; and spath, spar; see Field
and Spar (2).

FELICITY, happiness. (F.—L.) ME. felicitee, Chaucer, C. T.
7985 (H109).— OF. felicité.— L. félicitatem, acc. of feélicitas, happiness.
=L, félici-, decl. stem of félix, happy, fruitful; from the same root
as feline (below). Der. felicit-ous, -ous-ly; also felicit-ate, a coined
word first used as a pp., as in King Lear, i. 1. 76; -at-ion.

FELINE, pertaining to the cat. (L.) In Johnson’s Dict. First
used in 1681. = L. félinus, feline.—L. féles, a cat; prob. allied to L.
féltre, to suckle, and to Gk. @7jAvs, female (see Bréal).

FELL (1), to cause to fall, cut down. (E.) ME. fellen; ‘it wolde
felle an oke;’ Chaucer, C. T. 1704 (A 1702). OMerc. fellan, AS.
fyllan, Grein, i. 360; formed, as a causal, by vowel-change, from
OMerc. fallan, AS, feallan, to fall.-+-Du. vellen, causal of vallen ; Dan.
falde, caus. of falde ; Swed. falla, caus. of falla; Icel. fella, caus. of
falla; G. fallen, caus. of fallen. Teut. type *falljan-. See Fall.
Der. fell-er.

FELL (2), askin. (E.) ME. fel, Wyclif, Job, ii. 4 (early version).
AS. fel, fell, Grein, i. 278.4-Du. vel ; Icel. fell (App. to Dict. p. 773);
Goth. ~7ill, skin, in the comp. thrutsfill, leprosy; MHG. vel.+-L. pellis;
Gk. wéAAa. Der. fell-monger,a dealer in skins. Doublet, fell. Der.

l-m.

PRL (3), cruel, fierce. (F.—Late L.—L.?) ME. fel, Chaucer,
C. T..7584 (D 2002). —OF. jel, cruel, furious (Godefroy) ; Walloon
fel, cruel, furious; Ital. fello, cruel. = Late L. fello, felo, a malefactor,
felon, Perhaps from L. fel, gall; cf. Du. dial. fel, sharp, biting, acrid
(Molema). Closely connected with felon ; see Felon. Der. fel-ly,
fell-ness.

FELL (4), a hill. (Scand.) ME. fel, Sir Gawain and the Green
Knight, 723.—Icel. fjall, fell, a mountain; Dan. field; Swed. fall.
B. Probably allied to G. fels, a rock (Kluge). Cf. Gk. éAAa, a stone,

FELLAH, a peasant, tiller of the soil. (Arab.) First used in 1743 ;
pl. fellahin.= Arab. fellah (Devic), fallah (Rich. Dict. p. 1098), a
farmer, villager, peasant. = Arab. root falaha, to plough, tillthe ground,

FELLOK#, rim of a wheel; see Felly.

FELLOW, a partner, associate. (Scand.) ME. felawe, Chaucer,
C. T. 397 (A 395) ; felaze, King Horn, ed. Lumby, 996. = Icel. félagi,
a partner in a ‘ felag.’=Icel. fé/ag, companionship, association, lit. ‘a
laying together of property;’ as if ‘ fee-lay.’=Icel. /é, property, cog-
nate with AS. feoh, cattle, property, L, pecus; and lag, a laying


Cf. ‘Held


FELLY, FELLOE


together. See Law. Der. fellow-ship, spelt feolauschipe in the Ancren


Riwle, p. 160.

FELLY, FELLOE, part of the rim of a wheel. (E.) In Shak.
Hamlet, ii. 2.517. ME. felwe, Prompt. Parv.p. 154. AS. felge, also
Jelg, fem. sb.,a felly. ‘ Forpam pe zlces spacan bid oper ende feest on
pare neefe, Oper on S&re felge’ = because the one end of each spoke is
fixed in the nave, the other in the felly; Boethius, c. 39, sect. 7 (lib.
iv. pr. 6).4Du. velg; MDu. velge; Dan. felge; G. felge; cf. Low
G. falge, a felly. B.So named from the pieces of the rim being put
together; from Teut. verb *felkan-, to fit together ; found in this sense
in OHG. felahan, to put together, also, to hide; allied to Goth. filhan,
to hide, and Icel. fela, to hide, preserve. The AS. féolan (for *feolhan)
means to stick, to be joined to.

FELON, a wicked person. (F.—Late L.—L.?) ME. felun, Floriz,
ed. Lumby, 247, 329; felonie (=felony), id. 331.—OF. felon, a traitor,
wicked man. = Late L. fellénem, feldnem, acc. of fello, felo, a traitor,
tebel. See Fell (3). Der. felon-y, -i-ous, -i-ous-ly, -i-ous-ness.

FELSPAR, the same as Feldspar, q. v.

FELT, cloth made by matting wool together. (E.) ME. felt,
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1689. AS. felt, Voc. 120. 5.4-Du. vilt ;
Low G., Swed., Dan. filt; G. filz. Prob. allied to G. falzen, to groove,
to fit together. See Anvil. Der. felt, vb., -er, -ing. Also filter, q.v.

FELUCCA, a kind of small ship. (Ital.—Arab.) In use in the
Mediterranean Sea. Spelt felucco; Sandys’ Travels (1632) 5 p. 274.
Ital. feluca; cf. Span. faluca.= Arab. fulk, a ship; Rich. Dict.
p. Iegg. (See Devic.)

FEMALH, of the weaker sex. (F.—L.) An accommodated spell-
ing, to make it look more like male. ME. femele, Gower, C. A. ii.
45, bk. iv. 1301 ; P. Plowman, B. xi. 331.—OF. femelle, ‘ female; ’
Cot.—L. fémella, a young woman; dimin. of fémina, a woman. See
Feminine.

FEMININE, womanly. (F.—L.) In Shak. L.L. L. iv. 2.83;
Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, 1365.—OF. feminin, ‘feminine ;’ Cot.—L.
Sémininus.—L. fémina,a woman. f. Allied to L. félare, to suckle ;
Gk. @qAus, female, @7A7, the breast ; Skt. dha@tri,a nurse. Brugmann,
i. § 134. Der. (from L. fémina), female, q.v.; also ef-femin-ate.

FEMORAL, belonging to the thigh. (L.) In Johnson’s Dict. =
L. femordlis; formed from femor-, stem of femur, the thigh.

FEN, a morass, bog. (E.) ME. fen, King Alisaunder, 3965. AS.
jenn, Grein, i. 281.4-Du. veen; Icel. fen; Goth. fani, mud. Teut.
type *fanjom,n. Cf. OPruss. pannean, a morass. Der. fenn-y.

FENCE, a guard, hedge. (F.—L.) Merely an abbreviation for


defence. * Without weapon or fense’=defence; Udall, on Luke,
c. 10. v. 3. ME. fenss, in the sense of ‘parrying with a sword,’


Barbour, Bruce, xx. 384. Cf. ‘The place... was barryd and fensyd
for the same entent;’ Fabyan’s Chron, an. 1408-9. ‘ Fence, or de-
JSence;’ Prompt. Parv. See Defence, and Fend. Der. fence, verb,
(2) to enclose, (2) to practise fencing; fenc-ing, -ible.

FEND, to defend, ward off. (F.—L.) ME. fenden; the pt. t.
Jended occurs in P, Plowman, B. xix. 46, C. xxii. 46, where some
MSS. read defended. Fend is a mere abbreviation of defend, q. v.
Der. fend-er, (1), ametal guard for fire; (2) a buffer to deaden a blow.

FENIAN, one of an Irish brotherhood for promoting revolution.
(Irish.) From Olrish Féne, one of the names of the ancient popula-
tion of Ireland (Windisch) ; later confused with OlIrish Fianz, f., the
name of a body of warriors who defended Ireland in the time of Finn
and others (Windisch),

FENNETD,, a kind of fragrant plant. (L.) ME. fenel, older form
JSenkil; P. Plowman, A. vy. 156 (and footnote). AS. jinol, finul,
Jinugle, finule ; Cockayne’s AS. Leechdoms, iii. 326.—L. faeniculum,
feniculum, fennel, Formed, with dimin, suffixes -cu- and -/-, from L.
faeni-, for faeno-, from faenum, hay.

FENUGREEK, a plant, cultivated for its seeds. (F.—L.)
ME. venecreke, Book of St. Albans, leaf c 4, back. =F. fenugrec, ‘ the
herbe, or seed, fennigreeke ;’ Cot.—L. faenum Graecum, lit. ‘ Greek


hay.

FEOF, to invest with a fief. (F.-OHG.) ME. feffen, feoffen;
Chaucer, C. T. 9572 (E 1698) ; P. Plowman, B. ii. 78, 146; Rob. of
Glouc. p. 368; 1. 7585.—OF. feoffer, more commonly jieffer (Gode-
froy), to invest with a fief.—OF. fief, a fief; see Fief. Der. feoffee,
from OF. pp. feoffé, one invested with a fief.

FEON, a barbed arrow-head; see Pheon.

FERACIOUS, fruitful. (L.) ‘Nurs’d on feracious Algidum ;’
Thomson, Liberty, Partiii. 363. From L. ferdct-, decl. stem of ferax,
fruitful. —L. fer-re, to bear; see Bear (1).

FERAL (1), deadly, fanereal. (L.) In Burton, Anat. Melan. 1. i.
2. 11, we have mention of ‘ feral diseases.’ = L. féral-is, funereal.

FERAL (2), wild, uncultivated. (L.) Not common ; first in 1659.
=L. fer-a, a wild beast; with suffix -al (I. -al, L. -dlis). See
Fierce.

FERMENT, yeast, leaven, commotion. (L.)


‘ The nation is in


FESCUE 211


too high a ferment ;’ Dryden, pref. to Hind and Panther, 1.1. ME.
ferment, Palladius on Husbandry, bk. xi. 524.—L. fermentum, leaven ;
for *ferui-mentum; see Barm.—L. feruére, to boil, be agitated ; see
Fervent. Der. ferment, vb., Milton, Samson, 619 ; ferment-at-ion,
Chaucer, C. T. 16285 (G 817) ; ferment-able, -at-ive.

FERN, a plant with feathery fronds. (E.) ME. ferne, Chaucer,
C. T. 10568 (F 254). AS. fearn, Gloss. to Cockayne’s AS. Leech-
doms.-+ Du. varen; G. farnkraut =feather-plant ; Skt. parmza-, a wing,
feather, leaf, tree; the orig. sense being ‘ feather ;’ just as Gk. mrépis,
fern, is allied to mrepdv, a wing, feather. Brugmann, i. § 973. Cf. also
Lith. papartis, Russ. paparot(e), Irish raith, W. rhedyn, fern. Stokes-
Fick, p. 226. Der. fern-y.

FEROCITY, fierceness. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627; fero-
cious is in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ME. ferocyté, Caxton, Hist. of
Troye, leaf 97,1.24.—F. ferocité, ‘ fierceness ;’ Cot. = L. ferdcititem,
acc. of ferdcitds, fierceness.=L. ferdci-, decl. stem of ferox, fierce. =
L. ferus, wild. See Fierce. Der. feroci-ous, an ill-coined word,
suggested by the OF. feroce, cruel ; -ly, -ness.

FERREOUS, made ofiron. (L.) InSir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors,
b. ii. c. 3. § 4.—L. ferreus (by change of -ws to -ows, as in arduous,
egregious).—L,. ferrum, iron. Der. (from L. ferrum), ferri-fer-ous,
where -fer- is from 4/ BHER, to bear; also farrier, q. v.

FERRET (1), an animal of the weasel tribe. (F.—Late L.—L.)
See Shak. Jul. Ceesar, i. 2. 186. ME. forette, ferette; Prompt. Parv.
ME. (and AF.) furet, Nominale, ed, Skeat, 736-7.—OF. furet, ‘a
ferret;’ Cot.— Late L. furétus, ftirectus, a ferret; cf. furd (gen. fiirdnis),
a ferret, in Isidore (7th cent.). B. Said to bethe same as Late L. firo,
a thief; from L. fur, a thief (Diez) ; cf. Ital. furone, a robber. Der.
ferret, verb; =MF., fureter, ‘to ferret, search, hunt;’ Cot.

FERRET (2), a kind of silk tape. (Ital.—L.) ‘When perch-
mentiers [lacemakers] put in no ferret-silke ;’ Gascoigne, Steel Glass,
1095. [Also called jloret-silk, which is the French form; from
MF. fleuret, ‘ floret silk ;’ Cot.] Corrupted from Ital. fioretio, pl.
fioretti, ‘ flowrets, flourishings, a kinde of course [coarse] silke called
foret or ferret silke ;’ Florio.—Ital. fore, a flower; with dimin. suffix
-etto.=L. fldrem, acc. of flds,a flower. See Flower. 4 Apparently
named from its use in ornamentation. The OF. fleuret is, similarly,
the dimin. of F. fleur, a flower. The Ital. change of / to z accounts
for the E. form,

FERRUGINOUS, rusty. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —
L. ferriigin-us, shorter form of ferrugineus, rusty ; with suffix -ows,—
L. ferriigin-, stem of ferriigo, rust ; formed from L. ferrum, iron, just as
erigo, rust of brass, is from as (gen. #r-is), brass. See Ferreous.

FERRULE, a metal ring at the end ofa stick. (F.—L.) An
accommodated spelling, due to confusion with L. ferrum, iron.
Formerly verril, ‘Verrel, Verril,a little brass or iron ring at the
small end of a cane;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715. And so spelt in Sher-
wood’s index to Cotgrave. Also vyroll; in Palsgrave.—OF. virole,
‘ an iron ring put about the end of a staff,’ &c. ; Cot. Late L. virola,
a ring to bind anything.=L. wiriola, a little bracelet. —L. wiria, a
bracelet, armlet; only found in pl. wirix.—L. uiére, to twist, bind
round,

FERRY, to transport, carry across a river. (E.) | Orig. used
merely in the sense ‘to carry.’ ME, ferien, to convey; the pt. t.
ferede is in Layamon, 1. 237. AS. ferian, to carry ; Grein, i. 283.
From AS. faran, to fare, go.4-Icel. ferja, to carry, ferry, from fara,
to go; Dan. ferge, Swed. farja, to ferry; Goth. farjan, to travel by
ship, sail, allied to faran, to go. See Fare. Der. ferry, sb. (cf.
Icel. ferja, sb.) ; -boat, -man.

FERTILE, fruitful. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. i. 2. 338. =OF.
fertile, ‘ fertile; Cot. =—L. fertilis, fruitful. — L. ferre, to bear ; cognate
with E, bear. See Bear (1). Der. fertil-i-ty, -ise.

FERULB, a rod (or bat) for punishing children. (L.) Formerly
spelt ferula, ‘They would , . . awaken him with the clappe of a
ferula;’ Holland, tr. of Suetonius; Claudius, c. 8. Also the giant-
fennel, used as arod. ‘There is not a plant in the world lighter...
being easie to. .. carrie, the stem serves old men instead of staves ;”
Holland, tr. of Pliny, bk. xiii. c. 22.—L. ferula, a rod; orig. the stem
of the ferula or ‘giant-fennel.’ Perhaps from ferre, to carry; see
above.

FERVENT, heated, ardent, zealous. (F.—L.) ME. feruent (with
u=v). Chaucer has feruently, Troilus, iv.1384.— OF. fervent, ‘ fervent,
hot;’ Cot.—L. feruent-, stem of pres. pt. of feruére, to boil. Allied
to Olrish berb-aim, I boil. Der. fervent-ly, fervenc-y; also ferv-id,
Milton, P. L. v. 301, from L. feruidus, which is from feruére ; -id-ly,
-id-ness 3 ferv-our, Wyclif, Deut. xxix. 20, from OF. fervor, ferveur< |
L. feruorem, acc. of feruor, heat; also fer-ment, q.V., ef-ferv-esce, q.V-

FESCUE, a mote in the eye, a pointer used in reading. (F.—L.)
“A feskue in her fist ;? Two Noble Kinsmen, A. ii. sc. 2 (3). Used for
‘the mote in the eye ;’ Wyclif, Matt. vii. 3, but spelt fest (the ME.
form); cf. P. Plowman, B. x. 278.—OF. festu (F. fétu), ‘a feskue;

PQ


212 FESS


a straw, rush, little stalk used for a fescue ;’ Cot. = Folk-L. *festacum ;
for L. festiica, a stalk, stem, straw.

FESS, a horizontal band, in heraldry. (F.—L.) Spelt fesse in
Minsheu, and in Cotgrave, s.v. face. The pl. feces occurs about A.D.
1500; see Queen Elizabeth’s Academy, &c., ed. Furnivall, p. 98,
1.113. Florio (1598) translates Ital. fasce by ‘ bundles. . . also esses
in armorie,’=OF. fesse (Roquefort), spelt face in Cotgrave, and fasce
in mod. F.—L. fascia, a girth; allied to fascis, a bundle; see Fascine.

FESTAL, belonging to a feast. (F.—L.) In Johnson’s Dict.
Apparently unused in the 16th and 17th centuries; but it occurs ab.
1480 in English Gilds, ed. T. Smith, pp. 414-5, where we find ‘the

festall daie, —OF. festel, festal; Godefroy. From L. fest-um, a feast ;
with suffix -alis. See Feast.

FESTER, to rankle. (F.—L.) ME. festeren. ‘So festered aren
hus wondes’ =so festered are his wounds; P. Plowman, C. xx. 83.—
OF. festrir, to fester (Godefroy).— OF. festre, feste, fistle, a festered
wound, ulcer. —L. fistula, a tube, a pipe, an ulcer, a running sore. The
L. fistula is still in use as a medical term. Hence the sb. is older than
the verb. Cf.‘ The fester thrild his bodi thurgh ;” Cursor Mundi,
1, 11824; and Norm. dial. féire, a whitlow (Moisy). See Fistula.

FESTIVAL, a feast-day. (F.—L.) Properly an adj. ‘ With drapets
festivall ;’ Spenser, F. Q. ii. 9. 27.— OF. festival, festive ; also, as sb.
a festival; Roquefort.—Late L. festivalis; formed, with suffix -Glis,
from L. festiuus; see below.

FESTIVE, festal. (L.) Modern; see Todd’s Johnson. ‘To
Festive mirtth;’ Thomson, Summer, 404.—L, festiuus, festive. —L.
festum, a feast. See Feast. Der. festive-ly, festiv-i-ty.

FESTOON, an ornament, garland. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘The fes-
toons, friezes, and the astragals;? Dryden, Art of Poetry, 56.—F.
feston, a garland, festoon; cf. Span. feston. Ital. festone, ‘a garland,
a crowne of flowers;’ Florio. B. Usually derived from festum, a
holiday, from the use of garlands as festive ornaments. See Feast.
Der. festoon, verb. ,

FETCH, to bring. (E.) ME. fecchen, pt. t. fette, pp. fet; Chaucer,
C. T. 821 (A 819), 7646 (D 2064). AS. fecc(e)an, to fetch ; Gen. xviii.
4; Luke xii. 20. A later form of AS. fetian, gefetian, to fetch, Grein,
i. 283, 398; pp. fetod. Allied to AS. fet, a pace, step, journey; Grein,
i. 273. Cf. Icel. feta, to find one’s way; Icel. fet, a step, pace. Con-
nected with L. pés (gen. ped-is), foot, and with Foot, q.v. @f Cf.
AS. gefeccan, OE. Texts, p.178. See Anglia, vi.177; Sievers, A.S. Gr.
Der. fetch, used by Shak. to mean ‘a stratagem ;” Hamlet, ii. 1. 38.

FETE, a festival. (F.—L.) Modern.=—F. féte; OF. feste, a feast.
See Feast.

FETICH, FETISH, an object of superstitious dread. (F.—
Port.—L.) ‘ Fetisso, which is a kind of God;’ W. Dampier, A New
Voyage (1699); v. ii. part 2. p. 105. Not in Johnson. =F. fétiche. =
Port. feitic¢o, sorcery; also a name given by the Portuguese to the
roughly made objects of superstitious dread in W. Africa. The orig.
sense is ‘artificial.’ =—L. factitius, artificial. See Factitious. Der.
Setich-ism.

FETID, stinking. (F.—L.) In Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 481.—MF.
fetide, ‘stinking ;’ Cot.=—L. fétidus, fetidus, stinking. =L. fetére, to
stink. Der. fetid-ness.

FETLOCK, the part of the leg (in a horse) where the tuft of hair
grows behind the pastern-joint. (Scand.) Also the tuft itself; by
confusion with lock (of hair), ‘ Fetlock, or fetterlock, the hair that
grows behind on a horse’s feet;’ Kersey. The pl. is spelt fee‘lakkes
in Rich. Coer de Lion, 5816 ; and jitlokes in Arthur and Merlin, 5902.
Cf. Low G. jitlock (Liibben); MHG. vizzeloch (Kluge). Of Scand.
origin; the latter syllable is prob. only a double suffix (-/-ock); but
was understood as being our ‘lock’ of hair, viz. Icel. Jokkr, AS. locc.

_ B. In connexion with fet- we find Icel. fet, a pace, step, feti, a pacer,
stepper (used of horses), feta, to step, the fetlock being employed in
stepping; cf. Swed. fat, Dan. fied; a foot-print, footstep, track.
Further allied to Icel. fo‘r, a foot, and to G, fessel, Low G. vettel
(Liibben), a pastern; and thus connected with both foot and fetter ;
see Fetter, Fetch, Foot.

FETTER, a shackle. (E.) Orig. a shackle for the foot. ME. feter,
Chaucer, C. T. 1281 (A 1279). AS. fetor, feter, Grein, i. 283. + Du.
veter, lace; orig. a fetter; Icel. foturr; Swed. fjattrar, pl. fetters ;
MSwed. fjatter, a fetter (Ihre) ; cf. L. pedica; also com-pés (gen. com-
ped-is), a fetter; Gk. médn, a fetter. All from Idg. *ped-, Teut. *fet-;
allied to Tent. fot-, as in E. foot. See Foot.

FETUS (incorrectly FOSTUS), offspring, the young in the womb.
(L.) ‘Modern; in Johnson’s Dict.—L. fétus, a bringing forth, off-
spring. = L. fétus, fruitful, that has brought forth. From an Idg. base
*bhwé (< *bhu-é), to produce; related to fu- in fui, I was, and in fu-
turus, future. Cf. Gk. épin, was; pvev, to beget; puecOa, to grow;
futos, grown; Skt. bhu, to become, be; AS. béon, to be. See Be.
(of BHEU.) Brugmann, i. § 361, ii. § 587. Der. (from the same root)
Se-cundity, q.v.; fe-line, q.v.; fe-licity, q.v.; also ef-fete, fawn (2).


FIDDLE


FEUD (1), perpetual hostility, hatred. (F.—OHG.) In Shak. »
Troil. iv. 5.132. Modified in spelling from earlier fede, feid, in some
unexplained way; perhaps by the influence of the word foe; see
N.E.D. ME. fede (a Northern form), Wallace, i. 354; feid, Raul
Coilyear, 969; Levins has: ‘ Feade, odium’ (1570).— OF. faide, feide,
fede, perpetual hostility (Godefroy).—OHG. féhida, G. fehde, hatred,
enmity ; cognate with AS. f#hd, enmity, from fah, hostile. See Foe.

FEUD (2), a fief; FEUDAL, pertaining to a fief. (Low L.—F.
—OHG.) In Blackstone’s Commentaries, b. ii. c. 4; and see Fee in
Blount’s Law Dict.=Low L. feudum,a fief; a barbarous L. form
allied to OF. fiz, also spelt fief; see further under Fief. (The intru-
sive dis unexplained.) Der. feud-al; feud-al-ism, feud-at-or-y.

FEUTER, to lay the spear in rest. (F.—Teut.) ‘His speare he
feutred;’ Spenser, F. Q. iv. 4. 45.. From ME. feuter, sb., a rest for
a spear ;. Will. of Palerne, 3437 (cf. 1. 3593).— MF. feutre, felt, a piece
of felt, Cot.; OF. feltre, a rest for the lance (Godefroy). It was fitted
with a pad, lined with felt; Late L. filtrum. See Filter. From
the Teut. type *felt-oz; see Felt.

FEUTERER, a dog-keeper. (F.—Low L.—C.) ‘A yeoman-
feuterer;’ Ben Jonson, Every Man out of his Humour, ii.1 (Carlo). See
Nares. ME. vewter (for *vewtrier); Gawain and Grene Knight, 1146;
cf. Anglo-L. veltrarius (Blount, s.v. Vautrier); OF. veltrier (Gode-
froy). = OF. veltre, veutre,a boar-hound (Godefroy) ; F. vautre (Littré).
=—Late L. vertragum, acc. of veritragus (Ducange, s. v. Canis veltris) ;
L. uertagus (Martial). Of Celtic origin. —C. ver-, intensive prefix ;
and zrag-, to run; Stokes-Fick, pp. 136, 283.

FEVER, a kind of disease. (L.) ME. fewer (with « for v), P.
Plowman, C. iv. 96; fefre, Ancren Riwle, p. 112. AS. féfor, féfer;
Matt. viii. 15. —L. febris, a fever. Der. fever-ous, -ish, -ish-ly, -ish-ness ;
also fever-few, a plant, corrupted from AS. féfer-fuge, borrowed from
Late L. febrifuga=fever-dispelling, from L. fugare, to put to flight;
see Voc. 134. I.

FEW, of small number. (E.) ME. jfewe, Chaucer, C. T. 641
(A 639). AS. féa, both sing. and pl. ; feawe, pl. only, Grein, i. 287.
+ Icel. far; Dan. faa; Swed. fa; Goth. fawai, pl. +L. paucus; Gk.
mavpos, small,

FEY, doomed to die. (E.) ‘ Till fey men died awa’, man ;’ Burns,
Battle of Sheriffmuir, 1. 19. ME. feye, P. Plowman, C. xvi. 2. AS.
f®ge, doomed to die. + Icel. feigr, destined to die; Du. veeg, about
to die; OHG. feigi, doomed to die ; whence G. feige, cowardly. Alsq
Swed. feg, Dan. feig, cowardly.

FEZ, a red Turkish cap, without a brim. (F.— Morocco.) Borrowed
by us from F. fez, the same ; the word is also Turkish (Turk. fes). So
called because made at Fez, in Morocco; see Devic, Supp. to Littré.

FIASCO, a failure, break-down in a performance. (Ital.— Late L.)
From the Ital. phrase far fiasco, to make a bottle; also, to fail, to
break down (reason for this unknown; perhaps it means that the
empty bottle fails to please). Torriano, ed. 1688, has: ‘jiaschi,
bottles, flaggons; also, an interjection of admiration, as pape in
Latin.’ Also Ital. fasca, f., a flask, bottle. = Late L. fasca; see Flask,

FIAT, a decree. (L.) In Young’s Night Thoughts, vi. 465; and
Donne, The Storm, 1. 72. —L. fiat, let it be done. —L. fio, I become;
used as pass. of facere, to make; but really allied to fu-2, I was.
(/ BHEU.) Brugmann, i. § 282 (2).

FIB, a fable. (Low G.) In Pope, Ep. to Lady Shirley, 1. 24. Cot-
grave has: ‘ Bourde, a jeast, ib.’ Allied to fob, fub off (Shak.). Cf. G.
foppen, to banter (formerly to lie); Westphal. foppen, to deceive;
Jip-ken, a small lie, a fib (Woeste). Der. 7ib, vb.

FIBRE, a thread, threadlike substance. (F.—L.) Spelt fiber in.
Cotgrave. =F. fibre; pl. fibres, ‘the fibers, threads, or strings of mus-
cles;’? Cot.=—L. jibra, a fibre, thread. Der. jibr-ous, fibr-ine; also
fringe, q. V.

FIBULA,a clasp, buckle. (L.) First in 1673. ‘The fibula ;? Words-
worth, The Highland Broach, 17.—L. fibula, a clasp, buckle. —L.
fiuere, by-form of figere, to fix; see Fix.

FICKLE, deceitful, inconstant. (E.) ME. jkel, P. Plowman, C.
iii. 25. AS. ficol, found in a gloss, Voc. 69. 18; formed, with a com-
mon adj. suffix -o/, from *fic-ian, to deceive, in comp. be-fician, to
deceive; cf. jic, fraud, faicen, deceit; allied to Icel. feckn, an evil, a
portent, OSax. /ékn, deceit. Cf. Skt. piguna-s, malignant ; Brugmann,
1. § 646. Der. jickle-ness. a4

FICTION, a falsehood, feigned story. (F.—L.) In Skelton, Colin
Clout, 1. 114.—F. fiction, ‘a fiction ;? Cot. = L. jictidnem, acc. of fictio,
afeigning. Cf. L. fictus, pp. of fingere, to feign. See Feign, Figure.
Der. (from L, jictus) fict-it-i-ous, -ile; and see Figment, Figure.

FIDDLE, a stringed instrument, violin, (E.?) ME. jithel, P. Plow-
man, B. xiii. 457 3 idel, Chaucer, C. T. 298 (A 296). AS. 7idele, only
in the deriv. fdelere, a fiddler, in a copy of A®lfric’s Glossary (Bos-
worth) ; cf. Icei. fidla, a fiddle, fdlari,a fiddler; Dan. jiddel; Du,
vedel; G. fiedel (OHG. fidula), B. Of uncertain origin, but perhaps.
Teutonic; whence Late L. vidula, vitula, a viol, fiddle.. See Viol.


FIDELITY


FIDELITY, faithfulness. (F.—L.) In Shak. Mer. Wives, iv. 2.
160. Fabyan has fydelité, Chron. pt. vii. c. 238; p. 277. —F. jidelité,
‘fidelity ;? Cot. =—L. jidélitatem, acc. of fidélitds.—L. fidélis, faithful,
=L. jides, faith. See Faith.

FIDGET, to be restless, move uneasily. (Scand.) In Boswell’s
Life of Johnson (Todd’s Johnson). A dimin. form of fidge. ‘ Fidge
about, to be continually moving up and down;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.
Fidge is apparently a modification of the North E. fick or ike. ‘ Fike,
fyke, feik, to be in a restless state ;’ Jamieson. ME. jiken, Prompt.
Parv. p. 160; Bestiary, 656. ‘The Sarezynes fledde, away gunne
fyke’ =the Saracins fled, and away did hasten; used in contempt ;
Rich. Coer de Lion, 4749.—MDan. jige, Dan. dial. fige, to desire,
strive, hasten, hurry (see Kalkar and Molbech) ; cf. Norw. figa, more
commonly jika, to fidget, make restless movements (Ross) ; Icel. jika,
to climb up nimbly, as a spider; Swed. jika, fikas, to hunt after; and
see jika in Rietz; Norw. jika, to strive, take trouble; jika etter, to
pursue, hasten after (Aasen). Cf. G. dial. (Alsace) ficken, to itch, to
fidget. Der. fidget, sb., jidget-y, fidget-i-ness.

FIDUCIAL, showing trust. (L.) Rare; see Rich. Dict. ‘ Fidu-
ciary, a feoffee in trust ;? Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Both words are
from L. fidicia, trust. —L. fidere, to trust. See Faith.

FI, an interjection of disgust. (F.—L.). ME. fy, Chaucer, C. T.
4500 (B 80); ‘fy for shame;’ id. 14897 (B 4081) ; Will. of Palerne,
481.—F. fi.—L.f7, interj. Cf. also 'Icel. fy, fei; Dan. fy, also fy
skam dig, fie for shame ; Swed. fy, also fy skam, fie for shame. We
find similar forms in the G,. pfui, L. phui, phy, Skt. phut, natural
expressions of disgust, due to the sound of blowing away.

FIEF, land held of a superior. (F.—Low L.—OHG.?) In
Dryden, On Mrs. Killigrew, 1. 98. The ME. vb. feffen, to enfeoff, is
common ; see Chaucer, C. T. 9572 (E 1698); P. Plowman, B. ii. 78,
146.—OF. jief, early form fiw (Chanson de Roland). = Low L. fevum,
a fief (Ducange). Prob. from OHG. fehu, property; see Fee.

FIELD, an open space of land. (E.) ME. feeld, Chaucer, C. T.
888 (A 886). AS. feld; Grein.4Du. veld; G. feld (whence Dan.
felt, Swed. falt). Teut. type *feljuz. Allied to AS. folde, earth, land,
Cf. Russ. polé, a field; Skt. prthivi, earth. Brugmann, i. § 502. Der.
field-day, field-marshal, &c.

FIELDFARE, a bird of the thrush kind. (E.) ME. feldefare,
Chaucer, ‘Troil. iii. 861; feldfare, Will. of Palerne, 183. AS. felde-
fare, Wright’s Vocab. i, 63, 1. 27; but really miswritten feldeware ;
see Voc. 287.17. Lit. ‘ field-traveller;’ from jfaran, to travel; see
Fare. @ There. is also .an AS. feala-for, but this is the name of
some much larger’bird, and is a different word altogether; see Sweet,
0. E. Texts, p. 88; Ep. gl. 807.

FIEND, an enemy. (E.) ME. fend, Chaucer, C. T. 7286 (D 1674);
earlier feond, Layamon, 1. 237. AS. féond, fiond, an enemy, hater;
_ properly the pres, pt. of féoz, contr. form of féogan, to hate; Grein,
“1. 294, 295.-4-Du. vijand, an enemy; Dan. and Swed. jiende; Icel.
Jjdndi, pres. pt. of 77a, to hate; Goth. fijands, pres. pt. of fijan, to
hate; G. feind.—4/ PEI, to hate; Fick, i.145; whence also foe, q. v.
Cf, Skt. piy, to hate (Fick). J Similarly, friend is a pres. pt. from
-Teut. base frei-, to love; see Friend. Der. fiend-ish, fiend-ish-ness.
: FIERCE, violent, angry. (F.—L.) ME. jiers, Chaucer, C. T.,
‘A 1598 ; Rob. of Glouc. p. 188, 1. 3910. = OF. fers, fers, old nom. form
of OF. fer, fier, fierce (F. fier, proud). —L. ferus, wild, savage; cf. fera,
va wild beast.-Gk. Oyp, a wild animal. Brugmann, i. § 319. Der.
Jfer-0c-i-ous, Vv.

' FIFE, a shrill pipe. (F.-—OHG.—L.) In Shak. Oth. iii. 3. 352.

—F. jifre, ‘a fife;’ Cot.—OHG. pfifa, fifa; G. pfeife, a pipe. =
-OHG. pfifen, to blow, puff, blow a fife; cf. G. pif, a whistle, hissing.
.—Late L. pipare, to pipe; L. pipare, pipiare, to chirp. See Pipe.

. FIG, the name of a fruit. (F.—Prov.—L.) The pl. figes occurs in
‘the Ancren Riwle, p. 150, where also the fig-tree is called figer.

[The AS. fic (Matt. vii. 16) isa somewhat different form, being taken
‘directly from L. ficus.]—F. figue, due to the OProvencal form jiga,
a fig; cf. Span. figo.— Folk-L. *fica, for L. ficus, a fig. Cf. OF. fe,
-a fig; immediately from Folk-L. *fica. Der. fig-wort.

' FIGHT, to contend in war, (E.) ME. jihten, fehten, Layamon,
#ll. 1359, 1580. OMerc. fehtan, AS. feohktan, Grein, i. 289; whence
the sb. fehte, AS. feohte, a fight. + Du. vechten; OHG. fehtan; G.
fechten (whence Dan. fegte, Swed. fakta). Teutatype *fehtan-, pt. t.
*faht, B. Possibly connected with L. pectere, to comb, to card,
-hence, to pull, rend, fight (Streitberg). Der. fight, sb., fight-er, -ing.
. FIGMENT, a fiction. (L.) ‘You heard no figment, sir;’ B.
- Jonson, Every Man out of his Humour, iv. 4.—L. figmentum, a fiction ;
formed (with suffix -mentum) from the base jig- of fi(x)gere, to feign ;
‘pt. t. fic-tus (for *fig-tus). See below; and see Fiction, Feign.

FIGURE, something made, an appearance, representation,
(F.—L.) ME. figure, Chaucer, C. T. 7892 (E 16).—F. figure. =—L.
Jigira, a figure, thing made.—L. fig-, base of fi(z)gere, to form,
“fashion, feign; pp. jic-tus (for *fig-tus).4-Skt. dik, to smear; Goth.


FILLET 213


deigan, to fashion as a potter does; whence daigs, cognate with E.
dough, = 4/ DHEIGH, to smear, handle, form with the hands, See
Dough. Brugmann, i. § 589. Der. figure, vb., figur-ed, figure-
head ; figur-ate, -at-ive, -at-ive-ly; from the same root, feign, fiction,
Jigment, ef-jig-y, dis-figure, trans-figure ; also dike, dough, la-dy.

FILAMENT, a slender thread. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave, to
translate MF. jilamens, ‘filaments ;’ Cot.—F. filament (Hatzfeld).=
Late L, filamentum, a thread; formed (with suffix -mentum) from
Late L. fildre, to wind thread.—L. filum, a thread; see File (1).

FILBERT, the fruit of the hazel. (F.-OHG.) Formerly spelt
philibert or philiberd. ‘ The Philibert that loves the vale ;’ Peacham’s
Emblems, ed. 1612 (R.). Gower has: ‘ That Phillis in the same
throwe Was shape into a nutte-tre... And, after Phillis, philliberd
This tre was cleped in the yerd;’ C. A. ii. 30. [This is an allusion
to the story of Phyllis and Demophon in Ovid, and of course does
not account for the word, as it takes no notice of the last syllable.]
B. From AF. philbert, a filbert ; of which the pl. philbers occurs in
Britton, ed. Nichols, i. 371, note 5. Short for noix de philbert, as the
name is still zoix de filbert in Normandy (Moisy). From the proper
name Philibert. Cotgrave has: ‘ Philibert, a proper name for a man;
and particularly the name of a certain Bourgonian [Burgundian]
saint ; whereof chaine de S. Philibert, a kind of counterfeit chain.
Perhaps the nut was also named after St. Philibert, whose name also
thus appears in another connexion. ‘ Noix de Filebert, aveline; saint
F., qui avait beaucoup enrichi l’abbaye de Jumiéges [near Rouen], y
avait sans doute introduit de meilleures noisettes ;’ Duméril; Dict.
du Patois Normand. St. Philibert’s day is Aug. 22 (Old Style), just
the nutting season. The nameis Frankish. —OHG. jilu-bert, i.e. very
bright; from jilz (G. viel), much, very; and bert =berht, bright, cog-
nate with E. bright. See Hist. of Christian Names, by Miss Yonge,
ii. 231; where, however, jili- is equated to wille (will) by a mistake.
@ Similarly, a filbert is called in German Lambertsnuss as if for Lam-
bert’s nut (St. Lambert’s day is Sept. 17); but (according to Weigand)
the real orig. sense of Lambertsnuss was ‘nut from Lombardy.’

FILCH, to steal, pilfer. (Scand.?) [Rob. of Brunne has filchid ;
tr. of Langtoft, p. 282; but this seems to be a different word.] Filch
first appears in 1581, as a slang term; and its origin is quite un-
certain. Perhaps allied to ME. felen, to conceal; Icel. fela, to hide;
whence Icel. fylgsni, fylksni, a hiding-place. Cf. Goth. fulhsni,
secrecy.

FILE (1), a string, line, list, order, (F.—L.) In Macbeth, iii. 1.
95.— OF. file, ‘a file, rank, row;’ Cot. Allied to ji, a thread. =
Late L. fila, a string of things (see fila, filare in Ducange).—L. filum,
a thread, Der. jfile, verb; jil-a-ment, q.v.; jil-i-gree, q.v.3 fill-et,
q.v.; also en-fil-ade; also de-jile (2).

FILE (2), a steel rasp. (E.) ME. jile, Chaucer, C. T. 2510
(A 2508). OMerc. fil, Corpus gloss., 1234; AS. féol, a file;
Bosworth.4+Du. vil; OHG. fihala, figala; G. feile. Teut. type
*fihala <*finhala. Perhaps cf. Skt. pig, to adorn, form; but this is
doubtful. Der. jile, verb; il-ings.

FILE (3), to defile. (E.) ‘For Banquo’s issue have I jiled my
mind;’ Macb. iii. 1.65. ME. fylen, Early E. Allit. Poems, B. 136.
AS. -fylan, to render foul (in comp. gefylan); for *ftl-ian.— AS. ful,
foul. See Defile (1) and Foul,

FILIAL, relating to a child. (L.) ‘All filial reuerence;’ Sir T. °
More, Works, p. 63 f. Formed as if from Late L. jilidlis; cf. Late L.
filidliter, in a mode resembling that of a son.—L. filius, son; filia,
daughter; orig, an infant; cf. L. félare, to suck. —4/ DHEI, to suck ;
ef. Skt. dha, to suck. Der. jilial-ly, jili-at-ion, af-fili-ate. hae?

FILIBUSTER, a pirate, freebooter. (Span.—F.—Du.) First in
1587; from Spanish.—Span. filibuster, a buccaneer, a freebooter.
=F. flibustier, spelt fribustier in 1667 (Hatzfeld), Corrupted from
Du. vrijbuiter, a freebooter.—Du. vrijbuiten, to rob, plunder. — Du.
frij, free; buit, booty. See Free and Booty. @ The exact history
is obscure; but, in any case, the word is of Du. origin.

FILIGREE, fine ornamental work. (F.—Ital.—L.) A corruption
of filigrain or filigrane, the older form. ‘ A curious filigrane handker-
chief... out of Spain;’ Dr. Browne’s Travels, ed. 1685 (Todd).
‘ Several filigrain curiosities ;’ Tatler, no. 245.—F. jiligrane (cf. Span.
filigrana). = Ital. filigrana, filigree-work, fine wrought work. = Ital.
filo, a thread, row, flare, to spin; and grano, the grain or principal
fibre of the material; so called because the chief texture of the
material was wrought in gold or silver thread, From L. féum,
thread; and granum, grain. See File (1) and Grain,

FILL, to make full. (E.) ME. fillen, P. Plowman’s Crede, ed. ©
Skeat, 763; older form fullen, Ancren Riwle, p. 40. AS. fyllan,
fullian, Grein, i, 356, 360; from AS. ful, full.-Du. vallen ; Icel.
fylla; Dan. fylde; Swed. fylla; Goth. fulljan; G. fillen. _Teut. type
*fulljan-, See Full, Der. fll, sb., Chaucer, C. T, 2561 (A 2559);

ll-er.

“FILLET, a little band. (F.—L.) ME. filet, Chaucer, C. T. 3243;


214. FILLIBEG, FILIBEG


Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 154.—OF. filet, dimin. of fil, a thread.
=L. flum,a thread. See File (1), Der. fillet, verb.

' FILLIBEG, FILIBEG, a kilt. (Gaelic.) Used by Dr. John-
‘son, in his Tour to the Western Islands (Todd). = Gael. feileadh-beag,
the kilt in its modern shape; Macleod. = Gael. feileadh, feile, a kilt,
prob. from L. wélum, a veil (Macbain) ; and beag, little, small. Cf.
W. bach, small. (The older kilt was larger.)

FILLIP, to strike with the finger-nail, when jerked from under the
thumb. (E.) In Shak. 2 Hen. IV,i. 2.255. Another form of Flip.
Halliwell has: ‘ Flip, a slight sudden blow; also, to fillip, to jerk ;
Somerset. Lillie (Mother Bombie, v. 3, ed. 1632, sig. Dd. ii) seems
to use the word flip in the sense to jillip.’ Der. fillip, sb., spelt
fyllippe in Palsgrave. See Flippant.

FILLS, used for ¢hills (Shak.). See Thill.

FILLY, a female foal. (Scand.) Shak. has jilly foal, Mids. N.
Dr. ii. 1. 46. Merely the fem. form of foal, formed by suffixing
Teut. *-jan, f., which modifies the vowel.—Icel. fylja, a filly; foli, a
foal; cf. Dan. fél, neut.a foal; fole, masc. a foal; Swed. fol, neut. a
foal; fale, masc.; G. fiillen, a colt; OHG. volo, a foal. See Foal,

FILM, a thin skin. (E.) In Shak. Romeo, i. 4.63. ME. jilm,
fylme, Prompt. Parv. p. 160. AS. filmen, written fylmen, membrane,
prepuce ; Gen. xvii. 11 ; OF ries. filmene, skin. For W. Teut. *fi/min-
jo-; from *felmen-, *felmon-, as in AS. #ger-felma, the skin of an
egg. Extended from fel-, as in AS. fel, skin. See Fell (2). Der.

Im-y, -i-ness.

FILTER, to strain liquors; a strainer. (F.—Low L.—O. Low
G.) The sb. is in Cotgrave, s.v. feutre. ‘ Filter, or Filtrate, to
strain through a bag, felt, brown paper, &c.;’ also ‘ Filtrum or
Feltrum, a strainer; ... a felt-hat;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.—MF.
filtrer, ‘to straine through a felt;’ Cot.—MF.. (and F.) jiltre, a
filter (Hatzfeld). B. A modification (due to the influence of Ital.
filtro) of the OF. feltre (F. feutre). Cf. F. feutre, ‘a felt, also a
filter, a peece of felt... to straine things through;’ Cot.—Low L.
filtrum, felt. —O. Low G. filt (=E. felt), preserved in Du. vilt, Low
G. filt, felt; cf. G. filz. See Felt. Der. filt-r-ate, filt-r-at-ion.

FILTH, foul matter. (E.) ME. jilth, felth, fulthe; Prompt.
Pary. p. 160; Ancren Riwle, p.128. AS. fyl5, Matt. xxiii. 27, where
the Hatton MS. has felthe. Formed, by vowel-change of @ to y, from
the adj. fal, foul, the AS. /yl5 being the exact equivalent of OSax.
filitha, filth; so also OHG. fulida, filth, from ful, val, foul. See
Foul. Der. jfilth-y, -i-ness.

FIMBRIATED, edged with a narrow band. (L.) In heraldry.
¢ This cros fimbriatit or borderit;’ Book of St. Alban’s, pt. ii. fol. dr.
=L. jimbridtus, pp. of fimbriare, to fringe. —L. fimbria, fringe ; see
Fringe.

FIN, a wing-like organ of a fish. (E.) ME. finne; the pl. pp.
jinnede = furnished with fins, occurs in Alexander and Dindimus, ed.
Skeat, l. 298. AS. jinn; Levit. xi. 9.4Du. vin; Low G. finne; Swed.
finn-, in finnfisk, a finned fish; fena, a fin; Dan. jfinne.+L. pinna, a
fin, in the comp. pinniger, having fins; Ovid, Metam. xiii. 963.
@ The usual connexion asserted between L. pinna and penna is not
certain; if it were, we might connect jin with feather. Der. jinn-y.

FINAL, pertaining to the end. (F.—L.) ME. final, Gower, C. A.
iii. 348; bk. viii. 2183. —OF. jinal, ‘finall; ’ Cot.—L. findlis.=L.
finis, the end. See Finish. Der. jinal-ly, -i-ty; also jfin-ale, from
Ital. finale, final, hence, an ending.

FINANCE, revenue. (F.—L.) ME. fynaunce, used by Lord
Berners in the sense of ‘ransom ;’ tr. of Froissart, i. 311 (N. E. D.).
‘All the jixances or revenues;’ Bacon, The Office of Alienations
(R.).— OF. finance, pl. finances, ‘ wealth, substance, revenue, . . . all
extraordinary levies; ’ Cot.—Late L. financia, a payment. = Late L.
finare, to pay a fine or tax.— Late L. finis, a settled payment, a final
arrangement ; L. finis, the end. See Fine (2),and Finish. Der.
jinanc-i-al, -i-al-ly, -i-er.

FINCH, the name of several small birds. (E.) ME. finch, Chaucer,
C. T. 654 (A 652).. AS. fine; Voc. 23. 13.4+Du. vink; Dan. finke ;
Swed. jink; G. fink; OHG. fincho.4-W. pinc, a chaffinch ; also Gk.
oniyyos, omi(a, a finch ; prov. E. spink, a finch. Of imitative origin.
Der. chaf-jinch, q.v.; bull-finch, &c.

FIND, to meet with, light upon. (E.) ME. finden, Chaucer, Prol.
738 (A 736). AS. findan; Grein.-Du. vinden; Dan. finde; Swed.
and Icel. finna (<jfinpa) ; Goth. jinthan ; OHG. jindan; G. finden.
-Teut. type *fenthan- (pt. t. *fanth, pp. *funth-anoz) ; Idg. base *pent,
whence Olrish é¢-aim, I find. Perhaps allied to L. pet-ere, to seek
after, fly towards; from 4/PET, to fall, fly. Der. find-er.

. FINE (1), exquisite, complete, thin. (F.—L.) ME. fyn, K.
Alisaunder, 2657; superl. jinest; P. Plowman, B. ii. 9.—OF. jin,
‘witty, . . . perfect, exact, pure;’ Cot.=Late L. finus, fine, pure,
‘used of money; in place of L. jimitus, well rounded (said of a
sentence); orig. pp. of L. finire, to end, from finis, end. Finus
-was a back-formation from finire. Thus fine is related to finite ; see


FIRMAN


Finite. Der. jine-ly, -ness; jin-er-y, used by Burke (R.) ; jfin-esse
(F. finesse) ; fin-ic-al, a coined word, in Shak. K. Lear, ii. 2. 19; -ie-
al-ly; also re-fine. @ The Du. jfijn, G. fein, &c., are not Teutonic
words, but borrowed from the Romance Languages (Diez). :

FINE (2), a tax, forced payment. (Law L.) ME, jie, sb., Sir
T. More, Works, p. 62 b; vb., Fabyan’s Chron. an. 1440-1 (at the
end).=— Law L. fins, a fine; see Fine in Blount’s Law Dict., and jinis
in Ducange. The lit. sense is ‘a final payment’ or composition, to
settle a matter; from L. fimis, an end. See Finance, Finish.
Der. fine, verb; jin-able; jin-ance, q.v.

FINGER, part of the hand. (E.)) ME. finger, P. Plowman, C.
iii. 12, AS. finger, Grein.+Du. vinger ; Icel. jingr ; Dan. and Swed.
jinger ; Goth. jiggrs (=/ingrs) ; G. finger. Teut. type *fingroz, masc.
The Idg. type was probably *penkros; the word jist may be related.
Der. finger, verb ; jinger-post.

FINIAL, an ornament on a pinnacle. (L.) In Holland’s tr. of
Suetonius, p. 162; and tr. of Pliny, bk. xxxv. c. 12. Cf. ‘ every
butterace fined [ended] with finials ;* Will of Hen. VI.; Royal Wills,
ed. Nichols, p. 302 (1448). A coined word, suggested by Late L.
finiles lapidés, terminal stones; finiabilis, terminal.—L. finire, to
finish ; see Finish.

FINICAL,, spruce, foppish; see Fine (1).

FINISH, to end, terminate. (F.—L.) ME. jinischen; the pp.
Jinischid occurs in Will. of Palerne, 1. 5398.—OF. finiss-, base of
jiniss-ant, pres. pt. of finir, to finish.—L. finire, to end.=—L. finis,
end, bound. Der. jinish, sb., finish-er ; also in-ite, q.v., jin-ial, q.v.,
jin-al, q.v., af-fin-ity, con-fine, de-fine, in-fin-ite.

FINITH, limited. (L.) In Dryden, Hind and Panther, i. 105.
First in 1493. —L. finitus, pp. of finire, to end; see Finish. Der.

nite-ly, -ness ; in-finite.

FIORD, FJORD, a long narrow arm of the sea. (Norw.) First
in 1674.—Norw. fiord; Icel. fjordr, a firth, frith, bay. Teut. type
*ferthuz. See Frith (2), Ferd.

FIR, the name of_a tree. (Scand.) ME. jfirre, Chaucer, C. T.
2923 (A 2921); answering to a mutated form allied to AS. furh,
in the comp. furh-wudu, fir-wood, which occurs in Voc. 39. 34, but is
of Scand. origin. Cf. Icel. fyri-skdgr (written fyri-skogr), a fir-wood;
from Icel. fura, a fir; also Dan. fyr, Swed. fura.4+-OLombardic
fereha, ‘ esculus;’ G. fohre; W. pyr.+-L. quercus, an oak; see Max
Miiller, Lect. on Lang. vol. ii.

FIRE, the heat and light of flame. (E.) ME. fyr, Chaucer, C. T.
1248 (A 1296); also fur, P. Plowman, C. iv. 125. AS. fyr, Grein,
i. 364.4-Du. vaur; Icel. fyri; Dan.and Swed. fyr; G. feuer; OHG,
fiir. Teut. type *fa-ir ; cognate with Gk. mip. B. The root seems
to be 4/PU, to purify; cf. Skt. pavaka- (from pu), purifying, also
fire. See Pure. Der. fire, vb., fier-y (=/fir-y), jir-ing ; also
numerous compounds, as fire-arms, -brand, -damp, -jly, -lock, -man,
-place, -plug, -proof, -ship, &c.

FIRK, to conduct, drive, beat. (E.) To beat; in Shak. Hen. V,
iv.4.29. Orig. sense, to conduct; AS. fercian, AS. Chron. an. 1009 ;
also fercian. Prob. from AS. fer, a journey ; faran, to go ; see Fare.

FIRKIN, the fourth part of a barrel. (MDu.) In the Bible of
1551; John, ii.6. ‘ Kilderkyn and jirken ;’ Arnold’s Chron. (1502) ;
ed. 1811, p. 85. Spelt ferdkyn in 1413; Riley, Mem. of London,
p- 5973 and ferdekyn in 1423 (N.E.D.).—Du. vierde, fourth; with
MDu. dimin. suffix -ken (= -k-en), formerly common, but now super-
seded by -tje or -je ; see Sewel’s Du. Grammar (in his Dict.), p. 37.
Cf. MDu. vierdevat, a peck (Sewel); and see Farthing and Kil-
derkin. B. Du. vierde is from Du. vier, four; see Four.

FIRM (1), steadfast, fixed. (F.—L.) ME. ferme, P. Plowman,
B. xvi. 238.—OF. ferme.—L. firmus. Cf. Skt. dharman, right, law,
justice; dhara-, preserving; Skt. dhy, to maintain, carry, support.
Der. jirm, sb.; -ly, -ness; -a-ment, q.v.; also af-firm, con-firm, in-
jirm; also farm, q.v.; and see below.

FIRM (2), a partnership. (Span.—L.) ‘Firm, the name or
names under which any house of trade is established ;’ Ash’s Dict.,
1775. This is the proper sense; it alludes to the signature of the
house; and the word was used with the sense of ‘ signature’ as early
as 1574 (N.E.D.).—Span. jirma, a sign manual, signature ; from
jirmar, vb., to confirm.=L. firmadre, to confirm.—L. firmus, firm
(above).

FIRMAMENT, the celestial sphere. (F.—L.) In early use.
ME. firmament, King Alisaunder, 714.—OF. firmament; Cot.—L.
jirmimentum, (1) a support, (2) the expanse of the sky; Genesis, i. 6.
=L. firmare, to strengthen; with suffix -mentum.=—L. firmus, firm.
See Firm, , ;
FIRMAN, a mandate. (Persian.) In Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665,
p. 221.— Pers. ferman, a mandate, order; Palmer’s Pers. Dict., col.
452; OPers. framaina (Horn); cf. Skt. pramanam, a measure, scale,
authority, decision; from pra= Pers. far-= Gk. mpé, before; and ma,
to measure. - Biers lie


FIRST


FIRST, foremost, chief. (E.) ME. jirst, jirste, Chaucer, C. T.
4715 (B 295). AS. fyrst, Grein, i. 364. + Icel. fyrstr ; Dan. forste,
Swed. férsta ; OHG. furisto, first. Teut. type *furistoz, superl. from
the base *fur-, fore. See Fore, Former.

FIRTH, the same as Frith, q. v.

FISCAL, pertaining to the revenue. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627.—MF. fiscal, ‘fiscall;’ Cot.—Late L. jiscalis, adj.—L. fiscus,
a basket of rushes, also, a purse. Der. con-fisc-ate, q. v.

FISH, an animal that lives in water, and breathes through gills.
(E.) ME. fish, jisch; Chaucer, C. T. 10587 (F 273). AS. fisc;
Grein, + Du. visch ; Icel. fiskr 3, Dan. and Swed. jisk; G. fisch. + L.
piscis.+4-Irish and Gael. iasg, Olrish iase (with loss of initial p, as in
Trish athair=L, pater), Root unknown. Der. jish, verb; jish-er,
~er-y, -er-man, -ing’, -y, -i-ness, -monger (see monger).

FISSURE, a cleft. (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —F.
Jissure, ‘a cleft ;’ Cot.—L. fisstira, a cleft; cf. fissus, pp. of findere
(base jid), to cleave. Skt. bhid, to break, pierce, disjoin.—
“/ BHEID, to cleave; whence also E. Bite, q.v. Der. (from same
root), fiss-ile, easily cleft.

FIST, the clenched hand. (E.) ME. jist; also fest, Chaucer, C.T.
12736 (C 802) ; fust, P. Plowman, B. xvii. 166. AS. fyst; Grein,
i, 365.4-Du. vuist; G. faust; OHG. fist. Teut. type *fastiz. If the
orig. type was *funhstiz, it may be identified with Russ. piaste, the
fist, OSlav. pesti; from an Idg. type *peng-sti-. Brugmann, i. § 647 (6).

FISTULA, a deep, narrow abscess. (L.) In Levins, ed. 1570;
and Minsheu, ed. 1627.—L. fistula, a pipe; from its pipe-like shape.
Der. fistul-ar, -ous; also fester.

FIT (1), to suit; as adj., apt, suitable. (Scand.) ME. fitten, to
arrange, set (men) in array; Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 1989, 2455.
The adj. is ME. fit, fyt. ‘Fyt, or mete [meet];’ Prompt. Paryv.
p- 163.—Icel. fitja, to knit together; Norse dial. ji¢ja, to draw a lace
together in a noose, knit (Aasen) ; Swed. dial. fittja, to bind together
(Rietz). Cf. G. fitzen, to bind into skeins, from jitze,askein. From
Icel. fit, a hem, also ‘web’ ofa bird’s foot; cf. MDan. jidde, to bind,
Dan. fid, a skein. Note MDu. vitten, ‘to accommodate, to fitt, or
to serve’ (Hexham). 4 Influenced as to sense by ME. fete, well
done; from F, fait, L. factus; see Feat. Der. jit, verb; jitt-ing,
Spenser, F. Q. vii. 7. 43; jit-ly, -ness; fitt-er.

FIT (2), a part of a poem; a sudden attack of illness. (E.) ME.
Jit, a part of a poem, burst of song, P. Plowman, A. i. 139; and see
Chaucer, C.T. 4228 (A 4230). AS. fit, a song; also, a struggle;
Grein, i. 300. Apparently related to Icel. fet, a pace, step, foot (in
poetry), part of a poem. Cf. Skt. pada-, a step, trace, a verse of
a poem; connected with pad, pad, a foot. See Fetch, and Foot.
Der. fit-ful, Macbeth, iii, 2. 23; fit-ful-ly, fit-ful-ness.

FITCH, old spelling of vetch, Isaiah, xxviii. 25; see Vetch.
-FITCHET, FITCHEW, a polecat. (F.—MDu.) Spelt firchew,
King Lear, iv. 6. 124; Troil. v. 1. 67; and earlier, in P. Ploughm.
Crede, 1. 295. The pl. ficheux occurs in 1438, in Fifty Earliest E.
Wills, ed. Furnivall, p. 110.— OF. jichau (Godefroy) ; Picard ficheux ;
Walloon jichau (Sigart); answering to MF. Jissau, expl. by Cot. as
‘a fitch or fulmart,’ i.e. polecat.— MDu. jisse, a polecat; Kilian. So
called from thesmell. Cf. Du. vies, nasty, loathsome; Icel. fisi-sveppr,
a name of a fungus; Icel. fisa, Dan. fise, to make a smell.

FITZ, son. (AF.—L.) The spelling with ¢ is unnecessary, but
was due to a wish to preserve the old sound of Norm. F. z, which was
pronounced as ts, The usual old spelling is fiz ; see Vie de S, Auban,
ed. Atkinson (Glossary); the spellings liz, fitz, fiz all occur in P.
Plowman, B. vii. 162 (and footnote).—L. filius,a son. See Filial.

FIVE, the half of ten. (E.) ME. fif, Layamon, 1425. At a later
period, the pl. form fyue or five (with «=v, and with final e) is more
common ; cf. Rob. of Glouc, p. 6, 1.135 x. AS. fif; sometimes fife,
five; Grein, i, 300. [Here 7 stands for in or im, and the true form
was once *finf; or (by the influence of f) *#m/f.] 4 Du. vijf; Dan.
and Swed. fem; Icel. fimm; Goth. jimf; OHG. jfimf, jinf; G. funf.
+W. pump; Olrish coic; Lith. penki; Armenian hing; L. quinque ;
Gk. népme, mévre; Skt. paftcha. Idg. type *penge. Brugmann,
li. § 169. Der. fives, five-fold; fif-teen=ME. fiftene=AS. fiftyne,
see Ten; fif-th=ME. fifle=AS. fifta; fif-ly=AS. fiftig.

FIVES, a disease of horses, the strangles. (F.—Span.—Arab.)
In Shak. Tam. Shrew, iii. 2. 54. For vives, which is short for avives,
—F. avives, ‘vives;’ Hamilton.—Span. avivas, abivas, adivas, ‘the
vives ;’ Pineda. — Arab. ad-dhiba, the same disease. — Arab. al, the;
dhib, a wolf (which strangles). See Devic (in Littré),

FIX, to bind, fasten. (F.—L.) Originally a pp. as in Chaucer,
C. T. 16247 (G 779). [We also finda ME. verb jichen, to fix, pierce ;
Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, ll. 2098, 4239; formed directly from OF,
Jicher; from Late L, *figicdre (not found), a secondary form from
L. figere.]—OF. fixe, ‘ fixed, setled;” Cot.—L. fixus, pp. of figere,
to fix. Der. fix-ed, -ed-ly, -ed-ness; -at-ion, Gower, C. A. ii. 86; bk. iy,
2520; -i-ly; -ture, Merry Wives, iii. 3. 67; -ure, Troil. i. 3. 101,


FLAGRANT 215


FIZZ, to make a hissing sound. (Scand.) We also find fizzle, a
frequentative form, in Ben Jonson, The Devil is an Ass, v. 3. 2. Cf.
ME. fyse, a blowing, Voc. 679. 23; allied to /iist, Prompt. Parv. p. 163.
=Icel. fisa, Dan. jise, with the same sense as L. pedere. An imitative
word. See Fitchew.

FLABBERGAST, to frighten, greatly astonish. (E.) First in
1772. A dialect word, and more correctly flapper-gast ; see E. D. D.
The etymology is obvious; viz. to gast (frighten away) with a flapper,
i.e. a clapper for frightening birds (E.D.D.). Cf. gaste crowen, to
frighten crows; P. Plowman, A. vii. 129; and ‘ flappe, instrument to
smyte wythe flyys’ [flies]; Prompt. Parv. See Aghast and Flap.

FLABBY, soft and yielding, hanging loose. (E.) Not in early
use. ‘ Flabbiness, limberness, softness and moistness ;’ Bailey’s Dict.
vol. ii. ed, 1731. ‘ His flabby flanks ;’ Dryden, tr. of Virgil, Georg.
iii. 780. A variant of flappy, i.e. inclined to flap about. Cf. Low G.
fiabbe, a hanging lip, flabbsig, flabby (Danneil); MDu. jlabbe, a
contemptuous name for the tongue, Oudemans; Swed. dial. abd, the
hanging underlip of animals, 7/abd, an animal’s snout, Rietz; Dan.
jiab, the chops. See Flap.

FLACCID, soft and weak. (F.—L.) ‘ Flaccid, withered, feeble,
weak, flaggy;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. =F. flaccide, ‘weak, flaggie;’
Cot. = L. flaccidus, flaccid. —L. flaccus, flabby, loose-hanging. Der.
flaccid-ness, -i-ty.

FLAG (1), to droop, grow weary. (E.) ‘Slow and flagging
wings;’ 2 Hen. VI, iv. 1.5. Partly of F. origin (see at end); but
also partly imitative, and weakened from the form flack. ‘ Flack, to
hang loosely, to flap;’ E.D.D. Itis the same word as ME. flakken,
to move to and fro, to palpitate, as in Gower, C. A. iii. 315; bk.
viii. 1196: ‘her herte [began] to jlacke and bete.’ [Hence the
frequentative verb flacker, ‘ to flutter, quiver ;’ E.D.D.] From the E.
base flak, to waver; appearing in AS. flacor, flying, roving (Grein).
+Dan. flagre, to flicker, flutter; cf. Icel. flakka, to rove about;
jfiaka, to flap (said of garments); Swed. flacksa, to flutter; MDu.
flakkeren, to waver; G. flackern, to flutter. @ The special sense
is from OF. flaquir, to flag, MF. flaque, ‘ weake, feeble, faint, flaggy;’
Cot.; from L. flaccus, limp. Cf. also MDu. flaggéren, ‘to flagge,
or grow wearie;’ Hexham. See Flabby, Flap, Flicker. Der.

age-y, flagg-i-ness.

q ser kee) an ensign. (E.) In Shak. K. John, ii. 207.—The
E. flag occurs in Palsgrave (1530), and is the oldest Teut. form.
From ME, jlakken, to waver, Autter; see Flag (1). Cf. Dan. flag;
Norw. and Swed. flagg, a flag; Du. vlag; G. flagge.

FLAG (3), a water-plant, reed. (E.) Wyclif has faggy, filled
with flags or reeds; Exod. ii. 3. The same word as flag (2); and
named from its waving in the wind; see Flag (1). Cf. prov. E. flag,
a long, narrow leaf; Dan. fleg, an iris.

FLAG (4), FLAGSTONE, a paving-stone. (Scand.) Properly
‘a thin slice’? of stone ; applied formerly also to a slice of turf.
‘ Flags, the surface of the earth, which they pare off to burn: Norfolk ;’
Ray’s Gloss. of Southern Words, ed. 1691. ME. flagge; ‘flagge of
the erthe;” Prompt. Parv.=—Icel. flaga, a flag or slab of stone; flag,
the spot where a turf has been cut out. [These would regularly give
an E, form flaw, as in North E. (see E. D. D.), but flag is an E. Anglian
form, found also in South E.] Cf. Swed. dial. flagtorf, a cut turf
(Moller). Icel. fak-, appearing in flakaa, to flake off, to split; flagna,
to flake off. Flag (4) is closely allied to Flake, q. v.

FLAGELLATE, to scourge. (L.) Flagellation is in Blount’s
Gloss. ed. 1674.—L. flagellatus, pp. of jlagellare, to scourge.—L.
flagellum, ascourge; dimin. of flagrum, ascourge. Der. flagellat-ion;
Jlagell-ant, from L. flagellant-, base of pres. pt. of flagellaére; also
flail, q. v. 3 and perhaps flog.

FULAGEOLET, a sort of flute. (F.—Prov.) Spelt flagellate in
Hudibras, c. ii. pt. ii, 1. 610.—MF. flageolet, ‘a pipe, whistle, flute ;’
Cot. Dimin. (with suffix -e¢) of OF. flageol, with the same sense;
id.—OProy. flaujols, a flageolet ; as if from a Late L. type *flaviolus.
Of unknown origin; the f7- may have been suggested by L. flare,to blow.

FLAGITIOUS, very wicked. (L.) ‘Many flagicious actes ;’ Hall’s
Chron. Rich. III, an. 3. § 39. ME. flagiciouse; Wyclif has ‘ most
flagiciouse’ (Vulg. flagitiosissime) ; 2 Macc. vii. 34.—L. fligitidsus,
shameful. =—L. flagitium, a disgraceful act; cf. flagitdre, to act with
violence, implore earnestly. Perhaps allied to Flagrant. Der.
flagitious-ly, -ness.

FLAGON, a drinking vessel. (F.—Late L.) In Berners, tr. of
Froissart, vol. ii. c. 187 (R.). Spelt fagan in Caxton’s ed. of Malory,
Morte Arthure, b. vii. c. 14; leaf 117, back, 1. 7. OF. flacon, older
form flascon, ‘a great leathern bottle; ’ Cot. = Late L. flascdnem, acc.
of flasco, a large flask ; augmentative of flascus, flasca, a flask. See
Flask.

FLAGRANT, glaring, said of a fault. (F.—L.) In Minsheu,
ed. 1627.—MF. flagrant, ‘ flagrant, burning ;’ Cot.—L. flagrantem,
acc. of pres. pt. of fagrare, to bum.4+-Gk. pdrcyev, to burn; Skt.


216 FLAIL.. ”


bhraj, to shine brightly. —4/BHLEG, to burn, Brugmann, i. § 539
(2). Der. flagraxt-ly, flagranc-y ; see con-flagrat-ion.

FLAIL, an instrument for threshing corn. (F.—L.) In P. Plow-
man, B, vi. 187.—OF, flael (F. fléau), a flail, scourge. —L. flagellum,
a scourge; in Late L., a flail. See Flagellate. @ The Late AS,
frizel, Du. vlegel, G. flegel, are merely borrowed from L. flagellum.

FLAKE, a strip, thin slice or piece. (Scand.) ‘As flakes fallen
in grete snowes;’” Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii.102. Of Scand. origin;
MSwed. flake, a slice; the Norwegian dialects have preserved the word
as flak, a slice, a piece torn off, an ice-floe (Aasen) ; cf. Icel. flakna,
also flagna, to flake off, split; Swed. flaga, a flaw, crack, breach,
flake ; flagna, to peel off. Also Swed. dial. flag, flak, a thin slice;
Dan. snee-flage, a snow-flake. Perhaps allied to flay. See Flay,
Flaw, Floe, and Flag (4). Der. jlak-y, flak-i-ness.

FLAMBEAU, atorch. (F.—L.) In Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665,
p. 135; and in Dryden, tr. of Juv. Sat. iii. 450. —F. flambeau, ‘a linke,
or torch of wax;’ Cot. This answers to an *OF. flambel, dimin. of


OF. flambe, a flame (below).
FLAME, a blaze, warmth. (F.—L.) In Chaucer, C. T. 15983
(G. 515). OF. flame, flamme; whence a secondary form flambe.—L.


flamma, a flame. L. jflamma=*flag-ma, from the base flag-, to burn;
see Flagrant. Der. flame, verb, flam-ing ; flambeau, q.v. ; flamingo,

q-y. Also flamboyant, characterised by waving lines; from F. flam-
boyant, pres. pt. of flamboyer, to flame; from OF. jlambe, flame.

FLAMEN, a priest of ancient Rome. (L.) In Mandeville’s
Travels, p. 141; spelt flamyn.—L. flimen, a priest. 4 Perhaps for
*flag-men=he who burns the sacrifice; see Flame.

FLAMINGO, a bright red bird. (Span.—Prov.—L.) In Sir T.
Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p. 403; spelt flamengo, Hakluyt, iii. 520.
= Span. flamenco, a flamingo.= Prov. jflamenc, flamen, a flamingo;
so called from the colour. = Prov. flama, a flame.=L. flamma; see
Flame. @ The Proy. suffix -enc is an adaptation of the Teut.
suffix -ing. The F. form for‘ flamingo’ is flamant, lit. ‘flaming ;” but
it seems to have been confused with F. Flamand, a Fleming. Palsgrave
has: ‘ Flemmyng, Flammant.’

FLANGE, a projectingrim. (F.—OHG.) A dialectal form con-
nected with prov. E, flange, to project out; E.D.D. Again, flange
is a corruption of prov. E. flanch, a projection ; cf. flanch in heraldry,
an ordinary on each side (or flank) of ‘the shield. —OF. flanche (AF.
flanke), fem. sb. allied to F. flanc, side. Cf, MF. jlanchere, ‘a
flanker, side-peece ;’ Cot. See below.

FLANK, the side. (F.—OHG.) ME. flank, King Alisaunder,
3745.—OF. (and F.) flanc, side. Connected by Diez with L. flaccus,
soft; whichis unsatisfactory. Now thought to be of OHG. origin. =
OHG, hklanca, MHG., Janke, the loin, side (with change of initial A/
to fi); cf. MDu. ‘de Lancke, the flanks ;’ Hexham. Allied to AS.
hlanc, slender. See Lank. Der. flank, verb; flange, q.v.

FLANNEL, a woollen substance. (Welsh.) ‘The Welsh
flannel ;> Merry Wives, v. 5. 172. Prov. E. flannen, a more
correct form; cf. ‘apparelled in flanen, Sidney’s Arcadia, II, ii. 1
(ab. 1586). Prob. from W. gwlanen, an article made with wool, from
gwlan, wool. The W. gwlan is cognate with E. wool; Rhys, Lect.
on W. Philology, p. 10. See Wool.

FLAP, to strike or beat with the wings, &c. (E.) ME. flappen,
P. Plowman, B. vi. 187. Also flap, sb., a blow, stroke, id. B, xiii. 67.
EFries. flappen. Not found in AS.4Du. flappen, to flap; flap, a
stroke, blow, box on the ear. B. A variant of flack, to beat, ME.
Eee palpitate; see Flag (1); of imitative origin. Der. flap,
sb. ; flapp-er.

FLARE, to burn brightly, blaze, glare. (Scand.) In Shak. Merry
Wives, iv. 6.62. ‘His faring beams ;’ Milton, Il Pens. 132. Appa-
rently of Scand. origin. Cf. Norweg. flara, to blaze, flame, adorn
with tinsel; flar, tinsel, show; Aasen. Ross shows that it stands for
JSiadra, to blaze, to display, to make a show; allied to Swed. fladdra,
to flutter, also to blaze, flame (Widegren); Low G. fladdern, G.
fiattern, to flutter, flicker. From a Teut. base fad, to waver; cf, the
base flak, noticed under Flag (1).

FLASH, to blaze suddenly. (E.) In Shak. Timon, ii. 1. 32; used
of suddenly breaking out, K. Lear, i. 3. 4. ME. flaschen, to dash;
Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 63, ii. 369. Cf. Swed. dial. fasa, to burn
violently, blaze. And cf. Icel. fasa, to rush; flas, a headlong rush-
ing. Der. flash, sb.; flash-y, flash-i-ly, flash-i-ness. ¢@> We find:
‘Heo vlasked water peron’=she dashes or casts water on it ; Ancren
Riwle, p. 314; which seems to be allied.

FLASK, a kind of bottle. (Late L.) In Shak. Romeo, iii. 3. 132.
AS. flasce, whence by metathesis, the form flacse, written flaxe. [This
change of se to cs or x is common in AS. ; as in Gscian = dcsian = xian ;
mod. E. to ask and prov. E. toax.] See flasce in Voc. 240. 3 ; flaxe,
id. Io9. 5. ‘Twa fatu, on folcisc flaxan gehatene’=two vessels,
vulgarly called flasks; ‘Gregory’s Dialogues, ii. 18 (Bosworth); where
the L. text has ‘quze vulgo flascones vocantur.’ We find also Icel. faska


FLAX


(an old word); Dan. Lie Swed. flaska; G. flasche; OHG. flasea.
B. But it is improbable that the word is really Teutonic; it seems to.
be rather from Late L. flasca, a flask, of uncertain origin; the deriv.
jiasco occurs in Gregory (as above), ab. A.D. 600. Perhaps from L.
uasculum, a little vessel (Diez). We also find W. ffasg, Gael. flasg
(from E.). Der. jflagon, q.v.

FLAT, level, smooth. (Scand.) ME. flat; ‘sche fel . . flat to
the grounde ;’ Will. of Palerne, 4414. —Icel. flatr, flat ; Swed. flat;
Dan. flad. 4 The connexion with Gk. mdAarvs, broad, has not
been made out; Curtius, i. 346. And it must be rejected; see
Flawn, Der. fiat, sb. ; -ly, -ness; flatt-en (coined by analogy with
length-en, &c.); flatt-ish, flat-wise.

FLATTER, to coax, soothe. (F.—Scand.; or E.) ME. flateren
(with one ¢); P. Plowman, B. xx. 109. Perhaps from (or at any rate
influenced by) OF. flater (later flatter), ‘ to flatter, sooth, smooth;
. » also to claw, stroke, clap gently;’ Cot. But this would have
only given a ME. form *flat-en; so that the -er- is an E. addition.
B. The OF. flat-er is from Icel. flat-r, flat ; with the notion of making
smooth. y. But the base flat- may have been of imitative origin, like
jiak-, whence MSwed. fleckra, to flatter (Ihre); Swed. dial. fleka, to
caress (Rietz). Cf. ME. jlakken, to move to and fro, and G. flach,
flat; and note ME. flakeren as a variant of flateren, Ancren Riwle,
p. 222. @] The sb. flattery is from OF. flaterie, F. flatterie ; which,
indeed, may have suggested the suffix -er-.

FLATULENT, full of wind, windy. (F.—L.) In Minshen;
also in Holland’s Plutarch, p. 577 (R.).—MF. flatulent, ‘ flatulent,
windy ;’ Cot.—Late L. fldtulentus; not in Ducange, but regularly
formed from the base flatu-, by analogy with zemulentus, drunken. =
L. flatus, a blowing, a breath.—L. fldtus, pp. of flare, to blow; cog=
nate with E. blow. See Blow (1). Der. flatulent-ly, flatulence,
flatulenc-y.

FLAUNT, to display ostentatiously. (Scand.) Shak. has faunts,
s. pl. fine clothes, Winter's Ta. iv. 4. 23. ‘Yeeld me thy flanting
[showy] hood ;’ Turberville, To his Friend that refused him, st. 10.
‘With... fethers faupt-a-flaunt,’ i.e. showily displayed ; Gascoigne,
Steel Glass, 1163. Prov. E. flant, flaunt, to gad about, esp. in finery ;
flanty or flaunty, giddy, flighty. OfScand. origin. Cf. Norw. flanta,
to gad about; from jlana, to climb, to rove about, to gad about;
jiana, a gad-about, flanen, adj. obtrusive, forward (of children). So
also Jutland flanted, adj., as en flanted Tos, a gad-about (flaunting)
hussy, from a verb flante (Kok); Jutland flante, a giddy girl, flantet,
foolish (Feilberg); Dan. jlane, a giddy girl, flane, to flirt. Also
Swed. dial. lana, to be unsteady, to be extravagantly hilarious, fana,
a flirt; whence also Swed. dial. lanka, to be unsteady, waver, hang
and wave about, ramble; and the adj. and adv. jlankt, loosely,
flutteringly (which = Gascoigne’s flaunt-a-flaunt). Perhaps also allied
to Bavarian jlandern, to flutter, flaunt, Schmeller, i. 792. Cf. Gk,
mAdvn, a wandering ; see Planet.

FLAVOUR, the taste, scent. (F.—L.) Milton, Sams. Agon.,
544, says of wine ‘the flavor or the smell, Or taste that cheers the
heart of Gods or men,’ &c. He here seems to distinguish flavour
from both smell and ¢aste; but he may have meant the former. ME.
fiauor (=flavor); Early E, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, A. 87. But
Wyntown has flewoure, scent, Chron. ix. 26. 107; Henryson has
fiewer, Moral Fables, p. 66 (N.E.D.). The word must have been
modified by the influence of savour.—OF. fléur, fleiur, flaur, smell.
Cf. Ital. fiatore, a bad odour; answering to a Late L. acc. type
*flator-em.—L. flatus, pp. of flare, to blow. (Korting, § 3825.)

FLAW, a crack, break. (Scand.) ME. flawe, used in the sense of
‘flake ;’ ‘flawes of fyre’=flakes of fire; Allit. Morte Arthure, ed.
Brock, 2556.—Swed, flaga, a flaw, crack, breach; also, a flake;
Norw. flaga, a piece flaked off; a place (on a tree-stem) without
bark (Ross); see Flake. Cf. prov. E. flaw, a flake (as of snow);
also a gust of wind, like Du. vlaag. Der. flaw-less. —

FLAW, a kind of custard. (F.—OHG.) ‘Fill ouen full of
flawnes;’ Tusser, Husb. § go. st. 5. ME. flaun; ‘ Pastees and
fiaunes, Havelok, 644.—F. jlan, OF. flaon. Cotgrave gives flans,
‘flawns, custards, egg-pies ; also, round plates of metall ;’ and flaons,
‘round plates of metall.’ [Cf. Span. flaon, flawn, plate of metal;
Ital. fiadone, ‘a kind of flawne,’ Florio; Low L. flado, flato, a
flawn.]—OHG. flado, a broad flat cake, flawn; MHG. vlade3 G,
fiaden,akind of pan-cake. B. Cf. G. kuhjladen,a piece of cow-dung ;
MDu. vlade, ‘a flawne, Hexham; ME. flathe, a flawn, Wright,
Vocab. i. 127; a flat fish (Prompt. Parv.). Further allied to Gk.
mdatus, broad, wAd@avoy, a dish in which cakes were baked, a platter.
(See Scheler, Diez, Kluge.)

FLAX, the name of a plant. (E.) ME. flax, Chaucer, C. T. 678
(A 676). AS. fleax ; Aflfric’s Gloss., ed. Somner, Vestium Nomina,
1. t0.4-Du. vlas; G. flachs; OHG. vlahs, flaks. B. Cf. Goth. flahta,’
a plaiting of the hair; it is probable that flax is from the same root;
see Curtius, i. 203. Ifso, the root is PLEK, to weave; whencealso


FLAY


Gk. mAéxe, to weave, plait. Der. flax-en, where -en is an AS. adj.
suffix.

FLAY, to strip off skin, slice off. (E.) Formerly spelt flea; see
Rich, and Halliwell. ME. flean, pt. t. flow, pp. flain; Havelok,
2502, AS. fléan (in a gloss); Bosworth.Icel. fla, pt. t. fd, pp.
fleginn. Teut. type *flah-an-, pt. t. */ldh, to strike. Cognate with
Lith. plak-u, I strike; cf. L. pliga, a stroke. See Plague. Brug-
mann, i. § 569.

_ FLEA, a small insect. (E.) ME. flee, pl. fleen; Chaucer, C. T.
16966 (H 17). AS. fléah (O. E. Texts); spelt fleo, asa gloss to pulex,
in AElf. Gloss. ; Voc. 121. 38.4-Du. vloo; Icel. 45; G. floh. Teut.
base *flauh- (or rather *plawh-) ; allied to the verbto flee. See Flee.

FLEAM, a kind of lancet. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Kersey’s Dict.,
ed. 1715. Spelt fleame in Cotgrave, s.v. deschaussoir.— OF. flieme,
F. flamme, ‘a fleam;’ Hamilton and Legros. [Cotgrave gives only
the dimin. flammette, ‘a kind of launcet.’]—Late L. flétoma, a lancet
(Voc. 400. 11); shortened from flevotomum, phlebotomum, a lancet. =
Gk. pdeBordpor, a lancet.= Gk. pAeBo-, decl. stem of PAép, a vein ;
and rop-, 2nd grade of répvev, tocut. See Phlebotomy. { This
pardonable abbreviation of too long a word is countenanced by Du.
‘vlijm, G. fliete, and MHG. jliedeme, all various corruptions of the
same surgical word.

FLECK, a spot. (Scand.) ME. has only the verb flekken, to spot ;
Chaucer, C. T. 16033 (G 565).—Icel. flekkr, a spot; flekka, to stain,
spot; Swed. flack, a spot; fldcka, to spot; Du. vlek, sb.; vlekken, vb. ;
G. fleck, sb.; flecken, vb., to spot, stain, put on a patch,

FLECTION, a bending; see Flexible.

FLEDGE, to acquire (or be furnished with) feathers. (E.) Shak.
has fledged, Merch. Ven. iii. 1.32. This pp. fledged is a substitution
for an older adj. ledge, meaning ‘ ready to fly.’ ME. flegge, ‘ready
to fly’ (Stratmann), a Kentish form of ME. flygge, ready to fly; spelt
fiigge in the Prompt. Parv. p. 167 (and note). AS. *flycge, found in
comp. uaflycge; as in ‘inplumes, unflicge;’ O. E. Glosses (Napier),
28. 13. + Du. vlug, MDu. vlugge; Low G. flugge; OHG. flucchi.
Teut. type *fugjoz, adj.; from *flug-, weak grade of *fleugan-, to fly.
Cf. also Icel. fleygr, able to fly; Icel. fleyg7a, to make to fly, causal
of fijuga, to fly. See Fly (1). Der. fledge-ling.

Ei, to escape, run away. (E.) Not the same word as fly.
ME. fleen, pt. t. fleh, fleih; Cursor Mundi, 2818. [We also find the
pt. t. fledde, and pp. fled; Chaucer, C. T. 2932; Havelok, 1431. ]
AS. fiéon (pt. t. fléah).-+4-OSax. fliohan, G. fliehen; Icel. flyja (pt. t.
iG, also flydi); Swed. fly (pt. t. flydde) ; Goth. thliuhan. Teut. type
*thliuhan- (pt. t. thlauh); so that ff was orig. thl, and there was at
first xo connexion with the verb to fly, which was at an early date
confused with it. 4 The pt. t. fled, ME. fledde, was due to Icel.
fiy0i, Swed. flydde (above).

FLEECH, a sheep’s coat of wool. (E.) Here -ce stands for s, as
often. ME. flees, Prompt. Parv. p. 166; Wyclif, Gen. xxx. 35.
AS. fléos (Bosw.) ; earlier flius (O. E. Texts); also (with mutation)

Jiys, Ps. Ixxi. 6 (ed. Spelman).4-Du. vlies; G. fliess; MHG. vlius; cf.
also G. flaus, a woollen coat, MHG. viliis, a sheep-skin. Teut. types
*fleusi-, *fleuso-, *fliiso- ; possibly allied to L. plu-ma. See Plume.
(See Kluge.)

FLEER, to mock, to grin. (Scand.) In Shak. L. L. L. v. 2. 109;
Jul. Cees. i. 3.117. ME. flerien, Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 1088,
2778. Of Scand. origin; cf. Norw. flzra, to titter, giggle, langh at
nothing ; Aasen. Dan. dial. fire, to jeer. Also Norw. flisa, to
‘titter; Swed.) flissa, to titter. B. Another variation of this verb is
Swed. flina, to titter; Swed. dial. fina, to make a wry face (Rietz).

FLEET (1), a number of ships. (E.) ME. flete, Morte Arthure,

ed. Brock, 1189; fleote, Layamon, 2155. AS. fléot, a ship, Grein,
i. 304. [It seems afterwards to have been used collectively.]— AS.
fléotan, to ‘fleet,’ i.e. to float, swim.-4-OSax. fliotan, Du. vlieten, to
flow; G. fliessen, to flow; Icel. fjdta, Swed. flyta, Dan. flyde. Teut.
type */leutan-, pt. t. *flaut, pp. *flutanoz; Idg. base *pleud, as in Lith.
pludis, a float of a fishing-net. (4/PLEU.) Cf. Gk. mage, to sail;
Skt. plu, pru, to swim, float, flow. B. Hence also the more usual
AS. form flota, a ship, Grein, i. 305 (=ME. flote, Havelok, 738);
which is cognate with Icel. loti, (1) a raft, (2) a fleet. See
Float (4). ;

FLEET (2), a creek, bay. (E.) Inthe place-names North-fleet,
Fleet Street, &c. Fleet Street was so named from the Fleet ditch ;
and fleet was a name given to any shallow creek, or stream or channel
of water; see E.D.D. ME. fleet, Prompt. Parv. p, 166. AS. fléot,
a bay of the sea, as in s#s jléot=bay of the sea; tr. of Beda, i. 34.
Cf, also AS. fléote,a stream. The orig. sense was ‘ that which flows;’
and the deriv. is from the old verb fleet, to float, flow; see above.
Cf, OFries. flét, Icel. fjot, a stream ; Du. viet, a rill, a brook.

FLEET (3), swift. (E.) In Shak. L. L. L. v. 2. 261. It does
not seem to appear in ME., but the AS. form is fléotig (=fleet-y),
Grein, i. 304. It is a derivative from the old verb to fleet, and=


FLIPPANT 217


fleeting ; see Fleet (4). Cf. Icel. fijatr, fleet, swift; from the verb
Jijsta; see Fleet (1). Der. fleet-ly, -ness.

FLEET (4), to move swiftly. (E.) ‘As seasons fleet;? 2 Hen.
VI, ii. 4. 4. From Fleet (3). Der. fleet-ing, fleet-ing-ly. Not
the same word as flit, though allied to it; see Flit.

FLESH, the soft muscular covering of the bones of animals. (E.)
ME. flesch, fleisch; Chaucer, C. T. 147. AS. fl#sc, Grein, i. 302.4+Du.
vleesch; G. fleisch, flesh; and (with short vowel) Icel. flesk, in the
special sense of ‘ pork,’ or ‘bacon;’ Dan. jlesk, pork, bacon; Swed.
Jlask, pork, bacon. Teut. type *flaiskos, neut. Der. flesh, verb, K.
John, v. 1. 71; flesh-ed; -less, -ly, -y, -i-ly, -i-ness.

FLETCHER, an arrow-maker. (F.—C.) ME. flecchour, De-
struction of Troy, l. 1593.—OF. flechier, a fletcher. —OF. fleche (F.
fiéche), an arrow. = Olrish flesc, a rod,a wand. Stokes-Fick, p- 287.

FLEUR-DE-LIS, flower of the lily. (F.—L.) ME. floure-de-lice,
Minot’s Poems (Spec. of Eng. ed. Morris and Skeat, p. 131, 1. 25).—
OF, fleur de lis; whence also E. flower-de-luce, Winter's Ta. iv. 4. 127.
Here dis is from the old pl. form, because there were three flowers-
de-lis on the royal shield; the OF. nom. sing. was Jil. =—L. lilium, a
lily. See Flower and Lily.

FLEXIBLE, easily bent. (F.—L.) In Shak. Troil. i. 3. 50;
and Hoccleve, De Regim. Princ., 3358. —F. flexible, ‘ flexible;’ Cot.
—L. flexibilis, easily bent.—L. flexus, pp. of flectere, to bend. Der.
Slexible-ness, flexibl-y, flexibil-i-ty ; from L. flexus are also flex-ion
(wrongly flect-ion), -or, -ile, -ure; from the same source, circumflex,
de-flect, in-flex-ion (wrongly in-flect-ion), re-flect.

FLICKER, to flutter, waver. (E.) ME. flikeren, to flutter;
Chaucer, Troil.iy.1221. AS. flicerian, Deut. xxxii. 11; also flicorian,
fElfric, Hom. ii. 156. B. Here flicerian is a frequentative form from
the base flic-, an attenuated form of the base FLAK, to beat; the
sense is ‘to beat slightly and often.’ . y. This is made clear by the
occurrence of the stronger form flaker in the ME. flakeren, Ancren
Riwle, p. 222; of which the later form flacker occurs in Coverdale’s
Bible, Ezek. x. 19: ‘And the cherubins flackered with their wings.’


See Flag (1). @f The Icel. fldkra, to flutter=E. flacker ; Du.
jiikkeren, to sparkle=E. flicker. Cf. Prov. Du. flik, a light blow
(Molema).


FLIGHT (1), the act of flying. (E.) ME. flight, Chaucer, C. T.
190. AS. flyht, Grein, i. 306; allied to AS. flyg-e, flight. Teut.
type “fluhtiz; from *flug-, weak grade of *fleugan-, to fly. Der.
flight-y, -i-ness. See Fly (1).

FLIGHT (2), the act of fleeing away. (E.) ME. fliht, Layamon,
1. 21405; Ormulum, 1. 19683.4-OSax. and OHG. flucht. Teut. type
*thluhtiz; from *thluh-, weak grade of *thliuhan-, to flee; see
Flee.

FLIMSY, weak, slight. (Scand.?) ‘Flimsy, limber, slight;’
Phillips, ed. 1706. In Pope, Prol. to Satires, 1.94. Lit. ‘like the
skim on milk.’ Formed by adding -y to Dan. dial. flims, flems, skim
on milk; cf. EFries. fém, flim,afilm. These forms are allied to E.
jilm. If the ending was -sy (as from EFries. flim), cf. tip-sy, bump-sy,
also limp-sy, given by Webster as the synonym of flimsy in the U.S. A.
erereras

FLINCH, to shrink back. (F.—Teut.?) In Shak. All’s Well,
ii. I. 190.—OF. flenchir, flainchir, to turn aside, bend (given by
Godefroy, s. v. flechir). Perhaps from OHG. *hlencan, answering to
G. lenken, to bend, turn. This G. lenken is from OHG. hlanca, the
side (Kluge); see Flank. f The initial 7 would then be accounted
for, as in flank, from OHG. hi. See Link (1).

FLING, to throw, dart, scatter about. (Scand.) ‘The pt. t. fang
= flung, occurs in King Alisaunder, 2749. Cf. Swed. jldnga, to use
violent action, to romp; jldnga med hdstarna, to ride horses too hard ;
fling, sb., violent exercise, i flding, at full speed (cf. E. to take one’s
fling); Swed. dial. flanga, to strip bark from trees, to hack, strike
(Rietz); MSwed. flenga, to strike, beat with rods (Ihre) ; Dan. lenge,
to slash ; i fleng, indiscriminately. B. These forms presuppose a
strong verb *fling-a, which the E. form perhaps represents.

FLINT, a hardstone. (E.) ME. flint, Havelok, 2667. AS. jlint,
a rock; Numb. xx. 10. + Dan. flint; Swed. flinta. + Gk. mAivOos, a
brick; Brugmann, i. §§ 575,704. Der. flint-y, -i-ness.

FLIP (1), to fillip, jerk lightly, (Scand.) First in 1616; see
further under Flippant.

FLIP (2), a mixture of beer and spirit with sugar, heated. (E.)
‘Eat biscuit, and drink flip;’ Congreve, Love for Love, A. ili. sc. 4
(Ben). From flip (above), to beat up. Moisy (Dict. of Norman
patois) spells it phlippe, as if from F, Philippe; but it is borrowed
from E,

FLIPPANT, pert, saucy. (Scand.) ‘A most flippant tongue
she had;’ Chapman, All Fools, Act y. sc. I, prose speech by Gos-
tanzo, The suffix -ant is due to the Northern E, pres. pt. in -and ;
hence flippant =flippand, i.e. prattling, babbling. Or else -ant
imitates the F. pres. part., as inramp-ant. From the base jlip-, weak


218 FLIRT


grade allied to Icel. fle‘pa, to babble, prattle; Swed. dial. flepa, to
talk nonsense (Rietz). Cf flip,thelip. Der. flippant-ness, flippanc-y,

FLIRT, to trifle in wooing. (E.) In old authors ‘to mock,’ or
€scorn,’ and often spelt flurt ; see The Two Noble Kinsmen, ed.
Skeat, i. 2. 18 (and the note). The oldest sense of flirt was ‘to jerk
lightly away;’ see N,E.D.and E.D.D. We find EFries. flirr, flir¢,
a light blow; jlirtje, a giddy girl. Der. flirt, sb.; flirt-ation.

FLIT, to remove from place to place. (Scand.) ME. fliiten;
P. Plowman, B. xi. 62; also flutten, Layamon, 30503. —Swed. flytta,
to flit, remove; Dan. fiytte. From *flut-, weak grade of Icel. fijota
(Swed. jlyta, Dan. jflyde), to float, flow. See Fleet (1). Cf. Icel.
Jiyta, to hasten; flytja, to carry, cause to flit; jlytjask (reflexive), to
flit, remove. Der. flitt-ing, Ps. lvi. 8 (P.-Bk. version). Also jlitter-
mouse, i.e. a bat; see Flutter.

FLITCH, a side of bacon. (E.) ME. flicche, P. Plowman, B. ix.
169. AS. flicce, str. n., to translate L. succidia; Bosworth. The pl.
fliccu occurs in Diplom. Angl., ed. Thorpe, p. 158; gen. flicca, id.
p- 460. Teut. type *fik-jom, n.+Icel. flikki, a flitch; flik, a flap,
tatter. B. The Swed. flik is a lappet, a lobe; Dan. flik is a patch ;
cf. G. flick- (in comp.), a patch. Perhaps allied to Fleck.

FLOAT, to swim on a liquid surface. (E.) ME. floten, flotian,
flotten; [very rare, the usual form being fleten (AS. fléotan)]; see
Fleet (4). ‘A whal... by that bot flotte’=a whale floated by the
boat; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, C. 248. AS. flotian; as in ‘an scip
fiotigende,’ a ship floating; A.S. Chron., an. 1031. Cf. AS. flota,
a ship (Grein); allied words to which are Icel. fot’, a float, raft,
whence jlotna, to float to the top; Swed. flotta, a fleet, a raft, flotta,
to cause to float; Du, vlot, a raft, whence viotten, to cause to float,
to float ; G. floss, a raft, whence fléssen, to float ; see also Fleet (1).
Teut. type *flutdjan-, to float; from *flut-, weak grade of *fleutan-,
to float, whence mod. E. fleet. See Fleet (1). @ Partly confused
with F, flotter (OF. floter), to float; from the same Teut. base */ut-.
See Flotilla. Der. float, sb.; float-er, -age, -ing, -at-ion; also

otsam, q.V.

FLOCK (1), a company of birds or sheep. (E.) ME. flok; ‘a
flok of bryddis’=birds; King Alisaunder, 566. AS. flocc, m., Gen.
xxxil, 8.4Icel. flokkr; Dan. flok; Swed. flock. Der. flock, verb.

FLOCK (2), a lock of wool. (F.—L.) In Shak. 1 Hen. IV, ii.
1. 7; ME. flokkys, pl.; Prompt. Parv.=—MF. floc, floc de laine, ‘a
lock. or flock of wool;’ Cot.=—L. floceum, acc. of floceus, a lock of
wool. Der. flock-y; and (from L. floccus), floce-ose, flocc-ul-ent; also
flock-bed, &c. _ Brugmann, i. § 585 (1). 4 Not to be confused with
Jiake, with which it is unconnected.

FLOB#, a flake of ice. (Dan.) Modern; common in accounts of
Arctic Voyages.—Dan. flage, in the comp. iis-flage, an ice-floe;
Norw. isflak, isflok, lit. ‘ice-flake.’ See Flake. f Strictly, Dan.
Jlage gives E. flaw; the sound was not exactly caught.

FLOG, to beat, whip. (L.?) A late word. It occurs in Cowper’s
Tirocinium, 1. 329; and in Swift (Todd); also in Coles’ Dict. ed.
1671, which gives: ‘ Flog (cant word), to whip.’ Perhaps a school-
boy’s abbreviation from the L. flagellare, to whip, once a familiar
word. See Flagellate. @ This is paralleled by the use of Low G.
frogger, as acommon variant of flegel, a flail; where flegel represents
L. flagellum.

FLOOD, a great flow of water. (E.) ME. flod, P. Plowman,
B. vi. 326. AS. fldéd, Grein, i. 305.4-Du. vloed; Icel. fldd; Swed.
and Dan. flod; Goth. flddus, a river; G. fluth. Teut. type *f10-duz,
act of flowing, also a flood; from the Teut. base *#0(w)-. From the
notion of flowing; see Flow. Allied to Gk. mAw-7ds, floating.
Brugmann, i. § 154. Der. flood, verb; flood-ing, flood-gate.

FLOOR, a flat surface, platform. (E.) ME. for, Allit. Poems,
ed. Morris, B. 133. AS. flér, Grein, i. 306.4-Du. vloer; G. flur.
Teut. type *fldruz. Cognate with W. Jlawr; Bret. leur; Irish and
Gael. lar (<plar); Celtic type *(p)laros; Stokes-Fick, p. 236. From
Adg. *pla-, to spread out; whence also L. pla-nus, plain. See Plain.
Der. floor-ing.

FLOP, to flap or sway heavily. (E.) A dialectal form; see
E,D.D. An imitative variety of flap, expressive of greater heaviness
or clumsiness. Cf. prov. Du. #ldp, the sound of a blow or fall
(Molema); Low G. jlupps, suddenly (Berghaus).

FLORAL, pertaining to flowers. (L.) Late. In Johnson’s Dict.
=L. fldralis, belonging to Flora.—L. Flora, goddess of flowers;
mentioned in Shak. Wint. Ta. iv. 4. 2.—L. flér-, stem of flds, a
flower; cf. flér-ére, to flourish, See Flower. Der. flor-esc-ence
(from L. florescere, to blossom) ; flor-et; jlori-culture, -fer-ous, -form,
fior-ist; also flor-id, q. v., florin, q. Vv.

FLORID, abounding in flowers, red. (L.) In Milton, P.L. iv.

278. [Directly from Latin; the OF. floride means ‘lively.’]—L.
floridus, abounding with flowers. = L. fléri-, decl. stem of fds, a flower.
See Flower. Der. florid-ly, -ness.

FLORIN, a coin. of Florence. (F,—Ital.—L.) ME. forin,


FLOUT


Chaucer, C. T. 12704 (c. 770). Florins were coined by Edw. III in
1337, and named after the coins of Florence, which were much

esteemed. First in 13033 spelt florens (N. E.D.).—OF. florin, ‘a

florin ;’ Cot.—TItal. fiorino (=florino), a florin; so named because it

bore a lily, the symbol of Florence. —TItal. fore, a flower; with

allusion to L. Flérentia (Florence). —L. acc. flor-em, a flower, fldr-ére,

to flourish. See Flower.

FLOSCULE, a floret of a composite flower. (L.) Botanical
and scientific. —L. flosculus, a little flower; double dimin. of lds,
a flower. See Flower. ;

FLOSS, a downy substance, untwisted silken filaments. (F.—L.)
What is now called jfoss-silk was formerly called sleave-silk; see
Nares. The term floss-silk is modern (first in 1759). Cot. gives
‘ soye flosche, sleave silk;’ whence the E. word seems to have been
borrowed. ([Cf. Ital. floscio, flaccid, soft, weak; whence floscia seta,
‘raveling or sleave silke;’ Florio. The Venetian form, according
to Wedgwood, is flosso, which exactly agrees with the E. floss.] An
adj. formation from OF. flocher, to form into ‘ flocks’ or tufts. = OF.
jioc; see Flock (2),

FLOTILLA, a little fleet. (Span.—Teut.) Merely Spanish; Bailey
gives only the form flota. Span. flotilla, a little fleet; dimin. of flota,
a fleet, cognate with OF. flote, a fleet of ships, but also a crowd of
people, a group (OF. flote de gens); see Burguy. This OF. flote,
a fem. form, is from a Teut. source. Cf. Du. vloot, a fleet, allied to
Icel. floti, (1) a raft, (2) a fleet, AS. flota,a ship. From the Teut.
base *flut-; see Float, Fleet (1). (Korting, § 3861.)

FLOTSAM, goods lost in shipwreck, and left floating on the
waves. (AF.—E.) and L.) In Blackstone’s Comment. b. i. c. 8; spelt
flotson in Blount’s Law Dict., ed. 1691. Cotgrave has: ‘a flo,
floating ; choses a flo, flotsens or flotzams.’ This is an Old Law F.
term, appearing as AF. floteson, Black Book of the Admiralty, ed.
Twiss, i. 82; which answers to OF. flotaison, a flooding of fields, F.
flott-aison, flotation, formed with suffix -esor, -aison (L. -ationem) from
the verb flotter, to float; which is of Teut. origin (above).

FLOUNCKH (1), to plunge about. (Scand.) ‘After his horse had
flounced and floundered with his heeles;’ Holland, tr. of Ammianus,
p-77 (R.). ‘Alexander flounced,.. into the floudde;’ Udall, tr. of
Erasmus, Apophthegmes (1542), p. 183, b (N.E. D.). Of imitative
origin; Cf. Swed. dial. flunsa, to dip, plunge, to fall into water with
a plunge (Rietz); MSwed. flunsa, to plunge, particularly used of
the dipping of a piece of bread into gravy (Ihre); Norw. fluns,
violent and unusual treatment (Ross). See Flounder (1). ;

FLOUNCKEH (2), a plaited border on a dress. (F.—L.) ‘To
change a flounce;’ Pope, Rape of the Lock, ii. 100. ‘ Farthingales
and flounces,’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Mons. Thomas, iii. 2.3. Made,
by change of r to /, from ME. frounce, a plait, wrinkle; P. Plowman,
B. xiii. 318 ; Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. i. pr.2,1.20. We also have
frounced=frizzled and curled, in Milton, Il Pens. 123; cf. Spenser,
F.Q.i. 4. 14.—OF. froncer, fronser, ‘to gather, plait, fold, wrinkle;
fronser le front, to frown or knit the brows; Cot. B. Perhaps from
Late L. */rontiare, to wrinkle the forehead; not found, but regularly
formed from fronti-, decl. stem of frons, the forehead. See Front,
and Frounce. (Korting, § 4009.)

FLOUNDER (1), to flounce about. (Scand.) See quotation
under Flounce (1); also in Beaum. and Fletcher, Woman’s Prize,
ii. 6. 30. Of imitative origin; from Norw. flundra, to sprawl, to
flounder (Ross). Cf. Norw. fluna, to sprawl, struggle; Du. flodderen,
to dangle, flap, splash through the mire ; Swed. fladdra, to flutter.

FLOUNDER (2), the name of a fish. (F.—Scand.) Flounder-
like occurs in Massinger, Renegado, Act iii. sc. 1 (Mustapha’s 5th
speech). Flounder is in Beaum. and Fletcher, Mons. Thomas, ii. 3 ;
and in John Dennis, Secrets of Angling (ab. A.D. 1613), in Arber’s
Eng. Garner, i. 171. ME. floundre, Expeditions of Earl of Derby,
1390-3, Camden Soc.; p. 159, 1. 25.—OF. flondre (Normandy). =
Swed. jlundra, a flounder ; Dan. flynder; EF ries. flunder ; Icel. flydra.
Prob. allied to Norw. jlindra, a thin chip or slice, EFries. jlidder,
a flat fish; G. fladen, a flat cake. See Flawn.

FLOUR, the finer part of meal. (F.—L.) ‘Fyne flowre of whete;’
Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 11; also spelt flower, with which
it is identical. ME. flour of whete, Early E. Psalter, Ps. 80. 17 (81.
16).—OF. flour, F. fleur de farine, ‘flower, or the finest meal;’ Cot.
See Flower.

FLOURISH, to biossom, thrive. (F.—L.) ME. florisshen;
Prompt. Pary. p. 167; Wyclif, Ps. Ixxxix. 6.—OF. floriss-, base of
pres. pt. of florir, to flourish.—Folk-L. *flrire, for L. florére, to
flower; cf. L. jldrescere, inceptive form of fldrére, to flower, ©
bloom. =L. fldr-, stem of flés, a flower. See Flower. Der. flourish,
sb., -t2g. :

FLOUT, to mock. (F.) A peculiar use of flute, used as a verb;
Shak. Temp. iii. 2. 130. ME. flouten, to play the flute ; floute, a flute,
Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, 1223. From French; see Flute. Cf. MDu.


FLOW


fluyten, to play the flute, also to jeer, to impose upon; now spelt
fluiten (Oudemans) ; MDn. jluyt (Du. fluit), a flute. Der. flout, sb.
. FLOW, to stream, glide. (E.) ME. flowen (not very common),
Chaucer, Troil. iii, 1758. AS. fldwan, Grein, i. 306.4-Du. vloeijen ;
Icel. flda, to boil milk, to flood. Teut. base */1d-; cognate with Gk.
mAw-ew (for rAwF-ev), to float. Further allied to Gk. mAéew (for
mAéF-ev), to sail, L. plu-ere, to rain; and therefore distinct from
L. fluere, to flow. See Flood. Der. flow, sb.,-ing; also flood, q.v.

FLOWER, a bloom, blossom. (F.—L.) ME. flour, Chaucer,
C. T. 4; Havelok, 2917.—OF. flour, flor (F. fleur).=—L. florem, acc.
of flds, a flower; cf. florére, to bloom, cognate with E. blow, to bloom.
See Blow (2). Der. flower-y, -et; also flor-id, -al, -in; flos-cule,

ourish, q.v. Doublet, flour, q.v.

FLUCTUATE, to waver. (L.) In Milton, P. L. ix. 668; and
in Blount’s Gloss., 1656, 1681. —L. fluctudtus, pp. of fluctudre, to float
about.—L. fluctus, a wave.—L. fluctus, old pp. of fluere, to flow; see
Fluent. Der. fluctu-at-ion.

FLUE (1), an air-passage, chimney-pipe. (F.—L.) Evelyn speaks
of ‘chimney jiwes;’ Diary, Aug. 9, 1654. |Phaer (tr. of Virgil, x.
209) translates concha, the sea-shell trumpet of the Tritons, by
‘wrinckly wreathed flue’ (R.); but this is a misprint for flute.]
Prob. from ME. jluen, to flow; as the pipe conducts the flow of the
smoke ;. ‘to flue, flwere;’ Cath. Angl. (1483).—OF. flue, a flowing;
Jluer, to flow.—L. fluere, to flow. '@ So also Du. vloei-pijp, a ven-
tilating shaft, from Du. vloeijen, to flow, cognate with E. flow; see
Flow. But L. fre is quite distinct from E. flow.

FLUE (2), light floating down. (E.?) In Johnson’s Dict.,
explained as ‘soft down or fur.’ Also called fluff. Prob. of E.
origin. Perhaps a derivative of *fug-, weak grade of the verb to
fly; see Fly (1). We find the exact equivalent in Norw. fiz, flue
(Ross); EFries. fliig, flog, flue; Low G. flog, flue. Cf. G. flug, flight.

FLUENT, flowing, eloquent. (L.) Used in the sense of ‘copious?
in Shak. Hen. V, iii. 7. 36.—L. fluentem, acc. of pres. pt. of fluere, to
flow. Cf. Gk. pdvew, to swell, overflow, dvapAvew, to spout up ;
see Curtius,i. 375. Der. fluent-ly, fluenc-y; from same source, flu-id,
q.v., flu-or, q.Vv., flux, q.v., fluctuate, q.v.; also af-flu-ence, con-flux,
de-flux-ion, ef-flux, in-flux, re-flux, 8c.

FLUID, liquid. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. L. vi. 349; Bacon, Nat.
Hist., sect. 68.—OF. fluide; Cot.—L. fluidus, flowing, liquid. =
L. fluere, to flow; see Fluent. Der. fluid-i-ty, -ness.

FLUKE (1), a flounder, kind of fish. (E.) ME. fluke, Morte
Arthure, ed. Brock, 1088. AS. fldc, gloss to L. platissa, a plaice ;
fElfric’s Colloquy.-+-Icel. loki, a kind of halibut. From *#dk, 2nd
grade of a Teut. base *ffak-, which appears in G. flach, flat.

FLUKE (2), part of an anchor. (E.) . In Kersey’s Dict., ed.
1715. ‘Flouke of an anchor;’ Phillips (1658). Also spelt flook.
Apparently the same word as fluke (1), applied to the flattened end
of the hook. Apparently distinct from G. flunke, the fluke of an
anchor; and from Icel. akkerisfleinn, Dan. ankerflig, Swed. ankarfly,
G. ankerfliigel, the fluke of an anchor.

FLUMMERY, a light kind of food. (W.) ‘Flummery, a whole-
some jelly made of oatmeal ;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.— W. Ilymru,
llymruwd, flummery, sour oatmeal boiled and jellied.=W. Jymus,
sharp, tart.

FLUNKEY, a footman. (F.—OHG.) In Burns, Twa Dogs,
1.54. Its origin is clearly due to F. flanquer, to flank ; it seems to
be put for flanker. ‘ Flanquer, to flanke, run along by the side of;
to defend, support, or fence; to be at ones elbow for a help at need;’
Cot. See Flank.

FLUOR, FLUOR-SPAR, a mineral. (L.) Latinised from
G. fluss, a flowing, fusion ; a term applied by G. Agricola (in 1546)
to minerals used as fluxes in smelting. The L. fluor (lit. a flowing)
was formerly in use as a term in alchemy and chemistry. ‘Fluor, a
flux, course, or stream;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.—L. fluere, to flow ;
see Fluent.

FLURRY, agitation, hurry. (E.) ‘The boat was overset by
a sudden flurry [gust of wind] from the North;’ Swift, Voyage to
Lilliput; c. 1. And see Rich. Dict. From flurr, to whir (N. E. D.);
prov. E. flurr, to ruffle, to disarrange (E. D. D.); of imitative origin.
Cf. Norw. flurutt, rough, shaggy, disordered (Aasen); Swed. dial. fur,
disordered hair, whim, caprice; flurig, disordered; Norw. jflura, to
be in disorder (Ross).

FLUSH (1), to flow swiftly. (E.) ‘ The swift recourse of flushing
blood ;’ Spenser, F. Q. iv. 6. 29. G. Douglas/uses flusch to signify
£a pool;’ prol. to Atn. vii., 1.5453 spelt f2uss in Barbour, Bruce, xiii.
20, From flush, vb., to fly up quickly, like a startled bird ; cf. flusk,
to make a whirring or fluttering sound (E.D.D.’. Apparently of
imitative origin; cf. EFries. flos/ern, flustern, to fly with a noise, to
tustle (as wind); murmur (as water). [MDu. jluysen, ‘to gush or
breake out violently’ (Hexham), Dan. dial. fuse, to gush out, are from
OF, fluir. (pres. pt. fluiss-ant), to.flow; and may be independent. ]


FOCUS


FLUSH (2), to blush, to redden. (E.) Perhaps the same word
as the above, but much influenced by Flash, and perhaps by Blush.
Shak. has flushing =redness; Hamlet, i. 2. 158. ME. flushen, to
redden, as in ‘ flush for anger;’ Rich. the Redeless, ed. Skeat, ii. 166.
Cf. Swed. dial. flossa, to burn furiously, to blaze (Rietz) ; Norw. dial.
fiosa, passion, vehemence, eagerness; Aasen. And see Fluster.
Der. flush, sb., flush-ing.

FLUSH (3), level, even. (E.) Perhaps from Flush (1); as an
adj., it meant ‘in full flow;’ Dampier has: ‘Small brooks... that
run flush into the sea;’ Voy. i. 393. Hence, even or level, likea stream
when running full.

FLUSH (4), a term at cards; a hand containing a prescribed
number of cards of the same suit is ‘a flush.’ (F.—L.) ‘He facithe
owte at a flusshe, with shewe, take all!’ Skelton, Speke Parrot, 1. 424.
=F. flux, ‘a flowing, .. a flux,.. also, a flush at cardes;’ Cot.=L.
jiuxus, a flowing ; from the pp. stem of fluere, to flow; see Fluent
and Flux.

FLUSTHER, to heat with drinking, confuse. (Scand.) See Shak.
Oth. ii. 3. 60. Also flowster (Yks., Som.), E.D.D. Cf. Icel. faustra,
to be flustered; flaustr, sb., fluster, hurry. Allied to EFries.
jlostern, flustern, to rustle (as wind). Der. luster, sb.

FLUTE, a musical pipe. (F.) ME. floiten, flouten, to play
the flute; Chaucer, C. T. 91. The sb. flute is in North’s Plutarch,
p- 763 (R.). OF. fleute, flaute, flehute, flahute (Supp. to Godefroy) ;
fleute (Cot.), a flute; flauter, to play the flute. Cf. mod. Prov. flahuto,
flavuto, flaguto, a flute (Mistral). Prob. of imitative origin; the /-
may have been suggested by L. flare, to blow, cognate with E. blow;
see Blow (1). Der. flageolet, q.v.; and see flout.

FLUTTER, to flap the wings. (E.) ME. floteren, to fluctuate,
float about ; Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iii. pr. 11, 1. 156; Wyclif,
Isa. xxix. 9. AS. flotorian, to float about (fluctibus ferri) ; Gloss. to
Prudentius, p. 150, 1. 1; cf. AS. flot, the sea; flota, a ship. —AS.
fiot- (Teut. *flut-), weak grade of figotan, to float. B. Thus the orig.
sense was to fluctuate, hover on the waves; and the form of the
word is due to Float. The word was afterwards applied to other
vibratory motions, esp. to the flapping of wings; cf. Low G. fluttern,
flutter, flit about, Bremen Worterbuch, i. 431, which is closely allied
to flit; cf. prov. E. flittermouse, a bat; also EFries. fluttern, to fly
noisily; Norw. flo¢ra, to swim with difficulty (Ross). See Flit,
which is likewise a derivative of Teut. *flut-.

FLU VIATILE, belonging to ariver. (F.—L.) In Bailey’s Dict.,
vol. ii (1731). —F. fluviatile. = L. fluuiatilis, —L. fluuius, a tiver.—L.
Jluere, to flow.

FLUX, a flowing, a disease. (F.—L.) ME. flux, P. Plowman,
C. vii. 161; xxii. 46.—OF. flux, ‘a flowing, flux ;’ Cot. —L. fluxus,
a flowing; from the pp. of fluere, to flow; see Fluent. Der. flux-
ible, -at-ion, -ion; and see flush (4).

FLY (1), to float or move in air. (E.) ME. flegen, fleyen, flizen;
pt. t. he flew, Chaucer, C. T. 15423 (B 4607). AS. fléogan, pt. t.
flgah; Grein, i. 303.4-Du. vliegen; Icel. fljiga; Dan. flyve; Swed.
Jiyga; G. fliegen. B. Teut. type *feugan-, pt. t. *faug; pp. “flug-
anoz. Cf. L. pluma, a feather, wing; see Plume. @ Not allied to
flee, but early confused with it. Der. fly, sb.=AS. fléoge (Grein) ;
fiy-boat, fly-blown, -catcher, ~fishing, -leaf, -wheel, -ing-fish, fli-er ; also
flight =AS. flyht, Grein, i. 306; flight-y, -il-y, -i-ness.

FLY (2), a vehicle. (E.) Applied in 1708 to a stage-coach, to
express its swiftness of motion; this use is obsolete. Also the name
of a light vehicle, introduced at Brighton in 1816, and at first drawn
by men. ‘A nouvelle kind of four-wheeled vehicles, drawn by a man
and an assistant, are very accommodating to visitors. They are
denominated Flys;’ Wright’s Brighton Ambulator (1818); where
the date 1816 is given.

FOAL, the young of a mare. (E.) ME. fole, P. Plowman, B. xi.
335. AS. fola, Matt. xxi. 2.4-Du. veulen; Icel. foli; Swed. fale;
Goth. fula; G. fohlen. Tent. type *fulon-, m. Cognate with L.
pullus, the young of an animal; Gk, m@Aos, a foal. Der. jilly,.


219


aie ;
“FOAM, froth, spume. (E.) ME. fome, Chaucer, C. T. 16032
(G 564). AS. fam, Grein, i. 267.4Proy. G. faim; OHG, feim.
Teut. type *faimo-. Cognate with Russ. piena, foam; Skt. phena,
foam; and prob. with L. spwima (<*spoima), foam, and L. pum-ex,
pumice. Cf. Spume. Der. foam, verb. : i

FOB (1), a pocket for a watch. (O. Low G.) In Hudibras, pt.
iii. c. 1, 1. 107. An O. Low G. word, not preserved otherwise than
in the cognate prov. HG. (Prussian) fuppe, a pocket, which is cited
in the Bremen Worterbuch, i. 437. The dimin. fob-ke, a pocket,
is recorded by Berghaus.

FOB (2), to cheat, deceive, take in. (Low G.) Also ¢o fob off, to
put off; Shak. Cor. i. 1.97; and see E.D.D.—Low G. foppen, to
befool (Berghaus) ; G. foppen, to jeer, banter.


FOCUS, a point where rays of light meet. (L.) In Kersey, ed.


FODDER


1715. First in 1656.—L. focus, a hearth; hence technically used as
a centre of fire. Der. foc-al.

FODDER, food for cattle. (E.) ME. fodder, Chaucer, C. T.
3866 (A 3868). AS. fodor, foddor, foddur, Grein, i. 334; an extended
form from féda, food.+-Du. voeder ; Icel. fodr; Dan. and Swed. foder ;
G, futter. Teut. type *fodrom, n. See Food. Der. fodder, verb.

FOE, an enemy. (E.) ME. fo, foo; Chaucer, C. T. 63. AS. fah,
Jag, fa; Grein, i. 266. Teut. type *faihoz, m.; Idg. type * poigos,
whence also Irish oech, a foe, with loss of p. From the weak grade
*pig- we have Gk. mix-pés, bitter, Lith. pik-tas, unkind. Brugmann,
i. § 646. Der. foe-man.

FOETUS; see Fetus.

FOG, a thick mist. (Scand.) In Shak. Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. go.
See N.E.D., where it is shown that the earliest sense of fog was
coarse or rank winter-grass; see Early Eng. Allit. Poems, B. 1683,
where we read of Nebuchadnezzar, that ‘fogge was his mete.’ It

also meant ‘moss;* and hence the adj. foggy, covered with rank

grass, mossy, marshy, damp; whence fog, sb., damp, as a back-

formation. Norw. fogg, long-strawed, weak, scattered grass in a

moist hollow (Ross). Der. fogg-y, fogg-i-ness, fog-bank.

FOIBLHE, a weak point in character. (F.—L.) In Dryden,
Marriage a la Mode, iii. 1. F. foible, feeble; see Feeble.

FOIL (1), to disappoint, defeat. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. v.
Il. 33,foyle=to cover with dirt, to trample under foot. So yfoiled=
trampled under foot; King Alisaunder, 2712. Corrupted from OF.
Jouler, perhaps by the influence of ME. /ylen, to render foul. —OF.
Jfouler, ‘to tread, stampe, or trample on, ..to hurt, press, oppress,
foyle, overcharge extremely ;’ Cot.—Late L. fullare, folare, to full
cloth.eL. fullo, a fuller. See Fuller. Der. foil, sb., a blunt
sword, so called because it could only foil or check, not kill; (in
wrestling, a throw not resulting in a flat fall, and so incomplete,
was called a foil); see Much Ado, vy. 2.13; also foil, a defeat;
Ten VL, 'V..3. 23.

FOIL (2), a set-off, in the setting of a gem. (F.—L.) In Hamlet,
v. 2. 266.—AF. foille, a leaf; Stat. Realm, i. 219; MF. fueille, ‘a
leaf; . . . also the foyle of precious stones;” Cot.—L. folia, pl. of
JSolium, a leaf; afterwards used as a fem. sing.; see Foliage.

FOI, to thrust or lunge with a sword. (F.—L.) Obsolete. In
Chaucer, C. T. 1654; and in Shak. Merry Wives, ii. 3. 24. Lit. ‘to
thrust with an eel-spear.’ = OF. foine, foisne, an eel-spear. = L. fuscina,
a three-pronged spear, trident (Littré).

FOISON, plenty, abundance. (F.—L.) Obsolete; but in Shak.
‘Temp. ii. 1. 163; Chaucer, C. T. 4924 (B 504).—OF. foison,
‘abundance ;’ Cot.=—Folk-L. fusidnem, with short u; for L. fusidnem,
acc. of fusio, a pouring out, hence, profusion; allied to fusus, pp. of
Jundere, to pour; see F'use (1),

FOIST, to intrude surreptitiously, orig. to palm or put off.
(MDu.) In Shak. Sonnet 123, 1.6. The sb. foist is a trick: ‘Put
not your foists upon me; I shall scent them ;’ Ben Jonson, The Fox,
Act iii (last speech but 21). To foist was a term in dice-play, and
meant to palm (or conceal in the fist), to introduce so as to fall as
required ; see Ascham, Toxophilus, ed. Arber, p. 54, and quotations
in N.E. D. = Du. vuisten, to take in the fist or hand (N. E. D.). —Du.
vuist, the fist; cognate with E. Fist. Cf. Low G. /iistjen, to take
in the fst (Low G. fuust) ; spelt viisten (and vist) in Liibben.

FOLD (1), to double together, wrap up. (E.) ME. folden;
P. Plowman, B. xvii. 145, 176. OMerc. faldan; AS. fealdan,
Grein, i. 286.4-Dan. folde; Swed. falla; Icel. falda; Goth. falthan ;
G. falten. B. Teut. type *falthan-. Allied to Gk. &:-rAdovos, doubled;
mAaooev (for *nAdt-yev), to form, mould; Skt. puta-, a fold
(Macdonell). See Plaster. Der. fold, sb., ME. fold, a plait; -fold,
in composition, as in two-fold, &c.

_FOLD(2). (E), Theword fold, used as asb., in the sense ofsheep-fold,

is not in any way allied to the verb ¢o fold. It occurs as AS. fald, in

John, x. 1; but this is contracted from an older form falod, also spelt
Salud, faled (Sweet, O.E. Texts). Allied words are Du. vaalt, Low G.
Jfaal, E¥ ries. folt, fold, a dung-pit ; Dan. fold, a sheep-pen (Franck).
_ FOLIAGE, a cluster of leaves. (F.—L.) ‘ Foliage, branching
_ work in painting or tapestry; also leafiness;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed.

1674. A F. word, but modified by the L. foli-wm, a leaf; cf. foliation,
in Sir T. Browne, Cyrus Garden, c. 3. § 11; foliate, in Bacon, Nat.
Hist. § 293. — MF. fueillage, ‘branched work, in painting or tapestry ;’
Cot.— MF. fueille, a leaf.—L. folia, pl. of folium, a leaf; later used
as a fem. sing.+-Gk. vAdov, a leaf. See Curtius, i. 380. Der.
foliag-ed; also (from L. folium) foli-ate, -at-ed, -at-ion, -fer-ous; also
folio, from the phr. in folio, where fold is the ablative case.

FOLK, a crowd of people. (E.) ME. folk; Chaucer, C. T: 2830
(A 2828). AS. fole; Grein.4Icel. folk; Dan. and Swed. folk; Du.
volk; G.volk. Teut. type *folkom,neut. @ Lithuan. pulkas, a crowd,
Russ. polk’, an army, were prob. borrowed from Teutonic at a very
early date. Der. folk-lore,


220


FOP

FOLLICLE, a gland, seed-vessel. (F.—L.) ‘Follicle, a little
bag, purse, or bladder;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—F. follicule,
‘a little bag, powch, husk;’ Cot.=—L. folliculus, a little bag, dimin.
of follis, a pair of bellows, kind of bag.

FOLLOW, to go after. (E.) ME. folwen, folowen, Chaucer,
C. T. 3260; P. Plowman, B. vi. 2. [The w is due to the AS. g.]
AS. folgian, John, x. 27. We also find AS. fylegan, fylgian, fyligan ;
Grein, 1. 360.4+Du,. volgen; Icel. fylgja; Dan. folge; Swed. filja;
G. folgen. So also OFries. folgia, fulia, OSax. folgén. B. We also
find AS. fulgangan (pt. t. ful-éode), with the same sense, but derived
from AS. ful, full, and gangan, to go; and, in like manner, OHG.
follegan. Wence it is probable that the original sense was ‘to go
(or be) in full numbers,’ to go in a crowd, to accompany; and that
it is a derivative of Teut. *fulloz, full. See Full. Cf. AS. fylstan,
to assist, fultum, assistance; both derivatives of AS. full, full. Der.
follow-ing, follow-er.

FOLLY, foolishness. (F.—L.) ME. folie (with one 7); Laya-
mon, later text, 3024.=OF. folie, folly.—OF. fol, a fool; see Fool.
FOMENT, to bathe with warm water, heat, encourage. (F.—L.)
‘Which bruit [rumour] was cunningly fomented;’ Bacon, Life of
Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 22, 1. 28.—MF. fomenter, ‘to foment ;’
Cot.=—L. fomentare.=L. fomentum, contr. from *fouimentum, a warm
application, lotion. —L. fouére, to warm; of unknown origin. Dery
foment-er, -at-ion. ;
FOND, foolish. (E.) ME. fond, but more commonly jonned,
Wyclif, Exod. xviii. 18. Fonned is the pp. of the verb fonnen, to act.
foolishly ; thus thou fonnist =thou art foolish; Coventry Myst. p. 36.
Fonnen is formed from the sb. fon, a fool; of which the fuller form
fonne is in Chaucer, C. T. 4087 (A 4089). Prob. of Fries. origin,
as the sb. answers to EFries. fone, fon, a maid, girl, weakling,
simpleton (Koolman), ‘This form has a large number of variants,
as OF ries. famne, fomne, foune, fone, and appears to be ultimately the
same word as AS. fwmne, Icel. feima, a virgin. See Notes on
E. Etym., p. 102. Der. fond-ly, -ness; also fond-le, frequentative
verb, to caress, used by‘Swift and Gay; also fond-ling (with dimin.

suffix -ling =-14-ing), Shak. Venus and Adonis, 229.

FONT (1), a basin of water for baptism. (L.) In very early use.
AS. font, fant, Allfric’s Hom, i. 422.—L. fontem, acc. of fons, a fount;
see Fount.

FONT (2), FOUNT, an assortment of types. (F.—L.) ‘ Font, a
cast or complete set of printing-letters;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. =F. fonte,
“a casting of metals;’ Cot.—F. fondre, to cast. See Found (2).

FOOD, provisions, what one eats. (E.) ME. fode, P. Plowman,
B. vi. 271. AS. foda, AZIf. Hom. ii. 396, Cf. Icel. fedi, feda, food;
Dan. fode; Swed. foda. [In English, the verb /édan, to feed, is
derived from the sb. foda, food; not vice versa.] PB. From AS. */od-,
strong grade of AS. *fad-, corresponding to Gk, mar- in nar-éeo@at, to
feed, From the Idg. root *pa-, to feed; whence L. pa-nis, bread, pa-
bulum, food, and pa-scere, to feed. See Pasture. Der. feed, q.v.;
Sodder, q. Vv.

FOOL (:), a silly person, jester. (F.—L.) ME. fol; Layamon
(later text), 1442. — OF. fol (F. fou), a fool. = L. foll-em, acc. of follis,
a pair of bellows, wind-bag ; pl. follés, puffed cheeks ; whence the term.
was easily transferred to a jester, as in Late L. follis, a fool. Perhaps,
allied to Ball (1). Der. fool-ish, -er-y ; -hardy=ME. folherdi, Ancren
Riwle, p. 62 (see hardy) ; -hardi-ness; fools-cap, paper so called from
the water-mark of a fool’s cap and bells used by old paper-makers ;
also folly, q. v-

FOOL (2), a dish of crushed fruit, &c. (F.—L.) From the sb.
above; named like zrifle. Florio has: ‘ Mantiglia,a kind of clouted
creame, called a foole or a trifle in English.’

FOOT, the extremity of an animal below the ankle. (E.) ME. fot
foot; pl. fet, feet; Chaucer, C. T. 474, 475 (A 472-3). AS. fot, pl. fet,
Grein.-+ Du. voet; Icel. fotr ; Dan. fod; Swed, fot; Goth. fotus; G.
fuss. Teut. type *fot (consonant stem), corresponding to Idg. type
*pod, with the variants *pod, *ped. Cf. L. pés, foot, gen, ped-is; Gk.
mous, gen. 708-ds; Skt. pad, foot (gen, pad-as). Cf. Fetter, Fetlock,
Fetch. Brugmann, i. § 578. Der. foot, verb; foot-ball (1424), -boy,
-bridge, ~fall, -guard, -hold, -man, -mark, -pad, -passenger, -rot, -rule,
-soldier, -sore, -stalk, -stall, -step; also foot-ing, -less; also fetter, q, Vv.
From the same source, ped-al, -estal, -estrian, -icle, bi-ped, quadru-ped,
exped-ite, im-pede, centi-pede, &c.

FOOTY, paltry, insignificant. (E.) First in 1752; a variant of
the older foughty, musty (N.E.D.). ‘A mustie and foughtie taste in
the wine;’ Surflet, Countrie Farme, vi. 2. 731 (1600). From an AS.
form *fuhtig; answering to Du. vochtig, Dan. fugtig, Swed. fuktig,
damp; from AS. ,uht, damp, moist. Cf. G. feucht,damp. From
Teut. base *fewk-, as in Icel. fjuika, to drift as snow or dust (Franck),

FOP, a coxcomb, dandy. (E.) Shak, has fops, K. Lear, i. 2. 14;
fopped. (or fobbed) =befooled, Oth. iv. 2. 197; foppish, K. Lear, i. 4,
182; foppery, id. i. 2, 128. ME. foppe, a foolish fellow, Prompts


FOR


‘Parv.; fop, Cov. Mysteries, p. 295; also fobbe, P. Plowman, C. iii.
193. (Notin AS.) Cf. EFries. foppen, to jeer, banter; Du. foppen,
to cheat, mock, prate; fopper, a wag ; fopperij, cheating (=E. foppery);
Low G. fopp, a lout ; foppen, to befool (Berghaus). Der. /opp-ish,
-ish-ness, -er-y, fop-ling. Cf. fob (2).

FOR (1), in the place of. (E.) The use of for as a conj. is due to
such phrases as AS. for-pam-pe, for-py=on account of; the orig. use
is prepositional. AS. for, for; also, before that; the same word as
AS, fore, before that, for; Du, voor, for, before, from; Icel. fyrir,
before, for; Dan. for, for; for, adv. before; Swed. for, before, for ;
G. vor, before; fur, for; Goth. faura, before, for.--L. prd, before ;
Gk. mpd, related to mapa; Skt. pra, before, away. See Fore; and
see below. Der. for-as-much, for-ever.

FOR- (2), only in composition. (E.) For-, as a prefix to verbs,
has usually an intensive force, or preserves something of the sense of
from, to which it is related. The forms are: AS. /or-, Icel. for-,
Dan. for-, Swed. fér-, Du. and G. ver-, Goth. fra- (rarely fair-) Skt.
para. The Skt. para is an old instrumental sing. of para-, far;
perhaps the orig. sense was ‘away;” see From. B. The derived
verbs are for-bear, for-bid, for-fend, for-go (spelt forego), for-get, for-
give, for-lorn, for-sake, for-swear. @ It is distinct from fore-, though
ultimately related to it ; see Fore.

FOR- (3), only in composition. (F.—L.) In forclose (misspelt
foreclose) and forfeit, the prefix is French. See those words.

FORAGE, fodder, chiefly as obtained by pillage. (F.—Low L.—
Teut.) ME, forage, Chaucer, C. T. 9296 (E.'1422).—OF. fourage,
forage, pillage. = OF. forrer, to forage. OF. forre, fuerre (F. feurre),
fodder, straw. Low L.fodrum, a Latinised form of Teut. *fodrom,
the same as E, fodder; see Fodder. Der. forage, verb; forag-er ;
also foray, sometimes spelt forray, a Lowland Scotch form coined
from ME. forrier, forreyer, a forager.— OF. forrier, a forager.—OF.
forrer, to forage (above). Forray occurs in Barbour’s Bruce both as
sb. and verb; see bk. ii. 1. 281, xv. 511.

FORAMINATED, having small perforations, (L.) Modern
and scientific.—L. fordmin-, stem of foramen, a hole bored. =—L.
forare, cognate with E, Bore, q. v.

FORAY, FORRAY, a raid for foraging; see Forage.

FORBEAR (1), to hold away from, abstain from. (E.) ME.
forberen, Chaucer, C. T. 887 (A 885). AS. forberan ; Grein, i. 316.—
AS. for-, prefix; and beran, to bear. See For- (2) and Bear.
Der. forbearing ; -ance, a hybrid word, with F. suffix, K. Lear,
2S 2.

FORBEAR (2), an ancestor. (E.) Orig. Lowl. Scotch. ‘ His
Jorbearis .. of hale lynage;’? Wallace, i. 21. Lit. fore-beér, one who
is (or exists) previously ; from fore, before ; and the verb ¢o be. In
Montgomery’s Poems (Sc. Text Soc.), p. 211, the pl. forbe-ars rhymes
with le-ars (liars), Cf. G. vorweser, a predecessor ; from vor, before,
and wesen, to be.

FORBID, to bid away from, prohibit. (E.) ME. /orbeden,
Chaucer, C. T. 12577 (C 643). AS. forbéodan ; Grein, i. 316.—AS.
for-, prefix; and béodan,to bid,command, See For- (2) and Bid.
Cf. Du. verbieden; Goth. faurbiudan; Dan. forbyde; Swed. forbjuda ;
G. verbieten. Der. forbidd-en, pp. ; forbidd-ing.

FORCE (1), strength, power. (F.—L.) ME. force, fors, Chaucer,
C. T. 7094 (D 1512); Will. of Palerne, 1217. —OF. force. — Late L.
fortia, strength.=L. forti-s, strong; older form forctis. Allied to
Skt. brhant-, large, great; andto E. Borough. Brugmann, i. §§ 566,
756. Der.,force, verb; force-ful, -ful-ly; forc-ible, -ibl-y, -ible-ness;
Jorce-less, forc-ing, force-pump. Also fort, fort-i-tude, fort-ress, &c.

FORCKH (2), to stuff fowls, &c. (F.—L.) A corruption of farce.
‘ Farced, crammed, stuffed with a farce;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.
‘ Farce, in cookery, a compound made of several meats and herbs ;’
id. ME. farsen. ‘Farse the catte within als thu farses a gos’
[goose]; Reliq. Antique, i. 51.—F. farcer, to stuff; see Farce.
Der. force-meat, a corruption of farce-meat or farced-meat.

FORCE (3), FOSS, a waterfall. (Scand.) A Northern word, as
in Stock Gill Force, &c. —Dan. fos; Norw. foss; Icel. foss, formerly
fors, a waterfall; Swed. fors. Cf. Swed. forsa, frusa, to gush.

FORCEPS, pincers. (L.) In Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.—L. forceps,
-gen. forcipis, pincers, tongs; so called because used for holding hot
iron, &c. (Paulus Diaconus) ; for *formi-ceps.—L. formus, hot; and
stem cip-, from capere, to take, hold. Der. forcip-at-ed, forceps-like.

FORD, a passage, esp. through a river. (E.) ME. ford, also
forth; see P. Plowman, B. v. 576, and footnote. AS. ford; Grein,
i. 317.-4+G. furt, furth. Teut. type *furduz; allied to L. port-us,
a harbour, OWelsh (p)rit, W. rhyd, a ford. Also to frith (2).
Brugmann, i. § 514. B. Extended from the weak grade (*far) of AS.
faran, to fare, go; see Fare. Der. ford, vb.; -able.

_ FORE, in front, coming first. (E.) The adj. use, as in fore feet,
is uncommon; but we find fore fet=fore feet, in Will. of Palerne,
-3284, . The word is properly a prep. or ady., and in the former case


FOREJUDGE 221


is a longer form of for. AS. fore, for, before, prep.; fore, foran,
adv. See For (1).4-OHG. fora; Goth. faura. Cf. Gk. mapos, Skt.
puras, in front, pura, formerly. Der. for-m-er, q. v.; fore-m-ost, q.v.3
and used as a prefix in numerous compounds, for which see below.
Also in for-ward (=fore-ward), q.v. 4 The old comparative of
fore is fur-ther, q. v.

FORE-ARM (1), the fore part of the arm. (E.) A comparatively
modern expression ; first found in 1741. Merely made up from /ore
and arm. See Arm (1).

FORE-ARM (2), to arm beforehand. (Hybrid; E. and F.) In
Dryden, tr. of Virgil’s AXneid, vi. 1233. From fore and the verb to
arm; see Arms,

FOREBODE, to bode beforehand. (E.) In Butler, Hudibras,
pt. ii. c. 3. 172; and Dryden, tr. of Virgil’s Aneid, iii. 470. Com-
pounded of fore and bode; see Bode. Cf, Icel. fyrirboda ; Swed.
forebuda, Der. fore-bod-er, -ing, -ment.

FORECAST, to contrive beforehand.
Chaucer, C. T. 15223 (B 4407).
Cast. Der. forecast, sb., -er.
FORECASTILE, the fore part of a ship. (Hybrid; E. and L.)
‘ Forecastle of a ship, that part where the foremast stands;’ Kersey’s.
Dict., ed. 1715. Also in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ME. forcastel,
Destruction of Troy, 5657. A short deck placed in front of a ship,
above the upper deck, is so called, because it used in former times to
be much elevated, for the accommodation of archers and crossbow-
men. From /ore and castle; see Castle, § Commonly corrupted
to foc’sle or foxle.

FORECLOSE, to preclude, exclude. (F.-L.) ‘ Foreclosed,
barred, shut out, or excluded for ever;’ Blount’s Law Dict., ed. 1691;
with a reference to 33 Hen. VIII. c. 39. It should rather be spelt
forclosed. ‘He forclosed me fro all my kynsmen;’ Caxton, Four
Sons of Aymon, ch. xii. p. 289, 1. 11.—OF. forclos, pp. of forclorre,
to exclude, = OF. for-, from L. foris, outside; and clorre<L. claudere,
to shut. See Forfeit and Close. Der. forclos-ure.

FOREDATE, to date beforehand. (Hybrid; E. and¥.) Merely
a compound of fore and date. Todd gives an example from Milton,
Reason of Church Government, b. ii. See Date.

FOREFATHER, an ancestor. (E.) The pl. forfadres is in
P. Plowman, C. viii. 134, where two MSS. have forme faderes, a fuller
form. The ME. forme is the superlative of fore; see Former. Cf.
Du. voorvader ; G. vorvater; Icel. forfadir.

FOREFEND, to avert; see Forfend.

FORE-FINGER, the first of the four fingers. (E.) In Shak.
All’s Well, ii. 2. 24. ME. forefynger, Voc. p. 626, last line. From

ore and finger. So also fore-foot ; see under Fore.
FOREFRONT, the front part. (Hybrid; E. and F.) In the
Bible (A.V.), 2 Sam. xi. 15. ‘At a foyr frount;’ Wallace, bk. ix.
831. See Fore and Front.

FOREGO (1), to relinquish ; see Forgo.

FOREGO (2), to go before. (E.) Chiefly in the pres. part. fore-
going and the pp. foregone = gone before, previous; Othello, iii. 3. 428.
Cf. AS. foregangan, to go before; Grein, i. 321. Der. forego-er ; see
P. Plowman, B. ii. 187.

FOREGROUND, front part. (E.) Dryden speaks of ‘ the fore-
ground of a picture;’ see Todd’s Johnson, From fore and ground.
Cf. Du. voorgrond ; G. vorgrund.

FOREHAND, preference, advantage. (E.) Used in several
senses, and both as adj. and sb.; see Shak. Hen. V, iv. 1. 297; Troil.
i, 3. 143; Much Ado, iv. 1. 51; 2 Hen. IV, iii. 2, 52. A difficult
word; but the etymology is clearly from fore and hand. Der. fore-
hand-ed; in the phr. ‘a pretty forehanded fellow;’ Beaum. and
Fletcher, Scornful Lady, ii. 3 (last speech but 6),

FOREHEAD, the front part of the head above the eyes. (E.)
ME. forheed; Chaucer, C. T. 154. Older form forhewed (with w=
v); spelt vorheaued, Ancren Riwle, p. 18. From fore and head. Cf.
Du. voorhoofd; G. vorhaupt.

FOREIGN, out of doors, strange. (F.—L.) The insertion of
the gis unmeaning. ME. foreine, foreyne, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius,
b. ii. pr. 2, 1, 18.—OF. forain, ‘forraine, strange, alien;’ Cot.—
Folk-L. *feranus, for Late L. fordneus, applied to a canon who is
not in residence, or to a travelling pedlar.—L. fords, out of doors ;
ady. with an acc. pl. form, allied to L. pl. forés, doors; also to L.
forum, a market-place, and E, door, See Door. Der. foreign-er,
Shak. K. John, iv. 2. 172.

FOREJUDGE (1), to judge beforehand. (Hybrid; E. and F.)
In Levins. [The pp. foriugyd, cited from Fabyan, vol. ii. an, 1400:
(R.), has the prefix for-, not fore-.] Spenser has forejudgement ;
Muiopotmos, 1. 320. From fore and judge. Der. forejudge-ment.

FOREJUDGE (2), FORJUDGE, to deprive a man of a
thing by the judgment of a court. (F.—L.) Still in use as a law-
term, and quite distinct from the hybrid word fore-judge, to judge


(E. and Scand.) See
Compounded of fore and cast; see


222 FOREKNOW


beforehand. Better spelt forjudge; indeed, Blount’s Nomolexicon
(1691) has: ‘ forjudged the court, is when an officer of any court is
banished or expelled the same.’ The pp. foriugit is in the Kingis
Quair, 1. 21.—F. forjuger, ‘ to judge or condemn wrongfully, also to
disinherite, deprive, dispossess of; > Cotgrave. —OF. for-, prefix, out,
outside ; and juger, to judge. The OF. for- is short for fors<L.
foris, outside. See Foreclose, and Judge.

FOREKNOW, to know beforehand. (E.) Shak. has /fore-
knowing, Hamlet, i. 1. 134; also foreknowledge, Tw. Night, i. 5. 151.
Chaucer has forknowing ; tr. of Boethius, b. v. pr. 6, 1. 194. From
fore and know. Der. foreknow-ledge.

FORELAND, a headland, cape. (E.) In Milton, P. L. ix. 514.
ME. forlond, Gawain and Grene Knight, 1. 699. From fore and
land. Cf. Dan. forland; Du. voorland; G. vorland; Icel. forlendi,
the land between the sea and hills.

FORELOCK, the lock of hair on the forehead. (E.) In Milton,
P. L.iv. 302; Spenser, son. 70. From fore and lock.

FOREMAN, a chief man, an overseer. (E.) The expression
‘foreman of the petty jury’ occurs in The Spectator, no. 122;
and in Baret (1580), G620. From fore and man. Cf. Du. voorman,
G. vormann, the leader of a file of men; Icel. fyrirmadr, formadr.
Brugmann, i. § 518 (1).

FOREMOST, most in front. (E.) A double superlative, due to
the fact that the old form was misunderstood. a. From the base
Jore was formed the AS. superlative adj. forma, in the sense of first;
a word in common use; see Grein, i. 329. Hence the ME. forme,
also meaning ‘first;’ see Stratmann, B. A double superlative
JSormest was hence formed, as a by-form to the regular fyrmest; cf.
‘pat fyrmeste bebod,’ the first commandment; Matt. xxii. 38. This
became the ME. /ormest, both adj. and adv.; as in Will. of Palerne,
939. See examples in Stratmann. y. Lastly, this was corrupted to
foremost, by misdividing the word as for-mest instead of form-est.
Spenser has formost, F. Q. v. 7. 35. See Former. @ The Mceso-
Gothic also has frumists,a double superlative; the single superlative
being fruma, cognate with Gk. mpdpos, mpdpos, first, from mpd, before.
Brugmann, i. § 518 (1).

FORENOON, the part of the day before noon. (Hybrid; E.
and LL.) In Shak. Cor. il. 1. 78. From fore and zoon; see Noon.

FORENSIC, legal, belonging to law-courts. (L.) ‘ Forensal,
pertaining to the common-place used in pleading or in the judgment-
hall;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Forens-ic and forens-al are coined
words, formed (with suffixes -ic and -al) from L. forens-is, of or be-
longing to the forum or market-place or place of public meeting. =
L. forum, a market-place, orig. a vestibule + connected with L. forés,
doors. See Forum.

.FORE-ORDAIN, to ordain beforehand. (Hybrid; E. and F.)
See r Pet. 1. 20 (A. V.). From fore and ordain.

FOREPART, front part. (Hybrid; E. and F.) In Acts, xxvii.
41; and in Levins. From fore and part.

FORERANK, front rank. (Hybrid; E. and F.) In Shak.
Hen. V, v. 2.97. From fore and rank.

FORERUN, to run before. (E.) In Shak. L.L. L. iy. 3. 380.
From fore and run. Cf. Goth. faurrinnan, G. vorrennen. Der.
forerunn-er, Heb. vi. 20 (A. V.); cf. Icel. fyrir-rennari, forrennari.

FORESEE, to see beforehand. (E.) In Shak. Troil. v. 3. 64.
AS. foreséon; Grein, i. 322.—AS. fore, before; and séon, to see.
+Du. voorzien; G. vorsehen. See See. Der. foresight, q.v.

FORESHIP, the front part ofa ship. (E.) In Acts, xxvii. 30 (A.
V.). AS. forscip; Voc. 166.14. From fore and ship.4-Du. voorschip.

FORESHORTEN, to shorten parts that stand forward in a
picture. (E.) In Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715. From fore and shorten.
Der. foreshorten-ing.

FORESHOW, FORESHEW, to show beforehand. (E.) In
Shak. Cymb. v. 5. 473. From fore and show.

FORESIGHT, prescience. (E.) ME. foresiht, forsyghte; Prompt.
Parv. p. 171. From fore and sight. See Foresee.

FOREST, a wood, a wooded tract of land. (F.—L.) ME. forest,
King Alisaunder, 3581.—OF. forest, ‘a forrest;? Cot.—Late L.
foresta, a wood; forestis, an open space of ground over which rights
of the chase were reserved. Medieval writers oppose the forestis or
open wood to the walled-in wood or parcus (park). ‘Forestis est
ubi sunt ferze non inclusze; parcus, locus ubi sunt ferze inclusz ;’
document quoted in Brachet, q. v.=—L. foris, out of doors, abroad ;
whence /orestis, lying open. Allied to L. forés, doors; see Foreign.
Der. forest-er, contracted to forster, Chaucer, C. T. 117; and to
foster, Spenser, F.Q. iii. 1. 17.

FORESTALL, to anticipate in a transaction. (E.) ME. fore-
stallen, forstallen; P. Plowman, B. iv. 56, where we find: ‘ forstalleth
my feires’=anticipates my sales in the fair. Thus to foreséall, orig.
used as a marketing term, was to buy up goods by intercepting them
on the way. The object was, to sell again in the market at a higher


FORLORN


price; see Kersey’s Dict. From AS. forsteal, sb., obstruction, inter-
ception; see gloss. to Schmidt, A. S. Laws. In the Laws of Henry I
(Thorpe’s A. S. Laws, i. 586) we read that ‘forestel est, si quis ex
transverso incurrat, vel in via expectet et assalliat inimicum suum.’ =
AS. fore, before; and steal, a stall, the occupying of a fixed position.
See Fore and Stall.

FORETASTE, to taste beforehand. (Hybrid; E. and F.) In
Milton, P. L. ix. 929. From fore and taste. Der. foretaste, sb.

FORETELL, to prophesy. (E.) ME. foretellen; P. Plowman,
A. xi. 165. From fore and ¢ell. Der. foretell-er.

FORETHOUGHT, a thinking beforehand, care. (E.) ME. for-
thoght, Cursor Mundi, 1. 27661. (Shak. has the verb to forethink ;
Cymb. iii. 4. 171; from AS. fore-fencan.| From fore and thought.

FORETOKEN, a token beforehand. (E.) ME. foretokne; see
Gower, C. A. i. 13753 bk. i. 28123; spelt fortaken, Ormulum, 16157.
AS. foretacen; Grein, i. 322. 4 Du. voorteeken, a presage; G. vor-
zeichen. From fore and token; see Token. Der. foretoken, verb.

FORETOOTH, a front tooth. (E.) ME. foretof, pl. foretep; in
Le Bone Florence, 1609, in Ritson’s Metrical Romances, and in
P. Plowman, C. xxi. 386. AS. foretéd, pl.; Voc. 157. 30. From
fore and tooth,

FORETOP, the hair on the fore part of the head. (E.) ME.
fortop, Treatises on Popular Science, ed. Wright, p. 137, 1. 230. The
simple form zop or foppe is in P. Plowman, B. ili. 139. See Top.
Der. foretop-mast.

FOREWARN, to warn beforehand. (E.) In Shak. Wint. Ta.
iv. 4. 215. ME. for-warnen; Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 96,
1], 15. From fore and warn; see Warn.

FORFEIT, a thing forfeited or lost by misdeed. (F.—L.) Pro-
perly a pp. as in ‘So that your lif be noght forsfet;’ Gower, C. A. i.
194; bk. ii. 1039. Hence ME. verb forfeten, P. Plowman, C. xxiii.
25; and the ME. sb. forfeture, forsfaiture, Gower, C. A. ii. 153; bk.
vy. 780. = OF, forfait, forfet, forsfait, a crime punishable by fine, a fine
(Supp. to Godefroy; cf. AF. forfeit, Laws of Will. L., § 1); also pp.
of forfaire, orig. forsfaire, to trespass, transgress. = Late L. forisfactum,
a trespass, a fine; also pp. of forisfacere, to transgress, do amiss, lit.
‘to act beyond.’ = L. foris facere, lit. to do or act abroad or beyond. =
L. foris, out of doors; and facere, to do. See Foreign; and see
Fact. Der. forfeit, vb., -ure, -able; and cf. counter-feit.

FORFEND, FOREFEND, to avert, forbid. (Hybrid; E. and
F.) In Shak. Wint. Ta.iv. 4. 541. ME. forfenden, Wyclif, Job, xxxiv.
31. An extraordinary compound, due to E. for- (as in for-bid), and
fend, a familiar abbreviation of defend, just as fence (still in use) is a
familiar abbreviation of defence. See For- (2) and Fence, The
spelling forefend is bad.

FORGE, a smith’s workshop. (F.—L.) In Gower, C. A. i. 78;
bk. i. 1087 ; hence ME. forgen, to forge, Chaucer, C. T. 11951 (C 17).
- OF. forge, a forge; whence forgier, to forge. —Folk-L. *faurga <
*favrega (Schwan); for L. fabrica, a workshop, also a fabric. Cf.
Span. forja, a forge, forjar, to forge; mod. Proy. fabreja, faureja, to
forge (Mistral). Thus forge is a doublet of fabric. Der. forge, vb.,
forg-er, -er-y. See further under Fabric.

FORGET, to lose remembrance of, neglect. (E.) ME. forgeten,
forzeten; Chaucer, C.T. 1916 (A 1914). AS. forgitan; Grein, i. 324;
also forgetan (E. E. Texts). = AS. for-, prefix; and gitan,to get. See
For- (2) and Get. Cf. Du. vergeten; G. vergessen. Der. forget-ful
(which has supplanted AS. forgitol) ; -ful-ly, -ful-ness, -forget-me-not
(Palsgrave, p. 1024, 1. 1).

FORGIVE, to give away, remit. (E.) ME. forgiven (with u=v),
forziuen, for zeuen; Chaucer, C. T.8402 (E 526). AS. forgifan; Grein,
i. 323. — AS. for-, prefix; and gifan, to give. See For- (2) and Give.
Cf. Du. vergeven; Swed. forgifva, to give away, forgive; G. vergeben;
Goth. fragiban, to give, grant; Dan. tilgive, to forgive, pardon (with
prefix zil in place of for). Der. forgiv-ing, forgive-ness.

FORGO, FOREGO, to give up. (E.) The spelling forego is as
absurd as it is general; it is due to confusion with foregone, in the
sense of ‘gone before,’ from a verb forego of which the infinitive is
little used. ME. forgon, Chaucer, C. T. 8047 (E171). AS. forgan,
to pass over; ‘he forged pes hises duru’=he will pass over the
door of the house; Exod. xii, 23.—AS, for-, prefix; and gan, to go.
See For- (2) and Go. .

FORJUDGE, a better spelling of Forejudge (2), q. y.

FORK, a pronged instrument. (L.) ME. forke; the pl. forkis is
in King Alisaunder, 1191. Chaucer has ‘a forked berd’=beard,
C. T. 272 (A 270). AS. fore; Ailfric’s Homilies, i. 430.—L. furca,
a fork; of uncertain origin. Der. fork, vb., -ed, -ed-ness ; -y, -i-ness ;
also car-fax,q.v. Brugmann,i. § 605 (3). 4 The Du. vork, Icel.
Jorkr, F. fourche (whence fourch-ette) are all from L. furca.

FORLORN, quite lost, desolate, wretched. (E.) ME. forlorn,
used by Chaucer in an active sense=quite lost; C. ‘f. 11861 (F 1557).
It is the pp. of ME. forleosen, to lose entirely. AS, forloren, pp. of


FORM


forléosan, to destroy, lose utterly; Grein, i. 328.—AS. for-, prefix;


and loren, pp. of léosan, to lose, whence ME. Jorn, Chaucer, C. T.
3530. Cf. Dan. forloren, lost, used as an adj.; Swed. forlorad, pp.
of férlora, to lose wholly ; Du. verloren, pp. of verdiezen, to lose; G.
verloren, pp. of verlieren, to lose; Goth. fraliusan, tolose. See For-
(2) and Lose. Der. forlorn hope, in North’s Plutarch, p. 309 (R.),
or p. 372, ed. 1631, a vanguard; a military phrase borrowed from
MDu. de verloren hoop =the forlorn hope (of an army); Kilian. Cot-
grave has: ‘ Perdu, lost, forlorn, past hope of recovery. Enfans perdus,
perdus, or the forlorne hope of a camp, are commonly gentlemen of
companies.’ For Du. hoop, see Hope (2).

FORM, figure, appearance, shape. (F.—L.) ME. forme, King
Alisaunder, 388; whence formen, fourmen, to form, id. 5687.—OF.
forme. =L. forma, shape. = 4/ DHER, to hold, maintain ; cf. Skt. dhy,
to bear, maintain, support; dkarman, virtue, right, law, duty, character,
resemblance. Brugmann, ii. § 72. Der. form, vb.; form-al, Sir T.
More, Works, p. 125 f; -al-ly, -al-ism, -al-ist, -al-i-ty ; -at-ion, -at-ive,
cf, L. formatus, pp. of formare, to form; form-er, sb.; form-ul-a,
from L. formula, dimin. of forma; -ul-ar-y. Also con-form, de-form,
in-form, per-form, re-form, trans-form, uni-form, &c. 4 Form, a
bench, is the same word. See F. forme in Cotgrave.

FORMER, more in front, past. (E.) First in latest text of AS. Gos-
pels, Matt. xxi. 36 (ab.1160). In Shak. Jul. Czes.v.1.80. Spenser has
formerly, F. Q. ii. 12.67. a. The word is really of secondary forma-
tion, and due to the mistake of supposing the ME. formest (now
foremost) to be a single superlative instead of a double one; see this
explained under Foremost. B. Just as ME. form-est was formed
from AS. forma by adding -est to the base form-, so form-er was made
by adding -er to the same base; hence form-er is a comparative made
from the old superlative for-m-a. Cf. L. pri-m-us, first. ‘y. We may
therefore resolve for-m-er into for- ( = fore), -m-, superlative suffix, and
-er, comparative suffix. Der. former-ly.

FORMIC, pertaining to ants. (L.) First in 1671; chiefly used
of ‘formic acid.’ Short for *formic-ic.—L. formica, an ant. Brug-
mann, i. § 413 (8). Der. chloro-form.

. FORMIDABLE, causing fear. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. L. ii.
649. Fisher has formydable; Works (E.E.T.S.); Ps. 38, p. 53,
1, 27.—F. formidable, ‘fearfull ;? Cot.—L. formidabilis, terrible. = L.
Sormidare, to dread ; formido, fear. Der. formidabl-y, formidable-ness.

FORMULA, a prescribed form. (L.) In Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.
=L. formula, dimin. of forma,a form; see Form. Der. formul-
ate, -ar-y.

FORNICATE, to commit lewdness. (L.). The E. verb fornicate
is of late use, appearing in the Works of Bp. Hall (R.); and first in
1552. It was certainly developed from the sbs. fornication and forni-
cator, both in early use. Chaucer has fornicatioun, C. T. 6886
(D 1302); and fornicatour is in P. Plowman, C. iii. 191 (footnote).
These are, respectively, OF. fornication and fornicateur ; Cot.—L.
JSornicdtus, pp. of fornicari, to seek a brothel.=L. fornic-, base of
fornix, (1) a vault, an arch, (2) a brothel. Perhaps allied to Furnace;
cf, OL. fornus, L. furnus, an oven (of vaulted shape). Der. fornicat-
ion, fornicat-or, explained above.

FORSAKE, to give up, neglect. (E.) ME. forsaken, Chaucer,
C. T. 14247 (B 3431). AS. forsacan, AElfred’s tr. of Orosius, i. 12.
sect. 3. The orig. sense seems to be ‘to contend strongly against,’
to ‘ oppose.’ = AS. for-, intensive prefix ; and sacan, to contend, Exod.
ii. 13. B. This verb sacan is a strong verb, cognate with Goth. sakan,
to strive, dispute; and is represented in E. by the derived sb. sake.
Cf. Dan. forsage, to forsake; Swed. forsaka; Du. verzaken. See For-
(2) and Sake.

FORSOOTH, in truth, verily. (E.) ME. for sothe=for the truth,
verily; P. Plowman, B. iv. 2.—AS. for, for; and sdde, dat. of sdd,
truth. See Sooth.

FORSWEAR, to deny on oath, esp. falsely. (E.) ME. forsweren,
Prompt. Parv. p. 173; earlier forswerien, O. Eng. Homilies, i. 13,
1.11. AS. forswerian ; Grein, i. 332.—AS. for-, prefix ; and swerian, to
swear. See For- (2) and Swear.

FORT, a stronghold. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, i. 4. 28.—OF. fort,
“a fort, hold ;’ Cot.— Late L. fortis (domus), strong (house). = L. fortis,
strong. See Force. Der. fort-al-ice, q.v.; fort-i-fy, q.v:; fort-i-
tude, q.v.; fort-r-ess, q.v. From L. fortis we have also Ital. forte,
loud (in music), with its superl. fortissimo.

FORTALICE, a small outwork of a fort. (LateL.—L.) Rare;
see Jamieson’s Scottish Dict. Cf. OF. fortelesce, a fortress; Span.
fortaleza, — Late L. fortalitia, fortalitium. See Fortress.

FORTIFY, to make strong. (F.—L.) In Shak. K. John, iii. 4.
10.—OF. fortifier, ‘to fortifie, strengthen ;’ Cot. —Late L. fortificare.
= L. forti-, decl. stem of fortis, strong ; and fic-, from facere, to make.
See Fort, Force. Der, fortifi-er ; fortific-at-ion, from Late L. pp.
Sortificatus.

FORTITUDE, strength. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. i. 2. 154.


FOUL 223


— F. fortitude (Littré). — L. fortitido, strength; see ‘spiritus fortitudinis’
in P. Plowman, B. xix. 284.—L. fortis, strong. See Fort.
. FORTH, forward, in advance. (E.) ME. forth, Chaucer, C. T. 858
(A 856). AS. ford, adv. (common); extended from fore, before. ++ Du.
voort, forward; from voor, before; G. fort, MHG. vor?; from vor, before.
See Fore, Further. Der. forth-coming, Shak. Tam. Shrew, v. I. 96.
Also forth-with, in a poem of the 15th century called Chaucer’s Dream,
1, 1109, substituted for earlier forth mid=‘forth along with,’ O. E.
Hom, i. 117, 1. 18; cf. also ME. forthwithall, Gower, C. A. iii. 262 ;
bk. vii. 5064. | -

FORTNIGHT, a period of two weeks. (E.) ME. fourtenight,
(trisyllable), Chaucer, C. T. 931 (A 929). Written fouwrten ni3t, Rob.
of Glouc. p. 533, 1.17; 1. 11010. From ME. fourten =fourteen; and
nizt, old pl. =nights. The AS. form was féowertyne niht; Laws of Ine,
§ 55. B. Similarly, we have sennight = seven night; the phr. seofon niht
(=a week) occurs in Czedmon, ed. Grein, 1. 1349. It was usual to
reckon by zighis and winters, not by days and years; see Tacitus,
Germania, c. xi. Der. fortnight-ly.

FORTRESS, a small fort. (F.—L.) ME. fortresse, King Ali-
saunder, 2668.— OF. forteresce, a variant of fortelesce, a small fort
(Burguy). — Late L. fortalitia, a small fort. = Late L. fortis, sc. domus,
a fort. =L. fortis, strong; see Fort, Fortalice.

FORTUITOUS, depending on chance. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed, 1674. [The ME. fortuit, borrowed from OF. fortuit, occurs in
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. v. pr. 1. 1. 58, in the Camb. MS. ; see the
footnote.] Englished, by change of -us to -ows (as in arduous, strenuous,
&c.) from L. fortuitus, casual. —L. fortu-, related to forti-, decl. stem
of fors, chance (below). Der. fortuztous-ly, -ness.

FORTUNE, chance, hap. (F.—L.) In Chaucer, C. T, 1254
(A 1252); Cursor Mundi, 23719. =F. fortune. = L. fortiina. = L. forti-,
allied to forti-, decl. stem of fors, chance, orig. ‘that which is pro-
duced;’ from jfor-, weak grade of fer-, as in Latin fer-re, to bear;
cf. E. bear.=4/BHER, to bear; see Bear. See Bréal. Der.
fortun-ate, ME. fortunat, Chaucer, C. T. 14782 (B 3966), from L.
pp. fortiinatus ; -ate-ly, -ate-ness; fortune-less, -hunter, -teller; from the
same source, fortu-it-ous (above).

FORTY, four times ten. (E.) ME. fourty, Chaucer, C. T. 16829
(G1361). AS. féowertig; Grein, i. 296.—AS. féower, four; and -tig,
a suffix allied to ten; see Four and Ten.+ Du. veertig; Icel. forutiu;
Dan. fyretyve; Swed. fyratio; G. viertig; Goth. fidwortigjus. ‘The
Goth. tigjus is the pl. of tigus, a decade; cf. Gk. dexas. Der. forti-
eth, from AS. féowertigoda.

FORUM, the Roman market-place. (L.) In Holland, tr. of
Pliny, bk. xxii. c. 6. § 2.—L. forum, a market-place, place for
business; a forecourt; allied to jorés, doors; see Door. Der.
for-ensic, q. Vv.

FORWARD, adj. towards the front, (E.) ME. forward, adj. and
adv.; but rare, as the form forthward was preferred. Forward, adv.
occurs in Chaucer, C. T, Six-text, Group B, 263, in the Camb. MS.,
where the other 5 MSS. have forthward. AS. foreweard, adj.; Grein,
i. 322.— AS. fore, before; and -weard, suffix; see Toward. Der.
forwards, ME. forwardes, Maundeville, p. 61, where -es is an ady. sufhx,
orig. the sign of the gen. case (cf. Du. voorwaarts, G. vorwarts) ;
forward, verb, Shak. 1 Hen. 1V, i. 1. 333 forward-ly; forward-ness,
Cymb. iv. 2. 342.

FOSSH, a ditch. (F.—L.) In Holland, tr. of Suetonius, p. 185
(R.); ME. fos, Rob. of Glouc., 1. 179. —OF. fosse, ‘any pit or hole ;”
Cot. =L. fossa, a ditch. L. fossa, fem. of fossus, pp. of fodere, to dig.
Brugmann, i. § 166. Der. fossil, q.v.

FOSSET, a spigot ; the same as Faucet, q.v.

FOSSIL, petrified remains of an animal, obtained by digging.
(F.—L.) Formerly used in a more general sense; see Phillips’ Dict.,
ed. 1706.— OF. fossile, ‘ that may be digged;’ Cot.—L. fossilis, dug
up.—L. fossus, pp. of fodere, to dig; see Fosse. Der. fossil-ise,
Sossili-ferous.

FOSTER (1), to nourish. (E.) ME. fostren, Chaucer, C. T. 8098
(E 222). AS. fostrian, in a gloss (Leo); cf. fostring, sb., a disciple,
Pref. to St. Luke, 1. 2 (Lind. MS.).—AS. fdstor, fostur, nourishment;
Leo, p. 23; Grein, i. 335; Teut. type */dstrom, for *fod-trom, neut. ;
allied to AS. fada, food; see Food, Fodder.-+lIcel. fdsér, nursing ;
fostra, to nurse, foster ; Dan. foster, offspring ; fostre, opfostre, to rear,
bring up ; Swed, foster, embryo ; fostra, to foster. Der. foster-er ; also
(from AS. fostor) foster-brother, foster-child, foster-parent,

FOSTER (2), a forester; see Forest.

FOTHER, a load, cartload; a heavy mass. (E.) See Chaucer, Prol.
530. AS. foder,n.; A. S, Chron. an. 852 (Laud MS.).4+-MDu. voeder,
Du. voer; OHG. fuodar, G. fuder. Teut. type *fop-rom, n. From
*fop-, strong grade of *faJ-, td grasp; see Fathom. :

FOUL, dirty, unclean. (E.) ME. fow, P. Plowman, C. xix. 54-
AS. fal, Grein, i. 358.4-Du. vuil; Icel. full; Dan. fual ; Swed. ful ;
Goth. fails; G. faul, Teut. type */a-loz; cf. Icel. -fuinn, rotten ; akin


224 FOUMART


to Putrid. Brugmann, i. § 113. Der. foul-ly, -ness, -mouth-ed ;
also foul, vb.; de-jile, q.v.

FOUMART, a polecat. (E.) Lowland Se. fowmart; Jamieson.
ME. folmard, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 534; also fulmart, fulmard,
as in Stratmann, s.v. ful=foul. From AS, ful, foul, stinking; and
AS. meard, a marten. Thus it means ‘foul marten;’ see Foul and
Marten.

FOUND (1), to lay the foundation of. (F.—L.) ME. founden,
Wyclif, Heb. i. 10; P. Plowman, B. i. 64.—OF. fonder, to found. =
L. fundare.=L. fundus, foundation, base, bottom; cognate with E.
bottom; see Bottom. Andsee Fund. Der. found-er, ME. foundour,
Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 109; -r-ess; -at-ion.

FOUND (2), to cast metals. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. L. vi. 518;
and in Holland, tr. of Pliny, we find ‘famous for mettal-founding,’
b. xxxiv. c. 2; ‘the excellent founders and imageurs of old time,’ id.
c. 8 (of Deedalus); ‘the art of founderie or casting mettals for images;’
id.c. 7.— OF. fondre, ‘to melt, or cast, as metals ;’ Cot.—L. fundere,
to pour, cast metals; see Fuse (1). Der. found-er, found-r-y (= found-
er-y), -ing, font (2) or fount.

FOUNDER, to go to the bottom. (F.—L.) ME. foundren, said
of a horse falling ;’ ‘and foundred as he leep;’ Chaucer, C. T. 2689
(A 2687).—OF. fondrer, chiefly in the comp. afondrer (obsolete) and
effondrer, to fall in (still in use), as well as in the sb. fondriére, a place
to founder in, a slough, bog; see ford in Burguy, and fondriére in
Hatzfeld. The sense seems to have been ‘to sink in,’ and the deriv.
is from F. fond, the bottom of anything. = L. fundus, the bottom ; see
Found (1). @f The form of the OF. verb should rather have been
fonder; the r is intercalated, as in chanvre =chanve, hemp, from L.
cannabis; and may have been due to the influence of OF. fondre, to
melt; see Found (2). We have similar instances in E. part-r-idge,
t-r-easure, cart-r-idge, &c.

FOUNDLING, a deserted child. (E.) ME. fundeling, Will. of
Palerne, 481 ; fundling, King Horn, 228.— AS. fund-, weak grade of
jindan, to find; and -ling =-l-ing, double dimin. suffix.4-Du. vondeling ;
similarly formed. See Find.

FOUNT (1),aspring, fountain. (F.—L.) In Shak. Meas. iy. 3. 102;
and Lucrece, 850. = OF. funt, font, a fountain. = L. fontem, acc. of fons,
aspring. Brugmann; Addenda to vol.iv. Der. fountain, Spenser,
F, Q. ii. 12. 60, from OF. funtaine (F. fontaine), which from Late L.
Sontana; fountain-head; and see font (1).

FOUR, twice two. (E.) ME. feower, fower, feour, four, Layamon,
25, 194, 1902, 2092, 25395. Chaucer adds a final e, and treats it as
apl.adj. ‘ With fouré whité bolés in the trays;’ C. T. 2141 (A 2139).
AS. féower, Grein, i. 296.4-OF ries. fiower, fiuwer, fior; Icel. fjorir ;
Dan. fire; Swed. fyra; Du. vier; Goth. fidwor; OHG. jior; G. vier.+
W. pedwar; Gael. ceithir; Olrish cethir; L. quatuor; Gk. Térrapes,
técoapes; dial. micupes; Russ. chetvero; Lith. keturi; Pers. chehar; Skt.
chatvaras. Idg. type “getwer-. Der. four-fold, -foot-ed, -square; also
four-th (AS. fedrpa) ; four-teen (AS. fedwerténe) ; four-teen-th; also
JSor-ty, q.v.

FOWL, a kind of bird. (E.) In ME. it signifies ‘ bird’ generally.

ME. foul, Chaucer, C. T. 190; earlier, fugel, fowel, Layamon, 2832.
AS. fugol; Grein, i. 355.4-Du. vogel; Ivel. fugl, fogl; Dan. fugl;
Swed. fogel;. Goth. fugls; OHG. fugal; G. vogel. All from Teut.
type *fugloz, m.; certainly for *fugloz, by dissimilation ; the form
Jfluglas, pl., occurs in Matt. xiii. 32 (Rushworth gloss); flugles, gen.,
in the Erfurt glossary, 1085; and cf. flugol, adj., flying. Thus it is
from *flug-, weak grade of Teut. *fleugan-, to fly. See Fugleman
and Fly. Brugmann, i. § 491. Der. fowl-er=ME. foulere, Wyclif,
Prov. vi. 5; fowl-ing-piece.
- FOX, a cunning quadruped. (E.) ME. fox, also (Southern ME.) vox;
P. Plowman, C. xxiii. 44; Owl and Nightingale, 817. AS. fox ; Grein,
i. 334.4 Du. vos; G.fuchs. Teut. type */uhs, masc. Wealso find Icel.
foa, Goth. fauhd, fem., a vixen; Teut. type *fuhkd. Both from a base
*fuh-. A suggested connexion with Skt. puchchha-, ‘ tail,’ is doubtful.
Der. fox-hound, fox-y; also fox-glove, a flower=AS. foxes glifa,
Cockayne’s A.S. Leechdoms, iii. 327 (cf. Norw. revhandske = foxglove,
from rev, a fox, also Norw. revbjolla (fox-bell), a foxglove ; and prov.
E. fox-jingers, a fox-glove). And see vix-en.

FOY, a parting entertainment, given by (or to) a wayfarer. (Du. —
F.—L.) ‘Hoping..to give you a frendly foy;’ Howell, Letters,
vol. ii. let. 12 (1634).—MDnu. foy (Du. foot), [a] ‘ banquet given by
one at his parting from his friends ;’ Hexham. Prob. from F. voie,
a way, journey; from L. wia,a way; as suggested by Kilian. But
Franck derives it from F. foi, from L. acc. fidem; because Late L. fidés
occurs with the sense of ‘ payment.’

FRACAS, an uproar. (F.—Ital.—L.) Not in Johnson; borrowed
from mod. F. fracas, a crash, din. =F. fracasser, to shatter; borrowed
from Ital. in 15th cent. (Hatzfeld). = Ital. fracassare, to break in pieces;
whence fracasso, a crash. = Ital. fra-, prefix, from fra, prep. amongst,
short for L. infra, within; and cassare, to break. Imitated (or trans-


FRANCHISE


lated) from L. interrumpere, to break in amongst, destroy (Diez).
The vb. cassare is from L, quassdre, to shatter, intensive of quatere, to
shake. See Quash. :

FRACTION, a portion, fragment. (F.—L.) ME. fraction,
fraccion ; Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, ed. Skeat, prol. 1. 51 (or 53).
— OF. (and F.) fraction, ‘a fraction, fracture ;? Cot.=L. acc. frac-
tidnem, from nom. fractio, a breaking; cf. L. fractus, pp. of frangere, to
break (base frag-), cognate with E. break; see Break. Der. fraction-
al; also (from pp. fractus) fract-ure ; also (from base frag-), frag-ile,

.v., frag-ment, q.v. ; and (from frangere) frang-ible, q.v.

FRACTIOUS, peevish. (E.; partlyF.—L.) Not found in early
literature; it is given in Todd’s Johnson, without a quotation. A
prov. E. word, fratchous, fratchious, as if from the North. E. fratch,
to squabble, quarrel, chide with another; see E.D.D. Cf. ME,
fracchen, to creak as a cart; ‘ Fracchyn, as newe cartys;’ Prompt.
Parv. p. 175. Of imitative origin. B. But it also occurs (in 1725)
in the sense of ‘ refractory,’ as if formed from fraction, in the (obso-
lete) sense of ‘dissension;’ see N.E.D. See Fraction (above).

FRACTURE, a breakage. (F.—L.) In Minsheu; and G. Her-
bert’s Poems, Repentance, last line. OF. fracture, ‘a fracture,
breach ;? Cot.—L. fractiira, a breach.=L. fract-us, pp. of frangere,
to break; see Fraction. Der. fracture, vb.

FRAGILE, frail. (F.—L.) In Shak. Timon, v. 1. 204.—F.
fragile, ‘ fraile;’ Cot. —L. fragilis, easily broken ; from the base frag-,
to break; see Fraction. Der. fragil-i-ty. Doublet, frail, q.v.

FRAGMENT, a piece broken off. (F.—L.) In Shak. Much
Ado, i. I. 288.—F. fragment, ‘a fragment; ’ Cot.—L. fragmentum, a
piece ; formed with suffix -mentum from the base frag-, to break ; see
Fraction. Der. fragment-ar-y, -al.

FRAGRANT, sweet-smelling. (F.—L.) ‘The fragrant odor ;’
Sir T. More, Works, p. 1366 c.—F. fragrant, ‘ fragrant ;’ Cot.—L.
fragrantem, acc. of fragrans, pres. pt. of fragrare, to emit an odour.
Brugmann, i. § 665 (3). Der. fragrant-ly, fragrance.

FRAIL (1), easily broken. (F.—L.) ME. freel, frele, Wyclif,
Rom. viii. 3. Chaucer.has freletee, frailty ; C. T. 12012 (C 78). —
OF. fraile, ‘ fraile, brittle;’ Cot.—L. fragilis; see Fragile. Der.
frail-ty, -ness. ‘

FRAIL (2), a light basket for figs, &c. (F.—L.) Common in E.
dialects; see E.D.D. ME. fraiel, Wyclif, Jerem. xxiv. 2.—OF. freél,
also fleél, a basket, usually of rushes, for figs and grapes (Godefroy).
The older form is fleé/, whence freél by dissimilation. = L. flagellum,
a whip; but also a vine-shoot, whence baskets for grapes could
conveniently be made. . Verified by observing that both fleé/ and
flagellum had the peculiar sense of a certain measure of wax; thus
Godefroy has ‘ quatre fleaus de chandele de cire ;’ and Ducange, s. v.
fleolum, has ‘unum flagellum ceree, quorum sex debent ponderare
libram.’ Cf.Gk. fpayéAdcor, for flagellum, in John ii.15. (Atheneum,
Mar. 9, 1901).

FRAME, to form, construct. (E.) In Spenser, F. Q. iii. 8. 5.
ME. framien, fremien; fremen, Havelok, 441. AS. framian, to be
profitable, to avail; also fremian, fremman, to promote, effect, do;
Grein, i. 339. Lit. ‘ to further.’=—AS. fram, from, strong, excellent ;
lit. ‘ surpassing,’ or ‘ forward.’ Cf. AS. fram, prep. from, away ; see
From.-+lcel. fremja, to further; from framr, adj. forward; fram,
ady. forward ; and closely related to fra, from. PB. The AS. adj. fram,
excellent, is cognate with Icel. framr, Du. vroom, G. fromm, good ;
see Kluge. Der. frame, sb.=ME. frame, a fabric (Prompt. Parv.),
also profit, Ormulum, 961 ; cf. Icel. frami, advancement; also fram-er,
Jram-ing, frame-work.

FRAMPOLD, quarrelsome. (Low G.) Obsolete. In Shak.
Merry Wives, ii. 2. 94. Spelt frampald, frampard, and explained
as ‘ fretful, peevish, cross, forward’ in Ray, Gloss. of South-Country
Words. Allied to prov. E. rantipole, a romping child. B. The
former part of the word is explained by EFries. frante-pot, wrante-pot,
a peevish man; from EFries. franten, wranten, to be cross; MDu.
wranten, to chide, Dan. vrante, to be peevish; Dan. vranten, peevish.
Cf. also Dan. vrampet, warped; Low G. wrampachtigh, morose
(Liibben) ; Low G. frampe, a coarse, violent man (Berghaus). More
exactly, the root is supplied by MDu. wrimpen, ‘to wring the mouth,’
Hexham. Note also Lowl. Sc. frample, to disorder, and E. frump.
y. The second element, viz. -old, -ald, -art, -(p)art, may have arisen
ep EFries. pot, a pot (a term of contempt), confused with E. poll,
the head. :

FRANC, a French coin, worth about tod. (F.—G.) ME. frank,
Chaucer, C. T. 13117 (B 1377).—OF. (and F.) franc ; see Cotgrave.
Short for Francorum Rex, on a coin of 1360 (Hatzfeld); see
Frank.

FRANCHISE, freedom. (F.—G.) ME. franchise, freedom ;
Chaucer, C. T. 9861 (E 1987); Beket, 1289. Hence the verb
franchisen, fraunchisen, to render free, endow with the privileges of a
free man; P. Plowman, C. iv. 114.=OF. franchise, privileged liberty.


FRANGIBLE


= OF. franchis-, stem of parts of the verb franchir, to frank, render
free. — OF. franc, free; see Frank.

FRANGIBLE, brittle. (L.) Rare; first in 1440. In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674.— Late L. frangibilis, a coined word, from L. frang-
ere, to break. See Fraction. Der. frangibil-i-ty.

FRANION, a gay idle companion. (F.—L.) ‘ Franion, a gay
idle fellow; see Heywood’s Edw. IV, p. 45 [A. i. sc. 1]; Peele, i.
207 [Old Wives’ Tale, near beginning.]’ Halliwell. See further in
Nares; also Dodsley’s O. Plays, iv. 60, vi. 179. Apparently from
OF. fraignant, one who infringes (law); orig. pres. pt. of OF.
fraindre, freindre, to break; hence, to infringe.—L. frangere, to
break. See Fragile. 4 Perhaps somewhat confused with F.
fainéant, an idle fellow, lit. ‘one who does nothing.’

FRANK, free. (F.—OHG.) In Spenser, Shepherd’s Kal. Nov.
203.—OF. franc, free; Low L. francus, free. = OHG. franko, a Frank,
free man. The Franks were a Germanic people. Der. frank, vb.,
-ly, -ness ; frank-incense, q.v. 3 franchise, q.v., frank-lin, q.v.

FRANKALMOIGN, the name of the tenure by which most
church lands are held. (F.-OHG.; and L.—Gk.) In Blackstone,
Comment., b, ii. c. 4. Spelt frankalmoin in Blount’s Nomolexicon ;
dit. ‘free alms.’=F. franc, free; and almoine, Anglo-F. variant of
OF. almosne, mod. F. auméne, alms. See Frank and Almoner.

FRANKINCENSE, an odorous resin. (F.—OHG., and L.)
In Holland’s tr. of Pliny, b. xii.c. 14. ME. frank encens, Mandeville’s
Tray., p.120,.—OF. franc encens, pureincense. See franc in Cotgrave,
who gives the example : ‘ Terre franche, mould, pure soyle, soyle of it
selfe; a soyle without sand, gravell, or stones.’ See Frank and
Incense.

FRANKLIN, a freeholder. (F.—-OHG.) ME. frankeleyn,
Chaucer, C. T. 333 (A 331); shortened to franklen, P. Plowman,
C, vi. 64.— AF. fraunkelayn, Langtoft, ii. 212; Low L. francalanus,
franchilinus; Ducange. = Low L. francus, free; see Frank. B. The
suffix is from OHG. -linc=G. and E. -ling, as in G. fremd-ling, a
stranger, and E, dar-ling; precisely as in chamber-lain.

FRANTIC, full ofrage or madness. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. frenetik,
contr. form frentiz. Chaucer has frenetyk, Troilus, v.° 206 ; frentik
is in P. Plowman, C. xii. 6.—OF. frenatique (better frenetique),
*frantick ;’ Cot.=—L. phrenéticus, phrentticus, mad. =—Gk. ppevntikés,
rightly ppevtixds, mad, suffering from ¢pevi7is, or inflammation of
the brain. —Gk. ¢pev-, base of ¢pyv, the heart, mind, senses. See
Frensy.

FRATERNAL, brotherly. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. L. xii. 26;
Minsheu, ed. 1627; andin Palsgrave. Altered to the L. spelling. =
OF. fraternel, ‘ fraternall ;’ Cot. = Late L. /raternGlis, substituted for
L. fraternus, brotherly.=L. frater, cognate with E. brother; see
Brother, Der. fraternal-ly; from the same source, fraternity, q. v.;
fratricide, q.v.

FRATERNITY, brotherhood. (F.—L.) ME. fraternité,
Chaucer, C. T. 366 (A 364).—OF. fraternité.=L. fraternitatem,
acc. of frdternitds.=L. fraternus, brotherly.=L. frater, a brother;
see above. Der. fratern-ise=OF. fraterniser, ‘to fraternize,’ Cot. ;
-is-er, -is-at-ion (from fraternus).

FRATRICIDE (1), a murderer of a brother. (F.—L.) In
Minsheu, ed. 1627. This is the true sense; see below. = OF. fratri-
cide, ‘a murtherer of his own brother;’ Cot.=—L. fratricida, a fratri-
cide. —L, fratri-, decl. stem of frater, a brother; and -cida, a slayer,
from cedere (pt. t. ce-cidi), to slay. See Fraternal and
Cesura.

FRATRICIDE (2), murder of a brother. (L.) ‘ Fratricide,
brother-slaughter;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. fratricidium, a
brother’s murder. = L. frdiri-; and -cidium, a slaying; see above.

FRAUD, deceit. (F.—L.) ME. fraude; Chaucer, tr. of Boethius,
b. i. pr. 4, 1. 86. = OF. fraude, ‘ fraud, guile ;? Cot.— L. fraudem, acc.
of fraus (old form fris), guile. Der. fraud-ful, ful-ly, -less; fraud-
u-lent, from MF. fraudulent, ‘fraudulent, Cot., from L. fraudulentus ;
Fraud-u-lent-ly, -u-lence.

FRAUGHT, to lade a ship. (Friesic.) ‘If after this com-
mand thou fraught the court;’? Cymb. i. 1. 126; ‘The fraughting
souls within her;? Temp. i. 2.13. ME. fraghten, fragten, chiefly
used in the pp. fraught, Will. of Palerne, 2732, Chaucer, C, T., B171
(see my note on the line), [The form freight was also used; see
Freight.) From EFries. frachten (in comp. be-frachten) ; Low G.
vrachten (Liibben) ; Du. be-vrachten ; and cf. Swed. frakta, Dan.
fragte, to fraught or freight (from Friesic). From the sb. appear-
ing as EFries. fracht, Low G. vracht (Liibben), Du. vracht, G. fracht,
a load, cargo. See further under Freight.

FRAY (1), anaffray. (F.—L.) ‘There began a great fraye bitween
som of the gromes and pages;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart, v. i. c. 16
(R.). Short for affray, in the sense of ‘brawl’ or ‘disturbance.’
AF. affray, disturbance (Bozon). Formed, with prefix a- (F. a-,
L. ad), from OF. freier, to rub-(against); see Fray (3). Cf. Ital.


FREQUENT 225


fregare, ‘to rub, to chafe with one’ (Florio); and Span. refriega,
an affray, a skirmish.

FRAY (2), to terrify. (F.—L. and Teut.) In the Bible, Deut.
xxviii. 26, Jer. vii. 33, Zech. i. 21. Short for affray, to terrify, whence
the mod. E. afraid. See Afraid, Affray.

FRAY (3), to wear away by rubbing. (F.—L,) Ben Jonson, Sad
Shepherd, i. 2. 13, has frayings, in the sense of peel rubbed off a stag’s
horn. ‘A deer wassaid to fray her head, when she rubbed it against
a tree to renew it;” Halliwell.—OF. freier, MF. frayer, ‘to grate
upon, rub,’ Cot.=L. fricare, to rub. See Friction.

FREAK (1), a whim, caprice. (E.) ‘The fickle freaks . . . Of
fortune false ;’ Spenser, F. Q. i. 4. 50. This use as a sb., though
now common, is unknown in ME. in the same sense. Perhaps
closely allied to the once common adj. frek, in the sense of eager,
quick, vigorous. ‘Es nan sa frek,’ is none so eager; Cursor Mundi,
5198. And see frec in Stratmann. AS. frec, bold, rash; Grein,
i. 338.4 Icel. frekr, voracious, greedy ; Swed. frack, impudent,
audacious; Dan. frek, audacious; G. frech, saucy; OHG. Sreh,
greedy. Cf. Goth. fathufriks, lit. fee-greedy, avaricious. (An obscure
word.) Der. freakish, Pope, Wife of Bath, grt.

FREAK (2), to streak, variegate? (E.) ‘The pansy freak’d
with jet;’ Milton, Lycidas, 144. Perhaps ‘to streak whimsically ;’
from Freak (1). B. But cf. prov. E. freck, to mark with spots, to
dapple; which is allied to Freckle.

FRECKLE, a small spot. (Scand.) Spelt frekell in Sir T. More,
Works, p. 7f. From a base frek-, whence frek-el and frek-en are
diminutives. The latter is used by Chaucer, who has the pl. freknes,
fraknes, C. T. 2171 (A 2169).—Icel. freknur, pl. freckles ; Swed.
frakne, pl. fraknar, freckles; Dan. fregne, pl. fregner, freckles. Cf.
Fleck. Der. freckle, vb., freckl-ed, ~y.

FREE, at liberty. (E.) ME. fre, Chaucer, C. T. 5631 (D 49).
AS. fréo; Grein, i. 344. 4+ Du. vrij; Goth. freis (base *frijo-) ; G. frei.
B. Teut. type *frijoz; closely connected with Skt. priya-, beloved,
dear, agreeable; and E. Friend. Cf. also W. rhydd, for (p)rydd,
free. Der. free, vb., free-ly, -ness; freedom=AS. fréo-dim; free-
booter (see Booty) ; jfree-hold, -hold-er; free-man=AS. fréoman ;
free-mason, -mason-ry; free-stone (a stone that can be freely cut), a
tr. of F. pierre franche; free-think-er, -will. As to freestone, see Notes
on Eng. Etym., p. 105.

FREEBOOTER, a rover, pirate. (Du.) Bacon, in his Life of
Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 129, 1. 28, says that Perkin Warbeck’s men
were chiefly ‘ strangers born, and most of them base people and /ree-
booters.” ‘Lhese strangers were mostly Flemings; see p. 112, 1. 11, &c.
In a letter dated 1597, in the Sidney State Papers, ii. 78, is a mention
of ‘the freebutters of Flushenge;’ Todd’s Johnson. = Du. vrijbuiter,
a freebooter. = Du. vrijbuiten, to rob, plunder. = Du. vrijbuit, plunder,
lit. ‘free booty. The Du. vrij is cognate with E. free; and buit is
allied to booty. See Free and Booty. Doublet, filibuster, q. v.

FREEZE, to harden with cold, to be very cold. (E.) ME. freesen,
fresen; P. Plowman, C. xiii. 192, AS. fréosan, Grein, i. 347; pp.
froren. + Icel. frjdsa 3 Swed. frysa; Dan. fryse; Du. vriezen; G.
frieren; OHG. jfreosan, ‘Teut. type *freusan-. + L. pririre, to itch,
orig. to burn; cf. pruina, hoar-frost, prima, a burning coal ; Skt.
plosha-,a burning. From 4/ PREUS, to burn; whence the Teutonic
base-FREUS, appearing in Goth. frius, frost, as well as in the words
above. Der. fros-t, q.v., frore, q. V-

FREIGHT, a cargo. (F.—OHG.) ME. freyte (1463); ‘freyght
or huyr,’ i. e. hire, Caxton, Golden Legend ; St. Giles, § 3. Freighted
occurs in North’s Plutarch; see Shakespeare’s Plutarch, ed. Skeat,
p- 16,1. 3. Apparently an altered spelling of OF. fret, ‘the freight
of a ship, also the hire that’s paid for a ship;’ Cot.—OHG. freht,
earnings, hire (supposed to be the same word as G. fracht, a cargo).
B. The OHG. fréht is thought to represent an OHG. type *fra-aihtiz ;
from fra-, prefix (see Fret (1)), and *aihtiz > AS. #ht, acquisi-
tion, property, from dgan, toown. SeeOwn (1). Der. freight, vb.,
Sreight-age.

FRENZY, madness, fury. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. frenesye [not
frenseye as in Tyrwhitt], Chaucer, Troil. i. 727; P. Plowman, C.
xxiii-85. = OF, frenaisie [better frenesie], ‘frenzie;’ Cot.—L. phrenésis.
= Late Gk. ppevqots, equivalent to Gk. ppeviris, inflammation of the
brain.=Gk. gpev-, base of ppnv, the midriff, heart, senses. Der.
frantic, q. Vv.

FREQUENT, occurring often, familiar. (F.—L.) ‘How frequent
and famyliar a thynge;’ Sir T. Elyot, Governour, b.iil.c. 7,§ 2. ‘ Fre-
quently in his mouthe;’ id. b. i. c. 22.—MF. frequent, omitted by
Cotgrave, but given in Sherwood’s Index.—L. freguentem, acc. of
frequens, crowded, crammed, frequent ; pres. part. of a lost verb
*frequere, to cram, closely allied to farcire, to cram, and from the
same root. See Farce. Brugmann, ii. § 713. Der. frequent-ly,
-ness, frequenc-y; also frequent, vb. << MF. frequenter, ‘to frequent,
Cot. < L. frequentare ; frequent-at-ion, -at-ive.

Q


226 FRESCO


FRESCO, a painting executed on plaster while fresh. (Ital. —
OHG.) See Fresco in Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.—Ital. fresco, cool,
fresh. — OHG., frise (G. frisch), fresh. See Fresh.

FRESH, new, recent, vigorous. (E.; and F.—OHG.) ME. fresh,
fresch. ‘Ful freshe and newe;’ Chaucer, C. T. 367 (A 365).—OF.
fres, freis (fem. fresche), fresh, —OHG., frise (above). B. Also fersch,
fersh; spelt fersse (=fershe), Rob. of Glouc. p. 397, 1. 8187; also
uersc (=/fersc), O. Eng. Homilies, i. 175, 1. 248; representing AS.
jersc; ‘ne fersc ne mersc’=neither fresh water nor marsh; Ancient
Laws, ed. Thorpe, i.184,1.8.+4-Icel. ferskr, fresh; Du. versch; G.frisch;

OHG. frisc. y. Teut. type *friskoz. Allied to Lith. préskas, sweet,
unsoured, i.e. unleavened (applied to bread); Russ. priesnuii, fresh.
Der. fresh-ly, -ness, -en, -man; also fresh-et, a small stream of flowing
water, Milton, P. R. ii. 345. See Frisk, Fresco.

FRET (1), toeat away. (E.) ME. freten, a strong verb; Chaucer,
C. T. 2070 (A 2068). AS. fretan, pt. t. fret; Grein, i. 340. Con-
tracted from *fra-etan, as is clearly shown by the Gothic form; from
Teut. fra-, intensive prefix, and etan, to eat.--Swed. frdata, to corrode ;
Du. vreten (ver-eten); G. fressen (ver-essen) ; Goth. fraitan, from fra-,
intensive prefix, and itan, to eat. See For (2) and Hat. Der.
fret-ful, Shak. 2 Hen. VI, iii. 2. 403; -ful-ly, -ful-ness ; frett-ing.
@ The strong pp. occurs in Levit. xiii. 55, in the form fret; contr.
from the ME. strong pp. freten, frete; see Chaucer, C. T. 4895 (B 475).

FRET (2), to ornament, variegate. (F.) ME. jretten, to adorn
with interlaced work, esp. with gold or silver embroidery. ‘ Fyoles
fretted with flores and fleez of gold, phials [cups] adorned with
flowers and fleeces of golde,’ Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1476; cf.
P. Plowman, A. ii. 11.—OF. freter, to adorn; from frete, an (inter-
laced) fret (in heraldry, F. frette). See Fret (3). @ It can hardly
have been influenced by AS. fretwan, to adorn, as this would become
ME. fratwen, fratewen; see Matt. xii. 44 (AS. version). Der. fret-work.

FRET (3), a kind of grating. (F.—L.or G.) A term in heraldry,
meaning ‘a bearing composed of bars crossed and interlaced.’ See
explanation in Minsheu, ed. 1627. Kersey, ed. 1715, has: ‘in heraldry,
a bearing wherein several lines run crossing one another.’ =OF. /rete,
F, frette, a fret. Cotgrave gives ‘/retté, fretty, a term of blazon’
[heraldry]. According to Diez, frettes, pl., means an iron grating.
Roquefort gives: ‘freter, to cross, interlace.’ Cf. Span. fretes, ‘ frets,
narrow bands of a shield, a term in heraldry’ (Meadows); from a
sing. frete. B. Of doubtful origin. According to Diez, from a Late
L. type *ferritta; from L. ferrum, iron; cf. Ital. ferriata, a grate of
iron (Florio). Another suggestion (also doubtful) is to derive it from
OSax. jeter-, in feter-ds, pl., fetters, AS. feter, a fetter. See Korting,
§§ 3700, 3715. Der. frett-y.

FRET (4), a stop on a musical instrument. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Tam. Shrew, ii. 150. A fret was a stop such as is seen on a guitar,
to regulate the fingering; formed by thin pieces of metal or wires
running like bars across the neck of the instrument; see Levins. I
take it to be a particular use of OF. frete, a ferrule; or ‘the iron band
or hoop that keeps a woodden toole from riving;’ Cot. Cf. Ital.
Jerretti, little irons, tags for points (Florio). Perhaps the same word
as the above; but this is doubtful.

FRIABLE,, easily crumbled. (F.—L.) In Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. ili. c, 23. § 5.— MF. friable, ‘bruizeable, easie to be broken ;’
Cot. =L. fridbilis, easily crumbled. = L. friare, to rub, crumble. Der.

JSriable-ness, friabil-i-ty.

FRIAR, a member of a religious order. (F.—L.) ME. jfrere,
Chaucer, C..T. 208; Rob. of Glouc. p. 530, 1. 10939.—OF. /frere,
Sreire.—L. fratrem, acc. of frater, cognate with E. brother ; see Bro-
ther. Der. friar-y.

FRIBBLE,, to trifle. (Flem.—Du.) ‘Than those who with the
stars do fribble,’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 3.1. 36; and see Spectator,
no. 288. To fribble away is to waste foolishly and triflingly.—W.
Flemish fribbelen, wribbelen, to rub between the finger and thumb (as
a thread), to roll together by rubbing (De Bo); cf. Low G. wribbein,
to rub between the fingers, to rub away. (Hence, to twiddle, trifle.)
Frequentative of Du. (and EFries.) wrijven, to rub, rub with the hand,
tub away, grind (pt. t. wreef, pp. gewreven); G. reiben, to rub.

FRICASSEH, a dish made of fowls. (F.—L.?) ‘A dish made
by cutting chickens or other small things in pieces, and dressing them
with strong sauce ;’ Todd’s Johnson. ‘Soups, and olios, fricassees, and
ragouts;’ Swift, Tale of a Tub, § 7; id.=F. fricassee, a fricassee ;
‘any meat fried ina panne,’ Cot.; fem. pp. of fricasser, to fry, also, to
squander money. Of unknown origin (Brachet). 4 Perhaps a deri-
vative of frigere,.to fry; with ¢ inserted by a fancied connexion with
fricare,to rub; cf. Korting, § 3990. We once had /ricasy in the sense
of rubbing; as in ‘fricasyes or rubbings;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of
Helth, b. ii, c, 32.

FRICTION, rubbing, attrition. (F.—L.) ‘Hard and vehement
Jriction ;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxviii. c. 4.—F. friction, ‘a friction,
or frication ;? Cot.—L. frictionem, acc. of frictio, a rubbing. = L, fric-


| tus, usual pp. of fricdre,; to rub; allied to fridre, to crumble.


FRIPPERY


Der.

friction-wheel ; cf. friable. .

FRIDAY, the sixth day of the week. (E.) ME. Friday, Chaucer,
C. T. 1536 (A 1534). AS. frige-deg ; rubric to S. Mark, xi, 11.— AS.
Frige, gen.case of Frig, the wife of Woden (considered as the goddess of
love) and deg, a:day; see Grein,i. 349.—4/PREL, to love; see Friend.
Cf. Icel. frjadagr, Friday, OHG. Friatag, Frigetag, Friday. The
Teut. type (of AS. Frig) is *frija, fem. of *frijoz, dear, beloved,
‘free;’ Skt. priya, wife, loved one. Brugmann, i. § 309 (2). See
Free, Friend. AS. Frige deg was meant to translate L. diés

Veneris.

FRIEND, an intimate acquaintance. (E.) ME. frend, freond;
Ormulum, 443, 1609, 17960, AS. fréond; Grein, i. 346. Orig. pres.
pt. of fréon, fréogan, to love; so that the sense is ‘loving;’ id. 345.
+ Du. vriend, a friend; cf. vrijen, to court, woo; Icel. frendi, a kins-
man, from /frja, to love; Dan. frende, Swed. frande, a kinsman ;
Goth. frijonds, a friend, pres. pt. of frijon, to love; G. freund, a friend ;
OHG. friunt.—4/ PREI, to love; cf. Skt. pri, to love. Der. friend-
ly (AS. adv. fréondlice), -li-ness, -less (AS. fréondleas), -less-ness, -ship
(AS. fréondscipe).

FRIEZE (1), a coarse woollen cloth. (F.—Du.) Palsgrave (1530)
has; ‘ Fryse, roughe clothe, drap frise.’ Cf. ‘a gowne of grene frese,’
in 1418; Fifty E. E. Wills, ed. Furnivall, p. 37, 1.1. ‘ Panni lanei
de Frise ;’ Earl of Derby’s Expeditions, 1390-3, p. 280, 1.25. ‘Woven
after the manner of deep, frieze rugges ;’ Holland’s tr. of Pliny, b. viii.
c. 48.—MF. frise, frize, ‘frise ;’ Cot. He also gives drap de frise as
an equivalent expression; lit. cloth of Friesland. Du. Vriesland,
Friesland ; Vries,a Frieslander. [| The ME. Frise, meaning ‘ Fries-
land,’ occurs in the Romaunt of the Rose, 1093. Similarly, the term
‘cheval de Frise’ means ‘ horse of Friesland,’ because there first used
in defensive warfare.

FRIEZE (2), part of the entablature of a column. (F.—L.) In
Shak. Macb. i. 6. 6.—MF. frize ‘ (in architecture) the broad and flat
band, or member, that’s next below the cornish [cornice], or between
it and the architrave; called also by our workemen the frize;’ Cot.
Cf. Span. friso, a frieze, Ital. fregio, ‘a fringe, lace, border, ornament,
or garnishment ;’ Florio. Whether F. rise is from Ital. fregio is not
clear. The source is L. Phrygium (opus), Phrygian work; ef. Phry-
giam chlamydem, embroidered cloak, Ain. iii. 484.

FRIGATE, a large ship. (F.—Ital.) In Cotgrave; spelt frigat in
Hakluyt, Voy. iii. 665 (last line).=_MF. fregate, ‘a frigate, a swift
pinnace;’ Cot.=IJItal. fregata, ‘a frigate, a spiall ship;’ Florio.
@ Of uncertain origin; Diez supposes it to stand for *fargata, a sup-
posed contracted form of fabricdata, i.e. constructed, from fabricare, to
build; but this explanation is not now accepted. Der. frigat-oon
(Ital. fregatone), frigate-bird.

FRIGHT, terror. (E.) ME. fry3t; Seven Sages, ed. Wright, 948.
It stands for fyr3t, by the shifting of r so common in English, as in
bride, bird, brimstone, &c. ONorthumb. fyrihto, Matt. xxviii. 4; AS,
Syrhto, fyrhtu, fright; Grein, i. 362. Cf. fyrht, timid; afyrhtan, to
terrify. + OSax. forhta, fright; Goth. faurhtei, fright; faurhtjan,
to fear; G. furcht, OHG. forhta, forohta, forahta, fright; G. fiurchten,
to fear, Allidd to OSax. forht, OHG. foraht, Goth. faurhts, timid,
fearful. Der. fright, verb (later form fright-en) ; Shak. uses the form
fright only ; fright-ful, Rich. III, iv. 4. 169 ; -ful-ly, -ful-ness.

FRIGID, cold, chilly. (L.) ‘The frigid region ;’ Chapman, The
Ball, A. iv. sc. 2 (Lamount). Frigidity is in Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. ii. c. 1. § 4. = L. frigidus, cold.—L. frigére, to be cold. —L,

frigus, sb. cold. + Gk. piyos, cold; see Brugmann, i. § 875. Der.
Srigid-ly, -ness, -i-ly.

FRILL, a ruffle on a shirt. (Low G.) In Ash’s Dict., ed. 1775.
The N.E.D. quotes ‘that can frid and paint herself’ (1574); and
‘their flaunting ruffes, their borowed frilles’ (1591). Of Teutonic
(prob. Low G.) origin; but insufficiently recorded. Represented by
W.Flem. frul, frulle, a wrinkled plait, wrinkled fold in a small shred
or band; De Bo cites ‘/rullen round the bottom of a dress,’ and ‘ sleeves
with frullen.’ Another trace of it occurs in Swed. dial. frall, froll,
a wrinkled or curled strip, as on a woman’s cap, whence /ryllig,
wrinkled. This points to a Teut. */rulle, a frill, whence a verb
*fryllan-; so that the E, form frill appears to be verbal.

FRINGE, a border of loose threads. (F.—L.) Palsgrave has:
‘Freng, frenge.’ Chaucer has frenges, pl.; Ho. of Fame, iii. 228, —
OF. frenge, fringe (Supp. to Godefroy); F. frange. Cot. has:
‘Frange, fringe’ The Wallachian form (according to Cihac) is
frimbie, which stands for *fimbrie, by. a transposition of r, for greater
ease of pronunciation; cf. F. brebis from L. ueruécem.—L. jfimbria,
fringe; chiefly.in the pl. fimbrie, curled ends of threads, fibres.
Brugmann, i. § 875. See Fibre. Der. fringe, verb, fringed, Tem-
pest, i. 2. 408; fring-y.

FRIPPERY, worn out clothes, trifles. (F.—L.) ‘Some-frippery
to hide nakedness ;’ Ford, Fancies Chaste and Noble, A. i. sc. 1 (R.).


FRISK


Shak. has it in the sense of an old-clothes’ shop; Temp. iv. 225. =
MF. friperie, ‘a friperie, broker’s shop, street of brokers, or of
fripiers ;? Cot.— MF. /ripier, ‘a fripier, or broker; a mender or
trimmer up of old garments, and a seller of them so mended; ’ id. =
OF. frepe (also ferpe, felpe), frayed out fringe, rag, old clothes (Gode-
froy). Prob. from L. jibra, a fibre; Korting, § 3724.

. FRISK, to skip about. (F.-OHG.) In Shak. Wint. Ta. i. 2. 67.
A verb formed from the adj. frisk, which occurs in Cotgrave.—MF.
frisque, ‘friske, lively, jolly, blithe, brisk, fine, spruce, gay ;° Cot. ;
OF, frisque, NorthF. variant of frische, lively, alert (Godefroy) ; cf.
‘Fresshe, gorgeous, gay, frisgue, Palsgrave, p. 313; Walloon /fris-
quette, a gay girl (Sigart).—OHG. frisc, G. frisch, fresh, brisk, lively ;
see Fresh, Cf. Norm. dial. frisguet, frisky (whence E. frisky) ;
Moisy. Der. frisk-y, equivalent to the old adj. frisk; frisk-i-ly, -i-ness;
Srisk-et, a printer’s term for a light frame often in motion.

FRITH (1), an enclosure, forest, wood. (E.) It occurs asa place-
name in Chapel-le-Frith, Derbyshire, and is common in Kent in the
names of woods; but is obsolescent. Drayton has: ‘ Both in the
tufty frith and in the mossy fell,’ Polyolbion, song 17. ME. frith,
peace, Layamon, 1. 2549; Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 90 ; also
in the sense of enclosed land, enclosure, park for hunting, forest,
wood ; thus in Layamon, 1432, where the older MS. speaks of hunting
in the king’s frith [fride], the later MS. speaks of hunting in the king’s
park [parc]. See numerous examples in Matzner, and cf. AS. frid-
geard, an enclosed space, lit. ‘ peace-yard ’ or ‘ safety-yard,’ for which
see Thorpe, Anc. Laws, ii. 298; also MSwed. fridgiard, an enclosure
for animals (Ihre). AS. frid, peace; freodo, freodu, fridu, peace,
security, asylum ; Grein, i. 343, 347, 348.4+Icel./ridr, peace, security,
personal security; Dan. fred; Swed. fred, MSwed. frid. Cf. Du.
vrede, peace, quiet; G. friede. Teut. type *frithuz. From */ri-,
base of *fri-joz, free; see Free. @ The ME. /rith sometimes
means ‘ wooded country;’ this may be a different word; viz. from
AS. gefyrhde (Birch, Cart. Sax. iii. 120). Borrowed forms are W.
ffridd, park, forest; Irish frith, a wild mountainous place; Gael.
Srith, a forest for deer.

FRITH (2), FIRTH,.an estuary. (Scand.) ME. firth, Barbour’s
Bruce, xvi. 542, 547.—Icel. férdr, pl. firdir, a firth, bay; Dan. jiord ;
Swed. fjard. Teut. type, *ferduz; Noreen, § 139. Allied to L.
portus, ahaven; see Ford. (Not connected with L. fretum.)

FRITILLARY, a genus of liliaceous plants. (L.) In Phillips,
ed. 1706. Called Frettellaria in Bacon, Essay 46 (Of Gardens). So
called because chequered markings on the corolla were associated
with a fritillus, which (according to Gerarde) was by some supposed
to mean a chessboard. Englished from Late L. fritilldria, coined
from L. fritillus, a dice-box.

FRITTER (1), a kind of pancake. (F.—L.) Spelt frytowre in
Prompt. Parv. Cotgrave has: ‘ Friteau, a fritter.’ But the E. word
rather answers to OF. /riture, a frying, a dish of fried fish. Both
friteau and friture are related to OF. frit, fried. —L. frictus, fried, pp.
of frigere, to fry. See Fry (1). Der. fritter, vb., to reduce to slices,
waste.

FRITTER (2), a fragment. (F.—L.) ‘One that makes fritters
of English ;” Merry Wives, v. 5. 151 [but this may belong to the
word above]. Johnson has: ‘ Fritter, a fragment, a small piece ;’ but
his examples from Bacon and Butler are wrong, as the reading is
jitters in both. Pope has the verb /ritter, to break into fragments,
twice ; see Dunciad, i. 278, iv. 56.—OF. freture, fraiture, a fracture,
a fragment (Godefroy).—L. fractira, a breaking ; from fract-, pp.
stem of frangere, to break. See Fracture, Break.

FRIVOLOUS, trifling. (L.) In Shak. Tam. Shrew, v. 1. 28.

Cotgraye translates F. jfrivole by ‘ frivolous, vain.’ = L. friuol-us, silly,
trifling ; with change of L. -us to E. -ous, as in abstemious, arduous,
&c. The orig. sense of frivolus seems to have been ‘rubbed away ;’
also applied to refuse, broken sherds, &c. ‘ Friuola sunt proprie uasa
fictilia quassa;’ Festus. =—L. friare, fricire, to rub; see Friction,
Der. frivolous-ly, -ness; also frivol-i-ty, from F. frivolité.
.FRIZ, FRIZZ, to curl, render rough. (F.—Du.) More often
used in the frequentative form frizzle. ‘Meecenas, if I meete with
thee without my j/risled top;” Drant, tr. of Horace, Epist. i. 1. 94
(Lat. text). ‘Her haire frized short ;’ Pepys, Diary, Nov. 22, 1660.
=MF. frizer, ‘to frizle, crispe, curle;’ Cot. B. The orig. sense
perhaps was to roughen the nap of a cloth, to make it look like frieze.
This is rendered probable by Span. /risar, to frizzle, to raise the nap
on frieze; from Span. frisa, frieze. OF. frize, ‘the cloth called
frise ;? Cot. Cf. MDu. vriséren [from F. friser], ‘to frieze cloth; ’
Hexham. See Frieze (1). Der. frizz-le.

FRO, adv. from. (Scand.) ME. fra, fro, also used as a prep.
Ormulum, 1265, 4820; Havelok, 318. —Icel. fra, from; also ady. as
in the phrase #il ok fra=to and fro, whence our phrase ‘ to and fro’ is
copied. Dan. fra.4AS. from; see From, Der. jro-ward, q.v.
4] Fro is the doublet of from; but from a Scand. source.


FROST 227


FROCK, a monk’s cowl, loose gown. (F.—Late L.—L.) In Shak.
Hamlet, iii. 4.164. ME. frok, of which the dat. frokke occurs in P.
Plowman, B. y. 81. = OF. froc; whence ‘ froc de moine, a monk’s cowle
or hood ;’ Cot.; Late L. frocus, a monk’s frock; also spelt floccus,
by the common change of J to r; see floccus in Ducange; and cf.
Port. froco, a snow-flake, from L. floccus. Prob. so called because
woollen (Diez; Korting, § 3847). See Flock (2). @] Otherwise
in Brachet ; viz. from OHG. hroch (G. rock), a coat.

FROG (1),asmall amphibious animal. (E.) ME. frogge, Rob. of
Glouc. p. 69, l. 1562; pl. froggen, O. E. Homilies, i. 51, 1. 30. K
Jrocga (pl. frocgan) ; and frox (pl. froxas) ; Ps. xxvii. 50. Of these,
Jrox=*frocs =*frosc, cognate with Icel. froskr, Du. vorsch, G. frosch.
B. The ME. forms are various ; we find froke, frosche, frosh, froske,
and frogge, all in Prompt. Parv. p. 180.

FROG (2), a horny substance ina horse’s foot. (E.?) a. The frog
of a horse’s foot is shaped like a fork, and I suspect it to be a corruption
of fork, q.v. Cf. F. fourchette, ‘a fork; (vet.) a frush or frog ;’
Hamilton. B. On the other hand, it was certainly understood as being
named after a frog (though it is hard to see why), because it was also
called a frush, which much resembles frosh, a ME. form of frog; see
Frog (1); though this might also bea substitute for F. fourche, a fork,
and this for F. fourchette. ‘ Frush or frog, the tender part of a horse’s
hoof, next the heel ;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.

FROLIC, adj., sportive, gay, merry. (Du.) In Shak. Mids. Nt.
Dr. v. 394. Gascoigne speaks of a ‘ frolicke fauour’=a merry look ;
Fruites of Warre, st. 40. It seems to have been one of the rather
numerous words imported from Dutch in the reign of Elizabeth. =
MDnu. vrolick, ‘ frolick, merrie,’ Hexham; Du. vrolijk, frolic, merry,
gay.+G. frohlich, merry. B. Formed by help of the suffix -lijk (=E.
like, -ly) from the base vro-, orig. an adj. with the sense of ‘ merry,’
found in OSax. frak, OFries. frd, and preserved in mod. G. frok,
joyous, glad. +. Perhaps allied to Icel. frar, swift, light-footed
(Kluge). Der. frolic, verb, frolic, sb. ; frolic-some, -some-ness.

FROM, prep., away, forth. (E.) ME.from; common. AS. from,
fram.+lIcel. fra, from; OHG. fram, adv. forth ; prep. forth from ;
Goth. fram, prep. from. Cf. also Icel. fram, adv. forward (Swed.
fram, Dan. frem) ; Goth. framis, ady. further. Doublet, fro; and see
JSrame.

FROND, a leafy branch. (L.) Not in Johnson. Moder and
scientific. First in 1785.—L. frond-, stem of frons, a leafy branch.
Der. frond-esc-ence, frondi-fer-ous (from decl. stem frondi-, and fer-re,
to bear).

FRONT, the forehead. (F.—L.) Inearly use. ME. front; used
in the sense of ‘ forehead,’ King Alisaunder, 6550.—OF. front, ‘the
forehead, brow;’ Cot.—L. frontem, acc. of frons, the forehead. Der.
front, verb, 2 Hen. IV, iv. 1. 25; front-age, -less; front-al, q. v.,
front-ier, q.v., front-let, q. v., fronti-spiece, q.v. Also front-ed (rare),
Milton, P. L. ii, 532. Also af-front, con-front, ef-front-ery. Also
frounce, flounce.

RONTAL, a band worn on the forehead. (F.—L.) ‘ Which
being applied in the manner of a fronéall to the forehead ;’? Holland,
tr. of Pliny, b.xx.c. 21. ME. frountel, Polit. Songs, p. 154.—OF.
frontal, ‘a frontlet, or forehead-band ;’ Cot.—L. frontdle, an orna-
ment for a horse’s forehead.—L. jfront-, stem of j/rozs, the front.
See Front.

FRONTIER, a part ofa country bordering on another. (F.—L.)
In Shak. Hamlet, iv. 4.16; and Caxton, Hist. Troye, leaf 207 b, 1. 9.
= OF. frontiere, ‘the frontier, marches, or border of a country ;” Cot.
= Late L. frontéria, frontaria, a frontier, border-land; formed with
suffix -Gria, fem. of -drius, from front-, stem of frons. See Front.

FRONTISPIECE, a picture at the beginning of a book, front
ofa house. (F.—L.) A perverse spelling of frontispice, by confusion
with piece; see Trench, Eng. Past and Present. In Minsheu, ed. 1627;
and Milton, P. L. iii. 506.—F. frontispice, ‘the frontispiece, or fore-
front of a house;” Cot, — Late L. frontispicium, the front of a church ;
lit. ‘front view.’=L. jronti-, decl. stem of frons, the front; and
specere, to view, behold, see. See Front, and Special or Spy.

FRONTLET, a small band on the forehead. (F.—L.) In
Shak. K. Lear, i. 4. 208; Exod, xiii. 16, Deut. vi. 8 (A. V.); and in
Palsgrave. = OF. frontelet, a dimin. of frontel, with suffix -et, ‘A
frontlet, also the part of a hedstall of a bridle, that commeth over the
forehead; L. frontale;’ Baret’s Alvearie. See Frontal.

FROREH, frozen. (E.) In Milton, P. L. ii. 595. Short for froren,
the old pp. of the verb ‘to freeze.’ See An O. Eng. Miscellany, ed.
Morris, p. 151. AS. froren, gefroren, pp. of fréosan, to freeze. 4+-Du.
gevroren, pp. Of vriesen, to freeze; G. gefroren, pp. of frieren, See
Freeze.

FROST, the act or state of freezing. (E.) ME. frost; also
forst, by the common shifting of r ; Wyclif, Ps. lxxvii. 47. AS. forst
(the usual form), Grein, i. 331. Du. vorst; Icel., Dan., and Swed.
frost; G. frost. Teut. types */rus-toz, m., *frus-tom,n.; from *frus-y


Q2


FROTH


weak grade of *freusan-, to freeze. See Freeze. Der. frost, verb,
frost-y, -i-ly, -i-ness, -bite, -bitt-en, -bound, -ing’, -nail, -work.

FROTH, foam upon liquids. (Scand.) ME. frothe, Prompt. Parv.
p. 180. Chaucer has the verb frothen, C. T. 1661 (A 1659). —Icel.
froda, fraud; Dan.fraade; [Swed. fradga]. B. From the weak grade
(*fruth) of the Teut. verb *freuthan-, to froth up; seen in AS. a-
fréodan, to froth up. Der. froth-y, -i-ly, -i-ness.

FROUNCEH, to wrinkle, curl, plait. (F.—L.) The older form
of flounce; see Flounce (2). Der. frounce, sb.

FROWARD, perverse. (Scand. andE.) ME. froward, but com-
monly fraward; Hampole, Pricke of Conscience, 87; Ormulum, 4672.
This fraward is a Northern form of from-ward, due to substitution of
the Scand. Eng. fro for the AS. from. From Icel. fra, fro; and E.
ward; see Fro. Cf. AS. fromweard, only in the sense of ‘ about to
depart’ in Grein, i. 351; froward has the orig. sense of from-ward,
i.e. averse, perverse. Cf. wayward; i.e. away-ward. And see
Toward. Der. froward-ly, -ness, Spenser, F. Q. iii. 6. 20.

FROWN, to look sternly. (F.—Scand.) ME. frounen; Chaucer,
C. T. 8232 (E 356).—OF. frongnier, whence F. re-frongner, ‘to
frown, lowre, look sternly, sullenly;’ Cot. In mod. F., se refrogner,
to frown. Cf. Ital. infrigno, wrinkled, frowning ; Ital. dialectal
(Lombardic) frignare, to whimper, to make a wry face. B. Of Teut.
origin. From Teut. */runjan-, as seen in Swed. dial. fryna, to make
a wry face (Rietz), Norw. froyna, the same (Aasen). ‘Korting,
§ 3834.) Der. frown, sb.

FRUCTIFY, to make fruitful. (F.—L.) In Shak. L. L. L. iv. 2.
30; and in Chaucer, Lenvoy a Scogan, 48. —F. fructifier, ‘to fructifie;’
Cot.=L. fructificare, to make fruitful. L. fructi-, for fructu-, decl.
stem of fructus, fruit; and -ficare, suffix due to facere, to make. See
Fruit and Fact. Der. fructifica-tion, from the same L. verb.

FRUGAL, thrifty. (F.—L.) In Shak. Much Ado, iv. 1. 130.
=F. frugal, ‘frugall;’? Cot.=L. frigdlis, economical, lit. of or
belonging to fruits.=L. friig-, stem of frux, fruits of the earth; of
which the dat. frigi was used to signify useful, temperate, frugal.
Allied to Fruit. Der. frugal-ly, -i-ty; also frugi-fer-ous, i.e. fruit-
bearing, frugi-vor-ous, fruit-eating, from L. frigi-, decl. stem of fraus,
combined with fer-re, to bear, wor-are, to eat.

FRUIT, produce of the earth. (F.—L.) ME. fruit, frut; spelt
rut in the Ancren Riwle, p. 150.—OF. fruit (Burguy). =—L. fructum,
acc. of fructus, fruit. L. fructus, pp. of frui, to enjoy; cognate with
E. brook, to endure.—4/ BHREUG, to enjoy; see Brook (1).
Brugmann, i. § 111; ii. § 532. Der. fruit-age; fruit-er-er (for fruit-
er, with suffix -er unnecessarily repeated), 2 Hen. IV, iii. 2. 36; fruit-
ful, Tam. Shrew, i. 1.3; -ful-ly, -ful-ness, -less, -less-ly, -less-ness; also
fruition, q.v., fructify, q. v., fructiferous, fructivorous.

FRUITION, enjoyment. (F.—L.) In Shak. 1 Hen. VI, v. 5.

.= OF. fruition, ‘ fruition, enjoying ;’ Cot.=—Late L. fruitidnem, acc.
of fruitio; cf. fruitus, by-form of fructus, pp. of frui, to enjoy.

FRUMENTY, FURMENTY, FURMETY, food made
of wheat boiled in milk. (F.—L.) Spelt firmentie in Gascoigne,
Steel Glas, 1077; see Specimens of English, ed. Skeat, p. 322.
Palsgrave has furmenté. Holland speaks of ‘frumenty or spike corne;’
tr. of Pliny, b. xviii. c. 23. —OF. fromentee, MF . froumenté, ‘furmentie,
wheat boyled;’ Cot. Formed, with suffix -ee (L. -ata), from OF. fro-
ment, ‘wheat;’ id.=Late L. frumentum; for L. friimentum, corn ;
formed (with suffix -mentum) from the base fri-, frig-; see Fruit,
Frugal.

FRUMP, a cross, ill-tempered person. (MDu.?) The older sense
was a jeer or a sneer; then, ill humour; lastly, an ill-humoured
person. ‘Sweet widow, leave your frumps;’ Beaum. and Fletcher,
Scornful Lady, A. ii. sc. 3. Apparently from MDu. *wrump-,
*wromp-, weak grade of wrimpen, ‘to wring the mouth,’ Hexham ;
Kilian makes it equivalent to grijsen, i.e. to frown. So also
Low G. frampe, a coarse, violent man (Berghaus); wrampachtich,
morose (Liibben); from the*2nd grade *wramp. The E.D.D.
has also frump, an unseemly fold, frumple, to wrinkle.’ The base
wrimp- is a variant of wrink-, as in wrink-le; cf. wring. Cf.
Frampold.

FRUSH, to bruise, to batter. (F.—L.) In Shak. Troil. v. 6. 29.
ME. /ruschen, to crush; Wallace, iii, 197.—OF. fruissier, froissier
(F. froisser), to break in pieces; L. type *frustiare.= L. frustum, a
piece; see Frustum.

FRUSTRATE, to render vain. (L.) Formerly used as an adj.,
as in Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. iii. c. 10; and in Shak. Temp.
ii. 3. 10.—L. frustratus, pp. of frustrari, to disappoint, render vain.
=L. frustra, in vain; properly fem. abl. of obsolete adj. frustrus, for
*frud-trus, originally meaning ‘ deceitful.’ Allied to E. fraud. See
Fraud. Der. frustrat-ion.

FRUSTUM, a piece of a cone or cylinder. (L.) The pl. frustums
is used by Sir T. Browne, Cyrus’ Garden; ch. iii. § 51. —L. frustum,
a piece cut off, or broken off. Cf. Gk. @pavords, broken, brittle ;


228


FULL


Opavopa, a fragment; from Opavev, to break in pieces.
i. § 853. Der. frust-ule.

FRY (1), to:dress food:overa fire. (F.—L.) ME. frien; Chaucer,
C. T. 6069 (D 487); P. Plowman, C. ix. 334.—OF. frire, ‘to frie;”
Cot.=L. frigere, to roast. + Gk. ¢pvyev, to parch; Skt. bhrazj, to
boil, fry. Der. fry, sb.

FRY (2), the spawn of fishes. (F.—L.) In Shak. All’s Well, iv. 3.
250. ME. fri, fry; ‘to the and to thi fri mi blissing graunt I’=to.
thee and to thy seed I grant my blessing; Towneley Mysteries, p. 24.
AF. fry, frie, Liber Albus, pp. 507-8.=—OF. *fri, variant of OF. froi
(F. frat), spawn (Supp. to Godefroy) ; cf. OF. frier, variant of OF.
froier, to spawn (id.) ; Norm. dial. frier, to rub (Moisy).=—L. fricare,
to rub. See F. frai in Hatzfeld.

FUCHSIA, the name of a flower. (G.) A coined name, first
used in 1703 by C. Plumier, a French botanist; made by adding the
L. suffix -ia to the surname of the German botanist Leonhard Fuchs
(d. 1566), who published his De Historia Stirpium in 1542; see N.
and.Q. 7 S. xi. 326.

FUDDLE, to tipple, to render tipsy. (Low G.) Also found in
the sense ‘to waste time;’ as, ‘they fuddle away the day with riot
and prophaneness;’ Gent. Mag. xxvi. 431 (1756); see N. E. D.:and
E.D.D. A specialised sense of Low G. fuddeln, to work lazily
(Brem. Wort.) ; also to go about in rags (Berghaus); cf. Low. G.
fuddelke,aslattern. From the sb. fudden, rags; EFries. fudde, a rag,
a slut; Du. vod, a rag, a slut. Cf. Low G, fuddig, ragged, dirty;
Du. voddig.

FUDGE, an interjection of contempt. (F.) In Goldsmith, Vicar
of Wakefield (1766); also in Macklin, Love-a-la-Mode, A. ii. sc. X
(Groom); 1760.—Picard fuche, feuche, an interjection of contempt
(Corblet); Rouchi fuche, bah! (Hécart); Walloon foge, bah! (Grand-
gagnage); cf. LowG. futsch! begone! cited by Wedgwood from Dan-
neil ; see also Sanders, Ger. Dict. i. 525. Of onomatopoetic origin ;
cf. pish. The verb to fudge seems to have been influenced by fadge.

FUEL, materials for burnirig. (F.—L.) Also spelt fewel, fewell;
Spenser, F.Q, ii. 7. 36. Also fwaill, fewell ; Barbour’s Bruce, iv. 170.
Here, as in Richard Coer de Lion, 1471, it seems to mean ‘supplies.’
AF. fewaile, Liber Albus, p. 337.—OF. fowaille, fuaille, fuel, fagots
(Godefroy). = Late L. focdlia, pl. of focale, fuel. L. focus, a hearth,
fire-place. See Focus.

FUGITIVE, fleeing away, transitory. (F.—L.) Properly anadj.,
Shak. Antony, iii. 1, 7; also as a sb., id. iv. 9, 22; ME. fugitif,
Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, 146.—OF. fugitif, ‘fugitive;’ Cot.—L.
fugitiuus, fugitive. L. fugitum, supine of fugere, to flee; cognate with
E. bow, to bend.+-Gk. pevyev, to flee; Skt. buy, to bend, turn aside.
-4/ BHEUGH, to bow, to bend. Der. fugitive-ly, -ness. From
the same source, fug-ac-ious, fug-ac-i-ty ; fugue, q.v.; also centri-fug-al,
re-fuge, subter-fuge.

FUGLEMAN, the leader ofa file. (G.) Modern. Not in Todd’s
Johnson. Also written flugelman ; as in Sydney Smith, Works, 1859,
ii, 120 (N.E.D.). Borrowed from G. jliigelmann, the leader of a
wing or file.—G, fliigel, a wing; cf. flug, flight, from the weak grade
of fliegen, to fly; and mann, man. See F'ly (1).

FUGUE, a musical composition. (F,—Ital.+L.) In Milton,
P. L. xi. 563. — OF. (and F.) fugue, ‘a chace or report of musick, like
two or more parts in one;’ Cot.—TItal. fuga, a flight, a fugue.—L.
fuga, flight. See Fugitive. Der. fugu-ist.

FULCRUM, a point of support. (L.) ‘ Fulcrum, a stay or sup
port;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.—L. fulcrum, a support. = L. fulcire,to prop.

FULFIL, to complete. (E.) ME. fulfillen; P. Plowman, B. vi, 36,
AS. fulfyllan, which occurs in Atlfric’s Grammar, ed. Zupitza, p. 153.
Compounded of ful, full; and /yllan, to fill, See Full and Fill.
Der. fulfill-er, fulfil-ment.

FULGENT, shining, bright. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627; Milton,
P. L. x. 449; and York Mysteries, p. 514, 1. 1.—L. fulgent- stem of
pres. pt. of fulgére, to shine. 4-Gk. ¢dréyeiv, to burn, shine; Skt. bhraj,
to shine. Der. fulgent-ly, fulgenc-y; also ef-fulg-ence, re-fulg-ent.

FULIGINOUS, sooty. (L.) In Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 18 (R.).
Either from MF, fuligineux (Cot.); or, more likely, immediately from
L. fuliginosus, sooty.—L. fuligin-, stem of fuligo, soot. From the
same base as fii-mus, smoke; cf. Skt. dhuli-, dust. See Fume.

FULL (1), filled up, complete. (E.) ME. ful; P. Plowman, B.
prol.17. AS. ful; Grein, i. 355.4-Du. vol; Icel. fullr; Dan, fuld (for
full); Swed. full; Goth. fulls; G. voll, Teut. type *fulloz; Idg. type
*palnos. Cf. Lith. pilnas, full; Russ. polauti, full; Olrish lan (< *plan),
W. lawn, full; Skt. pirna-, Pers. pur; Gk. mAnpns; L. plenus. Idg.
root *plé (weak form, *pal), to fill. Brugmann, i. §§ 393, 461. Der.
full, adv., full-y, ful-ness ; -blown, -faced, -hearted,-orbed ; ful-fil (=full
fill), ful-fil-ment ; also fill, by yowel-change, q.v. Also ful-some, q.v.
And see Plenary. ;

FULL (2), to full cloth, to felt. (F.-L.) To full cloth is to felt
the wool together ; this is done by severe beating and pounding, The


Brugmann,


FULLER


word occurs in Cotgrave; also as ME. fullen, P. Plowman, B. xv. 445.
— OF. fuler, fouler; MF. fouller, ‘to full, or thicken cloath in a’mill;”
Cot. Also spelt fowler, ‘to trample on, press ;” id. —Late L. fullare
(2) to, cleanse clothes, (2) to full cloth. —L. fullo, a fuller. @ The
orig. sense of L. fullo was probably a cleanser, or bleacher; then, as
clothes were often washed by being trampled on or beaten, the sense
of ‘stamping’ arose; and the verb to full is now chiefly used in this
sense of stamping, pounding, or felting wool together. Der. full-ing-
mill, mentioned by Strype, Annals, Edw. VI, an. 1553.


to Full (2) above. AS. fullere, Mark, ix. 3. Adapted from L. fullo,
a fuller (above).

FULMAR, a sea-bird of the petrel kind. (Scand.) The name is
used in the Hebrides (E. D. D.); and is of Scand. origin. Lit. ‘ foul
mew ;’ from its disagreeable odour. —Icel. ful-, for full, foul; and
mar,a mew. See Foul and Mew (2).

FULMINATEH, to thunder, hurl lightning. (L.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627. Sir T. Browne has fulminating, Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 5. § 19.
[Spenser has the short form famine, F. Q. iii. 2. 5 ; from OF. fulminer,
“to thunder, lighten;’ Cot.]J—L. fulminatus, pp. of fulmindre, to
thunder, lighten. =L. fulmin-, for fulmen, lightning, a thunder-bolt
(=*fulg-men). = L. base fulg-, to shine ; seen in fulg-ére, to shine. See
Fulgent. Der. fulmin-at-ion.

FULSOME, cloying, satiating, superabundant. (E.) ME. fudsum,
abundant, Genesis and Exodus, 748, 2153; cf. Will. of Palerne, 4325.
Chaucer has the sb. fulsommnesse,C.T. 10719 (F 405). Made up from
ME. ful = AS. ful, full; and the suffix -som = AS. -sum (mod. E. -some).
See Full. Der. ful-some-ness. 4 Not from foul.

FULVOUS, FULVID, tawny. (L.) Rare. Fulvid is in Todd’s
Johnson. Borrowed, respectively, from L. fuluus, tawny, and Late L.
Juluidus, somewhat tawny. Allied to Yellow. Brugmann,i. § 363.

FUMBLE, to grope about. (Du.) In old authors ‘to bungle.’
‘False fumbling fantasye;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 698a; Shak.
Antony, iv. 4.14. The 0d is excrescent, and fumble stands for fummle.
— Du. fommelen, ‘to fumble, grabble;’ Sewel; Low G. fummeln, to
fumble.-++M. Swed. (and Swed.) fumla, to fumble. Cf. Swed. famla,
to grope; Dan. famle; Icel. falma, to grope about. f. Prob. allied
to AS. folm, the palm of the hand (Grein, i. 311), cognate with L.
palma. See Palm (ofthe hand). Der. fumbl-er.

FUME, a smoke, vapour. (F.—L.) Sir T. Elyot speaks of ‘fumes
in the stomake;’ The Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 17. ME. fume, Sowdone
of Babylon, 1. 681. —OF. fum, smoke (Burguy). —L. famum, acc. of
fimus, smoke. +Skt. dhiima-, smoke; Gk. Oupés, spirit, anger; cf. Skt.
dhi, to shake, blow. Brugmann, i. § 106. Der. fume, verb (see
Minsheu) ; fumi-ferous ; fum-ig-ate, q.v., fum-i-tory, q. v.

FUMIGATH, to expose to fumes. (L.) ‘You must be bath’d
and fumigated first ;’ Ben Jonson, The Alchemist, A. i. —L. fumigatus,
pp- of fumigare, to fumigate. — L. fam-, base of fimus, smoke; and -ig-,
for ag-, base of agere, to drive; thus the sense is ‘ to drive smoke about.’
See Fume. Der. fumigat-ion, from MF. fumigation, ‘ fumigation,
smoaking ;’ Cot.

FUMITORY,a plant; earth-smoke. (F.—L.) InShak. Hen. V,
y. 2. 45; a corruption of the older form fumiter, K. Lear, iv. 4.3; ME.
fumetere, Chaucer, C. T. 14969 (B 4153). —OF. fume-terre, ‘the herb
fumitory ;” Cot.. This is an abbreviation for fume de terre, smoke of
the earth, earth-smoke; so named from its abundance (Trevisa). = Late
L. fimus terre. —L. fiimus, smoke; and terra, earth. See Fume and
Terrace. The G. name is erd-rauch, earth-smoke; cf. W. cwd y mug,
lit. bag of smoke, fumitory.

FUN, merriment, sport. (Perhaps Scand.) Not found early. ‘ Rare
compound of oddity, frolic, and fux ;” Goldsmith, Retaliation, Post-
script, 1.3. Probably from the prov. E. verb to fun, to cheat, to hoax;
see E.D,D. Thisis ME. fonnen, to be foolish, dote; or, as act. vb.,
to deceive, befool; whence pp. fonned=mod. E. fond. See Fond;
where the word is traced further back. Der. funn-y, funn-i-ly. J Irish
jonn is from E.

FUNAMBULIST, one who walks on a rope. (L.) Formerly
funambulo, a rope-dancer ; see Gloss. to Bacon, Ady. of Learning, ed.
Wright; so that the word was suggested by Spanish; though -ist has
been put for -o; cf. Span. funambulo, a walker on a rope. = L. fin-, stem
of funis, a rope; and *ambulus, a walker, a coined sb. from ambulare,
to walk; see Amble.

FUNCTION, performance, duty, office. (F.—L.) Common in
Shak. ; see Meas. i. 2. 14; ii, 2.393 &c.— MF. function, ‘a function ;’
Cot. (F. fonction). —L. functidnem, acc. of functio, performance ; cf.
functus, pp. of fungi, to perform ; orig. to. enjoy, have the use of. Cf,
Skt. bhuij, to enjoy. Brugmann, ii. § 628. Der. function-al, -ar-y.

FUND, astore, supply, deposit. (F.—L.) ‘Fund, land or soil; also,
a foundation or bottom ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. And see Burnet,
Hist. of his Own Time, an. 1698 (R.). [It should rather have been
ond, as in Eng. Garner, ed. Arber, vi. 387 (ab. 1677); but it has been


| fini-cu-lus, double dimin. of funis, a rope.
. Der. funicul-ar.


FURLONG. 229


accommodated to the L. form.]—MF. fond, ‘a bottom, floore, ground;
-..a merchant’s stock ;’ Cot.—L. fundus, bottom, depth; cognate
with E. bottom. See Bottom, and see Found (1). And see below.

FUNDAMENT, foundation, base. (F.—L.) ME. foundement,
Sundement; Chaucer, C. T. 7685 (D 2103); Wyclif, Luke, vi. 48.
[Really F., and properly fundement, but altered to the L. spelling.]—
OF. fondement, foundation. —L. fundamentum, foundation. Formed,
with suffix -mentum, from funda-re, to found. See Found (1). Der.


. fundament-al, All’s Well, iii. 1. 2.
FULLER, a bleacher of cloth; a fuller of cloth. (L.) See note |


FUNERAL, relating to a burial. (F,—L.) Properly an adj., as


| in ‘To do th’ office of funeral servyse ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 2914 (A 2912).


=—OF. funeral, adj. (Godefroy).—Late L. funeralis, belonging to a
burial.=L. finer-, for *fines-, stem of finus, a burial; with suffix
-alis. Der. funeral, sb.; funer-e-al, Pope, Dunciad, iii. 152, coined,
from L. finere-us, funereal, with suffix -al.

FUNGUS, a spongy plant. (L.) ‘Mushromes, which be named
fungi;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, bk. xxii.c. 23.—L. fungus, a fungus.
Gk. agpéyyos, Attic form of ordyyos,a sponge. Thus fungus is allied
to sponge. See Sponge. Der. fung-ous, -o-id.

FUNICLE, a small cord, fibre. (L.) In Johnson’s Dict.—L.
See Funambulist.


FUNNEL, an instrument for pouring in liquids into vessels.
(Prov.—L.) In Ben Jonson, Discoveries, sect. headed Precipiendi
modi. And in Levins’ Dict., ed. 1570. ME. fonel; Prompt. Parv.
A Southern F. word, due to the Bourdeaux wine-trade. = Prov. founil,
enfounil, enfounilh, a funnel; Mistral, p. 911 (whence also Span. fozil,
Port. funil). = Late L. fundibulum, a funnel (Lewis) ; L. infundibulum, =
L.infundere,to pourin. = L.ix,in; and fundere,to pour. See Fuse (1).

FUR, short hair of animals. (F.—O. Low G.) [The orig. sense
was ‘casing.”| ME. forre; whence forred (or furred) hodes=furred.
hoods; P. Plowman, B. vi. 271. Also furre, Chaucer, Rom. Rose, 228.
Spelt for in King Alisaunder, 3295.—OF. forre, fuerre, a sheath, case;
(cf. Span. forro, lining of clothes, Ital. fodero, lining, fur, seabbard) ;
whence the verb forrer, to line with fur; Chaucer translates F. forrée by
furred ; Rom. Rose, 408. B. From an O. Low G. source, preserved in
Goth. fodr,a scabbard, sheath (John, xviii. 11) ; and in Icel. fodr, lining.
The cognate German word is fuiter. Allied to Skt. patra(m), a re-
ceptacle; cf. Gk. mya, a cover. From 4/PA, to protect. Brug-
marn,i.§174. Der. fur, verb, furr-ed, furr-y, furr-i-er (Goldsmith,
Animated Nature, b. iv. c. 3), furr-i-er-y.

FURBELOW, a flounce. (F.) In the Spectator, no. 15.—F.
farbala, a flounce; which, according to Diez (who follows Hécart), is
a Hainault word; the usual form is F., Span., Ital., and Port. falbala,
a word traced back to 1692 (Hatzfeld); whence also E. falbala, as
‘gq falbala apron,’ in C. Cibber, Careless Husband, A. i. sc. I (1704).
Origin unknown. Hatzfeld gives the orig. sense as ‘ bande d’étoffe
plissée ;’ and suggests a derivation from Ital. faldella, which Torriano
(ed. 1688) explains as ‘a plaiting, or puckering, also a kind of thick-
gathered frock.’ This Ital. word is the dimin. of falda, a fold; from
OHG. faldan, to fold; see Fold (1). Cf. Norm. dial. farbalas
(Moisy); Lyons dial. farbella (Puitspelu).

FURBISH, to polish, trim. (F.—OHG.) In Shak. Rich. II, i. 3.
76; Macb. i. 2. 32. ME. furbishen; Wyclif, Ezek. xxi. 9.—OF.
fourbiss-, stem. of pres. pt. of fourbir, ‘to furbish, polish ;’ Cot.—
OHG. *furbjan, furban, MHG. furben, to purify, clean, rub bright.

FURCATE, forked. (L.) The sb. furcation occurs in Sir T.
Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 9. § 4.—L. furcdtus, forked. = L. furca,
a fork. See Fork. Der. furcat-ion.

FURFURACEOUS, scurfy. (L.) Scarce; first in 1650. Merely
L. furfurdceus, like bran. = L. furfur, bran.

FURIOUS, full of fury. (F.—L.) In Chaucer, Compl. of Mars,
123.—OF. furieux, ‘furious;’ Cot.—OF. furie; see Fury. Der.
Jurious-ly, -ness.

FURL, to roll up a sail. (F.— Arab.) «. A contracted form of an
older furdle. ‘Nor to urge the thwart enclosure and furdling of
flowers ;’ Sir T. Browne, Cyrus’ Garden, c. iii. § 15; spelt fardling
in Wilkin’s edition. ‘The colours furdled [furled] up, the drum is
mute ;’ John Taylor’s Works, ed. 1630 ; cited in Nares, ed. Halliwell.
‘ Farthel, to furl;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. B. Furdle and farthel are cor-
tuptions of fardle, to pack up (see Nares); from the sb. fardel, a
package, burden. Note that fard/e also means to furl; as in ‘ fardle
it [the main-sheet] to the yard;’ Golding’s Ovid, fol. 138, l. 3 (ed.
1603). See further under Fardel.

FURLONG, one-eighth of a mile. (E.) ME. furlong, fourlong ;
P. Plowman, B. v. §; Chaucer, C. T. 11484 (F 1172). AS. furlang,
Luke, xxiv. 13. The lit. sense is ‘ furrow-long,’ or the length of a
furrow. It thus came to mean the length of an ‘acre,’ which was
originally a piece of land measuring 220 yards (40 poles) by 22 yards
(4 poles). See acre in N.E.D.=—AS. furh, a furrow ; and lang, long.
See Furrow and Long.


230 FURLOUGH


FURLOUGH, leave of absence. (Du.) Spelt furlough in Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. The gh was once sounded as f, and the word was
Dutch; hence Ben Jonson has ‘ Like a Low-Country vorloffe ;’ Staple
of News, A. v. sc. I. Du. verlof, leave, furlough ; cf. Dan. jforlov,
leave, furlough ; Swed. forlof; G. verlaub, leave, permission. B. The
Du. word stands for an older *verloof; from ver-, prefix, and -/oo/-,
the equivalent of G. -Jaub-, as seen in er-/aub-en,to permit, and in AS.
léaf, leave, permission; see Leave (2). y. The prefix ver-=Dan.
for-=E. for-; see For- (2).

FURMENTY, FURMETY; see Frumenty.

FURNACH, an oven. (F.—L.) ME. forneis, fourneys; Chaucer,
C.T.14169 (E 3353). — OF. fornaise, later fournaise, ‘afurnace ;’ Cot. =
L. fornacem, acc. of fornax,an oven.= L. fornus, furnus, an oven; with
suffix -de-; allied to L. formus,warm. Cf. Skt. gharma-, glow, warmth;
see Brugmann, i. § 146.

FURNISH, to fit up, equip. (F.—-OHG.) Common in Shak. ;
see Merch. of Ven. ii. 4. 9. OF. fournis-, stem of pres. part. of four-
nir, ‘to furnish ;? Cot. Formerly spelt fornir, furnir (Burguy) ; which
are corruptions of *formir, furmir. The AF. furmir occurs in the Life
of Edw. Confessor, 1. 1443 ; the form formir occurs in Proy., and is
also spelt fromir, which is the older spelling.=OHG. frumjan, to
perform, provide, procure, furnish; allied to OHG. fruma (MHG.
vrum, vrume), utility, profit, gain; cf. mod. G. fromm, good. From
the same root as E. former; see Former, Frame. Der. furnish-er,
-ing; also furni-ture (Spenser, F. Q. v. 3. 4), from F. fourniture,
‘furniture ;’ Cot.

FURROW, a slight trench, wrinkle. (E.) ME. forwe, P. Plow-
man, B. vi. 106; older form foruh, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. v. met.
5.1.3. AS. furh, a furrow; AZlfric’s Gloss. 1.17. The dat. pl.
furum is in Aélfred, tr. ef Boethius, v. 2; lib. i. met. 6.-+- Du. voor,
a furrow; Icel. for, a drain; Dan. fure; OHG. furh, MHG. vurch,
G. furche,a furrow. Cf. W.rhych (p-rych), a furrow; L. porca, a ridge
between two furrows. Brugmann, i. § 514. Der. furrow, verb; fur-
long, q. V-

FURTHER, comparative of fore. (E.) ME. furder, Ancren
Riwle, p. 228; forper, ferfer; Chaucer, C. T. 36, 4115 (A 4117).
AS. furdra, adj. m.; furdur, furdor, further, ady. Grein, i. 358. 4+
Du. vorders, ady., further; OFries. fordera, adj.; OHG. fordaro, G.
vorder, adj. Teut. type *furtheroz (i.e. *fur-ther-oz), answering to Gk.
mp6-Tep-os, compar. of mpé. In this view, the comp. suffix is -ther,
Gk. -rep-. See below. Der. further, vb., AS. fyrdran, formed from
furdor by mutation of x to y.

FURTHEST. (E.) Not in very early use. ME. furthest, adj.,
Gower, Conf. Amantis, i. 208; bk. i. 1. 1966. Made as the superl.
of forth; and due to regarding further as the compar. ofthe same. The
true superl. of fore is first.

FURTIV3, thief-like, stealthy. (F.—L.) In Kersey, ed. 1715.—
MF. furtif, m. furtive, f. ‘ filching, theevish ;’ Cot. = L. furtiuus, stolen,
secret.=L. furtum, theft. —L. furdri, to steal.=L. far, a thief. + Gk.
gmp, a thief; connected with pépev, to bear, carry off.—4/ BHER, to
bear. See Bear. Der. furtive-ly.

FURY, rage, passion. (F.—L.) ME. furie, Chaucer, C. T. 11262
(F 950).—OF. furie, ‘fury ;’ Cot.—L. furia, madness. —L. furere, to
rage; cf. Skt. bhuranya, to be active. —4/ BHEUR, to move about
quickly (Uhlenbeck). Der. furi-ous, q.v., -ous-ly, -ous-ness. Also
Juri-oso, from Ital. furioso; and fur-ere, from Ital. furore.

FURZBE, the whin or gorse. (E.) ME. firse, also friise, Wyclif,
Isaiah, lv. 13, Mic. vii. 4. AS. fyrs, Alfred’s tr. of Boethius, lib. iii.
met. 1; c. xxii. Older form fyres, Voc. 269. 22.

FUSCOUS, brown, dingy. (L.) ‘Sad and fuscous colours ;’ Burke,
On the Sublime, s. 16.—L. fuscus, dark, dusky; with change of -us
into -ous, as in arduous, strenuous.

FUSE (1), to melt by heat. (L.) In Johnson; but the verb is
modern, and really due to the far older words (in E.), viz. fus-ible,
Chaucer, C. T. 16324 (G 856), fus-il, i.e. capable of being melted,
Milton, P. L. xi. 573; fus-ion, Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 1.
§ 11; all founded upon L. fisus.—L. fisus, pp. of fundere, to pour,
melt. + Gk. xéew, for xéFew (base xev-), to pour; Goth. giutan, to
pour. All from 4/GHEU, to pour; of which the extended form
GHEUD (=Goth. GEUT) appears in Latin. Der. fus-ible, from
OF. fusible, ‘fusible’ (Cot.), from Late L. *fisibilis, not recorded in
Ducange ; fus-i-bili-ty; fus-ion, from F. form of L. fusidnem, acc. of
fusio, a melting; fus-il (Milton, as above), from L. fusilis, molten,
fluid. @ From the same root are found (2), con-found, con-fuse, dif-
Suse, ef-fus-ion, in-fuse, pro-fus-ion, re-fund, suf-fuse, trans-fuse ; fut-ile ;
also foison; also chyme, chyle, gush, gut.

FUSE (2), FUSHEE (1), a tube with combustible materials for
discharging shells, &c. (F.—L.) Also spelt fusee. In Kersey’s Dict.,
ed. 1715, we find: ‘ Fuse, Fusee, a pipe filled with wild fire, and put into
the touch-hole of a bomb.’ 1. Fuse first occurs in 1644, and may have
been taken directly from Ital. /uso, a spindle (with tow), also ‘a shaft


FYLFOT


or shank of anything ;’ (Torriano).—L. fusus,a spindle. 2. Fusee
first occurs in 1744, but is much earlier in French. —OF. fusée, a
spindle-ful of tow, also a fusee (Godefroy). = Late L. fisdta, a spindle
ful of tow; orig. fem. of pp. of fiisdre, to use a spindle. —L. fusus,
a spindle. See below. ;

FUSES (2), a spindle in a watch. (F.—L.) ‘Fusee or Fuzy of
a watch, that part about which the chain or string is wound ;’ Kersey,
ed. 1715,.— OF. fusée, ‘a spoole-ful or spindle-ful of thread, yarn, &c. ;’
Cot. = Late L. fusdta, a spindle-ful of thread ; orig. fem. pp. of fusare,
to use a spindle.=—L. /iisus, a spindle. See above.

FUSIG (1), a light musket. (F.—L.) The name has been trans-
ferred from the steel or fire-lock to the gun itself. Hollyband’s F.
Dict. (1580) explains F. fusil by ‘a fusill to strike fire in a tinder-boxe.’
=—F. fusil, ‘a fire-steele for a tinder-box ;’ Cot.; the same word as
Ital. focile, a steel for striking fire. = Late L. *focile, a steel for kindling
fire.—L. focus, a hearth. See Focus. Der. fusil-ier, -eer.

FUSIL (2), aspindle, in heraldry. (F.—L.) Explained in Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. OF. fuisel, fusel, a piece of wood, a spindle (Gode-
froy) ; he cites ‘ Hoc fusum, fusel’ from the Glasgow glossary. — Late
L. fusellus, formed as a dimin. from fusus, a spindle. See Fusee (2).

FUSIL (3), easily molten. (L.) See Fuse (1).

FUSS, haste, flurry. (E.) ‘There’s such a fuss and such a clatter
about their deyotion;’ Farquhar, Sir H. Wildair, A. ili. sc. 1. A
dialectal word, of imitative origin; cf. fuss up, to boil up, fussock
about, to bustle about quickly, make a fuss; E.D.D. Related words
are, probably, Norw. fussa, to complicate, to botch up, fjussa, to
complicate by using bustling haste, fjussa, a bewildered ninny ; /jassa,
to bustle abont, to fuss, to prate; /jass, a fuss (Ross); Swed. fjds,
Swed. dial. fjas, a fuss.

FUST (1), to become mouldy. (F.—L.) ‘To fust in us unused ;*
Hamlet, iv. 4. 39. ‘I mowld or fust as corne dothe, je moisis ;”
Palsgrave. Made from the form fusty (found in 1398), which is a lit.
translation of OF. fusté, ‘fusty, tasting of the cask, smelling of the
vessel ;’ Cot.— OF. fuste, ‘a cask,’ Cot.; allied to fust, ‘any staffe,
stake, stocke, stump, trunke, or log.’ [The cask was so named from
its resemblance to the trunk of a tree.]—L. fustem, acc. of fustis, a
thick knobbed stick, cudgel. Der. fus-ty, fust-i-ness ; and see below.

FUST (2), the shaft ofa column. (F.—L.) ‘ Fust, the shaft, or
body of a pillar;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.—OF. fust, a stump,
trunk; Cot.—L. fustem; asabove. Der. fust-ig-ate, q.y.

FUSTIAN, akind of coarsecloth. (F.—Ital.—Egypt.) In early
use. ME. fustane. ‘The mes-hakele of medeme fustane’ =the mass-
cloth [made] of common fustian; O. E. Homilies, ed. Morris, ii. 162.
Also fustian, Chaucer, C. T. 75.—OF. fustaine; Supp. to Godefroy,
Cot.—Ital. fustagno; Low L. fustineum, fustanium. = Arab. fustit, a
suburb of Cairo, in Egypt; whence the stuff first came. The Arab.
fustat also means ‘a tent made of goat’s hair.’ See Rich. Arab. Dict.
p. 1090. @ Introduced into French in the middle ages, through
Genoese commerce.

FUSTIGATE, to cudgel. (L.) ‘ Fustigating him for his faults;’
Fuller’s Worthies, Westmorland (R.). ‘Six fustigations;’ Fox,
Martyrs, p. 609 (R.).—Late L. fustigare, to cudgel (White and
Riddle). =—L. fust-, base of fustis, a cudgel; and -ig-, weakened form
from agere, to drive. See Fust (1). Der. fustigat-ion.

FUSTY, mouldy. (F.—L.) In Shak. Cor.i.9. 7. See Fust (1).

FUTILE, trifling, vain. (F.—L.) Orig. signifying ‘ pouring forth,’
esp. pouring forth vain talk, talkative. ‘As for talkers and futile
persons, they are commonly vain;’ Bacon, Essay VL =F. futile,
‘light, vain;’ Cot.—L. fatilis, futtilis, that which easily pours forth ;
also, vain, empty, futile. Formed with suffix -:/’s from the base *fud-,
to pour; cf. ef-fit-ire, for *effudtire, to blab (Bréal).—4/ GHEU, to
pour; see Fuse. Der. futile-ly, futil-i-ty.

FUTTOCKS, certain timbers in a ship. (E.) ‘ Futtocks, the
compassing timbers in a ship, that make the breadth of it;’ Kersey’s
Dict., ed. 1715. Called foot-hooks in Bailey. Explained as foot-hooks
in 16445 hook referring to the bent shape of the timbers. Cf. ‘Cour-
baston, a crooked peece of timber tearmed a knee, or futtock ;’ Cot.

FUTURE, about to be. (F.—L.) ME. futur; Chaucer, C. T.
16343 (G 875). —OF. futur, m. future, f. ‘future ;’ Cot. —L. futirus,
about to be; future part. from base fu-, to be; cf. fu-i, 1 was.—
o/ BHEU, to be. See Be. Der. futur-i-ty, Shak. Oth. iil. 4. 117;
future-ly, Two Noble Kinsmen, i. 1. 174 (Leopold Shakspere).

FUZZ-BALL, a spongy fungus. (E.) Spelt fussebal/e in Minsheu,
ed. 1627. <A fuzz-ball is a light, spongy ball resembling (at first
sight) a mushroom; also called puff-ball. Cf. prov. E. fuzzy, light
and spongy; fozy, spongy; E.D.D. Of English origin. Cf. Du.
voos, spongy ; Norw. fos, spongy; Low G. fussig’, loose, weak. Allied
to L. pis-ula, pustula, a pimple; Gk. puvodev, to blow. @] Also
called puckfiste, as in Cotgrave (s. v. vesse de loup); but this is from foist.

FYLFOT, a peculiarly formed cross, each arm being bent at right
angles, always in the same direction. (E.) Also called a gamma-


GABARDINE, GABERDINE


dion. See Fairholt, Dict. of Terms in Art; and Boutell’s Heraldry.
Modern; and due to a mistake. MS. Lansdowne 874, at leaf 190,
has fylfot, meaning a space in a painted window, at the bottom, that
Jills the foot. This was erroneously connected (in 1842) with the
‘gammadion,’ as the cross was rightly named.


G


GABARDINE, GABERDINE, a coarse frock for men.
(Span.—Teut.) In Shak. Merch. i. 3. 113; and in Du Wes, Supp.
to Palsgrave, p. 907, col. 1: ‘the gabardine, Ja gauardine.’ =Span.
gabardina, a coarse frock. Cf. Ital. gavardina (Florio); and OF.
galvardine, ‘a gaberdine,’ Cot.; whence ME. gawbardyne. Prob.
‘a pilgrim’s frock;’ from MHG. walfart (G. wallfahrt), pilgrimage. =
MHG. wallen, to wander ; fart, travel, from faran, to go; see Fare.

GABBULE, to chatter, prattle. (E.) In Shak. Temp. i. 2. 356.
Formed, as a frequentative, with suffix -le, from ME. gabben, to talk
idly, once in common use; see Chaucer, C. T. 15072 (B 4256); P.
Plowman, B. iii. 179. Of imitative origin; cf. gaggle, jabber, gobble.
@ The ME. gabben, to mock, from OF. gaber, to mock, is from Icel.
gabba, to mock, and is prob. of imitative origin. Cf. Icel. gap, ‘gab,
gibes;’ Norw. gapa, toclamour. See Gape; andcompare Babble.
Der. gabbl-er, gabbl-ing.

GABION, a bottomless basket filled with earth, as a defence
against the fire ofan enemy. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘ Gabions, great baskets
§ or 6 foot high, which being filled with earth, are placed upon
batteries ;” Kersey’s Dict., ed.1715. Also found in Minsheu; and in
Marlowe, 2 Tamb. iii. 3. 56.—F. gabion, ‘a gabion;’ Cot.=Ital.
gabbione, a gabion, large cage; augmentative form of gabbia, a cage.
The Ital. gabbia also means ‘the top of the maste of a ship where
the shrouds are fastened’ (Florio); the Span. gavia is used in the
same sense. The Ital. gabbva, in the latter sense, is also spelt gaggia,
which is allied to F.and E. cage. B. All from Late L. cavea, L. cauea,
a_ hollow place, cage, den, coop.—L. cauus, hollow. See Cage,
Cave, Gaol. Der: gabionn-ade (F. gabionnade, Cot.; from Ital.
gabbionata, an intrenchment formed of gabions).

‘GABLE, a peak of a house-top. (F.—Scand.) ME. gable,
Chaucer, C. T. 3571; P. Plowman, B. iii. 49. — OF. gable (Godefroy) ;
Norm. dial. gable; cf. Late L. gabulum, a gable, front of a building ;
Ducange. = Icel. gafl, Norw. and Dan. gavl, Swed. gafvel, a gable.
AS. geafel, a fork; Du. gaffel, G. gabel, a-fork. Further allied to
Olrish gabu/, a fork, gallows; W. gaff, the fork of the thighs. With
a different gradation, we find Goth. gibla, pinnacle, G. giebel, Du.
gevel, gable, OHG. gebal, head; also Gk. xepadn (Idg. *ghebhald).
See Gaff. Der. gable-end.

GABY, a simpleton. (Scand.) A dialectal word; see E.D.D.
Also in the form gawby. Prob. Scand.; cf. MDan. gabe, also gdbe
(Jutland), a fool (Kalkar); Dan. dial. gabenar, a simpleton (Dan.
nar means ‘fool’), Allied to Dan. gabe, to gape. Cf. also Icel.
gapi, a rash, reckless man; gapamudr (lit. gape-mouthed), a gaping,
heedless fellow ; Icel. gapa, to gape. See Gape.

GAD (1), a bar of steel, goad. (Scand.) ‘A gad of steel ;”? Titus
Andron, iv. I. 103, Also ‘upon the gad,’ i.e. upon the goad,
suddenly ; K) Lear, i. 2. 26. ‘Gadde of steele, quarreau dacier ;’
Palsgrave. ME. gad, a goad or whip; ‘bondemen with her gaddes’
=husbandmen with their goads or whips; Havelok, 1016.—Icel.
gaddr (for *gazdr), a spike, sting, hence a goad. + Goth. gazds, a rod;
Irish gath, a spear, sting ; L. hasta, a spear. 4] Much influenced by
goad, with which it is not etymologically connected. Der. gad-fly,
i.e. sting-fly; and see gad (2).

GAD (2), to ramble idly. (Scand.?) ‘Where have you been
gadding ?’ Romeo, iy. 2.16.. ‘ Gadde abrode, vagari;’ Levins, 7. 47.
Perhaps the orig. sense was to run about like cattle stung by a gad-fly.
Cf. to have a gadfly, to gad about (1591); in N. E. D.=Icel. gadda, to
goad.—Icel. gaddr, a goad. See above. @ Or possibly a back-
formation from ME, gadeling, a vagabond, for which see Gather.

GAFF, a light fishing-spear; also, a sort of boom. (F.—Teut.)
The gaff of a ship takes its name from the fork-shaped end which
rests against the mast. ‘ Gaff, an iron hook to pull great fishes into
a ship; also, an artificial spur for a cock;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.
= OF, gaffe, ‘an iron hook wherewith sea-men pull great fishes into
their ships ;’ Cot.; and sée Supp. to Godefroy. Cf. Span. and Port.
gafa, ahook, gaff. B. Of Teut. origin. = Low G. gaffel, a two-pronged
hayfork ; EFries. gaffel, a fork, a ship’s gaff; Du. gaffel, a pitchfork,
a ship’s gaff. Allied to G. gabel, a fork. See Gable. (Korting,
§ 4Io1. ;

‘GAFFER, an old man, grandfather. (Hybrid; F. and E.) ‘And


GALA 231


gaffer madman ;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, The Captain, iii. 5. Similarly,
gammer is a familiar name for an old woman, as in the old play of
‘Gammer Gurton’s Needle; in which ‘ gaffar vicar’ also occurs;
A. vy. sc. 2. The words are corruptions of gramfer and grammer,
which are the West of England forms of grandfather and grandmother ;
see E.D.D.

GAG, to stop the mouth forcibly, to silence. (E.) In Shak, Tw.
Nt. i. 5. 94; v. 384. ME. gaggen, to suffocate; Prompt. Parv. Of
imitative origin; cf. gaggle, gugele. Of similar formation is the Irish
gaggach, stammering. See Gaggle. Der. gag, sb.

GAGE (1), a pledge. (F.—Teut.) ME. gage, King Alisaunder,
904.—F. gage, m., ‘a gage, pawne, pledge;’ Cot. Cf. Late L.
uadium, a pledge.—Teut. type *wadjom, n., a pledge; as in Goth.
wadi, AS, wedd, a pledge. See Wed, and see Wage. From the
same source are Ital. gaggio, Span. and Port. gage, a pledge
(Hatzfeld). Der. gage, dis } en-gage, dis-en-gage. ide RE

GAGE (2), to gauge; see Gauge.

GAGGLE, to cackle as geese. (E.) ME. gaglen, Rich. Redeles,
iii. ror. An imitative word; a frequentative from the base gag-.
Cf. cack-le, gabb-le; also Icel. gagl, a wild goose; gagg, a fox’s cry;
Lithuan. gagéti, to gaggle. Cf. Gugegle.

GAIETY, mirth. (F.—Teut.) ‘Those gayities how doth she
slight ;” Habington, Castara, pt. iii. last poem, 1. 2; the 1st ed.
appeared in 1634.—OF. gayeté, ‘mirth, glee;’ Cot.—OF. gay,
‘merry ;’ id. See Gay.

GAIN (1), profit, emolument. (F.—Teut.) First in 1496; Pals-
grave has: ‘ Gayne or gettyng,’ p. 224; and ‘I gayne, I wynne,’
p- 559. = OF, gain, m., F. gagne, f. sb.; from OF. gaigner, F. gagner,
to gain; see Gain (2) below. 4 It displaced ME. gain, advantage,
which was of Scand. origin; from Icel. gagn, gain, advantage; Swed.
gagn, Dan. gavn, Allied to the (obsolete) ME. verb gainen, to profit,
be of use, avail, gen. used impersonally; see Chaucer, C. T. 1178
(A 1176) ; this answers to Icel. and Swed. gégna, to encounter, to suit.
Der. gain-ful, gain-ful-ly, gain-ful-ness, gain-less, gain-less-ness.

GAIN (2), to acquire, get, win. (F.—Teut.) Not in early use.

‘Yea, though he gaive and cram his purse with crounes;’ Gascoigne,
Fruites of Warre, st.69. Again, he has just above, in st. 66: ‘To
get a gaine by any trade or kinde.’ See Gain (1). [This verb
superseded the old use of the ME. gainen, to profit.} B. The
etymology of F. gagner, OF. gaigner (Cotgrave), gaagnier, gaaignier
(Burguy) =Ital. guadagnare, is from the OHG. weidenén (for *weidin-
jan), to pasture, which was the orig. sense, and is still preserved in the
F. sb. gagnage, pasturage, pasture-land.=OHG, weida (G. weide),
pasturage, pasture-ground ; cf. MHG. weiden, to pasture, hunt. +4 Icel.
veiér, hunting, fishing, the chase; veida, to catch, to hunt; AS. wad,
a hunt; Grein, ii. 636. -Cf. L. wéna@ri, to hunt. Further allied to Skt.
véti, he follows after (Uhlenbeck),

GAINLY, suitable, gracious. (Scand.) Nearly obsolete, except
in ungainly, now meaning ‘awkward.’ In Allit. Poems, ed. Morris,
C. 833; B. 728. Formed, with suffix -ly, from Icel. gegn, ready,
serviceable, kind, good. See Ungainly.

GAINSAY, to speak against. (Scand. and E.) In the A.V. Luke,
xxi. 15. ME. geinseien, a rare word. ‘ That thei not 3ein-seye my
sonde’=that they may not gainsay my message; Cursor Mundi,
5769 (Trinity MS.). The Cotton MS. reads: ‘pat pai noght sai
agains mi sand.’ B. The latter part of the word is E. say, q.v. The
prefix is rather the Icel. gegn, against, than the AS. gegn, against, as
occurring in the sb. gegncwide, a speech against anything. The
latter is better known in the comp. ongegn, ongéan, signifying again
or against. See Again, Der. gainsay-er, A.V. Titus, i. 9; gainsay-
ing, A.V. Acts, x. 29.

GAIRISH, GARISH, gaudy; see Garish.

GAIT, manner of walking. (Scand.) In Shak. Temp. iv. 102. A
particular use of ME. gate, a way. ‘ And goth him forth, and in his
gate’=and goes forth, and in his way ; Gower, C. A. iii. 196; bk.
Vii. 3314.—Icel. gata, a way, path, road ; Swed. gata, astreet ; Dan.
gade, a street.4-Goth. gatwd, a street; G. gasse, a street. See
Gate (2).

GAITER, a covering for the ankle. (F.—Teut.) Modern. Not
in Johnson’s Dict.—F. guétre, a gaiter; formerly spelt guesétre.
‘ Guestres, startups, high shooes, or gamashes for countrey folkes ; ’
Cot. Marked by Brachetas ‘ of unknown origin.’ B. However, the
form of the word shows it to be of Teutonic origin; and prob. from
the same source as MHG. wester, a child’s chrisom-cloth (G. wester-
hemd) and the Goth. wasti, clothing ; cf. Skt. vastra-,a cloth, garment ;
see Vesture, Vest. But see Korting, § toor4.

GALA, pomp, festivity. (F.—Ital.-OHG.) Chiefly in the comp.
‘a gala-day’ or ‘a gala-dress.’. Modern; not in Johnson. Sheridan
has: ‘the annual gala of a race-ball;’ Sch. for Scandal, i. 2,.—F. gala,
borrowed from Ital. gala, ornament, finery, festive attire. Cf. Ital.
di gala, merrily; closely connected with Ital. galante, gay, lively.


232 GALAXY |.
See Gallant. Der. gala-day=F. jour de gala, Span. and Port. dia
de gala.


GALAXY, the ‘ milky way’ in the sky; a splendid assemblage.
(F.—L.—Gk.). ‘See yonder, lo, the galaxye Which men clepeth
the milky wey ;’ Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, ii. 428. — OF. galaxie, ‘ the
milky way ;’ Cot. =L. galaxiam, acc. of galaxias.— Gk. yadafias, the
milky way. = Gk. yadaxs-, for yaAaxr-, stem of yada, milk, Certainly
allied to L. lact-, stem of Jac, milk; see Lacteal.

GALE (1), a strong wind. (Scand.) InShak. Temp. v. 314. To
be explained from Dan. gal, mad, furious; the Norweg. galen is
particularly used of storm and wind, as ein galen storm, eit galet veer,
a furious storm (Aasen). We say, ‘it blows a gale.’ Cf. Icel. gola,
a breeze, fjall-gola, a breeze from the fells. B. The Icel. galinn,
furious, is from gala, to sing, enchant. Cf. F. galerne, a north-west
wind.

GALE (2), a plant; the bog-myrtle. (E.) ME. gayle; Cath.
Anglicum. AS. gagel; AS. Leechdoms, iii. 6.4-Du. gagel.

GALEATHED, helmeted. (L.) Botanical. = L. galeatus, helmeted.

= LL. galea, a helmet.
GALINGALE, the pungent root of a plant. (F.—Span.— Arab.
—Pers.—Chinese.) ME. galingale, Chaucer, C. T. 383 (A 381).—
OF. galingal (Godefroy) ; the form garingal is more common, and
the usual later F. form is galangue, as in Cotgrave.—Span. galanga,
the same. = Arab. khalanjain, galingale; Rich. Dict. p. 625.—Pers.
khulanjan; id. p. 639. Said to be of Chinese origin; see N.E. D.
See Devic, Supp. to Littré; Marco Polo, ed. Yule, ii. 181.

GALIOT, a small galley; see Galliot.

GALL (1), bile, bitterness. (E.) ME. galle; P. Plowman, B.
xvi. 155. OMerc. galla, AS. gealla; Matt. xxvii. 34.4-Du. gal;
Icel. gall; Swed. galla; Dan. galde (with excrescent d); G. galle.4-
L. fel; Gk. xoA7. B. From the same rootas E, yellow; so that gall
was named from its yellowish colour; Prellwitz. Cf. Russ. jelch(e),
gall (j=zh) ; jeltuii, yellow. See Yellow. Der. gall-bladder,

GALL (2), to rub asore place, to vex. (F.—L.) ‘Let the galled
jade wince;’ Hamlet, iii. 2. 253. ME. gallen. ‘The hors...
was ... galled on the bak;’ Gower, C. A. ii. 46; bk. iv. 1344. —
OF. galler, ‘to gall, fret, itch, rub;’ Cot.—OF. galle, ‘a galling,
fretting, itching of the skin;’ id.; F. gale, a scab on fruit. —Late
L. galla, a soft tumour, app. the same word as L. galla, a gall-nut;
see below. 4 But also partly E.; cf. AS. gealla, (1) gall, bile;
(2) a gall on a horse. Soalso Du. gal. Der. gall, sb., Chaucer,
C. T. 6522 (D 940).

GALL (3), GALL-NUT, a vegetable excrescence produced by
insects. (F.—L.) InShak. ; ‘Though ink be made of gall ;’ Cymb.
i, 1.101. ME. gaile, Prompt. Parv.=OF-. galle, ‘the fruit called a
gall;’ Cot. =—L. galla, an oak-apple, gall-nut.

GALLANT, gay, splendid, brave, courteous. (F.—OHG.)
‘ Good and gallant ship ;’ Shak. Temp. v. 237. ‘ Like young lusty
galantes;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. ii.c. 105 (R.), ME, galaunt,
Polit. Poems, ed. Wright, i. 274.—OF. gallant; Cotgrave gives
‘gallant homme, a gallant, goodly fellow;” properly spelt galant
(with one 7), asinmod. F, B. Galant is the pres. part. of OF. galer,
to rejoice ; Cotgrave has: ‘ galler le bon temps, to make merry, to pass
the time pleasantly.’—OF. gale, show, mirth, festivity; the same
word as Ital., Span., and Port. gala, ornament, festive attire. y. Of
Teutonic origin; and prob. from MHG. wallen, OHG. wallén, to go
on pilgrimage (Hatzfeld). Der. gallant, sb., whence also gallant,
vb.; gallant-ly, gallant-ness; also gallant-r-y (Spectator, no. 4) from
MF. gallanterie, ‘gallantness,’ Cot. Also see gala, gall-oon.

GALLEON, a large galley. (Span.) Cotgrave explains MF.
gallion as ‘a gallion, an armada, a great ship of warre ;’ but the word
is Spanish.—Span. galeon, a galleon, Spanish armed ship of burden ;
formed, with augmentative suffix -on, from Late L. galea, a galley.
See Galley.

GALLERY, a balcony, long covered passage. (F.—Late L.)
‘ The long galleries ;’ Surrey, tr. of Virgil’s Aeneid, b. ii, 1. 691. — OF.
gallerie, galerie, ‘a gallerie, or long roome to walke in; ’ Cot.—Late
L. galeria, along portico, gallery; Ducange. B. Uncertain ; perhaps
from Gk. xa@Aov, wood, timber (Korting). See below.

GALLEY, a long, low-built ship. (F.—Late L.) In early use.
ME. galeie; King Horn, ed, Lumby, 185.—OF. galie (Godefroy) ;
gallée (Cotgrave).—Late L. galea, a galley. Of unknown origin;
perhaps from Gk, «adov, wood, also sometimes a ship (Korting),
Der. galley-slave; see galle-on, galli-as, galli-ot.

GALLIARD, a lively dance. (F.—C.?) In Shak. Tw. Nt. i.
3. 127, 137. ‘Dansyng of galyardes;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of
Helth, bk. ii. c. 33.—F. gailarde, fem. of gaillard, lively ; cf. galop
gaillard, ‘the galliard;’ Cot. Span. gallarda [in which J is pro-
nounced as Jy], a kind of lively Spanish dance; Span. gallardo,
pleasant, gay, lively. B. Of uncertain origin; Diez rejects a con-
nexion with gala and gallant (Span. galante) on account of the double


GALLOW


I and the F. form gaillard. The OF. gaillard meant ‘ valiant’ or
“bold ;’ perhaps of Celtic origin. Cf. Bret. galloud, power, galloudek,
strong; Corn. galluidoc, able; Irish and Gael. galach, valiant, brave ;
W. gallu, to be able. Cf. Lith. gal, 1 am able (Thurneysen).

GALLIAS, a sort of galley. (F.—Ital.—Late L.) In Shak. Tam.
Shrew, ii. 380.—OF. galeace, ‘a galeass;’ Cot.—Ital. galeazza, a
heavy, low-built galley. Ital. and Late L. galea, a galley. See
Galley. @ On the termination -ace, see Cutlass.

GALLIGASKINS, large hose or trousers. (F.—Ital.—L.)
a. Cotgrave has: ‘ Garguesques, a fashion of strait Venitians
without cod-peeces.’ Also: ‘ Greguesques, slops, gregs, gallogascoins,
Venitians.’ Also: § Gregues, wide slops, gregs, gallogascoins, Veni-
tians, great Gascon or Spanish hose.’ Also: ‘ Greguesque, the same
as Gregeois, Grecian, Greekish.’ B. Here it is clear that Garguesques
is a corruption of Greguesques; that Greguesque originally meant
Greekish; and that Gregues (whence obs. E. gregs) is a mere con-
traction of Greguesque. y. And further, Greguesque is borrowed from
Ital. Grechesco, Greekish, a form given by Florio; which is derived
(with suffix-esco=E. -ish) from Ital. Greco, Greek. = L. Grecus, Greek.
8. Finally, it seems probable that gallogascoin is nothing but a deriva-
tive of Ital. Grechesco, a name given (as shown by the evidence) to a
particular kind of hose or breeches originally worn at Venice. The
corruption seems to have been due to a mistaken notion on the part of
some of the wearers of galligaskins, that they came, not from Venice,
but from Gascony. @ Thissuggestion is due to Wedgwood ; it would
seem that galligaskins = garisgascans< garguesquans ; where the suffix
-an is the same asin Greci-an, &c. ‘The word was also influenced by
E. galley ; they were thought to be ‘ like shipmen’s hose ;’ N. E. D.

GALLIMAUFREY, a hodge-podge, aragout. (F.) Robinson,
in his tr. of More’s Utopia, has: ‘a tragycall comedye or gallymal-
freye;” ed. Arber, p. 64.—F. galimafrée ahodge-podge; spelt calima-
free in the 14th cent. (Hatzfeld). Of unknown origin,

GALLINACEOUS, pertaining to a certain order of birds. (L.)
Modern. Englished from lL. gallinaceus, belonging to poultry.
Formed from L. gallina, a hen.—L. gallus, a cock.

GALLIOT, a small galley. (F.—Late L.) ME. galiote, Minot’s
Poems, Expedition of Edw. III to Brabant, 1. 81 (Spec. of Eng. ed.
Morris and Skeat, p. 129).—OF. galiote, ‘a galliot ;’ Cot.— Late L.
galeota, asmall galley; dimin. of galea, a galley. Cf. Ital. galeotta, a
galliot. See Galley.

GALLIPOT, a small glazed earthen pot. (F.and E.) In Beaum.
and Fletcher, Nice Valour, iii. 1. 43. Similarly earthen tiles were
called galley-tiles. Wedgwood (ed. 1872) quotes from Stow: ‘ About
the year 1570, I. Andries and I, Janson, potters, came from Antwerp
and settled in Norwich, where they followed their trade, making
galley-tiles and apothecaries vessels’ [ gallipots]. Apparently so called
because at first brought over in galleys, Cf. galley-halfpenny, See
N.E.D. Phillips, ed. 1706, says that the galley-men came in galleys
from Genoa, ‘landed their goods at a place in Thames-street nam’d
galley-key,and traded with their own silver small coin call’d galley-
halfpence.? From Galley and Pot.

GALLON, a measure holding 4 quarts. (F.) ME. galon, galun,
galoun; P. Plowman, B. v. 224, 343; Chaucer, C. T. 16973 (H 24).
Spelt galun in King Horn, ed. Lumby, 1123. = OF. gallon, galon, jalon,
agallon (Godefroy) ; Late L. galéna (also galo), an English measure for
liquids; Ducange. B. The suffix -ov is augmentative ; anda shorter
form appears in mod. F. jale, a bowl, which evidently stands for an
older form *gale, just as jalon is for galon. ‘Thus the sense is ‘a large
bowl.’ Ofunknown origin.

GALLOON, a kind of lace or narrow ribbon. (F.—-OHG.) The
compound galloon-laces occurs in Beaum. and Fletcher, Philaster, v. 4.
46. Cotgrave has: ‘ Galon, galloon-lace.’ =F. galon, as in Cotgrave
(like E. balloon from F. ballon); cf. Span. galon, galloon, lace; orig.
any kind of finery for festive occasions. = OF. gale, Span. gala, parade,
finery, court-dress; the suffix -on being augmentative, as in balloon.
See Gallant, Gala.

GALLOP, to ride very fast. (F.—Teut.) ‘Styll he galoped.
forth right;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. i, c. 140. We also find
the form walopen, in the Romance of Partenay, ed. Skeat, 4827 (and
note on p. 259); and the pres. pt. walopande, Morte Arthur, ed.
Brock, 2827.—OF. galoper, to gallop; of which an older form must
have been waloper, as shown by the derivative walopin in Roquefort,
spelt galopin in mod. F. The sb. galop also appears as walop in
OFrench (Bartsch) ; and may be the original whence the verb was
derived. ‘The sense was perhaps ‘ Celtic running.’=OSax. Walk, a
Celt; and kldpan, to run, to leap; see Walnut and Leap. The
Norw. vallhopp, a gallop (Aasen); lit. ‘a bounding over a field,’ or
‘field-hop,’ would account for the word even better; but is merely
an adaptation from Teutonic. Der. gallop-ade.

GALLOW, to terrify. (E.) In Shak. King Lear, iii. 2. 44.
Prov. E, (Somersets.) gaily, ME. galwen. AS. galwan, in the comp,


GALLOWAY


age@elwan, to astonish ; ‘ pa weard ic agzelwed’ = then was I astonished ;
/Elfred, tr. of Boethius, c. xxxiv. § 5; lib. iii. pr. ro.

GALLOWAY, a nag, pony. (Scotland.) So called from
Galloway in Scotland ; the word occurs in Drayton’s Polyolbion, s. 3.
1. 28. Cf. Galloway-nag in Shak. 2 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 205.

GALLOW-GLASS, GALLOGLASS, a heavy-armed foot-

soldier. (Irish.) In Macbeth, i. 2. 13.—IJrish galloglach, a servant,
a heavy-armed soldier.—Irish gall, a foreigner, an Englishman ;
oglach, a youth, servant, soldier (from og, OlIrish dac, dc, young). It
meant ‘an English servitor;’ according to Spenser, View of Ireland,
Globe ed. p. 640; but gall orig. referred to Danes (Windisch).
(N. and Q. 6S. x. 145.)
- GALLOWS, a gibbet, an instrument for hanging criminals. (E.)
ME. galwes, Chaucer, C. T. 6240 (D 658). AS. galga, gealga, a cross,
gibbet, gallows; Grein, i. 492. , Hence was formed ME. galwe, by
the usual change from -ga to -we (and later still to -ow) ; and it
became usual to employ the word in the plural galwes, so that the
mod. E. gallows is also, strictly speaking, a plural form. + Icel. galgt,
the gallows, a gibbet; Dan. and Swed. galge, a gibbet; Du. galg;
Goth. galga, a cross; G. galgen. Teut. type *galgon-; cf. Lith.
Zalga, a pole (Z=zh).

GALOCHH, a kind of shoe or slipper. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) ME.
galoche, Chaucer, C. T. 10869 (F 555); P. Plowman, B. xviii. 14. —
F. galoche, ‘a woodden shooe or patten, made all of a piece, without
any latchet or tie of leather, and worne by the poor clowne in winter;’
Cot. = Late L. *galopia, *calopia, formed from *calopiis = Gk. kaddmous
(Hatzfeld) ; we find Late L. calopedia, a clog, wooden shoe (Brachet) ;
also calopodium=Gk. kadorddiov, dimin. of xaddmous, kaddmous, a
shoe-maker’s last. Gk. «a@Ao-, stem of «@Aov, wood; and mods (gen.
705-ds), a foot, cognate with E. foot.

GALORE, abundantly, in plenty. (C.) First in 1675. Also
spelt gelore, gilore in Jamieson, and golore in Todd’s Johnson.
“Galloor, plenty, North;’ Grose (1790).—TIrish goleor, sufficiently ;
where go, lit. ‘to,’ is a particle which, when prefixed to an adjective,
renders it an adverb, and J/eor, adj., means sufficient; Gael. gw leor,
gu leoir, which is the same. Cf, Irish Jia, more, allied to L. plis
(Stokes-Fick, p. 41).

GALT (1), GAULT, a series of beds of clay and marl. (Scand.)
A modern geological term. Prov. E. galt, clay, brick-earth, Suffolk
(Halliwell). Perhaps of Scand. origin. Norw. gald, hard ground,
a place where the ground is trampled hard by frequent treading, also
a place where snow is trodden hard; Icel. gald, hard snow, also spelt
galdr. (Doubtful.)

.GALT (2), a boar-pig. (Scand.) ‘Growene as a galte;’ Allit.
Morte Arthure, 1101.—Icel. golir, galti, a boar; Swed. Dan. galt,
ahog. Cf. OHG. galza, a sow; (see Schade).

GALVANISM, a kind of electricity. (Ital.) Named from
Luigi Galvani, of Bologna in Italy, inventor of the galvanic battery
in A.D. 1791. Der. galvani-c, galvani-se.

GAMBADO, a kind of legging. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘ Gambadoes,
much worne in the west, whereby, while one rides on horseback, his
leggs are in a coach, clean and warme;’ Fuller’s Worthies, Cornwall
(R.). An E. adaptation, simulating Spanish, of F. gambade, of which
the usual sense is ‘ gambol;’ see Gambol,

GAMBESON, a military tunic, sometimes padded. (F.—Teut.)
‘A band of Moorish knights gaily arrayed in gambesons of crimson
silk ;’ Longfellow, Outre-Mer (Ancient Spanish Ballads). ME.
gambisoun,, King Alisaunder, 5151.—OF. gambison, gambeison,
wambison (Godefroy); cf. Late L. wambasium. So called from
covering the belly. OHG. wamba, belly; see Womb.

GAMBIT, an opening at chess, (F.—Ital.—L.)  F. gambit. = Ital.
gambetto. a tripping up. = Ital. gamba, the leg; see Gambol.

GAMBLE, to play for money. (E.) Comparatively a modern
word. It occurs in Cowper, Tirocinium, 246; and Burns has
gambling, Twa Dogs, 154. Formed, by suffix -le (which has a fre-
quentative force), from the verb to game, the b being merely excres-
cent; so that gamble=gamm-le, This form, gamm-le (Yorkshire, see
E.D.D.) has taken the place of the ME, gamenien or gamenen, to
play at games, to gamble, which occurs in King Alisaunder, ed.
Weber, 5461. AS. gamenian, to play at a game, in the Liber
Scintillarum, § 55 (p. 172).—AS. gamen, a game. See Game.
Der. gambl-er.

-GAMBOGE, a gum-resin, of a bright yellow colour. (Asiatic.)
In Johnson’s Dict. ‘Brought from India by the Dutch, about a.p.
1600;’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates. The word is a corruption of Cam-
bodia, the name of the district where it is found. Cambodia is in the
Annamese territory, not far from the gulf of Siam.
is given by Dampier in 1699; Supp. to Voy. round the World, vi. 105 ;’
€N. E. D.).

GAMBOL, a frisk, caper. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Shak. Hamlet,
vy. I. 209, Older spellings are gambold, Phaer, tr, of Virgil, Ain. vi.


‘ The derivation |


GANG 233


(1. 643 of Lat. text); gambawd, or gambaud, Skelton, Ware the Hawk,
65; gambolde, gambalde in Palsgrave, s.v. Fetche; gambauld, Udal,
Flowers of Lat. Speaking, fol. 72 (R.). OF. gambade, ‘a gamboll ;’
Cot.—Ital. gambata, a kick (Brachet).—Ital. gamba, the leg; the
same word as F. jambe, OF. gambe.— Late L, gamba, earlier spelling
camba; cf. acc. pl. cambas, glossed by AS, homme in A.S. Leechdoms,
vol. i. p. Ixxi; ‘the bend’ of the leg. Cf. Gael. and W. cam,
crooked, answering to OCelt. *kambos (fem. *kamba), bent, crooked ;
Stokes-Fick, p. 78. 4 The spelling with 7 seems to have been due
to the confusion of the F. suffix -ade with F. suffix -aude, the latter of
which stands for an older -alde. Hence gambade was first corrupted
to gambaude (Skelton); then written gambauld (Udal) or gambold
(Phaer) ; and lastly gambol (Shakespeare), with loss of final d. Der.
gambol, vb., Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 1. 168.

GAME, sport, amusement. (E.) In Shak. Mids. Nt. Dr. i. 1. 240.
ME. game, Chaucer, C. T. 1808 (A 1806); older form gamen, spelt
gammyn and gamyn in Barbour’s Bruce, ed. Skeat, iii, 465, ix. 466,
&c. AS. gamen, gomen, a game, sport; Grein, i. 366. OSax.
gaman; Icel. gaman; Dan. gammen, mirth, merriment; MSwed.
gamman, joy (Ihre); OHG. gaman, MHG. gamen, joy. Root un-
known. Der. game, vb., gam-ing; game-some, ME. gamsum (=gamen-
sum), Will. of Palerne, 4193; game-ster (Merry Wives, iii. 1. 37),
where the suffix -ster, orig. feminine, has a sinister sense, Koch, Engl.
Gram. iii. 47 ; also game-cock, game-keeper. Doublet, gammon (2),

GAMMER, an old dame; lit. ‘ grandmother;’ see Gaffer.

GAMMON (1), the thigh of a hog, pickled and dried. (F.—L.)
‘A gammon of bacon;’ 1 Hen. IV, ii. 1. 26. Older form gambon,
Book of St. Alban’s, fol. f 2, back, 1. 9.— OF. gambon (Picard gambon),
the old form of F. jambon, corresponding to OF. gambe for jambe.
Cotgrave explains jambon by ‘a gammon;’ and Florio explains Ital.
gambone by ‘a hanche [haunch],a gammon.’ Formed, with suffix
-on, from OF. gambe, a leg. See Gambol.

GAMMON (2), nonsense, orig. a jest. (E.) A slang word; but
really the ME. gamen preserved; see Backgammon and Game.
Cf. ‘ This gamon shall begin ;” Chester Plays, vi.260. And Stanihurst
has gamening, i.e. ‘gambling ;’ Virgil, ed. Arber, p. 153.

GAMUT, the musical scale. (Hybrid; F.—Gk. and L.) In
Shak. Tam. Shrew, iii. 1.67, 71. A compound word, made up from
OF. game or gamme, and ut. 1. Gower has gamme in the sense of
‘a musical scale;’ C. A. iii, 90; bk. vii. 172.—OF. game, gamme,
‘gamut, in musick;’ Cot.—Gk. ydéupa, the name of the third letter
of the alphabet. Cf. Heb. gimel, the third letter of the alphabet, so
named from its supposed resemblance to a camel, called in Hebrew
gama] (Farrar, Chapters on Language, 136). Brachet says: ‘Guy
of Arezzo [born about A.D. 990] named the notes of the musical scale
a, b, c, d, e, f, g, in which a was the low Ja on the violoncello; then,
to indicate one note below this a, he used the Gk. y, which thus
standing in front of the whole scale, has given its name to it.’ 2. The
word u# is Latin, and is the old name for the first note in singing,
now called do. The same Guy of Arezzo is said to have named the
notes after certain syllables of a monkish hymn to S, John, in a stanza
written in sapphic metre. The lines are: ‘ U¢ queant laxis resonare
fibris Mira gestorum famuli tuorum Solue polluti /abii reatum Sante
Tohannes ;’ the last term s? being made from the initials of the final
words.

GANDER, the male of the goose. (E.) ME. gandre, Mandeville’s
Travels, p.216. AS. gandra; Aélfric’s Gram, De Tertia Declinatione,
sect. xvili; where it translates L. azser. Also spelt ganra, Voc.
131. 23.4 Du. gander; Low G. ganner (Berghaus). B. The d is
excrescent, as in thunder, and as usual after x ; gandra stands for the
older gan-ra. Teut.type *gan-ron-,m. See further under Gannet,
Goose.

GANG (1), a crew of persons. (Scand.) The word gang occurs in
ME. in the sense of ‘ a going,’ or ‘a course.’ The peculiar use of gang
in the sense of a ‘crew’ is late, and is rather Scand. than E. In
Skinner, ed. 1671. ‘ Gang, a company, a crew;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed.
1715. He adds that ‘in sea-affairs, gangs are the several companies
of mariners belonging to aship.’ But in the sense of a ‘ set’ of things,
it occurs as early as 1340 in Northern E. (N. E. D.).—Icel. gangr, a
going; also, collectively, a gang, as misagangr, a gang of mice,
pjdfagangr, a gang of thieves. Cf. Swed. gang, a going, a time; Dan.
gang, walk, gait; AS. gang, a going, a procession ; Du. gang, course,
pace, gait, tack, way, alley, passage; Goth. gaggs (=gangs), a way,
street. B. The ME. gang, a course, way, is from AS. gang, a journey
(Bosworth) ; which is from AS. gangan, to go; Grein, i. 367, 368. So
also Icel. gangr is from Icel. ganga, to go. See Gang (2). Der.
gang-days, from Icel. gangdagar, pl.; gang-week, AS. gang-wuce;
gang-way, from AS. gang-weg, a way, road; gang-board, a Dutch
term, from Du. gangboord, a gangway. ny f

GANG (2), to go. (Scand.) In Barbour’s Bruce, ii. 276, iv. 193,
x. 421.—Icel. ganga, to go. AS. gangan; OHG. gangan; Goth,


234 GANGLION


gaggan (=gangan), Teut. type *ganggan-. Allied to Lith. Zengiu,
I stride; Skt. jangha, the leg. Brugmann, i. § 609.

GANGLION, a tumour on a tendon. (L.—Gk.) Medical. In
Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.—L. ganglion (Vegetius).=<Gk. yayydcor,
a tumour nearatendon. Der. ganglion-ic.

GANGRENE, a mortification of the body, in its first stage. (F.—
L.—Gk.) Shak. has the pp. gangrened, Cor. iii. 1. 307. The sb. is
in Bacon, Nat. Hist., § 333; and in Cotgrave.—MF. gangrene, ‘a
gangreen, the rotting or mortifying of amember;’ Cot.=—L. gangrena.

=— Gk. ydyypaiva, an eating sore. A reduplicated form. Allied to
yép-wv, an old man, Skt. jaraya, to consume, jaras, old age; see
Prellwitz. Der. gangrene, vb.; gangren-ous.

GANNET, a sea-fowl, Solan goose. (E.) ME. gante (contracted
from ganet) ; Prompt. Parv. p. 186; see Way’s note. AS. ganot; ‘ofer
ganotes bed’ =over the sea-fowl’s bath, i.e. over the sea; A.S. Chron.
an. 975.4Du. gent, a gander; OHG. ganazo, MHG. ganze, a gander ;
Low G. gante, B. Formed with suffix -ot (-et), from the base gan-;
for which see Gander, Goose.

GANTLET (1), a spelling of Gauntlet, q.v.

GANTLET (2), also GANTLOPEH, a military punishment.
(Swed.) In Skinner, ed. 1671. Formerly written gantlope, but cor-
rupted to gantlet or gauntlet by confusion with gauntlet, a glove. ‘ To
run the gantlope, a punishment used among souldiers ;” Phillips’ Dict.,
ed. 1658. Again, the 2 is inserted, being no part of the orig. word,
which should be gatlope.—Swed, gatlopp (older form gatulopp), lit.
“arunning down a lane,’ because the offender has to run between two
files of soldiers, who strike him as he passes. Widegren’s Swed. Dict.
(1788) has: ‘lépa gatulopp, to run the gantelope.’ = Swed. gata, a street,
lane; see Gate (2); and opp, a course, career, running, from /opa, to
run, cognate with E. Leap. 4 Prob. due to the wars of Gustavus
Adolphus (died 1532).

GAOL, JAIL, a cage, prison. (F.—L.) Spelt gayole in Fabyan’s
Chron. (1516), an. 1293 ; gayhol inAn Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris,
p. 153, 1. 219. The peculiar spelling gaol is due to the OF. gaole
(Godefroy, s. v. jaiole), and has been preserved in LawFrench. Chaucer
has gayler, C. T. 1476 (A 1474); whence jailer and jail.— AF. gaole,
OF. jaiole, gaole, mod. F. gedle, a prison, cage for birds. ‘Inthe 13th
cent. people spoke of the geéle d’un oiseau as well as of the geéle d’un
prisonnier ;’ Brachet. [But it must be remembered that the 13th cent.
spelling was not gedle, but gaole.|=— Late L. gabiola, a cage, in a charter
of A.D. 1229, cited by Brachet. A dimin. of Late L. gabia, for cavea,
a cage; Ducange. = L. cauea,a cage, coop, lit. a hollow place, cavity.
=L. cauus, hollow. See Cage, Cave, and Gabion. Der. gaol-er
or jail-er.

GAPE, to yawn, open the mouth for wonder. (Scand.) ME. gapen,
P. Plowman, B. x. 41.—Icel. gapa, Swed. gapa, Dan. gabe, to gape.
So also EFries., Du., Low G. gapen.4-G. gaffen. Cf. Skt. jabh, jambh,
to gape, yawn. Der. gap-er; and gaby,q.v. Also gap,sb., ME. gappe
(dat.) in Chaucer, C. T. 1641 (A 1639) ; a word which is rather Scand.
than E. ; cf. Icel. and Swed. gap, a gap, breach, abyss, from gapa, vb.;
Dan. gab, mouth, throat, gap, chasm, from gabe, vb.

GAR (1), GARFISH, a kind of pike. (E.) A fish with a long
slender body and pointed head. ME. garfysche; Prompt. Pary. Prob.
named from AS. gar, a spear, from its shape; see Garlic. Cf. Icel.
geirsil, a kind of herring, Icel. geirr, a spear ; and observe the names
pike and ged.

GAR (2), to cause. (Scand.) Common in Lowland Scotch; and see
P. Plowman, B.i. 121; v. 130; vi. 303. —Olcel. ggrua (Noreen), Icel.
gora; Dan. gjore; Swed. gora, to cause, make, do; lit. ‘to make ready.’

=Icel. gorr, ready ; cognate with E. yare. See Yare. So also AS.
gierwan, gearwian, to make ready, from gearu, ready, yare; see below.

GARB (1), dress, manner, fashion. (F.—Ital.—OHG.) Used by
Shak. to mean ‘form, manner, mode of doing a thing’ (Schmidt) ;
Hamlet, ii. 2. 390; K. Lear, ii. 2. 103.— MF. garbe, ‘a garbe, come-
linesse, handsomenesse, gracefulnesse, good fashion,’ Cot.; (whence
TF. galbe, contour). Ital. garbo, ‘grace, handsomeness, garbe;’ Florio.
= OHG. garwi, garawi, preparation, getting ready, dress, gear; MHG.
gerwe, garwe; allied to OHG. garawen, MHG. gerwen, to get ready. =


OHG. garo, MHG. gar, gare, ready; cognate with E. yare. See
Gear.
GARB (2), a sheaf. (F.—OHG.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. ME.


garbe, in A. Neckam; Wright’s Vocab. i. 113. An heraldic term. =
AF. and Picard garbe (F. gerbe), a sheaf.—OHG. garba, a sheaf (G.
garbe). Lit. a handful, or ‘what is grabbed. Cf. E. grab, Swed.
grabba, to grasp; Skt. grah (Vedic form grabh), to seize. See Grab.
Brugm. i. § 531.

GARBAGE, offal, refuse. (F.) In Shak. Hamlet, i. 5. 57.
‘ The garbage, aluus, intestina ;’ Levins, 11.13. Florio translates the
Ital. tara by ‘the tare, waste, or garbish of any marchandise or ware.’
Palsgrave has: ‘ garbage of a foule,’ i.e. a fowl’s entrails. It agrees in
form with OF. garbage, gerbage, a tax paid in garbs or sheaves ; and


GARLAND


is prob. similarly formed from OF. garbe, a handful, small bundle,
Low L. garba, the same. See above. ;

GARBLE, to select for a purpose, to mutilate or corrupt an
account. (F.—Ital.—Arab.—L.) The old sense was ‘to pick out,’
or ‘sort,’ so as to get the best of a collection of things. The statute
1 Rich. III, c. 11, was made ‘for the remedie of the excessiue price and
badnesse of bowstaues, which partly is growen because the merchants
will not suffer any garbeling [or sorting] of them to be made.’ There
was an officer called the Garbler of spices, whose business was to visit
the shops, examine the spices, and garble, or make clean the same;
mentioned an. 21 Jacob. c. 1. See Blount’s Nomolexicon, where it is
further explained that ‘garbling of spice, drugs, &c. (1 Jacob. cap. 19)
is nothing but to purifie it from the dross and dirt that is mixed with
it.” — OF, garbeller (in Godefroy, entered by mistake under gerbele),
usually grabeller, ‘to garbell spices, also to examine precisely, sift
neerly ;” Cot. The same word as Span. garbillar, to sift, garble ; Ital.
garbellare, ‘to garbel spices’ (Torriano); and Low L. garbellare, to
sift, a word which occurs A.D.1269 (Ducange). Cf. Span. garbillo, a
coarse Sieve, sifter. = Pers. gharbil, a sieve; Arab. ghirbal, a large sieve;
Arab. kirbal, a sieve; gharbala, karbala, to sift. Prob. not an Arabic
word, but adapted from L. cribellum, dimin. of cribrum, a sieve;
allied to L. cernere, to sift. Rich. Dict., pp. 1046, 1177, 1178. See
Riddle (2).

GARBOIL, a disturbance, commotion. (F.—Ital.) In Shak.
Antony, i. 3. 61; ii. 2. 67.—OF. garbouil, ‘a garboile, hurliburly,
great stirre;’ Cot. Cf. Span. garbullo, a crowd, multitude. = Ital.
garbuglio, ‘a garboile, . . tumult, disorder;’ Florio. B. Of uncertain
origin. Referred by Diez to L. garr-ire, to prattle, chatter ; in con-
junction with bullire, to boil, bubble, boil with rage. y. The latter part’
of the word is thus well accounted for; see Boil. The former partis
less sure, and seems to be more directly from the Ital. gara, strife, since
Florio has ‘ garabullare, to rave.’ The source is probably imitative;
see Jar, to creak.

GARDANT, in heraldry: looking full at the spectator. (F.—
Teut.) Also guardant.—MF. gardant, pres. pt. of garder, ‘to ward,
watch, regard ;’ Cot. See Guard.

GARDEN, a yard, enclosure. (F.—Teut.) ME. gardin, Chaucer,
C. T. 1053 (A 1051); King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1028.—AF.,
O. North F. (Norm. dial. and Picard) gardin; F. jardin. —OSax.
gardo, a yard; cf. OHG. gartin, gen. and dat. of OHG. garto, a yard,
garden (Diez). The stem gartin- was retained in compounds, such as
OHG. gartin-ari, a gardener ; and this prob. suggested a Late L. form
*card-inum (with L. suffix -imum), whence the OF. form. B. The
OSax. gardo is cognate with AS. geard, whence E. yard; see Yard.
The substitution of OHG. ¢ (as in gart-) for Low G.d is regular.
Der. garden, vb.; garden-ing, garden-er.

GARFISH, a kind of pike. See Gar (1).

GARGLE, to rinse the throat. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) In Cotgrave.
Modified from F. gargouiller, just as the ME. gargyll (a gargoyle) is
from F. gargouille.—F. gargouiller, ‘to gargle, or gargarize ;’ Cot.
=F. gargouille; for which see Gargoyle. ¢@ The ME. gargarise,
used by Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iv. c. 10, is from MF.
gargarizer, to gargle (Cot.), borrowed (through L. gargarizare) from
Gk. yapyapiGev, to gargle. From an imitative base, viz. Gk. yapy- ;
cf. Gk. yapyapewv, the uvula. Hence also Ital. garg-agliare, to
murmur, garg-atta, the throat (see below). Der. gargle, sb.

GARGOYLE, in architecture, a projecting spout. (F.—Late L.
—Gk.) ME. gargoyle, also spelt gargyll. The spelling gargoyle is in.
Lydgate’s Siege of Troy, bk. ii. c. 11 (fol. F 5, back, col. 1); we read of
‘ gargylles of gold fiersly faced with spoutes running’ in Hall’s Chron.
Henry VIII, an. 19.—F. gargouille, ‘the weesle or weason [weazand]
of the throat ; also, the mouth of aspowt, a gutter;’ Cot. Cf. Span.
gargola,a gargoyle. B. We find, in Ital., not only gargatta, gargozza,
the throat, windpipe, but also gorgozza, the throat, gullet, dimin. of
gorga, the throat. Thus garg-ouille is from the imitative Gk. base
yapy- (see above), just as Ital. gorga and E. gorge are from the
parallel L. base gurg-; see Gorge. (Korting, §§ 4169, 4401.)

GARISH, glaring, staring, showy. (Scand.) ‘The garish sun ;’
Romeo, ili. 2. 25. ‘Day’s garish eye;’ Milton, Il Penseroso, 141.
Chaucer uses the form gauren, to stare; C. T. 5332 (B 912); with
which cf. ‘gaurish in colour,’ Ascham, Scholemaster, ed. Arber, p. 54.
Perhaps from Norw. gagra, to bend the head backwards (Ross); from
gag, adj., bent backwards. From the attitude adopted in staring ort
gazing fixedly. The change ag>aw is regular.

GARLAND, a wreath. (F.—Teut.?) In early use. ME. gerlond,
Chaucer, C. T. 668 (A 666). The form gerlaundesche occurs in Hali
Meidenhad, ed. Cockayne, p. 23.— OF. garlande, ‘a garland ;’ Cot.
[The mod. F. guirlande is borrowed from Ital. ghirlanda.| Cf. Span.
guirnalda, Ital. ghirlanda,a garland. B. Of uncertain origin; see the
discussion of the word in Diez. It seems as if formed with a suffix
-ande from a MHG. *wierel-en, a supposed frequentative of wieren, to


*


GARLIC


adorn; from OHG. wiara, MHG. wiere, gold wire, fine ornament.
(Korting, § 10389.) Cf. E. wire. Der. garland, vb.

G IC, a plant of the genus Allium. (E.) Lit. ‘ spear-plant ;’
from the shape of the leaves. ME. garleek, Chaucer, C. T. 636
(A 634). AS. gdrlzac, used to translate L. allium in Aflfric’s Glos-
sary, Nomina Herbarum. = AS. gar, a spear; and Jéac, a leek, plant.
+Icel. geirlaukr (similarly formed). See Gar (1), Gore, and Leek.
@ The W. garlleg is borrowed from E.

GARMENT, a robe, coat. (F.—Teut.) A corruption of ME.
garnement, P. Plowman, C. x. 119.—OF. garnement, garniment, a
robe, lit. a defence ; formed (with suffix -ment=L.-mentum) from OF.
garnir, to protect, garnish, adorn. See Garnish.

GARNER, a granary, store for grain. (F.—L.) ME. gerner;
Chaucer, C. T. 595 (A 593).—OF. gernier, a variant of grenier, a
granary (Supp. to Godefroy).—L. grandrium, a granary. Doublet,
granary,q.v. Der. garner, verb.

GARNET, a kind of precious stone. (F.—L.) ‘And gode
garnettes bytwene;’ Romance of Emare, ed. Ritson, 1. 156; so also
garnettes, pl., in Lydgate, Chorle and Bird, st. 34. A corruption of
granat, a form also used in E., and found in Cotgrave.— OF. grenat
[also granat], ‘a precious stone called a granat, or garnet ;’ Cot. Cf.
Span. granate, Ital. granato, a garnet.—Late L. grindtus, a garnet.
‘So called from its resemblance in colour and shape to the grains or
seeds of the pomegranate;’ Webster.=L. granatus, having many
grains or seeds; granatum (for malum grandtum), a pomegranate. =
L. granum, a grain; see Grain.

GARNISH, to embellish, decorate. (F.—Teut.) In Spenser,
Verses addressed to Lord Ch. Howard, 1. 2; Prompt. Pary. p. 188.
Also spelt warnish in ME.; the pp. warnished is in Will. of Palerne,
1, 1083.—OF. garnis-, warnis-, stem of pres. pt. of garnir, guarnir,
older form warnir, to avert, defend, fortify, garnish (Godefroy). =
OHG. *warndjan, OHG. warndn, to guard against; cf. OHG. warna,
foresight, care. See Ware (2). Der. garnish, sb., garnish-ment,
garnish-er ; also garniture (Cotgrave), from F. garniture, ‘ garniture,
garnishment’ (Cot.), Low L. garnitara, from Low L. garnire, to
adom, which is merely the F. word Latinised; also garnish-ee =‘ the
party in whose hands another man’s money is attached’ (Kersey’s
Dict., ed. 1715), barbarously formed on the model of a F. pass. part.
as opposed to garnish-er considered as an agent; also garment, q.v.,
and garrison, q. Vv.

GARRET, a room at the top of a house. (F.—OHG.) ME. garite
(with one r), Prompt. Parv. p. 187; P. Plowman’s Creed, ed. Skeat,
214. It properly means ‘a place of Jook out,’ or ‘ watch-tower.’ =
OF. garite, a place of refuge, place of look-out, watch-tower (F.
guérite).—OF. garir, older spelling warir, to preserve, save, keep. =
OHG. warjan, to defend; cf. AS. werian, to defend. Allied to
Weir, q.v.

GARRISON, a supply of soldiers for defending a fort. (F.—
Teut.) 1. ME. garnison, provision, in La Belle Dame sans Mercy,
1, 175; Barbour’s Bruce, ed. Skeat, xvii. 294 (footnote), where another
spelling is warnyson, and other reading is varnysing.—OF. garnison,
store, provision, supply (Norm. dial. garnison, Moisy).— OF. garnis-
ant, pres. part. of garnir, to supply, garnish; see Garnish. Thus
garnison is allied to garniture. 2. But it was supplanted by ME.
garison or warison, defence, safety ; from OF. garis-, pres. pt. stem of
garir, to defend; see Garret.

GARROTE, GARROTTE, a method of effecting strangulation.
(Span.—C.) ‘ Garrotte, a machine for strangling criminals, used in
Spain. Many attempts to strangle were made by thieves called gar-
rotters, in the winter of 1862-63. An act was passed in 1863 to punish
these acts by flogging; Haydn, Dict. of Dates. [See garrot and
garroter in Cotgrave.]—Span. garrote, a cudgel, tying a rope tight,
strangling by means of an iron collar;.Minsheu says, ‘a cudgel to
wind [twist] a cord.’ Formed, with dimin., suffix -ofe, from Span.
garra, a claw, a talon, clutch, whence also the phrase echarle a uno la
gerra, to grasp, imprison; Minsheu has ‘garra, a paw of a beast;’
cf. Prov. garra, leg (Mistral). Of Celtic origin; connected with
Breton gar, garr, W. and Corn. gar, the shank of the leg (Diez) ;
Celtic type *garris; Stokes-Fick, p. 107. See Garter. Der. gar-
rotte, verb; garrott-er. (Korting, § 4160.)

GARRULOUS, talkative. (L.) 1. Milton has garrulity, Sams.
Agonistes, 491 ; and it occurs in Cotgrave, to translate F. garrulité,
from L, acc. garrulitatem, talkativeness. 2. The adj. garrulous occurs
in Chapman’s Homer, Comment. on Iliad, b. iii; note 2. It is bor-
towed from L. directly, by change of -us to -ous, as in ardu-ous,
strenu-ous, &c. —L. garrulus, talkative. Formed, with suffix -(«)lv-,
from garr-ire, to prattle.—4/ GAR, to shout, call; whence also W.
gar-m, an outcry, Irish gairm., Brugmann, i. § 638. Der. garrulous-
ness; also garrul-i-ty, as above.

GARTER, a band round the leg, for fastening the hose. (F.—C.)
‘Eek ther be knightes old of the garter ;’ The Flower and the Leaf


GATHER 235


(15th cent.), 1. 519. Hoccleve has a poem addressed to ‘ Knightes of
the Garter.’ The order was instituted by Edw. III, ab. 1344.—AF.
garter, Stat. of the Realm, i. 380 (an. 1363); OF. gartier, in dialects
of N, France (Heécart), Walloon gartier (Sigart), spelt jartier in Cot-
grave, and explained by him as ‘a garter ;’ mod. F. jarretiére. Closely
connected with OF. garet (Godefroy), mod. F. jarret, the ham of the
leg. = Bret. gar, garr, the shank of the leg; cf. W. gar, the shank;
see Garrote. Der. garter, verb, All’s Well, ii. 3. 265.

GARTH, a yard, enclosure, fence. (Scand.) Northern; the pl.
garthis is in Hampole, Psalm xxxyi. 2.—Icel. gardr, a yard. + AS.
geard, a yard; see Yard.

GAS, an aeriform fluid. (Dutch.) The term is known to have been
a pure invention. The Belgian chemist Van Helmont (died a.p. 1644)
invented two corresponding terms, gas and blas; the former came into
use, the latter was forgotten. We may call it a Dutch word, as gas
is the Du. spelling. @ Van Helmont says that it was suggested by
the Gk. chaos :—‘ Halitum illum gas vocavi, non longe a Chao veterum
secretum ;’ Ortus Medicine, ed.1652,p.59a(N.E.D.). Der. gas-e-ous,
gas-o-meter.

GASCONADE,, boasting, bragging. (Gascony.) ‘That figure of
speech which is commonly distinguished by the name of Gasconade ;”
The Tatler, no. 115 (part 2).—F. gasconnade, boasting; said to be a
vice of the Gascons. =F. Gascon, an inhabitant of Gascony, formerly
Vasconia. Der. gasconade, verb, gasconad-ing, gasconad-er.

GASH, to hack, cut deeply. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) ‘His gashed
stabs ;” Macbeth, ii. 3.119. A corruption of an older form garsh or
garse. ‘A garse or gashe, incisura;’ Levins, 33.14. ‘Garsshe in
wode or in a knife, hoche ;’ Palsgrave. The pl. sb. garcen (another
MS. has garses) occurs in the Ancren Riwle, p. 258, in the sense of
‘gashes caused by a scourge.’ = OF. garser, to scarify, pierce with a
lancet (Roquefort, and see jarser, garser in Godefroy); garscher, to
chap, as the hands or lips (Cotgrave). Cf. Late L. garsa, scarification,
or the making of numerous small incisions in the skin and flesh; an
operation called by the Greeks éyxdpagis; Ducange. . Origin ob-
secure ; it is possible that OF. garser represents Late L. caraxdre, short
for incaraxare, incharaxGre, to pierce, incise; from Gk. xapaocey, to
furrow, scratch. See Character. 4 Diez suggests a Late L. form
*carptidre, founded on carpere, to pluck. Note ME. carsare, as a gloss
to scarificator, Voc. 652. 7. Der. gash, sb.

GASP, to gape for breath. (Scand.) ME. gaspen, Gower, C. A. iis
260; bk. v. 3975. Also gaispen (Northern), Allit. Morte Arthure, 1462.
The latter is from Icel. and Norw. geispa, to yawn; Swed. giispa; cf.
Dan, gispe. The former suggests a cognate AS. *gdspax (not found).
Note that sp commonly represents an earlier ps; thus clasp is ME.
clapsen, hasp was formerly haps, and aspen is from aps. Hence Icel.
geispa is for *geipsa ; froma Teut. base *geip (weak grade gip) ; cf. Du.
gijpen, to gasp, AS. gipung,a gaping. Der. gasp, sb.

GASTRIC, belonging to the belly. (Late L.—Gk.) Coles (1684)
has gastrick; so also Blount, ed. 1656.—Late L. gastricus, gastric;
formed with suffix -c- from gastri-= gastro-. = Gk. yaorpé-, for yaornp,
the belly (stem yaorep-). Der. from the same root, gastro-nomy; from
Gk. yaorpo-, and -voyia, derivative of vdpos, usage.

GATE (1), a door, opening, way. (E.) [In Proy. E. and ME. we
often find gate=a street; see below.] ME. gate, 3ate, yate. Spelt
gate, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 237, 1. 31 ; 3ate, Will. of Palerne,
37573 3et, Ancren Riwle, p. 74. AS. geat, a gate, opening; Matt.
vii. 13 (whence ME, yate); pl. gatu (whence ME. gate). 4+ Du. gat,
a hole, opening, gap, mouth; Icel. gat, an opening; OFries., OSax.,
and Low G. gat. See Gate (2). Der. gat-ed, gate-way.

GATE (2), a street. (Scand.) Common in the North; it also
means ‘a way.’ ‘ Whilest foot is in the gate;’ Spenser, F. Q. i. 1. 13.
ME. gate, Ormulum, 12749.—Icel. and Norw. gata, Swed. gata, a
way, path, street, lane; Dan. gade; cf. Goth. gatwé, a street, G. gasse.
Perhaps allied to Gate (1). B. Gate (1) answers to Teut. type
*eatom, n.; but gate (2) to Teut. type *gatwon-, f. See Gait,
Gantlet (2).

GATHER, to draw into a heap, collect. (E.) Just as father
corresponds to ME. fader, so gather corresponds to ME. gaderen or
gaderien, to gather; as also mod. E. ¢ogether corresponds to ME.
togideres. ‘And gadred hem alle togideres’=and gathered them all
together; P. Plowman, B. xvi. 80. AS. gedrian, gaderian; Luke,
vi. 44; Grein, i. 366, 373. B. Formed, with causal suffix -ian, from
AS. gader, together, preserved in the compound gader-tang’, associated
with (Grein, i. 365), and also as gador- or geador, together (Grein, i.
491); see Together. y. From a base gad-; cf. AS. ged, society,
fellowship, company ; whence also the AS, ge-gada, a companion,
and AS. ged-el-ing, an associate, comrade; cf. Goth. gad-i-iggs
( =gad-il-ings), a sister’s son, Col. iv. 10.-4-Du. gaderen, to collect,
from gader, together; Low G. gadden, to collect (Berghaus) ; the
base appears in Du. gade, a spouse, consort; cf. G. gatte, a husband,
gattin, a wife. The base *gad- prob. meant ‘fit’ or ‘suitable;’ cf.


236 GAUD>


Low G. gad, pleasant (Berghaus); Russ. godnuti, suitable, OSlav. godz, .


fitseason. See Good. Der. gather, sb.; gather-ing, gather-er.

GAUD, a show, ornament. (F.—L.) Also spelt gawd, Shak. Mids.
Nt. Dr. i. 1. 33. Chaucer uses gaude in the sense of ‘ specious trick ;’
C. T. 12323 (C 389).—OF. gaudir, to rejoice, to jest at.— L. gaudium,
gladness, joy; used in Late L. of ‘a large bead on a rosary ;’ whence
ME. gauded, furnished with large beads. ‘A peire of bedes gauded
al with grene;’ Chaucer, C. T. 159.—L. gaudére, to rejoice, pt. t.
gduisus sum; from a base gau-.4-Gk. ynGéev, to rejoice; allied to
yatew (= yaf-iev), to rejoice; yadpos, proud. Brugmann,i. § 589:
ii. § 694. Der. gaud-y, i.e. show-y ; gaud-i-ly, gaud-i-ness.

GAUFFER, the same as Goffer, q.v.

GAUGE, GAGE, to measure the content of a vessel. (F.—Low
L.) In Shak. Merch. of Ven. ii. 2. 208 (where the old edd. have
gage). ‘Or bore and gage the hollow caues uncouth ;’ Surrey, tr. of
Virgil, Aineid, ii. 52.—O. North F. gauger (printed gaugir in Roque-
fort), Norm. dial. gauger (Moisy), Central F. jauger, ‘to gage, or
measure a piece of [or?] cask;’ Cot.—OF. gauge (Norman; see
quot. in Moisy, s.v. gauge), old form of jauge, ‘a gage, the instrument
wherewith a cask is measured, also an iron leaver;’ Cot. Cf. Low
L. gaugia, the standard measure of a wine-cask (A. D. 1446) ; Ducange.
Also Low L. gaugatum, the gauging of a wine-cask; gaugetium, a
tribute paid for gauging, a gauge; gaugidtor, a gauger. Origin
unknown. Cf. gaugeour,a gauger; Stat. of the Realm, i. 331 (1353).
Der. gaug-ing, gaug-er.

GAULT, clayand marl. See Galt (1).

GAUNT, thin, lean. (Scand.) In Shak. Rich. II, ii. 1.74. ‘ His
own gaunt eagle;’ Ben Jonson, Catiline, iii. 1. ‘ Gawnt, or lene;’
also ‘ Gawnte, or slendyr;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 189. ‘ Gant, slim,
slender ;’ Ray’s South- and East-Country Words, ed. 1691. Also
mentioned in Forby as a Norfolk, and in Moor as a Suffolk word ;
also in Yks. Linc. Lanc.; see E.D.D. It corresponds to Norweg.
gand, a thin pointed stick, a tall and thin man, an overgrown stripling
(Aasen); we also find Swed. dial. gank, a lean and nearly starved
horse (Rietz). Cf. ‘arm-gaunt steed,’ i.e. slender in the fore-leg,
Shak. Ant. and Cleop. i. 5.48. Der. gaunt-ly, gaunt-ness.

GAUNTLET (1), aniron glove. (F.—Scand.) In Spenser, F.Q.


i. 4.43. ME. gauntelet, Sir T. Malory, Morte Darthur, bk. xix.c. 4
(end). —OF. gantelet, ‘a gantlet, or arming-glove;’ Cot. Formed,
with dimin. suffixes -el- and -et, from OF. gant, a glove. Of Scand.


origin. =OSwed. wante, a glove (Ihre); whence Low L. wantus and
OF. gant by the usual change of w to gin French; see Garnish ;
Dan. vante, a mitten; Icel. vattr (stem vatt=vant),a glove. OTeut.
type *wantuz. B. The most probable source is Teut. *windan-
(pt. t. wand), to wind, hence to involve, wrap, E. wind, verb. See
Wind (2). Cf. G. gewand, a garment; Low G. want, cloth
(Liibben). Noreen, § 257 (5).
‘GAUNTLET (2). (Scand.) In the phr. ‘to run the gauntlet,’
we have a corruption of an older gantlope. It appears as run the
gantlope in Bailey (1735), Kersey (1715), Philips (1706), and Blount
(1674). Bailey correctly defines it as ‘to run through a company of
soldiers, standing on each side, making a lane, with each a switch in
his hand to scourge the criminal.’ See further under Gantlet (2).

GAUZE, a thin silken fabric. (F.—Palestine?) ‘Gawz, a thin
sort of silk-stuff;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed. 1715.—MF. gaze, ‘ cushion
canvas, the thin canvas that serves women for a ground unto their
cushions or pursework ; also, the sleight stuffe tiffany ;’ Cot. And
see Hatzfeld. Perhaps so called because first brought from Gaza,
in Palestine. Cf. Low L. gazétum, wine brought from Gaza; gazzd-
zum, (perhaps) gauze. 4] Several kinds of stuffs are named from
places ; e.g. damask from Damascus, calico from Calicut, &c. ; but in
this instance evidence is lacking.

GAVELKIND, a peculiar sort of tenure. (E.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627. ‘ Gavelkind, a tenure, or custom, whereby the lands of the
father are equally divided at his death among all his sons ;’ Blount’s
Nomolexicon, ed. 1691. ME. gauelkind; earliest spelling gauelikind
in 1205 (N.E.D.). The latter answers to AS. gafelgecynd; from AS.
gafel, tribute, payment, and gecynd, kind, sort; see Kind. B. The
AS. gaf-ol (whence Low L. gabulum) is from Teut. *gab-, 2nd grade
of the verb /o give; see Give. 4 Early misunderstood and mis-
represented ; and wrongly supposed to be of Celtic origin.

GAVIAL, the crocodile of the Ganges. (F.—Hind.) First in
1825.—F. gavial (a corrupt form).—Hind. ghayiyal, a crocodile
(Forbes).

GAVOTTE, a kind of dance. (F.—Prov.) Spelt gavot in Ar-
buthnot and Pope’s Martinus Scriblerus, as quoted in Todd’s Johnson.
—MF. gavote, ‘a kind of brawle [dance], danced, commonly, by one
alone ;’ Cot.—Prov. gavoto,f. a gavotte (Mistral), Fem. of Gavot,a
mountaineer of the Upper Alps (id.). Of historical origin; ‘ orig. a
dance of the Gavotes, i.e. people of Gap ;’ Brachet. Gap is in the
department of the Upper Alps, and in the old province of Dauphiné.


GELD


GAWEK, awkward. (F.—Scand.) The orig. sense is left-handed.
It is short for E. dial. gauk-handed, left-handed (E. D. D.) ; and gauk is
contracted from gallack, gaulick, adj., left (of the hands) ; where -ickis
asuffix (N.E.D.). OfF. origin ; cf. Burgund. géle, numb with cold,
said of the fingers (Mignard).=—Swed. Dan. valenx, benumbed ; whence
Swed. dial. val-handt, Norw. val-hendt, having numbed hands. 4 Not
from F. gauche (N.E.D.) Der. gawk-y, awkward, ungainly.

GAY, lively, merry, sportive. (F.—OHG.) ME. gay, Chaucer,
C. T. 32133; Will. of Palerne, 816; King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 3204.
— OF. gai, merry ; spelt gayin Cotgrave.—OHG.wahi, fine, beautiful.
Der. gai-ly, Will. of Palerne, 1625; gai-e-ty, used by Bp. Taylor,
Holy Dying, c. 5.s. 5 [wot 15], from OF. gayeté, ‘mirth,’ Cot.

GAZE, to behold fixedly, stare at. (Scand.) ME. gasen. ‘When
that the peple gased up and down ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 8879 (E 1003). Of
Scand. origin, and preserved in Swed. dial. gasa, to gaze, stare, as in
the phrase gasa dkring se, to gaze or stare about one (Rietz); and in
Norw. gasa, to stare, gaze (Aasen). Der. gaze, sb., gaz-ing-stock.

GAZELLE, a kind of antelope. (F.—Span.—Arab.) Formerly
gazel. ‘ Gazel,akind of Arabian deer, or the antilope of Barbary ;’
Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.— MF. gazel, gazelle, ‘a kind of wild goat ;”
Cot.—MSpan. gacelo, ‘a wild goat;’ Minsheu.= Arab. ghazal, ‘a
fawn just able to walk; a wild goat ;’ Richardson’s Dict. p. 1050.
Explained as ‘a gazelle’ in Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 440.

GAZETTE, a small newspaper. (F.—Ital.) ‘As we read a
gazett;’ Bp. Taylor, vol. ii. ser. 1 (R.). [Ben Jonson has the
(supposed) Ital. pl. gazetti; Volpone, v. 2 (1. 7 from end).]—MF.
gazette, ‘a certain Venetian coin scarce worth our farthing; also, a
bill of news, or a short relation of the generall occutrences of the time,
forged most commonly at Venice, and thence dispersed, every month,
into most parts of Christendom ;’ Cot. B. The word is certainly from
Ital. gazzetta, but that word has two meanings, viz. (1) ‘a yoong piot
or magota pie’ [mag-pie]; and (2) ‘a small coine in Italie ;’ Florio,
Now the value of the latter (less than a farthing) was so small, that
Mr. Wedgwood’s objection would seem to be sound, viz. ‘ that it
never could have been the price either of a written or a printed sheet ;”
so that this (the usual) explanation isto be doubted. But in Hatzfeld,
it is suggested that the coin gazzetta was paid, net for the gazette itself,
but for the privilege of reading it; and it is added that it was a
periodical which appeared at Venice about the middle of the 16th
century. ‘y. Gazzetta, a small coin, is prob. a dimin. from L. gaza,
treasure, wealth, a word borrowed: from Gk. yd¢a, wealth, a treasury ;
which, again, is said to be from Pers. ganj, a treasure. | The
word gazet, a small coin, occurs in Massinger, Maid of Honour, iii. I
(speech by Yacomo), and in Ben Jonson, The Fox, ii. 1 (speech by
Peregrine). Der. gazett-eer, orig. a writer for.a gazette, now used to
denote a geographical dictionary (since 1704).

GEAR, dress, harness, tackle. (Scand.) ME. gere, Chaucer, C. T.
354 (A 352). —Icel. gervi, gérvi, gear, apparel. Cf. gorr, geyrr, skilled,
dressed, pp. of gora, to make.AS, gearwe, pl. fem., preparation,
dress, ornament ; Grein, i. 495 ; whence was formed the verb gearwian,
to prepare; alliedto AS. gearo, yare, ready. Also to OHG. garawi,
MHG. garwe, gear; whence OF, garbe, and E. garb; see Garb (1).
See Gar (2); and Yare. Der. gear, verb; gear-ing.

GECK, adupe. (Du.) In Tw. Nt. v. 351.—Du. gek, MDu. geck, a
fool, sot; cf. G. geck (the same) ; Dan. gjek, a fool ; Icel. gikkr, a pert,
tude person; Norw. gjekk, afool (Aasen). @ Distinct from gowk.

GECKO, a nocturnal lizard. (Malay.) Spelt gekko by Goldsmith
in 1774 (N.E.D.).—Malay gékog, a gecko: so named from an
imitation of its cry.

GED, the fish called a pike. (Scand.) A North. E. word. =Icel.
gedda, a pike; Swed. gadda; Dan. gedde (Larsen). Allied to Icel.
gaddr,a goad; see Gad (1). Named from the sharp thin head;
whence also the name ‘pike.’ So also gar-jish, q.v-

GEHENIWNA, the place of torture, hell. (L.—Gk.—Heb.)
© Gehenna, hell;’ Cockeram (1623); cf. Milton, P. L. i. 405.—L.
gehenna; Matt. v.22 (Vulg.).—Gk. yéevva; Matt. v. 22.—Late Heb.
gé(i)hinndm, hell, the valley of Hinnom; more fully, ‘the valley of
the son of Hinnom;’ see Jer. vii. 31.

GELATINE, a substance which dissolves in hot water and cools
asajelly. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘ Gelatina, any sort of clear gummy juice; ”
Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715. The mod. form is French.—F. gélatine. =
Ital. and Late L. gelatina, as cited by Kersey ; formed from L. gelatus,
pp. of geldre, to congeal. = L. gelu, frost; see Gelid. Der. gelatin-
ate, gelatin-ous. From the same source, jelly.

GELD, to emasculate. (Scand.) ME. gelden; Wyclif, Matt.
xix. 12. ‘ Geldyn, castro, testiculo, emasculo;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 190.
—Icel. gelda; Swed. gdlla (for galda); Dan. gilde. Cf. Icel. geldr,
Swed. gall, barren; and see Galt (2), Possibly related to Goth,
giltha, a sickle; Mark, iv. 29. Der. geld-er; also geld-ing, Chaucer,
C. T. 693 (A 691), from Icel. gelding, a gelding = Swed. galling=
Dan. gilding. On the suffix -ing, see March, A.S. Gram. sect. 228, :


GELID


GELID, cool, cold. (L.) ‘ Dwells in their gelid pores ;’ Thomson,
Autumn, 642. ‘Or gelid hail;’ Chapman, tr. of Homer, Il. xv. 162.
—L. gelidus, cool, cold.—L. gelu, frost. Brugmann, i. § 481. See
Cool. Der. gelid-ly, gelid-ness.

GEM, a precious stone. (F.—L.) ME. gemme; Chaucer, C. T.
8130 (E 254).—OF. gemme, ‘a gem;’ Cot.—L. gemma, a swelling
bud; also a gem, jewel; whence also AS. gim. B. Of uncertain
origin; prob. connected with Skt. janman, birth, production; so that
gemma is for *gen-ma (4/GEN). Brugmann, i. § 413 (4). Der.
gemmi-fer-ous, bud-bearing (L. ferre, to bear); gemmi-par-ous, bud-
producing (L. parere, to produce); gemmate, having buds (L. gem-
mitus, pp. of gemmdare, to bud); gemmat-ion.

GEMINI, twins. (L.) The name ofa sign of the Zodiac. ‘He
was that time in Geminis;’ Chaucer, C. T. 10096 (E 2222); where
Geminis is the ablative case.—L. gemini, pl., twins; pl. of geminus,
double. Der. gemin-ous, double (= L. geminus, double), Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, -b. iii. c. 15. § 453 gemin-at-ion, a doubling, Bacon,
Colours of Good and Evil, sect. 8.

GEMSBOK, a large antelope in S. Africa. (Du.—G.) The Oryx
capensis ; a misapplied name, as it orig. meant a male chamois. = Du.
gemsbok, chamois-buck, male chamois (Calisch).—G. gemsbock,
chamois-buck.=G. gems, gemse, chamois; and bock, buck, male.
See Chamois and Buck.

GENDER (1), kind, breed, sex. (F.—L.) ME. gendre; Chaucer,
Ho. of Fame, i. 18. The d is excrescent, as so commonly the case
after 2 in English; cf. tender, and see engender. OF. (and mod. F.)
genre, ‘kind;’ Cot.—L. genere, abl. case of genus, kind, kin, cognate
with E. kin; see Genus and Kin. @ The unusual deriv. from the
abl. case is due to the frequent use of the L. ablative in such phrases
as genere natus, hoc genere, omni genere, &c.; cf. Ital. genere, kind.
See below. Doublet, genre.

GENDER (2), to engender, produce. (F.—L.) ME. gendren,
Wyclif, Acts, vii. 8 (where the Vulgate has genuit),—_OF. gendrer
(Godefroy).—L. generdre, to beget.—L. gener-, for *genes, stem of
genus, kind, kin (above). Der. en-gender.

GENEALOGY, a pedigree of a family, descent by birth. (F.—
L.—Gk.) ME. genologie, Wyclif, Heb. vii. 3 (where the Vulgate
has genealogia).—OF. genealogie, ‘a genealogy, pedegree;’ Cot.=
L. genedlogia. = Gk. yeveadoyia, an account of a family; 1 Tim. i. 4.
= Gk. yevea, birth, race, descent; and -Aoyia, an account, from Aéyev,
to speak of. Cf. Gk. yévos, birth, race, descent ; see Genus and
Logic. Der. genealog-ic-al, genealog-ic-al-ly, genealog-ist,

GENERAL, relating to a genus or class, common, prevalent.
(F.—L.) ‘The viker general of alle;’ Gower, C. A. i. 253; bk. ii.
2804. Chaucer has the adv. generally, C. T. 17277 (H 328).—OF.
general, ‘generall, universall;’ Cot.=—L. generalis, belonging to a
genus.—L. gener-, for *genes, stem of genus, a race. See Genus.
Der. general, sb., esp. in the phrase in general, Gower, C. A. iii. 189 ;
bk. vii. 3088, and in the sense of ‘leader,’ All’s Well, iii. 3. 1;
general-ly ; general-ship; also general-ise, general-is-at-ion ; also general-
i-ty (Hooker, Eccl. Polity, ed. Church, b. i. sect. 6. subsect. 4), from
OF. generalité, ‘ generality, generallness,’ Cot.; also general-iss-i-mo,
supreme commander (see examples in Todd’s Johnson), from Ital.
generalissimo, a supreme commander, formed with the superlative
Pigsk -is-simo-, which has not been fully explained (Brugmann, ii.
§ 73):

GENERATE, to produce. (L.) Orig. a pp., as in ‘all other
. . from them, generate,’ i.e. born, Hawes, Past. of Pleasure, ch. 44,
st.14. The verb is in Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 758.—L. generdtus, pp. of
generare, to procreate, produce; see Gender (2). Der. generat-or,
generat-ive ; also generation (Wyclif, Mark, viii. 12), from OF.
generation < L. acc. generatidnem, from nom. generatio.

GENERIC, pertaining to a genus. (L.) The older word, in
E., is generical. * Generical, pertaining to a kindred;’ Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674 ; and found ina fifteenth century tr. of Higden; vol. i. p. 27.
A coined word, with suffix -c (or -c-al) from L. generi-, decl. stem of
genus; see Genus. Der. generical-ly,

GENEROUS, of a noble nature, (F.—L.) ‘The generous
[noble] and gravest citizens;’ Meas. for Meas. iv. 6. 13.—=MF.
genereux [older form genereus], ‘generous ;’? Cot.—L. generdsus, of
noble birth ; formed with suffix -dsus from gener-, for *genes, stem of
genus; see Genus. Der. generous-ly, generous-ness ; generos-i-ty
(Coriol. i. 1. 215), from OF. generosité< L. acc. generdsititem, from
nom. generdsitas.

GENESIS, generation, creation. Ce ,the name
of the first book of the Bible in the Vul version. = Gk. yéveais,
origin, source. From 4/,G beget.

GENET, a carnivorous animal, allied to the civet. (F.—Span. —
Arab.) ‘ Genet, a kind of cat;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715. Spelt
gennet in Skinner, ed. 1671. Caxton has genete, Reynard the Fox,
ch. 31.—F. genette, ‘a kind of weesell, black-spotted, and bred in


GENUS 237


Spain ;” Cot.—Span. gineta, a genet. = Arab. jarneit, cited by Dozy,
who refers to the Journal Asiatique, Juin, 1849, p. 541.

GENTAL, cheering, merry. (F.—L.) In Spenser, Epithalamium,
399. = MF, genial, ‘ geniall, belonging to luck or chance, or to a man’s
nature, disposition, inclination ;’ Cot.—L. genidlis, pleasant, delight-


ful.—L. genius, genius; also, social enjoyment. SeeGenius. Der.
genial-ly, genial-ness, genial-i-ty.
GENICULATE, jointed. (L.) A botanicalterm, Bailey gives


it in the L. form, viz. ‘ geniculatus, jointed;’ yol. ii., ed. 1731.
[Cockeram has the verb geniculate, ‘to ioynt.’]—L. geniculum, a little
knee, a knot or joint in a plant. Formed, with suffixes -cu- and -/-,
from geni-, for genu, a knee; cognate with E. knee. See Knee.

GENTE, a demon; see Jinn.

GENITAL, belonging to generation. (F.—L.) In Wyclif, Numb.
xxv. 8.—OF. genital, ‘ genitall, fit for breed, apt to beget ;’ Cot.—L.
genitalis, generative. — L. genitum, supine of gignere, to beget. Gignere
(=gi-gn-ere) is a reduplicated form, from 4/ GEN, to beget; cf. Gk,
yiyvopa=yi-yv-opa:; and Skt. jan, to beget. See Genus, Der.
genitals, pl. sb., which occurs in Gower, C. A. ii. 156; bk. v. 855.

GENITIVE, the name of a case in grammar. (F.—L.) In
Shak. Metry Wives, iv. 1.59. The suffix -ive is a substitution for an
older -zf, answering to F. -if, from L. -iuus.— OF. genitif, ‘the
genitive case;’ Cot.—L. genetiuus, lit. of or belonging to generation
or birth, applied in grammar to a particular case of nouns.=L,
genitum, supine of gignere, to beget. See above.

GENIUS, a spirit ; inborn faculty. (L.) See Shak. Macb. iii. 1.
56; Jul. Ceesar, ii. 1.66; Spenser, F. Q. ii. 12. 47; Gower, C. A.i. 48;
bk. i, 196.—L. genius, the tutelar spirit of a person ; also, inclination,
wit, talent; lit. ‘inborn nature.’ From the weak grade of 4/ GEN,
to produce, beget. See Genus. Der. geniz, pl., genius-es, pl.; also

eni-al, q. V.

GENNET, a Spanish horse; see Jennet.

GENRE, a style of painting, depicting ordinary life. (F.-L.) A
peculiar use of F. genre, kind, style; see Gender (1).

GENTEEL, lit. belonging to a noble race, well-bred, graceful.
(F.—L.) ‘Tis the most genteel [old ed. gentile] and received wear
now, sir;’ Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s Revels, i. 1 (Asotus). A doublet
of gentle; it arose at the end of the 16th century, and was at first spelt
gentile, with the 7 sounded as in French (N.E.D.).—MF. geniil,
‘gentle, . ... gracious, . . . also Gentile;’ Cot.—L. gentilis, orig.
belonging to the same clan; also, a gentile. See Gentile, Der.
genteel-ly, genteel-ness ; also gentil-i-ty, As You Like It, 1. 2. 22,
Doublet, gentle; also gentile.

GENTIAN, the name of a plant. (F.—L.) In Minsheu. ME,
genciane ; Med. Wks. of 14th cent., ed. Henslow, p. 131.—OF.
gentiane, ‘gentian, bitterwort;? Cot.—L. gentidna, gentian. So
named after the Illyrian king Gentius (about B.c. 180), who was the
first to discover its properties ; see Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxv. 7,

GENTILE, a pagan. (F.—L.) In Shak. Merch. of Ven. ii. 6. 51.
Fabyan has Gentyle; Pt. v. ch, 82 (end).—OF. gentil, ‘gentle, .. .
Gentile ;’ Cot.—L. gentilis, a gentile, lit. belonging to the same clan.
= L. genti-, decl, stem of gens, a tribe, clan, race, From 4/ GEN, to
beget, produce. Doublet, gentle; also, genteel.

GENTLE, docile, mild. (F.—L.) ME. gentil. ‘So hardy and
so gentil ;’? Rob. of Glouc, p. 167; 1. 3482. ‘Noble men and gentile
and of heh burde’ [high birth]; O. Eng. Homilies, i. 273.—OF. geniil,
‘gentle;” Cot.—L. gentilis. See Gentile and Genteel. Der.
gentl-y, gentle-ness; gentle-man (ME, gentelman, Gower, C. A. il. 783
bk. iv. 2275) 3 gentle-woman (ME. gentilwomman, Chaucer, C. T.
15893; G 425)3 gentle-man-ly, gentle-folks; also gent-ry, q. Vv.

GENTRY, rank by birth; gentlefolks. (F.—L.) ME. gentrie.
‘To pryde him of his gentrye is ful greet folye; for ofte tyme the
gentrye of the body binimeth [taketh away] the gentrye of the soule;’
Chaucer, Pers, Tale, De Superbia; I 461. Shortened from the older
form gentrise; see P. Plowman, C. xxi. 21, where we find the various
spellings gentrise, gentrice, genterise, and genirye. = OF. genterise, rank,
formed from OF. gentilise, by the change of J into r (Godefroy),
Gentilise is formed, with OF. suffix -ice, -ise (L. -itia), from the adj,
gentil, gentle. See Gentle.

GENUFLECTION, GENUFLEXION, a bending of the
knee. (F.—L.) Spelt genuflexion in Howell’s Letters, b. iti. let. 2.
§ 2.—F. genuflexion, ‘a bending of the knee;’ Cot.—Late L. acc.
geniiflexidnem, from nom. geniiflexio; Ducange.—L. gen, the knee;
and flexus, pp. of flectere, to bend, See Knee and Flexible.
@ The correcter spelling is with x; cf. L. flexio, a bending.

GENUINE, of the true stock, natural, real, (L.) ‘The last her
genuine laws which stoutly did retain;’ Drayton, Polyolbion, s. 9.
1.14.—L. genuinus, innate, genuine. From the base genw- (for *oen-
wo-), an extension of the base gen- as seen in genus, &c.— 4 GEN,
to beget. See Genus, Der. genuine-ly, genuine-ness.

GENUS, breed, race, kin. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674-


238 GEOGRAPHY


First in 1551, as a term in logic. = L. genus (stem gener-, for *genes-),
race ; cognate with E. kin ; see Kin. —4/GEN, to beget ; cf. Skt. jan,
to beget; Gk. yév-os, race; &c. Brugmann, i. § 604. Doublet,
hin, q.v. Der. gener-a, pl.; gener-ic, gener-ic-al, gener-ic-al-ly.
From the same root, gener-al, gener-ate, gener-ous; gender, en-gender,
con-gener; gen-i-us, gen-i-al, gen-it-al, con-gen-it-al; gen-it-ive, gen-u-
ine, gen-t-ile, gen-t-le, gen-t-eel ; con-gen-i-al ; de-gen-er-ate, indi-gen-
ous, in-gen-i-ous, in-gen-u-ous, pro-gen-t-tor, pro-gen-y, re-gener-ate, Kc.
Also, from the Gk., gen-e-a-logy, gen-esis, hetero-gen-e-ous, homo-gen-
€-ous; endo-gen, exo-gen, hydro-gen, oxy-gen, nitro-gen, 8c.

GEHOGRAPHY, a description of the earth. (F.—L.—Gk.) In
Minsheu (1627).—MF. geographie, ‘ geography ;’ Cot.=—L. geogra-
phia.= Gk.yewypagia, geography, lit. earth-description.= Gk. yew-=
yno-, combining form of yf, earth, land; and -ypad¢ia, description,
from ypapeiy, to write. Der. geograph-er, geograph-ic-al. From the
same form geo- as a prefix, we have numerous derivatives, such as
geo-centr-ic (see Centre), geo-logy (from Gk. Aévyev, to speak of),

.geo-mancy (from Gk. payreia, divination, through the French); and
other scientific terms. See also Geometry and Georgic.

GEOMETRY, the science of measurement. (F.—L.—Gk.)
ME. geometrie, Gower, C. A. iii. 90; bk. vii. 178.—OF. geometrie,
“geometry ;’ Cot.=L. gedmetria. = Gk. yewperpia, lit. ‘ the measure-
ment of land.’ = Gk. yew- (asabove), belonging to land; and -perpia,
ineasurement, from petpew, I measure, which is from pérpoy, a measure.
See Metre. Der. geometr-ic, geometr-ic-al, geometr-ic-al-ly, geometr-
ic-i-an, geometer.

GEORGIC, a poem on husbandry. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Georgicks,
bookes intreating of the tillage of the ground;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627.
The title of four books on husbandry by Virgil. =L. gedrgica, neut.
pl. (for georgica carmina=georgic poems).= L. gedrgicus, relating to
husbandry.=Gk. yewpyicds, relating to husbandry.=—Gk. yewpyia,
tillage. — Gk. yewpyety, to till. = Gk. yew- (as above), relating to the
earth; and *épyyeuv >€pdev, to work. See Geography and Work.
Der. George= Gk. yewpyos, a farmer.

GERANIUM, a kind of plant. (L.—Gk.) Sometimes called
crane’s-bill or stork’s-bill, First in Turner (1548). ‘ Geranium, stork-
bill or herb robert;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.—L. geranzum, Latin-
ised from Gk. yepamov, a geranium, crane’s bill (from the shape of
the seed-pod).— Gk. yépavos, a crane; cognate with Crane,

GERFALCON, a kind of falcon; see Gyrfalcon.

GERM, a seed. (F.—L.) Sir T. Browne speaks of the ‘ germ
of... anegg;’ Vulg. Errors, D. iii. c. 28, § 3.—F. germe, ‘a young
shute, sprout ;’ Cot.—L. germen (stem germin-), a sprout, shoot, bud.
Der. germin-al, germin-ate, germin-at-ion, from the stem germin-;
from the same source, german, q.v., germane. Doublet, germen,
Macbeth, iv. I. 59.

GERMAN, GERMANEH, akin. (F.—L.) Nearly obsolete,
except in quotations and in the phrase cousins-german or cousins-
germans, i.e. cousins having the same grandfather. In Shak. Wint.
Ta.iv. 4. 802; Timon, iv. 3.344; Hamlet, v.2.165. Formerly also
spelt germain, as in Cotgrave, and orig, derived rather from the French
than Latin. The phrase ‘ cosins germains’ (with the pl. adj. in s
according to the F. idiom) is in Chaucer, Tale of Melibeus, C. T.
Group B, 2558.—OF. germain, ‘ germaine, come of the same stock ;’
Cot.—L. germanus, fully akin, said of brothers and sisters having the
same parents. Allied toGerm,

GERMANDER, a plant. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) In Bacon,
Essay 46 (Of Gardens). ‘ Germandre, herbe, germandré;’ Palsgrave.
=F. germandrée, germander (Cotgrave); OF. gemandree (Supp. to
Godefroy, s.v. germandree) ; cf. G. gamander.— Late L. gamandria,
a popular alteration of Late Gk. xapyavipvd.—Gk. xapaldpus, ger-
mander, lit. ‘ground-tree,’ or low-growing tree. Gk. xapai, on the
ground; dpus, tree. See Chameleon and Tree.

GERMEN, GERMINAL, GERMINATE; see Germ.

GERUND, a part of a Latin verb. (L.) The derivative gerun-
dive, misprinted gerundine, is used as a coined word in Beaum, and
Fletcher, Wit at Several Weapons, i. 2 (speech of Wittypate).—L.
gerundium, a gerund.—L. gerundum, that which is to be done or
carried on; an adj. formed from gerere, to carry on, perform; pp.
Bates (fGES.) Der. gerund-i-al (from gerundi-um). See also
below.

GESTATION, the carrying of young in the womb. (F.—L.)
It occurs in the Index to Holland’s tr. of Pliny. MF. gestation, ‘a
bearing, or carrying ;’ Cot.—L. acc. gestationem, from nom. gestitio,
a carrying.—L. gestd-re, to carry; frequentative form of gerere, to
carry. See above. Der. gestat-or-y.

GESTICULATH, to make gestures. (L.) ‘Or what their
servile apes gesticulate;’ Ben Jonson, Roetaster, To the Reader (an
Epilogue).—L. gesticulatus, pp. of gesticulari, to make mimic ges-
tures.—L. gesticulus, a mimic gesture; formed, with suffixes -cu- and
-l-, from gesti- = gestu-, for gestus, a gesture. = L. gestus, pp. of gerere,


GIANT


to carry; reflexively, to behave. See Gerund. Der. gesticulat-ion,
gesticulat-or, gesticulat-or-y.

GESTURE, a movement of the body. (L.) In Shak.Temp. iii.
3. 37. ME. gesture, Sir Cleges (Weber), 1. 483. —Late L. gestira,a
mode of action. —L. gest-us, pp. of gerere, to carry; reflexively, to
behave oneself. See Gerund and Gesticulate.

GET, to seize, obtain, acquire. (Scand.) ME. geten, pt. t. gat, pp.
geten; Chaucer, C. T. 5792, 293 (D 210, A 291).—Icel. geta, pt. t.
gat, pp. getinn.4+-AS. -getan, -gietan, only in the compounds on-gitan,
and-gitan, for-gitan, be-gitan, &c. ; Grein, ii. 346, i. 511 ; Goth. -gitan,
in the comp. bi-gitan, to find, obtain. +-L. -hendere (base hed), in the
comp. prehendere, to seize; Gk. xavdave (base xad), to seize; Russ.
gad-ate, to conjecture. (4/GHwED.) Brugmann, i. § 632. Der.
gett-er, gett-ing ; be-get, for-get; from the same root are ap-pre-hend,
cont-pre-hend, re-pre-hend, &c.; also apprise, comprise, enterprise, sur-
prise; impregnable, &c.

GEWGAW, a plaything, specious trifle. (Scand.?) ‘ Gewgaws
and gilded puppets;? Beaum. and Fletcher, Four Plays in One,
Triumph of Time, sc. 1. Spelt gewgaudes, id. Woman’s Prize, i. 4
(Rowland), Also gugawes, Holinshed, Descr, of Ireland, c. 4. ‘He
counteth them for gygawis;’ Skelton, Why Come Ye Nat to Court,
1060. Cotgrave explains babiole as ‘a trifle, whimwham, gugaw, or
small toy ;’ and fariboles as ‘trifles, nifles, flim-flams, why-whaws,
idle discourses.’ The latter form why-whaw is a mere imitation of
the older gugaw. [The form gugaw seems to answer to ME. giuegoue
(=givegove?); ‘ worldes weole, ant wunne, ant wurschipe, ant oder
swuche giuegouen’=the world’s wealth and joy and worship, and
other such gewgaws; Ancren Riwle, p. 196; but the pronunciation
of this ME. word is uncertain; and it cannot be safely identified with
gewgaw.| B. One sense of gewgaw is a Jew’s harp; cf. Walloon gawe,
a Jew’s harp (Grandgagnage). Cf. Swed. dial. guva, to blow; Norw.
guva, gyva (pt. t. gauv), to reek; gufs,a puff. The ME. gweawe
(Prompt. Parv., p. 168) means a flute or pipe. See Notes on E,
Etym., p. 116.

GEYSIR, a hot spring in Iceland. (Icelandic.) ‘ Geysir, the name
of a famous hot springin Iceland. . . . The word geysir =“ a gusher,”’
must be old, as the inflexive -ir is hardly used but in obsolete
words ;’ Cleasby and Vigfusson. —Icel. geysa, to gush ; formed (with
mutation of au to ey) from gaus, as seen in the pt. t. of gjdsa, to gush;
see Gush.

GHASTLY, terrible. (E.) The & has been inserted, for no very
good reason. ME. gastly; ‘ gastly for to see;’ Chaucer, C. T, 1986
(A 1984). Formed, with suffix -ly, from the ME. gasten, AS. g@stan,
to terrify. Allied to Goth. us-gais-jan, to terrify, and us-geis-nan, to
be astonished. See further under Aghast. 4 Not to be confused
with ghostly, q.v. Der. ghastli-ness ; cf. also gasted, K. Lear, ii. 1.
547; gastness, Oth. v. 1. 106. ;

GHAUT, a landing-place, quay, way down to a river, mountain-
pass. (Hind.) For quotations, see Yule.—Hind. ghat; Bengali
ghat (H. H. Wilson ; Forbes, 1848, p. 450).

GHAZAT, an Oriental lyric poem. (Arab.) Spelt gaze/ in T,
Moore; Twopenny Postbag, vi. 69.—Arab. ghazal, an ode; Rich.
Dict. p. 1050.

GHEE, clarified butter. (Hind.—Skt.) See Yule. — Hind. ghi. ==
Skt. ghrta, clarified butter; orig. pp. of ghy, to sprinkle. (H. H.
Wilson.

GHERKIN, a small cucumber. (Du.—Slav.-—Low L.—Gk.—
Pers.) The /is inserted to keep the ghard. ‘ Gherkins or Guerkins,
a sort of pickled cucumbers ;’ Kersey’s Dict.,ed. 1715. Spelt gherkin
in Skinner, ed. 1671. Shortened from *agherkin.=—Du. agurkje,
a gherkin; cf. ‘ Gherkins, agurkes’ in Sewel’s Eng.-Du. Dict. ed. 1754.
B. Note that the Du. dimin. suffix -ken was formerly used (as ex-
plained by Ten Kate) where the dimin. suffix -je now occurs ; so that
agurkje stands for an older form *agurkken, whence the E. gherkin
must have been borrowed, with the loss merely of initiala. Koolman
gives augurken as the EFriesic form. ‘y. From Polish ogurek, Bohem.
okurka. = Low L. angiirius, a water-melon (MItal. anguria, a cucum-
ber, Florio). Late Gk. dyyovpiov, a water-melon. = Pers. angarah, a.
melon, a cucumber; Rich. Dict. p. 194.

GHOST, a spirit. (E.) The ’ has been inserted. ME. goost,
gost; Chaucer, C. T. 2770 (A 2768). AS. gast, a spirit; Grein, i.
371.4-Du. geest; G. geist, aspirit. Teut.type*gaistoz. Of uncertain
origin; but apparently allied to Icel. geis-a, to rage (like fire), and to
Goth. us-gais-jan, to terrify. Perhapsalso to ghastly. See Ghastly.
Cf. Skt. Aéda-s, anger, wrath of the gods (Macdonell) Brugmann, i.
§ 785 (c). Der. ghost-ly, ghost-li-ness.

GHOUL, a kind of demon. (Arab.) Pron. gool, to rime with
cool. Pers. ghdl, an imaginary sylvan demon; supposed to devour
men and animals; Arab. ghuwal (the same).— Arab. ghawl, attacking
suddenly and unexpectedly; Rich. Pers. Dict. p. 1062. See Yule.

GIANT, a man of great size. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. giant, more


GIAOUR


frequently geant, geaunt; Chaucer, C. T. 13738 (B 1997); King
Alisaunder, 3465.—OF. geant, ‘a giant;’ Cot-—L. acc. gigantem,
from nom, gigas, a giant.=Gk. yiyas, a giant (stem yyarT-).
B. Sometimes explained from Gk, yj, the earth, as if the word meant
‘earth-born.’ Der. gigant-ic, q.v.3 giant-ess.

GIAOUR, an infidel. (Ital.—Pers.) ‘In Dr. Clarke’s Travels,
this word, which means infidel, is always written djour. Lord Byron
adopted the Ital. spelling usual among the Franks of the Levant ;’
note 14 to Lord Byron’s poem of The Giaour. = Pers. gawr, an infidel ;
Rich. Dict. p.1227, A variant of Pers. gabr, a Gueber ; see Gueber.

GIBBERISH, nonsensical talk. (E.) Holinshed speaks of
‘ gibberishing Irish ;’ Descr. of Ireland, c, 1. ‘ All kinds of gibb’rish
he had learnt to know;’ Drayton, The Mooncalf, 1. 913. Cotgrave
has: ‘ Bagois, gibridge, strange talke. The hard g seems to separate
it from the old verb gibber, to gabble; Hamlet, i. 1. 116; which is
allied to jabber and gabble. But the g in gibber may have been some-
times hard, as in gibble-gabble (N. E. D.). Ifso, the derivation is from
gib-, variant of gab-, an imitative utterance; seeGabble. B. Johnson’s
derivation, from Gebir, an alchemist of the 8th cent., is unlikely, as the
word is not spelt gebirish.

GIBBET, a gallows. (F.) ME. gebet, gibet, Chaucer, Ho. of
Fame, i. 106; ‘hongen on a gibet;’ Ancren Riwle, p. 116.—OF.
gibbet, ‘a gibbet;’ Cot. (mod. F. gibet). B. Of unknown origin;
Littré suggests a comparison with OF. gibet, a large stick (Roquefort) ;
apparently a dimin. of OF. gibbe, a sort of arm, an implement for
stirring the earth and rooting up plants, apparently a hoe (Roquefort).
Perhaps Scand.; cf. Swed. dial. gippa, to jerk up, Norw. gippa, gjeppa,
to jerk up. This form gippa seems to be imitated from Swed. wippa,
to see-saw, to tilt up; cf. MDu. wippe, ‘a gibbit’ (Hexham), Swed.
vipp-galge, a gibbet.

GIBBON, a kind of ape. (F.) Cf. F. gibbon, in Buffon.
GIBBOSE,, swelling. (L.) The L. form of the word below.

GIBBOUS, humped, swelling. (F.—L.) ‘Its round and gibbous
back;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 26. § 5. The suffix
-ous is for F. -eux, by analogy with other words in which -ous
represents OF, -ows (later -eux).=—F. gibbeux, ‘hulch, bunched,.much
swelling ;’ Cot.—L. gibbdsus, hunched. Formed, with suffix -dsus,
from L. gibbus,a hump, hunch; cf. gibbus, bent; gibber, a hump.
Der. gibbous-ness.

GIBE, to mock, taunt. (E.) ‘And common courtiers love to gybe
and fleare;’ Spenser, Mother Hubberd’s Tale, 714. Of imitative
origin; cf. EFries. gibeln, to mock; Du. gijbelen, to sneer. Note
also Swed. dial. gipa, to gape, also, to talk rashly and foolishly
(Rietz) ; Icel. geipa, to talk nonsense; Icel, geip, idle talk; Norw.
geipa, to make grimaces. @ Also spelt jibe. Der. gibe, sb.
-GIBLETS, the various parts of a fowl that are removed before
cooking. (F.) ‘And set the hare’s head against the goose gyblets ;’
Harrington’s tr. of Orlando Furioso, b. xliii. st. 136 (R.); the date
of the Ist edition is 1591. ‘May feed on giblet-pie;’ Dryden, tr. of
Persius, vi. 172. ‘Sliced beef, giblets, and pettitoes;’? Beaum. and
Fletcher, Woman-hater, i. 2. ME. gibelet; see Wright’s Vocab.
i. 179. = OF. gibelet, which, according to Littré, is the old form of F.
gibelotte, stewed rabbit. Of unknown origin; not necessarily related
to F. gibier, game.

GIDDY, unsteady, dizzy. (E.) ME. gidi, gydi; Rob. of Glouc.
p- 68; 1.1542. Late AS. gidig, frantic; in Napier’s Glosses; for
earlier *gydig, as shown by the hard g. Teut. type *gudigoz, i.e.
possessed bya god (like Gk. &&@eos).—Teut. type *gudom, a god.
See God. Der. giddi-ly, giddi-ness,

GIER-EAGLE, a kind of eagle. (Du. and F.) In Levit. xi. 18.
The first syllable is Dutch, from Du. gier, a vulture; cognate with
G. geier, MHG. gir, a vulture. Allied to G. gier-ig, greedy, and to
E, Yearn. See Gyrfalecon. The word eagleis F. See Eagle.

GIFT, a thing given, present. (E.) ME. gift, commonly 3i/t, 3¢/t;
Rob. of Glouc. p. 122, 1. 2600; P. Plowman, B. iii. 99. [The
word is perhaps rather Scand. than E.] AS. gift, gyft, rare in the
sing., but common in the pl. (when it often has the sense of ‘ nuptials,’
with reference to the marriage dowry). In Bosworth’s Dict. is given
a passage from the Laws of Ine, no. 31, in which the word gyft
appears as a fem. sing., with the sense of ‘dowry;’ see Thorpe’s
Ancient Laws, i. 122, sect. 31. Or from Icel. gift, gipt (pron. gift),
a gift. + Du. gift, a gift, present; Goth. -gibés, -gifts, only in comp.
fragibts, fragifts, promise, gift, espousal; G. -gift, in comp. mitgift,
a dowry. 8. All from the corresponding verb, with the suffix -r, for
-ti-; Teut. type *giftiz, fem. See Give. Der. gift-ed; heaven-
gifted, Milton, Samson Agon. 36.

GIG, a light carriage, a light hoat. (Scand.) The orig. idea is
that of anything that easily whirls or twirls about. In Shak. gig
means a boy’s top; L. L. L. iv. 3. 167; v. 1. 70, 73. Cf. whirligig.
[In Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii. 852, we have: ‘ This hous was also ful


of gigges;’ where the sense is uncertain; it may be ‘full of whirling


GIMBALS


things ;” since we find ‘ful . . of other werkinges’=full of other
movements, immediately below.] B. The hard g shows it to be of
Scand. origin, as distinguished from jig, the French form. Cf. Norw.
giga, to totter, shake about; gigra, gigla, to shake about (Ross); the
latter is the prov. E. giggle, to shake about, be unsteady; E. D. D.
Also Norw. geiga, to swing one’s arms about (Ross). See Jig.

GIGANTIC, giant-like. (L.—Gk.) In Milton, P. L. xi. 659;
Sams. Agon. 1249. A coined word, from the decl. stem giganti- of
L. gigas, a giant; see Giant,

GIGGLE, to laugh lightly, titter. (E.) ‘ Giggle, to laugh out,
laugh wantonly;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715. ‘A set of gigglers 3°
Spectator, no. 158. ‘Some gygyll and lawgh;’ Barclay, Ship of
Fools, i. 63. An attenuated form of ME. gagelen, ‘to gaggle,’ or
make a noise like a goose. ‘Gagelin, or cryyn as gees, clingo;”
Prompt. Parv. p. 184. Cf. Icel. gagl, a goose; EFries, gicheln,
Low G. giggeln (Danneil), G. kichern, to giggle. A frequentative
form, from animitative root. See Cackle. Der. giggle, sb., giggi-er.

GIGLET, GIGLOT, a wanton woman. (Scand. ; with F. suffix.)
In Shak. Meas. for Meas. v. 352; 1 Hen. VI, iv. 7. 41. Earlier, in
Prompt. Parv. p. 194; and see the note. Cf. giglotrye, giddiness;
How the Good Wife taught her Daughter, 1. 159 (in Barbour’s Bruce,
ed. Skeat). A dimin., with suffix -e¢ or -of, from an older giggle or
gigle. Cotgraye has: ‘ Gadrouillette, a minx, gig/e, flirt, callet, gixie.’
Here again, gig-le and gixie (=gig-sy) are connected with ME. gigge,
a flighty girl, Plowman’s Tale, 759 (cf. Ancren Riwle, p. 204;
N.E.D.). Prob. from the base gig, applied to rapid motion, and
thence to lightness of behaviour. See Gig, Giggle.

GILD, to overlay with gold. (E.) ME. gilden, Wyclif, Exod.
xxvi. 29. AS. gyldan; only in the pp. gegyld, A. S. Psalter, ed.
Spelman, xliv. 11 (xlv. 9); and in comp. be-gyldan, ofer-gyldan.
Teut. type *gulthjan-. The y is the usual substitution, by vowel-
change, for an original ~, which appears in the Goth. gulth, gold.
Cf. Icel. gylla (for gylda), to gild. See Gold, Der. gilt, contracted
form of gild-ed; gild-er, gild-ing.

GILL (1), an organ of respiration in fishes. (Scand.) ‘ Gylle of
a fische, branchia;’ Prompt. Parv. Spelt gile, Wyclif, Tobit, vi. 4.
Allied to Dan. gielle, a gill; Swed. gal; MDan. geile, MSwed. gel.
Cf. Gk. xetAos, AXolic xéAAos, a lip.

GILL (2), a ravine, yawning chasm. (Scand.) Also spelt ghyll;
common in place-names, as Dungeon Ghyll. —Icel. gil, a deep narrow
glen with a stream at the bottom; Norw. gil; and cf. Icel. geil, a
ravine; Swed. dial. gilja, a defile.

GILL (3), with g soft; a quarter of a pint. (F.—L.?) ME. gille,
gylle; P. Plowman, B. v. 346 (where it is written Z:lle =jille).—OF.
gelle, a sort of measure for wine; Roquefort. Cf. Low L. gillo, a
wine-vessel ; gella, a wine-vessel, wine-measure; Ducange. Godefroy
equates OF, gille, gelle with OF. gerle, a jar; cf. Ital. gerla, a basket.
Possibly from Late L. gerula,a basket carried on the back, also, a
measure of wine (Ducange). From L. gerere, to carry (Korting,
§ 4233).

Git (4), with g soft; a woman’s name; ground-ivy. (F.—L.)
The name Gill is short for Gillian, which is in Shak. Com. Errors,
iii. 1. 31. And Gillian is from F. Fuliane, from L. Iuliana. This
personal fem. name is formed from L. Julius; see July. B. The
ground-ivy was hence called Gill-creep-by-the-ground (Halliwell); or
briefly Gill. Hence also Gill-ale, the herb ale-hoof (Hall.); Gill-
burnt-tail, an ignis fatuus; Gill-hooter, an owl; Gill-flirt, a wanton
gitl; flirt-gill, the same, Romeo, ii. 4. 162. St. Juliana’s day is
Feb. 16.

GILLIE, a boy, page, menial. (C.) Used by Sir W. Scott; but
Spenser also speaks of ‘ the Irish horse-boyes or cuilles, as they call
them ;’ View of the State of Ireland, Globe ed., p. 641, col, 2.— Gael.
gille, giolla, Irish giolla, a boy, lad, youth, man-servant, lacquey ;
Olrish gilla, a servant.

GILLYFLOWER, a kind of flower, a carnation, a stock. (F. —
L.—Gk.) Spelt gellifowres in Spenser, Shep. Kal, April, 137.
Spelt gilloflower by Cotgrave. By the common change of r to /,
gilloflower stands for giroflower, spelt gerafloure in The Kingis Quair,
st. 190; where the ending flower is a mere E. corruption, like the fisk
in crayfish, q. v.= MF. giroflée, ‘a gilloflower; and most properly,
the clove gilloflower;’ Cot. B. Here we have clove-gillojlower as
the full form of the name, which is Chaucer's clowe gilofre, C. T. 13692
(B 1952); thus confirming the above derivation. y. From F, clou de
girofle, where clou is from L. clauus, a nail (see Clove) ; and girofle
is from Late L. caryophyllum, a Latinised form of Gk. xapvdopvddror,
strictly ‘ nut-leaf,’ a clove-tree. (Hence the name means ‘ nut-leaf,’
or ‘nut-leaved clove.’)=—Gk. xapvo-, for xdpvov, a nut; and puddAorv,
a leaf (=L. folium, whence E. foli-age).

GIMBALS, a contrivance for suspending a ship’s compass so as
to keep it always horizontal. (F.—L.) The contrivance is one which
admits of a double movement, The name gimbals is formed (with


239


240 GIMLET, GIMBLET


excrescent b) from the older word gimmals, also called a gemmow or
gemmow-ring. See also gimbol and gimmal in Halliwell; and the
remarks in Nares. ‘Gemmow, or Gemmow-ring, a double ring, with
two or more links;’ Kersey’s Dict.,ed.1715. In Shak. ‘a gimmal bit’
is a horse’s bit made with linked rings; Hen. V, iv. 2.49. ‘Item,..
pro haspis, gemewis, et clauis;’ Earl of Derby’s Expeditions, p. 221,
1. 29 (1392). The forms gemmow and gimmal correspond to MF.
gemeau and OF, gemel, a twin. —L. gemellus, a twin; a dimin. form
from L. geminus, double. See Gemini.

GIMLET, GIMBLET, a tool for boring holes. (F.—Teut.)
And see there the gimblets, how they make their entry ;? Ben Jonson,
The Devil is an Ass, i. 1. ME. gymlot, Lydgate, Assembly of Gods,
1. 357.—MF. gimbelet,‘a gimlet or piercer;’ Cot.=mod. F. gibelet (by
loss of m). Formerly (better) spelt guimbelet (Godefroy) ; Norm. dial.
guimblet, vimblet (Moisy). Spelt guinbelet in 1412 (Godefroy). A
dimin. of wimble, as shown by the Norm. dial. vimbi-et. See Wimble.
And cf. Icel. vindla, to wind up, Norw. vindel, a gimlet (Ross).

GIMMAL, GIMMATL-RING; see Gimbals.

GIMP (with hard g), a kind of trimming, made with twisted silk,
wool, or cotton. (F.—Teut.) ‘My guimp petticoat;’? Dryden,
Marriage-a-la-Mode, iii. 1. ‘Gimp, a sort of mohair thread covered
with the same, or a twist for several works formerly in use;’ Bailey’s
Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1731. [It seems to have been influenced by confusion
with F. guimpe,a wimple, OF. guimple, whence OF. guimpler, to
adorn, attire (Godefroy), and MF. guimpier,a maker of wimples. See
Wimple.| Cf. also Low G.'gimpen, gimp (Berghaus). In sense it
answers to the F. guipure,a thread of silk lace. The F. guipure is of
Teutonic origin, from the base *wip-, to twist or bind round, appearing
in Goth. weipan, to crown. See Guipure.

GIN (1), to begin. (E.; pron. with g hard.) Obsolete; or only
used as a supposed contraction of begin, though really the orig. word
whence begin is formed. Itneed not be denoted by’gin ; the apostrophe
should be omitted. Common in Shak. Macb. i. 2. 25, &c. ME. ginnen;
Chaucer, C. T. 3020 (A 3018). AS, -ginnan, to begin; only used in
the compounds on-ginnan, to begin, Matt. iv. 7; and be-ginnan, to
begin; so that perhaps ME. ginnen is for a-ginnen.4+Du. be-ginnen; the
simple ginnen being unused; OHG. bi-ginnan; G. be-ginnen; Goth.
-ginnan, only in the comp. du-ginnan, to begin. See Brugmann, i.
§ 376. Der. be-gin.

GIN (2), a trap, snare. (F.—L.) ME. gin; ‘uele ginnes hep pe
dyeuel uor to nime pet uolk *=many snares hath the devil for to catch
the people; Ayenbite of Inwyt, ed. Morris, p. 54. (Pron. jin.) Also
in a far wider sense, and certainly a contraction of F. engin<L.
ingenium, a contrivance or piece of ingenuity. Thus, in describing the
mechanism by which the horse of brass (in the Squieres Tale) was
moved, we are told that ‘therein lyth th’effect of al the gin’ =therein
is the pith of all the contrivance; C. T. 10636 (F 322). See Engine.
@ Particularly note the use of the word in P. Plowman, B. xviii. 250;
“For gygas the geaunt with a gynne engyned’=for Gigas the giant
contrived by a contrivance.

GIN (3),akind of spirit. (F.—L.) Formerly called geneva, whence
gin was formed by contraction. Pope has gin-shops ; Dunciad, iii. 148:
* Geneva, a kind of strong water;’. Kersey’s Dict. ed.1715. So called
by confusion with the town in Switzerland of that name; but really
a corruption. = MF. genevre, ‘juniper;’ Cot. [It is well known that
gin is flavoured with berries of the juniper.]—L. itiniperum, acc. of
Zuiniperus, a juniper. See Juniper.

GINGER, the root of a certain plant. (F.—L.— Gk. —Skt.—Malay-
alam.) So called in Skt. (but by a popular etymology) because
shaped like a horn; the resemblance to a deer’s antler is striking. In
early use. ME. ginger ; whence ginger-bred (ginger-bread) ; Chaucer,
C. T. 13783 (B 2044). An older form gingiuere (=gingivere) occurs
in the Ancren Riwle, p. 370.—OF. gengibre, gingibre (Supp. to
Godefroy, s.v. gingembre) ; Norm. dial. gengivre (Moisy, ed. 1895) ;
mod. F. gingembre.—Late L. gingiber; L. zingiber, ginger.—Gk.
CvyyiBepis, ginger. — Skt. ev#gavera, ginger. Skt. ¢v#iga-,a horn; and
vera-, body (i.e. shape); adapted from Malayalam inchi-ver, green

inger; from inchi, a root (Yule). Der. ginger-bread.

GINGERLY, with soft steps. (F.—L.) ‘Go gingerly;’ Skelton,
Garl. of Laurell, 1. 1203 ; see Dyce’s note. Palsgrave has: ‘ Gyngerly,
a pas menu; as, allez a pas menu, ma fille. Prob. formed, with E. suffix
-ly, from OF. gensor, genzor, properly a comparative from OF. gent,
but also itself used as a positive, with the sense ‘ pretty, delicate.’ =
OF. gent, gentle, orig. well-born. = Folk-L. gentum, for L. genitum,
acc. of genitus, born, pp. of gignere, to beget. See Gentle, (So in
N.E.D.; cf. gent in Hatzfeld.)

GINGHAM, a kind of cotton cloth. (F.—Malay.) Spelt gingham
in1615(Yule).—F. guingan. = Malay ginggang,a striped or checkered
cotton. (C. P. G. Scott.)

GINGLE, another spelling of Jingle, q.v.

GIPSY, the same as Gypsy, q. v.


GIVE


GIRAFFE, the camelopard, an African quadruped with long
neck and legs. (F.—Span.—Arab.) ‘ Giraffa, an Asian beast, the
same with Camelopardus;’ Kersey’s Dict.,ed.1715. First in 1594,
spelt gyraffa; spelt giraffe in 1605. [Here giraffa=Span. girafa. We
now use the F, form.|—MF, giraffe (F. girafe).—Span. girafa. =
Arab. zaraf or zarafa(¢),a camelopard; Rich. Dict. p. 772, col. 2. "See
Dozy, who gives the forms as zarafa, zorafa, and notes that it is also
called jorafa.

GIRD (1), to enclose, bind round, surround, clothe. (E.) ME:
gurden, girden, gerden; the pp. girt is in Chaucer, C. T. 331 (A 329).
AS. gyrdan, to gird, surround; Grein, i. 536.4-Du. gorden; Icel-
gyrda, to gird; Dan. gjorde ; Swed. gjorda; G. giirten; OSax. gurdian.
B. These are weak verbs, of which the Teut. type is *gurdjan-; from
* gurd-, weak grade of Teut. *gerdan- (pt. t. *gard) to enclose; as in
Goth. bi-gairdan, to begird. Der. gird-er; gird-le, q.v.; girth, q.v.
From the same root we also have garden, yard ; and even horticulture,
cohort, court. See Yard (1).

GIRD (2), to jest at, jibe. (E.) A peculiar use of ME. girden,
gurden, to strike, cut. ‘ Gurdeth of Gyles hed,’ cut off Guile’s head;
P. Plowman, B. ii. 201. Of obscure origin. Hence, to gird at=to
strike at, jest at; a gird is a cut, sarcasm; Tam. Shrew, y. 2. 58.
@ Not from AS. gerd, gyrd, a rod, as that became E. yard (2);
a connexion with MDu. geerde, a rod (Hexham) is possible ; but not
very probable.

GIRDLE, a band for the waist. (E.) ME. girdel, gerdel; Chaucer,
C. T. 360 (A 358). AS. gyrdel, a girdle; Mark, i. 6.4-Du. gordel ;
Icel. gyrdill ; Swed. gérdel; G. giirtel. B. From the AS. gyrdan, to
gird, with suffix -el; see Gird (x). Allied to girth.

GIRL, a female child, young woman. (E.) ME. gerle, girle, gyrle,
formerly used of either sex, and signifying either a boy or girl. In
Chaucer, C. T. 3767 (A 3769) gerl is a young woman; but in C. T.
666 (A 664), the pl. girles means young people of both sexes. In Will.
of Palerne, 816, and King Alisaunder, 2802, it means ‘ young women ;’
in P. Plowman, B. i. 33, it means ‘boys;’ cf. B.x.175. Answering
toan AS. form *gyr-el-, Teut. *gur-wil-,a dimin. form from Tent. base
*gur-. Cf. NFnes. gor, a girl; Pomeran. goer, a child; O. Low G.
gor, a child; see Bremen Worterbuch, ti. 528. Cf. Swiss gurre,
gurrli, a depreciatory term for a girl; Sanders, G. Dict. i. 609, 641 ;
also Norw. gorre,a small child (Aasen); Swed. dial. gdrra, gurre
(the same). Root uncertain. Der. girl-ish, girl-ish-ly, girl-ish-ness,
girl-hood.

GIRON, GYRON, in heraldry, an eighth part ofa shield. (F. —
OHG.) It is made by drawing a diagonal line from the top (dexter)
corner to the centre, and from the centre horizontally to the same side ;
a tight-angled triangle. Spelt gyron, geron in Blount (1681).— MF,
gyron, guyron, ‘a tearme of blasonrie;’ Cot.—-MHG. gére, OHG.
géro, G. gehre, a gusset, a gore. —OHG. gér, a spear; see Gore (2).

GIRTH, the measure round the waist; the bellyband of a saddle.
(Scand.) ME. gerth. ‘His gerth and ‘his stiropes also;’ Richard
Coer de Lion, 5733; and see Prompt. Pary. This is a Scand. form.
=Icel. gjird, a girdle, girth; gerd, girth round the waist; Swed.
gjord; Dan. giord, a girth. + Goth. gairda, a girdle, Mark, i.6. Teut.
type *gerda, f. From the Teut. base *gerd-, to enclose; see Gird.
Der. girth, verb; also written girt. Allied to girdle.

GIST, the main point or pith of a matter. (F.—L.) Not in Todd’s
Johnson. A legal term (see Blackstone, Comment. iv. 333) denoting
the real ground of an indictment, or the point wherein the action lies,
= OF. gist (F. git), it lies. Cf. the old F. proverb, given by Cotgrave,
s.v.lievre. ‘le scay bien ou gist le lievre, I know well which is the
very point, or knot of the matter,’ lit. I know well where the hare lies.
This gist is the mod. F. git, and similarly we have, in modern French,
the phrase ‘tout gi# en cela,’ the whole turns upon that; and again,
‘c’est 1A que gZt le liévre,’ there lies the difficulty, lit. that’s where
the hare lies; Hamilton’s F. Dict. B. From the vb. gésir, to lie, of
which the 3 pers. pres. was gist (mod. F. git). —L. iacére, to lie; an
intransitive verb allied to zacere, to throw. See Jet (1).

GITTERN, a kind of guitar. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. gitern (with
one ¢); Chaucer, C. T. 12400 (C 466); P. Plowman, B. xiii, 233.—
OF. guiterne,a guitar (Godefroy). <A variant of cittern or cithern; see
Cithern and Guitar.

GIVE, to bestow, impart, deliver over. (E.) ME. yeuen, yiuen,
jeuen, piuen (with u for v); Chaucer, C. T. 232. In old Southern and
Midland English, the g almost always appears as y (often written 3) ;
the modern hard sound of the g seems to be due to the influence of
Northern English. ‘ Gifand and takand woundis wyd ;’ Barbour’s
Bruce, xiii, 160. The pt. t. is yaf or 3af, Northern gaf, changing to
yeuen or jeuen in the pl. number; pp. yiuen, jiuen, jouen, yoven, rarely
pifen, gifen. AS. giefan, geofan, giefan, gifan, Grein, i. 505; pt. t. ic
geaf, pl. we geafon, pp. gifen. + Du. geven; Icel. gefa; Dan. give;
Swed, gifva; Goth. giban; G. geben. Teut. type *geban-, pt. t. *gab.
Cf, Olrish gab-im, I give, I take. Der. giv-er; also gif-t, q.v.


GIZZARD


GIZZARD, a second stomach in birds. (F.—L.) Spelt gisard in|


Minsheu. Thed is excrescent. ME. giser. ‘The fowl that highte
yoltor that eteth the stomak or the giser of Tityus’ =the bird that is
named the vulture, that eats the stomach or gizzard of Tityus;
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iii. met. 12. 1. 28.—OF. gezier, jugier,
juisier (mod. F. gésier; Norm. dial. gisier, gigier; Picard gigier) ; see
Littré, who quotes a parallel passage from Le Roman de la Rose,
19506, concerning ‘li juisier Ticius’ =the gizzard of Tityus. = L. gigé-
rium, only used in the pl. gigéria, the cooked entrails of poultry.

GLABROUS, smooth. (L.) Rare. ‘French elm, whose leaves
are thicker, and more florid, glabrous, and smooth;’ Evelyn, Sylva,
i. iv. § 1 (Todd’s Johnson). Coined, by adding the suffix -ows, from
L. glabr-, base of glaber, smooth. Idg. stem *gladh-ro-; see Glad.
Brugmann, i. § 589.

GLACIAL, icy, frozen. (F.—L.) ‘Glacial, freezing, cold ;’
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ‘White and glacious bodies ;’ Sir T.
Browne, Vulg. Errors, bk. ii. c. 1, § 3.—F. glacial, ‘icy ;’ Cot.—L.
glacidlis, icy.—L. glaciés, ice. Cf. L. gelu, cold (Bréal) ; see Gelid.
Der. From same source, glacier, q.v.; glacis, q.v.

GLACIER, an ice-slope or field of ice on a mountain-side.
(F.—L.) First in 1744. ‘The glacier’s cold and restless mass ;’
Byron, Manfred, i. 1. 68. A Savoy word.=—F. glacier, as in ‘les
glaciers de Savoie;’ Littré. =F. glace, ice. —Folk-L. glacia, for L.
glaciés, ice. See above.

GLACIS, a smooth slope, in fortification. (F.—L.) In Kersey’s
Dict., ed. 1715.—F. glacis, ‘a place made slippery, . . . a sloping bank
or causey;’ Cot.=MF. glacer, ‘to freeze, harden, cover with ice;’
id. =F, glace, ice. See above.

GLAD, pleased, cheerful, happy. (E.) ME. glad, Chaucer, C. T.
310 (A 308); also gled, Ancren Riwle, p. 282. AS. gled, shining,
bright, cheerful, glad; Grein, i. 512.-- Du. glad, bright, smooth,
sleek; Icel. gladr, bright, glad; Dan. glad, Swed. glad, joyous; G.
glatt, smooth,even,polished. Cf. Russ. g/adkii, even, smooth, polished,
spruce; L. glaber, smooth. See Glabrous. Der. glad-ly, glad-ness ;
also gladsome= ME. gladsum, Wyclif, Psalm ciii. 15, Chaucer, C. T.
14784 (B 3968); glad-some-ly, glad-some-ness ; also gladd-en, in which
the suffix -ez is moder and due to analogy; cf. ‘ gladeth himself’ =
gladdens himself, Chaucer, C. T. 10923 (F 609). And see glade.

GLADE, an open space in a wood, (Scand.) ‘Farre in the
forrest, by a hollow glade;’ Spenser, F. Q. vi. 4,13. ‘Gladden, a
glade;’ A Tour to the Caves (KE. Yorksh., 1781). ‘ Gladden, a void
place,’ Yks.; Thoresby (1703); see E.D.D.; gladen, Wars of Alexan-
der, ed. Skeat, 131,and Glossary. Of Scand. origin; closely connected
with Icel. gladr, bright, shining (see Glad), the orig. sense being an
opening for light, a bright track, hence an open track in a wood
(Nares), or a passage cut through reeds and rushes, as in Two Noble
Kinsmen, ed. Skeat, iv. 1.64. Cf. Swed. dial. glad-yppen, completely
open, said of a lake from which the ice has all melted away (Rietz) ;
Swed. dial. glatt (=gladt), completely, as in glatt oppet, completely
open; id.

GLADEN, GLADDEN, a plant, Iris pseudacorus. (L.) Spelt
gladon in Palsgrave; gladone in Prompt. Parv.; see Way’s note, and
‘Turner’s Names of Herbes. AS. gledene; Cockayne’s Leechdoms,
Gloss. to vol. ii. Altered from L. gladiolus, ‘a sword-lily ;’ Lewis
and Short. =—L. gladius, a sword; see Gladiator.

GLADIATOR, a swordsman. (L.) ‘Two hundred gladiators ;’
Dryden, tr. of Persius, vi. 115.—L. gladiator, a swordsman.=L.
gladius, a sword, See Glaive. Der. gladiator-i-al; also, from the
same source, gladi-ole, a plant like the lily, from L. gladi-ol-us, a small
sword, dimin. of gladius. And see gladen.

GLADSOME, glad, cheerful; see Glad.

GLATR, the white of an egg. (F.—L.) Little used now. ME.
gleyre of an ey = white of an egg; Chaucer, C. T. 16274 (G 806) ; and
Prompt. Pary. =OF. glaire ; ‘la glaire d’vn ceuf, the white of an egge ;’
Cot. B. Here glaire is a later form of claire, as evidenced by related
words, esp. by Ital. chiara d’un ovo, ‘the white of an egge,’ Florio
(where Ital. chi=L. cl, as usual); and by Span. clara de huevo, glair,
white of an egg. = L. clara, fem. of clarus, clear, bright; whence Late
L. clara dui, the white of an egg (Ducange). See Clear, Clarify.

GLAIVE, a sword. (F.—L.) ME. gleiue (with u=v) ; Havelok,
1770; glayue, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, i. 653 (or 654).—OF. giaive,
‘a gleave, or sword; also, a launce, or horseman’s staffe ;? Cot. =L.
gladius, a sword; see Brachet. [ Contrary to the statement in
N.E.D., the AF. glaive had the sense of ‘sword’ as early as in P. de
Thann, Bestiaire, 888 ; see my Notes on E, Etym., p. 119.

GLAMOUR, gramarye, magic. (F.—L.—Gk.) Orig. Lowl.
Scotch ; spelt g/amer (ab. 1700). Introduced into the literary lan-
guage by Scott. ‘ Glamour, or deceptio visus ;’ Scott, Demonology,
letter iii. § 18. A corruption of grammar. See Gramarye.


GLANCE, a swift dart of light, a glimpse, hasty look; as a verb,
to glide off or from, to graze, to flash. (F.—L.) The sb. is from the


GLEEK 241


vb. Spenser has glaunce as a verb: ‘ The glauncing sparkles through
her bever glared ;* F. Q. v. 6. 38. It occurs often in Shak., both as
vb. and sb, ; Two Gent.i. 1. 4; Mids. Nt. Dr. v.13. Apparently a
nasalised form (influenced by ME, glenten, to glance) of obs. ME.
glace, OF. glacier, to glide, slip, glance (Godefroy). =F. glace, ice.
= Folk-L, glacia, for L. glaciés; see Glacier. The ME. glenten
answers to the causal form of the str. vb. glinta, still in use in Swed.
dial. (Rietz.) See Glint.

GLAND, a cell or fleshy organ in the body which secretes animal
fluid. (F.—L.) ‘Gland, a flesh-kernel;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.—MF.
glande, ‘a kernell, a fleshy substance filled with pores, and growing
between the flesh and skin ;’ Cot.; OF. glandre (Supp. to Godefroy,
s. v.glande).—L, glandula, a gland; dimin, of glans (stem gland-), an
acorn. Cognate with Gk. Bd-ay-os,an acorn. Brugmann, i. § 665 (2).
Der. glandi-form, from L. glandi-, decl. stem of glans; glandi-fer-
ous (from L. -fer, bearing); gland-ule, from L. glandula (above),
whence glandul-ar, glandul-ous ; gland-ers, a disease of the glands
of horses, Taming of the Shrew, iii. 2. 51, from OF. glandre (above);
see Palsgrave, p. 183, 1. 7.

GLARE, to shine brightly, to stare with piercing sight. (E.)
ME. glaren. ‘ Swiche glaring eyen hadde he, as an hare ;’ Chaucer,
C. T. 686 (A 684). ‘Hitis not al gold that glareth;’ id. House of
Fame, i. 272. ‘Thet gold thet is bricht and glareth;’ Kentish
Sermons, in An Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 27,1. 31. Pro-
bably a true E. word; cf. AS. gler or glér, a pellucid substance,
amber (Bosworth, Leo).--Low G. glaren, to glow; WFlem. giarien,
to glare, stare. Cf. also E. dial. glore, Norw. glora, to glare. Pro-
bably it is closely connected with Glass, q.v. Der. glar-ing-ly,
glar-ing-ness.

GLASS, a well-known hard, brittle, transparent substance. (E.)
Perhaps named fromits transparency. ME. glas, Chaucer, C. T. 198.
AS. gles, glass; Grein,i. 513.4-Du. glas; Dan. glar ; MSwed. gler
(Thre); Icel. gler; G. glas, OHG. clas. B. Perhaps from a Teut.
type *glazom, neuter ; and it may even be ultimately related to AS.
glowan, to glow. Der. glass-blow-er, glass-wort, glass-y, glass-i-ness ;
also glaze= ME. glasen, P. Plowman, B. iii. 49, 61 ; whence glaz-ing,
glaz-i-er (=glaz-er, like bow-y-er, law-y-er =bow-er, law-er).

GLAUCOUS, grayish blue. (L.—Gk.) A botanical word ; see
Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1731. First in1671 (Ray). Formed with
suffix -ous from L. glauc-us, blueish. = Gk. yAaveds, gleaming, glanc-
ing, silvery, blueish; whence yAatooev (=yAaveyev), to shine.
Allied to yeA-ety, to shine (Hesychius).

GLAZB, to furnish a window with glass. (E.) See Glass.

GLEAM, a beam of light, glow. (E.) ME. gleam, gleem, glem;
Havelok, 2122; Ancren Riwle,p.94. AS. gl#m, splendour, gleam,
brightness, Grein, i. 513; Leo. Cf. gliomu, glimu, brightness, orna-
ment; Grein, i. 515. Also OSax. glimo, brightness; ‘glitandi
glimo’ = glittering splendour; Heliand, 3146; OHG. glimo, a glow-
worm. B. Teut. type *glaimiz, m.; from *glaim, and grade of
*gleim-, to shine. ‘y. Related words further appear in the Gk. yAc-
apés, warm, xAi-w, 1 become warm; (Prellwitz). See Glimmer,
Glitter. Der. gleam, vb., gleam-y.

GLEAN, to gather small quantities of corn after harvest. (F.)
ME. glenen, P. Plowman, C. ix. 67.—OF. glener, glaner, to glean ;
mod. F. glaner. = Late L. glenare, found in a document dated A. D. 561
(Brachet). Of unknown origin; see Korting, § 4332. B. We may
notice the later by-form gleam or gleme. ‘To gleame corne, spicili-
gere;’ Levins, 208.20. ‘To glemecorne, spicilegium facere ; Gleamer
of corne, spicilegus;’ Huloet. Apparently due to some confusion
with gleam; cf. prov. E. gleen, to shine (E.D.D.). Der. glean-er.

GLEBE, soil; esp. land attached to an ecclesiastical benefice.
(F.—L.) ‘Have any glebe more fruitful ;’ Ben Jonson, The Fox,
A. y. sc. I (Mosca). ME. glebe, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 397. The
comp. glebe-land is in Gascoigne, Fruits of War, st. 21.—OF. glebe,
‘glebe, land belonging to a parsonage ;’ Cot.=L. gléba, soil, a clod
of earth. Der. gleb-ous, gleb-y; glebe-land.

GLEDS (1), the bird called a kite. (E.) ME. glede, Allit. Poems,
ed. Morris, ii. 1696. AS. glida, a kite, lit. ‘the glider,’ from the
sailing motion of the bird; Grein, i. 56; from glid-, weak grade of
glidan, to glide. See Glide.

GLEDE (2), GLEED, a glowing coal ; obsolete. (E.) ME. glede,
Chaucer, C. T. 1999 (A 1997). AS. gléd, Grein, i. 513. [Here é
results from 3, by mutation.]=AS. glowan, to glow; seeGlow. So
also Dan. gléd, a live coal; cf. Icel. glda, to glow.

GLEE, joy, mirth, singing. (E.) ME. gle, glee; Will. of Palerne,
824; also gleu, glew, Havelok, 2332. AS. gléo, earlier form gliv, joy,
mirth, music; Grein, i. 515.-4-Icel. gly, glee, gladness ; Swed. dial.
gly, mockery, ridicule (Rietz). Cf. Gk. xAevy, ajest, joke. B. Form
of the root, *ghlez; Brugmann, i. § 633. ;

GLEEK (1), a scoff, a jest.(F.—Du. ?) It meansa ‘scoff’ in Shak,
1 Hen. VI, iii. 2. 123; ‘a glance of the eye’ in Beaum. and Fletcher,

R


GLEEK


See examples in Nares. Prob. a peculiar
To gleek sometimes meant to beat at the


242


Maid in the Mill, ii. 2.

‘use of the word below.

game of gleek.
GLEEK (2), a game at cards. (F.—Du.) So in Ben Jonson,


Alchem. y. 2 (Subtle); it is said that Catharine of Arragon played |
‘at gleeke;’? Warton, Hist. of Eng. Poetry, sect. liv; vol. iii. p. 258, _


note c, ed. 1840. See Nares. The earliest quotation in N.E. D. is
dated 1533; but we find mention of the card-games ‘ post and glyeke’
in Roy, Rede Me (ed. Arber), p. 117 (1528). It should rather have
been spelt glik, but the E. ee represents the F.7. The expression ‘I
shall gleek some of you’ occurs in Greene’s Tu Quoque (Nares).=
OF. glic, an old F. game at cards (mentioned in Rabelais, bk. i. c. 22),
Roquefort; also spelt ghelicque (Godefroy). One object in the game
was to get three cards alike (as three kings) ; this was called a gleek.
= MDnu. gelijck, alike.—=MDu. ge-, ghe-, prefix (=AS. ge-, G. ge-,
Goth. ga-); and MDu. -lijck, Du. -lijk, cognate with E. like ; see
Like. @ Hexham has MDnu. gelijk ofte ongelijk spelen, ‘to play at
even or odds.’

GLEN, a narrow valley. (C.) In Spenser, Sheph. Kalendar,
April, 26.—Gael. and Irish gleann, a valley, glen; W. glyn; Corn.
glyn; Olrish glenn. Celtic type *glennos. Stokes-Fick, p. 120.

GLIB (1), smooth, slippery, voluble. (E.) The orig. sense is
‘slippery ;’ Shak. has ‘ glib and oily ;’ K. Lear, i. 1. 227; ‘ glib and
slippery ;’ Timon, i. 1.53. We also find glibbery. ‘ What, shall thy
lubrical and glibbery muse,’ &c. ; Ben Jonson, Poetaster, Act v (Tibul-
lus). A native word ; common in dialects; seeE.D.D. Cf. EFries.
glibberig, slippery; glippen, to slip.-Du. glibberig, slippery ;
glibberen, to slide; related to glippen, to slip away; Low G. glib-
brig, slippery (Berghaus), glippig, glib, smooth (Schambach), Low
G. glippen, v.; Dan. glippe, to fall, to slip. B. We also find a
somewhat similar prov. E. gliddery, slippery, which is related to AS.
glidan,to glide. Der. glib-ly, glib-ness,

GLIB (2), a lock of hair. (C.) ‘Long glibbes, which is a thick
curled bush of heare, hanging downe over their eyes ;’ Spenser, View
of State of Ireland; Globe ed. p. 630, col. 2.—Irish and Gael. glib,
also Irish clib, a bushy lock of hair.

GLIB (3), to castrate; obsolete. (E.) In Shak. Wint. Tale, ii. 1,
149. The g is merely prefixed, and may have been suggested by Du.
ge-, as in MDu. ge-lubt, ‘gelt;’ Hexham. The. orig. form is lib.
“ Accaponare, to capon, to gelde, to lib, to splaie;’ Florio, ed. 1612.
Here lib answers to an AS. */ybban, where y arose, by mutation, from
an older uw. Clearly cognate with Du. lubben, to castrate. See
Left, adj.

GLIDB, to slide, flow smoothly. (E.) ME. gliden, pt. t. glod or
glood ; Chaucer, C. T. 10707 (F 393). AS. glidan, Grein, i. 516.4-
Dn. glijden; Dan. glide ; Swed. glida; G. gleiten. Teut.type *gleidan-,
pt. t. *glaid, pp. *glidanoz.

GLIMMER, to shine faintly. (E.) ME. glimeren, whence the
pres. part. glimerand, Will. of Palerne, 1427. The AS. form does
not occur.-- Low G. glimmern, frequent. of glimmen, to shine;
MSwed. glimra (Ihre); Dan. glimre, to glimmer; glimmer, glitter,
also mica; Swed. dial. glimmer, to glitter, glimmer, a glimmer,
glitter ; Swed. glimmer, mica (from its glitter); G. glimmer, a
glimmer, mica; glimmern,to glimmer. B. The simple forms appear
in Dan. glimme, to shine, Swed. glimma, to glitter, Du. glimmen, G.
glimmen, to shine. Cf. also prov. G. glimm, a spark (Fliigel) ; Swed.
dial. glim, a glance (Rietz).. We even find the sb. glim, brightness,
in Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, A. 1088; and AS. gleomu (for *glimu),
splendour. All from Teut. *glim-, weak grade of *gleim-; see
Gleam, Der. glimmer, sb.; and see below.

GLIMPSE, a short gleam, weak light; hurried glance or view.
(E.) The p is excrescent; the old word was glimse. ME. glimsen,
to glimpse; whence the sb. glimsing, a glimpse. ‘Ye have som
glimsing, and no parfit sighte;? Chaucer, C. T. 10257 (E 2383).
Formed by suffixing -s- to the base glim-. See above.

GLINT, to glance, to shine. (Scand.) Obsolete; but important


as having influenced the form of glance; see Glance. For ME. |


glenten, to move quickly aside, to glance aside; in later E., to shine.
‘ Hir eyen glente Asyde;’ Chaucer, Troil. iv. 1223; cf. Allit. Poems,
ed. Morris, A. 70, 114, 671, 1026; B. 218. —Swed. dial. gldnta, glinta,
to slip or glance aside.4-G. glanzen, to make bright; from G. glanz,
brightness. B. We also find (really from a different root) MDan,
glinte, to shine, a nasalised form of giit- (in glitter); MHG. glinzen,
to shine.

GLISSADE, a sliding; a gliding step. (F.—Teut.) F. glissade,
a sliding.—F. glisser, to slide,. glide.
influenced by OF. glacier, F. glacer,to slide (Hatzfeld). B. OF. glier
is from OHG. gilitan (G. gleiten), to glide; see Glide. OF. glacier
is from glace,ice; see Glacier. 4 It seems simpler to derive glisser


From OF. glier, to glide;


GLOSS
GLISTEN, GLISTER, to glitter, shine. (E.) These are mére


extensions from the E. base glis-, to shine, which appears in ME,
glisien, to shine; ‘in glysyinde wede’=in glistening garment ; An Old
Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 91, 1. 21. AS. glisian, to shine;
Voc. 121.253; glisnian, to gleam, Grein, i. 516; cf. Swed, dial. glis-a,
to shine. A. Glisnian is formed from the base glis- by the addition
of the z so often used to extend such bases; and hence we had ME.
glisnien, with pres. part. glisnande, glittering ; Allit. Poems, ed.
Morris, A. 165. This ME. glisnien gave a later E. glissen, but
the word is now spelt gilis-t-en, with an excrescent ¢, which is
usually, however, not sounded. B. Similarly, from the base glis-,
with suffixed -¢ and the frequentative -er, was formed ME. glisteren or
glistren. ‘The water glistred over al;” Gower, C. A. ii, 252; bk. v.
3734. Cf. MDu. glisteren (Oudemans) ; now nasalised into mod. Du.
glinsteren, to glitter.

GLITTER, to gleam, sparkle. (Scand.) ME. gliteren (with
one 4); Chaucer, C. T. 979 (A 977); ‘glytered and glent;’ Gawain
and the Grene Knight, 604. —Icel. glitra, to glitter; frequentative of
glita, to shine, sparkle; Swed. gilittra, to glitter; glitter, sb. glitter,
spangle. Cf. AS. glitinian, to glitter, Mark, ix. 3; Goth. glitmunjan,
to shine, Mark, ix. 3. B. Shorter forms appear in AS. glitian, to
shine, Mone, Quellen, p. 355; Icel. glit, sb. glitter, -y. All from
Teut. base *glit-, weak grade of *gleit-,as in OSax. glitan, G. gleissen, to
shine. Cf. Gk. xAcd-7, luxury. From Idg. base GHLEI, whence also
gleam. SeeGleam. Der. glitter, sb.; and see glisten, glister.

GLOAMING, twilight. (E.) ‘Darker gloaming brought the
night;’ Burns, Twa Dogs, 232. But Hogg has: ‘Tween the
gloaming and the mirk ;” Song. Here the gloaming means the evening
glow of sunset. ‘Fra the glomyng of the nycht;’ Wyntoun, Chron.
iv. 7. 827. The oa is from AS. short 0; as in #fen-glommung,
twilight, in A. S. Hymnary (Surtees Soc.), 16.16. But the d is usually
long; as in &fen-gldm, evening glow, twilight; Grein, i.64. Here
glo-m is from Tent. root gld-, as in AS. gléwan, to glow. See Glow.
@ Distinct from Gloom. .

GLOAT, to stare, gaze with admiration. (Scand.) Also spelt glote.
‘So he glotes [starés], and grins, and bites;’ Beaum. and Fletcher,
Mad Lover, ii. 2.‘ Gloting [peeping] round her rock ;’ Chapman,
tr. of Homer, Odyssey, xii. 150.—Icel. glotta, to grin, smile scorn-
fully; Swed. dial. glotta, glutta, to peep (Rietz); G. glotzen, to stare

Fliigel).

GLOBE, a ball, round body. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. iv. 153.
= OF, globe, ‘a globe, ball;’ Cot.—L. globum, acc. of globus, a ball ;
allied to glomus, a ball, clue. See below. Der. glob-ate (L. globatus,
globe-shaped) ; gilob-ose (L. globdsus), Milton, P. L. v. 753, also
written glob-ous, id. v. 649; glob-y; glob-ule (L. glob-ul-us, dimin. of
globus); glob-ul-ar, glob-wl-ous, glob-ul-ar-i-ty.

GLOMERATE, to gather into a mass or ball. (L.) ‘A river,
which after many glomerating dances, increases Indus;’ Sir T. Herbert,
Travels, ed. 1665, p. 70(p. 69 in R.).—L. glomeratus, pp. of glomerare,
to collect into a ball. —L. glomer-, for *glomes, stem of glomus, a ball
or clew of yarn; allied to L. globus, a globe. See Globe. Der.
glomerat-ion, Bacon, Nat, Hist. § 832; also ag-glomerate, con-glomerate,

GLOOM, cloudiness, darkness, twilight. (E.) In Milton, P. L.
i. 244,544. Seldom found earlier except as a verb. ‘A glooming
peace ;’ Romeo, v. 3. 395. ‘Now glooming [frowning] sadly ;’
Spenser, F. Q. vi. 6.42. Cf. ME. glowmen, to lower, as in ¢The
wedire gloumes, Wars of Alexander, 4142; also gloumben (with
excrescent b), to frown; Rom. of the Rose, 4356. The ME. gloumen
answers to AS. *g/iimian (not found) ; cf. E. room< ME. roum< AS.
rim. AlliedtoGlum,. Der. gloom-y, Shak. Lucrece, 803 ; gloom-
i-ly, gloom-i-ness ; but not gloam-ing.

GLORY, renown, fame. (F.—L.) ME. gilorie, Ancren Riwle,
p- 358.— OF. glorie, later gloire.—L. gloria, glory; prob. for *cloria;
cf. L. inclytus (in-clu-tus), renowned; Gk. #Aéos, glory ; #Auréds,
renowned ; Irish cli, glory (Bréal). Der. glori-ous, in early use, Rob.
of Glouc. p. 483; glori-ous-ly, P. Plowman, C. xx, 15; glori-ous-ness ;
also glori-fy, ME. glorifien, Wyclif, John, vii. 39 (F. glorifier, L.
glorificare, to make glorious, from gléri-=gloria, and fic- (=fac-ere),
to do, make) ; also glori-jic-at-ion (from L. acc. glorificationem).

GLOSS (1), brightness, lustre. (Scand.) In Shak. Much Ado,
iii. 2.6. Milton has glossy, P. L. i. 672.—Icel. glossi, a blaze; glys,
finery. Cf. Swed. dial. glossa, to glow, shine; Norw. glosa, to glow;
MHG. glosen, to glow ; glose, a glow, gleam. Perhaps allied to
Glareand Glass. Der. g/oss, verb. @ Quite distinct from gloss (2),
Der. gloss-y, gloss-i-ly, gloss-i-ness.

GLOSS (2), a commentary, explanation. (L.—Gk.) ME. glose
(with one s), in early use; P. Plowman, C. xx. 15, [But the verb
glosen, to gloss or gloze, was much more common than the sb.; see
Chaucer, C. T. 7374, 7375 (D. 1792); P. Plowman, B. vii. 303.]


from Low G. glidschen or glisken, both meaning ‘to glide,’ and | This ME. giose is from the OF. glose, ‘a glosse;’ Cot. But the L.


secondary formations from the weak grade of Teut. *gleidan-.


form glosse (with doubles). was substituted for the F. form in the 16th


GLOSSARY


century; as, e.g. in Udal on S. Matt. xxiii. 18. —L. gldssa, a difficult
word requiring explanation. — Gk. yA@ooa, the tongue; also, a tongue,
language, a word needing explanation.. Der. gloss, verb; gloze, q. v. ;
gloss-ar-y, q.v.; glosso-graphy, glosso-logy; glottis, q. v.

GLOSSARY, a collection of glosses or words explained. (L. —
Gk.) In Kersey’s Dict. ed.1715. Spelt glosarye, Caxton, Golden
Legend, St. Clement, § 1.—L. gldssGrium, a glossary; formed with
suffix -dri-um from L, gldss-a, a hard word needing explanation
(above). Der. glossari-al, glossar-ist. See below.

GLOSSOGRAPHER, a writer of glossaries or glosses. (Gk.)
In Blount’s Glossographia, ed. 1674. Coined from glosso-, for Gk.
yAa@ooa, a hard word; and Gk. ypag-ew, to write. See Gloss (2).

GLOTTIS, the entrance to the windpipe. (Gk.) £ Gloftis, one
of the five gristles of the larynx;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. First in 1578.
— Gk. yA@rris, the mouth of the windpipe (Galen).—Gk. yAér7a,
Attic form of yA@ooa, the tongue (above). Der. glott-al, adj.;
epi-glottis.

GLOVE, a cover for the hand. (E.) ME. gloue (with w for v),
glove; Chaucer, C. T, 2876 (A 2874); King Alisaunder, 2033. AS.
glof, glove; Grein, i. 516. Cf. Icel. glaji; prob. borrowed from AS.
glof. B. Possibly the initial g stands for ge- (Goth. ga-), a common
prefix ; and the word may be related to Goth. Jdfa, Icel. 167i, the flat
or palm of the hand; Scottish Joof. Der. glov-er, fox-glove.

GLOW, to shine brightly, be ardent, be flushed with heat. (E.)
ME. glowen, Chaucer, C. T. 2134 (A 2132). AS. glowan, to glow;
very rare, but found in Atlfric, Hom. i. 424; the pt. t. g/éow occurs
in his Saints’ Lives, vil. 240. 4 Icel. glda; Dan. glo, to glow; Swed.
dial. glo, gloa, to glow; Du. gloeijen, to glow, to heat; G. gliihen.
Allied to Gk. xAwpds, light green; Brugmann, i. § 156. Also to W.
glo, a coal. Der. glow, sb.; glow-worm, Hamlet, i. 5. 89. Also
glede (2).

GLOWER, to look angrily, to scowl. (E.) Spelt glowir in
Dunbar’s Poems, ed. Small, xlix. 24. ‘ Glowres, is dull or lowering ;’
Pegge, Derbicisms, p. 102 (1791). EFries. gliren. Cf. Low G.
gluren, to be overcast (said of the weather); MDu. gloeren, ‘to look
awry, to leare,’ Hexham; Du. gluren, to peep, to leer. Cf. Lower (2).

GLOGZB, to interpret, deceive, flatter. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Rich. II,
ii. I. 10. ME. glosen, to make glosses; from the sb. glose, a gloss.
See further under Gloss (2).

GLUE, a sticky substance. (F.—L.) ME. giwe, Gower, C. A.
li, 248; bk. v. 3603.—OF. glu, ‘glew, birdlime;’ Cot.—Late L.
gliitem, acc. of glis (gen. gliitis), glue; a form used by Ausonius.
Allied to L. gliiten, glue; glitus, tenacious; and to Gk. yAods, mud,
gum. Allied to Clay. Brugmann,i. § 639. Der. glwe-y; and see
glutin-ous, agglutin-ate.

GLUM, sullen, gloomy, sad. (E.) ‘ With visage sad and glum ;’
Drant, tr. of Horace; to translate L. saeuus, Epist. ii. 2. 21. But
the word was formerly a verb. ME. glommen, to look gloomy,
frown; Towneley Myst. xxx. 596; Halliwell’s Dict. p. 404. Allied
to ME. gloumen, to be gloomy. EFries, glumen, gliimen, to look
sullen.--Low G. glum, turbid; glumen, to make turbid; gluum, a
sullen look ; Norw. glyme, a sullen look, glyma, gloma, to look sullen;
see Gloom.

GLUME, a bracteal covering, in grasses. (L.) A botanical term.
Borrowed, like F. glume, from L. gliima, a husk, hull. —L. glibere, to
peel, take off the husk; whence *glubma=glima. Cf. Gk. yAvpey,
to hollow out. Allied to E. cleave, to split asunder. See Cleave
(1). Brugmann, i. § 672 (1). Der. glum-ac-e-ous (L. gliimaceus).

GLUT, to swallow greedily, gorge. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. i. 1.
63. ‘ Til leade (for golde) do glut his greedie gal;’ Gascoigne, Fruits
of War, st.68. ME. glotien, P. Plowman, C. x. 76 (Ilchester MS.). = OF.
glotir, gloutir, to gulp down (Godefroy).—L. glitire, glittire, to
swallow, gulp down. Cf. L. gula, the throat. Der. glutt-on, q. v.;
from the same root, de-glut-it-ion, gullet, gules.

GLUTINOUS, gluey, viscous, sticky. (L.) ‘No soft and glutinous
bodies ;” Ben Jonson, Sejanus, i.1.8. Englished from L. glutindsus,
sticky.—L. glitin-um, glue; also gliten (stem glitin-), glue. See
Glue. Der. glutinous-ness; also Cot. has ‘ glutinosité, glutinositie,
glewiness;’ glutin-at-ive; ag-glutin-ate.

GLUTTON, a voracious eater. (F.—L.) ME. gloton, Chaucer,
C. T. 12454 (C 520); also glutun, Ancren Riwle, p. 2143; whence
glotonie, gluttony, Chaucer, C. T. 12446 (C 512).—OF. gioton, later
glouton, ‘a glutton;’ Cot. —L. acc. glitonem, from glito,a glutton. = L.
glitire, to devour. See Glut. Der. glution-y, glutton-ous.

GLYCERINE, a certain viscid fluid, of a sweet taste. (F.—Gk.)
Modern. Named from its sweet taste. F. glycérine; coined from Gk.

yAvkepos, sweet, an extension of yAvevs, sweet. Der. from the same
source, liquorice, q.v.

-GLYPTIC, relating to carving in stone. (Gk.) Mere Greek. = Gk.

yAumrikds, carving ; yAumtds, carved, fit for carving. =Gk. yAvpev, to

hollow out, engrave. Allied to Glume and Cleave (1).


GOAD 243


GNARL, to snarl, to growl. (E.) Perhaps obsolete. Shak. has
‘ gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite ;’ Rich, II, i. 3. 292; ‘Wolves
are gnarling ;’ 2 Hen. VI, iii. 1.192. Guar-l (with the usual added
-/) is the frequentative of gnar,to snarl. ‘ For and this curre do gzar’
= for if this cur doth snarl; Skelton, Why Come Ye Nat to Court, 297.
This word is imitative; cf. AS. gnyrran, to snarl; Wulfstan, p. 139.
We find, however, EFries. guarren, to creak, snarl.4-Du. knorren, to
grumble, snarl; Dan. knurre, to growl, snarl; cf. knarre, knarke, to
creak, grate; nur, a growl, the purring of a cat; Swed. knorra,
to murmur, growl; kxorr, a murmur; G. knurren, to growl, snarl;
knarren, knirren, to creak,

GNARLED, twisted, knotty. (E.) ‘ Gnarled oak ;’ Meas. for
Meas, ii. 2, 116. Gnarled means ‘full of gnarls,’ where guar-l is a
dimin. form of gnar or knar, a knot in wood. ME. kzarre, a knot in
wood; Wyclif, Wisdom, xiii. 13; whence the adj. kvarry, full of knots.
‘With knotty knarry barein treés olde ;’ Chaucer, C.T. 1979 (A.1977)«
B. The spelling knur or knurr (for knar) also occurs; ‘A bounche
[bunch] or #nur in a tree;? Elyot’s Dict., ed. 1559,s.v. Bruscum. This
word has also a dimin. form knurl, with the same sense of ‘ hard knot.?
These words may be considered E., though not found in AS. Cf.
EFries. knarre, knar, a knotty piece of wood; Icel. gnerr, a knot,
knob. See Knurr.

GINASH, to grind the teeth, to bite fiercely. (Scand.) A modifi-
cation of ME. gzasten, to gnash the teeth ; Wyclif, Isaiah, v. 29 ; viii.
19.—MDan. knaske, to crush between the teeth, to. gnash; Swed.
knastra, to crash (between the teeth); Icel. gzastan, sb. a gnashing ;
gnesta, to crack; G. knastern, to gnash, crackle; Low G. guastern, the
same (Berghaus). B. Of imitative origin; so also Dan. knase, to
crackle; cf. Icel. gntsta, EFries. gnisen, to gnash.

GINNAT, a small stinging insect. (E.) ME. gat, Chaucer, C. T.
5929 (D 347). AS. gnet, Matt. xxiii. 24. B. It has been suggested
that the insect was so named from the whirring of its wings; cf. Icel,
gnata, to clash; gnat, the clash of weapons.

GNAW, to bite furiously or roughly. (E.) ME. gnawen ; the pt. t.
gnow occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 14758 (B 3638); and grew in Rich.
Coer de Lion, ed. Weber, 3089. AS. gnagan; the compound for-
gnagan, to devour entirely, occurs in A‘lfric’s Homilies, ii. 194, 1. 1.
+Du. knagen; Olcel. gnaga, mod. Icel. naga; Dan. gnave; Swed.
gnaga. B. Without the g, we have Icel. naga, Dan. nage, G. nagen,
to gnaw; Swed. zagga, to nibble ; whence the prov. E. nag, to tease,
worry, irritate, scold. See Nag (2).

GINNBEISS, a species of stratified rock. (G.) Modern. <A term in
geology. Borrowed from G. gzeiss,a name given to a certain kind of
rock; from its sparkling. —OHG. gneistan, to sparkle; gneista, a
spark.--AS. gnast, Icel. gneisti, a spark. Der. gneiss-o-id, with a Gk.
suffix, as in Asteroid.

GNOME, a kind of sprite. (F.—Gk.) In Pope, Rape of the Lock,
i. 63.—F. gnome,a gnome. Littré traces the word back to Paracelsus;
it seems to be an adaptation of Gk. yvwyn, intelligence, from the
notion that the intelligence of these spirits could reveal the secret
treasures of the earth ; but thisis conjecture. The gnomes were spirits
of earth, the sylphs of air, the salamanders of jire, and the xymphs of
water. B. The Gk. yvwpy is from yv@va, to know (below).

GNOMON, the index of a dial, &c. (L.—Gk.) ‘The style in
the dial called the gnomon ;’ Holland’s Pliny,'b. ii.c. 72. —L. gndmon,
which is merely the Gk. word. = Gk. yvwpwr, an interpreter, lit. ‘ one
who knows;’ an index of a dial. = Gk. yra@va, to know. —4/GEN ;
whence alsoE. Know,q.v. Der. gnomon-ic, gnomon-ics, gnomon-ic-al.

GINOSTIC, one of a certain sect in the second Christian century.
(Gk.) ‘The vain science of the Gnosticks ;’ Gibbon, Rom. Empire,
c.15.§ 11. And see Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.— Gk. yywortinds, good
at knowing. = Gk. yvwords, longer form of yvwrés, known.= Gk.
yvava, toknow. See Gnomon. Der. Guostic-ism.

GNU, a kind of antelope. (Kaffir.) Found in S. Africa. Orig. a
Kaffir word; see the Kaffir Dict. by Davis, who gives it in the form
ngu, where the g represents a click. It was sometimes written gz,
whence gzu by an erroneous substitution of g for g. (N. and Q.,

S. v. 45.)

"Go, to move about, proceed, advance. (E.) ME. gon, goon, go;
Chaucer, C. T. 379 (A 377); common. AS. gén, to go, Grein, i. 368,
369.4Du. gaan ; (Icel. lost) ; Dan. gaae; Swed. gd; G. gehen, to go,
Distinct from Goth. gangan, OHG. kankan, Icel. ganga, E. gang. The
OHG. ga-m, I go, shows that the OTeut. *gai- belonged to the class
of ‘verbs in -mi.’ Der. go-by, go-cart, go-er, go-ing ; also gait, q.v.
it The pt. t. went is from wend; see Wend.

GOAD, 2 sharp pointed stick for driving oxen. (E.) ME. gode.
‘Wip a longe gode ;’ P. Plowman’s Crede, ed. Skeat, l. 433. AS. gad,
not common; but we find ‘ ongéan pa gade’ =against the goad (cf.
Acts, ix. 5); Elfric’s Hom. i. 386. 1.9. We find also the early form
gaad ; O. E. Texts, p. 99, 1. 1937+ Teut. type *gaida, fem. ; verified
by the Lombardic form gaida (Ducange). From the Teut, base *vai-,

R 2


GOAL


whence also AS. ga-r, Icel. gei-rr; cf. Olrish gai, a spear.
Gore (2). {J Not allied to gad or yard (2).

GOAL, the winning-post in a race. (E.) A term in running races.
‘ As, in rennynge, passynge the gole is accounted but rasshenesse;’
Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. iii. c. 21. ‘No person... should
haue wone the ryng or gott the gole before me;’ Hall’s Chron. Rich.
III, an.2.§ 2. ME. gol, a limit ; Shoreham’s Poems, p.145, 1.4. It
answers to an AS. form *ga/ (not found), which may have meant
‘barrier’ or ‘impediment ;’ whence g&lan, to impede, d-g#lan, to
delay. 4 Not of F. origin, as often said.

GOAT, the name of a well-known quadruped. (E.) ME. goof,
gote; Chaucer, C. T. 690 (A 688). AS. gat; Grein, i. 373.4-Du. geit;
Dan. ged; Swed. get; Icel. geit; G. geiss, geisse; Goth. gaits.4-L. haedus,
akid. Idg. base *ghaid-. Der. goats-beard, goat-moth, goat-sucker.

GOBBET, a mouthful, a little lump, small piece. (F.—C.) The
short form gob is rare. ‘Gob or Gobbet, a great piece of meat;’
Kersey’s Dict.,ed. 1715. ME. gobet, asmall piece; P. Plowman, C. vi.
100; Chaucer, C. T. 698 (A 696). ‘ Thei tooken the relifs of brokun
gobetis, twelue cofyns ful;’ Wyclif, Matt. xiv. 20. = OF. gobet, a morsel
of food (Godefroy); not given in Burguy or Cotgrave, but preserved in
the modern F. gobet, in use in the Norman dialect (Du Bois). A dimin.
form, with suffix -e¢, allied to MF. gob, a gulp, as used in the phrase
‘Vavalla tout de gob=at one gulpe, or, as one gobbet, he swallowed
it;’ Cot.—OF. gober, ‘to ravine, devour, feed greedily ;’ Cot. B. Of
Celtic origin ; cf. Gael. gob, the beak or bill of a bird, or (ludicrously)
the mouth; Irish gob, mouth, beak, snout; see Macbain. @ The prov.
E. gob, the mouth, is borrowed from Celtic directly. And see Gobble.

GOBBLE, toswallowgreedily. (F.—C.; with E. suffix.) ‘Gobble
up, to eat gobs, or swallow down greedily ;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.
First in 1601. <A frequentative, formed by adding -le, of OF. gober,
‘te ravine, devour, feed greedily, swallow great morsels, let downe
whole gobbets;’ Cot. See Gobbet. @ At a late period the word
gobble was adopted as being a suitable imitative word (cf. gabble), to
represent the sound made by turkeys. In this sense, it occurs in Prior,
The Ladle, 1. 74: ‘ Fat turkeys gobbling at the door.’

GOBELIN, arich French tapestry. (F.) ‘So named from a house
at Paris, formerly possessed by wool-dyers, whereof the chief (Giles
Gobelin) in the reign of Francis I. [1515-1547] is said to have found
the secret of dyeing scarlet ;’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates.

GOBLET, a large drinking-cup. (F.—L.) ‘A goblet of syluer ;’
Berners, tr. of Froissart, v. ii. c. 87. ‘In grete goblettez;’ Morte
Arthure, 1. 207.—F. gobelet, ‘a goblet, bole, or wide-mouthed cup ;’
Cot. Dimin. (with suffix -et) of OF. gobel, (later form gobeau) which
Cot. explains by ‘a mazer or great goblet.’ = Late L. ciipellum, acc.
of ctipellus, a cup; a dimin. of L. ciipa,a tub, cask, vat. See Coop.
Cf. Picard gobe, a great cup. (KoOrting, § 2693; but doubtful.)

GOBLIN, a kind of mischievous sprite, fairy. (F.—Low L.—G.)
Formerly gobeline, in 3 syllables. ‘ The wicked gobbelines ;’ Spenser,
F. Q. ii. 10. 73. ME. gobelyn; Wyclif, Ps. xc (xci).6.—OF. gobelin,
‘a goblin, or hob-goblin ;” Cot. Low L. gobelinus, a goblin; prob.
from the same source as G. kobold, a goblin (see Kluge). If so, it is
from MHG. kobel, a hut, with L. suffix -inus. The sense is to be
explained from the cognate AS. cof-godas, ‘ penates,’ or household
gods. B. MHG., fobel is the dimin. of MHG. hobe, a stall, cognate
with Icel. cof, a hut, AS. cofa, a chamber; see Cove. 4 So in
Kluge, and Korting, § 2279. Diez derives it from Gk. #dBGdos, a
rogue, a, knave, also,a goblin invoked by knaves. But kobold (at any
rate) is prob. Germanic.

GOBY, akind of sea-fish. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Gobio or Gobius, the gudgeon
or pink, a fish;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715. The goby is a mere cor-
tuption of L. gobius (cf. F. gobie), orig. applied to the gudgeon; also
spelt cdbius.— Gk. xwBids, a kind of fish, gudgeon, tench. See
Gudgeon,

GOD, the Supreme Being. (E.) ME. god (written in MSS. with
small initial letter) ; Chaucer, C. T. 535 (A 533). AS. god; Grein, i.
517-+Du. god ; Icel. gud ; Dan. gud; Swed. gud; Goth. guth; G. gott.
B. Teut. type *guthom; Idg. type *ghutom, perhaps ‘ the being who is
worshipped; ’ a pp. form from Idg. *ghu, to worship, as in Skt. hu, to
sacrifice (to), whence Skt. huta-,one to whom sacrificeis offered. @ In
no way allied to good, adj. Der. godd-ess, q.v. 3 god-child ; god-father,
q. Vv. ; god-head, q.v. ; god-less, god-like, god-ly, god-send, god-son ; also
good-bye, q.v. 3 gospell,q.v. 3 gossip, q.v.

GODDESS, a female divinity. (E.; with F. suffix.) ME. god-
desse (better godesse), a hybrid compound, used by Chaucer, C. T.
1103 (A 1101). Made by adding to God the OF. suffix -esse (=L.
-issa=Gk. -tooa). @ The AS. word was gyden (Grein, i. 536) ; cor-
rectly formed by vowel-change and with the addition of the fem. suffix
-en (Teut. -ina), asin Vixen, q.v. Cf. G. gottin, fem. of got.

GODFATHER, a male sponsor in baptism. (E.) ME. god-
fader, Rob. of Glouc. p.69; 1. 1571. Earlier, in William of Shore-
ham’s Poems, ed. Wright, p. 69 (temp. Edw. II). From god, God;


244


See


GONFANON


and fader, father. B. Other similar words are godchild, Ancrem
Riwle, p. 210; ME. goddo}ter=god-daughter, Ayenbite of Inwyt,
p- 48; ME. godmoder = god-mother, id, same page; ME. godsune=.
god-son, Wright’s Vocab. i. 214, col. 2. And see Gossip.

GODHEAD, divinity, divine nature. (E.) ME. godhed, Chau-
cer, C. T. 2383 (A 2381) ; spelt godhod, Ancren Riwle, p.112. The
suffix is wholly different from E. head, being a variant of the suffix
which is commonly written -hood. This -hood is from the AS. had,
office, state, dignity; as in ‘ pri on hadum’ =three in (their) Persons ;
fElfric’s Hom. ii. 42. B. This AS. had properly passed into -hood, as.
in E. man-hood ; but in ME. we also find the suffix -hede or -hed, as
in manhede, Will. of Palerne, 431; as if from an AS. mutated form
-h&d-; cf. OF ries. -héd, Du. -heid, OSax. -héd, equivalents of AS.
-h#du; Teut. type *haidja, f. AS. had < Teut. *haidoz, m. This.
accounts for the double form maider-hood and maiden-head.

GODWIT, the name of a bird. (E.) ‘Th’ Ionian godwit;’ Ben
Jonson, tr. of Horace’s Odes, lib. v. od. 2, 1.53. Of unknown origin;
but the former syllable may well bea shortened form of gdd, good, as
it was famous as a delicacy. The latter syllable -wit probably stands
for ME. wight, AS. wiht, a wight, a creature, which could be used
(in AS.) of a bird; see Cynewulf, Crist, 1.981. Variously corrupted
to god-wike in 1612 (N.E.D.); god-wipe (1579).

GOFFER, to flute or crimp a frill, &c. (F.—O. Low G.) Not
in Johnson, and not much used before 1800. (Theo islong.) —MF.
gauffrer, ‘to print (a garment) ; also, to deck or set out with puffes ;”
Cot. Orig. to mark like the edging of pie-crust, or like wafers. =
MF. gauffre, goffre, ‘a wafer; also, a honny-combe;’ Cot. See
further under Wafer.

GOGGLE-EYED, having rolling and staring eyes. (E.) ‘ They
gogle with their eyes hither and thither; ’ Holinshed, Descr. of Ireland,
c. I. ‘ Glyare, or gogul-eye, limus, strabo;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 199.
‘ Gogyl-eyid, gogelere, limus, strabo;’ id. p. 201. Wyclif translates
L. luscum by ‘ gogil-ized ’ = goggle-eyed ; Mark, ix. 46. ‘ Goggle-eyed”
man, louche;”’ Palsgrave. The suffix -Je is, as usual, frequentative ;
the base appears to be imitative; cf. prov. E. goggle, to shake, gog,a
quagmire (because it shakes). We find also Irish and Gael. gogshui-
leach, goggle-eyed, having wandering eyes; from gog,to moveslightly,
and suil, the eye, look, glance; but this gog seems to be of E. (and
imitative) origin. Cf. prov. E. coggle, Bavar. gageln, to be unsteady ;
and E.jog,joggle. Der. goggle, verb, to roll the eyes (Butler, Hudi-
bras, ii. I. 120) ; goggles, i.e.a facetious name for spectacles.

GOITRE, a swelling in the throat. (F.—Prov.—L.) Spelt goytre
in Howell, Letters, i. 1.43. Used in speaking of the Swiss peasants
who are afflicted withit. =F. gottre, a swelled neck ; a back-formation
from the adj. gottreux, afflicted with goitre (Hatzfeld). = Prov. goitros,
adj.; from gott, sb., the throat (in Mistral).—L. guttur, the throat ;.
see Juvenal, Sat. xiii. 162.

GOLD, a precious metal. (E.) ME. gold, Chaucer, C. T. 12704
(C 770). AS. gold; Grein, i. 519.4-Du. goud [for gold]; Icel. gull ;
Swed. and Dan. guld; G. gold; Goth. gulth; 1 Tim. ii. 9. Teut.
type *gul-thom, neuter ; Idg. type *ghal-tom; cf. Russ. zoloto, Skt.
hataka-, gold. Allied to Pers. zar, gold, Zend zaranya-, Skt. hiranya-,
gold. Named from its yellow colour; and allied to Yellow...
(/GHEL.) Brugmann, i. § 506; ii. § 79. Der. gold-en (AS.
gyld-en, by the usual letter change, but altered in ME. to gold-en) ;
gold-beater, gold-dust, gold-finch (Chaucer, C. T. 4365), gold-jish,.
gold-leaf, gold-smith (Prompt. Parv. p. 202); mary-gold or mari-gold,
Also gild.

GOLF, the name ofa game. (Du.) Mentioned in Acts of James
IL., of Scotland; 1457, c. 71, ed. 1566: ‘the futball and the golf.”
The name is usually supposed to have been taken from that of a Du.
game played with a mall and ball. = Du. folf, ‘a club to strike little
bouls or balls with, a mall-stick ;’ Sewel’s Du. Dict.4Icel. holfr, the
(rounded) clapper of a bell, a bulb, a bolt for a crossbow; kylfa, a
club ; Dan. kolbe, the butt-end of a weapon ; folv, a bolt, shaft, arrow ;
Swed. kolf, a butt-end, bolt; Low G. sulf, a club with which boys.
play a kind of hockey (Brem. Wort.) ; G. kolbe, a club, mace, knob,
butt-end of a gun. @f Or it may be allied to prov. E. gouff, to strike,
to hit (E. D. D.) ; which is possibly of imitative origin. Cf cuff.

GOLOSH. The same as Galoche, q. v.

GONDOLA, a Venetian pleasure-boat. (Ital.—Gk.?) Shak. has
gondola, Merch. of Ven. ii. 8. 8; and gondolier, Oth. i. 1. 126, = Ital.
gondola, a boat used (says Florio) only at Venice; a dimin. of gonda
(Torriano), with the same meaning. = Gk. «évév, a drinking-vessel ;
which the gondola was supposed to resemble (Diez). But this is
doubtful. Or from L. ciinula, a little cradle; see Korting, § 2402.

GONFANON, GONFALON, a kind of standard or banner.
(F.—MHG.) ME. gonfanon, Rom. of the Rose, 1201, 2018. [The
form gonfalon is from Ital. gonfalone.] The sb. gunfaneur = banner-
bearer, occurs in the Ancren Riwle, p. 300.—OF. gonfanon, gunfanon.
—MHG. gundfano,a banner, lit. battle-standard.=MHG. gunt, gund,


» GONG


battle (chiefly preserved in female names, as Rhadegund); and fano,
vano (mod. G, fahne), a standard, banner. B. The MHG. gund is
cognate with AS..gud (for *gun'S), war, battle; Icel. gunnr, gudr,
battle; from 4/GHwEN, to strike; cf. Skt. kan, to strike, kill. Brug-
mann, i. § 678. sy. G. fahne is cognate with E. vane; see Vane.

GONG, a metallic disc, used as a bell. (Malay.) Spelt gongo in
1590; gong in 1686; see Yule.— Malay agong or gong, ‘ the gong, a
sonorous instrument ;’ Marsden’s Malay Dict., p. 12, col. 1.

GOOD, virtuous, excellent, kind. (E.) ME. good, gode, Chaucer,
C. T. 479 (A 477). AS. god; Grein, i. 520.4-Du. goed; Icel. gddr ;
Dan. and Swed. god; Goth. géds; G. gut. Teut. type*gddoz; from
*eod-, strong grade of *gad-, to suit, fit; for which see Gather. Cf.
Kuss. godno, suitably; godnuit, suitable. Der. good, sb., pl. goods
(ME. goodes, P. Plowman, C. ix. 251); good-day ; good-Friday (ME.
gode fridaye, P. Plowman, B. x. 414); good-ly=AS. godlic, Grein, i.
523 3 good-li-ness (ME. goodlines, also in A.V. of Bible, Isaiah, xl. 6,
and Fairfax, tr. of Tasso, b. xx. st. 107) ; good-natured ; good-ness
=AS. godnes, Grein, i. 523 3 good-will. Also good-man, q.v.

GOOD-BYE, farewell. (E.) A familiar (but meaningless) con-
traction of God be with you, the old form of farewell. Very common in
Shak., where old edd. often have God buy you. ‘God buy you, good
Sir Topas; Tw. Nt. iv. 2. 108 (first folio). ‘God be with you;
I haue done ;’ Oth. i, 3. 189 (first folio). Strictly, God buy (also God
b’w’y) = God be with you; and the added you was needless, and is not
preserved.

GOODMAN, the master of the house. (E.) In the Bible, A.V.
Luke, xii. 39, &c. See Eastwood and Wright’s Bible Wordbook. ME.
godeman, in the Seven Sages, Thornton Komances, Introd. xliv, 1. 5.
Observe especially the occurrence of godeman, as a tr. of L. pater-
familias, in An O, Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 33. ‘ Two bondmen,
whyche be all vnder the rule and order of the good man and the good
wyfe of the house ;’ Sir T. More’s Utopia (E. version), ed. Arber, p. 75.
Compounded of good and man. Cf. Lowland Scotch gude man, the
master ofafamily; Jamieson.

GOOSANDER, the largest species of Mergus. (Scand.?) The
Mergus merganser ; formerly gossander, as in Drayton, Polyolb. song
xxv. 65. Of obscure formation; apparently ‘ goose-duck ;’ from
Notw. gaas, Icel. gis, goose (modified by E. goose), and Norw.
and, a duck, Icel. ond (pl. andir), a duck, cognate with AS. ened.
See Newton, Dict. of Birds.

GOOSKE, the name of a bird. (E.) ME. gos, goos, pl. gees;
Chaucer, C. T. 4135 (A 4137). . AS. gés, pl. gés; Grein, i. 523
(where géds stands for an older *gons<*gans, the lengthening of o
causing loss of »).4-Du. gaus; Dan. gaas (for *gans), pl. ges;
Swed. gds (for *gans); Icel. gas (for *gans); G. gans.4L. ans-er;
Gk. xnv ; Skt. hamsas, a swan; Olrish geis, a swan; Lithuan.
Zasis. Teut. type *gans, Idg. base *ghans-. @] From the Idg. base
*ehan- we have also gann-et and gan-d-er. See Gannet, Gander.
The occurrence of these words favours the theory that Gk. xnv is
allied to xaivev (for *xdav-yew), to gape. Der. goose-grass (so
called because geese are fond of it), goose-guill, gos-hawk, q.v.,
gos-ling, q.v. And see below.

GOOSEBERRY, the berry of a well-known shrub. (E.) ‘Not
worth a gooseberry;’ 2 Hen. IV, i. 2.196. ‘A gooseberrie, vua [uva]
crispa;’” Levins, 104. 28. ‘Gose berrys, groiselles;’ Du Wes (in
Palsgrave), p. 912. From goose and berry; cf. goose-grass, &c.
@[ Plant-names are often whimsical and inappropriate ; it is possible
that the name was suggested by North E, grosers, gooseberries (Halli-
well, Brockett). Bums has grozet, a gooseberry ; To a Louse, st. 5.
These forms are, apparently, from an OF. *grose, which occurs not
only in OF. grosele, groisele, a gooseberry, but also in Irish grois-aid,
Gael. grois-eid, W. grwys-en, a gooseberry, all borrowed from E.
(Turner has groser-bushe in 1548.) The OF. groisele is of Teutonic
origin; viz. from MHG. kris, curling, crisped; whence mod. G.
krausbeere, a cranberry, rough gooseberry. Cf. Swed. krusbar, a
‘gooseberry. [ Du. krutsbezie (lit. a cross-berry),is a singular corruption
of kroesbezie, by confusion between kruis, a cross, and kroes, crisp,
‘frizzled.] The G. kraus, Swed. krus, Du. kroes, crisp, frizzled, refer
to the short crisp curling hairs upon the rougher kinds of the fruit;
«f. the L. name wva crispa in Levins, given above.

. GOPHER, a kind of wood. (Heb.) In A.V. Gen. vi. 14.— Heb.
‘gopher, a kind of wood; supposed to be pine or fir.

» GORBELLIED, having a fat belly. (E.) In Shak. 1 Hen. IV,
ii. 2.93. Compounded of E. gore, lit. filth, dirt (here used of the
<ontents of the stomach and intestines) ; and belly. B. All doubt as
to the origin is removed by comparing Swed. dial. gdr-balg, a fat
paunch, compounded of Swed. dial. gar (Swed. gorr), dirt, the con-
tents of the intestines, and balg, the belly. See Rietz, p. 225.
See Gore (1). And see below.

* GORCROW, the carrion-crow. (E.)
my birds of prey;’ Ben Jonson, The Fox, Act i.


‘Raven and gorcrow, all
Compounded of


GORSE 245


E. gore, filth, dirt, carrion (a former sense of the word); and crow,
See Gore (1). And see above.

GORDIAN, intricate. (Gk.) Chiefly in the phr. ‘ Gordian knot;’
Cymb. ii. 2. 34. Named from the Phrygian king Gordius (Gk. Tép-
dios), father of Midas, who, on being declared king, ‘ dedicated his
chariot to Zeus, in the Acropolis of Gordium. The pole was fastened
to the yoke by a knot of bark; and an oracle declared that whosoever
should untie the knot should reign over all Asia. Alexander, on his
arrival at Gordium, cut the knot with his sword, and applied the
oracle to himself;’ Smith’s Classical Dict.

GORE (1), clotted blood, blood. (E.) It formerly meant also
dirt or filth. It occurs in the sense of ‘filthiness’ in Allit. Poems,
ed. Morris, B. 306. AS. gor, dirt, filth; Grein, i. 520.4Icel. gor,
gore, the cud in animals, the chyme in men; Swed. gorr, dirt,
matter; MDu. goor, OHG. gor. Origin uncertain. Der. gor-belly,
q.v., gor-crow, q.v. Also gor-y, Macbeth, iii. 4. 51.

GORE (2), to pierce, bore through. (E.) In Shak. As You Like
It, ii. 1. 25. Formed, as a verb, from ME. gare, gore, gar, a spear.
‘Brennes . . . lette glide his gar’ = Brennus let fall his spear; Laya-
mon, 5079. AS. gar,a spear; Grein, i. 370. (The vowel-change is
perfectly regular ; cf. bone, stone, loaf, from AS, ban, stan, hlaf.)+
Icel. geirr, a spear; OHG. gér, a spear. Teut. type *gaizoz, m.;
allied to Gaulish L. gaesum, ajavelin; Olrish gai, aspear. Brugmann,
i. § 210(3). Perhaps allied to goad. Allied to gore (3); see below.

GORE (3), a triangular piece let into a garment; a triangular
slip of land. (E.) ME. gore, Chaucer, C. T. 3237. AS. gara, a
projecting point of land; Aélfred, tr. of Orosius, i. 1, ed. Sweet,
p- 24, 1.3. From AS. gar, a spear; see Gore (2). B. Similarly
we have Icel. geri, a triangular piece of land; from geirr, a spear.
Also G. gehre, a wedge, gusset; Du. geer, a gusset, gore. Der.
giron, q.v.

GORGE, the throat; a narrow pass. (F.—L.) ME. gorge, the
throat; Allit. Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 3760. = OF. gorge, the throat,
gullet. [Ital. gorga.]=—Folk-L. *gorga, gullet (Hatzfeld); prob. a
popular form of L. gurgulio, the gullet. Perhaps allied to L. gurgés,
a whirlpool; with which cf. Skt. gargara-, whirlpool. Der. gorge,
verb, Romeo, v. 3. 46; gorg-et, a piece of armour to protect the
throat, Troilus, i. 3. 174; Spenser, F.'Q. iv. 3. 12 And see
gorgeous.

GORGEOUS, showy, splendid. (F.—L.) ‘Of gorgeous aray ;”
Sir T. More, Works, p. 808 c; ‘they go gorgeously arayed;’ id. 808 a.
A corruption of gorgias ; ‘ That were ioly and gorgyas in theyr gere;’
Justes of May and June, in Hazlitt’s Early Pop. Poet. ii. 117.—OF.
gorgias, ‘ gorgeous, gaudy, flaunting, brave, gallant, gay, fine, trimme,
quaintly clothed ;’ Cot. Cf. se gorgiaser, ‘to flaunt, brave, or gallan-
tise it;’ id. B. Perhaps formed from OF. gorgias, ‘a gorget;’ id.;
as though to wear a gorget were a fine thing; or from the swelling
of the throat considered as a symbol of pride. y. Either way, the
word depends upon F. gorge, the throat ; and much light is thrown
upon the word by another entry in Cotgrave, viz. ‘ se rengorger, to
hold down [let sink down] the head, or thrust the chin into the neck,
as some do in pride, or to make their faces look the fuller ; we say, to
bridle it.” 8. Note also Span. gorja, the throat ; gorjal, a gorget, the
collar of a doublet; gorguera,a gorget; gorguero, a kind of neckcloth,
of ladies of fashion; gorguerin, a ruff round the neck. See Gorge.
The editor of the F. poems of G. Coquillart has: ‘ Gorgias, élégant
qui se rengorge, fat qui se pavane, dont la poitrine est couverte d’étoffes
précieuses et de riches bijoux.’ Der. gorgeous-ly, gor geous-ness.

GORGON, aterrible monster. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. Macb. il. 3. 77.
=L. Gorgon, Gorgd. = Gk. Topyw#, the Gorgon, a monster of fearful
aspect. — Gk. yopyés, fearful, terrible. Cf. Olrish garg, fierce; per-
haps Skt. garj, to roar. Der. Gorgon-ian, Milton, P. L. ii. 611.

GORILLA, a kind of large ape. (OAfrican.) The word isan old
one, lately revived. It occurs just at the end of a treatise called the
Periplis (mepimdous), i.e. ‘circumnavigation, written by a Cartha-
ginian navigator named Hanno. This was originally written in the
Punic language, and afterwards translated into Greek. He there
describes some creatures ‘ which the interpreters called -yopiAAas.’

GORMANDIZE,, to eat like a glutton. (F.—Scand.) In Shak.
Merch. of Ven. ii. 5. 3. .Cotgrave has: ‘ Gourmander, to ravine,
devour, glut, gormandize or gluttonize it.’ The E. form was suggested
by the previous existence in E. of the sb. gourmandyse, as in ‘they
eate withoute gourmandyse;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castle of Helth, b. ii. c. 1.
This is from OF. gourmandise, gluttony; Cot. Both the sb. gour-
mandise and the vb. gourmander are from the OF. gourmand, ‘a glutton,
gormand, belly-god;’ Cot. See Gourmand. Der. gormandiz-er,
gormandiz-ing.

GORSE, a prickly shrub, furze. (E.) For gorst. ME. gorst,
furze; Wyclif, Isaiah, lv. 13.. AS. gorst. ‘On gorste;’ Luke, vi.
44; A.V. ‘of a bramble-bush;’ Vulgate, ‘de rubo.’ B. So named
from its prickles. Cf. Skt. kysk, to bristle; L. hirsiitus, horridus,


GOSHAWK


bristly; L. hordeum, Du. gerst, barley. Brugmann, i. § 882.
Hirsute.
‘“GOSHAWE, a kind of hawk. (E.) Lit. a  goose-hawk.’ ME.
goshauk, Wyclif, Job, xxxix. 13. The connexion with goose is
proved by two successive entries in Voc. 131. 21, 22; viz. ‘ Auca,
gos;’ and‘ Aucarius, gos-hafuc.’ Here gos=AS. gés, a goose; and
hafuc=a hawk. The Vocabulary is ascribed to the tenth century.
+ Icel. gas-haukr, similarly formed. And see below.
GOSLING, a young goose. (E.) In Shak. Cor. v. 3. 35.
ME. goselynge; Prompt.. Pary. Here gose=ME. gos=AS. gos, a
goose. ~The suffix -ling is a double diminutive, =/-ing. Cf. duck-
ling, from duck. See Goose.

GOSPEL, the life of Christ. (E.) ME. gospel, Chaucer, C. T.
483 (A 481). Also godspel, P. Plowman, C. xiii. 100. AS. godspell,
Grein, i. 519.. The orig. sense was ‘ good story,’ to translate L.
euangelium. We find: ‘Euuangelium (sic), id est, bonum nuntium,
godspel;? Voc. 314. 8. But the o (of AS. géd, good) was soon
shortened before dsp, and a more obvious popular etymology arose,
as if god-spell meant ‘story of God,’ i.e. Christ. Hence, when the
AS. word was introduced into Iceland, it took the form gudspjall =
God-story, and not gdd-spjall=good story. And the OHG. word
was likewise gotspel (=God-story), and not guot spel. @ It is inter-
esting to find the orig. interpretation in the Ormulum, 1. 157 of the
Introduction.

GOSSAMER, fine spider-threads seen in fine weather. (E.)
ME. gossomer, Chaucer, C. T. 10573 (F 259). Spelt gosesomer by
W. de Bibbesworth (13th cent.) ; Wright’s Vocab. i. 147, last line;
and in Nominale, ed. Skeat, 1. 625, we have ‘a web of gossomer.’
ME. gossomer is lit. goose-summer, and the proy. E. (Craven) name
for gossamer is summer-goose ; see Craven Gloss. It is named from
the time of year when it is most seen, viz. during St. Martin’s summer
(early November) ; geese were eaten on Nov. 11 formerly, Cf. Lowl.
Se. (popular variant) go-summer, Martinmas. B. We may note,
_ further, that Jamieson’s Scottish Dict. gives summer-cout, i.e. summer-
‘colt, as the name of exhalations seen rising from the ground in hot
weather; and .the Yorkshire expression for the same is very similar.
‘When the air is seen on a warm day to undulate, and seems to rise
as from hot embers, it is said, “see how the summer-colt rides!”’
Whitby Glossary, by F. K. Robinson ; quoted from Marshall. +y. In
the same Whitby Glossary, the word for ‘gossamer’ is entered as
summer-gauze. ‘This may be confidently pronounced to be an ingenious
corruption, as the word gawze is quite unknown to Middle-English
and to the peasants of Craven, who say summer-goose; see Carr’s
Craven Glossary, where the swmmer-colt and summer-goose are synony-
mous. §. The G. sommer means not only ‘summer,’ but also
‘ gossamer,’ in certain compounds. The G. name for ‘ gossamer’ is
not only sommerfaden (summerthreads), but also mddchen-sommer
(Maiden-summer), der-alte- Weiber-sommer (the old women’s summer),
or Mechtildesommer; see E. Miiller. It was also simply known as
der fliegende sommer, the flying summer (Weigand), ‘ This makes G.
sommer =summer-film ; and gives to gossamer the probable sense of
‘ goose-summer-film.’ The connexion of the word with summer is
further illustrated by the Du. zomerdraden, gossamer, lit. ‘summer-
threads,’ and the Swed. sommertrdd, gossamer, lit. ‘summer-thread.’
It may be observed that the spelling gossamer (with a) is certainly
corrupt. It should rather be gossomer or gossummer.

GOSSIP, a sponsor in baptism, a crony. (E.) The old sense
was ‘sponsor in baptism,’ lit. ‘ god-relative.’ ‘The final p stands for
b, and ss for ds. ME. gossib, Chaucer, C. T. 5825 (D 243)3 earlier
spelt godsib. See Poems of Will. of Shoreham, ed. Wright, pp.
68-70, where occur the words gossibbe, sibbe, and gossibrede (also
spelt godsibrede), a derivative from godsib by suffixing ME. -rede
(=AS. réden, E.-red in kind-red). B. Thus gossip stands for god-sib,
i.e. Telated in God; AS. godsibb, Wulfstan, ed. Napier, p. 160; m.
pl. godsibbas. The f. sb. sib in AS. means ‘ peace,’ but there was
a derived word meaning ‘relative.’ Thus, in Luke, xiv. 12, the
Northumb. glosses to Latin cognatos are (in one MS.) sibbo and (in the
other) gisibbe; and again, in the Ormulum, 1. 307, it is said of
Elizabeth that she was ‘ Sante Marse sibd,’ i.e. Saint Mary’s relative.
Cf. Icel. sif, affinity; sifi, a relative; G. sippe, affinity; pl. sippen,
kinsmen; Goth. siija, relationship, adoption as sons, Gal. iv. 5; unsibis,
lit. unpeaceful, hence, lawless, wicked, Mark, xv. 28 ; unsibja, iniquity,
Matt. vii. 23. These are further related to Skt. sabhya-, relating to
an assembly, fit for an assembly, trusty, faithful; from sabka, an
assembly. Brugmann, i. §§ 124 (4), 567.

GOTH, one of a certain early Germanic tribe. (Late L.— Gothic.)
‘Theodoric, the king of Gothes ;’ Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, bk. i. pr.
4. 53.— Late L. Gothi, pl. Goths. = Goth. *Gutds, or *Gutans, pl.; cf.
Goth. Gut-piuda, the Gothic people, where piuda (AS. péod) means
‘people.’ Der. Goth-ic.

‘GOUGE, a chisel with a hollowed blade. (F.—Late L.—C. ?)


246
See


Tig ane ee


GRADE


Formerly googe. ‘By googing of them out ;’ Ben Jonson, The Devil
is an Ass, A. ii. sc. 1 (Meercraft). ‘An yron goodg;’ Naval Accounts,
p- 240 (1497).—F. gouge, ‘a joyners googe;’ Cot. Cf. Span. gubia,
a gouge ; Ital. sgubia, sgubbia (Torriano) ; Port. goiva.— Late L. guvia,
a kind of chisel, in Isidore of Seville, lib. xix. De Instrumentis Lig-
nariis (Brachet) ; also gulbium (Ducange). B. Of obscure origin ; but
perhaps Celtic. =OlIrish gulban, a beak; W. gylf (N. E. D.).

GOURD, a large fleshy fruit. (F.—L.) ME. gourd, Chaucer,
C. T. 17031 (1182). —F. gourde, formerly spelt gouhourde or cougourde,
both of which spellings are in Cotgrave. Gourde is short for gou-
hourde, which is a corruption of cougourde.—L, cucurbita, a gourd ;
evidently a reduplicated form.

GOURMAND, a glutton. (F.—Scand.) Also gormand, gor-
mond. ‘To that great gormond, fat Apicius;’ Ben Jonson, Sejanus,
A. i. sc. 1. ‘To gurmander, abligurire;’ Levins, 83. 22.—F. gour-
mand, ‘a glutton, gormand, belly-god;” Cot. f. Of Scand. origin,
—Norw. gurmen, inclined to gorge oneself (Ross) ; from gurma, (1)
to stir up mud; (2) to eat steadily and continually ; (3) to gorge one-
self (Aasen, Ross). Cf. Icel. gormr ; Norw. gurm, ooze, mud, grounds
of coffee, &c., allied to gor, gore; see Gore (1). The Span. gormar
means ‘to vomit.’ Der. gormand-ize or gormand-ise, q.v.

GOUT (1), a drop, adisease. (F.—L.) ‘ Gouts of blood ;’ Mach.
ii. 1. 46. ‘And he was al-so sik mid goute,’ i.e. with the disease;
Rob. of Glouc. p. 564; 1. 11865. The disease was supposed to be
caused by a defluxion of humours; so that it is the same word as
gout, a drop. —OF. goute, goutte, a drop; also, ‘the gowt;” Cot. —
L. gutta,a drop. Der. gout-y, gout-i-ness.

GOUT (2), taste. (F.—L.) Merely borrowed from F, gout, taste.
— L. gustus, taste; cf. gustare, to taste; from the same root as E.
choose. See Choose.

GOVERN, to steer, direct, rule. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. gouernen,
(with « for v), Rob. of Glouc. p. 44; 1. 1036.—OF. governer, later
gouverner.—L. gubernare, to steer a ship, guide, direct. (Borrowed
from Gk.)=—Gk. «uBepyay, to steer. Cf. Lithuan, kumbritt, to steer.
Der. govern-able; govern-ess, Mids. Nt. Dream, ii. 1. 103; govern-
ment, Tempest, i. 2. 75 (the older term being govern-ance, as in
Chaucer, C. T. 12007, C 73); govern-ment-al; govern-or, ME,
gouernour (u for v), Wyclif, James, iii. 4, from OF. governeyr<L,
acc. gubernatorem, a steersman ; governor-ship.

GOWAN, a daisy. (Scand.) ‘ And pu’d the gowans fine ;’ Burns,
Auld Lang Syne, st. 2. Also formerly, a buttercup; North E. gowlan,
Sc. yellow gowan, corn marigold. Named from the colour. =Icel.
gulr, Swed. gul, Dan. guul, yellow. See Yellow.

GOWK, a cuckoo; a foolish person. (Scand.) ‘Thare galede the
gowke,’ there sang the cuckoo; Allit. Morte Arthure, 1.927. And
see E.D. D.—Icel. gaukr, a cuckoo; Swed. gok.--AS. géac (prov.
E. yeke), a cuckoo; G. gauch. Teut. type *gaukoz, m.

GOWN, a loose robe. (F.—Late L.) ME. goune, Chaucer, C. T.
393; P. Plowman, B. xiii. 227.—OF. gone, gonne, goune, a long coat
(Godefroy). = Late L. gunna, a skin, fur (scholiast on Geo. ili. 383) 5
also a garment of fur (8th cent.) Ducange. Hence also Ital. gonna,
OSpan. and Proy. gona, a woman’s gown. Cf. also Byzantine Gk.
youva, a coarse garment. ] Sometimes said to be Celtic, which is
doubtful; see Stokes-Fick, p. 281. Cf. W. gwa,a gown, loose robe;
Trish gunn, Gael. and Corn. gun, a gown; Manx goon; but these
may be borrowed from E, Der. gown-s-man,

GRAB, to seize, clutch. (E.) A somewhat vulgar word, but
given in Rider, Eng.-Lat. Dict. (1589). Prob. of native origin; cf.
EFries. grabbig, greedy, grabbelen, to grab at.+ Du. grabbel, a
scramble, grabbelen, to scramble for; Low G. grabbeln, to grab at;
Swed. grabba, to grasp. Very near to OSkt. grabh, to seize, a Vedic
form, of which the later form is grah; cf. OSlav. grabiti, to plunder,
The standard E. word is gripe. See Grapple, Gripe, Grasp. |

GRACE, favour, mercy, pardon. (F.—L.) ME. grace, in early
use; Layamon, 6616 (later text).—OF. grace, L. gratia, favour.=—
L. grdtus, dear, pleasing. Brugmann, i. §§ 524, 632. Der. grace~
ful, grace-ful-ly, grace-ful-ness ; grac-i-ous, Chaucer, C. T. 8489
(E 613); grac-i-ous-ly, grac-i-ous-ness ; grace-less, grace-less-ly, graces
less-ness. And see grateful.

GRADATION, an advance by short steps, a blending of tints.
(F.—L.) In Shak. Oth. i. 1. 37. —OF. gradation, ‘ a gradation, step,
degree ;’ Cot.—L. gradatidnem, acc. of gradatio, an ascent by steps.
Cf. L. gradatim, step by step.=—L. gradus, a step. See Grade, Der.
gradation-al, gradation-ed.

GRADE, a degree, step inrank. (F.—L.) Of late introduction
into E. ; see Todd’s Johnson ; though used asa mathem. term ( =degree)
asearly as 1511. [But the derived words graduate, &c., have been long
in use; see below.]=F. grade, ‘a degree ;’ Cot.—L. gradum, acc.,
a step, degree.—L. gradi (pp. gressus), to step, go. Brugmann, i.
§ 635; ii. § 707; Stokes-Fick, p. 118. Der. grad-at-ion, q.v., grad-
i-ent, q.v., grad-u-al, q.v., grad-u-ate,q.v. Doublet, gradus. From


' Bellay, st. 12.


GRADIENT


the same source are de-gree, de-grade, retro-grade ; in-gred-i-ent; also
ag-gress-ion, con-gress, di-gress, e-gress, in-gress, pro-gress, trans-gress.

ENT, gradually rising; a slope. (L.) A coined word,
used in modern mechanics.= L. gradient-, stem of gradiens, pres. part.
of gradi, to walk, advance. See Grade.

GRADUAL, advancing by steps. (L.) ‘By gradual scale ;’
Milton, P. L. v. 483. [Also as sb.,a gradual (see Blount), a service-
book called in Latin gradudle, and more commonly known in ME. by
the F. form grayl.|—Late L. *gradudlis, but only used in the neut.
gradudle (often graddle), to signify a service-book ‘containing the
portions to be sung by the choir, so called from certain short phrases
after the Epistle sung zz gradibus’ [upon the steps}; Proctor, On the
Common Prayer, p. 8. Formed, with suffix -alis, from gradu-, decl.
stem of gradus, a step. See Grade, Der. gradual-ly. And see
grail (1).

GRADUATE, one who has received a university degree; as
verb, to take a degree, to mark off degrees. (L.) Cotgrave has:
‘Gradué, graduated, having taken a degree;’ and also: ‘ Gradé,
graduate, or having taken a degree.” ‘I would be a graduate, sir, no
freshman;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Fair Maid, A. iv. sc. 2 (Dancer).
And as sb., in Barclay, Ship of Fools, i. 2.— Late L. graduatus, one
who has taken a degree; still in use at the universities. —L. gradu-,
decl. stem of gradus, a degree ; with pp. suffix -dtws. Der. graduat-
ton, graduat-or.

GRAFT, GRAFF; to insert buds ona stem. (F.—L.—Gk.) The
form graft is due to a confusion with graffed, which was orig. the pp.
of graff. Shak. has grafted, Macb. iv. 3. 51; but he also rightly has
graft as a pp. ‘ Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants; Rich. III,
iii. 7.127. Also the verb to graff, As You Like It, iii. 2. 124. Cf.
‘Rom. xi.17. ME. graffen, to graft ; P. Plowman, B. vy. 137. B. The
verb is formed from the sb. graff, a scion; found in 1398 (N. E. D.).
‘ This bastard graff shall never come to growth;’ Shak. Lucr. 1062.
'm OF. graffe, grafe, a style for writing with, a sort of pencil; also
greffe, ‘a graff, a slip or young shoot;’ Cot. [So named from the
resemblance of the cut slip to the shape of a pointed pencil. Similarly
we have L. graphiolum, (1) a small style, (2) a small shoot, scion,
graff.]—L. graphium, a style for writing with. = Gk. ypapiov, another
form of ypaetov, a style, pencil. = Gk. ypapeuw, to write, grave. See
Graphic. Der. graft-er.

GRAIL (1), a gradual, or service-book. (F.—L.) ME. graile,
grayle. ‘ Grayle, boke, gradale, vel gradalis ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 207 ;
and see Way’s note. —OF. graél; Godefroy. Late L. gradile; see
explanation s.v. Gradual.

, GRAIL (2), the Holy Dish at the Last Supper. (F.—L.) In
Spenser, F. Q. ii. 10. 53. ‘Fulfille the meruails of the greal ;’
Arthur and Merlin, ed. Kolbing, 2222. See my Pref. to Joseph of
Arimathie, published for the Early Eng. Text Society. It is there
shown that the true etymology was, at an early period, deliberately
falsified by a change of San Greal (Holy Dish) into Sang Real (Royal
Blood, but perversely made to mean Real Blood). =OF. graal, greal,
grasal, a flat dish, Prov. grasal, Late L. gradale, grasdle, a flat dish,
a shallow vessel. [The various forms in OF. and Low L. are very
numerous ; see the articles in Godefroy, Ducange, and Charpentier’s
Supplement to Ducange.] fB. The word would appear to represent
a Folk-L. type *cratalis, formed from Late L. cratus, a cup, substi-
tuted for crater,a bowl. See Crater. It was, fabulously, the dish in
which Joseph of Arimathea is said to have collected our Lord’s blood.

GRAIL (3), fine sand. (F.) Spenser uses the word in a way
peculiarly his own ; he seems to have meant ‘ fine particles ;’ he speaks
of ‘sandie graile,’ and of ‘golden grayle;’ F. Q.i. 7.6; Visions of
Perhaps suggested by MF. graisle, ‘thinne, small,
little ;? Cot. (mod. F. gréle).—L. gracilis, slender. It is, of course,
possible that Spenser was merely coining a new form of gravel.

GRAIN, a single small hard seed. (F.—L.) ME. grein, greyn,
grain; Chaucer, C. T. 598 (A 596); P. Plowman, B. x. 139.—OF.
grain. = L. granum, a grain, corn.+-Irish gran, W. gronyn. Cognate
with E. corn. See Corn. Der. grain-ed; also granule, q.v., grange,
q.v., granary, q.v., granite, q.y. > Grain in the sense of fibre of
wood is the same word; cf. F. grain des pierres, the grain of stones

(Hamilton). The phrase ‘to dye in grain’ meant to dye of a fast
colour, by means of kermes, &c.; whence grained, deeply dyed,
Hamlet, iii. 4.90. The phrase is an old one; see P. Plowman, B. ii.

15, and the note.

+ GRALLATORY, long-legged, said of birds. (L.) A term
applied to wading birds. Coined from L. grallator, a walker on
stilts. —L. gralle, stilts, contracted from * gradle, formed from the


‘base grad- in L. gradi,towalk. SeeGrade. Brugmann, i. § 587 (4)..


Der. grallatori-al.

GRAMARYE, magic. (F.—L.—Gk.) Used by Scott, Lay of the
Last Minstrel, iii. 11, vi. 17; who took it from ‘ King Estmere’ in
Percy’s Reliques, where it occurs in a passage the genuineness of


GRANT 247:


which is doubtful; see Percy Folio MS,, ii. 604, 1. 144, ii. 607, 1. 274.
The. same word as ME. gramery, gramory, skill in grammar, or
(jestingly) skill in magic. ‘Cowthe ye by youre gramery reche us a
drynk, I shuld be more mery;’ Towneley Myst. p. 90. ‘I se thou
can of gramory and som what of arte;’ id. p, 311.—OF. gramaire,
grammar;sceGrammar. ¢g> I desire here to record my opinion,
that the word glamour, magic, also used by Scott in the same poem
(iii. 9), and taken by him from the expression ‘ They coost the glamer
o’er her’ in Johnny Faa (printed in Ritson’s Sc. Poems, ii. 176), is
nothing but another form of gramere, i.e. grammar. The note in
Vigfusson’s Dict. asserting the identity of glamour with Icel. glamr,
the moon, cannot be seriously entertained. I see that Littré (s.v.
grimoire) agrees with me as to glamour; cf. grimoire in Hatzfeld.
[This note, now confirmed (see N. E. D.), first appeared in 1884.]

GRAMERCY, thanks! (F.—L.) In Shak. Merch. of Ven. ii. 2.
128. Formerly grand mercy, Chaucer, C. T. 8964 (E 1088).—F.
grand merci, great thanks. See Grand and Mercy,

GRAMINEOUS, relating to grass. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674. Coined from L. gramin-, stem of gramen, grass. Der. gra-
minivorous, grass-eating, from gramini-, decl. stem of gramen, and
uorare, to devour; see Voracious. And see Grass.

GRAMMAR, the science of the use of language. (F.—L.—Gk.)
ME. grammere, Chaucer, C. T. 13466 (B 1726).—OF. gramaire
(12th cent. ; see Hatzfeld).— Late L. grammatica, grammar (Hatzfeld).
= Gk. ypayparinn, grammar. = Gk. ypaypatixds, knowing one’s letters
(see below). Der. grammar-i-an, grammar-school; from the same
source, grammatical; see below.

GRAMMATICAL, belonging to grammar. (F.—L.—Gk.)
‘Those grammatic flats and shallows;’ Milton, Of Education (R.).
Grammajicall isin Palsgrave, page vy. =F. grammatical,‘ grammaticall;’
Cot. Formed, with suffix -al, from L. grammaticus, grammatical. =
Gk. ypapparirés, versed in one’s letters, knowing the rudiments. = Gk.
ypaupar-, stem of ypdypya, a letter.—Gk. ypapev, to write. Der.
grammatical-ly.

GRAMPUS, a kind of fish. (F.—L.) ‘ Grampus, a fish somewhat
like a whale, but less;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. Sir T. Herbert mentions
‘porpice, grampasse (the sus marinus), mullet,’ &c.; Travels, p. 404,
ed. 1655 (or p. 384, Todd’s Johnson). Spelt graundepose in Skelton,
Speke Parrot, 1. 309.—AF. grampais, Black Book of Admiralty,i. 152;
a changed form of OF. craspois, crapois, graspois, grapois (Godefroy);
by substituting OF. grand, great, for OF. cras, gras, fat. Cf. Late L.
craspiscis in Thorpe, Anc. Laws, i. 300.—L. crassum piscem, acc., fat
fish. See Grease and Fish. { The word jorpoise is similarly
formed. See Porpoise.

GRANARY, a storehouse for grain. (L.) ‘ Granary or Garner ;’
Kersey, ed. 1715. Also granarie in Levins, 104. 24.—L. grandrium
(pl. grandria), a granary.—L. granum, corn. See Grain and
Garner. Doublet, garner; also, grange.

GRAND, great, large. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. i. 2. 274. ME.
grant, graunt ; not much used formerly, except in compounds. The
comp. grandame occurs in St. Marharete, ed. Cockayne, p. 22, 1. 32.
Graund-father is in Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. i. c. 3. Fabyan has
graund-mother, vol. i. c. 124; ed. Ellis, p. 102.—OF. grand, great.
=L. grandem, acc. of grandis, great. Der. grand-child, grandame,
grand-sire, grand-father, grand-son, grand-mother, grand-daughter ;
grand-ly, grand-ness, And see below.

GRANDEE, a Spanish nobleman. (Span.—L.) Spelt grandy ;
‘in a great person, right worshipful sir, a right honourable grandy ;”
Burton, Anat. of Melancholy, To the Reader, ed. 1651, p. 35. Spelt
grande, B. Jonson, Alchemist, A. iii.—Span. grande, great; also, a
nobleman. =L. grandem, acc. of grandis, great. See Grand.

GRANDEUR, greatness. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. R, iv. rro.
=F. grandeur, ‘ greatnesse ;’ Cot. Formed, with suffix -ewr, from F.
grand, great. See Grand.

GRANDILOQUENT, pompous in speech. (L.) Notin early
use. The adj. and the sb. grandiloquence are in Blount’s Glossary
(1681). Formed (in rivalry of L. grandiloquus, grandiloquent), from
grandi-, decl. stem of grandis, great, and Jogwent-, stem of pres. part.
of Jogui, to speak. See Grand and Loquacious. Der. grandi-
loguence,

GRANGE, a farmhouse. (F.—L.) ME. grange, graunge; Chaucer,
C. T. 12996 (B 1256); P. Plowman, B. xvii. 71.—OF. grange, ‘a barn
for corn; also, a grange;’ Cot. ([Cf. Span. granja, a farmhouse,
villa, grange.] = Late L. grdnica, granea,a barn, grange.—L. granum,
com. See Grain.

GRANITE, a hard stone. (Ital.—L,) ‘Granite or Granita, a
kind of speckled marble ;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.—Ital. granito, ‘a kind
of speckled stone;’ Florio. =Ital. granito, pp. of granire, ‘to reduce
into graines;’ Florio; hence, to speckle.—Ital. grano, corn. =L.


granum, com. . See Grain,


GRANT, to allow, bestow, permit. (F.—L.) ME, graunten,


248 GRANULE


granten, in very early use; Layamon, 4789, later text ; Ancren Riwle,
p- 34.— OF. graanter, graunter, later spellings of OF. craanter, crean-
ter, to caution, to assure, guarantee; whence the later senses of
promise, yield. Cf. Late L. créantare (for *crédentire), to assure,
guarantee ; creantium, a caution, guarantee; Ducange.=—Late L.
*crédentare, to guarantee, not found; closely related to Late L. cré-
dentia, a promise, whence F. créance.— L. crédent-, stem of pres. part.
of crédere, to trust. See Creed. Der. grant, sb., grant-or, grant-ee.

GRANULE, a little grain. (L.) ‘Granule, a little grain, or barley-
corn;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. (Prob. directly from L.; but cf.
F. granule.) =L. granulum, a little grain; dimin. of granum, a grain.
See Grain. Der. granul-ar, granul-ate, granul-at-ion, granul-ous.

GRAPH, the fruit of the vine. (F.—O. Low G.) In Chaucer, C. T.
17032 (H 83); P. Plowman, B. xiv. 30.—OF. grape; MF. grappe,
“a bunch, or cluster of grapes ;’ Cot. [The orig. sense was ‘a hook,’
whence OF. graper, to gather clusters with a hook. The Rouchi dial.
has crape, a bunch (Hécart). In E., the sense has altered from
‘cluster’ to ‘single berry.’ But cf. Norman dial. grape, a grape
(Moisy; ed..1895). Cf. Span. grapa, a hold-fast, cramp-iron ; Ital.
grappare, to seize; grappo, a clutching ; grappolo, a cluster of grapes. }
= Teut. type *krappo-, whence O. Low G. crappo, a hook (Gallée),
Low G. krappe, a hook (Berghaus), OHG. chrapho, a hook. Allied
to E. cramp. See Cramp. Der. grape-ry, grape-shot. ¢ The
senses of ‘hook’ and ‘cluster’ or ‘handful’ result from that of
‘clutching.’ See grapnel.

GRAPHIC, pertaining to writing ; descriptive. (L.—Gk.) ‘The
letters will grow more large and graphicall ;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 503.
‘Each line, as it were graphic, in the face ;’ Ben Jonson, An Elegy
on My Muse, Underwoods, Io1, ix. 154.—L. graphicus, belonging to
painting or drawing. = Gk. ypagukés, the same. — Gk. ypapev, to write.
See Carve. Der. graphic-al, graphic-al-ly.

GRAPNEL, a grappling-iron. (F.—O. Low G.) ME. grapenel
(trisyllabic) ; Chaucer, Legend of Good Women, 640 (Cleopatra), =
OF. grapin (Supp. to Godefroy), F. grappin, a grapnel; with dim. suffix
-el, thus giving grapinel, in three syllables. Formed, with suffix -in,
from OF. grape, F. grappe, a hook. See Grape, Grapple.

GRAPPULEB, to lay fast hold of, clutch. (F.—O. Low G.) In
Shak. L. L. L. ii. 218; Spenser, F. Q. iv. 4. 29. Properly to seize with
a graple, i.e. a grapnel (Palsgrave, p. 227), and formed from the sb. =
MF. grappil, ‘the grapple of a ship;’ Cot. The same in sense as F,
grappin. Both grapp-il and grapp-in are formed from F. grappe,
formerly used in the sense of ‘hook;’ cf. the phrase mordre & la
grappe, to bite at the hook, to swallow the bait (Hamilton). See
further under Grape.

GRASP, to seize, hold fast. (E.) ME. graspen, used in the sense
of ‘ grope,’ to feel one’s way; as in ‘ And graspeth by the walles to
and fro;’ Chaucer, C. T. 4291 (A 4293); also in Wyclif, Job, v. 14,
xii. 25 (earlier version), where the later version has grope. Just as
clasp was formerly claps, so grasp stands for graps. The ME. graspen
stands for grap-sen, ‘ That grapsest here and there as doth the blynde ;’
Hoccleve, De Reg. Princ., ed. Wright, p. 8, st. 31 (1. 212). Prob.
from AS. type *grépsan (Teut. type *graipison), from grapan, to grope.
Cp. EFries. grapsen, to seize. SeeGrope. 4 Similar transpositions
of sp are seen in the proy. E. wops for wasp, in AS. heps, a hasp, AS.
@ps, an aspen-tree; &c. The extension of the stem by the addition
of s occurs in AS., and remains in E. clean-se from clean.

GRASS, common herbage. (E.) ME. gras, gres; also gers. Spelt
gras, Chaucer, C. T. 7577 (D 1995); gres and gresse, Prompt. Parv.
p. 210; gers, Ayenbite of Inwyt, ed. Morris, p. 111. AS. gers, gres,
Grein, i. 373, 525.4 Du. and Icel. gras ; Swed. and Dan. gras ; Goth.
gras; G.gras. Teut. type *gra-som, neut. From *gra-, a weak grade
of Teut. *grd-, to grow; cf. MHG. gruose, young plants; and E.
green. See Grow. Der. grass-plot, grass-y; grass-hopper= AS.
gershoppa, Ps. Ixxvii. 51, ed. Spelman; graze< ME. gresin, Prompt.
Pary. p. 210, from AS. grasian (Icel. gresja) ; graz-i-er=graz-er
(cf. bow-yer, law-yer).

GRATES (1), a frame-work ofiron-bars. (Late L.—L.) ME. grate.
‘ Grate, or trelys wyndowe, cancellus ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 207.— Late
‘L. grata, a grating ; cf. Ital. grata, a grate, gridiron. A variant of
Late L. crata, a grating, crate.—L. crates, a hurdle. See Crate.
Thus grate is a mere variant of crate, due to a weakened pronunciation.
Der. grat-ing, a dimin. form; grat-ed.

GRATE (2), to mb, scrape, scratch, creak. (F.—Tent.) ME.
graten. ‘ Grate brede [to grate bread], mico ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 207.
‘Gratynge of gyngure, frictura;’ id.=OF. grater, to scratch, to
scrape ;’ Cot.; Norm. dial. grater (Moisy); F. gratter. Cf. Ital.
grattare, to scratch, rub; Late L. cratare, found in the Germanic
codes; ‘si quis alium unguibus cratauerit ;* Lex Frisonum, app. 5.—
Teut. type *krattdjan-, as seen in Swed. kratta, to scrape; Dan. kratte,
to scrape; OHG. chrazzén, G. kratzen, to scratch. Der. grat-er,
-gral-ing, grat-ing-ly. Cf. scratch.


- GRAZE


GRATEFUL, pleasant, thankful. (Hybrid; F. and E.) In
Shak. All’s Well, ii. 1.132. The suffix -ful is E., from AS. -fud, full.
The first syllable appears again in in-grate, and is derived from OF.
grat, likewise preserved in OF. in-grat, ‘ ungrateful ;? Cot.—L. gratus,
pleasing. See Grace. Der. grate-ful-ly, grate-ful-ness ; also gratify,
q.v.; and see gratis, gratitude, gratuitous, gratulate; also agree.

GRATIFY, to please, soothe. (F.—L.) In Shak. Merch. of
Ven. iv. 1. 406.—MF. gratifier, ‘to gratifie;’ Cot.—L. gritificare,
graiificari, to please.=L. grati-< grato-, decl. stem of gratus, pleas-
ing; and -ficare (=facere), to make. See Grateful, Grace. Der.
gratific-at-ion, from L. acc. gratificatiénem, which is from gratificari.

GRATIS, freely. (L.) In Shak. Merch. of Ven. i. 3. 45.—L.
gratis, adv. freely ; for gritiis, abl. pl. of gratia, favour. See Grace.

GRATITUDH, thankfulness. (F.—L.) In Shak. Cor. iii. 1.
291.—F. gratitude; Cot.—Late L. gratitidinem, acc. of gratitido,
thankfulness. Formed (like beatitudo from bedtus) from gratus,
pleasing ; see Grateful.

GRATUITOUS, freely given. (L.) ‘By way of gift, merely
gratuitous ;’ Bp. Taylor, Rule of Conscience, b. ii. c. 3. rule 81.—L.
gratuit-us, freely given; with suffix -ous. Extended from gratu-, for
gratus, pleasing. See Grateful. Der. gratuitous-ly ; and see below.

GRATUITY, a present. (F.—L.) So called because given
freely or gratis.. ‘To be given me in gratuity ;’ Ben Jonson, The
Humble Petition of Poor Ben to K. Charles, 1. 10. And in Cotgrave.
— OF. gratuité, ‘a gratuity, or free gift;’ Cot.—Late L. gratuitatem,
acc. of gratuitds, a free gift. Allied to gratuitus, freely given. See
above.

GRATULATEH, to congratulate. (L.) In Shak. Rich. TI, iv.
I.10.—L, gratudtus, pp. of gratulari, to wish a person joy. Formed
as if from an adj. *gratulus, joyful; an extension of gratus, pleasing.
See Grateful. Der. gratulat-ion, gratulat-or-y; also con-gratulate,
which has now taken the place of the simple verb.

GRAVE (1), to cut, engrave. (E.) ME. grauen (with u for v), to
grave, also to bury; Chaucer, C. T. 8557 (E 681); Layamon, 9960.
AS. grafan, to dig, grave, engrave; Grein, i. 523. -++ Du. graven, to
dig; Dan. grave; Icel. grafa; Swed. grafva, to dig ; Goth. graban,
Luke, vi. 48; G. graben. Teut. type *graban-, pt. t. *grd6; Idg. type
*ehrabh-; whence also Russ. grob’,a tomb, a grave. Der. grave, sb.,
Chaucer, C. T. 12599 (C 665); lit. ‘that which is dug out ;’. also

rav-er, grav-ing, groove.

GRAVE (2), solemn, sad. (F.—L.) Lit. ‘heavy.’ In Spenser,
F.Q. v. 7. 18.=—F. grave, ‘ grave, stately ;’ Cot.—L. grauem, ace. of
grauis, heavy, grave. -++ Goth. kaurus, heavy, burdensome, 2 Cor.
x. 10; Gk. Bapts, heavy; Skt. guru-, heavy. Brugmann, i. § 665.
Der. grave-ly, grave-ness ; also grav-i-ty (Shak.), from F. gravité
(Cot.), from L. ace. grauilatem; gravi-t-ate, gravi-t-at-ion; gravi-d,
from L. grauidus, burdened. From the same root, grief, q.v.; also
ag-grav-ate, ag-grieve, baro-meter.

GRAVEL, fine small stones. (F.—C.) ME. grawel (with x for v),
in early use; in King Horn, ed. Lumby, 1. 1465.—OF. gravele, later
gravelle (Godefroy, Cot.); dimin. of OF. grave, rough sand mixed
with stones (Brachet).= Celt. base *gravo-, as in Bret. grouan, gravel,
Corn. grow, gravel, sand, W. gro, pebbles; Stokes-Fick, p. 117.
Der. gravell-y.

GRAVY, juice from cooked meat. (F.—L.) In Shak. 2 Hen, IV,
i. 2.184. Also spelt greavy, or greauy (with w for v). ‘In fat and
greauy;’ Chapman, tr. of Homer, Odyss. xviii. 166. ‘ With all their
fat and greauie;’ id. xviii. 63. ME. graué, grauey, the name of a
dressing for meats made of broth, milk of almonds, spices, and wine
orale. ‘Conyngus in graué, rabbits in gravy,’ Liber Cure Cocorum,
ed. Morris, p. 8; cf. pp. 24, 25. And see grawey in Two Cookery-
books, ed. Austin (glossary).—OF. grané, a similar sauce, which
seems to have been misread as graué; cf. ‘conyns en grané’ (mis-
printed gravé), Wright, Vol. of Vocab., i. 174. See Godefroy.—L.
granatus, full of grains (with apparent allusion to the thickened
broth). —L. granum, a grain; see Grain and Grenade. ¢> Thus
gravy appears to be an error for grainy, Torriano explains Ital.
granato, granito, as ‘kernelly or corny as honey, figs, soap, or oyl is
sometimes in winter.’ See N. E. D.

GRAY, ash-coloured; white mixed with black. (E.) ME. gray,
grey. ‘Hire eyen grey as glas;’ Chaucer, C. T. 152. OMerc. grei
(O. E. Texts); AS. gr@g; Grein, i. 525.4 Du. graauw; Icel. grar;
Dan. graa; Swed. grad; G. grau. Teut. type *gré@gwoz; whence
*grég-,*gréw-. Cf. Low G. grag, gray (Berghaus). Der. gray-ish,
gray-beard; gray-l-ing (with double dimin. suffix), Cf. graie as a
fish-name in Harrison’s Descr. of England, iii. 3.

GRAZE (1), to feed cattle. (E.) Merely formed from grass,
ME. grasen. ‘And lich an oxe, under the fot, He graseth as he
nedes mot ;’ said of Nebuchadnezzar ; Gower, C. A.i.142; bk. i. 2973.
AS. grasian, to graze. 4+ Icel. gresja; Dan. gresse; Du. grazen; G.
grasen. See Grass. Der. graz-i-er. : ‘


GRAZE


GRAZE (2), to touch lightly in passing and glance off. (E.) It
appears to be merely a peculiar use of graze (1); and was used of
cannon-balls that rebounded from the grass.. ‘ That being dead, like
to the bullet’s grazing, Break out into a second course of mischief ;’
Hen. V, iv. 3. 105. ‘Those bullets which graze on the ground do
most mischief;’ Fuller, Holy and Profane State, v. 1. 2. So also
G. grasen, to graze (pasture), also to roll and bound, as cannon-balls
(Fliigel) ; so also Dan. gresse (Larsen).

GREASE, animal fat, oily matter. (F.—L.) ME. grece, grese;
Chaucer, C. T. 135, 6069 (A 135, D 487).—OF. graisse, gresse,
earlier creisse (Supp. to Godefroy); F. graisse.—Folk-L. *crassia
(Hatzfeld).—L. crassus, thick, fat. See Crass. Der. greas-y,
greas-i-ness ;. also cresset, q. v.

GREAT, large, ample, big. (E.) ME. gret, grete; Chaucer,
C. T.1279. AS. gréat, Grein, i. 527. -+ Du. groot; G. gross. Teut.
type *grautoz. Der. great-ly, great-ness; great-coat, great-hearted ;
also great-grandfather, great-grandson. And see groat,

GREAVES (1), GRAVES, the sediment of melted tallow.
(E.) ‘Chandlers graiues [pr. graines] ... the offall of rendred
Tallow;’ G. Markham, Husbandry (1614), p.97 (N.E.D.). ‘To
Grave a ship, to preserve the calking, by laying over a mixture of
tallow or train-oil, rosin, &c. boiled together ;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed.
1715. ‘This verb merely means to smear with grave or graves, i.e. a
tallowy mess. Perhaps a native word; the AS. gréofa, glossed olla
(pot) may have meant ‘ melting-pot.’ Cf. EFries. grafen, pl., greaves.
Also MSwed. grefwar, dirt, ljus-grefwar, candle-dirt, refuse of tallow
(Ihre) ; Swed. dial. grevar, sb. pl. leavings of tallow, greaves (Rietz) ;
Westphal. graiwe; Low G. greven, greaves; Bremen Worterbuch,
ii. 541. 4+ G. griebe, the fibrous remains of lard, after it has been fried
(Flugel); OHG. griupo, griebo.

GREAVES (2), armour for the legs. (F.) In Milton, Samson,

1121. ME. greues, pl.; Gawain and Grene Knt. 575.—OF. greves,
‘boots, also greaves, or armour for the legs;’ Cot. Cf. Span. grebas
(pl. of greba), greaves.—OF. greve, ‘the shank, shin, or forepart of
the leg;* Cot.; Picard greve. :
_GREBEB, an aquatic bird. (F.) Not in Johnson. First found in
Pennant (1766).—F. grébe, a grebe (Hamilton) ; also grépe, in the
dial. of Lyons (Puitspelu). Of unknown origin; Cot. gives griaibe,
{a sea-mew,’ as a Savoyard word.
‘GRECEH,, a flight of steps. (F.—L.) ‘A grece ther was of steppis
fijftene ;’ Cursor Mundi,1l. 10584. Really a pl. ;=gree-s, pl. of gree,
a step.—OF. gré,a step (Roquefort).—L. gradum, acc. of gradus,
a step. See Grade and Degree. B. Hence grece was often im-
properly used to mean ‘a (single) step ;’ Shak. spells it grise ; Oth.
3, 3. 200.

GREEDY, hungry, voracious. (E.) ME. gredi, gredy; Ancren
Riwle, p. 416; whence gredinesse, id. p. 416. AS. grédig, grédig;
Grein, i. 525. + Icel. gradugr ; MSwed. gradig, gradig (Ihre); Dan.
graadig; Goth. grédags. Teut. type *gr@dugoz; an adj. formed from
Teut. gréduz, hunger, greed; as seen in Goth. grédus, hunger, Icel.
graér, hunger, and in AS. gréd-um, greedily, a dat. pl. form.
Further allied to Skt. grdhra-, greedy, grdh, to be greedy; gardha-s,
greed; Macdonell. («/GERDH.) Der. greed-i-ly, greed-i-ness. The
sb. greed, though not found before 1609, is a perfectly correct form.

GREEN, of the colour of growing plants. (E.) ME. green, grene,
Chaucer, C. T. 6443 (D 861); used’as sb., 6580 (D 998). AS. gréne,
Grein, i. 526. [Here @ represents the 7- mutation of d, so that the
base is grd-.] + Du. groen; Icel. grenn (for grenn) ; Dan. and Swed.
Bron; G. griin, MHG. gruene, OHG. kruoni. Teut. type *grdn-joz,
earlier type *grd-niz (Sievers). Allied to AS. gréwan, to grow.
Teut. base *gra-, *grd-; see Grass. Thus green is the colour of
growing herbs. Der. green-s; the phrase ‘ wortes of grenes’ is used
to translate holera herbarum in The Anglo-Saxon and Early English
Psalters, ed. Stevenson (Surtees Soc.), vol. i. p. 1113 Ps. xxxvi. 2.
Also green-cloth, green-crop, greengage, green-grocer (see grocer),
green-house, green-ish, green-ish-ness, green-room, green-sand, green-
stone ; also green-sward (s.v. sward).

GREENGAGE, a kind of plum. (E.)_ This stands for green
Gage, where Gage is a personal name. It is the French plum called
la grosse Reine Claude, and is written as Green Gage in P, Miller,
Gardener’s Dictionary, 7th ed. 1759, s.v. Prunus. ‘There is also a
blue Gage and.a purple Gage. ‘Plum; of the many sorts, the follow-
ing are good: Green and blue gage, Fotheringham,’ &c.; C. Marshall,
Introd. to Gardening, 1796, p. 350.
4th ed. 1875, it is said to have been introduced ‘at the beginning of
the last century, by Sir T. Gage, of Hengrave Hall, near Bury, who
procured it.from his brother, the Rev. John Gage, a Roman Catholic
priest then resident in Paris.’ The following account is more explicit,
and gives the name as Sir William Gage. In Hortus Collinsonianus,
p- 60, are some Memoranda by Mr. Collinson, written 1759-1765,
where is the following entry. ‘On Plums. Mem. I was ona visit to


In R. Hogg’s Fruit Manual, |


GRIEVE 249
Sir William Gage, at Hengrave, near Bury: he was then near 70.
He told me that he first brought over, from France, the Grosse Reine
Claude, and introduced it into England; and in compliment to him
the Plum was called the Green Gage; this was about the year 1725.”
(J. A. H. Murray.) B. It must be added, that Mr. Hogg shows that
there is reason for supposing that this plum was known in England
at least a century earlier than the above date, but was then called the
Verdoch, from the Ital. verdochia, obviously derived from verde
(L. uiridis), green. But this does not affect the etymology of the
present name. ‘The green gages’ occurs, with reference to plums,
in Foote’s Lame Lover, A. iii. (1770).

GREET (1), to salute. (E.) ME. greten, Chaucer, C. T. 8890
(E 1014); Ancren Riwle, p. 430. AS. grétan, to approach, visit,
address ; Grein, i. 526. + Du. groeten, to greet, salute; OSax. grotian ;
MHG. gruezen, G. griissen, to greet. Teut.type *grdtjan-; from the
sb. *grot-oz, m., seen in Du. groet, G. gruss,a greeting. Der. greet-ing.

GREET (2), to weep, cry, lament. (E.) In Northern E, only.
ME. greten, Havelok, 164, 241, 285. AS. grétan, grétan, to weep;
Grein, i. 525. + Icel. grata; Dan. grede; Swed. grata; Goth. grétan,
to weep, pt. t. gai-grot. Teut. type *grétan-, with reduplic. pt. t.
Perhaps allied to Skt. hrad; to resound, roar, hrad-as, noise.

GREGARIOUS, associating in flocks. (L.) ‘No birds of prey
are gregarious;’ Ray, On the Creation, pt. i. (R.).—<L. gregirius,
belonging to a flock (with suffix -ous). —L. greg-, base of grec, a flock;
with suffix -Grius. Cf. Olrish graig,a herd of horses; W. gre, a flock;
Stokes-Fick, p.117. Also Gk. dyetpev,to assemble (Prellwitz). Der.
gregarious-ly, gregarious-ness; from the same source, ag-greg-ate,
con-greg-ate, se-greg-ate, e-greg-tous. ;

GRENADE, a kind of war-missile. (F.—Span.—L.) Formerly
also granado, which is the Span. form. ‘Granado, an apple filled
with delicious grains; there is also a warlike engine, that being filled
with gunpowder and other materials, is wont to be shot out of a
wide-mouthed piece of ordnance, and is called a granado for the like-
ness it hath with the other granado in fashion, and being fully stuffed
as the other granado is, though the materials are very different ;’
Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674. Spelt granados, Evelyn, Diary, June 1,
1667. —OF. grenade, ‘a pomegranet; also a ball of wildfre, made
like a pomegranet ;’ Cot.—Span. granada, a pomegranate, a hand-
grenade. =—Span. granado, full of seeds. —L. grandtus, full of seeds. =
L. granum, a grain. See Grain, Garnet. Der. grenad-ier (spelt
granadier, Evelyn, Diary, June 29, 1678).

GREY, the same as Gray, q. v.

GREYHOUND, a swift slender hound. (E.)


© Grehoundes he


hadde as swift as fowel in flight;’ Chaucer, C. T. 190. Also spelt
greahund, Ancren Riwle, p. 332, last line. AS. grighund, Voc. 276.
3; where grig-=grieg- (Icel. grey-), for Teut. *graujo-. Cf. Icel.


greyhundr, a greyhound ; composed of grey, a dog, and hundr, a
hound. ‘The Icel. grey is also used alone in the sense of greyhound
or dog; and the Icel. greybaka means a bitch. 4 Whatever be the
source of Icel. grey, there is no pretence for connecting it with E.
gray, adj., for which the Icel. word is grar.

GRIDDLE, a pan for baking cakes. (F.—L.) ME. gredil, a
gridiron (in the story of St. Lawrence), Ancren Riwle, p.122. Called
a girdle (=gridle) in North, E.—AF. gridil (OF. greil), used to
gloss L. craticulam in Neckam; see Wright, Vol. Vocab. i. 102, 1. 9.
So also AF. gridile, glossed by ‘ rosting-hiron ;’ Nominale, ed. Skeat,
1. 488. [Cf Norm. dial. grédil, Moisy.]—Late L. *craticulum, for L.
craticula, a griddle, dimin. of cratis,a hurdle. [W. gretdyl/is from E.]
See Crate, and see Grill. Der. From the same ME. gredil, by a
slight change, was made the ME. gredire, a griddle, P. Plowman,
C. iii. 130. Very likely, this was at first amere change of / to r, but
the latter part of the word thus became significant, the ME. ire meaning
‘iron;’ hence our grid-iron, spelt gyrdiron in Levins, 163. 39.

GRIDE, to pierce, cut through. (E.) A favourite word with
Spenser; see F. Q. ii. 8. 36; Sheph. Kal. February, 1. 4; Virgil’s
Gnat, 254. And cf.‘ griding sword;’ Milton, P. L. vi. 329. A mere
metathesis of gird, ME. girden, to strike, pierce, cut through, used
by Chaucer, and borrowed from him by later poets. ‘Thurgh giré
| [pierced through] with many a grevous blody wound;’ Chaucer, C. T.
} 1012. See Gird (2). 4 The same word is used metaphorically

in the phrase ‘to gird at,’ i.e. to strike at, try to injure; see Shak.
| 2 Hen. IV, i. 2.7; so also a gird is a cut, a sarcasm, Tam. Shrew,
y. 2. 58.

GRIDIRON; see under Griddle.
| .GRIEF, great sorrow. (F.—L.) Inearly use. ME. grief, gref;
| spelt gref, Floriz and Blancheflur, ed. Lumby, 187. — OF. grief, gref,
' adj. burdensome, heavy, sad; as sb., grief (Godefroy). —L. grauem,
| acc. of grauis, heavy, sad, grave. See Grave (2). Der. grieve,
| &c. See below. : :

GRIEVE, to afflict; to mourn. (F.—L.) ME. grewen (with
!'uw=v), Rob. of Glouc. p; 41, 1. 969; P. Plowman, C. y. 95-— OF +


250 GRIFFIN, GRIFFON


grever, to grieve, burden, afflict.—L. graudre, to burden.=—L. grauis,
heavy (above). Der. griev-ous (ME. greuous, P. Plowman, C., xvii.
77)3 griev-ous-ly, griev-ous-ness; griev-ance, ME. grewance, Gower,
C. A. i. 280, bk. iii. 1. 296; and see above.

GRIFFIN, GRIFFON, an imaginary animal. (F.—L. — Gk.)
Griffin is a weakened spelling; a better spelling is griffon. ME.
griffon, Chaucer, C. T. 2135 (A 2133); King Alisaunder, 496. =F:
griffon, ‘a gripe, or griffon;’ Cot. Formed, with suffix -ov, from
Late L. griffus, a griffin. —L. gryphus, an extended form of gryps,
a griffin. = Gk, ypuy (stem ypur-), a griffin, a fabulous creature named
from its hooked beak. = Gk. ypu7és, curved ; also, hook-nosed, hook-
beaked. Allied to G. krauen, to claw (Prellwitz).

GRIG (1), a small lively eel. (Scand.) ‘A grigge, a young eele.
A merie grigge;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627. ‘ Anguilletie, a grig, or little
eele;’ Cot. Cf. Lowland Se. crike, crick, a tick, a louse (Jamieson).
Probably Scandinavian. = Scand. dial. krak, also krik, a little creature,
esp. a crawling creature; allied to krdka, to creep (Rietz); Norw.
krek, a creeping thing; hreka (pt. t. krak), to creep. [Distinct from
G. kriechen.| = The phrase as merry as a grig is probably due to
this word, though it was early changed to (or confused with) the
equivalent phrase as merry as a Greek ; see quotations in Nares,
amongst which we may note ‘she’s a merry Greek indeed ;’ Troilus,
i.2.118; ‘the merry Greeks, id. iv. 4.58. Merygreek is a character
in Udall’s Roister Doister; A.D. 1553. Cf. L. grecari, to live like
Greeks, i.e. effeminately, luxuriously ; Horat. Sat. ii. 2. 11.

GRIG (2), a cricket. (E.) Prov. E. grig; see E.D.D. Prob.
due to prov. E. crick, to make a sharp noise; and to E. cricket, q.v.
Cf. Du. kriek, a cricket. Apparently of imitative origin; and distinct
from Grig (1).

GRILL, to broil on a gridiron. (F.—L.) Extended to grilly by
Butler. ‘Than have them griilied on the embers ;’ Hudibras, pt. iii.
c. 2. 1. 15 from end.=F. griller, ‘to broile on a gridiron, to scorch ;’
Cot.—F. gril, ‘a gridiron;’ id. Formerly spelt greil, Godefroy. =
Late L. acc. *craticulum, a masc. form of craticula, a small gridiron,
Martial, xiv. 221 (whence F. grille, a grating). These are dimin.
forms from L. cradis, a hurdle. See Grate (1), Crate, Griddle.

GRILSEH, the young salmon on its first return to the river from
the sea. (F.—OHG.?) The forms in the N. E. D. suggest that the
older form grilles was a plural, so that grilse=grills. An Act of
22 Edw. IV, c. 2, mentions ‘grillez ou salmons’ (N.E.D.). And
perhaps grill represents OF. grisle, grille, grayish, applied (like the
variant OF. grisel) to a horse. If so, it is from OF. gris, gray.=
OHG. gris, gray. Some refer grilse to Irish grealsach, ‘a kind
of fish ;” but (if connected) the derivation may run the other way.

GRIM, fierce, angry-looking. (E.) ME. grim, Chaucer, C, T.
11458 (F 1146). AS. grim, fierce, cruel, severe, dire, Grein, i. 527;
for *grem-, and allied to AS. gram, angry, furious, hostile; id. i. 523.
Cf. also AS. grimetan, to rage, roar, grunt.4-Du. grimmig, angry ; cf.
grimmen, to foam with rage; Icel. grimmr, grim, stern 3 gramr,
wrathful; Dan. grim, ugly, grim; gram, wrathful; 4G. grimmig,
furious; grimmen, torage; grimm, fury; gram, hostile. From Teut.
root *grem- (and grade, *gram-). B. Further allied to Gk. xpépn,
xXpopos, noise ; xpepiCew, xpeueriCey, to neigh; see Brugmann,i. § 572.

GRIMACEH, an ugly look, smirk. (F.—Teut.?) ‘ Annotations of
grimaces;’ Butler, Hudib. iii. 2. 1004. ‘ Grimace and affectation ;’
Dryden, Poet. Epist. to H. Higden, 1. 10.—F. grimace, ‘a crabd
looke;’ Cot. Of uncertain origin; but probably from G. grimm,
fury, or from Icel. grimr, Norw. grimm, angry, furious; cf. EFries.
and Low G. grimlachen, to laugh maliciously. (K6rting, § 4355.)
Der. grimace, verb.

GRIMALKIN, a cat. (E.; partly OHG.) See Nares, who
suggests that it stands for gray malkin, ‘a name for a fiend, supposed
to resemble a grey cat.’ He is probably right. See Macb. i. 1. 8.
[Cf. the proverb ‘ All cats are grey in the dark.’] In this view,
Malkin is for Mald-kin, dimin. of Maud (Matilda), with suffix -kin.
The name Maud, AF. Mald, is from OHG. Maht-hilt; from maht,
might, and hilt, battle. The ME. Malkin, as a dimin. of Maud, was
in very common use; see Chaucer, C. T. 4450(B 30). It was aname
for a slut orloose woman. The Prompt. Parv. (1440) has: ‘ Malkyne,
or Mawt, propyr name, Molt, Mawde, Matildis, Matilda.’

GRIME, dirt that soils deeply, smut. (Low G.) In Shak. Com. of
Errors, ili. 2.106. Asa verb, K, Lear, ii. 3. 9.— WFlem. grijm, grime
(De Bo); cf. MDu. grijmsel, grimsel, soot, smut (Kilian) ; grimmelen,
to soil, begrime (Oudemans). Also Dan, grim, griim, lampblack,
soot, grime; whence grimet, streaked, begrimed (Ferrall); MDan.
grim, soot on a kettle (Kalkar); Swed. dial. grima, a spot or smut on
the face; Rietz. Probably allied further to AS. begriwan, to smear (2),
Elf, Hom. i. 384, ii. 368; and to-Gk. xpi-ev, to anoint, to smear.
See Chrism. Der. grim-y.

GRIN, to snarl, grimace. (E.) ME. grennen, Ancren Riwle, p. 212;
Layamon, 29550. AS. grennian, to grin; Grein, i. 525.-- OHG.


~GRIT.


grennan, to mutter, MHG, grennen, to grin. From a Teut. base
*eran-; whence also Icel. grenja,to howl. B. Perhaps influenced by
derivatives from a Teut. base *grein-; whence Du. grijnen, to weep,
cry, fret, grumble; grijnsen, to grumble, to grin; Dan. grine, to grin,
simper; Swed. grina, to distort the face, grimace, grin; G. greinen,
to grin, grimace, weep, cry, growl; all of the latter set being related
to E. groan; see Groan. Der. grin,-sb.

GRIND, to reduce to powder by rubbing. (E.) ME. grinden,
Chaucer, C. T. 14080 (B 3264); Ancren Riwle, p. 70. AS. grindan,
Grein, i. 528. Teut. type *grendan-, pt. t. *grand, pp. *grundanoz ;
whence also Du. grint, gravel, grit. Der. grind-er, grind-stone ; also
PTISL Newb?

GRIP, sb., a firm grasp; vb., to grasp firmly. (E.) 1. ME, gripe;
pl. gripen, Layamon, 1. 15273; vol. ii. p. 215. The pl. grippis is in
the Kingis Quair, st.171. AS. gripe, a grip (Bosworth). 2. ME.
grippen; ‘he gript his mantel ;’ Will. of Palerne, 744. ONorthumb.
grippa; whence gegrippde, pt. t., Luke, ix. 39. B. Both from grip-,
weak grade of Teut. *greipan-, to gripe (below).

GRIPE, to grasp, hold fast, seize forcibly. (E.) In Shak.
Macb, iii. 1. 62; K. John, iv. 2.190. ME. gripen, P. Plowman,
B. iii. 248. AS. gripan, to seize; Grein, i. 529. + Du. grijpen; Icel.
gripa; Dan. gribe; Swed. gripa; Goth. greipan; G. greifen. Teut.
type *greipan-, pt. t. *graip, pp. *gripanoz. Cf. Lithuan. graibyii, to
grasp at. And see Grope. Der. gripe, sb., gripes.

GRISE, GRIZH, a step. (Shak.) See Grece.

GRISETTE, a gay young Frenchwoman of the lower class.
(F.—MHG.) Borrowed (1723) from F. grisette, orig. a cheap dress
of gray colour, whence they were named.—F. gris, gray. —MHG.
gris, gray; cf. G. greis,a grayhaired man. See Grizzly. 4 Hence
also F. gris, the fur of the gray squirrel ; Chaucer, C. T. 194.

GRISKIN, the loin of a pig; prov. E. (Scand.) The lit. sense
is ‘a little pig’ (still found in Angus); it is formed by the dimin.
suffix -kin from the once common word gris or grice, a pig. ‘ Bothe
my gees and my grys’=both my geese and pigs; P. Plowman, B.
iv. 51. ‘Gryce, swyne,,or pygge, porcellus,’ Prompt, Pary. p. 2113
and see Way’s note. —Icel. griss, a young pig; Dan. grits, a pig;
Swed. gris, a pig. Cf. OSax. gris, gray.

GRISLED, the same as Grizzled, q. v.

GRISLY, hideous, horrible. (E.) ME. grisly, Chaucer, C. T.
1973 (A Ig71). AS. grislic, horrible (see Clark Hall); perhaps
shortened from angrislic, terrible, Ps. lxxxviii. 8 (ed. Spelman).
Formed with suffix -lic (like) from gris-an, d-gris-an (pt. t. d-gras),
to shudder. ‘ And for helle agrise’=and shudder at the thought of
hell; Laws of Cnut, i. 25; see Ancient Laws, ed. Thorpe, vol. i.
Pp. 374.4 Du. af-grijselijk, horrible; af-grijzen, horror; Low G.
grisen, griseln, to shudder (Berghaus).

GRIST, a supply of corn to be ground. (E.) ME. grist. ‘And
moreouer... grynd att the Citeis myllis...as long as they mey
have sufficiaunt grist ;’ Eng. Gilds, ed. Toulmin Smith, pp. 335, 336.
AS. grist, as a gloss to L. molitéra; Wright’s Vocab. i. 34, col. 2.
It represents a type *grin(d)-st-, from the verb grindan, to grind.
See Grind. J Cf. bla-st from blow (as wind), blossom ( = (b16-st-ma)
from blow (to flourish). The z was shortened before s¢; cf. jist.
Der. grist-le.

GRISTLE, cartilage. (E.) ‘Seales have gristle, and no bone ;’
Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xi. c.37; vol. i. p. 345.a. The word grisély
occurs in the preceding clause. It was especially used with reference
to the nose. ‘ Grystylle of the nose, cartilago;’ Prompt. Pary. ‘Nease-
gristles, i.e. gristles of the nose (speaking of many people together) ;
O.Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i.251. AS. gristle, as a gloss to cartilago;
fElfric’s Gloss. in Voc. 158. 22. OMerc. naes-gristle, gloss to carti-
lago; Voc. 10.20. Cf. OF ries. gristel, gristl, grestel, gerstel; Richtofen.
B. The word may be the dimin. of grist, and derivable from grind;
with reference to the necessity of crunching it if eaten. So also Du.
knarsbeen, gristle, from knarsen, to crunch (Wedgwood). See Grist.
@ The AS. grost (O. E. Texts, p. 112, 1. 56) also means ‘ griséle,’ but
has a different vowel; cf. NFries. grdssel, griissel (Outzen), OHG.
crustula, gristle (Schade). These may be connected with Du. gruizen,
to crush, EFries. griisen, to crunch ; from a Teut. root *greus, noted
by Franck, s.v. griesmeel. Cf. Grit (2). Der. gristl-y.

GRIT (1), gravel, coarse sand. (E.) Formerly greet. ‘ Greete,
sabulum ;’ Levins, 89, 11. $ Sablonniere, a sand-bed, ....a place full
of sand, greet, or small gravel ;’ Cotgrave. ME. greot, Ancren Riwle,:
p. 70. AS. gréot, grit, dust; Grein, i. 527. OFries. grét. + Icel.
grjot; G. gries; Swed. dial. grut, gravel. Closely allied to Grout,
q.v. See Grit (2). @ The short vowel is due to confusion with
grit (2). Der. gritt-y, gritt-i-ness ; see also groats, grout.

GRIT (2), coarse oat-meal. (E.) Usually in pl. grits. The oldest
sense is bran or chaff. From AS. gryttan, pl.; as in hwéte gryttan,
wheat-grits, Voc. 141. 20. Cf. MDu. gruéte, ‘barlie,’ Hexham; G,
gritize, f., grit, groats. Teut. type *grutjon-, fem.; from *grut-, weak


GRIZZLY, GRIZZLED


grade of *greut- (2nd grade *graut), Idg. root *ghreud, to crush, pound
(whence Lith. gruzti, to crush, pound, O. Church Slay. graud-a, a clod),
@ Grit (1), AS. gréot, is from the prime grade *greut-.

GRIZZLY, GRIZZLED, of a grey colour. (F.—MHG.; with
E. suffix.) Shak. has grizzled, Hamlet, i. 2. 240 (in some copies
grisly) ; also grizzle as sb., a tinge of gray, Tw. Nt. v. 168. Formed
with suffix -y (or -ed) from ME. grisel, a gray-haired man. ‘ That
olde grisel is no fole’ [fool] ; Gower, C. A. ili. 3563 bk. viii. 2407.
Grisel is formed, with suffix -el, from F. gris, gray.—MHG. gris,
gray; cf. G. greis, a gray-haired man. Der. From the same source,
gris-ette, q.V.

GROAN, to moan. (E.) ME. gronen, Chaucer, C. T. 14892
(B 4076); Ancren Riwle, p. 326. AS. granian, to groan, lament ;
Grein, i. 524. Teut. type *grain-djan; from a root *grei-, asin OHG.
grinan, G. greinen, to grin, weep, growl. Der. groan-ing.

GROAT, a coin worth 4d. (O. Low G.) ME. grote, Chaucer,
C. T. 7546 (D 1964) ; P. Plowman, B. iii. 137 (and see the note). =
O. Low G. grote, a coin of Bremen, described in the Bremen Worterb.
ii. 550. The word (like Du. groot) means ‘ great ;’ the coins being
greater than the small copper coins (Schwaren) formerly in use in
Bremen. Cognate with E. great. See Great.
-GROATS, the grain of oats without the husks. (E.) ME. grotes,
Liber Cure Cocorum, ed. Morris, p. 47. In the A. S. Leechdoms, iii.
292, appears the weak pl. grotan Ca ae gratan in the late MS.}.
This represents a weak sb. closely allied to AS. grot, an atom, par-
ticle, whence ME. grotes, bits, in Havelok, 472. The AS. grot is from
*grut-, weak grade of *greut-; see Grit (2). Cf. AS. grit, coarse
meal, whence E. grout, coarse meal, grouts, dregs. See Grout.

GROCER, a dealer in tea and sugar. (F.—L.) Formerly also
spelt grosser, as in Holinshed’s Chron. Rich. I], an. 1382 (R.) ;
Hakluyt’s Voyages, vol. i. p. 193. Spelt grocer, Libell of Eng.
Policye, 1. 346; AF. grossour, Liber Custumarum, i. 304. <A. In old
times, those whom we ow call grocers were called spicers. Dealers
were of two kinds, as now; there were wholesale dealers, called
grossers or engrossers, and retail dealers, called regrators ; see Liber
Albus, ed. Riley, p. 547, note 1. Thus the word grosser, properly
‘a whole-sale dealer,’ is now spelt grocer, and means ‘a spicer.’
B. Borrowed from OF. grossier, ‘a grocer; marchant grossier, that
sels only by great, or utters his commodities by wholesale ;’ Cot.=—
OF. gros, fem. grosse, great. See Gross. Cf. Norm. dial. grossier,
a spicer, a grocer (Moisy). Der. grocer-y, formerly grossery, from
OF. grosserie, ‘great worke; also grossery, wares uttered, or the
uttering of wares, by whole-sale ;’ Cot.:

GROG, spirits and water, not sweetened. (F.—L.) ‘O’er grog
or ale;’ Byron, The Island, ii. 19. 4. .An abbreviation of grogram.
“It derived its name from Admiral Edward Vernon, who wore gro-
gram breeches, and was hence called ‘‘Old Grog.” About 1745
{rightly, Aug. 1740], he ordered his sailors to dilute their rum with
water. .. He died 30 Oct.,1757;’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates. See
Grogram,

GROGRAM,, a stuff made of silk and mohair. (F.—L.) For-
merly grogran, a more correct form (Skinner). ‘ He shall have the
grograns: at the rate I told him;’ Ben Jonson, Every Man in his
Humorr, ii. 1. 9. Spelt grograyn in Cavendish, Life of Wolsey
(ab. 1557), ed. 1893, p. 147. So called because of a coarse grain or
texture. — OF. grosgrain, ‘ the stuffe grogeran ;’ Cot.—F. gros, gross,
great, coarse; and grain, grain. See Gross and Grain, Der.
grog, q.v. ;

GROIN, the fold or depression between the abdomen and each of
the upper thighs. (E.) In Shak, 2 Hen, IV, ii. 4. 227. But groin is
an incorrect variant of grine or gryne, a common form in the 16th
century, from the still older form grind or grynd. Thus Cotgrave
has: ‘ Aines, f., the grine or groyne of man or woman.’ Palsgrave
has: ‘ Grynde bytwene the thyghe and the belly, ayne.’ Spelt grynde
in Lanfranc’s Cirurgie, p. 41 (ab. 1400). Prob. from AS. grynde, an
abyss ; the lit, sense being ‘depression.’ Tent. type *grundjom, from
*grunduz, ground; see Ground. Cf. prov. E. grindle, a small gutter
(E.D.D.); Bavar. grund, a valley. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 124.
Der. groin-ed, i.e. having angular curves which intersect or fork off.

GROMWELAI, a plant. (F.—L.?) The letter w is a modern in-
sertion ; Cotgrave, s.v. gremil, gives gromill, grummell ; Palsgrave
has gromell ; the Prompt. Parv. has gromaly or gromely sede; grummel
occurs in the 14th century, in Reliquize Antiquee, i. 52, 1. 1; and the
Cath. Angl. has both grumelle and gromelle. |The gromwell or Litho-
spermum is remarkable for its hard, stony seeds ; whence Lithospermum
(stony seed) as the name of the genus.]—OF. gromil, 13th cent. ;
Hatzfeld (s.v. grémil). Also found as OF. gremil, grenil, grinnil
(Godefroy). Origin uncertain. 1, The form grenil seems to rest upon
L. granum, a grain; cf. ‘granum solis, gromylle;’ Voc, 587. 9.
2. Gromil perhaps is from OF. grume, stone of a grape (Godefroy),
Proy. grum, the same (Mistral).—L. griimus, a little heap. (Korting,


GROUND 251


§ 4372.)  Roquefort gives OF. grumel, ‘ pelote, peloton ;’ dimin.
of grume, used to mean all kinds of grain. Cotgrave also gives grum
as a Languedoc word synonymous with F. grain, grain. It would
seem that the L. griimus came to mean a mere clot of earth. Cf. Span,
grumillo, a small clot, a curd ; from grumo,a clot. We may note that
gromwell is also called in E. gray millet or (in Cotgrave) graymill,
which is merely the F. grémil ingeniously made partly significant, and
was clearly suggested by the fact that gromwell was sometimes called
milium solis as well as granum solis; see Cath. Anglicum.

GROOM, a servant, lad. (F.) Now esp. used of men employed
about horses; but orig. of wider use. It meant a lad, servant in
waiting, or sometimes, a labourer, shepherd. ME. grom, grome;
Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii. 135 ; P. Plowman, C. ix. 227; Havelok,
790; Ancren Riwle, p. 422; Polit. Songs (C.S.), p. 237, 1.3. B. OF
uncertain origin; Stratmann cites the MDu. grom and Olcel. gromr,
a boy, as parallel forms ; but neither of these forms are authorised or
have any obvious etymology, and may be borrowed from ME. grome,
which occurs in the Ancren Riwle (ab. 1225). yy. It seems to be from
an OF, *grome, only found in the dimin. form gromet ; or else it was
shortened from the form gromet itself. Godefroy has OF. gromet,
grummet, groumet, gourmet (F. gourmet), a seryant, valet, groom. Cf.
Span. grumete, a ship-boy. Referred by Diez to L. griimus, a small
heap, a clot. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 125. See Grume,
Grummet.

GROOVE, a trench, furrow, channel. (Du.) In Skinner; rare in
early books. ‘Groove, a channel cut out in wood, iron, or stone ;’
Kersey, ed. 1715. Also: ‘ Groove or Grove, a deep hole or pit sunk
in the ground, to search for minerals ;’ id.; see Manlove’s poem on
Leadmines (E. D.S. Glos. B. 8, ll. 18, 22, and the Glossary), printed
A.D. 1653. Cf. ME. grofe,a mine; Wars of Alex., 5394.— Du. groef
(Du. o¢=E, 00) or groeve, a trench, channel, groove; also, a mine,
quarry. Du, graven (pt. t. groef), to dig ; cognate with AS. grafan.
See Grave (1). 4 The ME. grofe may be from Icel. grof, a pit
(cognate with Du. groef); but mod. E. groove, a channel, first found
in 1659, is borrowed from the 2nd grade of the Dutch verb.

GROPE, to feel one’s way. (E.) ME. gropen, C. T. 646 (A 644) ;
used in the sense of ‘grasp,’ King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1957.
AS. grapian, to seize, handle, Grein, i. 524; a weak verb, and un-
original, Teut. type *graipojan, from *graipa, f. sb., as seen in AS.
grap, the grip of the fingers, grasp of the hand; id. From *graip,
and grade of Teut. *greipan-, AS. gripan, to gripe. See Gripe.
B. Similarly the Icel. grep, grip, grasp, is allied to gripa, to gripe;
and the OHG., greifa, a two-pronged fork (cited by Fick, iii. 111) to
OHG. grifan, to gripe. And see Grasp. Der. grop-ing-ly,

GROSS, fat, large. (F.—L.) Very common in Shak.; Merry
Wives, iii. 3. 43, &c. ‘This grosse imagination;’ Frith’s Works,
p- 140, col. 2. Spelt grosse in Palsgrave.—OF. gros (fem. grosse),
‘grosse, great, big, thick;’ Cot.—=L. grossus, thick (a late form).
Der. gross-ly, gross-ness, gros-beak or gross-beak (I. gros bec, great
beak, the name of a bird), grocer, q.v., grocer-y; also gross, sb., er-
gross, in-gross, gro-gram, ‘grog.

GROT, a cavern. (F.—Ital.—L.—Gk.) ‘Umbrageous groés and
caves; Milton, P. L. iv. 257.—F. grotte, ‘a grot, cave ;’ Cot.—Ital.
grotta, ‘a caue, a grot;’ Florio. (Cf. Prov. croto (Mistral), formerly
cropta, cited by Littré.)— Late L. crupta, L. crypta, a crypt, cave,
grotto. From Greek; see Crypt. And see Grotto. Doublet,
crypt; also grotto. Der. grot-esque, q.v.

GROTTO, a cavern. (Ital.—L.—Gk.) A corruption of the
older form grotta. ‘And in our grottoes;’ Pope, tr. of Homer's
Odyss. b. x. 480. (Pope had his own grotto at Twickenham.) ‘A
grotta, or place of shade;’ Bacon, Essay 45 (Of Building). = Ital.
grotta, a grotto, whence F. grotte. See Grot.

GROTESQUE, ludicrous, strange. (F.—Ital. —L.—Gk.) ‘Gro-
tesque and wild;’ Milton, P. L. iv.136. ‘And this grotesque design ;’
Dryden, Hind and Panther, iii. 1044. —OF. grotesque; pl. grotesques,
‘pictures wherein all kinds of odde things are represented ;” Cot.—
Ital. grottesca, ‘antick worke;’ Florio. [So called because such
paintings were found in old crypts and grottoes.}—Ital. grotta, a
grotto, SeeGrot, Grotto, 4 Sir T. Herbert uses the Ital. form.
*The walls and pavements, ,.. by rare artificers carved into story
and grotesco work;’ Travels, ed. 1665, p. 147.

GROUND, the surface of the earth. (E.) ME. grand, ground,
Chaucer, C. T. 455; Havelok, 1979; Layamon, 2296. AS. grund;
Grein, i. 530.4-Du. grond; Goth, *grundus, only in the comp. grundu-
waddjus, a ground-wall, foundation; Luke, vi. 48, 49 ; OHG. grunt,
G. grund. Teut, type *grunduz; also *grunthoz, as in Icel. grunnr,
bottom (Dan. Swed. grund), We also find Gael. grunnd, Irish grunnt,
ground, bottom (from Norse or E.). Der. ground, verb (Chaucer,
C.T. 416, A 414); ground-less, ground-less-ly, ground-less-ness, ground-
ling, q.v., ground-sill, q.v.; also ground-floor, -ivy, -plan, -rent, -swell,
-work, Also grounds, q.v.


252 GROUNDLING


GROUNDLING, a spectator in the pit ofa theatre. (E.) In
Shak. Hamlet, iii. 2. 12; Beaum. and Fletcher, Prophetess, i. 3. 32.
A term of contempt ; made by suffixing -ling, a double dimin. ending
(-l-ing), to the sb. ground. 2. There is also a fish called the
groundling, so called because it keeps near the bottom of the water ;
the Low G. name is griindlink (Berghaus).

GROUNDS, dregs. (E.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. ‘ Grounds,
the settling or dregs of drink;” Kersey, ed.1715. This peculiar use
of the word occurs also in Gael. grunndas, lees, dregs; Irish gruntas,
dregs, grunndas, lees, dross ; both borrowed from E. See Ground.

GROUNDSEL, a small plant. (E.) Corruptly written greneswel
in Levins. Better groundswell, as in Holland’s Pliny, b. xxv. c. 13.
AS. grundeswylige, grundeswelge, grundeswilie, with numerous refer-
ences ; ‘Cockayne’s Leechdoms, iii. 329. ‘Senecio, grundswylige ;”
Wright’s Vocab. i. 68, col. 2,1.1. B. The lit. sense would thus
seem to be ‘ground-swallower,’ i.e. occupier of the ground, abundant
weed; as if from AS. grund, ground, and swelgan, to swallow; but
this seems to be, after all, only a popular etymology, as a much older
form appears in gundae-suelgiae, K:pinal gloss. 976 (also spelt gundae-
suelgae, gundesuilge, O.E. Texts, pp. 97,98). Thus the orig. sense was
“swallower or absorber of pus;’ from AS. gund, pus; and in fact
the leaves are still used for reducing abscesses.

GROUNDSILAL, the timber of a building next the ground; a
threshold. (E.) Spelt grunsel, Milton, P. L.i. 460. ‘And so fyll
downe deed on the groundsyll;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. i. c. 176
(R.). Compounded of ground and sill; see Sill.

GROUP, a cluster, assemblage. (F.—Ital.—G.) «‘ Group, in paint-
ing, a piece that consists of several figures;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. ‘The
figures of the groups;’ Dryden, Parallel of Painting and Poetry, ed.
Yonge, 1882, p. 164. —F. groupe, a group; not in Cot. Ital. groppo,
a knot, heap, group, bag of money.—Teut. type *kroppoz, as seen in
G. kropf, a crop, craw, maw, wen on the throat; orig. a bunch. Cf.
Icel. kroppr, a hunch or bunch on any part of the body. See Crop,
of which group is a doublet. Der. group-ing, group, verb.

GROUSE, the name of a bird. (F.?) ‘ Growse, a fowl, common
in the North of England;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. Prof. Newton has
kindly sent me an earlier instance of the word. ‘ Attagen, perdix
Asclepica, the Heath-cock or Grouss.... Hujus in Anglia duas ha-
bemus species, quarum major vulgo dicitur, the black game, . . minor
vero, the grey game; Charleton, Onomasticon Zoicon, London, 1668,
p- 73. Earlier examples are given in N.E.D. In Household Ordi-
nances (1531), as given in Archeeologia, iii. 157, we have the pl.
forms ‘grows and peions’ [pigeons]. In Household Ordinances(1547),
ed. 1790, p. 220, the pl. is grewes. In 1674, the pl. is grooses. It is
possible that grows was at first a plural form, from a sing. grow or
grou. Of unknown origin; though the form seems to be French.
Giraldus Cambrensis, Topog. Hib. (Opera, Rolls Series, v. 47), has:
“gallinze campestres, quas vulgariter grutas vocant.’. | Cotgrave,
s.v. griesche, has ‘the hen of the grice or moorgame.’ ‘This seems to
be a mistake, as the form grice is otherwise unknown.

GROUT, coarse meal; in pl. grounds, dregs. (E.) Holland, tr.
of Pliny, bk. xx. c. 7 (v. ii. p. 46) has: ‘drie grout, or barley meale.’
AS. grit, groats, coarse meal; Codex Diplomaticus, ed. Kemble,
Charter 235 (vol. i. p. 311). + Du. gruit, dregs. Cf. Icel. grautr,
porridge; Dan. gréd, boiled groats; Swed. grt, thick pap; G. griitze,
groats. Allied to Lithuan. grudas, corn. Also to groats, q.v.;
grit, q.v. Der. gru-el, q.y.

GROVE, a collection of trees. (E.) In Shak. M. N. Dr. iii. 1.
390. ME. grove (with w« for v), Chaucer, C. T. 1480 (A 1478);
Layamon, 469. AS. graf, a grove (Lye) ; but the word is very scarce.
‘Leo refers to Codex Diplomaticus, ed. Kemble, Charter 305 (vol. ii.
p- 100; see also vol. iii. p. 436). It is both masc. and neut. Teut.
types *graibos, *graibom ; from a root *greib, which is wholly
unknown. No cognate forms appear; unless we may compare Norw.
greiv-la, a tree whose branches spread out wide like horns, greiv-la, v.,
to branch out, &c. (Ross).

GROVEL, to fall flat on the ground. (Scand.) In Shak. K. John,
ii. 305. (Not found earlier.) ‘The formation of the verb to grovel
‘was due to a singular grammatical mistake. Groveling was in use as
‘an adverb with the suffix -ling, but this was readily mistaken for the
pres. part. of a verb, and, the -ing being dropped, the new verb #6
grovel emerged. B. Spenser uses the form groveling only. ‘Streight
downe againe herselfe, in great despight She groveling threw to
ground;’ F. Q.ii. 1.45. ‘And by his side the Goddesse groveling
Makes for him endlesse mone;’ F. Q. iii. 1. 38. ‘Downe on the
ground his carkas groveling fell;’ F. Q. iii. 5. 23. In the last in-
stance, the sense is ‘ flatly’ or ‘ flat.’ y. The ME. groveling or
grovelings isa mere adverb. ‘ Grouelyng to his fete thay felle;’ Allit.
Poems, ed. Morris, A, 1120. ‘ Grovelynge, or grovelyngys, adv. Sup-
pine, resupine;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 215. After which is added: ‘Gro-
velynge, nom. Suppinus, resupinus ;’ showing that, in A.D. 1440, the


GRUFF


word was beginning to be considered as being sometimes a nom. pres.
part. Note also: ‘ Therfor groflynges thou shall be layde;” Towne-
ley Myst. p. 40. Way notes that in Norf. and Suff. the phrase ‘to
lie grubblins, or with the face downwards, is stillin use. 5. The cor-
rect ME. form is grofling or groflinges, where the -ling or -lings is the
ady. suffix that appears in other words, such as dark-ling, flat-ling ;
see Darkling, Headlong. The former part of the word could
be used alone, with exactly the same adverbial sense; as ‘they fillen
gruf;’ Chaucer, C. T. 951 (A 949). The phrase is of Scand. origin.
=—Icel. grifa, in the phr. liggja @ grifu, to lie grovelling, to lie on
one’s face, symja a griifu, to swim on one’s belly. Cf. also griifa,
verb, to grovel, couch, or cower down. Also grufia, to grovel, which
justifies the E. verb, though proof of direct connexion between the
words is wanting; Swed. dial. grava, flat on one’s face ; ligga a gruve,
to lie on one’s face; Rietz. Root uncertain; perhaps related to
Grub. Der. grovell-er.

GROW, to increase, become enlarged by degrees. (E.) ME.
growen, P. Plowman, B. xx. 56; C. xiii. 177. AS. growan, pt. t.
gréow, pp. growen; Grein, i. 529. + Du. groeijen (weak); Icel, groa;
Dan. groe; Swed. gro. B. Esp. used of the growth of vegetables,
&c., and hence closely connected with the word green, which is from
the same root. Teut. root *grd-, *gra-. See Green and Grass.
@ The AS. word for the growth of animals is properly weaxan,
mod. E. wax, q.v. Der. grow-er; growth, Othello, v. 2. 14, not an
AS. word, but of Scand. origin, from Icel. gréér, grddi, growth.

GROWL, to grumble. (F.—Teut.) In Skinner, ed. 1671; and
in Pope, Moral Essays, ili. 195. Lowl. Sc. has the form gurle.
Wyelif, Select Works, ed. Arnold, ii. 249, has: ‘A mete, not defied
[digested] makith mannis bodi to grouwle’ [rumble].—AF. grouler, to
make a noise likea crane ; Nominale, ed. Skeat, 1.837; Picard grouler,
to murmur, grumble (Corblet).=—EFries, grullen; WFlem. grollen,
to rnmble (De Bo); Du. grollen, to grumble. + G. grollen, to bear
ill-will against, to be angry; also, to rumble (as thunder). B. Of
imitative origin; see Grumble. And see grol in Franck. Der.
growl, sb., growl-er. .

GROWTH, sb.; see under Grow.

GRUB, to grope in the dirt. (E.) ME. grubben, grobben. ‘To
grobbe vp metal;’ Chaucer, /itas Prima, 1. 29. ‘So depe thei
grubbed and so fast;’ Legends of the Holy Rood, ed. Morris, p. 94,
1. 268. Cf. EFries. grubbeln, to grope.about. From Teut. type
*orubjan-; from *grub, weak grade of *graban-, to dig; see Grave (1).
From the same grade are Low G. grubbeln, to grope about; G.
griibeln, OHG. grubilon, to rake, dig, grub up ; and ON. gryfa, a pit.
Cf. Grovel. Der. grub, sb., an insect; grubb-er, grubb-y.

GRUDGE, to grumble, murmur. (F.) ME. grochen, gruchen,
grucchen, to murmur. ‘Why grucchen we?’ Chaucer, C. T. 3060
(A 3058). The weakened form grugge occurs in The Dictes and
Sayinges by Lord Rivers, pr. by Caxton, 1477, fol. 17, back, 1. 8.
‘sif pe gomes grucche’ =if the men murmur, P. Plowman, B. vi. 219.
Spelt grochi, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 67; grucchen, Ancren Riwle,
p-186. The earliest spelling was grucchen, then gruggen, and finally
grudge, Tempest, i. 2. 249.—OF. groucier, grousser, groucher, to
murmur, Godefroy; later gruger, ‘to grudge, repine;’ Cot. Cf.
Low L. groussére, to murmur, found in a passage written A.D. 1358
(Ducange). Godefroy also gives the spelling crowcier, evidently an
older form. B. Of uncertain origin, but prob. Scandinavian ; cf. Icel.
krytja (pt. t. krudtt), to murmur, krutr,a murmur; Swed. dial. kruttla,
to murmur (Rietz) ; Norw. grutta, to grunt, to growl (Ross); MDan.
krutte, to grumble (Kalkar). Different from mod. F. gruger, to
crunch. Der. grudge, sb., grudg-ing-ly.

GRUEL,, liquid food, made from meal. (F.—O. Low G.) ‘Or
casten al the gruwel in the fyr;’ Chaucer, Troilus, iii, 711.—OF.
gruel (Burguy) >mod. F. gruau.—Late L. gritellum, a dimin. of
gritum, meal, in a Carolingian text (Brachet).—O. Low G. grit,
cognate with AS. grit, groats, grout, coarse meal. See Grout.

GRUESOME, horrible, fearful. (Scand.) Also grewsome, gru-
some, grousum. ‘Death, that grusome carl;’ Burns, Verses to J.
Rankine. And see Jamieson’s Sc. Dict., s.v. grousum. ‘ Growsome,
horridus ;” Levins, 162. 10.— Dan. grusom, cruel; (Kalkar has M Dan.
grusommelig, cruel, violent); Norw. gruvsam, frightful, also timid
(Aasen).— Dan. gru, horror, terror; with Dan. suffix -som, as in
virk-som, active. Cf. Dan. grue, to dread, gruelig, horrid; Norw.
gruva, to dread; Swed. gruflig, dreadful, dismal, horrid, dire. + Du.
gruwzaam, terrible, hideous; MHG. griiwesam, griisam, G. grausam,
cruel, horrible. Further allied to E. dial. growze, EFries. grisen, G.
grausen, to shiver, shudder.

GRUFF, rough, surly. (Dutch.) A late word. ‘Such an one
the tall, . . . such an one the gruff;’ Spectator, no. 433. First in
Lowl. Sc., in 1533; and in.1563 we find ‘ grof stanis,’ coarse, rough
stones, in Winyet’s Works, i. 114 (S. T. S.).— Du. grof, coarse, plump,
loud, blunt, great, heavy. EFries. and Westphal. grof; Fries.


GRUMBLE


grufig, coarse; Swed. grof, coarse, big, rude, gross; Dan. grov, the
same; G. grob, coarse; OHG. gerob, grop. B. The OHG. form
shows that the initial g stands for ge (= AS. ge-=Goth. ga-), a mere
prefix. The syllable -rob. may perhaps be allied to the weak grade
corresponding to AS. hréof, rough.. Der. gruff-ly, gruff-ness.

GRUMBLE, to growl, murmur. (F.—G.) In Shak. Temp. i. 2.
249; &c.—Picard grumeler, groumeler (Corblet); F. grommeler, ‘to
grumble, repine;’ Cot.— Low and prov. G. grummelen, to grumble ;
frequentative of the verb grummen, grumen, or grommen; cf. Bayarian
sich grumen, to be vexed, fret oneself, Schmeller, 997 ; MDu. grom-
melen, frequent. of Du. grommen, to grumble, growl. From *grumm-,
weak grade of Teut. *gremman-, to rage, as in MHG. and AS.
grimman, to rage, str. vb. B. The orig. sense is ‘to be angry,’ and
the word is closely connected with G. gram, vexation ; see further
under Grim. Der. grumbl-er, grumbl-ing-ly.

GRUME,, a clot, as of blood. (F.—L.) Very rare; first used in
1619 (N.E.D.). Eden has groume,a lump ; Decades, p. 145 (1555) 3
ed. Arber, p. 182. Commoner in the adj. grum-ous, ‘ Grumous, full
of clots or lumps;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.—OF. grume, ‘a knot, bunch,
cluster ;’ Cot. Cf. F. grumeau, a clot of blood; id.=L. graumus,
a little heap or hillock of earth. Der. grum-ous,

GRUMMET (1), GROMET, a ship’s boy, cabin-boy. (F.)
Rare in books. ‘In everieship ..a boye, which is called a gromet ;’
Lambarde, Peramb. of Kent, ed. 1826, p. 110. —OF. gromet, a servant,
groom; see further under Groom.

GRUMMET (2), GROMMET, a ring of rope. (F.—C.)
‘ Grommets, little rings on the upper side of the yard, to which the
caskets are fastned ;’ Coles (1684). Spelt grummets; Capt. J. Smith,
Works, ed. Arber, p. 793 (1626).—OF. gromette (Hatzfeld), s.v.
F. gourmette, the curb of a bridle (affected by F. gourmer, to curb).
According to Thurneysen, p. 102, the OF. gromette is from Bret.
chadenn gromm, lit. ‘bent chain,’ the chain of a curb; where gromm
is the fem. of Bret. krowmm, bent, W. crwm. Celt. type *krumbos,
bent; Stokes-Fick, p. 100.

GRUNSETL,, used for Groundsill, q. v.

GRUNT, to make a sound like a pig. (E.) ME. grunten, Ancren
Riwle, p. 326. AS. grunnettan (O. E. Texts, p. 559), an extension of
grunian, to grunt, found in A‘lfric’s Grammar (Bosworth), 4+ Dan.
grynte, to grunt; Swed. grymta, to grunt; G. grunzen. + L. grunnire,
OL. grundire; Gk. ypu¢ew. B. All of imitative origin; cf. Gk. ypi,
the noise made by a pig. Der. grunt-er.

GUAIACUM, a genus of trees in the W. Indies; also, the resin
of the lignum vite. (Span.—Hayti.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627, and in
Kersey, ed. 1715. Latinised from Span. guayaco or guayacan, lignum
vite. From the language of Hayti; see Frampton, tr. of Monardes,
Joyfull Newes, p. 10, back. Guwa-, in Haytian, is a prefix or article
(R. Eden, p. 168). See Notes on E. Etym., p. 347.

GUANACO, a kind of Peruvian sheep. (Span.—Peruv.) Spelt
guancos, pl., in E. G., tr. of Acosta (1604) ; bk. i. c. 21, p. 70.—Span.
guanaco, ‘a beast in the West Indies, like a great sheep ;’ Pineda. =
Peruy. huanacu, a wild sheep; see Skeat, Notes on E. Etym., p. 343.

GUANO, the dung of a certain sea-fowl of S. America, used for
manure. (Span.—Peruvian.) See E. G., tr. of Acosta, 1604, p. 311
(bk. iv. c. 37); Prescott, Conq. of Peru, c. 5.—Span. guano or huano
(Pineda).=— Peruvian kuanu, dung; see Skeat, Notes on E. Etym.,


Pp: 343.

GUARANTEE, GUARANTY, a warrant, surety, (F.—
OHG.) Guarantee appears to have been misused in place of guaranty,
garantly, or garranty, probably owing to the use of words such as
lessee, feoffee, and the like; but the final -ee is (in the present case)
incorrect. Blount’s Nomo-lexicon gives the spellings garanty and
waranty, Cotgrave has garrantie and warrantie.—AF. guarantie;
OF. garrantie (better garantie), ‘ garrantie, warrantie, or warrantise,’
Cot.; fem. form of garanti, warranted, pp. of garantir, to warrant.
=— OF. garant, also spelt guarant, warant (Burguy), and explained by
Cotgrave as ‘a vouchee, warrant, warranter, supporter, maintainer.’
See further under Warrant. @ The OHG. w became in OF. first
w, then gu, and finally g. Thus OF. garant and E, warrant are the
same word. Der. guarantee, vb.

GUARD, to ward, watch, keep, protect. (F.—Teut.) Common
in Shak. both as verb and sb. [He also has guardage, Oth. i. 2. 70;
guardant, Cor. v. 2.67; guardian, Macb. ii. 4. 35. But the verb does
not seem to be much older, though the sb. is in Lydgate, De Deguil.
Pilgrimage, $793. Rich. cites gvardens (=guardians) from Surrey,
tr. of Virgil’s Ain. b. ii. 1. 1013 (E. version).] OF. garder, ‘to keep,
ward, guard,’ Cot.; also spelt guarder, as in the Chanson de Roland,
1.9; and, in the 11th century, warder.—OSax. wardon, to watch;
cognate with E. ward, vb. See further under Ward. { The sb.
guard is older than the verb; from OF. garde, guarde; from OTeut.
*warda, a guard. Der. guard-age, guard-ant, guard-ian (=OF;
gardien, which. Cot. explains by ‘a warden, keeper, gardien’) ;


GUILD, GILD


guard-ed, guard-ed-ly, guard-ed-ness;  guard-room,
Doublet, ward; the doublet of guardian is warden, q. Vv.

GUAVA, a genus of trees and shrubs of tropical America. (Span.
—W. Indian.) The Span. name guayaba is no doubt borrowed from
the W. Indian name; see Skeat, Notes on E. Etym., p. 347. Spelt
guayva in 1593; Eng. Garner, ed. Arber, vy. 5323; in an account of
Drake’s expedition to Panama, &c. The pl. is spelt guayavos in
E.G., tr. of Acosta, bk. iv. c. 24 (1604). The guava is found within
the tropics in Mexico, the W. Indies, and S. America.

GUDGEON, a small fresh-water fish. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak.
Merch. of Ven.i. 1.102. ME. gojone. ‘ Goione, fysche ; gobius, gobio;’
Prompt. Pary. =F. goujon, ‘a gudgeon-fish, also the pin which the
truckle of a pully runneth on; also, the gudgeon of the spindle of a
wheele ; any gudgeon;’ Cot.=L. gdbidnem, acc. of gdbio, a by-form
of gobius, a gudgeon.—Gk. xwBids, a kind of fish, gudgeon, tench.
The Sicilian name was «@0os (Liddell and Scott).

GUELDER-ROSE, a species of Viburnum, bearing large white
ball-shaped flowers. (Du. and F.) Sonamed from some resemblance
of the flower toa white rose. See Rose. The word guelder stands for
Gueldre, the F. spelling of the province of Gelderland in Holland.

GUERDON, a reward, recompense. (F.—OHG.) In Chaucer,
C. T. 7460 (D 1878). He also has the verb guerdonen=to reward ;
Pers. Tale, Group I, 1. 283, Six-text ed.; but this is derived from the
sb. Guerdonles occurs in Lydgate, Complaint of Black Knight,
1. 399. = OF. guerdon, ‘guerdon, recompence, meed;’ Cot. Equivalent
to Ital. guiderdone, a guerdon. = Low L. widerdonum, which, according
to Littré, is found in the time of Charles the Bald. B. This is a
singular hybrid compound from OHG. wider (G. wieder), against,
back again, and the L. dénum, a gift; but the whole word is a mere
adaptation of OHG. widarldx, a recompence. y. The OHG. word
has its exact cognate in the AS. wider-léan, a recompence, Grein,
ii. 6973 which is compounded of the prefix wider, against, back again
(connected with E. with- in the word with-stand) and the sb. léan,
payment, which is from AS. /éon, to lend; and Jéom is also allied
to E. loan. See With, Donation, and Loan. @ The same
notion of ‘ back’ occurs in the synonymous words re-ward, re-compence,
re-muner ation.

GUERILLA, GUERRILLA, an irregular warfare carried on
by small bands of men. (Span.—OHG.) We speak of ‘ guerilla
warfare,’ making the word an adj., but it is properly a sb.—Span.
guerrilla, a skirmish, lit. a petty war; dimin. of guerra, war (=F.
guerre.) = OHG. werra, discord, the same word as E. war. See War.

GUESS, to form an opinion at hazard, to conjecture. (Scand.)
The insertion of « was merely for the purpose of preserving the gas
hard. ME. gessen; Chaucer, C. T. 82,— Dan. gisse; Swed. gissa, to
guess; MDan. gidze, gitse, getse (Kalkar) ; NFriesic gezze, gedse
(Outzen); the oldest form being getze=*getsa, from the base *get-.
B. Closely related to Dan. gjette, to guess; the mod. Icel. gizka=
*git-ska, a denominative vb. from a base *git-isko-, for *get-isko-, 1.€.
acquisitive, is from Icel. geta (1), to get, (2) to guess. The latter
word is cognate with AS. gitan, and mod, E. get; and it is highly
probable that guess meant originally ‘to be ready to get,’ being a
secondary (desiderative) verb formed from get, See Get. Der.
guess, sb. ; guess-work.

GUEST, a stranger who is entertained. (E.) The ~ is inserted to
preserve the g as hard. The word is prob. Anglian or Scand., as
the AS. gi>y. ME. gest, Hampole, Pricke of Conscience, 1374;
also gist, Ancren Riwle, p. 68. AS. gest; also gist, giest; Grein,
i. 373. Cf. Icel. gestr; Dan. gest; Swed. gdst. + Du. gast; Goth.
gasts; G. gast. Teut. type *gastiz; Idg. type *ghostis, whence L,
hostis, a stranger, guest, enemy; Russ. gosé(e), a guest, alien. B. The
orig. sense appears to be that of ‘alien,’ whence the senses of ‘enemy’
and ‘guest’ arose. See Hostile. Der. guest-chamber, Mark, xiv. 14.
From the same root, host (2), hostile.

GUIACUM, a genus of trees. See Guaiacum.

GUIDE, to lead, direct, regulate. (F.—Teut.) ME. gyden,
Chaucer, C. T. 13410 (B 1670). [The ME. form gyez is also common
(C. T. 1952); see Guy.] The sb. is gyde, C. T. 806 (A 804). —OF.
guider (14th cent.), from older guier, to guide; the d being inserted
by the influence of OProy. guidar (Bartsch). Cf. also Ital. guidare ;
and Span. guiar, Romanic type *guidare.— OSax. witan (AS. witan),
to pay heed to; OHG. wizan.—Teut. root *weit-, *wit-; Idg. root
WEID, to know ; whence also AS. wis, wise, knowing, wisa, a leader,
director, wisian, to guide, lead, show the way. See Wit, Wise.
Der. guide, sb., guide-post, guid-on, guise, guy-rope.

GUIDON, 2 eae ae a jue CF a pennon. (F.—Teut.)
‘With guidons trail’d on earth ;’ Sandys, Travels (1632), p. 84.—F.
guidon, ‘a standard, or banner, under which a troop of men of arms
do serve; also, he that bears it;’ Cot.=F. guid-er, to guide; as
pointing the way. See above.

GUILD, GILD, an association of men of one class for mutual


253


guard-ship.


254 GUILDER


aid. (E.) The insertion of z, though common, is quite unnecessary,
and is unoriginal. See English Gilds, ed. Toulmin Smith, Early
Eng. Text Soc., 1870. ME. gilde, pilde; the pl. 3ilden=guilds,
occurs in Layamon, 32001. Cf. AS. gegyldscipe, a guild, gegilda,
a member of a guild, in Thorpe’s Ancient Laws, A‘thelst. v. 8. 6;
vol. i. p. 236. These words are formed from AS. gild, a payment,
a guild (from the fee paid); also spelt gield, gyld, geld; from the AS.
gildan, to pay, whence also mod. E. yield; see Yield; cf. also Icel.
gildi,a payment, a guild, from gjalda (pres. t. geld), to pay; Dan.
gilde, a feast, a guild. + Du. gild, 2 guild, company, society ; Goth.
gild, tribute-money, Lu. xx. 22. 4 The hard g is remarkable, as the
AS. form would rather have given yild. It is usually referred to the
influence of Icel. gildi, but we must not forget the possible influence
of Latin and AF., which adopted the word very early. The N.E. D.
cites L. gildis ab. 1009, L. gildam ab. 1189 ; and AF. forms with gui-
appear early likewise. It is unlikely that L. g was sounded as y, and
it is certain that AF. gu was hard. Der. guild-hall, ME. gild-halle,
yeldhalle, Chaucer, C. T. 372 (A 370).

GUILDER, a Dutch coin. (Du.) In Shak. Com. Errors, i. 1. 8;
iv.1.4. Acorrupt form of Du. gulden, a guilder, ‘a piece of 20 stivers’
(Sewel). Hexham has Carolus gulden, ‘a Charles gilder;’ Philippus gul-
den, ‘a Philip’s gilder ;’ the former evidently refers to Charles V. Cf.
G. gulden, gilden, a florin; as the name implies, the coin was at first of
gold, though afterwards made of silver. The MHG.name was guldin,
or guldin pfenninc, the golden penny (L. aureus dendrius). 4- Goth.
gultheins, golden. From Teut. adj. type *gulthinoz, golden; formed
(with suffix -azoz=L. -inus), from Teut. *gulth-om, gold. See Gold.

GUILE, a wile, cunning, deceit. (F.—Teut.) In early use.
ME. gile, gyle; Layamon, 3198, 16382 (later text) ; and common
later. OF. guile, guille (Godefroy). From a Teut. source; see
Wile. Der. guile-ful (ME. gileful, Wyclif, Job, xiii. 7, Ps. v. 7),
guile-ful-ly, guile-ful-ness (ME. gilefulnesse, Wyclif, Ecclus. xxxvii. 3) ;
guile-less, guile-less-ness. Doublet, wile.

GUILLEMOT, a sea-bird. (F.—Teut.) ‘A guillemot or sea-
hen;’ Ray, Willughby’s Ornithol., p. 324 (1678); N.E.D. ‘ Wil-
mots, Nodies, Gulles;’ Hakluyt’s Voy. iii. 76.—F. guillemot (1555,
Hatzfeld). Dimin. of F. Guillaume, as wilmot and prov. E. willock
(guillemot) are of William.—OHG, Wilhelm. In the Norm. dialect
roi Guillemot means our William I. (Robin).

GUILLOTINE, an instrument for beheading men. (F. personal
name.) ‘Named after the supposed inventor, a physician named
Joseph Ignatius Guillotin, who died in 1814. ‘The first person
executed by it was a highway robber named Pelletier, April 25,
1792; Haydn, Dict. of Dates. Der. guillotine, verb.

GUILT, crime, punishable offence. (E.) The w is inserted to
preserve the gashard. ME. gilt, Gower, C. A. ii, 122 (bk. iv. 3610) ;
Chaucer, C. T. 5057 (B 637); commonly also gulf, as in Ancren
Riwle, p. 258. AS. gylt, a crime; Grein,i. 536. Teut. type *gudéiz,
m. Some have connected it with AS. geldan,to pay; but this seems
to be inadmissible. No cognate word is known. Der, guilt-less
=ME. giltlees, Chaucer, C. T. 5063 (B 643) ; guilt-less-ly, guilt-less-
ness; also guilt-y=AS. gyltig, Matt. xxiii. 18; guilt-i-ly, guilt-i-ness.

GUINEA, the name of a (former) gold coin. (African.) ‘So
named from having been first coined of gold brought by the African
company from the coast of Guinea in 1663, valued then at 203.3 but
worth 30s. in 1695. Not coined since 1813. Reduced at various
times; in 1717 to 21s.;’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates. Der. guinea-fowl,
guinea-hen, named from the same country. 4 The guinea-pig is from
5. America, chiefly Brazil; so that the name is an erroneous one, as
in the case of turkey.

GUIPURE, 2 kind of lace; a kind of gimp. (F.—Tent.) First
in 1843 ; see N. E. D. =F. guipure, which Cotgrave defines as ‘a grosse
black thread, covered or whipt about with silk.’ =F, guiper, to cover
(thus) with silk; Godefroy gives the pp. guipé.—Teut. *wipan, to
wind; as in Goth. weipan, to crown (whence waips, a wreath); G,
weifen, to reel, to wind. Cf. MDan. gimpe, fringe; mod. Dan. gimpe,
to whip about with silk (Larsen). :

‘GUISE, way, manner, wise. (F.-OHG.) ME. gise, gyse, Chaucer,
C. T. 995 (A 993). Also guise, guyse; first used in Layamon, 19641,
later text, where the earlier text has wise. OF. guise, way, wise ; cf.
Prov., Port., Span., and Ital. guisa. [The gu stands for an older w.]

— OHG. wisa, MHG, wise (G. weise), a way, wise, guise; cognate
with AS. wise, whence E. wise, sb. See Wise (2). Doublet, wise (2).

‘GUITAR, a musical stringed instrument. (F.—L.—Gk.) In
Skinner, ed. 1671. [‘Give me my guittara;’ Ben Jonson, Gipsies
Metam. § 1 (end); from Span. guitarra.|—F. guitare (Littré),—L.
cithara (accented as in Gk.).—Gk. «0dapa, a kind of lyre. @ The
ME. form of the word is giterne, Chaucer, C. T. 3333. This also is
of F. origin; Cotgrave gives ‘ Guiterne, or Guiterre, a gitterne.’

GULES, the heraldic name for red. (F.—L.) ME. goules; Gawain
and Grene Knt., 619. Richardson cites: ‘And-to-bere armes than


GUN. .


are ye able Of gold and goules sete with sable ;’ Squier of Low Degre,
1. 203, in Ritson’s Metrical Romances, vol. iii. At p. 484 of Rob. of
Glouc., ed. Hearne, is a footnote in which we find: ‘that bere-the:
armes of gowles with a white croys..—F. gweules, ‘gules, red, or
sanguine, in blazon,’ Cot.; OF. goles, goules, geules; AF. goules,
gules, P. Langtoft, ii. 430, answering to Late L. gule, gules.
@ Ducange shows that L. gul@ also meant ‘skins of ermine dyed red.’
Cf. also OF. goler, to border with fur ; engoulé, engolé, angolé, trimmed
with fur. Cf. ‘murium rubricatas pelliculas, quas gulas vocant;’
S. Bernard, Epist. 42. c.2. The origin of Late L. gule (in this sense)
is doubtful.

GULF, a hollow in the sea-coast, a bay, a deep place, whirlpool.
(F.—Ital.—Gk.) Formerly spelt goulfe, gulph. . ‘Hast thou not read
in bookes Of fell Charybdis goulfe?’ Turberville, Pyndara’s Answer
to Tymetes. ME. goulf; ‘the goulf of Venyse;’ Mandeville, Trav.
ch. v. p. 54. Milton has the adj. gulphie, Vacation Exercise, 1. 92;
Spenser has gulphing, Virgil’s Gnat, 542.—F. golfe. (formerly also
goulfe), ‘a gulph, whirlepool ;’ Cot. Ital. golfo, a. gulf, bay. — Late
Gk, «éAgos, variant of Gk. «éAmos, the bosom, lap, a deep hollow,
bay, creek. (Cf, the various senses of L. sinus.] Der. gulf-y, en-gulf.

GULL (1), a web-footed sea-bird. (C.) ‘Timon will be left a
naked gull, Which flashes now a Phoenix ;’ Timon, ii. 1. 31.—Corn.
gullan, gwilan, a gull (Williams); W. gwylan; Bret. gwelan; Gael.
and Irish faoileann, Gael. faoileag, Irish faoileog, Olrish foilenn.
Celtic type *woilenno-. The prob. sense was ‘ wailer,’ from its cry; cf.
Bret. gwel-a, 10 weep. Stokes-Fick, p. 285.

GULL (2), a dupe. (Low G.) ‘Yond gull Malvolio;’ Tw. Nt.
iii. 2.73. There seems to have been a false notion that the gull was
a stupid bird. Thus a person who entraps dupes is called a gull-
catcher, Tw. Nt. ii. 5. 204; and it is possible that popular etymology
wrongly associated this word with Gull (1); cf. owl, goose, dotterel.
But it is probably quite a distinct word, and borrowed from Du. or
Low G. = Low G. gull, adj., soft, mild, good-natured, open-hearted
(Berghaus) ; MDu. gudle, ‘a great wench without wit,’ Hexham;
EFries. gul, soft, mild, liberal (Koolman). Der. gull, verb, Tw. Nt.
ii. 3. 1455 gull-ible.

GULLET, the throat. (F.—L.) ME. golet, gullet; Chaucer, C. T.
12477 (C543). ‘ Golet, or throte, guttur, gluma, gula;’ Prompt. Parve
=I, goulet, ‘the gullet;’ Cot. Dimin. of OF. gole, goule (mod. F.
gueule), the throat.—L. gula, the throat.. Brugm. i. § 499. From
the same source we have gules, q.v. Doublet, gully, q. v.

GULLY, a channel worn by water. (F.—L.) In Capt. Cook’s
Third Voyage, b.iv.c.4(R.). Formerly written gullet. ‘It meeteth
afterward with another gullet,’ i.e. small stream; Holinshed, Desc.
of Britain, c.11(R.).—F. goulet, ‘a gullet, . . . a narrow brook or deep
gutter of water;’ Cot. Thus the word is the same as Gullet, q. v.

GULP, to swallow greedily and quickly. (E.) ‘He has gulped
me down, Lance;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Wit without Money, A. i.
sc. 2. ME. gulpen, gloppen, glubben; ‘Til Gloton hedde 7-gloupet
(v.r. ygloppid, ygulpid) a galoun;’ P. Plowman, A. v. 191. Of
imitative origin. Cf. EFnes. and Du. gulpen, to swallow eagerly;
MDnu. golpen, gulpen, to quaff (Hexham); Du. gulp, a great billow,
wave, draught, gulp. f. Further allied to Swed. glupande, Dan.
glubende, voracious; Swed. glup-sk, Dan. glub-sk, ravenous. From
Teut. root *gleup-; as in Swed. dial. gliopa (pt. t. glop, pl. glupum),
to swallow, Norw. glupa (pt. t. glaup), to swallow. Der. gulp, sb.

GUM (1), the flesh of the jaws. (E.) ME. gome. In Legends of
the Holy Rood, ed. Morris, p. 218, 1. 250, where it means ‘ palate.’
“Gome in mannys mowthe, pl. goomys, Gingiva, vel gingive, plur.;’
Prompt. Parv. AS. géma, the palate, jaws; Grein, i. 523.4 Icel.
gomr, the palate; Swed. gom, the palate; OHG. guomo, G. gaumen,
the palate. B. Allied to Gk. yavvos, gaping; Lith. gomurys, the
palate. See Brugm. i. § 196; where the AS. 6 is explained as from
ou. Der. gum-boil. ;

GUM (2), the hardened adhesive juice of certain trees. (F.—L.—
Gk.—Egypt.) ME. gomme, Chaucer, Good Women, 121; P. Plow-
man, B. ii. 226.—F. gomme, gum. = L. fummi.— Gk. koupe, gum ; but
not orig.a Gk. word. Prob. of Egyptian origin; cf. Coptic komé,
gum; Peyron, Dict., p.67. Der. gum, verb; gummi-ferous, from L.
suffix -fer, bearing, which from ferre, to bear; gumm-y, gumm-i-ness.

GUN, an engine for throwing projectiles. (Scand.) ME. gonne,
Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, 1643; P. Plowman, C. xxi. 293 ; King Ali-
saunder, ed. Weber, 3268. See note by Way in Prompt. Parv. p. 218.
[W. gw, Irish gunna, gun, are from E.] Shortened from Icel.
Gunnhildr, a fem. proper name (whence Gunuild in Havelok), a name
once given to war-engines, and appropriately enough, because the
element gunn- (Icel. gunnr) signifies ‘ war,’ and hildr signifies ‘battle.’
This is confirmed by an account of munitions at Windsor Castle in
1330-1 (Exchequer Accts. Q. R. Bundle 18, no. 34), which mentions
‘una magna balista de cornu quee vocatur Domina Gunilda.” In ME.
Gunne would be the regular pet-name for Gunnhildr. A Guynild is


ir ee
Parse


GUNNY


mentioned in the A. S. Chron, an. 1045 (MS. D); and Gunz is now
asumame. Cf. also gonnylde gnoste,a spark of a gun; Polit. Songs,
ed. Wright, p. 237. @f In Icel. poetry, gunn-eldr (war-fire) meant
“a sword,’ and gurn-mani (war-moon) meant ‘a shield.’ Der. gunn-er,
gunn-er-y, gun-barrel, -boat, -carriage, -cotton, -powder, -shot, -smith,
-stock; also gun-wale, q.v.

GUNWNY, a coarse kind of sacking for bags. (Hind.—Skt.) Sce
Yule, — Hind. and Mahratti gd, gdwi, a sack, sacking. =—Skt. goni, a
sack. Perhaps orig. made of hide; cf. Skt. gaus (stem gé-), an ox
(Uhlenbeck).

GUNWALE, the upper edge of a ship’s side. (Scand. and E.)
Corruptly pronounced gunnel [gun‘l]. In Skinner, ed. 1671. ‘ Gua-
wale, or Gunnel of a Ship, a piece of timber that reaches from the
halfdeck to the forecastle on either side ;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. ‘Wales
or Wails, those timbers on the ship’s sides, which lie outmost, and
are usually trod upon, when people climb up the sides to get into the
ship;’ id. B. Compounded of gun and wale; see Wale. So called
because the guns used once to rest upon it ; cf. ‘some guns, that went
with a swivel upon their gunnal ;’ Dampier, Voy., ed. 1729, i. 400.
The sense of wale is ‘ stick’ or ‘ beam,’ and secondly, ‘the mark of a
blow with a stick.’

GURGLE, to flow irregularly, with a slight noise. (Ital.—L.)
‘To gurgling sound Of Liffy’s tumbling streams ;’ Spenser, Mourn-
ing Muse of Thestylis, 1.3. Imitated from Ital. gorgolare, ‘to gurgle
as water doth running,’ Florio; also gorgogliare, to gargle, purl,
bubble, boil; cf. gorgoglio, a warbling, the gurgling of a stream.
The latter answers to a L. type *gurgulidre, formed as if from L.
gurgulio, the gullet. See Gorge. Brugmann, i. § 499. @ To be
distinguished from gargle, though they were confused.

GURNARD, GURNET, a kind of fish. (F.—Prov.—L.; with
Teut. suffix.) ‘Gurnard, fysche ;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘ Gurnarde, a fysshe,
gournault ;’ Palsgrave. See Levins. Shak. has gurnet, 1 Hen. IV, iv.
2. 13. Cotgrave has: ‘ Gournauld, a gurnard fish ;’ but the E. word
answers rather to OF. gornard (Godefroy), F. *gournard (the suffixes
-ard, -ald, -auld being convertible); and this again stands, by the not
uncommon shifting of r, for *grounard. The latter form is represented
in Cotgrave by ‘Grougnaut, a gurnard,’ marked as being a Languedoc
word; cf. Prov. gournau, grougnau, a gurnard (Mistral), from Proy.
gourgna, grougna, to grunt (which shows that the word is really of
Prov. origin). . Again, we find another form of the word in MF.
grongnard (mod. F. grognard), explained by Cotgrave as ‘ grunting ;’
and, in fact, the word gurnard means ‘grunter.’ Godefroy has OF.
groignart, gruinard, ‘grondant.’ ‘The gurnards... derive their popu-
lar appellation from a grunting noise which they make when taken
out of the water ;’ Eng. Cyclop. s.v. Trigla. y. The F. grognard
is formed by the suffix -ard (=OHG. hard, hart) from F. grogner,
for OF. grognir, gronir, to grunt.=L. grunnire, to grunt. See
Grunt. The Prov. word is similar.

GUSH, to flow out swiftly. (E.) ME. guschen, Morte Arthure, ed.
Brock, 1130. Cf.EFries. giisen, to gush out; Low G. gusen (Berghaus).
Allied to MDu. guysen, to gush out (Kilian); Icel. gusa,to gush, spirt
out, a derivative of the strong verb gjdsa (pt. t. gauss, pp. gosinn), to
gush, break out as a volcano. Also Du. gudsen, to gush; ‘het bloed
gudsde uyt zyne wonde, the blood did gush ont of his wound ;’ Sewel.
From Idg. 4/GHEU, to pour (Gk. yé-erv) ; whence 4f GHEUD, to pour
(L. fundere (E. fuse), Goth. giutan, G. giessen, Icel. gjdta, Swed. gjuta,
Dan. gyde, AS. géotan, to pour). See Gut, Geysir, and Fuse.
@ The final sk suggests a Teut. base *gut-sk, extended from *gut-,
weak grade of Teut. *geut-, Idg. *gheud-. Der. gush-ing, gush-ing-ly ;
cf. gust (1), q.v-

GUSSET, a small insertion of cloth in a garment, for the purpose
of enlarging it. (F.) Particularly used of a piece of chain-mail pro-
tecting a joint in armour (see gloss. to Fairholt’s Costume), or an
insertion in the armhole of a shirt. ME, guschet, Wallace, bk. ii. 63.
The word occurs in Du Wes; see Palsgrave’s Dict., p. 906, col. 3.
—F. gousset, ‘a gusset; the piece of armour, or of a shirt, whereby
the arme-hoole is covered;” Cot. B. Named from some fancied re-
semblance to the husk of a bean or pea; the word being a dimin. of
F. gousse, ‘the huske, swad, cod, hull of beanes, pease, &c.;’ Cot.
+ Ital. guscio, a shell, husk; a word of unknown origin.

GUST (1), a sudden blast or gush of wind, (Scand.) In Shak.
‘Mer. of Ven. iv. 1. 77.—Icel. gustr, a gust, blast; cf. also gjdsta, a
gust. Cf. Swed. dial. gust, a stream of air from an oven (Rietz) ;
Norw. gust, a gust. —Icel. gus-, weak grade of gjdsa, to gush. See
Gush. Der. gust-y, gust-i-ness.

GUST (2), relish, taste. (L.) In Shak. Tw. Nt. i. 3. 333 and in
Spenser, F. Q. vii. 7. 39. —L. gustus, a tasting, taste (whence F. god?) ;
cf. gustare, to taste. —4/ GEUS, to choose; whence also Skt. jush, to
enjoy, like, Gk. yevew, to taste, and E. choose, See Choose.
Doublet, gusto, the Ital. form of the word. Der. dis-gust, q. v.

GUT, the intestinal canal. (E.) [The same word as prov. E. gut,


GYPSY, GIPSY 255


a water-course, wide ditch; ME. gote, Prompt. Parv. p. 205; see


Way’s note.] ME. gutte, gotte; P. Plowman, B. i. 36; Rob. of Glouc.
p- 289, 1. 5865. AS. gutt; pl. guttas, ‘receptacula viscerum ;’ A. S.
Gloss. in Mone’s Quellen und Forschungen, i. 1830, p. 333, 1. 198.
B.. The orig. sense is ‘channel ;’ cf. Swed. gjuta, a mill-leat (Rietz) ;
Dan. gyde, a lane; MDu. gote, a channel (Hexham); G. gosse, a
drain; ME. gote, prov. E. gut, a drain, water-course. y. All from
the Idg. weak grade *ghud- (Teut. *gut-) of 4/ GHEUD, to pour;
see Gush, Fuse. > Not connected with gutter, which is of Latin
origin. Der. gut, verb.

GUTTA-PERCHA, a solidified juice of certain trees. (Malay.)
‘Made known in England in 1843 ;’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates. The
trees yielding it abound in the Malayan peninsula and in Borneo. =
Malay gatah, guttah, gum, balsam (Marsden’s Malay Dict., p. 283);
and percha, the name of the tree producing it (though now obtained
from other trees). Hence the sense is ‘gum of the Percha-tree.’
B. The spelling gutta is obviously due to confusion with the L. gutta,
a drop, with which it has nothing whatever to do. ‘ Gutta in Malay
means gum, percha is the name of the tree (Isonandra gutta), or of an
island from which the tree was first imported (Pulo-percha) ;’ Max
Miiller, Lect. on Language, 8th ed., i. 231. The former seems to be
right; see C. P. G. Scott, Malayan Words in E.

GUTTER, a channel for water. (F.—L.) ME. gotere; Prompt.
Pary. The pl. goteres is in Trevisa, i. 181.—OF. gutiere, goutiere ;
see quotations in Littré, s.v. gouttiére, a gutter; cf. Span. gotera, a
gutter. B. Esp. used of the duct for catching the drippings of the
eaves of a roof; from OF. gote, goute (mod. F. goutte),a drop.=L.
gutta,a drop. See Gout (1). Der. gutter, verb.

GUTTURAL, pertaining to the throat. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave. =
F, guttural, ‘ gutturall, belonging to the throat ;’ Cot.=L. gutturdlis ;
formed with suffix -alis from guttur, the throat. Der, guttural-ly (2).

GUY (1), a hideous creature, a fright. (F.—Ital.—Teut.) Orig. an
effigy of Guy Fawkes; carried about and burnt on Noy. 5; see Hone,
Every-day Book, i. 1430.—F. Guy.—Ital. Guido; a name of Teut.
origin.

GUY (2), GUY-ROPH, a rope used to steady a weight. (F.—
Tent.) A nautical term. Spelt guie in Capt. J.Smith, Works, ed. Arber,
p-795. Dunbar has guye=a guide; p. 278, 1.1 (S.T.S.). In Skinner,
ed. 1671. ‘ Guy, a rope made use of to keep anything from falling or
bearing against a ship’s side, when it is to be hoised in;’ Kersey’s
Dict., ed. 1715.—OF. guie, guye,a guide; cf. Span. guia, a guide,
leader, guy.—F. guier, to guide; earlier form of I’. guider, to guide.
See Guide.

GU2ZZLE, to swallow greedily. (F.) ‘ Guzzile, to drink greedily,
to tipple ;? Kersey, ed. 1715. Cotgrave explains OF. martiner by
‘to quaffe, swill, guzzle. Prob. suggested by OF. goziller, gosillier,
to vomit, also to prattle, talk (Godefroy) ; whence (in Cotgrave) the
comp. desgouziller, ‘to gulp, to swallow down.’ But OF. desgosiller
had both senses. Cf. also F. s’égosiller, to make one’s throat sore with
shouting ; clearly connected with OF. gosillier, the throat (Godefroy),
and F. gosier, the throat. B. Littré connects goster with Lorraine
gosse, the throat, the stomach of fatted animals. Remoter source
unknown ; see Korting, § 4237. Der. guzzl-er.

GYMNASIUM, a place for athletic exercises. (L.—Gk.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. — L. gymnasium, = Gk. yupyacior, an athletic
school; so called because the athletes were naked when practising
their exercises.— Gk. yuprvd ev, to train naked, to exercise. = Gk.
yupvas, more commonly -yupyds, naked. See Prellwitz. Der. From
the same source are gymnast = Gk. yupvaorns, a trainer of athletes ;
gymnast-ic, gymnast-ics ; also gymnick, from L. gymnicus, Gk. yuprixés,
Milton, Samson Agon. 1324; also gymmno-sophist, Ben Jonson, Fortu-
nate Isles (Merefool), from L. pl. gymno-sophiste, Gk. pl. yupvo-
coguorai, lit. ‘naked sophists.? Also gymnotus, an electric eel; lit.
‘naked back,’ from the absence of dorsal fins upon it; short for
gymno-notus, from Gk, yuprd-s, naked, and v@rov, back.

GYNARCHY, government by a woman, (Gk.) Spelt gunarchy
by Lord Chesterfield (Todd). Coined from Gk, yvv-7, a woman, and
-apxia, dpxn, rule, from d&pxev, to rule; cf. olig-archy, tetr-archy, &c.
See Queen.

GYPSUM, a mineral containing sulphate of lime and water. (L.—
Gk.—Arab.) ‘ Gypsum, parget, white-lime, plaister ; also, the parget-
stone ;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.—L. gypsum, chalk. = Gk. *yvwor, for yiyos,
chalk; Herod. vii. 69. B. Prob. of Eastern origin; cf. Pers. jabsix,
lime; Arab. jibs, plaster, mortar; Rich. Dict. p. 494.

GYPSY, GIPSY, one of a certain nomad race. (F.—L.— Gk. —
Egypt.) Spelt gipsex by Spenser, Mother Hubbard’s Tale, 1. 86; see
Giptian in Nares. This is a mere corruption of ME. Egypcien, an
Egyptian. Chaucer calls St. Mary of Egypt ‘the Egipcien Marie ;’
C. T., B 500 (1. 4920); and Skelton, swearing by the same saint, says
‘ By Mary Gipey!’ Garland of Laurell, 1455.— OF. Egyptien, Egiptien.
= Late L. Zgyptianus, formed with suffix -dnus from L, Zigyptius, an.


GYRE


Egyptian.=—Gk. Alyirrios, an Egyptian.—Gk. Atyurros, Egypt.
From the name of the country. @&# The supposition that they were
Egyptians was false; their orig. home was India. Der. Hence per-
haps gyp, a college scout (at Cambridge) ; cf. Gip (dog’s name) in
David Copperfield. The common fable that gyp is from Gk. yy, a
vulture, is unsupported.

GYRE, a circle, circular course. (L.—Gk.) ‘Or hurtle rownd in
warlike gyre ;’ Spenser, F. Q. ii. 5. 8; cf. iii. 1. 23.—L. gyrus, a circle,
circuit. — Gk. ytpos, a ring, circle; cf. yvpos, adj. round. Der. gyrate,
from L. gyrdtus, pp. of gyrare, to turn round, formed from gyrus;
gyrat-ion, gyrat-or-y.

GYRFALCON, GERFALCON, abirdofprey. (F.—Teut.and
L.) ‘Gyrfalcon, a bird of prey ;’ Kersey, ed. 17153 spelt gerfaulcon
in Cotgrave; girefaucoun in Trevisa, i. 323, to translate L. gyrofalco.
a. The prefix is French, the word being from OF . gerfaucon, girfaucon
(Godefroy), MF. gerfault, ‘a gerfaulcon, the greatest of hawks, called
also falcon gerfault;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. gerfalco, girfalco, girifalco, a ger-
falcon.—Low L. gérofalco, a gerfalcon; girefalco, in 55 Hen. III,
Excerpta Historica, p. 20 ; and (corruptly) g¥rofalco (as if named from
his circling flight; see Gyre above). The right form is girefalco. =
MHG. girvalke; where gir is from OHG. gir-, for giri, greedy (whence
also G. geier, a vulture) ; and valke represents L. falco, a falcon, See
Gier-eagle.

GYRON, a term in heraldry. See Giron.

GYVES, fetters. (AF.—E.?) In early use; only in the plural.
ME. giues, gyues (with u for v); Layamon, 15338; P. Plowman, C. xvi.
254. The g was orig. hard; we find ‘ guyvies de ferro’ in Records of
Nottingham, iii. 100 (1505); ghywes (for guyves), Allit. Morte Arthure,
3621. From AF. guives, pl., spelt gives, Fr. Chron. of London, p. 89.
Of unknown origin ; presumably Teutonic, and perhaps E.; probably
from AS. widde, a thong, cord; see Layamon, 15338, 22833


(N. E.D.).


HA, an exclamation. (E.) ‘A ha! the fox!’ Chaucer, C. T. 15387
(B 4571). When reduplicated, it signifies laughter. ‘Ha! ha! ha!’
Temp. ii. 1. 36. Common in Shak, as an exclamation of surprise. Of
onomatopoetic origin; see also Ah. OF ries. haha, to denote laughter;
MHG. ha, G. he; MHG. haha; OF. ha.

HABERDASHER, a seller of small wares. (AF.)
dasher ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 363 (A 361). ‘The haberdasher heapeth
wealth by hattes;’ Gascoigne, Fruits of War, st. 64. ‘ Haberdasher,
a hatter, or seller of hats; also, a dealer in small wares;’ Kersey.
‘A haberdasher, mercier; a poore, petty haberdasher of small wares,
mercerot ;’ Sherwood, index to Cotgrave. a. So named from selling
a stuff called hapertas in Anglo-French, of which (possibly) hats were
sometimes made. Inthe Liber Albus, ed. Riley, p. 225, is mentioned
‘la charge de hapertas;’ in the E. version by Riley, ‘the load of
hapertas.’ And again, at p. 230, we find ‘ les feez de leyne d’ Espagne,
wadmal, mercerie, canevas, . . feutre, lormerie, peil, haberdassherie,
esquireux, ... et des autres choses ge l’em acustument par fee, vi. d;’
thus Englished by Riley: ‘the fixed charge upon wool of Spain,
wadmal, mercery, canvas, ... felt, lymere, pile, haberdassherie,
squirrel-skins, .. and upon other articles that pay custom at a fixed
rate, is six pence.’ B. The word is probably of Teutonic origin; but
its history is not known. Der. haberdasher-y.

HABERGEON, a piece of armour to defend the neck and breast.
(F.—OHG.) ME. habergeon, Chaucer, C.T. 76; hawberioun, Wyclif,
1 Kings, xvii. 5. =OF. haubergeon, hauberjon, a small hauberk (Supp.
to Godefroy); dimin. of OF. hauberc ; see Hauberk.

HABILIMENT, dress, attire. (F.—L.) ‘The whiche furnyssh-
ynge his people with all habylymentys of warre;’ Fabyan’s Chron.,
Charles VII. (of France); ed. Ellis, p. 553.— F. habillement,‘apparell,
clothing; ” Cot.
dresse, apparell;* Cot. B. The verb habiller signified orig. ‘to get
ready,’ from the F, habile, able, ready ; which is from the L. habilis,
manageable, fit. SeeAble. Der. from thesame source, dis-habille,q.v.

HABIT, practice, custom, dress. (F.—L.) ME. habit, abit; the
latter spelling being commion. Spelt habit, P. Plowman, B. prol. 3;
abit, id. C. prol. 3; Ancren Riwle, p. 12,1. 8.—OF. habit, ‘a garment,
raiment,. . . also, an habit, a fashion settled, a use or custom gotten;’
Cot.=—L. habitum, acc. of habitus, condition, habit, dress, attire. = L.
habitus, held in a certain condition, pp. of habére, to have, hold, keep.
See Brugmann, i. § 638. Der. habit, verb; pp. habited, i.e. dressed,
Wint. Tale, iv. 4. 557; habit-u-al, from MF. habitual (mod. F. habituel),
explained ‘habituall’ by Cotgrave, and from Late L. habitu-alis,


256


© An haber-


Formed with suffix -ment from habiller, ‘to cloth, |


HADES


formed with suffix -alis from habitu-, for habitus, habit; habit-u-al-ly;
habitu-ate, from L. habituatus, pp. of habi‘udare, to bring into a certain
habit or condition. Also, from the same source, habit-ude, q.v., habit-
able, q.V., habit-at, q.v., habit-at-ion, q.v., hab-ili-ment, q.v. From the
L. habére are also numerous derivatives, as ex-hibit, in-hibit, in-habit,
pro-hibit ; ab-le, ab-ili-ty, dis-hab-ille; debt; prebend ; binnacle, malady.

HABITABLE, that can be dwelt in. (F.—L.) In Milton,
P. L, viii. 157; earlier, in Gower, C. A. iii. 104; bk. vii. 586.—F.
habitable, ‘ inhabitable;’ Cot.—L. habitabilis, habitable; formed with
suffix -bélis from habitd-re, to dwell, frequentative form of L. habére,
to have (supine habit-um). See Habit. Der. habitabl-y, habitable-
ness, inhabitable. ‘

HABITANT, an inhabitant. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. L. viii.
99; x. 588. Spelt habitaunt in Palsgrave. = F. habitant, ‘an inhabitant;’
Cot. ; pres. part. of F. habiter, to dwell. = L. habitare, to dwell (above).
Der. in-habitant.

HABITAT, the natural abode of an animal or plant. (L.) A
word coined for use in works on natural history. It means ‘it dwells
(there).’=—L. habitat, 3 pers. s. pres. of habitare, to dwell.

HABITATION, a dwelling. (F.—L.) In Shak. Mids, Nt. Dr.
v.17. ME. habitacioun, Chaucer, C. T. 2928 (A 2926). =F. habitation,
‘a habitation ;” Cot.—L. habitatidnem, acc. of habitatio, a dwelling. =
L. habitare, to dwell. See-Habitable.

HABITUDEH,, usual manner, quality. (F.—L.) In Shak. Com-
plaint, 114.—F. habitude, ‘custom, use;’ Cot. = L. habitido, condition;
formed with suffix -(¢)a-do from habit-, pp. stem of habére, to have.

HACIENDA, a farm, estate, farmhouse. (Span.—L.) Since
1760; chiefly with relation to former Spanish colonies. Span.


hacienda, an estate, orig. employment ; OSpan. facienda. — L. facienda,


neut. pl., things to be done; from the gerundive of /acere, to do.
See Fact.

HACK (1), to cut, chop, mangle. (E.) ME. hakken. ‘To hakke
and hewe;’ Chaucer, C. T. 2867 (A 2865). ‘ Hacked of his heaued ’
== hacks off his head; Ancren Riwle, p. 298. AS. -haccian, to cut; in
comp. ¢6-haccian, of which the pt. t. t0-haccode occurs in St. Veronica,
ed. Goodwin, p. 36, 1. 22°4-Du. kakken, to hew, chop; Dan. hakke, to
hack, hoe; Swed. hacka, to chop; G. hacken, to chop, cleave. Teut.
type, *hakkon-, or *hakkdjan-. ¢ Mr. Oliphant calls attention to
ONorthumb. hackande, troublesome, in Early Eng. Psalter, Surtees
Soc., Ps. xxxiv. 13.. ‘ Hence, perhaps, our ‘‘ hacking cough.”’”

HACK (2), a hackney. See Hackney.

HACKBUT, an arquebus,an old kind of musket. (F. —O. LowG.)
In Holinshed, Hist. Scotland, an. 1583; hackbutter, a man armed with
a hackbut, id. an. 1544. Rich. says that ‘the 33 Hen. VIII. c. 6,
regulates the length in stock and gun of the hagbut or demihaque, and
sets forth who may keep and use them.’ Also spelt hagbut, less
correctly.— MF. haguebute, ‘an haquebut, or arquebuze, a caliver ;’
Cot. B.A less correct form of hackbush, formerly hakebusse, as in
Naval Accounts of Hen. VII (1485), p. 50; see Arquebus. A mere
corruption of Low G. hakebiisse, Du. haakbus (haeckbusse in Hexham),
an arquebus; due, apparently, to some confusion with OF. buter, te
thrust.

HACKERY, a bullock-cart. (Hindi—Skt.?) Anglo-Indian. See
Supp. to Yule, who suggests Hindi chakra, a wheel, a cart; from
Skt. chakra-, a wheel. Forbes gives Hind. chhakra, a kind of
carriage, car.

HACKLE (1), HATCHET, an instrument for dressing flax or
hemp. (E.) Also spelt Heckle, q.v.

HACKLBE (2), long shining feathers on a cock’s neck; or a fly
for angling, dressed with such feathers. (E.) It appears to be the
same word as the above; see N.E. D.

HACKNEY, HACK, a horse let out for hire. (E.) ME,
hakeney, Chaucer, C. T. 16027 (G 559); P. Plowman, B. v. 318;
Late L. hackeneius, as early as 1292; ‘ pro hackeneio ferente tunicam
nocturnam et resalias;’ Expenses of John of Brabant; in The Cam-
den Miscellany, vol. ii. p. 2. Cf. AF. un hakenay, Stat. Realm, i. 288
(1340); sur hakenai, P. Langtoft’s Chron. ii. 250(1307). Hackeneius
means ‘ belonging to Hackney,’ spelt Hakeneia in 1199, Rotuli Curize
Regis, ed. Palgrave, i. 216; ME. Hakeney (Middlesex) ; Inquis. p.
Mortem (1285). See Supplement. Der. hackney-ed.

HADDOCK, a sea-fish. (E.) ME. haddoke. ‘ Hic morus, a
haddoke ;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 222, col. 2. ,Spelt haddok, Prompt.
Pary.; and in Liber Albus, p. 376. Of unknown origin; the Gael. .
adag, a haddock, is a borrowed word from English ; similarly, the
OF. hadot, ‘a salt haddock’ (Cotgrave), is plainly a less orginal
form. The suffix -ock is perhaps diminutive, as in hill-ock. The
Trish name is codog.

HADES, the abode of the dead. (Gk.) Spelt Ades, Milton, P. L.
ii, 964.—Gk. didns, dds (Attic), aé5ns (Homeric), the nether world,
‘Usually derived from a, privative, and id«éy, to see [as though it
meant ‘the unseen’]; but the aspirate in Attic makes this very


HADJI, HAJJI


doubtful; ’ Liddell and Scott.
‘account in Prellwitz.

HADJI, HAJJI, one who has performed the pilgrimage to
Mecca. (Arab.) First in'1612.—Arab. haji, ‘a Christian who has
performed the pilgrimage to Jerusalem, or a Muhammedan [who
has performed] that to Mecca;’ Rich. Dict., p. 549. Orig. the
latter.

HAMATITE, HAUMORRHAGE; see Hematite, He-
morrhage.

HAFT, a handle. (E.) ME. haft, heft. ‘Losin the haft’ =loose
in the handle; Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 339. Spelt kaft, Wyclif,
Deut. xix. 5; heft, Prompt. Parv. AS. heft, a handle; Grein, ii. 20.
+Du. heft, hecht; Icel. hepti (pron. hefti); G. heft, a handle, hilt,
portion of a book. B. The orig. sense is ‘that which is seized, or
caught up;’ cf. the pp. seen in Icel. haftr, one who is taken, a
prisoner, and Goth. hafts, joined together; with which compare L.
captus, taken. y. All from the verb seen in AS. hebban, L. capere.
See Heave.

HAG, an ugly old woman. (E.) ME. hagge; P. Plowman, B. v.
191. The pl. heggen is in the Ancren Riwle, p. 216. The AS. form
is fuller, viz. hegtis, hegtesse, used to translate L. pythonissa, a pro-
phetess or witch ; Wright’s Vocab. i. 60, col. 1, Inthe same column,
we also find: ‘ Tisiphona, weelcyrre ; Parce, heegtesse ;? on which
Mr. Wright remarks: ‘The Anglo-Saxon of these words would
appear to be transposed. Hegtesse means properly a fury, or in its
modern representative, a hag, and would apply singly to Tysiphone,
while welcyrian wasthe name of the three fates of the A. S. mythology.’
+G., hexe, a witch ; OHG. hazissa, apparently short for hagazissa, also
hagazussa. B. The suffix -tesse, OHG. -zissa, contains a feminine
ending; the base is possibly (as has been suggested) the AS. haga
(G. hag), a hedge, bush; it being supposed that witches were seen in
bushes by night. See Hedge, and Haggard. Schade refers the
AS. -tesse to teswian, to harm, from tesu, teosu, harm; thus -tesse=
‘harmer, Der. hag-gard(2), q.v.; and eyen haggard (1) is from
the same base.

HAGGARD (1), wild, said of a hawk. (F.—G.) Orig. the
name of a wild, untrained hawk. ‘ Ashagard hauke ;’ Spenser, F. Q.
i, 11. 19. ‘For haggard hawkes mislike an emptie hand ;’ Gas-
coigne’s Flowers, Memories, John Vaughan’s Theme, |. 26.—OF.
hagard, ‘hagard, wild, strange, froward ... Faulcon hagard, a
hagard, a faulcon that preyed for herself long before she was taken ;’
Cot. B. The orig. sense is ‘living in a hedge,’ hence, wild. Formed
with suffix -ard (of G. origin, G. -hart), from MHG. hag (OHG. hac),
a hedge; see Hedge, Haw. See Hatzfeld.

HAGGARD (2), lean, hollow-eyed, meagre. (F.—G.) ‘ With
haggard eyes they stare;’ Dryden, tr. of Virgil, Georg. iv. 370.
Altered sometimes to hagged, as if ‘hag-like.’ ‘The ghostly prudes
with hagged face;’ Gray, A Long Story, 4th stanza from end.
Wedgwood cites from Lestrange’s Fables: ‘A hagged carrion of a
wolf and a jolly sort of dog with good flesh upon’s back fell into
company. A peculiar use of the word above; ‘ wild,’ hence ‘ gaunt.’
See Hatzfeld.

HAGGIS, a dish commonly made in a sheep’s maw, of the
minced lungs, heart, and liver of the same animal. (Scand. ; with AF.
suffix.) ME.hagas, hageys, hakkys, Prompt. Parv. Also spelt haggas,
hagges, hakeys; see notes to Prompt. Parv., and to the Catholicon
Anglicum, p. 169; also the account in Jamieson. The AF. form is
hagiz; see Wright’s Vocab. i. 172, 1.6: ‘ Estrere le hagiz du pocenet,’
to take the haggis out of the pot. Formed, with AF, suffix -iz, -eis,
from the verb hag, to cut, found also in the E, frequentative haggle; see
Haggle (1); cf. Norm. dial. haguer, to cut up (Moisy). Cf. also
Du. haksel, minced meat, and Low G. haks un pliiks, a kind of hash
or mince. 4 The Gael. ¢aigeis, a haggis, is merely borrowed from
English.

HAGGLE (1), to cut awkwardly, mangle. (Scand.) ‘ York, all
haggled over ;’ Hen. V, iv. 6. 11. A frequentative of Lowland Sc.
hag, to cut, to hew.—Icel. héggva, to hew, from a base *haggw-
(Noreen, § 72, note 8); Swed. dial. hagga, to hew (Rietz) ; allied to
E. hew ; see Hew.

HAGGLE (2), to be slow in making a bargain. (Scand.) Cot-
grave explains OF. harceler by ‘to vex, harry, . . . also, to haggle,
hucke, hedge, or paulter long in the buying of a commodity.’ He
similarly explains barguigner by ‘to chaffer, . . . dodge, haggle,
brabble, in the making of a bargain.’ It is plain that higgle is a
weakened form of thesame word. B. It seems probable that haggle
is ultimately the same as the word above. Similatly we have Du.
hakkelen, to mangle, to stammer; explained by Sewel as ‘ to hackle,
mangle, faulter;’ also Du. hakketeren, to wrangle, cavil ; both deriva-
tives of Du. hakken, to hack. Der. haggl-er; and see higgle.

HAGIOGRAPHA, holy writings. (Gk.) A name given to
the last of the three Jewish divisions of the Old Testament, contain-


See Homer, Il. i. 3. And see the


HALBERD, HALBERT 257


ing Ps., Prov., Job, Dan., Ez., Nehem., Ruth, Esther, Chron., Cant.,
Lam., and Eccles. = Gk. dyid-ypapa (8:BAia), books written by inspira-
tion. Gk. dyio-, for dyios, devoted to the gods, sacred, holy ; and
ypap-ev, to write. B. dos is allied to Skt. yaj, to worship, For
ypapev, see Graphic, Der. hagiograph-y (in Minsheu), hagiograph-
er; cf. hagio-logy, sacred literature.

HA-HA, HAW-HAW, a sunk fence. (F.) ‘Leap each ha-ha
of truth and common sense ;’” Mason, Ep. to Sir W. Chambers, 1, 14.
=F. haha, an obstacle that interrupts one suddenly; called ha! ha!
because it laughs at the man’s surprise who meets it. =F. ha ! inter-
jection oflaughter. With the pron. haw-haw compare E. spaw for
spa. ‘Just by the haw-haw ;’ Murphy, Three Weeks after Marriage,
A. i. sc. 1 (1776).

HAIL (1), frozen rain. (E.) ME. ha3el, Layamon, 11975 ; spelt
hawel inthe later text. Later hayl (by loss of } orw), Chaucer, Good
Women, Cleop. 76. AS. hagl, hagol ; Grein.4-Icel. hagl ; Du., Dan.,
Swed. hagel; G. hagel. Teut. types *hag(a)loz, m., *hag(a)lom, n.
Allied to Gk. «ayAné, a round pebble ; so that hail-stone is tautolo-
gical, Der. hail, verb, ME, hailen, Prompt. Parv.; also hail-stone,
ME. hailstone, Wyclif, Wisdom, y. 23 (later text).

HAIL (2), to greet, call to, address. (Scand) ME. heilen.
‘Heylyn, or gretyn, saluto;’ Prompt. Parv. Spelt he33lenn (for
hejlen), Ormulum, 2814. A verb formed from Icel. heill, sb.,
prosperity, good luck; a sb. formed from Icel. heill, adj., hale,
sound, This sb. was particularly used in greeting, as in far heill,
farewell! B. The usual Icel. verb is heilsa, to say hail to one, to
greet one, whence ME. hailsen, to greet. In P. Plowman, B.v. 101, we
have: ‘I hatlse hym hendeliche, as I his frende were’=I greet him
readily, as if I were his friend; and, in this very passage, the Bodley
MS. reads: ‘I haile him.’ Cf. Swed. hel, hale, Dan. heel, hale,


whole. See Hale (1), and Whole.
HAIL! (3), an exclamation of greeting. (Scand.) ‘ All hail,
great master! grave sir, hail, I come!’ Temp. i. 2. 189. ‘ Hayl be


pow, mary ’=Lat. axe Maria; Myrc’s Instructions for Parish Priests,
ed. Peacock, 1. 422.—Icel. heill, hale, whole, adj., heill, good luck,
sb. See Hail (2). ¢ Similar is the use of AS. wes hal, lit. be whole,
may you be in good health; but the AS. hal produced the E. whole,
and the Northern E. hale. See Wassail.

HATR, a filament growing from the skin of an animal. (E.; but
influenced by ¥.) ME. heer, her, Chaucer, C. T. 591 (A 589) ; Ancren
Riwle, p. 424. AS. hér, hér, Grein, ii. 24.4-Du. haar; Icel. har ;
Dan. haar; Swed. hdr; G. haar, OHG. har. Teut. type *hérom, n.
B. But this would have given a mod. E. form hear or here ; cf. heares in
Spenser, F, Q. iv. 8.4. The form now in use is due to the influence of
ME. heire, heyre, a hair shirt ; P. Plowman, B. v.66; from OF. haire,
a hair shirt ; and this OF. formis from OHG., harra (<*har-ja), hair-
cloth, a fem. derivative from OHG. har, hair. y. The AS. hér is
further related to Icel. haddr, hair (Teut. type *hazdoz); and to
Lith. kassa, plaited hair; L. carere,to card wool. Der. hair-y, ME.
heeri, Wyclif, Gen. xxvii. 11 ; hair-i-ness ; hair-less; also hair-breadth,
-cloth, -powder, -splitting, -spring, -stroke, -trigger, -worm.

HAIRIF, HAYRIF, goose-grass; Galium Aparine. (E.) AS.
hege-rife, goose-grass. = AS, hege, a hedge (see Hay (2)) ; and -rife,
prob. allied to Rife, and meaning ‘abundant.’

HAKH, a sea-fish of the cod family. (Scand.) ‘Hake, fysche,
squilla;’ Prompt. Parv.=—Norw. hakefisk (lit. hook-fish), a fish with
hooked under-jaw, esp. of salmon and trout (Aasen) ; from Norw.
hake, a hook; see Hook. fB. Compare AS. hacod, glossed by L.
luctus ; Wright’s Vocab..i. 55, col. 2; whence Prov. E. haked, a
large pike (Cambridgeshire); Blount’s Gloss.; allied to G, heche
MHG. hechet, OHG. hachit, a pike. We may explain AS. hac-od
as furnished with sharp teeth; from Teut. *hak-, to pierce, as in
OHG. hecchen, MHG. hecken (from *hak-jan-), to pierce, sting ;
see Hack.

HAKIM, a physician, doctor. (Arab.) ‘ The Doctors are named
hackeems ;’ Sir T, Herbert, Trav. (ed. 1638), p. 234.—Arab. Lakim,
wise; also a doctor, physician. Arab. root Zakama, he exercised
authority ; Rich. Dict., p. 577.

HALBERD, HALBERT, a kind of pole-axe ; a combination
of spear and battle-axe, with a long handle. (F.—MHG.) In Shak.
Com. Errors, v. 185 ; and in Naval Accounts (1497); ed. 1896, p. 99
An AF, halebarde occurs in 1372; Antiq. Repertory, ii. 27, col. 2.
Ben Jonson has halberdiers, Every Man, ed. Wheatley, iii. 5. 14.—
OF. halebarde, ‘an halberd ;? Cot. — MHG. helmbarte, later halenbarte,
mod. G, hellebarte, an axe with which to split a helmet, furnished with
a conveniently long handle, derived from MHG. (and G.) helm, a
helmet; and MHG. (and G.) barte, OHG. bara, a broad axe. The
latter element is derived from G. bart, a beard; just as Icel. skeggja,
an axe, is from skegg, a beard; and see Barb (1). Cf. Icel. barda,
a halberd. B. The former element has also been explained as ‘long


handle;’ from MHG, halm, a helve, handle; see Helm (1) ; but


S)


258 HALCYON


this explanation is no longer favoured; see Kluge and Darmesteter.
The halberd may have been named from the jagged and irregular
shape of the iron head. Der. halberd-ier, OF. halebardier, ‘an
halberdier ;’ Cot.

HALCYON, a king-fisher; as adj., serene. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Halcyon
days’=calm days, 1 Hen. VI, i. 2.131. It was supposed that the
weather was always calm when the kingfishers were breeding. ‘They
lay and sit about midwinter, when daies be shortest; and the time
whiles they are broody, is called the halcyon daies; for during that
season, the sea is calme and nauigable, especially in the coast of
Sicilie;’ Holland’s Pliny, b. x. c. 32.—L. halcyon, commonly alcyon,
a kingfisher.=Gk. dAxvay, ddxvwy, a kingfisher. B. The aspirate
seems to be wrong, and due to association with Gk. GAs, sea, combined
with xvwy, ‘ conceiving,’ by popular etymology; but the Gk. name is
clearly cognate with L. alcédo, the true L. name for the bird.

HALE (1), whole, healthy, sound. (E.) ‘For they bene hale
enough, I trowe ;” Spenser, Sheph. Kal., July, 107. A Northern E.
form; spelt hale in Cursor Mundi, 24888. It is the Northern form
corresponding to AS. hal, whence ME. hool, E. whole. See
Whole.

HALE (2), HAUL, to drag, draw violently. (F.-OHG.) ME.
halien, halen; whence mod. E. hale and a later form haul; it appears
as hall in 1581. Spelt halie, P. Plowman, B. viii. 95; hale, Chaucer,
Parl. of Foules, 151.—F. haler, to pull; which first appears in the
tath cent. (Hatzfeld).—OHG. halon, holén (G. holen), to summon,
to fetch. 4+ OF ries. halia, to fetch; OSax. halon, to bring, fetch; Du.
halen, to fetch, draw, pull; Low G. halen (whence Dan. hale, Swed.
hala), to pull, haul. Allied to AS. ge-holian, to acquire, get; L.
calare, to summon; Gk. xadeiv, to summon. See Calends. Der.
haul, sb., haul-er, haul-age; also halyard,q.v. #7 Hale is the older
form; we find ‘halede hine to grunde’=haled him to the ground,
Layamon, 25888 (later text); haul first occurs in the pp. chauled,
Life of Beket, ed. W. H. Black, 1. 1497.

HALF, one of two equal parts of a thing. (E.) ME. half; ‘half
a bushel;’ Chaucer, C. T. 4242 (A 4244). OMerc. half; AS. healf,
Northumb. half, Luke, xix. 8; where the later AS. text has half.
+ Du. half; Icel. halfr; Swed. half; Dan. halv; Goth. halbs; G.
halb, OHG. halp. B. In close connexion with this adj. we find ME.
half, AS, healf (Gen. xiii. 9), Icel. halfa, Goth. halba, OHG. halpa,
used with the sense of ‘side,’ or ‘ part;” and this may have been the
orig. sense. It occurs, e.g. in the Goth. version of 2 Cor. iii. 10,
where the Gk. év rovTw 7@ pepe: is translated by in thizai halbai.
y. A late example of the sb. is in the phrase Jeft half=left side, or
left hand; P. Plowman, B. ii. 5. It survives in mod. E. behalf; see
Behalf. Cf. Skt. kalp-aya (causal of k/p), to arrange, to distribute
(Uhlenbeck). Der. halve, verb, ME. haluen (= halven), Wyclif, Ps. liv.
243 halv-ed ; half-blood, half-breed, half-bred, half-brother, half-sister,
half-moon, half-pay, half-way, half-witted, half-yearly. Also half-penny,
in which the # (as well as the 7) has long been lost in pronunciation ;
spelt halpeny, P. Plowman, B. vi. 307. Also be-half.

HALIBUT, a large flat-fish. (E.) ‘ Hallibut, a fish like a plaice;’
Kersey’s Dict.,ed.1715. Cotgrave translates OF. flatelet by ‘a hallibut
(fish).’ Spelt halybut in Fabyan’s Chron., ed. Ellis, p. 587. Com-
pounded of ME. hali, holy (see Holy), and butze, a flounder, plaice,
which occurs in Havelok, 759. See Butt (4). So called because
excellent eating for holidays; the sense being ‘holy (i.e. holiday)
plaice.’ The fish often attains to a large size, and weighs as much
as 490 lbs. ‘The cognate languages have similar names for it. + Du.
heilbot; from heilig, holy, and bot, a plaice. Cf. Swed. helgflundra,
from helg, holidays, and flundra, a flounder; Dan. helle-flynder, from
hellig, holy, and flynder, a flounder.

HALIDOM, a holy relic. (E.) ME. halidom, halidam. ‘That
dar y swere on the halydom;’ Rob. of Brunne, Handlyng Synne,
1. 5629. AS. haligdom; ‘on pam haligddme swerian,’ swear on the
halidom, Laws of Ethelred, sect. 3, c. 2; in Thorpe, Anc. Laws,
i. 293.—AS. halig, holy; and -ddm, suffix, orig. the same as dém,
doom. See Holy and Doom. + Du. heiligdom; Icel. helgiddmr,
Dan. helligdom; G. heiligthum. @| By my halidam (with -dam for
-dom) was imagined to refer to our Lady (Dame).

HALIMOTH, a court of a lord of a manor, held in a hall. (E.)
ME. halimote, halimot. ‘Vel halimoto;? Laws of Hen. I., in
Thorpe, Anc. Laws, i. 517. Lit. ‘hall-moot;’ from ME. hal, hall;
and AS. gemét, ME. imot, a moot, a meeting. See Halland Moot.
For the form of the word, cf. Handiwork.

HALL, a large room. (E.) ME. halle, Chaucer, C. T. 2523
(A 2521). OMerc. hall; AS. heall, heal, Grein, ii. 50; the acc. healle
occurs in Mark, xiv. 15,'where the latest text has halle. 4. Du. hal;
Icel. hall, holl; OSwed. hall. (The G. halle is a borrowed word.)
Teut. type *halld, f., for *halnad; from *hal, 2nd grade of *helan-, to
cover, shelter; cf. AS. helan, to hide, conceal, cover; just as the L.
cella is allied to L. célare, to conceal, cover; the orig. sense being


HAM


‘cover,’ or place of shelter. See Cell, Der. hall-mark, guild-hall,
halimote. > Quite unconnected with L. aula.

HALLELUJAG, the same as Alleluiah, q. v.

HALLIARD, the same as Halyard, q. v.

HALLOO, HALLOW, to shout. (F.) ME. halowen, to chase
with shouts; Chaucer, Book Duch. 379; Rich. Redeles, iii. 228; cf.
‘ Halow, schypmannys crye, Celeuma;’ Prompt. Parv.=OF. halloer,
to pursue with shouts (Godefroy). Of imitative origin. Cotgrave
has F, halle, ‘an interj. of cheering or setting on a dog,’ whence
haller, ‘ to hallow, or incourage dogs with hallowing.’

HALLOW, to sanctify, make holy, (E.) ME. hal3ien, Layamon,
17496; later halwe, P. Plowman, B. xv. 557; halewe, halowe, Wyclif,
John, xi. 55. AS. hdlgian, to make holy; from halig, holy. See
Holy. And see below.

HALLOWMASS, the feast of All Hallows or All Saints.
(Hybrid; E. and L.) In Shak. Rich. II, v. i. 80. A familiar ab-
breviation for All Hallows’ Mass=the mass (or feast) of All Saints.
In Eng. Gilds, ed. Toulmin Smith, p. 351, we have the expression
alle halowene tyd=all hallows’ tide; and again, the tyme of al halowene
=the time of all hallows. B. Here hallows’ is the gen. pl. of
hallow, ME. halwe, a saint ; just as halowene is the ME. gen. pl. of the
same word. The pl. halwes (=saints) occurs in Chaucer, C. T, 14.
y. The ME. halwe=AS. halga, definite form of the adj. halig, holy ;
so also the ME, halowene = AS. halgena, definite form of the gen. pl.
of the same adj. See Holy, and see Mass (2). 2. Similarly,
halloween =all hallows’ even.

HALLUCINATION, wandering of mind. (L.) ‘For if vision
be abolished, it is called cecitas, or blindness; if depraved, and
receive its objects erroneously, hallucination ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. iii. c. 18. § 4. Also in Minsheu, ed. 1627. Formed, by
analogy with F. sbs. in -tion, from L. halliicinatio, allicinatio, or
alicinati a wandering of the mind.=L. hallicinari, allicinari, or
to wander in mind, dream, rave. Cf. Gk. dAvecy, ddvev,
to wander in mind; #Aedés, distraught. Der. hallucinate, verb,
hallucinat-or-y. .

HALM, the same as Haulm, q.v.

HALO, a luminous ring round the sun or moon. (F.—L.—Gk.)
‘This halo is made after this manner;’ Holland’s Plutarch, p. 68z
(R.).—F. halo (16th c.); Hatzfeld.—L. acc. kalo, from nom. halés,
a halo.=Gk. ddws, a round threshing-floor, in which the oxen trod
out a circular path ; a halo.

HALSER (in Minsheu), the same as Haweer, q. v.

HALT (1), lame. (E.) ME. halt, Havelok, 543. OMere. halt,
AS. healt, Northumb. halt, Luke, xiv. 21. + Icel. haltr; Dan. halt;
Swed. halt; Goth. halts; OHG. halz. Teut. type *haltoz. Cf. L.
claudus, lame. Der. halt, verb=ME. halten, AS. healtian (Ps. xvii.
47)3 halt-ing, halt-ing-ly.

HALT (2), as sb., asudden stop; as a verb, to stop quickly at the
word of command. (F.—G.) ‘And in their march soon made a halt;”*
Sir W. Davenant, The Dream, st.19. Amilitary term. Dr. Murray
says it first came in as an Ital. term, without initial 4; and Richardson
quotes the form al¢ from Milton, P. L. vi. 532, where mod. editions
have halt. The h is due to F.=—F. halte (Hatzfeld) ; cf. Ital. alto; as
in fare alto, to make a halt, to stop.—G. halt, halt! lit. hold! from
halten, to hold, check, cognate with E. Hold (1), q.v. The word
has passed, from G., into several languages.

HALTER, a rope for leading a horse, a noose. (E.) ME. halter,
Gower, C. A. ii. 47; bk. iv. 1357. Also helfter =halter, in O. Eng.
Hom., ed. Morris, i. 53, 1. 18. AS. healfter (rare); the dat. on
healftre=with a halter, occurs as a translation of L. zz camo in
Ps, xxxi. 12 (Camb. MS.), ed. Spelman; also spelt helftre; we find
‘capistrum, helftre,’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 84, col. 1; cf. Thorpe’s
Analecta, p. 28, 1. 1. + MDu. halfter (Hexham) ; G. halfter, a halter ;
OHG. halftra; O. Low G. haliftra (Schade). Teut. types *halftr-,
*haliftr- (Franck). From the base *halb-, apparently signifying ‘to
hold;’? see Helve. Lit. ‘something to hold by;’ cf. L. cap-istrum,
a halter, from L. capere, to take hold. Der. halter, verb.

HALVE, to divide in half. (E.) See Half.

HALYARD, HALLIARD, a rope for hoisting or lowering
sails. (E.) Both spellings are in Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715. A form
due to popular etymology, as if the ropes were so called because
fastened to the yards of the ship from which the sails are suspended,
and so hale or draw the yards into their places. But the dis excrescent;
from ME. halier, lit. ‘a haler,’ or ‘hauler.’. ‘Oon uptye with 2 haliers ;’
Riley, Mem. of London, p. 370 (A.D. 1373); Aalliers, Hakluyt, Voy.
iii. 847. See Hale (2).

HAM, the inner or hind part of the knee; the thigh of an animal.
(E.) ME. hamme, homme; the pl. is spelt both hommen and hammes,
Ancren Riwle, p.122. AS. hamm; ‘ poples,hamm ;’ Wright’s Vocab.
i. 44, col. 23 ‘suffragines, hamma’ (pl.); id. 4 Du. ham; Icel. hom


(gen. hamar); OHG, hamma, proy. G. hamme. B. Connected by


HAMADRYAD


Brugmann (i. § 421) with Gk. «<vnyn, the lower part of the leg. (But
see Gambol.) Der. ham-string, sb., Shak. Troil. i. 3.154; ham-
string, verb.

HAMADRYQAD, a dryad or wood-nymph. (L.—Gk.) Properly
used rather in the pl. Hamadryades, whence the sing. hamadryad was
(incorrectly) formed, by cutting off the suffix -es. Chaucer, C. T.
2930 (A 2938), has the corrupt form Amadrydes. = L. pl. hamadryades
(sing. hamadryas), wood-nymphs.=Gk. pl. “Apadpuades, wood-
nymphs; the life of each nymph depended on that of the tree to
which she was attached. —Gk. Gua, together with (i.e. coexistent
with) ; and dpts,atree. “Aya is co-radicate with same; and d5pts with
tree, See Same and Tree.

HAME, one of the two bent sticks round a horse collar. (E.)
Usually in the pl. kames. ME. hame; Catholicon Anglic. (1483). In
Wright’s Vocab. i. 168, the AF. esteles is glossed by hames; and
boceles by beru-hames; cf. prov. E. bargham(E. D.D.).4-Du. haam. Cf.
MDnu. hamme, ‘a cratch of wood to tie beasts to, or a yoke;’ Hexham,
Further allied to Skt. gamya, the pin of a yoke; Pers. sim, saym, ‘ the
neck-yoke of oxen,’ Rich. Dict., p. 866. (Horn, § 764; Uhlenbeck.)
Cf. Hem (1).

HAMLET, a small village. (F.—O. Low G.) ME. hamelet, of
three syllables; Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 269; spelt kamelat,
Barbour, Bruce, iv. 195 ; hamillet, id. ix. 403 (Edinb. MS.) ; hamlet,
id. ix. 403 (Camb. MS.). — AF. hamelet, Year-books of Edw. I, 1292-3,
p- 25; dimin. of OF. hamel (whence mod. F. hameau). Hamel is
used by Froissart, ii. 2. 232 (Littré). The suffix -el is also dimin. ;
the base being ham-.—OFriesic ham, a home, dwelling; cognate
with AS. ham, whence E. home. See Home. The fact that the
word is French explains the difference of vowel.

HAMMER, a tool for driving nails. (E.) ME. hamer, hammer ;
Chaucer, C. T. 2510 (A 2508); Havelok, 1877. AS. hamor, Grein,
ii, 11.4-Du. hamer ; Icel. hamarr; Dan. hammer ; Swed. hammare ;
G. hammer ; OHG. hamar. . Of doubtful origin ; Curtius (i. 161)
connects it with Church Slavonic kameni (Russ. kamene), a stone.
Perhaps orig. ‘a stone implement ;’ Icel. hamarr also means ‘a rock.’


Der. hammer, verb, K. John, iv. 1.67; hammer-head (a kind of shark). |


HAMMERCLOTH, the cloth which covers a coach-box.
(Hybrid; Du. and E.?) The N.E.D. quotes, from Mann. and Househ.
Exp. (1465), p. 315, ‘My mastyr bout [bought] . . xlj elles of
hamer-clothe. Also, from Archzol. xvi. 91 (Document of the time of
Queen Mary), “Hamer-clothes, with our arms and badges of our
colours . . apperteininge unto the same wagon.’ Of unknown origin.
B. But perhaps the form hammer is an E. adaptation of the Du. word
hemel (which was not understood); with the addition of E. cloth.
Du. hemel (1) heaven, (2) a tester of a bed, roof of a coach, canopy,
dais, baldachin (Calisch). ‘ Den hemel van een koetse, the seeling of
a coach,’ Hexham; explained by Sewel as ‘the testern of a coach.’
Cf. also MDu. hemelen, ‘to hide, cover, adorne;’ Hexham. Also
WFlem. hemelwagen, a triumphal car (De Bo). y. Cognate with
Swed., Dan., and G. kimmel, heaven, a canopy, tester. See hemel
in Franck.

HAMMOCK, a piece of strong netting slung to form a hanging
bed. (West Indian.) ‘Those beds which they call kamacas, or
Brasill beds;’ Hakluyt’s Voyages, iii. 641. ‘Cottom for the making
of hamaccas, which are Indian beds;’? Ralegh, Discovery of Guiana,
ed. 1596, p. 32 (Todd). ‘ Beds or hamacks;’ Sir T. Herbert, Travels,
p- 6 (id.).. Columbus, in the Narrative of his First Voyage, says: ‘a
great many Indians came to-day for the purpose of bartering their
cotton, and hamacas, or nets, in which they sleep’ (Webster). Cf.
Span. hamaca,a hammock. Of West Indian origin ; prob. Caribbean.
Eden has amacca, ed. Arber, p. 192; hamaca, p. 230. 4] Ingeniously
corrupted in Dutch to hangmat, i.e. a hanging mat; but the older
Du. form was hammak (Sewel).

HAMPER (1), to impede, hinder, harass. (E.) ME. hamperen,
hampren; the pp. is hampered and hampred, Will. of’ Palerne, 441,
4694. ‘For, I trow, he can hampre thee;’ Rom. of the Rose, 6426.
A difficult word; but it seemsto be a nasalised form allied to Low G.
hapern, EF ries, haperen, to stop short. Cf. Alsace haperen, hamperen,
to hesitate, proceed with difficulty; ’shampert,it goes hard (E. Martin) ;
Low G. hampern, occasional form of happern, happeln, to be stuck
fast (Berghaus); Du. kaperen, to stop, stagnate, flag, fail; de machine
hapert, the machine flags, is hampered; er hapert iets aan, there is
a hitch; Pomeran. kappern, hapern, to meet with difficulties; Swed.
dial. happla, to stammer; happe, to back a horse; Dan. happe, to
stutter. Cf. Hopple. Der. hamper, a fetter (rare).

HAMPER (2), a kind of basket. (F.—G.) ‘An hamper of
golde;’ Fabyan’s Chron., an. 1431-2; ed. Ellis, p. 607. ‘An hampyr
of gold;’ Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 20. ‘Cophinus, hampere ;’ Voc.
659. 10. A shortened form of Hanaper, q.v. ‘Clerk of the Hamper
or hanager (Clericus hanaperii) is an officer in Chancery (Anno 2 Edw.
iy. c. I) otherwise called Warden of the Hamper in the same statute ;’


HANDSEL, HANSEL 259:


Blount’s Law Lexicon. OF. hanapier; Low L. hanapérium, a large’
vessel for keeping cups in. OF. hanap (Low L. hanapus), a drinking-
cup.=OFrankish *hnapp- (Du. nap); OHG. hnapf (MHG. napf),
a drinking-cup.-4+AS. hnep, as a gloss to L. ciatus (cyathus) ; Wright’s.
Vocab. i. 24, col. 2. Doublet, hanaper.

HAMSTER, a species: of rodent, allied to the rat. (G.) The
skins of hamsters ;’ ‘Topsell, Four-footed Beasts, ed. 1658, p. 413.—
G. hamster, ‘German marmot;’ Fliigel.

HANAPER, the old form of Hamper (2). Cf. ‘ hanypere, or
hamper, canistrum ;’ Prompt. Parv., p. 226. ‘The Hanaper office
in the Court of Chancery derives its name from the hanaperium,
a large basket in which writs were deposited,’ &c. ; Way’s note.

HAND, the part of the body used for seizing and holding. (E.)
ME. hand, hond, Chaucer, C. T. 843 (A 841). AS. hand, hond;
Grein, ii. 11.-4-Du. hand; Icel. hind, hand; Dan. haand; Swed. hand;
Goth. handus; G. hand; OHG. hant. Teut. type *handuz, fem.
Root uncertain. Someconnect it with Goth. hinthan, to seize, a strong’
verb (pt. t. hanth, pp. hunthans), only found in the compounds:
frahinthan, to take captive, ushinthan, to take captive. Der. hand,
verb, Temp. i. 1. 253; hand-er ; hand-barrow, hand-bill, hand-book
(imitated from G. handbuch, see Trench, Eng. Past and Present) ;
hand-breadth, Exod. xxv. 253 hand-cart; hand-ful (Wyclif has hond-
fullis, pl., Gen. xxxvii. 7); hand-gallop; hand-glass, hand-grenade,
hand-kerchief (see Kerchief), hand-less, hand-maid (Gen. xvi. 1),
hand-maiden (Luke, i. 48), hand-spike, hand-staves (Ezek. xxxix. 9),
hand-weapon (Numb. xxxv. 18), hand-writing. And see hand-cuff,
hand-i-cap, hand-i-craft, hand-i-work, hand-le, hand-sel, hand-some,
hand-y.

HANDCUFF, a manacle, shackle forthe hand. (E.) In Todd’s
Johnson, without a reference; rare in books. The more usual word
(in former times) was hand-fetter,; used by Cotgrave to translate OF.
manette, manicle, and manotte. From hand and cuff. @ Too late to
be an adaptation of ME. and AS. handcops, a handcuff. We find
‘ manica, hond-cops’ in a vocabulary of the 12th century; Wright’s
Vocab. i. 95, col. 2

HANDICAP, a race for horses of all ages. (E.) Ina handicap,
horses carry different weights according to their ages, &c., with a view
to equalising their chances. The word was formerly the name of
agame. ‘To the Miter Taverne in Woodstreete ... Here some of
us fell to handycapp, a sport that I never knew before ;’? Pepys’ Diary,
Sept. 18, 1660. Orig. the same as the Newe Feire, described in
P. Plowman, B. v. 327; which shows that it was a custom to barter
articles, and to settle by arbitration which of the articles was more:
valuable, and how much (by way of ‘amends’) was to be given to the
holder of the inferior one. From this settlement of ‘amends’ arose
the system known as handicapping. The etymology is from hand?’ cap
(=hand in cap); from the mode of drawing lots. See the N. E.D.
and my Notes on P. Plowman; also N. and Q., June 23, 1855.

HANDICRAFT, manual occupation, by way of trade. (E.)
Cotgrave translates OF. mestier by ‘a trade, occupation, mystery,
handicraft.’ A corruption of handcraft; the insertion of i being due
to an imitation of the form of handiwork, in which i is a real part of.
the word. AS. handcreft, a trade; Canons under K. Edgar, sect. xi;
in Thorpe’s Ancient Laws, ii. 246. See Hand and Craft. Der.
handicrafts-man. :

HANDIWORK, HANDYWORK, work done by the
hands. (E.) ME. handiwerk, hondiwerc; spelt hondiwerc, O. Eng.
Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 129, 1. 20. AS. handgeweorc, Deut. iv. 28.
— AS. hand, hand ; and geweorc, a collective form of weorc, work. See
Hand and Work. @ The prefix ge- in AS. is extremely
common, and makes no appreciable difference in the sense of a word.
In later E., it is constantly rendered by ?- or y-, as in y-clept, from
AS. gecleoped.

ANDLBE, to treat of, manage. (E.) ME. handlen, Chaucer,
C. T. 8252 (E 376). AS. handlian, Gen. xxvii. 12. Formed with
suffix -J and causal -ian from AS. hand, hand.4 Du. handelen, to han-
dle, trade; Icel. hondla; Dan. handle, to treat, use, trade; Swed.
handla, G. handeln, to trade. All similarly formed. See Hand.
Allied to handle, sb., lit. a thing by which to manage a tool; the dat.
pl. hondlen occurs early, in St. Juliana, ed. Cockayne and Brock,
p- 59; from AS. handle, a handle, Corpus Gloss. 1904. Cf. Dan.
handel, a handle.

HANDSEL, HANSEL, a first instalment or earnest of a
bargain. (Scand.) 1. In making bargains, it was formerly usual to
pay a small part of the price at once, to conclude the bargain and as
an earnest of the rest. The lit. sense of the word is ‘delivery into
the hand’ or ‘hand-gift.”. The word often means a gift or bribe,
a new-year’s gift, an earnest-penny, the first money received in a
morning, &c. See Hansel in Halliwell. ME. hansele, P. Plowman,
C. vii. 375; B. v. 326; hansell, Rich. Redeles, iv. 91. 2. Another


sense of the word was ‘a giving of hands,’ a shaking of hands by


5 2


260. HANDSOME


way of concluding a bargain; see handsal in Icel. Dict. Cf. AS.
handselen, a delivery into the hand; cited by Lye from a Glossary
(Cot. 136); see Voc. 449. 29. [The AS. word is rare, and the word
is rather to be considered as Scand.]—Icel. handsal, a law term, the
transaction of a bargain by joining hands; ‘hand-shaking was with
the men of old the sign of a transaction, and is still used among
farmers and the like, so that to shake hands is the same as to conclude
a bargain’ (Vigfusson); derived from Icel. hand, hand, and sal, a
sale, bargain. Cf. Dan. handsel, a handsel, earnest; Swed. handsol.
Der. handsel or hansel, verb, used in Wamer’s Albion’s England,
b. xii. c. 75,1. 73 spelt hanselle, Cath. Angl. (1483).

HANDSOME, comely, orig. dexterous. (E.) Formerly it
signified able, adroit, dexterous; see Trench, Select Glossary; Shak.
has it in the mod. sense. ME. handsum. ‘Handsum, or esy to hond
werke, esy to han hand werke, manualis ;’ Prompt. Parv.=AS. hand,
hand; and suffix -swm, as in wyn-sum, winsome, joyous; but the
whole word handsum does not appear.4-Du. handzaam, tractable,
serviceable. . The suffix -sum is a weaker grade of Du. -zaam,
G. -sam (in lang-sam) ; see -some, suffix. Der. handsome-ly; hand-
someness, Troil. ii. I. 163 spelt hansom-nesse in Palsgrave.

HANDY (1), dexterous, expert. (E.) ‘With handy care;’
Dryden, Baucis and Philemon, 1.61. From hand and -y.  Some-
what different from ME. hendi, which occurs in King Horn, ed.
Lumby, 1336. ‘Theonne beo 3e his hendi children’ =then ye are his
dutiful children ; Ancren Riwle, p. 186; from AS. hendig, appearing
in the comp. Jist-hendig, having skilful hands (Grein) ; which is com-
posed of AS. dist, skill, and hendig, an adj. regularly formed from the
sb. hand by the addition of the suffix -ig and the consequent vowel
change from a toe. See Hand. + Du. handig, handy, expert ; cf.
Dan. hendig, usually behendig, expert, dexterous ; Swed. handig, dex-
terous ; Goth. handugs, clever, wise. Cf. G. behend, agile, dexterous ;
and see Handy (2).

HANDY (2), convenient, near. (E.) Also from hand and -y.
‘Very handy and convenient;’ T. Fuller, Pisgah Sight, i. 400 (N.E.D.).
‘Ah! though he lives so handy, He never now drops in to sup ;’
Hood’s Own, i. 44. Different in form from ME. hende. ‘ Nade
his help kende ben’=had not help been near him; William of Pa-
lerne, 2513. AS. gehende, near; ‘sumor is gehende’ =summer is nigh
at hand, Luke, xxi. 30; ‘he wees gehende pam scipe’=he was nigh
unto the ship, John, vi. 19. [The prefix ge- could always be dropped,
and is nearly lost in mod. English.] The AS. gehende is an ady. and
prep., formed from hand by suffixed -e (for -jo-) and yowel-change.
See Handy (1).

HANDYW ORK, the same as Handiwork, q.v.

HANG, to suspend; to be suspended. (E.) Here two E. verbs
and the ON, hengja have been mixed together. See the full account
in the N. E. D. A. Trans. and weak verb, pt. t. and pp. hanged.
‘Born to be hanged;’ Temp.i. 1.35. But the pt.t. is generally
turned into hung, as in ‘ hung their eyelids down;’ 1 Hen. IV, iii. 2.
81. ME. hangien, hongien; also hangen, hongen. ‘Honged hym
after’ =he hanged himself afterwards; P. Plowman, B. i. 68; pp.
hanged, id. B, prol.176. AS. hangian, hongian, but with intransitive
sense, Grein, il. 14; the pt. t. hangode occurs in Beowulf, ed. Grein,
2085. Cf. Icel. hengja, to hang up (weak verb), G. hingen (weak
verb). Teut. type *hangjan-. B. ME. kangen, pt. t. heng (some-
times hing), pp. hongen. ‘And theron heng a broche of gold ful
schene;’ Chaucer, C. T. 160. ‘ By ounces henge his lokkes that he
hadde ;’ id. 679. The ME. infin. hangen is conformed to the causal
and Ice]. forms, the AS. infin. being always contracted. AS. hon, to
hang, but transitive in sense (contr. from hahan or hanghan); pt. t.
heng, pp. hangen; Grein,ii.95. Cf. Icel. hanga, to hang, intr.; pt.
t. hekk, pp. hanginn; Goth. hahan, pt. t. haihah (formed by redupli-
cation), pp. hahans; G. hangen, pt. t. hieng, hing, pp. gehangen.
Allied to L. cunctari, to hesitate, delay, and Skt. gazk, to hesitate,
be in uncertainty, doubt, fear. Brugmann, i. § 420. @ The Du.
hangen, Dan. henge, Swed. hanga, are forms used with both trans.
and intrans. senses. Der. hang-er, (1) one who hangs, (2) a sus-
pended sword, orig. part of a sword-belt whence the sword was sus-
pended, Hamlet, v. 2. 157; hanger-on, hang-ing; hang-ings, Tam,
Shrew, ii. 351; hang-man, Meas. iv. 2. 18; hang-dog, Pope, Donne
Versified, Sat. iv. 267.

HANGNAIL; for angnail, a form of Agnail, q. v.

HANK, a skein or coil of thread or yarn. (Scand.) Cotgrave
translates OF. bobine by ‘a skane or hanke of gold or silver thread.’
‘An hank ;’ Catholicon Angl. (1483). Cf. prov. E. hank, a skein, a
loop to fasten a gate, a handle (Halliwell). The rare ME. verb
hanken, to fetter, occurs in Cursor Mundi, 16044.—Icel. hanki, the
hasp or clasp of a chest; honk, a hank, coil; Dan. hank, a handle,
ear of a vessel; Swed. hank, a string, tie-band. Also Low G. hank,
a handle (Liibben) ; G. henkel, a handle, ring, ear, hook. B. The
orig. sense seems to be ‘a loop,’ or ‘hasp,’ or ‘hook ;’ and the sb.


HARBINGER


is a nasalised form allied to Icel. haki, a hook, G. haken, a hook,
AS. haca, a fastening of a door. See Hatch (1), Hook.

HANKER, to long importunately. (E.) Not in early use. ‘And
felt such bowel-hankerings To see an empire, all of kings;’ Butler,
Hudibras, pt. iii. c. 2. 1. 239. Cf. prov. E. hank, to hanker after
(Worth) ; Halliwell. This verb is a frequentative allied to prov.
E. hake, to wander about, loiter, hanker after; also to tease; further
allied to prov. E. hake, a hook, and to hank (above). And see hanker
in the E.D.D.--MDnu. anckeren (surely for hanckeren), ‘to long or
desire much after anything ;” Hexham. Cf. WFlem. hankeren, with
the same sense as mod. Du. hunkeren, to hanker after, formerly hon-
keren (=hankeren) ; see Sewel. @ Perhaps it has often been asso-
ciated with the verb ¢o hang. ;

HANSEATIC, pertaining to the Hanse Towns in Germany.
(F.—OHG.) ‘The chiefe cities of the Hans;’ Hakluyt, Voy. i.
155. The Hanse towns were so called because associated in a league.
= OF. hanse, ‘the hanse; a company, society, or corporation of mer-
chants;” Cot.<OHG. hansa, mod. G. hanse, an association, league
(Fliigel).+-Goth. hansa, a band of men, Mk. xv. 16; Luke, vi. 17.4
AS. hos [for *hans], a band of men; Beowulf, 924. The Finnish
kansa, people, was borrowed from Teutonic. 4 The league began
about A.D. 1140 (Haydn).

HANSEL, the same as Handsel, q.v.

HANSOM, a kind of cab. (E.) Modern. An abbreviation for
‘ Hansom’s patent safety cab.’ From the name of the inventor (1834).
Hansom is prob. a variant of Hanson (son of Hans); see Bardley’s
E. Surnames.

HAP, fortune, chance, accident. (Scand.) ME. hap, happ; P.
Plowman, B. xii. 108; Layamon, 816, 3857.=—Icel. happ, hap, chance,
good luck. Cf. AS. gehep, fit; Allfric’s Colloquy, in Voc. 92. 8;
also AS. megenhep, full of strength, mddhep, full of courage, Grein,.
ii. 219, 259. | The W. haf, luck, hap, chance, must be borrowed
from E.; but the Olrish cod, Irish cobdh, victory, triumph, is cognate.
Der. happ-y, orig. lucky, Pricke of Conscience, 1334; happ-i-ly, happ-
i-ness ; hap-less, Gascoigne, Fruits of War, st. 108; hap-less-ly ; hap-
ly, Shak. Two Gent. i. 1.°32 (happily in the same sense, Meas. iv. 2.
98) ; hap-hazard, Holland, tr. of Livy, p. 578 (R.); happ-en, verb, q.v.;
mis-hap, per-haps.

HAPPEN, to befal. (Scand.) ME. happenen; Gower has
hapneth=it happens; C. A. iii. 62; bk. vi. 1815. ‘sif me pe lyffe
happene’ =if life be granted me; Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 1269.
B. The form happenen is an extension of the commoner form happen
(mod. E. hap); ‘In any cas that mighte falle or happe;’ Chaucer,
C. T. 587 (A 585). The latter verb is formed directly from the
sb. hap above. With the ending -exen compare Goth. verbs
in -nan.

HARAKIRI, a form of suicide. (Japan.) Also known as ‘happy
dispatch ;” but lit. suicide by disembowelment.= Jap. kara, belly ;
kiri, to cut (N.E, D.).

HARANGUE, a popular address. (F.-OHG.) In Milton, P. L.
xi. 663. ME. arang, Ratis Raving, i. 244.—MF. harangue, ‘an oration,

. set speech, long tale;’ Cot. Cf. Span. arenga, Ital. aringa,.
arringa, an harangue. fB. The Ital. aringa signifies a speech made
from an aringo, which Florio explains by ‘a pulpit;’ aringo also
meant an arena, lists, place of declamation.. The more lit. sense is
a speech made in the midst of a ring of people.—OHG. hring (mod.
G. ring), a ring, a ting of people, an arena, circus, lists; cognate
with E. ring. See Ring. 4 The vowel a (for 2) reappears in the
sb. rank; see Rank, Range. The prefix ha- in F., and a- in Span.
and Ital., are due to the OHG. h-, now dropped. Der. harangue,.
verb, Butler, Hudibras, pt. iii. c. 2. 1. 438.

HARASS, to torment, vex, plague. (F.—OHG.) Also spelt
harras. ‘To harass and weary the English ;’ Bacon, Life of Hen. VII,
ed. Lumby, p. 61 (spelt harrasse in R.).—MF. harasser, ‘to tire, or
toile out,.. . vex, disquiet;’ Cot. B. Of disputed origin; but it
seems best to suppose it to be an extension of OF. harer; ‘harer vn
chien, to hound a dog at, or set a dog on a beast;’ Cot.—OHG.
haren, to cry out; allied to Goth. hazjan, to praise. Der. harass, sb.,


' Milton, Samson, 257; harass-er.


HARBINGER, a forerunner. (F.—OHG.) In Shak. Macb. i.
4.45. See Trench, Select Glossary. The » stands for r, and the older
form is ME. herbergeour, one who provided lodgings for a host or
army of people. This sense is retained in Bacon, who says: ‘There -
was a harbinger who had lodged a gentleman in a very ill room;’
Apophthegms, no. 54 (or 63). ‘The fame anon thurgh Rome toun
is born... By herbergeours that wenten him biforn ;’ Chaucer, C. T.
5417 (Bgg5). In the title of the legend of St. Julian, in Bodley MS.
1596, fol. 4, he is called ‘ St. Julian the gode herberour,’ i.e. the good


‘harbourer. Herbergeour is formed (by help of the suffix -our, L. -a7-


rem, denoting the agent) from the OF. herberger, ‘ to harbour, lodge,
or dwell in a house;’ Cot. (and see Godefroy).—OF. herberge, ‘a.


HARBOUR


house, harbour, lodging ;’ Cot.; mod. F. auberge. =- MHG. herberge,
OHG. heriberga, a lodging, harbour; see further under Harbour.


HARBOUR, a lodging, shelter, place of refuge. (Scand.) ME. |


herberwe, Chaucer, C. T. 767 (A 765); whence mod. E. harbour by
change of -erwe to -our, and the use of ar to represent the later'sound of
er. ‘Che w stands for an older 3, and this again for g; the spelling her-
ber 32 isin Layamon, 28878. — Icel. herbergi, a harbour, inn, lodging, lit.
a ‘ host-shelter ;’ derived from Icel. herr, an army, and barg, 2nd grade
of bjarga, to save, help, defend. Cf. MSwed. herberge, an inn; derived
from her, an army, and berga, to defend (Ihre). + OHG. heriberga, a
camp, lodging; from OHG. heri (G. heer), an army, and bergan, to
shelter; whence come mod. F. auberge, Ital. albergo, an inn, and mod.
E. harbinger, q.v. B. For the former element, see Harry. For the
latter element, cf. Goth. bairgan, AS. beorgan, to preserve; and see
Bury. It is usual to cite AS. hereberga as the original of harbour ;
but it is hardly native; though the word may have been borrowed
very early. Der. harbour, verb, ME. herberwen, P. Plowman, B. xvii.
73, from Icel. herbergja, to shelter, harbour, a verb formed from the
sb. herbergi; also harbour-er; harbour-age, K. John, ii. 234; harbour-
less ; harbour-master ; also’ harbinger, q. v.

HARD, firm, solid, severe. (E.) ME. hard, Chaucer, C. T. 229
(and common). AS. heard, John, vi. 60; OFries. herd. + Du. hard ;
Dan. haard ; Swed. hard; Icel. harér; Goth. hardus; G. hart. Teut.
type *hardiuz; allied to Gk. xparus, strong; cf. mparepds, kaptepds,
valiant, stout. See Brugmann, i. § 792. Der. hard-ly, hard-ness=
AS. heardnes, Mark, x. 5; hard-en=ME. hardnen, Ormulum, 1574,
18219, which is an extension of the commoner ME. harden, of which
the pp. yhkarded occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 10559 (F 245); hard-en-ed;
hard-ship, ME. heardschipe, Ancren Riwle, p. 6, 1. 9 ; hard-ware, hard-
featured, hard-fisted, hard-handed, hard-headed, hard-hearted, hard-
mouthed, hard-visaged ; also hard-y, q. v.

HARDOCK, HORDOCK, prob. the corn-bluebottle; Cen-
taurea cyanus. (E.) Hardokes, pl., King Lear, iv. 4. 4 (1623); the
quartos have hordocks. ‘The same as haudods, used in Fitzherbert’s
Husbandry to mean the corn-bluebottle ; see Glossary, and Pref.
p. xxx. Mr. Wright (note to K. Lear) shows that khardhake meant
the Centaurea nigra. Both plants were called, indifferently, knobweed,
‘knotweed, and loggerhead. Named from the hardness of the head of
the Centaurea nigra, also called knapweed, iron-weed, iron-head, &c.
See Plant-names, ed. Britten and Holland. 4 No kind of dock is
suitable for a wreath, or grows among corn.

HARDS, fibres of flax. (E.) ME. herdes. ‘Hempen herdes ;’
Chaucer, Rom. Rose, 1233. AS. heordan, pl. ‘Stuppa, heordan ;’
Corp. Gloss. 1908. + MDu. heerde, herde (Kilian); later héde (Hex-
ham) ; EFries. héde. Teut. type *hizdon-; cf. Meed. 4 Not allied
to hard. Der. hard-en, adj.

HARDY, stout, strong, brave. (F.—OHG.) ME. hardi, hardy,
P. Plowman, B. xix. 285; the comp. hardiere is in Layamon, 4348,
later text. OF. hardi, ‘hardy, daring, stout, bold;’ Cot. Hardi was
orig. the pp. of OF. hardir, of which the compound enxhardir is
explained by Cotgrave to mean ‘to hearten, imbolden.’ =OHG,
hartjan (MHG. herten), to harden, make strong. —OHG. harti (G.
hart), hard; cognate with AS. heard, hard. See Hard. Der. hardi-ly,
hardi-ness, P. Plowman, B.. xix. 313 hardi-head, Spenser, F. Q.'i, 4.
38; hardi-hood, Milton, Comus, 650, ¢#> Hardi-ly, hardi-ness, hardi-
head, hardi-hood are all hybrid compounds, with E. suffixes; showing
how completely the word was naturalised.

HARE, the name of an animal. (E.) ME. hare, Chaucer, C. T.
13626 (B 1886). AS. hara, as a gloss to L. lepus, AElfric’s Gloss.,
in Voc. 119. 11.44 Du. haas; Dan. and Swed. hare; Icel. héri
‘(formerly here) ; G. hase; OHG. haso. Teut. types *hazon-, *hason-,
‘m. IRdg. type *kas-on-; cf. OPruss. sasnis (for *kasnis), W. cein-ach,
{. (Rhys) ; and Skt. gaga, orig. gasa, a hare. See Stokes-Fick, p. 74;
Brugmann, i. § 826. Uhlenbeck connects Skt. gagas with AS. hasz,
gray. Der. hare-brained, 1 Hen. IV, v. 2. 19; hare-lip, K. Lear, iii.
‘4. 1233 hare-lipped; harr-i-er, q.v.3; hare-bell, q.v.

HAREBELL, the name of a flower. (E.) In Cymb. iv. 2. 222.
The word does not appear among AS. names of plants; but we find
ME. hare-belle, Voc. 713.9. Certainly compounded of hare and bell ;
‘but, owing to the absence of reason for the appellation, it has been
supposed to be a corruption of hair-bell, with reference to the slender-
ness of the stalk of the true ‘hair-bell,’ the Campanula rotundifolia.


The apparent absence of reason for the name is, however, rather iz


favour of the etymology from hare than otherwise, as will be seen by
consulting the fanciful AS. names of plants given in Cockayne’s
Leechdoms, vol. iii. To name plants from animals was the old
custom ; hence hare’s beard, hare’s ear, hare’s foot, hare’s lettuce, hare's
palace, hare’s tail, hare-thisile, all given in Dr. Prior’s Popular Names
of British Plants ; to which add AS. haran-hyge (hare’s foot trefoil),
haran-specel (now called viper’s bugloss), haran-wyrt (hare’s wort),
from Cockayne’s Leechdoms.. The spelling hair-bell savours of


HARLOT 261


modern science, but certainly not of the principles of English etymo-
logy. J A similar modern error (invented in 1851, by Fox Talbot)
is to derive fox-glove from folks’-glove (with the silly interpretation of
folks as being ‘ the good folks’ or fairies), in face of the evidence that
the AS. name was foxes gldfa=the glove of the fox.

HAREM, the set of apartments ‘reserved for females in large
Eastern houses. (Arab.) Not in Todd’s Johnson. Spelt haram in Sir
T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1634, p. 62 (N.E.D.); and in Moore’s
Lalla Rookh; ‘And the light of his karam was young Nourmahal.’
Also in Byron, Bride of Abydos, c. i. st. 14.— Arab. Aaram, women’s
apartments; lit. ‘sacred;” Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 197. —Arab.
toot harama, he prohibited; the karam is the place which men are
prohibited from entering ; Rich. Dict., p. 563.

HARICOT, (1) a stew of mutton, (2) a kidney bean, (F.) ‘ Haricot,
in cookery, a particular way of dressing mutton-cutlets; also, a kind
of French beans ;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.—F. haricot, ‘ mutton sod
with little turneps, some wine, and tosts of bread crumbled among,’
&c.; Cotgrave (who gives two other methods of preparing it, showing
that it was sometimes served with ‘chopped herbs’). B. See Littré,
who discusses it; it is found that the sense of ‘ bean’ is later, whilst
the sense of ‘ minced mutton with herbs’ is old. Perhaps the bean
was so- named from ‘its usé in the dish called haricot, or from their
being cut up; cf. Du. snijboon, French bean, from snijden, to cut.
y. Of unknown origin, but presumably Teutonic. Hatzfeld quotes
febves de haricot, haricot beans (1642), hericog de mouton, haricot of
mutton, 14th c. Perhaps connected with OF. haligoter, harigoter, to
cut in pieces; haligote, harigote, a piece, a rag (Godefroy).

HARK! listen! (E.) ME. herke, Coventry Mysteries, 55 (Strat-
mann). The imp. mood of ME. herkien ; ‘And herke why,’ Chaucer,
Cre o187) (61323). Ch herkier, int: O. HE. Hom, i. 31, 1.6:
OFries. herkia, harkia. Closely allied to ME. herknen, to hearken,
See Hearken.

HARLEQUIN, the leading character in a pantomime. (F.—
Ital.) ‘The joy of a king for a victory must not be like that of a
harlequin upon a letter from his mistress ;” Dryden (in Todd’s John-
son; no reference). He also has: ‘ Those nauseous harlequins ;’ Epil.
to Man of Mode, 1. 3.—F. arleguin, a harlequin; spelt harlequin in the
16th cent. = Ital. arlecchino, a harlequin, buffoon, jester. B. It seems
best to connect it with the OF. hierlekin or hellequin (13th century)
for which Littré gives quotations. This word was used in the phrase
la maisnie hierlekin (Low L. harlequini familias) which meant a troop
of demons that haunted lonely places, called in Middle-English
Hurlewaynes kynne or Hurlewaynes meyné = Hurlewain’s kin or troop,
mentioned in Richard the Redeles, i. go, and in the Prologue to the
Tale of Beryn, 1. 8. The orig. signification of OF. helleguin (see
Godefroy) seems to have been ‘a troop of demons,’ sometimes also
a demon, a devil. -Cf. also Ital. Alichino, the name of a demon in
Dante, Inf. xxi. 118. The origin of the name is wholly unknown.
See note to Rich. Redeles, ed. Skeat, i. 90. 4 I shall here venture
my guess. Perhaps hellekin may have been of Teut. origin; thus
OHG. hella cunnt, OFriesic helle kin (AS. helle cyn, Icel. heljar kyn)
would mean ‘ the kindred of hell’ or ‘the host of hell,’ hence a troop
of demons. The sense being lost, the OF. maisnie would be added to
keep up the idea of ‘host,’ turning hierlekin into (apparently) a
personal name of a single demon. The change from hellekin to
herlequin, &c., arose from a popular etymology which connected the
word with Charles Quint (Charles V.); see the story in Max Miiller,
Lectures, ii. 581. 1t may also have been confused with OF. herle,
hierle, tumult.

HARLOT, a wanton woman. (F.—Teut.) Orig. used of either
sex indifferently ; in fact, more commonly of men in Mid. Eng. It has
no very bad sense, and means little more than ‘ fellow.’ ‘ He was a
gentil harlot and a kind ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 649 (A 647). ‘A sturdy
harlot [a stout fellow] wente ay hem behinde;’ id. 7336 (D 1753).
‘Dauwe the dykere with a dosen harlotes of portours and pykeporses
and pylede toth-drawers ’ = Davy the ditcher with a dozen fellows who
were porters and pick-purses and hairless (?) tooth-drawers ; P.
Plowman, C. vii. 369. ‘ Beggen'ase on harlot’=beg like a vaga-
bond, Ancren Riwle, p. 356. Undoubtedly of Romance origin. = OF.
herlot, arlot, explained by Godefroy as ‘fripon, coquin, ribaud,’ a
vagabond ; for which Diez givesa reference to'the Romance of Tris-
tran, i. 173 (where it is misprinted berlot by Michel). B. The Prov.
arlot, a vagabond, occurs in a poem of the 13th century; Bartsch,
Chrestomathie Provencale, 207. 20; and Mistral explains Prov. arlot
by ‘pillard, ribaud, goujat qui suivait les armées.’ Florio explains
Ital. arlotto by ‘a lack-Latin, a hedge-priest,’ and arlotta as a harlot
in the modern E. sense. Ducange explains Late L. arlotus, erlotus, to
mean a glutton, y. Of disputed origin, but presumably Teutonic,
viz. from OHG. heri, hari (G. heer), an army, anda suffix -lot. This
suffix occurs in Du. labber-lot, a blackguard, which Franck mentions
in connexion with Dn. lewteren, to loiter, linger, the sense of lot being


HARM


‘loiterer.’ The fem. of lot occurs in WF lem. lutte; De Bo explains
dronke-lutte asa drunken woman, a slut; and jexever-lutte as a gin-
drinking woman. Allied to OHG. lotar, MHG. lotar, lotter, useless,
vagabond-like, OHG. lozar, a frivolous fellow ; cf. prov. G. lotter-bube,
a vagabond (Fliigel) ; Bavar. Jotter (Schmeller). Thus her-lot meant
‘army-loafer,’ acamp-follower. @[ We find also W. herlod, a stripling,
lad ; but this is merely the E., word borrowed; the Cornish not only
borrowed the E.. harlot unchanged (with the sense of ‘rogue ”), but
also the word harlutry, corruption, which is plainly the ME. karlotrie,
with a suffix (-rie) which is extremely common in French. See
Williams, Cornish Lexicon, p. 211. Der. harlot-ry=ME. harlotrie,
of which one meaning was ‘ribald talk ;’ see Chaucer, C. T. 563,
3147 (A 561, 3145). The suffix -ry is of F. origin, as in caval-ry,
bribe-ry, &c.

HARM, injury, wrong. (E.) ME. harm, P. Plowman, C. xvi.
113; spelt herm, Ancren Riwle, p. 116. AS. hearm, herm, grief of
mind, also harm, injury; Grein, ii. 60.4-Icel. harmr, grief; Dan.
harme, wrath ; Swed. harm, anger, grief, pity; G. karm, grief. Teut.
type *harmoz, m. Cf. Russ. srame, shame.


262


ed. Morris, p. 263, 1.73; harm-ful, Wyclif, Prov. i. 22; harm-ful-ly,
harm-ful-ness; harm-less=ME. harmles, Will. of Palerne, 1671;
Aarm-less-ly, harm-less-ness.

HARMONY, concord, esp. of sounds. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
armonie, Gower, C. A. iii. go; bk. vii. 165. ‘ There is a melodye in
heven, whiche clerkes clepen armony ;’ ‘Testament of Love, ii. 9. 9. —
F.harmonie, = L. harmonia. = Gk. dppovia, a joint, joining, proportion,
harmony. = Gk. dpyés, a fitting, joining. Gk. *dpeww, dpapicrey (fut.
dpa), to fit, join together.=4/AR, to fit; whence also E. arm, article,
&c. Der. harmon-ic, Milton, P. L.iv.687 ; harmoni-cs, harmoni-c-al,


harmoni-c-al-ly ; harmoni-ous, Temp. iv. 119; harmoni-ous-ly, harmoni- |


ous-ness; harmon-ise (Cudworth), harmon-is-er, harmon-ist, harmoni-um
(about A.D. 1840).
HARNESS, equipment for a horse. (F.—C.) In old books, it
often means body-armour for soldiers; 1 Kings, xx. 11; &c. ME.
harneis, harneys, Chaucer, C. T., A 1613; spelt herneys, P. Plowman,
B. xv. 215. ‘He dude quyk harnesche hors’ =he commanded horses
to be quickly harnessed, King Alisaunder, 4708.—OF. harneis, her-
nots, armour. Of unknown origin. @ The G. harnisch, Du. harnas,


&c., are borrowed from French; so also the Bret. harnez, old iron,


armour (Thurneysen). Der. harness, verb,=OF. harnaschier.

P, a stringed musical instrument. (E.) ME. harpe, Gower,
C. A. iii. 301; bk. viii. 764; Layamon, 4898. AS. hearpe, Grein, ii.
62; and see Atlfred, tr. of Boethius, c. xxxv. § 6 (b. iii. met. 12).+
Du. harp ; Icel. harpa; Swed. harpa; Dan. harpe; G.harfe; OHG.
harpha. Teut. type *harpon-,f. Root unknown. Der. harp-er=
AS. hearpere, in A‘lfred, as above; harp, verb, AS. hearpian, id.;
also harpsichord, q.v.

HARPOON, a dart for striking whales. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Some
fish with harpons’ (late edd. harpoons), Dryden, Art of Love, 875.
Also spelt harpon in J. Davis, Voyages, 1599, p. 137 (Hakluyt Soc.).
The dart is also called ‘a harping-iron’ in Kersey’s Dict. F. harpon,
orig. ‘a crampiron wherewith masons fasten stones together’ (Cot-
grave); hence, a grappling-iron (whence also Du, harpoen),.=—OF.
harpe, ‘a dog’s claw or paw;’ Cot.; cf. ‘se harper l’un a l'autre, to
grapple, grasp, hasp, clasp, imbrace, cope, close together, to scuffle
or fall together by the ears;’ id. [Cf. Span. arpon, a harpoon, arpeo,
a grappling-iron, arpar, to tear to pieces, rend, claw. Also Ital.
arpagone, a harpoon, arpese, a cramp-iron, clamp, arpicare, to
clamber up, arpino, a hook, arpione, a hinge, pivot, hook, tenter. ]
B. The OF. harpe, claw, is from Late L. karpé, a sickle-shaped
sword.«Gk. dpmy, a sickle (Korting, § 4501). Allied to OLat.
Sarpere, to prune; Russ. serp’, ‘a sickle.’ Der. harpoon-er.

HARPSICHORD, an old harp-shaped instrument of music.
(F.—Teut. and Gk.) Also spelt harpsicon or harpsecol. ‘On the
harpsicon or virginals ;’ Partheneia Sacra, ed. 1633, p. 144 (Todd).
‘ Harpsechord or Harpsecol, a musical instrument ;’ Kersey. Spelt
harpsechord in Minsheu, ed. 1627. The corrupt forms of the word
are not easy to explain; in particular, the letter s seems to have been
intrusive. OF. harpechorde, ‘an arpsichord or harpsichord; ’ Cot.
Compounded of OF. harpe, a harp (from a Teutonic source); and
chorde, more commonly corde, a string. See Harp, Chord, and
Cord. Cf. Ital. arpicordo (Florio).

HARPY, a mythological monster, half bird and half woman.
(F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Temp. iii. 3. 83. Trevisa speaks of ‘ pe
arpies;’ tr. of Higden, ii. 363.— OF. harpie, or harpye, ‘a harpy;’ Cot,
—L. hartyia, chiefly used in pl. harpyie, Verg. An. iii. 226. — Gk. pl.
Gpmuat, harpies; lit. ‘the spoilers.’= Gk. dpm-, the base of dpma¢ev,
to seize; allied to L. rapere, to seize. See Rapacious,

HARQUEBUS, the same as Arquebus, q.v.

HARRIDAN, a worn-out wanton woman. (F.) In Pope,


Brugmann, ii. § 72.)
Der. harm, verb, ME. harmen, spelt hearmin in O. Eng. Homilies, |


HASP


Macer, a Character, 1. 24. It seems to be a variant of MF. haridelle,
which Cot. explains by ‘a poor tit, or leane ill-favored jade ;’ i.e. a
worn-out horse. Some connect this with MF. hardelle, a herd;
‘also, a girl, a young maid, lasse,’ Cot. Of unknown origin; cf.
Korting, § 4548. 4 It is remarkable that Godefroy has OF. harre-
banne, a debauched woman.

HARRIER (1), ahare-hound. (E.) Formerly harier, more cor-
rectly. So spelt in Minsheu, ed. 1627. The word occurs also in
Blount, Ancient Tenures, p. 39 (Todd). Formed from hare, with
suffix -ier ; cf. bow-yer from bow, law-yer from law.

HARRIER (2), a kind of falcon. (E.) ‘A sort of puttock
called a hen-harrier ;’ Ray, Collection of Words, pref. p. 3 (E. D.S.).
Named from its harrying or destroying small birds. See Harry.

HARROW, a frame of wood, fitted with spikes, used for breaking
the soil. (E.) ME. harwe, P. Plowman, B. xix. 268 ; spelt haru, harou,
harwe, Cursor Mundi, 12388. NFries. harwe. Not found in AS.
Icel. herfi, a harrow ; Dan. harv, a harrow; karve, to harrow; Swed.
harf, a harrow; harfva, to harrow. Apparently allied to MDan.
harge, Du. hark, Swed. harka, G. harke, a rake. @ The F. herce, a
harrow, is a different word; see Hearse. Der. harrow, verb, ME.
harwen, P. Plowman, C. vi. 19.

HARRY, to ravage, plunder, lay waste. (E.) Also written harrow,
but this is chiefly confined to the phrase ‘ the Harrowing of Hell,’ i.e.
the despoiling of hell by Christ. ME. her3ien, later herien, herwen,
harwen, ‘By him that karwed helle;? Chaucer, C. T. 3512. ‘He
that heried helle;’ Will. of Palerne, 3725. AS. hergian, to lay waste,
Grein, ii. 38. Lit. to ‘ over-run with an army ;’ cognate with Icel.
herja, Dan. herge, OHG. harjon, to ravage. Teut. type *harjojan-, to
harry ; from *karjoz, an army, which appears in AS. here, an army,
a word particularly used in the sense of ‘ destroying host ;’ Grein, ii.
35. BP. The AS. here is cognate with Icel. herr, Dan. her, Swed. har,
G, heer, and Goth. harjis, a host, army. Allied to OPruss. karjis,
an army (Uhlenbeck); OSlay. sara, strife; Lithuan. karas, war,
army. Der. harrier (2).

HARSH, rough, bitter, severe. (Scand.) ME. karsk, rough to the
touch, Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 1084. ‘ Harske, or haske, as sundry
frutys;’ Prompt. Parv.—Dan. harsk, rancid; Swed. harsk, rank,
rancid, rusty; MSwed. harsk (Ihre). G. harsch, harsh, rough.
B. Cf. Lithuan. kartus, harsh, bitter (of taste); see Hard, Der.
harsh-ly, harsh-ness. :

HART, a stag, male deer. (E.) ME. hert, Chaucer, C. T. 11503
{F 1191); spelt heort, Layamon, 26762. AS. heort, heorot, Grein, ii.
69; also herut.4-Du. hert; Icel. hjortr; Dan. hjort; Swed. Ajort;
G. hirsch, OHG. hiruz. Teut. stem *herut-, i.e. ‘horned.’ Allied
to L. ceruus, a hart, W. carw, a hart, stag, horned animal; OSlay.
krava, Russ. korova, a cow; cf. Gk. xepads (for *xépafFos), horned ;
from the base which appears in the Gk. xépas, a horn, and is related
to E. horn. The orig. sense is ‘ horned animal.’ See further under
Horn. See Stokes-Fick, p. 79. Der. harts-horn,so called because
the horns of the hart abound with ammonia; harts-tongwe.

HARVEST, the ingathering of crops, the produce of labour. (E.)
Sometimes used in the sense of ‘ autumn ;’ see Wyclif, Jude, 12; Shak.
Temp. iv. 116. ME, heruest (with u for v), P. Plowman, B. vi. 292,
zor. AS. herfest, autumn, Grein, ii. 24; the orig. sense being
‘crop.’ + Du. herfsé, autumn; Icel, haust, autumn (contracted form) ; -
Dan. host, harvest, crop (contr. form); Swed. hds¢, autumn (contr.
form); G. herbst, autumn, harvest; MHG. herbest, OHG. herpist.
B. All with a suffix -is-toz (-us-toz) from Teut. base hard-, allied
to the base xapm- of the cognate Gk. capmés, fruit. 4/ SQERP, to
shear; as in L, carp-ere, to pluck, gather, Lith. kerp-u, I shear.
Brugmann, i. § 631. Cf. Gk. xelpewv, to shear; and see Shear.
Der. harvest, verb; harvest-er; harvest-home, 1 Hen. IV, i. 3. 353
harvest-man, Cor. i. 3. 39; harvest-moon, harvest-time.

HASEL, the name of a tree; see Hazel.

HASH, a dish of meat cut into small slices. (F.—G.) ‘Hash,
cold meat cut into slices and heated again with spice, &c. ;’ Kersey,
ed. 1715. An abbreviation of an older form hachey or hachee, in
Cotgrave. =OF. hachis, ‘a hachey, or hachee; a sliced gallimaufrey
or minced meat;’ Cot.—OF. hacher, ‘to hack, shread, slice ;’ id. =
OF. and F. hache, an ax.—mOHG. *happja, whence OHG. heppa,
MHG. hefe, a bill, asickle. See Hatchet. Der. hash, vb., perhaps
directly from F. hacher; and see hatch (3).

HASHISH, HASHEESH, an intoxicating drink. (Arab.)
See Assassin.

HASLETS, HARSLETS, HASTELETS, the inwards of
a pig, &c., for roasting. (F.—L.) ME. hastelets, hastlettes; Gawaine
and the Grene Knt., 1. 1612. —OF-. hastelet, meat roasted on a spit. =
OF. haste, a spit.—L. hasta, a spear, a spit; see Hastate,

HASP, a clasp. (E.) ME. haspe, Chaucer, C. T. 3470. ‘ Hespe
of a dore, pessulum;’ Prompt. Parv. [Haspe stands for hapse, by the
same change as in clasp from ME. clapsen, aspen from AS. eps.] AS,


HASSOCK


hepse, as a gloss to sera (a bolt, bar), in Voc. 326. 36. + Icel. hespa;
Dan. haspe, a hasp, reel; Swed. haspe, a hasp; G. haspe, a hasp;
haspel, a staple, reel, windlass; cf. Du. hkaspel, a windlass, reel.
B. All from a Teut. type *hap-sdn-, f. Cf. Low G. happen, hapsen,
to snatch, clutch ; F. happer, to lay hold of ; NFries. happe, to
snatch at. The sense of hasp is ‘a catch.’

HASSOCK, a stuffed mat for kneeling on in church. (E.)
* Hassock, a straw-cushion us’d to kneel upon;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.
Also in Phillips, New World of Words, 1706, in the same sense ; see
Trench, Select Glossary. So called from the coarse grass of which
it was made; ME. hassok. ‘ Hassok, ulphus;’ Prompt. Parv.; see
Way’s Note, showing the word to be in use A.D. 1147 ; whilst in 1465
there is mention of ‘ segges, soddes, et hassokes’? =sedges, sods, and
hassocks. Forby explains Norfolk hassock as ‘ coarse grass, which
grows in rank tufts on boggy ground.’ AS. hassue, a tump or clump
of coarse grass or sedge; in Kemble, Cod. Dipl. iii. 223. @ Distinct
from W. hesg, pl. sedges.

HASTATH, shaped like the head of a spear. (L.) Modern, and
botanical. — L. hastatus, spear-like ; formed from hasta, a spear, which
is co-radicate with E. gad. See Gad (1).

HASTE, HASTEN, to go speedily ; Haste, speed. (F. — Tent.)
The form hasten appears to be nothing more than an extended form
of the verb ¢o hasée; the pt. t. and pp. hastened (or hastned) do not
occur in early authors; one of the earliest examples is that of the pp.
hastened in Spenser, Shep. Kal., May,.152. Strictly speaking, the
form hasée (pt. t. hasted) is much to be preferred, and is commoner
than hasten both in Shak. and in the A. V. of the Bible. ME. hasten
(pt. t. kastede), where the 2 is merely the sign of the infin. mood, and
was readily dropped. Thus Gower has: ‘Cupide . . Syh [saw]
Phebus hasten him so sore, And, for he sholde him haste more, .. A
dart throughout his herte he caste ;? C. A.i. 336; bk. iii. 1697. ‘To
hasten hem ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 8854; (E 978). ‘But hasteth yow’
=make haste, id. 17383 (I 72). ‘He hasteth wel that wysly can
abyde ; and in wikked haste is no profit; id., Six-text, B 2244.
B. It is hard to say whether the vb. or sb. first came into use in
English ; both occur in the Cursor Mundi, 5198, 26737; where we
also find the phr. iz hast=in haste, 13402. Neither is found in AS.
= OF. haste (F. hate), sb. WGerm. *hai(f)sii-, violence; as seen in
OF ries. haest (Richtofen, s. vy. hast), AS. h@st, violence, fury. Cf. AS.
héste, violent, vehement, OHG. heistz, violent ; also Goth. haifsts, f.,
strife; Icel. heipt (=heift), war. | Du. haast, G., Dan., Swed. hast,
haste, are all borrowed from French. Der. hast-y, Will. of Palerne,
4753 hast-i-ly, hast-i-ness. > Wealso find ME. hastif, hasty, Allit.
Poems, ed. Morris, iii. 520; this is from OF. hastif, adj. formed
from the OF. haste (mod. F. hate), haste, which was borrowed from
the Teutonic (as above).

HAT, a covering for the head. (E.) ME. hat, Chaucer, C. T. 472,
1390 (A 470, 1388). AS. het; ‘Galerus, vel pileus, fellen het ;’
Voc. 118. 14; ‘Calamanca, het;’ id. 153. 22. + Icel. hétt, a hood,
later hattr ; Swed. hatt; Dan. hat. Teut. type *hattuz, m. If it is
related to hood, this form stands for an earlier type *hadnuz. Der.
hatt-er, hat-band (Minshen).

HATCH (1), a half-door, wicket. (E.) A word presenting some
difficulty. ‘Leap the hatch;’ King Lear, iii. 6. 76. It is the same
as North of E. heck, an enclosure of open-work, of slender bars of
wood, a hay-rack ; a heck-door is a door only partly panelled, the rest
being latticed (Halliwell) ; cf. Lowland Sc. hack or heck, a rack for
cattle, a frame for cheeses (Jamieson). It seems to have been
specially used of anything made with parallel bars of wood. Palsgrave
has: ‘ Hatche of a door, hecg.’ In a 15th-cent. vocabulary we find:
‘Hoe osticulum, @ hatche ;’ Voc. 778. 14. Also: ‘Hoc ostiolum,
hek;’ id. 668. 4. AS. hee, f. (gen. hecce); ‘td p&re ealdan wude
heecce,’ to the old wood hatch ; Thorpe, Diplom. A®vi Saxon. p. 395.
+ Du. hek, a fence, rail, gate, Swed. hack, a coop, a rack. Teut.
type *hakja,f. Prob. named from being lightly fastened with a hook.
Cf. AS. haca, a fastening of a door; Epinal Gloss. 803. All,
probably, from the same source as hook; cf. prov. E. hatch, to fasten
(Halliwell); and see Shak. Per. iv. 2. 37. See Hake and Hook.
Der. hatch-es, q.v.; also hatch-way.

HATCH (2), to produce a brood by incubation. (E.) ME.
hacchen. ‘This brid [bird] . . hopith for to hacche;’? Richard the
Redeles, Pass. iii. 1. 44. The pt. t. ha3te occurs in The Owl and
Nightingale, ]. 105. Not found earlier; but prob. E. 4+ Swed. hacka,
to hatch, to breed; Dan. hekke, to breed, whence hekkebuur, a
breeding-cage (lit. a _hatch-bower), and hekkefugl, a breeder (lit. a
hatch-fowl), In German, we have hecken, to hatch, MHG. hecken.
Origin unknown. °

HATCH (3), to shade by minute lines, crossing each other, in
‘drawing and engraving. (F.—G.) ‘Hatch, to draw small strokes
‘with a pen;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. Acertain kind of omamentation on
a sword-hilt was called hatching, and is spelt hachyng in 1389; see


HAUNCH 263


Riley, Memorials of London, p. 513; hence ‘ hatched in silver,’ Shak.
Troil. i. 3. 65; ‘my sword well hatcht;’ Beaum. and Fletcher,
Bonduca, ii. 2.—F. hacher, ‘to hack, . « also to hatch a hilt;’ Cot.
—F. hache, an ax.=OHG. *happja, whence OHG. heppa, a bill, a
sickle. See Hash. Der. hatch-ing (perhaps sometimes confused
with etching) ; and see hatch-et.

HATCHES, a frame of cross-bars laid over an opening in a ship’s
deck. (E.) ME. hacches, Chaucer, Good Women, 648; Will. of
Palerne, 2770... Merely the pl. of Hatch (1),q.v. Der. hatch-way,
from the sing. hatch.

HATCHET, a small axe. (F.—G.) ME. hachet. ‘Axe other
[or] hatchet;? P. Plowman, B, iii. 304. Spelt hachet, John de
Garlande; in Wright’s Vocab. i. 137.—F. hachette, ‘a hatchet, or
smallaxe;” Cot. Dimin. of F. hache, ‘an axe;’ id.; see Hatch (3),
and Hash.

HATCHMENT, the escutcheon of a deceased person, publicly
displayed. (F.—L.) In Shak. Hamlet, iv. 5. 214. Well known to
be a corruption of atch’ment, the shortened form of atchievement (mod.
E. achievement), the heraldic name for the same thing. Dryden uses
atchievement in the true heraldic sense; Palamon and Arcite, 1. 16203
dicheament is in Ferne (1586); and hachement in Hall (1548). See
N.E.D. See Achieve.

HATH, extreme dislike, detestation; to detest. (E.) A. The sb.
is ME. hate, Chaucer, C. T. 14506 (B 3778). AS. hete, Grein, ii. 39;
the mod. E. sb. takes its vowel from the vb. (AS. hatian).4-Du. haat;
Icel. hatr; Swed. hat ; Dan. had; Goth. hatis; G. hass, hate. These
forms. suggest a Teut. type *hatoz, neut., gen. *hatizos; Idg. type
*kodos, gen. *kodesos ; whence a form *hatizin W. Germanic. Cf. Gk.
Kndev, to vex ; W.cawdd, displeasure. Stokes-Fick, p. 68. B. The
verb is AS. hatian, OF ries. hatia, OSax. hatén, OHG. hazzén; allied
to Goth. hatan, to hate; from the same base *hat-. Der. hat-er;
hate-ful, Chaucer, C. T. 8608 (E 732); hate-ful-ly, hate-ful-ness ; also
hat-red, q. v.; from the same source, heinous, q.v.

HATRED, extreme dislike. (E.) ME. hatred, P. Plowman,
B. iii. 140; fuller form hatreden, Pricke of Conscience, 3363. Not
found in AS.; but the suffix is the AS. suffix -réden, signifying ‘law,’
‘mode,’ or ‘ condition,’ which appears in fréondréden, friendship (Gen.
Xxxvii. 4), &c.; see Kindred, And see Hate.

HAUBERK, a coat of ringed mail. (F.—-OHG.) Orig. armour
for the neck, as the nameimplies. ME. hauberk, Chaucer, C. T. 2433
(A 2431); hawberk, King Alisaunder, 2372.—OF. hauberc, halberc
(Burguy). = OHG. halsberc, halsberge,a hauberk. = OHG. hals(G.hals),
the neck, cognate with AS. heals, L. collum, the neck; and OHG,
bergan, to protect, cognate with AS. beorgan, to protect, hide. See
Collar and Bury. Der. habergeon, q.v.

HAUGH, a piece of alluvial land beside a river. (E.) Northern;
also halgh, as in Greenhalgh. AS. healh, anook, a corner; see N.E.D,
@ From the dat. case heale, hale, we have ME. hale, anook ; common
in place-names as a suffix, and often written -hall.

HAUGHTY, proud, arrogant. (F.—L.) a. The spelling with
gh is a mistake, as the word is not E.; it is a corruption of ME.
hautein, loud, arrogant. ‘I peine me to have an hawutein speech’ =I
endeavour to speak loudly ; Chaucer, C. T. 12264 (C 330) ; cf. Rob.
of Glouc., 1.1504. ‘ Myn hauteyn herte’=my proud heart ; Will. of
Palerne, 472. B. The corruption arose from the use of the adj. with
the E. suffix -zess, producing a form hawtein-ness, but generally
written hautenesse, and easily misdivided into hauti-ness (like naughti-
ness). ‘For heo (she, i.e. Cordelia] was best and fairest, and to
hautenesse drow lest’ [drew least]; Rob. of Glouc. p. 29 (where the
best MS, has hautesce); 1. 687. Later forms hautyn, Book of
St. Alban’s, fol. a 5, kauty in Palsgrave.—OF. hautain, also spelt
haultain by Cotgrave, who explains it by ‘hauty, proud, arrogant.’
=OF. haut, formerly halt, high, lofty; with suffix -ain=L. -anus, =
L. altus, high; see Altitude. Der. haughti-ly; haughti-ness (for
hautin-ness = hautein-ness, as explained above).

HAUL, to hale, draw; see Hale (2). This spelling occurs early,
‘ T-hauled hi were . . out of the lond;’ Beket, 1. 1497.

HAULM, HALM, HAUM, the stem or stalk of grain. (E.)
Little used, but an excellent E. word. ‘The hawme is the strawe of
the wheat or the rie;’ Tusser’s Husbandry, sect. 57, st. 15 (E. D.S.).
‘Halm, or stobyl [stubble], Stipula ;’ Prompt. Parv. OMerc. halm ;
Vesp. Psalter, Ps. lxxxii. 14 (Ixxxiii. 13) ; AS. healm, in the compound
healm-streaw, lit. haulm-straw, used to translate L. stipulam in Ps.
lxxxii, 12, ed. Spelman.Du. halm, stalk, straw ; Icel. halmr ; Dan.
and Swed. halm.+-Russ. soloma, straw; L. culmus, a stalk; calamus,
a reed (borrowed from Gk.); Gk. «aAapos, a reed; xaddpy, a stalk or
straw of corn; W.calaf, a stalk. See Brugmann, ii. § 72; Stokes-
Fick, p. 73. B. From the same root as Culminate, q.v.

HAUNCH, the hip, bend of the thigh. (F.-OHG.) ME. hanche,
Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 1100; spelt haunche, Ancren Riwle, 280. —
F. Aanche, ‘the haunch or hip;’ Cot. Cf. Span. and Ital. anca, the


264 HAUNT


HAY


haunch; the F. word was also sometimes spelt anche (Cotgrave). Of | a hedged field, a pasture; Swed. kage, an enclosed pasture-ground ;


Teut. origin; from Frankish *hanka, fem., represented by MDu.
hancke, ‘ the haunch or the hip,’ Hexham ; whence also O. North F.
hanke, Norm. dial. hangue, haunch (Moisy). Korting, §§ 663,

479-
‘HAUN T, to frequent. (F.) ME. haunten, hanten, to frequent, use,
employ. ‘ That haunteden folie’ =who were ever after folly ; Chaucer,
C. T. 12398 (C 464). ‘ We haunten none tauernes’=we frequent no
taverns; Pierce Plowman’s Crede, ed. Skeat, 106. ‘ Haunted Mau-
metrie’ = practised Mohammedanism, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft,
p- 320. The earliest use of the word is in Hali Meidenhad, ed.
Cockayne, p. 25, 1. 15.—OF. hanter, ‘to haunt, frequent, resort
unto;’ Cot. fB. Origin unknown, and much disputed. Suggestions
are: (1) Icel. heimta, lit. to fetch home, to draw, claim, recover; but
neither form nor sense suit: (2) Bret. kent, a path: (3) a nasalised
form of L. habitare, to dwell (Littré): (4) a Late L. form *ambitare
(not found), to go about, from L. ambitus, a going about (Scheler).
The last seems to me the most likely; there are many such forma-
tionsin F. Der. haunt, sb.

HAUTBOY, akind of musical instrument. (F.—L.) [Also called
oboe, the Ital. name.] In Shak. 2 Hen. IV, iii. 2. 351 ; where the old
edd. have hoeboy. Spelt hau’boy (sic) in Ben Jonson, tr. of Horace’s
Art of Poetry, where the L. has tibia; Ars Poet. 202. Spelt hobois,
hoboy in Cotgrave. = MF. haultbois (or hautbois), ‘a hobois, or hoboy;’
Cot. = OF, hault, later haut, high, from L. altus, high; and F. bois<
Late L. boscus, wood. See Altitude and Bush. Thus the lit.
sense is ‘high wood;’ the hkautboy being a wooden instrument of
ahigh tone. Doublet, oboe.

HAUT-GOUT, a high flavour. (F.—L.) Spelt haugou in
Howell's Letters, vol. i. § 5. let. 38.—F. haut, high ; godt, taste. L.
allus, high; gustus, taste; see Gust (2).

HAVE, to possess, hold. (E.) ME. hauen, pt. t. hadde, pp. had
(common). AS. habban, pt. t. hefde, pp. gehefd.4Du. hebben; Icel.
hafa; Swed. hafva; Dan. have; Goth. haban; G. haben. Teut. stem
*habe-. If cognate, as some hold, with L. habére, to have, the Idg.
stem is *khabhé-. Streitberg, § 206, p. 307.

HAVEN, an inlet of the sea, harbour, port. (E.) ME. hauen
(with x for v), Chaucer, C. T. 409 (A 407); spelt hauene, Layamon,
8566. Late AS. hefene (acc. hefenan), A.S. Chron. an. 1031.—Icel.
héfn; Dan. havn, Swed. hamn.+-Du. haven; G. hafen. B. Allied to
AS. hef (Grein, ii. 19), Icel. and Swed. haf, Dan. hav, MHG., hab,
the open sea, main.

HAVERSACK, a soldier’s bag for provisions. (F.—G.) Lit.
“oat-bag’ or ‘oat-sack.’ A late importation. It occurs in Smollett’s
tr. of Gil Blas, b. ii.c. 8 (R.).—F. havresac, a haversack, knapsack
(Hamilton).—G. habersack, hafersack, a sack for oats.=—G. haber,
hafer, oats (cognate with Icel. hafr, Du. haver, Swed. hafre, Dan.
havre, oats), from MHG. habere, OHG. habaro, oats; and G. sack,
cognate with E. sack.

HAVILDAR, a sepoy non-commissioned officer, corresponding
to a sergeant. (Pers.—Arab.) So in Yule. From Pers. Zawal-dar,
a military officer of inferior rank; Rich. Dict., p. 585.— Arab.
hawala(h), commission, charge; and Pers. dar, holding (as in sir-dar).

HAVOC, general waste, destruction. (F.—Teut.) ‘Cry havoc,’
Shak. Cor. iii. 1. 275; Jul. Cees. iii. 1. 2733 ‘cries on havoc,’ Haml.
yv. 2. 375. ‘Pell-mell, havoc, and confusion;’ 1 Hen. IV, v. 1. 82.
‘ They entrid in-to Ylion and pillyd hit, and after did do crye hauok
upon all the tresours;’ Caxton, Troy-book, fol. 175. ‘ Tocrye havok’
occurs in 1419; Excerpta Historica, p. 32. From the AF. phrase
crier havok; Black Book of Admiralty, i. 455. An Eng. adaptation of
OF. havot, pillage, plunder (Godefroy), used in precisely the same
way; esp. in the phrase crier havot, to cry out ‘plunder,’ of which
Godefroy gives two examples. It is clearly connected with OF. havée,
a handful (Godefroy), which Cotgrave explains by ‘a gripe, or hand-
full, also a booty, or prey ;’ from the OF. verb haver, ‘to hooke, or
to grapple with a hook,’ Cot. Cf. havet, ‘a little hooke,’ Cot.;
havecg, the same (Godefroy). W. de Bibbesworth explains havet by
“a flesh-hook ;’ Wright, Vocab.i. 172. Apparently from the Teut.
base *haf- seen in Goth. hafjan, to heave, lift up; see Heave and
Haft. ‘To cry havoc’ was to give the signal for seizing upon the
spoil. Notes on E, Etym., p. 128. Der. havoc, verb (rare), Hen. V,
i. 2. 173, where a cat is said ‘to tear and havoc more than she can eat.’

HAW, a hedge; a berry of the haw-thorn. (E.) The sense of
‘inclosure’ or ‘hedge’ is the orig. one. In the sense of ‘ berry,’ the
word is really a short form for haw-berry or hawthorn-berry ; still it is
of early use in this transferred sense. ME. hawe. Chaucer uses
hawe, lit. a haw-berry, to signify anything of no value, C. T. 6241
(D 659); but he also has it in the orig. sense. ‘And eke ther was
a polkat in his hawe’ =there was a polecat in his yard; C. T. 12789
(C 855). AS. haga, an enclosure, yard, house, Grein, ii. 5 ; whence


the usual change to later hage, ha3e, hawe, by rule.+Icel. hagi,


Dan. have [for hage], a garden; Du. haag, a hedge; whence
*s Gravenhage, i.e. the count’s garden, the place called by us the
Hague. Teut. type *hagon-,m. Allied to G. hag, a fence, hedge;
and further, to W. cae, an enclosure. See Quay. Stokes-Fick,
p- 66. Der. haw-finch; haw-thorn=AS. hegporn, which occurs as
a gloss to alba spina, Voc. 139. 23; ONorthumb. hagaforn, Matt.
vii. 16. Also hedge, q.v.

HAWK (1), a bird of prey. (E.) ME. hauk, Chaucer, C. T.
4132, 5997 (A 4134, D415). Earlier hauek (=havek), Layamon,
3258. AS. hafoc, more commonly heafoc, Grein, ii. 42.4-Du. havic;
Icel. haukr ; Swed. hék; Dan. hig; G. habicht, OHG. hapuh. B, Alt
probably from the Teut. base *hab, to seize, hold; see Heave, and
cf. L. capere. Cf. Low L. capus, a falcon, from L. cap-ere; and L,
accipiter,a hawk. Der. hawk, verb, ME, hauken, Chaucer, C. T. 7957
(E 81); hawk-er.

HAWK (2), to carry about for sale. (O. Low G.) Not in early
use. Rich. quotes from Swift, A Friendly Apology, the line: ‘To
hear his praises hawk’d about.’ The verb is a mere development from
the sb. hawker, which is an older word. See Hawker.

HAWK (3), to force up phlegm from the throat, to clear the
throat. (E.) ‘ Without hawking or spitting ;’ As You Like It, v. 3.
12, Apparently an imitative word; cf. W. hochi, to throw up phlegm;
hoch, the throwing up of phlegm; Dan. harke, Swed. harska, to hawk.
And (perhaps) Norw. hauka, to shout, call out (Aasen); F. hoguet,
hiccough.

HAWKER, one who carries about goods for sale, a pedlar.
(O. Low G.) Minsheu tells us that the word was in use in the reign
of Hen. VIII; it is much older, in E., than the verb to hawk.
‘ Hawkers, be certain deceitfull fellowes, that goe from place to place
buying and selling brasse, pewter, and other merchandise, that ought
to be vttered in open market... You finde the word An. 25 Hen. VIII,
cap. 6, and An. 33 eiusdem, cap. 4;’ Minsheu. ‘Those people which
go up and down the streets erying newsbooks and selling them by
retail, are also called, Hawkers ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. [The
earliest trace of a similar word is in P. Plowman, B. v. 227, where the
trade of the pedlar is denoted by hokkerye, spelt also hukkerye and
hukrie; where the base of the word is the same as that of the word
huckster.| B. A word introduced from abroad; cf. Low G, héker,
aretail-dealer, Du. heuker ; MDu. heukeren, to sell by retail, to huckster;
heukelaar, a huckster, retailer (Sewel). We find also Dan. hoker,
a chandler, huckster, hokeri, a hawker’s trade, hokre, to hawk; Swed.
hokeri, higgling, hokare, a chandler, cheesemonger. Also G. hécker,
a retailer of goods. See further under Huckster.

HAWSE, HAWSE-HOLE. (Scand.) ‘Hawses, two large
round holes in a ship, under the head or beak, through which the
cables pass, when the ship lies at anchor;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Cf.
‘I was forced to cut cable in the hawse ;’ Eng. Garner, vii. 83 (ab.
1606). So called because made in the ‘neck’ or bow of the ship. =
Icel. hals, hals, the neck; also (as a sea-term) part of the bow of a
ship or boat. Cf. Du. hals, neck ; halsblok, a hawse-block ; Dan. and
Swed. hals, neck, also a tack (as asea-term). Also AS. heals, G. hals,
Goth. hals, neck; cognate with L. collum, neck. Distinct from
hawser ; see below.

HAWSER, HALSER, a small cable. (F.—L.) ‘ Hawser, a
three-stroud [-strand] rope, or small cable ;’ Kersey. In Sherwood’s
index to Cotgrave, halser means a tow-rope by which boats are drawn
along. In Grafton’s Chron., Rich. III, an. 3, we read: ‘ He wayed
up his ancors and halsed up his sayles.’ ‘Two haucers pour boy-
ropes ;’ (1373) Riley’s Mem. of London, p. 369. ‘ With well-
wreathed halsers raise Their white sails ;’ Chapman, tr. of Od. ii. 609.
From the old yerb hause, to lift, raise, as in Rom. of Partenay, 3083.
=OF. halcier, F. hausser (Hatzfeld), to raise.—Late L. altiare, to
elevate.—L, altus, high. See Altitude. Similarly the Mltal.
alzaniere, ‘a halsier [hawser] in a ship’ (Florio) is from Ital.
alzare, to raise. @ Often associated with hawse (above), though of
different origin.

HAWTHORN, from haw and thorn; see Haw.

HAY (1), grass cut and dried. (E.) Formerly used also of uncut
growing grass, ME. hey, hay; Chaucer, C. T, 16963 (H 14). ‘ Vpon
grene hey’=on green grass; Wyclif, Mark, vi. 39. From OMerc.
hég (faenum), Vesp. Psalter, xxxvi[i]. 2. AS. hig, grass, hay; ‘ ofer
peet gréne hig’ =on the green grass; Mark, vi. 39.4+-Du. hooi ; Icel.
hey; Dan. and Swed. hé; Goth. hawi, grass; G. heu, MHG. houwe.
B. The true sense is ‘ cut grass; the sense of ‘ growing grass’ being
occasional. The Teut. type is*hau-jom,n. From the base *hau(w)- of
the verb to hew, i.e. to cut. See Hew. Der. hay-cock, hay-maker.
But not ME. hay-ward, where hay =hedge (below).

HAY (2), a hedge. (E.) ME. hee, heye; ‘bi the heie,’ by the
hedge; Owl and Night., 817. AS. hege; see Corpus Gloss., 606.
Teut, type *hagiz; allied to Haw. Cf. OF. hate, a hedge, of Low


HAZARD


G. origin. Der. hay-ward, an officer who had charge of fences and
enclosures ; P. Plowman, C. vi. 16, and note.

HAZARD, : chance, risk. (F.—Span.— Arab.) ME. hasard, the

name of a game of chance, generally played with dice; Chaucer, C. T.
12525 (C 591). Earlier, in Havelok, 2326.—F. hasard, ‘ hazard,
adventure ;’ Cot. The orig. sense was certainly ‘a game at dice’
(Littré). B. We find also Span. azar, an unforeseen accident, hazard,
MSpan. azar, ‘an ill token, a pricke or note in a die, a hucklebone ;’
also azar en el dado, ‘a game at dice called ‘hazard;’ Minsheu. Cf.
Mital. zara, ‘a gameat dice called hazard, also a hazard or a nicke at
dice ;’ Florio. It is probable that F. ha-, Span. a-, answers to the
Arab. article al, turnedinto az byassimilation. Thus the F. word is
from Span., and the Span. from Arab. al zahr, the die, a word only
found in the vulgar speech; see Devic’s Supplement to Littré. But
Arab. zahr is a word of doubtful authority ; and the etym. is uncertain.
Der. hazard, verb, hazard-ous.
‘ HAZE, vapour, mist. (Low G.) Not in early use. The earliest
trace of the form haze is in Ray’s Collection of Northern-English
Words, 1691 (1st ed. 1674). He gives: ‘it hazes, it misles, or rains
small rain.’ Asasb., it occurs in Phillips, ed. 1706: ‘ Haze, a Rime
or thick Fog. ‘Hazy weather’ is in Dampier’s Voyages, ed. 1684
{R.) ; and ‘thicke and hawsey’ occurs in 1625 (N.E.D.). Appar-
ently due to the Low G. phrase de Hase Brouet, i. e. a mist or haze is
rising ; see Bremen Worterbuch, Brouet=brews,is brewing. Berg-
haus enters the phrase under Hase, a hare; but does not explain the
connexion. ~Rietz gives has, a slight shower of rain, as a Swed. dial.
word. Note also prov. E. haar,a cold sea-fog or mist(E. D. D.); Du.
dial. harig, foggy, misty (Boekenoogen). Der. haz-y, haz-t-ness.

-HAZEL, the name of a tree or shrub. (E.) ME, hasel. ‘The
hasel and the ha3-porne’ [haw-thorn]; Gawayne and the Grene
Knight, ed. Morris, 744. AS. hesel. ‘ Cortlus, hesel. Sagznus,
hwit heesel ;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 32, col. 1. ‘Abellane, hzesl, vel
heesel-hnutu’ [hazel-nut]; id. 33, col. 2 (Voc. 137. 16, 139. 17).
Du. hazelaar; Icel. hasl, hesli; Dan. and Swed. hassel; G. hasel;
OHG. hasala.4+-L. corulus (for *cosulus); W. coll; Olrish coll (for
*cosl). Stokes-Fick, p. 92. Teut. type *hasaloz; Idg. type *kosolos.
Der. hazel-nut = AS. heselhnutu, as above ; hazel-twig, Tam. Shrew,
11. 255.

HE, pronoun of the third person. (E.) ME. he; common. AS.
hé ; declined as follows. Mase. sing. nom. hé; gen. his; dat. him;
acc. hine. Fem. sing. nom. héo; gen. and dat. hire; acc. hi. Neut.
sing. nom. and ace. hit; gen. his; dat. him. Plural (for all genders) ;
nom. and ace. hi, hig; gen. hira, heora; dat. him, heom.+Du. hij;
OSax. he, hi; allied to Goth. neut. hi-ta. Allied to Lith. szis, this,
L. ct-ird, on this side, Gk. é-xet, there, xetvos, that one. Brugmann,
1. §§ 83, 604. Der. hence, here, hither.

HEAD, the uppermost part of the body. (E.) ME. hed, heed;
earlier heued (=heved), from which it is contracted. ‘His heed was
balled’ [bald]; Chaucer, C. T. 198. In P. Plowman, B. xvii. 70, it
is spelt hed; but in the corresponding passage in C. xx. 70, the
various readings are hede, heed, and heuede. AS. héafod, Mark, vi. 24,
where the latest MS, has héafed.4-Du. hoofd; Goth. haubith; G.
haupt ; OHG. houbit. Also Olcel. haufod, later hofud ; Dan. hoved ;
Swed. hufvud. Teut. types *haudud-, *haudid-, n.; which have no
equivalents. The L. caput (with short a) is allied to AS. hafela,
heafola, head. Der. head, vb.; head-ache, -band (Isa. iii. 20), -dress,
-gear, -land, -less, -piece (K. Lear, iii. 2. 26), -qguarters, -stall (Tam.
Shrew, ili, 2. 58), -stone (Zech. iv. 7), -strong (heed-strong in Pals-
grave), -tire (I Esdras, iii. 6), -way, -wind. Also head-ing, a late
word; head-s-man (All’s Well, iv. 3. 342); head-y (2 Tim. iii, 4),
headi-ly, head-i-ness. Also head-long, q.v.

HEADLONG, rashly; rash. (E.) Now often used as an adj.,
but orig. an adv. ME. hedling, heedling, hedlynges, heuedlynge ;

Wyclif, Deut. xxii. 8; Judg. v. 22; Matt. viii. 32; Luke, viti. 33.
“ Heore hors hedlyng mette’=their horses met head to head; King
Alisaunder, 2261. Thesuffix is adverbial, answering to the AS. suffix
-ling, which occurs in bec-ling, backwards. In.this suffix, the -/- is
‘separable ; the common form being -inga; as in fér-inga, suddenly.
* HEAT, to make whole. (E.) ME. helen. ‘For he with it conde
bothe hele and dere;’ i.e. heal and harm, Chaucer, C. T. 10554
(F 240). AS. hélan, to make whole; very common in the pres.
part. helend=the healing one, saviour, as a translation of Jesus.
Regularly formed (with i- mutation of @ to #) from AS. hal, whole ;


see Whole.+ Du. heelen, from heel, whole; Icel. hela, from hell; |


Dan. hele, from heel ; Swed. hela, from hel ; Goth. hailjan, from hails ;
G. heilen, from heil. Der. heal-er, heal-ing ; and see health.

. HEATTH, soundness of body, or of mind. (E.) ME. helzh,
P. Plowman, C. xvii. 137: AS. h#ld (acc. h#lde), AElfric’s Hom. i.
466, 1. 8; ii. 396, 1. 21. Formed from AS. hal, whole. Teut. type
*hailitha, {. The suffix -tha denotes condition, like L. -tas. J Not
a very common word in old writers ; the more usual form is ME. hele


HEARTY 265


(P. Plowman, C. vi. 7, 10), from AS. h#¥lu, Grein, ii.22. Der. héalth-y,
healih-i-ly, health-i-ness; health-ful, health-ful-ly, health-ful-ness ;
healih-some,. Romeo, iv. 3. 34.

HEAP, a pile of things thrown together. (E.) ME. heep (dat.
heepe, hepe), Chaucer, C. T. 577 (A 575); P. Plowman, B. vi. 190.
AS. héap, a heap, crowd, multitude; Grein, ii. 56.4-Du. hoop; (whence
Icel. hopr ; Dan. hob ; Swed. hop); G. haufe, OHG. hiifo.+ Russ. kupa,
a heap, crowd, group; Lithuanian kaupas, a heap (Fick, iii. 77).
Brugmann, i. § 421 (7). Der. heap, vb., AS. héapian, Luke, vi. 38.
Doublet, hope (2).

HEAR, to perceive by the ear. (E.) ME. heren (sometimes huyre),
pt. t. herde, pp. herd; Chaucer, C. T. 851 (A 849); 13448 (B 1708).
OMerc. héran; AS. hyran, pt. t. hyrde, pp. gehyred ; Grein, ii, 132.
Du. hooren; Icel. heyra; Dan. hore; Swed. hora; Goth. hausjan; G.
horen, OHG. horjan. Teut. type *hauzjan-. Cf. Gk. d-kov-ev, to hear.
@ It does not seem possible so to ignore the initial # as to connect it
with the word ear, though there is a remarkable similarity in form
between Goth. hausjan, to hear, and Goth. auso, the ear. See Har.
Der. hear-er, hear-ing, hear-say, q.v., hearken, q.v.

HEARKEN ; see under Hark,

HEARSAY, a saying heard,arumour. (E.) From hear and say.
‘I speake unto you since I came into this country by hearesay. ForI
heard say that there were some homely theeves, &c.: Bp. Latimer,
Ser, on the Gospel for St. Andrew’s Day (R.). The verb say, being
the latter of two verbs, is in the infin. mood, as in AS. ‘ Ful ofte time
I haue herd sein; Gower, C. A. i. 367; bk. iii. 2622. ‘He...
secgan hyrde’=he heard say; Beowulf, ed. Grein, 875.

HEARSE, a carriage in which the dead are carried to the grave.
(F.—L.) Much changedin meaning. ME. herse, herce. First (perhaps)
used by Chaucer, ‘ Adoun I fel when that I saugh the herse;’ Com-
plaint to Pity, st.3. ‘Heerce on a dede corce (hkerce vpon dede corcys),
Pirama, piramis ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 236. Mr. Way’s note says: ‘ This
term is derived from a sort of pyramidal candlestick, or frame for
supporting lights, called hercia or herpica, from its tesemblance in
form to a harrow, of which mention. occurs as early as the xiith
century, It was not, at first, exclusively a part of funeral display, but
was used in the solemn services of the holy week . . . Chaucer appears
to use the term herse to denote the decorated bier, or funeral pageant,
and not exclusively the illumination, which was a part thereof; and
towards the 16th century, it had such a general signification alone.
Hardyng describes the honours falsely bestowed upon the remains of
Richard IT. when cloths of gold were offered ‘‘ upon his hers”’ by the
king and lords ;’ &c. See the whole note; also Rock, Church, of our
Fathers, ii. 495. The changes of sense are (1) a harrow, (2) a tri-
angular frame for lights in a church service, (3) a frame for lights
over a tomb, (4) a.frame to support a pall, (5) a carriage for a dead
body; the older senses being quite forgotten. OF. herce, ‘a harrow,
also, a kind of portcullis, that’s stuck, as a harrow, full of sharp,
strong, and outstanding iron pins’ [which leads up to the sense of a
frame for holding candles]; Cot. Mod.F. herse, Ital. erpice, a harrow.
=—L. hirpicem, acc. of hirpex,a harrow, also spelt irpex. @ A re-
matrkable use of the word is in Berners’ tr. of Froissart, cap. cxxx,
where it is said that, at the battle of Crecy, ‘the archers ther stode
in maner of a herse,’ i.e. drawn up in a triangular form, the old F.
harrow being so shaped. See Specimens of English, ed. Skeat, p. 160.
Der. re-hearse.

HEART, the organ of the body that circulates the blood. (E,)
ME. herte, properly dissyllabic. ‘That dwelled in his herte sike and
sore, Gan faillen, when the herté felté deth;’ Chaucer, C. T. 2806,
2807 (A 2804). AS. heorte, fem. (gen. heortan), Grein, ii. 69.-+ Du.
hart; Icel. hjarta; Swed. hjerta; Dan. hyerte; Goth. hatrio; G. herz,
OHG, herza. Teut. type *herton- n.; which afterwards became fem.
+ Irish cridhe; Russ. serdise; L. cor (gen. cord-is); Gk. xp, kapiia; W.
craidd; Lith. szirdis, Streitberg, § 86; Stokes-Fick, p.95. Der. heart-
ache, Hamlet, iii. 1.62; heart-blood=ME. herte-blod, Havelok, 1819;
heart-breaking, Ant. i. 2. 743 heart-broken, heart-burn, heart-burning,
L. L. L. i. 1. 280; heart-ease, heart-en, 3 Hen. VI, ii. 2. 79; heart-
felt, heart-less=ME. herteles, Wyclif, Prov. xii.8; heart-less-ly, heart-
less-ness, heart-rending, heart-sick, heart-sickness, heart-whole. Also
heart’ s-ease, q.v., heart-y, q.v-

HEARTH, the floor in a chimney on which the fire is made. (E.)
ME, herth, herthe; a rare word. ‘Herthe, where fyre ys made ;’
Prompt. Parv. AS. heord, as a gloss to foculare; Wright's Vocab. 1.
27, col. 1 (Voc. 127. 4). Du. Aaard ; MDan. herd (Kalkar) ; Swed.
hard, the hearth of a forge, a forge; G. herd, a hearth; OHG. hert,
ground, hearth. Teut. type *herthoz, m. Idg. base *ker-; cf. L.
cremare, to burn.. Der. hearth-stone (in late use).

HEART’S-EASBE, a pansy. (E.) ‘ Hearts-ease, or Pansey, an
herb ;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. ‘Hartysease, a floure ;’ Palsgrave. Lit.
ease of heart, i.e. pleasure-giving.


HEARTY, cordial, encouraging, (E.) ME. herty. ‘Herty,


HEAT


eordialis;’ Prompt. Parv. An accommodation of the older ME.
hertly. *3e han hertely hate to oure hole peple’=ye have hearty hate
against our whole people; Alexander and Dindimus, ed. Skeat, 961.
Der. hearti-ly, hearti-ness.

HEAT, great warmth, (E.) ME. hete, Chaucer, C. T. 16876
(G 1408). AS. hétu, h@to; Grein, ii. 24; from *haitin-, heat,
fem. Formed from the adj. kat, hot. B. The Icel. Aiti, heat, Du.
hitte, G. hitze, are not precisely parallel forms; but are formed from
the weak grade hit-. See further under Hot. Der. heat, verb= AS.
hétan, in The Shrine, ed. Cockayne, p. 16, 1. 15 ; formed rather from
the adj. az, hot, than from the sb. ; heat-er.

HEATH, wild open country. (E.) ME, hethe (but the final e
marks the dat.); Chaucer, C. T. 6; spelt heth, P. Plowman, B. xv.
451. AS. héd, Grein, ii..18.+4 Du. heide; Icel. heidr ; Swed. hed;
Dan. hede; Goth. haithi, a waste; G. heide. Teut: type *haithja, f.
Further allied to W. coed, a wood; L. -cétwm in comp. bii-cétum, a
pasture for cows; where bi- is allied to bds,a cow. Stokes-Fick,
p. 76. Der. heath-y; also heath-en, q. v.

HEATHEN, a pagan, unbeliever. (E.) Simply orig. ‘a dweller
on a heath;’ see Trench, Study of Words; and cf. L. pagdnus, a
pagan, lit. a villager, from pagus, a village. The idea is that dwellers
in remote districts are among the last to be converted. ME. hethen.
‘ Hethene is to mene after heth and vntiled erthe’ =heathen takes its
sense from heath and untilled land; P. Plowman, B. xv. 451. AS.
hx#den, a heathen; Grein, ii. 18.— AS, A#0,a heath. See Heath.
B. So also Du. heiden, a heathen, from heide, a heath; Icel. heidinn,
from heidr; Swed. heden, from hed; Dan. heden, from hede; Goth,
haithnd, a heathen woman, haithiwisks, wild, from haithi; G. heiden,
from heide. And note AS. h@den, a wild creature, monster ; Beowulf,
986. Der. heathen-dom=AS, hz#dendim, Grein, ii. 19; heathen-ish,
heathen-ish-ly, heathen-ish-ness, heathen-ise, heathen-ism.

HEATHER, a small evergreen shrub. (E.) Usually associated
with heath. But heather is quite a late form; and the old name is
hadder. ‘Hadder, heath or ling;? Ray, N. Country Words (1691).
ME. haddyr; Wallace, v. 300. So that the words seem to be distinct.
@ MDan. hede meant (1) a heath; (2) ling (Kalkar),

HEAVE, to raise, lift or force up. (E.) ME. heuen (with x for v) ;
Chaucer, C. T. 552 (A550) ; earlier form hebben, Rob. of Glouc., p. 17,
1.8; or 1. 389. From AS. hef-, a pres. stem of AS. hebban, Grein, ii.
28; pt.t. kof, pp. hafen; orig. a strong verb, whence the later pt. t.
hove, occasionally found. Cf, OFries. heva, to heave. + Du. heffen ;
Icel. heffa; Swed. hafva; Dan. heve; Goth. hafjan; G. heben, OHG.
heffan. Teut. type *hafjan-, pt. t. *hof; corresponding to L. capio,
Iseize; cf. Gk. xwmn,a handle. 4 Distinct from have. Der. heav-er,
heave-offering ; also heav-y, q.v.

HEAVEN, the dwelling-place of the Deity. (E.) ME. heuen
(with « for v), Chaucer, C. T. 2563 (A 2561). AS. heofon, hiofon,
hefon, Grein, il. 63. + OSax, hedan. Cf. AS. hiis-heofon, a ceiling;
so that the sense may have been ‘ canopy’ or ‘cover.’ PB. Another
word for ‘ heaven’ is the Icel. Aiminn; Goth. himins, heaven; and
G. himmel, heaven (with altered sufix). The two forms can hardly
be connected. Der. heaven-ly=AS. heofonlic; heavenly-minded;
heaven-ward, heaven-wards, as to which see Towards.

HEAVY, hard to heave, weighty. (E.) ME. heui, heuy (with xu
=v). Chaucer has heuy and heuinesse; C. T. 11134, 11140 (F 822,
828). AS. hefig, heavy; Grein, ii. 29; lit. ‘hard to heave,’ from AS.
haf-, stem of hebban (pt. t. hdf), to heave. + Icel. hofigr, heavy ; from
hefja, to heave; OHG. hepig, hebig (obsolete), heavy; Low G. hevig.
Der. heavi-ly; heavi-ness=AS., hefignes-(Grein).

HEBDOMADAL, weekly. (L.€Gk,) ‘As for hebdomadal periods
or weeks;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Etrefs, b. iv. c. 12, § 11.—L. heb-
domadalis, belonging to a week.=L. hebdomad-, stem of hebdomas, a
number of seven, a week; with suffix -alis.— Gk. €Bdopuds, a number
of seven, a week ; cf. €B5oy0s, seventh. = Gk. énra (for *oenra), seven;
cognate with E. seven. See Seven.

HEBETUDE, dulness, obtuseness. (L.) ‘ Hebetude, bluntness,
dulness ;’ Bailey (1735).—L. hebetiido, bluntness,—L. hebes (hebet-),
blunt, dull.

HEBREW, a descendant of Abraham. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) In
Merch. of Ven. i. 3. 58, 179.—F. hébreu, spelt hebriew in Cotgrave. —
L. Hebreus. = Gk. €Spatos. — Heb. ‘ivri, a Hebrew (Gen. xiv. 13); of
uncertain origin, but supposed to mean one of a people dwelling in
Heber, i.e. in the land ‘beyond’ the Euphrates; from Heb. ‘avar, he
crossed over.

HECATOMB, a sacrifice of a large number of victims. (F.—L.
—Gk.) -Lit. a sacrifice of a hundred oxen. In Chapman’s tr. of
Homer’s Iliad, b. i. 1. 60.— MF. hecatombe; Cot.—L. hecatombé. = Gk.
€xa7T6uBn, a sacrifice of a hundred oxen; or any large sacrifice. = Gk.
€xardv, hundred (cognate with Skt. gata, L. centum, AS. hund); and
Bods, an ox (cognate with E, cow). See Hundred and Cow.

. HECKLE, HACKLE, HATCHET, an instrument for dress-


266


by


HEEL


ing flax or hemp. (E.) ME. hekele, hechele, ‘Hekele, mataxa;’ Prompt.
Parv. ‘I heckell (or hetchyll) flaxe;’ Palsgrave. ‘Hec mataxa, a
hekylle ;? Wright’s Vocab. i. 269, col. 2 (Voc. 668. 32). EFries. hekel,
hakel. 4+ Du. hekel, a heckle; Dan. hegle,a heckle; Swed. hackla; G.
hechel. ‘Teut. type *hakila, fem.; from a Teut. base *hak-, to pierce,
bite, as in OHG. ‘hecchen, MHG. hecken (for *hakjan), to pierce, bite
as a snake; cf. AS. hacod, a pike (fish), from its sharp teeth. Cf.
Hack (1). Der. hackle (1), hackle (2), q.v.

HECTIC, continual; applied to a fever. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘My fits
are like the fever ectick fits;’ Gascoigne, Flowers, The Passion of a
Lover, st. 8. Shak. has it as a sb., to mean ‘a constitutional fever ; ’
Hamlet, iv. 3. 68.—F. hectique, ‘sick of an hectick, or continuall
feaver ;’ Cot.— Late L. *hecticus, for which I find no authority, but
it was doubtless in use as a medical word.=—Gk. éxrixds, hectic,
consumptive (Galen).=—Gk. éfis, a habit of body; lit. a possession.
Gk. &-w, fut. of éxew, to have, possess. = 4/ SEGH, to hold in, stop;
whence also Skt. sak, to hold in, stop, bear, undergo, endure, &c.
Der. hectic, sb.

HECTOR, a bully; as a verb, to bully, to brag. (Gk.) ‘The
hectoring kill-cow Hercules ;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 1. 1. 352.
From the Gk. Hector ("Extwp), the celebrated Trojan hero, The lit,
sense of Gk. «7wp is ‘holding fast;’ from the Gk. éyev, to hold.
See Hectic.

HEDGE, a fence round a field, thicket of bushes. (E.) ME.
hegge, Chaucer, C, T. 15224 (B 4408). AS. hecg (dat. hecge); A.S.
Chron. an, 547; Cart. Saxon., ed. Birch, i. 339; iii. 532. Teut. type
*hagja, £.; formed from hag- with suffix -ja, causing vowel-change of
hag- to heg-; i.e. it is a secondary form from AS. haga, a hedge,
preserved in mod. E, in the form haw; see Haw. + Du. hegge, heg,
a hedge; cf. haag,a haw; Icel. heggr, a kind of tree used in hedges;
cf. hagi, a haw (see Icel. Dict. p. 774); G. hecke. Der. hedge, verb
(Prompt. Parv. p. 232), hedge-bill, hedge-born, 1 Hen. VI, iv. I. 43;
hedge-hog, Temp. ii. 2. 10; hedge-pig, Mach. iv. 1. 23 hedge-priest.
L.L.L. v. 2. 545; hedge-row,; Milton, L’Allegro, 58; hedge-school ;
hedge-sparrow, K. Lear, i. 4. 235; also hedg-er, Milton, Comus, 293.

HEED, to take care, attend to. (E.) ME. heden, pt. t. hedde ;
Layamon, 17801; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, A. 1050 (or 1051). AS.
hédan, to take care; pt. t. hédde; Grein, ii. 29. A weak verb, formed
by vowel change from a sb. *héd, care, not found in AS. but occurring
in OF ries. héde, hiide, care, protection, and allied to G. hut, OHG.
huota, heed, watchfulness. + OSax. hddian, to heed; Du. hoeden, to
heed, guard, from hoede, guard, care, protection; G. hiiten, to protect
(OHG. huaten), from G. hut (OHG. huota), protection. B. For the
vowel-change, cf. bleed (AS. blédan) from blood (AS. bléd). Brugmann,
i. § 754. Prob. allied to Hood. The notion of ‘guarding’ is
common to both words. Der. heed, sb.=ME. hede, Chaucer, C. T.
305 (A 303); heed-ful, heed-ful-ly, heed-ful-ness, heed-less, heed-less-ly,
heed-less-ness,

HEEL (1), the part of the foot projecting behind. (E.) ME. heel,
heele; Wyclif, John, xiii. 18. AS. héla, the heel; Grein, ii. 30. We
find also the gloss: ‘ Calx, héla, hoh nipeweard’ =the heel, the lower
part of the heel; Wright’s Vocab. i. 283, col. 2 (Voc. 266. 8).4-Du.
hiel (from OFriesic héla) ; Icel. hell; Swed. hal; Dan. hel. B, It
is probable that AS. héla is a contraction of *koh-ila, with the usual
vowel-change from 6 (followed by 7) toé; this would make the
word a diminutive of AS. kok, which also means ‘the heel,’ and is
a commoner word. See Hough. Der. heel-piece.

HEET: (2), to lean over, incline. (E.) <A corrupted form; the
word has lost a final d, whilst the vowel has been lengthened. It is
modified from ME, helden, hilden. Cf. the EFries., Du. and Swed.
forms. Palsgrave has: ‘I hylde, I leane on the one syde, as a bote
or shyp, or any other vessell, ie encline de cousté. Sytte fast, I rede
[advise] you, for the bote begynneth to hylde.’? ‘ Heldyn, or bowyn,
inclino, flecto, deflecto;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 2343 see Way’s note.
B. The ME, helden or hilden was frequently transitive, meaning (1) to
pour, esp. by tilting a vessel on one side; and (2) intransitively, to
heel over, to incline. Wyclifhas: ‘and whanne the boxe of alabastre
was brokun, she helde it [poured it out] on his heed ;’ Mark, xiv. 3.
AS. hyldan, heldan, trans. to tilt, incline, intrans. to bow down ;
Grein, ii. 131. ‘pu gestadoladest ... eordan swa feeste, pet hio on
&nige healfe ne helded’ = Thou hast founded the earth so fast, that it
will not heel over on any side; Alfred’s Metres, xx.164. It isa weak
verb, related to the (participial) adjective heald, inclined, bent down,
which occurs in wider-heald, bent downwards; Grein, ii. 295. + Icel.
halla (for *halda), to lean sideways, heel over, esp. used of a ship;
from hallr (< *halth-), leaning, sloping ; Dan. helde, to slant, slope,
lean, tilt (both trans. and intrans.); cf. held, an inclination, slope ;
Swed. halla, to tilt, pour; cf. EFries. hella, to heel over. The adj.
is AS. -heald, OFries. hald, Icel. hallr, OHG. hald, inclined, bent
forward; Teut. type *halthoz. Allied to AS. hold, G. hold, faithful,
true (to a master), Goth. hulths, gracious; Teut. type *hulthoz. Cf


. HEFT


Goth. wilja-halthei, inclination of will, partiality (which see in
Uhblenbeck).

HEFT, a heaving. (E.) In Shak. Wint. Ta. ii. r. 45. Formed
from the verb fo heave, and closely allied to haft. 4 Heft also occurs
as another spelling of ha/?.

HEGEMONY, leadership. (Gk.) Chiefly modern. =Gk. #ye-
povia, leadership.—Gk. #yepnov-, from 7yepurv, a leader.— Gk. iyé-
opat, I lead. Gk. 7y-, as in 7y-ayov, 2 aor. of dy-ev, to lead, cognate
with L. ag-ere.—4/ AG, to drive. See Agent.

HEGIRA, the flight of Mohammed. (Arab.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. ‘The era of the Hegira dates from the flight of Moham-
med from Mecca to Medina, on the night of Thursday, July 15, 622.
The era begins on the 16th;’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates, Arab. hijrah,
separation (here flight) ; the Mohammedan era; Palmer’s Pers. Dict.
col. 695. From the Arab. root hajara, he separated, he went away.
Cf. Arab. hajr, separation, absence; id. ] Hence, pronounce the
E. word as hejra, with soft g and no i.

HEIFSER, a young cow. (E.) ME. hayfare, hekfere. ‘ Juvenca,
hayfare;’? Wright’s Vocab. i.177,1.4 3 ‘ Hec juvenca, a hekfere ;” id.
250, col. 2. (Voc. 624.14; 758. 3, with Af< hf.) AS. héahfore.
‘Annicula, vel vaccula, héahfore;’ also, ‘ Altilium, fet héahfore’
{a fat heifer]; id. p. 23, col. 2 (Voc. 120. 29, 35). Also spelt
héahfru; Voc. 274.20. B. The first syllable (héak or heah) is prob.
the same as AS. héah, high; but the rest is obscure. The forms -/ore,
-fru, may be referred to AS. faran, to go; hardly to AS. fearr,
bull.

HEIGH-HO, an exclamation of weariness. (E.) Also, in Shak.,
an exclamation of joy; As You Like It, iv. 3. 169; ii. 7, 180, 182,
190; iii. 4. 54. ‘But sung hey-howe;? The Frere and the Boy
(Hazlitt; E. E. Pop. Poetry, iii. 62), 1. 50. Compounded of heigh,
a cry to call attention, Temp. i. 1.63; and ho! interjection. Both
words are of natural origin, to express a cry to call attention.

HEIGHT, the condition of being high; a hill. (E.) A variant
of highth, a form common in Milton, P. L.i. 24, 92, 282, 552, 723;
&c. Height is common in Shak. Merch. Ven. iv. 1.72; &c.
highte, hyghte, as in Chaucer, C. T. 1786 (where it rimes with lyghte) ;
also he3zpe (=heghthe), Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 317; heighthe,
Mandeville’s Travels, p. 40. AS. héahdu, héhdu, also hiehdu (Bos-
worth); from héak, high. + Du. hoogte, height; Icel. hed; Swed.
hijd; Dan. hoide; Goth. hauhitha. See High. Der. height-en,
Shak. Cor. v. 6. 22; formed by analogy with length-en, strength-en,
&c.; not an orig. form.

HEINOUS, hateful, atrocious. (F.—O.LowG.) Properly trisyl-
labic. ME. heinous, hainous; Chaucer, Troilus, ii. 1617. —OF. hainos,
odious; formed with suffix -os (=L. dsus, mod. F. -eux) from the sb.
haine, hate.—OF. hair, to hate. From an O. Low G. form, well
exemplified in Goth. hatjan (=hatian), to hate; OFries. hatia. See
Hate. Der. heinous-ly, heinous-ness.

HEIR, one who inherits property. (F.—L.) The word being F,
the h is silent. ME. heire, heyre; better heir, heyr; Chaucer, C. T.
5186 (B 766); also eyr, Will. of Palerne, 1283 eir, Havelok, 410.—
OF. heir, eir (later hotr), an heir.=Late L. hérem, for L. hérédem,
acc. of hérés, an heir. See Brugmann, i. § 477. Der. heir-dom,
heir-ship, hybrid words, with E. suffixes; heir-apparent, 1 Hen. IV, i.
2.65; heir-ess, with F. suffix, Blackstone’s Comment., b. iv. c. 15
(R.); heir-less, Wint. Ta. v. 1. 10; heir-presumptive, heir-male; also
hetr-loom, q. v.

HEIR-LOOM,, a piece of property which descends to an heir
along with his inheritance. (Hybrid; F. and E.) ‘Which he an
heir-loom left unto the English throne ;’ Drayton, Polyolbion, s. 11
(near the end). Also (in 1424) in E. E. Wills, p. 56. Compounded
of heir (see above); and Joom, a piece of property, furniture, the same
word as loom in the sense of a weayer’s frame. See Loom (1).

HELIACAL, relating to the sun. (L.—Gk.) A term inastronomy,
used and defined in Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iv. c. 13. § 73
‘We term that. . the heliacal [ascension of a star], when a star which
before, for the vicinity of the sun, was not visible, being further
temoved, beginneth to appear.’ = Late L. héliacus, Latinised from the
Gk. #Araxés, belonging to the sun.—Gk. fAvos, the sun; allied to L.


sol, See Solar. Der. heliacal-ly.
HE CENTRIC, considered with reference to the sun as
a centre. An astronomical term ; in Kersey, ed. 1715. Coined


from helio-= Gk. %Ato-, for #Aros, the sun; and cen/ric, adj. coined
from Gk. xévrpov, centre. See Heliacaland Centre. B. Similar
formations are helio-graphy, equivalent to photography, from ypageuw,
to write; helio-latry, sun-worship, from Aarpeia, service, worship ;
helio-trope, q. Vv.

HELIOTROPE, the name of a flower. (F.—L.—Gk.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674; Ben Jonson, Sejanus, iv. 5.—F. heliotrope,
‘the herbe turnsole ;? Cot.—L. heliotropium.—Gk. 7Atorpdmoyv, a
heliotrope.—Gk, 7Avo-, for 7Atos, the sun; and tpom-, 2nd. grade of


HEMATITE 267


Tpémev, to turn; lit. ‘sun-turner,’ or the flower which turns to the
sun. See Heliacal and Trope.

HELIX, a spiral figure. (L.—Gk.) ‘Helix, barren or creeping
ivy; in anatomy, the outward brim of the ear; in geometry, a spiral
figure ;” Kersey, ed. 1715. —L. helix, a volute, spiral; kind of ivy. —
Gk. é¢, anything twisted, a tendril, spiral, volute, curl.—Gk.
édiaoewv, to turn round. =Gk. root Fed; allied to L. uol- in uoluere,
toroll. See Volute, Der. helices, the pl. form; helic-al, helic-al-ly.

HELL, the place of the dead ; the abode of evil spirits. (E.) ME.
helle ; Chaucer, C.T.1202 (A 1200). AS, hel, a fem. sb., gen. helle ;
Grein, ii. 29.--Du. hel ; Icel. hel; G. hélle, OHG. hella ; Goth. halja,
hell. Teut. type *halja, f.; from hal-, and grade of the Teutonic base
*hel-, to hide, whence AS. helan, G. hehlen, to hide; so that the orig.
sense is ‘that which hides or covers up.’ The AS. helan is allied to
L. célare, to hide, from the root *#él, to hide, whence also L. cella,
E. cell. Der. hell-ish, hell-ish-ly, hell-ish-ness ; hell-fire = AS, helle-fyr,
Grein, ii. 313; hell-hound, ME. helle-hund, Seinte Marherete, ed.
Cockayne, p. 6, 1. 4 from bottom.

HELLEBORE, the name of a plant. (F.—L.—Gk.) Alsospelt
ellebore, as frequently in Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxv. c. 5.=OF.
ellebore, ‘ hellebore ;? Cot. Properly hellebore.=L. hellzborus, = Gk,
€AA€Bopos, the name of the plant. Of uncertain origin.

HELM (1), the instrument by which a ship is steered. (E.)
Properly used of the tiller or handle of the rudder. ME. helme;
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, iii. 149. AS. helma, masc., A£lfred’s tr. of
Boethius, cap. xxxv. § 4; lib. iii. pr. 12.4-Icel. hjalm, a rudder; G.
helm, a helve, handie. B. Closely allied to ME. halm, a handle,
Gawaine and Grene Knt., 1. 330. Another kindred word is helve.
See Helve, Der. helms-man; where helms =helm’s (the possessive
case).

HELM (2), HELMET, armour for the head. (E.) ME. helm,
Chaucer, C. T. 2611 (A 2609). AS. helm, masc., (1) a protector,
(2) a protection, helm; Grein, ii. 31.4Du. helm (also helmet), a
helm, casque; Icel. hjalmr, a helmet ; Dan. hielm; Swed. hjelm; G.
helm ; Goth. hilms. .'Teut. type *hel-moz, m., lit. ‘a covering.’ B. All
formed with suffix -mo- from the base kel- (Teut. hel-), a grade of
the root *él, to cover, protect. See Hell. Der. helm-ed, Chaucer,
C. T. 14376 (B 3560); helm-et, a dimin. form, with suffix -e¢ of F,
origin, from OF. helmet.

HELMINTHOLOGY, the natural history of worms. (Gk.)
A scientific word. Coined from Gk. éApu0-, decl. stem of €Apuys, a
worm; and -Aoya, a discourse, from Aéyew, to speak. The Gk.
éApus is also found as €Apyus, i.e. ‘that which curls about ;’ from the
same source as €A-1f, a helix. See Helix, Der. helminthologi-c-al.

HELOT, a slave, among the Spartans. (L.—Gk.) ‘The Helos ;’
Sir P. Sidney, Arcadia; (1638); p.16. The pl. helots answers to L.
pl. Hélotes, borrowed from Gk. EiAwres, pl. of EiAws, a helot, bonds-
man; fabled to have meant originally a man of Helos ("EAos), a town
of Laconia, whose inhabitants were enslaved under the Spartans.
Der. helot-ism.

HELP, to aid, assist. (E.) ME. helpen, pt. t. halp, pp. holpen;
Chaucer, C. T. 10244 (E 2370). AS. helpan, pt. t. healp, pp. holpen;
Grein, ii. 33.-4-Du. helpen ; Icel. hjalpa; Dan. hielpe ; Swed. hjelpa ;
Goth. hilpan; G. helfen, OHG. helfan. Teut. type *helpan- (pt. t.
*halp, pp. *hulpanoz). Allied to Lithuan. sze/pti, to help. Der. help,
sb.=AS. helpe (Grein) 3 help-er, help-ful, help-ful-ness, help-less, help-
less-ly, help-less-ness ; also help-meet, a coinage due to a mistaken
notion of the phrase az help meet (Gen. ii. 18, 20); later form help-
mate; thus Rich. quotes from Sharp’s Sermons, vol. iv. ser, 12: ‘ that
she might be a help-mate for the man.’

HELVE, a handle of an axe. (E.) ME. helue (=helve), Wyclif,
Dent. xix. 5; spelt helife (for helfe), Ormulum, 9948. AS. hielf, of
which the dat. hielfe occurs in Gregory’s Pastoral, ed. Sweet, p. 166,
1.8; also helfe, as in * Manubrium, heeft and helfe;’ Wright’s Vocab.
i, 35, col. 1 (Voc. 142. 21).4-MDu. helve, a handle ; Oudemans ;
Low G. helt, a handle; Pomeran. helfter. Allied to Helm (1) and
Halter.

HEM (1), the border of a garment. (E.) ME. hem; pl. hemmes,
Wyclif, Matt. xxiii. 5. AS. hemm, hem; ‘Limbus, stemning vel
hem;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 26, col. 1 (Voc. 125. 13). Orig. ‘an
enclosure;’ cf. OFries. ham, hem; NFries. ham, an enclosure;
EFries. ham, an enclosure surrounded by ditches. Der. hem,.verb,
chiefly in the phr. to hem in (cf. G. hemmen, to stop, check, hem,
from Fries. ham ; Swed. hémma, to withhold, keep in), Shak. Troilus,
iv. 5. 193.

HEM (2), a slight cough to call attention. (E.) ‘ Cry hem! when
he should groan,’ Much Ado, vy. 1. 16; cf. As You Like It, i. 3. 19.
An imitative word, formed from the sound. Allied to Hum. In
Dutch, we also find the same word hem, used in the same way. Der,
hem, verb, As You Like It, i. 3. 18.


HEMATITE, an ore of iron. (F.—L.—Gk.) The sesqui-oxide


268 HEMI-


of iron; so called because of the red colour of the powder (Webster).
‘The sanguine load-stone, called hematites;’ Holland’s Pliny, b. xxxvi.
c. 16.— OF. hematite (Supp. to Godefroy). —L. hematités; Pliny.— Gk.
aipatitns, blood-like. = Gk. aivar-, stem of aia, blood.

HEMTI,., half. (Gk.) From aL. spelling (hémi-) of the Gk. prefix
Hpe-, signifying half; cognate with L. sémi-, half. See Semi-.

HEMICRANTIA, megrim; see Megrim.

HEMISPHERE, a half sphere, a half globe. (F.—L.—Gk.)
In Cotgrave.— MF. hemisphere, ‘a hemisphere ;’ Cot. = L. hémisphe-
rium.—Gk. jpopaipiov, a hemisphere.— Gk. ymi-, prefix, signifying
half; and opatpa, a ball, sphere. See Hemi- and Sphere. Der.
hemispheri-c-al ; Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 1, § 13.

HEMISTICH, half a line, in poetry. (L.—Gk.) Not from F.
hemistique (Cotgrave), but directly from L. hémistichium, by dropping
the two latter syllables. Kersey has : ‘ Hemistichium, a half verse. =
Gk. jpuorixiov, a half verse.=Gk. jyi-, half; and otixos, a row,
order, line, verse. See Hemi- and Distich. ;

HEMLOCK, a poisonous plant. (E.) ME. hemlok; spelt hum-
loke, humlok, Wright’s Vocab. i. 226, col. 1, 265, col. 1; homelok, id.
i. 191, col. 2 (Voc. 711.343 786.16; 645.21). AS. hemlic, hymlice ;
Gloss to Cockayne’s Saxon Leechdoms ; early form hymblice, Epinal
Gloss. 185. Of unknown origin.

HEMORRHAGE, a great flow of blood. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt
hemorragy by Kay, On the Creation, pt. 1 (R.).—MF. hemorrhagie,
‘an abundant flux of blood;” Cot.—Late L. hemorrhagia, Latinised
from Gk. aipoppayia, a violent bleeding. = Gk. aiuo-, for afya, blood ;
and Fpay-, a grade of pyyvupe, I break, burst; the lit. sense being ‘a
bursting out of blood.’ Gk. Fpay is allied to E. wreak.

HEMORRHOIDS, EMERODS, painful bleeding tubercles
round the margin ofthe anus. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Hemorroides be vaynes
in the foundement ;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iii. c. 9.—MF.
hemorrhoide, ‘an issue of blood by the veins of the fundament ;’ Cot.
— L. hemorrhoide, hemorrhoids, pl.of hemorrhoida, —Gk. aipoppotdes,
pl. of aipoppois, adj., liable to flow of blood. Gk. afyo-, for afya,
blood; and féev, to flow, cognate with Skt. sru, to flow, and allied to
E. stream. Der. hemorrhoid-al. Doublet, emerods.

HEMP, a kind of plant. (L.—Gk.) ME. hemp, Havelok, 782.
Contracted from a form henep; the x becoming m by the influence of
the following p. AS. henep, henep; Cockayne’s A. S. Leechdoms, i.
124. ll. 1, 3, and note. [Cf Du. hennep; Icel. hampr; Dan. hamp ;
Swed. hampa; G. hanf; OHG. hanaf.) All from L. cannabis; Gk.
xavvaBis; hemp. Cf. Skt. gaza-s, hemp; prob. not an Idg. word.
B. The L. word is merely borrowed from Gk. ‘Grimm and Kuhn
both consider the Gk. word borrowed from the East, and the Teutonic
one from the L. cannabis which certainly made its way to them ;’
Curtius, i. 173. The word was borrowed so early that it suffered
consonantal change. Der. hemp-en, with adj. suffix, as in gold-en;
Hen. V, iii. chor. 8. Also canvas, q.v.

HEN, the female of a bird, especially of the domestic fowl. (E.)
ME. hen, Chaucer, C. T. 15445 ; pl. hennes, id. 14872 (B 4629, 4056).
AS. henn, hen, hen; Grein, ii. 23. Teut. type *hanjd, f.; from AS.
hana, a cock; Grein, ii. 11.4-Du. hen, fem. of haan, a cock; Icel.
hena, fem. of hani; Dan. hine, fem. of hane, a cock; Swed. héna,
fem. of hane; G. henne, fem. of hahn,acock. Cf. Goth. hana, a cock.
B. Thus hex is the fem. of a word for cock (obsolete in English), of
which the old Teutonic type was *han-on-. y. The AS. hana means,
literally, ‘singer,’ the suffix -a denoting the agent, as in AS. hunt-a,a
hunter. = 4/K AN, to sing; whence L. canere, tosing. Der. hen-bane,
Prompt. Parv. p. 235 3 lit. ‘ fowl-poison;’ see Bane. Also hen-coop,
hen-harrier, a kind of hawk (see Harrier) ; hen-pecked, i.e. pecked
by the hen or wife, as in the Spectator, no. 176: ‘a very good sort of
people, which are commonly called in scorn the henpeckt.’ ‘My
henpecked sire ;’ Dryden, tr. of Virgil, Past. iii. 49.

HENCE, from this place or time. (E.) ME. hennes, P. Plowman,
B. iii. 108; whence the shorter form hens, occurring in Lydgate’s
Minor Poems, p. 220. In the modern hence, the -ce merely records
that the ME. hens was pronounced with voiceless s, not with a final
z-sound.- B. In the form hennes, the suffixed s was due to a habit of
forming adverbs in -s or -es, as in ¢wy-es, twice, need-es, needs ; an older
form was henne, Havelok, 843, which is found as late as in Chaucer,
C. T. 2358 (A 2356). y. Again, henne represents a still older henen
or heonen, spelt heonene in Ancren Riwle, p. 230, 1. 8. AS. heonan,
hionan, hence; Grein, ii. 67. Here heonan stands as usual for an
older *hinanx. A shorter form appears in the AS. heona (for hina),
hence, Grein, li. 67; closely allied to hi-ne, acc. masc. of the pron.
hé, he. See He. @ Similarly, L. hinc, hence, is connected with L.
hic, this. Der. hence-forth, compounded of hence and forth, and
answering to AS. ford heonan, used of time ; see examples in Grein,
ii. 68, 11. 1-4; hence-forward, comp. of hence and forward,

HENCHMAN, a page, servant. (E.) In Shak. Mids. Nt. Dr.
ii. 1. 121, “Compare me the fewe.. disciples of Jesus with the


. Book of St. Albdn’s, fol. C 5, back, 1. 7.


HERALD


solemne pomp. .. of suchas go before the bishop, of his hensemen,
of trumpets, of sundry tunes,’ &c. ; Udal, on St. Mark, c. II. vv. I-10,
‘And eyery knight had after him riding Three henshmen on him
awaiting ;7 The Flower and the Leaf, 1. 252 (a poem wrongly
ascribed to Chaucer, and belonging to the fifteenth century). ME.
henksman; the pl. henksmen occurs in 1392, in the Earl of Derby’s
Expedition (Camden Soe.), p. 163; cf. p. 280. Spelt henxtman in
1402, The full (Latinised) form hengestmannus occurs in the Issue
Roll for 1380 (Easter); see N.E.D. B. We also find Hinxman as
a proper name in Wilts. (in the Clergy List, 1873) ; showing that the
right etymology is from ME. hengest (cognate with Du. and G. hengst,
Swed. and Dan. hingst), a horse, and E. man. We find similar
formations in Icel. hestvérdr (lit. horse-ward), a mounted guard
(Cleasby); and in Swed. hingstridare (lit. horse-rider), ‘a groom of
the king’s stable, who rides before his coach;’ Widegren’s Swed.
Dict. In this view, the sense is: simply ‘ groom,’ which is the sense
required in The Flower and the Leaf. y. The ME. hengest occurs in
Layamon, 1. 3546, and is from AS, hengest, a horse (Grein, ii. 34),
once a common word. It is cognate with Icel. hestr, Swed. and Dan.
hingst and hast, G. hengst ; from an orig. Teutonic *hangistoz. The
orig. sense of henchman was ‘horseman;’ then “a page,’ usually
a young man of high rank. See A Student’s Pastime (index). @ I
find in Blount’s Nomolexicon, ed. 1691, the following: ‘ Henchman,
qui equo innititur bellicoso, from the G. hengst, a war-horse: with us
it signifies one that runs on foot, attending upon a person of honor
or worship. [Mentioned] Anno 3 Edw. 4. cap. 5, and 24 Hen. 8,
cap. 13. It is written heuxman, anno 6 Hen. 8. cap. 1.’

HENDECAGON, a plane figure of eleven sides and angles.
(Gk.) So called from its eleven angles.—Gk. €vdexa, eleven; and
yovia,an angle. "“Evdexa=€év, one, and déxa, ten. See Heptagon.

HENDECASYLLABIC, a term applied to a verse of eleven
syllables. (Gk.) From Gk. évdexa, eleven (=v, one, and déxa, ten) ;
and ovAAaBy, a syllable. See Decasyllabic.

HENNA, the Egyptian privet; also a dye made from the leaves
to stain the nails, &c. (Arab.) ‘Their women. . with a certaine colour
in their hand called Hanna which will staine ;’ Purchas, Pilgrimage,
1614, p. 637 (N.E.D.).—Arab. Rinna‘, the dyeing or colouring
shrub; Lawsonia inermis; Rich. Dict., p. 582.

HENT, a seizure, an intention. (E.) In the latter sense, Shak.
Hamil. iii. 3. 88. .A doublet of hint; see Hint.

HEP, HIP, the fruit of the dog-rose. See Hip (2).

HEPATIC, pertaining to the liver. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt epatike,
‘ Hepatiques, obstructions
of the liver;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—MF. hepatique, ‘hepatical,
of or belonging to the liver;’ Cot.—L. hépaticus.— Gk. jmarikds,
belonging to the liver. — Gk, #mar-, stem of 7rap, the liver.4-L. iecur,
the liver; Skt. yakvt, the liver. Der. hepatic-al; hepatic-a, a flower,
the liver-wort ; see hepathigque, hepatique in Cotgrave.

HEPTAGON, a plane figure with seven sides and angles. (Gk.)
In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. So called from its seven angles. — Gk,
émra, seven, cognate with E. seven ; and ywvia, an angle, allied to ydvu,
aknee. See Seven and Knee. Der. heptagon-al.

HEPTAHEDRON, a solid figure with seven bases or sides,
(Gk.) Spelt heptaedron in Kersey, ed. 1715.— Gk. émra, seven, cognate
with E, seven; and €épa, a seat, base, from the same base as E. seat
and sit. See Seven and Sit.

HEPTARCHY, a government by seven persons. (Gk.) In
T. Fuller, Worthies of England, ch. 3. Applied to seven Old-English
kingdoms, viz. those of Kent, Sussex, Wessex, Essex, Northumberland,
Mercia, and East Anglia, The term is not a good one; see Freeman,
Old Eng. Hist..for Children, p. 40.— Gk. émr-, for éwra, seven; and
-apxia, government. See Seven and Anarchy.

HER, possessive and objective case of the fem. of the third pers.
pronoun. (E.) ME. hire, the usual form; also kere, Chaucer, C. T.
4880 (B 460); hure, P. Plowman, C. iv, 45-48. AS. hire, gen. and
dat. case of héo, she; the possessive pronoun being. made from the
gen. case, and indeclinable; see Sweet’s A. S, Reader, Grammat.
Introduction. The word is to be divided as hi-re, where hi- is to be
referred to a Teut. pronominal base, signifying ‘ this ;’ and -re is the
usual AS. fem, inflection in the gen. and dat. of adjectives declined
according to the strong declension. See He. Der. her-s, ME. hires,
Chaucer, C. T. 4647 (B 227); not found much earlier; her-self/.

HERALD, an officer who makes. proclamations. (F.—OHG.,)
ME. herald, .heraud; Chaucer, C. T. 2601 (A 2599); P. Plowman,
B. xviii. 16.—OF,. heralt, heraut, a herald; Low L. heraldus; cf. Ital.
araldo, a herald; OHG. herolt (G. herold), a herald (from OF.).
B. Nevertheless, the OF. word is of Teut. origin; and prob. from
OHG. harén, to proclaim, cry aloud; with the usual F. suffix -al¢ for
-ald<G. -wald (Toynbee, Gr. § 692. xx); the sense being ‘ crier’ or
‘proclaimer.’ Cf. OHG. fora-haro, a herald; from for-harén, to
proclaim. y. The OHG. harén is cognate with Goth. hazjan, AS.


~ HERB


herian, to praise. Korting, § 4491. Der. herald-ic; also herald-ry,
Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 213, spelt heraldie, Gower, C.A.i.173; bk. ii. 399.

HERB, a plant with a succulent stem. (F.—L.) The word being
of F. origin, the # was probably once silent, and is still sometimes
so considered; there-is a tendency at present to sound the k, the word
being a short monosyllable. ME. erbe, herbe, Chaucer, C. T. 14972,
14955 (B 4156, 4139); King Alisaunder, 331.—F. herbe, ‘an herb;’
Cot.=L. herba, grass, a herb; properly herbage, food for cattle.
B. Supposed to be allied to OL: forbea, food, and to Gk. gop,
pasture, fodder, forage, pépBev, to feed. Der. herb-less, herb-ac-eous,
in Sir T, Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 6, § 15, from L. herbaceus,
grassy, herb-like; herb-age, from F. herbage, ‘herbage, pasture’ (Cot.),
answering toa L.form *herbaticum ; herb-al; herb-al-ist, Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 6, § 4; herb-ar-ium, from L. herbarium, a book
describing herbs, a herbal, but now applied to a collection of plants ;
herbivorous, herb-devouring; from L.wordare,to devour (see Voracious).
And note ME. kerbere, a herb-garden, from L, herbarium through the
French; a word discussed under Arbour,

HERD (1), a flock of beasts, group of animals. (E.) ME. heerde,
heorde. ‘ Heerde, or flok of beestys;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 236. ‘Ane
heorde of heorten’ =a herd of harts; Layamon, 305. AS. heord, herd,
hyrd, (1) care, custody, (2) herd, flock, (3) family; Grein, ii. 68.4
Icel. hj6rd; Dan. hiord; Swed. hjord; G. heerde; Goth. hairda. Teut.
type *herda, f. Cf. Skt. cardha(s), a herd, troop. Brugmann, i. § 797.
Der, herd,vb., ME. herdien, to draw together into a herd, P. Plowman,
C. xiv. 148; herd-man, ME, herdeman, hirdeman, Ormulum, 6852 ;
later form hkerd-s-man, Shak. Wint. Ta. iv. 4. 344. Der. herd (2).

HERD (2), one who tends a herd. (E.) Generally used in the
comp. shep-herd, cow-herd, &c. ME. herde, Chaucer, C. T. 605
(A 603); Will. of Palerne, 6; spelt hurde, P. Plowman, C. x. 267.
AS. hierde, hirde; Grein, ii. 77.4I1cel. hirdir; Dan. hyrde; Swed.
herde; G. hirt, hirte; Goth. hairdeis, ‘Teut. type *herdjoz, i.e. keeper
of the herd (*herda), See above. Cf. Lithuan. kerdzus, a cow-herd.
Der. cow-herd, goat-herd, shep-herd.

HERE, in this place. (E.) ME, her, heer ; Chaucer, C. T. 1610,
1612. AS. hér; Grein, ii. 34.4+Du. hier; Icel. hér; Dan. her; Swed.
har; G. hier; OHG. hiar; Goth. hér. B. All from the pronominal
base HI (Fick, iii. 74); so that here is related to he just as where is
related to who. See He. Der. here-about, Temp. ii. 2. 41; here-
abouts; hereafter, ME. her-after, Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 243;
here-by, ME, her-bt, Owl and Nightingale, 127 ; here-in, ME. her-inne,
Havelok, 458; here-of, ME. her-of, Havelok, 2585; here-tofore, 1 Sam.
iv. 73 here-unto, I Pet. ii. 213; here-upon, answering to ME. her-on,
P. Plowman, B. xiii. 130; here-with, Malachi, iii. 10.

HEREDITARY, descending by inheritance. (L.) In Shak.
Temp. li. I. 223; and in Cotgrave, to translate MF. hereditaire.
Englished from L. héréditadrius, hereditary.—L. héréditds, heredity.
—L. hérédi-, decl. stem of hérés, an heir. See Heir, Der.
hereditari-ly. From the same base we have heredita-ble, a late and
rare word, for which heritable (MF. heritable) was formerly used, as
in Blackstone’s Comment. b. ii. c. 5 (R.); also heredita-ment, in
Fabyan’s Chron., ed. Ellis, p. 650; heredit-y (F. hérédité, L. acc.
héréditatem).

HERESY, the choice of an opinion contrary to that usually
received. (F.—L.—Gk.) The word means, literally, no more than
‘choice. ME. heresye, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 267 (see Spec. of
English, ed, Morris and Skeat, p. 103, 1. 149) ; eresie, Wyclif, Acts,
xxiv. 1¢; Ancren Riwle, p. 82.—OF. heresie, ‘heresie, obstinate or
wicked error;’ Cot.—L. type *kéresia, for L. keresis. =Gk. atpeots,
a taking, choice, sect, heresy.—Gk. aipeiv, to take, afpeia@a:, to
choose. Der. heretic, q.v.

HERETIC, the holder of a heresy. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. eretik,
heretik, Wyclif, Tit. iii. 10.—OF. heretique, ‘an heretick;’ Cot.—L.
hereticus.— Gk. aipetixds, able to choose, heretical. =Gk. aipeiv, to
take, aipeto@ar, to choose. Gee Heresy. Der. heretic-al:

HERIOT, a tribute paid to the lord of a manor on the decease of
a tenant. (E.) See Blackstone, Comment. b. ii. capp. 6, 28; and see
Hariot in Blount’s Law Lexicon; and Heriot in Jamieson’s Scot. Dict.
[Sir D, Lyndesay speaks of a herield hors, a horse paid as a heriot,
The Monarche, b., iii. 1. 4734; but this represents AS. heregield, war-
tax.] ME. heriet; ‘ And [h]is beste best [beast] to heriet;? S.E.
Legendary, ed. Horstmann, p. 445, 1. 480. From AF. heriet, Year-
books of Edw. I (1392-3), p. 213. From AS. heregeatz, lit. military
apparel; Grein, ii. 36. The heregeatu (-geatwa, -geatwe) consisted
of ‘military habiliments or equipments, which, after the death of the
vassal, escheated to the sovereign or lord, to whom they were
delivered by the heir;’ Thorpe, Ancient Laws, b. ii. glossary, s.y. In
later times, horses and cows, and many other things were paid as
heriots to the lord of the manor. ‘And pam cinge minne heregeatwa,
feower sweord, and féower spera, and féower scyldas, and féower
béagas, . . féower hors, and twa sylfrene fata; ’ i. e. And [I bequeath]


HERON


to the king my hkeriots, viz. four swords, and four spears, and four
shields, and four torques, . . four horses, and two silver vessels ; Will
dated about 946-955; in Thorpe’s Diplomatarium Alvi Saxonici,
p- 499.—AS. here, an army (hence, belonging to war); and geatw,
pl. geatwe, apparel, adornment; Grein, i. 495.

HERITAGE, an inheritance. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. heri-
tage, Hali Meidenhad, ed. Cockayne, p. 25, last line but one; King
Horn, ed. Lumby, 1281; also erttage, Alexander and Dindimus, ed.
Skeat, 981.— OF. heritage, ‘ an inheritance, heritage ;’ Cot. Formed,
with suffix -age (answering to L. -aicum) from OF. heriter, to inherit.
-L. héréditare, to inherit; the loss of a syllable is exemplified by
Low L. héritator, used for héréditator ; it would seem as if the base
héri- was substituted for hérédi-.— L. hérédi-, decl. stem of hérés, an
heir; see Heir. Der. from same source, herit-able, herit-or.

HERMAPHRODITE, an animal or plant of both sexes. (L.
—Gk.) In Gascoigne, The Steele Glas, 1. 53. See Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 17.—L. hermaphroditus.—Gk. éppappdd:ros
a coined word, made up from Gk. ‘Epyijs, Hermes (Mercury), as
representing the male principle; and ’Agppoditn, Aphrodité (Venus),
the female. Hence the legend that Hermaphroditus, son of Hermes,
and Aphrodite, when bathing, grew together with Salmacis, the
nymph of a fountain, into one person; see Ovid, Met. iv. 383. Der.
hermaphrodit-ic, -ic-al, -ism ; also hermaphrodism.

HERMENEUTIC, explanatory. (Gk.) A modern word. From
Gk. épynvevtikés, skilled in interpreting. — Gk. €pynvevrjs, an inter-
preter; of which a shorter form is épyyveis. Connected (perhaps)
with L. sermo, speech (Prellwitz). Der. hermeneutic-al, hermeneutic-
al-ly, hermeneutics (the science of interpretation).

HERMETIC, chemical, &c.(Gk.) ‘Their seals, their characters,
hermetic rings ;’ Ben Jonson, Underwoods, lxi. An Execration upon
Vulcan, 1. 73.—Low L. herméticus, relating to alchemy; a coined
word, made from the name Hermés (=Gk. “Eppjjs) ; from the notion
that the great secrets of alchemy were discovered by Hermés Trisme-
gistus (Hermes the thrice-greatest). Der. hermetic-al, hermetic-al-ly.
@ Hermetically was a term in alchemy ; a glass bottle was said to be
hermetically ‘i.e. perfectly) sealed when the opening of it was fused
and closed against the admission of air.

HERMIT, one who lives in solitude. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. eremite,
heremite; in early use. [It first appears in Layamon, 18763, where
the earlier text has eremite, the later heremite. This form was taken
directly from L. herémita, the later form hermite being from the French.
Heremite occurs in P. Plowman, B. vi. 190, and even as late as in
Holinshed’s Description of Britain, b. i. c.9 (R.).] The shorter form
armyte also occurs in Layamon, 18800; and hermyte is in Berners’
tr. of Froissart, vol. ii. c. 204 (R.).—F. hermite, ‘an hermit ;’ Cot.=
Late L. heremita, for herémita, in P. Plowman, B. xv. 2813 but
usually erémtta.— Gk. épepirys, a dweller in a desert.—Gk. épnuia, a
solitude, desert.=Gk. épjuos, deserted, desolate. Root uncertain ;
perhaps allied to Goth. arms, poor (Prellwitz). Der. hermit-age,
Spenser, F. Q. i. 1. 34, spelt heremytage, Mandeville’s Travels, p. 93,
from F. hermitage, ‘an hermitage;’ Cot. Also hermit-ic-al, spelt
heremiticall in Holinshed, Desc. of Britain, b. i. c. 9 (R.), from L.
herémiticus (better erémiticus), solitary.

HERN, the same as Heron, q.y.

HERNIA, a kind of rupture; a surgical term. (L.) In Kersey,
ed. 1715; hirnia in Chaucer, C. T. Pers. Tale (I 423). —L. hernia, a
rupture, hernia.

HERO, a warrior, illustrious man. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Hamlet,
li. 2. 270.—MF. heroé, ‘a worthy, a demygod;’ Cot.—L. hérdém, acc.
of hérds, a hero.—Gk. ffpws, a hero, demi-god. G The mod. F.
héros is now accommodated to the spelling of the L. nom. . The L.
acc. is, however, still preserved in the Span. heroe, Ital. eroe. Der.
hero-ic, spelt heroicke in Spenser, F. Q.v.1. 1, from MF. heroique (Cot.),
which from L. hérdicus; hero-ic-al-ly, hero-ism; also hero-ine, q.v.

HEROINE, a famous woman. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Minsheu.
‘A heroine is a kinde of prodigy ;’ Evelyn, Memoirs; Mrs. Evelyn
to Mr. Bohun, Jan. 4, 1672 (R.).— MF. heroize, ‘a most worthy lady;’
Cot.—L. hérdiné.—Gk. jpwivn, f. of fpws, hero (above).

HERON, a long-legged water-fowl. (F.-OHG.) ME. heroune,
Chaucer, Parliament of Foules, 346. Also hayron, Wright's Vocab.
i.1773; (Voc. 625. 4). ‘ Heern, bytde, heryn, herne, ardea ;’ Prompt.
Pary. p. 237.— OF. hairon, ‘a heron, herne, hernshaw;’ Cot. (Mod. F.
héron ; OProvy. aigros; Ital. aghtrone, airone ; Span. atron.) =OHG,
heigir, heiger, a heron; with suffixed -on (Ital. -ove). Allied to
Swed. hdger, a heron; Dan. heire, a heron; Icel. hegri, a heron;
OHG. hehara, G. haher, heher, a jackdaw; AS. higora, a magpie;
Gk. xiooa (for *xix-ya), Skt. kiki-, a jay (Prellwitz); of imitative
origin. Brugmann, i. §§ 86, 639. q The AS. name was kragra,


269


'Wright’s Vocab. i. 29, col. 1 (Voc. 6. 37) ; with which cf. G. rether,


a heron; Du. reiger; allied to Gk. xpeyj, a creaking, npiCev, to
screech. Der. heron-er, ME. heronere, Chaucer, Troilus, iv. 413 5.


270 HERONSHAW, HERNSHAW


from OF. -haironnier; Cotgrave explains faulcon haironnier as ‘a
herner, a faulcon made only to the heron.’ Also heron-ry. And see
Heronshaw, Egret.

HERONSHAW, HERNSHAW,, (1) a young heron, (2) a
heronry. (F.—OHG.). Spenser has herneshaw, a young heron; F.Q.
vi. 7.9. Two distinct words have been confused here. 1. Hernshaw,
a heron, is a corruption of heronsewe; the name heronsew for the heron
is still common in Lincolnshire and Yorkshire. Mr. Peacock’s Glos-
sary of Manley and Corringham (Lincoln) words has: ‘ Heronsew,
the common heron. ‘‘ There were vewed at this present survey cer-
tayne heronsewes whiche have allwayes used to brede there to the
number of iiij.”Survey of Glastonbury, temp. Hen. VIII, Mon. Ang.
i. 11. See Chaucer, Squyeres Tale, F. 68.’ The etymology of this
heronsewe is given by Tyrwhitt, who cites the F. herongeau from ‘the
glossary,’ meaning probably that in Urry’s ed. of Chaucer; but it is
verified by the fact that the OF. herouncel (older form of herongeau)
occurs in the Liber Custumarum, p. 304, and means ‘a young heron.’
And again, Palsgrave has ‘ heronceau, an hernshawe;’ p. 187. The
suffix -c-el is a double dimin., as in dion-c-el, later lionceau. Forew<F.
eau, cf. ME. bew-tee=F, beau-té. 2. Hernshaw in its other sense
is due to a (false) popular etymology, as if it were from heron,
and shaw, a wood. This sense is given by Cotgrave, who explains
OF. haironniere by ‘a heron’s neast, or ayrie; a herneshaw, or shaw
of wood wherein herons breed.’ Hence heronshaw (1) is (F.—OHG.) ;
heronshaw (2) is hybrid.

HERRING, a small fish. (E.) ME. hering (with one r), Have-
lok, 758. AS. hérincg; the pl. h@rincgas is in AElfric’s Colloquy, in
Thorpe’s Analecta, p. 24; also héring, Wright’s Vocab. i. 56, 1. 4
(Voc. 94. 13; 181. 4).4+ Du. haring; G. haring; OHG. haring
(Kluge). £. The explanation that the fish is named ‘from its ap-
pearance in large shoals,’ from the Teut. type *harjoz, an army (as
seen in Goth. harjis, AS. here, G. heer), seems to be phonetically im-
possible. The word remains unexplained.

HESITATE, to doubt, stammer. (L.) Spelt hesitate, hesitate in
Minsheu, ed. 1627. [Perhaps suggested by the sb. hesitation, which
occurs in Cotgrave to translate F. hesitation, whereas he explains hest-
ter only by ‘to doubt, feare, stick, stammer, stagger in opinion.’] =
L. hesitdtus, pp. of hesitare, to stick fast; a frequentative formed from
hesum, supine of herére, to stick, cleave. 4 Lithuanian gaiszti, gaisz-
oti, to tarry, delay (Nesselmann); Fick, i. 576.—4/GHAIS, to stick,
cleave; where the gh is not palatal. Brugmann, i. § 627. Der.
hesitat-ion, hesit-anc-y; from the same root, ad-here, co-here, in-her-ent.

HESPERIAN, western. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Your feigned Hesperian
orchards ;’ Massinger, Virgin Martyr, A. iv. sc. 3 (where it refers to the
Hesperides). —L. Hesperi-us, western; with suffix -an.—L, Hesperi-a.
— Gk. ‘Eozepia, the western land; fem. of éomépios, evening, western.
= Gk. éomepos, evening. L. uesper, evening; see Vesper. Der.
Closely allied to the adj. éomépios is the fem. éomepis, whence the pl.
‘Eorepides, the daughters of Night, who dwelt in a western isle, and
guarded a garden with golden apples; Hesiod, Th. 215.

HEST, a command. (E.) ME. hest, heste, a command; also, a
promise ; Chaucer, C. T. 11376 (F 1064). The final ¢ is properly
excrescent, as in whils-t, agains-t, amongs-t, amids-t, from ME. whiles,
againes, amonges, amiddes. AS. h#s,a command, Grein, i. 24; Teut.
type *haittiz, f. (>*haissiz, with ss for t#).— AS. hatan, to command;
Teut. type *haitan-. + Icel. heit, a vow, from heita, to call, promise ;
OHG. heiz (G. geheiss), a command, from OHG. heizan (G. heissen),
to call, bid, command. Cf. Goth. haitan, to name, call, command.

HETEROCLITE, irregularly inflected. (L.—Gk.) A gram-
matical term; hence used in the general sense of irregular, disorderly.
«Ther are strange heteroclites in religion now adaies;’ Howell, Familiar
Letters, vol. iv. let. 35.—L. heteroclitus, varying in declension. = Gk.
érepdxd7os, otherwise or irregularly inflected. — Gk. érepo-, decl. stem
of repos, other; and -sdrTos, formed from «Aivew, to lean, hence, to
vary as a case does, cognate with E, Jean (1).

HETERODOX, of strange opinion; heretical. (Gk.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Compounded from Gk. érepo-, decl. stem
of €repos, another, other; and dda, opinion, from doxeiv, to think.
Der. heterodox-y, Gk. Erepodogia.

HETEROGENEOUS, dissimilar in kind. (Gk.) Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674, gives the adjectives heterogene, heterogeneal, and the
sb. heterogeneity. Compounded from Gk. érepo-, decl. stem of érepos,
another, other; and yevos, kind, kin, cognate with E, kin. Der.
heterogeneous-ly, -ness; heterogene-it-y.

HETMAN, a captain; of Cossacks, or in Poland. (Pol.—G.)
First in 1710, in Whitworth, Acc. of Russia (ed. 1758, p. 19).—
Polish hetman (Russ. ataman’), a captain.—G. hauptman, a captain.
—G. haupt, head; and mann, man.

HEW, to hack, cut. (E.) ME. hewen, Chaucer, C. T. 1424 (A
1422). AS. héawan, to hew; Grein, ii, 62.4-Du. howwen; Icel.
hoggva; Swed, hugga; Dan. hugge; G. hauen; OHG. houwan. Teut.


HIDALGO


type *haxwan-. + Russ. kovate, to hammer, forge; Lith. kauti, to
fight; cf. Lith. kowa, battle. Allied to L. ciidere, to strike, pound,
beat. Brugmann, i. § 639. The root appears to be KEU, to
strike, beat. Der. hew-er; also hay (1), q.v.3 hoe, q.v, ;

HEXAGON, a plane figure, with six sides and angles. (L.—Gk.)
Hexagonal is in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Hexagone in Minsheu,
ed. 1627. Named from its six angles. —L. hexagdnum, a hexagon. =
Gk. éfd-ywvos, six-cornered.—Gk. é, six, cognate with E. six; and
‘ywvia, an angle, corner, allied to yévv, knee, cognate with E. knee.
See Six and Knee. Der. hexagon-al, hexagon-al-ly.

HEXAMETER, a certain kind of verse having six feet. (L.—
Gk.) ‘This provoking song in hexameter verse ;’ Sidney’s Arcadia,
b. i. (R.). ‘I like your late Englishe hexameters ;’ Spenser, letter to
Harvey, qu. in Globe ed. of Spenser, p. xxviii. —L. hexameter; also
hexametrus. = Gk. é€dperpos, a hexameter; properly an adj. meaning
“of six metres’ or feet. = Gk. &, six, cognate with E. six ; and pérpor,
a measure, metre. See Six and Metre.

HEY, interjection. (E.), ME. hez, Legend of St. Katharine, 1. 579 ;
hay, Gawayn and Grene Knight, 1445. A natural exclamation. + G.
hei, interjection; Du. hei, hey! ho!

HEYDAY (1), interjection (G. or Du.) In Shak. Temp. ii. 2.
190. ‘ Heyda, what Hans Flutterkin is this? what Dutchman does
build or frame castles in the air?’ Ben Jonson, Masque of Augurs.
‘Toly rutterkin, heyda!’ Skelton, Magnif. 757. Borrowed either
from G. heida, ho! hallo! or from Du. hei daar, ho! there. It comes
to much the same thing. The G. da, Du. daar, are cognate with E.
there. B. But note that Cotgrave has MF. hadea, ‘ interj. of perceiving
or surprising, ha! are you there?’; cf. OF. hé dea, hé dia, inter).
(Godefroy, s.v. dea). @f The interj. Zey is older; see above.

HEYDAY (2), frolicsome wildness. (E.) ‘At your age the heyday
in the blood is tame;’ Hamlet, iii. 4.69. I take this to be quite a
different word from the foregoing, though the commentators confuse
the two. In this case, and in the expression ‘ heyday of youth,’ the
word may well stand for high day (ME. hey day); and it is not sur-
prising that the old editions of Shakespeare have highday in place of
heyday; only, unluckily, in the wrong place, viz. Temp. ii. 2.190. So
also ‘in the highday of blood;’ Macklin, Love-a-la-Mode, A. i (Sir
Archy); ‘in the highday of youth ;’ Smollett, Hum. Clinker, 1771, ii.
50. Cf. ‘that sabbath day was an high day;’ John, xix. 31. For the
old spellings of high, see High.

HIATUS, a gap, defect, &c. (L.) In Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii. ed.
1731.—L. hiatus, a gap, chasm; cf. hidtus, pp. of hidre, to yawn,

ape; cognate with E. yawn. See Yawn. Doublet, chasm, q.v.

HIBERNAL, wintry. (F.—L.) In Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors,
b. iv. c. 13, § 10, where it is spelt hybernal. =F. hibernal, ‘ wintery ;’
Cot.—L. hibernalis, wintry (Wisdom, xvi. 29, Vulg.); lengthened
from L. hibernus, wintry. B. Hi-bernus is allied to Gk. xerpepivds,
wintry, xeiua, winter; and to L. hi-ems, winter, Gk. x1-dv, snow,
Skt. Zi-ma-s, cold, winter ; the form ofthe root is GHEI. Der. from
same source, hibern-ate.

HICCOUGH, HICCUP, HICKET, a spasmodic inspiration,
with closing of the glottis, causing a slight sound. (E.) Now generally
spelt hiccough. Spelt hiccup (riming with prick up), Butler’s Hudibras,
pt. ii. c. 1. 346. Also hicket, as in the old edition of Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. iv. c. 9, § 5; and in Minsheu. Also hichcock; Florio
explains Ital. singhiozzi by ‘ yeaxings, hichecocks.’ Also hickock ; Cot-
grave has: ‘ Hoguet, the hickock, or yexing ;’ also ‘ Hocqueter, to yex,
or clock [cluck], to have the hickup or hickcock.’ B. It seems to be
generally considered that the second syllable is cough, but it is ascer-
tained (see N. E. D.) that hiccough is an accommodated spelling, due
to popular etymology. The evidence takes us back to the forms
hick-ock, hick-et, both formed from hick by the help of the usual dimin.
suffixes -ock, -et. Cf. F. hogu-et, the hiccough, in which the final
-et is certainly a dimin. suffix; Walloon hikett, a hiccough, hiket,
a shaking (Remacle). y..The former syllable hic, hik, or hick is
of imitative origin, to denote the spasmodic sound or jerk; and is
preserved in the prov. E. hick, to hiccough. It is not peculiar
to English. + MDu. huck-up, ‘the hick or hock ;’ also hick, ‘ the hick-
hock,’ Hexham; Du. hik, the hiccough, hikken, to hiccough; Dan.
hikke, the hiccough; also, to hiccough; Swed. hicka, the hiccough ;
also, to hiccough. And cf. W. ig, a hiccough, sob; igio, to sob; _
Breton, Aik, a hiccough, called hak in the dialect of Vannes, whence
(perhaps) F. hoguet. 6. All from an imitative base HIK, variant
form of KIK, used to denote convulsive moyements in the throat ;
see Chincough.

HICKORY, an American tree of the genus Carya. (N. Amer,
Indian.) Short for pohickery, recorded in 1653 as the Amer. Indian
name; Virginian powcohicora (Trumbull).

HIDALGO, a Spanish nobleman of the lowest class. (Span.—L.)
The word occurs in Terry, Voyage to East India, ed. 1655, p. 169
(Todd) ; fidalgo, Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p. 116.—Span.


HIDE


hidalgo, a nobleman ; OSpan. fidalgo, Port. jidalgo, a nobleman; also
MSpan. hijodalgo (Minsheu). Lit. ‘son of something,’ i.e.a son to whom
a father has left an estate. (So Ko6rting; the explanation from filius
Italicus is baseless.) B. Hijo, OSpan. jijo, is from L. filium, acc. of
filius, son; see Filial; -d’algo is from L. dé aliqué, of something.

HIDE (1), to cover, conceal. (E.) ME. hiden, huden; Chaucer,
C. T. 1479 (A 1477); Ancren Riwle, p. 130. AS. hydan, Grein, ii.
125.4 Gk. «evOev, to hide. And cf. L. cus-tds, a custodian (see
Custody); W. cuddio, to hide (base coud-),—4/ KEUDH, to hide.
Der. hid-ing. Brugmann, i. § 699.

HIDE (2), a skin. (E.) ME. hyde, Pricke of Conscience, I. 5299;
hude, Ancren Riwle, p. 120. AS. hyd, the skin; Grein, ii. 125. +4
Du. huid; Icel. hud; Dan. and Swed. hud; OHG. hat; G. haut.4+L.
cutis, skin; Gk. xvros, oxdros, skin, hide; OPruss. keuto, hide.
= 4/SKEU, to cover; Fick, i. 816. See Sky. Der. hide-bound,
said of a tree the bark of which impedes its growth, Milton’s Areo-
pagitica, ed. Hales, p. 32, 1.2; also hide (3).

HIDE (3), to flog, castigate. (E.) Colloquial; ‘to skin’ by
flogging. Cf. Icel. hyda, to flog; from hud, the hide. Der. hid-ing.

HIDE (4), a measure of land, (E.) ‘ Hide of land;’ Blount’s Law
Dict., ed. 1691. Of variable size; estimated at 120 or 100 acres; or
even much less; see Blount. Low L. hida; Ducange. AS. hid;
/Elfred’s tr. of Bede, b. iii. c. 245; b.iv. c. 13, 16,19. (See Kemble’s
Saxons in England, b.i. c. 4; and the Appendix, showing that the
estimate at 120 or 100 acres is too large.) PB. This word is of a
contracted form; the full form is higid; Thorpe, Diplomatarium
ZEvi Saxonici, p. 657; Kemble, Codex Diplomaticus, no. 243. This
form higid-is equivalent to hiwisc, another term for the same thing ;
and both words orig. meant (as Beda says) an estate sufficient to
support one family or household. They are, accordingly, closely con-
nected with AS. hiwan, domestics, those of one household, and with
the Goth. heiwa-frauja, the master of a household; see further under
Hind (2). Popular etymology has probably long ago confused
the hide of land with hide, a skin; but the two words must be kept
entirely apart. The former is AS. higid, the latter AS. hyd.

‘HIDEOUS, ugly, horrible. (F.—L.?) The central e has crept
into the word, and it has become trisyllabic; the true form is hidous.
It is trisyllabic in Shak. Merry Wives, iv. 3. 34. ME. hidous (the
invariable form) ; Chaucer, C. T., A 3520; healso has hidously, C. T.,
A 1701.—OF. hidos, hidus, hideus, later hideux, hideous; the earliest
form is hisdos. B. Of uncertain origin; if the former s in hisdos is
not an inserted letter, the probable original is L. hispiddsus, roughish,
an extended form of L. hispidus, rough, shaggy, bristly. (Korting,
§ 4581.) Der. hideous-ly, hideous-ness.

HiIl, to hasten. (E.) ME. hien, hyen, hijen; P. Plowman, B. xx.
322; cf. Chaucer, C. T. 10605 (F 291). The ME. sb. hie or hye, haste,
is also found; id. 4629 (B 209). AS. higian (higian?), to hasten;
Grein, ii. 72. B. Allied to Du. hijgen, to pant; which seems to be
of imitative origin.

HIBRARCHY, a sacred government. (F.—Gk.) Gascoigne has
the pl. hierarchies; Steel Glas, 993; ed. Arber, p. 77; spelt hierarches,
Sir T. Elyot, The Governonr, i. 1. § 4.—F. hierarchie, ‘an hierarchy ;’
Cot.=—Gk, fepapxia, the power or post of an iepapyys. = Gk. iepdpxns,
a steward or president of sacred rites.—Gk. fep-, for iepds, sacred;
and apxew, to rule, govern. B. The orig. sense of iepés was ‘ vigor-
ous; cognate with Skt. ishiras, vigorous, fresh, blooming (in the
Peterb. Dict.) ; see Brugmann, i. § 851. For dpyew, see Arch-,
prefix. Der. hierarchi-c-al ; we also find hierarch (Milton, P. L. v.
408), from Gk. fepapxns.

HIEBROGLYPHIC, symbolical ; applied to picture writing.
(L.—Gk.) ‘The characters which are called hieroglyphicks;? Holland,
tr. of Plutarch, p. 1051 (R.). ‘An hieroglyphical answer ;’? Ralegh,
Hist. of the World, b. ili. c. 5. s. 4 (R.).—L. hieroglyphicus, sym-
bolical.—Gk. fepoyAuqurds, hieroglyphic.—Gk. iepo-, decl. stem of
iepds, sacred; and yAvpew, to hollow out, engrave, carve, write in
incised characters. See Hierarchy and Glyptic. Der. hiero-
glyphic-al, -al-ly; also the sb. hieroglyph, coined by omitting -ic,

HIEROPHANT, a revealer of sacred things, a priest. (Gk.)
In Warburton’s Divine Legation, b. ii. s. 4 (R.).—Gk. iepopayrys,
teaching the rites of worship. = Gk. fepo-, for iepds, sacred; and paive:y,
to show, explain. See Hierarchy and Phantom.

HIGGLE, to chaffer, bargain. (E.) ‘To higgle thus;’ Butler,
Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 2. 1. 491. And used by Fuller, Worthies, North-
umberland (R.). A weakened form of haggle; see Hagegle (2).
Der. higgl-er.

HIGH, tall, lofty, chief, illustrious. (E.) ME. heigh, high, hey,
hy; Chaucer, C.-T., A 316; P. Plowman, B.x.155. AS. héah, héh;
Grein, ii. 44.-+4- Du. hoog; Icel. har; Swed. hog; Dan. hai; Goth.
hauhs; G. hoch; OHG.héh. Teut. type *hauhoz. B. The orig. sense
is ‘knoblike,’ humped or bunched up; cf. G. hiigel, a bunch, knob,
hillock; Icel, haugr, a mound, The still older sense is simply


HIND


‘rounded ;’ cf. Lith. kawkaras, a hill, kaukas, a boil, a swelling ; Skt.
kucha-s, the female breast. 4/KEUK, to bend, make round; cf. Skt.
kuch, to contract, bend. Der. height, q.v.; high-ly; also high-born,
K. John, v. 2.79; high-bred; high-coloured, Ant. and Cleop. ii. 7. 43
high-fed; high-flown ; high-handed; high-minded, 1 Hen. VI, i. 5. 123
high-minded-ness ; high-ness, Temp. ii. 1.1723; high-priest; high-road;
high-spirited ; high-way=ME. heigh weye, P. Plowman, B. x. 155;
high-way-man ; high-wrought, Othello, ii. 1. 2 ; with numerous similar
compounds. Also high-land (below) ; and see how (2).

HIGHLAND, belonging to a mountainous region. (E.) ‘A
generation of highland thieves and redshanks;’ Milton, Obsery. on
the Art. of Peace (quotedin Todd). AS. héahlond, ahigh land; from
héah, high, and ond, land ; Cdmon, Exod. 385. Der. highland-er ;
highlands,

IGHT, was or is called. (E.) Obsolete. A most singular word,
presenting the sole instance in English of a passive verb; the correct
phrase was he hight =he was (or is) called, or he was named. ‘ This
grisly beast, which lion hight by name’ = which is called by the name
of lion; Mids. Nt. Dr. v. 140. ME. highte. ‘ But ther as I was wont
to highte [be called] Arcite, Now highte I Philostrat ;’ Chaucer, C.T.,
A1557. Older forms hatte, hette. ‘ Clarice hatte thatmaide’ =the maid
was named Clarice; Floriz and Blancheflur, ed. Lumby, 1. 479.
‘ Thet hettex Calef and Iosue’=that were named Caleb and Joshua;
Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 67. And see Stratmann’s Dict., s.v. hdten.
From AS. hatte, I am called, I was.called; pres. and pt. t. passive
or middle, of AS. hatan, active verb, to bid, command, call; Grein,
ii, 16, 17.4-Icel. hettiz, I am named, from heita, to call; G. ick
heisse, I am named, from heissen, to call. B. Best illustrated by
Gothic, which has haitan, to call, name, pt. t. haihait; whence was
formed the passive pres. tense haitada, I am called, he is called; as
in ‘Thomas, saei haitada Didymus’ = Thomas, who is called
Didymus; John, xi. 16. See Hest.

HILARITY, cheerfulness, mirth. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Restraining
his ebriety unto hilarity ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. v. c. 23,
§ 16.—F, hilarité, mirth; omitted by Cotgrave, but see Littré. =
L, hilaritatem, acc. of hilaritds, mirth.=L. hilaris, hilarus, cheerful,
gay. Not an orig. L. word; but borrowed.—Gk. fdapés, cheerful,
gay. Cf. Gk. fdaos, propitious, kind ; ‘Any, 1am gracious. —4/ SEL;
whence E. silly. Brugmann, iv. § 594. Der. Hence the late word
hilari-ous, formed as if from a L. *hilaridsus; hilarious does not occur
in Todd’s Johnson. From same source, ex-hilarate. | Hilary Term
is so called from the festival of St. Hilary (L. Hilarius); Jan. 13.

HILDING, a base, menial wretch. (E.) In Shak. used of both
sexes; Tam. Shrew, ii. 26; &c. [Not derived, as Dr. Schmidt says,
from AS. healdan, to hold ; which is impossible.) We also find
helding, hilding, heilding, applied to a worthless horse, a jade
(N.E.D.). Prob. from ME. helden, to incline, to bend down. Cf.
ME. heldinge, a bending aside ;, AS. hylding, a bending (Voc. 382. 2).
See Heel (2).

HILL, a small mountain. (E.) ME. Ail (with one 2); Havelok,
1287; also kul, Ancren Riwle, p. 178. AS, hyll; Grein, ii. 132.
‘Collis, hyll;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 54, col. 1 (Voc. 177. 24). And
see Northumbrian version of St. Luke, xxiii. 30.44-MDu. hil, hille;
Oudemans. fB. Further allied to Lithuan. kalnas, L. collis, a hill;
culmen, a top; Gk. koAwvds, a hill. Brugmann, i. § 633. See
Culminate, and Holm. From 4/QEL, to be elevated, rise up.
Der. hill-y, hill-i-ness; dimin. hill-ock, in Shak. Venus and Adonis,
237. @ Not connected with G. hiigel, a hill; for that is related to
E. how, a hill; see How (2).

HILT, the handle of a sword. (E.) In Shak. Hamlet, v. 2. 159;
it was common to use the pl. Ailés with reference to a single weapon;
Jul. Cesar, v. 3. 43. ME. hilt; Layamon, 6506. AS. hilt, Grein,
li. 75; helt, O. E. Texts. 4-Icel. hjalt ; Dan. hjalte; North Fries.
heelt; OHG. helza, a sword-hilt. Cf. OF. helé (from Teutonic).
Perhaps allied to Low G. he//t, an ax-handle, and to Helve. Der.
hilt-ed.

HIM, the objective case of he; see He.

HIN, a Hebrew liquid measure. (Heb.) In Exod. xxix. 40, &c.
Supposed to contain about 6 quarts. = Heb. hin, a hin; said to be a
word of Egyptian origin.

HIND (1), the female of the stag. (E.) ME. hind, hynde; P.
Plowman, B. xv. 274. AS. hind, fem.; Grein, ii. 76.-+4- Du. hinde,
a hind, doe. + Icel., Dan., and Swed. hind; OHG. hinta, MHG. hinde ;
whence G. hindin, a doe, with suffixed (fem.) -ix. Perhaps allied to
Gk. xey-ds, a young deer. Der. hind-berry, a wild raspberry-

HIND (2), a peasant. (F.) In Spenser, F. Q. vi. 8.12. The d
is excrescent. ME. hine, Chaucer, C. T. 605 (A 603); hye, P.
Plowman, B. vi. 133. AS. *kina, a domestic; but the word is un-
authenticated as a nom. sing., and was orig. a gen. pl.; so that hina
really stands for hina man=a man of the domestics. We find hina


271


ealdor = elder of the domestics, i.e. master of a household; Ailfred's


HIND


tr. of Beda, iii.9. B. Further, hina stands for higza, gen. pl. of hiwan
(pl. nom.), domestics; Grein, ii. 78. Cf. hiwen, a family; hiwreden,
a household; also G. hei-rath, marriage ; Goth. heiwa-frauja, master
ofa household. Allied to L. ciuis, a citizen. Brugmann, i. § Gog.

HIND (3), adj.in the rear. (E.) We say ‘ hind feet,’ i.e. the two
feet of a quadruped in the rear. But the older expression is ‘ hinder
feet,’ as in St. Brandan, ed. Wright, p. 30, the positive degree not being
used ; we also find hynderere, hyndrere, Wyclif, Gen. xvi. 13 ; hyndrest,
Chaucer, C. T. 624 (A 622). AS. hindan, only as ady., at the back
of ; hindeweard, hindwards, backwards ; hinder, ady. backwards;
Grein, ii. 76. + Goth. hindar, prep. behind; hindana, prep. beyond ;
G. hinter, prep. behind; hinten, adv. behind; OHG. hkintaro, comp.
adj., hinder. We also find Goth. hindumists, hindmost. All from
the base which appears in AS. hin-an (heon-an), hence; while the
comp. suffix -der answers to Gk.-repo-. See Hence, He, Behind.
Der. hind-ward, Wyclif, Ps. xlix. 17, ixix. 4; also hind-most, q. v. ;
hinder, vetb, g.v.; be-hind.

HINDER, to put behind, keep back, check. (E.) ME. hindren,
hyndren; Gower, C. A. i. 311; bk. iii. 937. He also has the sb.
hinderer ; i. 3303 iii. 111; bk. iii. 1526; bk. vii. 803. AS. hindrian;
A. S. Chron. an. 1003.—AS. hinder, adv. behind; cf. hindan,
behind. + Icel. kindra, to hinder; G. hindern. See Hind (3). Der.
hinder-er ; also hindr-ance (for hinder-ance), with F. suffix -ance;
‘damages, hurt, or hinderaunce;’ Frith’s Works, p. 15; and see
La Belle Dame sans Merci, 602.

HINDMOST, last. (E.) InShak.Sonnet, 85.12; 2 Hen. VI,
iii. I. 2; cf. henmast, Barbour, Bruce, viii. 245. The suffix is the
word most, and the compound is of late formation. f. Distinct from
AS. hindema, hindmost; Grein, ii. 76; where the suffix -ma is the
same as that seen in L. opti-mus, optu-mus, best ; see Aftermost;
cf. Goth. hindumists, hindmost, Matt. viii. 12; to be divided as hind-
u-m-ists; cf. Goth. fru-ma, first. See Hind (3). @ Also spelt
hindermost, as in Holinshed, Hist. Scotland, an. 1290 (R.). And
again, we have ME. hind-r-est, as in Chaucer, C. T. 624 (A 622).

HIN GH, the joint on which a door turns. (E.) Thez was formerly
e. ME. henge (with hard g), a hinge; with dimin. form hengel, a
hinge. ‘As a dore is turned in his hengis’ [earlier version, in his
heeng|; Wyclif, Prov. xxvi. 14, ‘ Hengyl of a dore;? Prompt. Parv.
Dp. 235. ‘Hic gumser, a hengylle;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 261, col. 1
(Voc. 779. 3). B. So called because the door hangs upon it; from
ME. hengen, tohang. ‘ Henged on a tre;’ Havelok, 1429. Hengen
is a later variant (cf. Icel. hengja) of ME. hangien, AS. hangian, to
hang; see Hang. Cf. AS. henge-clif, a steep cliff, and stone-henge ;
Dan. dial. hinge, henge, a hinge (Dan. hengsel); Low G. henge;
MDnu. henge, hengene, a hinge (Du. hengsel), For the sound, cf. singe,
swinge. Der. hinge, verb.

HINT, a slight allusion. (E.) o. The verb is later than the sb.
“As I have hinted in some former papers;’ Tatler, no. 267. First
found in 1648. Only the sb. occurs in Shak., where it is a common
word; Oth. i. 3.142,166. Esp. used in the phrases ‘ to take the hint,’
or ‘upon this hint.’ B. Hint properly signifies ‘a thing taken,’ i.e.
a thing caught or apprehended; being a derivative of the ME. henten
(pp. kent), to seizeupon. Palsgrave has: ‘J hente, I take by vyolence;’
also spelt hinten. Cf. hint, sb., a sudden seizure, Dunbar, Fenyeit
Friar, 1. 88. ‘ Hyntyd, raptus; Hyntyn, or revyn, or hentyn, rapio,
arripio ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 240. The earlier spelling of the verb was
henten, pt. t. hente, Chaucer, C. T. 700 (A 698); the pp. hent occurs
even in Shak. Meas. iv. 6.14. AS. hentan, to seize, to hunt after;
Grein, ii. 34. Cf. Goth. -hinthan, to seize. See Hunt. Der. hint,
verb.

HIP (1), the haunch, upper part of the thigh. (E.) ME. hupe, hipe,
hippe. ‘About hire hipes large;’ Chaucer, C. T. 474 (A 472).
‘ Hupes had hue faire’ =she had fair hips; Alisaunder, 1. 190; printed
with Will. of Palerne, ed. Skeat. AS. hype; Gregory’s Pastoral, ed.
Sweet, p. 383, 1. 2.4- Du. hkeup; (Dan. hofte; Swed. hoft; from G.
hiifte); Goth. hups; OHG. huf. B. The suffixed -t or -te in some
of these words stands for the Idg. suffix -to-; the older Teut. type is
*hupiz. Perhaps allied to Gk. «vBos, the hollow near the hips of
cattle. Der. hip-bone, AS. hype-bin; Wright’s Vocab. i. 44, col. 1,
last line (Voc. 159. 24). > The word hipped, depressed, is con-
nected with hypochondria; see Hippish.

HIP (2), also HEP, the fruit of the dog-rose. (E.) ME. hepe.
‘And swete as is the bremble flour That bereth the rede hepe;’
Chaucer, C. T. 13677 (B 937). AS. héope (Voc. 133. 36); whence
the comp. héop-brymel, a hip-bramble; Wright’s Vocab. i. 33, col. 1;
to translate L, rubus (Voc. 138. 37).-+Dan. hyben, pl.; MDan. hjuben-
torn, hip-thorn; MHG. hiefe, OHG. hiufo, a bramble-bush.

HIPPISH, hypochondriacal. (Gk.) In Byron, Beppo, st. 64.
The word is merely a colloquial substitute for hypochondriacal, of
which only the first syllableis preserved. Hence hippish is for hyp-ish.
See Someryille’s poem entitled ‘ The Hip.’


272


HITCH


HIPPOCAMPUS, a kind of fish. (Gk.) Hyppocamps ends a line
in W. Browne’s Britannia's Pastorals, bk. ii. song 1. It has a head
like a horse, and a long flexible tail; whence the name.=Gk..
inmoxdpmos, itmoxdymn, a monster, with a horse’s head and fish’s tail.
= Gk. inmo-, for inmos, a horse; and kaumos, masc. of kann, a cater-
pillar, also a sea-monster, allied to xaum-rew, to bend. ;

HIPPOPOTAMUS, the river-horse. (L.—Gk.) ME. ypota-
mus, Alexander and Dindimns, ed. Skeat, 157. Also ypotanos, King
Alisaunder, 6554. Both corrupted from L. hippopotamus.= Gk.
innonétapos, the river-horse of Egypt; also called tmmos mordpuos=-
river-dwelling horse.= Gk. immo-, for immos, a horse; and morapoés,
a river. B. The Gk. immos has a dial. by-form txxos, cognate with
L. eguus, a horse; see Equine, Moz7apds is ‘running’ water; cf.
Gk. mor-7, flight, mér-oa, I fly (Prellwitz). it From the same
Gk. immos we have hippo-drome, a race-course for horses; hippo-phagy,
a feeding on horse-flesh ; hippo-griff, a monster, half horse, half
griffin; 8c.

HIRE, wages for service. (E.) ME. hyre, Chaucer, C. T. 509
(A 507); also hure, huyre, hyre, P. Plowman, A. ii. gt; B. ii. 122.
AS. hyr, fem. (gen. hyre), Luke xix. 23.4+-Du. huur, wages, service ;
Swed. Ayra, rent, wages; Dan. hyre, hire ; prov. G. heuer, hire (Fliigel’s
Dict.). Teut.type *hirja, f. Der. hire, verb, AS. hyrian, Matt. xx.
7; hire-ling, AS. hyrling, Mark, i. 20.

HIRSUTEH, rough, shaggy, bristly. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674; and in Bacon, Nat. Hist., § 616.=—L. hirsutus, rough, bristly.


Allied to Gk. xépoos, dry, hard; L. horrére, to bristle. See
Horror. Der. hirsute-ness (Todd).
HIS, of him, of it. (E.) Formerly neut.as wellas masc. AS. his,


gen. m. and n. of hé, he. See He, Its.

HISS, to make a sound like a serpent or a goose. (E.) Wyclif
has hisshing, a hissing, 2 Chron. xxix. 8; and hisse, v., Isa. v. 26,
The L. sibulat is glossed by hyssyt, i.e. hisses ; Wright’s Vocab. i. 180,
1. 1 (Voc. 627. 15).4-MFlem, hisschen, to hiss; Kilian, Oudemans ;
Norw. hyssa; MSwed. hyss, a noise to drive away pigs (Ihre) ; Gascon
hissa, to hiss (Moncaut). B. Formed from the sound; the Du. sissez,
G. zischen, to hiss, are even more expressive; cf. jizz, whizz, whistle,
Der. hiss, sb.; hiss-ing, Jer. xviii. 16, &c.; and see hist, hush.

HIST, an interjection enjoining silence. (E.) InShak. Romeo,
ii, 2, 159. In Milton, Il Penseroso, 55, the word hist appears to
mean ‘to summon by saying hist;’ so that ‘And the mute silence
hist along’ =summon (and bring) along the mute Silence by saying
hist. Also ist, ’st. Cf. Dan. hys, inter]. silence! hysse, to hush.

HISTOLOGY, the science which treats of the minute structure of
the tissues of plants and animals. (Gk.) A modern scientific term.
Coined from Gk. ioro-, for icrés, a web; and -Aoyia, from Adyos, a
discourse, from Aé€yev, to speak. B. The orig. sense of fords is a
ship’s mast, also the bar or beam of a loom, which in Greek looms
stood upright; hence, a warpor web. y. So called because standing
upright ; from Gk. orn, to make to stand, set, place; from 4/STA,
to stand; see Stand.

HISTORY, also STORY, a narrative, account. (L.—Gk.)
Story (q.v-) is an abbreviated form. Gower has histoire, C. A.
iii. 48; bk. vi. 1383. Fabyan gave to his Chronicle (printed in
1516) the name of The Concordance of Histories. In older authors,
we commonly find the form sforie, which is of F. origin. Historie is
Englished directly from L. historia, a history. — Gk. ioropia, a learning
by enquiry, information, history. Gk. icrop-, stem of torwp oriatwp,
knowing, learned ; for */5-rwp, from the weak grade i5- of eidévar, to
know.=—4/WEID, to know; see Wit. Der. histori-an, formerly.
historien, Sir T. Elyot, The. Governour, b. i. c. 243 histori-c-al, Tyn-
dal’s Works, p. 260, col. 2 ; histori-c-al-ly : histori-c; histori-o-grapher,
a writer of history (from Gk. ypadev, to write), Gascoigne’s Stee
Glas, 981 ; histori-o-graphy. :

HISTRIONICAL, relating to the stage. (L.) In Minsheu.
‘ And is a histrionical contempt ;’ Ben Jonson, Magnetic Lady, A. ili.
sc. 4. Coined, with suffix -al, from L. histridnic-us, of or belonging to
a player.=L. histridni-, decl. stem of histrio, a player, actor. From
Etruscan hister, a player; Livy, vii. 2. ;

HIT, to light upon, to strike, to attain to. (Scand.) ME. hitten,
P. Plowman, B. xii. 108; xvi. 87; Layamon, 1. 1550.—Icel. hitta, to
hit upon, meet with ; Swed. hitta, to find, discover, light upon; Dan.
hitte, to hit upon. Der. hit, sb. ‘ .

HITCH, to move by jerks, catch slightly, suddenly. (E.) ME.
hicchen. ‘ Hytchyn, hychyn, hytchen, or remeyyn, Amoveo, moveo,.
removeo ;” Prompt. Parv. p. 239; where the word should have been »
printed as hycchyn or hycchen. Wealso find : ‘ Hatchyd [read hacchyd},
or remevyd, hichid, hychyd, Amotus, remotus 5’ ibid. Cf. Lowland
Scotch hatch, hotch, to move by jerks; Jamieson. Also prov. E.
hotch, hutch, to jerk, to hitch ; huck, to draw near, to hitch (E.D.D.).
Of obscure origin. Perhaps related to prov. E. huck, to hunch up ;
Du. hokken, to squat, to crouch, also to stick ;.as het hoki, there isan


HITHE, HYTHE


obstacle (or hitch); Calisch. If so, it is allied to huckster. See
Phil. Soc. Trans. 1903, p. 150. Der. hitch, sb.

HITHE, HYTHE, a small haven. (E.) ME. hithe; as in
Garleke-hithe, P. Plowman, B. v. 324; andsee Prompt. Pary., p. 242,
note r. AS. hyd, a haven; Grein, ii. 126. Teut. type *hithja, f.

HITHER, to this place. (E.) ME. hider, hither, Chaucer, C. T.
674 (A 672); the right form in Chaucer being probably hider, since
he rimes thider with slider ; C.T. 1265 (A 1263). [SoalsoME. fader,
moder are now father, mother.| AS. hider (common) ; Grein, ii. 71.-4-
Icel. hédra (for hidra) ; Goth. hidré.4-L. citré, onthisside. B. From
the Teutonic pronominal base hi- (see He) ; with a suffix allied to
the Idg. comparative suffix -ter. Der. hither-to; hither-ward, ME.
hiderward, P. Plowman, B. vi. 323.

HIVE, a basket for bees. (E.) The old sense is ‘hood.’ ME. hyve
(with « for v), Chaucer, C. T. 15398 (B 4582). Spelt hyfe, Wright’s
Vocab. i. 223, col. 2 (Voc. 706. 41). AS. hy, f.; Voc. 123. 16;
‘ Aluearia, hyfi;’ Corpus Gloss. 133. Teut. type *hiijiz.4+-Du. huif,
a hood, a hive (see Franck); Dan. dial. hyve. Allied to L. cipa,
a tub, acup. See Cupola.

HO, HOA, a call to excite attention. (E.) ‘And cryed ho!’
Chaucer, C. T., A1706. Merely a natural exclamation; cf. Icel. 26,
interj. ho!, also Icel. ha, to shout out ho!

HOAR, white, grayish white. (E.) ME. hor, hoor; Chaucer,
C. T. 3876, 7764 (A 3878, D 2182); P. Plowman, B. vi. 85. AS.
har, Grein, ii. 14.4-Icel. harr, hoar, hoary; G. hehr, exalted, OHG.
hér, proud, lofty, orig. ‘reverend.’ Teut. type *hairoz ( =hai-roz), lit.
‘shining;’ hence, white. The base hai- appears in Goth. hais, a
torch, G, hei-ter, orig. ‘ bright, Icel. hei-d, brightness ; cf. Skt. kétu-s,
asign,a meteor (Kluge). 4 To be kept distinct from Icel. har, which
is the E. high (the r being merely the sign of the nom. case) ; and also
from E. hair. Der. hoar-y, occurring in the comp. horilocket, having
hoary locks, Layamon, 25845; hoar-i-ness; also hoar-frost, ME.
hoorfrost, Wyclif, Exod. xvi. 14; also hoar-hound, q.v.

HOARD, a store, a treasure. (E.) ME. hord, Chaucer, C. T.
3262; Gower, C. A. iii. 155; bk. vii. 2094. AS. hord, Grein, ii. 96.
+Icel. hodd; G. hort; Goth. huzd, atreasure. B. The Teutonictype
is *huzdo-, due to Idg. *kudh-dho-, ‘a thing hidden ;’ from *kudhk, weak
grade of 4/ KEUDH, whence Gk, xevd-av, AS. hyd-an, to hide. See
Hide (1). Brugmann, i. §699. Der. hoard, verb, AS. hordian, in
Sweet’s A. S. Reader; cf. Goth. huzdjan, to hoard; hoard-er, AS.
hordere (Bosworth).

HOARDING, HOARD, a fence enclosing a house while
builders are at work. (F.—Du.; or Du.) Rare in books; it is
difficult to say how long it may have existed in E. asa builder’s term.
Hoard occurs in 1757 (N.E.D.). Either taken directly from Du.
horde, a hurdle; or from OF. hourd, ‘a scaffold,’ in Froissart (Gode-
froy, s.v. hourt), which is borrowed from it. The suffix -ing is, of
course, English. Cf. Picard hourdage, a scaffold (Corblet); AF.
hurdys, a scaffold, in Liber Albus; p. 477. The true E. word is
Hurdle, q.v.

HOARHOUND, HOREHOUND, the name of a plant. (E.)
The true hoarhound is the white, Marrubium vulgare ; the first part of
the word is hoar, and the plant is so called because its bushy stems
‘are covered with white woolly down ;’ Johns, Flowers of the Field.
The final dis excrescent ; the ME. form being horehune. ‘ Marubium,
horehune;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 139 (Voc. 554. 2). AS. harhiine; or
simply hiine ; for numerous examples of which see Cockayne’s A.S,
Leechdoms, iii. 334 ; where we also find: ‘the syllable har, hoary,
describes the aspect, so that ‘‘ black horehound”’ shows how we have
forgotten our own language.’ The words are also found separate ;
pa haran hiinman. We also find hwite hare hiinan, white horehound,
an early indication of the black horehound, Ballota nigra, a very
strong-smelling plant. B.. The first syllable is obvious; see Hoar.
The second syllable is unexplained. 4 It thus appears that the right
names should have been hoar houn and black houn; white hoarhound
involves a reduplication ; and black hoarhound, a contradiction.

HOARSE, having a rough, harsh voice. (E.) Ther in this word
is probably intrusive, and is (generally) not sounded; still, it was
inserted at an early period. ME. hoos, hos, hors; all three spellings
occur in P, Plowman, B. xvii. 324 (and various readings) ; hors,
Chaucer, Book of the Duchesse, 347. AS. has, Grein, ii. 14.--Dan.
hes; Swed. hes; Du. heesch; G.heiser. B. All froma Teutonic type
*haisoz; or (if the r be original) *hairsoz ; perhaps the latter is indi-
cated by the Icel. form hass. See N.E.D. Der. hoarse-ly, hoarseness,

HOARY, white; see Hoar. ‘

HOAX, to trick, to play a practical joke. (Low L.) In Todd’s
Johnson; not found in early writers. The late appearance of the
word suggests that it is a corruption of hocus, used in just the same
sense. ‘ Legerdemain, with which these jugglers hocus the vulgar ;”
Nalson, in Todd. ‘ This gift of hocus-pocussing ;’ L’Estrange (Todd).
See Hocus-Pocus, Der. hoaw, sb.


HOBNOB, HABNAB 273


HOB (1), HUB, the nave of a wheel, part of a grate. (E.) The
true sense is ‘ projection.’ Hence hub, ‘ the nave ofa wheel (Oxford-
shire) ; a small stack of hay, the mark to be thrown at in quoits, the
hilt of a weapon ; wp to the hub, as faras possible ;’ Halliwell, The
mark for quoits is the same word as hob, ‘a small piece of wood of a
cylindrical form, used by boys to set on end, to put half-pence on
to chuck or pitch at;’ Halliwell. Hob also means the shoe (pro-
jecting edge) ofa sledge. The hob of a fire-place is explained in the
N.E. D. as having been orig. ‘a boss or mass of clay behind the fire-
place.” EFries. hobbe, a rough tump of grassy land rising out of
water 3 hubbel, a projection.+-Du. hobbel, a knob; G. hiibel, OHG.
hubel, ahillock. [Cf. Du. hewvel, a hill; AS. hofer,ahump.] Lith.
kup-stas, atump of grass. Der. hob-nail, a nail with a projecting
head, 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 398; 2 Hen. VI, iv. 10. 63; hob-nail-ed,

HELOB (2), a clown, a rustic, a fairy. (F.-OHG.) ‘The hobbes as
wise as grauest men;’ Drant’s tr. of Horace’s Art of Poetry (R.).
‘From elves, hobs, and fairies That trouble our dairies;? Beaumont
and Fletcher, Monsieur Thomas, iv. 6. See Nares; also Hob in
Atkinson’s Cleveland Glossary, where, however, the suggestion of
identifying hob with elf is to be rejected. It is quite certain that Hob
was a common personal name, andinearlyuse. ‘ To beg of Hob and
Dick;’ Cor. ii. 3.123. That it was in early use is clear from its
numerous derivatives, as Hobbs, Hobbins, Hobson, Hopkins, Hopkinson.
B. That Hod, strange as it may seem, was a popular corruption of
Robin is clearly borne out by the equally strange corruption of Hodge
from Roger, as well as by the name of Robin Goodfellow for the hob-
goblin Puck; (Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1.40). Robert Bruce was nicknamed
‘kyng Hobbe;’ Polit. Songs, p. 216. ‘y. The name Robin is French,
and, like Robert, is of OHG. origin ; Littré considers it as a mere pet
corruption from Robert, aname early known in England, as being that
of the eldest son of Will. I. Der. hob-goblin (see goblin) ; spelt hob-
goblyng in Palsgrave, who translates it by F. goblin.

HOBBLE, to limp, walk with a limp. (E.) ME. hobelen (with
one b), P. Plowman, A. i. 113; P. Plowman’s Crede, 106; and see
Barbour’s Bruce, iv. 447. Practically, the frequentative of hop; so
that the lit. sense is ‘ to hop often.’4-Du. hobbelen, to toss, ride on a
hobby-horse, stammer, stutter (all with the notion of repetition of
uneven motion) ; frequent. of hobben, to toss up and down; allied to
huppen, huppelen, to hop, skip. Cf. EFries. and Westphal. hub-
belen, to hobble; OF. hober, to move, bestir oneself; prov. G.
hoppeln, io hop, hobble (Fliigel). See Hop (1). Der. hobdle, sb.

HOBBLEDEHOY, a youth approaching manhood. (E.) A
jocose word, very variously spelt (see N. E.D.). Palsgrave, in 1540,
has hobledehoye; Cotgrave explains F. marmaille as ‘ young rascals

. atroop of . . unprofitable hoberdihoies.? The true origin is un-
known. Perhaps suggested by E. hobble, expressive of clumsy move-
ment, and hoy! as an interjection. Cf. F. hober, ‘to remove from
place to place, a rustic word ;’ Cot. Low G. hop-hei, an assembly
of common people who dance about; Alsace hoppetihopp, a giddy,
flighty, eccentric man (Martin) ; Low G. hupperling, a boy who
jumps about, and cannot be still. Hobby was also a pet name for
Robert ; see Hobby (1).

HOBBY (1), HOBBY-HORSE, an ambling nag, a toy like a
horse, a favourite pursuit. (F.—OHG.) See Hobdy in Trench, Select
Glossary. <A hobby is now a favourite pursuit, but formerly a toy in
imitation of a prancing nag, the orig. sense being a kind of prancing
horse. In Hamlet, iii. 2.142. ‘They have likewise excellent good
horses, we term the hobbies ;’ Holland, Camden’s Ireland, p. 63. A
corruption of ME. hobin, a nag; Barbour’s Bruce, ed. Skeat, xiv.
68, 500; [whence OF. hobin, ‘a hobby, a little ambling and short-
maned horse;’ Cot.] B. But this ME. Hobin was a horse’s name
(see N.E.D.); of which Dobbin is a familiar variant. And Hobin is
but an E. variant of F. Robin; see further under Hob (2).

HOBBY (2), a small species of falcon. (F.—Du.) Obsolete. Cot-
grave translates MF. hobreau by ‘the hawke tearmed a hobby.’ ME,
hobi, hoby (withoneb). ‘ Hoby, hawke;’ Prompt. Pary. ; pl. hobies, Sir
T. Elyot, The Governour, cap. xviii ; see Spec. of English, ed. Skeat,
p. 204. Like other terms of falconry, it is of F. origin; being from
OF. hobet, a hobby, allied to the MF. hobreau mentioned above. So
named from its movement. = OF. hober, ‘ to stirre, move, remove from
place to place ;’ Cot.—MDu. hobben, to toss, move up and down. See
Hobble, @ This etymology is confirmed by noting that the OF.
verb hober was sometimes spelt auber (Cot.); corresponding to which
latter form, the hobby was also called aubereau (Cot.).

HOBGOBLIN, a kind of fairy. (F.—OHG.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627; and in Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 40; hobgoblyng in Palsgrave.
Compounded of hob and goblin. See Hob (2) and Goblin.

HOBNATIL, a kind of nail. See Hob (1).

HOBNOB, HABN AB, take or leave, in any case, at random.
(E.) Compounded of kab and nab, derived respectively from AS.
habban, to haye, and nabban, not to have. 1. In one aspect it means

£


HOCK


“take it or leave it ;’ implying free choice, and hence a familiar invita-
tion to drink, originating the phrase ‘ to hob-nob together.’ ‘ Hob-nob
is his word; give’t or take’t;’ Twelfth Night, ili. 4. 262. 2. In
another aspect, it means hit or miss, at random ; also, in any case.
‘Philautus determined, hab, nab, to sende his letters ;’ i.e. whatever
might happen; Lyly’s Euphues, ed. Arber, p. 354. ‘Although set
down hab-nab, at random;’ Butler’s Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 3. 1. go.
B. Hab is from AS. habban; see Have. Nab is from AS. nabban,
a contracted form of ze habban, not to have.

HOCK (1), the hough; see Hough,

HOCK (2), the name of a wine. (G.) ‘What wine is it? Hock ;’
Beaum. and Fletcher, The Chances, A. v. sc. 3. Shortened from
Hockamore (Stanford Dict.), which was an Anglicised form of Hoch-
heimer, i.e. wine of Hochheim, the name of a place in Germany, on the
river Main, whence the wine came. It means ‘high home;’ see
High and Home,

HOCKEY, the name of a game. (E.) Also called hawkey ; so
named because played with a hooked stick; see Hook. 4 In some
places called bandy, the ball being bandied backwards and forwards.

HOCUS-POCUOUBS, a juggler’s trick, a juggler. (Low L.) Hokos-
Pokos is the name of the juggler in Ben Jonson, Magnetic Lady, Chorus
at endof Acti. In Butler's Hudibras, it means a trick; ‘ As easily as
hocus-pocus ;’ pt. iii. c. 3. 1.716. If the word may be said to belong
to any language at all, it is bad Latin, as shown by the termination
-us. The reduplicated word was a mere invention, used by jugglers
in playing tricks. ‘At the playing of every trick, he [a juggler in the
times of James I] used to say “‘ hocus pocus, tontus, talontus, vade
celeriter, jubeo ;” ’ Ady’s Candle in the Dark, Treat. of Witches, &c.
p- 29; cited in Todd. See the whole articlein Todd. 4 The‘ deri-
vations’ sometimes assigned are ridiculous; the word no more needs
to be traced than its companions fontus and ¢alontus. Der. hocus, to
cheat; see Todd. Hence also hoax, q. v.

HOD, a kind of trough for carrying bricks on the shoulder.
(MDu.) ‘A lath-hammer, trowel, a hod, or atraie;’ Tusser. Five
Hundred Points of Husbandry, sect. 16, st.16(E. D.S. edition, p. 37,
last line). Cotgrave has: ‘ Oiseau, a bird . . also, a Hodd, the Tray
wherein Masons carry their Mortar.’=MDu. hodde, ‘a basket or a
maund ;’ given by Hexham, s. v. Botte. Cf. Swed. dial. hodda, hudda,
f., a hut; MDan. hodde, a hut, hudde, a small room; cognate with
Alsace hutte, G. hotte,a wooden vessell, a tub, a vintager’s dosser
(Fliigel); [whence F. hotte, ‘a scuttle, dosser, basket to carry on
the back; the right hotte is wide at the top and narrow at the
bottom ;’ Cot.] . All (perhaps) from Teut. *hud-, weak grade
of *heud- =Gk. Kev6-, to hide; the orig. sense being ‘ cover’ or
“case.” See Phil. Soc. Trans., 1902, p. 671. @ Note that E. has
the Low G. form, but F. the HG. form; whence ME. hofte, in
Chaucer, Hous of Fame, 1940; see my note.

HODGEH-PODGE, a mixture ; see Hotchpot.

HOH, an instrument for cutting up weeds, &c. (F.—G.) ‘ How,
pronounced as [i.e. to rime with] mow and throw ; a narrow iron rake
without teeth, to cleanse gardens from weeds; rastrum Gallicum’ [a
French rake]; Ray’s Collection of South-Country Words, ed. 1691.
Written haugh by Evelyn (R.). =F. hove, ‘an instrument of husbandry,
which hath a crooked handle, or helve of wood, some two foot long,
and a broad and in-bending head of iron ;* Cot.; Norm. dial. hoe. =
OHG. houwa, G. haue, a hoe.mOHG. houwan, to hew; cognate
with E. hew. See Hew. Der. hoe, vb.

HOG, the name of an animal, a pig. (E.) ME. hog; Wyclif,
Luke, xv. 16; King Alisaunder, 1885. Also hogge, ‘maialis, est
enim porcus carens testiculis ;” Cathol. Anglicum, p. 187. Cf. hog-
sheep, one clipped the first year. It occurs as AS. hocg in Hocges
tun, Kemble, Cod. Dipl. Moisy, ed. 1895, gives Norm. dial. hogge,
a six-months’ lamb, a pig; and hogastre, a two-year-old sheep (both
prob. from E.). AS. hogg, Cambridge Phil. Soc. Proceedings, 1xi-
Ixiii (1902), p. 13,1. 2. B. Cf.also the prov. E. hog, vb., to cut short
a horse’s mane, to cut a hedge, to pollard a tree, to hack off (E, D. D.).
= Norw. hogga, to cut (Aasen) ; allied to Icel. hoggva (base hagg-),
to hew. See Phil. Soc. Trans., 1903, p. 151. Der. hogg-ish, hogg-
ish-ly, hogg-ish-ness ; hog-ring-er ; hog’s-lard.

HOGSHEAD, a measure containing about 523 gallons; a half-
pipe. (E.) In Shak. Temp. iv. 252; L. L. L. iv. 2.883 &c. Also in
Cotgrave, to translate F’. tonneau; it seems to have meant a large cask.
Minsheu, ed. 1627, refers us to ‘An. 1 Rich. III, cap. 13.’ Cf. ¢ ij
pipes, v hogges-hedes,’ in The Earl of Derby’s Expeditions (Camden
Soc.), p. 156 (A.D. 1392). Certainly derived from ME. hogges hed,
‘hog’s head ;’ a fanciful name, of which the origin is.not known ; but
it seems as sensible as pipe in ‘pipe of wine.’ Hence were borrowed
MDan. hogshoved, a hog’s head, modified into Dan. oxehoved, as if it
meant ‘ox-head;’ Low G. Auwkeshovet, a hogshead (Liibben) ; also
Swed. oxkufuud, a hogshead, lit. ‘ox-head;’ G. oxhoft, a hogshead;
Du. oxhooft. Cf. also prov. E, hogget,a hogshead, a large cask.


274


HOLLY


HOIDEN, HOYDEN, aromping girl. (MDu.) See hoyden in
Trench, Select Glossary ; in old authors, it is usually applied to the
male sex, and means a clown, a lout, a rustic. ‘ Badault, a fool,
dolt, sot, . .. gaping hoydon;’ Cot. ‘ Falourdin, a luske, lowt,..
lumpish hoydon;’ id. ‘ Hilts. You mean to make a hoiden or a hare
Of me, to hunt counter thus, and make these doubles;’ Ben Jonson,
Tale ofa Tub, A. ii. sc. 1. = MDu. heyden (mod. Du. heiden), a heathen,
gentile; also a gipsy, vagabond ; Sewel.=— MDu. heyde,a heath. See
Heathen, Heath. @ This derivation, proposed by Skinner, is
probable enough. The W. hoeden, having only the modern E. meaning
of ‘ coquette,’ must have been borrowed from English, and is not the
original, as some have supposed.

HOIST, to heave, raise with tackle. (MDu.) The z is excrescent,
and due to confusion with the pp. The verb is properly hoise, with
pp. hoist=hoised. ‘ Hoised up the main-sail ;’ Acts, xxvii.40. Shak.
has both hoise and hoist, and (in the pp.) both hoist and hoisted;
Rich. III, iv. 4. 529; Temp.i. 2.148; Hamlet, iii. 4. 207; Antony,
iii, 10. 35, iv. 12. 34, v. 2. 55. ‘We hoyse up mast and sayle;’
Sackville’s Induction, st. 71 (A.D. 1563). ‘I hyse up the sayle;’
Palsgrave. ‘Made the saylles to be hyssed uppe ;’ Caxton, Eneydos,
ch. 31, p. 116. ‘With anker hoist ;’ Lydgate, Troy-book, bk. iii.
c. 13; fol. I. i (1555).—MDu. hyssen, to hoise (Sewel) ; mod. Du.
hijschen. [The MDu. y (mod. 7) being sounded like English long i,
the vowel-change is slight.] -+ Low G. hisen, hiessen, to hoist ; whence
Dan. heise, hisse, to hoist ; Swed. hissa, to hoist ; hissa upp, to hoist up.
Cf. F. hisser, to hoist a sail, borrowed from the Du. or Low G.; quite
distinct from F. hkausser, to exalt, which is from L. altus, high (F.
haut).

HOLD (1), to keep, retain, defend, restrain. (E.) ME. holden,
Chaucer, C. T. 12116 (C 182). AS. healdan, haldan, Grein, ii. 50.
+ Du. houden; Icel. halda; Swed. halla; Dan. holde; Goth. haldan;
G. halten. ‘Teut. type *haldan-; pt. t. *he-hald. Der. hold, sb.,
Chaucer, C. T, 10481 (F 167); hold-fast, hold-ing; be-hold, up-hold.

HOLD (2), the ‘hold’ of a ship. (Du.) ‘A hulk better stuffed in
the hold;’ 2 Hen. IV, ii. 4.70. Not named, as might be supposed,
from what it holds; but a nautical term, borrowed (like most other
such) from the Dutch. The d is really excrescent, and due to a
natural confusion with the E. verb. The right sense is ‘ hole.’ Du.
hol, a hole, cave, den, cavity; Sewel gives also ‘ het hol van een schip,
the ship’s hold or hull.’ Cognate with E. Hole, q. v.

HOLE, a cavity, hollow place. (E.) ME. hole, hol; Chaucer,
C. T. 3440, 3442; Havelok, 1813. AS. hol, a cave; Grein, ii. 92.
+ Du. hol; Icel. hol; Dan. hul; Swed. hal. Cf. also Goth. hulundi,
a hollow, cave; us-huldn, to hollow out, Matt. xxvii. 60. B. Teut.
type *hulom, n. 3 orig. neut. of *huloz, adj. hollow, as in AS. hol, Du.
hol, Icel. holr, Dan. hul, G. hohl. Prob. from *hul-, weak grade of
Teut. *helan-, tocover; see Hell. 4 Notallied to Gk. «otAos, hollow.

HOLIBUT, a fish. (E.) See Halibut.

HOLIDAY, a holy day, festival, day of amusement. (E.) For
holy day. Spelt holy day ; Chaucer, C. T. 3309; haliday, P. Plowman,
B. v. 409. See Holy and Day.

HOLINESS, a being holy. (E.) See Holy.

HOLLA, HALLO, stop, wait! (F.) Not the same word as
halloo, g.v., but somewhat differently used in old authors. The true
sense is stop! wait! and it was at first used as an interjection simply,
though easily confused with halloo, and thus acquiring the sense of to
shout. ‘Holla, stand there!’ Othello, i. 2. 56. ‘Cry holla [stop !]
to thy tongue;” As You Like It, iii. 2.257.—F. hold, ‘an interjection,
hoe there, enough; .. also, hear you me, or come hither ;’ Cot. =F.
ho, interjection; and Jd, there. B. The F. Ja is an abbreviation from
L. illac, that way, there, allied to éllic, pron. he yonder. Der. holla,
hollo, verb; K. Lear, iii. 1.55; Twelfth Night, i. 5. 291. @ The
form hallo is due to confusion with halloo.

HOLLAND, Dutch linen. (Du.) In Shak. 1 Hen, IV, iii. 3. 82.
‘A shert of feyn Holond;’ Cov. Myst. p. 241. From the name of
the country; Du. Holland. Orig. form Holt-land, i.e. wood-land ;
see Holt. (N.E.D.) Der. from the same source, hollands, i.e. gin
made in Holland.

HOLLOW, vacant, concave; as sb.,a hole, cavity. (E.) ME.
holwe, Chaucer, C. T. 291, 1365 (A 291, 1363). Regularly formed
from AS. hol3e, dat. form of holh, only as a sb., signifying a hollow
place, vacant space ; also spelt holg ; see Cockayne’s A. S. Leechdoms,
iii. 365 ; Gregory's Pastoral, ed. Sweet, p. 218, ll. 1, 3, 4,95 P- 241,
ly. Cf. OHG. huliwa, a pool, puddle. An extended form from
AS, hol, a hole; see Hole. Der. hollow, verb; ‘ hollow your body
more, sir, thus;’? Ben Jonson, Every Man in his Humour, ed.
Wheatley, i. 5. 1363; hollow-ly, Temp. iii. 1. 70; hollow-ness, ME.
holownesse, Chaucer, Troil. v. 1809 ; hollow-eyed, Com, Errors, vy. 240;
hollow-hearted, Rich. III, iv. 4. 435.

HOLLY, the name of a prickly shrub. (E.) The word has lost a
final x. ME. holin, holyn. The F. hous [holly] is glossed by holyn


HOLLYHOCK


in Wright’s Vocab. i. 163, 1.17; the spellings holin, holie both occur
in the Ancren Riwle, p. 418, note 7. AS. holen, holegn ; Cockayne’s
A.S. Leechdoms, iii. 332. -+ W. celyn; Corn. celin; Bret. kelen, holly;
Gael. cuilionn ; Irish cuileann, holly. Idg. type *kolenno-; Stokes-
Fick, p. 91. B. The base of the AS. word is also preserved in Du.
hulst, Low G. hulse, holly; and from the older form (hulis, huls) of
the G. word the F. houx is derived. Der. holm-oak, q.v.

HOLLYHOCK, a kind of mallow. (E.) It should be spelt with
one J, like holiday. ME. holthoc, to translate L. althea and OF. ymalue,
in a list of plants; Wright’s Vocab. i. 140, col. 1, 1. 6 (Voce. 556. 24).
[ Here the OF. ymalue=mod. F. guimauve, the marsh mallow (Cot.). ]
Also spelt holihocce, holihoke; see Cockayne’s Leechdoms, iii. 332,
col. 1, bottom. Compounded from ME. holi, holy; and hocce, hoke,
hoc, a mallow, from AS. hoc, a mallow; id. Minsheu, ed. 1627,
gives ‘ Holie hocke, i.e. malua sacra.’ B. The mallow was also called
in AS. hocléaf. Cf. W. hocys, mallows; hocys bendigaid, hollyhock,
lit. ‘blessed mallow’ (where bendigaid is equivalent to L. benedictus) ;
but this W. form is merely borrowed from the AS. nom. pl. hoccas.
y. ‘ Of hagiological origin ; another name was caulis Sancti Cuthberti ;’
N. E. D.

HOLM, an islet in a river; flat land neara river. (Scand.) ‘ Holm,
a river-island;’ Coles, ed. 1684. ‘Holm, in old records, an hill,
island, or fenny ground, encompassed with little brooks;’ Phillips,
ed. 1706. The true sense is ‘a mound,’ or any slightly rising ground ;
and, as such ground often has water round it, it came to mean an
island. Again, asa rising slope is often situate beside a river, it came
to mean a bank, wharf, or dockyard, as in German. ‘The most
curious use is in AS., where the main sea itself is often called holm,
from its convex shape; the later senses are Scandinavian. ME. holm.
‘Holm, place besydone a water, Hulmus;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 243; see
Way’s note, which is full of information about the word. [The
Low L. hulmus is nothing but the Teutonic word Latinised.] — Icel.
holmr, hélmi, holmr, an islet; ‘even meadows on the shore with
ditches behind them are in Icelandic called holms;’ Dan. holm, a
holm, quay, dockyard; Swed. kolme, a small island; whence G. holm,
a hill, island, dockyard, wharf (Fliigel). + L. culmen,a mountain-top;
cf. L. collis, a hill. See Culminate and Hill.

HOLM-OAK, the evergreen oak. (E.) Cotgrave translates MF.
yeuse by ‘the holme oake, barren scarlet oak, French oak.’ ‘The tree
is the Quercus Ilex, or common evergreen oak, ‘a most variable
plant, . . with leaves varying from being as prickly as a holly to being
as even at the edge as an olive;’ Eng. Cyclop.s.v. Quercus. Whether
because it is an evergreen, or because its leaves are sometimes
prickly, we at any rate know that it is so called from its resemblance
to the holly. B. The ME. name for holly was holin, sometimes
phonetically varied to holm or holy. ‘Holme, or holy ;’ Prompt.
Pary. p. 244; and see Way’s note. ‘ Hollie, or Holmtree ;’ Minsheu.
The form holm is in Chaucer, C. T. 2923 (A 2921). Thus holm-oak
=holly-oak. See Holly.

HOLOCAUST, an entire burnt sacrifice. (L.—Gk.) So called
because the victim offered was burnt entire. It occurs early, in the
Story of Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1319, 1326, where it is
plainly taken from the Vulgate version of Gen. xxil.8. = L. holocaustum;
Gen. xxii. 8. — Gk. dAéKavorov, neut. of dAdKcavoTos, dAdKavTos, burnt
whole. = Gk. 6A0-, for dAos, whole, entire; and xafew (fut. kavc-w),
to burn. B. The Gk. dros is cognate with Skt. sarva(s), all. Brug-
mann, i. § 319. For xaiew see Caustic.

HOLOTHURIAN, belonging to the genus of sea-slugs; as sb.,
a sea-slug, sea-cucumber, trepang. (L.—Gk.) Modern. — Modern
L. holothiiria, neut. pl. of Gk. 6Ao@ovpiov, a kind of zoophyte (Aristotle).

HOLSTER, a leathern case for a pistol, (Du.—G.) Merely ‘a
case;’ though now restricted to a peculiar use. In Butler, Hudibras,
pt.i.c. 1. 1. 391.— Du. holster, a pistol-case, holster; also, a soldier’s
knapsack (Sewel). B. The word is not orig. E., though we find
hulstred = covered, Rom. of the Rose, 6146; and AS. heolstor, a hiding-
place, cave, covering, Grein, ii. 67; as well as Icel. hulstr, a case,
sheath ; Goth. hulistr, a veil, 2 Cor. iii. 13. -y. But any real connexion
with these words is very doubtful; as the Du. word appears to have
been borrowed (with change of /¢ to st) from G. holfter, hulfter,
a holster; MHG. hulfter, a quiver; from OHG. hulft, a cover, case
(Franck, Kluge). Hexham has MDnu. hwelfte, ‘a galloch to weare
with shoes or bootes.’

HOLT, a wood, woody hill. (E.) ‘ Holt, a small wood, or grove;’
Kersey, ed. 1715. ME. holt, Chaucer, C. T. 6. ‘Hoc virgultum, a
holt;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 270, col. 1 (Voc. 796. 29). AS. holt,a wood,
grove ; Grein, ii. 95.-+Du. hout (MDu. holt), wood, timber ; Icel. holt,
a copse; G. hkolz, a wood, grove; also wood, timber, Tent. stem
*hulto-, ldg. stem *kaldo-. Allied to Olrish caill, coill (for *cald-),
a wood; W. celli, a grove; Russ. koldéda, a log; Gk. xAddos, a twig.
Stokes-Fick, p. 82.

HOLY, sacred, pure, sainted. (E.) The word is nothing but ME.


HOMOLOGOUS 275


hool (now spelt whole) with suffix -y. ME. holi, holy; Chaucer, C. T.
178; AS. halig; Grein,ii.7.4-Du. heilig; Icel. heilagr, often contracted
to helgr; Dan. hellig ; Swed. helig ; G. heilig ; Goth. heilag, neut., in
an inscription. Teut. type *hailagoz, a derivative of Teut. *hailoz,
whole (AS. hal) or of *hailoz or *hailiz, sb.,a good omen, Cf. Irish
cél, W. coel, an omen; Stokes-Fick, p. 88. See Whole. Der.
holi-ly; holi-ness, AS. hdlignes; holi-day, q.v.; holly-hock (for holy
hock), q.v.; hali-but (=holy but), q.v.

HOMAGE, the submission of a vassal to a lord. (F.—L.) In
early use. In Rob. of Glouc. p. 46, 1. 5; 1. 1061; P. Plowman,
B. xii. 155.—OF. homage, later hommage, the service of a vassal. —
Late L. homaticum (also homindticum), the service of a vassal or ‘man.’
=L. homo (stem homin-), a2 man; hence, a servant, vassal. See
Human, @ The AS. guma, a man, is cognate with L. homo;
see Bridegroom,

HOME, native place, place of residence. (E.) ME. hoom, home;
Chaucer, C. T. 2367 (A 2365); P. Plowman, B. v. 365; vi. 203;
common in the phrase ‘to go home.’ AS. ham, home, a dwelling;
Grein, ii.9. The acc. case is used adverbially, as in ham cuman, to
come home; cf. L. ire domum.+-Du. heem, a farm; heim, in the comp.
heimelijk, private, secret; Icel. heimr, an abode, village, heima, home;
Dan. jem, home; also used adverbially, as in E.; Swed. hem, home;
and used as adv.; G. heim; Goth. haims, a village.+ Lithuanian kémas,
OPruss. caymis, a village (Fick, iii. 75). Teut. types *haimoz,
*haimiz. Some compare Skt. kshéma(s), safety, safe abode, from
kshi, to dwell; but this is to be rejected. Cf. Brugmann, i. § 920.
Der. home-bred, Rich. LI, i. 3.187; home-farm; home-felt ; home-keeping,
Two Gent. of Verona, i. 1. 2; home-less, AS. hamléas (Grein); home-
less-ness; home-ly, Chaucer, C. T. 330 (A 328); home-li-ness, ME.
homlinesse, Chaucer, C. T, 8305 (E 429); home-made; home-sick ;
home-sick-ness ; home-spun, Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 1. 79; home-stall ; home-
stead (see Stead); home-ward, AS. hdémweard, Gen, xxiv. 61;
home-wards,

HOMER, a large Hebrew measure. (Heb.) Asa liquid measure,
it has been computed at 80 gallons (more or less). Also used as a dry
measure. = Heb. khdmer, a homer, also a heap or mound (with initial
cheth); from the root khamar, to undulate, surge up, swell up.

HOMESTEAD, a dwelling-place, mansion-house, with its en-
closures. (E.) In Bp. Hall, Contemplations, New Test. b. ii. cont. 3.
§ 6 (Todd). ‘Both house and homestead into seas are borne ;’ Dryden
(quoted in Todd; no reference). Compounded of home and stead.

HOMICIDE, man-slaughter; a man-slayer. (F.—L.) 1. Chaucer
has homicide in the sense of manslaughter; C. T. 12591 (C 657).—F.
homicide, ‘ manslaughter ;? Cot.—L. homicidium, manslaughter. =—L.
homi-, short for homin-, stem of homo, a man (see Homage) ; and
-cidere, for cedere, to cut, to kill. 2. Chaucer also has: ‘He that
hateth his brother is homicide;’ Pers. Tale, De Ira, § 4 (1 565).—
F. homicide, ‘an homicide, man-killer ;’ Cot.—L. homicida, a man-
slayer ; similarly formed from homi- and -cidere. Der. homicid-al.

HOMILY, a plain sermon, discourse. (F.—L.—Gk.) In As You
Like It, iii. 2. 164. And see Pref. to the Book of Homilies. ME.
omelye, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, ii. 183.—OF. omelie (F. homélie,
Hatzfeld).—L. komilia, a homily.—Gk. émAla, a living together,
intercourse, converse, instruction, homily.=Gk. djAos, an assembly,
throng, concourse.=Gk. é6u-, short for duo-, for duds, like, same,
cognate with E, Same ; and (possibly) tA, efAn, a crowd, band, from
eiAewv, to press or crowd together, compress, shut in. Der. homiletic,
from Gk. 6piAntixds, sociable, an adj. allied to éuAia, used in E. as


the adj. belonging to homily; hence homiletic-al, homiletic-s. Also
homil-ist (= homily-ist).
HOMINY, maize prepared for food. (West Indian.) ‘Milke


Homini ;’? Capt. J. Smith, Works, p. 886. ‘From Indian auhtiminea,
parched corn;’ Webster. Trumbull gives appuminnéonash, with the
same sense.

HOMMOCEK, a hillock; see Hummock.

HOMCEOPATHY, a particular treatment of disease. (Gk.) The
system is an attempt to cure a disease by the use of small doses of
drugs such as would produce the symptoms of the disease in a sound
person. Hence the name, signifying ‘similar feeling.’ Proposed
(ab. 1796) by Dr. Hahnemann, of Leipsic (died 1843). Englished
from Gk. éporordéeia, likeness in feeling or condition, sympathy. =
Gk. dpo.o-, for Spovos, like, similar ; and maGeiy, aorist infin. of tacxew,


to suffer. The Gk. dporos is from duds, same, like. See Same and
Pathos. Der. home@opath-ic, -ist.


HOMOGENEOUS, of the same kind or nature throughout.
(Gk.) ‘ Homogeneal, of one or the same kind, congenerous;’ Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. ‘Of homogeneous things;’ State Trials, Earl of
Strafford, an. 1640 (R.). Englished from Gk. éyoyevns, of the same
race.—Gk. dpo-, for duds, cognate with E. same; and -yévos, race,
cognate with E. kin. See Same and Kin. Der. homogeneous-ness.

HOMOLOGOUS, agreeing, corresponding. (Gk.) ‘Homolo-
ae 2,


~ 246


HOMONYMOUS


gous, having the same reason or proportion ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.
Englished from Gk. dpéAoyos, agreeing, lit. saying the same. —Gk.
épyo-, for duds, cognate with E. same; and Adyos, a saying, from
Aéyeww, to say. See Same and Logic. Der. so also homology,
agreement, from Gk. duoAoyia.

HOMONYMOUS, like in sound, but differing in sense. (L.—
Gk.) Applied towords. In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. — L.homonym-us,
of the same name ; with suffix -ows.— Gk. dumvvpos, having the same
name,—Gk. 6o-, for duds, cognate with E. same; and dvupa, Afolic
form of dvoya, a name, cognate with E. zame. See Same and
Name. The Gk. wis due to the double o. Der. homonymous-ly ;
also homonym, sb., from F. homonyme, ‘a word of divers significa-
tions ;’ Cot. Hence homonym-y. @ Similarly we have homo-phonous,
like-sounding; from Gk. ¢wvj, a voice, sound.

HONE, a stone for sharpening various implements. (E.) ‘ Hoone,
barbarys instrument, cos ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 245. AS. han, a hone,
but only found in the sense of ‘stone ;’ as in ‘to pé&re hane;’ Birch,
Cart. Saxon. ii. 458; whence the derived verb h#nan, to stone, John,
x. 32.4 cel. hein, a hone; Swed. hen, a hone (Widegren); MDan. hen.
Teut. type *haind, f. Cf. Skt. ¢¢, to sharpen. Brugmann, i. § 200.

HONEST, honourable, frank, just. (F.—L.) ME. honest, fre-
quently in the sense of ‘honourable ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 246; honeste,
King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 158. = OF. honeste (Littré) ; later honneste,
‘honest, good, virtuous,’ Cot.; mod. F. honnéte. = L. honestus, honour-
able; for hones-tus, related to L. konos, honour. See Honour. Der.
honest-ly ; honest-y, ME. honestee, Chaucer, C. T. 6849 (D 1267), from
OF. honestet (Ste. Eulalie, 1. 18), from L. acc. honestatem, from nom,
honestas, honourableness.

HONEY, a fluid collected by bees from plants. (E.) ME. hony,
Rob. of Glouc., p. 43, 1. 1013; P. Plowman, B. xv. 56; huni, Ancren
Riwle, p. 404. AS. hunig, Mark, i. 6.4-Du. honig; Icel. hunang ;
Dan. honning; Swed. honing; G. honig, MHG. honec, OHG. honang.
Teut. type *huna(n)gom, neut. Allied to Gk. «vnxds, pale yellow,
Skt. kanaka-m, gold. Der. honey-bag, Mid. Nt. Dr. iii. 1. 171;
honey-bee, Hen. V, i. 2. 187; honey-comb, q.v.; honey-dew, Titus, iii.
1.112; honey-ed, Hen. V,i. 1.50; honey-moon, ‘the first sweet month
of matrimony,’ Kersey, ed. 1715 ; honey-mouthed, Wint. Ta. ii. 2. 33;
honey-suckle, q.v. ; honey-tongued, L. L. L. v. 2. 334.

HONEYCOMB, a mass of cells in which bees store honey.
(E.) ME. honycomb, Chaucer, C. T. 3698. AS. hunig-camb; Bos-
worth, Lye.— AS. hunig, honey; andcamb,a comb. See Honey and
Comb. @ The likeness to a comb is fanciful, but there isno doubt
about the word. It seems peculiar to E.; cf. G. honig-scheibe=a
‘shive’ or slice of honey, a honey-comb; Swed. honingskaka, Dan.
honningkage (honey-cake) ; Icel. hunangsseimr (honey-string) ; Du.
honigraat (honey-mass). Der. honeycomb-ed.

HONEY-MOON, the first month after marriage. (E.)
Wedded love was compared to the full moon, that soon wanes;
Huloet, 1552. See N.E.D. There was at first no reference to the
period of a month.

HONEYSUCKIHE, the name of a plant. (E.) So named
because honey can be easily suckled or sucked from it. ME. honysocle,
Prompt. Parv. p. 245; also humnisuccles, Voc. 558. 15. Extended
from AS. huni(g)suce, Voc. 298. 23. See Honey, Suckle.

HONOUR, respect, excellence, mark of esteem, worth. (F.—L.)
In early use. ME. honour, Chaucer, C. T. 46; earlier honure, Laya-
mon, 6084 (later text). The verb honowrenisin Rob. of Glouc., p. 14,
1. 16; 1. 325.—AF. honur; OF. honur, honeur.=—L. honodrem, acc. of
honos, honor, honour. Der. honour, v., honour-able, Chaucer, C. T.
12574 (C 640); honour-abl-y, honour-able-ness, honour-ed, honour-
less; honor-ar-y, used by Addison (Todd), from L. honordarius ; also
honest, q.v. @ The spelling honor assumes that the word is from the
L. nominative, which is not the case. But it is now more phonetic.

HOOD, a covering, esp. for the head. (E.) ME. hood, Chaucer,
C. T. 195; P. Plowman, B.v. 329; hod, Ancren Riwle, p. 56. AS.
hod, a hood; Voc. 199. 18; spelt hood, Epinal Gloss. 239.-4-Du.
hoed, a hat; Pomeran. hdd, hood, a hat; G. hut, OHG. huot, hot,
ahat. . Allied to E. heed; cf. G. hiiten, to protect. Also to Hat.
Der. hood-ed ; hood-man-blind, Hamlet, iii. 4.77 ; hood-wink, Romeo,
i. 4. 4, lit. to make one wink or close his eyes, by covering him with
a hood.

-HOOD, -HEAD, suffix. (E.) AS. had, state, quality ; cognate
with Goth. haidus, manner, way; and Skt. kétu(s), a sign by which
a thing is known, from fit, to perceive, know (Vedic). Brugmann,
ii. § 104. The form -head (as in God-head) may be compared with
the OF ries. héd, héde, OSax. hed, cognate with AS. hdd.

HOOF, the horny growth which sheathes the feet of horses, &c.
(E.) ME. hoof, huf; dat. sing. hufe, Prick of Conscience, 4179; pl.
koves, Gawayn and the Grene Knight, 459. AS. hdf, to translate
L. ungula ; Wright’s Vocab. i. 43. col. 2, 71. col. 2 (Voc. 158. 20).
+Du. hoe’; Icel. hafr ; Dan. hov; Swed. hof; G. huf. Teut. type


HOP


*hofoz,m. Allied to Skt. gapha-s, a hoof, esp.a horse’s hoof. Der.
hoof-ed, hoof-less.

HOOK, a bent piece of metal, &c. (E.) ME. hok, Havelok, 11025
pl. hokes, P. Plowman, B. v. 603. AS.hdc, AElfric’s Homilies, i. 362;
also hooc ; ‘ Arpago, vel palum, hooc;’ Wright’s Vocab., i. 16, col. 2.
+Du. hoek; also (with a-grade), Du. haak; Icel. khaki, Dan. hage,
Swed. hake, a hook, clasp, hinge, G. haken, a hook, clasp, AS. haca,
a hook. See Hake. Der. hook, v.; hook-ed, ME. hoked, P. Plow-
man, B. prol. 53; hook-er ; hook-nosed, 2 Hen. IV, iv. 3. 45; also
arquebus, q.v. 4 Hence ‘by hook or by crook ;’ Spenser, F. Q.


Veloce

HOOKAH, HOOKA, a kind of pipe for smoking. (Arab.)
‘Divine in hookas, glorious in a pipe;’ Byron, The Island, c. ii. st.
19. — Arab. hugga(h), a casket, bowl, a pipe for smoking ; properly,.
the bottle through which the fumes pass. Cf. Arab. iugg, a hollow
place. Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 201; Rich. Dict. p. 575.

HOOP (1), a pliant strip of wood or metal bent into a band. (E.)
ME. hoop, hope, hoope. ‘ Hoope, hope, cuneus, circulus ;’ Prompt.
Pary. p. 245. ‘Hic circulus, a hope;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 276, col. 1.
AS. hop, a hoop ; rare, but found in Holy Rood, ed. Napier, p. 22,
l.9,and 1.14; p. 24, 1. 6.4-Du. hoep,ahoop. Teut. type *hopoz, m.
Der. hoop, verb ; hoop-er.

HOOP (2), WHOOP, to call out, shont. (F.—Teut.) Whoopis
a late spelling ; as in Spenser, F. Q. vi. 8. 11; and Palsgrave has:
‘I whoope, I call, je huppe.” ME. houpen, to call out; Chaucer, C. T.
15406 (B 4590); P. Plowman, B, vi. 174.— OF. houper, ‘ to hoop unto,
or call afar off;’ Cot. Of imitative origin; from F. houp! interj.
used in calling to dogs (Hatzfeld); cf. Goth. hwdpan, to boast;
Romans, xi. 18. Doublet, whoop; see Whoop; and cf. Hoot.
Der. hoop-ing-cough, a cough, accompanied with a hoop or convulsive
noisy inspiration; formerly called the chincough. See Chinecough.
@ Also spelt whooping-cough, but this makes no real difference.

HOOPOBKG, the name of a bird. (L.) a. The old name for the bird
was houpe or hoope, as in Minsheu’s Dict., ed. 1627; spelt houpe in
1580 (N.E.D.). This is the F. form; from F. huppe, OF. hupe,
huppe; spelt huppe in Philip de Thaun, The Bestiary, 1. 1263, pr.
in Wright’s Popular Treatises on Science, p. 119. B. Also called
hoopoop in 1668 (N. E. D.), in imitation of the L.name. Cf. also OF.
pupu, a hoopoe ; Low G. huppupp (Danneil). All from L. upupa, a
hoopoe ; the initial kin the mod. E. form being borrowed from the &
inthe F. form. y. Called émoy in Greek ; both L. wp-up-a and Gk.
én-oy are words of onomatopoetic origin, due to an imitation of the
bird’s cry. 4 The bird has a remarkable tuft on its head ; hence F.
huppe, a tuft of feathers. But the tuft is named from the bird; not
vice versa.

HOOT, to shout in derision. (Scand.) ME. houten, whence the
PP: yhouted, yhowted=hooted at; P. Plowman, B. ii. 218 ; also huten,
Ormulum, 2034. Of Scand. origin; the original being preserved in
MSwed. huta, in the phrase huta ut en, lit. to hoot one out, to cast out
with contempt, as one woulda dog (Ihre) ; Swed. huta ut, to take one
up sharply; Norw. hkuta, to shout, hut (with @), a cry toa dog
(Aasen). Hence also Norm. dial. houter, as a variant of houper, to
whoop. B. Formed from the Swed. interj. hut, begone! a word of
imitative origin; cf. Norw. hit (above), W. hawd#, off! away! Irish w#,
out! psha! Gael. ut! ut! interjection of dislike. So also MHG.
hiuzen, huizen, to call to the pursuit, from the interjection hkiz (mod.
G. hui), hallo! So also Dan. huje, to shout, hoot, halloo, from hui,
hallo! OF. kuer, to shout. The regular modern form would be
hout, but the expressive % has been preserved. Der. hoot, sb.; cf.
hue, in the phrase hue and cry; see Hue (2).

HOP (1), to leap on one leg. (E.) Formerly used of dancing on
both legs. ME. hoppen, huppen. ‘At every bridal wolde he singe
and hoppe,’ i.e. dance; Chaucer, C. T. 4373 (A 4375). ‘To huppe
abowte’=to dance about, P. Plowman, C. xviii. 279. AS. hoppian,
to leap, dance; Atlfric’s Homilies, i. 202, 1. 18.4+Du. hoppen, to hop ;
Icel. hoppa, to hop, skip; Swed. hoppa, to leap, jump, hop; Dan.
hoppe (the same); cf. G. hiipfen (thesame). Teut. type *huppojan-,
from Idg. base *gup-n-; allied to Russ. kipiete, to boil. Brugmann, i.
§ 421 (7). Der. hop, sb. (we still sometimes use hop in the old sense
of ‘a dance’) ; hopp-er (of a mill), ME. hoper or hopper, Chaucer,
C. T. 4034 (A 4036) ; hop-scotch, a game in which children hop over~
lines scotched or traced on the ground (see Scotch) ; hopp-le, a fetter
for horses, causing them to hop or progress slowly, a frequentative
form. Also hobb-le (=hopp-le); see Hobble. Also grass-hopper,


q.v.

HOP (2), the name of a plant. (Du.) In Cotgrave, to translate
MF. houbelon (=F. houblon). Also in Minsheu’s Dict., ed. 1627.
‘ Hoppe, humulus, lupulus ;’ Levins, ed. 1570. ‘Hoppes in biere’
[beer]; Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. 11. c. 21. The pl. hoppis
occurs as early as 1502, in Arnold’s Chron. ; ed. 1811, pp. 236, 246;
and hops are frequently mentioned in the Northumberland Household-.


HOPE


book, 1512. ‘ Hoppe, sede for beyre(v.r. bere), Hummulus, secundum
extraneos ;” (i.e. it isa foreign word) ; Prompt. Parv. (1440). —MDu.
hoppe (Franck), Du. hop, the hop-plant.+-G. hopfen, the hop. _ B. We
also find AS. hymele, Icel. humall, Swed., Dan. humle, MDu. hommel,
the hop (Kilian); whence the Late L. humulus, now used as the
botanical name. [The F. koublon is of Walloon origin, and ultimately
from the Dutch.] But these can hardly be related words. J An
old note of the word occurs inan Old Westphalian gloss. : ‘ volubilis
major, hoppe;’ Mone, Quellen, p. 292. Cf. O. Low.G. hoppo, hupo,
the hop (Gallée). Dr. E. Scott writes :—‘ One of the Westminster
‘Abbey documents, temp. Henry I or late 11th century, begins—
“Hee est firma... ad panem vj. cumbas. .. xx hopis de brasio.”’
Der. hop-vine, hop-bind (corruptly hop-bine).

. HOPS (1), expectation; as a verb, to expect. (E.) The verb is
-weak, and seems to be derived from the sb. ME. hope,sb., Chaucer,
C. T. 88. ME. hopen, verb,.sometimes in the sense ‘ to expect ;’ as,
‘Our manciple, I hope he wil be deed’=I fear he will be dead;
Chaucer, C. T. 4027 (A 4029). See P. Plowman, C. xviii. 313, and
the note. AS. hopa, sb., in Ailfric’s Hom. i. 350, 1. 24; i. 568,1.8;
, also used in the comp. ¢dhopa, hope, Grein, 11. 545 ; hopian, v. to hope,
‘Grein, ii. 96.-4-Du. hoop, sb., hopen, v.; Dan. haab, sb., haabe, v.;
Swed. hopp, sb., whence the reflexive verb hoppas, to hope; MHG.
hoffe, sb., represented by mod. G. hoffnung ; G. hoffen,to hope. Der.
hope-ful, hope-ful-ly, hope-ful-ness ; hope-less, -ly, -ness.

HOPE (2), a troop. (Du.) Only in the phr. forlorn hope, North’s
Plutarch, ed. 163Y, p. 372. The phr. also occursin An Eng. Garner,
vii. 128, where Sir F. Vere describes the battle of Nieuwport (S.W. of
Ostend) in the year 1600 ; here it is at once connected with Du. ver-
loren hoop; see Forlorn. Here hoop=band, troop, as in ‘ een hoop
krijghs-volck, a troupe or a band of souldiers;’ Hexham. Cf. verloren
hoop (Kilian). It is now obsolete in Dutch. The usual sense of
Du. hoop is heap; see Heap.

HOPLITH, a heavy-armed foot-soldier. (Gk.) Modern.. From
Gk. émAitns, a hoplite.=Gk. émA-ov, a weapon, piece of armour;
with suffix -.77s (E. -ite) ; allied to 6tAopa:, I prepare for myself, and
to émw, 1 am busy with (Prellwitz).

HOPPULE, to fetter a horse, &c. (E.) ‘To hopple an horse, to
tye his feet with a rope;’ Kersey (1721); andin Coles (1684). Lit.
to make to hopple, or hobble; see E.D.D. Cf. MDu. hoppelen, to
hobble; see Hobble, and Hop.

HORDE, a wandering troop or tribe. (F.—Turk.—Tatar.) Spelt
hoord in Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p. 61; and in Hakluyt,
Voy. i. 491.=F. horde, first in use in the 16th century (Littré). =
Turk. urdu, a camp (Zenker, p. 117); cf. Pers. drdu,.‘a coutt,
camp, horde of Tartars;’ also urdii, a camp, an army; Rich. Pers.
Dict., pp. 56, 201.—Tatar iirdu, a royal camp, horde of Tatars
(Tartars); see Pavet de la Courteille, p. 54. First applied to the
‘Tatar tribes.

HORDOCK:;; see Hardock.

HOREHOUND, a plant; see Hoarhound.

HORIZON, the circle bounding the view where earth and sky
seem to meet. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. 3 Hen. VI, iv. 7. 81. [But
we also find ME. orizonte, Chaucer, Treatise on the Astrolabe,
prol. 1.7. This is (through the OF.) from the L. acc. horizontem. |
=F. horizon, ‘a horizon ;’ Cot.—L. horizén (stem horizont-). —Gk.
épi(wv, the bounding or limiting circle; orig, the pres. pt. of the vb.
épicew, to bound, limit. = Gk. pos, a boundary, limit; perhaps allied
to Gk. €pxos, an enclosure (Prellwitz). Der. horizont-al, horizont-al-ly.

HORN, the hard substance projecting from the heads of some
animals. (E.) ME. horn, Chaucer, C. T. 116. AS. horn, Grein,
ii. 98. 4 Icel., Dan., and Swed. horn; Du. horen [for horn, the e being
due to the trilling of the r]; G. horn; Goth. haurn. Teut. type
*hornom, n. + W., Gael., and Irish corn; L. cornu. B. The Celtic
forms are from the Idg. base *kor-no-; Stokes-Fick, p. 79. Further
allied to Gk. xép-as,ahorn; andto Hart. Der. horn-beam, a tree;
horn-bill, a bird; horn-blende, a mineral term, wholly borrowed from
G. horn-blende, where -blende, i.e. a ‘ deceitful’? mineral, yielding little
ore, is from blenden, to dazzle, lit. to make blind; horn-book, L. L. L.
v.1. 49; horn-ed, Mids. Nt. Dr. v. 243, spelt hornyd in Prompt. Parv.
Pp. 247; horn-owl or horn-ed owl; horn-pipe, Wint. Tale, iv. 3. 47,
a dance so called because danced to an instrument with that name,
mentioned in the Rom. of the Rose, 42503; horn-stone; horn-work,
a term in fortification, named from its projections ; horn-less ; horn-y,
Milton, P. R. ii. 267; also horn-et, q.v. From the same source are
corn (2), corn-er, corn-et, 8«C.

HORNET, a kind of large wasp. (E.) So called from its
resounding hum. In Holland’s Pliny, b. xi. c.:21. AS. hyrnet,
hyrnetu ; the pl. kyrnytta occurs in Exod. xxiii. 28. ‘Crabro, hyrnet ;’
4Elfric’s Gloss., De Nominibus Insectorum. Formed, with suffix -et,
from horn, a horn, by regular vowel-change; cf. hyrned=horned,
Grein, ii. 133. The vowel has, however, reverted in mod. E. to the


HORSE-COURSER, HORSE-SCORSER 277


original 0, for clearness. See Horn.+EFries. hérnetje; Westphal.
horntje; LowG. horneke (Schambach). Cf. OSax. horno-bero, a hornet,
lit. a ‘horn-bearer;’” AS. horn-bera,a trumpeter. Hexham has MDu.
horener, hornte, a hornet, horentoren, a wasp; from horen, a horn.
q It is curious that G. hornisse, OHG. hornaz (without vowel-change)
is referred to a Teut. type *hurznatoz (cf. Du. horz-elen, to buzz), allied
to L. crabro (for *cras-ro), a hornet, Lith. szirszeé (gen. szirsz-ens),
a hornet ; lit. ‘a buzzer ;” see Brugmann, i. § 626.

HOROLOGE, an instrument for telling the hours, a clock.
(F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Oth. ii. 3. 135. Nearly obsolete. ME.
orloge, Chaucer, C. T. 14860 (B 4044).—OF. horologe, horloge;
‘Horloge, a clock or dyall ;’ Cot.=L. kérologium, a sun-dial, a water-
clock, = Gk. @poddyiov, the same. = Gk. wpo-, for pa, a season, period,
hour ; and -Aoy.ov, formed from Aéyev, to tell. See Hour and
Logic. Der. horolog-y, horolog-i-c-al.

HOROSCOPE, an observation of the sky at a person’s nativity.
(F.—L.—Gk.) A term in astrology. In Cotgrave. [Chaucer uses
the L. term horoscopum; Treatise on the Astrolabe, ed. Skeat, pt. ii.
§ 4.] =F. horoscope, ‘the horoscope, or ascendant at a nativity ;’ Cot.
=L. horoscopus, a horoscope; from hdroscopus, adj., that shows
the hour.= Gk. wpooxédtos, a horoscope; from the adj. wpooxéros,
observing the hour. = Gk. wpo-, for @pa, season, hour; and cxomeiv,
to consider, related to oxémropa:, I consider. See Hour and
Sceptic. Der. horoscop-y, horoscop-i-c, horoscop-ist.

HORRIBLE, dreadful, fearful. (F.—L.) ME. horrible, also
written orrible, Chaucer, C. T. 4893 (B 473). = OF. horrible, ‘horrible,
terrible;’ Cot.—L. horribilis, terrible, lit. to be trembled at; formed
with suffix -bilis from horrére, to tremble, shake. See Horror.
Der. horribl-y, Chaucer, C. T. 14535 (B 3807) ; horrible-ness.

HORRID, dreadful. (L.) Directly from Latin. Spenser uses
it in the L. sense of ‘rough.’ ‘His haughty helmet, horrid all with
gold;’ F. Q.i. 7. 31.—L. horridus, rough, bristly, &c.—L. horrére,
to be rongh. See Horror. Der. horrid-ly, horrid-ness,

HORRIFY, to make afraid, scare. (L.) A late word; not in
Johnson. Coined, by analogy with words in -fy (mostly of F. origin),
from L. horrificare, to cause terror. = L. horrificus, causing terror. = L.
horri-, from horrére, to dread; and -fic-, for facere, to make. Der.
From L. horrificus has also been coined the adj. horrific, Thomson’s
Seasons, Autumn, 782. See Horror.

HORROR, dread, terror. (F.—L.) Formerly also spelt horrour
(Minshen), because at first taken fromthe French. Sir T. Elyot has
horrour; Castel of Helth, bk. iii. ch. 1; and so in Chaucer, C. T,
Pers. Tale (I 224). We find ‘sad horror’ in Spenser, F. Q. ii. 7. 23 ;
and horrors in Hamlet, ii. 1. 84, in the first folio edition. OF.
horrour; later horreur, ‘horror ;’ Cot.—L. horrérem, acc. of horror,
terror, dread. = L. horrére, to bristle, be rough; also, to dread, with
reference to the bristling of the hair through terror. Cf. Skt. hrsh,
to bristle, said of the hair, esp. as a token of fear or of pleasure.
Thus horrére is for *horsére (cf. L. hirsutus, rough, shaggy) ; from
4 GHERS, to be rough. Der. From L. horrére we have horrent
(from the stem of the pres. part.) ; also horri-ble, q. v., horri-d, q.V.3
horri-fy, q.v.-; and horri-fic. Cf. hirsute, urchin.

HORSE, the name of a well-known quadruped. (E.) The final
e merely marks that the s is hard, and is not to be pronounced as z.
ME. hors; pl. hors (unchanged), also hors-es, as now. Chancer,
C. T. 74, 10504 (A 74, F 190). ‘Thei sellen bothe here hors and
here harneys’=they sell both their horses and their harness ;
Mandeville’s Travels, p. 38. AS. hors, neut.; pl. hors, Grein, ii. 98.
+Icel. kross; also hors; Du. ros; G. ross, MHG. ros, ors, OHG.,
hros. B. Teut. type *horsom, n.; Idg. stem *curs-o-; prob. allied to
curs-us, pp. of L. currere, to run, whence also E. courser with the sense
of ‘horse.’ See Courser. y. This supposition is made more
probable by the fact that the same base will account for AS. horse,
swift, Grein, ii. 98; cf. MHG. rosch, swift. Brugmann, i. § 516;
ii. § 662. Der. horse, verb, Wint. Ta. i. 2. 288; horse-back, ME.
hors-bak, Gower, C. A. iii. 256; bk. vii. 1. 4908 ; horse-block, horse-
breaker, horse-fly, horse-guards ; horse-hair, Cymb. ii. 3. 33; horse-
leech, Hen. V, ii. 3. 573 horse-man, Wint. Ta. iv. 3. 67; horse-man-
ship, Hen. V, iii. 7. 58; horse-power, horse-race, horse-racing ; horse-
shoe, Merry Wives, iii. 5. 123; horse-tail, horse-trainer, horse-whip,
sb, and vb. Also numerous other compounds, as horse-bread, horse-
flesh, horse-pond, all readily understood. Also horse-chestnut, said to
be so called because the nuts were ground and given to horses; the
word also occurs in several plant-names, as horse-foot, horse-knop,
horse-radish, horse-tail, horse-thistle, horse-tongue, horse-vetch, Also
wal-rus,

HORSE-COURSER, HORSE-SCORSER, a jobbing
dealer in horses. (Hybrid; E. and F.—L.) The latter form is


‘corrupt ; see examples in Nares, s. v. Horse-courser, Scorse. And


courser is for cosser, coser; ‘Hic mango, a cosyr;’ Voc. 684. 40
And cf. Gloss. to Elyot’s Governour, ed. Croft, s.v. Skocer. From


278 HORTATORY


AF. cossour (1310), a broker, in Riley, Mem. of London, p. xxii. =
Late L. cdciatorem, acc. of cdciator, a broker (Duc.). Cf. L. cécio,
a broker. See my Notes on E. Etym., p. 136.

HORTATORY, full of encouragement. (L.) ‘He animated his
soldiers with many horéatorie orations ;’ Holland, Ammianus, p. 202
(R.). Formed as if from L. *hortatorius, a coined word from hortdtor,
an encourager.=L. horta-, as in hortari, to encourage; prob. con-
nected with horiri (pres. tense horior), to urge, incite. Perhaps allied
to E. yearn (Prellwitz, s.v. xalpw). Der. So also horéative (Minsheu),
a better form, from L. hortatiuus, encouraging ; also ex-hort, q.v.

HORTICULTURE, the art of cultivating gardens, gardening.
(L.) First in Phillips, ed. 1678. From L. horti, gen. of hortus,
a garden ; and culture, Englished form of L. cultira, cultivation.
See Culture. L. hortus is allied to E. yard; see Yard (1). Der.
horticultur-al, horticultur-ist.

HOSANNA, an expression of praise. (Gk.—Heb.) In Matt.
xxi.g,15; &c. It is rather a form of prayer, as it signifies ‘save, we
pray.’=— Gk. woavva, Matt. xxi. 9.— Heb. hoshi'ah nna, save, we pray ;
Ps. cxviii. 25.— Heb. hishia‘, save, from yasha‘, to save; and na, a
particle signifying entreaty.

HOSE, a covering for the legs and feet; stockings. (E.) ME.
hose, pl. hosen ; Chaucer, C. T. 458 (A 456); Ancren Riwle, p. 420.
AS. hosa, pl. hosan; ‘Caliga vel ocrea, hosa;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 81,
col. 2 (Voc. 327. 29). + Du. hoos, hose, stocking, spout, water-spout ;
Icel. hosa, the hose covering the leg between the knee and ankle,
a kind of gaiter; Dan. hose, pl. koser, hose, stockings; G. hose,
breeches (whence OF. hose). Perhaps cf. Skt. kdska-s, a sheath.
Der. hos-i-er, where the inserted 7 answers to the y in law-y-er,
bow-y-er ; hos-i-er-y.

HOSPICH, a house for the reception of travellers as guests.
(F.—L.) Modern; chiefly used of such houses in the Alps.—F.
hospice, a hospice. = L. hospitium, a hospice. = L. hospiti-, decl. stem
of hospes, a guest; also, a host. See Host (1), Hospital.

HOSPIT ABLE, showing kindness to strangers. (F.—L.) In
K. John, ii. 244; Cor. i. 10, 26.—F. hospitable, ‘hospitable ;’ Cot.
Coined, with suffix -able, from Late L. hospitdre, to receive as a guest ;
Ducange. — L. hospit-, stem of hospes, a guest, host. See Host (1).
Der. hospitabl-y, hospitable-ness,

HOSPITAL, a building for receiving guests; hence, one for
receiving sick people. (F.—L.) ME. hospital, hospitalle ; Mandeville’s
Travels, ed. Halliwell, p. 81; hospytal, Eng. Gilds, ed. T. Smith,
p- 350, |. 25.—OF. hospital, ‘an hospitall, a spittle ;’ Cot. Late L.
hospitale, a large house, palace, which occurs A.D. 1243 (Brachet) ;
a sing. formed from L. pl. hospitalia, apartments for strangers. = L.
hospit-, stem of hospes; see Host (1). Der. hospitall-er, ME.
hospitalier, Chaucer, C. T. Persones Tale, De Luxuria (I 891);
hospital-i-ty, ME. hospitalité, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 96. Doub-
lets, hostel, hotel, spital.

HOST (1), one who entertains guests. (F.—L.) ME. host, hoste,
Chaucer, C. T. 749 (A 747).—OF. hoste, ‘an hoste, inn-keeper ;’
Cot. Cf. Port. hospede, a host, a guest. L. hospitem, acc. of hospes,
(1) a host, entertainer of guests, (2) a guest. B. The base hospzt- is
commonly taken to be short for *hosti-pot-, where hosti- is the decl.
stem of hostis, a stranger, a guest, an enemy; see Host (2). Again,
the stem -fof- is supposed to have meant ‘lord,’ being allied to L.
pot-ens, powerful; cf. Skt. pati-, a master, governor, lord; see
Possible, y. Thus hospes=*hostipotis, guest-master, a master of
a house who receives guests. Cf. Russ. gospode, the Lord, gospodare,
governor, prince; from goste,a guest, and -pode=Skt. pati-, a lord.
Brugmann, i. § 240. Der. host-ess, from OF. hostesse, ‘an hostesse,’
Cot. ; also host-el, q. v., host-ler, q. v., hotel, q.v-; and from the same
source, hospital, q.v., hospice, q. V., hospitable, q. Vv.

HOST (2), an army. (F.—L.) The orig. sense is ‘enemy’ or
‘foreigner.’ ME. host, Chaucer, C. T. 1028 (A 1026); frequently
spelt ost, Will. of Palerne, 1127, 1197, 3767; Cursor Mundi, 6160. —
OF. host, ‘an host, or army, a troop;’ Cot.—L. hostem, acc. of hos-
tis, a Stranger, an enemy; hence, a hostile army, host. + Russ. goste,
a guest, visitor, stranger, alien; AS. gest; see Guest. Der. host-ile,
Cor. iii. 3. 97, from F. hostile, which from L. hostilis; host-ile-ly ;
host-il-i-ty, K. John, iv. 2. 247, from F. hostilité, which from L. acc.
hostilitatem. Doublet, guest.

HOST (3), the consecrated bread of the eucharist. (L.) ‘In as
many hoostes as be consecrate ;’ Bp. Gardner, Of the Presence in the
Sacrament, fol, 35 (R.). And in Holland’s Plutarch, p. 1097 (R.).
ME. oste, Rob. of Brunne, Handlyng Synne, 1. 8849. Coined by
dropping the final syllables of L. hostia, a victim in a sacrifice; after-
wards applied to the host in the eucharist. B. The old form of
hostia was fostia (Festus), and it signified ‘that which is struck or
slain.’ = L. hostire (old form fostzre), to strike.

HOSTAGE, a person delivered to the enemy as a pledge for the
performance of the conditions of a treaty. (F.—L.) In early use.


A
ae
Saas a


HOUGH, HOCK


ME. hostage, Layamon, 4793, 8905 (later text only). —OF. hostage,
‘an hostage, pawne, surety,’ Cot.; mod. F. o¢age. Cf. Ital. ostaggio;
OProv. ostatge, Bartsch, Chrestomathie Prov. col. 173, 1. 18. Per-
haps from a Late L. *obsidaticum, acc. of *obsidaticus, not found, yet
preserved also in Ital. statico, a hostage, and regularly formed from
Late L. obsidatus, the condition of a hostage, hostage-ship. Obsidatus
is formed (by analogy with principatus from princip-, stem of princeps)
from L. obsid-, stem of obses, a hostage, one who remains behind with
the enemy.=L. obsidére, to sit, stay, abide, remain. —L. ob, at, on,
about ; and sedére, to sit, cognate with E. sit. See Sit. 4 Another
explanation is from a Late L. form *hospitaticum, a receiving as a
guest; from L. hospit-, for hospes, a host; see Host (1). So Korting.
The words may have been confused.

HOSTEL, an inn. (F.—L.) Now commonly hofel, q.v. ME.
hostel, Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1397; Sir Gawayn and the
Grene Knight, 805.—OF. hostel, aninn. Regularly contracted from
Late L. hospitale; see Hospital. Doublets, hotel, hospital, spitai.
Der. hostel-ry, ME. hostelrie, Chaucer, C. T. 23; hoséler, q.v.

HOSTLER, OSTLER, a man who takes care of horses at an
inn. (F.—L.) ‘ Hosé’ler, the horse-groom, but properly the keeper of
an hostelry;’ Coles, ed. 1684. Orig. the inn-keeper himself, and so
named from his hostel. ME. hostiler, Chaucer, C. T. 241.—OF.
hostelier, ‘an inn-keeper;’ Cot.—OF. hostel; see Hostel.

HOT, very warm, fiery, ardent. (E.) The vowel was formerly
long. ME. hot, hoot, Chaucer, C. T. 687. ‘Nether cold, nether
hoot ;” Wyclif, Rev. iii. 16. AS. kat, hot; Grein, ii. 15.4-Du. heet;
Icel. heitr; Swed. het; Dan. hed; G. heiss, OHG. heiz. Teut. type
*haitoz. The weak grade *hit- appears in Icel. hiti, heat, G. hitze.
Cf. also Goth. hats, a torch, heitd, fever; Lithuan, kaitra, heat.
Der. hot-bed; hot-blooded, Merry Wives, v. 5. 2; hot-headed; hot-
house, Meas. ii. 1. 66; hot-ly, hot-spur. Also heat, q.v.

HOTCH-POT, HODGE-PODGE, a farrago, confused mass.
(F.—Du.) Hodge-podge is’a mere corruption ; the old term is hotch-
pot. The intermediate form hotch-potch is in Sir T. Herbert’s Travels,
ed. 1665, p. 336. ‘A hotchpot, or mingle-mangle;’ Minsheu. ‘An
hotchpotte, incisium;”’ Levins. ‘A hotchepotte of many meates;’
Palsgrave. ME. hochepot, Chaucer, Tale of Melibeus, C. T. B 2447.
=F. hochepot, ‘a hotch-pot, or gallimaufrey, a confused mingle-
mangle of divers things jumbled or put together ;’? Cot. Cf. F. hocher,
‘to shake, wag, jog, nob, nod;’ id.=MDu. hutsepot (Hexham) ;
hutspot, ‘hodge-podge, beef or mutton cut into small pieces ;’
Sewel. So called from shaking or jumbling pieces of meat in a pot.
=MDu. huts-, base of hutsen, to shake, jolt (Qudemans); and Du.
pot, a pot. From hutsen was also formed the frequentative verb hut-
selen, ‘to shake up and down, either in a tub, bowl, or basket ;”
Sewel. The verb hutsex was also spelt hotsen (Sewel), which comes
still closer to the French; so also EFries. hotjen, hutjen, to shake up.
Cf. WFlem. hotteren, to shake up (De Bo). See Hustle and Pot.

HOTEL, an inn, esp. of a large kind. (F.—L.) A modern word ;
borrowed from mod. F’. hétel= OF. hostel. See Hostel.

HOTTENTOT, a native of the Cape of Good Hope. (Du.) The
word is traced in Wedgwood, who shows that the Dutch gave the
natives this name in ridicule of their peculiar speech, which sounded
to them like stuttering. He cites the word from Schouten (1653).
En is Dutch for ‘and;’ hence hot ex tot=‘hot’ and ‘tot;’ where
these words indicate stammering. Cf. hateren, to stammer, éateraer,
a stammerer, in Hexham’s Du. Dict., 1647; tateren to tattle (Sewel) ;
Pomeran. hiitentiit, a quack (a derisive name). See also Phil. Soc,
Trans. 1866; p. 15.

HOUDAH, HOWDAH, a seat to be fixed upon an elephant’s
back. (Hind.— Arab.) Used in works of travel; and in The Sur-
geon’s Daughter, c. xiv. by Sir W. Scott. — Hind. haudah (Forbes). =
Atab. hawdaj, a litter carried by a camel, in which Arabian ladies
travel; a seat to place on an elephant’s back; Rich. Dict. p. 1694 3
Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 709. (See Yule.)

HOUGH, HOCK, the joint in the hind-leg of a quadruped, be-
tween the knee and fetlock, corresponding to the ankle-joint in man ;
in man, the back part of the knee-joint. (E.) Now generally spelt
hock; but formerly hough. ‘Unto the camel's hough;’ 2 Esdras,
xv, 36 (A.V.). Cotgrave translates F. jarret by ‘the hamme, or
hough.’ ME. houch, Wallace, ed. Jamieson, i. 322. The pl. hoes
occurs in Sir Gawayn and the Grene Knight, 1. 1357. AS. koh, the
heel; Grein, ii. 92.4-Icel. Aa-, in the comp. hasimn =hock-sinew.
Teut. type *kanhoz. The E. heel is related; see Heel. B. Hock is
a later form; and may have arisen in the comp. ‘ hough-sinew,’ spelt
hohsinu in AS., and hoxene, howne in OFriesic. (AS. ks>x.) See G.
hechse (in Kluge); and see Hox, Allied to L. coxa, the hip; Skt.
kaksha-s, the arm-pit. Der. hough, verb, to cut the ham-string of
a horse, Josh. xi. 6, 2 Sam, viii. 4; often altered to hor, sometimes
spelt hocks; see Shak. Wint. Ta. i. 2. 244; howe, Wyclif, Josh. xi. 6
(later version),


HOUND


“HOUND, a dog. (E.) ME. hound, hund; P. Plowman, B. v. 261;
Havelok, 1994. AS. hund, Matt. vii. 6; Du. hond; Icel. hundr;
Dan. and Swed. hund; G. hund; Goth. hunds. Teut. type *hundoz,
m. Further allied to L. can-is, a dog, Gk. xudy (genitive «uv-ds),
Skt. gvan, a dog; also Irish cuz, Gael. cu, W. cit, a dog; Russ. suka,
a bitch; Lith. szz (stem szun-), a dog. Brugmann,i. § 609, The
final d may have been suggested by confusion with Teut. *henthan-,
to catch, See Hunt. Der. hound, verb, in Otway, Caius Marius,
Act iv. sc. 2 (R.); hound-fish, Chaucer, C. T. 9699 (E1825); hound’s-
tongue.

HOUR, a certain definite space of time. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
houre, Chaucer, C. T. 14733 (B 3613).—AF. houre, Statutes of the
Realm, p. 30 (1275); OF. hore (mod. F. heure).—L. hora.— Gk. wpa,
a season, hour; cf. @pos, a season, a year. Allied to year. See
Year. Der. hour-ly, adj. Temp. iv. 108, adv. Temp. i. 2. 402;
hour-glass, Merch. of Ven. i. 1. 253; hour-plate. Also (from L. hora)
hor-ar-y, Blount’s Gloss., ed. 16743; hor-al, Prior, Alma, c. 3. Also
horo-loge, horo-scope, which see.

HOURI, anymphofParadise. (F.—Pers.— Arab.) ‘With Paradise
within my view And all his houris beckoning through ;? Byron, The
Giaour; see note 39 to that poem. Also in Dr. Johnson’s Irene, iv.
5. 10,—F, houri.— Pers. hiir?, a virgin of Paradise; hard, hur, a virgin
of Paradise, a black-eyed nymph ; so called from their fine black eyes.
— Arab. hur, pl. of Arab. hawrd, fem. of akwar, having fine. black
eyes; Rich. Arab. Dict. pp. 585, 33; Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 206.
= Arab. root hawira, to be black-eyed like a doe. (Devic.)

HOUSE, a dwelling-place; a family. (E.) ME. hous, Chaucer,
C. T. 252. AS. his, Matt. xii. 25.4-Du. huis; Icel. hits; Dan. huus ;
Swed. hus; Goth. -hus, in the comp. gud-hus, a house of God;
G. haus, OHG. his. Teut. type *hisom, n. B. Probably allied
to Hoard, and Hide (1). From 4/ KEUDH, to hide. Brugm. i.
§ 796. Der. house, verb, now ‘to provide a house for,’ as in Gower,
C. A. iii. 18 (bk. vi. 498), but the ME. house also meant ‘to build
a house,’ as in Rob. of Glouc. p. 21, l. 13 (cf. ‘ howsyz, or puttyn yn
a howse, domifero;’ ‘howsyn, or makyn howsys, domifico;’ Prompt.
Parv. p. 251); house-breaker, house-breaking ; house-hold, ME. hous-
hold, Chaucer, C. T. 5681 (D 99), so called because held together in
one house; house-hold-er, ME. housholder, Chaucer, C. T. 341;
house-keeper, Cor. i. 3. 55, Macb. iii. 1. 975 house-keeping, L. L. L.
ll. 1043 house-leek, ME. hows-leke, Prompt. Parv. p. 2513 house-less,
K. Lear, iii. 4. 26; house-maid, house-steward, house-warming, house-
wife, spelt husewif, Ancren Riwle, p. 416, also hosewijf or huswij/,
Wyclif, 3 Kings, xvii. 17, and frequently huswife, as in Shak. Cor. i.
3. 76, Romeo, iv. 2. 433; house-wife-ry, or hus-wife-ry, Oth. ii. 1. 113,
with which cf. ‘huswyfery, yconomia;’ Prompt. Pary. See also
Husband, Hussy, Hustings, Hoard.

HOUSKHL, the eucharist or sacrament of the Lord’s Supper. (E.)
The orig. sense is ‘sacrifice. ME. howsel, Rom. of the Rose, 6386;
P. Plowman, C. xxii. 394. AS. hiisel (for *hunsel), the eucharist ;
Grein, ii. 112. -+ Goth. hunsl, a sacrifice, Matt. ix. 13. The orig.
sense was prob. ‘holy rite. Allied to Lith. szwentas, holy, conse-
crated; Zend spanta-, holy. Brugmann, i. § 377. Der. housel, verb,
ME. hoselen, houselen, P. Plowman, C. xxii. 3; wnhousel’d, Hamlet, i.


5: 77-

HOUSINGS, trappings of a horse. (F.—Arab.) Unconnected
with house, but probably often supposed to be related to it; the old
form was houss, the addition -ings being English. ‘The cattle used for
draught ...are covered with housings of linnen;’ Evelyn, Diary,
end of May, 1645. ‘A velvet bed of state drawn by six horses, houss’d
with the same;’ Evelyn, Diary, Oct. 22,1658. ‘Spread on his back,
the houss and trappings of a beast;’ Dryden, tr. of Ovid’s Metam.
b. xii, 582. “ Housse, the cloth which the king’s horseguards wear
behind the saddle; ’ Coles’ Dict., ed. 1684. ‘A howse of a horse;’
Cath. Angl. (1483).—OF. houce (Godefroy); F. housse, ‘a short
mantle of course cloth (and all of a peece) worn in ill weather by
country women about their head and shoulders ; also a footcloth for
a horse; also a coverlet ;’ Cot. Cf. Low L. hicia, a long tunic ;
housia, a long tunic, coverlet for a horse, also spelt hisia, hussia.
Ducange dates hicia in A.D. 1326, and hisia in A.D. 1259, so that
the word is of some antiquity. The sense is clearly ‘covering.’
B. Perhaps from OHG. hulst, a cover (Schade). + Icel. hulstr, AS.
heolstor, Goth. hulistr, a cover. From *hul-, weak grade of Teut.
*helan-, to cover, hide; cf. AS. helan, to hide, OHG. and Du. hullen,
to cover. yy. But Devic suggests as the origin Arab. yishiah, a
covering, veil (Mém. de la soc, de ling. de Paris; V. 37). Korting,
§ 4666. Cf. Arab. ghushwa(t), a veil, covering ; Rich. Dict. p. 1052.

The W. hws, a covering, is borrowed from E. howss.

OVEL, a small hut. (F.—Teut.) ME. hovel, hovil. ‘ Hovylie,
lytylle howse, Teges;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 250. ‘ Hovyl for swyne,
or oper beestys;’ ibid. Perhaps from an AF. *huvel; cf. OF.
huyelet, a penthouse (Godefroy), a double diminutive. Apparently


HUCKABACK 279


(like OF. huvet, a cap, helmet, from OF. huve, a cap, covering for
the head) from AS. hiife, a hood; cf. OHG. haba (G. haube), a
hood; MDu. huyve, a tilt of a cart, a coif (Hexham); Norw. huva,
Icel. hifa, a hood. Note prov. E. hovel, huvel, a finger-stall ; from
AS. hife. See Hive.

HOVER, to fluctuate, hang about, move toand fro. (E.) InMacb.i.
1.12. ‘Hover, to stay, wait for. ‘‘ Will you hover till I come?”’
E.D.S. Gloss. B. 22, p. 96. A frequentative, with suffix -er, of
ME. houen (=hoven), sometimes used in precisely the same sense, and.
once a common word, ‘ Onight! alas! why niltow [wilt thou not]
over us hove ;’ Chaucer, Troil. iii. 1427; also in P. Plowman, C. xxi.
83 (see the note); ‘ Where that she hoved and abode;’ Gower, C. A.
iii, 63; bk. vi. 1848; ‘He hovede and abode;’ Seven Sages, ed.
Wright, 2825 ; ‘ He houede’ =he waited, Rob. of Glouc. p. 172, 1. 12.
In the earliest examples, it had the sense of ‘hover,’ or ‘be poised.’
In the Bestiary, 1. 69, it is said of the eagle that ‘he houed in Se
sunne,’ he soars or is poised in the sunlight. The o in ME. héven
was long (N.E.D.). The origin is unknown; but if the orig. idea
was that of soaring or being lifted up, it may be related to haf, the
strong grade of AS. hebban, toheave. SeeHeave. @ The W. hofo,
to hover, to fluctuate, to suspend, was borrowed from English.

HOW (1), in what way. (E.) ME. how, hou, hu; spelt ku, Ancren
Riwle, p. 182, 1. 20; alsohwz,id., p. 256,1.10; also whow, P. Plow-
man’s Crede, 1.141. AS. hw; Grein,ii. 110.4-OF ries. hi, hd, how;
Du. hoe; Goth. hwaiwa. B. The Goth. form shows that the word is
closely related to the pronoun who, which is Goth. hwas, AS.hwda. Cf.
Gk. mws, how; and G. wie. See Who, Why. Der. how-be-it,
Hen. V, i. 2. 91, Cor. i.9. 70; how-ever, K. John, i. 173 ; how-so-ever,
Haml.i. 5. 84.

HOW (2), a hill. (Scand.) Chiefly in place-names; as Silver How,
near Grasmere. ME. how; Hampole’s Psalter mentions ‘ howys .
and hilles ;’ Ps. Ixxi. 3.—Icel. haugr, a how, mound; Swed. hog, a
heap, pile, mound; Dan. hd, a hill. Allied to E. high, Goth. hauhs.
Cf, Icel. har, Swed. hog, Dan. hoi, high; also Lithuan. kawkaras, a hill.
See High.

HOWDAH, the same as Houdah, q.v.

HOWITZER, a short light cannon. (G.—Bohemian.) Some-
times spelt howitz; a mod. word, in Todd’s Johnson. Borrowed
from G, haubitze, a howitzer ; a word formerly spelt haufnitz. — Bohe-
mian haufnice, orig. a sling for casting a stone; Jungmann, Bohem.
Dict. i. 662. The F. obus, a bomb-shell, is from the same G. word.

HOWL, to yell, cry out. (E.) ME. houlen, Chaucer, C. T. 2819
(A. 2817); Gower, C. A. ii. 265. An imitative word ; and prob.
native ; cf. MDu. huylen, to howl; Dan. hyle; Icel. yla; Swed. yla;
G. heulen, Similar forms are L. wlulare, to shriek, howl (whence
OF. huller) ; Gk. tAaw, I bark (said of a dog), I howl ot cry out
(said of a man); dAoAvyy, a cry. ( As Scheler remarks, the f# in
OF. huller was due to German influence. Der. howl, sb.; cf. hurly-
burly, q.v. And see Owl.

HOX, to hamstring. (E.) ME. hoxe, Wyclif, Josh. xi. 6. To cut
the hox or hamstring ; this sb. occurs in Wyclif, 2 Sam. viii. 4; and
is short for hoxen, huxen, or hockshin, lit. ‘hock-sinew,’ AS. hdhsinu.
= AS. koh, heel, also hock, hough; and simz, a sinew. See Hough
and Sinew.

HOY (1), a kind of sloop. (Du.) In Spenser, F. Q. ii. 10. 64.
‘Equyppt a hoye, and set hir under sayle ;’ Gascoigne, Fruits of War,
st. 136. ‘An hoye of Dorderyght ;’ Paston Letters, iii. 388. —MDu.
hoei (Verwijs), variant of MDu. heu, heude, ‘a boate or a ship’
(Hexham); a kind of flat-bottomed merchantman, a hoy; whence
also MF. hew, explained by Cotgrave to mean ‘a Dutch hoy.’ Of
uncertain origin.

HOY (2), interj. stop! (E.) A nautical term. ‘ When one ship
hails another, the words are, What ship, hoy? that is, stop, and tell
the name of your ship; ’ Pegge, Anecdotes of the English Language,
p- 16 (Todd). Also an exclamation, sometimes of joy; ME, hoy,
P. Plowman, C. ix. 123. Cf. Du. kui, hoy! come! well! Dan. hui,
hallo! See Ho! Der. a-hoy, q.v.

HOYDEN, the same as Hoiden, q.v.

HUB, the projecting nave of a wheel; a mark at which quoits are
cast ; &c. (E.) The orig. sense is ‘projection.’ ‘ Hubs, naves of
wheels;? Marshall’s Leicestershire and Warwickshire Words, ed.
1790 (E.D.S.). Also (in many dialects), the back of a grate, or the
side-ledge of it; see N. E.D. The same word as hob ; see Hob (1).

HUBBUB, a confused noise. (C.) Another spelling is whoobub,
Wint. Ta. iv. 4.629 ; Two Noble Kinsmen, ed. Skeat, ii. 5. 35. Spen-
ser has ‘shrieking hububs ;’ F. Q. iii. 10. 43 ; also ‘a terrible yell and
hubbabowe ;” View of State of Ireland, p. 632 (Globe ed.). An imita-
tive word; and perhaps suggested by Gael. ub! interj. of aversion ;
Trish abu! a warcry. Hubbub was confused with E. hoop-hoop, and
whoobub with E, whoop-hoop. See Hoop (2).

HUCKABACK, a sort of linen cloth. (Low G.?) ‘ Huckaback, a


280 HUCKLE-BERRY


sort of linen cloth that is woven so as to lie partly raised ;’ Bailey,
vol. ii. ed. 1731. First in 1690 (N.E.D.). The word bears so
remarkable a resemblance to Low G. hukkebak, G. huckeback, pick-a-
back, that it seems reasonable to suppose that it at first meant ‘ ped-
dler’s ware;’ see Huckster. Cf. Pomeran. eenen hukbak dragen, to
carry one pick-a-back; Low G. hokeboken, to carry on the back
(Liibben). Weigand (i. 828) explains G. Huckepack as (1) a humped
back for carrying a thing; (2) a burden borne on the back.

HUCKLE-BERRY, a berry of the Gaylussacia, a low berry-
bearing shrub, common in N. America. (E.) In Hawthorne, Twice-
told Tales, ed. 1851; I. xvi. 249: ‘alot of huckleberries.’ ‘The same
as whortleberry, formerly hurileberry. Spelt hurtilberyes ; Babees Book,
p- 123, 1.82. See Whortleberry.

HUCKLE-BONG, the hip-bone. (E.) ‘Thehip.. . wherein
the joint doth move The thigh, ’tis called the huckle-bone ;’ Chapman,
tr. of Homer, Iliad, v. 297. ‘Ache in the huckle-bones;’ Sir T.
Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iv.c.6. Huckle is the dimin. of prov. Eng.
huck, which is a mere variant of hock; thus huck-le=hock-le. See
E.D.D. And see Hough. Dunbar has hukebanis, hip-bones or
hock-bones ; Flyting with Kennedie, 181. @ In dialects, the hock,
orig. the heel, is confused with the ham and the hip.

HUCKSTER, a peddler, hawker, retailer of small articles. (O.
Low G.) Properly a feminine form, the corresponding masc.
form being hawker, as now spelt, though huckster answers better to
hucker. We have the expression ‘ she hath holden hokkerye,’ i.e. fol-
lowed a huckster’s trade; P. Plowman, B. v. 227. But the AS. dis-
tinction in gender between the terminations -er and -ster was lost at
an early period, so that the word was readily applied to men. ‘ Hwk-
stare, hukstere, auxionator, auxionatrix, auxionarius, Hukstare of
frute, colibista ;? Prompt. Parv. p. 252. Huester, as a gloss to insti-
torem ; Wright’s Vocab.i.123. ‘ Forr patt te33 turrndenn Godess hus
inntill huccsterress bope’=for that they turned God’s house into
a huckster’s booth; Ormulum, 15816, 7. B. An O. Low G. word,
but it does not appearin AS. ‘The related words are Du. heuker, a
retailer, hewken, to retail; also ‘ heukeren, to sell by retail, to huckster ;
heukelaar, a huckster, retailer;’ Sewel’s Du. Dict. Also Swed.
hékare, a cheesemonger (Widegren); Dan. hoker, a chandler,
huckster, hokeri, the huckster’s trade; hdkerske, a ‘huxteress’ (this
form is the Dan. equivalent of E. huckster) ; hokre, to huckster. ‘y. The
word was imported, about A.D. 1200, probably from the Nether-
lands ; the termination -ster being Dutch as well as English, asshown
by Du. spin-ster,a spinster, &e. 8. The etymology is much disputed ;
but it is well illustrated by Hexham’s MDnu. Dict., which gives
us hucken, to stoop or bow; een hucker, a stooper, bower, or bender ;
onder eenen swaren last hucken, to bow under a heavy burden ; een hucker,
a huckster, or a mercer. Compare also the Icel. hokra, to go bent, to
crouch, creep, slink about, on which it is noted that ‘ in modern usage
hokra means to live as a small farmer, whence hokr, in bii-hokr, small
farming ;’ Vigfusson. Nothing could bemore fitting than to describe
the peddler of olden times as a croucher, creeper, or slinker about;
his bent back being due to the bundle upon it. (See Sir W. Scott’s
description of Bryce Snailsfoot in The Pirate.) ¢. Cf. also MDu.
huycken, huken, Du. huiken, to stoop down, crouch (Oudemans) ; Icel.
huka, to sit on one’s hams, with its deriv. hokra; Low G. huken, to
crouch (Brem. Wort.); hoker; a huckster (Liibben). So also G.
hucke is properly the bent back, whence G. huckeback, pick-a-back ;
G. hocken is to squat, also to carry on the back, and_G. hécker means
(1) a hump on the back, and (2) a huckster. See Hawker.

HUDDLE, to throw together confusedly, to crowd together. (E.)
Used in late authors in the sense of performing a thing hastily; see
examples in Todd; but it simply meant, originally, to hide in a heap,


hence to crowd up, or to crowd; see Merch. of Ven. iv. 1. 28; Much |


Ado, ii. 1.252. ‘Tohudleup together;’ Minsheu. Not found in early
writers ; but the equivalent form to hudder (the suffixes -er, -le being
similarly used to express a frequentative) is represented by ME,
hodren = hoderen (with oned), ‘ Forscatred er thi Scottis, and hodred
in per hottes’=for thy Scots are scattered, and huddled (dispersedly)
in their huts; Rob. Manning, tr. of Langtoft, ed. Hearne, p. 273.
B. But again, this ME. hoderen also had the sense of ‘ cover;’ as in
‘hodur and happe’=cover and wrap up; Le Bone Florence, 112, in
Ritson’s Met. Romances, vol. iii; and the true notion of huddle or
hudder was to crowd together for protection or in a place of shelter,
a notion still preserved when we talk of cattle being huddled together
in rain. So also Low G. hudern, to huddle oneself up (Scham-
bach), Kurhessen huttern, to cover up warm. yy. From Teut. base
*hud-, weak grade allied to ME. huden, to hide, Ancren Riwle,
p- 174, more frequently written hiden, whence mod. E. hide; see
Hide (1). Thus to huddle is to hide closely, to crowd together
for protection, to crowd into a place of shelter. Cf. alsothe ME. sb.
hudels (= AS. hydels),.a hiding-place ; Ancren Riwle, p. 146; Wyclif,
Deut, xxvii. 15. 8. The notion of doing things hastily may have


HUGUENOT


been due to the influence of Du. hoetelen, ‘ to doe a thing unskilly ;”
Hexham. This is allied to G..hudeln, to bungle, of which the Alsatian
form is hudlen ; cf. Swed. hutla, Dan. hutle, to bungle.

HUE (1), show, appearance, colour, tint. (E.) ME. hewé, often
a dissyllabic word; Chaucer, C. T. 396 (A 394); but properly mono-
syllabic, and spelt hew, Havelok, 2918. AS. hiw, héow, appearance,
Grein, ii. 78.4-Swed. hy, skin, complexion; Goth. kiwi, form, show,
appearance, 2 Tim. iii. 5. Teut. type *hiwjom, n. Cf. Skt. chhavi,
skin, complexion, beauty. Der. hue-d, ME. hewed, Chaucer, C, T.
T1657 (F 1245); Aue-less.

HUE (2), clamour, outcry. (F.—Teut.) Only in the phr. hue and
ery, Merry Wives, iv. 5.92; 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 556. See Hue and cry
in Blount’s Nomolexicon; he notes that ‘Awe is used alone, anno
4 Edw. I. stat. 2. In ancient records this is called hutesium et clamor ;’
for the latter phrase he cites a passage from the Close Rolls, 30
Hen. IlI.m.5. ME. kwe, a loud cry ; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, i.
872 (or 873).— OF. hu, a cry (Godefroy) ; huer, ‘to hoot,... make
hue and cry ;’? Cot. Cotgrave also gives huée, ‘a showting, . . . outcry,
or hue and cry.’ Of Teut. origin. —MHG. ha, interj.; huzen, to
hoot ; MSwed. huta, to hoot ; see Hoot.

HUFF, to puff, bluster, bully. (E.) ‘A huff, a huffing or swag-
gering fellow. Huff, to puff or blow, to rant or vapour ;’ Kersey’s
Dict., ed. 1715. ‘And still you huff it;’ Ben Jonson, Every
Man, i. 2.35. Hence huffer, a braggart; ‘ By such a braggadocio
huffer ;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 3, 1. 1034. The old sense was
‘to blow’ or ‘ puff up.’ ‘ When as the said winde within the earth,
able to hugfe up the ground, was not powerful enough to breake forth
and make issue ;’ Holland’s Pliny, b. ii. c. 85. B. Of imitative
origin; we find huf, puf, and haf, paf in Relig. Antig. i. 240, to re-
present forcible blowing; cf. puff. Cf. Lowl. Sc. hauch, a forcible
puff; hech, to breathe hard. See Puff, Whiff. Der. huff, at
draughts, simply means ‘to blow;’ it seems to have been customary
to blow upon the piece removed; Jamieson gives ‘ blaw, to blow,
also, to huff at draughts; I blaw, or blow you, I take [i.e. huff] this
man.’ (So also in Danish; blese en brikke, to huff (lit. blow) a man
at draughts.) Also huff-er, in Hudibras, as above; huff-ish, huff-
ish-ly, huff-ish-ness, huff-y, huff-i-ness.

HUG, to embrace closely. (Scand.?) In Shak. Merch. of Ven. ii.
6. 163; Rich. III, i. 4.252; &c. [Quite distinct from hug, to shrink,
shudder ; Palsgrave has: ‘I hugge, I shrinke me in my bed. It is
a good sporte to se this lytle boye hkugge in his bedde for cold.’]
B. Of uncertain origin. Perhaps (but with a change of sense) from
Icel. hugga, to soothe, to comfort; kugga barnid, to soothe a child ;
allied to huga, to mind; hugna, to please; cf. Swed. hugna, to
delight, gratify; Dan. hue, to like. Kalkar has MDan. hugge, to
console, to encourage. This is not far from the sense of hug, in
Comus, 164: ‘and Aug him into snares,’ i. e. entice, lure.

HUGE, very great, vast. (F.) ME. huge, Chaucer, C. T. 2953
(A 2951); P. Plowman, B. xi. 242; Will. of Palerne, 2569. Oddly
spelt hogge; ‘an hogge geant;’ Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft,
p- 31,1.17. The etymology is much disguised by the loss of an
initial a, mistaken for the E, indef. article; the right word is ahuge.
(The same loss occurs in ME. avow, now always vow, though this is
not quite a parallel case, since vow has a sense of its own.)—OF.
ahuge, huge, vast; a 12th-century word. In the account of Goliath,
in Les Livres des Rois, we find: ‘E le fer de la lance sis cenz, e la
hanste fud grosse e ahuge cume le suble as teissures’= and the iron
of his lance weighed six hundred (shekels), and the shaft (of it) was
great and huge as a weaver’s beam; Bartsch, Chrestomathie Frangaise,
col. 45, 1. 36. Also ahoge, ahoje (Godefroy). B. Of unknown
origin ; but perhaps connected with OHG. irhdhen (G. erhohen), to
exalt; and the OHG. hoh, Icel. har, AS. héah, high. .Cf. Norw.
hauga, to heap up; Icel. haugr, a hill, whence OF. hoge, hogue,
a hill; Norm. dial. hogu, arrogant (Moisy). See How (2). Der,
huge-ly; huge-ness, Cymb. i. 4. 157.

HUGGER-MUGGER, secrecy. (E. and Scand.) In Hamlet,
iv. 5. 84, in phr. in hugger-mugger. A reduplicated form; orig.
hucker-mucker, as in More, Dialoge, ii. 52 b, iv. 121 b (N. E. D.).
The E. prefix hucker is unmeaning, but rimes to mucker, from ME,
mukren, mokeren, to heap up, hoard, conceal, from Norw. mukka,
aheap. See Muck,

HUGUENOT, a French protestant. (F.—G.). ‘ Huguenots,
Calvinists, Reformists, French Protestants ;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674.
And in Minsheu. =F. huguenots, s. pl. ‘ Huguenots, Calvinists, Re-
formists;’Cot. As if from some person of the name of Huguenot.
This name was in use as a Christian name two centuries before the
time of the Reformation. ‘Le 7 octobre, 1387, Pascal Huguenot de
Saint Junien en Limousin, docteur en decret;’ Hist. Litt. de la
France, t. xxiv. p. 307 (Littré). Huguenot is a dimin. of Hugues,
Hugh.—MHG. Hug, Hugh. B. But this form was due to popular
etymology ; and was perverted from G. eidgenoss, a confederate, or


HULK


from the equivalent Low G. form eedgenoot (MDnu. eedigenoot in
Hexham). Wedgwood cites the Swiss Romance forms einguenot,
higuenot, a protestant, also from G. Cf. Korting, § 3215.

HULK, a heavy ship. (Late L.—Gk.) Sometimes applied to
the body of a ship, by confusion with hull; but it is quite a different
word, meaning a heavy ship of clumsy make; Shak. Troil. ii. 3. 277.
The hulks were old ships used as prisons. ME. hulke. ‘ Hulke,
shyppe, Hulcus;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 252. ‘ Hulke,a shyppe, heureque ;’
Palsgrave. ‘Orque, a hulk or huge ship;’ Cot. Late AS, Aulc ;
‘Liburna, hAule;’ Voc. 181, 28,—Late L. hulka, a heavy merchant-
ship, a word used by Walsingham; see quotation in Way’s note to
Prompt. Parv. ; also spelt kulcus, as quoted above. Also spelt (more
correctly) holcas; Ducange.—Gk. dAnas, a ship which is towed,
a ship of burden, merchantman. = Gk. €Arev, to draw, drag; whence
also 6Acn, a dragging, éAKds, a furrow, a machine for dragging ships
on land; from the base *selk-. Allied to L. sulcus, a furrow, AS. sulh,
a plough. Brugmann, i. § 645. Der. hulk-ing, hulk-y, i.e. bulky
or unwieldy. @ Not the same word as ME. hulke, a hovel, Wyclif,
Isaiah, i. 8; which is from AS. hadc, a hut; Wright's Vocab. i. 58.

HULL (1), the husk or outer shell of grain or of nuts. (E.) ME.
hule, hole, hoole. ‘Hoole, hole, holl, or huske, Siliqua;’ Prompt.
Parv. p. 242. ‘Hull of a beane or pese, escosse. Hull or barcke of
a tree, escorce;’ Palsgrave; and see Way’s note in Prompt. Parv.
Peese hole (or pese hule) = pea-shell ; P. Plowman, B, vii. 194, in two
MSS.; see the footnote. AS. hulu, a husk; see index to Napier’s
glosses. Allied to G. hiilse, a husk. From Teut. *hul-, weak grade
of *helan-, to hide, to cover, as in AS. helan. Lit. ‘covering.’ See
Hell. Allied words are OSaxon bihullean, to cover, Heliand, 1406
(Cotton MS.); Du. hudlen, to put a cap on, mask, disguise ; Goth.
huljan, to hide, cover; G. ver-hullen, to wrap up; Icel. kylja, to hide,
cover ; Swed. holja, to cover, veil; Dan. hylle, to wrap. Der. see
housings.

HULL (2), the body of a ship. (E.) Not in very early use.
First in 1571. ‘She-never saw above one voyage, Luce, And, credit
me, after another, her hud Will serve again ;’ Beaumont and Fletch.
Wit Without Money, i. 2.17. The huil is, literally, the ‘shell’ of
the ship, being the same word with the above; see Hull (1).
B. But it is probable that its use with respect to a ship was due to
some confusion with ME. holl, Du. hol, the hold of a ship; see
Hold (2). Cf. ‘Hoole (holle) of a schyppe, Carina;’ Prompt.
Parv. Der. hull, verb, to float about, as a ship does when the sails
are taken down, Shak. Tw. Nt. i. 5. 217; Rich. III, iv. 4. 4383
Hen. VIII, ii. 4. 199. So in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, we find:
‘ Hull, the body of a ship, without rigging, Hulling is when a ship
at sea takes in all her sails in a calm,’

HUM (1), to make a low buzzing or droning sound. (E.) ME.
hummen ; Chaucer, Troilus, li. 1199; Palladius on Husbandry, ed.
Lodge, vii. 124. Of imitative origin.+G.hummen, to hum. Cf.
also Du. hommelen, to hum; the frequentative form; and Hem (2),
Also MSwed. hum, a rumour (Ihre). Der. hum (2), q. v., hum-bug,
q. v., hum-drum, q. v., humble-bee, q. v.; also humm-ing-bird, Pope’s
Dunciad, iv. 446, and in Evelyn’s Diary, July 11, 1654; called
a hum-bird, Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. vi. c. 8. § 10.

HUM (2), to trick, to cajole. (E.) A particular use of the word
above. In Shak. hum not only means to utter a low sound, as in
Temp. ii. I. 317, but also to utter a sound expressive of indignation,
as in ‘turns me his back And hums,’ Macb. iii. 6, 42 ; ‘to bite his lip
and. hum At good Cominius,’ Cor. v. I. 49. See Richardson and
Todd, where it further appears that applause was formerly expressed
by humming, and that to hum was to applaud; from applause to
flattery, and then to cajolery, is not a long step. See the passage
in Ben Jonson, The Alchemist, Act i. sc. 1, where Subtle directs his
dupe to ‘cry hum Thrice, and then buz as often;’ showing that the
word was used in a jesting sense. B. Wedgwood well points out
a similar usage in Port. zumbir, to buzz, to hum, zombar, to joke, to
jest ; to which add Span. zumbar, to hum, resound, joke, jest, make
one’s-self merry, zwmbon, waggish. Der. hum, sb. a hoax (Todd) ;
hum-bug, q.v. Cf. humkh! interj., Beaum. and Fletcher, Mons.
Thomas, i. 2.

HUMAN, pertaining to mankind. (F.—L.) Formerly humaine,
but now conformed to the L. spelling. ‘ All heimaine thought ;’
Spenser, F. Q. vi. 3.51. ‘I meruayle not of the inhumanities that
the humaim people committeth;’ Golden Book, lett. 11, § 2.—MF.
humain, ‘gentle, ... humane, manly ;’ Cot.—L. hiimanus, human;
perhaps for *hkumndnus (Bréal); allied to L. hom-o, a man. See
‘Homage. Der. human-ly, human-ise, human-is-at-ion, human-ist,
‘human-kind ; also human-i-ty, ME. humanitee, Chaucer, C. T. 7968
(E 92), from OF. humaniteit, which is from L. acc. hiimanitatem,


nom. himdnitaés; hence humanit-ar-i-an. And see Humane, .


@s> The accent distinguishes human, of French origin, from humane,
‘taken directly from Latin. :


HUMOUR 281


HUMANE, gentle, kind. (L.) In Shak., humane (so spelt)
does duty both for human and humane, the accent being always on
the former syllable; see Schmidt, Shak. Lexicon. Hence it has the
sense of ‘kind;”’ Temp. i. 2. 346. We have now differentiated the
words, keeping the accent on the latter syllable in humane, to make
it more like the L. hiima@nus. We may therefore consider this as the
L. form. Both L. hiimanus and F. kumain have the double sense
(1) human, and (2) kind. SeeHuman. Der. humane-ly, humane-
mess.

HUMBLE, lowly, meek, modest. (F.-L.) ME. humble,
Chaucer, C. T. 8700 (E 824). Spelt umble in O. Kentish Sermons,
in An O. Eng. Miscellany, ed, Morris, p. 30.—OF. (and F.) humble,
‘humble;” Cot. (With excrescent b.)—L. humilem, acc. of humilis,
humble ; lit. near the ground.—L. Aumus, the ground; humi, on the
ground. Cf. Gk. yapai, on the ground; Russ, zemlia, earth, land.
Brugmann, i. § 604. Der. humbl-y; humble-ness, formerly humblesse,
Chaucer, C. T. 1783 (A 1781). Also, from L. humilis, humili-ty,
q.v., kumili-ate, q.v. Also, from L, humus, ex-hume, q.y. And see
Chameleon.

HUMBLE-BER, a humming bee. (E.) To humble is to hum;
or more literally, to hum often, as it is the frequentative form,
standing for kumm-le; the b being excrescent. ‘To humble like a
bee;’ Minsheu. ME. humblen, for hummelen. ‘Or elles lyk the
last humblinge After the clappe of a thundringe ;’? Chaucer, Ho. of
Fame, 1039. Hence hombel-be or hombul-be; Reliquiz Antique,
ed. Wright and Halliwell, i. 81. ‘Hic tabanus, a humbyl-bee ;?
Wright’s Vocab. i. 255 (Voc. 767. 20).4-Du. hommelen, to hum,
a frequentative form; ommel, a humble-bee, a drone, G. hummel,
a humble-bee; hummen, to hum; Swed. humla,a humble-bee. See
Hum (1).

HUMBLE-PIE; see under Umble.

HUMBUG, a hoax, a piece of trickery, an imposition under fair
pretences. (E.) ‘ Humbug, a false alarm, a bugbear ;’ Dean Milles
MS. (written about 1760), cited in Halliwell. The word occurs in
a long passage in The Student, vol. ii. p. 41, ed. 1751, cited in Todd.
An alleged earlier trace of the word is on the title-page of an old
jest-book, viz. ‘ The Universal Jester, or a pocket companion for the
wits; being a choice collection of merry conceits, drolleries, .
bon-mots, and humbugs, by Ferdinando Killigrew, London, said to
be about 1735-403; but it is no older than1754(N.E.D.). See the
Slang Dictionary, which contains a good article on this word. It is
probably a compound of hum, to cajole, to hoax, and the old word
bug, a spectre, bugbear, ghost ; the orig. sense being ‘sham bugbear’
or ‘false alarm,’ as given by Dean Milles. [The N.E. D. makes
hum, y., to cajole, a shortened form of humbug, but it is of the same
date at least; and see Hum (1).] See Hum (2) and Bug. Der,
humbug, verb, as in ‘ humbugged, egad!’ Smollett, Peregrine Pickle,
ch. 85 (1751); humbug, sb., improperly used for humbugger.

HUMDRUM, dull, droning. (E.) Used as an adv., with the
sense of ‘idly’ or ‘listlessly’ in Butler. ‘Shall we, quoth she,
stand still hum-drum?? Hudibras, pt. i. c. 3. 1. 112. But it is
properly an adj., signifying monotonous, droning, tedious, as in ‘ an
old humdrum fellow ;? Addison, Whig Examiner (1710), No. 3
(Todd); and is thus found as early as 1553. The sb. humdrum,
a dull fellow, is in Ben Jonson, Every Man,i. 1. Merely formed, as
a reduplicated word, from hum, a humming noise, and drum, a dron-
ing sound, made to rime with hum. See Hum (1).

HUMERAL, belonging to the shoulder. (L.) ‘ Humeral muscle,
the muscle that moves the arm at the upper end;’ Kersey,. ed.
1715.— Late L. humerdlis, belonging to the shoulder; cf. L. humerdle,
a cape for the shoulders.—L. humerus, better wmerus, the shoulder,
+Gk. dos, the shoulder ; Goth. amsa, the shoulder ; Skt. avisa-s, the
shoulder. Brugmann, i. § 163.

HUMID, moist. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. L. iv. 151; and in
Cotgrave.—F. Aumide, ‘humid, moist;’ Cot.—L. himidus, better
tmidus, moist.—L. hiimére, better imére, to be moist; allied to
iiuens, moist, iuidus, tidus, moist.--+Gk. ty-péds, moist; Icel. vokr,
moist. Brugmann, i. §§ 658, 667. Der. humid-ness, humid-i-ly,
Merry Wives, iii. 3. 43 3 and see humour,

HUMILIATE, to make humble. (L.) A late word, really
suggested by the sb. humiliation, used in Chaucer, C. T. Pers, Tale
(I 480). The verb is formed from L. humiliatus, pp. of humiliare,
to humble. = L. Aumili-, decl. stem of humilis, humble. See Humble,
Der. humiliat-ion (formed by analogy with other words in ~-adion)
from L. acc. khumiliatidnem, nom. humiliatio.

HUMILITY, humbleness, meekness. (F.—L.) ME. humilitee,
Chaucer, C. T. 13405 (B 1665).—OF, humiliteit, later humilite.—L.
ace. humilitatem, from nom. humilitas, humility. —L. humili-, decl, stem.


of humilis, humble. See Humble,


HUMOUR, moisture, temperament, disposition of mind, caprice.


(F.—L.). See Trench, Select Glossary, and Study of Words. ‘He


282 HUMMOCK, HOMMOCK


knew the cause of euery maladye, And wher engendred, and of what
humour ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 423 (A 421). [The four humours,
according to Galen, caused the four temperaments of mind, viz.
choleric, melancholy, phlegmatic, and sanguine.]—OF. humor
(Littré), later humeur, ‘ humour, moisture ;” Cot.—L. himérem, acc.
of humor, better uimor, moisture.—L. humére, better umére, to be
moist. See Humid. Der. humour, verb ; humor-ous, humor-ous-ly,
humor-ous-ness, humour-less, humor-ist ; from the same source, hum-
ect-ant, moistening (rare).

HUMMOCK, HOMMOCK, a mound, hillock, mass. (E.)
‘Common among our voyagers,’ Kich. ; who refers to Anson, Voyage
round the World, b. ii. c. 9; Cook, Second Voyage, b. iii. c. 4.
“Round hoommockes or hyllockes ;’ R. Eden, ed. Arber, p. 381 (1555).
It appears to be related to hump and hunch. Cf. EFries. hummel,
variant of humpel, hiimpel, a hillock; Du. homp, a hump, hunch;
‘een homp kaas, a lunch [i.e. hunch] of cheese;’ Sewel. ‘ Hompelig,
tugged, cragged;’ id. So too Low G. hiimpel, a little heap or
mound; Bremen Worterb. ii. 669. Hummock is formed with dimin.
-ock, as in hill-ock; whilst the EFries. hiimmel is formed with the
dimin, -el. See Hump, Hunch.

HUMP, a lump, bunch, esp. on the back. (E.) ‘Hump, a
hunch, or lump, Westmoreland;’ Halliwell. Of O. Low G. origin,
and may be claimed as E., though not in early use. ‘Only a natural
hump’ [on his back]; Addison, Spectator, no. 558. ‘The poor
hump-backed gentleman;’ id. no. 559.4-Du. komp, a hump, lump;
cf. Low G. hiimpel, a small heap, Bremen Worterbuch, ii. 669 ;
Dan. humpel, a hummock; Norw. hump, a knoll, a hillock; Swed.
dial. hump, a clot or piece of earth, &c.; Low G. humpe, hompe, a
hunch of bread (Berghaus). Cf. also Skt. kubja-s, hump-backed.
Der. hump-backed; humm-ock, q.v.3 hunch, q.v.

HUNCH, a hump, bump, a round or ill-shaped mass. (E.)
A variant of hump. Hunch-backed occurs in the later quarto edd. of
Shak. Rich, III, iv. 4. 81 (Schmidt). ‘Thy crooked mind within
hunch’d out thy back;’ Dryden, qu. in Todd (no reference); it
occurs in C£dipus, i. 6, by Dryden and Lee (N. E.D.). A palatalised
form of proy. E. hunk, a lump; which agrees with WFlem. hunke,
as in hunke brood, a hunch of bread (De Bo). And see Franck,
s.v. honk. Der. hunch, vb., hunch-backed.

HUNDRED, ten times ten. (E.) ME. hundred, Chaucer, C. T.
2155 (A 2153); also kundreth, Pricke of Conscience, 4524. AS.
hundred, Grein, ii. 111. A compound word.=AS, hund, a hundred,
Grein, ii. 111; and -red, with the sense of ‘reckoning’ or rate, to
denote the rate of counting; cf. Icel. hund-rad, which orig. meant
120; and G, hund-ert. This suffix is allied to Goth. rathjo, number
(L. ratio); cf. Goth. garathjan, to reckon, number, Matt. x. 30;
and see Rate (1). Thus the word grew up by the unnecessary
addition of -red (denoting the rate of counting) to the old word
hund, used by itself in earlier times. B. Dismissing the suffix, we
have the cognate OHG. hunt (also once used alone), Goth. hund;
cf. also W. cant, Gael. ciad, Irish cead, L. centum, Gk. é-xat-ov,
Lith. szimtas, Russ. sto, Pers. sad, Skt. eatam, all meaning a hundred.
y- All from an Idg. type *kamtém, prob. a docked form of *dekam-
tom, a decad; and allied to Goth. taihunté-hund, a hundred, which
Brugmann explains as Sexddwyv dexds (a decad of decads). See
Brugmann, i. § 431, ii. § 179. Andsee Ten. @ The ME. hun-
dreth is a Scand. form; from the Icel. hundrad. Der. hundred-th,
hundred-fold, hundred-weight, often written cwt., where c=L. centum,
and wt=Eng. weight.

HUNGER, desire of food. (E.) ME. hunger, Chaucer, C. T.
14738 (B 3618). AS. hungor, Grein, ii. 111.4Icel. hungr; Swed.
and Dan. hunger; Du. honger; G. hunger; Goth. hihrus, hunger ;
whence huggrjan (=hungrian), to hunger. Teut. types *hungruz,
*hunhruz, m. Allied to Lith. kanka, suffering. Brugm. i. § 639.
Der. hunger, verb=AS. hyngran (with vowel-change of u to y);
hungry=AS. hungrig (Grein); hungri-ly; hunger-bitten, Job, xviii.


12.

HUNT, to chase wild animals. (E.) ME. hunten, honten, Chaucer,
C. T. 1640. AS. huntian; see Aélfric’s Colloquy, in Voc., p. 92.
Properly ‘to capture ;’ a secondary verb related to hentan, to seize,
also a weak verb; Grein, ii. 34. B. We also find Goth. hunths,
captivity, Eph. iv.8; formed from the weak grade (hunth-) of the
verb hinthan (pt. t, hanth), to seize, capture, only used in the comp.
fra-hinthan, with pp. fra-hunthans, a captive, Luke, iv. 19. It
would hence appear that hunt- is a variant of hunth-, though the
variation is not easy to explain. ‘On an apparent pre-Teutonic
change of nt to nd in these and some other words, see Prof. Napier
in Mod. Quart. Lang. & Lit., July, 1898, p. 130; cf. Brugmann,
i. § yor.’—N. E. D. Der. hunt, sb.; hunt-er, Chaucer, C. T. 1638,
later form of AS. hunta, a hunter, in Aélfric’s Colloquy ; hunt-r-ess,
with F. suffix -ess, As You Like It, iii. 2. 45; hunt-ing, sb., hunt-ing-
box, hunt-ing-seat ; hunt-s-man (=hunt’s man), Mid. Nt. Dr. iv. 1. 143;


HURRICANE


hunts-man-ship ; hunts-up (=the hunt is up, i.e. beginning), Rom, iii.
5. 34, replaced by the hunt is up, Tit. Andron. ii 2. 1.

HURDLE, a frame of twigs interlaced or twined together, a
frame of wooden bars. (E.) ME. hurdel; pl. hurdles, K. Alisaun-
der, 6104. AS. hyrdel; ‘cleta, cratis, hyrdel;’ ‘crates, i.e. flecta,
hyrdel ;’? Wright’s Vocab. i. 26. col. 2, 34. col. 1 (Voc. 126. 16;
140. 23). Also OMerc. hyrdil, Voc. 16.7. A dimin. from a Tent.
base *hurd-; see the cognate words.+Du. horde, a hurdle; Icel.
hurd; G. hiirde, MHG. hurt; Goth. haurds, a door, i.e. one
made of wicker-work, Matt. vi. 6. Further allied to L. cratis, a
hurdle, Gk. #aprados, a (woven) basket, from 4/QERT, to weave;
whence also Skt. kvt, to spin, chyt, to connect together. Cf. also
Skt. kafa-s, a mat. Brugmann, §§ 529, 633; also Stokes-Fick,
p. 80, where we find Irish certle, glossed by L. ‘glomus.’ Der.
hurdle, verb, pp. hurdled, Milton, P. L. iv. 186. Doublet, crate, q.v-

HURDY-GURDY, a kind of violin, but played by turning
a wheel. (E.) ‘Hum! plays, Isee, upon the hurdy-gurdy;’ O’Hara’s
play of Midas, Act i (1764). Suggested by Lowl. Sc. hirdy-girdy, a
confused noise; cf. also hirdum-dirdum, with the same sense. Note
also: ‘Som vsep straunge wlafferynge, chiterynge, harrynge and
garrynge, i.e. some people use a strange babbling, chattering,
snarling and growling; Trevisa, tr. of Higden, ii. 159. Cf. Low-
land Sc. hur, to snarl; gurr, to snarl, growl, purr; Jamieson. ‘R
is the dog’s letter, and hurreth in the sound;’ Ben Jonson, Eng.
Grammar. The word seems to have been fashioned on the model of
hurly-burly.

HURL, to throw rapidly and forcibly, to push forcibly, drive.
(Scand.) ‘And hurlest {Tyrwhitt has hurtlest| al from est till occi-
dent ’=and whirlest all from east to west; Chaucer, C. T, Group B,
297=1. 4717. ‘Into which the flood was hurlid;’ Wyclif, Luke,
vi. 49, in six MSS.; but seventeen MSS. have hurtlid. So again, in
Luke, vi. 48, most MSS. have hurtlid, but eight have hurlid. In the
Ancren Riwle, p. 166, we find ‘ mid a lutel hurlunge’ =with a slight
collision; where another reading is hurtlinge. B. It is plain that
hurl was often contused with hurtle, both being used in the sense of
to push violently, jostle, strike with a forcible collision. For those
who wish to make the comparison, further references are (1) for
hurlen: Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 211; Poems and Lives of Saints,
ed. Furnivall, xxiii. 25; Will. of Palerne, 1243; Legends of the
Holy Rood, p. 140; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 44, 223, 376, 413,
874, 1204, 1211 ; Destruction of Troy, 1365; Rob. of Glouc. p. 487,
1. 9974; Fabyan’s Chron., an. 1380-1 (R.); Spenser, F. Q.i. 5. 2,
&c.; (2) for hurtlen, Wyclif, Jerem. xlviii. 12; Prompt. Parv. p. 253;
Will. of Palerne, 5013; Pricke of Conscience, 4787; Chaucer,
Legend of Good Women, Cleopatra, 59; &c. B. Nevertheless, they
seem to have zo etymological connexion. Hzrl is not found in AS.,
nor earlier than 1225; so that it is prob. of Scand. origin. Explained
by Swed. dial. hurra, to whir, to whirl round; whence hurrel, a
whirl, kurrel-wind, a whirlwind. So also Dan. hurre, to buzz;
whence hurle, to whir (Larsen); Norw. urra, to whirl, hum ; hurla,
to buzz; cf. Icel. hurr, a noise. And cf. EFries. hurrel, a gust of
wind; hurreln, to blow in gusts; hurrel-wind, a whirlwind. We
likewise find E. hurleblast, a hurricane, hurlepool, a whirlpool;
hurlewind, a whirlwind. See Hurry. And compare Whirl, of
which hurl is perhaps a ‘ weak-grade’ form. Der. hurl-er.

HURLY-BURLY, a tumult. (F. and E.) In Macb. i. 1. 33
as adj., 1 Hen. IV, v. 1. 78. Spelt hurly-burlye, in Bale’s Kynge
Johan, p. 63 (before 1560). A reduplicated word, the second sylla-
ble being an echo of the first, to give more fulness. The simple form
hurly is the original; see K. John, iii. 4.169; 2 Hen. IV, iii. 1.25. —
OF. hurlee, a howling, great noise, orig. fem. pp. of hurler, ‘to howle,
to yell;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. urlare, to howl, yell. Both these forms are
corrupt, and contain an inserted r. The OF. form was orig. huller,
to howl, also in Cot.; cf. Bartsch, Chrestomathie Francaise, col.
354, 1. 24; and the correct Ital. form is wludare, to shriek, also to howl
or yellasa wolf (Florio). = L. wlulare, to howl; ulula,an owl. @ The
MF, hurluburlu, a heedless, hasty person, used by Rabelais, does not
seem to be immediately connected. But we may note MDan. hulder-
bulder, noise, racket (Kalkar); Swed. huller om buller, pell-mell.
The mod. E, hullabaloo seems to be a corruption.

HURRAH, an exclamation of joy. (G.) Spelt whurra in Addison, _
The Drummer (near the end). From G. hurra, MHG. hurra. Of
imitative origin; see Hurl. The older word is Huzzah, q. v.

HURRICANE, a whirlwind, violent storm of wind. (Span.—
Caribbean.) Formerly hurricano, ‘The dreadful spout, Which
shipmen do the hurricano call;’ Shak. Troilus, v. 2. 172.—Span.
huracan, a hurricane; spelt hurracan in Pineda. — Caribbean huracan,
as written by Littré, who refers to Oviedo, Hist. des Indes. ‘ Great
tempestes which they caule furacanas or haurachanas;’ Eden, ed.
Arber, p. 216. See also Washington Irving’s Life of Columbus,
b. viii. c. 9 (Trench); Rich. quotes from Dampier’s Voyages, y. ii.


HURRY


pt. ii. c, 6, that hurricanes are ‘ violent storms, raging chiefly among
the Caribbee islands.’ Hence also Port. furac@o, ‘a hurricane.

HURRY, to hasten, urge on. (Scand.) Quite different from
harry, with which Richardson confuses it. In Shak. Romeo, v. 1.
65; Temp. i. 2.131. Extended by the addition of y from an older
form hurr, just as scurry is from skirr. It is probably the same word
with the rare ME. horien, to hurry. ‘ And by the hondes hym hent
and horyed hym withinne’=and they [the angels] caught him [Lot]
by the hand, and hurried him within ; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B.
883.— MSwed. hurra, to swing or whirl round (Ihre); Swed. dial.
hurra, to whirl round, to whiz; Swed. dial. hurr, great haste, hurry
(Rietz) ; Dan. hurre, to buzz, to hum; Icel. hurr, a noise. B. Of
imitative origin, and a weaker form of the more expressive and fuller
form whkir ; see Whir, Whiz. Ben Jonson says of the letter R that
it is ‘the dog’s letter, and hurreth in the sound.’ Der. hurry, sb.

HURST, a wood. (E.) In Drayton’s Polyolbion, s. 2, 1. 187:
‘that, from each rising hurst. ME. hurst (Stratmann), Very com-
mon in place-names in Kent, e.g. Pens-hurst. AS. hyrst, i.e. Hurst
in Kent; Thorpe, Diplomatarium, p. 65.4-MHG. hurst, a shrub,
thicket; Low G. horst; EFries. horst; MDu. horst, horscht, ‘the
wood of osieres or withes;* Hexham. Perhaps allied to Hurdle.

HURT, to strike or dash against, to injure, harm. (F.) In early
use. ME. hurten, hirten, used in both senses (1) to dash against,
push; and (2) to injure. Ex. (1) ‘And he him hurteth [pusheth]
with his hors adoun,’ Chaucer, C. T. 2618 (Six-text, A 2616), ac-
cording to 4 MSS.; ‘heo hurten heora hafden’ = they dashed their
heads together, Layamon, 1878. (2) ‘That no man hurte other=
that none injure other; P. Plowman, B.x. 366. Inthe Ancren Riwle,
it has both senses ; see the glossary.—OF. hurter, later heurter, ‘ to
knock, push, jur, joult, strike, dash, or hit violently against ;’ Cot.
‘Se heurter 4 une pierre, to stumble at a stone,’ id. B. Hardly of
Celtic origin; and not from W. hyrddu, to ram, push, impel, butt,
make an assault, hwrdd, a push, thrust, butt; see Thurneysen, p. 81.
We find also OProv. urtar, hurtar (Gloss. to Bartsch, Chrest. Pro-
vencale), Ital. urtare, to knock, hit, dash against; perhaps from
a late L. type *urtdre, as if from *ur/um, unused supine of urgére, to
urge, to press on. See Korting, § 9924. 4 MDu. horten, and Low G.
hurten, to push, are from F. Der. hurt, sb., Ancren Riwle, p. 112,
Chaucer, C. T. 10785 (F 471); hurt-ful, hurt-ful-ly, hurt-ful-ness ;
hurt-less, hurt-less-ly, hurt-less-ness.

HURTHLB, to come into collision with, to dash against, to
rattle. (F.; with E. suffix.) Nearly obsolete, but used in Gray’s Fatal
Sisters, st. 1; imitated from Shak. Jul. Cesar, ii. 2.22. ME. hurtlen,
to jostle against, dash against, push; see references under Hurl.
To these add: ‘ And he him hwréleth with his hors adoun;’ Chaucer,
C. T. 2618 (Six-text, A 2616), in the Ellesmere MS., where most
other MSS. have hurteth. B. In fact, hurt-le is merely the frequenta-
tive of hurt in the sense ‘ to dash.’? And this kurtis the ME. hurten,
to dash, also to dash one’s foot against a thing, to stumble. ‘If ony
man shal wandre in the day he hirtith not,’ i. e. stumbles not ; Wyclif,


John, xi. 9. Du Wes has MF, hurteler, ‘to hurtle together ;’
perhaps from E.; see Palsgrave, p. 948, col. 2. See further under
Hurt.


HURTLEBERRY, a bilberry. (E.) Hakluyt has hurtilberies,
Voy. i. 477. Also called huckleberries, hurts, horts, hearts, hart-
berries; E, Plant-names (E.D.S.). Spelt hurtes, A. Boorde, Dyetary,
ed. Furnivall, p. 267. AS. heorotberge, a berry of the buckthorn ;
AS.Leechdoms, iii, 331; but cf. Voc, 33. 12, 203. 22, 409. 13, 443.
28. From AS. heorot, a hart; and berge, berie, a berry, See Hart
and Berry.

HUSBAND, the master of a house, the male head of a household,
a married man. (Scand.) The old sense is ‘master of a house.’
ME. husbonde, husebonde, ‘The husebonde... warned his hus pus’=
the master of the house guardeth his house thus; OEng. Homilies,
ed. Morris, i. 247. ‘Till a vast husbandis houss’=to an empty
[waste] house ofa farmer; Barbour’s Bruce, vii. 151. AS. hisbonda ;
‘cet hira hiisbondum’ = from their fellow-dwellers in the same house;
Exod. iii. 22. Not a true AS. word, but borrowed from Scandina-
vian. = Icel, huisbdndi, the master or ‘goodman’ ofa house; a contracted
form from hisbiiandi.—Icel. his, a house; and baandi, dwelling,
inhabiting, pres. part. of bua, to abide, dwell. See Boor, Busk.
Der. husband-man, ME. housbonde-man, a householder, Wyclif, Matt,
xx. 1; husband-ry, ME. housbonderye, P. Plowman, B. i. 57, spelt
housbondrye, Chaucer, C. T. 9172 (E1296).

HUSH, to enjoin silence. (E.) Chiefly used in the imp. mood
and in the pp. ME. hushen, hussen; ‘and husht was al the place,’
Chaucer, C. T. 2983, ed. Tyrwhitt; spelt hust, kuyst in Six-text,
A2981. ‘Tho weren the cruel clariouns ful whist [Camb. MS. hust]
and full stille ;? Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. ii. met. 5, 1. 16 (or 25).
‘ After iangling wordes cometh ‘‘huissht! pees, and be stille”;’ Test.
of Love, bk. i. ch. 5,1. 90, B. The word is purely imitative, from


HUT 283


the use of the word hush or husht to signify silence (hucht being after-
wards looked upon as a pp.) ; and it is seen that whist is but another
expression of the same kind. See Whist. Cf. Low G. husse bussee,
an expression used in singing children to sleep ; Bremen Wérterb. ii.
678; Hamburgh hiisser, to hush to sleep (Richey). So also G. husch,
hush! quick! Pomeran. hiisch, Dan. hys, hush! also Swed. hyssa,
Dan. husse, MDan. hvisse, to hush. And see Hist. Der. hush-
money, Guardian, no. 26, April 10, 1713. @ In the form husht, the
¢ was at first an integral part of the word, just as in whist. ‘I huste,
I styll,’ Palsgrave ; ‘to huste, silere ;? Levins.

HUSK, the dry covering of some fruits, &. (E.) ME. huske.
‘ Huske of frute or oper lyke;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 254. ‘The note [nut]
of the haselle hathe an husk with-outen ;? Mandeville, Tray. ch. xviii.
p. 188. The & is a dimin. suffix. From AS. his, a house. Cf.
Low G. huuske ; (1) alittle house; (2) core of an apple (Berghaus) ;
Pomeran. hitiseken, the same; EFries. hiiske, a little house, core of an
apple, small case; MDu. huysken, a little house, case, husk of fruit
(Kilian). And note AS. pisan hosa, pea-shell, as a gloss to L.
siligua; Corpus Gloss. 1867. Der. husk, verb, to take off the shells;
husk-ed.

HUSKY, hoarse, as applied to the voice. (E.) A peculiar use
of husky, i.e. full of husks (N. E. D.). ‘ Huskye, or ful of huskes,
siliquosus ;” Huloet (1552). Andseethe otherexamples. But perhaps
influenced by prov. E. hask, dry, parching, tart, hoarse (E. D. D.);
husk, hoarse, dry, also hoarseness (id.). Der. husk-i-ness.

HUSSAR, a cavalry soldier. (G.—Hungarian, —Servian. — Gk.
—L.) , ‘Hussars, Husares, Hungarian horsemen ;’ Coles’ Dict. ed.
1684. ‘After the manner of the Hussars ;? Spectator, no. 576.
‘ Hussars, light cavalry in Poland and Hungary, about 1600. The
British Hussars were enrolled in 1759;’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates. =
G, Husar. = Hungar. huszar, a free-booter, later, a light horseman. =
Sery. xusar, a hussar, free-booter, robber, sea-robber ; Popovic.’ = Late
Gk. xovpodpios, a corsair, pirate (Ducange).=—Late L. cursirius, a
corsair.—L. curs-us, a course. See Corsair; of which hwssar is
a doublet. 4 The word is older than the story about Mathias
Corvinus (1458); see N. and Q. 8S. ii. 156; Miklosich, p. 148.

HUSSIF, a case containing thread, needles, and other articles for
sewing, (E.) ‘ Hussif, that is, house-wife; a roll of flannel with
a pin-cushion attached, used forthe purpose of holding pins, needles,
and thread ;” Peacock, Gloss. of words used in Manley and Corring-
ham, co. Lincoln. Spelt husswife in Garrick, Miss in her Teens,
Act 2. sc. 1 (1747), The sense is ‘housewife’s companion.’ [It is
remarkably like Icel. his‘, a case; but this is accidental.] From
House and Wife. The ME. word was nedyl-hows, i.e. needle-house;
Voc. 659. 37-

HUSSY, a pert girl. (E.) ‘The young husseys ;” Spectator, no.
242. Hussy is a corruption of huswife; cf. ‘Doth Fortune play the
huswife with me now ?’ Hen. V, v. 1. 85. And again, huswife stands
for house-wife= woman who minds a house; from house and wife in
the general sense of woman; cf. ‘the good housewife Fortune,’ As
You Like It, i. 2. 33; ‘ Let housewives make a skillet of my helm ;’
Oth. i. 3. 273. Cf. ME. hoswy/, mater familias; Voc. 794.9. See
House and Wife. And see Hussif.

HUSTINGS, a platform used by candidates for election to par-
liament. (Scand.) The modern use is incorrect; it means rather
a ‘council,’ or assembly for the choice of such a candidate; and it
should rather be used in the singular husting. Minsheu has hustings,
and refers to 11 Hen. VII. cap. 21. ME, husting, a council ; ‘ hulden
muchel husting’ = they held a great council ; Layamon, 2324. AS.
husting, a council (of Danes); A. S., Chron. an. 1012. Not an AS.
word, but used in speaking of Danes.—Icel. hasping, ‘a council
or meeting, to which a king, earl, or captain summoned his people
or guardsmen,’=Icel. hiis, a house; and ping, (1) a thing, (2) as
a law term, ‘an assembly, meeting, a general term for any public
meeting, esp. for purposes of legislation; a parliament, including
courts of law.’ Cf. Swed. ting, a thing, an assize; halla ting, to
hold assizes ; Dan. ding, a thing, court, assize. B. The Icel. his is
aerate with E, house; and ping with E. thing. See House and

hing.

HUSTLE, to push about, jostle in a crowd. (Du.) It should
have been hwtsle, but the change to hustle was inevitable, to make it
easier of pronunciation. In Johnson’s Dict., but scarce in literature.
First in 1684.— Du. kutselen, to shake up and down, either in a tub,
bowl, or basket; onder malkanderen hutselen, to huddle together [lit.
to hustle one another]; Sewel. A frequentative form of MDu.
hutsen, Du. hotsen, to shake, jog, jolt. ‘ Hutselen, or hutsen, to shake
something in a hat;’? Hexham. Cf. Lowland Sc. hotch, hott, to move
by jerks, hotter, to jolt; prov. G. hotze, a cradle, a swing (Schade).
See Hotchpot.

HUT, a cottage, hovel. (F.—OHG.) ME. hotte. ‘For scatred
er pi Scottis, and hodred in per hottes’= for scattered are thy Scots,


284 HUTCH


and huddled in their huts; Rob. Manning, tr. of Langtoft, ed.
Hearne, p. 273.—F. hutte, ‘a cote [cot] or cottage ;’ Cot.—OHG,
hutta, G. hiitte, a hut, cottage; whence also Span. huta, a hut ; and
probably Du. hut, Dan. hytte (since these words have not the Low G.
d for HG. ¢t). + Swed. hydda, a hut; MDan. hodde, a hut, hudde,
a nook (Kalkar). From Teut. *hud-, weak grade of *heud-, to hide.
See Hide (1), Hod.

HUTCH, a box, chest, for keeping things in. (F.—Low L.)
Chiefly used now in the comp. rabbit-hutch. Shak. has bolting-hutch,
a hutch for bolted (or boulted) flour; 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 495. Milton
has hutch’d=storedup; Comus, 719, ME. huche, hucche, P. Plowman,
B. iv. 116; Hampole’s Psalter, Ps, 131 (132). 8.—OF. (and F.) huche,
‘a hutch or binne;’ Cot.—mLow L. hiitica; ‘quadam cista, vulgo
hutica dicta ;’ Ducange. PB. Ofunknown origin ; but prob. Teutonic ;
and prob. from OHG. huotan, MHG. hueten, to take care of, from
OHG. huota, heed, care, cognate with E. heed. See Heed.

HUZZAH, a shout of approbation. (E.) ‘Loud huzzas;’ Pope,
Essay on Man, iv. 256. ‘They made a greate huzza, or shout, at
our approch, three times;’ Evelyn’s Diary, June 30, 1665. Of
imitative origin; cf. G. hussa, huzza 3 hussa rufen, to shout huzza.
We find also Dan. hurra, hurrah! Swed. hurra, hurrah! hurrarop,
a cheer (rop =a shout); hwrra, v., to salute with cheers; MHG,
hurra, hurrah! Cf. Dan. hurre, to hum, to buzz. See Hurrah,
Hurry.

HYACINTH, a kind of flower. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Cotgrave
and Minsheu; and in Milton, P. L.iv. yor. Spelt kyacint in Daniel,
Sonnet 34.—F. hyacinthe, ‘the blew or purple jaeint, or hyacinth
flower ; we call it also crow-toes;’ Cot. = L. hyacinthus.— Gk. taxiv@os,
an iris or larkspur (not what is now called a hyacinth) ; said, in
Grecian fable, to have sprung from the blood of the youth Hyacinthos ;
but, of course, the fable is later than the name. Cf. Brugmann,
i. § 280. Der. hyacinth-ine, i.e. curling like the hyacinth, Milton,
P. L. iv. 301; Pope, Odys. vi. 274. Doublet, jacinth.

HYADHES, a group of stars in Taurus. (Gk.) In G. Douglas, tr.
of Virgil, bk. iii. ch. 8,1. 21.— Gk. tades, pl., the Hyades; lit. ‘little
pigs;’ allied to Gk. és, a sow; see Sow (2). Called in Latin
sucule, with the same sense. 4 Connected in popular etymology
with tev, to rain; hence Virgil has ‘ pluuiasque Hyadas;’ Aen.
iii. 516.

HY AGNA, the same as Hyena, q. v.

HYALINGE, crystalline, glassy. (L.—Gk.) See Milton, P. L.
vii. O19.—L. hyalinus. —Gk. tddcvos, glassy; see Rev, iv. 6.—Gk.
Uados, vedos, crystal.

HYBRID, mongrel, an animal or plant produced from two
different species. (L.—Gk.) ‘She’s a wild Irish born, sir, and
a hybride;’ Ben Jonson, New Inn, A, ii. sc. 2 (Host); also spelt
hybride in Minsheu. = L. hibrida, hybrida, a mongrel, hybrid; esp. with
reference to a wild boar and a sow; Pliny, bk. viii. c. 53. B. Some-
times derived from Gk. vBpi5-, stem of HBpis, insult, wantonness,
violation; but this is doubtful. Rather, from Gk. v-, for ts, a sow;
and iBpo-, only known from the comp. iBpi-tado1 = yxorpoar, i. e. hogs
(Hesychius), So M. Warren, in Amer. Journal of Philology;
vol. v. no. 4.

HYDATID, a cyst containing a watery fluid. (Gk.) The pl.
hydatides occurs in 1683; Phil. Trans. xiii, 284.—Gk. tda715-, stem
of tdaris, a watery vesicle.Gk. tdar-, stem of tdwp, water. See
Hydra.

HYDRA, a many-headed water-snake. (L.—Gk.) In Shak,
Cor. iii. 1. 93.—L. hydra.—Gk. t5pa, a water-snake; also written
Udpos ; from the base 5- which appears in vdwp, water.4-Skt. udra-s,
a water-animal, otter; cited by Curtius, i. 308; Russ. vuidra,
an otter; Lithuan, udrd, an otter; AS. ofer, an otter. See Otter
and Water, Brugmann, i. § 572. Der. hydra-headed, Hen. V,
i. I. 35; also hydr-ant, barbarously coined, with L. suffix -ant-;
also hydr-ate.

HYDRANGEA, a kind of flower. D>) A coined name,
referring to the cup-form of the capsule, or se€d-vessel ; Johnson’s
Gardeners’ Dict., 1877. First in 1753. Made from Gk. ddp-, for
vdwp, water; and dyyetoy or dyyos, a vessel.

HYDRAULIC, relating to water in motion, conveying or
acting by water. (F.—L.&Gk)) ‘ Hydraulick, pertaining to organs,
or to an instrument to draw Water, or to the sound of running waters
(Bacon) ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Bacon has hydraulicks, Nat.
Hist. § 102.—F. hydraulique, ‘ the sound of running waters, or music
made thereby;” Cot.—L. hydraulicus,—Gk. t5pavaicds, belonging
to a water-organ.—Gk, vdpavdis, an organ worked by water. = Gk.
b8p-, for Vdwp, water; and avAds, a tube, pipe; from the base af, to
blow; cf. dn, 1 blow. For a description of what the hydraulic
organ really was, see Chappell’s Hist. of Music.

HYDRODYSAMICS, the science relating to the force of
water in motion. Gk) A scientific term; coined (in 1738) from


HYPNOTISM


Gk. vépo-, from véwp, water; and Late L. dynamicus, a word of Gk. —


origin. See Water and Dynamic.

HYDROGEN, a very light gas. (F.-—Gk.)) F. hydrogene
(1787). Spelt hydrogene, E. Darwin, Botanic Garden, c. iii. 1. 260
(note); 1791. A scientific term; coined from hydro-, for Gk.
U5po-, from v5wp, water ; and -géne, for Gk. root yév-, to produce,.
generate. The name means ‘ generator of water.’ See Water and
Genesis.

HYDROPATHY, the water-cure. (Gk.) First in 1843.
Coined from hydro-, standing for Gk. #Spo-, from téwp, water; and
Gk. 746-0s, suffering, hence, endurance of treatment. See Water
and Pathos. Der. hydropath-ic, hydropath-ist.

HYDROPHOBIA, fear of water. (L.—Gk.) In Kersey’s
Dict., ed. 1715; spelt Aydrophobie,a French form, in Minsheu. First
in 1547. A symptom of the disease due to a mad dog’s bite. Coined
from Gk, wdpo-, from vowp, water; and Gk. $68-os, fear, fright, allied
to peBopua, I flee.

HYDROPSY, the old spelling of Dropsy. (F.—L.—Gk.)
ME. ydropesie, Wyclif, Luke, xiv. 2; where the later text has
dropesie (with loss of y).— MF. hydropisie, ‘dropsie ;’ Cot. —L. hydré-
pisis, hydropisia.—Late Gk. *tdpwmots, not found; extended from
Gk. vdpan), dropsy, a disease due to excess of water.— Gk, vdpo-, for
viwp, water. See Water.

HYDROSTATICS, the science which treats of fluids at rest.
(Gk.) In Kersey, ed. 1715; first in 1660. Coined from hydro-=
Gk, ¥5po-, from tSwp, water; and E. statics. See Water and
Statics,

HYENA, a sow-like quadruped. (L.—Gk.) Also spelt hyena ;
Milton, Samson, 748. [Older authors use the French form, as hyen,
Shak. As You Like It, iv. 1.156. ME. hyene, Chaucer, La Respounse
de Fortune au Pleintif, st. 2.)}—L. hyena.—Gk. tava, a hyena, lit.
“sow-like;’ thought to resemble a sow.—Gk. #-, stem of és, a sow,
cognate with E. sow; with fem. adj. suffix -ava. See Sow (2).

HYGIENE, sanitary science. (F.—Gk.) Hygiene occurs in 1671
(N. E. D.). =F. hygiene ; in Dict. Acad. 1762.—Gk. tyew7 (TéExv7),
fem. of tyevés, healthful. — Gk. dy7s, healthy.

HYMEN, the god of marriage. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. Temp. iv.
I. 23.—L. hymen. —Gk. ‘Ypyy, the god of marriage. Der. hymenean
or hymenean, Milton, P. L. iv. 711, from MF. hymenean, ‘of or
belonging to a wedding,’ Cot., from L. Hymeneus, Gk. tpévacos,
another name of Hymen, though the proper signification is a
wedding-song; later turned into hymen-eal, as in ‘ hymeneal rite,’
Pope’s Homer, Il. xviii. 570. Allied to hymn; Brugmann, i.
§ 204.

HYMN, a song of praise. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. ympne, Wyclif,
Matt. xxvi. 30; in which the p is excrescent after m, as in ME,
solem&ne = solemn. = OF. ymue (Littré), later hymne, ‘a hymne,’ Cot.=
L. hymnum, acc. of hymnus. = Gk. tpvos, a song, festive song, hymn.
B. Some explain tyvos as ‘a stitching or joining together’ (cf.
Rhapsody), and connect it with Skt. syiman, a thread (Macdonell)
and E. seam (1) and sew; Brugmann, i. § 294. Der, hymno-


logy.

HYPALLAGE, an interchange. (L.—Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674; and in Puttenham, Eng. Poesie, ed. Arber, bk. iii. ch. 15,
p. 183.—L. hypallagé, ‘a rhetorical figure, by which the relations of
things seem to be mutually interchanged; as, dare classibus austros
(=to give the winds to the fleet) instead of dare classes austris (to
give the fleet to the winds); Virgil, Afn. iii. 61;’ White. —Gk.
tmadAayn, an interchange, exchange, hypallage.—Gk. im-, for td,
under (see Sub-) ; and ad\Aayn,a change, from adAddcouy, to change;
from Gk. @AA-os, another, other. See Alien, Else.

HYPER-, prefix, denoting excess. (L.—Gk.) L. hyper, for
Gk, tmép, above, beyond, allied to L. super, above. See Super-.
Hence hyper-baton, a transposition of words from their natural order,
lit. ‘a going beyond,’ from Baiveay, to go, cognate with E. come;
hyper-critical, coined from hyper- and critical ; hyper-borean, extreme
northern (Minsheu), from L. boreas, Gk. Bopéas, the north wind ;
hyper-metrical, &c. And see below.

HYPERBOLE, a rhetorical exaggeration. (L.—Gk.) In Shak.
LL. L. v. 2. 407.—L. hyperbolé.— Gk. imepBodn, excess, exaggera-
tion. — Gk. ivép, beyond (see Hyper-); and Bade, to throw, cast.
Der. hyperbol-ic-al, Cor. i. 9. 51. Doublet, hyperbola, as a mathe-
matical term.

HYPHEN, a short stroke (-) joining two parts of a compound
word, (L.—Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. hyphen, which
is merely a Latinised spelling of Gk. bpév, together, lit. ‘ under one.’
—- Gk. ip-, for i7d, under (see Hypo-) ; and &, one thing, neuter of
eis, one, which is prob. allied to L. sim- in sim-plex,

HYPNOTISM, the process of artificially producing a deep sleep,
(Gk.) Introduced in 1842; due to hypnotic, adj., which occurs as
early as 1625. ‘ Hypnoticks, medicines that cause sleep ;’ Kersey,


HYPO-


ed. 1721.—Gk. imvwrixés, sleepy, narcotic. Gk. imvd-ey, to put to.


sleep. —Gk. tmvos, sleep, for *sup-nos, where sup- is the weak grade
of o/SWEP, to sleep; cognate with L. somnus (< *swep-nus); see
Somniferous. Brugmann, i. §§ 97, 121.

-HYPO-, prefix, lit. ‘under.’ (Gk.) Gk. id, under ; cognate with
L. sub. See Sub-.

HY POCHONDRIA, a mental disorder, inducing gloominess
and melancholy. (L.—Gk.) The adj. hypocondriack occurs in Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. Named from the spleen, which was supposed
to cause hypochondria, and is situate under the cartilage of the
breast-bone.—L. hypochondria, sb. pl., the parts beneath the breast-
bone. = Gk. ioxévipia, pl. sb., the same, = Gk, t76, under, beneath ;
and xé6vdpos, a corn, grain, groat, gristle, and esp. the cartilage of
the breast-bone (cognate with G. grand, gravel, and allied to E.
grind). Der. hypochondria-c, hypochondria-c-al; also hip, to depress
the spirits, hipp-ish. See Hippish.

HYPOCRISY, pretence to virtue. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. ifo-
crisye, Chaucer, C. T. 12344 (C 410) ; ypocrisie, P. Plowman, B. xv.
108. =OF. hypocrisie, ‘hypocrisie, dissembling ;’ Cot.—L. hypocrisis,
in 1 Tim. iv. 2 (Vulgate). — Gk. iméxpicrs, a reply, answer, the playing
of a part on the stage, the acting of a part, hypocrisy. = Gk. iroxpivo-
pa, L reply, make answer, play a part. — Gk, ind, under; and xpivopa,
I contend, dispute, middle voice of xpivew, to judge, discern, See
Critic. Der. from the same source, hypocrite, ME. ypocryte,
Chaucer, C. T. 10828 (F 514), F. hypocrite, L. hypocrita, hypocrités,
from Gk. troxpitys, a dissembler, Matt. vi. 2; hypocrit-ic, hypocrit-
ic-al, hypocrit-ic-al-ly.

HYPOGASTRIC, belonging to the lower part of the abdo-
men. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt kypogastrick in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
‘The hypogaster or paunch;’ Minsheu.—MF. hypogastrique, ‘ be-
longing to the lower part of the belly ;’ Cot.—Late L. hypogastricus.
— Gk. troyaorpioy, the lower part of the belly. See Hypo- and
Gastric.

HYPOSTASIS, a substance, personality of each Person in the
Godhead. (L.—Gk.) In Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715 ; and in Minsheu,
ed. 1627. ‘The hypostatical union is the union of humane nature
with Christ’s Divine Person ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. hypo-
stasis.— Gk. tréoraois, a standing under, prop, groundwork, subsist-
ence, substance, Person of the Trinity. Gk. imo, under; and ordos,
a placing, a standing, from 4/STA, to stand. See Hypo- and
Stand. Der. hypostatic=Gk. troaratixds, adj. formed from i7d-
otacs ; hypostatic-al.

HYPOTENUSE, HYPOTHENUSE,, the side of a right-
angled triangle which is opposite the right angle. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Hypothenuse in Kersey, ed. 1715; but it should rather be hypotenuse.
-F. hypoténuse.—L. hypoténisa.— Gk. iroreivovoa, the subtending
line (ypaypy, a line, being understood) ; fem. of tmoreivwy, pres. pt.
of bmoreivey, to subtend, i.e. to stretch under.—Gk. id, under ;
and reivecy, to stretch, from 4/TEN, to stretch. See Subtend.

HYPOTHEC, a kind of pledging or mortgage. (F.—L. —Gk.)
A law term. The adj. hypothecary is in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
Hypothec is Englished from MF. hypotheque, ‘ an ingagement, mort-
gage, or pawning of an immovable;’ Cot. = L. Aypothéca, a mortgage.
— Gk. imo06q«n, an under-prop, also a pledge, mortgage. —Gk. iz,
under ; and base 67-, to place, from 4/DHE, to place. See Hypo-
thesis. Der. hypothec-ate, to mortgage; hypothec-at-ion.

HYPOTHESIS, a supposition. (L.=Gk.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627. The pl. hypotheses is in Holland’s Plutarch, p. 623 (R.). —Late
L. hypothesis.—Gk. tmo@éo.s, a placing under, basis, supposition. =
Gk, v7, under; and base 6e-, to place, from 4/DHE, to place. See
Hypo- and Thesis. Der. hypothetic, adj.=Gk. tmodetixds, sup-
posed, imaginary ; hypothetic-al, h»pothetic-al-ly.

HYSON, a kind of tea. (Chinese.) First mentioned in 1740.
In the Amoy dialect called chhun-té, lit. ‘spring tea,’ from chhun,
spring, and ¢é, tea (Douglas). Said to have been orig. from hi
chhun, lit. ‘blooming spring ;’ i.e. early crop. Frem Amoy hi,
blooming ; chhun, spring ; Chinese hei-ch‘un.

HYSSOP, anaromatic plant. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) Spelt hysope
in Minsheu. ME. ysope, Wyclif, Hebrews, ix. 19.—OF. hyssope,
‘hisop ;’ Cot.—L. hyssdpus. Gk. toowmos, an aromatic plant, but
different from our hyssop; Heb. ix. 19.—Heb. ézd6h, a plant,
the exact nature of which is not known; see Concise Dict. of the
Bible.

HYSTERIC, convulsive, said of fits. (F.-L.—Gk.) Kersey
has hysteric and hysterical; only the latter is in Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674.—MF. hysterique; ‘affection hysterique, the suffocation of the
matrix ;’ Cot.—L. hystericus; whence hysterica passio, called in E.
‘the mother ;’ see K. Lear, ii. 4. 56.—Gk. torepixds, suffering in the
womb, hysterical. —Gk. torépa, the womb; allied to Skt. udara-m,
the belly, the womb; which see in Uhlenbeck. Brugmann, i. § 706.
Der. hysteric-al, -al-ly; hysterics, hysteria.


ICOSAHEDRON 285


It


I, nom. case of first personal pronoun. (E.) ME. (Northern) if, :;
(Southern) ich, uch, i. AS. ic.-Du. ik; Icel. ek; Dan. jeg ; Swed.
jag; Goth. ik; G. ich; OHG. ik.4Russ.ia; Lith. asz; L. ego; Gk.
éyw, éyov; Skt. aham. IRdg. base EGH-, EG-; see Brugmann, ii.
§ 434; Streitberg, § 183. See Me, which is, however, from a different
base.

I-, prefix with negative force. (L.) Only in i-gnoble, i-gnominy,
i-gnore, as an abbreviation of L. in-; see In- (3).

IAMBIC, a certain metre or metrical foot, denoted by U-, for
short followed by long. (L.—Gk.) ‘Zambick, Elegiack, Pastorall ;’
Sir P. Sidney, Apologie for Poetrie (1595); ed. Arber, p. 28.—L.
iambicus.—Gk. iapBurcds, iambic.—Gk. tayBos, an iamb or iambic
foot, also iambic verse, a lampoon, Origin doubtful. @ Zamb is
sometimes used to represent Gk. tapBos.

IBEX, a species of goat. (L.) Jbexe in Minshen. A scientific
name. = L. ibex, a kind of goat, chamois.

IBIS, a genus of wading birds. (L.—Gk.—Egyptian.) ‘A fowle
in the same Egypt, called ibis ;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. viii. c. 27.
‘Sikonyes, that thei clepen ibes ;” Mandeville’s Trav. ch. 5, p. 45.—
L. ibis. — Gk. (Bis; an Egyptian bird, to which divine honours were
paid; Herod. ii. 75, 76. Of Egyptian origin; cf. Coptic hippen
(Peyron), occurring as a bird-name in Levit. xi. 17, Deut. xiv. 16,
where the LXX version has 7@is, and the Vulgate has ibis.

ICE, any frozen fluid, esp. water. (E.) ME. ys, zis; spelt ijs (=iis),
P. Ploughman’s Crede, 436; yse (dat. case), Rob. of Glouc. p. 463,
1. 4; l.g511. AS. is, ice ; Grein, ii. 147.-4-Du. is; Icel. iss; Dan.
iis; Swed. is; G. ets; OHG.ts. Teut. type *isom, neut. Der. ice-
berg, found in 1774, but not in Todd’s Johnson; in which the latter
element is the Du. and Swed. berg, Dan. bjerg, G. berg, a mountain,
hill; whence Du. ijsberg, Swed. isberg, Dan. tisbjerg, G. eisberg, an
iceberg. We prob. borrowed it from Dutch. Also ice-blink, from
Dan. iisblink, Swed. isblink, a field of ice extending into the interior
of Greenland; so named from its shining appearance; from Dan.
blinke, to gleam; see Blink. Also ice-boat, ice-bound, ice-cream
(abbreviated from iced-cream), ice-field, ice-float, ice-floe, ice-house,
ice-island, Ice-land, ice-man, ice-pack, ice-plant. Also ice, vb., ic-ing.
Also ic-y=AS. isig; Grein, il. 1473 ic-i-ly, ic-i-ness. And see
Icicle.

ICHNEUMON, an Egyptian carnivorous animal. (L.—Gk.) In
Holland’s Pliny, b. viii. c. 24; Gosson, School of Abuse, ed. Arber,
p- 38 (1579).—L. ichneumon (Pliny). = Gk. ixvedpwy, an ichneumon;
lit. ‘a tracker;’ so called because it tracks out the eggs of the
crocodile, which it devours. See Aristotle, Hist. Animals, 9. 6. 5.—
Gk. ixvevew, to track, hunt after.—Gk. iyvos, a track, footstep.
Der. From the same source is ichno-graphy, a design traced out,
ground-plan, a term in architecture (Vitruvius).

ICHOR, the fluid in the veins of gods. (Gk.) ‘ The sacred ichor ;’
Pope, tr. of Homer, Il. v. 516.—Gk. ixwp, juice, the blood of gods.
Der. ichor-ous.

ICHTHYOGRAPHY, a description of fishes. (Gk.) A
scientific term. Coined from Gk. ix@vo-, decl. stem of ix@us, a fish;
and ypapew, to describe. B. So also ichthyology, spelt icthyology
by Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 24. § 1; from Gk. ixéus,
a fish, and Adyos, a discourse, from Aéyeuv, to speak of.

ICICLE, a hanging point of ice. (E.) ME. isikel; spelt ysekel,
iseyokel, isykle, isechel, P. Plowman, B. xvii. 227; C. xx. 193, Com-
pounded of ME. ys, ice (see Ice) ; and zky/, also used alone in the
same sense of ‘icicle,’ as in Prompt. Parv., p. 259. Levins also has
ickles=icicles. AS. isgicel, compounded of is, ice, and gicel, a small
piece of ice; orig. written ises gicel, where ises is in the gen. case.
‘Stiria, ises gicel;’ /Elfric’s Gloss., in Wright’s Vocab. i, 21, col. 2
(Voc. 117.14). B. Gicel appears in the older form gecilae, Epinal
Gloss. 954, which is cognate with Icel. jokall, used by itself to signify
‘icicle;’ cf. Low G. is-hekel, is-jakel, icicle. -y. Icel. jokull is the
dim. of Icel. jaki, a piece of ice, cognate with Irish aig, W. ia, ice
(from an OCeltic type yagi-) ; Stokes-Fick, p. 222. Cf. also Pers.
yakh, ice; Rich. Dict. p. 1705; Horn, § 1126. Also prov. E. ickle,
an icicle; and the comp. ice-shockle, Thus the word really =ice-ice-l,
though the second ice is not the same word with the first. @ Observe
that -ic- in ic-ic-le is totally different from -ic- in art-ic-le, part-ic-le.

ICONOCLAST, a breaker of images. (Gk.) ‘ Iconoclasts, or
breakers of images;’ Bp. Taylor, Of the Real Presence, xii. § 28.
A coined word; from Gk. eixdvo-, for eixwy (Latinised as tcdz), an
image; and «Aaorys, a breaker, one who breaks, from kdaev, to
break. Der. iconoclast-ic.

ICOSAHEDRON, a solid figure, having twenty equal triangular
faces. (Gk.) Spelt icosaedron in Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715. Coined.


286 IDEA


from Gk. eixoor, twenty; and é6pa, a base, lit. a scat, from base é6-,
to sit, cognate with E. Sit. Der. icosahedr-al.

IDEA, a (mental) image, notion, opinion. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Idea is
a bodilesse substance,’ &c.; Holland, tr. of Plutarch, p..666. ‘The
fayre Idea ;’ Spenser, Sonnet 45.—L. idea.—Gk, id€a, the look or
semblance of a thing, species. — Gk, ideiv, to see. —4/WEID, to see;
cf. Skt. vid, to perceive, know. See Wit, verb. Der. ide-al, from
MF. ideal, ‘ideall’ (Cot.), which is from L. idedlis ; hence zde-al-ly,
ide-al-ise, ide-al-ism, ide-al-ist, ide-al-is-at-ion, ide-al-ist-ic, ide-al-i-ty
(most of these terms being rather modern).

IDENTICAL, the very same. (L.) ‘Of such propositions as in
the schools are called identicall ;? Digby, Of Man’s Soul, c. 2 (R.)
Coined by adding -al to the older term identic, spelt identick in
Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715. ‘The beard’s th’ identiqgue beard you
knew ;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 1. 1. 149. Identic is formed as if
from a Late L. *identicus, suggested by the older identitas; see
Identity. Der. identic-al-ly, -ness.

IDENTITY, sameness. (F.—Late L.—L.) ‘Of identity and
of diversity ;? Holland’s Plutarch, p. 54 (R.); and in Minsheu.=—F.
identité, ‘identity, likeness, the being almost the very same; Cot. =
Late L. identitaitem, acc. of identitas, sameness ; a word which occurs
in Marcianus Capella. — L. identi-, occurring in identi-dem, repeatedly ;
with suffix -tas.—L. idem, the same; for *is-dem >*iz-dem; Brug-
mann, ii. § 416.—L. i-, from base I, pronominal base of the 3rd
person ; and -dem, from base DE, likewise a pronom. base of the 3rd
person. Der. From the same L, identi- we have identi-fy =F.
identifier (Littré); whence identi-fic-at-ion; see identical.

IDES, the 15th day of March, May, July, and October, and the
13th of other months. (F.—L.) ‘The ides of March;’ Jul. Cesar,
i. 2.18, 19.—F. ides, ‘the ides of a month ;’ Cot. =L. idiis, the ides.
Rob. of Brunne has the Lat. form Idus; tr. of Langtoft, p. 341.

IDIOM, a mode of expression peculiar to a language. (F.—L.—
Gk.) ‘The Latine and Greek idiom;’ Milton, Of Education (R.)
Spelt zdiome in Minsheu.—F. idiome, ‘an ideom, or proper form of
speech;’ Cot.=—L. idiéma.—Gk. idiwya, an idiom, peculiarity in
language.— Gk. idi6w, I make my own.=—Gk. idco-, decl. stem of
810s, one’s own, peculiar to one’s self. (See Prellwitz.) Der. idiom-
at-ic, from idwwpar-, stem of iStwpua; idiom-at-ic-al, idiom-at-ic-al-ly.
Also idio-pathy, a primary disease not occasioned by another, from
ico-, for iS:0s, and ma$-, as seen in madetv, to suffer (see Pathos) ;
idio-path-ic, idio-path-ic-al-ly. And see below.

IDIOSYNCRASY, peculiarity of temperament, a character-
istic. (Gk.) ‘ Whether quails, from any idiosyncracy or peculiarity
of constitution,’ &c.; Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 28, last
section. Cf. F. idiosyncrasie.— Gk. iSioovyxpacia, a peculiar tempera-
ment or habit of body.=—Gk. iS:0-, for ios, peculiar to one’s self;
and ovyxpacis, a mixing together, blending. For Gk. id1os, see
Idiom. The Gk. ovyxpacis is compounded of ov, together, and
Kpaois, a mingling; see Crasis.

IDIOT, a foolish person, one weak in intellect. (F.—L.—Gk.)
See Trench, Study of Words. ME. idiot, Chaucer, C. T. 5893 (D 311).
=—F. idiot, ‘an ideot (sic) or naturall fool;? Cot.—L. ididta, an
ignorant, uneducated person. Gk. idiiwrns, a private person, hence
one who is inexperienced or uneducated. (See 1 Cor. xiv. 16, where
the Vulgate has locum ididte, and Wyclif ‘ the place of an ydiote.’) =
Gk. i&i6w, I make my own.=Gk. i&10-, for id:0s, one’s own. See
Idiom. Der. idiot-ic, idiot-ic-al, idiot-ic-al-ly, idiot-ism (=idiom) ;
also idioc-y, in Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715, formed from idiot as
prophec-y is from prophet.

IDLE, unemployed, useless, unimportant. (E.) ME. ydel, Chaucer,
C. T. 2507 (A 2505); hence the phr. im idel sin vain, id. 12576
(C 642). AS. idel, vain, empty, useless; Grein, ii. 135.-4-Du. idel,
vain, frivolous, trifling; (whence Dan. and Swed. del); G. eitel,
vain, conceited, trifling; OHG. ital, empty, useless, mere. The
orig. sense seems to have been ‘ empty’ or ‘ clear;’ cf. Low G. idel,
pure, unmixed (Liibben); cf. Gk. i@apés, pure, aidyp, a clear sky.
See Ether. Der. idl-y; idle, verb; idl-er, idle-ness, Ormulum,
4736, from AS. idelnes, Grein, ii. 135.

IDOL, a figure or image of a god. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. idole,
Chaucer, C. T. 15753 (G 285).—OF. idole; see Sherwood’s index to
Cot.—L. idélum, 1 Cor. viii. 4 (Vulg.); also iddlon.—Gk. e/Swdov,
an image, likeness. —Gk. eiSouar, I appear, seem; cf. Gk. eZdor,
I saw, idetv, to see. —4/WEID, to see; cf. Skt. vid, to perceive; and
see Wit, verb. Der. ido-latry (contraction of édolo-latry), ME.
ydolatrie, Chaucer, C. T. Pers. Tale, De Avaritia, § 2 (I 748), from
F. idolatrie=Late L. idélatria, shortened form of idélolatria, from
Gk, «idwAoAarpeia, service of idols, Coloss. iii. 5; composed of
eidwdo-, for efSwAov, and Aarpeia, service, from Adtpoy, hire. Also
idolater, from OF. idolatre, ‘an idolater’ (Cot.); also idolastre in
OF., whence ME. idolastre, an idolater, Chaucer, C. T. Pers. Tale,
De Avaritia, § 3 (1 749); the OF. idolatre is developed from OF.


ILIAC


idolatr-ie, explained above. Hence also idolatr-ess, idolatr-ise, idolatr-
ous, idolatr-ous-ly. Also idol-ise (Kersey), idol-is-er ; see idy/.
IDYL, IDYLL, a pastoral poem. (L.—Gk.) ‘Amatorious
eidyls ;? Holland’s Pliny, bk. xxviii. ch. 2 (ii. 296). ‘Zdyl, a poem
consisting of a few verses;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. = L. idyllium.

— Gk. eidvAXov, a short descriptive pastoral poem ; so called from
its descriptive representations.— Gk. e?50s, shape, figure, appear-
ance, look.— Gk, etSoya:, I appear, seem (above). Der. idyll-ic.

IF, a conjunction, expressive of doubt. (E.) ME. if, Chaucer,
C.T. 145; 3if, P. Plowman, B. prol. 37; giff, Barbour, Bruce, i. 12.
AS. gif, if; Grein, i. 505. Cf. Icel. ef, if, if; OFries. ief, gef, ef,
if; OSax. ef, if; Goth. iba, bai, interrog. particle, jabai, if. Cf. also
Du. of, OF ries. of, OSax. of, G. ob; OHG. iba, condition, stipula-
tion, whence the instrum. case bu, pu, used in the sense of ‘if,’ lit.
‘on the condition ;’ also OHG. ui, upa, ube, mod. G. ob, whether.
B. The OHG, zbu is the instrumental case of iba, as said above ; so
also the Icel. ef, if, is closely related to (and once a case of) Icel. ef
(if), doubt, hesitation, whence also the verb efa (ifa), to doubt. See
Kluge, s. v. 0b. @ The guess of Horne Tooke, that AS. gif is the
imperative mood of AS. gifan, to give, has been copied only too
often. It is plainly wrong, (1) because the AS. use of the words
exhibits no such connexion, and (2) because it fails to explain the
cognate forms.

IGNITION, a setting on fire. (F.—L.) ‘Not a total ignition ;’
Sir T. Browne, Works, b. ii. c, 2. § 6.—F. ignition, ‘a burning,
firing;’ Cot. Coined (as if from L. *ignitio, a burning) from L.
ignitus, pp. of ignire, to set on fire. —L. zgnis, fire.4+-Skt. agni, fire ;
base *egni-. Cf. Russ. ogone, Lith. ugnis, fire; base *ogni-, Brug-
mann, i. § 148. See also Ingle (2). Der. Hence ignite, a later
word, though perhaps formed directly from L. pp. ignitus ; ignit-ible.
Also igneous, Englished from L. igneus, fiery, by the common change
from L. -us to E. -ous. Also, directly from the Latin, ignis fatuus,
lit. ‘ foolish fire,’ hence, a misléading meteor; see Fatuous. ‘Fuller
(Comment. on Ruth, p. 38) would have scarcely spoken of ‘‘a
meteor of foolish fire,” if ignis fatuus, which has now quite put out
“¢ fredrake,” the older name for these meteors, had not been, when
he wrote, still strange to the language, or quite recent to it;’
Trench, Eng. Past and Present, lect. iv. (ed. 1875).

IGINOBLE, not noble, mean, base. (F.—L.) In Shak. Rich. III,
ii. 7. 127.—F. ignoble, ‘ignoble ;’ Sherwood’s index to Cotgrave. =
L. igndbilis.—L. i-, short for in-, not; and gndbilis, later nobilis,


noble. See I- and Noble. Der. ignobl-y, ignoble-ness. And see
Ignominy.
IGNOMINY, disgrace, dishonour. (F.—L.) In Shak. 1


Hen. IV, v. 4. 100. =F. ignominie, ‘ignominy ;’ Cot.—L. igndminia,
disgrace.=L. i-, short for in-, not; and gndmini-, decl. stem of
-gnomen (as in a-gndmen, co-gndmen), something by which one is
known; from gnd-scere, to know; see Know. 4 Distinct from L.
nomen, a name; see Name. Der. ignomini-ous, ignomini-ous-ly,
-ness. See Ignore.

IGNORE, not to know, to disregard. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave.
=—F. ignorer, ‘to ignore, or be ignorant of;’ Cot.—L. ignorare, not
to know.=L. i-, short for im-, not; and the base gzd-, seen in
gnoscere, later noscere, to know. See Know. Der. ignorant, in the
Remedie of Love, st. 34, pr. in Chaucer’s Works, ed. 1561, fol. 323 b,
from F. ignorant (Cot.), which from L. igndrant-, stem of pres. pt. of
ignorare; ignorant-ly; also ignorance, in early use, Ancren Riwle,
p. 278, 1. 7, from F. ignorance (Cot.), which is from L. igndraniia,
ignorance, Also ignoramus, formerly a law term; ‘Igndramus (i. e-
we are ignorant) is properly written on the bill of indictments by the
grand enquest, empanelled on the inquisition of causes criminal and
publick, when they mislike their evidence, as defective or too weak
to make good the presentment;’ Blount’s Law Dict. 1691 (rom
Cowel, 1607).

IGUANA, a kind of American lizard, (Span.—Caribbean.)
‘The yguana’ is described in a translation by E. G. of Acosta’s
Hist. of the Indies, p. 313. Spelt zwanna in Eden, ed. Arber, p. 167.
Also called guana.—Span. iguana, B. Eden (ed. Arber, pp. 85,
167) gives ivanna as the (Caribbean) name in Hayti; he spells it
yuana at p. 220. Littré gives ywana as a Caribbean word, cited by
Oviedo in 1525,

IGUANODOYN, a fossil dinosaur, with teeth like an iguana.
From iguana, and Gk, édov-r-, stem of ddovs, a tooth.

IL- (1), the form assumed by the prefix in- (=L. in, prep.) when
followed by J. Exx.: il-lapse, il-lation, il-lision, il-lude, il-luminate,
il-lusion, il-lustrate, il-lustrious. See In- (2).

TL- (2), the form assumed by the L. prefix iz-, used in a negative
sense, when followed by J. Exx.: il-legal, il-legible, il-legitimate,
il-liberal, il-licit, il-limitable, il-literate, il-logical. See In- (3).

ILIAC, pertaining to the smaller intestines. (F.—L.) ‘The
iliacke passion is most sharpe and grieuous;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny,


ILIAD


b. xxx. c 7.—F. iliague, ‘of or belonging to the flanks;’ Cot.
Formed from Late L. iliacus, adj. (Lewis); from L. 2/a, sb. pl. the
flanks, groin. B. But interpreted as if from Late L. ileos, for Gk.
eideos, a Severe pain in the intestines; from Gk. efAeiv, cide, to
press hard. See also Jade (2).

ILIAD, an epic poem by Homer. (L.—Gk.) Called ‘ Homer’s
Iliads’ by the translator Chapman.=L. Jliad-, stem of Ilias, the
Tiad. = Gk. Tca5-, stem of *IAcds, the Iliad. = Gk. “IAcos, "IAcov, Ilios,
lion, the city of Illus; commonly known as Troy.=—”IAos, Ilus, the
(mythical) grandfather of Priam, and son of Tos (whence Troy).

TLK, same. (E.) Hence, of that ilk, of the same (territorial)
name; e.g. Guthrie of that ilk, i.e. Guthrie of Guthrie. ME.
(Northern) ik; AS. ilca, m., the same. From the pronominal stem
i- (as in Goth. z-s, L. i-s, he), and AS. lic, like. Cf. such, which
(North. swilk, quhilk).

ILL, evil, bad, wicked. (Scand.) The comp. and superl. forms
are Worse, Worst, q.v. ME. ill, il/e, Ormulum, 6647 ; common
as ady., Havelok, 1165; chiefly used in poems which contain several
Scand. words. —Icel. illr, adj. ill; also written illr; Dan. ilde (for
ille), adv. ill, badly ; Swed. ila, adv. ill, badly. [It is not allied to
the AS. yfel, whence the mod. E. evil.| Der. ill, adv., ill, sb. ; ill-
ness, Macb. i. 5. 21 (not in early use) ; #l-blood, ill-bred, ill-breeding,
ill-favoured, ill-natured, ill-starred, ill-will,

ILLAPSH, a gliding in, sudden entrance. (L.) Rare. ‘The
illapse of some such active substance or powerful being, illapsing
into matter,’ &c.; Hale, Origin of Mankind, p. 321 (R.) Coined (in
imitation of Japse) from L. illapsus, a gliding in.—L. iJ- (for iz), in;
lapsus, a gliding, from the same stem as the pp. of /4@bi, to glide.
See Il- (1) and Lapse. Der. illapse, vb.

ILLATION, an inference, conclusion. (F.—L.) ‘TIillation, an
inference, conclusion ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674; and in Cotgrave.
=F, illation, ‘an illation, inference ;’ Cot.—L. acc. illatidnem, from
nom. illatio, a bringing in, inference.—L. il-=in-, prefix, in; and
lat-, as in ldtus=tlatus, borne, brought (=Gk. rAnrés, borne), from
ATEL, to lift. See Il- (1) and Tolerate. {@f Since latus is used
as the pp. of ferre, to bear, whence in-fer-ence, the senses of illation
and inference are much the same. Der. il-lative, il-lative-ly.

ILLEGAL, contrary to law. (L.) ‘Not an illegal violence ;’
Milton, Reason of Church Government, b. ii (R.) And in Selden,
Table Talk, ed. Arber, p. 75. From Il- (2) and Legal. Der.
illegal-ity, from F, illegalité, ‘illegality;’ Cot.; illegal-ly, illegal-ise.

ILLEGIBLE, not to be read. (F.—L.) ‘The secretary poured
the ink-box all over the writings, and so defaced them that they
were made altogether illegible ;? Howell, Dodona’s Grove, ed. 1645,

. 55 (N. E. D.), Coined from Il- (2) and Legible. Der.
illegibl-y, illegible-ness; also illegibil-i-ty.

ILLEGITIMATE, not born in wedlock. (L.) In Shak. Troil.
v. 7. 18. From Il- (2) and Legitimate. Der, illegitimate-ly,
illegitimac-y.

ILLIBERAL, niggardly, mean. (F.—L.) In Marlowe, Faustus,
i. 1, Bacon has illiberalitie; Essay vii (Of Parents). From Il- (2)
and Liberal, Der. illiberal-ly, illiberal-i-ty.

ILLICIT, unlawful. (F.—L.)  ‘ Illicitous, Illicite, unlawful ;’
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1684. =F. illicite, ‘illicitous ;? Cot.—L. ilicitus,
not allowed.—L. il-=in-, not; and licitus, pp. of. licére, to be
allowed, to be lawful. See Inicense. Der. illicit-ly, illicit-ness.

ILLIMITABLE, boundless. (L.) In Spenser, Hymn of
Heavenly Love, 1. 57; Milton, P. L. ii. 892. From Il- (2) and
Limitable; see Limit, Der. illimitabl-y, illimitable-ness.

ILLISION, a striking against. (L.) In Holland’s Plutarch,
p- 867 (R.); and Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 27, part 10.
Formed (by analogy with F. sbs. from L. accusatives) from L. illisio,
a striking or dashing against; cf. i/lis-us, pp. of illidere, to strike
against.—L. i- (for iz, upon); and Jedere, to strike, hurt. See
Il- (1) and Lesion,

ILLITERATE, unlearned, ignorant. (L.) In Shak. Two Gent.
lil, i. 296.—L. illitterdtus, less correctly illiteradtus, unlettered. = L.
il-=in-, not; and Jitteratus, literatus, literate. See Il- (2) and
Literal. Der. illiterate-ly, -ness.

ILLOGICAL, not logical. (L. and Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674. From Il- (2) and Logical; see Logic. Der. illogical-ly,
~e€SS.

ILLUDS#, to deceive. (L.; or F.—L.) ‘I cannot be iliuded;’
Sir T, More, Works, p. 166 g. Cf. F. illuder, ‘to illude, delude, mock;’
Cot. —L. illadere, pp. illiisus, to make sport of, mock, deceive. = L.
il- =in-, on, upom; and lidere, to play. See Il- (1) and Ludi-
erous. Der. illus-ion, q.v.; also illus-ive, Thomson, to Seraphina,
1. 25 illus-ive-ly, illus-ive-ness.

ILLUMINATE, to enlighten, light up. (L.) In the Bible,
A. V., Heb. x. 32; Shak. Jul. Cesar, i. 3. 110. But properly a pp.,
as in Bacon, Adv. of Learning, b.i. 7. § 3; G. Douglas, tr. of Virgil,


IMBECILE 287


prol, to bk. xii., 1. 54. [Older writers use ilumine; see Dunbar,
Thrissill and Rois, st. 3. We also find the shortened form illume,
Hamlet, i. 1. 37. Both from F. illuminer; Cot.) =—L. illaminatus,
Heb. x. 32 (Vulgate); pp. of iluminire, to give light to.=L. il-,
for ix, on, upon; and lamindre, to light up, from limin-, for lamen,
light. See Il- (1) and Luminary. Der. illuminat-ion, illuminat-
ive, illuminat-or; also illumine (see above), for which Gower uses
enlumine, C, A. iii. 86 (bk. vii. 64), whence the short form illume
(see above), with which cf. relume, Oth. v. 2. 13.

ILLUSION, deception, false show. (F.—L.) In Chaucer, C. T.
11446 (F 1134).—F. illusion, ‘illusion ;’ Cot.—L. acc. illisidnem,
from nom. illusio, a deception; cf. illisus, pp. of illadere, to mock.
See Illude; which also see for illusive,

ILLUSTRATE, to throw light upon. (L.) In Shak. Hen. VIII,
iii, 2.181; and in Palsgrave. Properly a pp.; see L. L. L. iv. 1.65;
y. 1. 128.—L. illustratus, pp. of illustrdre, to light up, throw light
on.=—L, il-, for in, upon; and lustrare, to enlighten. See Illus-
trious. Der. illustrat-or, illustrat-ion, illustrat-ive, illustrat-ive-ly ;
and see below.

ILLUSTRIOUS, bright, renowned. (F.—L.; or L.) In
Shak. L. L. L. i. 1.178. A badly coined word; either from F.
illustre, by adding -ous, or from the corresponding L. illustris, bright,
renowned. [Its form imitates that of industrious, which is correct. |
B. The L. illustris is derived from 7J-, for iz, on, upon; and -listris,
for *louc-s-tris, from lJouc-, base leuc- > liic-, as in liic-idus, bright.
See Lucid. Brugmann, i. § 760. Der. illustrious-ly, -ness.

IM- (1), prefix. (F.—L.) In some words, im- stands for em-, the
OF. form of L. im-, prefix. Exx.: im-brue, im-mure, im-part.

IM- (2), prefix. (E.) For E. iz; as in im-bed, for in-bed. But
due to the influence of Im- (r).

IM- (3), prefix. (L.) L. im- (for ix), in; when 6, m, or p follows.

ixx.: tm-bue, im-merge, im-migrate, im-mit, im-pel, &c.

IM- (4), prefix. (F.—L.; or L.) Negative prefix; for L. iz-,
not. Exx.: zm-material, im-mature, im-measurable, im-memorial, in-
modest, im-moderate, im-moral, im-mortal,, im-movable, im-mutable ;
im-palpable, im-parity, im-partial, im-passable, im-passive, im-patient,
im-peccable, im-penetrable, im-penitent, im-perceptible, im-perfect, im-
perishable, im-personal, im-pertinent, im-perturbable, im-piety, im-pious,
im-placable, im-polite, im-politic, im-ponderable, im-possible, im-potent,
im-practicable, im-probable, im-proper, im-provident, im-prudent, im-
pure; for which see material, &c.

IMAGE, a likeness, statue, idol, figure. (F.—L.) In Chaucer,
C. T. 420 (A 418). And in St. Katherine, 1. 1476.—F. image, ‘an
image;’ Cot.—L. imdaginem, acc. of imago, a likeness. Formed,
with suffix -dgo, from the base im- seen in im-itdri, to imitate. See
Imitate. Der. image-ry, Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii. 100; ymagerie,
Gower, C, A. li. 320; bk. v. 5771; also imag-ine, q. v.

IMAGINE, to conceive of, think, devise. (F.—L.) ME. ima-
ginen; Chaucer, C. T. 5309 (B 889).—F. imaginer, ‘to imagine,
think;’ Cot.—L. imagindri, pp. imigindtus, to picture to one’s self,
imagine, =L,. imagin-, stem of imago, a likeness; see Image. Der.
imagin-er ; imagin-able, Sir T. More, Works, p. 1193 d; zmagin-abl-y,
imagin-able-ness ; imagin-ar-y, Com. of Errors, iv. 3. 10; imagin-at-
ion, ME. imaginacioun, Chaucer, C. T. 15223 (B 4407) ; imagin-at-ive
=ME. imaginatif, Chaucer, C. T. 11406 (F 1094) ; imagin-at-ive-ness.

IMAM, IMAUM, a Muhammedan priest. (Arab.) Arab. imam,
a leader, chief, prelate, priest.—Arab. root amma, ‘he tended
towards;’ Rich. Dict., p. 163.

IMBALM, the same as Embalm, q.v. (F.) Milton has im-
balm’d, Areopagitica, ed, Hales, p. 6, 1. 7.

IMBANK, the same as Hmbank, q.v. (F. and E.)

IMBARGO, the same as Embargo, q.v. (Span.) In Coles’
Dict. ed. 1684.

IMBARK, the same as Embark, q.y. (F.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.
IMBECIBLE, feeble. (F.—L.) ‘We in a manner were got out
of God’s possession; were, in respect to Him, become imbecile and.
lost;’ Barrow, Sermons, vol. ii. ser. 22 (R.) [Formerly a rare word
as an adj.; but the verb to imbécill (accented on the penultimate) was
rather common; see note below.] Jmbecility is in Shak. Troil. i. 3.
114.—MF. imbecille, ‘weak, feeble;’ Cot.—L. imbécillum, acc. of
imbécillus, feeble. Root unknown. Der. imbecil-i-ty. ¢- The
examples in R. show that the verb to imbécill or imbécel, to weaken,
enfeeble, was once tolerably well known. It also meant ‘to diminish’
or ‘subtract from,’ and was repeatedly confused with the verb fo
embezzle, to purloin. An example from Udal, on the Revelation of
St. John, c. 16, shows this sense. It runs as follows: ‘The second
plage of the second angell is the second iudgement of God against
the regiment of Rome, and this is imbeselynge and diminishyng of
theyr power and domynion, many landes and people fallynge from
them.’ The quotations (in R.) from Drant’s tr. of Horace, b. i. sat. 6
and sat. 5, introduce the lines : ‘So tyrannous a monarchie imbecelyng


288 IMBED


freedome, than’ [then]; and: ‘And so imbecill all theyr strengthe
that they are naught to me.’ These lines completely establish the
accentuation of this verb, and further illustrate its sense. See Hm-
bezzle. The old word bezzle, to squander, is, however, the real
original of im-bezzle; from OF. besiler, to destroy, waste.

IMBED, to lay, as in a bed. (E.; with F. prefix.) In Todd’s
Johnson. From Im- (2) and Bed. For in-bed or em-bed.

IMBIBE, to drink in. (F.—L.; or L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674, Cf. enbibing in Chaucer, C. T.,G 814.—MF. imbiber, in use in
the 16th cent.—L. imbibere, to drink in.=L. im- =in, in; and bibere,
to drink, See Bib. Or taken immediately from Latin. Der.
imbibit-ion, once a common term in alchemy; see Ben Jonson,
Alchemist, ii. 1 (Subtle). Der. imbue, q.v.; imbrue, q.v.
IMBITTER, to render bitter. (E.; with F. prefix.) ‘ Why loads
he this imbitter’d life with shame?’ Dryden, tr. of Homer’s Iliad,
b. i, 1. 494. From Im- (1) and Bitter.

IMBODY, the same as Embody. (E.; with F. prefix.) In
Milton, P. L. i. 574; Comus, 468. See Im- (1).

IMBORDER, io border. (F.) From Im- (1) and Border.
In Milton, P. L. ix. 438.

IMBOSOM, the same as Embosom. (E.; with F. prefix.) In
Milton, P. L. iii. 75, v. 597. See Im- (1).

IMBOWER, to shelter with a bower. (E.; with F. prefix.)
From Im- (1) and Bower. In Milton, P. L. i. 304.

IMBRICATED, bent and hollowed like a gutter-tile; covered
with scales that overlap. (L.) A term in botany. Both imbricated
and imbrication are in Kersey, ed. 1715. Blount (1656) has imbricate,
i.e. formed like a gutter-tile.—L. imbricatus, pp. of imbricare, to
cover with a gutter-tile.=—L. imbric-, stem of imbrex, a gutter-tile. =
L. imbri-, decl. stem of imber, a shower of rain.+Gk. dppds, foam ;
Skt. abhra-, a rain-cloud. Brugmann, i. § 466. Der. imbricat-ion.
IMBROGLIO. (Ital.) In Gray, A Long Story, 1. 66.—Ital.
imbroglio, perplexity, trouble, intrigue; hence, a confused heap. =
Ital. imbrogliare, to entangle, perplex, confuse.—Ital. im- (for iz),
in; broglio, a broil, confusion; see Broil (2).

IMBROWN, to make brown. (E.; with F. prefix.) From
Im- (1) and Brown. In Milton, P. L. iv. 246.

IMBRUE, IMBREW, EMBRUE, to moisten, drench. (F.—
L.) ‘[{Mine eyes] With teares no more imbrue your mistresse face ;’
Turberville, The Lover Hoping Assuredly. ‘ Imbrew’d in guilty
blood ;’ Spenser, F.Q.i. 7.47. ‘ With mouth enbrowide ;’ Lydgate,
Stans Puer, 1. 38.—OF. embruer ; Cot. gives ‘ s’embruer, to imbrue
or bedable himself with. Variant of OF. embevrer, embreuver,
to moisten; allied to MItal. imbevere, which Torriano gives as
equivalent to zmbuire, ‘to sinke into, to moist or wet, to embrue ;’
Florio. Cf. mod. Ital. imbevere, to imbibe. B. The OF. embreuver
is formed, like mod. F. abreuver, from a causal verb -bevrer, to give
to drink, turned into -brever in the 16th century, and thence into
-bruer. See abreuver in Brachet. y. This causal verb (as if L.
*biberare) is founded on OF. beure (F. boire), to drink; from L.
bibere, to drink. 8. Hence imbrue is the causal of to imbibe, and
signifies ‘to make to imbibe,’ to soak, drench. See Imbibe.
@= Probably it has often been confounded with imbue (below).
Unconnected with E. brew, with which it is sometimes supposed to
be allied.

IMBUE, to cause to drink, tinge deeply. (L.) ‘ With noysome
rage imbew’d;’ Spenser, Ruines of Rome, st. 24, 1. 6. Cf. Milton,
P. L. viii. 216.—L. imbuere, to cause to drink in.—L. im-, for in,
in; and -buere, a causal form, apparently allied to L. bibere, to drink.
Cf. Norm. dial. embu, saturated with wet (Moisy). @ Early exx.
have only the pp. imbued, suggested by the L. pp. imbitus.

IMITATE, to copy, make a likeness of. (L.) ‘Zmitate and follow
his passion;’ Sir T. More, Works, 1346 b.—L. imitatus, pp. of
imitari, to imitate. Imitari is a frequentative form of *im-dre, not
found; cf. Image. Root uncertain. Der. imitat-ion, imitat-or,
imitat-ive, imitat-ive-ly, imit-a-ble, imit-a-bil-i-ty.

IMMACULATE, spotless. (L.) ‘The moste pure and immaculate
lambe,’ Udal, on St. Matt. c. 26. v. 26; Shak. Rich. II, v. 3. 61. And
in Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 79. —L. immaculatus, unspotted. = L.
im-=in-, not; and maculatus, pp. of maculare, to spot, from macula,
aspot. See Mail (1). Der. immaculate-ly, immaculate-ness.

IMMANENT, indwelling. (L.) In Sir D. Lyndesay, Satyre,
1. 3460.—L. immanent-, stem of pres. pt. of immanére, to dwell
within. —L. zm-, for iz, within ; and manére, to, remain, dwell. See
Mansion.

IMMATERIAL, not material. (F.—L.) In Shak. Troil. v.
1. 35.—MF. immateriel, ‘immateriall;’ Cot. See Im- (4) and
Material. @ The final syllable has been changed to -a/, to make
it nearer the Latin. Der. immaterial-ly, -ise, -ism, -ist, -i-ty.

IMMATURE, not mature. (L.) In Milton, P. L. vii. 277. See
Im- (4) and Mature. Der. immature-ly, -ness, immatur-ed,


IMMURE


IMMEASURABLE, not to be measured. (F.—L.) ‘ Theire
immesurable outrage ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 590b. See Im- (4)
and Measurable. Der.immeasurable-ness, immeasurabl-y. Doublet,
immense,

IMMEDIATE, without intervention, direct, present. (F.—L.)
‘Their authoritye is so hygh and so immediate of [not to] God;’
Sir T. More, Works, p. 893 d.= MF. immediat, ‘immediate ;’ Cot.
See Im- (4) and Mediate. Der. immediate-ly, -ness.

IMMEMORIAL, beyond the reach of memory. (F.—L.) ‘ Their
immemorial antiquity ;? Howell, Familiar Letters, b. ii. let. 59 (R.) ;
let. 60, ed. 1678; dated 1630.—F. immemorial, ‘without the com-
passe, scope, or reach of memory;’ Cot. See Im- (4) and
Memorial. Der. immemorial-ly.

IMMENSE, immeasurable, very large. (F.—L.) In Milton,
P. L. i. 790; and in Daniel, Musophilus, st. 27 from end.=—F.
immense, ‘immense ;’ Cot.—L. immensus, immeasurable.=L. im-=
in-, not; and mensus, pp. of metir?, to measure. See Im- (4) and
Mete. Der. immense-ly, immense-ness, immens-i-ty, immeas-ur-able,
from mensiirus, fut. pp. of metiri; immens-ur-abil-i-ty.

IMMERGE, to plunge into. (L.) ‘Immerged, or Immersed, dipt
in or plunged ;’ also ‘Immerse, to plunge or dip over head and
ears;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. Immerse occurs as a pp. in Bacon, Nat.
Hist. s. 114.—L. immergere, pp. immersus, to plunge into. —L. im-=
in, in, into; and mergere, to plunge, sink. See Im- (3) and Merge.
Der. immerse, from pp. immersus ; immers-ion.

IMMIGRATE, to migrate into a country. (L.) ‘ Hitherto I
have considered the Saracens, either at their immigration into Spain
about the ninth century,’ &c.; Warton, Hist. Eng. Poetry, Diss. i. ;
ed. 1840, vol. i. p. xviii. The verb is in Cockeram (1623).—L.
immigraius, pp. of immigrare, to migrate into. See Im- (3) and
Migrate. Der. immigrat-ion, immigrant.

IMMINENT, projecting over, near at hand. (L.) ‘ Against the
sinne imminent or to come;? Sir T. More, Works, p. 370b. ME.
imminent, Libell of E. Policye, 1. 739.—L. tmminent-, stem of pres.
part. of imminére, to project over. L. im-=in, upon, over; and
minére, to jut out. See Eminent. Der. imminent-ly; imminence,
Shak. Troil. vy. To. 13.

IMMIT, to send into, inject. (L.) ‘ Immit, to send in, to put
in;’ Cockeram (1642). Immission is in Bp. Taylor, Great Exemplar,
pt. ii. dis. 12 (R.)—L. immittere, pp. immissus, to send into. See
Im- (3) and Missile. Der. immiss-ion, from pp. immissus.

IMMOBILITY, steadfastness. (F.—L.) ‘The earth’s settled-
ness and immobility ;’ Wilkins, That the Earth may be a Planet, b. ii.
prop. 5 (R.) =F. immobilité, ‘ steadfastnesse ;’ Cot.—L. acc. immé-
bilitatem, from L. immodbilitas, immobility.=L. immodilis, immoy-
able. See Im- (4) and Mobile.

IMMODERATE, not moderate. (L.) ‘Zmmoderate slepe ;’
Sir T. Elyot, Castell of Helthe, bk. ii. ch. 30. Sir T. More has
immoderately; Works, p. 87 a, 1. 1.—L. immoderatus, not moderate.
See Im- (4) and Moderate. Der. immoderate-ly.

IMMODEST, not modest. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. b. ii.
c. 6. st. 37.—F. immodeste, ‘immodest ;* Cot.—L. immodestus. See
Im- (4) and Modest. Der. immodest-ly, immodest-y.

IMMOLATEH, to offer in sacrifice. (L.) Cotgrave has immolated,
to explain F. immolé.—L. immolitus, pp. of immolire, to sacrifice ;
lit. to throw meal upon.a victim, as was the custom.=—L. im-=in,
upon ; and mola, meal, cognate with E. meal. See Im- (3), Meal
(1). Der. immolat-ion, from F. immolation, ‘an immolation, sacri-
fice ;’ Cot.

IMMORAL, not moral, wicked. (F.—L.) In Kersey, ed. 1715.
From Im- (4) and Moral. Der. immoral-ly, -ity.

IMMORTAL, not mortal. (F.—L.) ME. immortal, Chaucer
C. T. 5059 (B 639). —MF. immortel, ‘immortall;’ Cot.—L. im-
mortalis, See Im- (4) and Mortal. Der. immortal-ly, immortal-
ise, 1 Hen. VI, i. 2. 148; itmmortal-i-ty, Shak. Lucrece, 725.

IMMOVABLE, not movable. (F.—L.) ME. immouable; Test.
of Love, bk. iii. ch. 4. 1. 207. From Im- (4) and Movable ; see
Move. Der. immovable-ness, immovabl-y.

IMMUNITY, freedom from obligation. (F.—L.) In Hall’s
Chron. Edw. IV, an. Io. § 19. Wryclif has yumunité, 1 Macc. x. 34.
=F. immunité, ‘immunity;’ Cot.=—L. immiinitatem, acc. of im-
minitas, exemption. —L. immiinis, exempt from public services. = L.
im-=in-, not; and minis, serving, obliging (whence also commiinis,
common). Cf. L. minus, duty ; see Common,

IMMURE, to shut up in prison. (F.—L.) In Shak. L. L. L. iii.
126; Merch. Ven. ii. 7.52. Shak. also has immures, sb. pl. fortifica-
tions, walls, Troilus, prol. 1. 8; spelt emures in the first folio. Similarly
immure stands for emmure.—= MF. emmurer, ‘to immure, or wall
about;’ Cot.—F. em-, from L. im-=in, in, within; and F. murer,
‘to wall;’ Cot., from L. murdre, to wall, from murus, a wall. See
Im- (1) and Mural.


IMMUTABLE


IMMUTABLE, not mutable. (F.—L.) ‘Of an immutable
necessitie,” Sir T., More, Works, p. 838h [not p. 839]; and in
Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 25.—F. immutable, with same sense as
immuable, which is the better form; both are in Cotgrave. = L. im-
miutabilis, See Im- (4) and Mutable. Der. immutabl-y, immuta-
ble-ness, tmmuta-bili-ty,

IMP, a graft, offspring, demon. (Late L.—Gk.) . Formerly used
in a good sense, meaning ‘scion’ or ‘ offspring.’ ‘Well worthy
impe;’ Spenser, F. Q. i. 9. 6. ‘And thou, most dreaded impe of
highest Jove ;’ id. Introd. to b. i. st. 3. ME. imp, ymp, a graft on
a tree ; impen, ympen, to graft. ‘I was sumtyme a frere [friar], And
the couentes [convent’s ] gardyner, for to graffe ympes ;: On limitoures
and listres lesynges I ymped;’ P. Plowman, B. v. 136-8. ‘Of feble
trees ther comen wrecched impes;’ Chaucer, C. T. 13962 (B 3146).
The pl. sb. impen occurs in the Ancren Riwle, p. 378, 1. 24.;.and the
pp. i-imped, i.e. grafted, in the same, p. 360, 1.6. (The verb is due
to the sb.) AS. impian, to graft; Gerefa, § 12; in Anglia, ix. 262.
AS. impan, s. pl., grafts; Gregory’s Past. Care, ed. Sweet, p. 381,
1. 17.—Late L. impotus, a graft, occurring in the Lex Salica; see the
text called Lex Emendata, c. xxvii. § 8.—Gk. €uguros, engrafted ;
James, i. 21.—Gk, éudtdev, to implant.—Gk. éu- for év, in; and
pve, to produce, from 4/ BHEU, tobe. SeeIn andBe. @ From
the same source are W, impio, to graft, imp, a graft, scion; Dan.
ympe, Swed. ympa, G. impfen, OHG. impiton, imphon, to graft; also
F, enter, to graft; showing that the word was widely spread at an
early period. Der. imp, vb. Rich. II, ii. 1. 292, ME. impen, AS.
impian, as above.

IMPACT, a striking against, collision. (L.) Modern. ‘The
quarrel [crossbow-bolt] by that impact driven, True to its aim, fled
fatal;’ Southey, Joan of Arc, b. viii. 1, 228.—L. impactus, pp. of
impingere, to impinge. SeeImpinge. { The right form of the sb.
should rather have been impaction. The word impacted occurs in
Holland’s Pliny, b. xx. c. 21. ‘ Impacted, dashed or beaten against,
cast or put into ;” Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.

IMPATR, to make worse, injure, weaken. (F.—L.) ‘ Whose
praise hereby no whit impaired is;’ Spenser, Colin Clout, 1. 755.
ME. empeiren, also written enpeiren; Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iv.
pr. 3, 1. 353; b. iv. pr. 6, 1. 170.—OF. empeirer (Burguy); later
empirer, ‘to impaire ;” Cot.—Late L. impéiorare, to make worse. =
L. im-=in, with an intensive force; and L. péior, worse; a com-
parative form from a lost positive, and of uncertain origin. Cf.
Pessimist.

IMPALE, the same as Empale, q.v. (F.—L.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674; and in Minsheu, ed. 1627. In Shak. it means ‘to
surround ;” Troilus, v. 7. 5; but it is the same word. Der. impale-
ment.

IMPALPABLE, not palpable. (F.—L.) In Holland’s Plu-
tarch, p. 913 (R.); and in Cotgrave. =F. impalpable, ‘impalpable ;’
Cot. See Im- (4) and Palpable. Der. impalpabl-y.

IMPANEL, IMPANNEL, the same as Empanel, q. v.

IMPARITY, want of parity. (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674. From Im- (4) and Parity; cf. L. imparitis. See Par.
[No MF. imparité in Cotgrave ; but OF. imparité is in Godefroy. ]

IMPARK, EMPARK, to enclose for a park. (F.) ‘Zmpark, to
enclose . . . a piece of ground fora park ;”? Kersey, ed. 1715. ‘Not
.-. held nor emparked within any laws or limits;’ Bp. King, Vine
Palatine, 1614, p. 32 (Todd).— AF. exparker, Stat. Realm, i. 197.—
F. en,for L. in, in; and F. parc, from Late L. parcus. See Park.

IMPART, to give a part of, communicate. (F.—L.) ‘The secrete
thoughtes imparted with such trust ;’ Surrey, Prisoned in Windsor,
1. 37; see Specimens of English, ed. Skeat, p. 220.— MF. impartir,
‘to impart ;’ Cot.—L, impartire, impertire, to bestow a share on. —L.
im-, for in, on, upon; and partire, partiri, to share, from parti-,
decl. stem of pars, a part. See Part. Der. impart-ible.

IMPARTIAL, not partial. (F.—L.). In Shak. Rich. II, i. 1.
115. FromIm- (4) and Partial, Der. impartial-ly, impartial-i-ty.

IMPASSABLEH, not to be passed through. (F.—L.) In Milton,
P. L. x. 254. From Im- (4) and Passable; see Pass, Der.
impassabl-y, impassable-ness.

IMPASSIBLE, incapable of feeling. (F.—L.) ‘This most
pure parte of the soule, . . . diuyne, impassible, and incorruptible ;’
Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. iii. c. 24. § 2. Impassibilitie is in
Sir T. More’s Works, p. 1329 b.=—F. impassible, ‘impassible, sence-
lesse ;’ Cot.—L. impassibilis, incapable of passion’ or suffering. —L.
im-=in-, not; and passibilis, capable of suffering, allied to passus, pp.
of pati, to suffer. See Im- (4) and Passion, Patient, Der. im-
passtble-ness, impasstbili-ty.

IMPASSIONED, roused to strong feeling. (F,—L.) In
Milton, P. L. ix.678. From the prefix im-=L. in, with an intensive
force; and Passion. Der. A similar formation. is impassionate,
rarely used.


IMPERIAL 289.


IMPASSIVE, not susceptible of feeling, not showing feeling.
(F.—L.) In Milton, P. L. vi. 455. From Im- (4) and Passive.
Der. impassive-ly, -ness; Burton has impassionate in a like sense;
Anat. .of Melancholy, i. 3. 1. 3.

IMPATIENT, not patient. (F.—L.) ME, impacient. ‘Im-
pacient is he that wol nat been y-taught ;’ Chaucer, C. T. Pers. Tale,
De Superbia, I 401.—F. impatient, ‘impatient;’ Cot. See Im-
(4) and Patient. Der. impatient-ly, impacience, impacienc-y.

IMPAWN, to pledge. (F.) In Shak. Hen. V, i. 2. 21; Hamlet,
v. 2.155, 171. From im-, prefix, a substitute for F. em-=L. im-, in;
and pawn; see Im- (1) and Pawn.

IMPEACH, to charge with a crime. (F.—L.) The orig. sense
is ‘to hinder;’ and it was once so used. ‘ The victorie was much
hindered and impeached;’ Holland, tr. of Livy, p. 308 (R.) 1 ST
impeach and stop their breath;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xi. c. 3.°
ME. empechen; ‘no man [schal], empeche hem; Wyclif, Works, ed.
Arnold, iii. 294.— OF. empescher, ‘to hinder, let, stop, bar, impeach ;’
Cot. B. Littré and Scheler connect it with Proy. empedegar, which
they cite; from Late L. impedicare, to fetter. Impedicare is from
the prefix zm-=in, in, on; and pedica, a fetter, from pedi-, decl. stem
of pés, a foot; see Im- (1) and Foot. y. At the same time some
(at least) of the senses of OF. enpescher are due to OF. empacher,
Span. empachar, Ital. impacciare, to delay; these represent a Late L.
frequent. form *impacticare, a derivative from impingere, pp. im-
pactus, to’ fasten upon. Impingere is compounded of im- = zn, in,
on; and pangere, to fasten. See Pact, and see Despatch. Der.
impeach-er, impeach-able, impeach-ment, spelt impechement, Sir T. Elyot,
The Governour, b. i. c. 15 (end); empeschement, Dictes of the Philo-
sophers, pr. by Caxton, fol. 13, back, 1. 5.

IMPEARL, to adorn with pearls. (F.) In Milton, P. L. v. 747.
From Im- (1) and Pearl.

IMPECCABLE, not liable tosin. (L.) ‘ Zmpeccable, that cannot
offend or do amiss;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. impeccabilis,
faultless. L. im- for in-, negative prefix; and peccdabilis, peccable.
See Im- (4) and Peeeable. Der. impeccabili-ty.

IMPECUNIOUS, in want of money. (L.) . ‘Put him out, an
impecunious creature;’? Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s Revels, A. v. sc. 2
(Anaides). = L. im-, for in-, not; and peciinidsus, rich, from peciinia,
money; see Pecuniary.

IMPEDE, to obstruct. (L.) In Macbeth, i. 5. 29. The sb. im-
pediment is commoner, and earlier; Hoccleve, De Regimine Prin-
cipum, 1, 1807.—L. impedire, to intangle the feet, obstruct.—L. im-
=in, in; and ped-, stem of pés, a foot; see Im- (3) and Foot.
Der. impedi-ment, impedi-t-ive.

IMPEL, to drive forward, urge. (L.) ‘The flames impell’d;’
Dryden, Annus Mirabilis, st. 230, And in Caxton, Eneydos, ch. xxii.
p- 78, 1. 17. —L. impellere, pp. impulsus, to urge on.=L. im-=in, on,
forward: and pellere, to drive. See Im- (3) and Pulsate, Der.
impell-ent, impell-er; and (from pp. impulsus) im-pulse, Milton, P, L.
iii. 120; impuls-ion, id. Sams. Agon. 422; impuls-ive, impuls-tve-ly,
impuls-ive-ness.

IMPEND, to hang over, be near. (L.) Milton has zmpendent,
P. L. ii. 177, v. 891. ‘ Vengeance impending on you;’ Massinger,
The Old Law, A. v. sc. 1.—L. impendére, to hang over.=L. im-=in,
on, over; and pendére, to hang. See Im- (3) and Pendant, Der.
impend-ing ; also impend-ent, from the stem of the pres. part.

IMPENETRABLE, not penetrable. (F.—L.). In Sir T. Elyot,
The Governour, b. i. c. 23. § 5; Shak. Merch, Ven. iii. 3. 18.— MF.
impenetrable, ‘impenetrable;’ Cot. See Im- (4) and Penetrate,
Der. impenetrabl-y, Milton, P. L. vi. 400; impenetrabili-ty,

IMPENITENT, not penitent. (F.—L.) Sir T. More has both
impenitent and impenitence; Works, p. 5734. From Im- (4) and
Penitent. Der. impenitent-ly, impenitence ; impenitenc-y, Bible A. V.
heading to Isa. ix. F

IMPERATIVE, authoritative. (F.—L.) In Palsgrave (Of
Verbs). =—MF. imperatif, ‘imperative, imperious; the imperative
mood in grammer;’ Cot.=L. imperatiuus, due to a command.=L.
imperatum, a command; neut. of imperdtus, pp. of imperare, to
command. =—L. im-=in; and pardre, to make ready, order, See
Im- (3) and Parade. Der. impera-tive-ly ; and see imperial.
‘IMPERCEPTIBLE, not perceptible. (F.—L.) ‘ Hang on such
small impérceptible strings’ [mot things]; Cowley, Davideis, b. iv;
1. 323.—F. imperceptible, ‘imperceptible;’ Cot. See Im- (4) and
Perceive. Der. imperceptibl-y, imperceptible-ness, imperceptibili-ty.

IMPERFECT, not perfect. (F.—L.) Really of French origin,
but conformed to the Latin spelling. ME. imparfit, inparfit, inperfit ;
P. Plowman, B. xv. 50; Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. 1ii. pr. 9, 1. 16.
= OF. imparfait (Hatzfeld); imperfaict (Cotgrave) =L. imper-fectus,
See Im- (4) and Perfect. Der. imperfect-ly, imperfect-ness, im-
perfect-ion. ¥ :

IMPERIAL, relating to an empire, (F.—L.) ME. imperial,

U


290 IMPERIL


Gower, C. A. iii. 61; bk. vi. 1785.—OF. emperial (Burguy); later
imperial (Cot.).— L. imperidlis, belonging to an empire. = L. imperium,
an empire. See Empire. Der. imperial-ly, imperial-ism, imperial-
ist; also (from L. imperium) imperi-ous, Hamlet, v. 1. 236, Oth. ii. 3.
276 ; imperi-ous-ly, imperi-ous-ness.

IMPERIAL, to put in peril. (F.—L.) In Ben Jonson, Magnetic
Lady, at the end of Act ii; Probee’s second speech; Spenser, F. Q.
iv. 4.10. From Im- (1) and Peril.

IMPERISHABULHE, not perishable. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. L.
vi. 435.— MF. imperissable, ‘unperishable;’? Cot. See Im- (4) and
Perish. Der. imperishabl-y, imperishable-ness, imperishabil-i-ty.

IMPERSONAL, not personal. (F.—L.) In Levins. Ben Jonson
treats ofimpersonal verbs; Eng. Grammar, b.i. c. 16.—F. impersonnel,
‘impersonall;’ Cot.—L. impersonalis. See Im- (4) and Person.
Der. impersonal-ly, impersonal-i-ty.

IMPERSONATE, to personify, to personate or represent a
person’s qualities. (L.) ‘The masques ... were not only furnished
by the heathen divinities, but often by the virtues and vices imper-
sonated ;” Warton, Hist. Eng. Poetry, sect. Ixi; ed. 1840, iii. 400.
From L, im-=in, used as a prefix ; and personate. See Im- (3) and
Person. Der. impersonat-ion.

IMPERTINENT, not pertinent, trifling, rude. (F.—L.) ME.
impertinent; Chaucer, C. T. 7930 (E 54).—F. impertinent, ‘ imperti-
nent, unfit;’ Cot.=L. impertinent-, stem of impertinens, not belonging
to. See Im- (4) and Pertinent, Pertain. Der. impertinence,
Milton, P. L. viii. 195; impertinenc-y, K. Lear, iv. 6.1783 imperti-
nent-ly,

IMPERTURBABLE, not easily disturbed. (L.) In Ash’s
Dict., ed. 1775.—L. imperturbabilis, that cannot be disturbed. See
Im- (4) and Perturb. Der. imperturbabili-ty.

IMPERVIOUS, impassable. (L.) In Cowley, Ode upon Dr.
Harvey, st. ii. 1.6; and in Milton, P. L. x. 254,.—L. imperuius, im-
passable; the L. -ws being turned into E. -ous, as in arduous, con-
spicuous, &c.—L. im-=in (=E, un-), not; per, through; and wia, a
way. See Viaduct. Der. impervious-ly, -ness.

IMPETRATE, to procure by entreaty. (L.) ‘Impetrate, to
obtaine;’ Cockeram (1642); and in Minsheu.—L. impetrat-us, pp.
of impetrare, to procure.—L. im-, for in, prep., to; patrare, to bring
to pass, to achieve, perhaps orig. ‘to act as father,’ and allied to
pater, father.

IMPETUS, sudden impulse, violent push, (L.) In Boyle’s
Works, vol. i. p. 138 (R.)=—L. impetus, an attack, impulse; lit. ‘a
falling on.’=—L. im-=in, on, upon; and petere, to seek, tend to, lit.
to fly or fall. —4/PET, to fall, fly; cf. Skt. pat, to fly; see Im- (3).
Der. impetu-ous, Caxton, Troy-book, leaf 174 back, 1. 19, from F.
impetueux, which is from L, impetudsus; impetu-ous-ly, impetu-ous-ness,
impetu-os-i-ty,

IMPIETY, want of piety. (F.—L.) In Shak. Much Ado, iv. 1.
105.—F. impieté, ‘impiety ;’ Cot.—L. impietatem, acc. of impietas.
See Im- (4) and Piety. And see Impious.

IMPINGE, to strike or fall against. (L.) ‘ Impinge, to hurl or
throw against a thing;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1678.—L. impingere,
Pp. impactus, to strike upon or against.—L. im-=in, on; and pan-
gere, to fasten, also to strike. See Pact. Der. impact, q.v.

IMPIOUS, not pious, wicked. (F.—L.) In Shak. Haml. i. 2.
94. Coined from Im- (4) and Pious. [The OF. word is impie.]
Der. impious-ly, -ness; and see-impiety.

IMPLACABLE, not to be appeased. (F.—L.) ‘Bering im-
placable anger ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 83 a.—F. implacable, ‘ un-
placable;’ Cot.—L. implacabilis, See Im- (4) and Placable.
Der. implacabili-ty.

IMPLANT, to plant in. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. L. xi. 23; and
Barnes, Works, p. 323, col. 1.—F. implanter, ‘to implant, to fix, or
set into;’ Cot.—L. im-=in, in; and plantare, to plant. See Im- (1)
and Plant. Der. implant-at-ion.

IMPLEAD, to urge a plea or suit at law. (F.—L.) In Acts, xix.
38 (A. V.); and Fuller, Hist. of Waltham Abbey, § 16 (p. 10, ed.
1655). ME. enpleden, empleden, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, vii. 481.
= AF. enpleder, Stat. Realm, i, 49 (1278) ; MF. emplaider, ‘to sue,
to implead;’ Cot. See Im- (1) and Plead. ‘Der. implead-er.

IMPLEMENT, a utensil, tool. (Late L.—L.) In Hamlet, i.
1. 74.—Late L. implémentum, an accomplishing, filling up; furni-
ture, necessaries, an instrument.=— L. implére, to fill, discharge,
execute. — L, im-=in, in; and plére, to fill; see Im- (3) and Full,

IMPLICATEH, to involve. (L.) Cot. has implication, to trans-
late F. implication; the verb is noted by Cockeram (1642); and
the pp. form implicat occurs as early as 1536.—L. implicatus, pp. of
implicare, to infold, involve.—L. im-=in, in; and plica, a fold. See
Im- (3) and Ply, Der. implicat-ion, from F. implication; also
implicit, Milton, P. L. vii. 323, from L. implicitus, also a pp. of
implicare ; implicit-ly, -ness ; and see imply.


IMPOTENT


IMPLORE, to entreat, beg earnestly. (F.—L.) In Spenser,
F. Q. iii. 11. 18; used as a sb., id. ii, 5. 37.—¥F. implorer,
‘to implore;’? Cot.—L. implorare, to implore.—L. im-=in, on,
upon; and plérare, to wail. See Im- (3) and Deplore. Der.
implor-ing-ly.

IMPLY, to mean, signify. (F.—L.) ‘It implyeth fyrst repug-
naunce;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 1127 b. A coined word; from
Im- (1) and Ply, as if from an OF. emplier; but the OF. form was
empleier, later emploier. [According to stress, an infin. emplier would
answer to L. implicare, inf., whilst emplete would answer to L. im~
plicéd ; but Godefroy gives no example of the stem empli-.] Doublets,
implicate, q. v.; employ, q.v.

IMPOLITHE, not polite. (L.) ‘I never saw such impolite con-
fusion at any country wedding in Britain;? Drummond, Tray, (let. 3.
1744), p. 76 (Todd). First in 1612.—L, impolitus, unpolished, rude.
See Im- (4) and Polite. Der. impolite-ly, -ness.

IMPOLITIC, not politic. (L..and L.—Gk.) ‘ They [the mer-
chants] do it so impoliticly ;’ Bacon, Report on the Petition of the
Merchants (R.). Spelt impolitick in Phillips and Kersey. From Im-
(4) and Politic. Der. im-politic-ly.

IMPONDERABLE, without sensible weight. (L.) Modern.
The older word is imponderous; Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii,
c.5.§ 10. From Im- (4) and Ponderable or Ponderous,

IMPORT, to bring in from abroad, to convey, signify, interest.
(F.—L.; or L.) In the sense ‘to bring in from abroad,’ the word
is Latin. ‘It importeth also plaine and open blasphemy ;” Sir T.
More, Works, pp. 325, 320a.—F. importer; ‘cela importe moult, that
imports much, that is of great consequence ;’ Cot.—L. importare,
to import, bring, introduce, cause.=—L. 2m-=in, in; and portdre, to
carry; see Port (1). Der. import, sb.; zmport-ant, L. L. L. v. 1. 104,
from F. important, pres. pt.; important-ly ; importance, Wint. Ta, vy.
2, 20, from F. importance; also import-er, import-at-ion,

IMPORTABLE, intolerable. (F.—L.) Obsolete. Inthe Prayer
of Manasses (A. V.) ; Spenser, F. Q. ii. 8. 35 ; and earlier, in Chaucer,
C. T. go20 (E1144), =F. importable, ‘intollerable;’ Cot.—L. im-
portabilis, that cannot be borne. See Im- (4), Port (1).

IMPORTUNE, to molest, urge with eager solicitation. (F.—L.)
In Ant. and Cleop. iv. 15.19; Meas. i. 1. 57. Formed from ME.
importune, adj., molesting, troublesome; cf. ‘ And for he nill be impor-
tune Unto no wight, ne onerous;’ Rom, of the Rose, 5632.—OF,
importun, ‘importunate, urgent, earnest with, tronblesome;’ Cot.
—L. importinus, unfit, unsuitable, troublesome, grievous, rude.
B. The L. importiinus (with prefix im-=in-, not) and opportinus
(with prefix ob) are both related to L. portus, a harbour, with refer-
ence to approach or access to it; so that zmportunus =hard of access,
unsuitable, &c. Cf. L. Portinus, the protecting god of harbours.
See Port (2). Der. importun-i-ty (Levins), from F. importunité=L.
acc. importinitatem; also importun-ate (Levins), a coined word;
importun-ate-ly, importun-ate-ness.

IMPOSE, to lay upon, enjoin, obtrude, palm off. (F.—L. and
Gk.) In Spenser, F. Q. v. 8. 49.—F. imposer, ‘to impose;’ Cot.
=F. im-=L. im-=in, on, upon; and poser, to place; see Im- (1)
and Pose. @ The F. imposer was confused with L. impdonere
(below). Der. impos-ing, impos-ing-ly.

IMPOSITION, a laying on, tax, deception, (F.—L.) ‘Thy
fader sette on us... grete zmposicions ;? Caxton, Golden Legend,
Hist. of Roboas.—F. imposition.—L. acc. impositidnem, from nom.
impositio, a laying on; cf. impositus, pp. of impdnere, to lay on.—L.
im-=in, on; and ponere, to put, lay; see Im- (3) and Position.
Der. from same source: impost, from F. impost, ‘an impost, custom”
(Cot.), which from L. pp. impositus; impostor, Temp. i. 2. 477; from
L. impostor, a deceiver; impost-ure, Hall’s Chron, Hen. VI, an, 26.
§ 2, from F. imposture, ‘imposture, guile’ (Cot.).

IMPOSSIBLE, not possible. (F.—L.) ME. impossible, Chaucer,
C. T. 6270 (D 688). =F. impossible, ‘impossible ;’ Cot. = L. impossi-
bilis. See Im- (4) and Possible. ‘Der. impossibili-ty. :

IMPOSTHUME, an abscess. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘A boyle or
imposthyume;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii.c. 25. Also (better)
spelt apostume, as in Prompt. Parv.= OF. apostume, ‘an apostume, an
inward swelling full of corrupt matter;’? Cot. Also (better) spelt
aposteme ; Cot.=L. apostéma, an abscess, — Gk. daéornpa, a standing
away from; hence, a separation of corrupt matter. —Gk. amd, from,
cognate with E. of, of; and o7n-, base of iornm, I set, place, stand,
from 4/STA, to stand. See Apo- and Stand. Der. imposthum-ate,
imposthum-at-ion. i Here the prefix im- is due to mere corruption ;
the right form was aposteme or apostem (N. E. D.).

IMPOSTOR, IMPOST;; see under Imposition.

IMPOTENT, not potent, feeble. (F.—L.) ME. impotent;
Gower, C. A, iii, 383; bk. viii. 3127. =F. impotent, ‘impotent ;’ Cot,
—L. impotentem, acc. of impotens, unable. See Im- (4) and Potent,
Der. impotent-ly, impotence, impotenc-y.


IMPOUND


IMPOUND, to put into a pound, as cattle. (E.) In Shak. Hen.V,
i. 2,160. From Im- (2) and Pound (2). Der. impound-age.

IMPOVERISH, to make poor. (F.—L.) ‘Him and his sub-
jects still impoverishing ;? Drayton, Barons Wars, b. v. st. 8; and in
Baret. From OF. empovriss-, stem of pres. part. of empovrir, to im-
poverish (Godefroy).—F. em-, for L. ix, extremely; and OF. povre,
poor. See Poor. Der. impoverish-ment (Cotgrave).

IMPRACTICABLE, not practicable. (Late L.—Gk.) In
Phillips, ed. 1706, and Kersey, ed. 1715; see Tatler, no. 187, § 3.
From Im- (4) and Practicable. Der. impracticabl-y, impracticable-
ness, impracticabili-ty.

IMPRECATEH, to invoke a curse on. (L.) [The sb. imprecation
(from F. imprecation) is in earlier use than the verb, and occurs in
Puttenham, Eng. Poetrie, ed. Arber, bk. iii. ch. 19; p. 221. ‘The
imprecation of the vestall nun Tuccia;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxviii.
c. 2,)—L. imprecatus, pp. of imprecari, to call down by prayer. —L.
im-=in, upon, on; and precarz, to pray. See Im- (3) and Pray.
Der. imprecat-ion (above) ; imprecat-or-y.

‘IMPREGNABLE, not to be taken or seized upon. (F.—L.)
‘ Impreignable cities and stronge holdes;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Gover-
nour, b, i. c. 27. § 10. [The g is inserted much as in sovereign, and
was sometimes silent; or gz was pronounced as zy.] Caxton has
imprenable, Golden Legend, Moses, § 5 from end. =OF. imprenable,
‘impregnable ;’ Cot.=—F. im-=L. im-=in-, negative prefix; and F.
prendre, to take, from L. prehendere, to seize. See Comprehend.
Der. impregnabl-y, impregnabili-ty. .

IMPREGNATE, to render pregnant. (L.) Milton uses impregn,
P. L, iv. 500, ix. 737; this is a mere abbreviation. Sir T. Brown
has impregnate, Vulgar Errors, bk, ili. ch. 12. § 9. —L. impraegnatus,
pp: of an (unused) impraegnare, to make pregnant. = L. im-=in, in ;
and praegna-, seen in praegnans, praegnas, pregnant. See Im- (3)
and Pregnant. Der. impregnat-ion.

IMPRESE, an heraldic device, with a motto. (F.—Ital.—L.)
In Shak. Rich. II, iii. 1. 25. Also spelt zmpresa (Nares). = MF. im-
prese. = Ital. impresa,‘an imprese, an embleme; also an enterprise ;’
Florio. Fem. of impreso, undertaken (hence, adopted), pp. of im-
prendere, to undertake. = L. iz, in ; and prehendere, to lay hold of; see
Prehensile. Doublet, emprise, an enterprise; Spenser, F. Q. ii.
4.12, from F, emprise, fem. pp. of emprendre, to undertake, Cot.
Der. impresario, an undertaker, stage manager, from Ital. impresa,
an undertaking.

IMPRESS, to imprint, make an impression, press. (L.) ME. zm-
pressen, Chaucer, Troil. iii. 1543 ; Gower, C. A. i. 257; bk. ii. 2900.
The sb. impressioun is in Chaucer, C. T. 3613.—L. impressare,
frequentative of imprimere, to impress.—L. im-=in, upon; and
premere, to press. See Im- (3) and Press. Der. impress, sb., Two
Gent. iii. 2.6; impress-ion, Gower, C. A. ii. 14; bk. iv. 389; impress-
ible, impress-ibl-y, impress-ible-ness, impress-ive, impress-ive-ly, tmpress-
ive-ness. @ But impress-ment, a seizing of provisions or sailors for
public service, is a coined word allied to the press in Press-
gang; see Press (2).

IMPRINT, to print upon, impress deeply. (F.—L.) ‘Im-
printed that feare so sore in theyr ymaginacyon ;’ Sir T. More, Works,
1196 d [not 1197]. ME. empreinten, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, bk. y.
met. 4.1. 12,.—OF. empreinte, “a stamp, print;’ Cot. Orig. fem. of pp,
of empreindre, ‘to print, stamp;’ id. = L.imprimere, to impress (above).
tp The OF. verb is empreindre. Der. imprint, sb. (first in 1480).

IMPRISON, to put in prison. (F.—L.) ME. enprisonen, Rob.
of Glouc., ed. W. A. Wright, 1. 9521. For emprison.—OF. em-
prisonner, ‘to imprison;* Cot.—F. em-=L. im-=in, in; and F.
prison, a prison. See Im-(1) and Prison. Der. imprison-ment.

IMPROBABLE, not probable. (F.—L.) In Shak. Tw. Nt. iii,
4. 141.—F. improbable, ‘improbable;’ Cot. See Im- (4) and Pro-
bable. Der. improbabl-y, improbabili-ty.

IMPROMPTH, off hand ; a thing composed extempore. (F, —L.)
‘They were made ex tempore, and were, as the French call them,
impromptus;’ Dryden, A Discourse on Satire; in Dryden’s Poems,
ed. 1856, p. 366. —F. impromptu ; ‘ L’ Impromptu de Versailles’ is the
title of a comedy by Moliére.=L. in promptii, in readiness; where
prompt is the abl. of promptus, a sb. formed from promere, to bring
forward. See In and Prompt.

‘IMPROPER, not proper. (F.—L.) ME. improper.  Impro-
prelich he demeth fame;’? Gower, C. A. i. 213 prol. 537.—F. im-
propre, ‘unproper;” Cot. From Im- (4) and Proper. Der.
improper-ly ; so also impropriety, in Selden’s Illustrations to Drayton’s
Polyolbion, s. 2, note tol. 110, from im- and propriety,

IMPROPRIATEH, to appropriate to private use. (L.) ‘Canst
thou impropriate to thee Augustus’ worthy praise?’ Drant, tr. of
Horace, Ep. to Quinctius (Ep. i. 16,1. 29). Coined from L, im-=
in, in, hence to (a person) ; and propriare, to appropriate, from pro-
prius, one’s own ; see Im- (3) and Proper. Der, impropriat-ion,


IN- 291
IMPROVE, to make better. (F.—L.) In Shak. Jul. Cesar, ii.


1.159. ‘Approve and improve, approvement and improvement, are
used in our old law as respectively equivalent ;’ Richardson. See
Blount’s Nomolexicon. Improve is altered from the late ME. ex-
prowen (see Skelton, Philip Sparowe, 793), which was a parallel
form to ME. approwen, to ‘ approve,’ to benefit. = AF. emprouwer, to
benefit, parallel to OF. aproer, approuer, to benefit. These are
formed (with prefix em--for L. iz, or prefix a- for L. ad) from OF.
prou, sb. profit, benefit ; which is allied to Ital. prode, sb. benefit,
and Ital. prode, adj. good, valiant. See Prowess. The AF. forms
enprouver, emprover, both occur in Britton. @ Not allied to prove,
with which it was confused in form, Der. improv-able, improv-abl-y,
eS improv-ing-ly, improve-ment, Bacon, Essay 34, Of
Riches.

IMPROVIDENT, not provident. (L.) In Shak. 1 Hen. VI, ii.
1.58. From Im- (4) and Provident; see Provide. Der. im-
provident-ly, improvidence. Doublet, imprudent.

IMPROVISE, to recite extemporaneously, bring about on a
sudden. (F.—Ital.—L.) Quite modern. Not in Todd’s Johnson.
—F. improviser. = Ital. improvvisare, to sing extempore verses. = Ital.
improvviso, sudden, unprovided for. =—L. improuisus, unforeseen, = L.
im-=in-, negative prefix; and prowisus, pp. of prduidére, to foresee.
See Im- (4) and Provide. Der. improvis-er, improvis-ate, improvis-
at-ore (Ital.), improvis-at-ion ; we even find improvis-at-ise, Chambers,
Cyclop. of Eng. Literature, 1860, ii. 499, col. 2.

IMPRUDENT, not prudent. (F.—L.) In Chaucer, C. T.,
B 309. Milton has imprudence, P. L. xi. 686.—F. imprudent, ‘im-
prudent ;’ Cot. —L. imprident-, stem of impriidens, not prudent. See
Im- (4) and Prudent. Der. imprudent-ly, imprudence.

IMPUDENT, shameless. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F, Q. iii. 12. 5;
Chaucer, C. T., 1397. =F. impudent, ‘impudent ;’ Cot. = L. impudent-,
stem of impudens, shameless. = L. im-=in-, not; and pudens, modest,
properly pres. part. of pudére, to feel shame (a word of doubtful
origin), Der. impudent-ly; impudence, from F. impudence, ‘im-
pudence’ (Cot.).

IMPUGN, to attack, call in question. (F.—L.) In rather early
use. ME. impugnen; P. Plowman, B. vii. 147.—F. impugzer, ‘to
impugne, fight or stirre against;’ Cot.=L. impugndare, to fight
against.=L. im-=in, against ; and pugnare, to fight. See Im- (1)
and Pugnacious. Der. impugn-er, impugn-able.

IMPULSE, IMPULSION, IMPULSIVE: see Impel.

IMPUNITY, safety from punishment. (F.—L. and Gk.) ‘As
touching both the zmpunitie and also the recompense of other the
informers;’ Holland, tr. of Livy, p. 1035 (R.); and in Cotgrave.
=F. impunité, ‘impunity ;’ Cot.—L. impunitdtem, acc. of impiinitas,
impunity.—L. impuni-, decl. stem of impunis, without punishment.
= L. im-=in-, not; and poena, penalty, from Gk. nowy. See Im-
(4) and Pain,

IMPURE, not pure. (F.—L.) ‘Impure and uncleane ;’ Tyn-
dall, Works, p. 193, col. 2.—F.impur, ‘impure;’ Cot.=—L. impirus.
See Im- (4) and Pure. Der. impure-ly, impure-ness, impur-i-ty,
Shak. Lucrece, 854

IMPUTE, to place to the account of, reckon against as a fault,
ascribe, charge. (F.—L.) In Levins. ‘Th’ imputed blame ;’
Spenser, F. Q. ii. 1. 20. And in Caxton, Eneydos, ch. 20; p. 73.—F.
imputer, ‘to impute, ascribe, or attribute unto;’ Cot. —L. imputare,
to bring into a reckoning.=—L. im-=in, in; and putare, to reckon,
suppose, orig. to cleanse. See Im- (1) and Putative. Der,
imput-er, imput-able, imput-abl-y, imput-able-ness, imputabil-i-ty ; imput-
at-ion, Merch. Ven. i. 3. 13 3 imput-at-ive, imput-at-ive-ly,

IN, prep. denoting presence or situation in place, time, or circum-
stances. (E.) ME. in; passim. AS. in; passim.4+Dn. in; Icel, 7;
Swed. and Dan. i; Goth. in; G. in.4-W. yn; Olrish in (Fick, i.
486); OPruss. en; L.in; Gk. évi, év. B. L.in isa weakened form of ex,
as in OL. en-do; cf. Gk. év, év-5ov. Der. inn-er, from AS. innera,
a comparative adj., Grein, ii. 143 ; i-most, ME. inemaste (written for
innemest), Castel of Love, ed. Weymouth, 1. 809 (Stratmann), from
AS. innemest, an authorised form (Bosworth). a The form inzer-
most is doubly corrupt, having an inserted r, and o substituted for
oldere; the correct form is ixnemest = AS. innemest above. Even this
is a double superlative, with the suffix -est added to the formative
-m- which in itself denotes the superlative (as in Latin pri-m-us) ; see
this explained under Aftermost, Foremost. Similarly immost
should rather have been inmest. Der. (continued) : in-ward, q. V,}
also there-in, where-in, with-in, in-as-much, in-so-much ; and cf. in-ter-,
in-tro-; also inn, q.V.

IN- (1), prefix, in. (E.) In some words, the prefix in- is purely
E., and is merely the prep. im in composition. Exx.: in-born, in-
breathe, in-bred, in-land, in-lay, in-let, in-ly, in-mate, in-side, in-sight,
in-snare, in-stall, in-step, in-twine, in-twist, in-weave, in-wrap, in
wrought, See In, )

U 4


292 IN-


IN- (2), prefix, in. (L.; or F.—L.) In some words, the prefix is
not the E. prep. im, but the cognate L. form. Exx.: in-augurate,
in-carcerate, in-carnate, in-cidence, &c. These words are rather
numerous. f. Sometimes the L. word has passed through F. before
reaching E. Exx.: in-cise, in-cite, in-cline, in-dication, &c.  @ In-
(2) becomes il- before /, as in il-lusion ; im- before m and p, as in im-
bue, im-peril ; ir- before r, as in ir-rigate.

IN- (3), prefix, with negative force. (L.; or F.—L.) In numerous
words, the prefix iz- has a negative force; from L. neg. prefix in-,
which is cognate with E. wn- (with the same force), Olrish an-, Skt.
an- (frequently shortened to a-), Gk. dv- (often shortened to 4-),
Zend an-,a-. See Un- (1), An-, A-(9). £. In many words, the
L. word has reached us through the medium of French. Exx,: in-
capable, in-certainty, in-clement, in-compatible, &c. @{ In- (3) be-
comes 7- before gz, as in i-gnoble; il- before 1, as in il-legal ; im-
before m and #, as in im-mense, im-pure ; ir- before r, as in ir-rational.

INABIGDITY, lack of ability. (F.—L.) ME. inabylité; in A
Goodly Balade, a poem wrongly ascribed to Chaucer, 1. 68; see
Chaucerian Poems, p. 407. See In- (3) and Able.

INACCESSIBLE, not accessible. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp.
ii. 1. 37.—F. inaccessible; Cot. From In- (3) and Accessible ;
see Accede. Der. inaccessible-ness, inaccessibili-ty.

INACCURATE, not accurate. (L.) ‘Very inaccurate judg-
ments;’ Warburton, Divine Legation, b. ii. s. 6 (R.) Inaccuracy is
in Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1731. From In- (3) and Accurate.
Der. inaccurate-ly, inaccuracy.

INACTION, want ofaction. (F.—L.) In Bailey, vol. ii. ed. 1731.
From In- (3) and Action; see Act. Der. inact-ive, inactive-ly;
in-activity, Swift, Horace, b. iv, ode g, 1. 2.

INADEQUATE, not adequate. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.
From In- (3) and Adequate. Der. inadequate-ly, inadequate-ness,
inadequac-y.

INADMISSIBLE, not admissible. (F.—L.) Inlate use. Used
by Burke, On a Regicide Peace, let. 1, note (R.)—F. inadmissible,
‘unadmittable;’ Cot. From In- (3) and Admissible; see
Admit.

INADVERTENT, unattentive, heedless. (L.) Spelt inadvertant
in Bailey, vol. ii. ed. 1731; first found in 1653. Jnadvertence is in
earlier use; Coles’ Dict., ed. 1684; first found in 1568 ; znadvertency
in Bp. Taylor, vol. i. ser. 5 (R.) Inadvertent is of L. origin ; inadver-
tence is from the F. inadvertence, ‘inconsideration;’ Cot. See In-
(3) and Advert. Der. inadvertent-ly; also in-advertence, in-adver-
zenc-y, as above.

INALIENABLE, not alienable. (F.—L.) In Howell, Letters,
vol, ii. let. x. § 4.—F. inalienable,‘ unalienable;’ Cot. From In-
(3) and Alienable; sce Alien.

INAMORATO, a lover. (Ital.—L.) In Greene, Upstart Courtier,
fol. D 4 (1592).—MItal. zxamorato, a lover, spelt innamorato in
Florio; pp. of imnamorare, to enamour.=L. in, in; and amér-, stem
of amor, love, allied to amare, to love; see Enamour. Der. in-
amorata, fem. of the same.

INANE, empty, void, silly, useless. (L.) ‘We speak of place,
distance, or bulk, in the great inane’ [i.e. void, used as a sb.];
Locke, On Human Underst. b. ii. c. 15. s. 7.. [Not from F., but
suggested by F, zzanité, ‘ emptiness, inanity’ (Cot.), which is from
L. inanitatem, acc. of indnitais, emptiness.]=—L. indnis, void, empty.
Of uncertain etymology. Der. inan-i-ty; inan-it-ion, q.v.
‘INANIMATE, lifeless. (L.) ‘ Znanimate, without life ;? Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. And in Cockeram (1642), —L. inanimatus, lifeless,
See In- (3):and Animate. Der. inxanimat-ion.

INANITION, emptiness, exhaustion from lack of food. (F.—L.)
Spelt inanisioun, Lanfranc’s Surgery, p. 100 (1380). ‘Repletion and
inanition may both doe harme;’ Burton, Anat. of Melancholy,
p- 235 (R.)=—F. inanition, ‘an emptying;’ Cot. Allied to the
Pp: inanitus of L. inanire, to empty ; from inani-, decl. stem of indnis,
empty. See Inane.

INAPPLICABLE, not applicable. (L.) Bailey has inapplicable-
ness, vol. ii. ed. 1731. From In- (3) and Applicable ; see Apply.
Der. inapplicable-ness, inapplicabili-ty.

INAPPRECIABLE, not appreciable. (L.) A rather late word;
not in Todd’s Johnson. First in 1787. From In- (3) and Ap-
preciable; see Appreciate.

INAPPROACHABLE, not approachable. (F.—L.) A late
word ; not in Todd’s Johnson, but in Webster (1828). From In-
(3) and Approachable ; see Approach,

INAPPROPRIATE, not fit. (L.) Late; not in Todd. From
In- (3) and Appropriate. Der. inappropriate-ly, inappropriate-
ness.

-INAPT, not apt. (F.—L.) First in 1744; but ineptitude is in
Howell, Familiar Letters, b. i. s. 1. let. 9; dated 1619. From In-
(3) and Apt. 4 Note that ineptitude is a correct spelling, from


INCARNADINE


L. ineptitudo; so too the L. adj. is ineptus, not inaptus. Der. inapt-
ly, inapt-i-tude. Doublet, inept, q. v. (a better form).

INARTICULATEH, not distinct. (L.) ‘The izarticulate sounds
of music;’ Giles Fletcher, Poems; Pref. to the Reader.=L. inarti-
culdtus, indistinct. From In- (3) and Articulate. Der. izarticu-
late-ly, -ness; inarticulat-ion.

INARTIFICIAL, without artifice. (L.) ‘An inartificial argu-
ment ;”’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. i. c. 7. § 2.—L. inartificidlis,
not according to the rules of art. From In- (3) and Artificial;
see Artifice. Der. inartificial-ly.

INASMUCH, seeing that. (E.) Merely the three words ix as
much run together. We find North. E. in als mekil als, Cursor Mundi,
19596; also inasmyche as, Wyclif’s Works, ed. Arnold, ii. 206. Cf.
‘be als moche as that ryvere may serve ’= by as much as that river, 8c. ;
Mandeville’s Travels, ed. Halliwell, p. 45.

INATTENTION, lack of attention. (F.—L.) ‘This universal
indolence and inattention among us;’ Tatler,no.187. From In- (3)
and Attention; see Attend. Der. inattent-ive, inattent-ive-ly.

INAUDIBLE, not audible. (L.) In Shak. All’s Well, v. 3. 41.
See In- (3) and Audience. Der. inaudibl-y, inaudibili-ty.

INAUGURATEH, to consecrate, install, enter upon or invest with
an office formally, begin formally. (L.) ‘The seat on which her
kings inaugurated were ;’? Drayton, Polyolbion,s. 17.1. 188. Properly
app., as in ‘being inaugurate and invested in the kingdome;’ Holland,
tr. of Livy, p. 14 (R.) ‘When is the inauguration?’ Beaum. and.
Fletcher, Valentinian, v. 5. 1.—L. inaugurdtus, pp. of inaugurare,
to consult the divining birds, practise augury, inaugurate. =L. in-=
prep. in, for, towards; and augurare, to act as augur. See In- (2)
and Augur. Der.inaugurat-ion (above) ; inaugurat-or ; inaugural.

INAUSPICIOUS, not auspicious. (L.) In Shak. Romeo, vy. 3.
111. See In- (3) and Auspice. Der. inauspicious-ly, -ness.

INBORN, born within one, native. (E.) ‘And straight, with
inborn vigour, on the wing; Dryden, Mrs. Anne Killigrew, 1. 191.
Late AS. inboren, in-born, From in, prep.; and born, pp. of bear.
See In- (1) and Bear (1). So also Icel. znnborinn, inborn.

INBREATHED, breathed in. (E.) ‘Dead things with zn-
breathed sense ;’ Milton, At a Solemn Musick, 1. 4. See Im- (1) and
Breathe.

INBRED, bred within, innate. (E.) ‘My inbred enemy ;’ Milton,
P. L. ii. 785. From in, prep.; and bred, pp. of Breed.

INCA, a royal title. (Peruvian.) ‘ The Indian Inca ;’ Howell,
Fam. Letters, 2nd Introd. Poem, 1.19. Dryden has the pl. Incas;
Fables, Dedication, § 7.— Peruy. inca, a title. Cf. Peruv. capay kapac
Inca, king of Peru (¢apay=only; kapac=lord); Peruv. Dict. Inca
was orig. the chief of a tribe (Oviedo). Garcilasso de la Vega
explains capa Inca as ‘sole lord;’ and complains that the Span.
form inga is corrupt.

INCAGE, to put in a cage. (F.—L.) Better excage. In Shak.
Rich, II, ii. 1. 102.—F. encager, ‘to incage, to shut within a cage;’
Cot.=—F. en=L. in, in; and cage,acage. See In- (2) and Cage.

INCALCULABLE, not to be counted. (L.) ‘Do mischiefs
incalculable ;? Burke, On Scarcity (R.) From In- (3) and Caleula-
ble; see Calculate. Der. incalculabl-y.

INCANDESCENT, glowing hot. (L.) Jncandescence is in
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. incandescent-, stem of pres. part. of
incandescere, to glow.—L. in, towards; and candescere, inceptive
form of candére, to glow. See In- (2) and Candle. Der. incan-
descence. ;

INCANTATION, a magical charm. (L.). ME. incantacion,
Gower, C. A. iii. 455 bk. vi. 1309. —OF. incantation; see N. E. Di=
L. incantatiOnem, acc. of incantatio, an enchanting ; cf. incantatus, pp.
of incantare, to sing charms. See Enchant.

INCAPABLE, not capable. (F.—L.) In Drayton, Moses his.
Birth, b.i. 1. 250; Milton, P.L. ii. 140, v. 505 ; Shak., Sonnet 113.—
F. incapable, ‘uncapable;’ Cot. From In- (3) and Capable. Der.
incapabili-ty ; and see below.

INCAPACITY, want of capacity. (F.—L.) In Minsheu. =
F. incapacité, ‘incapacity;’ Cot. Cf. L. zxcapax, incapable. From
In- (3) and Capacity; see Capacious. Der. incapacit-ate ; in-
capacit-at-ion, Burke, Thoughts on the Present Discontents, ed. E. J,
Payne (Clar. Press), p. 63, 1. 3.

INCARCERATE, to put in prison. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss.
ed. 1674. Asa pp. in Roy, Rede Me, ed. Arber, p. 48, 1. 6.—L. in,
in; and.carcerdtus, pp. of carcerare, to imprison, from carcer, a prison ;
a word of uncertain origin. Der. incarcerat-ion.

INCARNADINE,, to dye of a red colour. (F.—Ital.—L.) In
Shak, *Macb. ii. 2. 62; see Nares.—F. incarnadin, ‘carnation, of
adeep, rich, or bright carnation ;’ Cot. = Ital. ixcarnadino, ‘carnation
or flesh colour ;’ Florio. Also spelt incarnatino (Florio), asin mod,
Italian. Ital. izcarnato, incarnate, of flesh colour.—L. incarnatus,,
incarnate. See Incarnation.


ee


INCARNATION


INCARNATION, embodiment in flesh. (F.—L.) ME. in-
carnacion, Rob. of Glouc. p. 9; 1. 197.—F. incarnation. = Late L.
incarnationem, acc. of incarndatio; cf. incarnatus, pp. of incarnare, to
clothe with flesh.—L. zz, in; and carn-, stem of caro, flesh. See
Carnal. Der. incarnate, Merch. Ven. ii. 2. 29, from pp. incarnatus ;
incarnat-ive, i.e. causing flesh to grow, Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxvii.
c. II (near end).

INCASE, the same as Encase. (F.—L.) In Pope, tr. of Homer,

BOGri. 3935

INCAUTIOUS, not cautious, (L.) ‘ You treat adventurous, and
incautious tread ;’ Francis, tr. of Horace, b. ii. ode z (R.). From In-
(3) and Cautious; see Caution. Der. incautious-ly, ness.

INCENDIARY, one who sets fire to houses, &c. (L.) ‘ Others
called him .. . incendiarie;’ Holland, tr. of Suetonius, p. 238. —L.
incendiarius, setting on fire. = L. incendium, a burning. = L. incendere,
to kindle. See Incense (1). Der. incendiar-ism.

INCENSE (1), to inflame. (L.) ‘Much was the knight in-
censt ;’ Spenser, F. Q. v. 3. 36.—L. incensus, pp. of incendere, to kindle,
inflame. — L. iz, in, upon; and *candere, to burn (found also in comp.
accendere), allied to candére, to glow. See In- (2) and Candle.
Der. incend-iary, q. v.; incense-ment, Twelfth Nt. iii. 4. 260.

INCENSE (2), spices, odour of spices burned. (F.—L.) ME.
encens, Chaucer, C. T. 2279 (A 2277).—F. encens, ‘incense, frankin-
cense;” Cot.—L. incensum, incense, lit. what is burnt; orig. neuter of
incensus, pp. of incendere; see INGense(1). Der. frank-incense, censer.

INCENTIVE, provoking, inciting. (L.) ‘Part incentive reed
Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire;’ Milton, P. L. vi. 519.
{Yet not connected with L. incendere, to kindle.]—L. incentiuus, that
which strikes up or sets a tune; hence, that provokes or incites; cf.
L. *incentus, unused pp. of incinere, to blow or sound an instrument.
—L. in, into; and canere, to sing. See Enchant, Chant,

INCEPTIVE, beginning. (L.) In Phillips’ Dict. ed. 1706.
Formed, with suffix -ive (=L. -iuus), from incept-um, supine of
incipere, to begin, lit. to seize on.—L. in, on; and capere, to seize;
see In- (2) and Capable. Der. inceptive-ly; and see incipient.

INCERTIFUDE, uncertainty. (F.—L.) In Holland, tr. of
Pliny, bk. xviii. c. 25, p. 586 h.=—F. incertitude, ‘incertainty ;’ Cot.
= L. in-, not; and Late L. certitédo, certainty (Duc.), from certus,
sure. See Certain.

INCESSANT, ceaseless. (L.) In Levins. And in Shak. Hen. V,

ii. 2. 38. —L. incessant-, stem of incessans, unceasing. = L. in-, negative
prefix; and cessans, pres. pt. of cessdre, to cease. See In- (3) and
Cease. Der. incessant-ly.
‘INCEST, impurity. (F.—L.) Inearly use. ME. incest, Ancren
Riwle, p. 204, 1. 20.—F. inceste, ‘incest ;’ Cot. —L. incestus (gen. -is),
sb. incest.—L. incestus, adj., unchaste.—L. in-, not; and castus,
chaste. See In- (3) and Chaste. Der. incest-u-ous, Hamlet, i. 2.
1573 incest-u-ous-ly.

INCH (1), the twelfth part of a foot. (L.) ME. inche, Prompt.
Parv. p. 261. Older spelling also unche; ‘feouwer unchene long ;’
Layamon, 23970. AS. ynce; Laws of Ethelberht, 67; in Thorpe’s
Ancient Laws, i. 18.—L. uncia, an inch; also, an ounce. See
Ounce (1), which is the doublet. Der. inch-meal, Temp. ii. 2. 3
(see Piecemeal) ; inch-thick, Wint. Tale, i. 2. 186. @@ The AS.
y=t, derived from uz by vowel-change; the changes from L. u to
AS. y, and thence to ME. 2, are quite regular.

INCH (2), an island. (Gael.) In Shak. Macb. i. 2. 61; Henry,
Wallace, bk. ix. 1147. —Gael. innis, an island.4Izish nis, an island;
W. ynys; Bret. enez; Corn. enys. Cf. L. insula.

INCHOATE, just begun. (L.) First in 1534 (N.E.D.).=—L.
inchodtus, more correctly incohatus, pp. of incohare, to begin.

INCIDENT, falling upon, liable to occur. (F.—L.) In Levins;
and in Shak, Timon, iv. 1.21. Also used as sb. Lydgate incydentes,
sb. pl., Troye Book, bk. v. last ch.; fol. Ddij, back.=F. incident,
“an incident, circumstance;” Cot.—L,. incident-, stem of pres. pt. of
incidere, to befall. —L. iz, on; and cadere, to fall. See Cadence.
Der. incident-al, -ly, -ness; incidence ; incidenc-y, Wint. Tale, i. 2. 403.

INCIPIENT, beginning. (L.) Found in 1669.  ‘TIucipient
apoplexies;’ Boyle, Works, vol. iv. p.641 (R.).—L. incipient-, stem
of incipiens, pres. pt. of inctpere, to begin; see Inceptive. Der,
incipient-ly, incipience.

INCIRCLE, the same as Encircle. (F.—L.) In Kersey, ed.
1715.
iNCISE, to cut into, gash. (F.—L.) ‘But I must be incised
first, cut, and opened ;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Mad Lover, ii. x. 17.
=F. inciser, ‘to cut into, make an incision;’ Cot. =—L. incisus, pp. of
incidere, to cut into.<L. in, into; and cedere, to cut. See In- (2)
and Cesura. Der. incis-ion, L. L. L. iv. 3. 97, from F. incision


(Cot.); inczs-ive, from F. incisif, ‘ cutting,’ Cot.3 tncis-ive-ly, incis-ive- |


ness; incis-or, from L. incisor; incis-or-y.


INCITE, to rouse, instigate. (F.—L.) In K. Lear, iv. 4. 27.—


INCOMPREHENSIBLE 293


F, inciter, ‘to incite;’ Cot.—L. incitare, to urge forward.=L. in;
towards, forwards; and cifdre, to urge. See In- (2) and Cite.
Der. incite-ment, from F, incitement, ‘an inciting,’ Cot.; incit-at-ion,
spelt incitacion, Sir T. More, Works, p. 551 c.

INCIVIL, uncivil, rude. (F.—L.) In Shak. Cymb. v. 5. 292. =
F. incivil, ‘uncivill;’ Cot.—L. inciuilis, rude. From In- (3) and
Civil. Der. incivil-it-y, Com. Errors, iv. 4. 49, from F. incivilité,
‘ incivility ;’ Cot.

INCLEMENT, not clement. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. L. iii.
426, =F, inclement, ‘unclement;’ Cot. From In- (3) and Clement.
Der. inclement-ly; inclemenc-y, used by Cot. to translate F. inclemence.

INCLINE, to lean towards, bow towards. (F.—L.) ME. en-
clinen, Gower, C, A. i. 168; bk. ii. 271; also in Chaucer, C. T.
13908 (B 3092).—F. incliner, ‘to incline;’ Cot.—L. inclindre, to
incline. = L, ix, towards; and *clinare, to lean, cognate with E. lean.
See Lean (1). Der. inclin-at-ion, Hamlet, iii. 3. 39, ME. incly-
nacioun, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 91, from F. inclination, ‘an
inclination,’ Cot.; also izclin-able, Cor. ii. 2. 60.

INCLOSE, the same as Enclose. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q.
iii. 2.31; Dunbar, Thistle and Rose, st. 23. Der. enclos-ure, Milton,
P. L. iv. 133. See Include.

INCLUDE, to shut in, contain. (L.) In Barnes, Works, p. 228,
col. 2.—L. incliidere, pp. inclisus, to shut in.—L. in, in; and clau-
dere, to shut. See In- (2) and Close (1), Der. inclus-ion; inclus-
ive, Rich. III, iv. 1. 59; inclus-ive-ly.

INCOGNITO, in concealment. (Ital.—L.) In Dryden, Kind
Keeper, Act i. sc. 1; and in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. = Ital. incog-
nito, unknown. = L. incognitus, unknown. =L. iz-, not; and cognitus,
known. See In- (3) and Cognition. @] Shortened to incog,
Tatler, no. 230.

INCOHERENT, not coherent. (L.) ‘Two incoherent and un-
combining dispositions;’ Milton, On Divorce, b. i. c. 1. ‘ Besides
the incoherence of such a doctrine ;’ id. b. ii. c. 2. See In- (3) and
Cohere. Der. incoherent-ly, incoherence.

INCOMBUSTIBILE, that cannot be burnt. (L.) ‘Stories of
incombustible napkins ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii.c. 14, § 3.
From In-.(3) and Combustible; see Combustion. Der. in-
combustible-ness, incombustibili-ty.

INCOME, gain, profit, revenue. (E.) Properly, the ‘ coming in,’
and hence, accomplishment, fulfilment. ME. income, coming in;
Cursor Mundi, 11127. ‘Pain. pays the income of each precious
thing ;” Shak. Lucrece, 334. From In- (1) and Come.

INCOMMENSURABLE, not commensurable. (F.—L.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—F. incommensurable, ‘ unmeasurable ;’
Cot.—L. incommensirabilis. See In- (3) and Commensurate.
Der. incommensurabl-y, incommensurable-ness, incommensurabili-ty.

INCOMMENSURATE, not commensurate. (L.) In Boyle,
Works, vol. iv. p. 780 (R.). From In- (3) and Commensurate,

INCOMMODE, to cause inconvenience to. (F.—L.) In Florio
(1594), s.v. Incomodare. =F. incommoder, ‘to incommodate, hinder ;’
Cot. =—L, incommodare, to cause inconvenience to.—L. incommodus,
inconvenient. —L. zz-, not;.and commodus, convenient. See In- (3)
and Commodious. Der. ixcommod-i-ous, North’s Plutarch, p. 77
(R.) 3 incommod-i-ous-ly, -ness; also incommod-i-ty, Sir T. Elyot,
Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 31.

INCOMMUNICABLE, not communicable. (F.—L.) | In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—F. incommunicable, ‘ uncommunicable ;’
Cot. See In- (3) and Commune. Der. incommunicabl-y, incom-
municable-ness, incommunicabili-ty; so also in-communic-at-ive.

INCOMMUTABLE, not commutable. (F.—L.) ‘The in-
comutable deyté ;’ Caxton, Golden Legend; Pentecost, § 1.—F. in-
commutable; Cot. See In- (3) and Commute. Der. incommutabl-y,
incommutable-ness, incommutabili-ty.

INCOMPARABLE, matchless. (F.—L.) In Shak. Timon,
i. I. 10; and Lydgate, Troye Book, bk. i. ch. 6, fol. D 4 (end).=—
F. incomparable, ‘incomparable ;’ Cot. See In- (3) and Compare,
Der. incomparabl-y, incomparable-ness.

INCOMPATIBLE, not compatible. (F.—L.) In Beaum, and
Fletcher, Four Plays in One, Triumph of Love, sc. 1, 1. 7.—F. in-
compatible, ‘incompatible;’ Cot. From In- (3) and Compatible.
Der. incompatibl-y ; incompatibil-i-ty, from F. incompatibilité (Cot.). .

INCOMPETENT, not competent. (F.—L.) In Minsheu.=
F. incompetent, ‘incompetent, unfit ;? Cot. See In- (3) and Com-
petent. Der. incompetent-ly, incompetence ; also incompetenc-y, used
by Cot. to translate F. incompetence.

INCOMPLETE, not complete. (L.) ‘A most imperfect and
incompleat divine ;’ Milton, Animad. upon Remonstrants Defence
against Smectymnuus (R.).. ME. .incompleet, Wyclif, Works, ed.
Amold, iii. 342, 1. 9.—L. incomplétus. See In- (3) and Complete,
Der. incomplete-ly, -ness.


INCOMPREHENSIBLE, not to be comprehended. (F.—L.)


INCOMPRESSIBLE


‘How incomprehensible are his waies;’ Frith, Works, p. 84, col. 2,
last line. And in Wyclif, Jerem. xxxii. 19.—F. incomprehensible ;
Cot. From In- (3) and Comprehensible ; see Comprehend.
Der. incomprehensibl-y, incomprehensibili-ty ; so also incomprehens-ive,
incomprehens-ive-ness.

INCOMPRESSIBLE, not compressible. (L.) In Bailey,
vol. ii. ed. 1731. From In-.(3) and Compressible; see Com-
press. Der. incompressibili-ty.

INCONCEIVABLE, not to be conceived. (F.—L.) First in
1631. Bailey has inconceivable-ness, vol. ii.ed. 1731. A coined word ;
see In- (3) and Conceive. Der. inconceivabl-y, inconceivableness.
-INCONCLUSIVE, not conclusive. (L.) First in 1707. See
Todd’s Johnson. From In- (3) and Conclusive ; see Conclude.
Der. inconclusive-ly, -ness.

INCONDITE, ill-constructed, crude, rude. (L.) ‘Carol ixcon-
dite rhythms ;’ Philips, Cyder, bk. ii. —L. inconditus, ill put together.
=L. in-, not; conditus, pp. of condere, to put together, from coz-, for
cum, together, and -dere, to put, place, allied to Gk. ri-@y-u, I place.
See Thesis. Brugmann,i. § 573.

INCONGRUOUS, inconsistent, unsuitable. (L.) In Cotgrave,
to translate F. incongrue.—L. incongruus; with -oxs for -us. From
In- (3) and Congruous; see Congrue. Der. incongru-i-ty, in
Minsheu, and used by Cot. to translate F. incongruité.

INCONSEQUENT, not following from the premises. (L.)
Kersey has inconsequency, ed. 1715; Bailey has inconsequentness,
vol. ii. ed. 1731.—L. inconsequent-, stem of inconsequens, inconsequent.
See In- (3) and Consequent. Der. inmconsequent-ly, -ness; incon-
sequence, inconsequenc-y ; also inconsequent-ial , inconsequent-ial-ly,

INCONSIDERABLE, unimportant. (F.—L.) In Milton,
P.R. iv. 457. From In- (3) and Considerable; see Consider.
Der. So also inconsider-ate, Shak. K. John, ii. 67; inconsider-ate-ly,
inconsider-ate-ness 3 inconsider-at-ion, in Cotgrave, to translate F. in-
consideration.

INCONSISTENT, not consistent. (L.) ‘Though it be in-
consistent with their calling;’ Howell, Foreign Travel, ed. 1642,
s. 18; ed. Arber, p. 76. From In- (3) and Consistent; see
Consist. - Der. inconsistent-ly, inconsistence, inconsistenc-y.

INCONSOLABLE, not to be consoled. (F.—L.) In Min-
sheu.< F. inconsolable, ‘inconsolable;’ Cot.—L. inconsdlabilis, See
In- (3) and Console. Der. inconsolabl-y.

INCONSTANT, not constant. (F.—L.)  ‘Inconstant man;’
Spenser, F. Q.i. 4. 26. ME. inconstaunt, Hoccleve, Letter of Cupid,
1, rot.—F. inconstant, ‘inconstant;? Cot. See In- (3) and Con-
stant. Der. ixconstant-ly; inconstanc-y, used by Cot. to translate
¥F, inconstance.

INCONSUMABLE, that cannot be consumed. (L.) ‘Coats,
inconsumable by fire ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 14, § 4.
A coined word. See In- (3) and Consume.

INCONTEHSTABLE, not contestable. (F.—L.) ‘ By necessary
consequences, as incontestable as those in mathematicks;’ Locke, Of
Human Underst. b. iv. c. 3. s. 18 (R.).—F. incontestable, ‘not to be
contested or stood on;’ Cot. See In- (3) and Contest. Der.
incontestabl-y.

INCONTINENT (1), unchastee (F.—L.) In Shak. As You
Like It, v. 2. 42. —F. incontinent, ‘incontinent, immoderate ;’ Cot. = L.
incontinent-, stem of incontinens.=L. in-, not; and continens, contain-
ing, pres. pt. of continére, to contain. See In- (3) and Contain.
Der. incontinent-ly ; incontinence, used by Cot. to translate F, in-
continence ; also incontinenc-y, spelt incontinencie in Sir T. More,
Works, p. 297 f.

INCONTINENT (2), immediately. (F.—L.) In Spenser,
F. Q. i. 9. 19. ME..incontinent, Generydes, 1. 1571. =F. incontinent,
‘adverb, incontinently, instantly ;’ Cot. Lit. ‘immoderately ;’ and
due to the word above. Der. incontinent-ly, Oth. i. 3. 306.

INCONTROLLABLE, not to be controlled. (F.—L.) ‘An
incontroullable conformity ;? Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iy.
c.12,§ 15. Acoined word, See In- (3) and Control. Der. in-
controllabl-y.

INCONTROVERTIBLE, not to be gainsaid. (L.) In Sir T.

Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. vii. c. 13, § 4 [vot c. 23]. A coined word.
See In- (3) and Controversy, Der. incontrovertibl-y, incontro-
wertibili-ty.
“INCONVENIENT, not suitable, incommodious. (F.—L.) ‘I
wene that non inconuenient shalt thou fynde betwene Goddes for-
weting and liberté of arbitrement ;’ Test. of Love, b, iii. c. 3. 77.
‘ Withouten any inconuenience thereof to folow ;’ id. c. 4. 139.—F.
inconvenient ; Cot.—L. inconuenient-, stem of inconueniens, unsuitable.
See In- (3) and Convenient. . Der. inconvenient-ly, inconvenience,
anconventenc-y, :

INCONVERTIBLE, not convertible. (L.) ‘And accompanieth
the inconvertible portion;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b, ii. c. 5,


294


INCULPABLE


§ 8 [reference in R. wrong].—L. inconuertibilis, unchangeable.
In- (3) and Convert. Der. inconvertibili-ty.

INCONVINCIBLE, not convincible. (L.) ‘Yet it is not
much less injurious unto knowledge, obstinately and inconvincibly [in-
convincedly, R.| to side with any one; Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors,
b. i. c..7, § 6. A coined word; from In- (3) and Convince. Der.
inconvincibl-y.

INCONY, adj., rare, fine, delicate, pretty, very dear. (E.) In
Shak. L, L. L. iii. 1. 1363 iv. 1. 144; Marlowe, Jew of Malta, iv. 5
(or 6). Perhaps for in-conny ; where in- is intensive, as in ME. in-ly,
very; and conny (also canzny) is North E., meaning skilful, gentle,
pleasant, dainty, &c. (E.D.D.) From E. can, I know (how); cf.
Icel. kunnigr, knowing, wise ; Swed. kunnzg’, skilful.

INCORPORATE, to form into a body. (L.) In Shak. Romeo,
ii.6.37. Orig.a pp.as in Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 208 ; and much earlier
(spelt iazcorporat) in Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 329.—L. incorpordtus,
pp. of incorporare, to furnish with a body.=L. in, in; and corpor-,
decl. stem of corpus, a body. See In- (2) and Corporal (2). Der.
incorporat-ion, Sir T. More, Works, p. 1045 h; so also incorpor-eal,
Milton, P. L. i. 789 ; zncorpor-eal-ly.

INCORRECT, not correct. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, i. 2. 95.—F-.
incorrect, ‘incorrect;’ Cot.—L. zxcorrectus, uncorrected. See In-
(3) and Correct. Der. incorrect-ly, -ness; so also incorrigible, in
Minsheu, and used by Cot. to translate F. incorrigible ; incorrigible-
ness, incorrigibili-ty.

INCORRUPT, not corrupt. (L.) ‘The most iuste and incorrupt
iuge’ [judge]; Joye, Exposicion of Daniel, c. 7. And in Trevisa,
tr. of Higden, vii. 149.— L. incorruptus, uncorrupted. See In- (3)
and Corrupt. Der. incorrupt-ly; incorrupt-ion, Sir T. More,
Works, p. 13454; incorrupt-ness; also incorrupt-ible, Bible, 1551,
1 Cor. xv. 52, from F. incorruptible, Cot. ; incorruptibl-y, incorrupt-
ible-ness.

INCRASSATE, to make thick. (L.) ‘Liquors which time hath
incrassated into jellies;’ Sir T. Browne, Urn-burial, c. iii. § 3.—L.
incrassatus, pp. of incrassdre, to make thick. —L. in, in, into; and
crassdre, to thicken, from crassus, thick. See Crass. Der. incrass-
ation, incrassat-ive.

INCREASE, to grow in size, to augment. (F.—L.) ME. iz-
cresen, Prompt. Pary. p. 261. Earlier, encresen, Chaucer, C. T. 13394
(B 1654). — AF. encress-, a stem of encrestre, to increase; Stat. Realm,
p- 284.—F. en, in; and AF. cres-, stem of creistre, to grow (OF.
croistre, F. crottre). ‘Un arbresu ki eu munt fu cresant’ =a small tree
which was growing on the mount; Vie de St. Auban, ed. Atkinson,
1172.° Cf. L. increscere, to increase. = L, in, in; and crescere, to grow.
See In- (2) and Crescent. Der. increase, sb., Bible, 1551, Ezek.
xxxiv. 27. And see increment.

INCREDIBLE, not credible, (F.—L.) ‘ Reioysyng incredibly ;”
Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. ii. c. 2; Shak. Tam. Shrew, ii.
308. — F. incredible, ‘incredible ;’ Cot.—L. incrédibilis, From In- (3)
and Credible; see Creed. Der. incredibl-y, incredibili-ty ; so also
incred-ul-ous, 2 Hen. IV, iv. 5.154, from L. incrédulus, by change of -us
to -ous, as in numerous other instances ; incredulous-ly; incredul-i-ty,
from F. incredulité, ‘incredulity,’ Cot.

INCREMENT, increase. (L.) Used by Bp. Taylor, Liberty of
Prophesying, § 16. ‘Jncrement, incrementum ;’ Levins, ed. 1570. —
L. incrémentum, increase. Formed with suffix -mentum from incré-,
base of izcrescere, to increase. See Increase.

INCROACH, the same as Encroach. (F.) In Minsheu; and
in Cotgrave, to translate MF. enjamber.

INCRUST, to cover with a crust. (F.—L.) ‘The chapell is
incrusted with such precious materials;’ Evelyn, Diary, Novy. 10,
1644. ‘ Incrustate, incrustare ;’ Levins, ed. 1570. =F, incruster, ‘ to
set a scab or crust on ;’ Cot.= L. incrustare, to cover with a crust. —L,
in, on; and ecrusta,a crust. See In- (2) and Crust. Der, zxcrustat-
ion, Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. > Better than encrust.

INCUBATE, to sit on eggs to hatch them. (L.) The verb is
late, and suggested by the sb. incubation. ‘The daily incubation of
ducks;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c.7, § 9.—L. incubitus,
pp. of incubare, to lie upon, sit upon eggs. See Incubus. Der,
incubat-ion, incubat-or. : ;

INCUBUS, a nightmare, oppressive weight. (L.) ‘ Ther is
noon other ixcubus but he;’? Chaucer, C. T. 6462 (D 880). =—L.
incubus, a nightmare. =L. incubare, to lie upon. —L. iz, upon ; and
cubare, to lie down, lit. to be bent down. Cf. Gk. xvmrewv, to stoop
down.

INCULCATE, to enforce by admonitions. (L.) ‘To inculcate,
inculcare ;’ Levins. L. inculcdlus, pp. of inculcare, lit. to tread in,
=L. in, in; and calcare, to tread. See Calk. Der. inculcat-ion.
INCULPABLE, not culpable. (L.) ‘As one that was in-
culpable ;’? Chapman, Homer’s Iliad, b. iv. 1. 103; and in Minsheu,
=m L. inculpabilis, See In< (3) and Culpable, Der. inculpabl-y..


See


INCULPATE


- INCULPATEH, to bring into blame. (L.) First in 1799. Not
in Todd’s Johnson, = Late L. inculpare, to bring blame upon, accuse ;
Ducange.=L. iz, upon; and culpa, blame; see In- (2) and Culp-
able. Der. inculpat-ion, inculpat-or-y.

INCUMBENT, lying upon, resting upon asa duty. (L.). ‘ Aloft,
incumbent. on the dusky air ;’ Milton, P. L. i. 226. —L. incumbent-, stem
of pres. pt. of incumbere, to lie upon; a nasalised form allied to
incubare, to lie upon. See Incubus. Der. incumbent, sb., one who
holds an ecclesiastical office, see Minsheu, and Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674 3 incumbent-ly, incumbenc-y.

INCUMBER, the same as Enecumber. (F.—L.) In Minsheu;
and in Milton, P. L. vi. 874, ix. 1051.

INCUR, to become liable to, bring on. (L.) In Shak. Merch.
Ven. iv. 1. 361. —L. incurrere, to run.into, fall into, run upon, attack,
befal, occur.—L. iz, upon; and currere, to run. See In- (2) and
Current. Der. incursion, q. v.

INCURABLE, not curable. (F.—L.) ME. incurable, P. Plow-
man, B. x. 327; Gower, C. A. ii. 119; bk. iv. 3509.—F. incurable ;
Cot. = L, inctirabilis.—L. in-, not; and cirabilis, curable, from curdare,
to cure. See In- (3) and Cure. Der. incurabl-y, incurable-ness,
incurabili-ty.

INCURSION, an inroad, encounter. (F.—L.) In Shak. 1 Hen.
IV, iii. 2. 108.—F. imcursion, ‘an incursion, inrode ;’ Cot.=—L. in-
cursionem, acc. of incursio, an attack; allied to L. incursus, pp. of
incurrere, to attack. See Incur.

INCURVATES, to bend, crook. (L.) In Cockeram, pt. ii. s. v.
bow. ‘ Incurvation, a crook’ning or bowing ;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. —L.
incuruadtus, pp. of incurudre, to bend into a curve.=—L. in, in, into;
and curudre, to curve, from curuus, crooked ; see In- (2) and Curve.
Der. incurvat-ion.

INDEBTED, being in debt. (F.—L.) In Luke, xi. 4 (A. V.).
ME. endetted; Chaucer, C. T. 16202 (G 734).—OF. endetter, MF.
endebter, ‘to bring into debt;’ Cot.—F. ez, in, into; and OF. dette,
MF. debte, a debt. See In- (2) and Debt. Der. indebted-ness.

INDECENT, not decent. (F.—L.). In Spenser, b. ii. c. g. st. 1.
=F. indecent, ‘undecent ;” Cot.—L. indecent-, stem of indecens, un-
becoming. See In- (3) and Decent. Der. indecent-ly, indecenc-y.

INDECISION, want of decision. (F.—L.) Used by Burke
(R.). =F. indecision, ‘an undecision ;’ Cot. See In- (3) and Decide.
Der. indects-ive, indecis-ive-ly, -ness.

INDECLINABLE, that cannot be declined. (L.) A gram-
“matical term. In Palsgrave, Introd. p. xxxvii.—L. indéclinabilis,
indeclinable.=—L. im-, neg. prefix; and déclinare, to. decline, inflect
a substantive. See In- (4) and Decline. Der. indeclinabl-y,

INDECORUM, want of propriety. (L.) ‘To entermingle merie
‘iests in a serious matter is an indecorum ;” Gascoigne, On Verse, ed.
-Arber, p. 32. And in Minsheu’s Dict., ed. 1627.—L. indecdrum,
what is unbecoming; neut. of indecorus, unbecoming. See In- (3)
and Decorum. Der. indecor-ous, used by Burke (R.); directly
from. L, indecérus, with -ous for -us ; hence indecor-ous-ly.

INDEED, in fact, in truth. (E.) ME. in dede, in reality, accord-
ing to the facts. ‘And how that al this proces fil iz dede” =and how
all this series of events happened in reality ; Chaucer, C. T. 14327
(B 3511). We find nearly the modern usage in the following.
“Made her owne weapon do her finger blede, To fele if pricking wer
so good in dede;’ Sir T. Wiat, Of his Love that pricked her finger
with a nedle. From iz, prep.; and dede, dat. case of deed. See In
and Deed.

INDEFATIGABLE, that cannot be wearied ont. (F.—L.)
In Milton, P. L. ii. 408; and in Minsheu. =F. indefatigable, ‘ inde-
fatigable ;” Cot. —L. indéfatigabilis, not to be wearied out.—L. in-,
negative prefix; and défatigare, to weary out, from dé, down, ex-
tremely, and fatigdre, to weary. See In- (3) and Fatigue. Der.
indefatigabl-y, indefatigable-ness.

- INDEFEASIBBLE, not to be defeated or made void. (AF.—L.)
An AF. law-term. Spelt indefeosable in Cockeram (1642). ‘An
indefeasible title;’ Burnet, Hist. Reformation, an. 1553 (R.). Also
spelt indefeasable ; Tatler,no.187. From In-(3) and Defeasible;
see Defeasance, Defeat. Der. indefeasibl-y, indefeasibili-ty.

- INDEFENSIBLE, not defensible. (L.) Used by Sir T. More,
Works, p. 151. From In- (3) and Defensible. See Defend.
Der. indefensibl-y. :

> INDEFINABLE, that cannot be defined. (L.) Modern.
Added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. From In- (3) and Definable.
‘See Indefinite.

. INDEFINITE, not definite, vague. (L.) ‘It was left somewhat
indefinitely ;’ Bacon, Life of Hen. VII, ed, Lumby, p. 102, 1. 25.
-From In- (3) and Definite. See Define. Der. indejinite-ly, -ness.

INDELIBLE, not to be blotted out. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave.
Misspelt for indeleble. Owing to the lack of E. words ending in -edle,
“it. has been made to end in -ible, by analogy with ¢err-ible, horr-ible,


INDIAMAN 295


and the like. The correct spelling indeleble often occurs (see Rich.
and Todd) and is given in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ‘Might fix any
character indeleble of disgrace upon you;’ Bacon, Letters, ed. 1657,
p- 13 (Todd).—MF. indelebile, ‘indelible;’? Cot.—L. indélébilis,
indelible.—L. in-, not; and déébilis, destructible, from délére, to
destroy. See In- (3) and Delete. Der. indelibl-y, indelibili-ty.

INDELICATE, not delicate, coarse. (F.—L.) ‘If to your nice
and chaster ears That term indelicate appears;’ Churchill, The
Ghost, b. iii. 1. 283. Indelicacy is in the Spectator, no. 286. From
In- (3) and Delicate. Der. indelicate-ly, indelicac-y.

INDEMNIFY, to make good for damage done. (F.—L.) *2
believe the states must at last engage to the merchants here that they
will ixdemnify them from all that shall fall out on this occasion;’
Sir W. Temple, to Lord Arlington (R.). Cf. MF. indemniser, ‘to
indemnize, or indamnifie;’ Cot. [A clumsy and ignorantly formed
compound, made as if from an OF. indemnifier or Late L. indemni-
jiedre, neither of which is used; the true words being OF. in-
demniser and. Late L. indemnisdre.|—L. indemni-, decl. stem of
indemnis, unharmed; and F. suffix -fer=L. -fictire, forms due to L.
facere, to make; see Fact. B. L. indemmis is from in-, neg. prefix;
and damnum, harm, loss; see In- (3) and Damage. Der. indemnific-
at-ion. And see Indemnity.

INDEMNITY, security from loss, compensation for loss.
(F.—L.) ‘Sufficiently prouide for thindemnity [i.e. the indemnity]
of the wytnes;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 970 b.=F. indemnité, ‘in-
demnity ;’ Cot.—L.indemnitatem, acc. of indemnitds, security from
damage. = L. indemni-, decl. stem of indemnis ; see Indemnify.

INDEMONSTRABLE, not demonsirable. (L.) ‘ Undiscern-
able, and most commonly indemonstrable;’ Bp. Taylor, Liberty of
Prophesying, s. 2. —L. ixdémonstrabilis, not to be shown. = L. in-, not;
and démonstrabilis, demonstrable, from démonstraire, to show. See
In- (3) and Demonstrate.

INDENT (1), to notch, cut into points like teeth. (Law L.)
A law term. In making duplicates of deeds, it was usual to cut or
indent the edges exactly alike so that they would tally with each
other upon comparison. The deeds with edges so cut were called
indentures, and the verb to: indent came also to mean to execute a
deed or make a compact. See indentura in Ducange. ‘Shall we
buy treason, and indent with fears, When they have lost and for-
feited themselves?” 1 Hen. IV, i. 3. 87. It was also used as a term
in heraldry, as in the following. ‘ His baner, . . . the which was
goules, . . . bordred syluer indented;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. i.
c. 60(R.). Hence used in a general sense. ‘ With indented glides;’
As You Like It, iv. 3. 113. —Law L. indentire, to notch or cut into
teeth ; whence also MF. endenter (Cotgrave).—L. iz, in, into; and
dent-, stem of dens, a tooth, cognate with E. Tooth, q.v. Der. in-
denture, Hamlet, v. 1. 119 (=Law L. indentiira, Ducange), formed
with F. suffix -ure (=L. -tra) by analogy with F. sbs. such as bless-
ure from bless-er, &c. Also indentat-ion (in one sense).

INDENT (2), to make a dint in. (E.) ‘Deep scars were seen
indented on his breast;’ Dryden, Juvenal, vi. 151. From. E. iz,
prep. ; and dent, a dint. See Dent. Suggested and much affected
by ident (1), though really a different word. Der. indent-ation.

INDEPENDENT, not dependent. (L.) The Independents
formed a sect famous in history. ‘Robert Brown preached these
views [i.e. such views as they held] in 1585 ... A church was
formed in London in 1593, when there were 20,000 independents...
Cromwell, himself an Independent, obtained them toleration;’ Haydn,
Dict. of Dates. From In- (3) and Dependent; see Depend.
Der. independent-ly, independence, independenc-y.

INDESCRIBABLE, not to be described. (L.) A late word;
added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. From In- (3) and Describ-
able ; see Describe.

INDESTRUCTIBLE, not to be destroyed. (L.) ‘ Primitive
and indestructible bodies ;’ Boyle, Works, vol. i. p. 538 (R.). From
In- (3) and Destructible ; see Destroy. Der. indestructibl-y,
indestructible-ness, indestructibili-ty.

INDETERMINATE, not. fixed. (L.) ‘Any sterre . . . in-
determinat;’ Chaucer, Astrolobe, pt. ii. § 17 (rubric).—L. indééer-
mindatus, undefined. = L. in-, not ; and détermindtus, pp. of déterminare,
to define, limit, fix; see In- (3) and Determine. Der. indeter-
minate-ly, indeterminat-ion; so also indetermin-able, indetermin-abl-y ;
and indetermin-ed.

INDEX, a hand that points out, a table of contents toa book. (L.)
See Nares.. In Shak. Rich. IT], ii. 2.149; Troil. i. 3. 343; Hamlet,
iii. 4.52. [The L. pl. is indices; the E. pl. is indexes.|—L, index
(stem indic-), a discloser, informer, index, indicator ; allied to indicare,
to point out. See Indicate, Der. index, verb (modern), index-
learning, Pope, Dunciad, ii. 279.

TAMAN, a large ship employed in trade with India; from


India and man. See Indigo and Man. Sue


296 INDIAN


INDIAN RUBBER, INDIA-RUBBER, caoutchouc, so


named from its rubbing out pencil marks, and because often brought
from the W. Indies; from Jndia and Rubber. @ The use of
Indian with teference to the West Indies was once common; see
Temp. ii. 2. 34; Pope, Horace, Ep. I. i. 69. See Indigo.

INDICATE, to point out, show. (L.) In Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715 ;
first in 1651. Indication is earlier, in Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 479.—L.
indicatus, pp. of indicare, to point to, point out.=L. iz, towards;
and dicdre, to proclaim, make known. From dic-, weak grade of
a DEIK, to show; whence also E. Token, qg.v. Der. indicat-or,
indicat-or-y, indicat-ion ; also indicat-ive, a grammatical term, used in
the F. grammar prefixed to Palsgrave’s F. Dict., p. xxxi; indicative-ly ;
‘also index, q.v.

INDICT, to accuse. (L.; rather F.—L.) The spelling is Latin;
but the pronunciation is invariably indite [i.e. rhyming with bite],
showing that it is really French. See further under Indite.
Shak. has indict (old editions izdite) in. Haml. ii. 2. 464; Oth. iii.
4.154. Der. indict-able; indict-ment, Wint. Ta. iii. 2. 11; and see
Indiction.

INDICTION, a cycle of 15 years. (F.—L.) Lit. an imposition
of a tax, an impost, tax, Specially applied to the period called the
Indiction, ‘a cycle of tributes orderly disposed for 15 years, not
known before the time of Constantine... In memory of the great
victory obtained by Constantine over Mezentius, 8 Cal. Oct. 312, the
council of Nice ordained that the accounts of years should be no
longer kept by the Olympiads, but by the Indiction, which has its
epocha 1 Jan. 313. It was first used by the Latin church in 342
{Sept. 1];* Haydn, Dict. of Dates. Given and explained in Minsheu
and Blount. =F. indiction, ‘a tearme of 5, 10, or 15 years used by the
ancient Romans in their numbring of years ; also an imposition, taxe,
or tallage;’ Cot.—L. indictidnem, acc. of indictio, an imposition of
a tax; cf. L. indictus, pp. of indicere, to appoint, impose. = L. iz, in,
to; and dicere, to say, speak, tell, appoint. See Im- (2) and
Diction.

INDIFFERENT, impartial, neutral, unimportant. (F.—L.) In
Palsgrave; and Ecclus. xlii. 5 (A. V.). See Bible Wordbook and
Nares. And see Shak. Rich. II, ii. 3.116; Jul. Ceesari. 3.115; Tam.
Shrew, iv. 1. 94.—F. indifferent, ‘indifferent, equall, tollerable, in
a mean between both ;’ Cot.—L. indifferent-, stem of indifferens,
indifferent, careless. From In- (3) and Different; see Differ.
Der. indifferent-ly, Jul. Czesar, i. 2. 87; Titus Andron. i. 430; Haml.
ill, 2. 41; indifference.

INDIGENOUS, native, born in, naturally produced in. (L.)
‘Negroes. . . not izdigenous or proper natives of America ;’ Sir T.
Browne, Vulg, Errors, b. vi. c. 10. § 7.—L. indigenus, native; by
change of -us to -ows, as in very numerous instances. = L. indi-, for
‘indu, Old L. extension from the prep. in (cf. Gk. évSov, within) ; and
gen-, as in gen-i-tus, born, pp. of gignere, to beget, formed from
“/ GEN, to beget. See Genus,

INDIGENT, destitute, needy, poor. (F.—L.) ME. indigent;
the sb. indigence is in Chaucer, C. T. 4524 (B 104); Gower, C. A.
ili, 1533 bk. vil. 2028. =F. indigent, ‘indigent;’ Cot.—L. indigent-,
stem of indigens, a needy person, lit. needing; orig. pres. pt. of
indigére, to need, to be in want.=L. ind-, shortened from indu, an
Old L, extension from the prep. ix (cf. Gk. évdov, within) ; and egére,
to be in want. B. Egére is allied to *egus, adj., only found in comp.
ind-igus, needy. Cf. Gk. dxnv, poor, needy (rare); Theocritus, 16.
33- Both L. and Gk. words appear to be from 4/EGH, to be in
want; Fick, i. 482. Der. indigent-ly, indigence.

INDIGESTED, not digested, unarranged. (L.) JIndigested in
the sense of ‘unarranged’ is now commonly so written, as if to dis-
tinguish it from undigested, applied to food; but the words had once
the same sense. ‘Hence, heap of wrath, foul indigested lump ;’
2 Hen. VI, v. 1.157. The shorter form indigest also occurs; ‘mon-
sters and things indigest;’ Shak. Sonnet 114, 1. 5.—L. indigestus,
(1) unarranged, (2) undigested,—L. in-, not; and digestus, pp. of
digerere, to arrange, digest. See In- (3) and Digest. Der. indi-
gest-ible (cf. digestible in Chaucer, C. T., A 437), from F. indigestible,
‘indigestible,’ Cot., from pp. indigestus ; indigest-ibl-y; also indigest-
ion, from F. indigestion, ‘indigestion,’ Cot.

INDIGNATION, anger at what.is unworthy. (F.—L.) ME.
indignacion, ‘The hates and indignaciouns of the accusour Ciprian ;’”
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. i. pr. 4, 1. 74. —F. indignation, ‘indigna-
tion;” Cot. L. indignatidnem, acc. of indignatio, displeasure; cf.
indignatus, pp. of indignari, to consider as unworthy, be displeased
at.=—L. indignus, unworthy. =—L. in-, not; and dignus, worthy. See
In- (3) and Dignity. Der. So also indignant, Spenser, F. Q. iii. 5.
23, from L. indignant-, stem of pres. part. of indignart;, indignant-ly ;
also indignity, Spenser, F. Q. iv. 7. 36, from MF, indigneté, ‘indignity’
(Cot.), from | L. indignitatem, acc. of indignitas, unworthiness, indig-
nity, indignation.


~ INDOCILE


INDIGO, a blue dye obtained from a certain plant. (F.—Span.—
L.—Gk. —Pers.—Skt.) Most of it comes from India, whence the
name. The mod. name indigo is French, a word borrowed from
Spanish. Holland uses the Span. form. ‘There commeth from
India ...store enough not only of indico;’ tr. of Pliny, b. xxxv.
c. 7.=F. indigo. =Span. indico, indigo; lit. ‘Indian.’—L. Indicum,
indigo; neut. of Indicus, Indian.—Gk. ivdinéy, indigo; neut. of
Ivdixds, Indian. = Pers. Hind, India; Rich. Dict. p. 1691. The name
is due to the Jndus, a large river.=Skt. sindhu-, the river Indus, a
river. 4 The Persian changes initial s into hk; see Max Miiller,
Lectures, i. 265.

INDIRECT, not direct, crooked. (F.—L.) In Shak. Merch.
Ven. iv. 1. 350; Caxton, Chesse, bk. iv. c. 2.—F. indirect, ‘indirect,
not right;’ Cot.—L. indirectus. See In- (3) and Direct. Der.
indirect-ly, -ness, indirect-ion, Hamlet, ii. 1. 66.

INDISCERNIBLE, not discernible. (L.) Spelt indiscernable
in Kersey, ed. 1715. From In- (3) and Discernible; see Dis-
cern. Der. indiscernibl-y.

INDISCREET, not discreet. (F.—L.) -ME. indiscret; spelt
indyscrete in Myrc’s Instructions for Parish Priests, ed. Peacock, l. 825.
—F. indiscret, ‘indiscreet;’ Cot.—L. indiscrétus, unseparated, in-
discriminate ; also, that does not discern or distinguish. See In- (3)
and Discreet; also Discern. Der. indiscreet-ly, -ness; also indis-
cretion, from F. indiscretion, ‘indiscretion;’ Cot. See below.

INDISCRIMINATE, confused. (L.) ‘ The use of all things
indiscriminate;’ Bp. Hall, b. v. sat. 3,1. 25. Here it is used as an
adverb. =L. indiscriminatim, adv., without distinction. —L. in-, not;
and discriminatim, with a distinction. —L. discrimin-, decl. stem of
discrimen, a separation, distinction. See In- (3) and Diserimi-
nate. Der. indiscriminate-ly.

INDISPENSABLE, that cannot be dispensed with. (L.) In
Bale’s Apology, fol. 133 (R.). From In- (3) and Dispensable ;
see Dispense. Der. indispensabl-y, indispensable-ness.

INDISPOSED, disinclined, unwell in health. (F.—L. and Gk.)
©The indisposed and. sickly;’ K. Lear, ii. 4. 112.—MF. indisposé,
‘sickly, crazie, unhealthfull, ill-disposed;” Cot. =F. in-= L. in-, not;
and MF. disposé, ‘nimble, well disposed in body,’ Cot.; from the
verb disposer. See In- (3) and Dispose. Der. Hence the verb
indispose, which is quite modern; indisposed-ness. ] But indispos-
it-ion, Timon, ii. 2. 139, from F. indisposition, Cot., is wholly Latin;
see Disposition.

INDISPUTABLE, not disputable, certain. (F.—L.) ‘ Indis-
putably certain ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. v. c. 12. § 1. From
In- (3) and F. disputable, ‘ disputable,’ Cot.; see Dispute. Der.
indisputab-ly, indisputable-ness.

INDISSOLUBLE, not dissoluble. (F.—L.) ‘The indissoluble
knot;” Udal, on St. Matthew, c. 19; vv. 1-9.—F. indissoluble, ‘ in-
dissoluble;’ Cot.—L. indissolubilis, = L. in-, not ; and dissolubilis, that
may be dissolved, from dissoluere, to dissolve. See In- (3) and
Dissolute. Der. indissolubl-y, indissoluble-ness, indissolubili-ty.

INDISTINCT, not distinct. (F.—L.; or L.) In Ant. and
Cleop. iv. 14. 10.—F. indistinct, ‘indistinct ;* Cot.—L. indistinctus.
From In- (3) and Distinet. Der. indistinct-ly, -ness; so also in-
distinguish-able, Shak. Troil. v. 1. 33 3 indistinguishabl-y.

INDITEH, to dictate for writing, compose, write. (F.—L.) It
should rather be endite. ME. enditen, Chaucer, C. T. 1874 (A 1872).
‘ Indyted or endyted of clerkly speche, Dictatus ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 261.
‘Indytyd be [by] lawe, for trespace, Indictatus;’ id. —OF. enditer,
MF. endicter, ‘to indict, accuse, impeach;” Cot. Spelt exditer, with
the sense ‘to point out;’ Bartsch, Chrest. Frangaise.— Late L. in-
dictire, to accuse; frequentative of L. indicere, to proclaim, enjoin,
impose. = L. in, upon; and dicere, to say; see Diction. It would
seem that the senses of the related words indicare, to point out, and
dictare, to dictate, have influenced the sense of indite. | Thespelling
indict is reserved for the sense ‘to accuse.’ Der. iudit-er, indite-
ment. Doublet, indict, q.v.

INDIVIDUAL, separate, pertaining to one only. (L.) ‘If it
were not for two things that are constant ... no individuall would
last one moment ;’ Bacon, Essay 58, Of Vicissitude. Formed, with
suffix -al, from L. indiuidu-us, indivisible, inseparable; hence, dis-
tinct, apart.—L. iz-, not; and diuiduus, divisible, from diwidere, to
divide; see In- (3) and Divide. Der. individual-ly, individual-ise,
individual-is-at-ion ; -ism, -i-ty; also individu-ate (rare), individu-at-ion ;
and see below.

INDIVISIBLE, not divisible. (F.—L.) ‘ That indivisible
point or centre;’ Hooker, Eccl. Polity, ed. Church, b. i. sect. viii.
subsect. 8. Also in Cotgrave. =F, indivisible, ‘indivisible ;’ Cot.—L.
indiuisibilis, From In- (3) and Divisible; see Divide. Der.
indivisibl-y, indivisible-ness, indivisibili-ty.


INDOCIGE, not docile. (F.—L.) ‘Hogs and more indocile


| beasts ;’ Sir W. Petty, Adv. to Hartlib (1648), p. 23; Todd. F, in=


INDOCTRINATE


docile, ‘indocible;’ Cot. lL. indocilis, not teachable.
and Docile. Der. indocil-i-ty.

INDOCTRINATE, to instruct in doctrine. (L.) -‘ His indoc-
trinating power ;’ Milton, Apology for Smectymnuus (R.). Coined
as if from Late L. *indoctrinare, not found.—L. iz, in; and doc-
trina, learning. See In- (2) and Doctrine. Der. indoctrinat-ion.

INDOLENCE, idleness. (F.—L.; or L.) Also indolency. ‘ In-
dolence or Indolency;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. Only indolency is given in
Coles and Blount, and occurs in Holland’s Plutarch, p. 480 (R.).
Indolence and indolent both occur in the Spectator, no. 100; the
former is from F. indolence. Indolency is Englished from L. indo-
lentia, freedom from pain; hence, ease.=L. in-, neg. prefix; and
dolent-, stem of dolens, pres. part. of dolére, to grieve. See In- (3)
and Dolour. Der. indolent (later than indolence) ; indolent-ly,

INDOMITABLB, untameable. (L.) ‘It is so fierce and in-
domitable ;’ Sir T. Herbert, Travels, p. 383 (R.). A coined’ word;
from L, iz-, not; and domitare, frequentative of domare, to tame,
cognate with E. zame; see In- (3) and Tame. Der. indomitabl-y.

INDORSE, the same as Endorse, (L.) @ The OF. is endosser ;
the Late L. is ¢xdorsare. Der. indors-er, indors-ee, indorse-ment.

INDUBITABLE, not to be doubted. (F.—L.) ‘He did not
indubitably believe;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. i. c. 1. § 6.
= F. indubitable, ‘undoubtable;’ Cot.=—L. indubitabilis, indubitable.
=L. in-, not; and dubitabilis, doubtful, from dubitdre, te doubt.
See Doubt. Der. indubitabl-y, indubitable-ness; so also in-dubious.

INDUCEH, to lead to, prevail on. (L.) ‘Induceth in many of
them a lowe to worldly thinges;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 880h;
Caxton, Eneydos, ch. 24; p. 90.—L. indiicere, to lead in, conduct
to.—L. in, towards; and diucere, to lead. See In- (2) and Duct.
Der. induc-er, induc-ible; induce-ment, Spenser, F. Q. vii. 6. 32; also
induct, q.V.

INDUCT, to introduce, put in possession. (L.) ‘ Znducted and
brought in thither;’ Holland, tr. of Livy, p. 1029 (R.); and in
Palsgrave.—L. inductus, pp. of inducere, to bring in; see above.
Der. induct-ion, from F. induction, ‘an induction, entry, or leading
into’ (Cot.), from L. inductidnem, acc. of inductio, an introducing;
induct-ive, induct-ive-ly. @ Induction was formerly used for ‘ intro-
duction ;’ as in Sackville’s Induction to the Mirror for Magistrates.

INDUS (1), to invest or clothe with, supply with. (L.) ‘ Infinite
shapes of creatures there are bred . . . Some fitt for reasonable
sowles t’indew;’ Spenser, F. Q. iii. 6. 35. ‘Indu’d with robes of
various hue;’ Dryden, tr. of Ovid’s Metam. b. xi. 1. 264; where the
Lat. has ‘induitur uelamina mille colorum,’ Metam. xi. 589. —L.
induere, to put into, put on, clothe with. And see Higden’s Poly-
chronicon, ili. 453, where ixduenge occurs in the 15th cent. transla-
tion, and Higden has induit. B. Connected with induuie, clothes,
ex-uuie, spoils; the prefix is ixd- rather than iz-, there being no con-
nexion with Gk. évdvew, évdvvew, to put on. See Bxuvie. Der.
indue-ment (rare). And see below.

INDUS (2), a corruption of Endue, to endow, q.v. (F.—L.)
This word is distinct from the above, but some of our best writers
seem to have confused them. For instances, see Shak. Tw. Nt. i. 5.
105, Oth. ili. 4. 146, &c.; Spenser, F. Q. ii. 2.6. See Todd’s Johnson.
The mistake chiefly arises in the phrase ‘indued with,’ miswritten
for ‘endued with,’ in the sense of ‘endowed with;’ see Shak. Two
Gent. v. 4. 153, Com. Errors, ii. 1. 22. Dryden uses ‘ indued with’
correctly, as in the instance cited under Indue (1).

INDULGENCE, permission, licence, gratification. (F.—L.)
ME. indulgence, P. Plowman, B. vii. 193; Chaucer, C. T. 5666
(D 84).—F. indulgence, ‘indulgence;’ Cot.—L. indulgentia, indul-
gence, gentleness. = L. indulgent-, stem of pres. part. of indulgére, to
be courteous to, indulge. B. Origin doubtful; it is not even certain
whether the prefix is ix- or ind-. Bréal explains indulgentia as from
*indu-licentia; but Prellwitz connects it with Gk. év-deAey7s, con-
tinuous, Goth, tulgus, steadfast, and E. long; see Long (2). Der.
indulg-ent, Ant. and Cleop. i. 4. 16, from F, indulgent, ‘ indulgent,’
Cot. Hence the (later) verb indulge, Dryden, tr. of Persius, Sat. v.
474, answering to L. indulgére.

INDURATEH, to harden. (L.) Indurated occurs four times, and
induration twice, in Barnes, Works, p. 282. Properly a pp., as in
Tyndal, Works, p. 28, col. 1; ‘for their harts were indurate;’ cf.
Caxton, Golden Legend, Moyses, § 10.—L. indiratus, pp. of indi-
rare, to harden. See-Hndure. Der. indurat-ion, ME. induracioun,
@haucer, C..1) G 855-

INDUSTRY, diligence. (F.—L.) In Shak. Two Gent. i. 3. 22;
spelt industree, Spenser, F. Q. i. 10. 45.—F. industrie, ‘industry ;’
Cot.—L. industria, diligence.—L. industrius, diligent. B. Of un-
certain origin; perhaps for *industruus=*indu-stru-us, from indu,
OLat. extension from iz, in; and the base stru-, occurring in struere,
to arrange, build (hence, to toil); see Instruct. Der. industri-al,
industri-al-ly; also industri-ous, ‘Temp. iv. 33, from F. industrieux,


See In- (3)


INEXPEDIENT 297


‘industrious’ (Cot.), which from L. ixdustri-dsus, abounding in
industry ; industri-ous-ly.

INDWELLING, a dwelling within. (E.) ‘The personal in-
dwelling of the Spirit ;’ South’s Sermons, vol. v. ser. 7 (R.). From
In- (1), and Dwelling, sb. formed from Dwell. Der. So also
indwell-er, Spenser, F. Q. vii. 6. 55.

INEBRIATEH, to intoxicate. (L.) In Levins,—L. inébridtus,
pp. of inébriare, to make drunk.—L. iz, in, used as an intensive
prefix; and ébriare, to make drunk, from ébri-us, drunk. See
Eibriety. Der. inebriat-ion, Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, .b. v.
c. 23, part 16; also in-ebriety.

INEDITED, wnpublished. (L.) First in 1760; see Todd. From
In- (3) and Kdit.

INEFFABLE, unspeakable. (F.—L.) In Tindale; 2 Cor. ix.
15; and in Caxton, Golden. Legend; Holy Sacrament, § 1,=—F.
ineffable, ‘ineffable;’ Cot. =—L. ineffabilis, unutterable.— L, in-, not ;
and effabilis, utterable, from effari, to speak out, utter. —L. ef < ex,
out; and farz, to speak; see Fame. Der. ineffabl-y, Milton, P. L.
v1. 721.

INEFFACEABLE, not to be effaced. (F.—L.) Modern; not
in Todd’s. Johnson. MF. ineffacable, ‘ uneffaceable;’ Cot. See In-
(3) and Eifface. Der. ineffaceabl-y.

INEFFECTIVE, not effective. (L.) ‘An ineffective pity;
Bp. Taylor, vol. i. ser. 12.(R.). . From In- (3) and Effective; see
Effect. Der. ineffective-ly; so also ineffect-u-al, Milton, P. L. ix.
301; ineffectual-ly, -ness. And see below.

. INEFFICACIOUS, that has no efficacy. (F.—L.) In
Phillips, ed. 1706. From In- (3) and Efficacious; see Efficacy.
Der. inefficacious-ly; so also inefficient, a late word, added by Todd
to.Johnson’s Dict.; whence inefficient-ly, inefficienc-y.

INELEGANT, not elegant. (L.) In Levins; and Milton, P. L.
V. 335.—L. inélegant-, stem of inélegans. See In- (3) and Elegant.
Der. inelegance, ineleganc-y.

INELIGIBLE, not eligible. (F.—L.)
Todd’s Johnson. From In- (3) and Eligible.
ineligibili-ty. ;

INELOQUENT, not eloquent. (F.—L.)
viii. 219.—MF. ineloguent, ‘uneloquent;’ Cot.
Eloquent.

INEPT, not apt, inexpert, foolish. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave and
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—MF. inepte, ‘inept, unapt;’ Cot.—L.
ineptus, improper, foolish. =L. in-, not; and apéus, fit, proper. See
Apt. Der. inept-ly, inept-i-tude.. Doublet, imapt,q.v. .«

INEQUALITY, want of equality. (F.—L.) ‘But onely con-
siderynge the inequalitie;? Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. ili.
c. 1. end. = MF. inequalité, ‘inequality ;’ Cot.—Late L. inegualitas.
=L. in-, not; and egualitads, equality, from egualis, equal. .See In-
(3) and Equal. @ The adj. inegual (for unequal) is in Chaucer,
Cal. e27siCAsaz7m):

INERT, dull, inactive. (L.) ‘Znertly strong;’ Pope, Dunciad,
iv. 7.—L. izert-, stem of ivers, unskilful, inactive. —L. iz-, not; and
ars (gen. art-is), art, skill. See Art. Der. inert-ly, inert-ness; also
inert-ta=L. inertia, inactivity.

INESTIMABLE, that cannot be valued, priceless. (F.—L.)
In Shak. Rich. III,:i. 4. 27; Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, bk. v. pr. 3.


Modern; not in
Der. ineligibl-y,


In Milton, P. L.
See In- (3) and


137. From In- (3) and Estimable; see Estimate. Der. in-
estimabl-y,
INEVITABLE, that cannot be avoided. (F.—L.) ‘Inevitable


destiny ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 645 d. = MF. inevitable, ‘inevitable ;’
Cot. = L. inéuitabilis, unavoidable. = L. in-, not ; and éuztabilis, avoid-
able, from éuitare, to avoid; from L. é-, out, away; and witare, to
shun (of doubtful origin). Der. inevitabl-y, inevitable-ness,
INEXACT, not precise. (L.) Modern; not in Todd; coined
from In- (3) and Exact, Der. inexact-ly, -ness.
INEXCUSABLE, not excusable. (F.—L.) In Bible, 1551,
and in Tindale; Rom. ii. 1.—F. inexcusable, ‘unexcusable ;’ Cot.=—
L. inexctisabilis, Rom. ii. 1 (Vulgate). —L. iz-, not ; and exciisare, to
excuse. SeeIn- (3) and Excuse. Der. inexcusabl-y, inexcusableness.
INEXHAUSTED, not spent. (L.) In Dryden, On Mrs, Anne
Killigrew, 1. 28. . From In- (3) and Exhausted; see Exhaust.
Cf. L. inexhaustus, inexhausted. Der. inexhaust-ible, in Cowley’s
Pref. to Poems, on his Davideis 3 inexhaustibl-y, inexhaustibili-ty.


- INEXORABLE, unrelenting. (F.—L.) . In Shak. Merch. Ven.


iv. 1. 128; Romeo, v. 3. 38. —F. izexorable, ‘inexorable ;’ Cot.—L.


inexdrabilis, that cannot be moved by entreaty.—L. in-, not; and


exdrabilis, easily entreated, from exdrare, to gain by entreaty; which
is from ex, from, and drare, to pray. .See Adore, Oral. Der.
inexorabl-y, inexorable-ness, inexorabili-ty.

INEXPEDIENT, unfit. (K.—L.) In Phillips,ed.1706. From
In- (3) and Expedient; see Expedite. Der. inexpedient-ly,


inexpedience, inexpedienc-y.


298 INEXPERIENCE


TNEXPERIENCE, want of experience. (F.—L.) In Milton,
P. L. iv. 931.— MF. inexperience (Godefroy, Supp.).— L. inexperientia,
‘want of experience. See In- (3) and Experience. Der. inex-
perienc-ed.

INEXPERT, not expert. (F.—L.) In Tindale, Heb. v. 13.—
OF. inexpert (Godefroy). —L. inexpertus, untried. = L. in-, not; and
expertus, experienced. See Expert. Der. inexpert-ly, -ness.

INEXPIABLH, that cannot be expiated. (F.—L.) In Levins;
and in Milton, Samson, 839.—MF. inexpiable (Supp. to Godefroy).
—L. inexpiabilis. —L. in-, not; and expiabilis. See Expiate. Der.
inexpiabl-y, inexpiable-ness.

INEXPLICABLE, that cannot be explained. (F.—L.) In
Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. ii. c. 12, § 2; and Hamlet, iii. 2. 13.
=F. inexplicable, ‘inexplicable;’ Cot.—L. inexplicabilis.—L. in-,
not; and explicare, to unfold, explain. See Explicate. Der. in-
explicabl-y, inexplicabili-ty.

INEXPRESSIBLE, that cannot be expressed. (L.) In Milton,
Pp. L. v. 595; viii. 113. From In- (3) and Expressible; see
Express. Der. inexpressibl-y; so also imexpress-ive, inexpress-ive-ly,
-1€SS.

- INEXTINGUISHABLE, that cannot be quenched. (F.—L.)

In Hawes, Pastime of Pleasure, ch. xly. st. 3. From In- (3) and
Extinguish. @ The old form is inextinguible, Sir T. More, Works,
p. 825 g, from F. inextinguible (Cot.), L. inextinguibilis, Matt. iii. 12
(Vulgate). Der. inextinguishabl-y.

INEXTRICABLE, that cannot be extricated. (F.—L.)} In
Cotgrave; and Milton, P. L. v. 528.—F. inextricable, ‘inextricable ;’
Cot.=—L. inextricabilis.—L. in-, not; and extricare, to extricate. See
In- (3) and Eixtricate. Der. inextricabl-y,

INFALLIBLE, quite certain. (F.—L.) In Shak. Meas. iii. 2.
119; see Palsgrave, p. 896, 1. 7.—F. infallible, ‘infallible ;’ Cot.
‘From In- (3) and Fallible. Der. infallibl-y, infallibili-ty.

INFAMY, ill fame, vileness. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. vi. 6.1;
Caxton, Eneydos, ch. xxvi. p.93. =F. infamie, ‘infamy.’ = L. infamia,
ill fame. = L. infiimi-s, of ill report, disreputable.— L. im-, not; and
fam-a, fame; see Fame. Der. So also in-fam-ous, accented in-
famous, Spenser, F. Q. i. 12. 27, from im- and famous.

INFANT, a babe, person not of age. (L.) [The ME. enfaunt
(shortened to faunt, P. Plowman, B. vii. 94), from F. enfant, has
been supplanted by the Law Lat. form.] In Spenser, F. Q. vi. 9. 14.
=L, infant-, stem of infans, a babe, lit. one who cannot speak. = L.
in-, not; and fans, speaking, pres. part. of farz, to speak. See
Fame. Der. infanc-y, Temp. i. 2. 484, suggested by F. enfance,
infancy ; infant-ile, from MF. infantile (Cot.), which is from L. infan-
zilis ; infant-ine, from MF. infantin, ‘infantine,’ Cot. ; infanti-cide=F.
infanticide, ‘ child-murthering” (Cot.), from L. infanticidium, child-
‘murder: and this from L. infanti-, decl. stem of infans, and -cid-
(=ced-) in ced-ere, to kill (see Cassura) ; infanticid-al; and see
Infantry. Also infante, a prince of Portugal or Spain who is not
the heir to the throne (Port. infante) ; infanta, a princess (Port. infanta).

INFANTRY, a band of foot-soldiers. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘ The
principal strength of an army consisteth in the infantry or foot;’
Bacon, Hist. Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 72.—F. infanterie, ‘the
infantry or footmen of an army;’ Cot. = Ital. izfanteria, ‘infantery,
souldiers on foot ;’ Florio. B. The lit, sense is ‘a band of infants,’
i.e. of young men or servants attendant on knights. — Ital. infante, an
infant. —L. infantem, acc. of infans, an infant; see Infant,

INFATUATE, to make foolish, besot. (L.) In Skelton, Speke
Parrot, 1. 377. Properly a pp., as: ‘ There was never wicked man
that was not infatuate ;’ Bp. Hall, Contemplations on O. T., b. xviii.
c. 4. par. 7.—L. infatudtus, pp. of infatuare, to make a fool of.—
L. in-, as intensive prefix; and fatu-us, foolish; see Fatuous. Der.
infatuat-ion.

INFECT, to taint..(F.—L.) Properly a pp., as: ‘the prynce,
whose mynd in tender youth infect, shal redily fal to mischief ;’
Sir T. More, Works, p. 39 b. So also infect in Chaucer, C. T. 322
(A 320), where Tyrwhitt has ‘in suspect.’ Hence ME, infecten, to
infect, Prompt. Pary. p. 261.—OF, infect, ‘infect, infected ;’ Cot.—
L. infectus, pp. of inficere, to put in, dip, mix, stain, tinge, infect. =
L. in, in; and facere, to make, put; see Fact. Der. infect-ion,
infect-i-ous, infect-i-ous-ly, infect-i-ous-ness ; infect-ive (Levins), from
L. infectiuus.

INFELICITY, misfortune. (F.—L.) ME. infelicitee, Com-
plaint of Creseide, st. 6.—OF. infelicité (omitted by Cot.).—L. in-
félicitatem, acc. of infélicitas, ill luck, See In- (3) and Felicity.
Der. infelicit-ous.

- INFER, to bring into, deduce, imply. (F.—L.) In Sir T. More,

Works, p. 840 h. = MF. inferer, ‘to inferre, imply ;’ Cot. =—L. inferre,
to bring into, introduce, infer.—L. in, into; and ferre, to bring,
cognate with E. bear; see Bear. Der. infer-able, or inferr-idle,
infer-ence, infer-ent-i-al, infer-ent-i-al-ly,


INFLUENCE


INFERIOR, lower, secondary. (F.—L.) Now conformed to
the L. spelling. Spelt izferiour in some edd. of Spenser, F. Q. iii. 3.
54 (R.); and in Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, bk. i. c. 1. § 7. Spelt
inferioure in Levins.=MF. inferieur, ‘inferiour, lower;’ Cot.=—L.
inferiorem, acc. of inferior, lower, compar. of inferus, low, nether.
B. Strictly, ixfer-tor is a double comparative ; inferus itself is a comp.
form, answering to Skt. adhara(s), lower, from adhas, ady. under-
neath, low, down. Der. inferior-i-ty; and see Infernal.

INFERNAL, hellish. (F.—L.} ME. infernal, Chaucer, C.T.
2686 (A 2684).—F. infernal (Burguy).=—L. inferndlis, belonging to
the lower regions, infernal.=L. infernus, lower; extended from
inferus, low. SeeInferior, Der. infernal-ly.

INFEST, to disturb, harass, molest. (F.—L.) In Spenser,
F. Q. ii. 1. 48.—F. infester, ‘to infest ;’ Cot.—L. infestare, to attack,
trouble.—L,. infestus, attacking, hostile. For in-fest-us; probably
allied to of-fend-ere, to offend; see Offend.

INFIDEL, faithless, unbelieving; a heathen. (F.—L.) ‘Oute
of the handes of the infydelles ;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. ii. c. 40
(R.).— OF. infidele, ‘infidell;” Cot.—L. infideélis, faithless. —L. in-,
not; and jidélis, faithful. See In- (3) and Fidelity. Der. infidel-
i-ty, from F, infidelité, ‘infidelity ;’ Cot.

INFINITE, endless, boundless. (L.) ME. infinit, Chaucer,
C. T. 2829 (A 2827).—L. infinitus, infinite. See In- (3) and
Finite. @ The MF. form is injini; but there was (see Hatzfeld)
an older form infinit, from which the ME. word was really taken.
Der. infinite-ly ; infinit-y (ME. infinitee), from F. infinité, which from
L. acc. infinitatem ; infinit-ude, from F. infinitude (Cot.) ; infinit-ive,
from F, infinitif (Sherwood’s, index to Cot.), from L. infinitiuus,
the unlimited, indefinite mood (in grammar); also injinit-esimal,
a late and coined word, in which the suffix is imitated from that of
cent-esimal, q.v.; infinit-esimal-ly. ;

INFIRM, feeble, weak. (L.) ‘Infirm of purpose;’ Macb. ii. 2.
52. ME. infirme, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, bk. v. met. 2.1. 3.—L.
infirmus, not firm, weak. See In- (3) and Firm, Der. injirm-ly ;
also infirm-ar-y, q. V.5.inpirm-i-ty, q.V-

INFIRMARY, a hospital for the infirm. (F.—L.) Modified
from ME. fermerye so as to bring it nearer to the Lat. spelling.
The ME. fermerye, shortened from *enfermerie, occurs in the Prompt.
Parv. p. 157.—OF. enfermerie, ‘an hospitall;? Cot.—Late L. in-
jirmaria, a hospital. = L. infirmus; see Infirm.

INFIRMITY, feebleness. (F.—L.) ME. injfirmitee, spelt
infirmyte, Wyclif, 2 Cor, xi. 30.—F. infirmité, ‘infirmity ;’ Cot.—L.
infirmitatem, acc. of infirmitas, weakness. = L. infirmus; see Infirm,

INFIX, to fix into, (L.) ‘Znjixed into his flesh ;’ Sir T. More,
Works, p. 1114a.—L. infixus, pp. of infigere, to fix in.=L. in, in;
and figere, to fix; see Fix,

INFLAME, to cause to bum, excite. (F.—L.) In Shak. K. John,
vy. I. 7; and in Palsgrave. Modified from OF, enflamber, ‘to
inflame’ (Cot.), so as to bring it nearer to L. inflammare, to set in
a flame.—L. in, in; and flamma, a flame. See Flame. Der.
inflamm-able, from F. inflammable, ‘inflammable’ (Cot.), formed
from L. inflammdre ; inflamm-a-bili-ty; inflamm-at-ion, 2 Hen. IV,
iv. 3. 103 3 inflamm-at-or-y.

INFLATE, to blow into, puff up. (L.) In Palsgrave; and in
Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 7 (Of Fylberdes). Orig. a pp.,
as in The Complaint of Creseide, st. 7 (1. 463).—L. inflatus, pp. of
inflare, to blow into.—L. im, into; and flare, cognate with E.
Blow (1), q. v. Der. inflat-ion, Lanfranc, Cirurgie, p. 204, 1. 16;
from F. inflation, ‘an inflation ;’ Cot.

INFLECT, to bend, bend in, modulate the voice; (in grammar)
to vary the terminations. (L.) ‘Somewhat inflected,’ i. e. bent;
Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 1. § 4. And in Cockeram
(1642).—L, inflectere, to bow, curve, lit. bend in.—L. im, in; and
flectere, to bend; see Flexible. Der. inflect-ion (better spelt
inflex-ion, as in Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 1. § 2), from
L, inflexio; cf. inflex-us, pp. of inflectere ; inflex-ion-al ; inflect-ive.

FLEXIBLE, that cannot be bent. (F.—L.) In Lanfranc,
Cirurgie, i. 2. 1, p. 243 and Milton, Samson, 816.—=F. inflexible,
‘inflexible ;’ Cot.—L. inflexibilis, not flexible. See In- (3) and
Flexible. Der. inflexibl-y, inflexibzli-ty.

INFLICT, to Jay on, impose. (L.) In Spenser, F. Q. vi. 8. 22.
= L. inflictus, pp. of infligere, to inflict.—L. in, upon; and fligere, to
strike. See Afflict. Der. inflict-jon, Meas. i. 3. 285 injlict-ive,
from MF. inflictif, ‘ inflictive ;’ Cot.

INFLORESCENCE, mode of flowering, said of plants.
(F.—L.) A moder botan. term.—F. inflorescence (Littré). Coined
from L. inflorescent-, stem of pres. part. of infldrescere, to burst into
blossom. =L, in, in; and flérescere, to flourish; see Flourish,

INFLUENCE, an inspiration, authority, power. (F.—L.)
Properly aterm in astrology; see quotation from Cotgrave below.
‘O influences of thise hevenes hye ;’ Chaucer, Troil, iii, 618. —OF,


INFLUENZA


influence, ‘a flowing in, and particularly an influence, or influent
course, of the planets; their vertue infused into, or their course
working on, inferiour creatures ;’ ‘Cot. = Late L. influentia, an inunda-
tion, lit. a flowing into.—L. influent-, stem of pres. part. of influere,
to flow into.—L. in, in; and fluere, to flow; see Fluid. Der.
influence, verb; influenti-al, from L. influenti- 3 influenti-al-ly; influx,
q.v. Doublet, influenza.

INFLUENZA, a severe catarrh. (Ital.—L.) ‘The new
influenza ;’ Foote, Lame Lover, A. i. (ab. 1770). — Ital. influenza, lit.
influence, also (according to Littré) an epidemic catarrh. A doublet
of Influence, q. v.

INFLUX, a flowing in, abundant accession. (L.) Formerly
used as we now use ‘influence.’ ‘That dominion, which the starres
have ... by their influxes;’ Howell, Forraine Travell, sect. vi;
ed. Arber, p. 36.—L. influxus, a flowing in.—L. influxus, pp. of
influere, to flow in; see Influence.

INFOLD, to inwrap. (E.) Sometimes written enxfold, but badly.
In Shak. Macb.i. 4.31. From In- (1) and Fold.

INFORM, to impart knowledge to. (F.—L.) ME. enformen,
Gower, C. A. i. 87; bk. i. 1340.—OF. enformer (Godefroy); MF.
informer, ‘ to informe ;’ Cot.—L. inxformdare, to put into form, mould,
tell, inform.=L. iz, into; and forma, form; see Form. Der. in-

form-er ; inform-ant ; inform-at-ion, ME. enformacion, Gower, C. A.
iii. 145; bk. vii. 1780,

INFORMAL, not formal. (L.) In Shak. Meas. y. 236. From
In- (3) and Formal; see Form. Der. informal-ly, informal-i-ty.

INFRACTION, a violation, esp. of law. (F.—L.) Used by
Waller (Todd’s Johnson; without a reference) ; and in Cockeram
(1642).—F. izfraction, the same as infracture, ‘an infracture, in-
fringement ;” Cot.—L. infractidnem, acc. of infractio, a weakening ;
cf, infractus, pp. of infringere ; see Infringe.

INFRANGIBLE, that cannot be broken. (F.—L.) In Min-
sheu; and in Holland’s tr. of Plutarch, p. 661 (R.).=—F. infrangible,
‘infrangible, unbreakable ;’ Cot. See In- (3) and Frangible.
Der. infrangibili-ty.

INFREQUENT, not frequent. (L.) In Sir T. Elyot, The
Governour, b. ili. c, 22. —L. infrequent-, stem of infrequens, rare. See
In- (3) and Frequent. Der. infrequent-ly, infrequenc-y.

INFRINGE, to break into, violate, esp. law. (L.) In Shak.
L. L. L. iv. 3. 144, 146.—L. infringere, to break into. —L. iz, into ;
and frangere, to break, See Fraction. Der. infringe-ment.

INFURIATEH, to enrage. (L.) Properly a pp., as in Milton,
P. L. vi. 486.—Late L. infuridtus, pp. of infuridre, to rouse to fury
(Ducange). [Perhaps suggested by Ital. infuriato, pp. of infuriare,
*to grow into fury or rage;’ Florio.—Ital. iz furia, ‘in a fury,
ragingly ;’ Florio,]=L. iz, in; and furia, properly a Fury, hence,
fury.. See Fury.

INFUSH, to pour into. (F.—L.) In Shak. Merch. Ven. iv. 1.
132,137. The pp. enfused is in Palladius on Husbandry, ili. 755.
—F. infuser, ‘to infuse ;* Cot.—L. infiisus, pp. of infundere, to pour
into.—L. iz,in; and fundere, to pour; see Fuse(1). Der. infus-ion,
Wint. Ta. iv. 4. 816 ; infus-or-i-a, infus-or-i-al.

INFUSIBLE, not fusible. (F.—L.) In-Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. ii. c. 1,§ 11. From In- (3) and Fusible ; see Fuse (1).

INGATHERING, a gathering in. (E.) In Bible, ed. 1551,
and A. V.; Exod. xxiii. 16. From In- (1) and Gather.

INGENDER, the same as Engender. (F.—L.) In Minsheu;
and Milton, P. L. ii. 794, iv. 809, x. 530.

INGENIOUS, witty, skilful in invention. (F.—L.) In Caxton,
Golden Legend, St. Machaire, § 1; and in Shak. Tam. Shrew, i. 1. 9.
Shak, often- uses it indiscriminately with ingenuous (Schmidt). Cf.
ingeniously, Timon, ii, 2. 230,.—F. ingenieux, ‘ingenious, witty, in-
ventive ;’ Cot.=—L. ingenidsus, clever. = L. ingenium, temper, natural
capacity, genius. See Engine, Genius, Der. ingenious-ly, -ness.
And see below.

INGENUOUS, frank, honourable. (L.) InShak.,who confuses
it with ingenious (Schmidt) ; see L. L. L. i. 2. 29; iii. 59; iv. 2. 80.
=—L. ingenuus, inborn, free-born, frank, candid; with change of -us
to -ous.—L. in, in; and gen-, base of gignere, to beget (pt. t. gen-ut),
from 4/GEN, to beget. Der. ingenuous-ly, -ness ; also ingenu-i-ty, Ben
Jonson, Every Man out of his Humour, Act iii. sc. 3 (some edd., sc. 9g,
Macilente’s speech), from F. ingenuité, ‘ingenuity’ (Cot.), which is
from L. acc. ingenuitatem. And see above.

INGLE (1), fire. (C.) Burns has ingle-lowe, blaze of the fire, The
Vision, st. 7. Spelt ingill, G. Douglas, tr. of Virgil, bk. v. ch, 11.
117.— Gael. and Irish aingeal, fire; allied to L. ignis, Skt. agni-, fire.
See Ignition,.

INGLE (2), a darling, paramour. (Du. or Fries.—L.—Gk.) See
Nares. Spelt enghle; Ben Jonson, Poetaster, A. i. (Ovid sen.).—MDu.
ingel, engel, an angel; Koolman notes EFries. engel, an angel, as
being commonly used as a term of endearment and as a female


INGRATITUDE 299


name; cf. Low G. miin engel, the usual term of endearment between
a married couple (Berghaus); whence E. my ningle (Nares).—L.
angelus. = Gk. dyyedos ; see Angel.

GLORIOUS, not glorious. (F.—L.) In Shak. K. John, y.
1.65.—}'. inglorieux, ‘ inglorious ;” Cot.— Late L. ingloridsus, formed
from L. inglorius, inglorious. See In- (3) and Glory. Der. in-
glorious-ly, -ness. _ @J Perhaps borrowed directly from L. ing/orius,
like arduous from L, arduus, &c.

INGOT, a mass of metal poured into a mould, a mass of un-
wrought metal. (E.) See my note to Two Noble Kinsmen, i. 2. 17.
ME. ingot, Chaucer, C. T. 16677, 16691, 16696, 16701 (G 1209-33) ;
where it means ‘a mould in which metal is cast;’ see the passages,
But the true sense is that which is still preserved, viz. ‘that which is
poured in,’ a mass of metal. From AS. in, in; and goten, poured,
pp. of géotan, to pour, shed water, fuse metals; Grein, i. 504. Cf.
Du. ingieten, Swed. ingjuta, to pour in. B. The AS. géotan is
cognate with Du. gieten, G. giessen, Icel. g7ota (pp. gotinn), Dan.
gyde, Swed. gjuta (pp. guten), Goth. gjutan, to pour, shed, fuse; all
from 4/GHEUD, to pour, seen also in L. fundere (pt. t. fadi, pp.
fusus); which is an extension of 4/GHEU, to pour. See Fuse,
Chyle. ¢@ A. From the E. ingot is derived the F. ingot, an
ingot, which stands for /’imgot, by that incorporation of the article
which is not uncommon in French; cf. lendemain (=le en demain),
loriot (from L. aureolus), luette (from L. uua), lierre (from L. hedera).
And again, from F. lingot (found in 1405) was formed the Low Lat.
lingotus, which is not an early word, but assigned by Ducange to
A.D. 1440. This Low Lat. word has been by some fancifully
derived from L. lingua, the tongue; owing to a supposed resemblance
of a mass of molten metal to the shape of the tongue; much as the
countryman described the size of a stone as being ‘as big as a lump
of chalk.? B. Scheler hesitates to accept the derivation here given,
from the notion that the AS. verb géotanx soon became obsolete.
This is quite a mistake, as it is still extant; see ‘ Vote, to pour,’ in
Halliwell, and cf. Cleveland yetling, a small iron pan; and more E.
dialect words from the same source might be adduced. The ME.
verb 3eten was long in use also ; see examples inStratmann, s. v. 3eoter,
3rd ed., p. 262. ‘ Hys mase [mace] he toke in hys honde tho, That
was made of yoten ‘bras,’ i.e. brass formed in a mould; Rich. Coer
de Lion, ed. Weber, 370. ‘ The lazar tok forth his coupe [cup] of
gold; Bothe were yotex in o mold, i.e. both the lazar’s cup and
another were cas¢ in one mould; Amis and Amiloun, ed. Weber,
2023. ‘Mawmez igoten of golde’=idols cast out of gold; Juliana,
ed. Cockayne, p. 38, 1. 13. ©. Moreover, there was a derivative
sb. gofe, a channel ; see Prompt. Parv., p. 205, and note; it occurs
in the statutes 33 Hen. VIII, c. 33, 2 and 3 Edw. VI, c. 30; still in
usé in the forms gote, gowt, gut, got, in various parts of England ; cf.
Du. goof, a gutter; Low G, giite, gete,‘a can for pouring out, the
beak of such a can; géote, a pouring out; see Bremen Worterb. ii.
502. D. And note particularly that the whole word ingot has its
parallel in the cognate (yet independent) G. einguss, ‘infusion, in-
stillation, pouring in, potion, drink (given to horses) ; as a technical
term, jet, ingot;” Fliigel’s G. Dict. Cf. also Swed. ingéte, the neck
of a mould for casting metals (Oman); Low G. ingote=G. einguss
(Berghaus). The objection that the ME. pp. was usually yoterx rather
than goten, is not fatal; cf. E. give with ME. yeven, yiven.

INGRAFT, ENGRAFT, to graft upon. (F.—L.—Gk.)
See Engraffed and Engraft in Schmidt, Shak. Lexicon. Spelt in-
graft, Milton, P. L. xi. 35. Coined from In- (1) or In- (2) and
Graft, q. v.

INGRAILED, 2 term in heraldry; see Engrailed.

INGRAIN, to dye of a fast colour. (F.—L.) ME. engreynen,
P. Plowman, B. ii. 15, xiv. 20; cf. P. Plowman’s Crede, 1. 230. See
the excellent note by Mr. Marsh, in his Lect. on the E. Language,
ed. Smith, p. 55, on the signification of to dye im grain, or of a fast
colour. And see Shak. Tw. Nt. i. 5. 255, Haml. iii. 4. 90; Milton,
Il Pens. 33, Comus, 750.—F, en graine, in grain ; Cot. gives ‘ graine,
the seed of herbs, also grain wherewith cloth is died in grain, scarlet
die, scarlet in graine” PB. The F. en=L. in, in; the’ F. graine is
from Late L. grana, the dye produced from cochineal, which appears
also in Span. and Ital. grana, grain, seed, cochineal. So named
from the resemblance of the dried cochineal to fine graiz or seed;
from L. grdnum, a grain ; see Grain.

INGRATIATH, to commend to the favour of. (L.) In Bacon,
Life of Hen. VII, ed’ Lumby, p. 93, 1. 2. Coined from L, in, into;
and gratia, favour; see Grace. Cf. Ital. ingratiare, * to engrace ; ’
ingratiarsi, ‘to. ingratiate, or to insinuate ones self into favour
(Torriano). ¢

INGRATITUDEF, want of gratitude. (F.—L.) ME. ingratitude,
Ayenbite of Inwyt, ed. Morris, p. 18, l. 4.—F. ingratitude, ‘ingrati-
tude;? Cot.—L. ingratitiido, unthankfulness.— L. ingrati-, from the
decl. stem of ingratus, unpleasant, unthankful. See In- (3) and


INGREDIENT


Grateful. Der. ingrate, Tam. Shrew, i. 2. 270, from F. ingrat=L.
ingratus; whence ingrate-ful, Tw. Nt. v. 80.

INGREDIENT, that which enters into a compound. (F.—L.)
In Shak. Wint. Ta. li. 1. 43.—F. ingredient, ‘an ingredient, a begin-
ning or entrance; also, in physick, a simple put into a compound
medicine ;’ Cot.=L. ingredient-, stem of pres. pt. of ingredt (pp.
ingressus), to enter upon, begin. =L. iz, in; and gradi, to walk; see
Grade. And see Ingress.

INGRESS, entrance. (L.) In Holland, Pliny, b. xxi. c. 14;
and in Palladius on Husbandry, bk. i. 964.—L. ingressus, an enter-
ing. — L. ingredi, to enter upon (above).

INGUINAL, relating to the groin. (L.) A medical term; used
in 1681.—L. inguindlis, belonging to the groin. —L. inguin-, stem of
inguen, the groin.

INGULF, the same as Engulf. (F.) Spelt ingulfe in Minsheu.
INHABIT, to dwell in, occupy. (F.—L.) In Shak. Tw. Nt.
iii. 4.391. ME. enhabiten, Wyclif, Acts, xvii. 26.—F. inhabiter, ‘to
inhabit ;’ Cot.—L. inhabitare, to dwell in.=L, in, in; and habitare,
to dwell; see Habit. Der. inkabit-able; inhabit-ant, Macb. i. 3.
41; inhabit-er, Rev. viii. 13 (A. V.).

INHALE, to draw in the breath. (L.) A lateword. In Thom-
son, Spring, 834.—L. inhalare, to breathe upon.—L. iz, upon; and
halare, to breathe. The E. sense assumes the L. verb to mean
*to draw in breath,’ whichis not the case. Inhale is used in contrast
with Exhale, q.v. Der. inhal-at-ion.

INHARMONIOUS, not harmonious. (F.—L.—Gk.) A mod.
word; in Cowper, The Task, i. 207. Coined from In- (3) and
Harmonious; see Harmony. Der. inharmonious-ly, -ness.

INHERENT, existing inseparably, innate. (L.) ‘A most in-
herent baseness ;’ Shak. Cor. iii. 2, 123.—L. inherent-, stem of pres.
part. of inherére, to stick fast in.=L. in, in; and herére, to stick.
See Hesitate. Der. inherent-ly; inherence, from F. inherence, an
inherence ; ixherenc-y. Somewhat rarely, inhere is used as a verb.

INHERIT, to possess as an heir, come to property. (F.—L.)
“ Inheryte, or receyue in heritage, Heredito;” Prompt. Parv. p. 261.
= OF. enheriter, to inherit (Godefroy). = Late L. inhéréditare.—L. in,
in; and héréditare, to inherit. L, hérédi- or herédi-, decl. stem of
héres or heres, an heir. See Heritage, Heir. Der. inherit-able,
inherit-or, inherit-ress ; inherit-ance, K. John, i. 72.

INHIBIT, to check, restrain. (L.) In Palsgrave; and in Shak.
All’s Well, i. 1.1573; Oth. i. 2. 79.—L. inhibitus, pp. of inhibére, to
have in hand, check.=L. iz, in; and habére, to have. See Habit.
Der. inhibit-ion, Dunbar, Thrissill and Rois, st. 10, from F. inhibition,
“an inhibition,’ Cot. ; inhibit-or-y,

INHOSPITABLE, not hospitable. (F.—L.) In Levins; and
in Shak. Per. v. 1. 254.—F. inhospitable, ‘unhospitable ;’ Cot. See
In- (3) and Hospitable. Der. inhospitabl-y, inhospitable-ness ; so
also in-hospi-tality.

INHUMAN, not human, barbarous, cruel. (F.—L.) Also
written zxhumane in old authors; Shak. Merch. Ven. iv. 1. 4. Cf.
inhumayne in Caxton, Golden Legend, St. Vincent, § 2. —F. inhumain,
‘inhumane, ungentle;’ Cot.—L.inhiimanus. See In-(3)and Human.
Der. inhuman-ly, inhuman-i-ty.

INHUME, to inter, deposit in the earth. (F.—L.) In Minsheu,
ed, 1627.—F, inhumer, ‘to bury, inter;’ Cot.—L. inkumare, to bury
in the ground.=—L. in, in; and humus, the ground. See Humble.
Der. inhum-at-ion, Sir T. Browne, Urn Burial, c. 1, § 4.

DINIMICAL, like an enemy, hostile. (L.) ‘Inimical to the con-
stitution ;’ Brand, Essay on Political Associations, 1796; Todd’s
Johnson. =—L. inimicdlis, extended from inimicus, unfriendly. — L. in-,
not; and amicus, a friend; see In- (3) and Amity. Der. inimical-ly.

DNIMITABLE, that cannot be imitated. (F.—L.) ‘For the
natine and inimitable eloquence ;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. i.
c. 23, § 6.—F. inimitable, ‘unimitable;’? Cot.—L. inimitabilis, —L.
in-, not; and imitabilis, that can be imitated; see In- (3) and Imi.
tate. Der. inimitabl-y,

INIQUITY, wickedness, vice, crime. (F.—L.) ME. iniquitee,
Chaucer, C. T. 4778 (B 358).—F. iniquité, ‘iniquity ;’ Cot.—L.
iniquitatem, acc. of iniquitas, injustice, lit. unequalness. = L. in-, not;
and eguitas, equality, uniformity, justice; see In- (3) and Equity.
Der. iniquit-ous, iniquit-ous-ly, :

INITIAL, commencing, pertaining to the beginning. (L.) In
Phillips, ed, 1706.—L. initialis, incipient. L. initium, a beginning.
—L. initum, supine of inire, to enter into.—L. in, into; and ire, to
go, from 4/EI, to go. Der. from same source, commence, g.v. And
see Initiate.

INITIATE, to instruct in principles. (L.) The participial
form occurs in Shak. Macb. iii. 4. 143; ‘the initiate fear that wants
hard use. = L, initidtus, pp. of initiare, to begin. = L, initium, a begin-
ning (above). Der. initiat-ion, initiat-ive, initiat-or-y.


INJECT, to throw into, cast on. (L.) ‘Applied outwardly or


300


INLET


iniected inwardly ;’. Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxvi.c. 15. ‘ The said
iniection;’ id. b. xx. c. 22 (Of Horehound).=—L. iniectus, pp. of
inicere (injicere), to throw into.—L. iz, into; and zacere, to throw;
see Jet. Der. inject-ion.

INJUDICIOUS, not judicious. (F.—L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706;
and Bp. Hall, Cases of Conscience, dec. 3, cas. 9g (R.). From In-
(3) and Judicious. Der. injudicious-ly, -ness; so also in-judicial.

INJUNCTION; an enjoining, order. (L.) ‘After the special
injunccion of my lorde and master;’ Bale, Image, pt.i; and in Shak.
Merch. of Venice, ii.g.17. Formed, by analogy with F. sbs. in
-ion, from L. iniunctidnem, acc. of iniunctio, an injunction, order; cf.
iniunctus, pp. of iniuagere, to join into, enjoin. See Enjoin.

INJURH, to hurt, harm. (F.—L.) (Really made from the sb.
injury, which was in much earlier use.) In Shak. As You Like It,
iii. 5.9. Cf. F. injurier, ‘to wrong, injure, misuse;’ Cot.— Late L.
initiridre 3 for L. iniuriari, to do harm to. = L. initiria, an injury.—L.
initrius, wrongful, unjust.—L. iz-, neg. prefix; and zur-, stem of itis,
law, right; see Just. Der. injur-y, ME. iniurie, Wyclif, Col. iii.
25, from AF. injurie, Phil. de Thaun, Bestiary, 1. 395, rather than
from OF. injure, an injury (the usual form), both forms answering
to L. initiria, an injury ; injuri-ous, injuri-ous-ly, -ness. And see
below.

INJUSTICE, want of justice. (F.—L.) ‘If he be sene to
exercise injustyce or wrong ;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. iii.
c. 4.—F. injustice, ‘injustice ;’ Cot.—L. iniustitia. See In- (3) and
Justice,

INK, a fluid for writing with, usually black. (F.—L.—Gk.)
‘Inke, encaustum;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 261. Older form enke, Wyclif,
Jer. xxxvi, 18.—AF. enxke, A. Neckam, in Wright’s Vocab. i. 116,
last line; OF. engue, ink (Littré); the mod. F. form being encre,
with inserted r.—L. encaustum, the purple red ink used by the later
Roman emperors; neut. of encaustus, burnt in, encaustic.Gk.
éyxavoros, burnt in. See Encaustic. @f Littré remarks that the
accent on the L. excaustum varied; from éncaustum was derived the
OF. engue, whilst from encaztistum was derived the Ital. inchiostro
(ink). Der. ink-y ; ink-holder, ink-stand ; ink-horn, Ezek. ix. 2(A.V.),
but otherwise almost obsolete.

INKILE, a kind of tape. (Du.?) In Shak. L. L. L. iii. 140;
Wint. Ta. iv. 4. 208. ‘ White yvkell ;? Harman, Caveat (E.E.T.S.),
p- 65. Spelt inky/l in Arnold’s Chron.; ed. 1811, p. 237; ‘ brod
enkell,’ broad tape; Wills and Inventories from Durham, p. 103
(1582). Prob. from MDu. inckel (Oudemans), Du. enkel, single (as
opposed to double), which may have been applied to a commoner
sort of tape. No certain connexion is known; but WFlem. izkel-
ooge or enkelooge, lit. ‘ single-eye,’ is a term in lace-making, referring
to the edging of the lace (De Bo), Koolman has enkel daken, a
single coverlet ; cf. Dan. evkelt-garn, single yarn (Larsen).

INKLING, a hint, intimation. (Scand.?) In Shak. Hen. VIII,
ii, 1.140; Cor. i, I. 59. ‘ What cause hee hadde soo to thynke,
harde it is to saye, whyther hee, being toward him, any thynge
knewe that hee suche thynge purposed, or otherwyse had any inke-
lynge thereof; for hee was not likelye to speake it of noughte ;’
Sir T. More, Works, p. 38 a. Inkling is a verbal sb. formed from
the ME. verb incle. ‘To incle the truthe;’ Alisaunder, ed. Skeat,
616 (in Appendix to Will. of Palerne). ‘(Alexander] herd a nyngk-
iling [whispered mention] of his name ;? Wars of Alexander, 1. 2968 ;
where a nyngkiling =an yngkiling. Origin unknown; perhaps allied
to Swed. enkel, single, Dan. enkelt. Cf. Swed. et enkelt ord, a single
word; Dan. enkelte bemerkninger, a few stray remarks ; MDu. encke-
linge, ‘a falling or a diminishing of notes;’ Hexham. Kilian has
MDnu. ‘eenckelen den sanxck [song], ornare cantum symphonia;...
voce remittente canere.’ See Inkle.

INLAND, an inner part of the country. (E.) Orig. a sb., sig-
nifying a place near some great town or centre, where superior
civilisation is supposed to be found. The counties lying round
London are still, in a similar spirit, called ‘home’ counties. Used
in contrast to upland, which signified a remote country district where
manners were rough. See Shak. Tw. Nt. iv. I. 52; Hen. V, i. 2.
142; &c. Cf. AS. inland (a legal term), a domain; see Laws of
King Edgar, i. 1, in Thorpe, Ancient Laws, i. 263; also p. 432,
last line but one.—AS. ix, within; and land, land, country. Cf.
Icel, inlendr, native. See In and Land. Der. inland, adj. As
You Like It, ii. 7. 96; inland-er, Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. iii. c. 11,
1. 7 (end).
INTAy, to lay within, ornament with inserted pieces. (E.) In
Shak. Merch. Ven. v. 59; Cymb. v. 5. 352. From In and Lay.
Der. inlay-er ; inlaid (pp. of the verb).

INLET, a place of ingress; a small bay. (E.) The orig. sense
is ‘admission’ or ‘ ingress ;’ hence, a place of t ingress, esp. from the
sea to the land. Spelt inlate; ‘The king o blis will haf inlate’ =the
king of glory will have admission, must be admitted; Cursor Mundi,


INLY


18078. From AS. iz, in; and létan, to let. Cf. the phr. ‘to let in.’
+G. einlass, place of ingress; Low Gk. inlat (Schambach). See In
and Let (1).

INLY, adj., inward; ady., inwardly. (E.) As adj. in Two Gent.
ii, 7. 18; commonly an adv., Temp. v, 200. ME. inly (chiefly as
ady.), Chaucer, Troil. i. 640. AS. inlic, adj. inward, Ailfred, tr. of
Beda, b. iii. c. 15; whence izlice, adv. inwardly.— AS, iz, in; and
lic, like ; see In and Like,

INMATE, one who lodges in the same place with another,
a lodger, co-inhabitant. (E.) In Minsheu; and Milton, P. L. ix.
495, xii. 166. First in 1589, From In, prep. within; and Mate,
a companion, q. v.

INMOST, INNERMOST:;; see under In.

INN, a large lodging-house, hotel, house of entertainment. (E.)
ME. in, inn; Ancren Riwle, p. 260, 1. 63 dat. inne, P. Plowman,
B. viii. 4. AS. iz, inn, sb.; Grein, ii. 140. Allied to AS. in, inn,
ady. within ; AS. iz, prep. in; see In.+Icel. ini, an inn; cf. inni,
adv. indoors; inn, adv. indoors; from iz, the older form of 7, prep.
in. Der. inn, verb (see Inning) ; inn-holder; inn-keeper, 1 Hen.1V,
iy. 2. Bite

INNATE, in-born, native. (L.) ‘Your imnat sapience;’ Hoc-
cleve, De Regimine Principum, 2130. . Also formerly spelt innated ;
see examples in Nares.—L. inndtus, in-born; pp. of innasci, to be
born in.=L. in, in; and xasci, to be born; see Native, Der.
innate-ly, -ness.

INNAVIGABLE, impassable by ships. (F.—L.) In Cockeram
(1642). ‘Th’ innavigable flood ;? Dryden, tr. of Virgil, vi. 161. —
F, innavigable.—L. innaduigabilis. From In- (3) and Navigable.

INNER, INNERMOST; see under In.

INNING, the securing of grain; a turn at cricket. (E.) As
a cricket term, invariably used in the pl. ixnings, though only one
side has an inning at a time (first in 1746). Merely a peculiar use
of the verbal sb. formed from the verb to inz, i.e. to house or secure
corn when reaped, also to lodge. Cf. ‘All was ined at last into the
king’s barn;’ Bacon, Hist. Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 65,1. 6. The
verb ¢o inn is from the sb. Inn, q.y. Cf. AS. izmnung, a dwelling;
Liber Scintillarum, 11. 18.

INNOCENT, harmless, not guilty. (F.—L.) ME. innocent,
Chaucer, C. T. 5038 (B 618). Innocence also occurs, id. 11905
(F 1601).—F. innocent, ‘innocent ;’ Cot.—L. innocent-, stem of
innocens, harmless, = L. in-, not; and zocens, harmful, pres. part. of
nocere, to hurt; see In- (3) and Noxious. Der. innocent-ly, inno-
cence ; innocenc-y, Gen. xx. 5 (A. V.). And see Innocuous.

INNOCUOUS, harmless. (L.) Sir T.Browne has innocuously,

Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 28, § last. Englished from L. innocuus, harm-
less; by change from -zs to -ous, as in numerous instances. = L. in-,
not; and xocuus, harmful, from zocére, to harm; see Innocent.
Der. innocuous-ly, -ness. Doublet, innoxious.

INNOVATE, to introduce something new. (L.) In Levins,
Shak, has innovation, Haml. ii. 2. 3473 innovator, Cor. iii. 1. 175.—
L. innoudtus, pp. of innouare, to renew.—L. in, in; and noudre, to
make new, from. xouus, new; see In- (2) and Novel. Der.
innovat-ion, innovat-or,

INNOXIOUS, harmless. (L.) ‘Benign and of innoxious quali-
ties ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iv. c. 13, § 25.—L. innoxius,
harmless. From In- (3) and Noxious. Der. iznoxious-ly.

INNUENDO, INUENDO, an indirect hint. (L.) The
spelling zzwendo, though not uncommon, is incorrect. ‘Innuendo is
a law term, most used in declarations and other pleadings; and the
office of this word is onely to declare and ascertain the person or
thing which was named incertain before; as to say, he (innuendo, the
plaintiff) is a thief; when as there was mention before of another
person ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —L. innuendo, i.e. by intimation;
gerund of innuere, to nod towards, intimate.—L. iz, in, towards;
and nuere, tonod. See In-.(2) and Nutation,

INNUMERABLE, that cannot be counted. (F.—L.) ME.
innumerable, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 267, 1. 17.—F. innumerable, ‘in-
numerable;’ Cot.=L. innumerabilis.—L. in-, not; and numerabilis,
that can be counted, from numerare, to number; see Number,
Der. innumerabl-y.

INNUTRITIOUS, not nutritious. (L.) Innutrition, sb., first
found in 1796; the adj. appears to be of the same date. From In-
(3) and Nutritious. Der. So also in-nutrition.

INOBSERVANT, not observant, heedless, (L.) Inobservance
is used by Bacon (R.).=—L. inobseruant-, stem of inobseruans ; from
In- (3) and Observant; see Observe. . Der. inobservance.

INOCULATE, to engraft, introduce into the human system. (L.)
‘The Turkish inoculation for the small pox was introduced to this
country under the name of ingrafting’ (R.); he refers to Lady Mary
W. Montague’s Letters, let. 31. But izoculate in old authors sig-


nifies to engraft; see Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xix. c. 8, sect. on |


- INSECT 301


‘ graffing herbs ;’ and Hamlet, iii. 1. 119,—L. inoculdtus, pp. of
inoculdre, to engraft, insert a graft.—L. in, in; and oculus, an eye,
also a bud or burgeon of a plant; see Eye. Der. inoculat-ion.

INODOROUS, not odorous. (L.) In Kersey, ed. 1715.—L,
inodorus, inodorous. From In- (3) and Odorous; see Odour.

INOFFENSIVE, giving no offence. (F.—L.) In Milton,
P. L. v. 345, vili.164. From In- (3) and Offensive; see Offend.
Der. inoffensive-ly, -ness.

INOFFICIAL, not official. (F.—L.) Modern; but once in
1632. From In- (3) and Official; see Office. Der. inofficial-ly.

INOPERATIVE, not operative. (F.—L.) In South’s Sermons,
vol. vi. ser. 4 (R.). From In- (3) and Operative.

INOPPORTUNE, not opportune, unfitting. (F.—L.) ‘An
inopportune education ;’ Bp. Taylor, Great Exemplar, pt. iil, ads, 15.
From In- (3) and Opportune. Der. inopportune-ly.

INORDINATE, unregulated, immoderate. (L.) Skelton has
inordinat, Why Come Ye Nat to Court, 1228; and inordinatly, 7or.
And see Chaucer, C. T. (I 414). —L. inordindtus, irregular. =—L. in-,
not; and ordindtus, pp. of ordindre, to set in order, from ordin-,
stem of ordo, order; see Order. Der. inordinate-ly, -ness; in-
ordinat-ion.

INORGANIC, not organic. (F.—L. and Gk.) Formerly in-
organical; Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ‘Organical or inorganical ;’
Burton, Anat. of Melancholy, p. 26 (R.). From In- (3) and Or-
ganic; seeOrgan. Der. inorganic-al-ly; inorgan-is-ed.

INQUEST, a judicial inquiry. (F.—L.) ‘And seththe thoru
enqueste [ MS. anqueste] he let thorugh the contreies anquere ;’ Beket,
1. 387; in S. Eng. Legendary, p. 117.—OF, enqueste, ‘an inquest ;’
Cot. = Late L. inguesta, sb.; from inguesta, fem. of inguestus, late sub-
stitution for inguisttus, pp. of inguirere, to search into. See Inquire.
Doublet, inquiry.

INQUIETUDE, want of rest, disquiet. (F.—L.) In Phillips,
ed. 1658.— MF. inquietude, ‘ disquiet ;? Cot.—L. inguiétiido, restless-
ness.=L. in-, not; and quiétido, rest, from guiétus, quiet. See
Quiet.

INQUIRE, ENQUIRE, to search into or after. (L.) The
spelling izguire is Latin, but the word is really a modification of
the ME, enquire, (also) enqueren (see quot. under Inquest) ; from
OF. enquerre (Godefroy). Spelt ixquyre, Spenser, F. Q. b. ii. introd.
st. 4.—L. inguirere, pp. inguisitus, to search into. See Enquire.
Der. inguir-er, inquir-ing, inquir-ing-ly; inquir-y, Spenser, F. Q.
vi. 4. 243 also inquisit-ion, Temp. i. 2. 35, from F. inguisition<L.
inguisitidnem, acc. of inquisitio, a searching for, from pp. inguisit-us ;
inquisit-ion-al ; inquisit-or (Levins), from L. inguisttor, a searcher ;
inquisit-or-i-al, inquisit-or-i-al-ly ; inquisit-ive, ME. inguisitif, Gower,
C. A. i. 226; bk. ii. 1987, an OF. spelling of L. inquisttiuus, searching
into; inguisit-ive-ly, -ness, And see inquest.

INROAD, a raid into an enemy’s country. (E.) ‘Many hot
inroads They make in Italy ;? Ant. and Cleop. i. 4.50. ‘An inrode,
an invasion ;” Baret (1580). Compounded of iz, prep., and road, the
Southern E. equivalent of North E. raid, a riding, from AS. rad,
ariding. See Road, Raid, Ride. 4 The change from AS. @ to
later oa is the usual one.

INSANE, not sane, mad. (L.) In Macb. i. 3. 84. —L. insdnus,
not sane. See In- (3) and Sane. Der. insane-ly, insan-i-ty.

INSATIABLE, not satiable. (F.—L.) ‘Gredynes ixsaciable ;’
Hoccleve, De Regimine Principum, 1. 1172. =F. insatiable, ‘ insatiate,
unsatiable;’ Cot.=—L. insatidbilis. = L. in-, not; and satiare, to satiate.
See In- (3) and Satiate. Der. insatiabl-y, insatiable-ness, insatia-
bili-ty. Also insatiate, Skelton, Colyn Cloute, 1181; from L. in-
satidtus, not sated.

INSCRIBE, to engrave as on a monument, engrave, imprint
deeply. (L.) In Shak. Hen, VIII, iii, 2. 315.—L. inscribere, pp.
inscriptus, to write upon.=L, iz, upon; and scribere, to write. See
Scribe. Der. inscrib-er ; also inscription, Merch, Ven. ii. 7. 4, from
F. inscription< L. inscriptidnem, acc. of inscriptio, an inscription, from
PP: tnscriptus ; inscript-ive.

INSCRUTABLE, that cannot be scrutinised. (F.—L.) ‘God’s
inscrutable will;’ Barnes, Works, p. 278, col. 1.—F. inscrutable,
‘inscrutable ;? Cot.—L. inscriitabilis.—L in-, not; and *scriutabilis
(not found), formed from serifari, to scrutinise. See Scrutiny,
Der. iniscrutabl-y, inscrutable-ness, inscrutabili-ty,

INSECT, a small invertebrate animal, as described below.
(F.—L.) ‘Wel may they all be called insecta, by reason of those
cuts and diuisions, which some haue about the necke, others in the
breast and belly, the which do go round and part the members of
the body, hanging together only by a little pipe and fistulous con-
ueiance;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xi. c. 1. =F. insecte, ‘an insect ;’
Cot.=L. insectum. ‘Iure omnia insecta appellata ab incisuris, que
nune ceruicum loco, nunc pectorum atque alui, preecincta separant
membra, tenui modo fistula cohgerentia;’ Pliny, b. xi. c. 1, § I.—


’


302 INSECURE


L. insectus, pp. of insecdre, to cut into. L. in, into; and secdre, to cut.
See Section. @] The L. insectum is a rendering of Gk. évropor, an
insect. Der. insect-ile; insecti-vorous (from L. uorare, to devour).

INSECURE, not secure. (L.) Bp. Taylor has ‘znsecure appre-
hensions;’ The Great Exemplar, pt. i. ads. 2; also ‘insecurities and
inconveniencies ;’ id. ib. pt. i. ads. 6 (R.).=—L. inséctirus, not secure.
See In- (3) and Secure. Der. insecure-ly, insecur-i-ty.

INSENSATE, void of sense. (L.) In Milton, P. L. vi. 787;
and Skelton, Works, i. 209.—L. insensGtus, irrational. L. in-, not;
and sensdtus, gifted with sense, from sensus, sense; see In- (3) and
Sense.

INSENSIBLE, devoid of feeling. (F.—L.) In Levins; and
Shak. Cor. iv. 5. 239.—F. insensible, ‘insensible.’—=L. insensibilis.
From In- (3) and Sensible; see Sense. Der. insensibl-y, insensi-
bili-ty. So also in-sentient.

INSEPARABLBE, not separable. (F.—L.) In Sir P. Sidney,
Apol. for Poetry, ed. Arber, p. 49, 1. 36.—F. inseparable, ‘ insepar-
able;’? Cot.—L. inséparabilis. From In- (3) and Separable;
see Separate. Der. inseparabl-y, inseparable-ness, inseparabili-ty.

INSERT, to join into, introduce into. (L.) ‘I haue...inserted;’
Sir T. More, Works, p. 1053 f.—L.insertus, pp. of inserere, to insert,
introduce into. =L. iz, into; and serere, to join, bind, connect; see
In- (2) and Series. Der. insert-ion.

-INSESSORIAL, having feet (as birds) formed for perching on
trees. (L.) Scientific and modern. Formed,-in imitation of L.
sessor, a sitter, from insess-us, pp. of insidére. to sit upon,—L. in,
upon ; and sedére, to sit; see Sit.

INSHRINE, the same as Enshrine. (E. azd L.)

INSIDBE, the inward side or part. (E.) Sir T. More, Works,
p. 1256 f, has ‘on the outsyde’ opposed to ‘on the insyde.’ Formed
from In and Side.

INSIDIOUS, ensnaring, treacherous. (F.—L.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674.—F. insidieux, ‘deceitfull;’ Cot.=—L. insididsus,
cunning, deceitful. L. insidie, sb. pl. (1) troops of men who lie
in wait, (2) a plot, snare, cunning wiles. —L. insidére, to sit in, take
up a position, lie in wait. L. zz-, in; and sedére, to sit, cognate
with E. sit; see In- (2) and Sit. Der. insidious-ly, -ness.

INSIGHT, the power of seeing into. (E.) ME. insight, insiht.
‘Salomon, Which hadde of euery thing izsihte’ =Solomon, who had
insight into everything ; Gower, C. A. ii. 80; bk. iv. 2340. Spelt
insiht, Layamon, 30497. ‘From In and Sight. + Du. inzicht,
insight, design ; G. einsicht, insight, intelligence.

INSIGNIA, signs or badges of office. (L.) Borrowed from L.
insignia, pl. of insigne, a distinctive mark, which was orig. the neut.
of the adj. insignis, remarkable. See Ensign.

INSIGNIFICANT, poor, mean, vile. (L.) § Little insigni-
Jicant monk ;? Milton, A Defence of the People of England (R.).
From In- (3) and Significant; see Sign. Der. insignificant-ly,
insignificance, insignificanc-y. So also in-significative.

INSINCERE, not sincere. (F.—L.) ‘But ah! how insincere
are all our joys;’ Dryden, Annus Mirabilis, st, 209. From In-~ (3)
and Sincere. Der. insincere-ly, insincer-i-ty.

INSINUATEH, to introduce artfully, hint. (L.) In Levins; and
in Shak. Rich. II, iv. 165.—L. insinudtus, pp. of insinudre, to intro-
duce by winding or bending. = L. iz, in; and sinuare, to wind about,
from simus,a bend. SeeSinuous. Der. insinuat-ing, insinuat-ing-ly ;
insinuat-ion, K. John, v. 1. 68, from F. insinuation, ‘an insinuation,’
Cot. 3 insinuat-or, insinuat-ive.

INSIPID, tasteless. (F.—L.) ‘His salt, if I may dare to say
so, [is] almost izsipid,’ spoken of Horace; Dryden, Discourse on
Satire; Poems, ed. 1856, p. 377, 1. 7.—F. insipide, ‘unsavory, smack-
lesse ;’ Cot.—L, insipidus, tasteless. —L. in-, not; and sapidus, well-
tasting, savoury. See Savour, Der. insipid-ly, insipid-i-ty.

INSIST, to dwell upon in discourse. (F.—L.) In Shak. Jul.
Ces. li. 1. 245. F. insister, ‘to insist on;’ Cot.—L. insistere, to
set foot on, persist.—L. in, upon; and sistere, to set, causal verb
formed from stare, cognate with E. Stand.

INSNARE, the same as Ensnare, (E.)

INSOBRISTY, intemperance. (F.—L.) In Howell, Familiar
Letters, vol. iii. let. 26 (end). From In- (3) and Sobriety ; see
Sober.

INSOLENT, contemptuous, rude. (F.—L.) ME, insolent,
Chaucer, C. T. Pers. Tale, De Superbia (I 399).—F. insolent, ¢ in-
solent, malapert, saucy ;’ Cot.—L. insolent-, stem of insolens, not
customary, unusual, haughty, insolent. —L. in-, not ; and solens, pres.
part. of solére, to be accustomed, to be wont (root unknown); or
from L. in-, against, and sol-, weak grade of the vb. to swell (AS.
swellan). Der. insolent-ly; insolence, Court of Love, 1. 936; Chaucer,
C. T., I 391; insolenc-y, in the Bible Wordbook.

INSOLIDITY, want of solidity. (F.—L.) Used in 1578. From
in- (3) and Solidity; see Solid,


INSTEP


INSOLUBLE, not soluble, that cannot be solved. (F.—L.)
Insolubles, in the sense of ‘ insoluble problems,’ occurs in Sir T. More,
Works, p. 355 b; cf. p. 165, col. 2. See Wyclif, Heb. vii. 16 (earlier
version). =F. insoluble, ‘insoluble;’ Cot.—L. insoliibilis. See In-


(3) and Soluble. Der. insolubl-y, insoluble-ness, insolubili-ty. And


see below. ;

INSOLVENT, unable to pay debts. (L.) In Kersey’s Dict.,
ed. 1715. ‘If his father was insolvent by his crime;’ Bp. Taylor,
Rule of Conscience, b. iii. c. 2. Formed from L. ix-, not; and
soluent-, stem of soluens, pres. part. of soluere, to solve, to pay; see
Solve. Der. insolvenc-y (Kersey).

INSOMNIA, sleeplessness. (L.) First as insomnie; in Cockeram
(1623).—L. insomnia, —L. insomnis, adj., sleepless. = L. in-, not; and
somnus, sleep. See Somnolence,

INSOMUCH, to such a degree. (E.) ‘Insomuch I say I know
you are;’ As You Like It, v. 2.60. From In, So, and Much;
See Inasmuch.

INSPECT, to look into, examine. (L.) In Kersey, ed. 1715;
Cockeram (1623) has inspected. [But the sb. inspeccioun is in much
earlier use, and occurs in Gower, C. A. iii. 46; bk. vi. 1349. ]—L.
inspectare, to observe ; frequent. of inspicere, to look into.—L. in, in;
and specere, to spy ; see Spy. Der. inspect-or, inspect-or-ship ; also
inspect-ion = F. inspection, ‘ an inspection’ (Cot.), from L. inspectiOnem,
acc. of inspectio, a looking into.

INSPIRE, to breathe into, infuse, influence. (F.—L.) ME.
enspiren, Chaucer, C. T. 6; Gower, C. A. iii, 226; bk. vii. 4003.
= OF. enspirer, later inspirer, the latter being the form in Cot-
grave.=L. inspirdre, to breathe into, inspire.—L. iz, into; and
spiradre, to breathe; .see Spirit. Der. inspir-able, inspir-at-ion,
Robert of Brunne, Handlyng Synne, I. 7746, inspir-at-or-y, inspir-er ;
also in-spirit (Pope, To Mrs. M. B., 1, 13), from im and spirit.

INSPISSATE, to make thick, as fluids. (L.) ‘ The sugar doth
inspissate the spirits of the wine;? Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 726.—L.
inspissatus, pp. of inspissare, to thicken.—L. in, into, here used as
intensive prefix; and spissare, to thicken, from spissus, dense.

INSTABILITY, want of stability. (F.—L.) ‘For some,
lamentyng the instabilitee of the Englishe people;’ Hall’s Chron.
Hen. IV, an. 1. § 15.—F. instabilité, ‘instability ;” Cot.—L. instabili-
tatem, acc. of instabilitas, = L, instabilis, unstable. See In- (3) and
Stable, adj.

INSTALL, INSTAL, to place ina stall, seat, or office. (F. —
Low L.—OHG.) Though the word might easily have been coined
from Eng. elements, yet, as a fact, it was borrowed. ‘To be installed
or inthronised at Yorke;”’ Hall’s Cron. Hen. VIII, an. 22. § 9.—F.
installer, ‘ to install, settle, establish, place surely in ;? Cot.— Low L.
installare, to install.—L. in, in; and Low L. stallum, a stall, seat,
place to sit in; Ducange. f. The Low L, séallum is from OHG.
stal, G, stall, a stall, place, cognate with E. stall. See Stall.
Der. install-at-ion, from MF. installation (Cot.) ; instal-ment, formerly
used in the sense of installation, Shak, Rich. III, iii. 1. 163;
a coined word.

INSTANCE, solicitation, occasion, example. (F.—L.) ‘ At
his instance ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 9485 (E 1611).—F. instance, ‘instance,
earnestnesse, urgency, importunitie;’ Cot.—L. instantia, a being
near, urgency. L. instant-, stem of instans, present, urgent; pres.
part. of instare, to be at hand, press, urge.—L. in, upon, near; and
stare, to stand, cognate with E. Stand, q.v. Der. instant, adj.
urgent, Luke, xxiii. 23, from L. instant-, stem of instans ; instant-ly=
urgently, Luke, vii. 4; also instant, sb.=moment, Spenser, F, Q. ii.
5. I1, from F. instant, ‘an instant, moment’ (Cot.), from the same
L. instant-. Also instant-an-e-ous, Thomson, To the Memory of
Lord Talbot, l. 27, coined as if from a L. *instant-Gneus, made by
analogy with L. mdment-dneus ; instant-an-e-ous-ly.

INSTATE, to put in possession. (F.—L.) In Shak. Meas. v.
249. Coined from én-, equivalent to F. en-, prefix; and state, See
In- (2) and State. Der. re-instate,

INSTEAD, in the place. (E.) ME. in stede, Mandeville’s
Travels, ch, 21, ed, Halliwell, p. 227. We also find on stede nearly
in the same sense. ‘And he toc him on sunes stede’=and he took
him in place of a son, received him as a son; Genesis and Exodus,
ed. Morris, 2637. From AS. on stede, lit. in the place. £ On pxra
negla stede’=in the place of the nails; John, xx. 25. See In and
Stead.

INSTEP, the upper part of the foot, rising from the toes to the
ankle. (E.) In TheSpectator,no. 48. Asomewhat rare word; formerly
also spelt instup or instop. .§ Coudepied, the instup ;’ Cot. Minsheu,
ed, 1627, refers, under Instep, to Instop ; and also gives: ‘ the instop
of the foot,’ as well as ‘Instuppe, vide Instoppe.’ But Palsgrave, in
1530, has the form insteppe; and A. Borde, ab, 1542, has instep,
Introd. of Knowledge, ed. Furnivall, p. 189, 1. 26, B. It would
seem that instep and instop (or instup) were both in use; the former


INSTIGATE


must be from iz, prep. in, and ME. steppen, to step. The latter may
contain the strong grade stop- of AS. steppan, to step; cf. AS. stdp-el,
a footprint, OSax. s¢dp-o, a step. The reference seems to be to the
movement of the instep in walking. See Step.

INSTIGATE, to urge on, incite. (L.) In Shak. Merry Wives,
iii. 5. 77 ; and in Levins. —L. instigdtus, pp. of instigare, to goad on,
incite. —L. iz, in, on; and *stig-, to stick, prick, sting, allied to L,
stinguere, to prick or scratch out, to quench. See Sting, Distin-
guish. See Brugmann, i. § 633. Der. instigat-ion, Wint. Ta. ii.
I. 163, from F. instigation, ‘ an instigation;’ Cot. ; instigat-or ; and
see instinct.

INSTT, to infuse drop by drop. (F.—L.) ‘A faythfull preacher
- . - doth instill itinto us ;’ Fryth, Works, p. 166, col. 2.—F. izstiller,
‘to drop, trill, drizle;’ Cot. —L. instillare, to pour in by drops. =—L.
in, in; and stilla, a drop. See Still (2). Der. instill-at-ion, from
F, instillation, * an instillation ;’ Cot.

INSTINCT, a natural impulse or instigation, esp. that by which
animals are guided aright. (F.—L.; or L.) ‘A secrete inward
instincte of nature ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 521 c. =F. instinct, ‘an
instinct or inclination ;? Cot, [Or perhaps directly from Latin. ]—L.
instinctum, acc. of instinctus, an instigation, impulse; cf. instinctus,
pp. of instinguere, to goad on, instigate.—L. iz, on; and stinguere,
to stick, prick; see Instigate. Der. instinct-ive, instinct-ive-ly,
Temp. i. 2, 1483; also instinct, adj.=instigated, moved, Pope, tr. of
Iliad, b. xviii. 1. 442, from L. pp. instinctus,

INSTITUTE, to establish, set up, erect, appoint. (L.) In Shak.
1 Hen. VI, iv. 1. 162; Tam. Shrew, i. 1. 8; and in Palsgrave. —L.
instititus, pp. of instituere, to set, plant, establish. —L. in, in (with
little force) ; and statuere, to place, from status, a position. See
Statute, State. Der. institute, sb.; institut-ion, Meas. for Meas. i,
I. 11, from F, institution, ‘an institution; Cot.; izstitut-ion-al, in-
stitut-ion-ar-y, institut-ive,

INSTRUCT, to inform, teach, order. (L.) ‘But dustructe hem,’
i,e. them; Lord Rivers, Dictes and Sayings, pr. by Caxton, fol. 4,
1,7. Properly a pp. as in ‘informed and izstructe in all thynges ;’
Caxton, Golden Legend, Conv. of St. Paul, § 6.—L. instructus, pp.
of instruere, to build into, instruct. L, ix, into; and struere, to build;
see Structure. Der. instruct-ible ; instruct-ion; L. L. L. iv. 2. 81,
from F. instruction, ‘an instruction,’ Cot. ; instruct-ive, instruct-ive-ly,
-ness ; instruct-or, -ress; and see instrument.

INSTRUMENT, a tool, machine producing music, contract
in writing, a means. (F.—L.) ME. instrument=a musical instru-
ment, Chaucer, Parl. of Foules, 197.—F. instrument, ‘ an instrument,
implement, engine,’ &c.; Cot.—L. instriimentum, formed with suffix
-mentum, and prefix in-, from struere, to build; see Instruct. Der.
instrument-al, instrument-al-ly, instrument-al-i-ty, instrument-al-ist, in-
strument-at-ion.

INSUBJECTION, want of subjection. (F.—L.) <A late word;
added to Johnson by Todd, From In- (3) and Subjection.

INSUBORDINATEH, not subordinate. (L.) Quite modern.
From In- (3) and Subordinate. Der. insubordinat-ion.

INSUFFERABLE, intolerable. (F.—L.) ‘ Perceiving still her
wrongs insufferable were ;’ Drayton, Polyolbion, s.6. 1.141. Coined
with prefix zz- (=not) and suffix -able from Suffer, q.v. Der.
insufferab-ly, Milton, P. L. ix. 1084,

INSUFFICIENT, not sufficient. (L.) Chaucer has insufficient,
C. T., D 1960. Shak. has insufficience, Wint. Ta. i. 1. 16; also in-
sufficiency, Mid, Nt. Dr. ii. 2, 128.—L. insufficient-, stem of insufficiens,
From In- (3) and Sufficient ; see Suffice, Der. insufficient-ly,
insufficience, insufficienc-y. .

INSULAR, belonging to an island. (L.) In Cotgrave, to trans-
late F. insulaire.— L, inswlaris, insular. — L. insula, an island. Perhaps
allied to Gael. innis, an island; see Inch (2). Der, insular-ly,
insular-i-ty; also insul-ate, from L. insulatus, made like an island;
insul-at-or, insul-at-ion. And see Isle, Isolate,

INSULT, to treat with indignity, affront. (F,—L.) In Shak.
Rich. Il, iv. 254.—F. insulter, ‘to insult;’? Cot.—L, insultare, to
leap upon or against, scoff at, insult; frequent. form of insilire, to
leap into, spring upon.—L. ix, upon; and salire, to leap. See
Salient. Der. insult, sb. = MF. insult, ‘an affront,’ Cot. ; insult-er,
insult-ment, Cymb. ili. 5. 145.

.INSUPERABLE, insurmountable. (F.—L.) In Caxton,
Eneydos, ch. xii. p. 44; and Milton, P. L. iv, 138. =F. insuperable,
‘insuperable ;’ Cot. = L. insuperabilis, insurmountable. —L. in-, not ;
and superare, to surmount, from super, above. See Super-. Der.
insuperabl-y, insuperabili-ty.

INSUPPORTABLE, intolerable. (F.—L.) Accented as in-
supportable, Spenser, F. Q. i. 7. 11.—F. insupportable, * unsupport-
able;’ Cot.=F, in-<L, in-, not; and F. supportable, from supporter,
to support; see Support. Der. insupportab-ly, insupportable-ness,
-INSUPPRESSIBLE, that cannot be suppressed. (L.) A


INTEND 303


coined word; first in 1610. Also used by Young, On Orig. Com-
position (R.). Shak. has insuppressive, Jul. Cees. ii. 1. 134. From
In- (3) and Suppress.

INSURE, to make sure, secure. (F.—L.) ME. ensure, Chaucer,
C. T. 12971 (B 1231; Petworth MS.; most MSS. have assure). —AF.
enseurer (Godefroy); used instead of OF. asseurer (Cot.), aseurer
(Burguy), by the substitution of the prefix ex (<L. in) for the prefix
a(<L.ad), The form -sewrer is from OF, seur, sure. See In- (2)
and Sure; also Assure, Der. insur-able, insur-er, insur-ance 3 in-
sur-anc-er, Dryden, Threnodia Augustalis, 186.

INSURGENT, rebellious. (L.) A late word, added by Todd
to Johnson’s Dict.—L. insurgent-, stem of pres. part. of insurgere,
to rise up.—L. iz, upon; and surgere, to rise; see Surge. Der.
insurgenc-y; and see insurrection.

INSURMOUNTABLE, not surmountable. (F.—L.) In
Phillips, ed, 1696.—F. insurmontable, ‘unsurmountable;’ Cot,
=F. in- << L. in-, not; and surmontable, from surmonter, to surmount;
see Surmount. Der. insurmountabl-y,

INSURRECTION, rebellion, (F.—L.) In Shak. 1 Hen. IV,
v. I. 79.—OF. insurrection (Hatzfeld).—L. insurrectidnem, acc, of
insurrectio, an insurrection; cf. insurrectus, pp. of insurgere, to rise up,
rebel; see Insurgent. Der. insurrection-al, insurrection-ar-y, in-
surrection-ist.

INTACT, untouched. (L.) In Bailey, ed. 1721.—L. intactus,
untouched. —L, in-, not; and tactus, pp. of tangere, to touch; see
Tangent, Tact, Intangible.

INTAKE, an enclosure from a moor. (Scand.) Northern; see
EK. D. D. — Norw. inntak, a taking in; from inn, in, and faka, to take.
See Take. Cf. Swed. intaga, an enclosed space that was formerly
part of a common; intaga, to take in (Widegren).

INTANGIBLE, that cannot be touched. (L.) $ Jntactible or
Intangible;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. From In- (3) and Tangible.

INTAGLIO, an engraving, esp. a gem in which the design is
hollowed out. (Ital.—L.) Evelyn has intaglias, Diary, 1 Mar.,
1644; and inxtaglios, 23 Oct., 1654.—Ital. intaglio, an engraving,
sculpture, carving.—Ital. intagliare, to cut into, engrave.— Ital.
in< L. in, in; and ¢agliare, to cut, from Late L. zaledre, to cut, esp.
to cut twigs, from ¢alea, a rod, stick, bar, twig. See Entail and
Tally. Der. intagli-at-ed.

INTEGER, that which is whole or entire; a whole number. (L.)
In Kersey, ed. 1715, as an arithmetical term; first in 1509,.—L.
integer, adj. whole, entire; lit. untouched, unharmed. —L, in-, not;
and tag-, base of tangere, to touch; see Tangent, Der. integr-al,
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, formed from integr-um, neut. of integer
used as sb.; integr-al-ly, integr-ate, integr-at-ion, integr-ant ; also
integr-i-ty, Sir T. More, Works, p.1337h, fromF. integrité (Cot.) < L.
integritdtem, acc. of integritas, soundness, blamelessness. Doublet,
entire, q.V-

INTEGUMENT, a covering, skin. (L.) In Chapman, tr. of
Homer, Il, xxii. 1. 7° from end.—L. integumentum, a covering.—L.
in, upon; and fegere, to cover. See Tegument, Der. integu-
ment-ar-y,

INTELLECT, the thinking principle, understanding. (F.—L.)
ME. intellect, Chaucer, C. T. 2805 (A 2803),.—OF. intellect, ‘the
intellect ;? Cot.—L,. intellectum, acc. of intellectus, perception, dis-
cernment; cf, intellectus, pp. of intelligere, to discern; see Intelli-
gence, Der, intellect-u-al, Sir T. Elyot, The Goyernour, b. iii. c.
24. § 23 intellect-u-al-ly ; intellect-ion, intellect-ive,

INTELLIGENCE, intellectual skill, news, (F.—L.) ME.
intelligence, Gower, C. A. iii. 85; bk. vii, 28.—F. intelligence ; Cot.
=L. intelligentia, perception. = L. intelligent-, stem of intelligens, pres.
part. of intelligere, to understand, lit. ‘to choose between.’ = L, inéel-,
for inter, between, before Z following; and legere, to choose; see
Legend. Der. intelligenc-er, Rich. III, iv. 4. 715 intelligenc-ing,
Wint. Ta, ii. 3. 68; also intelligent, Wint. Ta, i. 2. 378, from L.
intelligent-, stem of intelligens ; intelligent-ly, intelligent-i-al ; also in-
telligible, Wyclif, Wisdom, vii. 23, from F, intelligible, ‘ intelligible’
(Cot.), from L. intelligibilis, perceptible to the senses, Wisdom, vii.
23 (Vulgate) ; intelligibl-y, intelligibili-ty.

INTEMPERANCE, want of temperance, excess. (F.—L.)
Spelt intemperaunce, Spenser, F. Q, ii. 4. 36.—F. intemperance, ‘in-
temperance ;? Cot.—L, intemperantia, want of mildness or clemency,
intemperance, excess. See In- (3) and Temperance. Der. in-
temperate, Meas. v. 98, and in Levins, from L. intemperatus, un-
tempered ; intemperate-ly, intemperate-ness.

INTEND, to fix the mind upon, purpose. (F.—L.) ME. entenden,
Gower, C. A. i. 12; prol. 253; later spelt indend, to bring it nearer
Latin,=F. entendre, ‘to understand, conceive, apprehend,’ Cot.;
whence entendre a, ‘to study, mind, heed,’ id.—L. intendere, to
stretch out, extend, stretch to, bend, direct, apply the mind.—L.
in, towards; and tendere, to stretch; see Tend, Der. intend-ant,


304 INTENSE


Kersey, ed. 1715, from MF, intendant, one of ‘the foure overseers
or controllers of the exchequer, at first brought in by king Francis
the First’ (Cot.), formed as a pres. part. from L. pres. part. intendens ;
intend-anc-y; intend-ed ; intend-ment, As You Like It, i, 1. 140; also
intense, q. V.; intent, q. Vv. e
TENSE, highly increased, esp. in tension, severe. (L.) In

Milton, P. L. viii. 387.—L. intensus, stretched out, pp. of intendere,
to stretch out; see Intend. ‘Der. intense-ly, intense-ness, intens-i-ty ;
intens-i-fy (from F. suffix -fier<L. ~ficare, for facere, to make) ;
intens-ive, intens-ive-ly, intens-ive-ness.

INTENT, design, intention. (F.—L.) ME. entente, Chaucer,
C. T. 960 (A 958); Ancren Riwle, p. 252, notea. Later, intent,
Gower, C. A. ii. 262; bk. v.. 4038.—F. entente, ‘intention, purpose,
meaning; Cot. Entente is a participial sb. formed from the vb.
entendre; see Intend. Der. The adj. intent (Milton, P. L. ix. 786)
is directly from L. intentus, pp. of intendere ; intent-ly, intent-ness.
Also intent-ion, Wint. Ta. i. 2, 138 (spelt intencyone in Prompt.
Pary.), from F. intention, ‘an intention, intent,’ from L. intentionem,
acc. of intentio, endeavour, effort, design ; intent-ion-al, intent-ion-al-ly,
intention-ed.

INTER, to bury. (F.—L.) ME. enterren. ‘And with gret dule
entyrit wes he;’ Barbour’s Bruce, xix. 224. Later, inter, K. John,
v. 7. 99.—F. enterrer, ‘to interre, bury ;’ Cot.—Late L. interrare,
to put into the ground, bury. —L. iz, in; and ¢erra, the earth; see
Terrace. Der. inter-ment=ME. enterement, Gower, C. A. ii. 319,
bk. v. 5727, from F. enterrement, ‘an interring ;’ Cot.

INTER-, prefix, among, amongst, between. (L.) L. inter-,
prefix; from inter, prep. between, among. A comparative form,
answering to Skt. antar, within; and closely connected with L.
interus, interior. See Interior. In a few cases, the final r becomes
I before Z following, as in intel-lect, intel-ligence. Most words with
this prefix are purely Latin, but a few, as inter-weave, are hybrid.
In some cases, inzfer- stands for the F. entre.

INTERACTION, mutual action. (L.; avd F.—L.) Modern;
not in Todd’s Johnson. Coined from Inter- and Action.

INTERCALATE, to insert between, said of a day in a calendar.
(L.) In Raleigh, Hist. of World, b. ii. c. 3.8.6. Intercalation is
explained in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. intercaldtus, pp. of
intercalare, to proclaim that something has been inserted. = L. inter,
between, among; and calare, to proclaim; see Calends. Der.
intercalat-ion; also intercalar = L. intercalaris; intercalar-y = L.
intercalarius.

INTERCEDE, to go between, mediate, plead for one. (F.—L.)
Milton has intercede, P. L. xi. 215 intercession, P. L. x. 2283 inter-
cessour, P. L, iii. 219. — MF, interceder ; ‘interceder pour, to intercede
for;’ Cot.—L, intercédere, lit. to go between.—L. inter, between ;
and cédere, to go; see Inter- and Cede. Dev. interced-ent, interced-
ent-ly; also (like pp. intercessus) intercess-ion =F. intercession, ‘ inter-
cession, Cot.; intercession-al ; intercess-or, formerly intercessour,
from IF’, intercesseur, ‘an intercessor’ (Cot.), which is from L. acc.
intercessorem’; hence intercessor-i-al, intercessor-y.

INTERCEPT, to catch by the way, cut off communication.
(F.—L.) Orig. a pp.; thus Chaucer has intercept =intercepted; On
the Astrolabe, pt. ii. § 39, 1. 24. ‘To intercept, intercipere ;’ Levins
(1570). =F. intercepter, ‘to intercept, forestall ;* Cot.— L. interceptus,
pp. of intercipere, lit. to catch between.—L. inter, between; and
capere, to catch, seize. See Inter- and Capable. Der. intercept-
er ; intercept-ion, Elen. V, ii. 2. 7.

INTERCESSION, INTERCESSOR ; see Intercede.

INTERCHANGE, to change between, exchange. (F.—L.)
Formerly enterchange. ‘ Full many strokes... were enterchaungéd
twixt them two ;’ Spenser, F. Q. iv. 3. 17.—F. entrechanger ; sentre-
changer, to interchange ;’ Cot.—F. entre < L, inter, between; and
changer, to change. See Inter- and Change. Dev. interchange-
eke interchange-abl-y, Rich, II, i. 1. 1463 interchange-ment, Tw. Nt.
v. 162.

INTERCOMMUNICATE, to communicate mutually. (L.)
In Phillips (1706). Coined from Inter- and Communicate ;
seeCommune. Der. intercommunicat-ion ; so also intercommun-ion,

INTERCOSTAL, lying between the ribs. (F.—L.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674.— I". intercostal, ‘between the ribs ;’ Cot. From L,
inter, between ; and costa, a rib. See Inter- and Costal.

INTERCOURSE, commerce, connexion by dealings, com-
munication. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. L. ii. 1031, vii. 571. Spelt
entercourse in Fabyan’s Chron., an. 1271-2; ed. Ellis, p. 368.
Modified from F. enxtrecours, intercourse ; omitted by Cotgrave, but
in use in the 16th century in the sense of ‘commerce;”’ see Littré.
= Late L. intercursus, commerce; L. intercursus, interposition. See
Inter- and Course. Der. So also inter-current, inter-currence.

INTERDICT, a prohibitory decree. (L.) A law term, from
Law Latin. [The F. form enredit is in early use; Rob. of Glouc.,


INTERLACE


p- 495, l. 6 (and note), 1. 10173; enterdite, Gower, C. A.i. 259; bk.
ii, 2979. Hence the ME. verb entrediten, Rob. of Glouc., p. 495,
1, 10184.] ‘An interdicte, that no man shal rede, ne syngen, ne crystene
chyldren, ne burye the deede, ne receyue sacramente ;’ Caxton, tr. of
Reynard the Fox, ch. 28; ed. Arber, p. 70,-last line. = Law L.
interdictum, a kind of excommunication, Ducange; L. interdictum,
a decree of a judge. =—L. interdictus, pp. of interdicere, to pronounce
judgment between two parties, to decree.—L. inter, between; and
dicere, to speak, utter. See Inter- and Diction. Der. inéerdict,
vb. ; interdict-ion, Macb. iv. 3. 106; interdict-ive, interdict-or-y.

INTEREST (1), profit, advantage, premium for use of money.
(F.—L.) Differently formed from the word below. ‘My well-won
thrift, Which he calls interest;’ Merch. Ven. i. 3. 52. — OF. interest.
(mod. F. zzterét), ‘an interest in, a right or title unto a thing; also
interest, or use for money;’ Cot.—L. interest, it is profitable, it
concerns; 3 p.s. pres. indic. of interesse, to concern, lit. to be between.
-L. inter, between; and esse, to be. See Inter- and Essence.
@ Littré remarks that the F. has considerably modified the use of:
the L, original; see ‘his Dict. for the full history of the word. He
also bids us observe that the Span. interes, Port. interesse, Ital. inter-
esse, interest, are all taken from the infinitive mood of the L. verb,
not from the 3 p.s. pres., as in French; cf. Late L. interesse, interest.
Besides this, the use of this sb. helped to modify the verb below; q. v.
@@ Spenser has the Ital. form interesse, F. Q. vii. 6. 33; cf. intresse,
Chaucer, Fortune, 71; interesse, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 170.

INTEREST (2), to engage the attention, awaken concern in,
excite in behalf of another. (F.—L.) A very curious word; formed
(by partial confusion with the word above) from the pp. inéeress’d of
the obsolete verb ¢o interess. ‘The very same confusion occurs in the
formation of Disinterested, q.v. ‘The wars so long continued
between The emperor Charles and Francis the French king, Have
interess’d, in either’s cause, the most Of the. Italian princes;’ Mas-
singer, Duke of Milan, i. 1.‘ T7b. By the Capitol, And all our gods,
but that the dear republic, Our sacred laws, and just authority Are
interess'd therein, I should be silent;’ Ben Jonson, Sejanus, iii. I.
‘ To interess themselves for Rome, against Carthage;’ Dryden, On
Poetry and Painting, § 13 (R.). ‘To interess or interest, to concern,
to engage;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.— MF. interessé, ‘intéressed, or touched
in;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. interessare (pp. interessato), Span. interesar (pp.
interesado), to interest. = L. interesse, to concern; see Interest (1)..
Der. interest-ed (really a reduplicated pp.), first used in 1665 ; interest-
ing (first in 1711), interest-ing-ly; also dis-interest-ed, q.v.

INTERFERE, to interpose, intermeddle. (F.—L.) A word
known in the 15th cent., but not much used. Chiefly restricted to
the peculiar sense of hitting one leg against another; said of a horse ;.
see Palsgrave, s.v. Entrefyer. ‘ Entyrferyn, intermisceo ;’ Prompt.
Pary. ‘To interfeere, to hacke one foot or legge against the other,
as a horse doth; ’ Minshen, ed. 1627.) ‘ To enterfeir, to rub or dash
one heel against the other, to exchange some blows ;’ Blount’s Gloss.,;
ed. 1674.— MF. entreferir, ‘to interchange some blows; to strike or
hit, at once, one another; to interfeere, as a horse ;’ Cot.=—F. entre,.
between ; and ferir, to strike.—L. inter, between; and ferzre, to
strike. See Inter- and Ferule. Der. interfer-er, interfer-ence.

INTERFUSE, to pour between. (L.) Milton has interfus’d,
P.L. vii. 89.—L. interfasus, pp. of interfundere, to pour between.
See Inter- and Fuse (1). Der. interfus-ion.

INTERIM, an interval. (L.) At least 14 times in Shak.; see
Jul. Ceesar, ii. 1.643; &c.—L. interim, adv. in the mean while.=L.
inter, between ; and im, allied to is, demonst. pronoun,

INTERIOR, intemal. (L.) In Shak. Rich. III, i. 3. 65. —L..
interior, compar. of interus, which is itself a comparative form. Thus
interior (like inferior) is a double comparative. The L. interus and
intimus correspond to Skt. antara- (interior) and antima-,Vedic antama-
(last), which are, respectively, compar. and superl. forms. The
positive form appears in L. and E.iz. Brugmann, i. § 466. Der.
interior, sb., Merch. Venice, ii. 9. 28; interior-ly; and see internal.

INTERJACENT, lying between. (L.) In Kersey, ed. 1715.
Interjacency is in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. interiacent-, stem of
pres. part. of interiacére, to lie between. —L. inter-, between; and
tacére, to lie. See Inter- and Gist. Der. interjacenc-y.

INTERJECTION, a word thrown in to express emotion.
(F.—L.) In Shak. Much Ado, iv. 1. 22; and in Palsgrave.=—F.
interjection, ‘an interjection ;’ Cot.—L. interiectionem, acc. of inter-
iectio, a throwing between, insertion, interjection; cf. interiectus,
pp. of .intericere, to cast between.—L. inter; and iacere, to cast;
see Inter- and Jet (1). Der. interjection-al ; also interject, verb
(rare).

INTERLACEH, to lace together. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q.
y. 3. 23; and in Sir T. More, Works, p. 739 b. Spelt enterlace in
Baret (1580); and Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, iii. pr.12. 118. Modified
from MF. extrelasser, ‘to interlace;’ Cot.=—F. entre, between; and


INTERLARD


lasser, lacer, to lace; Cot. See Inter- and Lace. Der. interlace-
ment.

INTERLARD, to place lard amongst. (F.—L.) ‘Whose grain
doth rise in flakes, with fatness izterlarded ;’ Drayton, Polyolbion,
s. 26, 1. 255. Caxton has entrelarded, Troy-bk, fol. 62, 1. 7.—F.
entrelarder, ‘to interlard, mingle different things together ;’ Cot.
See Inter- and Lard.

INTERLEAVE, to insert blank leaves in a book between the
others. (Hybrid; L. axd E.) In The Spectator, no. 547, § 2. Coined
from Inter- and Leave, the latter being a coined verb from the
sb. Leaf (pl. leaves).

INTERLINE, to write between the lines. (L.) ‘I interline, I
blot, correct, I note;’ Drayton, Matilda to K. John, 1. 36; and in
Cotgrave, to translate F. entreligner. —Late L. interlineare, to write
between lines for the purpose of making corrections ; used A.D. 1278;
Ducange. —L,. inter, between; and linea, a line. See Inter- and
Line. Der. interline-ar, from Late L. interlinearis; whence inter-
line-ar-y, Milton, Areopagitica, ed. Hales, p. 41, 1. 3; interline-at-ion.

INTERLINK, to connect by uniting links. (Hybrid; L. and
Scand.) ‘With such infinite combinations interlinked ;’ Daniel,
Defence of Rhyme, § 19. Coined from L. inter and dink. See Inter-
and Link.

INTERLOCUTION, a conference, speaking between. (F.— L.)
“A good speech of interlocution ;” Bacon, Essay 32, Of Discourse. =
F. interlocution, ‘an interlocution, interposition ;’ Cot.=—L. inter-
locutiOnem, acc. of interlociitio.—L. inter, between; and locitus, pp.
of logui, to speak; see Inter- and Loquacious, Der. So also
interlocut-or, Bp. Taylor, Great Exemplar, pt. iii.s. 11 (R.), from
L. inter and loctitor, a speaker; interlocut-or-y.

INTERLOPHER, an intruder. (Hybrid; L.andE.) ‘ Interlopers
in trade ;? Minsheu’s Dict., ed. 1627. ‘Interlopers, leapers or runners
between; it is usually applied to those merchants that intercept the
trade or traffick. of a company, and are not legally authorised ;’
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. inter, between; and E. dial. Joper,
a.runner (as in Jand-loper), from E. dial. lope, dial. form of E. leap.
SeeInter- andLeap; andseeHlope. 4 Low G.and Du.enterloper
are said to be from E. Der. interlope, vb., coined from the sb.

INTERLUDE, a short piece played between the acts of a play.
(L.) In Shak. Mids. Nt. Dr.i. 2.6; and in G. Douglas, ed. Small,
y. i. p. 45, 1. 18. ME. enterlude, Gawaine and G. Knight, 472;
entyrlude, Rob. of Brunne, Handlyng Synne, 8993. = Anglo-Lat. inter-
lidium (Ducange). Coined from L. inter, between; and liidus, a play,
or liidere, to play; see Inter- and Ludicrous. Der. interlud-er.

INTERLUNAR, between the moons, (L.) ‘ Hid in her vacant
interlunar cave ;’ Milton, Samson Agon., 89. Applied to the time
when the moon, about to change, is invisible. Coined from L. inter,
between ; and liza, moon. See Inter- and Lunar.

INTERMARRY, to marry amongst. (Hybrid ; L.andF.) See
examples in R. from Bp. Hall and Swift. Coined from L. iner,
amongst ; and marry, of F. origin; see Inter- and Marry. Der.
intermarri-age.

INTERMEDDLE, to mingle, meddle, mix with. (F.—L.)
ME. entermedlen; ‘Was entermedled ther among;’” Rom. of the
Rose, 906.—OF. entremedler, a variant of entremesler, ‘to inter-
mingle, interlace, intermix;’ Cot. [For this variation, see mesler,
medler, in Godefroy.]=OF. entre, from L. inter, among; and OF.
medler, to meddle. See Inter- and Meddle. Der. intermeddl-er.

INTERMEDIATE, intervening. (F.—L.) In Kersey, ed.
1715.—F. intermediat, ‘that is between two;’ Cot.—L. inter, be-
tween; and medidtus, pp. of mediare, to halve. See Inter- and
Mediate. Der. intermediate-ly.

INTERMINABLE, endless, (L.) In Chaucer, tr. of Boethius,
b. v. pr. 6, 1. 29.—L. interminabilis, endless.—L. in-, not; and
terminaire, to terminate, from terminus, an end. See In- (3) and
Term. Der. interminabl-y, interminable-ness.

INTERMINGLE, to mingle together. (Hybrid; L. and E.)
In Shak. Oth. iii. 3. 25; earlier, in Surrey, tr. of Virgil, Ain. b. iv.
1. 691. From L. inter, amongst; and mingle. See Inter- and
Mingle.

INTERMIT, to interrupt, cease for a time. (L.) In Shak. Jul.
Ces. i. 1. 59. —L. intermittere, to send apart, interrupt.—L, inter,
between ; and mittere, to send; see Inter- and Missile. Der.
intermilt-ent, aS in ‘ an intermittent ague,’ Holland, tr. of Ammianus,
p- 420, from the pres. part. ; cnztermitt-ing-ly; also intermiss-ion,
Macb. iv. 3. 232, from F. intermission (Cot.) < L. intermissidnem,
acc. of intermissio, allied to intermissus, pp. of intermittere; inter-
miss-ive, 1 Hen. VI, i. 1. 88. -

INTERMIX, to mix together. (L.) Shak. has intermixed; Rich.
II, v. 5. 12. Coined from L. inter, among, and mix, of L. origin;
see Inter- and Mix, Der. inter-mixture, from inter- and mixture,
q: ve


INTERSTICE 305


INTERNAL, being in the interior, domestic, intrinsic. (L.)
In Spenser, F. Q. iii. 10.59. Coined, with suffix -al, from L. internus,
inward; extended from inter-,inward; see Interior. Der. internal-
ly, Allied to denizen, q.v., entrails, q.v.

INTERN, to confine within certain limits. (F.—L.) Modern.
=F. interner, to relegate into the interior (Hamilton). = F, interne,
internal. —L. internus (above).

INTERNECINE, thoroughly destructive. (L.) ‘ Internecine
war;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. i. c. 1.1. 774. —L. internecinus, thoroughly
destructive.—L. interneci-o, utter slaughter.—L. inter, thoroughly
(see Lewis) ; and necdre, to kill. See Inter- and Necromaney.

INTERPELLATION, an interruption, summons, hindrance.
(F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. —F. interpellation, ‘ an interruption,
disturbance ;” Cot.—L. interpellatidnem, acc. of interpellatio, an in-
terruption, hindrance; cf. interpellatus, pp. of interpellaire, to drive
between, hinder.=L, inter, between; and jpellere, to drive; see
Inter- and Pulsate.

INTERPOLATE, to insert a spurious passage. (L.) ‘Although
you admit Ceesar’s copy to be therein not interpolated;’ Drayton,
Polyolbion, s. 10; Illustrations (end), —L. interpolitus, pp. of inter-
polare, to furbish up, patch, interpolate.—L. interpolus, inter polis,
polished up. —L. inter, between, here and there ; and folire, to polish.
See Inter- and Polish. Der. interpolat-ion, from F. interpolation,
‘a polishing ;? Cot.

INTERPOSEH, to put between, thrust in, mediate. (F.—L. and
Gk.) In Shak. Jul. Cees. ii. 1. 98. —F. interposer, ‘to interpose, to
put or set between;’ Cot. See Inter- and Pose. Der: interpos-er,
Merch. Ven. iii. 2. 329.

INTERPOSITION, intervention, mediation. (F.—L.) ‘By
reason of the often izterposicion ;? Sir T. More, Works, p. 1291 d.=
F. interposition, ‘an interposition, or putting between;’ Cot. See
Inter- and Position (which is zot from pose).

INTERPRET, to explain, translate. (F.—L.) ME. interpreten,
Wyclif, 1 Cor. xiv. 273 interpretour is in verse 28.—F, interpreter,
‘to interpret ;’ Cot.—L. interpretari, to expound. =L. interpret-, stem
of interprés, an interpreter; properly an agent, broker, factor, go-
between. B. Of uncertain origin; the former part of the word is
L. inter, between; the base -pret- is perhaps allied to L. pretium,
price. Der. interpret-able, interpret-er (in Wyclif, as above); also
(ef. L. pp. interpretatus) interpretat-ion =F. interpretation, ‘ an inter-
pretation’ (Cot.) 3 interpretat-ive, inter pretat-ive-ly.
INTERREGNUM, an interval between two reigns. (L.) ‘Zn-
terreign or Interregnum;’ Kersey, ed, 1715.—L. interregnum. =L.
inter, between ; and regnum, a reign, rule. See Inter- and Reign.
INTERROGATE, to examine by questions, question. (L.) In
Minsheu, ed. 1627. Shak. has interrogatory, K. John, iii. 1. 147;
shortened to intergatories, Merch. Ven. v. 298. —L. interrogatus, pp.
of interrogare, to question. L. inter, thoroughly (see Lewis) ; and
rogare, to ask; see Rogation. Der. interrogat-or, interrogat-or-y ;
interrogat-ion =F. interrogation, ‘an interrogation’ (Cot.), from L.
acc. interrogatidnem; interrogat-ive, from L. interrogitiuus ; inter-
rogat-ive-ly.

TERRUPT, to break in amongst, hinder, divide continuity.
(L.) ‘Your tale for to interrupte or breke;’ Hoccleve, De Regimine
Principum, 1. 1231.—L. interruptus, pp. of interrumpere, to burst
asunder, break up, hinder.—L. inter, between; and rumpere, to
break. See Inter- and Rupture. Der. interrupt-ed-ly, inter-
rupt-ive, interrupt-ive-ly; also interruption, ME. interrupcioun, Gower,
C. A.i. 37 (prol. 985) =F. interruption (Cot.), from L. acc. inter-
ruptionem.

INTERSECT, to cut between, cross as lines do. (L.) ‘Inter-
secteth not the horizon;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. vi. c. 7. § 4.
—L. intersectus, pp. of intersecdre, to cut apart.—L. inter, between,
apart; and secdre, to cut. See Inter- and Section. Der. inter-
sect-ion.

INTERSPERSE, to disperse amongst, set here and there. (L.)
‘Interspersed, bestrewed, scattered or sprinkled between ;’ Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. interspersus, pp. of interspergere, to sprinkle
amongst.=L, inter, amongst; and spargere, to scatter; see Sparse.
Der. interspers-ion.

INTERSTELLAR, lit. between the stars. (L.) ‘The izéer-
stellar sky;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 354. Coined from L. inter,
amongst; and E. stellar, adj. dependent on L. séella, a star; see
Stellar.

INTERSTICE, a slight space between things set closely
together. (F.—L.) ‘For-when the airy interstices are filled;’
Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 5. § 14.— MF. interstice, in use
in the 16th century; Littré. —L. interstitium, an interval of space. =
L. inter, between ; and status, pp. of sistere, to place, a causal verb
formed from stdre, to stand; see State. Der. interstiti-al, from L.
interstiti-um.

x


306 INTERTWINE


INTERTWINE, to twine amongst. (Hybrid; L. and E.) In
Milton, P. R. iv. 405. From L. inter, amongst; and E. Twine,
qv. ¥&f So also inter-twist.

INTERVAL, a space or period between. (F.—L.) ME. inter-
ualle, Chaucer, C. T. (B 2723).— OF, intervalle, ‘an interval ;’ Cot.
— L. interuallum, lit, the space between two palisades; or the space
within the breastwork of a camp.=—L. inter, between; and wallum,
a rampart, whence E, wall. See Inter- and Wall.

INTERVENE, to come between, interpose. (F.—L.) In
Bacon, Ady. of Learning, bk. i. 4: 1.—F. intervenir, ‘to interpose
himselfe ;’ Cot. —L. interuenire, to come between. = L. inter, between ;
and uenire, to come, cognate with E. Come,gq.y. Der. inter-
vent-ion=F, intervention, ‘an intervention’ (Cot.), from L. ace.
interuentionem, allied to L. pp. interuentus,

INTERVIEW, a mutual view or sight, a meeting. (F.—L.}
In Shak. L. L. L. ii. 167; spelt exterveue in 1520; Royal Letters,
ed. Ellis, i. 166, = OF. enxtrevue (Supp. to Godefroy), a verbal sb. allied
to entreveu, pp. of entrevoir; cf. ‘s’entrevoir, to behold or visit one
another 3’ Cot. F. entre, from L. inter, between; and OF. vez, pp.
of voir, from L. widére, to see; see View.

INTERWEAVE, to weave together. (Hybrid; L. and E.)
The pp. interwoven is in Milton, P. R. ii. 263. Coined from L. inter,
between; and Weave, q.v.

INTESTATE, without a will. (L.) ‘Or dieth intestate ;’
P. Plowman, B. xv. 134.—L. intestatus, that has made no testament
or will.=L. iz-, not; and zestdtus, pp. of testari, to be a witness, to
make a will; see Testament. Der. intestac-y.

INTESTINE, inward, internal. (F.—L.) In Shak. Com.
Errors, i. 1. 11.—F. intestin, ‘intestine, inward ;’ Cot.=—L, intestinus,
adj. inward, . Formed from L. intus, adv. within; cognate with
Gk. évrés, within. ‘These are extensions from L. in, Gk, év, in; see
In. Der. intestines, pl. sb., in Kersey, ed. 1715, from F. intestin,
“an intestine’ (Cot.), which is from L. intestinum, neut. of intestinus.
Also intestin-al, from F, intestinal (Cot.). Cf. Entrails.

INTHRAL, the same as Enthral, q.v., but with E. prefix.
(E.) Spelt inthrall in Kersey, ed. 1715; and in Phineas Fletcher,
Purple Island, c. 5. st. 7. Der. inthral-ment,

INTIMATE (1), to announce, hint. (L.) In Shak. L. L. L. ii,
129. Properly a pp., as: ‘their enterpryse was intimate and pub-
lished to the kyng;’ Hall’s Chron. Hen, IV, an. 1. § 11.—L, inti-
matus, pp. of intimare, to bring within, to announce.=L. intimus,
innermost; superl, corresponding to comp. interior; see Interior.
Der. intimat-ion, from F. intimation, ‘an intimation;’ Cot, And
see Intimate (2).

INTIMATS (2), familiar, close. (L.) The form of this word
is due to confusion with the word above. A better form is intime,
as in: ‘requires an intime application of the agents;’ Digby, On
Bodies, b. 5. s. 6. This is MF. intime, ‘inward, secret, hearty,
especiall, deer, intirely affected’ (Cot.), from L. intimus, innermost,
closely attached, intimate; see above. Der. intimate-ly, intimac-y.

INTIMIDATS, to frighten. (Late L.—L.) . In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. [Probably suggested by MF. intimider, ‘to fear, to skare ;’
Cot.]—Late L. intimidatus, pp. of intimidare, to frighten; in the
Acta Sanctorum (Ducange).=—L. in-, intensive prefix, from the prep.
in; and timidus, timid, fearful; see Timid. Der. intimidat-ion,
from F. intimidation, ‘a fearing, a skaring ;’ Cot.

INTITULED, entitled. (F.—L.) In Shak. L. L. L. v. 1. 8;
and in Caxton, Godefroy of Bologne, rubric to ch. 1.—F. intitulé,
‘intitled or intituled,’ Cot.; intituler, ‘ to intitle, id. See Entitle.

INTO, prep. denoting passage inwards, (E.) ME. into, Chaucer,
C. T. 2431 (A 2429); Layamon, 5150.—AS,. iz 10 (two words),
where iz is used adverbially, and 70 is the preposition. Cf. up Zo,
down to. ‘Ne ga pi mid pinum esne zz 40 dome’ =go not thou into
judgment [lit. 7zwards to judgment] with thy servant; Psalm cxlii. 2
(metrical version) ; Grein, ii. 140. See In and To,

INTOLERABLE, not tolerable. (F.—L.) ‘For lenger to
endure it is intollerable ;? Lament of Mary Magdalen, st. 54; and
see st, 10.—F. intolerable, ‘intollerable ;’ Cot.—L. intolerabilis ; see
In- (3) and Tolerable. Der. intolerabl-y, intolerable-ness. So
also in-tolerant, a late word, in Todd’s Johnson; intolerance=F. in-
tolerance, ‘impatiency,’ Cot.

INTOMB, the same as Entomh, (F.—L.—Gk.; with E. prefix.)
In Shak. Macb. ii. 4. 9 (first folio).

INTONE, to chant. (Late L.—L. and Gk.) Formerly entone
(from OF. entoner); G. Douglas, tr. of Virgil, bk, vii. ch, 12. 5.
“Ass intones to ass;’ Pope, Dunciad, ii. 253.—Late L. intondare, to
sing according to tone.=L. in tonum, according to tone; where
tonum is acc. of tonus, not a true L. word, but borrowed from Gk.
tovos; see Tone. Der. inton-at-ion. @] Note that intonation was
also formerly used in the sense of ‘loud noise.’ Thus Minsheu
(ed. 1627) has: ‘Intonation, loud noise or sound, a thundering.’


INTROSPECTION


‘This is from the classical L. intondre, to thunder forth, compounded-


of iz (used as intensive prefix) and tondre, to thunder, which is from |
OL. tonus, thunder. See Thunder. : :

INTOXICATE, to make drunk. (Late L.—L. and Gk.) In,
Shak. Hen, V, iv. 7. 39. ntoxycat in Palsgrave. Lydgate has.
intoxycate=invenomed, Troy-Book, bk. ii. c. 24; fol. Q2, back,
col. 1. Used asa pp. in Fryth’s Works, p. 77: ‘their mynde is so.
intoxicate.’ = Late L. intoxicatus, pp. of intoxicdre, to poison. L. iz,
into; and /oxicum, poison, a word borrowed from Gk. rofixdy, poison
in which arrows were dipped, from rdfov, a bow; of which the pl.
7oéa=(1) bow and arrows, (2) arrows only. Der. intoxicat-ion.

INTRA., prefix, within. (L.) L. intra, on the inside, within;
for *intera, abl. fem. of *interus, whence the compar. interi-or ; see
Interior.

INTRACTABLE, not tractable. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627.—F. intractable, ‘intractable ;’ Cot. —L. intractabilis. See In-
(3) and Tractable, Trace. Der. intractabl-y, intractable-ness.

INTRAMURAL, within the walls. (L.) Modern; not in
Todd’s Johnson.—L. intra, within; and mirus, a wall; see
Mural.

INTRANSITIVE, not transitive. (L.) In Kersey, ed. 1715.
= L. intransitiuus, that does not pass over to another person; used
of verbs in grammar. See In- (3) and Transitive. Der. intrans-
itive-ly. Pa

INTREAT, the same as Entreat. (F.—L.; with E. prefix.)
Minsheu, ed. 1627, gives both spellings; and see the Bible Word-
book and Nares. Spelt intreate in Palsgrave.

INTRENCH, the same as Entrench, (F.—L.; with E. prefix.)
In Shak. 1 Hen. VI, i. 4.9. Der. intrench-ment. :

INTREPID, dauntless, brave. (L.) ‘That quality [valour]
which signifies no more than an intrepid courage;’ Dryden; Dedic.
to Virgil’s Aineid. = L. intrepidus, fearless. —L. in-, not; and drepidus,
restless, alarmed; see In- (3),and Trepidation. Der. intrepid-ly ;
intrepid-i-ty, Spectator, no. 122.

INTRICATE, perplexed, obscure. (L.) In Shak. Com. Errors,
v. 269, ‘ With mundane affections intricate;’ Roy, Rede me, ed.
Arber, p. gt, 1. 15.—L. intricdtus, pp. of intricadre, to perplex, embar-
rass, entangle. =—L. iz, in; and ¢rice, pl. sb., hindrances, vexations,
wiles (whence also Extricate). Der. intricate-ly, intricate-ness ;
intricac-y, Milton, P. L. viii. 182. And see Intrigue.

INTRIGUE, to form secret plots. (F.—Ital.—L.) Untriguing
fops ;? Dryden, Absalom and Achitophel, pt. ii]. 521.—F. intriguer,
formerly also spelt zntriquer, ‘to intricate, perplex, pester, insnare ;”
Cot. Ital. intrigare, ‘to intricate, entrap ;” Florio.=L. intricare, to
perplex; see above, Der. intrigue, sb.; intrigu-er,

INTRINSIC, inward, .genuine, inherent. (F.—L.) A mistake
for intrinsec. Intrinsecal was formerly in use, as in Minshen, ed.
1624. Shak. has intrinse, K. Lear, ii. 2. 81 ; and inétrinsicate, Antony,
Vv. 2. 307. ‘Intrinsecal or Intrinsick, inward or secret ;’ Kersey, ed.
1715.— MF. intrinseque, ‘intrinsecal, inward ;’ Cot.—L. intrinsecus,
inwards; lit. following towards the inside.—L. *intrim, allied to
intr-G, within; and secus, lit. following, connected with L. secundus,
second, and segui, to follow. Brugmann, i. § 413 (2). See Intra--
and Second. 4 Similarly Extrinsic, q.v. Der. intrinsic-al
(for intrinsec-al), intrinsic-al-ly.

INTRO., prefix, within. (L.) L. intro, an adv. closely allied to
L. intra, within ; from ixterus, inner. See Interior.

INTRODUCE, to lead or conduct into, bring into notice or use.
(L.) ‘ With whiche he introduceth and bringeth his reders into a false
ynderstanding;”’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 341 e. ‘ Who hath intro-
duced the[e] to do this;” Caxton, Troy-book, fol. 248, 1, 5.—L.
introdiicere, pp. intrdductus, to bring in.—L. in¢ré, short for interd,
orig. abl. of interus, inward (see Interior); and diicere, to lead;
see Duke. Der. introduct-ion, Chaucer, C. T. 16854 (G 1386),
from F. introduction<L. acc. introductibnem (nom. introductio) ;
introduct-ive; introduct-or-y, Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, prol. 733
introduct-or-i-ly.

INTROIT, an antiphon sung as the priest approaches the altar.
(F.—L.) ‘The introyte of the masse ;’ Caxton, Golden Legend;
The Purification, § last. OF. introtte, F. introi¢ (Hatzfeld).—L.
introitum, acc. of introitus, lit. ‘entrance.’ = L. introitus, pp. of introire,
to enter. = L. intrd, within ; ire, to go.

INTROMISSION, a letting in, admission. (L.) ‘Zntromission,
a letting in;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, A rare word. Formed,
by analogy with F. sbs. in -ion, from intrdmissum, supine of the -
verb intrdmittere, to introduce. —L. intrd, within (see Introduce) ;
and mittere, to send; see Mission, Der, Sometimes the verb
intromit is used, but it is not now common.

INTROSPECTION, a looking into. (L.) In Kersey, ed,
1715, Formed, by analogy with F. sbs. in -ion, from L. acc. in-
trospectionem, from nom. introspectio, a looking into.—L. intrd,


age


INTRUDE


within (see Introduce); and the base spec-; cf. spectus, pp. of
specere, to look; see Spy.

INTRUDE, to thrust oneself into. (L.) In Hamlet, iii. 4. 31.
—L. intriidere, to thrust into, obtrude (oneself), —L. iz, into; and
tradere, to thrust. See Thrust. Der. inirud-er; also intrus-ion,
Sir T. More, Works, p. 640 b=F. intrusion, § an intrusion’ (Cot.),
allied to L. pp. intriisus 3 intrus-ive, Thomson, Liberty, pt. i. 1. 299;
intrus-ive-ly, intrus-ive-ness, L
INTRUST, to give in trust, commit to one’s care. (Scand.; with
E. prefix.) Sometimes entrust, but intrust is much better, as being
purer English; the latter part of the word being of Scand. (not F.)
origin. In Dryden, Character of a Good Parson, 1. 57. Com-
pounded of In and Trust.

INTUITION, a looking into, ready power of perception.
(F.—L.) Used by Bp. Taylor in the sense of ‘looking upon ;’
Great Exemplar, pt. i.s. 36; and Rule of Conscience, b. iv. c. 2 (R.).
[Intuitive is in Cotgrave, and in Milton, P. L. v. 488.]—MF. (and F.)
intuition (Hatzfeld). Formed by analogy with tuition; allied to L.
intuitus, pp. of intuéri, to look upon. —L. in, wpon ; and tieri, to look ;
see Tuition, Tutor. Der. intuit-ive=F. intuitif, ‘intuitive’ (Cot.) ;
intuit-ive-ly,

INTUMESCENCEH, a swelling. (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. —F. intumescence, ‘a swelling, puffing ;’ Cot. Formed (as
if from a Late L. *intumescentia), from L. intumescent-, stem of pres.
pt. of intumescere, to begin to swell. —L. iz, used intensively ; and
éumescere, inceptive form of twmére, to swell. See Tumid.

INTWINE, another form of Entwine, q. v. (E.) Really a better
form, as being purer English. . Qf So also in-twist ; see Entwist.

INUNDATION, an overflowing of water, a flood. (L.) In
Palsgrave; and in Shak. K. John, v. 1. 12; v. 2. 48. [Imitated
from F. inondation.|—L. inundatidnem, acc. of inundatio, an over-
flowing ; cf. inundatus, pp. of inundare, to overflow, spread over in
waves.—L, iz, upon, over; and unda, a wave. See Undulate.
Der. inundate, vb., really suggested by the sb., and of later date.
INURE, to habituate, accustom. (F.—L.) In Shak. Tw. Nt. ii.
5. 160. Also enure,as in Spenser, F. Q. iv. 2. 29; v. 9. 393 Vi. 8. 143
and Sonnet 14, 1. 7. ‘A fayre company, and well enxewred to the
warre;’ Caxton, Four Sons of Aymon, ch. viii. p. 187.—OF.
enovrer, to work ; whence pp. enxovré %, employed in. —L. inoperdre,
to effect ; from in, in, and operare, to work, from opera, work. See
Operate. B. The word may have also been influenced by the
phrase ix (F. en) ure, i.e. in operation, in work, in employment ;
which was formerly common. ‘Thus, in Ferrex and Porrex, Act iy.
sc. 2, we have: ‘And wisdome willed me without protract [delay]
In speedie wise to put the same in wre,’ i.e. ix operation, not in use ;
see the passage in Morley’s Library of Eng. Literature, Plays, p. 59,
col. 1. And again, ‘I wish that it should streight be put ix wre ;’
id. Act v. sc. I, sy. Hence was also formed the verb to wre, used
in the same sense as inure. ‘Ned, thou must begin Now to forget
thy study and thy books, And wre thy shoulders to an armout’s
weight ;” Edw. III, Act i. sc. 1, 1. 159 (in the Leopold Shakspere,
p- 1038). 8. The etymology of ure is from the OF. ovre, oevre,
ueure, eure, work, action, operation. [Mr. Wedgwood well remarks
upon the similar sound-changes by: which the F, man-ceuvre has
become the E. man-ure.]| Der. inure-ment (rare).  - The word
ure here treated of is quite distinct from ME. wre, fate, destiny, luck,
as used in Barbour’s Bruce, i. 312, ii. 434, &c.; see glossary to my
edition.” In this case, ure is the OF. eur, aur (mod. F. heur in bon-
heur), from L. augurium; see Augur.

INURN, to put into a sepulchral urn. (F.—L.; or L.) In Shak.
Hamlet, i. 4. 49. See In- (1) and Urn.

INUTILITY, uselessness. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave,=—F. inutilité,
‘inutility ;” Cot.—L. inatilitatem, from nom. inutilitas. See In- (3)
and Utility.

INVADE, to enter an enemy’s country, encroach upon. (F.—L.)
“And streight imuade the town;’ Lord Surrey, tr. of Aneid, b. ii.
1. 336.—F. invader, ‘to invade;’ Cot.—L. inudidere, to go into,
enter, invade.—L. im, in, into; and uddere, to go. See Wade.
Der. invad-er; invas-ion, K. John, iv. 2. 173=F. invasion, ‘an
invasion’ (Cot.), from L. inudsionem, acc. of inudsio; cf. pp. inudsus;
also invas-ive, K. John, v. I. 69.

INVALID, not valid. (L.; or F.—L.) <A. Accented invalid,
Milton, P. L. viii. 116. = L. inualidus (below). B. Accented invalid,
and pronounced as a F. word, when used asasb. ‘ As well stow’d
with gallants as with ixvalids;’ Tatler, no. 16.—F. invalide, ‘im-
potent, infirme;’ Cot.—L. inualidus, not strong, feeble. —L. in-, not ;
and ualidus, strong; see Walid. Der. invalid-ate, Burnet, Own Time,
an. 1680 (R.) ; ixvalid-at-ion ; invalid-i-ty.

‘INVALUABLE, that cannot be valued. (F.—L.) ‘For rare-
ness of invaluable price ;? Drayton, Moses, his Birth and Miracles,
bk, i. 1. 550. From In- (3) and Valuable. Der. ixvaluabi-y.


INVIDIOUS 307
INVARIABLE, not variable. (F.—L.) In Sir T. Browne,


Vulg. Errors, b. i. c. 6, § last. =F. invariable, ‘unvariable ;’ Cot.
From In- (3) and Variable. Der. invariabl-y, invariable-ness.

INVASION, an entry into an enemy’s country. (F.—L.) See
Invade.

INVECKED, INVECTED, in heraldry, the reverse of
engrailed, said of an edge indented with successive cusps. (L.)
Formerly used with a slightly different meaning; see the diagram
in the Boke of St. Albans, pt. ii. fol. d 4 (1486). Lit. ‘ carried in.’
—L. inwectus, carried inwards, pp. of inuehere (below).

INVEIGH, to attack with words, rail. (L.) In Shak. Lucrece,
1254. The close connexion of inveigh with the sb. invective at once
points out the etymology. In this word, the L. k is expressed by
the guttural gh, just as the AS. hk was replaced by the same com~
bination; see Matzner, Eng. Gram. i. 149. Cf. Span. invekir, to
inveigh.—L. inuehere (pp. inuwectus), to carry into or to, to intro-
duce, attack, inveigh against.—L. iz, into; and wehere, to carry;
see Vehicle. Der. invect-ive, sb. from F. invective, ‘an invective’
(Cot.) ; also, as adj., as in ‘inuectyue monycyons,’ Caxton, Eneydos,
ch. 16, p. 65, 1. 1, from L. adj. inwectiuus, scolding, from the pp.
inuectus ; hence invect-ive, adj. ; invect-ive-ly, As You Like It, ii. 1. 58,
Also invecked (above). Also (obs.) izvect, to inveigh, from the pp,
invectus ; as in ‘Fool that I am, thus to invect against her;’ Beau-
mont and Fletcher, Faithful Friends, iii. 3.

INVEIGLE, to seduce, entice. (AF.—L.) ‘ Achilles hath in-
veigled his fool from him ;’ Shak. Troil. ii. 3. 99. ‘ Yet have they
many baits and guileful spells To izveigle and invite the unwary
sense ;” Milton, Comus, 537, 538. And see Spenser, F. Q. i. 12. 32.
‘The sayd duke of Glouceter zzuegelyd so the arbysshop of Caunter-
bury ;’ Fabyan, ed. Ellis, p. 668. [Indirectly from F. aveugler, to
blind; cf. E, aveugle, to cajole, seduce, in Froude’s Hist. v. 132
(A. D. 1547); and State Papers, ix. 287 (A.D. 1543).]— AF. enveoglir,
to blind, in Will. of Wadington’s Manuel des Peches, 1, 10639; and
in N. Bozon. Altered, ignorantly, from F. aveugler, to blind. =F,
aveugle (AF, enveogle in Bozon), adj., blind. = Late L. *aboculum, acc.
of *aboeulus, blind. [Ducange has avoculus, also aboculis, adj.]—L.
ab, without; oculus, eye. 4 Baret (1580) has: ‘inveigle ones
minde, occecare animum.’ Der. inveigle-ment (rare).

INVENT, to find out, devise, feign. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q.
lili. 5. 10; with the sense ‘to find.’ =F. inventer, ‘to invent ;’ Cot.
=—L. inuent-us, pp. of inuenire, to come upon, discover, invent. =L.
iz, upon; and wenire, to come, cognate with E. Come, q.v. Der.
invention, ME. inuencion, Testament of Creseide, st. Io=F. invention,
“an invention” (Cot.), from L. inuentidnem, acc. of inuentio; in-
ventive<F, inventif, ‘inventive’ (Cot.); invent-ive-ly, invent-ive-ness 3
invent-or, ME. inuentor, Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. i. c. 20,
§ 11<F. inventeur, from L. acc. inuentdrem ; invent-or-y, Cor. 1. 1. 21.

INVERSE, inverted, opposite. (F.—L.) ME. invers, Gower,
C.A. ili. 3; bk. vi. 70. —OF. invers, ‘inverse’ (Cot.).—L., inwersus, pp.
of inuertere; see Invert. Der. inverse-ly, invers-ion, Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 15, § 6, formed by analogy with F. sbs. in -ion,
from L. acc. inuersionem.

INVERT, to turn upside down, reverse. (L.) In Shak. Temp.
iii, I. 7o.—L. inuertere, to invert.—L. ix, signifying motion to-
wards, or up; and wertere,to turn. See Verse. Der. invert-ed-ly;
also inverse, q.v.

INVERTEBRATE; see In- (3) and Vertebrate. (L.)

INVEST, to dress with, put in office, surround, lay out money.
(F.—L.) ‘This girdle to invest ;’ Spenser, F. Q. iv. 5, 18.—F. in-
vestir, ‘to invest, inrobe, install;? Cot.—L. inuestire, to clothe,
clothe in or with.=L. zm, in; and westire, to clothe, from westis,
clothing; see Vest. Der. invest-ment, Hamlet, i. 3. 128; invest-i-
ture, in Tyndal’s Works, p. 362 [misnumbered 374]<F. investiture
(Cot.), resembling L. inuestituira, fem. of fut. part. of inuestire.

INVESTIGATE, to track out, search into. (L.) £ She [Pru-
dence] doth ixwestigate and prepare places apt and conuenient ;’ Sir
T. Elyot, The Governour, b. i. c. 22, § 2.—L. inuestigadtus, pp. of
inuestigare, to track out, search into a track.—L. iz, in; and uesti-
gare, to trace. See Vestige. Der. investigat-ion, ME. inuesti-
gacioun, Libell of E. Policy, 1. 9043; investigat-ive, investigat-or,
investigat-or-y ; also investiga-ble. @ Note that investigable also some-
times means ‘unsearchable,’ from L. inuestigabilis, unsearchable
(distinct from inxuestigabilis, that may be investigated) ; where the
prefix zz- has a negative force.

INVETERATE, grown old, firmly established or rooted. (L.)
In Shak. Temp. i. 2. 122; Rich, II, i. 1. 14.—L. inueterdtus, pp. of
inueterare, to retain for a long while. —L. ix, with intensive force ;
and ueter-, decl. stem of wetus, old. See Veteran. Der. inveteraie-ly,
inveterate-ness, inveterac-y.

INVIDIOUS, envious, productive of odium. (L.)  ‘ Invidious
crimes ;’? Dryden, tr. of Virgil, Ain, xi. 518. Formed by analogy

X 2


308 INVIGORATE


with adjectives in -ous (of F. origin) from L. inuididsus, envious,
productive of odium.=—L. inuidia, envy. See Envy. Der. in-
vidious-ly, invidious-ness.

INVIGORATE, to give vigour to. (L.) ‘This polarity...
might serve to invigorate and touch a needle;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. ii. c. 2, § 6. A coined word, formed as if from a L, *in-
uigorare (not found); from in, prefix, and wigor, vigour. See
Vigour.

INVINCIBLE, unconquerable. (F.—L.) In Shak. Cor. iy. 1.
10; and Caxton, Golden Legend, St. Vincent, § last.—F. invincible,
‘invincible;’? Cot.—L. inuincibiliss —L. in-, not; and wincibilis,
vincible. See In- (3) and Vincible. Der, invincibl-y, invincible-
ness, invincibili-ty.

INVIOLABLE, that cannot be violated or profaned. (F.—L.)
In Sir T. More, Works, p. 527 g: and in Spenser, F. Q. iv. 10. 35.
=F. inviolable, ‘inviolable;’ Cot.—L. inuiolabilis.—L. in-, not;
and uiolabilis, that may be violated, from wioldre. See In- (3) and
Violate ; and see below. Der. inviolabl-y, inviolabili-ty,

INVIOLAT#, not profaned. (L.) In Spenser, tr. of Virgil’s
Gnat, 1. 425; ME. inuiolat, Hoccleve, De Regim. Principum,
1, 3696. —L. inuiolatus, unhurt, inviolate. —L. ix-, not; and wiolatus,
pp. of uiolare, to violate; see In- (3) and Violate.
INVISIBLE, that cannot be seen. (F.—L.) ME. inuisible,
Chaucer, Legend of Good Women, 1021; Gower, C. A. ii, 247;
bk. v. 3574.—F. invisible; in Sherwood’s index to Cotgrave. = L.
inuisibilis. See In- (3) and Visible. Der. invisibl-y, invisibili-ty.

INVITE, to ask, summon, allure. (F.—L.) ‘ God inuited men
ynto the folowing of himselfe;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 1205 e.
=F. inviter, ‘to invite;’ Cot.=—L.. inuitére, to ask, bid, request,
invite. Allied to *wit-ws, willing ; as seen in zn-uitus, unwilling ;
Brugmann, i. § 343. Der. invitat-ion, Merry Wives, i. 3. 50< F.
invitation, ‘an invitation,’ Cot. ; énvit-er, invit-ing-ly.

INVOCATEH, to invoke. (L.) In Shak. Rich. III, i. 2. 8.—L.
inuocdtus, pp. of inuocare; see Invoke. Der. invocat-ion, ME. in-
uocacioun, Gower, C. A. iii. 46 (bk. vi. 1329), from F. invocation,
“an invocation’ (Cot.), from L. acc. inmuocationem,

INVOICH, a particular account of goods sent. (F.—L.) ‘Zn-
voice, is a particular of the value, custom, and charges of any goods
sent by a merchant in another man’s ship, and consigned to a factor
or correspondent in another countrey;” Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
The word is certainly a corruption of invoyes, an English plural of
F. envoi, OF. envoy, a sending. See Invoy, an invoice, in N.E.D.
Compare the phrases in Littré : ‘par le dernier envoi; j’ai regu’ = by
the last conveyance, I have received, &c.; ‘j’ai recu votre envoi’
=I have received your last consignment; ‘lettre d’envo/,’ an invoice.
See Envoy. 4 A somewhat similar example occurs in the pro-
nunciation of ‘ bourgeois’ type, called by printers bzrjoice.

INVOKE, to call upon. (F.—L.) ‘ Whilst I invoke the Lord,
whose power shall me defend;’ Lord Surrey, Psalm 55, 1. 27; and
in Shak. Hen. V, i. 2. 104.—F. invoguer, ‘to invoke ;’ Cot.=—L.
inuocare, to call on.—L. im, on; and uwocare, to call, allied to udc-,
stem of wdx, voice; see Voice. Doublet, invocate, q. v.

INVOLUNTARY, not voluntary. (L.) In Pope, Imit. of
Horace, Odes, iy. 1, l. 38; and Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, bk.
jii.c. 1, § 3.—L. inuoluntarius. See In- (3) and Voluntary. Der.
involuntari-ly, involuntari-ness.

INVOLUTEH, involved, rolled inward. (L.) ‘Involute and
Evolute Figures, certain geometrical figures;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. —
L. inuolutus, pp. of inuoluere; see Involve. Der. involution, from
F. involution, ‘an involution, enwrapping, enfolding,’ Cot., from L.
inuoliitionem, acc. of inuolitio, a rolling up.

INVOLVE, to infold, wrap up. (F.—L.) ‘That reuerende
studie is izwolued in so barbarouse a langage;’ Sir T. Elyot, The
Governour, b, i. c. 14, § 1. In Hoccleve, De Regimine Principum,
1. 2657.—F. involver, ‘to involve;’ Cot. —L. inuoluere, to roll in or
up.=—L. im, in; and woluere, to roll; see Voluble. Der. involve-
ment ; involucre, an envelope, from F. involucre, L. inuoluicrum ; and
see Involute.

INVULNERABLE, not vulnerable. (F.—L.) In Spenser,
F.Q. vi. 4. 4.—F. invulnerable, ‘invulnerable ;’ Cot.—L. inuulner-
abilis. See In- (3) and Vulnerable. Der. invulnerabl-y, invulner-
able-ness, invulnerabili-ty.

INWARD, internal. (E.) ME. inward, adj., St. Juliana, p. 44,
1. 12; commonly ady., as in Ancren Riwle, p. 272. [The ady. is
also inwardes, id. p. 92.] AS. inneweard, innanweard, adj.; Grein, i.
143.—AS. innan, inne, adv. within, formed from prep. iz, in; and
suffix -weard, with the notion of ‘towards;’ see Toward, To-
wards. Der. inward-s, adv., where -s answers to ME. adverbial
suffix -es, orig. the inflection of the gen. case; inward-ly, AS. in-
weardlice; Grein, i. 144. Also inwards, sb. pl., Milton, P. L. xi.


439-


IRON


INWEAVE, to weave in, intertwine. (E.) Milton has inwove,
P. L. iii, 3525 inwoven, P. L. iv. 693. Compounded of In- (1) and
Weave.

INWRAP, the same as Enwrap, q.v. (E.)

INWREATHE, to wreathe amongst. (E.) Milton has in-
wreath’d, P. L. iii. 361. From In- (1) and Wreathe.

INWROUGAHT, wrought in or amongst. (E.) ‘ Inwrought with
figures dim;’ Milton, Lycidas, 105. From In- (1) and Wrought,
i.e. worked.

IODINE, an elementary body, in chemistry. (Gk.) First in
1814. So named from the violet colour of its vapour. Formed,
with suffix -ime (asin chlor-ine, brom-ine), from Gk. iw5-ns, contr. form
of ioedys, violet-coloured.—Gk. to-v, a violet; and «7?5-os, appear-
ance. See Violet andIdyl. Der. iod-ide.

IOTA, a jot. (Gk.) The name of the Gk. letters. See Jot.

ITPECACUANHA, a medicinal West-Indian root. (Port.—
Brazilian.) So defined in Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1731.— Port.
ipecacuanha, given in the Eng.-Port. part of Vieyra’s Dict. Cf. Span.
ipecacuana. Both Port. and Span. words are from the Guarani
(Brazilian) name of the plant, ipe-kaa-guavia ; where ipé =peb, small ;
kaa, plant; guava, causing sickness (Cavalcanti). See Notes on E.
Etym., p. 337- 4] Spelt pecacoanha in Historia Naturalis Braziliz,
1648 ; p. 17.

TR- (1), prefix. (L.; or F.—L.) The form assumed by the prefix
in- (=prep. in), when the letter r follows. See In- (2). Exx,;
ir-radiate, ir-rigate, ir-rision, ir-ritate, ir-ruption.

TR- (2), prefix. (L.; or F.—L.) For in-, negative prefix, when the
letter r follows. See In- (3). Exx.: all words beginning with ir-,
except those given under Ir- (1).

IRE, anger. (F,—L.) In Chaucer, C. T. 7587 (D 2005). =F. ire,
‘ire;? Cot.—L. tra, anger (of doubtful origin).. Der. ire-ful, Com.
Errors, vy. 151 ; ir-asc-i-ble, in Palsgrave, from F. irascible, ‘cholerick”
(Cot.), which from L. trascibilis, adj. formed from irasc?, to become
angry ; irascibl-y, irascibili-ty.

IRIS, a rainbow. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. All’s Well, i. 3. 158. —L.
iris, a rainbow.—Gk. Zpis, Iris, the messenger of the gods; fps,
a rainbow (Homer). Root uncertain. Der. irid-esc-ent, a coined
word, as if from pres. part. of a L. verb irid-esc-ere, to become like
a rainbow, formed with inceptive suffix -esc- from irid-, stem of iris
(gen. irid-is) ; hence iridescence ; also iridi-um (from the decl. stem
iridi-). Tris, a flower, is the same word; and see orrice.

IRK, to weary, distress. (E.) Now used impersonally, as in
Shak. As You Like It, ii. 1. 22. A. Formerly used personally.
ME. irken, (1) to make tired, (2) to become tired. Of these, the
transitive (orig.) sense does not often appear, though preserved in
the mod, phrase ‘it irks me,’ and in the word irksome=tiring.
‘ Irkesoum, fastidiosus ; Irkesumnesse, fastidium ; Irkyn, fastidio, acci-
dior;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘The intrans. sense is common. ‘To preche


‘also pow my3t not yrke’=you must not grow weary of preaching ;


Myrc, Instructions for Parish Priests, 526. Jrked =shrank back, drew
back; Gawain and Grene Knight, 1573. ‘Swa pat na man moght
irk withalle’=so that none may grow tired withal; Pricke of Con-
science, 8918. ‘ Men schuld yrke to telle them alle;’ Rob. of Brunne,
Chron. (Rolls Series), 1. 11122. B. We also find ME. irk=tired,
oppressed. ‘ Owre frendis of us wille sone be irke’ =our friends will
soon be tired of us; Sir Isumbras, 118. ‘Syr Arther wos irke,’ i.e.
tired; Anturs of Arthur, st. vi. ‘ Thof he was irk [tired];’ Cursor
Mundi, 6425. Hence jor-hirked, for for-irked, very weary; Gen.
and Exodus, 3658. Palsgrave has: ‘I waxe yrke, Il me ennuye.
C. The verb irken, to be tired, is from the adj. irk, tired, weary,
sluggish; apparently a back-formation from the AS. irgf (which
came to be pronounced as irk-J; cf. length, strength), with the
meaning ‘sluggishness;’ see irg} in Toller. And irgp, iergp was
formed (with suffix -J7) from AS. earg, inert, sluggish, weak, timid ;
cognate with Lowl. Scotch ergh, timid, Icel. arg, Du. erg, G. arg,
cowardly. Cf. G. es drgert mich, it irks me. See Phil. Soc. Trans.
1903, p. 151. Der. irk-some, irk-some-ness, in the Prompt. Parv., as
above.

IRON, a common metal. (E.; or C.) ME. iren, Chaucer, C. T.
502 (A 500); yzen (for isex), Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 139, 1. 31. AS.


‘aren, both adj. and sb., Grein, ii. 145; older form ise, both adj. and


sb., id. 147; also isern, adj., Ailfred, tr. of Gregory, p. 165; shortened
form of *isern-en, as the Goth. form shows.+-Du. izer, formerly
yzer3 Icel. jarn, contracted from the old form isarn; Dan. and Swed.
jern; OHG, isarn; MUG. isern, isen; G. eisen; Goth. eisarn, sb.;
eisarneins, adj. And cf. W. haiarn, Irish iarann, Bret. houarn, iron.
B. The Teut. forms are all from the base *isarno-; and the Celtic
forms are likewise from an OCeltic *isarno-, *eisarno-; see Stokes-
Fick, p. 25. And it is’ suggested that the Teut. forms were bor-
towed from Celtic. Cf. also Goth. aiz, L. aes, brass ; Skt. ayas, iron.
Der. iron-bound, -clad, -founder, -foundry, -grey, -handed, -hearted,


Te aie


IRONMONGER


~master, -mould [see mould (3)], -ware, -work, -witted, Rich. III,
jy. 2, 28. Also tron-monger, q.v.

IRONMONGER, a dealer in iron goods. (E.) In Minsheu’s
Dict., 1627; Pepys’ Diary, Feb. 6, 1668-9; Beaum. and Fletcher,
Cupid’s Revenge, iv. 3; also irenmanger, York Mysteries, p. xxii.
See Iron and Monger. Der. iron-monger-y. ‘

IRONY, dissimulation, satire. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Tronic, a speaking
by contraries, a mocke, a scoffe;’ Minsheu’s Dict., ed. 1627. —F.
ironie (not in Cotgrave, but cited by Minsheu).—L. tronia.—Gk.
eipwveia, dissimulation, irony.—Gk. eipwv, a dissembler, one who
says less than he thinks or means. B. This Gk. word is a pres.
part. from épéw (€tpopat, €pouar), I ask, I question ; and is an Ionic
form. Cf. «ipwréw, Ionic for épwraw, I ask; épevva, enquiry (base
*ren) ; see Prellwitz. Der. ironi-c-al, ironi-c-al-ly.

IRRADIATEH, to throw rays of light upon, light up. (L.) In
Cockeram (1623); Milton, P. L. iii, 53.—L. irradiatus, pp. of
irradiare, to cast rays on. L. ir-=in, on; and radius, a ray. See
Ir- (1) and Ray. Der. irradiat-ion; also irradiant, from stem of.
pres. pt. of irradiare ; irradiance, Milton, P. L. viii. 617.
IRRATIONAL, not rational. (L.) In Milton, P. L. ix. 766,
x. 708 ; and in Henrysoun, The Cock and Fox. =L. irratidndlis. See
Ir- (2) and Rational. Der. irrational-ly, irrational-i-ty.

TRRECLAIMABLE, that cannot be reclaimed. (F.—L.)
First in 1662 (in its present sense). Coined from Ir- (2) and
Reclaim, Der. irreclaimabl-y.

IRRECONCILABLE, that cannot be reconciled. (F.—L.) In
Minsheu, ed. 1627; in Cotgrave; and in Milton, P. L. i. 122.=—F.
irreconciliable, ‘ irreconcilable ;’ Cot. F. ir-<L. ir-=in-, not; and
F. reconcilier, ‘to reconcile;’? Cot. See Ir- (2) and Reconcile.
Der. irreconcilabl-y, irreconcilable-ness.

ITRRECOVERABLE, that cannot be recovered. (F.—L.)
In Shak. 2 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 360. Milton has irrecoverably, Samson
Agon. 81. Coined from zr-, for in-, not; and F. recouvrable, ‘ re-
coverable;’ Cot. See Ir- (2) and Recover. Der. irrecoverabl-y.
Doublet, irrecuperable.

IRRECUPERABULE, irrecoverable. (F.-—L.) ‘Ye [yea],
what trrecuperable damage ;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. i. c. 27.
§ 11.—OF. irrecuperable, ‘unrecoverable ;’ Cot.—L. irrecuperabilis.
—L. ir-=in-, not; and recuperare, to recover. See Ir- (2) and
Recover. Doublet, irrecoverable.

IRREDEEMABLE, not redeemable. (F.—L.) <A coined
word; first in 1609. From Ir- (2) and Redeem. Der. irredeem-
abl-y.

IRREDUCIBLE, not reducible. (L.) In Boyle’s Works, vol.i.


p: 50 (R.); first in 1633. From Ir- (2) and Reduce. Der.
trreducibl-y, irreducible-ness,
IRREFRAGABLE, that cannot be refuted. (F.—L.) In


More’s Works, p. 1031, col. 1; and Minshen, ed. 1627.—MF. irre-
JSragable, ‘irrefragable, unbreakable ;’ Cot.—L. irrefragabilis, not to
be withstood.—L. ir-=in-, not; and refragari, to oppose, thwart,
withstand. 8. Refragdari is of doubtful origin. Perhaps from re-,
back, and frag-, base of frangere, to break ; the orig. sense perhaps
being ‘ to break back ;’ but see Bréal.. See Fragment. 4 The
long a appears also in L. suffragium, prob. from the same root.
Der. irrefragabl-y, irrefragable-ness, irrefragabili-ty.

IRREFUTABLE, that cannot be refuted. (F.—L.) In Kersey,
ed. 1715; first in 1620, From Ir- (2) and Refute. Der. irre-
Sutabl-y- .

IRREGULAR, not regular. (F.—L.) In Shak. K. John, v. 4.
54; and in Cath. Anglicum (1483).—OF, irreguler.L, irréguliris.
See Ir- (2) and Regular. Der. irregular-ly; irregular-i-ty, from
MF. irregularité, ‘ irregularity,’ Cot.

IRRELEVANT, not relevant. (F.—L.) Used by Burke (R.).
From Ir- (2) and Relevant. Der. irrelevant-ly, irrelevance.

IRRELIGIOUS, not religious. (F.—L.) In Shak. Merry
Wives, v. 5. 242.— MF. irreligieux, ‘irreligious ;” Cot. = L. irreligidsus.
See Ir- (2) and Religious. Der. irreligious-ly; irreligious-ness
(Bible Wordbook). So also ir-religion, Holland’s Pliny, b. ii. c. 7,
ed, 1634, p. 41.

IRREMEDIABLE, that cannot be remedied. (F.—L.) In
Minshen, ed. 1627; first in 1547.—MF. irremediable, ‘ remediless ;’
-Cot.—L. irremediabilis.—L. ir-, for in-, not; and remediabilis, reme-
diable, from remedium, a remedy. See Ir- (2) and Remedy.
Der. irremediabl-y, irremediable-ness.

IRREMISSIBLE, that cannot be remitted or forgiven. (F.—L.)
© Your sinne is irremissible ;’ Fryth, Works, p. 3, col. 1.— MF. irremis-
sible, ‘unremittable ;’ Cot.=—L. irremissibilis, unpardonable.. ‘See |
Ir- (2) and Remit. Der. irremissible-ness.

IRREMOVABLE, not removable, firm. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Wint. Tale, iv. 4. 518. Coined from ir-=in-, not; and removable ;
see Ir- (2) and Remove. Der. irremovabl-y.


ISINGLASS 309


IRREPARABLE, that cannot be repaired. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Temp. iv. 140; and Hoccleve, De Regim. Principum, |. 2082. — MF,
irreparable, ‘ irreparable, unrepairable;’ Cot.—L. irreparabilis. See
Ir- (2) and Repair. Der. irreparabl-y, irreparable-ness,

IRREPREHENSIBBLE, free from blame. (F.—L.) In Min-
sheu, ed. 1627; ME. irreprehensyble, Wyclif, 1 Tim. iii. 2 (earlier
text). MF, irreprehensible, ‘irreprehensible, blamelesse ;’ Cot. —L.
irreprehensibilis, unblamable. See Ir- (2) and Reprehend. Der.
irreprehensibl-y, irreprehensible-ness.

IRREPRESSIBLE, not repressible. (F.—L.) Modern; added
by Todd to Johnson. Coined from ir-=in-, not; and repressible.
See Ir- (2) and Repress. Der. irrepressibl-y.

IRREPROACHABLE, not reproachable. (F.—L.) In Kersey,
ed. 17153 first in 1634.— MF. irreprochable, ‘unreprochable;’ Cot. =


F. ir-=in-, not; and MF. reprochable, ‘reproachable;’ Cot. See
Ir- (2) and Reproach. Der. irreproachabl-y,
IRREPROVABLE, not reprovable, blameless. (F.—L.) In


Minsheu, ed. 1627. — MF. irreprovable, ‘unreprovable;’ Cot. See Ir-
(2) and Reprove. Der. irreprovabl-y, irreprovable-ness.

IRRESISTIBLE, that cannot be resisted. (F.—L.) In Milton,
P. L. vi. 63. Coined from Ir- (2) and resistible; see Resist. Der.
irresistibl-y, trresistible-ness, irresistibili-ty.

IRRESOLUTEH, not resolute. (L.) In Shak. Hen. VIII, i. 2.
209; first in 1573. Coined from Ir- (2) and Resolute. Der.
irresolute-ly, irresolute-ness; also irresolut-ion.

IRRESPECTIVE, not respective. (F.—L.) ‘God’s absolute
irrespective decrees of election ;? Hammond, Works, v. i. p. 462 (R.).
From F. ir-=in-, not; and F. respectif, ‘respective ;’ Cot, See
Respect. Der. irrespective-ly.

IRRESPONSIBLE, not responsible, (L.) ‘Such high and
irresponsible licence over mankind;’ Milton, Tenure of Kings (R.).
From Ir- (2) and responsible; see Response. Der. irresponsibl-y,
irresponsibili-ty.

IRRETRIEVABLE, not retrievable. (F.—L.) ‘The con-
dition of Gloriana, I am afraid, is irretrievable;’ Spectator, no. 423.
From F, ir-=in-, not; and retrievable; see Retrieve. Der, irre-
trievabl-y, irretrievable-ness.

IRREVERENT, not reverent. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. L. xii.
Iol.=MF. irreverent, ‘unreverent ;’ Cot.—L. irreuerent-, stem of
irreuerens, disrespectful. L. ir-=in-, not; and rewerens, respectful,
properly pres. part. of rewerérz, to revere. See Revere. Der.
irreverent-ly ; irreverence, Chaucer, C. T. Pers. Tale, De Superbia,
sect.. r (I 391).

IRREVOCABLE, that cannot be recalled. (F.—L.) In
Spenser, F. Q. vi. 2. 15; and in Palsgrave.—F. irrevocable, ‘ irre-
vocable;’ Cot.—L. irrenocabilis.—L. ir-=in-, not ; and reuocabilis,
revocable, from rezocare, to recall. See Revoke. Der. irrevocabl-y,
irrevocable-ness.

TRRIGATE, to water. (L.) ‘Jrrigate, to water ground;’
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. And earlier, in Minsheu, ed. .1627.—L.
irrigGtus, pp. of irrigadre, to moisten, irrigate, flood.=—L. ix, upon,
or as an intensive prefix; and rigare, to wet, moisten. Der. irrigat-
ion; also irrig-u-ous, Milton, P. L. iv. 255, from L. irriguus, adj.
irrigating, allied to irrigare.

ITRRISION, mocking, scorn. (F.—L.) Rare; in Minsheu, ed.
1627. —MF. irrision, ‘ irrision, mocking ;” Cot.—L. irrisidnem, acc.
from irrisio, a deriding; cf. irrisus, pp. of irridére, to laugh at.—
L. ir-=in, at; and ridére, to laugh. See Risible.

IRRITATEH, to provoke. (L.) ‘Zrritate [provoke] the myndes
of the dauncers;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. i. c. 19.—L.
irritatus, pp. of irritére, perhaps, to cause to snarl, also to pro-
voke, tease, irritate. B. Prob. a frequentative from irrire, also
spelt Zirrire, to snarl as a dog, which seems to be an imitative word.
Der. irritat-ion=F. irritation, ‘an irritation’ (Cot.), from L. acc.
irritationem ; irritat-ive, irritat-or-y; irrit-ant, from the stem of pres,
pt. of irritare; also irrit-able, in Minsheu, ed. 1627, from L.
irritabilis ; irrit-abl-y, irrit-able-ness, irrit-abili-ty.

IRRUPTION, a bursting in upon, sudden invasion. (F.—L.)
‘An irruption, or violent bursting in;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627. =F. irrup-
tion, ‘an irruption, a forcible entry ;’ Cot.=L. irruptionem, acc, of
irruptio, a bursting into. = L.ir-=in, in, upon; and rupzio, a bursting ;
cf. ruptus, pp. of rumpere, to burst. See Rupture. Der. irrupt-ive,
irrupt-ive-ly, from pp. irruptus of irrumpere, to burst in.

IS, the 3 pers. pres. of the verb substantive. (E.) AS. is; see
further under Are, Essence,

ISINGLASS, a glutinous substance made from a fish. (Du-)
‘Ising-glass, a kind of fish-glue brought from Island [Iceland], us’d
in medicines;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715. Spelt ison-glass in 1662
(N. E. D.). A singular perversion of MDu. huyzenblas, mod. Du,
huisblad. ‘Isinglass, huyzenblas;’ Sewel’s Eng.-Du. Dict.; 1754.
The lit. sense is ‘ sturgeon-bladder;’ isinglass being obtained from


310 eo) SLAM


the bladdér of the sturgeon (Accipenser sturio).—MDu. huys, a stur-
geon; blaese, a bladder (Kilian).4-G. hausenblase, isinglass; from
hausen, a kind of sturgeon (answering to MDu. huyzen); and blase
(=Dnu. blas), a bladder, from blasen, to blow, allied to E. Blast.

ISLAM, the religions system of Mohammed. (Arab.) ‘The
revolt of Islam ;’ Shelley. — Arab. islam, lit. ‘ submission,’ or ‘ resigna-
tion.’ Arab. root salama, he was resigned; whence also salaam,
Moslem, Mussulman..

ISLAND, an isle, land surrounded by water. (E.) The s is
ignorantly inserted, owing to confusion with isle, a word of F. origin ;
see below. In Spenser, F. Q. ii. 6. 11, the word is spelt island in
the Globe edition, but i/and in the passage as quoted in Richardson.
ME. iland, ilond, yland, ylond; spelt ylond in Octovian Imperator,
1. 539 (Weber’s Met. Romances, iii. 179); élond, Layamon, 1. 1133
(later text). AS. igland, Grein, ii. 136. B. The AS. ig-land is
compounded of ig, an island, and Jand, land; prob. by association
with éa-land, an island, from éa, water. Grein (ii, 136) gives ig, ieg
as equivalent forms, with references; the word is also written ég in
Mercian (id. i. 233); and in Eng. local names appears as -ea or -ey,
as in Batters-ea, Aldern-ey, Angles-ey. y. Cognate words are: Du.
eiland,an island, formerly written eyland (Sewel); Icel. eyland; Swed.
éland, used as a proper name for an island in the Baltic Sea; G.
eiland. 8. Dropping the syllable -land, we also find AS. 2g, ieg,
Mercian @g (as above); Icel. ey, an island; Dan. and Swed. 6, an
island; also G. aue, a meadow near water, All from Teut. *agwia,
fem. of *agwioz, adj., belonging to water; an adj. formed from Teut.
*ahwa, water, represented by AS. éa, OHG. aha, Goth. ahwa, astream,
cognate with L. agua, water. See Aquatic, Thus the AS, éa sig-
nifies ‘ water ;’ whence ieg’, 7g, ‘a place near water,’ lit. ‘ aqueous ;”
and ig-land, an island. ‘Der. island-er, Temp. ii. 2. 37.

ISLE, an island. (F.—L.) Quite distinct from the E. island, in
which the s was ignorantly inserted. It is singular that, in the word
isle, the s was formerly dropped, thus tending still further to confound
the two words. ME. ile, yle; Rob. of Glouc., p. 1, 1. 33 Wyclif,
Deeds [Acts], xxviii. 1.—OF. ille, ile; MF, isle, ‘an isle ;’ Cot. ;
mod. F. ile,=L. insula, an island. See Insular. Der. isl-ez, in
Drayton’s Polyolbion, s. 24, note, from MF, is/eéée, ‘a little island’
(Cot.), a dimin. form. And see isolate.

ISOCHRONOUES, performed in equal times. (Gk.) In Phillips’
Dict., ed. 1706 (s. v. Zsochrone). Imitated from Gk. iséxpovos, con-
sisting of an equal number of times (a grammatical term). —Gk. too-,
for icos, equal; and xpévos, time, whence also E. Chronicle.
B. The Gk. ioos or @aos is perhaps allied to Gk. ef50s, form; Brug-
mann, i. § 345 (c). Cf. Skt. vishu-, adv., equally. Der. isochron-ism.

ISOLATE, to insulate, place in a detached situation. (Ital. —L.)
The word occurs in the Preface to Warburton’s Divine Grace, but
was censured in 1800 as being a novel and unnecessary word (Todd).
And see note in Trench, Eng. Past and Present. Todd remarks,
further, that isolated was properly a term in architecture, signifying
detached. It was thus at first a translation of Ital. zsolato, detached,
separate, formed as an adj. (with pp. form) from isola, an island. =
L. insula, an island; also, a detached house or pile of buildings,
whence insulatus, insulated, answering to Ital. isolato. See Insular.
@ The F. isolé is likewise borrowed from the Ital. zsolato; the E.
word was not taken from F., but directly.from the Italian. Der.
isolat-ion, Doublet, insulate.

ISOSCELES, having two sides equal, as a triangle. (L.—Gk.)
In Phillips’ Dict., ed. 1706.—L. isoscelés. — Gk. iooxedns, with equal
legs or sides. —Gk, igo-, for cos, equal (see Isochronous); and
oKédos, a leg, which see in Prellwitz.

ISOTHERMAL, having an equal degree of heat. (Gk.)
Modern.=—Gk. ico-, for icos, equal; and @épu-n, heat; with adj.
suffix -al, See Isochronous, Thermometer.

ISSUE, that which proceeds from something, progeny, produce,
result. (F.—L.) ME, isswe. ‘To me and to myn issue ;’ P. Plow-
man, C, xix. 259, ‘An issue large;* Chaucer, Troil. v. 205.—OF.
issué, ‘the issue, end, success, event;’ Cot. A fem. form of issz,
‘issued, flowen, sprung, proceeded from;’ pp. of issir, ‘to issue, to
go, or depart out;” id.—L. exire, to go out of; from ex, out, and
ire, to go; see Exit, The F. pp, issu answers to Folk-L. *exitus,
for L. exitus. Der. issue, verb, borrowed from the sb.; ‘we issued
out’ is in Surrey’s tr. of Virgil, where the L. text has ‘ iuuat ire,’
féneid, ii. 27; ME. zswen, Rich. Coer de Lion, 4432. [The ME.
Northern verb was isch, common in Barbour’s Bruce, and borrowed
from the F. vb. issir.] Also issu-er; issue-less, Wint. Ta. v. 1. 174.

ISTHMUS, a neck of land connecting a peninsula with the main-
Jand. (L.—Gk.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627; spelt istmus in Cotgrave, to
translate MF. isthme.—L. isthmus. Gk. ioOpués, a narrow passage,
neck of land; allied to (@ua, a step; from 4/EI, to go.

IT, the neuter of the third personal pronoun. (E.) Formerly also
hit, P. Plowman, A. i, 85, C. ii. 83; but i¢ in the same, B. i. 86.


IWIs


AS. hit, neuter of hé; see He.+Icel. hit, neut. of hinn; Du. het,
neut. of hij; Goth. kita. @@- The gen. case its was just coming
into use in Shakespeare’s time, and occurs in Temp. i. 2. 95, &c.,
but the usual form in Shak. is Ais, as in AS. We also find zé in
Shak. (with the sense of its) in the first folio, in 13 passages, Temp.
ii. 1. 163, &c. See the articles in The Bible Wordbook and in
Schmidt’s Shak. Lexicon.. J¢s.does not once occur in the Bible, ed.

1611, which has z¢ where mod. editions have its in Levit. xxv. 5;
but first appears in Florio’s Ital. Dict. (1598), s.v. Spontaneamente.
The use of hit for his (=its) occurs early, viz. in the Anturs of
Arthur, st. viii. 1. 11, and in Allit. Poems, B. 264. The AS. neuter
form is hit, nom.; his, gen.; him, dat.; hit, acc. Der. it-self; see
Self,

ITALICS, the name given to letters printed thus—in sloping type.
(L.) So called because invented by Aldo Manuzio (Aldus Manutius),
of Venice, about A.D. 1500. Aldo was born in 1449, and died in
1515. Letters printed in this type were called by the Italians corsivz
(cursive, or running hand), but were known to other nations as
Italics; see Engl. Cyclop. s.v. Manuzio.=L. Italicus, Italian.—L.
Italia, Italy (Gk. “Iradia). The initial Jis long. Der. italic-ise.

ITCH, to have an irritating sensation in the skin. (E.) Like if
(=ME. yif, 3if=AS. gif) this word has lost an initial ME. y or
3=AS. g. ME. iken, icchen, 3ichen, 3iken; see Prompt. Parv. pp.
259,538. The pp. occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 3684, where the Six-text
(A 3682) has the various spellings iceched, yched, and 3echid, AS.
giccan, for *gyccan, to itch; in AS. Leechdoms, ed. Cockayne, vol.
iii. p. 50, 1.133 whence AS. gyhda, an itching, in Allfric’s Hom.
i. 86.4+-Du. jewken, to itch; whence jeuking, jeukte (=AS. gyhpa), an
itching; G. jucken, to itch; OHG. jucchan, Tent. type *jukjan- or
*jukkjan-. Der. itch, sb., ttch-y.

ITEM, a separate article or particular. (L.) The mod. use of
item as a sb. is due to the old use of it in enumerating particulars.
Properly, it is an adv. meaning ‘also’ or ‘likewise,’ as in Shak. Tw.
Nt. i. 5. 265: ‘as, item, two lips, indifferent red; item, two grey
eyes;’ &c.—L. item, in like manner, likewise, also; closely related
to ita, so; cf. is, he. Cf. Skt. ittham, thus; cttha, thus; itz, thus,

ITERATE, to repeat often. (L.) Bacon has iterations and
iterate in Essay 25 (Of Dispatch). Shak. has zterance, Oth. v. 2. 150

(folio edd.); iteration, 1 Hen. IV, i, 2. I01.—L. iteradtus, pp. of
iterare, to repeat.=L, iterum, again; a comparative adverbial form
(with suffix -ter-) from the pronom. base I of the third person; see
Item. Cf. Skt. 7-tara(s), other. Der. iterat-ion, iterat-ive.

ITINERANT, travelling. (L.) ‘And glad to turn itinerant ;’
Butler, Hudibras, pt. iii. c. 2. 1. 92. —L. itinerant-, stem of pres. pt.
of the verb ztinerdri, to travel. — L. itiner-, stem of iter, a journey. —
L. it-um, supine of ire, to go.—4/EI, to go; cf. Skt. 7, to go. Der.
itinerant-ly, itineranc-y, itinerac-y. Also itinerary (Levins), from L.
itinerairium, an account of a journey, neut. of i/iner-drius, belonging
to a journey, from the base ¢timer- with suffix -drius.

IVORY, a hard white substance chiefly obtained from the tusks
of elephants. (F.—L.) ME. yuory, iuorie (with u for v), Chaucer,
C. T. 7323 (D 1741); also spelt exery, Trevisa, i. 79.—AF, ivorie,
Charlemagne, ed. Michel, 1. 353; OF. zvurie, ivory, a 12th-century
form, cited by Littré; later ivoire, ‘ivory;’ Cot. (Cf. Prov, evori,
Bartsch, Chrestomathie Provencale, 29. 20, whence perhaps the ME, ~
form every. Also Ital. avorio, avolio.}=L. eboreus, adj. made of
ivory.—L. ebor-, stem of ebur, sb. ivory. B. Supposed by some to
be connected with Skt. zbha-s, an elephant. Der. ivory, adj., :vory-
black, ivory-nut.

IVY, the name of a creeping evergreen. (E.) ‘He moot go pypen
in an ivy-leef;’ Chaucer, C. T. 1840 (A 1838). AS. ifig, ivy; see
Gloss. to AS. Leechdoms, ed. Cockayne; also i/egn, an old form in
the Corpus glossary, 1. 718. [The AS. / between two vowels was
sounded as v, and the change of AS. -ig to E. -y is regular, as in AS.
stin-ig =E. ston-y].4-OHG. ebahewi, ivy (cited by Kluge); G. epheu.
B. The AS. if-ig seems to be a compound word. The syllable 7/ is
equivalent to Du. e7- in ei-loof, ivy (lit. ivy-leaf); and to OHG.
eba(h)- in ebahewi; but the orig. sense is unknown, Der. ivy-mantled,
ivi-ed,

IWIS, certainly. (E.) ME. ywis, iwis; Chaucer, C. T. 3277,
3705. Common in Shak., as in Merch. Ven. ii. 9. 68, Tam. Shrew,
i. 1. 62, Rich. III, i, 3. 102. AS. gewis, adj. certain; gewislice, adv.
certainly; Grein, i. 43.4+Du. gewis, adj. and ady., certain, certainly ;
G. gewiss, certainly. Cf. Icel. viss, certain, sure. B. All from Teut.
type *wissoz, for *wittoz (Idg. *wid-tos), pp. from the base wit- in
Teut. *wit-an-, to know. See Wit (1). From 4/ WEID, to know.
¢a> It is to be particularly noted that the ME. prefix 7- (=AS. ge-)


| was often written apart from the rest of the word, and with a capital


letter. Hence, by the mistake of editors, it is sometimes printed J wis,
and explained to mean ‘I know.’ Hence, further, the imaginary
verb wis, to know, has found its way into_many dictionaries, _


bie


IZARD.


IZARD, a kind of antelope. (F.) Modern.—F. isard; perhaps of
Iberian origin (Hatzfeld). -

IZZARD, the letter Z. (F.—Gk.) Written ezod in 1597 (N.E.D.);
izzard in Goldsmith, She Stoops to Conquer, A. iv.=F. ézed, a F.
name for the letter (see my Notes on E. Etym., p. 146); Prov. izédo,
izéto (Mistral).—Gk. (fra, the name of the 6th letter of the Gk.


alphabet.


JABBER, to chatter, talk indistinctly. (F.?) Formerly jaber or
jable. *Whatsoeuer the Jewes would jabver or iangle agayn;’ Sir T.
More, Works, p. 665 c. ‘To iabil, multum loqui;’ Levins, ed.
1570. ME. iaberen, to chatter; see under T'ateryn in Prompt.
Parv. And cf. gibber, Hamlet, i. 1. 116. ‘Jabber, Fabble are imita-
tive words, similar to gabber, gabble, which are from the base gab,
seen in Icel. gabba, to mock, scoff. More immediately, they may be
referred to OF. jaber, given by Godefroy as a variant of gaber, to
mock. Cf, also MF. javioler, ‘to gabble, prate, or prattle;\ Cot.
Of imitative origin. See Gabble; and cf. Du. gabberen, ‘to
jabber’ (Sewel). Der. jabber-er.

JABIRU, a large wading bird of tropical America. (Brazil.)
From the Tupi-Guarani (Brazilian) jabirw; see Hist. Nat. Brasilize,
1648 ; ii. 200.

JACAMAR, a bird of the family Galbulide. (F.—Brazil.)
¥. jacamar (with c as s), Brisson. —Tupi-Guarani (Brazilian) jacama-
cirt; Hist. Nat. Brasilize, 1648; ii. 202; Newton, Hist. Birds.

JACAWA, a grallatorial aquatic bird. (Brazil.) From Tupi-
Guarani (Brazilian) jasandé; written jacana (for jagana); see Newton,
Hist. Birds ; and Hist, Nat. Brasilice, 1648; ii. 190.

JACINTAH, a precious stone. (F.—L.—Gk). In the Bible, Rev.
ix. 17; xxi. 20. ‘In Rey. ix. 17, the hyacinthine, or dark purple,
colour is referred to, and not the stone ; as in Sidney’s Arcadia (B. i.
p- 59, 1. 28), where mention is made of ‘¢ Queene Helen, whose Zacinth
haire curled by nature,’ &c.;’ Bible Wordbook, ed. 1866. [But
I should explain ‘tacinth haire, like ‘hyacinthine locks’ in Milton,
P. L. iv. 301, to mean ‘hair curling like the hyacinth,’ without refer-
ence to colour.] ME. iacynte, Wyclif, 2 Chron. ii. 7 (earlier version),
iacynct (later version). Gower has jacinctus; C. A. iii. 112; bk. vii.
842.—OF. jacinthe, ‘the precious stone called a jacint;” Cot. — Late
L. iacintus, hiacinthus, for hyacinthus, a jacinth, Rev. xxi. 20 (Vul-
gate).—Gk, tdvOos; Rev. xxi. 20. See Hyacinth. @ Thus
jacinth is for hyacinth, like Ferome for Hierome or Hieronymus, and
Jerusalem for Hierusalem.

JACK (1), a saucy fellow, sailor. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) The
phrase ‘thou Sire John’ is in Chaucer, C. T. 14816 (B 4000); on
which Tyrwhitt remarks; ‘I know not how it has happened, that in
the principal modern languages, John, or its equivalent, is a name of
contempt, or at least of slight. So the Italians use Gianni, from
whence Zani; the Spaniards Fuanz, as bobo Huan, a foolish John; the
French Fean, with various additions ; and in English, when we call
aman a Fokn, we do not mean it as a title of honour, Chaucer, in
1, 3708, uses Facke fool, as the Spaniards do bobo Juan; and I suppose
jack-ass has the same etymology.’ ‘Go fro the window, }acke fool,
she said;’ Chaucer, C. T. 3708. This ME. ‘acke has been supposed
to have been borrowed from the F. Faques; but it is hard to believe
that this common French name should have been regarded as an
equivalent to the E, common name Yokn, since it really answers to
Jacob. Indeed, a strong case has been made out by Mr. E. B.
Nicholson (in his Pedigree of Jack, 1892) for regarding it as short
for Facken (found in 1327) which is a variant of Yankin, the regular
dimin. of ohn, and so used by Chaucer, C. T., B 1172. See further
under Zany. B. Itis difficult to tell to what extent the various senses
of the word jack depend upon the name above. a. It is, however,
‘clearly to be traced in the phrase Fack o? the clock, Rich. II, v. 5. 60,
‘where it means.a figure which, in old clocks, used to strike upon the
bell, B. In a similar way, it was used to name various implements
which supplied the place of a boy or attendant, as in boot-jack and in
the jack which turns a spit in a kitchen. yy. Similarly, it denoted
‘the key of a virginal; Shak. Sonnet 128. 8. Hence perhaps also
a familiar name for the small bowl aimed at in the game of bowls;
Shak. Cymb. ii. 1.2. ¢. And for a small pike (fish), as distinct from
a full-grown one ;-and in many other instances (see N.E.D.). Der.
Jack-o-lent = Jack of Lent, a puppet thrown at in Lent, Merry Wives,
iii. 3. 27; Yack-a-lantern= Jack o’ lantern, also called Yack-with-the-
lantern, an ignis fatuus (see Todd’s Johnson) ; Fack-pudding, Milton,
‘Defence of the People of England, c. 1 (R.), compounded of Yack
and pudding, just as a buffoon is called in French ean-pottage (John-


JAG. . 311


pottage) and in German Hans-wurst (Jack-sausage); 3ack-an-apes
(for which see below); ‘fack-by-the-hedge, ‘an herb that grows by


| the hedge-side,’ Kersey, ed. 1715, i.e. Sisymbrium Alliaria, see Lyte,


tr. of Dodoens, bk. v. c. 72; jack-ass; jack-daw, Pliny, b. x.
c. 29 (and not a corruption of chough-daw, as it has been desperately
guessed to be): cf. MF. jaquette, ‘a proper name for a woman, a
piannat, or megatapy’ [magpie], Cot. Also jack-screw, a screw for
raising heavy weights, &c.

ACKAWNAPES, a tame ape, a man who displays tricks like
an ape; used as a term of contempt. Tyndall has Jack an apes
(Jacke a napes in ed. 1528); Works, 1572, p. 132, col, 1, 1.11. ‘ He
grynnes and he gapis As it were iack napis;’ Skelton, Why Come
ye nat to Courte, 1.651. History shows that the orig. form was Jack
Napes, and it is first known as a nick-name of Wm. de la Pole,
duke of Suffolk (murdered in 1450), whose badge was an ape’s clog
and chain, such as was usually attached to a tame ape. It is
possible that, at the same time, there was a covert meaning in
Napes (which also then meant Naples), because he advocated the
king’s marriage with Margaret, daughter of René, titular king of
Jerusalem, Sicily, and Naples; which made him unpopular,

JACK (2), a coat of mail, a military coat worn over the coat of
mail. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) ‘ Iakke of defence, iak of fence, garment,
Baltheus ;’? Prompt. Parv. p. 256, and note, showing that the word
was in use as early as 1375. ‘ Iacke, harnesse, iacg, iacque ;’ Pals-
grave. = OF. Faque, ‘James, also a Iack, or coat of maile, and thence,
a Iack for the body of an Irish grey-hound . .. put on him when he
is to coap’ [with a wild boar]; Cot. Cf, Ital. giaco, a coat-of-mail,
Span. jaco, a soldier’s jacket; also Du. jak, G. jacke, Swed. jacka,
a jacket, jerkin. B. Of obscure origin. Most likely Ducange is
right in assigning the origin of it to the Facquerie, or revolt of the
peasantry nicknamed Facgues Bonhomme, A.D. 1358. That is, it is
from the OF, name Jacgues,—L. Iacdbus.—Gk. “IdnwBos. = Heb.
¥a‘aqodb, Jacob, lit. ‘one who seizes by the heel.’—Heb. root ‘agab,
to seize by the heel, to supplant. 4 In some instances, jack (1)
and jack (2) were doubtless confused; as, e. g. in blackjack. Der.
jack-et, q.v.3 also jack-boots, boots worn as armour for the legs, in
the Spectator, no. 4353; black-jack (Nares, s. v. jack).

JACKAL, a kind of wild animal. (Turk.—Pers.) In Dryden,
Annus Mirabilis, st. 82, 1. 3273 Sir T. Herbert, Travels, ed. 1665,
p. 115. Spelt Zaccal in Sandys, Trav. p, 205.—Turk. chakal, —Pers.
shaghal; Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 383. Cf. Skt. grgala-s, a jackal,
a fox.

JACKET, a short coat. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) ‘Ina blew jacket;’
Spenser, Mother Hubberd’s Tale, 1. 205. Palsgrave has Jacket.=—
OF. jaquette, ‘a jacket, or short and sleevelesse country-coat ;’ Cot.
Dimin. of OF. jague, ‘a jack, or coat of mail;’ Cot. See Jack (2).
Der. jacket-ed.

JACOBIN, a friar of the order of St. Dominick. (F.—L.—Gk.
—Heb.) ‘Now frere menour, now Jacobyn;’ Rom. of the Rose,
1. 6338.—F. jacobin, ‘a jacobin;? Cot.—Low L. facdbinus, adj,
formed from facdbus; see Jack (2). B. Hence one of a faction
in the French revolution, so called from the Facobin club, which first
met in the hall of the Jacobin friars in Paris, Oct. 1789 ; see Haydn,
Dict. of Dates. C, Also the name of a hooded (friar-like) pigeon ;
F. jacobine, fem. of jacobin. Der. Facobin-ic-al, Facobin-ism.

JACOBITE, an adherent of James II. (L.—Gk.— Heb.)
Formed with suffix -ite (=L. -ita), from Facdb-us, James. See Jack
(2). Der. Facobit-ism.

JACONET, a cotton fabric. (Hind.—Skt.) At first imported
from India; spelt jaconot in 1769. ‘Corrupted from Urdii [Hind.]
Fagannathi, from Jagannath (Juggernaut) or Fagannathpiri in Cut-
tack, where it was originally manufactured;” N.E.D. See Juggers
naut. (Hind. pir=a town.)

JADE (1), a sorry nag, an old woman. (Scand.?) ME, jade
(MS. Iade), Chaucer, C. T. 14818 (B 4002). Also found as jaud,
jad (E.D.D.). Of unknown origin; unless it can be a variant of
Lowl. Sc. yaud, yad, yade, which seems probable; see E.D.D. If
so, it is from Icel. jalda, 2 mare; cf. prov. Swed. jalda@, a mare
(Rietz).. Der. jade, vb. to tire, spurn, Antony, iii. I. 34.

JADE (2), a hard dark green stone. (F.—Span.—L.) In Bailey’s
Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1731. Cf. F. jade, Span. jade, jade. Florio’s Ital.
Dict. gives the form iada. The jade brought from America by the
Spaniards was called piedra de ijada, because it was believed to cure
pain in the side (see Pineda, s.v. piedra); for a similar reason it was
called nephritis (from Gk. veppés, kidney), Hence F. jade is from
Span. ijada, also ijar, the flank; cf. Port. ilhal, ilharga, the flank,
side.— L, alia, pl., the flanks. Korting, § 4708.

JAG, a notch, a pointed shred. (F.2) ‘Fagge, or dagge of a
garment ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 255. ‘I iagge or cutte a garment;
Iagge, a cuttyng;’ Palsgrave. Cf. iagger, to pierce, strike through ;
Morte Arthure, 2087. Apparently coined as a parallel form to dag;


312 JAGGERY


and as dag may have been (in some of its senses) suggested by F.
dague, a dagger (see Morte Arthure, 2102), so jag may have been
suggested by an OF. *jagaye, variant of zagaye or azagaye or archegaie,
an assagai (Cot., Godefroy). Godefroy and Cotgrave quote the
dimin. form jagayette; and archigaie occurs in Froissart; see
Assagai. Der. jagg-ed, spelt iaggde in Gascoigne, Steel Glas,
1161; whence /o-iagged, Skelton, Elinour Rummyng, |. 124; jagg-
ed-ness; jagg-y.

JAGGERY, a coarse brown sugar. (Port.—Canarese—Skt.)
Spelt gagara, Hakluyt, Voy., ii. pt. 1. 252.—Port. jagara, jagra.—
Canarese sharkare (11. H. Wilson).—Skt. garkara. See Sugar.

JAGUAR, aS. American beast of prey. (Brazilian.) In a trans-
lation of Buffon’s Nat. Hist., London, 1792. The word is Brazilian ;
see Buffon, Quadruped. t. iii. pp. 289, 293 (Littré). ‘agua in the
Guarani [Brazilian] language is the common name for tygers and
dogs. The generic name for tygers in the Guarani language is
FJaquarete;’ Clavigero, Hist. of Mexico, tr. by Cullen, ii. 318 (ed.
1787). Cavalcanti gives Brazil. ydudra, a dog, ydudra-eté, idudra-eté,
a jaguar ; Granada, in his Vocab. Rioplatense, gives ‘jaguar, tigre.’
See my Notes on E. Etym., p. 338.

JAIL, another spelling of Gaol, q.v. (F.—L.)

JALAP, the root of a Mexican plant. (Mexican.) ‘ Falap, the
root of a kind of Indian night-shade;’ Phillips’ Dict., ed. 1706.
And in Coles, ed. 1684. Named from Falapa or Xalapa, in Mexico.
From Aztec Xalapan, lit. ‘sand by the water;’ from xal(i:), sand,
a(dl), water, and pan, on, near; where -/i, -t/ are suppressed in com-
position. See my Notes on E. Etym., p. 332.

JALOUSIE, a blind made with slats sloping upward from with-
out. (F.—L.—Gk.) First in 1824.—F. jalousie, ‘jealousie; also
a lattice window, or grate to look through;’ Cot. So called because
it prevents strangers from seeing in. — F. jaloux, jealous; see
Jealous.

JAM (1), to press, squeeze tight. (E.) ‘fam, to squeeze ;’
Halliwell. ‘ammed in between the rocks;’ Swinburne, Travels
through Spain (1779), let. 3, p.8. ‘ fam, to render firm by treading,
as cattle do land they are foddered on ;’ Marshall’s Rural Economy
of Norfolk (E.D.S. Gloss. B. 3). The same word as cham, or
champ. ‘I chamme a thyng small bytwene my tethe, or champe ;’
Palsgrave. ‘Champ [with excrescent p], to tread heavily, Warwick-
shire; to bite or chew, Suffolk ;’ Halliwell. Whence also: ‘Champ,
hard, firm, Sussex ;’ id.; i.e. chammed or jammed down, as if by
being trodden on; and see E.D.D. See Champ, which is of
imitative origin. 4 For the common and regular change from ch
to j, see Jaw, Jowl.

JAM (2), a conserve of fruit boiled with sugar. (E.) In
Johnson’s Dict.; and in Ashe (1775). Apparently from Jam (1).
The following quotation suggests that it may mean a soft substance,
resembling what has been chewed. ‘And if we haue anye stronger
meate, it must be chammed afore by the nurse, and so putte into the
babe’s mouthe;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 241h. See Champ.

JAMB, the side-post of a door. (F.—L.) ‘ faum of the door, the
side-post. This word is also used in the South, where they say the
jaum of the chimney;’ Ray, Collection of North-Country Words,
1691. Spelt jawmbe in Cotgrave. ‘ Yea, the jambes, posts, principals,
and standards, all of the same mettall;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b.
xxxiii.c. 3, §'7. And in Baret (1580).—F. jambe, ‘ the leg or shank,
.. . the jaumbe or side-post of a door ;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. gamba, Span.
gamba, the leg ; Port. gambias, pl. the legs. — Late L. gamba, a hoof;
Vegetius, 1. 56, near the end; 3. 20. From an older form camba,
which appears in the book of Cerne (see Gambol), and in O. Spanish
(Diez, whom see). Closely allied to O. Celtic *kambos, crooked
~(Stokes-Fick) ; so that the word was orig. used of the bent leg or the
knee. Cf. W. cam, crooked. And see Ham. Der. giamb-eux,
leggings, greaves, Spenser, F. Q. ii. 6. 29 ; jambeaux, Chaucer, C.T.,
B 2065; pl. from an AF, *iambel; from OF. jambe.

JANE, a twilled cotton cloth; see Jean.

JANGLE, to sound discordantly, to quarrel. (F.—Scand.) ‘A
jangling of the bells;” Shak. Per. ii, 1. 45. Hence jangle=to
make discordant; ‘like sweet bells jangled;’ Hamil. iii. 1. 166.
ME. janglen, to quarrel, talk loudly. ‘To jangle and to jape;’
P. Plowman, B. ii. 94. Spelt gangle, Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 7413. —
OF. jangler, ‘to jangle, prattle, talk saucily or scurvily;’ Cot.
B. Of Scand. origin,=Swed. dial. and Norw, jangla, to quarrel;
cf. Du. jangelen, to importune (Sewel), a frequentative form (with
suffix -el) from Du. janken, to howl, yelp as a dog (Sewel). Cf.
Low G. janken, to. yelp as a dog; Bremen Worterb. ii. 636; also
Westphal. janglen, to play out of tune. Of imitative origin ; cf L.
gannire, to yelp as a dog, talk loudly. Der. jangl-er, jangl-ing; see
jingle,

JANIZARY, JANISSARY, a soldier of the old Turkish
footguard, (F.—Ital.—Turkish.) Bacon speaks of ‘the Janizaries’


JASMINE, JESSAMINE


in Essay 19, Of Empire, near the end. There is an earlier reference
to them in Sir T. More, Works, p. 279 f. ‘ Fanissaries, an order of
infantry in the Turkish army: originally, young prisoners trained to
arms; were first organised by Orcan, about 1330, and remodelled by
his son Amurath I. 1360... .A firman was issued on 17 June, 1826,
abolishing the Janizaries ;? Haydn, Dict. of Dates. And see Gibbon,
Roman Empire, c. 64.—MF. Fannissaires, ‘the Janizaries;’ Cot. =
M. Ital. zanizzeri, ‘the Turkes gard;’ Florio. Of Turkish origin ;
the word means ‘new soldiery ;’ from Turk. ye#i, new, and cheri,
soldiery (Devic). The # represents saghir noon, a nasal letter peculiar
to Turkish. And cheriis from Pers. charik, auxiliary forces (Zenker) ;
see Rich. Dict., p. 537.

JANUARY, the first month of the year. (L.) ME. January
(MS. Ianuary), Chaucer, C. T. 9267 (E 1393). Englished from L.
Tinudrius, January, named from the god Janus, Janus (for *Didnus)
is allied to Diana (Bréal).

JAPAN, aname given to certain kinds of varnished work. (Japan.)
Properly ‘ Japan work,’ where Fapan is used adjectivally. Named
from the country; see Yule. Pope playfully alludes to ‘shining
altars of Fapan ;’ Rape of the Lock, iii, 107. Der. Hence japan,
verb, to varnish like Japan work, to polish ; japann-er, a polisher of
shoes, shoe-black, Pope, Imit. of Horace, Epist. i. 1. 156.

JAPH, to jest, mock, befool. (F.—Scand.) Obsolete. In Chaucer,
C. T. 1731; P. Plowm. B. i. 67. Apparently suggested by OF,
japer (Hatzfeld), F. japper, to bark as a dog, to yap, of imitative
origin; but in sense answering rather to OF. jaber (Godefroy),
variant of gaber, ‘to mock, flout, gull, cheat,’ Cot.; which has just
the same sense as jape. Roquefort has gap=gab, mockery. —Icel.
gabba, to mock; gabb, mockery. Puitspelu gives Lyons dial. japia,
foolish stories. See Gabble, Jabber.

JAR (1), to make a discordant noise, creak, clash, quarrel. (E.)
‘ All out of ioynt ye iar ;” Skelton, Duke of Albany, 1. 378. And see
Shak. Tam, Shrew, iii. 1. 39,47; V. 2. 1. ‘far stands for an older form
char, only found in the prov. E. char, to chide, and in the derivative
charken, to creak like a cart or barrow (Prompt. Parv.), also to creak
like a door (Gower, C. A. ii. 102); cf. also AS. ceorian, cerian, to
murmur, MDu. karren, kerren, ‘to crake [creak] like a cart,’ Hexham ;
OHG. kerran, to give a loud harsh sound; cf. Jargon and Gar-
rulous. Der. jar, sb., spelt jarre, Spenser, F. Q. ili. 3. 23.

JAR (2), an earthen pot. (F.—Span.—Arab.) ‘A great jar;’
Ben Jonson, tr. of Horace’s Art of Poetry; 1. 28. And in Cotgrave.
The Latinized form jarrus occurs in The Earl of Derby’s Expeditions
(Camden Soc.), p. 228, 1. 18.—OF. jare, ‘a jarre,’ Cot.; mod, F.
jarre. (Cf. Span. jarra, a jug, pitcher; Ital. giara, giarra, ‘a iarre;”
Florio.]=— Span. jarra, jarro, a jar (Pineda); jarro (Minsheu). —
Arab. jarrah, a jar (Devic); cf. Pers. jurrah, a little cruise, or jar ;
Rich. Dict. p. 504, col. 2. Probably borrowed by the Spanish from
the Arabs.

JARGON, a confused talk. (F.-—L.?) ME. jargon, jergon,
chattering. ‘And ful of jargon’=very talkative; Chaucer, C. T.
9722 (E1848). Particularly used of the chattering of birds ; Gower,
C. A. ii. 264; bk. v. 4103; Rom. of the Rose, 716.—F. jargon,
‘gibridge, fustian language,’ Cot.; jargonner, ‘to speak fustian,
jangle, chatter,’ id. The word is old, and appears also as OF.
gergon, gargon (Godefroy). Cf. Span. gerigonza, jargon; gerigonzar,
to speak a jargon; Ital. gergo, jargon. B. All perhaps from
an imitative base garg- (cf. garg-le, gurg-le), prob. allied to
L. garrire; see Jar (1). This extended form GARG, answering
to a Teut. base KARK, is exactly represented in English by ME.
charken, to creak as a cart, and the AS. cearcian, to gnash the
teeth (AElfric’s Homilies, i. 132). An attenuated form of charken is the
ME. chirken, to chirp, to make a harsh noise. ‘Al ful of chérking
[ =jargon] was that sory place ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 2006 (A 2004).

JARGONELLE, a variety of pear. (F.—Ital.— Arab. — Pers.)
In Johnson’s Dict.=—F. jargonelle, a variety of pear, very stony or
gritty (Littré). Formed (according to Littré) as a dimin. from F.
jargon, a yellow diamond, a small stone. =Ital. giargone, a sort of
yellow diamond; E. zircon. Arab. zargiin.—Pers. zargiin, gold-
coloured, from zar, gold, and giim, colour ; see Devic, Supp. to Littré,
and Yule.

JASEY, JAZY, a wig made of worsted or tow. (Jersey.) ‘The
old gentleman in the flaxen jazy;’ Scott, Redgauntlet, ch. xxi [not
xx]. For Jersey, because made of Jersey yarn; see Forby, Vocab.
of E. Anglia. See Jersey.

JASMINE, JESSAMINE, a genus of plants. (F.—Pers.)
Spelt jasmin, jessemin, jelsomine, jesse, in Cotgrave. Milton has jessa-
mine, P, L. iv. 698; Lycidas, 143. The spelling jasmin agrees with
MF. jasmin; Cot. Fessemin, jelsomine answer to the Ital. forms
gesmino, gelsomino. ‘The Span. form is jazmin. All are from Pers.
yasmin, jasmine; of which another form is ydsamin, jessamine; Rich.
-Pers. Dict. p..1703; Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 715. :


JASPER


JASPER, a precious stone. (F.—L.—Gk.—Arab.) ME. Laspre,
Tasper. ‘ What is bettre than gold: Zaspre;’ Chaucer, C. T., Tale
of Melibeus, B 2297. Also spelt Jaspis, Gower, C. A. iii. 112; bk.
vii. 841.— OF. jaspre (see Littré), an occasional spelling of OF. and
F. jaspe, ‘a jasper stone ;’ Cot. [Thus the r is an addition, and no

-real part of the word.]—L. iaspidem, acc. of iaspis, a jasper. Gk.

taoms.— Arab. yasb, yasf, also spelt yashb, jasper ; whence Pers. yashp,
yashf, jasper; Rich. Pers. Dict. p. 1707; Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col.
719. Cf. Heb. sashpheh, a jasper.

JAUNDICH, a disease caused by bile. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Merch. Ven. i. 1. 85. The d is purely excrescent, as commonly in
E. words after 2; cf. sound from F. son. ME. Iaunys, Pricke of Con-
science, 1. 700; spelt iaundys, Trevisa, ii. 113 ;. further corrupted to
‘zawndres, ina 15th-cent. tr. of Higden, on the same page as the last
reference. — OF. (and F.) jaunisse, so spelt in the 13th cent. (Littré) ;
but Cot. gives it as jaulnisse, ‘the jaundies.’ Formed with suffix -isse
(=L. -itia) from F. jaune, yellow; because the disease is character-
ized by yellowness of the skin and eyes. The oldest spelling of jaune
is jalne (Littré).—L. galbinus, also galbineus, greenish yellow. =L.
galbus, yellow. The likeness of L. galbus to G. gelb is so close as to
suggest that it is of Teutonic origin; the true L. form being heluus.
See Yellow. Der. jaundic-ed.

JAUNT, a tiring ramble, an excursion. (F.) It would seem
from the exx. in Shak. that jaunt and jaunce are equivalent terms.
Faunt isa wild and fatiguing ramble, Romeo, ii. 5. 26; where another
reading is jaunce; cf. geances, fatiguing journies, in Ben Jonson,
A Tale of a Tub, A. ii (Hilts). It also means to ramble, rove, id.
ii. 5. 53, where another reading for jaunting is jaunsing. Again, Shak.
has: ‘Spurred, galled, and tired by jauncing Bolingbroke,’ i.e. hard-
riding Bolingbroke. This jaunce is from ME. jancer, of which
Cotgrave says: ‘ Fancer va cheval, to stirre a horse in the stable
till he sweat with-all, or as our jaunt; an old word.’ Not found
in OF. Cf. E. dial. jankit, jaded; Swed. dial. jank, useless trouble,
slow motion (Rietz); Norw. janka, to stagger. Der. jaunt, vb., to
ramble. 4 I suggest that jaunt arose from jaunts, a corrupt form

of jaunce, taken as a plural form.

JAUNTY, JANTY, genteel, stylish, fantastical. (F.—L.) ‘We
owe most of our jazty fashions now in vogue to some adept beau
among them” [the French]; Guardian, no. 149; dated 1713. Asif
formed with suffix -y from the verb jaunt, to ramble idly about; but
formerly janty or jantee, also jentee, variants of genteel, and used in
the same sense. See therefore Genteel. B. Exx.: ‘This jantee
sleightness to the French we owe ;’” T. Shadwell, Timon, p. 7 (1688).
“A jaunty [genteel] part of the town;’ Spectator, no. 503. ‘Turn
you about on your heel with a janéee air ;’ Farquhar, The Inconstant,
Act 1. Cf. also ‘Sae jimpy lac’d her genty waist;’ Burns, Bonie
Ann. Der. jaunt-i-ness, Spectator, no. 530.

JAVELIN, a kind of spear or dart. (F.—C.?) Used in the
sense of boar-spear, Shak., Venus, 616. ‘JZavelyn, a speare, iauelot ;’
Palsgrave.—MF.. javelin, m., javeline, f., ‘a javeling, a weapon ot a
size between the pike and partizan ;’ Cot. Cf. MF. javelot, ‘a gleave,
dart, or small javelin;’ Cot. Also Span. jabalina, Ital. giavellotto,
a javelin, B. Perhaps of Celtic origin. The Breton gavlin and
‘gavlod are merely borrowed from the French; but the origin is
shown by the Irish gabhla, a spear, lance; gabhlach, forked, divided,
peaked, pointed ; gabhlan, a branch, a fork of a tree; gabhlog, any
forked piece of timber; gabhal, Olrish gabul, a fork. Cf, Gael. gobhal,
a fork; gobhlach, forked, pronged; gobhlag, a small fork, two-pronged
instrument; gobhlan, a prong, small fork, weeding-hook. Also W.
gafl, a fork; gaflach, a fork, a dart. See Gaff. y. Hence may
also be explained the ME. gavelok, a javelin, dart, in King Alisaunder,
1, 1620; AS. gafeluc, Voc. 143.6; also MHG. gabilat, a javelin (from
F.). See Thurneysen, p. 63; Macbain, s.v. gobhal.

JAW, part of the mouth. (F.—L.) ME. jowe; * Yowe or cheke-
bone, Mandibula;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘git drow [drew] I him out of
pe Iowes, scilicet faucibus, of hem pat gapeden;’? Chaucer, tr. of
Boethius, b. i. pr. 4,1. 70. ‘Pe ouer ‘awe’ =the upper jaw, .Trevisa,
iii. 109; with various readings, jawe, geowe.— AF. jowe, glossed
‘cheke ;’? W. de Bibbesworth, in Wright’s Voc. i. p. 145; Norm. dial.
joe, Guernsey jaue (Moisy); F. joue, the cheek ; OF. joe (with o for
later ow), Chanson de Roland, 1. 3921; corresponding to Ital.
gota, ‘a cheek, a iaw’” (Florio), Prov. gauta; which Diez derives
from Late L. gavata, L. gabata, a kind of platter, a bowl; from the
rounding of the jaw. ‘Korting, § 4103. 4 Palsgrave has chawe-
bone; this alteration to chaw is later, and due to association with the
-verb to chew. Somewhat similar is the MDu. kouwe, the cavity of the
mouth, from MDu. kouwen (Du. kaauwen), to chew; Kilian. Der.
jaw-bone, Bible, 1551, Judg. xv. 155 jaw-teeth; jaw-fallen, Fuller,
Worthies, Essex (R.); lantern-jaw-ed.

JAY, a bird with gay plumage. (F.-OHG.) ME. jay, Tay;
Chaucer, C. T. 644; King Alisaunder, 1. 142,.—MF.. jay (older


JENNETING


spellings gay, gai),a jay; Cot. Mod. F. gcai; Gascon gai; Norm.
dial. gai. So also Span. gayo, a jay, gaya, a magpie. PB. Hardly
from OHG, gaki (MHG. gehe, G. jaz), adj., quick, lively (Kluge).
But rather allied to gay, OF. gai; and to be derived from OHG.
waht, fine, beautiful, Korting, § 1718.

JEALOUS, suspicious of rivalry, tender of honour. (F.—L.— Gis)
ME, jalous, Chaucer, C, T. 1331 (A 1329). Earlier gelus, Ancref
Riwle, p. 90, where it occurs to translate L. zéltes, —OF..jalous, later
jaloux, ‘jealous;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. geloso, Span. zeloso, jealous. =
Late L. zéldsus, full of zeal; related to L. zéldtés, one who is jealous.
—L. zélus, zeal. — Gk. (jdos, zeal; see Zeal. Der. jealous-ly; jealous-y,
ME.. jalousye, Chaucer, C. T. 12300 (C 366), from F. jalousie ;
also jalousie, q.v. Doublet, zealous.

JEAN, JANE, a twilled cotton cloth. (F.—Ital.) ‘ Gene
fustian ;’ in 1589; H. Hall, Society in Eliz. Age, p. 210. Cf. ME,
Gene, Genoa; spelt Geane in The Paston Letters, ii. 293.—MF.
Genes, Genoa. = Ital. Genova, Genoa; whence it was brought.

JEHER, to mock, scoff. (F.—L.?) In Shak. Com. Errors, ii. 2, 22.
‘He saw her toy, and gibe, and geare;’ Spenser, F. Q. ii. 6. 21.
‘There you named the famous jeerer, That ever jeered in Rome or
Athens;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Nice Valour, v. 1 (Song). It seems
to have been regarded as a foreign word; see Ben Jonson, Staple of
News, iv. 1.5: ‘Let’s jeer alittle. Feer? what’s that? Expect, sir,’
i.e. wait a bit, and you will find out. Not found before 1553.
B. The origin of the word is doubtful. If it were a slang term, it
might be a corruption of Du. scheren, scheeren. From the Du. gek,
a fool, and scheeren, to shear, was formed the phrase den gek scheeren
(lit. to shear the fool), to mock, jeer, make a fool of one. Soon these
words were run together, and the word gekscheeren was used in the
sense of jeering. See Sewel’s Du. Dict., which gives the above forms,
as well as the sb. gekscheeren, ‘ a jeering, fooling, jesting : Zk laat my
niet gekscheeren, I will not be trifled with.’ This is still preserved in
mod. Du. gekscheren, to jest, banter, and in the phrase het is geen gek-
scheren, it isno laughing matter, The phrase was also used as scheeren
den gek, to play the fool; whence simply scheeren, ‘ to gibe, or to jest’
(Hexham), ‘y. But it accords better with phonetic laws to derive it
from OF, (or AF.) giere, an occasional variant of OF. chiere, whence
E. cheer, Godefroy has: ‘S’aucuns hons te fait d’amere giere,’ if
any man makes you bitter cheer (jeers at you). Again, in his Supple-
ment: ‘ Mas faites bale, giere, ioie, solas, et ris,’ but dance, make
cheer and joy, and pleasure, and laughter, From the phr. faire male
chere, to make ill cheer, to frown upon. See Cheer. 4 See my
Note; Phil. Soc. Trans., 1902. Der. jeer, sb., Oth. iv. 1. 83.

JEHOVAH, the chief Hebrew name of the Deity. (Heb.) In
Exod. vi. 3. — Heb. yahdvah, or more correctly ykwh (not pronounced) ;
see article on Jehovah in the Concise Dict. of the Bible.

JEJUNE, hungry, meagre, empty. (L.) ‘ We discourse jejunely,
and falsely, and unprofitably;’ Bp. Taylor, pref. to Great Exemplar.
—L, iéiiinus, fasting, hungry, dry, barren, trifling, poor. Of uncer-
tain origin. Der. jejune-ly, jejune-ness,

JELLY, anything gelatinous, the juice of fruit boiled with sugar.
(F.—L.) In Hamlet, i. 2, 205. ME. Jely; Lydgate, Hors, Shepe,
and Goos; 1. 70. Hence geli-cloth; Earl of Derby’s Expeditions
(Camd. Soc.), p. 234. Sometimes spelt gelly.—F. gelée, ‘a frost, also
gelly;’ Cot. Properly the fem. form of gelé, frozen, pp. of geler, ‘ to
freeze, to thicken or congeale with cold;* Cot.=L. gelare, to congeal.
—L. gelu, frost. See Gelatine, Gelid, Congeal. Der. jelly-jish.

JEMADAR, a native officer in a sepoy regiment. (Hind. — Arab.
and Pers.) See Yule.— Hind. jama‘dar, a jemadar. = Arab. jam@at,
a body of men (from Arab. root jama‘a, he collected); and Pers. dar,
a holder, master. See N. E. D.; and Rich. Dict., pp. 518, 646.

JENNET, GENNET, a small Spanish horse. (F.—Span.—
Arab.) ennets; Shak. Oth, i. r. 113. ‘A breeding jennet;’ Shak.
Venus, 260, ‘ We have xx. thousande of other mouzted on genettes ;’
Bemers, tr. of Froissart, vol. i. c. 236. ‘ Iennettes of Spayne ;’? Squyr
of Lowe Degre, 1. 749.—MF. genette, ‘a genet, or Spanish horse ;’
Cot.—Span. ginete, a nag; but the orig. sense was a horse-soldier,
esp. a light-armed horse-soldier. Minsheu (1623) has: ‘ ginete,
a light horseman that rideth a /a gineta;’ also ‘ cavalgar a la Gineta,
to ride with the legs trussed up in short stirrups, with a target and
a ginnet launce.’ Of Moorish origin. The word is traced by Dozy
(Glos. p. 276) to Arab. zendta, a tribe of Barbary celebrated for its
cavalry; see Devic, Supp. to Littré.

JENNETING, an early apple. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) ‘In July
come... plummes in fruit, ginnitings, quadlins ;’ Bacon, Essay 46,
Of Gardens. ‘Contrariwise, pomgranat-trees, fig-trees, and apple-
trees, liue a very short time; and of these, the hastie kind or ienitings,
continye nothing so Jarge as those that bear and ripen later ;’
Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xvi.c. 44. So called because they were ripe
about St. John’s day (June 24) in France and Italy; but in England
sometimes later. See Hogg’s Fruit Annual, pp. 361, 522. Cf. pere-


313


314 JEOPARDY


Tonettes [Jeannot pears] in P. Plowman, C. xiii. 221, and the note.
Sometimes spelt geniton (N. E. D.).—F. Feanneton, Feannet; from
ean, John. Cotgrave has: ‘Pomme de S. fean, or Hastivel, a soon
tipe apple called the St. John’s apple.’ Cf. G. fohannisapfel, « John
apple, geniting;’ Fliigel. See Jack (1). € Commonly said to
be a corruption of Fune-eating apples!

JHOPARDY, hazard, peril, danger. (F.—L.) ME. jupartie, later
ieopardy or jeopardy. ‘Hath lost his owen good thurgh jupartye ;’
Chaucer, C. T. 16214 (G 743). The various readings in this line
are Iupartie, Iopardy, Iopardye, and Iepardye. Spelt Iupartye, Chaucer,
Troilus, ii. 465. The original sense was a game in which the chances
are even, a game.of hazard, hence hazard or chance; as in: ‘To
putte that sikernes in jupartye=to put in hazard that which is secure ;
‘Troil. iv, 1512.—OF. jeu parti, lit.a divided game. ‘A jeu parti is
properly a game, in which the chances are exactly even. See Froissart,
vy. i. c. 2343 Ils n’estoient pas a jew parti contre les Francois (=for
they were unequal in numbers to the French) (Johnes’ translation) |:
and vol. ii. c. 9, si nous les voyons a jeu parti. From hence it sig-
nifies anything uncertain or hazardous. In the old French poetry,
the discussion of a problem, where much might be said on both
sides, was called a jeu parti. See Poesies du Roy de Navarre,
chanson xlviii.,—Tyrwhitt’s note to Chaucer, C. T. 16211.—Late L.
iocus partitus, an alternative, a phrase used when a choice was given,
of choosing one side or the other; see Ducange.=L. iocus, a joke,
jest, sport, play, game; and partitus, divided, pp. of partiri, to part,
from part-, stem of pars, a part. See Joke and Part. Der.
jeopard, to hazard (coined by dropping -y), Judges, v. 18, ME.
Iuparten, Chaucer, Troil. iv. 1566; jeopardise, vb.; also jeopard-ous,
spelt zeopardeous in Hall’s Chron. Hen. VIII, an. 25, § 10; jeopard-
ous-ly. 4 Observe the AF. diphthong eo, representing the F. ew.

JERBOA, a small rodent quadruped. (Arabic.)’ Mentioned in
an E. translation of Buffon’s Nat. Hist., London, 1792. The animal
takes its name from the strong muscles in its hind legs.= Arab.
yarbi, ‘(1) the flesh of the back or loins, an oblique descending
muscle; (2) the jerboa, an animal much resembling the dormouse,
which makes prodigious bounds by means of its long hind legs; see
Nat. Hist. of Aleppo, by Russell; Rich. Pers. Dict. p. 1705, col. 2.

JEREED, JERID, a wooden javelin, used ina game. (Arab.)
The hurl’d on high jereed ;’ Byron, Giaour, ix. Arab, jarid, a palm-
branch stripped of its leaves, a lance. Rich. Dict., p. 505.

JERK, to give a sudden movement, throw with a quick action.
(E.) Cotgrave has: ‘Fouetter, to scourge, lash, yerke, or jerke.’ In
Shak, as a sb. L. L. L. iv. 2. 129.. ‘A ierk, verber;’ Levins, ed.
1570. ‘With that which jerks [lashes] the hams of every jade;’
Bp. Hall, Satires, b. iii. sat. 5, 1. 26. Lowland Sc. yerk, to beat,
strike smartly; a smart blow. ‘To jerke or gerke;’ Minsheu, ed.
1627. ‘A girke or yerke of a rod or whip;’ Minsheu’s Span. Dict.
(E. index). Halliwell also gives: ‘Girk, a rod; also, to beat.
B. Another form is jert. Cotgrave has: ‘Attainte, a reach, hit, blow,
stroke, ...a gentle nip, quip, or jert, a sleight gird, or taxation.’
y- Moreover, the words jer¢ and gird were regarded as equivalent;
thus Sherwood has, in his index to Cotgrave: ‘A jert or gird,
Attainte.’ The words jerk, jert, and gird are probably all connected,
and all had once the same meaning, viz. to strike, esp. with a whip
or rod. 8. The only one of these three forms found in ME, is
gurden, girden, to strike ; see gurden in Stratmann. See Gird (2).
@ It may be added that the usual meaning of jerk in old authors is
to whip, to lash; as partly shown above. Der. jerk, sb.

JERKED BEEF, dried beef. (Peruvian.) The beef thus called
is cut into thin slices and dried in the sun to preserve it. The process
is explained in Capt. Basil Hall’s Extracts from a Journal written
on the coasts of Chili, Peru, and Mexico, vol. i. c. 4. The name is
a singular corruption of ccharqui, the S. American name for it, which
is a Peruvian word. ‘The male deer and some of the coarser kind
of the Peruvian sheep were slaughtered ;. . . and their flesh, cut into
thin slices, was distributed among the people, who converted it into
charqui, the dried meat of the country ;’ Prescott, Conquest of Peru,
c.y. B. An earlier form is jerkin beef. ‘Their fish and flesh they
boyle . . or broyle..; or else . . putting it on a spit, they turne first
the one side, then the other, till it be as drie as their derkin beefe in the
West Indies ;? Capt. J. Smith, Works, ed. Arber, p. 63.—Peruv.
echarquini, to make jerked (or hung) beef. Cf. Peruv. echarqui, sb.,
a slice of flesh or hung beef or driéd beef. Still common in the form
charqui, sb., dried flesh, unsalted, in long strips; Granada, Vocabu-
lario Rioplatense. See my Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 343.

JERKIN, a jacket, short coat. (Low G.) ‘With Dutchkin
dublets, and with Zerkins iaggde;’ Gascoigne, Steel Glass, 1. 1161
(in Spec. of Eng. ed. Skeat). Similar forms are Westphal. jiirken,
a kind of overcoat; EFries. jurken, a child’s frock. The origin is
unknown; but perhaps it is from some name. Thus under EFries.
Djure, Koolman notes that EFries. Djurko, Diurko is their form of


JET


Du. Dirk (G. Dietrich, Theodoric), whence also the surnames Djurken
and Furken. Ferkin may represent Djurken, whilst the forms jurken,
jiirken (above) may come from Furken; so also may the late Du.
jurk, a frock (Sewel). B. I prefer the solution suggested by Berg-
haus; that Low G. Furi isa pet name for George, and that it alse
takes the dimin. form Fiirgen, and in Hamburg #Firken; cf. OF.
Georget, a sort of casaque (Godfrey). And cf. E. jacket (Athenzeum,
Jan. I0, 1903); Phil. Soc. Trans., 1903, p. 153.

JERSEY, fine wool, a woollen jacket. (Jersey.) ‘ Hersey, the
finest wooll taken from other sorts of wooll, by combing it ;’ Kersey,
ed. 1715. Lit. ‘ Jersey wool,’ and named from Jersey, one of the
Channel islands. On the termination -ey, meaning ‘island,’ see
Island. Of Scand, origin.

JERUSALEM ARTICHOKE, a kind of sunflower. (Ital. —
L.) ‘ There is a soup called Palestine soup. It is made, I believe,
of artichokes called Ferusalem artichokes, but the Jerusalem artichoke
is so called from a mere misunderstanding. The artichoke, being
a kind of sun-flower, was called in Italian girasole, from the Latin
gyrus, circle, and sol, sun. Hence Jerusalem artichokes and Palestine
soups!’ Max Miiller, Lect. on Language, 8th ed. ii. 404.— Ital.
girasole, a sun-flower. = Ital. girare, to turn; and sole, sun.=—L. gyrare,
to turn round, from gyrus (=Gk. yipos), a circle; and sdlem, acc. of
sol, sun. See Gyre and Solar.

JESSAMINE, the same as Jasmine, q. v.

JESSES, straps of leather or silk, with which hawks were tied by
the legs. (F.—L.) In Shak. Oth. iii. 3. 261. ‘ That like an hauke,
which feeling herselfe freed From bels and jesses which did let her
flight ;’7 Spenser, F. Q. vi. 4.19. ‘ esses for a hauke, get ;” Palsgrave.
ME. ges, both s.and pl. ‘ Me ofhalt thane uogel be the ges,’ one
restrains the bird by the jess; Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 254. ‘ Gesse
made of leder’ [leather]; Book of St. Albans, fol. b 5, back. —OF.
ges, gies, nom., get, giet, acc.; pl. ges, gies (Godefroy, s.v. giet) ;
MF. jects, pl. ‘ Gect, a cast or throw, as at dice; Jes jects d’un oyseau,
a hawkes Jesses;’ Cot. So called from their use in letting the hawk
fly.=—L. iactus, nom:, a cast, throw (acc. iactum).—L. iactus, pp. of
iacere, to throw. Cf. also OF. jeter, MF. jecter, ‘to cast, hurl;* id,
= L. iactare, to hurl, throw, frequentative of zacere, to throw. See
Jet (1).

JEST, a joke, fun. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. iv. 241, Orig.
a story, tale. ME. geste, a story, a form of composition in which
tales were recited. ‘ Lat see wher [whether] thou canst tellen aught
in geste ;? Chaucer, C. T..13861 (B 212). ‘I cannot geste’=I cannot
tell tales like a gestour, or professed tale-teller; id, 17354 (I 43).
Geste=a tale, a saying; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, A. 277.=—OF.
geste, an exploit, a history of exploits, romance, tale; chansons de
geste, heroic poems; see Burguy. = L, gesta, used for rés gesta, a deed,
exploit, lit. ‘a thing performed ;’ or from L, gesta, neut. pl. = L. gestus,
pp. of gerere, to carry on, do, perform. See Gesture. Der. jest,
vb., jest-ing-ly; also jest-er=ME. gestour, a reciter of tales, as in:
‘And gestours for to tellen tales,’ Chaucer, C. T. 13775 (B 2036).
From L. gerere are also formed gest-ure, gest-i-cu-late, con-gest-ion,
di-gest, in-di-gest-ion, sug-gest, re-gist-er; also belli-ger-ent, con-ger-
ies, ex-ag-ger-ate.

JESUIT, one of the Society of Jesus. (F.—Span.—L.—Gk. —
Heb.) In Cotgrave. The order was founded in 1534 by Ignatius
Loyola; see Haydn, Dict. of Dates. —MF. Fesuite, ‘a Jesuite;’ Cot.
= Span. Fesuita (the order being of Spanish foundation). Formed
with suffix -tta (=L. ita as in L. erém-ita=Gk. -i77s as in épnyirys,
a hermit) from L. Jési-, for Jéstis, q.v. Der. jesuit-ic, jesuit-ic-al,
jesuit-ic-al-ly, jesuit-ism; all words with a sinister meaning, craft
being commonly attributed to the Jesuits.

JESUS, the Saviour of mankind. (L.—Gk.—Heb.) In Wyclif’s
Bible. =L. Jésus (Vulgate).—Gk. *Incovs.— Heb. Véshi‘a (Jeshua,
Nehem. viii. 17, a later form of Joshua); contracted form of Yeho-
shia (Jehoshua, Numb. xiii. 16), signifying ‘ Jehovah is salvation’ or
‘ Saviour.’ = Heb. root yasha‘, to be large; in the Hiphil conjugation,
to save. Der. fesuit, g.v. Doublets, Foshua, Feshua, Fehoshua.
@@ In ME, commonly written in a contracted form (Ihs), which
by editors is often printed Fhesus. This is really an error, the hk
standing for the Gk. H (long é), so that ‘Ihs’=Jésws. So also ‘Thi’
= Iésu. In Gk. capitals, it is IHC, where H=long @ and C=s,
being a form of the Gk. sigma; the mark above signifying that the
form is contracted. In later times IHC became IHS. Lastly (the
H being misunderstood) the ingenious fiction arose that IHS meant
Iesus Hominum Salvator=Jesus Saviour of Men. The mark, being
then unmeaning, was turned into a little cross, as on modern altar-
cloths.

JET (1), to throw out, fling about, spout. (F.—L.) In Tudor-
English it commonly means to fling about the body, to strut about,
to stalk about proudly, ‘ How he jets under his advanced plumes ;’
Tw. Nt. ii. 5. 36. ‘Then must ye stately goe, e¢ding vp and downe;’


JET


Ralph Roister Doister, A. iii. sc. 3. 1. 121 (in Spec. of Eng. ed. Skeat),
ME. getter, ietten; see Prompt. Parv. pp. 192, 258, and Way’s notes;
also Hoccleve, De Regimine Principum, 428. ‘I iette, I make a
countenaunce with my legges, ie me iamboye; I iette with facyon and
countenaunce to sette forthe myselfe, ze braggue;’ Palsgrave.—OF.
jetter, also getter, ‘to cast, hurl, throw, fling, dart or send out
violently, put or push forth;’ Cot.—L. iactare, to fling, frequent. of
iacere, to throw; whence iactaresé, to boast. Der. jet, sb., ME. get,
in early use in the sense of ‘ fashion;’ cf. ‘ Get, or maner of custome,
Modus, consuetudo,’ Prompt. Pary.; ‘al of the newe Jet’ =all in the
new fashion, Chaucer, C. T. 684 (A 682); this answers to OF. iet or
get (mod. F. jez), which Cot. explains by ‘a cast or throw, as at
dice. [The mod. sense of je¢ is a spout of water, as in Pope,
Dunciad, ii. 177.] Hence also jetteau, Spectator, no. 412, for Ital.
getto, a jet, by confusion with F. jet d’eax=a spout of water, a foun-
tain (where F. eaw=L. aqua, water). Also jet-sam, q. y., jett-y, q.v.
¢@=> From L. iacere (pp. iactus) are numerous derivatives ; as, ab-ject,
ad-ject-ive, con-ject-ure, de-ject, e-ject, in-ject, inter-ject-ion, ob-ject, pro-
ject, reject, sub-ject; also ad-jac-ent, circum-jac-ent, sub-jac-ent, e-jac-
ulate; also amice (1), agistment, gist, joist, jesses.

JET (2), a black mineral, used for ornaments. (F.—L.—Gk.)
‘ His bille was blak, and as the Jee¢ it shoon;’ Chaucer, C. T. 14867
(B 4051).=—OF. iaiet (Hatzfeld, s. v. jais), iaye¢ (Godefroy); MF.
jet, jaet, ‘jet;’ Cot.—L, gagatem, acc. of gagatés, jet (whence the
forms gayet, jaet, jet in successive order of development); see Trevisa,
ji. 17, where the L. has gagates, Trevisa has gagates, and the later
E. version has ie¢te. Described in Pliny, xxxvi. 19.—Gk. yaydar7s,
jet; so called from T'dyat, a town in Lycia, in the S. of Asia Minor.
Der. jet-black ; jett-y, Chapman, tr. of Homer, Il. ii. 629; jett-7-ness.
JETSAM, JETSON, JETTISON, things thrown overboard
from a ship. (F.—L.) ‘ Fetson is a thing cast out of the ship, being
in danger of wreck, and beaten to the shore by the waters, or cast
on the shore by mariners; Coke, vol. vi. fol. 106.a;’ Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674 (s. v. flotson) ; jetson, in Minsheu.= AF. getesone,
Black Book of the Admiralty, i. 96, 170; OF. getaison (Godefroy). =
L. iactationem, acc., a casting. L, iactare, to cast out. Cf. F. ‘faire
le iect, to throw the lading of a ship overboard;’ Cot. See Jet (1).

JETTY, a projection, a kind of pier. (F.—L.) Lit. ‘thrown
out. ME, gettey; Lydgate, Troy-book, fol. N 1, back, col. 2, 1. 2
(bk. ii. c. 21). The same as Jutty, q. v.—OF. getee, MF. jettée,
*a cast, hurle, throw, fling, also a jetty or jutty; also, the bank of
a ditch, or the earth cast out of it when it is made;’ Cot. Properly
the fem. of the pp. of OF. geter, F. jeter, to throw. See Jet (1).

JHW, a Hebrew. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) ME. ewes, pl. Jews;
Chaucer, C. T. 12409 (C 475); earlier, Giwes, Giws, Ancren Riwle,
p- 106.—AF. eu, Geu,a Jew; F. Fuif; Cotgrave.—Late L. ludeum,
acc. of Iuideus. — Gk. Iovdaios, an inhabitant of Judea. — Gk. "Iovdaia,
Judza.— Heb. Vehidah, Judah, son of Jacob; lit. ‘celebrated’ or
‘illustrious.’ = Heb. root yadah, to throw; in the Hithpiel conjuga-
tion, to praise, celebrate. Der. Yew-ess (with F. suffix); Few-ish;
Few-ry, ME. Iewerie, Chaucer,.C. T. 13419 (B 1679), earlier Giwerie,
Ancren Riwle, p. 394, signifying ‘a Jew’s district,’ from OF. Faerie
(Littré) =mod. F. Fuiverie. Also Hews-harp, Hakluyt, Voy. iii. 665,
1, 21, sometimes called ews-trump, as in Beaum. and Fletcher,
Humorous Lieutenant, A. v. sc. 2.1. 10; a name given in derision,
prob. with reference to the harp of David.

JEWEL, a precious stone, valuable ornament. (F.—L.) ME.
iowel,~Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 112, 1. 6; iwel, id. p. 77, 1. 1.— AF.
ivel, touel; OF. joiel, joel, jouel (Godefroy); later joyau, ‘a jewell ;’
Cot. Origin disputed; either (1) from Late L. ioc@le, usually in pl.
iocalia, jewels (lit. trinkets), from L. ioc&ri, to play (OF. joer, jouer).
—L. iocus, play; see Joke. Or (2) a dimin. (with suffix -el) of OF.
and F, joie, joy, pleasure; so that the sense is ‘a little joy,’ i.e. a
toy, trinket. Cf. Span. joyed, a jewel, trinket, dimin. of joya, a jewel,
present (answering in form to F. joze, though not used in same sense).
Also Ital. giojello, a jewel, dimin. of gioja, (1) joy, (2) a jewel. See
further under Joy. & The use of Span. joya and Ital. gioja in the
sense of ‘jewel’ supports the latter etymology; hence some think
that the word was misunderstood in the middle ages, so that ‘jewel’
-was translated into Late L. in the form jocdle, preserving the sense of
‘toy,’ but missing the etymology, which was thought to be from L.
iocus instead of from gaudium, the sense of the two words being not
very different. See Toynbee, §§ 76, 143; Korting, §§ 4188, 5182.
Der. jewell-er, with which cf. MF. joyallier, a ‘jeweller,’ Cot. ; jewell-
er-y or jewel-ry, with which cf. MF. joyaulerie, ‘jewelling, the trade
or mystery of jewelling,’ Cot.

JIB (1), the foremost sail of a ship. (Du.) ‘ib, the foremost
sail of a ship; Ash’s Dict., ed. 1775. First, spelt gibb, in 1661.
Perhaps so called because readily shifted from side to side; the sb.
being derived from the verb. See Jib (2). Der. jib-boom (Ash),

JIB. (2), to shift a sail from side to side. (Du.) . §720, to shift


JOB


the boom-sail from one side of the mast to the other;’ Ash’s Dict.,
ed.1775. ‘ Tojib round the sail;’ Cook, Third Voyage, b. ii. c. 3 (R.).
Also spelt jibe. ‘ Fibing, shifting the boom-sail from one side of
the mast to the other (Falconer) ;’ id. Also spelt gybe. ‘ Gybing,
the act of shifting the boomssail,’ &c.; id.; cf. Dan. gibbe, ‘to gybe,
a naut. term;’ Ferrall (from E. or Du.).—Du. gijpen (of sails), to
turn suddenly; Calisch. Sewel gives: ‘ Gypen, ’t overslaan der
zeylen [the overturning of a sail] a sail’s being turned over by an
eddy wind.’ Cf. Jutland gippe, to shift the sails; Swed. dial. gippa,
verb, used of a sudden movement or jerk; thus, if a man stands on
the lower end of a slanting plank, and a sudden weight falls on the
upper end and tips it up, he is gippad, i.e. jerked up; Reitz. Cf
Swed. guppa, to move up and down, torock. Andsee Gibbet. -

JIB (3), to move restively, as a horse, (F.—Scand.) ‘ }ib, said
of a draught-horse that goes backwards instead of forwards ;’ Halli-
well. A very early use of a compound from this verb occurs in
ME. regibben, to kick. ‘* Hit regibbeth anon, ase uet kelf and idel’=
it kicks back again, like a fat and idle calf; Ancren Riwle, p- 138.
Cf. ‘ Wynsyng of an horse, regibement;’ Palsgrave.=OF. giber, ‘se
débattre des pieds et des mains, s’agiter, lutter,’ i.e. to struggle with
the hands and feet, Roquefort ; giber, to shake (Godefroy). Whence
OF. regiber (Roquefort), mod. F. regimber, to kick ; accounting for
the ME. regibben. Cf. also OF. giper, to kick (as a horse) ; Godefroy ;
Burgundy gipai, to gambol (Mignard). B. Of Scand. origin; cf.
Swed. dial. gippa, to jerk. See Jib (2).

JIBBAH, the same as Jubbah. (Arab.) See Jupon,

JIBE, the same as Gibe, q.v. (Scand.)

JIG, a lively tune or dance. (F.—MHG.) As sb. in Shak. Much
Ado, ii. 1,77; Hamlet, ii. 2.522. Asyvb., Hamlet, iii, 1. 150.—OF.
gige, gigue, a sort of wind instrument, a kind of dance (Roquefort) ;
but it was rather a stringed instrument, as noted by Littré and
Burguy; which may be verified by consulting Dante’s use of the Ital,
giga in Paradiso, xiv. 118. Cf. Norm. dial. gigwer, to dance (Moisy) ;
Span. giga, a jig, lively tune or dance; Port. giga, a jig; Ital. giga,
‘a fiddle, a croud, a kit, a violin’ (Florio), —MHG. gige, mod. G.
geige, a fiddle. Der. jig, verb, jig-maker, Hamlet, ili, 2, 131.
Doublet, gig, q.v.

JILT, a flirt, inconstant woman. (L.)
plays the ji/¢t;’ Otway, The Orphan, i. 1. 66. ‘And who is jilted
for another’s sake;” Dryden, tr. of Juvenal, Sat. vi. 530. A con-
traction of jillet. ‘A jillet brak his heart at last;’ Burns, On a
Scotch Bard, Gone to the W. Indies, st. 6. A diminutive (with
suffix -et) of Fill, a personal name, but used in the same sense as
jilt or flirt. Hence the compounds flirt-gill, Romeo, ii. 4. 162; and
fiirt-Gillian, Beaum. and Fletcher, The Chances, iii. 1 (Landlady).
Cf. ‘ Bagasse, a baggage, queane, jyll, punke, flirt ;’ Cot. Gull is
short for Gillian, i.e. Fuliana; see Gill (4). See Gillott, Gillett, in
Bardsley, Dict. of Surnames. Der. jit, verb.

JINGLE, to make a clinking sound. (E.) ME, gingelen, ginglen ;
Chaucer, C. T. 170. A frequentative verb from the base jing, by-
form of prov. E. jink, to chink, to jingle, allied to and probably the
same word as chink, a word of imitative origin; see Chink (2).
A fuller form appears in jangle; hence Palsgrave has gyngle-geangle
see Jangle. Der. jingle, sb.

JINN, a demon. (Arab.) Formed from the Arab. pl. jimna(Z),
demons; so that the form is properly a plural. The Arab. sing. is
jinni, jinniy, which is Englished as jinnee or (more frequently) as genie
(as if connected with L. genius). ;

JINRIKSHA, a light two-wheeled vehicle drawn by one or
moremen. (Japan.) See Fennyrickshaw in Yule. = Japan. jinrikisha ;
from jiz, a man; riki, strength; and sha, acar. ‘A car drawn by
strength of man.’

JOB (1), to peck with the beak, as a bird. (E.?) ‘Becquade, a
pecke, job, or bob with a beake;’ Cot. ‘ Zobbyn wythe the bylle’=
to job with the beak; Prompt. Parv. Prob. of imitative origin; cf.
chop, dab, bob. Cf. Irish and Gael. gob, the beak or bill of a bird.

JOB (2), a small piece of work. (F.—C.?) In Pope, Epilogue to
Satires, 1. 104; ii. 40; Donne versified, Sat. iv. 142. He also has
the verb: ‘And judges job, Moral Essays, to Bathurst, 141. Spelt
jobb in Kersey, ed. 1715. First in 1627. It seems to be equivalent
to gob. ‘Gob, a portion, a lump; hence the phrase, to work by the
gob;’ Halliwell. Dimin. forms are seen in: ‘ Gobbet, a morsel, 2
bit; a large block of stone is still called a gobbet by workmen ;’”
Halliwell. ‘§ Yobbel, Fobbet, a small load, generally of hay or straw,
Oxfordshire ;” id. And see E.D.D. 8. In earlier authors, only
gobbet is found; ME. gobet, Chaucer, C. T. 698.—OF. gob, lit. a
mouthful. ‘ L’avalla tout de gob, at one gulpe, or as one gobbet, he
swallowed it;’ Cot. Cf. gober, ‘to ravine, devoure, swallow great
morsels, let downe whole gobbets;’ Cot. Of Celtic origin; cf. Gael.
and Irish god, the bill or beak of a bird, also, ludicrously, the mouth.
See Gobbet, and Job (1). Der. job, verb ; jobb-er, jobb-er-y.


315


‘Where dilatory fortune


316 JOCKEY


JOCKEY, a man who rides a race-horse. (F.—-L.—Gk. — Heb.)
“As jockies use;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. iii. c. 1.1.6 from end. ‘ Whose
jockey-rider is all spurs;’ id. pt. ill. c. ii. last line. A Northern E.
pronunciation of Fackey, dimin. of Fack as a personal name; see
Jack (1). A name given to the lads who act as grooms and riders.
ocky, for Fack, occurs in Skelton, Works, ed. Dyce, i. 185, 1. gt.
Der. jockey, verb ; jockey-ism, jockey-ship.

JOCOSH, merry. (L.) Focose is in Kersey, ed. 1715. Focosity,
in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —L. iocdsus, sportive.=—L. iocus, a joke,
sport. See Joke. Der. jocose-ly, jocos-i-ty.

JOCULAR, droll. (L.) ‘My name is Fokphiel,... An airy
jocular spirit ;’ Ben Jonson, Masques, The Fortunate Isles. = L. iocu-
Jaris, jocular.—L,. ioculus, a little jest; dimin.-of éocus, a jest; see
Joke, And see Juggle. Der. jocular-ly, jocular-i-ty.

JOCUND, merry, pleasant. (F.—L.) ME. ioconde, Iocunde ;
Chaucer, C. T. 16064 (G 596).—OF. jocond, pleasant, agreeable
(Godefroy); Roquefort gives the derived adj. jocondeux, and the
derived sb. jocondité.—L. iticundus, pleasant, agreeable; from L.
iuudre (pt. t. id-ui), to help, aid; so that the orig. sense was ‘ help-
ful See Adjutant. Der. jocund-ly, jocund-i-ty.

JOG, to push slightly, jolt. (E.?) Prob. imitative. Cf. Kentish
jock, to jolt, shake; E.D.D. Coopers Thesaurus (1565) has:
“Succutio, To shake a thyng, to iogge vp.’ Not found earlier. De Bo
gives the WFlem. djokken, to jolt, to jog, as equivalent to F. choquer,
to knock; cf. also Low G. jukkeln, jukkern, to jog on, to ride badly
(Berghaus); Norw. and Swed. dial. jukka, to jog up and down in
riding. Cf. also E. shog, as used in Hen. V, ii. 1. 47. And see
Shock. Der. Hence jog as a neuter verb, to move by jolts, ride
roughly, trot, Wint. Ta. iv. 3. 132,Tam. Shrew, iii. 2. 213 ; jog-trot;
jogg-le, frequentative form.

JOHN DORY, the name of a fish. (F.—L.) John Dory is the
vulgar name of the fish also called the dory. It occurs in Todd’s
Johnson, spelt Fokn Dory, dory, and doree. 1. Dory or doree is
merely borrowed from the F. dorée, the vulgar F. name of the fish,
signifying ‘ golden’ or ‘gilded,’ from its yellow colour. Dorée is the
fem. of the pp. of the verb dorer, to gild.=L. deaurdre, to gild, lit.
‘cover with gold.’=L. dé, prep. of, with; and aurum, gold. See
Aureate. 2. The prefix Yokn is nothing but the ordinary name;
cf. jack-ass. It is usually explained as a corruption of F. jaune,
yellow; but there is no reason why Englishmen should have prefixed
this F. epithet, nor why Frenchmen should use such a tautological
expression as jaune dorée, ‘This suggested corruption is not a ‘ well-
known fact,’ but given as a mere guess in Todd’s Johnson. 3. In
fact, the prefixing of the name Fokz was due to the popularity of an
extremely well-known ballad, entitled Yohkn Dory, pr. in 1609; see
Ritson’s Anc. Songs. It is alluded to in Beaum. and Fletcher, The
Chances, A. ili..sc. 2. .See Nares.

JOIN, to connect, unite, annex. (F.—L.) ME. ioynen, ioignen ;
P, Plowman, B. ii. 136; A. ii. 106.—OF. joign-, pr. pl. stem of
joindre, to join. = L. iwngere, pp. iunctus, to join (base iug-). = 4/YEUG,
to join; cf. Skt. yj, to join, connect; also Gk. (evyvuvar, to join,
yoke. From the same root is E. yoke; see Yoke. Der. join-er,
Sir T. More, Works, p. 345 d3 join-e-ry; joind-er (from F. joindre),
Tw. Nt. v. 160; and see joint, junct-ure, junct-ion, junta. From F.
joindre we also have ad-join, con-join, dis-join, en-join, re-join, sub-join.
From L. iungere (pp. iunct-us) we have ad-junct, con-junct-ure, con-
junct-ion, dis-junct-ion, in-junct-ion, sub-junct-ive; whilst the L. base
iug- appears in con-jug-al, con-jug-ate, sub-jug-ate, jug-ul-ar.

JOINT, a place where things are joined, a hinge, seam. (F.—L.)
ME. ioynt, P. Plowman, B. xvii. 175, C. xx. 1423 ‘out of coynte,’ id.
C. x. 215.—F. joint, ‘a joint, joining;’ Cot.—OF. joint, pp. of
joindre, to join; see Join. Der. joint, adj. (from the pp.) ; joint-ly,
joint-stock ; joint, verb, Ant. and Cleop. i. 2. 963 joint-ure, Merry
Wives, iii. 4. 50, from MF. joincture, ‘a joining, coupling, yoaking
together’ (Cot.), from L. iunctira, from the pp. stem of iungere, to
join ; joint-ress (short for joint-ur-ess), Hamlet, i. 2. 9.

JOIST, one of a set of timbers which support the boards of a
floor. (F.—L.) Sometimes called jist (with i as in Christ); and
vulgarly jice, riming with mice. ‘They were fayne to lay pavesses


[large shields] and targes on the joystes of the bridg to passe ouer;’”
Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. i. c. 415 (R.). ME. giste, gyste. ‘Gyyste,


balke, Trabes;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 196. ‘The gistes;’ Wright’s
Vocab. i. 170 (Walter de Bibbesworth). ‘ Gyst that gothe ouer the
florthe, soliue, giste;’ Palsgrave.— OF, giste, ‘a bed, couch, lodging,
‘place to lie on’ (Cot.) ; also a joist, as in Palsgrave; mod. F. gite.
So called because these timbers form a support for the floor to lie
on.—OF, gesir, to lie, lie on. See Gist, which is related. Der.
joist, verb.

JOKE, a jest, something mirthful. (L.) ‘ Foking decides great
things;’ Milton, tr. of Horace (in Minor Poems). =—L. iocus, ‘a joke,


JOT


Der. joke, vb.; and see joc-ose, joc-uwl-ar. ¢@- The Du. jok, a joke,
is merely borrowed (like the E. word) from Latin,

JOLE, another form of Jowl, q.v. (E.)

JOLLY, merry, plump. (F.—Scand. or L.) ME. Joly, ioly, ioli,
Chaucer, C. T. 3263. He also has iolily, id. 4368 (A 4370) ; iolinesse,
id. 10603 (F 289); iolitee, id. 10592 (F 278). The older form is
Jolif or iolif; King Alisaunder, 1. 155.—OF. jolif, later joli, ‘jolly,
gay, trim, fine, gallant, neat;’ Cot. B. Perhaps the orig. sense was
‘festive.’ = Icel. jol, Yule, a great feast in the heathen time; see jal
in Icel. Dict. See Yule. . But this solution is by no means
certain. Perhaps from Late L. *gaudivus, joyful; from gaudium,
joy, gaudére, to rejoice (P. Meyer). Der. jolli-ly, jolli-ty, jolli-ness.

JOLLY-BOAT, a small boat belonging to a ship. (Scand.) In
Todd’s Johnson. Apparently, the element jolly is the adj. above,
but this may have been substituted for Dan. jolle, a yawl, jolly-boat ;
Swed. julle, a yawl; cf. Du. jol, a yawl, skiff. See Yawl., Boat is
then a needless addition, due to the corruption into the E, adj. jolly.
B. Perhaps suggested by jolywat, which seems to have been a sort of
boat. ‘Grete boat and jolywat ;’ Naval Accts. of Hen. VII (1896),
p-181. And this is (doubtfully) derived from Port. galeota, a galliot ;
see Gallevat in Yule ; and see Galliot.

JOLT, to shake violently, to jerk. (E.) Formerly also jozlé.
Cotgrave explains F. heurtade as ‘a shock, knock, jur [jar], jolt,
push;’ and heurter as ‘to knock, push, jur, jowlé, strike.’ Also
found in the comp. jolt-head, a thick-headed fellow, Two Gent. ili.
1. 290; Tam. Shrew, iv. 1.169. ‘ Teste de baeuf, a joult-head, jober-
noll, loger-head, one whose wit is as little as his head is great ;’ Cot.
In North’s Plutarch, p. 133 (R.), or p. 158, ed. 1631, we find some
verses containing the word jolt-head, as well as the expression ‘ this
heavy jolting pate, said of Jupiter, when regarded as a stupid tyrant.
B. The frequent association of jolt with head or pate suggests a con-
nexion with joll or jowl in the sense of ‘head.’ Jol, or heed, iolle,
Caput;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘Jolle of a fysshe, zeste;” Palsgrave. ‘Ther
they jollede [beat on the head] Jewes thorowe ;’ MS. Calig. A. ii.
f. 117; cited in Halliwell. ‘They may joll horns [knock heads}
together ;’ As You Like It, i. 3. 59. ‘How the knave jowls it [viz.
a skull] to the ground ;’? Hamlet, v. 1.84. ‘I jolle one aboute the
eares, Je soufflette;’ Palsgrave. Cf. prov. E. jow, jowl, to knock
(the head); jollock, to jolt. We may also compare prov. E. jot,
to jerk, spelt jotte in Palsgrave. ‘y. It may be added that jolt seems
to have acquired a frequentative sense, ‘to knock often,’ and was
soon used generally of various kinds of jerky knocks. ‘He whipped
his horses, the coach jolted again ;’? Rambler, no. 34 (R.). See further
under Jowl. Der. jol, sb.

JONQUIL, a kind of narcissus. (F.—Span.—L.) In Kersey’s
Dict. ed. 1715. Accented joxguil, Thomson’s Seasons, Spring, 548.
= Mod. F. jonguille, a jonquil. So named from its rush-like leaves ;
whence it is sometimes called Narcissus juncifolius.=—Span. junguillo,
jonquil.—Span. junco, a rush.—L. iuncus, a rush. See Junket.


q So also Ital. giunchiglia, a jonquil; from gijzrcto~g4tish
JORDAN, a pot, chamber-pot. (L.? 1Gk.22 ME.
Iordan, Chaucer, C. T. 12239 (C 305); see ‘Pytwhits-ncte. Also


Iurdon, Iordeyne; see Prompt. Pary., and Way’s note; p. 267.
Halliwell explains it as ‘a kind of pot or vessel formerly used by
physicians and alchemists. It was very much in the form of a soda-
water bottle, only the neck was larger, not much smaller than the
body of the vessel; &c.’— Late L. imrdanus; as in Prompt. Parv.
B. Origin uncertain; but it may very well have been named from the
river Jordan (L. Jordanés, Gk. “Iopddvns, Heb. Yardén, i.e. flowing
down). ‘We must remember this was the time of the Crusades.
It was the custom of all pilgrims who visited the Holy Land to
bring back a bottle of water from the Jordan for baptismal purposes.
... It was thus that Fordan as a surname has arisen. I need not
remind students of early records how common is Yordax as a
Christian name, such cognomens as ‘ Jordan de Abingdon’ or
‘Jordan le Clerc’ being of the most familiar occurrence;’ Bardsley,
Our English Surnames, p. 53. Thus ordan may be short for
‘Jordan-bottle.’ Halliwell further explains how the later sense (as
in Shakespeare) came about; the bottle being, in course of time,
occasionally used for baser purposes. | Not from Dan. or Swed,
jord, earth; the adj. from which is jordisk, and means ‘terrestrial.’
JOSS, a Chinese figure of a deity. (Port.—L.) ‘Critic in jars
and josses ;’ Epilogue to A Jealous Wife, by Colman (1761). Not
Chinese ; but a corruption of Port. deos, God. Cognate with Span.
dios, OF. deus. L. Deus, God; nom. case. See Deity.
JOSTLE, JUSTLE, to strike or push against. (F.—L.; with E.
suffix.) [Not in P. Plowman, as said in R.] ‘Thou justlest nowe too
nigh;’ Roister Doister, iii. 3. 129 (in Spec. of Eng., ed. Skeat).
aoe with E, frequentative suffix -le, from just or joust; see
oust.


jest.” Cf. OF. joguer; in Ducange, s.v. Jocare. Brugmann, i. § 302. | JOT, a tittle. (L.—Gk.—Heb.) In Spenser, Sonnet 57. Spelt


JOURNAL


iote in Udall, Prol. to Ephesians, and Phaer’s Virgill, An. b. xi; see
Richardson. Englished from L. idta, Matt. v.18 (Vulgate).=—Gk.
idra, the name of the Gk. letter 1.— Heb. ydd (y), the smallest
letter of the Heb. alphabet. £. Hence also Du. jot, Span. and Ital.
jota, a jot, tittle. See the Bible Word-book. Der. jot, verb, in the
phr. ‘to. jot down’=to make a brief note of. _@ Not the same
word as prov. E. jot, to jolt, jog, nudge; which appears as jotée in
Palsgrave.

JOURNAL, a day-book, daily newspaper, magazine. (F.—L.)
‘Turnall, a boke, journal;’ Palsgraye. Properly an adj., signifying
‘daily.’ ‘ His journal greeting ;’ Meas. for Meas. iv. 3.92. ‘Their
journall labours ;’ Spenser,.F. Q.i. 11. 31.—F. journal, adj. ‘joumall,
dayly ;’ Cot.=—L. diurndlis, daily; from diés,a day. See Diurnal,
Diary. Der. journal-ism, journal-ist, journal-ist-ic, And see
journey, ad-journ. Doublet, diurnal.

JOURNEY, a day’s travel, travel, tour. (F.—L.) ME. Tornee,
Tournee. It means ‘a day’s travel’ in Chaucer, C. T. 2740 (A 2738).
Spelt jurneie, Ancren Riwle, p. 352, 1. 29.—F. journée, ‘a day, or
whole day; also...a daies worke or labour; a daies journy, or
travell;’ Cot. B. F. journée answers to Span. jornada, Ital. gior-
nata, Late L. jornata, a day’s work; all formed with the fem. ending
of a pp. as if from a verb *jorndre, from the stem jorn- (<diurn-),
which appears in Late L. jorn-dle (=E. journal). = L. diurn-us, daily.
See Journal. Der. journey, verb, Rich. III, ii. 2. 146; journey-
man, Rich. II, i. 3. 274.

JOUST, JUST, to tilt, encounter on horseback. (F.—L.) ME.
Tusten, Iousten ; Chaucer, C. T. 96; P. Plowman, B. xviii. 82,.—OF.
jouster, ‘to just, tilt, or tourney ;’ Cot. (mod. F. jouwter). (Cf. Ital.
giostrare, Span. justar, to tilt.] B. The orig. sense is merely ‘to
meet’ or ‘to approach,’ a sense better preserved in OF. adjouster,
to set near, to annex; (not E. adjust), [The hostile sense was
easily added as in other cases; cf. E. to meet (often in a hostile
sense), to encounter, and ME. assemblen, to fight, contend, so common
in Barbour’s Bruce. So also F. rencontre.J—=Late L. iuxtare, to
approach, cause to approach, join; see Ducange.—L. iuxta, near,
close, hard by; whence OF. jouste, ‘neer to, hard by;’ Cot. y. The
form iuxtaé=iig-is-ta, fem. abl. of the superl. form of adj. iig-is,
continual; from base ag- of iungere, to join.—4/YEUG, to join;
see Join. Brugmann, i. § 760 (1), note I. Der. joust, sb., ME.
Iuste, Touste, P. Plowman, B. xvii. 74. Also jost-le, q.y.

JOVIAL, mirthful. (F.—L.) In the old astrology, Jupiter was
‘the joyfullest star, and of the happiest augury of all;’ Trench, Study
of Words. ‘The heavens, always joviall, i.e. propitious, kindly ;
Spenser, F. Q. ii. 12. §1.—OF. Fovial, ‘joviall, sanguine, born under
the planet Jupiter;’ Cot.—L. Jowidlis, pertaining to Jupiter. —L.
Toui-, for OLat. Iouis, Jove, only used in later Lat. in the form
Ti-piter (=Jove-father), Jupiter. B. Again Jowis stands for an older
Diouis (cf. Oscan dat. Diuv-ei), allied to diés, day, and to deus, God;
cf. Gk. Acds, gen. case of Zevs. See Deity, Tuesday. Brugmann,
i. §§ 120, 223. Cf. Skt. div, to shine, whence deva-, a deity, daiva-,
divine; also Skt. dyu-, inflectional base of Dyaus. See Max Miiller,
Lect. on Lang. vol. ii. Der. jovial-ly, jovial-ness, jovial-i-ty.

JOWL, JOLH, the jaw or cheek. (E.) ‘Cheek by jowl;’ Mids.
Nt. Dream, iii. 2. 338. B. A corruption of chowl; cf. cheek and
chowl, and cheek for chowl in E.D.D. [Wealso find chowl ina some-
what different sense. ‘ The chowle or crop adhering unto the lower
side of the bill [of the pelican], and so descending by the throat ;
a bag or sachel very observable ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. v.
c. I. §5. ‘His chyn with a chol lollede’ =his chin wagged with the
hanging flesh beneath it; Piers Ploughman’s Crede, 1. 224 (in Spec.
of Eng. ed. Skeat).]  y. There is also a form chaul, meaning (ap-
parently) ‘jaw. ‘Bothe his ckaul [jowl] and his chynne;’ Ali-
saunder, fragment A, ed. Skeat, 1119 (in App. to Wm. of Palerne).
This chaul is a corruption of an older form chawel=chavel. Thus in
the Cursor Mundi, 1. 7510, when Dayid describes how he slew the
lion and the bear, he says: ‘I scok pam be pe berdes sua pat I pair
chafftes raue in twa’ =I shook them by the beards so that I reft their
chaps in twain; where other MSS. read chawelis, chaulis, and chaules.
So also: ‘Chavylbone, or chawl-bone or chaule-bone, Mandibula ;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 70; and see Way’s note, who cites: ‘A chafte,
a chawylle, a chekebone, maxilla;’ and: ‘Brancus, a gole, or a
chawle.’ And again: ‘ And pat deor to-dede his chefles’ (later text,
choules) =and the beast opened (?) his jaws; Layamon, 6507.— AS.
ceafi, the jaw; pl. ceaflas, jaws, chaps; Grein,i. 157. ‘Danid...
his ceaflas t0-teer’? = David tare asunder the chaps (of the bear) ;
ZElfric on the Old Test.; Liber Regum.+OSax. kaflds, pl. the jaws.
Allied to Icel. kjaptr, the mouth, jaw, esp. of a beast; for *kjaf-ir;
cf. Swed. aft, jaw, Dan. kjeft. The Zin AS. ceaff is a mere suffix,
and the word must have originated from a Teutonic base *kaf-.
See Chafer. §&. But the connexion of chowl with chaul is doubtful,
and the word cannot be said to be satisfactorily solved; see N. E. D,


JUGGERNAUT


@ The change from ch to j is well illustrated by the Norfolk jig-
by-jole=cheek by jowl= Ayrshire cheek for chow, cheek by chowl;
see EB. D. D.

JOY, gladness, happiness. (F.—L.) ME. Joyé, ioyé (dissyllable),
Chaucer, C. T. 1873 (A 1871); earlier, in Ancren Riwle, p. 218.—
OF. joye, joie, ‘joy, mirth;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. gioja, joy; Gascon goy.
-L. nent. pl. gaudia, which was turned into a fem, sing. as in other
cases (see Antiphon); from sing. gaudium, joy.—L. gaudére, to
rejoice. SeeGaud. Der. joy, verb, 2 Cor. vii. 13 (A. V.); joy-ful,
ME. joiefull, Gower, C. A. i. 191, bk. ii. 931 ; joy-ful-ly, joy-ful-ness ;
Jjoy-less, joy-less-ly, joy-less-ness ; joy-ous, ME. joy-ows, Shoreham’s
Poems, ed. Wright, p. 120, 1. 143 joy-ous-ly, joy-ous-ness.

JUBBAH, a kind of tunic. (Arab.) See Jupon.

JUBILATION, a shouting for joy. (L.) In Cotgrave; ME.
Iubilacioun, Wyclif, Ps. cl. 5.—F. jubilation, ‘a jubilation, exulta-
tion ;’ Cot.=—L. iubilationem, acc. of iibilatio,a shouting for joy; cf.
L. iubilatus, pp. of itibilare, to shout for joy.—L. iabilum, a shout of
joy. B. There is nothing to connect this with the following word ;
the resemblance is accidental. Nevertheless, the words were con-
fused at an early date. Der. jubil-ant, from pres. pt. of iubilare.

J UBILES, a season of great joy. (F.—L.—Heb.) ME. Iubilee,
Chaucer, C. T. 7444 (D 1862).—OF. jubilé, ‘a jubilee, a year of
releasing, liberty, rejoicing ;” Cot.—L, iabileus, the jubilee, Levit.
xxv. IL; masc. of adj. ‘u#bileus, belonging to the jubilee ; Levit. xxv.
28. An alteration of L. *obéleus (due to the influence of L. iabilum,
a shout of triumph), which is the true rendering of Late Gk.
iwBndatos, adj. formed from iwBndos, jubilee (Josephus, Antiq. iii. 12.
3).— Heb. yobél, a blast of a trumpet, a shout of joy; orig. a blast
onaram’s horn. Distinct from the word above.

JUDGE, an arbitrator, one who decides a cause. (F.—L.) ME.
Tuge, iuge, Chaucer, C. T. 15931 (G 463).—F. juge, ‘a judge;’
Cot.—L. itdicem, acc. of ilidex, a judge. B. The stem is ié-dic-,
and signifies ‘one who points out what is law;’ from ii-s, law, and
dic-dre, to point out, make known. For ius, see Just. For dicare,
see Indicate. Der. judge, verb, ME. Iugen, iuggen, Rob. of
Glouc., p. 345, l. 7082 ; judge-ship ; judg-ment, ME. iugement (three
syllables), Chaucer, C. T. 807 (A 805); judgment-day, judgment-
seat; and see judicature, judicial, judicious. Also ad-judge, pre-
judge.

SUDICATURE, judgment. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave and Pals-
grave.—F. judicature, ‘judicature;’ Cot.—L. iidicdtira, office of
a judge; cf. zudicat-us, pp. of iudicare, to judge.—L. itdic-, stem
of ttidex, ajudge. See Judge. Der. (from L. ttidicare) judic-able ;
(like pp. ttdicatus), judicat-ive (L. itdicatiuus), judicat-or-y (L.
itidicatorius).

JUDICIAL, pertaining to courts of law. (F.—L.) In Cot-
grave; and in Wyclif, Nehem. iii. 30.—OF. judiciel, ‘judiciall;’
Cot, = L. ztidicialis, pertaining to courts of law. = L. tudici-um, a trial,
suit, judgment. = L,. ‘tidici-, decl. stem of itidex, a judge. See Judge.
Der. judicial-ly ; judiciar-y (L. itidiciarius); and see below.

JUDICIOUS, full of judgment, discreet. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Macb. iv. 2. 16.—F. judicieux, ‘judicious ;’ Cot. —L. *idicidsus, not
found, but regularly formed with suffix -dsws from L. iidici-, decl.


stem of tuidex, ajudge. Der. jyudicious-ly, judicious-ness.

JUG, a kind of pitcher. °A iugge, poculum ;’ Levins,
ed. 1570. ‘Aiuggeto drinkin; Minsheu, ed. 1637. Of uncertain
origin. Mr. Wedgwood’s suggestion is probably right; he connects
it with ‘ Fug or Fudge, formerly a familiar equivalent of Joan or
Jenny.’ In this case, the word is of jocular origin ; which is rendered
probable by the fact that a drinking-vessel was also called a jack, and
that another vessel was called a jill. ‘ A jacke of leather to drink
in;’? Minsheu. ‘ack seems to have been the earlier word, and Fill
was used in a similar way to go with it. ‘Be the Jacks fair within,
the Fills fair without ;’ Tam. of Shrew, iv. 1.51; on which Steevens
remarks that it is ‘a play upon the words, which signify two
drinking-measures as well as men and maid-servants.’? B. The use
of Fug or Yoan appears in Cotgrave, who gives: ‘ Fehannette, Jug,
or Jinny ;’ and again: ‘ annette, Judge, Jenny, a woman’s name.
[How Fug came to be used for Joanna is not very obvious; but pet
names are liable to strange confusion. The forms Jug and Fudge are
‘more like the Heb. Fudith (Gen. xxvi. 34).] Similarly, Wedgwood
cites ‘Susan, a brown earthenware pitcher,’ used in the district of
Gower (Philol. Proceedings, iv. 223). Cf. also ‘a jack of beer,’
Dodsley’s O. Plays, ed. Hazlitt, vii. 218, ix. 441. As Fug was
a female name, we also find jug, a mistress, as a term of endearment;
id. iv. 183, vi. 511, viii. 400, xii. 115. @ The curious word jubbe,
in the sense of bottle, occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 13000 (B 1269) ; but
jug can hardly be a corruption of it.

JUGGERNAUT, the name of an Indian idol. (Hindi—Skt.)
See Southey, Curse of Kehama, c. xiv; and see Yule. = Hindi Fagan-
natha, vernacularly jaganndth, a name esp. applied to Kyshna, as


317


318 _ JUGGLER


worshipped at Puri in Orissa (H. H. Wilson). =—Skt. jagannatha-,
lord of the world. —Skt. jagat, world ; natha-, protector, lord.

JUGGLER, one who exercises sleight of hand. (F.—L.) ME.
Togelour, iogelour, Chaucer, C. T. 7049, 10533 (D 1467, F 219).
« Ther saugh I pleyen iogelours, Magiciens, and tregetoures;’ Chaucer,
Ho. Fame, iii. 169. Spelt juglur, with the sense of ‘ buffoon ;’
Ancren Riwle, p. 210, 1. 30.—OF. jogleor, jugleor, jougleor (Burguy) ;
later jongleur, with inserted x; hence ‘ jongleur, a jugler;’ Cot.=—L.
zoculatorem, acc. of ioculator, a jester. = L. ioculari,to jest. = L. zoculus,
a little jest, dimin. of iocws, a joke; see Joke. Der. juggler-y, ME.
Togelrie, Chaucer, C. T. 11577 (F 1265). Hence also was developed
the verb juggle, formerly iuglen, used by Tyndall, Works, p. Iot,
col. 2, 1. 7 from bottom (see Spec. of Eng. ed. Skeat, p. 169, 1. 70,

. 170, 1. 101) 3 juggl-ing, juggle, sb.
eS UGULAR, sii the side of the neck. (L.) Also
jugulary. ‘ Fugularie, of or belonging to the throat;’ Minsheu, ed.
1627. Formed with suffix -ar or -ary (== L. -Grius) from iugul-um or
iugul-us, the collar-bone (so called from its joining together the
shoulders and neck); also, the hollow part of the neck above the
collar-bone; also the throat. Dimin. of iugum, that which joins,
a yoke. —4/YEUG, to join. See Yoke.

JUICE, sap, fluid part of animal bodies. (F.—L.) ME. Iuse,
iuce ; Gower, C. A. ii. 265; bk. v. 4120; spelt Zuys, S. E. Legendary,
St. Cuthbert, 1. 52.—OF. jus, ‘juice, liquor, sap, pottage, broath ;’
Cot.—L. itis, broath, soup, sauce, pickle; lit. ‘ mixture.’ Skt.
yusha-, soup. 4/ YEU, to bind, mix; cf. Skt. yz, to bind, join, mix ;
Gk. Cup, leaven. Der. juic-y, juice-less, juic-i-ness.

JUJUBE, the fruit of a certain tree. (F.—L.—Gk.—Pers.) The
tree is the Rhamnus zizyphus or Rhamnus jujuba. ‘ Iuiubes, or iubeb-
fruit ;? Minsheu, ed. 1627. See Lanfranc, Cirurgie, p. 74, 1. 14.—
OF. jujubes, ‘the fruit or plum called jujubes;’ Cot. A pl. form. =
Late L. jujuba (Ital. gingiuba, Florio); altered. form of the pl. of L.
zizyphum, the jujube; fruit of the tree zizyphus.—Gk. Ci¢upor, fruit
of the tree (i¢upos. = Pers. zayzafun, zizfin, zizafun, the jujube-tree ;
Rich. Dict. p. 793.

JULEP, a sweet drink, demulcent mixture. (F.—Span.— Arab. —
Pers.) ‘This cordial julep here;’? Milton, Comus, 672. ‘Good
wine ... made in a zwlep with suger;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth,
b. iii. c. 18. See Lanfranc, Cirurgie, p. 76, 1. 9. =F. julep, ‘a julep,
or juleb, a drink made either of distilled waters and syrops mixed
together; or of a decoction sweetned with hony and sugar, or else
mingled with syrops;’ Cot.=Span. julepe, julep.— Arab. julab, julep;
from Pers. gulab, rose-water, also, Julep; Rich. Dict. pp. 512, 1239.
= Pers. gul, a rose; and ab, water; id. pp. 1238, I.

JULY, the name of the seventh month. (F.—L.) Chaucer, Treat.
on the Astrolabe, calls the month Julius, Iuyl, Iuylle; pt.i. § 10. Fuly
is from AF, Fulie, L. Itilius, a name given to this month (formerly
called Quinctilis) in honour of Caius Julius Cesar, who was born in
this month. Hence the E. form was accented as ily (rhyming with
newly) as late as in Dr. Johnson’s time; cf. ‘Then came hot Fely,
boyling like to fire;’ Spenser, F. Q. vii. 7. 36. Now 4u-ly, prob.
to distinguish it more clearly from Fine (N. and Q., 9 S. x. 426).
 Quinctilis is from quintus, fifth, because this was formerly the
fifth month, when the year began in March. Quintus is from quingue,
five; see Five.

JUMBLE, to mix together confusedly. (E.) ‘1 jumbyll, I make
a noyse by removyng of heavy thynges. I jumble, as one dothe
that can [not] play upon an instrument, je brouille;’ Palsgrave.
Here it means to make a confused noise. Cf. prov. E. jum, a jolt ;
whence jummle, jumble, to jolt (frequentative). Of imitative origin.
@ Chaucer uses the equivalent form jompren. ‘Ne jompre eek no
discordaunt thing yfere’=do not jumble discordant things together;
Troilus, ii. 1037. But Sir T. More uses the word in the sense of
“to mingle harmoniously;’ as in: ‘Let vs... see how diffinicion
of the churche and hys heresies will jumper and agree together
among themselfe ;? Works, p. 612a. Compare this with the phr.
‘to jump together’ (=to agree with). Der. jumble, sb.; jumbl-
ing-ly.

JUMP (1), to leap, spring, skip. (Scand.?) In Shak. As You
Like It, il. 1. 53, and in Palsgrave; but not found earlier. The
frequentative form jumper occurs in Sir T. More, and jompren in
Chaucer; see quotations s. v. Fumble. Hence the word jump may
have been known to our dialects at an earlier date. Cf. Sc. jump
(pt. t. jamp) in E.D.D. Perhaps it is of Scand. origin. Cf. Jutland
jumpe, to be in oscillating motion, also, to jump, spring (Feilberg);
allied to Swed. dial. jémpa, to jog up and down, as in riding (Rietz).
Note also Swed. dial. gumpa, to spring, jump, or wag about heavily
and clumsily (Rietz); Swed. guppa, to move up and down; Dan.
gumpe, to jolt; gimpa, to wriggle (Rietz) ; Norw. gimpa, to swing
oneself about (Ross); Norw. gimpe, to see-saw, gamp, a nag (Larsen).
As Rietz remarks, there must have been a strong verb *gimpa, pt. t.


JUNTO


*vamp, pp. gumpinn. + MHG. gumpen, to jump; gumpeln, to play
the buffoon ; gempeln, to jump, dimin. form of prov. G. gampen, to
jump, spring, hop, sport; see Schmeller’s Bavarian Dict.; cf. MHG.
gampelmann, a buffoon, jester, one who plays antics ; mod. G. gimpel,
a simpleton. But the history of the verb is very obscure. Der. jump,
sb., used in the sense of ‘lot’ or ‘hazard,’ Anthony, iii. 8.6, Also
jump (2).

JUMP (2), exactly, just, pat. (Scand.?) ‘¢Fump at this dead
hour ;’ Hamlet, i. 1. 65; cf. v. 2.386; Oth. ii. 3. 392. From the
verb above, in the sense to agree or tally, commonly followed by
with, but also used without it.
in one;’ Tam. Shrew, i. 1.195. ‘ They jump not on a just account;’
Oth. i. 3. 5. See Jump (1).

JUNCTION, ajoining. (L.) Used by Addison, Spectator, no. 165,
§ 5: ‘Upon the junction of the French and Bavarian armies.’ Formed,
by analogy with F. sbs. in -iov, from L. iunctidnem, acc. of tunctio,
a joining; cf. L. iunctus, pp. of tungere, to join. See Join.

JUNCTURE, a union, critical moment. (L.) ‘Signes work-
ings, planets iunctures, and the eleuated poule’ [pole]; Warner,
Albion’s England, b. v. c. 27. ‘ Functure, a joyning or coupling
together ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. iunctiira, a joining; cf.
iunet-, stem of pp. of iungere, to join. See Join. 4 The sense of
‘ critical moment’ is probably of astrological origin ; cf. the quotation
from Warner. ;

JUNE, the sixth month. (L.) Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, pt. i.
§ 10, has Zunius and Iuyn; the latter answering to F. Fuin. Englished
from L. Junius, the name of the sixth month and of a Roman gens
or clan.

JUNGLE, country covered with trees and brushwood. (Hind.—
Skt.) Not in Johnson; first in 1776 (N.E.D.).—Hind. jangal,
wood, jungle (Forbes).—Skt. jafigala-, adj. dry, desert. Hence
jungle=waste land. @ The Skt. short a is sounded like u in mud;
hence the E. spelling. Der. jungl-y.

JUNIOR, younger. (L.) In Levins, ed. 1570.—L. idnior,
comparative of iuuenis, young; so that ivnior stands for iuuenior.
Cf. Skt. yuvan, young. SeeJuvenile. Der. junior-ship, junior-i-ty.

JUNIPER, an evergreen shrub. (L.) In Levins, ed. 1570.
Spelt junipere; Spenser, Sonnet 26; ieniper, Palladius on Husbandry,
bk. i. 1. 397. —L. dainiperus, a juniper-tree. Of doubtful origin. Der.
gin (3), -V.

JUNK (1), a Chinese three-masted vessel. (Port.— Malay.)
‘China also, and the great Atlantis, ... which have now but junks
and canoas’ [canoes]; Bacon, New Atlantis, ed. 1639, p. 12. Also
in Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, pp. 42, 384. — Port. (and Span.)
junco, a junk.—Malay jong, also ajong, a junk; Javanese jong.
@[ Not allied, as often said, to Chinese chw‘an, ‘a ship, boat, bark,
junk, or whatever carries people on the water;’ Williams, Chinese
Dict., 1874, p. 120; unless the Chinese word is borrowed from
Malay.

JUNK (2), pieces of old cordage, used for mats and oakum.
(Port.—L.) ‘ Funk, pieces of old rope;’ Ash’s Dict., ed. 1775.
“Funk, a sea-word for any piece of old cable ;” Kersey’s Dict., ed.
1715.— Port. junco, a rush; (in a ship) the junk; Vieyra’s Dict.
[As if so called from rush-made ropes; but there is no obvious
connexion. |= L. iuncus, a rush.  B. Salt meat is also facetiously
termed junk by the sailors, because it is as tough as old rope.
@ funk, a lump (Halliwell), is a different word, being for chunk,
a log of wood; see Chump.

JUNKET, a kind of sweetmeat. (F.—Ital.—L.) Also spelt
juncate; Spenser, F. Q. v. 4. 49. In Shak. Tam. Shrew, iii. 2. 250;
Milton, L’Allegro, 102. The orig. sense was a kind of cream-cheese,
served up on rushes, whence its name. Also used as a name for
various delicacies made of cream. Cf. Iuncade; Voc. 590. 44.
‘ Milke, crayme, and cruddes, and eke the Joncate;’ I. Russell, Boke
of Nurture, 1. 93 ; in Babees Book, p. 124.—MF. joncade, ‘a certain
spoon-meat, made of cream, rose-water, and sugar;’ Cot.—Ital.
giuncata, ‘a kind of fresh cheese and creame, so called because it is
brought to market upon rushes; also a iunket;’ Florio. [Cf. MF.
jonchée, ‘a bundle of rushes; also, a green cheese or fresh cheese
made of milk thats curdled without any runnet, and served in a fraile
[basket] of green rushes;’ Cot.; Norm. dial. jonquette, a junket
(Moisy).] Formed as a pp. from Ital. giuncare, ‘to strewe with
rushes ;’ Florio.—Ital. giunco, a rush.—L. iuncum, acc. of iuncus,
arush. Der. junket, vb., junket-ing, Spectator, no. 466. From the
same source, jonguil, q.v., junk (2).

JUNTA, a congress, council. (Span.—L.) In Howell’s Letters,
vol. i. sect. 3, let. 21.—Span. junta, a junta, congress.—L. iuncta,
f. of iunctus, pp. of iungere, to join; see Join. And see Junto,

JUNTO, a knot of men, combination, confederacy, faction.
(Span.—L.) ‘And these to be set on by plot and consultation with
a junto of clergymen and licensers;’ Milton, Colasterion (R.).


‘ Both our inventions meet and jump


JUPON


Erroneously used for junta (above); as if from Span. junto, united,
conjoined. = L. zunctus, pp. of iungere, to join.

JUPON, a tight-fitting tunic, a skirt. (F.—Arab.) ME. gipoun,
Chaucer, C. T. 75; Iupon, Allit. Morte Arthure, 905.—OF. Iupon,
gippon, ‘a short cassock;’ Cot.; also Iuppon. Extended form of F.
jupe, MF. juppe, ‘a gaberdine, cassock,’ Cot.; OF. Iupe, Iuppe. =
Arab. jubba(t), ‘a waistcoat with cotton quilted between the outside
and lining;’ Rich. Dict. p. 4943. whence also E. jubbak, jibbah, a
kind of tunic. See Notes on E, Etym., p. 149.

JURIDICAL, pertaining to a judge or to courts of law. (L.)
Blount, in his Glossographia, ed. 1674, has juridical and juridick.
First in 1502, Formed with suffix -al, from L. diridic-us, relating
to the administration of justice. = L. itri-, decl. stem of itis, law; and
dicaére, to proclaim. See Just and Diction. Der. juridical-ly.

JURISDICTION, authority to execute laws. (F.—L.) ME.
Iurisdiction, Chaucer, C. T. 6901 (D 1319).—F. jurisdiction, ‘ juris-
diction ;’ .Cot.=—L. itirisdictiénem, acc. of turisdictio, administration
of justice. =L. iiris, gen. of itis, justice; and dictio, a saying, pro-
claiming. See Just and Diction.

JURISPRUDENCE, the knowledge of law. (F.—L.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—F. jurisprudence; Cot.—L, iturispridentia,
the science of law.=L. iaris, gen. of ius, law; and pridentia, skill,
prudence. See Just and Prudence.

JURIST, a lawyer. (F.—L.) ‘Furist, a lawyer;’ Blount’s
Gloss.,ed.1674. First in 1481.—F. juriste, ‘a lawyer;’ Cot. — Late
L. itrista, a lawyer. Formed, with suffix -ista (Gk. -torns), from
zur-, stem of itis, law. See Just.

JUROR, one of a jury. (F.—L.) In Shak. Hen. VIII, v. 3.
60. ME. iuroure, P. Plowman, B. vii. 44.— AF. iurour, Yearbooks
of Edw. I, 1292-3, p. 43. [Cf. F. jureur, ‘a swearer or deposer,
a juror;’ Cot.J—L. iiratorem, acc. of iirator, a swearer.=L, iira-,
stem of iu#rdre, to swear; with agential suffix -tor. See Jury.

JURY, a body of sworn men. (F.—L.) ‘I durst as wel trust
the truth of one iudge as of two iuries;’ Sir T. More, Works,
p- 988d. ME. iuree, Allit. Morte Arthure, 662.—F. jurée, ‘a jury,’
Cot.; lit. a company of sworn men. Properly the fem. pp. of F.
jurer, to swear. = L, iiirare, to swear ; lit. to bind oneself by an oath.

_Cf. Skt. yz, to bind; yds, health (Macdonell). Der. jury-man, Tw.
Nt. iii. 2.17. From same source, con-jure. And see juror.

JURY-MAST, a temporary mast. (F.—L.?) ‘ Fury-mast,a yard
set up instead of a mast that is broken down by a storm or shot,
and fitted with sails, so as to make a poor shift to steer a ship ;”
Kersey, ed. 1715. And in Capt. J. Smith, Works, p. 221 (1616).
Perhaps short for ajury mast, where ajury= OF. ajuirie, aid, succour
(Godfrey). From L. adjutare, to aid; see Aid. Cf. ‘cuwere,
remedium;’ Prompt. Parv. Also mod. Proy. ajudaire, ajuaire,
auxiliary (Mistral); OF. ajuer, one who aids (Roquefort).

JUST (1), righteous, upright, true. (F.—L.) ME. Lust, iust;
Wyclif, Luke, i. 17.—F. juste, ‘just;’ Cot.=L. iustus, just. Ex-
tended from zits, right, law, lit. what is fitting ; with suffix -tws. See
Jury. Der. just=exactly, Temp. ii. 1..63; just-ly, just-ness; and
see justice, justify.

JUST (2), the same as Joust, g.v. (F.—L.)

JUSTICH,, integrity, uprightness ; a judge. (F.—L.) ME. Justice,
iustice, generally in the sense of judge; Chaucer, C. T. 316.—OF.
justice, (1) justice, (2).a judge (Burguy); the latter sense is not in
Cotgrave. = L. iustitia, justice; Late L. iustitia, a tribunal, a judge ;
Ducange.= L. iusti-=iusto-, for iustus, just; with suffix -t/-a. See
Just (1). Der. justice-ship, justic-er, K. Lear, iii. 6. 59; justic-i-a-ry,
from Late L. iustitiarius.

JUSTIFY, to show to be just or right. (F.—L.) ME. Iustifien,
iustifien ; Wyclif, Matt. xii. 37; Gower, C. A. i. 843; bk. i. 1250.—
F. justifier, ‘to justifie ;” Cot.—L. iustificire, to justify, show to be
just.=L, iusti-=iusto-, for iustus, just; and -ficare, used (in com-
position) for facere, to make. See Just and Fact. Der. justifi-able,
justifi-abl-y, justifi-able-ness, justifi-er; also justificat-ion, Gower, C. A.
i. 169; bk. ii. 296; Wyclif, Rom. v. 16, from F. justification, from
L. acc. iustificatiénem, allied to the pp. iustificdtus ; also justificat-ive,
justificat-or-y.

JUSTLE, the same as Jostle, q.v. In Temp. v. 158.

JUT, to project. (F.—L.) ‘Futting, proiectus;’ Levins. ‘ For-
jetter, to jut, leane out, hang over;” Cot. A phonetic variant of
Jet (1),q.v. Der. jutt-y, sb. a projection, Macb, i. 6. 6, from MF.
jettée, ‘a cast ..a jetty, or jutty, Cot.; hence jutt-y, vb. to project
over, Hen. V, iii. i, 13. See Jetty.

JUTE, a substance-resembling hemp. (Bengali.—Skt.) ‘ The
jute of commerce is the product of two plants of the order of Tiliacee,
viz. Corchorus capsularis and Corchorus olitorius . . the leayes .. are
employed in medicine . . dried leaves prepared for this purpose being
found in almost every Hindu house in some districts of Bengal , . Its
recognition as a distinct plant [from hemp] dates from the year 1795,


KEDGE, KIDGE 319


when Dr. Roxburgh, Superintendent of the East India Company’s
Botanical Garden at Seebpoor, forwarded a bale prepared by himself,
under its present name of jute ;? Overland Mail, July 30, 1875, p. 17
(which contains a long article on Jute). — Bengali jit, joot, ‘the fibres
of the bark of the Corchorus olitorius, much used for making a coarse
kind of canvas, and the common ganni bags; it is also sometimes
loosely applied to the plant ;’ H. H. Wilson, Gloss of Indian Terms,
p- 243. From jhdfo, vulgarly jhufo, the native name in Orissa (Yule).
Perhaps from Skt. jita-, more commonly jafé, the matted hair of
Civa, a braid of hair.

JUVENILE, young. (F.—L.) Fuvenile is in Bacon’s Essays,
Of Vicissitudes, § last ; juvenilitie in Minsheu, ed. 1627. =F. juvenile,
‘youthful ;’ Cot.=—L. iwuenilis, youthful, L. inwenis, young ; cognate
with E. Young, q.v. Der. juvenile-ness, juvenil-i-ty. Cf. juvenal
(from L. iwuendlis, by-form of iuuenilis), jocularly used, L. L, L. i. 2.8.
And see junior.

JUXTAPOSITION, contiguity, nearness. (F.—L.) In Kersey,
ed. 1715.—F. juxtaposition (1690); Hatzfeld. A coined word, from
L. iuxta, near; and F. position, position. See Joust and Position.


K


KAFTAN, a Turkish robe. See Caftan.

KAI, KAGE, a cabbage. (North. E.—L.) Kail or kale is the
North E. form of cole or cole-wort. Spelt keal in Milton, Apology
for Smectymnuus (R.). ‘ Cale, olus ;’ Cath. Anglicum (1483). ME.
caul; AS. caul, cawel.—L. caulis, a stalk, a cabbage; whence were
also borrowed Icel. kal, Dan. kaal, Swed. kal; see Cole.

KATLS, nine-pins. (O. Low G.) Perhaps obsolete. Formerly
also keyles, ‘A game call’d nine-pins, or heils;’ Ben Jonson,
Chloridia. *¢ Quille, the keel of a ship, also a keyle, a big peg, or pin
of wood, used at nine-pins or keyles;’ Cotgrave. Spelt hayles;
Reliquize Antiquze, i. 292; caylys,id. ii. 224. Of O. Low Ger. origin;
Du. hegel, ‘a pin, kail; mid kegels spelen, to play at nine-pins ;’
Sewel. (It may be observed that sails were shaped like a cone.) Cf.
Dan. kegle, a cone; kegler, nine-pins; Swed. kegla, a pin, cone; both
borrowed from Low G.-+-OHG. chegil, G. kegel, a cone, nine-pin,
bobbin (whence F. quiile). B. Evidently a dimin. form; from
a Teut. base *kagil-. Related to Du. keg, kegge, a wedge; Swed.
dial. kage, stubs, stumps.

KALEIDOSCOPE, an optical toy. (Gk.) Modern. Invented
by Sir D. Brewster, and named by him in 1817. Coined from Gk.
kad-os, beautiful, ef60-, for efS0s, appearance, and oxor-ety, to behold,
survey. Thus the sense is an instrument for ‘ beholding beautiful
forms.’

KALENDAR, KALENDS; see Calendar, Calends.

KALI, soda-ash; see Alkali.

KANGAROO, the name of a quadruped. (Australian.) ‘The
kangaroo is one of the latest discoveries in the history of quadrupeds ;’
tr. of Buffon’s Nat. Hist., London,1792. ‘The animals called by the
natives kangooroo or kanguru;’ Cook, Journal, Aug. 4, 1770. But
the name is no longer in use in the Australian dialects, which change
rapidly. See Austral English, by E. E. Morris. Der. kangaroo-
rat,

KAVASS, an armed constable. (Turk.— Arab.) Modern. From
Turk.-Arabic gawwas, lit. a bowmaker; from Arab. gaws, a bow;
Rich. Dict. pp, 1152, 1153.

KAYAK, a light Greenland canoe. (Eskimo.) An Eskimo word ;
common in all the dialects (N. E. D.).

KAYLES, ninepins; see Kails,

KEDGE (1), to warp a ship. (F.—L.) ‘Kedge, to set up the
foresail, and to let a ship drive with the tide, lifting up and letting
fall the kedge-anchor, as often as occasion serves ;’ Kersey’s Dict.
ed. 1714. And see the longer description in Todd’s Johnson. ‘A
caggeyng cable ;’ Naval Accounts, Henry VII, 1485, ed. 1896, p. 12.
Allied to cadge, to fasten, to tie, which seems to be a variant of catch.
Cf. catch-anchor, under catch, sb. (3),in N.E.D. See Catch. Cf.
also: ‘let fall a cadge anker;’ Hakluyt, Voy. iii. 107 (last line).
Der. kedg-er, kedge-anchor, ‘Kedge-anchors, or Kedgers, small anchors
used in calm weather, and in a slow stream;’ Kersey. So called
because used to assist in kedging ; see Todd’s Johnson. ;

KEDGE (2), KIDGE, cheerful, lively. (E.) ‘Kedge, brisk,
lively ;? Ray’s Gloss., ed. 1691; see reprint, ed. Skeat (Eng. Dial.
Soc.), pref. p. xviii. Also called Aidge (Forby). An East Anglian
word, ‘Kygge, or ioly, kydge, kyde, jocundus, hillaris, vernosus ;
Prompt Parv. Cf. prov. E. cadgy, cheerful ; and perhaps Swed. dial.
kagg, wanton, kagas, to be eager.


320 KEEL


KEEL (1), the bottom of a ship. (Scand.) ME. hele (rare). ‘The
schippe [Noah’s ark] was ... thritty cubite high from the cule to the
hacches vnder the cabans ;’ i.e. from the bot/om to the hatches; where
[instead of cule = bottom, from F. cul] another reading is kele=keel;
Trevisa, tr. of Higden, ii. 233. Of Scand. origin; answering to Icel.
kjolr, Dan. kjol, Swed. kél, the keel of a ship; Teut. type *heluz.
@ Distinct from AS. céol, a ship, OHG. Aol, MHG. #iel, a ship.
But Du. and G. kiel, a keel, are borrowed from Scand. Der. keel-ed,
hkeel-age; also keel-son, q.v. Also keel-haul, q.v.

KEEL (2), to cool. (E.) ‘ While greasy Joan doth keel the pot;’
L. L. L. v. 2.930. The proper sense is not to sewm the pot (though
it may sometimes be so used) but to keep it from boiling over by stirring
it round and round; orig. merely to cool it or keep it cool. ‘Keel,
to keep the pot from boiling over;’ A Tour to the Caves, 1781; see
Eng. Dial. Soc. Gloss. B. 1. ‘Faith, Doricus, thy brain boils ; heel
it, keel it, or all the fat’s in the fire;’ Marston, [Induction to] What
You Will, 1607; in Anc. Drama, ii. 199 (Nares). ME. kelen, to cool,
once a common word; see Ormulum, 19584; OEng. Homilies, i. 141;
Prompt. Parv., p. 270; Court of Love, 775; Gower, C. A. ii. 360;
bk. v. 6908. AS. célan, to cool.= AS. cdl, cool; seeCool. @f Note
the regular change from 6 to @, as in fot, foot, pl. fet, feet; so also
feed from food, &c.

KEELHAUL. (Du.) Also keelhale, ‘to punish in the seaman’s
way, by dragging the criminal under water on one side of the ship
and up again on the other;’ Johnson. ‘ Hawling vnder the keele ;’
Capt. Smith, Works, p. 790. Formerly called keel-raking (Phillips).
A less severe punishment was ducking at the main-yard (Phillips).
From keel (1) and hale (2); like Du. kielhalen, G. kielholen. The E.
word was imitated from Dutch. See N. E. D.

KEELSON, KELSON, a piece of timber in a ship next to the
keel. (Scand.) ‘Keelson, the second piece of timber, which lies
right over the keel;” Kersey, ed. 1715. Spelt kelsine, Chapman, tr.
of Homer, Iliad, i. 426.—Swed. kolsvin, the keelson; Dan. kjolsviin ;
Norweg, &jélsvill (Aasen) ; whence G. kielschwein, a keelson. B. For
the former syllable, see Keel. The latter syllable wholly agrees, in
appearance, with Swed. svin, Dan. sviin, G. schwein, which = E, swine
(see Swine). And such may have been the original sense; for
animal names are strangely applied. Perhaps a better sense is
given by Norweg. kolsvill, where svill answers to G. schwelle, E. sill ;
see Sill. It is not known in which direction the alteration was
made.

KEEN, sharp, eager, acute. (E.) ME. kene, Chaucer, C. T. 1968
(A 1966); Havelok, 1832. AS. céne; Grein, i.157. Here é comes
from an older 4; the orig. sense is ‘ knowing’ or ‘skilful.’4-Du. hoen,
bold, stout, daring ; Icel. kenn (for kenn), wise ; OHG. chuoni, kuani,
MHG. kuene, G. kiihn, bold. Teut. type *kdnjoz, able, wise; from
kon-, 6-grade of the Teut. root *ken (4/GEN), to know; see Ken,
Can (1). Der. keen-ly, keen-ness, Merch. of Ven. iy. 1. 125.

KEEP, to regard, have the care of, guard, maintain, hold, pre-
serve. (E.) ME. kepen, pt. t. kepte, pp. kept; Chaucer, C. T. 514 (or
512). AS. cépan (weak verb), to keep, guard, observe, heed ; also to
seize, lay hold of, &c. Teut. *kdpjan; root unknown; prob. allied
to AS. gecép, fit, suitable. [Distinct from AS. cépan, variant of cypan,
to buy (see Cheap).] In Ailfric’s Homilies, i. 412, we find ‘gif he
dysigra manna herunga cépd on arfeestum weorcum’=if he seek after
the praises of men in pious works. ‘Georne Saes andagan cépton’
=they earnestly awaited the appointed day; AKIf. Hom. ii. 172.
‘ Cépad heora timan’ = they observe (or keep) their times ; id. ii. 324.
Der. keep, sb., keep-er, keep-er-ship ; keep-ing, As You Like It, i. 1. 9;
also keep-sake, i.e. something which we seep for another’s sake, first
known in 1790, and added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict.

KEG, a small cask or barrel. (Scand.) Formerly also spelt cag.
“Cacque, Caque, a cag;’ Cot. And in Sherwood’s Index to Cotgrave,
we find: ‘A kegge, caque; voyez a Cag.’ —Icel. kaggi, a keg, cask ;
Swed. kagge, ‘a cag, rundlet, runlet,’ Tauchnitz, Swed. Dict.; Nor-
wegian kagge, a keg, a round mass or heap, a big-bellied animal or
man (whence prov. E. kedge-bellied, pot-bellied). And see Kails,
which is probably related.

KEDP, a kind of large sea-weed; hence, the calcined ashes of
sea-weed. (E.) Formerly kilp or kilpe. ‘As for the reits [sea-weeds]
kilpe, tangle, and such like sea-weeds, Nicander saith they are as
good as treacle. Sundry sorts there be of these reits, going under
the name of Alga;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxxii. c.6. ME. culp;
“as culpes of the see waggeth with the water ;’ Trevisa, tr. of Higden,
ii. 181. Not found in AS.

KELPTE, in Scotland, a fabulous demon assuming various shapes,
usually that of a horse. (C.) ‘Be thou a kelpie;’ Burns, Let. to
Mr. Cunningham, Sept. 10, 1792. And see Brand, Antiq., ed. Ellis,
ii. 513; the kelpie is a kind of horse, that makes a bellowing or
neighing sound, and browses beside a lake. Prob. from Gael. calpach,
colpach, a heifer, bullock, colt; colpa, a cow, a horse; Irish colpach,


KERSEY


colpa, a cow,a.colt. And perhaps the Gael. word is from Icel. kalfr,


a calf (Macbain). See my Notes on E. Etym. p. 150.

KELSON, the same as Keelson, q.v. (Scand.)

KELT, the same as Celt, q.v.

KEMB, to comb. (E.) See Unkempt.

KEN, to know. (Scand.) Not E., but Scand. ME. kennen, to
know, discern. ‘ That kenne myght alle, that all might know; Allit.
Poems, ed. Morris, C. 357.—Icel. kenna, to know; Swed. hanna;
Dan. kende.4Du. kennen; G. kennen. B. The sense ‘to know’ is
Scand.; but it is not the original sense. ‘The verb is, etymologically,
a causal one, signifying to make to know, to teach, show; a sense
frequently found in ME. ‘Kenne me on Crist to bileue’=teach me
to believe in Christ; P. Plowman, B.i. 81. Such is also the sense


of AS. cennan, Grein, i. 156; and of Goth. kaznjan, to make known,,


John, xvii. 26. Teut. type *kannjan-, to make known, causal of the
verb which appears as cunnan in AS. and kunnan in Gothic, with the
sense ‘to know.’ For further remarks, see Can (1). Der. ken, sb.,
Cymb. iii. 6. 6; a coined word, not in early use; kenn-ing, the range
of sight, as far as one can see.

KENNEL (1), a house for dogs, pack of hounds. (F.—L.)
Properly ‘a place for dogs;”’ hence, the set of dogs themselves.
ME. kenel (with one 2), Prompt. Parv.; Sir Gawayn and Grene
Knight, 1140.— Norm. French *kenil, answering to OF. chenil,
a kennel. £. The Norman form is proved by the & being still
preserved in English, and by the Norman F. kevet, a little dog,
occurring in a Norman poem cited in Way’s note in Prompt. Pary.,
p- 271, where the ME. kenet also.occurs. This kenet is dimin. of
a Norman F. ken, answering to Picard kien, OF. chen (Littré), mod.
F. chien, a dog. So also in OF. chen-il, the former syllable=the
same OF. chen. sy. From Late L. canile, ‘domus canis;’ Voc. 198.
29.—L. can-, base of canis, a dog ; with the termination -tle, occurring
in ou-ile, a house or place for sheep, a sheepfold, from oz-ts, a sheep ;
cf. Ital. canile, a kennel. See Canine. Der. kennel, vb.; kennell’d,
Shak. Venus, 913.

KENNEL (2), a gutter. (F.—L.) In Shak. Tam. Shrew, iv.
3. 98. A later form of the ME. canel or canell, of which ME. chanel
(=mod. E. channel) is a variant with palatalisation.—AF. canel,
a channel; in Charlemagne, ed. Michel, 1. 556.—L. canalem, acc. of
canalis, a canal; hence, a channel or kennel. See Channel, of
which kennel is a doublet;-also Canal.

KERAMIC, the same as Ceramic, q.v.

KERBSTONE, CURBSTONH, a stone laid so as to form
part of the edging of stone or brick-work. (Hybrid; F.—L.; and
152)
Dict., ed. 1715. A phonetic spelling of curbstone ; so called from its
curbing the stone-work, which it retains in its place. See Curb and
Stone.

KERCHIEF, a square piece of cloth used to cover the head;
and later, for other purposes. (F.—L.) Better spelt curchief. Spelt
herchiefe in Shak. Merry Wives, iii. 3. 62, iv. 2. 74. ME. couerchef
(=coverchef), Chaucer, C. T. 6172 (D 590); also spelt cowerhcief
(=coverchief), id. 455 (A 453). Also kerchef, Chaucer, Parl. of
Foules, 272.—OF. covre-chef, later couvre-chef; cf. ‘Couvre-chef,
a kerchief ;? Cot.—OF. covrir, later cowvrir, to cover ; and chef, chief,
the head, which is from L. caput, the head. See Cover and Chief.
q A word of similar formation is curfew, q.v. Der. hand-kerchief,
pocket-hand-kerchief.

KERMES, the dried bodies of insects used in dyeing crimson.
(Arab.—Skt.) See Crimson,

KERN (1), KERNG, an Irish soldier. (Irish.) In Shak. Macb.
i. 2. 13, 30; v. 7.17. ‘The kearne... whom only I tooke to be the
proper Irish souldiour;’ Spenser, View of the State of Ireland ; in
Globe ed. of Spenser, p. 640, col. 1.—Trish ceatharn, a troop, but
used in the sense of ceatharnach, a (single) soldier; from Olrish
ceithern, a troop (Macbain). Cp. L. caterua,atroop. See Cateran.
(Stokes-Fick, p. 76).

KERN (2), another spelling of Quern, q. v.

KERNEL, a grain, the substance in the shell of a nut. (E.)
ME, hkirnel (badly hirnelle), P. Plowman, B. xi. 253; curnel, id. C.
xiii. 146. AS. cyrzel, to translate L. granum; Voc. 138.22. Formed
(with dimin. suffix and vowel-change from Teut. «to y) from AS,
corn, grain. Teut. stem, *kurnilo-. See Corn.

KEROSENE, a lamp-oil made from petroleum. (Gk.) Il coined
from Gk. xnpés, wax; with suffix -ene.

KERSEY, coarse woollen cloth. (E.) In Shak. L. L. L. v. 2.
413. ‘Carsey cloth, cresy;’ Palsgrave. ‘ Pro tribus ulnis de kersey ;”
Earl of Derby’s Expedition, 1390 (Camd.Soc.), p. 89, 1. 3. The word
is certainly English, and the same word as the personal name Kersey;
named from Kersey, 3 miles from Hadleigh, in the S. of Suffolk,
where a woollen trade was once carried on. A little weaving still
goes on at Hadleigh. The place of the manufacture of kersey is now


‘Kerbstone, a stone laid round the brim of a well;’ Kersey’s’


‘ee


ter See


KERSEYMERE


the North of England, but it was once made in the South (Phillips’
Dict.). AS. Ceres-ig, ‘Ceer’s island;’ Birch, Cart. Saxon. iii. 603.
@ The F. carizé, ‘kersie’ (Cot.), Du. karsaai, Swed. kersing, are all
from the E. word.

KERSEY MERE, a twilled cloth of fine wool. (Cashmere.) A
modern corrupt spelling of cassimere, an old name for the cloth also
called Cashmere. See Cassimere, Cashmere. The corruption
is clearly due to confusion with sersey, a coarse cloth ofa very different
texture.

KESTREL, a base kind of hawk. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q.
il. 3. 43 spelt castrel, Beaum. and Fletcher, Pilgrim, i. 1; kastril,
Ben Jonson, Epiccene, iv. 4; see Nares, The # is excrescent (as
after s in whils-t, amongs-2); it stands for kas’rel, kes’rel, short for
casserel, kerserel. = OF, quercerelle, ‘a kastrell ;’ Cot. Also cresserelle,
crecerelle,‘a kestrel,’ id. Probably for *guercelelle, the regular dimin.
of quercelle, ‘a kastrell,’ Cot.—L. querquédula, a kind of teal; see
Diez and Scheler. Prob. of imitative origin. B. See also, in Cot-
grave, the forms cercelle, a teal; cercerelle, a kestrel, teal; crecerelle,
a kestrel; mod. F. crécerelle. The form cercelle is mod. F. sarcelle ;
see Littré, under crécelle, crécerelle, sarcelle; Diez, under cerceta, the
Spanish form. The Ital. zristarello, a kestrel (Florio), represents
a form *cristarello; cf. Burgundian cristel, a kestrel, a form cited by
Wedgwood. (See my letter to The Academy, Oct. 7, 1882, p. 262.)

KETCH, a small yacht or hoy. (F.—L.) ‘Ketch, a vessel like
a hoy, but of a lesser size;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. ‘ We stood in for the
channel : about noon we saw a sail having but one mast; judged it
to be a ketch; but, drawing nearer, found it was a ship in distress,
having lost her main and mizen masts;’ Randolph’s Islands in the
Archipelago, 1687, p. 103 (Todd). Formerly also catch; Capt. J.
Smith, Works, ed. Arber, p. 51. Supposed to be a particular use of
catch, from the verb to catch. See Catch; and see Catch, sb. 2)
in N. E, D.

; KETCHUP, a sauce. (Malay.) ‘Shall I use hetch-up?’ W. King,
Art of Cookery, let. 8; in Eng. Poets (1810); ix. 252. Spelt ketchup
in 1711 (N. E. D.).—Malay kéchup, kichup, a sauce; soy. (In Du.
spelling ketjap.) See C. P. G. Scott; Malayan Words in English.
Perhaps ult. of Chinese origin; see N. E. D.

’ KETTLE, a metal vessel for boiling liquids. (Scand.—L.) ME.
ketel (with one ¢), Prompt. Parv.; Wyclif, Levit. xi. 35. As the & is
hard, it is prob. from Icel. hetill, a kettle; we find also AS. cete/,
AS. Leechdoms, ii. 86; spelt cetil in the Epinal Glossary, 168. Cf.
also Du. ketel, G. kessel. The Mceso-Goth. form is katils, occurring
in the gen. pl. fatilé in Mark, vii. 4 (Gk. xaAxiowv, Lat. eramentorum,
A. V. ‘brazen vessels”), B. Borrowed from L. catillus, a small bowl,
also found in the form catinulus; dimin. form of L. catinus, a bowl,
a deep vessel for cooking food. The L. catinus is a kindred word to
Gk. KdrvA0s, a cup, soTvAn, asmall cup; seeCotyledon. 4 From
the L. catillus were also borrowed Icel. ketill, Swed. kittel, Dan. kedel,
Du. ketel, G. kessel, and even Russ. hotel’. Der. kettle-drum, Hamlet,


Tee feeel.

KEX, hemlock; orig. a hollow stem. (C.?) ‘Bundles of these
empty exes ;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Elder Brother, iii. 5.13. ME.
hex, kix; P. Plowman, B. xvii. 219; Prompt. Parv. In Walter de
Bibbesworth, zhe kex seems to mean ‘ dry stalks,’ and translates OF.
le frenole; Wright, Vocab., vol. i. p. 157. Cf. prov. E. keggas, tall
umbelliferous plants; answering to Corn. cegas, hemlock. Prob. of
Celtic or Latin origin ; cf. Welsh cegid, hemlock; L. cictita, hemlock.
@ Hence also prov. E. kecksies=hexes, in Shak. Hen. V, v. 2. 52;
a pl. sb, of which the proper singular form is not hecksy, but kex. See
Way’s note in Prompt. Pary., s.v. kyx. Note also that hex really =
kecks, and is itself a plural; kexes being a double plural. W. cecys, pl.,
is merely the E. word borrowed.

KEY, that which opens or shuts a lock. (E.) Formerly called kay,
timing with may, Merch, of Ven. ii. 7.59; and with swrvey, Shak.
Sonnet 52. ME. eye (timing with pleye, to play), Chaucer, C. T.
9918 (E 2044). AS. cég, cege, Grein, i. 156; whence ME. heye by
the usual change of g into y, as in day from AS. deg ; OFries. hat,
kei, akey. Der. key-board, key-hole, key-note, key-stone.

KHALIF, KHALIFA, the same as Calif, q. v.

KHAN, a prince, chief, emperor. (Pers.—Tatar.) Common in
Mandeville’s Travels, spelt Cham, Cane, Chane, Can, Chan; pp. 42,
215, 216, 224, 225.= Pers. khan, lord, prince (a title); Palmer’s Pers.
Dict., col. 212. But the word is of Tatar origin; the well-known


title Chingis Khan signifies ‘great khan’ or ‘great lord,’ a title |
| kydneers ;? Wyclif, Exod. xxix. 13 (earlier version) ; ‘and twey hid-


assumed by the celebrated conqueror Temugin, who was proclaimed
Great Khan of the Moguls and Tatars, A.D. 1205. He is always


known by the sole 7i#/e, often also spelt Gengis Khan, corrupted (in | a
three MSS. have kideneiren. In W. de Bibbesworth, we find the sing.


| form hidenei; Wright’s Voc. vol: i. p. 149. Comparing hiden-ei, pl.


See Introd. to Chaucer’s Prioresses Tale,


Chaucer) to Cambuscan.
Der. khan-ate, where the suffix is of L.


&c., ed. Skeat, p. xlii.
origin.
KHEDIVE, a prince. (F,—Pers.) A Turkish title given to the


‘blains, kibes ;’ Spurrell.


KIDNEY 321


| governor of Egypt; the word itself is, however, not Turkish, but’ bor=


rowed from Persian.—F, Khédive.=Pers. khadiw, khidiw, khudiw,
a king, a great prince, a sovereign, Rich. Dict. p. 601; spelt hidiv,
a king, Palmer’s Dict. col. 216, where the name for the viceroy of
Fort is given as khidéwi. Cf. Pers. khoda, God (Vullers, p. 663).
KHIDMUTGAR, KITMUTGAR, a male servant who waits
at table; in India. (Hind.—Pers.—Arab.) First in 1765. — Hind.
khidmatgar, a male domestic who waits at table (Forbes). = Pers.
khidmat-gar, the same ; lit. ‘rendering service ;’ Rich. Dict., p. 601.
Formed with Pers. -gar, agential suffix, from Arab. khidmat, service,


employment, from Arab. root khadama, he served; ib. (See Yule.)


KIBBE, a chilblain. (C.) In Hamlet, v. r.153. ‘She halted of
[owing to] a kybe;’ Skelton, Elynour Rummyng, 1. 493. ‘ He haltith
often that hath a kyby hele ;’ id. Garland of Laurell, 1.502. ‘ Gibbus,
kybe,’ Voc. 586. 25. ‘Kybis on the fete ;? Lanfranc, Cirurgie, p. 5
(ab. 1400). == W. cibi, a kibe (D. Silvan Evans); also cibwst, ‘ chil-
B. Explained in Pughe’s Welsh Dict. as
standing for cib-gwst, from cib, a cup, seed-vessel, husk, and gwst,
a humour, malady, disease. Thus the sense would appear to be
‘a malady in the shape of a cup,’ from the swelling or rounded form.

KICK, to strike or thrust with the foot. (Scand.) ME. kiken,
Chaucer, C, T. 6523 (D 941); P. Plowman, C. v. 22. [W. cicio, to
kick, given in the Eng.-Welsh portion of Spurrell’s Dict., and Gael.
ceig’, to kick, are both from E.] We find also prov. E. kink, to kick,
also to jerk, twist the body, to sprain. —Norw. kikka, for kinka, to
over-drive a horse, so as to sprain him; 4ikla, to jerk, to go jerkily,
like a capricious horse; kk, a spraining or straining of a sinew
(Ross). Evidently related to Kink. Cf. Swed. kik-hosta, Low G.
kinkhoost, the chincough, hooping-cough. A kink is a twist in a rope;
hence, a hitch, jerk, kick, sprain. See hick, kink, in E. D. D.

KICKSHAWS, a delicacy, fantastical dish. (F.—L.) ‘Any
pretty little tiny hickshaws;’? 2 Hen. IV, v.1. 29. The pl. is kick-
shawses. ‘Art thou good at these kickshawses?’ Twelfth Nt. i. 3. 122.
At a later time, Aickshaws was incorrectly regarded as being a pl.
form.s Kickshaws is a curious corruption of F. quelque chose, lit.
something, hence, a trifle, small delicacy. This can be abundantly
proved by quotations. ‘Fricandeaux, short, skinlesse, and dainty
puddings, or quelkchoses, made of good flesh and herbs chopped
together, then rolled up into the form of liverings, &c., and so boiled ;’
Cotgrave’s F. Dict. ‘I made bold to set on the board kickeshoses, and
variety of strange fruits;’ Featley, Dippers Dipt, ed. 1645, p. 199
(Todd), ‘Fresh salmon, and French hkickshose ;’ Milton, Animad-
versions upon Remonstrant’s Defence (R.). ‘ Nor shall we then need
the monsieurs of Paris .. . to send [our youth] over back again
transformed into mimicks, apes, and hicshoes;’ Milton, Treatise on
Education (Todd). ‘As for French hickshaws, Cellery, and Cham-
paign, Ragous, and Fricasees, in truth we’ve none;’ Rochester,
Works, 1777, p. 143. ‘Some foolish French guelquechose, I warrant
you. Quelguechose! oh! ignorance in supreme perfection! He means
a kek shose!’ Dryden, Kind Keeper, A. iii. sc. 1.=F. quelque chose,
something. = L, gudal-is, of what kind, with suffix -guam; and caussa,
a cause, thing. Qudlis answers to E. which; quam is fem. acc. of qui,
answering to E. who. See Which, Who, and Cause,

KID, a young goat. (Scand.) ME. hid, Chaucer, C. T. 3260, 9238
(E 1364); Ormulum, 7804. —Norw. and Dan. kid, a kid; Swed. kid,
in Widegren’s Swed. Dict., also hidling ; Icel. hid, kidlingr, a kid.
OHG. kizzi, MHG. and G. hitze, a kid. Der. kid, verb ; kid-ling, with
double suffix -J-ing ; kid-fox, a young fox, Much Ado, ii. 3. 44; also
kid-nap, g.v-

KIDDILE, a kind of weir formed of basket-work, placed in a river
to catch fish, (AF.) AF. hidel, pl. kideux, Statutes of the Realm,
i. 316 (1351); MF. quideau, ‘a wicker engine whereby fish is caught ;’
Cot. F. guideau; which cannot be derived from F. guider (Hatzfeld),
though it may have been modified byit. Cf. E. it, a tub, basket for
fish; prov. E. kid, a tub, basket. See Kit (1).

KIDNAP, to steal children. (Scand.) ‘ People that lye in wait
for our children, and may be considered as a kind of kidnappers
within the law ;’ Spectator, no, 311 (Richardson, Johnson). ‘ Thou
practisest the craft of a kidnapper ;’ said by Giant Maul, in Bunyan,
Pilg. Prog. pt. 2.. Compounded of &id, a child, in thieves’ slang; and
nap, more commonly zab, to steal. Kid is of Scand. origin; see Kid.


_ Nap is also of Scand. origin ; from Dan. zappe, to snatch, Swed. nappa,


to catch, to snatch, lay hold on; see Nab. Der. hid-napp-er.
KIDNEY, a gland which secretes the urine. (E.) ‘And the two


neris;? (later version). But the ending -eris, -eers seems to be a sub-
stitution for -eren, -eiren (see N. E. D.); and, in the same passage,


kiden-eiren, with ME.. ei, ey; an egg, pl. eiren, eggs, we see the


| probability that ME. ei (pl. eiren) constitutes the second element in


as


322 KILDERKIN


kid(e)n-ey. B. This ME. ei is from AS. ég (pl. @gru, whence ME.
eire, later eire-n, a double pl. form), meaning ‘egg ;’ from the shape.
Cf. Du. e7, an egg, pl. ezjeren. The former element is unknown;
perhaps it represents an AS. adj. form *cydden, or an AS. *cyddan,
formed from AS. codd, a bag, husk, which in ME. also meant ‘belly.’
Cf. prov. E. kid, a pod, husk; kiddon, a kidney; Swed. dial. kudde,
apod. @ The ME. zere,a kidney, seems to be a different word;
from Icel. yra, Dan. nyre, cognate with G. niere,a kidney. Der.
hidney-bean. The phrase ‘ of his kidney’ means ‘ of his size or kind ;’
see Merry Wives, ili. 5. 116.

KILDERKTN, a liquid measure of 18 gallons. (Du.—F.—Span.
—Arab.—L.) In Levins, ed. 1570; spelt kylderkin. ‘Take a kilder-
hin... of 4 gallons of beer ;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist., § 46. The size of
the measure appears to have varied. A corruption (by change of the
liquid x tol) of MDu. kindeken. Spelt kylderken in Palsgrave; hil-
derkyn in 1390; see Riley, Memorials of London, p. 517; but kin-
derkin in 1598 and 1691, kynterkyn in 1530 (N. E.D.). Kilian
gives: ‘Kindeken, kinneken, the eighth part of a vat.’ In mod. Du.,
kinnetje means ‘a firkin,’ which in English measure is only half
akilderkin. B. The form resembles that of Du. kindekin, ‘a. little
child,’ Sewel ; formed, with dimin. suffix -ken (=E. -kin=G. -chen),
from Du. kind, a child; but the real origin is very different. It is
ascertained to be a derivative, with the same suffix -kenx, from a Du.
spelling of OF. quintal, ‘a quintal, or hundredweight ;” Cot. See
further under Quintal. ‘See Grimm, Wort., s.v. Kindlein (2);
Verwijs and Verdam, s. v. Kindekijn (2);’ N. E. D.

KILL, to slay, deaden. (E.) ME. fillen, more commonly cullen ;
a weak verb. Spelt cullen, P. Plowman, A. i. 64; kullen (various
reading, killen), id. B. i. 66. The old sense appears to be simply ‘to
hit’ or ‘strike.’’ ‘ We kylle of thin heued’=we strike off thy head ;
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 876. ‘pauh a word cuwlle pe ful herde
up o pine herte’=though a word strike thee full hard upon the
heart; Ancren Riwle, p. 126, 1. 13; with which compare: ‘ be cul
of per eax’ =the stroke of the axe; id. p. 128, 1.1. ‘ Ofte me hine
culde, often people struck him; Layamon, 1. 20319. If a native
word, it answers to an AS. type *cyllan, from the weak grade,
c(w)ul, of cwel-an, to die; of which E. quell is the causal form, The
sense ‘to strike’ is somewhat against this; but there is a parallel
form in EFries. kiillen, to vex, strike, beat; which suits very well ;
cf. also OHG. chollen, to vex, kill, martyr, allied to quellan, with
the same sense. For the loss of w, cf. dull, which is related to
dwell. See Quell. 4 It bears some resemblance to Icel. holla,
to hit on the head, to harm; from ollr, top, summit, head, crown,
shaven crown, pate; cf. Norweg. kylla, to poll, to cut the shoots
off trees; from Norweg. koll, the top, head, crown; Aasen. But this
hardly seems the right solution. Der. kill-er.

KILN, a large oven for drying corn, bricks, &c.; bricks piled for
burning. (L.) ‘Kylne, Kyll, for malt dryynge, Ustrina;’ Prompt.
Parv., p. 2743 kulne, Reliquiz Antique, ii. 81. AS. cylz, a drying-
house ; ‘ Siccatorium, cyl, vel ast;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 58 (where
ast = Gst=E, oast in oast-house, a drying-house). Also spelt cyline in
the Corpus glossary, 1.906. . Merely borrowed from L. culina,
a kitchen;. whence the sense was easily transferred to that of
‘drying-house.’ The Icel. kylna, Swed. kélna, a kiln, are from the
same source ; so also W. cylyn, cyl,a kiln. See Culinary.

KILOGRAMME, KILOGRAM, a weight containing 1000
grammes ; about 2.205 lb. avoirdupois. (F.—Gk.) F. kilogramme
(1795).—F. kilo-, for Gk. xiao, a thousand; and F. gramme, for
Gk. ypaypa, a letter, also taken to mean a small weight.

KILOMETRE, a length of 1000 metres; nearly five furlongs.
(F.—Gk.) F. kilometre (1795).—F. kilo-, for Gk. xidcot, a thousand;
and F. métre,a metre. See Metre.

KILT, a very short petticoat worn by the Highlanders of Scotland.
(Scand.) The sb. is merely derived from the verb Hilt, to tuck up,
added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. ; he makes no mention of the sb.
“Her tartan petticoat she'll Ait,’ i.e. tuck up; Burns, Author’s
Earnest Cry, st. 17. ‘Kilt, to tuck up the clothes;’ Brockett’s
North-Country Words. G. Douglas translates Virgil’s Nuda genu
(Zin. i. 320) by hiltit. ‘To kylte, succingere;? Cath. Anglicum
(1483).— Dan. hilte, to truss, tuck up; Swed. dial. #ilta, to swathe
or swaddle a child (Rietz); MSwed. upkilta, to tuck up (Ihre). Cf.
Icel. hilting, a skirt. B. There is an allied sb., signifying ‘lap ;’
occurring in Swed. dial. Ailta, the lap; cf. Icel. kjalta, the lap,
kjoltu-barn, a baby in the lap, kj6ltu-rakki, a lap-dog.

KIMBO; see this discussed under Akimbo.

KIN, relationship, affinity, genus, race. (E.) ME, kun, hyn, kin.
‘J haue no kun pere’ =I have no kindred there; P, Plowman, A. vi.
118, where some MSS. have kyn; spelt kynne, id. B. v. 639. AS.
eynn; Grein, i. 177. 4+ OSax. hunni; Icel. kyn, kin, kindred, tribe;
cf. kynnt, acquaintance; Du. kunne, sex; Goth. huni, kin, race, tribe.
B. Teut. type *kunjom, neut. From Teut. *kun, weak grade of the


KING


‘root KEN, equivalent to Idg. 4/GEN, to generate; whence L. genus..


See Genus, Generate. Der. from the same source are kind, q.v.,
kindred, -q.v., king, q.v. Also kins-man = kin’s man = man of the.
same kin or tribe, Much Ado, v. 4. 112 ; kins-woman, id. iv. I. 305;
kins-folk, Luke, ii. 44. i

KIND (1), sb., nature, sort, character. (E.) ME. hund, kunde,
hind, kinde ; Chaucer, C. T. 2453 (A 2451); spelt kunde, Ancren
Riwle, p. 14, 1. 10. AS. cynd, generally gecynd, Grein, i. 387, 388;
the prefix ge- making no difference to the meaning ; the most usual
sense is ‘nature.’ ‘Teut. type *kundiz, fem.; from *kun-, base of
*kun-jom, kin, with suffix -di-=Idg. -ti-. See Kin. Der. kind-ly,
adj., ME. kyndli=natural, Wyclif, Wisdom, xii. 10, and so used in
the Litany in the phr. ‘ kindly fruits;’ whence also kindli-ness. Also
hind (2) below.

KIND (2), adj., natural, loving. (E.) ME. kunde, kinde;
Chaucer, C. T. 8478 (E 602). ‘For pe kunde folk of pe lond’=for
the native people of the land; Rob. of Glouc. p. 40, 1. 937. A
common meaning is ‘ natural’ or ‘native.’ AS. cynde, natural, native,
in-born; more usually gecynde, where the common prefix ge- does
not alter the sense; Grein, i. 178, 388. Tent. type *kund-joz, from
the sb. *kundiz; see the sb. above. Der. kind-ness, ME. kindenesse
(four syllables), Chaucer, C. T. 5533 (B 1113); hind-ly, adv. ; kind-
hearted, Shak, Sonnet 10,

KINDLE (1), to set fire to, inflame. (Scand.) ME. kindlen ;
Chaucer, C. T. 12415 (C 481); Havelok, 915; Ormulum, 13442.
Formed from Icel. kynda, to light a fire, kindle; Swed. dial. kinda,
kynda, kvdnda, to kindle. £. But Icel. Ayndill, Swed. dial. kyndel,
a torch, has evidently been affected by AS. candel, a candle (from
L. candéla); as shown by Icel. kyndill-messa, Candlemas ; adapted
from AS. candel-me@sse, Candlemas, at the time of the introduction
of Christianity into Iceland. Der. kindl-er.

KINDLE (2), to bring forth young. (E.) ‘The cony that you
see dwell where she is kindled;’ As You Like It, iii. 2. 358. ME.
kindlen, kundlen. ‘ Thet is the uttre uondunge thet kundled wredde’
=it is the outward temptation that produces wrath, Ancren Riwle,
p- 194, l. 20: where we also find, immediately below, the sentence :
‘thus beod theo inre uondunges the seouen heaued-sunnen and hore
fule kundles’ =thus the inward temptations are the seven chief sins
and their foul progeny. Cf. also: ‘ Kyndlyn, or brynge forthe yonge
kyndelyngis, Feto, effeto;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 275. And in Wyclif,
Luke, 1ii. 7, we find ‘ kyndlis of eddris’ in the earlier, and ‘ kyndlyngis
of eddris’ in the later version, where the A. V. has ‘ generation of
vipers. B. The verb kindlen, to produce, and the sb. &indel,
a generation, are due to the sb. kind; see Kind (1). We may
probably regard the sb. kindel as a derivative of kind, and the verb as
formed from it. Both words refer, in general, to a numerous progeny,
a litter, esp. with regard to rabbits, &c.

KINDRED, relatives, relationship. (E.) ‘The former d is ex-
crescent, the true form being &imred, which occurs occasionally in
Shakespeare; as, e. g. in Much Ado, ii. i. 68 (first folio). ‘All the
kinred of Marius;’ Shakespeare’s Plutarch, ed. Skeat, p. 47, 1. 27.
ME. kinrede, Chaucer, C. T. 2792 (A 2790); spelt cunreden, St.
Juliana, ed. Cockayne, p. 60, 1.13. Composed of AS. cyn, kin (see
Kin), and the suffix -r@den, signifying ‘condition,’ or more literally
‘mule. The AS. cynuréden does not appear, but we find the parallel
word hiwréden, a household, Matt. x. 6; and the same suffix is
preserved in E. hat-red. Réden is connected with the Goth. garaideins,
tule, and the adj. Ready, q.v. Der. kindred, adj., K. John, iii. 4. 14.

KINE, cows. (E.) Not merely the plural, but the double plural
form; it is impossible to regard it as a contraction of cower, as some
have absurdly supposed. a. The AS. ci, a cow, made the pl. cy,
with the usual vowel-change of % to 7 ; cf. mis (E. mouse), pl. mys (E.
mice). Hence the ME. ky (=cows), Barbour, Bruce, vi. 405, and
still common in Lowland Scotch. ‘The Aye stood rowtin i the
loan;’ Burns, The Twa Dogs, 1. 5 from end. B. By the addition
of -en, a weakened form of the AS. plural-ending -anx, was formed
the double plural fy-ex, so spelt in the Trinity-College MS. of P.
Plowman, B. vi. 142, where other MSS. have kyene, kyne, kijn, ken.
Hence kine in Gen. xxxii. 15; &c. See Cow. Cf. ey-ne for ey-en
(AS. éag-an), old pl. of eye (AS. gage). Also MDu. hoeyen, pl. of
koe, a cow. ‘y. Or kine may represent the AS. gen. pl. cyna, used.
with numerals; the evidence is insufficient. ;

KINEMATIC, relating to motion. (Gk.) From Gk, «wjyar-,
stem of xivnua, movement; from «veiv, to move; with adj. suffix -ic.

KINETIC, causing motion, (Gk.) From «wytids, moving ;
from xuwety, to move.

KING, a chief ruler, monarch, (E.) ME. ding, a contraction of
an older form kining or kyning. Spelt king, Ancren Riwle, p. 138,
last line; ining, Mark, xv, 2 (Hatton MS.). AS. cyning, also
eynincg, cyninc, cynyng, Mark, xv. 2; Grein, i. 179.— AS. cyn, a tribe,
race, kin; with suffix -ing. The suffix -ing means ‘belonging to,”


KINGDOM


and is frequently used with the sense ‘son of,’ as in ‘#lfred pel-
wulfing ’= A‘lfred son of Atthelwulf; A.S. Chronicle, an. 871. Thus
cyn-ing = son of the tribe, i.e. chosen of the tribe, or man of rank.
OSax. kuning, a king, from kuni, kunni, a tribe; OFriesic hining,
kening, from ken, a tribe; Icel. konungr, a king, with which cf.
Olcel. konr, a noble, Icel. Ayx, a kind, kin, tribe; Swed. konung ;
Dan. konge; Du. koning; G. koinig, MHG, kiinic, OHG. chuning,
kunninc; from MHG. kiinne, OHG. chunni, a race, kind, See Kin.
B. Or else cyn-ing is ‘son of a noble,’ from AS. cyn-e, royal; the
ultimate result is the same. See below. Der. king-crab, king-craft,
king-cup, Spenser, Shepherd’s Kalendar, April, 1.141 3 king-jfisher (so
called from the splendour of its plumage), Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. iii. c. 10; king-less, Rob. of Glouc. p. 105 (1. 2289) $ king-
fet, a double diminutive, with suffixes -/- and -et; hking-like, king-ly,
ME, kingly, Lydgate’s Minor Poems, p. 20; king-li-ness. Also king’s
bench, so called because the king used to sit in court; king’s evil,
Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xx. c.-4 (end), and in Palsgrave, so called
because it was supposed that a king’s touch could cure it, And see
kingdom.

“KINGDOM, the realm of a king. (E.) ME. kingdom, kyng-
dom; P. Plowman, B. vii. 155. Evidently regarded as a compound
of king with suffix -dom; and AS. cyningddm occurs thrice in the
poem of Daniel, But, as a fact, the commoner form was kinedom ;
‘pene kinedom of heouene’=the kingdom of heaven, Ancren Riwle,
p- 148, 1. 3. AS. cyneddm, a kingdom; Grein, i. 179. B. The
former is cognate with OSax. kuningdim, ONorse konungdomr. ‘The
‘latter was formed (with suffix -ddm) from the adj. cyne, royal, very
common in composition, but hardly used otherwise. This adj.
answers nearly to Icel. kour, a man of royal or noble birth; and
is related to Kin and King. Thus the alteration from ME. kine-
to E. king- makes little practical difference. 4 So also, for king-ly,
there is an AS. cynelic, royal; Grein, i. 179.

KINK, a twist in a rope. (Du.) ‘Kink, a twist or short con-
volution in a rope;’ Brockett, Gloss. of North Country Words, ed.
1846.— Du. kink, a twist in a rope; but prob. of Scand. origin. Cf.
Norw. and Swed. kink, a twist in a rope; also Low G, kinke, a twist
inathread. B. From a Teut. base KEIK, to bend; appearing in
Icel. kikna, to sink at the knees through a heavy burden, keikr, bent
backwards, keikja, to bend backwards. ‘The base is well preserved
in Norw. kzka, to twist, keika, to bend back or aside, kinka, to writhe,
twist, kink, a twist (Aasen). @ There is an ultimate relation to
Chincough, q.v. And see Kick.

KIOSK, a Turkish open summer-house, small pavilion. (F.—
Turk.—Pers.) In Byron, Corsair, iii. 1. Spelt kiosgue in French. —
Turk. kushk, késhk (with k pronounced as ki), a kiosk ; Zenker’s Dict.,
p. 774.—Pers. kishk, a palace, a villa; a portico, or similar pro-
jection in a palace, Rich. Dict. p. 1217 ; a palace, kiosk, Palmer’s
Dict. col. 496. Devic remarks that the 7 is due to the Turkish
practice of inserting a slight z after k.

KIPPER, to cure or preserve salmon. (E.) This meaning is
quite an accidental one, arising from a practice of curing kpper-
salmon, i.e. salmon during the spawning season. Such fish, being
inferior in kind, were cured instead of being eaten fresh. ‘ Kipper-
time, a space of time between May 3 and Twelfth-day, during which
salmon-fshing in the river Thames was forbidden ;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.
But some explain kipper to mean a salmon before spawning. It answers
exactly, in form, to AS. cypfera, a kind of salmon ; though the precise
sense is not known. ‘ Eow fon lysted leax odde cyperan,’ You wish
to catch a salmon or a kipper; Metres of Boethius, xix. 12.

KIRK, a church. (North. E.—Gk.) The North, E. form; see
Burns, The Twa Dogs, 1. 19. ME, kirke, P. Plowman, B. v. 1;
Ormulum, 3531. Cf. Icel. kirkja; Dan. kirke; Swed. kyrka; borrowed
from AS. cirice, circe, a church, Of Gk. origin. See Church.

KIRTLE, a sort of gown or petticoat. (L.; with E. suffix.) Used
rather vaguely. ME. kirtel, Chaucer, C. T. 33213 kurtel, Ancren
Riwle, p. 10. AS. eyrteZ, to translate L. palla; Allfric’s Gloss., in
Voc. 107. 26. Also ONorthumbrian cyrte/,to translate L. tunica;
Matt. v. 40 (Lindisfame MS.)+4Icel. #yrtill, a kirtlé, tunic, gown ;
Dan. kjortel, a tunic; Swed. Aortel, a petticoat. PB. Evidently
a diminutive, with suffixed -el, for -22. From L. curtus, short ; which
also appears in Du. hort, G. kurz, short. See Curt.

KISMET, fate, destiny. (Turk.—Pers.—Arab.) First in 1849.—
Turk. gismet, fate.—Pers. gismat, fate.— Arab. gisma(t), a portion ;
fate, destiny. = Arab. root gasama, he divided.

‘KISS, a salute with the lips, osculation. (E.) ME. cos, kos, cus,
kus; later kisse, kiss. "The vowel z is really proper only to the verb,
which is formed from the sb. by vowel-change. ‘And he cam to


Jhesu, to hisse him; And Jhesus seide to him, Judas, with a coss |


thou bytrayest mannys sone ;’ Wyclif, Luke, xxii. 47,48. The form
kusse is as late as Skelton, Phylyp Sparowe, 361. In the Ancren
Riwle, p. 102, we find cos, nom. sing., cosses, pl., cosse, dat. sing. ;


| whence kussen, vb.; Icel. koss, sb., whence kyssa, vb.; Dan. kys, sb.


KLEPTOMANIA 323


as well as cus, verb in the imperative mood. AS. coss, sb., a kiss,
Luke, xxii. 48; whence cyssan, to kiss, id. xxii. 47.44Du. kus, sb.,
hysse, vb.; Swed. kyss, sb., kyssa, vb.; G. huss, MHG. kus, sb.,
whence kiissen, vb. B. All from a Tent. type *kusswz, sb. Cf, Goth.
pe to kiss; EFries. kik, a kiss. Der. hiss, verb; as shown
above.

KISTVAEN, the same as Cistvaen, q.v.
‘KIT (1), a vessel of various kinds, a milk-pail, tub; hence, an
outfit. (Du.) ‘A kit, a little vessel, Cantharus;’ Levins. ‘Hoc
mul[c}trum, a kytt;’ Voc. 696. 14. In Barbour’s Bruce, b. xviiis
1. 168, we are told that Gib Harper’s head was cut off, salted, put
into ‘a ky, and sent to London.—MDnu. kitte, ‘a great wodden
bowle, or tancker,’ Hexham ; Du. it, ‘a wooden can;’ Sewel, Cf,
Norweg. hitte, a large corn-bin in the wall of a house (Aasen), Kit,
an outfit, a collection, set, lot, is the same word (N.E.D.).

KIT (2), a small violin. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Tl have his little gut
to string a Ait with ;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Philaster, Act v. sc. 4
(4th Citizen). Abbreviated from MF. quiterne, a cittern, or cithern,
Cot. ; OF. qguitterne (Roquefort) ; which is borrowed from L. cithara.
See Cithern, Gittern. Godefroy, s.v. guiterneur, a player on
a cittern, quotes the by-form quiterneur, ‘The form is North. F.;
Norm, dial. guiterne, Moisy, ed. 1895.

KIT-CAT, KIT-KAT, the name given to portraits of a, par-
ticular size. (Personal name.) a. A portrait of about 28 by 36 in.
in size is thus called, because it was the size adopted by Sir Godfrey
Kneller (died 1723) for painting portraits of the members of the
Kit-kat club. B. This club, founded in 1703, was so named because
the members used to dine at the house of Christopher Kat, a pastry-
cook in King’s Street, Westminster [or in Shire Lane, near Temple
Bar; see Spectator, no. g, and note in Morley’s edition;] Haydn,
Dict. of Dates. ‘Immortal made, as Kit Kat by his pies;’ W. King,
Art of Poetry, letter viii; pr.in 1708. y. Kit is a familiar abbrevia-
tion of Christopher, a name of Gk. origin, from Gk. Xpioro-dédpos, lit.
‘ Christ-bearing.’

KITCHEN, a room where food is cooked. (L.) The ¢ is in-
serted, ME. kichen, kychene, kechene, Will. of Palerne, 1681, 1707,
21713 kychyne, P. Plowman, B.v. 261. Spelt kuchene, Ancren Riwle,
p. 214. AS. ‘cycene, coquina;’ Voc. 283. 12.—Late L. cucina, for
L. coguina, a kitchen, = L. coquere, to cook; see Cook. Der. kitchen-
maid, kitchen-stuff, kitchen-garden,

KITE, a voracious bird; a toy for flying in the air. (E.) ME.
kité, kyté (dissyllabic), Chaucer, C. T. 1181 (A 1179). AS. cyta;
we find the entry ‘ Butio (sic), cyta’ in Aflfric’s Gloss. (Nomina
Auium) ; and in the Corpus Glossary, 333. The L. butio is properly
a bittern; but doubtless buteo is meant, signifying a kind of falcon
or hawk. The y was long, as shown by the modern sound; cf.
E. mice with AS. mys. B. Teut. type *hut-jon-, an agential form.
Prob. from its swift flight ; cf. Norw. kuta (pt. t. kau¢), to run, go
swiftly (Aasen). ‘y. The toy called a kite is mentioned in Butler,
Hudibras, pt. li. c. 3. 1. 414; and is named from its hovering in the
air.

KITH, kindred, acquaintance, sort. (E.) Usual in the phrase
‘kith and kin.’ ME, cudde, kippe, kith; see Gower, C. A. ii. 267,
bk. v. 4180; P. Plowman, B. xv. 497. AS. cyddu, native land, cyd,
relationship; Grein, i. 181, 182.— AS. cud, known; pp. of cunnan,
to know; see Can (1) and Kythe.

KITLING, a kitten. (Scand.) Palsgrave has kydlyng (1530). —
Icel. ketlingr, a kitten; dimin. of kéttr (stem kattu-), a cat. Cog-
nate with E. cat; see Cat. @] The ME. kitling, ketling, also meant
a whelp, or young of any animal; perhaps it was influenced by L.
catulus, a whelp. It first appears in ‘the hitelinges of liouns;’ E.
Eng. Psalter, lvi. 5 ; where the Vulgate has catulorum leonum.

KITTEN, a young cat. (F.—L.) ME. kyton, P. Plowman, C.
i, 204, 2073 kitoun, id., B. prol. 190, 202. From an AF. *kitoun,
variant of OF. chitown, a kitten, used by Gower, Mirour de l’?Omme,
1. 8221. Again, AF, *kitoun is a variant of Norm. F. caton, Northern
form of F. chafon, a kitten, formed from F. chat, a cat, with suffix
-on (<L. -dnem).—Folk-L. cattum, acc. of cattus, for L. catus, a cat.
See Cat. Cf. MF. chatton. ‘ Chatton, a kitling or young cat;’ Cot.
For the 7- sound, cf. Low G. kette, hitte, kettin, kittin, f., a female cat;
kitten, a kitten (Schambach). ¢@ The true E. form is hit-ling;
see above. Note also the old verb ¢o hittle, to produce young as
acat does. Cf. Norw. kjetling, a kitling or kitten, ke¢la, to kittle or
kitten; Aasen. ‘TI kydtell, as a catte dothe, je chatonne. Gossyppe,
whan your catte kytelleth, I praye you let me haue a kytlynge (chatton),’
Palsgrave; cf. Way’s note in Prompt. Parv. p. 277+

, the apteryx, a wingless bird. (Maori.) First in 1835.
The native name in New Zealand; so called from the note of the
bird. .See Austral English; by E. E. Morris.

KLEPTOMANTIA, an irresistible propensity to theft. (Gk.)

Y %


324 KNACK


Spelt cleptomania in 1830.—Gk, xAenro-, for xAerrys, a thief; and
pavia, frenzy; see Mania.

- KNACK, a snap, quick motion, dexterity, trick. (E.) ‘The
moré queinté knakkés that they make’=the more clever tricks they
practise; ' Chaucer, C. T., A 4051 (Harl. MS.). On which Tyrwhitt
temarks ; ‘ The word seems to have been formed from the knacking
or snapping of the fingers made by jugglers.’ For this explanation,
he refers us to Cotgrave. ¢ Matassiner des mains, to move, knack, or
waggle the fingers, like a jugler, plaier, jeaster, &c.;’ Cot. ‘ Niquet,
a knick, tlick, snap with the teeth or fingers, a trifle, nifle, bable
[bauble], matter of small value;’ id. ‘ Faire la nique, to threaten or
defie, by putting the thumbe naile into the mouth, and with a jerke
(from the upper teeth) make it to knack;’ id. The word is clearly
(like crack, click) of imitative origin; cf. EFries. knakken (base
*knakan), pt. t. knuok, kndk, to snap, make a snapping noise.-+ Du.
knakken;. Norw. knaka, Swed. knaka, Dan. knage, to crack. [Gael.
éenac, a crack, is from E. crack.] The senses are (1) a snap, crack,
(2) a snap with the finger or nail, (3) a jester’s trick, piece of
dexterity, (4) a joke, trifle, toy. See Shak. Mids. Nt. Dr. i. 1. 34;
Tam. Shrew, iv. 3. 67; Wint. Tale, iv. 4. 360, 439. @ A similar
succession of ideas is seen in Du. kuap, a crack; knappen, to crack,
snap; knap, clever, nimble; knaphandig, nimble-handed, dexterous.
See Knap. Der. knick-knack, g.v. @ The F. nique (above) is
from Du. knikken, to crack slightly, an attenuated form of knakken.
And see Knock.

KNACKER, a dealer in old horses. (E.) Now applied to a
dealer in old horses and dogs’ meat. Prob. it meant at first a dealer
in knacks, i.e. trifles or worthless articles. See Knack, above.
2. We also find: ‘ Knacker, one that makes collars and other furni-
ture for cart-horses;’? Ray, South and East Country Words, 1691
(E. D. S. Gloss. B. 16), Perhaps from Icel. hnakkr, a man’s saddle ;
cf. hnakkmarr, a saddle-horse.

KWNAG, a knot in wood, a peg, branch of a deer’s horn. (E.)
‘I schall hyt hynge on a knagg’ =I shall hang it on a peg; Le Bone
Florence, 1. 1795 ; in Ritson, Metrical Romances, y. iii. ‘A knagge
in wood, Bosse;’ Sherwood’s Index to Cotgrave. We read also of
the ‘sharp and branching kzags’ of a stag’s horn; Holland, tr. of
Plutarch, p. 1039. Not found in AS. EFries. knagge, a knot in
wood, a stump. Cf. also Low G. knagge, knot, peg (Liibben) ;
Norw. knagg, a knag, short branch; Swed. knagg, a knag, knot;
Dan. knag, a peg, cog. We also find Irish cxag, a knob, peg, cnaig,
a knot in wood; Gael. cnag, a pin, peg, knob; borrowed from E.
Der. knagg-y.

KWAP, to snap, break with a noise. (E.) ‘He hath knapped the
speare in sonder;’ Ps, xlvi. 9, in the Bible of 1535, also of 1551;
still preserved in the Prayer-book version. ‘As lying a gossip as
ever knapped ginger;’ Merch. Ven. iii. 1. 10. ‘Thow can knap
doun [knock down] caponis;”? Henryson, Wolf and Fox. Not in
AS.; EFries. knappen. Of imitative origin; cf. EFries. knap, a
cracking, a snap.4-Du. knappen, to crack, snap, catch, crush, eat;
whence knapper, (1) hard gingerbread, (2) a lie, untruth [this brings
out the force of Shakespeare’s phrase]; Dan. kneppe, to snap, crack
with the fingers; kvep, a snap, crack, fillip. Cf. Swed. knep, a trick,
artifice ; bruka knep, to play tricks; which illustrates the use of the
parallel word knack, q.v. Der. knap-sack.

KNAPSACK, a provision-bag, case for necessaries used by
travellers. (Du.) ‘And each one fills his knapsack or his scrip ;’
Drayton, The Battle of Agincourt, 6th st. from end.— Du. knapzak,
a knapsack ; orig. a provision-bag.—Du. knap, eating, knappen, to
crack, crush, eat; and zak, a bag, sack, pocket. Cf. Westphalian
knapp, a piece of bread (Franck). See Knap and Sack.
KNAPP, a hill-top; KNAPWEED, knopweed; see Knop,

KWNAR, a knot in wood. (E.) See Gnarled and Knurr.

KNAVE, a boy, servant, sly fellow, villain. (E.) The older
senses are ‘ boy’ and ‘servant.’ ME. knaue (withwforv). ‘ A knaue
child’ =a male child, boy; Chaucer, C. T. 8320, 8323. (E444, 447).
«The kokes kvaue, thet wasshed the disshes;’ =the cook’s boy, that
washes the dishes; Ancren Riwle, p. 380, 1. 8.. AS. cxafa, a boy,
another form of cnapa, a boy; capa occurs in Matt. xii. 18, and in
Ps. Ixxxv. 15, ed. Spelman, where another reading (in the latter
passage) is cnafa.4-Du. knaap, a lad, servant, fellow; Icel. knapi,
a servant-boy; Swed. kndfvel, a rogue (a dimin. form); G. kuabe,
a boy; OHG. knappo, also knabo, as to which see Streitberg, § 131
(5). B. The origin of the word is doubtful; but. it is generally
supposed that the initial kn- corresponds to the weak grade of the
“GEN, to beget. Cp.Genus. And see Knight. Der. knav-ish,
Chaucer, C. T.17154 (H. 205) ; knav-ish-ly; knav-er-y, Spenser, F. Q,


Be gs0.
KNEAD, to work flour into dough, mould by pressure. (E.)
ME. kneden, Chaucer, C. T. 4092 (A 4094); Ormulum, 1486. AS.
enedan, to knead, very rare; in the ONorthumbrian versions of


KNIGHT


Luke, xiii. 21, the L. fermentaretur is glossed by sie gedersted vel
gecnoeden in the Lindisfarne MS., and by sie gederstad vel cneden in
the Rushworth MS.; hence we infer the strong verb cnedan, with
pt. t. ened, and pp. exeden, We also find the form gecnedan, Gen.
xviii. 6; where the prefix ge- does not affect the force of the verb:
The verb has become a weak one, the pp. passing from knoden to
kneded in the 15th century, as shown by the entry: ‘Knodon, knedid,
Pistus;? Prompt. Parv. p. 280.4-Du. kneden; Icel. knoda, Swed.


. kndda (both from the weak grade); G. knetern, OHG. chnetan.. Teut.


type *knedan-, pt. t. *knad, pp. *knedanoz. Further allied to Russ.
gnetate, gnesti, to press, squeeze, from an Idg. base *gnet-, to press.
Der. knead-ing-trough, ME. kneding-trough, Chaucer, C. T. 3548.

KNEE, the joint of the lower leg with the thigh. (E.) ME. kue,
knee; pl, knees, Chaucer, C. T. 5573 (B 1153); also cneo, pl. cneou
(=kneen), Ancren Riwle, p. 16, last line but one. AS. cned, cneow,
aknee; Grein, i. 164.4-Du. knie; Icel. kné; Dan. kne@; Swed. kna;
G. knie, OHG. chniu; Goth. kniu. Tent. type *kxzewom, neut.
Allied to L. genu; Gk. yévu; Skt. janu, knee. B. The Idg. related
bases are *genu- (as in L.), *gonu- (as in Gk.), and *gneu- (answering
to Teut. *kneu-), The loss of vowel in the weak grade is well illus-
trated by the Gk. yvv-meros, fallen upon the knees. Der. kvee-d,
knee-pan; also kneel, q.v. And see geni-culate, genu-flection, penta-
gon, hexa-gon, &c.

KNEEL, to fall on the knees. (E.) ME. knelen, Havelok,
1320; Ormulum, 6138. AS. cneowlian, to kneel, various reading
for gecneowigan in Canons under k, Edgar; see N. E. D., and Thorpe,
Anc. Laws, ii. 282, § xvi.4-Du. knielen; Low G. knelen (Liibben) ;
whence Dan. knele, to kneel. Formed from knee (AS. cneow) by
adding -/-, to denote the action. :
KNELL, KNOLL, to sound as a bell, toll. (E.) ‘ Where bells
have knolled to church;’ As You Like It, ii. 7.114; ‘I knolle a belle,
Ie frappe du batant;’ Palsgrave. ME. knillen; ‘And lete also the
belles knille;? Myrc’s Instructions for Parish Priests, ed. Peacock,
1.779. ‘Knyllynge.of a belle, Tintillacio;? Prompt. Parv., p. 279.
The orig. sense is to beat so as to produce a sound. AS. czyllan, to
beat noisily; in the ONorthumb. version of Luke, xi. 9, we find :
‘cnyllad and ontyned bid iow’=knock and it shall be opened to
you (Rushworth MS.). We find also AS. enyl, a knell, the sound of
a bell (Bosworth), The AS. verb=Teut. *knul-jan, whence ME.
knillen, of which knell and knoll are later variants (prob. of imitative
origin). From a Teut. base *knel- (whence *knal, *knul- by grada=
tion); as in the OHG. strong verb er-knellan, to resound. Cp. Du.
knallen, to give a loud report; kzal, a clap, a report; Dan. knalde
(=hnalle), to explode ; knalde med en pidsk, to crack a whip; knald
(=knall), a crack; Swed. knalla, to make a noise, to thunder; nail,
a report, loud noise; G. kvallen, to make a loud noise ; knall, a report,
explosion ; Icel. gvella, to scream. B. All words of imitative origin,
like knack, knap, knock. @[ We find also W. enill, a passing-bell, cxudl,.
a knell; borrowed from E. Der. knell, sb., Temp. i. 2. 402.

KNICKERBOCKERS, loose knee-breeches. (Du.) First in
1859. ‘The name is said to have been given to them because of
their resemblance to the knee-breeches of the Dutchmen in Cruik-
shank’s illustrations to W. Irving’s Hist. of New York;’ N. E. D.
This book came out under the pseudonym of Diedrich Knickerbocker.

KNICK-KNACK, a trick, trifle, toy. (E.) A reduplication of
knack in the sense of ‘trick,’ as formerly used¢ or in the sense of
‘toy,’ as generally used now. ‘ But if you use these knick-knacks,’
i.e. these tricks; Beaum. and Fletcher, Loyal Subject, ii. r (Theo-
dore). The reduplication is effected in the usual manner, by the
attenuation of the radical vowel a to i; cf. click-clack, ding-dong,
pit-a-pat. Cf. Du. knikken, to crack, snap, weakened form of knakken,
to crack. See further under Knack.

KNIFE, an instrument for cutting. (E.) ME. knif, enif; pl.
kniues (with w=v), Chaucer, C. T. 233. The sing. Anif is in the
Ancren Riwle, p. 282, last line but one. AS. cnif, a knife (late),
Voc. 329.17. EFries. knif, also knip.4-Du. knijf; Icel. knifr, hnifr ;
Dan. kniv; Swed. knif; G. (provincial) kneif, a hedging-bill, clasp-
knife (Fliigel) ; Low G. knif, knip (Liibben). B. The root is un-


certain; if we may take *knip- as the Teut. base, we may perhaps
| connect it with the verb which appears in Du. knijpen, to pinch, nip ;


G. kneipen, to pinch, kneifen, to nip, squeeze. See Nip, {J The
F. canif is of Teut. origin.. Der. knife-edge. :
KNIGHT, a youth, servant, man at, arms. (E.) ME. knight;
see Chaucer's Knightes Tale. AS. cniht, a boy, servant; Grein, i.
165; OMerc. cnxehkt (O. E. Texts).4-Du. knecht, a servant, waiter,
whence Dan. kunegt, a servant, knave (at cards) ; Swed. knekt, a soldier,
knave (at cards); G. knecht, a man-seryant. B. Origin uncertain ;
the AS. suffix -eht, -iht is adjectival, as in stan-iht=stony. Probably
cn-eht is from cn-, weak grade of cen-, Idg. gen-, as in Gk. yér-os,
kin; cf. Gk. yv-qovos, legitimate, allied to yévos. Thus cn-eht may =
*cyn-eht, i. é. belonging to the ‘kin’ or tribe; it would thus signify


KNIT


one of age to be admitted among the men of the tribe. Der. knight,
‘verb, knight-ly, Wyclif, 2 Macc. viii. 9, with which cf. AS. cnihiélic,
‘boyish (Bosworth) ; knight-hood, ME. kny3thod, P. Plowman, B. prol.
112,.from AS. cnikthad, lit. boyhood, youth (Bosworth); knight-
errant, 2 Hen. IV, v. 4. 24; knight-errant-r-y.

KNIT, to form into a knot. (E.) ME. kwitten, Chaucer, C. T.
1130 (A 1128); P. Plowman, B. prol. 169. | AS. czyttan, cnittan ;
‘Necto, ic cnytte,’ A®lfric, Gram., ed. Zupitza, p. 214; the comp. be-
cnittan is used in A‘lfric’s Homilies, i. 476, 1. 5. Formed by vowel-
change from Teut. *knut-, base of AS. cnotta, a knot.+-Icel. knyta,
knytja, to knit; cf. kntitr, a knot; Dan. kuytte, to tie in a knot, knit ;
Swed, knyta, to knit, tie; knut, knot. See Knot. Der. knitt-er,
knitt-ing. i

KNOB, allied to Knop, q.v. (E.) . In Levins; and Chaucer,
C. T. 635 (A 633). Cf. Low G. knobbe, aknob; Du. knobbel. Der.
knobb-ed, knobb-y, knobb-i-ness.

KNOCK, to strike, rap, thump. (E.) ME. knokken; Chaucer,
C. T. 3432. AS. cnucian, later cnokien, Matt. vii. 7; Luke, xi. 10.
Also ge-cnocian, ge-cnucian, AS. Leechdoms, i. 168, note 8.-+-Icel.
‘knoka, to knock. An imitative word; from Teut. *knuk-, weak
grade allied to *knak-. See Knack. Cf. Low G. knuk, a knock.
Der. knock, sb., knock-kneed, knock-er.

KNOLL (1), the top of a hill, a hillock, mound. (E.) ME. knol,
a hill, mount} Genesis‘and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1. 4129. AS. cnoll;
‘pra munta enollas’ =the tops of the hills; Gen. viii. 5.4-Du. kno,
a tumip; fromits roundness; Dan. knold (for *knoll),a knoll; Swed.
knél, a bump, knob, bunch, knot; G. kuollen, a knoll, clod, lump,
knot, knob, bulb (provincially, a potato); MHG. knolle. And cf.
Swed. dial. Avail, a knoll. We also find W. cnol, a knoll, hillock ;
from E.

KNOLL (2), the same as Knell, q.v. (E.)

KWNOP, KNOB, a protuberance, bump, round projection. (E.)
Knob is a derivative, yet occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 635 (A 633),
where we find the pl. kzobbes, from a singular knobbé (dissyllabic).
Knop is in Exod. xxv. 31, 33, 36 (A. V.). The pl. duoppis is in
Wyclif, Exod. xxvi. 11; spelt knoppes, Rom. of the Rose, 1683, 1685,
where it means ‘rose-buds.’ It also occurs in the sense of a hill-top
(N. E. D.; E. D. D.). [It is perhaps allied to kxap, in the sense of
‘hill-top ;’ as in: ‘some high kxap or tuft of a mountaine;’ Holland,
tr. of Pliny, b. xi. c. 11.]-4-Du. kop, a knob, pummel, button, bud;
allied to. knoop, a knob, button, knot, tie; Dan. kuop, a knob, bud ;
Swed. knopp,a knob; allied to knop, a knot ; G. knopf, a knob, button,
pummel, bud. Teut. stem *kuuppo-; and Du. knoop is from Teut.
stem *knaupo-; both from a Teut, base *kneup- (Franck). B. With
a different vowel, we find E. knap (as above), from AS. cnepp, a hill-
top, Luke, iv. 29; Numb. xiv. 44; allied to Icel. knappr, a knot, stud,
button ; MSwed. kxapp, a button; Dan. knxap, a knob, button; Low
G. knap, a hill (Schambach). And this may be allied to knap, to
Strike; cf. bump. See Knap. Kuap, in the sense of ‘ to beat,’ occurs
in King Lear, ii. 4.125. Der. knop-weed or knap-weed.

KNOT, a tight fastening, bond, cluster. (E.) ME. knotté (dis-
«syllabic), Chaucer, C. T. 10715 (F gor). AS. cnotta,aknot; Atlfric’s
Hom. ii. 386, 1. 22.-4-Du. knot, Low G. hnutte. Teut. type *knutton-
(whence E. knit); from a base *knuf-. B. We. also find OHG.
knodo, a knob, from a Teut. type *knuSon-, Idg. type *gndton-; as
well as OHG. knoto, G. knoten, a knob, a knot, from a Teut. type
*knuidon-, Idg. type *gnutén-. y. Also (with a long vowel), Icel.
knutr, aknot, Swed. knut, Dan. knude, 8. Also (with original a)
Icel. knotir, a ball; Teut. type *knattuz. For this change, cf. knop,
knap; see Knop. 4 Not connected with L. xddus,a knot. Der.
knot, vetb; knit, q.v.; knott-y, knot-less, knot-grass.

KNOUT, a whip used as an instrument of punishment in Russia.

(Russian—Scand.) Not in Todd’s Johnson. = Russ. knute, a whip,
scourge; but spelt as in French. Not a Slavonic word. =—Swed. kuut
(Icel. kntitr),a knot. See Knot (y). Der. knowt, verb.

KNOW, to be assured of, recognise. (E.) ME. knowen; pt. t.
knew, Chaucer, C. T. 5474:(B 1054); pp. knowen, id. 5310 (B 890).
AS. cndwan, pt. t.cnéow, pp. cndwen; gen. used with prefix ge-, which
does not affect the sense; Grein, i. 386.4Icel. knd, I know how
to, defective verb; OHG. chnaan, to know, only in the compounds
bi-chnaan, ir-chnaan, int-chnian; cited by Fick, iii. 41.-4-Russ. znate,
to know, OSlavon. zna-ti; L. ndscere (for gndscere), to know; Gk.
yi-yveoney (fut. yywoopar), a reduplicated form; Skt. jnd, to know.
Cf. also Pers. far-zan, knowledge ; Olrish gnath, known, accustomed;
W. gnawd, acustom. f. All from *gné, *gnd-, to know. secondary


forms from 4/GEN, to know; whence Can (1), Ken, Keen, &c.


Brugmann, i. § 394. Der. know-ing, know-ing-ly; also know-ledge, q.v.


« KNOWLEDGE, assured belief, information, skill, (E.) ME.'


knowlege, Chaucer, C. T. 12960; spelt knoweliche, knowleche in Six-
ttexti-ed.,Bi<1220.


straw; prov. G. knorz, a knob, knot (Fliigel).


In the Cursor Mundi, 12162, the spellings are,
-knaulage, knawlage, knauleche, knowleche. The d is a late insertion ;_


LABELLUM


and -lege is for older -leche. For know-, see above. As to the suffix,
it is of verbal origin ; the ch is a palatalised form of c as usual; and
the ME. suffix -lechen represents the AS. suffix -Jécan, as in néah-
-lécan, to draw nigh. . The origin of this -Jécan is not quite


325


_certain; I regard it as representing *-ldcian, from the substantival


suffix lac, preserved in E, Wedlock, q.v._ y. The AS. -ldae corre-
sponds to Icel. -Jetkr ; and we find a related word in Icel. kunnleikr,
knowledge. Der. acknowledge, a bad spelling of a-knowledge; see
Acknowledge. ;

KNUCKLE, the projecting joint of the fingers. (E.) ME.
knokil. ‘Knokyl of an honde, knokil-bone, Condilus ;? Prompt. Parv.
‘Knokylle-bone of a legge, Coxa;’ id. ‘The knokelys of the fete ;’
Rel. Antiq. i. 190 (ab. 1375). Not found in AS.; the alleged form
cnucl, due to Somner, appears to be a fiction. Yet some such
form probably existed, though not recorded ; it occurs in OFriesic as
knokele, knokle.4-Du. knokkel, a knuckle (Sewel); dimin. of knoke,
knake,a bone, or a knuckle (Hexham); Low G. knukkel ; Dan. knokkel ;
Swed. knoge, a knuckle (in which the dimin. suffix is not added); G.
knochel, a knuckle, joint; connected .with knochen, a bone. Note
MDu. knoke; Hexham has: ‘De knoest, knoke, ofte Weere van cen boom,
the knobb or knot of a tree.’ All from a Teut. base *knuk-; perhaps
allied to Knock. And cf. Knop.

KNURR, KNUR, a knot in wood, wooden ball. (E.) ‘A
knurre, bruscum, gibbus;’ Levins, 190. 16. ‘Bosse, a knob, knot, or
knur in a tree;’ Cot. ME. kxor. ‘Without knot or knor, or eny
signe of goute;” Tale of Beryn, ed. Furnivall, 1. 2514. Not found
in AS., but prob. a native word. EFries. knure. Cf. also MDu.
knorre, a hard swelling, knot in wood (Kilian, Oudemans); Dan.
knort, a knot, gnarl, knag; Swed. dial. knurr, knurra, a round knob
ona tree; G. knorren, a hunch, lump, protuberance, knot in reed or
B. It is evidently
allied to ME. kxarre, a knot in wood; see Wyclif, Wisd. xiii. 13 ;
see Gnarled.

KOPJE, a small hill. (Du.) Common in S. Africa. Du. hopje,


dit. ‘little head ;’ dimin. of kop, head. Cf. E. cop, AS. cop, top, esp.


of a hill; G. kopf, head. ;

KORAN, the sacred book of the Mohammedans. (Arab.) Also
Alcoran, where al is the Arabic def. article. Bacon has Alcoran,
Essay 16 (Of Atheism). =— Arab. quran, Palmer’s Pers. Dict., col. 469;
explained by ‘reading, a legible book, the kuran,’ Rich. Pers, and
Arab. Dict. p. 1122. — Arab. root gara‘a, he read ; Rich. Dict. p. 1121.
@ The a is long, and bears the stress; but Byron has kérans, Corsair,
is 2:

KOUMISS, a fermented liquor prepared from mare’s milk. (F.—
Russ.— Tatar.) Spelt chumis in 1607; Topsell, Fourfooted Beasts,
Pp: 332.—F. kowmis,— Russ. kymuis’; Reiff.— Tatar kumiz (N. E. D.).

KRAAL, a Kaffir village. (Du.—Port.—L.) ‘This shews the
koral, or kraal, to be a village;’ Voyages (1745); vol. ii. p. 120
(note); under the date 1714. — Du. kraal. = Port. curral, an enclosure
for cattle, a fold for sheep; Span. corral.—Port. corr-o, a ring in
which to bait bulls ; with suffix -al.—L. currere, torun ; see Current.
From the Span. phrase correr foros, to run bulls, to hold a bull-fight
(Diez). Korting, § 2705.

KYTHE, KITHH, to make known. (E.) In Bums, Hallowe’en,
st. 3. ME. hythen, kithen; Chaucer, C. T. 5056 (B 636). AS. cydan,
to make known; formed by regular vowel-change from cid, known,
pp. of cunnan, to know. See Uncouth, Can (1).


i


LAAGER, a camp, a temporary lodgement surrounded by
waggons. (Du.) SAfrican Du. lager; Du. leger; cf. G. lager, a
camp, MHG. Jeger. See Leaguer, Lair.

LABEL, a small slip of paper, &c. (F.) Variously used, In
heraldry, it denotes a small horizontal strip with (usually) three
pendants or tassels, Also, a strip or slip of silk, parchment, or
paper. ME, abel; Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, pt. i. § 22; where
it denotes a movable slip or thin rule of metal, used on the front of
the astrolabe, revolving on a central pin, and used as a sort of pointer.
=OF. label, also lambel (F. lambeau), in the heraldic sense; see


-Hatzfeld. Cotgrave has: ‘Lambel, a label of three points; Lambeau,


a shread, rag, or small piece of stuffe or of a garment.’ Of uncertain
origin ; perhaps allied to OLat. lamberdre, to tear in pieces (Ascoli).
Korting, § 5399. B. But the OF. label may be of Teut. origin ; from
OHG, lappa (G. lappen), a flap, rag, shred; see Lap (1). Der.


label, verb; Twelfth Night, i. 5. 265.


LABELLUM, a-pendulous petal. (L.) A botanical term.=L.
labellum, a little lip.. For */abrellum, dimin. of labrum, a lip, akin to
labium, alip; seeLabial, |


‘826 LABIAL |


LABIAL, pertaining to the lips. (L.) ‘Which letters are
labiall;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 198. [The Zadial letters are p, 6, /, v,
ws; closely allied to which is the nasal m.]— Late L, labzdlis, belong-
‘ing to the lips; coined from L. labium, the lip. See Lip.

_ DLABIATE, having lips or lobes. (L.) A botanical term.
Coined, as if from a L. pp. *labidtus, from L. labium, the lip. See
Labial.

LABORATORY, a chemist’s workroom. (L.) ‘Laboratory, a
chymists workhouse ;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. And in Ben Jonson,
Mercury Vindicated. Shortened from elaboratory, by loss of -e.
-Elaboratory, a work-house;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ' Cf. MF.
elaboratoire, ‘an elaboratory, or workhouse;’ Cot. Formed, as if
from a L. *élaboratorium, from élaborare, to take pains, compounded
of L. @, out, extremely, and Jabdrare, to work. See Elaborate,
Labour.

LABORIOUS, toilsome. (F.—L.) ME. laborious ; Gower,
Conf. Amant. ii. go; bk. iv. 2636.—F. laborieux, ‘ laborious ;” Cot.
= L. labéridsus, toilsome ; formed with suffix -dsus from labori-, decl.
stem of labor. See Labour. Der. laborious-ly, -ness.

LABOUR, toil, work. (F.—L.) ME. Jabour (accented on
-our); Chaucer, C. T. 2195 (A 2193).— OF. labour, later labeur.—L.
laborem, acc. of labor (oldest form labés), labour, toil. B. Perhaps
allied to labdre, to totter, to sink, from the idea of struggling with
a heavy weight (Bréal). Der. labour, verb, ME. labouren, Chaucer,
C. T. 186; labour-ed; labour-er, ME. laborer, Chaucer, C. T. 1411
(A 1409); and see labor-i-ous, labor-at-or-y. @a> The spelling with
final -owr, answering to OF. -our, shows that the derivation is not
from L. nom. labor, but from the acc. laborem.

LABURNUM, the name ofa tree. (L.) In Holland, tr. of Pliny,
b. xvi. c. 18.—L. laburnum; Pliny, xvi. 18. 31.

LABYRINTH, a place full of winding passages, a maze.
(F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Troil. ii. 3. 2.—F. labyrinthe; Cot. =L.
labyrinthus. = Gk. AaBvpivO0s, a maze, place full of lanes or alleys.
Prob. of Egypt. origin. 4 Cotgrave spells the E. word ‘laborinth;’
so also Late L. laborintus, Trevisa, i. 9; by confusion with L. labor.
Der. labyrinth-ine, labyrinth-i-an.

LAC (1), a resinous substance. (Hind.—Skt.) A resinous sub-
stance produced mainly upon the banyan-tree by an insect called the
Coccus lacca. ‘Lacca, a kind of red gum;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.
= Hind. lakh, the same as Pers. lak, luk, § the substance commonly
‘called gum-lac, being the nidus of an insect found deposited on certain
trees in India, and from which a beautiful red lake is extracted, used
in dyeing ;’ Richardson’s Pers. Dict. p. 1272. —Skt. Jaksha, lac, the
‘animal dye; also laktaka-, lac; rakta, lac, from rakéa-, pp. of the verb
rawj, to dye, to colour, to redden; cf. Skt. ramga-, colour, paint
(Benfey). Doublet, lake (2). Der. lacgu-er, gum-lac, shel-lac.

DLAC (2), a hundred thousand. (Hind.—Skt.) Imported from
India in modern times; we speak of ‘a Jac of rupees’ = 100,000
rupees. = Hind. /akk, a hundred thousand. = Skt. laksha, a lac,
a hundred thousand ; orig. ‘a mark;’ cf. Skt. laksh, to mark. Accord-
ing to H. H. Wilson, the reference is to the great number of acca
insects ina nest. See Lackin Yule. See hac (1).

LACH, a cord, tie, plaited string. (F.—L.) ME. las, Jaas, King
Alisaunder, 7698 ; Chaucer, C. T. 394 (A 392).—OF. das, a snare ;
MF. lags (F. lacs); cf. Jags courant, a noose, running knot; Cot,—L.
laqueum, acc. of laqueus, a noose, snare, knot. B, Perhaps allied
to L. lacére, to allure, used in the comp. allicere, to allude, élicere, to
draw out, délicere, to entice, delight. See Delight. Der. lace,
verb, Spenser, F. Q. v. 5. 3. Doublet, /asso. ¢ The use of
lace in the orig. sense of ‘snare’ occurs in Spenser, Muiopotmos, 427.

LACERATE, to tear. (L.) In Cotgrave, to translate F. lacerer; :
and in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—L. laceratus, pp. of laceradre, to tear,
rend. L,. lacer, mangled, torn.4-Gk. Aaxepés, torn; cf, Aaxis, a rent.
Der. lacerat-ion, lacerat-ive.

LACHRYMAL, LACRIMAL, pertaining to tears. (L.)
The usual spelling lachrymal is false; it should be lacrimal. In
anatomy, we speak of ‘the lachrymal gland,’ Spelt Jachrymall in
Holland, tr. of Pliny, bk, xxix. c.63; p. 367 e; we find ‘lachrymable,
lamentable,’ ‘Jachrymate, to weep,’ and ‘Jachrymatory, a tear-bottle’
in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. All formed from L. lacryma, a tear,
‘better spelt Jacruma or lacrima, B. The oldest form is dacrima
(Festus); cognate with Gk. daxpv, a tear, and with E. tear. See
‘Tear, sb. Der. from the same L. lacrima are lachrym-ose, lachry-
‘mat-or-y.

LACK (1), want. (E.) The old sense is often ‘ failing,’ ¢ failure,’
or ‘fault,’ ME. lak, spelt Zac, Havelok, 1. 1913 the pl. lakkes is in‘
-P. Plowman, B. x. 262, Not found in AS., but cf. EFries, Jak,
defect, blame; OFries. /ek, damage, harm, Jakia, to attack.-Du.
-lak, blemish, stain ; whence Jaken, to blame; Low G. Jak, defect,
blame; MSwed. Jack, defect, blame. We also find Icel. Jakr,
defective, lacking. Der. Jack, verb; see below. 3g


LADE


LACK (2), to want, be destitute of. (E.) ME. lakken, Chaucer,

C. T. 758, 11498 (A 756, F 1186); P. Plowman, B. v. 132. The
verb is formed from the sb. ; hence the verb is a weak one; and the
pt. t. is Jakkede, as in Chaucer. See therefore aack (1) above.

LACKER, another form of Lacquer, q. v.

LACKEY; LACQUEY, a footman, menial attendant. (F.—
Span.?—Arab.?) In Shak. As You Like It, iii. 2. 314; Tam.
Shrew, iii. 2.:66. Also spelt alakay in Lowl. Sc.; see Rolland,
Court of Venus, ii, 1035 (S. T.S.).—MF. laquay, ‘a lackey, footboy,
footman;’ Cot. ModF. laguais. There was also an OF, form
alacay; see Littré, who shows that, in the 15th cent., a certain class
of soldiers (esp. crossbow-men) were called alagues, alacays, or
lacays. (The prefix a- suggests al, the Arab. def. article.) —Span,
lacayo, a lackey ; cf. Port. dacaio, a lackey, Jacaia, a woman-servant
in dramatic performances. B. The use of a- (for al) in OF. alacays
suggests an Arab. origin.— Arab. luka‘, worthless, slavish, and, as
a sb., a slave. The fem. form daka, mean, servile (applied to
a woman) may account for the Port. lacaia. Allied words are Jaki,
abject, servile, Jaka‘i, slovenly ; alka‘, sordid, servile. See Richardson,
Pers. Dict. pp. 1272, 1273, 159. sy. However, this is but a guess 5
the etymology is quite uncertain ; Diez connects it with Ital. leccare,
G. lecken, to lick ; see Lick. Der. lackey, verb, Ant. and Cleop. i.
4. 46 ; Spenser, F, Q. vi. 2. 15.

LACONIC, brief, pithy. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Laconical, that speaks
briefly or pithily;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ‘* With laconic brevity ;”
Beaum, and Fletcher, Little Fr. Lawyer, vy. 1 (Cleremont).—L.
Lacénicus, Laconian.— Gk. Aaxwvitds, Laconian.= Gk. Adkwv, a La-
conian, an inhabitant of Lacedeemon or Sparta. These men were
proverbial for their brief and pithy style of speaking. Der. laconic-al,
laconic-al-ly, laconic-ism ; also lacon-ism, from Gk. Adkwy.

LACQUER, LACKER, a sort of varnish. (F.—Port.— Hind.
—Skt.) ‘Lacker, a sort of varnish ;? Kersey, ed. 1715. ‘Lacguer’d
chair ;’ Pope,. Horace, Ep. ii. 1. 337. The Jack of Tonquin is
a sort of gummy juice, which drains out of the bodies or limbs of
trees... . The cabinets, desks, or any sort of frames to be lackered,
are made of fir or pone-tree (sic)... .. The work-houses where the dacker
is laid on are accounted very unwholesom ;’ Dampier, Voyages, an.
1688; ed. 1699; vol. ii. pt. I, p. 61.—MF. Jacre, ‘a confection or
stuffe made of rosin, brimstone, and white wax mingled, and melted
together,’ &c.; Cot. = Port. lacre, sealing-wax; allied to Port.
laca, gum-lac. = Hind. lakh, lac. Skt. laksha, lac. See Lac (1).
Der. lacquer, verb.

LACROSSE, a Canadian game; played with a crosse, or large
stringed bat. (F.—L.) FF. la crosse; from Ja, f., the, and crosse,
a bent stick. = L. illa, f. of ille, that; Late L. type *croccia, *croccea,
fem. of adj. formed from Late L. croccus, a hook.

LACTEAL, relating to milk, conveying chyle. (L.) ‘ Lacteal,
Lacteous, milky ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ‘ Lactory [read lactary|
or milky plants, which have a white and Jacteous juice;’ Sir T.
Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. vi.c. 10, § 2. Formed with suffix -al from
L, lacte-us, milky. —L, lact-, stem of Jac, milk.4-Gk. yadaxr-, stem
of yada, milk. Der. lacte-ous (=L. lacteus) ; lactesc-ent, from pres.
part. of lactescere, to become milky ; whence Jactescence. Also lacti-c,


from Jacti-, decl. stem of lac; whence also Jacti-ferous, where the .


suffix is from L. -fer, bearing, from ferre, to bear, cognate with E.
bear. Also lettuce, q.v.

LACUNA, a hiatus, gap in a MS. (L.) First in 1663.—L.

lactina, a hole, pit. —L. lacu-s, a lake; see Lake (1), Lagoon.
LACUSTRINE, pertaining to a lake. (L.) First in 1830.
Formed from L. dacus, a lake; like L. palustri-, from palus, a marsh,

LAD, a boy, youth. (E.) ME. ladde, pl.laddes ; Havelok, 1. 1786 ;
P. Plowman, B. xix. 32; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 36. Of obscure
origin; perhaps (as suggested in N.E.D.) the orig. sense was ‘ one
led,’ i.e. a follower, dependant. From ME. Jad, led, pp. of éden,
to lead. See Lead (1). (H. Bradley, in Atheneum, June 1, 1894.)
@ Larsen has Dan. aske-ladd (Norw. oske-ladd) the youngest son in
Norw. nursery tales, a (male) Cinderella ; where aske=ash.

LADANUM, the same as Laudanum, q. v.

LADDER, a frame with steps, for climbing up by. (E.) ME.
laddre, P. Plowman, B. xvi. 44; Rob. of Glouc. p. 333, 1. 6830.
The word has lost an initial kh. AS. kl@dder, hiéder, a ladder;
Grein, ii. 80.4-Du. ladder, a ladder, rack or rails of a cart; OHG.
hleitra, G, leiter,aladder,scale. B. Allied to Gk. #Aiyag, a ladder;
see Climax. Named from sloping; see Lean (1). (4/KLEIL.) »

LADE (1), to load. (E.) ‘And they Jaded their asses with the


.corn;’ Gen, xlii. 26. Formerly a strong verb; we still use the pp.


laden =loaded; Ant. and Cleop. iii. II. 5; Vv. 2.123. ME. laden,
pp. Zaden, Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1. 1800. AS. hladan, to
heap together, to lade, to burden; also, to lade out (water) ; pt. t.
hlod, pp. hladen.4-Du. laden; Icel. hlada, Dan. lade, Swed. ladda;
Goth. -hlathan (in comp. af-hlathan ; G. laden, OHG.hladan. B,. All


LADE


from a Teut. base *hlad (not *hlath), to lade (Kluge). Allied to
Russ. klade, a load. Der. lad-ing, a load, cargo, Merch. Ven. iii. 1.
3. And see Lade (2). (Distinct from load.)

GLADE (2), to draw out water, drain, (E.) ‘He'll Jade it [the
sea] dry;’ 3 Hen. VI, iii. 2.139. ME. hladen, laden; ‘lhade out
thet weter’=lade out the water, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 178, 1. 19
[where /z is written for Al]. AS. hladan, to heap together, to load,
to lade out; Grein, ii. 79. ‘ Hldd weeter’=drew water; Exod. ii.
19. The same word as Lade (1). Der. /ad-le, q. v.

LADLE, a large spoon. (E.) So called because used for lading
or dipping out water from a vessel. ME. Jadel, Chaucer, C. T.
2022; P. Plowman, B. xix. 274. AS. hledel; in Glosses, ed. Napier.
Formed with suffix -e/ from AS. hladan, to lade; see Lade (2).
B. The suffix -el in this case denotes the means or instrument, as in
E, sett-le (= AS. set-l), a seat, a thing to sit upon.

LADY, the mistress of a house, a wife, woman of rank. (E.)
ME. lady, Chaucer, C. T. 88. Older spellings /efdi, Layamon, 1256;
lefdi, leafdi, Ancren Riwle, pp. 4, 38; lheuedi (=hlevedi), Ayenbite
of Inwyt, p. 24; Jafdi?, Ormulum, 1807. AS. hléfdige, a lady;
Grein, 1i. 81; ONorthumb. A/a@fdia, in the margin of John, xx. 16,
in the Lindisfarne MS. B. Of uncertain origin; the syllable 2/éf
is certainly from the word Alaf, a loaf; see Loaf, Lord. But the
suffix -dige remains uncertain; the most reasonable guess is that
which identifies it with a supposed *dige, a kneader, from a verb
cognate with Goth. deigan, to knead. This gives the sense ‘ bread-
kneader,’ or maker of bread, which is a very likely one; see Lord.
Cf. Icel. deigja, a dairy-maid ; and see further under Dairy, Dough.
@ The Icel. Jafdi, a lady, is merely borrowed from English. B. The
term Lady was often used in a special sense, to signify the blessed
Virgin Mary ; hence several derivatives, such as lady-bird, lady-fern,
lady’s-finger, lady’s-mantle, lady’s-slipper, lady’s-smock, lady’s-tresses.
Cf. G. Marien-kafer (Mary’s chafer), a lady-bird; Marien-blume
(Mary’s flower), a daisy; Marien-mantel (Mary’s mantle), lady’s-
mantle; Marien-schuh (Mary’s shoe), lady’s-slipper. Der. A. (in
the general sense), lady-love, lady-ship, ME. ladiship, Gower, C. A.
ii. 301, bk. v. 5208; written lefdischip (=deference), Ancren Riwle,
p. 108 ; lady-like. TB. (in the special sense) lady-bird, &c., as above.
Also lady-chapel, lady-day, which strictly speaking are not compound
words at all, since Jady is here in the gen. case, so that lady chapel =
chapel of our Lady, and lady day=day of our Lady. The ME. gen.
case of this word was lady or Jadie, rather than ladies, which was
a later form; this is remarkably shown by the phrase ‘in his /ady
grace’=in his lady’s favour, Chaucer, C, T. 88; where Tyrwhitt
wrongly prints Jadies, though the MSS. have lady. The contrast of
Lady day with Lord’s day is striking, like that of Fri-day with
Thur-s-day, the absence of s marking the fem. gender; the AS. gen.
case is hl@fdig-an.

LAG, sluggish, coming behind. (E.) ‘Came too Jag [late] to
see him buried ;’ Rich. III, ii. 1. 90. Cf. prov. E, Jag, late, last,
slow ; Jag-last, a loiterer; lag-teeth, the grinders, so called because
the last in growth; Halliwell. <A difficult word, prob. due to con-
fusion of Jag, in other senses (see N. E. D.) with ME. Jak, E. lack,
failure, deficiency. Cf. prov. E. lack, to be absent, to loiter, lackish,
slow, backward, lacky, laggy, a last turn, last of all; ME. Dan. lakke,
to go slowly (Kalkar) ; Norw. lagga, to go slowly (Ross) ; Icel. dakra,
to loiter, tolag behind. The obs. /agg, remnant of liquor in a
cask, seems to answer to Norw. lagg(a)hall, with the same sense
(Ross), which is prob. derived from Icel. /égg,, the end of a cask, and
Norw. ald, inclined. This may have influenced the form. Der. lag,
verb, Spenser, F. Q. i. 1.6; spelt Jaggein Palsgrave ; also lagg-ing-ly,
lagg-er; lag-end, 1 Hen. IV, v. 1. 24; lagg-ard (a late word), where
the suffix -ard is French (of Teut. origin) and is affixed even to English
bases, as in drunk-ard.

LAGAN, wreckage lying on the bed of the sea. (F.—Scand.)
‘ Lagan, such a parcel of goods as the mariners in danger of ship-
wrack cast out of the ship ; and because they sink, they fasten to them
a buoy ;’ Cowel, Interpreter (1701), He adds that they are called
ligan, from Lat. ligando, i.e. fastening. But they are called Jagan. —
AF. lagan, used by Edw. II in 1315 (Godefroy); whence Late L.
laganum. Allied to Icel. légn, pl. lagnir, a net laid in the sea. —Icel.
lag, 2nd stem of liggja, to lie; see Lie (1). So called because


sunk.

LAGER-BIER, a light German bier. (G.) From G. lager-bier,
beer brewed for keeping.=G. lager, a store (see Leaguer) ; and
bier, beer (see Beer).

LAGOON, LAGUNE, a shallow lake. (Ital. or Span.—L.)
Ray speaks of ‘the Jagune,... about Venice’ in 1673 (N.E.D.).
And Dampier of a Jagune in Mexico; New Voy. (1699), i. 241. We
speak of ‘the lagoons of Venice ;’—Ital. and Span. laguna, a pool. =
L. lactina, a pool. = L. lacus, a lake; see Lake (1).

LAIC, LAICAL, pertaining to the people. (L.—Gk.) ‘A


LAMPOON 327


Laicke, or Lay-man ;” Minsheu, ed. 1627.—L. laicus; of Gk. origin.
See Lay (3), the more usual form of the word.

LATR, the den or retreat of a wild beast. (E.) ME. leir; the dat.
case Jeire occurs in OEng. Homilies, ed. Morris, and Series, p. 103,
1, 11, where it means ‘bed.’ Spelt Jayere, meaning ‘camp,’ Morte
Arthure, ed. Brock, 1. 2293. AS. leger, a lair, couch, bed ; Grein,
ii. 167 ; from AS. *leg-, base of licgan, to lie down. See Lie (1).4
Du. leger, a bed, couch, lair ; liggen, to lie.-MHG. leger, OHG.
legar, now spelt lager, a couch; OHG. liggan, to lie; Goth. ligrs,
a couch ; ligan, to lie. Doublet, leaguer.

LAITY, the lay people. (F.—L.—Gk.; F. suffix.) In Kersey,
ed. 1715; laitie, Cockeram (1642). A coined word; AF. laieté, lay
property, Yearbooks of Edw. I, 1304-5, p. 411; from the adj. lay,
with the F. suffix -té, due to L. acc. suffix -titem. Formed by
analogy with du-ty from due; &c. See Lay (3).

LAKE (1), a pool. (F.—L.) ME. Jac; Layamon, 1280; also
AF. lac, as in ‘pas meres and laces’ = these meres and lakes; in MS. E.
of the AS. Chron. an. 656; see Plummer’s ed. p. 31.—L. lacum, acc.
of Jacus, a lake. The lit. sense is ‘a hollow’ or depression.+Gk.
Aaxkkos, a hollow, hole, pit, pond. Doublet, loch. Der. lag-oon, q. v.

LAKE (2), a colour, a kind of crimson. (F.—Pers.—Skt.) A
certain colour is called‘ crimson Jake.’ ‘ Vermillian, lake, or crimson;’
Ben Jonson, Expostulation with Inigo Jones, 1. 11 from end.=F,
laque, ‘sanguine, rose or rubie colour;’ Cot.— Pers. lak, lake pro-
duced from lac; Rich. Dict. p. 1253; Pers. lak, lac; see Lac (1).

LAMA (1), a high priest. (Thibetan.) We speak of the Grand
Lama of Thibet. ‘ Offered to a living Lama;’ Murphy, Orphan of
China (1759), A. ii. sc. 2. First in 1654.— Thibetan blama, a priest,
the d being silent; Jaschke, Dict., p. 650.

LAMA (2), the same as Llama, q. v.

LAME, the young of the sheep. (E.) ME. lamb, lomb; Chaucer,
C.T. 5037 (B617). AS.lamb, Grein, ii. 154; pl. lambru.4-Du. lam;
Icel. amb; Dan.lam ; Swed.lamm; G.lamm; Goth.tamb. B. All
from Teut. type */amboz, neut.; root unknown. Der. lamb, verb,
lamb-like, lamb-skin; also lamb-k-in (with double dimin. suffix),
Elen Vij tle) ia 099s

LAMBENT, flickering. (L.) ‘Was but a lambent flame;’
Cowley, Pindaric Odes, Destiny, st. 4.—L. lambent-, stem of pres.
part. of lambere, to lick, sometimes applied to flames; see Virgil,
fin, ii. 684. From 4/LAB, to lick; whence also E. labial, lip, and
lap, verb. See Lap (1).

LAME, disabled in the limbs, esp. in the legs. (E.) ME. lame,
Wyclif, Acts, iii. 2; Havelok, 1938. AS. lama (weak form only),
Matt. viii. 6.4-Du. Jam; Icel. lami; Dan. lam, palsied ; Swed. lam ;
MHG., lam; G. lahm, 8B. The orig. sense is maimed, bruised,
broken; from the base LEM, to break (second grade LOM), pre-
served in Russ. lomate, to break; Fick, iii. 267. Cf. Icel. Jama, to
bruise, prov. E. Jam, to beat; whence lamming, a beating, Beaum.
and Fletcher, King and No King, A. v. sc. 3. Der. lame, verb ;
lame-ly, lame-ness.

LAMENT, to utter a mournful cry. (F.—L.) Though the sb.
is the orig. word in Latin, the verb is the older word in English,
occurring in John, xvi. 20, in Tyndal's version, A.D. 1526.—F.
lamenter, ‘to lament ;’ Cot.—L. lamentari, to wail.=—L. lamentum,
a mournful cry; formed with suffix -mentum from the base /a-, to
utter a cry, which appears again in /d-trare, to bark. B. Cf. Russ.
laiate, to bark, snarl, scold. Ofimitative origin. Der. lament, sb.;
lament-able, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 145; lament-at-ion, ME.
lamentacioun, Chaucer, C. T.937 (A 935), from F. lamentation.

LAMINA, a thin plate or layer. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674.—L. lamina, a thin plate of metal, Cf. Omelette. Der.
lamin-ar, lamin-at-ed, lamin-at-ion.

LAMMAS, a name for the first of August. (E.) ME. lammasse ;
P. Plowman, B. vi. 291; see note on the line (Notes, p. 173). AS.
hlafmasse, Grein, i. 80; AS. Chron. an. 921; at a later period spelt
hlammesse, AS. Chron. an. 1009. K. Alfred has: ‘on p&re tide
calendas Agustus, on peem dege pe wé hatad hlaifmasse ;’ Orosius,
V. xiii. § 2. B. The lit. sense’ is ‘loaf-mass,’ because a loaf was
offered on this day as an offering of first-fruits ; see Chambers, Book
of Days, ii. 154.— AS. hlaf, a loaf; and messe, mass, See Loaf and
Mass (2). Another AS. name for Jammas was hlaf-sénung, i.e. loaf-
blessing; The Shrine, p, 112. ff Not from lamb and mass, as the
fiction sometimes runs.

ERGEYER, the bearded vulture. (G.) First in 1817.
= G. lammergeier, lit. ¢lambs-vulture.’=—G. lammer, pl. of damm,
alamb; geier,a vulture, See Lamb and Gyrfalcon.

LAMP, a vessel for giving light. (F.—L.—Gk.) In early use.
ME. lampe; St. Margaret, ed. Cockayne, p. 20, 1. 21. OF. lampe,
‘a lampe;” Cot.—L. lampas.—Gk. Aapmds, a torch, light. —Gk.
Adpmev, to shine. Der. lamp-black ; lantern, q.v-

LAMPOON, a personal satire. (F.—O. Low G.) In Dryden,


328 LAMPREY


Essay on Satire, 1. 47.—F. Jampon, orig. a drinking song; so called
from the exclamation /ampons !=let us drink, frequently introduced
into such songs. (See Littré, who gives an example.) =F. lamper,
to drink; a popular or provincial word; given in Littré. Perhaps
a nasalised form of OF. lapper, ‘to lap or lick up;’ Cot. Cf.
Picard lamper, to drink, Of O. Low G..origin; see Lap (1). Der.
lampoon-er.

LAMPREY, a kind of fish. (F.—L.) ME. laumprei, laumpree ;
Havelok, ll. 771, 897.—AF. lamprey, Liber Albus, p. 382; OF.
lamproie, spelt lamproye in Cot. Cf. Ital. lampreda, a lamprey. =
Late L. lampréda, a lamprey, of which an older form was lamzpetra
(Ducange). B. So called from its cleaving to rocks; lit. ‘ licker of
rocks;’ coined from L. damb-ere, to lick, and petra, a rock. See
Lambent and Petrify. @ Scientifically named Petromyzon, i.e.
stone-sucking.

LANCH, a shaft of wood, with a spear-head. (F.-L.) ME.
launce; P. Plowman, B. iii. 303; King Alisaunder, 1. 936. —F. lance,
‘a lance;’ Cot.—L.lancea, a lance. Root uncertain. Der. lance,
verb, Rich. III, iv. 4. 224 (sometimes spelt lanch)=ME. launcen,
spelt lawncyn in Prompt. Parv., p. 290; Janc-er, formerly written
lanceer, from F. lancier, ‘a lanceer’ (Cot.); also lancegay, q. v.,
lanc-et, q.v-, lance-ol-ate, q.v. (But not Jansquenet.)

_. LANCEGAY. a kind of spear. (Hybrid; F.—L.; and F.—
Span.— Moorish.) Obsolete. In Chaucer, C. T. 13682, 13751 (Six-
text, B 1942, 2011). A corruption of F. lance-zagaye, compounded

of lance, a lance (see ance), and zagaye, ‘a fashion of slender. .
pike, used by the Moorish horsemen;’ Cot. Cf. Span. azagaya=al
zagaya, where al is the Arab. def. art., and zagaya is an OSpan. word
for assegay or ‘ dart,’ a word of Berber or Algerian origin. See my
note to Chaucer, loc. cit., and Way’s note, Prompt. Parv., p. 290.
@ Assegai is from Port. azagaia. }

LANCEOLATEH, lance-shaped. (L.) A botan. term, applied
to leaves which in shape resemble the head of a lance. = L. danceolatus,
furnished with a spike. = L. lanceola,a spike ; dimin. of lancea, a lance;
see Lance. 4 Esp. applied to the leaf of the plantain; cf. F.
lancelée, ‘ ribwort plantaine’ (Cot.).

LANCET, a surgical instrument. (F.—L.) ME. launcet, also
spelt lawnset, lawncent, Prompt. Parv., p. 290.—OF. lancetie, ‘a sur-
geon’s launcet; also, a little lance;’ Cot. Dimin. of F. lance; see
Lance.

LAWNCH, another spelling of Lance, verb, and of Launch.

LAND, earth, soil, country, district. (E.) ME. land, lond;
Chaucer, C. T. 4912 (B.492). AS.land; Grein, ii. 154.4-Du. land;
Icel., Dan., and Swed. land; Goth. land; G. land; MHG. lant.
Teut. type *Jandom, neut. ; closely allied to Celtic type *Janda, whence
Trish dann, land, open space, W. /Jan, a yard, churchyard ; whence F.
lande, a moor. See Lawn (1). Der. land, verb, AS. lendan
(=landian), Grein, ii. 168; land-breeze, land-crab, land-flood, land-
grave, q.v., land-holder, land-ing, land-lady; land-lord, Tyndal’s
Works, p. 210, col. 1, AS. land-hlaford ; lands-man ( land-man, Ant.
and Cleop. iv. 3. 11); land-mark, Bible, 1551, Job, xxiv. 2; land-rail,
q.v.; land-scape, q.v.; land-slip, land-steward, land-tax, land-waiter,
land-ward.

LANDAU, akind of coach. (G.) Added by Todd to Johnson’s
Dict. In E, Darwin, Botanic Garden, pt. ii. c. i. 344. Named from
Landau, a town in Bavaria, Here, Land=E. land; for -au, see
Island.

LAND-GRAVE, a count of a province. (Du.) ‘Landgrave,
or Landsgrave, the earl or count of a province, whereof in Germany
there are four ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Spelt langraue, Fabyan,
Chron., ed. 1811, p. 328.—Du. landgraaf, a landgrave. = Du. land,
land, province; and graaf, a count, earl. So also G. landgraf, from
landand graf. 3B. The word was borrowed from the Du. rather than
the G., at any rate in the fem, form landgravine, which answers to
Du. landgravin rather than to G. landgrdjfinn. See Land and Mar-
grave. Der. landgrav-in, as above; landgrav-i-ate, ‘that region or
country which belongs to a landgrave ;’ Blount.

LANDRAIL, a kind of bird; see Rail (3).

LANDSCAPE, the prospect of a country. (Du.) In Milton,
LAllegro, 1. 70, Formerly spelt landskip ; see Trench, Select Glossary.
‘The landskipp . . which is in the Dutch cabinett;’ (1648); Bury
Wills, ed. Tymms, p. 216. And see Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, which
gives it as a painter’s term, to express ‘ all that part of a picture which
is not of the body or argument ;’ answering somewhat to the mod.
term back-ground. It was borrowed from the Dutch painters. = Du.
landschap, a landscape, province; cf. landschap-schilder, a landscape
painter. — Du. land, cognate with E, land; and -schap, a sufix=AS.
-scipe=E. -ship (in friend-ship, wor-ship), allied to the verb which in
Eng. is spelt shape. See Land and Shape... @ The Du. sch is:
sounded more like E. sk than E. sh; hence the mod. sound.

LANE, an open space between hedges, a narrow passage or street.


LAP


(E.) ME. Jane, lone; Chaucer, C. T. 16126 (G 658) ;. P. Plowman,
A.ii. 192, B. ii. 216. AS. dane, lone, a lane; Codex Diplomaticus, ed.
Kemble, vol. i. p. 1.1. 133 vol. iii. p. 33 (no. 549). [Cf. Prov. E.
lone (Cleveland), Jonnin (Cumberland).] OFriesic lona, lana, a lane,
way; North Fries. Jona, lana, a narrow way between houses and
gardens (Outzen).+4- Du. Jaan, an alley, lane, walk. Teut. type
*lanon-, fem. L

LANGUAGE, speech, diction. (F.—L.) ME. langage, King
Alisaunder, 1. 6857; Chaucer, C, T. 4936 (B 516). —F. langage, lan-
guage ; formed with suffix -age (< L.-dticum) from langue, the tongue.
—L. lingua, the tongue. See Lingual, Tongue.

LANGUID, feeble, exhausted, sluggish. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674.—L. languidus, languid.=L, languére, to be weak. See
Languish. Der. languid-ly, languid-ness,

LANGUISH, to become enfeebled, pine, become dull or
torpid. (F.—L.) ME. languishen, Chaucer, C. T. 11262 (F 950);
Cursor Mundi, 14138.—F. languiss-, stem of pres. part. of languir, ‘to
languish, pine;’ Cot. —L. languére, to be weak; whence languescere,
to become weak, which furnishes the F. stem languiss-. . From
/SLEG, to be slack or lax, whence also E. Jax, q.v. See Slack.
Brugmann, i. § 193; ii. § 632. Der. languish-ing-ly, languish-ment ;
and see languid, languor.

LANGUOR, dulness, listlessness. (F.—L.) ME. langour,
Will. of Palerne, 918, 986; langur, Cursor Mundi, 3596. [Now
accommodated to the L. spelling.]=—F. langueur, ‘langor;’ Cot.—
L. langudrem, acc. of languor, languor. = L. languére, to be weak. See
Languish.

LANIARD, the same as Lanyard, q.v.

LANIFEROUS, wool-bearing. (L.) A scientific term in
zoology. In Coles (1676). Coined from L. lanifer, producing wool.
=—L. lani-, for lana, wool; and ferre, to bear. B. The L. lana is
allied to Wool, q.v.; L. ferre is cognate with E. bear. Der. So
also lani-gerous, wool-bearing, from L. gerere, to carry.

LANK, slender, lean, thin. (E.) ME. lank, lonk; spelt lonc, OE.
Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 249, 1. 9: ‘lone he is ant leane’=he is lank
and lean. AS. Alanc, slender; Grein, ii. 80. B. The orig. sense was
‘bending,’ weak; cf. G. lenken, to turn, bend; see further under
Link (1). Der. lank-ly, lank-ness.

LANWNER, a species of falcon. (F.) ME. laner, Voc. 761. 10;
lanner, Newton, Dict. of Birds.— OF. lanier, ‘a lanner;’ Cot. Per-
haps the same word as OF. lanier, cowardly. (N.E.D.)

LANSQUENET, a German foot-soldier; a game at cards.
(F.—G.) Corruptly spelt lanceknight in old authors, by a popular
blunder. See Ben Jonson, Every Man, ed. Wheatley, A. ii.sc. 4. 1. 21.
‘Lansknyght, lancequenet ;? Palsgrave.== F. lansquenet, ‘a lanceknight,
or German footman; also, the name of a game at cards ;’ Cot.—G.
(and Du.) landsknecht, a foot-soldier. = G. lands, for landes, gen. case
of land, land, country; and knecht,a soldier. Land=E. land; and
knecht =E, knight. ‘Thus the word is land’s-knight, not lance-knight.
@ The term means a soldier of the flat or Low Countries, as distin-
guished from the men who came from the highlands of Switzerland ;
see Revue Britannique, no. for Sept. 1866, p. 29 (Littré).

LANTERN, a case for carrying a light. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
lanterne, Floriz and Blancheflur, ed. Lumby, 1. 238.—F. lanterne, =
L. lanterna, laterna, a lantern; the spelling Janterna occurs in the
Lindisfarne MS., in the L. text of John, xviii. 3. Lanterna=*lam-
terna=*lampterna; not a true L. word, but borrowed from Gk.
Aapnrnp, a light, torch. =Gk. Adumeav, to shine. See Lamp.
@ Sometimes spelt lanthorn (Kersey), by a singular popular etymo-
logy which took account of the korn sometimes used for the sides of
lanterns.

LANUGINOUS, covered with down or soft hair. (L.) In
Blount’s Gloss. (1681). From L. lanigindsus, downy. = L. lanigin-,
stem of Janiigo, down; from lana, wool. See Wool.

LANYARD, LANIARD, a certain small rope in a ship. (F.)
The spelling laniard is the better one, since the word has nothing to
do with yard. The d is excrescent; the old spelling was lannier.
‘Lanniers, Lanniards, small ship-ropes that serve to slacken or make
stiff the shrowds, chains,’ &c.; Kersey, ed. 1715. ‘Laniers, vox
nautica ;’ Skinner,ed,1671. ‘Lanyer of lether, Jasniere ;’ Palsgrave.
— MF. laniere, ‘a long and narrow band or thong of leather ;’ Cot.
B. Origin uncertain ; but Cotgr. has lanieres, ‘ hawks lunes,’ i.e. jesses;
perhaps from OF. lanier, a species of falcon. See Lanner, |

LAP (1), to lick up with the tongue. (E.) ME. lappen, lapen,
Wyclif, Judges, vii. 7; Gower, C. A. iii. 2153 bk. vii. 3671. AS.
lapian, to lap; rare, but found in Elfric’s Grammar, De Tertia Conj.
§ 6; and in Glosses to Prudentius (Leo). The derivative lepelder,
a dish, is in Aélfric’s Homilies, ii. 244, 1. 4.4-Icel. lepja, to lap like
a dog; Dan. Jabe, to lap; MHG. Jagfen, OHG. laffan, to lap up;
MDu. lappen, lapen, ‘to lap or licke like a dogge;’ Hexham.+L.
lambere (with inserted m), to lick. All from 4/LAB, to lap, lick


—


LAP


up; Brugmann, ii. § 632. Der. from the same base are Jab-i-al,

lamb-ent, lip.

LAP (2), the loose part of a coat, an apron, part of the body
covered by an apron, a fold, flap. (E.) ME. lappe (dissyllabic),
Chaucer, C. T. 688 (A 686); P. Plowman, B, ii. 35, xvi. 255; often
in the sense of ‘skirt of a garment;’ see Prompt. Parv., and Way’s
note. AS. leppa, a loosely hanging portion ; ‘ lifre-leppar’ = portions
of the liver; AElfric’s Gloss., in Voc. 160. 39. OF ries. lappa, a piece
of a garment. Du./ap,a remnant, shred, rag, patch; Dan. Jap, a patch;
Swed. lapp, a piece, shred, patch ; G. Jappen, a patch, shred. B. The
Teut. type is *lappon-, m.; allied to Icel. Japa, to hang down (not
given in Cleasby, but cited by Fick and others). Cf. Gk. AoBds, a lobe
of the ear, or of the liver (Prellwitz). See Lobe. Der. lap-ful;
lap-el, i.e. part of a coat which laps over the facing (a mod. word,
added by Todd to Johnson), formed with dimin. suffix -el; lapp-et,
dimin. form with suffix -et, used by Swift (Johnson); /ap-dog, Dryden,
tr. of Juvenal, Sat. vi. 853; also dew-lap. Perhaps connected with
lap (3). Cf. lop-eared = lap-eared, with hanging ears, applied to
rabbits. :

LAP (3), to wrap, involve, fold. (E.) Prob. derived from the

word above ; whence also ME. bi-lappen, to enfold ; Ormulum, 14267.
ME. lappen, to wrap, fold, Will. of Palerne, 1712; ‘lapped in cloutes’
= wrapped up in rags, P. Plowman’s Crede, ed. Skeat, 1. 438. B. The
puzzling form wlappen is misleading ; thus in Wyclif, Matt. xxvii. 59,
the L. inuoluit is translated in the later version by ‘lappide it, but in
the earlier one by ‘ wlappide it.? But this ME. wlappen is a later form
of wrappen, to wrap, by the frequent change of r to 7; so that wlap is
a mere corruption or later form of wrap, prob. influenced by Jap, to
enfold. See Wrap.

LAPIDARY, one who cuts and sets precious stones. (L.) Cot-
grave translates F. lapidaire by ‘a lapidary or jeweller.’ ‘ Werk of
the lapidarie ;’ Wyclif, Ecclus. xlv. 13 (A. V. 11). Englished from
L. lapidarius, a stone-mason, a jeweller. —L. Japid-, stem of lapis,
astone. Allied to Gk. Aémas, a bare rock, Aéms, a scale, flake. From
the base LEP, to scale off, peel; seen in Gk. A€mewv, to peel. Der.
‘from the same source, lapidi-fy, lapid-esc-ent, lapid-esc-ence, lapid-esc-
enc-y, Sir T, Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 23. § 5. Also di-lapid-ate,

.v.

4 LAPIS LAZULI, a silicate containing sulphur, of a bright
blue colour. (L. and Arab.) From L. apis, a stone; and Jazuli, gen.
of Med. L. lazulum, azure; see Azure.

LAPSE, to slip or fall into error, to fail in duty. (L.) In Shak.
Cor. v. 2.19; the sb. Japse is in All’s Well, ii. 3.170.—L. lapsare, to
slip, frequentative of /abi (pp. apsus), to glide, slip, trip. Cf. F. laps,
aslip. Allied toSleep. Cf. Skt. lamb, to hang down; Brugmann,
i. § 553. Der. lapse, sb., from L. lapsus, a slip; hence also some
senses of the vb.; cf. AF. laps de temps, lapse of time, Stat. Realm,
‘I. 318 (1351). Also col-lapse, e-lapse, il-lapse, re-lapse.

LAPWING, the name of a bird. (E.) ME. lappewinke (four
syllables), Gower, C. A. ii. 329, bk. v. 6041; later Japwinke, Prompt.
Parv. p. 288; spelt lhapwynche, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 61,1. 31. AS.
hléapewince; Voc. 260.2. PB. The first part is hléape-, connected with
hléapan, to run, spring, leap; see Leap. ‘y. The second part of the
word is, literally, ‘winker;’ but we must assign to the verb wink its

original sense. This orig. sense appears in the OHG. winchax, MHG,

‘winken, to move from side to side, a sense preserved in mod. G. wanken,
‘to totter, stagger, vacillate, reel, waver, &c. Thus the sense is ‘ one
‘who turns about in running or flight,’ which is fairly descriptive of
_the habit of the male bird. 6. We find, however, an AS. form Jaepae-
uince (OE. Texts, p. 504), which has not been explained. 4] Popular
etymology explains the word as ‘ wing-flapper ;’ but Jap does not really
‘take the sense of flap; it means, rather, to droop, hang down loosely ;
see Lap (2). This interpretation iss wrong as to both parts of the
‘AS. form of the word, and is too general.

LARBOARD, the left side of a ship, looking from the stern.
‘(E.) Cotgrave has: ‘ Babort, the larboord side of a ship.’ It is also
‘spelt Jarboord in Minsheu, ed. 1627. The spelling is, however, pro-
‘bably corrupt; the ME. spelling appears to be laddebord. In Allit.
‘Poems, ed. Morris, C. 1. 106, some sailors are preparing to set sail,
and after spreading the mainsail, ‘ pay layden in on ladde-borde and

the lofe wynnes’=they laid in [hauled in?] on the larboard and

set right the loof (see Luff). Again, in the Naval Accounts of

Henry VII, ed.‘Oppenheim, p. 192, we find sterborde and latheborde ;

and, at p. 203, latebord ; so that the former syllable was once Jathe,

late,ot ladde. It was obviously altered to leerebord (Hakluyt, Voy.

i. 4) and to larboard (Milton, P. L. ii. 1019) by the influence of steer-

board, later starboard; see Starboard. B. The only word which

answers in form to ME. Jadde is Swed. ladda, to lade, load, charge,

‘answering to Icel. klada, AS. hladan, E. lade. We find Icel. hlada
seglum=to take in sail. yy. Beyond this, all is uncertainty ; we may
“conjecture that the’sails, when taken down, were put on the left side


LARK 329


of the ship, to be out of the way of the steersman, who originally
stood on the starboard (=steer-board) or right side of the ship.
5. But it is worth notice that Icel. hladask & mara bagu, lit. ‘to lade
oneself on the shoulders of a horse,’ meant ‘to mount a horse ;’ and
one mounts a horse on the left side. The F. babord=G. backbord,
where back means ‘behind’ the steersman, who used his paddle on
the right side of the ship.

LARCENY, theft, robbery. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave, who ex-
plains OF. larrecin by ‘larceny, theft, robbery.’ An old law term;
see Blount’s Nomolexicon.—OF. larrecin, larcin (both forms are in
Cotgrave); mod. F. larcin. The spelling larrecin occurs in the
Laws of William the Congueror, § xiv; in Thorpe’s Ancient Laws
of England, i. 472; and Jarcin in Britton, bk. i.c. 25. [The suffix
-y appears to be an E. addition, to conform the word to forger-y,
burglar-y, felon-y, and the like; but it is unnecessary.]—L. latré-
cinium, freebooting, marauding, robbery; formed with suffix -cinium
(occurring also in ¢ird-cinium) from latro, a robber. £B. Curtius
(i. 453) considers latro as borrowed from Gk. It is, rather, allied
to Gk. Adrpis, a hireling, used in a bad sense. The suffix -éro or
-rpis denotes the agent, and the base is /é- or Ja, discussed by
Prellwitz, s.v. Adrpov. Der. larcen-ist.

LARCH, a kind of tree like a pine. (G.—L.) Spelt Jarche in
Minsheu, ed. 1627. Also spelt Zarche by Turner, Names of Herbes
(1548), who seems to have introduced the spelling directly from G.
larche, a larch, though the ch naturally took the E. sound.=—G.
lérche.=L. laricem, acc. of larix, the larch-tree (whence Late Gk.
Adpié). The L. larix is for *darix (cf. lingua for dingua); cognate
with Irish dair, W. dar, an oak (Stokes-Fick, p. 147); cf. Skt. daru,
wood, a kind of pine. Allied to Tree.

LARD, the melted fat ofswine. (F.—L.) ‘ Larde of flesche, larda,
vel lardum;? Prompt. Parv. p. 288.—OF. (and F.) lard, ‘lard;’
Cot. = L. lardum ; also larda, shortened form of laridum (also larida),
lard, fat of bacon. Akin to Gk. Aapds, pleasant to the taste, nice,
dainty, sweet, Aapuwds, fat. Der. lard, verb, ME. larden (Prompt.
Parv.), from F. larder, to lard (see note to Ben Jonson, Every Man,
ed. Wheatley, A. iii. sc. 5, 1.174); lard-er,, Gower, C, A. ili. 124,
with which cf. AF. larder, OF.‘ Jardier, ‘a tub to keep bacon in’
(Cotgrave), hence applied to a room in which bacon and meat are
kept, called by Palsgrave a larder-house; lard-y, lard-ac-e-ous ; inter-
lard,

LARGE, great, bulky, vast. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. large
(which usually has the sense of liberal), O. Eng. Homilies, ed.
Morris, i. 143, 1. 32.—F. large.—L. larga, fem. of largus, large,
long. Cf. OF. larc, larg, m. (superseded by large, f.) Der. large-ly ;
large-ness, King Alisaunder, 1. 6879; large-heart-ed; large-hand-ed,
Timon of Ath. iv. 1. 11; and see largess, en-large.

LARGESS, a liberal gift, donation. (F.—L.) ME. largesse,
P. Plowman, A, vi. 112; Ancren Riwle, p. 166. =F. largesse, bounty ;
Cot.—Late L. *largitia (not found), for L. largitio, a bestowing,
giving ; cf. L. largitus, pp. of dargiri, to bestow.=L. largus, large,
liberal; see Large.

LARIAT, a rope with a noose, a lasso. (Span.—L.) ‘LZariats,
or noosed cords;’ W. Irving, Tour on the Prairies, 1835, p. 26.—_
Span. Ja reata, lit. ‘the rope that ties together.’ = L. ila, fem. of ille,
he; and Span. reatar, lit. ‘to retie,’ attach together, from L. re-,
again, and aptdre, to adjust, from aptus, fit. See Apt.

LARK (1), the name of a bird. (E.) Lark also appears as
lavrock ; see Burns, Holy Fair, st. 1. ME. larke, Chaucer, C. T.
1493 (A 1491); spelt Javerock, Gower, C. A. ii. 2643 bk. v. 4100.
AS. laiwerce, later lauerce, laiverce, liferce. ‘The spelling lawerce is in
Voc, 286. 173 lauerce in Voc. 131. 28. Laferce is in the comp.
lafercan-beorh, a place-name cited in Kemble. But the oldest spelling
is Jaurice, Corpus Gloss. 1173.-+-Icel. levirki, a lark; Low G. lewerke
(Bremen Worterbuch); OHG. lérehha; G. lerche; Du, leeuwrik,
leeuwerik ; Swed. larka; Dan.lerke. B. The Icel. le-virki=skilful
worker or worker of craft, from le, craft, and virki, a worker; cf.
Icel. Je-visi, craft, skill, Je-viss, crafty, skilful; and (as to virki), ill-
virkt, a worker of ill, spell-virki, a doer of mischief. But the general
Teut. form points rather to an original */aiwirakjon- (N. E. D.),
which may perhaps mean ‘revealer of treachery;’ from *rakjan-
(AS. reccan, to relate,expound). Cf. /@wa,a traitor, betrayer, Mark,
xiv. 44; also Goth. léw, an occasion, opportunity (Rom. vii. 8, 11),
whence léwjan, leiwjan, to betray. Such a name would point to some
superstition which may have connected the bird with the rising sun ;
but no such legend is known. Thus the true origin remains wholly
unknown ; and the oldest spelling (Jaurice) is obscure.

LARK (2), a game, sport, fun. (E.) Spelt Jark in modern E.,
and now a slang term. Also used as sky-Jark, and probably due to
a peculiar use of Lark (1); from its cheerful note. @ Often (but
perhaps wrongly) connected with ME. Jak, lok; also laik, which is
a Scand. form. See Will. of Palerne, 678; P. Plowman, B. xiv.


330 LARUM


243; Ormulum, 1157, 2166; Ancren Riwle, p. 152, note b; &c.
(Stratmann). Cf. AS. lac, play, contest, prey, gift, offering ; Grein,
ji. 148; Icel. Jetkr, a game, play, sport.

LARUM, short for Alarum, q.v. In Shak. Cor. i. 4. 9.

LARVA, an insect in the caterpillar state. (L.) A scientific
term. = L. larua, a ghost, spectre, mask; the insect’s first stage being
the mask (disguise) of its last one; a fanciful term. Root unknown.
Der. larv-al, Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.

LARYNX, the upper part of the windpipe. (L.—Gk.) In
Kersey, ed. 1715; and in P. Fletcher, Purple Island, c. 4, note 29.—
L. larynx.=—Gk. Adpuyé, the larynx, throat, gullet; gen. case, Ad-
puyyos. Der. laryng-e-al, laryng-e-an, laryng-itis.

LASCAR, a native E. Indian sailor. (Pers.) ‘ Lascars, or Indian
seamen ;’ W. Dampier, A New Voyage, vol. ii. pt. i. p. 112 (1669).
First in 1625.=Pers. Jashkar, an army; whence lashkari, military ;
hence, a soldier, camp-follower; Rich. Pers. Dict. p. 1265. See
Yule.

LASCIVIOUS, lustful. (L.) In Shak. Rich. II, ii. 1.19; Lyd-
gate, Assembly of Gods, 1. 686.—Late L. Jascividsus, lustful. —L.
lasciuia, sb.; from L. Jasciuus, lascivious. ' Lengthened from an older
form *lascus (not found), as fest-iuus is from fest-us. Cf. Skt. lash, to
desire, covet, akin to Gk. Ar-Aaiopa:, I desire, and to E. dust. See

ust. Der. lascivious-ly, lascivious-ness.

LASH (1), to fasten firmly together. (F.—L.) ‘Lash (in sea
affairs), to fasten or bind up anything to the ship’s sides;’ Kersey,
ed. 1715. ‘ Her ordnance being Jashed so fast ;’ Capt. Smith, Works,
ed. Arber, p. 674.—OF. lachier, variant of lacier (Godefroy), to
fasten with a lace or string. —OF. Jache (Godefroy), a lace, also a
hinge. = Folk-L. *lacium, for L. laqueum, acc. of laqueus, a snare.
See Lace. Cf. Norm. dial. lacher, to fasten with thongs (Moisy).
@ We also find Du. Jasschen, to join, scarf together ; lasch, sb., a
piece, joint, seam, notch ; Swed. laska, to stitch, Jask, a scarf, joint ;
Dan. laske, to scarf, lask, a scarf; but it is not clear that they have
influenced the E. word. See Jasch in Franck. Der. lash-ing, sb.

LASH (2), a thong, flexible part of a whip, a stroke, stripe.

(F.—L.) ME, lasche. ‘Lasche, stroke, ligula, flagrum;’ Prompt.
Parv. p. 288. ‘Whippes Jasskhe;’ Chaucer, Parl. of Foules, 178.
Perhaps formed from Lash (1). Cf. Norm. dial. Jaschier, to lash,
whip with a cord (Le Héricher). . Or, from OF. lache, a lace
(Godefroy) ; seeabove. Der. lash, verb, to flog, scourge ; cf.‘ Laschyn,
lashyn, betyn, ligulo, verbero;’ Prompt. Parv.

LASS, a girl. (Scand.) ME. Jasse, spelt Zasce in Cursor Mundi,
1. 2608. ME. Jasce may be regarded as allied to Icel. Jéskr (base
Zask-), weak ; MSwed. losk, a person having no fixed abode; OSwed.
loska kona, a spinster (cited by Vigfusson):—H. Bradley ; in Athe-
neum, June 16, 1894. Cf. Bavarian Jasch, a woman (a term of
contempt) ; Schmeller. B. Olcel. déskr is for *lat-kwaz, allied to
Goth. lat-s, idle, E. late, q.v.; Brugmann, ii. § 85.

LASSITUDE, weariness. (F.—L.) ‘The one is callyd cruditie,
the other lassitude;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iv. c. 1.—F.
lassitude; Cot. = L. lassitido, faintness, weariness. = L. lassi-, for lassus,
tired, wearied ; with suffix -ti-den-. B. Lassus is for *lad-tus, where
lad- corresponds to /at- in Goth. Jats, slothful, cognate with E. date.
See Late. Brugmann, i. § 197.

LASSO, a rope with a noose. (Span.—L.) Modern; not in
Todd’s Johnson. The pron. is that used in Texas, which is archaic.
= OSpan. Jaso (Minsheu, 1623); Span. azo, a snare, slip-knot; and
cf. F. lacs, = Folk-L. *lacium, for L. lagueum, acc. of laqueus, a snare.
See Lace. @ Not from mod. Spanish, for the Span. z is sounded
like our voiceless #k. Der. lasso, verb.

LAST (1), latest, hindmost. (E.) Last is a contraction of Jatest,
through the intermediate form Jatst (=Ja?’st), for which see Ormulum,
1. 4168. See Late. Cf. Du. Jaatst, last, which is the superl. of
Zaat, late.

LAST (2), a wooden model of the foot on which shoes are made.
(E.) ME. last, leste. ‘Hec formula, last;’? Voc. 654. 35; in a
glossary of the 15th cent. ‘Leste, sowtarys [shoemaker’s] forme,
formula ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 298. AS. last, a foot-track, path, trace
of feet ; Grein, ii, 160; also AS. /éste, a model of the foot ; ‘Calo-
podium, uel mustricula, Jeste;’ Voc.’ 125. 32.4-Du. Jeest, a last,
shape, form; Icel. Jeistr, the foot below the ankle; Swed. last, a
shoemaker’s last ; Dan. lest, the same; G. leisten, the same; Goth.
laists, a track, way, footstep; 2 Cor. xii. 18. B. The Teut. types are
all from a base Jaist-, and the original sense is foot-track, trace of
a man’s path; cf. G. gleise (ge-leise), a track. Formed from Teut.
*lais, as in Goth, lais, I know (Phil. iv. 12); the trace being that
whereby a man’s path is known. This word Jais was orig. used in
the sense ‘I have experienced,’ and it is the pt. t. of Goth. Jeisan, to
track, to find out. From Teut. base *Jeis, to find out, whence E,
learn ; allied to L. lira, a furrow, a track, whence E. de-lir-ious. See
-Learn. Der. last (3). |


ee


LATH


LAST (3), to endure, continue. (E.) ME. lasten, Havelok, 538;
also lesten, Prompt. Pary. p. 299. AS. Jzstan, to observe, perform,
last, remain ; the orig. sense being ‘to follow in the track of,’ from
last, a foot-track; see Last (2).4Goth. Jaistjan, to follow, follow
after; from Jaists, a foot-track; G. leisten, verb, to perform, follow
out, fulfil, allied to Jeisten, sb., a form, model, shoemaker’s last.
Der. last-ing-ly, ever-last-ing. @ The train of ideas in learn, last (2),
and Jast (3) is: trace (whence learn, know), follow out, fulfil,
continue.

LAST (4), a load, a large weight, ship’s cargo. (E.) ME. last.
‘A thousand Jast quad yere’=a thousand cargoes of bad years;
Chaucer, C. T. 13368 (B 1628); and see Deposition of Rich. II, ed,
Skeat, iv. 74. AS. Alest, a burden; Grein, ii, 81.— AS. hladan, to
load; see Laade, Load.+Icel. Zest, a load, from hlada, to load ;
Dan. last, a weight, burden, cargo, from Jade, to load; Swed. Jast,
a burden, allied to ladda, to load; Du. and G. last, from laden, to
load. Idg. type *4lat-sto- (-sti-), from *klat-, to lade; whence also
Idg. *klat-to-, as in Icel. hlass, a cart-load, Swed. lass, the same.

LATCH, a catch, fastening. (E.) ME. lacche, used by Walter
de Bibbesworth to translate OF. cliket; Wright’s Vocab. i.170. [See
cliket in Chaucer, C. T. 9920 (E 2046).] ‘Latche, lakche, lach, or
snekke, Clitorium, vel pessula;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 283. From ME.
verb lacchen, to seize, catch hold of, Will. of Palerne, 666, 671; P.
Plowman, B. xviii. 324. AS. /e@ccan, to seize, lay hold of, Grein, ii.
161; also ge-leccan, ALlfric’s Homilies, i. 182, ii. 50. B. AS. leccan
is a weak verb (pt. t. Jehte), from a base *lakk-. It is perhaps ulti-
mately connected with L. lagqueus, a snare. “@[ The assertion in
Trench’s Select Glossary that Jace and Jatch are ‘the same word,’
may be true for some senses of the latter; thus ME. lacche occurs in
the sense of ‘snare’ in Ch., Rom. Rose, 1624. The E. and F. words
were prob. confused. For the F. word, see Latchet. Der. latch,
verb, to fasten with a latch, merely formed from the sb., and not the
same as ME. lacchen ; also latch-key.

LATCH, to moisten. (E.) In Shak. Mid. Nt. Dream, iii. 2. 36:
‘But hast thou yet Jacht the Athenians eyes With the loue-iuyce, as
I did bid thee doe?’ ed. 1623. Oberon had bidden Puck to ‘ annoint
his eyes;’ ii. I. 261. A variant of North E. Jeck, to moisten, which
exactly represents AS. Jeccan, to moisten, water; latch has the vowel
of prov. E. lache, a gutter, AS. Jacu, a stream, closely allied to leccan.
Cf. MDnu. laken, to flow (Oudemans), Swed. laka pa, to pour on to.
See Notes on E. Etym., p. 158.

LATCHET, a little lace,a thong. (F.—L.) Inthe Bible, Mark,
i. 7, Isa. v. 27. The former ¢ is intrusive. ME. lachet, as in ‘lachet
of a schoo;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 284. ‘ Lachet outher loupe’ =latchet
or loop; Sir Gawayne and the Grene Knight, ]. 591.—OF-. lachet,
Norman and Picard form of OF. Jacet, ‘the lace of a petticote, a
woman’s lace or lacing, also a snare or ginne;’ Cot. Dimin. (with
suffix -e?) of OF. lache (Godefroy), variant of Jas,a snare. See Lace.
@@> Observe that Jatche¢ is the dimin. of lace, and distinct from latch
in most of its senses.

LATE, tardy, coming behind, slow, delayed. (E.) 1. ME. lat,
rare as an adj. in the positive degree. ‘A Jat mon’=a man slow of
belief; Joseph of Arimathie, ed. Skeat, 1.695. The adv. is late, as
in ‘late ne rathe’=late nor early, P. Plowman, B. iii. 73. 2. The
compar, form is later or latter, spelt Jettere in Layamon, 1. 5911.
3. The superl. is latest, latst, or last, the intermediate form appearing
in the Ormulum, 1. 4168. AS. let, slow, late; Grein, ii. 165.4-Du.
laat, late; Icel. Jatr, slow, lazy; Dan. lad, lazy, slothful; Swed. dat,
lazy, idle; Goth. Jats, slothful, Luke, xix. 22; G. lass, weary, indo-
lent. Allied to L. dassus (=*lad-tus), weary. B. All from the weak
grade of Teut. base */é, to let, let go, let alone; so that Jate means
let alone, neglected, hence slothful, slow, coming behindhand. See
Let (1). Brugmann, i. § 197. Der. late-ly, late-ness, lat-ish, latt-er,
latt-er-ly, last (1), q.V., Zast-ly. Also let (2). From the same source,
lassitude, q.V.

LATEEN, triangular, applied to sails. (F.—L.) In Ash’s Dict.,
ed. 1775. Vessels in the Mediterranean frequently have lateen sails,
of a triangular shape. The E, spelling preserves the pronunciation
of the F. word Latine, the fem. of Latin, Latin; the lit. sense being
‘Latin sails,’ i.e. Roman sails, See Latin. ‘ Voile Latine, a mizen
or smack saile;? Cot. ‘Latina, the mizen saile of a ship; also, the
Latine toong;’ Florio, Ital. Dict. ed. 1598. So also Span, Latina
vela, a lateen sail; a da Latina, of a triangular form. y
LATENT, lying hid, concealed. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674; and in Cockeram (1642).—L. datent-, stem of pres. pt. of
latére, to lie hid. Der. latent-ly, latenc-y.

LATERAL, belonging to the side. (L.) In Milton, P. L. x.
705. ‘A lateral view;’ Ben Jonson, Underwoods, xxiii. 1. 9.—L.
laterilis, belonging to the side. —L. later-, for *lates-, stem of latus,
the side.4Irish Jeth, W. led, side. Der. lateral-ly.

LATH, a thin slip of wood. (E.) In Shak. Tw. Nt. iv. 2. 136,


vel


LATHE


In the North of England, the form used is Jat; see Ray, Halliwell,
and the Holderness Glossary (E. D.S.). This corresponds with ME.
Jatte,a lath. ‘Hic: asser, a latt;’? Voc. 729. 4. AS. lett, pl. letta;
‘ Asseres, Jetta;’ Allfric’s Gloss., in Voc. 126. 143 also atta, pl.,
Voc. 185. 20.4Du. Jat, a lath; G. latte, a lath, whence F. Jatte is
borrowed. f. The exact correspondence of the dental sound in AS.
lett and G. latte presents a difficulty. Perhaps the modern E. form
was influenced by the W. Jlath, a rod, staff, yard, which is cognate
with Irish sfat, a rod, from a Celtic type *slatta. The pl. lathes occurs
in 1350; Riley, Memorials of London, p. 261. Der. Jatt-ice, q.v.,
latt-en, q.v-

LATHE (1), a machine for ‘ turning’ wood and metal. (Scand.)
‘Could turn his word, and oath, and faith, As many ways as in a
lathe ;? Butler, Hudibras, pt. iii. c. 2. Il. 375, 376. Cotgrave explains
F. tournoir by ‘a turner’s wheel, a lathe or Jare.’ Prob. of Scand.
origin; froma form represented by Dan. lad, as in dreie-lad, a turning-
lathe; which also means ‘frame,’ as in vever-lad, a loom (weaving-
frame). This Dan. Jad is prob. the same as Icel. 4/ad, a pile, a stack;
from hlada, to lade; see rade (2). B. We may also compare AS,
hlad-hwéogl (lit. lade-wheel), an engine or wheel ofa well, to draw
water (Bosworth) ; also AS. hled-trendel, a wheel for drawing water
(id.) ; which are clearly derived from AS. hladan, to lade out water.
A transference of name from the water-wheel to the lathe would be
easy. 4 The entry /0d, a lathe, in Vigfusson’s Icel. Dict., is incorrect
(N.E.D.).

LATHE (2), a division of a county. (E.) Kent is divided into
five /athes or portions; see Pegge’s Alphabet of Kenticisms; E.D.S.
Gloss. C. 3. AS.1@6,a portion of land; ‘ne gyrne ic pines, ne /edes
ne landes’=I covet not thine, neither lathe nor land; Thorpe’s
Ancient Laws, i.184. ‘In quibusdam vero provinciis Anglice voca-
batur Jed, quod isti dicunt tithinge;’ id. i. 455, note 3; and see
Glossary in vol. ii.4-Icel. 143, land, landed possession. Teut. type
*]@dom, neuter. Cf. Goth. un-léds, poor, lit. ‘ landless.’

LATHER, foam or froth, esp. when made with soap and water.
(E.) ME. lather, for which Stratmann gives no reference; but we
find the derived verb letherien, as in ‘ he leferede a swote’ =he was in
a lather with sweat; Layamon, 1. 7489 (later text). AS. Jéador,
lather, Voc. 456. 14; also in the comp. Jéador-wyrt, lit. lather-wort,
i.e. soap-wort; Gloss. to AS. Leechdoms, ed. Cockayne ; whence
the verb Jédrian, to anoint, John, xi. 2 (Lindisfarne MS.).+-Icel.
laudr, later lodr, froth, foam, scum of the sea, soap; whence laudra,
lédra, to foam, also to drip with blood; leydra, to wash.. Teut. type
*laudrom, neut.; Idg. type */outrom, as in Gk. Aourpédv, for AoFerpor,
a bath, from Aov’w, Homeric Adw (for *Aofw), I wash (Prellwitz).
Cf. L. laudre, to wash ; for which see Lave. Der. lather, vb.

LATIN, pertaining to the Romans. (F.—L.) ME. Latin;
Chaucer, C. T. 4939 (B 519); and earlier, in St. Juliana, p. 3.—F.
Latin.=—L. Latinus, Latin, belonging to Latium.—L, Latium, the
name of a country of Italy, in which Rome was situate. Der. Latin-
ism, Latin-ist, Latin-i-ty, Latin-ise. Also latim-er = Latin-er, an
interpreter, Layamon, 14319; well known as a proper name. Also
lateen, q.v.

LATITUDE, breadth, scope, distance of a place N. or S. of the
equator. (F.—L.) ME. latitude; Chaucer, C. T. 4433.—F. latitude.
—L. latitido, breadth.=L. latus, broad; from an OL. sélatus,
appearing in sflata, a broad ship. See Brugmann, i. § 529 (2).
Der. latitudin-al, from stem Jatitidin- of the sb. latitudo ; latitudin-
ar-i-an, latitudin-ar-i-an-ism, latitudin-ous.

LATTEN, a mixed metal, a kind of brass. (F.—G.?) ‘This
latten bilbo;’ Merry Wives, i.1. 165. ME. latoun, laton ; Chaucer,
C. T. zor (A 699).—OF. Jaton (13th cent., see Littré) ; mod. F.
laiton. Cotgrave has: ‘Laiton, lattin (metall).’? Cf. Span. Jaton,
latten, brass; Port. Jato, brass ; Ital.-ottone (corrupted from Jottone
‘or Jattone), latten, brass, yellow copper. . According to Diez,
the OF. laton is from Jatte, a lath (also spelt Jate, as in Cotgrave) ;
because this metal was hammered into thin plates. This is rendered
probable by the Ital. /atta, tin, a thin sheet of iron tinned, answering
in form to Low L., Jatta, a lath (occurring in Voc. 729. 5); so
also Span. Jatas, laths, hoja de lata, tin-plate, tinned iron plate [where
hoja=foil, leaf]; also Port. Jata, tin plate, Jatas, laths. y. If
this be right, these words are of G. origin viz. from G. Jatte, a lath;
see Lath. ;

LATTER, another form of later; see Late. (E.)

LATTICH, a network of crossed laths. (F.—G.) Here, as in
‘other words, the final -ce stands for s; a better form is Jattis, as in
Spenser, F. Q. iii. 12.15. ME. latis, latys; Wyclif, Prov. vii. 6.—
AF. latys, Liber Albus, p. 333, 1. 43 F. Jatits, lath-work (Hamilton),
=F. latte, a lath. —G. Jatte, a lath; see Lath. Der. Jattice-work.

LAUD, to praise. (L.) ME.lauden, ‘If thou laudest and ioyest
any wight;’ Test. of Love, -b. i. ch. 10. 76; ‘laude it nought ;’
P. Plowman, B. xi. 102.—L. laudare, to praise.—L. laud-, stem of


LAVATORY


laus, praise. Root uncertain. Der. laud-er, laud-able, laud-able-ness,
laud-abl-y; also laud-at-or-y (from pp. laud-atus) ; laud, sb., Troil.
iil, 3. 179; Hamlet, iv. 7. 178. And see allow (2).
LAUDANUM, a preparation of opium. (L.—Gk.—Pers.)
‘Laudanum or Opiate Laudanum, a medicine so called from its ex-
cellent qualities ;’ Kersey, ed. 1715; and in Sir T. Browne, Religio
Medici, pt. ii. § 12. Kersey’s remark refers to a supposed connexion
with L. laudare, to praise; on which Mahn (in Webster) remarks :
‘this word cannot be derived from L. laudandum, to be praised, nor
was it invented by Paracelsus, as it previously existed in Provengal.’
The name, in fact, was an old one; but was transferred from one
drug to another. ‘Laudanum, Ladanum, or Labdanum, a sweet-
smelling transparent gum gathered from the leaves of Cistus Ledon,
a shrub, of which they make pomander ; it smells like wine mingled
with spices ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Cf. MSpan. laudano, ‘the gum
labdanum ysed in pomanders ;” Minsheu (1623). Spelt Jabdanum in


331


‘Cotgrave, s. vy. labdane; but laudanum in Bullein’s Dialogue (1578),


p- 43, 1. 13. Spelt Jadanum, Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s Revels, v. 2
(Perfumer),—L. /adanum, lédanum, the resinous substance exuding
from the shrub Jada; Pliny, xxvi. 8. 30, § 47; xii. 17. 37, § 45.—Gk,.
Andavoy, Adbavov, the same.=Gk. Ajdov, an oriental shrub, Cistus
Creticus, = Pers, ladan, the gum-herb lada; Rich, Pers. Dict., p. 1251,
col. 2, last line.

LAUGH, to make the noise denoting mirth. (E.) ME. laughen,
Chaucer, C. T. 3847 (A 3849). Various spellings are lauhwen,
lauhen, laghen, leh3en, lih3en, &c. ; see Stratmann. OMerc. hlehhan,
AS. hlehhan, hlihhan, hlihan, pt. t. hloh ; Grein, ii. 81.4+-Du. lagchen;
Icel. hlaja, pt. t. h1G; Dan. lee; Swed. le; G. lachen; Goth. hlahjan,
pt. t. hloh. B. All imitative words from a Teut. base HLAH,
corresponding to an Aryan base KLAK, to make a noise. Cf.
Lith. kleg-éti, to laugh, Gk. eAdocew, to cluck. Somewhat similar
words are Kaw (ev, to cry as a jackdaw, xpw (ew, to caw, KAa fev, to
clash, xpa(ev, to croak, &c.; L. crocitare, glocire; and cf. E. crake,
creak, crack, click, clack, cluck, &c. Der. laugh, sb., laugh-er, laugh-
able, laugh-abl-y, laugh-able-ness, laugh-ing-ly, laugh-ing-gas, laugh-
ing-stock, Also, laugh-ter, Chaucer, Troil. ii. 1169, from AS. hleahtor,
Grein, ii. 82, cognate with Icel. klatr, Dan. latter, G. lachter.

LAUNCH (1), LANCH, to throw forward like a spear, hurl,
send forth, send (a ship) into the water. (F.—L.) ME. launchen, to
pierce, Destr. of Troy, 68113 variant of launcen, to hurl, Will. of
Palerne, 1. 27553 cf. P. Plowman’s Crede, 551. ‘Lawncyn, lawnchyn,
or stynge with a spere or blode-yryne, lanceo;’ Prompt. Parv.—OF,.
lanchier, variant of lancier, Picard lancher, F. lancer, ‘to throw, fling,
hurle, dart; also, to prick, pierce;’ Cot.=F. Jance, a lance; see
Lance. Doublet, lance, verb.

LAUNCH (2), the largest boat of a man of war, a kind of long-
boat. (Span.—Port.—Malay.) Formerly Janch. ‘The craft was..
a lanch, or long-boat ;? Dampier, Voy. (ed. 1729), i. 2.—Span.
lancha, ‘the pinnace of a ship;’ Pineda,— Port. /ancha, pinnace of
a ship; also lanchara,—Malay lanchar, swift, nimble; lanchar, to
proceed quickly. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 158.

LAUNDRESS, a washerwoman. (F.—L.) Formerly launderess
(see below), formed by adding the F. suffix -ess to the old word
launder or lavender, which had the same sense. ME, Javender,
Chaucer, Legend of Good Women, 1. 3583 spelt Jawender, laynder,
landar, Barbour’s Bruce, ed. Skeat, xvi. 273, 292.—OF. lavandier,
masc. one who washes; (whence the fem. lavandiere, ‘a launderesse
or washing-woman ;’ Cot.).— Late L. lavanddarius, one who washes ;
Ducange. = L. Jauand-a, things to be washed ; from laudre, to wash ;
see Lave. Der. laundr-y (=launder-y), spelt lauendrye in P. Plow-
man, B. xv. 182.

LAUREATE, crowned with laurel. (L.) ME. laureat, Chaucer,
C. T. 14614 (B 3886). =L. laureatus, crowned with laurel. = L. /aurea,
a laurel crown; fem, form of adj. Jaureus, made of laurel, from laurus;
see Laurel. Der. laureate-ship.

LAUREL, the bay-tree. (F.—L.) In Shak. Troil. i. 3. 107.
Formed, by the common substitution of J for r, from ME. Jaurer,
a laurel, Chaucer, C. T. 9340 (EK 1466); spelt lorer, Gower, C. A.
i. 3373 bk. iii. 1716; Zorel, Will. of Palerne, 1. 2983. —F. laurier,
‘a laurell, or bay-tree;’ Cot.—Late L. */aurarius (not found), an
adjectival formation with suffix -drius.— L. laurus, a laurel-tree.
Der. laureil-ed ; also laur-e-ate; see above.

LAURUSTINUS, an evergreen shrub. (L.) Used by Evelyn
in 1664. Really compounded of two separate words. —L. Jaurus,
a laurel ; ¢izus, a laurustinus.

LAVA, the matter which flows down a burning mountain. (Ital.
—L.) In Keats, Lamia,i.157. A late word ; added by Todd to
Johnson’s Dict.—TItal, Java, ‘a running gullet, streame, or gutter
sodainly caused by raine;’ Florio’s Ital. Dict., ed. 1598, —Ital.
Javare, to wash. = L. laudre, to wash; see Lave.


LAVATORY, a place for washing, (L.) In Levins; and in


332 LAVE


Wyclif, Exod. xxx. 18." Cotgrave explains F, /avatoire as ‘a lavatory,


a place or vessell to wash in,’ —L. laudtorium, a lavatory; neut. of
laudtorius, belonging to a washer.=—L. Jaudtor, a washer. =L. laudre,
to wash; see Lave.

LAVE, to wash, bathe. (F.—L.) ME. lauen; ‘And Jaueth
them in the Jauandrie’ [laundry]; P. Plowman, C. xvii. 330; cf.
Layamon, 7489. =F. laver, to wash. = L. Jauare, to,wash.+Gk. Aovew,
to wash. From the Idg. base LOU, to wash. See Lather. Der.
lav-er (Exod. xxxviii. 8), ME. lavour, lauour, Chaucer, C. T. 5869
(D 287), from OF. laveoir, lavoer (Godefroy), lavoir, ‘a washing
‘poole’ (Cot.), from L. lauatorium (above). And see laundress, lotion.
From the same base are de-luge, al-luvial.

LAVEER, to beat to windward, to tack. (Du.—F.—Dnu.) ‘But
those that ’gainst stiff gales Javeering go;’ Dryden, Astraea Redux,
1. 65.— Du. laveeren, MDu. laveren, loeveren, ‘ to saile up and downe,’
Hexham. = MF. loveér (Littré); F. louvoyer.—F. lof, luff, weather-
side.—Du. Joef. See Luff. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 159.

LAVENDER, an odoriferous plant. (F.—Late L.) | Spelt
lavendre in Palsgrave; cf. Shak. Wint. Ta. iv. 104. ‘Lavendere,
herbe, Lavendula ;? Prompt. Parv.— AF. lavendre, Voc. 557.9. — Late
L. lavendula, as in Prompt. Parv. and Voc. 557.9. Other forms are
lavandula, livendula (N.E.D.). Also F. lavande, ‘ lavender,’ Cot. ;
Ital. Javanda, lavender; Ital. lavendola, Span. lavandula. B. The
plant was often laid with fresh-washed linen, and thus came to
be associated (in popular etymology) with L. laudre, to wash. But
the early form livendula tends rather to associate it with liuére, to be
livid, from its blueish colour. The exact source is unknown.

LAVISH, adj., profuse, prodigal. (F.—L:) a. The adj. is due
to an obs. sb., also spelt lavish; also lavas, lavess, which is explained
below. . Examples of the adj. are as follows. ‘In al other thing
so light and ldawes [are they] of theyr tong;’ Sir T. More, Works,
p- 250b. ‘Punishing with losse of life the Javesnes of the toung;’
Brende, Quintus Curtius, fol. 67 (R.). ‘ Although some lawishe lippes,
which like some other best ;’ Gascoigne, In Praise of Lady Sandes,
1. 7 (Poems, ed. Hazlitt, vol. i. p..53). ‘Lavish Nature;’ Spenser,
Muiopotmos, 1. 163. Spelt Zavas in ‘Romeus and Juliet,’ p. 20
(Halliwell) ; so also ‘lavas of theyr tungys;’ Paston Letters, iii.
323.  y. The adj. arose from the use of Javas, sb., in the sense of
lavishness or prodigality. ‘There was no lawas [ profusion, excess ]
in their speche ;’ Caxton, Golden Legend, fol. 364, back (N.E.D.).
Whence also the vb., as in; ‘Those, who did prodigally Jauesse out
and waste their substaunce;’ Udall, tr. of Erasmus’ Apophthegms,
Diogenes, § 161. The sb. is of F. origin. — OF. Javasse, an inundation,
abundant rain (Godefroy); cf. Rouchi Javache, as in plowvoir & lavache,
to rain abundantly (Hécart).—F. aver, to wash; Norm. dial. Zaver,
to lavish, to squander (Moisy).—L. lauare, to wash. See Lave.
Compare: ‘ He /awez hys gyftez as water of dyche’ = God Javishes his
gifts as (freely as one would take) water out of a ditch; Allit. Poems,
ed. Morris, A. 607; see the whole passage, which treats of God’s
profuseness of reward to the souls in heaven. Der. lavish-ly, lavish-
ness, lavish-ment; also lavish, verb (Levins).

LAW, a rule of action, edict, statute. (Scand.) ME. Jawé (two
syllables), Chaucer, C. T. 1167 (A 1165). AS. lagu, a late word,
used in place of the early AS. @, law. Borrowed from prehistoric
ON. *lagu, answering to Icel. log (below). Cf. OSax. Jag (pl. lagz),
a statute, decree; Icel. Jég (s. pl., but used in the sing. sense), for
older “lagu, alaw; it is the pl. of Jag, a stratum, order, due place,
lit. ‘that which lies’ or is placed; Swed. Jag; Dan. lov. Teut.
type “lagom, n. _B. The sense is ‘that which lies’ or is in
due order; from Teut. base *lag, 2nd grade of *liggan-, to lie;
see Lie (1). Der. law-ful, ME. laweful, Trevisa, iii, 193; law-
Sul-ly, ME, lawefulliche, P. Plowman, C. x. 59; law-ful-ness, see Owl
and Nightingale, ed. Stratmann, 1. 1741; law-giver ; law-less, ME.
Zaweles, Trevisa, iii. 73; Jaw-less-ly, law-less-ness; law-book, see
Ormulum, 1. 1953; law-suit; also law-yer, q.v.

. LAWN (1), a space of ground covered with grass in a garden.

(F.—C.) Properly an open space, esp. in a wood; a glade (see
Glade). The spelling lawn is not old; the older spelling is in-
variably Jaund, which was still in use in the 18th century. ‘Laund
or Lawn, in a park, plain untilled ground ;’ Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.
Spelt Zaund in Shak. Venus, 813; 3 Hen. VI, iii. 1. 2. ME. laund,
Chaucer, C. T. 16913 (observe that Dryden substitutes Jawn in his
Palamon and Arcite, 1. 845); P. Plowman, C. i. 8.—OF. Jaunde
(Godefroy), also dande, ‘a land or laund, a wild, untilled, shrubby,
or bushy plain;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. and Span. Janda, a heath, tract of
open country, OCeltic */anda, fem.; whence Bret. Jann, a bushy
shrub, of which the pl. Jannow is only used to signify waste land, like
the F. landes. The Bret. lann is also used in a variety of senses,


corresponding to those of Gael. and Irish Jann, and W./lan; one of |
these senses is Jand or territory, though most often used of an inclosure, |


Spurrell gives W. Jlan, ‘an area, yard, church;’ but_the Gael. Jann


LAY FIGURE


means ‘ an inclosure, a house, a church, a repository, land;’ and the
Irish Jann is ‘land, a house, church, repository.’ In fact, the Irish
lann and E. land are cognate words; see Land.

LAWN (2), a sort of fine linen. (F.?—L.?) In Shak. Wint. Ta.
iv. 4. 209, 220. ‘In the third yeare of the raigne of Queene Elizabeth,
1562, beganne the knowledge and wearing of Jawne and cambrick,
which was then brought into England by very small quantities ;’
Stow, King James, an. 1604 (R.). But this misleading statement is
entirely wrong, as the word is known to English as early as 1415
(N. E. D.). It also occurs in Lydgate’s London Lickpenny, 1. 66
(Minor Poems, p. 105); and in Henrysoun, Test. Cressid, 423. In
1502, Jawn is enumerated among the wares of Flanders; Arnold’s
Chron., ed. 1811, p. 205. And Palsgrave (1530) has: ‘Laune lynen,
crespe.’ I understand Laune lynen to mean ‘linen of Laon,’ formerly
also Lan, not far N.W. of Rheims; cf. ‘ Lawne, or fine linnen cloth
called cloth of Remes;’ Baret. Linen manufacture was carried on
at Laon for many centuries (Romania, xxix. 182). For the spelling
Lan, see Calendar of State Papers, vi. 203, 224; and for OF. Lan
(Laon) see Ménage.—L. Laudiinum, Lugdinum, a name of Celtic
origin. Cf. fawn (2), from OF. fan, faon ; pawn (2), from OF. paon.

LA R, one versed in the law, one who practises law. (E.)
ME. lawyer, lawier; P. Plowman, B. vii. 59. From Jaw, with suffix
-yer. This suffix originated in the use of the suffix -ien in place of
-en in causal verbs, and verbs derived from sbs. Thus, from the AS,
lufu, love, was formed the vb. lujigan or lufian, to love, which became
lov-ien in ME. Hence the sb. lov-ier or lov-yer, a lover, another form
of lov-er or lov-ere, a lover; see the readings in the Petworth and
Lansdowne MSS. in Chaucer, C.T., A 1347. By analogy, from lawe,
law, was formed law-ier or law-yer. So also bow-yer, one who uses
a bow; saw-yer, one who uses a saw.

LAX, slack, loose, soft, not strict. (L.) In Milton, P. L. vii. 162.
=L. laxus, lax, loose.=L. base LAG, to be weak; whence also
langu-ére, to be languid, with inserted x. Allied to slack; see Slack.
Brugmann, i. § 193. Der. lax-ly, lax-ness; lax-i-ty, from F. laxité
(Cot.), which from L. acc. laxitatem; and see lax-at-ive.

LAXATIVE, loosening. (F.—L.) ME. laxatif, Chaucer, C. T.
14949 (B 4133).— F. laxatif, ‘laxative ;’ Cot. —L. laxatitius, loosening;
cf. laxatus, pp. of laxare, to render lax. —L. laxus; see Lax. Der.
laxative-ness.

LAY (1), to cause to lie down, place, set. (E.) The causal of lie,
from which it is derived. ME. leggen; weak verb, pt. t. leide, pp. leid;
Chaucer, C. T. 81, 3935 (A 3937). AS. leegan (where cg=gg’), to
lay; pt.t. legde, pp. gelegd; Grein, ii. 166. Formed (by vowel-change
of a to e) from lag, orig. form of AS. leg, pt. t. of licgan, to lie; see
Lie (1).4Du. leggen, pt. t. legde, leide, pp. gelegt; Icel. leggja, pt. t.
lagdi, pp. lagidr, lagdr ; Dan. legge, pt. t. lagde, pp. lagt; Swed. lagge,
pt. t. lade, pp. lagd; Goth. lagjan, pt. t. lagida, pp. lagiths; G. legen,
pt. t. egte, pp. gelegt. . Teut. type *lagjan-; from lag, 2nd grade of
*legjan-,to lie. B. The form Jay is due to the base Jeg-, occurring in
AS. leg-est, leg-, 2nd and 3rd pers. sing. of the present tense. Der.
lay-er, q.V.

LAY (2), a song, lyric poem. (F.-OHG.) ME. Jai, O. Eng.
Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 199, 1. 167; Jay, P. Plowman, B. viii. 66.—
OF. Jai, spelt Jay in Cotgrave; cf. Prov. lais,a lay. [The Jay was
regarded as specially belonging to the Bretons; Mr. Wedgwood cites
from Marie de France: ‘ Les cuntes ke jo sai verais Dunt li Breton
unt fait lor ais Vus cunterai assez briefment’ =the tales which I know
to be true, of which the Bretons have made their days, I will briefly
relate to you. See further in note 24 to Tyrwhitt’s Introductory
Discourse to the Cant. Tales; and see Chaucer, C. T. 11021 (F 709).]
Of doubtful origin ; but most probably from OHG. leih, Zeich, a game,
sport; also melody, song (see Schade).-+Icel. leikr; AS. lac, sport ;
Goth. laiks, dancing (Lu. xv. 25). Teut. type *Jaikoz, m.; whence
also OSlav. diki, Russ. lik’, a chorus, choir. @[ Not from Celtic;
and not from G. lied; see under Lark (2).

LAY (3), LAIC, pertaining to the laity. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
lay ; ‘ Lered men and Jay’ =learned men and laymen; Rob.of Brunne,
tr. of Langtoft, p. 171, last line. = OF. Jai, ‘lay, secular, of the laity ;’
Cot. —L. laicus, belonging to the people (whence the E. Jaic).=—Gk.
Aads, belonging to the people. Gk. Aads (Ionic Anés, Attic Acws),
the people. Root uncertain. Der. Jaic-al, lay-man, ‘Trevisa, v. 289;
also lai-ty, used by Cotgrave (as cited above), formed with suffix -ty
by analogy with words such as chasti-ty, guanti-ty, &c.

LAY FIGURE, a jointed wooden model of the human body,
used by artists. (Du. and F.) Figure is from F. jigure, L. jigiira.
Lay is properly a part of the older word Jayman (used in the same
sense as lay figure).— Du. leeman, lit. ‘joint man,’ 1. e. jointed figure ;
where Jee is for Jede-, in compounds (Sewel) ; from MDu. ledt, lidt
(Hexham), Du. Jid, a joint, limb, which is cognate with AS. 1:0,
a limb, G. g-lied, Goth. lithus, a limb. See Franck. See Notes on
E. Etym,, p. 159...


LAYER


LAYER, a stratum, row, tier, bed. (E.) ‘Layer, a bed or channel
in a creek, where small oisters are thrown in to breed; among gar-
deners, it is taken for a young sprout covered with mould, in order to
taise its kind;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. Lay-er=that which lays, hence
a mode of laying or propagating. It was extended to mean anything
carefully laid in due order. See Lay (1). (J Distinct from Jair,
which is from the intrans. verb to lie, Der. layer-ing.

LAZAR, a leper. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) ME. /azar, Chaucer,
C. T. 242. —F. Lazare; see Littré. = L. Lazarus. Gk. Ad¢apos, the
name of the beggar in the parable; Luke, xvi. 20; contracted from
the Heb. name Eleazar.— Heb. El‘azar, ‘he whom God helps.’ Der.
lazar-like, Hamlet, i. 5. 72; lazar-house, Milton, P. L. xi. 4793 also
lazar-etto, from Ital. lazzeretto, a plague-hospital.

LAZY, slow, sluggish, slothful. (Low G.?) In Shak. Temp. iii.
1. 28; spelt daesée in Spenser, Shep. Kal. Feb., 9; July, 333 lazie in
Minsheu, ed. 1627. We also find the verb to laze. ‘S’endormir en
sentinelle, to sleep when he hath most cause to watch; to laze i¢ when
he hath most need to looke about him;’ Cot.; this is a back forma-
tion from the adj. Spelt Jaysyin 1549 (N.E.D.). Of obscure origin ;
but prob. from Low G. lasich, variant of Josich, languid, idle (Ltibben) ;


Allied to Loose. The phonology offers difficulties; it does not
appear to be connected with G. Jassig, weary, lazy (though the sense
corresponds) ; which is from G. dass, cognate with E. ate. Of course
we did not borrow words from High German in the 16th century,
except in very rare and peculiar instances, such as carouse. Der.
lazi-ly, lazi-ness.

LEA (1), LHY, LAY, -a tract of open ground. (E.) ‘On the
watry /ea,’ i.e. plain; Spenser, F. Q. iv. 2.16. Often spelt ley, leigh,
in E, place-names, as in Brom-ley, Haw-ley, Had-leigh, ‘Thy rich
leas ;’ Tempest, v. 1.60. AS. léah, léa, gen. case léages, also léage ;
see Thorpe, Diplomatarium /Evi Saxonici, p. 109, 1. 8, p. 292, 1. 4;


also p. 526, where the place-name Hed-léah (Hadleigh) occurs; also |


p. 658. B. Justas AS. féak (=E. flea) is cognate with G. floh, so lea
is cognate with proy. G. lok, a morass, bog, wood, forest (Fliigel),
which also appears in place-names, such as Hohen-lohe, i.e. high leas.
So also we find the Low G. loge, which in place-names near Bremen
signifies a low-lying tract, a grassy plain; Bremen Worterb. iii. 80.
So also Water-loo=water-lea. Teut. types */awhoz, m., *lauhda, f.
Further cognates occur in Lithuanian Jaukas, an open field (Nessel-
mann); L, liicus, a grove, glade, open space in a wood (?); Skt.
loka-s, a region; Idg. type *lougos. Orig. sense ‘a clearing, cleared
land.’ Allied. to Lucid. Brugmann, i. § 221, No connexion
whatever with Jay (1); but see below.

LEA, (2), LEY, LAY, fallow land, arable land under grass,
pasture-land, (E.) Often very difficult to distinguish from Lea (z).
‘Leys, to falowe or to sowe otes upon;’ Fitzherbert, Husbandry, § 8.
‘Lay, londe not telyd;’ Prompt. Parv. Short for ley-land, from Jey,
adj. ‘Thi lond that lith Zeze;? Gamelyn, 1. 161. AS. *lége; as in
léh-hrycg, ‘lea rig;’ Birch, Cart. Saxon. iii. 96. From lég-, 3rd
stem of licgan, to lie; see Lie (1). Cf. Icel. -legr, as in gras-legr,
lying in the grass. See N. E. D.

LEAD (1), to bring, conduct, guide, precede, direct, allure. (E.)
ME. leden, pt. t. ladde, ledde, pp. lad, led; Chaucer, C. T. 4777, 4862,
5066 (B 357, 442, 646). AS. l&¥dan, pt. t. ledde, pp. leded; Grein,
ii. 161; lit. ‘to show the way.’ = AS. lad, a way, path; Grein, ii. 150.
— AS. liSan, strong verb, to travel, go; Grein, ii. 183 ; of which l#dan
may be regarded as the causal form.-+-Icel. Jeida, to lead, from /eid,
away; which from Jia, to go, pass, move along; Swed. leda, to lead,
from led, a. way, course; which from lida, to pass, go on; Dan. /ede,
to lead, from led, a gate; which from Jide, to.glide on; G. leiten, to
lead; causal of OHG. lidan, to go, go away, undergo, endure, suffer
= mod, G. leiden, to suffer; cf. G. begleiten (= be-geleiten), to accom-
pany, go on the way with. Cf. Du. leiden, to lead. B. Teut. type
*laidjan-3 from *laith, 2nd grade of *leithan-, to travel, asin AS. lidan,
Goth. ga-leithan, to.go.(pt. t. ga-laith, pp. ga-lithans), Der. lead, sb.,
lead-er, lead-er-ship, lead-ing-strings. And see lode, load.

LEAD (2), a well-known metal. (E.) ME. leed, led; dat. lede,
Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii. 341 ; P. Plowman, B. v. 600; cf. Havelok,
924. AS. léad; Grein, li. 168.-- Du. dood, lead, a plummet; M. Low
G. lad (whence Swed, lod, a weight, plummet; Dan. lod, a weight,
plummet); G. lotz, a plummet, bullet; MHG. dot, lead. Teut. type
*laudom, neut. Cognate with Olrish luaidhe, Gael. luaidh, lead (Mac-
bain). Der. lead-en, ME. leden, Chaucer, C. T. 16196 (G 728), with
suffix as in gold-en; lead-pencil ; also lead, vb., lead-ed.

LEAF, part of a plant, two pages of a book. (E.) ME. leef, lef,
pl. lewes (=leves) ; Chaucer, C. T. 1840 (A 1838). AS. léaf, pl. léaf;
Grein, ii. 168. OFries. Jaf.4-OSax. Jaf; Du. loof, foliage; Icel. lau/';
Swed. 1éf; Dan. lov, foliage; Goth. laufs, pl. laubds; OHG. laup,
MHG. /oup, a leaf; OHG. laup, MHG. loup, leaves, G. laub, leaves,


_hence weak, thin, poor.


_ LEAP 333


‘foliage. B. All from Teut. types */au6om, n., or *landoz,m. Further


allied to Russ. dupite, to peel, OSlav. lupiti, Lithuanian Jipii, to strip.
Der, leaf-age (made in imitation of foli-age), leaf-less, leaf-let, leav-ed,
leaf-y (also leauy, i.e. leav-y, in ed. 1623 of Shak. Macb. v. 6. 1), leaf-i-
ness, inter-leave.

LEAGUE (1), a bond, alliance, confederacy. (F.—Ital.—L.) In
Shak. Mer. Wives, iii. 2. 25. Spelt /yge in G. Douglas, tr. of Virgil,
bk. iii. ch. 7, 1. 63. =F. lige, ‘a league or confederacy ;’ Cot.—Ital.
liga, variant of lega, ‘a league, confederacie ;? Florio; Late L. liga
(sometimes /ega), a league, confederacy.—L, ligare, to clasp, bind,
fasten, tie, ratify an agreement. See Ligament, Der. league, verb,
Oth. ii. 3. 218; cf. ‘ se liguer l’un & l’autre, to make a league;’ Cot.
And see ligature.

LEAGUE (2), a distance of about three miles. (Proy.—L.—C.)
The distance varied. ‘A league or myle;’ Levins, ed. x 570. Cot-
grave, s. v. liewe, notes that German or long leagues are about 4 miles
long, those of Languedoc, about 3 miles, and Italian or short leagues
are about r mile. ‘A hundred /eages fro the place ;’ Berners, tr.
of Froissart, Chron. vol, i. c. 81. ‘The space of iii deges ;’? Gesta
Romanorum, c. 78; p. 397.—Prov. legua; OF. legue, a league
(Godefroy, Supp., s. v. liewe); Bordeaux légue (Mistral) ; but the usual
OF. form was liue ; mod. F.liewe. Cf. Gascon lega; mod. Prov. lego ;
Ital. lega (Florio) ; Span. legua. — Low L. léga, which occurs A.D. 1217,
Ducange; another form being Jeuca, which is the more original; L.
leuca (more correctly leuga), a Gallic mile of 1500 Roman paces;
a word of Celtic origin. B. The Celtic word remains in Bret. Jed or
lev,a league; in the district of Vannes, Jew. From Celtic type leuga ;
Stokes-Fick, p. 244. Observe that the F, form from which the E.
word is derived is a Southern F. or Provencal form; and the E. league
of 3 miles coincides, as to length, with that of Languedoc. See
Phil. Soc. Trans. 1903, p. 154. Der. seven-leagu-ed.

LEAGUER, acamp. (Du.) In All’s Well, iii. 6. 27.—Du. leger;
a lair; also, acamp, army. See Beleaguer. Doublet, Jair.

LEAK, to ooze through a chink. (Scand.) ME, leken. ‘ That
humoure oute may Jeke’ =that the moisture may leak out; Palladius
on Husbandry, ed. Lodge, b. vi. 1. 33.—Icel. Jeka (pt. t. Jak), to drip,
dribble, leak as a ship. Cf. Swed. lacka; Dan. lekke; Du. lekken, to
leak, drop; G. lecken, to leak, run, trickle; AS. leccan, to wet, to
moisten; Ps. vi. 6 (ed. Spelman) ; all weak verbs from the same root.
Teut. type *lekan-, pt. t. *lak, pp. *lekanoz. See hack. Cf. also
AS. hlec, leaky; Westphal. lek, leaky.+-Irish and Gael. leagh, to
melt; W. dlaith, moist; base *leg. Der. leak, sb., from Icel. leki,
a leak; leak-y, Temp. i, 1. 513 leak-i-ness ; also leak-age, a late word,
with F. suffix -age (=L.-Gticum). Also lack (1), lack (2).

LEAL, loyal, true. (F.—L.) Spelt deale in Levins, ed. 1570.
A Northern word ; in Burns, Halloween, st. 3. ME. Jel; ‘ And be Jel
to the lord;’ Will. of Palerne, 1. 5119.—AF. deal; see Vie de St.
Auban, ed. Atkinson; OF. Jee/, mod. F. loyal. See further under
Loyal, of which it is a doublet.

LEAN (1), to incline, bend, stoop. (E.) ME. lenen, P. Plowman,
B. prol. 9, xviii. 5. The trans. and intrans, forms are now alike;
properly, the intrans. form is the more primitive, and the mod. E.
verb may have arisen, from this form only, as the causal form was
rare. AS, hleonian, hlinian, intrans. weak verb, to lean, Grein, i. 85 ;
whence hi#nan, to make to lean, id. i. 81.4+-OSax. Alindn, intrans.
form; OHG. hlinén, MHG. lenen, G. lehnen, intrans. form. All from
Teut. root *hlei-, Idg.4/ KLEI; whence L, *clanare, obsolete, occurring
in inclinare; see Incline; Gk. «dive (with long +), to make to bend,
cause to lean. See Clinical. Der. From the same root, in-cline,
de-cline, re-cline, en-cline, ac-cliv-i-ty, de-cliv-i-ty,

LEAN (2), slender, not fat, frail, thin. (E.) ME, lene (two
syllables). ‘ As Jexé was his hors as is.a rake ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 289.
AS. hizne, lean ; used of Pharaoh’s lean kine; Gen. xli. 3.4+Low G.
leen, lean. B. Perhaps the orig. sense was leaning, bending, stooping;
Cf. L. décliuis, bending down, declining ;
@tite décliuis, in the decline of life; OFries. lanig, yielding, weak ;
Olrish cider, sloping, bad. See Lean (1). ¢@ The occurrence of
the initial & in AS. Al#ne at once separates it from AS. l&ne, adj.
transitory, which is connected with lend and Joan. Der. lean-ly,
dean-ness. :

LEAP, to bound, spring, jump. (E.) ME. lepen, pt. t. leep, lep,
pp. lopen ; Chaucer, C. T. 4376, 2689 (A 4378, 2087); P. Plowman,
B. v. 198. AS. hléapan, to run, leap, spring; a strong verb; pt. t.
hléop, pp. gehléapen ; Grein, ii. 82, andi. 24 (s. v. dhléapan). OF ries.
hlapa (cf. prov. E. lope).4-OSax. hldpan, to run; in comp. ahlopan ;
Du. loopen, to run, flow; pt. t. liep; pp. geloopen ; Icel, hlaupa, to
leap, jump, run; pt. t. 2/jap, pp. klaupinn; Dan. lébe, to run ; Swed.
Iépa, to run; Goth. -Alaupan, to leap, only in comp. us-hlaupan ; pt.
t. hlaihlaup (reduplicated) ; OHG. hlaufan, MHG, loufen, G. laufen
(pt. t. lief, pp. gelaufen),to run. . All from Teut. type *hlaupan-,
pt. t. *hle-hlaup, to leap, run. Der. leap, sb., AS. Alyp, Grein, ii. 89,


334 LEARN


cognate with Icel. Alaup, a leap, G. lauf, a course. Also leap-frog ;
leap-year, ME. lepe3zeer, Mandeville’s Travels, p. 77.

LEARN, to acquire knowledge of. (E.) ME. lernen, Chaucer,
C. T. 310 (A 308). AS. leornian, to learn; Grein, ii. 179.-4-OSax.
lindn, to learn, contracted form of *lizndn; OHG. lirnén, G. lernen.
Teut. type *Jizndjan-; in which LIS is the base, and -n- is a forma-
tive element used in certain verbs ; see Streitberg, § 208. Cf. Goth.
full-nan, to become full, and-bund-nan, to become unbound, af-lif-nan,
to be left remaining, ga-hail-nan, to become whole, ga-wak-nan, to
become awake. B. From Teut. type *Jiz(a)noz, pp. of *Jeisan-, to
trace out, of which the pt. t. Jas occurs in Gothic with the sense ‘I
know,’ i.e. I have found out. Hence also Teut. */aizjan-, to teach,
as in AS. l#ran, ME. léren, G. lehren, to teach; and Teut. *Jaiza, sb.,
as in AS. Jar, E. lore. See Last (2), Lore. Brugmann, i. § 903 (c).
Der. learn-ed, orig. merely the pp. of the verb; dearn-ed-ly, learn-ed-
ness, learn-er, learn-ing.

LEASE (1), to let tenements for a term of years. (F.—L.) ‘To
lease or let leas, locare, dimittere; the lease, letting, locatio, dimissio;’
Levins, ed, 1570. An AF. law term; see Blount’s Nomolexicon,
ed. 1691.—AF. lesser, Year-book of Edw. I (1292-3), p. 43; F.
laisser, ‘to leave, relinquish;’ Cot. [Cf. Ital. lasciare, to quit.]
Laisser is still used in the sense ‘to part with’ or ‘let go’ at a fixed
price; see Littré. [The AF. form Jesser at once accounts for E.
less-or, less-ee.|—L. laxare, to slacken, let go.—L. Jaxus, lax, slack ;
see Lax. @ Not related to G. lassen, which=E. let; see Let (1).
Der. Jease-hold; also less-or (spelt leassor in Blount’s Nomolexicon),
signifying ‘ one who leases,’ with suffix -or of the agent ; less-ee (spelt
leassee in Blount), signifying ‘one to whom a lease is granted,’ with
suffix -ee in place of OF. -é (<L. -atus), the pp. ending, with a passive
sense.

LEASE (2), to glean. (E.) In Dryden, tr. of Theocritus, Idyl 3,
1. 72. ME. lesen, P. Plowman, B. vi. 68. AS. lesan, to gather
(Grein).4-Du. lezen, to gather, read; Icel. lesa, to glean, to read ;
G. lesen; Goth. lisan, to gather; pt. t. Jas. Teut. type *Jesan-, pt. t.
*las ; allied to Lith. Jésti, to pick up with the bill.

LEASE (3), a pasture, meadow-land. (E.) ME. dese, pasture,
Will. of Palerne, 175. AS. /@s, a pasture; gen., dat., acc. Jéswe.
Teut. type /2swa, fem. Prob. connected with Jét-an, to let alone;
so that the sense was ‘land not tilled.” See N. E.D. Doublet,
prov. E, leasow; see E.D.D. 4 Often confused with Lea (1).

LEASH, a thong by which a hawk or hound is held; a brace
and a half. (F.—L.) 1. ME. lees, leese, leece. ‘Alle they renne
in o lees’ =they all run in one leash ; Chaucer, C. T. Pers. Tale, De
Septem Peccatis (Six-text, Group I, 387). And see Prompt. Parv.
p- 291.—OF. lesse (mod. F. laisse), a leash, to hold a dog in;” Cot.
Cot. also gives: ‘Laisse, the same as Lesse, also, a leash of hounds,
&c.’ Cf. Ital. Jascio, a leash, band; also a legacy, will.—Late L.
laxa, a lease, thong; lit. a loose rope; cf. ‘Laxa, a lees;’ Voc.
592. 5.—L. laxa, fem. of laxus, loose, lax; seeLhax. 2. The sense
of ‘three’ arose from the application of the word to the number
usually leashed together (Richardson); see Shak. 1 Henry IV, ii.
4.7. ‘A Brace of grehoundis, of ij ; a Lece of Grehoundis, of iij ;’
Book of St. Alban’s, fol. f 6, col. 2. Der. Jeash, verb, Hen. V,
prol. 7.

LEASING, falsehood, lying. (E.) In Ps. iv. 2, v. 6; A. V.
ME. lesynge, lesinge ; Chaucer, C. T. 1929 (A 1927). AS. léasing,
léasung, a falsehood; Grein, ii. 179; from AS. léasian, to lie. AS.
léas, false, orig. empty; the same word with AS. déas, loose. Cf.
Icel. lausung, falsehood ; Du. loos, false; Goth. Jaus, empty, vain;
lausa-waurds, loose-worded, speaking loose and random words, Tit.
i. Io. See Loose.

LEAST ; see under Less.

LEAT, a duct, open water-course. (E.) See Leat in E.D.D.
From AS. ge-lét, outlet, course; ‘op pera streta geleto,’ to the
cross-roads ; Earle, Land Charters, p. 292, 1. 4; also weter-gelét,
a conduit; Voc. 211. 13.—AS. létan, to let, allow, let out; see
et (1). Cf. WFlem. Jaat, a leat; De Bo.

LEATHER, the prepared skin of an animal. (E.) ME. lether,
Chaucer, C. T. 3250. AS. leder, in comp. geweald-leder, lit. ‘ wield-
leather,’ i.e. a bridle; Grein, i. 478. ‘Bulge, leper-coddas,’ i.e.
leathern bags; Aflfric’s Gloss., in Voc, 117. 3.4+Du. leder ; Icel.
ledr ; Dan. leder ; Swed. lider; G.leder. Teut. type *lethrom, neut.;
Idg. type *Jetrom, as in Olrish lethar, W. lledr. Stokes-Fick, p. 248.
Der. leather-n, ME. letheren, P. Plowman, B. v. 192, formed with
suffix -en, as in gold-en; also leather-y,

LEAVE (1), to quit, abandon, forsake. (E.) ME. leuen (with
u =v), pt. t. lafte, lefte, pp. laft, left; Chaucer, C. T. 8126, 14204,
10500 (E 250, B 3388, F 186). AS. l#fan, Grein, ii. 162. The lit.
sense is ‘to leave a heritage,’ to leave behind one. — AS. laf, a heritage,
residue, remnant. OFries. /éva, to leave.+-Icel. leifa, to leave, leave
.a heritage ; from Jeif, a leaving, patrimony. . The Goth. form is


LEDGE


laibjan, only in comp. bi-laibjan, to leave behind; from the sb. Jaiba,
a remnant. Teut. type *laibjan-, to leave; from */aib-, as in AS.
laf, Icel. leif, Goth. laiba, above. And *laib- is the 2nd stem of
Teut. leidan-, to remain, as in AS. be-lifan, G. b-leiben from OHG.
bi-liban. From the Idg. 4/LEIP, whence Gk. Aim-apis, persistent; the
weaker grade *Jip is in Skt. lip, to smear, Gk. Aim-os, grease, Russ.
lip-kii, sticky, Lith. lif-ti, to adhere to. See Live. Brugmann, i.


§ 87. @ The Gk. Acimzew answers to L. linguere, and to Goth.
leihwan, G. leihen, to lend (orig. to let go). See Lhoan, Der.
leav-ings.


LEAVE (2), permission, farewell. (E.) In the phr. ‘to take
leave,’ the word is the’ same as leave, permission. The orig. sense
was, probably, ‘to take permission to go,’ hence, ‘ to take a formal
farewell.’ Cf. ‘to give leave.” We may, then, remember that the
sb. is entirely independent of the verb above. ME. leue, leaue (with
u=v). ‘ By your Jeue’ = with your permission; Chaucer, C. T. 13377.
‘ But taketh his Jewe’ =but takes his leave; id. 1219. AS. Jéaf, per-
mission; Grein, ii. 168; whence was formed the verb /yfan (OAnglian
léfan), to permit=ME. léuen, to permit, grant (now obsolete), one
of the most troublesome words in old authors, as it is frequently
confounded by editors with ME. Jenex, to lend, and misprinted ac-
cordingly ; see note to Chaucer’s Prioress’s Tale, ed. Skeat, 1. 1873.
The orig. sense of leave is ‘ that which is acceptable or pleasing,’ or
simply ‘ pleasure ;’ and the Teut. type is *Jawba, fem.; from */laub-,
and grade of Teut. root *Jewd, whence AS. Jéof, pleasing, lief, dear ;
see Lief.4Du. -lof, only in the comp. oor-lof, permission, ver-lof,
leave ; cf. also Icel. ley7i, leave ; leyfa, to permit; lofan, permission ;
G. ur-laub, leave, furlough; ver-laub, leave, permission; er-lauben,
to permit. See Furlough and Love,

LEAVEN, the ferment which makes dough rise. (F.—L.) ME.
leuain, leuein (with u for v). ‘ He is the leuein of the bred’ [bread] ;
Gower, C. A. i. 294; bk. iii. 446; cf. Prompt. Parv. p. 300.—F.
levain, ‘leaven ;’ Cot.=L. lewamen, an alleviation, mitigation; but
used (here) in the orig. sense of ‘that which raises.’ [Ducange
records the sense of ‘leaven’ for Late L. leudimentum, a parallel form
to leudmen.|=L. leudre, to raise. See Lever. Similarly, Ital.
lievito, leaven, is from Ital. lievare, to raise (<L. leudre). Der.
leaven, verb.

LECHER, a man addicted to lewdness. (F.—G.) In early use.
ME. lechur, lechour; O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 53, 1. 27;
Ancren Riwle, p. 216; Rob. of Glouc. p. 119; 1. 2529. —OF. lecheor
(Godefroy), lecheur (Cotgrave), lit. one who licks up. —OF. lechier,
to lick, to live in gluttony (Godefroy), mod. F. écher, to lick. —OHG.
lecchon, G. lecken, to. lick; cognate with E, Lick, q.v. Der. lecher-
ous, P. Plowman, C. ii. 25; lecher-ous-ly, lecher-ous-ness ; lecher-y,
ME. lecherie, leccherie, Hali Meidenhad, ed. Cockayne, p. 11, 1. 3.
Cf. lickerish.

LECTERN, LECTURN, a reading-desk. (F.—L.) ‘Leterone,
lectorne, lectrone, lectrun, deske, Lectrinum;’ Prompt. Parv. p.. 299.
Spelt lecterne in Minsheu, ed. 1627. Adapted from OF. letrun,
a lectern (Godefroy), with c added from the Late L. form. = Late L.
lectrum, a reading-desk or pulpit (attributed to Isidore of Seville).
For *leg-trum; from leg-ere, to read (below). [Cf. L. mulc-trum,
a milking-pail; from mulg-ére, to milk.] See Legend. Some
forms, as OF. leitrin, F. lutrin, were influenced by Late L. lectrinum,
by-form of Jectrum. Hence lectryne, a lectern; Trevisa, tr. of
Higden, vi. 447.

LECTION, a reading, portion to be read. (F.—L.) £ Other
copies and various lections;’ Milton, A Defence of the People of
England. (R.)=OF. lection, a reading, a lesson (Godefroy). —L.
lectionem, acc. of lectio, a reading ; cf. L. lectus, pp. of legere, to gather,


read; see Legend, Der. lection-ary; and see below, Doublet,
lesson.
LECTURE, a discourse, formal reproof. (F.—L.) * Wherof


oure present lecture speaketh ;’ Sir T. More, p. 1301 c.=F. lecture,
‘a lecture, a reading;’ Cot.—Late L. lectira, a commentary ; cf.
lectus, pp. of legere, to read; see Legend. Der, /ecture, verb,
lectur-er, lecture-ship.

LEDGE, a slight shelf, ridge, small moulding. (E.) Palsgrave
has: ‘Ledge of a shelfe, apuy,’ i.e. support; also: ‘Ledge of a dore,
barre. See Legge in Prompt. Parv. In Norfolk, a bar of a gate, or
stile, of a chair, table, &c., is termed a ledge, according to Forby.
A door made of three or four upright boards, fastened by cross-
pieces, is called a ledger-door ; a ledger is a horizontal slab of stone,
a horizontal bar, and is also called a ligger (Halliwell). A ligger
is ‘a lier,’ that which lies, from AS. licgan, to lie; and ledge is from
a like source, as it was evidently formed from ME. leggen [gg =dj],
to lay, the causal of liggen, AS. licgan (above). So also MHG.
lekke, legge, a layer, stratum, from OHG. Jekkan, to lay, We may
also note Norw. lega, a lying, couch, lair, bed, a support upon which
anything rests. See Lay (1), Lie (1).


s


LEDGER


. LEDGER, a book in which a summary of accounts is preserved.
(E.) Formerly called a ledger-book ; Kersey, ed. 1715. Spelt lidger
in 1538, with reference to a bible that was always to lie in the same
place (N.E.D.). The word had other meanings, most of them
involving the sense of ‘ lying still.’ Thus a Jedger was a horizontal
slab of stone (Halliwell) ; /eger ambassadors were such as remained
for some time at a foreign court ; see leiger in Shak. Meas. iii. 1. 59.
A ledger-bait was a bait that was ‘fixed or made to rest in one
. certain place;” I. Walton, Angler, pt. i. c. 8. ‘A rusty musket,
which had lien long Jeger in his shop;’ Fuller’s Worthies, London
(R.). Formed, like ledge above, from ME. leggen | gg =dj], to lay,
or from ME, liggen [gg=dj], to lie; which were much confused.
Cf. prov. E. lidge, to lie (E.D.D.)._ A similar formation occurs in
Du. legger, ‘one that lyes down’ (Sewel); hence mod. Du. legger,
the nether mill-stone [answering to E. ledger, a horizontal slab of
stone]; MDu. ligger, ‘a dayly Booke kept for ones use,’ i. e. a ledger
(Hexham) ; MDnu. leggen, to lie, once in common use, though the
true form is liggen, and the proper sense of legge is to lay, We
know how these words are constantly confused in English. ‘Te
bed leggen, to ly a-bed. Neér leggen, to lie down. Waar legt hy
t’huys, where does he ly, or lodge?’ Sewel. See Lie (1). @ Thus
a ledger-book is one that lies always ready in one place. The
etymology of the word was ill-understood, and it was confused with
OF. legier, light; see Ledger-line. Hence it was sometimes
spelt ligier (see Richardson) ; and Howell goes so far as to use
a leger-book in the sense of a portable memorandum-book, apparently
from thus mistaking the true sense. ‘Some do use to haye a small
leger-booke fairely bound up table-book-wise,’ i.e. like a memorandum-
book ; Howell, Forraine Travell, sect. iv, ed. Arber, p. 27. N.B. The
earliest quotation in the N.E. D. is dated 1481, with reference to
‘a large copy of the breviary;’ but Wylie, Hist. Henry IV, iv. 198,
cites ‘ 19 portos, 3 diggers’ in 1401.

LEDGER-LINE, in music; one of the short lines added
above or below the stave to accommodate notes lying beyond the
usual five lines. (Hybrid; E. and L.) Not in Todd’s Johnson.
Spelt leger-line in Ash’s Dict.,1775. § You add a line or two to the
five lines,. .. those lines... being called Ledger-lines ;’ Playford,
Skill of Music, i. 6; ed. 1700 (N. E.D.). So called from lying flat ;
cf. ledger, a horizontal timber (N.E.D.). @] Not from F. léger,
OF. legier, light ; the F. name is ligne additionnelle.

LEE, a sheltered place, shelter; part of a ship away from the
wind. (Scand.) ME. Jee, shelter. ‘ We lurked yvndyr lee,’ we lay
hid under shelter ; Mort Arthure, ed. Brock, 1. 1446. A-lee=on the
lee; Deposition of Rich. II., ed. Skeat, iv. 74. The word and its
use are perhaps both Scand.; the E. word is Jew, a shelter, still in
use provincially (E.D.D.), though Jee also occurs. Prob. from
Icel. hlé, lee, used only by seamen ; sigla & hlz, to stand to leeward ;
hlé-bord, the lee-side; Dan. Je; Swed. la.4-Du. Jij. Cognate with
AS. hléo, hleow, a covering, protection, shelter; Grein, ii. 82 ; whence
prov. E. lew, a shelter, also, as.adj., warm; see Lew, fB. From
AS, hléo was formed the sb. hléod, hleowd, a shelter (Grein, ii.
83); the same word as prov. E. lewth, shelter, warmth. With these
forms we may compare Icel. hly, warmth, Aler, hiyr, warm, hlyja,
to shelter. All from a Teut. type *Alewoz, adj. warm. @] Note
the pronunciation lew-ard, for lee-ward, due to E. lew. Der. lee-shore,
lee-side, lee-way. Also lee-ward, allied to MDu. lywaard, lee-ward
(Sewel) ; the mod. Du. form being Jijwaarts.

LEECH (1), a physician, (E.) In Shak. Timon, v. 4.84. ME.
leche, Chaucer, C. T. 15524 (G56). AS. léce, a physician; Matt.
ix. 12; Lu. iv. 23. Connected with AS. lacnian, to heal; Grein,
ii. 150. Cf. Icel. leknir, a physician ; lekna, to cure, heal; Dan.
lege, a physician; lege, to heal; Swed. lékare, a physician; from
laka, to heal; Goth. leikeis, lékeis, a physician, Lu. iv. 23 ; connected
with leikinon, lekinon, to heal; OHG. lahhi, lachi, a physician; con-
nected with OHG. lahhinon, to heal, MHG. lachenen, to employ
remedies, MHG. lachen, a remedy. B. The AS. /&ce, Dan. lege,
Goth. lékeis, are all from a Teut. type */£kjoz, a healer; from Idg.
base */ég-. ‘y. We may further compare Irish and Gael. leigh,
Olrish liaig, a physician.

LEECH (2), a blood-sucking worm. (E.) ME. leche, Prompt.
Parv. p. 291. AS. léce; we find ‘Sanguisuga, vel hirudo, Jéce’ in
filfric’s Gloss., Nomina Insectorum; Voc. 121, 36. Lit. ‘the
healer ;’ and the same word as the above.

LEECH (3), LEACH, the border or edge of a sail at the sides.
(Scand.) ‘Leech, the edge of a sail, the goring ;’ Ash’s Dict., ed. 1775.
©The leetch of a sail, vox nautica;’ Skinner, ed. 1671. ‘ Penne d’une
voile, the leech of a saile ;? Cot. Ultimately allied to Icel. /zk, a leech-
line; Swed. lik, a bolt-rope, stdende liken, the leeches ; Dan. lig, a bolt-
Tope, staaende lig, a leech.4-MDu. lyken, a bolt-rope (Sewel); Du.
lijk (see Franck),

LEEK, a kind of onion. (E.) ME, leek, Chaucer, C. T. 3877


LEGATE 335


(A 3879); P. Plowman, B. v. 82. AS. léac; Voc. 295. 22.4-Du.
look ; Icel. laukr ; Dan. lég ; Swed. lok; G.lauch. Teut.types *laukoz,
m.}; *laukom,n. Root unknown; perhaps from Tent. type */auk, as
in AS. /éac, pt. t. of liican, to weed, to pull up. Der. gar-lic, char-
lock, hem-lock.

LEER, to cast side-glances. (E.) ‘I Jeare or lere, as a dogge dothe
underneth a dore ;’ Palsgrave. Cf. Shak, L. L. L. v. 2. 480, 2 Hen. IV.
v. 5.73 Troil. v.1.97. The verb is a later development from the
ME. lere, meaning the cheek, also the face, complexion, mien. ‘A
loveli lady of Jere’ =a lady of lovely mien; P. Plowman, B. i. 3. It
was orig. almost always used in a good sense, and with adjectives
expressive of beauty, but in Skelton we find it otherwise in two
passages. ‘Her lothely dere Is nothynge clere, But vgly of chere’ =
her loathsome look is not at all clear, but ugly of aspect; Elynoure
Rummynge, 1. 12. ‘Your lothesum lere to loke on;’ 2nd Poem
against Garnesche, I. 5. Shakespeare has it in two senses; (1) the
complexion, aspect, As You Like It, iv. 1. 67, Titus Andron. iy. 2.
11g; (2) a winning look, Merry Wives, i. 3. 50. Ata later period it
is generally used in a sinister sense.= AS. higor, the cheek; hence the
face, look, Grein, ii, 85.4-OSax. hlior, the cheek; MDu. lier (Oude-
mans) ; Icel. kiyr, pl. the cheeks. Der. leer, sb., a side-glance.

LEES, dregs of wine. (F.) In A. V. Isa. xxv. 6, Jer. xlviii. 11.
‘ Verily the dies of wine are so strong;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxiii.
c. 2, ME. lyes, pl.; Chaucer, House of Fame, iii. 1040. Gower
has lie, sing., sediment ; Conf. Amant. i. 309; bk. iii. 895. <A pl.sb.,
from a sing. not much used. =F. /ie, ‘the lees, dregs, grounds, thick
substance that settles in the bottome of liquor;’ Cot. Of unknown
origin; the Late L. form is Jia; the phr. ‘ fecla sive Jias uini’ occurs
in a MS. of the roth century (Littré). Moncaut has Gascon lio, ‘ lie
de vin.’ Perhaps Celtic; cf. Bret. lec’hid, sediment, W. /laid, mire.
Korting, § 5574; Thurneysen, p. 66.

HET, a special court of record held by certain lords of manors.
(E.?) ‘Amercyn in a corte or lete;? Prompt. Pary. Spelt léa in
Law Latin (Cowell); and /ete in AF., as in Stat. Realm, i. 342
(1353); Year-books of Edw. I., 1392, p. 297. Lete is perhaps the
AF. spelling and adaptation of AS. /@0; for which see Lathe (2).
B. Or perhaps it was adapted from Icel. Jeid, which, according to
Vigfusson, means precisely ‘a leet.’ ‘y. Or perhaps a particular use
of leat, q.v. Cf. Low G. gelaat, G. gelass, room, space.

LEFT, a term applied to the (usually) weaker hand. (E.) ME.
left, lift, luft. Spelt left, Chaucer, C. T. 2955 (A 2593); Zift, Will.
of Palerne, 2961 ; Juft, P. Plowman, A.ii. 5 ; Layamon, 24461. Rare
in AS., which has the term winster instead ; see Grein, ii. 716. We
do, however, find ‘inanis, deft,’ in a Gloss (Mone, Quellen, i. 443),
and the same MS. has senne for synne (sin); so that left is the Kentish
form of lyft, with the sense of ‘ worthless’ or ‘ weak ;’ cf. AS. ly/t-
adl, palsy. WNFriesic leeft, leefter hond (left hand) ; Outzen.4-MDu.
luft, left (Oudemans) ; Kilian also gives the form lucht. B. The is
a suffix; cf. EFries. uf, weak. All from Teut. base *Jud-; cf. Du.
lubben, togeld. See Lib. (So H. Sweet; in Anglia, iii. 155; 1880.)
Der. left-handed, -ness.

LEG, one of the limbs by which animals walk, a slender support.
(Scand.) ME. leg (pl. legges), Chaucer, C. T. 593 (A 591); Layamon,
1. 1876 (later text, the earlier text has sconken =shanks). = Icel. leggr,
a leg, hollow bone, stem of a tree, shaft of a spear; Dan. Jeg, the
calf of the leg; Swed. lagg, the calf or bone of the leg. Teut. type
*lag-joz. Cf. Icel. hand-leggr (lit. hand-stem), the fore-arm, arm-
leggr, the upper arm; L. Jac-ertus, the upper arm; Skt. lak-ufa-,
a cudgel (Macdonell), Der. leg-less, legg-ings.

LEGACY, a bequest of personal property. (F.—L.) ME. legacie,
¢ Hir Jegacy and Jamentatioun;’ Henrysoun, Complaint of Creseide,
1.597; Wyclif, 2 Cor. v. 20 (earlier version). Cf. MF. legat, ‘a legacy;’
Cot. The ME. legaciealso meant‘ office of a legate ;” Trevisa, tr. of
Higden, viii. 260. — OF. degacie, office of a legate (Godefroy). = Late L.
légatia (Ducange).=—L. légatus, a legate; see Legate. Cf. also L.
legatum, a legacy, bequest; orig. neut. of pp. of L. /égare, to appoint,
bequeath. —L. Jég-, stem of lex, law. See Legal. Der. legacy-
hunter ; also legat-ee, a barbarously formed word, coined by adding
the F, suffix -¢é (=L. -dtus), denoting the pp., to the stem of L.
légat-us, pp. of légare. :

LEGAL, pertaining to the law. (F.—L.) In Minshevu’s Dict.,
ed. 1627.—MF. legal, ‘ legall, lawful ;’ Cot.—L. légdiis, legal. = L.
lég-, stem of lex, law. Allied to L. legere, Gk. AEyeuv, to collect.
Brugmann, i. § 134. (/LEG.) Doublets, leal, loyal. Der. Jegal-ly,
legal-ise ; legal-i-ty, from F. legalité, ‘ lawfulness’ (Cot.), which from
Late L. acc. légalititem. And see legacy, legate, legislator, legitimate ;
allege, delegate, relegate, college, colleague, privilege, &c.

TEGATE, a commissioner, ambassador. (F.—L.) ME. legate,
legat; Rob. of Glouc. p. 499; 1. 10276; Layamon, 1. 24501; AS.
Chron, an. 1123 (Laud MS.).—OF. Jegat, ‘a legat, the popes
ambassador ;’ Cot.—L. légatus, a legate, deputy ; pp. of légare, to


336 LEGATEE


appoint, send. = L. /ég-, stem of lex, law. See Legal. Der. legate-
ship; legat-ion, from MF. legation, ‘a legateship’ (Cot.), which trom
L. acc. légatidnem ; also legat-ine, adj., Hen. VIII, iii. 2. 339.

LEGATEE ; see under Legacy.

LEGEND, a marvellous or romantic story. (F.—L.) ME.
legende, Chaucer, C. T. 3143 (A 3141); P. Plowman, C. xii. 206.—
OF. legende, ‘a legend, a writing, also the words that be about the
edge of a piece of coyne;” Cot. = Late L. légenda, as in Aurea legenda
=the Golden Legend; fem. sing. from L. légenda, neut. pl. of fut.
pass. part. of legere (pp. lectus), to read, orig. to gather, collect.
Gk. Aé€yew, to collect, gather, speak, tell. B. From 4/LEG, to
gather. Brugmann, i. § 134. Der. legend-a-ry; also (from L. leg-ere)
leg-ible, leg-ibl-y, leg-ible-ness, leg-i-bili-ty; together with numerous
other words such as lection, lecture, legion, lesson; col-lect, coil (1),
cull, di-lig-ent, e-leg-ant, e-lect, e-lig-ible, intel-lect, intel-lig-ent, neg-lect,
neg-lig-ent, re-col-lect, se-lect, pre-di-lect-ion, sacri-lege, &c. Also (from
Gk. Aéyew) lexicon, dialect, ec-lect-ic ; log-ic, log-arithm, and the suffixes
logue, -logy; syllogism.

LEGERDEMATN, sleight of hand. (F.—L.) ‘And of legier-
demayne the mysteries did know;’ Spenser, F. Q. v. 9.13. ‘ Per-
ceiue theyr leygier demaine ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 813 g. Also in
Lydgate, Dance of Macabre (The Tregetour). = OF. legier de main,
lit. light of hand. The OF. legier, F. léger, light, slight, is from
a Late L. type *leviarius; from L. leuis, light; whence also Span.
ligero, Ital. leggiero. The F. de is from L. dé, prep. The F. main is
from L. manum, acc. of manus, the hand; see Manual.

LEGER-LINE, in music; see Ledger-line.

LEGIBLE, that can be tread. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.
‘Legibylle, legibilis ;? Cath. Anglicum (1483).—OF. legible, ‘ legible,
readable ;’ Cot.= L. legibilis, legible. = L. legere, to read; see Legend.
Der. legibl-y, legible-ness, legibil-i-ty.

LEGION, a large body of soldiers. (F.—L.) In early use.
ME, legiun, Layamon, 6024; later, legioun, legion. = OF. legion,
“a Roman legion ;’ Cot. = L. legidnem, acc. of legio, a Roman legion,
a body of troops of from 4200 to 6000 men.=L. legere, to gather,
select, levy a body of men. See Legend. Der. legion-ar-y.

LEGISLATOR, a law-giver. (L.) In Bacon, Life of
Henry VII, ed. Lumby, p. 69, 1. 30. —L. légis-lator, lit. proposer of
a law. = L. légis, gen. case of lex, a law ; and lator, a proposer of a law,
lit. a carrier, bearer, allied to Jatwm, to bear, used as supine of ferre,
to bear, but from a different root. B. For L. lex, see Legal. L.
Zatum stands for dlatum, from 4/TEL, to lift; see Tolerate. Der.
legislat-ion, legislat-ive, legislat-ure; hence was at last developed the
verb to legislate. And see Legist.

LEGIST, one skilled in the laws. (F.—L.) ‘A great iuryst
and legyst;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. ii. c. 210 (R.). — OF. legiste,
in use in the 13th century; mod. F. légiste; Littré. = Late L. dégista,
a legist.—L. lég-, stem of lex, law; with (Gk.) suffix -ista. See
Legal.

LEGITIMATE, lawful, lawfully begotten, genuine, authorised.
(L.) In Shak. K. John, i.116. ‘ Without issu legyttymat;’ Fabyan’s
Chron., ed. Ellis, p. 253.—Late L. légitimatus, pp. of légitimare, to
declare to be lawful.—L. légitimus, pertaining to law, legitimate ;
formed with suffix -timus from légi-, decl. stem of lex, a law; see
Legal. Der. legitimate-ly, legitimac-y, legitim-ist (from legitim-us).

LEGUME, a pod. (F.—L.) A botanical term. In Todd’s
Johnson. Formerly, the L. legiimen was used, as in Kersey’s Dict.,
ed. 1715.—F. légume, pulse; in botany, a pod.—L. degumen, pulse,
bean-plant ; applied to that which can be gathered or picked, as
opposed to crops that must be cut. = L. legere, to gather; see Legend.
Der. legumin-ous, from stem legiimin- (of legiimen).

LEISURE, freedom from employment, free time. (F.—L.) ME.
leyser, leysere ; Chaucer, Book of the Duchess, 1. 172 ; Rob. of Brunne,
tr. of Langtoft, p. 229, 1. 1.— OF. leisir (Godefroy), later loisir (Cot.),
leisure. The OF. desir was orig. an infin. mood, signifying ‘ to be
permitted ;’ Littré.—L. licére, to be permitted. See Licence. Der.
leisure-ly. it#- We may note the bad spelling; it should be Zeis-er,
Jeis-ir, or lezir ; but is now mispronounced.

LEMAN, LEMMAN, a sweetheart, of either sex. (E.) In
Shak. Merry Wives, iv. 2.172; Tw. Nt. ii. 3. 26. ME. lemman,
Havelok, 1283; older form leofmon, Ancren Riwle, p. go, 1. 14.
From AS. léof, dear; and mann,a man or woman. See Lief and
Man.

LEMMA, in mathematics, an assumption. (L.—Gk.) In Kersey’s
Dict., ed. 1715. First in 1570.—L. lémma.—Gk. Ajppa, a thing
taken ; in logic, a premiss taken for granted. —Gk. ¢i-Anupaz, perf.
pass. of AapBavew, to take; base AaB-, for *cAaB-; Brugmann, i.
§ 852.


LEMMING, LEMING, a kind of Norwegian rat. (Nor-


wegian.) Described as ‘the leming or Lapland marmot’ in a trans-
lation of Buffon’s Nat. Hist., London, 1792; cf. Goldsmith, Nat.


DM Wh te eS


| LENTISK


Hist., 1774, ii. 283. Not in Todd’s Johnson. =—Norweg. lemende ;
also used in many various forms, as Jemende, limende, lemende, lémende,
lemming, lemelde, &c.; see Aasen; Swed. lemel ; Icel. lomundr ; Swed.
dial. lemming. There is also, according to Ihre (Lexicon Lapponi-
cum), a Lapp form, lwomek. B. Origin obscure; Aasen thinks that
the word means ‘ laming,’ i.e. spoiling, very destructive, and connects
it with Norweg. lemja, to palsy, strike, beat; but this is ‘ popular
etymology.’ Perhaps itis of Lapp origin, after all.

LEMNISCATEH, one of certain closed curves, resembling the
figure 8. (L.—Gk.) First in 1781. From L. lémniscdtus, adorned
with a ribbon; from the ribbon-like form.—L. lémniscus, a pendent
ribbon. Gk. Anpvicnos, a fillet. Said to be from Gk. Ajvos, wool ;
see Wool.

LEMON, an ovate fruit, with acid pulp. (F.—Late L.—Pers. —
Malay.) Formerly limon; as in Levins, ed. 1570; lymon, Lydgate,
Minor Poems, p. 15.—F. limon, ‘alemmon;’ Cot. = Late L. limonem,
ace. of limo, a lemon. [The pl. limdnés occurs about A.D. 12003
Yule.|—Pers. Jimi, lemon, citron. Malay limau; Javanese limo,
lime, citron, lemon; Uhlenbeck (on Skt. zimbi). The final -n may
be Latin; whence, perhaps, Pers. limiin, limiind, a lemon, citron;
Richardson’s Pers. Dict., p. 1282, col. r. Cf. Turk. limiin; Arab.
laimiin,a lemon; Palmer’s Pers. Dict>col. 517. Der. lemon-ade, from
F. limonade.

LEMUR, a nocturnal mammal. (L.) First in 1795. From its
habit of going about at night, it has been nicknamed ‘ ghost’ by
naturalists. —L. lemur, a ghost.

LEND, to let for hire, allow the use of for a time. (E.) The
final d is excrescent, as in sound from F. son. ME. lenen, pt. t. lenede,
lende, lente, pp. lened, lend, lent. ‘Thus the mod. final d was easily
suggested by the forms of the pt. t. and pp. ‘Zeen me your hond’
=lend me your hand; Chaucer, C. T. 3084 (A 3082). ‘This lond
he hire Jende’=he lent [granted] her this land ; Layamon, 1. 228.
AS. lénan, to lend, also, to give, grant; Grein, ii. 163.—AS. l&z,
a loan, Grein, ii. 163.4-Du. leenen, to lend; from leen, a fee, fief ;
Icel. Jana, to lend; from Jan, a loan; Dan. Jaane, to lend; from laan,
a loan; OHG. léhandén, G. lehnen, to lend (a provincial word) ; from
OHG, lékan, lehen, lehn, a fief. See further under Loan. Der.
lend-er ; lend-ings, K. Lear, iii. 4, 113.

LENGTH, extent, the quality of being long. (E.) ME. lengthé
(two syllables), Chaucer, C. T. 83, 4428 (B 8). AS. lengdu; the
dat. lengde occurs in the AS. Chron. an. 1122. For *langida. Formed
with suffix -83u and vowel-change of a to e from AS. lang, long.4+-Du.
lengte, from lang; Dan. lengde, from lang ; Swed. langd, from lang ;
Icel. Jengd, from langr. See Long. Der. length-en, in which the
final -ex has a causal force, though this peculiar formation is conven-
tional and unoriginal; in the ME. lengthen, the final -ex merely
denoted the infinitive mood, and properly produced the verb to
length, as in Palsgrave, and in Shak. Passionate Pilgrim, 1.210. Also
length-y, length-i-ly, length-i-ness ; length-wise, length-ways.

LENIENT, mild, merciful. (L.) In Milton, Samson, 659. = L.
lénient-, stem of pres. part. of lénire, to soften, soothe. —L. Jénis, soft,
mild. See Lenity, Lithe. Der. lenient-ly, lenienc-y.

LENITY, mildness, clemency. (F.—L.) In Shak. Hen. V,
iii. 2. 26, 6. 118.— OF. lenité, mildness (obsolete). = L. lénitaitem, acc.
of lénitds, softness, mildness. = L. léni-, decl. stem of énis, soft, gentle,
mild; with suffix -tds. Root uncertain; but re-lenf and lithe are
related words. Der. lenit-ive= OF. lenitif, a ‘lenitive’ (Cot.), from
Late L. lénitivus, And see Lenient.

LENS, a piece of glass used for optical purposes. (L.) In Kersey,,
ed. 1715. So called, from the resemblance in shape to the seed of
a lentil, which is like a double-convex lens.—L, lens; see Lentil.
Der. lenticul-ar, from L. lenticula, a little lentil. :

LENT, a fast of forty days, beginning with Ash Wednesday. (E.)
The fast is in the spring of the year, and the old sense is simply
‘spring.’ ME. lenten, lente, lent ; spelt Jenten, P. Plowman, B. xx.
359. AS. lencten, the spring; Grein, ii. 167.4-Du. lente, the spring ;.
G. lenz, spring ; OHG. lenzin, lengizen. B. Supposed to be derived
from AS., Du., and G. lang, long, because in spring the days lengthen ;
Kluge suggests that the orig. Teut. type was */angi-tino-, i.e. ‘ long
day ;’ where -tino- is allied to Skt. dima-, Lith. déna, a day. Der.
lenten, adj., Hamlet, ii. 2. 329 ; here the suffix -en is not adjectival (as
in gold-en), but the whole word is the ME. lenten fully preserved ; so
also Lenten-tide = AS. lencten-tid, spring-time, Gen. xlviii. 7.

LENTIL, an annual plant, bearing pulse for food. (F.—L.)
ME. lentil; Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1. 1488. —OF. lentille,
‘the lintle or lentill;’ Cot.—L. lenticula, a little lentil ; double
dimin. (with suffix -cu-l-) from lenti-, decl. stem of lens, a lentil. See
Lens. Der. lenticul-ar, resembling a lens or lentil.

LENTISK, the mastic-tree. (F.—L.) In Turner’s Herbal (1562) ;
and in Cotgrave. =F. lentisque, ‘ the lentiske or mastick-tree ;’ Cot.
= L. lentiscum, lentiscus, ‘a mastic-tree ; named from the clamminess


he


LEO


ef the resin yielded by it.—L. Jenti-, decl. stem of lentus, tenacious,
sticky, pliant. See Relent and Lithe.

LEO, a lion, (L.—Gk.—Egypt.) As the name of a zodiacal sign;
Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, ed. Skeat, i. 8. 2. We even find AS. Jeo,
Grein, ii. 171.—L, leo, a lion; see Lion. Der. leon-ine=F. leonin
(Cot.), from L. dedn-in-us, from ledn-, stem of leo.

LEOPARD, the lion-pard, an animal of the cat kind. (F.—L.
—Gk.) MEs leopard, leopart, P, Plowman, B. xv. 293.—OF. leo-
pard, ‘a leopard, or libbard, a beast ingendred between a lion and
a panther;’ Cot. —L. leopardus, a leopard. = Gk. Aedmapdos, AeovTd-
mapdos, a leopard; supposed to be a mongrel between a pard or
panther and a lioness; Pliny, Nat. Hist. b. viii. c. 16.—Gk. Acé-,
Aeovro-, secondary form or decl. stem of A€wy, a lion; and mapbos,
a pard. See Lion and Pard.

LEPER, one afflicted with leprosy. (F.—L.—Gk.) The form
of the word is founded on a mistake ; the word properly means the
disease itself (2 Kings, v. 11), now called leprosy; the old term for
‘leper’ was leprous man. ‘And loo! a leprouse man cam... And
anon the lepre of him was clensid ;” Wyclif, Matt. viii. 2, 3. And
see Henryson, Test. of Cresseid, ll. 438, 451, 474, 480, &cc.=—F.
lepre, ‘a leprosie ;? Cot.—L. lepra,=—Gk. Aémpa, leprosy. So called
because it makes the skin scaly. Gk. Aempés, scaly, scabby, rough.
— Gk. Aémos, a scale, husk, rind.mGk. Aémev, to strip, peel, take
off the husk or rind, scale. Cf. Russ. dupite, to scale, peel, bark ;
Lithuanian pti, to scale, peel. Der. lepr-ous = OF. leprous, from L.
leprosus, adj.; whence was coined the sb. lepros-y, Matt. viii. 3.

LEPIDOPTERA, s. pl., a certain order of insects. (Gk.)
Modern, and scientific ; due to Linnzeus. Used of the butterfly, and
other insects whose four wings are covered with very fine scales.
Coined from Gk, Aemido-, decl. stem of Aemis, a scale; and mrepd, pl.
of mrepév, a wing. Aeris is from Aémewv, to scale (see Leprosy) ;
and mrepov is allied to E. feather, from mr-, weak grade of 4/PET,
to fly; see Feather, Pen. Der. lepidopter-ous.

LEPORINE, pertaining to the hare. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1656. Either from F. leporin, ‘ of or belonging to a hare’ (Cot.),
or rather directly from L. leportnus, with the same sense. = L. lepor-,
for *lepos-, stem of lepus,a hare. See Leveret.

-LEPROSY ; see under Leper. (F.—L.— Gk.)

LESION, an injury, wound. (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674.— MF. lesion, ‘hurt, wounding, harme ;” Cot. = L. lesidnem, acc.
of lesio, an injury; cf. Jesus, pp. of ledere, to hurt. Der. (from L.
ledere), col-lide, col-lis-ion, e-lide, il-lis-ion.

LESS, smaller. (E.) Used as compar. of Jitile, but from a differ-
ent root; the coincidence in the first letter is accidental. ME. /essé,
lassé, adj., les, adv. * The Jesse luue’=the less love; Ancren Riwle,
p. 92,1. 7. Les as adv., id. p. 30,1. 7. AS. l&ssa, adj., l#s, adv. ;
Grein, ii. 164.4-OFries. éssa, less. B. Lé#ssa stands for l#s-ra, by
assimilation; Teut. type *Jais-iz-on-; and J/#s represents the Teut.
type *Jais-iz, both formed (with comp. suffix -iz-) from a base *Jais-,
for *Jais-o-, small; allied to Lith, Jésas, thin, small. From Idg. base
*leis-.

LEAST, the superl. form, is the ME. Jesté, adj., P. Plowman, B.
iii. 243; lest, adv., Gower, C. A. i. 1533 bk. i. 3285. AS. lésest
(whence /#s¢ by contraction), Grein, ii. 164; from the same base
*Jais-, with the usual suffix -est (for -ist, Gk. -taTos). Der. less, sb. ;
less-er, a double comparative, Gen. i. 163; Jess-en, vb., from ME.
lassen, Sir Gawain and the Grene Knight, 1. 1800, Jessiz (for lessen),
Prompt. Pary., p. 298; with a new suffix -en (as in length-en) added,
after the loss of the ME. infin. suffix -ex, -e. And see lest.

-LESS, suffix. (E.) AS. léas, cognate with Loose, q.v.

LESSEE, LESSOR: see under Lease.

LESSON, a reading of scripture, portion of scripture read, a
task, lecture, piece of instruction. (F.—L.) ME. Jesson, Chaucer,
C. T. 9069 (E 1193); spelt lescun, Ancren Riwle, p. 282, l. 3.—OF.
lecon, ¥. legon.— L. lectidnem, acc. of lectio, a reading ; from legere, to
read; see Legend. Doublet, lection.

LEST, for fear that, that not. (E.) Not for Jeas¢, as sometimes
erroneously said, but due to Zess. It arose from the AS. equivalent
expression Sy /#s Se, as in the following sentence. ‘Nelle we das
race na leng téon, Sy /#s Se hit eow &pryt pynce’=we will not
prolong this story farther, lest it seem to you tedious; Sweet’s A. S.
Reader, p. 94, 1. 211. Here dy l&s Se literally=for the reason less
that (L. quod minus) ; where 3y (=for the reason) is the instrumental
ease of the def. article; /#s=less, adv.; and Se (=that) is the in-
declinable relative. B. At a later period Sy was dropped, Jes
became /es, and les Se, coalescing, became one word lesthe, altered
(regularly) to deste, and lastly to Jest, for ease of pronunciation, The
form /este occurs in the Ancren Riwle, p. 58, 1. 12, whilst the older
expression pi Jes pe occurs in O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 117,
1. 2 from bottom; so that the word took the form deste about the
beginning of the 13th century. See Nevertheless,


LEVER. 337


LET (1), to allow, permit, suffer, grant. (E.) ME. Jeten (with
one ¢), a strong verb; pt. t. lat, let, leet ; pp. laten, leten, lete. See
Chaucer, C. T. 128, 510 (A 508). AS. l&/an, létan, to let, allow;
pt. t. Jét, leort, pp. léten; Grein, ii. 165.4-Du. laten, pt. t. et, pp.
gelaten; Icel. lata, pt. t. lét, pp. latinn; Dan. lade, pt. t. lod, pp.
ladet ; Swed. lata, pt. t. lat, pp. ldten; Goth, létan, pt. t. laildt,
pp. létans ; G. lassen, pt. t. liess, pp. gelassen._ B. The Teut. type
is *l#t-an-, pt. t. *lelot, pp. */€tanoz.  Idg. 4/LE(I)D ; from the weak
grade *lad comes E, late. See Late. Brugmann, i. § 478. Cf.
Lith. /éidmi, I let (base léid). And see Let. (2).

LET (2), to hinder, prevent, obstruct. (E.) ME. letten (with
double 7), a weak verb. ‘ He Jetted nat his felawe for to see’ =he
hindered not his fellow from seeing ; Chaucer, C. T. 1894 (A 1892).
AS. lettan, to hinder; also gelettan; Grein, ii. 168. A causal verb,
with the sense ‘ to make late,’ just as hinder is derived from the -hind
in behind. AS. let, slow; see Late.4-Du. letten, to impede; from
laat; Icel. letja, from latr; Goth. latjan, intrans., to be late, to
tarry; from dats, slothful. Teut. type *Jat-jan-; from *lat-, slow.
See above.

LETHAL, deadly, mortal. (F.—L.; or L.) Spelt lechald in
Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. lethal, ‘deadly, mortal;’ Cot. [Or directly
from Latin.]|=L. léthalis, better létalis, mortal.—L. létum, death.
Der. lethi-ferous, deadly ; from Jéthi-, for léthum, and -fer-ous =-fer-us,
bearing, from ferre, to bear.

LETHARGY, heavy slumber, great dulness. (F.—L.—Gk.)
In Shak. Wint. Ta, iv. 4. 627. Spelt letharge, Sir T. Elyot, Castel
of Helth, b. ii. c. 34.—MF. lethargie, ‘a lethargy ;” Cot.=—L, /é-
thargia.= Gk. Anéapyia, drowsiness.=Gk. AnOapyos, forgetting, for-
getful.=Gk. A76y, oblivion. See Lethe. Der. lethargi-c, from
Gk. An@apyixés, drowsy ; lethargi-c-al; lethargi-ed, K. Lear, i. 4. 249.

LETCH, to moisten. (E.) AS. leccan, to moisten; see Latch (2).
The usual spelling is Jeach, to remove by percolation; see N. E. D.

LETHE, forgetfulness, oblivion. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. Hamlet,
i. 5. 33-—L. léthé.—Gk. Anon, a forgetting; also Lethe, the river
of oblivion in the lower world, Allied to Gk. Aa@-, base of Aay-
Oavev, to lie hid. Der. leth-argy, q.v.; lethe-an; lethe’d, Antony,
iis. P127

LETTER, a character, written message. (F.—L.) ME. letére,
Genesis and Exod., ed, Morris, 1. 993. =F. lettre. L. littera (older
forms litera, leitera), a letter. Brugmann, i. § 930. Der. letter-ed,
Will. of Palerne, 1. 4088; Jetter-founder, letter-ing, letter-press ;
letters-patent, Rich. II, ii. 1. 202, where patents is the F. plural
adjective.

LETTUCE, a succulent plant. (F.—L.) ME. Jetuce, Palladius
on Husbandry, b. ii. st. 29, 1. 202; letus, Cursor Mundi, 6079. Of
obscure formation; it seems to be a plural form, from a singular
letu.= AF, letue; Voc. 558. 27.—L. lactiica, lettuce; named from its
juiciness; Varro, De Lingua Latina, y. 104.—L. Jact-, stem of Jac,
milk. See Lacteal. Cf. F. laitue.

LEUCOMA, a white opacity in the cornea of the eye. (Gk.)
In Phillips (1706). — Gk. Aedxwpa, whiteness, — Gk. Aeveovy, to make
white. = Gk. Aevxds, white. Allied to Lucid. ;

LEVANT, the East of the Mediterranean Sea. (F.—Ital.—L.)
Levant and Ponent, lit. rising and, setting (with ref. to the sun) are
old terms for East and West. ‘Forth rush the Levant and the
Ponent winds;” Milton, P. L. x. 7o4.—F. levant, ‘the Levant, the
East ;? Cot. Ital. devante, ‘ the east winde, the cuntrey lying toward
or in the east;’ Florio. =L. leuant-, stem of pres. part. of lewdre, to
raise, whence sé leudre, to rise; see Lever. Der. levant-ine. Cf,
slang E. devant, from Span. levantar, lit. to raise; levantar la casa, to
break up house, move away.

LEVEE, a morning assembly. (F.—L.) ‘The good man early
to the levee goes;’ Dryden, tr. of Juvenal, Sat. vi. 1. 428. As if
from F. levée (see Levy), but really an alteration of F, lever, infin.
used as a sb. in the sense of Jevee (see Littré).—F. lever, to raise ;
see Levy.

LEVEL, an instrument by which a thing is determined to be
horizontal. (F.—L.) ME. liuel, level (with u for v) ; P. Plowman,
A. xi. 135 ; B. x. 179. — OF. livel, preserved in the expression ‘ d’uz,
livel, levell ;? Cot. Later spelt liveau, afterwards corrupted to ni-
veau; both spellings are in Cotgrave, who explains it by ‘a mason’s
or carpenter’s levell or triangle.’ He also gives the verb ziveler
(corruption of liveler), ‘to levell.’—L. Jibella, a level; dimin. of
libra, a level, balance; see Librate, 4 Not an AS. word, as
sometimes said. Der. level, verb, spelt Jevel] in Palsgrave, of which
the pp. leaueld (=Tlevell’d) occurs in Sir P. Sidney, Apology for
Poetry, ed. Arber, p. 55; levell-er, level-ness. :

LEVER, a bar for raising weights. (F.—L.) ME, Jewour (with
u=v), Rob. of Glouc. p. 126, 1. 2680; lever, Romance of Partenay,
ed. Skeat, 1. 4177. —OF. leveor (Godefroy), MF. leveur, ‘a raiser,
lifter ;? Cot, [Not quite the same word as F, levier, a lever, which

Z


338 LEVERET


differs in the suffix.]=—L. leudtérem, acc. of leudtor, a lifter.—L.
leware, to lift, lit. to make light. — L. leuis, light. See Levity. Der.
lever-age.

LEVERET, a young hare. (F.—L.) Spelt lyueret in Levins, ed.
1570. ME. leveret, Voc. 592. 22.—AF. leveret, pl. leveres, Gaimar,
Chron. 6239; pl. leverez, Rel. Antiq. i. 155; allied to OF. levrault,
a ‘leveret, or young hare;’ Cot. fB. The suffix -ault=Late L.
-aldus, from OHG. wald, power; see Introd. to Brachet, Etym, Dict.,
§ 195; but the AF. suffix -et is diminutive; cf. Ital. lepretia, a
leveret. The base Jevr- is from L. lepor-, for *lepos, stem of Jepus,
ahare. See Leporine. .
LEVIATHAN, a huge aquatic animal. (L.—Heb.) In Min-
sheu, ed. 1627; and in Shak. Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 174.—Late L.
leviathan, Job, xl. 20 (Vulgate), where Wyclif has leuyathan. = Heb.
livyathan, an aquatic animal, dragon, serpent; so called from its
twisting itself in curves. Heb. root lavah, Arab. root Jawa’, to
bend, whence Jawa, the twisting or coiling of a serpent; Rich. Dict.
pp. 1278, 1275. "
LEVIGATE, to make smooth. (L.) Now little used. [Rich-
ardson cites an example from Sir T. Elyot, where levigate= lightened,
from L. leuigare, to lighten, which from Jeuis, light; see Levity.
But this is quite another word.] ‘When use hath levigated the
organs, and made the way so smooth and easie;’ Barrow, vol. iii.
ser. 9 (R.).—L. léuigdtus, pp. of léuigare, to make smooth. = L. léu-,
stem of Jéwis, smooth; with suffix -ig- weakened from ag-ere, to
drive. The L. léuis is cognate with Gk. Actos, smooth; which see
in Prellwitz. Der. levigat-ion.

LEVIN, lightning. (Scand.) ‘The flashing levin;’ Spenser,
F. Q. v. 6. 40; ‘Thunder and lewene;’ Genesis and Exodus, 3265.
Cf. MDan. Jéffn, lightning; Kalkar, s.v. ljune; Swed. dial, lyuna,
lygna; Rietz,s. v. una. Teut. *leugnd-. (4/ LEUQ).

LEVITH, one of the tribe of Levi. (L.—Gk.—Heb.) In A. V.
Lu. x. 32; P. Plowman, B. xii. 115.—L. Leuita, Lu. x. 32.—Gk.
Aevirns, Lu. x. 32. Formed with suffix -rys from Aevt?, Rev. vii. 7.—
Heb. Lévi, one of the sons of Jacob. Der. Levit-i-c-us, Levit-i-c-al.
LEVITY, lightness of weight or of conduct. (F.—L.) In Shak.
All’s Well, i. 2. 35.—OF. Jevité, lightness (Godefroy) ; obsolete. =
L. leuitatem, acc. of leuitas, lightness.— L. Jewis, light; usually con-
sidered as allied to Gk. éAaxus, small, Skt. laghu-s, light; see
Prellwitz and Uhlenbeck.

LEVY, the act of raising men for war; a force raised. (F.—L.)
In Shak. Macb, iii. 2. 25. ‘Make Jewy of my dettys;’ Bury Wills
(Camd. Soc.), p. 43 (1463). ‘Whanne kynge Iohn had Jeuyed many
great summes of money;’ Fabyan, Chron., Edw. III, an. 30. [The
verb is from the sb.]=—F. Jevée, ‘a bank, or causey ; also, a levy, or
levying of money, souldiers, &c.;’ Cot. Properly the fem. of the
pp. of the vb. lever, to raise. = L. Jeudre, to raise; lit. to make light.’

—L. leuis, light; see Levity. Der. levy, verb, levi-able; see lev-ee,
lev-er, lev-ant, al-lev-iate, e-lev-ate, leav-en, legerdemain, re-lev-ant, re-
lieve. Doublet, levee.

LEW, warm. (E.) ‘The sunne, briht and Jewe;’ Havelok, 2921.
AS. hléow, warm; as in comp. ge-hléow (Bosworth).+4Icel. hlyr,
warm, mild. Der. Jew-warm, tepid; also lew, sb., warmth, shelter ;
prov. E. lew-th, shelter. See Lee.

LEWD, ignorant, base, licentious. (E.) Contracted for lewed.
ME. lewed, Chaucer, C. T. 576. AS. léwede, adj. lay, i.e. be-
longing to the laity ; ‘ pat lewede folc’=the lay-people, /Elfric’s
Homilies, ed. Thorpe, ii: 74, 1. 17. ‘Laicus, J#wede mann,’ Voc.
308.15. The word thus originally merely meant ‘the laity,’ hence
the untaught, ignorant, as opposed to the clergy. The phrase Jered
and lewede=clergy and laity, taught and untaught, is not uncommon;
see P. Plowman, B. iv. 11. B. The form /&wede is not participial in
form, and the assumed connexion or confusion with the verb Jéwan,
to betray, does not suit the sense or help the development. y. It
has been derived from L. */aicatus, belonging to the laity, parallel to
Late L. cléricatus, whence clergy; and if so, is from L. laicus, a word
of Gk. origin; see Laic, So Sievers, § 173; Pogatscher, § 340.
But the phonetic difficulties seem too great for this. Der. Jewd-ly,
dewd-ness =ignorance, Acts, xviii. 14.

LEXICON, a dictionary. (Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —
Gk. Acéixdy (with BiBdAtov, a book, understood), a lexicon; properly
neut. of Aegixds, adj., of or for words. —Gk, Aé€éi-s, a saying, speech.
~ Gk. Aéyewv, to speak; see Legend. Der. lexico-graph-y, lexico-
graph-i-c-al, lexico-graph-i-c-al-ly, lexico-graph-er; all from ypapay,
to write; see Graphic.

LEY, a meadow; see Lea. (E.)

LIABLE, responsible, subject. (F.—L.) In Shak. John, ii. 490;
v. 2.101. In the latter passage it means ‘allied, associated, com-
patible ;’ Schmidt. Formed, with the common suffix -able, from F.
lier, ‘to tie, bind, fasten, knit,. .. unite, oblige, or make beholden
to;’ Cot.—L. ligare, to tie, bind; see Ligament. Der. Jiabil-i-ty.


LICENCE, LICENSE


LIAISON, an illicit intimacy between a man and woman.
(F.—L.) ‘Some chaste liaison ;? Byron, Don Juan, iii. 25. =F. liaison.
— L. ligatidnem, acc. of ligdtio, a binding ; from ligare,to bind. See
Ligament.

LIANE, LIAWA, a climbing tropical plant. (F.—L.) ‘The
nebees, called by the French Jiannes;’? Stedman, Surinam, vol. i.
p- 231.—F. liane, the same ; from Norm. and Picard lian, a band. = L.
ligamen, a tie.— L. ligare, to bind (above). See Lien.

LIAS, a formation of limestone, underlying the odlite. (F.)
Modern in E, as a geological term; but found in Northern E.,
and spelt lyas, as early as 1404 (N.E.D.).=—F. liais, formerly liois.
‘Liais, a very hard free-stone whereof stone-steps and tombe-stones
be commonly made ;’ Cot. Spelt liois in the 13th cent, (Littré,
Hatzfeld.) Of unknown origin. Der. liass-ic.

LIB, to castrate; now dialectal. (E.) Florio, ed. 1598, has:
‘ Accaponare, to geld, splaie, or lib.’ Cf. EFries. lubben, Du. lubben,
to lib. See Glib (3).

LIBATION, the pouring forth of wine in honour of a deity.
(F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627; and in Wyclif, Ezek. xx. 28.—F.
libation (Cot.) —L. libatidnem, acc. of libatio, a libation.— L. libare,
to sip, taste, drink, pour out. +Gk. AcBev, to pour out, offer
a libation, let flow, shed. Brugmann, i. § 553.

LIBEL, a written accusation, defamatory publication. (F.—L.)
The orig. sense is merely ‘a little book’ or ‘a brief piece of writing.’
Hence Wyclif has: ‘3yue he to hir a libel of forsakyng;’ Matt. v.
31.— OF. libel (Godefroy). = L. libellum, acc. of libellus, a little book,
writing, written notice; hence ‘libellum repudii’ in Matt. v. 31,
(Vulgate). Dimin. of liber, a book; see Library. @ Perhaps
taken directly from the Latin, Der. libel, verb, libell-er, libell-ous,
libell-ous-ly.

LIBERAL, generous, candid, free, noble-minded. (F.—L.)
ME, liberal, Gower, C. A. iii. 114; bk. vii. 876.—OF. liberal,
‘liberall;’ Cot.—L. liberalis, befitting a free. man, generous. =—L.
liber, free. Der. liberal-ly; liberal-i-ty=¥, liberalité (Cot.), from
L. ace. liberailitatem ; liberal-ism, liberal-ise, And see liberate, liberty,
libertine.

LIBERATH, to set free. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.—L,
liberdtus, pp. of liberare, to set free.—L. liber, free; see Liberal,
Der. liberat-ion, liberat-or.

LIBERTINE, a licentious man. (L.) In Shak. Much Ado, ii.
1.144. ‘Applied at first to certain heretical sects, and intended to
mark the licentious liberty of their creed ;’ Trench, Select Glossary ;
q:v. Wyclif has libertyns in Acts, vi. 9.—L. libertinus, adj., of or
belonging to a freed man; also, as sb., a freed man; used in the
Vulgate in Acts, vi. 9. An extended form of L. Jibertus, a freed
man.=L. liber, free; with participal suffix -tws. See Liberal,
Der. libertin-ism.

LIBERTY, freedom. (F,—L.) ME. liberté, libertee, Chaucer,
C. T. 8047 (E 171).—OF. liberte, later liberté, ‘liberty, freedom ;’
Cot.—L. libertatem, acc. of libertas, liberty.—L. liber, free; see
Liberal.

LIBIDINOUS, lustful. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627; ‘ His
lybidynous desire ;’ Caxton, Eneydos, ch. ix. p. 36.—F. libidineux,
‘libidinous, lascivious;’ Cot.—L. Jlibidindsus, eager, lustful. L.,
libidin-, stem of libido, lust, pleasure.—L. libet, it pleases; also
(better) spelt Zubet. Cf. Skt. Jubh, to desire. Allied to Lief, Love.
Der. libidinous-ly, libidinous-ness.

LIBRARY, a collection of books, a room for books. (F.—L.)
ME. librarie, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. i. pr. 4, 1. 10.—F. Librairie ;
which in OF. meant a library (Godefroy).—Late L. type libraria ;
allied to L. librarius, of or belonging to books. =L. libr-, stem of
liber, a book, orig. the bark of a tree, which was the earliest writing
material; with suffix -arivs. B. Prob. connected with Gk. Aéms,
a scale, rind; from 4/ LEP, to peel; Brugmann, i. § 499. Der.
librari-an, librari-an-ship.

LIBRATE, to balance, be poised, move slightly as things that
balance; LIBRATION, a balancing, slight swinging motion.
(L.) The verb is rare, and prob. suggested by the sb. ‘ Libration,
a ballancing or poising ; also, the motion of swinging in a pendulum;’
Kersey, ed. 1715. First in 1603. Formed, by analogy with F. sbs,
in -ion, from L. libratidnem, acc. of libratio, a poising.—L. librare,
to poise. = L. dibra, a balance, a level, machine for levelling, a pound
of 12 ounces.4+Gk. Airpa, a pound of 12 ounces,a coin. B. L. li-bra
= Gk. Ai-rpa, the words being cognate. Brugmann, i. § 589. Der.
librat-or-y ; from the same source are de-liber-ate, equi-libri-um, level,
Also F. litre, from Gk. Airpa; lira, q. v-

LICENCE, LICENSE, leave, permission, abuse of freedom,
excess. (F.—L.) ‘Leue and lycence’=leave and licence ; P. Plow-
man, A. prol. 82. ‘A lycence and a leue 5” id. B. prol. 85. [The
right spelling is with c; the spelling with s is reserved for the verb,
by analogy with practice, practise, &c.]=—F, licence, ‘ licence, leave ;”.


LICENTIATE


Cot.=L. licentia, freedom to act.—L. licent-, stem of pres. pt. of
licére, to be allowable, to be permissible; see Brugmann, ii. § 587.
Der. licence, or more commonly license, verb, 1 Hen. IV, i. 3. 123;
licens-er, spelt licenc-er, Milton’s Areopagitica, ed. Hales, p. 24, 1. 8;
also licentiate, q.v., licentious,q.v. See also leisure, il-licit,

LICENTIATE, one who has a grant to exercise a function.
(L.) ME. licentiat, Chaucer, C.T. 220. Englished from Late L.
licentiatus, pp. of licentidre, to license. = L. licentia (above),

LICHNTIOUS, indulging in excess of freedom, dissolute.
(F.—L.) ‘A licentious libertie ;’ Spenser, F. Q. v. 5. 25.—OF.
licentieus (Godefroy) ; F. licencieux.—L. licentidsus, full of licence.
= L. licentia, licence. See Licence. Der. licentious-ly, -ness.

LICHEN, one of an order of cellular flowerless plants; also, an
eruption on the skin. (L.—Gk.) See Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxvi.
c. 4; p- 245. Also Kersey’s Dict., ed. 1715.—L. lichén, in Pliny,
Nat. Hist. xxvi. 4. 10, § 21; xxiii. 7. 63, § 117.—Gk. Aciyny, lichen,
tree-moss ; also, a lichen-like eruption on the skin, a tetter. Generally
connected with Gk. Acixew, to lick, to lick up; from its encroach-
ment; see Lick. Cf. Russ. lishai, a tetter, a lichen.

LICH-GATE, a church-yard gate with a porch under which a
bier may be rested. (E.) In Johnson’s Dict. The word is scarce,
though its component parts are common. Chaucer has lich-wake
{or rather liché-waké in 4 syllables] to signify the ‘waking’ or
watching of a dead body; C. T. 2960 (A 2958), The lit. sense is
‘ corpse-gate.? ME. lich, the body, most often a dead body or
corpse (sometimes lengthened to liche in two syllables, as above) ;
see Layamon, 6682, 10434; Ormulum, 8183, 16300; St. Marharete,
ed. Cockayne, p. 5; Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 2441, 2447,
2488, 4140; P. Plowman, B. x. 2; &c. AS. lic, the body, almost
always used of the living body; Grein, ii. 179. The orig. sense is
‘form,’ shape, or likeness, and it is from the same root as like, adj.,
with which it is closely connected; see Like (1).4Du. Jijk, a corpse;
Icel. Jik, a living body (in old poems); also a corpse; Dan. lig,
a corpse; Swed. lik, a corpse; Goth. leik, the body, Matt. v. 29;
a corpse, Matt. xxvii. 52; G. leiche, OHG. lih, the body, a corpse;
whence G. /leichnam, a corpse. Teut. type *Jikom, n. And see
Gate.

LICK, to pass the tongue over, to lap. (E.) ME. licken, likken ;
Wyclif, Luke, xvi. 21. AS. liccian, Luke, xvi. 21; Grein, ii. 180.
+Du. likken; G. lecken. Teut. type *likkdn- (whence F. lécher).
Allied to Goth. laigdn, only in the comp. bi-laigén, Luke, xvi. 21.
+Russ. lizate; L. lingere; Gk. Acixery ; Lith. lész-ti; Olrish lig-im,
I lick; Pers. lish-tan; Skt. liz, Vedic form rik, to lick. B. All from
AY LEIGH, to lick. Brugmann, i. § 604. . Der. lecher, q.v.

LICKERISH, LIQUORISH, fond of dainties; greedy;
lecherous. (F.—G.) ‘The liquorish hag rejects the pelf with
scorn ;’ Dryden, Wife of Bath, 319. Adaptations of ME. likerous ;
‘she had a likerous yé’ [eye]; Chaucer, C. T., A 3244. — AF. *likerous,
*Jekerous, Northern variant of OF, licherous, lecherous, lecherous; cf.
Norman dial. liguer, lequer, for F. lécher, to lick (Moisy). = North F.
lequer, for F. lécher, to lick. OHG, lecchon (G, lecken), to lick.
See Lecher.

LICORICE, LIQUORICE, a plant with a sweet root, used in
medicine. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. licoris. In early use; Layamon,
17745; Chaucer, C. T. 3207.— AF. lycorys, Liber Albus, p. 224;
OF. *licorice, spelt licorece, Vie de St. Gilles, 854; MF. liquerice,
‘lickorice, in Cotgrave. [Littré gives also the corrupt (but old)
spellings reculisse, regulisse, whence mod. F. réglisse. So also in
Ital., we have the double form legorizia, regolizia.|—L. liquiritia,
liquorice, a. corrupted form; the correct spelling being glycyrrhiza,
which is found.in Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxii. 9. 11.— Gk. yAvevppi(a,
the liquorice-plant ; so called from its sweet root. = Gk. yAvsv-, for
yAukds, sweet; and fifa, a root, cognate with E. wort. The Gk.
yAveds is often regarded as cognate with L. dulcis, sweet ; but this
is very doubtful,

LICTOR, an officer in Rome, who bore an axe and fasces. (L.)
In Shak., Antony, v. 2. 214.—L. lictor ; so called (perhaps) from
the fasces or bundles of bound rods which he bore, or from binding
culprits. Connected with ligare, to bind (Bréal). See Ligament.

LID, a cover. (E.) ME. did (rare, see exx. in Stratmann) ; spelt
led, Sir Cleges, 1. 272, in Weber’s Met. Romances, vol. i. AS. hlid,
Matt. xxvii. 60.4-+Du. lid, a lid; (not the same word as Jid, a joint).
+Icel. £110, a gate, gateway, gap, space, breach; OHG. Alit, MHG.
lit, a cover (whence G. augen-lied, eye-lid). Teut. type *hliom, n.
B. From *Alid-, weak grade of Teut. *hleidan-, *hlidan-, to cover ; as
in AS. hlidan, to shut, cover, Grein, ii. 86; cf. OSax. hlidan, to
cover. Der. lid-gate, a swing-gate; also occurring as a poet’s
name, from a place-name in Suffolk:

LIE (1), to rest, lean, lay oneself down, repose, abide, be situate.
(E.) A strong verb. ME. liggen, lien, pt. t. lei, lat, lay, pp. leien,
lein, lain; Chaucer, C. T. 3651, 20; P. Plowman, B. iii. 175, i. 30,


LIEUTENANT 339


iii, 38. AS. licgan, pt. t. leg, pp. legen; Grein, ii. 181.4-Du. liggen,
pt. t. Jag, pp. gelegen.+-Icel. liggja, pt. t. la, pp. leginn ; Dan. ligge;
Swed. ligga; G, liegen, pt. t. lag, pp. gelegen; Goth. ligan, pt. t. lag,
pp. ligans. Teut. type *lig-jan- (except in Gothic); pt. t. *Jag, pp.
*leganoz. Teut. root *leg; Idg,4/LEGH. Further related to Russ.
lejate, to lie; L. base leg-, to lie; only in lectus, a bed; Gk. base
Aex-, appearing in aorist €Aefa, Homer, Iliad, xiv. 252 3 Aéxos, a bed.
@ As tothe modern E. form, which depends on the AS, stem Jig-,
occurring in the 2nd and 3rd person sing. indic. and in the imp. sing.,
see Sweet, E. Gram. § 1293. The pp. lien occurs in Gen, xxvi. 10,
Ps. Ixviii.. 13. Der. lay, q. v., Jaw, q.v.

LIE (2), to tell a lie, speak falsely. (E.) ME. lijen, lien, lyen,
a strong verb; Layamon, 3034, Chaucer, C. T. 765 (A 763); pt.t.
leh, Layamon, 12942, 17684 ; pp. lowen, P. Plowman, B. v.95. AS,
léogan, pt. t. léag, pp. logen ; Grein, ii. 176.4-Du. liegen, pt. t. loog,
pp- gelogen; Icel. juga, pt. t. laug, pp. loginn; Dan. lyve, pt. t. 1oj,
pp. lojet; Swed. ljuga, pt. t. log, pp. jugen ; Goth. liugan, pt. t. lauh,
pp: lugans ; G. liigen, pt. t. log, pp. gelogen, B. Teut. type *leugan-,
pt. t. *laug, pp. *luganoz. ‘Teut. root leug; Idg. fLEUGH. Cf.
Russ, lgate, luigate, to lie; loje,a lie. Der. lie, sb.= AS. lyge, lige,
Grein, il, 199; li-ar, cf. AS. léogere ; ly-ing, ly-ing-ly.

LIEF, dear, beloved, loved, pleasing. (E.) Now chiefly used in
the phr. ‘ I had as lief,’ which is common in Shak. ; see Hamlet, iii.
2.4. ME. lief, leef, lef, Chaucer, C. T. 3790 (A 3792); vocative
and pl. lewe (=TJeve), id. 1138; compar. leuer (=Tlever), id. 295;
superl. Jewest (=Tlevest), P, Plowman’s Crede, ed. Skeat, 1.16. AS.
léof, liof, vocative léofa, pl. léofe; compar. léofra, superl. léofesta,
Grein, ii. 174, 175 (a common word).-+Du. lief, dear; Icel. Ljafr ;
Swed. Ljuf; Goth. liubs ; G. lieb, MHG. liep, OHG. liup, Tent. type
*leuboz; Idg. type *leubhos. Cf. also Russ, lioboi, agreeable; liobite,
to love. B. All from Teut. base LEUB, to be pleasing to; cf. L.
lubet, libet, it pleases; Skt. lubh, to covet, desire. —4/LEUBH, to
desire. Der..(from the same root) love, leave (2), believe, furlough,
lib-idinous.

LIEGE, faithful, subject, true, bound by feudal tenure. (F.—
OHG.) a. The etymology is disguised by a change both of sense
and usage. We now say ‘a liege vassal,’ i.e..one bound to his lord;
it is easy to see that this sense is due to a false etymology which
connected the word with L. ligadtus, bound, pp. of ligare, to bind;
see Ligament, ff. But the fact is, that the older phrase was
‘a liege lord,’ and the older sense ‘a lord entitled to feudal alle-
giance.’ The phrase ‘my/ege man” occurs twice, and ‘ my lege men’
once, in Will. of Palerne, 1174, 2663, 3004. The expression ‘ vr [our]
lige louerd’ occurs in Rob. of Glouc. p. 457, 1. 9376; and in Chaucer,
C. T. 12271 (Six-text, C 337, where the MSS. have lige, lege, liege).
In Barbour’s Bruce, ed. Skeat, v. 165, we find: ‘ Bot and I lif in lege
pouste’=but if I survive in sovereignty entitled to homage; or, in
free sovereignty.—OF, lige, ‘liege, leall, or loyall; Prince lige,
a liege lord; Seigneur lige, the same;’ Cot. Also (better) spelt
liege in the 12th cent, (Littré.)—OHG. ledec, ledic, also lidic, lidig
(mod. G. ledig), free, unfettered, free from all obligations; which
seems to have been the orig. sense. The expression ‘ligius homo,
quod. Teutonicé dicitur ledighman’ occurs A.D.1253; Ducange. ‘A
liege lord’ seems to have been a lord of a free band; and his lieges,
though serving under him, were privileged men, free from other
obligations. B. Further; the OHG. Jidic is cognate with Icel.
lidugr, free, also ready, willing; and is prob. allied to OHG. lidan,
to go, depart, experience, take one’s way; cognate with AS. lidan,
to go, travel. Also, the Icel. lidugr, ready, free, is from Icel. lida,
to travel; see Lead (1). @ For further information on this difficult
word, see Diez, Scheler, and Littré; and the MDu. ledig, free, in
Kilian. And see KGrting, § 5506. ‘ Leecheyt [ =ledigheid] is moeder
van alle quaethede’ = idleness is mother of all vices; O. Du. Proverb,
cited in Oudemans. Ducange’s attempt to connect the word with
Late L. litus, a kind of vassal, is a failure.

LIEGER, LEIGER, an ambassador; see Ledger.

LIEN, a legal claim, a charge on property. (F.—L.) <A legal
word; not in Todd’s Johnson; preserved as a law term from. the
16th century. —F. lie, a band, or tye, . . . anything that fasteneth or
fettereth ;? Cot.=—L. ligaimen, a band, tie.—L. ligare, to tie; see
Ligament. And see Liane.

LIEU, place, stead. (F.—L.) In the phr. ‘in lieu of’ =in place
of; Temp. i. 2. 123.—F. lieu, ‘a place, roome;’ Cot. Spelt Zi in
the 1oth century. (Littré.)—L. locum, acc. of locus, a place; see
Locus. Der. lieu-tenant, q.v.

LIEUTENANT, a deputy, vicegerent, &c. (F.—L.) ME.
lieutenant, Gower, C. A. i. 73; bk. i. 947; P. Plowman, B. xvi. 47.
=F. lieutenant, ‘a lieutenant, deputy;’ Cot.—L. locum-tenentem,
acc. of locum-tenens, one who holds another’s place, a deputy. —L.
locum, acc. of locus, a place; and Zenens, pres. part. of tenére, to
hold, See Locus and Tenant. Der. liewtenanc-y. @] The pron.

Z2


340 . LIFE


as leftenant is old; cf. luftenand in Barbour, Bruce, xiv. 139. Cf.
OF. luef, for lieu (Godefroy).

LIFE, animate existence. (E.) ME. lif, lyf, gen. case lyues, dat.
lyue, pl. lyues (with u=v) ; Chaucer, C. T. 2757, 2778, 14100 (A 2755,
2776, B 3284). AS. lif, gen. lifes, dat. life, pl. lifas; Grein, ii. 183.
+Icel, lif, lifi; Dan. liv; Swed. lif; OHG. lip, leip, life; mod. G.
leib, the body. Cf Du. lijf, the body. B. Teut. type *lidom, n.
This sb. is a derivative from Teut. root *Ji (weak grade *Jid), to
remain, occurring in Icel. Jifa, to be left, to remain, to live, AS.
lifian, to be remaining, to live; OHG. daban, lipan, only used in the
comp. beliban, MHG. beliben, G. bleiben, to remain, be left. y. The
sense ‘ remain’ arose from that of ‘ to cleave;’ and thus /ife is con-
nected with Lithuanian Jipti, to cleave, stick, Skt. lip, to anoint,
smear, Gk. dAeipery, to anoint, Atw-apys, persistent; the form of the
root being LEIP; Fick, i. 754. Der. life-blood, life-boat, life-estate,
life-guard, q.v., life-hold, life-insurance, &c.; also life-less, life-less-ly,
life-less-ness, life-long. Also live, live-ly, live-lihood, live-long. From
the same source, leave (1), And see Alive,

LIFEGUARD, a body-guard. (Hybrid; E. and F.) ‘The
Cherethites were a kind of lifeguard to king David;’ Fuller, Pisgah
Sight of Palestine, ed. 1650, p. 217, From Life and Guard.
@ See Trench, Eng. Past and Present. The word is nof borrowed
from the G. Jeibgarde, a body-guard; and it is much to the purpose
to observe that, if it were so, it would make no difference; for the
G. leib is the G. spelling of the word which we spell life, despite the
difference in sense. The MHG. Jip meant ‘life’ as well as ‘ body.’

LIFELONG, lasting for a life-time. (E.) Modern; suggested
by livelong; see Livelong.

GIFT (1), to elevate, raise. (Scand.) ME, liften, to raise;
Prompt. Parv. p. 303; P. Plowman, B. v. 359; Havelok, 1028;
spelt leften (lefftenn), Ormulum, 2658, 2744, 2755, O141, 7528, &c.
The orig. sense is to raise aloft, to exalt znto the air.—Icel. lypta
(pronounced Jyfta), to lift; allied to loft, the air; Dan. léfte, to lift;
loft, a loft, a cock-loft, orig. ‘the air;’ Swed. lyfta, to lift; loft,
a loft, garret, orig. ‘the air.’ Teut. type *luftjan-; from *luftuz, the
air; see Loft. Thez=y, mutation of u (0).

GIFT (2), to steal. (E.) ‘But if night-robbers Jit [steal from]
the well-stored hive;’ Dryden, Annus Mirabilis, st. 228, 1, 916.
The sb. lifter, a thief, occurs in Shak., Troil. i. 2,129. This sense
arose from that of lifting up and carrying away; and the word is
ult. the same as Lift (1). See N.E.D. Skelton has: ‘Conuey it
be [by] crafte, Jyft and lay asyde;’ Magnificence, 1. 1373.
LIGAMENT, a band, the membrane connecting the moveable
bones. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. ME. ligament, Lanfranc,
Cirurgie, p. 24, 1. 1.—F. ligament, ‘a ligament, or ligature ;’ Cot.—
L. ligamentum, a tie, band.=L. ligd-re, to tie; with suffix -mentum.
Der. ligament-al, ligament-ous. From L. ligdre we have also liga-
ture, liable, liane, lictor, lien, lime-hound, ally, alligation, alloy, ally,
league (1), oblige, rally (1).

LIGAN, as if from L. ligdre ; corrupt form of Lagan, q.v.

LIGATURE, a bandage. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627;
and in Lanfranc, Cirurgie, p. 177, 1.17.—F. ligature, ‘a ligature, tie,
band;’ Cot.—L. ligatura, a binding, bandage; from ligare, to bind;
see Ligament.

LIGHT (1), illumination. (E.) ME. light, Chaucer, C. T. 1989,
1991 (A 1987, 1989). AS. léoht, Grein, ii. 177 (cf. Lyhtan, lihtan, to
shine, id. ii. 200); OMerc. Jéht, whence ME. Jiht, light.4-Du. Licht ;
G. licht, OHG. lioht ; Goth. linhath, light. B. Observe that the ¢ is
a mere suffix; Teut. type */ewh-tom, n., related to *leuh-toz, adj.,
‘bright,’ as in E. light, adj. The Goth. diuh-ath answers to Teut.
type *lewh-a-thom, Idg. type *leuk-o-tom. y. Neglecting the final ¢,
we have cognate words in Icel. Jjés (Teut. type *leuh-som), light,
Icel. Jogi, a flame (whence Lowland Scotch lowe, a flame), Idg.
root LEUQ; whence L. Jam, light, L. limen (=luc-men), light, lina
(= louc-sna), moon; with numerous connected terms; also Gk.
Aevx-ds, white, bright, Avyvos (=Avx-vos), a light, lamp, &c. Cf.
Skt. ruch, to shine. See Lucid. Der. light-house. Also light, verb,
ME, lighten, Chaucer, C. T. 2428, AS. lyhtan, lihtan, Grein, ii. 200;
whence light-er, sb. Also light-en (1), q.v., light-ning,q.v. Con-
nected words are luc-id, luc-i-fer, e-luc-idate, il-lu-minate, lu-nar,
Iu-natic, luc-ubration, lea (1), q.v., lustre, il-lu-strate, il-lu-strious, lu-
minous, lynx, 8C,

LIGHT (2), active, not heavy, unimportant. (E.) ME. light,
Chaucer, C. T. 9087 (E 1211); lightly, adv., id. 1463 (A 1461).
AS, léoht, adj., Grein, ii. 176; OMerc. liht, Matt. xi. 30 (Rushworth
MS.).+ Du. ligt; Icel. Jéttr ; Dan. let; Swed. att; Goth. lechts, 2 Cor.
1.17; G. leicht, MHG. lihte, OHG. lihti, likt. Tent. type *lthtoz,
for *linxtoz, *lenxtoz. Allied to Lith. Jengwas, light; from Idg. base
*lengh(w). From the weak grade of the same we have Gk. é-Aayx-vs,
Skt. Jagh-u(s), light, Allied further to Skt. lazgh, to jump over.
See Brugmann, i. § 684; Sievers, § 84. Thus the orig. sense is


LIGULE


‘springy,’ active, nimble; from which the other senses aré easily
deduced. Der. Light-ly, light-ness, lights, q. v., light-fingered, light
headed, light-hearted, light-minded, 8&c.; light-some, Rom. of the Rose,
1. 936; light-some-ness; light-en (2), q.v.; light-er, q.v. From the,
same root we have (from L. Jeu-is) lev-ant, lev-er, lev-ity, lev-y, al-lev-
iate, &c. And see Lung.

LIGHT (3), to settle, alight, descend. (E.) ME. lighten,
likten; ‘adun heo gunnen lihten’=they alighted down; Layamon,
26337; ‘he lighte a-doun of lyard’=he lighted down from his horse,
P. Plowman, B. xvii.64. B. The sense is to relieve a horse of his
burden, and the word is identical with ME. lighten in the sense of to
relieve of a burden. The derivation is from the adj. light, not heavy ;
see Light (2). y. When a man alights from a horse, he not only
telieves the horse of his burden, but completes the action by
descending or alighting on the earth; hence light came to be used
in the sense of to descend, settle, often with the prep. on. ‘New
lighted on a heaven-kissing hill ;’ Hamlet, iii. 4. 59; ‘this murderous
shaft Hath yet not lighted;’ Macb. ii. 3.148. Hence this verb is
(in sense) a doublet of ticks (2), q.v., as well as of Lighten (3),
Der. light-er, q.v. And see Alight, verb.

LIGHTEN (1), to illuminate, flash. (E.) The force of the final
-en is somewhat dubious, but appears to have arisen in the transitive
form. 1. Intrans. to shine as lightning; ‘it lightens,’ Romeo; ii,
2. 120. ME. lightenen, Prompt. Pary. p. 304; also lightn-en, to
shine; Wyclif, Gen. i. 15. 2. Trans. The trans. use is in Shak.
Hen. VIII, ii. 3. 79, Titus And. ii. 3. 227, with the sense ‘to
illuminate.” ME. lightenen; as in ‘that lightend has ur ded sa dim;”
Cursor Mundi, 18600. From light, sb. with causal suffix -ex, as in
length-en, strength-en. We also find the simple form light, as in:
‘the eye of heaven that lights the lower world ;’ Rich, II, iii. 2. 38.
This is the ME. lighten, lighté (where the final -en is merely the
mark of the infin. mood, often dropped); Chaucer, C. T. 2428
(A 2426). AS. léohtan, to illuminate; Grein, ii. 178,—AS. Jéohz,.
light; see Light (1). Der. lighin-ing.

LIGHTEN (2), to make lighter, alleviate. (E.) The final -ex is
merely formative, as in strength-en, length-en, short-en, weak-en, It is
intended to have a causal force. We also find the simple form ¢o
light, answering to ME. lighten, lighté (in which the final -en is
merely the mark of the infin, mood, and is often dropped). ‘Lyghteyn,
or make wyghtys [weights] more esy, lightyn burdens, heuy weightis,


Allevio;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 304. ‘To likten ower heaued’=to take


the weight [of hair] off your head; Ancren Riwle, p. 422. From


the adj. light; see Light (2), and Light (3). So also Dan. lette,.


to lighten, from Jeé, light.

LIGHTEN (3), to descend, settle, alight. (E.) ‘O Lord, let
thy mercy lighten upon us;’ Te Deum, in the Prayer-book (L.
‘fiat). Here lighten is a mere extension of Light (3), q.v.
LIGHTER, a boat for unlading ships. (Du.) In Skinner, ed.
1671; and in Pope, Dunciad, ii. 287. ‘Lyghter, a great bote;’
Palsgrave. Probably borrowed from Du. ligter, a lighter (Sewel) ;
spelt dichter in Skinner. Hence also lighter-man, from Du. ligterman,
a lighter-man (Sewel). = Du. ligé, light (not heavy); see Light (2),
@ Thus the sense is the same as if the word had been purely
English; it means ‘unloader;’ from the use made of these vessels.
Der. lighter-man (as above) ; lighter-age.
LIGHTNING, an illuminating flash. (E.)
schyneden;* Wyclif, Ps. Ixxvii (Ixxviii). 19.
Lighten (1).

LIGHTS, lungs. (E.) ME. lightes, Destruction of Troy, 10705 ;
pa lihkte=the lights, Layamon, 6499, answering to AS. Sa lihtan,
i.e. the light things. So called from their lightness. So also Russ.
legkiia, lights; from leghkii, light. See Light (2). j
LIGN-ALOES, the bitter drug aloes. (Hybrid; L. and Gk.)
In Numbers, xxiv. 6 (A. V.) ‘A kind of odoriferous Indian tree,
usually identified with the Aguilaria Agallochum which supplies the
aloes-wood of commerce. Our word is a partial translation of the
L. lignum aloés, Gk. gvAaAbn. The bitterness of the aloe is pro-
verbial ;” Bible Wordbook, ed. Eastwood and Wright. Chaucer has;
‘As bittre ... as is ligne aloes, or galle;’ Troilus, iv. 1137.—L. lig-
num, wood; and aloés, of the aloe, gen. case of aloé, the aloe, a word
borrowed from Gk. dAdy, the aloe. [ On the true distinction between
aloe and aloes-wood, see note to Aloe, And see Ligneous,

LIGNEOUS, woody, wooden, wood-like. (L.) ‘Of a more

ligneous nature ;” Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 504. Formed by mere change
of L. -us into E. -ous (as in ingenuous, arduous, and many others),
from L. ligneus, wooden.=L. lignum, wood; a word of disputed
origin, Der. from ligni- (for ligno-) we have ligni-fer-ous =wood-
producing (from ferre, to bear); ligni-fy=to turn to wood; and
from the stem lign- has been formed lign-ite, coal retaining the
texture of wood, where the suffix -ite is Gk.

LIGULE, a strap-shaped petal. (L.) A mod. botanical term;


‘Thi lightnyngis
Verbal sb, from


LIGURE

-also applied to the flat part of the leaf of a grass. —L. ligula, a little
‘tongue, a tongue-shaped extremity; by-form of lingula. Dimin. of
Jingua, a tongue; see Lingual. But Brugmann (i. § 604) derives
Jig-ula immediately from lig-, base of ling-ere, to lick. See Lick.

’ LIGURE, a precious stone. (L.—Gk.) In the Bible, A, V., Ex.
xxviii. 19, xxxix. 12. ‘Our translators have followed the Septuagint
Avyvpeoy and Vulgate ligurius in translating the Heb. leshem by
‘ligure, which is a precious stone unknown in modern mineralogy ;’
Bible Wordbook, by Eastwood and Wright. =—L. ligirius.—Gk, AL
yuptov, also spelt Avyyouvpioy, Avyxovpiov, Avyxovpiov, a sort of gem;
acc. to some, a reddish amber, acc, to others, the hyacinth
(Liddell).

LIKE (1), similar, resembling. (E.) ME. lyk, lik; Chaucer,
C. T. 414, 1973 (A 412, 1971). AS: lic, in comp. ge-lic, like, in
which form it is common; Grein, i. 422. The prefix ge- was long
retained in the weakened form 7- or y-; Chaucer has yliche as an
adv., C. T. 2528 (A 2526).4-Du. ge-lijk, like; where ge- is a prefix;
Icel. likr, glikr, like; where g- = ge-, prefix; Dan. lig; Swed. lik;
Goth. ga-leiks, Mark, vii. 8; G. gleich, MHG. ge-lich, OHG. ka-lih.
B. All signifying ‘resembling in form, and derived from the Teut.
sb. *likom, a form, shape, appearing in AS. /ic, a form, body (whence
Lich-gate), OSax. lik, Icel. lik, Goth. Jeik, the body, &c. Cf. Lith.
lygus, like; Skt. linga(m), a mark, sign; W. cyffe-lyb, like, similar ;
Stokes-Fick, p. 251. Der. like-ly, ME. ‘lykly, Chaucer, C. T. 1174
(A 1172); like-li-hood, ME. liklihed, id. 13526 (B 1786); like-li-ness,
‘ME. Iiklines, id. 8272 (E 396); like-ness, ME. liknes, P. Plowman, B.i.
113, formerly z-Jicnes, Ancren Riwle, p. 230, from AS. ge-licnes; like-
wise, short for in like wise (see Wise, sb.) ; like (2), q. v.3 like, sb. ;
lik-en, q.v. => All adjectives ending in -ly have adopted this
ending from AS. -Jic, lit. ‘like;’ all adverbs in -ly take this suffix
from AS. -lice, the same word with the adverbial -final -e added.
‘The word like-ly = like-like, a reduplication.

LIKE (2), to approve, be pleased: with. (E.) The mod. sense
is evolved by an alteration in the construction. The ME. verb lyken
‘(or liken) signified ‘to please,’ and was used impersonally. We
haye, in fact, changed the phrase it likes me into I like, and so on
throughout. Both senses are in Shak.; see Temp. iii. 1. 43, Hamlet,
‘y. 2. 246. Chaucer has only the intrans, verb. ‘And if you lyketh’ =
and if it please you; C. T. 779 (A 777); still preserved in the mod.
“phrase ‘if you like. ‘That oghte lyken yow’=that ought to please
you; id. 13866 (B 2128). AS, lician, to please, rarely lican; Grein,
‘ji. 182. ‘The lit. sense is to be like or suitable for.— AS. lic, ge-lic,
like; see Like (1).4Du. lijken, to be like, resemble, seem, suit;
from ge-lijk, like; Icel. lika, to like; from likr, like; Goth. leikan,
ga-leikan, to please; from ga-letks, like; MHG. lichen, ge-lichen, to
be like; from ge-lich, like (G. gleich). Der. lik-ing, ME. lykynge,
P. Plowman, B. xi. 20, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 271. Also
well-liking =well-pleasing, Ps. xcii. 13, Prayer-book.

LIKEW, to consider as similar, to compare. (E.; or Scand.)
ME. liknen. ‘The water is likned to the worlde;’ P. Plowman, B. viii.
39, A. ix. 34. ‘ And lyknez hit to heuen ly3te’ =and likens it to the
‘light of heaven; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, A. 500. But the orig.
sense was perhaps intransitive, as in the case of Goth. verbs in -zan,
and several Swed. verbs in -za; and the peculiar use and form of the
word seem to be Scand. It is intrans. in Allit. Poems, B. 1064.—
Swed. likna, (1) to resemble, (2) to liken ; from ik, like; Dan. ligne,
(1) to resemble, (2) to liken; from Jig, like. See Like (1).

LILAC, a flowering shrub. (F.—Span.—Arab.—Pers.) ‘ The
Telacke tree;’ Bacon, Essay 46. Spelt Jilach in Kersey, ed. 1715.—
MF, lilac, Cot.; now spelt lilas.—Span. lilac, lila, a lilac. Of
Oriental origin. = Arab, Jilak, lilik (Devic). Derived from the Pers.
lilaj, lilanj, or lilang, of which the proper sense is the indigo-plant ;
Rich. Pers. Dict. p. 1282. Here the initial 7 stands for x, and the
above forms are connected with Pers. nil, the indigo-plant ; whence
nilak (dimin, form, whence Arab. Jilak), blueish; Rich. Dict. pp. 1619,
1620. Cf, Skt. ila-s, dark-blue, ili, the indigo-plant. Named from
the blueish tinge on the flowers in some varieties (Devic).
| LILLIPUTIAN, diminutive, very small. (E.) ‘ The stairs are
‘of lilliputian measurement ;’ Dickens, American Notes (1850), p. 33:
Formed with suffix -ianz, from Lilliput, the name of an imaginary
country in Gulliver’s Travels, inhabited by pygmies six inches high,
Coined by Swift (1726).

GILT, to sing cheerfully. (Scand.) Cf. ME. lilting-horn, Chaucer,
‘Ho. of Fame, 1223. The pp. Julted occurs in Early E. Allit. Poems,
A, 1207. Connected with Norw. Jilla, to sing in a high tone;
OSwed. lyila, to lull to sleep (Rietz, s. v. lulla).—Swed. ludla, Dan.
Julle, to hum, to lull. See Lull. See Notes on E, Etym., p. 163.

LILY, a bulbous plant. (L.—Gk.) ME. lilie; Chaucer, C. T.
15555 (G 87), AS. lilie, pl. lilian; Matt. vi. 28; Aflfric’s Gloss.,
Nomina Herbarum.=—L. Jilium; Matt. vi. 28.—Gk. Aciptoyv, a lily;
‘the change of Gk. p to L. 7 being in accordance with usual laws.


LIME-HOUND 341


@ The more usual Gk. name is xpivoy, as in Matt. vi. 28. Der.
lilt-ac-e-ous = L, liliticeus,

LIMB (1), a member of the body, branch of a tree. (E.) ME,
lim, pl. limes; Chaucer, C. T. 4881 (B 461). AS, lim, pl. leomu;
Grein, ii. 188 ; Icel. limr ; Dan. and Swed. lem. Teut. types */i-mom,
n.; *li-moz, m.; allied to AS. li-A, Goth. li-thus, a limb. See Lay
figure. Cf. Lith. lémz, trunk, stature.

LIMB (2), the edge or border of a sextant, &c. (L.) ‘Limb, in
mathematics, the outermost border of an astrolabe; .. in astronomy,
the utmost border of the disk or body of the sun or moon, when
either is in eclipse ;” Kersey, ed. 1715. Kersey also gives the form
limbus.—L. limbus, a border, edging, edge. Cotgrave gives MF,
limbe de bouteille, ‘the mouth or brink of a bottle.’ Doublet,
limbo.

LIMBECK, the same as Alembic, q.v. Palsgrave has: ‘ Lem-
byke for a styllatorie, lembic;’ where lembic is a F. form.

LIMBER (1), flexible, pliant. (E.) Not found very early.
‘With limber vows;’ Wint. Tale, i. 2. 47. Richardson quotes an
earlier and better example. ‘Ne yet the bargeman, that doth rowe
With long and limber oare;’ Turbervile, A Myrrour of the Fall of
Pride. Cooper’s Thesaurus has: ‘ Lentus, softe, pliant, limber’ (1565).
Perhaps allied to limp, flexible, pliant; or to prov. E. limmock,
flexible, pliant. The suffix -er is adjectival, as in bit¢-er, fai-r (= AS,
feg-er), &c.; see Matzner, Engl. Gramm. i. 435. See Limp (1).

LIMBER (2), part of a gun-carriage consisting of two wheels
and a shaft to which horses are attached. (F.) Taken up from
prov. E. ‘ Limbers, thills or shafts (Berkshire) ; Limmers, a pair of
shafts (North) ;” Grose’s Prov. Eng. Glossary, ed. 1790; and see
E.D.D. It appears that 6 is excrescent, and the form limmers is
the older one. B. Further, dimmer was formerly spelt limour (in
1480), and lymowr, as in: ‘ The cartis stand with lymowris ;’ Douglas,
tr. of Virgil, bk. ix. ch. 6, 1. 23. In Douglas, Palice of Honour,
st. 33, the form used is lymnaris, pl. of lymnar, for limner. The
spelling limours seems to be an E, variant of F. limons, pl. of limon,
‘the thill of a waine,’ which was mostly used in the pl.; Cot.
Similarly, limner may well represent F. limonier, as in ‘ Cheval
limonier, a thill-horse ;” Cot.

LIMBO, LIMBUS, the borders of hell. (L.) In Shak. All’s
Well, v. 3. 261. The orig. phrase was iz limbo, Com. Errors, iv. 2.
32; or more fully, ix limbo patrum, Hen. VIII, v. 4. 67.—L. limbo
(governed by the prep. iz), abl. case of limbus, a border; see Limb
(2). £ The limbus patrum, in the language of churchmen, was the place
bordering on hell, where the saints of the Old Testament remained
till Christ’s descent into hell;’ Schmidt. The Ital. word is also
limbo, derived (not from the ablative, but) from the acc. limbum of
the same L. word. Cf. P. Plowman, B, xvi. 84. Doublet, limb (2).

LIME (1), viscous substance, bird-lime, mortar, oxide of calcium.
(E.) The orig. sense is ‘viscous substance.’ ME. lym, litm, lyme.
‘Lyme, to take with byrdys [to catch birds with], viseus; Lyme, or
mortare, Calx;* Prompt. Parv, p. 305. And see Chaucer, C. T.
16274 (G 806). AS. lim, bitumen, cement; Grein, ii. 188.4Du.
lijm, glue, lime ; Icel. lim, glue, lime, chalk; Dan. liim, glue; Swed.
lim, glue; G. leim, glue; MHG. lim, bird-lime.4+L. limus, mud,
slime. B. Teut. type *Jimoz, Idg. type *leimos, from 4/LEI; of
which the weak grade (Ji) appears in L. li-nere, to smear, daub;
cf. Russ. ite, to pour, flow; cf. Skt. Ji, to melt, to adhere; allied to
Skt. rz, to distil. See Ihooam (which is allied). Der. lime, verb,
Ancren Riwle, p. 226, Hamlet, iii. 3. 68; lim-y; lime-kiln, Merry
Wives, iii. 3. 86; lime-stone; lime-twig, Lydgate, Minor Poems,
p. 189; lime-rod, spelt lymrod, Chaucer, C. T. 14694 (B 3574).

LIME (2), the linden-tree. (E.) In Pope, Autumn, 25. <A cor-
ruption of the earlier spelling line. ‘Linden-tree, or Line-tree;’
Kersey, ed. 1715. ‘In the Jine-grove’ (modern edd. lime-grove) ;
Shak. Temp. v. 10. The change from line to lime does not seem to
be older than about A.D. 1625. The form /ime is in Bailey’s Dict.,
vol. ii. ed. 1731; Bacon has ‘the lime-tree;’ Essay 46. B. Again,
line is a corruption of lind, the older name, by loss of final d. See
Linden. Der. lime-iree.

LIME (3), a kind of citron. (F.—Span.— Arab. or Pers. — Malay.)
First in 1638. ‘Lime, a sort of small lemmon ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.—
F, lime, a lime ; Hamilton. Span. lima. = Arab. limah (below) ; Pers.
lima, a lemon, citron; Rich, Dict. p. 1282. — Malay limau, Javanese
limo, a generic name for a lime or citron. And see Lemon. Dozy
gives Arab. limah, a lime ; see Devic.

LIME-HOUND, a dog led by a cord; a dog used for hunting
the wild boar. (F.—L.; and E.) Lime-hound is short for liam-
hound, a hound held by a liam or leash. ‘ The string wherewith wee
leade a Grey hounde is called a Jease, and for a hounde a Jyame ;"
Turberville, Booke of Hunting, ed. 1575, p. 240. See Croft’s Gloss,
to Sir T. Elyot’s The Governour. . Spenser has lime-hound; F. Q.
Vy. 2. 25,— OF. liem; F. lien; see Littré, s.v. lien ; and cf. Norm,


342 LIMIT


dial. lian, a tie, a cord. =—L. ligdmen, a fastening; see Lien. And
see Hound. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 164.

LIMIT, to assign a boundary; a boundary. (F.—L.) The verb
is in older (general) use in E. than the sb. /imiz, though really the
derived word. ME, limiten, to limit. ‘To limite us or assigne us ;’
Chaucer, Tale of Melibeus, Six-text, B 2956. [Hence the sb. limzt-or,
Chaucer, C. T. 209.] =F. limiter, ‘to limit ;’ Cot. =F. limite, a limit;
id. —L. limitem, acc. of limes, a boundary; akin to L. limen, a thres-
hold. Prob. allied’ to L. limus, transverse (Bréal). Der. limit-ed,
limit-ed-ly, limit-ed-ness, limit-less, limit-able; also limit-at-ion=F.
limitation, ‘a limitation’ (Cot.), from L. acc. limitationem.

LIMN, to illuminate, paint. (F.—L.) ME. limnen, a contracted

form of luminen. ‘Lymnyd, or lumynid, as bookys;’ Prompt. Pary.
p-317. ‘Lymnore, luminour, Alluminator,illuminator;’ id. B. Again,
luminen is short for enluminen, by loss of the prefix: Chaucer has
enlumined =enlightened; C. T. 7909 (E 33).—MF. enluminer, ‘to
illuminate, inlighten; . . also to sleek, burnish ; also to dimn; Cot.
— Late L. inliiminare; for L. illamindare, to enlighten ; see lumin-
ate. Der. limn-er=ME. luminour, as above, short for enluminour ;
© Enlumineur de livres, a burnisher of bookes, an alluminer;’ Cot.
. LIMP (1), flaccid, flexible, pliant, weak. (E.) ‘Limp, limber,
supple ;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. Scarce in books, but known to our E.
dialects, and doubtless an old E. word. B. Allied words are perhaps
‘Swiss lampig, lampelig, faded, loose, flabby, hanging,’ and similar
words, cited in Wedgwood, Also Bavarian lampecht, flaccid, lampende
Ohren, hanging ears (answering to E. lop-ears, as in ‘a lop-eared
‘rabbit’); lamp, lemp, arag,a hanging shred; from the verb lampen,
to hang loosely down ; Schmeller, Bay. Dict.1474. Cf. Skt. Jamba-,
depending, Jambana-, falling; from the verb Jamb, to fall, hang
‘downwards. Der. limp-ness; cf. limber (1).

LIMP (2), to walk lamely. (E.) In Shak. Merch. Ven. iii. 2.
.130; and in Levins (1570). Palsgrave has: ‘lympe-hault, boiteux.’
Not easily traced earlier, and the orig. form is uncertain. Allied to
AS. lemp-healt, limp-halting, halting, lame, of which the earliest
form is laempi-halt, Epinal Gloss., 589; cf. lemp-halt, Corpus Gloss.,
1250. Allied also to MDan. limpe, to limp (Kalkar) ; MHG. limphin,
to limp. Possibly connected with Limp (1), rather than (as some
think) with Lame. 4 We also find Low G. lumpen, to limp
(Bremen WoOrterbuch) ; which seems to be connected with limp by
gradation. So also Dan. dial. Jumpe, to limp; lumpen, lame.

LIMPET, a small shell-fish, which cleaves to rocks. (L.) Cot-
grave explains OF, berdin by ‘the shellfish called a lympyne or
a lempet.’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxxii. c. 9, translates L. mituli
by ‘limpins.’ ME. lempet, Durham Acc. Rolls (Surtees Soc.), p. 10
(1313). AS. lempedu, (properly) a lamprey.—Late L. lemprida, for
lampréda, late form of lampetra, a lamprey; see Lamprey, of
which limpet is a doublet. We find in Wiilker’s Gloss., 438, 17:
‘lemprida, dempedu ;’ where lempedu is the AS. form. See Notes on
‘H..Etym.,; p. 164.

LOMPID, pure, clear, shining. (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss. ed.
1674. ‘Most pure and limpid juice ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors,
bk. ii..c. 1. § 16.—F. limpide, ‘clear, bright ;’ Cot.—L. limpidus,
dimpid, clear. Allied to L. lympha, pure water; see Lyymph.
Brugmann, i. § 102. Der. limpid-i-ty, limpid-ness.

LINCH-PIN, a pin to fasten the wheel on to the axle. (E.)
Formerly also spelt lins-pin 3 see Kersey, ed. 1715; Coles, ed. 1684;
Skinner, ed, 1671. [Linch appears to be a corrupted form, obviously
by confusion with link.] The pl. Jinses in Will. of Shoreham’s Poems,
Pp. 109, means ‘linch-pins.’ AS. lynis, an axle-tree ; Epinal Gloss., 8.
+Du. luns, a linch-pin; whence Zunzen, to put the linch-pin to
a wheel; Low G. lunse, a linch-pin ; Bremen Worterbuch ; G. liinse,
alinch-pin.  B. Cf. also OHG., dun, a linch-pin.

LIND, LINDEN, the lime-tree. (E.) Here (as in the case of
asp-en) the true sb. is lind, whence lind-en was formed as an adjective,
with the suffix -e as in gold-en, birch-en, beech-en, The true name
is lind, or, in longer phrase, linden tree. Lind was in time corrupted
to line, and later to lime; see Lime (2). ME. lind, lynd; Chaucer,
C. T. 2924 (A 2922). AS. lind, Grein, ii, 128. ‘Seno vel tilia,
dind;’ /Elfric’s Gloss., Nomina Arborum. Hence the adj. linden
(Grein, ii, 189), as in linden bord=the linden shield, shield made of
lind.-+Du. Linde, linde-boom; Icel. lind; Dan. lind, lind-tre ; Swed.
lind; G. linde, OHG. linta. Tent. type *lendai; Idg. base *lent-;
the weak grade appears in Gk. éAdrn, silver fir. Cf. Lith. lenta,
a board.

_ LING, a thread, thin cord, stroke, row, rank, verse. (L.; or F.—
L.) In all senses, the word is of L. origin; the only difference is
that, in some senses, the word was borrowed from L. directly, in
other senses through the French. We may take them separately, as
follows. 1. Line=a thin cord or rope, a thread, rope of a ship.
ME, lyne; P. Plowman, B. v. 355. AS. line, a cord; Grein, ii,
189.—L. linea, a. string of hemp or flax, hempen cord; properly


~ ee


LINIMENT


the fem. of adj. Jineus, made of hemp or flax. = L. linum, flax. Prob.
rather cognate with than borrowed from Gk. Aivor, flax. [The G.
lein, &c. are probably borrowed from Latin.] 2. Line=a verse,
rank, row; Chaucer, C. T. 1553 (A 1551); P. Plowman, B. vii. 110.
=F. ligne, a line. L. linea, a line, stroke, mark, line of descent ;
the same word as above. Der. line, verb, in various senses; to
line garments is properly to put linen inside them (see Linen) ;
also lin-ing, lineal, q.v., linear, q.v., lineage, q.v., lineament, q.Ve
And see linnet, linseed, linsey-woolsey, lint, de-lineate, a-lign.

LINEAGE, race, family, descent. (F.—L.) ME. linage (with-
out the medial e), Chaucer, C. T. 1552 (A 1550); Romance of
Partenay, 5033; ligaage, Gower, C. A. i. 344; bk. iii. 1944.—F.
lignage, ‘a lineage;’ Cot. [Here E, ne=F. gn.] Made with suffix
-age (=L. -aticum) from F. ligne, a line.=L. linea, a line; see
Line.

LINEAL, belonging to a line. (L.) In Spenser, F. Q. iv. 11.
12. ‘Lineally and in the genelogye ;’ Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 17.
=L. linedlis, belonging to a line. = L. linea, a line; see Line. Der.
lineal-ly. Doublet, linear.

LINEAMENT, a feature. (F.—L.) ‘In the liniamentes and
fauor of his visage;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 61 b. MF. lineament,
‘a lineament or feature;’ Cot.—L. linedmentum, a drawing, . de-
lineation, feature. = L. linedre, to draw a line; with suffix -mentum. —
L. linea, a line; see Line,

LINEAR, consisting of lines. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674. —L, linearis, belonging to a line. = L. linea; see Line.
Doublet, lineal, which is an older word. Der. linear-ly.

LINEN, cloth made of flax. (L.) Used asa sb., but really an
adj., with adj. suffix -ez as in wooll-en, gold-en; the orig. sb. was lin,
preserved in lin-seed. ME. lin, sb. linen, adj. The sb. is rare.
‘The bondes . . . That weren of ful strong line’=the bonds that
were of very strong flax; Havelok, 539. The adj. is common.
‘Clothid with Jyznun cloth ... he lefte the yznyn clothing ;’ Wyclif,
Mark, xiv. 51, 52. “It was also used as a sb., as now. ‘In lynnen
yclothed’=clothed in linen; P. Plowman, B. i. 3.—AS. Jin, flax,
linen; in comp. Jin-w@d, a linen garment; John, xiii. 5. Thence
was formed the adj. linen, as in linen hregl=a linen cloth, John,


xiii, 4.—L. linum, flax; cognate with Gk. Awov, flax. See Line.
And see linseed, linnet.
LING (1), a kind of fish. (E.) ‘Lynge, fysshe;’ Palsgrave.


Spelt leenge in Prompt. Parv. p. 296; and see Way’s note. Spelt
lenge, Havelok, 1. 832. Not found in AS., but answering to Teut.
*lang-jon-, f., from lang, long; i.e. ‘the long one.’ EFries. leng,
leng-fisk. So called from its slender shape.-+-Du. Jeng, a ling; from
lang, long; Icel. langa, a ling; from langr, long; Norw. langa,
longa (Aasen); Swed. ldnga; G. lange, a ling; also called langyisch,
i.e. long fish.

LING (2), heath. (Scand.) ‘Lynge, or heth;’ Prompt. Parv.
p- 305; and see Way’s note. ‘Dede in the lyng’= lying dead on
the heath; Sir Degrevant, 1. 336, in Thornton Romances, ed. Halli-
well. (Not AS.) —Icel. dyng, ling, heather; Dan. lyng; Swed. ljung,
ling, heather; Swed. dial. ding (Rietz). Teut. type *lengwo-; cf.
Swed. lingon, the whortleberry.

LINGER, to loiter, tarry, hesitate. (E.) ‘Of lingring’ doutes such
hope is sprong, pardie;’ Surrey, Bonum est mihi, 1. 10; in Tottell’s
Miscellany, ed. Arber, p. 31. Formed by adding the frequentative
suffix -er or -r to the ME. lengen, to tarry ; with further thinning of
e toi before mg. This ME. verb is by no means rare. ‘I may no
lenger Jenge’ =I may no longer linger; P. Plowman, B.i. 207. Cf.
Will. of Palerne, 5421; Havelok, 1734.—AS. lengan, to prolong, put
off; Grein, i. 168; formed by the usual vowel-change (of a to e) from
AS. lang, long ; see Long. Cf. Icel. lengja, to lengthen, from langr,
long; G. verlangern, to prolong, from Jang, long; Du. lengen, to
lengthen, verlengen, to prolong.

LINGO, speech, language. (Prov.—L.) A contemptuous term.
‘ Well, well, I shall understand your lingo one of these days ;’ Con-
greve, Way of the World, A. iv. sc. 1 (Sir Wilfull).— Prov. lengo,
lingo, speech (Mistral) ; dingo is the precise form used at Marseilles,
and lengo is Gascon (Moncaut).—L. lingua, tongue, speech (below).
Cf. Port. lingoa.

LINGUAL, pertaining to the tongue. (L.) A late word (with
few exceptions); not in Todd’s Johnson. Coined, as if from an adj.
lingudlis, from L. lingua, the tongue, of which the OL. form was
dingua (see Lewis’ Dict.) ; cognate with E. Tongue, q.v. Der.
(from L. lingua) lingu-ist, q.v., language, q.V-

LINGUIST, one skilled in languages. (L.) In Shak. Two
Gent. iv. 1. 573 and in Minsheu, ed. 1627. Coined, with suffix -is¢
(=L. -ista, from Gk. -corns), from L. lingu-a, the tongue; see Lin-
gual. Der. linguist-ic, linguist-ic-s.

LINIMENT, a salve, soft ointment. (F.—L.) The word occurs
3 or 4 times in Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxii. c. 21.—F. liniment,


LINING


*a liniment,-a thin ointment ;’ Cot.=L. linimentum, smearing-stuff,
ointment. Formed, with suffix -mentum, from linire, to smear; allied
to linere, to smear. Cf. Skt. ri, to distil, ooze, drop; Ji, to melt,
adhere. Brugmann, i. §-476 (5); ii. § 608.

LINING, a covering on the inner surface of a garment. (L.) In
Shak. L. L. L. v. 2.791. Formed, with E. suffix -ing, from the verb
to line, meaning to cover the inside of a garment with Jine, i.e. linen ;
see Line, Linen.

LINK (1), a ring of a chain, joint. (Scand.) In Shak. Cor. i. 1.
73. Cf. ‘Trouth [truth] and mercy linked in a chain ;’ Lydgate,
Storie of Thebes, pt. ii (How trouth is preferred). —Olcel. *hlenkr,
Icel. hlekkr (by assimilation); Dan. lenke; Swed. lank.4-AS. hlence
(which would have given linch); as in the comp. sb. welhlence,
a slaughter-link, i.e. linked coat of mail, Grein, ii. 646. Teut. type
*hlankjoz, m.; cf. also G. gelenk, a joint, link, ring; G. lenken, to
turn, bend. Der. link, verb.

LINK (2), a torch. (Scand.) ‘A link or torch ;? Minsheu’s Dict.,
ed. 1627. ‘Links and torches ;’ Shak. 1 Hen. IV, iii. 3. 48. ‘ Lynke,
torche ;’ Palsgrave. Of obscure origin; but it is prob. the same as
the word above, in the sense of ‘length of rope;’ cf. ‘a link of
sausages.’ Such seems to be the sense in Shak. 2 Hen. IV, v. i. 23:
‘ Now, sir, a new link to the bucket must needs be had.’ Links for
torches were made of handy lengths of rope.

LINN, a pool; also a cascade, torrent. (C.) Two words have
been confounded; (1) AS. klynn, a torrent; Rushworth Gospels,
John, xviii. 1; and (2) Gael. linne, Irish linn, W. Ilyn, a pool. See
Notes on E. Etym., p. 165.

LINNET, a small singing-bird. (F.—L.) ME. lynet, Court of
Love, 1. 1412.—OF. linette (Godefroy) ; F. limotte, ‘a linnet ;” Cot.
{So called from feeding on the seed of flax and hemp, as is clearly
shown by similar names in other languages, e.g. G. hanfling, a linnet,
from hanf, hemp, G. lein-finke, a linnet (cited by Wedgwood), lit.
a lin-finch, flax-finch.]=F. Jin, flax.=L. linum, flax; see Linen,
Line. @ The E.name is/lintwhite, Scotch lintquhit ; see Complaint
of Scotland, ed. Murray, p. 39, 1. 24. From AS. linetwige, a linnet ;
fElfric’s Gloss., Nomina Avium. This name is also (probably) from
L. linum, flax. So also W. Ilinos, a linnet; from Jliz, flax.

LINSEED, flax-seed. (Hybrid; L.andE.) ME. lin-seed ; spelt
lynne-seed in P. Plowman, C. xiii. 1903; linseed (to translate OF. lynoys)
in Walter de Bibbesworth ; Wright’s Vocab. i. 156. From ME. lin
= AS, lin, flax, borrowed from L. linum, flax; and E. seed. See
Line, Linen, and Seed. Der. linseed-oil, linseed-cake.

LINSEY -WOOLSEY, made of linen and wool mixed.
(Hybrid; L. and E.) ‘Lynsy-wolsye, linistema, vel linostema ;’
Cathol. Anglicum (1483). Used facetiously in Shak. All’s Well, iv.
I. 133; Minsheu (ed. 1627) has: ‘Jinste-woolsie, i.e. of linnen and
woollen.’ Asif from ME. diz, linen; and E. wool; with -sy or -sey
as a suffix twice over; cf. zip-sy; see Linen and Wool. Bf. But
linsey may represent Lindsey, near Kersey (Suffolk); see Kersey. In
fact, Lindsey was formerly Lynsey, Lylsey, Lelesey ; Skelton has the
form Lylse wulse ; see further in the Supplement.

LINSTOCK, LINTSTOCK, a stick to hold a lighted match.
(Du.) In Dryden, Annus Mirabilis, st. 188; spelt lizstock in Mar-
lowe, Jew of Malta, v. 4. 4. ‘Lint-stock, a carved stick (about half
a yard) with a cock at one end to hold the gunner’s match, and
a sharp pike at the other, to stick it anywhere ;’ Coles’ Dict., ed.
1684.— Du. lontstok, ‘ a lint-stock ;? Sewel. — Du. ont, a match; and
stok, a stick, for which see Stock.4Dan. lunte-stok, a lint-stock ;
from dunte, a match, and stok, a stick ; Swed. lunt-stake; from lunta,
a match, an old bad book (fit to be burnt), and stake, a stick, candle-
stick. B. The derivation of Du. dont, Swed. lunta, is uncertain; but
it would appear from Kilian that Du. lomp, a rag, tatter, MDu. lompe,
was also used in the same sense as Jonf, MDu. lonte. Perhaps lonte
arose from *lomp-te; cf. MDu. lonte, a match, rag, with MDu. lompe,
a rag, tatter; and Swed. Junta, a match, with Swed. lumpor, rags
(only used in the plural). See Ihre, s.v. unta; and see Lump.

LINT, scraped linen. (F.—L; or L.) ‘Lynt, schauynge of lynen
clothe, Carpea ;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 306. Spelt lynnet in Lanfranc,
Cirurgie, p. 83; but lyn (flax) in Barbour, Bruce, bk. xvii. 612.
Either from F. lin, flax, with F, suffix -et or -ette (cf. OF. linette,
linseed, in Godefroy) ; or perhaps borrowed directly from L. linteum,
a linen cloth. =L. linteus, made of linen. = L. lizum, flax. See Line,
Linen. @ And see Du, Jin¢ in Franck.
-LINTEL, the head-piece of a door or casement. (F.—L:) ME.
lintel, lyntel ; Wyclif, Exod. xii. 22.— OF. lintel (see Littré), later F.
linteau, ‘ the lintell, or head-piece, over a door ;’ Cot.— Late L. lin-
tellus, a lintel ; which (as Diez suggests) stands for *Jimitellus, dimin.
of L. limes (stem Jimit-), a. boundary, hence a border; see Limit.
Prob. confused with Jimen, athreshold. . A similar contraction is
found in Span. linde, from L, acc. limitem, a boundary.

LION, a large and fierce beast of prey. (F.—L.—Gk.—Egypt.)


LIST


In early use. In Layamon, 1463, we find Jeon in the earlier text, lion
in the later. A still earlier form was leo, but this was borrowed from
the Latin directly; see Leeo.—OF-. leon, lion. —L. lednem, acc. of leo,
a lion.—Gk, Aéwy, a lion. Also Gk. Aéauwa, for *A€Fauva, a lioness ;
from Egypt. Jabai, lawai, a lioness ; which was also the name of the
hieroglyphic for L. Cf. Heb. 1abi, a lion; also of Egypt. origin.
See Notes on E. Etym., p. 165. We also find G. lowe, OHG. leo,
lewo; Russ. lev’; Lithuanian Jévas, lavas; Du. leeuw; &c. Der.
lion-ess, As You. Like It, iv. 3. 115, from F. lionnesse ; lion-hearted;
also lion-ise, orig. to show strangers the lions which used to be kept
in the Tower of London. See Capt. Smith, Works, ed. Arber;
p- 872.

LIP, the muscular part forming each of the upper and lower edges
of the mouth. (E.) ME. lippe, Chaucer, C. T. 128, 133. AS. lippa.
‘Labium, ufeweard lippa’=upper lip; A®lfric’s Gloss., in Voc. 157.
22. ‘Labrum, nidera lippe’=nether lip; id.+Du. lip; Dan. lebe ;
Swed, lapp ; G. lippe, lefze ; OHG. lefs, leffur. Further allied to L.
lab-rum, lab-ium, the lip; Pers. lab, the lip, Palmer’s Pers. Dict.
col. 511. See Brugmann, i. § 563. Perhaps allied to Jambere, to
lick (Bréal). The AS./Jippa represents a Teut. type *lep-jon-,m. Der.
lipp-ed ; from the same root are Jab-ial, lab-iate, lamb-ent.

LIQUEFY, to make liquid. (F.—L.) Also ‘ to become liquid,’
but this is a later sense. ‘ The disposition not to liquefie’ =to become
liquid ; Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 840.—MF. liquefier ; but only found in
Cot. as a pp.; he gives ‘ligquefié,’ dissolved, melted, made liquid’
B. The E. liquefy is formed by analogy with other words in -/y, which
answers to F. -fier=L. -ficdire, used in place of facere, to make. But
in the intrans. sense the word corresponds to L. liquefiert, to become
liquid, used as pass. of liguefacere, to make liquid.—L. ligue-, from
liquére, to be fluid; and facere, to make. See Liquid and Fact.
Der. lique-fact-ion, Minsheu, ed. 1627; allied to liguefactus, pp. of
liquefacere.

LIQUESCENT, melting. (L.) Modern; in Todd’s Johnson ;
and in Bailey, vol. ii. L. ligquescent-, stem of pres. pt. of liguescere, to
become liquid ; inceptive form of liguére, to be liquid. See Liquid.
Der, liquescenc-y, de-liquescent.

LIQUEUR, a cordial. (F.—L.) In Pope; Dunciad, iv. 317.
A modern F. form of the older term Liquor, q.v.

LIQUID, fluid, moist, soft, clear. (F.—L.) ‘The playne [flat]
and liquide water ;? Tyndal, Works, p. 265, col. 2. =F. liquide, ‘liquid,
moist, wet ;’ Cot. —L. liquidus, liquid, moist. = L. liguére, to be liquid
or moist orclear. See Bréal. Der. liquid, sb., liquid-i-ty, liquid-ness ;
also liguid-ate, q.v.; liquor, q.v., lique-fy, q.v.

LIQUIDATH, to make clear, clear or pay off an account.
(L.) Bailey has liquidated, vol. ii. ed. 1727. ‘Liguidate, to make
moist or clear;’ Blount, Gloss., 1681.— Late L. liguidatus, pp. of
liquidare, to clarify, make clear. =—L. liquidus, liquid, clear; see
Liquid. Der. liquid-at-ion =F. liquidation ; liquidat-or.

LIQUOR, anything liquid, moisture, strong drink. (F.—L.)
The word is really F., but has been accommodated to the orig. L.
spelling; yet we retain somewhat of the F. pronunciation, the gu
being sounded as c (k). ME. licour, Chaucer, C. T. 1. 3; spelt licur,
Ancren Riwle, p. 164, 1. 13.—AF. licur, Tristan, i. 136; F. liqueur,
‘liquor, humor;’ Cot.— L. ligudrem, acc. of liquor, moisture. = L.
liquére, to be liquid; see Liquid. Doublet, liqueur.

LIQUORICEH, the same as Licorice, q.v.

LIRA, an Italian silver coin. (Ital.—L.) First in 1617. = Ital.
lira.—L. libra, a pound. Doublet, litre.

LISP, to pronounce imperfectly, utter feebly, in speaking. (E.)
ME. lispen, lipsen; Chaucer, C. T. 266 (Six-text, A 264, where 5 MSS.
have lipsed for lisped). AS. *wlispian, to lisp; in G-wlispian, in Napier’s
Additions. = AS. wlisp, imperfect in utterance, lisping, Voc. 8. 29;
also spelt wilips, Voc. 192. 11.-4-Du. lispen, to lisp; Dan. lespe, to
lisp; Swed. laspa; G. lispeln, to lisp, whisper. B. An imitative
word, similar to Whisper, q.v. Der. lisp, sb.; lisp-ing-ly.

LISSOM,, pliant, agile. (E.) A contr. form of Jithesome; from
E. lithe, with suffix -some. See Lithe.

LIST (1), astripe or border of cloth, selvage. (E.) ME. list, liste.
‘With a brode iste’ =with a broad strip of cloth; P. Plowman, b.
v. 524. AS. liste ;‘ Lembus, liste ;? Corp. Gloss., 1228. Teut. type
*list-jon-, f.4-Dnu. Jijst, list, a border; G. leiste, list, border; OHG.
lista, whence Ital. lista, F. liste, Der. list (2).

LIST (2), a catalogue. (F.—G.) In Shak. Hamlet, i. 1. 98,
i. 2. 32. —F,. liste, ‘a list, roll, catalogue ; also, a list, or selvage ;’
Cot. The older sense is the latter, viz. border; hence it came to
mean a strip, roll, list of names. —OHG. lista, G. leiste, a border ;
cognate with AS. liste, whence list, a border. See List (1).
@ Thus Zist (1) and list (2) are the same word, but the latter is
used in the F. sense. Der. list, verb, en-list.

LIST (3), gen. used.in the pl. Lists, q.v.

LIST (4), to choose, to desire, have pleasure in. (E.) In Shak.


343


LIST


1 Hen. VI, i. 5. 22. Often used as an impers. verb in older authors.
ME, listen, lusten ; ‘if thee Just’ or ‘if thee Jist’=if it pleases thee ;
Chaucer, C. T. 1185; cf. 1. 1054 (A 1183, 1052). AS. lystan, to
desire, used impersonally ; Grein, ii. 200. Formed (by regular vowel-
change from x to y) from AS. lust, pleasure; see Lust.+ Du. Justen,
to like; Icel. lysta, to desire ; Dan. lyste; Swed. Jysta; Goth. lustdn ;
G, geliisten, ‘Teut. type *lustjan-; from *lustuz, sb. Der. list, sb.,
Oth. ii, 1,105. And see Jist-less.

LIST (5), an inclination (of a ship) to one side. (E.) A variant
of lust, desire, inclination, which was formerly used in the same sense.
‘The ship at low water had a great Just to the offing ;’ T. James,
Voy. (1633), p. 82 (N. E. D.). ‘Lust of a ship;’ Phillips (1658);
prov. E. Just (E.D. D.). Cf. Dan. lyst, inclination, See List (4).

LIST (6), to listen. (E.) In Hamlet, i. 5,22. ME. listen, lusten.
‘ Listeth, lordes ;? Chaucer, Sir Thopas, 1.1. ‘And Just hu ich con
be bitelle;” Owl and Night., 263. AS. hlystan, Grein, ii. go.— AS.
lyst, hearing, the sense of hearing, id. Teut. type *hlustiz, Idg. type
*clustis 3 cf. Icel, hlust, the ear, W. clust, the ear; Skt. grustis, hearing,
obedience (Uhlenbeck). All from 4/KLEUS, extended form of
“4 KLEU, to hear, whence L. clu-ere, Gk, #Av-ev, Skt. gru, to hear.
See Loud.

LISTEN, to hearken, give ear. (E.) In Shak. Macb. iv. 1. 89 ;
ii, 2.29. We also find dist, as above. So we also find both ME.
Justnen ox listnen, and lusten or listen, 1. ¢ Or lysteneth to his reson,’
P. Plowman, B. xiv. 307; where the Trinity MS. has Jistneth, ed.
Wright, 1. 9534. Here dist(e)neth stands for the older Listneth, the e
being inserted for greater ease of pronunciation, and still retained in
mod, E. spelling, though seldom sounded. We further find the pt. t.
lustnede, Layamon, 26357; and the pp. Justned, id. 25128. ‘This
form lus(t)nen is derived from an AS. form *hlysnan (see below) by
an insertion of ¢, due to confusion with the closely allied List (5),
AS. hlystan, used in the same sense. The AS. *hlysnan is inferred
from O, North. lysna (for *hlysna) in Matt, xiii. 18; cf. AS. hlosnian,
to listen (Bosworth), Here lysna represents a Teut. type *hlusindjan-,
and hlosnian represents a Teut. type *hlusndjan; both from Teut.
*hlus-, weak grade of *hleus, to hear ; 4/KLEUS (above), Cf. Swed.
lyssna, to listen; EF ries, liistern, Westphal, lustern,

LISTLESS, careless, uninterested. (E.) The lit. sense is ‘ devoid
of desire.’ Not immediately derived from the verb to dist (see List
(4)), but put in place of the older form Justless. We find lyséles in
Prompt. Parv.. p. 307; but Justles in Gower, C. A. ii. 1113; bk, iv.
3262, Formed from Just with the suffix -less. See Inust and -less.
Cf, Icel. lystarlauss, having no appetite, from lyst=Josti, lust. Der.
Jist-less-ly, list-less-ness.

LISTS, the ground enclosed for a tournament, (E.) Scarcely
used in the singular, Used to translate OF. dices in the Rom. of the
Rose, 4199; and much affected by the influence of that word. ME.
listes, pl. sb., the lists, Chaucer, C. T. 63, 1864. Teally the pl. of
E, list, a stripe, border, which took up the further sense of limit or
boundary; as in Eng. Gilds (E. E. T.S.), p.44: ‘Any brother or
sister that duellen wyt[h]outen the Zystys of thre myle fro the cyte.’
See therefore List (1). B. Note also OF. disse, lice (mod. F. lice),
“a list or tiltyard;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. liccia, a barrier, palisade, list ;
Span. liza, a list for tilting; Port, liga, ligada, list, enclosed ground
in which combats are fought : whence Low Lat. licia, s. pl., barriers,
palisades ; licie duelli, the lists. Natzfeld thinks this OF. lice may
be derived from a Romanic type *Jistea, formed from OHG, Jista (G.
leiste), a border. If so, it is closely related to E. list (1); and this
explains the way in which the two were so readily confused.

LITANY, a form of prayer. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. letanie, Ancren
Riwle, p. 20, 1. 4; altered to litanie, litany, to bring it nearer to the
L. spelling.—OF. Jetanie, a litany; so spelt in the 13th century
(Littré); mod. F, litanie. — L. litania. = Gk, Avraveia, a prayer. — Gk.
Airaiverv, to pray. Gk. Avravds, a suppliant; from Acry, supplica-
tion, prayer, allied to Alropa, Aicoopa, I pray, beg, beseech.

LITERAL, according to the letter. (F.—L.) ‘It hath but one
simple Jitterall sense;’? Tyndal, Works, p. 1, col. 2.—OF. literal,
MF. litéral, ‘ literall ;’ Cot.—L. litterdlis, literal. = L. littera, a letter ;
see Letter, Der. Jiteral-ly, -ness; also liter-ar-y, Englished from
L, litteradrius, belonging to learning ; and see Literature,

LITERATUR, the science of letters, literary productions.
(F.—L.) In Wyntoun, Chron. v. 3633.—MF. literature, ‘literature,
learning ;’? Cot.—L., litteratiira, scholarship; allied to the pp. form
litteraitus, learned. —L. littera, a letter; see Letter. Der. literate,
from L, litterdtus; literatur-ed, Hen. V, iv. 7. 157.

LITHARGE, protoxide of lead. (F.—L.—Gk.) Lit. ‘ stone-
silver.’ ME, litarge, Chaucer, C. T. 631, 16243 (A 629, G 775).—
OF. litarge, F. litharge, ‘litargie, white lead ;? Cot.—L. lithargyrus.
= Gk. AOdpyupos, litharge.— Gk. Av8-, base of AlPos, a stone (root
unknown) ; and dpyupos, silver (see Argent).

LITHE,, pliant, flexible, active. (E.) ME. lithe, Chaucer, Ho. of


344


LIVE .


Fame, i. 118. AS. iSe (for *linde), gentle, soft; Grein, ii. 1835
178, gentle, id. 182.44G. ge-lind, ge-linde, OHG. lindi, soft, tender.
Teut. type *Jinthjoz. B. Shorter forms appear in Icel. Jinr, soft, L.
lénis, gentle, Jen-tus, pliant; see aenient. Der. lithe-ness; lissom
=lithe-some. And see lenity, lentisk, re-lent.

LITHER, foul, pestilential, of the air. (E.) ‘Two Talbots
winged through the Jither skie;’ 1 Hen. VI, iv. 7. 21. Also ex-
plained as ‘yielding,’ owing to the influence of, dithe, which is un-
connected ; but see ‘luther eir’ in °P. Plowman, C, xvi. 220. ME.
lither, luther; AS. lydre, evil, poor, bad (hence, dull). See Stratmann
and E.D.D. Cf. G. liederlich, vicious.

LITHOGRAPHY, writing on stone. (Gk.) Modern. Coined
from Gk. Aido-, decl. stem of Aidos, a stone; and ypdadew, to write.
Der. lithograph-er, lithograph-ic; lithograph. A\so lith-ia, lith-ium.

LITHOTOMY, the operation of cutting for stone. (L.—Gk.)
Englished from Late L. lithotomia, the form given in Kersey’s Dict.,
ed, 1715.— Gk, Ai@oropia.— Gk. Aido-, decl. stem of Aios, a stone ;
and rop-, 2nd grade of rey-, base of réuvew, to cut; see Tome.
Der. lithotom-ist.

LITIGATION, a contest in-law. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed,
1674. Formed, by analogy with F. words in -ion, from Late L.
litigdtio, a disputing. —L. litigadre, to dispute.—L. Ji-, stem of lis,
strife, law-suit ; and -ig-, weakened form of ag-ere, to drive, conduct
(see Agent). B. The L. is was in OL. stlis (Festus). Der. liti-
gate, a late verb, really due to the sb.; litigant =L. litigant-, stem of
pres. pt. of litigdre; also litigious, q. v.

LITIGIOUS, contentious. (F.—L.) In old authors it also
means ‘ debatable’ or doubtful; see Trench, Select Glossary. Liti-
gious = precarious ; Shak, Pericles, iii. 3. 3.—F. litigieux, ‘ litigious,
debatefull ;’ Cot.—L. litigidsus, (1) contentious, (2) doubtful, —L.
litigium, strife; cf. litigare, to dispute; see Litigation. Der.
litigious-ly, litigious-ness,

LITMUS, a kind of dye. (Du.) Spelt litmose-blew in Phillips,
ed. 1706. It appears.in AF. as lytemoise, Liber Albus, p. 238, Put
for Jakmose ; prob, by association with the old E. word Jit, to dye. =
Du, Jakmoes, a blue dye-stuff (Sewel).— Du, Jak, lac; and moes, pulp,
Hence also G. Jackmuss, litmus. See Lac.

LITRE, a unit of capacity in the metric system. (F.— Late L.—
Gk.) It contains about 13 pints. —F. litre (1793). — Late L. litra. =
Gk. Aizpa, a pound. See Librate, Lira.

LITTER (1), a portable bed. (F.—L.) ME. litere, Cursor
Mundi, 13817; Wyclif, Isa. lxvi. 20. Spelt lyter in Caxton, Rey-
nard the Fox, ed. Arber, p. 61, 1. 1.— AF. littere, Livere de Reis, 86 ;
OF, litiere (F, litiére), ‘a horse-litter;’ Cot.—Late L. lectaria, a
litter. L. lectus, a bed. Cf. Gk. Aéxrpov, a bed, A€xos, a couch, —
L. and Gk. base LEGH, to lie; see Lie (1). Allied to Lectern.

LITTER (2), materials for a bed, a heap of straw for animals
to lie on,.a confused mass of objects scattered about ; &c. (F.—L.)
Really the same word as the above; with allusion to beds of straw
for animals, and hence a confused heap, Thus Cotgrave has:
‘ Litiere, a horse-litter, also litter for cattell, also old dung or manure.’
See Litter (1). B. Hence also Jitter in the sense of ‘a brood;’ see
the various senses of lyfere in Prompt. Pary.; and cf. F. accoucher,
and E. ‘to be in the straw.’ And see Wright, Vocab. p. 156. Der,
litter, verb, Temp. i. 2. 282.

LITTLE, small. (E.) ME. Jitel, lutel (with one 4); Chaucer,
C. T. 492 (A 490); Havelok, 481; Layamon, 9124. AS. lytel,
Tytel, Grein, ii. 201.4-OSax. luttil; Du. luttel, little, few; MHG.
liitzel; OHG. luzzil; Teut. type *Juttiloz. B. All from a base
LEUT, to deceive, in connexion with which we also find AS. lytig,
deceitful, Aflfric’s Colloquy, in Voc. 1or. 2; also AS. lot, deceit,
Grein, i. 194; and the Goth. Jiuts, deceitful, Jiuta, dissembler, luton,
to betray. y. Further, the Teut. base LEUT meant orig. to stoop,
to bow down (hence to creep, or sneak), as in AS. litan, to stoop,
‘lout,’ incline to; see Lout. Der. litile-ness. ta It is remarkable
that the Icel. Jitill, Swed. liten, Goth. Jeitils, little, are unrelated ;
being from a base *Jeit. The forms less, least, are from a different
source. But see Loiter.

LITTORAL, belonging to the sea-shore. (L.) Spelt dittoral in
Kersey; Jitoral in Blount, ed. 1674, Mere Latin. —L. Jittordlis,
better Jitoralis, belonging to the sea-shore. = L. ditor-, for *Jitos, stem
of litus, the sea-shore.

LITURGY, public worship, established form of prayer. (F.—
Late L.—Gk.) Spelt Jitturgie in Minsheu, ed. 1627.— MF. lyturgie,
‘a liturgy, or form of service;’? Cot.=—L. liturgia.— Gk. Acroupyia,
public service. Gk. Aecroupyds, performing public service or duties.
— Gk. Ac?ro-, for A€fros, public ; and épyov, work, cognate with E,
Work, f. Aciros, Aéiros, Adiros, public, is derived from Aads, Aews,
the people; whence E. Laic, Laity. Der. liturgi-c, liturgi-c-al,
litur g-tst.

LIVE (1), to continue in life, exist, dwell. (E.) ME, linen, liuen


LIVE


(with « for v); Chaucer, C. T. 508 (A 506); Havelok, 355. AS.
lifian; Grein, ii. 185 ; also libban, id. 179; where bd stands for fi.
Du. leven ; also used as sb., with sense of ‘life;’ Icel. lifa, to be
left, to remain behind, also to live; Dan. leve; Swed. lefva; Goth.
liban ; G. leben, to live (whence leben, sb. life), MHG. leben, lepen, to
live (also spelt libjan, lipjan); allied to b-leiben, MHG. beliben, OHG.
beliban, to remain, be left. From Teut. stem *Jib-, weak grade of
*leib-. to remain. B. The sense of ‘live’ is unoriginal; the older
sense is to remain, to be left behind. See further under Life.
Der. liv-er, liv-ing ; and see live (2).

LIVE (2), adj. alive, having life, active, burning. (E.) ‘Upon
the next Jive creature that it sees;’? Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1.172, The
use of this adj. is really due to an attributive use of live, aphetic
form of alive, which is not a true adj., but a phrase consisting of
a prep. and a dat. case; see Alive. B. The use as an adj. arose
the more easily owing to the currency of the words live-ly and Jiv-ish,
The former is still in use, but the latter is obsolete; it occurs as
lifissh in Gower, C. A. iii. 93; bk. vii. 257. Der. live-stock.

LIVELIHOOD, means of subsistence. (E.) a. Cotgrave
translates F. patrimoine by ‘ patrimony, birthright, inheritance, Jiveli-
hood” And Drayton speaks of a man ‘Of so fair livelihood, and so
large rent;’» The Owl. The metre shows that the word was then,
as now, trisyllabic. B..But it is a singular corruption of the ME.
livelode, liuelode, i.e. life-leading, means of living; due to confusion
with livelihood in the sense of ‘ liveliness,’ as used (quite correctly) in
Shak, Venus, 26; All’s Well, i. 1. 58. y..Again livelode is better
spelt liflode, as in P. Plowman, B. prol. 30. Cf. ‘Lyflode, liyflode,
fyuelode, or warysome, Donativum;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 308; indeed,
we find livelode as late as in Levins, ed. 1570. An older spelling is
in St. Marharete, ed. Cockayne, p. 20, 1. 16, where we find Jiffade,
meaning ‘ way of life,’ lit. leading of life. 8. Late AS. liflad, course
of life; Rule of St. Bennet, ed. Schréer, c. 1; p. 13, 1. 24. Com-
pounded of AS. Jif, life; and AS. lad, a leading, way, also provisions
to live by, Grein, ii. 150. Another sense of AS. Jad is a course, as
preserved in mod. E. lode. See Life and Lode.

LIVELONG, long-lasting, long as it is. (E.) ‘The livelong
night ;’? Macb. ii. 3.65. Orig. lief-long, i.e. ‘dear long ;’ but altered
to live-long at the end of the 16th cent., where Jive represents the
verb to live, the i being short. Sometimes understood as Jive-long
(with long 7) as if connected with life. Really from Lief and
Long. f. Cf. ‘Alle the lefe longe daye;’ Sowdan of Babylon,
1. 832; ‘Al that Jeve longe nyht;’ H. Lovelich, The Holy Grail,
CU XKKIX. LTO. ;

LIVELY, vigorous, active. (E.) A corruption of lifely. ‘Lyvely,
liyfly, or qwyk, or fulle of lyyf, Vivax;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 308.
Chaucer uses /y/fy in the sense of ‘in a life-like manner,’ C. T., A 2087.
AS. liflic. Compounded of Life and Like. Der. liveli-ness, in
Holinshed, Conquest of Ireland, c. 9 (R.). Cf. lively, adv., in a life-
like manner, Two Gent. iv. 4. 174; Chaucer (as above).

LIVER, an organ of the body, secreting bile. (E.) ME. liver
{with u=v); Chaucer, C. T. 7421 (D 1839). AS. lifer, Grein, ii.
184.4Du. lever; Icel. lifr; Dan. lever; Swed. lefver; G. leber,
MHG. lebere, OHG. lepara, lipara, Cf. Russ. liver’, the pluck (of
animals) ; (from Teut.) Teut. type *Jidra, f.; cognate with Armenian
Jeard, liver; but not with L. iecur. Brugmann, i. §§ 280, 557 (2).
Der. liver-coloured ; also liver-wort, Prompt. Parv. p. 309.

LIVERY, a thing delivered, as e. g. a uniform worn by servants ;
a delivery. (F.—L.) ME. diweré (with u for v, and trisyllabic),
Chaucer, C. T., A 363.— AF. liveré (Britton); F. livrée; ‘a delivery
of a thing that’s given, the thing so given, hence, a livery;’ Cot.
Properly the fem, of the pp. of livrer, to deliver, give. Cf. Ital.
liberare, to deliver. = Late L. liberare, to give, give freely ; a particular
use of L. libertre, to set free; see Liberate. Der. livery-man ;
livery-stable, a stable where horses are kept at livery, i.e. at a certain
rate or on a certain allowance; liveri-ed. t= The word is fully
explained in Spenser, View of the State of Ireland, Globe ed., p. 623,
col. 2; and Prompt. Pary. p. 308.

LIVID, black and blue, discoloured. (F.—L.) ‘Purple or livid
spots;’ Bacon, Life of Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 12, 1. 31.—F. livide
(Cot.) —L. diwidus, leaden-coloured, bluish. L. liuére, to be bluish.
Cf. W. lliw, Olrish li, colour, hue. Brugmann,i. § 94. Der. lividness.

LIZARD, a kind of four-footed reptile. (F.—L.) . ME. lesarde,
Prompt. Parv. p. 298; Jusarde, P. Plowman, B. xviii. 335.—OF.
lesard, m., lesarde, f., a lizard;’ Cot.—L. lacerta, a lizard; also
lacertus. Root unknown. Cf. Alligator,

LLAMA, a Peruvian quadruped. (Peruvian.) See Prescott, Con-
quest of Peru, c.v. ‘Llama, according to Garcilasso de la Vega, is
a Peruvian word signifying flock; see Garcilasso, Com. Real. parte i.
lib. viii. c. xvi;’ note in Prescott, But the Peruy. Dict. gives ‘llama,
camero de la tierra,’ i.e. sheep of the country. Cf. ‘Llamas, or
sheepe of Peru;’ Hakluyt, Voy. iii. 735.


LOBBY 345


LLANO, a treeless plain in S. America. (Span.—L.) Usually in
the pl. W/anos ; spelt Janos in E. G., tr. of Acosta, b. iii. c. 20. —Span.
Ilano (pl. llanos), a plain.—Span..Jlano, plain, flat.—L. planus, flat.
See Plain.

LO, interj. see, behold. (E.) ME. Jo, Chaucer, C. T. 3019 (A 3017).
AS. 14, lo! Grein, ii. 148. B. Lo is gen. considered as equivalent to
look; and we actually find a ME. Jo (with close 0), prob. from J0-,
short for AS. Jdca, look thon! But this would have become Joo in
modern E., and is obsolete; though it may have affected the sense
of the surviving form. The AS. Ja is a natural interjection, to call
attention. Cf. Gk. ddAady, a loud cry, dAadd (ev, to utter a war-cry,
L. la-trare, to bark; &c.

LOACH, LOCHE, a small river-fish. (F.) ME. loche ; Prompt.
Pary. p. 310. Also lochefissh, Stat. of the Realm, i. 355 (1357).—F.
loche, ‘the loach;’ Cot. Cf. Norm. dial. logue, a loach, a slug
(Moisy); Ital. locca, locchia, ‘a cob, or gudgeon-fish;’ Florio. Of
unknown origin.

LOAD, a quantity carried, a burden. (E.) Most probably this
word has been extended in meaning by confusion with the unrelated
verb to Jade. Load iscommon in Shakespeare both as a sb. and verb,
but in ME. it is a sb. only, and is identical with Lode, q.v., not-
withstanding the difference in sense. The AS. lad means only way,
course, journey; but ME. lode has also the sense of ‘burden.’ An
early example of this is ‘hors and /ode,’ Ancren Riwle, p. 268; cf.
also carte-lode, a cart-load, in Havelok, 1. 895. It should be par-
ticularly noticed, however, that the derived verb Zo Jead is constantly
used in prov. E. in the sense ‘to carry corn ;’ and, in the Prompt.
Paryv. p. 62, we find: ‘Cartyn, or lede wythe a carte, Carruco.’
Chaucer has y-lad=carried, Prologue, 530. ‘Se geneat sceal...
lade ledan,’ the tenant shall carry loads;’ Birch, Cart. Saxon. iii.
102. Hence load=ME. lode= AS. lad, a derivative from the 2nd
grade of the verb Jidan, to go, travel. See Lode, Lead (1). Der.
load, vb.

LOAD-STAR, LOAD-STONE, the same as Lode-star,
Lode-stone.

LOAF, a mass of bread; also of sugar. (E.) ME. lof, loof ‘A
pese-lof’=a loaf made of peas; P. Plowman, B. vi. 181; pl. looues
(=loves), Wyclif, Matt. iv. 3. AS. hla, a loaf; Grein, ii. 79.4Icel.
hleifr; Goth. klaifs; G.laib, MHG.leip. Cf. also Lithuanian klépas,
Lettish klaipas, bread; Russ. khlieb’, bread; prob. borrowed from
Teutonic. B. Perhaps named from its ‘rising,’ when leavened ; cf.
AS, Alifian, to rise high; NFries. lif, a loaf; MSwed. Jef (Ihre).
Der. loaf-sugar; lady, lord, lammas.

LOAM, a mixed soil of clay, sand, &c. (E.) ME. Jam, dat. lame;
Cursor Mundi, 11985; where one MS. has cley (clay). AS. lam;
Grein, ii. 153; Du. leem; G. lehm, OHG. leim. B. Teut. types
*laimo-, *laimon- ; from the base *Jai-, 2nd grade of */ei- (> *li-), as
in lim, lime, to. which Joam is closely allied. See Lime (1). Also
akin to Icel. leir, loam (Teut. type *Jai-zom). Der. loam-y, ME.
lami, Hali Meidenhad, ed. Cockayne, p. 47, 1. 28.

LOAN, a lending, money lent. (Scand.) ME. Jone, Chaucer,
C.T. 7443 (D 1861); P. Plowman, B. xx. 284. This corresponds to
an AS. lan, but we only find Jéx, Grein, ii. 163; A®lfric’s Homilies,
ii. 176, last line. We once find /az-land for l@n-land, Kemble, Cod,
Dipl. iii. 165; from Norse.—Icel, Jax, a loan; Dan. laan, a loan;
Swed. Jadu. Cognate with AS. /é@nx, a loan (whence E. lend, q.v.) ;
Du. een; G. lehn, B. These words answer to Teut. types *Jathwniz,
*laihwnoz, n.; from *laihw-, 2nd grade of the verb appearing in Goth.,
lethwan, to lend (Luke, vi. 34), AS. léon, for likan, to lend, give
(Grein, ii, 187), Icel. jz, to lend, G. leihen, OHG. lihan. y. The
Teut. base *l/eihw answers to Idg. 4/LEIQ, whence the L. linguere
(pt. t. ligu-i), to leave; which is closely related to Gk. Aetrew, Skt.
rich, to leave ; Olrish Jec-im, I leave. @ Quite distinct from AS,
léan, Icel. Zaun, G. lohn, a reward; see Lucre., Der. len-d, q.v.

LOATH, disliking, reluctant, unwilling. (E.) ME, loth (opposed
to leef, dear, willing), Chaucer, C. T. 1839 (A 1837); Havelok,
261. AS. lad, hateful (very common), Grein, ii. 150.4Icel. le7dr,
loathed, disliked; Dan. Jed, loathsome ; Swed. Jed, odious; OHG.
leit, odious; orig. mournful. f. All from a Teut. type */aithoz,
mournful, in which -¢hoz is prob. a suffix. Allied to G. leiden, to
suffer; but prob. not to AS, Jidan, to travel (pt. t. 140), as usually
said (Kluge). Der. loath-ly=AS. lddlic, Grein, ii. 151; loathe, verb
= AS. ladian, AElfric’s Hom. ii. 506, 1, 24; loath-ing, sb., ME. lothynge,
Prompt. Pary. p. 316; loath-some, ME. lothsum, Prompt. Parv. p. 314,
spelt laithsum, Cursor Mundi, 23229 (Gott. MS.), where the suffix
-some = AS, -sum as in win-some; also loath-some-ness.

LOBBY, a small hall, waiting-room, passage. (Low L.—G.)
In Hamlet, ii. 2. 161, iv. 3. 39. Becon (1553) has: ‘ Our recluses
neuer come out of their Jobbeis ;? Reliques of Rome, 53. [Hence we
may suppose that it was a monastic term, and was taken up into E.
directly from the Low L.]=—Low L., lobia, a portico, gallery, covered


346 LOBE


way, Ducange ; also spelt lobium. Also laubia; as if from a Tent.
type *laubjd.—MHG. loube, an arbour, a bower, also an open way
up to the upper story of a house. The latter sense will be at once
intelligible to any one who has seen a Swiss chalet ; and we can thus
see also how it easily passed into the sense of a gallery to lounge or
wait in. The same word as mod. G. laube, a bower. So called from
being formed orig. with branches and foliage.—MHG. loub, lop,
OHG. laup, mod. G. laub, a leaf; cognate with E. Leaf, q.v.
Doublet, lodge.

LOBKH, the flap or lower part of the ear, a division of the lungs
or brain. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) In Cotgrave.—F. Jobe, ‘the lap or
lowest part of the ear, also a Jobe or lappet of the liver;” Cot. — Late
L. lobum, acc. of lobus, not given in Ducange, but it may (I suppose)
be found in old works on medicine as a transliteration of the Gk.
word; Cooper’s Thesaurus (1565) has Jobos.— Gk. AoBds,.a lobe of
the ear or liver; allied to L. legula, the lobe of the ear, Brugmann,
i. § 667. Der. lob-ate, mod. and scientific ; lob-ed. :

LOBELIA, a genus of herbaceous plants. (Personalname.) First
in 1739; but named after Matthias de Lobel (1538-1616), botanist
and physician to James I. (N.E. D.)

LOBSTER, a kind of crustacean. (L.) ME. lopstere, loppester,
loppister. ‘A loppyster or a crabbe;’ Voc. 624.12; ‘ Hic polupus,
lopstere;’ id. 642. 22. AS. loppestre; Voc. 181. 2; a corruption of
an earlier form Jopust; Voc. 30. 36. B. The word had no sense in
AS., lopust being a mere corruption of L. Jocusta, meaning (1) lobster,
(2) locust; see Locust. Hence the entry: ‘ Locusta, lopust;’ in
Voc. 30. 36.

LOCAL, belonging to a place. (F.—L.) Spelt Jocald in Frith,
Works, p. 139, last line.—F. local, ‘locall;’ Cot.—L. locdlis,
local. = L. locus, a place; see Locus. Der. local-ly, local-ise, local-
is-at-ion, local-i-ty, Blount’s Gloss., ed. 16743 also loc-ate, q. v.

LOCATE, to place. (L.) A late word, added by Todd to
Johnson’s Dict. = L. locdtus, pp. of locdre,to place. = L. locus,
a place; see Local. Der. Jocat-ion, in Cockeram, ed. 1623;
locat-ive.

LOCH, a lake. (Gaelic.) - In place-names, as Loch Lomond, Loch
Ness. — Gael. and Irish loch, a lake, arm of the sea; cf. Corn. lagen;
Bret. laguenn, lagen.4-L. lacus; see Lake. Doublets, lake, lough.

LOCK (1), a contrivance for fastening doors, an enclosure in
acanal; &c. (E.) ME. Joke, Prompt. Parv. p. 311; pl. Joken, also
Jocun, lokes, Layamon, 5926. AS. loca, pl. locan; Grein, ii. 191;
allied to loc, a hole.+-Icel. Joka, a lock, latch; Jok, a cover, lid of
a chest ; Swed. Jock, a lid; cf. G. Jock, a dungeon, hole; orig. a locked-
up place. B. All from Teut. */uk-, weaker grade of the strong verb
*lukan-, to lock, enclose, appearing in the AS. strong verb liican, to
enclose, Grein, ii. 194; also in Icel. Jiika, to shut, finish (strong
verb); MHG. lichen, to shut; Goth. galiikan, to shut, shut up.
Der. lock, vetb, ME. lokken, locken, Chaucer, C. T. 5899, D 3173
(observe that this verb is a secondary formation from the sb., and
not to be confused with the old strong verb luken, louken = AS. liican,
now obsolete, of which the pp. loken occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 14881,
B 4065); also Jock-er, a closed place that locks = ME. lokere, Prompt.
Parv. p. 311, answering to OFlemish loker, a chest (Kilian) ; also
lock-jaw, for locked-jaw ; lock-keeper; lock-smith; lock-up. And see
lock-et.

LOCK (2), a tuft of hair, flock of wool. (E.) ME. lok; pl.
lokkes, lockes, Chaucer, C. T. 81. AS. locc, Joc, Grein, ii. 191; pl.
loccas.4-Du. lok, a lock, tress, curl; Icel. Jokkr ; Dan. lok; Swed.
lock ; OHG. loch, G. locke. B. The form of the Teut. type is *Jukkoz,
m.; Idg. type */ugnos; from a Teut. base *Juk, weak grade of Teut.
*leuk, Idg. LEUG; whence also Icel. lykkr, a loop, bend, crook.
From the same root are Gk. Avyos, a pliant twig, withy; Avyicerv,
to bend; Lith. Jxgnas, pliable.

LOCKET, a little gold case worn as an ornament. (F.—Scand.)
ME. loket, Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 154. The old sense is a
small lock, something that fastens. ‘With wooden lockets *bout
their wrists,’ with reference to the pillory; Butler, Hudibras, pt. ii.
c. I. 1]. 808.—_F. Joguet, ‘the latch of a door;’ Cot. Cf. Guernsey
dial. loguet, cadenas.’ Dimin. of OF. loc, a lock; Godefroy. Bor-
rowed from Icel. Joka, a lock, latch; see hock (1).

LOCKRAM, a cheap kind of linen. (F.—Breton.) In Shak.
Cor. ii. 1. 225; see Nares and Halliwell. ‘A lockerom kercher ;’
Bury Wills, ed. Tymms (Camd. Soc.), p, 147 (1556).—F. locrenan,
the name given to a sort of unbleached linen; named from the place
in Brittany where it is manufactured ; Dict. de Trévoux.—F. Loc-
renan, also called S. Renan, the name of a place in Basse Bretagne,
a few miles N. by W. from Quimper.— Bret. Lok-ronan, the Bret.
name for the same place.. The sense of the name is ‘St. Ronan’s
cell; ’ from Bret. 6k, a cell, and Ronan, St. Ronan; see Legonidec’s
Bret. Dict., where this very name is cited as an instance of the use of
Lok- as a prefix in place-names. @ Cf. dowlas, similarly named ;


LOG
‘dowlas and lockeram’ are mentioned in 1529; Act 21 Hen. 8.


14s

LOCOMOTION, motion from place to place. (L.) ‘Pro-
gression or animal locomotion ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii.
c.I,§ 2. Coined from L. Jocé, abl. of locus, a place; and motion. See
Locus and Motion. Der. Jocomot-ive, adj., Kersey’s Dict., ed.
1715; hence locomotive, sb. =locomotive engine, the first of which
was used A.D. 1814, Haydn, Dict. of Dates.

LOCUS, a place. (L.) ‘Locus, a place, room, or stead ;’
Phillips, ed. 1706. He also gives instances of its technical use in
astronomy and philosophy. L. Zocus, a place; a later form of OL.
stlocus, a place. Prob, allied to Skt. sthala-m, firm ground, also,
a place. Brugmann, i. § 585. Cf. G. stelle, a place. See Stall.
Der. Joc-al, q.v., loc-ate, al-locate, allow.(1), col-locate, dis-locate, lieu,
lieu-tenant, loco-motive; also couch.

LOCUST, a winged insect. (L.) In Kersey, ed. 1715, it also
means ‘a fish like a lobster, called a long-oister;’ see Lobster.
ME. Jocust, Cursor Mundi, 6041; Wyclif, Rev. ix. 3.—L. locusta,
a shell-fish ; also a locust. Doublet, lobster, q.v.

LODHE, a vein of ore. (E.) In Halliwell. Also spelt load, as in
Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, p. 10 (R,). An old mining term. The
lit. sense is ‘course.’ AS, lad, a way, course, journey; oz Jade=in
the way, Beowulf, ed. Grein, 1. 1987. Teut. type *laida, f.; closely
allied to *laidjan-, to lead; see Lead (1).+4Icel. /eid, a lode, way,
course; Dan. Jed, a gate; Swed. led, a way, course. Der. lode-star,
lode-stone; also lead (1).

LODESTAR, LOADSTAR, the pole-star. (E.) ‘Lit. ‘ way-
star;’ i.e. the star that shows the way, or that leads. ME. lode-
sterre, Chaucer, C. T, 2061 (A 2059). Compounded of Jode, a way,
course; and star. See Lode and Star.+Icel. leiar-stjarna ; from
leidar, for leid, a way, and stjarna, a star; Swed. led-stjerna; G. leit-
stern.

LODESTONE, LOADSTONE, an ore that attracts pieces
of iron. (E.) ‘For-lyke as the Jodestone draweth unto it yron;’
Udall, on S. Mark, c.°5, v. 21. And see Robinson’s tr. of More’s
Utopia (1556), ed. Arber, p. 32. Spelt Jodestone, Joadstone, in
Minsheu,-ed. 1627. Compoumded of lode and stone, similarly to
lodestar ; see above.+Icel. leidarsteinn ; from leidar, for leid, a lode ;
and steinn, stone.

LODGE, a small house, cottage, cell, place to rest in. (F.— Low
L.—G.) ME. loge, logge; Chaucer, C. T. 14859 (D 4043); Seven
Sages, ed. Weber, 2603.—OF. loge, ‘a lodge, cote, shed, small
house 3’ Cot. (Cf. Ital. Joggia, a gallery, a lodge. ]—Low L. laubia,
a porch; cf. /obia, a gallery. ‘We find in an act of A.D. go4, ‘In
palatio quod est fundatum juxta basilica beatissimi principis aposto-
lorum, in Jaubia ... ipsius palatii;”’ Brachet (see Ducange).—Teut.
type *laubja; cf. OHG. louba (MHG. loube, G. laube), an arbour,
a hut of leaves and branches.mOHG. laup (MHG. loub, G. laub),
a leaf; cognate with E. Leaf, q.v. Der. Jodge, verb, ME. loggen,
Chaucer, C. T. 14997 (B 4181), Ancren Riwle, p. 264; from OF.
loger, ‘to lodge, lie, sojourne’ (Cot.); lodg-ing=ME. logging,
Chaucer, C. T. 15001 (B 4185); lodg-er; lodg-ment, in Kersey, ed.
1715. Doublet, lobby, q.v.

LOFT, a room in a roof, attic, upper room. (Scand.) See Bible
Word-book. ME. Joft, Gawain and the Grene Knight, ed. Morris,
1, 1096. The proper sense of loft, is ‘air,’ as in Aloft, q.v. The
peculiar sense is Scand. = Icel. /opt (pron. Joft), meaning (1) air, sky,
(2) an upper room, balcony; cf. the proy. E. sky-parlour as applied
to an attic; Dan. loft, a loft, cock-loft ; Swed. Joff, a garret.-AS.
lyft, air, sky, Grein, ii. 198; whence ME. Jit, sky, P. Plowman, B.
xv. 3513 Goth. luftus, the air; Du. lucht [for lift], air, sky; G. luft,
the air. Root unknown. Der. Joft-y, Shak. Lucrece, 1167, Rich. II,
lii. 4. 353 Joft-i-ly; loft-i-ness, Isa. ii. 173 also lift, q.v.; a-loft, q.v.

LOG (1), a block, piece of wood. (E.) ‘A long log of timbre ;’
Sir T. More, Works, p. 54g. ‘ Logges, buches;’ Du Wes, Sup. to
Palsgrave, p. 914, col. 1. ME. logge (1398). An obscure word;
perhaps allied to prov. E. lug, ME. lugge, a long stick, a pole. The
prov. E. Jug also means a tree-trunk. Cf, E. clog. Der. log-cabin,
log-hut ; log-man, Temp. iii. 1. 67 ; logg-et, a small log (with dimin.
suffix -et, of F. origin), Ben Jonson, Tale of a Tub, A. iv. sc. 5, Puppy’s
5th speech ; Jog g-ats, another spelling of Jogg-ets, the name of a game,
Hamlet, v. 1. 100; Jog-qwood, so called because imported in logs, for
which reason it was also called b/ock-wood, as appears from Kersey’s


Dict. and the Stat. 23 Eliz. c. 9, cited in Wedgwood; also Jog (2), ©


q.v. 3 logger-head, q. v. 3

LOG (2), a piece of wood with a line, for measuring the rate of
a ship. (E.) In Kersey, ed. 1715. ‘The same as Log (1). But
Swed. dogg, a log (as a sea-term), whence Jog-lina, log-line, log-bok,
log-book, logga, to heave the log (Widegren), Dan. Jog, Jog-line, log-
bog’, logge, Du. log, log-lijn, log-boek, loggen, do not seem to be old
words, and were prob. taken from E. Der. /og-board, -book, -line,-reel.


LOG


LOG (3), a Hebrew liquid measure. (Heb.) The twelfth part of
a hin. In Levit. xiy. 10. Heb. log, a word which orig. signified ‘a
basin ;” Smith, Dict. of the Bible. °
‘LOGARITHM, the exponent of the power to which a given
number or base must be raised in order to produce another given
number. (Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674; and in Ben Jonson,
Magnetic Lady, .A. i. sc. 1 (Compass). Logarithms were invented
by Napier, who published his work in 1614; Haydn. Coined from
Gk. Aoy-, stem of Adyos, a word, a proportion; and dpiOpds, a
number; the sense being ‘ratio-number.’? See Logic and Arith-
metic. Der. logarithm-ic, -ic-al, -ic-al-ly.

LOGGER-HEAD, a dunce; a piece of round timber (in a
whale-boat) round which a line is passed to make it run more slowly.
(E.) In Shak. it means a blockhead; L. L. L. iv. 3. 204. The
word evidently means much the same as Jog-head and is a similar
formation to block-head; the difficulty is to account for the syllable
-er. However, the prov. E. logger means a clog fastened to a horse’s
leg, to hamper its movements. See Log (1) and Head.

LOGIC, the science of reasoning correctly. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
logike, Chaucer, C. T, 288 (A 286).—OF. logique, ‘ logick;’ Cot.—
L. logica (=ars logica), logic; properly fem. of Jogicus, logical. =
Gk. Aoy:en (=Aoyixn TéExVN), logic; properly fem. of Aoyeds, belong-
ing to speaking, reasonable.mGk. Adyos, a speech. = Gk. Aéyew, to
collect, gather, select, tell, speak.4L. legere, to collect, select, read ;
see Legend. Der. logic-al, logic-al-ly, logic-i-an (Levins). Also
(from Gk. Aoytorys, a calculator, Aoyorids, skilled in calculating),
logistic, logistic-al. Also logo-machy, a strife about words = Gk. Aoyo-
paxia, 1 Tim. vi. 4, from Gk. Adyo-, for Aoyds, and paxopat, I fight
or contend. From the same Gk. source we have numerous words,
as ana-logue, apo-logue, cata-logue, deca-logue, dia-logue, ec-logue, epi-
logue, mono-logue, pro-logue; also syl-log-ism; also log-arithm; also
ana-logy, apo-logy, etymo-logy, eu-logy; also all scientific terms in
-logy, such as bio-logy, concho-logy, &c. And (from Aéyev), dia-lect,
ec-lectic, lex-icon.

LOIN, part of an animal just above the hip-bone. (F.—L.) ME.
loine, loyne; Prompt. Pary. p. 312; Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 191,
in a song written temp. Edw. II. = OF. loigne, logne (Godetroy), also
longe, ‘the loyne or flank ;’ Cot. —Late L. */umbea (not found), fem.
of an adj. */umbeus, formed from L. Jumbus, the loin. @ We may
note that the AS. lendenz, pl. sb., the loins, is cognate with the L.
word; hence came ME, Jendis, leendis, the loins, in Wyclif, Matt. iii.
4, &c. See Lumbar.

LOITER, to delay, linger. (Du.) ‘Zoyter and goe a-begging ;’
Tyndall’s Works, p. 217, col. 1; see Trench, Select Glossary, where
the orig. bad sense of the word is noted; and see Palsgrave. ME.
loitren. -‘Loytron, or byn ydyl, Ocior ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 311.—Du.
(and MDu.) Jeuteren, to linger, loiter, trifle, waver ; also MDu, loteren,
to delay, linger, act negligently, deceive, waver, vacillate (Kilian,
Oudemans) ; cf. MFlemish /utsex, with the same senses (Kilian) ;
WFlem. lutteren, to totter (De Bo) ; Norw. lutra, to loiter. Perhaps
allied to Lout. Der. loiter-er.

LOLL, to lounge about lazily. (E.) . ME. Jollex; ‘And wel
loseliche Jolleth there’ = and very idly he lounges there; P. Plowman,
B. xii. 213. ‘He that Jolleth is lame, other his leg out of ioynte,
Other meymed in som membre’ = he who lounges is lame, or his leg
is out of joint, or he is maimed in some member; id. C. x. 215.
See also id. B. v. 192; P. Plowman’s Crede, ed. Skeat, 1. 224. Cf.
Icel. Jolla, ‘segniter agere,’ Halddrsson; MDu. Jollen, to sit over
the fire. .* Wie sit en Jolt of sit en vrijt Verlet sijn werck, vergeet sijn
tijt’ = he who sits and warms himself, or sits and wooes, neglects his
work and loses his time; Cats, ed. 1828, i. 428, a; cited by Oude-
mans. Kilian also gives lollebancke, a sleeping-bench, as a Zealand
word. The older sense was prob. to ‘doze,’ to sleep, hence to brood
over the fire, to lounge about. It appears to be allied to Jull, i.e. to
sing to sleep; see Lull. Der. Joll-er; and see Lollard.

LOLLARD, a name given to the followers of Wyclif. (MDu.)

The history of the word is a little difficult, because it is certain that
several words have been purposely mixed up with it. 1. In the first
place, the ME. word most commonly in use was not Jollard, but
loller = one who lolls, a lounger, an idle vagabond. ‘Ismelle a loller
in: tte wind, quod he;’ Chaucer, C. T, 12913 (B. 1173). That
‘lounger’ is the true sense of his form of the word, is clear from
‘a passage in. P, Plowman, C. x. 188-218, the whole of which may be
consulted. The most material lines are: ‘ Now kyndeliche, by Crist,
beth suche callydJolleres, As by englisch of oure eldres of olde menne
techynge ; He that Jolleth is lame other his leg out of ioynte Other
meymed in som membre,’ i.e. such fellows are naturally called Jollers
in the English of our forefathers; he that Jolls about is lame, or
broken-jointed, or maimed; see Loll. 2. At the same time, the
name lollard was also in use as a term of reproach ; and this was a


MDn., term, Latinised as Lollardus...It had been in use before |


LOO


Wyclif. Ducange quotes from Johannes Hocsemius, who says,
under the date 1309: ‘Eodem anno quidam hypocritae gyrovagi,
qui Lollardi sive Deum laudantes vocabantur, per Hannoniam et
Brabantiam quasdam mulieres nobiles deceperunt ;’ i.e. In this year
certain vagabond hypocrites, called Lollards or God-praisers, deceived
certain noblewomen in Hainault and. Brabant. He adds that Tri-
themius says in his Chronicle, under the date 1315: ‘ita appellatos
a Gualtero Lolhard, Germano quodam.’ This latter statement makes
no difference to the etymology, since Lolhard as a surname (like our
surnames Fisher, Baker, or Butcher) is precisely the same word as
when used in the sense of ‘ God-praiser.’ The lit. sense is ‘a singer,’
one who chants. —MDu. Jollaerd (1) a mumbler of prayers or hymns
(L. mussitator), one who hums; (2) a Lollard ; Kilian, Oudemans.
This is a mere dialectical variation of a form lull-ard, formed regu-
larly from the MDnu. /ullen (also lollen), to sing, hum, with the suffix
-ard as in E. drunk-ard, slugg-ard, &c., denoting the agent. This
MDnu. Jullen is our E. word Lull, q.v. Hexham has: ‘/o/, or lule,
a harmonious sound.’ 3. Besides the confusion thus introduced, it
was common to compare the Lollards to tares, by help of a bad pun
on the L. Jolia, tares; this has, however, nothing to do with the
etymology. See my note on Chaucer, C. T., B 1173, in the Prioresses
Tale, &c. (Clarendon Press). @ Since doll and Juli are allied words,
it makes no very great difference to which verb we refer Joller and
Lollard; still loller =loll-er, and Lollard =lull-er,

LONE, solitary, retired, away from company. (E.) Not in early
use ; the word does not appear in Minsheu or Levins, and I find no
example much earlier than Shakespeare, who has: ‘a poor Jone
woman ;’ 2 Hen. IV,ii. 1. 35. It probably was at first a colloquial
or vulgar word, recommended by its brevity for more extended use.
It is known to be a short form of alone, as has generally been ex-
plained by lexicographers ; even Shakespeare brings it in as a pun:
‘a long Joan for a poor Jone woman to bear.’ Observe: ‘I go alone,
Like to a lonely dragon;’ Cor. iv. 1. 30. Todd cites a slightly
earlier instance : ‘ Moreover this Glycerie is a Jone woman;’ Kyffin,
transl. of Terence, ed. 1588; but Palsgrave has ‘ lone, onely, sew ;’ and
see P. Plowman, B. xvi. 20. See Alone. B. Other examples of loss
of initial a occur in the words mend, purtenance,.limbeck, vanguard,
Der. Jove-ly, Cor. iv. 1. 303; lone-li-ness, Hamlet, iii. 1. 46; also lone-
some, spelt Jonesom in Skinner, ed. 1671; lone-some-ness ; also lone-ness :
‘One that doth wear himself away in done-ness,’ Fletcher, Faithful
Shepherdess, A. i. sc. 2 (Amarillis).

LONG (1), extended, not short, tedious. (E.) ME. /ong, Northern
lang ; Chaucer, C. T. 3021 (A 3019); Pricke of Conscience, 1. 632.
AS. lang, long; Grein, ii. 156.4-Du. lang; Icel. Jangr;, Dan. lang ;
Swed. Jang; Goth. laggrs (=langrs); G. lang; L. longus. Brug-
mann, i. § 642. Der. long, adv.; long-boat, long-measure, long-run,
long-sight-ed, long-stop, long-suffering. Also a-long (1), a-long (2),
and be-lomg, verb (see N. E. D.). Also (from L. longus) long-evity,
q. v., long-itude, q.v. Also length, q.v.; ling (1), q.v.; ling-er, q-v.,
lunge, q.v. Cf. lumber (1).

LONG (2), to desire, yearn; to belong. (E.) Often used with
for or after. Very common in Shak. ME. longen, longien. ‘Than
longen folk to goon on pilgrimages’=then people desire, &c. ;
Chaucer, C. T. 12. AS. langian, impers. vb. with acc. of person.
‘Langad pé awuht,’ dost thou desire ought? ‘ Heled langode’ =the
heroes longed; Grein, ii,157. [Distinct from Jangian, to grow long. ]
+OSax. langén, impers.; Icel. Janga, impers. and pers.; OHG. lan-
gon, impers. Cf. G. verlangen, to long for. Not allied to long (1),
but rather to G. gelingen, to succeed, prosper; to AS. dungre, quickly ;
and Gk. éAagppds, light, nimble. See Kluge ; and Brugmann, i. § 684.
But the N. E.D. connects it with long (1). Der. long-ing, sb.;
long-ing, adj., long-ing-ly.

LONGEVITY, length of life. (L.) ‘In longevity by many con-
ceived to attain unto hundreds’ [of years]; Sir T.. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. iii. c. 9. § I. Spelt longeuitie in Minsheu, ed. 1627.
Coined, by analogy with F. words in -ité (=E. -ity), from L. longe-
uitas, long life. = L. Jong-, stem of longus, long ; and euitas, full form
of the word commonly written @/as, age. See Long and Age. |

LONGITUDE, lit. length; distance in degrees from a given
meridian. (F.—L.) ‘Longitudes and latitudes ;’ Chaucer, On the
Astrolabie, Prol. 1. 57.—F. longitude.L. longitiido (gen. longi-
tidin-is), length, long duration; in Late L., longitude. —L. longi-,
for longo-, decl. stem of longus, long ; with suffix -taido. See Long.
Der. longitudin-al (from stem longitidin-) ; longitudinal-ly.

LOO, a game at. cards. (F.) Spelt Ju in Pope, Rape of the Lock,
c. iii. 1, 62 (1, 350).. Formerly called Lanterloo (Engl. Cycl..Supp.).
‘Pam in Janteraloo;’ Farquhar, Sir Harry Wildair, ii. 2 (1701).=F.
lanturelu or lanturlu, interj. nonsense ! fiddlestick! fudge! (Hamilton);
also a game at cards, jeu de la béte (i.e. loo) ; see Littré and Hamil-
ton. [The more usual F. name for loo is mouche.] B. The expression
was orig. the refrain of a famous vaudeville in the time of Cardinal


347


348 LOOBY


Richelieu (died 1642); hence used in order to give an evasive.answer.
As the expression is merely nonsensical, it admits of no further
analysis.

LOOBY, a simpleton, a lubber. (E.) ME. Joby, Rich. the Redeles,
ii. 170. Allied to Lubber, q.v.

- LOOF, another spelling of Luff, q.v.

LOOK, to behold, see. (E.) ME. loken, lokien; Chaucer, C. T.
1697. AS. lécian, to look, see; Grein, ii. 192. 4-OSax. lokdn, to look ;
cf. prov. G. lugen, to look out, OHG. luogén, MHG. luogen, to mark,
behold. Brugmann, i. § 421 (7). Der. look, sb., ME. loke, Chaucer,
C. T. 3342; look! interj.; look-er, look-out, look-ing,, look-ing-glass.

LOOM (1), a machine for weaving cloth. (E.) In Spenser,
Muiopotmos, ]. 272. ME. lome, a tool, instrament; P. Plowman,
C. vi. 45; and see Prompt. Pary., p. 312. The pl. omen=implements
for tilling the soil, occurs in the Ancren Riwle, p. 384. AS. geloma,
a tool, implement, A®lfred, tr. of Beda, iv. 28, ed. E. E. T.S., p. 366,
1. 233; cf. AS. and-loma, a tool, implement, utensil; Voc. 549. 9.
The mod. E. Joom has the sense of ME. weblome, a weaving loom ;
see Test. Eboracensia, i. 191; Records of Nottingham, ii. 22 (1404).

LOOM (2), to appear faintly or at a distance. (Scand.) The orig.
sense is to glimmer or shine faintly. Rare; and usually used of
aship. ‘Looming of a ship, is her prospective [appearance] or shew.
Hence it is said, such a ship looms a great sail, i.e. she appears or
seems to bea great ship;’ Kersey’s Dict. ed.1715. So also Skinner,
ed. 1671, who adds: ‘she looms but small,’ i.e. looks small. The
orig. sense may have been ‘to come slowly towards ;’ answering to
EF nies. lémen, Swed. dial. Joma, to move slowly; cf. MHG. luomen,
to be weary, from the adj. Juomi, slack. Kilian has MDu. lome, slow,
inactive. From Teut. base */dm-, 2nd grade of *Jam-, as in E. lame.
See Lame, Loon (2). Der. loom-ing, sb.

LOON (1), LOWN, a base fellow. (E.) Spelt Jooz in Macbeth,
v. 3. 11; Jown in Oth. ii. 3.95. The latter passage is ‘ he called the
tailor Jown,’ cited from an old ballad. In the Percy Folio MS., ed.
Hales and Furnivall, ii. 324, 1. 52, the line appears as: ‘therfore he
called the taylor clowne.’ Lowl. Sc. loun, used frequently by Dunbar
(see Small’s Glossary); see Joon in E.D.D. Cf. MDu. Joen, ‘homo
stupidus;’ Kilian.

LOOW (2), a water-bird, diver. (Scand.) A corruption of the
Shetland name Joom; see Gloss. of Shetland Words by T. Edmonds-
ton; Phil. Soc. 1866.—Icel. Jomr, a loon; Swed. and Dan. Jom;
Norw. Jom. Prob. from the Jame or awkward motion of such birds
on land; cf. Swed. dial. Joma, EF ries. Jémen, to move slowly; see
Loom (2). For derogatory use of the names of birds, cf. booby, gull,
goose, owl, &c.

LOOP, a bend, a bend in a cord leaving an opening. (C.) Spelt
Joupe in the Bible of 1551, Exod. xxvi. 4, 5. The ME. loupe is also
used in the sense of ‘ loop-hole,’ but it is prob. the same word, denoting
a small hole in a wall shaped like a loop in a piece of string. In this
sense it occurs in P, Plowman, C. xxi. 288; and Romance of Partenay,
1. 1175. The pl. loupis, loops, occurs in the allit. Troy-book (see
Glossary). Palsgrave has: ‘ Loupe in a towne-wall, creneau ; Loupe
to holde a button, fermeau.’ G. Douglas has Jowpis, Ain. bk. v. ch. 5.
66; and lowpit, looped, id. 13. Jamieson has Lowl. Scotch doops,
the windings of a river. The word appears to be Northern, and
borrowed from Gaelic. Gael. Jub, a bend, loop, noose, winding,
meander ; duib, a fold, corner, or angle, a turn of a stream, a bending
of the shore; Macleod. Cf. Irish Jub, a loop, bow, staple, plait, fold,
thong, meander; and note the sense of ‘thong’ in Cath, Anglicum,
which has: ‘a Jowpe, Amentum.’ = Gael. and Irish Jub, to bend; cf.
Olrish lubtha, bent (Windisch). And see Macbain. Der. Joop,
verb; loop-ed, full of holes, K. Lear, iii. 4. 31 ; loop-hole, Shak. Lucr.
1383, the older term being ME. loupe, as above; loop-hol-ed. ta- But
the N. E. D. connects loop-hole with Du. luipen, MDu. liipen, to lurk
(hence, to spy).

LOOSE, free, slack, unfastened, unconfined. (Scand.) ME. laus,
loose, Chaucer, C. T. 4062 (A 4064) ; where the Camb. MS. has Jos,
and the Petworth MS. has louse. Spelt Jowse, Jousse, in the Ancren
Riwle, p. 228, note d. a, The form laus is Scand.; from Icel. Jauss
(Swed. Dan. Jos); it is the Norse equivalent of ME. lees, false; see
Prompt. Parv. p. 298. ‘The latter is from AS. Jéas, (1) loose, (2) false ;
cognate with Icel. lauss, loose, vacant, Dan. and Swed. /és, loose.
+OSax. 10s, MDu. Joos, (1) loose, (2) false (Oudemans); the mod.
Du. separates the two senses, having Jos, loose, and loos, false.
Further cognate words appear in Goth. Jaus, empty, vain; G, Jos,
loose. Teut. type */ausoz; from *laus, 2nd grade of Teut. *leusan-,
to lose. See Lose; and see Loosen, See Notes on E. Etym.,
p. 173. Der. loose-ly, loose-ness. Note that -less (AS. léas) is the
commonest suffix in E.; see -less, And see Leasing.

LOOSE, LOOSEN, to make loose, set free. (E.) The suffix
+en is due to analogy with words like lengthen, strengthen, and has
been added. ME, Josen, lousen, lowsen; where the final x merely


LOSE


marks the infinitive mood, without having the causal force which is
implied by the final x at present. ‘The boondis of alle weren Jousid’
=the bonds of all were loosed; Wyclif, Acts, xvi. 26. From the
adj. above.4-OSax. Jdsian, ‘to make free.’ So also Du. Jossen, to
loosen, release; Icel. Jeysa, to loosen; Swed. lésa; Dan. Jése; G.
lésen; Goth. lausjan; all from the adjective,

LOOT, plunder, booty. (Hindi.—Skt.) A modern term, imported
from India. = Hindi ut (with cerebral #), loot, plunder. The cere-
bral ¢ shows that an r is elided. —Skt. lotram, short form of ldpiram,
booty, spoil, = Skt. up, to break, spoil; the neut. pp.duptam is also used
in the sense of ‘ booty,’ like the deriv. Joptram; see Benfey, p. 798. —
“4 REUP, to break; whence L. rumpere, G, rauben, and E, rob. See
Rob, Rupture. Cf. Horn, Pers, Dict., § 608. 4 Thus loot =that
whichis robbed. Der. loot, verb.

LOOVER, the same as Louver, q. v.

LOP, to maim, to cut branches off trees. (E.) In Levins, ed,
1570; and in Shak. Cymb. v. 4. 141. Spelt loppe in Palsgrave.
Ducange quotes loppare as an Anglo-Latin word ; Birch (Cart. Saxon,
iii, 240) has ‘ cet loppede thorne;’ asif from an AS. verb loppian, to lop.
Der. Jop, sb., small branches cut off, Henry VIII, i. 2.96. And see
glib (3), left.

LOQUACIOUS, talkative. (L.) In Milton, P, L. x. 161. A
coined word, formed by adding -ious to L. Jogudc-, stem of loguax,
talkative. [Prob. suggested by the sb. loguacity, which had pre-
viously been introduced into the language from, F. loguacité,
‘loquacity;’ Cot. Loguacity occurs in Minsheu, ed. 1627.] —L. logui,
to speak. Der. Joguacious-ly, -ness. Also loguac-i-ty, from F, loqguacité,
which from L. acc. logudcitatem. From the same root are col-logu-ial,
e-logu-ence, ob-logu-y, soli-logu-y, ventri-logu-ist; also (like L, pp.
lociit-us) al-locut-ion, circum-locut-ion, e-locut-ion, inter-locut-ion, pro-
locutor.

LORD, a master, mler, peer. (E.) ME, louerd (=loverd),
Havelok, 1. 96; gen. contracted to Jord, Chaucer, C. T. 47. AS.
hlaford, a lord; Greity ii. 80. Fuller form hlafweard (misprinted
halfweard), Ps. civ. 17 (ed. Thorpe). B, Thus the word is a com-
pound, and the former syllable is AS. Alaf, a loaf. It also appears
that -ord stands for weard, a warden, keeper, master; whence hlaf-
weard =loaf-keeper, i.e. the master of the house, father of the family,
See Loaf and Ward. The simple word weard is used nearly
synonymously with the comp. hlaf-weard; and cf. hord-weard, 2
treasure-keeper, lord (Grein). Der. Jord, verb (gen. used with ¢),
2 Hen. VI, iv. 8. 47; lord-ed, Temp. i. 2. 97.3 lord-ing (with dimin,
suffix -ing), Wint. Ta. i. 2.62=ME. lauerd-ing, Layamon, 27394;
lord-l-ing (with double dimin,), Bp. Hall’s Satires, b. ii. sat. 2, 1. 12
=ME. louerd-ling, Layamon, 12664, later text ; Jord-ly = ME. lorde-
liche, P. Plowman, B. xiii. 302; lord-li-ness, Shak. Ant. v. 2. 161;
lord-ship =ME. lordeship, P. Plowman, B. iii. 206.

LORE, learning, doctrine. (E.) ME, lore, Chaucer, C. T. 529,
4424 (A 527, B 4). [The final e is unessential, and due to the
frequent use of the oblique cases.] AS. Jar, lore; gen., dat., acc.
lare; Grein, ii. 158.4Du. leer, doctrine; G.lehre, MHG. lére, OHG.
léra (whence Dan. Jere). ‘Teut. type */aiza, f.; cf. Goth. Jaisjan, to
teach ; Jaiseins, doctrine. From */ais, 2nd grade of *leisan-, to trace
out. See further under Learn.

LOREL, a variant of Losel, q.v.

LORGNETTE, an opera-glass. (F.) F. lorgnette.—F, lorguer,
to spy.

LORIKEET, a small lory. (Malay; with Span. sujix,) From
lory, q.V-; with dimin. suffix -keet, borrowed from parrakeet.

LORIMER, a maker of bits and spurs. (F.—L.) Also loriner ;
both forms are in Blount’s Gloss, (1681). ‘Zoremar that maketh
byttes;’ Palsgrave. = OF. loremier, lorenier (Godefroy) ; F. lormier.—
OF. lorain, tein, bridle, bit. Late L. léranum, a rein, bit. L. lorum,
a thong.

LORIOT, the golden oriole. (F,—L.). ‘ Loriot, a bird other-
wise called a witwall;’ Kersey, ed. 1715.—F, loriot, ‘the bird called
a witwall, yellowpeake, hickway;’ Cot, Corruptly written for
Poriot, Poriol, the prefixed 7 being the def. article (=L. ile),
Cotgrave has: ‘Oriot, a heighaw, or witwall;’ also spelt Oriol, id.
The latter form is the same as E. Oriole, q.y.

LORN, old pp. of the verb to Jose. (E.) See Lose, Forlorn, |

LORY, a small bird of the parrot kind. (Malay.) In Webster.
Also called lury, and (better) xory, nury.— Malay liri, a bird of the
parrot kind, also called nari; Marsden’s Malay Dict., p. 311. Niri,
the lury, a beautiful bird of the parrot kind, brought from the
Moluccas ; id, p. 350.

LOSE, to part with, be separated from. (E.) The mod, E. lose
appears to be due to confusion between three ME. forms, viz. (1)
losien, (2) lésen, (3) léosen. 1, Losien is recorded in Stratmann, p. 405 ;
it occurs in the sense ‘to be lost,’ or ‘to perish,’ as in O, Eng,
Homilies, ed. Morris, i, 117, IL 28, 35; and in Layamon, 20538, it


“=z
a:


LOSEL


is used exactly in the sense of ‘lose.’= AS. dosian, to become loose,
to escape, Grein, ii. 194. From dos-, weak grade of Jéosan, to lose.
2. ME, losen, to loose, set free, is from the adj. lds, lows, loose; see
Loose. 3. The ME. /éosen, more commonly /ésen, is in Stratmann,
at p. 394. This is the verb which invariably has the force of ‘ lose,’
but it should rather have produced a mod. E. Jeese. It is a strong
verb, with pt. t. lees, and pp. loren, lorn ; see Chaucer, C. T. 1217,
3536; P. Plowman, B. v. 499. AS. -léosan, to lose; pt. t. Jéas, pp.
loren; only used in comp. for-léosan, to lose entirely, Luke, xv. 4, 9,
Grein, i. 328.-4-Du. -liezen, only in comp. ver-liezen, to lose; pt. t.
verloor, pp. verloren; G. -lieren, only in comp. ver-lieren, pt. t. verlor,
pp- verloren; Goth. -liusan, only in comp. fra-liusan, to lose, Luke,
xv. 8, with which cf. fra-lusnan, to perish, 1 Cor. i. 18. B. All three
forms are from different grades of the Teut. verb *leusan-, to lose ;
pt. t. *laus, pp. *luzanoz. From the Teut. base LEUS, to lose,
become loose (Fick, iii. 273). This base is an extension of 4/LEU,
to set free, whence Gk, Ave, to set free, release; L. luere, to set free.
A still older sense, ‘to.set free by cutting a bond,’ is suggested by
Skt. Ja, to cut, clip; Benfey, p. 799. 4 Note the double form of
the pp., viz., Jost, lorn ; of which lost (=Jos-ed) is formed from ME.
losien: but lorn (=lor-en) is the regular strong pp. of /éosen = AS.
léosan. Der. los-er, los-ing ; from the same Teut. base are loose, vb.,
also spelt loosen, q.v., loose, adj.; leasing, q.v.; lorn, for-lorn ; loss,
q-v- From the root LEU we also have solve, solution, ana-ly-sis,
para-ly-sis, palsy.

LOSEL, LOREL, a worthless fellow, a scamp. (E.) In
Shak., Wint. Tale, ii. 3. 109. ME. Josel, P. Plowm. B. vi. 124; also
Torel, id., vii. 136. Cf.-AS. los-ian, to perish. From Teut. *Jus-,
weak grade of */Jeusan-, AS. lZosan, to lose, of which the pp. was
lor-en (for older *los-en) ; whence lor-el. See Lose (above). The
sense is ‘devoted to perdition;’ for the suffix, cf. AS. wac-ol,
watchful.

LOSS, a losing, damage, waste. (E.) ME. los, Chaucer, C. T.
4447 (B 27). AS. los, destruction; 6 lose wurdon, i.e. perished,
fElfred, tr. of Beda, lib. v. c. 9 (or c. 10). ONorthumb. Jos, Matt.
vii. 13 (Lindisfarne MS.).. From Teut. *Jus-, weak grade of *leusan-,
AS. Jéosan, to lose; see Lose.

LOT, a portion, share, fate. (E.) ME. Jot, a share; Rich. Cuer
de Lion, 4262, in Weber’s Met. Romances. AS. Alot; Matt. xxvii.
35, Luke, xxiii. 34; also hklyt, Grein, ii. go. The AS. Alot, n. (Teut.
type *hlutom) is from hlut-, the weak grade of Teut. *hleutan-, AS.
hléotan, to cast lots, a strong verb.4-Du. Jot, a lot; loten, to cast
lots; Icel. hluti, a part, share; from the strong verb hljota, to obtain
by lot; Dan. lod, a lot; Swed. Jott, a lot; lotta, to cast lots. Cf
also G. Joos, a lot; loosen, to cast lots; Goth. hlauts, a lot, Mark,
xv. 24; from Teut. *hlaut, 2nd grade of *hleutan- (above). Der. lot,
vb. ; lott-er-y, q.v.; al-lot, q.v.

LOTH, reluctant; the same as Loath, q.v.

LOTION, a washing, external medicinal application. (L.) ‘Zot-
ion, a washing or tinsing;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Formed, by
analogy with F. words in -ion, from L. ldtio, a washing; cf. lotus,

p. of lawdre, to wash; see Lave. Brugmann, i. § 352 (3).

LOTO, LOTTO, the name of a game. (Ital.—Teut.) Modern;
the spelling lotto is the correct Ital. spelling ; Jofo is a F. form of the
Ital. word.— Ital. otto, a lot, lottery. Of Teut. origin; cf. OHG.
hléz (G. loos), a lot; see Lot.

LOTTERY, a distribution by lot or chance. (Ital. —Teut.)
In Levins, ed. 1570; and in Shak. Merch. Ven. i. 2. 32, ii. I. 15.
—Ital. lotteria, lottaria, ‘a lottery;’? Torriano (1688). —Ital. lotto
(above). 4 The F. loterie is borrowed from Italian, but is in much
later use; thus it is omitted by Cotgrave, and Sherwood’s index to
Cotgrave only gives balotage, sort, as equivalent words to E, lottery.

LOTUS, the Egyptian water-lily. (L.—Gk.) ‘LZotos, or Lotus,
the lote-tree;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. Minsheu, ed. 1627, speaks of the
lothe-tree or lote-tree, It is spelt lote by Chapman, tr. of Odyssey, ix.
163. —L. lotus, lotos.— Gk. Awrdés, a name given to several shrubs;
(1) the Greek lotus; (2) the Cyrenean lotus, an African shrub, the
eaters of which were called Loto-pkagi = Lotus-eaters, from Gk.
gayeiv, to eat; (3) the lily of the Nile; see Liddell and Scott. Der.
Loto-phagi; lotus-eater,

LOUD, making a great sound, noisy. (E.) ME. loud; more
common in the ady. form Jowdé =loudly; Chaucer, C. T. 674, 15339
(A 672, B 4523). AS. hlad, loud, Grein, ii. 88.4-Du. luid; G, laut,
OHG, hlut. B. Tent. type *hlidoz, for *hlathds (with accent on 0);
allied to the Idg. type *#/uitdés (with weak grade klu) as seen in L.
-clutus, in comp. in-clutus, renowned; Gk. «Avrés, renowned; Skt.
gruta-, heard, from gru, to hear, Gk. Avery. 4/KLEU, to hear.
Brugmann, i. §§ 100, 113. Der, loud-ly, loud-ness ; from the same
root is cli-ent,

LOUGH, a lake. (Irish.) The written Irish form of Joch, = Irish
loch, a lake, lough, arm of the sea; see Loch.


LOW 349


LOUNGE, to loll about, move about listlessly. (F.—L.) In
Skinner’s Dict., ed. 1671; not before 1508. ‘A very flourishing
society of people called loungers, gentlemen whose observations are
mostly itinerant ;’ The Guardian, no. 124, dated Aug. 3,1713. The
verb seems to have been suggested by the term Jungis, defined in
Minsheu, ed. 1627, as meaning ‘a slimme, a tall and dull slangam,
that hath no making to his height ;’ and even as late as in Kersey,
ed. 1715, we find Jungis explained as ‘a drowsy or dreaming fellow.’
It was once a well-known term, and occurs in Decker’s Satiromastix ;
Beaum, and Fletcher, Knight of the Burning Pestle, Act ii, sc. 3,
speech 1; Lyly’s Euphues and his England, ed. Arber, p. 325; and
the Play of Misogonus, written about 1560; see Nares and Halliwell.
=F. longis, ‘a lungis; a slimme, slow-back, dreaming luske [idle
fellow], drowsie gangrill; a tall and dull slangam, that hath no
making to his height, nor wit to his making; also, one that being
sent on an errand is long in returning;’ Cot. Cf. Norm. dial. Jongis,
or seint-longis, a dolt, a slow fellow (Moisy). B. Littré supposes
that the sense of F. Jongis was due to a pun, having reference to L,
longus, long; see Long. For, strictly, Longis was a proper name,
being the OF. form of L. Longius, or Longinus, the name of the
centurion. who pierced the body of Christ. This name Longinus
first appears in the Apocryphal Gospel of Nicodemus, and was
probably suggested by the Gk. Adyx7, a lance, the word used in
John, xix. 34; hence the Picard form /ongin, with the sense of F.
longis. See my note to P. Plowman, C. xxi. 82. See the word
Lunge, which is certainly due to L, longus. Der. loung-er.

LOUSH, the name of an insect. (E.) ME. lous, pl. lys or lis;
P. Plowman, B. v. 197, 198. AS. dis, as a gloss to L. pediculus ;
fElfric’s Gloss., Nomina Insectorum; the pl. form was lys.4+Du.
luis; Dan, lus, pl. lus; Swed. lus, pl. loss; Icel. lis, pl. lyss; G.
laus, pl. lause. All from Teut. *Jus, fem. Cf. W. Ilewen, a louse;
Stokes-Fick, p. 256. Der. lous-y, lous-i-ness ; louse, v.

LOUT, a clown, awkward fellow. (E.) The lit. sense is ‘stoop-
ing’ or ‘ slouching.’ In Levins; and in K. John, ii. 509, iii. 1. 220.
Sidney has: ‘this Jowtish clown;’ Arcadia, b. i. (R.) From the
old verb lout, to stoop, bow: ‘he humbly /outed ;’. Spenser, F. Q. i.
Io. 44. ME, louten, to stoop, bow down; Chaucer, C. T. 14168
(B 3352); P. Plowman, B. iii.115. AS. Jatan, to stoop, str. vb.;
pt. t. /éat; Grein, ii. 197.4Icel. lata, to bow down; whence Jutr,
adj. bent down, stooping, which may have suggested our modern
lout; Swed. luta, to lean; Dan. Jude, to stoop. Teut. type *lutan-,
pt. t. *Jaut, pp. lutanoz. Der. lout-ish, lout-ish-ness, loit-er.

LOUVER, LOOVER, an opening in the roofs of ancient
houses. (F.—Teut.) ME. lover, Prompt. Parv. p. 315; see Way’s
note. He cites: ‘A Joower, or tunnell in the roofe, or top of a great
hall, to auoid smoke, fumarium, spiramentum;’ Baret. Also in
P. Plowman, C. xxi. 288; Romance of Partenay, 1175. In the
latter passage we find: ‘ At lowers, lowpes, archers had plente, To
cast, draw, and shete, the diffence to be’=it (the town) had plenty
of archers at openings and loop-holes, to cast, draw (bow), and
shoot.=OF. lovier, a louver; see Godefroy, who has lovier, luvier,
lover, with three instances in which it is used to translate Late L.
lodium. = Romanic type *lédarium, adj. form due to Late L. lodium,
a louver. (For the intercalated v, cf. F. pouvoir, from OF . pooir=
Span. poder.) PB. The orig. sense was prob. an opening over a fire-
place; from Icel. #06, n. pl. a hearth, a fire-place; ult. allied to
Icel. hlada, to lade, to pile, build up. See ade, (See Academy,
Dec. 1894.)

LOVAGE, an umbelliferous plant. (F.—L.) In Levins, ed.
1570, and in Cotgrave. Spelt Joweache in Palsgrave ; and ab. 1400,
in Henslow’s Medical Works of 14th cent., p. 8, 1. 18. From OF.
levesche (mod. F. livéche), ‘ common lovage, Lombardy lovage,’ Cot. ;
spelt livesche, liuvesche, luvesche, lovache in Godefroy ; cf. luvesche, as
in Voc. 555. 11, whence the E. form. Cf. Ital. Jevistico, lovage. = L.
ligusticum, lovage, a plant indigenous to Liguria ; whence its name.
=-L. Ligusticus, belonging to Liguria.—L. Liguria (prob. formerly
*Ligusia), a country of Cisalpine Gaul, of which the principal town
was Genua, the modern Genoa. Similarly, we have Etruscan from
Etruria [Etrusia?).

LOVE, affection, fondness, attachment. (E.) ME. love (with w
for v), Chaucer, C. T. 1137, 1161 (A 1135, 1159). AS. dufu, love ;
Grein, ii. 196. From the weak grade (*Jud) of Teut. base *leub-.-
Goth. Jubd; OHG, luba; cf. G. liebe, OHG. liupa, love; Russ.
liobov’, love; Skt. lébha-, covetousness, Jubk, to desire. Closely
allied to Lief. (4/LEUBH). Der. love, verb, ME. lowen (=loven),
older forms louien, Iuuien, AS. lufigan, lufian, Grein, ii. 195 5 also
lov-able, lov-er (Chaucer, C, T., A 1347), lov-ing’, lov-ing-Ly, lov-ing-nessy
lov-ing-kind-ness; also love-ly, ME, luuelich, Ancren Riwle, p. 428,
1. 25; love-li-ness ; also love-less, love-bird, love-knot, love-lock, love-
lorn. Also be-love, ME. bi-lufien, to love greatly. «

LOW (1), inferior, deep, mean, humble. (Scand.) ME. low, pl.


350. LOW


lowe ; Chaucer, C. T. 17310 (H 361); older spellings Jowk, Ancren
Riwle, p. 140, 1. 2; lah, Ormulum, 15246, loogh (in the comp.
biloogh =below), Allit. Poems, B. 116. Late AS. Jah, in 1. 8 of The

Grave; in Thorpe’s Analecta, p. 153.—Icel. lagr, low ; Swed. lag;
Dan. lav.+Du. laag. B. The orig. sense is ‘ that which lies down,’
or lies low (as we say). From Icel. Jag-, 3rd (pt. pl.) stem of liggja,
to lie. See Lie (1). Der. Jow-ness, P. Plowman’s Crede, ed.
Skeat, 1. 513 ; low-ly, Chaucer, C. T. 99, low-li-ness ; low-er, verb=
to make or become more low, formed from the comparative of the
adj. (cf. better), Shak. Ant. i. 2. 129 ; low-church, low-land, low-lander,
low-spirited. Also be-low (=by low).

LOW (2), to bellow as a cow or ox. (E.) ME. loowen, lowen,
Wyclif, Job, vi. 5; Jer. li. 52. AS. kldwan, to bellow, resound ;
Grein, ii. 88.4-Du. Joeijen, to low; MHG. luejen, OHG. hldjan, to
low. Cf. L. claé-mare, to exclaim, cry out; Gk. «é-«An-pat, perf. pass.
of xad-eiy, to call. Der. low-ing, 1 Sam. xv. 14.

LOW (3), a hill. (E.) In place-names; as Lud-low, Bart-low,
Trip-low. AS, hlaw,a hill, a slope; also spelt kl@w, Grein, ii. 81.
It also means'a mound, a grave.4+Goth. Alaiw, a grave, tomb ;
allied to Goth. hAlains, a hill. From Teut. base *Alai-, 2nd grade of
*hlei- (Idg. KLEI), to incline, slope. Hence it is related to L.
cliuus, a hill; clinare, to lean; and E. lean, verb. See Lean (1).

LOW (4), flame. (Scand.) In Burns, The Weary Pund o’ Tow,
1. 10. ME. Jo3ke, Ormulum, 16185.—Icel. ogi, a flame; NFries.
lowe (Outzen); MDan. loge, Dan. lue. From Teut. *luh, weak
grade of *leuk- (Idg. LEUK), to shine; allied to L. lux; see
Lucid.

LOWER (1), to let down, abase, sink. (E.) See Low (1).

LOWER (2), to frown, look sour. (E.) ME, louren, Chaucer,
C. T. 6848 (D 1266); P. Plowman, B. v. 132; spelt Juren, K. Hom,
ed. Lumby, 1. 270. Not found in AS.4-EFries. and Low G., lien,
to lower, frown, peer; MDu. Joeren (with oe for i, Franck), ‘to
leere, to frowne;’ Hexham. Also G. lauern, to lurk, lie on the
watch; a sense which appears in the E. derivative Jur-k; see Lurk.

LOYAL, faithful, true. (F.—L.) Common in Shak.; as in Rich.
Il, i. 1. 148, 181.—F. loyal, ‘loyall, faithfull, also lawfull;’ Cot.
—L. légalis, legal. —L. lég-, stem of lex, law, See Legal, Doublets,
leal, legal. Der. loyal-ly, loyal-ty, loyal-ist.

LOZENGE, a rhombus; a small cake of flavoured sugar, &c.,
orig. of a diamond shape. (F.—Prov.—L.) Formerly spelt losenge;
and esp. used as an heraldic term, to denote a shield of a diamond
shape; see Romaunt of the Rose, 1. 893, where the OF. word is
also losenges. The word losenges in Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, 1317,
is prob. the same word. = OF. losenge, lozenge, ‘a losenge, a lozenge,
a little square cake of preserved herbs, flowers, &c. ;’ Cot. Mod. F.
losange; Prov. lausange (Mistral). —OProv. Jauza, Prov. Jauso (Gascon
oso), a square stone, a tomb-stone (Mistral); Low L. lausa, lauza,
the same. Allied to Span. Jaude, a tomb-stone (Pineda). = L. acc.
lapidem, from nom, lapis, a stone, also a tomb-stone, grave-stone.
See Lapidary. 4 See N.and Q. 9S. x. 84. The phonology is
quite regular; the L. d, between two vowels, becomes OProy. z, mod.
Proy. s, as in L. laudare, to praise, OProv. auzar, mod. Prov. lausa.
WithSpan. laude< L.lapidem, compare Span.raudo, rapid< L.rapidum.
But Jauza may represent an adj. ‘ori *lapidea. Cf. also Span. losa,
a flag-stone, marble-slab, a square stone used for paving; whence
losar, to pave; OF. dauze, Port. dousa, a flat-stone, a slate for
covering roofs ; all from Proy.. Thus the word meant grave-stone,
ke slab ; and finally a flat square cake.

UBBER, a clumsy fellow, dolt. (E.) ME. lobre, lobur, P. Plow-
man, A. prol. 52; B. prol. 55; wheresome MSS. have Joby, Palsgrave
has: ‘I dubber, I playe the lubber.’ We find similar forms in Du.
lobbes, a booby ; Swed. dial. Zubber, a thick, clumsy, lazy man (Rietz) ;
lubba, the same, from lubba, y., to be slow or dull; MDu. lobben,
“a Inbbard, a clown;’ Norw. Jubb, lubba, one of round thick figure,
lubben, short and thick. Cf. W. dlob, a dolt, lubber; Jabi, a strip-
ling, looby ; Pomeranian Jobbe, a lubber ; EFries. Jobbe, cb, a flabby
lump. Shak. has Job, Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 16, which is exactly the W.
word ; also to Job down =to droop, Hen. V, iv. 2.47. Der. lubber-ly,
Merry Wives, v. 5.195. And see lump.


LUBRICATE, to make smooth or slippery. (L.) Used by Ray, |


On the Creation, pt. ii. (R.) Kersey, ed. 1715, has lubricitate, to
make slippery. The adj. /ubrick occurs in Cotgrave to translate F.
lubrique; and the sb. lubricity, for F. lubricité. = L. libricatus, pp. of
liibricare, to make slippery. = L, liibricus, slippery (whence F. lubrique).
Allied to Slip, q.v. Der. lubricat-ion, lubricat-or ; also lubricity =F,
lubricité, as above.

LUCBH, a fish, prob. the pike. (F.—L.) ‘Luce, fysche, Lucius ;’
Prompt. Parv.; and see Chaucer, C. T. 352 (A 350).—OF, lus,
‘a pike;’ Cot.—L. Jiicius, a fish, perhaps the pike. tap It is
probable that duce in Shak. Merry Wives, i. 1. 16, means a louse,
by a pun upon the word; see note in Schmidt,


LUFF


LUCID, bright, shining, clear. (L.) ‘Lucid firmament;’ Spenser,
Mother Hubbard’s Tale, 1.1259. [There is no MF. Jucide in Cot.;
the E. word was taken directly from Latin.]—L. licidus, bright,
shining. =L, licére, to shine; L, Jitc-, stem of Jux, light. From
 LEUK or 4/REUK, to shine; whence also Skt. ruch, to shine,
ruch, light, Gk. Aeveds, white, &c. Der. lucid-ly, lucid-ness, lucid-i-ty,
Also Luci-fer, Chaucer, C. T, 14005 (B 3189), from L. Jici-fer
(bringer of light, morning-star), from L, Jici-, decl. stem of lux, and
fer-re, to bring. Also lucent, Ben Jonson, Epigram 76, 1. 8, from
L. liicent-, stem of pres. pt. of liicére, to shine. Also lucubration,
q.v. From the same root we have lu-nar, lu-min-ous, lu-min-ary,
e-lu-cid-ate, il-lu-min-ate, limn, pel-luecid, lu-s-trat-ion, il-lu-s-trate,
trans-luc-ent, lu-natic, lustre (1), lynx, And see Light (1).

LUCK, fortune, chance, good hap, (MDu.) ‘Lukke and good
happe;’ Caxton, Hist. of Troye, leaf 216, back, 1. 7. Not found
in AS.=—Du. luk, geluk, good fortune, happiness.4-MHG, geliicke,
good fortune; whence G. gliick (for geliick). Prob, allied to G.
locken, MHG., locken, OHG. lokén, to entice, allure, decoy; cf. the
Shetland word luck, to entice, to entreat (Edmondston), The
EFries. luk, Swed. lycka, Dan. lykke, are all from G. Der. luck-y,
Much Ado, v. 3. 323 luck-i-ly, luck-i-ness, luch-less, luck-less-ly, -ness.

LUCRE, gain, profit, (F.—L.) ME. lucre, Chaucer, C. T.
16870 (G 1402).—F. lucre.—L. lucrum, gain. Allied to Irish Zuach,
value, price, wages, hire; G. lohn, a reward; Gk. Aelia, booty; Russ.
lov’, catching of prey, Jovite, to capture. All from 4/LEU, to win,
capture as booty; Fick, i. 755. Der. lucr-at-ive, from F. lucratif,
‘lucrative,’ Cot.<L. lucratiuus, from lucratus, pp. of lucrari, to gain,
which is from lucrum, sb.; also lucrative-ly, -ness.

LUCUBRATION, a production composed in retirement. (L.)
‘Lucubration, a studying or working by candle light ;’ Phillips’ Dict.
ed. 1706. Coined, in imitation of F. words in -tion, from L. liicu-
britio, a working by lamp-light, night-work, lucubration. —L. liicu-
brare, to bring in lamps, to ,»work by lamp-light.—L. licubrum,
a faint light (Isidore); formed from lic-, stem of lux, light. See
Lucid, Light (1).

LUDICROUS, laughable, ridiculous. (L.) ‘Some ludicrous
schoolmen;’ Spectator, no. 191, 1.1. Formed (like arduous, &c.)
immediately from L. lidicrus, done in sport; by change of ~-us to
-ous.L,. ludi-, for ludo-, decl. stem of liidus, sport. L. ladere, to
play. Root unknown. Der. ludicrous-ly, -ness; also (from liidere),
al-lude, col-lude, e-lude, de-lude, inter-lude, pre-lude; and (like pp.
litsus), al-lus-ion, col-lus-ion, de-lus-ion, il-lus-ion.

LUFF, LOOF, to turn a ship towards the wind. (E.?) The
pp. loofed is in Shak. Ant. iii, 10. 18. ‘To loof, usually pron. to
luff ;’ Phillips’ Dict. ed. 1706, Shak. prob. took the word from
North’s Plutarch, since we find ‘he was driven also to loof off to
have more room” in the description of the battle of Actium ; see
Shakespeare’s Plutarch, ed. Skeat, p. 212, note 1. The verb answers
to Du. loeven, to luff, to keep close to the wind. 3B. But the verb
is due to an older sb., found in ME. more than once. This is the
ME. lof, a ‘ loof,’ the name of a certain contrivance on board ship,
of which the use is not quite certain. We find it in Layamon,
ll. 7859, 97443 the pl. being loves (=Jloves), 20949, 309223 see Sir F.
Madden’s remarks in vol. ili. p. 476 of his edition ; and cf. OF. lof,
loef, louf in Godefroy, used in the same sense. See also Richard
Cuer de Lion, 1. 71; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, C. 106; Ancren
Riwle, p. 104, 1, 1 (though this passage is of doubtful meaning).
The word seems to have had different senses at different times ; thus
the mod. Du, loef is ‘ weather-gage,’ like mod. E. luff; but Kilian
explains the MDu. Joef by scalmus, i.e. a thole-pin. In Falconer’s
Marine Dict. we find Joof explained as ‘the after-part of a ship’s
bow ;’ whilst in Layamon and other passages in ME. we find (as
Sir F, Madden says) that. it is ‘applied to some part of a ship, the
agency of which was used to alter its course.’ Sir F. Madden quotes
from the Supplement to Ducange, s.v. dracena, which L. word is
used as equivalent to E. /oof, and explained by gubernaculum. The
reader should consult Sir F. Madden’s note. The Joof was certainly,
as Mr. Wedgwood remarks, ‘a timber of considerable size, by which
the course of the ship was directed.’ It was not, however, what we
now call a rudder. C. In my opinion, the passages in which the
word occurs go to prove that it was orig. a kind of paddle, which in
large ships became a large piece of timber, perhaps thrust over the
after-part of a ship’s bow (to use Falconer’s expression) to assist the
rudder in keeping the ship’s head right. D. In any case, we may
perhaps infer that the orig. sense was ‘ paddle ;’ and the word may be
an English one, though we may have also re-borrowed the word, in
the 16th century, from the cognate Du. loef Cf. also Dan. Juv, luff,
weather-gage ; Juve, to luff; Swed. lof, weather-gage; but these may
have been borrowed from Dutch. We find, however, the cognate
Bavarian laffen, the blade of an oar, flat part of a rudder (Schmeller).
These words are further to be connected with Icel. Jaf, the flat hand,


“oe


LUG


Goth, léfa, the flat hand, palm of the hand, the Lowland Scotch
form being loof. EH. Recapitulating, we may conclude that the
flat or palm of the hand was the original Joof which, thrust over the
side of the primitive canoe, helped to direct its course when a rude
sail had been set up; this became a paddle, and, at a later time,
a more elaborate piece of mechanism for keeping the ship’s head
straight; which, being constantly associated with the idea of the
wind’s direction, came at last to mean ‘ weather-gage,’ esp. as in the
Du. loef houden, to keep the luff, de loef afwinnen, to gain the luff,
te loef, windward ; &c. A similar idea is seen in L. palma, (1) the
palm of the hand, (2) the blade of an oar. The verb is from the
older sb. 4 Napier’s Collection of Glosses contains the entry:
‘ Redimicula, /@fas;’ 52413; otherwise, /df is unrecorded. We must
not connect Du. doef, luff, with Du, lucht, air; nor with our own
word loft. Der. a-loof, q.v.

LUG, to pull, haul, drag. (Scand.) ‘To lugge, trahere, vellere ;’
Levins. The old sense was ‘to pull by the hair.’ In Gower, iii.
148 (bk. vii. 1892), we have: ‘ And be the chin and be the cheke
She luggeth him riht as hir liste,’ i.e. she pulls him by his beard and
whiskers as she pleases. So also : ‘ to-lugged of manye’ = pulled by
the hair by many people; P. Plowman, B. ii. 216.—Swed. lugga, to
pull by the hair; cf. Swed. dugg, the fore-lock; Norw. lugga, to
pull by the hair; dugg, the hair of the head. B.. Perhaps a variant
(with # for g’) appears in Low G. luken, to pull, esp. to pull by the
hair; Brem. Worterbuch, iii. 97; cf. prov. E. louk, to weed, pull up
weeds (see loukers=weeders, in Halliwell), from AS. lican, str. vb.,
to pull up weeds; cf. Dan. duge, the same. ‘ Ceorl of his cecere lycd
yfel wéod monig’=a peasant lugs many an evil weed out of his field;
/Elfred’s tr. of Boethius, met. xii. 28.. Der, dugg-age (with F. suffix
-age), Temp. iv. 231. And see Lugsail, ¢@ The alleged AS.
geluggian, due to Somner, is unauthorised.

LUGSAIL, a sort of square sail. (Hybrid; Scand. and E.)
‘Lugsail, a square sail. hoisted occasionally on a yard which hangs
nearly at right angles with the mast;’ Ash’s Dict., ed. 1775. [He
does not mention lugger, which appears to be a later word ; the Dan.
lugger, Du. logger, a lugger, may be borrowed from E.] Apparently
from the verb to Jug’, it being so easily hoisted by a mere pull at the
rope which supports the yard, Der. dugg-er, a ship rigged with Jug-
sails; unless the derivation runs the other way; in which case the
lugsail is named from the lugger, which may be from Du. logger,
‘slow ship,’ from Du. log, EFries. lug, slow. (Uncertain.)

LUGUBRIOUS, mournful. (L.) Spelt lugubrous and lugubrious
in Kersey, ed. 1715 ; but Jugubrous only in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
Suggested by L. lagubris, mournful. —L. ligére, to mourn. Cf. Gk.
Avypos, sad; prob. also Skt. ruj, to break, bend. Der. lugubrious-ly,
-71€SS.

LUKEWARM, partially warm, not hot. (E.) ‘Leuke warme or
blodde warme;’ Palsgrave. Luke means ‘tepid,’ and can correctly
be used alone, as by Sam Weller in Dickens, Pickwick Papers, ch.
33: ‘let me have nine penn’orth o’ brandy and water Juke,’ It is
sufficient to trace this word alone, ME, leuk, leuke, luke, warm,
tepid. ‘ Als a Jewke bath, nouther hate ne calde;’=as a tepid bath,
neither hot nor cold; Pricke of Conscience, 1. 7481 (Harl. MS.).
‘Tha blod com ford Juke’ =the blood came forth warm; Layamon,
27557. Not in AS. Cf. Du. leuk, lukewarm; EFries. luk, luke,
tepid, weak, slack. Root uncertain; see Du, Jewk in Franck.
@ Distinct from the older word lew, with the same sense, but perhaps
affected by it. Thou art Jew, nether cold nether hoot;’ Wryclif,
Rev. iii. 16, where one MS. has Jewk. This Jew is closely allied to
AS, hléo, hleow, a shelter, a place that is protected from cold wind,
&c., allied to the mod. E. lee; see Lee. Der. luke-warm-ly, luke-
warm-ness.

LULL, to sing to rest, quiet. (E.?) ME. lullen, Chaucer, C. T.
8429, 9697 (E 553, 1823), Earlier, in Walter de Bibbesworth, 1. 9;
in Wright, Vocab. i. 143. Not in AS.+Swed. ludla, to hum, to lull;
Dan. lulle, to lull; MDu. Judlen, to sing in a humming voice, sing to
sleep; Oudemans; WFlem. lul/en, the same; De Bo. B. Purely an
imitative word, from the repetition. of Ju, Ju, which is a drowsier
form of the more cheerful Ja/ Ja/ used in singing. Cf. G. lallen, to
lisp as children do, to babble (lit. to say ala) ; so also Gk. Aadéiv, to
speak. Der. lull, sb. ; lull-a-by; and see loll, loll-ard, lilt.

LUMBAGO, pain in the loins. (L.) In Phillips’ Dict., ed. 1706.
— L. lumbago (a rare word), pain in the loins. L. lumb-us, the loin.
See Lumbar.

LUMBAR, belonging to the loins. (L.) ‘Lumbar or Lumbary,
belonging to the loins ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.—L, lumbaris, adj., only
found in the neut. lumbdre, used as sb. to signify ‘apron;’ Jerem.
xiii. 1 (Vulgate).—L. Jumbus, the loin. Cf. AS. lendenu, pl. the
loins, Matt. iii. 4; Du. lendenen, s. pl.; Swed. land, Dan. lend, the

loin; G, lende, the haunch, Root unknown. Brugmann, i. § 360.
Der. (from L, Jumbus) lumb-ago ; also loin, q. v.


LUNATIC 351


LUMBER (1), cumbersome or useless furniture. (F.—G.) See
Trench, Select Glossary, where we find: ‘The Jumber-room was
orig. the Lombard-room, or room where the Lombard banker and
broker stowed away his pledges. .. . As these would naturally often
accumulate here till they became ont of date and unserviceable, the
steps are easy to be traced by which the word came to possess its
present. meaning.’ So in Webster, Northward Ho, A. v. sc. I:
‘for though his apparel lie i’ the Lombard.’ ‘To put one’s clothes
to lumber, pignori dare ;’ Skinner’s Dict., ed. 1671. ‘ Lombardeer,
an usurer or broaker, so called from the Lombards... hence our
word lumbar, which signifies refuse household stuff. Lombard is also
used for a bank for usury or pawns ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674 ; so
also in Fuller, Church Hist., III. v. 10. Minshen, ed. 1627, gives
Lumbar, Lombar, or Lombard, ‘a bancke for vsury or pawnes.’ He
also gives: ‘Lumber, old baggage of household stuffe, so called of
the noise it maketh when it is remoued, lumber, lumber, &c.3’ and
if any reader prefer this fancy, he may do so;, see Lumber (2).
But, on the other hand, Butler uses dumber to mean ‘money for
pledges ;’ as: ‘The lumber for their proper goods recover;’ Upon
Critics, 1.94. And the word had reference to quite small articles ;
as ‘a brasse ladle, and other lomber;’ Unton Inventories, p. 27.
‘A panne of brasse, with other /Jombor;’ Will of R. Morton (1488);
pr. by E. M. Thompson. B. The Lombards were early known as
lenders of money on pawn; see P. Plowman, C. vii. 241, B. v.
242, and the note. = F. Lombard, ‘a Lombard ;’ Cot.; OF,
Lombart, a usurer (Godefroy). (It also formerly meant a pawn-
broker’s shop; Littré),—_Late L. Longobardus, Langobardus ; for G.
Langbart, Long-beard ; a name given to the men of this tribe (Littré).
See Long and Beard. {@ Or the sb. may have been originally
due to the verb to dumber, to rumble, to move heavy furniture, make
a noise thus; cf. lumber, v., in Palsgrave, and Swed. dial. lomra, to
roar. See N.E.D. The word may have been influenced by both
sources. See Lumber (2). Der. lumber-room.

LUMBER (2), to make a great noise, as a heavy rolling object.
(Scand.) {The lumbering of the wheels;’ Cowper, John Gilpin,
st. 6 from end. ‘I dumber, I make a noise above ones head, Je fais
bruit. You lumbred so above my head I could not sleep for you;’
Palsgrave. ‘They lumber forth the lawe;’ Skelton, Colin Clout,
1. 95. A frequentative verb of Scand. origin; preserved in Swed.
dial. lomra,.to resound, frequent. of jzmma, or ljomma, to resound,
thunder ; from /jumm, a great noise ; Rietz. [Similarly lumber (with
excrescent b) stands for Jumm-er, where -er is the frequentative suffix. ]
B. The Swed. ljumm is cognate with Icel. hljémr, a sound, tune,
voice ; but differs from AS. Alyn, a loud noise (Grein), in the suffix
and quantity. The Goth. kliuma means ‘ hearing;’ Mk. vii. 35.
y. Swed. ljumm, Icel. hljamr, Goth. hliuma, are from the Teut. base
*hleu-, to hear; 4/KLEU. See Loud,

LUMINARY, a bright light. (F.—L.) ‘£O radiant Luminary ;’
Skelton, Prayer to the Father of Heaven, 1, 1.—OF. luminarie
(Littré) ; later luminaire, ‘a light, candle, lampe;’ Cot.=—L. limi-
nare, a luminary, neut. of Jiminaris, light-giving. = L. liimin-, stem of
limen (=*liic-men), light, Cf. L. licére, to shine; see Lucid.
And see Luminous.

LUMINOUS, bright, shining. (F.—L.) ‘Their sunny tents,
and houses /wminous ;’ Giles Fletcher, Christ’s Triumph after Death ;
ii. st. 31. =F, dumineux, § shining ;’ Cot. =—L. liimindsus, luminous. = L.
limin-, stem of liimen, light; see Luminary. Der. luminous-ly,
-ness. Also (from L, liimen) lumin-ar-y, il-lumin-ate. See Lucid.
@ Perhaps taken directly from Latin.

LUMP, a small shapeless mass, clot, (Scand.) ME. lompe,
lumpe; ‘a lompe of chese’=a lump of cheese; P. Plowman, C. x.
150. Of Scand. origin; cf. Swed. dial. dump, a piece hewn off a log
(Rietz) ; Norweg. lump, a block, knop, stump (Aasen). B. Allied
words are Du. lomp (MDu. lompe), a rag, tatter, lump; Du. lomp,
clumsy, dull, awkward; EFries. Jump, clumsy, thick, vile, lumpy ;
Swed. and Dan. lumpen, shabby, mean. Perhaps allied to Limp (2)
by gradation ; cf. Dan. dial. Jumpe, Low G. lumpen, to limp. Der.
lump-ing ; lump-ish, Two Gent. iii, 2.62; lump-y, lump-fish. Also
lunch, q. v-

LUNAR, belonging to the moon. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.
[The older word was lunary, used by Cot. to tr. F. lunaire.]}—L.
linGris, lunar. =—L, lina (<*loucsna@), the moon, lit. light-giver. Cf.
L. licére, to shine; see Lucid. Brugmann, i. § 218. Der. (from
L. lina) lun-ate, i.e. moon-shaped, crescent-like ; Jun-at-ion, in
Kersey, ed. 1715; lun-at-ic, q. v. ; lun-ette, ‘in fortification, a small
work gen. raised before the courtin in ditches full of water,’ Phillips
=F. lunette, dimin. of F. lune, the moon, Also inter-lunar.

LUNATIC, affected with madness. (F.—L.) ME. lunatik,
P. Plowman, C. x. 1073; used as sb. id. B. prol. 123.—F. lunatique,
‘lunatick;’ Cot.—L. liinditicus, insane; lit. affected by the moon,
which was supposed to cause insanity.—L. Jundtus, moon-like.


352 LUNCH


=. lina, the moon; see Lunar. Der. lunac-y, Hamlet, ii. 2. 49,
iii. I. 14.

LUNCH, a lump, large piece of bread, &c. (Scand.) ‘Lunches,
slices, cuts of meat or bread;’ Whitby Glossary, Minsheu (ed. 1627)
mentions lunch, as being equivalent to ‘ gobbet, or peece.’ ‘ Cheese
an’ bread .. in Junches;’ Burns, Holy Fair, st. 23. Rietz has Swed.
dial. Junk, a ball of flour in broth. The word is a variant of lump ;
just as bunch, hunch, are variants of bump and hump; see those words.
Similarly, Swed. linka,tolimp. Andsee Lump. Der.lunch-eon,q.v.

LUNCHEON, LUNCH, a slight meal between breakfast

and dinner. (Scand.) Lunch, in the modern sense, seems at first to
be an abbreviation of Juncheon, though we shall trace the latter back
to lunch in the sense mentioned in the article above. Cotgrave
translates OF. caribot by ‘a lunchion, or big piece of bread, &c. ;’
also OF. horion by ‘a dust, cuff, rap, knock, thump, also, a luncheon,
or big piece.” ‘A lunch, or a luncheon of bread;’ Gazophylacium
Anglicanum (1689). We may suspect the spellings lunch-ion, lunch-
eon, to be merely literary English for Junch-in. ‘A huge lunshin of
bread, i.e. a large piece;’ Thoresby’s (Yorkshire) Letter to Ray,
1703 (E.D.S. Gloss. B. 17, p. 103). And this lunchin is probably
nothing but lunching, with x for ng. At any rate, luncheon, lunchion,
or lunchin, is nothing but an old provincial word, and a mere
extension of lunch, a lump, without, at first, any change of meaning.
It was easily extended to mean a slight meal, just as we now say ‘to
take a snack,’i.e. asnatch of food. Quite distinct from Nuncheon,
q-.v. Der. lunch, verb.
-LUNE, a leash; as, the lune of a hawk. (F.—L.) ‘Lunes, or
small thongs of leather;’ Strutt, Sports, bk. i. c. 2. § 9. Prob.
a variant of ME. loigne, the same; Rom. Rose, 3882.—OF. loigne,
longne, a lune. = Late L. longia, a thong ; formed from L, longus, long;
see Long. Cf. MF. longe, ‘a hawk’s lune or leash;’ Cot.

LUNG, one of the organs of breathing. (E.) Gen. in the pl.
lungs. ME. lunge (sing.), Gower, C. A. iii. 100; bk. vii. 465;
lunges (pl.), id. iii. 99 ; bk. vii. 452. Also longes, pl., Chaucer, C. T.
2754 (A 2752). AS. lungen, fem. sing.; pl. lungena. ‘Pulmo,
lungen;’ Voc. 160. 34; lungena, 306. 18.4-Du. long, s. pl., lungs,
lights; Icel. dunga, neut. sing.; usually in pl. lungu; Dan. lunge ;
pl. lunger ; Swed. lunga; G. lungen, pl. B. Allied to AS. lungre,
quickly (orig. lightly), Grein, ii. 196; also to E. light (2), which is
allied to Gk. éAaxds, Skt. laghu-, light ; see Light (2). Thus the
lungs are named from their lightness; indeed, they are also called
lights. Finally, lungs, light, levity are all from the same root. Cf.
also Russ. Jegkoe, lung, as compared with Russ. legkii, light; Port.
leves, lights, from Jeve, light. Brugmann, i. § 691. Der. lung-wort,
AS. lungenwyrt, Gloss. to Cockayne’s A. S. Leechdoms.

LUNGE, a thrust, in fencing. (F.—L.) In Todd’s Johnson ;
formerly longe, used by Smollett (Johnson). ‘I have my passees, .
My longes;’ Dekker, Wonder of a Kingdom, A. i. sc. 1; spelt
longees, Butler, Hud. pt. iii. c. 1.159. The E. a longe is a mistaken
substitute for F’. allonge (formerly also alonge), ‘a lengthening,’ Cot.
So named from the extension of the body in delivering the thrust. =
F. allonger (formerly alonger), to lengthen; cf. Ital. allongare,
allungare, to lengthen (Florio). Compounded of F. a (L. ad) and
*longare, only in comp. é-longdre, to lengthen; see Klongate. .

LUPINE, a kind of pulse. (F.—L.) The pl. is both lupines and
lupins in Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxii. c. 25. ME.. lupines, pl.,
Lanfranc’s Cirurgie, p. 88, 1. 20.—F. lupin, ‘the pulse lupines;’
Cot.=—L, lupinum, a lupine, kind of pulse; neut. of lupinus, wolfish,
though the reason of the name is not apparent ; perhaps ‘ because it
exhausts the soil’ (Webster). —L. lupus, a wolf; see Wolf.

LURCH (1), to lurk, dodge. (Scand.) Merely a variant of lurk,
due to a palatalised pronunciation; see Lurk. It means to lie in
wait, lurk; Merry Wives, ii. 2. 26. Der. lurch-er, ‘one that lies
upon the lurch, or upon the catch, also a kind of hunting-dog,
Phillips, ed. 1706 ; ‘false lorchers,’ Roy, Rede Me, ed. Arber, p. 98,


WG

BURCH (2), the name ofa game. (F.—G.) The phr. ‘ to leave
in the Jurch’ was derived from its use in an old game ; to lurch is
still used in playing cribbage. ‘ But rather leave him in the lurch ;’
Butler, Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 3.1. 1151. The game is mentioned in
Cotgrave.—F. lourche, ‘the game called Lurche, or, a Lurch in
game; il demoura lourche, he was left in the lurch ;’ Cot. He also
gives: ‘ Ourche, the game at tables called lurch.’ B. This suggests
that lourche stands for l’ourche, the initial J being merely the def.
article; but this is doubtful, as we find also Ital. /urcio, ‘the game
lurch;’ Torriano. y. Apparently from OF. lourche, deceived,
duped (Godefroy).—Bavar. lurzen, to deceive; lurz, left (of the
hands), perverse, beaten at draughts; Schmeller, i. 1503. Der.
lurch, v., to cheat, rob; see Coriolanus, ii. 2. 105.

LURCH (3), to devour; obsolete. (F.?—G.?) Bacon says that
proximity to great cities ‘Jurcheth all provisions, and maketh every


LUSTRE


thing deare;’ Essay xlv, Of Building. That is, it absorbs them,
lit. gulps them down. ‘ To lurch, deuour, or eate greedily, Ingur-
gito;’ Baret, Alvearie. ‘ Lurcher, an exceding eater;’ Palsgrave.
Perhaps a peculiar use of lurch (2), as if to devour before others.
Cf. ‘I lurtche, as one dothe his felowes at meate with etynge to
hastyly ;? Palsgrave. But influenced by Ital. Jurcare, to lurch or
devour greedily;’ Torriano ; Late L. lurcare, to devour greedily; L.
lurcGri, the same; L. lurco, a glutton.

LURCH (4), a sudden roll sideways. (Scand.?) Not in Todd’s
Johnson. ‘A lee lurch, a sudden jerky roll of a ship to the leeward,
as when a heavy sea strikes her on the weather side ;” Cent. Dict.
A sea term. Of obscure origin; but probably due to Jurch (1) in
the sense of to stoop or duck like one who skulks or tries to avoid
notice. See Lurch (1).

LURE, a bait, enticement, decoy. (F.—G.) ME. lure, Chaucer,
C. T. 17021 (H 72). The pp. lured, enticed, occurs in P. Plowman,
B. v. 4393; cf. Chaucer, C. T. 5997 (D 415). A term of the chase;
and therefore of F. origin. OF. loerre, loirre (see Littré), later leurre,
‘a faulconer’s lure;’ Cot.—Teut. type *léthrom, n.; as in MHG.
luoder (G. luder), a bait, decoy, lure. Der. dure, vb.

LURID, wan, gloomy. (L.) ‘ Lurid, pale, wan, black and blew;’
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. liiridus, pale, yellow, wan, ghastly.
Prob. allied to Gk..xAwpds, green (Prellwitz) ; see Chlorine.

LURK, to lie in wait, skulk, lie hid. (Scand.) ME. lurken, lorken,
Chaucer, C. T. 16126 (G 658); P. Plowman, B. ii. 216. Of Scand.
origin. = Norw. lurka, to sneak away, to go slowly; Swed. dial.
lurka, to do anything slowly; EFries. /urken, to shufflealong. B. The
-k appears to be a suffix; cf. Norw. and Swed. dura, Dan. lure, to
lurk, outwit, G. lauern, to lurk. See Lower (2). Doublet, lurch
(1); perhaps lurch (4).

LURY, the same as Lory, q. v.

LUSCIOUS, delicious, very sweet, fulsome, nice. (F.—L.?)
Also spelt lushious, Spenser, F. Q. ii. 12. 54; and in Skinner.
Wedgwood cites from Palsgrave: ‘ Fresshe or lussyouse, as meate
that is nat well seasoned or that hath an unplesante swetnesse in it,
fade. ‘The strong may eate good looshiouse meate;’ Drant, tr. of
Horace, bk, ii. sat. 4 (1566). It seems to be formed from prov. E.
lush, sweet, juicy, abundant, said of vegetation (E.D.D.). B. Possi-
bly influenced by ME. Zucius, variant of licius, short for delicious ; as
in ‘ with /ucius drinkes;’ Robson, Three Met. Romances, p. 17; cf.
‘ with liciws drinke,’ id. p. 38. So also: ‘Jicious quails ;? Bp. Hacket,
Cent. of Sermons, fol. p. 515. And it may also have been influenced
by ME. Zusty, pleasant. ‘How lush and lusty the grass looks ;”
Temp. ii. 1.52. See Lush, Der. luscious-ness.

LUSH, fresh, luxuriant, juicy, said of vegetation. (F.—L.)
‘ Then green and voyd of strength and Jush and foggy is the blade;’
Golding, tr. of Ovid, Metam. xv. leaf 182 (1603). Cf. Tempest, ii.
1. 52. A parallel form to lash, relaxed, tender, soft and watery
(E. D.D.). And see N. E. D.—MF. lasche, ‘slack, flagging, weak ;”
Cot.=— MF, lascher (F. lacher), to slacken. Late L. *lascare, for L.
laxtre, to slacken. = L. laxus, lax; see Iaax.

LUST, longing desire. (E.) The old sense is ‘ pleasure. ME.
lust, Chaucer, C. T. 192. AS. lust, pleasure; Grein, ii. 196.4-Du.
lust, delight ; Icel. lyst, losti; Dan. lyst; Swed. lust; Goth. lustus 3
G. lust. Allied to Skt. dash, to desire; Gk. AtAafopat. Brugmann,
i. § 518 (2). Der. lust, verb, K. Lear, iv. 6. 166, the older form
being Jist= AS. lystan; lust-y, ME. lust-y, Chaucer, C. T. 80; lust-i-ly;
lust-i-ness ; lust-ful, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 80; Just-ful-ness, O. Eng.
Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 21 ; list-less (=Just-less), Gower, C. A. ii.
111, bk. iv. 3262 ; Prompt. Parv. p. 307; Jist-less-ness,

LUSTRATION, a purification by sacrifice, a sacrifice. (L.)
‘The doctrine of /ustrations, amulets, and charms ;’ Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. i. c. II. sect. 12, Formed, by analogy with F.
words in -tion, from L. lustratio, an expiation, sacrifice. = L. lustrare,
to purify. —L. dustrum, an expiatory sacrifice. See Lustre (2).

LUSTRE (1), splendour, brightness. (F.—Ital;—L.)  ‘ Lustre of
the dyamonte;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 73e: Spelt duster in
Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. lustre, ‘a luster, or gloss;’ Cot.—TItal,
lustro, ‘a lustre, a glasse, a shining ;’ Florio; cf. Late L. lustrum,
a window ; lit. a place for admitting light ; connected with L. lustrare,
to enlighten, illumine. B. This verb dustrare appears to be quite
distinct from lustrére, to purify; for which see Lustre (2), It-is
prob. formed from a lost adjective */ustrus, shining, an abbreviation
of *Jiic-strus; in any case, it is to be connected with lécére, to shine ;
see Lucid. Der. lustr-ous, All’s Well, ii. 1. 41 ; lustrous-ly ; lustre-
less; also lutestring, q.v.

LUSTRE (2), LUSTRUM, a period of five years. (F.—L.)
Spelt Zustrum in Minsheu, ed, 1627; which is the L. form. In
Du Wes, Sup. to Palsgrave, p. 1078, we find the pl. Justres, both E.
and F,=OF. and F. lustre, ‘a tearm of .. fifty months;” Cot.—L.
lustrum, an expiatory offering, a lustration; also a period of five


egy fie A)'> Oe lal


LUTE


years, because every five years a lustrum was performed. _B. The
orig. sense is ‘a washing’ or purification ; connected with L. luere,
to cleanse, purify, and Jaxare, to wash; see Lave. Der. lustr-al,
adj.; lustr-at-ion, q. ¥.

LUTE (1), a stringed instrnment of music. (F.—Proy.—Span.—
Arab.) ME. lute, Chaucer, C. T. 12400 (C 466). It is not easy to
say how the word came to us; but prob. it was through the French,
viz. OF. leut. = Proy. laut. Span. laud.— Arab, al “id (below). The
forms are: OF. /eut, pl. lews (Hatzfeld) ; MF. Ju¢ (Cot.), mod. F.
luth; Prov. laut, Span. laud, Port. alaude, Ital. liuto, leuto; also
MDu. Juyte (Kilian), Du. luit, Dan. Iut, G. laute, PB. The Port.
form alaude clearly shows the Arab, origin of the word, the prefix a/-
being the Arab, def. article, which in other languages appears merely
as an initial 7. Thesb. is Arab. “ad (with initial ain), wood, timber,
the trunk or branch of a tree, a staff, stick, wood of aloes, lute, or
harp; Rich. Dict. p. 1035, col. 1. Der. lute-string, Much Ado, ili.
2. 61; and in Palsgrave.

LUTE (2), a composition like clay, loam. (F.—L.) Chaucer has
enluting, Six-text, Group G, 1. 766, on which see my note. We also
find the pp. luted, i.e, protected with lute; see Bacon, Nat. Hist.
§ 99; Massinger, A Very Woman, iii. 1. 38. OF. Jt, ‘clay, mould,
loam, durt;’ Cot.—L. Jutum, mud, mire ; lit. that which is washed
over or washed down.=L. Juere, to wash, lave; see Lave, Der.
lut-ing’.

LUTESTRING, a lustrous silk. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Skinner,
ed. 1671. ‘The price of lutestring ;’ Spectator, no. 21. A curious
corruption of lustring or lustrine. ‘Lustring or Lutestring,a sort of
silk;’ Kersey.—F. dustrine, lustring; Hamilton. = Ital. Justrino, lute-
string (a shining silk), tinsel; Meadows. . So called from its
glossiness. Ital. lustrare, to shine. = L, lustrare, to shine; see
Lustre (1). @ Distinct from lute-string under lute (1).

LUXATION, dislocation. (F.—L.) In surgery.=F. luxation,
‘a luxation; a being out of joint;’ Cot.—L. luxatidnem, acc. of
luxatio, a dislocation. = L. luxare, to dislocate. = L, /uxus, adj., out of
joint. Cf. Gk. Aogds, bent sideways, oblique. Brugmann, ii. § 635.
Der. luxate (Davies) ; from pp. luxat-us.

LUXURY, free indulgence in pleasure, a dainty, (F.—L.)
ME, luxurie, Chaucer, C. T. 12418 (C 484), —AF. Juxurie, Phil. de
Thaun, Bestiary, 566; F. luxure, ‘luxury;? Cot.—L. luxuria, luxury.
An extended form from L. luxus, pomp, excess, luxury. Der. luxuri-
ous, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. i. pr. 4,1. 2245 luxuri-ous-ly, -ness ;
luxuri-ate, from L. luxuridtus, pp. of luxuridre, to indulge in luxury ;
Iuxuri-ant, Milton, P. L. iv. 260, from L. luxuri-ant-, stem of pres.
pt. of luxuriare ; luxuri-ant-ly, luxuri-ance, luxuri-anc-y.

-LY, 2 common adj. and ady. ending. (E.) As an adj. ending, in
man-ly, &c.; the AS. form is -lic. As anady. ending, the AS. form
is -lice. The suffix -lic is the same word as AS. lic, like; see Like.

LYCANTHROPY, a belief in werwolves, (Gk.) From Gk.
AveavOpwria, a madness in which one imagines himself a wolf. = Gk.
AveavOpwros, a man-wolf, werwolf.= Gk. AvK-os, a wolf; dvOpwmos,
aman. See Wolf. Der. From Gk. Avsos we also have lyco-podium,
a genus. of cryptogamous plants; where -podiwm is from Gk. 7106-,
from mrovs, the foot; from the claw-like shape of the root; N. E. D.

LYDDITE, an explosive. (E.) Named from Lydd, a place in
Kent; see N. and Q., 9S. v. 185 (Ig00).

LYE, a mixture of ashes and water, water impregnated with alka-
line salt imbibed from wood-ashes. (E.) ‘Ley for waschynge, lye,
leye, Lixivium ;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 294; Jeje, dat., Ayenbite of
Inwyt, p. 145, 1. 22. AS. leah, f., gen. léage, ‘lie, lee’ [lye], AS.
Leechdoms, ii. 338, 397.4+-Du. loog; G. lauge, OHG. louga. Teut.
type *lauga, f. _B. Further allied to Icel. Jaug, a bath; from
a Teut. base LAU, to wash, akin to L. laudre, to wash; see Lave
and Lather.

LYM, alime-hound. (F.—L.) In Shak., K. Lear, iii. 6.72. Short
for lime-hound, q.v.

LYMPH, a colourless fluid in animals. (L.) A shortened form
of lympha, the older term. ‘Lympha, a clear humour ;’ Kersey, ed.
1715.—L. lympha, water, lymph; also, a water-nymph. fp. The
spelling with y is due to a supposed derivation from the Gk. viu¢pn,
a nymph, which is false. The word is rather to be spelt limpa,
lumpa, and to be connected with L. limpidus, clear ; see Limpid,
Brugmann, i. §§ 102, 763 (b). Der. lymph-at-ic, Evelyn’s Diary,
Jan. 10, 1657; from F. lymphatique (Cot.), L. lymphaticus.

LYNCH, to punish summarily, by mob-law. (E.) Not from
John Lynch (Haydn), but from Charles Lynch, his brother, a Virginia
planter (1736-96), who ‘undertook to protect society . . in the
region where he lived, on the Staunton river, by punishing with
stripes or banishment such lawless or disaffected persons as were
accused.—Cent, Dict. The name Lynch is from AS. hlinc, a ridge
of land; see Link (1). Der. lynch-law.

LYNX, a keen-sighted quadruped. (L.—Gk.) ME, lynx; Ayen-


MACE 353


bite of Inwyt, ed. Morris, p. 81, 1. 6.—L. lynw.= Gk. Avyé, a lynx;
allied to Aevooery (for *Aeve-yew), to see, Acvxos, bright, and named
from its bright eyes.—4/REUK, to shine; cf. Skt. ruch, to shine,
loch, to see. The corresponding Teut. base is LEUH, to shine,
whence G. luchs, Swed. Jo, OSax. lohs, Du. losch, AS. lox, a lynx.
Cf. also Lith. uszis, a lynx, Russ. ruise, Polish rys, and prob. Zend
raozha. See A Student’s Pastime, p. 393. See Lucid. Der.
lynx-eyed.

LYRE, a stringed musical instrument. (F.—L.—Gk.) In
Milton, P. L. iii. 17; he also has lyrick, P. R. iv. 257.—F. lyre,
‘a lyra [sic], or harp ;* Cot.=L. lyra. — Gk. Avpa, a lyre, lute. Der.
lyre-bird ; lyr-ic, spelt Jiricke in Sir P. Sidney, Apol. for Poetry, ed.
Arber, p.'45, last line; lyr-tc-al, lyr-ic-al-ly, lyr-ate.


M


MACADAMISE, to pave a road with small, broken stones.
(Hybrid; Gael. and Heb.; with F. suffix.) ‘Macadamising, a system
of road-making devised by Mr. John Macadam, and published by
him in an essay, in 1819,’ &c.; Haydn, Dict. of Dates. Macadam=
son of Adam; from Gael. mac, son; and Heb, adam, a man, from
the root adam, to be red.

MACARONI, MACCARONT, a paste made of wheat flour.
(Ital.—L.) ‘He doth learn to make strange sauces, to eat an-
chovies, maccaroni, bovoli, fagioli, and caviare;’? Ben Jonson,
Cynthia’s Revels, A. ii (Mercury). ‘ Macaroni, gobbets or lumps of
boyled paste,’ &c.; Minsheu, ed. 1627.—MItal. maccaroni, ‘a kinde
of paste meate boiled in broth, and drest with butter, cheese, and
spice;’ Florio, The mod. Ital. spelling is maccheroni, properly the
plural of maccherone, used in the sense of a ‘macarone’ biscuit.
B. Of somewhat doubtful origin; but prob. to be connected with
Mital. maccare, ‘to bruise, to batter,’ i.e. to pound; ef. Ital. macco,
‘a kind of dish made of beans boiled to a mash;’ Torriano.=L.
mic-, base of macerare, to macerate, See Macerate. y. Thus the
orig. sense seems to have been ‘pulp;’ hence anything of a pulpy
or pasty nature. Der. Macaron-ic, from F. macaronique, ‘a maca-
ronick, a confused heap or huddle of many severall things’ (Cot.),
so named from macaroni, which was orig. a mixed mess, as described
by Florio above. Cf. Ital. maccheronea, ‘Macaronics;’ Baretti.
The name macaroni, according to Haydn, Dict. of Dates, was given
to a poem by Theophilo Folengo (otherwise Merlinus Coccaius) in
1509; macaronie poetry is a kind of jumble, often written in a
mixture of languages. And see macaroon. Maccaroni, a fop, a
dandy, belongs here, Garrick has ‘rake and maccaroni;’ Bon Ton,
A. i, sc. I (Sir J. Trotley). Florio has: ‘maccarone, a gul, a dolt,
a loggerhead ;’ so that the E. word for ‘fop’ should have ended in
-e. See the long extract under macaroni in Davies, Suppl. Glossary.

MACAROON, a kind of cake or biscuit. (F.—Ital.—L.) In
Albumazar, A. ii. sc. 3 (Davies). Formerly macaron, as in Cotgrave.
=F. macarons; pl. macarons, ‘macarons, little fritter-like buns, or
thick losenges, compounded of sugar, almonds, rose-water, and
musk, pounded together and baked with a gentle fire; also [the
same as] the Ital. macaroni;’? Cot.—Ital. macarone, a macaroon.
See further under Macaroni. > The sense of the word has
been somewhat altered.

MACAW, a kind of parrot. (Brazil.) Gay has mockaw, The
Toilette, 1. 9. Spelt maccaw by Willughby, Ornithologia (1676),
p- 73; but machao by Charleton, Onomasticon (1668), p. 66.—
Brazil. macao; see Macaw in Newton, Dict. of Birds.

MACH (1), a kind of club, (F.—L.) In early use. ME. mace,
King Alisaunder, 1901.— AF. mace, Stat, Realm, i. 231; OF. mace,
mache (Burguy), mod. F. masse, a mace. L. *matea, a beetle, only
preserved in the dimin, mazeola, a beetle, mallet; Pliny, 17. 18. 29.
Korting, § 6000, Der. mace-bearer.

MACE (2), a kind of spice. (F.—L.—Gk.) <A pl. form maces
occurs in Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 10; cf. ‘item,
in maces;”’ Earl of Derby’s Expedition, 1392-3; p. 221, Ll. 25.—AF.
maces, Liber Albus, p. 230.—F, macis, ‘the spice called mace;’
Cot.; OF. macis, maceis, maceys (Godefroy); so that the E, form
should be maces, sing., not plural. B, The etym. is very obscure ;
the L. macis or maceis (gen. maccidis) is a doubtful word, the name of
a fictitions spice in Plautus (Lewis). It is possible that the F.
macis was confused with OF. macer, of which Cot. says that it ‘is
not mace, as many imagine, but a reddish, aromaticall, and astringent
rind of a certain Indian root.’ This OF. macer is the word con-
cerning which we read in Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xii. c. 8, that ‘the
macir is likewise brought out of India; a reddish bark or rind it is of
a great root, and beareth the name of the tree itselfe.” Cf. L. mactr,

Aa


354 MACERATE


i.e. ‘macir;’ Pliny.=Gk. paxep; doubtless a borrowed word from
the East.

MACERATE, to soften by steeping, to soak. (L.) In Spenser,
Virgil’s Gnat, 1. 94.—L. maceratus, pp. of macerdre, to steep; a
frequentative from a base mac-; from an Idg, base *mak, Der.
macerat-ion.

MACHICOLATION, an opening in the floor of a projecting
gallery of a tower, for pouring down molten lead and the like. (Low
L.) Coined from Late L. machicolare, to provide with machi-
colations; cf. MF. machecoulis, maschecoulis, § the stones. at the foot of
a parapet (especially over a gate) resembling a grate, through which
offensive things are thrown upon assailants;’? Cot. Of uncertain
origin; perhaps from MF. mache-, as in MF. mache-rave, ‘a turnip-
eater,’ Cot., and other words, but here meaning ‘ bruising’ or ‘killing;’
and OF, coléis, MF. coulis, adj., gliding, or as sb., a groove; L. type
*cdlaticius, from colare, to strain; see Cullis and Portcullis. Here
mache- (F. mache-) is from the OF. mascher, macher, to chew, also
used in the sense of to crush, to murder (see OF. mascher in Gode-
froy). Hence it may mean ‘a groove for crushing foes,’ The OF.
mascher is from L. masticare; see Masticate.

MACHINE, a contrivance, instrument. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak,
Hamlet, ii. 2. 124; first in 1549.—F. machine. L. machina. = Gk.
pnxavn, a device, machine; cf. uAxos, means, contrivance, B. From
the base unx, 2nd. grade of the Idg. 4/MAGH, Teut. MAG, to
have power; whence also the E. verb may; Curtius, i. 416. See
May (1). Der. machin-er-y, machin-ist ; machin-ate, from L. machi-
natus, pp. of machinari, to contrive, which is from the sb. machina ;
machin-at-ion, K. Lear, i. 2. 122, v. 1. 46; AF. machinacion, Stat.
Realm, i. 342 (1353); machin-at-or.

MACKEREL, the name of a fish. (F.—L.?) ME. makerel,
Havelok, 758.—OF. makerel, in Neckam’s Treatise de Utensilibus;
Wright’s Vocab, i. 98, 1.1; makerelle, Liber Albus, p. 235. (Mod.
F. maquereau.) From Late L. maquerellus; of unknown origin.
@ The suggestion in Mahn’s Webster, that the F. maguereau, a
mackerel, is the same word as OF. magquereau, a pandar (Cotgrave),
from ‘a popular tradition in France that the mackerel, in spring,
follows the female shads, which are called vierges or maids, and
leads them to their mates,’ is one which is open to doubt. It may
be that the story arose out of the coincidence of the name, and
that the name was not derived from the story. The etymology of
OF. maguereau, a pandar, is from the Teut. source preserved in Du.
makelaar, a broker, pandar, from Du. makelen, to procure, bring
about, frequentative form of maken, to make.

MACKINTOSH, a waterproof overcoat. (Gael.) From the
name of the inventor.

MACROCOSM, the whole universe. (Gk.) In Phillips, ed.
1706; and in Howell’s Letters, vol. i. let. 34 (1621). ME. macro-
cosme, Lydgate, Assembly of Gods, 995. Spelt macrocosmus in
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Coined from Gk. paxpd-, for paxpés,
long, great; and #dapos, the world. See Microcosm,

MACULATE, to defile. (L.) Used as a pp. in The Two Noble
Kinsmen, ed. Skeat, v. 1, 134.=—L. maculatus, pp. of maculare, to
spot.=L. macula, a spot; adimin, form, Der. maculat-ion. Shak.
Troil. iv. 4. 66; im-maculate,q.v. And see mail (1).

MAD, insane, foolish. (E.) The vowel was at first long. ME.
mad, spelt maad in Li Beau Disconus, 1. 2001, in Ritson’s Met.
Romances, vol. ii.; made in The Seven Sages, ed. Wright, 2091.
Cf. médschipe = madness; Ancren Riwle, p. 148, 1.1. The ME. mad
is from AS. (ge-)m#ded, maddened, shortened to (ge-)m#dd (cf. fat),
pp. of ge-m#dan, to madden, to drive mad, Cf. AS. ge-maad, mad,
Corpus Gloss. 2105.-4-OSax. ge-méd, foolish; OHG. ka-meit, gi-meit,
vain; Icel. meiddr, pp. of meidSa, to maim, hurt; Goth. ga-maids,
bruised, maimed; Luke, iv. 19, xiv. 13, 21. B. Thus the Teut. sense
appears to be ‘maimed.’ . Teut. type *maidoz, Idg. type *moitds,

p. from the root MEI, to change; cf. L. mitdre, to change; see

utable. Not connected with Ital. matto, mad (see Mate (2)) ;
nor with Skt. matta-s, mad (pp. of mad, to be drunk), Der. mad-ly,
mad-ness ; also ME. madden, to be mad, Wyclif, John, x. 20 (obsolete) ;
also madd-en, to make mad, for which Shak. uses the simple form mad,

Rich. I, v. 5, 61, &c.; mad-cap (from mad and cap), K. John, i. 84;
mad-house; mad-man, L. L. L. v. 2. 3383 mad-wort.

MADAM, my lady, a lady. (F.—L.) In early use. ME.
madame, King Alisaunder, 269.—F.madame=ma dame, my lady. =
L. mea domina, my lady. See Dame. Doublet, madonna.


MADDER, the name of a plant. (E.) ME. madir, mader (with |


one d); Prompt. Pary. AS. medere, in Cockayne’s Leechdoms, iii.


3373 cf. feld-medere, field-madder, Voc. 300. 10.4-Icel. madra; Du. |


mede, mee. Cf. Skt. madhura-, sweet, tender ; whence fem. madhura,

the name of several plants (Benfey). See Mead (1).
MADEIRA, a sort of wine. (Port.—L.) In Shak. 1 Hen. IV,

i. 2,128. So named from the island of Madeira, off the N. W.


MAGIC


coast of Africa. The name is Port., and signifies that the island was
well-wooded. = Port. madeira, wood, timber. Cf. Span. madera (the
same). = L. materia, stuff, wood, timber; see Matter (1). See Diez,
p- 465; also Hakluyt, Voy. vol. ii. pt. 2. p. 7.

-MADEMOISELLE, miss; lit. my damsel. (F.—L.) Milton,
Apology for Smectymnuus, speaks slightingly of ‘grooms and
madamoisellaes’ (R.). Spelt madamoselle, Caxton, Blanchardyn, ch.

16.—F. mademoiselle, spelt madamoiselle in Cotgrave.—F. ma, my ;
and demoiselle, formerly damoiselle, a damsel. See Madame and
Damsel, :

MADONNA, my lady, Our Lady. (Ital.—L.) In Shak. Tw,
Nt. i. 5. 47.—Ital. madonna.—Ital. ma, my; and donna, lady.=—
L. mea, my; and domina lady, dame. See Dame. Doublet,
madame.

MADREPORE, the common coral. (F.—Ital.—L. and Gk.)
Modern; not in Todd’s Johnson.=F. madrépore, madrepore. = Ital.
madrepora, explained in Meadows as ‘a petrified plant.’ B. Of
somewhat uncertain origin; but prob. the first part of the word is
Ital. madre, mother, used in various compounds, as madre-selva (lit.
mother-wood), honeysuckle, madre-bosco (lit. mother-bush), wood-
bine (Florio), madre perla, mother of pearl (Florio); from L.
matrem, acc. of mater, mother; see Mother. y. The part -pora
appears to be from the Gk. m@pos, a light, friable stone, also a
stalactite. Hence madre-pore=mother-stone, a similar formation to
madre perla (lit. mother-pearl), @ If this be right, it has nothing
to do with F. madré, spotted, nor with pore. But it has.certainly
been understood as connected with the word pore, as shown by the
numerous similar scientific terms, such as catenipora, tubipora, denti-
pora, gemmipora, &c.; see the articles in Engl. Cycl. on Madrephyl-
liea and Madreporea. It does not follow that the supposed con-
nexion with pore was originally right; it only shows that this sense
was substituted for that of the Gk. m@pos. In fact, the Ital. poro
(a@pos) was misunderstood as representing L. porus in 1599; N.E.D.

MADRIGAL, .a pastoral song. (Ital.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Melodious
birds sing madrigals;’ Marlowe, Passionate Shepherd; cited in
Shak. Merry Wives, iii. 1. 18, 23.—Ital. madrigale, pl. madrigali,
madriali, ‘ madrigals, a kind of short songs or ditties in Italie ;’ Florio.
It stands for *mandrigale, and means ‘a shepherd’s song;’ cf. man-
driale, mandriano, ‘a heardesman, a grasier, a drover; [also] as
madrigale;* Florio. Ital. mandra, ‘a herde, drove, flocke, folde ;”
Florio. = L. mandra, a stall, stable, stye.—Gk. pavdpa, an inclosure,
fold, stable.4-Skt. mandura, a stable for horses; prob. from mand,
to sleep. @ The suffix -gale=L. -calis, Perhaps through F.
madrigal,

MAGN AD, a priestess of Bacchus. (Gk.) From Gk. pavas-,
stem of pawvds, mad, raving; assb., a female Bacchanal. = Gk. paivopat,
Iam mad, I rave; allied to pavia, madness; see Mania.

MAGAZINE, a storehouse, store, store of news, pamphlet.
(F.—Ital.—Arab.) In Milton, P. L. iv. 816. Spelt magason,
Hakluyt, Voy. ii. pt. 1. p. 234.< MF. magazin, ‘a magazin,’ Cot.;
mod. F. magasin. Ital. magazzino, a storehouse. [Cf. Span. maga-
cen, also almagacen, where al is the Arab. article.]= Arab. makhzan
(pl. makhazin), a storehouse, granary, cellar; Rich. Dict. p. 1366.
Cf. also khizanat, a magazine, treasure-house; from khazn, a laying
up in store; id. pp. 609, 610. Der. magazine, vb., to store; North,
Examen, 1740, p. 222.

MAGGOT, a grub, worm. (E.) ME. magot, magat (with one
g), given as a variant of ‘ make, mathe, wyrm yn the fleshe ;” Prompt.
Parv. p. 321. Cf. maked in Wright’s Vocab. i. 255, col. 1, to
translate L. ¢arinus [misprint for tarmus] or simax [=L. cimex].
Maggot is an AF. perversion of ME, maddok, a maggot; see Voc.
594. 3; Lanfranc’s Cirurgie, p. 44, 1. 18; Henslow, Medical Works
of the 14th Cent., p. 141; also madek, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris,
i. 326. A dimin. from AS. mafa, mafu, a worm; Voc. 122. 3;
205. 8.-4- Du. made; G. made, OHG. mado; Goth. matha, a worm.
Cf. Icel. madkr, a maggot; Dan. maddik, madike, a maggot. See
Mawkish. Der. maggot-y.

MAGI, priests of the Persians, (L.—Gk.—Pers.) In P. Plowman,
C. xxii. 85. Borrowed from L. magi, Matt. ii. 1 (Vulgate). = Gk.
pao, Matt. ii, 13 pl. of uayos, a Magian, one of a Median tribe
(Herod. i, ror), hence, an enchanter, wizard, juggler. Properly,
one of the priests or wise men in Persia who interpreted dreams, .&c.


| (Liddell.). B. From OPers. magu- (nom. magus), Pers. mugh, miigh,


one of the Magi, a fire-worshipper; Horn, § 984; Rich. Dict.,
p- 1527. Der. mag-ic,q.v. > It is interesting to note that the
word magus, which Sir H. Rawlinson translates by ‘the Magian,’
occurs in cuneiform characters in an inscription at Behistan; see
Schleicher, Indogerm. Chrestomathie, p. 151; Nineveh and Perse
polis, by W. S. W. Vaux, ed. 1851, p. 405... ;

MAGIC, enchantment. (F.—L.—Gk.—Pers.) ME. magike,
sb., Chaucer,.C. T. 4634 (B 214).—F. magique, adj. ‘ magicall ;’ Cot.


MAGISTERIAL


= L, magicus, magical.—Gk. payiueds, magical. = Gk. pdyos, one of


the Magi, an enchanter. See Magi. B. The sb. magic is an
abbreviation for ‘magic art,’ L. ars magica. Der. magic-al, magic-
al-ly; magic-ian, ME. magicien, Chaucer, C. T. 14213 (B 3397),
from F. magicien, a magician;’ Cot.

MAGISTERIAL, master-like, authoritative. (L.) In Phillips,
ed, 1706. Coined, with suffix -al, from L. magisteri-us, magisterial,
belonging to a master. L. magister, a master. See Magistrate.
Der. magisterial-ly, magisterial-ness,

MAGISTRATE, a justice of the peace. (F.—L.) ME.
maiestrat (=majestrat), Wyclif, Luke, xxiii. 13.—F. magistrat, ‘a
magistrate, ruler;’ Cot.—L, magistratus, (1) a magistracy, (2) a
magistrate, = L. magister,a master, See Master, Der. magistrac-y.

MAGNANIMITY, greatness of mind. (F.—L.) ME. magna-
nimitee, Chaucer, C. T. 15578 (G 110),.—F. magnanimité, ‘ magnani-
mity;’ Cot.—L. magnanimititem, acc. of magnanimitas, greatness of
mind.—L. magn-, stem of magnus, great; and animi-, for animus,
the mind; with suffix -ta@s. See Magnate and Animus.

MAGNANIMOUS, high-minded, noble. (L.) In Shak. All’s
Well, iii. 6. 70. Formed (by changing -ws to -ows,as in ardu-ous,
&c.) from L. magnanimus, great-souled, = L, magn-, stem of magnus,
great; and animus, the mind, Der. magnanimous-ly.

MAGNATE, a great man, noble. (L.) A late word; not in
Todd’s Johnson. From Late L. magnatem, acc. of magnas, a prince
(Judith, v. 26).—L. magn-, stem of magnus, great. B. L. magnus is
cognate with Gk. péyas, great, Skt. mahant-, great, and E. much; see
Much. @ Magnate is a Hungarian and Polish use of the L. word;
the F. magnat (in Littré, but little used) is, more strictly, due to the
pl. magnats=L. magnatés, For derivatives from L. magnus, see
Magnitude.

MAGNESIA, the oxide of magnesium. (Late L.—Gk.) The
name magnesia, apparently formerly applied to manganese, occurs in
Chaucer, C. T. 16923 (G 1455); and in Ben Jonson’s Alchemist,
Act ii (Surly), Added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. Coined from
some supposed resemblance to the mineral called by a similar name
in Gk., from L. Magnésia, fem. of Magnésius, of or belonging to the
country called Magnesia. = Gk. Mayvyjotos, belonging to Magnesia,
in Thessaly; whence Aidos Mayvnrns or Ai@os Mayvyjazos, lit. Mag-
nesian stone, applied to (1) the magnet, (2) a metal that looked like
silver. See Schade, p. 1395. Der. magnesi-um. See Magnet.

GINET, the loadstone, a bar having magnetic properties.
(F.—L.—Gk.) ME. magnete, Prompt. Parv. p. 325.—AF. magnete,
Bozon, p. 51; OF. magnete (Godefroy), also found as manete, in
a F. MS. of the 13th cent.; see Littré, s.v. magnétique. —L. magnéta,
acc. of magnés, for magnés lapis= Magnesian stone, the loadstone. =
Gk. Mayvns (stem Mayvynr-), Magnesian; also Mayvyrns, whence
AiGos Mayvntys, the Magnesian stone, magnet. See Magnesia,
@ Spenser has the L. form magzes, F. Q. ii. 12. 4. Der. magnet-ic,
magnet-ic-al, magnetic-al-ly, magnet-ism, magnet-ise.

MAGNIFICENT, doing great things, pompous, grand. (L.)
In Shak. L, L. L. i. 1. 193.—L. magnificent-, stem of magnificens,
doing great things.—L. magni-, for magnus, great; and -jic-, for fac-,
base of facere, to do; with suffix -ent of.a pres. part. See Magnify.
Der. magnificent-ly; magnificence (Chaucer) =F. magnificence, ‘ mag-
nificence,’ Cot. So also magnific-al, A. V. 1 Chron. xxii. 5, from L.
magnificus, grand.

MAGNIFY, to enlarge, praise highly. (F.—L.) ME. magni-
fien, Wyclif, Matt. xxiii. 5.—F. magnifier, ‘to magnifie;’ Cot.—L.
magnificare, to make large. = L. magni-, for magnus, great; and -~fic-,
for fac-, base of facere, to make, do. See Magnate and Fact.

MAGNILOQUENCE, elevated or pompous language. (L.)
Modern ; added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. Coined, by analogy
with F. words in -ence (=L. -entia), from L. magniloquentia, elevated
language. —L. magni-, for magnus, great; and Joguentia, discourse,
from lJoquent-, stem of pres. part. of logui, to speak. See Magnate
and Loquacious. Der. magniloquent, a coined word,

MAGNITUDE, greatness, size. (L.) In Minshen, ed. 1627.
[There is no F. magnitude.]—L. magnitido, greatness. —L. magni-,
for magnus, great; with suffix -tudo, expressive of quality. See
Magnate. tar The derivatives from L. magnus are numerous,
viz, magn-animity, magn-animous, magn-ate, magni-ficent, magni-fy,
magni-loguence, magni-tude, From the base mag- of the same word
we have also mag-istrate, mag-isterial, master, majesty, major, mayor.
And see Much and May (1).

MAGNOLIA, the name of a genus of plants. (F.) ‘A genus
of plants named in honour of Pierre Magzol, who was professor of
medicine and prefect of the botanic garden of Montpellier [in
France]. He was born in 1638, and died in 1715;’ Engl, Cycl.
See his Botanicum Monspeliense, 1686.

MAGPIE, the name of a bird. (Hybrid; F.—L.—Gk.; and F.
—L.) 1. Called magot-pie in Macbeth, iii. 4.125. We also find


MAIM


prov. E. maggoty-pie; and madge, meaning (1) an owl, (2) a magpie.
The prefixes Mag, Magot, Maggoty (like Madge) are various forms of
the name Margaret; cf, Robin as applied to the red-breast, Jenny to
the wren, Philip to the sparrow. Mag may be taken to be short for
Magot=¥. Margot, which is (1) a familiar form of F. Marguerite,
and (2) a name for the magpie.—F, Margot, for Marguerite, = L.
margarita, a pearl.—Gk. papyapirns, a pearl, a word of Eastern
origin; cf. Pers, murwarid, a pearl; Rich. Dict. p. 1396; Skt.
manjari,a pearl. 2, The syllable pie=F. pie, from L. pica, a magpie;
see Pie (1),

MAGUEY, the American aloe. (Cuba.) According to Oviedo,
it is of Cuban origin. Not Mexican, which has no g. The Mex.
name is metl.

MAHARAJAH, a title of some Indian princes. (Skt.) From
Skt. mahd-raja, m., lit. ‘ great king.’ =—Skt. maha-, for mahant-, great,
allied to L. magnus, great ; and raja, king, allied to L. rex, king.

MAHDI, an Arabian Messiah. (Arab.) From Arab, mahdi, one
who is (divinely) guided ; from ma, prefix, and hady, to guide. Cf.
hadi, a guide (Rich, Dict., pp. 1661, 1670).

MAHLSTICK, the same as Maulstick, q.v.

MAHOGANY, the name of a tree and a wood. (W. Indian.) See
mahogany in index to Boswell’s Life of Johnson. Added by Todd to
Johnson’s Dict.; ‘said to have been brought to England by Raleigh,
in 15953’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates. Spelt mohogeney in 1671, with
a reference to Jamaica. Of W. Indian origin; but from what dialect
is unknown.

MAHOMETAN ; see Mohammedan.

MAHOUT, an elephant-driver. (Hind.) ‘The mahout of his
elephant had been pulled off his seat ;* Thackeray, Vanity Fair,
ch, iv. Hind. mahawat, an elephant-driver (Forbes). And see
Yule.

MAID, MAIDEN, a girl, virgin. (E.) 1. Mayde occurs in
Rob. of Glouc. p. 13, 1. 297. It isnot common in early ME., and is,
practically, merely a corruption of maiden, by the loss of final x,
rather than a form derived from AS, meg or meged, a maiden
(Grein, ii. 216), 2. The usual early ME. word is maiden or meiden,
Ancren Riwle, pp. 64, 166. AS. megden, a maiden (Grein, ii. 216) ;
also m#den, Mark, v. 41; later text, maide. B, AS. maegden, cognate
with OHG. magatin, is formed from megd- (for meged) by adding
the suffix -ix (cf. L. -in-us); see March, A. S. Gram. art. 228.
y: Meged is cognate with Goth. magaths, a virgin, maid (=G. magd),
where the suffix -hs answers to the Idg. suffix -to-s. The base meg-
is allied to Goth. mag-us, a boy, a child, Luke, ii. 43; also to Icel.
mogr, a boy, youth, son. 8. The orig. sense of magus is ‘a growing
lad,’ one increasing in strength; from the Teut. base MAG, to have
power, whence also might, main. See May (1). See Stokes-Fick,
p- 198 Der. maiden-hood=AS. megdenhad, Grein, ii. 216; also
spelt maiden-head=ME. meidenhed or maydenhede, Gower, C. A. il.
230, bk. v. 3068, which is a mere variant of maiden-hood; maiden-ly,
Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 217, Skelton, Garden of Laurel, 1. 865 ; s#aiden-
li-ness; maiden-hair ; also maid-child, Levit. xii. 5.

MATL (1), steel network forming body-armour. (F.—L.) ‘For
though thyn housbonde armed be in maille;’ Chaucer, C. T. 9078
(E 1202); the pl. mayles is in the Anturs of Arthur, st. xxx. Cf.
“macula, mayl;’ Voc. 594. 18.=OF, maille, ‘maile, or a link of
maile, whereof coats of maile be made; . . any little ring of metall;
.. also, a mash [mesh] of a net;’ Cot.—L. macula, a spot, speck,
hole, mesh of a net, net. See Maculate.

MAIL (2), a bag for carrying letters. (F.-OHG.) ME. male,
a bag, wallet ; Chaucer, C. T. 3117, 12854 (A 3115, C 920); Havelok,
48.—OF. male (mod. F. maile), ‘a male, or great budget ;” Cot.—
OHG., malaha, MHG. malhe, a leathern wallet. Cf. Gael. and Irish
mala, a bag, sack (from E.).-++ Gk. podyds, a hide, skin. Der.
mail-bag, mail-coach, mail-cart.

MAIL (BLACK), a forced tribute. (Scand.) Mail is a Scottish
term for rent, Jamieson cites the phr. burrow-mailles, duties payable
within -boroughs, from the Acts of Jas. I. c. 8 (A.D. 1424). Black-
maill is mentioned in the Acts of Jas. VI. c. 21 (1567), and in the
Acts of Elizabeth, an. 43, cap. 13, as a forced tribute paid to moss-
troopers; see Jamieson and Blount. Spelman is right in supposing
that it meant black rent or black money, a jocose allusion to tribute
paid in cattle, &c., as distinct from rent paid in silver or white
money ; Blount shows that the term black money occurs in 9 Edw. III.
cap. 4, and white money isnot uncommon. Blount also cites the term
black-rents. A Northern form.—TIcel. mal, speech, law-suit, agree-
ment; mali, agreement, payment. Cognate with AS. mafel, mal,
a meeting, speech; Goth. mathl, a meeting-place.

MAIM, a bruise, injury, crippling hurt. (F.—OHG.) Also spelt
mahim in Law-books; Blount’s Nomolexicon, ed. 1691. ME. maim,
pl. maimes, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 135, l. 27; the pp. y-maymed is in
the preceding line. The verb occurs also in Chaucer, C, T. 6714

Ka 2,


855


356 MAIN


(D1132).— AF. mahaym, Liber Albus, p.281; OF .meshain (Godefroy) ;
MF. mehaing,‘a maime, or ... abatement of strength... by hurts
received ;’ Cot. Whence the verb mehaigner, ‘to maime;’ id. Cf.
Ttal. magagna, a defect, blemish ; whence magagzare, to spoil, vitiate.
B. Of uncertain origin ; Bret. macha#, mutilation (whence machafia,
to maim, mutilate), is borrowed from F. (Thurneysen). Some derive
the Ital. word from OHG. mann, a man, and *kamjan, to mutilate,
from the OHG. adj. ham, maimed (KGrting). In the OF. form, the
prefix is mes-; see Mis- (2). Der. maim, verb.

MAIN (1), sb., strength, might. (E.) To be distinguished from
main (2), though both are from the same Idg. root. ME. main, dat.
maine, Gower, C. A. iii. 4; bk. vi. 90; also mein, as in ‘ with al his
mein,’ Floriz and Blauncheflor, ed. Lumby, 1. 17. AS. megen,
strength; Grein, ii. 217.-4-Icel. megin, strength; OSax. megin,
strength; OHG. megin. Also OHG. magan, Icel, magn. Tent.
types *maginom, *maganom, n.; from Teut. base *mag-; see May (1).

MAIN (2), adj., strong, great. (Scand.) In Shak. Rich. III,
‘v. 3.299. ME. mayn, Wars of Alex. 3018. Maine saile (=main-
sail) occurs in the Bible of 1551, Acts, xxvii. 40.—Icel. megn, strong,
mighty; allied to megin, strength (above). Cf. Icel. meginland,
main-land ; megin-sjOr, mainsea, the main. Der. main-ly; also main-
deck, -mast, -sail (Palsgrave), -spring, -stay, -top, -yard; main-land
(Palsgrave).

MAINOUR. (F.—L.) In the phr. ‘taken with the mainour,’
or later, ‘taken in the manner;’ see 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4.347. See note
to Manner. We find pris ov meinoure (where ov=F. avec), Stat. of
the Realm, i. 30, an. 1275. Blount, in his Nomolexicon, explains
mainour as meaning ‘the thing that a thief steals ;” and ‘ to be taken
~vith the mainour,’ as ‘with the thing stoln about him, flagrante
delicto.’ It is lit.‘ with the manceuvre,’ and therefore refers rather to
the act than the thing; see Cotgrave, s.v. flagrant; E. Webbe,
Travels, 1590, ed. Arber, p. 28. The Anglo-F. meinoure, also
mainoure (Stat. Realm, i. 161) answers to OF, manouvre (Littré).
see Manoeuvre.

MAINTAIN, to keep in a fixed state, keep up, support. (F.—L.)
ME. maintenen, mayntenen, K. Alisaunder, 1. 1592. =F. maintenir, ‘to
maintain;’ Cot.—L. mani tenére, to hold in the hand; or more
likely, in Late Latin, to hold by the hand, to support or aid another,
as shown by the use of ME. mainteinen, to aid and abet, P. Plowman,
B. iii. 90, and note. =L. mani, abl. case of manus, the hand; and
tenére, to hold. See Manual and Tenable. Der. maintain-able,
maintain-er ; mainten-ance, ME. meintenaunce, spelt mentenaunce in
Shoreham’s Poems, p. 100, 1. 19, from OF. maintenance, ‘main-
tenance ;’ Cot.

MAIZE, Indian corn or wheat. (Span.—W. Indian.) ‘Indian
maiz ;? Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 49; and in Essay 33. Also in Dampier’s
Voyages, an. 1681 (R.).—Span. maiz, maize.—W. Indian mahiz,
mahis, in the old Carib dialect of the island of Hayti (S. Domingo) ;
see R. Eden (ed. Arber), pp. 67, 116, 118; Acosta, Hist. Indies,
bk. iv. c. 16.

MAJESTY, grandeur, dignity. (F.—L.) ME. magestee, Chaucer,
C.-T. 4320 (A 4322); E. E. Psalter, Ps. 71. 20.—OF. majestet,
majeste, later majesté, ‘ majesty ;’ Cot. = L. maiestatem, acc. of maiestas,
dignity, honour. = L. mdies-, related by gradation to ma-ior, comp. of
mag-nus, great, with the addition of a comparative suffix; see Brug-
mann, ii. § 135. The sense of maiestas is the ‘condition of being
greater,’ hence, dignity. See Major, Magnitude. Der. majest-ic,
a coined word, Temp. iv. 118; majest-ic-al, L. L. L. v. 2. 102;
majest-ic-al-ly, 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 479.

MAJOLICA, usually with ware; decorative enamelled pottery.
(Ital.—Span.—L.) From Ital. maiolica, also maiorica, ‘the earth we
call porcelane, whereof China dishes are made;’ Florio.—Span.
Mallorca, Majorca, formerly Majolica (Ducange), whence the first
specimens came. From L. mdior, greater.

MAJOR, greater; the title of an officer in the army. (L.)
Early used (as an adj.) as a term in logic, as in ‘this maior or first
proposition ;? Fryth, Works, p. 147, col. 1. The major part ;’
Cor. ii. 1. 64.—L. mdior, greater; comparative of magnus, great;
see Magnitude. Der. major-ship, major-general ; major-domo,
spelt maiordomo in Puttenham, Art of Poesie, b. iii. c. 4. (ed. Arber,

. 158), imitated from Span. mayor-domo, a house-steward (see
Domestic) ; also major-i-ty, 1 Hen. IV, iii. 2. 109, from F. majorité,
“majority;’ Cot. Doublet, mayor.

MAJUSCULE, a capital or uncial letter; not a minuscule.
(L.) From L. mdiusculus, somewhat larger; allied to mdior, greater;
see Major.

MAKE, to fashion, frame, cause, produce. (E.) ME. maken,
makien; pt. t. makede, made, pp. maked, maad, mad; Chaucer, C. T,
9, 33, 396. AS. mactan, pt. t. macode, pp. macod; see Sweet, A. S.
Reader ; also ge-macian (Grein).4-Du. maken; G. machen, OHG.
machon, to make. Allied to Match (1). Der. make, sb., Gower,


MALIGN


C. A. ii. 204; bk. -v. 2096; mak-er, P. Plowman, B. x. 240; make-
peace, Rich. II, i. 1.160; make-shift, make-weight ; and see match (1).

MALACHITE, a hard green stone. (Gk.) ‘Malachites, Molo-
chites, a kind of precious stone of a dark green colour, like the herb.
mallows ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Formed, with suffix -ites (= Gk. -irns)
from Gk. padayx-n, a mallow. See Mallow.

MALADMINISTRATION, bad administration. (F,—L.)
Spelt maleadministration in Swift, Sentiments of a Church of Eng.
Man, s. 2 (R.).—F. male, fem. of mal (=L. malus), bad; and F.
administration. See Malice and Administer. € So also mal-
adjustment, mal-adroit, mal-apert, mal-conformation, mal-content, 8c.
these have the same F, adj. (or mal, adv.) as a prefix.

MALADROIT, clumsy. (F.—L.) F. maladroit; for mal (L.
male), ill, badly ; and adroit. See Adroit.

MALADY, disease, illness. (F.—L.) ME. maladie, maladye,
Chaucer, C. T. 421, 1375 (A 419, 1373). Also earlier, in O. Eng.
Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 31,1. 13.— AF. maladie; Edw. Conf. 1511;
F. maladie, ‘malady ;’ Cot.—F. malade, sick, ill; oldest spelling
malabde (Littré). Cf. Prov. malaptes, malautes, malaudes, sick, ill;
Bartsch, Chrestomathie. = L. male habitus, out of condition ; cf. male
habens, sick, Matt. iv. 24 (Vulgate).—L. male, adv., badly, ill, from
malus, bad; and habitus, held, kept, kept in a certain condition, pp.
of habére, to have. ‘See Malice and Habit. 4 The usual deriva-
tion is that given by Diez, who imagined F. malade to answer to male
aptus; there appears to be no authority for the phrase, which (like
ineptus) would mean ‘ foolish’ rather than ‘ill.’ See Korting, § 5833.

MALAPERT, saucy, impudent, ill-behaved. (F.—L.) The
true sense is § ill-skilled,’ ‘ill-bred.’ In The Court of Love, 737
(after A.D. 1500); also in Chaucer, Troil. iii, 87.—OF. mal appert,.
insolent (see Godefroy).—OF. mal<L. male, ady., badly, ill; and
appert, ‘ expert, ready, dexter, prompt, active, nimble; feat, handsome
in that he does;’ Cot. Also spelt aspert, espert; from L. expertus,
expert; see Expert. [The OF. apert,‘ open, evident,’ is a different
word, and der. from L. apertus, open; but the OF. apert and appert
were much confused}, as, e.g. in Godefroy, though kept apart by
Cotgrave.]| @ By a complete confusion of L. apertus and expertus,
we find OF. espert used in the sense of ‘open.’ Der. malapert-ly,
malapert-ness.

MALARIA, miasma, noxious exhalation. (Ital.—L. and Gk.)
Modern. Not in Todd’s Johnson. = Ital. mal’ aria, for mala aria, bad
air. Mala is fem. of malo, bad, from L. malus, bad; see Malice.
Aria represents Late L. *dria, for deria, f. of derius, adj. formed from
L. aér, air, Gk. aqp. See Air.

MALCONTENT, MALECONTENT, discontented. (F.
—L.) In Shak. 3 Hen. VI, iv. 1. 10, 60.—OF. malcontent, ‘ male-
content ;’ Cot.—F. mal, adv., from L. male, badly; and F. content.
See Malice and Content.

MALE, masculine, (F.—L.) ME. male. ‘ Male and female ;”
Wyclif, Matt. xix. 4. Cf. Chaucer, C.T. 5704 (D 122).—OF. masle
(later male), ‘a male,’ Cot. (who gives both spellings); mod. F. male ;
earliest spelling mascle (Hatzfeld).—L. masculum, acc. of masculus,
male; formed with suffixes =cw- and -/- from mas-, stem of mas,
a male creature, man (gen. mar-is=*mas-is). See Masculine.
Der. mascul-ine, mallard. @ Nowise connected with female.

MALEDICTION, a curse, execration, (F.—L.) In Shak.
K, Lear, i. 2. 160. Spelt malediccion in the Bible of 1551, Gal. iii.
10.—F. malediction, ‘a malediction ;’ Cot.—L. maledictidnem, acc. of
maledictio, a curse; cf. maledictus, pp. of maledicere, to speak evil
against. —L. male, adv., badly; and dicere, to speak. See Malice
and Diction. Doublet, malison.

MALEFACTOR, an evil-doer. (L.) ‘ Heretik or any male-
factour ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 941 h; and in Dictes of the Philo-
sophers, pr. by Caxton, fol. 11 b, 1, 18.—L. malefactorem, acc. of
malefactor, an evil-doer.—L. male, adv., badly; and factor, a doer,
from facere, to do. See Malice and Fact. Der. So also malefac-
tion, Hamlet, ii. 2. 621, from factidnem, acc. of factio, a doing.

MALEVOLENT, ill-disposed to others, envious. (L.) Lit.
‘wishing ill.” In Shak. r Hen. IV, i. 1. 97.—L. maleuolent-, stem
of maleuolens, wishing evil.—L. male, adv., badly, ill; and wolens,.
pres. pt. of welle, to wish. See Malice and Voluntary, Der.
malevolent-ly ; malevolence, from OF. malivolence (Godefroy).

MALFORMATION, anill formation. (F.—L.) Coined from
mal- and formation; see Maladministration.

MALIC, made from apples. (L.) Formed with suffix -ie (L,
-ic-us) from L. mal-um, an apple.4+Gk. pijroyv, a fruit, an apple.

MALICH, ill will, spite. (F.—L.) ME. malice, Rob. of Glouc.
p- 570; 1. 12027.—F. malice, = L. malitia, badness, ill will.—L. mali-,
for malus, bad; with suffix -éi-a. Root unknown. Der. malici-ous,
ME. malicious, K. Alisaunder, 3323, 5045, from F. malicieux ;.
malicious-ly, -ness.


MALIGN, unfavourable, malicious. (F.—L.) ‘The spirit


MALINGER


malign ;’ Milton, P. L. iii. 553; cf. iv. 503, &c. ME. maligne; in
Shoreham’s Poems, p. 72, 1.25. [The derived verb malign, to curse,
is found in Sir T. More, Works, p. 37 b.] = OF. maling, fem. maligne,
‘malignant ;’ Cot. (Mod. F. malin.) — L. malignus, ill-disposed,
wicked ; for *mali-gen-us, ill-born; like benignus for *beni-gen-us. =
L. mali-, for malus, bad; and gen-, base of gignere, to produce. See
Malice and Generate. . Der. malign, verb (as above), due to L.
malignare, to act spitefully ; malign-ly, malign-er; also malign-ant,
Temp. i. 2. 257, from L, malignant-, stem of pres. pt. of malignare,
to act spitefully; malign-ant-ly; malign-anc-y, Tw. Nt. ii. 1. 4;
malign-i-ty, ME. malignitee, Chaucer, Persones Tale, De Inyidia
(Six-text, I 513), from F. malignité< L. malignitatem, acc. .of
malignitas, malignity. :

« MALINGER, to feign sickness. (F.—L. and G.) Modern.
Not in Todd’s Johnson. Coined from F. malingre, adj. diseased,
sickly, or ‘sore, scabby, ugly, loathsome;’ Cot.=—F. mal, badly;
and OF. haingre, heingre, Norm. dial. haingre, thin, emaciated
(Godefroy, Moisy).—L. male, adv. badly, fram malus, bad; and G.
hager, thin, lean. Cf. Korting, § 306; where another solution is
offered, viz. from L. mal- (for male), and the suffix -ing- (of G.
origin); § 5825; which fails to explain the h.

: MATISON, a curse. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. malison,
spelt malisun in. Hayelok, 426.—AF. malicoun, Polit. Songs, ed.
Wright, p. 234; OF. maleison, in Godefroy. A doublet of male-
diction, just as benison is of benediction; see Malediction and
Benison, }

. MALKIN, a kitchen wench. (F.-OHG.) In Chaucer, C. T.
B 30 (see note); P. Plowm. B. i. 182 (see note). Orig. a reduced
form. (not of Mary, but) of Matilda. ‘Malkyne, or Mawt, Molt,
Mawde, propyr- name, Matildis;’ Prompt. Parv. Dimin. of AF.
Maid, Maud, Matilda. —OHG. Maht-hilt; where maht means ‘ might,’
and hilt, ‘battle.’ Cf. Macbeth, i.1.8. Der. Gri-malkin.

MADIi (1), a large wooden hammer or beetle. (F.—L.) Also
maul, It occurs in the Spectator, no. 195, near the beginning ; and
in Spenser, F. Q. i. 7. 51. ME. malle, St. Brandan, ed. Wright,
p- 48; spelt mealle in O. Eng.-Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 253, 1. 12 ;
melle, Hampole, Pricke of Conscience, 6572.—OF. mail, mal, maul
(Godefroy) ; F. mail, ‘a mall, mallet, or beetle ;’ Cot.=L. malleum,
acc. of malleus,a hammer, [The vowel a in the E. word was perhaps
suggested by the L. form.] Der. mail (2), q..v,; mall-e-able, q. v.,
mall-et, q. Vv.

MAMI (2), the name ofa public walk. (F.—L.) Preserved in

the name of the street called Pall Mall, and in The Mall in St. James’s
Park. In Pope, Rape of the Lock, v. 133. ‘To walk in the Mail ;’
Parsons, Wapping Old Stairs,.1.9. Named from MF. pale-maille,
fa game wherein a round box bowle is with a mallet struck through
a high arch of iron,’ &c. [i.e. the game imitated in mod. croquet] ;
Cot. A representation of the game is given in Knight’s Old England,
vol. ii, fig. 2152.—MlItal. palamaglio, ‘a stick with a mallet at one
end to play at a wooden ball with ; also, the name of such a game;’
Florio. Better spelt pallamaglio, as in Baretti’s Dict. Lit. ‘a ball-
mallet’ or ‘ ball-mall.’ Ital. palla, a ball; and maglio (=F. mail),
a mace, mall, hammer. fp. A hybrid word; from OHG. alla,
pallo (MHG, baile, G., ball), a ball, cognate with E. Ball, q. v.; and
L. malleum, acc. of malleus, a hammer; see Mall (1).  Itis
contended that Ital. pallamaglio really meant ‘mallet-ball,’ not
‘ball-mallet ;’ if so, it was.misunderstood. See my Notes on E.
Etym., p. 204; s. v. Pall-mall.
. MALLARD, a wild drake. (F.—L.) ME. malard. ‘ Malarde,
anas;’ Prompt. Pary.—OF. malard, also maslard, ‘a mallard, or
wild drake ;’ Cot, Formed with suffix -ard (of G. origin); and
certainly from.OF. masle (mod. F. mdle), male; see Male. . The
suffix -ard (= Goth. hardus, G. hart, hard) was much used in forming
masculine proper names, to give the idea of force or strength ; hence
it was readily added to OF. masle, producing a form masl-ard, in
which the notion of ‘male’ is practically reduplicated. ‘See Introd.
to Hatzfeld, Etym. Dict. § 147. sy. As this etymology, given by
Diez, offers some difficulty, Hatzfeld suggests that Malart (Malard
in Godefroy) was.a proper name, playfully given to the bird ; and that
this name is from OHG. Madal-hard, a proper name cognate with
AS. Mathelheard (Birch, Cart. Saxon. i. 280). And in fact the ME,
form mawdelarde, ‘mallard’ occurs in the Liber Cure Cocorum, p. 27.
But it represents the OF. madlarde, f., wild duck (Godefroy), f. of
madlard; from AF. madle, male, variant of OF. masle (above). For
AF, di=OF. sl, cf. medlar, medley.

MALLEABLE, that can be beaten out by the hammer, (F.—L.)
In Shak. Per. iv. 6.152; and even in Chaucer, C. T. 16598 (G 1130).
= OF. maileable, ‘mallable, hammerable, pliant to the hammer ;’
Cot. Formed with suffix -able from obs. L. *malleare, to hammer, of
which the pp. malledtus occurs. —L. malleus, a hammer; see MaJ1
(1). Der. maileabili-ty, malleable-ness (see Locke, On Hum. Underst.


MAMMA 357


b. iii. c. 6, s. 6, c. 10, s. 17) ; malleat-ed, Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674,
from L. pp. malleat-us ; malleat-ion,

MALLECHO, mischief; lit. ‘malefaction.” (Span.—L.) In
Hamlet, ili. 2. 147.—Span. malhecho, ‘misdone; an evil deed;’
Minsheu.—Span. mal, evil; hecho, done, pp. of hacer, to do.—L.
male, ill; factus, pp. of facere, todo. See Fact.

MALLET, a small mall, a wooden hammer. (F.—L.) ‘Bear-
ynge great ma/ettes of iron and stele;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol.
i. c. 422(R.), ME, maillet, Romance of Partenay, 4698; malyet,
Wyntoun, Chron. iii. 104.—F. maillet, ‘a mallet or hammer;’ Cot.
Dimin. of F. mail; see Mall (1).

MALLOW, the name of a plant. (L.) ME. malwe; Prompt.
Parv. AS. malwe, mealewe; Voc. 135. 273 297.27. Not a Tent.
word, but borrowed from L. malua, a mallow.4+Gk. padrdxyn (for
*ynakFaxn), a mallow. B. Named from its supposed emollient pro-
perties; cf. Gk. paddooey (==*padak-yev), to make soft, from
padakés, soft, mild. Der. marsh-mallow, AS. mersc-mealewe, Voc.
296.21. Also malv-ac-e-ous (=L. maludceus, adj.). ta Mr. Wedg-
wood shows that the Arabs still use mallows for poultices to allay
irritation, And see Malachite.

MADLM, a kind of earth. (E.) Common in prov. E. AS. mealm,
as seen in mealm-iht, sandy, chalky ; mealm-stan, malm-stone, maum-
stone.--Icel. malmr, sand; Goth. malma, sand. Teut. base *mal-m-,
from mal-an, to grind, allied to L. mol-ere, to grind. See Meal (1).

MALMSEY, a strong sweet wine. (F.—Gk.) In Shak. L.L. L.
Vv. 2. 233. Spelt malmesay in Tyndall, Works, p. 229, col. 2. Also
called malvesye, Chaucer, C. T. 13000 (B 1260).—AF. malvesy
(Ducange) ; OF. malvoisie, ‘malmesie;’? Cot.. From Malvasia, now
called Napoli di Malvasia (see Black’s Atlas), the name of a town on
the E. coast of Lacedaemonia in the Morea; for Monemvasia (Gk.
pov-euBacia), lit. ‘single entrance.’ = Gk. pov-n, fem. of udvos, single ;
éu-Bacia, entrance, from év, in, Baiyew, to go. Cf. Span. malvasia,
Ital. malvagia,malmsey. [| The second m in Malmsey is due to the
form Monemvasia.

MALT, grain steeped in water, and dried in a kiln, for brewing.
(E.) ME, malt, Chaucer, C. T. 3989 (A 3991). AS. mealt, Voc.
196. 22; whence mealt-hiis, a malt-house, Voc. 185.24. From Teut.
*malt (AS. mealt), 2nd grade of *meltan-, strong verb, to melt; hence,
to steep, soften. Du. mout; Icel. malt, whence the weak verb melia,
to malt (not the same as E, melt) ; Dan. and Swed. malt; G. maiz,
malt; cf. MHG. malz, soft, weak. Cf. Skt. mrdu-s, L. mollis, soft.
See Melt. Der. malt, vb., ME. malten, Prompt. Parv.; malt-horse,
Com. Errors, iii. 1. 323 malt-house; malt-worm, 1 Hen. IV, ii. 1.
83; also malt-ster, ME. malte-stere, Prompt. Parve @ The suffix
-ster was once looked upon as a fem. termination, as in brew-ster,
baxter for bake-ster, web-ster, spin-ster; and the baking, brewing,
weaving, and spinning were once all alike in the hands of females.
See Spinster. ;

MALTREAT, to treat ill. (F.—L.) ‘ Yorick indeed was never
better served in his life; but it was a little hard to maltreat him
after ;’ Sterne, Tristram Shandy, vol. ii. c. 17, not far from the end.
=F. maltraiter, to treat ill. Cf, Ital. maltrattare, to treat ill.—L.
male, adv., ill, badly ; and fractare, to treat, handle. See Malice
and Treat. Der. maltreat-ment, MF. maltraictement, ‘hard deal-
ing;’ Cot.

MALVERSATION, fraudulent behaviour. (F.—L.) ‘ Mal-
versation, ill conversation, misdemeanour, misuse ;’ Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. =F. malversation,‘misdemeanor;’ Cot. Regularly formed
(with suffix -a-tion) from F. malverser ; Cot. gives ‘malverser en son
office, to behave himself ill in his office.” =L. male, ady., badly ; and
uersart (pp. uersdtus), to dwell, be engaged in, from _wersdre, fre-
quentative form of wertere, to turn. See Malice and Verse.

MAMALUKE, MAMELUKE, an Egyptian light horse-
soldier. (F.—Arab.) In Sir T, More, Works, p. 279 f. Also in
Skelton, Why Come Ye Nat to Courte, 1. 476; see Spec, of Eng.
ed. Skeat, p. 143, and the note. —MF. Mamaluc, ‘a Mameluke, or
light-horseman;’ Cot. [Cf Span. Mameluco, Ital. Mammalucco. |
They were a corps of slaves. Arab. mamlik, a purchased slave or
captive; lit. * possessed.’ Arab. root malaka, he possessed ; Rich,
Dict. pp. 1494, 1488.

MAMMA, an infantine term for mother. (E.) Seldom found in
books, except of late years; it occurs in Prior’s poems, entitled
‘Venus Mistaken,’ and ‘ The Dove.’ ‘The babe shall now begin to
tattle and call her Mamma ;’ Lily, Euphues, ed. Arber, p, 129. In
Skinner and Cotgrave it is spelt mam; Cot. gives: Mammam, the
voice of infants, mam.’ Skelton has mammy, Garl. of Laurel, l. 974.
The spelling mamma is doubtless pedantic, and due to the L. mamma;
it should rather be mama, as it is merely a repetition of ma, an
infantine syllable. It may also be considered as an E, word; most
other languages have something like it. Cf. MF. mammam, cited
above, mod. F. maman; Span. mama, Ital. mamma, Du, mama,


MAMMALIA


G. mama, miimme, memme, all infantine words for mother; also
W. mam, mother, L. mamma, mother, Gk. pappn, Russ. mama, &c.
@ We have no evidence against the borrowing of the word from
French; still it was. most likely, not so borrowed. Brugmann, ii.
§ 179, 947.

MAMMALIA, the class of animals that suckle their young.
(L.) Modern and scientific; not in Johnson. Formed from L.
mammalis, belonging to the breasts. = L. mamma, the breast.
B. There is a doubt whether the word is the same as L. mamma,
mother; if it be, we may consider it as of infantine origin; see
above. yy. Brugmann separates them (i. § 587), and explains this
mamma as *mad-ma, from mad-ére, to be wet; cf. Gk. wads (<Q *pad-
yos), paortés (< *yad-rds), breast; pad-dety, to flow away. Der.
mammalian; we also use mammal as a convenient short term for
‘one of the mammalia.’

MAMMILLARY, pertaining to the breasts. (L.) ‘The
mammillary teats ;? Dr. Robinson, Endoxa (ed. 1658), p. 51; Todd’s
Johnson. Coined from L. mammillaris, adj. formed from mammilla,
a teat, dimin. of mamma, abreast. See Mammalia.

MAMMON, riches, the god of riches. (L.—Gk.—Syriac.) In
A. V. Matt. vi. 24; Luke, xvi. 9.—L. mammona, Matt. vi. 24 (Vul-
gate).—Gk. papwvds; ibid.—Syr. maména; a word which often
occurs in the Chaldee Targums of Onkelos, and later writers, and in
the Syriac version, and means ‘riches;’ Dict. of the Bible. Cf. Heb.
matmon, a hidden treasure; from ¢aman, to hide (¢=¢eth).
‘MAMMOTH, an extinct species of elephant. (Russ. — Tatar ?)
‘An entire mammoth, flesh and bones, was discovered in Siberia, in
1799;’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates.—Russ. mamant’, a mammoth.=
Siberian mammont, ‘From Tartar mamma, the earth, because the
Tungooses and Yakoots believed that this animal worked its way in
the earth like a mole;’ Webster. But it does not appear that there
is any such Tatar word. See N. and Q.9S. xi. 286.

MAN, a human being. (E.) ME. man, Chaucer, C. T. 1. 43.
AS. mann, also mon; Grein, ii. 105.4-Du. man; Icel. madr (for
*mannr); also man; Swed. man; Dan. mand (with excrescent @) ;
Goth. manna; G. mann; [the G. mensch=midnnisch, i.e. mannish,
human]. Allied to Skt. manu-, Vedic manus-, a man. . Con-
nected by some with Skt. man, to think; see Mind. But it is
unlikely that the orig. sense could have been ‘ thinker.” Der. man-
child, Gen. xvii. 10; man-ful, Lydgate, Complaint of the Black
Knight, st. 60; man-ful-ly, Two Gent. iv. 1. 28; man-ful-ness ; man-
hood, Chaucer, C. T. 758 (A 756); man-of-war, Luke, xxiii. 11;
man-kind, q.v.; man-ly, ME. manlich, P. Plowman, B. v. 260, from
AS. manlic, man-like, see Grein, ii. 211 ; man-li-ness ; man-slaughter,
ME. man-slaghter, Cursor Mundi, 25772; man-slay-er, ME, mansleer,
Trevisa, ili. 41, 1. 8, Wyclif, John, vili. 44. Also man, vb., Rich. II,
H. 3.54. Also man-like, Antony, i. 4. 5; man-ly, adv., Macb. iv. 3.
235; mann-ish, As You Like It, i. 3. 123, Chaucer, C. T. 5202
(B 782) ; man-queller, 2 Hen. IV, ii. 1. 58, Wyclif, Mark, vi. 27 ;
man-tk-in, q. Vv.

MANACLE, a fetter, handcuff. (F.—L.) Better spelt manicle,
as in Cotgrave. ME. manycle, Wyclif, Ps. cxlix. 8, earlier text ;
where the later text has manacle.— AF, manicle, Vie de St. Auban ;
OF. manicle, pl. manicles, ‘manicles, hand-fetters, or gyves ;” Cot.=—
L. manicula, dimin. of manica, a long sleeve, glove, gauntlet, manacle,
handcuff. =—L. manus, the hand; see Manual. Der. manacle, vb.,
Temp. i. 2. 461.

MANAGE, government of a horse, control, administration.
(F.—Ital.—L.) Orig.a sb., but now superseded by management.
‘Wanting the manage of unruly jades;” Rich. II, iii. 3. 179.— MF.
manege, ‘the manage, or managing of a horse;’ Cot. Mod. F.
manege,= Ital. maneggio, ‘a busines, a managing, a handling,... an
exercise ;’? Florio. Particularly used of managing horses; the mod.
Ital. maneggio means ‘ariding-school.’ The lit. sense is ‘a handling,’
the word being formed from maneggiare, ‘to manage, handle.’ = Ital.
mano, the hand.=—L. manum, acc. of manus, the hand; see Manual.
Der. manage, vb., to handle, Rich. U, iii. 2, 118 ; manag-er, L. L. L.


358


i, 2. 188; manage-able, manage-able-ness; manage-ment (a coined |


word), used by Bp. Hall in a Fast Sermon, April 5, 1628 (R.).
Doublet, manége, from mod. F. manége. tt Not to be confused
with ME. menage, a household, K. Alisaunder, 2087, from OF.
maisnage, MF. mesnage (Cot.), mod. F. ménage; this OF. maisnage
stands for maison-age, extended from F. maison, a mansion; see
Mansion. (Scheler.)

MANATEE, a sea-cow, a dugong. (Span.—Carib.) The word
occurs in Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p. 404; spelt manate
in R. Eden, ed. Arber, p. 231, 1. 2 (1555).—Span. manati, a sea-cow ;
also written manato. ‘A West Indian word; spelt manaétoiti in
Raymond Breton’s Dictionaire Caraibe-Frangois; Auxerre, 1665 ;
p. 349. és The Malay name is dugong, s.v.

MANCHET, a loaf of fine wheaten bread. (F,—L.?) ‘Of breade


° eee one a


MANDREL


. . the most excellent is the mainchet? v.r. ‘manchet;’ Harrison;
Desc. of England, bk. ii. ch.6. ME. manchete, Liber Cure Cucorum,
p- 53- B. The word seems to refer to quality; and, if so, is prob.
different from Norm. dial. manchette, bread made in the shape of a
crown, and also called couronne; i.e. of an annular shape; Moisy,
Robin; prob. from manchette, ‘a cuff or hand-ruff ;’ Cot.; which is
also annular. Dimin. of manche, a sleeve. L. manica, a sleeve; from
L. manus, the hand; see Manacle.

MANCHINEEL, a W. Indian tree. (F.—Span.—L.) ‘ Man-
chinelo-tree, a tree that grows wild in the woods of Jamaica, the fruit
of which is as round as a ball;’ Phillips, ed.1706. Spelt manchineel,
W. Dampier, New Voy. (1699), iii. 673 mancinell, Capt. Smith,
Works, p. 905. —F. mancinelle (Hatzfeld). [Mahn gives Ital. manci+
nello, but it must be modern, and borrowed from Spanish; the
name, like many W. Indian words, is certainly Spanish, not Italian. ]
=Span. manzanillo, a little apple-tree; hence, the manchineel tree,
from the apple-like fruit; dimin. of Span. manzana, an apple, also
a pommel. Cf. Span. manzanal, an orchard of apple-trees.—L.
Matiana, neut. pl. of Matianus, adj.; we find Matidna mala, and
Matiina poma, applied to certain kinds of apples. The adj. Matianus,
Matian, is from L. Matius, the name of a Roman gens (Lewis).

MAWNCIPLE, a purveyor, esp. for a college. (F.—L.) Not
obsolete; still in use in Oxford and Cambridge. ME. manciple,
Chaucer, C. T. 569 (A 567). The is an insertion, as in principle,
syllable, participle. OF. mancipe, a slave; also manciple (Godefroy).
Cf. MItal. mancipio, ‘a slave, vassal, subject, captive, manciple,
farmer, baily,’ &c.; Florio.—L. mancipium, a slave, orig. possession,
property, lit. a taking in the hand; see Maine, Ancient Law, p. 317+
Cf. L. mancipi-, decl. stem of manceps, a taker in hand.—L. man-,
base of man-us, the hand; cip-, weakened form of cap-, base of cap-ere,
totake. See Manual and Captive.

MANDARIN, a Chinese governor of a province. (Port.— Malay
—Skt.) Not a Chinese, but a Malay word; brought to us by the
Portuguese. In Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p. 395; and in
E, G[rimston], tr. of Acosta, 1604, p. 370. — Port. mandarim, a man-
darin.= Malay (and Hindu) mantri, ‘a counsellor, minister of state;
JSerdana mantri, the first minister, vizir;? Marsden, Malay Dict., p. 334.
= Skt. mantrin-, a counsellor; mahd-mantrin-, the prime minister. =
Skt. mantra-, a holy text, charm, prayer, advice, counsel. Formed,
with suffix -tra, from Skt. man, to think, mind, know ; cf. Skt. man-tu-,
man-tr, an adviser.=4/MEN, to think; see Mind. (See Yule.)

MANDATE, a command, order, charge. (F.—L.) In Hamlet,
iii. 4. 204.—MF. mandat, ‘a mandate, or mandamus, for the prefer-
ment of one to a benefice;’ Cot.—L. manditum, a charge, order,
commission. = L. manditus, pp. of mandare, to commit to one’s
charge, enjoin, command. f. Lit. ‘to put into one’s hand,’ from
man-, base of manus, the hand, and dare, to give. [So also manceps
=a taker by the hand; from man- and capere, to take.] See
Manual and Date (1). Brugmann, i. § 589 (2, b). Der. man-
dat-or-y, Doublet, maundy, in the term Maundy Thursday, q.v.
From L. mandare are also counter-mand, com-mand, de-mand, re-mand,
com-mend, re-com-mend, commodore. Also mandamus, a writ that
enjoins. a duty; from L. mandamus, we command, the first word in it.

MANDIBLE, a jaw. (L.) ‘ Mandibula, the mandible, or jaw ;”


Phillips, ed. 1706. —L. mandibula, a jaw.—L. mandere, to chew, eat. —


Der. mandibul-ar, adj., from L. mandibula.

MANDILION, a soldier’s cloak. (Ital.—Span.—Arab.—L.)
See examples in Nares. = Ital. mandiglione, ‘a mandillion, souldier’s
iacket;’ Florio.—Span. mandil, a coarse apron.=Arab. mandil, a
table-cloth, towel, mantle. —L. mantile, a napkin.

MANDOLIN, a kind of guitar. (F.—Ital.—Gk.) Added by
Todd to Johnson’s Dict. ‘Lutes and mandolins;? T. Moore; Oh!
come to me when daylight sets; 1. 7.—F. mandoline, a mandolin. =
Ital. mandolino, dimin. of mandola, a kind of guitar (there were
several kinds). Mandola is a corruption of mandora (cf. F. mandore) ,
and, again, this is for bandora=Ital. pandora. See further under
Banjo.

MANDRAKE, a narcotic plant. (AF.—L.—Gk.) In Gen. xxx,
14, where the Bible of 1551 has pl. mandragoras. Also mandrake in
Palsgrave. ME. mandragores, Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris,
p- 19, 1. 613. AS. mandragora, Cockayne’s Leechdoms, i. 244.
Mandrake (also spelt mandrage in Minsheu) is the AF, mandrake,
also mandrage (Bozon); a shortened form of mandragora, the form
used by Shak. in Oth. iii. 3. 330. Cf. OF. mandragore, Ital. man
dragora, Span. mandragora. =. mandragoras, gen. -@ ; Gen. Xxx. 14,
— Gk. pavdpaydpas, the name of the plant ; of uncertain origin.

MANDREL, the revolving shank in which turners fix their work
ina lathe. (F.—L.) ‘Manderil, a kind of wooden pulley, that is part
of a turner’s leath;’ Bailey’s Dict. vol. ii. ed. 1731. Corrupted from
F. mandrin, a punch, a mandrel (Hamilton). B. Marked by Littré
as of unknown origin; but. prob. derived from a L. type *mandar+


MANDRILL


imum, allied to Oscan mamphur, (apparently) a mandrel or part of
a lathe (Lewis). Cf. also Icel. méndull, handle of a handmill; Lith.
menturé, something that twirls; Skt. mantha-s, a churning-stick,
manthana-s (the same), from math, manth, to churn, See Brugmann,
i. §§ 571, 589 (2, b), 757.

MANDRILLI, a kind of baboon. (E.) Nares, s.v. Drill, shows
that mandrill occurs in Smith’s Voyage to Guinea (1744), who thought
the animal was so called from its likeness to a man. Compounded of
E. man, and dril, ‘a large overgrown ape or baboon ;? Blount’s Gloss.
The origin of dril or drill is unknown; perhaps allied to MDu. drillen,
‘to goe, trot, or run up and downe,’ Hexham; whence also E. drill, v.
See Drill in Nares, and in the N. E. D.

MANE, long hair on the neck of a horse, &c. (E.) ME. mane,
King Alisaunder, 1957. AS. manu, mane; Erfurt gloss., 1182.-+
Icel. mon (gen. manar, pl. manar), a mane; Swed. and Dan. man;
Du. maan (Sewel) ; MDu. mane (Hexham); G. mahne, OHG. mana.
Cf. W. myngen, a horse’s mane, mung, a mane; from mwn, the neck.
So also Irish mong, a mane, mutnce, a collar (W. mynci, the hame of
a horse-collar) from Irish muin, the neck. Hence E. mane is plainly
connected with Skt. manyd@, the tendon forming the nape of the neck ;
and with L. monile, a necklace (Stokes-Fick, p. 216).

MANZEGE, the control of horses; see Manage.

MANGANESE, the name of a metal. (F.—Ital.—L.—Gk.)
The metal was discovered in 1774 (Littré). But the term is much
older, otherwise used. ‘Manganese, so called from its likeness in
colour and weight to the magzes or loadstone,. is the most universal
material used in making glass;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—MF.
manganese, ‘a certain minerall which, being melted with ~glasse,
amends the colour thereof ;’ Cot. = Ital. manganese, ‘a stuffe or stone
to make glasses with; also a kind of mineral stone;’ Florio. B. A
perverted form of magnesia, also written mangnesia. See Cent. Dict.,
and Schade, p. 1395; and see Magnesia. Palsgrave has mangnet
for magnet,

MANGE, the scab or itch in dogs, &c. (F.—L.) Minsheu, ed.
1627, gives ‘the mange’ as sb., and mangie as adj. Cf. ‘a mangy
dog,’ Timon, iv. 3. 371; ‘In wretched beggary And maungy misery,’
Skelton, How the Douty Duke of Albany, &c., ll. 137, 138. But
earlier, the sb. is mangie, as in ‘the mangie, or the scurvie,’ in E. G.,
tr. of Acosta, p. 465. ME. maniewe,(=manjewe) ; see N. E. D. =OF.
manjue, mange; cf. mod. Norman manjure, Guernsey manjue (Moisy).
= OF. manjuer, mangier, F, manger, toeat. [The MF. sb. for‘ mange’
is mangeson.| See further under Manger. Der. mangi-ness.

MANGEL-WURZEL, a variety of beet. (G.) For mangold-
wurzel, also sometimes used. = G. mangold-wurzel, beet-root. = G. man-
gold, MHG. mangolt, beet, derived by Schade from the personal name
Manegolt ; and wurzel, root, allied to Wort (1).

MANGER, an eating-trough for cattle. (F.—L.) In Sir T.
More, Works, p. 1139 h. ME. maungeur, Cath. Anglicum (1483).
= OF. mangeure (Godefroy); F. mangeoire, ‘a manger ;’ Cot.=—F
manger, to eat. L. mandiicare, to eat.—L. mandicus, a glutton.=
L. mandere,to chew. See Mandible.

MANGLE (1), to render maimed, tear, mutilate. (F.—G.) In
Sir T. More, Works, p. 538 f= AF. mangler, to maim (Godefroy) ;
for mahangler, to maim, Langtoft, i. 254. Frequent. form of OF.
mahaigner, to maim. —OF. mahaing, a maim, a hurt; see Maim.
Der. mangl-er.

MANGLE (2), a roller for smoothing linen; vb., to smooth
linen. (Du.—Late L.—Gk.) A late word; added by Todd to John-
son’s Dict. ‘A movement capable of being applied to mangles and
calenders ;’ Ann. Reg. (1799), p.- 399. Borrowed from Dutch; cf. Du.
mangelen, to roll with a rolling-pin; Jinnen mangelen, to roll linen on
a rolling-pin; mangelstok, a rolling-pin (Sewel); een mangelstok,
‘a smoothing role, or a battle-dore’ (Hexham). The corresponding
Mital. word is mangano, ‘a kind of presse to presse buckrom ;’
Florio. Both Du. and Ital. words are modifications of Late L. man-
ganum, mangona, a very common word as the name of a military
engine for. throwing stones; see Mangonel. The mangle, being
worked with an axis and winch, was named from its resemblance to
the old war-engine; sometimes it was reduced to an axis or cylinder
worked by hand. The Ital. mangano also means ‘a mangonel.’ =
Gk, pdyyavoy,a machine for defending fortifications ; also, the axis
ofa pulley. See Prellwitz.

-MANGO, the fruit of an E. Indian tree. (Span.— Port. — Malay. —


Tamil.) In Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p. 350.—Span. mango. |


—Port. manga.—Malay mafggd, ‘the mango-fruit, of which the
varieties are numerous;’ Marsden’s Dict., p.327. Formerly mangka
(see Yule). — Tamil man-kay, i.e. man-fruit, or fruit of the tree called
mamaram, i.e. man-tree (from max and maram, wood, tree); cf.
Catamaran (Yule). i

-MANGONEL, a war-engine for throwing stones. (F.—Late L,
—Gk.)- ME. mangonel, in a MS. of the time of Edw, II; Polit.


MANNA 359


Songs, ed. Wright, p. 69.—AF. mangonel, Langtoft, i. 494; OF.
mangonel, later mangonneau, ‘an old-fashioned sling or engine,’ &c.;

Cot.—Late L. mangonellus, dimin. of mangona, manganum, a watr-
engine. — Gk. pdyyavov ; see Mangle (2).

MANGOSTEEN, a fruit. (Malay.) Formerly mangostan.—
Malay manggustan (C. P, G. Scott); manggista (Marsden).

MANGROVE. (Hybrid; Malay and E.) ‘A sort of trees called
mangroves ;’ Eng. Garner, vii. 371 (ab. 1689). My belief is that the
second syllable is nothing but the E. word grove, and has reference to
the peculiar growth of the trees, which form a close thicket of some
extent. Again, the tree is sometimes called the mangle (F. mangle,
from Span. mangle) ; so that mangrove may well stand for mang-grove
or ‘grove of mangs or mangles.’ The syllable mang may be due to
the Malay name for the tree, viz. manggi-manggi; see Pijnappel’s
Malay-Dutch Dict. p.133. B. On the other hand, the Span. mangle,
a mangrove, appears to be of S. American origin (Yule). Cf. Brazil.
mangue, Hist. Nat. Brasil. i. 113.

MANTA, madness, frenzy. (L.—Gk.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.
(ME. manie, Chaucer, C. T. 1376, is from F. manie, ‘ madnesse;’
Cot.]=—L. mania. = Gk. pavia, madness, frenzy. B. The orig. sense is
‘mental excitement ;’ cf. wévos, mind, spirit, force; Skt. manyu-,
anger, fury. See Mind, Der. mania-c, spelt maniack in Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674, from F, maniaque, ‘mad, Cot.; as if from a Lat.
*maniacus, Hence maniac-al.

MANIFEST, evident, apparent. (F.—L.) ME. manifest, Chaucer,
tr. of Boethius, b. ili. pr. 10, 1. 104.—F. manifeste, ‘manifest ;? Cot.
=L. manifestus, evident. B. The lit. sense is (probably) ‘struck by
the hand,’ hence, palpable.—L. mani-, for manu-, from manus, the
hand; and -festus=*-fed-tus, pp. of obs. verb *fendere, to strike,
occurring in the compp. dé-fendere, of-fendere ; cf. in-festus, in-fensus,
hostile. —4/GwHEN, to strike; see Defend (Bréal). And see
Manual. Der. manifest-ly, manifest-ness ; manifest, vb., ME. mani-
festen, Chaucer, Boeth. bk. ii. pr. 7, 1. 31; manifest-at-ion ; also mani-
Sesto, q. Vv.

MANIFESTO, a written declaration. (Ital.—L.) ‘ Manifesto
or evidence ;’? Sir T, Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 17. § 5.— Ital.
manifesto, sb., a manifesto, = Ital. manifesto, adj., manifest. = L. mani-
Jestus; see Manifest.

MANIFOLD, various. (E.) ME. manifold, manyfold, Gower,
C. A. i. 3443 bk, ili. 1952. AS. manigfeald, manifold; Grein, ii.
210,— AS. manig, many; and -feald, suffix (E. -fold), connected with
fealdan, to fold. See Many and Fold.

MANIKIN, MANAKIN, a little man, dwarf. (F.—Du.) In
Tw. Nt. iii. 2. 57. [Not an E. word.]—MF. manequin, ‘a puppet ;’
Cot.=—MDu. manneken, a little man (Hexham) ; mod. Du. mannetje,
by alteration of the suffix, Formed, with double dimin. suffix -k-en,
from Du. manne-, for man, a man. See Man. Cf. G. mdnnchen,
from mann.

MAWNTOC, the cassava-plant. (Port.—Brazil.) Better spelt maz-
dioc. = Port. mandioca (Span. mandiocha in Pineda). = Brazil. mandioca,
the root of the cassava-plant. Cp. ‘ mandiiba, maniiba, cujus radix
mandioca vocatur ;” Hist, Brasil. ii. 65. It is spelt mandihoca in the
same, i. 52. Granada gives the Guarani name as mandidg.

MANIPLE, a handful; small band of soldiers, a kind of priest’s
scarf. (F.—L.) ‘Our small divided maniples,’ i.e. bands of men;
Milton, Areopagitica, ed. Hales, p. 48, 1.6. Also manypule, a scarf ;
Supp. to Palsgrave, p. 1068, 1. 31.—MF. manipule, ‘a fistfull ;’ Cot.
= L. manipulus, 2 handful; hence, a wisp of straw, &c. used as an
ensign ; and hence, a company of soldiers under the same standard,
a band of men.=—L. mani-, for manu-, for manus, the hand; and
-pulus, lit. filling, from the weak grade ( pal) of the root *p/é-, to fill;
ef. L. plénus, full, and AS, full, See Manual and Full. Der.
manipul-ate, q.v.

MANIPULATEH, to handle. (L.) A modern word; not in
Johnson ; the sb. manipulation (but not the verb) was added by Todd
to Johnson’s Dict. The verb was prob. suggested by the sb. manipula-
tion, which appears in F.in 1716. Even the sb. is quite a coined word,
there being nothing nearer to it than the L. manipulatim, by troops,
an ady. formed from manipulus,a troop. The word manipulate should
mean ‘to 7ilJ the hands’ rather than merely to use them, Altogether,
the word has little to recommend it on etymological grounds; but it


| is now well established. Perhaps the suffix has been confused with


that of inter-polate, Der, manipulat-ion, -ive, -or.

MANITO, a spirit, a fetish. (Algonkin.) ‘Gitche Manito, the
mighty ;’ Longfellow, Hiawatha, xiv. From the Algonkin manitu,
manito, a spirit, a demon (Cuogq).

MANKIND, the race of men. (E.) ME. mankinde, Gower,
C. A, ii, 83; bk. iv. 2443, The final d is excrescent, the older form
being mankin, Ormulum, 799. AS. mancynn, mankind; Grein, il,
207.—AS. man, a man; and cynn, kind, race; see Man and Kin.
MANNA, the food supplied to the Israelites in the wilderness of


360 MANNER


Arabia. (L.—Gk.—Heb.) In A. V. Exod. xvi. 15; Numb. xi. 7;
Deut. viii. 3; &c. = L. manna, Deut. viii. 3 (Vulgate); but in Exod. xvi.
15 the Vulgate has manhu, and in Numb. xi. 7 it has man. — Gk. pavva.
— Heb. maz, manna. B. Two explanations are given: (1) from Heb.
man hu, what is this? from the enquiry which the Hebrews made
when they first saw it on the ground, where maz is the neuter inter-
rogative pronoun; seé Exod. xvi. 15. But this isa popular etymology;
since man is not Hebrew, but Aramaic (Gesenius). And (2) that the
sense of man is ‘it is a gift” (cf. Arab. mann, beneficence, grace, favour,
also manna, Rich. Dict. p. 1495). See Gesenius, Heb. Dict. (1883),

. 468.

PMANNER, way, fashion, habit, sort, kind, style. (F.—L.) In
early use. ME, manere, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 51, 1. 30.
= AF. manere, Stat. Realm, i. 27 (1275); OF. maniere, ‘ manner ;’
Cot. Mod. F. maniére; properly ‘ habit.’ Orig. fem. of OF. manier,
adj. manual,-easily managed (Godefroy) ; allied to OF. manier, ‘to
handle, hand, manage, wield;’ Cot.=Late L. type *mandrius, for
L. manuarius, handy.=L. manu-, for manus, the hand; see Manual.
Der. manner-ly, in Skelton, who wrote a poem called Manerly
Margery Mylk and Ale; manner-li-ness; un-manner-ly, Hamlet, iii. 2.
36045 manner-ism. te The phrase #o be taken in the manner (a law
phrase) is a corruption of zo be taken with the mainour ; the L. phrase
is cum manuopere captus. Here mainour is the same word as
maneuvre, q.v. See maynure in Croft’s gloss. to Sir T. Elyot’s
Governour. And see Mainour.

MANCEUVRE, dexterous management, stratagem. (F.—L.)
Introduced into E. in the 18th cent. Added to Johnson’s Dict. by
Todd, who cites it from Burke, but without a satisfactory reference.
=F. maneuvre, a manceuyre, properly a work of the hand. = Late
‘L. manuopera (more commonly manopera), a working with the hand.
[Cf. Span. maniobra, handiwork; maniobrar, to work with the
hands; manceuvre 3 Ital. manovra, the working of a ship; manovrare,
to steer a ship.]=—L. mani operari, to work with the hand.=L.
manu, abl. of manus, the hand; and oferari, to work, from opera,
work. See Manualand Operate. Der. manewvre, vb., maneuvr-
er. Doublet, manure.

MANOR, a place of residence for a nobleman in former times ;
estate belonging to a lord. (F.—L.) In Shak. Merry Wives, ii. 2.
1g. ME, manere, P. Plowman, B. v. 595. OF. manoir, ‘a mansion,
mannor, of mannor-house,’ Cot.; formerly also spelt menoir (Gode-
froy). Properly ‘a place to dwell in;’ from OF. manoir, menoir,
to dwell (Godefroy).=L. manére, to dwell, remain; see Mansion.
Der. manor-house, L. L. L. i. 1. 208 3 manor-seat ; manor-i-al.

MAWNSEH, a clergyman’s house, in Scotland. (L.)  ‘ Manse, a
habitation, a farm ;’ Blount’s Law Lexicon, ed. 1691. An old law
term.=Late L. mansa, a farm.—L. mansa, fem, of mansus, pp. of
manére, to dwell; see Mansion.

MANSION, a large house, dwelling-place. (F.—L.) ME.
mansion, Chaucer, C. T. 1976 (A 1974).—OF. mansion, a dwelling-
place; Burguy.—L. mansidnem, acc. of mansio, a stopping, a place
of abode; cf. mansus, pp. of manére, to dwell.4+-Gk. pévey, to stay,
remain; allied to pdvipos, staying, steadfast. —4/MEN, to remain.
Der. mansion-house; mansion-ry, Macb. i. 6. 5; from L. manére are
also manse, manor, permanent, remain, remnant. And see menial,
menagerie, messuage.

MANTEL, a shelf over a fire-place. (F.—L.) Hardly used
except in the comp. mantel-piece and mantel-shelf; formerly used in
the comp. manile-tree, which occurs in Cotgrave, s.v. manteau, In
old fire-places, the mantel slopes forward like a hood, to catch the
smoke; the word is a mere doublet of Mantle, q.v. ‘ Mantyltre of
a chymney, manteau dune cheminee;’ Palsgrave. 4 The difference
in spelling between mantel and mantle is an absurdity. “Der. mantel-
piece, -shelf.

MANTLE, a cloak, covering. (F.—L.) Better spelt mantel,
as it is the same word as that above. In early use. ME. mantel,
Layamon, 14755, 15274. [Cf. AS. mentel, a mantle, Ps. cviii. 28.]
= OF. mantel (Godefroy), later manteau, a cloke, also the mantle-
tree of a chimney ;’ Cot.—L. mantellum, a napkin; also, a means
of covering, a cloak (in a figurative sense); cf. L. mantéle, mantile,
a napkin, towel. A shortened form appears in the Late L. man-
tum, a short cloak, used by Isidore of Seville, whence Ital. and
Span. manto, F. mante, a mantle. For the origin, see Brugmann,
i, §§ 134, 483 (7). Der. mantle, vb., to cloak, cover, Temp. vy.
67; also mantle, vb., to gather a scum on the surface, Merch. Ven.
i. 1. 893 mantel-et (with dimin. suffix), ‘a short purple mantle,,..
in fortification, a moveable pent-house,’ Phillips, ed. 1706, from F.
mantelet, ‘a little mantle, a moyable pent-house,’ &c., Cotgrave.
Also mantilla, a long head-dress, from Span. mantilla, dimin, of
manto, a cloak, a veil.

MANTUA, a lady’s gown, (Ital.) Seldom used except in the
comp. mantua-maker,a lady’s dressmaker, ‘ Mantoe or Mantua gown,


MAR


a loose upper garment, now generally worn by women, instead of a
straight body’d gown;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘By th’ yellow mantos
of the bride ;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. iii. c. 1.1. 700. Manto is from
Ital. (or Span.) manto, a mantle, or even from F. manteau; but
Mantua gown must refer to Mantua in Italy, though this connexion
seems to haye arisen from mere confusion. As to Ital. manto, see
Mantle.

MANUAL, done by the hand, suitable for the hand. (F.—L.)
We recognize it as a F. word from its use after its sb., in such phrases
as ‘sign manual,’ or ‘seal manual;’ the spelling has been conformed
to the L. vowel in the final syllable. Shak. has seal manual, Venus,
1. 516. Formerly spelt manuel, as in Cotgrave. Cf. ‘syne manuell,’
sign manual; Fifty Eng. Wills, ed. Furnivall, p. 83, 1. 18 (1428). =—
F. manuel, ‘manuel, handy, of the hand;’ Cot.—L. manudlis,
manual,=L. manu-, for manus, the hand. .B. The sense of manus is
‘the measurer;” formed (with suffix -zu-) from *ma, weak grade of
4/ ME, to measure, whence also Skt. ma, to measure, a verb which
when used with the prep. zis, out, also means to build, cause, create,
compose; cf. also Skt. mdza-, sb., measuring, measure; Brugmann,
li, § 106. Der. manual, sb., a hand-book; manual-ly. From L.
manus we also have man-acle, man-age, man-ciple, man-ege, mani-fest,
mani-ple, mani-pul-ate, mann-er, man-cwuvre, man-ure; manu-facture,
manu-mit, manu-script, a-manu-ensis; also main-tain, e-man-cip-ate,
guadru-man-ous, &c.

MANUFACTURE, a making by hand. (F.—L.) In Bacon,
Life of Henry VII, ed. Lumby, p. 58,1. 19; p. 196,1. 4. Also spelt
manifacture, as in Cotgrave.=F. manufacture (also manifacture in
Cot.), ‘manifacture, workemanship;’? Cot. Coined from Latin. =
L. mani, by the hand, abl. of manus; and factira, a making, from
facere, to make. See Manual and Fact. Der. manufacture, vb.,
manufactur-al, manufactur-er, manufact-or-y.

MANUMIT, to release a slave. (L.) ‘Manumitted and set at
liberty ;’ Stow, Edw. III, an. 1350. ‘The pp. manumissed occurs in
North’s Plutarch, p. 85 (R.); or p. 103, ed. 1631.—L. maniimitiere
(pp. mantimissus), to sét,at liberty a slave, lit. ‘to release from one’s
power,’ or ‘send away from one’s hand.’=L. mani, abl. of manus,
the hand; and mittere, to send. See Manual and Missile, Der.
manumission, from F. manumission, ‘a manumission or dismissing”
(Cot.), from L. maniimissionem, acc. of manumissio, a dismissal,
formed like the pp. manimissus.

MANURE, to enrich with a fertilising substance. (F.—L.)
The old sense was simply ‘to work at with the hand.’ * Arable
land, which could not be manured [tilled] without people and
families, was turned into pasture;’ Bacon, Henry VII, ed. Lumby,
p- 70, 1. 26. ‘Manured with industry ;’ Oth. i. 3. 328. Cf. manure
in G. Douglas, tr. of Virgil, bk. iv. ch. 5.1.72, See Trench, Select
Glossary. Manure is a contracted form of maneuvre; see Manceuvre
andInure. Der. manure, sb., manur-er, manur-ing,

MANUSCRIPT, written by the hand. (L.) Properly an adj.,
but also used as a sb. ‘A manuscript;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627.—Late
L. manuscriptum, a manuscript; L. manu scriptum, written by the
hand.—L. mani, abl. of manus, the hand; and scriptum, neut. of
scriptus, pp. of scribere, to write. See Manual and Scribe.

MANY, not few, numerous, (E.) ME. mani, many, moni, fre-
quently followed by a, as ‘many a man;’ Chaucer, C. T. 229, 3905
(A 3907). The oldest instances of this use are in Layamon, 7993,
16189, 29131. AS. manig, monig, Grein, ii. 209.4-Du. menig; Dan.
mange; Swed. mange; Icel. margr (with a singular change from 2
tor); see Noreen, § 369; Goth. manags; G. manch, MHG. manec,
OHG. manac. B. All froma Teut. type *managoz. Further allied
to Irish minic, Gael. minig, W. mynych, frequent, Russ. mnogie, pl.
many.

MAP, a representation of the earth, or of a part of it. (F.—L.)
The oldest maps were maps of the world, and were called mappe-
mounde, as in Gower, C. A. iil. 102; bk. vii. 530. This is a F. form
of the L. name mappa mundi, which occurs in Trevisa, i. 27, and in
the corresponding passage of Higden’s Polychronicon. B. The
original sense of L, mappa was a napkin; hence, a painted cloth.
According to Quinctilian, it isa Punic word, See Napkin.

MAPLE, the name of a tree. (E.) ME. maple, mapul; Chaucer,
C. T. 2925 (A 2923). AS. mapul-der, the maple-tree; * Acer,
mapulder,’ Voc. 138. 153 we also find mapolder, a maple, Mapulder-
stede, now Maplestead (in Essex), in Thorpe’s Diplomatarium vi
Saxonici, pp. 146, 403; and Kemble has Mapeles baruue in his index.
Hence the AS, name is mapul, mapel; cf. mapel-tréow, Birch, Cart,
Saxon. i. 290. The Icel. mopurr is borrowed from E,

MAR, to injure, spoil, damage. (E.) ME. merren, less com-
monly marren, P, Ploughman’s Crede, 1. 66; Will. of Palerne, 664.
OMerc. *merran, in comp. G-merran, to hinder; Vesp. Ps. 77. 31.
Also AS. a-myrran, used in various senses, such as to dissipate,
waste, lose, hinder, obstruct ; see Matt..x. 42, Luke, xv. 14; /Elfric’s


MARABOU


Hom. i. 372, 1. 3; Grein, i. 28,29. Cf. also AS. mirran, to impede,
Exod. v. 4; gemearr, an impediment, /Elfred, tr. of Gregory’s Past
Care, ed. Sweet, p. 401, ll. 17, 20.4-MDu. merren, to stay, retard
(Hexham); Du. marren, to tarry; OHG. marrjan, to hinder, disturb,
vex; whence mod. F. marri, vexed, sad; Goth. marzjan, to offend,
cause to stumble. ‘Teut. type *marzjan-; base *marz-, Brugmann,
i. 903 b. :
‘MARABOU, MARABOUT, a kind of African stork; also,
its downy feathers. (F.—Port.—Span.—Arab.) F. marabout.= Port.
marabuto (Hatzfeld).—Span. morabito, a Moorish anchorite, a re-
ligious man (Pineda). The bird obtained itsname from its sage-like
appearance; the Indian variety is called the adjutant-bird, for a
similar reason. Arab. murabit, quiet, still; a hermit, sage; a re-
ligious sage among the Berbers; see Devic: And see Maravedi.

MARANATHA, our Lord cometh. (Syriac.) In 1 Cor. xvi. 22.
“Tt is a Greecised form of the Aramaic words maran.atha, our Lord
cometh ;’ Dict. of the Bible... Cf. Arab. mar, lord (from Syriac).
‘-MARASCHINO, a cordial. (Ital.—L.) It is said to have come
originally from Dalmatia, where the cherries grow.—TItal. mara-
schino, an adj. form from marasca, amarasca, a kind of sour cherry
(Baretti).—L. amarus, bitter, sour. a ‘
‘MARAUD, to wander in quest of plunder. (F.) ‘ Marauding,
ranging about as soldiers in quest of plunder, forage, &c.;? Bailey’s
Dict. v. ii. ed. 1731.—= MF. marauder, ‘to beg, to play the rogue;’
Cot.—F. maraud, ‘a rogue, begger, vagabond, varlet, rascall ;’ Cot.
B. The etymology is much disputed; see Scheler ‘and :Korting.
Bugge suggests a Late L. form *malaldus, from Ly malus, evil ;
whence maraud by dissimilation. :

MARAVEDI, a small coin, less than a farthing. (Span.— Arab.)
in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—Span. maravedi, the smallest Span. coin.
Called in Port. both marabitino and maravedim. The name is an old
one, the coin being so called because first struck during the dynasty
of the Almoravides at Cordova, A.D. 1094~—1144 (Haydn, Dict. of
Dates, s.v. Spain). Maravedi is derived from the Arab, name of
this dynasty. Arab. Murabitin, the name of an Arab. dynasty; pl.
of murabit, a hermit, a sage; see Marabou. Rich. Pers. Dict.

. 1382.

MARBLE, a sort of stone. (F.—L.) Gen. called marbreston
{=marble-stone) in ME. ; afterwards shortened to marbre, and thence
changed to marbel or marble. Spelt marbre-ston, Layamon, 1317
(later text); marbelston, P. Plowman, A. x. lol; marbel, Chaucer,
C. T. 1895 (A 1893).—OF. marbre, ‘marble ;’ Cot. —L. marmorem,
acc. of marmor, marble, considered as a masc. sb.; but it is com-
monly neuter.+Gk. pdppapos, explained as a glistening white stone,
whence pappatpev, to sparkle, glitter; cf. pappdpeos, sparkling,
paipa, the dog-star, lit. ‘sparkler.’ But named rather from its hard-
ness; cf. uapyap, explained as orepedy, i.e. a hard body; see Prell-
witz. Der. marbl-y; also marble-hearted, K. Lear, i. 4. 281, &c.
‘-MARCASITE, a. kind of iron pyrites. (F.—Span.—Arab.)
‘Other metals and marcasites;? Evelyn’s Diary, June 21, 1650.—
F. marcasite, marcassite, ‘ the marcassite, or fire-stone;’ Cot.—Span.
marquesita, *a stone found in the copper-mines;’ Pineda. = Arab,
marqashitha, marcasite; Devic. And see Viillers.
‘“MARCESCENT, withering. (L.) Botanical, In Bailey’s Dict.
vol. ii, ed. 1731.—L. marcescent-, stem of pres. pt. of marcescere,
inceptive form of marcére, to wither, lit. to grow soft. Brugmann, i.
§ 413 (8).

MARCH (1), a border, frontier. (F.—OHG.) Usually in the pl.
marches, aS in Hen. V, i. 2.140. ME. marche, sing., P, Plowman,
B. xv. 438. AF. marche, Liber Albus, p. 229; Stat. Realm, i. 211. —
F. marche, a march, frontire;’ Cot.—OHG. marka, a boundary.
See Mark (2), of which march is a doublet.

MARCH (2), to walk with regular steps, as a soldier. (F.—L.?
er G.?) In Spenser, F. Q. v. 10. 33.—F. marcher, ‘to march, goe,
pace ;’ Cot. B. Of disputed origin; a good suggestion is Scheler’s,
who sees in it the notion of regular beating (cf. E. ‘to be on the beat,’
“to beat time’), and connects it with L. marcus, a hammer, whence
a verb *marcare, to beat, could easily have arisen in Late L., and
‘would well express the regular tramp of a marching host. -y. Other-
wise, from F. marche, a frontier, from OHG, marka, cognate with
AS. mearc; see March (1). Cotgrave has: ‘Marche, .. a march,
frontire, ... a march, marching of soldiers.’ Diez cites an OF. phr.
aller de marche en marche, to go from land to land, to make expeditions,
Der. march, sb., K. John, ii. 60.

‘MARCH (3), the name of the third month. (F.—L.) ME. March,
Chaucer, C, T. 10361 (F 47). Not from OF. and F. mars, but from
Marche, the ONF, (Picard) form, also found in the dial. of Rouchi
(Hécart).—L. Martium, acc. of Martius, the month of Mars, lit.
belonging to Mars. —L. Marti-, decl.stem of Mars, the god of war.

MARCHIONESS, the fem. of Marquis, q.v.

MARCHPANE, a sweet cake, made with almonds and sugar.


| marge, Spenser, F. Q. iv. 8.61, from F’, marge; also mark (2).


MARJORAM 361


(F.—Ital.—L.?) In Romeo and Jul. i, 5.9. ME. march payne, in
a list temp. Hen. V; Fabyan, repr. 1811, p. 587. From a dial. form
(prob. Picard) of MF. marcepain, which occurs in 1544 (Hatzfeld) ;
corruptéd to massepain in F.—Ital. marciapane, marzapane (Florio).
The origin of marcia is unknown, but it prob. represents a name, such
as L. Martia; pane is from L. panem, acc. of panis, bread.

MARE, the female of the horse. (E.) ME. mere, Chaucer, C. T.
543 (A 541). AS. mere; we find ‘equa, mere’ in Voc. 119. 36. This
is the fem. form of AS. mearh, a horse, Grein, ii. 238 ; also spelt mearg,
mear.+-Icel, merr, a mare, mer-hross, mer-hryssi, a mare-horse, used as
fem. of marr, a steed; Dan. mer, amare; Swed. marr, a mare; Du.
merrie, a mare; G. mdhre, OHG. meriha, a mare; fem. of OHG.
marah, a battle-horse. B, The AS. mearh, Icel. marr, OHG. marah,
a battle-horse, steed, are cognate with Irish and Gael. marc, W. and
Corn, march, a horse, a stallion. Root uncertain. Teut. type *marh-
oz, Idg. type *mark-os, m., a horse; whence Teut. type *marh-jon-,
f,,a mare. Der. mar-shal,q.v. @ The mare in night-mare (q.v.)
is a different word.

MARGARINE, a pearl-like substance extracted from hog’s lard;
and (by misapplication), a substitute for butter. (F.— L.—Gk. —Pers.)
A barbarons formation from margar-ic (acid), a substance supposed
to be present in certain fats; from margar-, as in margar-et, F. mar-
guerite, lit. ‘ pearl.’ = L. margarita, pearl. = Gk. papyapirns, pearl. =
Pers. murwarid, a peatl; Rich. Dict. p. 1396.

MARGIN, an edge, border. (L.) ME. margin; spelt margyne,
P, Plowman, B. vii. 18. Trevisa (i. 41) translates L. margines by
margyns. = L..margin-, stem of margo, a brink, margin, border; cognate
with E. Mark (2),q.v. Der. margin-al, margin-al-ly, margin-at-ed.
Doublets, margent, with excrescent ¢, Tyndal, Works, p. 32, col. 2;


MARGRAVE, a marquis, a lord of the marches. (Du.) ‘The
maregraue, as thei call him, of Bruges ;’ tr. of Sir T. More’s Utopia,
1551, ed. Arber, p. 28, Cf. meregrave in Liber Custumarum, p. 634.
= Du. markgraaf, a margrave.—Du. mark, a mark, also a march,
border, border-land ; and graaf,a count, earl. -+G. markgraf, similarly
compounded... For the first element, see Mark (2). The second
element is Du. graaf, G. graf, MHG. grave, OHG. kravjo, graveo,
grdavo,alord chief justice, administrator of justice, count. Of unknown
origin; Franck and Kluge reject the explanations from Late L. or
Celtic. Kluge dissociates it from AS. geréfa, a reeve, but connects it
with Goth. ga-gréfts, a decree (Luke, ii.1). Franck admits associa-
tion with AS. geréfa ; for which see Reeve (2), Der. margrav-ine,
from Du. markgravin, where -in is a fem. suffix. See marquis.

MARIGOLD, the name of a plant. (Hybrid; Heb. and E.)
The pl. mary-goulden occurs in Medical Works of the 14th cent., ed.
G. Henslow, p. 81 (from MS. Harl. 2378, fol. 29). Spelt marygould
in Levins; maryguld in G. Douglas, Palace of Honour, Prol. st. 5.
In Shak. Wint, Ta. iv. 4.105, It bears a yellow flower, whence also
the Du. name goud-bloem (gold-bloom), a marigold. Compounded
of Mary and Gold, Chaucer has gold for marigold; C. T. 1931
(A 1929). The Gaelic name is lus-mairi, Mary’s leek or plant.
Flowers named from the Virgin Mary are numerous; hence our lady’s-
slipper, lady’s tresses, &c. ‘The name Mary (from F. Marie, L. Maria,
Gk. Mapia) is Hebrew, and is the same as Heb. Miryam or Miriam.

MARINE, belonging to the sea. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave. [The
sb. mariner is in much earlier use, spelt marineer, Chaucer, C. T.
13367 (B 1627). ]—F. marin, ‘marine, of the sea;’? Cot. —L. marinus,
adj., of the sea.—L. mare, the sea; cognate with E. mere, a pool; see
Mere (1). Der. mariner, which occurs in Floriz and Blanchefiur,
ed. Lumby, 1.71; from AF. mariner, Liber Albus, p. 381 (footnote) ;
F. marinier, ‘a mariner ;’ Cot.

MARIONETTE, a puppet. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) Cotgrave
has marionnette, ‘little Marian; .. also, a puppet.’ Dimin. of F.
Marion, Marian; from Marie, Mary; see Marigold.

MARISH, a marsh. (F.—L.) In Ezek. xlvii. 11. Variant of
ME. mareis, Chaucer, C. T. 6552 (D 970). OF. maresche (Godefroy) ;
also mareis (Hatzfeld); Late L. type mariscus,—L. mar-e, the sea;
cognate with Mere (1); with suffix -iscws, @] The F, marais is
preserved in the name Beaumaris, in Anglesey. Doublet, morass,

MARITAL, belonging to a husband, (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674.—F. marital, ‘ belonging to a mariage, esp, on the husband’s
side ;? Cot.—L. maritalis, adj., formed from maritus, a husband ; see


arry. :
MARITIME, pertaining to the sea. (F,—L.) In Shak. Ant. 1. 4.
51.—F. maritime, ‘maritime ;’ Cot.—L. maritimus, adj., formed with
suffix -zimus from mari-, for mare, the sea, cognate with E. Mere (1),


q.v.
MARJORAM, an aromatic plant, (F.—Late L.) The former r
is often omitted in various languages. ME. majoran, Gower, C. A. ili
133; bk. vii. 1433.—OF. majorane (Godefroy); Late L, majorana
(Ducange). Cf, Ital, majorana, Span, mayorana, Port. matorana,


MARK


marjoram. f. Doubtfully connected with Late L. majoraca, mar-
joram, Ducange; thought to be a disfigured form of L. a-mdaracus,
marjoram, with loss of initial a.— Gk. dydpakos, marjoram.

MARK (1), a stroke, outline, trace, line, sign. (E.) ME. merke,
Chaucer, C, T. 6201 (D 619). AS. mearc, fem. a mark, sign.4+Du.
merk ; cel. mark ; Swed. marke; Dan. merke; G. marke, MHG. mare,
a mark, token. Cf. Lithuan. margas, marked, variegated. Prob.
the same as Mark (2), which seems to be older. Der. mark, vb.,
AS. mearcian (Grein) ; mark-er, mark-ing ink; marksman, Dryden’s
Meleager (from Ovid, bk. viii), 1. 188; also mark-man, Romeo, i.
Lon?

MARK (2), a march, limit, boundary. (E.) Not common:in
ME., the usual form being merche or marche. ME. merke; as in
“merke of felde,’ Gen. and Exodus, ed. Morris, 440. AS. mearc, fem.
a boundary.-+ OSax. marka; Du. mark; G. mark, fem., OHG.
marcha; Goth. marka,a confine, coast. So also Icel. mérk, f., a forest ;
orig. a boundary. Teut. type *marka, f. Allied to L. margo, a
margin; Zend merezu, Pers, marz, a border; Olrish mruig, a mark,
province. See Mark (1). The sense of ‘ boundary’ suggested that
of ‘mark to indicate a boundary.’ Doublet, march (1). Cf. margin.

MARK (3), the name of a coin. (Scand.) The Old E. mark was
valued at 13s. 4d. ME. mark, Chaucer, C. T. 12324 (C 390). AS.
marc; ‘i. mare goldes’=1 marc of gold, Diplomatarium A‘vi Saxon.,
ed. Thorpe, p. 379.—Icel. mérk; Dan. and Swed. mark, a mark.+G.
mark, a certain weight of silver, viz. 8 oz.; also acoin. . Perhaps
a particular use of Mark (1), as denoting (1) a fixed weight, and
(2) a fixed value. Cf. the use of zoken to denote a coin.

MARKET, a place of merchandise. (F.—L.) In early use.
ME. market, Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 16,1. 491. Late
AS. market, Birch, Cart. Saxon. iii. 582; 1. 23.—OF. *market, NF.
variant of marchet (Roland, 1150), mod. F. marché. Cf. Walloon
markié, Proy. mercatz (Bartsch), Ital. mercato, Span. mercado, a
market.—L. mercatum, acc. of mercitus, traffic, trade, also a market
(whence also G. markt, Du. markt, Icel. markadr, &c.).=—L. mercatus,
pp. of mercdri, to trade. Closely connected with L. merx, mer-
chandise. See Mercantile. Doublet, mart. Der. market-able,
Temp. v. 266; market-cross, -town. And see merchant.

MARL, a rich earth, (F.—L.) ME. marle, marl, Trevisa, ii. 15 ;
see Spec. of Eng. ed. Morris and Skeat, p. 236, ll. 25,27. Dis-
syllabic in marle-pit, Chaucer, C. T. 3460.—OF. marle, merle, malle,
now spelt marne; cf. Picard and Walloon marle, Gascon merle; and
see Littré, s.v. marne, Cot. has the derivative marliere, ‘a marle-pit.’
— Late L. margila, marl; dimin. of Late L. marga, marl (a common
word); Ducange. It occurs in Pliny, xvii. 6. 4, § 42, who considers
it to be a word of Gaulish origin. 4] The Irish and Gael. marla,
W. marl, must be borrowed from E.; the G., Du., Dan., and Swed.
le are from the L. margila. Der. marl-y, marl-pit.

ARLINE, a small cord used for binding large ropes, to protect
them. (Du.) ‘Some the galled ropes with dauby marling bind ;’
Dryden, Annus Mirabilis, st. 148. — Du. marling, marlijn,'a marline ;
also called marlreep (corruption of marreep). So called from its use
in binding ropes.—Du. marren, to tie (MDu. marren, maren, ‘to
bynde, or to tye knots,’ Hexham); and Jijn (corruptly ling), a line,
borrowed from F. ligne, L. linea, a line. Similarly mar-reep, from
reep, a rope. The MDu. maren=E. moor, in the expression ‘to
moor a ship.” See Moor (2) and Line. Der. marline-spike.

MARMALADE, a jam or conserve, gen. made of oranges, but
formerly of quinces. (F.—Port.—L.—Gk.) ‘Marmalet, Marmelade,
a kind of confection made of quinces, or other fruit;’ Phillips. Spelt
marmalat, marmalet in Levins; marmalet in Baret; marmelad in
Tyndall, Works, p. 229, col. 2.—MF. mermelade, ‘marmelade ;’
Cot. Mod. F. marmelade. = Port. marmelada,marmelade; orig. made
of quinces. Formed with suffix -ada (like that of a fem. pp.) from
marmel-o, a quince; thus the sense is ‘ made of quince.’ = L. melimélum,
lit. a honey-apple, sometimes applied to the quince, as shown by the
allied word mélomeli, the syrup of preserved quinces.— Gk. peAiundAov,
a sweet apple, an apple grafted on a quince; cf. pnAduedi, honey
flavoured with quince. —Gk. pédAr-, honey, cognate with L. mel, honey ;
and pnaAoy,an apple. See Mellifluous and Melon.

MARMOSET, a small variety of American monkey. (F.—L.)
Formerly applied to a different animal, as the word is older than
Columbus. ME. marmosette, marmozette. ‘ Apes, marmozetties, babe-
wynes [baboons], and many other dyverse bestes;’ Mandeville’s
Travels, ed. Halliwell (1866), p. 210; see Wright’s note to Temp. ii.
2. — F. marmouset (OF. marmoset), ‘the cock of a cestern or fountaine,
made like a woman’s dug; any antick image, from. whose teats water
trilleth ; any puppet, or antick; any such foolish or odd representa-
tion; also, the minion, favorite, or flatterer of a prince;’ Cot. It
would seem that the word was applied to some kind of ape because
of its grotesque antics. PB. The origin of OF. marmoset (Cotgrave)
looks uncertain; and Scheler’s statement that the Late L. vicus mar-


362


MARQUE


morétorum occurs as a translation of F. rue des Marmousets turns out
to be a mistake ; as the L. form is marmosétérum. y. At the same
time, it is perfectly clear that one reason for the use of this particular
word as meaning a kind of ape was due to a connexion with the
F. word marmot (not to be confused with E, marmot, which may be
a different word). Cotgrave has: ‘Marmot, a marmoset, or little
monky ;’ also: ‘Marmotte, a she marmoset, or she monky.’ The
etym. of this F. marmot is uncertain; the most likely explanation is
Scheler’s; he takes it to be a dimin. with:suffix -o¢ from OF. merme,
little, tiny, lit. very small. This OF. merme is a curious derivative
of L. minimus (like OF. arme from L. animus); see Minim. This
gives to F. marmot the sense of ‘ dear little creature,’ and accounts
for the mod, use in the senses of ‘ puppet’ and ‘little child’ (Hamil-
ton); cf. Ital. marmotta, ‘a marmoset, a babie for a childe to play
withall, a pugge;’ Florio. Korting, § 1678.

MARMOT, a mountain-rat, a rodent animal. (F.—Rom.—
L.). Sometimes introduced into Eng. from Ital. Ray speaks of
‘the Marmotto or mus Alpinus, a creature as big [as] or bigger than
a rabbet ;’ On the Creation, pt. ii (R.). ‘ Marmotto, a mountain-
rat;? Kersey, ed. 1715. Also Englished from F. marmoitte; cf.
Ital. marmotia, ‘a marmotte,’ Baretti; substituted for marmotana,
‘the mountain-rat, a marmotan;’ Torriano. [Cf. OF. marmotaine,
marmotan, ‘the Alpine mouse, or mountain-rat ;’ Cot.]— Romansch
(Grisons) murmont; cf, OHG. murmunti, muremunto, a marmot. =L.
mir-, for miis,a mouse, and montis, gen. of mons, a mountain, Thus
the sense is ‘mountain-mouse.’ See Mountain and Mouse.
@ So in Diez, But Korting (§ 6387) rejects this etymology, and
proposes to refer marmotte to OF. merme, very small, from L. minimus;
cf. Romania, xxiii. 237, and see Marmoset.

MAROON (1), brownish-crimson. (F.—Ital.) Not in Todd’s
Johnson, ‘Marones or great chesnuts;’ Passenger of Benvenuto (1612).
Lit. ‘chesnut-coloured.’ =F. marron, ‘the great chestnut;” Cot.=
Ital. marrone; Florio gives the pl. as marroni, maroni, ‘a kind of
greater chestnuts then any we haue.’? Of unknown origin; Diez
suggests a connexion with the L.name Maro. Cf. late Gk. papaov,
the fruit of the cornel-tree, in Eustathius (12th cent.).

MAROON (2), to put ashore on a desolate island. (F.—Span. —
L.—Gk.) It occurs in Scott, The Pirate, c. xli. Dampier has:
‘I was ...morooned or lost ;’? Voy. (1699) ; v. ii. pt. 2. p. 843 cf.
p- 95. And see Maroons in Haydn, Dict. of Dates. =F. marron, adj.,
an epithet applied to a fugitive slave; négre marron, a fugitive slave
who takes to the woods and mountains (Littré); hence the E. verb
to maroon =to cause to live in a wild country, like a fugitive slave.
See Scheler, who points out that the F. word is a clipt form of Span.
cimarron,wild, unruly; hence, savage. Of unknownorigin. B. Some
have connected it with Span. cima, amountain-summit. Cf. Ital. and
Port. cima, F. cime, a mountain-top; according to Diez, the OSpan.
cima also meant a twig, sprout; from L. cyma, a young sprout of
a cabbage. = Gk. sta, anything swollen, a wave, young sprout.
@ Mr. Wedgwood says that ‘the fugitive negroes are mentioned
under the name of symarons in Hawkins’ Voyage, § 68, where they
are said to be settled near Panama.’ He also cites the following:
‘I was in the Spanish service, some twenty years ago in the interior
of Cuba, and negro cimarrén or briefly cimarrén, was then an every-
day phrase for fugitive or outlawed negroes hidden in the woods and
mountains ;’? Notes and Queries, Jan. 27, 1866. Verified by Granada’s
Vocab. Rioplatense, which has cimarron, adj., belonging to the hills,
said of animals and plants; applied in Span. to slaves.

MARQUE, LETTERS OF, letters authorising reprisals.
(F.—Prov.—G.) The old sense of letter of marque was a letter signed
by a king or prince authorising his subjects to make reprisals on
another country, when they could not otherwise get redress. It is
now only used in nayal affairs, to show that a ship is not a pirate or
a corsair. Palsgrave has: ‘I sende forthe a letter of marke,’ &c.
‘ Law of Marque, or [corruptly] Mart; this word is used 27 Edw. II,
stat. 2. c. 17, and grows from the German word march [ which, how-
ever, is the English form of the word], i.e. limes, a bound or limit.
And the reason of this appellation is because they that are driven to
this law of reprizal, take the goods of that people (of whom they
have received wrong and can get no ordinary justice) when they
catch them within their.own territories or precincts ;’ Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. ‘Marque... signifies in the ancient statutes of our land as
much as reprisals; as An. 4 Hen. V, c. 7, Marques and Reprisals are
used as synonima; and letters of marque are found in the same signi-.
fication in the same chapter;’ id. See also Ducange, s.v. Marcha.
In one instance, cited by Wedgwood and Littré, the OF. margquer
seems to mean ‘to pillage,’ the lit. sense being ‘to catch within one’s
borders.’ Littré also shows that the spelling marche was used in the
same sense as marque, in this connexion ; it would hence appear that,
marque is lit. a border, and hence a catching within one’s borders,
as explained by Blount above. —OF, marque, properly a boundary 5


MARQUEE


explained by Cot. as ‘a distresse, arrest, or seisure of body or
goods.’ Healso gives: ‘Droict de Marque, power to arrest the body,
and seize the goods of another; granted by the king, and in old time
given by the parliament, against a stranger or forreiner.’ = Prov.
marca (mod. marco), verbal sb. from marcar, to seize by way of
reprisal (Hatzfeld) ; cf. also Prov. marca, a mark.=MHG. marke,
OHG, marcha, a march, boundary, border. See March (1) and
Mark (2), gm The corrupt form Jetters of mart occurs in Beaum.
and Fletcher, Wife for a Month, ii. 1 (Tony).

MARQUEE, a large field-tent. (F.—G.) Modern; not in Todd’s
Johnson, This is one of the words in which a final s has been cut
off, from a false idea that marquees is a plural form; so also we have
sherry for sherris, pea for pease, and ‘ Chinee’ for Chinese, &c. Marquees
is nothing but an E. spelling of F. marquise, an officer’s tent, large
tent, marquee. PB. Littré says that marquise, a tent, a little elegant
construction, was no doubt so named from marquise, a marchioness,
or lady of rank who was to be protected from the inclemency of the
weather, That is, it is short for ‘tent of the marchioness.’ The F.
marquise is the fem. of marquis, a marquis; see Marquis.

MARQUETRY, inlaid work. (F.—MHG.) In Sir T, Herbert’s
Travels, ed. 1665, p. 146. —F. marqueterie, ‘inlaied work of sundry
colours ;’ Cot. =F. marqueter, ‘to inlay, to diversifie, flourish, or work
all over with small pieces of sundry colours, also, to spot ;’ id.
Lit. ‘to mark slightly, or with spots; iterative form of marquer, to
mark.=F, marque, a mark.—MHG. mark, G. marke, a mark, token;
cognate with E. mark; see Mark (1).

MARQUIS, a title of nobility. (F.—Low L.—G.) ME. markis,
marquis; Chaucer, C. T. 7940, 8473 (E 64, 597).—OF. marchis
(Hatzfeld), later marquis, ‘a, marquesse, in old time the governour
of a frontire, or frontire town ;” Cot. Cf. Prov. and Span. marques,
Port. marquez, Ital. marchese.— Low L. marchensis, a prefect of the
marches. = Low L. marcha, a march, boundary, = OHG. marcha,
a march, boundary; see March (1) and Mark (2). @ The true
OF. form was marchis; altered to markis by the influence of Ital.
marchese (with ch as k); Hatzfeld. Der. marquis-ate, in Minsheu;
also marchioness= Low L. marchidnissa, formed with fem. suffix -issa
(=Gk. -toca) from Low L. marchidn-em, acc. of marchio, a prefect
of the marches, which is a variant of marchensis. Also marquee, q.v.
Doublet, marguess, Merch. Ven. i. 2. 125, from Span. marques ; cf.
margrave, q. Vv.

MARROW (1), pith, soft matter within bones. (E.) ME. marow,
marwhe, marughe (with one r), Prompt. Pary. p. 326. More com-
monly mary, Chaucer, C. T. 12476 (C 542). AS. mearh, marrow,
dat. mearge, Voc. 159. 32. OMerc. merg, dat. merge, Corpus gloss.
1308.4 Du. merg, marrow, pith ; Icel. mergr, marrow; Swed. merg;
Dan, marv; G. mark, OHG. marag, marrow. Teut. types *mazgom,
n., mazgoz, m. Further allied to Russ. mozg’, marrow; Zend mazga-,
Pers. maghz; and Skt. majjan (for *masjan), marrow of bones, pith
or sap of trees; Root unknown. 4 The Gael. smior, marrow,
strength, Irish smear, grease, W. mer, marrow, do not belong here,
but are related to E. smear. Der. marrow-bone, ME. mary-bone,
Chaucer, C. T. 382.

MARROW (2), a companion, partner. (Scand.) ME. marwe,
‘socius ;’ Prompt. Pary.Icel. margr, (1) many; (2) friendly; see
Vigfusson. Cognate with E. many; see Many.

MARRY, to take for a husband or wife. (F.—L.) Properly ‘to
provide with a husband.” ME, marien (with one r), Rob. of Glouc.
p. 30, 1. 7oo.—F. marier, to marry.—L. maritdre, (1) to give a
woman in marriage, (2) to take a woman in marriage, —L. maritus,
a husband; the fem. marita means lit. provided with a husband, or
joined to a male.—L. mari-, for mas, a male. See Male. Der.
marri-age, ME. mariage (with one r), Rob. of Glouc. p. 31, 1. 726,
from F. mariage, which from Late L. maritaticum, a woman’s dowry,
in use A.D. 1062, later maritégium (Ducange); marriage-able,
marriage-able-ness. And see marital.

MARSALA, a wine. (Ital.) From Marsala, a town on the
W. coast of Sicily.

MARSH, a morass, swamp, fen. (E.) ME. mersche, Wyclif,
Gen. xli. 18 (earlier text). AS. mersc,a marsh; Grein, ii.234. [The
change from sc to sh is usual and regular.] Mersc is a contraction of
mer-isc, orig. an adj. signifying full of meres or pools (=mere-ish) ;
Teut. type *mar-isk- ; formed with suffix -isc (-ish) from Teut. *mari-,
AS. mere, a mere, pool, lake; see Mere.+Low G. marsch, Bremen
Worterbuch, iii. 133. Der. marsh+y, marsh-i-ness.

‘MARSHAL, a master of the horse; variously applied as a title
ofhonour. (F.—OHG.) The orig. sense is ‘ horse-servant,’ a farrier
or groom; it rose to be a title of honour, like constable, q.v. ME.
mareschal, Rob. of Glouc: p. 491, 1. 10081; marschal, P. Plowman,
B. iii. 200. — OF. mareschal (mod. F. maréchal), ‘a marshall of a
kingdom or of a camp (an honourable place), also, a blacksmith,
farrier ;’ Cot.—OHG. maraschalh (MHG. marshalc, G. marschall),


MARTINGALE


an attendant upon a horse, groom, farrier. OHG. marah, a battle
horse, whence the fem. meriha, a mare, cognate with E. Mare, q.v.;
and schalh, MHG., shalc, a servant, whence G. schalk, a knave, a
rogue (by a change of sense parallel to that of E. knzave). B. The
latter element is cognate with AS. scealc, a servant, man (Grein),
Du. schalk, a knave, Icel. skalkr, a servant, knaye, rogue, Swed. skalk,
a rogue; the oldest form and sense being preserved in Goth. skalks,
a servant, Mat. viii..g. Der. marshal, vb., Macb. ii. 1. 42, the sense
being ‘to act as marshal,’ it being orig. a part of his duty to arrange
for tournaments and to direct ceremonies ; marshall-er, marshal-ship.
@~ The syllable -skal occurs also in sene-schal, q. v.

MARSUPIAL, belonging to a certain family of animals. (L.—-
Gk.) Modern. Applied to such animals as have a pouch in which
to carry their young.=L. marsiipium, a pouch.—Gk. papovmoy,
papoimoy, a little pouch; dimin. of ydpoumos, udpormos, a bag, pouch
(Xenophon, Anab. 4. 3. 11).

MART, a contracted form of Market, q.v. In Hamlet, i. 1. 74.

MARTELLO TOWER, a circular fort on the S. coast of
England. (Ital.—L.—Gk.—Pers.) ‘The English borrowed the name
of the tower from Corsica in 1794;’- Webster. More correctly
Mortella, because the fort taken in 1794 by the English was situate in.
Mortella bay, Corsica (Davies). The Ital. mortella means a myrtle.
@ Some have thought that these towers were called ¢orri di martello
because the watchmen gave the alarm by striking the bell with
a hammer; Sir G. C. Lewis, Letters, 1862, p. 419 (see quot. in
Davies, Suppl. Glossary). Torriano has sonare le campane a martello,
to sound the bells with a hammer, to give an alarm ; and see Ariosto’s
Orlando, x. 51; xiv. 100. Hence the mistaken spelling. Cf. N.
and Q, 10 S. iii. 193. See Myrtle.

MARTEN, a kind of weasel. (F.—Low L.—Teut.) a. Marten
is a contraction of the older form marterz, in Harrison’s Description
of England, b. ii, c. 19, ed. Furnivall, p. 310, and in Palsgrave ;
ME. maritryn, properly ‘ marten’s fur,’ used by Lydgate (Halliwell’s
Dict.). B. Again, marétrin is an adj. form; from OF. martrin, adj.,
belonging to the marten (Godefroy) ; cf. OF. martrine, f., marten’s
fur. The E. sb. is marter or martre; it is spelt martre in Caxton,
tr. of Reynard the Fox, ed. Arber, p. 112, 1, 18.—F. marire (also
marte), ‘a martin,’ Cot.; spelt martre in the 11th cent. (Littré).
Cf. Ital. martora, Span. marta, Low L. *marturis, of which Ducange
gives the pl. marturés, as being a common word ; also martalus (with
the common change of / forr).= Teut. type *marf-uz, a marten; cf.
MHG. and G. marder ; Du. marter; AS. meard, a marten, Orosius, 1.
1; see Sweet’s A. S. Reader; Icel. mérdr (gen. mardar) ; Swed. mard;
Dan. maar (for *maard), Root unknown. 4 1. The supposed L.
martes, a marten, is due to a doubtful reading in Martial, 10. 37. 18,
and cannot be relied on, It is curious that the AS. name was lost,
and replaced by the F. one; but many terms of the chase are Norman.

MARTIAL, warlike, brave. (F.—L.) In Shak. Hen. V, iy. 8.
46; Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 5.—F. martial, ‘ martiall ;? Cot.=—L.
Martialis, dedicated to Mars. = L. Marti-, decl. stem of Mars, the god
of war; see March (3). Der. martial-ly; also martial-ist (obsolete),
Two Noble Kinsmen, i. 2. 16.

MARTIN, a bird of the swallow kind. (F.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627, the name of the bird is given as martin, marten, martinet, and
martelet, Palsgrave has martynet. Of these forms, marten is corrupt ;
and martinet, martelet are dimin. forms, for which see Martlet. =F.
martin, (1) a proper name, Martin, (2) the same name applied to
various birds and animals (Scheler) ; thus martin-pécheur is a king-
fisher (Hamilton), and oiseau de S. Martin is ‘the ring-taile or hen-
harm,’ Cot.; whilst the MF,name for the martin was martinet; Cot.
A note to Dunbar’s Poems (S. T. S.), ii. 223, says that the hen
harrier was called in F. otseau de Saint-Martin because it traverses
France about Noy..11 (St. Martin’s day). Der. mart-let, q.v. Also
(from the name Martin) Martin-mas or (corruptly) Martle-mas, 2
Hen. IV, ii. 2. 1103 martin-et, q. v.

MARTINET, a strict disciplinarian. (F.) ‘You martinet
rogue;’ Wycherley, Plain Dealer (1677), A. lii.sc. 1. ‘So called
from an officer of that name, whom Voltaire describes as the regulator
of the French infantry under Louis XIV’ (A. D. 1643-1715); Todd’s
Johnson. See Sir S. D. Scott, The British Army, iii. 302. The
name is a dimin. of the name Martin; see Martin. ,

MARTINGALE, MARTINGAL, a strap fastened to a
horse’s girth to hold his head down; in ships, a short spar under the
bowsprit. (F.—Prov.) The ship’s martingale is named from its re-
semblance, in situation, to the horse’s. The word, spelt martingal,
is given in Johnson only with respect to the horse. Minsheu, ed.
1627, speaks of ‘a martingale for a horse’s taile;’ the word also
occurs in Cotgrave.—F. martingale, ‘a martingale for a horse;
Cot. He also gives: ‘a la martingale, absurdly, foolishly, un-
towardly, . . . in the homeliest manner.’ B. See the account in
Littré, who shows that the term arose from an oddly made kind of


363


364 MARTINMAS


breeches, called chausses & la martingale, a phrase used by Rabelais.
Cf. Span. martingal, an old kind of breeches; Ital. martingala, an
old kind of hose. y. The explanation of Ménage is accepted by
Littré and -Scheler. He says the breeches were named after the
Martigaux (pl. of Martigal), who were the inhabitants of a place
called Martigues in Provence (S. of France). See Mistral, who gives
Prov. martingalo, martegalo, a martingale (both for horse and ship).
—Prov. Martingau, Martegau, an inhabitant of Martegue. = Prov.
Martegue, Martigue, near the mouths of the Rhone; said to be named
from St. Martha, who was supposed to be buried at Tarascon.

MARTINMAS, MARTLEMAS, the feast of St. Martin;
Noy. 11. (Hybrid; F. and L.) Palsgrave has Martylmas. The
corruption to Martlemas (2 Hen. IV, ii. 2. 110) is due to the easy
change of x tol; see Lilac. ME. Martynmesse, Rob. of Brunne, tr.
of Langtoft, p. 230, 1. 1. Compounded of the F. proper name
Martin; and ME. messe=AS. messe, from L. missa, a mass. See
Martin and Mass (2).

MARTLET (1), a kind of bird, a martin. (F.) In Levins ;
and in Shak. Merch. Ven. ii. 9. 28. Martinet in Baret. (1580).
A corruption of the older name martnet or martinet by the same
change of x to J as is seen in Martlemas for Martinmas. ‘ Martnet,
martenet, byrd;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 327.—F. martinet, ‘a martlet or
martin;’ Cot. Picard martinet, a martin; also martelot, in the de-
partment of la Meuse (Corblet), Dimin. of F. martin, a martin ;
with suffix -et. See Martin.

MARTLET (2), a swift; in heraldry. (F.—L.) The name was
orig. merlette, altered to martlet by confusion with martlet (1), which
meant ‘a martin,’ a bird closely allied to the swift.» The alteration
was earlier than Cotgrave’s time, as he gives F..merlette, f., ‘a mart-
let, in blason.’ But the true sense of merlette was ‘a little blackbird.’
=F, merle, a blackbird.—L. merula; see Merle. 4 We find OF.
merlos, pl. of merlot, in the sense of ‘ martlets’ or swifts, in the Roll of
Caerlaverock (1300), p. 7. See Notes on E. Etym., p..179.
‘MARTYR, one who suffers for his belief. (L.—Gk.) Lit. fa
witness’ to the truth. ME. martir, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris,
ii.185,1.10. AS. martyr, A®lfred, tr. of Beda, lib. i.c. 7. —L. martyr.
= Gk. paprup, paprus, a witness; lit. one who remembers, records,
or declares. Cf. Skt. ser, to remember, desire, record, declare. =
4/SMER, to remember ; whence also E. memory, Gk. pépimva, care,
&c. Der. martyr-dom, AS. martyr-dim; also martyro-logy, from
Gk. paprupo-, decl. stem of paptus, with the common suffix -logy of
Gk. origin, from Aéyew, to speak 5 martyro-log-ist.

MARVEL, a wonder. (F.—L.) ME. mervaile; King Alisaunder,
I, 218.—F. merveille, ‘a marvell;’ Cot. [Cf. Span. maravilla, Ital.
maraviglia, Port. maravilha.|—L. mirabilia, neut. pl., wonderful
things; according to the common confusion in Late L. between the
fem. sing. and neut. pl.; from the adj. mirabilis, wonderful. =—L.
mirari, to wonder at. = L. mirus, wonderful ; formed with suffix -rus
from the base mi-, later form of smi-. See Miracle. Der. marvell-
ous, ME. meruailous, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 174, 1. 20;
marvell-ous-ly, marvell-ous-ness; also marvel, vb., ME. meruailen,
merueillen, P. Plowman, B. xi. 342.

‘“MASCLE, in heraldry; a perforated lozenge. (F,—L.) An
erroneous spelling of OF. macle.—OF. macle, a mascle, or lozenge-
shaped plate of steel, used in making scale-armour (Godefroy) ; MF.
(and F.) macle, ‘ the mash [mesh] of anet; also, in blazon, a mascle,
or short lozenge, having a square hole in the middest;’ Cot.—L.
macula, a mesh; whence also Mail (1), q.v. Perhaps confused
with OHG. masca, a mesh. Doublet, mail (1). See Notes on E.
Etym., p. 181. ‘

MASCULINE, male. (F.—L.) ME. masculin, Chaucer, tr. of
Boethius, b. ii. pr. 3. 1. 28.—F. masculin, ‘masculine ;’ Cot.—L.
masculinus, lengthened from masculus, male; see Male, Der.
masculine-ly, masculine-ness.

MASH, to beat into a mixed mass. (E.) The old sense was ‘to
mix.’ ‘To masche, miscere;’ Levins, 35. 10. ‘Maschyn, yn brew-
ynge, misceo; Maschynge, mixtura, mixtio;’ Prompt. Parv. Also
ME. méshen, to mash; Owl and Nightingale, 84; as if from AS.
*me@scan, from *masc, sb. ‘To mash is, in particular, to steep malt;
the tub into which the refuse grains are put is called the mash-tub,
‘whence pigs are fed. A mash for horses is a mixture of malt and
bran, Cf. Lowland Scotch mask-fat, a vat for brewing ; masking-fat,
a mashing-vat; masking-pat, a tea-pot, lit..a pot for steeping or
infusing tea (see Burns, When Guildford good our pilot.stood, st. 1).
See Halliwell and Jamieson. . Apparently E.; cf. AS. max-wyrt (for
*masc-wyrt), wort, new beer, Cockayne’s Leechdoms, ii. 87, 97, 107.
Here max stands for masc, as usual, whence Sc. mask, E. mash; the
sense of mdse was probably a mixture, esp.. brewers’ grains.-4-Swed.
dial. mask, brewers’ grains (Rietz), Swed. mask, grains ; Swed. mdska,
to mash; Dan. mask, a mash; whence mask-kar, a. mashing-tub ;
meske, to mash, to fatten pigs (with grains); North Friesic mask,


‘reason for this distinction.


MASS


grains, draff (Outzen); Norw. meisk, sb., meiska, vb.; G. meisch,
a mash (of distillers and brewers); whence meischfass, a mash-vat,
meischen, to mash, mix. B. Thus the verb to mash is due to the sb.
mash (from AS, masc-, with vowel-shortening), meaning ‘a mixture ;”
and it is probable that the base *mdsc- (Teut. *maisk-) is allied by
gradation to misc-, as in AS. miscian, to mix; see Mix. The Irish
masgaim, I infuse, mash malt, Gael. masg, to mix, infuse, steep, are
borrowed from E. But Irish measgaim, I mix, Gael. measg, to mix,
W. mysgu, to mix, as well as Lithuan. maiszyti, to stir things in’
a pot, from miszti, to mix (Nesselmann), are cognate. -Unconnected’
with OF. mascher, F..macher, which is merely L. masticare, to chew.

MASK, MASQUE, a disguise for the face; a masked enter-
tainment. (F.—Span.—Arab.) It is usual to write mask in the
sense of visor, and masque in the sense of masquerade; there is no
Perhaps we may call mask the E., and
masque the F. spelling. No doubt it is, and long has been, gen.
supposed that the entertainment takes its name from the visor,
according to the F. usage; but it is remarkable that the sense of
entertainment is an old one, the use of the visor being accidental.
The sense of entertainment is a common one in old authors, ‘A jolly
company In maner of a maske;’ Spenser, F. Q. ili. 12. 5. ‘The
whiles the maskers marched forth in trim array;’ id. ili, 12. 6.
‘Some haue I sene ere this, full boldlye come daunce in a maske,
whose dauncing became, theym so well, that yf theyr vysours had
beene of [off] theyr faces, shame woulde not haue suffred theym to set
forth a foote;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 1039 e. ‘Cause them to be
deprehended and taken and their maskers taken of [off] and theyr
hipocrisie to be dyscouered ;’ id. p. 758 b. Note here the use of
maskers in the sense of masks; it is not a mistake, but correct accord~-
ing to the Span. spelling, as will appear.—F. masque, ‘a mask, a
visor;’ Cot, B. This F. masque is probably due to the Late L.
masca, a mask, or a spectre, in the Corpus Glossary, 1.1275. But
we must further consider the fullerforms evidenced by MF. masquarizé,
‘masked,’ Cot.; as well as by masquerie, masquerade, mascarade, ‘a mask
ormummery,’ y. The lat form, mascarade, is plainly borrowed from
Span. mascarada, a masquerade, assembly of maskers, from mascara,
a masker, masquerader, also a mask. Cf. Ital. mascherata, a mas-
querade; mascherare, to mask, maschera, a mask; so that Sir T.
More’s use of masker=mask, is fully accounted for.— Arab. mas-
kharat, ‘a buffoon, a fool, jester, a droll, a wag, a Ian in masquerade ;
a pleasantry, anything ridiculous or mirthful, sport; Pers. mas-
kharah kardan, to ridicule or deride, to play the buffoon;” Rich.
Pers. Dict. p. 1416.— Arab, root sakhira, he ridiculed; id. p, 815.
@ Both sources seem real; as M. Devic remarks, in the Supplement
to Littré, it is needless to give all the details in full by which
the latter etymology can be proved. It is sufficient to refer to
Dozy, Glossaire des Mots Espagnols tirés de PArabe, Der. mask-er ;
also masquer-ade, explained above; whence masquerad-er.

MASON, a worker in stone. (F.—Late L.—G.?) In early use.
ME. mason, King Alisaunder, 1. 2370; spelt mascun, Floriz and
Blauncheflor, 1. 326.—OF. magon, masson (F. magon), ‘a mason ;”
Cot.=— Late L. macidnem, acc. of macio, a mason; we find also the
forms machio, macho, maco, and even marcio, mactio, matio, mattio.
B. The difficulty is to tell the true Low Lat. form; marcio is prob-
ably wrong, and mactio may be a misreading of matiio. If we take
matio or mattio as the standard form, we may perhaps suppose
machio, macho, macio, maco to come from it; the difficulty of dis-
tinguishing between ¢ and ¢ in MSS. is often very great. y. Mattio
may be referred to a Teut. stem *matjon-, m., i.e. a cutter, from
a base *mat-, to hack, or cut; whence possibly E. mag-tock. Cf.
OHG., mezzo, a mason, G. steinmetz, a stonemason. Der. mason-ic ;
also mason-ry, Rom. of the Rose, 1. 302, from F. magonnerie, from
the verb magonner, to do mason’s work.

MASQUE, MASQUERADE; see Mask.

MASS (2), a lump of matter, quantity, size. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
masse, Prompt. Parv.—F. masse, ‘a masse, lump ;’ Cot. =—L. massa,
amass. (Prob. not a true L. word, but taken from Gk.) =—Gk. pa(a,
a barley-cake, closely allied to pdyyua, any kneaded mass.—Gk.
paooey (for *uax-yev), to knead. Cf. Lith. minkyti, to knead. Der.
mass, vb.; mass-ive, from F. massif, ‘massive,’ Cot.; mass-ive-ly,
mass-ive-ness; also mass-y (an older adj., with E. suffix -y=AS. -ig),
Spenser, F. Q. iii. 11. 47 5 mass-i-ness,

MASS (2), the celebration of the Eucharist. (L.) ME. messe,
masse, P. Plowman, B, v. 418, C, viii. 27; Chaucer has masse-peny,
C. T. 7331 (D 1749). Spelt messe in Havelok, 188. [Not from F,
messe, but directly from L.] OMerc. messe, Matt. vili. 4; AS. masse,
(1) the mass, (2) a church-festival, Grein, ii, 226; /¥lfred, tr. of
Beda, b. iv. c. 22, ed, Whelock, p. 319.—Late L. missa, (1) dis-
missal, (2) the mass; see Ducange. f. The name is usually
accounted for by supposing that the allusion is to the words ite,
missa est (go, the congregation is dismissed), which were used at the


MASSACRE


conclusion of the service. ‘Come I to ite, missa est, I holde me
yserued ’=TIf I come in time to hear the last words of the service, it
suffices for me; P. Plowman, B. v. 419. Wedgwood suggests that
it meant rather the dismissal of the catechumens who were not
allowed to remain during the celebration of the eucharist ; for which
he cites the following passage from Papias: ‘ Missa tempore sacrificii
est quando. catecumeni foras mittuntur, clamante lenita [the deacon],
Si quis catecumenus remansit, exeat foras; et inde missa, quia sacra-
mentis altaris interesse non possunt, quia nondum regenerati sunt.’
y- It matters little; for we may be sure that missa is, in any case,
derived from L. missa, fem. of missus, pp. of mittere, to send, send
away; see Missile, 4 The change of vowel from L, 7 to AS. @ is
remarkable, but we find a similar change in Icel. messa, Swed.
messa, Dan. messe; and still more clearly in G. messe from OHG.
messa and missa; also in OF. messe, Ital. messa. (All these words
are, of course, borrowed from Romanic, which substitutes e for L. short
i; cf. F. vert from L. uiridem.) Der. Candle-mas, Christ-mas, Hallow-
mas, Lam-mas, Martin-mas, Michael-mas; q.v.

MASSACRE, indiscriminate slaughter, carnage. (F.—O. Low
G.?) Pronounced massdere in Spenser, F. Q. iii, 11. 29; he also
has massdcred, id. iii. 3. 35.—F. massacre, ‘a massacre;’ Cot. Also
massacrer, ‘to massacre;’ id, The OF. sb, is magacre, machacre
(Godefroy). B. Of disputed origin; perhaps extended from Low G.
matsken, to cut, to hew (Bremen Worterb. iii. 137), Du. matsen, to
maul, to kill, Cf. G. metzeln, an extension of metzen, to cut, to kill
(Fliigel) ; G. metzelei, a massacre, butchery, slaughter; see Mason.
@ The F. word is one of much difficulty ; the above solution is very
doubtful. See Norm. dial. machacre, a massacre (Moisy), allied to
ONF. macheclier, a butcher (Wace); cf. Late L, macellarius, a butcher
{Ducange), from L. macellum, shambles, meat-market. Cf. also OF,
maceclier, macheclier, macacrier, macecrier, &c., a butcher (Godefroy).
This seems to lead to a right solution, though the forms are
abnormal.

MAST (1), a-pole to sustain the sails of a ship. (E.) ME. mast,
Chaucer, C. T. 3264. AS. mest, the stem of a tree, bough, mast of
a ship; Grein,i., 226 (whence Icel. mastr was prob. borrowed),+Dnu.
mast ; Swed. and Dan. mast; G. mast. Prob. cognate with L, malus
{<*mazdos), a mast; Brugmann, i. § 587. Der. mast-less, dis-mast.

MAST (2), the fruit of beech and forest trees. (E.) The orig.
sense is ‘ edible fruit, with reference to the feeding of swine. ME.
mast. “They eten mast;’ Chaucer, Autas Prima, 1.7. AS. mest;
‘prim hund swina mest’=mast for three hundred swine; Thorpe,
Diplomatarium Afvi Saxonici, p. 70.+G. mas¢, (1) mast, (2) stall-
feeding, fattening; whence mdsten, to fatten. B. Doubtless allied
to Skt. médas, sb., fat; see Brugmann, i. § 698.

MASTER, a superior, lord, teacher. (F.—L.) In early use.
ME. maister, meister, spelt meister, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris,
i. 41, 1. 29.— OF. maistre, meistre; mod. F. maitre, a master.—L.
magistrum, acc. of magister,a master. PB. L. mag-is-ter is a double
comparative form; the base mag- is the same as in mag-nus, great,
Gk. péy-as, great; so that the sense is *great-er-er’=much more
great. Der. master, verb; master-ly, master-ship, master-y, q.v.; also
master-builder, -hand, -key, -less, -piece, -work, &c.

MASTERY, lordship, dominion. (F.—L.) Inearly use. ME.
maistrie, meistrie; spelt meistrie in Ancren Riwle, p. 140.—AF.
maisterie, Philip du Thaun, Livre des Creatures, 1, 1564; OF.
maistrie, meistrie, mastery (Burguy).—OF. maistre, a master; see
Master.

MASTIC, MASTICH, a kind of gum resin. (F.—L.—Gk.)
The tree yielding it is also called mastic, but should rather be called
the mastic-tree, spelt mastick-tree in the Bible, Story of Susanna, v. 54.
Another name for the tree is Jentisk. _* The lentiskes also haue their
rosin, which they call mastick;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xiv. c. 20.
ME. mastyk, Prompt. Parv.; mastic, Palladius, xi. 410.—F. mastic,
‘mastick, a sweet gum ;’ Cot.—L, mastiché. = Gk. paotixn, the gum
of the tree oxivos, called in L. lentiscus. B. So called because it was
used for chewing in the East; from the base paor-, seen in pdorag,
the mouth, paordfev, to chew.—Gk. pacdoua, I chew. Der.
mastic-ate, q.V.

MASTICATE, to. chew. (L.—Gk.) The E. verb was sug-
gested by the previous use of the sb. mastication, which alone appears
in Minsheu, ed. 1627, and in Cotgrave, who uses it to translate the
F. mastication. = L. masticatus, pp. of masticare, to chew ; a late word,
marked by Lewis as ‘post-classical.’? B. Formed, like most verbs in
-Gre, from a sb. The orig. sense was probably ‘to chew mastic,’ from
L. masticé, mastiché, mastic, Gk. paorixn; see Mastic. @ The
true L,.word for ‘ chew’ is mandere, The explanation under Mastic,
that mastic is so named from being chewed, only applies to Greek;
in Latin, the verb is derived from the sb. Der. masticat-ion, from
F. mastication, as above; masticat-or-y.


MASTIFF, a large dog. (F,—Late L.—L.) ME. mesitif,


MATE 365


mastif. ‘Als grehound or mastif’ (riming with hastif), Rob. of
Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 189, 1. 8. ‘ Mastyf, or mestyf, hownde ;’
Prompt. Parv. But the AF, form was mastin; see Polit. Songs, ed.
Wright, p. 283; Langtoft, ii. r00.— OF. maséin, a mastiff, lit. ‘ house-
dog’ (Supp. to Godefroy) ; also ‘a domestic ;’ see Godefroy. = Late
L. type *mansuétinum, acc. of *mansuétinus, tame, domestic; extended
from mansuétus, tame.—L. mansuétus, pp. of mansuescere, to tame ;
lit. ‘to accustom to the hand. =—L. man-, for manus, the hand; and
suescere, to accustom, make one’s own, which is allied to swus, one’s
own. See Korting, § 5906. Cf. L. mansuétirius, a tamer (Lewis);
B. The Late L. mastinus seems to have been mistakenly changed to
mastiuus (mastivus); see Ducange. Confusion also set in with ME.
masty, fat (adj. formed from mast (2)), and OF. mestif, mongrel,
Late L. *mixtivus, from L. mixtus, pp. of miscére, to mix.

MASTODON, the name of an extinct elephant. (Gk.) Modern;
so called from the conical or nipple-like projections on its molar
teeth, Coined from Gk. paor-, base of paords, the female breast
(connected with paddev, L. madére, to be moist); and ddov-, short
for d5ovr-, stem of d50vs, a tooth ; see Tooth.

MAT, a texture of sedge, rushes, or other material, to be laid on
a floor, &c. (L.) ME. matie. ‘Matte, or natte, Matta, storium;’
Prompt. Pary. AS. meatta; ‘ Storea, vel psiata, meatta;’ Voc. 154. 2.
[L. storea means ‘a mat.’ Observe the variant ME. zatte given in
the Prompt. Parv.J=L. matta, a mat; cf. Low L. natia, a mat
(Ducange). B. From the form matta were borrowed E. mat, Du.
mat, G. matte, Swed. matia, Dan. maatte, Ital. matta, Span. mata;
whilst the form atta is preserved in F. matte. Precisely a similar
interchange of m and x occurs in F. xappe from L. mappa; see Map.
y- Root uncertain; the curious shifting of m and ~ suggests that (as
in the case of map) the word may have been a Punic word; indeed,
it would not be surprising if the words mappa and matta were related.
Der. mat, verb; matt-ed, matt-ing.

MATADOR, the slayer of the bull in bull-fights. (Span. —L.)
In Dryden, Span. Friar, A. i. sc. 2. Spelt matadore, Pope, Rape of
the Lock, iii. 33, 47.—Span. matador, lit. ‘ the slayer ;’ formed with
suffix -dor (=L. acc. -térem) from matar, to kill.mL. mactére, (1
to honour, (2) to honour by sacrifice, to sacrifice, (3) to kill.—L.
mactus, honoured ; allied to mag-nus, great (Bréal).

MATCH (1), one of the same make, an equal, a contest, game,
marriage. (E.) ME. macche, mache. Spelt macche=mate, com-
panion; P. Plowman, B. xiii. 47. ‘This was a mache ynmete’= this
was an unfit contest; Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 4070; whence the
pp: machede=matched, id. 1533, 2904. The orig. sense was ‘ com-
panion’ or ‘mate,’ hence an equal, giving the verb fo match=to
consider equal; the senses of ‘contest, game, marriage,’ &c., are
really -due to the verb. AS. -mecca, generally ge-mecca, a com-
panion, comrade, spouse; Grein, i. 426, [The prefix ge-, often and
easily dropped, makes no difference.] The change of sound from
final -cea to -cche, and later to -tch, is perfectly regular. B. The form
gemecca or mecca is one of secondary formation; from the more
original form maca, a companion, as in gi-maca, gloss to compar in
Durham Ritual, p. 165, 1. 6; whence ME. make, a companion
(Chaucer).Icel, maki, Swed. make, Dan. mage, OSax. gi-mako, a
mate, acomrade, fB. Allied to AS. gemec, adj., like, Icel. makr, adj.,
suitable, MHG. gemach, suitable; and to AS. macian, to make, to
‘fit together.’ See Make. Distinct from Mate (1). Der.
match, verb, see exx, above, and see P. Plowman, B. ix. 173; also
match-less, match-less-ly, match-less-ness.

MATCH (2), a prepared cord for firing a cannon, a ‘lucifer.’
(F.—L.—Gk.) ME. macche; ‘the macche brenneth’=the match
burns (used of a smouldering wick) ; P. Plowman, B, xvii. 213, =
OF. mesche, meiche, ‘ the wicke or snuffe of a candle; the match of
a lamp; also, match for a harquebuse, &c.;’ Cot. Mod. F. méche.
The corresponding Late L. type is *micca or *mycca, which may be
connected with Gk. pve«ns, the snuff of a lamp-wick; and with Late
L. myxus, the wick of a candle (Ducange) ; and Martial (14. 41. 2)
uses the acc. pl. myxas, as if from nom. mywa, i.e. the nozzle of
a lamp, the part through which the wick protrudes. — Gk. pvéa, the
nozzle of a lamp; the more orig. senses being (1) mucus, discharge
from the nose, (2) a nostril, See further under Mucus. Der.
match-lock, i.e. a lock of a gun holding a match, and hence the gun
itself; added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. Korting, § 6429.

MATE (1), a companion, comrade, equal. (Low G.) Spelt mate
in Prompt. Parv., p. 3293 Sir Ferumbras, 1.1372. (Distinct from
AS. gemaca, and borrowed from Low German. ]—Mid. Low G. mate
(Franck); Low G. maat, a companion; MDu. maet, ‘a mate or
fellow-companion ;” Hexham; Du. maat..-OHG, gimazzo, a com-
panion at table; cf, Goth, matjan, to eat, from mat-, base of mats,
meat. See Meat. The sense is ‘one who eats with you;’ the
prefix gi- (Goth. ga-), meaning ‘together,’ is lost in the MDu. form.
Der. mate, vb., All’s Well, i, 1. 102 ; mate-less,


366 MATE


MATS (2), to check-mate, confound, (F.—Pers.—Arab.) Used
by Shak. in the sense ‘to confound;’ as in ‘My mind she has
mated, and amazed my sight;’ Macb. v. 1.86. It is the same word
as is used in chess, the true form being check-mate, which is often
used as a verb. B. Properly, check mate is an exclamation, mean-
ing ‘ the king is dead;’ this occurs in Chaucer, Book of the Duchess,
659. — OF. eschec et mat, ‘check-mate;’ Cot. ; so also in Rom. Rose,
ed. Méon, 6676. Cf. AF. maté, mated; Gaimar, 3320. Here the
introduction of the conj. e¢ is unnecessary and unmeaning, and due
to ignorance of the sense.= Pers. shah mat, the king is dead.=— Pers.
shah, king; and mat, he is dead, Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 518.
y. Shah is a Pers. word (see Shah) ; but mat is not, being of Arab.
origin. Arab. root mata; he died; Rich. Dict. p. 1283; whence is
derived the Turk, and Pers. mat, ‘ astonished, amazed, confounded,
perplexed, conquered, subjected, .. . receiving check-mate,’ id.; also
Pers. mat kardan, ‘to give check-mate, to confound;’ id. Cf. Heb.
mith, to die. @ We have here the obvious original of OF. mat,
‘deaded, mated, amated, quelled, subdued,’ Cot. Also of ME. mate,
confounded, Ancren Riwle, p. 382, Will. of Palerne, 2441, &c.;
a word merely borrowed from OF, See also Check, Chess,

MATERIAL, substantial, essential. (F.—L.) ‘ Hys materiall
body;’ Tyndall, Works, p. 460, col. 2, And in Chaucer, C, T.,
I 182,— OF. materiel, ‘ materiall;’ Cot.—L. maééridlis, material,
= L. matéria (also matériés), matter; see Matter. Der. material-ly,
material-ness, material-i-ty, material-ise, material-ism, material-ist,
material-ist-ic, material-ist-ic-al.

MATERNAL, belonging to a mother. (F.—L.) Spelt maternall
in Minshea and Cotgrave. Caxton has: ‘our maternal tongue;’
Godfrey of Boloyne, prol.; p. 4, 1. 24.—F. maternel, ‘maternall,;’
Cot.—Late L. mdaternalis, extended from L. mdaternus, motherly.
This adj. is formed with suffix -xus (Idg. -nos) from L. mater,
cognate with E. mother: see Mother. Der. maternal-ly; also
matern-i-ty, from F, maternité, ‘maternity’ (Cot.), which from L.
acc. maternitatem.

MATHEMATIC, pertaining to the science of number. (F.—
L.—Gk.) Gower speaks of ‘the science ... mathematigue;’. C. A.
ili. 87; bk. vii. 72.—OF. mathematique, ‘mathematical ;’ Cot.—L.
matheématicus. —Gk. paOnparixés, disposed to learn, belonging to the
sciences, esp. to mathematics. =Gk. pa@npuar-, stem. of panpa, that
which is learnt, a lesson, learning, science.—Gk. pa6y-, appearing
in padnooua, I shall learn, fut. of pav-0d-vew, to learn; one of the
derivatives from 4/MEN, to think; cf. wav7is, a seer, pévos, mind,
Skt. man, to think. The syllable -@a- prob. represents Idg. dha,
weak grade of 4/DHE, to put, place (Gk. 7i-67-). See Mind.
Der. mathematic-al, -al-ly, mathematic-i-an ; also mathematic-s, sb. pl.

MATINS, MATTINS, morning prayers. (F.—L.) ‘ Masse
and matines;’ Rob. of Glouc. p. 369, 1. 7605. ‘Matynes and masse ;’
P. Plowman, B. v. 418.—F. matins, ‘ matins, morning praier ;’ Cot.


A pl. sb. from F, matin, properly an adj., but used as a sb. to mean |
‘the moming.’=L. mdtitinum, acc. of matiitinus, belonging to the |


morning; which passed into F. with the loss of x, thus pro-
ducing ma?’tin, contracted to matin; cf. Ital. mattino, morning. = L.


Miatita, the goddess of morning or dawn; cf. Lucretius, v. 655; as


if from a masc. *matiitus, with the sense of ‘timely,’ or ‘early ;’
closely related to L. matirus (Bréal); see Mature.
sb. morning (in later use), Hamlet, i. 5. 89, from F. matin, the
morning; hence matin, adj., as in ‘the matin trumpet,’ Milton, P. L.
vi. 526. And see matutinal. @] The spelling with double ¢ may
be due to Ital. mattino, or simply to the doubling of ¢ to keep the
vowel a short, as in matter, mattress.


MATRASS, a long-necked glass bottle; in chemistry. (F.—_|


Span.—Arab.?) From F. matras, the same. Cotgrave has matraz,
matrac, also matelas, ‘a streight, long, narrow-necked, and great,
wide, round-bellied bottle or violl, of strong and thick glasse.’
Perhaps from Span. matraz,a matrass. Devic thinks it is of Arab.
origin.

MATRICIDE, the murderer of one’s mother. (F.—L.) 1. The
above is the correct sense, but rare; see Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. =
F. matricide, adj., ‘ mother-killing ;’ Cot. —L. mdtricida, a murderer
of a mother.=L. matri-, decl. stem of mdter, a mother (see
Mother) ; and -cida, killing, formed from cedere (pt. t. ce-cidi), to
kill (see Cesura). 2. Sir T. Browne has the word in the sense
‘murder of one’s mother;’ Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 16, § 5. In this
case, it is coined directly from L. matricidium, a killing of a mother.
= L. matri-, as before ; and -cidium, a killing, from cedere, as before.
@ Fratricide, parricide, are equally ambiguous. Der. matricid-al.

MATRICULATEH, to admit to membership, esp. in a college,
to register. (L.) Used as a pp., with the sense of ‘enrolled,’ in
Skelton, Garland of Laurel, 1. 1281.—Late L.. mdtriculatus, pp. of
miatriculare, to enrol, a coined word.—L. mdatricula, a register ;
a dimin. of matrix; (1) a breeding animal, (2) a womb, matrix,


Der. matin,


MAUGRE .


(3) a public register, roll, list, lit. a parent-stock. See Matrix,
Der. matriculat-ion.

MATRIMONY, marriage. (F.—L.) ME. — matrimoine,
Chaucer, C. T. 3097 (A 3095).—AF. matrimonie, Year-book of
Edw. I, 1304-5, p. 251; OF. matrimonie; MF. matrimonie, ‘ matri-
mony,’ Cot.; of which another form was matrimoine. = L, matrimonium,
marriage. L. matri-, decl. stem of mater, a mother (see Mother);
with suffix -mdn-io-. Der. matrimoni-al, matrimoni-al-ly,

MATRIX, the womb, a cavity in which anything is formed,
a mould, (L.) Exod, xiii. 12, 15. [Written matrice in Numb. iii.
12 in A. V., ed. 1611. Minsheu has both matrice and matrix ; the
former is the F. form. | Cf, ‘ matrice, the matrix,’ Cot. ; from the L.
matricem, the acc. case.]=L. matrix, the womb.=—L, matri-, decl.
stem of mater, mother, cognate with E. Mother, q.v.

MATRON, a married woman, elderly lady. (F.—L.) ME.
matrone, Gower, C. A, i. 98; bk. i. 1657.—F. matrone, ‘a matron;’
Cot.—L. matréna, a matron; extended from métr-, for mater,
a mother; see Mother. Der. matron-ly, matron-al, matron-hood ;
also (from L. mdtri-), matrix, q.v., matri-c-ul-ate, q. V., matri-cide,
matri-mony; and see mater-nal.

MATTER (1), the material part of a thing, substance. (F.—L.)
ME. matere (with one #), Chaucer, C. T. 6492 (D g10). Earlier
form materie, Ancren Riwle, p. 270, 1. 7.—OF. matiere, matere; mod:
F. matiére.—L. matéria, matter, materials, stuff; so called because
useful for construction, building, &c. See Brugmann, i. § 407. Der.
matter, vb., not in early use ; matter-less ; materi-al,q.v. Also matter

2), q.v.

MATTER (2), pus, a fluid in abscesses, (F.—L.) ‘£ Matter,
that which runs out of a sore;” Kersey, ed. 1715. Really the same
word as the above; see Littré, s.v. matiere, sect. 8, who gives:
‘Matiére purulente, ou simplement matiére, le pus qui sort d’une
plaie, d’un abscés.’ So also in the Dict. de Trevoux. Littré gives
the example: ‘II est sorti beaucoup de matiére de cette plaie’=much
matter has come out of this sore. See Matter (1),

MATTINS, the same as Mating, q. v.

MATTOCK, a kind of pickaxe. (E.) ME. mattok. ‘Hoc
bidens, a mattok ;? Voc. 726. 29; and see Prompt. Parv., AS. mattuc,
Orosius, b. iv. c, 8. § 2. B. Hence probably W. matog, a mattock,
hoe; cf. Gael. madag, a mattock, pickaxe (from E.); Russ. motuika,
Lithuan. matikkas, a mattock (from Teut.). See Mason,

MATTRESS, a quilt to lie upon. (F.—Arab.) ‘A mattress,
culcitra;’ Levins. ME. materas, Voc. 583. 21.—OF. materas, ‘a
matteresse, or quilt to lie on;’ Cot. Picard and Walloon matras
(AF. materas; Royal Wills, p. 181). Mod. F. matelas (by change of
r tol); cf. Span. and Port. al-madraque, a quilted cushion, mattress
(where al is the Arab. def. article). = Arab. matraf, ‘a place, station,
post, situation, foundation, a place where anything is thrown; mufrah,
thrown away, rejected ;’ Rich. Dict. p. 1440, This Arab. word
came to mean anything hastily thrown down, hence, something to
lie upon, a bed (Devic) ; just as the L. stratum, lit.‘ anything spread,’
came to mean a bed. The Arab. matrah is derived from the Arab.
root faraha, he threw prostrate; Rich. Dict. p. 967.

MATURE, ripe, completed. (L.) ‘Maturity is a mean between
two extremities, ... they be maturely done;’ Sir T. Elyot, The
Governour, b. i. c. 22. ‘ Peres right mature;’ Palladius, iii. 827. —
L. mdturus, mature, ripe, arrived at full growth. See Matins.
Der. mature-ly; matur-i-ty, from F. maturité, ‘maturity’ (Cot.),
which from L. acc. mdatiritatem; mature-ness; matur-at-ion, from
MF. maturation, ‘a maturation, ripening’ (Cot.), which from L. acc.
matiérationem, allied to matiratus, pp. of maturdre, to ripen ; matur-
at-ive, from MF. maturatif, ‘maturative, ripening’ (Cot.), a coined
word; matur-esc-ent, from the stem of the pres, pt. of maturescere,
inceptive form of mdatiradre. Closely related words are matin,
matutinal.


MATUTINAL, pertaining to the morning, early, (L.) Matu-


from mdatiitin-us, belonging to the moming; see further under
Matins. :

MAUDLIN, sickly sentimental. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb:) ‘The
orig, sense was ‘ shedding tears of penitence,’ like Mary Magdalene,
who was taken as the type of sorrowing penitence. Hence the ex-.
pression ‘their maudlin eyes’ in Dryden’s Prol. to Southerne’s play
of The Loyal Brother, l. 21 (A.D. 1682). Corrupted from ME.
Maudeleyne, or Magdelaine, Chaucer, C. T. 412 (A 410); P. Plow-
man, B. xv. 289.—OF. Maudeleine, Magdaleine.—L, Magdaléné.—

Gk. MaydaAnvh, i.e. belonging to Magdala; Luke, viii. 2, Here
‘Magdala’ answers to Heb. migdol, a tower; Smith’s Dict. of the
Bible. @ Observe the spelling Maudlin (for Magdalen) in All’s
Well, v. 3. 68.


MAUGRE, in spite of. (F-—L.) Obsolete, except in imitating


MAUL


archaic writing. In Shak. Tw. Nt. iii. 1. 163; Tit. And. iv. 2.110;
K. Lear, v. 3.131. In P. Plowman, B. ii. 204, it means ‘ in spite
of;’ but in B. vi. 242, it is (rightly) a sb., signifying ¢ ill will.’ = OF.
malgre, maugre, maulgre; Cot. has ‘maulgré eux, mauger their
teeth, in spite of their hearts, against their wils.’ The lit. sense of
malgre is ‘ill will’ or ‘ displeasure.’ Compounded of mal, from L.
malum, acc. of malus, bad, ill; and OF. gre, gret, from L. gratum,
a pleasant thing. See Malice and Agree.

MAUL, to beat grievously, to bruise greatly, disfigure. (F.—L.)
Formerly mall. ‘Then they malled the horsses legges, that their
mightie coursers lefte praunsynge;’ Bible, 1551, Judges, y. 22.
ME. mallen, to strike with a mall or mace, Joseph of Arimathie,
ed, Skeat, 1. 508. Merely formed from ME, malle, a mall, mace;
see Mall (1).. 4 Even the sb, is spelt maul in A. V. Prov.
xxv. 18, ;

MAULSTICK, a stick used by painters to steady the hand.
(Du.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.— Du. maalstok, a maulstick. = Du. malen,
to paint; stok, stick. Cf. G. malerstock, a maulstick, lit. ‘ painter’s
stick ;’ from G. malen, to represent, paint, and stock, a stick, staff.
B. G. malen, OHG. malén, to mark (hence to delineate, draw, paint),
is der. from G, makl, MHG. and OHG, mal, a mark ; see Meal (2).
y. G. stock.is cognate with E. stock, stake; see Stock.

MAUND (1), a basket. (F.—LowG.) ME. mawnd, ‘sportula;’
Prompt. Pary. [This word, now nearly obsolete, occurs as early as
the 8th century, in the gloss: ‘ Qualus, mand;’ Voc, 42. 26; but it
became obsolete, and was replaced by AF. mande.|—OF. mande,
a basket (Godefroy) ; Picard mande (Corblet). = Du. mand, a basket,
hamper; prov. G. mand, mande, manne, a basket (Fliigel), whence
F. manne; EFries. mande.

MAUND (2), a (very variable) weight. (Arab.) From Arab.
mann; Pers. man. Cf. Heb. maneh, Gk. pva (Yule).

MAUNDY THURSDAY, the day preceding, Good Friday.
(F.—L.; and E.) Thursday is the E. name of the fifth day of the
week; see Thursday. Maundy is ME. maundee, maunde, a com-
mand, used with especial reference to the text ‘ Mandatum novum,’
&c.; John, xiii. 34. ‘He made his maundee,’ He [Christ] performed
his own command, i.e. washed his disciples’ feet; P. Plowman, B.
xvi. 140. ‘Lord, where wolte thou kepe thi maunde?’ Coventry
Mysteries, ed. Halliwell, p. 259. The ‘new commandment’ really
is ‘ that ye love one another ;° but in olden times it was, singularly
enough, appropriated to the particular form of devotion to others
exemplified by Christ when washing his disciples’ feet, as told in
earlier verses of the same chapter, ‘ The Thursday before Easter is
called Maundy Thursday, dies mandati, a name derived from the
ancient custom of washing the feet of the poor on this day, and sing-
ing at the same time the anthem—Mandatum novum, &c.;. John, xiii.
34... The notion was, that the washing of the feet was a fulfilling of
this command, and it is so called in the rubric, conveniunt clerici ad
faciendum mandatum. This rite, called mandatum or lavipedium, is
of great antiquity, both in the Eastern and Western church ;’ &c.;
Humphrey on the Common Prayer, p. 179. See my long note on
P. Plowman, B. xvi. 140, and Maundy Thursday in the Index to the
Parker Society’s publications. Maundy, for mandatum, occurs in


Grindal’s Works, p. 51; Hutchinson, pp. 221, 259, 346; Tyndale, |


i. 259, iii. 236 (Parker Soc.), B. From OF. mandé, that which is
commanded, Cot. has ‘ mandé, commanded, ... directed, appointed.’
= L. mandatum, a command, lit. that which is commanded, neut.
of mandatus, pp. of mandare, to command. See Mandate, of which
maundy is, in fact, the doublet. Not connected with maund,
a basket, for which see Maund (1). Cf. OHG. mandat, the wash-
ing of feet (Otfrid) ; obviously from L, mandatum.
MAUSOLEUM, a magnificent tomb. (L.— Gk.)


of Caria ;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxxvi. c, 5.—L. mausdléum, a


splendid tomb, orig. the tomb of Mansolus.—Gk. MavowAciov, the |


tomb of Mausolus. = Gk. Mavowaos, king of Caria, to whom a splendid
monument was erected by his queen Artemisia.

MAUVE, the name of a colour. (F.—L.) Modern. So named
from its likeness to the tint of the flowers of a mallow. =F. mauve,
a mallow.=—L. malua, a mallow; see Mallow. ;

MAVIS, the song-thrush. (F-—C.) ME. mavis, Rom. of the
Rose, 619. =F. mauvis, ‘amavis, a throstle ;’ Cot.; and see Roman de
la Rose, 614. Cf. Span. malvis, a thrush. Supposed to be derived


from or related to Bret. milvid, also milfid, a mavis; called milchouid


Cf. Corn, |


(with guttural ch) in the neighbourhood of Vannes.
melhues, OCorn. melhuet, a lark (Williams). See Thurneysen,


p- 107.
MAVOURNEEN, my darling. (Irish.) ‘Erin mavournin;’


Campbell, Exile of Erin; last line.=Irish mo, my 3 mhuirnin (with
mh=v), mutated form of muirnin, darling, from muirn, affection.
See Gael. mtirn in Macbain.


¢ This mauso-
deum was the renowned tombe or sepulchre of Mausolus, a petty king |


MAZE 367


MAW, the stomach, esp. in the lower animals. (E.) ME. mawe
(disyllabic), Chaucer, C. T. 4906 (B 486). AS. maga, the stomach ;
Voc. 48. 39.+-Du. maag; Icel. magi; Swed. mage; Dan. mave;
G. magen, OHG. mago. Root unknown. 4 The change from
maga to mawe, maw, is quite regular; cf. AS, haga, ME. hawe, E.
haw. Der. maw-worm, i.e, stomach-worm, parasite, Beaum. and
Fletcher, Bonduca, i. 2 (3rd Soldier),

MAWKISH, squeamish, (Scand.; with E, suffix.) ‘Mawkish,
sick at stomach, squeamish;’ Phillips, ed,1706, Dryden has ‘maw-
kish joys;’ tr. of Lucretius, bk. iii. 1, 307. The older sense is
‘loathsome,’ or, more literally, ‘ maggoty.’ Formed with suffix -isk
from ME, mauk, mawk, a maggot; cf. mawky, adj., ‘ cimicosus ;”
Cath. Anglicum. ‘Hic cimex, Anglicé mawke;’ Voc. 643. 2.
Mauk is a contraction of the older form madek, a maggot, which
occurs (in another MS.) as a variant of meade, a maggot; O. Eng.
Homilies, i. 251, 1. 19; cf. note on p. 326. —Icel. madkr, a maggot;
Dan. maddik, a maggot; whence the Norweg. makk (Aasen)=E.
mawk,  £. This is a dimin. form with suffix -k, from the older form
appearing in AS, mada, Goth. matha, Du. and G. made, a maggot;
prob. allied to Moth. Der. mawkish-ly, mawkish-ness.

MAXILLAR, MAXILLARY, belonging to the jaw-bone.
(L.) Blount, ed. 1674, gives both forms. Bacon has ‘ maxillary
bones ;’ Nat.. Hist. § 747.—L. masxillaris, belonging to the jaw-
bone. —L. maxilla, the jaw-bone; allied to mala, the cheek-bone
(Bréal).

MAXIM, a proverb, general principle. (F.—L.) Lit. ‘a saying
of the greatest importance.’ In Shak. Troil. i, 2. 318.—F. maxime,
‘a maxime, principle;’ Cot.—L. maxima, greatest (for maxima
sententiarum, the chief of opinions); fem, of maximus, greatest, super].
of magnus, great. See Magnify.

MAXIMUM, the greatest value or quantity. (L.) A mathe-
matical term. = L. maximum, neut. of maximus, greatest; see Maxim,

MAY (1), I am able, Iam free to act, I am allowed to. (E.)
There is no infinitive in use; if there were, it would rather take the
form mow than may. May is the present tense (once, the past tense


of a strong verb); might is the past tense (really a secondary past


tense or pluperfect). ME. infin. mown (for mowen), Prompt. Parv.
p- 346; pres. t. sing. J may, Chaucer, C. T. 4651 (B 231); pt. t.
I mighte, id. 322, 634 (A 320, 632). AS. mugan, infin., to be able;
pres. t. ic meg, I may or can; pt. t. ic mihte, I might.4-OSax. mugan;
pres. t. zk mag; pt. t. mahta; Icel. mega; pres. t. ek ma; pt. t. ek
matti; Du. mogen; pres. t.ik mag; pt.t. ik mogt; Dan. pres. t. maa;
pt. t. maatte; Swed. pres. t. ma; pt. t. mdtte; G. modgen; pres. t.
mag; pt. t. mochte; Goth. magan; pres. t. ik mag; pt. t. ik mahta.
B. All from a Teut. base MAG, to have power. Further allied to
Russ. moche, to be able; cf. moche, sb., power, might; Gk. pnxav7,
means. All from 4/MAGH, to have power. Der. might; also
dis-may. And cf. machine, mechanic. .

MAY (2), the fifth month. (F.—L.). ME. Mai, May; Chaucer,
C. T. 1502 (A 1500). = OF. May, Mai, ‘ the month of May ;’ Cot.=
L, Maius, May; so named as being the month of ‘ growth.’ It was
dedicated to Maia, i.e. ‘the increaser.’ Allied to maior, greater,
magnus, great (Bréal). See Magnitude. Der. May-day, -flower,
-jly, -pole, -queen.

MAYOR, the chief magistrate of a town. (F.—L.) ME. maire,
P. Plowman, B. iii.87. There were mayors of London much earlier ;
cf. AF. meire, Stat. Realm, i. 52 (1281).—F. maire, a mayor.—L.
maior, greater; hence, a superior. See Major. > It is most
remarkable that the sixteenth century spelling, viz. mayor, resembles
the Span. spelling mayor. Spelt maior in Shak, Rich, III, iii. 1.
17 (first folio); it answers to OF. maior, from L, maidrem, the acc.
case.. The word maire was first used temp. Hen. III; Liber Albus,
p-13. Der. mayor-ess, a coined word, formed by adding the F, fem.
suffix -esse (=L. -issa, Gk. -tgga); Ben Jonson speaks of ‘the lady
mayress? in An Elegy, Underwoods, Ix. 1, yo. Cf. Norm. dial.
mairesse, wife of a mayor (Moisy). Also mayor-al-ty, Lord Bacon,
Life of Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 209, 1. 24; a coined word, as if
from a Lat. acc. *maidralitatem. Also mayor-ship, mayor-dom, in
Cotgrave, s.v. mairie.

MAY-WEED, stinking camomile; Axthemis Cotula. (E.) Short
for maythe-weed ; where maythe represents AS. mega, magefe, camo-
mile. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 183.

MAZE, a labyrinth, confusion, perplexity, (E.) ME. mase,
P. Plowman, B.i. 6. Prob. from the yerb; we find ME. masen, to
confuse, puzzle ; Chaucer, C. T. 4946 (B 526). The AS. *masian,
vb., appears in the comp. pp. a-masod; Wulfstan, Homil. (ed.
Napier), p. 137, 1. 23; cf. Norweg. masa-st (where the final -st=-sk
= sik, oneself), a verb of reflexive form, to fall into a slumber, to lose
one’s senses and begin to dream; masa, to be continually busy at
a thing, to have a troublesome piece of work to do, also, to prate,
chatter (Aasen). Icel. masa, to chatter, prattle; Swed. dial. masa,


368 MAZER


(1) to warm, (2) to bask before the fire or in the sun, ... (4) to be
slow, lazy, work slowly and lazily; mas, adj., slow, lazy (Rietz).
B. These senses of lounging, poring stupidly over work, dreaming,
and the like, agree with the E. phrase to be iz a maze, i.e. in a
dreamy perplexity. Compare the following: ‘Auh pe bimasede
Isboset, lo! hwu he dude maseliche” =but the stupid Ishbosheth, lo!
how stupidly he acted; Ancren Riwle, p. 272. Prob. the orig. sense
was ‘to be lost in thought ;’ hence to be in perplexity. Der. maz-ed,
Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1, 113 (cf. ME. mased, bimased) ; maz-y, maz-i-ness.
Also a-maze, q.V. }

MAZER, a large drinking-bowl. (F.—OHG.) Obsolete. ‘Mazer,
a broad standing-cup, or drinking-bowl ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. ME.
maser, Prompt. Parv.; pl. masers, Testamenta Ebor. i. 160 (1391). —
AF. maser, Royal Wills, p. 25 (1360); mazer (Bozon, p. 50); OF.
masere, a bowl of maple-wood [explained by Godefroy as made of
a kind of streaked precious stone, but see madre in Diez].—OHG.
masar, a knot in wood, also maple-wood. Mazers were so. called
because often made of maple, which is a spotted wood; the orig.
sense of the word being ‘a spot,’ a knot in wood, &c. Cf. Icel.
mosurr, ‘a maple-tree, spot-wood;’ mdésur-bolli, a mazer-bowl ;
mosurtré, a maple-tree. 8. The word is allied to the form which
appears in MHG. mase, a spot, mark of a blow; whence also E.
Measles, q.v. Der. masel-yn (=maser-in), a dimin. form, used in
the same sense, Chaucer, C. T..13781 (B 2042).

MAZURKA, a lively Polish dance. (Pol.) From Pol. Mazurka,
lit. a woman of Massovia or Mazovia, a province of Poland contain-
ing Warsaw. Similarly, Polozaise means both a Polish woman and
a dance; and cf. Polka.

-MAZZARD, MAZARD, the head, the skull. (F.-OHG.)
In Hamlet, v. 1.97. Formed from mazer, a bowl; with excrescent
d. See Mazer. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 183.

ME, pers. pron. the dat. and obj. case of J. (E.) ME.me. AS.
mé; fuller form mec, in the acc. only. 4 Du. mij; Icel. mér, dat. ;
mik, acc.; Swed. and Dan. mig; Goth. mis, dat.; mik, acc.; G. mir,
dat.; mich, acc.4-Corn. me, mi; Bret. me; Irish, Gael., and W.
mi. +L. mihi, dat.; mé, acc.; Gk. pol, éuot, dat. ; pe, éué, acc.; Skt.
mahyam, mé, dat.; mam, ma, acc. Der. mine (1), my.

MEAD (1), a drink made from honey. (E.) ME. mede, Legends
of the Holy Rood, p. 138, 1. 202. Also spelt meth, meeth, Chaucer,
C. T. 3261, 3378. AS. medu, meodu, medo, meodo, Grein, ii. 239. ++
Du. mede; Icel. mjodr; Dan. midd; Swed. mjéd; G. meth; OHG. meto;
W. medd; Lithuan. middus, mead ; mediis, honey; Russ.med’; Gk. pé6v,
intoxicating drink; Skt. madhu, sweet; also, as sb., honey, sugar.
Idg. type *medhu ; Brugmann, ii. § 104.

MEAD (2), MEADOW, a grass-field, pasture-ground. (E.) So
called because ‘mown.’ 1. ME. mede, Chaucer, C. T. 89. AS.
méd; ‘ Pratum, m@d;’ Voc. 147. 16. Allied to the prov. E. math,
a mowing, used only in the comp. after-math, an after-mowing, a
second crop; and to AS. mawan, to mow; see Mow (1). Cf. G.
mahd,a mowing; MHG, mat, a mowing, a crop, a mead; MHG.
mate, matte, a meadow ; Swiss matz, a meadow, in the well-known
names Zermatt, Andermatt ; also OHG. mdaen, to mow, cognate with
E. mow; also Gk. d-pnros, a harvest, duaeyv, to mow. 2. The fuller
form meadow is due to the inflected form, dat. méd-we, of the same
word; the change from final -we to later -ow is the usual one, as in
sparrow, arrow, &c. ‘Mid /#swe and mid m#dwe’ = with leasow and
with meadow; A.S. Chron., an. 777, MS. E. (see Thorpe’s edit.
Pp. 92,note 1). Teut. type *m#-d-wa, nom. f.; from Teut. root *mé
=Idg. *mé, to mow, as in Gk. d-pn-Tos (above). Der. meadow-y.

MEAGRE, lean, thin, poor, scanty. (F.—L.) ME. megre,
P. Plowman, B. v. 128; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1198. (Not in
earlier use; and not from AS. meger, in A. S. Leechdoms, ii. 242.)
— AF, megre, Sir Bevis, 1101; F. maigre, thin. L. macrum, acc. of
macer, thin, lean; whence also AS. meger, Icel. magr, Dan., Swed.,
and G. mager, thin, lean, were borrowed at an early period; unless
they be cognate, which is possible. Cf. Gk. paxpds, long. Der.
meagre-ly, -ness. From the same source, e-mac-i-ate.

MEAL (1), ground grain. (E.) . ME. mele, Chaucer, C. T. 3993
(A 3995). AS. melu, melo, gen. melewes, Matt. xiii. 33.4-Du. meel ;
Icel. mjol, later form mél; Dan. meel ; Swed. mjol; G. mehl. Teut.
type *melwom,n. B. All from the Idg. 4/MEL, to grind; as in
Olrish mel-im, OSlav. mel-jg, I grind. ‘The 2nd grade occurs in L.
mol-ere, Lith. mal-zi, to grind, and in Teut. *mal-, as in Icel. mala,
Goth. malan, OHG. malan, to grind. See Mill, Molar. Der.
meal-y, meal-i-ness, meal-y-mouth-ed.

MEAT: (2), a repast, share or time of food. (E.) ME. meel,
Chaucer, C. T. 4886 (B 466). AS. mé#l (1), a portion of time, stated
time, Grein, ii. 221. Hence the orig. sense was ‘time for food;’ cf.
mod. E. ‘regular meals.’ It has reference to the common meal at a
stated time, not to a hastily snatched repast.4-Du. maal, (1) time,
(2) a meal; Icel. mal, (1).a- measure, (2) time, nick of time, (3) a


MEASURE


meal; Dan. maal, measure, dimension; maaltid, a meal (lit. meal-
time); Swed. mdl, measure, due size, meal; Goth. mé/, time, season;
G. mahl,a meal; mal,atime. f. Teut.type *mélom, n.; base mai-,
from Idg. 4/ME, to measure; cf. Skt. ma, to measure; see Mete.
Der. meal-time, meal-tide.

MEAN (1), to have in the mind, intend, signify. (E.) ME.
menen, Chaucer, C. T. 2065 (A 2063). AS. ménan, tointend ; Grein,
ii. 222. 4+ Du. meenen, to think, believe, fancy, mean ; Dan. mene, to
mean, think ; Swed. mena, to mean, think; G. meinen, OHG. meinjan,
to think upon, mean, signify. B. These are all secondary verbs, as
shown by the OHG. form, and derived from the sb. which appears
as MHG. meine, OHG. meina, thought, intent, signification. Further
allied to Icel. minni, OHG. minni, remembrance, memory, mind ; see
Mind. Der. mean-ing, ME. mening, Chaucer, C. T. 10465 (F 151),
cognate with G. meinung ; mean-ing-less. See moan.

MEAN (2), common, vile, base, sordid. (E.) ME. mene; ‘pe
mene and pe riche;’ P. Plowman, B. prol. 18. AS. méne, usually
ge-méne, common; OFries. méne, common; and cf. Goth. gamains,
common, Titus, i. 4; see Common. @ The peculiar sense of
‘base, vile’ is prob. due to confusion with Mean (3), which some-
times meant ‘middling.’ The AS. geméne is further allied to the
AS. méne, wicked, false, evil, from man, sb., wickedness. Cf. Icel.
meinn, mean, base, hurtful; mein, a hurt, harm; Dan. meen, Swed.
men, hurt, injury; MHG. mein, false; mein, a falsehood; cf. G. meineid,
perjury. Der. mean-ly, L. L. L. v. 2. 328; mean-ness (not in early use).

MEAN (3), coming between, intermediate, moderate. (F.—L.)
ME. mene. ‘And a mene [i.e. an intermediate one, a mediator]
bitwene pe kyng and pe comune’ [commons]; P. Plowman, B. i,
158. ‘In pe mene while;”’ Will. of Palerne, 1148.—AF. meen, Stat.
Realm, i. 140 (1300) ; OF. meien, moien (Godefroy); mod. F. moyen,
mean, intermediate. = L. medianus, extended form from medius, middle;
see Mediate. Der. mean, sb., ME. mene, Rom. of the Rose, 6527 ;
mean-s, ME. menes, Chaucer, C. T. 11195 (F 883).

MEAN (4), to moan. (E.) In Mid. Nt. Dream, v. I. 330 (first
folio). ME. ménen, AS. ménan, to moan; see Moan, So also in
Merch. Ven. iii. 5, 82, I explain mean it by ‘ lament, sorrow.’

MEANDER, a winding course. (L.—Gk.) £ Through forthe
rights and meanders ;’ Temp. iii. 3. 3. —L. Meander. = Gk. Maiavdpos,
the name of a river, remarkable for its circuitous course; Pliny, b. v.
c. 29. Der. meander, vb., meander-ing.

MEASLES, a contagious fever accompanied by small red spots
on the skin. (E.) [The remarks in Trench, Select Glossary, are
founded on a misconception. The word is quite distinct from ME,
mesel, a leper, which will be explained below.] ‘ The maysidles,
variole,’ Levins, 125. 15. ‘ Rougeolle, the meazles;’ Cot. In Shak.
Cor. iii. 1. '78, the sense is ‘ measles,’ not ‘leprosy,’ as explained in
Schmidt. The use of the term was quite definite. ‘The maisils, a
disease with many reddish spottes or speckles in the face and bodie,
much like freckles in colour;’ Baret. ME. maseles, to translate
OF. rugeroles (14th cent.), in Wright’s Voc, i. 161, 1, 23. AS.
mesle-, a spot; in composition. Cf. ‘eruca, mel-sceafa, Voc. 121.
343 ‘eruca, mesle-sceafa, Voc. 544.13; so that mesle has the same
sense as mél, i.e. a spot, mark.-+- Du. maselen. ‘De maselen, ofte
[or] masel-sieckte, the measels, or sick of the measels, De masel-sucht,
the measell-sicknesse ;’ Hexham. The same word as MDu. masselen.
‘ Masselen ofte masseren, black spots or blemishes of burning upon
one’s body or leggs;’ Hexham. . It is obvious that the word
simply means ‘spots,’ or rather ‘little spots;’ the Du. form masel
being a dimin. of an older form *mase, allied to the MHG, mdse,
OHG. masa, a spot, the mark of a wound; cf. also G. maser [ =masel],
a spot, speckle, and masern, pl. measles. sy. Precisely the same
form maser, ‘a spot,’ is the source whence is derived the E. Mazer,
q-v. 4 It thus appears that measle means ‘a little spot.’ It is
therefore wholly unconnected with ME. mesel, which invariably
means ‘a leper’ (see Stratmann); whence meselrie, i.e. leprosy.
Both mesel and meselrie occur in Chaucer, Pers. Tale, I. 624-5. This
word is borrowed from OF. mesel, which is from L. misellus, wretched,
unfortunate, dimin. of miser, wretched; see Miser. The confusion
between the words is probably quite modern; when, e. g., Cotgrave
explains MF. mesel, meseau, by ‘a meselled, scurvy, leaporous,
lazarous person,’ he clearly uses meselled as equivalent to leprous ;
whilst he reserves the spelling meazles to translate rougeolle. Cf.
Skt. mastirika, a kind of eruption or small pox (Macdonell). Der,
measl-ed, measl-y.

MEASURE, extent, proportion, degree, moderation, metre.
(F.—L.) ME, mesure, P. Plowman, B.i. 35; Ancren Riwle, p. 372,
1.1; O. Eng. Homilies, 2nd Ser. p. 55, l. 8. —OF. mesure. — L. men
stra, measure; cf. mensus, pp. of métiri, to measure. From Idg.
“ME, to measure, whence Skt. ma, to measure, Gk. -71s, counsel.
See Brugmann, ii. § 771, Der. measure, vb., ME. mesuren, Chaucer,
tr. of Boethius, b. iii. pr. 2, 1. 283; measur-able, ME. mesurable,


MEAT


P. Plowman, B. i. 19; measur-abl-y, measur-ed, measure-less, measure-
ment.

MEAT, food, flesh of animals used as food, (E.) ME. mete,
Chaucer, C. T. 1615. AS. mete, John, iv. 32, 34. Teut. type
*matiz, m.+Icel. matr, food; Dan. mad, victuals, food; Swed. mat,
victuals; Goth. mats, food (whence matjan, to use as food, eat) ;
OHG. maz, food. . Prob. allied to Skt. mad, to be glad, madaya,
to exhilarate, to be satisfied (Uhlenbeck), Der. meat-offering,

MECHANIC, pertaining to machines. (F.—L.—Gk.) First
used as a sb., with the sense ‘mechanic art.” ME. mechanike,
mechanique, * Whos arte is cleped mechanique’ = whose art is called
mechanic; Gower, C. A. iii. 142; bk. vii. 1693. —OF. mechanique,
mecanique, ‘ mechanicall;’ Cot. = L. méchanica, mechanic; also used
as sb., the science of mechanics.— Gk. unyavixn, sb., the science of
mechanics; fem. of adj. pynxaveds, relating to machines. —Gk.
pnxavn, a machine; see Machine. Der. mechanic-al (see Trench,
Select Glossary); mechanic-al-ly; mechanic-s, mechanic-i-an; also
mechan-ist, mechan-ism.

MEDAL, a piece of metal in the form of a coin. (F.—Ital.—L.
—Gk.) Shak. has medal to signify ‘a piece of metal stamped with
2 figure;? Wint. Ta. i, 2. 307.— MF. medaille, ‘a medall, an ancient
and flat jewel, &c.; Cot. (Mod. F. meédaille.) — Ital. medaglia,
a medal, coin; equiv. to OF. meaille, whence mod. F. maille, a small
coin. =—Folk-L. type *metallea, adj. fem.—L. metallum, metal; a
word of Gk. origin; see Metal. Cf. Late L. medalia, a small coin.
Der. medal-ist or medall-ist ; medall-i-on, in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674,
from MF. medaillon (F. médaillon), ‘a little medall,’ Cot., which is
from the Ital. medaglione, formed from medaglia.

MEDDLE, to mix or interfere with. (F.—L.) To meddle with
is to mix with. The ME. verb medlenx simply means ‘to mix.’ ‘Medled
togideres’ = mixed together, P. Plowman, B, ix. 3. Also frequently
spelt mellen; thus, for ‘ zmedled togidres,’ another reading is ymelled,
in Trevisa, iii, 469, 1. 4.—AF. medler, Langtoft, i. 248; OF. mesler,
meller, to mix, interfere or meddle with (Godefroy). Cotgrave has:
‘mesler, to mingle, mix,. . jumble; se mesler de, to meddle, inter-
meddle, deal with, have a hand in.” Mod, F. méler. Cf. Span.
mezclar, Port. mesclar, Ital. meschiare [for mesclare, by usual change
of cl to chi], to mix. —Late L. misculare, to mix; cf. L. miscellus,
mixed.=L. miscére, to mix; see Miscellaneous. f. The orig.
OF. form was mesler, whence AF. *mezdler, medler. An intrusive d
occurs, similarly, in medlar,q.v. Der. meddl-er, meddle-some (with
E. suffix), meddl-ing. Also medley, q.v.

MEDIATE, middle, acting by or asa means, (L.) Rare as an
adj., and not very common in the adv. form mediate-ly. ‘ Either
immediatly or mediatly;’ Fryth’s Works, p. 18.—L. mediiitus, pp. of
medidre, to be in the middle. —L. medius, middle; cognate with AS.
midd, middle; see Medium. Jer. mediate, verb (rare in old
books); Rich. quotes: ‘employed to mediate A present marriage, to
be had between Him and the sister of the young French queen ;’
Daniel, Civil War, b. viii. st. 49. Also mediat-ion, q.v., mediat-or,
q.v. Also im-mediate. Also medial, from L. medi-alis.

MEDIATION, intercession, entreaty for another, (F.—L.)
ME. mediation, mediacioun, Chaucer, C. T. 4654 (B 234).—OF.
mediation, ‘mediation ;’? Cot. Formed as if from a L. acc. *media-
tionem, from a nom. *medidtio.—L. mediare, to be in the middle, be
between; see Mediate.

MEDIATOR, an intercessor. (F.—L.) Now conformed to
the L. spelling. ME, mediatour, Wyclif, 1 Tim. ii. 5.—OF. media-
zeur.—=L. medidtorem, acc. of mediator, one who comes between, a
mediator.=L. mediare; see Mediate. Der. mediator-i-al, mediator-
i-al-ly.

MEDIC, a kind of clover. (L.—Gk.) Botanical, Lit. ‘ Median.’
Phillips, ed. 1706, has both medick and the L. form médica. =—Gk.
Mydinn, for Mndin7y moa, Median grass; fem. of Myndixds, Median.
From Media, the name of a country in Asia; Pliny, b. xviii. c. 16.

MEDICAL, relating to the art of healing diseases, (L.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.— Late L. medicalis, medical. —L. medicus,
a physician. —L. medéri, to heal, See Medicine. Der, medical-ly.

MEDICATE, to impregnate with anything medicinal. (L.)
Rich. quotes ‘his medicated posie at his nose’ from Bp. Hall, A
Sermon of Thanksgiving. —L. medicatus, pp. of medicarz, to heal. =
L. medicus, a physician, See Medicine. Der. medicat-ed, medicat-
ion, medicat-ive, Also medica-ble, Blount’s Gloss,, ed. 1674, from L.
medicabilis ; medicament, from OF . medicament, ‘a medicament, salve’
(Cot.), which is from L. medicamentum,

MEDICIN®, something given as a remedy for disease. (F.—L.)
In early use. ME, medicine, in O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 187,
1. 4 from bottom. =OF. medecine (for medicine). L. medicina, medi-
cine. = L. medicus, a physician, —L. medéri, to heal. B. Fick (i. 714)
compares also Zend madh, to treat medically, madha, medical science,
Der. medicine, vb., Oth, iii. 3. 332; medicin-al, Wint. Ta, ii. 3. 37;


MEET


medicin-al-ly ; medicin-able, Much Ado, ii, 2. 5.
medicate,

MEDIEVAL, relating to the middle ages. (L.) Also written
medieval, Modern; not in Todd’s Johnson. Coined from L. medi-,
for medius, middle; and L. @u-um, an age; with suffix -al, See
Mediate and Age.

MEDIOCRE, middling, moderate. (F.—L.) ‘A very mediocre
poet, one Drayton ;”’ Pope, To Dr. Warburton, Nov. 27, 1742 (R.).
=F. médiocre, middling. L. mediocrem, acc. of mediocris, middling ;
extended from medius, middle. (Cf. ferox from ferus.) See Mid.
Der. mediocri-ty, F. médiocrité, from L. acc. mediocritatem.

MEDITATE, to think, ponder, purpose. (L.) In Shak. Rich. II,
ili. 7. 75. [The sb. meditation is in much earlier use, spelt meditaciun
in the Ancren Riwle, p. 44, 1. 4.]—L. meditatus, pp. of meditari, to

onder, Cf. Gk. pédopuar, I attend to; Brugmann, i, § 591. See

ete. Der. meditat-ion, from OF. meditation< L. acc. meditationem ;
meditat-ed, meditat-ive, meditat-ive-ly, meditat-ive-ness.

MEDITERRANEAN, inland. (L.) In Shak. Temp. 1. 2,
234; and in Cotgrave, who translates MF. Mediterranée by ‘the
mediterranean or mid-earth sea.’ = L. mediterrdne-us, situate in the
middle of the land; with suffix -az (=F. -az, L. -dnus). =L. medi-,
for medius, middle; and ¢erra, land; with suffix -ze-o-. See Mid and
Terrace. { Chiefly applied to the Mediterranean Sea, which
appeared to the ancients as nearly in the middle of the old world;
but the word was sometimes used more generally ; see Trench, Select
Glossary.

MEDIUM, the middle place, means, or instrument. (L.) In
Dryden, Art of Poetry, c. iv. 1. 888; Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 293. —
L. medium, the midst, a means; neut. of medius, middle; see Mid.

MEDLAR, a small tree with a fruit somewhat like an apple or
pear. (F.—L.—Gk.) Palsgrave has medlar for both the fruit and
the tree. Properly, medlar is the name of the tree; the fruit should
be called a medle, but the word is obsolete; the medlar is so called
because it bears medles. ME. medler, a medlar-tree; Rom. of the
Rose, 1375. Also called medle-tre, Sir Beves of Hamptoun, ed.
Turnbull, 52 (Stratmann).—AF. medler, OF. meslier, a medlar-tree ;
both in Godefroy, Supp., s.v. nesplier (sic) ; MF. meslier, ‘ a medlar-
tree ;’ Cot.—AF. medle, OF, mesle (both in Godefroy, Supp., s.v.
nesple) ; MF. mes/e, ‘a medlar (a Picard word) ;’ Cot.=—L. mespilum,
a medlar; cf. mespilus, 2 medlar-tree; Pliny, b. xvii. c. 10.—Gk.
peomaAoy, amedlar. 4 The introduction of d before 7 in this word
is curious; but the same phenomenon occurs also in meddle and
medley; it arose from the OF. sl, which became zd, and finally dl.

MEDLEY, a confused mass, confusion, mixture. (F.—L.) ME.
medlé, medlee. ‘ Medle, mixtura ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 331. Also spelt
mellé. (dissyllabic), which occurs in Barbour’s Bruce in the sense of
‘mixture,’ b. v.1. 404, and over and over again in the sense of ‘ fray,’
‘ contest,’ exactly corresponding to the mod. F. mélée, which is in
fact the same word. See Trench, Select Glossary. Chaucer has
medlee in the sense of ‘ mixed in colour,’ asin: ‘ He rood but hoomly
in a medlee cote,’ Prol. to C. T, 330 (A 328).—AF. medlee, a combat,
Life of Edw. Conf., p. 15; cf. OF. mesle, melle (fem. forms meslee,
mellee), pp. of mesler, or meller (mod. F. méler), to mix. See further
under Meddle. 4 The verb to meddle also appears as mel, All’s
Well, iv. 3. 257; Barbour’s Bruce, y. 409 ; and see Nares.

MEDOC, a red wine. (F.) From Médoc, a region of France, in
the department of Gironde.

MEDULLAR, MEDULLARY, belonging to the marrow.
(L.) Medullar is in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Kersey, ed. 1715, has
both forms. =L. medullaris, belonging to the marrow.—L. medulla,
the marrow. Cf. L. medius, middle.

MEED, reward, wages, hire, reward of merit. (E.) ME. mede,
P. Plowman, B. ii. 20, 27, 34, 36, 39, &c. AS. méd, Matt. vi. 1;
allied form meord (with r for older s), John, iv. 36, Rushworth MS.
+G. miethe, hire; MHG. miete, OHG. mieta. Cf. Goth. mizdo,
reward; Russ. mzda, remuneration; Gk. picdds, pay; Pers. muzd,
wages; Skt. midha-, reward. Idg. types *méizdha, *mizdha, f.;
*mizdhos, m.; *mizdhom, n. .Brugmann, i, § 226.

MEEK, mild, gentle. (Scand.) ME. meke, Chaucer, C. T. 69;
Havelok, 945 3 spelt meoc, Ormulum, 667.—Icel. mjikr, soft, agile,
meek, mild; Swed. mjuk, soft, pliable, supple; Dan. myg, pliant,
soft; NFries. mick. Cf. also Du. muik, soft ; Goth. *miks, only in
comp. mika-modei, gentleness. Teut. types *meukoz,*miikoz. (AS.
méoc, from Scand., only occurs in Méoces din, a place-name; Birch,
Cart. Sax, ii. 557. Der. meek-ly, meek-ness.

MEERSCHAUM, a substance used for making tobacco-pipes.
(G.) Modern. =G. meerschaum, lit, sea-foam, — G. meer, sea, cognate
with E. Mere (1) ; and schaum, foam, cognate with E, Seum,

MEET (1), fitting, according to measure, suitable. (E.) ME.
mete, Chaucer, C. T. 2293 (A 2291). [We also find ME, mete with
the sense of moderate, small, scanty; P. Plowman’s ay 1. 428.

B


369


And see medical,


370 MEET


MENACE


This is the same word, from the notion of fitting tightly.] OMerc. | MELODRAMA, MELODRAME, a theatrical performance,


méte, measurable, as in or-méte, excessive, Epinal Gloss. 640; AS. |
mé&te, small, scanty, lit. tight-fitting; whence wuméte, immense, im- |
measurable; Grein, ii. 227, 624.—AS. mét-, 3rd grade of metan, pt.
t. pl. mét-on, to mete; see Mete. Cf. G. massig, moderate, frugal ;
from messen, to measure. Der. meet-ly, meet-ness,

MEET (2), to encounter, find, assemble. (E.) ME. meten,
Chaucer, C. T. 1526 (A 1524). AS. métan, to find, meet; Grein,
ii. 234; OMerc. mdetan (Sweet, OE. Texts). (Formed with the
usual vyowel-change from 6 to @, as in fot, pl. fét.)—AS. mot, gemdt,
a meeting; see Moot.4+OSax. métian (the exact equivalent of AS.
métan), from mot; Du. moeten, only in comp. ontmoeten, to meet,
from gemoet, a meeting; Icel. meta, meta, to meet, from mot, a
meeting ; Swed. mota, to meet, from mot, preserved only in the prep.
mot, against, towards; Dan. méde, to meet; cf. mod, against; Goth.
gamotjan, to meet. All from Tent. base *mot-, of uncertain meaning.
Perhaps cf. Gk. y5-opac, I devise, plan. Der. meet-ing, AS. geméting,
Grein, i. 429; meet-ing-house.

MEGALOSAURUS, a fossil animal. (Gk.) Lit. ‘great lizard!’
= Gk. peyddo-, decl. stem extended from péya-, for péyas, great,
cognate with E. Much, q.v.; and caitpos, a lizard.

MEGATHERIUM, a fossil quadruped. (Gk.) Lit. ‘ great
wild beast.’ = Gk. péya, n. of péyas, great, cognate with E. Much,
q.v.; and therium, for Gk. @npiov, dimin. of @np, a wild beast.

MEGRIM, a pain affecting one side of the head. (F.—L.—Gk.)
ME. migrim, migreim, migrene. ‘Mygreyme, migrym, mygrene,
sekenesse, Emigranea;’ Prompt. Pary. Here migrim is a corruption,
by change of x to m, of the older form migrene.—F. migraine, ‘the
megrim, head-ach;’ Cot.=—Late L. hémigranea, megrim, Ducange ;
cf. émigranea in Prompt. Parv., just cited. L. hémicrania, a pain on
one side of the face.—Gk. juixpavia, megrim.=—Gk. ju-, half (see
Hemi-); and xpavioy, the cranium, skull (see Cranium).

MELANCHOLY, depression or dejection of spirits, sadness.
(F.—L.—Gk.) Supposed to be caused by an excess of black bile;
whence the name. ME. melancolie, malencolie, Gower, C. A. i. 39;
prol. 1069; cf. ‘engendred of humour malencolyk,’ Chaucer, C. T.
1377 (A 1375). — OF. melancolie, MF. melancholie, ‘ melancholy,
black choler;’ Cot.—L. melancholia. = Gk. pedayxodia, melancholy.
— Gk. pedrayxodos, jaundiced, filled with black bile.—Gk. pédar-,
stem of pédas, black, dark, gloomy (allied to Skt. mala-, dirty,
malina-, black) ; and xoan, bile, cognate with E. Gall, q.v. Der.
melanchol-ic, MF. melancholique, ‘melancholick’ (Cot.), from L.
melancholicus.
MELANITE, a black variety of garnet. (Gk.) From Gk.
peday-, stem of pwédas, black; with suffix -ite (Gk. -177s).

MELEE, a confused conflict. (F.—L.) Explained under
Medley.

MELILOT, the name of a plant. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Levins and
Cotgrave.= MF. melilot, ‘melilot;’ Cot.—L. melilotos.=Gk. pedt-
Awros, periAwrov, a kind of clover; so called from the honey it
contained. — Gk. yéAr, honey; and Awzés, lotus, clover. See Melli-
fluous and Lotus.

MELIORATE, to make better, improve. (L.) Bacon has
meliorate and melioration, Nat. Hist. §§ 232, 434.—L. melioratus, pp.
of melidrare, to make better (Lewis), —L. melior, better. B. Cognate
with Gk. paddov, rather, compar. of pada, adv., very much, ex-
ceedingly. Der. meliorat-ion, a-meliorate.

MELLIFLUOUS, flowing sweetly, sweet. (L.) In Milton,
P.L.v. 429; P.R.iv. 277. And in Shak. Tw. Nt. ii. 3. 54.—L. melli-
Jfluus, flowing like honey (by change of -us to -ous, as in numerous
other instances).—L. melli-, decl. stem of mel, honey; and suffix
fluus, flowing, formed from fluere, to flow. B. L. mel is cognate
with Gk. pédr, Goth. milith, honey ; Irish mil, W. mél. For L. fluere,
see Fluent. Der. So also melli-fluent, from melli- (as above) and
fiuent-, stem of pres. pt. of fluere. So also melli-ferous, i.e. honey-
bearing, from L. ferre, to bear. And see melilot, marmalade.

MELLOW, fully ripe. (E.) ‘ Melwe, melowe, or rype, Maturus ;’
Prompt. Pary. Hence mellow-y, as in ‘not mellowy,’ for L. ‘necdum
mitia;’ Palladius, iv. 523. Pegge notes that, in Derbyshire, a mellow
apple or pear is called a mealy one; and perhaps mellow is an adjec-
tival use of meal. The ME. melwe may be due to AS. melw-, as in
melw-e, dat. of melu, meal. See Meal (1). Cf. Du. malsch, Low G.
mals, soft, mellow; Du. mul, soft, mollig, soft (see Franck). @ Per-
haps confused with OMerc. merwe, tender (Matt. xxiv. 32); AS.
mearu, G. mirbe, mellow. Der. mellow-ness.

MELOCOTON, a peach grafted on a quince. (Span. —Ital.—L.
—Gk.) Spelt malakatoon; Webster, Devil’s Law-case; A. i, sc. 2;
and see Nares.=—Span. melocoton, a quince, a peach grafted on a
quince. = Ital. melocotogno, a quince.—Late L. mélum cotdneum, a
quince (Ducange).—Gk. phAov xvdwvov,a quince; lit. a Cydonian
apple. See Quince.


with songs. (F.—Gk.) Given in Vodd’s Johnson only in the form
melodrame, noted by Todd as a modern word lately borrowed from
French. It is now written melodrama. =F. melodrame, properly,
acting with songs. A coined word.—Gk. pédo-, for péAos, a song
(see Melody) ; and dpaya, an action, drama (see Drama). Der.
melodramat-ic, melodramat-ist, from the stem dpapar-.

MELODY, an air or tune, music. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. melodie,
melodye, Chaucer, C. T..9; Legend of St. Christopher, 1. 18.—OF.
melodie. = L.. melodia. Gk. pedpdia, a singing.= Gk. peAwdds, adj.,
singing, musical.-Gk. meA-, for méAos, a song, music; and gn,
a song, ode (see Ode). Der. melodi-ous, -ly, -ness. ;

MELON, a kind of fruit. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Of melones;’ see
Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 7; ME. meloun, Wyclif,
Numb, xi. 5.—OF. melon, ‘a melon;”’ Cot.—L. mélonem, acc. of
méld, an apple-shaped melon. =Gk. pjAoy, (1) an apple, (2) fruit of
various kinds. Cf. L. malum, an apple (possibly borrowed from
Gk.).. Der. mar-mal-ade, q.v.

MELT, to become liquid, dissolve. (E.) ME. melten; pt.t. malt,
Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1017; pp. molten, P. Plowman,
B. xiii. 82. AS, meltan, pt. t. mealt, Grein, ii. 230.4-Gk. pérdey, to
melt. Allied to Skt. mydu-, soft, and the OSlavonic mladu, soft
(cited by Max Miiller, Lect. on Language, 8th edit., ii. 363). Brug-
mann, i. § 580, ii. § 690. (4/MEL). Der. melt, trans. vb., AS,
mieltan, miltan ; melt-ing, melt-ing-ly. Also malt, q.v., milt (1),q.v.

MEMBER, a limb, a clause, one of acommunity. (F.—L.) ME,
membre, Rob. of Glouc. p. 511, 1. 10525.—F. membre, a member, =
L. membrum, a member. Brugmann, i. § 875. Der. member-ship,
with E. suffix. Also membr-ane, q.v.

MEMBRANE, a thin skin or film. (F.—L.) ‘The skin is
a membrane of all the rest the most large and thick;’ P. Fletcher,
Purple Island, c. 2, note 13.—F. membrane, ‘a membrane;’ Cot. =
L. membrana, a skin covering a\member of the body, a membrane.
—L. membr-um, a member; see Member. Der. membran-ous,
membran-ac-e-ous.

MEMENTO, a memorial or token whereby to remember another.
(L.) A Lat. word, adopted into E.; as early as 1401; see Polit.
Poems, ii. 103. From the first word in one of two prayers in the
Canon of the Mass. The phrase memento mori (remember you must
die) is in Shak. 1 Hen. IV, iii. 3. 35; but this is used in a different
connexion. ‘That memento would do well for you too, sirrah;’
Dryden, Kind Keeper, A. iv. sc. 1. We find ‘for memento sake’ as
early asin P. Plowman, B. v. 474, where there is a special allusion to
the text ‘ Remember me,’ Luke, xxiii. 42. — L. memento (see Luke, xxiii:
42, Vulgate); imperative of memini, I remember; see Mention,
Mind. Brugmann, ii. § 846. (4/MEN).

MEMOIR, a record, short biographical sketch, collection of
recollections. (F.—L.) Commonly in the pl. memoirs, spelt memoires
in Phillips’ Dict., ed. 1706.—MF. memoires, ‘notes of, writings for,
remembrance, ... records;” Cot. Pl. of MF. memoire, memory. =
L. memoria, memory; also, a historical account, record, memoir.
See Memory.

MEMORY, remembrance, recollection. (F.—L.) ME. memorie,
Chaucer, C. T. 10118 (E 2244); King Alisaunder, 4790. = OF.
memoire, memory (of which the AF. form memorie is in Gaimar). =
L, memoria, memory.—L. memor, mindful. B. The L. me-mor
appears to be a reduplicated form (like me-min-i, I remember) ; cf.
Gk. pép-pepos, anxious, pep-pypifev, to be anxious, to ponder
earnestly (with which the notion of memory is closely associated) ;
the simpler form in Gk. appears in pép-tyva, care, thought. y. Thus
the base is MER, a later form of 4/SMER, to remember, as in Skt.
smr,to remember; cf. E. Martyr, q.v. Brugmann, ii. § 846. Der.
memori-al, Gower, C. A. ii. 19; bk. iv. 532; from OF. memorial,
‘a memoriall’ (Cot.), from L. memoridlis ; memori-al-ist, memori-al-ise.
Also memor-able, Hen. V, ii. 4. 53, from MF. memorable, ‘memor-
able’ (Cot.)<L. memoré@-bilis, from memordre, which from memor.
Hence memor-abl-y, Also memorandum, pl. memorandums, t Hen. 1V,
iii. 3. 179, from L. memorandum, neut. of fut. pass. part. of memorare,
torecord. Also com-memor-ate, im-memor-ial, re-mem-ber. Doublet,
memoir. Not allied to memento.

MENACE, a threat. (F.—L.) ME. menace, manace ; spelt manas,
King Alisaunder, ]. 843. ‘Now cometh manace, that is an open folye ;
for he that ofte manaceth,’ &c.; Chaucer, Pers. Tale, De Ira (I 646).
=—OF. menace, menache, manace (Supp. to Godefroy) ; MF. menace
(Cot.), a threat. L. mindcia, a threat, of which the pl. minacie is
used by Plautus. = L. mindci-, decl. stem of minax, full of threats ; also,
projecting. = L. ming, pl., things projecting, hence (from the idea of
threatening to fall) threats, menaces ; cf. mindri, to threaten. Perhaps
allied to L. -minére, as in é-minére, to jut out, project. Der. menace,
verb, asabove ; menac-ing, menac-ing-ly. From the same source, com-


| min-at-ion, de-mean (1); perhaps allied to e-min-ent, pro-min-ent.


MENAGERIE


MENAGERIE, a place for keeping wild animals. (F.—Late L.
—L.) ‘The menagerie in the tower;’ Burke, On a Regicide Peace,
let. 1 (R.). =F. ménagerie, ‘properly a place where the animals of
a household are kept, then by extension a place in which are kept rare
and foreign animals;* Brachet. (So also Scheler.)=—F. ménager, to
keep house. =F. ménxage, a household, housekeeping; OF. mesnage,
‘houshold stuffe, businesse, or people, a houshold, family, or meyney ;’
Cot. See further under Menial, Mansion.

MEND, to remove a fault, repair. (F.—L.) ME. menden, Will.
of Palerne, 647. The sb. mendyng is in King Alisaunder, 5206.
Mend is an aphetic form of amend, by the loss of the initial vowel.
See Amend. Der. mend-er, mend-ing.

MENDACITY, falsehood, lying. (L.) ‘The mendacity of
Greece ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. i. c. 6. § 9. Formed, by
analogy with F. words in -ty, from L. acc. mendacitatem, from nom.
mendicitas, falsehood.=L. mendici-, decl. stem of mendax, false,
lying, Allied to mentir7, to lie. B. The orig. meaning of L. mentiri
was ‘ to think out, invent, devise ;’ cf. commentum, a device, a false-
hood, comminisct, to devise. ‘y. Hence the base men-- is plainly an
extension from the common 4/MEN, to think. See Mention,
Mentor. Der. mendaci-ous, formed with suffix -ous from mendaci-
above; mendaci-ous-ly, -ness.

MENDICANT, a beggar. (L.), Properly an adj., as ‘ the men-
dicant (or begging) friars.’ The word came in with these friars, and
must have been well known, as a Latin word at least, in the 14th
century. Chaucer has the F. form mendinant, C. T. 7488 (D 1906).
Palsgrave has: ‘ mendycante, an order of freres, mendicant.’ = L.
mendicant-, stem of pres. part. of mendicdre, to beg.—L. mendicus,
beggarly, poor; cf. L. menda, a fault. Der. mendicanc-y. Also
mendic-it-y, ME. mendicite, Rom. of the Rose, 6525, from OF. men-
dicité, ‘ mendicity,’ Cot.

MENHIR, a tall monumental stone. (Bret.) A modern name;
from Bret. men, also mean, a stone; and Bret. hir, long. The
former is from the Celtic type *:maini-, as in W. maen, Bret. mean,
a stone; allied to L. menia, walls. The latter is from the Celtic
type *séros, long, as in Irish str, W. hir, Corn, and Bret. hir; cf. L.
sérus, late.

MENTAL, one of a household, servile. (F.—Late L.—L.)
Properly an adj., but also used as sb. ‘His seruauntes menyall;’
Skelton, Why Come Ye Nat to Courte, 592. ME. meineal, meyneal.
‘ Grete 3e wel her meyneal chirche,’ i.e. the church of their household,
Wyclif, Rom. xvi. 5. This adj. is formed, by help of the common
suffix -al (=F. -al, L. -alis) from the ME. sb. meine, meinee, maine,
mainee, a household, now obsolete, but once in common use; see
Rob. of Glouc., pp. 167, 1. 3484; Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft,
p.15; Will. of Palerne, 184, 416; Havelok, 827; Wyclif, Matt.x. 25,
Luke, ii. 4; Chaucer, C.T. 7627 (D 2045). B. [Note that this word
is entirely unconnected with E. many, with which Richardson con-
fuses it. In Spenser, prob. owing to such confusion, the word is
badly spelt many or manie, F. Q. v. 11. 3.]—OF. mesniee, maisnee,
meisnee, mainsniee (Godefroy) ; cf. ‘ Mesnie, a meyny, family;’ Cot.
The same word as Ital. masnada, a family, troop, company of men.
— Late L. *mansidnita, for which Ducange gives the forms mansnada,
maisnada, a family, household ; whence the derivative mansidnaticum,
expenses of a household, as explained in Brachet, s.v. ménage.
y. Formed, with fem. pp. suffix -ata, from mansidn-, stem of L.
mansio, a dwelling. See Mansion, Menagerie.

MENINGITIS, inflammation of the membranes of the brain or
spinal cord. (Gk.) From Gk. pnwyy-, stem of pjveyé, a membrane,
esp. of the brain; with suffix -itis (Gk. -ctus).

MENISCUS, a crescent-shaped lens, (Gk.) From Gk. pyvionos,
a crescent; dimin. of wnvn, the moon. See Moon.

MENIVER, MINEVER, MINIVER, a kind of fur.
(F.—L.) ME. meniuer (with u for v); spelt menyuwere, P. Plowman,
B. xx. 137.—AF, meniver, Liber Albus, p. 283; OF. menu ver;
“menu ver, ou verk, the furre minever, also, the beast that bears it;’
Cot. Also spelt menu vair, ‘ minever, the furre of ermins mixed or
spotted with the furre of the weesell called gris;’ Cot.— OF. menz,
‘little, small,’ Cot.; and vair, ‘a rich fur of ermines powdered thick
with blue hairs;’ Cot. B. The F. menu is from L. miniitus, small ;
see Minute. The F. vair is from L. uarius, variegated, spotted ;
see Vair, Various. Thus the sense is ‘little spotted’ fur or
animal.

MENSES, the monthly discharge from the womb. (L.) A L.
medical phrase. - In Phillips, ed. 1706.—L. mensés, with the same
sense; pl. of mensis, a month ; from the same root as E. Month, q.v.
Der. menstruous, q.v.

MENSTRUOUS, having or belonging to menses. (L.) In
Isaiah, xxx. 22 (A. V.); Palladius, i. 859. —L. menstruws, monthly.
—L. mensis,a month. See Month. Der. menstru-ate, from men-
struadre. Also menstruum, a solvent, Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors,


MERE 371


b. ii. c. i. § 113 considered as a solvent liquid, and likened, by the
alchemists, to menstrual blood; see N. E. D,

MENSURATION, measuring, measurement. (L.) In Phillips,
ed. 1706. Formed, by analogy with F. words in -tion, from L. men-
strationem, acc. of mensiirdtio, a measuring. = L. mensirare, to
measure. —L,. menstira, measure; see Measure.

-MENT, a common suffix. (F.—L.) F. -ment, from L. -mentum,
answering to Gk. -pa-ro-, Idg. -man-to-.

MENTAL, pertaining to the mind. (F.—L.) In Shak. Timon,
i, I. 31. —F. mental,‘ mentall;’ Cot.—Late L. mentéalis, mental. —L.
ment-, stem of mens, mind; see Mind, Brugmann, i. § 431 (2).
Der. mental-ly.

MENTION, a notice, remark, hint. (F.—L.) ME. mencioun,
Chaucer, C. T. 895 (A 893). —F. mention, ‘mention.’ = L. mentionem,
acc. of mentio,a mention. Closely related to mens (decl. stem menti-),
the mind, and to me-min-i, 1 remember. See Mind. Der. mention,
vb., Wint. Tale, iv. 1. 22; mention-able.

MENTOR, an adviser, monitor. (Gk.) Not in Todd’s Johnson.
Simply adopted from the story in Homer, where Athene takes the
form of Mentor with a view to give advice to Telemachus. See Pope’s
Homer, Od. b. ii. = Gk. Mévrwp, proper name; it means ‘adviser,
and is equivalent to L. monitor. Doublet, monitor, q.v.

MENU, a bill of fare. (F.—L.) From F. menu, a brief account
or minute; substantival use of menu, small. L. miniitus, small; see
Minute.

MEPHITIS, a pestilential exhalation. (L.) In Phillips, World
of Words, ed. 1706. The adj. mephitick is in Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 16743; spelt mephiticke in Cockeram (1623).—L. mephitis, a pesti-
lential exhalation; A®n. vii. 84. Der. mephit-ic.

MERCANTILE, commercial. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘That I may
use the mercantile term;’ Howell, Familiar Letters, vol. i. let. 29;
A.D. 1621.—MF. mercantil, ‘merchantly;’ Cot.—Ital. mercantile,
mercantile.—L. mercant-, stem of pres. part. of mercari, to trade;
with suffix -ilis. See Merchant.

MERCENARY, hired for money, greedy of gain. (F.—L.)
ME. mercenarie, Chaucer, C. T. 516 (A 514).—F. mercenaire, ‘mer-
cenary;’ Cot.—L. mercénarius, older form mercennarius, a hireling ;
for *merced-narius.—L. mercéd-, stem of mercés, a reward, pay.=—L.
merc-, stem of merx, merchandise. Brugmann, i. § 762 (2). See
Mercy.

MERCER, a dealer in silks and woollen cloths. (F.—L.) The
sense is simply ‘a trader.’ In early use. ME. mercer; Ancren Riwle,
p- 66, 1. 18.—F. mercier.—L. type *merciarius ; cf. Late L. mercérius,
a mercer, trader.—L. merci-, decl. stem of merx, merchandise; with
suffix -Grius, denoting the agent. See Merchant, Der. mercer-y,
from AF. mercerie, Liber Albus, p. 225.

MERCHANDISE, a merchant’s goods, wares. (F.—L.)
ME. marchandise, P. Plowman, B. prol. 63.—F. marchandise, ‘ mer-
chandise ;’ Cot.—F. marchand; see Merchant.

MERCHANT, a trader. (F.—L.) ME. marchani, Chaucer,
C. T. 272 (A 270); Floriz and Blauncheflur, ed. Lumby, 42, —OF.
marchant (Burguy), F. marchand, a merchant.—L. mercant-, stem of
pres. pt. of mercari, to barter. = L. merc-, stem of merx, merchandise.
Perhaps allied to merére, to gain, buy, purchase; see Merit. So
Bréal. Der. merchantman, Matt. xiii. 45; merchand-ise, q.v. And
see com-merce,

MERCURY, the messenger of the gods; quicksilver. (F.—L.)
ME. mercurie, with the sense of quicksilver, Chaucer, C. T. 16240,
16242 (G 772, 774); as the name of the god, id. 1387.—AF. mer-
curie, Livre des Creatures, by Philippe de Thaun, 1. 264 (in Wright,
Popular Treatises on Science); F. mercure.—L. Mercurium, acc. of
Mercurius, Mercury, the god of traffic.—L. merc-, stem of merx,
merchandise ; see Merchant. Der. mercuri-al, Cymb. iv. 2. 310;
mercurial-ise.

MERCY, favour, clemency. (F.—L.) In early use. ME.
merci, Old Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 43; Ancren Riwle, p. 30.—
F. merci; OF. mercit.—L. mercédem, acc. of mercés, reward, pay ;
which in Late L. had the sense of mercy or pity. =L. merc-, stem of
merx, merchandise, traffic. Der. merci-ful, spelt merciuol, Ayenbite
of Inwyt, p. 188; merci-ful-ly, merci-ful-ness ; merci-less, merci-less-ly,
merci-less-ness ; mercy-seat, Exod. xxv. 17; gra-mercy.

MERE (1), a lake, pool. (E.) ME. mere, Allit. Poems, ed.
Morris, A. 158. AS, mere,a mere; Grein, ii. 232.-4-Du. meer ; Icel.
marr, the sea; G. meer, OHG. mari, sea; Goth. marei, sea.-- Russ.
moré, sea; Lithuan. marés, pl.; W. mér; Gael. and Irish muir; L.
mare. B. Some explain it as ‘that which is dead,’ hence a
desert, waste, a pool of stagnant water or the waste of ocean ;
cf. Skt. maru-, a desert, allied to my, to die. But this is too
far-fetched. Der. mar-sh, q.v.; mar-ish, q.v. J Probably allied
to moor (1). :

MERE (2), pure, simple, absolute. (L.) Very ae in Shak.;

Bb2


372 MERE


see Meas. for Meas. iii. 7. 30, &c. See Trench, Select Glossary. =
L. merus, pure, unmixed; esp. used of wine. Der. mere-ly.

MERE (3), a boundary. (E.) Spelt meare; Spenser, F. Q. iii. 9.
46. ME. mere, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 137. AS. gemé#re, a
boundary (the prefix ge- makes no difference). Cf. Icel. landa-meri,
aland-mark. Teut. type *(ga)mairjom, n.; allied to L. murus (for
*moiros),a wall. See Mural. Der. mere-stone; spelt meere-stone,
Bacon, Essay 56, § 1.

MERETRICIOUS, alluring by false show. (L.) In Minshen,
ed. 1627. Formed, by the common change of -us to -ous, from
meretricius, pertaining to a courtesan. —L. meretrici-, decl. stem of
meretrix, a courtesan. Formed with fem. suffix -fr-ix (signifying an
agent) from meré-re, to gain, receive hire. See Merit. Der.
meretricious-ly, -1ess.

MERGANSER, a bird resembling a duck. (L.) Compounded
of L. merg-us, a diver, diving-bird, from merg-ere, to dive; and
anser, 2 goose, cognate with E. goose. See Merge and Goose.

MERGE, to sink, plunge under water. (L.) It occurs in
Prynne’s Breviate of the Prelates, ed. 1637, p. 64; Todd’s Johnson.
The sb. mersion is in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. mergere, to dip.
+Skt. majj, to dive, bathe, sink. Brugmann, i. § 816. Der. merg-er ;
mers-ion, from mersidnem, acc. of mersio, a dipping, cf. mersus, pp. of
mergere; also merg-anser (above). Also e-merge, im-merge.

MERIDIAN, pertaining to mid-day. (F.—L.) ME. meridian;
‘the altitude meridian;’ Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, prol. 1. 56 (or
60). Also used as sb.—OF. meridien, ‘ meridian, south ; also as sb.,
the meridian ;’ Cot.—L. meridiainus, belonging to mid-day. = L. meri-
diés, mid-day; as if mert-dié signified ‘in the clear day,’ from merus,
pure, and diés, a day; but really for *medi-dié, at mid-day, from
‘medius, middle, and diés. Brugmann, i. § 587 (7). See Medium
and Diurnal. Der. meridion-al, Chaucer, C. T. 10577 (F 263),
from OF. meridional, L. meridionalis ; meridion-al-ly.

MERINO, a variety of woollen. (Span.—L.) Not in Todd’s
Johnson.=Span. merino, roving from pasture to pasture; a name
given to a certain kind of sheep.—Span. merino, an inspector of
pastures and sheep-walks. = Late L. majorinus, a major-domo, steward
of a household ; cf. Late L. m@jordlis,a head-shepherd. See Ducange
and Diez. Formed from L. mdior, greater; see Major.

MERIT, excellence, worth, desert. (F.—L.) ME. merite, Gower,
C. A. iii. 187; bk. vii. 3029. —OF. merite, ‘ merit ;’ Cot. —L. meritum,
lit. a thing deserved; orig. neut. of meritus, pp. of merére, to deserve,
B. The orig. sense of merére was perhaps ‘ to receive as a share ;’ i.e.
if it is allied to Gk. pelpoya, I obtain a portion, pépos, a portion,
share. Der. merit-or-i-ous, Tyndall’s Works, p. 171, col. 1, Englished
from L, meritorius, deserving ; meritor-i-ous-ly, -ness. And see mere-
tricious.

MERLE, a blackbird. (F.—L.) In Henrysoun’s Testament of
Creseide, 1. 430.—OF. merle, ‘a mearle, owsell, blackbird ;’ Cot. =
L. merula, a blackbird. See Titmouse. And see merl-in.

MERLIN, a kind of hawk. (F.—Teut.) ME. merlion, Chaucer,
Parl. of Foules, 339; cf. AF. merilun, in MS. Digby 86, desc. by
Stengel (p. 10).—OF. emerillon, esmerillon, ‘the hawk termed a
marlin;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. smerlo, a kind of hawk, whence smeriglione,
a merlin; Span. esmerejon, a merlin. Of Teut. origin; cf. OHG.
smirl, Icel. smyrill, mod. G. schmerl, a merlin. B. Diez supposes the
Romance words to have been formed from L. merula, a blackbird;
the initial s being unoriginal. See Merle. But L. merula may be
cognate; with m for sm. Cf. Korting, § 6124.

MERMAID, a fabled marine animal. (E.) ME. mermaid,
Chaucer, C. T. 15276 (B 4460) ; also mermaidens, Rom. of the Rose,
682.=—:AS. mere, a lake, mere; and megd,a maid; cf. AS. mere-wif,
a mere-woman, Grein, ii. 233. See ‘Mere and Maid. 4 The
sense of mere was easily exchanged for that of sea under the influence
of F. mer, the cognate word. Der. mer-man, similarly formed.

MERRY, sportive, cheerful. (E.) ME. merie, mirie, murie (with
one r), Chaucer, C. T. 235, 1388 (A 1386). Best form murie, as in
Layamon, 10147. AS. merg[e], merry, Grein, ii. 233. Better spelt
myrge (see mirige in Bosworth); cf. murge, ady. (Grein). B. The
orig. sense of AS. myrg-e was ‘making the time short’ (cf. OHG.
murg-fari, transitory). Cognate with Gk. Bpax-vs, short; from the
common base *mygh- (Brugmann, ii. § 104). Hence the AS. myrge
(from Teut. type *murgjoz) means ‘ lasting.a short time,’ and so
‘making the time short ;’ cf. Goth. ga-maurgjan, to shorten. See
Brief (1). . @ First explained in Engl. Studien, viii. 465. The form
merie is Kentish. Der. merri-ly, merri-ness, L. L. L. i. 1. 202; also
merriment (a hybrid word, with F. suffix, which has almost displaced
merriness), Spenser, F, Q. ii. 6.3. Also merry-andrew, where Andrew
is a personal name, asserted by Hearne (Benedict. Abbas, ed. 1735,
tom. i. pref. p. 50) to have been given to jesters in remembrance of
the once famous Andrew Boorde, Doctor of Physic in the reign of
Henry VIII; several jest-books were ascribed to him, perhaps


MESSENGER


wrongly; see Mr. Furnivall’s preface to his edition of Andrew


Boorde’s Introduction of Knowledge, and see the passage from Hearne:


cited at length in Todd’s Johnson. Also merry-thought; Cot. trans-
lates F. lunette by ‘the merry-thought, the forked craw-bone of
a bird, which we use in sport to put on our noses.’ See further in
N. E.D.. And see mirth.

MESENTERY, a membrane in the middle of the intestines.
(L.—Gk.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. Englished from L. mesenterium.
= Gk, pecevrépiov, also peoévrepov, the membrane by which all the
intestines are connected. —Gk. peo-, for péoos, middle, cognate with
L. medius (see Mid); and érepoy, a piece of the entrails (see
Entrails). Der. mesenter-ic.

MESH, the opening between the threads of a net. (E.) Some-
times mash. Surrey has meash as a verb. ‘ How smal a net may take
and meash a hart of gentle kinde ;’ Description of the Fickle Affec-
tions, 1. 44; in Tottel’s Misc., ed. Arber, p. 7. [ME. maske; ‘ maske
of nette, macula;’ Prompt. Parv.; but this is a Scand. form; cf.
Icel. méskvi, Dan. maske, a mesh.] AS. max, a net (equivalent to
masc, by the frequent interchange of » and sc, as in ask == AS. axian,
Gesian). We find ‘max mine,’ glossed by retia mea; /Elfric’s Col-
loquy, in Thorpe’s Analecta, p. 23,1. 5 (or in Voc. 92.8). .The very
rare dimin. mescre, a mesh, is glossed by L. macula in a gloss; Voc.
450. 10.--Du. maas, a mesh, net; Icel. miskui, a mesh; Dan. maske ;
OHG. masca; G. masche. B. The orig. sense seems to have been
‘a knot,’ from the use of knots in netting; this sense appears in
Lithuanian mazgas, a knot, magztas, a knitting-needle, allied to the
verb megsti (pres. t. mezgt), to knot, to weave nets; forms cited by
Fick, iii. 236; Nesselmann, p. 387. Der. mesh, vb., as above.

MESMERISE, to induce an extraordinary state of the nervous
system, in which the operator controls the action of the patient.
(G. proper name.) Formed with verbal suffix -ise (=F, -iser), from.
Mesmer, the name of a German physician, of Mersburg, who first
published his doctrines in 1766. See Haydn, Dict. of Dates. Der.
mesmer-ist, mesmer-ism, mesmer-ic.

MESNE,, intermediate. (F.—L.) Given in Cowell’s Interpreter,
with a wrong derivation from OF. maisne, younger by birth. But it
is a variant of AF. meen, mean, intermediate; see Mean (3).

MESO-, middle. (Gk.) From Gk. péoo-, for péoos, middle,
cognate with L. medius, middle; see Medium, Mid. Hence meso-
cephalic, having a head of medium size; and many scientific terms.

MESS (1), a dish of meat, portion of food. (F.—L.) ‘A mease
of meat, ferculum ;’ Levins, 204. 36. ‘A messe, or dish of meate
borne to the table, ferculum ;” Baret, Alvearie. And see Gen. xliii.

ME. messe_ ;‘ Messe of mete, ferculum;’ Prompt. Pary. ‘ His
furste mes,’ his first dish; King of Tars, 86; in Ritson, Met. Rom.
li. 160. [Cf. ME. entremesse, a side dish, on which see my note to
Barbour’s Bruce, b. xvi. 1. 457.]|—OF. mes, a dish, course at table
(Godefroy; Burguy). Cotgrave has: ‘més, a messe, or service of
meat, a course of dishes at table.’ Mod. F. mets (which also appears
in Cotgrave), is a misspelt form due to a wish to point out more dis-
tinctly its connexion with the verb metre, of which the old pp. was
mes, Cf. Ital. messo, a course of dishes at table; also, a messenger
(the former =L. missum: the latter =L. missus). —OF. mes (<Late L.
missum), that which is set or placed, viz. on the table; pp. of metire,
to place.=Late L. mittere, to place; L. mittere, to send. See
Mass (2) and Message. @ Not to be derived from AS. myse,
a table, nor from L. mensa, nor from OHG. maz, meat; all of which
have been (absurdly) suggested. Der. mess, sb., a number of persons
who eat together, the orig. number being four; see Levins, and
Trench, Select Glossary; also L. L. L.iv. 3. 207. ‘A fourth, to
make us a full messe of guests;? Heywood, Witches of Lancs., A. i.
sc. I. ‘Euery messe being jive persons;’ Hakluyt, Voy., iii. 100;
1. 1. _ Also mess, vb., to eat of a mess, to associate at table; also
mess-mate.

MESS (2), a mixture, disorder. (F.—L.) ‘As pure a mess
almost as it came in;’ Pope, Epilogue to Satires, Dial. ii. 176. The
same as mess (I); see N. E. D.

MESSAGE, a communication sent to another, an errand. (F.
—L.) In early use. In Rob. of Glouc. p. 359, 1. 7405.—F. message,
‘a message;’ Cot.—Late L. missdticum, message. Extended from
L. miss-us, pp. of mittere, to send; see Mission. Der. messenger, q. v.
And see mess (1), mass (2). :

MESSENGER, the bearer of a message. (F.—L.) The x is
excrescent, as in scavenger for scavager, passenger for passager; so
also messenger is for messager. ME. messager, Chaucer, C. T. 5163,
5191, 5205 (B 743, 771); Ancren Riwle, p. 190,1. 20. AF. messager,
Polit. Songs, p. 243 (1307); messanger, Langtoft’s Chron., ii. 210.
Formed from message with suffix -er of the agent; see Message.
@ We also find ME, message in the sense of ‘messenger,’ as in
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 454. This form answers to Late L..
missdticus, M. -


Bes y= Bi) ie


MESSIAH


“MESSIAH, the anointed one. (Heb.) In Dan. ix. 25.— Heb.
mashiakk, anointed; from mdéshakh, to anoint.

MESSUAGE, a dwelling-house with offices, &c. (F.—L.)
“Messuage (messuagium), a dwelling-house ; but by that name may
also pass a curtilage, a garden, an orchard, a dove-house, a shop,
a mill, a cottage, a toft, as parcel of a messuage,’ &c.; Blount, Nomo-
lexicon, ed. 1691. ME. messuage, Chaucer, C. T. 3977.—AF.
mesuage, Year-books of Edw. I, 1292-3, p. 219; OF. mesuage, a
manor-house (Roquefort); cf. Late L. mesuigium, messuagium,
a manor-house (Ducange), also mansuagium, a farm-house. = Late L.
type *mansudticum (cf. mansudrius, a dweller in a house); allied to
mansionaticum, a mansion, mansiticus, a mansion. All from Late L.
mansa, a small farm with a house, a manse.—L. mansa, fem. of
mansus, pp. of manére, to remain, dwell. See Manse, Mansion.
Thus messuage=mansu-age; cf. OF. mes, a manse, MF. metz, ‘a
mesuage;’ Cot.

MET A., prefix. (Gk.) From Gk. perd, prep., among, with,
after; frequently used as a prefix, when it commonly implies
‘change.’ Cognate with Goth. mith, AS. mid, G. mit, with. Der.
met-al, meta-morphosis, meta-phor, meta-phrase, meta-physics, meta-
thesis, met-empsychosis, met-eor, meth-od, met-onymy ; &c.

METAL, a name given to certain solid opaque substances, as
gold. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. metal, Rob. of Glouc. p. 28,1. 665; also
metel, id. p. 6, 1. 144.— OF. metal, ‘mettal, mettle;’? Cot. —L.
metallum, a mine, metal.—Gk. péraddAor, a pit, cave, mine, mineral,
metal. Cf. weradAAdw, I search after, search carefully, explore. Of
unexplained origin. It prob. contains the prep. wera. Der. metall-ic,
Milton, P. L. i. 673, immediately from L. metallicus; metalli-fer-ous,
from metalli-=metallo-, for metallum, and -fer, producing, from

ferre, to bear; also metalloid, i.e. metal-like, from Gk. peraddAo-,
for péradAov, and eidos, form; also metallurgy, q.v. Doublet,
mettle,

METALLURGY, a working in metals. (F.—L.—Gk.) In
Phillips, World of Words, ed. 1706. — MF. metallurgie, ‘a search for
metall in the bowels of the earth,’ Cot. [But this would appear to
be but a partial explanation.|—Low L. *metallurgia, not recorded,
but such a form must have existed as a transcription from the Gk. =
Gk. peraddoupyos, adj., working in metals, mining; “eraAdAoupyeiv,
to smelt ore or work metals. = Gk. péraddo-, decl. stem of wérarAorv,
a metal; and épyov, work, cognate with E. work. See Metal and
Work. 4 The vowel x=Gk. ov, resulting from o and e. Der.
metallurg-ic-al, metallurg-ist.

METAMORPHOSIS, change of form, transformation. (L.—
Gk.) Chaucer has Metamorphoseos, short for Metamorphoseos liber,
book of metamorphosis, C. T. 4513 (B 93). He alludes to the
celebrated Metamorphoseon Libri, books of metamorphoses, by Ovid;
and there is no doubt that the word became widely familiar because
Ovid used it.—L. metamorphdsis (gen. sing. metamorphdsis or meta-
morphoseos, the latter being the Gk. form; gen. pl. metamorphdsedn),
a transformation. —Gk. petapdppwors, a transformation. = Gk. pera-
poppdopar, I am transformed.=Gk. pera, which in comp. has the
sense of ‘change ;’ and poppdw, I form, from popdy, form. B. The
etymology of poppy is uncertain; some connect it with L. forma,
form. Brugmann, i. § 413 (8). Der. metamorphose, Two Gent. i. 1.
66, ii. I. 32, a verb coined from the sb. above; also used by Gas-
coigne, Complaint of Philomene, 1.18 from end. Also metamorph-ic,
a geological term, likewise a coined word.

METAPHOR, a transference in the meaning of words. (F.—L.
—Gk.) ‘And make therof a metaphore;’ Gascoigne, Complaint of
Philomene (near the end); ed. Arber, p. 116.— MF. metaphore,
‘a metaphor ;? Cot.—L. metaphora.—Gk. peradopd, a transferring
of a word from its proper signification to another.— Gk. perapépey,
to transfer.—Gk. pera, which in comp. often gives the sense of
‘change;’ and gépew, to bear, carry, cognate with E. bear. See
Meta- and Bear (1). Der. metaphor-ic, -ic-al, ic-al-ly.

METAPHRASE, METAPHRASIS, a literal translation.
(Gk.) ‘ Metaphrasis, a bare translation out of one language into
another;’ Phillips, World of Words, ed. 1706.—Gk. perappacts,
a paraphrasing. — Gk. petappafew, to paraphrase, translate, lit. to
change the style of phrase. =Gk. pera, signifying ‘change;’ and
<ppacew, to speak. See Meta- and Phrase. Der. metaphrast=Gk.
petappaorns, a translator; metaphrast-ic.

METAPHYSICS, the science of mind. (L.—Gk.) Formerly
called metaphysic; thus Tyndall speaks of ‘textes of logike, ... of
metaphysike ;? Works, p. 104, 1.1. ME. methaphesik, Trevisa, tr. of
Higden, iii. 365.—L. metaphysicus, metaphysical; whence meta-
physica, sb. pl., metaphysics. — Gk. pera 7d gvona, after physics ;
because the study was supposed fitly to follow the study of physics
or natural science. The name is due to editors of Aristotle. See
Physics. Der. metaphysic-al, Levins; -al-ly, -i-an.


METASTASIS, a change of condition. (Gk.) From Gk.


METROPOLIS


peTaoracis, 2 removal, change; allied to peOiordva, to remove. —
Gk. pera, implying change, and iorava, to place.

METATHESIS, transposition of some letters of a word. (L,—
Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —L. metathesis. — Gk. peraOeais,
transposition. — Gk. pera, signifying ‘change ;’ and @éats, a setting,
place. See Meta- and Thesis.

METE, to measure. (E.) ME. meten, P. Plowman, B. i. 175.
AS. metan, gemetan, to measure; Grein, ii. 234.4-Du. meten; Icel.
meta, to tax, value; Swed. mata, to measure; Goth, mitan; G,
messen, Cf, Gk. péd-ona, I provide for; L. modus, measure,
moderation. See Mode. (4/MED.) Brugmann, i. § 412 (1).
Der. mete-yard, Levit. xix. 35, from AS. met-geard, a measuring-rod,
Voc. 147. 20 (see Yard) ; meet (1).

METEMPSYCHOSIS, the transmigration of souls. (Gk.)
* Metempsychosis, a passing of the soul from one body to another ;’
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Spelt metempsichosis in Herbert’s Travels,
ed. 1665, p. 53. —Gk. perepvxwors, a transferring of the soul. —Gk.
peteptvxow, I make the soul pass from one body to another. =Gk.
per-, for pera, denoting ‘change;’ ey-, for év, in, into, before the
p following ; yuy-, for pux7n, the soul. See Psychology.

METEOR, an apparition in the sky. (F.—Gk.) Frequent in
Shak. ; see Rich. II, ii. 4. 9, &c.— MF. meteore, ‘a meteor ;’ Cot.—
Gk. peréwpos, adj., raised up above the earth, soaring in air; hence
peréwpov, a meteor. = Gk. per-, for pera, among; and éwpa, allied to
aiwpa, anything suspended, from deipev, to lift, raise up. See Prell-
witz. Der. meteor-ic ; meteoro-logy, from Adyos, a discourse, A€yesv,
to speak ; meteoro-logi-c-al, meteoro-log-ist.

METHEGLIN, mead. (W.) In Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth,
b. ii. c. 22; L. L. L. v. 2. 233.— W. meddyglyn, mead ; lit. medical
liquor. = W. meddyg, from L. medicus, healing, curative; and Zlyn,
liquor (Spurrell, pt. i. p. 189). See J. Davies, Welsh-Lat. Dict.
1632.—A. L. Mayhew.

METHINKS, it seems to me. (E.) ME. me thinkes, Will. of
Palerne, 430; also me thinketh, id. 839. AS. mé pynced, it seems to
me; Grein, ii. 613. Here méis the dat. case of the Ist pers. pronoun ;
and pynced is from the impersonal verb pyncan, to seem, distinct from
pencan, to think (Grein, ii. 579). B. Cognate with AS. pyncan are
OSax. thuncian, Icel. pykkja (=pynkja), Goth. thugkjan (=thunkjan),
G. diinken, OHG. dunchan, to seem. These answer to a Teut. type
*thunkjan-; from *thunk-, weak grade of *thenk-; see Think.

METHOD, arrangement, system, orderly procedure, way. (F.—
L.—Gk.) In Shak. Meas. for Meas. iii. 2. 52.—MF. methode, ‘a
method, a short, ready, and orderly course for the teaching, learning,
or doing of a thing; Cot.—L. methodus,— Gk. peOo50s, an enquiry
into, method, system.—Gk. pe-, for werd, after; and 68ds, a way 5
the lit. sense being ‘a way after,’ or ‘a following after.’ B. The
Gk. 65és is from 4/SED, to go; cf. Skt. sadaya (with @), to approach
(Benfey, p. 999); Russ. chodite, to go, walk, march, choad’, a going,
course. See Prellwitz; Brugmann, i. § 907,n.1. Der. method-ic-al,
method-ic, method-ist (Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, and see Trench,
Select Glossary), method-ise, Method-ism.

METHYLATED, mixed with methyl. (Gk.) Methyl is the
radical of wood-spirit or methylic alcohol. From Gk. pé@u, wine ;
and van, wood. As if ‘spirit of wood;’ see N. E. D.

METONYMY, a rhetorical figure. (L.—Gk.) ‘I understand
your metonymy ;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 3. 1. 588. ‘Metonymie,
a putting one name for another; a figure, when the cause is put for
the effect, or contrarily ;? Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. metonymia.
—Gk. perovupia, a change of names, the use of one word for an-
other. — Gk. era, implying ‘change;’ and dvoya, a name, cognate
with E. name; see Name. Der. metonym-ic-al, -ic-al-ly,

METRE, METER, poetical arrangement of syllables, rhythm,
verse. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. metre, Chaucer, C. T. 13987 (B 3170).
—OF. metre, ‘meeter;’? Cot.—L. metrum.—Gk. pétpoy, that by
which anything is measured, arule, metre. PB. From base pe-, with
suffix -rpoy, signifying the agent; see Brugmann, ii. § 62. From
the weak grade (e-) of 4/ME, to measure; cf. Skt. ma, to measure.
@ The word meter occurs in A. S. (see Bosworth), from L. metrum ;
but Chaucer took it from the French. Der. metr-ic-al (Skelton,
A Replycacion, 338), metr-ic-al-ly; dia-meter, Also metro-nome,
a musical time-measurer, from pérpo-, for peérpoy, and vépos, dis-
tribution, from véyev, to distribute. Also baro-meter, chrono-meter,
hexa-meter, hydro-meter, hygro-meter, penta-meter, thermo-meter, tri~
meter; geo-metry, trigono-metry, &c. .

METROPOLIS, a mother city, (L.—Gk.) Ecclesiastically, it 1s
applied to the chief cathedrad city; thus Canterbury is the metropolis
of England, but London is not so, except in a secular sense. In
K, John, v. 2. 72; and Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. The adj, metro-
politan (=L. métropolitanus) was in much earlier use, having a purely
ecclesiastical sense. ‘Bysshoppes metropolitanes’ = metropolitan
bishops; Sir T. More, Works, p. rogth. (Here Sir T. More uses


373


374 METTLE


the word as a F. adj., with added s, and following its sb.) —L. métro-


MIDRIFF


1 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 450, and in Ancren Riwle (as above); mich-ing,


polis. Gk. pnrpéodis, a mother-state; ecclesiastically, the city of | Hamlet, ili. 2. 146.


a primate.—Gk. pprpo-, for pytnp, a mother, cognate with E.
Mother; and méArs, a city, for which see Police. f In St.
Erkenwald, ed. Horstmann, |. 26, London is called ‘pe metropol and
pe mayster-tone.’ ‘ And thereof is metropolis called the chiefe citee,
where the Archbishop of any prouince hath his see, . . as Caunterbury
and Yorke ;’ Udall, tr. of Erasmus’ Apophthegms ; Diogenes, § 110.
Der. metropolit-an, from L. metropolitanus (cf. Gk. modir-ns, a
citizen).

METTLE, spirit, ardour. (F.—L.—Gk.) Absolutely the same
word as metal, though the difference in sense is now indicated by a
difference in the spelling. Common in Shak.; see K. John, ii. 401,
Jul. Cesar, i. 1. 66, i. 2. 313, ii. 1. 134, iv. 2. 24, &c. ‘No dis-
tinction is made in old editions between the two words, either in
spelling or in use;’ Schmidt. The allusion is to the temper of the
metal of a sword-blade. See Metal, Der. mettl-ed; mettle-some
(with E. suffix),

MEW (1), tocryasacat. (E.) In Shak. Macb.iv.1.1; Hamlet,
v.1. 3153 ‘cry mew!’ 1 Hen. IV, iii. i. 129. ME. mawen. ‘Tybert
[the cat] coude not goo awaye, but he mawede and galped so lowde,’
i.e. mewed and yelped so loudly; Caxton, tr. of Reynard the Fox,
ed. Arber, p. 22. Of imitative origin.--Low G. mauen, miauen. So
also Pers. maw, the mewing of a cat; Arab. mua, a mewing; Rich.
Dict. p. 1517. Der. mew-l, As You Like It, ii. 7. 1445 this isa F,
form, from MF. miauler, ‘to mewl or mew like a cat,’ Cot.

MEW (2), a sea-fowl, gull. (E.) ME. mawe. ‘ Hec fuliga,
semawe’ [sea-mew]; Voc. 641.1. AS. m#w. ‘ Alcedo, vel alcion,
mew ;’ id. 131. 30; also méau, id. 5. 16; méu, 432. 9.4- NFries.
méwe; Du. meeuw; Icel. mar; Dan. maage; Norw. maake; G. mowe.
B. Teut. types *mai(g)wiz, *maihwoz; Idg. types *moigis, *moigos
(N.E.D.). Perhaps allied to Skt. méchaka-s, dark-blue.

MEW (3), a cage for hawks, &c. (F.—L.) The sense of ‘ cage’
gave rise to the verb mew, to enclose. [The verb mew also meant
‘to moult,’ which is the orig. sense in French; cf. ME. mewen, to
change; Chaucer, Troil. ii. 1258.] ME. mewe, meuwe, mue. §And
by hire beddes heed she made a mewe;’ Chaucer, C: T. 10957
(F 643). ‘In meuwe;’ Will. of Palerne, 3336. ‘In mue;’ Knight
de la Tour Landry, ch. 64; ed. Wright, p. 85, 1. 3 from bottom. =
OF. mue, ‘a change, or changing; any casting of the coat or skin,
as the mewing of a hawke;... also, a hawks mue; and a mue, or
coope wherein fowle is fattened;’ Cot. So also Guernsey mue,
a mew.=F, muer, ‘to change, to mue, to cast the head, coat, or
skin ;* Cot.—L. mitare,to change. . For *mowitdre, frequentative
form of mouére, to move; see Move. Cf. priidens for prouidens,
bubus for bouibus (Bréal). Der. mew-s, s. pl., a range of stabling,
orig. a place for falcons; the reason for the change of name is given
in Stow’s Survey of London, ed. 1842, p. 167, ‘Then is the Mewse,
so called of the king’s falcons there kept by the king’s falconer,
which of old time was an office of great account, as appeareth by a
record of Rich. II, in the 1st year of his reign... After which time
[A. D. 1534 ] the fore-named house called the Mewse, by Charing-cross,
was new built, and prepared for stabling of the king’s horses, in the
reign of Edw. VI and Queen Mary, and so remaineth to that use.’
Also mew, vb., to cage up, confine, of which the pp. mued occurs in
The Knight de la Tour Landry, ch. 64, p. 85,1. 29. Also mew, vb.,
to moult, cast the coat; ‘But I have mew’d that coat,’ Beaum. and
Fletcher, Little French Lawyer, iii. 2. See Moult.

MEWL; see under Mew (1).

MEWS, a range of stabling; see Mew (3).

MEZZOTINTO, a mode of engraving. (Ital.—L.) See Evelyn’s
Diary, Mar. 13, 1661.—Ital. mezzo tinto, half tinted.—Ital. mezzo
(L. medius) ; and tinto, pp. of tingere, to tinge. See Mediate and
Tinge.

MIASMA, pollution, infectious matter. (Gk.) In Phillips, ed.
1706.—Gk. placya, pollution, stain.—Gk. praivery, to stain.

MICA, a glittering mineral. (L.) ‘ Mica, a crum, or little quan-
tity of anything that breaks off; also glimmer, or cat-silver, a
metallick body like silver, which shines in marble and other stones,
but cannot be separated from.them;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Cf. mod.
F. and Span. mica, mica. Apparently from L. mica, a crumb (see
Microcosm) ; but it seems to have been applied to the mineral
from, a notion that this word is related to L. micdre, to shine,
glimmer; which is not the case.. Der. mic-ac-e-ous, a coined adj.

MICH, to skulk, hide, play truant. (E.) ME. michen, Prompt.
Parv. The sb. micher, a skulking thief, occurs in the Rom. of the
Rose, 6541; and, much earlier, spelt muchare, in Ancren Riwle, p.
150, last line. The ME. muchen, michen, result from an AS. form
*myccan, not found. But it is allied by gradation to OHG. mihhon,
to lie in wait secretly ; whence G. meucheln, to assassinate, meuch-
tings, insidiously, maliciously. See meuchel- in Kluge. Der.-mich-er,


MICHAELMAS, the feast of St. Michael. (Hybrid ; F.— Heb.
and L.) ME. michelmesse, mychelmesse, P. Plowman, B. xiii. 240.
1. Michel is from F. Michel, the F. form of Heb. Mikhael, a proper
name, signifying ‘ who is like unto God?’ from Heb. mi, who? ke,
like, EI, God. 2. The suffix -mas, ME. messe, AS, messe, is from
L. missa, a mass ; see Mass (2). .

MICKLE, great. (E.) ME. mikel, mukel, michel, muchel, mochel ;
used as adv. in Chaucer, C. T. 260 (A 258). And see Havelok,
1025; Ormulum, 788; &c. AS, micel; Grein, ii. 242.4-Icel. mikill
(myhill); Goth. mikils; MUG. michel, OHG. mihil.4-Gk. peyaa-n,
fem., great. Allied to Gk. péyas, great, L. magnus. See Much.

MICROBE, a very minute living being. (F.—Gk.) F. microbe,
due to Sédillot (1878); and prob. meant to express ‘small living
being ;’ but it should mean ‘ short-lived.’ = Gk. puxpdBr0s, short-lived,
= Gk. puxpds, also opixpés, little ; and Bios, life.

MICROCOSM, a little world. (F.—L.—Gk.) This term,
meaning ‘a little universe,’ was applied in old times to man, who
was regarded as a model or epitome of the universe. In Minsheu,
ed. 1627. ‘This word is sometimes applied to man, as being a com-
pendium of all other creatures, his body being compared to the baser
part of the world, and his soul to the blessed angels ;’ Blount, ed,
1674. Also in Shak. Cor. ii. 1.68.—F. microcosme, ‘a little world;’
Cot. =—L. microcosmus.— Gk. puxpoxoopos, a little world. = Gk. puxpo-,
decl. stem of puxpds, also opuxpds, small, little; and «écpos, a world
(see Cosmetic).

MICROSCOPE, an instrument for viewing small objects. (Gk.)
In Milton, P. R. iv. 57. Coined from Gk. puxpo-, decl, stem of
puxpds, small; and oxor-eiy, to behoid, see. Cf. Gk. éni-cxomos, an


overseer, bishop. See Microcosm and Scope. Der. microscop-ic,


microscop-ic-al, So also micro-meter, an instrument for measuring
small distances; see Metre. . Many compounds begin with micro-.

MID, middle. (E.) ME. mid, midde; only used in compounds
and phrases; see Stratmann. AS. mid, midd, adj., middle; Grein,
ii. 248.4 Du. mid-, used in composition, as mid-dag, mid-day ; Icel.
midr, adj.; Swed. and Dan. mid-, in composition; Goth. midjis ;
OHG, mitti, adj.4-L. medius, adj.; Gk. péoos, Holic péooos (=*p005
yos); Skt. madhya-, adj., middle. Teut. type *medjoz; Idg. type
*medhjos, adj. Der. amid, q.v., whence the use of mid (for mid) as
a preposition, like Russ. mejdu, mej’, amid; a-mid-s-t, q.v. Also
mid-day, AS. mid-deg, John, iv. 6; mid-land, 2 Macc. viii. 35 (A.V.);
mid-night, AS. mid-niht, Voc. 175. 38; mid-rib, a modern botanical
term, not in Todd’s Johnson; mid-riff, q.v.; mid-ship, short for
amid-ship, whence also the term midship-beam, Phillips, World
of Words, ed. 1706; mid-ship-man; mid-summer, AS. midsumor,
A.S. Chron., an. 1052; mid-way, ME. midwei, Ancren Riwle, p. 412.
Also midd-le, q.y.; mid-st, q.v. Also (from L. medi-us), medi;
ate, &c.

MIDDEN, a dunghill. (Scand.) Common in dialects. ME,
midding ;, spelt myddyng, Palladius, i. 750.—Dan. méddyng, a dung-
hill (for *mdégdynge).— Dan. mog (Icel. myki), muck; Dan. dynge,
a heap. Lit. ‘muck-heap.’? Dan. dynge=Swed. dynga, dung; allied
to E. dung. See Muck and Dung.

MIDDLE, adj., intervening, intermediate. (E.) ME. middel,
adj. ‘In the myddel place;’ Mandeville’s Travels, p. 2 (in Spec. of
English, p. 165, 1. 34). Also middel, sb. ‘Aboute hir middel ;”
Gower, C, A. ii. 47, 1. 12; bk. iv. 1356. AS. middel, sb., Grein, ii.
249. f. Formed with suffix -el from AS. midd, adj.; see Mid.4+Du.
middel, adj., adv , and sb..; G. mittel, sb., means; OHG. mitiil, adj.,
middle. Cf, Icel. medal, prep. among. Der. middle-man, given in
Phillips, ed. 1706, as a military term, signifying ‘he that stands
middlemost in a file;’ middl-ing, used by L’Estrange and Dryden
(Johnson), not an early word ; middle-most, Ezek. xlii. 5 (in the Bible
of 1551 and in the A. V.), an ill-coined superlative on the model of
Jfore-most and after-most.

MIDGE, a small fly or gnat. (E.) ME. migge, mygge. ‘Hee
sicoma, a myge’ [better mygge]; Voc. 707. 4. AS. micge, Aflfric’s
Gloss., Nom. Insectorum; in Voc. 122. 7; ‘ Culix, myge’ [for myeg'];
id. Voc. 261. 6; mygg, 16. 23. Here micge is for mycge, where y is
due to an earlier x, with the usual vowel-change.4-Du. mug, a gnat;
Low G. mugge, Bremen Worterbuch ; Swed. mygg; Dan. myg; G.
miicke, OHG, mucca, mugga, B. Teut. types *mugjon-, f.; *mugjoz,
m.; perhaps the orig. sense was ‘ buzzer,’ from the noise made by
the insect’s wings. Cf. Gk. pu¢ew, to mutter, puta, a fly (Prellwitz) ;
also Icel. my, a midge. Der. mug-wort, q.v.

MIDRIFF, the diaphragm, separating the heart from the stomach,
&c. (E.) ME. midrif, mydryf, Prompt, Parv. AS. midrif. ‘ Dis-
septum, midrif; \Exta, midrif;’ Voc, 159. 40, 42. Older form
midhrif; A. S. Leechdoms, ii. 260.—AS. mid, middle; and hrif,
the belly, the womb, Grein, ii. 104. Cf. Du, rif, in the sense of


_ MIDST *


‘carcase;’ OHG. href, the body, OFries. rif, ref, the belly, midref,
the midriff. @ With AS. hrif compare L. corp-us, body,

MIDST, the middle. (E.) ‘In the midst,’ Com, Errors, i. 1.
104; and 11 other times in Shakespeare. ‘In middest of his race ;’
Spenser, F. Q. vi. 3. 25, In the midst is from this older phrase ix
middest, Moreover, the ¢ is excrescent, as in whils-t, amongs-¢; and
in middest answers to ME. in middes, as in ‘in myddes the se’ =in the
midst of the sea, Pricke of Conscience, 1. 2938. A parallel phrase is
amyddes, P, Plowman, B. xiii. 82, 8B. Here the s gives the phrase
an adverbial force, and is due to the habit of forming adverbs from
the AS. gen. case in -es. The older form is withont the s, as in a
midde, Layamon, 4836, also spelt a midden, id. 8154. Still earlier,
we have oz midden, Luke, xxiv. 36, in the latest version of the A. S.
Gospels, where the earlier version has on mydlene. yy. The ME.
form midde answers to AS. middan, dat. case of the sb. midde, formed
from the adj. mid, middle. See Mid; and see Amidst.

MIDWIFE, a woman who assists another in childbirth. (E.)
ME. mydwyf, P. Plowman’s Crede, 1. 78; mydwyf, Myrc’s Duties
of Parish Priest, ed. Peacock, 1. 98; mydewy/, id. 1. 87; mydwijf,
Wyclif, Gen. xxxvili. 27 (later version); medewife, id. (earlier version).
The false spelling medewife (not common) is due to confusion with
mede, i, e. meed, reward; this has misled Verstegan and others as to
the etymology. In Cursor Mundi, 5543, the Fairfax MS. has the pl.
midwyues ; but the Cotton MS. has midwimmen(mid-women), fB. The
prefix mid- is certainly nothing but the once common AS. and ME.
mid, prep., together with ; it occurs again as a part of the ME. mid-
polinge, compassion (lit. suffering with), Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 157.
There are several such compounds in AS.; as mid-wyrcan, to work
with, Mk. xvi. 20, mid-wyrhta, a worker together with, co-adjutor,
A. S. Chron. an. 945; see Bosworth. . This AS. mid is cognate with
Du. mede, with (whence medebroeder, a companion, lit. mid-brother,
medegenoot, a partner, medehelpen, to assist); also with G. mit
(whence G. mit-bruder, a comrade, mithelfer, a helper, mitmachen, to
take a part in, &c.); also with Gk. pera, with (whence peradapBaverw,
to participate). The sense of mid in this compound is clearly ‘ helping
with,’ or ‘ assisting.’ y. The ME. wif means no more than ‘ woman;’
see Wife, Woman. And see Meta-. Der. midwif-er-y, spelt
midwifry in Bp. Hall, Sat. i. 1, 25, a clumsy compound, with F.
suffix -ery (=F. -erie).

MIEN, look, bearing, demeanour. (F,—C.) Spelt meen in

Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Hehas: ‘Meen (F. mine), the countenance,
figure, gesture, or posture of the face.’ [Meane in Spenser, F. Q, vi.
7. 39, is a different word.]—F. mine, ‘the countenance, look, cheer;’
Cot. B. The F. word is not found earlier than the 15th century ;
still, Ital. mina is borrowed from it (Hatzfeld). Prob. of Celtic
origin. = Bret. minx, muzzle, beak (also used of men); cf. W. min,
lip; Irish méz, mouth; Corn. mein, min, lip, mouth (Thurneysen),
Celtic types *makna, *mekno-, open mouth ; Stokes-Fick, 197. (So
Hatzfeld ; Korting, § 6172).
- MIGHT (1), power, strength. (E.) ME. might, mij¢; Chaucer,
C. T. 5580 (B 3160). AS. miht, meht, meht; Grein, ii. 235.4-Du.
magt ; Goth. mahts; G. macht, OHG. maht, B. Teut. type *mahtiz,
for *mag-tiz, might (Fick, iii, 227) ; from MAG, to be able ; see May
(1). Cf. Russ. moche, might, from moche, to be able. Der. might-y,
AS. mihtig, meahtig, Grein, ii. 237 might-i-ly, might-i-ness.

MIGHT (2), was able. (E.) AS. meahte, mihte, pt. t. of mugan,
to be able; Grein, ii. 267. See May (1).

MIGNONETTS, an annual plant. (F.—G.) Modern. Added
by Todd to Johnson. = F. mignonette, fem. dimin. of mignon, a darling.
See Minion.

MIGRATE, to rernove from one country to another. (L.) The
sb. migration is in Cotgrave, and in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L.
migrdatus, pp. of migrare, to wander; connected with Gk. dueiBev, to
change (Prellwitz). Der. migration, from F. migration, ‘a migration’
(Cot.), from L. acc. migrationem. : Also migrat-or-y, e-migrate, tm-
migrate.

- MIKADO, the emperor of Japan. (Japan.) From Jap. mikado,

said to mean ‘high gate ;’ like the Turkish Sublime Porte. = Jap. mi,
august, exalted; kado, gate, door.

ILCH, milk-giving. (E.) In Gen. xxxii. 15.
kine;? Tam. Shrew, ii. I. 359. ‘Mylch cowe, vacca mulsaria;
Prompt..Parv., p. 337. Also melche, as in Lay le Freine, 196; in
Weber, Met. Rom., vol. i. From AS.melc, adj., milch (see Bosworth);
The Shrine, p. 130, 1. 3. Allied to Milk, q.v. Cf. Icel. mjalk,
milk ; milkr, mjolkr, adj., milk-giving ; milk er, a milch ewe. So
G. melk, adj., milch; Low G. melsch, milch (Schambach).

MILD, gentle, kind, soft. (E.) ME. mild, milde ; Rob. of Glouc.
p- 72, 1.1625. AS. milde, Grein, ii. 250.4-Du. mild; OSax. mildi;
Icel. mildr; Dan. and Swed. mild; G. mild, OHG. milti; Goth,
mildeis, only in comp. un-mildeis, without natural affection, 2 Tim,
dii. 3.. Allied to Gk. pad@axds, soft, mild; Olrish meld, pleasant ;


¢A hundred milch


?


MILLENNIUM


Skt. mydh, to grow weary of, disregard (Macdonell) ; root *meldh,
Brugmann, i. § 591, ii. § 690. Der. mild-ly, mild-ness.

MILDEW, a kind of blight. (E.) ME. meldew, Wyclif, Gen.
xli. 6. AS. meledéaw, honey-dew, Grein, ii. 230; mildéaw, Voc. 455.
19. Cf. OHG. militou, mildew, cited by Grein. _B. The sense is

rob, ‘ honey-dew,’ from the sticky honey-like appearance of some
kinds of blight, as, e.g. on lime-trees. Cf. Goth. milith, honey;
allied to L. mel, Gk. pwédc, honey; Irish mil, honey, milcheo, mildew.
See Mellifluous and Dew. @ The mod. G. word is mehlthau,
i,e, meal-dew; but this is an altered form, as it does not agree with
the OHG. militou; the OHG. for ‘ meal’ being melo,

MILE, a measure of distance, 1760 yards. (L.) ME. mile, pl.
mile, Chaucer, C. T. 16023 (G555). AS. mil,a mile; fem. sb., with
pl. mila, mile; Grein, ii. 250, Formed from L. pl. milia, more
commonly millia, used in the sense of a Roman mile; the proper
sense is ‘thousands.’ The older name for the Roman mile was mille
passus, or mille passuum, a thousand paces, B. Hence also G. meile,
OHG. mila, a mile; Du. mil, a mile, &c. 4 The ME. unchanged
pl. mile explains such a. phrase as ‘a ten-mile stage.’ Der. mile-age
(with F. suffix); mile-stone. And see millenary, milfoil, million.

MILFOIL, the name of a plant. (F.—L.) Ina Vocabulary of
Plant-names, said to be of the thirteenth century, we find ‘ Midle-
folium, milfoil;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 139. The sense is ‘ thousand-
leaf,’ from the minute and numerous sections into which the leaf is
divided. = OF. milfoil ; from F. mille, a thousand, and OF. fuil, foil,
m., a leaf. = L. milifolium, millefolium, milfoil; from mille, a thousand,
and folium, a leaf. See Foil, 4 The true E. name is yarrow,


875


q. v-

MILITATE, to contend, fight, be opposed to. (L.) Moder.
Added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. [But militant, chiefly used of
‘the church militant,’ occurs in Barnes, Works, p. 253, col. 2.]—L.
militatus, pp. of militare, to serve as a soldier, fight. —L. milit-, stem
of miles, a soldier. Root uncertain. Der. militant, from L. militant-,
stem of pres. pt. of militare. From L. milit- we have also milit-ar-y,
All’s Well, i. 1. 132; milit-ar-ist, a coined word, All’s Well, iv. 3.
161, Also milit-ia, q. v.

MILITIA, a body of soldiers for home service. (L.) ‘ Except
his militia of natives be of good and valiant soldiers ;’ Bacon, Essay
29, Of Greatness of Kingdoms. = L. militia, (1) warfare, (2) troops,
army.=L. milit-, stem of miles, a soldier. See Militate. Der.
militia-man.

MILK, a white fluid secreted by female mammals for feeding
their young. (E.) ME. milk, Chaucer, C. T. 360 (A 358). OMere.
mile (in Sweet, O. E. Texts), AS. meolc, sometimes meoluc; Grein,
li. 240. + Du. melk; OSax. miluk; Icel. mjolk ; Dan. melk; Swed.
mjolk ; Goth. miluks; G. milch, Teut. stem *meluk-, f. Allied to
AS. melcan, str. vb., pt. t. meale; G. melken (pt.t. molk, pp. gemolken),
OHG. melchan, to milk ; orig. ‘to stroke, from the action employed
in milking a cow. f. Teut. type *melkan-, pt. t. *malk, str. vb. ;
allied to Gk, dpéayev, to milk, L. mulgére, to milk ; Lith. milsz-ti,
to milk, Oltish blig-im, I milk. From 4/MELG; Brugmann, i,
§ 608. The older sense appears in Skt. mzj, to wipe, rub, stroke,
sweep; from 4/MERG, to rub, wipe. Der. milk-er, milk-y ; milk-
maid, milk-pail, milk-tree ; milk-sop, q. v.; milch, q.V-

MILKSOP, an effeminate man. (E.) ‘Allas, she seith, that
euer I was shape To wedde a milksop, or a coward ape ;” Chaucer,
C. T. 13916 (B 3100). The lit, sense is ‘bread soaked in milk ;’
hence, a soft, effeminate man. From ME. milk, milk; and soppe,
a sop, bread soaked in milk. See Milk and Sop.

MILL, a machine for grinding corn, &c. (L.) ME. melle (riming
with ¢elle); Chaucer, C. T. 3921 (A 3923). Also mudle, in comp.
windmulle, a windmill, Rob. of Glouc. p. 547, l. 11383. Mill is a
corruption, for ease of pronunciation, of milz, still in use provincially ;
cf. the name Milner, equivalent to the commoner Miller, Similarly,
ME, mule is for ME. mulne, which occurs in Sir Gawain, ed. Morris,
2203. In P. Plowman, A. ii. 80, we have as various readings the
forms mulnere, mylnere, myllere, mellere, a miller, corresponding re-
spectively to mulne, mylne, mylle, melle, a mill, AS. myln, a mill§
‘Molendenum, mylx;’ Voc. 330. 19. Also spelt mylen, Grein, ii.
270. Not an E. word, but borrowed from Late L. mulina, for L,
molina, a mill; whence also Icel. mylna, a mill. Extended from
L. mola, a mill, lit. ‘that which grinds;’ cf. molere, to grind. =
MEL, to grind, rub; whence also Lithuan. malti, Goth, malan,
G. mahlen, to grind, Brugmann, i. § 121 (2). Der. mill-cog, mill-
dam, mill-race, mill-stone, mill-wright, mill-wheel. Also mull-er,
mill-er’s-thumb (a fish). See Meal (1). dems
MILLENNIUM, a thousand years. (L.) In Johnson’s Dict. =
Mod. L. *millennium, a period of a thousand years.—L. mille, a
thousand; and annus, a year; see Annual. The same change of
vowel occurs in bi-ennial, tri-ennial, &c. Der. millenni-al. gar We
also find millenary, Bp. Taylor, Sermons, vol. ii. ser. 12 (R.)._ This


376 ~ MILLET


is from L. millénarius, belonging to a thousand, a derivative of pl.
adj. milléni, extended from mille, a thousand.

MILLET, the name of a plant. (F.—L.) In Holland, tr. of
Pliny, bk. xviii. c. 7.—F. millet, < millet, mill;? Cot. Dimin. of F.
mil, ‘mill, millet ;’ Cot.—L. milium, millet; whence also AS. mil,
millet (Bosworth). + Gk. pedivn, millet. Root uncertain. Der.
mili-ar-y, directly from L. milium,

MIGLLINER, one who makes bonnets, &c. (Ital.) In Shak.
Wint. Ta. iv. 4. 192. ‘ A millaner’s wife ;’ Ben Jonson, Every Man
(ed. Wheatley), i. 3. 120; see the note. <A milliner or millaner was
formerly of the male sex. Spelt millener in Phillips; millenier in
Minsheu. Origin somewhat disputed; but probably for Milaner,
a dealer in wares from Milan, in Italy. Milan steel was in good
repute at an early period; we find ‘ And a Millaine knife fast by my
knee’ in the Percy Folio MS., ed. Hales and Furnivall, i. 68; where
a note says: ‘ The dealers in miscellaneous articles were also called
milliners, from their importing Milan goods for sale, such as brooches,
aiglets, spurs, glasses, &c. ; Saunders’s Chaucer, p. 241.’ Chapman
has: ‘Milan, a rich state of haberdashers;? The Ball, Act v. See
examples in Palmer, Folk-Etymology. The Ital. Milano, L. Medio-
lanum, is a name of Celtic origin; see Bacmeister, Kelt. Briefe,
pp- 71, 102. We must also remember that the old sense of milliner
was a haberdasher, or seller of small wares; see Minsheu, ed. 1627,
whose suggestion that milliner is derived from L. mille (a thousand)
is to be rejected, though it shows that their wares were of a very
miscellaneous character, and that they had ‘a thousand small wares
to sell.” @ We also have the term mantua-maker, as if from the
Italian town of Mantua, but this is a corruption of Ital. manto. Der.
mulliner-y.

MILLION, a thousand thousand. (F.—L.) ME. millioun ;
Chaucer, C. T. 7267 (D 1685). —F. million, ‘a million;’ Cot.— Late
L. millidnem, acc. of millio; Ducange. Evidently a coined word, ex-
tended from L. mille, a thousand. See Mile. : Der. million-th;
million-aire, from F. millionnaire.

MILREIS, a Portuguese coin. (Port.—L.) Formerly milree.
‘ Mill-Ree or a Thousand Rees, a Portuguese coin, worth 6s. 83d.
sterling ;? Phillips (1706). Now worth ab. 4s. 6d.— Port. milreis ;
from mil, a thousand, and reis, pl. of real, ‘a Port. coin called ree,
equal to 27/400d.;’ Vieyra. He also gives: ‘ mil réis, a milree,
equal to 5s. 73d.3° (1857).—L. mille, a thousand ; régalem, acc. of
regalis, royal. See Real (2).

MILT (1), the spleen. (E.) ME. milte, O. Eng. Miscellany, ed.
Morris, p. 178, 1. 171. AS. milte; ‘Splen, milte;’? Voc. 160. 35.
+Du. milt, the spleen; Icel. mili, the spleen; Dan. milt; Swed.
mialte; G. milz, milt; OHG. milzi. Teut. stem *meltjo-, *meltjon-.
B, All from the verb to melt, in the sense ‘ to digest ;’ cf. Icel. meléa,
(1) to malt for brewing, (2) to digest; see Melt.

MIUGT (2), soft roe of fishes, (MDu.) In Walton’s Angler, with
the spelling melt; see Todd. Palsgrave has: ‘ Mylte [in] a fysshe,
laicte de poisson.’ In this sense, it was prob. borrowed from MDu.
milte, *the milt of a fish, Hexham; cf. Norw. mjelie, the same.
Doubtless confused with milk, sometimes used with the same sense;
cf. § Lactes, mylke of fyshe;’ Voc. 591.16. This use of the word is
known elsewhere. Cf. Swed. mjélk, milk; mjolke, milt of fishes;
mpolkyisk, a milter, lit. milk-fish ; Dan. jiske-melk, soft roe, lit, fish-
milk, So also G. milch, (1) milk, (2) milt of fishes; MDu. melcker
van een visch, §the milt of a fish,’ Hexham; Low G. melk, milk, also
milt (Liibben). Der. mil, vb., milt-er.

MIMIC, imitative, apt in imitating. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Mimic Fancy ;’
Milton, P. L. v. 110. The sb. mimick occurs in Milton, Samson,
1325; and once in Shak. Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 19, spelt mimmick in
the folios. —L. mimicus, farcical. Gk. pupuxds, imitative, belonging
to or like a mime.=—Gk. piwos, an imitator, actor, mime. Der.
mimic, sb., mimic, vb., mimic-ry. We sometimes find mime, directly
from Gk. pipos; also mim-et-ic, from Gk. pupnrtxds, imitative, from
Hipn-TNs, an imitator.

MIN ARET, a turret on a mosque. (Span.— Arab.) Added by
Todd to Johnson; it occurs in Swinburne’s Travels through Spain;
letter 44.—Span. minarete, a high slender turret. — Arab. mandarat,
a candle-stick, lamp, light-house, a turret on a mosque; Rich. Dict.
p-. 1496.—Arab. mandr, the same, id.; connected with zdar, fire,
p. 1548.-4-Heb. manorah, a candle-stick ; from ni, to shine.

MINCE, to chop small. (F.—L.) ME. mincen; the pp. mincid,
spelt myncyd, occurs in the Liber Cure Cocorum, ed. Morris, p. 18.
=—OF. mincier, MF. mincer, ‘to mince, to shred;’ Cot.—Late L.
type *minitidre, to mince, make small (see Schwan, § 199); from
Late L. minitia, a small piece.—L. miniitus, small; see Minute.
Cf. F, dial. mincer (Berry); Norm. dial. mincher, to break up (Moisy),
@ From the same root we have AS. minsian, to become small, to
fail. It only occurs twice: ‘wérigra wlite minsode’ =the comeliness
of the accursed ones failed; Daniel, 268, ed. Grein; and again,


MINIKIN


‘swide ne minsade’=it did not greatly fail; Reimlied, 29. From


the adj. min, small, Grein, ii. 252. Cf. Du. min, less; L. min-or,
less; see Minish. See Korting, § 6202. Der. minc-ing =taking
small steps, Isa. iii. 16; mince-pie, formerly minced-pie, Spectator,
no. 629; mince-meat, formerly minced-meat (Baret).

MIND, the understanding, intellect, memory. (E.) ME. mind,
mynd, often in the sense of memory; Chaucer, C. T. 1908, 4972
(A 1906, B 552). AS. gemynd, memory, mind, thought (where the
prefixed’ ge- makes no difference); Grein, ii. 432. Formed (with
the usual vowel-change of z to y) from AS. munan, to think, gemunan,
to remember ; id. i. 431; ii. 268.4-Goth. gamunds, remembrance, f. ;
from gamunan, to remember. Teut. type *mundi-z, f.; for *mun-
thiz, by Verner’s law. Idg. type *man-ti-s; cf. L. mens (decl. stem
menti-), mind ; Skt. ma-ti-,f., mind. B. All from the weak grade of
AMEN, to think; cf. Skt. man, to think, L. me-min-i, I remember.
Der. mind, verb, from the sb.; cf. AS. gemyndgian, to remember,
Grein, ii. 4333 mind-ed; like-mind-ed; mind-ful, Shak. Lucrece,
1. 15833 mind-ful-ly, mind-ful-ness ; mind-less, Pricke of Conscience,
2088. From the same root, mental, mentor, mania, mandarin, money,
mint (1), mendacious, com-ment, &c.

MINE (1), belonging to me. (E.) ME. min, pl. mine, Chaucer,
C. T. 1146 (A 1144); frequently shortened to my, as in id. 1145.
AS. min, poss. pron. (declinable), Grein, ii. 252; from AS. min
(unchangeable), gen. case of the Ist pers. pronoun; see Me.+Goth.
meins, poss. pron. (declinable), mine; from meina, gen. case of Ist
personal pronoun. So in other Teut. tongues. Doublet, my.

MINE (2), to excavate, dig for metals. (F.—C.) In King
Alisaunder, 1. 1216; cf. 1.1218. ‘And therupon anon he bad His
mynours for to go and myne;’ Gower, C. A. ii. 198; bk. v. 2120.—
F. miner, ‘to mine, or undermine;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. minare, Span.
and Port. minar, to mine. All of Celtic origin, according to
Thurneysen (p. 67). Cf. Irish and Gael. mein, ore, vein of metal ;
Olrish mianach, ore (Windisch); W. mwn, ore, a mine; W. mwn-
glawdd, a mine (from.clawdd, a pit); Bret. men-gleuz, a mine (cf.
cleuz, hollow), pron. men-glé in the dialect of Vannes. Celtic type
*meint (Stokes). Der. mine, sb.3 min-er, ME. minour, as above;
min-ing ; min-er-al, q.v. Also counter-mine, under-mine.

MINERAL, what is dug out of mines. (F.—C.) ME. mineral.

‘The thridde stone in special By name is cleped mineral Whiche the
metalls of every mine Attempreth, til that thei ben fyne;’ Gower,
C. A. ii. 87; bk. iv. 2554.—F. mineral, ‘a minerall;’ Cot. Formed
as adj. to accompany the sb. miniere, ‘a mine of metals or minerals,’
Cot.—F. miner, to mine ; see Mine (2). Cf. Span. minera, a mine.
Der. mineral-ise, mineral-ist, minera(l)-logy (where the final 7 is
dropped, owing to the 7 following), a coined word from Gk.
Adyos, discourse, from Aé€éyew, to speak; minera-logi-c-al, minera-
log-ist.

MINEVER, MINIVER, the same as Meniver, q.v.

MINGLE, to mix, confuse. (E.) Common in Shak. ; both trans.
and intrans. K. Lear, i. 1. 242; Macb. iii. 4.3. Spelt myngell in Pals-
grave ; but cf. mengling, sb.,a mingling, More, Life of Rich. III, ed,
Lumby, p. 70. A frequentative form, lit. ‘ to mix often,’ from the older
verb ming, ME. mengen, mingen. ‘The busy bee, her honye now
she minges;’ Surrey, Desc. of Spring; see Spec. of Eng. ed. Skeat,
p- 217(C), Liz. The ME. verb occurs as ming, imp., in Henrysoun,
Test. of Cresseid, 1. 613; it is more often mengen, and mostly used
in the pp. meint (contracted form of menged), or meind, or meynd,
Gower, C. A. ii. 262; bk. v. 4049. AS. mengan, to mix, also to
become mixed; also spelt mencgan, mengan, Grein, ii. 231. B. The
vowel-change (of a to @ or e) shows that mengan is a causal verb,
derived from the older form mang, a mixture, preserved in the forms
ge-mang, ge-mong, a mixture, crowd, assembly (where the prefixed
ge- makes no difference), Grein, i. 425.4+-Du. mengelen, to mingle;
from mengen, to mix; OFries. mengia, to mix; cf. mong, prep.
among; Icel. menga, to mingle; G. mengen, to mingle. y. These
forms are all due to the sb. mang, a mixture, crowd, as above.
@ Not allied to mix, nor to Gk. piyvupt. Der. mingl-ing; com-
mingle, q.v. And see Among, Monger, and Mongrel,

MINIATURE, a painting onasmall scale. (Ital.—L.) ‘Minia-
ture (from minium, i.e. red lead), the art of drawing pictures in little,
being done with red lead. Miniated, painted or inlaid, as we read


of porcellane dishes miniated with gold;’ Blount’s Gloss. ed. 1674. — -


Ital. miniatura, a miniature; cf. Ital. miniato, pp. of miniare, ‘ to die,
to paint, to coloure or limne with vermilion or sinople or red lead ;’
Florio,.—L. minium, cinnabar, red lead. B. Said to be an Iberian
word, the Romans getting their minium from Spain; see Pliny, b,
XXXI1l1l. C. 7.

MINIKIN, a little darling. (Du.) In Baret (1580). Florio
translates Ital. mignone by ‘a minion, a fauorit, a minikin, a darling.’
— Du. minnekyn, a cupid; Sewel’s Du. Dict.; ‘Minne, Minneken, my
love ;’ Hexham’s Du, Dict, ed. 1658. Dimin. of Du. minne, love,


MINIM


cognate with OHG. minna, love, allied to E. mind. See Mind,
Minion. Der. minikin, adj., i.e. dear little, K. Lear, iii. 6. 45.

MINIM, a note in music; Ath of a drachm. (F.—L.) Mynym
in Palsgrave. The minim was once the shortest note, a quarter of
the breve, or short note. The modern semibreve is so long a note
that the breve is out of use. Formerly also spelt minum; Romeo,
iil. 4. 22, second quarto (Schmidt). OF. minime; ‘ minime blanche,
2 minume in musick [so called from its open head]; minime noire,
a crochet’ [because wholly black]; Cot.—L. minimum, minumum,
acc. of minimus, minumus, very small; a superlative form with Idg.
suffix -mo- (Brugmann, ii. § 72) from a base min-, small. See
Minor. Doublet, minimum, directly from L. neut. minimum, the
smallest thing.

MINION, a favourite, flatterer. (F.—OHG.) Palsgrave has
mignyon. In Shak. Temp. iv. 98; see Trench, Select Glossary. =F.
mignon, ‘a minion, favorite; Cot. —F. mignon, adj., ‘ minion, dainty,
neat, spruce; also pleasing, gentle, kind ;* Cot. [The use as a sb.,
with a sinister sense, appears more clearly in Ital. mignone, ‘a
minion, a favorite, a dilling, a minikin, a darling;’ Florio.] B. The
F. -on, Ital. -one, isa mere suffix; the base mign- is due to MHG.
minne, OHG. minna, minni, memory, remembrance, love; well-
known by its derivative minnesinger=singer of love. y. This OHG.
minna, memory, is allied to L. me-min-i, and to E. mind; see
Mind, Minikin.

MINISH, to make little, diminish. (F.—L.) In Exod. v. 19;
see Bible Word-book. ME. menusen. ‘Menusid, or maad lesse ;’
Wyclif, John, iii. 30, earlier version. Chaucer has the comp. amenuse,
Pers. Tale, I 377 (Six-text).—F. menuiser, ‘to minish, extenuate;’
Cot. Cf. Ital. minuzzare, to mince, cut small. — Late L. *minitiare,
not found; cf. Late L. miniitare, to reduce to fragments. —L. mi-
niitia, smallness, = L. mintitus, small (whence F. menu) ; see Minute,
Minor. Der. di-minish; see mince,

MINISTER, a servant. (F.—L.) ME. ministre, Chaucer, C. T.
1665 (A 1663); Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 312, 1. 13.
[Afterwards altered to the L. form.)=—F. ministre.—L. ministrum,
acc. Of minister, a servant. B. Formed with compar. suffix -ter from
*min-es, related by gradation to min-us, adv. less, and to min-or, adj. ;
see Minor, Minim,. Der. minister, vb., ME. ministren, Rob. of
Brunne, p. 80, from F. ministrer, L. ministrare ; minister-i-al, minister-
i-al-ly; ministr-ant, from the stem of pres. pt. of L. ministrare;
ministr-at-ion, from L. acc. ministratiOnem, from ministrare; ministr-
at-ive; ministr-y, Also minstrel, q.v.

MINIVER, the same as Meniver, q.v.

MINK, a small stoat-like animal. (Low G.) ‘Powlecats,
weessels, and minkes;’ Capt. J. Smith, Works, p. 60. ‘ Mynkes,
a furre, mingues ;’ Palsgrave.—Low G. mink, menke, a sort of otter
(Liibben). Cf. MDan. minke, Swed. menk, a mink (Kalkar).

MINNESINGER, a German lyric poet of early times. (G.)
‘Songs of the Minnesingers;’ Longfellow, Hyperion; bk. i. ch. 8
(conclusion), They composed love-songs in the 12th and 13th
centuries. = G. minne, love; singer,asinger. See Minikin, Minion.

MINNOW, the name of a very small fish. (E.) ‘There are two
similar names for the fish in early books; one corresponds to minn-
ow, and is prob. a pure E. word; the other corresponds to OF.
menuise. 1. ME. menow, spelt menawe in a Nominale of the 15th
cent., in Voc. 704. 443 spelt menoun, pl. menounys, Barbour’s Bruce,
i. 577. The suffix -ow cannot be traced to the earliest period; we
find only AS. myne. ‘Capito, myne, vel &lepiite’ [eel-pout]; Voc.
180. 38. We also find, in AElfric’s Colloquy (Voc. 94. 13), the ace.
pl. mynas and é&lepiitan as a gloss to Late L. menas et capitones.
This AS. myne is cognate with OHG. muniwa, a minnow
(Kluge). It is not a mere borrowing from L. mena. Similarly,
the AS. pyle, a pillow, answers to E. pillow. 2, The ME. menuse
occurs (spelt menuce) in the Prompt. Parv. p. 333; and (spelt
menuse) in the Babees Book, ed. Furnivall, p. 168, 1. 747. Cf.
«Hec menusa, a menys;” Voc. 763. 33.—OF. menuise, ‘small fish of
divers sorts, the small frie of fish;’ Cot. Clearly connected with L.
minitia, smallness, also, a small particle; from L. miniitus, minute ;
see Minute. @ The Late L. ména, L. maena, is not the same
word, being borrowed from Gk. yaivn, a small sea-fish, often
salted.

MINOR, less, inferior. (L.) Like major, it was a term familiar
in logic. It occurs in Sir T. More, Works, p. 504 d.—L. minor,
less; compar. from a base min, small, not found in Latin, but
occurring in the very form min in NFriesic and Low G.-+Icel. minar,
less (no positive); Goth. minniza, less (no positive). B, All from
*mi, weak grade of 4/MEI, to diminish ; Brugmann, 1. § 84. Der.
minor-i-ty, Rich. III, i. 3. 11, coined in imitation of major-ity.

MINOTAUR, a fabulous monster. (L.—Gk.) ME. Minotaure,
Chaucer, C. T. 982 (A 980).—L. Mindtaurus.—Gk. Mwwravpos, a
monster, half man, half bull; born, according to the story, of


MIRAGE 377


Pasiphaé, wife of Minos.—Gk. Mivw-, for Mivws, Minos, king of
Crete ; and taipos, a bull.

MINSTER, a monastery. (L.—Gk.) ME. minster; in the name
West-minster, of frequent occurrence; P, Plowman, B, iii. 12; &c.
AS. mynster, Grein, ii. 271. Borrowed early from L. monastérium,
a monastery. See Monastery, which is a doublet.

MINSTREL, a musical performer. (F.—L.) ME. minstrel,
minstral ; spelt mynstral, P. Plowman, B. prol. 33; ministral, Chaucer,
C. T. 10392 (F 78); menestral, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 192. The pl.
menestraus occurs in Ancren Riwle, p. 84, 1. 11.—OF. menestrel,
‘a minstrell;’? Cot. Also menestral (whence pl. menestraus).—Late
L. ministralis, ministeridlis, a retainer; hence applied to the lazy
train of retainers who played instruments, acted as buffoons and
jesters, and the like. =L. minister, a servant; see Minister. Der.
minstrel-sy, Lydgate, London Lyckpeny, st. 12; see Spec. of English,
ed. Skeat, p. 26; spelt minstralcye, Chaucer, C. T. 2673 (A 2671).

MINT (1), a place where money is coined. (L.) ME. mint;
spelt mynt, Myrc’s Instructions for Parish Priests, 1. 1775; menet,
Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 241. AS. mynet, mynyt, a coin; Matt. xxii. 19.
Not an AS. word, but borrowed from L. monéta, (1) a mint,
(2) money. B. Monéta was a surname of Juno, in whose temple at
Rome money was coined. The lit. sense is ‘ the warning one,’ from
monére, to warn, admonish, lit. ‘to cause to remember;’ cf. L. me-
min-i, I remember. See Bréal; and Brugmann, ii. § 79. Cf. G.
minze, mint; MDu. munte. Der. mint, vb., mint-er, mint-age.
Doublet, money.

MINT (2), the name of an aromatic plant. (L.—Gk.) ME,
minte, mynte, Wyclif, Matt. xxiii. 23. AS. minte, Matt. xxiii. 23;
Voc. 2. 7. Not an E. word, but merely borrowed from L. menta,
mentha, Matt. xxiii. 23 (Vulgate).—Gk. piv@a, pivOos, mint.

MINUET, the name of a dance. (F.—L.) ‘Menuet or Minuet,
a sort of French dance, or the tune belonging to it;’ Phillips, ed.
1706. So called from the short steps in it.—F. menuét, ‘smallish,
little, pretty;” Cot. Dimin. of F. menu, small.—L. minitus; see
Minute.

MINUS, the sign of subtraction. (L.) Mathematical.=L.
minus, less; neuter of minor, less; see Minor,

MINUSCULE, small, as applied to a letter in early MSS.
(L.) ‘Minuscule letters are cursive forms of the earlier uncials;’
Is. Taylor, The Alphabet, i. 71.—L. minuscula (sc. littera), fem. of
minusculus, rather small; dimin, of minus (minor), less.

MINUTE, very small, slight. (L.) An accentuation on the
first syllable occurs in: ‘ With minute drops; Milton, Il Penseroso,
1. 130. But the word first came into use as a sb., in which use it is
much older. ME. minute, meaning (1) a minute of an hour, (2) a
minute of a degree inacircle. ‘ Foure minutes, that is to seyn, minutes
of an houre ;” Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, pt. i. § 7.1.8. ‘A degree
of a signe contieneth 60 minutes;’ id. pt. i. § 8. 1. 11. —L. minitus,
small (whence F. menu); Late L. miniita, fem., a small portion, a
mite (of money). Pp. of minuere, to make small.—L. min-, small,
only found in min-or, less, min-imus, least; but cognate with NFries.
min, small.-Gk. puvd-Oev, to make small.—4/MEI, to diminish;
cf. Skt. mz, to hurt. See Minor, Minish. Der. minute-ly, minute-
ness; and from the sb., minute-book, minute-glass, minute-gun, minute-
hand.

MINX, a pert, wanton woman, (Low G.) In Shak. Tw. Nt. iii.
4. 1333 Oth. iii. 3. 475. An adaptation of Low G. minsk, (1) m.,
a man, (2) n., a pert female. Cf. G. mensch, neut., a wench; Du.
mensch, n. (vulgar), a woman; het oude mensch, the old woman
(Calisch). ‘The G, mensch was orig. an adj.=mann-ish, from mann,
aman. Cf. AS. mennisc, human, from mann, a man; EFries. minske,
minsk, a man; West Flem. minsch (De Bo).

MIOCENE, less recent, in geology. (Gk.) A coined word,
signifying ‘less recent.’ — Gk. peio-, for petwy, less; and xa.v-ds, new,
Tecent.

MIRABOLAN, in Hakluyt; see Myrobolan.

MIRACLE, a wonder, prodigy. (F.—L.) In very early use.
ME, miracle, Chaucer, C. T. 4897 (B 477). The pl. miracles is in
the A.S, Chron. an, 1137 (last line).—F. miracle. —L. mira-culum,
anything wonderful, Formed with suffixes -cv- and -lu- (=Idg.
suffixes ko-, Jo-) from mird-ri, to wonder at.—L. m2rus, wonderful
(base smi-ro).—4/SMEI, to smile, laugh, wonder at; see Smile,
Cf. Skt. smi, to smile, whence smaya-, wonder, Der. miracul-ous,
Macb. iv. 3. 147, from F. miraculeux, ‘miraculous’ (Cot.), answering
to a L. type *miraicul-dsus, not used ; miracul-ous-ly, -ness, From L,
mirart we have also mir-age, mirr-or.

MIRAGE, an optical illusion, (F.—L.) Modern. =F. mirage,
an optical illusion by which very distant objects appear close at
hand; in use in 1753 (Hatzfeld).—F. mirer, to look at.—Late L.
mirare, to behold, = L. mirari, to wonder at. See Miracle,
Mirror.


378 MIRE


MIRE, deep mud. (Scand.) ME. mire, myre; Chaucer, C. T.
510 (A 508); myre, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 70, 1. 18;
mire, Will. of Palerne, 3507.—Icel. myrr, mod. myri, a bog, swamp ;
Swed. myra, a bog, marsh; Dan. myr, myre, a marsh.--OHG. mios,
MHG. mies,.moss, swamp; NFries. myrre; AS. méos, moss. Teut.
base *meus->*meuz- > *meur-. Allied to Moss, q.v. The sense is
‘mossy ground,’ bog, deep mud. I cannot find authority for an
alleged AS. myre, mire. Der. mire, vb., Much Ado, iv. I. 135;
mir-y, Tam. Shrew, iv. 1.77.

MIRKY; see Murky.

MIRROR, a looking-glass. (F.—L.) ME. mirour, myroure
(with one r); P. Plowman, B. xi. 8.—OF. mireor, later miroir, ‘a
myrror;’ Cot. This form answers to a L. type *miratorium, not
found. Evidently from the Late L. mirdre, to behold. = L. mirari,
to wonder at. See Miracle.

MIRTH, merriment, pleasure, jollity. (E.) ME. mirthe, Chaucer,
C. T..775 (A 773). AS. myrgd, myrd, mirhd, mirigd, mirth, Grein,
ii. 271, Formed from AS. myrge, merry. Cf. Gael. and Irish mear,
merry (Macbain). See Merry. Der. mirth-ful, mirth-ful-ly, -ness.

MIS-.: (1), prefix. (E. and Scand.) The AS. prefix mis- occurs in
mis-déd, a misdeed, and in other compounds. It answers to Du.,
Dan., and Icel. mis-, Swed. miss-, G. miss-; Goth. missa- (with the
sense of ‘ wrong’), as in missa-déds, a misdeed. Teut. type *misso- ;
Idg. type *mit-to-; allied to OHG. mitdan (G. meiden), to avoid; L.
mittere, to send away, pp. missus. Brugmann, i. § 794. Hence the
verb to miss; see Miss (1). It is sometimes Scand., as in mis-take.
Der, mis-become, -behave, -deed, -deem, -do, -give, -lay, -lead, -like,
-name, -Shape, -time, -understand. Also prefixed to words of F. and
L. origin, as in mis-aptly, -apprehend, -appropriate, &c. Also to
Scand. words, as in mis-call, -hap, -take. And see Mis- (2).

MIS- (2), prefix. (F.—L.) Not to be confused with miés- (1).
The proper old spelling is mes-, as in OF. mes-chief, mischief. The
comparison of this with Span. menos-cabo, diminution, Port. menos-
cabo, contempt, &c. shows that this prefix undoubtedly arose from
L. minus, less, used as a depreciatory prefix. At the same time,
Scheler’s observation is just, that the number of F, words beginning
with mé- (OF. mes-) was considerably increased by the influence of
the G. prefix miss- (see above) with which it was easily confused.
Clear examples of this F. prefix occur in mis-adventure, mis-alliance,
mis-chance, mis-chief, mis-count, mis-creant, mis-nomer, mis-prise.

MISADVENTURE, ill luck. (F.-L.) ME. misauenture ;
spelt messauenture, King Horn, ed. Lumby, 1. 710.—OF. mesaventure
(Burguy).—OF. mes-, prefix (<L. minus); and F. aventure, ad-
venture. See Mis- (2) and Adventure.

MISALLIANCEH, an improper alliance. (F.—L.) A late
word; added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict.—F. meésalliance. See
Mis- (2) and Ally.

MISANTHROPH, a hater of mankind. (Gk.) ‘I am mis-
anthropos ;’ Timon, iv. 3. 53.—Gk. picdvOpwmos, adj., hating man-
kind. = Gk. puc-ety, to hate, from pic-os, hatred ; and av@pwos, a man.
See Anthropology. Der. misanthrop-ic, misanthrop-ic-al, mis-
anthrop-ist, misanthrop-y (Gk. pucavOpwria).

MISAPPLY, to apply amiss. (Hybrid; F.—L.; with E. prefix.)
In Shak. Romeo, ii. 3. 21. From Mis- (1) and Apply. Der. mis-
appli-ca-tion.

MISAPPREHEND, to apprehend amiss. (Hybrid ; E. azd L.)
Tn Phillips, ed. 1706. From Mis- (1) and Apprehend. Der.
misapprehens-ion,

MISAPPROPRIATE, to appropriate amiss. (Hybrid; E. and
L.) Late; not in Johnson. From Mis- (1) and Appropriate.
Der. misappropriat-ion. |

MISARRANGE, to arrange amiss. (Hybrid; E. and ¥.) From
Mis- (1) and Arrange.

MISBECOME, not to suit. (E.) In Shak. L. L. L. v. 2. 778;
and in Palseraye. From Mis- (1) and Become.

MISBEHAVE, to behave amiss. (E.) In Shak. Romeo, iii. 3.
143; and in Palsgrave. From Mis- (1) and Behave. Der. mis-
behav-iour, spelt mysbehavour in Palsgraye; see Behaviour,

MISBELIEVE, to believe amiss. (E.) ME. misbeleuen, Gower,
C. A. ii. 152, 1.53 bk.v. 739. From Mis- (1) and Believe. Der.
misbelief, spelt mysbylyefe, Pricke of Conscience, 5521; misbileaue,
St. Katharine, 348.

MISCALCULATEH, to calculate amiss. (Hybrid; E. and 1.)
Late. In Johnson. From Mis- (1) and Caleulate. Der. mis-
calculat-ion, AS 5

MISCALL, to abuse, revile. (Hybrid; E. and Scand.) In
Spenser, F. Q. iv. 8.24. From Mis- (1) and Call.

MISCARRY, to be unsuccessful, to fail, to bring forth pre-
maturely. (Hybrid; E. amd. F.) In Shak. Meas. for Meas. iii. 1.
217. ME. miscarien, ‘Yet had)I leuer dye than I sawe them mys-
carye to-fore myn eyen;’ Caxton, tr. of Reynard Fox, ed. Arber,


MISERABLE


p- 79, l. 10; and see Chaucer, C. T., A 513. From Mis- (1) and
Carry. Der. miscarri-age.

MISCELLANEOUS, various, belonging to or treating of
various subjects. (L.) ‘An elegant and miscellaneous author ;’ Sir
T. Browne, Works, b. i. c. 8, part 6.—L. miscellaineus, miscellaneous,
varied (by change of -ws to -ows, as in arduous, &c.).—L. miscellus,
mixed. = L, miscére, to mix. See Mix. Der. miscellaneous-ly, -ness.
Also miscellany, which appears to. be due to L. neut. pl. miscellinea,
various things. ‘As a miscellany-madam, [I would] invent new
tires ;’ Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s Revels, iv. 1 (Phantaste’s long speech).

MISCHANCHEH, mishap, ill luck, (F.—L.) ME. meschance,
Rob. of Gloue. p. 137, 1. 143; 1. 2902. —OF. meschance, ‘a mischiefe,
or mischance;’ Cot. See Mis- (2) and Chance.

MISCHIEF, an ill result, misfortune, damage, injury, evil.
(F.—L.) ME. myschief; P. Plowman, B. prol. 67. Opposed in.
ME. to bonchief, i.e. a good result. ‘Good happes and boonchief,
as wel as yuel happes and meschief;? Trevisa, i. 87, 1. 19.—OF.
meschief, a bad result, misadventure, damage. Cf. Span. menoscabo,
diminution, loss; Port. menoscabo, contempt ; which are varied forms.
of the same word. From Mis- (2) and Chief. (The L. words
in the compound are minus and caput.) Der. mischiev-ous, a coined
word, As You Like It, ii. 7. 643 miéschiev-ous-ly, -ness.

MISCONCHEIVE, to conceive amiss. (Hybrid; E. and F.—L.)
‘He that misconceyveth, he misdemeth ;” Chaucer, C. T. 10284 (E 2410).
A coined word. From Mis- (1) and Conceive. Der. miscon-
cept-ton.

MISCONDUCT, ill conduct. (Hybrid; E. and L.) It occurs
in the Spectator; no. 256, § 4. From Mis- (1) and Conduct.
Der. misconduct, verb. '

MISCONSTRUE, to interpret amiss. (Hybrid; E. and L.) In
Shak. Merch. Ven. ii. 2. 197; Chaucer, Troilus, i. 346. From
Mis- (1) and Construe. Der. misconstruct-ion.

MISCOUNT, to count wrongly. (F.—L.) ME. miscounten,
Gower, C. A. i. 147, 1.125 bk. i. 3112.—OF. mesconter, to miscount
(Godefroy). From Mis- (2) and Count.

MISCREANT, a vile fellow, wretch. (F.—L.) Orig. an un-
believer, infidel ; see Trench, Select Glossary. Formerly also used
as an adjective. ‘Al miscreant [unbelieving] painyms;’ Sir T. More,
Works, p. 774a. ‘ This miscreant [unbeliever] now thus baptised ;’
Frith’s Works, p. 91, col. 1. Gower has the pl. mescreantz, in his
Praise of Peace, 268. = OF. mescreant, ‘ miscreant, misbelieving ;’ Cot.
B. The prefix mes- answers to L. minus, less, used in a bad sense ;
see Mis- (2). By comparing OF. mescreant with Ital. miscredente,
incredulous, heathen, we at once see that OF. creant is from L.
crédent-, stem of pres. part. of crédere, to believe; see Creed. And
see Recreant.

MISDATE, to date amiss. (Hybrid; E. and F.—L.) ‘Oh!
how misdated on their flattering tombs!’ Young’s Night Thoughts,
Night, v. 1. 778. From Mis- (1) and Date.

MISDEED, a bad deed. (E.) ME. misdede, Ancren Riwle,
p- 124, 1. 22. AS. misdéd, Grein, ii. 255.44-Du. misdaad; Goth.
missadéths ; G. missethat, OHG. missitaat. From Mis- (1) and
Deed.

MISDEEM, to judge amiss. (E.) ME. misdemen, Chaucer, C. T.
10284 (E 2410). From Mis- (1) and Deem. (Icel. misdema.) _

MISDEMEANOUDUR, ill conduct. (Hybrid; E. and F.—L.)
In Shak. Tw. Nt. ii. 3. 106. From Mis- (1) and Demeanour,
@ It is possible that the prefix is French ; see Mis-(2). But I find
no proof of it.

MISDIRECT, to direct amiss. (Hybrid; E.and L.) Added by
Todd to Johnson. From Mis-(1) and Direct. Der. mis-direction,

MISDO, to do amiss, (E.) ME. misdon, misdo; P. Plowman,
B, iii, 122. We find ‘yfle vel mis doed’ as a gloss to ‘male agit”
in the ONorthumb. glosses of John, iii, 20,-4+ Du. misdoen; G,
missthun. From Mis- (1) and Do. Der. misdo-er, ME. misdoer,
mysdoer, Wyclif, 1 Pet. ii. 12, And see misdeed. }

MISEMPLOY, to employ amiss. (Hybrid; E. and F.—L.)
In Dryden, Absalom, 1. 613. From Mis-(1) and Employ. Der,
misemploy-ment, : ‘

MISER, an avaricious man, niggard. (L.) It sometimes means
merely ‘a wretched creature ;’ Spenser, F. Q. ii. 1. 8. See Trench,
Select Glossary.—L. miser, wretched. Cf. Ital. and Span. misero,
(t) wretched, (2) avaricious. Prob. connected with Gk. yivos,
hatred; Curtius, ii. 225. Der. miser-ly; miser-y, ME. misérie,
Chaucer, C. T, 14012 (B 3196), from OF. miserie (Littré, mod. F..
misére), which from L. miseria, wretchedness ; also miser-able, q.v.

MISERABLE, wretched. (F.—L.) Skelton has miserably.
and miserableness; Why Come Ye Nat to Court, 865, 1029.—F,
miserable, ‘miserable ;’ Cot,—L. miserabilis, pitiable.—L. miserari,
to pity.=L. miser, wretched; see Miser. Der. miserabl-y, miser-
able-nes }


MISFORTUNE


“MISFORTUNE, ill fortune. (Hybrid; E. and F.—L.) In
the Bible of 1551, Nehem. i. 3. Palsgrave has: ‘ Mysfortune, des-
fortune;” so that the prefix is not French. From Mis- (1) and
ortune.

MISGIVE, to fail, be filled with doubt. (E.) In Shak, Julius,
li. 1.145. Irom Mis- (1) and Give. Der. misgiv-ing.

MISGOVERN, to govern amiss. (F.—L.) In Shak. Rich. II,
y. 2. §; and in Palsgrave. = MF. mesgouverner, recorded by Palsgrave.
‘= OF, mes-, mis-; and F. gouverner, to govern; see Mis- (2) and
Govern, Der. misgovern-ment, Much Ado, iv, I. 100.

MISGUIDE, to guide wrongly. (Hybrid; E. and F,—Teut.)
ME, ‘misguide, Gower, C. A. iii. 373, 1. 143 bk. viii. 2920; where it
is contrasted with guide. Also misgyen, Chaucer, C.T. 14451 (B3723).
From Mis- (1) and Guide. @ The prefix does not seem to be
French. Der. misguid-ance.

MISHAP, ill hap. (Hybrid; E. and Scand.) In Prompt. Parv.
The verb mishappen, to mishap, fall out ill, occurs in Chaucer, C. T.,
A 1646. From Mis- (1) and Hap.

MISHNAH, MISHNA, a digest of Jewish traditions; the
‘second Law.’ (Heb.) ‘Their Mishna or Talmud text;’ Purchas,
Pilgrimage, bk. ii. ch. 12. § 1. par. 7.—Heb. mishnah, a repetition;
a second part; instruction (in oral tradition).— Heb. shanah, to
repeat.

MISINFORM, to inform amiss. (Hybrid; E. and F.—L.) ME.
misenformen, Gower, C. A.i. 178; bk. ii. 559. From Mis- (1) and
Inform. Der. mis-inform-at-ion.

MISINTERPRET, to interpret amiss. (Hybrid; E. and F.—
L.) . In Shak. Rich. II, iii, r. 18. From Mis- (1) and Interpret.
Der. micinter pret-at-ion.

MISJUDGE, to judge amiss. (F.—L.) ‘And therefore no more
mysse-iudge any manne;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 952 h. —OF. mes-
juger, to misjudge (Godefroy). See Mis- (2) and Judge. Der.
mis-judg-mnt,

MISLAY, to lay in a wrong place, lose. (E.) ‘The mislaier of
a meere-stone [boundary-stone] is to blame;’ Bacon, Essay lvi, Of
Judicature. From Mis- (1) and Lay. (Icel. misleggja.)

MISLEAD, to lead astray. (E.) ‘ Misleder [misleader] of the
papacie;” Gower, C. A. i. 261; bk. ii. 3021. AS. misl@dan, to
mislead, seduce (Bosworth). From Mis- (1) and Lead, verb.

MISLIK#, to dislike. (E.) In Shak. Merch. Ven. ii. 1.1. ME.
misliken, to displease (usually impersonal); Will. of Palerne, 20309.
AS. mislician, to displease ; Exod. xxi. 8. Der. mislike, sb., 3 Hen. VI,
vin. 24)

MISNAME, to name amiss. (E.) In Skelton, A Replycacion,
1. 59. From Mis- (1) and Name.

MISNOMER, a wrong name. (F.—L.) ‘ Misnomer, French
Law-Term, the using of one name or term for another;’ Phillips,
ed. 1706. It properly means ‘a misnaming.’ Also in Blount’s
Nomolexicon, ed. 1691, where the prefix is said to be the F. mes-,
which is correct. The E. word answers to an OF. mesnommer
(Godefroy). = OF. mes- (< L. minus), badly; and nommer, to name,
from L. nomindre, to name. See Mis- (2) and Nominate.

MISOGAMY, a hatred of marriage. (Gk.) In Blount’s Glossary


(1656). From suoo-, hating, from puceiy, to hate; and -yayia, from
yapos, marriage. So also misogynist, from puco-, hating, and yuv7,
a woman.


MISPLACH, to place amiss. (Hybrid; E. and F.—L.) In As
YouLike It, i. 2.37. From Mis- (1) and Place. Der. misplace-
ment.

MISPRINT, to print wrongly. (Hybrid; E. and F.—L.) ‘By
misse-writing or by mysse-pryntynge;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 772 b.
From Mis- (1) and Print. Der. misprint, sb.

MISPRISE, MISPRIZEH, to slight, undervalue. (F.—L.) In
As You Like It, i. 1.177. Spenser has the sb. mesprise = contempt ;
F. Q. iii. 9. 9. — MF. mespriser, ‘to disesteem, contemn,’ Cot. ; OF.
mesprisier (Godefroy).— OF. mes- (< L. minus), badly; and Late L.
pretiare, to prize, esteem, from L. pretium, a price. See Mis- (2)
and Prize, Price. But see below.

MISPRISION, .a mistake, neglect. (F.—L.) See Blount’s
Nomolexicon, ed. 1691. He says: ‘misprision of clerks (Anno 8
Hen. VI. c. 15) is a neglect of clerks in writing or keeping records
.. « Misprision also signifies a mistaking (Anno 14 Edw, III. stat. 1.
cap. 6).’—OF. mesprision (Godefroy); MF. mesprison, ‘ misprision,
‘error, offence, a thing done, or taken, amisse;? Cot, B. This OF.
‘mesprison or mesprision has the same sense and source as mod. F,
‘méprise, a mistake (Littré). It is written miésprisio in Low L,
(Ducange); but this is only the OF. word turned into Latin.
y. From OF. mes-< L. minus, badly; and Late L. prensiénem, acc.
of prensio, a taking, contracted form of L. prehensto, a seizing. The
latter is from L. prehensus, pp. of prehendere, to take. See Mis- (2)
‘and ‘Prison... Cf. mispris’d, mistaken; Mid. Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 74. |


MISSILE 379
@ Misprision was ignorantly confused with msprise, in the sense of
contempt. Thus Blount, in the article already cited, says: ‘ misprision
of treason is a neglect or light account made of treason ;’ and he
derives the word from MF. mespris, contempt. Milton wrongly: has
misprision in the sense of ‘scorn;’ Cent. Dict.

MISPRONOUNCE, to pronounce amiss. (Hybrid; E. and
F.—L.) ‘They mis-pronounced, and I mislik’d;’ Milton, Apology
for Smectymnuus; Works (1852), iii. 268. From Mis- (1) and
Pronounce. Der. mispronunci-at-ion.

MISQUOTE, to quote amiss, misinterpret, (Hybrid; E. and
F.—L.) In Shak, 1 Hen. IV, v. 2. 13. From Mis- (1) and
Quote. Der. misquot-at-ion.

MISREPRESENT, to represent amiss. (Hybrid; E. and F.
—L.) In Milton, Samson, 124. From Mis- (1) and Represent.
Der. misrepresent-at-ion.

MISRULE, want of rule, disorder. (Hybrid; E. and F.—L.)
Gower has it as a verb. ‘That eny king himself misreule;’ C. A;
iii. 170; bk. vii. 2509. Stow mentions ‘the lord of misrule’ under
the date 1552 (R.); and it occurs in 1503, in the Privy Expenses of
Elizabeth of York, p. 91; and first in 1491. From Mis- (1) and
Rule.

MISS (1), to fail to hit, omit, feel the want of. (E.) ME. missen,
Will. of Palerne, 1016. Rather a Scand. than an E. word, but the
prefix mis-, which is closely connected with it, is sufficiently common
in AS. AS. missan (rare). ‘ py lees pe him misse,’ lest aught escape
his notice, or, go wrong with him; Canons under King Edgar, 32;
in Thorpe, Ancient Laws, ii. 250, And in Beowulf, 2439. A weak
verb, formed from a base *mith-, weak grade of *meith-, as in AS.
and OS. midazn, to conceal, avoid, escape notice (also in G. meiden,
OHG. midan, to avoid), Cf. the prefix mis-, signifying amiss or
wrongly.4Du. missen, to miss; mis, sb., an error, mistake ; mis, adv.,
amiss; mis-, as prefix, amiss; Icel. missa, to miss, lose; mis, or
@ mis, ady., amiss; mis-, prefix; Dan. miste (for misse), to lose ; mis-,
prefix; Swed. mista (for missa), to lose; miste, ady., wrongly, amiss ;
miss-, prefix ; Goth. missd, adv., reciprocally, interchangeably ; missa-,
prefix, wrongly; MHG. missen, OHG. missan, to miss; OHG, mis
or missi, variously; OHG. missa-, prefix; MHG. misse, an error.
Allied to L. mittere, to send; see Missile, and see Mis- (1). Brug-
mann, i. § 794. Der. miss, sb., ME. misse, a fault; ‘to mende my
misse’ =to repair my fault, Will. of Palerne, 1. 532. Also miss-ing.

MISS (2), a young woman, a girl. (F.—L.) Merely a contraction
from Mistress, q.v. One of the earliest instances in dramatic
writing occurs in the introduction of Miss Prue as a character in
Congreve’s Love for Love. An early example occurs in the
following: ‘she being taken to be the Earle of Oxford’s misse, as at
this time they began to call lewd women;’ Evelyn’s Diary, Jan. 9,
1662. Thus Shak. has: ‘this is Mistress Anne Page,’ where we
should now say ‘ Miss Anne Page ;’ Merry Wives, i.1. 197. Cf.‘ The
virtuous matron and the miss;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. iii. c. 1. 864.

MISSAL, a mass-book. (L.) ME. myssalle, Voc. 719. 333
cf. mass-book, ME. messebok, Havelok, 186. In Minsheu, ed. 1627.
In Sherwood’s Index to Cotgrave we find E. missal, given as equi-
valent to OF. messel, missel; but Cotgrave himself explains the
OF. words as ‘masse-book.’ The E. word is rather taken directly
from the familiar Latin term than borrowed from OF.—Late L.
missale, a missal.—Late L. missa, the mass. See further under
Mass (2).

MISSEL-THRUSH, MISTLE-THRUSH, the name of
a kind of thrush. (E.) So called because it feeds on the berries of
the mistle-toe. Thename is not recorded early. ‘ We meet in Aristotle
with one kind of thrush [éfoBdpos] called the miselthrush, or feeder
upon miseltoe;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 6. § 21 (part 3),
+G. mistel-drossel, a mistle-thrush; from mis¢el, mistletoe, and drossel,
athrush. See Mistletoe and Thrush.

MISSH APH, to shape amiss. (E.) Chiefly in the pp. misshaped,
3 Hen. VI, iii. 2. 170; or misshapen, Temp. v. 268. ME. misshapen,
pp-» spelt mysshape (with loss of final x), P. Plowman, B. vii. 95.
From Mis- (1) and Shape.+MDu. misscheppen, to misshape, used
by Vondel (Oudemans) ; G. missschaffen, to misshape (rare).

ISSILE, that may be thrown; a missile weapon. (L.) Properly
an adj., now chiefly used as a sb. Taken directly from L. rather
than through the F. Cotgrave gives ‘few missile, a squib or other
firework thrown,’ but the word is not in Littré, and probably not
common. ‘His missile weapon was a lying tongue;’ P. Fletcher,
The Purple Island, c. vii. st. 68.—L. missilis, adj., that can be
thrown; the neut. missile is used to mean a missile weapon (¢élum
being understood).—L. missus, pp. of mittere, to throw. B. Perhaps
for *mitere; cf. pt. t. mi-st.4-OHG, midan, to avoid; see Miss (1),
Brugmann, i. § 930. Der. From L. mitiere are also derived ad-mit,
com-mit, e-mit, im-mit, inter-mit, manu-mit, o-mit, per-mit, preter-mit,
re-mit, sub-mit, trans-mit, with their.derivatives; from the pp. miss-us


»


380 MISSION


are also mass (2), mess (1), miss-al, miss-ion, q.V., miss-ive, q.V-, dis-
miss, di-missory, e-miss-ar-y, pro-miss-or-y; com-pro-mise, de-mise, pre-

mise, pre-mises, pro-mise, sur-mise, message, &c.

MISSION, a sending, an embassy. (L.) In Shak. Troil. iii. 3.
189. [The MF. mission merely means ‘expence, disbursement ;’
Cot.} Formed, by analogy with F. words in -ion, from L. mis-
sidnem, acc. of missio, a sending; cf. missus, pp. of mittere, to send.
See Missile. Der. mission-er, a missionary, Dryden, Hind and
Panther, ii. 565 mussion-ar-y, Tatler, no. 270, Dec. 30, 1710.

MISSIVE, a thing sent. (F.—L.) Used by Shak. to mean
“a messenger;’ Macb. i. 5. 7. And in G. Douglas, Palice of
Honour, pt. ii. st. 5. K. Edw. IV employs the phr. ‘our lettres
missiues, in 14773 Orig. Letters, ed. Ellis, i. 17.— MF. missive, ‘a
letter missive, a letter sent;’ Cot. Coined, with suffix -ive (=L.
-iuus), from L. miss-us, pp. of mittere, to send; see Missile,

MISSPEND, to spend ill, to squander. (Hybrid; E. and L.)
‘That folke in folyes myspenden her fyue wittes;’ P. Plowman,
B. xv. 74. From AS. mis-, prefix, wrongly, amiss; and AS. spendan,
in the compounds dspendan, forspendan; see Sweet’s A. S. Reader.
But spendan is not a true E. word; it is borrowed from L, dispendere.
See Mis- (1) and Spend.

MIST, watery vapour, fine rain. (E.) ME. mist, P. Plowman,
A. prol..88; B. prol. 214. AS. mist, gloom, darkness; Grein, ii.
256.4 cel. mistr, mist; Swed. mist, foggy weather at sea; Du. mist,
fog. B. Teut. type *mih-stoz, m. Apparently from the base mig
(Idg. migh, Skt. mik) which appears in Lithuan, mig-la, mist
(Nesselmann), Russ. mgla (for mig-la), mist, vapour, Gk. 6-piy-An,
mist, fog, Skt. mih-ira-, a cloud; cf. also Skt. mégh-a-, a cloud.
y. All from 4/MEIGwH, to darken; different from 4/MEIGH,
which appears in L. mingere. Brugmann, i. §§ 604, 633. Der.
mist-y, AS. mist-ig (Grein) ; mist-i-ness,

MISTAKE, to take amiss, err. (Scand.) ME. mistaken, Rom.
of the Rose, 1. 1540.—Icel. mistaka, to take by mistake, to make a
slip.—Icel. mis-, cognate with AS, mis-, prefix; and taka, to take.
See Mis- (1) and Take. Der. mistake, sb., mistak-en, mis-tak-en-ly,

MISTER, MR., a title of address to a man. (F.—L.) The
contraction Mr. occurs on the title-page of the first folio edition of
Shakespeare (1623); but it is probably to be read as Master. Cot-
grave explains monsieur by ‘sir, or master.’ It is difficult to trace
the first use of mister, but it does not appear to be earlier than 1550,
and is certainly nothing but a corruption of master or maister, due to
the influence of the corresponding title of mistress. See Master,
Mistress. B. Richardson’s supposition that it is connected with
ME. mister, a trade, is as absurd as it is needless; notwithstanding
the oft-quoted ‘what mister wight,’ Spenser, F. Q. i. 9. 23. @ It
may be remarked that ME. mister is from OF. mestier (F. métier),
L. ministerium, and is therefore a doublet of ministry.

MISTERM, to term or name amiss. (Hybrid; E. and F.—L.)
In Shak. Romeo, iii. 3. 21. From Mis- (2) and Term.

MISTIME, to time amiss. (E.) ME. mistimen, to happen amiss,
Ancren Riwle, p. 200, note e. AS. mistimian, to happen amiss,
turn out ill (Bosworth). From Mis- (1) and Time.

MISTLE-THRUSH; see Missel-thrush.

MISTLETOE, a parasitic plant. (E.) In Shak. Titus, ii, 3. 95.
Scarcely to be found in ME., but it must have existed. The
variant form mystyldene is in MS. Sloane 2584, p. 90; see Henslow,
Medical Werkes, p. 130. AS. misteltan. ‘ Viscarago, mistiltan’ (sic) ;
Elfric’s Gloss., Nomina Herbarum; in Voc. 136.11. [The a is of
course long; cf. E. stone with AS. stan, &c.| This should have
produced mistletone, but the final x (xe) was dropped, probably
because the ME. Zone (better toon) meant ‘toes,’ which gave a false
impression that the final x was a plural-ending, and unnecessary.
Icel, mistelteinn, the mistletoe. B. The final element is the easier to
explain; it simply means ‘ twig.’ Cf. AS. tan, a twig (Grein), Icel.
zeinn, Du. teen, MHG. zein, Goth, tains, a twig, Dan. ten, Swed. ten,
a spindle; all from a Teut. type *tain-oz, m., a twig, rod. y. The
former element is AS. mistel, which could be used alone to mean
“mistletoe, though it was also called Gc-mistel (oak-mistle), to
distinguish it from eord-mistel (earth-mistle), a name sometimes
given to wild basil or calamint; see Cockayne’s A. S. Leechdoms.
In Danish, the mistletoe is called either mistel or mistelten. In
Swed. and G. the mistletoe is simply mistel. 6. The word mist-el is
clearly a mere dimin. of mist, which in G. has the sense of ‘dung ;’
cf. MDu. mest, mist, dung (Hexham), As to the reason for the
name, cf. ‘it [the mistletoe] comes onely by the mewting of birds. .
which feed thereupon, and let it passe through their body ;’ Holland,
tr. of Pliny’s Nat. Hist., bk. xvi. ch. 44. €. The G. mist is cognate
with Goth. maihstus, dung; which see in Uhlenbeck. Der. missel-
thrush, q.v.

MISTRESS, a lady at the head of a household. (F.—L.) Also
written Mrs., and called Missis, In Shak, Mach. iii. 5. 6. ME,


MIX —


maistresse, Chaucer, C. T. 10691 (F 377).—OF. maistresse, ‘a mis-
tress, dame;’ Cot. (Mod. F. maitresse.) Formed with F. suffix
-esse (<L. -issa, Gk. -.ooa) from OF. maistre, a master; see Master.
Der. mistress-ship, Titus Andron. iv. 4. 40.

MISTRUST, to regard with suspicion. (Scand.) ME. missetrost,
Coventry Plays, ed. Halliwell, 126 (Stratmann); miéstraist, Bruce,
x. 327 (in Hart’s edition, see the footnote); mistriste, Chaucer,
C. T. 12303 (C 369). Rather Scand. than E. See Mis- (1) and
Trust. Der. mistrust, sb.; mistrust-ful, 3 Hen. VI, iv. 2.8; mis-
trustful-ly, -ness.

MISTY (1), nebulous, foggy. (E.) ‘A ful misty morow;’
Chaucer, Troil. iii, 1060. AS. mistig, adj.; from mist, mist; seé
Mist. .

MISTY (2). (F.—L.—Gk.) Used for mystic; in the Prompt.
Pary., we find a distinction made between ‘ mysty, nebulosus’ and
‘mysty, or prevey to mannes wytte, misticus.” So also mysty, mystic,
in Wyclif, Eng. Works, ed. Matthew, p. 344; and mystily, mystically,
in the same, p. 343. Cf. mistier, with the double meaning, in
P. Plowman, B. x. 181. See Palmer, Folk-Etymology. For the
loss of the final letter, cf. E. jolly from OF. jolif. See Mystic.

MISUNDERSTAND, to understand amiss. (E.) ME. mis-
understanden, Rob. of Glouc. p. 42, 1. 990. From Mis- (1) and
Understand. Der. misunderstand-ing.

MISUSE, to use amiss. (F.—L.) ‘That misuseth the might and
the power that is yeven him ;’ Chaucer, C. T. (Melibeus), Group B,
3040 (Six-text); Gower, C. A. ii. 279, 1. 12.—OF. mesuser, to mis-
use 3 Godefroy.—OF,. mes-, mis- ; and user, to use. See Mis- (2)
and Use. Der. misuse, sb., 1 Hen. IV, i, 1. 43, OF. mesus, sb.
(Godefroy) ; misusage, OF, mesusage,

MITE (1),avery small insect. (E.) ME. mite, Chaucer, C. T. 6142
(D 560). AS. mite. ‘Tomus, mada, mite;’ Azlfric’s Gloss., Nom.
Insectorum; Voc. 122. 6.4-Low G. mite, a mite; Du. mit; OHG.
miza, a mite, midge, fly. B. The word means ‘cutter’ or ‘ biter,’
from the Teut. root MEIT, to cut small; whence Goth. maitan, to
cut, Icel. meita, to cut;.also Icel. meitill, G. meissel, a chisel. Der.
mit-y. And see emmet.

MITE (2), a very small portion. (F.—Du.) ME. mite; ‘not
worth a myte;’ Chaucer, C. T., A 1558. ‘A myte [small coin] that he
offrep;” P. Plowman, C. xiv. 97.—OF. mite (Godefroy).—MDu.
mijt, a small coin, the sixth part of a doit; mite, myte, a small coin,
worth a third of a penning, according to some, or a penning and
a half, according to others; anything small; niet eener myte, not
worth a mite (Oudemans). From the Teut. base MEIT, to cut
small; see Mite (1).

MITIGATE, to alleviate. (L.) Mytigate in Palsgrave. ‘ Breake
the ordinaunce or mitigat it ;’ Tyndall’s Works, p. 316, col. 1.—L.
mitigadtus, pp. of mitigare,to make gentle.—L. mit-, stem of mitis,
soft, gentle; with suffix -ig-, for agere, to make. oot uncertain.
Der. mitigation, ME. mitigacioun, P. Plowman, B. v. 477, from F.
mitigation, ‘mitigation,’ Cot.; mitigat-or; mitigat-ive, from MF.
mitigatif, ‘mitigative,’ Cot.; also mitiga-ble, L. mitigabilis, from
mitiga-re.

MITRAILLEUSEH, a machine-gun. (F.—Du.) F. mitrailleuse,
fem. agential sb. from mitrailler, to fire small missiles. —F. mitraille,
small bits of grape-shot; ‘lumps consisting of divers metals’ in Cot.
Variant of MF. mitaille, ‘great file-dust,’ Cot. Extended from OF.
mite, a mite, small piece; see Mite (2).

MITRE, a head-dress, esp. for a bishop. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Thy
mytrede bisshopes’=thy mitred bishops; P. Plowman, C. v. 193.
‘On his mitere,’ referring to a bishop; Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Lang-
toft, p. 302, 1. 2.—OF. mitre, ‘a bishop’s miter;’ Cot.—L. mitra,
a cap.=—Gk. pirpa, a belt, girdle, head-band, fillet, turban. B. Per-
haps allied to Gk. piros, a thread of the woof (Prellwitz).

MITTEN, a covering for the hand. (F.) ME. mitaine; spelt
miteyn, Chaucer, C. T, 12307 (C 373) ; myteyne, P. Plowman’s Crede,
ed. Skeat, 1. 428.—OF. mitaine; Cot. gives: ‘mitaines, mittains,
winter-gloves.’ Cf. Gascon mitano,a mitten. B. Of disputed origin ;
see Hatzfeld, Scheler, and Korting, § 6043. Mistral has Prov. mito,
a mitten, as well as mitano.

MITTIMUS, a warrant of commitment to prison. (L.) ‘Take
a mittimus;’ Massinger, A New Way, 1. 47 from end. From L.
mittimus, we send; from the first word in the warrant. = L. mitiere, to
send; see Missile.

MIX, to mingle, confuse. (L.) In Shak. 2 Hen. IV, v. 2. 46.
Rich. cites ‘ mixed with faith’ from the Bible of 1561, Heb. iv. 2.
But in earlier books it is extremely rare; Stratmann cites the pp.
mixid from Songs and Carols, ed. Wright, no. VI. Mix (see N. E. D.)
is a back-formation from the pp. mixt, in use as a law-term, as in
Shillingford’s Letters (Camden Soc.), App. 39: ‘Any action real,
personal, and myxte;’ A.D.1448. Cf. AF. mixte, Britton, ii.64. Hence
Palsgrave has; ‘I myate or myngell.’=L, mixtus, pp. of miscére, to


MIXEN


mix. W. mysgu, to mix; cymmysgu, to mix together; Gael. measg,
to mingle, mix, stir; Irish measgaim, I mix, mingle, stir, move ;
Russ. mieshate, to mix; Lithuan. maiszyti, to mix. Cf. Skt. miera-,
mixed. B. All from a 4MEIK, to mingle; see Brugmann, i.
§ 707, 760. Der. mix-er, com-mix ; also mix-ture, Romeo, iv. 3. 21,
Sir T. More, Works, p. 83 a, from L. mixtira, a mixing, mixture,
allied to mixt-us, pp. of miscére.

MIXEN, a dung-hill. (E.) In Chaucer, C. T., I g11. AS.
mixen, meoxen, a dung-hill; from meox, dung. Allied to G. mist,
Goth. maihstus, dung; from the verbal root seen in AS. migan, L.
mingere, Gk. d-4ex-«tv, to make water. Brugmann, i. § 796 (b).

IZEN, MIZZEN, the hindmost of the fore and aft sails, in
a three-masted vessel. (F.—Ital.—L.) Spelt mzisen in Minsheu, ed.
1627, and in Florio, ed. 1598; meson in Naval Accts. of Hen. VII,
p: 30. ‘Meson sayle of ashyppe, mysayne;’ Palsgrave.=MF. misaine,
which Cotgrave defines as ‘ the foresaile of a ship.’ —TItal. mezzana,
‘a saile in a ship called the poope or misen-saile ;’ Florio, ed. 1598.
Cf. mezzano, ‘a meane or countertenour in singing, a meane man,
betweene great and little;’ id. B. The sense had reference to its
original position, which was that of a fore-sail’ (see Cotgrave), and
in mod, F, it still signifies a sail between the bowsprit and the main-
mast, occupying the middle position between the jib and main-sail
of a cutter. =Late L. mediainus, middle; whence also F. moyen, and
E. mean (3). Extended from L, medivs, middle; see Mid, Doublet,
mean (3). Der. mizen-mast or mizzen-mast.

MIZZGLB, to rain in fine drops. (E.) ‘As the miseling vpon the
herbes, and as the droppes vpon the grasse;”’ Deut. xxxil. 2, in the
Bible of 1551. ‘Immoysturid with mislyng;’ Skelton, Garland of
Laurell, 698. ‘To miselle, to mysylle, pluitare ;’ Cathol. Anglicum ;
p- 241. Cf, MDu. mieselen, to drizzle (Hexham); Low G. miseln
(Berghaus). From the base mis-, as in EFries. mis-ig, damp, gloomy ;
allied to EFries. mis, mis-ig, damp, moist. Cf. Mist.

MNEMONICS, the science of assisting the memory.  (Gk.)
‘Mnemonica, precepts or rules, and common places to help the
memory ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.—Gk. pynpovixd, mnemonics; neut, pl.
of pynpouxés, belonging to memory.=Gk. pyjpov-, from pyjpor,
mindful. Gk. pydopa, I remember; Skt. mna, to remember. From
the base *mnd, lengthened grade of 4/MEN, to think; see
Mind.

MOAN, a complaint, a low sound of pain. (E.) ME. mone,
Chaucer, C. T. 11232 (F 920). This corresponds to an AS. form
*mdn, which does not appear with the modern sense; but the derived
verb mé#nan, to moan, to lament, is common; see exx. in Grein,
ii. 222. B. This AS. verb passed into the ME. menen, to moan;
whence mened hire = bemoaned herself, made her complaint, P. Plow-
man, B. iii. 169. After a time this verb fell into disuse, and its
place was supplied by the sb. form, used verbally. ‘Than they of
the towne began to mone;’. Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. i. c. 348.
y. Some identify AS. mé#nan, to moan, with AS. m#nan, to mean ;
see Mean (1); but there is no connexion in sense. Ettmiiller
compares AS. mdn, adj., evil, wicked, sb. evil, wickedness. Note
that the Icel. meiz (cognate with AS. man, wickedness) means
a hurt, harm, disease, sore, whence there is but a step to a moan as
the expression of pain; but this is unsatisfactory. ] Cf. means
(some edd. moans) in Shak., M. Nt. Dr. y. 330. Der. moan, verb,
as explained above ; also be-moan, q.v.

MOAT, a trench round a fort, filled with water. (F.—Teut.) ME.
moteP. Plowman, B. v. 595.—OF. mote, ‘chaussée, levée, digue,’
i.e. a causeway, embankment, dike, Roquefort; and see Godefroy.
Norm. dial. motte, a moat, foss.. [Just as in the case of dike and
ditch, the word moat originally meant either the trench dug ont, or
the embankment thrown up; and in OF. the usual sense was cer-
tainly an embankment, hill. It is therefore the same word as mod.
F. motte, a mound, also a clod, or piece of turf. ‘Motte, a clod,
lumpe, round sodd, or turfe of earth; also, a little hill or high
place; a fit seat for a fort or strong house; hence, also, such a fort,
or house of earth; ,. a butt to shoot at;” Cotgrave. The orig.
sense is clearly a sod or turf, such as is dug out, and thrown up into
a mound; and the word is associated with earthen fortifications,
whence it was transferred to such a trench as was used in fortifica-
tion, Thus Shak. speaks of ‘a moat defensive to a house ;’ Rich. II,
ji. 1. 48; and in P. Plowman, the ‘mote’ is described as being ‘the
manere aboute,’ i.e. all round the manor-house. Cf. also: ‘Mothe,
a little earthen fortresse, or strong house, built on a hill;’ Cotgrave.]
Cf. also Low L. mota, motta, (1) a mound, (2) a mound and moat
together; Ital. mota, a heap of earth, also a hollow, trench (as in
E.) ; Span. mota, a mound; Romansch muota, muotia, a rounded
hill. B. Of Teut. origin, but rarely found; it occurs, however, in
the Bavarian mott, peat, esp. peat such as was dug up, burnt, and
used for manure; whence moften, to burn peat; Schmeller, Bavarian
Dict., col. 1693. This Bavarian word is prob, related to E. mud;


MODERATE 381


see Mud. Cf. also MHG, mot, peaty earth. Der. moat-ed, Meas.
for Meas. ili. 1. 277.

MOB (1), a disorderly crowd. (L.) Used by Dryden, in pref. to.
Cleomenes, 1692; as cited in Nares. A contraction from mobile
uulgus, ‘I may note that the rabble first changed their title, and
were called “ the mob” in the assemblies of this [The King’s Head]
Club.. It was their beast of burden, and called first mobile vulgus,
but fell naturally into the contraction of one syllable, and ever since
is become proper English ;’ North’s Examen (1740), p. 574; cited
in Trench, Study of Words. In the Hatton Correspondence, ed.
E. M. Thompson (Camden Soc.), the editor remarks that mob is
always used in its full form mobile throughout the volumes (see ii. 40,
99, 124, 156); but, as Mr. Thompson kindly pointed out to me, he
has since noted that it occurs once in the short form mob, viz. at.
p- 216 of vol. ii. Thus, under the date 1690, we read that ‘ Lord
Torrington is most miserably reproached by the mobile’ (ii. 156);
and under the date 1695, that ‘a great mob have been up in Holborn
and Drury Lane’ (ii. 216). In Shadwell’s Squire of Alsatia (1688),
we find mobile in A. i. sc. I, but mob in A. iy. sc. 2. And see
Spectator, no, 135.—L. mobile, neut. of mdbilis, movable, fickle ;
mobile uulgus, the fickle multitude. See Mobile and Vulgar,
Der. mob, verb. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 190.

MOB (2), akind of cap. (Dutch.) ‘Mob, a woman’s night-cap;’
Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1731. We also say mob-cap.—Du. mop-
muts, a woman’s night-cap; where muts means ‘cap;’ MDu. mop,
a woman’s coif (Sewel); Low G. mopp, a woman’s cap (Danneil).
Cf. prov. E. mop, to muffle up (Halliwell).

MOBILE, easily moved, movable. (F.—L.) ‘Fyxt or els
mobyll ;* Skelton, Why Come Ye Nat to Courte, 1.522. [The ex-
pression ‘ mobil people’ occurs, according to Richardson, in The
Testament of Love, b. i; but the reading is really mofi/, i.e. much ;
ch. 6, 1. 73.]—F. mobile, ‘movable;’ Cot.—L. mdbilis, movable (for
mouibilis).—L. mouére, to move; see Move. Der. mobili-ty, from
F, mobilité, which from L. acc. mdbilitatem; also mobil-ise, from mod.
F. mobiliser ; hence mobil-is-at-ion. And see mob (1).

MOCCASIN, MOCCASSIN, MOCASSIN, a shoe of deer-
skin, &c. (N. American Indian.) Spelt mocassin in Fenimore Cooper,
The Pioneers, ch. i. A North-American Indian word. From
Powhatan méckasin; Algonquin makisin (Cuoq); Micmac mkdsun
(S. T. Rand). Capt. Smith (Works, ed. Arber, p. 44) cites Indian
‘ mockasins, shoaes.’

MOCK, to deride. (F.—L.) ME. mokken, Prompt. Parv.—OF.
mocquier, late moguer. ‘Se mocquer, to mock, flowt, frumpe, scoffe ;’
Cot. According to Korting, § 6330, it is the Picard form of
moucher, to wipe the nose; Corblet gives the Picard form as mouker,
and Moisy has Norm. dial. mouguer, to wipe the nose (so that the
vowel does not quite correspond); but Mistral has mod. Prov.
mouca, moucha, to wipe the nose, and se mouca, to mock. Cotgrave
has MF. moucher, ‘to snyte or make cleane the nose; also to frumpe,
mocke, scoff, deride.” Cf. Ital. moccare, ‘to blow the nose, also to
mocke;’ Florio.—Late L. muccare, to blow the nose.—L. muccus,
mucus, mucus. See Mucus. Der. mock, sb.; mock-er ; mock-er-y,
spelt mocquerye in Caxton, Hist. of Troye, fol. 95, 1. 8, from F.
moquerie; mock-ing, mock-ing-bird.

MODE, a manner, measure, rule, fashion. (F.—L.) ‘In the first
figure and the third mode;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 504 d; where
it is used in a logical sense. F. mode, ‘ manner, sort, fashion ;’ Cot.
—L. modum, acc. of modus, a measure, manner, kind, way. B. Akin
to Gk. pédouar, I think upon, plan, L. meditor, I meditate, Gk.
phsos, a plan, pndoma:, I intend, plan; from 4/MED (Teut. MET),
to measure, to plan, best exemplified in E. mete; cf. Icel, maiz,
a mode, manner, way; see Mete. Brugmann, i. § 412. Der.
mod-al, a coined word from L. mod-us ; mod-ish, coined from F. mode ;
mod-el, q.v., mod-er-ate, q.V., mod-ern, q.V., mod-est, q.V.; mod-ic-um,
q.V-, mod-i-fy, q.v.3 mod-ul-ate, q.v. From the L. modus we also
have accom-mod-ate, com-mod-ious. Doublet, mood (2).

MODEL, a pattern, mould, shape. (F.—Ital.—L.) See Shak.
Rich. II, iii. 2.153; Hen. V, ii. chor. 16; &c.—MF. modelle (F.
modéle), ‘a modell, pattern, mould ;” Cot. —Ital. modello, ‘a model,
a frame, a plot, a mould;’ Florio. Formed as if from a L. type
*modellus, dimin. of modulus, a measure, standard, which again is.
a dimin. of modus. See Modulate, Mode. Der. model, vb.,.
modell-er, modell-ing ; re-model.

MODERATE, temperate, within bounds, not extreme. (L.)
‘ Moderat speche ;’ Hoccleve, Reg. of Princes, 2436. ‘Moderately
and with reuerence ;’ Sir T, More, Works, p. 361 h.=—L, moderatus,
pp. of moderari, to fix a measure, regulate, control. From a stem
*moder-, answering to an older *mmodes-, extended from mod-, as in
modus, a measure; see Modest, Mode. Der. moderate, verb,
Shak. Troil. iv. 4. 5; moderate-ly, moderate-ness, moderat-or, Sir P.
Sidney, Apology for Poetrie, ed. Arber, p. 32, from L. moderator 5.


382 MODERN.


moderat-ion, Troil. iv. 4. 2, from OF. moderation, ‘moderation’ (Cot.),
which from L. acc. moderationem.

MODERN, belonging to the present age. (F.—L.) Used by
Shak. to mean ‘common-place ;’ Macb. iv. 3.170, &c. =F. moderne,
“modem, new, of this age;’ Cot.—L. modernus, modern ; lit. of the
present mode or fashion ; formed from a stem *moder-, for *modes- ;
{rom mod-, as in modus, a measure; cf. modo, ady., just now. See
Moderate. Der. modern-ly, modern-ness, modern-ise.

MODEST, moderate, decent, chaste, pure. (F.—L.) Modestly
is in Gascoigne, Fruites of Warre, st. 208 (and last). Modestie is in
Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. i. c. 25, § 6. =F. modeste, ‘modest ; *
Cot. —L. modestus, modest, lit. keeping within bounds or measure.
From a stem *modes- (extended from mod-us), with Aryan suffix -to ;
the same stem, weakened to moder-, gives moder-ate, moder-n.—L.
modus, a measure; see Mode. Der. modest-ly, modest-y.

MODICUM, a small quantity. (L.) In Shak. Troil. ii. 1. 74.
Merely L. modicum, neut. of modi-c-us, moderate. From modi-, for
modus, a measure; see Modify, Mode.

MODIFY, to moderate, change the form of. (F.—L.) ME.
modifien, Gower, C. A, iii. 1573 bk. vii. 2153; Chaucer, C. T.,
A 2542.—F. modifier, ‘to modifie, moderate ;’ Cot.—L. modificare.
=—L. modi-, for modus, a measure; and -~jic-, for fac-ere, to make.
See Mode and Fact. Der. modifi-er, modifi-able ; modific-at-ion
=F, mod‘fication, ‘modification’ (Cot.), from L. acc. modifica-tidnem,

MODULATE, to regulate, vary. (L.) ‘To modulate the
sounds ;’ Grew, Cosmographia Sacra (1701), b. i. c. 5. sect. 16 (R.).
[But the verb was prob. suggested by the sb. modulation, given as
both a F. and E, word by Cotgrave; from the L. acc. modulatidnem. |
—L. modulatus, pp. of modulari, to measure according to a standard.
=L. modulus, a standard; dimin. of modus,a measure. See Mode.
Der. modulat-ion, as above 3 modulat-or, from L. modulator. So also
module, from F. module, ‘a modell or module’ (Cot.), from L.
modulus. Also modulus =L. modulus.

MOGUL, a Mongolian. (Mongolia.) In Sir T. Herbert, Travels,
ed. 1665, p.75; Milton, P. L.xi. 391. ‘Mr. Limberham is the mogul
[lord] of the next mansion ;’ Dryden, Kind Keeper, iv.1. The word
Mogul is only another form of Mongol; the Great Mogul was the
emperor ‘of the Moguls in India. ‘The Mogul dynasty in India
began with Baber in 1525; Haydn, Dict. of Dates. Cf. Pers.
Moghol, a Mogul; Rich. Pers. Dict. p. 1460.

MOHAIR, cloth made of fine hair. (Arab.) The E. spelling is
a sophisticated one, from a ridiculous attempt to connect it with E.
hair; just as in the case of cray-fish. Spelt mohaire in Skinner, ed.
1691; older spelling mockaire, Hakluyt, Voy. ii. 273; whence was
borrowed the MF. mouiiire, cited by Skinner ; the mod. F. is moire.
Other MF. forms are mohére, mouhaire, cited by Scheler. The name
was given to a stuff made from the hair of the Angora goat (Asia
Minor). = Arab. mukhayyar, ‘a kind of coarse camelot or hair-cloth;’
Rich. Dict. p. 1369, col. 2. See Devic, in Supp. to Littré. Doublet,
moire, from F. moire.

MOHAMMEDAN, a follower of Mohammed. (Arab.) From
the well-known name. = Arab. muammad, praiseworthy; Rich. Dict.
p. 1358.— Arab. root amada, he praised; id. p. 581.

MOHUR, a gold coin current in India. (Pers.) From Pers.
muhr, muhur, ‘a seal, a gold coin current in India for about ZI 16s. ;’
Rich. Dict. p. 1534, col. 1; Pers. muhr, muhar, a seal, a gold coin
worth 16 rupees (H. H. Wilson).4Skt. mudra, a seal.

MOIDORE, a Portuguese gold coin. (Port.—L.) ‘Moidore,
a Portugal gold coin, in value 27 shillings sterling; Bailey’s Dict.,
vol. ii. ed. 1731.— Port. moeda d’ouro or moeda de ouro, a moidore,
4&t 7s. Lit. “money of gold.’—L. monéta, money; dé, of; aurum,
gold. See Money and Aureate.

MOIETY, half, a portion. (F.—L.) See K. Lear, i. 1. 7, where
it means ‘a part’ merely. It means ‘a half’ in All’s Well, iii. 2. 69.
— AF. moyté, Year-books of Edw. I, ii. 441; F. mottié, ‘an half, or
half part ;’ Cot.—L. medietitem, acc. of medietas, a middle course,
a half.—L. medius, middle; see Mediate.

MOIL, to toil, to drudge. (F.—L.) Skinner, ed. 1691, explains
moil by ‘impigré laborare,’ i.e. to toil, drudge. But it is prob.
nothing but a peculiar use of the word moile, given in Minsheu,
ed. 1627, with the sense ‘ to defile, to pollute ;’ cf. moil, ‘ to drudge,
to dawb with dirt ;’ Phillips, ed.1706. As Mr. Wedgwood suggests,
moil, to drudge, is probably ‘ only a secondary application from the
laborious efforts of one struggling through wet and mud ;’ or simply,
from the dirty state in which hard labour often leaves one. yy. We
find earlier quotations for both senses; Halliwell cites ‘we moyle
and toyle’ from the Marriage of Wit and Humour, A.b. 1579.
Rich. quotes from Gascoigne: ‘A simple soule much like myself did
once a serpent find, Which, almost dead for cold, lay moyling in the
myre;’ i.e. wallowing in the dirt ; see Gascoigne, ed. Hazlitt, i. 94.
So also Spenser uses moyle for ‘to wallow ;’ see his Hymn of Heavenly


MOLE


Love, st. 32. Still earlier, the sense is simply to wet or moisten.
ME. moillen, to wet. ‘A monk ... moillid al hir patis,’ i.e. moistened
all their heads by sprinkling them with holy water; Introd. to Tale
of Beryn, ed. Furnivall, p. 6, 1. 139.—OF. moiller, moiler (Littré),
later mouiller, ‘to wet, moisten, soake;’ Cot. The orig, sense was
‘to soften,’ which is effected, in the case of clay, &c., by wetting it.
The OF. moiller answers to a L. type *molliare, to soften (not found),
formed directly from L. molli-, stem of mollis (OF. mol), soft. See
Mollify.

MOIRE, watered silk. (F.—E.—Arab.) A later F. form of E.
Mohair, q.v.; in a slightly altered sense. Korting suggests that,
in the sense of ‘ watered silk,’ it may represent L. marmoreus, shining
like marble, from marmor, marble; because moire cannot well
represent the Arabic form. But Hatzfeld derives F. moire from
E. mohair; which explains the matter. We then reborrowed this
F. form moire.

MOIST, damp, humid. (F.—L.) ME. moiste; ‘a moiste fruit
with-alle ;’ P. Plowman, B. xvi. 68. The peculiar use of ME. moiste
is suggestive as to the derivation of the F. word. It means ‘ fresh’ or
‘new ;’ thus the Wife of Bath’s shoes were ‘ ful moiste and newe;’
Chaucer, C. T. 459 (A 457). The Host liked to drink ‘ moiste and
cornyale;’ id. 12249 (C 315). And again ‘ moisty ale’ is opposed to
old ale; id. 17009 (H 60).—OF. moiste (Littré), later moite, ‘ moist,
liquid, humid, wet ;’ Cot. But the old sense of F. moiste must have
agreed with the sense with which the word was imported into
English. Etym. disputed. Either (1) from L. musteus, of or belonging
to new wine or must, also new, fresh; as musteus cdseus, new cheese
(Pliny). = L. mustum, new wine; a neut. form from mustus, adj., young,
fresh, new. See Korting, § 6414; and cf. Prov. mousti, moist, allied
to moust, new wine (Mistral). . Or (2) from L, muccidus, miicidus,
mouldy; from L. miicus, mucus (Ko6rting); see Mucus. y. Or
from L. *muscidus, for L.. miicidus, the same (Hatzfeld). Perhaps
the two L. words coalesced in French (N.E.D.). Der. moist-ly,
moist-ness ; moist-en, Spenser, F. Q. iii. 6. 34, where the final -en is
really of comparatively late addition (by analogy with other verbs
in -en), since Wyclif has ‘ bigan to moiste hise feet with teeris, Luke,
vii. 38; moist-ure, Gower, C. A. iii, 109; bk. vii. 730; from OF.
moisteur, mod. F, moiteur (Littré).

MOLAR, used for grinding. (L.) ‘Molar teeth or grinders ;’
Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 752.—L. molaris, belonging to a mill, molar. =
L. mola, a mill. —4/MEL, to grind; see Mill. Brugmann, ii. § 690.

MOLASSES, syrup made from sugar. (Port.—L.) Also
ntolosses ; in Phillips, ed. 1706. It ought rather to be medasses ; as in
Stedman’s Surinam, i. 317 (1796). Spelt malasses, Hakluyt, Voy. ii.
pt. 2,p.4. As it came to us from the West Indies, where the sugar
is made, it is either a Port. or a Span. word. The Span. spelling is
melaza, where the z (though now sounded like zk in bath) may well
have had (ab. 1600) the sound of E. ss; see Lasso. Cf. also Port.
melago, molasses; where the ¢ is sounded like E. ss; and this Port.
form better represents the L. neuter sb. [We also find Ital. melassa,
F. mélasse.)—L. mellaiceum, a kind of must (Lewis); neuter of
mellaceus, made with honey, hence honey-like; cf. Port. melado,
mixed with honey. Formed with ending -dc-e-us from mell-, mel,
honey. See Mellifluous (with which cf. also marmalade, another
decoction).

MOLE (1), a spot or mark on the body. (E.) ME. mole. ‘ Many
moles and spottes;’ P. Plowman, B, xiii. 315. [As usual, the ME.
o answers to AS. @.] AS. mal, also written maal (where aa=@).
‘ Stigmentum, fal maal on reegel’ =a foul spot on a garment; Aflfric’s
Gloss., in Voc. 125. 19.44-OHG. meil, a spot; Goth. mail, a spot,
blemish. Teut. type *mailom,n. Root unknown.

MOLE (2), a small animal that burrows. (E.) Mole seems to be
quite distinct from another name of the animal, viz. moldwarp. Shak.
has both forms, viz. mole, Temp. iv. 194; and moldwarp, 1 Hen. IV,
iii. 1.149. Palsgrave has mole. In the 15th cent., we find ‘ Talpa,
molle;’ Voc. 639. 14.4+-MDu. and Du. mol; Low G. mull (Berghaus).
Teut. type *mudloz or *mulluz, m. (Franck). Prob. related to MDu.
mul, ‘the dust or crumblings of turf, Hexham; ME. mul, AS. myl,
dust; which are further related to Mould (1). The sense may
have been ‘ earth-grubber’ or ‘ crumbler,’ from the weak grade of
MEL, to pound; see Molar. Cf. EFries. mullen, to grub ; mulle,
a child that grubs in the ground; mudle, mul, a mole; Low G, mull-
worm, a mole (Danneil), 2. The other form appears as ME. mold-
werp; Wyclif, Levit. xi. 30. From ME. molde, mould; and werpen,
to throw up, mod. E. to warp. See Mould and Warp. So also
MDnu. molworp (Kilian); Icel. moldvarpa, a mole, similarly formed,
Cf. Swed. mull-sork, mull-vad, a mole; from mull, mould. And note
Icel. mylja, to crush. Der. mole-hill, Cor. v. 3. 30°.

MOLE (3), a breakwater. (F.—Ital,—L.) ‘Mole or peer’ [pier];
Blount’s Gloss., ed.1674. ‘The Mole, that . . defendeth the hauen ;’
Sandys, Trav. (1632); p. 255.=MF. mole, ‘a peer, a, bank, or causey


MOLECULE


on the sea-side;’ Cot. F. méle.—Ital. molo, mole, ‘a great pile ;’
Florio. = L. mdlem, acc. of moles, a great heap, vast pile. A word of
doubtful origin. Der. From L. mdles we also have molecule, q.v.

MOLECULE, an atom, small particle. (L.) Formerly written
molecula, ‘ Molecula, in physicks, a little mass or part of anything ;’
‘Bailey’s Dict. vol. ii. ed. 1751. A coined word ; formed with double
dimin, suffix -c-zl- (in imitation of particula,a particle) from L. mdles,
aheap. See Mole (3). Der. molecul-ar.

MOLEST, to disturb, annoy. (F.—L.) ME. molesten, Chaucer,
Troilus, b. iv. 1. 880. =F. molester, ‘to molest;’ Cot. =—L. molestare,
to annoy. =L. molestus, adj., troublesome, burdensome. . Formed
(with suffix -tus=Idg. -to-s) from a stem moles-, which is usually
associated with mdles; see Mole (3). Der. molest-er ; molest-at-ion,
Oth. ii. 1. 16.

- MOLLA, the same as Mullah, q.v.

MOLLIF'Y, to soften. (F.—L.) In Isa. i. 6 (A.V.). ‘It
[borage | mollyfyech the bealy ;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii.
c.9. Hoccleve has mollifie, Reg. of Princes, 2638. [The sb. mollif-
cacioun is in Chaucer, C. T. 16322; G 854.)—OF. mollifier, ‘to
mollifie ;? Cot. —L. mollificare, to soften. = L. molli-, for mollis, soft ;
and -fic-, for facere, to make. B. L. mollis is akin to Skt. mydu-,
soft; O. Ch. Slav. mladz, young, tender (Russ. molodoi) ; and to Gk.
pérdev, E. melt; see Melt. Brugmann, ii. § 690. Der. mollifi-able,
mollifi-er ; also mollific-at-ion, allied to mollificatus, pp. of mollificare.
And see moil, mollusc.

MOLLUSC, an invertebrate animal, with a soft fleshy body, as
asnail. (L.) Modern. Not in Todd’s Johnson. Cf. F. mollusque,
a molluse (Littré).—L. mollusca, a kind of nut with a soft shell,
which some molluscs were supposed to resemble; from molluscus,
softish; allied to mollescere, to become soft.—L. mollis, soft; see
Mollify.

- MOLTEN, melted. (E.) In Exod. xxxii. 4; &c. The old pp.
‘of melt; see Melt.

- MOLY, the name of a certain plant. (L.—Gk.) In Spenser,
Sonnet 26.—L. moly.—Gk. po@dAv; Homer, Od. x. 305; cf. Skt.
miula-m, an edible root.

MOMENT, importance, value, instant of time. (F.—L.) ‘In
a moment ;’ Wyclif, 1 Cor. xv. 52.— F. moment, ‘a moment, a minute,
a jot of time; also moment, importance, weight ;’ Cot. —L. mdmen-
zum, a movement, hence an instant of time; also moving force, weight.
8B. For mouimentum; formed with the common suffix -ment- from
mouére, to move; see Move. Der. moment-ar-y, Temp. i. 2. 202,
from L. mémentarius ; moment-ar-i-ly, -ness; moment-an-y (obsolete),
Mids. Nt. Dr. i. 1. 143, from L. mdmentineus ; moment-ly ; moment-
ous, from L. mdmentésus ; momentous-ly, -ness. Doublets, momentum
(=L. momentum) ; also movement.

MONAD, a unit, &c. (L.—Gk.) The pl. monades was formerly
used as synonymous with digits. ‘ Monades, a term in arithmetick,
the same as digits;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.—L. monad-, stem of monas,
a unit. = Gk. povds, a unit. — Gk. pdvos, alone, sole. See Mono-.

MONARCHY, sole government, a kingdom. (F.—L.—Gk.)
The word monarchy is (perhaps) older than monarch in English.
Sir David Lyndsay’s book entitled ‘ The Monarché,’ written in 1552,
treats of monarchies, not of monarchs; seel. 1979 of the poem. ME.
monarchie, Gower, C. A.i. 27; prol. 695. =F. monarchie, ‘a monarchie,
a kingdom ;’ :Cot.—L. monarchia. =Gk. povapxia, a kingdom. = Gk.
povapxos, adj., ruling alone. — Gk. pov-, for pdvos, alone; and dpxev,
to be first. See Mono- and Arch-. Der. monarch, Hamlet, ii. 2.
270, from F. monargue<L. monarcha, from Gk. povdpyxns, a sovereign ;
monarch-al, Milton, P. L. ii. 428; monarch-ic, from F. monarchique
(Cot.), Gk. povapyxixds ; monarch-ic-al; monarch-ise, Rich. II, iii. 2.
165; monarch-ist.

MONASTERY, a house for monks, convent. (L.—Gk.) The
older word was minster, q.v. Sir T. More has monastery, Works,
p- 135 e. Also in Caxton, Golden Legend; Mary Magd. § 12.
Englished from L. monastérium, a minster.—Gk, povacrnpiov, a
minster. = Gk. povacrns, dwelling alone; hence, a monk. = Gk.
povacev, to be alone. —Gk. povds, alone. See Mono-. Der. From
Gk. provaotns we also have monast-ic, As You Like It, iii. 2. 441=
Gk. povaorixés, living in solitude; hence monast-ic-al, monastic-ism.
Doublet, minster.

MONDAY, the second day of the week. (E.) ME, monenday,
Rob. of Glouc. p. 495, 1. 10180; later Moneday, Monday. AS. Monan
deg, Monday; rubric to John, vii. 32. The lit. sense is ‘day of the
Moon.’=AS. mdnan, gen. of ména, the moon (a masc. sb. with gen.
in -an); and deg, a day. See Moon and Day.

MONETARY, relating to money. (L.) Modern; not in Todd’s
Johnson. Imitated from L. monétarius, which properly means
‘belonging to a’ mint,’ or a mint-master.—L. monéta, (1) a mint,
(2) money; see Mint:(1).

MONEY, current coin, wealth. (F.=L.) ME. moneie; Chaucer,


MONODY 383


C. T. 705 (A 703).—OF. moneie; mod. F. monnaie.—L. monéta,
(1) a mint, (2) money. See further under Mint (1). Der. money-
bag, Merch. Ven. ii. 5.18; money-ed, Merry Wives, iv. 4. 88; money-
changer ; money-less. Also monetary, q.v.

MONGER, a dealer, trader. (L.) Generally used in composition.
ME. wol-monger, a wool-monger; Rob. of Glouc. p. 539, 1. 11173.
AS. mangere, a dealer, merchant; the dat. case mangere occurs in
Matt. xiii. 45. Formed with suffix -ere (= mod. E. -er) from mang-
ian, to traffic, barter, gain by trading, Luke, xix, 15. Cf. mangung,
merchandise, Matt. xxli.5. B. The form mangian is from L. mango,
a dealer, of which mangere is a translation or equivalent. 4 Prob.
sometimes confused with AS. mengan, to mingle, already treated of
under Mingle, q. v.; AS. mang, a mixture, preserved in the forms
ge-mang, ge-mong, a mixture, crowd, assembly, Grein, i. 425. Der.
cheese-monger, fell-monger, fish-monger, iron-monger, &c.

MONGOOSE; see Mungoose.

MONGRELD, an animal of a mixed breed. (E.) In Macbeth,
iii. 1. 93. Spelt mungrel, mungril in Levins, ed. 1570. The exact
history of the word fails, for want of early quotations; but we may
consider it as short for *mong-er-el, with double dimin. suffixes as
in cock-er-el, pick-er-el (a small pike), so that it was doubtless orig.
applied to puppies and young animals, B. As to the stem mong-,
we may refer it to AS. mang, a mixture. The sense is ‘a small
animal of mingled breed.’ See Mingle. 4 We also find late
ME. mengrell, Book of St. Albans, fol. {4, back. If not an error for
mongrell, it is from AS. mengan, to mix; from mang, as above.

MONITION, a warning, notice. (F.—L.) ‘With a good
monicion;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 245 g. Caxton has monycion,
Golden Legend, St. Juliana, § 2.—F. monition, ‘a monition, ad-
monition ;’? Cot.—L. monitidnem, acc. of monitio, a reminding; cf.
monitus, pp. of monére, to remind; lit. to bring to mind or make to
think, —4/MEN, to think. Brugmann, ii. § 794. Der. monit-or,
from L. monitor, an adviser, from monére ; hence monit-or-y, Bacon,
Henry VII, ed. Lumby, p. 73, 1. 6; monit-or-ship ; monit-r-ess (with
fem. suffix -ess=F., -esse, L. -issa, Gk. -tcoa) ; monit-or-i-al. And see
Admonish. The doublet of monitor is mentor.

MONK, a religious recluse. (L.—Gk.) ME. monk, Chaucer, C. T.
165. AS. munec, Grein, li. 269; also munuc, Sweet’s A. S. Reader.
= L. monachus. = Gk. povaxds, adj. solitary; sb.a monk. Extended
from Gk. pov-os, alone; see Mono-. Der. monk-ish; monk’s-hood,
Also (from L. monachus) monach-ism. And see monastery, minster.

MONKEY, an ape. (Low G.—F.—Ital.—L.) Spelt munkie in
Levins and Baret, monkey, munkey, in Palsgrave; perhaps not found
much earlier. Borrowed from Low G. Moneke, the name of the ape’s
son in Reinke de Vos (1479); where -ke is for -kex, dimin. suffix ; so
that the F. version has Monnekin (Godefroy). Formed (with Low G.
suffix -ke = -ken=G. -chen) from MF. monne, an ape. = MItal. monna,
mona, ‘an ape, a munkie, a pug, a kitlin [kitten], a munkie-face;
also a nickname for women, as we say gammer, goodie, good-wife
such a one;’” Florio. He notes that mona is also spelt monna ; cf.
mod. Ital. monna, mistress, dame, ape, monkey (Meadows). [Cf. also
Span. mona, Port. mona, a she-monkey; Span. and Port. mono,
a monkey.] ‘The order of ideas is: mistress, dame, old woman,
monkey, by that degradation of meaning so common in all languages.
B. The orig. sense of Ital. monna was ‘ mistress,’ and it was used as
a title; Scott introduces Monna Paula as a character in the Fortunes
of Nigel. As Diez remarks, it is a familiar corruption of madonna,
i.e. my lady, hence, mistress or madam; see Madonna, Madam.
@ The Span. and Port. mona were, apparently, borrowed from
Italian; being feminine sbs., the masc. sb. mono was coined to
accompany them. The Mltal. has also monicchio, ‘a pugge, a
munkie,’ Florio; which is the Ital. equivalent of the Low G. form.

MONO,, prefix, single, sole. (Gk.) From Gk, pévo-, for pdvos,
single. Shortened to mon- in mon-arch, mon-ocular, mon-ody ; see
also mon-ad, mon-astery, mon-k. Words with this prefix are numerous ;
e.g. mono-ceros, a unicorn, from Gk. xépas, a horn; mono-chrome,
painting in one colour, from xp@pa, colour; mon-ecious, having
stamens and pistils in different flowers on the same plant, from
oixos, a house, dwelling.

MONOCHORD, a musical instrument with one chord. (F.—
L.—Gk.) Spelt monacorde; in Hall’s Chron. Hen. VII, an. 1. § 9.
=F. monocorde.—L. monochordon.—Gk. povdxopdov.—Gk. povo-;
and xopdy, the string of a musical instrament. See Mono- and
Chord.

MONOCOTYLEDON, a plant with one cotyledon.
Modern and botanical. See Mono- and Cotyledon.

MONOCULAR, with one eye. (Hybrid; Gk. and L.) A
coined word; used by Howell (R.). From_Gk. pov-, for pédvo-,
from: pdvos, sole; and L. oculus, an eye. See Mono-and Ocular.

MONODY, a kind of mournful poem. (Gk.) ‘In this monody,’
&c. ; Milton, Introd. toLycidas. So called because sung by a single


(Gk.)


384 MONOGAMY


person. = Gk. povwdia, a solo, a lament.—Gk. por-, for pévos, alone;
and #67, a song, ode, lay. See Mono-and Ode. Der. monod-ist.

MONOGAMY, marriage to one wife only. (L.—Gk.) Spelt
monogamie in Minsheu, ed. 1627. Used by Bp. Hall, Honour of the
Maried Clergie, sect. 19, in speaking of a book by Tertullian. —L.
monogamia, monogamy, on which Tertullian wrote a treatise. — Gk.
povoyapia, monogamy; povdyapos, adj., marrying but once.—Gk.
yovo-, for pévos, alone, sole; and yapety, to marry, ydpos, marriage.
See Mono- and Bigamy. Der. monogam-ist, Goldsmith, Vicar
of Wakefield, ch. xiv.

MONOGRAM, a single character, a cipher of characters joined
together. (L.—Gk.) Used by Ben Jonson, but in a different sense ;
Underwoods, Poet to Painter, Ixx. 11.—L. monogramma, a mono-
gram.=—Gk. povoypayparoy, a mark formed of one letter; neut. of
povoypapyparos, consisting of one letter.=Gk. pdvo-, sole; and
ypappar-, stem of ypayupa, a letter, from ypapev, to grave, write.
See Mono- and Graphic. Der. So also mono-graph, a modern
word, from Gk. -ypagy, writing.

MONOLOGUE, a soliloquy. (F.—Gk.) ‘ Besides the chorus
or monologues ;’ Dryden, Essay of Dramatic Poesie. But Minsheu,
ed. 1627, distinguishes between monologue, a sole talker, and mono-
logie, ‘along tale of little matter.’ =F. monologue, given by Cotgrave
only in the sense ‘ one that loves to hear himselfe talke ;’ but, as in
dia-logue, the last syllable was also used in the sense of ‘speech,’ =
Gk. povdédoyos, adj., speaking alone. = Gk. pévo-, alone; and A€éyey,
to speak. See Mono- and Logic.

MONOMANTA, mania on a single subject. (Gk.) A coined
word; from Mono- and Mania. First in 1823.

MONOPOLY, exclusive dealing in the sale of an article.
(L.—Gk.) ‘ Monopolies were formerly so numerous in England that
parliament petitioned against them, and many were abolished, about
1601-2. They were further suppressed by 21 Jas. I, 1624;’ Haydn,
Dict. of Dates. ‘Thou hast a monopoly thereof;’ Sir T. More,
Works, p. 1303h.=—L. monopdlium. —Gk. povormdoy, the right of
monopoly ; povomwAia, monopoly. = Gk. pdvo-, sole (see Mono-);
and mwdAety, to barter, sell; connected with Icel. fal-r, adj., venal,
for sale (Prellwitz) ; Skt. pazya-, saleable, paz (for paln), to buy.
Der. monopol-ise, spelt monopol-ize in Bacon, Hist. Hen. VII, ed.
Lumby, p. 147, 1. 333 a coined word, formed by analogy, since
the MF. word was simply monopoler (Cotgrave).

MONOSYLLABLBE, a word of one syllable. (F.—L.—Gk.)
In Minsheu, ed. 1627; he makes it an adjective. Altered from F.
monosyllabe, adj., ‘ of one syllable ;’ Cot. = L. monosyllabus, adj. — Gk.
povocvAdaBos, adj., of one syllable. See Mono- and Syllable.
Der. monosyllab-ic.

MONOTONY, sameness of tone. (Gk.) Bailey, vol. ii. ed.
1731, gives it in the form monotonia.—Gk. povorovia, sameness of
tone.=Gk. povdrovos, adj., of the same tone, monotonous. See
Mono- and Tone. Der. monoton-ous, formed from Gk. poydrovos,
by change of -os into -ows; like the change of L. -us into E. -ous (as
in ardu-ous, &c.). Also monotone, a late term. Also monoton-ous-ly,
=71€SS.

MONSOON, a periodical wind. (Du.—Port.— Arab.) Spelt
monson in Hakluyt’s Voyages, ii. 278. Sir T. Herbert speaks of the
monzoones ; Travels, ed. 1665, pp. 409, 413. Ray speaks of ‘the
monsoons and trade-winds;’ On the Creation, pt. 1 (R.).—MDu.
monssoen, in 1596 (Yule). — Port. mongao, monsoon. = Arab. mawsim,
a time, a season; Rich. Dict. p. 1525; whence also Malay musim,
“a season, monsoon, year;’ cf. also awal miusim, ‘ beginning of the
season, setting in of the monsoon;’ Marsden, Malay Dict. pp. 340,
24. (See Monsoon in Yule.)

MONSTER, a prodigy, unusual production of nature. (F.—L.)
ME. monstre, Chaucer, C. T.11656(F 1344). =F. monstre, ‘a monster ;’
Cot.—L. monstrum, a diyine omen, portent, monster. To be re-
solved into mon-es-tru-m (with Idg. suffixes -es- and -tro-, for which
see Brugmann) from mon-ére, to warn, lit, to make to think. =
MEN, to think; see Mind. Der. monstr-ous, formerly monstru-
ous, as in Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iv. met. 3, 1. 22, from OF.
monstrueus (Godefroy), MF. monstriieux, ‘monstrous’ (Cot.), which
from L. monstrudsus (also monstrdsus), monstrous; monstrous-ly,
monstrous-ness ; monstros-i-ty, spelt monstruosity, Troilus, iii, 2. 87.
Also de-monstrate, re-monstrate. Doublet, muster.

MONTH, the period of the moon’s revolution. (E.) Properly
28 days ; afterwards so altered as to divide the year into 12 parts.
ME. moneth (of two syllables), Rob. of Glouc., p. 59, 1. 1369; some-
times shortened to month. AS. ménad, sometimes mond, a month;
Grein, ii. 262; properly ‘a Junation.’ Cf. AS. mana, moon; see
Moon.+Du. maand ; Icel. manudr, manadr, monodr; Dan. maaned;
Swed. mdnad; Goth. ménoths; G. monat. Teut.type *m@noth-. Cf.
also Lithuan. ménesis, a month, ménz, moon ; Russ. miesiats’, a month,
also the moon; L. mensis, a month; Irish and W,. mis, Gael. mios,


MOOT


a month; Gk. pv, month, pyvy, moon; Pers. mak, a moon, a
month; Skt. mas,a month. Der. month-ly, adj., K. Lear, i. 1.134;
month-ly, adv., Romeo, ii. 2. IIo.

MONUMENT, a record, memorial. (F.—L.) Tyndall speaks
of ‘ reliques and monumentes ;’ Works, p. 283, col. 1.—F. monument,
‘a monument;’ Cot.—L. monumentum,a monument. f. Formed,
with suffix -ment-um, from mon-u-=mon-i-, seen in moni-tus, pp. of
monére, to remind, cause to think. =4/MEN, to think; see Moni-
tion. Der. monument-al, All’s Well, iv. 3. 20.

MOOD (1), disposition of mind, temper. (E.) It is probable that
the sense of the word has been influenced by confusion with mood (2),
and with mode. ‘The old sense is simply ‘mind,’ or sometimes
‘wrath.’ ME. mood; ‘aslaked was his mood’ = his wrath was
appeased; Chaucer, C. T. 1762 (A 1760). AS. méd, mind, feeling,
heart (very common); Grein, ii. 257.4-Du. moed, courage, heart,
spirit, mind; Icel. mddr, wrath, moodiness ; Dan. and Swed. mod,
courage, mettle; Goth. mdds, wrath; G. muth, courage. . All
from a Teut. type *md-do- ; where -do- is a suffix. Cf. Gk. pe-pa-a,
I strive after. Brugmann,i. § 196. Der. mood-y, AS. médig, Grein,
ii. 260 ; Sweet, New E. Gr. § 1608; mood-i-ly, mood-i-ness.

MOOD (2), manner, grammatical form. (F.—L.) A variant of
mode, in the particular sense of ‘ grammatical form of a verb.’ Spelt
mode in Palsgrave. ‘ Mood, or Mode, manner, measure, or rule. . In
Grammar there are 6 moods, well known;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
See Mode. 4 Perhaps it has often been confused with Mood (1) ;
see Mood in Trench, Select Glossary.

MOON, the planet which revolves round the earth. (E.) ME.
moné, of two syllables; Chaucer, C. T. 9759 (E 1885). AS. mona,
a masc. sb.; Grein, ii. 262.4-Du. maan ; Icel. mani, masc. sb. ; Dan.
maane; Swed, mane, masc. ; Goth. ména, masc.; G. mond, masc. 3
OHG. mano. Teut. type *mé-non-, m.+4+Lithuan. ménz, masc.; Gk.
pyvn. Cf. Skt. mas, a month; which Benfey refers to ma, to measure.
—4/ME, to measure, as it is a chief measurer of time. See also
Month. Der. moon-beam, moon-light, moon-shine; moon-calf, Temp.
ji. 2. L113 moon-ish, As You Like It, iii. 2. 430.

MOONSHEE, a Secretary. (Hind.—Arab.) Hind. munshi, ‘a
writer, a secretary; applied by Europeans usually to teachers or
interpreters of Persian and Hindustani;’ H. H. Wilson, Gloss. of
Indian Terms, p. 356.—Arab. munshi, a writer, secretary, tutor,
language-master ; Rich. Dict. p. 1508. (See Moonshee in Yule.)

MOOR (1), a heath, extensive waste ground. (E.) ME. more,
King Alisaunder, 6074. AS. mdr, a moor, morass, bog; Grein, ii.
262.4-MDu. moer, ‘ mire, dirt, mud;’ moerlandt, ‘ moorish land, or
turfie land of which turfe is made,’ Hexham; OHG. muor. Teut.
types *mdroz, m., *mérom, n.; prob. related, by gradation, to Goth.
marei, sea, lake; see Mere (1). Der. moor-ish, moor-land, moor-
cock; moor-hen, ME. mor-hen, Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 158, 1. 6.
Also mor-ass, q. v-

MOOR (2), to fasten a ship by cable and anchor. (E.) In
Minsheu, ed. 1627; Milton, P. L. i. 207. Not found in ME. or AS.,
but prob. E., and representing an AS. form *mdrian, to moor a ship;
for we find, as derivatives, AS. marels, a mooring-rope or painter,
Voc. 288. 28, and mérels-rap, the same, Voc, 182. 30. Cognate
with Du. maaren, meeren (Sewel), to tie, to moor a ship; MDu.
marren, maren, to bind, or tie knots (Hexham); Du. meren (Franck) ;
whence perhaps ME. marlen, to moor; Prompt. Pary. Der. moor-
ing, moor-age; and see marline.

MOOR (3), a native of North Africa. (F.—L.) ‘A Moore,
or one of Mauritania, a blacke moore, or neger ;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627.
ME. Mowres, pl. Moors; Mandeville’s Travels, ch. xiv. p. 156.—F.
More, ‘a Moor, Maurian, blackamore;” Cot.—L. Maurus, a Moor;
see Smith’s Class. Dict. Der. Moor-ish; and see morris, morocco,
Morian. Also black-a-moor, spelt blackamore, in Cotgrave, as above ;
a corruption of black moor in Minsheu, as above; also spelt blackmoor
in Beaum. and Fletcher, Mons. Thomas, v. 2.

MOOSE, the American elk. (N. Amer. Indian.) ‘Moos, a beast
bigger than a stagge;’ Capt. Smith, Works, p. 207. The native
Virginian name; Abenaki mus, Penobscot muns; see N. and Q. 9 S.
xii, 504. Cuoq cites Algonquin mons (with x).

MOOT, to discuss or argue a case. (E.) Little used, except in
the phr. ‘a moot point.” ‘To moote, a tearme ysed in the innes of
the Court, it is the handling of a case, as in the Vniuersitie, their dis-
putations, problemes, sophismes, and such other like acts ;’ Minsheu,
ed. 1627. The true sense is ‘to discuss in or at a meeting,’ and the
verb is unoriginal, being due to AS. mdt, ME. mote, later moot, an
assembly or meeting, whence also moot-hall, i,e. a hall of assembly,
occurring in P, Plowman, B. iv. 135; ¢f. also ward-mote, i.e, meet-
ing of a ward, id. prol. 94. Cf. ME. motien, moten, to moot, discuss,
also to cite, plead, P. Plowman, B, i. 174; AS. médtian, to cite,
summon (to an assembly or court); ‘gif man... pane mannan mdte’
=if one summon (or cite) the man; Laws of Hlothhere, sect. 8; see


MOP


-Thorpe, Ancient Laws, i. 31.—AS. mat, a meeting, an assembly;
usually spelt gemdt, a word familiar in the phrase witena gemdt, an
assembly of wise men, a parliament.+Icel. mé¢, a meeting, court of
law; MHG. muoz, méz, a meeting.. B. From a Teutonic type
*motom, n. Der. moot-able, moot-case, i.e. case for discussion;
moot-point, i.e. point for discussion; moot-hall, a hall of assembly,
law court. Also meet, q.v. . Q] Observe that meet is a mere deriva-
tive of moot, as shown by the vowel-change.

MOP (1), an implement for washing floors, &c. (F.—L.) In
Torriano’s Ital. Dict., the word pannatore is explained by ‘a maulkin,
a map of rags or clouts to rub withal;’ ed. 1688. Halliwell gives
prov. E. mop, a napkin, as a Glouc. word. ‘ Not such maps as you
wash houses with, but maps of countries;’ Middleton, Span. Gipsy
(acted in 1623); A.ii.sc.2. Most likely borrowed from OF. mappe,
a napkin, though this word was later corrupted to nappe. See Nappe
in Littré, who cites the spelling mappe as known in the 15th century,
though the corrupt form with initial 2 was already known in the
11th century. Both mappe and nappe are from L. mappa, a napkin ;
whence also Map and Napkin, the former being taken from the
form mappe, whilst the latter was due to xappe. L. mappa is a word
of Punic origin. See Map. We find Walloon mag, a table-cloth,
mappe, a napkin (Remacle); W. Flem. moppe, a (ship’s) mop (De
Bo). @ Cf. strop, knop, with strap, knap. The Celtic forms are
from E. Der. mop, verb.

MOP (2), a grimace; to grimace. (E.) Obsolete. ‘ With mop
and mow;’ Temp. iv. 47. Also as a verbal sb.; ‘mopping and
mowing;” K. Lear, iv. 164. The verb to mop is allied to Mope,
q.v- Hence also ME, moppe, a foolish person; in Weber, Met. Rom.
11) 56:

MOPH, to be dull or dispirited. (E.) In Shak. Temp. v. 240.
Allied to ME. mopisch, foolish; Beket, 1. 78. We also find mof,
to grimace; see Mop (2). Cf. ‘in the mops, sulky;’ Halliwell.
+Du. moppen, to pout; whence to grimace, or to sulk; MSwed.
mopa, to mock (Ihre); Westphal. mépen, to grimace; Dan. maabe,
to mope; cf. prov. G. muffen, to sulk (Fliigel). Also ME. mappen,
to bewilder, stupefy ; Legends of the Holy Rood, p. 216. And see
Mow (3). Der. mop-ish, mop-ish-ness.

MORAINE, a line of stones at the edges of a glacier. (F.—
Teut.) Modern; well known from books of Swiss travel. =F.
moraine, a moraine; Littré. [Cf. Port. morraria, a ridge of shelves
of sand; morro, a great rock, a shelf of sand; Ital. mora, a pile of
‘stones. (But not Span. moron, a hillock.)] B. Of Teut. origin; cf.
Bavarian mur, sand and broken stones, fallen from rocks into a
valley; Schmeller, Bayerisches Worterbuch, col. 1642. Schmeller
notes the name moraine as used by the: peasants of Chamouni,
according to Saussure. -y. The radical sense is ‘mould’ or ‘ crumbled
material ;’ hence fallen rocks, sand, &c.; cf. G. miirbe, soft, OHG.
muruwi, soft, brittle ; Icel. merja, to crush (K6rting).

MORAL, virtuous, excellent in conduct. (F.—L.) ‘O moral
Gower ;’ Chaucer, Troilus, b. v, last stanza but one.=F. moral,
*morall;’ Cot.—L. mérdlis, relating to conduct.<L. mér-, from
mos, 2 manner, custom. Root uncertain. Der. moral, sb., morals,
sb. pl.; moral-er, i.e. one who moralises, Oth. ii. 3. 301; moral-ly;
morale (a mod. word, borrowed from F. morale, morality, good
conduct) ; moral-ise, As You Like It, ii. 1. 44; moral-ist; moral-i-ty,
Meas. for Meas. i. 2. 138, from F. moralité, ‘ morality,’ Cot.

MORASS, a swamp, bog. (Du.—F.—Teut.) ‘Morass, a moorish
ground, a marsh, fen, or bog ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Todd says that
P. Heylin, in 1656, noted the word as being ‘new and uncouth;’
but he omits the reference. It occurs in a list of ‘uncouth words’
at the end of Heylin, Obs. on the Hist. of K. Charles I, published
by H{amon] L{estrange]} ; but Heylin should rather have attributed
it to Fuller.—Du. moeras, marsh, fen (Sewel), The older Du.
form. is moerasch, adj., ‘moorish’ (Hexham); as if from the sb.
moer, ‘ mire, dirt, or mud’ (id.), But this moerasch is an altered form
of MDu. marasch, maerasch, a marsh, pool (Kilian), OF. maresque,
maresche, adj., marshy; also, as sb.; a marsh, a pool; Low L.
mariscus.='Teut. *mari, the sea; see Marish. Cf. G. morast, from
Du. or Low G. (see Morast in Kluge); whence also Swed. moras;
Dan. morads (a corrupt form). Doublet, marish.

' MORBLID, sickly, unhealthy. (F.—L.) ‘Morbid (in painting),
a term used of very fat flesh very strongly expressed ;” Bailey’s Dict.,
vol. ii. ed. 1731.—F. morbide, sometimes similarly used as a term in
painting (Littré).—L. morbidus, sickly (which has determined the
present sense of the E. word). L. morbus, disease. Allied to mor-i,
to die, mors, death; see Mortal. Brugmann, ii. § 7or. Der.
morbid-ly, morbid-ness ; also morbi-fic, causing disease, a coined word,
from morbi-, for morbus, and L. suffix =fic-us, due to facere, to make.

MORDACITY, sarcasm. (F.—L.) Little used. It occurs in
Cotgrave. =F. mordacité, ‘ mordacity, easie detraction, bitter tearms;’
Cot.—L. acc. mordacitatem, from nom. mordacitas, power to bite.=


MORN | 385


L. mordaci-, decl. stem of mordax, biting; with suffix -ta@s.—L.
mordére, to bite. Cf. Skt. mardaya, to rub, break in pieces; from
myd, torub. Brugmann, ii. § 794. (4/MERD, SMERD.) 8. Prob.
from the same root as E, Smart, q.v. Der. mordaci-ous, little
used, from the stem mordaci-; mordaci-ous-ly, Also mordant, biting,
F. mordant, from L. mordent-, stem of pres. pt. of mordére, to bite.

MORE, additional, greater. (E.) The mod. E. more does duty
for two ME. words which were, generally, well distinguished, viz.
mo and more, the former relating to number, the latter to size.
1. ME. mo, more in number, additional. ‘Mo than thries ten’=
more than thirty in number; Chaucer, C. T. 578 (A 576), AS. ma,
both as adj. and ady., Grein, ii. 201. Thus ‘ ber by3 wundra ma’=
there are wonders more in number, lit. more of wonders (Grein).
This AS. ma@ was originally an adverbial form; it is cognate with
Goth. mais, more, adv. 2. ME. more, larger in size, bigger; ‘ more
and lesse?=greater and smaller, Chaucer, C. T. 6516 (D 934).
[The distinction between mo and more is not always observed in old
authors, but very often it appears clearly enough.] AS. mdra,
greater, larger; Grein, ii. 212. Cognate with Icel. meiri, greater;
Goth. maiza (stem maizon-), greater. See Most. Allied to Olrish
mar, mor, W. mawr, great; AS. mére, illustrious. @ Mo is an
adverbial, but zot a positive form; the positive forms are much,
mickle, many. The -r- in more represents Teut. -z-, which in the adv.
*mais (being final) was (regularly) lost in AS. Brugmann, i. § 200.
Der. more-over.

MOST, the superl. form, answers to ME. moste, Chaucer, C. T.
2200 (A 2198), also spelt meste, maste, measte, in earlier authors (see
Stratmann). AS. mé#st, most; Grein, ii. 226. Cognate with Du.
meest, Icel. mestr, G. meist, Goth. maists; Teut. type *mmais-toz, the
superl, form allied to the comp. *maiz-on- (above). Altered from
ME. méste to later mdst by the influence of more and mo.

MOREL, an edible fungus. (F.-OHG.) ‘Spungy moréls;’
Gay, Trivia, iii. 203. [Properly morille, but confused with another
morel, the name of a herb, but lit. ‘ mulberry-colored;’ MF. morelle,
‘the herb morell, garden nightshade,’ Cot. (cf. MF. morelles,
‘morell cherries,’ Cot.), ultimately from L. mdrum, a mulberry.]=F.
morille, ‘the smallest and daintiest kind of red mushrome;’ Cot. =
OHG. morhila (G. morchel), a morel; from OHG. morha, a root,
a carrot, allied to AS. more, an edible root. See morchel in Kluge.

MORGANATIC, used with reference to a marriage of a man
with a woman of inferior rank. (Low L.—G.) ‘When the left
hand is given instead of the right, between a man of superior and a
woman of inferior rank, in which it is stipulated that the latter and
her children shall not inherit the rank or inherit the possessions of
the former. The children are legitimate. Such marriages are fre-
quently contracted in Germany by royalty and the higher nobility.
Our George I was thus married ;” Haydn, Dict. of Dates. — Low L.
morganatica. Ducange explains that a man of rank contracting a
morganatic marriage was said ‘accipere uxorem ad morgandaticam.’
This L. word was coined, with suffix -atica, from the G. morgen,
morning, which was in this case understood as an abbreviation for
MHG, morgengabe, morning-gift, a term used to denote the present
which, according to the old usage, a husband used to make to his
wife on the morning after the marriage-night; esp. if the wife were
of inferior rank. This G. morgen is cognate with E. morn; see
Morn.

MORIAN, a blackamoor, a Moor. (F.—L.) ‘The Morians’
land;’ Ps. lxviii. 31 (P. B.).—OF. Morien, a Moor (Godefroy);
also Moriaine (15th cent.). From a Late L. type *Mauritanus or
*Mauritanius, a man of Mauritania, the country of the Maur? or
Moors. (A Student’s Pastime, p. 254.)

MORION, an open helmet, without visor. (F.—Span.) In
Spenser, Muiopotmos, 1. 322. =F. morion, ‘a murrian, or head-peece ;’
Cot.—Span. morrion. Cf. Port. morrigo, Ital. morione, a morion.
The word is Spanish, if we may accept the very probable derivation
of Span. morrion from morra, the crown of the head, The latter
word has no cognate form in Ital. or Port. Cf. Span. morro, any-
thing round; moron, a hillock. Perhaps from Basque murua, a hill,
heap (Diez).

MORMONITE, one of a sect of the Latter-day Saints. (E.; but
a@ pure invention.) The Mormonites are the followers of Joseph Smith,
‘called the prophet, who announced in 1823, at Palmyra, New York,
that he had had a vision of the angel Moroni, In 1827 he said that
he found the book of Mormon, written on gold plates in Egyptian
characters ;? Haydn, Dict. of Dates, q.v. We may call the word E.,
as used by English-speaking people ; but it is really a pure invention.
B. Joseph Smith’s own explanation was that it meant ‘ more good ;’
from E. more, and Egypt. mon, good. (This was probably an after-
thought.) See The Mormons; London, 1851. Der. Mormon-ism.

MORIN, the first part of the day. (E.) ME. morn, a North E.
form. ‘On the morn?=on the morrow; Barbour’s Bruce, i. 601 ;

ce


MORNING


to-morn = to-morrow; - id. i. 621. Morn and morrow are merely
doublets; the former being contracted from ME. morwen, and the
latter standing for ME. morwe, the same word with loss of final x.
The form morwe is in Chaucer, C. T., A 1492; the older form morwen
is in the Ancren Riwle, p. 22,1. 16. AS. morgen, morn, morrow,
Grein, ii. 264; whence morwen by the common change of g to w.
Cf, OFries. morn, morning.--Du. morgen; Icel. morginn; Dan.
morgen; Swed. morgon; G. morgen; Goth. maurgins. Cf. Lith.
merk-ti, to blink. Orig. sense prob. ‘dawn.’ Doublet, morrow.

MORNING, dawn, mom. (E.) ME. morning, P. Plowman,
B. prol. 5; contracted from the fuller form morwening, Chaucer,
C. T. 1064 (A 1062). Morwening signifies ‘a dawning,’ or ‘a be-
coming morn ;’ formed with the substantival (not participial) suffix
-ing (AS. -ung) from ME. morwen = AS. morgen, morn; see Morn.
Cf. even-ing ; from even. Der. morning-star.

MOROCCO, a fine kind of leather. (Morocco.) Added by Todd
to Johnson’s Dict. Named from Morocco, in N. Africa; whence
also F. maroguin, morocco leather. So called from the Moors.

MOROSE, ill-tempered, gloomy, severe. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. See Trench, Select Gloss., who shows that the word was
once used as if it owed its derivation to L. mora, delay; but this use
is obsolete. = L. mérdsus, self-willed; (1) in a good sense, scrupulous,
fastidious, (2) in a bad sense, peevish, morose.=L. mér-, decl.
stem of mds, (1) self-will, (2) usage, custom, character. See Moral.
Der. morose-ly, morose-ness. Also moros-i-ty, in Minsheu, ed. 1627,
from OF. morosité, ‘morosity, frowardnesse,’ Cot.; but now ob-
solete.

MORPHIA, MORPHINE, the narcotic principle of opium.
(Gk.) Modern; coined words from Gk. Morpheus (Moppevs), the
god of sleep and dreams, lit. ‘the shaper,’ i.e. creator of shapes
seen in dreams.=Gk. poppy, a shape, form. Der. meta-morph-osis,
a-morph-ous; from popd-7.

MORRIS, MORRIS-DANCE, an old dance on festive
occasions. (Span.—L.) In Shak. Hen. V, ii. 4. 25. See Nares’
Glossary. G. Douglas has the pl. morisis, Aen. bk. xiii. ch. ix.
1, 112. The dance was also called a morisco, as in Beaum. and
Fletcher, Wild Goose Chase, v. 2. 7. A morris-dancer was also
called a morisco, 2 Hen. VI, iii. 1. 365; and it is clear that the word
meant ‘ Moorish dance,’ though the reason for it is not quite certain,
unless it was from the use of the tabor as an accompaniment to it. =
Span. Morisco, Moorish. Formed with suffix -isco (=L. -iseus, E.
-ish) from Span. Moro, a Moor.=L. acc. Maurum, a Moor; see
Moor (3). See Brand, Popular Antiquities. 4 We also find
morris-pike, i.e. Moorish pike, Com. Errors, iv. 3. 28. Spelt morys-
pike, Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b, ii. c. 33. ‘The Mourish
daunce’ is mentioned in 1494; Excerpta Historica, p. 95.

MORROW, morning, morn. (E.) A doublet of morn. From
ME. morwe by the change of final -we to -ow, as in arr-ow, sparr-ow,
sorr-ow, &c. ‘A morwe’=on the morrow, Chaucer, C. T. 824
(A 822), Again, morwe is from the older morwen, by loss of final x;
and morwen=mod. E. morn. See Morn. Der. to-morrow=AS. 26
morgene, where <6=mod. E. to; the sense is ‘for the morrow;’ see
Grein, il. 264,

MORSE, a walrus. (F.—Finnish.) . Spelt morsse, Hakluyt’s
Voyages, i. 5 (margin). ‘The tooth of a morse or sea-horse;’ Sir
T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 23. § 5.—F. morse. = Finnish
mursu, a morse (Renyall); whence also Russ. morj’, a morse (with
j sounded as zh, i.e. as F. 7). Cf. Lapp. morsha, a morse (Friis).
The Russ. name is morskaia korova, i.e. sea-cow.

MORSEL, a mouthful, small piece. (F.—L.) ME. morsel,
Chaucer, C. T. 128. Also mossel, Rob. of Glouc. p. 342, 1. 7025;
‘thys mossel bred’ =this morsel of bread. The corrupt form mossel
is still in common use in prov. E.—OF. morsel, morcel, mod. F.
morceau, ‘a morsell, bit,’ Cot. (And see Burguy.) Cf. Ital. morsello.
Dimin. from L. morsum, a bit.=L. morsus, pp. of mordére, to bite;
see Mordacity.

MORTAL, deadly. (F.—L.) See Trench, Select Glossary. ME.
mortal, Chaucer, C. T., A 61, 1592.—OF. mortal (Burguy); mortel
(Cot.)—L. mortélis, mortal.L. mort-, stem of mors, death. The
decl. stem mor-ti- contains the Idg. suffix -ti-. 4/MER, to die; cf.
Skt. my, to die, pp. myta-, dead; L. mori, to die. Der. mortal-ly;
mortal-i-ty, from F, mortalité, ‘mortality’ (Cot.), from L. acc. mor-
talitatem ; morti-fer-ous, Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, from L. fer-re, to
bring, cause. And see mort-gage, morti-fy, mort-main, mort-u-ary.

MORTAR (1), MORTER, a vessel in which substances are
pounded with a pestle. (L.) [A certain kind of ordnance was also
called a mortar, from its orig. resemblance in shape to the mortar for
pounding substances in. This is a French word.] ME. morter, P.
Plowman, B, xiii. 44; King Alisaunder, 1. 332. AS. mortere, a
mortar; A. S. Leechdoms, ed. Cockayne, i. 142. [Cf. OF. mortier,
‘a morter to bray (pound) things in, also, the short and wide-


386


MOSS


mouthed piece of ordnance called a morter,’ &c.; Cot.J=L. mors
tarium,a mortar. Cf, L, marculus, a hammer. See mortar (2).

MORTAR (2), cement of lime, sand, and water. (F.—L.)
ME. mortier, Rob. of Glouc., p. 128, 1. 2715.— OF. mortier, ‘ morter
used by dawbers;’ Cot.—L. mortarium, mortar; lit. stuff pounded
together; a different sense of the word above; see Mortar (1).

MORTGAGE, a kind of security for debt. (F.-L.) ME,
mortgage, spelt morgage in Gower, C. A. iii. 234; bk. vii. 4228.—
OF. mortgage, mortgaige, ‘morgage, or mortgage;’ Cot. ‘It was
called a mortgage, or dead pledge, because, whatever profit it might
yield, it did not thereby redeem itself, but became lost or dead to the
mortgager on breach of the condition;’ Webster.=F. mort, dead,
from L. mortuus, pp. of mori, to die; and F. gage, a pledge, See
Mortal and Gage (1). Der. mortgag-er; mortgag-ee, where the
final -ee answers to the F. -é of the pp.

MORTIFY, to destroy the vital functions, vex, humble.
(F.-L.) ME. mortifien, used as a term of alchemy, Chaucer, C. T.
16594 (G 1126).—OF. mortifier, ‘to mortifie,’ Cot.=—L. mortificare,
to cause death. L. morti-, decl. stem of mors, death ; and -<fc-, for
fac-ere, to make, cause; see Mortal and Fact. Der. mortify-ing ;
mortific-at-ion, Sir T. More, Works, p. 7oo f, from OF. mortification
(Cot.), from L. acc. mortificationem.

MORTISE, a hole in a piece of timber to receive the tenon, or
a piece made to fit it. (F.) Spelt mortesse in Palsgrave; mortaise in
Cot. Shak. has mortise as a sb., Oth. ii. 1.9; and the pp. mortised,
joined together, Hamlet, iii. 3. 20. ME. morteys, Prompt. Pary.;
Mandeville, Trav. ch. 7, p. 76.—F. mortaise, ‘a mortaise in a piece
of timber;’ Cot. Cf. Span. mortaja, a mortise. B. Of unknown
origin; it cannot be from L. mordére, to bite, which could not have
given the 4. Devic (in a supplement to Littré) thinks the Span.
word may be of Arabic origin. Der. mortise, verb.

MORTMATN, the transfer of property to a corporation. (F.—L.)
‘ Agaynst all mortmayn;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 333h. ME. mayn
mort, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, viii. 265. The Statute of Mortmain
was passed A.D. 1279\(7 Edw. I). Property transferred to the church
was said to pass into main mort or mort main, i.e. into a dead hand,
because it could not be alienated.—F. mort, dead; and main, a hand
(L. manus). See Mortgage and Manual.

MORTUARY, belonging to the burial of the dead. (F.—L.)
The old use of mortuary was in the sense of a fee paid to the parson
of a parish on the death of a parishioner. ‘ And [pore over] Linwode,
a booke of constitutions to gather tithes, mortuaries, offeringes, cus-
tomes,’ &c.; Tyndall’s Works, p. 2, col. 1. Lyndwode, to whom
Tyndall here refers, died A.D. 1446.—AF. mortuarie, Year-books of
Edw. I, 1302-3, p. 443.— Late L. mortuarium, a mortuary; neut. of
L. mortudrius, belonging to the dead. = L. mortu-us, dead, pp. of mori,
to die; see Mortal.

MOSAIC, MOSAIC-WORK, ornamental work made with
small pieces of marble, &c. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt mosaick, Milton,
P. L. iv. 700. ‘ Mosaicall-worke, a worke of small inlayed peeces ;’
Minsheu’s Dict., ed. 1627.— MF. mosaigue, ‘mosaicall work;’ Cot.
= Ital. mosaico, mosaic; [ Span. mosaica obra, mosaic work. | Formed
from a Late L. misdicus, adj.,an extended form from L. miiseum
opus (also called miusiuum opus), mosaic work. The Late L. form
miisdicus answers to a Late Gk. *yovcaixds, an extended form in
some way related to the Late Gk. povgetov, mosaic work; neut. of
povaeios, of or belonging to the Muses (hence artistic, ornamental).
= Gk. potca, a Muse; see Muse (2).

MOSLEM, a Mussulman or Mohammedan; as adj., Mahom-
medan. (Arab.) ‘This low salam Replies of Moslem faith I am ;’
Byron, The Giaour (see note 29).—Arab. muslim, ‘a musulman,
a true believer in the Muhammedan faith;’ Rich. Dict. p. 1418.
A mussulman is one who professes islam, i.e. ‘obedience to the will
of God, submission, the true or orthodox faith ;’ id. p.g1. A parti-
cipial form, from the 4th conj. of salama, to be safe, be at rest. The
words moslem, mussulman, islam, and salaam are all from the same
toot salama. Doublet, mussulman.

MOSQUE, 2 Mahommedan temple or church. (F.—Span.—
Arab.) ‘ Mosche or Mosque,.a temple or church among the Turks
and Saracens;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Spelt musgue, Sandys,
Tray. (1632), p. 27.—F. mosquee, ‘a temple or church among the
Turks;’ Cot.—Span. mezguita, a mosque. = Arab. masjid, a mosque,
temple; Rich. Dict. p. 1415. Cf. Arab. sayadah, ‘a carpet, &c.,
place of adoration, mosque;’ id. p. 812.— Arab. root sajada, to adore,
prostrate oneself.

MOSQUITO, a kind of gnat. (Span.—L.) Spelt muskitio in
Sir T. Herbert, Travels, ed. 1665, p.128; muskyto, Hakluyt, Voy. iii.
107.—Span. mosquito, a little gnat; dimin, of mosca, a fly. —L. musca,
a fly. Cf. Gk. pia, a fly; Lithnan. musé, a fly. ;

MOSS, a cryptogamic plant. (E.) ME. mos, P. Plowman, C. xviii,
14; mosse (dat.), id. B. xv. 282. AS. mos (Bosworth).--Du, mos ;


MOST


Tcel. mosi, moss; also, a moss, moorland; Dan. mos; Swed. mossa;
G, moos, MHIG. mos, moss; also a moss, swamp. Teut. base *mus-,
weak grade allied to MHG. mies, OHG. mios, moss ; AS. méos, moss
(Teut. base *meus-) ; andto Mire. B. Further allied to Russ, mokh’,
moss; L. muscus, moss. Brugmann, i. § 105. 4 We may note the
E. use of moss in the sense of bog or soft moorland, as in Solway
Moss, Chat Moss; this sense comes out again in E. mire, which is
certainly related to moss. Der. moss-land, moss-rose; moss-trooper,
i.e. a trooper or bandit who rode over the mosses on the Scottish
border ; moss-ed, As You Like It, iv. 3. 105 5 moss-grown, 1 Hen. IV,
ili. I. 333 moss-y, moss-i-ness, Also mire.

MOST, greatest. (E.) ME. most, mést. AS. mést.4-Du. meest ;
Icel. mestr; G. meist; Goth. maists. Teut. type *ma-ist-oz, superl.
form allied to More, q.v. The o (for early ME. 2) is due to
association with the o in more.

MOTE, a particle of dust, speck, spot. (E.) ME. mot, mote;
‘Chaucer has the pl. motes, C. T.6450 (D 868). AS. mot, Matt. vii. 3.
+Du. mot, saw-dust ; EF ries, mut, rubbish.

: MOTET, a short piece of sacred music. (F.—L.) In Blount’s
Gloss,, ed. 1674, ME. motetis, pl.; Wyclif, Works; ed. Matthew,
p- 9I.—F. motez, ‘a verse in musick, or of a song, a poesie, a short
lay;’ Cot. [Cf. MItal. mottetto, ‘a dittie, a verse, a iigge, a short
song; a wittie saying;’ Florio.] Dimin. of F. mot, ‘a word; the
note winded by a huntsman on his horne;’ Cot.—L. muttum, a mur-
mur; see Motto.

* MOTH, a lepidopterous insect. (E.) ME. motthe, Chaucer, C. T.
6142 (D 560); also spelt mopJe, moupe, mou;te, P. Plowman, C. xiii.
217. AS, modde, Grein, ii. 261; also mohde, Matt. vi. 20, latest text ;
©. Northumbrian mohde, mohda, Matt. vi. 20.4-Du. mot; Icel.
motti; Swed. mdtt, a mite; G. motte, a moth. Origin doubtful.
B. We also find AS. madu, a maggot, bug; ‘ Cimex; madu,’ AE lfric’s
Gloss., Nomina Insectorum, in Wright’s Vocab. i. 24; cognate forms
being Du. and G. made, a maggot, Goth. matha, a worm ; but con-
nexion with moth is doubtful. A late example of ME. mathe, a
maggot, occurs in Caxton’s tr. of Reynard the Fox, ed. Arber, p. 69;
fa dede hare, full of mathes and wormes.’ y. Perhaps the latter
word meant ‘a biter’ or ‘eater;’? Fick refers AS. madu to the root
of E. mow, to cut grass. Der. moth-eaten, ME. moth-eten, P. Plow-
man, B. x. 362.

MOTHER (1), a female parent. (E.) ME. moder, Chaucer, C. T.
5261 (B 841), where Tyrwhitt prints mother; but all the six MSS. of
the Six-text ed. have moder or mooder. [The ME. spelling is almost
invariably moder, and it is difficult to see how mother came to be
the present standard form ; it was probably due to dialectal influence. ]
AS. méder, médor, médur ; Grein, ii. 261.4+Du. moeder ; Icel. mddir ;
Dan. and Swed. moder; G. mutter, OHG. muotar.+Irish and Gael.
mathair; Russ. mat(e); Lithuan. moté (Schleicher); L. mater; Gk.
‘pntnp ; Pers. madar; Skt. mata, maty. B. All formed from a root
*ma, of uncertain meaning. Der. mother-ly, mother-li-ness, mother-
hood, mother-less. Cf. matrix, matron,

MOTHER (2), the hysterical passion. (E.) In K. Lear, ii. 4.
56. Spelt moder in Palsgrave ; the same word as the above. So also
Du. moeder means ‘ mother, womb, hysterical passion ;’ cf. G. mutter-
beschwerung, mother-fit, hysterical passion.

MOTHER (3), lees, sediment. (E.) ‘As touching the mother or
lees of oile oliue ;” Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxiii. c. 3. It is prob.
the same word as Mother (1), as the dregs seem to be bred in the
liquid. So also in mod. Du. we have moer signifying both sediment
or dregs, also a matrix or female screw; G. mutter, mother, sediment
in wine or other liquids. Cf Gk. ypais, an old woman ; also, scum,
mother. Perhaps affected by E. mud, MDu. modder, mud, lees, dregs ;
G. moder, mould. Der. mother-y.

MOTION, movement. (F.—L.) ‘Of that mocyon his cardynalles
were sore abashed;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. i. c. 326.—F.
motion, omitted in Cotgrave, but used by Froissart in this very
passage, as quoted by Littré.—L. mdtidnem, acc. of mdtio, a move-
ment 5 cf. mdtus, pp. of mouére, to move; see Move. Der. motion-
Jess, Hen. V, iv. 2. 50.

MOTIVE, an inducement. (F.—L.) . Properly an adj., but also
used asasb. ME. motif, a motive, Chaucer, C. T. 5048, 9365 (B 628,
E 1491).—OF. motif, ‘a motive, a moving reason;’ Cot.—Late L.
motivum, a motive; found A.D.1452; but certainly earlier. Late L.
motixus, moving, animating ; found A.D,..1369. Formed with L. suffix
-tuus from mdt-, stem of mdtus, pp. of mouére; see Move. Der.
motiv-i-ty (modern). Also motor, i.e. a mover, Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. ii. c. 2.-§ 2, borrowed from L. mdtor,a mover. .

» MOTLEY, of different colours. (F.—G.) ME. mottelee, Chaucer,
C.T. 273 (A271). So called because spotted or clotted. Apparently
formed, with pp. suffix -é, from OF. motel, *mottel, MF. motteau,
“a clot of congealed moisture,’ Cot.; also used in the sense of MF.
mottelet, ‘a little clod, lump of earth,’ id, A dimin, of OF. more,


MOULT 387


motte, MF. motte, ‘a clod, lump, round sodd, or turfe of earth; also
a little hill;? Cot. See Moat. Cf. Languedoc moutel, a clot of
anything adhesive, dimin. of mouto, a clod (D’Hombres). Mistral
gives Prov. mouteloun, ‘petite pelote;’ & mouteloun, ‘en grumeaux.’
B. Perhaps affected by OF. mattelé, ‘clotted, knotted, curdled, or
curd-like;’ Cot. Cf. OF. mattonné, in the expression ciel mattonné,
“a curdled [i.e. mottled] skie, or a skie full of small curdled clowds ;’
id, The OF. mattelé answers to a pp. of a verb *matteler, representing
an OHG, *matteln, a frequentative verb regularly formed from
Bavarian matte, curds; Schmeller’s Bayerisches Worterbuch, col.
1685 ; MDu. matte, curds(Hexham). Der. mottled, Drayton, Muses’
Elysium, Nymph. 6. 1. 57.

MOTTO, a sentence added to a device. (Ital.—L.) In Shak,
Per. ii. 2. 38.—Ital, motto, ‘a word, a mot, a saying, a posie or
briefe in any shield, ring, or emprese’ [device]; Florio.—L. muttum,
a mutter, a grunt, a muttered sound; cf. miitire, muttire, to mutter,
mumble. Formed from 4/MEU, to make a low sound; cf. Gk. pod,
a muttered sound. See Mutter, And cf. Motet.

MOULD (1), earth, soil, crumbling ground. (E.) ME. molde,
P. Plowman, B. prol. 67, iii. 80. AS. molde, dust, soil, earth,
country; Grein, ii. 261.4-Du. moude, molde, mould; cf. molm,
mould; Icel. mold, mould, earth; Dan. muld; Swed. mull (for muld) ;
Goth, mulda, dust; Mk. vii. 11; prov. G. molt, molten, garden mould
(Fliigel) ; OHG. molta. B. All from a Teut. type *mul-don, f.;
from *mal, weak grade of 4/MEL, to grind; see Meal(1). Der.
mould-warp, the old name for a mole (see mole); also mould-er,
a frequentative verb, ‘to crumble often,’ hence, to decay, cf. ‘in the
mouldring of earth in frosts and sunne,’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 337.
@ The adj. mouldy, in its commonest sense, is unconnected.

MOULD (2), a model, pattern, form, fashion. (F.—L.) ME.
molde, P. Plowman, B, xi. 341. ONorth F. molde, Les Rois, p. 244
(Moisy); OF. molle, mole, mod. F. moule, a mould. Littré gives
molle as the spelling of the 14th century; a still earlier form was
modle, in the 13th cent.—L. modulum, acc. of modulus, a measure,
standard, size. See Model. Cf. Span. molde, from modulus, by
transposition. Der. mod-el, a dimin. form, Also mould, vb., Mids.
Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 211; mould-er, mould-ing.

MOULD (3), rust, spot. (E.) Spenser has: ‘Upon the litle
brest .. a litle purple mold;’ F. Q. vi. 12. 7. But chiefly in the
compound iron-mould. Here mould is a mere extension of mole,
a spot; the added d was prob. due to confusion with moled, i.e.
spotted. ‘ One droppe of poyson infecteth the whole tunne of Wine;
. one yron Mole defaceth the whole peece of Lawne ;’ Lyly, Euphues,
ed. Arber, p. 39. See further under Mole (1).

MOULDY, musty, fusty. (Scand.) In Shak. 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4.
134; iii. 2.119. This is an extremely difficult word. It has probably
been confused with mould (1), supposed to mean dirt, though it
properly means only friable earth. It has also probably been con-
fused with mould (3), rust, spot of rust. But with neither of these
words has it anything to do. It is formed from the sb. mould,
fustiness, which is quite an unoriginal word, as will appear. For
an example of this sb., compare: ‘ we see that cloth and apparell,
not aired, doe breed moathes and mould ;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 343.
This sb. is due to the ME. verb moulen, to become mouldy, to
putrefy or rot, as in: ‘ Let us not moulen thus in idlenesse ;’ Chaucer,
C. T., Group B, 32. The pp. moulded was used in the precise sense
of the mod. E. mouldy, and it is easy to see that the sb. was really
due to this pp., and in its turn produced the adj. mouwldy. Stratmann
cites ‘ pi mowlid mete,’ i.e. thy mouldy meat, Political Poems, &c.,
ed. Furnivall, p. 181; moullyde brede, i.e. mouldy bread, Reliquize
Antique, i. 85 ; ‘ Pannes mouled in a wyche,’ clothes lying mouldy
in a chest; Test. of Love, b. ii. ch. ii.1.29. So also mowled, mowlde,
mucidus ; from mowle, mucidare, Catholicon Anglicum, q.v. Todd
cites: ‘Sour wine, and mowled bread ;’ Abp. Cranmer, Ans. to
Bp. Gardiner, p. 299. With which compare: ‘ Very coarse, hoary,
moulded bread,’ Knollys, Hist. of the Turks (Todd). B. The oldest
spelling of the ME. verb is muwlen. ‘ Oder leten pinges muwlen oder
rusten ’= or let things grow mouldy or rusty; Ancren Riwle, p. 344,
1, 4. We also find ‘mulede pinges’= mouldy things, id. p. 104,
note k. Hence mowly, adj.; ‘All the brede [bread] . . waxed anon
mowly;’ Caxton, Golden Legend, St. Thomas, § 10. Cf, prov. E.
mouly, mouldy; E.D.D. Of Scand. origin. Cf. ME. mouwl, sb.,
mouldiness, answering to MDan. mul, Swed. dial. mul, muel, mijel,
Swed. mégel, mould. Cf. also Dan. mullen, mouldy, muine, to
become mouldy ; Swed. dial. mulas, Swed. méglas, to grow mouldy;
Icel. mygla, to grow musty, formed, by vowel-change of x to y,
from Icel. mug-, as in mugga, mugginess. See Muggy. Thus
mould is mugginess ; the notions of muggy,and mouldy are still not
far apart. Der. mouldi-ness; also mould, verb, for moul, Spenser.
F. Q. ii. 3. 41. See note on Mould (1) above, ae ;

MOULT, to cast feathers; as birds do. (L.) The / is intrusive,

CC 4


388 MOUND


just as in fault from ME. faute; see Fault. ME. mouten; ‘his’


haire movtes,’ i.e. falls off, Pricke.of Conscience, 1. 781. ‘Mowtyn,
as fowlys, Plumeo, deplumeo;’. Prompt. Parv. ‘ Mowter, moulter,
quando auium pennz decidunt';’ Gouldman, cited by Way to illus-
trate ‘ Mowtare, or mowtard [i.e. moulter, moulting bird], byrde,


Plutor;’ Prompt. Pary. AS. bi-miitian,.to exchange (Bosworth). |


—L. mitare, to change; whence F. muer, to moult ; see Mew (3).
So also OHG, miizén, to moult, is merely borrowed from L. mitare ;
now spelt mausen in mod. G. Der. moulting; also mews; and see
mutable.

MOUND, an-earthen defence, a hillock. (F.—L.) ‘Compast
with a mound;’ Spenser, F. Q. ii. 7. 56. ‘The sense of ‘hillock’ or
‘heap’ is found also in F. mont, Ital. monte, and Walloon mont,
a heap, a mass (Sigart); as well as in L. mons. Mound is merely
a variant of mount (1).—AF. mund, variant of munt, a hill; Vie de
St. Auban, 848, 875; OF. mont.—L. montem, acc, of mons, a moun-
tain, a heap. See below. [ Perhaps confused with AS. mund,
protection ; thus Baret (1580) has: ‘A hedge, a mound, sepes.’ Cf.
prov. E. mound, a hedge.

MOUNT (1), a hill, rising ground. (L.) ME. munt, OEng.

Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 11, 1. 14. AS. munt, Grein, ii. 269. [Im-
mediately from Latin, but affected by AF. munt.]—L. montem; acc. of
mons, a, mountain ; stem mon-ti-. Formed (with suffix -¢i-) from the
second grade (mon-) of 4/MEN, to project, seen in L. é-min-ére, to
jut out; cf. E. pro-mon-tor-y.
q-V.; mount (2), q.v.
‘ MOUNT (2), to ascend. (F.—L.) ME. mounten, P. Plowman,
B. prol. 67; older form monten, King Alisaunder, 784.—F. monter,
‘to mount ;’ Cot. =F. mont, a mountain, hill. [The verb is due to
the use of the OF. adverb a mont, up-hill; so also the adv. a val,
down-hill, produced F. avaler, to swallow, and avalanche.|=—L. mon-
tem, acc. of mons, a hill. See Mount (1). Der. mount-er, mount-
ing; also mount-e-bank, q.v. Also a-mount, q.V.; para-mount, re-
mount, sur-mount, tanta-mount, tra-montane.

MOUNTAIN, a hill. (F.—L.) Inearly use. ME. montaine,
Layamon, 1. 1282.—OF. montaigne, montaine; mod. .F. montagne,
a mountain. Late L. montinea, by-form of montaina,.a mountain ;
Ducange. = L. montana, neut. pl., mountainous regions ; from mon-
zainus, adj., hilly. —L. mont-, stem of mons, a mountain. See
Mount (1). Der. mountain-ous, Cor. ii. 3. 127, from MF. montaign-
eux, ‘mountainous,’ Cot.; mountain-eer, Temp. iii. 3. 44, with suffix
~eer=F., -ier,


MOUNTEBANKE, a charlatan, quack doctor. (Ital. —L. and '


G.) Lit. ‘one who mounts on a bench,’ to proclaim his nostrums.
See Trench, Select Glossary. In Shak. Hamlet, iv. 7.142. ‘ Fellows,
to mount a bank! id your instructor In the dear tongues, never
discourse to you Of the Italian mountebanks?’ Ben Jonson, Volpone,
ii. 1 (Sir Politick), — Ital. montambanco, a mountebank ; MItal. monta
in banco, ‘a mountibanke,’ montar’ in banco, ‘to plaie the mounti-
banke ;’ Florio. B. Hence the e stands for older i, which is short
for in; the mod. Ital: must be divided monta-m-banco, where -m- (for
in) has become m before the following 6.—TItal. montare, to mount,
cognate with F. monter, to mount; in=L. in, in, on; and Ital.
banco, from OHG., banc, a bench, money-table. See Mount (2),
In, and Bank (2). Cf. Ital. saltimbanco (for saltar’ in banco),
a quack.

MOURN, to grieve, be sad. (E.) ME. moornen, mournen, mornen;
Chaucer, C. T., A 3704. AS. murnan, to grieve; Grein, ii. 269.4+Icel.
morna; Goth. maurnan; OHG, mornén.. B. The Goth. -n- before
-an is a mere suffix, giving the verb an intransitive character; and
the Teut. type is *mur-n-an-. Allied to AS. meornan, to care; Gk.
pép-tuva, sorrow. From 4/SMER; cf. Skt. smy, to remember, to
long for. Der. mourn-ful, Spenser, F. Q. i. 1. 543 mourn-ful-ly,
mourn-ful-ness ; mourn-ing, sb., AS. murnung.

‘ MOUSE, a small rodent quadruped. (E.). ME. mous (without
final e), Chaucer, C. T. 144. AS. mis, in Atlfric’s Gloss., Nomina
Feraram ; Voc. 120.16. The pl. is mys, by vowel-change ; whence
KE. mice.4-Du. muis ; Icel. mis, pl. myss; Dan. muus; Swed. mus;

G. maus; Russ. muish(e); L. mus; Gk. pis; Pers. mish; Rich. Dict.
P- 13255 Skt.-misha-, a rat,a mouse. f. The sense is ‘ the stealing
animal.’ =4/MEUS, to steal; whence Skt. mush, to steal, miisha-,
a stealer. Der. mouse, vb., Mach. ii. 4. 13, mous-er; mouse-ear,
a plant, mouse-tail,a plant. Also muscle. (But not tit-mouse.)

MOUSTACHE, MUSTACHE, the hair on the upper lip.
(F.—TItal.—Gk.) Formerly mustachio, Shak. L. L. L. v. 1. 110;
this is taken from the Ital. form given below. Both mustachio and
mustache are given in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—F. moustache, ‘a
mustachoe ;’ Cot.—Ital. mostaccio, ‘a face, a snout, a mostacho;’
Florio. (Cf. Span. mostacho, a whisker, moustache; answering to
the E, form mostacho in Florio.]—Gk. picrar-, stem of wtorag, the
upper lip, a moustache; Doric and Laconic form of pdorag, that


See Eminent, Der. mount-ain, '


MUCK, AMUCK


wherewith one chews, the mouth, the upper lip; cf. wacrd¢ey, to.
chew, eat. See Mastic.

MOUTH, the aperture between the lips, an aperture, orifice, out-
let. (E.) ME. mouth, Chaucer, C. T. 153. AS. mad, Grein, ii.
266.4Du, mond; Icel, munnr (for *mundr); Dan. mund; Swed.
mun; G, mund; Goth, munths,. B. Teut. type *munthoz, m.; Idg.
type *mantos; cf, L. mentum, the chin. Der. mouth, vb., Hamlet,.
iv. 2,203; mouth-ful, Pericles, ii, 1. 35 ; mouth-piece.

MOVE, ‘to set in motion, stir, impel. (F.—L.) ME. mouen,
moeuen, meuen; P. Plowman, B. xvii. 194 (where all three spellings
occur in the MSS. The w is written for v; the form meuen is.
common). Also in Chaucer, Parl, of Foules, 1. 150.—OF. movoir,
mod, F. mouvoir.—L. mouére, to move; pp. motus. Allied to Skt.
miv, to push (with pp. mita-, moved, corresponding to L. motus 3
also Gk. dpedopna:, 1 surpass. Der. mov-er, Chaucer, C. T. 2989
(A 2987); mov-able, of which the ME. form was meble or moeble,
P, Plowman, B, iii. 267, borrowed from F. meuble, L. mobilis,
movable ; mov-abl-y, mov-able-ness; move-ment, Gower, C. A. iii, 107,
bk, vii. 674, from OF. movement (Burguy); mov-ing, mov-ing-ly.
Also mobile, from L. mdbilis, movable, often contracted to mob; see
Mob. Also mot-ion, q.v., mot-ive, q.v., mot-or; cf. L. pp. motus.
Also mo-ment, com-mot-ion, e-mot-ion, pro-mote, re-mote, remove ;
mutiny.

MOW (1), to cut down with a scythe. (E.) ME. mowen; ‘Mowe

other mowen’ (other MSS. mouwen), i.e. mow (hay) or stack (in a
mow); P. Plowman, C. vi. 14. The old pt. t. was mew, still com-
mon in Cambridgeshire; see Layamon, 1942, AS. mawan, Grein,
ii. 213. (The vowel-change from AS. @ to E, o is regular ; cf. stan,
stone.) Du. maaijen ; G. mahen, OHG. maan, tomow.  B. Teut.
type *mé@wan-; allied to Gk. d-pa-w, I reap, L. me-t-ere, to reap.
Brugmann, ii. § 680. Der. mow-er, mow-ing ; also mea-d, mea-d-ow,
after-ma-th. — -
- MOW (2), a heap, pile of hay or corn. (E.) ME. mowe; ‘ mowe:
of scheues’=heap of sheaves, given as a various reading in Wyclif,
Ruth, iii, 7 (later text). AS. miga, a mow, Exod. xxii. 6, where
the Vulgate has aceruus frugum. Oldest form miiha, Corpus Glos.,
46.4Icel. miga, migi, a swathe in mowing, also a crowd of people,
a mob; Norw. muga, mua, a heap (of hay). B. The change from
AS. g to ME. w is common; so also in ME. morwe (morrow) from
AS. morgen; ME. hawe, a haw, AS. haga,

MOW (3), a grimace; obsolete. (F,—MDu.) ‘With mop and
mow;’ ‘Temp. iv. 47. ‘Mopping and mowing ;’ K. Lear, iv. 1, 64.
+I mowe, I mocke one; he useth to mocke and mowe;’ Palsgrave.
Chaucer has ME. mowes, pl.; C. T., I 258.—OF. moe, mouth, lip,
grimace ; F. zmoue, ‘a moe, or mouth, an ill-fayoured extension or
thrusting out of the lips ;” Cot.—MDu. mouwe, the protruded under-
lip ; see Oudemans, who cites the phrase maken die mouwe=to make
a grimace, deride, in two passages. 4 The word mop, its com-
panion, is also foreign; see Mop (2).

MUCH, great in quantity. (E.) ME. moche, muche, miche.
Formerly also used with respect of size. ‘A moche man’=a tall
man; P. Plowman, B. viii. 70; where one MS. reads mykil. * Muche
and lyte’=great and small; Chaucer, C. T. 496 (A 494), where
other MSS. have moche, miche, meche. B. When we compare ME,
miche, moche, muche, with the older forms michel, mochel, muchel, we
see at once that the former result from the latter by the loss of final
1, Muche occurs in Layamon, 10350; but net in AS. Muchel,
mochel, are variants of michel (the orig. form) due to form-association
with ME. lutel, from AS. Jytel. B. The orig. form was AS. micel
(cf. Lowl. Sc. mickle), great.4-Icel. mikill, great; OHG. mihhil;
Goth. mikils. Allied to Gk. peydaA-n, great, wéeyas, great; and to L.
magnus. See Magnitude. ;

MUCILAGE, a slimy substance, gum. (F.—L.) Richardson
cites the word from Bacon’s Philosophical Remains. The adj. muci-
laginous is in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. =F. mucilage, ‘ slime, clammy
sap, glewy juice;’ Cot.—L. micilago (stem miiciligin-), mouldy
moisture; used by Theodorus Priscianus (iv. 1), a physician of the
4th century (Lewis). Extended from *micilus, for miucidus, an adj.
formed from miicus; see Mucus. Der. mucilagin-ous (from the
stem).

MUCK, filth, dung, dirt, (Scand.) ME. muck; spelt muk, Gower,
C. A. ii. 2903 bk. v. 48533 muc, Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris,
2557.—Icel. myki, dung; whence myki-reka, a muck-rake, dung-
shovel; cf. moka, to shovel dung out of a stable; Dan, mog, dung;
Norw. mok-dunge, a muck-heap; prob. allied to Norw. mukka,
aheap. Cf. Swed. mocka, to throw dung out of a stable, like prov.
E. ‘to muck out? J Not allied to AS. meox, dung, whence prov, E.
mixen,adung-heap, Der. muck-y, muck-i-ness; muck-heap, muck-rake
(Bunyan’s Pilg. Progress).

MUCK, AMUCK, a term applied to malicious rage. (Malay.)
Only in the phrase ‘to yun amuck;’ the word has been absurdly


MUCKINDER


turned into a muck, Dryden goes further, and inserts an adjective
between muck and the supposed article! ‘ And runs an Indian. muck
at all he meets;” Hind and Panther, iii, 1188. . To run amuck is to
run about in a mad rage.—Malay dmuk, ‘engaging furiously in
battle, attacking with desperate resolution, rushing in a state of
frenzy to the commission of indiscriminate murder, running amuck.
It is applied to any animal in a state of vicious rage;’ Marsden,
Malay Dict. p. 16.
.MUCKINDER, a handkerchief. (Prov.—L.) ‘Take my muck-
ander, And dry thine eyes ;’ Ben Jonson, Tale of a Tub, iii. i (Turfe).
ME. mokadour, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 30. = Prov. mocadour, mod.
Prov. moucadou (Mistral); the same as F. mouchoir. = L. type *mucca-
torium, the same as miicatorium, a wiper; given by Ducange in the
sense of ‘ pair of snuffers.’ = Late L. muccare, to free from mucus. = L.
muccus, micus; see Mucus.
‘ MUCUS, slimy fluid. °(L.) The adj. mucous is in older use, the
sb. being modern. Sir T. Browne says the chameleon’s tongue has
“a mucous and slimy extremity ;’ Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 21. § 7.—L.
miicus, muccus, slime from the nose; whence the adj. micdsus,
Englished by mucous, Allied to Gk. pvéa, the: discharge from the
nose, “wens, snuff of a wick; cf. Gk. dmopvocey (=dmo-pix-yev), to
wipe the nose; L. é-mungere, to wipe the nose.. Der. muc-ous; and
see mucilage, match (2). .~ Ay a oe :
.MUD, wet, soft earth, mire. (E.) .ME. mud; the dat. mudde
occurs in Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 407; see Spec. of Eng., ed.
Morris and Skeat, p. 156, 1. 407. Not found in AS, Of Old Low
G., origin, and prob. a native word. EFries. mudde. Cf. OLow G.
mudde, mud ; whence the adj. muddig, muddy, Bremen Worterbuch ;
MSwed. modd, mud (Ihre); Pomeran. modde. Also in an extended
form ; cf. Du. modder, mud. B. The cognate High German form
is found in the Bavarian mott, peat, already mentioned as the origin
of E. moat;.see Moat. This. establishes it as a Teut. word. Cf.
Skt. miitra-m, urine. Der. mudd-y, mudd-i-ly, mudd-i-ness, mudd-le.
MUDDLE, to confuse. (E.) ‘Muddle, to rout with the bill,
as geese and ducks do; also, to make tipsy and unfit for business ;’
Kersey, ed. 1715. A frequentative verb, formed with the usual
suffix -/e, from the sb. mud. .Thus to mudd-le is to go often in mud,
to dabble in mud; hence, to render water turbid, and, generally, to
confuse. Similarly, Dan. muddre, to stir up mud in water, said of
a ship, from Dan. mudder, mud (from Du.). Cf. EFries. muddelen,
to dirty;; MDu. moddelen, ‘to mudd water,’ Hexham; Pomeran.
muddeln, to disorder. See Mud. }

MUEZZIN, a Mohammedan crier of the hour of prayer. (Arab.)
Spelt muezin in Sir T. Herbert, Travels, ed. 1665, p. 339.— Arab.
mu’zin, mw azzin, ‘the public crier, who assembles people to prayers
by proclamation from a minaret ;’ Rich. Dict. p. 1523; mzazzin,
‘the crier of a mosque;” Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 617. Connected
with Arab. azan, the call to prayers, Palmer, col, 17; uzn, the ear,
Rich. p. 48, Palmer, col. 17; azina, he listened, Rich. p. 48. (Here
Z=4, with the sound of E. ¢h in that.)

MUFF (1), a warm, soft cover for the hands. (Walloon—F.—

Late L.) Spelt muffe in Minsheu, ed. 1627. Prob. from Walloon
mouffe (Sigart), mof (Remacle), a muff, [Cf. Du. mof, Low G. muff
(Berghaus); EFries. muf; from the same.] A shortened form of
F. moufle, a kind of muff; see further under Muffie.
. MUFF (2), a silly fellow, simpleton. (E.) A prov. E. word, of
imitative origin. It simply means ‘a mumbler’ or indistinct speaker.
Cf. prov. E. muff, muffle, to mumble (Halliwell) ; moffe, to do any-
thing ineffectually ; id. So also prov. E. maffle, to speak indistinctly,
an old word, occurring in Richard the Redeles, ed. Skeat, iv. 63:
‘ And somme mafflid with the mouth, and nyst [knew not] what they
mente.’ Cf. Du. muffen, to dote; prov. G. muffen, to be sulky
(Fliigel) ; EFries. muf, a muff, simpleton ; Du. mof, a (Westphalian)
boor, a clown, used asanickname. 4 Cf.‘ Almains, Rutters, Mujfes,
and Danes;’ Marlowe, Tamb. pt. ii. A. i. sc. 1.22. This is the
same word; Muffe (Du. mof) was a nickname given by one Germanic
people to another. ‘The Low Dutch call the High muffes . . up-
braiding them with their heavinesse ;’ Sir J. Reresby, Travels (1657).
And see Addit. to Nares. ser

‘MUFFIN, a kind of tea-cake. (F.?) Lance. dial. mowjin, moujin,
a wheat-cake baked upon a bake-stone over the fire; tea-cake in
general (E.D.D.). Cp. Norm. dial. moujflu, adj., said of bread
swollen up in the baking, Moisy, Corblet; OF. mouflet, soft bread
(Roquefort); OF. mofffet, bread of a finer sort (Ducange); Prov.
pan mouflet, soft bread (Mistral); OF. pain moflet, soft; bread
(Godefroy). Probably related to EFries. muffeln, to mumble food,
as a toothless person does. See Muff (2). .

MUFFLE, to cover up warmly. (F.—Late L.) Levins, ed. 1570,
gives: ‘A muffle, focale [i.e. a neck-cloth]; to muffle the face,
velare; to muffle the mouth, obturare ;’ col. 184. ‘1 muffyil, je em-
monffle;’ Palsgrave. The pp. muffeld is in Malory, ed. Caxton,


MULLAH, MOLLA 389;


| bk. viii. ch. 25; 1. 34. Only the verb is now used, but it is detived from


the sb. here given.—OF. mofle, moufle (13th cent., Littré) ; the same
as mouffie, which Cot. explains by ‘a winter mittaine.’ [Cf. MDu.
moffel, ‘a muff, or muffe lined with furre;? Hexham; Norweg:
muffel, a half-glove, mitten; Aasen; from OF.]=Late L. muffula
(occurring A.D. 817), a winter glove (Ducange) ; also spelt mulfola.
Of unknown origin. B. From the sb. muffle came the verb to muffle,
in common use owing to analogy with the numerous frequentative
verbs ending in -/e. See Muff (1). To muffle a bell is to wrap
a cloth round the clapper ; a muffled peal is a peal rung with such
bells, rung on the 31st of December. At midnight, the muffles are.
taken off, and the New Year is rungin. Hence the phrase ‘a muffled
sound ;’ the sense of which approaches that of prov. E. muffle, to
mumble, from a different source, as explained under Muff (2).
Der. Le agg Merry Wives, iv. 2. 73.

MUF TI, an expounder of the law, magistrate. (Arab.) In Sir.
T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, pp. 175, 285; spelt mujiti, Howell,
Directions for Travel, ed. Arber, p. 85; mu/ti in Sandys, Trav. 1632,
p- 36 (end). = Arab. mufti, ‘a magistrate’ (Palmer, col. 590) ;. ‘ wise,
one whose sentence has the authority of the law, an expounder of
the Muhammedan law, the mufti or head law-officer amongst the
Turks ;’ Rich. Dict. p. 1462. Connected with fatwa, ‘a judicious
or religious decree pronounced by a mufti, a judgment, sentence ;’
id. p. 1070. 4 The phrase ‘in mufti’ means in civilian costume,
as opposed to military dress, See Yule.

MUG, a cylindrical cup for liquor. (Low G.) .‘A mugge, potte,
Ollula;” Levins, 184, 24. ‘Clay mugis, pl.; G. Douglas, tr. of
Virgil, prol. to bk. viii. st. 8. Perhaps from EFries. mukke, a
cylindrical earthen vessel; Groningen mokke (Molema, p. 543);
whence also Norm. dial. mogue, Guernsey mogue (Moisy); Norw.»
mugge, mugga, an open can or pitcher; see Aasen, Larsen. The.
Trish mugan, a mug, is prob. from E. Cf. prov. E. muggen, made of
earthenware.

MUGGY, damp and close, said of weather. (Scand.) Both.
muggy and muggish are in Ash’s Dict., ed. 1775.—Icel. mugga, soft
drizzling mist; whence mugguvedr, muggy, misty weather, Cf.
Norw. mugg, fine rain; muggen, moist, muggy. Perhaps allied
to Dan. muggen, musty, mouldy; mugne, to grow musty; Swed. dial,
muggen, mouldy, from mugg, mould. Cf. also Swed. mégel, mould,
Icel. mygla, to grow musty. Der. muggi-ness; cf. mouldy.

MUGWORT, the.name of a wild flower. (E.) Spelt mogworte
in Palsgrave. AS. mucgwyrt, the Artemisia; see numerous examples:
of the word in Cockayne’s A. S. Leechdoms, iii. 339. It prob. means
‘midge-wort ;’ see Midge. Perhaps regarded as being good against
midges; cf. flea-bane, For the form, cf. OSax. muggia, Du. mug,
Low G. mugge, a midge, muggert, mugwort. Note also Dan. myg-
blomst, ‘midge-bloom,’ bog orchis.

MULATTO, a child of a white person and a negro. (Span.—L.)
Used by E. Young, The Centaur (1754), letter 2; Todd’s Johnson.
=Span. mudato, ‘a mulatto, a son of a black and of a white;’
Pineda (1740); ‘the sonne of a black Moore and one of another
nation ;’ Minsheu (1623). From Span. mal-o, a mule, with dimin.
suffix -at-; see Diez. —L. milum, acc. of milus; see Mule.

MULBERRY, the fruit of a certain tree. (Hybrid; L. and E.)
ME, moolbery. Trevisa translates sycomoros by moolberyes, i. 11,
1.4. Here the / stands for r; cf. ME. murberie, Voc. 557. 31. The
AS. name for the tree was mér-béam ; see Cockayne’s A. S, Leech-
doms, iii. 339. ‘ Morus, vel rubus, mOor-béam;’ /Elfric’s Gloss.,
Nomina Arborum, in Wright’s Vocab. i. 32, col. 2. [The AS. béam,
a tree, is mod. E. beam.| B. Berry is an E. word; mul=ME.
mool= AS. mér-. The AS. mor- is from L. morus, a mulberry-tree..
Cf. Gk. p@pov, pdpov, a mulberry, popéa, a mulberry-tree; perhaps
p@pov is the origin of L. morum,a mulberry. @ The G. maulbeere
(OHG, mirberi) is similarly compounded, from L. mérus and G..
beere. See Sycamore. Der. murrey.

MULCT, a fine, penalty. (L.) Given as a sb. in Minsheu, ed,
1627.—L. mulcta, a fine, penalty; whence also OF. multe (Cot-
grave). The older and better L. form is muléa. Said to be of Sabine
or Oscan origin, . Der, mulct, vb.

MULE, the offspring of the horse and ass. (F.—L.) ME. mule}
Rob, of Glouc, p. 189, 1. 3913. =F. mule.—L, miilum, acc. of miilus,
amule. f. The long &% points to a loss; the word is cognate with
Gk. puxdos, an ass, puxAds, a stallion ass. (See Prellwitz.) _ | The
L. miilus is also the origin of AS, mil, which is obsolete; it would
have given the mod..E. form as moul or wowl, Der, mul-ish; mul-
et-eer, spelt muleter in old edd. of Shakespeare, 1 Hen, VI, iii. 2. 68,
from F, muletier, ‘a muletor’ (Cot.), which from F. met, ‘a moyle,
mulet, or great mule’ (id.), formed with suffix -et from F, mule<L,
milum, acc. of milus, ;

MULLAH, MOLLA, a Mohammedan title of respect given to
some Teligious dignitaries. (Arab.) Arab. mauld, a judge, the magis-


390. MULLED


trate of a large city, a lord, a master; Rich. Dict. p. 1528; commonly
pronounced molla in Turkey (Devic).

MULLED, a term applied to sweetened ale or wine. (F—L.?)
Apparently from ME. mullen, to break to powder, crumble (Prompt.
Parv. p. 348), from the sb. mull, powder, the sense of which was
perhaps transferred (as Way suggests) to the ‘ powdered condiments’
which the ale contained, esp. grated spices, and the like. Cf. ME.
mul, AS. myl, dust, powder. But Blount’s Gloss. has: ‘ Mulled
sack (vinum mollitum), because softened and made mild by burning
and a mixture of sugar.’ =F. mollir, to soften. = L. mollire, to soften.
=L, mollis, soft; see Mollify. Cf. muill’d, weak; Cor. iv. 5. 239.

MULLEIN, a kind of wild flower. (F.) The great mullein is
Verbascum thapsus. Spelt mullein in Minsheu, ed. 1627. ME. moleyn,
Prompt. Parv.=AF. moleine, Voc. 556. 31; F. moléne. The ME.
name was softe, i.e. the soft. This suggests a der. from OF. mol,
soft; from L. mollis, soft.

MULLET (1), a kind of fish. (F.—L.) ME. molet; ‘ Molet,
fysche, Mullus;’ Prompt. Parv. Older form mulet, occurring as a
gloss to L. milus in a list of fishes of the 12th cent.; see Wright’s
Vocab. i. 98, 1. 1.—OF. mulet, ‘the mullet-fish;’ Cot. Formed,
with dimin. suffix -et, from L. mullus, Late L. miilus, the red mullet.
Cf. Gk. piAdos, a sea-fish.

MULLET (2), a five-pointed star. (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. A term in heraldry. ME. molet, a mullet (in heraldry) ;
Book of St. Alban’s, pt. ii. fol. £7, back; pl. molettys, id. fol. b 3,
back. = OF, and F. molette, a rowel; ‘ molette d’esperon, the rowell of
a spur,’ Cot.; mollette,‘a mullet, the ramhead of a windlesse, the
rowell of a spur;’ id. MHatzfeld explains F. molette as the dimin.
of F. meule, a mill-stone.—L. mola, a mill. See Molar, Mill.
@ The transference of sense was from ‘wheel of a water-mill’ to
any wheel, including the spur-rowel, which the mullet resembled.

MULLIGATAWNY, ahotsoup. (Tamil.) It occurs in 1784;
see Yule. From Tamil milagu-tannir, lit. pepper-water (Yule). Cf.
Malayalam mulaka, pepper; Tamil ¢annir, water (H. H. Wilson).

MULLION, an upright division between the lights of windows.
(F.) A variant of munnion, with the same sense, which is still in
use in Dorsetshire; Halliwell. It occurs in some edd. of Florio;
see below.=F. moignon, ‘a stump, or the blunt end of a thing;
moignon des ailes, the stumps, or pinions of the wings; moignon du
bras, the brawn, or brawny part of the arm;’ Cot. B. Hence
munnion, just as OF. troignon gives E. trunnion. Cf. MItal. mugnone,
“a carpenters munion or trunion;’ Torriano. As Wedgwood well
observes, ‘the munnion or mullion of a window is the stump of the
division before it breaks off into the tracery of the window.’ It
clearly took its name from the likeness to the stump of a lopped
tree, which is one of the senses of F. moignon; see Littré. The
word also occurs as Span. muzton, the brawn or muscle of the arm,
the stump of an arm or leg cut off; Port. munhées, pl. of munhGo, the
trunnions of a gun. Further allied to Span. muvteca, the wrist, Port.
munheca. y. From OF. moing, maimed (Diez, 4th ed. p. 725). Of
uncertain origin; see Korting, § 6369. 4 The E. form may be
Walloon. Sigart has: ‘ Mouyon, mouillon (d’cabiau), tranche de
cabillaut; peut-étre de moignon.’

MULTANGULAR, having many angles. (L.) In Kersey, ed.
1715.—L. mult-, stem of multus, many; and anguldris, angular.
See Multitude and Angular. @ Similarly, multi-lateral, from
multi=multo-, from multus, and E. lateral, q.v. So also multi-
form.

MULTIFARIOUS, manifold, diversified. (L.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674; he says it occurs in Bacon. Englished (by change
of -vs to -ous, as in ardu-ous, &c.) from L. multifarius, manifold,
various. Theorig. sense appears to be ‘ many-speaking,’ i. e. speak-
ing on many subjects.=L. multi=multo-, from multus, much; and
~farius, prob. connected with fari, to speak. Cf. the rare word
fariari, to speak. See Multitude and Fate.

MULTIPLE, repeated many times. (L.) In Kersey, ed. 1775.
A coined word, analogous to ¢ri-ple, quadru-ple, &c., the suffix being
due to the L. suffix -plex; see Multiply.

MULTIPLY, to increase many times, make more numerous.
(F.—L.) ME, multiplien, Chaucer, C. T. 16303 (G 835). He also
has multiplying, sb., C. T. 12308 (C 374); and multiplication, C. T.
16317 (G 849).—F. multiplier, ‘to multiply ;’ Cot. —L. multiplicare,
to render manifold.—L. multiplic-, stem of multiplex, manifold. = L,
multi+« = multo-, for multus, much ; and the suffix -plex, with the sense of
“fold.” See Multitude and Complex, Plait. Der. multiplic-and,
from the fut. pass. part. multiplicandus ; multiplic-at-ion, from F. mul-
tiplication<L. acc. multiplicatiénem; multiplic-at-ive; multipli-er ;
multiplic-i-ty, Drayton, The Mooncalf, 1. gor (R.).

MULTITUDE, a great number, a crowd. (F.—L.) ME.
multitude, Gower, C. A. i. 220; bk. ii. 1810.—F. multitude, ‘a mul-
titude;’ Cot.—L. multitidinem, acc. of multitudo, a multitude.


MUMPS


Formed (with suffix -taido) from multi- = mulio-, from multus, many,
much. Root unknown. Der. multitudin-ous, Macb. ii. 2. 62, from
the stem multitudin-.

MULTUREH, a toll or fee taken for grinding corn at a mill.
(F.—L.) MF. moulture, ‘a multure; a grist, or grinding ; the corne
ground; also, the toll or fee that’s due for grinding;’ Cot. (F.
mouture.)=L. molitira, a grinding; from molere (pp. molitus), to
grind. See Molar.

MUM (1), an inierjection, impressing silence. (E.) In Shak.
Temp. iii. 2. 59. ME. mom, mum, expressive of the least possible
sound with the lips; P. Plowman, B. prol. 215; Lydgate, London
Lyckpeny, st. 4, in Spec. of Eng. ed. Skeat, p. 24. So also L. mu,
Gk. pi, the least sound made with the lips. Evidently of imitative
origin. Der. mum-ble; and see mummer. Compare mew, murmur,
mutter, myth,

MUM (2), a kind of beer. (Low G.) ‘Cold roast beef and mum ;”
Guardian, no. 34 (1713). ‘Mugs of mum;’ Pope, Dunciad, ii. 385.
Named after Christian Mumme, a brewer of Brunswick (ab. 1492).
Cf. Du. mom, G. mumme (in Weigand).

MUMBLE, to speak indistinctly, to chew inefficiently. (E.)
The d is excrescent, and due to emphasis; the final -/e is the usual
frequentative ending. ME. momelen, mamelen, to speak indistinctly
or weakly; P. Plowman, A. v. 21, B. v. 21. Formed with the
frequent. suffix -el- from ME. mom, a slight sound. See Mum (1).
Cf. Du. mommelen, EFries. and G. mummeln, to mutter, mumble;
similarly formed ; Low G. mummeln, to mumble food (Schambach.)
Der. mumbl-er, mumbl-ing.

MUMMER, a masker, buffoon. (F.—Du.)
mummynge;° Tyndall, Works, p. 13, col. 2, 1.1. ‘As though he
came in in a mummary;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 975 b.. * Made
prouysyon for a dysguysynge or a mummynge ;’? Fabyan’s Chron, an.
1399-1400. ‘Mommery, mommerie;’ Palsgrave. ME. mommerye,
mommynge, a rude dramatic entertainment; Trevisa, tr. of Higden,
viii. 539, 540. This early use of the F. form mummery shows that
we took the word through the French, though it was orig. a Dutch
or Platt-deutsch word. Cotgrave gives, however, no verb; but this
was easily developed. MF. mommeur, ‘a mummer, one that goes
a mumming;’ also mommerie, ‘a mummery, a mumming;’ Cot.=—
MDu. mommen, ‘to goe a moming, or in a maske;’ also mom,
mommer, Or mommekans, ‘a mommer, or a masker ;’ also mommerye,
‘momming, or masking’ (with F. suffix); Hexham, He also gives
mom-aensicht, ¢a vizard, or a mommers vizard.’ Cf. Low G. mum-
meln, bemummeln, to mask, mumme, a mask; Bremen Worterbuch.
(Hence G. vermummen, to mask.) B. The origin is imitative, from:
the sound mum or mom, used by nurses to frighten children, like the
E. bo! See Wedgwood, who refers to the habit of nurses who wish
to frighten or amuse children, and for this purpose cover their faces
and say mum! or bo/ whence the notion of masking to give amuse-
ment. Cf. G. mummel, a bugbear. ‘Thus the origin is much the
same as in the case of mum, mumble; see Mum (1). Der. mum-<
mer-y.

MUMMY, an embalmed human body. (F.—Ital.—Pers.) For=
merly used of stuff derived from mummies. ‘Mumy, Mummy, a
thing like pitch sold by the apothecaries; .. one [kind] is digged
out of the graves, in Arabia and Syria, of those bodies that were
embalmed, and is called Arabian Mummy ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
‘ Mummy hath great force in stanching of bloud ;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist.
§ 980.—MF. mumie, ‘mummy; man’s flesh imbalmed; or rather
the stuffe wherewith it hath been long imbalmed;’ Cot.—Ital.
mummia, mumia (cf. Span. momia).—Pers. mimiyd, a mummy. =
Pers. mim, mom, wax (much used in embalming); Rich. Dict.

. 1520.

PMUMP, to mumble, sulk, whine, beg. (Du.) A mumper was an
old cant term for a beggar; and to mump was to beg, also to be
sulky; see Nares, ed. Halliwell and Wright. The original notion
was to mumble, hence to mutter, be sulky, to beg; used derisively
with various senses. ‘ How he mumps and bridles!’ where the sense
appears to be ‘ grimaces;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Maid in the Mill,
iii, 2 (Pedro).— Du. mompen,to mump, to cheat (Sewel). Cf. MDu.
mompelen, to. mumble (Sewel); mommelen, mompelen, to mumble
(Hexham). . The form mompelen is nothing but an emphasised:
form of mommelen, and mompen of mommen, to say mum, to mask.
That is, mump is merely a strengthened form of the imitative word
mum; see Mum (1), Mumble,Mummer, Cp. Norw. mumpa, to
munch; WFlem. mompe, a mouthful, also, one who pouts (De Bo).
The curious Goth. verb bi-mamp-jan, to deride, mock at, Luke, xvi.
14, has a similar origin. Der. mump-er, mump-ish (sullen) ; mumps,


‘That goeth a


q- Ve ‘

MUMPS, a swelling of the glands of the neck. (Du.) This
troublesome disease renders speaking and eating difficult, and gives
the patient the appearance of being sullen or sulky. ‘To have the


MUNCH


mumps’ or ‘to be in the mumps’ was, originally, to be sullen; the
sense was easily transferred to the disease which gave such an
appearance. It is derived from the verb Mump, q.v. We find
mumps used as a term. of derision. ‘Not such another as I was,
mumps!’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Scornful Lady, v. 1 (Elder Loveless).
‘Sick o’ the mumps,’ i.e. sulky; B. and F., Bonduca, i. 2 (Petillius),
near the end. :

MUNCH, to chew, masticate. (E.) In Macb. i. 3. 5 (where ed.
1623 has mouncht). Udall has maunch, Apoph. of Erasmus, § 23.
ME. monchen, Chaucer, Troil. i. 914. Monch- answers to an older
form monk-, apparently an imitative word parallel to the base mom-
in ME. momelen, to mumble;. see Mumble. Kilian has MDu.
moncken, mompelen, ‘mussitare.” Cf, EFries. and Low G. munkeln,
to mumble; and see Mump. 4 We cannot deduce it from F.
manger, for phonetic reasons; yet it is quite possible that this
common F, word may have helped to suggest the special sense.
The F. manger is from L. mandicare, to chew, extended from
mandiicus, a glutton, which is from mandere, to chew; see Man-
dible. Der. munch-er.

MUNDANE, worldly. (F.—L.) Taken from F., but now spelt
as if from Latin. ‘For folowinge of his pleasaunce mondayne ;’
Skelton, Book of Three Fooles, ed. Dyce, i, 205.—F. mondain,
‘mundane; Cot.—L. mundanus, worldly.—L. mundus, the world
(lit. order, like Gk. xécpos).—L. mundus, clean, adorned.

MUNGOOSE, MONGOOSE, an Indian ichneumon., (Telugu.)
Spelt mongoose in 1673; mangus in 1685; see Yule, who says: ‘ The
word is Telugu, mangisu. Jerdon gives mangis however as a Deccani
and Mahratti word.’ Forbes, in his Hind. Dict:, has: ‘mangiis,
a weasel, a mongoose.’

MUNICIPAL, pertaining to a township or corporation. (F.—L.)
In Cotgrave.=F. municipal, ‘municipall;’ Cot.—L. minicipdlis,
belonging to a miinicipium, i.e. a township which received the rights
of Roman citizenship, whilst retaining its own laws.—L. minicipi-,
from miniceps, a free citizen, lit. one who takes office or undertakes
duties. —L. miini-, for minus, obligation, duty, and capere, to take ;
see Capture; andsee below. Der. municipal-i-ty.

MUNIFICENCEH, bounty, liberality. (F.—L.) Both muni-
Jicence and munificent are in Minsheu, ed. 1627. The sb. is the more
orig. word.=—F., munificence, ‘ munificence;’ Cot.—L. miinificentia,
bounty, bountifulness. Formed as if from an adj. *miinificent-,
with secondary suffix -ent; the only related word found is the adj.
minificus, bountiful, liberal, formed upon mini-, for minus, a duty,
a present, and facere, to make; so that miini-ficus = present-making.
[The verb minificare is a mere derivative of minificus.] B. For the
verb facere, see Fact. The L. minus signifies orig. ‘ obligation ;’
from an Idg. base *7oi-, whence also E. munition, muniment, com-
mon, com-mune, com-muni-c-ate, im-muni-ty, re-muner-ate. See Bréal;
and Brugmann, i. § 208. From 4/ MEI, to exchange; see Com-
mon. Der. munificent, coined to suit the sb.; muni-ficent-ly.

MUNIMENT, a defence, a record of a claim, title-deed.

(F.—L.) .In Shak. muniments means expedients or instruments ; Cor.
i, I. 122.—F. muniment, ‘a fortifying; also used in the sense of
munition;’ Cot.—L. minimentum, a defence, safeguard. Formed
with suffix -mentum from mini-re, to fortify, for an older form
moenire, lit. to furnish with a wall.=L. moenia, neut. pl., ramparts,
walls, defences. Allied to munition, Brugmann, i. § 208.

MUNITION, materials used in war; also, a fortress, (F.—L.)

In Isaiah, xxix. 7, xxxiii. 16; and in Shak. K. John, v. 2. 98.=—F.
munition, ‘munition, store, provision, provant or victuals for an
army ;’ Cot. L. miinitidnem, acc. of miinitio, a blockading, defending,
securing ; cf. miinitus, pp. of minire, to fortify. See Muniment.
Der. am-munition.

MUNNION, the older and correct form of Mullion, q. v.

MURAL, belonging to a wall. (F.—L.) ‘He [Manlius Capi-
tolinus] .. . was honoured with a murall crown of gold;’ Holland,
tr. of Pliny, b. vii. c. 28.—F. mural, ‘murall, of or belonging to a
wall;’ Cot.<L. miralis, mural.—L. miirus, a wall; OL. moerus,
moirus, . Probably akin to moenia, walls. See Muniment.
Der. im-mure.

MURDER, MURTHER, wilful killing of another man. (E.)
ME. mordre, morder; Chaucer, C. T.15057(B 4241). Also morthre,
Rob. of Glouc. p. 560, 1. 11736. AF. murdre, Laws of Will. I,
§ 22. AS. mordor, mordur; Grein, ii. 263.4-Goth maurthr. B. The
word appears without the suffix -or in AS, and OSax. mord, OFriesic
morth,y mord, Du. moord, G. mord, Ice]. mord, death, murder, cognate
with L. mors (base mort-), death; see Mortal. The change from
th (as in AS. mordor) to d was due to Norman influence; -note the
AF, forms murdre, murdrir, Der. murder, vb., AF. murdrir, ME.
mortheren, P. Plowman, B. xvii. 278; murder-er; murder-ess, spelt
moerdrice in Gower, C. A. i. 351; bk. iii. 21625 murder-ous or murther-
ous, Macb. ii. 3. 147 3 murder-ous-ly, :


MUSCLE 391
MURIATIC, briny, pertaining to brine. (L.) In Johnson. =


L. i a pickled or lying in brine. —L. muria, salt liquor, brine,
ickle.

MURICATED, prickly. (L.) ‘ Muricated, in botany, prickly,
full of sharp points;’ Ash’s Dict., ed. 1775.—L. miricdtus, adj. of
the form of a pp. formed from miiric-, stem of miirex, a fish having
sharp prickles, also, a sharp pointed stone, a spike.

MURKY, MIRKY, dark, obscure, gloomy. (Scand.) The -y
is a modern addition. ‘Hell is murky;’ Macb. vy. 1. 41. ME.
mirke, merke. ‘The merke dale;’ P. Plowman, B.i.1. ‘The mirke
nith’ [night]; Havelok, 404. —Icel. myrkr (for *mirkwoz, Noreen);
Dan. and Swed. mork, dark, murky. + AS. mirce; OSax. mirki.
q The AS. mirce would have become mirch; the final # shows that
the origin is Scand. Cf. Skt. marka-, an eclipse (Macdonell) ; see
Uhlenbeck, Skt. Dict. Der. murki-ly, murki-ness.

MURMUR, a low muttering sound; to mutter, complain in a
low voice. (F.—L.) ME. murmur, sb., Chaucer, C. T. Pers. Tale,
De Invidia (1 503); murmuren, vb., id. 10518 (F 204). —F. murmure,
“a murmure;’ also murmurer, ‘to murmure;’ Cot.={L. murmur,
a murmur; whence the verb murmurare.4+-Gk. popptpev, to rush and
roaras water; Skt. marmara-, the rustling sound of the wind. . Evi-
dently a reduplicated form from the imitative 4/MUR, expressive of
a rustling noise; asin Icel. murra,G.murren, to murmur. Brugmann,
i. § 499. Der. murmur-ous, Pope, tr. of Odyssey, b. xx. 1. 19.

MURRAIN, an infectious disease among cattle. (F.—L.) ME.
moreyne, moreine, P, Plowman, C. iv. 97.—OF. *moreine, not found ;
closely allied to OF. morine, a-carcase of a beast, a malady or
murrain among cattle. See Roquefort, who cites an OF. translation
of Levit. xi. 8; ‘tu eschiveras mortes morines’=thou shalt eschew
dead carcases. [Cf. Norm. dial. morine, Span. morrifia, Port.
morrinha, murrain.|—OF. morir (mod. F. mourir), to die (Burguy).
= Folk-L. morire, for L. mori, to die; see Mortal.

MURREY, dark red; obsolete. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘The leaves of
some trees turn a little murry or reddish;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 512.
Spelt murrey, Palsgrave ; murreye, Hoccleve, De Regim. Principum,
695.— OF. morée, ‘a kind of murrey, or dark red colour;’ Cot.
This OF. morée answers to a Late L. mérdta, fem. of mordtus. We
actually find Late L. mératum in the sense of a kind of drink, made
of thin wine coloured with mulberries; see Ducange. Cf. Ital.
morato, mulberry-coloured, from Ital. mora, a mulberry; Span.
morado, mulberry-coloured, from Span. mora. Hence the derivation
is from L. mdrum, a mulberry ; and the sense is properly ‘ mulberry-
coloured.’ See Mulberry.

MURRION, another spelling of Morion, q. v.

MUSCADEL, MUSCATEL, MUSCADINE, a rich fra-
grant wine, a fragrant pear. (F.—Ital.—L.—Gk.—Pers.) Shak.
has muscadel, a wine, Tam. Shrew, iii. 2,174. ‘ Muscadell, mulsum
apianum ;’ Levins. Spelt muscadine, Beaum. and Fletcher, Loyal
Subject, iii. 4, last line. And see Nares.— MF. muscadel, ‘the wine
muscadell or muscadine;’ Cot. =MItal. moscadello, moscatello, ‘ the
wine muscadine ;’ cf. moscardino, ‘a kinde of muske comfets, the name
of a kind of grapes and peares;’ moscatint, ‘ certaine grapes, peares,
and apricocks, so called ;’ Florio. Dimin. forms from MItal. moscato,
‘sweetened or perfumed with muske; also the wine muskadine ;’ id.
= MItal. mzsco, ‘muske; also, a muske or civet cat;’ id. —I.. museum,
acc. of muscus, musk; see Musk.

MUSCLE (1), the fleshy parts of the body by which an animal
moves. (F.—L.) Sir T. Elyot has the pl. muscules; Castel of
Helth, b.ii.c.33. But thisisa Latinised form. Spenser has muscles,
Astrophel, 120.—F. muscle.—L. musculum, acc. of musculus, (1) a
little mouse, (2) a muscle, from its creeping appearance. (Cf. F.
souris, (1) mouse, (2) muscle.) Dimin. of mis, a mouse, cognate
with E. mouse; see Mouse. Der. muscul-ar, in Kersey, ed. 1715,
substituted for the older term musculous (Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674),
from L. musculdsus, muscular.

MUSCLE (2), MUSSEL, a shell-fish. (L.) Really the
same word as the above, but borrowed at a much earlier period, and
directly from Latin. ME. muscle, Chaucer, C. T. 7682 (D. 2100) ;
P. Plowman, C. x. 943; which follows the F. spelling. AS. muzxle ;
‘Muscula, muxle;’ Voc. 319. 22; and again, ‘Geniscula, muzle;’
Voc. 261. 34. [Here the « stands for cs, by metathesis for sc, just
as in AS. dxian for adscian; see Ask.]=—L. musculus, a small fish,
sea-muscle ; the same word as musculus, a little mouse; see Muscle:
(1). @ The double spelling of this word can be accounted for;
the L. musculus became AS. muscle (Mone, Quellen, p. 340), early
turned into muxle, whence E. mussel, the final -e/ being regarded as
the AS, dimin. suffix. The spelling muscle is French. ¢- The


‘remarkable change of sense in L. musculus from ‘little mouse’ to


‘muscle’ has its counterpart in Dan. mus-ling, a muscle (the fish),
lit. ‘mouse-ling.’ Cf. Swed. mus, a mouse ; mussla, a muscle (fish) ;


Gk, 0s, (1) mouse, (2) muscle, in both E, senses. We even find,’


392 MUSCOID


as Mr. Wedgwood points out, F. sowris, ‘a mouse, also, the sinewy
brawn of the arm;’ Cot.

MUSCOID, moss-like. (Hybrid; L., with Gk. suffix.) Botanical.
Coined from L. musco-, for muscus, moss; and the Gk. suffix -edys,
like, from e@5os, form. See Moss.

MUSE (1), to meditate, be pensive. (F.—L.) ME. musen,
Chaucer, C. T: 5453 (B 1033); P. Plowman, B. x. 181. [We also
find ME. mosard, musard, a dreamer, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Lang-
toft, pp. 229, 266; from F. musard, sb. ‘a muser, dreamer,’ also as
adj. ‘musing, dreaming,’ &c.; Cot.]—F. muser, ‘to muse, dreame,
study, pause, linger about a matter;’ Cot.—OF. muse, the mouth,
snout of an animal, Godefroy ; whence the dimin. musel, later museau,
whence E. muzzle; see Muzzle. B. Strange as it may seem, this
etymology, given by Diez, is probably the right one; it is well
borne out by Florio’s Ital. Dict., where we find : ‘ Musare, to muse,
to thinke, to surmise, also to muzle, to muffle, to mocke, to iest, to
gape idlie about, to hould ones musle or snout in the aire.’ This is
plainly from Ital. muso, ‘a musle, a snout, a face.” The image is
that of a dog snuffing idly about, and musing which direction to take;
and arose as a hunting term. ‘Thus in the Book of St. Alban’s, fol.
e 6, we find: ‘And any hound fynd or musyng of hir mace,’ i.e.
if any hound find her [a hare], or makes a scenting of her. See the
OF. musari, muse, musel, muser. @ Disputed; see Diez, Korting,
Scheler. Der. mus-er, a-muse,

MUSE (2), one of the nine fabled goddesses who presided over
the arts. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Hen. V, prol. 1.—F. museo= L.
musa, a muse. = Gk. potoa,a muse. Der. mus-eum, q.v., mus-ic, q. V-,
mos-aic, q. V.

MUSEUM, a repository for works of art, &c. (L.—Gk.)
‘ Museum, a study, or library; .., The Museum or Ashmole’s Museum,
a neat building in the city of Oxford .. . founded by Elias Ashmole,
Esq.;’ Phillips, World of Words, ed. 1706. This building was
finished in 1683. ‘That famous Museum;’ Sandys, Trav. 1632;
p- 111.—L. miiséum.=— Gk. pouvcetoy, the temple of the muses, a study,
school. — Gk. podoa, a muse; see Muse (2).

MUSHROOM, a kind of fungus. (F.—OHG.) In Shak. Temp.
v. 39. The final m is put for x. ME. muscheron, explained as
‘toodys hatte, boletus, fungus;’ Prompt. Parv.—MF. mouscheron,
mousseron, ‘a mushrome;” Cot. Extended from OF. mousse, moss
(Hatzfeld) ; where mushrooms grow.—OHG. mos (G. moos), moss ;
cognate with E. moss; see Moss.

MUSIC, the science of harmony. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. musik,
musyk, P. Plowman, B. x. 172.—F. musique, ‘ musick;’ Cot.—L,
nusica. = Gk. wovoiwn, any art over which the muses presided, esp.
music; fem. of povoixds, belonging to the muses.—Gk. povoa, a
muse; see Muse (2). Der. music-al, L. L. L. iv. 3. 3423 music-al-
ly; music-i-an, Merch. Ven. v. 106, from F. musicien.

MUSIT, a small gap in a hedge; obsolete. (F.—C.) In Shak.
Venus, 683; and see Two Noble Kinsmen, iii. 1. 97, and my note
thereon; also Nares.= MF. mussetie, ‘a little hole, corner, or hoord
to hide things in;’ Cot. Hence applied to the hole in a hedge
through which a hare passes. Dimin. of OF. musse, ‘a secret
corner ;’ Cot.=—F. musser, ‘to hide, conceale;’ id. Of Celtic origin;
cf. Olrish miich-aim, I hide (Thurneysen, p. 108).

MUSK, a strong perfume obtained from the musk-deer. (F.—L.
—Gk.—Pers.) In Shak. Merry Wives, ii. 2.68. Spelt muske in
Palsgrave.=— MF. musgue (Palsgrave); F. musc, ‘musk;’ Cot,=—L.
muscum, acc. of muscus, musk.= Late Gk. péoxos.— Pers. musk, misk,
musk; Rich. Dict. p. 1417. Cf. Skt. mushka-s, a testicle; because
the musk was obtained from a bag behind the musk-deer’s navel.
Another sense of mushka-s was (probably) ‘little mouse;’ from mush,
to steal. See Mouse. Der. musc-adel, q.v., nut-meg, q.V.; musk-
apple, musk-rose (from the scent); musk-y.

MUSKET, a small hawk; a hand-gun. (F.—Ital.—L.) a, The
old guns had often rather fanciful names. One was called the
falconet, a dimin. of falcon; another a saker, which was also the
name of a hawk; another a basilisk; another a culverin, i. e. snake-
like; see Culverin. So also the musket was called after a small
hawk of the same name. f. Shak. has musket, a hand-gun; All’s
Well, iii. 2.111. ME. musket, spelt muskytte in Prompt. Parv., and
explained asa ‘byrde.’ ‘ Musket, a lytell hauke, mouchet ;’ Palsgrave.
See Way’s note, who remarks that ‘the most ancient names of fire-
arms were derived from monsters, dragons, or serpents, or from
birds of prey, in allusion to velocity of movement.’= MF, mousquet,
“a musket (hawke, or piece) ;’ Cot. [Here piece=gun.] [Cotgrave
also gives MF. mouchet, mouschet, ‘a musket, the tassel of a spar-
hauke; also the little singing-bird that resembles the friguet, [which
is] a kind of sparrow that keeps altogether about walnut-trees.’]—
Ital. mosgwetto, ‘a musket; also, a musket-hawke;’ Florio.  y. Just
as MF. mouchet, mouschet, is related to MF. mouche, mousche, a fly,
so Ital. mosguetto is related to Ital. mosca, a fly. [The connexion is


MUSTANG


not very obvious, but see the remarks in Scheler, who shows that
small birds were sometimes called flies; a clear example is in G.
gras-miicke, a hedge-sparrow, lit. a ‘ grass-midge.’ The particular
hawk here spoken of was ‘so named from his small size.] = L. musca,
a fly. Observe also, in Florio, the forms moscardo, ‘a kind of birde,
also a musket hauke;’ moscherino, ‘a kind of flie, the name of
a birde;’ moschetti, ‘a kinde of sparowes in India, so little, as with
feathers and all one is no bigger then [than] a little walnut ;’ all of
which words are derived from mosca. We may also compare the
Span. and E. mosquito; see Mosquito. Der. musket-eer, spelt
musqueteer in Hudibras, pt. i.c.2, 1, 567, from MF. mousquetaire,
‘a musketeer,-a souldier that serves with a musket ;’ Cot.; musket-
oon, ‘a short gun, with a very large bore,’ Kersey, ed. 1715, from
Ital. moschettone, a blunderbuss (Baretti); cf. moschettone, a great
horse-fly (Florio) ; musket-r-y.

MUSLIN, a fine thin kind of cotton cloth. (F.—Ital.—Syriac.)
Spelt musselin and muslin in Phillips, ed. 1706.—F. mousseline, mus-
lin. Ital. mussolino, muslin; a dimin. form of mussolo, also used in
the same sense.—Syriac Mosul (Webster), the name of a city in
Kurdistan, in the E. of Turkey in Asia, where it was first manu-
factured, according to Marco Polo. The Arab. name of the city is
Mawsil; Rich. Dict. p. 1526.

MUSQUASH, a rodent quadruped. (N. Amer. Indian.) Capt:
Smith has the pl. musguassus, Works, p. 207; in his description of
New England. From the old N. Amer. Indian name.

MUSQUITO, MUSSEL ; see Mosquito, Muscle (2).

MUSSULMAN, a true believer in the Mohammedan faith.
(Pers.—Arab.) ‘The full-fed Mussulman;’ Dryden, Hind and
Panther, i. 377. ‘A Musselman, which is a true beleeuer;’ Sandys,
Trav. 1632, p. §6. In Richardson’s Arab. and Pers. Dict., p. 1418,
the form musulman, an orthodox believer, is marked as Persian. The
Arab. form is muslim, answering to E. moslem; see Moslem.

MUST (1), part of a verb implying ‘ obligation.” (E.) This verb
is extremely defective ; nothing remains of it but the past tense, which
does duty both for past and present. The infinitive (mote) is obsolete;
even in AS. the infin. (mdtan) is not found. But the present tense
is common in the Middle-English period. ME. mot, moot, pres. t.,


Iam able, I can, I may, I am free to, very seldom with the sense of


obligation; pt. t. moste (properly dissyllabic), I could, I might,
ITought. ‘As euer mote I drinke wyn or ale’=as sure as I can (or
hope to be free to) drink wine or ale; Chaucer, C. T, 834 (A 832).
In Ch. C. T. 734, 737, 749, 744, Tyrwhitt wrongly changed moot into
moste, against both the MSS. and the metre. The right readings are:
‘ He moot reherse’=he is bound to relate; ‘he moot telle’ =he will
be sure to tell; ‘He moot as wel’=he is bound as well; ‘The
wordes mote be’ =the words should be. The pt. t. moste, muste, occurs
in 1. 714; *‘ He muste preche’=he will have to preach; where many
MSS. have the spelling moste. AS. *mdéan, not used in the infinitive;
preterito-pres. t. ic mot, 1 am able, I may, can, am free to, seldom
with the sense of obligation; new pt. t. ic mdste; see Grein, ii. 265.
+OSax. *motan (not found) ; pres. t. ik mét, ik muot ; pt. t. tk mdsta;
OFries. pres. t. 2k mot; pt. t. ik mdste; Du. moeten, to be obliged ;
pres. t. 2k moet, pt. t. ik moest; Swed. mdste, I must, both as pres.
and pt. tense; so that the similar use in E. may be partly due to
Scand. influence; G. miissen, MHG. muezen, OHG. mozan, of which
the old sense was ‘to be free to do’ a thing, to be allowed ; pres. t.
ich muss; pt. t. ich musste; Goth. *mdtan, not found; pres. t. ik ga-
mot; pt. t. ik ga-mosta, In Mark ii, 2, Goth. ni gamdstédun =‘ they
could not find room;’ so that the orig. sense of mdtan was ‘ to find
room.  f. Root uncertain; it may be connected with meet, moot;
but this is not at all made out. Some connect it with the E, vb.
mete, to measure.

MUST (2), new wine. (L.) In early use. ME. must, most ;
P. Plowman, B. xviii. 368; Layamon, 8723. AS. must, in a gloss
(Bosworth).—L. mustum, new wine; neut. of mustus, young, fresh,
new. Der. must-ard.

MUSTACHE, MUSTACHIO; see Moustache.

MUSTANG, a wild horse of the prairies. (Span.—L.) MSpan.
mestengo, used in the same sense as mostrenco, adj., stray, having no
owner; the spelling mest- shows confusion with mestefio, meaning
(1) belonging to the mesta or graziers, and (2) the same as mostrenco,


i-e., stray; see Minsheu, Pineda, Neumann. It is difficult to.


estimate the extent to which these words respectively influenced the
form mestengo. 1, Mostrenco answers to a L, type *monstranicum,
a stray animal, which the finder was bound to have publicly cried ;
from L. monstrare, to show, inform (hence, to cry); see Diez, and cf.


Muster. . 2. Meste#io is from Span. mesta, a company of graziers;,


from L. mixta, fem, of pp. of miscére, to mingle, to mix; cf. Span.
mestura, a mixture. B, Minsheu shows how much the words were
confused in 1623; he gives: ‘Mesta, a monethly faire among herd-


men; also, the ordinance that all owners and keepers of cattell ,


MUSTARD


are to observe.’ Also: ‘ Mestengo, or Mostrenco, a strayer.’ Also:
‘ Mostrenco, a straier, a bill signed: belonging to shepherds faires.’

MUSTARD, a condiment made from a plant with a pungent
taste. (F.—L.; with Teut. suffix.) ME. mustard, Prompt. Parv. ;
mostard, Ayenbite of Inwyt, ed. Morris, p. 143, 1. 30.—OF. mostarde
(Hatzfeld), later moustarde (Cotgrave), mod. F. moutarde. Cf. Ital.
and Port. mostarda [Span. mostaza (with a different suffix)]. B. The
suffix -ard (fem, -arde) is of Teut. origin; from G. hart, lit. ‘hard ;”
see Toynbee, Hist. F. Gr. The condiment took its name from the
fact that it was made by mixing the pounded seeds of the mustard-
plant with must or vinegar (Littré). ‘The name was afterwards given
to the plant itself (L. sinapi). yy. From OF. *most, only found in
the form moust (Supp. to Godefroy), mod. F. modt, must. Cf. Ital.,
Span., and Port. mosto. = L. mustum, must, new wine; see Must (2).

MUSTER, an assembling in force, display, a fair show. (F.—L.)
The E. sb. is older than the verb, and is nearly a doublet of monster.
ME. moustre. ‘And the moustre was thretti thousandis of men;’
Wyclif, 3 Kings, v. 13, earlier version; the later version has summe
[sum]. ‘And made a gode moustre’=and made a fair show; P.
Plowman, B. xiii. 362.—OF. mostre (13th cent.), another form of
MF. monstre, fem. ‘a pattern, also a muster, view, shew, or sight ;’
Cot. Mod. F. montre, which see in Littré. Cf. Port. mostra, a
pattern, sample, muster, review of soldiers, mostrar, to show; Ital.
mostra, a show, review, display, mostrare, to show. = Late L. monstra,
a review of troops, show, sample. = L. monstrare, to show. = L. mon-
strum, a divine omen, portent. See Monster, which differs in
gender, being orig. neuter. Der. muster, vb., ME. mustren, Romance
of Partenay, ed, Skeat, 3003; muster-master. Cf. OF. moustrer,
variant of monstrer, ONorman mustrer, Gascon mustra, to show.

MUSTY, mouldy, sour, spoiled by damp. (Prov.—L.) ‘Men
shall find little fine flowre in them, but all very mustie branne, not
worthy so muche as to fede either horse or hogges;’ Sir T. More,
Works, p. 649 h (not p. 694, as in Richardson). See Hamlet, iii. 2.
359. Minsheu (1623) has Span. mosto, new wine; mostoso, ‘mustie,
of sweet wine.’ Godefroy (Supp.) gives OF. muste, moste, moete,
muiste, moite, all as variants of OF. moiste, moist; also moiste and
muste with the sense ‘moisi.’ ‘The simplest solution is to take it
as having come straight from Provence, with which we were con-
nected by the wine trade from Bourdeaux.— Prov. mousti, musti
(Gascon), adj., moist, humid (Mistral).— Prov. moust, must, new
wine; see Must, and cf. ‘ moisty ale’ in Chaucer, C. T., H60. We
may suspect some confusion with OF. moisi, explained by Cotgrave
as ‘mouldy, musty, fusty.’ But to derive the word from OF. moisi
is, phonetically, impossible. Der. must-i-ly, -ness.

MUTABLE, subject to change. (L.) ME. mutable, Chaucer, tr.
of Boethius, b. iv. pr. 6, 1. 110.—L. miutabilis, subject to change. = L.
miatare, to change; see Moult. For older *moitdre; allied to L.
mit-uus, moutual, and to Gk. potros, thanks, favour (Prellwitz);
Goth, maidjan, to change, corrupt; Skt. méth, to associate with,
Der. mutabili-ty, Chaucer, Troilus, i. 851. Also mut-at-ion, ME,
mutacioun, Chaucer, Boeth. b. i. pr. 6, 1. 61, from F. mutation (Cot.),
from L, acc. miitationem, Also (from mitare) com-mute, per-mute,
trans-mute, mew (3), moult. Cf. mut-ual.

MUTCHKIN, an E. pint. (Du.) ‘Ix. pyntis and three mutch-
kinnis;’? Acts of Jas. I (1426), c. 80; ed. 1566 (Jam.). The Scotch
pint was 4 E. pints.—MDu. mudseken, ‘our halfe common pinte ;”
Hexham. For *mutseken; lit. ‘small cap;’ a dimin., with suffix
~ken, of MDu, mutse, Du. muts, a cap. Cf. G, miitze,a cap, See
Amice (2).

MUTES (1), dumb, (L.) In Shak. Temp. iv. 1. 126.—L. miitus,
dumb. _ B. The form is that of a pp. from 4/MEU, to mutter with
closed lips; cf, Gk. pv, alas! pueiv, to close; and esp. Skt. miika-,
dumb, Gk. pvdos, dumb; from the notion of attempting to mutter
low sounds; from the imitative L. mu, Gk. pd, a muttered sound.
See Mumble, Mutter, Mum, @ The ME. muet (Chaucer,
Troil. v. 194) is from OF. muet ; from a L. type *miit-ett-us, a dimin.
form. Der. mute-ly, mute-ness; also mutter.

MUTE (2), to dung; used of birds. (F.—MDu.) In Tobit, ii. 10
(A. V.); and in Palsgrave.— MF. mutir, ‘to mute, as a hawke;’
Cot. A clipped form of OF. esmeutir, ‘to mute, as birds doe;’ id.
Spelt esmeltir in the 13th cent. (Littré, s. v. émeutir, who fails to give
the etymology, which is to be found in Scheler).—MDu. smelten, also
smilten, to smelt, to liquefy ; also used of liquid animal discharge, as
in Hexham. See Smelt.

MUTILATS, to.maim. (L.) Formerly a pp. ‘Imperfect or
mutilate, i.e. mutilated ; Frith, Works, p, 90, col. 1.—L. mutilatus,
pp. of mutilare, to maim,—L. mutilus, maimed.4+-Gk. yitvaos, also
puridos, curtailed, docked. Der. mutilat-ion, from F. mutilation,
“a mutilation,’ Cot., from.L. acc. mutilationem.

MUTINY, a rebellion, insurrection, tumult. (F.—L.) Mutin-y
is allied to the old verb to mutine, ‘If thou canst mutine in a


MYRMIDON 393


matron’s bones;’ Hamlet, iii. 4. 83. [Hence were also formed
mutin-er, Cor, i, 1. 25.43 mutin-eer, Temp. ili. 2. 403 mutin-ous, Temp.
v. 42.]—MF. mutiner, ‘to mutine;? Cot.—MF. mutin, ‘mutinous,
tumultuous;’ id. B. MF. mutin stands for meutin, extended from
OF. muete, mute, meute, an armed expedition (Godefroy); better
known by the mod. F. derivative émeute. The mod. F. meute, though
the same word, is only used in the sense of ‘a pack of hounds;’
answering to Late L. méta canum (Ducange).—Late L. movita, a’
movement, contention, strife; used in place of L. mda, fem. of
motus, pp. of mouére, to move; see Move, . y. Thus the orig. sense
is movement,’ well expressed by our ‘commotion.’ Parallel forms
are MItal. mutino, ‘a mutinie’ (Florio), mutinare, ‘to mutinie’ (id.),
whence mod. Ital. ammutinarsi, to mutiny; also Span. molin, a
mutiny, sedition, Port. motim, a mutiny, uproar. Der. mutiny, verb,
As You Like It, i. 1. 245 mutin-er (as above), mutin-eer (as above),
mutin-ous (as above), mutin-ous-ly, mutin-ous-ness,

MUTTER, to murmur, speak in a low voice. (E.) ME. motren,
Chaucer, Troil. ii. 541. Also moteren, whence the pres. part.
moteringe, used to tr. L. mussitantes, Wyclif, 2 Kings, xii. i9. The
word is rather E. than borrowed from L. miitire, to mutter. To be
divided as mot-er-en, where -er is the usual frequentative verbal
suffix, and mo#¢- or mut- is an imitative sound, to express inarticulate
mumbling; see Mum. Cf. EFries. motjen, to mutter; Swed. dial.
mutla, muttra, Norw. mutra; also prov. G. mustern, to whisper,
similarly formed from a base must-; L, mut-ire, mutt-ire, muss-dre,
to mutter, muttum, a muttered sound; &c.

MUTTON, the flesh of sheep. (F.—C.) ME. motoun (with one
t), spelt motone in Prompt. Parv. In P. Plowman, B, iii. 24, the
word motown means a coin of gold, so called because stamped with
the image ofa sheep. ‘The older spelling moJ‘oun is in Gower, C. A.
i. 39; prol. 1060.—OF. moton (mod, F. mouton), a sheep; a still
older spelling is multon (Godefroy).—Low L. multénem, acc. of
multo, a sheep, also'a gold coin (asin P. Plowman). Cf. Ital. mon-
tone, ‘a ram, a mutton,’ Florio; where z is substituted for /, pre-
served in the Venetian form moltone, cited by Diez. B. Of Celtic
origin; from a Celtic type *moltos, a sheep; as in Irish and Manx
molt, Gael. mult, W. mollt, Bret. maout, meut (for *molt), a wether,
sheep. See Stokes-Fick, p. 212. Miklosich cites Russ. moliz(e), to
castrate, s. v. moli-. Der. mutton-chop.

MUTUAL, reciprocal, given and received. (F.—L.) ‘Conspy-
racy and mutuall promise ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 1019 c; mutuall
in Palsgrave.—OF. mutuél, ‘mutuall, reciprocal;’ Cot. Extended
from L. miitu-us, mutual, by help of the suffix -el (<L. -dlis).
ee The orig. sense is ‘exchanged ;’ from L. miitare, to change; see

utable. Cf. mort-u-us, from mort-. Der. mutual-ly, mutual-i-ty.

MUZZLE, the snout of an animal, (F.—L.) ME. mosel,
Chaucer, C. T. 2153 (A 2151).—OF.. musel (Burguy), muzel (A. D.
1521, Godefroy); later museau, ‘the muzzle, snout, or nose of a
beast ;’ Cot.; Norm. dial. musel (Du Bois). As Diez shows, an
older form morsel is indicated by the Bret. morzeel, which (like Bret.
muzel) means ‘muzzle,’ and is merely a borrowed word from
OFrench. . Again, the Provencal (according to Diez) not only has
the form mus, but also mursel, in which the r is again preserved ; but
it is lost in Ital. muso, the muzzle, and in the E. Muse (1). yy. The
OF. *morsel thus indicated is a dimin. (with suffix -el) from a form
*mors ; cf. Ital. muso, standing for an older *morso, which may have
meant ‘muzzle’ as well as ‘ bit, bridle, or snaffle for a horse’
(Florio). Cf. F. mors, ‘a bitt, or biting;’ Cot.—Late L. morsus,
(1) a morsel, (2) a buckle, (3) remorse, (4) a beak, snout, in which
sense it is found A.D. 1309; L. morsus, a bite, a tooth, clasp of
a buckle, grasp, fluke of an anchor.=—L. morsus, pp. of mordére, to
bite. See Morsel. 4 Disputed; see Korting, §§ 244, 6307, 6411 ;
and add. note on § 244. Der. muzzle, verb, spelt mosell in the Bible
of 1551, Deut. xxv. 4.

MY, possessive pronoun. (E.) ME. mi, formed from ME, min,
mine, by dropping the final x ‘ Ne thenkest nowt of mine opes That
ich haue mm louerd sworen?’ Havelok, 578 ; where grammar requires
‘min louerd’ to answer to the plural ‘miné opes.? See Mine.
@ The final x is often retained before vowels, as in the case of an.
Der. my-self, ME. mi self, a substitution for me self; see Stratmann,
s.v. self,

MYOPIA, shortsightedness. (Gk.) Bailey has: ‘ Myopia, pur-
blindness;’ vol. ii. ed. 1731.—Gk. puwmia, shortsightedness. — Gk,
puwn-, from puwy, closing the eyes, blinking, shortsighted. —Gk.
pu-w, I am shut, said of the eyes, I wink or wince; and wy, the eye,
face. See Optic. ye

MYRIAD, ten thousand, a vast number. (Gk.) In Milton, P: L.
i. 87, &c,; Ben Jonson, Fortunate Isles (Johphiel). Englished from
Gk. pupidd-, stem of pupids, the number of 10,000.—Gk. pupios,


9


numberless. :


MYRMIDON, one of a band of men, (L.—Gk.) Gen. in pl.


394 MYROBALAN


myrmidons; the Myrmidons were the followers of Achilles; in Chap-
man, tr. of Homer, Iliad ii. 604; Surrey, tr. of Aineid, ii. 1, 10; and
Lydgate, Hist. of Troye, fol. M 5. col. 1.—L. Myrmidones, Verg.
én. ii. 7.— Gk. Mupyiddves, a warlike people of Thessaly, formerly
in AXgina (Homer). There was a fable (to account for the name)
that the Myrmidons were ants changed into men; Ovid, Met. vii.
635-654. Cf. Gk. puppndwy, an ant’s nest; pdpyné, an ant, cognate
with Pers. mur, L. formica.

MYROBALAN, the dried drupaceous fruit of some Terminalia,
having an astringent pulp. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt mirabolan, Hakluyt,
Voy. ii. 1. 276.—F. myrobalan, ‘an East-Indian plumb;’ Cot.—L.
myrobalanum.= Gk. pupoBdaAayvos, lit. ‘acom producing an unguent.’
= Gk. pipo-, for pipov, a sweet juice, unguent; and BdAavos, acorn,
allied to L. glans, whence E. gland.

MYRRH, a bitter aromatic gum. (F.—L.—Gk.—Arab.) ME.
mirre, Ancren Riwle, p. 372, l. 7; now adapted to the L. spelling. =
OF. mirre (11th cent.); mod. F. myrrhe (Littré).—L. myrrha.= Gk.
poppa, the balsamic juice of the Arabian myrtle.—Arab, murr,
(1) bitter, (2) myrrh, from its bitterness; Rich. Dict., p. 1381.4
Heb. mor, myrrh; allied to mar, bitter.

MYRTLE, the name of a tree. (F.—L.—Gk.—Pers.) In Shak.
Meas, for Meas. ii. 2. 117.—=MF. myriil, ‘a mirtle-berrie; also, the
lesse kind of mirtle, called noble mirtle;’ Cot. Dimin. of myrte,
meurte, ‘the mirtle-tree;’ id. — L. murtus, myrtus, myrtle.=Gk.
pupros.=— Pers. miird, the myrtle; Palmer, col. 617; Rich. Dict.


p- 1524.

MYSTERY (1), anything kept concealed or very obscure, a
secret rite. (L.—Gk.) ME. mysterie, Wyclif, Rom. xvi. 25. Englished
from L. mystérium, Rom. xvi. 25 (Vulgate).—Gk. pvorqpiov, Rom.
xvi. 25.—Gk. pvorns, one who is initiated. = Gk. pveiy, to initiate
into mysteries.=Gk. pve, to close the eyes; suggested by Gk. pi,
a slight sound with closed lips; of imitative origin. See Mute,
Mum. Der. mysteri-ous, from F. mysterieux, ‘mysterious,’ Cot. ;
mysteri-ous-ly, -ness. And see mystic, mystify.

MYSTERY (2), MISTERY, a trade, handicraft. (F.—L.)
Cotgrave translates OF. mestier by ‘a trade, occupation, mystery,
handicraft.’ Spenser, Mother Hubbard’s Tale, 221, speaks of the
soldier's occupation as being ‘the noblest mysterie.’ This is a
different word from the above, but often confused with it. Itshould
rather be spelt mistery. Indeed, it owes to the word above not only
the former y, but the addition of the latter one; being an extension
of ME. mistere, a trade, craft, Chaucer, C. T. 615 (A 613).— AF.
mister, Stat. Realm, i. 311 (1351); OF. mestier (as above); mod. F.
métier. [Cognate with Span. menester, want, need, employment,
trade; Ital. mestiere, with same sense.]—L. ministerium, service,
employment. =L. minister, a servant; see Minister.

MYSTIC, secret, allegorical. (F.—L.—Gk.) Milton has mystick,
P. L. v. 178, ix. 442; also mystical, P. L. v. 620,.—F. mystique,
‘mysticall ;’ Cot. = L. mysticus. = Gk. pvorixds, mystic. = Gk. puorns,
fem. pvorts, one who is initiated into mysteries; see Mystery (1).
Der. mystic-al, in Skelton, ed. Dyce, i. 222; mystic-ism; and see mystify.

MYSTIF'Y, to involve in mystery, puzzle. (F.—Gk. and L.)
Quite modern; not in Todd’s Johnson.=F, mystifier, to mystify.
An ill-formed jumble, from Gk. pvort-xds, mystic (not well divided),
and L. -ficare, for facere, to make. See Littré, who remarks that it
was not admitted into the F. Dict. till 1835 (rather in 1798; Hatzteld).
See Mystic. Der. mystific-at-ion, from mod. F. mystification.

MYTH, a fable. (Gk.) Now common, ‘but quite a mod. word
and formed directly from Gk. pd@os, a fable; see Mythology,
which is a much older word in our language. Der. myth-ic, myth-
zc-al, myth-ic-al-ly.

MYTHOLOGY, a system of legends, the science of legends.
(F.—L.—Gk.) In Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. i. c. 8, Of
Ctesias. Lydgate has methologies, Hist. Troye, fol. H 2, back, col. 2.
=F. mythologie, ‘an exposition, or moralising of fables;’ Cot.—L.
uythologia.= Gk. pvOoroyia, legendary lore, a telling of fables. — Gk.
pv00-, for pos, a fable; and A€yer, to tell. B. The Gk. pd-60s is
trom pd, a slight sound, hence a word, saying, speech, tale; see
Mute,Mum. Der. mytholog-ic, mytholog-ic-al, mytholog-ist.


N. A few remarks upon this letter are necessary. An initial », in
English, is very liable to be prefixed to a word which - properly
begins with a vowel; and again, on the other hand, an original


initial x is sometimes dropped. A. In the former case, the ” is pro-
bably due to the final letter of am or mine; thus an ewt becomes


NAIL


“a newt, mine uncle becomes my nuncle, and hence newt and nuncle,


used independently. Another example occurs in zickname for eke-name.
In Middle-English, numerous similar examples occur, such as a noke
for an oke, an oak (cf. John Nokes= John an-oaks, i.e. John of the
oaks); a naye=an aye, an egg; thi nye=thin ye, thine eye; thz
nynon=thin ynon, thine eyes; examples of all these are given in


‘Halliwell, under xoke, naye, nye, and nynon respectively. In the case


of for the nonce, the n belongs to the old dat. case of the article, the
older phrase being for then ones; see Nonce, 3B. On the other
hand, an original 2 is lost in auger for nauger, in the sense of
a carpenter’s tool; in umpire for numpire, adder for nadder, apron
for anpron, ouch for nouch, See my note to P. Plowman, C,
xx. 306,

NAB, to seize. (Scand.) A dialect word; also found as zap.
Added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict.—Swed. nappa, Dan. nappe, to.
catch, snatch at. @ Rich. cites the word nab-cheats from Beaum.
and Fletcher, Beggar’s Bush, ii. 1, with the sense of caps. This is
a totally different word; here nab=knob, the head ; cheat=a thing,
in the cant language; and nab-cheat=head-thing, cap; see Harman’s
Caveat, ed. Furnivall, p. 82.

INABOB, an Indian prince, very rich man. (Hind.— Arab.) See
Burke, Speech on the Nabob of Arcot’s debts. The word signifies’
‘deputy’ or vice-roy, esp. applied to a governor of a province of the’
Mogul empire (Webster). Also nobobb, a nobleman; so spelt by Sir
T. Herbert, Travels, ed. 1665, p. 104, who assigns it that meaning ‘in'
the language of the Mogul’s kingdom, which hath mixt with it much
of the Persian.’ = Hind. nuwwab (pl. of n@ ib), ‘ vice-gerents, deputies;
nawwab, vulg. nabob ;? Forbes. But the word is' merely borrowed’
from Arabic; Devic notes that Hind. often employs Arab. plurals”
as sing.= Arab. nawwab; which is properly a plural form (used
honorifically), signifying vice-gerents, deputies; pl. of naib, a vice-
gerent, lieutenant, deputy. Cf. Arab. zawb, supplying the place of
another. See Rich. Dict. pp. 1606, 1557, 1608. Palmer’s Pers. Dict.
col. 665, has: Arab. zavvab, ‘a viceroy, governor; in Persia, this
title is given to princes ofthe blood;’ cf col.639. Cf. Port. zababo,’
a nabob; see Yule. Bi

NACRE, mother-of-pearl. (F.—Span.—Arab.) In Cotgrave.=
F. nacre, ‘a naker, a great and long shell-fish, the outside of whose
shell is rugged . . the inside smooth and of a shining hue;’ nacre de
perles, ‘mother of pearle, the beautiful shell of another fish, wherein
the best, and most pearles be found;’ Cot.—Span. zacar.— Arab.
nagrah, a cavity (from the hollow inside of the shell); from Arab.
root zagara, he hollowed out; Rich. Dict., p. 1596.

NADIR, the point of the sky opposite the zenith. (Arab.)
Chaucer uses zadir to signify the point of the zodiac opposite to
that in which the sun is situate; Treatise on the Astrolabe, pt. ii.’
sect. 6, 1. 1.— Arab. naziru’s ’samt (or simply nazir), the point of the
sky opposite the zenith.=Arab. zazir, over against, corresponding
to; and as’ samt, the azimuth, or rather an abbreviation of as’
samtwr’ras, the zenith. Rich. Dict. pp. 1586, 848. See Azimuth,
Zenith. The Arab. z (or @) here used is the 17th letter of the Arab.
alphabet, an unusual letter with a difficult sound, which came to be
rendered by d in Low L. and E.

NAG (1), a small horse. (MDu.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. ME..
nagge.. ‘Nagge, or lytylle beest, bestula, equillus;’ Prompt. Parv.:
‘He neyt [neighed] as a zagge;’ Destruction of Troy, ed. Panton
and Donaldson, 1. 7727.—MDu. negghe, a smali horse (Kilian);
negge, ‘a nagg,a small horse,’ Hexham; Du. neg; Du. dial. knagge’
(Molema). And compare Low G. aikkel, a nag; and perhaps’
Norw. kneggja, Icel. gneggja, hneggja, to neigh.

NAG (2), to worry, tease. (Scand.) Provincial; but a good
word. Norw. and Swed. nagga, to nibble, peck; Dan. nage, Icel.
gnaga,to gnaw; Low G. nagen, naggen, to gnaw, vex, nag, gnaggen,
to nag (Berghaus). Allied to Gnaw, q. v.

NAIAD, a water-nymph. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. Temp. iv. 128.—
L. naiad-, stem of naias, a water-nymph.=— Gk. vaids (gen. vaidd-os),
a water-nymph.=Gk. vaev, to flow; Aolic form vavev (=vafev).
From SNA; cf. Skt. sza, to bathe; Olrish szaim, I swim. And
see Natation. dae

NAIL, the horny scale at the end of the human fingers and toes ;’
a spike of metal. (E.) ME. nail, nayl; the pl. xayles, used of the’
human nails, is in Havelok, 2163; the pl. zailes, i. e. iron spikes, is -
in Chaucer, C, T. 6351 (D 769). AS. xe@gel, in both senses, Grein,
ii, 274. [The loss of g is regular, and occurs in hail, sail, &c.}4-Du.
nagel, in both senses; Icel. zag/, the human nail; nagli, a spike, peg;
Dan. nagle, in both senses; Swed. xagel, in both senses; Goth.
*nagls, only in the derived verb ganagijan, to nail ; G. nagel, in both -
senses. B..Teut. type *zagloz, m. - Allied to Lithuan. zagas, a claw, -
nail, Russ. zogot(e), a nail, Skt. zakha-m, n., nakha-s, m., a nail of
the finger or toe; Pers. nakhun, thesame. y. The Gk. dvv€, a nail,
claw, L. uaguis, Gael. and Trish ionga, Olrish inga, W.-ewin, go


NAILBOURN


back to forms with a different gradation.
7o2. Der. nail, vb., AS. neglian, whence the pp. negled, in Grein;
nail-er. Cf. onyx.

NAILBOURN, an intermittent stream. (E.) Given in N. E.D.
s.v. eylebourn, as it was spelt in 1719. But spelt nailbourne in 1667,
and naylborne in 1480. We find in Birch, Cart. Saxon. ii. 172 :-—
‘thonne. .. of dune on stream on neglesburnan.’ I cannot explain
the form; cf. Phil. Soc, Trans. 1903-6, p. 364.

NAIVE, artless, simple, ingenuous. (F.—L.) A late word; the
adv. naively is used by Pope.in a letter; see the quotation in
Richardson. Dryden has: ‘it was so naive,’ and “twas such a
naiveté;’ Marriage 4 la Mode, iii. 1.—F. naive, fem. of naif, which
Cot. explains by ‘lively, quick, naturall, kindly, . . no way counter-
feit’ = L. natiuus, native, natural; see Native. 4 The fem. form
naive was chosen, because it appears in the adv. zaivement, and in
the sb. zaiveté; and, in fact, it is nearer the Latin original than the
mase. aif. Der. naive-ly, for F. naive-ment; and naive-tée, sb.,
directly from the French.. Doublet, native.

NAKED, bare, uncovered, exposed. (E.) Always dissyllabic.
ME. naked, Chaucer, C. T. 2068 (A 2066). AS. nacod (=nac-od),
which is plainly an old -pp., with the pp. suffix -od; Grein, ii. 272.
+OFries. nakad, naken; Du. naakt; Icel.. nakinn, nokvidr ; Dan.
nogen; Swed. naken; G. nackt, MHG, nacket, OHG. nachot, nakot;
Goth. nakwaths (where -aths is the usual pp. suffix). B. Most of
these point to an old pp. form; the Du. -t, Icel. -idr, G. -¢, Goth.
-aths, are all pp. suffixes of a weak verb, and lead us back to the orig.
Teut. type *ndkwathéz (> *ndkwadéz); Idg. type *nog(w)otos.
y- But Icel. nak-inn, Dan. ndg-en, Swed. nak-en, OFries. nak-en,
adopt the pp. suffixes of a strong verb from a base NAQ, answering
to an Idg. 4/ NOGw, to strip, lay bare; cf. Skt. zagna-, naked, Russ.
nagoi, naked, Lith. nzgas, naked, L. niidus (= *noudos for *nogwedos).
Further allied words are the Irish and Gael. nochd, naked, bare,
exposed, desolate, W. noeth, Bret. ndaz. 8. Lastly, it is remarkable
that English has evolved a verb from this pp. by back-formation,
viz. ONorthumb. ge-nacian, Mark, ii. 4; ME. naken. The following
are examples. ‘He akide the hous of the pore man,’ Wyclif, Job,
xx. 19, early version; the later version has ‘ he made nakid the hows.’
*O nyce men, why nake ye youre bakkes’=O foolish men, why do
ye expose your backs (to the enemy, by turning to flee); Chaucer,
tr. of Boethius, b. iv. met. 7,1. 45. It is also found much later.
*Lus. Come, be ready, zake your swords, Think of your wrongs ;’
Tourneur, The Revenger’s Tragedy, Act v. sc. 1. We even find
a derived verb naknen; ‘A! nu xacnesmon mi lef?’=Ah! now men
strip my beloved; O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 283, 1. 10. Cf.
Brugmann, i. § 165; Rhys, W. Phil. p. 95. Der. naked-ly, ME.
nakedliche, Anctren Riwle, p. 316; naked-ness, ME. nakidnesse, Wyclif,
Rev. iii. 18. Also stark-naked, q.v. Doublet, nude.

NAKER, a kettle-drum. (F.—Arab.) Chaucer has zaters, pl.,

C. T., A 2511.—OF. nacaire (Godefroy).— Arab. xaggarah, a kettle-
drum; Palmer’s Pers. Dict.
-NAMBY-PAMBY, weakly. sentimental. (E.) Coined from
Ambrose, i.e. Ambrose Philips (d. 1749), a poet whose style was
ridiculed by Carey and Pope. Johnson, in his Life of Philips says :
‘ The pieces that please best are those which, from Pope and Pope’s
adherents, procured him the name of Namby Pamby ;’ see Chalmers,
Eng. Poets, xili. 103.

NAME, that by which a thing or person is called, a designation:
(E;) ME. name (orig. dissyllabic); Chaucer, C. T. 3939 (A 3941).
AS. nama, Gein, li. 273.4 Du. naam; Icel. xaf, namn ; Dan. navn ;
Swed. xamn; Goth. amd; G, name, OHG. namo. Teut. type
*namon-. B. Further allied to L. xdmen; Gk. dvopa, Pers. nam, Skt.
naman ; and to Irish ainm, W. enw, name; Russ. imia. Brugmann,
i. §§ 399, 425- @ Not allied to Know; see Prellwitz. Der.
name, vb., AS. nemnan, Grein, ii. 280; nam-er ; name-ly, ME. name-
liche, nomeliche, Ancren Riwle, p. 18, 1..16; name-less, ME. nameles,
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b.iv. pr. 5, 1.53; name-less-ly, name-less-ness ;
also xame-sake (=name’s sake, the ’s being dropped before s following),
i.e. one whose name is given him for the sake of another’s fame,
Dryden, Absalom, pt. ii. 1. 323 (see Sake). Allied words are
nominal, de-nominate.. Doublet, noun.

NANKEEN, NANKIN, a kind of cotton cloth. (China.)
Added by Todd to Johnson. . So called from Nankin in China, —
Chinese xan-king, ‘south court;’ cf. Pekin, from pe-king, ‘north
court’ (Yule). hE

WAP (1), a short sleep. (E.) We now say ‘ to take a zap,’ and
treat nap as a sb. We also say ‘to be caught napping.’ It was
formerly a verb; ME. nappen, to doze. ‘See! how he nappeth;’
Chaucer, C. T. 16958 (H 9). AS. hneppian, to nap; hneppad is
a gloss upon dormit, Ps. xl. 9, ed. Spelman. Cf. Bavarian knappen,
to nod-with the head (Schmeller); OHG, knaffezen, to nap.; Der.
napp-ing, sb., AS. hnappung, Grein, ii. go. OM


Brugmann, §§ 539, 658,


NARRATION 395.


NAP (2), the roughish surface of cloth. (MDu.) In Spenser,
Muiopotmos, |. 333. Shak. has napless=threadbare ; Cor. ii. 1. 250.
The older form is noppe (Palsgrave), ME. noppe; ‘noppe of a cloth,
villus ;’ Prompt. Parv. See Way’s note, where he cites passages to’
show that noppe ‘denotes those little knots, which, after cloth has
passed through the fulling-mill, are removed by women with little
nippers ; a process termed burling cloth.’ He cites: ‘noppy, as cloth
is that hath a gross woffe [woof];’ Palsgrave. Also: ‘ Clarisse, the
nopster (esbourysse) can well her craft, syth whan she lerned it, cloth
for to xoppe ;’ Caxton, Book for Travellers. We now apply the term,
not to the rough surface, but to the sheared surface, by a natural
change in the sense, due to our not seeing the cloth till the process
is completed. Prob. introduced by Du. clothworkers, [AS. *hnoppa
is unauthorised. ] = M Du. noppe, ‘the nap of wooll or cloath,’ Hexham;
cf. MDu. noppen, ‘to sheare of [off] the nap,’ id. Cf. Du. xo, nap;
Dan. noppe, frizzed nap of cloth; MSwed. nopp, nap; Low G.-
nobben, nap; Bremen Worterbuch. Also Norw. napp, nap, and Norw.
nuppa, to pluck off with the fingers; AS. hnoppian, to pluck, Voc.
480. 23; AS. a-hnéapan, to pluck off; Goth. dis-hnupnan, to be torn
in pieces ; dis-hniupan, to tear to pieces. All from Teut. base *hneup,
to pluck, pull. Der. napless,as above.

NAPE, the joint of the neck behind. (E.) In Shak. Cor. ii. 1. 43.
ME. zape, Prompt. Pary. ‘Dedly woundid through the zape;’
King Alisaunder, 1. 1347. The orig. sense is projection or ‘knob;’
and the term must have been first applied to the slight knob at the
back of the head, felt on passing the finger upwards from the neck ;
cf. OF ries. halsknap, nape of the neck. It is, in fact, a mere variant of
ME. knappe, a knob, button, P. Plowman, B. vi. 272. Cf. Icel.
knappr, a knob, stud, button; AS. cxep, the top of a hill. See
Knop, Neck.

NAPERY, linen for the table. (F.—L.) ‘Manie farmers . .
have learned also to garnish their cupbords with plate, . . and their
tables with fine zaperie ;’ Harrison, Descr. of England, ed. Furnivall,
b, ii, c. 12, p. 239. Palsgrave has: ‘ Naprie, store of lynen.’ =OF,
naperie, table-linen (Godefroy); orig. the office in a household for
providing table-linen (Roquefort).—Late L. naparia, the same;
Ducange; also spelt mapparia.—Late L. nadpa, a cloth; corrupted
from L. mappa, a cloth. See Napkin.

NAPHTHA, an inflammable liquid. (L.—Gk.—Pers.) In
Milton, P. L.i. 729. Spelt xephta by Sir T. Herbert, Travels, p. 182
(Todd).=—L. naphtha. = Gk. vapOa. — Pers. naft, nift, naphtha; Rich.
Dict. p. 1591. Allied to Zend napta-, moist; Horn, § 1035. Cf.
Arab, raft, nift, ‘naphtha, bitumen;’ Rich. Dict. p. 1593. The
final letter of the Arab. word is the 16th letter of the alphabet, some-
times rendered by ¢h; and the Arab. form is unoriginal; prob. from Gk.

KIN, a cloth used at the table, a small cloth. (F.—L.;
with E, suffix.) ME. napekin. ‘ Napet or napekyn, Napella, manu-
piarium, mapella;’ Prompt. Parv. Both these forms, zap-et and
nape-kyn, are formed with dimin. suffixes from F. xappe, ‘a table-
cloth ;’ Cot.; OF. nape, mape (Supp. to Godefroy).— Late L. napa;
corruption of L. mappa, a cloth. See Map. Der. ap-ron (for
naf-ron); nap-er-y, q. V-

NARCISSUS, a kind of flower. (L.—Gk.) In Cotgrave, to
translate F. narcisse.—L. narcissus.= Gk. vapsicoos, the narcissus ;
named from its zarcotic properties ; see Narcotic.

NARCOTIC, producing torpor; an opiate. (F.—Gk.) Chaucer,
has the pl. xercotikes as a pl. sb., C. T. 1474 (A 1472). It is properly
an adj.—F. zarcotique, ‘stupefactive, benumning;’ Cot. [The L.
form does not appear.]—Gk, vapxwrixds, benumbing. = Gk. vapéw,
I benumb; vapxaw, I grow numb.—Gk. vdpxn, numbness, torpor.
For *ovdpxn, i.e. contraction; see Snare. Der. xarcissus, from
vapk-n.

WARD, an unguent from an aromatic plant. (F. —L.—Gk.— Pers.)
In the margin of A. V., Mark, xiv. 3, where the text has spikenard ;
and in Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xii. c. 12. ME. xard, Wyclif, John,
xii, 3.—F. ard, ‘spikenard ;’ Cot.—L. xardus, Mk. xiv. 3 (Vulgate).
=Gk. vapdos, Mk. xiv. 3.—OPers. type *narda- (Horn, § 1060),
whence also Heb. xérd, and Skt. zalada-, the Indian spikenard, Nardo-
stachys jatamansi; Benfey. B. The name is Persian; the Arab,
nardin is borrowed, like the Skt. and Heb. forms. The interchange
of J and r is common in many languages. Der. spike-nard. :

NARGILEH, NARGILE, NARGILI, a pipe or smoking-
apparatus in which the smoke is passed through water. (Pers.)
‘Making believe to puff at a xarghile;’ Thackeray, Van. Fair, bk.
ii. c. 16, From Pers. xargil, a coco-nut; because these pipes were
orig. made with a coco-nut, which held the water; Rich, Dict.,
p. 1548. . Cf. Skt. narikera-s, narikela-s. a coco-nut. See Yule and


Deyic.

NARRATION, 2 tale, recitation. (F.—L.) [The verb xarrate
is late.] Narration is'in Minsheu, ed. 1627. It occurs earlier, in
The Monk of Evesham, p..65 (1482).—F'. narration, ‘a narration ;,


NARROW


Cot. =—L. narratidnem, acc. of narratio, a tale.— L. xarrare, to relate,
tell; lit. to make known.=L. narus, another form of gnarus, know-
ing, acquainted with. From *gna-, allied to 4/GEN, to know; cf.
Skt. jxd, to know, Russ. znate, E. know; see Know. Der. From
L. narrare we also have zarrate, vb., in Johnson’s Dict.; xarrat-ive,
adj., from F. zarratif, ‘narrative’ (Cot.); zarrat-ive, sb., Bacon,
Life of Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 54, 1. 143 zarrat-or.

NARROW, of little breadth or extent. (E.) ME. zarowe,
narewe, narwe (with one r); Chaucer has zarwe (=narrowly) as an
adv., C. T. 3224; also as an adj., C. T. 627 (A 625). AS. nearzu,
nearo, adj.; nearwe, adv., Grein, ii. 287, 288.4 OSax. naru, adj.,
narawo, ady.; Du. naar, dismal, sad (see Franck). ‘Teut. type
*narwoz. Connected by Curtius (i. 392) with xerve. Der. xarrow-ly,
narrow-ness, narrow-mind-ed,

NARWHAL, the sea-unicorn. (Scand.) In Ash’s Dict., ed.
1775. ‘Teeth of narwhals;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulgar Errors, bk. iii.
c. 23. § 6. — Dan. and Swed. narhval; Icel. nahvalr,anarwhal, B. The
latter part of the word is the same as E. whale. As to the sense of
the prefix, the lit. sense of Icel. xa-hvair is ‘corpse-whale,’ from Icel.
nar (in compounds na-), a corpse; and the fish is often of a pallid
colour. Such is the usual explanation ; perhaps it is only a ‘ popular’
etymology.

NASAL, belonging to the nose. (F.—L.) In Kersey, ed. 1715.
Burton uses nasals for medicines operating through the nose; Anat.
of Melancholy, p. 384 (R.); or p. 393 (Todd).=—F. zasal, belonging
to the nose; Cot.=—Late L. nasalis, nasal; a coined word, not used
in good Latin. —L. nds-us, the nose, cognate with E. nose; see Nose.
Der. nas-turt-ium, q.V.

NASCENT, springing up, arising. (L.) A late word, added by
Todd to Johnson.—L. xascent-, stem of pres. part. of nasci, to be
born, to arise, an inceptive form with pp. zdtus. See Natal.

NASTURTIUM, the name of a flower. (L.) In Ash’s Dict.,
ed. 1775. ‘Cresses tooke the name in Latine nasturtium, a narium
zormento, as a man would say, nose-wring, because it will make one
writh and shrink vp his nosthrils;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xix. c. 8.
=. nasturtium, cress; better spelt zasturcium.—L. nas-, stem of
nasus, the nose; and ¢urc-=¢orc-, from torguére, to twist, torment.
see Nose and Torture.

NASTY, dirty, filthy, unpleasant. (Scand.) In Hamlet, iii. 4.
94. Formerly also (as Wedgwood points out) written zasky. ‘ Mau-
lavé, ill-washed, slubbered, zaskie, nasty, foul;? Cot. In such cases,
the form with # is the older; cf. ME. zaxty; as in ‘ naxty, and needy,
and nakut ;’ Three Met. Romances, ed. Robson, A. st.xv. Of Scand.
origin ; preserved in Swed. dial. naskug, nasty, dirty, foul (used of
weather); we also find the form zasket, dirty, sullied (Rietz); cf.
Dan. dial. zasken, nasket, old, worn out (said of clothes), Molbech.
B. Perhaps allied to Swed. dial. snaskig, nasty, swinelike; Swed.
snuskig, slovenly, nasty ; Swed. dial. snaska, to eat like a pig, to eat
greedily and noisily, to be slovenly (Rietz); Dan. snaske, to champ
one’s food with a smacking noise. ‘These words are of imitative
origin, like various other suggestive words of a like character. The
word appears also in Low G. nask, nasty, Bremen Worterbuch ; and
may be allied to Norweg. ask, greedy, xaska, to eat noisily. Cf.
Dan. knaske, gnaske, to crunch; and E. gnash. Der. nasti-ly, nasti-
NESS.

NATAL, belonging to one’s birth. (F.—L.) ‘By xatall Joves
feest ’=by the feast of Jove, who presides over nativity; Chaucer,
Troilus, ili. 150.—F. natal, in use at least as early as the 15th cent.
(Littré); though the true OF. form is néel. —L. natalis, natal, also
presiding over a birth. = L. natus (for gndatus), born. Cf. Gk. -yvnros,
in xaci-yvnros, a blood relation. From the base gna-, allied to
GEN, to beget, produce; see Kin, Genus. Der. From L.
natus are in-nate, cognate; and see nat-ion, nat-ive, nat-ure.
‘NATATION, swimming. (L.) Used by Sir T. Browne, Vulgar
Errors, bk. iv.c.6. § 2. From the acc. of L, matatio, a swimming, =
L, natare, to swim; frequent. of L. xare, to swim. Cf. Gk. vj-xew,
to swim; Olrish sza-im, I swim. See Naiad.

NATION, a race of people. (F.—L.) ME. ation, Chaucer,
C. T. 4688 (B 268).—F. nation. = L. nitidnem, acc. of natio, a race;
cf. natus, born; see Natal. Der. nation-al, nation-ally, nation-al-
i-ty, nation-al-ise.

NATIVE, original, produced by nature, due to birth. (F.—L.)

®O native land!’ Surrey, tr. of Aineid, b. ii. 1. 305; where the L.
text has patria; see Spec. of English, ed. Skeat, p. 207. ‘ His natiue
countrey ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 306a.—F. natif, masc. native,
fem. ‘native;’ Cot.—L. ndtiuus, natural, native.=L. natus, born;
see Natal. Der. native-ly, native-ness ; also nativ-i-ty, ME. natiuitee,
Chaucer, C. T. 14022 (B 3206), from F. nativité, from L. acc.
na Doublet, naive. :

NATRON, native carbonate of sodium. (F.—Span.— Arab. — Gk.
—Heb.) F. xatron.—Span. natron.= Arab. natriin, nitriin, natron,


396


NAVEW


‘nitre; Rich. Dict., p- 1585.—Gk. vizpov. Heb. nether, nitre, Prov.


xxv. 20. Doublet, nitre.

NATTER-JACK, a kind of toad. (E. and F. —L.—Gk. —Heb.)
In Pennant (1769). ‘It has a deep, hollow voice, which may be heard
at a considerable distance;’ Cent. Dict. Perhaps from prov. E. xatter,
gnatter, to make a rattling noise; see E.D.D, And see Jack.

NATTY, neat. (F.—L.) Formerly zettie ; Tusser, Husbandry,
§ 68,1.6. From net, adj.; see Net (2), Neat (2).

NATURE, kind, disposition. (F.—L.) ME. xature, in OEng.
Miscellany, Ser. i., ed. Morris, p. 35, 1. 29.—F. nature. =—L. natura,
nature. = L. natus, born, pp. of rasci, to be born; see Natal. Der.
natur-al, ME, naturel, OEng. Miscellany, Ser. i. p. 30, 1. 17, from F.
naturel <L. natiralis; natur-al-ly, natural-ness, natur-al-ism, natur-
al-ise, natur-al-ist (see Trench, Select Gloss.), natur-al-is-at-ion
(Minsheu); also un-natural, preter-natural, super-natural.

NAUGHT, NOUGHT, nothing. (E.) ME. naught, Chaucer,
C.T..758. Older spelling nawikt, Layamon, 473. AS. nawiht, often
contracted to naht, Grein, ii. 274.— AS. na, no, not; and wiht, a
whit, thing; Grein, ii. 272,703. See Noand Whit. Der. naught,
adj., i.e. worthless, As You Like It, i. 2. 68, 69, iii. 2. 15; whence
naught-y, i.e. worthless (Prov. vi. 12), Sir T. More, Works, p. 155 e3
naught-i-ly, naught-i-ness. Doublet, not.

NAUSEHOUS, disgusting. (L.—Gk.) Nauseous and nauseaie
are in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Englished from L. nausedsus,
that produces nausea.—L. nausea, nausia, sea-sickness, sickness. —
Gk. vavota, sea-sickness. = Gk. vais, a ship, cognate with L. nauis ;
see Nave (2). Der. zauseous-ly, -ness; nause-ate, from L. nause-
atus, pp. of nauseare, to feel sick, from nausea, sickness. We have.
also adopted the sb. zausea, which occurs in Phillips, ed. 1706.

NAUTCH, a kind of ballet-dance by women, (Hind. — Prakrit —
Skt.) Spelt ack by Bp. Heber in 1825, who speaks of ‘ the ndach-
women.’ = Hind. (and Mahratti) nach, a dance; Prakrit nachcha. = Skt.
nytya-, dancing, acting; orig. fut. pass. part. of mvt, to dance, act. (See
Yule.) Der. xautch-girl, a dancing girl.

NAUTICAL, naval, belonging to ships. (L.—Gk.) Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674, has zautical and nautick, the latter being the more
orig. form, = L. nauticus, nautical. = Gk. vavrixds, pertaining to ships. _
Gk. vadrns, a sea-man. = Gk. vais, a ship, cognate with L. xduis; see
Nave (2). Der. xautical-ly.

NAUTILOUS, a kind of shell-fish. (L.—Gk.) ‘The Nautilus
or Sailer, a shell-fish, that swims like a boat with a sail;’ Phillips,
ed. 1706.—L. nautilus. = Gk. vavtidos, a sea-man, also, the nautilus.
= Gk. vavrns, a sea-man; see Nautical.

NAVAL, belonging to ships, marine. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave. =
F. naval, ‘navall;’ Cot.—L. ndualis, naval.—L. nduis, a ship ; see
Nave (2).

NAVE (1), the central portion or hub of a wheel, through which
the axle passes. (E.) ME. zaue (with w=v), Chaucer, C. T. 7848
(D 2266). AS. nafu, nafa; Atlfred, tr. of Boethius, b. iv. pr. 6,
cap. xxxix, § 7.4+-Du. zaaf; Icel. ndf; Dan. nav; Swed. naf; G. nabe,
OHG. zaba. Teut. type xaba, fem. Allied to Skt. xabhi-, the navel,


the nave of a wheel, the centre. See Navel. Der. auger, for
nau-ger,
NAVE (2), the middle or body of a church. (F.—L.) In


Phillips, World of Words, ed. 1706. Spelt ef in Addison, Travels
in Italy, description of the church of St. Justina in Padua.=F. nef,
‘a ship; also, the body of a church;’ Cot. = Late L. nauem, acc. of
nauis, the body of a church. The similitude by which the church of
Christ is likened to a ship tossed by waves was formerly common,
See my note to P. Plowman, C. xi. 32, where I cite the passage from
Augustine about ‘ nauis, i.e. ecclesia ;’ S, Aug. Sermo lxxv. cap. iii.
ed. Migne, v. 475.—L. nauis, a ship.-Gk. vats, a ship; Skt. au-,
a ship, boat; Olrish zauw. Brugmann, i. § 184; Prellwitz. Der.
nav-al, q. V., nau-ti-c-al, q. V., nau-ti-lus, q. V., argo-naut, q. V., nav-ig=
ate (see navigation), nav-y. From the same root are zai-ad,
2au-sea.

NAVEL, the central point of the belly. (E.) A dimin. of nave (1).
We find nave used for navel, Macb. i, 2. 22; and conversely nauels
(=navels) for the zaves of a wheel, Bible, ed. 1551, 3 Kings, vil. 33.
ME. nauel (=navel), Chaucer, C. T. 1959 (A 1957). AS. wafela,
/Elfred, tr. of Orosius, b. iv. c. 1. § 5.4-Du. navel ; Icel. naffi; Dan.
navle; Swed. nafle; G. nabel, Teut. type *nadalon-, from *naba,
anave. Cf. also Pers. naf, navel (Horn, § 1020); Skt. nabdi-, navel,
nave, centre. See Nave (1). B. Further related, with a difference
of gradation, to Gk. éupadds, navel, L. umbilicus, Olrish imbliu. So
also nave (1) is related to L. umbd, the boss of a shield. Brugmann,
li, § 76.

NAVEW, the wild turnip. (F.—L.) ‘Rape-rotes and Nauews;’
Sir T, Elyot, Castel of Helth, bk. ii. c. 9.— MF. naveau, ‘the navew
gentle 3? Cot.—Late L.. napellum, acc, of napellus; dimin. of L.
napus, a kind of turnip, a navew.. Cf. ¢yr-nip,


vt


NAVIGABLE
- NAVIGABLE, that may be travelled over by ships. (F.—L.)


In Palsgrave.—F. navigable, ‘navigable;’ Cot.=— L. nduigabilis,
navigable.—L. nduigare, to navigate; see Navigation. Der.
navigabl-y, navigable-ness,

NAVIGATION, management of a ship. (F.—L.)_ In Shak.
Macb. iv. 1. 54.—F. navigation, ‘navigation, sailing;’ Cot.—L.
nauigationem, acc. of nduigdtio, a sailing.=—L. nduigare, to sail,
manage a ship.—L. ndu-, stem of nduis, a ship; and -ig-, for ag-,
base of agere, to drive. See Nave(2) and Agent. Der. navigate,
from L, nauigatus, pp. of nauigare, but suggested by the sb.; navigat-
or, familiarly contracted to zavvy, formerly applied to the labourers
on canals for internal navigation, and now applied to labourers on
railways! Also circum-navigate.

NAVY, a fleet of ships. (F.—L.) ME. nauie, Chaucer, Ho, of
Fame, i. 216,—=OF. zavie, a fleet (Burguy); the orig. sense was a
single ship. =L. nauia, a ship, vessel.=L. naui-, decl. stem of nazis,
a ship; see Nave (2).

NAW AB, the same as Nabob.

NAY, no, a form of denial. (Scand.) There was a difference in
usage between zay and no formerly; the former answered simple
questions, ‘the latter was used when the form of the question in-
volved a negative expression. Besides this, ay was the simple, xo
the emphatic form, often accompanied by an oath. The distinction
went out of use in the time of Henty VIII; see Skeat, Spec. of Eng.
p- 192, 1. 22, and the note; Student’s Manual of the Eng. Language,
ed. Smith, pp. 414, 422. Moreover, zay is. of Scand. origin, whilst
noisE, ME. zay, Chaucer, C. T., A 1667, 8693 (E 817); spelt nei,
nai, Layamon, 13132.—Icel. nei, no, Dan. nei, Swed. nej ; cognate
with E. no; see No. Opposed to Aye.

NAZARITE, a Jew who made vows of abstinence, &c. (Heb. ;
‘with Gk. suffix.). ‘To vowe a vowe of a Nazarite to separate
{himself] vnto the Lorde;’ Geneva Bible, 1561, Numb. vi. 5 (R.);
-[rather, vi. 2]. Formed with suffix -ite (=L. -ita, from Gk. -ir7s)
from Heb. nazar, to separate oneself, consecrate oneself, vow, ab-
stain. Der. Nazarit-ism.

NEAP, scanty, very low; said of a tide. (E.) ME. xeep; very

rare. ‘In the neep-sesons,’ i.e. in the neap-tide seasons, when boats
cannot come to the quay ; Eng. Gilds, ed. Toulmin Smith, p. 425. —
AS. nép, in the term xép-flod, as opposed to héah-flod =high flood ;
Voc. 182. 38; also Voc. 1. 14. The spelling neap indicates an open
@; prob. nép is an OMercian form, for *n€p; from Teut. root *nxipan
(*neipan), to pinch; whence Du. nijpen, to pinch, neep, a pinch, nip.
-Thus the sense is ‘ pinched,’ or ‘scanty.’ Cf. EFries. nép-tange, a
-pair of pincers. See Phil. Soc. Trans. 1903-6; p. 254. J Quite
a distinct word from ebb. Der. neap-tide.
- NEAR, nigh, close at hand. (E.) By a singular grammatical
confusion, this word, orig. used as the comparative of nigh, came to
be used as a positive, from which the new comparative nearer was
evolved. In Schmidt’s Shakespeare Lexicon, the explanation is
given wrongly; he says.that near is put by contraction for nearer,
whereas it is the old form of the word, Shak. uses both zear and
nearer as comparatives ; both forms occur together, Mach. ii. 3.146:
cf. ‘nor near nor farther off;’ Rich, II, iii. 2. 64; ‘being ne’er the
near, id. vy. I. 88. The form zear-er is late, not found in the r4th
cent., perhaps notinthe 15th. Dr. Morris (Outlines of E. Accidence)
observes that ‘ zear, for nigh, first came into use in the phrase far and
near, in which near is an adverb.’ But it first appears in ‘ comen zer;’
Genesis and Exod. 2611 (ab. 1250). [He goes on to cite an AS.
neorran, not given in the dictionaries.] It is clear that the precise
form was first of all adverbial; the ME. form of nigher was zerre,
whilst the adv..was ner, or meer. ‘Cometh meer’ =come near;
Chaucer, C. T. 841 (A 839). AS. néar, comp. adverb from zéah,
nigh; Grein, ii. 283.-4-Icel. ner, adv.; both pos.:and comp.; orig.
the latter. See Nigh, Der. near-ly, Macb. iv. 2. 67; near-ness,
Rich. Il, i. 1. 1193 mear-sight-ed.

WEAT (1), black cattle, an ox, cow. (E.) ME, zee?, both sing.
and pl. ; used as pl. in Chaucer, C. T. 599 (A 597). AS. xéat, neut.
sb., unchanged in the plural (like sheep, deer, also neuters) ; Grein,
ii. 288.-+-Icel. zaut, neut. sb., unchanged in the plural, and gen. used
to mean cattle, oxen; Swed. not; Dan. ndd; MHG. dz, neut. sb.,
cattle. Teut. type *zautom,n. \B. Sonamed from their usefulness
and employment. From *nawf, 2nd grade of Teut. *neut-an-, to
employ, as seen in AS. néotan, niotan, to use, employ; Grein, ii. 292;
Icel. njota, to use, enjoy; MHG. niezen, OHG, niozan, G. geniessen,
to enjoy, have the use of; Goth. xiutan, to receive joy (or benefit)
from. From Idg. 4/NEUD; whence Lithuan. nauda, usefulness,
naudingas, useful (Nesselman). Brugmann, i. § 221. Der. neat-
herd.

NEAT (2), tidy, unadulterated. (F.—L.) ‘Neat and fine ;’ Two
Gent. of Verona, i..2. 10. Also spelt nett; Spenser, F. Q. iii. 12. 20.
*To kepe it cleen and nette;’ Caxton, Godfrey of Boloyne, ch, 6.


. NEED


=F. net, masc., nette, fem., ‘neat, clean, pure ;’ Cot. [Cf. beast from
OF, beste.]—L. nitidum, acc. of nitidus, shining, clear, handsome,
ae ai =—L. nitére, to shine. Der. neat-ly, neat-ness. Doublet,
net (2).

NEB, the beak of a bird, the nose. (E.) In Winter’s Tale, i. 2.
183. ME. eb. ‘ Ostende mihi faciam, scheau thi neb to me’ =shew
me thy face; Ancren Riwle, p. 90. AS. nebb, the face, John, xi.
44.-4- Du. neb, bill, beak, nib, mouth; Icel. zef, the nose; Dan. nab,
beak, bill; Swed. nabb, beak, bill. B. The word has lost an initial
s; we also find Du. sweb, a bill, beak, snxavel, a bill; G. schnabel,
a bill, beak, nib. The MHG. szabel, a bill, is derived from MHG;
snaben, to snap. And cf. Lith. snapas, a bill. Doublet, zib,

NEBULA, a misty patch of light; a cluster of very faintly
shining stars. (L.) Modern and scientific. —L,. nebula, a mist.4-Gk.
vepédn, a cloud; dimin. of végos, cloud, mist.-G. nebel, mist, fog;
Du. nevel, Icel. nifl. B. The Gk. vépos is cognate with W. nef,
Olrish xem, heaven, Russ. xebo, heaven; Skt. zabhas, sky, atmosphere,
ether. Brugmann, i. § 554. Der. nebul-ar, nebul-ose, nebul-ous,
nebul-os-i-ty.

NECESSARY, needful, requisite. (F.—L.) ME. zecessarie,
Chaucer, C. T. 12615 (C 681).—OF. necessaire, ‘necessary ;’ Cot,
= L.: necessdrius, needful. —.L. mecesse, neut. adj., unavoidable,
necessary. fB. The usual derivation from ze, not, and cédere, to give
way, isnotsatisfactory. Der. necessari-ly, also necessity, ME. necessitee,
Chaucer, C. T. 3044 (A 3042), from OF. necessite << L. acc, necessi-
tatem ; hence necessit-ous, -ly, -ness, necessit-ate, necessit-ar-ian.

NECK, the part of the body joining the head to the trunk. (E.)
ME. nekke (dissyllabic), Chaucer, C. T. 5859 (D 277). AS. knecca,
Deut. xxviii. 35.+4-Du. nek, the nape of the neck; G. genick, MHG.
genicke. Teut. type *hnakjon-. Cf. Icel. hnakki, the nape of the
neck, back of the head; Dan. zakke, the same; Swed. nacke, the
same; G. nacken, nape, neck, crag; from Teut. type *hnakkon-.
Cf. Norw. nakk, a knoll, nakke, nape, neck; the orig. sense being
‘projection,’ as in the parallel form zape. Further allied to Irish
cnoc, a hill. Der. neck-cloth, neckerchief (for mneck-kerchief, see
Kerchief), xeck-band, neck-tie; neck-lace, Winter’s Tale, iv. 4. 244,
compounded of neck and lace; neck-verse, Tyndall’s Works, p. 112,
col. 1, on which see my note to P. Plowman, C. xv. 129.

NECROLOGY, a register of deaths. (Gk.) Added by Todd
to Johnson, From Gk. ve«pé-, stem of vexpds, a corpse; and -Aoyia,
due to Ad-yos, discourse, from Aéyewv, to speak. See Necromancy.

NECROMANCY, divination by communion with the dead.
(F.—L.—Gk.) The history of the word is somewhat concealed by
our modern knowledge of Gk., which enables us to spell the word
correctly. But the ME. forms are nigromaunce, nigromancie, and the
like. Precisely the same ‘ correction’ of the spelling has been made
in modem French. Spelt nygremauncye in King Alisaunder, 1. 138;
nigromancye in P. Plowman, A. xi. 158, on which see my Notes to
P. Pl.,p.246. Trench rightly remarks, in his Eng. Past and Present,
that ‘the Latin medizeval writers, whose Greek was either little or
none, spelt the word xigromantia, as if its first syllables had been
Latin.’ =OF, nigromance, ‘nigromancy, conjuring, the black art ;’
Cot. Spelt xigromancie in the Vie de S. Auban, 1. 997. —=Late L.
nigromantia, corrupt form of xecromantia. = Gk. vexpopayteia, necro-
mancy.—Gk. vexpé-, for vexpds, a corpse; and payreia, prophetic
power, power of divination. B. The Gk. vexpés is allied to véxus,
a corpse, dead body. —=4/NEK, to perish, to kill; whence Skt. zag,
to perish, zdcaya, to destroy, L. necare, to kill, and E. inter-nec-ine,
q:-v. y. The Gk. pavreia is from paytis, a prophet, seer, inspired
one; cf. Gk. paivona, I rage; see Mania. Der. necromanc-er,
Dent. xviii. 11 (A. V.); necromantic, from Gk. vexpo-, and paytixds,
prophetic ;. necromantic-al. @ From the singular confusion with
L. niger, black, above mentioned, the art of mecromancy came to
be called the black art!

NECTAR, a delicious beverage. (L.—Gk.) In Spenser, Sonnet
39, 1. 13. —L. nectar.—Gk. véxrap, the drink of the gods ; Homer,
Il, xix. 38, Od. v.93. Perhaps ‘ overcoming death;’ cf. Gk. véx-vs,
a corpse, and Skt. ¢ar-a-, overcoming. Der. nectar-e-an, nectar-e-ous,
nectar-ous, nectar-y ; also nectar-ine, the name given to a variety of the
peach, orig. an adj., as in ‘Nectarine fruits,’ Milton, P. L. iv. 332.

NEED, necessity, distress. (E.) ME. need, nede, Chaucer, C. T.
4523 (B 103). OMerc. néd; AS. nyd, nied (néad); Grein, ii. 301.-+
Du. nood; Icel. naud; Dan. and Swed. néd; Goth. nauths; G. noth,
OHG. not, B. The Teut. stem is *xaudi- (>*naudi-) ; answering
to Idg. stem *naw-ti-; as in OPruss. zautin, need. (But néad re-
presents Teut. *xauda.) Brugmann, i. § 427 b. . J Confused in late
AS. texts with néod, nied, nyd, desire; which is related to OSax,
niud, OHG. niot, earnestness; from the Teut. base *nxeud-, Der.
need-ful, ME. neodful, Ancren Riwle, p. 260, 1. 10; need-less, need~
less-ly, need-less-ness ; need-y, ME. nedy, P.. Plowman, B. xx. 40, 41,
47,°48; need-i-ly, need-i-ness,. Also need-s, adv., ME, needes, nedes,


397


398 NEEDLE


Chaucer, C. T. 1171 (A 1169), where the final -es is an adverbial |
ending, orig. due to AS.. gen. cases in -es; but in this case nedes


supplanted an older form nede, Layamon, 1. 1051, which originated
in AS. xzyde, gen. case of xyd, which was a fem. sb. with gen. in -e.

NEEDLE, a sharp pointed steel implement, for sewing with.
(E.) ME. nedle, nedel, also spelt nelde, neelde; P. Plowman, C, xx.
56, and various readings. AS..n#dl, Grein, ii. 274; earlier forms
néol, népl (OE. Texts).4-Du. zaald (for naadl); Icel. nal (by con-
traction); Dan. zaal; Swed. ndl; G. nadel, OHG. nadela; Goth.
nethla, B. The Teut. type is *x&-thla, from a base n# =Idg. 4/NE,
to sew, fasten with thread, preserved in OHG, nahen, G,. niihen, to
sew, and also in L. nére, Gk. vnPev, véev, tospin. The suffix denotes
the agent.  y. This is clearly one of the rather numerous cases in
which an initial s has dropped off; the orig. root is 4/SNE; as in
Trish sxathad, a needle, snathaim, I thread, or string together, szaidhe,
thread, Gael. snathad, a needle, snath, thread, yarn; Olrish sxim,
aspinning. Stokes-Fick, p. 315; Brugmann, i. § 136. Der. needle-
book, -ful, -gun, -woman, -work.

NEESE, NEEZB, to breathe hard, sneeze. (Scand.) ‘To neeze’
=to sneeze, Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 56. The sb. xeesing isin Job, xli. 18
(A. V.).. ME. nesen, vb., nesing, sb.; see Prompt. Parv., and Way’s
note. Not found in AS. — Olcel. hajdsa; Dan. nyse; Swed.
nysa.4-Du. niezen, G. niesen, OHG. niusan. Teut. type *hneusan-.
Like the parallel form sneeze, it is of imitative origin ; cf. Skt. kshz,
to sneeze. @f In the later version of Wyclif, Job, xli. 9, the reading
is fnesynge ; this isnot quite thesame word, though of similar formation.
The sense of fnesynge is ‘ violent blowing,’ but it also means sneezing ;
cf. AS. fnéosung, sneezing, fuest, a puff, Du. fniezen, to sneeze. Cf.
‘And fneseth faste’=and puffs hard, Chaucer, C. T., H 62. Teut.
type *fneusan-. It reminds us of Gk. mvéev,to blow. Der. nees-ing,
neez-ing, as above.

-NEFARIOUS, unlawful, very wicked. (L.) In Butler, To the
Memory of Du-Val, 1. 20. Englished from L. nefarius, impious,
very wicked; by change of -us to -ous, as in arduous, &c.—L. nefas,
that which is contrary to divine law, impiety, great wickedness. = L.
ne-, for né, not; and fas, divine law, orig. that which is divinely
uttered; cf. fari, to speak; see Fate. Der. nefarious-ly, -ness.

NEGATION, denial. (F.—L.) In Shak. Troilus, v. 2. 127.—
F. negation, ‘a negation;’? Cot.=L. acc. negatidnem, from nom.
negatio; cf. negdtus, pp. of negare,to deny. PB. Negare is opposed
to diere, to affirm; but is unconnected withit. Brugmann, ii. § 774,
explains neg-dre by comparing Lith. ne-gi, not at all; cf. L. neg-
otium. Der, negat-ive, adj., Wint. Tale, i. 2. 274, ME. negatif,
negative, Usk, Test. of Love, bk. iii. ch. 2. 92, from F. negatif< L.
negitiuus; negative-ly, negative-ness; also negative, sb., Twelfth Nt.
vy. 24. From the same L. negare we have de-ny, ab-negate, re-negate,
re-negade.

NEGLECT, to disregard. (L.) Orig. a pp. ‘ Because it should
not be zeglect or left undone;’ Tyndall, Works, p. 276, col. 2. ‘To
neglecte and set at nought ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 257 g.=—L. neg-
lectus, pp. of negligere, to neglect. Negligere=neg-legere.mL. neg-,
a particle of negation, and legere, to gather, collect, select. See
Wegation and Legend. Der. xeglect-ful, neglect-ful-ly, neglect-
Sul-ness ; neglect-ion, a coined word, 1 Hen. VI, iv. 3. 49; and see
negligence,

NEGLIGENCE, disregard. (F.—L.) ME. negligence, Chau-
cer, C. T. 1883 (A 1881).—F. negligence, ‘negligence;’ Cot.—L.
negligentia, carelessness. = L. negligent-, stem of pres. part. of negli-
gere, to neglect; see Neglect. Der. negligent, ME. negligent,
Chaucer, C. T. 7398 (D 1816), from F. negligent (Cot.)<L. negli-
gentem, acc. of pres. part. of negligere; negligent-ly; also negligee,
from F. negligé, pp. of negliger, to neglect << L. negligere.

NEGOTIATE, to do business, transact. (L.) In Minsheu,
ed. 1627. ‘She was a busy negociating woman;’ Bacon, Life of
Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 24, 1. 14..—L. negotiatus, pp. of negatiari,
to transact business.—L. negdtium, business. Compounded of L.
neg-, negative particle (see Negation) ; and dtium, leisure. Der.
negotiat-or, from L. negétidtor; negotiat-ion, from F. xegociation,
‘negociation,’ Cot., from L. acc. negotidtionem ; negotia-ble ; negotiat-
or-y. @@ The right (historical) spelling is negotiate for the verb,
negociation for the sb.; but this is not regarded.

NWEGRO, one of the black race of mankind, (Span.—L.) In
Shak.. Merch. Ven. iii. 5. 42. . ‘ Black as negros;’ Hakluyt, Voy. iii.
649.=—Span. negro, a black man.—L. nigrum, acc. of niger, black;
see Nigrescent. 4 Minsheu gives the form xeger; this is from
the OF. negre (mod. F. négre), ‘a negro’ (Cot.), and answers to
mod. E. nigger, q.v.

NEGUS (1), a beverage of wine, water, sugar, &c. (E.) ‘The
mixture now called xegus was invented in Queen Anne’s time by
Colonel Negus ;’ Malone, Life of Dryden, p. 484 (Todd’s Johnson).
Col. Francis Negus died in 1732; N.E.D. The Neguses are a


- NEREID


Norfolk family ; see Notes and Queries, 1 Ser, x. 10, 2 Ser. v. 2243
Gent. Maga. Feb. 1799, p. 119. :
NEGUS (2), a title of the kings of Abyssinia (Abyssinian). ‘Th’


| empire of Negus ;” Milton, P. L. xi. 397. ‘ Neguz [which signifieth]


a mo John Pory, tr. Lee’s Hist. Africa, Introd. p. 21 (Stanford
Dict.).

NEIF, NEAF, the fist. (Scand.) In Shak. Mids. Nt. Dr. iv.
1,20; 2 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 200. ME. neue (=neve, dat. case), Havelok,
2405. —Icel. hnefi, the fist; Swed. nafve; Dan. neve.

NEIGH, to make a noise as a horse. (E.) ME. nezen, Wyclif,
Isa. xxiv. 14, earlier version, AS. hn#gan, to neigh; AElfric’s
Grammar, p. 192, 1.8; whence the sb. kn#gung, a neighing, id. p. 4,
1. 15 (Zupitza).--Low G. neigen (Liibben); MDu. neyen, to neigh.
Cf. Icel. gneggja, hneggja; Swed. gnagga; Dan. gnegge. An imita-
tive word.

NEIGHBOUR, one who dwells near. (E.) ME. neighebour,
Chaucer, C. T. 9423 (E1549). AS. néahgebir, a neighbour, John,
ix. 8; so that the trisyllabic form zeigh-e-bour in Chaucer is easily
explained. The AS. form xéahbir also occurs, but more rarely.—
AS. néah, nigh ; and gebir, a husbandman, for which see the Laws
of Ine, sect. vi, in Thorpe’s Ancient Laws, i, 106. The AS, gebur
or bir is cognate with Du. boer, a boor (the prefix ge- making no
difference). +MHG, nachgebiir, nachbir; mod. G. nachbar. See
Wigh and Boor. Der. neighbour, adj., Jerem. xlix. 18, 1. 40
(A. V.) 3 neighbour-hood, ME. neyghbourhede, Prompt. Parv.; neigh-
bour-ing, All’s Well, iv. 1.18; neighbour-ly, Merch. Ven. i. 2. 85 ;
neighbour-li-ness,

NEITHER, not either. (E.) ME. neither, Havelok, 458. [Dis-
tinct from noither, nouther, nother (whence the contracted form zor) $
earlier nowther (Ormulum, 3124), xawther, nauther ; see examples in


‘| Stratmann.] Formed by prefixing ze, not, to ME. either = AS. #gSer


= @ghweder, for d+ge+hweder; where @ means ‘ever. Thus
neither =no-whether; see No and Whether. With AS. ze, not,
compare OSax. ne, ni; Goth. and OHG, zi, not.

NEMESIS, retributive justice. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. 1 Hen. VI,
iv. 7. 78.—L. Nemesis.=Gk. vépeots, distribution of what is due,
retribution. — Gk. véuev, to distribute; see Nomad.

NEMORAL, belonging to a grove. (L.) Phillips (1658) has
‘nemoral or nemorous. = L. nemordalis or nemordsus, woody. —L.
nemor-, for *nemos, in nemus, a grove.4+Gk. vépos, a pasture; from
veyew, to distribute, to pasture; from 4/NEM. See Nomad.

NENUPHAR, a kind of water-lily. (F.—Pers.—Skt.) ‘Nenu-
phar, water-lillie ;? Baret (1580); and see the Stanford Dict,—= MF.
nenuphar, ‘nenuphar, the water-lilly, or water-rose;’ Cot.= Pers.
ninifar, for nilifar, nilupar, nilipal, a water-lily (Devic).—Skt.
nilotpala, a blue lotus. =Skt. nitla-, blue; utpala-,a lotus, lit. ‘ burst-
ing out,’ from wd, out, and pat, to burst.

NEOLOGY, the introduction of new phrases. (Gk.) Modern.
Compounded from Gk. véo-, for véos, new; and -Aoyia, from Aédyos,
discourse, which is from Aéyev, to speak. See New and Logic.
Der. neologi-c, neologi-c-al, neolog-ise, neolog-ism, neolog-ist.

NEOPHYTE, a new convert, a novice. (L.—Gk.) ‘There
stands a neophite glazing of his face ;” Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s Revels,
iii. 2 (Crites). = L. neophytus. — Gk. vedpuTos, lit. newly planted, hence,
a novice; I Tim. iii. 6.—Gk. véo-, for véos, new; and ¢uréy, a plant,
gutés, grown, from the vb. pve, (1) to cause to grow, (2) to grow,
allied to E. be. See New and Be.

NEOTERIC, recent, novel. (L.—Gk.) Spelt neoterigue in Min-
sheu, ed, 1627; but not given in Cotgrave or Littré. = L. nedtericus. =
Gk. vewreputds, novel ; expanded from vewrepos, comp. of véos, new,
which is cognate with E. zew. See New. Der, xeoteric-al.

NEPENTHE, NEPENTHES, a drug which lulled sorrow.
(Gk.) Spelt nepenthe in Spenser, F. Q. iv. 3. 43; better nepenthes,
as in Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxi. c. 21.— Gk. vyn7ev6és, an epithet of
a soothing drug in Homer, Od. iv. 221; neut. of ynmev6ns, free from
sorrow.= Gk. v7-, negative prefix allied to E. no; and mév@os, grief,
allied to 7400s, suffering. See INo and Pathos.

NEPHEW, a brother’s or sister's son. (F.—L.) An old
meaning is ‘ grandson,’ as in 1 Tim. v. 4, &c. The ph is a substitute
for the older v, often written ~. ME. neuew (==nevew), Chaucer,
Legend of Good Women, 1. 2659; neweu (=neveu), Rob. of Glouc.


p- 1693 1. 3529.—OF. neven, ‘a nephew ;’ Cot.—L. nepotem, acc. of .


nepos, a grandson, a nephew.-+Pers. zawada, a grandson ; Skt. napiit,
a grandson.+AS, nefa, a nephew; #lfred, tr. of Beda, b. ili. c. 6
(near the end). [This AS. word was supplanted by the F. form] ;
OHG. nefo, nevo, G. neffe; Du. neef. ldg. type *nepot-; whence
orig. Teut. type *nefod-, later *nefon-, The fem. type is Idg. *nepzi-,
whence Skt. xapti, L. neptis; Teut. type *nefti>*nifti, as in AS,
nift, Du. nicht. Brugmann,i.§ 149. Der. nepot-ism, i.e. favouritism
to relations, from L. stem mepdt-, with suffix -ism. See niece,
NEREID, a’sea-nymph. (L.—Gk.) Minsheu has the pl. form


a


NERVE


Nereides.—L. Néreid-, stem of Néreis (pl. Néreides), a sea-nymph,
a daughter of Nereus.= Gk. Nypeis, a sea-nymph, a daughter of
Nereus. = Gk. Nypevs, an ancient sea-god. = Gk, yypds, wet; an allied
word to vais, varas, a naiad; see Naiad,

NERVE, physical strength, firmness, a fibre in the body conveying
sensation. (F.—L.) ME. nerfe, Chaucer, Troilus, b, ii. 1. 642.—F.
nerf, ‘a sinew, might ;? Cot.—L. xeruum, acc, of neruus, a sinew.
Prob, allied to Gk. vedpov, a sinew, string; cf. Gk. vevpd, a string;
Skt, sndva-,a tendon, Der. nerve, verb, not in early use; xerv-ous,
formerly used in the sense of ‘sinewy’ (Phillips), from F. nerveux,
“sinewy’ (Cot.), which from L. nerudsus, full of nerve; nervous-ly,
nervous-ness ; also nerv-y, i. e. sinewy (obsolete), in Shak. Cor, ii. 1.
177; nerve-less; cf. neur-algia.

_NESCIENT, ignorant. (L.) Coles (1684) has nescient and
nescience.—L, nescient-, stem of nesciens, pres. part. of nescire, not to
know. = L, ne-, not; scire, to know. See Nice and Science.

NESH, tender, soft. (E.) Still in use in prov. E. ME. nesh;
‘tendre nesh;’ Court of Love, 1. 1092 (16th cent.); ‘That tendre
was, and swithe [very] zesk;’ Hayelok, 2743. AS. hnesce, hnesce,
soft; Grein, ii, 91.— Goth, hnxaskwus, soft, tender, delicate, Matt. xi. 8.

SS, a promontory. (E.) Preserved in place-names, as Tot-ness,
Sheer-ness. AS. ness, ness, (1) the ground, (2) a promontory, head-
land, as in Beowulf, ed. Grein, 1. 1360; the form zessa also occurs,
Grein, ii. 277.--Icel. nes; Dan. nes; Swed. nds. B. The sense of

‘ promontory’ suggests association with AS, nasu, nose, and E. zose.

NEST, the bed formed by a bird for her young. (E.) ME. zest,
P, Plowman, B. xi. 336. AS. nest, a nest; Grein, ii. 282.4-Du. nest ;
G,. nest.4-Bret. neiz; Gael. and Irish nead; Olrish net; W. nyth;
L. nidus (for *niz-dus); Lithuan. lizdas (for nizdas), Nesselmann ;
Skt. nida-, a nest,a den. B. Now usually explained as representing
a form *nizdos=*ni-sd-os, ‘a place to sit down in;’ from i, down,
and the weak grade of the root SED, to sit. Cf. Skt. ni-sad, to sit
down. See Sit. Brugmann,i. § 81. Der. nest, vb.; nest-le, AS.
nestlian, to make a nest, a frequentative form, orig. ‘to frequent
anest ;’ nest-ling, with double dimin, suffix (= -l-ing), as in gos-ling,
duck-ling.

NET (1), an implement made of knitted or knotted twine for
catching fish, &c, (E.) ME. zet, nett, Wyclif, John, xxi. 6, AS.
net, nett, Grein, ii, 282.4-Du. net; Icel. and Dan. net; Swed. nat ;
Goth. nati; G. netz. Teut. type *xatjom,n. Cf. L. nassa, a wicker
creel; Icel. 2d¢, a net. [| Not connected with knit, which has
initial k, Der. net, verb, (1) to use a net, (2) to make a net; nett-
ing, net-work.

NET (2), clear of all charges. (F.—L.) Merely a doublet of
neat; see Neat (2). Caxton has: ‘the ayer [air] was pure and net ;’
Troy-book, leaf 95, back, 1. 23.

NETHER, lower. (E.) ME. nethere; ‘the overe lippe and the
nethere’ =the upper lip and the lower one, Wright’s Vocab. i. 146,
1.14. . AS. neoSera, neodra, Ps. lxxxvii. 6, ed. Spelman, A com-
parative adj. due to the compar. adv. ider, niodor, downward ;
Grein, ii. 294. Related forms are ide, adv. below, neodan, adv.
below, Grein, ii. 294, 290; but these are really forms suggested
by niSer, and not original ones. B. The word is to be divided as
ne-ther, the suffix -ther being comparative, as in o-ther, and answering
to the -ter in af-ter, and the Skt. -tara- (Gk. -repos).+4Icel. nedri,
nether, lower; xedarr, adv. lower; cf. nedan, from below; Dan.
neder-, in comp. nederdel, the lower part of a thing; cf. neden, adv.
below, ede, ned, down; Swed. zedre, nether, as in nedre lappen, the
nether lip; cf. nedre, below, neder, ned, down; Du. neder; G. nieder,
nether, lower. sy. As said above, the base is ni-; cf. Skt. ni-taram,
adv., excessively; a comp. form from xi, downward, into. Cf. also
Russ. zije, lower. Der. nethermost, 1 Kings, vi.6; a false form, due
to a popular etymology which connected the ending with most; but
really a corruption of AS, midemesta, in Aélfred, tr. of Boethius,
b. ii. pr. 2 (cap. vil. § 3); and AS. 2i-Se-m-est- is from xi, down,
with the Idg. suffixes -te-mo- (as in L. op-ti-mus, best) and the usual
AS. superl. suffix -est. Cf. be-neath,

NETTLE, a well-known stinging plant. (E.) ME. nedle, nettle
(better with one z); ‘ Netle in, dokke out ;’ Chaucer, Troil. iv. 461.
AS. netele, netle; Cockayne, A. S. Leechdoms, iii. 340.4-Du. xetel ;
Dan. nelde (MDan. nedle) ; Swed. ndssla (MSwed. niitla) ; G. nessel,
OHG. nezzila, nezila. B. A dimin. form; Teut. type *nat-il-on-, f.;
the simple form appears in Swed, dial. nata, OHG, nazza, a nettle.
Cf. Olrish nenaid, nettles. Der. netile-rash; nettle, vb., Phillips, ed.


7OOs i.

NEURALGIA, pain in the nerves. (Gk.) Modern; not in
Todd’s Johnson. Coined from Gk. veup-, stem of vevdpoy, a nerve;
and Gk. day-, stem of dA-yos, pain; with Gk. suffix -ia (-ta). Perhaps
the Gk. vedpov is allied to L. neruus; see Nerve. Der. neuralg-i-c.

NEUTER, neither, sexless, taking neither part. (L.)
duke... abode as euter and helde with none of both parties ;’


‘The |


NEXT


Bemers, tr. of Froissart, vol. i. c. 252 (R.).—L. neuter, neither.
Compounded of ne, not; and wer, whether of the two; which some
connect with Whether. Der. neutr-al, Macb. ii. 3. 115, from L.
neutrdlis; neutr-al-ly, neutral-ise, neutral-is-at-ion; neutral-i-ty=F.
neutralité (Cotgrave), from L. acc. neutralitatem.

NEVER, not ever, at no time. (E.) ME, neuer (with u for v),
Chaucer, C. T. 1135 (A 1133). AS. x@fre; compounded of ze, not,
and @fre, ever; Grein, ii. 275. See Ever. Der. never-the-less,
ME. neuerpeles, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 16, 1. 9, sub-
stituted for the earlier form nabeles=AS. na pi les (=no-the-less,
not the less). In this phrase, the AS. pi, also written. py, is the
instrumental case of the def. article se, and is cognate with Goth. hé,
on that account, instrum. case of sa; for examples, see Jes in Grein,
ii. 164. See The (2).

NEW, recent, fresh. (E.) ME. newe (dissyllabic), Chaucer, C. T.
459, 8733 (A 457, E857). AS. niwe, néowe, niowe, Grein, ii, 298.
Du. nieww; Icel. nyr; Dan. and Swed. ny; Goth. niujis; G. neu,
OHG, niuwi; L. nouus; W. newydd; Irish nua, nuadh, Gael. nuadh;
Lithuan. naujas; of which an older form was perhaps nawas (Nessel-
mann); Russ. novwit; Gk. véos; Skt. nava-,new. Idg. types *newos,
*newios ; Brugmann, i. §§ 120, 318; ii. § 63. Allied to Skt. nu, nit,
now; see Now. Thus zew means ‘that which is now,’ recent,
Der. new-ly,=AS. niwlice, Grein, ii. 299; new-ness, spelt newenesse
in Sir T. More, Works, p. 1328; new-ish, new-fashioned ; and see
new-fangled, news, re-new; also nov-el, nov-ice.

NEWEL, the upright column about which a circular staircase
winds, (F.—L.) ‘The staires,...let them bee upon a faire open
newell, and finely raild in;’ Bacon, Essay 45, Of Building. Cot-
grave, s.v. noyau, spells it muell, which is an older and better spelling.
The right sense is much the same as that of nucleus, with which
word it is connected. The form seems to show that the word was
borrowed early.—OF. nuel, noiel (Godefroy); later F. noyau, ‘the
stone of a plumme, also, the nwell or spindle of a winding staire;’
Cot. So called because it is the centre or nucleus of the staircase,
round which the steps are ranged.=L, xucdle, neut. of nucilis, lit.
belonging to a nut; hence applied to the kernel of a nut or the
stone of a plum.=L. zuc-, stem of mux, a nut; with suffix -dlis. See
Nucleus. Cf. F. nueil, a nut (dial. of La Meuse).

NEWFANGLED, fond of what is new, novel. (E.) The old
sense is ‘ fond of what is new;’ see Shak. L. L. L, i. 1. 106, As You
Like It, iv. 1.152; and in Palsgrave. The final -d is a late addition
to the word, due to a loss of a sense of the old force of -/e (see
below); the ME. form is newefangel (4 syllables), fond of novelty,
Chaucer, C. T. 10932 (F 618). So also Gower, C. A. ii. 2733
1. 4366: ‘ Bot euery newe loue quemeth To him, that newefongel is’
=but every new love pleases him who is fond of what is new.
B. Compounded of ewe, new; and fangel, ready to seize, snatching
at, formed from the base fang-, to take (occurring in AS. fang-en,
pp. of fon, to take), with the suffix -el (=AS. -ol) used to form
adjectives descriptive of an agent. y. This suffix is preserved in
mod. E. witt-ol=one who knows, sarcastically used to mean an
idiot; cf. AS. sprec-ol, fond of talking, talkative; wac-ol, vigilant;
and see Nimble. So also fangel =fond of taking, readily adopting,
and new-fangle = fond of taking up what is new ; whence zew-fangle-d,”
by later addition of d. See Fang. Der. newfangled-ness, for ME.
newefangelnesse, Chaucer, C. T, 10924 (F 610); formed by adding
-nes (-ness) to ME. newe-fangel.

NEWS, what is new, tidings. (E.) Formerly newes, which
does not seem to be older than about A.D. 1400. ‘ Desyrous to here
newes;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. i. c. 66. ‘What newes he
brought;’ Surrey, tr. of Virgil, Afn. ii. 1.95. ‘I bring the newis
glad;’ James I, The Kingis Quair, st. 179. It is nothing but a
plural, formed from new treated as a sb.; so also tidings, It is
a translation of F. nouvelles, news, pl. of nouvelle, new (Cotgrave) ;
so also L. zowa=new things, i.e. news. In Wyclif, Ecclus. xxiv. 35,
in diebus novorum is translated by ‘in the dayes of newes;’ later
version, ‘of ewe thingis. See New. Notes on E.Etym., p. 196.
Der. news-boy, -monger, 1 Hen. IV, ili. 2. 25, -paper, -room, -vendor.

NEWT, a kind of lizard. (E.) This is one of the words which
has taken to itself an initial z, borrowed from the indef. art. an; see
remarks on the letter N. A newt=an ewt. ME. newte, ewite.
‘ Newte, or ewte, wyrme, lacertus;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 355. Ewe is
a contraction of the older form euete (=evete). The OF. lesard, a
lizard, is glossed by evete (the MS. prob, has ewefe), in Walter de
Biblesworth; see Wright’s Vocab. i. 159. AS. efeta; ‘Lacerta,
efeta, in a gloss; Wright’s Voc. i. 78, col. 2, 4 The mod. prov.
E. eft is a contraction of AS. efefa, For further references, see
King Alisaunder, 1. 6126, Mandeville’s Travels, p. 61, &c.; see
Stratmann. i

NEXT, nighest, nearest. (E.) Next is a doublet of nighest, of
which it is an older spelling. ‘ When pe bale is hes?, penne is pe bote


399


400 NIAS.


‘nest’ =when the sorrow is highest, then is the remedy nighest; Pro-
verbs of Hendyng, st. 23. This is often cited in the form: ‘ When
bale is kext, then bote is zext;’ and just as hext or hest is a contrac-
tion of ME. hehes¢ (highest), so is next or nest a contraction of ME.
nehest (nighest). See Stratmann, s.v. zeh. The AS. forms are néahst,
néhst, nyhst, nihst, niehst; Grein, ii. 283. See Nigh.

WIAS, a young hawk; also, a ninny. (F.—L.)
Glossary. The correct form of Kyas, q.v.

IB, the point of a pen. (E.) Another form of neb, which is the
older spelling. The spelling ib is in Johnson’s Dict., but is not
older than 1585. See Neb. Cf. EFries. nibbe, nib, Low G. nibbe,
aneb; Norw. nibba, a sharp point. Der. nipp-le, q.v.

NIBBLE, to eat in small portions. (E.) In Shak. Temp. iv. I.
62. Not connected with ib, or neb, but with zip, of which it is the
frequentative form, and means ‘to nip often.’ In fact, it has lost an
initial #, and stands for kibble, just as nip does for knip. G. Douglas
has knyp, with the sense of ‘nibbled ;’ tr. of Virgil, prol. to bk. xii.
1. 94.4-Low G. nibbeln, knibbeln, to nibble, gnaw slightly ; Bremen
Wort.; Westphalian nibbeln, nippeln, to nibble. Cf. also Du. knibbelen,
to cavil, haggle; the same word, differently employed. See Nip.
Cf. Du. knabbelen, to nibble, allied to E. knap. Cotgrave has:
‘ Brouter, to knap or nible off.’ Der. nibbl-er.

NICH, hard to please, fastidious, dainty, delicious. (F.—L.) ME.
nice, foolish, simple; later, it took the sense of fastidious; and
lastly, that of delicious. In Chaucer, C. T. 5508, 6520 (B 1088,
D 938); in the latter passage ‘wise and nothing nice’ = wise and not
simple at all. So also in P. Plowman, B. xvi. 33. ‘For he was
nyce, and ne couthe no wisdom’=for he was foolish, and knew no
wisdom; Rob. of Glouc. p. 106; 1. 2326.—OF. nice, ‘lazy, slothful,
idle, faint, slack, dull, simple;’ Cot. The orig. sense was ‘ ignorant.’
—Romanic type *necium (cf. Span. necio); for L. nescium, acc. of
nescius, ignorant.—L. me, not; and sci-, related to scire, to know.
See No and Science. 4 The remarkable changes in the sense
may have been due to some confusion with E. xesh, which sometimes
meant ‘ delicate’ as well as ‘soft’. Der. mice-ty, ME. nicetee, Chaucer,
C. T. 4044 (A 4046), from OF. nicete, ‘sloth, simplicity’ (Cot.) ;
alice-7€SS.

NICHE, a recess in a wall, for a statue. (F.—Ital.—L.) In
Minsheu, ed. 1627. =F. niche, ‘a niche;’ Cot.=Ital. xicchia, a niche;
closely allied to micchio, a shell, hence a shell-like recess in a wall,
so called (probably) from the early shape of it. Florio explains
nicchio as ‘the shell of any shell-fish, a nooke or corner, also such
little cubboords in churches as they put images in or as images
stand in’ =—L. mitulum, mytilum, acc. of mitulus, mytilus, a sea-
muscle. ‘Derived in the same way as Ital. secchia from situla, a
bucket, and Ital. vecchio, from L. wetulus, old; as to the change of
initial, cf. Ital. zespola with L. mespilum, a medlar;’ Diez. A similar
change of initial occurs in E. napkin, due to L. mappa, and in F.
natte,a mat. B. Referred by some to Gk. putidos, a muscle; but
the Gk. word may be of Lat. origin. The L. mytilus is also found in
the form mitulus, and is by some connected with musculus, a little
mouse, also a sea-muscle. 4 Thesimilarity to E. mick is acci-
dental.

NICK (1), a small notch, a cut. (E.) ‘Though but a stick with
a nick;’ Fotherby, Atheom., p. 62, ed. 1622 (Todd’s Johnson).
“To nick, to hit the time right; I nick’d it, came in the ick of time,
just in'time. Mick and notch, i.e. crena, are synonymous words, and
to nick a thing seems to me to be originally no more than to hit just
the notch or mark ;’ J. Ray, pref. to Collection of English (dialectal)
Words, ed. 1691. Palsgrave has: ‘I mycke, I make nyckes on a
tayle, or on a stycke;’ where zayle=tally. Nick is an attenuated
form of mock, and means a little notch; so also zip from top. See
Nock. f. Hence zick, a score on a tally, a reckoning; ‘ out of all
nick’ =past all counting, Two Gent. iv. 2. 76. Der. xick, to notch
slightly, Com. Errors, y. 175.

NICK (2), the devil. (F.—L.—Gk.) In the phrase ‘Old Nick,
i.e. ‘Old Nicholas’ or ‘Old Nicolas.’ [Not really connected with
AS. xicor, a water-sprite; Beowulf, ed. Grein, ll. 422, 575, 845,
1427; Icel. nykr, a fabulous water-goblin; Dan. 2ok; OHG. xichus,
a water-sprite, fem. nicchessa; G. nix, fem. nixe. See Nix in Kluge.]
=F. Nicolas.=—L, Nicolaus. — Gk. Ninodaos; cf. Acts, vi. 5.

NICKEL, a grayish white metal. (Swed.—G.) One of the few
G. words in E. Added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. From Swed.
nickel; so named by Cronstedt, a Swede, in 1754; he abbreviated
the G. word kupfernickel to nickel, to denote the metal which he had
discovered in 1751 (Weigand). The origin of the G. name is doubtful.

NICKNACK, the same as Knickknack, q.v.

NICKNAME, a surname, soubriquet. (E.). In Shak. Romeo,
ji. I. 12. One of the words which has acquired an unoriginal initial
2; see remarks on the letter IN. ME. xekename, corruption of
ekename, an additional name; in later times changed to. nickname,


See Nares’


NIGHTINGALE


from a popular etymology which connected the word with the verb
nick, which properly means ‘to notch,’ not ‘to clip.’ It may further
be remarked that a zickname is not so much a docking of the name,
as an addition to it, a sur-name. ‘ Neke-name, or eke-name, agnomen ;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 352. Way cites in-his note similar glosses, such
as: ‘Agnomen, an ekename, or a surename (sic),” Medulla; ‘An
ekname, agnomen;’ Catholicon. Spelt ekename, Testament of Love;
bk. ii. ch. 1. 96. There can be no doubt as to the purely E. origin
of the word, which has just the sense of L. agndmen, and is parallel
to ME. toname, a to-name, additional name, surname (cognate with
G. zuname, a nickname), for which see P. Plowman, C. xiii. 211,
Layamon, 9383. Thus the word is simply compounded of eke and
name; see H#ke, Name.-+lcel. auknafn, a nickname ; from auka, to
eke, and zafn, a name; Swed. éknamn, from oka, to eke, and namn,
a name; Dan. dgenavn, from dge, to eke. Der. nickname, verb,
Hamlet, iii. 1. 151.

NICOTIAN, belonging to tobacco. (F.) ‘Your Nicotian [tobacco]
is good too;’ Ben Jonson, Every Man, ed. Wheatley, A. iii. sc. 5,
1. 89.—MF. Nicotiane, ‘ Nicotian, tobacco, first sent into France by
Nicot in 1560;’ Cot. Coined, with fem, suffix -iane (=L. -iana),
from the F. name Nicot. Der. Hence also nicot-ine. .

WIECH, the daughter of a brother or sister. (F.—L.) . The fem.
form of nephew. ME. nece, Rob. of Glouc. p. 353, 1. 7252; spelt
neyce, King Alisaunder, 1. 1712.—OF. niece, mod. F. niéce. Cf.
Prov. zepta, a niece, in Bartsch, Chrestomathie Provengale. = Late L.
neptia, which occurs A.D. 809 (Brachet). = L. xeptis, a granddaughter,
a niece; used as fem. of nepods (stem nepat-) ; see Nephew. .

NIGGARD, a miser. (Scand.) ME. zigard (with one g’), Chaucer,
C. T. 5915 (D 333); cf. wigardye, sb., id. 13102 (B 1362). Thesuffix
-ard is of F. origin, as usual; and the F. -ard is of OHG. origin ; see
Brachet, Introd. to F. Etym. Dict. § 196. But this suffix was freely
added to E. words, as in drunk-ard; and we find a parallel form in
ME. nygun. ‘{He was] a zygun and auarous’ =he was a niggard and
an avaricious man; Rob. of Brunne, Handlyng Synne, 1. 5578. We
also find an adj. niggish (Richardson), from the sb. zig, a niggardly
person ; see Plowman’s Tale, 1. 757. Of Scand. origin. =Icel. hnoggr,
niggardly, stingy ; Swed. xjugg, niggardly, scanty ; cf. MDan. ygger,
Swed. dial. xugger, stingy; MDu. nugger, ‘nimble, carefull, or
diligent;’ Hexham; Swed. dial. guugger, a miser, from gaugga, to
be stingy. ++ AS. hnéaw, sparing. The orig. sense was prob. ‘ scrap-
ing;’ from Teut. base *kneu-, allied to Gk. xvvev, to scratch,
scrape; see Prellwitz. Der. niggard, adj., Hamlet, iii. 1. 13;
niggard-ly, Hen. V, ii. 4. 46; niggard-ly, adv., Merry Wives, ii. 2.
205 3 niggard-li-ness.

NIGGER, a negro. (F.—Span.—L.) ‘He takes us all for
a parcel of negers;’ Garrick, A Peep behind the Curtain, A. i. sc. 2.
—MF. negre, ‘a negro;’ F. négre.—Span. negro, a negro; see
Negro.

NIGGILB, to trifle, fret, mock. (Scand.) ‘Take heed . . You
niggle not with your conscience;’ Massinger, Emp. of the East,
A. v. sc. 3. Cf. Norw. nigla, gnigga, to pinch, spare, save; Low G.
gnegeln, to spare, save; Norw. gnika, to rub, scrape, save.

NIGH, near, not far off, close. (E.) ME. neh, neih, ney, neigh,
ny; Chaucer, C. T. 1528 (A 1526); Havelok, 464; &c. AS. néah,
neh, Grein, ii, 282, used as adj., ady., and prep.4Du. za, ady., nigh;
Icel. na-, adv., nigh ; only used in composition, as za@-bui, a neigh-
bour; Goth. néhw, néhwa, adv., nigh; whence néhwjan, to draw
nigh; G. zahe, adj., nach, prep., nigh, next, &c. B. These forms
belong to a Teut. type *x#hwoz, adj., nigh; root unknown. Der.
near, q. V., neighbour, q. v., next, q.V.

NIGHT, the time of the sun’s absence. (E.) ME. niht, night;
Chaucer, C. T. 23. AS. niht, neht, neaht, Grein, ii. 284.4-Du. nacht;
Icel. zatt, ndtt; Dan. nat; Swed. xatt; Goth. nahts; G. nacht.4-W.
nos; Irish nochd; Lithuan. naktis; Russ. noch(e) ; L. nox (stem noct-) 5
Gk. vwi£ (stem vuer-); Skt. nakta-. B. All from the Idg. type
*nokt-; whence Teut. *zaht-. . Brugmann, i. §§ 420, 658b. Der.
night-cap, -dress, -fall, ~jar (from its jarring noise), -piece, -watch ;
also night-ly, ME. nihtliche, Reliquize Antique, i. 131, night-less,
night-ward ; also numerous compounds in Shak., as -bird, -crow, -dog,
ly, ~foe, -gown, &c. And see night-mare, night-shade, night-in-gale,
nocturn. Also fort-night, sen-night.


NIGHTINGALE, the bird that sings by night. (E.) The x.


before g is excrescent, as in messenger for messager, passenger for
passager, &c. ME. nightingale, Chaucer, C. T. 983 earlier form
niztegale, Reliquize Antique, i. 241, AS. niktegale, Voc. 247. 11.
Lit. ‘singer of [or in] the night.’—AS. nite, gen. and dat. case of
niht, neaht, night; and gale=singer, from galan, to sing (Grein).+-Du.
nachtegaal; Dan. nattergal ; Swed. naktergal; G. nachtigall, OHG.
nahtagala, nahtegala, nahtigala. 8. The verb galan became galen in
ME., and occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 6414 (D532); it is cognate with
Dan. gale, Swed. gala, to crow as a cock, OHG, kalan, to sing ; and


NIGHTMARE


is derived from *gal, 2nd stem of the Teut. verb which appears as E.
yell. See Yell.

NIGHTMARE, an incubus, a dream at night accompanied by
pressure on the breast. (E.) ME, nightemare, ‘Nyghte mare, or
mare, or wytche, Epialtes, vel effialtes’ [ephialtes]; Prompt. Parv.
= AS. neaht, nikt, night; and mare, anight-mare, a rare word, occur-
ring in Cockayne’s A. S. Leechdoms, ii 306, 1. 12; older forms mera,
m., Epinal gloss., 558; maere, f., Corpus gloss., 1111. 4 Du. zacht-
merrie, a night-mare ; an accommodated spelling, due to confusion
with Du. merrie, a mare, with which the word has no connexion.
A like confusion is probably common in modern English, though
the AS. forms are distinct; Icel. mara, the nightmare, an ogress ;
Swed. mara; Dan. mare; Low G. moor, nagt-moor ; Bremen Worter-
buch, iii. 184, where the editor, against the evidence, confuses moor
with ‘mare;’ OHG. mara, a nightmare, incubus.+Polish mora,
nightmare. B. The sense perhaps is ‘crusher;’ from a root *mer;
cf, Icel. merja, to crush (pt. t. mar-di). The AS., Icel., and OHG,
suffix -a (fem. -e) may denote the agent, as in numerous other cases ;
e. g. AS. hunt-a, a hunter, huntsman.

NIGHTSHADE, a narcotic plant. (E.) AS. nihtscadu, niht-
scada, nightshade; Cockayne’s A. S. Leechdoms, iii. 340. Com-
pounded of nzht, night, and scadu, shade; pethaps because thought
to be evil, and loving the shade of night. See Night, Shade.
B. But this may be ‘ popular’ etymology. Cf. Du. nachtschade, MDu.
nachischaede, G. nachtschatten, nightshade. But the MHG. for ‘night-
shade’ is nahktschate, and the Swed. dial. form is nattskate-gris, lit.
‘ bat-grass,’ from naht-skata, a bat. Notes on E. Etym., p. 197.

NIGRESCENT, growing black. (L.) In Todd’s Johnson. =
L. nigrescent-, stem of pres. pt. of nigrescere, to become black,
inceptive form of nigrére, to be black.—L. nigr-, stem of niger,
black. Der. nigritude, from L. nigritido, blackness; see Hood’s
Poems, A Black Job, last line but one. Also negro, q. v.

NIHILIST, one who rejects all positive beliefs. (L.) Formed
with suffix -ist from L. nihil, nothing.

NILGAU, the same as Nylghau, gq. v.

NIMBLE, active. (E.) The d is excrescent. ME. nimel, nimil ;
see ‘Nymyl, capax’ in Prompt. Pary., and Way’s note. Formed
from AS. nim-an, to take, catch, seize, with the AS. suffix -ol, still
preserved in E. witt-ol, lit. a wise man, used sarcastically to mean a
simpleton. We find the parallel AS. forms numol, numul, numel,
occurring in the compounds scearp-numul, lit. ‘ sharp-taking,’ i. e.
efficacious, and teart-numul, also lit. ‘ tart-taking,’ i.e. efficacious;
Cockayne’s A. S. Leechdoms, i. 134, 1. 10, 152, 1. 3, and footnotes;
these are formed from num-, the weak grade of the same verb zinan.
The sense is ‘ quick at seizing,’ hence active, nimble. So also Icel.
nema, keen, quick at learning, from nema, to take ; Dan. nem, quick,
apprehensive, adroit, from zemme, to apprehend, learn. B. The AS.
niman, to seize, is cognate with Icel. nema, Dan. nemme, G.nehmen,Goth.
niman, to take; a strong verb, with AS. and Goth. pt. t. zam. The orig.
sense is ‘ to take as one’s share.’ —4/NEM, to apportion, distribute,
allot; whence also Gk. véyev, to distribute, L. m-erus, a number.
&c.; see Prellwitz. Der. ximbl-y, nimble-ness. From the same root,
nem-esis, nom-ad, num-b-er, num-ism-at-ic. And see Numb.

BUS, a cloud, halo, (L.) L. nimbus, a cloud; allied to
Nebula.

NINCOMPOOP, a simpleton. (L.) ‘An old ninnyhammer,
a dotard, a nincompoop;’ The Guardian, no. 109 (1713). A cor-
ruption (by association with ninny) of L. non compos, short form of
non compos mentis, not in possession of one’s mind. ‘ Bo! the man’s
non compos ;? Murphy, The Upholsterer, A. i. sc. 3.—L. nn, not;
compos, in control of, from com- (for cum, prep., with) and -fos, allied
to potis, capable ; see Potent.

E, a numeral, one less than ten. (E.) ME. xyne, nine,
Chaucer, C.T.24. Here the final -e is the usual pl. ending, and nyne
stands for an older form niz3ene, extended form of ni3en, Layamon,
2804. AS. nigon, nigen, Grein, ii. 296.4-Du. negen; Icel. nix; Dan.
ni; Swed. nio; G. neun; Goth. niun.4-W. naw; Irish and Gael. xaoi,
L. nouem; Gk. &véa (=é-véFa); Zend nava, Pers. nuh, Skt. nava.
Idg. type *xewan; Brugmann, ii. § 173. Der. nine-fold, nine-pins ;
nine-teen, AS. nigontyne (Grein); nine-ty, AS. nigontig (Grein); nin-th,
AS. nigoda, nigeda (id.); nine-teen-th, nine-ti-eth; nin-th-ly, And
see Novem-ber.

Y, asimpleton. (E.) ‘ What a pied ninny’s this!’ Temp.
iii. 2. 71. Prov. E. ninny, nonny, or nunny, a simpleton ; ninny-
hammer (the same) ; E.D.D. Of imitative origin (see below). Cf.
Westphal. zinne, an infant (Woeste) ; Picard ninette (Corblet) ; Ital.
ninno, a child, a dialectal form cited by Diez, not given in Florio
nor in Meadows’ Dict., but the same word with Span. zi#o, a child,
infant, one of little experience. Cf. also Span. mene (collog.), an
infant; Gascon menet, ninet, an infant (Mistral). Cf. Ital. xinna,
a lullaby, nurse’s song to rock a child to sleep, xixzare, to lull to


NOCK | 401


sleep, nanna, ‘a word that women use to still their children with’

(Florio). From the repetition of the syllables ni, ni, or na, na,

“ humming or singing children to sleep. Korting, § 6545. See
un.

NIP, to pinch, break off the edge or end. (E.) ME. xippen;
‘nyppyng hus lyppes’’= biting his lips, pressing them with his teeth,
P. Plowman, C. vii. 104, For knip; see G. Douglas, Prol. to XII
Book of the AEneid, 1. 94. Not found in AS., though the (possibly)
cognate cnif, a knife, occurs; see Knife. From the weak grade
(knip-) of a Teut. verb *kneipan-, to pinch, as seen in Du. knijpen, to
pinch; Dan. knibe, to pinch, nip; Swed. knipa, to pinch, squeeze,
catch; G. kneifen, to pinch, nip; kneipen, to pinch, twitch. Perhaps
allied to Lith. knébti, to pinch; or to Lith. gnybii, to pinch. Der.
nip, sb., a cut, Tam. Shrew, iv. 3. 90; nipp-er, nipp-ers, nibb-le. And
see knife.

NIPPLE, a teat, a small projection with an orifice. (E.) In
Shak. Macb. i. 7. 57; and in Minsheu, ed. 1627. A dimin. of nib,
just as neble is the dimin. of neb. ‘ Neble of a womans pappe, bout
de la mamelle;’ Palsgrave. Nib and neb are the same word; see
Nib, Neb. Cf. Low G. nibbe, a beak ; whence OF. nifle, niffle,
a nose, Ital. niffa, niffolo, a snout. Korting, § 6526. Der. nipple-
wort.

NIT, the egg of a louse or small insect. (E.) ME. nite, nyte, also
used to mean a louse. ‘Wyte, wyrme, Lens;’ Prompt. Parv. AS.
hnitu, to translate L. lens; Voc. 30. 2; 122. 2.-4-Du. zeet; Icel. nitr,
pl., Olcel. gnit; Dan. gnid; Swed. gnet; G. niss, MHG. niz. Cf.
also Russ, gnida, a nit, Gk. noms (stem «65-) ; W. nedd, pl. nits.
B. Teut. base *hnit, which may be the weak grade of the verb seen
in AS, hknitan, only used of an ox, meaning ‘to gore,’ Exod. xxi. 28,
Icel. hnita, to attack, strike. The corresponding Idg. root is KNEID,
appearing in Gk. «view (=xvi5-yerv), to scrape, tease, make to itch.
See Prellwitz.

NITREH, saltpetre. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) Spelt iter in Minsheu,
ed. 1627. =F. nitre, ‘niter;’? Cot.—L. nitrum.=Gk. virpor, ‘natron,
a mineral alkali, our potassa or soda, or both (not our zitre, i.e.
saltpetre) ;’ Liddell and Scott. This means that the sense of the
word has changed; but the form is the same.— Heb. zether, nitre ;
Prov. xxv. 20; cf. Arab. nifriin, natrin, natron, native alkaline salt ;
Rich. Dict. p. 1585. Der. nitr-ate, nitr-ic, nitr-ous, nitr-i-fy, nitr-
ite. Also nitro-gen, i.e. that which produces nitre, from virpo-, for
vitpov, and yev-, base of yiyvew, to produce ; see Generate.

NIZAM, the title of a ruler in the Deccan, in Hindustan. (Hind.
—Pers.— Arab.) Foundin 1793; seeStanfordDict. Short for Hind.
nizam-ul-mulk, administrator of the empire (Forbes). = Arab. zig¢ham,
government ; which the Persians pronounce as nizam. Though the
proper sense is ‘ government,’ in the phrase nizam-'l-mulk it is used
as a title, meaning ‘governor of the empire.’ First used by Asaf
Jah in 1713 (Yule), From Arab. root nadkama, he arranged or
ordered. See Devic and Richardson.

NO (1), a word of refusal or denial. (E.) ME. xo, Will. of
Palerne, 2701, 3115. There is a clear distinction in ME. between
no and nay, the former being the stronger form; see Nay, which is
of Scand. origin. AS. nd, adv.,never,no. Compounded of ze, not,
and @, ever. The form @ became oo in ME., occurring in Genesis
and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1. 111; but this form was entirely superseded
by the cognate word ai, ay, mod. E. ay, aye, which is of Scand.
origin. See Aye, adv., ever. B. The neg. particle xe, signifying
‘not,’ is cognate with OHG. ni, MHG. ze, not; Goth. zi, not ;
Russ. ze, not; Irish, Gael., and W. zi, not; L. ze, in non-ne ; Skt.
na, not. C. In mod. E. this neg. particle is represented by the
initial n- of n-ever, n-aught, n-one, n-either, n-ay, n-or, and the like.
@ It is quite a mistake to suppose that the ME. ze, not, so common
in Chaucer, is of F. origin. It is rather the AS. ze, which happens
to coincide in form with F. ve, of L. origin; and that is all.

NO (2), none. (E.) Merely a shortened form of none, as a is of
an; see None. Der. no-body, q.v.

NOBLE, illustrious, excellent, magnificent. (F.—L.) In early
use. ME. zoble, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 273, 1. 16.—F.
noble. =, nobilem, acc, of nobilis (= gnd-bilis), well-known, notable,
illustrious, noble.=L. gnd-, base of noscere (=gnoscere), to know,
cognate with E. know; with suffix -bilis. See Know. Der. nobl-y,
adv.; noble-man, in O. Eng. Homilies, as above ; noble-ness (a hybrid
word, with E. suffix), Wint. Tale, ii. 3.12. Also mobil-i-ty, K. John,
v. 2. 42, from OF. nobilite, nobilitet<L. acc, ndbilitatem.

NOBODY, no one. (E.) In Shak. Merry Wives, i. 4.14. Com-
pounded of zo, short for zone, and body; not in early use. It took
ts place of ME. xo man, which is now less used. See None and

ody.

NOCK, an indentation. (MDu.) ‘The xocke of the shafte ;’
Ascham, Toxophilus, bk. ii. ed. Arber, p. 127. ME. nokke, Prompt.
Pary., p.357- ‘Nokked and fethered aright,’ said of arrows 5 Chaucer,

D


402 NOCTURN


Rom. Rose, 942.—MDu. nocke (Kilian); also nock, “een nock .. in
een pijl, a notch in the head of an arrow;” Hexham.4+MSwed. xocka,
an incision (Ihre) ; Swed. dial. zokke, nokk, an incision or a cut in
timber (Rietz). B. The MSwed. zocka also denotes the same as
Icel. knokki, i. e. one of the small metal hooks holding the thread in
a distaff. @ Constantly confused with xotch, which is a different
word. The Norman dial. xogue (Du Bois), Ital. zocca, a nock (see
Florio), are of Germanic origin.

NOCTURN, the name of a service of the church. (F.—L.)
See Palmer, Origines Liturgice, i. 202, ed. 1832. ‘A nocturne of the
Psalter;’ Lord Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. ii. c. 26 (R.). ME.
nocturne, Ancren Riwle, p. 270, 1. 1.—F. zocturne, nocturnal; also,
a nocturn.= Late L. nocturna, a nocturn ; orig. fem. of L. xocturnus,
belonging to night. B. To be divided as xoct-urnus, from noct-, stem
of now, night, with a suffix imitating di-urnus. See Night. Der.
nocturn-al, spelt nocturnall, Hardyng’s Chron., ch. 95, st. 10; and in
Milton, P. L. iii. 40, viii. 134, from Late L. nocturndlis, extended
from nocturnus; nocturn-al-ly.

NOD, to incline the head forward. (E.) ME. nodden, Chaucer,
C. T. 16996 (H 47). Not found in AS., and difficult to trace.
But it answers to a G. form *notzen, found in the frequentative form
notteln, a proy. G. word, meaning to shake, wag, jog (Fliigel). To
nod is to shake the head by a sudden inclination forwards, as is done
by a sleepy person; to make a butting movement with the head.
Schmeller gives notteln as Bavarian. The orig. notion seems to be
that of butting or pushing; and there is a connexion with Icel.
hnjoda, to hammer, clinch, rivet, hnydja, a rammer for beating turf;
G. nieten, to rivet. Teut. base *hnud-, weak grade of *hneud-.
@ Not connected with L. zuere, to nod (base xu). Der. nod, sb.

NODDULE, a name for the head. (E.) In Shak. Tam. Shrew, i.
I. 64. Wedgwood well says: ‘the zoddle, noddock, or niddock is
properly the projecting part at the back of the head, the nape of the
neck, then ludicrously used for the head itself” ME. nodle, nodil.
‘ Nodyl, or nodle of the heed, or nolle, Occiput;’ Prompt. Parv.
B. It really stands for knoddel, and is the dimin. of knod, a word lost
in Early E., but preserved in E. dial. zod, nape, and in other languages;
ef. MDu. knodde, a knob (Hexham); Icel. kntidr, a knob, ball; G.
knoten, a knot, a knob; Du. knuod, a club. Cf. Low G. knuddel,
a ball of yarn, a hard swelling under the skin (Berghaus). y. This
knod is a variant of Knot, q. v.

NODE, a knot. (L.) ‘ Nodes, in astronomy, are the points of the
intersection of the orbit of the sun or any other (!) planet with the
ecliptick;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘Nodus or Node, a knot, or noose,
&c.;’ id.—L. nddus,a knot. Allied to Skt. naddha-, tied, bound,
pp. of xah (for nadh), to tie. From Idg. root NEDH, to fasten.
Brugmann, i, § 700 (a), note 2. Der. nod-al, adj.; nod-ous, Sir T.
Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iv. c. 4, § 1, Englished from L. ndddsus ;
nod-os-i-ty, id. b. v. c. 5, § 2, from F. zodosité, ‘knottiness’ (Cot.)
<L. acc. nddésitatem; nod-ule, Englished from L. xddulus, a little
knot, dimin. of xddus.

NOGGIN, a wooden cup, small mug. (Scand.) ‘ Of drinking-
cups. . we have. . mazers, broad-mouthed dishes, zoggins, whiskins,
piggins, &c.;’ Heywood, Drunkard Opened, &c., ed. 1635, p. 45
(Todd). Also in Minsheu, ed. 1627. (Cf. Irish noigin, ‘a noggin,
a naggin, quarter of a pint,’ O’Reilly ; Gael. noigean, a wooden cup ;
Gael. cnagan, a little knob, peg, pin, an earthen pipkin; Gael.
cnagaire, a knocker, a noggin; all from E. (Macbain).] We also
find Lowl. Sc. noggin, noggie, spelt knoggin by Swift, in Lines to
Dr. Sheridan (1719). For *knoggen, with -en as in wood-en, from
knog, a small cask, a firkin (E. D.D.), variant of knag,akeg (E.D.D.),
which is prob. the same word as Knag, a knot in wood, a peg; q.v.;
whence also knaggie, a keg.

NOISE, a din, troublesome sound. (F.—L.—Gk.) In early use.
ME. noise, Ancren Riwle, p. 66, 1. 18.—F. noise, ‘a brabble, brawle,
debate, . . also a noise ;’ Cot. B. The OF. form is also ose; and
the Provencal has nausa, nauza, noisa, nueiza (Bartsch). The origin
is uncertain ; it is discussed by Diez, who decides that the Prov.
form nausa could only have been derived from L. nausea, so that
a noise is so called because nauseous; see Nausea. If this be right,
the word is really of Greek origin, So K6rting, § 6471. Der. nois-y,
for which formerly noise-ful was used, as in Dryden, Annus Mirabilis,
st. 40; nois-i-ly, nois-i-ness; noise-less, -ly, -ness; also noise, verb, ME.
noisen, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iii. met. 6, 1. 7.

NOISOME, annoying, troublesome. (F.—L.; with E. suffix.)
Formed from ME. zoy, annoyance, injury; with E. suffix -some=AS,
-sum, as in Winsome, q.v. We find three forms in use formerly,
viz. noy-ous, Wyclif, 2 Thess, iii. 2; noy-ful, Sir T, More, Works,
p. 481 e; and xoy-some, id. p.1389h. B. Noyis a mere contraction
of ME. anoy, anoi; see Romaunt of the Rose, 4404, &c, The deriva-
tion is from the L. phrase in odid habére, as explained s.v. ANNoy,
q-v. Not connected with L. xocére, to hurt.


md NS


NONPAREIL


NOLE, NOLL, the head; see Noule. : 2

NOMAD, wandering; one of a wandering tribe. (Gk.) ‘The
Numidian nomades, so named of changing their pasture ;? Holland,
tr. of Pliny, b. v. c. 3.—Gk. voyad-, stem of vouas, roaming, wander-
ing, esp. in search of pasture. —Gk. voyds, a pasture, allotted abode.
= Gk. vévew, to assign, allot.—4/NEM, to assign; cf. Skt. xam, to
bow to, bow, bend, upa-nam, to fall to one’s share. Hence also
nem-esis, nim-ble, num-ber ; and the suffix -zomy in astro-nomy, auto-
nomy, gastro-nomy, anti-nomi-an. Der. nomad-ic.

NOMENCLATOR, one who gives names to things. (L.)
‘What? will Cupid turn zomenclator ?’ Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s Revels,
A. v. sc. 3 (2nd Masque). In Minsheu, ed. 1627.—L. ndmenclator,
one who gives names, lit. ‘name-caller ;’ fuller form 2dmenculdtor. —
L. némen, a name; and calare,to call. See Name and Calendar.
Der. nomenclat-ure, from L. ndmenclatira, a calling by name, naming.

NOMINAL, pertaining to a name, existing only in name.
(L.) ‘One is a reall, another a nominall;’ Tyndal’s Works, p. 104,
col. 1; see Spec. of English, ed. Skeat, p. 176, 1. 316. This refers
to the famous dispute between the Nominalists and Realists; the
founder of the former sect was condemned by a council at Soissons,
A.D. 1092; Haydn, Dict. of Dates.—L. ndmindlis, nominal.—L.
nomin-, for nOmen, a name, cognate with E. Name, q.v. See
Nominate.

NOMINATE, to name. (L.) In Shak. L. L. L. i. 2. 16.—L.
nomindtus, pp. of ndmindre, to name.—L. nomin-, for nomen, a name,
cognate with E. Name, q.v. Der. nominat-ion, Fryth’s Works,
p. 58, col. 2, from F. zomination, ‘a nomination’ (Cot.) ; xomina-tor ;
nominat-ive, ME. nominatif, Trevisa, i, 327, from OF. nominatif, in
use in the 13th century (Littré), from L. ndmindtiuus. Also nomin-ee,
a term of law, formed as if from a F. verb *xominer, with a pp. nominé ;
but the real F. verb is xommer.

NON,, prefix, not. (L.) In compounds, such as non-appearance,
non-compliance. =L,. ndn, not; orig. none, not one; compounded of
L. ne, not, and oinum, old form of ainum, neut. of uinus, one (Bréal).
Thus L. én is of parallel formation with E. None, q. v.

NONAGE, minority. (F.—L.) In Shak. Rich. SII, ii. 3. 13.°
Orig. a law-term. AF. nonage, Stat. Realm, i. 38 (1275). Com-
pounded of F. zon, from L. nén, not, and age; see Non-, Age.

NOWCEH, in phr. for the nonce. (E.) ME. for the nones, Chaucer,
C. T. 381 (A 379). The sense is ‘for the once, for the occasion or
purpose. The older spelling is for zhen ones, still earlier for then
anes, as in St. Juliana, ed. Cockayne, p. 71. Thus the z really
belongs to the dat. case of the article, viz. AS. Sam, later San, then.
Ones=mod. E. once; see Once. We may note that ones was first
agen. case, then an ady., and was lastly used as a sb., as here.

NONCHALANT, careless. (F.—L.) In R. North’s Examen,
p- 463 (Davies).—F. nonchalant, ‘careless,’ Cot.; pres. pt. of OF.
nonchaloir, ‘ to neglect, or be carelesse of ;’ Cot. =F. non, not ; chaloir,
‘to care, take thought for;’ id. Cf. OF. chaloir, caloir, in Bartsch,
orig. ‘to glow,’ hence, to be hot over, be fervent; also Anglo-F.
nunchaler, to be careless, Life of Edw. Conf. 4519.44L. nén, not;
calére, to glow, be animated. See Caldron, Der. nonchalance, sb.,
Whitehead’s Poems, Variety, 1. 284, from F. zonchalance, careless-
ness, indifference.

NONCONFORMING, refusing to conform. (L.; and F.—L.;
with E. suffix.) The Act of Uniformity came into operation on
24 Aug. 1662; Haydn, Dict. of Dates. Hence arose the name zon-
conformist, and the adj. xonconforming. Compounded of L. én, not;
and Conform, q.v. Der. xonconform-ist, non-conform-i-ty.

NONDESCRIPT, not yet described, novel, odd. (L.) ‘Such
as are non-descripts;’ Letters of Eminent Men, ed. Ellis (Cam. Soc.)
p- 203; A.D. 1696. Added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict.=L. dn,
not; and descriptus, pp. of describere, to describe; see Describe.

WONE, not one. (E.) ME. xoon, non; as in ‘non other’ =no
other, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 5. Before a consonant it
commonly becomes zo, as in mod. E.; but in very early authors we
find non even before a consonant, as in ‘none tonge;’ Rob. of Glouc,
p. 285, 1. 5806. AS. nan, none; compounded of ze, not, and az,
one; see No (1) § B, and One. j

NONENTITY, a thing that does not exist. (L.) In The
Tatler, no. 118, § 6 (1710). From Non- and Entity.

NONES, the ninth day before the ides. (L.) Also used of the
old church service at the ninth hour, which is the older use in E.
See P. Plowman, B. v. 378. This ninth hour or zones was orig.
3 P.M., but was changed to midday; whence our zoon. See further
under Noon.

NONJUROR, one who refuses to take the oath of allegiance.
(L.; and F.—L,) First used of those who refused allegiance to
Will. IIL. in 1689. From Non- and Juror.

NONPAREIL, one without equal, matchless, (F.—L.) In


Shak. Temp. iii. 2.108. —F, non, not, from L. xd; and pareil, equal,


NONPLUS


from Late L. pariculus, double dimin. from L. par, equal. See
Apparel, and Par.

NONPUUS, a state of perplexity; to perplex. (L.) Most com-
monly averb. ‘ He has xon-plus’d me ;’ Dryden, Kind Keeper, iii.
1. The orig. phrase was ‘ to be at a non-plus,’ which occurs in Cot-
grave, s.v. Latin, A half-ludicrous coined term for a state of per-
plexity, in which one can do no more, nor go any further. —L. non
plas, no more. See Non- and Plural.

NONSENSE, language without meaning. (L.; and F.—L.) It
occurs in Cowley, The Mistress; The Incurable, 1. 2, From Non-
and Sense. Der. nonsens-ic-al.

NONSUIT, a withdrawal of a suit at law. (L.; and F.—L.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, which see; and in Baret (1580); AF.
nonsute, From Non- and Suit. Der. zonsuit, verb.

NOOK, a corner, recess. (E.) ME. 20k, Havelok, 820; pl. xdkes,
Cursor Mundi, 17675, The comp. feower-ndked = four - cornered,
occurs in Layamon, ii. 500, 1. 21999. The Lowland Sc. form is neuk
(Jamieson) ; whence, probably, Irish and Gael. xiuc, a nook, corner.
The AS. *xdc is not found.4Norw. 26k, a nook, corner (Supp. to
Aasen, p. 970); cf. Norw. xakke, a comer cut off (Ross) ; and perhaps
even Dan. dial. xogg, a bend in a river.

NOON, midday. (L.) Orig. the ninth hour of the day, or 3 P.M.,
but afterwards the time of the church-service called zones was shifted
back, and the term came to be applied to midday as early as the
twelfth century; see Hampson, Medii Xvi Calendarium, i. 87. ME.
none, Layamon, 17063; zones, pl., P. Plowman, B. v. 378, vi. 147 (see
notes). AS. 2dn-tid ( =noon-tide), the ninth hour, Mark, xv. 33, 34.—
L. néna, for nona hora, ninth hour; where x6na is the fem. of ndnus,
ninth. Ndnus =nouimus, from nouem, nine ; cf. decimus from decem,
ten. The L. nouem is cognate with E. Nine, q.v. Der. noon-tide,
AS. non-tid, as above ; noon-day, Jul. Cesar, i. 3. 27. Also nones,
nun-chion. :

NOOSE, a slip-knot. (Prov.—L.) ‘Caught in my own zoose ;’
Beaum. and Fletcher, Rule a Wife, iii. 4 (Perez). Cotgrave explains
F, lags courant as ‘a noose, a running knot.’ Imported from Gascony
by sailors. Gascon nus, Prov. nous, a noose, a loop of cord. =L.
nodus, a knot. Cf. Prov. xous courrént, a running noose ; pl. nouses ;
also nous de l’araire, a noose for mooring ships (whence the nautical
word); see Mistral. Also Gascon nousef, a knot; nousera, to tie
aknot. @ The F. xeud is from L, acc. nddum; whereas Prov. nous
is from the nom, nddus. See Node. Der. noose, verb.

WOR, neither. (E.) ME. zor, short for ME. nother, nauther ; from
AS. nahweder (no-whether); but partly confused with other forms
of or. *£ Vor hor hors were al astoned, and nolde after wylle Sywe
noper spore no brydel’=for their horses were all astonied, and would
not, according to their will, obey zor spur nor bridle; Rob. of Glouc.
p- 396; 1. 8169. For a full account of the word, see N. E.D. See
Or


NORMAL, according to rule. (L.) A late word; added by
Todd to Johnson.—L. xormalis, made according to a carpenter’s
square. =—L. norma, a carpenter’s square, rule, pattern. Contracted
from a form *gnérima, and perhaps merely a borrowed word from
Gk. The corresponding Gk. word is yywpipyn, fem. of yvwprpos, well-
known, whence the sense of ‘ exact’ in Latin; allied to Gk. ywopor,
that which knows or indicates, an index, a carpenter’s square. See
Gnomon. Der. zormal-ly; also e-norm-ous, q. v., ab-norm-al
(modern). We also find norm, a rule, model; from L. norma.

NORMAN, a Northman. (F.—Scand.) ME. Norman, Rob. of
Glouc. p. 360; 1. 7418.—OF. Normand, ‘a Norman;’ Cot.=—Dan.
Normand}; Icel. Nordmadr (= Norémannr), pl. Norémenn, a North-
man, Norwegian. See North. Der. Norman-d-y, ME, Normandy,
Rob. of Glouc. p. 345, 1. 7074, F. Normandie, Dan. Normandi, Icel.
Nordmanndi, tle bay Norman’s land, where the suffix is French
(F, -ie, L. -ia).

NORSE, Norwegian. (Scand.) Short for Norsk, the Norwegian
and Dan. spelling of Norse=Icel. Norskr, Norse, adj., which appears
in the 14th cent. instead of the older Icel. Norrenn. Norsk is short
for *North-isk, i.e. North-ish; see North.

NORTH, the cardinal point opposite to the sun’s place at
noon. (E.) ME. north, Wyclif, Luke, xiii. 29. AS. nord; Grein, ii.
300.4Du. zoord ; Icel. nordr ; Dan. and Swed. nord; G. nord. Root
unknown. Some compare the Umbrian zertru, on the left hand (to
‘one looking eastwards) ; Gk. véprepos, lower. Der. xorth-ern, ME.
northren, Chaucer, C. T. 1989 (A. 1987), AS. zorSern (Grein), cognate
with Icel. zorr-enn, OHG. nord-r-dni, northern; where the latter suffix
is like the L. -dneus. Also north-east, -west, &c. Also north-ward;
north-er-ly (short for northern-ly), &c. Also Nor-man, Nor-se.
NOSE, the organ of smell. (E.). ME. nose (orig. dissyllabic),
‘Chaucer, C. T. 123,152. AS. nosz, Grein, ii. 300.4-Du. neus. Teut.
type *nas-a, f., related by gradation to Teut. type *nas-d, f.; cf. AS.
nas-u, nose; Icel. nis; Dan. nese; Swed. nasa; G. nase; Russ. nos’ ;


NOTICE . 403


Lithuan. xosis.-L,. nasus; also ndr-es, pl.; Skt. nasa, dual. “Der.
nose-bag,, nose-less ; nose, v., Hamlet, iv. 3. 38; nose-gay, Mids. Nt.
Dr. i. 1. 34, and Palsgrave, with which cf. gay, sb., a gay flower, as
in ‘gayes To make a Posie,’ in Golding’s Ovid, fol. 47, back, I. 4;
and prov. E. (Essex) gay, a painted picture in a child’s book, derived
from gay, adj. And see nos-tril, nozz-le, nuzz-le.

NOSOLOGY, the science of diseases. (Gk.) In Bailey’s Dict.
— Gk, vdco-, for vécos, disease; and -Aoyia, from Adyos, a discourse,
which is from Aéyetv, to speak.

NOSTRIAL, one of the orifices of the nose. (E.) Nostril = nose-
thrill or nose-thirl, ME. nosethirl, Chaucer, C. T. 559 (A 557). AS.
nosdyrl; the pl. xosdyrla (=nosdyrlu, the sb. being neuter) is used to
translate L. xares in Voc. 157. 15.—AS. nos-, for osu, the nose; and
Syrel, pyrel, a perforation, orifice, Grein, ii, 613. See further under
Thrill.

NOSTRUM, a quack medicine. (L.) In Pope, Prol. to Satires,
1, 29.—L. nostrum, lit. ‘ our own,’ i.e. a special drug peculiar to the
seller of it. Neut. of zoster, ours, possess. pron. formed from xds, we.
Cf. Skt. nas, us,

NOT (1), a word expressing denial. (E.) ME. not, often spelt
nought or noght, Chaucer, C. T. 304. ‘The less stressed form of
Naught, q. v.

NOT (2), I know not, or he knows not. (E.) Obsolete. ME, zot,
noot, Chaucer, C. T. 286 (A 284). AS. nat, I know not, or he knows
not; Grein, ii, 274. Equivalent to xe wat; from ze, not, and wai,
I know or he knows. See Wot, Wit.

NOT (3), to crop, shear closely ; see Not-pated,
NOTABLE, remarkable. (F.—L.) ME. notable, Chaucer, C. T.
13615 (B 1875).—F. notable, ‘ notable ;’ Cot.—L. xotabilis, remark
able. = L. zotare, to mark.—L. nota, a mark, note; see Note. Der.
notabl-y, notable-ness ; notabil-i-ty, ME. notabilitee, Chaucer, C. T.
15215 (B 4399), answering to F. notabilité, as if from L. acc. *nota=
bilitatem, from nom. *notabilitas, a word not recorded.

OTARY, a scrivener, one who takes notes. (F.—L.) The
pl. zotaryes occurs in the Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 40,1. 8. Englished
from AF. notarie, Langtoft, ii. 392; OF. notaire, ‘a notary, a
scrivener;” Cot.—L. zotarium, acc. of notarius, a short-hand writer,
one who makes notes ; formed with. the adj. suffix -rius from nota-,
stem of zota, a mark; see Note.

NOTATION, a system of symbols. (L.) In Ben Jonson’s Eng.
Grammar, cap. viii is on ‘ the xotation of a word,’ by which he means
the etymology. The word was really taken directly from Latin, but
was put into a French form, by analogy. Formed as if from a F.
notation (not in Cotgrave); from L. notatidnem, acc. of notatio, a
designating, also, etymology; cf. notdtus, pp. of notare, to mark ;
from nota, a mark; see Note.

NOTCH, to make an indentation, or a small cut in an arrow-
head, &c. (F.—L.) Much confused with zock, with the same sense ;
but it appears to be of different origin. The vb. to zotch seems to be
older than the sb.; Cotgrave has both (see below). ‘He.. notched
him like a carbonado ;’ Cor. iv. 5. 199. It seems to have acquired
an initial x; from ME. ochen, to cut, as in Morte Arthure, 2565,
4246, where it occurs as ‘he oches in sondire,’ and ‘he ochede it in
sondyre.’= MF’, ocher, OF. oschier (hoschier in Godefroy), ochier, ‘to
nick, nock, notch, to cut as a tally;’ Cot. Cognate with Prov. dial.
auscar (Korting), spelt ousca in Mistral, Catalan oscar, to cut into ;
cf. Proy. osco, a notch (Mistral), Catalan osca. =—L. *absecare, to cut
off, whence L. absegmen, a piece cut off (Lewis).—L. ab, off; and
secare, ta cut; seeSection. Der.xnotch,sb.; cf. MF. oche, ‘a nock,
nick, or zotch,’ Cot. ; Norm. dial. oche, noche, a notch (Le Heéricher) ;
F. hoche.. {| So Korting, § 49; but the MF. ocher also answers to Late
L. occare, to cut (Duc.), L. occare, to harrow; from occa, a harrow.

NOTE, a mark, sign. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. note, Chaucer,
C. T. 13477 (B 1737); Layamon, 7000. =F. note, = L. nota, a mark,
sign, note. . The o is short, and perhaps nota stands for *gndta,
allied to ndtus (for gndtus), known. The shortening of the syllable
appears still more decisively in cognitus=cogndtus, known (Bréal).
See Notice. Thus a zofe is a mark whereby a thing is known.’
Der. note, verb, ME. noten, Gower, C. A. iii. 164; bk. vii. 1. 2340;
not-ed, ibid.; not-ed-Ly, note-less, not-er ; note-book, Jul. Czes. iv. 3. 98 ;
note-worthy (= worthy of note), Two Gent, of Verona, i. 1.13. And
see not-able, not-ary, not-at-ion, not-ice, not-ify, not-ion, not-or-i-ous.

NOTHING, absence of being, insignificance. (E.) Merely an
abbreviation, in pronunciation, of xo thing. The words were formerly
written apart. Thus, in Chaucer, C. T. 1756 (Six-text, A 1754),
the Ellesmere and Hengwrt MSS. have xo ¢hyng, where the Camb.
MS. has nopyng. See No (2) and Thing. Der. xothing-ness, in
Bp. Hall, Select Thoughts, § 22 (R.).

NOTICE, an observation, warning, information. (F,—L.) In
Shak. Hen. V, iv. 7. 122.—F. notice, ‘notice;’? Cot.—L. ndtitia, a
being known, knowledge, acquaintance, Extended from a known,

Da


404 NOTIFY |


pp. of ndscere, to know, See Note, Know, Der, notice, verb,
notice-able, notice-abl-y.

NOTIFY; to signify, declare. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed, 1627;
cf. Oth, iii. 1.31. ME, xotifyen, Chaucer, Troil. ii. 1591. —F. notifier,
“to notifie ;’ Cot. = L. ndtificare, to make known. =L. ndti-, for ndtus,
known; and -fc-, for fac-ere, to make, See Notice and Fact.
Der. notific-at-ion.

NOTION, an idea, (F.—L.) Formerly, intellectual power,
sense, mind; see Shak, Cor. v. 6. 107.—F. notion, omitted by Cot-
graye, but given in Sherwood’s Index to the same.—L. ndtidnem,
acc. of ndtio, an investigation, notion, idea; cf. zdtws, known; see
Notice. Der. notion-al.

NOTORIOUS, manifest to all. (L.) In Shak. All’s Well, i.
1.111. Notoriously is in Sir T. More, Works, p. g60f. Englished
from L. ndtorius, by changing -us into -ous, as in arduous, &c. ‘This
L. word is only represented in Lewis’s Dict. by the fem. and neut.
forms ndtdria, nodtorium, both used substantively; cf. OF. nofoire,
‘notorious’ (Cot.), which points back to the same L. adj. Formed
from L. ndtor, a voucher, witness ; which again is formed with agential
suffix -tor from 76-, base of noscere, to know, cognate with E. know;
see Know. Der. zoforious-ly, -ness.

NOTORIETY, notoriousness. (F.—L.) Used by Addison, On
the Christian Religion (Todd).—MF. nozorieté, ‘notoriousness ;’
Cot.; mod, F. notoriété.-Late L. ndtdrietatem, acc. of ndtorietas
(Ducange).—L. notérius; see Notorious,

NOT-PATED, closely shorn or cropped. (E. and Late L.) See
Shak. 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 78. Chaucer has zot-heed, a closely
cropped head; C. T. prol. 109. Cf. ‘To Notte his haire, comas
recidere ;’ Baret (1580), From AS. hnot, close shorn, smooth ; and
Pate.

NOTWITHSTANDING, nevertheless, (E.) ME. noght with-
stondende, Gower, C. A. ii. 181; bk. v. 1611. From xoght=naught;
and withstanding, pres. part. of withstand. Perhaps suggested by L.
non obstante. See Naught and Withstand.

NOUCH, the same as Ouch, q.v.

NOUGHT, the same as Naught, q.v.

NOULE, NOWL, NOLE, NOLL, a head. (E.) ‘An Asses
nole;’ Mids. Nt. Dream, iii. 2. 17 (1623). And see Nares, ME.
nol. AS. knoll, the crown of the head.--OHG. hknol, top.

NOUN, the name of a thing. (F.—L.) Used so as to include
adjectives, as being descriptive. Rich. quotes ‘that nowne know-
ledging, and that verbe knowledge’ from Sir T. More, Works,
p. 437a. Also zowne in Cathol. Anglicum (1483); but the word is
older, and belongs to the 14th cent. ; first appearing in 1398 (N.E.D.).
=OF. non, nun, nom, num (Godefroy); mod. F. nom, a name,
anoun. In Philip de Thaun, Livre des Creatures, we have the AF.
forms nun, 1. 241, num, 1. 233; see Wright’s Popular Treatises on
Science. = L. ndmen, a name, noun; cognate with E. Name, q.yv.
Doublet, zame.

NOURISH, to feed or bring up. (F.—L.) In early use. ME.
norisen, norysen, Rob. of Glouc. p. 238, 1. 4901; whence the sb.
norysynge in the preceding line. = OF. zoris- (mod. F. nourriss-), stem
of parts of the verb zorir (mod. F. nourrir), to nourish.—L. nutrire,
to suckle, feed, nourish. Der. nourish-er, Macb. ii. 2. 40, nourish-
able; nourish-ment, Spenser, F.Q. vi. 9. 20. And see nurse, nurture,
nutri-ment, nutri-ti-ous, nutri-tive.

NOVEL, new, strange. (F.—L.) In Shak, Sonnet 123. It seems
to be less old in the language than the sb. zovelty, which is ME.
noveltee, Chaucer, C. T., E too4. And it follows the OF. spelling
of the sb. = OF. novel (Godefroy), later zouvel, mod. F. nouveau. = L.
nouellus, new; dimin. form from nowus, which is cognate with E.
New, q.v. Der. zovel-ty, ME. noveltee (as above), OF. noveliteit,
from L. nouellitatem, acc. of nouellitis, newness ; novel, sb., a late
word in the mod. sense, but the pl. zovels (=news) occurs in the
Towneley Mysteries (see Trench, Select Glossary); ovel-ist, formerly
an innovator (Trench); and see xov-ice, in-nov-ate.

NOVEMBER, the eleventh month. (L.) In Chaucer, On the
Astrolabe, pt. i. § 10, 1. 11,—L. Nowember, the ninth month of the
Roman year.=L. xowem, nine. See Nine.

NOVICH, a beginner. (F.—L.) In Shak. Meas. i. 4.18. ME.
novys, novice, Chaucer, C. T. 13945 (B 3129).—F. novice, ‘a novice,
a young monke or nunne;’ Cot.—L. noutcius, nouitius, new, fresh,
a novice; Juvenal, Sat. iii. 265. Extended from nouus, new; see
Novel, New. Der. xoviti-ate, Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, from F.
novitiat, ‘the estate of a novice,’ from Late L. nouitiditus, sb.; see
nouitidri in Ducange.

NOW, at this present time. (E.) ME. xow, Chaucer, C. T. 763
(A 761); also spelt zou, for older nu. AS. ni, Grein, ii. 301.4Du.
nu; Icel. nt; Dan. and Swed. xu; OHG. nu; Goth. nu.+4+Skt. nu,
nit, now (Vedic). PB. The G. nu-n, Gk. vd-v, L. nu-n-c, are extended
forms from the same source. Brugmann,i. § 1042. Der. now-a-


NULL


days (=now on days), Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 1. 148, Chaucer, C. T. 16864
(G 1396); see A- (2), prefix. Hence also new, novel.

NOWAY, NOWAYS, in no way. (E.) The older form is
noways, for ME. nanes weies, in no way, by no way, Layamon, 11216.
This answers to AS, ndnes weges, the gen. case used adverbially, as
usual. = AS. nanes, gen, of naz, none; and weges, gen. of weg, a way.
See No (2) and Way.

NOWHERE, in no place, (E.)- AS. na&hwer, nowhere;
Grein, iis 273.— AS. na, no; and hwer, where. See No (1) and
Where.

INOWISH, in no way. (E.) Short for iz no wise, ME. on none
wise, Castell of Love, ed. Weymouth, 573 (Stratmann). Here on =
in, is a prep.; mone is dat. case of ME. noon, AS. nan, none;
wise=wisan, dat. of AS. wise, a wise, a way. See No (2) and
Wisse, sb.

NOXIOUS, hurtful. (L.) In Milton, Par. Reg. iv. 460.
Englished from L. noxius, hurtful, by change of -ws to -ous,.as im
ardu-ous, &c.—L, noxa, harm, hurt; cf. xocére, to hurt; nex (stem
nec-), destruction. =4/NEK, to perish, or cause to perish; whence
also Skt. nag, to be lost, disappear, Gk. véxus, a corpse. Brugmann,
i. § 143; ii. § 794. Der. nowxious-ly, -ness. From the same root are
nec-ro-mancy, inter-nec-ine, per-nic-i-ous, ob-nox-i-ous, nuis-ance, 8c.

NOYAU, a cordial flavoured with orange-peel and kernels of
stone-fruits. (F.—L.) Found in 1818 ; see Stanford Dict. =F. zoyau,
lit. ‘kernel’ of a fruit.—L. mucale, neut. of nucdlis, like a nut.=L,
nuc-, stem of nux,anut. See Newel,

NOZZLE, a snout. (E.) Rare in books, Spelt nozle in Arbuth-
not and Pope, Martinus Scriblerus (Todd) ; nozzle (E.D.D.). Cp.
‘a candylstyk nosled;’ Archzeol. Cantiana, xvi. 315 (A.D. 1500).. The
dimin. of ose, with suffix -Je for -el); so also Westphal. miiasel,
a nozzle (Woeste). See Nose, Nuzzle.

NUANCEH, a shade of a colour, gradation of colour. (F.—L.)
It occurs in 1781; see Stanford Dict.—F. nuance, a shade.=F.
nuer, to shade. = F. nue, a cloud. = Folk-L. *xiuba, for L. niibés, a cloud.
Allied to L. nimbus, a cloud ; see Nimbus, Nebula.

NUCLEUS, the kemel of a nut, core. (L.) In Phillips, ed.
1706.—L. nucleus, a small nut, a kernel 3 cf. nucula, a small nut.
Dimin. from L. nux, a nut (stem nuc-). Root uncertain. @ Noé
allied to E. nut, Allied to newel, q. v.

NUDE, naked, bare. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. Taken from
the L. directly; cf. nude contract, Englished from L. law-term
niidum pactum, Blount’s Nomolexicon.=L. nudus, naked, L. niidus
==*nugdus, for *nogwedos, allied to Skt. zagna-, naked, and to E.
Waked, q.v. Brugmann, i. § 165. Der. nude-ly; nud-i-ty, spelt
nuditie in Minsheu, from F. nudité, ‘nudity’ (Cot.), from L. acc.
nuditatem.

NUDGE, a slight push. (Scand.) ‘Kuudge, v. to kick with the
elbow ;’ E. D. S. Glos. B. 1; A.D. 1781. Lowland Sc. nodge, ‘a
push or strike, properly with the knuckles, nodge, to strike with the
knuckles ;? Jamieson; North E. nog, to jog; Lowland Sc. gnidge, to
press, squeeze; Jam. Cf. Norw. gnugga, nugga, to rub, push; allied
to gnyggja, nyggja (pt. t. nogg), to push; Swed. dial. nogga, to move
slightly. Also NFries. nocke, tojog. Allied to Knock. Cf. also
Icel. knaii, a knuckle, knyja, to press down with the fists and knees ;
Swed. knoge, a knuckle; Dan. knuge, to press.

NUGATORY, trifling, vain. (L.) In Bacon, Adv. of Learning,
bk. ii. 7. 5. —L. niigatorius, trifling. = L. niigator, a trifler.— L. nugar?,
to triflee=L. pl. nige, trifles. Root unknown. Cf. L. naucum,
a trifle; and perhaps L. nwx, a nut (Bréal).

NUGGET, a lump or mass of metal. (E.) Formerly also niggot.
‘ After the fire was quenched, they found in xiggots of gold and
silver mingled together, about a thousand talents;’ North, tr. of
Plutarch’s Lives, p. 499; cited in Trench, Eng. Past and Present,
without a statement of the edition used; it is not that of 1631.
I find ‘siluer niggots’ in the same, ed. 1631, p. 425 (Marius). Cf.
prov. E. ug, a block of wood; nigg,a small piece (Essex) ; nog,
knog, a block of wood, knob, peg; allied to Knag. See Noggin.
Ross gives Norw. knugg, a rounded projection, a ‘knot’ on the
body.

NUISANCE, a troublesome or annoying thing. (F.—L.) Spelt
nuissance in Minsheu, ed. 1627; but zwisance is better, as in Cotgrave.
ME. nusance, Hoccleve, De Regim. Princ., Sio.—F. nuisance, ‘nuis-
ance, hurt, offence;? Cot.—F. nuisant, ‘hurtfull, id.; pres. part. of
nuire, to hurt.—L, nocére, to hurt; see Noxious.

NULL, of no force, invalid. (F.—L.) In Dryden, tr. of Juvenal,
Sat. i.87. Cf. xullity, which occurs in Minsheu, ed. 1627. — AF. nul
(in law); Stat. of Realm, i. 334.—L. nullum, acc. of nullus, none, not
any.=L. ze, not, related to E. xo; and wllus, any, short for *unulus,
dimin, from tinus, one. See No(1) and One. Der. null-i-ty, from
F. nullité, ‘a nullity’ (Cot.), from Late L. acc. nullitatem; nulli-fy,
formed (as if from F. nullifier) from L. nullificare, to make void,


NULLAH


from nulli-, for nullus, and -fic-, for facere, to make; also null, verb,
Milton, Samson, 935. Also an-nul, dis-an-nul.

NULLAH, a water-course, bed of a torrent. (Hind.) In 1776
(Yule). Hind. ala, a water-course (Yule); ala, a ravine, rivulet
(Forbes).

INUMB, deprived of sensation. (E.) The 4 is excrescent ; spelt
numme in Shak. 1 Hen. VI, ii. 5. 13 (first folio), ME. zome, a
shortened form of xomen, which was orig. the pp. of ME. nimen, to
take. Thus zome=taken, seized, hence overpowered, and lastly,
deprived of sensation. ‘ Whan this was seid, into wepinge Sche fel,
as sche that was thurgh-zome With love, and so fer overcome’ = when
this was said, she fell a-weeping, as being thoroughly overcome by
love, &c.; Gower, C. A. ii. 249; bk. v. 3634. Gower uses the same
word zome elsewhere in the ordinary sense of ‘taken;” C. A, ii. 227
(bk. v. 2993) ; ii. 386 (bk. v. 7524).—AS. numen, pp. of niman, to
take; see Nimble. So also Icel. xuminn, the pp. of nema, to take,
is similarly used; as in xuminn mali, bereft of speech ; fjorvi numna,
life-bereft. Der. be-numb, q. v.; also numb, verb, Spenser, F. Q. vi.
II. 45; numb-ness, Wint. Tale, v. 3. 102 (spelt xaumnesse in the first
folio). Also num-scull.

NUMBER, a unit in counting, a quantity. (F.—L.) The @ is
excrescent in the F. form. ME. xombre, noumbre, Rob. of Glouc.
p- 60, 1. 1397; Chaucer, C. T. 718 (A 716).—F. nombre; Norman
F, numbre (see Philip de Thaun, Livre des Creatures, ]. 127, in
Wright, Popular Treatises on Science, p. 24).—L. numerum, acc. of
numerus, a number.=4/NEM, to distribute; cf. Gk. vdp-os, law,
véyu-ev, to distribute. Brugmann,i. § 442. Der. number, verb, ME.
nombren, noumbren, Rob. of Glouc. p. 61, 1. 1398; nzumber-er ; number-
less; and see numer-al, numer-ation, numer-ous.

NUMBLES, the entrails of a deer. (F.—L.) ‘Noumbles of
a dere or beest, entrailles ;’ Palsgrave. ME. nowmbles, Gawaine and
Grene Knight, 1347.—OF. nxombles (dun cerf’), ‘the numbles of
a stag,’ Cot.; and see zomble in Godefroy. Nomble is for OF. lomble,
by confusion with F. xombril, navel (from L. umbilicus). See lomble
in Godefroy, who quotes the AF. di mien lumble, Ps. xxvii. 8, where
the Vulgate version has lumbi mei,i.e. my reins or loins. = L. lumbulum,
ace. of lumbulus, dimin. of lumbus, loin; see Loin.

RAL, a figure expressing a number, (L.) Orig. an
adj. ‘Numeral, of or belonging to number;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674; and in Palsgrave, p. 372. —L. zumerdlis, belonging to number.
L. numerus, anumber; see Number. Der. numeral-ly.

NUMERATION, numbering. (F.—L.) In Sir T. Browne,
Pseudodoxia, iii. 5. § 2.—F. numération; in use in the 15th cent. —L.
numerationem, acc. of numeratio, a counting out; cf. numerdtus, pp.
of numerare, to number.—L. numerus, number; see Number.
Der. numerate (really due to the sb.), formed from L. numerdtus;
numera-tor=L. numerator, a counter, numberer. Also e-numerate,
in-numer-able,

NUMEROUS, many. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. L. i. 675, &c.
=— MF. numereux, a less usual form than xombreux ; both are in Cot-
grave.=—L, numerdsus, numerous. — L. numerus, a number; see
Number. Der. nxumerous-ly, numerous-ness; also (obsolete) numer-
osity= F. numerosité, ‘numerosity, a great number’ (Cot.). So also
numer-ic, Butler, Hudibras, pt.i.c. 3, 1. 461, as if from L. *numericus
(not used); numeric-al, -al-ly.

NUMISMATIC, relating to coins. (L.—Gk.) The pl. sb.

numismaticks was added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. Coined from
L. numismat-, stem of numisma, current coin. = Gk. vépiopa, a custom,
also, current coin. = Gk. vopi¢ew, to practise, adopt, to use as current
coin.=Gk. vdpos, usage. = Gk. vévev, to distribute; see Nomad.
Der. numismatic-s; numismato-logy, from -Aoyia, which from Aéyos,
a discourse, from Aéyev, to speak.
_ NUN, a female celibate, living in seclusion. (L.) ME. xonne,
Chaucer, C. T. 118; but this is an alteration to the F. spelling; cf.
F. nonne, a nun. The mod. E. agrees with the AS. spelling, and
with ME. nunne, as found in the Ancren Riwle, p. 316, last line.
AS. nunne, a nun; Laws of A‘lfred (political), sect. 8; in Thorpe’s
‘Ancient Laws, i. 66.—Late L. zumna, more commonly nonna, a nun,
orig. a title of respect, esp. used in addressing an old maiden lady,
or a widow who had devoted herself to sacred duties. The old sense
is ‘mother,’ answering to L. nonnus, father, later, a monk; a word
of great antiquity.-Gk. vavvn, vévva, an aunt; vavvas, vévvos, an
uncle; Skt. and, a familiar word for mother, used by children;
see the St. Petersburg Dict. iv. 25; answering to Skt. ata, father.
f. Formed by repetition of the syllable xa, used by children to a
father, mother, aunt, or nurse; just as we have ma-ma, da-da or
daddy, and the like. Compare Mamma, and Dad. Der. nunn-er-y,
ME. xonnerie, Rob. of Glouc. p. 291, 1. 5918, from OF. xonnerie,
spelt nonerie in Roquefort, which was formed from OF. nonne, a nun,
from L. nonna. '


» NUNCHION, a luncheon. (Hybrid; L. and E.) In Butler,


NURSE 405


Hudibras, i. 1. 346. Cotgrave explains MF. ressie by ‘an after-
noons nunchion, or drinking;’ and rightly, for the old sense had
relation to drinking, not to eating, as will appear. Florio has:
‘merenda, a repast betweene dinner and supper, a nunchin,? The
ME. spelling, in one instance at least, is nonechenche. We find that
certain donations for drink to workmen are called in the [London]
Letter-book G, fol. iv (27 Edw. III), nonechenche; see Riley, Me-
morials of London, p. 265, note 7; see my note to P. Plowman, C.
ix. 146. It should rather be spelt noneschenche. B. The etymology
is obvious, viz. from ME. none, noon; and schenche, a pouring out or
distribution of drink. The none-schenche or ‘noon-drink’? was the
accompaniment to the moze-mete or ‘noon-meat,’ for which see nun-
mete in the Prompt. Parv. p. 360, and Way’s note upon it. y. The
ME. none, noon, is from L. néza, the ninth hour, as explained
s.v. Noon. &. ME. schenche, a pouring out of drink, is a sb. made
from ME, schenchen, to pour out drink. ‘Bachus the wyn hem
schenchith al aboute’=Bacchus pours out the wine for them all
round; Chaucer, C. T, (Harleian MS.), ed. Wright, 1. 9596. Tyr-
whitt’s ed. has skinketh, 1. 9596; the Six-text edition (E 1722) has
skynketh, shynketh, shenketh, schenketh, as various readings. All these
are various forms from the verb skenken, AS. scencan, to pour out
drink, occurring in Beowulf, ed. Grein, 1. 496. This AS. verb is
cognate with Du. schenken, to pour out, fill, give, present, Icel.
skenkja, to serve drink, fill one’s cup, Dan. skjenke, G. schenken, ein-
schenken, €. The derivation of AS. scencaz is very curious; it is
a causal verb, derived with the usual vowel-change of a to e, from
AS. scanc, usually written sceanc, a shank; see Shank. The
explanation is, that a shank also meant a hollow bone, a bone of
the leg, shin-bone, and hence ‘a pipe;” in particular, it denoted the
pipe thrust into a cask to tap it and draw off the liquor. Thus prov.
E. shank means ‘a tunnel for a chimney’ (Halliwell), i.e. a chimney-
pipe; the MDnu. schenkkan means ‘a pot with a pipe or a gullet to
pour out,’ Sewel. A precisely parallel interchange of sense occurs
in G. rohr, a reed, tube, pipe; whence réhkrbeix, the hollow bone of
a leg, shin-bone; rohkrbrunnen, a jet of a fountain; rohre, a pipe, also
a funnel, shaft, or tunnel (like the use of prov. E. shank). @ We can
now understand the full force of the quotation in Way’s note from
Kennett’s MS., viz. ‘ Nooning, beavre, drinking, or repast ad nonam,
three in the afternoon, called ... in the North parts a zoonchion, an
afternoon’s nunchion.’ In many parts, the use of nuncheon was driven
out by the use of bever (lit. a drinking) in the same sense, and in
East Anglia by the more intelligible word nooning. Lastly, by a
curious confusion with the prov. E. lunch, a lump of bread, nuncheon
was turned into the modern luncheon; see Luncheon. The same
change of initial x to 7 occurs in dilac, from Pers. nil, blue;. see
Lilac. The verb schenchen was afterwards supplanted by skink, and
occurs in Shakespeare in the deriv. uxder-skinker, 1 Hen. IV, ii.


4. 26.

INUNCIO, a messenger, esp. a papal ambassador. (Ital.—L.)
In Minsheu, ed. 1627; and in Shak. Tw. Nt. i. 4. 28.—TItal. nuncio,
nuntio, ‘an ambassador;’ Florio.—L. nuntium, acc. of nuntius, a
bringer of tidings; of doubtful origin. Cf. announce, de-nounce, pro-
20unce, €-10UNCE, FE-NOUNCE.

NUNCUPATIVE, declared by word of mouth. (F.—L.) ‘Nun-
cupative, called, named, pronounced, expresly declared by word of
mouth ;’ Blount’s Glos. ed. 1674. It occurs in Cotgrave; also in
the sense of ‘ nominal,’ in Hall’s Chron. Hen. VII, an. 11, § 10.—F.
nuncupatif, ‘nuncupative;’ Cot.—Late L. nuncupatiuus, nominal, =
L. nuncupatus, pp. of nuncupare, to call by name. Prob. from nomen,
a name, and cajere, to take (Bréal). We find cup- for cap- in oc-
cup-Gre, to occupy. Der. zuncupat-or-y, formed from L, nuncupator,
a namer, caller by name.

NUPHAR, a yellow water-lily. (Pers.—Skt.) A corrupt form,
due to Nenuphar, q.v. Attributed in the Cent. Dict. to Sir J. E.
Smith, 1806. The form is absurd, as the word can only be (etymo-
logically) divided as nen-uphar; nevertheless, the form niifar (for
ninifar) occurs in Persian; see Rich. Dict., p. 1611.

NUPTIAL, pertaining to marriage. (F.—L.) ‘Our nuptial hour ;’
Mids. Nt. Dr. i. 1. 1.—F. nuptial, ‘nuptiall;’ Cot.—L. nuptialis,
belonging to a marriage.—L. sb. pl. nuptie, a wedding. —L. nupia,
a bride, fem. of zuptus, pp. of niibere, to marry. Brugmann, 1.
§ 877 (a), connects L. niibere with OSlavonic szubiti, to love, to woo.
Der. nuptial, sb., Meas. for Meas. iii. 1. 122, usually in pl. xupiials,
Pericles, v. 3. 80. And see con-nub-i-al.

NURSE, one who nourishes an infant. (F.—L.). Contracted
from ME. zurice, a nurse; Ancren Riwle, p. 82,1. 20. Also xorice,
King Alisaunder, 1. 650.—OF. norrice, nurrice (Littré), later nour-
rice (Cot.),.a nurse. = L. nutricia, a nurse. = L, nutric-, stem of nutri,
a nurse, formed with fem. suffix from the same base as. nutrire, to
feed, nourish; see Nourish. Der. zurse, verb, Wyatt, To his
Ladie, cruel ouer her yelden Louer, 1: 5, in Tottell’s Miscellany, ed.


406 NURTURE


Arber, -p.’62; nurs-er, 1 Hen. VI, iv. 7. 46; nurs-er-y, K. Lear, i. 1.
126, Cymb. i. I. 59, and see Trench, Select Glossary; zurs-ling,
spelt xoursling in Spenser, Virgil’s Gnat, 282, formed with double
dimin. suffix -l-ing, as in duck-ling; nurs-ing-father, Numb. xi. 12.
And see nurture.

NURTURE, nourishment, education. (F.—L.) ME. zorture,
Rob..of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 188, 1. 3.—AF. nurture, Stat.
Realm, i. 104; OF. xorriture (Godefroy), mod. F. nourriture,
‘nourishment, nutriment,...also nurture;’ Cot. [Cf. Ital. nutri-
tura, nutriment:]— L. nutritira; from nutrire, to nourish; see
Nourish. Der. nurture, verb, spelt zourter in the Bible of 1551,
Deut. viii. 5 ; zurtur-er. And see nutriment.

NUT, the fruit of certain trees, a hard shell with a kernel. (E.)
ME. zote, Havelok, 419; King Alisaunder, 3293; mute, O, Eng.
Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 79, 1.14. AS. hnutu, to translate L. nux;
Voc. 137. 18.4-Du. noot; Ice]. knot; Swed. not; Dan. nod; G. nuss.
Teut. base *hnut-; allied to Irish cnu, Gael. cno, W. cneuen, a nut ;
Stokes-Fick, p. 96. 4 It cannot be brought under the same form
with L. zux. Der. nut, vetb, to gather nuts; nut-shell, ME. note-
schale, Trevisa, iv. 1413; mut-brown, ME. nute-brun, Cursor Mundi,
18846; mut-cracker (Baret); nut-hatch, a bird also called the zut-
jobber or nutpecker, ME. nuthake, Squire of Low Degree, 55, the sense
being nut-hacker, the bird that hacks or pecks nuts, see Hack (1).
And see nut-meg.

NUTMEG, the musk-nut. (Hybrid; E. and F.—L.—Pers.)
ME. zxotemuge, Chaucer, C. T. 13693 (B 1953); nutmegge, Rom. of
the Rose, 1361. A hybrid word; the former half being E. nut; see
Wut. B. The latter half is from OF. mugue, musk, standing for
*musgue, which is ultimately from L. muscum, acc. of muscus, musk;
see Musk. The OF, mugue and muge occur in quotations given by
Godefroy. The form musque is a Southern F, (Dauphinois) form,
the usual Prov, form being musc; see Mistral. The s also appears
in OF. musguette, by-form of muguette in the phr. notx muguette,
a nutmeg (Godefroy); whence MF, muguette, ‘a nutmeg,’ Cot. Cf.
F, noix muscade, ‘a nutmeg, id,; Span. muwez moscada, a nutmeg,
Ital. noce moscada, the same; Late L, muscdta, a nutmeg, lit. ‘musk-
like,’ formed with suffix -dta from musc-, stem of muscus. The L.
muscus is from the Pers., as shown s. v. musk.

NUTATION, a nodding, vibratory movement of the earth’s axis.
{L.) In Pope, Dunciad, ii, 409. Astronomical. Englished from
L. niulatio, a nodding, swaying.=L. niitadre, to nod, frequentative
form of nuere, to nod.+Gk. vevev, to nod. From a base NEU,
signifying ‘to move slightly.” Der. Hence also in-nu-endo.

NUTRIMENT, nourishment, food. (L.) In Milton, P. L. v. 496.
=L. niitrimentum, food; formed with suffix -mentum from niitri-re,
to nourish; see Nourish, Der. nutriment-al; and see nutritious.

NUTRITIOUS, furnishing nutriment. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. Englished from L. nutritius, by change of -us to -ous, as
in ardu-ous, &c. The L. word is also (better) spelt nitricius. = L.
niutric-, stem of ntitrix, a nurse; see Nurse. Der. xutritious-ly,
«ness. So also nutrition, Pope, Essay on Man, ii. 64; a coined word.

NUTRITIVE, nourishing, (F.—L.) In Minsheu and Cot-
grave. ME. nutritiff, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 195.—F. nutritif,
‘nutritive ;’ Cot. Formed with suffix -if (<L. -iwus) from nitrit-,
stem of pp. of nutrzre,to nourish; see Nourish. Der. nutritive-ly,
-71eSS.

NUZZLE, to thrust the nose in. (E.) Also spelt xousle; Shak,
Venus, 115; Pericles, i. 4. 42; nosyll in Palsgrave. A frequentative
verb, with suffix -Je, from the sb. nose. It means ‘to nose often,’
i.e. to keep pushing the nose towards. Cf. Low G. nusseln; EFries.
niisseln, Swed, dial, xosla, with the same sense; Swed. nosa pa all
ting, to thrust one’s nose into every corner (Widegren); Du. neuzelen,
neusen. See Nose, and cf. Nozzle,

NYLGHAU, a large species of antelope. (Pers.) Lit. ‘blue
cow;’ the males being of a bluish colour.—Pers. nilgaw, ‘the
white-footed antelope of Pennant, and antelope picta of Pallas;’
Rich, Pers. Dict, p. 1620.—Pers. nil, blue; and gaw, a bullock, cow,
cognate with E, cow; id. pp. 1619, 1226. See Lilac and Cow.
NYMPH, a bride, maiden. (F,—L.—Gk.) ME. nimphe, Chaucer,
C. T. 2930 (A 2928).—F. xymphe, ‘a nimph ;’ Cot.=L,. nympha.=
Gk. viupn, a bride. Der. nymph-like, Milton, P. L. ix, 452.


O


O (1), OH, an interjection, (E.) ME. 0, Ancren Riwle, p. 54;
Layamon, 17126. Not in AS.4+Du. 0; Dan. and Swed, 0; G. 0;
Goth. 0, Mk. ix..19.4L. 0; Gk.@,@, B. A natural exclamatory
sound, akin to :Ah! 4 .There:is no particular reason. for the


OB


spelling ok, which is not older than 1548. Some make a distinction
in use between o and oh; this is merely arbitrary.

O (2), a circle. (E.) In Shak. Hen. V, prol. 13; Mids. Nt. Dr.
iii. 2. 188. So called because the letter o is of a circular shape.

OAF, a simpleton. (Scand.) ‘You oaf, you!’ Dryden, Kind
Keeper, i. 1; where the old ed. has auph; see ed. 1763, vol. iv.
p- 302. In Drayton’s Nymphidia, 1. 79, the old ed. of 1627 has
aulf; Prof. Morley prints oaf. It is the same word as prov. E. aw/,
an elf (Halliwell). Again, auf or awf stands for aulf, a dialectal
variety. of E. elf.—Icel. alfr, an elf, cognate with E. Elf, q.v.
B. Thus oaf is the Northern or Scand. variant of elf; perhaps in
some counties it resulted from AS. elf.

OAK, the name of a tree. (E.). ME. oke, better ook, Chaucer,
C. T, 3019 (A 3017). AS. ae, Grein, i. 14; the long a changes into
ME, 00, by rule.+Du. eik; Icel. ek; Dan. eeg, eg; Swed. ek; G.
eiche. . All from the Teut. type *aiks, f. Root unknown. Cf.
Gk. aiy-iAwy, a kind of oak. Der. oak-en, adj., AS. acer (Bosworth),
with adj. suffix -en as gold-en, beech-en, &c. Also oak-apple, ME.
oke-appul, Henslow, Medical Werkes, p. 80, 1. 20; oak-leaf, oak-gall.
[But not acorn, as often wrongly supposed. |

OAKUM, tow, old ropes teased. into loose hemp. (E.) Spelt
ockam in Skinner, ed. 1671, Spelt oakam in Dampier’s Voyages, v. i.
p- 295, an. 1686 (R.); okwm, Naval Accounts (1486); p.18. AS.
adcumba, tow, in a gloss, ed. Napier, 3293; cf. ‘Stuppa, #cumbe,’
Voc. 152.15. [The L. stuppa means ‘tow.’] B. The sense is ‘ that
which is combed off;’ the prefix is the AS. a-, ‘ away, off,’ as in the
OHG. a-chambi. The rest of the word is related to AS, cemban, to
comb, and camb, a comb; see Comb. Mr. Wedgwood says:
‘OHG. dcambi [achambi], tow; MHG. hanef-acamb, the combings
or hards of hemp, tow, what is combed out in dressing it; as dswinc,
the refuse swingled out in dressing flax. ‘‘Stuppa pectitur ferreis
hamis, donec omnis membrana decorticatur ;” Pliny, xix. 1. 3, cited
by Aufrecht in Philological Transactions.’ Holland’s translation of
the passage is as follows: ‘ Now that part thereof which is vtmost
and next to the pill [peel] or rind, is called sow or hurds, and it is
the worst of the line or flaxe, good for little or nothing but to make
lampe-match or candle-wiek; and yet the same must be better
kembed with hetchell teeth of yron, vntill it be clensed from all the
grosse barke and rind among;’ vol. ii. p. 4. Hence acumba is used
to gloss L. putamen ; Mone, Quellen, p. 407, col. 1.

OAR, a light pole with a flat blade, for rowing a boat. (E.) ME.
ore, Havelok, 1871; Northern form ar, Barbour’s Bruce, iii, 576,
691. AS. ar, Grein,i. 34; the change from @ to long o being quite
regular.Icel. dr; Dan. aare; Swed. Gra. Teut. type *a:ra, f.;
whence Finnish airo (Noreen, § 57). 4 A connexion with Gk. ép-
érns, an oarsman, cannot be established. Cf. rather Gk. ofa¢ (for
*otcagé), a tiller. Der. oar, verb, Temp. ii. 1, 118; oar-ed; eight-
oar, i.e. eight-oared boat, &c.; oar-s-man, formed like hunt-s-man.

OASIS, a fertile spot in a desert. (L.—Gk.—Egyptian.) First in
1613; and now common.=L. oasis.—Gk. éacis, avacis, a name of
the fertile islets in the Libyan desert; Herod. iii. 26. Of Egyptian
origin; cf. Coptic ouahe, a dwelling-place, oasis; ouih, to dwell;
Peyron, Copt. Lexicon, 1835, pp. 159, 160.

OAST, OAST-HOUSE, a kiln for drying hops, (E.) Spelt
oast or east in Ray’s Collection of South-Country Words, ed. 1691.
[The form east is from Du. eest.] ME. ost; Palladius on Husbandry,
1.457. AS. dst,a kiln, ‘Siccatorium [i.e. a drying-house], cyln,
vel dst;’ Voc. 185. 30. ‘Thus the word is E., the change from @ to
oa being quite regular; cf. AS. ac, an oak, dr, an oar.-+4-Du. eest;
MDnu. ast; ‘een ast, a place where barley is dryed to make malt
with ;’ Hexham. Teut. type *aistoz, for *aid-toz. B. Allied to AS.
dd, a funeral pile (Leo), MHG. eit, a fire, oven; just as L. @estus,
glow, is related to L. edes, a hearth, house. Cf. Gk. af@os, a burning
heat; Skt. idh, to burn. =4/EIDH, to kindle; see Ether. 1

OATH, a solemn vow. (E.) ME. ooth, oth; Chaucer, C. T. 120.
AS. @, Grein, i. 17; the change from @ to oa being regular, as in
ac, oak, Gr, oar.4+Du. eed; Icel. eidr; Dan. and Swed. ed; Goth.
aiths; G. eid; OHG. eit. B. The Teut. type is *aithoz, m.; Idg.
type *ortos; allied to Olrish oeth, oath (Rhys).

OATS, the name of a kind of grain. (E.) ME. ofes,s. pl., Chaucer,
C. T. 7545 (D 1963). The sing. form appears in mod. E, oat-cake,
oat-meal, and the adj, oat-en. AS. Gite; we find afta as a gloss to
zizania in the Northumb. gloss to Matt. xiii. 38; also @cer-s#d aten,
an acre-seed of oats, AS, Chron. an. 1124, where Gten is for aan, pl.
Perhaps allied to Icel. ei#ill, a nodule in stone, Norweg. eitel, a gland,
knot, nodule in stone, Russ. zadro, a kernel in fruit, bullet, ball, shot,
Gk, of5os, a swelling. If this be right, the orig. meaning of oat has
reference to its swollen form; from 4/EID, to swell. Der. oat-en,
adj., with suffix -en as in gold-en, oak-en ; oat-meal, oat-cake.

OB-, prefix. (L.) A common prefix, changing to oc- before c, of-
before /, and: op- before p, as in oc-cur, of-fer, op-pose, LL, ob, with


OBDURATE


OBSERVE 407


‘very variable senses; as, towards, at, before, upon, over, about, near. | F. obliger, ‘ to oblige, tie, bind;’ Cot. = L. obligare, to bind together,


Cf. Oscan op, near, Gk. ém, upon; Brugmann, i. § 557.
OBDURATHEH, hardened, stubborn. (L.) ‘ Obdurate in malice ;’

Sir T. More, Works, p. 503 b.=L. obdiratus, pp. of obdirare, to

render hard.—L. ob, prefix (which hardly affects the sense); and


dirare, to harden, from dirus, hard. See Ob- and Dure. Der.
obdurate-ly, -ness; obdurac-y, 2 Hen. IV, ii. 2. 50.
OBEDIENT, submissive, dutiful. (F.—L.) In early use. ME.


obedient, Ancren Riwle, p. 424, 1. 11. = OF. obedient, § obedient ;” Cot.
=L. obédient-, stem of pres. pt. of obédire, to obey. B. The old L.
form was oboedire.—L. ob-, prefix (of little force) ; and audire, to
hear, listen to. See Ob- and Audience. Brugmann, i. § 250.
Der. obedient-ly, obedience, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 213, 1. 5
from bottom, = OF. obedience, L. obedientia. And see obeisance, obey.

OBEISANCE, a bow or act of reverence. (F.—L.) ME.
obeisance, formerly also used in the orig. sense of obedience or act of
obedience, Chaucer, C. T. 8106, 8378 (E 230, 502); cf. Gower, C. A.
i. 370, ii. 219.— OF. obeissance, later obeissance, ‘obedience, obeissance,
a dutiful observing of;* Cot.—OF. obeissant, pres. pt. of obeir, to
obey. See Obey.

OBELISK, a tall tapering pillar. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Holland,
tr. of Pliny, b. xxxvi.c. 8 and c. 9; and in Minsheu, ed. 1627. And
see Trench, Select Glossary. — MF. obelisque, ‘an obeliske ;’ Cot.—
L. obeliscum, acc. of obeliscus. = Gk. dBedioxos, lit. a small spit, hence
a thin pointed pillar; dimin. of dBeAds, a spit; AXolic and Doric
é5eAds. Root uncertain. See Obolus.

OBESE, fat, fleshy. (L.) ‘The sb. obeseness is in Bailey, vol. ii.
ed. 1731. [The sb. obesity is older, and occurs in Cotgrave to trans-
late MF. obesité, der. from L. acc. obésitdtem. |= L. obésus, (1) wasted,
eaten away, (2) fat, lit. ‘that which has eaten away’ from something ;
pp- of obedere, to eat away.—L. ob, near; edere, to eat. See Ob-
and Bat. Der. obese-ness, obes-i-ty.

OBEY, to submit, yield to, do as bid. (F.—L.) ME. obeyen,
Gower, C. A. ii. 219; bk. v. 2571. —OF. obeir, ‘to obey ;”’ Cot. =—L.
obédire, to obey ; see Obedience.

OBFUSCATH, to darken, bewilder. (L.) ‘ Obfuscate, or made
darke ;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Govyernour, b. iii. c. 23.—L. obfuscdtus,
pp. of obfuscére, to darken over, obscure ; also spelt offuscare. = L. ob,
over; and fuscare, to darken, from fuscus, dark, swarthy. See Ob-
and Fuscous.

OBIT, a funeral rite. (F.—L.) Almost obsolete. ‘Men shall

care little for obi¢es within a whyle ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 880 d.
ME. obit, Destr. of Troy, 5357.—OF. obit, ‘an obit, obsequy,
buriall ;? Cot.—L. obitus, a going to, a going down, downfall, death.
=L. obitum, supine of obire, to go near.= L. ob, near; and ire, to go,
from 4/EI, to go. See Ob- and Itinerant. Der. obit-u-al, formed
with suffix -al (=L. -dlis) from obitu-, for obitus ; also obitu-ar-y, adj.
relating to a decease, whence obitu-ar-y, sb. notice of a decease.
' OBJECT, to offer in opposition, oppose. (L.) ‘The kinges
mother obiected openly against his mariage ;’ Sir T. More, Works,
‘p. 60, 1.1. ‘To obiecte [venture] their owne bodyes and lyues for
their defence;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iii. c. 12.—L.
obiectare, to throw against, oppose ; frequentative of obicere (objicere),
to throw towards.—L. 0b, towards, against ; and iacere, to throw.
See Ob- and Jet (1). Der. object, sb., a thing thrown before or
presented to the senses or mind, Merch. Ven. i. 1. 20 (from the pp.
obiectus) 5 object-glass; object-ion, 1 Hen. VI, iv. 1. 129, and in Pals-
grave, from F, objection (obiection in Cotgrave), from L. acc. obiec-
tidnem ; object-ion-able; object-ive, in Bailey, vol. ii. ed. 1731, a coined
word, object-ive-ly, object-ive-ness, object-iv-i-ty.

OBJURGATION, a blaming, reproving. (F.—L.) In Min-
sheu, ed. 1627; and in Cotgrave. =F. objurgation, ‘an objurgation,
chiding ;’ Cot. =L. obiurgatidnem, acc. of obiurgatio, a chiding. =L.
obiurgare, to chide.—L. 0b, against; and zurgdre, to sue, proceed
against, quarrel, chide. B. L. iurgare stands for iur-ig-are, from
iur-, stem of itis, law; and -ig-, for ag-ere, to drive (Bréal). See
Jurist and Agent.

OBLATEH, widened at the sides. (L.) Mathematical. = L. oblatus,
pushed forwards, viz. at the sides, said of a sphere that is flattened
at the poles, and (by comparison) protrudes at the equator.—L. ob,
towards ; and /atus, pushed, lit. borne, for *#/atus (=Gk. rAqrés), pp.
related to follere, to bear, sustain. See Ob- and Tolerate. 4 Ob-
latus is used as the pp. of offerre, with which it has no etymological
connexion. Der. odlate-ness ; also oblat-ion. (And see prolate.)

OBLATION, an offering. (F.—L.) ‘ Blessed oblacion of the
holy masse;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 338 f. ME. oblacion, Lydgate,
Siege of Troy, ii. 13. 159.—F. oblation, ‘an oblation, an offering ;’
Cot. =L. oblatidnem, acc. of ob/atio, an offering; cf. oblatus, used as

p. of offerre, to offer. See Oblate.

OBLIGE, to constrain, to bind by doing a favour to, to do
a‘favour to. (F.—L.) ME. obligen, Rob. of Glouc. p. 12, 1, 280. =


oblige. —L, 0b, to; and ligare, to bind. See Ob- and Ligament.
Der. oblig-ing’, used as adj., Pope, Prol. to Satires, 208 ; oblig-at-ion,
ME. obligacion, Rob. of Glouc. p. 391, 1. 8042, from F. obligation
<L. acc. obligatidnem ; oblig-at-or-y, from L, obligatorius; oblig-at-
or-i-ly, oblig’-at-or-i-ness.

OBLIQUE, slanting, perverse. (F.—L.) In Shak. Timon, iv. 3.
18. =F. oblique, ‘ crooked, oblique ;* Cot. —L, obliquus, oblicus, slant-
ing, sideways, awry.—L. ob, towards; and a base *ligu- or */ic-.
B. The orig. sense of this *liquus is ‘ bent ;’ cf. L. licinus, bent, limus,
for *licmus, askew; and perhaps Lithuan. lenkti, to bend. Der.
obliqu-i-ty, from F. obliquité, ‘ obliquity’ (Cot.), from L. acc. obligui-
tatem ; oblique-ness.

OBLITERATE, to efface. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.—L. ob-
literatus, pp. of obliterare or oblitterare, to efface, smear out. = L. ob,
over; and littera, a letter; see Letter. . It seems to have been
associated with L. oblitus, pp. of oblinere, to smear over; but there is
no etym. connexion. Der. obliterat-ion.

OBLIVION, forgetfulness. (F.—L.) ME. obliuion (for oblivion),
Gower, C. A. ii. 23; bk. iv. 651.—F. oblivion, = L. obliuidnem, acc. of
obliuio, forgetfulness. = L. obliu-, base of the inceptive verb obliuisci,
to forget. Root uncertain; the prefix is the prep. 0b. Perhaps con-
nected with liuescere, to become livid, turn black and blue (hence,
pethaps, to become dark); see Livid. But Bréal connects it with
oblitus, i.e. effaced, pp. of oblinere, to smear over. Der. oblivi-ous,
Minsheu,. oblyvyouse in Palsgrave, from F, oblivieux (Cot.)<L. ob-
liuidsus ; oblivi-ous-ly, oblivi-ous-ness.

OBLONG, long from side to side. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave.=F.
oblong’, ‘ oblong, somewhat long ;’ Cot.=—L. oblongus, long, esp. long
across. = L. ob, across, over; and longus, long. See Ob- and
Long.

OBLOQUY, calumny. (L.) ‘From the great obloguy in which
hee was ;” Sir T. More, Works, p. 44f. Englished from L. obloguium,
contradiction. L. oblogui, to speak against. L. 0b, against; and
logui, to speak. See Ob- and Loquacious.

OBNOXIOUS, offensive, answerable. (L.) Formerly used in
the L. sense of ‘ liable to ;” as in Milton, Samson, 106; P. L. ix. 170,
1094. ‘The perils that you are obnoxious to;’ Ben Jonson, Silent
Woman, ii. 1. See Trench, Select Glossary. =L. obzoxius, liable to
hurt ; confused with L. zoxius, hurtful; whence the E. word was
formed by change of -us to -ous.—L. ob, prefix; and zoxa, harm.
See Ob- and Noxious. Der. obnoxious-ly, -ness.

OBOE, a hautboy. (Ital. —F.—L.) The Ital. spelling of hautboy.
=TItal. oboé, a hautboy (Meadows, Eng.-Ital. section). =F. hautbois.
See Hautboy.

OBOLUS, a very small Gk. coin. (L.—Gk.) Sometimes used in
mod, E,=L. obolus. = Gk. é8oAds, a small coin, perhaps orig. in the
shape of a small rod or nail; acollateral form of é8«Ads, a spit. See
Obelisk.

OBSCENE, unchaste, foul. (L.) In Shak, Rich. I, iv. r. 131.
Spelt obscene in Minsheu, ed. 1627. —L. obscénus, obscenus, obscenus,
repulsive, foul. Etym. very doubtful; as one sense of obscézus is ill-
boding, inauspicious, it may be connected with L. scewus, left, left-
handed, unlucky, inauspicious. Der. obscene-ness, obscen-i-ty.

OBSCURE, dark, little known. (F.—L.) ‘Now is faire, and
now obscure;’ Rom. of the Rose, 5348. =F. obscur, ‘obscure,’ Cot. =
L. obsctirus, dark, lit. ‘covered over.’=L. 0b, over; and -scirus,
covered, from 4/SKEU, to cover. Cf. Skt. sku, to cover; and see
Sky. Der. obscure-ly, -ness; obscure, verb, used by Surrey to trans-
late L. caligare in Virgil, Ain. ii. 606; obscur-i-ty, ME. obscurete,
Caxton, G. Legend, St. Hilary, § 1, from F. obscurité, ‘ obscurity”
(Cot.), from L, acc. obsciiritatem ; also obscur-at-ion, directly from L.
obsciiratio.

OBSECRATE, to entreat. (L.). ‘ Obsecrate, heartily to request ;”
Cockeram (1642). =—L. obsecrat-us, pp. of obsecrare, to entreat, con-
jure.=L. 0b, on account of; and sacrare, to treat as sacred, from
sacr-, for sacer, sacred, See Ob- and Sacred.

OBSEQUIES, funeral rites. (F.—L.) ME. obseguies, Chaucer,
C. T. 995 (A 993).—AF. and OF. obsequies, MF. obsegues, ‘ ob-
sequies ;* Cot.—L. obsequids, acc. of obsequie, s. pl., funeral rites ;
lit. ‘followings ;’ a late form, for exsequids (Lewis).—L, ob, prep.,
near; and segui, to follow. See Ob- and Sequence; also Ob-
sequious.

OBSEQUIOUS, compliant. (L.) See Trench, Select Glossary.
In Shak. Oth. i. 1. 46. [F. obsequieux, ‘ obsequious ;’ Cot.]—L.ob-
sequidsus, full of compliance. = L. obsequium, compliance. =L, obsequt,
to comply with; lit. ‘to follow near. =L. ob, near; and segui, to
follow. See Ob- and Sequence. Der. obsequious-ly, -ness.

OBSERVE, to heed, regard, keep. (F.—L.) ME. obseruen (with
u=v), Chaucer, C. T. 13561 (B 1821). =OF. observer, ‘to observe ;
Cot. == L, obserudre, to mark, take notice of. = L. ob (scarcely affecting


408 OBSIDIAN


the sense) ; and serudre, to keep, heed. See Ob- and Serve. Der.
observ-er, observ-able, observ-abl-y, observ-able-ness ; observ-ance, ME.
obseruaunce, Chaucer, C. T. 1502, 10830 (A 1500, F 516), from F.
observance, which from L. obseruantia; observ-ant, Hamlet, i. 1. 71,
from F. observant, pres. part. of the verb observer; observant-ly ; ob-
serv-at-ion, L. L. L. iii. 28, and in Palsgrave, directly from L. obser-
uatio; observ-at-or, observ-at-or-y.

OBSIDIAN, a vitreous stone. (L.) Bailey (1735) has: ‘ Ob-
sidianum marmor, the touchstone ;’ and see Holland, tr. of Pliny,
bk. xxxvi. c. 26.—L. ObsidiGnus lapis, a false reading for Obsidius
lapis; a stone found by one Obsidius (false reading for Obsius) in
Aethiopia; in Pliny, lib. xxxvi. c. 26, and lib. xxxvii. c. 10,

OBSOLESCENT, going out of use. (L.) In Johnson’s Dict.,
s. v. Hereout.—L. obsolescent-, stem of pres. part. of obsolescere, to
grow old, inceptive form of obsolére, to decay. See Obsolete. Der.
obsolescence.

OBSOLETE, gone out of use. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.—
L. obsolétus, pp. of *obsolére, to grow old, decay. B. The etym. of
this word is very doubtful; it is not even known how it should be
' divided. Perhaps from ob, against, and solére, to be wont, as if
obsolére=to go against custom; cf. ex-solescere, to become disused
to (Tertullian). Der. obsolete-ness ; and see obsolescent.

OBSTACLE, a hindrance. (F.—L.) ME. obstacle, Chaucer,
C. T. 9533 (E 1659).—F. obstacle. L. obstaiculum, a hindrance,
a double dimin. form with suffixes -cu-lu-.=—L. obstdre, to stand in
the way.=—L. 0, over against ; and stare, to stand, from 4/STA, to
stand. See Ob- and Stand; also Obstetric.

OBSTETRIC, pertaining to midwifery. (L.) In Pope, Dun-
ciad, iv. 394. Shortened from obstetricious, occurring in Cudworth,
Intellectual System, b. i. c. 4 (R.).—L. obstetricius, obstetric. —L.
obstetric-, stem of obstetrix, a midwife. B. In obste-trix, the suffix
-trix is the fem. suffix answering to masc. suffix -tor; the lit. sense is
“a female who stands near or beside.’ = L. obstare, to stand near. =
L. ob, near; and stare, to stand. See Obstacle. Der. obstetric-s,
obstetric-al.

OBSTINATEH, stubborn. (L.) ME. obstinat, Gower, C. A. ii.
117; bk. iv. 3434. We find the sb. obstinacy 5 lines above, with the
L. obstinacio in the margin.—L. obstindtus, resolute, stubborn ; pp.
of obstindre, to set about, be resolved on.=—L. 0b, over against; and
a verb *standre, to cause to stand, set, allied to Cretic oravidw, I set ;
whence also the comp. dé-stina, a support, stay, prop. See Ob- and
Destine. The root is 4/STA, to stand, stand firm. Brugmann,
di. § 603 (2). Der. obstinate-ly ; obstinac-y, formed by analogy with
legacy from legate, &c.

OBSTREPEROUS, noisy, clamorous. (L.) In Beaum. and
Fletcher, Maid in a Mill, iii. 1. 5.—L. obstreperus, clamorous; with
change of -us to -ous.—L. 0b, against, near; and strepere, to make
a noise, rattle, roar, perhaps of imitative origin. Der. obstreperous-
ly, -ness.

OBSTRICTION, obligation. (L.) Very rare. In Milton,
Samson, 312. A coined word; made from L. obstrictus, bound,
obliged, pp. of obstringere, to bind, fasten.—L. ob, over against ; and
stringere, to bind. See Ob- and Strict.

OBSTRUCT, to block up a way, &c. (L.) In Milton, P. L. v.
257, x. 636; and in Cotgrave, s.v. Oppiler. [Probably really due to
the earlier sb. obstruction, occurring in Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth,
b. ii. c. 32, a word taken directly from L. obstructio.|]—L. obstructus,
pp- of obstruere, to build in the way of anything. = L. ob, over against ;
and struere, to build. See Ob- and Structure. Der. obstruct-ion,
as above; obstruct-ive, obstruct-ive-ly.

OBTAIN, to get, gain, hold. (F.—L.) ‘Possible for vs in this
life to obtaine;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 7 d. Spelt opteyne, Dictes
and Sayings, pr. by Caxton, fol. 19, 1. 24.—F. obtenir. = L. obtinére,
to hold, obtain. — L. 0d, near, close to; and ¢enére, to hold. See Ob-
and Tenable, Der. obtain-able.

OBTEST, to conjure, call to witness, supplicate. (F. — L.)
‘[They] Odzes¢ his clemency ;’ Dryden, tr. of Virgil, Ain. xi. 151.
“He earnestly obtested’ [besought]; Hall’s Chron., Hen. VII, an. 4,
§ 8.—MF-. odiester, ‘to obtest, conjure, invoke ;’ Cot.—L. obtestari,
to call as witness.—L, ob, near; ¢estGri, to witness, from ¢estis, a
witness. See Testament.

OBTRUDE, to thrust upon, thrust in upon. (L.) In Minsheu,
ed. 1627.—L. obtrudere, pp. obtrisus, to thrust against, obtrude on
one.= L. ob, against; and ¢ridere, to thrust, allied to E. threaten.
See Ob- and Threat. Der. obtrus-ion, obtrus-ive, obtrus-ive-ly ;
from the pp. obtrisus.

OBTUSE, blunt, dull. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. —MF.
obtus, ‘dull, blunt ;’ Cot.—L. obtisus, blunt; pp. of obtundere, to
beat against or upon, to dull, deaden. —L. 0b, upon; and tundere, to
beat, strike, from 4/TEUD, to strike; cf. Skt. ¢ud, to strike. Der.
obtuse-ly, -ness.


OCTAGON


OBVERSE,, lit. turned towards one, used of the face of a coin,
as opposed to the reverse. (L.) ‘Silver pieces, ... with a rude head
upon the obverse;’ Sir T. Browne, Hydriotaphia, ch. ii. § 7.—L.
obuersus, pp. of obuertere, to turn towards.=—L. ob, towards; and
uertere, toturn. See Ob- and Verse. Der. obverse-ly.

OBVIATE, to meet in the way, prevent. (L.) ‘Obviate, to meet
with one, withstand, resist ;” Minsheu, ed. 1627.—L. obuidtus, pp. of
obuidre, to meet in the way, go towards.=—L. ob, over against; and
uia,a way. See Ob- and Voyage. And see Obvious.

OBVIOUS, evident. (L.) Orig. ‘ meeting in the way,’ as
defined by Minsheu, ed. 1627. —L. obuius, meeting, lying in the way,
obvious. =L. 0b, near; and uia, a way; see Obviate. Der. ob-
vious-ly, -ness.

OCA, a name of Oxalis crenata and Oxalis tuberosa, cultivated for
their tubers. (Span.—Peruvian.) ‘The Papas and Ocas be the chiefe
for nourishment ;’ E.G.; tr. of Acosta, bk. iv.c.18; p. 261.—Span.
oca. = Peruy. occa, an edible root; Peruv. Dict. p. 262.

OCCASION, opportunity, occurrence. (F.—L.) ME. occasion,
occasioun, Chaucer, C. T. 12000 (C 66). =F. occasion. = L. occasidnem,
acc. of occdsio, opportunity.—L. oc-, for ob before c; and -casto,
allied to casus, pp. of cadere, to fall, befall; see Ob- and Chance.
Der. occasion-al, occasion-al-ly, And see occident.

OCCIDENT, the west. (F.—L.) Not now common. ME.
occident, Chaucer, C. T. 4717 (B 297). —OF. occident, ‘the occident,
the west;” Cot.=—L. occidentem, acc. of pres. pt. of occidere, to set (as
the sun), go down. =L. oc- (for ob before c) ; and cadere, to fall; see
Ob- and Chance. Der. occident-al, All’s Well, ii. 1. 166.

OCCIPUT, the back part of the skull. (L.) In Phillips, ed.
1706; and first in 1602. [The adj. occipital is found earlier, in
Minsheu, ed. 1627; and first in 1541.]—L. occiput, the back of the
head. =—L. oc- (for ob before c), over against; and caput, the head,
See Ob- and Chief. Der. occipit-al, formed from occipit-, decl.
stem of occiput.


OCCULT, hidden, secret. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674;


first in 1567. [Cf. F. oceulte, ‘hidden;’ Cot.]—L. occultws, hidden,
pp. of occulere, to cover over.=L. oc- (for ob before c); and *celere,
to hide (not found), from 4/KEL, to cover, hide, whence also
OlIrish cel-im, I hide, and E. hell. See Ob- and Hell. Der.
occult-ly, -ness; occult, verb, Hamlet, iii. 2. 85, from F. occulter, ‘to
hide’ (Cot.), which from L. oceuléare, frequentative of occulere. Also
occult-at-ion, in Palsgrave, an astronomical term, borrowed from L.
occultatio, a hiding.

OCCUPY, to keep, hold, fill, employ. (F.—L.) ME. occupien,
Chaucer, C. T. 4844 (B 424); P. Plowman, B. v. 409.—F. occuper.
= L. occupare, to lay hold of, occupy.=—L. oc- (for ob before c); and
capere, to seize. See Ob- and Captive. The final -y is due to the
iin the ME. infin. ending -ien, which was substituted for the ordinary
ending -ex, probably to strengthen the word; cf. the suffix -ian for
-an in AS, causal verbs. Der. occupi-er; also occup-at-ion, ME.
occupacion, Gower, C. A. ii. 50, bk. iv. 1452, from F. occupation,
which from L, acc. occupatidnem; also occup-ant, from F, occupant,
pres. pt. of oceuper; occup-anc-y.

OCCUR, to happen. (F.—L.) The word occurs in a letter from
Cromwell to Sir T. Wyat dated Feb. 22, 1538 (R.).—MF. occurrer,
‘to occurr;’ Cot.=L. occurrere, to run to meet, meet, appear,
occur. L. oc- (for ob before c); and currere, to run. See Ob- and
Course. Der. occurr-ent, Bible, 1 Kings, v. 4, from MF. occurrent,
‘occurrent, accidentall’ (Cot.), which from L. occurrent-, stem of
the pres. part. of occurrere. Also occurr-ence, 1 Hen. V, v. chor. 40,
from MF. occurrence, ‘an occurrence or accident,’ Cot.

OCEAN, the main sea. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. ocean, occean,
Chaucer, C. T. 4925 (B 505).—OF. ocean, fem. oceane; Cot. gives
‘la mer oceane, the ocean, or maine sea.’—L. dceanum, acc. of
Oceanus, the main sea.—Gk. d@xeavds, the great stream supposed to
encompass the earth, Homer, Il. xiv. 245, xx. 7; a word of unknown
origin. Der. ocean-ic.

OCELOT, a small carnivorous animal. (Mexican.) Described in
a tr. of Buffon, London, 1793, i. 303. ‘Ocelodl, or leopard-cat of
Mexico ;’ Clavigero, Hist. of Mexico, tr. by Cullen, ii. 319. ‘Ocelotl
in Mexican is the name of the tyger, but Buffon applies it to the
leopard-cat ;’ id., footnote. = Mex. oce/o#l, a tiger, jaguar.

RE, a fine clay, commonly yellow. (F.—L.—Gk.) In.
Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxxiii. c. 13. The ch is due to Gk. x; it is
spelt occar in Palsgrave, oker in Cotgrave.—OF. ocre, ‘ painters’
oker;’ Cot.—L. dchra. Gk. éxpa, yellow ochre, so called from its
pale colour. = Gk. &xpds, pale, wan, esp. pale-yellow. Root uncertain.
Der. ochre-ous, ochr-y.

OCTAGON, a plane figure with eight sides and angles. (Gk.) In
Phillips, ed. 1706. Spelt octogon in Blount (1656). Coined from Gk,
dxrd, for dx7w, eight, cognate with E, eight; and ywvia,an angle, corner,


| allied to yévu, the knee. See Hight and Knee. Der. octagon-al.


OCTAHEDRON


OCTAHEDRON, a solid figure with eight equal triangular
sides. (Gk.) Spelt octaedron in Phillips, ed. 1706; ed. 1658 has the
adj. octohedrical, The h represents the Gk. hard breathing. Coined
from é«ra, for éx7w, eight, cognate with E. eight; and édpa, a base,
a seat, from the base ked-, cognate with E. sit. See Hight and Sit.
And see Decahedron.

OCTANGULAR, having eight angles. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. Formed with adj. suffix -ar (=L..-aris) from L. oct-
angul-us, eight-angled.—L. oct-, for octo, eight; and angulus, an
angle. See Hight and Angle.

OCTANT, the aspect of two planets when distant by the eighth
part of a circle. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.—L. octant-, stem of
octans, an instrument for measuring the eighth of a circle.=L. octo,
eight. See Hight.

OCTAVE, lit. eighth; hence eight days after a festival, eighth
note in music. (F.—L.) [The true old F. form of eight was oit,
uit, whence ME, wtas, an octave (Halliwell); occurring as late
2s in Palsgrave.] ‘ The octauis [octaves] of the Epyphany ;’ Fabyan’s
Chron. an, 1324-5, ed. Ellis, p. 428.—F. octaves, pl. of octave; Cot.
gives ‘octave, an octave, an eighth; l’octave d’une feste, the octave,
eight days, [or] on the eighth day, after a holyday.’ =L. octaua, fem.
of octauus, eighth.—L. octo, eight; see Bight. Der. octav-o, from
L. octaéuo, abl. case of octauus; a book was said to be ix folio, in
quarto, in octavo, &c. ‘a

OCTOBER, the eighth month of the Roman year. (L.) In
Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, pt. i. § 10, 1. 4.=L, Octdber; from octo,
eight. The origin of the suffix -ber is doubtful.

OCTOGENARIAN, one who is eighty years old. (L.) Added
by Todd to Johnson. Coined from L. octogénarius, belonging to
eighty.—L. octogéni, eighty each; distributive form belonging to
octoginta, eighty.—L. octo, eight; and -ginta= -cinta, prob. short for
*decinta, a derivative from decem, ten, cognate with E. zen. See
Hight and Ten. Brugmann, ii. § 164.

OCTOPUS, a cephalopod mollusc with. eight arms or feelers.
(L.—Gk.) Pl. octopodes or octopuses. First in 1758.—L. octdpiis. =
Gk. é#Tmrous (gen. dxTwm05-0s), i. e. eight-footed. = Gk. d«7w, eight ;
and mous (gen. 706-os), foot. See Hight and Foot.

OCTOROON, the offspring of a white person and a quadroon.
(L.) First in 1861. One who is, in an eighth part, black. Coined
from L. octd, eight; in imitation of guadroon. See Quadroon.

OCTOSYLLABIC, having eight syllables. (L.—Gk.) Tyr-
whitt, in his Introd. to Chaucer, § vii, speaks of ‘ the octosyllable
metre,’ without the suffix -ic.—L. octosyllabus, adj., having 8 sylla-
bles. — Gk. d«7w, eight ; and ovAAaBn, a syllable. See Hight and
Syllable.

.OCTROT, a duty or toll on articles admitted into a town. (F.—L.)
First in 1614; in the sense of ‘grant. =F. octroi; MF. octroy,
‘a grant, a priviledge conferred;’ Cot.—MF. octroyer, ‘to grant,
allow,’ Cot.; OF. otreiier, otroier.—Late L. type *autoridiare, for
Late L. auctorizare, to authorise. —L. auctor, author; see Author.

OCULAR, pertaining to the eye. (L.) ‘Ocular proof;’ Oth.
iii. 3. 360.—L. oculdris, adj., formed from oculus, the eye, a dimin. of
*ocus, the eye, a form not used, but cognate with Gk. dupa, the eye.
Der. ocular-ly, bin-ocular, in-oculate; also ocul-ist, from L. oculus,

ODALISQUE, a female slave in a Turkish harem. (F.—Turk.)
Blount, ed. 1681, has ‘Odalisque, a slave. ‘Sleek odalisques ;’
Tennyson, Princess, ii. 63.—F. odalisgue, the same (Littré) ; better
spelt.odalique (Devic). = Turk. ddalig, a chambermaid. = Turk. dda(h),
a chamber, a room; Zenker’s Dict. p. 115.


ODD, not even, strange, queer. (Scand.) ME. odde. ‘Odde or
euen ;’ Gower, C. A. iii. 138 ; bk. vii. 1580. ‘None odde 3erez’=
no odd years, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 426. ‘None odde


wedding’ =no irregular marriage; Myre’s Instructions for Parish
Priests, ed. Peacock, 1. 198. —Icel. odd:, a triangle, a point of land;
metaph. from the triangle, an odd number, opp. to even; also used
in the metaphorical phrase standask i odda, to stand at odds, be at
odds, quarrel. In composition, we find Icel. oddamadr, the odd man,
the third man, one who gives a casting vote; oddatala, an odd
number. Hence it is clear that the notion of ‘ oddness’ arose from
the figure of a triangle, which has two angles at the base and an odd
one at the vertex. Also oddi is closely related to oddr, a point of
a weapon, which stands for *ozdr, by assimilation.-AS, ord, point
of a sword, point, beginning, chief; Dan. od, a point; odde, a tongue
of land; Swed. udda, odd, not even; udde, a point, cape, promon-
tory; udd, a point, prick; G. ort, a place, region, MHG. ort, an
extreme point. B. The common Teut. type is *wzdoz ; and the orig.
sense seems to have been sharp point or edge, esp. of a weapon.
@ The: sense of ‘strange,’ or ‘queer,’ seems to be a mere develop-
ment.from that of uneven. The W. od, notable, excellent, odd, is
merely borrowed from E, The phrase odds and ends means ‘ points
and ends,’ hence, scraps; different. from the ME. ord and ende=


OFFICE


beginning and end; see Tyrwhitt’s note to Chaucer, C. T. 14639,
and my note to the same line in the Monkes Tale, B 3911.
@@~ Quite distinct from Orts, g.v. Der. odd-ly, odd-ness, odd-i-ty,
odd-fellow ; odds, Oth. ii. 3. 185.

ODE, a song. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. L. L. L. iv. 3. 99.—F.
ode, ‘an ode;’ Cot.=—L. dda, ddé.—Gk. @54, a song; contracted
form of dodn, a song. —Gk. deidew, to sing; related to dndwy, a
nightingale, singing bird. B. The base of deiSev is dFerd, where &
is prosthetic, and fed represents a 4/WEID, to cry out ; whence also
Olrish faed, W. gwaedd, a cry, shout. Stokes-Fick, p. 259: Der.
ep-ode, com-ed-y, trag-ed-y, mel-od-y, mon-od-y, palin-ode, par-od-y,
psalm-od-y, pros-od-y, rhaps-od-y.

ODIUM, hatred. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706. [The adj. odious
is much older; in Chaucer, C. T., D 2190.]—L. odium, hatred. =—L.
odi, [hate; an old pt. t. used as a present. Cf. Armenian at-eam,
Thate. Brugmann, i. § 160. Der. odi-ous, Test. of Creseide, st. 33,
1. 229, and as above, from F. odiewx, ‘ odious’ (Cot.), from Is. odidsus,
adj., formed from odium ; odi-ous-ly, -ness. And see annoy.

ODOUR, scent, perfume. (F.—L.) ME. odour, Wyclif, Eph. v.
2; Cursor Mundi, 3701.—AF. odour, OF. odor, F. odeur, ‘an odor,
sent;’ Cot.—L. odérem, acc. of odor, a scent.=4/OD, to smell;
whence also Gk. d€erv (=65-yew), to smell; and Lithuan. “zi,
Ismell, Der. odor-ous, Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 110, from L. oddrus, by
change of -us to -ows, and throwing back the accent; odor-ous-ly.
Also odori-fer-ous, L. L. L. iv. 2. 128, Lydgate, Assembly of Gods,
336, coined from L. odéri-fer, odour-bearing; which from odéri-,
decl. stem of odor, and -fer, bearing, from ferre, to bear; see Bear (1).
And see Olfactory, Osmium, Ozone, Redolent.

G2SOPHAGUS, the gullet. (L.—Gk.) ‘The oesophagus, or
meatpipe ;’ P. Fletcher, The Purple Island, c. iv. note 30.— Late L.
oesophagus. = Gk. oisopayos, the gullet; of uncertain origin.

OF, from, belonging to, among. (E.) ME. of; passim. AS. of,
of; Grein, ii. 308.-4-Du., Icel., Swed., Dan., and Goth. af; G. ab;
OHG. aba.+L. ab; Gk. do; Skt. apa, away. Brugmann, i. § 560,
The E. off is merely another spelling of of; see Off. A compara-
tive form occurs in E. after; see After. And see A- (6), Ab-,
Apo-.

OFF, away, away from. (E.) Merely another form of of, due
to an emphatic or stressed use of it; and in old authors there is no
distinction between the words, the spelling of doing duty for both.
‘Smiteth of my hed’=smite off my head; Chaucer, C. T. 784
(A 782, Harl. MS.). The spelling off for of occurs in Barbour’s
Bruce, i. 27, &c. An early instance. occurs in the line: ‘ For thou
art mon off strange lond;’ Rob. of Glouc. p. 115, 1.15; ed. Hearne.
In the 13th century the spelling off is (I believe) never found. See
Of. Der. see below, of-fal, off-ing, off-scouring, off-set, off-shoot, off-
spring.

OFFAL, waste meat, refuse. (E.) See Trench, Select Glossary.
ME. offal; ‘ Offal, that ys bleuit of a thynge, as chyppys, or other
lyke, Caducum};’ Prompt. Parv. Cf. ‘Offall of trees;’ Palsgrave.
Thus it was formerly used of chips of wood falling from a cut log;
and is merely compounded of off and fall; see Off and Fall.-+Du.
afval, fall, windfall, refuse, offal; from af, off, and vallen, to fall;
Dan. affald, a fall off, decline, refuse, offal; G. abfall, offal; from ab,
off, and fallen.

OFFEND, to annoy, displease. (F.—L.) ME. offenden, Chaucer,
C. T. 2396 (A 2394).—F. offendre, ‘to offend, hurt;’ Cot.—L.
offendere (pp. offensus), to strike or dash against, hurt, injure.—L. of-
(for ob before 7), against; and *fendere, to strike, only occurring in
compounds, See Defend. Der. offence or offense, ME. offence,
Chaucer, C. T. 5558 (B 1138), from OF. offense (Cot.), from L.
offensa, an offence, orig. fem. of pp. offensus ; offens-ive, K. Lear, iv. 2.
11, from F. offensif (Cot.), as if from L. *offensiuus (not used) ;
offens-ive-ly, offens-ive-ness ; also offend-er.

OFFER, to propose, present, lay before. (L.) Directly from
Latin. In very early use; found evenin AS. ME. offren, Chaucer,
C. T. 12841 (C 907); Rob. of Glouc. p. 14, 1. 325. AS. offrian, to
offer; see exx. in Sweet’s A. S. Reader. = L. offerre, to offer. —L. of
(for ob before f), near; and ferre, to bring, to bear, cognate with
E. bear. See Ob- and Bear (1). Der. offer, sb., offer-er; offer-ing =
AS. offrung, Mark, ix. 49. Also offer-tor-y, ME. offertorie, Chaucer,
C. T. 712 (A 710), F. offertoire (Cot.), from L. offertérium, a place
to which offerings were brought, an offertory, extended from offertor,
an offerer, formed from the verb offer-re with agential suffix -zor.

OFFICE, duty, employment, act of worship, &c. (F.—L.) In
early use. ME. offiz, office. ‘On thin offiz’ =in thy official position ;


409


| Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1. 2071.—F. office.—L. officium,


duty, service. Perhaps from o/- (for ob before f), and -fic-, for fac-
ere, to do (Bréal). See Ob- and Fact. Der. office-bearer; offic-er,
ME. officere, Chaucer, C. T. 8066 (E 190), from F. officier< Late L.
officiarius, one who performs an office ; offic-i-al, P. Plowman, B. xx,


410 OFFICINAL


136, from OF. official, ‘an officiall’ (Cot.), which from L. officidlis ;
offic-i-al-ly ; offici-ate, in Milton, P. L. viii. 22, from Late L. officiatus,
pp- of officidre, to perform an office, occurring A.D. 1314 (Ducange).
Also offici-ous (see Trench, Select Glossary), used sometimes in a
good sense, Titus Andron. v. 2. 202, from F. officieux, ‘ officious,
dutifull, serviceable’ (Cot.), which from L. officidsus, obliging ;
offici-ous-ly, offici-ous-ness.

OFFICINAL, pertaining to or used in a shop or laboratory.
(L.) ‘ Officinal, such drugs, plants, &c. as are sold in shops;’
Bailey (1735). Formed with suffix -al (L. -dlis) from L. officin-a,
a workshop, office ; contracted form of ofificina (Plautus).=— L. opific-,
decl. stem of opfifex, a workman.=L. opi-, for opus, work; and ~fic-,
for facere, todo. See Operate.

OFFING,, the part of the visible sea remote from the shore. (E.)
‘ Offin or Offing, the open sea, that part of it which is at a good dis-
tance from the shore;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Merely formed from off
with the suffix -ing. See Off.

OFFSCOURING, refuse. (E.) Lit. anything scoured off;
hence, refuse. In 1 Cor. iv. 13 (A.V.). From Off and Scour.

OFFSET, a young shoot, &c. (E.) Used in several senses. The
sense ‘shoot of a plant’ occurs in Ray, as cited in Todd’s Johnson
(without a reference), From Off and Set.

OFFSHOOT, that which shoots off. (E.) Not in Todd’s John-
son. Used figuratively in The Tatler, no. 157, § 10. From Off
and Shoot.

OFFSPRING, progeny, issue, (E.) ME. ofspring, Rob. of
Glouc. p. 164, 1. 3433. The odd spelling oxspring occurs in Cursor
Mundi, 1.11415. AS. ofspring, Gen. iii. 15.— AS. of, off, from; and
springan, to spring. See Off, Of, and Spring.

-OFFUSCATEH, the same as Obfuscate, q.v.

OFT, OFTEN, frequently. (E.) Off is the orig. form; this
was lengthened into ofte (dissyllabic), because -e was a common
adverbial ending in the ME. period. Lastly, ofte was lengthened to
often before a vowel or k in hadde, &c. Thus: ‘Ful ofte tyme,’
Chaucer, C. T. 358 (A 356), where Tyrwhitt prints often unneces-
sarily, the best MSS. having ofte. Again: ‘That often hadde ben,’
id. 312 (A 310); but Cursor Mundi has oftix before a consonant,
3520, &c. AS. oft, Grein, ii. 320.4Icel. oft, opt (pronounced oft) ;
Dan. ofte; Swed. ofta; G. off; OHG. ofto; Goth. ufta, adv. oft,
Mk. v. 4; used as adj. in the phrase thizd ufta sauhté, frequent
infirmities, 1 Tim. v. 23. Origin unexplained. Der. often, adj.,
esp. in the phr. ofte tyme or often-tyme, Chaucer, C. T. 52, 358 (A.52,
350); often-ness. a> We now Say often-er, often-est ; the old forms
were oft-er, oft-est.

OGEE, OGIVE, a double curve. (F.—Span.—Arab.) Some-
times absurdly written OG, as if compounded of two letters of the
alphabet. Ogee is another form of ogive (with i as in machine). ‘An
Ogiue or Ogee, a wreath, circlet, or round band in architecture; ’
Minsheu, ed. 1627. It is now generally used to mean a double
curve —, formed by the union of a convex and concave line. An ogee
arch is a pointed arch, with double-curved sides. —OF. augive, ‘an
ogive, a wreath, circlet, round band, in architecture;’ branches
@ augives, ‘ branches ogived, or limmes with ogives;’ Cot. Healso
has: ‘ Ogive, an ogive, or ogee in architecture. £. The suggestion
in E. Miller is perhaps right; he compares the Span. auge, highest
point. Excellent examples of the ogee curve are to be found in
Moorish domes and arches, and we may derive the term from the
pointed top of such domes, &c. Cf. Span. cimacio ogee, an ogee
moulding, where cimacio is derived from cima, a summit, top; Late
L. cymatium, an ogee curve (Vitruvius). Similarly, the F. augive
is derived from Span. auge, highest point, also apogee (Pineda),
which curious word is also found in Port. and Italian. sy. The
Span. auge is from Arab. dwj, top, summit, vertex, altitude or
ascendent of a planet; Rich. Dict. p. 200. Cf. Korting, § 1049;
Devic, s.v. auge. 4 Prob. not an Arab. word, but from Gk.
dnéya.ov, apogee. Der. ogiv-al, adj., sometimes oddly corrupted to
ogee-fall.

OGHAM, OGAM, used with reference to the alphabet of twenty
characters employed by the ancient Irish and British. (Irish.) From
Trish ogham, ‘ the occult manner of writing used by the ancient Irish;’
O'Reilly. Olrish ogum (Windisch). Said to have been devised by
a mythical inventor named Ogma.

. OGLE, to look at sideways, glance at. (Du.) Not an old word
in E. In Pope, Rape of the Lock, vy. 23. ‘I see him ogle still;’
‘Dryden, Prol. to the Prophetess, 46. ‘They say their wives learn
ogling in the pit;’ T. Shadwell, Tegue o Divelly, Epilogue, p. 80
(1692); where a side-note says: ‘A foolish word among the canters
for glancing. Certainly of Du. origin; answering to a Du. verb

*oogelen (not in the Dictt.), a regular frequentative of oogen, ‘to cast
sheeps eyes upon one;”. Hexham. Such frequentative verbs are
extremely common in Dutch, and may be numbered by hundreds;


-OLFACTORY


and we actually find the Low G. oegeln, to ogle, in the Bremen


“Worterbuch, used as a frequentative of oegen, to look at; Low G.


ogelen, to ogle (Liibben) ; as well as MDu. oogheler, a flatterer, eye-
servant, i.e. ogler (Oudemans). — Du. ooge, the eye ; cognate with E.
Hye, q.v. ‘ ; ;

OGRE, a monster, in fairy tales. (F.) Late. Added by Todd to
Johnson’s Dict. The quotation in Todd is from the E. version of
the Arabian Nights (first in 1713), which was taken from the F.
version. = F, ogre, an ogre; first used by Perrault in his Contes, 1697 ;
see N.E.D. Diez proposed to connect it with Ital. orco, ‘a sea-
monster ;’ Florio; OSpan. huergo, uerco.—L. orcum, acc. of orcus,
(1) the abode of the dead, (2) the god of the infernal regions, Orcus,
Pluto. @ But it is difficult to guess what Perrault had in mind.
Der. ogr-ess, from F. ogresse.

OH, a later spelling of O, q.v.

OIL, juice from the olive-tree, a greasy liquid. (F.—L.—Gk.)
{We find in AS. the form ele, in Goth. alew, forms borrowed ulti-
mately from the Gk., but at a very early period.} The ME. oile
was borrowed from French; it occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 2963
(A 2961); and in Early E. Prose Psalter, Ps. xliv. 9.—AF. oile,
St. Nicolas, by Wace, 636; OF. oile, later huile (Cotgrave).=—L..
oleum, oil; olea, an olive-tree. = Gk. €Aaov, oil; éAaia, an olive-tree,
also an olive. See Olive. Der. oil, verb; the pp. oyled occurs in
Hall’s Satires, b. iv. sat. 4,1. 48. Also orl-y, K. Lear, i. 1. 2275
oil-i-ness, Also otl-bag, -cake, -cloth, -colour, -nut, -painting. And
see Oleaginous, Oleaster.

OINTMENT, a greasy substance for anointing wounds, &c-
(F.—L.) The ¢ is due to confusion with ME. ointen, vb., to anoint ;
the ME. form being oinement or oynement. ‘{'They] bou3ten [bought]
swete-smelling oynementis, to come and to anoynte Jesu;’ Wyclif,
Mark, xvi. 1. Spelt otnement in Chaucer, C. T. 633 (A 631).—OF-.
oignement, an anointing, also an unguent, liniment; Burguy. Formed
with suffix -ment ( = L. -mentum) from OF. oigner (Godefroy), another
form of OF, (and mod.-F.) oindre, to anoint.—L. wngere, to anoint ;
see Unguent, Anoint.

OLD, aged, full of years, ancient. (E.) ME. old, def. form and
pl. olde; Chaucer, C. T. 5240, 10023 (B 820, E2149). OMerc. ald,
later ald (written ald), Matt. ix. 16 (Rushworth MS.); AS. eald,
ONorthumb. ald, Luke, i. 18.4-Du. oud (for old); G. alt; Goth.
altheis. Teut. type *aldoz ; Idg. type *altos; cf. L. ad-ultus, an adult,
one of full age. B. Like the -wltus in L. adulius, it is a pp. form
from the 4/AL, to nourish, as seen in Goth. alan, to nourish, L. alere,
to nourish; cf. Goth. us-althan, to grow old. It means ‘nourished,
grown up.’ See further under Adult, Altitude. Der. old-en,
Macbeth, iii. 4. 75 ; Cursor Mundi, 18100 (Trin. MS.); apparently
a Scand. word from Icel. aldinn, old, or (more probably) the adj.
suffix -en was merely tacked on; cf. gold-ex. Also old-ness, K. Lear,
i. 2. 50; cf. eldness, Wyclif, Rom. vii. 6.. Also eld, sb., eld-er (1),
eld-est, ald-er-man.

OLEAGINOUS, oily. (L.—Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
— L. oleaginus, belonging to olive-oil; by change of -ws to -ous, as
in arduous, &c. An adj. form from olea, the olive-tree. Not a true
L. word, but borrowed from Gk. éAaia; see Oil.

OLEANDER, the rose-bay-tree. (F.—Late L.)  ‘ Oleander,
tose-bay;’ Minsheu.=— MF. oleandre, ‘the rose-tree, rose-bay, rose-
lawrell, rose-bay-ttee;’ Cot. The.same as Ital. oleandro, Span.
eloendro, ‘the rose-bay-tree,’ Minsheu (1623), Port. eloendro, loendro.
All those forms are variously corrupted (it is supposed) from Late L..
lérandrum, a word cited by Isidore of Seville; Origines, xvii. .7<
B. Again, Isidore has suggested that /drandrum was corrupted from
rhododendron: ‘Rhododendron [v.r. rodandarum] quod corrupte
lorandrum uocatur, quod sit foliis Jauri similibus, flore ut rosa, arbor
uenenata.’ Perhaps we may rather guess Jorandrum to represent
lauridendrum (Ducange); from lauri- for L. laurus, laurel, and Gk.
dévSpov, a tree. sy. The change from lérandrum to oleandrum is
clearly due to confusion with olea, an olive-tree.

OLEASTER, the wild olive. (L.—Gk.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.
Spelt oliaster, Palladius on Husbandry, bk. iv. 115.—L. oleaster,
Rom. xi. 17 (Vulgate). Formed with suffix -s-ter (as in poeta-s-ter)
from olea, an olive-tree.— Gk. éAaia, an olive-tree. See Oil. See
Bréal.

OLFACTORY, pertaining to smell. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1658...
= L. olfactdrius, belonging to one that smells; only appearing in
the fem. and neut. forms, olfactoria, olfactorium, a smelling-bottle,
= L. olfactor, one who smells; (but only the fem. form olfactrix
occurs); cf. olfactus, a smelling, also pp. of olfacere, to smell, to
scent; of which a fuller form olefacere also occurs. =L. olé-re, to:
smell; and facere, to make; hence, to’ emit a scent. B. It is clear
that olére stands for *odére, whence odor, smell ; cf. Gk. 65-7, scent.
The change of d to J is a peculiarity of Latin, as in Ulysses for
Odysseus, lacruma for dacruma; see Tear (2), See Odour..


OLIGARCHY


OLIGARCHY, government by a few. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt
oligarchie in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. oligarchie, ‘an oligarchie;’
Cot. —Late L. oligarchia (Ducange).— Gk. éAvyapxia, government in
the hands of a few.=Gk. éAly-, for dAlyos, few, little ; and -apyxia,
from dpxev, to rule. Der. oligarchi-c-al; also oligarch, Gk. 6d-
yapvns; oligarch-al.

OLIO, a mixture, medley. (Span.—L.) A mistaken form of olia,
which is an E. spelling of Span. o//a, sounded very nearly as olia, the
Span. // answering to E. ly or to E. ili in million. The mistake
occurs in Kikon Basilike, cap. xv, and is noticed by Milton. ‘Not
to tax him for want of elegance as a courtier in writing oglio for ol/a,
the Spanish word;’ Milton, Answer to Eikon Basilike, cap. 15.—
Span. olla, ‘a round earthen pot, an oglio’ (sic); Meadows.
Properly, the latter sense is due to the Span. dish called olla podrida,
a dish of various meats and vegetables, hence a mixture, medley,
olio. =L. olla, a pot; from OL. aula, a pot. Root uncertain.

OLIVE, the name of an oil-yielding tree. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
oliue (with « for v), O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, ii. 89, 1. 5 from


bottom. =F, olive. =L. olzua.=Gk. éAaia, an olive-tree. Brugmann,
i. § 121. See further under Oil.
OLYMPIAN, belonging to Olympus, celestial. (L.—Gk.)


* Above th’ Olympian hill ;’ Milton, P. L. vii. 3.— Late L. Olympianus,
adj., for L. Olympius, Olympian. — Gk. ’OAvymia, a sacred region in
Elis, where the Olympian games were held; “OAvymos, a mountain
in Thessaly, the fabled abode of the greater gods of Greece. Der.
Olympia-d (from the same source), a period of four years, from one
celebration of these games to another.

OMADAUN, OMADHAWYN, a simpleton. (Irish.) First in
1818. Anglo-Irish. Irish amaddn, a simpleton. Irish amad (the
same). = Irish am-, for an-, negative prefix (cf. Gk. dv-) ; and -mad,
Olrish -met, mind, cognate with L. mens and E. mind. Cf. L. amens,
mad.

OMBRE, a game at cards. (F.—Span.—L.) In Pope, Rape of
the Lock, i. 56. The game came to England with Charles II, in
1660. A pamphlet called ‘ The Royal Game of Ombre’ was pub-
lished in that year (Chatto, p. 145).—F. hombre, ombre (Hamilton).
=—Span. juego del hombre, the game of ombre; lit. ‘ game of the man;’
see Eng.-Span. part of Meadows’ Dict. The Span. juego is from L.
zocus; see JOke. The Span. hombre is from L. hominem, acc. of
homo, a man; see Human. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 201.

OMEGA, the end. (Gk.) In Rev. i. 8. The sense ‘end’ is due
to the fact that omega is the last letter of the Gk. alphabet. Its
force is that of long 0. —Gk. &, called & péya, i.e. great o or longo;
where péya is the nent. of péyas, great, allied to E. mickle; see
Mickle. 4 Opposed to alpha, the first letter; see Alphabet.

OMELET, a pancake made chiefly of eggs. (F.—L.) In Cot-
grave.—F. omelette, ‘an omelet or pancake of eggs;’ Cot. An
older form was aumelette; Cot. also gives: * Aumelette deufs, an
omelet, or pancake made of egges.? B. The forms of the word
are various; a very common old form, according to Scheler, was
‘amelette, but this was: preceded by the forms alemette, alemelle, and
alumelle. It is clear that amelette is a corruption from the older
alemette; and it seems that alemette, in its turn, took the place of
alemelle. yy. Now the OF. alemelle signified ‘a thin plate,’ esp.
the blade of a knife, and is still preserved in the mod. F. alumelle
(a corrupted spelling), with the sense of ‘sheathing of a ship,’ as
a nautical term (Hamilton). That is, the omelet was named from its
thin, flat, shape, and has nothing to do with F. eu/s, eggs, as some have
supposed ; so that the old expression in Cotgrave, viz. aumelette d’eufs,
is quite correct, not tautological. See alemele, the blade of a knife,
in Godefroy, who has also alemelle; as well as (in the Supp.) the
forms alumette, amelette, omelette, eufmolette (!), aumelete, an omelet ;
s.v. omelette. 8. Lastly, alemelle (or alemele) is a mistaken form,
due to confusion of Ja lemelle (the correct form) with /’alemelle, as if
the article had been elided before a vowel. = L. lamella, a thin plate,
properly of metal ; dimin. of /amina, a thin, flat plate; see Lamina.
@ There seems to be no reason for doubting the correctness of this
curious etymology, due to Littré; see the articles in Littré and
Scheler, under the words omelette and alumelle. Cf, Norm. dial.
amelette, omelette (Moisy). i

OMEN, a sign of a future event, prognostication. (L.) In Shak.
Hamlet, i. 1. 123.—L. Omen, an omen; OL. osmen. B. Root
uncertain; Brugmann takes it to stand for *ouis-men, which he
connects with Gk. ofo-ya, I think, suppose; §§ 877, 352 (3). Der.
omen-ed, chiefly in ill-omened; omin-ous (Minsheu), imitated from L.
Smin-dsus, adj., formed from dmin-, decl. stem of dmen ; omin-ous-ly,
omin-ous-ness. Also ab-omin-ate.

OMENTUM, ‘2 fold or duplication of the peritoneum connect-
ing the stomach with certain of the other viscera, as the liver, spleen,
‘and colon; the caul;’ N.E.D. (L.) Called oment in 1547.—L.


omentum,


ONION


OMIT, to leave out, neglect. (L.) ‘Nor omitted no charitable
meane ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 887 e.—L. dmittere, to omit ; lit.
‘to let go.’ For *ommittere, which stands (by assimilation) for
*obmittere. = L. 0b (which often scarcely affects the sense); and mittere,
to send, let go. See Ob- and Mission. Der. omiss-ion, Troil. iii.
3. 230, from F. omission, ‘an omission’ (Cot.), which from L, dmiss-
idnem, acc. of dmissio, allied to the pp. dmissus. Also omitt-ance,
a coined word, As You Like It, iii, 5. 133.

OMNIBUS, a public vehicle. (L.) The name seems to have
been first used in France. They were used in Paris about 1828;
and were so called because intended for the use of all classes.—L.
omnibus, for all, dat. pl. of omnis, all. Root uncertain ; see Supp.
note to Brugmann, § 762.

OMNIPOTENT, almighty. (F.—L.) ME. omnipotent, Chaucer,
C. T. 6005 (D 423).—F. omnipotent; Cot.—L. omnipotent-, stem of
omnipotens, all-powerful.—L. omni-, for omnis, all; and joftens,
powerful; see Potent. Der. omnipotent-ly, omnipotence, from F.
omnipotence (Cot.).

OMNIPRESENT, everywhere present. (F.—L.) Milton has
omnipresence, P. L. vii. 590, xi. 336. Coined from omni-, for omnis,
all; and Present, q.v. Der. omnipresence.

OMNISCIENT, all-knowing. (L.) In Milton, P. L. vi. 430.
Coined from omni-, for omnis, all; and scient-, stem of sciens, pres.
part. of scire, to know; see Science. Der. omniscience.

MNIVOROUS, all-devouring, feeding on all kinds of food.
(L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. omniuorus, all-devouring ;
by change of -ws to -ous.=L. omni-, for omnis, all; and -uorus, de-
vouring, from uorare, to devour; see Voracious.

OMRAH, a prince, lord. (Hind.— Arab.) ‘ Aigrettes by Omrahs
worn;’ Scott, Vision of Don Roderick, ii. 31.—Hind. wmara,
a noble; lit. ‘nobles,’ pl., used as a title (Forbes). = Arab. wmara,
pl. of amir, a prince, emir; see Hmir. Cf. the Arab. title amirvwl-
umara, prince of princes (Yule).

ON, upon, at, near. (E.) ME. ox; passim. AS. on; passim.
+Du. aan; Icel. & (for an); Dan. an, prep. and ady.; Swed. a,
prep. ; G. ax; Goth. aza, to, upon, on.4+-Gk. dva; Russ. na. IRdg.
type *ana. Der. on, adv. ; on-set, on-slaught, on-ward, on-wards; and
see anon.

ONCE, a single time, at a former time. (E.) ME. ones, oones,
onis, Chaucer, C. T. 5592, 5595 (D 10, 13); cf. at ones, id. 767
(A 765). The final s was voiceless, not pronounced as z; and this
is why the word is now spelt with ce, which is an attempt to show
this. AS, des, once; orig. gen. case masc. and neut. of dn, one;
the gen. case was sometimes used adverbially, as in need-s, twi-ce,
thri-ce. See One (1). Der. nonce, in the phr. for the nonce; see
Nonce.

ONCE, OUNCE, an animal ; see Ounce (2).

ONG (1), single, undivided, sole. (E.) [The mod. pronunciation
[wun] seems to have arisen in the W. of England; it is noticed by
Jones, in 1701, as in use ‘in Shropshire and some parts of Wales; ’
Ellis, On Early Eng. Pronunciation, p. 1012. It does not appear to
be older in literature than about A.D. 1420; see N.E.D. Tindale
has wons in Mark, vi. 31. At any rate, the ME. pronunciation was
at first with long open o, later with long close 0, whence the sound
of -one, on-, in al-one, at-one, on-ly; we never say wunly. We do,
however, say wuns (with voiceless s) for once.] ME. oon, on; also
00, 0; dative oone, one; Chaucer, C. T. 343, 365, 681, 749 (A 341,
&c.). AS. am, one; Grein, i. 29.4-Du. een; Icel. enn; Dan. een;
Swed. en; G. ein; Goth. ains.4-W.un; Irish and Gael. aon; L. anus ;
OL. oinos; Gk. *oivds, one (fem. oivn, an ace on adie). Teut. type
*ainoz; Idg. type *oinos. Cf. Lith. vénas, one; Brugmann, ii. § 165.
Der. one-sided, one-sided-ness ; one-ness; and see on-ce, on-ly, al-one, l-one,
at-one; un-ique, un-ite, un-ion, un-animous, uni-son, uni-versal, on-ior 5
also n-one, z-on-ce, an-on (=in one), an-other.. Doublet, az or a
(from the unstressed form). > The Gk. e/s, one (base *sem) cannot
be referred to the same source; Brugmann, i. § 408.

ONE (2), a person, spoken of indefinitely. (E.) In the phrase
‘one says, the one means a single person. Cf. ‘ One that moche wo
wrou3te, Sleuthe was his name’=one who wrought much wo, whose
name was Sloth; P. Plowman, B. xx. 157. See Matzner, Engl.
Grammatik. ‘The indefinite ove, as in one says, is sometimes, but
wrongly, derived from the F. oz, L. homo. It is merely the use of
the numeral oxe for the older man, men, or me;’ Morris, Hist. Out-
lines of Eng. Accidence, p, 143; which see for examples. And see
N.E.D.3; One, § 20. '

ONEROUS, burdensome. (F.—L.) In the Rom, of the Rose,
1, 5633. =F. onxereux, ‘onerous ;’ Cot. —L. onerdsus, burdensome. =
L. oner-, for *ones, stem of onus, a burden. B. Benfey (Skt. Dict.
p- 19) compares onus with Skt. anas, a cart; and so Brugmann. i:
§ 159. Der. onerous-ly, -ness; also ex-oner-ate.


ONION, the name of a plant. (F.—L.) ME. oynon, Chaucer,


41}


“ONLY


C. T. 636. =F. oignon, ‘an onion;’ Cot.—L. tinidnem, acc. of inio,
(1) unity, oneness, (2) a single large pearl, (3) a kind of onion. =—L.
dnus, one; cognate with E. One, q.v. Doublet, uzion, esp. in the
sense ‘a large pearl,’ Hamlet, v. 2. 283.

ONLY, single, singly. (E.) Both adj. and adv. ME. oonli,
earlier oonliche, onliche, ‘ Onliche liue’ =solitary life; Ancren Riwle,
p- 152, last line but one. Onliche, adv., Will. of Palerne, 3155. AS.
Gnlic, adj., unique, lit. one-like ; Grein, i. 33.—AS. Gz, one; and lic,
like. See One and Like.

ONOMATOPOSIA, name-making, the formation of a word
with resemblance in sound to that of the thing signified. (Gk.) Esp.
used of words such as click, hiss, and the like, directly imitative of
sounds. Spelt ozomatopeia in Puttenham, Arte of E. Poesie, bk. iii.
ch. 17 (ed. Arber, p. 192, sidenote). — Gk. évoyaroroiia, the making
of a name; we also find évoparonoinots. = Gk, dvoparo-, decl. stem
of dvoya, a name; and moely, to make. See Name and Poem.
Der. onomato-poetic. Also (from Gk. évopa) an-onym-ous, hom-onym,
met-onym-y, par-onym-ous, Syt-onym,

ONSET, an assault, attack. (E.) In King John, ii. 326. A good
word ; but not in early use. Due to the phrase #o set on, i.e. to
attack. ‘Percy! and set on!’ 1 Hen. IV, v. 2.97. See On and
Set.

ONSLAUGHT, an attack. (E.) In Butler, Hudibras, pt. i.
c. 3. ll. 422, 424. ‘The ME. form would be onslaht; but it does not
occur. Compounded of ME. on, on; and slaht, slaght, slaught,
a stroke, blow, also slaughter, as in Gower, i. 348; bk. ili. 2058.—
AS. on, on; and sleaht, a stroke, blow, found in the compounds
mordor-sleaht, wel-sleaht, Grein, ii. 264, 647, and derived from sléan,
to strike. See On and Slaughter.

ONTOLOGY, the science of being. (Gk.) ‘Ontology, an Account
of Beings (sic) in the Abstract ;’ Bailey (1735). Compounded of
Gk. éyro-, for évr-, stem of the pres. part. of «iva, to be; and
-Aoyia, from Adyos, discourse, from Aéy-ev, to speak.

ONWARD, ONWARDS, forward. (E.) Not a very old
word, ‘I haue driuen hym onxwarde one steppe down ;’” Sir T. More,
Works, p. 409 d._ Peculiarly used in Chaucer, C. T., A 970. Com-
pounded of on and -ward, in imitation of Toward, q.v. So also
onwards, Shak. Sonnet 126, in imitation of towards.

ONYX, a kind of agate. (L.—Gk.) In Holland, tr. of Pliny,
b. xxxvii. c. 6. ME. onix; Wyclif, Ezek. xxviii. 13. —L. onyx.— Gk.
évug, a claw, a nail, a finger-nail, a veined gem, onyx, from the
resemblance to the colour of the finger-nail. The stem is dévvy-,
allied by gradation to Skt. zakha-, a nail, Russ. nogote, a nail, and
E. nail ; see Nail.

OOLITE, a kind of limestone. (F.—Gk.) Modern and geological.
A coined word, but coined in France; an Englishman would have
said oolith. =F. oolithe, with th pronounced as E. 7; in Dict. Acad.
1762.—Gk. wé-, for dév, an egg, cognate with L. duum; and Xi6-os,
astone. See Oval and Lithography.

OOZE (1), moisture, gentle flow; confused with Ooze (2), soft
mud. (E.) These words have lost an initial w; they should rather
be wooze, or woze; see E.D. D. The vb. to woose is in Golding, tr.
of Ovid, fol. 127. For the loss of w, cf. prov. E. ’ooman for woman,
Shropshire ’ood for wood. 1. ME. wose, moisture; ‘alle the othre
woses,’ all the other fluids, Ayenb. of Inwyt, p. 186. AS. wds, juice;
as in ofetes wos, juice of fruit; Voc. 128. 11.4Icel. vds, wetness.
Noreen looks upon Icel. vas as from a form *vans; and if so, AS.
wos is from a form *wons. But wds may be allied to OHG. waso,
turf, sod; see G. wasen in Kluge. 2. ME. wose, soft mud ; ‘in wose
and in donge;’ P. Plowm. C. xiii. 229; and see Prompt. Paryv.,
p. 532. AS. wase, sepia; as in wase-scite, a cuttle-fish, Voc. 181. 7;
wase, mud, Voc. 203. 45.4Icel. veisa, a stagnant pool; Norw. veisa,
mud. Teut. type *wais-dn-, f. Der. from ooze (1), ooze, verb, to
exude, Timon, i. 1. 215 ooz-y.

OPACITY, opaqueness ; see Opaque.

OPAL, a precious stone. (F.—L.—Skt.?) In Holland, tr. of
Pliny, b. xxxvii. c. 6; Tw. Nt. ii. 4.77.—F. opale, ‘the opall stone ;’”
Cot.—L. opalus, an opal;. Pliny, as above. Cf. Gk. dmdAdcos, an
opal. Apparently from Skt. upala-s, a stone; cf. tapana-upalas, a
fabulous gem, rasa-upalas, a pearl (Benfey).

OPAQUE, not transparent, dark. (F,—L.) In Milton, P. L. iii.
619; ME. opake, Palladius on Husbandry, ii, 261.—F. opaque,
‘duskie, gloomie, obscure ;’ Cot.—L. opacum, acc. of opdcus, shady.
Root unknown. Der. opaque-ness ; also opac-i-ty, Minsheu, from F.
opacité, ‘ opacity’ (Cot.), from L. acc. opacitatem.

OPE, to open. (E.) <A short form for open, verb; K. John, ii.
536. So also ope is used as a short form for open, adj., as in ‘ the
gates are ope,’ Cor. i. 4..43- Seldom used except in poetry. See
Open.


412


from the adj., as is shown by the old forms,


OPOSSUM


C. T. 8666 (E 790). Ata later period contracted to ope; see Ope.
AS. open, open, Grein, ii. 355. Lit. ‘ that which is lifted up;’ the
metaphor being probably taken from the lifting of the curtain of
a tent, or the lifting of a door-latch; cf. dup (=do up), to open,
Hamlet, iv. 5. 53. Allied to AS. up, up; see Up.+Du. open; op,
up; Icel. opinn, open, also face upwards; upp, up; Dan. aaben;
op, up; cf. the phr. Zk Doren op, open the door, lit. ‘lock the door
up ;’ Swed. dppen; upp, up; G. offen; allied to auf, OHG. wf.
Teut, types *upanoz, *upenoz; allied to Up, q.v. Der. open, verb,
AS, openian, causal verb from adj. open; so also Du. openen, from
open; Icel. opna, Dan. aabne, Swed. dppna, G. dffnen. Also open-ly,
open-ness, open-ing,, open-handed, open-hearted.

OPERA, a musical drama, (Ital.—L.) ‘An ofera is a poetical
tale or fiction,’ &c.; Dryden, pref. to Albion and Albanius; first in
Evelyn, Diary, Nov. 19, 1644. Ital. opera, work; hence a perform-
ance. =L. opera; see Operate. Der. operat-ic; opera-glass.

OPERATE, to produce an effect. (L.) In Shak. Cymb. v. 5.
197. [Really due to the sb. operation, in much earlier use; ME.
operacion, Chaucer, C. T. 6730 (D 1148); Gower, C. A. iii. 128;
bk. vii. 1282; from F. operation, which from L. acc. operationem.| —
L. operatus, pp. of operart, to work.=L. opera, work ; closely allied
to L. opus (decl. stem oper-), work, labour, toil.-Skt. apas, work
(Vedic). Der. operat-ion, as above; operat-ive, King Lear, iv. 4. 14,
from F. operatif, ‘ operative’ (Cot.) ; operat-ive-ly; operat-or, from L.
operator ; oper-ant, Hamlet, iii. 2. 184, from operant-, stem of pres.
part. of operari; oper-ance, Two Noble Kinsmen, i. 3. 63. Also
oper-ose, i.e. laborious, Blount’s Gloss., from L. operdsus; oper-ose-ly,
oper-ose-ness ; oper-os-i-ty, Minsheu. From the same root we have
co-operate, en-ure, in-ure, man-ure, man-cuvre. ‘

OPHICLEIDE, a musical instrument. (F.—Gk.) Modern. =
F, ophicléide, ‘an ophicleid, key-serpent ;? Hamilton. An odd name;
due to the old twining musical instrument called ‘a serpent,’ to
which keys were added, thus turning it into a ‘ key-serpent.’=Gk.
bpi-, for pis, a serpent; and xA«d-, decl. stem of xAcis, a key. See
Ophidian and Clavicle.

OPHIDIAN, relating to serpents. (Gk.) Modern; formed
with E. suffix -az (=L. -anus) from Gk. *dg.d-, an imaginary form
wrongly supposed to be the stem of dqus, a serpent ; perhaps sug-
gested by the Gk. dimin. form égid:ov. The true stem is d¢-, as
seen in ophi-cleide and Ophi-uchus (Gk. égcovxos, serpent-holder, from
éxev, to hold), Milton, P. L. ii. 709.

OPHTHALMIA, inflammation of the eye. (Gk.) Spelt oph-
thalmie in Blount’s Gloss., which is borrowed from F. ophthalmie
(Cotgrave).—Gk. dp@adryia, a disease of the eye. —Gk. dpOadpds, the
eye; Boeotian d«taddos; cf. Doric dmridos, the eye, dmrevety, to see,
émrnp, one who looks, a spy, eye-witness. See Optic. Der. oph-
thalmi-c.

OPINION, a notion, judgement, estimation. (F.—L.) ME.
opinion, Chaucer, C. T. 183; Gower, C. A. i. 267; bk. ii. 3214.—F.
opinion, ‘opinion ;’ Cot.—L. opinidnem, acc. of opinio, a supposition.
= L. opinari, to suppose; rarely opinare.—L. opinus, thinking, ex-
pecting ; only in the comp. nec-opinus, in-opinus, unexpected ; perhaps
connected with ob, near, as sup-inus is with sub (Bréal). Der. opinion-
at-ive (Johnson), which has taken the place of the older opinative
(Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674), coined from L. opindtus, pp. of opinari,
to suppose; opinion-at-ive-ly, opinion-at-ive-ness. We also use the
coined word opinion-at-ed, a clumsy formation. The verb opine is
a perfectly correct word, from F. opiner, ‘to opine’ (Cot.), which
from L. opindre, more commonly opinadri, as above; it occurs in
Pope, Moral Essays, ili. 9. The derivatives opin-able, opin-at-ive,
opin-at-or (all in Blount) are obsolete.

PIUM, a narcotic drug. (L.—Gk.) In Holland, tr. of Pliny,
b, xx. c. 18 ; and in Milton, Samson, 630. [The ME: opie, Chaucer,
C. T. 1474 (A 1472), answers to an OF. opie.|—L. opium; Pliny. =

Gk. dmoy, poppy-juice, opium ; dimin. from é7ds, juice,sap. @ Not
connected with E. sap; but rather with Skt. apas, pl., waters. Der.
opi-ate, Milton, P. L. xi. 133, spelt opiat in Cotgrave, from F. opiate,
which from Late L. opidtus (Ducange), lit. ‘ provided with opium.”

OPODELDOGC, a medical plaster, soap liniment. (Partly Gk.)
A name believed to have been invented by Paracelsus, about 1541.
He spelt it oppodeltoch. The first part seems to be Gk. dmo-, for
émés, Juice (above). : :

OPOPANAX, a gum-resin orig. obtained from an umbelli-
ferous plant, the Opopanax Chironium. (L.—Gk.) Spelt opopanac in
Lanfranc’s Cirurgerie, p. 60 (ab. 1400).—L. opopanax, Pliny, xx. 24.

—Gk. drondvag, the juice of panax.—Gk. dmo-, for dds, juice, sap
(above); and mavaf, lit. all-heal; see Panacea.

OPOSSUM, an American quadruped. (W. Indian.) In a tr. of


| Buffon’s Nat. Hist., London, 1792, i, 214. , Orig. opassom, in the
OPEN, unclosed, free of access, clear. (E.) The verb is formed |
ME. open, Chaucer, |


language of the Indians of Virginia; Captain Smith, Works, ed.
Arber, p. 59.


OPPIDAN


‘OPPIDAN, at Eton, a student who boards in the town, not in the
college. (L.) Formerly in more general use. ‘ Oppidan, a citizen
or townsman ;” Blount’s Gloss.,ed. 1674.—L. oppidanus, belonging
to a town.=—L. oppidum, a town; OL. oppedum. Cf. L. Pedum, the
name of a town in Latium, Livy, ii. 39. 4. B.‘ The word oppidum
I derive from pedum (cf. Pedum)=Gk. ré5ov, ground, country, Skt.
pada-m, tread, step, place, spot, foot-print, track, and od, on, near,
over, and interpret it accordingly as orig. ‘‘ What lies on or over the
open ground;”,., hence may well also be derived the old use of
oppida for the barriers of a race-course, which lie on [or] over the
arena ;’ Curtius, ii. 103, 303. Bréal compares Gk. éumedos, steadfast,
firm (with prefix éy-, for év),

OPPILATION, a stopping up. (F.—L.) Sir T. Elyot has the
pl. oppilations; Castel of Helthe, bk. ii. c. 7 (Of Fygges).—MF.
oppilation, ‘an obstruction;’ Cot.-L. acc. oppilatidnem, allied to
oppildtus, pp. of oppilare, to stop up.—L. op (for ob), against ; and
pilare, to ram, from pilum, a pestle. L. pilum is for *pinslom, from
pinsere, to pound.

OPPONENT, one who opposes. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. =
L. oppdnent-, stem of pres. pt. of oppdnere, to oppose, lit. set against.
= L. op- (for ob before p); and ponere, to place. See Ob- and
Position.

OPPORTUNE, seasonable. (F.—L.) Spelt oportune in Lyd-
gate, Siege of Thebes, prol. 139. =F. opportun, ‘timely;’ Cot. =L.
opportiinus, convenient, seasonable; lit. near the harbour.=—L, op-
(for ob before p), near; and portus, a harbour, port. Cf. im-portune ;
and L. Porttinus, the protecting deity of harbours. See Ob- and
Port (2). Der. opportune-ly, opportune-ness; also opportun-i-ty, ME.
opportunité, Wyclif, Matt. xxvi. 16, from F. opportunité (Cot.), which
from L. acc. opportunitatem.

‘OPPOSE, to resist, withstand. (F.—L. and Gk.) ME. opposen,
used commonly in the special sense of to contradict in argument, as
an examiner used to do in the schools; see Chaucer, C. T. 7179
(D 1597), where Tyrwhitt prints apposen ; Gower, C. A. i. 49; bk. i.
225. ‘Aposen, or oposyx, Oppono ;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 13.—F. opposer ;
teflexively s’opposer, ‘ to oppose himself, to resist, withstand, gainsay,
to object, except, or protest against;’ Cot.=F. op-=L. opf- (for ob
before p), against; and F. poser, to place. See Ob- and Pose.
Der. oppos-er, oppos-able.

OPPOSITE, over against, contrary, adverse. (F.—L.) ME.
opposite, Chaucer, C. T., A 1894.—F. opposite, ‘ opposite ;’ Cot.—L.
oppositus, pp. of oppdnere, to set against.=L. op- (for ob before p),
against; and pdnere, to put, set; see Ob- and Position. Der. op-
posite-ly, opposite-ness ; also opposit-ion, ME. opposition, Chaucer, C. T.
11369 (F 1057), from F, opposition, which from L. acc. oppositidnem,

OPPRESS, to press against, constrain, overburden. (F.—L.)
ME. oppressen, Chaucer, C. T. 11723 (F 1411).—F. oppresser, ‘ to
oppresse ;” Cot. =Late L. oppressdre, to oppress ; Ducange. = L. op-
press-us, pp. of opprimere, to oppress, press upon. See Ob- and
Press. Der. oppress-ion, Chaucer, C. T. 6471 (D 889), from F.
oppression, which from L. acc. oppressidnem ; oppress-ive, oppress-ive-ly,
oppress-ive-ness ; oppress-or, Hamlet, iii. 1. 71.

OPPROBRIOUS, reproachful, disgraceful. (L.) Spelt oppro-
brious in Trevisa, tr. of Higden, vii. 167 ; opprobrous, by a misprint,
in The Remedie of Loue, st. 41, pr. in Chaucer’s Works, ed. 1561,
fol. 323, back.—L. opprobridsus, full of reproach. —L. opprobrium,
reproach. =L. op- (for ob before ),-on, upon; and probrum, disgrace,
infamy. Root uncertain, Der. opprobrious-ly, -ness. .The sb. oppro-
brium is also sometimes used, having taken the place of the older
word opprobry.

OPPUGN, to oppose, resist. (F.—L.) ‘The true catholike
faythe is, and euer hath been, oppugned and assaulted ;’ Sir T. More,
Works, p. 571 h.=F. oppugner, ‘to oppugne ;’ Cot. =L. oppugnare,
to buffet, beat with the fists. —L. op- (for ob before p), against ; and
pugnare, to fight, esp. with the fists, from pugnus, the fist. B. Pug-
nus is from a base pug-, appearing in pug-il, a boxer, pugilist. See
Ob- and Pugilist. Der. oppugn-er ; oppugn-anc-y, Shak. Troil. i.
3.11.

OPTATIVE, wishful, wishing, (F.—L.) The name of a mood
in grammar, sometimes expressive of wishing. In Palsgrave, p. 84;
and in Sherwood’s Index to Cotgrave, where the F. optatif is also
given.=F. optatif.=L. optdtiuus, expressive of a wish; the name of
a mood.=—L. optdtus, pp. of optire, to wish; a frequentative verb
from a base op-, perhaps connected with ap-isci, to obtain ; cf. Skt.
Gp, ap, to obtain, attain. Der. optative-ly; from the same source,
opt-ion, ad-opt. — é

OPTIC, relating to the sight. (F.—Gk.) Formerly optick.
‘ Through optick glass;’ Milton, P. L. i. 288.=F. optique, “of, or
belonging to, the eie-sight ;? Cot.—Gk. dm7i«és, belonging to the
sight ; cf. ém7np, a spy, eye-witness. From the base OII (for OQ)
occurring in Ionic é7-w7-a, I have seen, dYouar, I shall see ; Boeotian


ORANGE 413


| 8e-raddos, for. *Sxerav-Aos (cf. Skt. akshan-, the eye); also Lith.


ak-is, eye, L. oc-ulus, Russ. ok-o, the eye. Der. optic, sb., an eye,
as in ‘ the cleere casements of his own optiques,’ Howell, Instructions
for Foreign Travel, last sentence; optic-s, sb.; optic-al, optic-al-ly,
optic-i-an, Also aut-op-s-y, cat-op-tric, di-op-tric, syn-op-sis; and see
oph-thalmia,

OPTIMISM, the doctrine that all is for the best. (L.; with Gk.
suffix.) Added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. Coined by adding the
suffix -ism (=Gk. -topos) to optim-, stem of L. optimus, best, OL.
opitumus ; see Brugmann, ii. § 73. Perhaps related to L. of-és, riches
(Bréal). Der. optim-ist, with Gk. suffix -cor7s.

OPTION, choice, wish. (F.—L.) In Minsheu. = F. option,
‘option ;? Cot.—L. optidnem, acc. of optio, choice.. Allied to optare,
to wish; see Optative. Der. oftion-al, option-al-ly,

OPULENT, wealthy. (F.—L.) In K. Lear,i. 1. 88. =F. opulent,
‘ opulent ;’ Cot.=L. opulentus, wealthy. Extended from op-, stem
of opés, sb. pl., wealth, riches. Cf. Skt. apnas, wealth. Der. opu-
lence; opulenc-y, Timon, v. I. 38. From the same source are c-op-y,
c-op-i-ous, c-op-ul-ate, &c.

OR (1), conjunction, offering an alternative. (E.) Short for other,
owther, outher, auther, the older forms. ‘Amys other elles’ = amiss
or else; P. Plowman, B. i. 175; where the Trin. MS. (printed by
Wright) has ‘amys owther ellis.’ ‘ Other catell other cloth’ =either
property or cloth; P. Plowman’s Crede, ed. Skeat, 1.116. ‘Auther
to lenge lye, or to longe sitte’ =either to lie long, or to sit long;
Gawain and the Grene Knight, 1.88. B. This other or auther is not
the mod. E. other, nor allied to either ; but seems to have been sub-
stituted for AS. odde. Cf AS. odde... ode, either... or. See
N.E.D. Der. n-or.

OR (2), ere. (E.) The use of or for ere is not uncommon; see ‘or
ever I had seen that day;’ Hamlet, i. 2. 183. Particularly in the
phrase or ere, Temp. i. 2. 11; Macb. iv. 3. 173, &c. The forms or,
er, ar occur as exact equivalents in the same passage in the three
texts of P. Plowman, C. viii. 66, B. v. 459, A. v. 232. All are from
AS. @r, ere, or from its equivalents in various E. dialects. See Ere.
@ It is probable that or ere arose as a reduplicated expression, in
which ere repeats and explains or; and this was confused with or
e’er; whence or ever.

OR (3), gold. (F.—L.) A common heraldic term.—F. or, gold.
=L. aurum, gold; see Aureate.

ORACH, ORACHE, a plant of the genus Atriplex, esp. moun-
tain-spinach. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt orech in Turner, Names of
Herbes, s. v. Atriplex; orach in Lyte, tr. of Dodoens, bk. v. ch. 1 ;
better spelt arache (see N. E. D.).—AF. arasche; in Voc. 559. 15
MF, and F. arroche, Cot. A Picard form (Hatzfeld) for OF. *arreuce
(not found).—L. atriplicem, acc. of atriplex, orach; Pliny, xix. 6.=
Gk. drpapagis, dtpapagus, orach; of unknown origin.

ORACLE, the utterance or response of a deity, (F.—L.) ME.
oracle, Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, b. i. 1. 11.—F. oracle, ‘an oracle ;’
Cot.—L. draculum, a divine announcement; formed with double
dimin. suffix -cu-lu- from drare, to speak, announce, pray; from dr-
(for ds), the mouth ; see Oral. Der. oracul-ar, due to L. dracularius,
oracular ; oraczul-ar-ly, -ness.

ORAL, spoken, uttered by the mouth. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. A coined word; formed with suffix -al (=F. -al, -el, L.
-Glis) from dr-, stem of ds, the mouth. fB. Allied to Skt. dsya-m, the
mouth; Icel. dss, the mouth of ariver. Der. oral-ly; also or-ac-le,
q.v., or-at-ion, q.v., or-at-or, q.v., ori-fice, q.v.; ori-son, q.v.; also
ad-ore, in-ex-or-able.

ORANG-OUTANG, a large ape. (Malay.) ‘ Orang-outang is
the name this animal bears in the E. Indies; Pongo, its denomination
at Lowando, a province of Congo;’ E. tr. of Buffon, London, 1792.
‘ An oran-outang o’er his shoulders hung;’ Garth, Dispensary, c. v.
1. 150 (1699). = Malay drang daitan, ‘the wild man, a species of ape;’
Marsden, Malay Dict., p. 22.— Malay drang, a man, id.; and husan,
utan, ‘woods, a forest, wild or uncultivated parts of the country,
wild, whether in respect to domestication or cultivation ;’ id. p. 364.
Thus it means ‘ wild man.”

ORANGE, the name of a fruit. (F.—Ital.—Pers.) The pl.
orenges is in Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii.c. 7. ‘Colour of
orenge’ occurs in 1, 11 of a 15th-century ballad beginning ‘O mossie
Quince,’ pr. in Chaucer’s Works, ed. 1561, fol. 344, back; and see
Oronge in Prompt. Parv. Lydgate has the pl. orengis, Minor Poems,
p- 153; the sing. orenge occurs in Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1044.
= OF. orenge (14th century), Littré; later changed into orange, ‘an
orange;’ Cot. [The form should rather have been narenge, but the
initial 2 was lost, and arenge became orenge under the influence of
F. or (L. aurum), gold; because the notion arose that the name
denoted the golden colour of the fruit.]— MItal. zarancia, an orange


(Florio); also arancia, id., as now... Cf. Span. naranja, Port. laranja
(for naranja), an orange.=Pers. naranj, ndrinj, also narang, an


ORATION


orange; Rich. Pers. Dict. p..1548; perhaps from Skt. zarazga-s, an
orange-tree. Cf, Pers. nar, a pomegranate.

ORATION, a speech. (F.—L.) In Sir T. More, Works, p. 399 a.
— F. oration, ‘an oration, or harang;’ Cot.—L. dratidnem, acc. of
dratio, a speech.—L. drare, to speak, pray; from dr-, stem of ds,
mouth. See Oral,

ORATOR, a speaker. (F.—L.) Formerly oratour, but now
conformed to the L. spelling. ME. oratour, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius,
b. 4. pr. 4, lL. 183.—AF. oratour, F. orateur, ‘an orator;’ Cot.
L. oratérem, acc. of drator, a speaker.=L. Grare, to speak; see
Oration. Der. oratori-c-al, oratori-c-al-ly; orator-y, ME. oratorie,
Chaucer, C. T. 1907 (A 1905), from F, orazoire, ‘an oratory’ (Cot.),
from L. dratérium, a place of prayer, neut. of dratdrius, belonging to
prayer; orator-i-o, from Ital. oratorio, an oratory, also an oratorio,
from the same L. dratorius.

ORB, a sphere, celestial body, eye. (F.—L.) In Shak. Merch.
Ven. v. 60; and earlier. —F. orbe, an orb; omitted in Cotgrave, but
given in Sherwood’s Index, and in use in F, in the 13th century
(Littré).=—L. orbem, acc. of orbis, a circle, circuit, orb. Root un-
known. Der. orb-ed, Haml. iii. 2. 1663; orbi-c-ul-ar, Milton, P. L.
iii. 718, from L. orbicularis, circular ; orbi-c-ul-ar-ly; also orb-it,
Dryden, tr. of Virgil, xii. 1076, directly from L. orbita, a track,
course, orbit, formed with suffix -ta from orbi-, decl. stem of orbis.
Hence orbit-al.

ORC, ORK, a sea-monster. (L.) ‘Seals and orks;” Milton, P. L.
xi, 835. ‘Epaular, an Orke, a great sea-fish, mortal enemy to the
whale;’ Cot.—L. orca, a sea-fish; perhaps the narwhal; Pliny, ix. 6.
Holland’s translation has: ‘The Orcz, other monstrous fishes...
deadly enemies they be vnto the foresaid whales.’

ORCHARD, a garden of fruit-trees. (L. and E.) ME. orchard,
Ancren Riwle, p. 378, 1. 2 from bottom; orcherd, Layamon, 12955.
AS. orceard, also spelt orcerd, Gen. ii. 8, 16; Wright, Popular Treatises
on Science, p. 10, 1. 3. The older form is ortgeard, A‘lfred, tr. of
Gregory’s Pastoral, c. 40; ed. Sweet, p. 292, 1.4. [We also find
wyrtgeard, to translate L. promptuarium, Ps. exliii. 16, ed. Spelman.]
Cognate with Goth. aurtigards, a garden, John, xviii. 1; cf. aurtja,
a gardener, husbandman, Luke, xx. 10. B. The latter element is
merely the mod. E. yard; see Yard (1). The former element is
merely borrowed from L. hortus, a garden, both in E. and Gothic;
and, as L. hortus is cognate with E. yard, the form ort-geard merely
repeats the idea of ‘yard.’ 4[ So in Brugmann, i. § 767; but some
have considered AS. ort-geard as wholly Teutonic, and have con-
nected it with AS. wyrt-geard above (Dan. urt-gaard, Swed. Griegdrd),
a kitchen-garden, from AS. wyrt, Dan. urt, Swed. 6rt, a wort. But
the change from wyrt to ort (before A.D. goo) is incredible, and is
now generally abandoned.

ORCHESTRA, the part of a theatre for the musicians. (L.—
Gk.) In Holland, tr. of Suetonius, p. 242 (R.).—L. orchéstra,—
Gk. épxnorpa, an orchestra; which, in the Attic theatre, was a
space on which the chorus danced.—Gk. dpyéoua, I dance, Cf.
Skt. ryghaya, torage. Root uncertain. Der. orchestr-al.

ORCHIS, a name for certain plants. (L.—Gk.) In Holland, tr,
of Pliny, b. xxvi. c. 10; and in Swinburne, Trav. through Spain,
(1779), p- 233, 1. 1.—L. orchis (Pliny).—Gk. épyxis, a testicle; hence
applied to a plant with tubers of testicular shape. Der. orchid-
ac-e-ous, a coined word, as if from orchid-, stem of orchis (but the L.
orchis makes gen. orchis, and Gk. dpxis makes gen. épxéws); also
orchid, similarly coined. @ A similar mis-coinage is seen in ophidian,
for which see under Ophicleide.

ORDAIN, to set in order, arrange, regulate, (F.—L.) ME.
ordeynen; P. Plowman, B. prol. 119; Rob. of Glouc. p. 236, 1. 4864.
= AF. ordeiner, Stat. Realm, i. 1573; OF. ordener, later ordonner, as
in Cotgrave.—L. ordindre, to set in order.—L. ordin-, stem of ordo,
order; see Order. Der. ordin-ance, q.v.; ordin-ate, adj., ME.
ordinat, Chaucer, C, T. 9160 (E1284), from L. pp. ordindtus ; ordin-
ate, sb. (in mathematics); ordin-ate-ly; ordin-at-ion, in Phillips, ed.
1706, formed, by analogy with F, words in -tion, from L, ordindatio,
an ordinance, also ordination. And see ordin-al, ordin-ar-y, ord-
mance.

ORDEAL, a severe trial, a judgement by test of fire, &c. (E.)
The spelling is artificial; from about A.D. 1605; see N.E.D. It
is also remarkable that this word (from complete ignorance of its
etymology) is commonly pronounced ordé-al in three syllables,
though the -deal is related to the deal spoken of in dealing cards.
ME. ordal, Chaucer, Troilus, iii. 1046. AS. ordél, ordal; the
spelling ordél is rare, but occurs in the Laws of Edward and
Guthrum, sect. ix, in Thorpe’s Ancient Laws, i. 172; this form
would answer to mod. E. ordeel, or (by shortening due to want of
stress) to a form ordel. ‘The usual spelling is ordal, as in the Laws
of Ethelred, sect. i (in Thorpe, i. 281), and sect. iv (id. i. 294), and
see numerous references in Thorpe’s Index; this form answers to


414


ORGAN —


Chaucer’s ordal (the a ‘having been shortened by lack of stress) ;
though the latter part of the word (dal) answers to mod. E. dole.
The orig. sense is ‘a dealing out,’ separation, or discrimination ;
hence, a judgement, decision.-OFries. ordél; OSax. urdéli, a judge-
ment, decision; Du. oordeel, judgement; G. urtheil, HG. urteili,
judgement. B. The latter part of the word is (etymologically) the
same as Dole; as shown by Du. deel, G. theil. The prefix is the
Du. oor-, OSax. and G. wr-, answering to the OHG., prep. ur, Goth.
us, out, out of, hence, thorough. It was common in AS., in such
words as or-mé#te, immense, or-mdd, despondent, or-sorg, free from
care, or-trywe, wanting in trust, or-wénxa, wanting in hope, &c.; see
Grein, ii. 356-360.

ORDER, arrangement, system. (F.—L.) ME. ordre; occurring
four times on p. 8 of the Ancren Riwle.—F. ordre, substituted for
OF. ordine (Godefroy), by the not uncommon change of z to r; see
Coffer, —L. ordinem, acc. of ordo, order, arrangement. B. Sup-
posed to be connected with L. ord-iri, to begin, esp. to begin to
weave, to lay a warp; see Bréal, and Brugmann, ii. § 128. Der.
order, verb, in Sir T. Wiat, Sat. ii. 1. 87; order-less, K. John, iii. 1.
2533 order-ly, adj., Cymb. li. 3. 52; order-ly, adv., Two Gent, i, 1.
130; order-li-ness, order-ing. Also dis-order, ordain, ordin-ance,
ordn-ance, ordin-ate, ordin-at-ion, ordin-al, ordin-ar-y, in-ordin-ate,
co-ordin-ate, sub-ordin-ate.

ORDINAL, showing order or succession. (L.) In Phillips,
ed. 1706; chiefly in the phr. ‘an ordinal number.’ ‘ Ordinall
Numerals ;’? Minsheu’s Span. Grammar (1623); p. 12.—L. ordindlis,
in order, used of an ordinal number. =L. ordin-, decl. stem of ordo,
order; see Order. Der. ordinal, sb., ‘a book of directions for
bishops to give holy orders,’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, from Late L.
ordinile, neut. of ordindlis.

ORDINANCE, an order, regulation. (F.—L.) ME. orden-
nace, Rob, of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 83, last line. — OF. ordenance,
later ordonnance (Cotgtave).— Late L. ordinantia, a command. =L.
ordinant-, stem of pres. part. of ordinare, to set in order; see Ordain.
Doublet, ordnance.

ORDINARY, usual, customary. (F.—L,) ‘The ordinary
maner;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 583d, Ordinarily occurs on
p- 582 he F. ordinaire, ‘ ordinary;’ Cot.—L. ordinarius, regular,
usual.=L. ordin-, decl. stem of ordo, order; see Order. Der.
ordinary, sb., from F. ordinaire, ‘an ordinary’ (Cot.), L. ordinarius,,
an overseer; ordinari-ly. Also extra-ordinary.

ORDINATE, ORDINATION $§ see Ordain.

ORDNANCH, artillery. (F.—L.) The same word as ordi-
nance, which is the old spelling; see K. John, ii. 218; Hen. V, ii.
4.126; cf. Gower, C. A. il. 195; bk. v. 2040. It sometimes referred
to the bore or size of the cannon; cf. Caliver. ‘Engin de telle
ordonnance, of such a bulk, size, or bore;’ Cotgrave.

ORDUREH, excrement. (F.—L.) In Shak. Hen. V, ii. 4. 39.
ME. ordure, Chaucer, Pers. Tale, De Superbia (Six-text, Group I,
428).—F, ordure, ‘ordure ;’ Cot. OF. ord (fem. orde) ‘ filthy, nasty,
foule,...ugly, or loathsom to behold;’ Cot. Cf. OF. ordir, ‘to
foule, defile, soile;? id. [So also Ital, ordura is from the adj. ordo,
dirty, slovenly, soiled, deformed.]=L. horridus, rough, shaggy, wild,
frightful; see Horrid. So also Ital. ordo answers to MItal. horrido,
mod. Ital. orrido, which Florio explains by ‘ horride, hideous, .. .
euill fauoured, . . . lothesome to behold.’

ORE, crude or unrefined metal. (E.) ME. ore, in Chaucer, C. T.
6646 (D 1064). From AS. dra; ‘hit is €ac berende on wecga drum
ares and isernes,’ it is fertile in ores of lumps of brass and iron;
Elfred, tr. of Beda, lib. i.c. 1. The word dra was, sooner or later,
entirely confused with the (unrelated) AS. Gr, brass, also occurring
in the above quotation; and the dat. case dre, meaning ‘ bronze,’
occurs in Gregory’s Pastoral, c. 37, ed. Sweet, p. 266. The change
from AS. @ to long open o is seen again in E, oar from AS. Gr;
whilst the change from AS. 6 to the same is illustrated by AS. jor,
E. floor. B. The AS. dra is cognate with Du. oer. But Gr is cognate
with Icel, eir, brass; OHG. ér, brass; Goth. aiz, ais, brass, coin,
money, Mark, vi. 8; cf. aizasmitha, a copper-smith, 2 Tim. iv. 14;
L. es, bronze. Cf. Skt. ayas, iron; Max Miiller, Lect. ii. 256.

OREAD, a mountain-nymph. (L.—Gk.) ‘The Nymphs and
Oreades;’ Spenser, A Pastorall Aeglogue, 1. 64.—L. Oréad-, stem
of Oréas, a mountain-nymph.=—Gk. ’Opeéas (the same). =—Gk. dpos,
amountain. See Origan.

ORGAN, an instrument, esp. of music. (F.—L.—Gk.) In old
books, the instrument of music is frequently called the organs or
a pair of organs; orgone or orgoon (answering to L. pl. organa)
occurs in P. Plowman, C. xxi. 7; Chaucer, C. T. 14857 (B 4041);
the pl. organs is in Chaucer, C. T. 15602 (G 134); see my note to
P. Plowman, C. xxi. 7.—F. organe, ‘an organ, or instrument where-
with anything may be made or done;’ Cot.—L. organa; orig. pl. of
organum, an implement.—Gk. épyavov, an implement; allied to


ORGIES


épyov, a work; see Work. And see Orgies. Der. organ-ic,’


organ-ic-al, organ-ic-al-ly, organ-ism, organ-ist, organ-ise, organ-ts-
at-ion, pr The AS. organan, sb. pl., used to translate L. organa in
Ps. cxxxvi. 2 (ed. Spelman), can hardly be called an AS, word.

ORGIBS, sacred rites accompanied with revelry; revelry, drunk-
enness. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Milton, P. L. i. 415; Drayton, Polyol-
bion, s. 6,1. 111.—F. orgies, ‘the sacrifices of Bacchus;’ Cot. =—L.
orgia, sb. pl., a nocturnal festival in honour of Bacchus, orgies. = Gk.
épy:a, sb, pl., orgies, rites; from sing. *épyov, a sacred act; closely
connected with épyoy, work, action. See above. 4] The sing. orgy
is comparatively rare.

ORGULOUS, proud. (F.—OHG.) The reading in modem
editions for orgillows, Shak. Troil. prol. 2. Palsgrave has: ‘ Orguyllous,
prowde, orgueilleux.’? ME. orgeilus,O.E. Misc. p. 30, 1. 23; cf. Sir T.
Malory, Morte Arthure, bk. xxi.c.1. Anglo-F. orguyllus, Langtoft’s
Chron. i. 54.—OF. orguillus (11th cent.), later orgueilleux, ‘ proud,’
Cot.—OF. orguil, orguel, orgoil, mod. F. orgueil, ‘pride,’ id. [Cf.
Span. orgullo, orig. urgullo, as shown by 1. 1947 of the Poem of the
Cid, Ital. orgoglio, pride.] From a supposed OHG. sb, *urguoli,
pride; formed from OHG. urguol, remarkable, notable (Graff, iv.
153). See Diez, Scheler, Littré. Cf. AS. orgellice, arrogantly, in
/lfred, tr. of Boéthius, c. 18, § 4; though connexion with this is
uncertain. B. The OHG. word is compound ; the prefix wr- answers
to AS. or-, Goth. ws, out, and has an intensive force, as explained
under Ordeal. y. The latter part of the word is not clear; the
vowel suggests a connexion with AS. gé/, 2nd grade of galan, to sing
loudly.

ORIEL, a recess (with a window) in a room. (F.—L.) ‘It may
generally be described as a recess within a building; Blount has
oriol, the little waste room next the hall in some houses and mona-
steries, where particular persons dined, and this is clearly an autho-
rised and correct explanation;’ Halliwell’s Dict., which see. Spelt
oryall in the Squire of Low Degree, 1. 93; in Ritson’s Metrical
Romances, vol. iiii—OF. oriol, eurieul, a porch, alley, gallery,
corridor ; Godefroy. We find Je oriol glossed by ‘de la chambre,’
i.e. the oriel of a chamber, in Wright’s Vocab. i. 166, 1. 9. The
Late L. form is driolum, explained as a portico in Matt. Paris, in
Ducange; see the citations in N. E.D. and Halliwell. B. Also
specially applied to the small apartment in which it was the privi-
lege of sick monks to dine; ‘ut non in infirmaria sed seorsim in
driolo monachi infirmi carnem comederent ;’ Matt. Paris, v. 2593; in
Ducange. Also to an oriel-window, as in the Squire of Low Degree,
1. 93, and in the Erl of Tolouse, 1. 307; Ritson, Met, Rom. vol. iii.
Of unknown origin; but the OF. ez points to orig. L. 6; see N. E. D.
Perhaps the L. dri- is the same as in E. ori-fice ; from L. 6s, a mouth,
an entrance, an opening; cf. E. usher, q.v. 4 There is an article
on the senses of the word Oriel in the Archzologia, vol. xxiii.

ORIENT, eastern. (F.—L.) ME. orient, in Chaucer, C. T.
14320 (B 3504).—F. orient.—L. orient-, stem of oriens, the rising
sun, the east; properly pres. part. of oriri, to rise. See Origin.
Der. orient-al, Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, pt. i. sect. 5,1. 4, from F.
oriental, L. orientalis ; orient-al-ist.

ORIFICE, a small opening. (F.—L.) Spelt orifis in Spenser,
F. Q. iv. 12. 22.—F. orifice, ‘ orifice ;’ Cot.—L. drificium, an open-
ing, lit. ‘the making of a mouth.’=L, dri-, decl. stem of ds, a
mouth; and -fic-, for facere, to make. See Oral and Fact.

ORIFLAMME, the old standard of France. (F.—L.) ‘The
oryflambe, a speciall relyke that the Frenshe kynges vse to bere before
them in all battayles;’ Fabyan’s Chron. an. 1355, ed. Ellis, p. 467.
— OF. oriflambe, ‘the great and holy standard of France;’ Cot. =
Late L. auriflamma, the standard of the monastery of St. Denis in
France. The lit. sense is ‘ golden flame,’ hence ‘a golden banner ;”
so called because the banner was a red pennon with streamers, and
was carried on a gilt pole. Cf. L. flammula, a little flame, also
a small banner used by cavalry.—L. auri-, for aurum, gold; and
flamma, a flame. See Aureate and Flame. = But the
Chanson de Roland, 3093, has orie flambe (L. auream flammam), as
if the flag itself were golden; and a drawing, showing the shape of
the oriflamme, is given in Gautier’s edition, p. 278.

ORIGAN, ORIGANUM, wild marjoram. (F.—L.—Gk.) [An
older name is organy, mentioned in Cotgrave. We also find AS.
organe, for which see Cockayne’s Leechdoms, iii. 340, borrowed
directly from L. origanum.| In Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xx.c, 17;
Spenser, F. Q. i. 2. 40. F. origan, ‘ garden organy, wild marjerome ;’
Cot.=—L. origanum (Pliny).—Gk. dpiyavoy, dpiyavos, marjoram ; lit.
‘ mountain-pride.’=Gk. dpi-, for dpe-, from épos, a mountain; and
yavos, brightness, beauty, ornament, delight. B. Gk. dpos is perhaps
allied to Skt. varshma, height; yavos is perhaps from the same root
as L. gaudére, to rejoice. Cf. Oread.

ORIGIN, source, beginning. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, i. 4. 26; the
adj. original is much older, in Chaucer, C. T. 12434 (C 500).—F.


ORPIMENT


origine, ‘an originall, beginning ;” Cot.—L. originem, acc. of origo,
a beginning. L. oriri, to arise, begin. Allied to Gk. épvupu, I stir
up. Der. origin-al (as above), origin-al-ly, origin-al-i-ty, origin-ate,
origin-at-ion, origin-at-or. And see ori-ent, prim-ordial.

ORIOLE, the golden thrush. (F.—L.) Called ‘the golden
oriole’ in a translation of Buffon, London, 1792. The old names
are golden thrush, witwall, wodewale, and heighaw. —OF. oriol, ‘a
heighaw, or witwall;? Cot.—L. aureolus, golden; extended from
aureus, golden. =—L. aurum, gold; see Aureate.

ORISON, a prayer. (F.—L.) ME. oryson, orisoun, Rob. of
Glouc. p. 235, 1. 4846; Chaucer, C. T. 5016 (B 596). —AF. oreison;
OF. orison, oreson, oreison (Burguy), later oraison, ‘ orison, prayer;’
Cot.=—L. dritidnem, acc. of Gratio, a speech, prayer.—L,. drare, to
pray. —L. or-, from ds, the mouth; see Oral. Doublet, oration.

ORLE, in heraldry, an ordinary like a fillet round the shield
within it, at some distance from the edge; in architecture, a fillet.
(F.—L.) F. orle, fem. ‘a hem, selvidge, or narrow border; in
blazon, an wrle, or open border about, and within, a coat of arms;’
Cot.; Late L. orla, a border, edge; in use A.D, 1244 (Ducange).
This answers to a L. form *drula, not found, dimin, of dra, border,
edge, margin.

ORLOP, a deck of a ship. (Du.) ‘Orlope, the uppermost deck
of a great ship, lying between the main and missen mast, and other-
wise called the spare-deck; the second and lowest decks of a ship
that has three decks, are likewise sometimes termed orlopes;’
Phillips, ed. 1706. Also ‘the second and lower deck of a ship;’
id., ed. 1658. But properly applied only to the deck over the hold,
which became the lower (or lowest) deck in ships having more decks
than one. Contracted from overlop ; spelt overloppe in Naval Accounts
of Hen. VII, p. 176; 1. 21.— Du. overloop, ‘a running over; de over-
loop van een schip, the deck of a ship, the orlope;’ Sewel. So called
because it runs over or traverses the ship; cf. Du. overloopen, ‘to run
over, to run from one side to the other;” Sewel. = Du. over, cognate
with E. over; and loopen, to run, cognate with E. Jeap. See Over
and Leap.

ORMOLQU, a kind of brass. (F.—L.) ‘Ormolu, an alloy in
which there is less zinc and more copper than in brass, that it may
present a nearer resemblance to gold. . . . Furniture ornamented
with ormolz came into fashion in France in the reign of Louis XV’
[1715-1774]; Beeton’s Dict. of Univ. Information.=F. or moulu,
lit. pounded gold. =F. or, gold, from L. aurum; and moulu, pp. of
moudre, to grind, pound, OF. moldre, molre, from L. molere, to grind ;
see Aureate and Mill.

ORNAMENT, that which beautifies, adornment. (F.—L.) ME.
ornament; the pl. ornamentes occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 8134 (Six-
text, E 258); where it is remarkable that the Ellesmere and Camb.
MSS. have aornementes, and the Hengwrt MS. has aournementes.
[These forms answer to OF. aornement, an ornament, from the verb
aorner (< L. adornare), to adorn.| Also ornementes, pl., Allit.
Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1799.—F. ornement, ‘an ornament ;’ Cot.=
L. ornamentum, an ornament; formed with suffix -mentum from
ornare, to adorn. B. According to Bréal, a contracted form of
ordinare, to set in order; see Ordain. Der. ornament, verb, added
by Todd to Johnson; ornament-al (in 1646); ornament-al-ly, orna-
ment-at-ion; also (from L. pp. ornatus) ornate; ornate-ly, ornate-ness.
Also ad-orn.

ORNITHOLOGY, the science of birds. (Gk.) [In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674, where it is noted as being ‘the title of a late book ;’
viz. Fuller’s Ornithologie, or the Speech of Birds; which is a different
usage.] First truly used by Ray (1678) in his tr. of Willughby’s
Ornithologie Libri Tres (1676).—Gk. dpvido-, decl. stem of dpyis,
a bird; and -Aoyia, allied to Adyos, a discourse; see Logic. B. The
Gk. dpus is interesting as being cognate with AS, earn, an eagle,
Matt. xxiv. 28. A shorter form appears in Goth. ara, G. aar, an
eagle; cf. also Russ. orél’, an eagle. Named from its soaring; cf.
Gk. dpvupe, I stir up. Der. ornithologi-c-al, ornitholog-ist.

ORNITHORHYNCUS, an Australian mammal. (Gk.) Lit.
‘ bird-snout ;’ so called from the resemblance of its snout to a duck’s
bill. Gk. dpv8o-, for dpvis, a bird (above); and fyxos, a snout,
muzzle.

ORPHAN, a child bereft of father or mother, or of both parents.
(L.—Gk.) ‘He will not leue them orphanes, as fatherlesse chil-
dren ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 173 e; with a reference to John, xiv.
[This form supplanted the older F’, form orphelin, used by Chaucer,
tr. of Boethius, b. ii. pr. 3, 1. 21.J—L. orphanus, John, xiv. 18
(Vulgate).—Gk. dpparés, destitute, John, xiv. 18; A, Vv. ‘ comfort-
less,’ Cf. Gk. dppés, with the same sense; whence dppoBorns, one
who brings up orphans. The shorter form dp¢ds answers to L. orbus,
deprived, bereft, destitute. Der. orphan-age, a coined word.

ORPIMENT, yellow trisulphide of arsenic. (F.—L.) ME.
orpiment, Chaucer, C. T. 16291 (G 823). Lit. ‘gold paint.’—F.


415


416 ORPINE, ORPIN


orpiment, ‘ orpiment ;’ Cot. —L. auripigmentum, orpiment. = L, auri-, '


for aurum, gold; and pigmentum, a pigment, paint. See Aureate
and Pigment. Der. orpine.

ORPINE, ORPIN, a kind of stone-crop. (F.—L.) Also
called Jive-long ; whence Spenser speaks of the ‘ orpine growing still,’
i.e. growing continually; Muiopotmos, 1.193. ME. orpyn; Prompt.
Pary.—F. orpin, ‘orpin, or live-long; also orpine, orpiment, or
arsenick ;” Cot. Merely a docked form of F. orpiment, orpiment ;
so called from its yellow flowers, See Orpiment.

ORRERY, an apparatus for illustrating the motions of the
planets, &c. (Ireland.) ‘Constructed at the expense of Charles
Boyle, [second] earl of Orrery, about 1715 [rather 1713];” Haydn,
Dict. of Dates. Orrery is the name of a barony in the county of
Cork, in Ireland; the chief town in it is Bannevant. It derives its
name from the Orbraighe, or ‘descendants of Orb;’ see Cormac’s
Glossary, ed. Stokes, ed. 1868, p. 128. (A. L. Mayhew.)

ORRIS, the name of a plant. (Ital. —L.—Gk.) ‘The nature of
the orris-root is almost singular;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 863. Spelt
orice in Cotgrave, who explains F. iris by ‘the rainbow, also, a
flowerdeluce; iris de Florence, the flowerdeluce of Florence, whose
root yields our orice-powder.’ The Spanish term for orris-root is raiz
de iris florentina = root of the Florentine iris. In Holland, tr. of Pliny,
b. xxi. c. 7, we read: ‘but as for the flour-de-lis [commonly called
ireos, Holland’s note], it is the root only therof that is comfortable
for the odor.’ It appears that orris, orice, and orrice, are English
corruptions of the Ital. irios or ireos. Mltal. irios, ‘a kinde of sweete
white roote called oris-roote:’ Florio, ed. 1598; cf. mod. Ital. zreos,
corn-flag, sword-grass (Meadows). 8. The form of the Ital. irios,
ireos is not easy to explain; it occurs as Late L. yreos in Synonima
Bartholomei, p. 25; but it is certainly connected with L. tris, which
is the very word in Pliny, b. xxi. c. 7; and this is borrowed from Gk.
ips, ‘the plant iris, a kind of lily with an aromatic root;’ Liddell
and Scott. y. Zreos was specially used of the dried roots of the
iris; see Lyte, tr. of Dodoens, b. ii. c. 35. It is prob. short for
tpews pica, where tpews is a variant of the gen. ipidis (see Prellwitz).
See Iris.

ORT, a leaving, remnant, morsel left at a meal. (E.) Usually in
the pl. orts, Troil. v. 2. 158; Timon iv. 3. 400. ME. ortes, sb. pl.,
spelt ortus in the Prompt. Pary. p. 371, which has: ‘ Ortus, releef of
beestys mete,’ i.e. orts, remnants of the food of animals. Not found
in AS., but it is in general dialectal use, and is found in MDu., Low
G., and Friesic. The Friesic is ort (Outzen); the Low G. is ort, esp.
used of what is left by cattle in eating; cf. Low G. ortstro, refuse-
straw; Bremen Worterbuch, iii. 272. The word is solved by the
fuller form found in MDu., viz. oorete, ooraete, a piece left uneaten at
a meal, also nausea due to over-eating ; Oudemans, v. 403. B. This
is a compound word, made up of MDu. oor-, cognate with AS. or-,
OHG. ur- (mod. G. er-), Goth. us, prep. signifying ‘out’ or ‘with-
out;” and MDnu. aef, victuals (Hexham). Thus the sense is ‘ what is
left in eating,’ an ‘ over-morsel,’ if we may so express it. For the
prefix, see further under Ordeal; and see Hat. Cf. AS. #, food;
from the 3rd grade of etan, to eat; whence *or-ét, y. We may par-
ticularly note Swed. dial. or-dte, ur-dte, refuse fodder, orts, from ur-,
or-, the prefix corresponding to Du. oor- above, and Swed. dita,
victuals, food (Rietz). Dan. dial. ored, orret, an ort; cf. also
NFries. 6rfe, to leave remnants after eating. Also Bavarian urdssen,
urezen, to eat wastefully, urdss, urez, refuse; where ur- is the OHG.
form of the same prefix, and dssen=G. essen, to eat; see Schmeller,
Bav. Wort. i. 134. Also Norw. orreta (for oreta), orts; MDan. orte.

ORTHODOX, of the right faith, (F.—L.—Gk.; or L.—Gk.)
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, has orthodox and orthodoxal; so also in
Cotgrave.—F. orthodoxe, ‘ orthodoxe, orthodoxall ;’ Cot.—Late L.
orthodoxus (Lewis). = Gk. 6p0d8o0€0s, of the right opinion. = Gk. ép00-,
for 6p0és, upright, right, true; and dda, opinion. B. Gk. dp6ds is
cognate with L. arduus, high, Irish ard, high. sy. Gk. 5é£a is from
doxeiv, to seem, allied to L. decet, it is fitting ; see Decorum. Brug-
mann, ii. § 143. Der. orthodox-y, Gk. épOo0do¢ia,

ORTHOEPY, correct pronunciation. (Gk.) The word occurs
in Bp. Wilkins, Essay towards a Real Character, pt. iii. c. 1 (R.).
This work appeared in 1668. Imitated from Gk. ép@0é7e:a, correct
pronunciation. — Gk. 6p0d-, for dp0ds, right, true ; and ém-os, a word.
See Orthodox and Epic.

ORTHOGRAPHY, correct writing. (F.—L.—Gk.) Inrather
early use. ‘Of this word the true ortographie;’ Remedy of Love
(15th cent.), st. 41, 1. 6; pr. in Chaucer’s Works, ed. 1561, fol. 323,
back. The word was at first spelt orto-, as in French, but afterwards
corrected, = OF. ortographie; Cot. only gives the verb ortographier,
‘to ortographise, to write or use true ortography.’=L. orthographia,
(Lewis).— Gk. ép00ypagia, a writing correctly. Gk. 6p0é-, for 6p0és,
right; and ypapev, to write; see Orthodox and Graphic. Der.
orthographi-c, -c-al, -al-ly; orthograph-er, -ist.


OSTEOLOGY


ORTHOPTEROUS, lit. straight-winged ; an order of insects.
(Gk.) Modern and scientific: coined from 46p0d-, for dp6és, right,
straight ; and mrep-ov, a wing. - See Orthodox and Diptera. So
also orthoptera. J

ORTOLAN, the name of a bird. (F.—Ital.—L.) See Trench,
Select Glossary; the word means ‘haunting gardens,’ and Trench
cites ortolan in the early sense of ‘ gardener’ from the State Papers,
an. 1536, vol. vi. p. 534.—OF. hkortolan, ‘a delicate bird,’ &c. ;. Cot.
= Mital, hortolano, ‘a gardiner ; also a daintie bird so called ;’ Florio.
= L. hortulanus, a gardener, belonging to a garden.—L,. hortulus,
a little garden, dimin. of hortus, a garden, cognate with E. yard and
garth; see Court, Garth, Yard (1). @ The change from u to
o is common in Italian.

ORTS, the pl. of Ort, q.v.

OSCILLATE, to swing. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L.
oscillatus, pp. of oscillare, to swing, sway.—L. oscillum, a swing.
B. Vanicek (with a reference to Corssen in Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, xv. 156)
identifies oscillum, a swing, with oscillum, a little mouth, a little
cavity, a little image of the face, mask or head of Bacchus which was
suspended on a tree (Lewis) ; with the remark that it meant a puppet
made to swing or dance. If so, oscillum is a dimin. of osculwm, the
mouth, itself a dimin. from ds, the mouth; see Oral. Cf. Verg.
Georg. ii. 389. Der. oscillat-ion, oscillat-or-y. And see osculate.

OSCULATEH, to kiss. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L.
osculatus, pp. of osculari, to kiss. —L. osculum, a little mouth, pretty
mouth ; double dimin. (with suffix -cu-lu-) from ds, the mouth; see
Oral. Der. osculat-or-y, osculat-ion.

OSIER, the water-willow. (F.—Late L.) In Shak. L, L. L. iv.
2.112, ME. osyere; Prompt. Parv. p. 371; oyser, K. Alisaunder,
ed. Weber, 6186. =F. osier, ‘the ozier, red withy, water-willow tree ;’
Cot. Cf. AF. osere, an osier; A. Neckam; in Wright’s Vocab. Ist
Ser. p. 110. B. Origin uncertain ; but obviously related to Late L.
dsaria, ausaria, a bundle of osiers or twigs of the willow, in Irminon’s
Polyptychum (9th cent.) ;\Phil. Soc. Trans., 1902 ; p. 543. Godefroy
has OF. ausay, an osier.

OSMIUM, a metal. (Gk.) Discovered in 1803 (Haydn). The
oxide has a disagreeable smell; hence the name, coined from Gk,
dopn, a smell; earlier form, 6547. Connected with ofr (= d5-yer),
to smell, and with L. odor; see Odour.

OSPREY, the fish-hawk. (F.—L.) In Shak. Cor. iv. 7. 34; cf.
Two Noble Kinsmen, i. 1.138. In the old texts, it is spelt aspray in
both passages. Spelt osprey, ospreie, orfraie (F. orfraie), in Holland,
tr. of Pliny, b. x. c. 3; all these forms are related to ossifrage, also
occurring in the same chapter. Spelt ospray in Lydgate, Assembly
of Gods, 813. The name signifies ‘ bone-breaker ;’ from the bird’s
strength. PB. The form orfraie is from MF. orfraye, ‘the osprey ;’
Cot. The form osprey appears to be an altered form of an OF.
*osfraie (not found, but the form intermediate between F. orfraie and
the L. word) ; perhaps by confusion with E. prey. All from L. ossi-
fragus, ossifraga, the sea-eagle, osprey. = L. ossifragus, bone-breaking.
= L. ossi-, decl. stem of os, a bone; and frag-, a stem of frangere, to
break, cognate with E. break. See Osseous and Break. Doublet,
ossifrage.

OSSEOUS, bony. (L.) A late word; added by Todd to
Johnson. =L. osseus, bony; by change of -ws to -ows (common).=—L.
oss-, from os, a bone. f. Allied to Gk. éoréov, Skt. asthi, a bone.
Brugmann, i. § 703. Der. ossi-fy, to turn to bone, from oss-, decl.
stem of os, and F.-fier < L. -jicare (for facere), to make ; ossific-at-ion ;
ossu-ar-y, Sir T. Browne, Urn-burial, c. v. § 4, from L. ossuarium,
a receptacle for the bones of the dead. Also ossi-frage, os-prey.

OSSIFRAGE, an osprey; also, the bearded vulture. (L.) In
Levit. xi. 13; Deut. xiv. 12.—L, ossifragus, also ossifraga, a bone-
breaker; see Osprey.

OSTENSIBLE, that may be shown, apparent. (L.) Late; see
Todd’s Johnson. Coined by adding the sufhx -ble (F. -ble, L. -bilis)
to ostensi-, for ostensus, pp. of ostendere, to show. _B. Ostendere is for
*ops-tendere, where *ops is related to ob, near, before, and tendere is
to stretch ; hence the sense is ‘to spread before’ one, to show. See
Ob- and Tend. Der. ostensi-bl-y, ostensi-bili-ty; we also find ostens-
ive=‘that serves to shew,’ a term in logic; see Bacon, Adv. of
Learning, bk. ii. § xiii. 3. And see ostent-at-ion.

OSTENTATION, show, pomp. (F.—L.) ‘ Ostentacion and
shew ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 1191 c. =F, ostentation, ‘ ostentation ;’
Cot. —L. ostentitionem, acc. of ostentdtio, display. —L. ostentare, in-
tensive form of ostendere, to show; see Ostensible. Der. ostentati-
ous, in 1673; ostentati-ous-ly, -ness. We also find ostent, Merch. Ven.
ii. 2. 205, from L. ostentus, display. prey)

OSTEOLOGY, the science of the bones. (Gk.) Scientific. =
Gk. éeréo-, decl. stem of édcréov, a bone; and -Aoyia, equivalent
to Adyos, discourse, from Aéyewv, to speak. See Osseous and
Logic. .


OSTLER


-OSTLER, the same as Hostler, q.v. (F.—L.) Wyclif has


ostiler, an innkeeper, Luke, x. 35.

OSTRACISE, to banish by a vote written on a potsherd. (Gk.)
‘And all that worth from hence did ostracise ;? Marvell, Lachrymze
Musarum; 1650 (R.). [The'sb. ostracisme is in Minsheu, ed. 1627,
and the MF. ostracisme is in Cotgrave.]=—Gk. éorpaxiferv, to banish
by potsherds, to ostracise. = Gk. éorpaxov, burnt clay, a tile, potsherd,
tablet for voting ; also, a shell, which appears to be the orig. meaning.
B. Closely allied to Gk. do7peov, an oyster, and to Gk. écréov, a bone.
See Oyster and Osseous. Der. ostracis-m (=F. ostracisme), from
Gk. daTpakicpés.


OSTRICH, a very large bird. (F.—L. and Gk.) ME. oystryche,


Squire of Low Degree, 1. 226; in Ritson, Met. Romances, vol. iil.
Earlier ostrice, Ancren Riwle, p..132, note e. Ostrice is a weakened
form of ostruce. = OF. ostrusce (12th cent.), ostruche, Palsgrave, ostruce,
Cotgrave, mod. F. autruche; see Littré. Cf. Span. avestruz, Port.
abestruz, an ostrich. B. All from L. auis striithio, i.e. ostrich-bird,
=L. auis, a bird; and strithio, an ostrich, borrowed from Gk. orpov-
Oiwy, an ostrich. y. For the L. auis, see Aviary. The Gk.
orpovdiwr is an extension from orpov§és, a bird ; which is prob. allied
to Lith. strazdas, a thrush; see Throstle. 4 The L. awis also
occurs as a prefix in the singular word bustard (= auis tarda); see
Bustard. N.B. We find also the spelling estridge, 1 Hen. IV,
iv. I. 98.

OTHER, second, different, not the same. (E.) A. The word
second is the only ordinal number of F. origin, till we come to
millionth; it has taken the place of other, which formerly frequently
had the sense of ‘second.’ B. We constantly meet with chet on,
thet other = the one, the other (lit. that one, that other); these
phrases are often spelt the ton, the tother, the ¢ being attached to the
wrong word; and this explains the common prov. E. the tother, often
used as tother, without the. It must be remembered that thet or that
was orig. merely the neut. of the def. article. ‘And euer whyl that
on hire sorwe tolde That other wepte ’= and ever, whilst the one told
her sorrow, the other wept; Chaucer, C. T. ro809 (F 495). AS.
oder, other, second, Grein, ii. 305. The long 6- is due to older on-,
for an-, as in gds (goose) for gars; 268 (tooth) for tanth; hence dder
stands for *ander.-+- Du. ander ; Icel. annarr (for *antharr, by assimila-
tion) ; Dan. anden (neut. andet, pl. andre) ; Swed. andra, next, second,
other; G. ander; Goth. anthar.+-Lithuan. antras, other, second
(Nesselmann); Skt. antara-s, other. B. We also find Skt. anya-s,
other; which at once shows the division of the word. [We must be
careful, by the way, to separate Skt. antara-s, other, from Skt. antara-s,
interior, connected with antar (L. inter), within.] In Skt. an-tara-s,
Goth. an-thar, E. o-ther, the suffix is the usual comparative suffix
appearing in Gk. copw-rep-os, wiser, &c.; seen also in E. whe-ther,
ei-ther, hi-ther, &c.; the Idg. form being -TER-.. y. The base an-
is perhaps the Idg. pronominal base found in Lithuan. an-as, that one
(Nesselmann, p. 5), and in Russ. on’, he. Thus the orig. sense is
‘more than that,’ or ‘ beyond that,’ used in pointing out something
more remote than that which was first contemplated ; hence its use in
the sense of ‘second.’ Der. other-wise, ME. other wise=in another
way, Will. of Palerne, 1. 396 3 an-other.

OTIOSH, unemployed, idle, futile. (L.) First in 1794. —L. dtidsus,
unemployed. = L. dtium, leisure.

OTTER, the water-weasel. (E.) ME. ofer (with one #); Old
Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 70, 1, 358. AS. ofor, as a gloss to
L. lutria in Ailfric’s Gloss., Nomina Ferarum; Voc. 118. 42; spelt
oter, id. 320, 21. Hence the adj. yteren, by vowel-change ; Sweet’s
AS. Reader.4-Du. otter; Icel. ofr; Dan. odder; Swed. utter; G.
otter; Russ. vuidra; Lithuan. udra ; Gk. #5pa, a water-snake, hydra,
B. The common Tentonic type is *otroz, m.; Idg. types *udros, m.,
*udra, f.; closely related to water; cf. Gk. #5pa, water-snake, with
vdwp, water. The sense is ‘ water-animal.? See Water, Wet.
Doublet, hydra.

OTTO, a bad spelling of ATT-AR, q.v. (Arab.)

OTTOMAN, a low stuffed seat. (F.—Arab.) F. ottomane, ‘an
ottoman, sofa ;’ Hamilton.=F. Ottoman, Turkish, Turk. So named
from Othman or Osman, the founder of the Ottoman or Turkish
empire in A.D. 1299. From Arab. ‘othman (Devic).

OUBIT, a hairy caterpillar. (E.) Also oobit, woubit, woubet; see
The Oubit in Kingsley’s Poems. Spelt woubet, Montgomery’s
Poems, S. T. S., p. 68, 1. 268. ME. wolbode, wollebode, ‘ multipes ;’
Catholicon Anglicum.=— AS. wall, wool, and budda, a beetle; Voc.
543. 10. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 203-

OUCH, NOUCH, the socket of a precious stone, an ornament.
(F.—OHG.) The orig. sense is ‘socket of a gem,’ but it is com-
monly used for gem or ornament. The true form is xowch, but the
initial z is often dropped; see remarks upon the letter N. Spelt
ouches in Exod, xxviii, xxxix; and in Shak. 2 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 53;
owches in Sir T. More, Works, p. 337d. ‘As a precious stone in


OUT Al7


a riche ouche;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. iii. c. 30. ME.
nouche, Chaucer, C. T. 8258 (E 382), after a word ending with a con-
sonant ; but az ouch (for a nouch) in C. T. 6325 (D 742). *Nowche,
monile;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 359, and see Way’s note; he cites : ‘Fer-
maglio, the hangeyng owche, or flowre that women use to tye at the
chaine or lace that they weare about their neckes,’ W. Thomas, Ital.
Grammar, 1548. Sothat one sense of the. word is exactly mod. E.
‘locket.’ ‘A golden lase or nowche ;’ Wyclif, 1 Macc. x. 89; where
the A. V. has ‘a buckle of gold.’—AF. zouche, Stat. Realm, i. 380;
OF. nouche, nosche, nusche, a buckle, clasp, bracelet, given by Gode-
froy, s.v. noche. [It is, indeed, obvious that the. Low L. xouchia,
which occurs in the Inventory of jewels of Blanche of Spain (cited in
Way’s note) is nothing but the F. nouche Latinised.]| The more
correct Late L. form is zwsca (Ducange).—MHG. nusche, nuske, OHG.
nusca, nuscha, a buckle, clasp, or brooch for a cloak. Prob. ult. of
Celtic origin; cf. Irish zasc, a tie, chain, ring; nasgaim, I bind
(Schade, Stokes).

OUGHT (1), past tense of OWe, q.v. (E.)

OUGHT (2), another spelling of Aught, q.v. (E.) Spelt ow3¢
in Wyclif, Luke, ix. 36.

OU NCH (1), the twelfth part of a pound Troy. (F.—L.) ME. unce,
Chaucer, C. T. 16224, 16589 (G 756, 1121).—OF. unce (12th cent.),
mod. F. once (Littré). —L. uncta, (1) an ounce, (2) an inch. B. The
orig. sense is ‘a small weight;’ allied to Gk. dyxos, bulk, mass,
weight. Doublet, iach.

OUNCE (2), ONCH, a kind of lynx. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak.
Mids. Nt. Dream, ii. 2. 30; Milton, P. L. iv. 344; and in Holland,
tr. of Pliny, b. xxviii. c. 8, last section. ME. unce, King Alisaunder,
5228.—F. once, an ounce; OF. lonce, Supp. to Godefroy, s.v. once ;
MF. lonce, ‘ the ounce;” Cot. Cf. Port. oxga, Span. onza, Ital. lonza,
anounce. B. The OF. and MF. lonce show that the mod. F. once
resulted from taking lonce to represent Ponce, where 1 seemed to be
the def. article. So also Florio (1598) gives an Ital. form oxza; but
lonza is in Dante, Inf. i. 32. All froma Late L. popular type *uncia,
for L. lyncea, f., lynx-like. = L. lync-, stem of lynx, a lynx.—Gk. Avy,
a lynx; see Lynx. For F. o<Gk. v, cf. grotto, tomb, torso.

OUPH, OUPHE, an elf. (E.) In Merry Wives, iv. 4. 49. A
variant of Oaf, q.v. And see Oaf in E. D. D.

OUR, possessive pronoun of the Ist pers. plural. (E.) ME. owre,
older form ure ; Hayelok, 1.13. AS. are, gen. pl. of Ist personal pro-
noun; orig. meaning ‘of us.” This gen. pl. was used as a possessive
pronoun, and regularly declined, with gen. ares, dat. irum, &c.; see
Grein, ii. 633. It then completely supplanted the older AS. possess.
pron. user, usser (Grein, ii. 633), cognate with G. user and Goth.
unsar.  B. Yet tre is itself a contracted form for *usere, cognate
with Goth. wxsara, the Gothic form of the gen. pl. of the 1st pers.
pronoun. Here -ara is the gen. pl. suffix, and a shorter form appears
in Goth. wzs, equivalent to E. us. yy. Briefly, our is the gen. pl.
corresponding to the acc. pl. us; see Us. Der. our-s, ME. oures,
Chaucer, C. T. 13203 (B 1463), due to AS. adres, gen. sing. of ire,
when declined as above ; also our-selves, or (in regal style) our-self;
see Self. @ As to the dispute as to whether we should write
ours or our’s, it cannot matter; we write day’s for AS. deges (gen.
sing.), but days for AS. dagas (nom. pl.) ; thus marking the omission,
strangely enough, only where the weaker vowel is omitted. The
apostrophe is merely conventional, and better omitted.

OURANG-OUTANG; see Orang-Outang. (Malay.)

OUSEL, OUZEL, a kind of thrush. (E.) ME. osel, Wright’s
Vocab. i. 164, 1. 3; oswl, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 237. AS. dsle,
gloss upon L. merula, Voc. 260. 26; older form dsle, id. 32. 27.
Here, as in AS. oder, other= Goth. anthar, the long 6 stands for ax
or am; thus dsle< *ansele or *amsele; in this case, for the latter.-G.
amsel, OHG. amsala, a blackbird, ousel. The L. merula (whence E.
merle) can stand for *mesula, and may be connected with OHG.
amsala by gradation. See Merle.

OUST, fo eject, expel. (F.—L.) The word has come to us
through Law French, ‘Ousted, from the Fr. oster, to remove, or put
out, as ousted of the possession (Pecks Case, Mich. 9 Car. 1. 3 Part
Crokes Rep. fol. 349), that is, removed, or put out of possession ;’
Blount’s Nomolexicon, ed. 1691.—AF. ouster (Bozon); OF. oster,
‘to remove, withdraw,’ Cot. ; mod. F. éfer. Cf. Prov. ostar, hostar
(Bartsch). B. Of disputed origin; it has been proposed to derive it
from L. obstare, to withstand, hinder, but this does not wholly suit
the sense. Yet this is prob. right. Ducange has obstdre vel ostare
viam, to get in one’s way, from which the change to the sense of ‘ to
turn one out of the way’ is not difficult. See Korting, § 6643 ; and
ef. Romaunsch dustar (*de-obstare), to drive away flies, &c.; also
Proy. dowsta, to remove (Mistral). Der. oust-er.

OUT, without, abroad, completely. (E.) ME. owé, prep.; ME.
oute, older.form ite, adv., out. ‘Out of alle charitee ;’ Chaucer,
C,T.,A 452. ‘That hiine ssolde out wende’=that they should not

Ee


OUTBALANCE


418


go out; Rob. of Glouc. p. 170. AS. ite, iitan, adv., out, without ;


Grein, i. 634. Formed with adv. suffix -e (or -az) from AS. wt, adv. |


‘Fléogan of hiise ut’=to fly out of the house; ‘ut of earce’=out
of the ark; Grein, ii. 633. (This shows the origin of the phrase out
of=out from.) + Du. wit; Icel. at; Dan. ud; Swed. ut; G. aus;
OHG. az; Goth. a; whence dita, adv. (= AS. tte); utana, adv. and
prep. (=AS. wian).4-Skt. ud, up, out. It appears also in Gk. darepos
= %6-repos, corresponding to E. utter, outer. All from Idg. types UD,
UD, up, out. Der. with-out, there-out, out-er, ut-ter, out-m-ost, ut-
m-ost (double superlatives); see Utter, Utmost, Uttermost.
Also as a prefix in numerous compounds, for which see below. (But
not in outrage.)

OUTBALANCEH, to exceed in weight. (Hybrid; E. and F.—
L.) In Dryden, tr. of Ovid, Met. xiii. 397. From Out and
Balance.

OUTBID, to bid above or beyond. (E.) In Shak. 2 Hen. IV, ii.
4. 363. See Bid (2).

OUTBREAK, an outburst. (E.) In Hamlet, ii. i, 33.
Break.

OUTBURST, a bursting forth. (E.) First in 1657, in imitation
of out-break ; but a good word. Neither in Rich. or Todd’s Johnson.
See Burst.

OUTCAST, one who is cast out, a wretch. (Hybrid; E. and
Scand.) ‘For yif it so be that a wikked wight be. . . the more owt
cast (L. abiectior) ;’ Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iii. pr. 4. 1. 31. See
Cast.

OUTCOME, result, event. (E.) An old word; ME. uteume,
a coming out, deliverance; Ancren Riwle, p. 80. See Come.

OUTCRY, a crying out, clamour. (Hybrid; E. and F,—L.)
Shak. Romeo, v. 3. 193; and in Palsgrave. See Cry.

OUTDO, to surpass. (E.) In Shak. Cor. ii. 1. 150. See Do.

OUTDOOR, in the open air. (E.) First in 1765; a modern
contraction for out of door. See Door.

OUTER, OUTERMOST: see Utter, Uttermost.

OUTEIT, equipment. (Hybrid; E. and Scand.) First in 1769;
added by Todd to Johnson. See Fit. Der. owtjitt-er, outfitt-ing.

OUTGO, to surpass. (E.) In Shak. Timon, i. 1. 285; and Pals-
grave. See Go. Der. outgo-ing, sb., expenditure. And see outwent.

OUTGROW, to grow beyond. (E.) In Shak. Rich. III, iii. 7.
104. See Grow.

OUTHOUSKH, a small house built away from the house, (E.)
In Beaum. and Fletcher, The Coxcomb, iii. 1, 53. See House.

OUTLANDISH, foreign. (E.) Cf. AS. ailendisc, exiled, Levit.
xxiv. 22.—AS. ut, out; and land, land. See Land.

OUTLAST, to last beyond. (E.) In Beaum. and Fletcher, Nice
Valour, iv. 1 (Shamont). See Last (3).

OUTLAW, one not under the protection of the law. (Scand.)
ME. outlawe, Chaucer, C. T. 17173 (H 224). AS. atlaga, utlah, an
outlaw; see numerous references in Thorpe, Ancient Laws, index to
vol. i. Borrowed from Icel. alagi, an outlaw. See Out and Law.
@ The word Jaw is rather Scand. than E. Der. outlaw, verb,
K. Lear, iii. 4. 172, from AS. adlagian, A. S. Chron. an. 1014;
outlaw-ry (with F. suffix -rie=-erie), Jul. Ces, iv. 3. 173.

OUTLAY, expenditure. (E.) Not in Todd’s Johnson; but a
good word ; orig. Northern; first in 1798. See Lay.

OUTLET, a place or means by which a thing is let out. (E.)
An old word. ME. utlete, Owl and Nightingale, 1. 1752; lit. ‘a
letting out.’=AS. atl@tan, verb, to let out, let down; Luke, v. 5.
See Let (1).

OUTLINE, a sketch. (Hybrid; E. and F.—L.) Used by
Dryden; Parallel bet. Painting and Poetry; repr. 1882, p. 139; and
in The Tatler, no, 182, § 6. Lit. a line lying on the outer edge,
a sketch of the lines enclosing a figure. See Line.

OUTLIVE, to live beyond. (E.) In Shak. Merch. Ven. iv. 1,
269. See Live.

OUTLOOK, a prospect. (E.) ‘Which owe’s to man’s short
out-look all its charms;’ Young’s Night Thoughts, Night 8, 1. 264
from end. See Look. Der. out-look, verb, to look bigger than,
K. John, v. 2. 115.

OUTLYING, remote. (E.) Used by Sir W. Temple and Wal-
pole; see Richardson. See Lie (1).

OUTPOST, a troop in advance of an army. (Hybrid; E. and
F.—L.) Late; see quotation in Richardson. See Post.

OUTPOUR, to pour out. (Hybrid; E.azdF.) In Milton, P. R.
ii. 311; Samson, 544. See Pour. Der. outpour-ing.

OUTRAGE, excessive violence. (F.—L.) ME. outrage, to be
divided as outr-age, there being no connexion with out or rage;
Chaucer, C. T. 2014-(A 2012); Rob. of Glouc. p. 46, 1. 1062. —OF.
outrage, earlier oultrage (Godefroy); MF .oultrage, ‘ outrage, excesse;’
Cot. Cf. Ital. oltraggio, outrage. B. Formed with suffix -age (<L.
-aticum) from OF. oltre, outre, beyond; spelt oultre in Cotgrave; cf.


See


In


OVER


Ital. oltra, beyond; from L. ultra, beyond. See Ulterior. Der.
outrage, verb, Spenser, F. Q. i. 6. 5; outrag-e-ous, ME. outrageous,
Chaucer, C. T. 3996 (A 3998), from OF. outrageux, spelt oultrageux
in Cotgrave; outrageous-ly, -ness. Also outré, exaggerated, pp. of
outrer, to pass beyond, from F, outre, beyond.

OUTREACH, to reach beyond, (E.) In Beaum. and Fletcher,
Love’s Pilgrimage, v. 4 (Philippo). See Reach.

OUTRIDE,, to ride faster than. (E.) In 2 Hen. IV,i. 1.36. See
Ride. Der. outrid-er, one who rides forth, Chaucer, C. T. 166.

OUTRIGGER, a naval term. (E. and Scand.) A projecting
spar for extending sails,a projecting rowlock for an oar, a boat with
projecting rowlocks (ab, 1840). See Rig.

OUTRIGHT, thoroughly, wholly. (E.) Properly an adverb.
‘The frere made the foole madde outright;’ Sir T. More, Works,
p- 483a. See Right.

OUTROAD, an excursion. (E.) Lit. ‘a riding out.’ In 1 Macc.
xv. 41 (A.V.). For the sense of road =a riding, see Inroad.

OUTRUN, to surpass in running. (E.) In John, xx. 4 (A. V.);
and in Tyndale’s translation (1526).. See Run.

OUTSET, a setting out, beginning. (E.) Used by Burke (R.).
See Set.

OUTSHINE, to surpass in splendour. (E.) In Spenser, F. Q.
v. 9. 21. See Shine.

OUTSIDE, the exterior surface, (E.) In King John, v. 2. 109.
See Side.

OUTSKIRT, the outer border. (E. and Scand.) ‘ All that ou-
skirte of Meathe ;’ Spenser, View of the State of Ireland; Globe ed.
p- 668, col. 1,1. 27. See Skirt.

OUTSTRETCH, to stretch out. (E.) ME. outstrecchen, pt. t.
outstraughte, Rom. of the Rose, 1515. See Stretch.

OUTSTRIP, to outrun. (E.) In Hen. V,iv. 1.177. From owt,
and strip, to run fast. ‘The swiftest Hound, when he is hallowed
[i. e. urged on] strippes forth; Gosson, School of Abuse, ed. Arber,
p. 58. See Strip. ©

OUTVIE, to exceed, surpass, (E. and F,.—L.) In Tam. of the
Shrew, ii. 387. See Vie.

OUTVOTE, to defeat by excess. of votes. (E. and F.—L.)
‘Sense and appetite outvote reason ;’ South’s Sermons, vol. iii. ser. 6
(R.), See Vote.

OUTWARD, towards the outside, exterior. (E.) ME. outward,
earlier utward, adv., Ancren Riwle, p. 102, 1. 3e AS. ateweard,
uitewerd, Exod. xxix. 20.—AS. dite, adv., out; and -weard, suffix
indicating direction. See Out and Toward. Der. outward, adj.,
Temp. i. 2. 1043 outward, sb., Cymb. i. 1. 23; outward-ly, Mach. i.
3. 543 outward-s, where the -s answers to the ME. adv. suffix -es,
Hamlet, ii. 2. 392; owtward-bound, as to which see Bound (3).

OUTWEIGH, to exceed in weight. (E.) In Shak. Cor. i. 6. 71,
See Weigh.

OUTWENT, went faster than. (E.) In Mark, vi. 33 (A. V.).
From Out, and went, pt. t. of Wend.

OUTWIT, to surpass in wit. (E.) ‘To outwit and deceive them-
selves ;’ South’s Sermons, vol. ii. ser. 7 (R.). See Wit.

OUTWORKS, external or advanced fortifications. (E.) ‘And
stormed the outworks of his fortress ;” Butler, Hudibras, pt. iii. c. 1,
1.1136. See Work.

OUZEL, another form of Ousel, q. v.

OVAL, of the shape of an egg. (F.—L.) Spelt ova// in Minsheu,
ed. 1627.—MF. oval, ‘ ovall, shaped like an egg;’ Cot. Formed
with suffix -al (<L. -dlis) from L. du-wm, an egg; there was prob.
a Late Latin dudlis, adj., but it is not recorded. B. L. Ouum is
cognate with Gk. gdv, an egg; and they answer to the Idg. types
*dwom, *dwiom, related by gradation to L. auis,a bird; see Aviary.
Perhaps connected with E. egg; see Egg. Der. (from L. duum)
ov-ar-y, Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 28, § 5, from Late L,
dvaria, the part of the body where eggs are formed in birds (Du-
cange) ; ov-ate, i.e. egg-shaped, L. duatus, with suffix -dtus like the

p. suffix of the Ist conjugation; and see ovi-form.

OVATION, a lesser Roman triumph. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed,
1627,—F, ovation, ‘a small triumph granted to a commander;’ Cot.
=—L. dudtidnem, acc. of duatio, lit. shouting, exultation. = L. oudre, to
shout.4+Gk. eba¢ev, to shout, callaloud; from eval, edoi, interjections
of rejoicing, esp. in honour of Bacchus.

OVEN, a furnace, cavity for baking bread, &c. (E.) ME. oven
(with « for v), Wyclif, Luke, xii. 28. AS. ofen, ofr, Grein, ii. 310,
+Du. oven; Icel. ofu, later omn; of which an earlier form ogn is
found; Swed. ugn; G. ofen; Goth. aukns, B. It would appear that
the Teut. types are *zhno-, *ufno-; Idg. type *ugnos. Allied to Skt.
ukha, a pot; and to Gk, imvds, an oven; the older sense is remark-
ably preserved in AS. ofnet, a pot, a closed vessel.

OVER, above, across, along the surface of. (E.) ME. ower (with
u for v), Chaucer, C. T. 3920 (A 3922). AS. ofer (Grein).4+Du,


OVERACT


over; Icel. yfir; also ofr, adv., exceedingly; Dan. over; Swed. dfver;
G,. tiber, OHG, ubar; Goth. ufar; Gk. trép; L. super; Skt. upari,
above. . The prefixed s in L. s-uper has not been satisfactorily ex-
plained; some think it is equivalent to Gk. é€. _The common Idg.
base is *uper-, closely related to *uperos, upper (Skt. upara-, L.
s-uperus, AS. ufera, Grein, ii. 614). y. It is obvious that *up-eros is
a comparative form; the superlative takes a double shape, (1) with
suffix -MO, as in L. summus (from s-upmos), highest, AS. *ufema,
highest (only found with an additional suffix -es¢t in ufemyst, written
for *ufemest, in Gen, xl. 17); and (2) with suffix -TO, as in Gk.
tnaros, highest. 68. The positive form is *upo-; this appears in Skt.
upa, near, on, under, Gk. dé, under, L. sub, under, Goth. uf, under.
A closely related adverbial form occurs in AS. ufan, above, G. ober,
and E, -ove in ab-ove. The Goth. form uf appears to be further
related to E. up, and G. auf, upon; so that there are two parallel
Teutonic types, viz. UF (Goth. uf, G. oben, E. ab-ove) and UP (E. up,
G. auf); with the parallel comparative forms seen in over and upper.
«. The senses of ‘under’ and ‘over’ are curiously mixed, as in L.
sub, under, and super, above; Bréal suggests that L. sub refers to an
upward movement; cf. L. surgere (for *sub-regere) to rise. £. We
may further note ME. over, adj., with the sense of ‘ upper,’ Chaucer,
C. T. 133; and ME. overest, with the sense of ‘uppermost,’ id. 292
(A 290). And see Up, Sub-, Hypo-, Super-, Hyper-, Above,
Sum, Summit, Supreme, Sovereign. Der. verbs, as over-
act, over-awe, &c.; adverbs, as over-board, &c.; sbs., as over-coat,
&c.; adjectives, as over-due, &c.; see below.

OVERACT, to act more than is necessary. (E. and L.) Used
by Ben Jonson ; Catiline, ii. 3 (Curius). See Act.

OVERALLS, loose trowsers worn above others. (E.) Modern;
from Over and All.

OVERARCH, to arch over. (E. and F.—L.) In Milton, P. L.
i. 304. See Arch.

OVERAWE, to keep in complete subjection. (E. and Scand.) In
Shak. 1 Hen. VI, i. 1. 36. See Awe.

OVERBALANCEH, to exceed in weight. (E.andF.—L.) ‘For
deeds always overbalance words;’ South’s Sermons, vol. vii. ser. 13 (R.).
See Balance. Cf. out-balance. Der. overbalance, sb.

OVERBEAR, to overrule. (E.) Much Ado, ii. 3. 157;
pp. overborne, 1 Hen. VI, iii. 1. 53. See Bear. Der. overbear-
ing, adj.

OVERBOARD, out of theship. (E.) Rich. III,i. 4.19. ME.
ouer bord; Chaucer, C.T.,B 922. See Board.

OVERBURDEN, to burden overmuch. (E.) Spelt owerburdein,
Sir T. More, Works, p. 824 b. See Burden.

OVERCAST, to throw over, to overcloud. (E. and Scand.) The
orig. sense is ‘to throw over,’ ME. owerkasten, Rob. of Brunne, tr.
of Langtoft, p. 7o. 1.14. The sense ‘overcloud’ is old; Chaucer,
C. T. 1538 (A 1536). See Cast.

OVERCHARGE, to overburden, charge too much. (E. and
F.—C.) The old sense is ‘to overburden;’ Gascoigne, Steel Glass,
1062; and Palsgrave. See Charge. Der. overcharge, sb.

OVERCLOUD, to obscure with clouds. (E.) In Dryden, tr. of
Virgil, Ain. xi, 1193. See Cloud.

OVERCOAT, a coat worn above the rest of the dress. (E. and
F.—G.) Modern; see Coat.

OVERCOME, to subdue. (E.) ME. ouercomen, Wyclif, John,
xvi. 33. AS. ofercuman, Grein, ii. 314.— AS. ofer, over; and cuman,
tocome. Cf. Icel. yfirkominn, pp. overcome. See Come.

OVERDO, to do too much, to fatigue, to cook too much. (E.)
ME. ouerdon; ‘That that is ouerdon’=a thing that is overdone;
Chaucer, C. T. 16113 (G 645). AS. oferddn.— AS, ofer, over; and
don, todo. See Do.

OVERDOSE, to dose too much. (E. and F.—Gk.) Modern;
not in Todd’s Johnson. See Dose.

OVERDRAW, to exaggerate in depicting, (E.) First in 1844,
in this sense ; not in Johnson. See Draw.

OVERDRESS, to dress too much. (E. and F.—L.) In Pope,
Moral Essays, iv. 52. See Dress.

OVERDRIVE, to drive too fast. (E.) In Gen. xxxiii. 13
(A. V.); and in the Bible of 1551. AS. oferdrifan, /Elfred, tr. of
Orosius, b. 1. c. 7; ed. Sweet, p. 40, 1. 1. See Drive.

OVERFLOW, to flood, flow over. (E.) We find the pp. over-
flown, inundated, Spenser, F. Q. iii. 5. 17. ME. owerflowen, Wyclif,
Luke, vi. 38. AS. oferflowan, Luke, vi. 38.—AS. ofer, over; and
fldwan, to flow; pt. t. fléow, pp. flowen ; so that the form overflown
for the pp. is correct. See Flow. Der. overflow, sb. ; overflow-ing.

OVERGROW, to grow over. (E.) Pp. ouergrowen, Sir T. More,
Works, p. 74d; Gawayn and Grene Knight, 2190. See Grow.

OVERHANG, to project over, impend. (E.) Contracted to
oerhang, Hen. V, iii. 1.13. See Hang.

OVERHAUL, to draw. over, to scrutinise. (E. and F.—G.)


OVERSHOOT 419


Spenser has overhaile, to hale or draw over; Shep. Kal. Jan. 75.
See Hale, Haul.

OVERHEAD, above one’s head. (E.) In Shak. L. L. L. iv. 3.
281. See Head.

OVERHEAR, to hear without being spoken to. (E.) In Shak.
Meas, iii. 1.161. See Hear.

OVERJOYED, transported with gladness. (E. and F.—L.) In
Shak. Much Ado, ii. 1.230. See Joy. Der, overjoy, sb., 2 Hen. VI,


Lvle. 30.

OVERLADE, to lade with too heavy a burden. (E.) ‘For
men may owerlade a ship or barge;’ Chaucer, Legend of Good
Women, Cleop. 42. The pp. owerladen is in Ancren Riwle, p. 368.
1.21. See Lade.

OVERLAND, passing over the land. (E.) First in 1800; not
in Todd’s Johnson. See Land.

OVERLAP, to lap over. (E.) Spelt overlop in 1726; not in
Todd’s Johnson. See Lap.

OVERLAY, to spread over, to oppress. (E.) Often confused
with overlie; in particular, the pp. overlaid is often confused with
overlain, the pp. of overlie. Richardson confounds the two, Wyclif
has ‘owerletyng of folkis’ for L. pressura gentium; Luke, xxi. 25.
See Lay.

OVERLEAP, to leap over. (E.) ME. owerlepen, pt.t. ouerleep ;
P. Plowman, B. prol. 150, where the true sense is ‘ outran,’ in con-
formity with the fact that ME. lepen (like G. Jaufen) commonly
means ‘to run.’ AS. oferhléapan; the pt. t. oferkléop occurs in
fElfred’s tr. of Beda, b. v. c. 6.—AS, ofer, over; and hléapan, to
run, to leap. See Leap.

OVERLIE, to lie upon. (E.) Often confused with overlay ; the
pp. ouerlein, in the sense of ‘ oppressed,’ occurs in Gower, C. A. iii.
2243 bk. vii. 3930. The verb ouerliggen occurs in O. Eng. Homilies,
ed. Morris, i. 53, 1. 16. See Lie (1).

OVERLIVE, to outlive, survive. (E.) ME. owerliuen, Wyclif,
Exod. xxi, 22 (later text). AS. oferlibban, in Bosworth-Toller’s
Dict. See Live.

OVERLOAD, toload overmuch. (E.) Gascoigne has ouerloding,
Steel Glass, ]. 1009. See Load. Doublet, overlade, q.v.

OVERLOOK, to inspect, also to neglect, slight. (E.) ME.
ouerloken, in the sense ‘ to look over,’ or ‘ peruse ;’ Chaucer, Book of
the Duchess, 1, 232. See Look.

OVERMATCH, to surpass, conquer. (E.) ME. ouermacchen,
Chaucer, C. T. go96 (E 1220). See Match.

OVERMUCH, too much. (E.) Spelt overmuchel in Chaucer, tr.
of Boethius, b. iii. pr. 7; 1.13. See Much.

OVERPASS, to pass over. (E. and F.—L.) ME. ouerpassen,
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. v. pr. 6; 1.74. See Pass.

OVERPAY, to pay in addition. (E. and F.—L.) In All’s Well,
iii. 7.16. See Pay.

OVERPLUS, that which is more than enough. (E. and L.) In
Antony, iii. 7. 51, iv. 6.22; ME. ouerpluse, Trevisa, tr. of Higden,
i. 407. From E. over; and L. plis, more; see Nonplus. Doublet,
surplus.

OVERPOWER, to subdue. (E. and F.—L.) Contracted to
o’erpower, Rich. II,v. 1.31. See Power. Der. overpower, sb., i.e,
excess of power, Bacon, Ess. 58.

OVERRATEH, to rate too highly. (E. and F.—L.) Contr. to
o'errate, Cymb. i. 4. 41. See Rate.

OVERREACH, to reach beyond, to cheat. (E.) ME. ouer-
rechen, P. Plowman, B. xiii. 374. See Reach.

OVERRIDE, to ride over. (E.) ME. ouerriden, pp. ouerriden,
Chaucer, C. T. 2024(A 2022). AS. oferridan, to ride across (a ford) ;
fElfred, tr. of Beda, iii. 14. See Ride.

OVERRULE, to influence by greater authority. (E, and F.
—L.) In K. Lear, i, 3.16. See Rule.

OVERRUN, to spread or grow over, to outrun. (E.) ME. over-
rennen, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 124, 1. 10. See
Run.

OVERSEE, to superintend. (E.) ME. ozersen, P. Plowman,
B. vi. 115. AS. oferséon, used in the sense to look down on, to
despise; Aélfred, tr. of Boethius, c. 36, sect. 2. See See. Der.
overse-er, Tyndall, Works, p. 252, 1. 63; over-sight, (1) super-
intendence, Bible, 1551, 1 Chron. ix. 31; (2) omission, 2 Hen. IV,


ii. 3.47.

OVERSET, to upset, overturn. (E.) ME. ouersetten, to oppress ;
O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, ii. 51 ; and see Prompt. Parv. p. 373.
AS. ofersettan, to spread over, cover, /Elfred, tr. of Boethius, b. ii.
pr. 73 c. xviii. sect. 1. See Set.

OVERSHADOW, to throw a shadow over. (E.) ME. ouer-
schadewen, Luke, ix. 34. AS. ofersceadian, Luke, ix. 34. See
Shadow.

OVERSHOOT, to shoot beyond. (E.) The pp. owershotte

Ee 2


420 OVERSIGHT


(better overshot) is in Sir T. More, Works, p. 1134h. Palsgrave has
I overshote my-selfe. See Shoot.

OVERSIGHT; see Oversee.

OVERSPREAD, to spread over. (E.) ME. owerspreden, pt. t.
ouerspradde, Chaucer, C. T. 2873 (A 2871); Layamon, 14188. AS.
ofersprédan, to overspread (Bosworth). = AS. ofer, over ; and sprédan;
see Spread.

OVERSTHP, to step beyond, exceed. (E.) Contr. to o’erstep,
Hamlet, iii. 2.21. AS. ofersteppan. See Step.

OVERSTOCK, to stock too full. (E.) O’erstock’d is in Dryden,
The Medal, 102. See Stock.

OVERSTRATIN, to strain too much. (E.andF.—L.) In Dryden,
Art of Painting, § 54 (R.). See Strain.

OVERT, open, apparent, public. (F.—L.) ‘The wey ther-to is
so ouerte;’ Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, b. ii. 1. 210.—OF. overt (later
ouvert), pp. of ovrir (later ouvrir),to open. B. The exact formation
of the word is uncertain; but Littré’s explanation is now accepted,
that OF. ovrir was a perverted form of OF. avrir, to open; from L.
aperire, to open; the change being due to frequent association with
OF. covrir (F. couvrir), to cover. (So Korting, Hatzfeld.) .For L.
aperire,see Aperient. Diez cites Prov. obrir, ubrir, MItal. oprire
(Florio), to open, which he distinguishes from Span. abrir, mod. Ital.
aprire, derived directly from L. aperire, to open. As to ovrir, he
supposes this to be a shorter form of OF. a-ovrir, a-uvrir, to open,
words of three syllables, occurring in the Livre des Rois. These
forms arose from Prov. adubrir (Raynouard, Lexique Roman, ii. 104),
in which the prefixed a-(<L. ad) does not alter the sense, but is
added as in ablasmar, afranher ; whilst dubrir is from the L. dé-operire,
to open wide, lit. ‘ uncover,’ used by Celsus (White). He supports
this by instancing mod. Prov, durbir, Piedmontese durvi, Walloon
drovi, Lorraine deurvi, all corresponding to the same L. dédperire.
L. operire is for *op-uer-ire, parallel to Lith. wz-wer-ti, to shut ; just
as L. aperire (for *ap-uer-ire) is parallel to Lith. at-wer-ti, to open ;
Brugmann, i. § 282. Cf, Skt, vv, to cover. Der. overt-ly; overt-
ure, meaning ‘an open, unprotected place,’ Spenser, Shep. Kal.
July, 28, from OF, overture, later ouverture, ‘ an overture, or opening,
an entrance, hole, beginning made, a motion made [i.e. proposal],
also an opening, manifestation, discovery, uncovering,’ Cot.

OVERTAKE, to come up with, in travelling. (E. and Scand.)
ME. owertaken, Havelok, 1816; Ancren Riwle, p. 244, note g.—
AS, ofer, over; and Icel. taka, to take. Cf. Icel. yfirtak, an over-
taking, surpassing, transgression ; which prob. suggested the E. word.
See Take.

OVERTASK, to task too much. (E. and F.—L.) In Milton,
Comus, 309. See Task. {f So also over-tax.

OVERTHROW, to throw over, upset, demolish. (E.) ME.
ouerthrowen, King Alisaunder, 1113. See Throw. Der. overthrow,
sb., Much Ado, i. 3. 69.

OVERTOP, to rise above the top of. (E.) Temp, i. 2. 81.
See Top.

OVERTURE, a proposal, beginning. (F.—L.) All’s Well, iv.
3. 46. Also ‘a disclosure,’ K. Lear, iii. 7. 89. See Overt.

OVERTURN, to overthrow, upset. (E. and F.—L.) ME.
ouerturnen, Ancren Riwle, p. 356, 1.16. See Turn.

OVERVALUE, to value too much. (E. and F.—L.)
tracted to o’ervalue, Cymb. i. 4.120. See Value,

OVERWEENING,, thinking too highly, conceited. (E.) The
pres: part. overweninde occurs in the Ayenbite of Inwyt, ed. Morris,
p- 169, 1. 26; where -inde is the Kentish form for -imge (-ing). Shak.
even uses the verb overween, 2 Hen. IV, iv. 1.149. AS. oferwenian,
to be insolent. ‘Insolesceret, oberwenide;’ Corpus Gloss. 1099;
spelt oberunaenidae, Epinal Gloss. 538. Lit. ‘going beyond what is
customary.’= AS. ofer, beyond; wenian, to be accustomed; see
Wean. Thus it is only remotely connected with ween, q.v.

OVERWEIGH, to outweigh. (E.) ME. ouerwejen; ‘luue
ouerweid hit’ =love overweighs it, Ancren Riwle, p. 386, 1. 25. See
Weigh. Der. overweight.

OVERW HELM, to turn over, bear down, demolish. (E.) ME.
ouerwhelmen, Rom. of the Rose, 3775; Rob. of Brunne, tr. of
Langtoft, p. 190, 1. 10. ‘The erthe sall thaim ower-whelme;’
St. Cuthbert, 4964. See Whelm,

OVERWISE, wise overmuch, (E.) In Beaum. and Fletcher,
Philaster, last line of Act iv. See Wise. Der. overwise-ly, -ness.

OVERWORK, excess of work. (E.) The verb to overwork is
in Palsgraye. The sb, is, etymologically, the more orig. word. See
Work. Der. overwork, verb; whence the pp. overwrought,

OVERWORN, worn too much. (E.) In Twelfth Nt. iii. 1. 66.
From over; and worn, pp. of wear. See Wear.

OVERWROUGHT, wrought to excess. (E.) In Dryden, Art
of Poetry, c. i. 1. 50. See Overwork.

OVIFORM, egg-shaped. (L.) Used by T. Burnet, Theory of


Con-


OXALIS


the Earth, 1759 (R.).=L. dui-, for duum, an egg; and form-a, form.
See Ovaland Form. So also oviduct, Phillips, ed. 1706, from
L. ductus, a conducting, a duct; see Duct. Also ovi-parous, Phillips,
ed. 1706, from L. ducparus, egg-producing, from parere, to produce ;.
see Parent. Also ovoid, egg-shaped, a clumsy hybrid compound,
from L, duo-, for duum, an egg, and Gk. dos, form.

OWB, to possess; hence, to possess another’s property, to be in
debt, be obliged. (E.) ME, ajen, awen, 0321, owen, orig. ‘to
possess ;’ hence, to be obliged to do, to be in debt. ‘The dette
thet tu owest me’=the debt that thou owest me, Ancren Riwle,
p. 126, 1. 13. -‘ Hou myche owist thou?’ Wyclif, Luke, xvi. 5.. For
this important verb, see Matzner’s O. Eng. Dict. p. 49, s.v. agen; or
Stratmann, p. 23; or N.E.D. The sense ‘to possess’ is very
common in Shakespeare; see Schmidt. AS. dgan, to have, possess,
Grein, i. 19. The change from @ to o is perfectly regular, as in ban,.
bone, saz, stone; the g passes into w after @, as usual.+Icel. eiga,
to possess, have, be bound, own; Dan. eie, to own, possess; Swed.
diga, to own, possess, have a right to, be able to; OHG. eigan, to
possess ; Goth. aigan, to possess. Teut. type *aig-an-. B. Further
related to Skt. 7g, to possess, to be able; whence i¢a-, a proprietor,.
owner; the form of the root being EIK. Brugmann, i. § Zot.
@ It may be noted that the Goth. aigan has the old past tense ach,
used as a present tense; so also AS. Gh.

OUGHT. The pres. tense of AS. dgan is ah, really an old past
tense; the past tense is akte (Goth. aihta), really a secondary past.
tense or pluperfect; this became ME. ahte, agte, aughte, oughte,
properly dissyllabic, as in ‘ oghté be,’ Chaucer, C. T. 16808 (G 1340) ;
where Tyrwhitt has the inferior reading ‘ought to be.’ The pp, of
AS, agan was agen, for which see Own (1). Der, ow-ing, esp. in
phr. owing to, i.e. due to, because of. Also own (1), own (2).

WA, a nocturnal bird. (E.) ME. owle, Chaucer, Parl. of Foules,
3433; pl. oules, id. 599. AS. dle, Levit. xi. 16.4-Du. wil; Icel. ugla;
Dan. ugle; Swed. wgla; G. eule, OHG. tiwela. Teut. types *uwalon,
uwwalon-, f. PB. Allied to L. wluda, an owl, Skt. uluka-, an owl.
All from an imitative root, signifying to hoot, howl, screech; cf, Gk.
tAdw, I howl, dAoAvCev, to howl, éAeAcd, interjection; L. wlulare, to
howl, wlucus, a screech-owl. y. With a prefixed hk, added for
emphasis, we get G. heulen, whence OF. huller; see Howl. Some-
what similar is G. whu, an owl, MHG. hitwe, OHG. hiwo; cf. E.
hoot. Der. owl-et, dimin. form, also spelt howlet, Mach. iv. 1. 173;.
owl-ish.

OWN (1), possessed by any one, proper, peculiar, belonging to
oneself. (E.) ME, azen, awen (North. E. awin), owen; later, con-
tracted to own by omission of e. ‘ Right at min owné cost, and be
your gyde;’ Chaucer, C. T. 806 (A 804). ‘Thar awyn fre’ =their
own free property ; Barbour, Bruce, iii. 752. AS. agen, own, Grein,
i, 20; orig. the pp. of the anomalous strong verb agan, to owe, i.e.
to possess; see Owe.-+Icel. eigin, one’s own; orig. the old pp. of
eiga, to possess; Dan, and Swed. egex, one’s own; Goth. aigin,
property, possessions ; a neut. sb. formed from the adj. which was
orig. the old pp. of aigan, to possess. Thus the orig. sense is.
‘possessed’ or ‘held.’ Der. own, verb, to possess; see own (2),
own (3).

OWN (2), to possess. (E.) ME, ajnien, ahnien, ohnien, ahnen,,
ohnen; see Layamon, 11864, 25359; Ormulum, 5649. AS. adgnian,
to appropriate, claim.as one’s own; Grein, i. 22. Formed with
causal suffix -1an from agn, contracted form of agen, one’s own; see
Own (1).+4Icel. eigna, to claim as one’s own; from eigin, own;
Goth. ga-aiginén, to make a gain of, lit. make one’s own, 2 Cor. ii. I1;
from aigin, one’s own property. @f It is thus evident that the verb
is a derivative from the adjective. Der. own-er, ME. ojenere, Ayen-
bite of Inwyt, ed. Morris, p. 37, last line but one; owner-ship. —

OWN (3), to grant, admit. (E.) ‘You will not own it,’ i.e.
admit it, Winter’s Tale, iii. 2.60. A peculiar development of own (2) ;
as if ‘to make one’s own,’ or ‘to take to oneself.’ 4 The ME.
unnen (AS. unnan), to grant, comes near to the sense of owxz (3); but
it does not seem to have influenced it, and soon became obsolete.

OX, a ruminant quadruped. (E.) ME. ox, pl. oxen, Chaucer,
C. T. 889 (A 887) ; oxis, Wyclif, Luke, xvii. 7. AS. oxa, pl. oxan,
Grein, ii. 360.4-Du. os; Icel. wi, also oxi; pl. yon, Oxn; Dan. oxe,
pl. ower; Swed. oxe; Gy ochse, ochs, pl. ochsen; OHG. okso; Goth.
auhsa, auhsus.4-W. ych, pl. ychen; Skt. ukshan-, an ox, bull; also,
‘a Vedic epithet of the Maruts who, by bringing rain, i.e. by
sprinkling, impregnate the earth like bulls;’ Benfey. The Maruts.
are storms; see Max Miiller, Lectures, ii. 416. Teut. base *ohsan- ;
Idg. base *zkson-. B, The Skt. wkskanis usually derived from wksh,
to sprinkle. Further, wksh is allied to Gk. typds, moist, as well as
to Icel. vékr, moist, prov. E, wokey, moist (Halliwell); see Brug-
mann, ii. § 114; Benfey, p. 108. See Wake (2). Der, ow-eye,
a plant, ox-eyed, ox-fly, ox-goad ; ox-stall; also ox-lip, q.v.

OXALIS, wood-sorrel. (L.—Gk.) In Holland, tr. of Pliny, b, xx.


OXIDE


c. 21.—L, oxalis (Pliny).—Gk. dfadis, (1) a sour wine, (2) sorrel.
So named from its sourness.—Gk. d¢vs, sharp, keen, cutting, acid.
‘Allied to L. acer, sharp, pungent ; Brugmann, i. §§ 161, 536. Der.
oxali-c; cf. ox-ide, oxy-gen, ony-mel, oxy-tone,

‘Ei, a.compound of oxygen with a non-acid base. -(Gk.)
A coined word; from ox-, short for oxy-, part of the word oxy-gen ;
and -ide, due to Gk. -e15#s, like, which more commonly appears as
-id, as in ellipso-id, sphero-id, ovo-id, and the like. See Oxygen.
Der. oxid-ise, oxid-is-er, oxid-is-able, oxid-at-ion ; all coined words.

OXLIP, the greater cowslip. (E.) In Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 250;
Wint. Ta. iv. 4.125. AS. oxanslyppe; see Cockayne’s Leechdoms,
iii, 340.— AS. oxan, gen. case of oxa, an ox; and slyppe, a slop, i.e.
a piece of dung. [This confirms the etymology of cowslip already
given; see Cowslip.] @ It should therefore be spelt ox-slip.

OXYGEN, a gas often found in acid compounds. (F.—Gk.)
The sense is ‘generator of acids;’ and it is a coined word. The
discovery of oxygen dates from 1774, (Haydn); but the name is
French. =F. oxygéne; in 1787 (Hatzfeld).—Gk. é¢v- (written oxy- in
Roman characters), for dfvs, sharp, keen, acid; and yev-, to produce,
base of +yi-yv-opuat, 1 am produced or born. See Oxalis and Gene-
rate. Der. oxygen-ate, oxygen-ise, oxygen-ous; and see ox-ide.

OXYMEL, a mixture of honey and vinegar. (L.—Gk.) In
early use; it occurs as AS. oxumelle; see Cockayne’s A. S. Leech-
doms, ili. 368.—L. oxymeli (Pliny).=—Gk. dfvuedr.—Gk. dév-, for
ofds, acid; and wédr, honey. See Oxalis and Mellifluous.

OXYTONE, having an acute accent on the last syllable.
(Gk.) A grammatical term.—Gk. d¢vrovos, shrill-toned; also, as
a grammatical term.—Gk. dév-, for dvs, sharp; and Tévos, a tone.
See Oxalis and Tone.

OYER, a term in law. (F.—L.) An OF. law term. , ‘ Oyer and
terminer [lit. to hear and determine], is a commission specially
granted to certain persons, for the hearing and determining one or
more causes,’ &c.; Blount’s Law Dict., ed. 1691. Cf. AF. oier et
zerminer ; Stat. Realm, i. 44 (1276); AF. oyer, as sb., a hearing,
Year-books of Edw. I. i. 73.—AF. oyer, mod. F. owir, to hear. =—L.
audire, to hear. See Audience. Der. oyez.

OYEZ, OYES, hear ye! (F.—L.) Henryson has: oyas/
oyas! Parl. of Beistis, 1.53. The first word of.eyery proclamation
by a public crier; now corrupted into the unmeaning O/ yes /
*O yes, a corruption from the F. oyez, i. e. hear ye, is well known to


be used by the cryers in our courts,’ &c.; Blount, Law Dict., ed. '


1691.—AF..oyez, 2 p. pl. imp. of oyer, to hear; Stat. Realm, i. 211
(ab. 1286); see Oyer.

OYSTER,,a well-known bivalve shell-fish. (F.—L.—Gk.) [The
AS. form ostre was borrowed from Latin; cf. ‘ostrea, ostre’ in Voc.
261. 33. The diphthong shows the mod. E. form to be from the
French.| ME. oistre, Chaucer, C. T. 182.— AF. oyster, Liber Albus,
p. 244; OF. oistre, in the 13th cent. (Littré); whence mod. F.
huitre. =. ostrea, more rarely ostreum.=—Gk. dorpeov, an oyster; so
called from its shell. = Gk. d07éov, a bone, shell; akin to L. os (gen.
ossis),a bone. See Osseous, Ostracise.

OZONE, a substance perceived by its smell in air after electric
discharges. (Gk.) ‘ Ozone, a name given in 1840 by M. Schénbein
of Basel to the odour in the atmosphere developed during the elec-
tric discharge;’ Haydn.—Gk. é(wv, smelling; pres. pt. of dev, to
smell. Gk. 6¢ew stands for d8-yew, from the base 65-, to smell,
appearing also in L. od-or, smell; see Odour.


P


PABULUM, food. (L.) ‘Pabulum or food;’ Bp. Berkeley,
Siris (1747), § 197 (Todd). —L. pabulum, food. Formed with suffix


~bulu- from pd-, base of pascere, to feed (pt. t. pa-wi); see Pastor.


Der. pabul-ous, Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ili. c. 21. § 153
pabul-ar.
- PACH, a step, gait. (F.—L.) ME. pas, paas, Rob. of Glouc.


p- 149, 1. 3129; Chaucer, C. T., A 825, 1033.—F. pas.—L. passum, |


acc. of passus, a step, pace, lit. a stretch, i.e. the distance between
the feet in walking. L. passus, pp. of pandere, to stretch. See Ex-
pand. Der. pace, verb, a doublet of Pass,.q.v.; pac-er, Spectator,
no. 104. :

PACHA, the French spelling of Pasha, q.v.


-PACHYDERMATOUS, thick-skinned. (Gk.) Modern and


scientific. — Gk. maxv-, for raxvs, thick; and Seppar-, stem of dépya,
a skin ; with suffix -ous (=L. -dsus). B. The Gk. raxus is cognate
with Skt. bahu-, strong. y.'Gk. 5épya is a hide, ‘ that which is flayed
off ;’ from Gk. 5épey, to flay, tear, cognate with E, Tear, verb, q.v.
Der. pachyderm, an abbreviation for pachydermatous animal, i


. PADDLE. 421


_PACIFY, to appease, make peaceful. (F.—L.} Spelt pacifie,
Sir T. More, Works, p. 871 b. =F. pacifier, ‘to pacifie;’ Cot.=L.
pacificire, pacificari, to make peace.—L, paci-, decl. stem of pax,
peace ; and ~jicare, for facere, to make; see Peace and Fact. Der.


| pacifi-er, spelt pacyfyer, Sir T. More, Works, p. 872 d; pacific-at-ion,


from F. pacification, ‘a pacification’ (Cot.), which from L. acc.
pacificationem, due to pacificare ; pacificat-or, Bacon, Life of Hen. VII,
ed. Lumby, p. 52,1. 10, from L. pacificator ; pacific, formerly pacifick,
Milton, P. L. xi. 860, from F. pacifique, ‘ pacificous’ (Cot.), which
from L, adj. pacificus, peace-making ; pacific-al, pacific-al-ly.

PACK, a bundle, burden, set of cards or hounds, &c. (Low G.)
ME. pakke, P. Plowman, B. xiii. 201; pl. packes, Ancren Riwle,
p- 166, last line.mLow G. pakk, pak; Du. pak, a pack; cf. Icel.
pakki, a pack, bundle; Dan. pakke; Swed. packa; G. pack. B. It
appears to be a true Teutonic word, though few Teutonic words
begin with ~. There is no proof that it was suggested by the L.
base pac-, as in pp. pac-tus, from pangere, to fasten. [We also find
Irish pac, Gall. pac, from E.; Bret. pac, borrowed from Romanic;
Ital. pacco, F. pagu-et, Late L. paccus, from Teutonic.] Der. pack,
verb, ME. pakken, P. Plowman, B. xv. 184; pack-er, pack-horse,
2 Hen. IV, ii. 4.1773; pack-ing; pack-man; pack-needle or pack-ing-
needle, ME. pakkenedle or paknedle, P. Plowman, B. v. 212; pack-
saddle, Cor. ii. 1. 99; pack-thread Romeo, v. 1. 47. Also pack-age,
q.V., pack-et, q.v. 3 Quite distinct from bag.

PACKAGE, a packet, small bundle. (Low G.; with F. suffix.)
A late word; added by Todd to Johnson; formed by adding F. suffix
-age (<L. -aticum) to pack; see Pack. Cf. packet.

PACKET, a small pack, package. (AF.—Low G.). In Hamlet,
v. 2. 15.. AF, pacquet, Black Book of the Admiralty, i. 277 (1463) 3
whence MF. pacquet, paquet, ‘a packet, bundle;’ Cot. Formed
with dimin. suffix -et from ME. pakke, a pack; cf. Low G. pakk,
a pack (Bremen Worterbuch); MDu. pack, ‘a pack’ (Hexham);
Icel. pakki. See Pack. Der. packet-boat, a boat for carrying mail-
bags, Evelyn’s Diary, Oct. 10, 1641; now often shortened to packet.
Doublet, package.

PACT, a contract. (L.) In Bacon, Life of Hen. VII, ed.Lumby,
p- 7,1. 19; and p. 27, 1. 30.—L. pactum, an agreement.=L. pacius,
pp. of paciscere, to stipulate, agree; inceptive form of OLat. pacere,
to agree, come to an agreement about anything. =4/PAK, to bind;
whence also Skt. pag, to bind; cf. Gk. mqyvup, I fasten, L. pangere
(pp. pac-tus), to fasten, fix, Brugmann, i. § 200; ii. § 79. Der.
pact-ion, Fox’s Martyrs, p. 272 (R.), from F: paction (Cot.)<L.
pactionem, acc. of pactio, an agreement. Also appease, com-pact, im-
pact, im-pinge. From the same root we have peace, paci-fy, page (2),
pale (1), pay, pro-pag-ate, peel (3), pole (1), re-pay.

PAD (1), a soft cushion, &c. (E.?) ‘He was kept in the
bands, hauing under him but onely a pad of straw ;’ Fox, Martyrs,
Pp. 854 (R.). Spelt padde, Gascoigne, Fruits of War, st. 177. A
stuffed saddle was called a pad; hence: ‘ Padde, saddle,’ in Leyins,
ed. 1570. It also occurs in the sense of ‘bundle;’ see Halliwell.
Of obscure origin. B. In the proy. E. sense of paw, or animal’s
foot, it agrees with MDu., Low G., and Pomeranian pad, sole. of the
foot ; perhaps borrowed from Slayonic. Cf. Russ. podoshva, sole of
the foot; podushka, a cushion; also Lith. padas, sole of the foot. And
cf. Pod. Der. pad, verb; padd-ing.

PAD (2), a thief on the high road. (Du.) We now speak of
a foot-pad. The old word is a padder, Massinger, A New Way, ii. 1,
1. 15 from end; Butler, Hudibras, pt. iii.c. 1,1. 5 from end. This
means ‘one who goes upon the gad or foot-path.’ A pad is also
a ‘roadster,’ a horse for riding on roads; Gay’s Fables, no. 46; also
(more correctly) called a pad-nag, i.e. ‘ road-horse’ (R.).—Du. pad,
a path; MDu. padt (Hexham); cf. Low G. pad. Cognate with E.
path; see Path. ¢@ Many cant words are of Du. origin; see
Beaum. and Fletcher, Beggar’s Bush. Der. pad, v., to tramp along.

PADDLE (1), to finger; to dabble in water. (E.) 1. It means
‘to finger, handle;’ Hamlet, iii. 4. 185; Oth. ii, . 259. It is
a parallel formation to pattle, which is the frequentative of pat; and
cf. patter. 2. The sense ‘to dabble in water’ is in Palsgrave, who
has: ‘I paddyl in the myre;’ cf. Low G. paddeln, to tramp about
(Danneil); frequent. of pedden, to tread, or padjen, to take short
steps (Brem. Wort.); from pad, the sole of the foot ; see Pad (1).
Der. paddle, sb., in the sense of broad-bladed oar, but there is
probably some confusion with the word below; paddl-er, Beaum.
and Fletcher, Wit at Several Weapons, i. 1. 20; paddle-wheel.

PADDLE (2), a little spade, esp. one to clean a plough with.
(E.) In Deut. xxiii. 13 (A. V.). It seems to be a parallel form
to spaddle, the dimin. of spade. ‘Others destroy moles with a
spaddle,? Mortimer’s Husbandry (R.); and see spud and spittle-staff
in Halliwell. Cf. also Irish and Gael. spadal, a plough-staff, paddle ;
words. borrowed from. English. See Spade. {@ In the sense of
‘broad-bladed aar,’ see Paddle (1).


422 PADDOCK


PADDOCK (1), a toad. (Scand.) In Hamlet, iii. 4. 190;
Macb. i. 1. 9. ME. paddok, King Alisaunder, 6126. Dimin. with
suffix -ok or -ock (as in hill-ock, bull-ock), from ME. padde, a toad,
frog; in Wyclif, Exod. viii. 9 (later version), one MS. has the pl.
paddis for paddokis, which is the common reading.=Icel. padda,
a toad; Swed. padda, a toad, frog; Dan. padde.4-Du. padde, pad ;
EFries. padde. Cf. G. schild-patt, tortoise-shell. Origin obscure,
Der. paddock-stool, a toad-stool.

PADDOCK (2), a small enclosure. (E.) ‘ Delectable country-
seats and villas environed with parks, paddocks, plantations,’ &c.;
Evelyn (Todd; no reference). Here park and paddock are conjoined ;
and it is certain that paddock is a corruption of parrock, another
form of park. Parrocks (Kent) is now called Paddock Wood;
Hasted, Hist. Kent, 8vo, v. 286. ‘Parrocke, a lytell parke,’ Pals-
grave. See Way’s note to Prompt. Parv., p. 384. He adds that
“a fenced enclosure of nine acres at Hawsted (Suffolk), in which
deer were kept in pens for the course, was termed the Parrock;’
Cullum’s Hawsted, p. 210. See also parrock in Jamieson, and
parrick in Halliwell. [The unusual change from r to d may have
been due to some confusion with paddock, a toad, once a familiar
word; cf. poddish for porridge.} AS. pearruc, pearroc, a small
enclosure. ‘On Sisum lytlum pearroce’= in this little enclosure;
4Elfred, tr. of Boethius, c. xviii. § 2, b. ii. prosa 7. Perhaps formed,
with dimin. suffix -oc (=mod. E. -ock, as in padd-ock (1), hill-ock,
bull-ock), from a verb *parran, to shut, enclose; only found in ME.
parren; see Park.

PADDY, rice in the husk. (Malay.) Malay padi, rice in the
straw. (See Yule.) Itseems to have been sometimes confused with
Hind. bhat, boiled rice (Forbes), derived from the Skt. bhakta-,
(properly) boiled rice; orig, pp. of bkaj, to divide, take, possess
(Benfey).

PADISHAAH, great king, emperor. (Turk.—Pers.) A title given
by the Turks to the Sultan and other kings.— Turk. padishah.—
Pers. padshah, an emperor, sovereign; Rich. Dict., p. 315. The
Pers. pad answers to OPers. pati- (=Skt. pati-), master, lord; and
shah is ‘king.’ See Despot and Shah; also Pasha.

PADLOCK, a loose hanging lock. (E.) <A padlock is a loose
hanging lock with a staple, suitable for hampers, baskets, &c., when
the case to which it is affixed is not made of a solid substance. It
occurs in Pope’s Dunciad, iv. 162. Todd quotes from Milton’s
Colasterion (1645): ‘Let not such an unmerciful and more than
legal yoke be padlocked upon the neck of any Christian.’ Ben Jonson
has padlock in The Staple of News, Act v. sc. 1 (Picklock). Min-
sheu’s Span. Dict. has: ‘Candado, a hanging locke, a padlocke’
(1623); cf. locchetto, ‘a padlocke’ in Florio (1598). Of uncertain
origin; perhaps formed by adding Jock to prov. E. pad, a pannier
(Halliwell), given as a Norfolk word. This word is more commonly
‘written ped, ME. pedde. ‘Pedde, idem quod panere ;’ Prompt. Parv.
Of unknown origin ; see further under Pedlar.

PADUASOY, a rich silk. (F.) ‘Her crimson paduasoy ;’ Gold-
smith, Vicar of Wakefield, ch. iv. § 5. As if ‘Padua silk;’ from
Padua (in Italy); and F. soie, silk, from L. séta, a pig’s bristle, hence
strong hair, silk (like Span. seda). But really a popular perversion
of F. pou-de-soie, a silken stuff (Hatzfeld). Godefroy has pout de
soye (1389); poul de soie (1394). The origin of pou- is un-

nown.

PAGAN, a hymn in honour of Apollo. (L.—Gk.) ‘I have ever
hung Elaborate peans on thy golden shrine ;’ Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s
Revels, A. v. sc. 2; near the end.—L. pean, (1) a name of Apollo,
(2) a religious hymn, esp. to Apollo. = Gk. Mady, Mawy, (1) Peean,
Peon, the physician of the gods, who cured Hades and Ares,
Homer, Il. v. 401, 8993 cf. Od. iv. 232; also Apollo; also his son
fEsculapius; a deliverer, saviour; (2) a choral song, hymn, chant,
song of triumph. Der, peon-y, q.v.

PASDOBAPTISM; the same as Pedobaptism, q.v.

PAGAN, a countryman, hence, a heathen. (L.) InShak. Rich. II,
iv.95. [The ME. form is paien or payen, Chaucer, C.T. 4954 (B 534),
from OF. paien (Burguy) ; which from L. paganus.])—L. paiganus,
(1) a villager, countryman, (2) a pagan, because the rustic people
were supposed to be unconverted at a time when townsmen were
converts. See Trench, On the Study of Words. =L. paiganus,
adj., rustic, belonging to a village.—L. pagus, a district, canton,
B. Some connect it with L. pangere (pt. t. pégi), to fasten, fix, set,
as being marked out by fixed limits; see Pact. Der. pagan-ish,
pagan-ism, pagan-ise ; and see paynim, peasant.

PAGE (1), a boy attending a: person of distinction. (F.—Low
Lat.—Gk?) ME. page, King Alisaunder, 835; Havelok, 1730, —
F. page, ‘a page;’ Cot. [Cf. Span. page, Port. pagem, Ital. paggio.]
—Late L. pagium, acc. of pagius, a servant (Ducange). @ See
Littré, who does not admit the etymology suggested by Diez, viz.
that Ital. paggio might have been formed from Gk. ma:dioy, a little


| approaching closely to the L. pagina.


PAGODA


boy, dimin. of mais, a boy, child ; for which see Pedagogue. But
Korting accepts this solution.

AGE (2), one side of the leaf of a book. (F.—L.) ‘If one
leafe of this large paper were plucked off, the more pages took
harme thereby ;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xiii. c. 12. [ME. pagine,
Ancren Riwle, p. 286; an older form.]—F. page, ‘a page, a side of
a leafe;’ Cot.=L. pagina, a page, or leaf. B. Orig. ‘a leaf;
and so called because the leaves were once made of strips of papyrus
fastened together.—L. pangere (base pag-), to fasten; see Pact.
@ We also find ME. pagent (with added ¢), Romance of Partenay,
prol. 79. The three forms page, pagine, pagent, from L. pagina,
ate parallel to the three forms marge, margin, margent, from L.
marginem. Der. pagin-at-ion, a modern coined word.

PAGEANT, an exhibition, spectacle, show. (Late L.—L.)
A. It orig. meant ‘a moveable scaffold, such as was used in the
representation of the old mysteries. A picture of such a scaffold
will be found in Chambers, Book of Days, i. 634. The Chester
plays ‘ were always acted in the open air, and consisted of 24 parts,
each part or pageant being taken by one of the guilds of the city. . .
Twenty-four large scaffolds or stages were made,’ &c.; Chambers,
as above; see the whole passage. Phillips, ed. 1706, defines pageant
as ‘a triumphal chariot or arch, or other pompous device usually
carried about in publick shows.’ B. ME. pagent; also pagyn, as
in Wyclif’s Works, ed. Arnold, i. 129. The entry ‘pagent, pagina,”
occurs in Prompt. Parv. p. 377; where there is nothing to show
whether a pageant is meant or a page of a book, the words being
ultimately the same; see Page (2). But Way’s excellent note on
this entry is full of information, and should be consulted. He says:
‘the primary signification of pageant appears to have been a stage
or scaffold, which was called pagina, it may be supposed, from its
construction, being a machine compaginata, framed and compacted
together. The curious extracts from the Coventry records given by
Mr. Sharp, in his Dissertation on the Pageants or Mysteries per-
formed there, afford definite information on this subject. The term
is variously written, and occasionally appears as pagyn, pagen,
The various plays or pageants
composing the Chester mysteries . . are entitled Pagina prima, .
Pagina secunda, ,. and so forth; see Chester Plays, ed. Wright.
A curious contemporary account has been preserved of the construction
of the pageants [scaffolds] at Chester during the xvith century,
“which pagiants weare a high scafold with 2 rowmes, a higher and
a lower, upon 4 wheeles;” Sharp, Cov. Myst. p.17. The term
denoting the stage whereon the play was exhibited subsequently
denoted also the play itself; but the primary sense . . is observed
by several writers, as by Higins, in his version of Junius’s Nomen-
clator, 1585: ‘“ Pegma, lignea machina in altum educta, tabulatis
etiam in sublime crescentibus compaginata, de loco in locum portatilis,
aut quee vehi potest, ut in pompis fieri solet: Eschaffaut, a pageant,
or scaffold.”’ Palsgrave has: ‘ Pagiant in a playe, mystére;’ and
Cotgrave explains MF. pegmate as ‘a stage or frame whereon
pageants be set or carried.’ See further illustrations in Wedgwood.
C. We may conclude that, just as ME. pagent is used as a variant of


pagine, in the sense of page of a book, so the ME. pagent (or pagiant, —


&c.) was formed, by the addition of an excrescent ¢ after x, from an
older pagen or pagin, which is nothing but an Anglicised form of
Late L. pagina in the sense of scaffold or stage. For examples of
excrescent ¢, cf. ancient, margent, tyrant, pheasant. D. Though this
sense of pagina is not given by Ducange, it was certainly in use, as
shown above, and a very clear instance is cited by Wedgwood from
Munimenta Gildhalliz Londoniensis, ed. Riley, iii. 459, where we
find: ‘ parabatur machina satis pulcra . . . in eadem pagina erige-
bantur duo animalia vocata antelops;”’ showing that (in 1432) machina
and pagina were synonymous. EE. The true sense of pagina I take
to have been simply ‘stage’ or ‘platform;’ we find one sense of
L. pagina to be a slab of marble or plank of wood (White). Cf. L.
paginatus, planked, built, constructed (White). Hence the derivation


is from L. pangere (base pag-), to fasten, fix; see Page (2). .


@ Note that another word for the old stage was pégma (stem pégmat-,
whence MF, pegmate in Cotgrave); this is the corresponding and
cognate Greek name, from Gk. mfjyua (stem myyxar-), a platform,
stage, derived from the base of Gk. myyvusut, I fix, cognate with L,
pangere. Der. pageant, verb, to play, Shak. Troil. i. 3. 151;
pageant-r-y, Pericles, v. 2. 6.

PAGODA, an Indian idol’s temple. (Port.— Pers.) Spelt pagotha
in Sir T. Herbert, Travels, ed. 1665, pp. 69, 393 ; pagod in Skinner,
ed. 1671; pagodes, pl., in Hakluyt, Voy. ii, part 1. 221, 253.— Port.
pagoda, now generally pagode; but both forms are given in the Eng.-
Port. part of Vieyra’s Dict. Adapted from Pers. but-kadah, an
idol-temple; Rich. Dict. p. 241, col. 2; spelt but-kedah in Palmer,
Pers. Dict. col. 70.—Pers. but, an idol, image, God, id. p. 241,
col. 1; and kadah, a habitation, id. p. 1175. B. The initial Pers.


PAH, PA


sound is sometimes rendered by p, as in Devic. Yule suggests
some confusion with Skt. bkagavati, f., lit. ‘venerable,’ as the name
of a goddess.

PAH, PA, a fort. (New Zealand.) A Maori word, signifying
a fort surrounded by a stockade. ‘In Maori, the verb pa means to
touch, to block up. Pa=a collection of houses to which access is
blocked by means of stockades and ditches; ’ Morris, Austral English.

PAIGLE, the cowslip. (O. Low G.?) ‘ Paggles, greene and
yelow ;” Tusser’s Husbandry, § 43. 25 (E.D.S.) ‘Pagyll, a cow-
sloppe;’ Palsgrave. As cowslip, formerly cowslop, orig. meant ‘ cow-
dung,’ it is possible that paigle may have meant ‘horsedung.’
Woeste’s Westphal. glossary gives paen-wiamel, a dung-beetle; and
he notes that the Hannover form is pagel-worm, where pagel means
‘ ee evidently from Low G. page, MDu. paghe (Oudemans),
a horse.

PATIL, an open vessel of wood, &c. for holding liquids. (F.—L.)
ME. paile, payle. ‘Payle, or mylke-stoppe [milk-pail];’ Prompt.
Parv. AF. paile; glossed by ME. stoppe; Nominale, ed. Skeat,
1. 496.— OF. paele, a pan; ‘a footless posnet,’ i. e. iron cooking-pot ;
saucepan; Cot.—L, patella, dimin. of patina, a pan; see Paten.
B. Or from AS, pegel, occurring as a gloss upon L. gillo in Wright’s
Vocab., where it is misprinted wegel; see Voc. 124. 2, and Toller’s
A.S. Dict. It is cognate with Du. and G. pegel, G. peil, a gauge for
liquids; cf. Dan. pegel, half a pint. But it seems to have been
French ; note the final -e. Der. pail-ful.

PAIN, bodily suffering, anguish. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. peine, peyne,
King Alisaunder, 4522.—F. peine, ‘a paine, penalty ;’ Cot.=L. pena,
punishment, penalty, pain.—Gk. mow7, penalty. B. The L. word
was borrowed from the Gk. very early. Idg. type *goind; cf. Olrish
cin (Ir. cion), a fault; Zend kaénd-, punishment, Pers. ki, revenge ;
Russ. ¢siena, a price; Gk. tivey, to pay a price. Brugmann, i.
§ 202, Cf. Pine (1). Der. pain, verb, ME. peinen, Chaucer,
C. T. 1393 pain-ed; pain-ful (with E. suffix -ful=full), formerly
used with the sense of ‘industrious,’ see exx. in Trench, Select
Glossary; pain-ful-ly, pain-ful-ness, pain-less, pain-less-ness; also
pains-taking, adj., i. e. taking pains or trouble, Beaum. and Fletcher,
Span. Curate, iv. 5 (Diego) ; pains-taking, sb. And see pen-al, pen-
ance, pen-itent, pun-ish, pine (2).

PAINIM; see Paynim,

PAINT, to colour, describe, depict. (F.—L.) ME. peinten,
Chaucer, C. T. 11946, 11949 (C 12,15); but the word must have been
in use in very early times, as we find the derived words peintunge,
painting, and peinture, a picture, in the Ancren Riwle, p. 392, 1. 17,
p- 242, 1. 14.—OF. peint, paint (mod. F. peint), pp. of peindre,
paindre (mod. F. peindre), to paint.=L. pingere, to paint. Allied
to Skt. piij, to dye, colour; piijara-, yellow, tawny. B. The form
of the root is PEIG, to colour; perhaps allied to 4/PEIK, to adom,
form, whence Skt. pig, to adorn, form, pé¢as, an ornament, and Gk.
motkidos, variegated. Der. paint, sb. (a late word), Dryden, to
Sir Robert Howard, 1. 8 ; paint-er, Romeo, i. 2. 41; paint-ing, in early
use, ME. peintunge, as above. And see pict-ure, de-pict, pig-ment,
pi-mento, or-pi-ment, or-pine, pint.

PAINTER, a rope for mooring a boat. (F.—L.) ‘ Painter,
a rope employed to fasten a boat;’ Hawkesworth’s Voyages, 1773,
vol. i. p. xxix ; spelt paynter, Naval Accounts (1485), p. 37. B. Some
have supposed it to have been corrupted (by assimilation to the
ordinary sb. painter) from ME. panter, a snare, esp. for catching
birds; see Chaucer, Legend of Good Women, 131; Prompt. Parv.
Pp- 381; spelt paunter, Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 344.—AF. panter
(Godefroy); MF. pantiere, a kind of snare for birds (Roquefort) ;
panthiere, ‘a great swoop-net ;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. pantiera, ‘a kinde of
tramell or fowling-net,’ Florio; panthera, ‘a net or haie to catch
conies with, also a kind of fowling-net ;’ id.—L. panthér, a hunting-
net for catching wild beasts; cf. panthéra, an entire capture. — Gk.
mav@npos, catching all sorts of animals. — Gk. way, neut. of mas, every ;
and 6np, a wild beast; seePan-and Panther. @ Thelrish painteir,
Gael. painntear, a gin, snare, are borrowed from E.; the ME. word
occurs as early as the reign of Edw. II. It is remarkable that, in
America, a panther is also called a painter ; see Cooper, The Pioneers,
cap. xxviii. sy. But ME. panter means ‘net’ rather than ‘noose.’
Perhaps painter represents MF. penteur, ‘the name of one of the
ropes which passe over the top of a mast,’ Cot.; or OF. pentoir,
pendoir, in Godefroy, a perch for hanging clothes to dry, part of
a belt to which a sword is hung, also strong cordage; from L.
pendére, to hang. But the history is obscure.

PAIR, two equal or like things, a couple. (F.—L.) ME. peire,
peyre, applied to any number of like or equal things, and not limited,
as now, to two only, Thus ‘a geire of bedes’=a set of beads,
Chaucer, C. T. 159. ‘A pair of cards’=a pack of cards; Ben
Jonson, Masque of Christmas (Carol). ‘A pair of organs "=a set
of organ-pipes, i.e. an organ; see my note to P. Plowman, C. xxi. 7.


PALE 423


‘A pair of stairs’=a flight of stairs. Yet we also find ‘a peyre
hose’=a pair of hose; Rob. of Glouc. p. 390, 1. 8013.—F. paire,
“a paire, or couple of ;’ Cot.; F. pair, ‘like, alike, equall, matching,
even, meet ;’ Cot.—L. paria, neut. pl., and parem, ace. of par, alike.
See Par, Peer. Der. pair, verb, Wint. Ta. iv. 4.154. Also um-
pire, q.V-


PAJAMAS, PYJAMAS, loose drawers. (Hind. — Pers.)


“Modern. Lit. ‘leg-clothing.’= Hind. pa’ejama, pajama, drawers. =


Hind. pa’e, leg, pa, foot ; jama, garment (Forbes, Yule). = Pers. pai,
cognate with E. foot; jamak, a garment. (Horn, § 412.) See
pyjammas in Yule.

PAL, a brother, comrade. (Gipsy.) ‘Pal is a common cant word
for brother or friend, and it is purely Gipsy. On the Continent it is
prala or pral;” C. G. Leland, Eng. Gipsies, vi.

PALACE, a royal house, (F.—L.) ME. palais, King Horn,
ed. Lumby, 1256; paleis, Floriz and Blancheflur, 87.—F. palais, ‘a
palace;’? Cot.—L. palatium, formerly a building on the Palatine
hill at Rome. ‘On this hill, the Collis Palatinus, stood ... the
houses of Cicero and Catiline. Augustus built his mansion on the
same hill, and his example was followed by Tiberius and Nero.
Under Nero, all private honses had to be pulled down on the Collis
Palatinus, in order to make room for the emperor’s residence . . .
called the Palatium; and it became the type of all the palaces of
the kings and emperors of Europe;’ Max Miiller, Lectures on
Language, ii. 276. B. The Collis Palatinus is supposed to have
been so called from Pales, a pastoral deity; see Max Miller, as
above. Pales was a goddess who protected flocks; and the name
may have meant ‘protector;’ cf. Skt. pala-, one who guards or
protects; pa, to protect, cherish. Der. palati-al (Todd), formed
with suffix -al from 1. palati-um ; also palat-ine, q.v.; palad-in, q.v.

PALADIN, a warrior, a knight of Charlemagne’s household.
(F.—Ital.—L.) Jn Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —F. paladin, ‘a knight
of the round table;” Cot. Ital. paladino, ‘a warrier, a valiant man
at armes;’ Florio.=L. palatinus; see Palatine. Properly applied
to a knight of a palace or royal household. Doublet, palatine.

PATLAGO-; see Paleo-.

PALANQUIN, PALANKEEN, a light litter in which
travellers are carried on men’s shoulders. (Port.—Hind.—Skt.) ‘A
pallamkeen or litter;’ Sir T. Herbert, Travels, 1665, p. 72. Spelt
palankee in Terry’s Voyage to East India, 1655, p. 155 (Todd) ;
palanguin in Skinner, ed. 16713 pallanchine in Hakluyt, Voy. ii.
part i. 222,—Portuguese palanguim. = Hind. palang, a bed, bedstead ;
otherwise palki ; Forbes, Hindustani Dict.; and (in the Carnatic)
pallakki (H. H. Wilson); Pali pallanko (Yule). Cf. Pers. palank,
palang, a bedstead; Rich. Dict. p. 335. All from Skt. paryazeka-
(Prakrit pallanka-), a couch-bed, a bed; the change from r to J
being very common. = Skt. pari, about, round (Gk. epi); and
anka-, a hook, the flank, &c. Apparently from the support given to
the body. The Skt. azka- is allied to L. uneus, a hook, AS. angel,
ahook. See Peri- and Angle (2).

PALATE, the roof of the mouth, taste, relish. (F.—L.) In
Cor. ii. 1.61. ME. palet, Wyclif, Lament. iv. 4; Prompt. Parv.
p- 378.—AF. palet, palate, in Nominale, ed. Skeat, 29; OF. palat,
in the 14th century; see Littré.=L. palatum, the palate. Root
uncertain. 4 The mod. F. palais answers to a Late L, palatium,
which seems to have been used by mistake for palatum. See remarks
in Max Miiller, Lect. on Lang. ii. 276. Der. palat-al, palat-able,
palat-abl-y, Also palate, verb, Cor. iii. 1. 104,

PALATINE, orig. pertaining to a palace. (F.—L.) Chiefly
in the phr. ‘count palatine, where the adj. follows the sb., as in
French; see Merch. Ven. i. 2. 49.—F. palatin, ‘a generall and
common appellation, or title, for such as have any speciall office or
function in a soveraign princes palace ;” Cot. He adds: ‘Compte
palatin, a count palatine, is not the title of a particular office, but an
hereditary addition of dignity and honour, gotten by service done in
a domesticall charge.’ = L. palatinus, (1) the name of a hill in Rome,
(2) belonging to the imperial abode, to the palace or court. See
Palace. Der. palatin-ate, from F. palatinat, ‘a palatinaty, the
title or dignity of a count palatine, also a county palatine;’ Cot.
Doublet, paladin.

PALAVER, a talk, parley. (Port.—L.—Gk.) Frequently used
in works of travel, of a parley with African chiefs ; a word introduced
on the African coast by the Portuguese.— Port. palavra, a word,
parole.—L. parabola; from Gk. See Parole, Parable,

PALE (1), a stake, narrow piece of wood for enclosing ground,
an enclosure, limit, district. (F.—L.) ME. paal, Wyclif, Ezek.
xv. 3 (earlier version) ; the later version has stake; Vulgate, paxidlus.
Dat. pale, Wyclif, Luke, xix. 43.—F. pal, ‘a pale, stake, or pole;’
Cot.—L. palus, a stake. For *pacslus, from pac-, to fasten; as im
pac-isct, to stipulate. Brugmann, ii. § 76. See Pact. Der. pal-ing,
Blackstone’s Comment. b. ii. c. 3 (R.); pale, verb, 3 Hen. VI, i. 4.


PALE


Doublet, pole (x).


424


103; im-pale; also pal-is-ade, q. v. ¢@ar The
heraldic term pale is the same word.

PALE (2), wan, dim. (F.—L.) ME. palé, Chaucer, C. T. 5065
(B 645). = OF. pale, palle (Burguy), later pasle (Cot.), whence mod. F.
pale. L. pallidum, acc. of pallidus, pale. On the loss of the last
two atonic syllables, see Brachet, Introd. § 50, 51. Allied to Gk.
modtés, gray, and to E. fallow; see Fallow (2). Der. pale-ly, pale-
ness, pal-ish. Doublet, pallid.

PALEOGRAPHY, the study of ancient modes of writing.
(Gk.) . Modern; coined from Gk. madaé-, for madaids, old; and
ypap-ev, to write. Tadacds is from madat, adv., long ago.

PALEOLOGY, archxology. (Gk.) Modern. From Gk.
madatb-, for madras, old; and -Aoyia, from Adyos, a discourse,
which from Aéyew, to speak. See Paleography and Logic.
Der. palzolog-ist.

PALEONTOLOGY; the science of fossils, &c. (Gk.)
Modern. Lit. ‘a discourse on ancient creatures.’ Coined from Gk.
maAat, long ago; dvro-, decl. stem of wy, existing; and -Aoyia, from
Adyos, a discourse, which from Aéyev, tospeak. See Paleography,
Sooth, and Logic. Der. paleontolog-ist.

PALESTRA, a wrestling-school, (L.—Gk.) In Lyly, Euphues,
ed.. Arber, p. 4473; palestr-al, adj., Chaucer, Troilus, v. 304.—L.
palestra.= Gk. madaiotpa, a wrestling-school. = Gk. madaiev, to
wrestle; cf. maA7, wrestling. Connected with Gk. maAdun, the palm
of the hand (Prellwitz). See Palm (1). Der. palestr-al, as above.

PALETOT, a loose garment. (F.) Modern. Borrowed from
mod. F. paletot, formerly palletoc, for which see below. However,
the word is by no means new to English ; the ME. faltok is not, an
uncommon word ; see numerous references in my note to P. Plowman,
B. xviii. 25, where the word occurs; and see Prompt. Parv., and
Way’s note; cf. AF. paltoke (below). This form was borrowed
from OF. palletoc, ‘a long and thick pelt, or cassock, a garment like
a short cloak with sleeves, or such a one as the most of our modern
pages are attired in;’ Cot. Explained by Diez as palle-togue, a cloak
with a hood; from L. palla, a mantle, and Bret. tak, W. toc, a cap.
B. Littré derives OF. palletoc from MDu. paltrok, a:mantle; but
Franck says that this MDu. form was taken (with alteration) from
the OF. word. Cf. Bret. paltok, a peasant’s robe; from L. palla and
Bret. ok, acap. See Pall (1). @ Way says that ‘Sir Roger de
Norwico bequeaths, in 1370, unum paltoke de ueluete, cum armis
meis;’ &c.

PALETTE, a small slab on which a painter mixes colours.
(F.—L.) ‘Pallet, a thin oval piece of wood, used by painters to hold
their colours ;’ Kersey, ed. 1715. The word is used by Dryden;
see Todd (who gives no reference).—F. palette, ‘a lingell, tenon,
slice, or flat tool wherewith chirurgians lay salve on plaisters;
also, the saucer or porringer, whereinto they receive blood out of an
opened vein; alsa, a battledoor;’ Cot. Thus it orig. meant a flat
blade for spreading things, and afterwards a flat slab for colours,
Cf. Ital. paletta, ‘a lingell, slice [such] as apothecaries vse ;’ Florio;
dimin. of pala, ‘a spade;’ id.—L. pala, a spade, shovel, flat-bladed
vat for putting bread into an oven; see Peel (3). Doublet,

allet (2).

PP ALFREY, a saddle-horse, esp. a lady’s horse. (F.—Low L, —

Gk. and C.) In early use. ME. palefrai, O. Eng. Homilies, ed.
Morris, i. 5,1. 20; palfrei, Chaucer, C.T. 2497 (A 2495). =OF. palefrei
(13th century, Littré), MF. palefroy, ‘a palfrey,’ Cot.; mod. F.
palefrot. Spelt palefreid in the 11th century; Littré. — Low L.
paraverédus, a post-horse, lit. ‘an extra post-horse’ (Lewis). Brachet
gives quotations for the later forms paravrédus, parafrédus, and pala-
frédus (10th century); and OF. palefreid=Low L. acc. palafrédum ;
every step being traced with certainty. B. The Low L. paraverédus
is a hybrid formation from Gk. mapa, beside (hence extra); and
Late L. uerédus, a post-horse, courier’s horse (Lewis). y. Here
verédus stands for *vorédus, from a Celtic type *vo-reidos, a carriage-
horse. Celtic *vo (Irish fo, W. go), prep. under, in;‘and *reida,
Gaulish L. rhéda, réda, a carriage. The Celtic *vo-reidos occurs in
W. gorwydd,a horse. The Celtic *reid& is from the verb. seen in
Olrish riad-aim, 1 travel, ride, cognate with E. ride (Stokes). 4 The
Low L. parauerédus is also the original of G. pferd, Du. paard,
a palfrey, horse.

PALIMPSEST, a manuscript which has been twice written
on, the first writing being partly erased..(Gk.) Palimpseston in
Phillips (1706).—Gk. madiyinoror, a palimpsest (manuscript) ; neut.
of madiuynaros, lit. scraped again.—Gk. mdAtp-, for mad, again,
before the following y; and yyords, rubbed, scraped, verbal adj,
from wWaew, to rub, Ionic péev. Cf. Skt. psd, to eat.

PALINDROME, a word or sentence that reads the same back-
wards as forwards. (Gk.) Examples are Hannah, madam, Eve;
Todd quotes subi dura a rudibus from Peacham, Experience in these
Times (1638). ‘Curious palindromes ;’. Ben Jonson, An Execration


PALM


upon Vulcan, Underwoods, Ixi. 1. 34.—Gk. madivdpopos, running
back again.=Gk. mdAw, back, again; and dpdyos, a running, from
dpapety, to run; see Dromedary.

PALINODE, a recantation, in song. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ You,
two and two, singing a palinode;’ Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s Revels,
last speech of Crites.—F. palinodie, ‘a palinody, recantation, con-
trary song, unsaying of what hath been said;’ Cot.—L. palinddia. =
Gk. maAwdia, a recantation, esp. of an ode.—Gk. maéduv, back,
again; and #67, a.song; see Ode.

PALISADE, a fence made of pales or stakes. (F.—L.) . Shak.
has the pl. palisadoes, 1, Hen. 1V, ii. 3. 55; this is a pseudo-Spanish
form ; the mod. Span. word is palizada. Dryden has palisades, tr. of
Virgil, b. vii. 1. 214.—F. palissade, ‘a palisadoe;’ Cot.—F. paliss-er,
‘to inclose with pales,’ id.; with suffix -ade<L. -dta.—F. palis, a
‘pale, stake, pole,’ id.; extended from pal, a pale. See further
under Pale (1). Der. palisade, verb.

PALL (1), a cloak, mantle, archbishop’s scarf, shroud. (L.) ME.
pal, Layamon, 897, 1296; pl.. pelles, id. 2368. AS. pall, purple
cloth ; we find pellas and stdan=purple cloths and silks, as a gloss
to L. purpuram et séricum in AElfric’s Colloquy (the Merchant); see
Thorpe, Analecta, p. 27.—L. pallium, a coverlet, pall, curtain, toga ;
allied to palla, a mantle, loose dress. Sievers, Gr. § 80. Der.
pall-i-ate, q.v. : :

PALL (2), to become vapid, lose taste or spirit. (F.—L.) ME.
pallen, ‘Pallyn, as ale and drynke, Emorior ;’ Prompt. Parv. Way,
in the note on the passage, quotes from Lydgate’s Order of Fools:
‘Who forsakith wyne, and drynkithe ale pallid, Such foltisshe foolis,
God lete hem never the’ [prosper]; Minor Poems, p. 168. He also
cites from Palsgrave: ‘I palle, as drinke or bloode dothe, by longe
standyng in a thynge, ie appallys. This drink wy]ll pall (s’appallyra)
if it stande vncouered all nyght. I palle, I fade of freshenesse in
colour or beautye, ie flaitris.. B. He also has: ‘I appalle, as drinke
dothe or wyne, whan.it leseth his colour, je appalys;’ and again:
‘I appale ones colour, je appalis.’ Thus pall is merely an aphetic
form of appal, which meant both to wax pale and to make pale or to
terrify. See Appal. 4
PALLADIUM, a safeguard of liberty. (L.—Gk.) ‘A kind of
palladium to save the city;’ Milton, Of Reformation in England,
B. 1 (Todd).—L. Palladium; Virgil, Ain. ii. 166, 183. —Gk. MadaAa-
d.ov, the statue of Pallas on which the safety of Troy was supposed
to depend.—Gk. MadAad-, stem of MaAdAds, an epithet of Athene
(Minerva).

PALLET (1), a kind of mattress or couch, properly one of straw.
(F.—L.) ME. paillet, Chaucer, Troil. iii. 229.—AF. paillete, straw,
Bestiary, 4753; IF. paillet, a heap of straw, given by Littré as a pro-
vincial word. Cotgrave only gives pailler, ‘a reek or stack of straw,
also, bed-straw.’ Dimin. of F. paille, ‘straw ;’ Cot. —L. palea, straw,
chaff, Allied to Skt. palala-, straw ; Russ. polova, chaff; Lith. pelai,
pl. chaff. See Palliasse.

PALLET (2), an instrument used by potters, also by gilders;
also, a palette. (F.—Ital.—L.) See definitions in N.E. D.; it is,
properly, a flat-bladed instrument for spreading plasters, gilding, &c.,
and for moulding; and is only another spelling of Palette, q.v.

PALLIASSH, a straw mattress. (F.—L.) Not in Todd’s
Johnson. The introduction of i is due to an attempt to represent
the ‘JJ mouillés’ of the F. paillasse, which see in Littré. The MF.
form in Cotgrave is paillace, ‘a straw-bed.’ The suffix -ace, asse
(< L..-dceus) is a diminutive one; Brachet, Etym. Dict. Introd.
§ 272; and paill-ace is from paille, straw. =L. palea; see Pallet (1).

PALLIATE, to cloak, excuse. (L.) ‘Being palliated with
a pilgrim’s coat and hypocritic sanctity;’ Sir T. Herbert, Travels,
ed. 1665, p. 341. Properly a pp., as in ‘certain lordes and citezens. .
in habite padliate and dissimuled;’ Hall’s Chron., Hen. IV. introd.
§ 11.—L. pallidtus, cloaked, covered with a cloak.—L. pallium,
a cloak, mantle. See Pall (1). Der. palliat-ion, palliat-ive.

PALLID, pale. (L.) ‘Paillid death ;’ Spenser, F. Q. v. 11. 45.—
L. pallidus, pale. See Pale (2), Doublet, pale (2).

PALL-MALL, the name of an old game. (F.—Ital.—L.) Dis-
cussed under Mall (2), q.v. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 204.

PALLOR, paleness, (L.) Used by Bp. Taylor, Artificial Hand-
someness, p. 2 (Todd).—L. pallor, paleness. = L, pallére, to be pale..
Cf, L. pallidus, pale; see Pale (2).

PALM (1), the inner part of the hand. (F.—L.) ME. paume, the
palm of the hand, P. Plowman, B. xvii. 141, 147, 150, 153.—F.
paume, ‘the palme of the hand ;’ Cot.—L. palma, the palm of the
hand.+Gk. maddyun; Skt. paxi- (for *palni-).-AS. folm; Grein,
i, 3113; Olrish Jim; W. /law. Brugmann, i. § 529 (2). Allied to
AS, folm is E, fumble; see Fumble, Der. palmate, from L. pal-
matus, marked with the palm of the hand, shaped like the palm;
palm-ist-ry, in Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, bk. v. ch, 24, pt, 13


ME. pawmesiry, Lydgate, Assembly of Gods, 870.


PALM


PALM (2), the name of a tree. (L.) AS. palm, a palm-tree;
borrowed directly from Latin. ‘Palma, palm-twig, vel palm;’
Wright’s Vocab. i. 32, col. 2. So called from some resemblance of
the leaves to the out-spread hand; see Palm (1).. 4 We may
note that the L. spelling has prevailed over the French, as in psalm,
&c. Der. palm-er, ME. palmere, Chaucer, C. T. 13, King Horn,
ed. Lumby, 1027, i.e. one who bears a palm-branch in token of
having been to the Holy Land; palm-er-worm, Joel, i. 4, ii. 25,
a caterpillar supposed to be so called from its wandering about like
a pilgrim, and also simply called palmer (see Eastwood and Wright’s
Bible Word-book) ; Palm-sunday, ME. palme-suneday, O. Eng. Mis-
cellany, ed. Morris, p. 39, 1. 65, AS. palm-sunnandeg, Luke, xix. 29
(margin); palm-y, Hamlet, i. 1. 113; palm-ary, ice. deserving the
palm (as token of a victory). @ The palmer or palmer-worm
might have been named from prov. E. palm, the catkin of a willow ;
but we also find palmer in the sense of wood-louse, and in Holli-
band’s Dict., ed. 1593, a palmer is described as ‘a worme having
a great many feete;’ see Halliwell.

PALPABLE, that can be felt, obvious. (F.—L.) In Macb. ii.
1. 40; Chaucer, Ho. Fame, 869.—F. palpable, omitted by Cotgrave,
but in use in the 15th century (Littré), and given by Palsgrave, who
has: ‘Palpable, apte or mete to be felte, palpable.’ —L. palpabilis,
that can be touched. —L. palpare, to feel, palpari, to feel, handle.
8. An initial s has been lost, if it be related to Gk. WnAapdw, I feel ;
Skt. sphalaya, to strike, to touch. Der. palpabl-y, palpable-ness,
palpabili-ty. And see palpitate.

PALPITATSH, to throb. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. [It is
not unlikely that the E. verb to palpitate was really due to the sb.
palpitation.|—L. palpitatus, pp. of palpitare, to throb; frequentative
of palpare, to feel, stroke, pat. See Palpable. Der. palpitat-ion,
from F. palpitation, ‘a panting ;” Cot.

PALSY, paralysis. (F:—L.—Gk.) ME. palesy, Wyclif, Matt. iv.
24; pallesye, Rob. of Brunne, Handlyng Synne, 11922; fuller form
parlesy, Prick of Conscience, ed. Morris, 2996.—F. paralysie, ‘the
palsie ;’ Cot. L. paralysin, acc. of paralysis; see Paralysis. Der.
‘palsy, verb ; palsi-ed, Cor. v. 2. 46.

PALTER, to dodge, shift, shuffle, equivocate. (Scand.) . See
Macb. v. 8. 20; Jul. Cees. ii..1. 126. Cotgrave, s.v. harceler, has:
“to haggle, hucke, hedge, or paulter long in the buying of a com-
moditie.’ It also means ‘to babble,’ as in: ‘One whyle his tonge it
ran and paltered of a cat, Another whyle he stammered styll upon
a rat;’ Gammer Gurton, ii. 3. Cf. prov. E. polter, to work care-
lessly, to go about aimlessly, to trifle. Prob. of Scand. origin. Cf,
Swed. dial. pallta, to go about, to hobble about, to toddle ; palléer,
a poor wretch, who goes about aimlessly; from pala, to work
slowly (Rietz). Perhaps of imitative origin; cf. falter.

PALTRY, mean, vile, worthless. (Scand.) In Shak. Merry
Wives, ii. 1. 164; Marlowe, Edw. II, ii. 6. 57. Jamieson gives
paltrie, peltrie, vile trash ; Halliwell has paltring, a worthless trifle ;
Forby explains Norfolk paltry by ‘rubbish, refuse, trash;’ and
Brockett gives palterly as the North, Eng. form of the adj. paltry.
It stands for palter-y (North. E. palter-ly), formed with the adj. suffix
-y (or -ly) from an old pl. palt-er (formed like ME. child-er =children,
breth-er =brethren), which is still preserved in Swed. and Danish.
This account is verified by the G. forms; see below. The sense of
palter is ‘rags, and that of paltr-y is ‘ragged,’ hence, vile, worth-
less; or, as a sb., trash or refuse.—Swed. paltor, rags, pl. of palta,
a rag; Ihre gives MSwed. faltor, old-rags, with a reference to
Jerem. xxxviil. 11; Dan. pjalter, rags, pl. of pjalt, a rag, tatter;
hence the adj. pjaltet, ragged, tattered.4-Low G. palte, pulte, a rag,
a piece of cloth torn or cut off; whence the adj. paltrig, pultrig,
ragged, torn; Bremen Worterb. ili. 287; Prov. G. palter (pl. paltern),
arag; whence palterig, paltry (Fliigel). Cf. also MDu. palt, a piece,
fragment, as, palt brods, a piece of bread (Oudemans, Kilian) ;
NFries, palt, a rag (Outzen). B. The origin is by no means clear;
Thre connects Swed. paltor with MSwed. palt, a kind of garment.
See Rietz, s.v. pallt. Possibly of Slavonic origin; cf. Russ. polotno,
platno, linen; which may be allied to E. fold (as of linen); cf. Skt.
pata-, woven stuff, piece of cloth. Der. paltri-ly, paltri-ness.

PALUSTRAL, PALUSTRINE, of the marshes, marshy.
(L.) Coined from L. paluster, marshy. =—L. palus, a marsh, morass.

PAMPAS, plains in South America. (Span.— Peruvian.) Pampas
is the Span. pl. of pampa,a plain. From the Peruy. pampa, a plain;
hence Moyo-bamba, Chuqui-bamba, places in Peru, with bamba for
pampa (wrongly). Garcilasso, in his Comment. on Peru, bk. vii. c. 4,
complains that the Spaniards often mispronounced pampa as bamba,

PAMPER, to feed luxuriously, glut. (Flemish.) In Much Ado,
iv. 1.61. ‘Pampired with ease ;’ Court of Love, 1. 177 (first printed
1561). ‘Oure pamperde paunchys,’ Skelton, ed. Dyce, i. 19, 1. 25.
But the word was known to Chaucer; ‘ They ne were nat forpampred
with owtrage;’ A&tas Prima, 1.5. Wedgwood quotes from Reliquiz


PANDEMONIUM 425


Antique, i. 41: ‘Thus the devil farith with men and wommen;
First, he stirith him to pappe and pampe her fleisch, desyrynge
delicous metis and drynkis.’ Not found in AS., and prob. imported
from the Netherlands. The form pamp-er is precisely the W. Flemish
pamperen, to pamper (De Bo) ; a frequentative from pamp (as above),
meaning to feed luxuriously; and this verb is a causal form from
a sb. pamp, a nasalised form of pap.—jLow G. pampen, more com-
monly slampampen, to live luxuriously; Brem. Worterb. iv. 800.—
Low G. pampe, thick pap, pap made of meal ; also called pampelbry,
i.e. pap-broth; and, in some dialects, pappe; id. iii. 287. So also
Low G. (Altmark) pampen, pappen, to cram oneself (Danneil) ; vulgar
G, pampen, pampeln, to cram, pamper, from pampe, pap, thick broth;
Bavarian pampfen, to stuff, sich anpampfen, vollpampfen, to cram one-
self with pap or broth (Schmeller, i. 392). 4] The use of the prefix
for- in Chaucer is almost enough in itself to stamp the word as being
of Teutonic origin. Der. pamper-er.

PAMPHLET, a small book, of a few sheets stitched together.
(F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt pamflet, Testament of Love, bk. iii. ch. 9.
1, 543 ed. 1561, fol. 317 b, col. 1; pamphlet in Shak. 1 Hen. VI,
iii.1.2. [The mod. F. pamphlet is borrowed from English (Littré).]
Hoccleve has the form panzfilet (trisyllabic) in 1. 1 of a poem
addressed to Richard, duke of York. It is obviously formed, with the
F. suffix -et, from the name Pamphil-us, as in other similar instances.
Thus the OF. Esop-et meant a book by Atsop, Avion-et meant one
by Avianus (see note to P. Plowman, B. xii. 257), and Chaton-et one
by Cato (Godefroy). Similarly, Pamphil-et or Pamfil-et meant
one by Pamphile, i.e. Pamphilus. The allusion is to a medieval
Latin poem (in 780 lines) of the 12th century referred to by Chaucer
inC.T.,F 1110. The title is: ‘ Pamphili Mauriliani Pamphilus;’
there is an edition by Goldastus. See my note on the passage.
[There was also a Pamphila, a female historian of the first century,
who wrote numerous epitomes; see Suidas, Aul. Gellius, xv. 17, 23;
Diog. Laertius, in life of Pittacus.] The earliest record of the word
in England is in the Late L. panfletus, a little book; in Richard of
Bury, Philobiblon, c. 8 (A.D. 1344). Cf. F. pamphile, a name for the
knave of clubs (Littré), due to the Gk. name Pamphilus ; whence
Pam, in Pope, Rape of the Lock, 349. Der. pamphlet-eer, Bp. Hall,
Satires, b. ii: sat. 1, 1. 30; pamphlet-eer-ing.

PAN, a broad shallow vessel for domestic use. (E.?) ‘Pannes
and pottes;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b.i.c. 1. ME. panne,
Chaucer, C. T. 7196 (D 1614). AS. panne, a pan; ‘ Patella, panne ;’
‘jsen panne’ = an iron pan; fyr-panne =a fire-pan ; Aflfric’s Vocab.
Nomina Vasorum, in Voc. 123. 6; 124.10, 11. And see /Elfred, tr.
of Gregory’s Pastoral, c. xxi, ed. Sweet, p. 162, last line. [Irish
panna, W. pan, are from E.] Cf. Icel. panna, Swed. panna, Dan.
pande (for panne), Du. pan, G. pfanne; also Low Lat. panna.
B. Perhaps of Teut. origin. If not, it may be a corrupted form of
L. patina, a shallow bowl, pan, bason. Der. brain-pan, with which
cf. ME. panne in the transferred sense of skull, Chaucer, C. T. 1167
(A 1165); knee-pan; pan-cake, As You Like It, i. 2. 67, and in
Palsgrave; also pannikin, from MDu. panneken, ‘a small. panne,’
Hexham; with MDu.-dimin. suffix -kex, Also pan-tile, first in 1640
(N. E. D.).

PAN., prefix, all. (Gk.) From Gk. may, neut. of nas, all. The
stem is mayT-.

PANACEA, a universal remedy. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Panacea, a medy-
cine... of much vertue ;’ Udall, pref. to Luke, fol. 8, back. Oddly
spelt panachea, Spenser, F. Q. iii. 5. 32.—L. panacéa. — Gk. ravdaxeaa,
fem. of mavdKeos, allied to mavaxys, all-healing.—Gk. may, neut.
of mds, all; and ax-, base of dxéopa, I heal, dxos, a cure,
remedy.

PANCREAS, a fleshy gland under the stomach, commonly
known as the sweet-bread. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Pancreas, the sweet-bread ;’
Phillips, ed. 1706.—L. pancreas. —Gk. mayxpeas, the sweet-bread ;
lit. ‘all flesh.’ Gk. av, neut. of mas, all; and xpéas, flesh, for
*xpéF-as, allied to Skt. kravya-m, raw flesh, L. crii-dus, raw. See
Pan- and Crude. Der. pancreat-ic, from the stem mayxpear-.

PANDECT, a comprehensive treatise, digest. (F.—L.—Gk.)
‘Thus thou, by means which th’ ancients never took, A pandect
mak’st, and universal book ;? Donne, Vpon Mr. T. Coryat’s Crudities,
1. 50. More properly used in the pl. pandects, as in Sir T. Elyot,
The Governor, bk. i. c. 14. § 10.—MF. pandectes, ‘ pandects, books
which contain all matters, or comprehend all the parts of the subject
whereof they intreat;’ Cot.—L. pandectas, acc. of pl. pandecte, the
title of the collection of Roman laws made by order of Justinian,
A.D. 533; see Gibbon, Rom. Empire, ch. 44. The sing. pandecta
also appears; also pandectés, the true orig. form.— Gk. TavoeKTNS,
all-receiving, comprehensive; whence pl. mavdexra, pandects.—
Gk. way, neut. of mas, all; and 5ex-, base of 5éXopat, Ionic déxopat,
I receive, contain. See Pan-.

_PANDEMONIUM, ‘the home of all the demons, hell. (Gk.)


426 PANDER, PANDAR


In Milton, P. L. i. 756. Coined from Gk. may, all; and daipo-,


from daiuwy, a demon; see Pan- and Demon.

PANDER, PANDAR, a pimp, one who ministers to another's
passions. (L.—Gk.) Commonly pander; yet pandar is better. Much
Ado, v. 2. 313 used as a proper name, Troil. i. 1. 98. ME. Pandare,
shortened form of Pandarus; Chaucer uses both forms, Troil. i. 610,
618. —L. Pandarus, the name of the man ‘ who procured for Troilus
the love and good graces of Chryseis; which imputation, it may be
added, depends upon no better authority than the fabulous histories
of Dictys Cretensis and Dares Phrygius;’ Richardson. In other
words, the whole story is an invention of later times. — Gk. Havdapos,
a personal name. Two men of this name are recorded: (1) a Lycian
archer, distinguished in the Trojan army; see Homer (Il. ii. 827);
(2) acompanion of AEneas; see Smith’s Classical Dict. Der. pander,
vb., Hamlet, iii. 4. 88; pander-ly, adj., Merry Wives, iv. 2. 122;
pander-er (sometimes used, unnecessarily, for the sb. pander).

PANDOUBRS, soldiers in a certain Hungarian regiment. (F.—
Low L.—Teut.) ‘ Hussars and pandours (1768), Foote, Devil upon
Two Sticks, ii. 1._.F. pandour; from a Serbo-Croatian form pandur
(earlier bandir), a constable, catchpole, mounted policeman, watcher
of vineyards (N. E. D.).— Low L. bandérius, a follower of a banner,
watcher of vineyards. Low L. bandum, a banner; of Teut. origin ;
see Banner.

PANE, a patch, a plate of glass, (F.—L.) ‘A pane of giass, or
wainscote;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627. ME. pane, applied to a part or
portion of a thing; see Prompt. Parv. p. 380, and Way’s note.
‘Vch pane of pat place had pre 3atez’= each portion of that place
had three gates; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, i. 1034 (or 1033).—F.
pan, ‘a pane, piece, or pannell of a wall, of wainscot, of a glasse-
window, &c.; also, the skirt of a gown, the pane of a hose, of
a cloak, &c.;’ Cot.=L. pannum, acc. of pannus, a cloth, rag, tatter;
hence, a patch, piece. Allied to panus, the thread wound upon
a bobbin in a shuttle; and to Gk. mjvos, mnvn, the woof. Also to
Goth. fana, and E. vane; see Vane. Der. pan-ed, in the phr. paned
hose, ornamented breeches, which see in Nares; also pan-el, q.v.
And see pan-icle.

PANEHGYRIC, a eulogy, encomium. (L.—Gk.) Spelt pane-
gyricke in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—L. panégyricus, a eulogy; from pané-
gyricus, adj., with the same sense as in Greek. —Gk. ravnyupixds, fit
for a full assembly, festive, solemn ; hence applied to a festival oration,
or panegyric.—Gk,. may, neut. of mas, all; and -nyupr-s, related to
dyopa, a gathering, a crowd, dyelpev, to assemble. See Pan- and
Gregarious. Der. panegyric, adj. (really an older use); panegyric-al,
panegyric-al-ly, panegyr-ise, panegyr-ist.

PANEL, PANNEL, a compartment with a raised border,
a board with a surrounding frame. (F.—L.) In Shak. As You Like
It, iii. 3. 89. ME. panel, in two other senses: (1) a piece of cloth
on a horse’s back, to serve as a sort of saddle, Cursor Mundi, 14982 ;
(2) a schedule containing the names of those summoned to serve as
jurors, P. Plowman, B. iii. 315. The general sense is ‘a little piece,’
and esp. a square piece, whether of wood, cloth, or parchment, but
orig. of cloth only. = OF. panel, MF. paneau, ‘a pannel of wainscot,
of a saddle, &c.;’ Cot.—Late L. pannellus, panellus, used in Prompt.
Parv. p. 381, as equivalent to ME. panele. Dimin. of L. pannus,
cloth, a piece of cloth, a rag; see Pane. Der. em-panel, im-panel ;
see Empanel.

PANG, a violent pain, a throe. (E.) In the Court of Love,
1. 1150, we find: ‘ The prang of love so straineth thaim to crye;’
altered, in modern editions, to ‘ The pange of love.’ In Prompt. Parv.
Pp- 493, we find: ‘ Throwe, womannys pronge, sekeness, Erumpna ;’
i.e. a throe, a woman’s pang. So also: ‘ These prongys myn herte
asonder thei do rende ;’ Coventry Myst., p. 287. But the pl. pangus
is in The Tale of Beryn, 963. The sense is ‘a sharp stab, severe
prick.’ It is clear that the word has lost anr; for the etymology,
see Prong. . In Skelton, Philip Sparowe, 1. 44, the word occurs
as a verb: ‘ What heuyness dyd me pange ;’ it is also a sb., id. ]. 62.
Cf. also: ‘ For there be in us certayne affectionate pangues of nature ;’
Udall, Luke, c. 4, v. 12. Both sb. and vb. are common in Shake-
speare. Cf. MDu. prange, ‘ oppression, or constraint ;? Hexham.

PANGOLIN, the scaly ant-eater. (Malay.) See C.P. G. Scott
and Yule.— Malay peng-géling. Lit. ‘the creature that rolls itself
up. From Malay géling, a roller, that which rolls up; with the
denominative prefix pe-, which becomes peng- before g (Marsden,
Scott).

PANIC, extreme fright. (Gk.) When we speak of a panic, it is
an abbreviation of the phrase ‘a panic fear,’ given in Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. Camden has ‘a panicall feare;’ Remaines, chap. on
Poems (R.).=Gk. 70 Mavxdv, used with or without de?ua (= fear),
Panic fear, i.e. fear supposed to be inspired by the god Pan.—Gk.
Tlavixds, of or belonging to Pan.=Gk. May, a rural god of Arcadia,
son of Hermes. Cf. Russ. gan’, a lord, Lithuan. ponas, a lord,


PANTALOON


also, the Lord. Cf. Skt. pa, to cherish. Der. panic-struck or panic-.
stricken.

PANICLE, a form of inflorescence in which the cluster is irregu-
larly branched. (L.) Modern and scientific.—L. pdanicula, a tuft,
panicle. Double dimin. form from pdnus, the thread wound round
the bobbin of a shuttle, a swelling; as to which see Pane. Der.
panicul-at-ed, panicul-ate.

P. AGH, food of swine in woods ; money paid for such food.
(F.—L.) Obsolete; see Blount’s Nomo-Lexicon, Todd’s Johnson,
&c. Also spelt pawnage, and even pounage; see Chaucer, The
Former Age, 7. Anglo-F. ganage, Year-Books of Edw. I, i. 63,
ii. 135. —OF. pasnage, ‘pawnage, mastage, monie .. . for feeding of
swine with mast ;’ Cot.—Late L. pasndticum, short for pastindticum,
pastionaticum, pannage (Ducange).=—Late L. pastidnire, to feed on
mast, as swine. L. pastidn-, stem of pastio, a grazing, used in Late L.
with the sense of right of pannage.= L. past-um, supine of pascere, to
feed; see Pastor.

PANNEL, the same as Panel, q. v.

PANNIER, a bread-basket. (F.—L.) ME. panier (with one 2),
Havelok, 760. =F. panier, ‘a pannier, or dosser ;? Cot. = L. panarium,
a bread-basket.—L. panis, bread; allied to pascere (pt. t. pa-ui), to
feed. See Pastor. Der. see pantry and company.

PANNIKTN, dimin. of Pan, q. v.

PANOPLY, complete armour. (Gk.) In Milton, P. L. vi. 527,
760. ‘Than all your fury, and the panoply;’ Ben Jonson, Magnetic
Lady, A. iii. sc. 4.— Gk. ravoraia, the full armour of an émAirns, or
heavy-armed soldier.=Gk. may, neut. of mds, all; and émA-a, arms,
armour, pl. of SmAov, a tool, implement. B. Gk. 67-Aoy is con-
nected with éw, Iam busy about (whence émoyar, I follow); Brug-
mann, ii. § 657. Der. panopli-ed.

PANORAMA, a picture representing a succession of scenes.
(Gk.) Late; added by Todd to Johnson. Invented by R. Barker,
A.D. 1788 (Haydn). Coined to mean ‘a view all round.’ = Gk. av,
neut. of as, all; and dpapa, a view, from dpaw, I see, from 4/ WER,
to protect. See Pan- and Wary. Der. panoram-ic.

PANSY, heart’s-ease, a species of violet. (F.—L.) In Hamlet,
iv. 5.176. ME. pensees, pl., Assembly of Ladies, 1. 62 (and note).
‘Pensy floure, pensee;’ Palsgrave.=F. pensée, ‘a thought ; . . also,
the flower paunsie;’ Cot. Thus, it is the flower of thought or
remembrance; cf. forget-me-not. The F. pensée is the fem. of pense,
pp. of penser, to think.—L. pensare, to weigh, ponder, consider;
frequentative form of pendére, to weigh (pp. pensus). See Pensive.

PANT, to breathe hard. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Tw. Nt. iii. 4.
323. ‘To pant and quake ;’ Spenser, F. Q.i. 7. 20. ME. panten ;
Prompt. Parv. p. 381. And see Skelton, Phyllyp Sparowe, 1. 132.
A hawk was said ‘to pante’ when it was short-winded; Book of
St. Alban’s, fol. b6, back. Obviously connected with F. panteler, to
pant, a new formation from OF. pantaisier (below), MF. pantiser,
‘to breath very fast, to blow thick and short ;’ Cot. From the same
OF. verb was formed MF. pantois, ‘short-winded, oft-breathing, out
of breath ;’” pantois, sb., ‘short wind, pursinesse, a frequent breathing,
or a difficult fetching of wind by the shortness of breath; in hawks,
we call it the pantais;’ Cot. [In Sherwood’s index to Cotgrave we
find: ‘The pantasse or pantois in hawkes, le pantais.’| This use of
the term in hawking appears to be old. B. All from AF. pantoiser,
to pant, Vie de St. Auban, 697; OF. panteisier, pantaisier, pantoisier
(Godefroy), to breathe with difficulty; cognate with Prov. pantaisa(r),
to dream, to be oppressed, to pant.—Late L. *phantasiare, by-form
of phantasiari, to dream, see visions in sleep, imagine (Ducange).—
Gk. payracia, a fancy; see Fancy. @ SoG. Paris, in Romania,
vi. 628; Korting, § 7111. Cf. Gascon pantaia, to dream, to pant
(Mistral); ME. to panty, Voc. 564. 4.

PANTALOON (1), a ridiculous character in a pantomime, buf-
foon. (F.—Ital.—Gk.) In Shak. As You Like It, ii. 7. 158; Tam.
of Shrew, iii. 1. 37.—F. pantalon, (1) a name given to the Venetians,
(2) a pantaloon; see Littré. Ital. pantalone, a pantaloon, buffoon.
“The pantalone is the pantaloon of Ital. comedy, a covetous and
amorous old dotard who is made the butt of the piece ;” Wedgwood.
The name, according to Zambaldi (Vocabulario Etimologico) was
applied to the pantaloon as representing the old Venetian merchant ;
and Mahn (in Webster) says that St. Pantaleone was ‘the patron
saint of [rather, a well-known saint in] Venice, and hence a baptismal
name very frequent among the Venetians, and applied to them by
the other Italiansasanickname.’ Lord Byron speaks of the Venetian
name Pantaleone as being ‘ her very by-word;’ Childe Harold, c. iv.
st. 14. B. St. Pantaleone’s day is July 27; he was martyred A.p.
303; Chambers, Book of Days, ii. 127. The name is also written
Pantaleon (as in Chambers), which is perhaps better. It is certainly
Gk., and he is said to be known in the Greek church as Panteleémon ;
from mavr-, for mas, all, and éAejpov, pitying, merciful. The pres,
pt. of éAeetv, to pity, would give a by-form Paxteledn. @ The


PANTALOONS


etymology advocated by Lord Byron is extraordinary, and indeed
ridiculous, viz. Ital. pianta-leone=the planter of the lion, i.e. the
planter of the standard bearing the lion of St. Mark, supposed to be
applied to Venice; see note 9 to c. iv of Childe Harold. Der.
pantaloons.

PANTALOONS, a kind of trousers. (F.—Ital.—Gk.) ‘And
as the French, we conquered once Now give us laws for pantaloons ;’
Butler, Hudibras, pt. i. c. 3, 1. 923; on which Bell’s note says:
‘The pantaloon belongs to the Restoration. It was loose in the
upper part, and puffed, and covered the legs, the lower part terminating
in stockings. In an inventory of the time of Charles II pantaloons
are mentioned, and a yard and a half of lutestring allowed for them.’
See also Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—F. pantalon, a garment so called
because worn by the Venetians, who were themselves called Pantalont,
i.e. Pantaloons (Littré). See Pantaloon.

PANTHEISM, the doctrine that the universe is God. (Gk.) In
Waterland, Works, vol. viii. p. 81 (R.). Todd only gives pantheist.
Coined from Pan- and Theism. And see Pantheon. Der. so
also pan-theist, from pan- and theist ; hence pantheist-ic, pantheist-ic-al.

PANTHEON, a temple dedicated to all the gods. (L.—Gk.)
‘One temple of pantheon, that is to say, all goddes;’ Udall, on the
Revelation, c. 16. fol. 311 B; and in Shak. Titus, i. 242.—L. pan-
théon. =—Gk. mévOecov, for mavOeiov tepdv, a temple consecrated to all
gods,=—Gk. mdv@eov, neut. of mayvOe10s, common to all gods. = Gk.
may, neut. of mas, all; and Oétos, divine, from 6¢ds, god. See Pan-
and Theism.

PANTHER, a fierce carnivorous quadruped. (F.—L.—Gk.—
Skt.) ME. pantere, King Alisaunder, 6820; panter, O. Eng. Mis-
cellany, ed. Morris, p. 23.  [Cf. AS. pandher (sic); Grein, ii.
361.]—OF. panthere, ‘a panther ;’ Cot.—L. panthéra; also panthér.
— Gk. mavOnp,a panther. Foreign to Gk., and prob, of Skt. origin. =
Skt. pundarika-s, explained by Benfey as ‘the elephant of the south-
east quarter;’ but also ‘a tiger,’ according to the St. Petersburg
Skt. Dict. @f A popular etymology from way, all, and @7p, a beast,
gave rise to numerous fables; see Philip de Thaun, Bestiaire, 1. 224,
in Wright's Pop. Treatises on Science, p. 82.

PANTLER, a servant who has charge of the pantry. (F.—L.)
In Shak. 2 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 258. ME. pantlere, Prompt. Parv.;
pantelere, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 33. Altered from OF,
panetier, ‘a pantler,’ Cot. ; prob. by the influence of but-ler.— Late L.
panétarius (pdnitarius, Prompt. Parv.).—Late L. panéta, one who
makes bread; see Pantry.

PANTOMIME, one who expresses his meaning by action; a
dumb show. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Pantomime, an actor of many parts in
one play,’ &c.; Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674; so also in Butler, Hudibras,
pt. ili. c. 2, 1287. [Such is the proper sense of the word, though
now used for the play itself.J—F. pantomime, ‘an actor of many
parts in one play,’ &c.; Cot.=L. pantomimus.—Gk. mavrépipos, all
imitating, a pantomimic actor.—Gk. mavto-, decl. stem of mas, all;
and pipos, an imitator, from pspéopar, I imitate. See Pan- and
Mimic. Der. pantomim-ic, pantomim-ist.

PANTRY, a room for provisions. (F.—L.) ME. pantrye,
pantrie; Prompt. Parv.=OF. paneterie, ‘a pantry ;’ Cot.—Late L.
panétaria, panitaria, a place where bread is made (hence, where it is
kept); Ducange.— Late L. panéta, one who makes bread. —L. pan-,
base of panis, bread. Cf. Skt. pd, to nourish. Der. from the same
base, pann-ier, com-pan-y, ap-pan-age.

PAP (1), food for infants. (E.) ‘An Englishe infant, whiche
liuethe with pappe;’ Hall’sChron. Hen. VI, an. 3.§6. TheME. pappe
is only found in the sense of ‘ breast;’? we have, however, ‘ papmete
for chylder,’ Prompt. Parv. p. 382. To be considered as an E. word,
and perhaps of considerable antiquity, though seldom written down.
B. Of imitative origin, due to a repetition of the syllable pa. ‘ Words
formed of the simplest articulations, ma and pa, are used to designate
the objects in which the infant takes the earliest interest, the mother
and father, the mother’s breast, the act of taking or sucking food ;’
Wedgwood.+ Du. pap, ‘pap sod with milke or flower;’ Hexham;
G. pappe, pap, paste. +L. papa, pappa, the word with which infants
call for food. Cf. Dan. pap, Swed. papp, pasteboard; also Span.
papa, Ital. pappa, pap, from L. pappa. This is one of those words
of expressive origin which are not necessarily affected by Grimm’s
law. See Pap (2), Papa.

PAP (2), a teat, breast. (E.) ME. pappe, Havelok, 2132;
Ormulum, 6441. Probably a native word; see Pap (1). Cf.
MSwed. papp, the breast; which, as Ihre notes, was afterwards
changed to patt. Still preserved in Swed. patt, the breast. So also
Dan. patie, suck, give paite, to give suck. The Swedish dialects
retain the old form pappe, papp (Rietz). So also NFriesic pap,
pape, papke (Outzen); Lithuan. papas, the pap. B. Doubtless
ultimately the same word as the preceding; and due to the infant’s
cry for food.


PARACHUTE 4.27


PAPA, a child’s word for father. (F.—L.) Seldom written down;
found in Swift, in Todd’s Johnson (without a reference, but it occurs
in his Directions for Servants, 1745, p. 13): ‘where there are little
masters and misses in a house,.bribe them, that they may not tell
tales to papa and mamma.” Spelt pappa by Steele in The Spectator,
no. 479, § 4 (1712). Whilst admitting that the word might
easily have been coined from the repetition of the syllable pa by
infants, and probably was so in the first instance, we have no proof
that the word is truly of ative origin; the native word from this
source took rather the form of pap; see Pap (1) and Pap (2):e7In:
the sense of father, we may rather look upon it as merely borrowed.
=F. papa, papa; in Moliére, Malade Imaginaire, i. 5 (Littré) ;
spelt pappa in 1552 (Hatzfeld).—L. papa, found as a Roman
cognomen. Cf. L. pappas, a tutor, borrowed from Gk. zdmmas,
papa. Nausicaa addresses her father as mamma pite=dear papa;
Homer, Od. vi. 57. See Pope.

PAPAL, belonging to the pope. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. papal, papall,
Gower, C. A. i. 257; bk. ii. 2925.—F. papal, ‘ papall;’ Cot. — Late
L. papalis, belonging to the pope. = L. papa, a bishop, spiritual father.
See Pope. Der. pap-ac-y, ME. papacie, Gower, C. A. i. 256; bk.
ji. 2895, from Late L. papatia, papal dignity, formed from papat-,
stem of papas, pappas, borrowed from Gk. mémmas, papa, father.
Also pap-ist, All’s Well, i. 3. 56, from F. pape, pope; the word
pap-ism occurs in Bale’s Apology, p. 83 (R.) ; pap-ist-ic, pap-ist-ic-al,
pap-ist-ic-al-ly,

PAPAW, afruit. (Span.—WIndian.) ‘The fair papa;’ Waller,
Battle of the Summer Islands, i. 52.—Span. papaya (Pineda). =
Cuban papaya (Oviedo, qu. by Littré); from the Carib ababai,
explained by ‘grosses papaye’ (sic) in R. Breton, Dict. Caraibe-
Francois (Auxerre, 1665).

PAPER, the substance chiefly used for writing on. (F.—L.—Gk.
—Egyptian.) ME. paper, Gower,C. A. ii. 8; bk.iv.198. Chaucer has
paper-white=as white as paper; Legend of Good Women, 1198. —
OF, (and F.) papier. —L. papyrum, acc. of papyrus, paper. See
Papyrus. Der. paper-faced, 2 Hen. IV, v. 4. 123; paper-mill,
3 Hen. VI, iv. 7. 41; paper, adj., paper, vb., paper-ing ; paper-hang-
ings, paper-hang-er, paper-money, paper-reed, Isaiah, xix. 7, paper-
stainer; and see papier-maché.

PAPIER-MACHE, paper made into pulp, then moulded,
dried, and japanned. (F.—L.) First in 1753. FF. papier-mdché, lit.
chewed paper. The F. papier is from L. papyrus; and maché is the
pp- of mdcher, OF. mascher, from L. masticire, to masticate. See
Paper and Masticate.

PAPILIONACEOUS, having a winged corolla somewhat like
a butterfly. (L.) Botanical; in Glossographia Nova (1719). Used
of the bean, pea, &c. — L. *papiliondceus, a coined word from papilién-,
stem of papilio, a butterfly. See Pavilion.

PAPILLARY, belonging to or resembling the nipples or teats.
(L.) In 1667; see examples in Todd’s Johnson; Phillips, ed. 1706,
gives the sb. papilla, a teat or nipple.=L. papilla, a small pustule,
nipple, teat; dimin. of papula,.a pustule. Again, papula is a dimin.
from a base PAP, to blow out or swell. Cf. Lithuan. papas, a teat,
pampti, to swell, Gk. moydds, a bubble, blister on the skin. See
Prellwitz, s.v. méugi€. Der. papul-ous, full of pimples ; from papula.

PAPYRUS, the reed whence paper was first made. (L.—Gk.—
Egyptian.) In Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xiii, c. 11 [not 21].—L.
papyrus. Gk. manvpos, an Egyptian kind of rush or flag, of which
writing-paper was made by cutting its inner rind (8vBAos) into strips,
and pressing them together transversely. The word is not Gk., but
of Egyptian origin. See Bible.

PAR, equal value, equality of real and nominal value or of condition.
(L.) ‘To be at par, to be equal;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. —L. par, equal.
Der. pari-ty, q.v.; also pair, peer (1), ap-par-el, compeer, disparage,
disparity, non-pareil, prial, umpire.

PARA.-, beside; prefix. (Gk.) A common prefix.=Gk. mapa-,


beside. Allied to Skt. para, away, from, forth, towards, param, be-
yond, paré, thereupon, further, paratas, further, &c. Also to E. far ;
see Far.


PARABLE, a comparison, fable, allegory. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
parable, Chaucer, C. T. 6261 (D 679); Wyclif, Mark, iv. 2.—OF.
parabole, ‘a parable;’ Cot. —L. parabola, Mark, iv. 2.— Gk. mapaBoAn,
a comparison; also a parable, Mark, iv. 2.—Gk. mapaBdddeuw, to
throw beside, set beside, compare. = Gk. mapa, beside; and BadAav,
to throw, cast. Brugmann, ii. § 713. Doubleis, parle (old form of
parley), parole, palaver ; also parabola, as a mathematical term, from
L. parabola, Gk. mapaBodH, the conic section made by a plane
parallel to a side of the cone. Hence parabol-ic, parabol-ic-al,
parabol-ic-al-ly. And see parley, parole, palaver.

PARACHUTE, an apparatus like an umbrella for breaking the
fall from a balloon. (F.—L.) Modern; borrowed from F. parachute,
coined from para-, as in para-sol, and chute; lit. that which parries


428 PARACLETE


or guards against a fall, Para- represents Itai. para- (see Parasol,
Parapet), from Ital. parare, to adorn, to guard; and chute, a fall,
is allied to Ital. caduto, fallen, from L. cadere, to fall.

PARACLETH, the Comforter. (L..—Gk.) ‘Braggynge Win-
chester, the Pope’s paraclete in England ;’ Bale, Image, pt. iii (R.).—
L. paraclétus.— Gk. mapdxdAnros, called to one’s aid, a helper, the
Comforter (John, xiv. 16).—Gk. mapaxadeiv, to call to one’s aid,
summon.=—Gk. mapa, beside; and xadeiy, to call. See Para- and
Calendar.

PARADE, show, display. (F.—Span.—L.) In Milton, P. L.
iv. 780.—F. parade, ‘a boasting appearance, or shew, also, a stop on
horseback ;’ Cot. The last.sense was the earliest in French (Littré).
—Span. parada, a halt, stop, pause.=—Span. parar, to stop, halt;
a particular restriction of the sense ‘to get ready’ or ‘ prepare.’ =
L. parare, to prepare, get ready. . The sense of ‘display’ in F.
was easily communicated to Span. parada, because F. parer (=Span.
parar) meant ‘to deck, trimme, adorn, dress,’ as well as ‘to ward
or defend a blow’ (which comes near the Spanish use); see Cot-
grave. See Pare.

PARADIGM, an example, model. (F.—L.—Gk.) Philips, ed.
1658, gives paradigme, the F. form.—F. paradigme (Littré). = L.
paradigma.=—Gk. napaderypa, a pattern, model; in grammar, an
example of declension, &c. — Gk. mapadelievuju, I exhibit, lit. show by
the side of.—Gk. mapa, beside; and dSeixvujuz, I point out. See
Para- and Diction.

PARADISE, the garden of Eden, heaven. (F.—L.— Gk. — Pers.)
In very early use; in Layamon, ]. 24122.—F. paradis, ‘ paradise ;’
Cot.—L. paradisus.— Gk. mapadeoos, a park, pleasure-ground; an
Oriental word in Xenophon, Hell. 4. 1. 15, Cyr. 1. 3. 14, &c., and
used in the Septuagint version for the garden of Eden. See Gen. ii. 8
(LXX version); Luke, xxiii. 43 (Gk.). Cf. Heb. pardés, a garden,
paradise. . Of Pers. origin, the Heb. word being merely borrowed,
and having no Heb. root.—Zend pairidaéza, an enclosure, place
walled in.—Zend pairi (=Gk. epi), around; and diz (Skt. dik), to
mould, form, shape (hence to form a wall of earth); from4/DHEIGH;
see Dough. y. It appears in other forms; cf. mod. Pers. and Arab.
jirdaus, a garden, paradise, Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 451, Rich. Dict.
p- 1080; pl. farddis, paradises, Rich. Dict. p. 1075. For the Zend
form, see Justi. And see Max Miiller, Selected Essays, 1881; i.
130. Doublet, farvis.

PARADOX, that which is contrary to received opinion; strange,
but true. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s Revels, A. ii.
sc. I (Amorphus’ second speech). Spelt paradoxe in Minsheu, ed.
1627.—F. paradoxe, ‘a paradox;’ Cot.—L. paradoxum, neut. of
paradoxus, adj.—Gk. mapaSofos, contrary to opinion, strange. = Gk.
mapa, beside; and 6ééa, a notion, opinion, from Soxeiv, to seem. See
Para- and Dogma. Der. paradox-ic-al, paradox-ic-al-ly, Sidney,
Apologie for Poetrie, ed. Arber, p. 51, 1. 6 from bottom; paradox-
ic-al-ness.

PARAFFINE, a solid substance resembling spermaceti, pro-
duced by distillation of coal. (F.—L.) ‘First obtained by Reichen-
bach in 1830;” Haydn, Dict. of Dates. It is remarkable for resisting
chemical action, having little affinity for other bodies; whence its
name. =F. paraffine, having small affinity. Coined from L. par-um,
ady., little; and affinis, akin, having affinity. See Affinity.

PARAGOGE, the addition of a letter at the end of a word.
(L.—Gk.) In Glossographia Nova (1719). Examples are common
in English; thus in soun-d, ancien-t, whils-t, tyran-t, the final letter
is paragogic. The word has 4 syllables, the final e being sounded.
—L. paragigé.—Gk. mapaywyn, a leading by or past, alteration,
variety.— Gk. mapdyew, to lead by or past.—Gk. map-d, beside,
beyond; and dyew, to lead, drive, cognate with L. agere. See
Para-and Agent. Der. paragog-ic, paragog-ic-al.

PARAGON, a model of excellence. (F.—Ital.—Gk.) In Shak.
Temp. ii. 1. 75; Hamlet, ii. 2. 320.—F. paragon, ‘a paragon, or
peerlesse one;’ Cot. [MSpan. paragon, a model of excellence.]—
Ital. paragone, ‘a paragon, a match, an equal, a touch-stone,’ Florio ;
paragonare, to compare. The latter answers to Gk. mapaxovdev, to
rub against a whetstone (hence, probably, to try by a whetstone, to
compare).— Gk. map-a, beside; daxévn, a whetstone, allied to dxis,
a sharp point. (4/AK.) See Korting, § 6859; Tobler, in Zt. fiir
roman. Philol. iv. 373. Der. paragon, vb., Oth. ii. 1. 62.

PARAGRAPH, a distinct portion of a discourse; a short pas-
sage of a work. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. But the
word was in rather early use, and was corrupted in various ways,
into pargrafte, pylcrafte (by change of r to /), and finally into pilcrow
or pyllcrow. ‘ Pylcrafte, yn a booke, paragraphus;’ Prompt. Parv.
p- 398; see Way’s note for further examples. Even the sign 4, which
was used to mark the beginning of a paragraph, was called a pilcrow ;
see Tusser’s Husbandry, A Lesson, &c., st. 3.—F. paragraphe, ‘a para-
graffe, or pillcrow;’ Cot.—Late L. paragraphum, acc. of para-


PARAMOUNT


graphus, occurring in the Prompt. Parv., as above. = Gk. rapaypagos,
a line or stroke drawn in the margin, lit. ‘that which is written
beside.’ = Gk. mapa, beside; and ypadev, to write. See Para- and
Graphic. Der. paragraph-ic, paragraph-ic-al.

PARAKEET; the same as Paraquito, q. v.

PARALLAX, the difference between the real and apparent place
of a star, &c. (Gk.) In Milton, P. R. iv. 40; and Ben Jonson has
‘no parallax at all, i.e. no variation; Magnetic Lady, Acti. But
since Milton’s time, the word has acquired special senses; he


‘may have used it for ‘refraction.’—Gk. mapdAdafis, alternation,


change; also, the inclination of two lines forming an angle, esp. the
angle formed by lines from a heavenly body to the earth’s centre
and the horizon. —Gk. mapaAAdooev, to make things alternate. = Gk.
mapa, beside; and dAAdooev, to change, alter, from dAAos, other,
cognate with L. alius. See Para- and Alien. See Parallel.

PARALLEL, side by side, similar. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak.
Oth. ii. 3. 355.—MF. parailele, ‘paralell;’ Cot.=—L. parallélus, =
Gk. mapaddAndos, parallel, side by side.=Gk. map’ for mapa, beside;
and *déAAnAos, one another, only found in the gen., dat., and acc.
plural. 8B. The decl. stem dAA-nAo- stands for GAA’ GAAo-, a re-
duplicated form; hence the sense is ‘the other the other,’ or ‘ one
another,’ i.e. mutual, “AAAos is cognate with L. alius, other. See
Para- and Alien, Der. parallel, sb., Temp. i. 2. 74; parallel,
vb., Macb. ii. 3. 67 ; parallel-ism; also parallelo-gram, q.v., parallelo-
piped, q. Vv.

PARALLELOGRAM, a four-sided rectilineal figure, whose
opposite sides are parallel. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Cotgrave.—OF.
paralelogramme, ‘a paralelogram, or long square;’ Cot. [He uses
only two /’s.]|—=L. parallélogrammum, a parallelogram. = Gk. mapaa-
AnAdypappov, a parallelogram; neut. of mapadAndAdypappos, adj.,
bounded by parallel lines. = Gk. mapaAdAnao-, for mapadAAnios, parallel ;
and ypaypyn, a stroke, line, from -ypdpew, to write. See Parallel
and Graphic. ’

PARALLELOPIPED, a regular solid bounded by six plane
parallel surfaces. (L.—Gk.) Sometimes written parallelopipedon,
which is nearer the Gk. form. In Phillips, ed. 1706. A glaring
instance of bad spelling, as it certainly should be parallelepiped (with
e, not 0).—L. parallélepipedum, used by Boethius (Lewis).—Gk.
mapadAnaeninedov, a body with parallel surfaces. Gk. mapdddnr’,
for mapdAdndos, parallel; and émimedov, a plane surface. The form
émimedov is neut. of émimedos, on the ground, flat, level, plane; from
émi, upon, and médov, the ground. The Gk. mé5oy is from the same
root as movs (gen, 7o5-ds), the foot, and E. foot. See Parallel,
Epi-, and Foot.

PARALOGISM, a conclusion unwarranted by the premises.
(F.—L.—Gk.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. paralogisme, cited by
Minsheu.=—L. paralogismus.—Gk. mapadroyopos, a false reckoning,
false conclusion, fallacy.=Gk. mapadoyifoua, I misreckon, count
amiss.=Gk. mapa, beside; and Aoyi¢oua, I reckon, from Adyos, a
discourse, account, reason. See Para- and Logic.

PARALYSE, to render useless, deaden. (F.--L.—Gk.) Modern;
added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. Todd cites: ‘Or has taxation
chill’d the aguish land And paralysed Britannia’s bounteous hand ?”
London Cries, or Pict. of Tumult, 1805, p. 39.—F. paralyser, to
paralyse; Littré. Formed from the sb. paralysie, palsy ; see further
under Paralysis.

PARALYSIS, palsy. (L.—Gk.) In Blount, ed. 1656.=L.
paralysis. Gk. mapadvois, a loosening aside, a disabling of the
nerves, paralysis.—Gk. mapadvew, to loose from the side, loose
beside, relax.—Gk. mapa, beside; and Avewv, to loosen. See Para-
and Lose. Der. paralyt-ic, from F. paralytique (Cot.), which from
L, paralyticus << Gk. mapadurinés, afflicted with palsy (Matt. iv. 24).
Doublet, palsy.

PARAMATTA, a fabric like merino, of worsted and cotton.
(New S, Wales.) So named from Paramatta, a town near Sydney,
New South Wales. Also Parramatta, on a river of the same name.
Said to mean ‘plenty of eels;’ others explain it from para, fish,
and matta, water. See Morris, Austral English.

PARAMOUNT, chief, of the highest importance. (F,—L.) In
Minsheu, ed. 1627. He also gives paravail, the term used in contrast
with it. A’ lord paramount is supreme, esp. as compared with his
tenant paravail, i.e. his inferior. ‘Let, him [the pope] no longer
count himselfe lord paramount ouer the princes of the world, no
longer hold kings as his seruants parauaile;’ Hooker, A Discourse
of Justification (R.). Neither words are properly adjectives, but ad-
verbial phrases ; they correspond respectively to OF. par amoné, at
the top (lit. by that which is upwards), and par aval (lit. by that
which is downwards). Both are AF. phrases of law; see Blount’s
Law Lexicon. The prep. par=L. per; see Per-, prefix. The
F. amont is explained under AMount; and F. aval under Ava-
lanche, Der. paramount, sb., Milton, P. L. ii. 508,


aes


PARAMOUR


PARAMOODR, a lover, one beloved, now usually in a bad sense.
(F.—L.) In Chaucer, C. T. 6036 (D 454). But orig. an adverbial
phrase, as in: ‘ For par amour I louede hire first or thou;’ id. C. T.
1157 (A 1155).—F. par amour, by love, with love.—L. per, by,
with; and amdrem, acc. of amor, love. See Per- and Amour.

PARAPET, a rampart, esp. one breast-high. (F.—Ital.—L.)
In Shak. 1 Hen. IV, ii. 3. 55.—F. parapet, ‘a parapet, or wall breast-
high ;’ Cot.—TItal. parapetto, ‘a cuirace, a breast-plate, a fence for
the breast or hart; also, a parapet or wall breast-high;’ Florio.
Lit. ‘breast-defence.’=Ital. para-, for parare, ‘to adorne,... to
warde or defende a blow,’ Florio; and petto, the breast.—L. pardare,
to prepare, adorn; and pectus, the breast. See Parry and Pectoral.

PARAPHERNALIA, ornaments, trappings. (L.—Gk.) Pro-
perly used of the property which a bride possesses beyond her
dowry. ‘In one particular instance the wife may acquire a property
in some of her husband’s goods; which shall remain to her after his
death, and not go to his executors. These are called her paraphern-
alia, which is a term borrowed from the civil law; it is derived
from the Greek language, signifying over and above her dower ;’
Blackstone’s Commentaries, b, ii. c. 29 (R.). Formed from Late L.
paraphern-a, the property of a bride over and above her dower, by
adding -dlia, the neut. pl. form of the common suffix -dlis.—Gk.
mapapepva, that which a bride brings beyond her dower. —Gk. mapa,
beyond, beside; and depy7, a dowry, lit. that which is brought by
the wife, from ¢épev, to bring, cognate with E. bear. See Para-
and Bear (1).

PARAPHRASKH, an explanation or free translation, (F.—L.
—Gk.) See Udall’s translation of Erasmus’ ‘ Paraphrase vpon the
Newe Testamente, 2 vols. folio, 1548-9.—MF. paraphrase, ‘a
paraphrase ;’ Cot.=L. paraphrasin, acc. of paraphrasis. = Gk. mapa-
pacts, a paraphrase. = Gk. rapadpa(ev, to speak in addition, amplify,
paraphrase. = Gk. apd, beside; and ppdfev, to speak. See Para-
and Phrase. Der. paraphrase, vb., in Dryden, Cymon, 1. 21;
paraphrast, one who paraphrases, Gk. mapappaorys; paraphrast-tc,
paraphrast-ic-al, paraphrast-ic-al-ly,

PARAQUITO, a little parrot. (Span.—L.—Gk.) In Shak.
1 Hen. IV, ii. 3.88; pl. paraguitoes, Ford, Sun’s Darling, A. i. sc. I.
= Span. periquito, a paroquet, small parrot ; dimin. of perico, a parrot.
B. Prob. the same as Perico, a pet-name for ‘little Peter;’ see
Pineda; a dimin. from Pedro, Peter. See Parrot.

PARASANG, a distance of over three miles. (L.—Gk.— Pers.)
‘Persian myles cauled Parasange;’ R. Eden, ed. Arber, p. 342.
From L. parasanga (Lewis).—Gk. mapacdyyns; of Pers. origin,
Mod. Pers. farsang, ferseng, a league (Horn, § 818). See Notes on
E. Etym., p. 206.

PARASITE, one who frequents another’s table, a hanger-on.
(F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Rich. II, ii. 2. 70.—F. parasite, ‘a para-
site, a trencher-friend, smell-feast ;? Cot.=—L, parasitus, = Gk. mapa-
otros, eating beside another at his table, a parasite, toad-eater. = Gk.
mapa, beside; and otros, wheat, flour, bread, food, of unknown
origin. 4 The invidious use of the word is unoriginal ; see Liddell.
Der. parasit-ic, from Gk. mapacitixds; parasit-ic-al.

PARASOL, a small umbrella used to keep off the heat of the
sun. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘Upon another part of the wall is the like
figure of another great man, over whose head one officer holds a
parasol ;’ Sir T. Herbert, Travels, ed. 1665, p. 153.—F. parasol,
‘an umbrello;’ Cot.—Ital. parasole, an umbrella (Torriano). = Ital.
para-, for parare, to ward off, parry ; and sole, the sun, See Parry
and Solar. We find also Span. parasol, Port. parasol. @] Of
similar formation is F, para-pluie, a guard against rain, an umbrella,
from pluie, rain, L. pluuia.

PARBOIL, to boil thoroughly, (F.—L.) It now means ‘to
boil in part,’ or insufficiently, from a notion that it is made up of
part and boil. Formerly, it meant ‘to boil thoroughly,’ as in Ben
Jonson, Every Man, iv. 1. 16 (ed. Wheatley) ; on which see Wheat-
ley’s note. ‘To parboyle, precoguere;’ Levins. ‘ My liver’s par-
boil’d, i.e. burnt up; Webster, White Devil, near the end. ME.
parboilen; ‘ Parboylyd, parbullitus; Parboylyn mete, semibullio, par-
bullio;’ Prompt. Parv. Here the use of semibullio shows that the
word was misunderstood at an early time. =OF. parboillir, to cook
thoroughly, also to boil gently (Godefroy); Cotgrave has: ‘ pour-
bouillir, to parboile throughly.’ = Late L. parbullire (as in the Prompt.
Parv.); L. perbullire, to boil thoroughly. See Per- and Boil (1).
tz For a somewhat similar change in sense, see Purblind.

PARCEL, a small part, share, division, small package. (F.—L.)
ME. parcel, P. Plowman, B. x. 63; parcelle, Rob. of Brunne, tr, of
Langtoft, p. 135, 1. 13. The old sense is ‘portion. =F. parcelle,
‘a parcell, particle, piece, little part;’ Cot. Cf. Port. parcela, an
article of an account. Formed from Late L. particella, preserved in
Ital. particella, a small portion, a word given in Florio; a dimin.
of the true L. form particula; see Particle. Der. parcel, vb,


PARENTHESIS 429


PARCENER, a co-heir. (F:—L.) A law term; see Blackstone,
Comment. II. xi. The old spelling of Partner, q. v.

PARCH, to scorch. (F.—L.—Gk.?) ME. parchen, paarchen.
‘Paarche pecyn or benys [ =to parch peas or beans], frigo, ustillo;’
Prompt. Parv. [Assimilated in form to the ME. perchen, to pierce,
an occasional form of percen, to pierce (F. percer); see Pierce.
‘A knyghte... perchede the syde of Iesu;’ Religious Pieces, ed.
Perry (E. E. T. S.), p. 42; see another example in Halliwell, s. v.
perche; and cf. perche, to pierce, Cathol. Anglicum, p. 276. Persaunt,
lit. piercing, was used as an epithet of sunbeams; Lydgate, Compl.
of Black Knight, 1. 28, has: ‘Til fyry Tytan, with his persaunt
hete. The prov. E. pearch means ‘to pierce with cold;’ cf. Milton,
P. L. ii. 594.—F. (Norm. dial. and Picard) percher, to pierce (Moisy,
Corblet); cf. Walloon percher, to pierce (Sigart); variant of F.
percer; see Pierce.] £. But the sense of percher seems too remote.
I suggest that ME. parchen really meant ‘to dry or harden like
parchment,’ and was formed from OF. parche, a familiar contraction
for parchment ; of which we have sufficient evidence. ‘Or est issuz
Noe de l’arche, Si con gel truis escrit el parche,’ then Noah went out
of the ark, As I find it written in the parchment ; Bartsch, Chrestom-
athie, 1887, col. 309, 1. 15; whence Span. parche, the parchment
end of a drum, and (probably) Rouchi parche, a page of a book
(Heécart). Ina Vocabulaire du Haut Maine, by C. R. de M. (Paris,
1859), we are told that a pea that is elsewhere called pois sans
parchemin is there called pois sans parche. Compare with this the
earliest example of the E. verb in 1398 :—‘ Saresines put peper into
an ouen whan it is new igadered and fercheth and rostith it so, and
benemeth [take away] the vertu of burginge and of springinge,’ i.e.
of sprouting.

PARCHMENT, the skin of a sheep or goat prepared for
writing on. (F.—L.—Gk.) The ¢ is excrescent. ME. perchemin,
parchemyn; P. Plowman, B. xiv. 191, 193.—F. parchemin, parchment.
—L. pergamina, pergaména, parchment; orig. fem. of Pergaménus,
adj., belonging to Pergamos. [Parchment was invented by Eumenes,
of Pergamus, the founder of the celebrated library at Pergamus, about
190 B.C.; Haydn.]=—Gk. mepyaynyy, parchment; from the city of
Pergamos in Asia, where it was brought into use by Crates of Mallos,
when Ptolemy cut off the supply of biblus from Egypt (Liddell and
Scott). Crates flourished about B.c. 160. Either way, the ety-
mology is clear.= Gk. THépyayos, more commonly Tlépyapov, Per-
gamus, in Mysia of Asia Minor; now called Bergamo.

PARD, a panther, leopard, spotted wild beast. (L.—Gk.) ME.
pard, Wyclif, Rev. xiii. 2.—L. pardus, a male panther; Rev. xiii. 2
(Vulgate). —Gk. mdpidos, a pard; used for a leopard, panther, or
ounce, An Eastern word; cf. Pers. pars, parsh, a pard; pars, a
panther, Rich. Dict. pp. 316, 325;. Skt. prdaku-, a leopard, Der.
leo-pard, camelo-pard,

PARDON, to forgive. (F.—L.) Common in Shakespeare. Rich.
quotes ‘nor pardoned a riche man’ from the Golden Boke, c. 47.
But the verb first appears in 1430, being formed (in English) from
the ME, sb. pardoun, pardun, pardon, a common word, occurring in
Chaucer, C. T. 12860 (C 926), And see Chaucer’s description of
the Pardonere, 1. 689.—F. pardon, sb., due to pardonner, vb., to
pardon.= Late L. perdondre, to remit a debt (used A.D, 819), to
grant, indulge, pardon.=L. per, thoroughly; and déndre, to give,
from dénum, a gift. See Per- and Donation. Der. pardon, sb.
(but see above) ; pardon-er, pardon-able, pardon-abl-y.

PARE, to cut or shave off. (F.—L.) ME. paren. ‘To wey pens
with a peys and gare the heuyest’=to weigh pence with a weight,
and pare down the heaviest; P. Plowman, B. v. 243.—F. parer, ‘to
deck, trimme, .. . also to pare the hoofe of a horse;’ Cot.—L.
parare, to prepare. Der. par-ing. From L. paradre we have com-
pare, pre-pare, re-pair (1), se-par-ate, sever, em-per-or, im-per-ial, ap-
par-at-us, para-chute, para-pet, para-sol, rampart, &c. And see
Parry, Parade.

PAREGORIC, assuaging pain; a medicine that assuages pain.
(L.—Gk.) ‘Paregorica, medicines that comfort, mollify, and
asswage;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.—L. parégoricus, assuaging; whence
neut. pl. paregorica.=Gk. mapnyopixds, addressing, encouraging,
soothing. = Gk, mapiyopos, addressing, encouraging; cf. mapnyopetv,
to address, exhort. = Gk. mapa, beside ; and dyopd, an assembly. Cf.
Gk. dyeipecv, to assemble; and Gregarious. ;

PARENT, a father or mother. (F.—L.) In the Geneva Bible,
1561, Ephes. vi. 1 (R.).—F. parent, ‘a cousin, kinsman, allie ;’ Cot. =
L. parentem, acc. of parens,a parent, lit. one who produces, formed from
parere, to produce, of which the usual pres. part. is pariens. Brug-
mann,i.§ 515. Der. parent-al, from L. parentalis ; parent-al-ly, parent-
less ; also parent-age, in Levins, from F. parentage, ‘ parentage,’ Cot.

PARENTHESIS, a phrase inserted in another which would
appear complete without it. (Gk.) Spelt parentesis, T. Heywood,
Love’s Mistris, Act i (last word). And in Cotgrave, to translate


430 PARERGON


MF. | parenthese.m Gk. mapévOeors, a putting in beside, insertion,
parenthesis. ~ Gk. map’, for mapa, beside; év, in; and 6és, a placing,
from 4/DHE, to place, set. See Para-, In-, and Thesis. Der.
parenthet-ic, extended from Gk. rapév@eros, put in beside, parenthetic ;
parenthet-ic-al, -ly.

PARERGON, an incidental or subsidiary work. (L.—Gk.) L.
parergon (Pliny).—Gk. mdpepyov, a by-work, subordinate work;
neut. of mapepyos, subordinate. —Gk. map-, for map-a, beside; and
épyov, a work, cognate with E. work.

PARGET, to plaister a wall. (F.—L.) Nearly obsolete; once
rather common. In Levins, Baret, Palsgrave, &c. ME. pargeten.
‘ Pargetyn walles, Gipso, linio (sic); Parget, or playster for wallys,
Gipsum, litura;’ Prompt. Parv., and see Way’s note. It is frequently
spelt perget.—OF. pargeter, to scatter (Chanson du Roland, 2634) ;
yariant of Norm. dial. projeter, to re-plaster (cf. projet, plaster) ; see
Moisy; also spelt (in OF.) porgeter, to roughcast a wall (Godefroy).
[Cf. Walloon porgeté, to parget (Remacle).]—L. proiectire, to cast
forth.mL. prd, forth; and zactare, to cast. See Pro- and Jet (1).
@ The form pargeter gave rise to a Late L. periactare; cf ‘ Perjacio,
Anglice, to perjette ;’ Vocab. 602. 7. See my Notes on E. Etym.,


. 206.

PPARHELION, a mock sun, a bright light sometimes seen near
the sun. (L.—Gk.) Spelt parhelium and parelium in Phillips, ed.
1706.—L. parélion (Lewis).—Gk. mapndAtoy, a parhelion; neut. of
mapndvos, adj., beside the sun. — Gk. wap’, for mapa, beside; and #AL0s,
the sun. See Para- and Heliacal. 4 The insertion of k is due
to the aspirate in #Av0s ; it hardly seems to be needed.

PARIAH, an outcast. (Tamil.) Spelt paria in the story called
The Indian Cottage, where it occurs frequently. From ‘Tamil
paraiyan, commonly, but corruptly, pariah, Malayalim parayan, a
man of a low caste, performing the lowest menial services; one of
his duties is to beat the village drum (called payai in Tamil), whence,
no doubt, the generic appellation of the caste;” H. H. Wilson,
Glossary of Indian Terms, p. 401,

PARIAN, belonging to Paros. (Gk.) Paros is an island in the
Egean sea.

PARIETAL, forming the sides or walls, esp. applied to two
bones in the fore part of the scull. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706. —L.
parietalis, belonging to a wall.=—L. pariet-, stem of pariés, a wall.
Der. pellitory (1), q.v.

PARISH, a district under one pastor, an ecclesiastical district.
(F.—L.—Gk.) Orig. an ecclesiastical division. ME. parisshe,
Chaucer, C. T. 493 (A 491).—AF. parosse, Laws of Will. I., i. 1;
¥. paroisse, a parish.mL. parochia, late form of parecia, a parish,
orig. an ecclesiastical district. — Gk.mapo.xia, an ecclesiastical district,
lit. a neighbourhood. = Gk. mépo:xos, neighbouring, living near to-
gether.=—Gk. map’, for mapa, beside, near; and olxos, a house,
abode, cognate with L. wicus. See Para- and Vicinage. Der.
parish-ion-er, formed by adding -er to ME. parisshen, P. Plowman,
B. xi. 67; this ME. parisshen<OF. paroissien< Late L. parochianus,
with the same sense as (and a mere variant of) L. parochidlis; see
Parochial. Also paroch-i-al. ¢@- It follows that parishioner
should rather have been spelt parishener; also that the suffix -er
was quite unnecessary. Indeed Paroissien survives as a proper name ;
I find it in the Clergy List, 1873.

PARITORY, the same as Pellitory (1).

PARITY, equality, resemblance, analogy. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave.
=F. parité, ‘ parity ;’ Cot.—L. paritatem, acc. of paritas, equality. =
L. pari-, decl. stem of par, equal; with suffix -ta@s. See Par.

PARK, an enclosed ground. (E.) In early use; ME. parc, in
Layamon, J]. 1432 (later text). Park=OF. parc, is a F. spelling,
and is found in F. as early as in the 12th century; but the word is
of E. origin, being a contraction of ME. parrok, from AS. pearruc,
pearroc, a word which is now also spelt paddock. See further under
Paddock (2). We find also Irish and Gaelic pairc, W. park and
parwg (the latter preserving the full suffix), all from E.; and Du.
perk, Swed. and Dan. park, G. pferch (an enclosure, sheepfold) ; also
F. pare, Ital. parco, Span. pargue, all from a Late L. type parricus,
parcus,an enclosure. £. The AS. pearruc and Late L. parricus are
from a base *parr-, which may be Teutonic, and possibly from an
older base *sparr-. We actually find ME. parr-en, to enclose, con-
fine; Havelok, 2439; Iwain and Gawain, 3228 (ed. Ritson). Also
AS. sparrian, to shut, fasten, as in gesparrado dure din, thy door
being shut, Matt. vi. 6 (Lindisfarne MS.). See Spar. Der. park-ed,
1 Hen. VI, iv. 2. 455 park-er, i.e. park-keeper (Levins) ; park-keeper ;
im-park.

PARLEY, a conference, treating with an enemy. (F.—L.—Gk.)
1. Shak. has parley as a sb., Macb. ii. 3. 87; also as a verb, Haml.
i. 3. 123. Prob. for parlee, as spelt in Eng. Garner, ed. Arber, iii.
375; and in Decker, Seven Deadly Sins, ed. Arber, p. 32.—OF.
parlee, sb. f. ‘tour de parole;’ Godefroy. =—OF,. parlee, pp. f. of


PARROT


F. parler, vb., to speak. 2. Shak. also has the vb. parle, to speak,
Lucrece, 1. 100; whence the sb. parle, a parley, Haml. i. 1. 62... This
is also from F. parler. Late L. parabolare, to discourse, talk. — Late
L. parabola, atalk ; L. parabola, a parable. Gk. mapaBoAn, a parable ;
see Parable. Der. parl-ance, borrowed from F. parlance, formed
from F. parlant, pres. part. of parler; parl-ia-ment, q.v., parl-our,
q.v. And see parole, palaver.

PARLIAMENT, a meeting for consultation, deliberative as-
sembly. (F.—L.—Gk.; with L. suffix.) ME. parlement, Havelok,
1006 ; Rob. of Glouc., p. 169, 1. 3519; Chaucer, C.T. 2972 (A 2970).
[The spelling parliament is due to Late L. parliamentum, frequently
used in place of parlamentum, the better form.]—F. parlement, ‘a
speaking, parleying, also, a supreme coutt;” Cot. Formed with
suffix -ment (=L. -mentum) from F. parler, to speak. See Parley.
q AF. parlement, Stat. Realm, i. 26 (1275); Late L. parlamentum,
Matt. Paris, p. 696 (under the date 1246); Late L. parliamentum,
Matt. Westminster, p. 352 (1253); see Stubbs, Select Charters, pt.
vi. Der. parliament-ar-y, parliament-ar-i-an, j

PARLOUR, a room for conversation, a sitting-room. (F.—L.
—Gk.) ME. parlour, Chaucer, Troil. ii. 82; parlur, Ancren Riwle,
p. 50, 1. 17.— OF. parleor (Littré), later parloir, ‘a parlour ;’ Cot. =
F. parl-er, to’ speak, with suffix -oir (-eor) << L. -atdrium; so that
parloir answers to a Late L. *parabolatérium, a place to talk in; cf.
ME. dortour, F. dortoir < dormitérium, a place to sleep in. See
further under Parley.

PARLOUS, old form of Perilous. (F.—L.) ‘A parlous fear,’
Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 1.14. See Peril.

PAROCHIAL, belonging to a parish. (L.—Gk.) In the Rom.
of the Rose, 7687.—L. parochidlis. —L. parochia, another form of
parecia, a parish. = Gk. mapotxia; see Parish.

PARODY, the alteration of a poem to another subject, burlesque
imitation. (L.—Gk.) ‘Satiric poems, full of parodies, that is, of
verses patched up from great poets, and turned into another sense
than their author intended them ;’ Dryden, Discourse on Satire [on
the Grecian Silli]; in Dryden’s Poems, ed. 1851, p. 365. —L. parddia.
— Gk, mapwdia, the same as mapwd7, a song sung beside, a parody. =
Gk. map’, for mapa, beside; and #57, an ode. See Para- and Ode.
Der. parody, verb; parod-ist.

PAROLE, a word, esp. a word of honour, solemn promise; a
pass-word. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—F. parole,
“a word,a tearm, a saying;’ Cot. The same word as Prov. paraula
(Bartsch), Span. palabra (< parabra< parabla, by the frequent inter-
change ofr and 7), Port. palavra; all from Late L. parabola, a dis-
course, L. parabola, a parable. See further under Parable.
Doublets, parable, parle (old form of parley), palaver.

PARONYMOUS, allied in origin; also, having a like sound,
but a different origin. (Gk.) Rathera dubious word, as it is used in
two senses, (1) allied in origin, as in the case of man, manhood ; and
(2) unallied in origin, but like-sounding, as in the case of hair, hare.
= Gk. rapwvvpos, formed from a word by a slight change; i.e. in
the former sense.=Gk. mapa, beside; and édvoua, a name, cognate
with E. name. See Para- and Name. Der. paronom-as-ia, a
slight change in the meaning of a word (in Dryden’s pref. to Annus
Mirabilis), from Gk. tapwvopacia, better tapovopacia, Also paronyme,
i.e, a paronymous word, esp. in the second sense.

PAROXYSM, a fit of acute pain, a violent action. (F.—L.—
Gk.) ‘Paroxisme, the accesse or fit of an ague;” Minsheu.=—F.
paroxisme, ‘the return, or fit, of an ague;’ Cot.=—L.. paroxysmus. =
Gk. mapofvopés, irritation, the fit of a disease. Gk. mapofvvew, to
urge on, provoke, irritate.—Gk. map’, for mapa, beside; and dfvver,
to sharpen, provoke, from dfvs, sharp. See Para- and Oxygen.
Der. paroxysm-al.

PARQUETRY, a mosaic of wood-work for floors. (F.—Teut.)
Modern. =F. parqueterie.=F. parqueter, to inlay a wooden floor. =F.
parquet, a wooden floor; orig. a small enclosure; dimin. of F. pare,
a park; see Park.

PARRAKEET ; the same as Paraquito, q.v.

PARRICIDH, (1) the murderer of a father; (2) the murder of
a father. (F.—L.) 1. The former is the older sense. Both senses
occur in Shakespeare, (1) K. Lear, ii. 1. 48; (2) Macb. iii. I. 32.—


F. parricide, ‘a parricide, a murtherer of his own father;’ Cot.—L. |


parricida, for an older form paricidas (Brugmann, ii. 190), a murderer
of a relative. = L. pari-, a relative (cf. Gk. més, arelative; Prellwitz,
s.V. méopat) ; and -cidas, older form of -cida, i. e. a slayer, from cid-,
a stem of ced-ere (pt. t. ce-cid-i), to cut, toslay. SeeCesura. 2.In
the latter sense, it answers to L. parrictdium, the murder of a father ;
formed from the same sb. and vb. 4 There is the same ambiguity
about fratricide and matricide. Der. parricid-al.

PARROT, a well-known tropical bird, capable of imitating the
human voice. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Merch. Ven. i. 1. 53. Spelt
parat in Levins, ed. 1570; but parrot in Skelton; see his poem called


TT eerie |


PARRY


“Speke, Parrot.’=F. perrot, ‘a man’s proper name, being a diminu-
tive or derivative of Pierre ;’ Cot. Cf. F. perroquet, ‘a parrat,’ Cot.;
also spelt parroguet. B. The F. Perrot or Pierrot is still a name for
a spatrow; much as Philip was the ME. name for the same bird.
The F. perroquet was probably an imitation of, rather than directly
borrowed from, the Span. perichito, which may likewise be explained
as a derivative of Span. perico, meaning both ‘a parrot’ and ‘little
Peter,’ dimin. of Pedro, Peter.  y. For the mod. Ital. parrocchetto
we find in Florio the MItal. forms parochetto, parochito, a kind of
parrats, called a parokito;’ which seems to be nothing but the Span.
word adapted to Italian. We may refer all the names to L. Petrus,
Peter. — Gk. mérpos, a stone, rock; as a proper name, Peter.

PARRY, a defensive movement, in fencing. (F.—L.) ‘Parrying,
in fencing, the action of saving a man’s self, or staving off the strokes
offered by another ;’ Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1731. Older form
parree, a fencing-bout; ‘a parree of wit;’ R. North, Examen, ed.
1740, p. 589 (Davies).=—F. parée, used as equivalent to Ital. parata,
a defence, guard; properly fem. pp. of parer, ‘to deck, trick, trimme,
. . also to ward or defend a blow;’ Cot.—L. parare, to prepare,
deck. See Pare. Der. par-a-chute, q.v., para-pet, q.v., para-sol,
q-V-, ram-part, q.Vv.

PARSE, to tell the parts of speech. (L.) ‘Let the childe, by
and by, both construe and parse it ouer againe;’ Ascham, School-
master, b. i. ed. Arber, p. 26. An old school term; to parse is to
declare ‘ quze pars orationis ’= what part of speech, a word is. It is
merely the L. pars used familiarly. See Part. Der. pars-ing.

PARSEH, an adherent of the old Persian religion, in India.
(Pers.) Spelt Persee, Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p. 55.
= Pers. parsi, a Persian; from Pars, Persia; Palmer’s Pers. Dict.
col. 106.

PARSIMONY, frugality. (F.—L.) Spelt parsimonie in Minsheu,
ed. 1627. =—MF. parsimonie; Cotgrave.—L. parsimonia, better parci-
monia, parsimony. = L. parci-, for parcus, sparing ; with suffix -monia,
formed by joining the Idg. suffixes -mdn-and-ya. Cf. L. parcere, to
spare. Perhaps allied to E. spare; see Spare. Der. parsimoni-
ous, -ly, -ness.

PARSLEY, a well-known pot-herb. (F.—L.—Gk.) Formerly
persely, Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iii. c. 5. ME. percil, P.
Plowman, B, vi. 288; spelt persely in one of the MSS., id. A. vii. 273,
footnote. =F. persil,‘ parseley;’ Cot. Spelt peresi in the 13th cent. ;
Wright’s Vocab. i. 139, col. 2.—Late L. petrosillum, at the same
reference; contr. from L. petroselinum, rock-parsley.—Gk. mezpo-
oédwov, rock-parsley.— Gk. mérpo-, for mérpos, a rock; and céAwor,
a kind of parsley, whence E. Celery.

PARSNEP, PARSNIP, an edible plant with a carrot-like
root. (F.—L.) Formerly parsnep; the pl. parsnepes occurs in Sir
T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii.c.g. Palsgrave rightly drops the r,
and spells it pasneppe; also spelt passenep, Pistyll of Susan, 107.
Corrupted from OF. pastenaque, ‘a parsenip;’ Cot. [For the change
from qu to p, compare Lat. guingue with Gk. méume (five). The r is
due to the sound of the F, a; the te was dropped, and the latter a was
weakened, first to e, and then to 7.] Cotgrave also gives pastenade
and pastenaille with the same sense. = L. pastindca, aparsnip. B. Pas-
tinaca prob. meant ‘that which is dug up,’ hence a parsnip, also a
carrot ; the root being the edible part. —L. pastinare, to dig up. = L.
pastinum, a kind of two-pronged dibble for breaking the ground.
qj] The change in the final syllable may have been influenced by the
AS. n#p, L. napus, a kind of parsnip; cf. the later word turnep or turnip.

PARSON, the incumbent of a parish. (F.—L.) ME. persone,
Chaucer, C. T. 480(A 478). In the Ancren Riwle, p. 316, persone
means person, It is certain that parson and person are the same
word; for the Late L. persdna is constantly used in the sense of
‘parson.’ See persona in Ducange; it means dignity, rank, a choit-
master, curate, parson, body, man, person; and see Selden’s Table
Talk, s.v. Parson. The sense of parson may easily have been due to
the mere use of the word asa title of dignity; cf. ‘Laicus quidam
magne persone’=a certain lay-man of great dignity; Ducange.
B. The ME. persone is from OF. persone, ‘cure, recteur d’une paroisse,
prieur, dignitaire, bénéficier ecclésiastique ;’ Godefroy.—L. persdna
(above). 4 The quotation from Blackstone is better known than
his authority for the statement. Hesays: ‘A parson, persona ecclesia,
is one that hath full possession of all the rights of a parochial church.
He is called parson, persona, because by his person the church, which
is an invisible body, is represented;’? Comment. b. i. c. 11. This
is the usual sense in E. civil law, but is hardly required by the
etymology. See Person. Der. parson-age, a coined word with
F. suffix, Bp. Taylor, vol. iii. ser. 7 (R.).

PART, a portion, piece. (F.—L.) ME, part, sb., Floris and
Blancheflur, ed. Lumby, 1. 522; hence parten, vb., id. 387.—F. part,


‘a part;’ Cot.—L. partem, acc. of pars,a part. From the same root |


as portion. Brugmann, i. § 527. Der. part, vb., ME. parten, as


PARTITION 431


above ; part-ible, from L, partibilis; part-ly, Cor. i. 1. 403 part-ing ;
and see part-i-al, partake, parti-cip-ate, parti-cip-le, parti-cle, part-isan,
part-it-ion, part-ner, part-y; also a-part, com-part-ment, de-part, im-
part, re-part-ee, par-c-el, parse, port-ion.

PARTAKE, to take part in or of, share. (Hybrid; F.—L.,
and Scand.) For part-take, and orig. used as part take, two separate
words ; indeed, we still use take part in much the same sense. ‘The
breed which we breken, wher it is not [is i¢ zor] the delynge, or part
takynge, of the body of the lord?’ Wyclit, 1 Cor. x. 16 (earlier ver-
sion; later version omits part). In the Bible of 1551, we find: ‘is
not the breade whiche we breake, partakynge of the body of Christ?”
in the same passage. See further in a note by Dr. Chance in N. and
Q. 4th Series, viii. 481. Similarly, we find G., theilnehmen=theil neh-
men, to take a part. Indeed, E. partake may have been suggested
by the corresponding Scandinavian word (viz. Dan. deeltage, Swed.
deltaga, to partake, participate) since take is a Scand. word. See
Part and Take. Der. partak-er, spelt partetaker in Coverdale’s
Bible (1538), Heb. xii. 8; partak-ing, spelt partetakyng, Palsgrave.

PARTERRE, a laid-out garden, a system of plots with walks,
&c. (F.—L.) ‘Thus...was the whole parterre environ’d;’ Eve-
lyn’s Diary, 8 Oct., 1641.—F. parterre, ‘a floor, even piece of ground,
part of a garden which consists of beds, without any tree;’ Cot.—
F, par terre, along the ground.=L. per terram, along the ground ;
see Per- and Terrace.

PARTHENOGENESIS, reproduction by a virgin. (Gk.) A
term in zoology. Gk. map@évo-, for mapOévos, a virgin; and yéveots,
birth; see Genesis.

PARTIAL, relating to a part only. (F.—L.) Frequently in the
sense of taking one part in preference to others, hence, inclined in
behalf of. ‘That in thine own behalf maist partiall seeme ;’ Spenser,
F. Q, vii. 6. 35.—F. partial, ‘solitary, .. . also partiall, unequall,
factious;’ Cot.—Late L. partidlis; formed with suffix -alis from
L. parti-, decl. stem of pars, a part. See Part. Der. partial-ly;
partial-i-ty, spelt parcialité, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 120, from F.
partialité, ‘ partiality,’ Cot.

PARTICIPATE, to partake, have a share. (L.) In Shak.
Tw. Nt. v. 245; properly a pp. or adj., as in Cor. i. 1. 106.—L.
participatus, pp. of participare, to have a share, give a share.=L.
particip-, stem of particeps, sharing in.—L. parti-, decl. stem of pars,
a part, and capere, to take. See Part and Capacious. Der.
participat-ion, ME. participacioun, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iil. pr.
10, 1. 110, from F. participation, which from L. acc. participationem ;
also particip-ant, from the stem of the pres. part.; also particip-le,


q. Vv.

PARTICIPLE, a part of speech. (F.—L.) So called because
partaking of the nature both of an adjectival substantive and a verb.
In Ben Jonson, Eng. Grammar, c. 6. ME. participle, Wyclif’s
Bible, Prologue, p. 57, 1. 29. The insertion of the J is curious,
and perhaps due to a misapprehension of the sound of the F.
word; as in principle and syllable.—F. participe, ‘a participle, in
grammer ;’? Cot.—L. participium, a participle.=L. particip-, decl.
stem of particeps, partaking ; see Participate.

PARTICLE, a very small portion, atom. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Jul. Cees, ii. 1. 139. An abbreviation for particule, due to loss of
stress in the last syllable. =F. particule, not in Cot., but in use in the
16th cent. (Littré). = L. particula, a small part; double dimin. (with
suffixes -cu- and -la) from parti-, decl. stem of pars, a part. Der.
particul-ar, ME. particuler, Chaucer, C. T. 11434 (F. 1122), from F.
particulier, which from L, particuladris, concerning a part; particu-
lar-ly; particular-ise, from F. particulariser, ‘to particularize,’ Cot. ;
particular-i-ty, from F. particularité, ‘a particularity,’ Cot. Doublet,

arcel,

‘ PARTISAN (1), an adherent of a party. (F.—Ital.—L.)
‘These partizans of faction often try’d;’ Daniel, Civil War, bk. ii.
St. 4.—F. partisan, ‘a partner, partaker;” Cot.—TItal. partigiano,
formerly also partegiano, ‘a partner;’ Florio. Cf. Ital. parteggiare,
“to share, take part with,’ Florio; answering to F. partager, to take
part in, The form partigiano answers to a Late L. form *parten-
stanus, not found ; from part-, base of pars, a part; with suffixes -ensi-
and -duus. See Part, Partition. Der. partisan-ship.

PARTISAN (2), PARTIZAN, a kind of halberd. (F.—
Ital.—L.?) In Hamlet, i. 1. 140.—F. pertuisane, ‘a partisan, or
leading-staffe;’ Cot. B. But the spelling pertuisane is an accom-
modated form, to make it appear as if derived from F. pertuiser, to
pierce (cf. pertuis, a hole). Ital. partegiana, ‘a partesan, a iauelin,’
Florio; cf. Late L. partesina (occurring A.D. 1488); partisana
(1493) ; pertixana (1468). Supposed to be closely related to the
word above, as if the weapon of a partisan (K6rting, § 6882).

PARTITION, a separate part, something that separates. (F.—
L.) In Shak. meaning (1) division, Mid. Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 210 ; (2) a
party-wall, id. v. 168. Spelt particioune in Lydgate, Minor Poems,


432 PARTNER


p. 170.—F. partition, omitted by Cot., but occurring in the 14th cent.
(Littré).—L. partitionem, acc. of partitio, a sharing, partition. =L.
partiri, to divide.—L. parti-, decl. stem of pars, a part. See Part.
Der. partition, vb. So also partit-ive, from F. partitif (Littré), as if
from L. *partitiuus, not used; hence partit-ive-ly.

PARTNER, a sharer, associate. (F.—L.) A curious corrup-
tion, due to the eye, i.e. to the misreading of MSS. and books. In
many MSS. ¢ and ¢ are just alike, and the ME. word which appears
as partener or parcener is really to be read as parcener, with c, not ¢.
The spelling parcener occurs as late as in Cotgrave, as will appear;
and even in Blackstone’s Commentaries, b. ii. c. 12 (R., s.v. parcel).
For the spelling partener, see Wyclif, 1 Cor. ix. 12; for the spelling
parcener, id. Rey. xviii. 4.— OF. parcener, MF. parsonnier, ‘a parte-
ner, or co-parcener;” Cot.—Late L. *partitidnarius, not found ;
but we find partidnarius sometimes used in the sense of ‘common’
or ‘mutual,’ which seems to be a contracted form of it, and is the
original of the F. form.—L. partitién-, stem of partitio; see Par-
tition. Thus partner =partitioner. Der. pariner-ship.

PARTLET, a gorget or loose collar, a garment for the neck and
shoulders, esp. for women. (F.) ME. patelet, Henryson, Garmond
of Gude Ladeis, st. 7.— OF. patelette, dimin. of patte, a band of stuff
(Godefroy) ; cf. MF. patellette, ‘ the broad piece of leather that runnes
over-crosse, or through, the top of a head-stall [for a horse] ;’ Cot.
Cf. pate, ‘a plate or band of iron for the strengthening of a thing ;’
Cot. Of obscure origin ; see Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 208. The r
is unoriginal. Perhaps a dimin. of Late L. pata, a kind of ‘ limbus’
or border worn by some ecclesiastics (Ducange). Or for *platelette ;
cf. OF. platel, a flat piece (Godefroy) ; see Plateau.

PARTRIDGE, a well-known bird preserved for game. (F.—
L.—Gk.) ME. partriche, pertriche, Richard the Redeles, ed. Skeat,
iii. 38.—ONorm. F. pertrix, in Moisy, Gloss. Comparatif Anglo-
Normand; F. perdrix, ‘a partridge;’ in which the second r is in-
trusive. = L. perdicem, acc. of perdix.— Gk. mépdié, a partridge; per-
haps named from its cry or its noisy flight, as some connect it with
Gk. mépdopat, Skt. pard (Prellwitz).

PARTURIENT, about to produce young. (L.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674.=L. parturient-, stem of pres. part. of parturire, to
be ready to bring forth young. Cf. partir-us, fut. part. of parere, to
produce; see Parent, Der. partur-it-ion=F. parturition (Littré),
from L. acc. parturitionem, which from parturire.

PARTY, a company, faction, assembly. (F.—L.) ME. parite,
King Alisaunder, 4756; parti, party, Cursor Mundi, 7470.—F. partie,
‘a part, share, party, side;? Cot. We also find F. parti, ‘a match,
bargain, party, side;” Cot. ‘The former is the fem. of the latter. —
L. partita, fem. of partitus, pp. of partiri, to divide. = L. parti-, decl.
stem of pars,a part. See Part. Cf. Ital. partita, a share, part;
Span. partida, a party of soldiers, crew, &c. Der. party-coloured,
Merch. Ven. i. 3. 89; party-verdict, Rich. II, i. 3. 234.

PARVENU, an upstart. (F.—L.) Modern.—F. parvenu, lit.
one who has arrived at a place, hence, one who has thriven; pp. of
parvenir, * to atchieve, arrive, thrive ;’ Cot. L. peruenire, to arrive.
—L. per-, through; and wenitre, cognate with E. come. See Per-
and Come. :

PARVIS, a porch; also, a room over a church-porch for a school.
(¥F.—L.—Gk.—Pers.) See Halliwell, and Prompt. Pary. p. 385.
ME. paruis (=parvis), Chaucer, C. T. 312 (A 310); see note. —OF.
parvis, ‘the porch of a church; also (or more properly), the utter
court of a palace or great house;’ Cot. A variant of OF. parevis,
pareis, parais (Low L. paravisus), lit. paradise.—L. paradisus, para-
dise ; also a church-porch, outer court. It is thus the same word as
Paradise, q.v. Diez cites Neapolitan paraviso as a variant of Ital.
paradiso. According to Littré, when the old mystery-plays were
exhibited in the church-yard, the porch represented paradise. 4[ The
v-was inserted in OF. pare-is, to avoid hiatus.

PASCH, the Jewish passover; Easter. (L.—Gk.—Heb.) ME.
paske, P. Plowman, B. xvi. 139; Ormulum, 15850. AS. pascha; the
gen. pasches is in the A. S, Chron. an. 1122.—L,. pascha.=— Gk. racya,
the passover, John, vi. 4.—Heb. pesakh, a passing over, the pass-
over; from Heb. root pasakh, he passed over. See Exod. xii. 11,
27. Der. pasch-al, from F. paschal, ‘paschall,’ Cot., from L. paschalis;
pasch-flower or pasque-flower, (The Heb. s is samech.)

PASH, to dash, strike hard. (Scand.) ‘As he was pashing it
against atree;’ Ford, Lover’s Melancholy, i.1. And in Shak. Troil.
ii. 3. 213, v.5.10. ME. paschen, P. Plowman, B. xx. 99. Cf. Swed.
dial. paska, to dabble in water, baska, to beat (Rietz); Norweg.
baska, to dabble in water, tumble, work hard, fight one’s way on,
baksa, to box (Aasen); Dan. baske, to slap, thwack, drub ; baxes, to
box. From Swed. dial. bas-a, to beat. Cf. prov. E. bash, of which
pash is a variant. Also G. patschen, to strike, to dabble; Low G,
bat, a stroke, a blow. And see Baste (1), Box (3).

PASHA, PACHA, PASHAW, BASHAW, a prince, lord.


‘PASTE


(Pers.) Spelt ‘baskaw in Evelyn’s Diary, Dec. 17, 1684; dasha in
Sir T. Herbert, Travels, ed. 1665, p. 139.— Pers. basha, badshah, ‘a
governor of a province, counsellor of state, great lord, sometimes the.
grand vazir;’ the same as padshak, ‘an emperor, sovereign, mon-
arch, prince, great lord;’ Rich. Dict. pp. 234, 228, 315. — Pers. pad-,
OPers. pati-, equivalent to the syllable -pot in des-pot; and Pers.
shah, whence the E.skak. See Padishah.

PASQUE-FLOWER;; see under Pasch.

PASQUIN, PASQUINADKH, a lampoon, satire. (F.—Ital.)
Formerly also pasguil, from MF. pasguille, ‘a pasquill;’ Cot.=F.
pasquin, ‘the name of an image or post in Rome, whereon libels and
defamatory rimes are fastened, and fathered ; also, a pasquill;’ Cot.
[Hence pasguinade, which see in Littré.] — Ital. Pasguino, ‘a statue in
Rome on whom all libels are fathered ;’ Florio; whence pasguinata,
a libel, the original of F. pasguinade. ‘In the 16th century, at the
stall of a cobbler named Pasguin [ Pasquino], at Rome, a: number
of idle persons used to assemble to listen to his pleasant sallies, and
to relate little anecdotes in their turn, and indulge themselves in
raillery at the expense of the passers-by. After the cobbler’s death
the statue of a gladiator was found near his stall, to which the people
gave his name, and on which the wits of the time, secretly at night,
affixed their lampoons;’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates. ‘ The statue still
stands at the corner of the Palazzo Braschi, near the Piazza Navona ;’
note in Gloss. to Bacon, Adv. of Learning, ed. Wright.

PASS, to walk onward, pace, move on. (F.—L.) In early use;
Ancren Riwle, p. 330, 1. 20; Layamon, 1341 (later text). =F. passer,
to pass.= Late L. passare, to pass.—L, passus, a step, a pace. Diez
considers passdre to be a frequentative from pandere, to stretch; but
it makes little ultimate difference, since passus is itself derived from
the same verb, and meant, originally, ‘a stretch,’ hence the difference
of space between the feet in walking. Either way, we are led to L.
passus, pp. of pandere, to stretch. ,See Pace. Der. pass, sb., Hamlet,
ii, 2, 773 pass-book, pass-key, pass-word; pass-able, Cor. vy. 2. 13}
pass-abl-y, pass-able-ness ;pass-age, q.V-; pass-er, passer-by; pass-ing,
Two Gent. i. 2.173 pass-ing, adv., L. L. L. iv. 3. 103 ; passing-bell,
Shak. Venus, 702; pass-over, Exod. xii. 11, 27; pass-port, q. v.;
past; pastime, q.v.

PASSAGE, a journey, course. (F.—L.) ME. passage, King
Hom, ed, Lumby, 1323.—F. passage, ‘a passage;’ Cot.—Late L.
passticur.1, a right of passage, occurring A.D.1095; Ducange. [Cf.
Ital. passaggio, Span. pasage.|— Late L. passare, to pass; see Pass.
Der. passeng-er, in which the z is merely excrescent before the fol-
lowing g, the old spelling being passager, as in North’s Plutarch, ed.
1631, p. 24 (Life of Romulus), where we read that some ‘ hold a false
opinion, that the vulturs are passagers, and come into these parts out
of strange countries.’ See F. passager in Cotgrave.

PASSERINE, relating to sparrows. (I..) Scientific.=L. passe-
rinus, adj., formed from passeri-, decl. stem of passer, a sparrow.

PASSION, suffering, strong agitation of mind, rage. (F.—L.)
In early use. ME. passions; spelt passiun, O. Eng. Homilies, ed.
Morris, i. 119, 1. 6 from bottom.=—F. passion, ‘passion, perturbation ;’
Cot.—L. passiénem, acc. of passio, suffering, &c.; cf. passus, pp. of
pati, to suffer; see Patient. Der. passion-flower, passion-less, passion=
week; passion-ate, Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 220, from Late L. passidnatus,
occurring A.D. 1409 (Ducange), with which cf. F. passioné (Cot.) 5
passion-ate-ly, passion-ate-ness ; com-passion. Also passible, F. passible,
from L. passibilis, capable of suffering ; from passi-, for passus, with
suffix -bilis; hence passibili-ty, And see Passive.

PASSIVE, enduring, unresisting. (F.—L.) In Shak, Timon,
iv. 3. 254.—F. passif, ‘passive, suffering ;’ Cot.=L. passiuus, suffer-
ing.—L. passus, pp. of pati, to suffer. See Passion. Der. passive-
ly, -ness; passiv-i-ty, a coined word, in Bp. Taylor, vol. iii. ser. 10 (R.).

PASSPORT, a permission to travel. (F.—L.) ‘A travelling
warrant is call’d Passport, whereas the original is passe per tout ;’
Howell, Familiar Letters, b. iv. let. 19, ‘They gave us our passe-
port ;’ Hakluyt’s Voyages, ed. 1598, vol. i. p. 71. Spelt passeporte,
Gascoigne, Fruites of War, st. 116, [Howell’s remark is wrong; a
passport and a passe-partout are different things ; one is ‘leave to quit
a port,’ the other is ‘ permission to travel everywhere ;’ he probably
means that the former word came to signify much the same as the
latter. Dryden has: ‘ with this passe par tout I will instantly conduct
her to my own chamber ;’ Kind Keeper, Act v. sc. 1.]—F. passe-
port, ‘a passe, or passe-port, or safe conduct ;’ Cot. F. passer, to
pass; and port, a port, a seaport, from L. acc. portum, a port. See
Pass and Port (2).

PASTE, dough prepared for pies, flour and water, &c. (F.—L.
=Gk.) ‘Paste for to make;’ P. Plowman, B. xiii, 250.—OF,
paste, ‘ paste, or dough ;’ Cot. Mod, F. pate; Span. and Ital. pasza.
~ Late L. pasta, paste, used by Marcellus Empiricus, about A.D. 400
(Lewis).— Gk. maorj, a mess of food; strictly a fem, form from
maorés, besprinkled, salted, adj., formed from magcev, to strew,


- PASTEL

sprinkle, esp.'to sprinkle salt. Thus the orig. sense was ‘a salted
‘mess of food.’ Der. paste-board; past-y, ME. pastee, Chaucer, C. T.
4344 (A 4346), from OF. pasté (mod. F. pate), ‘a pie, or pastie,’
Cot.; past-r-y, used in Shak. in the sense of a room in which pasties
were made, Romeo, iv. 4. 2 (cf. ‘ Pastrye, pistorium,’ Levins), and
formed accordingly on the model of pant-r-y and butt-er-y (i.e, bottl-
er-y), but now applied to articles made of paste; pastry-cook ; pait-y
(as applied to oyster-patties), from mod. F. pate.

PASTEL, a roll of coloured paste used like a crayon, a coloured
crayon. (F.—Ital.—L.) An artist’s term.—F. pastel, ‘a pastel,
crayon;’ Hamilton. =Ital. pastello, ‘a little bit of paste; Baretti.
Also ‘a pastil;’ Meadows. ‘The pastel was named from being
shaped like a roll of bread. —L. pastillum, acc. of pastillus, a little
loaf or roll. Dimin. of pastus, food.=—L. pastus, pp. of pascere, to
feed. See Pastor. = Sometimes written pastil, very like pastille.
However, pastel and pastille are doublets: and neither is at all related
to pasty or paste, which are from Gk. Doublet, pastille.

PASTERN, the part of a horse’s foot from the fetlock to the
hoof. (F.—L.) Spelt pasterne in Levins, ed. 1570. Palsgrave has:
‘Pastron of an horse, pasturon.’ =MF. pasturon, ‘the pastern of a
horse ;’ Cot. Mod. F. pdturon. So called because when a horse
was turned out to pasture, he was tethered to a peg by a cord passing
round the pastern; the tether itself was called pasture in Old French.
‘Le suppliant frappa icellui Godart deux ou trois coups par le costé
@unes cordes appelées pastures’=the petitioner beat this Godart
twice or thrice on the side with cords called pastures; in a passage
dated A.D. 1460, in Ducange, s.v. pasturale, and cited by Littré. =
OF. pasture, ‘pasture, grasse, fodder;’ Cot. See further under
Pasture. Thus OF. pasturon was formed from pasture, a tether,
by adding the suffix -on, which gave various meanings to the sb.;
see Brachet,Introd. § 231. So also Ital. pasturale, the pastern, from
pastura, a pasture. 3 Hence we may explain a passage in
Beaum. and Fletcher, The Chances, i. 8. 16, viz. ‘She had better
have worn pasterns.’ It means tethers, or clogs tied to her foot;
i.e, she had better have been tethered up. Indeed Kersey, ed. 1715,
‘gives : ‘Pastern, the hollow of a beast’s heel, the foot of a horse,
that part under the fetlock to the hoof; also, a shackle for a horse.’
It is remarkable that this sense should have been retained in English,
though unnoticed in Cotgrave’s F. Dict.

PASTILLE, a small cone made of aromatic substances, to be
burnt to purify the air of a room. (F.—L.) Modern. Borrowed
from F. pastille, Cot. gives: ‘Pastilles, little lumps or loaves of
wood, &c.’=—L. pastillum, acc. of pastillus, a little loaf or roll.
Dimin. from pastus, food. Also spelt pastil; cf. Walloon pastil, a
pastille (Remacle). See Pastel, which is a doublet.

PASTIME, amusement. (Hybrid: F.—L.; and E.) In Shak.
Temp. v. 38. For pass-time. Spelt passe-tyme in Sir T. Elyot, The
Governor, b.i.c. 22. It is a sort of half translation of F. passe-
temps, ‘ pastime;” Cot. We also find, in old authors, the form
pastaunce or pastans, which is the F. passe-temps Anglicised, Gawain
Douglas has pastans, Prol. to Aineid, bk. xii. 1. 212.

PASTOR, a shepherd. (L.) In Hamlet, i. 3. 47; spelt pastour
in Skelton, ed. Dyce, i. 203, 1. 23.—L. pastor, a shepherd, lit.
feeder ; cf. past-us, pp. of pascere, to feed, an inceptive verb, pt. t.
pai-ui.—4/PA to feed; whence also E. food; see Food. Der.
pastor-al, in Sir P. Sidney, Apology for Poétrie, ed. Arber, p. 43,
1, 16,-from F. pastoral, ‘ pastorall, shepherdly,’ Cot., from L. pastor-
Glis ; pastor-ship; pasture, Cursor Mundi, 18445, from OF. pasture
(mod. F. pature), ‘ pasture’ (Cot.), which from L. pastira, a feeding,
like pastiirus, fut. part. of pasc?, to browze, from pascere, to feed;
pastur-able, from OF. pasturable, ‘ pasturable, Cot.; pastur-age,
from OF, pasturage (mod. F. paturage), ‘ pasturage,’ Cot, And see
pastern, pabulum.

PASTY, a patty, a pie; see Paste.

PAT (1), to strike lightly, tap. (E.) ‘It is childrens sport, to
prove whether they can rubbe upon their brest with one hand, and
pat upon their fore-head with another ;’ Lord Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 63.
ME, pat, sb. ‘ And gafe his sone soche a patte;’ Sir Eglamour, 1241
(in Thornton Romances). Of imitative origin; like tap. Not in
AS, ; but a parallel formation to AS. pletian, to strike. ‘ Hi pletton
hyne’=they smote him with their hands, John, xix. 3. So also
Swed. dial. pjatza, to pat, to strike lightly and often (Rietz), allied
to Swed. platia, to tap, plait, a tap, pat; MDu. pletten, to beat
(Kilian). Cf. MF. (Gascon) patact, ‘a tack, clack, knock, flap ;’
Cot.; Prov. pata, to beat, to pat, to tap, allied to pato, an animal’s


paw. Also Bavarian patzen, to pat, patzen, a pat on the hand;


Schmeller; see Patrol. And see Patch (1). Korting, § 6917.
Der. pat, sb.; patt-er.
PAT (2),a ‘small lump of butter. (E.) Cf. Irish pait, a hump,


paiteog, a small lump of butter ; Gael. pait, a hump, paiteach, humpy,


faiteag, a small lump. of butter; all from E. pat. Thus the orig. |


PATE 433,


sense is ‘lump.’ Prob. from the vb. pat, above; as being patted
into shape; as dab, a small lump, is from dab, verb. Cf prov. F.

(Berry) pater, to stick to the shoes, said of mud.

PAT (3), quite to the purpose. (E.) Orig. an adv., as in ‘Pathe
comes,’ K. Lear, i. 2. 146; ‘it will fall [happen] pat,’ Mids. Nt. Dr.
v. 188; ‘now might I do it pat,’ Haml. iii. 3. 73. This can hardly
be other than the same word as pat, a tap; see Pat (1); cf. dab, an
adept, from dab, verb, and the phrase fo hit pat, to hit with a flat blow;
see exx.in N.E.D. £B. But the sense may have been affected by
Du. pas, pat, fit, convenient, in time, which is used in exactly the
same way as E, pat; cf. komt het te pas, ‘if it comes convenient,’ i.e.
pat, te pas dienen, ‘to serve just at the time;’ Hexham. So also G,
pass, pat, fit, suitable; zu passe, apropos; passen, to fit, suit, to be
just right. These are not true Teutonic words, but borrowed from
F.; cf. ‘se passer, whence il se passe & peu de chose, he is contented,
he maketh shift, he doth well enongh;’ Cot.

PATCH (1), a piece sewn on a garment, a plot of ground. (E.?)
ME. pacche, patche, Wyclif, Mark, ii. 21; Prompt. Parv. p. 377.
The letters eh really appear as cch in old MSS.; the spelling ¢ck is
of later date, and sometimes due to the editors. The letters ech
answer to an AS. cc, as in ME. strecchen, to stretch, from AS.
streccan. . It seems to be a by-form of platch. We find: ‘Platch,
a large spot, a patch, or piece of cloth sewed on to a garment to
repair it;’ Dialect of Banffshire, by W. Gregor; cf. prov. E. plack,
a plot of ground, E. D. D.; Low G. plakke, plakk (1), a spot;
(2) a piece, both a piece torn away, and a patch put on; (3) a piece
of land (cf. E. patch of ground); ME. flekke, a plot of ground.
Hence the verb plakken, to patch, fasten. ‘Frisch, from Alberi
Lexicon, cites: ich plack, reconcinno, resarcino; ich setze einen
placken an, assuo;’ Bremen Worterbuch. The orig. sense of plakken
was ‘to strike;’ cf. MDu. placken, (1) to strike, (2) to plaster,
besmear with lime or chalk, (3) to spot, to stain; placke, mod. Du,
plek, a spot (een mooi plek grondes, a fine spot [patch] of ground,
Sewel); see Oudemans. y. With a change of kk to t¢, we have
Dan. pletie, to strike, AS. plettan, to strike with the hands; and
Goth. plats, a patch, Mark, ii. 21, where Wyclif has pacche. 4 The
AS. plece means an open space, lit. ‘a place.’ The phrase ‘in the
comers of the streets’ (Lat. in angulis platearum) is glossed by
‘huommum Sera plecena vel wordum’ in the Northumb. version of
Matt. vi. 5. Here the AS. place is, apparently, merely Englished
from L. platea; see Place. It is remarkable that the Norman
dialect has plache (for place) in the sense of ‘plot of ground.’ Der.
patch, verb, Tw. Nt. i. 5. 523 patch-work.

PATCH (2), a paltry fellow. (E.) In Shak. Temp. iii. 2. 71,
Com, Err, iii. 1. 32, Merch. Ven. ii. 5. 46; &c. ‘In these passages,
the word is by most commentators interpreted . . ‘‘ a domestic fool,”
supposed to be so called from his parti-coloured dress ;’ Schmidt.
‘Wolsey we find had two fools, both occasionally called Patch,
though they had other names; see Douce, Illustrations of Shak.,
i. 258;”’ Nares. ‘To Peche, the fole, in rewarde, 6s. 8d.;’ Excerpta
Historica, p. 88 (1492). The supposition that patch is a nick-name
from the dress is most probably right; if so, the derivation is from
patch (1); see above. In Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 9, the word merely
means clown, or an ill-dressed mechanic. @ It is independent of
Ital. pazzo, a fool, madman, which is used in a much stronger sense.
Der. patch-ock, a dimin. form (cf. bull-ock, hill-ock); ‘as very
patchockes [clowns] as the wild Irish,’ Spenser, View of the State of
Ireland, Globe ed. p. 636, col, 2; this is the word spelt pajock in
Shak. Hamlet, iii. 2. 295.

PATCHOULI, the name of a scent. (F.—Dravidian.) F. pat-
chouli; of obscure origin. Apparently from E. patcha-leaf, i.e.
green leaf, imitating the vernacular (Bengali) pacha-pat, where pat is
Hind. for ‘leaf.’ Or from Dravidian words meaning ‘ green leaf.’
Cf. Tamil pachchai, green, ilai, leaf (Knight); Malayalim pachchila,
green leaf (Gundert); Canarese pachcha, green, yele, leaf (Reeve).
Wilson gives the Telugu name as pachchaku, with the same sense,
from Telugu aki, a leaf.

PATE, the head. (F.—L.) In Spenser, Shep. Kal., June, 1. 16.
ME, pate; ‘bi pate and by polle,’ Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 237,
in a song of the time of Edw. II. The etymology may be disguised
by the loss of 7; pate may stand for plate, i.e. the crown of the head.
= MF, pate, not recorded in the special sense here required, but
Cotgrave gives: ‘Pate, a plate, or band of iron, &c. for the
strengthening of a thing;’ which suggests the loss of . Cf. G.
platte, a plate, bald pate, in vulgar language, the head (Fliigel) ;
MHG. plate, a plate, the shaven crown of the head. B. Cf. also
Late L. platta, the clerical tonsure from ear to ear (Ducange) ;
MDnu. platte kruyne, ‘ flat-crowned, or ball-pated,’ Hexham ; platte,
the shaven crown, Kilian. y. Even in Irish, we find plata, a plate ;
plait, the forehead, plaitin, a little pate, a skull, the crown of the
head (with the usual change of a to ai); O'Reilly. wes words

F


434 PATEN


were prob. borrowed from OF. or ME. We may note a similar
change in sense in the word crown, meaning (1) the clerical tonsure,
(2) the top of the head, esp. if bald. See Plate.

PATEN, the plate for the bread in the eucharist. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Spelt patine in Cotgrave; Shak. has patines=plates of metal, Merch.
Ven. v.59. ME. pateyn, a paten, Havelok, 187.—OF. patene, ‘the
patine, or cover of a chalice;’ Cot.—Late L. patena, the paten in
the eucharist; L. patena, patina, a wide shallow bowl, basin. Gk.
mardyvn, a kind of flat dish. So named from its flatness; from
PET, to spread out, whence Gk. merdvvuju, I spread out; cf. L.
patére, to lie open, spread out, extend; see Patent. Brugmann, i.
§ 120, note. Doublet, pan (?).

PATENT, lit. open, hence conspicuous, public; gen. as sb., an
official document conferring a privilege. (F.—L.) The use as an
adj. is less common, but it occurs in Cotgrave. ME. patente, sb.,
a patent, Chaucer, C. T, 12271 (C 337). [The patent was so called
because open to the inspection of all men.] = OF. patent (fem. patente),
‘patent, wide open, discovered ;’ Cot.—L. patent-, stem of pres.
part. of patére, to lie open. 4/PET, to spread out; whence also Gk.
meravvupt, I spread out, unfold, unfurl, and E. fath-om. Der. patent,
vb. (modern) ; patent-ee, where the suffix=F. -é<L. -dtus. And see
pace, pass, paten, pan, petal, fathom, ex-pand, compass, surpass, tres-
pass.

PATERA, a flat round ornament, in bas-relief. (L.)
a flat saucer.=L. patére, to lie open. Cf. Paten.

PATERNAL, fatherly. (F.—L.) In Shak. King Lear,i. 1. 115.
=F. paternel, ‘ paternal ;’ Cot.—Late L. paterndlis, extended from
L. paternus, paternal, fatherly. Formed with Idg. suffix -zo- from
pater, a father. Formed with suffix -¢er ; but probably zot from 4/PA,
to guard, feed, cherish; cf. Skt. pa, to protect, cherish, and E. food.
+Gk. natnp; E. father; see Father. Der. paternal-ly; also
patern-i-ty, from F. paternité, ‘ paternity, fatherhood,’ Cot., from L.
acc. paternitatem. Also pater-noster, Chaucer, C. T. 3485, so called
from the first two words, pater noster, i.e. Our Father. And see
patri-arch, patri-cian, patri-mony, patri-ot, patr-istic, patr-on.

PATH, a way, track, road. (E.) ME. path, pap, P. Plowman, B.
xiv. 300; pl. papes, Havelok, 268. AS. ped, pad, a path, Grein, ii.
361.4Du. pad; G. pfad. Der. path-less, path-way.

PATHOS, emotion, deep feeling. (Gk.) In South’s Sermons,
vol. iv. ser. I (R.); andin Phillips, ed. 1706. [But the adj. pathetical
is in earlier use, occurring in Cotgrave, and is oddly used by Shak.
As You Like It, iv. 1.196, &c.|=—Gk. ma@os, suffering, deep feeling ;
from mageiv, used as 2 aor. infin. of macxeuv, to suffer (as if for *mad-
onev). Allied to révO0s, grief; from the weak grade ma0- (for 7av@).
Der. path-et-ic, from MF. pathetique, ‘ patheticall, passionate,’ Cot.,
from L. pathéticus (Lewis), from Gk. raOnrixds, extended from ma0nrés,
subject to suffering; path-et-ic-al, path-et-ic-al-ly, path-et-ic-al-ness.
Also patho-logy, in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, from MF. pathologie,
‘that part of physick which intreats of the causes, qualities, and
differences of diseases,’ Cot., from Gk. madoAoyeiv, to treat of diseases ;
which is from 7d6o-, for aos, and Aéyewv, to speak. Hence patho-
log-ic, Gk. ma0oroy:kds, patholog-ic-al, pathologist.

ATIENT, bearing pain, enduring, long-suffering. (F.—L.)
ME. pacient, patient, Chaucer, C. T. 486 (A 484).—OF. patient,
‘patient.’=L. patient-, stem of pres. part. of pati, to suffer. Der.
patient-ly; patience, ME. pacience, Ancren Riwle, p. 180, from F.
patience, L. patientia. And see passion,

PATINE, a round plate; see Paten.

PATOIS, a vulgar dialect, esp. of French. (F.—L.) In Smollett,
France and Italy, let. 21 (Davies). Borrowed from F. patois, ‘ gib-
ridge, clownish language, rusticall speech ;’ Cot. Patois perhaps stands
for an older (doubtful) patrois; see Godefroy, Diez and Littré. = Late
L. patriensis, one who is indigenous to a country, a native; so that
patois is the ‘ speech of the natives.’ =L. patria, one’s native country.
See Patriot.

PATRIARCH, a chief father. (F.—L.—Gk.) The lit. sense
is ‘chief father.’ ME. patriarche, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris,
i. 131, l. 4; patriarke, P. Plowman, B. xviii. 138.—OF. patriarche,
“a patriarke, Cot.—L. patriarcha, also patriarchés.=—Gk. matpidpxns,
the father or chief of a race.—Gk. matpi-, short for marpia, a lineage,
race, from warpi-, for marnp, a father; and dpyxewv, to rule. See
Father and Archaic. Der. patriarch-al, patriarch-ic, patriarch-
ate. @# ‘The ecclesiastical historian Socrates gives the title of
patriarch to the chiefs of Christian dioceses about A.D. 440;’
Haydn.

PATRICIAN, a nobleman in ancient Rome. (L.) In Shak.
Cor. i. 1. 16, 68, 75. Formed with suffix -an (<L. -anuus) from L,
patrici-us, adj. patrician, noble; sb. a patrician, a descendant of the
patres, senators, or heads of families.—L..patri-, for pater, a father.
See Paternal.

PATRIMONY, an inheritance, heritage. (F.—L.) ME. patri-


L. patera,


PAUNCH


monye, P. Plowman, C. xxiii. 234; spelt patrimoigne, id. B. xx. 233.


=F. patrimoine, ‘patrimony;’ Cot.—L. patriménium, an inherit-
ance. Formed (with suffix -mdn-io-=Idg. -mon-yo-) from patri-
decl. stem of pater, a father, cognate with E. father. See Paternal
and Father. Der. patrimoni-al.

PATRIOT, one who loves his fatherland. (F.— Late L.— Gk.)
‘A patriot, or countrey-man;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627.—OF. patriote,
‘a patriot, ones countreyman ;” Cot.—Late L. patridta, a native. =
Gk. nar piwrns, properly, a fellow-countryman. — Gk. marpros, belong-
ing to one’s fathers, hereditary.—Gk. mazpi-, for marnp, a father.
Der. patriot-ic, Gk, marpiwtikds, patriot-ic-al-ly, patriot-ism; also
com-patriot, ex-patriate, re-pair (2). @ The peculiar use of patriot
in its present sense arose in French.

PATRISTIC, pertaining to the fathers of the Christian church.
(F.—Gk.) From F. patristique, which see in Littré. Coined from
Gk. warp-, for marnp, a father; with suffix -catexds. @] Not a well-
made word.

PATROL, to go the rounds in a camp or garrison; a going of
the rounds. (F.—Teut.) It occurs, spelt patroll, in Phillips, ed.
1706, both as a sb. and verb. ‘And being then upon fatrol ;’
Butler, Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 3, 1. 801.— MF. patrouille, ‘a still night-
watch in warre,’ Cot. Lit. a paddling about, tramping about, from
MF. (Picard) patrouiller, ‘to paddle or pudder in the water;’ Cot.
The same word (with inserted r) as patouiller, ‘to slabber, to paddle
or dable in with the feet;’ Cot. B. Formed, as a sort of fre-
quentative verb, from OF. pate (mod. F. patte), ‘the paw, or foot of
a beast;’ Cot. [Cf. Span. pata, a paw, beast’s foot ; patullar, to run
through mud; patrulla, a patrol, patrullar, to patrol; Ital. pattuglia,
patrol, watch, sentry (showing that the r is inserted).] y. Prob.
from a Teutonic base pat- appearing in Bavar. patzen, to pat; EFries.
patjen, to splash; G. patsche, an instrument for striking the hand,
patsch-fuss, web-foot of a bird, patschen, to strike, dabble, walk
awkwardly. See Pat (1). The suffix -owiller represents L. -uculare.

PATRON, a protector. (F.—L.) ME. patron, Rob. of Glouc.
p. 471, 1. 9673. —F. patron, ‘a patron, protector.’ —L. patrénum, acc.
of patrénus, a protector, lit. one who takes the place of a father. —L.
patr-, for pater, a father, cognate with E. father. See Paternal.
Der. patron-age, from MF. patronnage, ‘patronage, Cot.; patron-
ess, Cor. v. 5. 13 patron-ise. Doublet, patiern.

PATRONYMIC, derived from the name of a father or an-
cestor. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘So when the proper name is used to note
one’s parentage, which kind of nouns the grammarians call patro-
nymics;’ Ben Jonson, Eng. Grammar, b. ii. c. 3.— MF. patronymigue,
‘derived of the fathers or ancestors names;’ Cot.=—L. patrénymicus.
— Gk. watpwyvpurds, belonging to the father’s name. = Gk. marpwvupia,
a name taken from the father. Gk. marpo-, for marnp, a father; and
évupa, a name, usually spelt dvoua. The w results from the doubling
of theo. The Gk. marnp is cognate with E. father; and Gk. évopa
is cognate with E, name. Der. patronymic, sb.

PATTEN, a wooden sole supported on an iron ring; a clog.
(F.—Teut.) ‘Their shoes and patiens;’ Camden’s Remaines, On
Apparel (R.). Spelt paten, patin in Minsheu, ed. 1627; paten,
Palsgrave.—F. patin, ‘a pattin, or clog; also, the footstall of
a pillar;’ Cot.—OF. pate, patte, mod. F. patte, ‘the paw or foot of
a beast, the footstall of a pillar;’ Cot. See Patrol. Cf. Ital.
pattino.

PATTER, to strike frequently, as hail. (E.) ‘Or pattering hail
comes pouring on the main;’ Dryden, tr. of Virgil, Ain. ix. gIo.
A frequentative of pat, with the usual suffix -er; the double ¢ being
put in to keep the vowel short. See Pat(1). A dialectal (Lonsdale)
variant is pattle, to pat gently (Peacock). Cf. Swed. dial. padra, to
patter as hail does against a window (Rietz), ¢» It is probable
that ME. pateren, in the sense ‘to repeat prayers,’ was coined from
pater, the first word of the pater-noster. ‘And patred in my pater-
noster ; P. Plowman’s Crede, ed. Skeat, 1.6; so also in the Rom. of
the Rose, 1. 6794. Hence patter, to prattle, and patter, sb. talk.

PATTERN, an example, model to work by. (F.—L.) In many
parts, as in Lincolnshire and Cambs., the common people say patron
for pattern; and rightly. ‘Patron, a pattern;’ Peacock, Manley
Words (Lincoln); E.D.S. ME. patron ; Chaucer, Book Duch. 910.
‘Patrone, form to werk by, patron or example, Exemplar ;’ Prompt.
Parv. ‘Patrons of blacke paper;’ Eng. Gilds, ed. Toulmin Smith,
p- 321.—F. patron, ‘a patron, protector,. . also a pattern, sample ;’
Cot. See Patron. Doublet, patron.

PATTY, a little pie. (F.—L.—Gk.) Mod. F. paté; OF. paste,
a pasty. See Paste. Doublet, pasty. Der. patty-pan.

PAUCITY, fewness in number. (F.—L.) Spelt paucitie in
Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. paucité, ‘paucity;’ Cot.—L. paucitatem,
acc. of paucitads, fewness. = L. pauci-, for paucus, few; with suffix -tas.
B. Allied to Gk. maipos, small; and to E. few; see Few.

|. PAUNCH, the belly. (F.—-L.) ME. paunche, P. Plowman,


-PAUPER


B. xiii. 87.—O. North F. panche; OF. pance, ‘the paunch, maw,
belly ;? Cot.—L. panticem, acc. of pantex, the paunch.

PAUPER, a poor person. (L.)° In Phillips, ed. 1706. —L. pauper,

poor. . B. The syllable pau- is the same as pau- in paucus, few, Gk.
mav-pos; see Paucity. The second element in pau-per is prob.
allied to parare. See Pare. Der. pauper-ise, pauper-ism; and see
poor, poverty.
.PAUSE, a stop, cessation. (F.—L.—Gk.). In Shak. Hamlet,
ii, 2. 509. Earlier, spelt pawse, in Prompt. Parv. =F. pause,
‘a pause, a stop;’ Cot.—Late L. pausa, a pause. Adapted from
Gk. mavots, a. pause, stopping, ceasing, end.—Gk. navw, I make to
cease ; mavopuar, I cease. See Few. Der. pause, vb., Much Ado,
iv. I. 202. Doublet, pose, q.v.

PAVE, to floor, as with stones. (F.—L.) ME. pauen (with u=v),
Chaucer, C. T. 16094 (G 626). —OF. pauer, later paver, ‘to pave,’ Cot.
— Late L. *pavare, for L. pauire, to beat, strike, also,to ram, tread down.
Der. pave-ment, ME. pauiment (with u for v, and trisyllabic), Rob. of
Glouc. p. 476, 1. 9791, pauement, Chaucer, C. T. 7686 (D 2104),
from F. pavement (Cot.), which from L. pauimentum, a hard floor,
from pauire, to ram; also pav-i-or (where the -i- is an English
insertion, as in law-y-er, bow-y-er, saw-y-er, intended to give the word
a causal force), from F. paveur,‘a paver, Cot.

PAVILION, atent. (F.—L.) ‘The spelling with 7: is intended
to represent the sound of the F.//. ME. pauylon (with u=v), Rob.
of Glouc. p. 272, 1. 5510.—F. pavillon, ‘a pavillion, tent;’ Cot.
So called because spread out like the wings of a butterfly.—L.
papilidnem, acc. of papilio, (1) a butterfly, (2) atent. ‘Cubicula aut
tentoria, quos etiam papiliones uocant ;? Augustine, cited in Ducange.
Der. pavilion-ed, Hen. V, i. 2. 129; also papilion-ac-e-ous, q.v.

PAVIN, PAVAN, a stately Spanish dance. (F.—Span. —L.—
Pers.— Tamil.) See exx. in Nares.—F. pavane, ‘a pavane ;’ Cot. =
Span. pavana, ‘a daunce called a pauin, playing ;’ Minsheu. Prob.
from a Late L. *pavanus, peacock-like, from the row of stately dancers


(Scheler); cf. Span. pava, a peahen, pavo, a peacock, pavonear, to |


walk with affected dignity. Late L. pavus, L. pauo, a peacock. See
Peacock.

PAVISH, a large shield. (F.—Ital.) Obsolete. See examples in
N.E. D., Halliwell and R. Also spelt pavese, pavish, pauesse, pauice,
pauys. ‘That impenetrable pawuice,’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 1179 c.
Spelt pauys, Reliquize Antique, ii. 22; paves, Skelton, ed. Dyce, i. 8,
1. 48; pauys, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 204. —OF. pavais, F. pavois,
‘a great shield,’ Cot. Cf. Span. paves, MItal. pavese (Florio).
=—Late L. pavensis, a large shield, occurring A.D. 1299. Usually
said to have been named from the city of Pavia, in the N. of Italy.
Godefroy has the adj. pavinois, paviois, pavois, pavais, ‘de Pavie;’
escus pavais, shields of Pavia,

PAW, the foot of a beast of prey. (F.—Teut.) ME. pawe, Sir
Isumbras, 1.481, in the Thornton Romances, ed. Halliwell; powe, Rich.
Cuer de Lion, 1. 1082, in Weber’s Met. Romances. [Hence W.
pawen, a paw, claw, Corn. paw, a foot (found in the 15th century) ;
Bret. paé, pav,a paw, being from F.]—AF. powe, OF. poe, a paw;
the same word as Prov. pauta, Catalan pota, a paw. Perhaps from
a Tent. source; cf. Low G. pote, a paw (Bremen Worterbuch), the
same word as Du. poot, G. pfote. Perhaps from an imitative root;
see Pat (1). Or related to potter; see poot in Franck.
verb, Job, xxxix. 21.

PAWL1L,a short bar, which acts as a catch to a windlass. (F.—L.)
A mechanical term; borrowed from OF. paul (Godefroy), variant of
pal, a stake.—L. palum, acc. of palus, whence also E. pale; see
Pale (1), Pole. Cf. W. pawl, a pole, stake, bar, from E.; Du. pal,
Swed. pall, a pawl; from F. or E. Der. paul-windlass (Halliwell).

PAWN (1), a pledge, something given as security for the repay-
ment of money. (F.) Spelt pawne in Minsheu, ed. 1627; Levins
(ed. 1570) has the verb to paune.—¥F. pan, ‘a pane, piece, or pannel
of a wall; also a pawn, or gage, also the skirt of a gown, the pane
of a hose, of a cloak, &c.;? Cot. B. But we must distinguish the
senses. In the sense. of ‘pane’ or ‘skirt, F. pan is of L. origin. =
L. pannum, acc. of pannus, a cloth, rag, piece; see Pane. jy. In
the sense of ‘ pawn or gage,’ OF. pan is rather from Teutonic; from
Du. pand, a pledge; cf. G. pfand, OHG. phant,a pledge. 8. Kluge
connects G.pfand with OF. paner,panner, to seize upon, which Godefroy


connects with OF. panir, pannir, to seize upon, despoil; which looks |


like an adaptation of OHG. *phant-jan; cf. MHG. phanten, phenten,
to pledge, also to rob of. I see no reason why all the forms may


not be ultimately referred to L. pannus, a piece of cloth or of clothing, |


as being the readiest article to seize upon as a pledge,
vb., pawn-er, pawn-broker.


PAWN (2), one of the least valuable pieces in chess. (F.—L.)


Der. pawn,


“ME. paune, Chaucer, Book of the Duchess, 1. 661 (Thynne); but.


‘spelt powne, poun.in the Tanner and Fairfax MSS. (Chaucer Soc.) =
‘OF. paon, a pawn at chess (Roquefort); spelt poor in the 12th cent.


Der. paw, |


PEA 435


(Littré); but also peon, pehon, pedon (Godefroy); whence also F.
pion, explained by Cotgrave as ‘a pawn at chests,’ [Cf. Span. peony
a foot-soldier, a pawn, Port. pido, one of the lower people, a pawn,
Ital. pedone, ‘a footeman’ (Florio), pedona, ‘a pawne at chesse,’ id. }
=Late L. pedinem, acc. of pedo, a foot-soldier; from ped-, stem of
pes, a foot, cognate with E. Foot. @ For the form, cf. E. fawn,
F. faon ; from Late L. fétonem. Der. pion-eer, q.v.

PAWNEE, drink ; as in brandy-pawnee, Thackeray, Newcomes,
ch. i. (Hind.—Skt.) Hind. pani, water (also in Bengali, and other
dialects) ; Wilson, Gloss. of Indian Terms, p. 397. —Skt. paniya-,
drink (Macdonell), allied to pana-, drinking, beverage (Benfey). —
Skt. pa, to drink; cf. E. potation.

PAX, a thin tablet bearing a picture of Christ, kissed by the con-
gregation. (L.) In Shak. Hen. V, iii. 6. 42. ‘Paxe to kysse;’
Palsgrave.—L. pax, peace; with reference to the kiss of peace.
See Peace. See Hone’s Year-book, 321.

PAXW AX, the strong tendon in the neck of animals. (E.)
Still common provincially ; also called paxywaxy, packwax, faxwax,
jixfax. ME. paxwax, Prompt. Parv.; see Way’s note. He quotes:
‘Le vendon, the fax-wax,’ MS. Harl. 219, fol. 150, Again he says:
‘Gautier de Biblesworth [Bibbesworth] says, of a man’s body, E¢ si
ad le wenne (fex wex) au col derere,’i.e. and he has paxwax at the
back of his neck. The orig. form is fax-wax or fex-wex, and it
exactly corresponds to the equivalent G. haarwachs, lit. ‘ hair-growth;’
presumably because the tendon is situate just where the hair ends.
Compounded of ME. fax, hair, as in Fair-fax=fair-hair ; and wax,
growth.=—AS. feax, fex, hair, Luke, vii. 38; and weaxan, to grow;
see Wax (1). The AS. feax, OHG. fahs, is related to Gk. wéxev,
to comb ; see Pectinal.

PAY (1), to discharge a debt. (F.—L.) ME. paien, Ancren
Riwle, p. 108, 1. 9; Layamon, 2340 (later text). It often has the
sense of ‘please’ or ‘content’ in old authors. ‘Be we paied with
these thingis’=let us be contented with these things, Wyclif, 1 Tim.
vi. 8.—OF. paier (also paer), later payer, ‘to pay, satisfie, content ;’
Cot.—L. pacadre, to appease, pacify; Late L. pacare, to pay
(A.D. 1338).—L. pac-, stem of pax, peace. See Peace. Der. pay,
sb., ME, paie, satisfaction, P. Plowman, B. v. 556; pay-able, pay-er,
pay-ee (=F. payé, pp.) 3 pay-master ; pay-ment, ME. paiement, Chaucer,
C. T. 5713 (D 131), from OF. paiement, later payement, ‘a payment,’
Cot


ot.

PAY (2), to pitch the seam of a ship. (F.—L.) A nautical
term, as noticed by Skinner, ed. 1671; and in the proverb: ‘the
devil to pay, and no pitch hot.’ ‘To pay a rope, een kabel teeren,’
lit. to tar a cable; Sewel’s Eng.-Du. Dict. 1754.— AF. *peier,
answering to O. North F. peier, to cover with a plaister (a peculiar
use, in Wace; see Godefroy); OF. poier, to pitch.=L. picare, to
pitch.=—L. pic-, stem of pix, pitch; see Pitch. Cf. ME. peys, pitch,
K. Alisaunder, 1620; from AF. pers, OF. pois, pitch; from L. acc.
picem.

PAYNIM, PAINIM, a pagan. (F.—L.) ‘The paynim bold ;’
Spenser, F. Q. i. 4. 41; cf. Fairfax, tr. of Tasso, xviii. 80. ME.
paynim. ‘ The paynymys hii ouercome’= they overcame the pagans ;
Rob. of Glouc. ed. Hearne, p. 401; where the better reading is
paens, i.e. pagans, as in ed, W. A. Wright, 1. 8283. This E. use of
the word is due to a singular mistake. A paynim is not a man, but
a country ; it is identical with paganism, which was formerly extended
to mean the country of pagans, or heathen lands. It is correctly
used in King Horn, ed. Lumby, 1. 803, where we find ‘a geaunt
.. fram paynyme’ = a giant from heathen lands. = AF. paenime, heathen
lands, Life of Edw. Conf. 336; OF. paienisme, spelt patanisme in
Cotgrave, who explains it by ‘ paganisme.’ [The sense is borrowed
from that of OF. paénie, paiénie, the country inhabited by pagans
(Burguy).] = Late L. pagdnismus, paganism; formed with suffix
-ismus (Gk. -icpos) from L. pagan-us, a pagan. See Pagan.
@ When a writer, wishing to use fine language, talks of a paynim,
he had better say a pagan at once.

PEA, a common vegetable. (L.) [We now say pea, with pl. peas.
This is due to mistaking the s of the older form for a plural termina-
tion ; just as when people say shay for chaise, Chinee for Chinese, &c.
Other words in which the same mistake is made are cherry (F. cerise),
sherry (formerly sherris).] ME. pese, pl. pesen and peses. ‘ A pese-lof’
=a loaf made of peas, P. Plowman, B. vi. 181; pl. peses, id. 189;
pesen,id. 198. A later spelling of the pl. is peason ; see examples in
Nares. Shak. has peas-cod=pea-pod, Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 1.191; and
otherwise only the form fease. We also find pescodes in Lydgate,
London Lyckpeny, st. 9. AS. pise, pl. pisax (Bosworth). Not an
E. word, but borrowed from L. pisa, later by-form of L. pisum, a
pea. [The vowel-change from i to ea occurs again in the case of
pear, q.v.]+Gk. micos, a pea.—4/PEIS, to grind, pound, whence Is


| pinsere, to pound, Skt. pisk, to grind; with reference to its round shape.


Cf. Russ. pesok’, sand. Der. pea-pod, peas-cod. f
FI2


436 PEACE


PEACH, quietness, freedom from war. (F.—L.). “ME. pais,
occurring as early as in the A. S. Chron. an. 1135.—OF. pais, later
paix, ‘ peace ;’ Cot.—L. pacem, acc. of pax, peace, orig. a compact
made between two contending parties.—L. pac-, seen in pic-isci, to
make a bargain; cf. OL. pac-ere, to. bind, tocome to an agreement;
see Pact. Der. peace!, interj.; .peace-able, Much Ado, ili. 3. 613
peace-abl-y, peace-able-ness; peace-ful, K. John, ii. 340, peace-ful-ly,
peace-ful-ness, peace-maker, As You Like It, v. 4. 108 ; peace-offering,
peace-officer. Also ap-pease, pay (1), paci-fy.

PEACH (1), a delicious fruit. (F.—L.—Pers.) ‘Of Peaches 3’
Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. c.7. ME. peche, peshe, Prompt.
Pary. p. 395; where it is also spelt peske, a form dune to Late L.
pesca.= OF. pesche, ‘a peach;’ Cot. (Cf. Port. pécego, Ital. persica,
shorter form pesca, a peach. |—L. Persicum, a peach, Pliny, xv. 11.12;
so called because growing on the Persicus or peach-tree ; where Per-
sicus stands for Persica arbor, the Persian tree. = Pers. Pars, Persia.
See Parsee. Der. peach-coloured, peach-tree.

PEACH (2), to inform against. (F.—L.) From ME. apechen,
by loss of a; and apechen is a variant of impechen, to impeach, with
a- (<L. ad) for im- (<L. in); see Impeach.

PEACOCK, a large gallinaceous bird with splendid plumage.
(Hybrid; L.—Gk.—Pers.— Tamil; and E.) ME. pecok, but also
pacok and pocok. In P. Plowman, B. xii. 241, where the text has
pekok, two other MSS. have. pokok, pacok. In Chaucer, C. T. 104,
the MSS. have pekok, pokok. We also find po used alone, Polit.
Songs, ed. Wright, p. 159. The form pekok is due to AS. péa,
variant of AS. pawe, a peacock, which is not a true E. word, but
borrowed from L. pauo. ‘Pauo, Pauus, pawe;’ /Elfric’s Gloss.,
Nomina Avium, in Voc. 131. 9. Here pawe is the AS. form, whilst
pauo, pauus, are L. forms. From L. paiuo come also Du. pauuw,
G. pfau, F. paon, &c, PB. The L. word is not a native one, but
borrowed from Gk. rads, raév, where the aspirate is a relic of the
digamma, from a form taf@s, See Liddell and Scott, and Curtius,
ii. ror. The curious change from initial ¢ to p indicates that both
words are from a foreign source.— Pers. ¢awus, taus, Arab. tawis,
a peacock; Rich. Dict., p. 962.—OTamil zdkei, togei, a peacock;
Max Miiller, Lect. i. 233. +. The latter element of the word is E.
cock, a native word of imitative origin. 4 ‘The name is Tamil,
zokei; and the peacock is still called by it in Ceylon;’ Oxford
Helps to the Study of the Bible. Der. pea-hen, similarly formed;
ME. pehen, pohen, P. Plowman, B. xii. 240,

PEA-JACKET, a coarse thick jacket often worn by seamen.
(Hybrid; Du. and ¥.) Prob. of modern introduction, The latter
element is the ordinary word jacket. The former element is spelt
so as to resemble pea, a vegetable, with which it has nothing to do.
It is borrowed from Du. ij, pije, a coat of a coarse woollen stuff;
the word jacket being a needless explanatory addition. ‘Een pije,
a ple-gowne, or a rough gowne, as. souldiers and seamen weare;’
Hexham, 1658. As the Du. pi is pronounced like E. pie, it should
rather be called a pie-jacket, as the form pie-gowne suggests. The
material of which the jacket is made is called pij-laken, where laken
is cloth. B. The Dn. pie is the same word as Low G. fije, a
woollen jacket, called pigge, pyke in the Osnabriick dialect (Bremen
Worterbuch). Prob. from F. pie, a magpie; cf. E. pied, spotted,
The variant pyke may be immediately from L. pica. See Pie (1).
@ Cf. ME. courtepy (short coat), Chaucer, C. T. 292 (A 290).

PHAK, a sharp point, top. (Low G.?) ‘Seleucia, which is
a great promontory, or peake;” Udall, on Acts, xiii. 4. Also peake
in Palsgrave. Apparently a variant of pike, q.v. Cf. dial. of
Normandy pec, a hob (or mark) in the game of quoits (Godefroy,
Moisy) ;. also Low G. peek, a pike, a pointed weapon. Allied to


Peck, q.v., and Pick, q.v. Der, peak-ed, not quite the same word ,


as ME. piked (Prompt. Parv.) though used in the same sense; the
ME. form answers rather to mod, E, pike, sb., with the suffix -ed
added. Also (probably) peak, verb, to become thin, dwindle, Macb.
i. 3. 23. Cf. peeked, thin, Dorsetshire (Halliwell).

PEAT, a loud sound, summons, chime of bells, sound of a
trumpet. (F.—L.) ‘A peale of gunnes, &c.;’ Levins. ‘Peele of
belles;’ Palsgrave. * Of the swete pele and melodye of bellys;’


Monk of Evesham,:c. lvii, ed. Arber. A shortened form of ME, |


apele, lit. appeal;’ see ‘ apele of bellis,’ in Prompt. Parv., p. 13.—
AF. apel, an appeal; ‘Le clerk soune le dreyne apel,’ the clerk rings


the last peal; Wright, Vol. of Vocab., i. 149. —OF. apeler, to call.


We speak of a trumpet’s peal; compare this with F. appel, a call
with drum or trumpet (Hamilton), B. Besides the form apel, mod.
F. appel, there was a later derived form appeau, now used in the


sense of ‘ bird-call’ (Hamilton), Cotgrave has: ‘Appeau, as Appel, |


also a bird-call; Appeaux, chimes, or the chiming of bells.’ This at


once explains our common use of the phrase ‘a peal of bells.’ Note


also ME, ape/, ‘an old term in hunting music, consisting of three
‘long moots;’ Halliwell. This etymology is.noticed by Minsheu,


PECCANT


ed. 1627; he has: *a peal of bells, from the F. appeller, i.e. vocare.”
See Appeal. Der. peal, verb.

PHAN, the same as Pean, q.v. (L.—Gk.)

PEAR, a well-known fruit. (L.) ME. pere, Chaucer, C. T. 10205
(E 2331). AS. pere or peru; AB lfric’s Grammar, 6, 9 (Bosworth) ;
spelt pere, Voc. 269. 33. [The AS. pirige, a pear-tree, occurs in
‘Pirus, pirige;’ AE lfric’s Gloss., in Voc. 269. 32. Hence ME. pery,
a pear-tree, Chaucer, C. T. 10199 (E 2325), or pirie, P. Plowman, B.
y. 16.]= Late L. pira, fem. sing., for L. pira, pl. of L. pirum, a pear,
Pliny, xv. 15, 16; whence also Norm. dial. peire (Moisy); F. poire.
@ The vowel-change from z to e appears again in Ital. pera, a pear.
Der. pear-tree, perr-y.

PEARL, a well-known shining gem. (F.—L.) ME. perle, Allit.
Poems, ed. Morris, A. I.—F. perle, ‘a pearle, an union, also a
berrie;’ Cot. f. Of disputed etymology, but prob. Latin. It is
best to collect the forms; we find Ital., Span., Prov. perla, Port.
perola, sometimes perla; OHG. perala, perla, berala, berla. All
prob. from Late L. pirula, point of the nose, found in Isidore of
Seville, inthe 7th century. ‘y. Diez explains pirula as prob. meaning
a little pear, from pirum, a pear; the change of vowel is well seen
in Ital. pera, a pear. See Pear. This is perhaps the best solution;
the change of sense from § pear’ to ‘pearl’ may easily have been
suggested by the use of the L. bacca, which meant (1) a berry,
(2) an olive-berry, (3) any round fruit growing on a tree, (4) a pearl
(Horace, Epod. viii. 14). Diez also draws attention to Span. perilla,
(1) a little pear, (2) a pear-shaped ornament. Perhaps we may add
Mital. perolo, ‘a little button or tassell of wooll on the top and
middle of a knit cap;’ Florio. And observe the sense of ‘ berry’
which Cotgrave assigns to F, perle. 5. But it may be that a form
perula (for per’la?) was a corruption of Late L. perna, a pearl (see
perne in Duc.; cf. Norm. dial. perne, a pearl (from Sicil. perna),
Mital. perna, ‘a shell-fish called a nakre;’ Florio. L. perna, a sea-
mussel. See perne in.Moisy. Der. pearl-y, pearl-i-ness; pearl-ash,
a purer carbonate of potash, named from its pearly colour.

PHARL-BARLEY. (F.—L.; and E.) A translation of F.
orge perlé, lit. ‘pearled barley;’ but this looks like an adaptation
of MF. orge pelé, lit. ‘peeled barley;’ Cot. See Peel (x) and
Barley.

PEASANT, a countryman. (F.—L.) The ¢ is excrescent, as in
ancien-t, tyran-t, but it occurs in OF. In Gascoigne, Steele Glas,
1. 647.— OF. paisant, ‘a peasant, boor;’ Cot.; Norm. dial. paisané
(Moisy). Mod. F. paysan, and the more correct OF. form paisan,
answer to Ital. paisano, Span. paesano, one born in the same country,
a compatriot. £. Formed with suffix -an (=Ital. -ano, L. -dnus)
from OF. pais (mod. F. pays), a country; answering to Ital. paese,
Span. pais, Port. pais, paiz. All these latter forms answer to Late
L. pagensem, acc. of pagensis, for pagensis ager, country.—L. pagus,
a village. See Pagan, Der. peasant-ry, Bacon, Life of Hen, VII,
ed. Lumby, p. 72, 1. 16, a coined word.

EAT, a vegetable substance like turf, found in boggy places, and
used as fuel. (C.) ‘There other with their spades the peats are
squaring out;’ Drayton, Polyolbion, s. 25.1.143. ‘Turf and peat
, - are cheape fuels;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 775. Spelt peit, Gloss.
to Leslie’s Hist. of Scotland (1596); S.T.S. Very common in
Northumbrian. ME. pete; in comp. fete-pot, a hole out of which
peats have been dug; Wyntown, viii. 24. 46 (Jamieson). Latinised
as peta (Ducange); whence also petaria, a place whence peats were
dug. Ducange quotes: ‘Cum suis... turbariis, tresidiis, petariis,
&c.; and again, ‘Cum... petariis, turbariis, carbonariis’ (1503).
As a peat often meant ‘a piece of cut turf,’ it is likely that the Late
L. peta was a by-form of Late L. petia, ‘a piece,’ from a Celtic source.
We find OGael. pett (Book of Deer), borrowed from British; cf. W.
peth, a thing, a piece; cognate with Gael. cuid, which see in Macbain.
See Thurneysen, Keltoromanisches, p. 76. See Piece.

PEBBLH, a small round stone. (E.) In Shak. Cor. v, 3. 585
a pebble-stone, Two Gent. ii. 3. 11. ME. pobbel, Allit. Poems, ed,
Morris, A. 117; pibbil-ston, Wyclif, Prov. xx. 17. AS. papol-stan,
a pebble-stone; Atlfric’s Homilies, i. 64, 1. 3. Cf. AS. pabbel,
Birch, Cart. Saxon. ii. 403. Der. pebbl-y, pebbl-ed.

PECCABLE, liable to sin. (L.) Rare; Rich. gives quotations
for peccable and peccability from Cudworth, Intellectual System (first
ed. 1678, also 1743, 1820, 1837, 1845), pp- 564, 565. Englished
from L. *peccabilis, a coined word from peccare, to sin, Brugmann,
i. § 585. Der. peccabili-ty, See Peccant.

PECCADILLO, a slight offence, small sin. (Span.—L.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—Span. pecadillo, a slight fault, dimin. of
pecado, a sin=L. peccatum, a sin; orig, neut. of peccdtus, pp. of
peccare, to sin. See Peccant.

PECCANT, sinning. (F.—L.) Used in the phrase ‘ peccant
humours;’ Bacon, Advancement of Learning, ed. Wright, bk. i. 4.
12, 5.12; ps 37, l. 32, Pp 43, 1. 28.—F. peccant, ‘sinning; l’humeur


-PECCARY


peccante, the corrupt humour in the body;* Cot.=—L. peccant-, stem
of pres. part. of peccdre, tosin. Der. peccant-ly, peccanc-y; and see
pecc-able, pecc-ad-illo.

-PECCARY, a hog-like quadruped of S. America. (F.—Carib-
bean.) ‘ Pecary, a sort of wild hogs, called here [at Bahia] pica;’
W. Dampier, New Voy. iii. 76; spelt peccary, id. i. 9 (1699).—F.
pécari, a peccary. A S. American word.=—Carib. pakira, the name
used in Guiana; see N. and Q. 9S. iv. 496. .Cf. pachira, ‘which is
the name given to this quadruped in Oronoko;’ Clavigero’s Hist. of
Mexico, tr. by Cullen, 1787, ii. 319. It is also called, in different
parts of America, saino, cojametl, and tatabro (id.). And cf. Span.
pacquire (Pineda). See my Notes on Eng. Etymology, p. 209.
PECK. (1), to strike with something pointed, to snap up..(E.?)
A mere variant of pick. In Chaucer, C. T. 14973 (Six-text, B 4157)
we have: ‘Pikke hem up right as they growe,’ in MS. C., where
most- MSS. have Pekke or Pek. Pick is the older form; see Pick.
Some Swed. dialects have pekka for pikka; cf. W. Flem. pekken
(De Bo) ; for Du. pikken. Der. peck-er, wood-peck-er,

PECK (2), a dry measure, two gallons. (F.—Low G.?) ME.
pekke, Chaucer, C. T. 4008. Cf. AF. pek, Liber Albus, p. 335; OF. pek
(Godefroy). The word is somewhat obscure, but it is probably
related to peck, to snap up. As in the case of most measures,
the quantity was once indefinite, and prov. E. peck merely means
“a quantity ;’ we still talk of ‘a peck of troubles.’ In particular, it
was a quantity for eating; cf. prov. E. peck, meat, victuals, from the
prov. E. verb peck, to eat. ‘We must scrat before we feck,’ -i.e.
scratch (work) before we eat; Halliwell. Hence slang E. pecker,
appetite. B. Similarly Scheler derives picotin, a peck, a measure,
from the verb picoter, to peck as a bird does; and fpicofter is itself
a mere extension from the Teut.. root appearing also in E. peck.and

ick,

?DECTINAL, comb-like, applied to fish with bones like the teeth
of a comb. (L.) Sir T. Browne speaks of pectinals, i.e. pectinal
fish; Vulg. Errors, b, iv. c. 1, last section. Coined from L. pectin-,
decl. stem of pecten, a comb.—L. pectere, to comb.4Gk. mexreiy, to
comb; lengthened form from méxev, to comb, to card wool, to shear.
B. From 4/PEK, to pluck, pull hair, comb; preserved also in
Lithuanian jesz-ti, to pluck, pull hair. From the same root is AS.
fex, a head of hair, whence Fairfax, i.e. fair hair. Der. Hence also
pectin-ate, pectin-at-ed ; and see paxwax.

PECTORAL, belonging to the breast or chest. (F.—L.) In
Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. pectoral, ‘pectorall;” Cot.—L. pectordlis,
belonging to the breast.—L. pector-, for *pectos, stem of pectus, the
breast. Der. pectoral-ly, ex-pector-ate. -

-PECULATHEH, to pilfer, steal. (L.) ‘Peculator, that robs the
prince or common treasure;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. pecii-
latus, pp. of pectilari, to appropriate to one’s own use. Formed as if
from *peculum, with the same sense as peciilium, private property,
and allied to pecii-nia, property; see Peculiar, Pecuniary. Der.
peculat-ion, peculat-or. . ‘

PECULIAR, appropriated, one’s own, particular. (F.—L.)

In Levins; and in Shak, Oth. i. 1. 60.—MF. peculier, * peculiar ; ’
Cot.—L, peciliaris, relating to property, one’s own. =—L. peciilium,
property; allied to pectinia, property, money, from which it differs in
the suffix. See Pecuniary. Der. peculiar-ly, peculiar-i-ty.

PECUNIARY, relating to property or money. (F.—L.) Spelt
pecuniarie in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—MF. pecuniaire, ‘ pecuniary ;’ Cot.

—L. peciiniarius, belonging to property.—L. peciinia, property.
B. Formed from pecu-, as appearing in OL. pecu, cattle, and in L.
pl. pecu-a, cattle of all kinds, sheep, money; the wealth of ancient
times consisting in cattle.4-Skt. pagu, cattle; Goth. faihu, property ;
AS. feoh, G. vieh, cattle. Der. pecuniari-ly.

.-PEDAGOGUBE, 2 teacher, pedant. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Caxton’s
Golden Legend, St. Eutrope, § 1.—MF. pedagogue, ‘a schoolmaster,
teacher, pedant;’ Cot. =L. pedagogus, a preceptor. = Gk. rardaywyds,
at Athens, a slave who led a boy to school, hence, a tutor, instructor.
—Gk. mad-, stem of mais, a boy; and dywyds, leading, guiding,
from dyev, to lead. B. The Gk. mats is for rafts, i.e. pau-is, from
a probable 4/PEU, to beget, whence L. pu-er, a boy, Skt. pu-ira-,
ason. The Gk. dye, to lead, is cognate with L. agere, whence E.
Agent, q.v. Der. pedagog-ic; pedagog-y, MF. pedagogie (Cot.).
‘PEDAL, belonging to the foot. (L.) ‘Pedal, of a foot, measure
or space;” Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ‘Pedadls, or low keyes, of
organs ;’ Sherwood, index to Cotgrave. Now chiefly used as a sb.,
as the pedal of an organ, i.e. a key acted on by the foot. =L. pedalis,
(1) belonging to a foot, (2) belonging to a foot-measure (whence the
old use, as in Blount).=—L. ped-, stem of pés, a foot; cognate with
E. Foot, q.v. -
_PEDANT, 2 schoolmaster, vain displayer of learning. (F,—
Ital.—Gk.?) In Shak. L. L. L. iii. 179.— MF. pedant, ‘a pedant, or
ordinary schoolmaster ;’ Cot. Borrowed, from Italian (Littré). =


PEDIMENT 437


Ital. pedante, ‘a pedante, or a schoolemaster, the same as pedagogo ;”
Florio.. B. Pedante is a pres. participial form as if from a verb
*pedare, which, as Diez suggests, is probably not the MItal. pedare,
‘to foote it, to tracke, to trace, to tread or trample with one’s feete”
(Florio), but rather *peddare, an accommodation of the Gk. madevecv, to
instruct, from maz5-, stem of mais, a boy. See Pedagogue. Diez
cites from Varchi (Ercol., p. 60, ed. 1570), a passage in Italian, to


| the effect that ‘ when I was young, those who had the care of children,


teaching them and taking them about, were not called as at present
pedanti nor by the Greek name pedagogi, but by the more honourable
name of ripititori’ [ushers]. Der. pedant-ic, pedant-ic-al, pedant-ry.

PEDDLE, to deal in small wares. (E.) Bp. Hall contrasts
‘pedling barbarismes* with ‘classick tongues ;’ Satires, bk. ii [not
iii). sat. 3, 1.25. Here pedling means ‘ petty,’ from the verb peddle
or pedle, to deal in small wares ; a verb coined from the sb. pedlar,
a dealer in small wares, which was in earlier use. See Pedlar.

PEDESTAL, the foot or base of a pillar. (Span.—Ital.—L. and
G.) Spelt pedestall in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—Span. pedestal, ‘the base
or foot of a pillar,’ Minsheu. Cf. MF. pied-stal in Cotgrave. As the
Span. for ‘foot’ is pié, it is not a Span. word, but borrowed wholly
from Ital. piedestallo, ‘a footstall or a treshall [threshold] of a doore ;’
Florio. Lit. ‘ foot-support.’ 8. A hybrid compound; from Ital.
piede, ‘a foote, a base, a footstall or foundation of anything’ (Florio),
which is from L. pedem, acc. of pés, a foot; and Ital. stadlo, a stable,
a stall, from OHG. stal, G. stall, astable, stall, cognate with E. stall.
See Foot and Stall. ts Foorstall (G. fussgestell) is a better
word,

PEDESTRIAN, going on foot; an expert walker. (L.)
Properly an adj. Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, gives the form pedestrial.
Both pedestri-an and pedestri-al are coined words, from L. pedestri-,
decl. stem of pedester, one who goes on foot. Formed, it is supposed,
from *pedit-ter, i. e. by adding the suffix -ter (Idg. -ter) to pedit-, stem
of pedes, one who goes on foot. Ped-it- is from ped-, stem of pés,
a foot; and it-um, supine of ire, to go, from 4/EI, to go. Cf.
com-es (stem com-it-), a companion, one who ‘ goes with’ another.
The L. pés is cognate with E. foot ; see Foot. Der. pedestrian-ism.

PEDICEL, PEDICLE, the foot-stalk by which a flower or
fruit is joined onto. a tree. (F.—L.) Pedicel is modern, from mod. F.
pédicelle; not a good form, since L. pedicellus means “a little louse.’
Pedicle is the better word, as used by Bacon, Nat, Hist. § 592. —MF.
pedicule, ‘the staulk of a leafe, or of fruit;’? Cot.—L. pediculum, acc.
of pediculus, a little foot, foot-stalk. Double dimin. from Zedi-,
decl. stem of pés, cognate with E. foot. See Foot.

PEDIGREE, a register of descent, lineage, genealogy. (F.—L.)
In Shak. Hen. V, ii. 4.90. Spelt pedegree in Minsheu (1627) ; pedi-
grew in Levins (1570); petygrewe in Palsgrave (1530). In the
Prompt. Parv., A.D. 1440, we find the spellings pedegru, pedegrw,
pedygru, pedegrewe, petygru, petygrwe, and it is explained by ‘lyne of
kynrede and awncetrye, Stemma, in scalis. In the Appendix to
Hearne’s ed. of Rob. of Gloucester, p. 585, he cites from a MS. of
Rob. of Glouc. in the Herald’s Office, a piece which begins: ‘ A pete-
greu, fro William Conquerour.. vn-to kyng Henry the vi. The
last circumstance mentioned belongs to A.D. 1431, so that the date
is about the same as that of the Prompt. Parv. Wedgwood cites from
the Rolls of Winchester College, temp. Henry IV, printed in Pro-
ceedings of the Archzological Institute, 1848, p. 64, a passage
relating to the expenses ‘Stephani Austinwell ..ad loquendum ..
de evidenciis scrutandis de pe de gre progenitorum hzredum de
Husey.’ Lydgate has peedegrue ; in Polit. Poems, ed. Wright, ii.
138; A.D. 1426; also peedegrewe, Hors, Shepe and Goos, 1. 9; pee
de grewe, Troybook, fol. Ee 1, back, 1. 7. ‘Thus the word does not
appear till the 15th century. PB. From AF. pee de grue, lit. ‘ foot
of a crane ;’ sonamed from a three-line mark (like the broad arrow,
or a bird’s foot), which was used in denoting succession in pedigrees;
indeed, the symbol is still in use as the ‘ pedigree-sign.’ = L. pedem,
acc. of pés, a foot; dé, of; gruem, acc. of grus, a crane, related to.E.
Crane. 4 First explained by Mr. C. Sweet, in The Athenzeum,
March 30, 1895. See my Notes on Eng. Etymology.

PEDIMENT, an ornament finishing the front of a building.
(F.—L.) ‘Fronton, in architecture, a member that serves to compose an
ornament, raised over cross-works, doors, niches, &c., sometimes
making a triangle, and sometimes part of a circle ; it is otherwise
called a pediment, and fastigium by Vitruvius ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.
Evelyn, Hist. of Architecture, 1696, speaks of the fronton, ‘which
our workmen call pediment.’ The older form was periment, as shown
in the N. E. D.; and this was said to be a workman’s term, and
‘corrupt English.’ B. I think it is likely that @ periment was simply
a mistaken way of pronouncing operiment, given in the N .E. D. with
the sense of ‘a covering,’ and recorded with that sense in Blount’s
Glossographia, ed..1656, and in Phillips, ed. 1658. = L. operimentum,
a covering.=L,. oferire, to cover; see Cover. y. When the


438 PEDLAR


Source of (0)pediment was lost sight of, it seems to have been asso-
ciated with the L. (im) pedimentum, whence the form pediment.
PEDLAR, PEDLER, PEDDLER, a hawker, one who travels
about selling small wares. (E.) The verb to peddle, to sell small
wares, is later, and a mere derivative from the sb. We find pedler in
Cotgrave, to explain F. mercerot, and pedlar in Sherwood’s index.
But a shorter form was peddar or pedder, appeating as late as in
Levins, ed. 1570; although, on the other hand, pedlere occurs as
early as in P. Plowman, B. v. 258; and Lydgate has: ‘ as pedeler to
his pakke;’ Minor Poems, p. 30. The Prompt. Parv. gives:
‘ Pedlare, shapmann,’ i.e. chapman, hawker. ‘ Peddare, calatharius
{basket-maker], piscarius’ [one who sells fish hawked about in
baskets]; Prompt. Parv.; formed from pedde, explained by ‘ panere,’
i.e. a pannier; id. See Way’s excellent illustrative note. B. As
Way remarks, in the Eastern counties, a pannier for carrying pro-
visions to market, esp. fish, is called a ped; ‘the market in Norwich,
where wares brought in from the country are exposed for sale, being
known as the ped-market ; and a dealer who transports his wares in
such a manner is termed a pedder.’ Perhaps pedlar is due to a dimin.
from peddle, i.e. little ‘ped,’ which is not recorded. The word
peddar is old, and is spelt peoddare in the Ancren Riwle, p. 66, 1. 17,
where it has the exact sense of pedlar or hawker of small wares.
And see Lowland Sc. peddir, a pedlar (Jamieson). Cf. ‘ A haske is
a wicker pad, wherein they vse to carry fish;’ Gloss by E. Kirke to
Spenser, Shep. Kal. November, 1. 16. See Padlock. Der. peddle,


vb., q..v.

PEDOBAPTISM, infant baptism. (Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. A coined word, as if from L. *pedobaptismus, Latinised
form of Gk. radoBamricpos ; from mado-, decl. stem of mais, a boy;
and Bamricpds, baptism. See Pedagogue and Baptism. Der.
pedobaptist.

PEDUNCLE, a flower-stalk. (L.) Modern; cf. F. pédoncule;
used in 1798 (Hatzfeld).—L. pedunculus, variant of pediculus, a foot-
stalk or pedicle. = L. ped-, stem of pés, a foot. See Pedal, Pedicel.

PEEL (1), to strip off the skin or bark. (F.—L.) In Shak. Merch.
Ven. i. 3.85. [Two F. verbs are mixed up here, viz. F. peler and F.
piller. It is true that peler and piller are now well distinguished in
French, the former meaning ‘to peel, strip,’ and the latter ‘to
plunder,’ a sense preserved in E. pillage. But in OF. they were
sometimes confused, and the same confusion appears in ME. pilien,
pillen, used in the sense of ‘peel.’ ‘ Rushes to pilie’=to peel rushes,
P. Plowman, C. x. 81; pilled=bald, Chaucer, C. T. 3933 (A 3935)-
A clear case is in Palsgrave, who has: ‘I pyll rysshes, Je pille des
ioncz.’ For further remarks on pill, see Pillage.] We may con-
sider peel, in the present place, as due to peler only. =F. peler, ‘ to
pill, pare, bark, unrind, unskin ;’ Cot. [Cf. Span. pelar, Ital. pelare,
to strip, peel, MItal. pellare, ‘to vnskin,’ Florio.]—OF-. pel, skin.—=
L. pellem, acc, of pellis, skin; see Fell (2). | But some senses of
F, peler are due to L. pilare, to deprive of hair, make bald. = L. pilus,
hair. Der. peel-ed; peel, sb.

PEEL (2), to pillage. (F.—L.) ‘Peeling their provinces,’ i.e.
robbing them; Milton, P. R. iv. 136. This is not the same word as
the above, but another spelling of the old verb pill (F. piller), to rob.
See Pillage, and see remarks under Peel (1).

PEEL (3), a fire-shovel. (F.—L.) Once a common word. ‘ Pele
for an ouyn, pelle a four;’ Palsgrave.—F. pelle, also spelt pale,
‘a fire-shovell,’ Cot.—L. pala, a spade, shovel, peel. See Palette.
Der. pal-etie.

PEEL (4),:a small castle. (F.—L.) Used by Burns, The Five
Carlins, st. 5; see Jamieson. ME. pel (also pele, pell), Chaucer, Ho.
of Fame, 1. 1310 (iii. 220); peill, pl. pelis, Barbour, Bruce, x. 137,
147.— OF. pel (given in Godefroy under pa/), a stake, pale, stock,
stockade. (The original peels were stockades or wooden structures ;
the name was retained after stone was used; see an Essay on the
word Peel by G. Neilson, of Glasgow.) =L. palum, acc. of pilus,
a stake; see Pale (1). 4 Different from ME. pile, P. Plowman,
C, xxii. 366; cf. <I dwelle in my pile of ston,’ Torrent of Portugal,
ed. Halliwell, 573; ‘ Grete pylis and castellys ;? Cov. Mysteries, p. 210,
See Pile (2).

PHEP (1), to chirp, or cry like a chicken. (F.—L.) In Isaiah,
Vili. 19, X. [4 ; see Bible Wordbook, ‘ Now, suete bird, say ones to
me pepe!’ Kingis Quair, st. 57. Cf.‘ A pepe of chekennys (chickens) ;’
Book of St. Alban’s, fol. f 7,1. 4. An imitative word, but it seems
nevertheless to have been borrowed from F.—OF. pepier, ‘to peep,
cheep, or pule, as a young bird in the neast,’ Cot.; also pipier
(Godefroy). Allied to piper, ‘to whistle, or chirp, like a bird,’ id. ;
cf. pipée, ‘the peeping or chirping of small birds,’ id. The latter
form (piper) represents a Folk-L. *pippare, allied to L. pipare,
pipire, to peep, chirp. Of imitative origin; due to repetition of the
syllable PI. Cf. Gk. maifew, mnie, to chirp. See Pipe (1).


PEEP (2), to look out (or in) through a narrow aperture, to look |


PEEVISH


slily. (F.—L.) ‘Where dawning day doth never peepe;’ Spenser,
F. Q. i. £. 39. ‘To peepe, inspicere ;’ Levins, ed. 1570. It seems
to have arisen from the sound peep! used as an interjection. In his
Du. dial. Dict., Molema explains how the exclamation piep! is
made (as a slight guide) by a hider in the game of peep-bo, bo-peep,
or hide and seek; whence Du. dial. piepen, (1) to cry piep! (2) to
peep out. Prob. Palsgrave refers to this when he says: ‘I peke or
prie, je pipe hors,’ i.e. I peep out. The F. piper usually meant ‘ to
pipe;’ Cot. gives: ‘piper, to whistle, chirp like a bird, cousen,
deceive, cheat.’ £. The old phrase ‘at peep of day’ answers to
MF. a la pipe du jour, which Palsgrave explains by ‘ at daye-pype ;’
p. 804, col. 1; which has reference to the chirping of birds at day-
break. All from L. pipare, to chirp; see Peep (1), Pipe (1). See
my Notes on Eng. Etymology. Der. peep-bo or bo-peep, a game of
hide and seek ; in its simplest form, a nurse says peep to an infant, in
a squeaky voice, with her face behind her apron, and then bo!
suddenly in a louder one, uncovering her face at the same time.
Compare: ‘ Bo, Boe, cucullus lugubris oculos faciemque obstruens ;
Kijke-boe, lusus puerilis, in quo alicuius oculi, manu linteove, etc.,
obtecti, subito infantis in gratiam deteguntur ;’? Ten Kate, Anleidning
tot de Kennisse van het verhevene Deel der Nederduitsche Sprake ;

1723, vol.i. p. 279. Also W. Flem. piepbeu, peep-bo (De Bo).

PEER (1), an equal, a nobleman. (F.—L.) The orig. sense is
‘equal ;’ the twelve peers of France were so called because of equal
rank. ME. pere, Chaucer, C.T. 10990 (F 678) ; per, Havelok, 2241. —
OF. per, peer, later pair, ‘a peer, a paragon, also a match, fellow,
companion ;’ Cot. ; or, as an adj., ‘like, equall,’ id. [Cf. Span. par,
equal, also a peer; Ital. pare, pari, alike, pari, a peer.]—L. parem,,
acc. of par, equal. See Par, Pair. Der. peer-ess, a late word, with
fem. suffix -ess, of F. origin, Pope, Moral Essays, ii. 70, iii. 140;
peer-age, used in 1671 (see N. E. D.) in place of the older word peer-
dom, used by Cotgrave to translate F. pairie; also peer-less, Temp. iii.
I. 47; peer-less-ly, peer-less-ness: ?

PEER (2), to look marrowly, to pry. (E.?) ‘Peering [quarto,
Piring| in maps for ports;’ Merch. Ven. i. 1. 19. Of obscure
origin; apparently altered, by confusion with peer (3), from ME.
piren. ‘Ribt so doth he, whan that he pireth And toteth on hire
wommanhiede;” = so does he, when he peers and looks upon her
womanhood; Gower, C. A. iii. 29; bk. vi. 819. ‘And preuylich
pirith till pe dame passe’ = and privily peers, or spies, till the
mother-bird leaves the nest; Rich. Redeles, ed. Skeat, iii. 48. Cf.
EFries. piren, Westphal. piren, Low G. piren, to look closely; esp.
Westphal. piren na wot, to peer after something. Cf. also the parallel
forms pliren, pliiren; see Bremen Worterbuch. For the loss of J,
cf. Patch.+Swed. lira, to blink; Dan. plire, to blink. The orig.
sense of Low G. pliiren is to draw the eyelids together, in order to
look closely. And see Peer (3).

PEER (3), to appear. (F.—L.) Distinct from the word above,
though prob. sometimes confused with it. It is merely short for
appear. ME. peren, short for aperen. ‘There was I bidde, on pain
of death, to pere;’ Court of Love (16th cent.), 1.55. Cf. ‘When
daffodils begin to peer;’ Shak. Wint. Ta, iv. 3. 1. As the ME.
aperen was usually spelt with one 9, the prefix a- easily dropped off,
as in the case of peal for appeal; see Peal. Cf. Chaucer, Troil.
ii. 909, where to appere is also written tapere; see further under
Appear. @ In F. the simple verb paroir (L. parére) was used in
a similar way. ‘Paroir, to appear, to peep out, as the day in a
morning, or the sun over a mountain ;’ Cot.

PEEVISH, cross, ill-natured, fretful. (E.) ME. peuisch; spelt
peyuesshe in P. Plowman, C. ix. 151, where four MSS. have peuysche ;
the sense being ‘ill-natured.’ It occurs also in G. Douglas, tr. of
Virgil, Ain. xi. 408 (Lat. text), where we find: ‘Sik ane pevyche and
cative saule as thyne’=such a perverse and wretched soul as thine.
And again, Aruns is called ‘thys pewech man of weir’ [war], where
it answers to L. improbus; A’n. xi. 767. Ray, in his North-country
Words, ed. 1691, gives: ‘Peevish, witty, subtil.’ Florio explains
schifezza by ‘coynes, quaintnes, peewishnes, fondnes, frowardnes.’
Peevish in Shak. is silly, childish, thoughtless, forward. Peevishnesse
= waywardness, Spenser, F. Q. vi. 7. 37. Thus the various senses
are childish, silly, wayward, froward, uncouth, ill-natured, perverse,
and even witty. All of these may be reduced to the sense of
‘childish,’ the sense of witty being equivalent to that of ‘ forward,’
the child being toward instead of froward. BB. A difficult word ;
but prob. of onomatopoetic origin, from the noise made by fretful
children. The origin is illustrated by Lowland Sc. peu, to make
a plaintive noise, used in the Complaint of Scotland, ed. Murray,
vi. .39, to denote the plaintive cry of young birds: ‘the chekyns
[chickens] began to peu.’ Peevish answers to MDan. pjeven, tearful ;
adj. from pjeve, to whimper (Kalkar) ; and Wedgwood cites Dan.
dial. piwve, to whimper or cry like a child; cf. Low G. pau-en, to
whimper. Cf. F. piauler, ‘to peep or cheep as a young b:rd, also to


PEEWIT


pule, or howle as a young whelp;’ Cot. Cf. Pewit. In this view,
the suffix -isk has the not uncommon force of ‘ given to,’ as in thiev-
ish, mop-isk. Similarly, from Gael. ping, a plaintive note, we have
piugach, having a querulous voice, mean-looking. Der. peevish-ly,
-71€SS,

PHREWIT, another spelling of Pewit. (E.)

PEG, a wooden pin for fastening boards, &c. (E.?) ME. pegge;
‘Pegge, or pynne of tymbyr;’ Prompt. Parv. The nearest form is
Swed. dial. pegg, variant of Swed. pigg (below); cf. Dan. pig (pl.
pigge), weakened form of pik, a pike, peak; Swed. pigg, a prick, spike,
from pik, a pike. Cf. also W. pig,a peak, point; Corn. peg, a prick.
B. Perhaps we may also compare Du. and Low G. pegel, a measure
of liquid capacity, such as was marked by the pegs in a ‘ peg-tankard.”
Der. peg, verb, Temp. i. 2. 295; pegg-ed.

PHISH, PEIZE, to weigh, to poize. (F.—L.) ‘To peize the
time,’ i.e. to weight or retard it; Shak. Merch. Ven. iii. 2. 22. ME.
peisen, to weigh; P. Plowm. A. v. 131.—AF. peiser, Stat. Realm,
1. 218; OF. poiser. See Poise, of which it is a doublet.

PHITREL, the AF. form of Poitrel, q.v. In Baret; 1580.
Gaimar has AF. peitrels, pl.; 1. 6385.

PEJORATIVEH, depreciatory. (L.) From Late L. péidrat-us,
pp. of péidrare, to impair.—L. péidr-, from péior, worse, used as the
comp. of malus, bad. See Pessimist. Cf. mod. F. péjoratif.

PEKOH, a kind of black tea. (Chinese.) ‘Pekoe Bohea;’ H.
Carey, Chrononhotonthologos, A. i.= Chinese (Amoy dialect) pek-
ho; from pek, white, ho, down; the tea being picked young, with
the down still on the leaves (N. E. D.).

PELARGONIUM, a flower of the order Geraniacez. (Gk.)
From Gk. meAapyés, a stork; from the resemblance of the beaked
capsules to a stork’s bill. Perhaps from meA-ids, dusky, and dpyés,
white.

PELERINE, a kind of lady’s tippet. (F.—L.) F. pélerine,
a tippet.—F. pélerin, a pilgrim.—L. peregrinum, acc. of peregrinus ;
see Pilgrim.

PHELP, lucre, spoil, booty, gain. (F.) ‘But all his minde is set
on mucky pelfe;’ Spenser, F. Q. iii. 9. 4. ME. pelfyr, pelfrey,
‘Spolium;” Prompt. Pary. Pelf, property; St. Cuthbert, 5989.
Pelf, to rob, occurs as a verb, Cursor Mundi, 1. 6149.—OF-. peljre,
booty, allied to pelfrer, to pilfer (Godefroy); cf. also OF. peljir, to
pillage. Der. pilfer. Of unknown origin.

PELICAN, a large water-fowl. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Hamlet, iv.
5.146. Spelt pellican, Ancren Riwle, p. 118.—F. pelican, ‘a pel-
lican;’ Cot.—L. pelicdnus, pelecinus. = Gk. medexav (gen. meAEKGvos),
medexas, med€xas, strictly, the wood-pecker, the joiner-bird of Aristo-
phanes, Ay. 884, 1155; also a water-bird of the pelican kind. The
wood-pecker was so called from its pecking; and the pelican from
its large bill. —Gk. meAexaw, I hew with an axe, peck. —Gk. méAexus,
an axe, hatchet.4+-Skt. paragu-, an axe, hatchet.

PELISSH, a silk habit, worn by ladies. (F.—L.) Formerly a
furred robe. Of late introduction; added by Todd to Johnson.
[The older E. form is pilch, q.v.]—F. pelisse, formerly also pelice,
‘a skin of fur;’ Cot.—L. pellicea, pellicia, fem. of pelliceus, pellicius,
made of skins.—L. pellis, a skin, cognate with E. fell, a skin; see
Pell and Fell (2). Der. sur-plice. Doublet, pilch.

PELL, a skin, a roll of parchment. (F.—L.) ME. pell, pel
(pl. pellis) ; King Alisaunder, 7081.—OF. pel (Burguy); mod. F. peaz,
a skin. = L, pellem, acc. of pellis,a skin, cognate with E. fell, a skin ;
see Fell (2). Der, pel-isse, pell-icle, pel-t (2), sur-plice, peel (1).

PELLET, a little ball, as of lint or wax, &c. (F.—L.) ME. pelet.
Formerly used to mean a gun-stone, or piece of white stone used as
acannon-ball. ‘As pale as a pelet,’? P. Plowman, B. v. 78. ‘A pelet
out of a gonne’ [gun], Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii. 553. — OF. pelote,
‘a hand-ball, or tennis-ball;’ Cot. Cf. Span. pelota, a ball, cannon-
ball, Ital. pidlotta, a small ball. All diminutives from L. pila, a ball.
Der. pellet-ed; plat-oon, q.v.

PELLICLE, a thin film. (F.—L.) ‘A pellicle, or little mem-
brane;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii, c. 27, part 10.—F.
pellicule, ‘a little skin;’ Cot.—L. pellicula, a small skin or hide;
double dimin. from pellis, a skin. See Pell.

PELLITORY (1), PARITORY, a wild flower that grows on
walls. (F.—L.) Often called pellitory of the wall, a tautological
expression; spelt pellitorie of the wall in Baret (1580).  Pellitory
stands for paritory, by the common change of rtol. ME. paritorie,
Chaucer, C. T. 16049 (G 581).—OF. paritoire, ‘pellitory of the
wall;’ Cot.=—L. parietaria, pellitory; properly fem. of adj. parie-
tarius, belonging to walls. —L. pariet-, stem of pariés, a wall.
.PELLITORY (2), PELLETER, the plant pyrethrum. (Span.
—L.—Gk.) ME. peletyr, Prompt. Parv. Sometimes called pelleter
of Spain, because it grows there (Prior). It is the Anacyclus pyre-
thrum, the name of which has been assimilated to that of the plant
aboye, which was earlier known. On account of this it is called by


PEN 439.


' Cotgrave ‘bastard pellitory, or right pellitory of Spain;’ but the


name is not from MF, pirette (Cot.), but from Span. pelitre, pellitory


|} of Spain. —L. pyrethrum.=—Gk. ripeOpov, a hot spicy plant, feverfew


(Liddell), So named from its hot taste.=Gk. mip, fire, cognate
with E. fire; with suffix -@po-, denoting the agent. See Fire. .

PELL-MELL, promiscuously, confusedly. (F.—L.) In Shak.
K. John, ii. 406.—MF. pesle-mesle (mod. F. péle-méle), ¢ pell-mell,
confusedly,’ Cot.; also spelt pelle-melle in the 13th cent. (Littré.)
The apparent sense is ‘stirred up with a shovel;’ as if from F.
pelle, a shovel, fire-shovel (E. peel), from L. pala, a spade, peel,
shovel, and OF. mesler, to mix. But orig. it was only a reduplicated
form of mesle; in fact, mesle-mesle and melle-melle also occur. See
Korting, § 6214. From Late L. misculare, extended from miscére, to
mix. See Peel (3) and Medley.

PELLUCID, transparent. (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
‘Such a diaphanous pellucid dainty body;’ Howell, Letters, v. i.
sec. I. let. 29 (1621).—F. pellucide, ‘bright, shining;’ Cot.—L.
pellicidus, transparent.—L. pellucére, perlucére, to shine through. = L.
per, through; and lucére, to shine, allied to Ju», light. See Per-
and Lucid.

PELT (1), to throw or cast, to strike by throwing. (L.) ‘The
chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds;’ Oth. ii.1.12. ME. pelten,
pilten, pulten, to thrust, strike, drive; pt. t. pelte, pilte, pulie; pp. pelt,
pilt, pult. ‘And hire oder eare pilted hire tail per-inne’=and in her
other ear she [the adder] thrusts her tail; O. Eng. Homilies, ed.
Morris, ii. 197. ‘ Fikenhild agen hire pelte Wip his swerdes hilte’=
Fikenhild pushed against her with his sword-hilt; King Horn, ed.
Lumby, 1415. The pp. pi/t=thrust, put, is in Gen. and Exodus,
ed. Morris, 2214. The pp. ¢pulé=cast, thrown, is in Layamon,
10839 (later text). See further examples in Stratmann, to which
add, from Halliwell: ‘With grete strokes I shalle hym pelte,’ MS.
Ashmole 61; which comes very near the mod. usage. The sense of
‘drive’ comes out in the common mod. E. phrase full pelt=full
drive. B. The easiest way of interpreting the vowel-sounds is to
refer the word to an AS. form *pyltan, to thrust, drive, not recorded.
This would give ME. pulten or pilten; cf. AS. pyt, a pit, whence
ME. put, pit. The e is a dialectal variety, like Kentish pet for pit.
y- Just as pyt is from L. puteus, such a form as AS. *pyltan would
result from *pult-jan, from L. pultare, to beat, strike, knock. 6. L.
puliare, like pulsdre, is an iterative form from fellere (pp. pulsus), to
drive; see Pulsate. The simple L. pellere appears, perhaps, in
Havelok, 810: ‘To morwen shal ich forth pelle’ =to-morrow I shall
drive forth, i.e. rush forth. Der. pelt-ing, pelt, sb.

PELT (2), a skin, esp. of a sheep. (F.—L.) Used in the North
for the skin of a sheep; in hawking, a pelt is the dead body of
a fowl killed by a hawk (Halliwell). The skin of a beast with the
hair on (Webster). And see E.D.D. ME, pelt. ‘Off shepe also
comythe pelt and eke felle’ [skin]; The Hors, Shepe, and Goos,
1. 43 (by Lydgate), in Political, Religious, and Love Poems, ed.
Furnivall. We also find prov. E. peltry, a skin (E. D. D., s. v. pelt) ;
formerly peltre-ware, as in Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. ii. c. 170
(R.); Hakluyt’s Voyages, i. 192, 1. 11 from bottom, where it occurs
in areprint of The Libell of E. Policye, 1. 309. B. As peliry=MF.
pelleterie, ‘the trade of a skinner, or peltmonger;’ Cot., from MF.
pelletier, ‘a skinner ;’ so pelt answers to OF. pelete, pellete, a small
skin (Godefroy), the sense ‘sheep’s skin’ being preserved in Norm.
dial. pelette (pron. plet?), a sheep-skin (Moisy). Dimin. of OF. pel,
a skin; see Pell.

PELTATS, lit. ‘shield-shaped.’ (L.—Gk.) In botany; said of
a leaf.—L. peltdtus, furnished with a pelta, or light shield. —Gk.
méAtn, a light shield; prob. allied to méAAa, skin, hide, and to E.
fell (2).

PELVIS, the bony cavity in the lower part of the abdomen. (L.)
In Phillips, ed. 1706. — L. peluis, lit. a bason; hence, the pelvis, from
itsshape. Allied to Gk. méArs, méAAa, a wooden bowl, cup.

PEMMICAN, a preparation of dried meat. (N. Amer. Indian.)
A Cree word; see Cree Dict. by Lacombe. = Cree pimikkan, pimican,
a bag filled with a mixture of fat and meat; from pimiy, grease.
Cf. Algonkin pimite, grease (Cuoq). The e is an error for 7.

PEN (1), to shut up, enclose. (L.) ME. pennen, O. Eng.
Homilies, ed. Morris, ii. 43; also pinnen, see P. Plowman, C. vii. 219,
and footnote. AS. pennian, only recorded in the comp. on-pennian,
toun-pen. ‘Ac gif sio pynding wierd onpennad’ = but if the water-
dam is unfastened or thrown open; Alfred, tr. of Gregory's Pastoral,
ed. Sweet, c. xxxviii, p. 276. Cf. Low G. pennen, to bolt a door, from
penn, a pin, peg. Pennian is thus connected with pir, and is ultimately
of Latin origin. See Pin. Note EFries. penne, pinne, penn, pin,
a peg,a pin. Der. pen, sb., Merry Wives, iii. 4. 41; Allit. Poems,
ed. Morris, B. 322. a> The verb /o pen seems to have been con-
nected with pindar at an early period; but pindar is related to
a pound for cattle. See Pinfold.


440 PEN


‘PEN (2), an instrument used for writing. (F.—L.) “ME. penne,
Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 156, 1. 15; P. Plowman, B. ix. 39.—OF.
penne, ‘a quill, or hard feather, a pen-feather;’ Cot.—L. penna, a
feather; in Late L.a pen. . The old form of penna was pesna
(Festus); for *petna or *petsna, formed with suffix -xa or -sva from
a/ PET, to fly; whence also E. feath-er, im-pet-us, pet-it-ion, &c. See
Feather. Brugmann, i. § 762 (2). Der. pen, vb., Skelton, Phyllyp
Sparowe, |. 810; pen-knife, pen-man, pen-man-ship; penn-er, a case
for pens, Chaucer, C. T. 9753 (E 1879); penn-ate, from L. pennatus,
winged; penn-on, q.v. Also pinn-ac-le, pinn-ate, pin-ion. Doublet,


772.

PPENAL, pertaining to or used for punishment. (F.—L.—Gk.)
In Levins, 1570.—MF. penal, ‘ penall;’ Cot.—L. pendlis, penal. =
L. pena, punishment.—Gk, mown, a penalty, requital. See Pain.
Der. penal-ty, L. L, L. i. 1. 123, from MF. penalité, not in Cotgrave,
but in use in the 16th century (Littré), coined as if froma L.
*peenalitas. Also pen-ance, pen-it-ence, pun-ish.

PENANCH, repentance, self-punishment expressive of peni-
tence. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. penance, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft,

. 303, 1. 14; penaunce, in the sense of penitence or repentance,
Wyclif, Matt. iii. 2.—OF. penance, older form peneance; formed from
L. penitentia, penitence, by the usual loss of medial ¢ between two
vowels. It is thus a doublet of penitence ; see Penitent.

PENATEHES, household gods. (L.) L. Pendies; allied to penes,
with, in the house of; see Penetrate.

PENCHANT, a strong inclination, bias (in favour of). (F.—L.)
In Dryden, Marriage-a-la-Mode, iii. 1.—F. penchant, sb.; orig. pres.
part. of pencher, to lean, lean towards.—Late L. type *pendicare;
from L. pendére, to hang.

PENCIL, a small hair-brush for laying on colours, a pointed
instrument for writing without ink. (F.—L.) The old use of a
pencil was for painting in colours; see Trench, Select Glossary.
ME. pensil; ‘With sotil pencel was depeynt this storie;’ Chaucer,
C. T. 2051 (A 2049).—OF. pincel (13th century, Littré), later
pinceau, ‘a pensill, a white-limer’s brush;’ Cot.—L. pénicillus, a
small tail, also, a painter’s brush; dimin. of péniculus, a little tail,
which again is a double dimin. of pénis,a tail. For *pes-nis; cf. Skt.
pasa-, Gk. méos; Brugmann, i. § 877. Der. pencil, vb.; pencill-ed,
Timon, i. I. 159.

PENDANT, anything hanging, esp. by way of ornament, (F.—
L.) ‘His earerings had pendants of golde;’ Hakluyt’s Voyages, i.
346, 1. 12. ‘It was a bridge.. With curious corbes and pendants
graven faire;’ Spenser, F. Q. iv. 10. 6.—F. pendant, ‘a pendant ;’
Cot.—F. pendant, hanging, pres. part. of pendre, to hang.=L. pendére,
to hang; allied to pendere, to weigh. B. The L. pendere is further
allied to Gk, opevdévn, a sling, Skt. spand, to tremble, throb,
vibrate. —4/SPHED, SPHEND, to tremble, vibrate, Der. pend-ent,
hanging, Latinized form of F. pendant; pend-ing, Anglicized form of
F, pendant, as shown by the F. phrase pendant cela, ‘in the mean
while, in the mean time,’ Cot.; pend-ence (rare); pend-ul-ous, q.v.;
pend-ul-um, q.v., pens-ile, q.v. Also (from L. pendére) ap-pend,
com-pend-i-ous, de-pend, ex-pend, im-pend, per-pend, per-pend-ic-u-lar,
s-pend, sti-pend, sus-pend, &c. Also (like pp. pensus) pens-ion, pens-


ive, com-pens-ate, dis-pense, ex-pense, pre-pense, pro-pens-i-ly, recom- |


pense, sus-pens-ion; see also poise, avoir-du-pois, counter-poise, pans-y,
pent-house, ponder, pound (1), pre-ponderate, spencer.


PENDULOUS, hanging, impending. (L.) In Shak. K. Lear, |


ill. 4.69, Englished directly from L. pendulus, hanging, by change
of -us to -ous, as in ardu-ous, &c.—L. pendére, to hang; see Pend-
ant. Der. pendulous-ly, -ness.

PENDULUM, a hanging weight, vibrating freely. (L.) ‘That
the vibration of this pendulum ;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 3, 1. 1024.
—L. pendulum, neut. of pendulus, hanging; see Pendulous.

PENETRATE, to pierce into. (L.) In Palsgrave, ed. 1530.—
L, penetratus, pp. of penetrare, to pierce into.  B. L. pene-trare is


a compound. The part pene- is from the base of penes, with, peni- |


tus, within, pen-us, the inner part of a sanctuary; [ prob. connected
with penus, stored food, provisions kept within doors, Lithuan. penas,
fodder.] ‘The idea “ stores, store-room,” furnishes the intermediate
step from penus to penetrare;’ Curtius, i. 336. y. The suffix -trare,
to pass beyond, is the same as in in-trare, to enter, connected with
L. in-tra, within, ex-tra, without, trans, across; allied to Skt. tara-,
a crossing. Der, penctra-ble, Hamlet, iii. 4. 36, immediately from
L. penetrabilis; impenetrable; penetrabl-y, penetrable-ness, penetrabili-
ty; penetrat-ing; penetrat-ive, from MF. penetratif, ‘penetrative’
(Cot.); penetrat-ive-ly, penetrat-ive-ness; penetrat-ion, Milton, P. L.
iii. 585, immediately from L. penetratio.

PENGUIN, PINGUIN, the name of an aquatic bird. (C, ?)
‘As Indian Britons were from penguins ;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. i.
c. 2, 1, 60. ‘It occurs still earlier, in the 15th note (by Selden) to
Drayton’s Polyolbion, song 9, ed. 1613, where we find: ‘ About the


PENSILE


"year 1170, Madoc, brother to Dauid ap Owen, Prince of Wales,


made this sea-voyage [to Florida]; and, by probability, those
names of Capo de Breton in Norumbeg, and pengwin in part of the
Northerne America, for a white rock and a white-headed bird, accord-
ing to the British, were reliques of this discouery.’ Certainly, the
form penguin bears a striking resemblance to W. pen gwyn, where
pen =head, and gwyn=white ; and if the name was given to the bird
by W. sailors, this may be the solution. We can go still further
back, and show that the word existed in Sir F. Drake’s time. Yule
quotes from Drake’s Voyage by F. Fletcher (Hakluyt Soc.), p. 72,
with reference to the year 1578: ‘In these Islands we founde greate
relief and plenty of good victuals, for infinite were the number of
fowle which the Welsh men named Penguin, and Magilanus [Magel-
lan] tearmed them geese.’ In a tract printed in 1588, and reprinted
in An English Garner, ed. Arber, vol. ii. p. 119, we read that: ‘On
the 6th day of January, 1587, we put into the straits of Magellan;
and on the 8th, we came to two islands named by Sir F. Drake, the
one Bartholomew Island, because he came thither on that Saint’s
day; and the other Penguin Island, upon which we powdered
[salted] three tons (!) of penguins for the victualling of. our ship ;’
cf. Hakluyt, Voy. iii. 805, 806, 849. We find in the same, iii. 161:
‘ Insula est ea, quam vestri Penguin vocant, ab auium eiusdem nominis
multitudine,’ in a letter dated Aug. 6, 1583... The etymology is
open to the objection that the penguin’s head is black, but the name
may have been transferred to the penguin from the great auk,
which has white patches below its eyes, or the puffin, with a whitish
head. 2, Another story (in Littré) is that some Dutchmen, in 1598,.
gave the name to some birds seen by them in the straits of Magellan,
intending an allusion to L. pinguis, fat. But this will not account
for the suffix -iz, and is therefore wrong ; besides which the ‘ Dutch-
men’ turn out to be Sir F. Drake’s men, some of whom named the
island at least 20 years earlier than the date thus assigned. The
F. pingouin is derived from the E. word.

PENINSULA, a piece of land nearly surrounded by water. (L.)

Cotgrave has ‘ peninsule, a peninsula.’=L. péninsula, a piece of land
nearly an island.=—L. pén-e, pen-e, almost; and insula, an island ;
see Isle. Der. peninsul-ar, peninsul-ate.
.PENITENT, repentant, sorry for sin. (F.—L.) ME. penitent,
Chaucer, C. T. Persones Tale (I 81).—OF. penitent, ‘ penitent; ’
stem of pres. part. of penitére, to cause to repent, frequentative form
of pénire, the same as punire, to punish; see Punish. Der.
penitent-ly; penitence, OEKng. Homilies, ed. Morris, ii. 61, 1. 5
(doublet, penance) ; penitent-i-al, penitent-t-al-ly, penitent-i-ar-y.

PENNON, PENNANT, a small flag, banner, streamer. (F.—
L.) Pennant is merely formed from pennon by the addition of ¢ after
n, as in ancien-t, tyran-t. It occurs in Drayton, Battle of Agincourt,
st. 70. Pennon.is in Shak. Hen. V, iii. 5. 49. ME. penon, penoun,
Chaucer, C. T. 980 (A978). = MF. pennon, ‘a pennon, flag, streamer ;
les pennons d’une fleiche, the feathers of an arrow;’ Cot. [Cf.Span.
pendon, a banner (with excrescent d); Ital. pexnone, a pennon, of
which the old meaning was ‘a great plume or bunch of feathers”
(Florio).] Formed, with suffix -on, from L. pena, a wing, feather ;
whence the sense of ‘plume,’ and lastly, of streamer or standard,
See Pen (2). Der. pennon-cel, a dimin. form, from MF. pennoncel,
‘a pennon on the top of a launce, a little flag or streamer ;’ Cot.

PENNY, a copper coin, one twelfth of a shilling. (L. ? with
E. suffix.) Formerly a silver coin; the copper coinage dates from
A.D. 1665. ME. peni, Havelok, 705; pl. penies, Havelok, 776, also
pens (pronounced like mod. E. pence) by contraction, P. Plowman,
B. v. 243. The mod. E. pence is due to this contracted form. AS.
pening, a penny, Mark, xii. 15, where the Camb. MS. has penig, by
loss of x before g ; the further loss of the final g produced ME, pent.
A by-form is pending (A.D. 833), Thorpe, Diplomatarium, p. 471,
l. 26; as if formed from the base pand- with dimin. suffix -mg.
B. This pand=Du. pand, a pawn, pledge, OHG. pfant, G. pfand;
a word possibly of L. origin; see Pawn (1). In this view, a penny
is a little pledge, ‘a token.’4Du. penning ; Icel. penningr ; Dan.and
Swed. penning; G. pfennig, OHG. phantinc, phentinc, from pfant,
Der. penny-weight, penny-worth, penni-less.

PENNY-ROYAL, a herb. (F.—L.) In Sir T. Elyot, Castel of
Helth, b. ii. c. 9, it is spelt penyryall ; but the first part-of the. word
is a singular corruption of the old name puliol or puliajl ; we find
Cotgrave translating MF. pulege by ‘ penny royall, puliall royall,
the name being really due to. L. paléium régium, penty-royal (Pliny,
b. xx, c. 14), a2 name given to the plant (like E. flea-bane) from its
supposed efficacy against fleas; from L. pilex, a flea. The form


piléium is short for pulegium, whence the dimin. *pilegi-olum > OF,
puliol, whence ME. puliol. And régium is the neuter of régius, royal;
from rég-, stem of rex, a king. See Puce and Royal. So also


‘ Origanum, puliol real, wde-minte,’ i.e. wood-mint; Voc. 557. 20,
PENSILE, suspended, (F.—L.). ‘If a weighty body be pensile ;”


PENSION


Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 763-—MF. pensil, ‘sleightly hanging ;’ Cot.=—
L. pensilis, pendent ; from *pens-wm, unused supine of pendére, to
hang;. see Pendant.

PENSION, a stated allowance, stipend, payment. (F.—L.) In
Shak. K. Lear, ii. 4. 217; pencyon in Palsgrave.—F. pension, ‘ a pen-
sion;’ Cot.—L. pensidnem, acc. of pensio, a payment. = L. pensus, pp.
of pendere, to weigh, weigh out, pay; orig. to cause to hang, and
closely connected with pendére, to hang; see-Pendant. Der. pen-
sion, vb., pension-er, Mid. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 10; pension-ar-y. And see
Pensive.

PENSIVE, thoughtful. (F.—L.) ME. pensif, Gower, C. A.
ii. 65; bk. iv. 1906.—F. pensif, ‘pensive;’ Cot. Formed, as if
from a L. *pensiuus, from pensire, to weigh, ponder, consider ;
intensive form of pendere (pp. pensus), to weigh; see Pension,
Der. pensive-ly, -ness, And see Pansy.

PENT, for penned, pp. of Pen (1), q. v.

PENTACLE, a magical figure. (F.—Gk.) ‘ Their raven’s wings,
their lights, and peztacles;’ B. Jonson, The Devil an Ass, i. 2. 8.
See Nares. — OF. pentacle, a pentacle; also, a candlestick with five
branches. Variant of ME. pentangel, in the same sense, Gawain
and the Grene Knight, 620.—Gk. meévre, five, cognate with E. jive ;
and L, suffix -deulum (cf. MItal. pentacolo in Florio), in place of
L. angulus, an angle, as in rect-angle. @ Ignorance of Gk. caused
the substitution of a pentacle with six points for the pentangle of jive
points ; see Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 212.

PENTAGON, a plane figure having five angles. (F.—L.—Gk.)
The adj. pentagonall is in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. pentagone, ‘ five-
cornered ;’ Cot.=—L. pentagénus, pentagdnius, pentagonal. — Gk.
mevTayovos, pentagonal ; neut. mevraywvov, a pentagon. = Gk. revta-,
for mevre, fine, cognate with E. five; and ywvria, a corner, angle, lit.
a bend, from yévv, a knee, cognate with E. knee. See Five and
Knee. Der. pentagon-al.

PENTAMETER, a verse of five measures. (L.—Gk.) In
Skelton’s Poems, ed. Dyce, i. 193, 1. 6.—L. pentameter.— Gk. revta-
petpos.= Gk. mevta-, for mévre, five, cognate with E. five; and
perpov, a metre. See Five and Metre.

PENTATEUCH, the five books of Moses. (L.—Gk.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Spelt pentateuches in Minsheu, ed. 1627;
penthatheukes in Palsgrave.=L. pentateuchus.— Gk. névra-, for wévTe,
five, cognate with E. five; and revdxos, a tool, implement, in late
Gk., a book. Hence applied to the collection of the five books of
Moses. B. Tedxos is allied to revxev, to prepare, get ready,
make ; allied to tvos, TUxos, an instrument for working stones with,
a mason’s pick or hammer, whence ruxi¢eyv, to work stones. Brug-
mann, i. § 780. Der. pentateuch-al.

PENTECOST, Whitsuntide; orig. a Jewish festival on the
fiftieth. day after the Passover. (L.—Gk.) ME. pentecoste, OEng.
Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 89, 1.5. AS. pentecosten, rubric to John vi.
44.—L. pentécostén, acc. of pentécosté. Gk. mevtnxoorn, Pentecost,
Acts, ii. 1; lit. fiftieth, fem. of mevrynxoords, fiftieth (f#uépa=day,
being understood). = Gk. revtjxovta, fifty. = Gk. revrn-,for eve, five;
and -«ovta, tenth. Again, -covra is short for *5éxovra, tenth, from
déxa, ten, cognate with E. ten. See Five and Ten. Der. peniecost-al.

PENTHOUSE, a shed projecting from a building. (F.—L.)
In Shak. Much Ado, iii. 3. 110. A corruption of pentice or pentis,
due to an effort at making sense of one part of the word at the
expense of the rest, as in the case of crayfish, &c. ME. pentice,
pentis. ‘* Pentice of an howse ende, Appendicium ;’ Prompt... Parv.
Caxton, in the Boke of the Fayt of Armes, explains how a fortress
ought to be supplied with fresh water, cisterns being provided
‘where men may receive inne the rayne-watres that fallen doune
along the thackes of thappentyzes and houses ;’ Part ii. c. 17 (Way’s
note). Here thackes=thatches; and thappentyzes=the appentices,
showing that pertice stands for apentice, the first syllable having been
dropped, as in peal for appeal. Way further quotes from Palsgrave :
“ Penthouse of a house, appentis;’ and from the Catholicon; ‘A pentis,
appendix, appendicium.’ Also spelt pendize, Met. Homilies, ed. Small,
p- 63. The AF. pl. pentyz occurs in Liber Albus, p. 271; and appen-
tices, pl., at p. 288.—MF. apentis, appentis, ‘a penthouse ;’ Cot. =
L. appendicium, an appendage ; allied to appendix, an appendage ;
see Append. @ Thus a penthouse is an ‘appendage’ or out-
building. See.the next word. ‘

PENTROOF, a roof with a slope on one side only. (Hybrid;
F.—L. and E.) Given in Cent. Dict. I notice it because the F.
original of this pent- may have affected the sense of penthouse. Com-
pounded of F. pente, a slope; and E. roof. The F. pente is formed
from pendre, to hang, like vente from vendre, to sell.—L. pendére, to
hang; see Pendant.

PENULTIMATE, the last syllable but one. (L.) A gramma-
tical term; coined from L. pen-e, almost; and ultima, fem., last.
See Ulterior. Der. penult, the contracted form.


PERCH 44]


PENUMBRA, a partial shadow beyond the deep shadow of
an eclipse. (L.) In Kersey, ed. 1721. Coined from L. pan-e,
almost ; and wmbra, ashadow. See Umbrella,

PENURY, want, poverty. (F.—L.) ‘In great penury and
miserye ;’ Fabyan’s Chron. vol. i. c. 157. ‘For lacke and penurye ;’
Caxton, Golden Legend, Moses, §:7.— MF. penurie, ‘penury ;’ Cot. =
L. péntria, want, need. Allied to Gk. meiva, hunger. Der. penu-
rious (Levins) ; penuri-ous-ness.

PEON, a foot-soldier, orderly, messenger. (Port.—L.) . See quo-
tations in Yule. [Also, in Span. America, a serf; from the cognate
Span. peor. |= Port. pio, a pawn at chess; one of the lower people.
=Late L. pedonem, acc. of pedo, a foot-soldier; see Pawn (2).
Altered to the Span. spelling.

PEONY, PASONY, a plant with beautiful crimson flowers.
(L.—Gk.) The mod. E. peony answers to the AS. peonie, Leech-
doms, i. 168; L. paednia. [The ME. forms were pione, pioine,
piane, pianie; P. Plowman, A. v. 155; B.v. 312; later, peony, Pals-
grave.—OF, pione (mod. F. pivoine); Littré.]—L. pednia, medicinal,
from its supposed virtues; fem. of Pednius, belonging to Peén, its
supposed discoverer. = Gk. Ma:wv,Pzeon, the god of healing. SeePzan.

PEOPLE, a nation, the populace, (F.—L.) ME. peple, P. Plow-
man, A. i. 5; spelt poeple, id. B. i. 5; spelt peple, poeple, puple,
Chaucer, C. T. 8871 (Six-text, E. 995). [The spelling with co or oe
is due to AF. people, poeple (later péple).|—OF. pueple, mod. F.
peuple, people. = L. populum, acc. of populus, people. 8. Po-pul-us
appears to be a reduplicated form; cf. L. plé-bés, people. Allied to
ple-nus, full, E. full. See wipmdne in Prellwitz. And see Populace.

PEPPER, the fruit of a plant, with a hot pungent taste. (L.—
Gk.—Skt.) ME. peper (with only two #’s), P. Plowman, B. v. 312.
AS. pipor; A.S. Leechdoms, ed. Cockayne, iii. 341. =—L. piper: = Gk.
mémept.—= Skt. pippalt (1) long pepper; (2) the fruit of the holy fig-
tree; Benfey, p. 552. Cf. Pers. pulpul, pepper; Palmer’s Dict. col.
114. Der. pepper-corn, pepper-mint.

PEPSINE, one of the constituents of the gastric juice, helpful in
the process of digestion. (F.—Gk.) From mod. F. pepsine, formed
with suffix -ize from Gk. méy-, base of réyus, digestion ; for *émris
<*péq-tis, related to wénrev, to cook. (4/PEQ). See Cook. Der.
So also pept-ic, i.e. assisting in digestion, from Gk. mem7ixds ; whence
dys-peptic.

PER., prefix, through. (L.) L. ger, through; whence F. fer-,
par-, as a prefix. Orig. used of spaces traversed ; allied to Gk. rapa,
map, by the side of, Skt. para, away, from, forth, param, beyond, and
to E. from. Also to Goth. fair-, G. ver-, prefix. The prefixes para-
and peri-, both Gk., are nearly related. See Curtins, i. 334, 338.

PERADVENTURE, perhaps. (F.—L.) The d before v is an
insertion, as in adventure. ME. perauenture (with u=v), Rob. of
Glouc. p. 358, 1. 7373; often shortened to peraunter or paraunter,
spelt parauntre in the same passage, in MS. Cotton, Calig. A. xi.=—F.
par, by; and aventure, adventure.=L. per, through, by; and see
Adventure.

PERAMBULATES, to walk through or over, (L.) Prob. made
from the earlier sb. perambulation ; Lambarde’s ‘ Perambulation of
Kent’ was printed in 1576. Cf. L. perambuldtus, pp. of perambulare,
lit. to walk through. =L. per, through; and ambulare, to walk; see
Per- and Amble. Der. ferambulat-ion; also perambulat-or, an
instrument for measuring distances, as in Phillips, ed. 1706, but now
used to mean a light carriage for a child, and sometimes shortened
to pram. : :

PERCEIVE, to comprehend. (F.—L.) ME. perceyuen (with
u=v), also parceyuen, P. Plowman, B. xviii. 241.—OF, perceiv-,
stressed stem of percevoir (Godefroy). Cot. gives only the MF. pp,
perceu. [The mod. F. has the comp. apercevoir, with the additional
prefix a-< L. ad.| — L. percipere, to apprehend.=L. per, through,
thoroughly, and capere, to take, receive. See Per- and Capacious,
Der. perceiv-er, perceiv-able. Also percept-ion, from F. perception,
‘a perception’ (Cot.), from L. perceptidnem, acc. of perceptio, like
the pp. perceptus ; also percept-ive, percept-ive-ly, percept-iv-i-ty, per-
cept-ive-ness ; percept-ible, F. perceptible, ‘perceptible’ (Cot.), from
L. perceptibilis, perceivable ; percept-ibl-y, percept-ibil-i-ty. Also per-
cipient, from the stem ofthe pres. part. of percipere. ‘

PERCH (1), a rod for a bird to sit on; a long measure of five and
a half yards. (F.—L.) The orig. sense is ‘rod;’ whether for measur-
ing or for a bird’s perch. ME. perche, Chaucer, C. T. 2206 (A 2204).
=F. perche, ‘a pearch;’ Cot:—L. pertica, a pole, bar, measuring-
rod. Der. perch, vb., Rich. III, i. 3. 71, ME. perchen, Chaucer, Ho.
Fame, 1991; perch-er.

PERCH (2), a fish. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. perche, Prompt. Parv.

|p. 393; King Alisaunder, 5446.—F. perche.—L. perca.—Gk. méprn,

a perch ; sonamed from its dark marks. — Gk. w€pkos, mépKvos, spotted,
| blackish.-Skt. preni-, spotted, pied, esp. of cows; Curtius, i. 340.
| B. Further allied to OHG, forh-ana, G. for-elle, AS. for-n, a trout.


442 PERCHANCE


PERCHANCEH, by chance. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. ii. 2.
17; ME. parchaunce, Hampole, Prick of Conscience, 2489.
[Another ME. phrase is per cas or parcas, Chaucer, C. T. 12819
(C 885); from F. par cas; see Case.]—F. par, by; and chance,
chance; see Per- and Chance.

PERCIPIENT:; see under Perceive.

PERCOLATEH, to filter through. (L.) In Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 396.
Prob. suggested by the sb. percolation, in Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 3.—L.
percdlatus, pp. of percdlare, to strain through a sieve.—L. per,
through; and cdlare, to filter, from cdlum, a filter. See Per- and
Colander. Der. percolat-ion, percolat-or.

PERCUSSION, a shock, quick blow. (L.) Bacon has percussion,
Nat. Hist. § 163; percussed, id. 164; percutient, id. 190. Formed,
by analogy with F. sbs. in -ion, from L. percussio, a striking. = L.
percussus, pp. of percutere, to strike violently.—L. per, thoroughly ;
and quatere, to shake, which becomes -cwtere in compounds. See
Quash. Der. percuss-ive; percuti-ent, from the stem. of the pres.
participle.

PERDITION, utter loss or destruction. (F.—L.) ME. per-
dicioun, Wyclif, 2 Pet. ii. 1.—F. perdition ; Cot.—L. perditionem, acc.
of perditio, destruction; cf. L. perditus, pp. of perdere, to lose utterly,
to destroy. = L. per, thoroughly, or away; and_-dere, to put, place,
representing Idg. *dka, weak grade of 4/DHE, io place; see Do.
@ L. per-dere=E. do for. Der. perd-u, hidden ; from F. perdu, pp.
of perdre, to lose, from L. perdere,

PERDURABLE, long-lasting. (F.—L.) In Shak. Othello, i. 3.
343; Chaucer, C. T., B 2699.—OF. perdurable, ‘ perdurable, per-
petual ;’ Cot.=L. perdiird-re, to endure; with suffix -bilis.—L. per,
through, throughout ; dirare, to last, from dirus, hard, lasting. See
Dure. Der. perdurabl-y, perdura-bili-ty.

PEREGRINATION, travel, wandering about. (F.—L.) In
Cotgrave.=F. peregrination, ‘ peregrination ;’ Cot.—L. peregrinat-
idnem, acc. of peregrinatio, travel.—L. peregrinari, to travel.—L.
peregrinus, foreign, abroad; see Pilgrim. Der. peregrinate, verb,
tare, from L. pp. peregrindtus; peregrinat-or. Also peregrinate, adj.,
ei. vet. 15.

PEREMPTORY, authoritative, dogmatical (F.—L.) In
Spenser, F. Q. iii [wot iv]. 8. 16. AF. peremptorie, Liber Albus,
p- 217; MF. peremptoire, ‘peremptory ;’ Cot.—L. peremptorius,
destructive; hence, decisive.=L. peremptor, a destroyer; cf. L.
peremptus, pp. of perimere, older form peremere, to take entirely away,
destroy.=—L. per, away (like Skt. para, from) ; and emere, to take,
also to buy. See Per- and Example. Der. peremptori-ly, -ness.

PERENNIAL, everlasting. (L.) In Evelyn’s Diary, Noy. 8,
1644. Coined by adding -al (= L. -dlis) to perenni-, for perennis, ever-
lasting, lit. lasting through the year.—L. per, through; and annus,
a year, which becomes ezzi- in compounds. See Per- and Annual.
Der. perennial-ly.

PERFECT, complete, whole. (F.—L.) ME. parfit, perjit,
Chaucer, C. T. 72. [The word has since been conformed to the L.
spelling.]=OF. parjit, parfeit, ME. parfaict (Cot.); mod. F. parfait.
—L. perfectus, complete; orig. pp. of perficere, to complete, do
thoroughly.—L. per, thoroughly; and -ficere, for facere, to make.
See Per- and Fact. Der. perfect-ly, -ness ; perfect, vb., Temp.i. 2,
79; perfect-ible, perfect-ibil-i-ty; perfect-er; perfect-ion, ME. per-
fection, Ancren Riwle, p. 372, 1. 9, from F. perfection ; perfection-ist.

PERFIDIOUS, faithless, treacherous. (L.) In Shak. Temp.
i. 2. 68. Not a F. word, but formed (by analogy with words of
F. origin) directly from L. perfididsus, treacherous. = L. perfidia,
treachery. =L. perfidus, faithless, lit. one that goes away from his
faith.L. per, away (like Skt. para, from); and jfidés, faith. See
Per-and Faith. Der. perfidious-ly, -ness ; also perfid-yin Phillips,
ed. 1706, F. perfidie, in Moliére (Littré), from L. perfidia.

PERFOLIATEH, having the stem passing through the leaf. (L.)
‘ Perfoliata, the herb thorough-wax ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Botanical.
—L. per, through; and foli-um, a leaf; with suffix -ate (=L. pp.
suffix -d/us), See Per-and Folio. @ Cf. MF. perfoliate, ‘through-
wax, an herb;’ Cot.

PERFORATE, to bore through. (L.) Bacon uses perforate as
a pp., Nat. Hist. § 470. ‘A cros perforatid, Book of St.
Albans, pt. ii, fol. c 3.—L. perfordtus, pp. of perforare, to bore
through.—L. per, through; and forare, to bore, cognate with E.
bore. See Per- and Bore (1). Der. perforat-ion, -or.

PERFORCE, by force, of necessity. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F.Q.
i. 8. 38 ; spelt parforce, Lord Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. ii. c. 38 (R.).
=F. par, by (<L. per); and force, force. See Per- and Force.

PERFORM, to achieve. (F.-OHG.; with L. prefix). ME.
parfournen, P, Plowman, B. v. 607; perfourmen, Wyclif, John, v. 36.
= OF. parfournir, ‘to perform, consummate, accomplish ;’ Cot.—
F. par (<L. per), thoroughiy; and fournir, to provide, furnish,
a word of OHG. origin. See Per- and Furnish. The ME.


PERIPATETIC


form parfournen is thus accounted for; the ME. parfourmen is prob.
due to association with form, with which it has no real connexion.
Der. perform-er ; perform-ance, Macb. ii. 3. 33, a coined word.

PERFUME, to scent. (F.—L.) The verb is the original word,
and occurs in Shak, Temp. ii. 1. 48.—F. parfumer, ‘to perfume ;”
Cot. Lit.‘ to smoke thoroughly.’ =F. par (<L. per), through ; and
fumer,to smoke, from L. fumare, vb. formed from fumus, smoke.
See Per- and Fume. Der. perfume, sb., F. parfum ; perfum-er,
perfum-er-y.

PERFUNCTORY, done in a careless way. (L.) ‘In a care-
lesse perfunctory way;’ Howell, Foreign Travel, § 4, ed. Arber,
p- 27. Englished from L. perfunctorius, done in a careless way,
done because it must be done; allied to perfunctus, pp. of perfungi, to
perform, discharge thoroughly. —L. per, thoroughly; and fungi, to
perform. See Per- and Function. Der. perfunctori-ly, -ness.

PERHAPS, possibly. (Hybrid; L. azd Scand.) In Hamlet, i.
3.14. A clumsy compound, which took the place of the ME. per
cas, and formed also on the model of perchance; see Perchance.
The per is rather from the F. par than the L. per, but it makes no
difference. Haps is the pl. of hap, a chance, a word of Scand. origin.
See Hap. Spelt perhapis, Roy, Rede me, ed. Arber, p. 98.

PERI, a fairy. (Pers.) See Moore’s poem of ‘ Paradise and the
Peri,’ in Lalla Rookh.= Pers. pari, a fairy ; Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col.
112, See Horn, § 310.

PERI., prefix, round, around. (Gk.) Gk. wepi, around, about.+-
Skt. pari, round about. Also allied to L. per- in permagnus, &c.

PERIANTH, the floral envelope, whether calyx or corolla, or
both. (Gk.) Botanical. Gk. wepi, around; and dv6os, flower.

PERIAPT, an amulet. (F.—Gk.) In Shak. 1 Hen. VI, v. 3. 2.
= MF. periapte, ‘a medicine hanged about any part of the body.’ =
Gk. mepianroy, an amulet ; neut. of repiamtos, fitted or fastened round.
= Gk. mepiarrecv, to fasten round. = Gk. wepi, round ; Garey, to fasten.

PERICARDIUM, the sac which surrounds the heart. (L.—Gk.)
In Phillips, ed. 1706, Anatomical. = Late L. pericardium. = Gk.
mepitapodioy, the membrane round the heart.—Gk. wepi, round; and
kapdia, cognate with E. heart. See Peri- and Heart.

PERICARP, a seed-vessel. (Gk.) _ Botanical. — Gk. mepixdpmor,
the shell of fruit.—Gk. mepi, round; and «apmés, fruit, allied to E.
harvest. See Peri- and Harvest.

PERICRANIUM, the membrane that surrounds the skull.
(Late L.—Gk.) The pl. pericraniums occurs in Beaum. and Fletcher,
The Chances, iii. 2. 10.— Late L. pericranium. = Gk. tepixpdmor, neut.
of mepixpavios, passing round the skull. = Gk. mepi, round; and xpavior,
the skull. See Peri- and Cranium.

PERIGEE, the point of the moon’s orbit nearest the earth. (F.—
L.—Gk.) Scientific. In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Opposed to
apogee,=MF. perigée; Cot.—Late L. perigéwm.—Late Gk. mepi-
yevov, neut. of mepiyeros, near the earth. Coined from Gk. mepi,
about (here near); and yj, the earth, which appears in geo-graphy, &c.

PERIHELION, the point of a planet’s orbit nearest the sun.
(Gk.) Scientific. In Phillips, ed. 1706. Opposed to aphelion. =
Gk. mepi, around (here near); and 7Avos, the sun. See Peri- and
Aphelion.

PERIL, danger. (F.—L.) ME. peri/, Ancren Riwle, p. 194,
1, 24.—OF. peril, ‘perill;’ Cot.=—L. periclum, periculum, danger ; lit.
a trial, proof.=—L. periri, to try, an obsolete verb of which the pp.
peritus, experienced, is common. . Allied to Gk. qeipdw, I try,
prove, mepdw, I press through, pass through, as well as to Goth.
faran, to travel, fare; see Fare. Thus a peril is a trial which one
passes through. Der. peril-ous, Chaucer, C. T. 13925 (B 3109);
peril-ous-ly, -ness.

PERIMETER, the sum of the lengths of all the sides of a plane
figure. (L.—Gk.) Lit. the ‘measure round.’ In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674.—L. perimetros (Lewis).— Gk. mepiverpos, the circumference
of a circle ; hence, the perimeter of a plane figure. = Gk. aepi, round ;
and péTpov, a measure; see Peri- and Metre.

PERIOD, the time of a circuit, date, epoch: (F.—L.—Gk.) In
Shak. it often means ‘ conclusion, end ;’ Rich. III, ii. 1. 44; K. Lear,
iv. 7.97, V. 3. 204.—OF. periode, ‘a period, perfect sentence, conclu-
sion;’ Cot.=—L, periodus, a complete sentence. = Gk. wepiodos, a going
round, way round, circuit, compass, a well-rounded sentence. = Gk.
epi, round ; and 6dés,a way. See Peri- and Exodus, 4 The sense
of ‘time of circuit’ is taken directly from the orig. Gk. Der. period-
ic; period-ic-al (Blount, 1674), period-ic-al-ly, period-i-ct-ty.

PERIPATETIC, walking about. (L.—Gk.). ‘ Peripatetical,
that disputes or teaches walking, as Aristotle did; from whence he


and his scholars were called peripateticks ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.


—L. peripatéticus.— Gk. mepimarntixés, given to walking about, esp.
while disputing; Aristotle and his followers were called mepemarnrixoi.
= Gk, repimaréw, I walk about. = Gk. wepi, about ; and maréw, I walk,
from maros, a path, which is allied to L. poxs; see Pontoon, «= ;


PERIPHERY


PERIPHERY, circumference. (L.—Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., |
ed. 1674. ME. periferie; ‘This air in periferies thre Devided is,’
Gower, C.A. iii. 93 (bk. vii. 265) ; where the sidenote is: ‘Nota
qualiter aer in tribus periferiis diuiditur.’ = L. periferia, peripheria.—
mepipepera, the circumference of a circle.—Gk. mepi, round; and
pépew, to carry, cognate with E. bear. See Peri- and Bear (1).
»PERIPHRASIS, a roundabout way of speaking. (L.—Gk.)
‘ Periphrase, circumlocution ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674; but this is
rather a F. form. ‘The figure periphrasis;’ Puttenham, Arte of Poesie,
bk. iii. c. 18.—L. periphrasis.— Gk. mepippacis. = Gk. mepi, round ;
and ¢pacis,a speech, phrase. See Peri- and Phrase. Der. periphrase,
vb.; periphrast-ic, adj., from Gk. repippactixds ; periphrast-ic-al.

PERISH, to come to naught. (F.—L.) ME. perisshen, Cursor
Mundi, 8789; perischen, Wyclif, John, vi. 27.—F. periss-, stem of
some parts of the verb perir, ‘to perish;’ Cot. (The stem periss- is
formed as if from a L. *periscere, an imaginary inceptive form). =
L. perire, to perish, come to naught. —L. per, thoroughly, but with
a destructive force like that of E. for-; and ire, to go; thus perire=
to goto the bad. Tre is from 4/EI, to go; cf. Skt.z, to go. And
see For- (2). Der. perish-able, perish-abl-y, perishable-ness.

PERITONEUM, the membrane lining the abdominal cavity and
investing its viscera. (Gk.) Late L. peritoneum, for Gk. mepitévaiov,
the peritoneum ; neut. of meperdvacos, stretched around.—Gk. epi,
around, and rov-, 2nd grade of rev-, base of reivey (for *rév-yetv), to
stretch. See Tone. Der. periton-itis, inflammation of the peritoneum.

PERIWIG, a peruke. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Shak. Two Gent. iv. 4.
196. The after r is corruptly inserted ; Minsheu, ed. 1627, gives
the spellings perwigge and perwicke. Of these forms, perwigge is a
weakened form of perwicke or perwick; and perwick is a corrupted
form of peruke or perruque; see Perruque. Du Wes has: ‘the
perwyke, la perrucque;’ Supp. to Palsgrave, p. 902, col. i. B. The
form periwig gave rise to a notion that peri- was a prefix, like Gk.
mepi; see Peri-. Hence, it was sometimes dropt, the resulting form
being wig. See Wig.

PERIWINKLE, (1),a genus of evergreen plants. (L.) Formed
with dimin. suffix -/e, and insertion of 7, from ME. peruenke (= per-
venke), a periwinkle ; Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 218, 1.11. AS.
peruince, as a gloss to L. uinca, in Voc. 322. 32.—L. peruinca, also
called uinca peruinca, or (in one word) uincaperuinca (Lewis). B. The
name was doubtless orig. given to a twining plant, as it is clearly
allied to uincire, to bind; the prefix per being the usual L. prep.

PERIWINKLE (2), a small univalve mollusc. (E.; with Gk.
prefix.) In Levins; and Palsgrave has: ‘ Perivyncle, a shellfysshe.’
A corrupt form, due to a confusion with the word above. The best
name is simply winckle, as in Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. ix. c. 32.
Periwincle is in Drayton, Polyolbion, song 25, 1. 190; and is a cor-
tuption of the AS. name pinewincla;. cf. ‘s&-sn&l, vel pinewinclan,’
i.e. sea-snail, or periwinkles, in Voc. 122. 24. Cf. prov. E. penny-
winkle, a periwinkle (E. D.D.); directly from AS. pinewincla. The
prefix pine- is from L. pina, Gk. miva, a kind of mussel. See
Winkle.

PERJURE, to forswear (oneself), swear falsely. (F.—L.) The
-prefix has been conformed to the L. spelling. Shak. has perjured,
Oth. v. 2. 63; also perjure, to render perjured, Antony, iii. 12. 30;
also perjure, a perjured person, L,L.L. iv. 3. 47 3 perjury, L.L. L. iv.
3. 62. Skelton has pariured, perjured ; How the Douty Duke of
Albany, &c., 1,125. So also in Dictes and Sayings, pr. by Caxton,
fol. 6,1. to.—F. parjurer; whence se parjurer, ‘to forsweare him-
selfe;’ Cot. Cf. F. parjure (also MF. perjure), a perjured person ;
Cot.—L. peritirare, to forswear; periurus, a perjured person.=L.
per-, prefix used in a bad sense, exactly equivalent to the cognate E.
for- in forswear ; and iurare, to swear. See Per- and Jury. Der.
perjury, AF. perjurie, Philip de Thaun, Bestiary, 1310, from L.
peritirium ; perjur-er.

PERK, to make smart or trim. (F.—L.) .‘To be perked up
{dressed up] in a glistering grief;’ Hen. VIII, ii. 3. 21. Prov. E.
perk, a perch; also, to perch, sit; perk up, to become brisk; perked
up, elated ; see E. D, D. (Cf. W. perc, compact, trim; percz, to trim,
to smarten ; percus, smart; prob. from E.] ME. perken, to trim its
feathers, as a bird; ‘The papeiayes perken’ (another MS. perchyn);
The Pistill of Susan, 81 (S.T.S.). From the sb. gerke, a perch ; cf.
‘an hauk’s perke,’ Cavendish, Life of Wolsey, p.81; ed. F. S. Ellis. =
North F. perque (Norm. dial. perque, Moisy), a perch.—L. pertica,
a perch. See Perch (1).

PERMANENT, enduring. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. vii. 6. 2;
and in Skelton’s Poems, ed. Dyce, i. 199, 1.19.—F. permanent, ‘ per-
manent ;’ Cot.—L. permanent-, stem of pres. part. of permanére, to
endure.=L. per, thoroughly; and manére,to remain. See Per- and
Mansion. Der. permanent-ly; permanence.

. PERMEATE, to penetrate and pass through small openings or
pores,.pervade. (L.) In Phillips, ed..1706. Sir T. Browne has


_. PERRY 443


‘permeant parts,’ Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c.5. § 8 (in speaking of gold),
w= L. permedtus, pp. of permeare, to pass through. =L. per, through ;.
and medre, to pass, go. See Gk. otros in Prellwitz. Der. permeat-
ion ; permeant (from the stem of the pres. part.) ; permea-ble, from L.
permeabilis.

PERMIAN, an epithet given to a certain system of rocks. (Rus-
sian.) So named from Perm, in E. Russia (ab, 1841).

PERMIT, to let go, let pass, allow. (L.) In Skelton, Magnifi-
cence, 1. 58. ‘Yet hisgrace .. . wolde in no wise permyt and suffre
me so to do ;’ State Papers, vol. i. Wolsey to Henry VIII, 1527 (R.).
—L. permittere (pp. permissus), to let pass through, lit. to send
through.—L. per, through; and mittere, to send; see Per- and
Mission. Der. permit, sb.; also (like pp. permissus) permiss-ible,
permiss-ibl-y, permiss-ion, Oth, i. 3. 340; permiss-ive, Meas. for Meas.
i. 3. 383 permiss-ive-ly.

PERMUTATION, exchange, various arrangement. (F.—L.)
ME, permutacion, P. Plowman, B. iii. 256,—F. permutation, ‘ permu-
tation;’ Cot. —L. permutationem, acc. of permutatio,a changing. = L.
permitdre, to change, exchange.—L. per, thoroughly ; and mitre,
to change ; see Per- and Mutation. Der. permute, vb., P. Plow-
man,,B. xiii. 110, from L. permiutare; permut-able, permut-abl-y, per-
mutable-ness.

PERNICIOUS, hurtful, destructive. (F.—L.) In Shak. Meas.
for Meas. ii. 4. 150; pernyciouse, Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth,
bk. ii. c. 3.—F. pernicieux, ‘pernicious;’ Cot.=—L. pernicidsus,
destructive. =L. perniciés, destruction.—L. per, thoroughly; and
nici-, for neci-, decl. stem of nzex, violent death. See Internecine.
Der. pernicious-ly, -ness.

PERORATION, the conclusion of a speech. (F.—L.) In
Shak. 2 Hen. VI, i. 1. 105.—F. peroration, ‘a peroration ;’ Cot.=
L. perératidnem, acc. of perdratio, the close of a speech. = L. perdrare,
to speak from beginning to end, also, to close a speech.—L. per,
through; and drare, to speak ; see Per- and Oration.

PERPENDICULAR, exactly upright. (F.—L.) ME. per-
pendiculer, Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, pt. ii. § 23, 1. 28.—F. perpen-
diculaire ; Cot.—L. perpendiculadris, according to the plumb-line. =
L. perpendiculum, a plummet; used for careful measurement. =
L. perpendere, to weigh or measure carefully, consider.—L. per,
through ; and pendere, to weigh. See Per- and Pension, Pen-
dant. Der. perpendicular-ly, perpendicular-i-ty. Also perpend, to
consider, Hamlet, ii. 2. 105, from perpendere.

PERPETRATE, to execute, commit. (L.) Orig. a pp.
‘ Which were perpetrate and done;’ Hall, Hen. VI, an. 31 (end). =
L. perpetratus, pp. of perpetrdre, to perform thoroughly. —L. per,
thoroughly; and patrare, to make, accomplish. Der. perpetrat-or,
from L. perpetrat-or ; perpetrat-ion.

PERPETUAL, everlasting. (F.—L.) ME. perpetuel, Chaucer,
C. T. Pers. Tale (I 137).—F. perpetuel, ‘ perpetuall;’ Cot.=L. per-
petualis, universal; later used in same sense as perpetudrius, perma-
nent.—L. perpetuus, continuous, constant, perpetual.—L. perpet-,
stem of perpes, lasting throughout, continuous. = L. per, throughout ;
and pet-, as in pet-ere, to seek, to direct one’s course. See Per-
and Petition. Der. perpetual-ly, ME. perpetuelly, Chaucer, C. T.
1344 (A 1342) 3 perpelu-ate, Palsgrave, from L, pp. perpetudtus ; per-
petu-at-ion; perpetu-i-ty, from F. perpetuité, ‘ perpetuity’ (Cot.),
from L. acc. perpetuitatem.

PERPLEX, to embarrass, bewilder. (F.—L.) ‘In such ger-
plexed plight ;’ Spenser, F. Q. iii. 1. 59. Minsheu gives only the
participial adj. perplexed, not the verb; and, in fact, the form jer-
plexed was really first in use, as a translation from the French,
Spelt perplexid in Dictes and Sayings, pr. by Caxton, fol. 1.—F. per-
plex, * perplexed, intricate, intangled;’ Cot. —L. perplexus, entangled,
interwoven.—L. per, thoroughly; and plexus, entangled, pp. of
plectere, to plait, braid. See Per- and Plait. Der. perplex-i-ty,
ME. perplexitee, Gower, C, A. iii. 348, bk. viii, 2190, from F. per-
plexité, which from L. acc. perplexitatem.

PERQUISITEH, an emolument, small gain. (L.) Applied to a
special allowance as being a thing sought for diligently and specially
obtained. ‘ Perguisite (L. perquisitum) signifies, in Bracton, any-
thing purchased, as perquisitum facere, lib. ii. c. 30, num. 3, and lib. iv.
c. 22. Perquisites of Courts, are those profits that accrue to a lord
of a manor, by vertue of his Court Baron, over and above the certain
and yearly rents of his land ; as, fines for copyhold, waifes, estrays,
and such like;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. — L. pergquisitum, as
above; properly neut. of perguisitus, pp. of perquirere, to ask after
diligently. L. per, thoroughly; and guerere, to seek; see Per-
and Query..

-PERRUQUE, variant of Peruke, q. v.

PERRY, the fermented juice of pears. (F.—L.) In Phillips, ed.
1706. ‘Perrie, drinke of peares;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627. ME. pereye ;
‘Piretum, pereye;’ Voc. 603. 11.— OF. peré, perry, supp. to Gode-


444, PERSECUTE


froy ; mod. F. poiré, ‘perry, drink made of pears ;’ Cot. Cf. Norm. |


dial. péré, perry (Robin). Formed with suffix -é (<L. -dtus, i.e.
made of) from OF. peire, F. poire, a pear.—L. pirum, a pear; see


Pear.

PERSECUTE, to harass, pursue with annoyance. (F.—L.)
The sb. persecution is older in E. than the vb., and is spelt persecuctoun
in Wyclif, Second Prologue to Apocalypse, 1.1. Shak. has persecute,
All’s Well, i. 1.16. — MF. persecuter, ‘to persecute, prosecute ;’ Cot.
Formed as if from a Late L. *perseciitare, from L. perseciitus, pp. of
persequi, to pursue, follow after. —L. per, continually ; and seguz, to
follow. See Per- and Sequence. Der. persecut-ion.

PERSEVERE, to persist in anything. (F.—L.)} Formerly
accented and spelt perséver, Hamlet, i. 2.92. ME. perseueren (with
u=v), Chaucer, C. T. 15585 (G117).—OF. perseverer, ‘to perse-
vere ;’ Cot.=L. perseuérare, to adhere to a thing, persist in it.—L.
perseuerus, very strict.—L. per, thoroughly ; and sevérus, strict ; see
Per- and Severe. Der. persever-ance, ME. perseverance, Ayenbite
of Inwyt, p. 168, ]. 22, from OF. perseverance, L. persetierantia.

PERSIFLAGE, light banter. (F.—L.) In Greville’s Memoirs,
Mar. 15, 1831 (Cent. Dict.) =F. persiflage, banter (1735).—F. persi-
fier, to jeer.—L. per, through, thoroughly ; stbilare, to hiss, from
sibilus, adj., hissing. See Sibilant.

PERSIMMON, a date-plum, the fruit of a tree of the genus
Diospyros. (N. Amer. Indian.) Chiefly in use in N. America; said
to be a Virginian Indian word. ‘The fruit like medlers, they call
putchamins, they cast vppon hurdles on a mat, and preserue them as
pruines ;’ Capt. Smith, Works, ed. Arber, p. 57. (The preceding
sentence treats of fruits that are dried to keep.) Spelt pessimmins in
1612; not stressed on the second syllable (N.E.D.). ‘The second
element is the suffix -min,’ i.e. grain, small fruit, N. E. D.—Algon-
kin pasimine, to cause fruits to dry ; from pas, to be dry (Cuogq).

PERSIST, to continue steadfast, persevere. (F.—L.) In Shak.
All’s Well, iii. 7. 42. =F. persister, ‘to persist ;’ Cot.—L. persistere,
to continue, persist. L. per, through ; and sistere, properly to make
to stand, set, a causal form from stare, to stand. See Per- and
Stand. Der. persistent, from the stem of the pres. part. ; persistence ;
persistenc-y, 2 Hen. IV, ii. 2. 50.

PERSON, a character, individual, body. (F.—L.) ME. persone,
(1) a person, Chaucer, C. T. 10339: (F 25); (2) a parson, id. 480;
earlier persun, Ancren Riwle, p. 126, 1. 15.—OF. persone, F. personne,
‘a person, wight, creature;’ Cot.—L. persona, a mask used by an
actor, a personage, character, part played by an actor, a person.
The large-mouthed masks worn by the actors were so called from
the resonance of the voice sounding through them; at any rate, in
popular etymology. . Perhaps the long 6 in persona was due to the
Gk. mpdcwmoy, a mask, a dramatic character ; but Walde (whom see)
connects it with Gk. (@#vn,a zone. As if from L. personare, to sound
through.=—L. per, through ; and sonare, to sound, from sonus, sound.
See Per- and Sound. (3) Doublet, parson, q.v. Der. person-
able, Spenser, F. Q. iii. 4. 5; person-age, id. F. Q. iii. 2. 26, from
MF. personnage (Cot.); person-al, Macb. i. 3. 91, from MF. per-
sonnel, L. persondlis ; person-al-ly; personal-i-ty, also in the contracted
form personal-ty, with the sense of personal property ; person-ate,
Timon, i. 1. 69, from L. pp. persondtus ; person-at-ion, person-at-or ;
person-i-fy, a coined and late word, in Johnson’s Dict.; whence per-
son-t-fic-at-ion.

PERSPECTIVE, optical, relating to the science of vision.
(F.—L.) Properly an adj., as in ‘the perspectiue or optike art ;’
Minsheu, ed. 1627; but common as a sb., accented pérspective, in the
sense of an optical glass or optical delusion ; see Rich. II, ii. 2. 18;
also Skelton’s Poems, ed. Dyce, i. 25, 1. 22.—F. perspective, sb. f.,
‘the perspective, prospective, or optike art ;’ Cot. —L. *perspectiua
(not found), sb. f., the art of thoroughly inspecting; fem. of *per-
Spectiuus, relating to inspection. L. perspectus, clearly perceived, pp.
of perspicere, to see through or clearly. = L. per, through ; and specere,
to see, spy. See Per- and Spy. Der. perspective-ly, Hen. V, v. 2.
347- And see Perspicacity, Perspicuous.

PERSPICACITY, keenness of sight. (F.—L.) In Minsheu,
ed. 1627; and in Cotgrave.=—F. perspicacité, ‘ perspicacity, quick
sight ;’ Cot.—L. perspicdcitatem, acc. of perspicacitas, sharpsighted-
ness. L. perspicaci-, from perspicax, sharp-sighted ; with suffix -¢as.
Perspicax is formed with suffix -ax from perspic-ere, to see through ;
see Perspective. Der. perspicaci-ous, a coined word, as an equi-
valent to L. perspicax ; perspicaciously, -ness. And see Perspicuous.

PERSPICUOUS, evident. (L.) In Shak. Troil. i. 3. 324.
‘Taken immediately (by change of -us to-ows, as in arduous, &c.) from
L. perspicuus, transparent, clear.=—L. perspicere, to see through; see
Perspective. Der. perspicuous-ly, -ness; also perspicu-i-ty, from
F. perspicuité, ‘ perspicuity,’ Cot.

. PERSPIRATION, a sweating. (F.—L.) The verb perspire is
prob. later, and due to the sb.; it occurs in Sir T. Browne, Vulg.


PERUKE


Errors, b. iv. c. 7. § 4: ‘A man in the morning is lighter in the scale,
because in sleep some pounds have perspired.” ‘The sb. is in Cot-
grave; perspirable is in Minsheu, ed. 1627. —F. perspiration, ‘ a per-
spiration, or breathing through.’=L. perspiratidnem, acc. of *per-
spiratio, not given in Lewis’s Dict., but regularly formed from
perspirare, to breathe or respire all over.—L. per, through; and
spirare, to breathe ; see Per- and Spirit. Der. perspirat-or-y ;
also perspire, verb, answering to L. perspirare.

PERSUADE, to prevail on, convince by advice. (F.—L.)
Common in Shak., Meas. for Meas, i. 2. 191; perswade in Palsgrave.
— F. persuader, ‘to perswade;’ Cot.—L.perstiadére (pp. persudsus),
to persuade, advise thoroughly.—L. ger, thoroughly; and suadére,
to advise ; see Per- and Suasion. Der. persuad-er; also (from
Pp. persuasus) persuas-ible, from F. persuasible, ‘ perswasible,’ Cot. ;
persuasible-ness, persuasibili-ty; also persuas-ion, Temp. ii. 1. 235,
Skelton, Garland of Laurel, 1. 34, from F. persuasion, ‘ perswasion,’
Cot. ; persuas-ive, from F. persuasif, ‘ perswasive,’ Cot. ; persuas-ive-ly,
persuas-ive-ness.

PERT, forward, saucy. (F.—L.) In Shak. it means ‘lively,
alert, L.L.L. v. 2. 272. ‘ Perte, saucy,’ Palsgrave, p. 320. ME. pert,
which, however, has two meanings, and two sources; and the mean-
ings somewhat run into one another. 1. In some instances, pert is
certainly a corruption of apert, and pertly is used for ‘ openly’ or
“evidently ;’ see Will. of Palerne, 4930, also 53, 96, 156, 180, &c.
In this case, the source is the F. apert, open, evident, from L. apertus,
pp. of aperire, to open; see Aperient. 2. But we also find
‘proud and pert,’ Chaucer, C. T. 3948 (A 3950) ; ‘stout he was and
pert, Li Beaus Disconus, 1. 123 (Ritson). This is likewise short for
F. apert, better spelt appert, ‘ expert, ready, prompt, active, nimble,’
Cot.; OF. appert, aspert (Godefroy); from L. expertus, expert; see
Expert. y. It is the latter sense that now prevails. See Mala-
pert. Der. pert-ly, Temp. iv. 58; pert-ness, Pope, Dunciad, i. 112.

PERTATN, to belong. (F.—L.) ME. partenen, Will. of Palerne,
1419; Wyclif, John;.x. 13. Not a common word.—OF. partenir,
to pertain; in Godefroy and Burguy, but not in Cotgrave. (It
seems to have been supplanted by the comp. apartenir ; see Apper-
tain.) —L. pertinére, to pertain. See Pertinent.

PERTINACITY, obstinacy. (F.—L.) Phillips, ed. 1706,
gives both pertinacity and pertinacy ; Minsheu, ed. 1627, has only the
latter form, which is the commoner one in old authors, though now
disused. Pertinacity is from F. pertinacité, omitted by Cotgrave,
but occurring in the 15th century (Godefroy). Pertinacy is from F.
pertinace, cited by Minsheu, but not found in Cotgrave or Littré.
B. Pertinacity is a coined word; pertinacy (F. pertinace) is from L.
pertinacia, perseverance.=L. pertindci-, for pertinax, very tenacious.
—L. per-, very; and tenax, tenacious, from tenére, to hold. See
Per- and Tenable. Der. pertinaci-ous, Milton, Apology for
Smectymnuus (R.), a coined word, to represent L. pertinax, just as
perspicacious represents perspicax ; pertinacious-ly, -ness.

PERTINENT, related or belonging to. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Wint. Tale, i. 2. 221.—F. pertinent, ‘ pertinent ;’ Cot.—L. pertinent-,
stem of pres. part. of pertinére, to belong. —L. per-, thoroughly ;
and ¢enére, to hold, cling to; see Per- and Tenable. Der. perii-
nent-ly, pertinence; and see pertinacity.

PERTURB, to disturb greatly. (F.—L.) ME. perturben,
Chaucer, C. T. 908 (A 906).—F. perturber, ‘to perturb, disturb ;’
Cot.—L. perturbare, to disturb greatly.—L. per, thoroughly; and
turbare, to disturb, from ¢urba, a crowd. See Per- and Turbid.
Der. perturb-at-ion, spelt perturbacyon, Bp. Fisher, On the Seven
Psalms, Ps. 38, ed. Mayor (E. E. T.S.), p. 53, 1. 21, from F. per-
zurbation (Cot.), which is from L. acc. perturbationem.

PERUKE, an artificial head of hair. (F.—Ital.—L.) The same
word as periwig, which, however, is a corrupt form of the word ; see
Periwig. For the form peruke, R. refers toa poem by Cotton to
John Bradshaw, 1. 185; and Todd refers to Bp. Taylor, Artificial
Handsomeness, p. 44 ; and Cooper’s Lat. Dict. (1565) has : ‘ Capilla-
mentum, A false perruke. =F. perrugue, ‘a lock of haire;’ Cot.
=Ital. parrucca, MItal. parucca, ‘a periwigge, Florio; who also
gives the form perucca. B. The same word with Span. peluca, a
wig, Port. peruca; Littré also cites Sardinian pilucea, and other
forms. The key to the etymology is in remembering the frequent
interchange of r and/; the true forms are those with /, such as Span.
peluca, Sardinian pilucca, These are closely related to Ital. piluccare,
now used in the sense ‘to pick a bunch of. grapes,” but formerly ‘ to
pick or pull out haires or feathers one by one;’ Florio. y- The
true old sense of pilucca was probably ‘a mass of hair separated
from the head,’ thus furnishing the material for a peruke. Cf. also
Ital. pelluzo, very soft down, MItal. pellucare, pelucare, ‘to plucke
off the haires or skin of anything, to pick out haires;* Florio. Also
F. peluche, ‘shag, plush,’ Cot.; see Plush. 5. The MItal.
pelucare and Sard. piluccq ave formed (by help of a dimin. suffix


PERUSE


-ucca) from Ital. pel-o, hair. = L. pilum, acc. of pilus, a hair. Doublets,

eriwig, wig’, .

PERUSE, to examine, read over, survey. (Hybrid; L. and F.
—L.) InShak. in the sense ‘ to survey, examine,’ Com. Errors, i. 2.
13; also ‘to read,’ Merch. Ven. ii. 4. 39. ‘That I perused then;’
G. Turbervile, The Louer to Cupid for Mercy, st.12. ‘ Thus hanynge
perused the effecte of the thirde booke, I will likewise peruse the
fourth ;” Bp. Gardiner, Explication, &c., Of the Presence, fol. 76
(R.). ‘To peruse, peruti;’ Levins, ed. 1570, And see Skelton,
Phyllyp Sparowe, 1. 814. B. The older senses of the word are
nearer to the etymology. Thus, in the Naval Accounts of Henry
VII (1485-8), p. 57, there are notes of a ship’s fittings that were
“spent and perused,’ i.e. used up, ‘in a voiage into Lumbardye.’
Fitzherbert, in his Husbandry, § 131, 1.15 (EZ. D.S.) has a similar
usage. In giving directions for stacking faggots, he shows how to
lay them in courses ‘and so to peruse them [go through with them],
tyll thou haue layd all up;’ which shows a truer use of the word.
So also in § 124, 1.35. In § 40, 1. 23, a shepherd is bidden to peruse
all his sheep, i.e. to examine them separately, ‘tyll he haue doone.’
See also § 30, 1. 7. -y. A coined word; from Per- and Use. L.;
in imitation of OF. paruser, ‘ user entierement, achever, consommer;’
Godefroy. He quotes: ‘ paruser sa vie en seureté,’ to lead his life in
safety. The difficulty lies solely in the change of sense. The old
sense seems to have been ‘to go through one by one,’ and so to
‘use up (things) till all were done with.’ Thus, in Cavendish’s Life
of Wolsey, p. 36, some maskers paid certain compliments to all the
ladies in turn, thus ‘ perusyng all the ladys and gentylwomen ;’ and
again, at p. 65, a certain choir was directed to use a particular set of
words in a litany; ‘and so perused the lettany thoroughe.’ It may
further be noted that compounds with per were once far more com-
mon than they are now. I can instance peract, Dr. Henry More,
Poems (Chertsey Worthies’ Library), p. 133, 1. 31 5 perdure, perfixt,
perplanted, perquire, persway, all in Halliwell; perscrute, pertract,
Andrew Borde, Introduction of Knowledge, ed. Furnivall, p. 144,
1. 32, p. 264, 1. 25; pervestigate, pervigilate, both in Minsheu; per-
action, perarate, percruciate, perduction, perendinate, perfilation, perfre-
tation, perfriction, perfusion, pergraphical, perpession, perplication,
perside, perstringe, perterebrate, pervagation, all in Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. Der. perus-al, Hamlet, ii. 1. go.

PERV ADH, to penetrate, spread through. (L.) ‘ Pervade, to go
over or through;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.—L. peruddere, to go through.
—L. per, through; and wddere, to go, allied to E. wade. See Per-
and Wade, Der. per-vas-ive (rare), like the pp. perudsus, Shen-
stone, Economy, pt. iii.

PERVERT, to turn aside from the right, to corrupt. (F.—L.)
ME. peruerten (with u for v), Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, bk. ii. pr. 1.
1. 9.—F. pervertir, ‘to pervert, seduce;’ Cot.—L. peruertere, to
overturn, ruin, corrupt (pp. peruersus).—L. per, thoroughly; and
uertere, to turn; see Per- and Verse. Der. pervert-er; also per-
verse, Fabyan’s Chron. vol. i. c. 112, in the description of Brune-
chieldis, from F. pervers, * perverse, cross’ (Cot.), which from L. pp.
peruersus; hence perverse-ly, perverse-ness, pervers-i-ty, pervers-ion.
Also pervert-ible.

PERVICACIOUS, wilful, obstinate. (L.) ‘Why should you
be so pervicacious now, Pug?’ Dryden, Kind Keeper, A. ii. sc. 2 (ed.
Scott). Coined by adding -ous to peruicaci-, from peruicax, wilful,
stubborn; allied to peruicus, stubborn. B. Perhaps from jer-,
thoroughly, and the base wi-, weak grade of wi-, as seen in wi-ci,
pt. t. of uincere, to conquer (Bréal). See Per- and Victor.

PERVIOUS, penetrable. (L.) In Dryden, tr. of Ovid, Meleager,
1, 146. Borrowed directly from L. peruius, passable, by change of
-us to -ous, as in arduous, &c.—L. per, through; and wia, a way;
hence, ‘ affording a passage through.’ See Per- and Voyage. Der.
pervious-ly, -ness.

PESETA, a silver coin of modern Spain. (Span.—L.) Worth
2 silver reals, or about 93d.—Span. peseta; dimin. of pesa, a weight,
allied to peso, a weight, a Span. dollar. Peso is from L. pensum, a
portion weighed ont to spinsters. = L, pensus, pp. of pendere, to weigh;
see Poise.

PESSIMIST, one who complains of everything as being for the
worst. (L.) Modern; not in Todd’s Johnson. Formed with suffix
-ist (=L. -ista, from Gk. -corns) from L. pessim-us, worst. [So also
optim-ist from optim-us, best.] B. Pessimus is connected with comp.
péior, worse; see IMpair. Brugmann, ii. § 73.

PEST, a plague, anything destructive or unwholesome, (F.—L.)
‘The hellish pest;’ Milton, P. L. ii. 735.—=F. peste, ‘the plague, or
pestilence ;’ Cot, —L. pestem, acc. of pestis, a deadly disease, plague.
Der. pest-house; pesti-ferous, Sir T. Elyot, The Governor, b. i. c. 4.
§ 2, Englished from L. pestiferus (the same as pestifer), from pesti-,
for pestis, and -fer, bringing, from ferre, to bring, cognate with E.
Bear (1); also pesti-lent, q. v:


PETARD


PESTER, to encumber, annoy. (F.—L.) The old sense is to
‘encumber’ or ‘clog.’ ‘Neither combred wyth ouer greate multitude,
nor pestered with to much baggage ;’ Brende, tr. of Q. Curtius, fol. 23 b
(1592). ‘ Pestered [crowded | with innumerable multitudes of people;’
North’s Plutarch (in Shakespeare’s Plutarch, ed. Skeat, p. 175).
Hence pesterous, cumbersome, in Bacon, Life of Hen. VII, ed. Lumby,
p- 196, 1. 29 (wrongly explained as pestiferous). A shortened form of
impester, by loss of the first syllable, as in the case of fence for defence,
sport for disport, story for history, &c. Cotgrave explains the F. pp.
empestré as ‘ impestered, intricated, intangled, incumbered.’ = MF. em-
pestrer, to ‘pester, intricate, intangle, trouble, incumber.’ Mod. F.
empétrer. B. ‘ Empétrer signifies properly to hobble a horse while
he feeds afield, and depétrer is to free his legs from the bonds. These
words come from the medieval L. pastorium, a clog for horses at
pasture. Pastorium (derived through pastum from pascere, to feed) is
common in this sense in the Germanic laws : ‘ Si quis in exercitu ali-
quid furaverit, pastorium, capistrum, frenum, &c. (Lex Bavar. tit. II.
vi. 1). So also inthe Lex Longobard. tit. I. xx. 5: ‘Si quis pastorium
de caballo alieno tulerit ;’ Brachet. y. Thus empestrer represents
Late L.* impastéridre, regularly formed from 2, prep., and pastérium, a
clog. Pastoriumis a derivative from pastus, pp. of pascere, to feed, in-
ceptive form froma base pa-;see Pastor.  Unconnected with pest;
but connected with Pastern, q. v.

PESTIFEROUS; see under Pest.

PESTILENT, bringing a plague, hurtful to health or morals.
(F.—L.) In Hamlet, ii. 2.315. [The sb. pestilence is much older ;
ME. pestilence, P. Plowman, B. v. 13.])—F. pestilent, ‘pestilent,
plaguy;’ Cot.=L. pestilent-, stem of pestilens, unhealthy; we also
find an old rare form pestilentus. B. Pestilens is formed as a pres.
part. from a verb *pestilére not in use, but founded on the adj. pescilis,
pestilential, This adj. is formed with suffix -li- from fes¢i- decl.
stem of pestis, a plague; see Pest. Der. pestilence, sb. (as above),
from F. pestilence<L. pestilentia; pestilent-ly, pestilent-i-al.

PESTLB#, an instrument for pounding thingsina mortar. (F.—L.)
ME. pestel, Tale of Gamelyn; 1.122. ‘Pestel, of stampynge, Pila,
pistillus, pistellus;? Prompt. Parv.—OF. pestel (Godefroy), later
pesteil, a pestle or pestell ;’ Cot. =—L. pistillum, a pestle; regularly
formed, as a dimin. of an unused sb. *pistrum, from pistum, supine of
pinsere, to pound, rarely spelt pisere. See Pistil, Piston.

PET (1), a tame and fondled animal, a child treated fondly. (F. ?)
‘The love of cronies, petts, and favourites ;’ Tatler, no. 266, Dec. 21,
17io. Cf. also peat, as in Shak. Tam, Shrew, i. 1. 78. ‘ Pretty
peat ;’? Gascoigne, Flowers, Hir Question ; Works, ed. Hazlitt, i. 48.
Ray (A.D. 1691) calls pet a North-country word, and explains a pee-
lamb as ‘a cade lamb.’ [Cf. Irish peat, sb. a pet, adj. petted ; Gael.
peata, a pet, a tame animal; borrowed from EF.) Of uncertain
origin. Perhaps suggested by MF. peton, ‘a little foot, the slender
stalke of a leafe ; mon peton, my pretty springall, my gentle imp (any
such flattering or dandling phrase, bestowed by nurses on their
suckling boies) ;? Cot. Used by Rabelais; see Hatzfeld. Usually
considered as a derivative of F. pied, a foot; from L. ped-em, acc. of
pes, a foot. Cf. also F. petiot, a dear little child (Godefroy) ;
Norm, dial. petiot (Moisy) ; andsee Petty. Der. pet, verb; pett-ed;
and probably pet (2), q. v-

PET (2), a sudden fit of peevishness. (F.?) ‘Ina pet of tem-
perance;’ Milton, Comus, 721. Shak. has pettish, adj., i.e. capri-
cious, Troil. ii. 3. 139; spelt petish, Levins. There was also an old
phrase ‘to take the pet,’ or ‘to take pet.’ Cotgrave translates F.
se mescontenter de by ‘to take the fet, to be ill satished with.’ The
simplest and most probable derivation is from Pet (1), q.v. <A pet
is a spoilt child; hence pettish, capricious ; to take the pet, to act like
a spoilt child; whence, finally, the sb. ef in its new sense of
‘capricious action’ or peevishness. Der. pett-ish, pett-ish-ly, pett-
ish-ness.

PETAL, a flower-leaf; part of a corolla. (Gk.) ‘ Petala, among
herbalists, those fine coloured leaves of which the flowers of all
plants are made up;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Here petala is the Greek
plural form, showing that the word was taken from the Greek
immediately.—Gk. wéradov (pl. wérada), a leaf; properly neut. of
mérados, spread out, broad, flat. Méra-Aos is formed with suffix
-hos from the base we7- (whence also wet-dvvupi, I spread out). Cf.
L. patulus, spreading, pat-ére, to lie open, be spread out.—4/PET,
to spread out; see Fathom, Der. petal-oid.

PETARD, a war-engine, a case filled with explosive materials.
(F.—L.) In Hamlet, iii. 4. 207; spelt pefar in the quarto edd, of
Hamlet, and by all editors down to Johnson. Cotgrave has both
petard and petarre.—F. petart, petard, ‘a petard or petarre; an
engine , , wherewith strong gates are burst open.’ Lit. ‘explosive.
Formed with suffix -art or -ard (of Germanic origin, from G, hart,
hard, Brachet, Introd. § 196) from the verb peter, to break wind. =
F, pet, a breaking wind, slight explosion.=L, péditum, a breaking


445,


446 PETIOLE


wind.=L. péditus, pp. of pédere (contracted from *pezdere), to break
wind. See Brugmann, i. § 857. 4 The E. form petar arose from
the fact that the OF. pl. of petard was petars.

PETIOLE,, the footstalk of a leaf. (F.—L.) Modern; botanical.
=F. pétiole, a petiole. =L. petiolum, acc. of petiolus, a little stem or
stalk. Usually considered as a derivative of L. pés, a foot.

PETITION, a prayer, supplication. (F.—L.) ME. peticion,
petition; Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 313, 1. 18.—F. petition,
“a petition ;’ Cot.—L. petitidnem, acc. of petitio, a suit ; cf. petitus,
pp. of petere, to attack, ask; orig. to fall on.—4/PET, to fly, fall;
whence also E. feather; see Feather, Impetus. Der. petition,
vb., petition-ar-y, petition-er, petition-ing.

PETREL, PETEREL, a genus of ocean-birds. (F.—G.—
L.—Gk.) For the form peterel, see Todd. ‘The petrel is a Bird
not much unlike a Swallow. They fly sweeping like Swallows, and
very near the water;” W. Dampier, A New Voyage, iii. 97. The
spelling petrel is also used in a translation of Buffon’s Nat. Hist.,
London, 1792, where we are told that the stormy petrels ‘ sometimes
hover over the water like swallows, and sometimes appear to run on
the top of it;’ vol. ii. p. 128. From the latter peculiarity they take
their name.—F. pétrel (sometimes pétérel); Littré cites a letter
written by Buffon, dated 1782, who gives his opinion that pétrel
is a better spelling than pétérel, because the derivation is from the
name Peter, which is pronounced, he says, as Pétre. (The usual F.
word for Peter is Pierre.) B. Thus pétrel is formed as a diminutive
of Pétre or Peter; and the allusion is to the action of the bird, which
seems to walk on the sea, like St. Peter. The G. name Petersvogel
(lit. Peter-fowl = Peter-bird) gives clear evidence as to the etymology.
=G. Peter.—L. Petrus, Peter. = Gk. Mézpos, a rock; a name given to
the apostle by Christ; see John i. 42, in the orig. Gk. text. See

etrify. 4 The F. Pétre was prob. borrowed from G. Peter, not
from the L. directly. Or the F. word may have been borrowed
from E.; in which case E. petrel is from L. Petrus.

PETRIPFY, to turn into stone. (F.—Gk. and L.) Properly
transitive ; also used intransitively. ‘ When wood and many other
bodies do petrify;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, bk. ii. c. 1. § 3.—
F. petrifier, ‘to make stony;’ Cot. Formed as if from L. *petri-
jicare, a coined word, to make stony. = L. petri-, for petra, a rock,
and -ficare, for facere, tomake. B. The L. petra is merely borrowed
from Gk. mérpa, a rock; cf. Gk. mérpos, a mass of rock, a stone.
Der. petrifact-ion, as if from a L. pp. *petrifactus, but the older word
is petrification, from F. petrification, ‘a petrification, a making stony’
(Cot.) ; petrifact-ive; also petrific, adj., Milton, P.L. x. 294.

PETROLEUM, rock-oil. (L.—Gk.) Minsheu, ed. 1624,
explains petrol or petroleum as ‘a kind of marle or chaulky clay ;’
this is the same word, differently applied. Coined from L. petr-,
for petra, a rock, a word borrowed from Gk. mérpa; and L. oleum,
oil, from Gk. édaov, oil. See Petrify and Oil. Cooper’s
Thesaurus (1565) has the form fetroleon. @ There is a curious
mention of rock-oil in Plutarch’s Life of Alexander; see North’s
Plutarch, ed. 1631, p. 702.

PETRONED, a large horse-pistol. (F.—L.)
then are called petronels ;? Gascoigne, Weedes; The Continuance of
the Author, upon the Fruite of Fetters, st. 7; Works, ed. Mazlitt,
i. 408. Spelt petrionel, in Ben Jonson, Every Man, ed. Wheatley,
iii. 1 ; some edd. have petronel.— MF. petrinal, ‘ a petronell, or horse-
man’s piece;’ Cot. B. Wedgwood remarks that they are said to
have been invented in the Pyrenees ; Godefroy gives also poictrinal
(1585), and says that it was fired by resting the butt-end against
the chest (so also Fairholt). Cf. MlItal. pietranelli, ‘ souldiers
serving on horseback, well armed with a pair of cuirasses and
weaponed with a fire-locke-piece or a snaphance or a petronell;’
Florio. From OF. peitrine, poitrine, the chest, allied to AF. peitral,


a poitrel; both are from L. pector-, for *pectos, stem of pectus, the |


breast; see Poitrel.

PETTO, the breast. (Ital.—L.) In the phr. iz petto, within the
breast, in secret. Ital. petto, breast. L. pectus, breast.

PETTY, small, insignificant. (F.—C.) Common in Shak.;
see Merch. Ven. i. 1.12, &c. ME. petit, P. Plowman, B. xiv. 242.
—F. petit, ‘little, small, . . meane, petty;’ Cot.
Celtic origin ; Diez connects it with Sardinian piticu, little, Wallachian


pitic, a dwarf, Oltal. pitetto, petitto, Prov. and Catalan petit, Walla- |


chian piti, small, little, &c. All from:a Gaulish stem *pett- = Celtic
*gett-, which occurs again in Piece.
Henry V, iii. 6. 136; petti-coat, i.e. little coat, As You Like It, i.
3. 15 (see Coat); petti-fogger, Marston, The Malcontent, A. i. sc.
6 (R.), spelt pettie fogger in Minsheu, ed..1627, whence prov. E.
fog, to hunt in a servile manner, to flatter for gain, used by
Dekker (Halliwell), equivalent to MDu. focker, ‘a monopole, or
an engrosser of wares and commodities,’ Hexham; and focker is
prob, a corruption of the surname Fugger, Englished as fogger


‘Their peeces_


B. Perhaps of


Der. petti-ly; petti-ness, |


PHALANX


(N.E.D.). Also petti-toes, usually pig’s trotters, sometimes human


feet (jocularly), as in Shirley, Maid’s Revenge, iv. 1; see below.
| PETTITORS, pig’s trotters. (F.—C. and L.) Understood as
petty-toes, whence the present sense (see end of last article). But
this is popular etymology. It formerly meant giblets or garbage
(see N. E. D.)—MF. petitose, ‘garbage of fowls,’ Cot.; pl. of
petitoye, the same, Palsgrave, p. 224 ; petite oye, the same, Cot. (s. v.
oye). Here oye (F. oie) is from Late L. auca, a goose ; for L. au’ca,
*aui-ca, from awis, a bird.

PETULANT, peevish. (L.) In Ben Jonson, Epigram 2 (To
My Book), 1. 5.—L. petulant-, stem of petulans, forward, pert,
petulant ; lit. ‘ready to attack in a small way, as it answers to the
form of a pres. part. of *petulare, a dimin. of petere, to attack, seek.
See Petition. Der. petulant-ly; also petulance, from F. petulance,
‘ petulancy,’ Cot. ; petulanc-y.

PETUNIA, a plant or flower; of the order Solanacee. (F.—
Port.—Brazil.) F. pétunia (Hatzfeld). Formed with suffix -ia from
F. petun, MF. petum, ‘tobacco,’ Cot.—Port. petum (Hatzfeld). =
Guarani (Brazil.) petz, tobacco (with nasalized 7); P. Restivo, Vocab.
de la Lengua Guarani.

PEW, an enclosed seat in a church. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. puwe.
‘Yparroked in puwes’ = enclosed in pews ; P. Plowman, C. vii. 144.
Cf. AF. pui, a stage, platform ; in Liber Custumarum, p. 216.—OF.
puie, an elevated place, MF. puye, f., ‘an open and outstanding
terrace or gallery, set on the outside with rails to lean on;’ Cot.
Cf. Span. poyo, a stone-bench near a door, Ital. poggio, a hillock.
[Prob. orig. applied to a raised desk to kneel at.]=L. podia, pl.
of podium, an elevated place, a balcony next the arena, where the
emperor and other distinguished persons sat. [The loss of d and
change of po-ia to OF. puie, are regular.]=—Gk. réé:ov, a little foot ;
whence the senses of footstool, support for the feet, gallery to sit
in, &c., must have been evolved; for there can be no doubt asto the
identity of the Gk. and L. words. = Gk. rodi-, from movs, a foot; with
dimin. suffix -ov. Gk. movs is cognate with E. foot; see Foot. Der.
pew-fellow, Rich. III, iv. 4.58. #7 The Du. puye, ‘a pue’ (Hexham),
is borrowed from MF. puye.

PEWHT, PEEWIT, the lapwing. (E.) ‘ Pewet or Puet, a kind
of bird;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘Een Piewit-vogel, ofte [or] Kiewit,
a puet, or a lap-winckle;’ Hexham’s Du. Dict., ed. 1658. Spelt
puwyt, Skelton, Philip Sparowe, 1. 430. Named from its cry. So
also Du. piewit or hiewit, G. kibitz; Westphal. piwik, piwit. See
Peevish.

PEWTER, an alloy of lead with tin or zinc. (F.—E.?) ME.
pewtir, pewtyr. ‘ Pewtyr, metalle ;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘ Pewter pottes ;’
Lydgate, London Lyckpeny, st. 12. ‘ xij pottes de peutre ;’ Earl of
Derby’s Expeditions, 1390-1, p. 101.—OF. peutre, peautre, piautre,
a kind of metal (Roquefort). Peutre stands, as usual, for.an older
form *peltre; cf. Span. pelire, Ital. peltro, pewter. Diez remarks that
the Italians believe their word peltro was borrowed from England ;
but he rejects this solution, on the ground that the form pewter could
not well become peléro in Italian. The Low L. form is peltrum ; as in
‘ vasorum de peltro,’ York Wills, ii. 146 (1450). The solution is, prob-
ably, that the Ital., Span., and OF. forms have lost an initial s, owing
to the difficulty of sounding the initial sp; and the original word really
does appear in E. in the form spelter. ‘ Spelter, a kind of metall, not
known to the antients, which the Germans call zink ;’ Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674; whence OF. espeautre, espiautre, a kind of metal (Godefroy).
Cf. MDu. peauter or speauter, pewter; Hexham. Zinc and pewter
are often confounded. See Spelter. Der. pewter-er, Prompt.


Piel


PHAETON, a kind of carriage. (F.—L.—Gk.) Properly Phae-
thon, but we took the word from French. Spelt phaéton (trisyllabic)
in Young, Night Thoughts, bk. v. 1. 825.—F. phaéton, a phaeton ;


name.=L. Phaethon,—Gk. &aé0wv, son of Helios, and driver of the
chariot of the sun.—Gk. Pacey, radiant, pres. part. of paédav,
to shine; allied to ¢dev, to shine. —4/BHA, to shine; see
Phantom.

PHALANX, a battalion of troops closely arrayed. (L.—Gk.)
In Minsheu, ed. 1627; and Milton, P. L. i. 550, iv. 979. ‘ This
legion he called the phalanx ;’ Holland, tr. of Suetonius, Nero,
ch. 19.—L. phalanx.—Gk. padayé, a line of battle, battle-array,
a battalion. See Plank. Der. phalanger, a marsupial mammal,
in a tr, of Buffon, i. 292 (1792); named phalanger (F.) by Buffon.
| (see Littré) from the structure of the hind feet; from F. phalange=


occurring in a work written in 1792 (Littré).—F. Phaéthon, proper


PHALLUS


Gk. padayy-, stem of pddayé, the bone between two joints of the
toes. 4 The L. pl. is phalanges.

PHALLOS, an emblem of the generative power in nature,
honoured in Bacchic festivals. (L.—Gk.) ‘Two Phalli;’ Purchas,
Pilgrimage, bk. i. c. 15; p. 79.—L. phallus.=Gk. gaddAds, lit.
membrum virile.--Irish ball, a limb, member; Olrish ball, glossed
‘membrum.’

PHANTASM, a spectre. (F.—L.—Gk.) Phantasme, Minsheu,
ed. 1627. ME. fantesme, Ancren Riwle, p. 62.—OF. fantasme. =
L. phantasma ; see Jul. Ces, ii, 1. 65.—Gk. pavtacpa, a spectre;
see Phantom. Der. phantasm-agoria, lit. a collection of spectres,
as shown by the magic lantern, from Gk. dyopd, an assembly,
collection, which from dyeipev, to assemble. Doublet, phantom.

PHANTASTIC, PHANTASY ; see Fantastic, Fancy.

PHANTOM, a vision, spectre. (F.—L.—Gk.) Partly con-
formed to the Gk. spelling. ME. fantome, Chaucer, C. T. 5457
(B 1037); jfantum, Wyclif, Matt. xiv. 26.—OF. fantosme, MF.
phantosme, ‘a spirit, ghost;’ Cot.={L. phantasma.=—Gk. pdvtacpa,
a vision, spectre, lit. an apparition, appearance.—Gk. pavrd(ey, to
display ; in passive, to appear; cf. the sb. -pavrns, one who shows,
only used in the compounds éepo-payrns, ovKo-payrns ; see Hiero-
phant, Sycophant. —Gk. ¢ay-, as seen in gaivew (=¢pdy-yev) to
show, lit. ‘to cause to shine;’ where gav- is an extended form of
oa-, to shine; cf. ¢dewv, to shine, pdos, light. —4/BHA, to shine;
cf. Skt. dha, to shine. Hence also fan-tas-y (shorter form fancy),
hiero-phant, syco-phant, dia-phan-ous, phen-o-men-on, pha-se, em-phas-
is, phaeton, photograph, phosphorus. See Fancy, Phenomenon,
Phase. Doublet, phantasm.

PHARISEE, one of a religious school among the Jews. (F.—
L.—Gk.—Aramaic.) Partly conformed to Gk. spelling; ME. farisee,
Wyclif, Matt. ix. 11.—OF, pharisee; Godefroy. =L. phariséus, phari-
saeus, Matt. ix. 11 (Vulgate). = Gk. gapicatos, Matt. ix. 11; lit.
‘one who separates himself from men.’=— Aram. Perishin, for Heb.
Periishtm, pl., ‘separated;’ Smith, Dict. of the Bible. Cf. Heb.
parash, to separate. Der. Pharisa-ic, Pharisa-ic-al.

PHARMACY, the knowledge of medicines ; the art of preparing
medicines. (F.—L.—Gk.) Partly conformed to the Gk. spelling.
ME. fermacy, Chaucer, C. T. 2715 (A 2713).—OF. farmacie, later
pharmacie, ‘a curing, or medicining with drugs ;’ Cot. L. pharmacia.
—Gk. gappaxeia, pharmacy.—Gk. pdpyaxov, adrug. . Perhaps
so called from its bringing help; allied to ¢épew, to bear, bring,
cognate with E. bear; see Bear (1); cf. Skt. bhytis, nourishment,
service, from bhy, to bear. Der. pharmac-eu-t-ic, formed with suffix
-ic (Gk, -xos) from gappaxevt-7s, a druggist, which again is formed
with suffix -7ys from dappaxed-ev, to administer a drug, from
pappar-evs, a druggist; hence pharmaceutic-al, pharmaceutic-s. Also
pharmaco-peia, from ole, to make, prepare.

PHARYNX, the cavity forming the upper part of the gullet.
(L:—Gk.) In Phillips’ Dict. ed. 1706. —Late L. pharynx ; merely
the Latinized form of the Gk. word. =—Gk. papuyé, the joint opening
of the gullet and windpipe; also, a cleft, a bore; closely allied to
papayé, a chasm, gulley, cleft, ravine, and to papaev, to plough. All
from the base fap-, to bore, cut, pierce, hence, to cleave; allied to L.
forare and E. bore. —4/BHAR, to bore, cut; see Bore (1).

PHASE, PHASIS, an appearance; a particular appearance of
the moon or of a planet at a given time. (L.—Gk.) The form phase
does not appear to have been borrowed from F. phase, but to have
resulted as an E. singular from the pl. sb. phases, borrowed immedi-
ately from Latin. ‘ Phases, appearances; in astronomy, the several
positions in which the moon and other planets appear to our sight,
&c.;’ Phillips’ Dict., ed. 1706. ‘Phasis, an appearance ;’ Bailey,
vol. ii, 1731. And see Todd’s Johnson, —Late L. phasis, pl. phasés ;
merely the L, form of the Gk. word.—Gk. gdots, an appearance ;
from the base ga-, to shine; cf. pdos, light. —=4/BHA, to shine; see
Phantom. ws The Gk. pacts not only means ‘appearance,’ as
above; but also ‘a saying, declaration,’ in which sense it is connected
with pnt, I speak, declare, from 4/BHA,to speak; see Ban. This
explains the word em-phasis.

PHEASANT, a gallinaceous bird. (F.—L.-Gk.) Now con-
formed to the Gk. spelling as far as relates to the initial pk. Formed
with excrescent ¢ (common after ”, as in tyran-t, ancien-t, parchmen-t)
from ME. fesaun, Will. of Palerne, 183; later form fesaunt, Chaucer,
Parl. of Foules, 357.—AF. fesaunt, Liber Custumarum, p. 304;
OF. faisan, ‘a phesant;’ Cot.—L. phasiaéna, a pheasant; for
Phasiana auis=Phasian bird, where Phasiana is the fem. of Phasianus,
adj.; we also find phasidnus, masc., a pheasant.—Gk. Sacravds, a
pheasant, lit. Phasian, i. e. coming from the river Phasis (@dovs) in
Colchis, B. The river Phasis is now called the Rioni; it flows
from the Caucasus into the Black Sea.

PHENTX, PHOENIX, a fabulous bird. (L.—Gk.) The word


appears very early. Spelt fenix, it is the subject of an AS. poem .


PHIZ 447


extant in the Exeter book; printed in Grein’s Bibliothek, i. 21 Be
This poem is imitated from a L. poem with the same title. —L.
phoenix; Pliny, Nat. Hist. x. 2. 2.—Gk. poimg, a phoenix; see Hero-
dotus, ii, 73, and Smith’s Classical Dictionary. B. The same word
also means Pheenician or Punic (Gk. poimg=L. Piinicus); also,
a palm-tree; also purple-red. @ Littré supposes that the phcenix
was named from its bright colour; and that the colour was so named
because invented by the Phoenicians.

PHENOMENON, a remarkable appearance, an observed result.
(L.—Gk.) Formerly phenomenon, with pl. phenomena, as in Phillips,
ed, 1706.—L. phenomenon, pl. phenomena.—Gk. pawépevor, pl.
gavdpeva, properly the neut. of the pass. part. of ¢aivew, to show
(pass. paivoya, to be shown, to appear). See Phantom. Der.
phenomen-al, a coined adj.

PHEON, the broad barbed head of an arrow. (F.—Teut.?)
Heraldic; spelt feon, Book of St. Alban’s, pt. ii. fol. B 5. Perhaps
for *fleon ; from Late L. fletdnem, acc. of fleto, fletho, an arrow-head
(Ducange). Cf. Du. fits, an arrow.

PHIAL, a small glass vessel or bottle. (F.—L.—Gk.) Formerly
spelt vial, viall, viol; altered to phial (a more ‘learned’ form) in
some mod. edd. of Shakespeare. We find phial as well as vial in
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—MF. phiole, ‘a violl;? Cot.—L. phiala.
— Gk, gidAn, a broad, shallow cup or bowl (applied in F. to a small
bottle). See Vial.

PHILANDER, a lover. (Gk.) ‘You and your Philander !’
Congreve, Way of the World, v. 1. From the use of the name
Philander for a lover, as e. g. in Beaumont and Fletcher’s Laws of
Candy.—Gk. pidavdpos, lit. ‘loving men.’ Gk. gid-eiv, to love;
avdp-, from dvnp, a man.

PHILANTHROPY, love of mankind. (L.—Gk.) Spelt philan-
thropie in Minsheu, ed. 1627. Englished from L. philanthropia. =
Gk. piAavOpwria, benevolence. —Gk. giAdvOpwros, loving mankind. =
Gk. qgud-, for pidos, friendly, kind; and dv@pwros, a man. [The
words philo-sophy, philo-logy show that qA- represents ¢giAos, adj.,
not @iAciv, verb.] See Philosophy and Anthropology. Der.
philanthrop-ic; philanthrop-ist, Young, Night Thoughts, Night 4,
1. 603.
PHILHARMONIC, loving music. (Gk.) Modern; not in
Todd’s Johnson. Coined from Gk. guA-, for pidos, friendly, fond
of; and harmoni-a, Latinised form of Gk. dpyovia, harmony; with
suffix -xos; as if from Gk. giA-appow-nés. See Philosophy and
Harmony.

PHILIBEG, a kilt (Gaelic). See Fillibeg.

PHILIPPIC, a discourse full of invective. (L.—Gk.) In
Minshen, ed. 1627; and in Dryden, tr. of Juvenal, sat. x. 1. 196.—
L. Philippicum, used by Juvenal (Sat. x. 1. 125) in the pl. Philippica,
used to denote the celebrated orations of Demosthenes against Philip.
— Gk. pidermos, a lover of horses; also Philip, a personal name. =
Gk. gid-, for pidos, fond of; and imzos, a horse, cognate with L.
eqguus. See Philosophy and Equine.

PHILOLOGY, the study of languages. (L.—Gk.) In Skelton,
Why Come Ye Nat toCourte, 514. Spelt philologie in Minsheu, ed.
1627; and in Chaucer, C. T., E1734. Englished from L. philologia,
= Gk. giAodozia, love of talking; hence, love of learning and litera-
ture. = Gk. ¢rAdAoyos, fond of talking ; also a student of language and
history. Gk. ¢ido-, for ¢idos, fond of ; and Adyos, discourse, from
Aéyev, to speak. See Philosophy and Legend. Der. philologi-
c-al, philologi-c-al-ly; philolog-ist.

PHILOMEL, a nightingale. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. Lucrece,
1079.—L. pthiloméla, a nightingale (Virgil). = Gk. é:AounAn, daughter
of Pandion, who was changed into a nightingale.

PHILOSOPHY, love of wisdom, knowledge of the causes of
phenomena, (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. philosophie, Rob. of Glouc. p. 130,
1, 2748; Chaucer, C. T. 297 (A 295). =F. philosophie, ‘ philosophy ;’
Cot. =—L. philosophia. = Gk. pirogodia, love of wisdom. = Gk. giAdco-
gos, lit. loving a handicraft or art; also, a lover of true knowledge.
—Gk. pido-, for pidos, friendly, also, fond of; and co-, base of
a6o-os, skilful, and cogia, skill (see Sophist). Der. philosophi-c,
philosophi-c-al, philosophi-c-al-ly; philosoph-ise, a coined word, spelt
philosophize by Cotgrave, who uses it to translate the F. verb philoso-
pher<L. philosophari, from Gk. piAdocogeiv, to be a philosopher.
Also philosoph-er, ME. philosophre, Chaucer, C. T. 299; here the r is
a needless addition, as the F. word was philosophe, correctly answering
to L. philosophus and Gk. giAdaogos. ;

PHILTRE, a love potion. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627.—F. philtre, ‘an amorous potion;’ Cot.—L. philtrum (Juv. vi.
611).—Gk. $iArpov, a love charm, love potion, drink to make one
love. = Gk. giA-, for pidos, dear, loving ; and suffix -rpov (Idg. -ter),
denoting the agent. : :

PHIZ, face, visage. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘What a furious phiz I have!
Congreve, Old Bachelor, iv. 4 (Belinda). Short for phisnomy (ME.


448 PHLEBOTOMY


jisnomie), spelt phisnamy in Palsgrave; and phisnomy is short for
Physiognomy, q. v.

PHLEBOTOMY, blood-letting. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt phle-
botomie in Minsheu, ed. 1627; flabotomye in Dictes and Sayings, pr.
by Caxton, fol. 17, 1. 10.—F. phlebotomie, ‘ phlebotomy, blood-
letting;’ Cot.—L. phlebotomia.—Gk. pdreBoropia, blood-letting, lit.
cutting of a vein. = Gk. ¢A«Bo-, from PAéy, a vein ; and ropés, cutting.
B. The sb. prep is from PAéev, to gush, overflow, from the base
pare-, allied to L. flére, to weep. Brugmann, ii. § 590. y. For Gk.
Tépvev, see Tome. And see Fleam.,

PHLEGM, slimy matter in the throat, sluggishness, indifference.
(F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt flegme in Cotgrave. R. quotes from Ar-
buthnot, On Aliments, c. 6: ‘Phlegm among the ancients signified
a cold viscous humour, contrary to the etymology of the word, which
is from gAéyev, to burn ; but amongst them there were two sorts of
phlegm, cold and hot.’ The use of the word was due to the supposed
influence of the four ‘humours,’ which were blood, choler, phlegm,
and gall; phlegm causing a dull and sluggish temperament. Chaucer,
C. T. 625, has satuceflem, a word formed from L. salsum phlegma, salt
phlegm.—F. phlegme, ‘flegme;’ Cot.—L. phlegma.—Gk. préypa,
base pAeyuar-, (1) a flame, (2) inflammation, (3) phlegm.—Gk.
paréyev, to burn. BP. Gk. préypa (from pdreéyer) is allied to L.
jflamma (for *flagma, from the base flag- in flagrare, to burn). Thus
phlegm is almost a doublet of flame. See Flame, Flagrant. Der.
phlegmat-ic, misused by Mrs. Quickly in Merry Wives, i. 4. 79, from
the Gk. adj. preypartixés, from the base pAeypar-; phlegmat-ic-al,
phlegmat-ic-al-ly.

PHLOX, the name of a flower. (Gk.) It means ‘ flame,’ from
its colour. In Phillips, ed. 1706.—Gk. pddg, a flame.— Gk. pdoy-,
and grade of $Aey-, as in pA€éyev, to burn; see Phlegm.

PHOCINE, pertaining to the seal family of mammals. (L.—
Gk.) Scientific.—L. phoca, a seal. —Gk. pw«n, a seal; Homer, Od.
iv. 404,

PHOENIX, the same as Phenix, q. v.

. PHOLAS, a mollusc that makes holes in stones. (Gk.) Modern.

=Gk. gwdas, lurking in a hole; allied to ¢wAeds, a lurking-hole,
a den. From a stem *bhdl-, for *bhdu-l-, where *bhou- is allied to
Teut. *bau-, whence G. bau-en, to live, and AS, bii-an, to live; see
Booth. (So Prellwitz.)

PHONETIC, representing sounds. (Gk.) Modern ; not in Todd’s
Johnson; the science of sounds was formerly called phonics, spelt
phonicks in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1706.—Gk. gwvntixds, belonging to
speaking.=— Gk. pwvé-w, I produce a sound.=—Gk. gery, a sound;
formed with suffix -vy (Idg. -n@) from ¢w-, allied by gradation to $7-
in ¢npi, I speak. =4/BHA, tospeak; whence also E. ban. See Ban.
Der. phonetic-al, phonetic-al-ly; also, from sb. @wvn, phon-ics (as
above); phono-graphy, from ypapew, to write; phono-graph, phono-
graph-er, phono-graph-ic, phono-graph-ic-al ; also phono-logy, from
-Aoyia, a discourse, from Aéyev, to speak; phono-type, phono-typ-y.
Also, from Gk. @wyv7, anthem =anti-phon.

PHOSPHORUS, a yellowish wax-like substance, of inflam-
mable nature. (L.—Gk.) In Phillips, ed. 1706. Discovered in 1667
(Haydn). ‘The very phosphorus of out hemisphere’; Congreve,
Double-Dealer, ii, 1 (Lady Froth). =—L. phosphorus. — Gk. pwapdpos,
bearing, bringing, or giving light.—Gk. gas, light, equivalent to
aos, light, from the base ¢a-, to shine; and -dopos, bringing, from
pépev, to bring. From 4/BHA, to shine; and 4/BHER, to bring,
bear. With Gk. ¢$@s, cf. Irish ban, white; and see Bale-fire.
Der. phosphor-ic, phosphor-ous, phosphur-et, phosphur-et-ted, phosphor-
esc-ence,

PHOTOGRAPHY, the art of producing pictures by the
action of light. (Gk.) Modern; Fox ‘albot’s photographs took
the place of the old Daguerrotypes about 1839 (Haydn).—Gk. gwro-,
decl, stem of ¢és, light; and ypad-ewv, to write (hence, to produce
impressions), The Gk. és is equivalent to a-os, light (above).
Der. photograph, short for photographed picture ; photograph-ic,
photograph-er. So also photo-meter, an instrument for measuring the
intensity of light; see Metre.

PHRASE, part of a sentence, a short sentence, (F.—L.—Gk.)
Frequent in Shak. Merry Wives, i. 1. 151, i. 3. 33, &c.—F. phrase,
not in Cotgrave, but cited in Minsheu ; Littré cites the spelling frase
in the 16th century.—L. phrasis.—Gk. ppaots, a speaking, speech,
phrase.=Gk. ppafeav (=¢pab-yev), to speak. B. The Gk. base
pa6- is probably allied to Irish bard, a poet; see Bard. Cf. Gk.
«ppad-ns, shrewd. Der. phrase, vb., Hen. VIII, i. 1. 343 phrase-less,
Shak. Lover’s Complaint, 226; phrase-o-logy, Spectator, no. 616,
a strange compound, ‘in which the o is inserted to fill out the word,
and conform it to other words in -o-logy; phrase-o-logi-c-al. Also
antiphrasis, para-phrase, peri-phrasis.


PHRENOLOGY, the science of the functions of the mind. (Gk.)


* Phrenology, a compound term of modern formation, in very common


PHY TOID


use, but not very clearly explained by those who employ it;’
Richardson. = Gk. ppevd-, decl. stem of ppv, the mind; and -Aoyia,
from Adyos, a discourse, which from Aéyev, to speak. Der. phreno-
logi-c-al, phrenolog-ist.

PHTHISIS, consumption of the lungs. (L.—Gk.) In Phillips,
ed. 1706, [The disease was formerly called ‘the phthisick,’ as in
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. This is an adjectival form, from L.
phthisica (passio), fem. of phthisicus= Gk. p@torxds, consumptive. The
difficulty of sounding phth was easily got over by the substitution of
¢ for the compound sound; hence Phillips has ‘ Phthisis, the phthisick
or ¢issick ;” and it is still called ‘ the tizic.’ The spelling ¢ysyk occurs
as early as in Hampole, Pricke of Conscience, 7o1. So also Ital.
tisica, Span. tisica, tisis, consumption. Milton speaks of ‘a broken-
winded ¢izzic ;’ Animadversions on the Remonstrants’ Defence (R.).]
= L. phthisis. = Gk. pOio1s, consumption, a decline, decay. = Gk. pie,
to decay, wane, dwindle. The Gk. $@ answers to Skt. ksh, and
poiav is allied to Skt. kshi, to destroy, whence pp. kshita-, decayed,
and kshitis=0io1s; Curtius, ii. 370. Brugmann, i. §:652. Der.
phthisi-c, phthisi-c-al.

PHYLACTERY, a charm, amulet, esp. among the Jews, a slip
of parchment inscribed with four passages from scripture. (F.—L.—
Gk.) Spelt philaterie in Tyndall’s version, A.D. 1526; ME. filaterie,
Wyclif, Matt. xxiii. 5.—OF. filatere, filatiere, forms given in Littré,
s. Vv. phylactére ; Cotgrave spells it phylacterie. [The c, omitted in
Wyclif and Tyndall, was afterwards restored.]=—L. phylactérium,
Sylactérium. = Gk, pudAakrnptoy, a preservative, amulet; Matt. xxiii. 5.
= Gk. guAakrnp, a guard, watchman.—Gk. puddacoey (fut. puddtw,
from vAak-), toguard. Cf. pvAagf, a watchman, guard.

PHYLLOPHOROUS, leaf-bearing. (Gk.) Modern. = Gk. puaA-
Aopdpos, bearing leaves. Gk. puAdo-, for puAdor, a leaf; pop-, and
stem of pep-, as in pépev, to bear, cognate with E. bear(1).  B. Gk.
gvAdov=L. folium, a leaf.. The prefix phyllo- occurs in many
scientific words, as in phyllo-xera, the insect that attacks grapes, lit.
‘leaf-drying ’ or ‘ leaf-withering,’ from Gk. énp-ds, dry.

PHYSIC, the art of healing diseases ; hence, a remedy for disease.
(F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Throw physic to the dogs ;’ Macb. v. 3. 47. ‘A
doctor of phisike ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 413. Spelt jistke, Seven Sages, ed.
Weber, 186.—OF. phisike, phisique. ‘ Phisique est une science par le
[la] quele on connoist toutes les manieres du cors de ’homme, et par
le quele on garde le [la] santé du cors et remue les maladies; ’
Alebrant, fol. 2 (13th cent.; cited in Littré). In Cotgrave’s time, the
word had a more ‘learned’. meaning; he gives ‘ Physique, naturall
philosophy,’ and ‘ Physicien, a naturall philosopher. =—L. physica,
physicé, natural science. — Gk. @vowng, fem. of puorkds, natural, physi-
cal.= Gk, gvot-, for gvois, nature, essence of a thing; with suffix
-xos, PB. Gk. pvois=*pv-71s, formed with suffix -71s (Idg. -t#-) from
the base ¢u- appearing in ¢vev, to produce, also, to grow, wax. =
7 BHEU, to grow, to be; whence also Skt. bhu, to be, L. fore, and
E. be. See Be. Der. physic, verb, As You Like It, i. 1. 92;
physic-s, physic-al, physic-al-ly, physic-ist. Also physic-i-an, ME. fisi-
cian, fisicien, spelt ficicion in King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 3504, from
OF. physicien, coined as if from L. *physicianus. Also physiognomy,
q: v.; physiology, q. v.53 cf. phytoid.

PHYSIOGNOMY, visage, expression of features. (F.—L.—
Gk.) Lit. ‘the art of knowing a man’s disposition from his features ;”
but frequently used as merely equivalent to features or face. Some-
times shortened to phiz, as in Congreve, The Old Bachelor, iv. 4
(Belinda). ME. jfisnomie, visnomie; also fisnamy, fyssnamy. ‘The
fairest of fyssnamy that fourmede was euer;’ Allit. Morte Arthure,
ed. Brock, 3331; cf. l. 1114.—OF. phisonomie, which occurs in the
13th century (Littre); Cotgrave has ‘ Physiognomie, physiognomie,
a guess at the nature, or the inward disposition, by the feature, or
outward lineaments ;’ and he gives physonomie as an old form of the
word. The mod. F. is physionomie. [Observe that, though the g is
now inserted in the word, it is not sounded; we follow the F. pro-
nunciation in this respect.] Cf. Ital. and Span. fisonomia, features,
countenance. Formed as if from a L. *physiognomia, but really
corrupted from a longer form physiogndmonia, which is merely the
L, form of the Gk. word. = Gk. gvatoyvwpovia, the art of reading the
features; for which the shorter form ¢vo.oyvwpia is occasionally
found. Gk. g¢votoyvmpwr, skilled in reading features, lit. judging
of nature.—Gk. gpvovo-, extended from pvor-, from ¢vous, nature ;
and yvwpwv, an interpreter; see Physic and Gnomon, Der.
phiz, physiognom-ist.

PHYSIOLOGY, the science of nature. (F.—L.—Gk.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—F. physiologie, in Cotgrave.—L. physio-
logia.= Gk. pvotodoyia, an inquiry into the nature of things. = Gk.
¢voto-, extended from ¢vat-, from gars, nature; and -Aoyia, a dis-
course, from Adyos, speech, which from Aéyev, to speak. See
Physics and Legend. Der. physiologi-c-al, physiologi-c-al-ly.

PHYTOID, plant-like ; resembling plants. (Gk.) A term


roe eh


PIACULAR


in zoology.—Gk. ¢urd-y, a plant; and ¢f5-os, form, appearance.
Gk. pv-réy (lit. ‘ product’) contains the same base as #v-ots, nature ;


Pirie


PIACULAR, expiatory, or requiring expiation. (L.) Little used
now. Blount, ed. 1694, has both piacular and piaculous.—L. pid-
cularis, expiatory.=L. pidculum, an expiation; formed, with suffixes
-cu-lu-, from pidre, to expiate, propitiate, make holy. L. pius, sacred,
pious ; see Pious, Expiate.

PIANOFORTE, PIANO, a musical instrument. (Ital.—L.)
Generally called piano, by abbreviation. Added by Todd to John-
son’s Dict. Invented A.D, 1717; first made in London, 1766 (Haydn).
So called from producing both soft and loud effects.—Ital. piano,
soft ; and forte, strong, loud. —L. planus, even, level (hence, smooth,
soft) ; and fortis, strong. See Plain and Force (1). Der. pian-ist,
a coined word.

PIASTRE, an Italian coin, (F.—Ital.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Piaster, a
coyn in Italy, about the value of our crown;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674.—F. piastre, in Cot.—Ital. piastra, ‘any kind of plate or leafe
of mettal;’ piastra dargento, ‘a coine or plate of silver used in
Spaine’ (Florio). [But the form of the word is Italian.] Closely
allied to Ital. piastro, ‘a plaister;’ Florio. Cf. also MItal. plasma,
‘a kind of coine or plate of silver in Spaine,’ id. In fact, the word
is a mere variant of Plaster, q.v, The lamina of metal was likened
to a plaster or ‘ flattened piece.’
| PLAZZA, a square surrounded by buildings ; a walk under a roof
supported by pillars. (Ital.—L.) Properly pronounced jiaiza, as
in Italian, with the Ital. vowel-sounds. First in Foxe (1583) ; described
in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, at which time it was applied to the
piazza in Covent Garden. ‘The piazza or market-stead;’ Foxe,
Martyrs, p. 1621, an. 1555 (R.).—Ital. piazza, ‘a market-place, the
chiefest streete or broad way or place in a town;’ Florio. = Folk-L.
*plattea, for L. platea; see Place. Doublet, place.

PIBROCAE, the music of the bag-pipe, a martial tune. (Gaelic
—E.—L.) ‘ Pibrochs or airs ;’ Smollett, Humphrey Clinker, letter
dated Sept. 3. ‘The pibroch resounds, to the piper’s loud number,
Your deeds on the echoes of dark Loch na Garr ;’ Byron, Lachin y
Gair (1807). ‘Pibroch is not a bag-pipe, any more than duet means
a fiddle ;’ Edinb. Review, on the same. = Gael. piobaireachd, ‘ the art
of playing on the bag-pipe, piping; a pipe-tune, a piece of music
peculiar to the bag-pipe,’ &c.—Gael. piobair, a piper. — Gael. piob, a
pipe, a bag-pipe; from E. pipe; see Pipe.

PICA, a kind of printer’s type. (L.) See Pie (1) and (2).

PICADOR, in bull-fighting; a horseman armed with a light
lance. (Span.—Teut.) Span. picador; lit. ‘ pricker ;’ from picar, to
prick; see Piccadill.

PICANINNY, PICCANINNY, a baby, a child, esp. among
the negroes, (Span.) Spelt peekeneenee in Stedman’s Surinam, ii.
258; dimin. of peekeen, small, little. Span. peguefio, small ; allied
to Ital. piccolo, small. Of uncertain origin.

PICCADILL, PICKADILL, a piece set round the edge of
a garment, whether at the top or bottom ; most commonly the collar;
Nares. (¥.—Span.—Tent.) See Piccadell in Nares, ‘ Pickadil, the
round hem, or the several divisions set together about the skirt of a
garment, or other thing, also a kind of stiff collar, made in fashion
of a band ;” Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Also in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—
F, piccadille, picadille ; Cot. explains the pl. piccadilles by ‘ piccadilles,
the several divisions or peeces fastened together about the brimme of
the collar of a doublet.’ The form of the word shows it to be of
Spanish origin; it is formed, with dimin. suffix -illo, from Span.
picado, pp. of picar, to prick, to pierce with a small puncture
(Neuman). Cf. picada, a puncture, incision made by puncture;
picadura, a puncture, an ornamental gusset in clothes (Neuman). =
Span. pica, a pike, a long lance, a word of Teut. origin; see Pike.
Der. Piccadilly, the street so named, according to Blount and Nares ;
first applied to ‘ a famous ordinary near St. James’s.’

PICH, a small copper coin in the E. Indies. (Marathi.) From
Hind. and Marathi paisa, a copper coin, of varying value ; the Com-
pany’s paisa is fixed at the weight of 100 grains, and is rated at 4 to
the ana, or 64 to the rupee; H. H. Wilson, Gloss. of Indian Terms,
p- 389. And see Yule.

PICK, to prick with a sharp-pointed instrument; hence, to peck,
to pierce, to open a lock with a pointed instrument, to pluck, &c. (E.)
The sense ‘ to choose’ or ‘gather flowers’ is due to a niceness of
choice, as if one were picking them out as a bird with its beak. All
the senses ultimately go back to the idea of using a sharply pointed
instrument. ME. pikken, picken, Chaucer, C. T. 14973; in the Six-


PICTURE 449


text edition (B 4157) the Camb. MS. has pikke, where the rest have
pekke. ‘ Get wolde he teteren and pileken mid his bile’ =yet would
tear in pieces and pluck with his bill; where another MS. has pikken
for pileken; Ancren Riwle, p. 84. B. Allied to ME. piken (with one
k), as in ‘to pyken and to weden it,’ P. Plowman, B. xvi. 17; AS.
ptcan, to pick. ‘ And lét him pycan iit his Gagan’ =and caused his
eyes to be picked out; Two Saxon Chronicles, ed. Earle, an. 796,
p. 267. From AS. pic, a point, pike; see Pike. y. Cf. also Icel.
pikka, to pick, to prick ; Du. pikken, to pick ; G. picken, to pick, peck.
{Also Irish piocaim, I pick, pluck, nibble; Gael. pioc, to pick, nip,
nibble; W. pigo, to pick, peck, prick, choose; Corn. piga, to prick,
sting; from E.] Der. pick-er, Hamlet, iii. 2. 348; pick-lock, pick-
pocket, pick-purse, Chaucer, C. T. 1900; also pickax q.v., picket,
q.v., piquet. Also pitch-fork=ME. pykkforke, Prompt. Parv. Perhaps
pick-le, pic-nic. Doublets, peck (1), pitch, verb.

PICKAX, a tool used in digging. (F.—Teut.) A pickax is
not an ax at all, but very different ; the name is an ingenious popular
adaptation of the ME. pikois or pikeys; see my note to P. Plowman,
C. iv. 465. ‘ Pykeys, mattokke;? Prompt. Parv. ‘* Mattok is a
pykeys, Or a pyke, as sum men seys;’ Rob. of Brunne, Handlyng
Synne, 940. The pl. appears as pikoys in the Paston Letters, ed.
Gardner, i. 106; and as pikeyses, Riley, Memorials of London, p. 284.
=—AF. *pikeis; OF. picois, MF. picquois, ‘a pickax;’ Cot.=—OF.
piquer, ‘to prick, pierce, or thrust into;’ Cot.=F. pic, ‘a mason’s
pickax,’ Cot. ; still called ‘a pick’ by English workmen. = Late L.
pica, a pickax ; of Teut. origin; see Pike.

PICKET, a peg for fastening horses; a small outpost. (F.—
Teut.) The sense of ‘outpost’ is secondary, and named from the
picketing of the horses, i.e. fastening them to pegs. Not in early use ;
in Phillips, ed. 1706.—F. piquet, spelt picquet in Cotgrave, who ex-
plains it as ‘a little pickax, also the peg or stick thrust down into
the earth by a surveyor that measures with cord or a chain.’ Dimin.
of pic, a pickax (above). Der. picket, verb. Doublet, piguet.

PICKLE, a liquid in which some eatables are preserved. (E.?)
ME. pikil, pykyl. ‘ Pykyl, sawce, Picula;’ Prompt. Parv. Cf. Du.
pekel, pickle, brine; Low G. pekel, the same (Bremen Worterb.).
B. Origin uncertain ; the old story that pickle took its name from its
inventor, whose name is given as William Beukeler in Pennant’s
British Zoology, vol. iii, and as William Béckel in the Bremen
Worterbuch, is an evident fable; 6 would not thus become ~. By
way of mending matters, the name is turned into Pokel in Mahn’s
Webster, to agree with G. pokel, pickle; but then Pokel will not
answer to the Du. form pekel. y. Wedgwood’s suggestion is pre-
ferable to this, viz. that the word is E., and is the frequentative of the
verb to pick, in the sense ‘ to cleanse,’ with reference to ‘the gutting
or cleansing of the fish with which the operation is begun.’
The prov. E. pickle, to pick, to peck at, is still in use; and the
Prompt. Pary. has: ‘ pykelynge, purgulacio,’ derived from ‘pykyn, or
clensyn, or cullyn owte the onclene, purgo, purgulo, segrego.’ Also
‘pykynge, or clensynge, purgacio.’ See Pick. Der. pickle, sb.,
brine ; whence the phr. a rod in pickle, i.e. a rod soaked in brine
to make the punishment more severe; also ¢o be in a pickle, i.e. in
a mess. 3

PICNIC, an entertainment in the open air, at which each person
contributes some article to the common table. (F.—Teut.) Added
by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. The word found its way into French
as early as 1692 (Ménage), and was then spelt as piquenique. Italso
found its way into Swedish before 1788, as we find in Widegren’s
Swed. Dict. of that date the entry ‘ picknick, an assembly of young
persons of both sexes at a tavern, where every one pays his club,’ i.e.
his share. B. A coined word; from Teut. elements; there can be
little doubt that the first element is MDu. picken, to pick up (as
a bird), to reap; cf. E. pick. y. The latter element is difficult to
explain; in reduplicated words, with riming elements, one of the
elements is sometimes unmeaning, so that we are not bound to find
a sense for it. At the same time, we may, perhaps, assign to nique
the sense of ‘trifle ;? cf. MF. niquet, a knick, snap with the teeth
or fingers [Du. dnikken, to snap], a trifle, matter of small value ;’
Cot. Cf. E. knick-knacks, trifles, spelt nick-nacks in Hotten’s Slang
Dictionary. Indeed Foote calls a picnic a nicknack ; Nabob, Act I;
see Davies, Supp. Glossary.

PICOTEE, a variety of the carnation. (F.—Teut.). Lit. ‘ spotted.’
=F. picoté, spotted; pp. of picoter, to spot.—F. piquer, to prick. =
F. pic, a pickax. Of Teut. origin; see Pike.

PICRIC; as in fpicric acid, used in dyeing. (Gk.) Formed by
adding -ic to Gk. mxp-és, bitter. Allied to Gk. TELKELV, to cut,
shear, and to mouiAos, variegated, AS. fah, variegated (Prellwitz).

PICTURE, a painting, drawing. (L.) ‘The picture of that
lady’s head;’ Spenser, F. Q. ii. 9. 2. Englished (in imitation of
F. peinture, a picture) from L, fictiira, the art of painting, also
a picture, L, pict-us, pp. of pingere, to paint; see Paint. Der.


Gg


f


450 PICUL


pictur-esque, in Johnson’s Dict., ed. 1755, s.v. Graphically, Englished
from Ital. pittoresco, like what is in a picture, where the suffix is the
L. -iseus, Gk. -tcxos, cognate with AS. -isc, E. ish; hence picturesque-
ly, -ness. Also pictor-i-al, Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 24.
§ 2, formed with suffix -al from L. pictori-us, pictorial, from pictori-,
decl. stem of pictor, a painter, allied to pictus, pp. of pingere.

PICUL, the same as Pikul, q. v.

PIDDLE,, to trifle with. (Scand.) ‘ Neuer ceasynge piddelynge
about your bowe and shaftes;’ Ascham, Toxophilus, ed. Arber,
p. 117. Perhaps a weakened form of pitile, to keep picking at, to
trifle with (see E. D. D.) —Swed. dial. pitila, to keep picking at,
frequent. of Swed. pefa, to pick, poke (Rietz). Hence piddling,
paltry, used as an adj.; see E. D. D.

PIE (1), a magpie; mixed or unsorted printer’s type. (F.—L.)
The unsorted type is called pie or pi, an abbreviation of pica; from
the common use of pica-type. It is ultimately the same word as
pie=magpie, as will appear ; see Pie (2). ME. pie, pye, a magpie,
Chaucer, C. T. 10964 (F 650). =F. pie, ‘a pie, pyannat, meggatapy ;’
Cot. (See Magpie.)=L. pica, a magpie. . Doubtless allied to
L. picus, a woodpecker ; and prob. to Skt. pika-, the Indian cuckoo.
Note also Irish pighead, Gael. pigheid, a magpie, Gael. pighid, a robin,
W. pi, pia, piog, piogen, a magpie; from E.orL. Der. pi-ed, varie-
gated like a magpie, L. L. L.v. 2.904; pi-ed-ness, variegation, Wint.
Tale, iv. 4.87 ; and see pie-bald.

PIE (2), a book which ordered the manner of performing the
divine service. (F.—L.) ‘Moreover, the number and hardness of
the rules called the pie;’ Introd.to Book of Common Prayer, 1661.
Here, as in the case of Pie (1), the word pie is a F. form of the L.
pica, which was the old name for the Ordinale: ‘ quod usitato voca-
bulo dicitur Pica, sive directorium sacerdotum,’ Sarum Breviary,
fol. 1, cited in Procter, On the Book of Common Prayer, p. 8. The
name fica, lit. magpie, was perhaps given to these rules from their
‘pied’ appearance, being printed in the old black-letter type on
white paper, so that they resembled the colours of the magpie.
B. The word pica is still retained as a printer’s term, to denote cer-
tain sizes of type ; and a hopeless mixture of types is pie. 4 Inthe
oath ‘ by cock and pie,’ Merry Wives, i. 1. 316, cock is for the name
of God, and pie is the Ordinal or service-book.

PI (3), a pasty. (F.—L.?) ME, pie, Chaucer, C. T. 386
(A 384). Probably the same as Pie (2); the name may be due to
a medieval pleasantry, as denoting the miscellaneous nature of the
contents, In the Babees Book, ed. Furnivall, pt. ii. p. 37, l. 51, we
find the L. pl. picé (=picae) apparently in the sense of pies or
pasties; the next word is pastilli, i.e. pasties; cf. ‘pyes et pas-
tellis’ in quot. dated 1303 in N. E. D. @ Gael. pighe, a pie, is
from E.

PIBBALD, of various colours, in patches. (Hybrid: F.—L.;
and.C.) ‘A piebald steed;’ Dryden, tr. of Virgil, Afn. ix. 1. 54.
Richardson quotes it in the form ‘ A pie-ball’d steed ;’ which is a cor-
rect old spelling. Compounded of pie and bald. B. Here pie
signifies ‘like the magpie,’ as in the word pied. Bald, formerly
ball’d or balled, signifies ‘streaked,’ from W. bal, having a white
streak on the forehead, said of 2 horse. See further under Pie (1)
and Bald. @ A like compound is skew-bald, i.e. streaked in a skew
or irregular way.

PIECH, a portion, bit, single article. (F.—C.) ME. pece, Rob.
of Glouc. p. 555, l. 11590; the spelling piece is rarer, but occurs in
Gower, C.A. i. 295; bk. iii. 465.—OF. piece, mod. F. piéce, a piece.
[Cf. Span. pieza, a piece; Proy. pessa, pesa (Bartsch) ; Port. pega;
Ital. pezza.]— Late L. *pettia, petia; allied to Late L. petium, a piece
of land, used as early as A.D. 730. From a Gaulish type *perii-,
answering to OCeltic type *getti-, a piece, a portion ; evidenced by
W. peth, a piece, a thing, Corn. peth, Bret. pez, a piece; cf. *gotzi-,
as in Irish and Gael. cuid, OIrish cuit, a piece, share. So Thurneysen,
Stokes, K6rting. Der. piece, vb., Hen. V, prol. 233; piece-less, piec-er,
piece-work ; also piece-meal, q.v.

PIECH-MEATL,, by portions at a time. (Hybrid; F. and E.)
ME. pece-mele; Rob. of Glouc. has by pece-mele, p. 216, 1. 4422.
The sense is reduplicated, meaning ‘ by piece-pieces.’ For the first
element, see Piece. B. The second element is the ME. termination
-mele, found also in flokmele, in a flock or troop, lit. ‘in flock-pieces,’
Chaucer, C. T. 7962 (E 86) ; lim-mede, limb from limb, lit. ‘ in limb-
pieces,’ Layamon, 25618. A fuller form of the suffix is -melum, as
in wukemelum, week by week, Ormulum, 536; hipyllmelum, by heaps,
Wyclif, Wisdom, xviii. 23. See Koch, Eng. Gram. ii. 292. ME.
-melum= AS. mélum, dat. pl. of mél, a portion ; see Meal (2).

PIEPOWDER COURT, a summary court of justice formerly
held at fairs. (F.—L.) Explained in Blount’s Nomolexicon, ed.
1691; he says, ‘so called because they are most usual in summer,
and suiters to this court are commonly country-clowns with dusty
feet,’ Atany rate, the L. name was curia pedis pulverizati, the court


PIGMENT


of the dusty foot; see Ducange, s.v. curia. And see AF. pe-poudrous
in Liber Albus, p. 67; i.e. F. pied poudreux. The E. piepowder is an
adaptation of OF. pied pouldré, i.e. dusty foot. =F. pied, a foot, from
L. acc. pedem; and OF. pouldré, dusty, pp. of pouldrer, poudrer, to
cover with dust, from pouldre, poudre, dust. See Foot and Pow-
der. 4 Blount refers us to the statute 17 Edw. IV. cap. 2; &c.
Cf. ‘Les pletz..qe lem appele pepoudrous ;’ Black Book of the
Admiralty, ii. 22.

PIER, a mass of stone-work. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Merch.
Ven. i. I. 19. ME. pere. ‘Pere, or pyle of a brygge [bridge], or
other fundament’ [foundation]; Prompt, Parv. Early E. pere, Birch,
Cart. Saxon. iii. 659.— AF. pere, a stone; Langtoft, i. 124.—L. petra,
stone; see Petrify. (And see the Supplement.) Der. pier-glass,
orig. a glass hung on the stone-work between two windows.

PIERCKH, to thrust through, make a hole in, enter. (F.—L.?)
ME. percen, Rob. of Glouc. p. 17, 1. 391.—F. percer, ‘to pierce,
gore;’ Cot. OF. percier (Roland-song). . Origin uncertain ; the
suggestion in Diez, that percer is contracted from OF. pertuisier, with
the same sense, is ingenious, but somewhat violent ; Hatzfeld equates
percer to a Late L. type *pertiisiare, which may have become *fert’-
sire. Pertuisier, occurring in the 12th century, is from pertuis,
a hole, and is parallel to Ital. pertugiare, to pierce, from peringio,
a hole; and to Prov. pertusar, to pierce. y. The Ital. pertugiare
answers to a Late L. type *pertusiare, from L. pertisus, pp. of
pertundere, to thrust through, bore through, pierce, a compound of
per, through, and ¢undere, to beat; see Contuse. 5. The sug-
gestion above is supported by these considerations : (1) that the
L. per, through, seems certainly to be involved in F. percer ; and (2)
that L. pertundere gives the right sense. Ennius has latu’ pertudit
hasta, which is exactly ‘the spear pierced his side.’ 4 Bartsch sug-
gests a type *per-itiare, to go through; see Korting, §§ 7057, 7082.
Der. pierc-er; also pierce-able, spelt perceable in Spenser, F. Q. i.
eA

PIETY, the quality of being pious. (F.—L.) In Shak. Timon,
iv. 1.15; Lyly, Euphues, p. 103. =F. pieté, piety; omitted by Cotgrave,
but given in Sherwood’s index.=L. pietatem, acc. of pietas, piety.
Formed, with suffix -tas, from pie-, for pius, pious; see Pious.
Doublet, pity.

PIG, a porker, the young of swine. (E.) ME. pigge, Ancren
Riwle, p. 204, 1.9. Cf. prov. E. peg, a pig (Berks.). Perhaps the
AS. form was *picga (for *peg-joz?). Cf. also the AS. form pecg ;
as in ‘of swinforda 03 pecges ford;’ Birch, Cart. Saxon. iii. 223.
But the connexion is doubtful. Allied to MDu. pigge, ‘a pigge,’
Hexham ; and perhaps to Du. bigge, big, a pig; Low G. bigge, a pig,
also, a little child ; ‘de biggen lopet enem under de vote,’ the children
run under one’s feet; Bremen Worterbuch. Der. pig, verb ; pigg-ish,
pigg-er-y; pig-head-ed, used by Ben Jonson, News from the New
World (near beginning), pig-tail; pig-nut, Temp. ii. 2.172. Also
pig-tron: ‘A sow of iron is an ingot; Pano di metallo, a mass, a sow
or ingot of metal (Florio). When the furnace in which iron is
melted is tapped, the iron is allowed to run into one main channel,
called the sow, out of which a number of smaller streams are made
torun at right angles. These are compared to a set of pigs sucking
their dam, and the iron is called sow and pig iron respectively.
Probably the likeness was suggested by the word sow having pre-
viously signified an ingot.— Wedgwood. But probably the original
use of sow and pig referred merely to size. Add to this, that sow may
very well have been applied jocularly to an ingot, owing to its
bulk and weight. Ray mentions these sows and pigs in his ‘ Account
of Iron-work ;’ see Ray’s Glossary, ed. Skeat (E. D. S.), Gloss. B,


15, Pp. 13.

PIGEON, the name of a bird. (F.—L.) Spelt pyione ( = pijor) in
the Prompt. Parv. p. 396; pygeon in Caxton, tr. of Reynard the Fox
(1481), ed. Arber, p. 58.—F. pigeon, ‘a pigeon, or dove ;’ Cot. [Cf.
Span. pichon, a young pigeon; Ital. piccione, pippione, a pigeon. ]
—L. pipidnem, acc. of pipio, a young bird, lit. ‘a chirper’ or ‘ piper.’
-L. pipire, to chirp, cheep, pipe; see Pipe, Peep. Of imitative
origin, from the cry pi, pi of the young bird. Der. pigeon-hole,
pigeon-hearted; pigeon-livered, Hamlet, ii. 2. 605.

PIGGIN, a small wooden vessel. (E.) _‘ Piggin, a small wooden
cylindrical vessel, made with staves and bound with hoops like a
pail ;’ Brockett. Cotgrave translates F. ¢rayer by ‘a milking pale,
or piggin. ‘liij piggins,’ Lanc. and Chesh. Wills, p. 113 (1541).
[Cf. Gael. pigean, a little earthen jar, pitcher, or pot; diminutive of
pigeadh (also pige), an earthen jar, pitcher, or pot ; Irish prgin, a small
pail, pighead, an earthen pitcher; W. picyn, a piggin; all from E.]
Extended from pig, in the sense of ‘earthen vessel,’ as in G. Douglas,
tr. of Virgil, bk. vii. ch. 14, 1. 25. The suffix is the E. -en, as in.
wood-en ; or, possibly, Gael. -an, dimin.

PIGHT, old form of pitched; see Pitch (2).

PIGMENT, a paint, colouring matter. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., -


PIGMY


ed. 1674.—L. pigmentum, a pigment; formed with suffix -mentum
from pig-, base of pingere, to paint; see Paint. Der. or-piment,
or-pine. Doublet, pimento.

PIGMY, the same as Pygmy, q.v. (F.—L.—Gk.)

PIKE, a sharp-pointed weapon, a fish. (E.) 1. ME. pike, pyke,
in the sense of a pointed staff, P. Plowman, B. v. 482; spelt pic, in
the sense of spike, Layamon, 30752. AS. pic: ‘ Acisculum, piic ;’
Voc. 3. 13. And cf. Northumb. horn-pic, as a gloss to L. pinnam.
Luke, iv. 9. (Hence Irish pice, a pike, fork; picidh, a pike or long
spear, a pickax; Gael. pic, a pike, weapon, pickax ; W. pig, a

oint, pike, bill, beak, picell, a javelin; Bret. pik, a pick, pickax.)

. The orig. sense is ‘sharp point’ or ‘spike.’ Allied to Spike,
Spoke; and see Pick. 2. ME. pike, a fish; ‘Bet is, quod he,
a pyk than a pikerel,’ Chaucer, C. T. 9293 (E1419). So called from
its sharply-pointed jaws; see Hake. The young pike is called
a pikerel, or pickerel (Nares), formed with dimin. suffixes -er and -el,
like cock-er-el from cock, Der. pik-ed, old form of peaked, Rob. of
Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 328, 1. 8; pike-head, Spenser, F. Q.i. 7. 37;
pike-man ; pike-staff, i.e. piked-staff or staff with a spike. ME. pyk-
staf, P. Plowman, B, vi. 105. Also pick, vb., peck, pitch, vb. ; pickax ;
piccadill, picket, piquet, picnic. Doublets, peak, pick, sb., pique, sb.

PIKUL, the name of a weight. (Malay.) See Pecul in Yule.=
Malay pikul, the Malay name for the Chinese weight of 100 catties
or katis. About 133% pounds avoirdupois. See Caddy.

PILASTER, a square pillar or column, usually set in a wall.
(F.—Ital.—L.) Spelt pilaster, pillaster in Phillips, ed. 1706. Pilas-
ter in Chapman, tr. of Homer, Od. vii. 121. Also in Cotgrave. =F.
pilastre, ‘a pilaster or small piller;’ Cot.—TItal. pilastro, ‘ any kind
of piller or pilaster;’ Florio. Formed with suffix -stro from Ital.
pila, ‘a flat-sided pillar ;’ Florio.=L. pila, a pillar; see Pile (2).
Der. pilaster-ed.

PILAU, an Oriental dish; see Pillau.

PILCH, a furred garment. (L.) For the various senses, see
N.E.D. It orig. meant a warm furred outer garment. ME. pilche,
Ancren Riwle, p. 362, last line. AS. pylce, in Screadunga, ed.
Bouterwek, p. 20, 1. 28; pylece, Voc. 328. 11.—L. pellicea, fem. of
pelliceus, made of skins; see further under Pelisse. Cf. Pelt.
Doublet, pelisse.

PILCHARD, the name of a fish. (E.?) ‘ A Pilcher or Pilchard ;’
Minsheu, ed. 1627; pilchard, Baret, ed. 1580. ‘ Pylcher, a fysshe,
sardine ;’ Palsgrave. Spelt pilcher in Shak. Tw. Nt. iii. 1. 39 (first
folio). Of uncertain origin; cf. Irish pilseir, a pilchard (from E.).
B. The prov. E. pilch means to filch, to pick; see E. D. D. and
N.E.D.; whence pilch-er might be derived.
-PILCROW, a curious corruption of Paragraph, q.v. And see
Notes on E. Etym., p. 215.

PILE (1), a tumour, lit. a ball; only in the pl. files,
Piles.

PILE (2), a pillar; a heap. (F.—L.) ME. pile, pyle; P. Plowman,
B. xix. 360; C. xxii. 366.—F. pile, ‘a pile, heap, or stack ;’ Cot.—L.
pila, a pillar; a pier or mole of stone. Der. pile-driver ; also pillar,
q.v., pil-aster, q.v. @ Pile in the heraldic sense is an imitation of
a sharp stake; see Pile (3). In the old phrase cross and file,
equivalent to the modern head and tail, the allusion is to the stamp-
ing of money. One side bore a cross; the other side was the under
side in the stamping, and took its name from the pile or short pillar
(L. pila) on which the coin rested. Thus Cot. translates F. pile
(which here= ila, not pila) by ‘the pile, or under-iron of the stamp,
wherein money is stamped ; and the pile-side of a piece of monie,
the opposite whereof is a crosse; whence, Je n’ay croix ne pile? =1
have neither cross nor pile.

PILE (3), a stake. (L.) ME. pile, P. Plowman, B. xvi. 86.
AS. pil, a pointed stick, something pointed.—L. pilum, a javelin ;
orig. a pestle. For *pins-lom.—L. pinsere, to pound.+Skt. pish,
pimsh, to pound. d The heraldic pile is a sharp stake; from F.
pile, m. ‘a javelin, Cot. ; from L. pilum. Brugmann, ii. § 76.

PIGE (4), a hair, fibre of wool. (L.) In Shak. All’s Well, iv. 5.
103; cf. three-piled, L.L. L, v. 2. 407. Directly from L. pilus, a
hair (the F. form being poil). Cf. Gk. mtdos, felt. Brugmann, ii. § 76.
Der. pil-ose, three-piled. Also de-pil-at-or-y, pl-ush, per-uke, per-i-wig,
wig.

PILES, hemorrhoids. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. Spelt pyles in
Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iii.c.9. Small tumours; directly
from L. pila, a ball, Cf. MF. pile, ‘a ball to play with ;’ Cot.

PILFER, to stealin a small way, filch. (F.) InShak. Hen. V,
i, 2, 142.—OF. pelfrer, to pilfer.—OF. pelfre, booty, pelf. See
Pelf. Der. pilfer-ings, K. Lear, ii. 2. 151.

ILGRIM, a wanderer, stranger. (Ital.—L.) ME. pilgrim,
Chaucer, C. T. 26; earlier forms jpilegrim, pelegrim, Layamon,
30730, 30744. [The final m is put form, by the frequent interchange
between liquids.]—Ital. pellegrino, ‘a wandrer, pilgrim, stranger ;’


See


PILOT


Florio. (Cf. Prov. pellegrins, a pilgrim (Bartsch), Port. and Span.
peregrino.) —L, peregrinus, a stranger, foreigner ; used in Heb. xi. 13,
where the A.V. has ‘pilgrims.’ Orig. an adj. signifying strange,
foreign, formed from ady. peregri, away from home; allied to the
sb. pereger, a traveller. This sb. was also orig. an adj. signifying
‘on ajourney,’ abroad or away from home, lit. ‘ passing through a
(foreign) country.’—L, per, through; and ager, a land, country,
cognate with E. acre. ‘The vowel-change from a in ager to e in
pereger is regular. See Per- and Acre. Der. pilgrim-age, Chaucer,
C.T.12 5; formed with suffix -age in imitation of OF, pelerinage, ‘a
peregrination or pilgrimage;’ Cot. Doublet, peregrine, chiefly
used of the peregrine or ‘foreign’ falcon, Chaucer, C. T. 10742
(F 428). And see Peregrination. @ The form is Italian, not-
withstanding its early use; due to the fact that English pilgrims
frequently went (like King Alfred) to Rome. The OF. pelerin had
no g; but cf. Roumansch felegrin.

PILL (1), a little ball of medicine. (L.) ‘Pocyons, electuaryes,
or pylles;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iii.c. 5. Contracted,
like MDu. pille, a pill, Late L. pilla, from L. pilula (as recipes were
in Latin), The Late L. pilla occurs in Gemma Gemmarum, Coloniz,
1507. ‘The same book has the spelling pillula. Cf. OF. pile, a pill;
F. pilule, ‘a physical pill; Cot.—L. piluda, a little ball, globule,
pill. Dimin. of pila, a ball; see Piles.

PILL (2), to rob, plunder. (F.—L.) Also spelt peel ; see Peel (2).
[But the words peel, to strip, and peel, to plunder, are from different
sources, though much confused; we even find ill used in the sense
‘to strip.’ The sense of ‘stripping’ goes back to L. pellis, skin, as
shown under Peel (1).] ME. pillen, most MSS. pilen, Chaucer,
C.T. 6944 (D'1362); also pilen, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft,
p- 42, 1. 9.—F. piller, ‘to pill, ravage, ransack, rifle, rob;’ Cot.=L.
type *piliare, for L. pilare, to plunder, pillage; a rare verb, used by
Ammianus Marcellinus; a later use of pildre, to deprive of hair ;
from pilus, a hair. Der. pill-age, plunder; we find ‘ such as delyte
them in pyllage and robbery’ in Fabyan, Chron. vol, i. c. 114, ed.
Ellis, p. 87; from F. pillage (as if from a L. *pildticum), Hence
pill-ag-er, for which piller was formerly used, spelt pilour in Chaucer,
C. T. 1009 (A 1007),

PILLAGE, plunder ; see under Pill (2).

PILLAR, a column, support. (F.—L.) Inearlyuse. ME. piler,
O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 281, 1. 29.—OF. piler (Littré), later
pilier, ‘a pillar;’ Cot. (Cf. Span. and Port. ilar, a pillar.] = Late
L, pilare, a pillar; formed (with adj. suffix) from L. pila, a pier of
stone; see Pile (2).

PILLAU, PILAU, a dish of meat or fowl with rice and spices.
(Pers.) In Terry, Voy. to India, p. 195 (Pegge).=— Pers. pilaw, the
same; Rich. Dict., p. 335.

PILLION, the cushion of a saddle, a cushion behind a saddle.
(C.—L.) Spenser speaks of a horseman’s ‘ shaunck-pillion (shank-
pillion) without stirrops ;” View of the State of Ireland, Globe ed.
p- 639, col. 2, 1. 21. [Not the same word as pylion, a kind of hat,
in P. Plowman’s Crede, 839; which is from L. pileus.] ‘ Pyllyon for
a woman to ryde on;’ Palsgrave. Lowl. Sc. pilyane (1503);
N. E. D.; prob. borrowed from Gaelic. Cf. Irish pilliun, pillin,
a pack-saddle; Gael. pillean, pillin, a pack-saddle, riding-cloth ;
allied to Irish and Gael. peall, a skin ; all from L. pellis, a skin.
See Pell, Fell (2).

PILLORY, a wooden frame with an upright post, to which
criminals were fastened for punishment. (F.) ME. pilory, Polit.
Songs, ed. Wright, p. 345; pillory, P. Plowman, B. iii. 78, C. iv. 79
(see my note on the line).—F. pilori, ‘a pillory;’ Cot. B. Of
unknown origin; other remarkable variants occur, viz. OF. pilorin,
pellorin, Port. pelourinho, Prov. espitlori, Late L. pilloricum, spiliorium,
&c., cited by Littré and Scheler. There seems to have been a loss
of initial s.

PILLOW, a cushion forthe head. (L.) ME. pilwe, Gower, C. A.
i. 142; bk. i. 2986. The change from ME. -we to E. -ow is regular ;
cf. arrow, ME. arwe. But it.is less easy to explain the ME. form, as
the usual AS. form is pyle, Atlfred, tr. of Orosius, b, v. c. 11. § 1.
However, there is a by-form pylu, which is more correct ; it occurs
in the gloss: ‘ceruical, pylu;’ Napier’s glosses, 29. 4. This AS,
pylu is from a type *pulwi-; from L. puluinum, acc. of puluinus, a
cushion, pillow, bolster; a word of uncertain origin. B. The L.
puluinus also gave rise to Du. peuluw, a pillow; OHG. phului,
MHG. phulwe, G. pfiihl, a pillow; Westphalian pilf. Der. pillow,
vb., Milton, Ode on Christ’s Nativity, 1. 231 5 pillow-case.

PILOT, one who conducts ships in and out of harbour. (F,— Ital.
—Gk.) Spelt pylot in Gascoigne, Voyage into Holland, A.D. 1572,
1. 443 cf. Macb. i. 3. 28.—MF. pilot, ‘a pilot or steersman;’ Cot.
Mod. F. pilote ; whence piloter, to take soundings, a word used by
Palsgrave, ed. 1852, p. Corrupted from OF. pedot, a pilot
(Godefroy).= MItal. pedota, ‘a pilot or guide by sea ;’ Florio, = Late’

Gg2


451


PIMENTO


Gk. *rndarns, a steersman; regularly formed, with suffix -rys (of the
agent) from mnddv, a rudder, the blade of an oar. Korting, § 6986.
Der. pilot, vb., pilot-age, pilot-cloth, pilot-fish.

PIMENTO, all-spice or Jamaica pepper; or, the tree producing
it. (Port.—L.) Also called pimenta; both forms are in Todd’s
Johnson. = Port. pimenta, pepper (Vieyra); there is also (according
to Mahn) a form pimento. The Spanish has both pimienta and
pimiento; but the E. word clearly follows the Port. form. B. The
OF. piment meant ‘a spiced drink,’ and hence the ME. piment, Rom.
of the Rose, 6027. All these forms are from L. pigmentum, (1) a pig-
ment, (2) the juice of plants. See Pigment.

PIMP, a pandar, one who procures gratification for the lust of
others. (F.—L.?) Not an old word. ‘ Fol. Let me see; where
shall I chuse two or three for pimps now?’ Middleton, A Mad World,
Act iii (end). Of unknown origin ; but perhaps suggested by MF.
pimpreneau, pimperneau, ‘a grig (kind of eel) ; also, a knave, rascall,
varlet, scoundrell 3? Cot. Soalso OF. pimpernel, a small eel, a lively
fellow, in an unfavourable sense (Godefroy). Cf. Norm. dial. pin-
perneau, piperneau, a kind of small eel (Moisy) ; Late L. pipernella,
pipella (Ducange). B. Or perhaps allied to MF. pimper, ‘to
sprucifie, or finifie it ;’ Cot. Allied to the Prov. verb pimpar, to
render elegant, from the Prov. sb. pimpa, equivalent to F. pipeau,
meaning (1) a pipe, (2) a bird-call, (3) a snare ; with an allusion to
an old proverb piper en une chose, to pipe in a thing, i.e. to excel in
it. Hence pimper came to mean (1) to pipe, (2) to excel, (3) to
beautify or make smart. Cf. also F. pimpant, ‘spruce’ (Cot.),
especially applied to ladies whose dress attracted the eye (Littré).
y. Thus pimper is from piper, to pipe; see Pipe.

PIMPERNEL, the name of a flower. (F.—L.) Spelt pympernell
in Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iii. c.6. ‘ Hee pimpernella, pim-
pernolle ;’ Voc. 645. 10; ‘ Piponella, pympernele,’ Voc. 603. 7. Also:
‘Pinpernele, (AF.) pinpre, (ME.) briddes-tunge;’ Voc. 557. 35.—
MF. pimpernelle, pimpinelle, * the burnet,’ Cot.; mod. F. pimprenelle ;
Norm. dial. pimpernelle (Moisy). Cf. Span. pimpinela, burnet; Ital.
pimpinella, pimpernel; Late L. pipinella (Hatzfeld). PB. Diez derives
it from L, *bipinella<*bipennula, a dimin. from bipennis, i.e. double-
winged. The pimpernel was confused with burnet (see Prior), and
the latter (Poterium sanguisorba) has a feather-like arrangement of
its leaves. Cf. Rosa pimpinellifolia. y. If this be right (which is
highly doubtful), we trace the word back to bi-, for bis, twice ; and
penna, a wing; see Bi- and Pen. 6. Diez also cites Catalan
pampinella, Piedmontese pampinela, but regards these as corrupter
forms, since we can hardly connect pimpernel with L. pampinus, a
tendril of a vine.

PIMPLE, a small pustule. (Scand.?) Spelt pimpel in Minsheu,
ed. 1627; pimple in Baret (1580). Prov. E. pumple (E. D, D.).
‘ Pimples or little wheales ;’ Udall, tr. of Erasmus’ Apophthegmes,
Diogenes, § 6. ‘Pymple, pustule ;’ Palsgrave. [The alleged AS.
pinpel is Lye’s misprint for winpel; Voc. 125. 8.]. Apparently not
an E. word, but perhaps Scand. Prob. allied to Norw. pump-en,
swollen up, particularly in the face (Ross). There seems to have
been a Scand. strong verb *pimpa (pt. t. *pamp, pp. *pump-in), of
which traces are found in Swed. dial. pimp-ug, swelling out, full-
pemp-ad, pregnant, Dan. dial. pamp-er, a thickset man, Norw. pump,
a,small fat man (Ross); cf. Bavar. pampfen, to stuff, pumpf-grob, very
coarse or thick, pumpet, thick-set. Hence perhaps also F. pompette,
‘a pumple or pimple on the nose, or chin,’ Cot. Cf. Pamper.

PIN, a peg, a small sharp-pointed instrument for fastening things
together. (L.) ME. pinne, Chaucer, C. T. 196, 10630 (F 316).
AS. pinn, a pin, also a pointed style for writing (Toller). The ME.
pinne or pin often means ‘a peg’ rather than a small pin in the
modern sense. PB. We also find Irish pinne, a pin, peg, spigot, stud,
pion, a pin, peg ; Gael. pinne, a pin, peg, spigot; W. fiz, a pin, style,
pen; Du. gin, pin, peg; MDu. penne, a wooden pin, peg (Hexham);
pinne, a small spit or ironshod staff, the pinnacle of a steeple (id.) ;
Swed, pinne,a peg, Dan. pind, a (pointed) stick ; Icel. pinni, a pin;
G. pinnen, to pin; penn, a peg. y. All borrowed words from
L. pinna, a wing, fin, pinnacle; cognate with E. jin., See Brug-
mann, ii. §66 (note), Der. pin, verb, L. L. L. v. 2.321, ME. pinnen,
Prompt. Parv. ; pin-afore, so called because formerly pinned in front
of a child, afterwards enlarged and made to tie behind; pyz-case,
Skelton, Elinor Rummyng, 529; pin-cushion ; pin-money, Spectator,
NO, 295 ; pin-point ; pinn-er, (1) a pin-maker, (2) the lappet of a head-
dress, Gay, Shepherd’s Week, Past. 5, 1. 585 pin-t-le (= pin-et-el), a
little pin, a long iron bolt (Webster). And see pinn-ac-le, pinn-ate,
pin-i-on. @ The sense of peg or pointed instrument arose from
that of ‘pinnacle,’ as in pinnam templi, Luke, iv. 9.

PINCH, to nip, squeeze, gripe. .(F.). ME. pinchen, Chaucer,
C. T. 328 (A 326); P. Plowman, B. xiii. 371. O. North. F. pinchier,
Norm. dial. pincher, Moisy; Guernsey pinchier, Métivier; F. pincer,
*to pinch, nip, twitch;’ Cot. B. This is a nasalised form of M.Ital.


452


PINK


piceiare, pizzare, ‘to pinch, to snip’ (Florio), mod. Ital. pizzicare,.
to pinch; see Diez for otherrelated forms. y. These verbs are allied
to the sb. which appears as Ital. pinzo, a sting, a goad, pinzette,
pincers. 5. The orig. sense seems to have been ‘a slight pricking
with some small pointed instrument ;’ the word being formed from a
base pic (probably Teut.) allied to E. pick; see Pick. Cf. Du.
pitsen, pinsen, to pinch (Hexham). Der. pinch-er ; pinch-ers or pine-
ers, ME. pynsors, Voc. 627. 19 ; with which cf. F. pinces, ‘a pair of
pincers,’ Cot. And cf, Pink (1).

PINCHBECK, the name of a metal. (Personal name.) It is
an alloy of copper and zinc, to resemble gold. Added by Todd to
Johnson’s Dict. ; also in Ash’s Dict., ed. 1775. So named from the
inventor, Mr. Christopher Pinchbeck, the elder, a London watch-
maker (ab. 1670-1732). See Notes and Queries, Ser, I. vol. xii.
p- 341; Ser. II. vol. xii. p. 81. Cf. Mason’s Ode to Mr, Pinchbeck
[the younger] on his patent snuffers (1776). B. The name was.
probably taken from one of the villages named East and West Pinch-
beck, near Spalding, Lincolnshire.

PINDER, PINNER, one who impounds stray cattle. (E.)
See the anonymous play, ‘ A pleasant conceyted Comedie of George-
a-Greene, the pinner of Wakefield, London, 1599, Spelt pinder in
the reprint of 1632. ME. pinder, pinner; spelt pyndare, pinnar in
Prompt. Parv. p. 400; and see Way’s note. Formed, with suffix -er
of the agent, from AS. pynzdan, to pen up; Ailfred, tr. of Gregory’s
Pastoral Care, c. xxxix, ed. Sweet, p. 282, 1.13. Pyndan is formed
(with the usual vowel-change from z to y) from the AS. sb. pund, a
pound for cattle; see Pound (2), Pinfold. ¢@ The spelling
pinner is due to a supposed connexion with the verb to pen up; but
there is no real relationship. See Pen (2).

PINE (1), a cone-bearing, resinous tree. (L.) ME. pine, Legends
of the Holy Rood, ed. Morris, p. 70, 1. 307; spelt pigne, Gower, C. A.
ii. 161; bk. vy. 1010, AS. pin; pin-treow, a pine-tree; Voc. 138. 3.
=L. pinus. B. L. pinus is allied to Gk. miztus, a pine, Skt. pitu-
daru-, lit. ‘ resin-tree ;’ and to L. pitu-ita, phlegm, also ‘resin’. See
Pip (1). Der. pine-apple, because the fruit resembles a pine-cone,
which was called a pine-apple in ME.; cf. Palladius on Husbandry,
bk, iii. 1049, where a pine is called pynappultree ; pine-cone; pin-e-ry,
a place for pine-apples, a coined word. Also pinn-ace.

PINE (2), to suffer pain, waste away, be consumed with sorrow.
(L.) ME. pinen, almost always transitive, signifying ‘to torment ;”
Rom. of the Rose, 3511; Chaucer, C. T. 15065 (B 4249); merely
formed from the sb. pie, pain, torment, Chaucer, C. T. 1326 (A 1324).
AS. pinian, to torment, A.S. Chron. an. 1137; AS. piv, pain, torment,
A.S. Chron. an. 1137. See also pinian, verb, in Toller. B. Not
a Teut. word, but borrowed from L. poena, pain; see Pain. Hence
also G. pein, Du. pijn, &c.

PINFOLD, a pound for cattle. (E.) In Shak. K. Lear, ii. 2. 9,
For pind-fold, i.e. pound-fold ; see P. Plowman, B. xvi. 264, C. xix:
282, where we find poundfold, pondfold, pynfold. See Pound (2),
Pinder. The AS. variant pundfold occurs in Birch, Cart. Saxon.
iii. 309.

PINION, a wing, the joint of a wing. (F.—L.) Used in Shak..
to mean ‘ feather,’ Antony, ili. 12.4; he also has nimble-pinioned=
nimble-winged, Rom. ii. 5. 7. ME. pinion. ‘ Pynyon of a wynge,
pennula ;’ Prompt. Parv.—F. pignon, only given by Cotgrave in the
sense of ‘a finiall, cop, or small pinacle on the ridge or top of @
house,’ like mod. F. pignon, a gable-end. The sense of the E. word
was derived from OF. pignon, a feather (Godefroy, s. v. pennon) ; and
the Span. pifion means ‘ pinion,’ asin English. B. Both F. pignon
and Span. pijion are derivatives from L. pinna, variant of penna, a
wing ; whence E. jen (1); confused with L. pinna, afin. The Late
L. pinna means ‘a peak,’ whence the sense of F. pignon ; the same sense
appears in L. pinndculum. See Pin, Pinnacle. @ The E. pinion,
in the sense of ‘a small wheel working with teeth into another,’ is
really the same word; it is taken from F. pignon, with the same sense
(Littré), which is from L. pinna, in the sense of ‘ float of a water-
wheel.’ Cotgrave gives ‘ pinon, the pinnion of a clock.’ Der. pinion,
yerb, lit. to fasten the pinions of a bird, hence, to tie a man’s elbows
together behind him, K. Lear, iii. 7. 23.

PINK (1), to pierce, stab, prick. (E.) Esp. used of stabbing so-
as to produce only a small hole, as, for instance, with a thin rapier.
The word, though unusual, is still extant. ‘ Pink, to stab or pierce ;
in the days of rapier-wearing a professed duellist was said to be “a
regular pinker and driller;”’ Slang Dictionary. ‘Todd quotes from
Addison’s Drummer, iv. 2: ‘They grew such desperate rivals for
her, that one of them pinked the other in a duel.’ Cotgrave has >
‘ Eschiffeur, a cutter or pinker.’ Shak. has pink’d porringer, i.e. a
cap reticulated or pierced with small holes, Hen. VIII, v. 4.50. ME.
pinken, to prick. ‘ Heo pynkes with heore penne on heore parchemyn’
=they prick with their pens on their parchment ; Polit. Songs, ed.
Wright, p. 156. B. It is best to regard pink as the regular nasalised


PINK.


form of pick, in the sense ‘to peck, prick;’ see Pick. In fact,


the E. pink, to cut silk cloth in round holes or eyes (Bailey), is


parallel to MF. piquer, with the same sense (Cotgrave). See also
‘Pinch, which is an allied word.

PINK (2), half-shut, as applied to the eyes. (Du.) Obsolete.
*Plumpy Bacchus, with pink eyne;’ Shak. Ant. ii. 7,121. It means
‘winking, half-shut ;’ from MDu. pincken, or pinck-oogen, ‘to shut
the eyes,’ Hexham; where ooge=eye. The notion is that of bringing
to a point, narrowing, or making small. Cf. prov. E. pink, to con-
tract the eyes. The same notion comes out in the verb to pinch; also
in prov. E. pink, a minnow, i.e. a very small fish. See also Pink
(3). Der. pink-eyed, q.v.

PINK (3), the name of a flower, and of a colour. (E.) Spelt
pincke, as the name of a flower, Spenser, Shep. Kal. April, 1. 136.
{The name of the colour is due to that of the flower, as in the case
‘of violet, mauve. Again, the phrase ‘ pink of perfection’ is prob. due
to Shakespeare’s ‘ pink of courtesy,’ a forced phrase, as remarked by
Mercutio; Romeo, ii. 4. 61.] The flower seems to have been named
from the delicately cut or peaked edges of the petals; see Pink (1)
and Pink (2). Cf. ‘The iagged pinkes’; Baret (1580). See also
Lyte, tr. of Dodoens, bk.i.c. 7. The use of pink in the sense to
pierce, to cut silk cloth into round holes or eyes, has already been
noted; see Pink (1). We may note ‘ pink’d porringer,’ i.e. cap
ornamented with eyelet-holes, in Shak. Hen. VIII, v. 4. 50. Cf.
MF. pince, ‘a pink,’ Cotgrave (see also pinces); from pincer, to
pinch, nip.

PINK (4), a kind of boat. (Du.) See Nares.
and sloops;’ Crabbe, The Borough, let. 1, 1. 52. ‘ Pinke, a little
ship;’ Baret (1580).—Du. pink, a fishing-boat. Short for MDu.
espincke, as shown by Hexham, who has: ‘ Espincke, or pincke, a
pinke, or a small fisher’s boat’ (whence also F. pingue, Span. pingue,
a pink). This is the same word as Swed. esping, Icel. espingr, a long
boat ; formed with suffix -ing from esp-, signifying ‘ aspen,’ of which
wood it must have been first made. Cf. Icel. espi, aspen-wood ; MDu.
espe, ‘an aspe-tree;’ Hexham. See Aspen.

PINK-EYED, having small eyes.. (Hybrid; Du. and E.)
“Them that were pinke-eied and had very small eies, they termed
ocelle ;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xi. c. 37 (on the Eye). See Nares.
‘Plumpy Bacchus, with pink [half-closed] eyne;’ Antony, ii. 7. 121.
= Du. pinken, to wink. Hexham has: ‘ pincke, light, or an eye;
pincken, ofte [or] pinck-oogen, to shut the eyes; pimpooge, ofte [or]
pimpoogen, pinck-eyes, or pinck-eyed.’ See Pink (2).

PINNWACH, a small ship. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Shak. Merry
Wives, i. 3..89.—F. pinasse, ‘the pitch-tree; also, a pinnace;’ Cot. =
Mital. pinaccia, pinazza, ‘a kind of ship called a pinnace ;’ Florio.
So called because made of pine-wood. = L. pinus, a pine; see Pine (1).
@ There is also an OF. esfinace, a pinnace (Ducange, s.v. spina-
chium), found in 1451; perhaps it obtained its initial es- by con-
fusion with MDu. espincke; see Pink (4). Cf. the form espyne in
Barbour, Bruce, xvii. 719.

PINNACLE, a slender turret, small spire. (F.—L.) ME.
pinacle, Gower, C. A. ii. 124; bk. iv. 3662; spelt pynacle, Wyclif,
Matt. iv. 5.=—F. pinacle, ‘a pinacle, a spire;’ Cot.—L. pinnaculum,
a pinnacle, peak of a building; Matt. iv. 5 (Vulgate). Double
dimin. (with suffixes -cu-lu-), from pinna, a wing, fin; Late L. a
pinnacle (Luke, iv. 9). See Pin. ;

PINNATE, feather-like. (L.) A botanical term. ‘ Pinnata
Jfolia, among herbalists, such leaves as are deeply indented, so that
the parts resemble feathers;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.—L. pinnatus, sub-
stituted for penndtus, feathered.—L. penna, a feather. See Pen (2).

PINT, a measure for liquids. (F.—Span.—L.) ME. pinte, pynte ;
Prompt. Parv. =F. pinte, a pint ;? Cot. Span. pinta, a spot, blemish,
drop, mark on cards, pint. So called from the pint being marked
by a mark outside (or inside) a vessel of larger capacity. —Late L.
pincta, a pint (A.D. 1249); for L. picta, fem. of pictus, painted,
marked, pp. of pingere, to paint. Cf. Span. pintor,a painter, pintura,
a painting. Tie
. PIONEER, a soldier who clears the way before anarmy. (F.—L.)
-Formerly written pioner, Hamlet, i. v. 163. This may have been
merely an E. modification, as the whole word appears to be F.
‘Richardson quotes the spelling pyoner from Berners’ tr. of Froissart,
vol. i. c. 138.—F. pionnier, a pioner;’ Cot. B. F. pionnier, OF.
peonier, is a mere extension of F. pion, OF. peon, a foot-soldier ; with
the more special meaning of foot-soldier who works at digging mines.
For the etymology of OF. peon, see Pawn (2).

PIONY, the same as Peony, q.v.

PIOUS, devout. (F.—L.) In Macb, iii. 6. 12, 27; Hamlet, iii.
i. 48.—F. pieux (fem. pieuse) ; ‘pious, godly ;’ Cot. The OF. form
was pius (Littré), directly from L. pius, holy ; not from a form *pidsus.
-Brugmann, ii. § 643. Der. pious-ly; piety, Timon, iv. 1. 15, a coined
word, and a doublet of pity, q.v.; piet-ist, borrowed from G. jpietist,


‘Hoy’s, pinks,


PIQUE 453


the name of 4 Protestant sect in Germany instituted about 1689
(Haydn), and taking their name from their collegia pietatis, the word
being a mere coinage (with suffix -ist) from a part of the stem (piet-)
of L. pietas. And see pity.

PIP (1), a disease of fowls, in which a horny substance grows on
the tip of the tongue. (Du. —L.) ME. pippe, pyppe (once dissyllabic).
‘ Pyppe, sekenesse [sickness], Pituita;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘ Pyppe, a
sickenesse, pepye;’ Palsgrave.mMDu. pippe, the pip; Hexham. .
Cf, also Walloon, pipie (Sigart), MF. pepie, ‘pip ;’ Cot.; Norm.
dial. pipie, pip; Span. pepita, the pip (Neuman) ; Ital. pipita, Port.
pevide (in the phrase pevide de gallinhas, the pip). B. All from L.
pituita, phlegm, rheum, the pip ; which must have passed into the
form *pitvita, whence *pipita, Late L. pipida, and afterwards into that
of pepida. We find also OHG. phiphis, the pip, cited by Diez;
Du. pip; Swed. pipp, &c. y. L. pituita is formed (with suffix -ita, «
like -ttus in crin-itus) from a stem pitw- ; for which see Pine (1).

PIP (2), the seed of fruit. (F.—L.—Gk.) This is nothing buta |
contraction of the old name pippin or pepin, for the same thing. Pippin
is in Cotgrave ; pepiz in Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xv. c. 14, ed. 1634,
p- 438 1; b. xvii. c.10, p.511 a, b. = MF. pepin, ‘a pippin or kernel,
the seed of fruit ;7 Cot. Allied to Span. pepita, a pip, kernel ; and
prob. to Span. pepino, a cucumber. f. It is conjectured that the
name was first applied to the pips of the melon or cucumber, and that °
the derivation is, accordingly, from L. pepd, a melon, borrowed from
Gk. ménwy, a melon, orig. an adj. signifying ‘ripe.’ The Gk. mérawy
meant ‘ ripened by the heat of the sun,’ lit. ‘ cooked,’ from mem-, base
of mémrev, to cook, allied to Skt. pach, to cook, and to L. coguere ;
see Cook. KoOrting, § 7023. @ The odd resemblance between Span. .
pepita, a pip, and fepita, the pip in fowls, is due to mere confusion;
see Pip (1). They are not connected. See Pippin.

PIP (3), a spot on cards. (F.—L.?) Cf. prov. E. pip, a spot on
a dress, or on the face. But the old spelling is peep, or peepe, as
in Shakespeare, Tam. Shrew, i. 2. 33. It sometimes meant a small
blossom. Perhaps from the verb to peep; cf. prov. E. peep, a peep-
hole, or an eye. See Peep (2).

PIPH, a musical instrument formed of a long tube ; hence, any
long tube, or tube in general. (L.) The musical sense is the orig.
one. ME. pipe, Wyclif, Luke, vii. 32; Chaucer, C. T. 2752. The
pl. pipen is in Layamon, 5110. AS. pipe, a pipe, A. S. Leechdoms,
ed. Cockayne, ii, 126, 1. 3; and in comp. sang-pipe, a song-pipe, in
the Glosses to Prudentius, 130. An imitative word; but borrowed
from Latin. —Late L. pipa, a pipe; from L. pipare, to chirp. Bs. It
well denotes a ‘ peeping’ or chirping sound ; the pipe was frequently
used to imitate and decoy birds. It is very widely spread. We
find Irish and Gael. piob, a pipe, flute, tube; Irish pib, a pipe, tube;
W. pib, a pipe, tube, pipian, to pipe, pibo, to pipe, squirt. Also Du.
pip, Icel. pipa, Swed. pipa, Dan. pibe, G. pfeife.. Cf. also L. pipire,
to peep or chirp as a young bird, Gk. mai¢ev, to chirp. All from
the repetition pi-pi of the cry of a young bird. Der. pipe, verb,
Chaucer, C. T. 3874 (A 3876); pip-er, pip-ing ; pipe-clay; and see
pip-kin, pib-roch. See also peep (1), peep (2). For pipe, ‘a tun,’ see
below. Doublet, jife.

PIPKIN, a small earthen pot. (L.; with E. suffix.) ‘A pipkin,

or little pot ;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627. A dimin. (with suffix -kiz) of E.
pipe, in the sense of a vessel, chiefly applied toa cask of wine. ‘I pipe
vinei rubei;’” York Wills, iii. 14 (1400). This particular sense may
have been imported. It occurs in French, Spanish, Provengal, and
Dutch. ‘ Pipe,a measure called a pipe, used for corn as well as wine;’
Cot. Span. pipa, Prov. pipo. ‘Een pijpe met olye ofte wijn, a pipe or
caske with oyle or wine;’ Hexham.

PIPPIN, a kind of tart apple. (F.—L.—Gk.?) In Shak. Merry
Wives, i. 2. 13; and in Minsheu, ed..1627. Cotgrave explains F,’
renette as ‘the apple called a pippin, or a kind thereof.’ Spelt pepyn,
Babees Book, p. 122, 1. 79. AF. pepynes, pl.; Wright’s Vocab., 1st
Ser. p. 150. Sometimes said to be named from pip (3), because of
the spots upon it, which fails to explain the suffix -ix. We must
rather connect it with pip (2), of which the old spelling was actually
pippin, as has been shown. ‘That is, it was named with reference to
the pips inside it (not outside) ; ‘ prob. an apple raised from the pip
or seed,’ Wedgwood; cf. Norm. dial. pépin, an apple raised from
seed (Robin). See Pip (2). Hence we find; ‘To plante trees of
greynes and fepins;’ Arnold’s Chron., 1502; ed. 1811, p. 167.
4 Hexham has MDnu. ‘ pippinck,, puppinck, a pipping, an apple so |
called ;’ also ‘ pupping, an apple called a pippinck.’ But the Du. .
word seems to have been borrowed from E, Thus Sewel’s Du. Dict.
has yet another form pippeling, with the example ‘ Engelsche pippe-
lingen, English pippins.’

PIQUE, wounded pride. (F.— Teut.) Oddly spelt pike in Cotgrave,
who is an early authority for it.—MF. picgue, pique, ‘a pike; also, a
pikeman ; also a pike, debate, quarrel, grudge; Cot.’ | B. Of Teut.
origin ; see Pike. Der. pique, verb; pigu-ant (asin ‘ piquant sauce,’


44 PIQUET

Howell, Familiar Letters, vol. i, sect. 5. let. 38 [not 36], where, by
the way, the spelling is pickant), from F. piquant, pres. part. of piquer,
verb. Hence piguant-ly, piquanc-y.

PIQUET, a game at cards. (F.—Teut.) ‘ Piguet, or Picket, a
certain game at cards, perhaps so called from pique, as it were a
small contest or scuffle;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. This is ingenious,
and perhaps true; Littré says the game is supposed to have been
named from its inventor; but Hatzfeld derives it from F. piquer,
vb., to prick, tovex. Darmesteter derives it from the phrases faire
pic, faire repic. employed in the game. Cf, F. pic, ‘a pickax, a
thrust,’ Cot.; MF. picgue, ‘a spade at cards,’ id.; whence prov. E.
pick, a spade (or a diamond) at cards.
doublet of Picket, q. v.

PIRATE, a sea-robber, corsair. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Merch.
Ven. i. 3. 25.—F. pirate, ‘a pirat;’ Cot.—L. pirdta.—Gk. meparns,
one who attempts or attacks, an adventurer (by sea). Formed with
suffix -rns from mepa-w, I attempt.—Gk. metpa, an attempt, trial,
essay. For *mép-a; and allied to E. ex-per-ience and fare; see
Fare, Experience. Der. pirat-ic-al, pirat-ic-al-ly ; pirate, verb ;

irac-y.

PIROGUEH, a sort of canoe.
spelt piragua, which is the Span. spelling.
Canoa;’ W. Dampier, A New Voyage, i. 3 (1699). Both F. pirogue
and Span. piragua are from the native W. Indian name. The word
is said by Oviedo to be Caribbean. ‘ Llamanlos los Caribes piraguas ;’
Oviedo, 1851, 1. 171.

PIROUETTEH, a whirling round, quick turn, esp. in dancing.
(F.) Formerly used as a term in horsemanship. ‘ Pirouette, Piroet,
a turn or circumvolution, which a horse makes without changing his
ground ;’ Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1751. =F. pirouette, ‘a whirligig,
also a whirling about ;’ Cot. B. Origin unknown, according to
Littré; but in Métivier’s Dict. Franco-Normand appears the Guernsey
word piroue, a little wheel or whirligig, a child’s toy, also Norm.
dial. piroue, a top (Robin), of which pirouette is obviously the dimi-
nutive. [The spelling has prob. been affected by confusion with F.
roue (L. rota), a wheel. ] Prob. allied to MItal. pirolo, a peg,a child’s
top; origin unknown. Cf. also ME. pirle, prille, a whirligig, child’s
toy, Prompt. Parv. p. 413; MF. pirevollet, a whirligig (Cot.); MItal.
pirla, ‘a top or a gigge, also a twirle;’ Florio. Der. pirouette, vb.

PISCHS, the Fish; a zodiacal sign. (L.) ME. Pisces, Chaucer,
C. T.6286 (D 704). —L. piscés, pl. of piscts, a fish ; cognate with E.
Fish, q.v. Der. pisc-ine; pisc-ina, a basin, from L. pisc-ina, a fish-
pool, basin; pisci-vorous, fish-eating, from L. wordre, to devour ;
pisc-at-or-y, from L, piscatorius, belonging to fishing, from piscator,
a fisherman, formed from piscGri, to fish.

PISH, an interjection, expressing contempt. (E.) In Shak. Oth.
ii. 1. 270; iv. 1.42. Of imitative origin; it begins with expulsion
of breath, as in pook /, and ends with a hiss.

PISMIRE, an ant. (Hybrid; F. and E.) In Shak. 1 Hen. IV,
i. 3.240. ‘The old name of the ant, an insect very generally named
from the sharp urinous smell of an ant-hill;’ Wedgwood. ME. pisse-
mire (four syllables), Chaucer, C. T. 7407 (D 1825).—ME. pisse,
urine; and mire, an ant, Bestiary, 234. See Piss. B. The AS.
mire, given in Benson’s A.S. Dict., is unauthorised, but may be
correct; still, the usual E. word is emmet or ant. Cf. Du. mier,
MDnu. miere, EFries. mire, an ant; Teut. type *mir-on-. y. We
also find the somewhat similar (but unrelated?) forms : Swed. myra,
Dan. myre, Icel. maurr, an ant. Also Irish moirbh, W. mor-grugyn,
Bret. merienen, Russ. mur-avei, Gk. pdp-pnt, Pers. mir, mor, all
meaning ‘ant.’ The Cornish murrian means ‘ants.’ @ Wedgwood
notes a similar method of naming an ant in the Low G. miegemke,
an ant; from miegen=L. mingere. And cf. Pomeran. pissmiren, pl.,
pismires.

PISS, to discharge urine. (F.) ME. pissen, Mandeville’s Travels,
ed. Halliwell, ch. 23, p.249.—F. pisser; supposed to be a Romance
word, and of imitative origin. Der. piss, sb., Chaucer, C. T. 6311
(D 729) ; pis-mire, q.v.

PISTACHIO, PISTACHO, the nut of a certain tree. (Span.
—L.—Gk.—Pers.) In Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665, p. 80.
Spelt pistachoe or pistake-nut in Phillips, ed. 1706.—Span. pistacho
(with ch as in English), a pistacho, pistich-nut.—L. pisticium.=
Gk. mordxov, a nut of the tree called mordkn. = Pers. pista, pistah,
the pistachio-nut; Rich. Dict. pp. 331, 332. Cf. Ital. pistacchio,
whence the form pistachio.

PISTIL, the female organ in the centre of a flower. (L.) In
Ash’s Dict., ed. 1775. Named from the resemblance in shape to the
pestle of a mortar. = L. pistillum, a small pestle ; dimin. of an obsolete
form *pistrum, a pestle. L. pistum, supine of pinsere, to pound. Cf.
Skt. pish, to pound. (4/ PIS.) See Pestle. Doublet, pestle.

PISTOL, a small hand-gun. (F.—Ital.) In Shak. Merry Wives,
y. 2.53; and as a proper name.=F. pistole, ‘a pistoll, a great


(F.—W. Indian.) Sometimes
‘ Pereago, or large


In any case, piquet is a_


PITCHER


horseman’s dag;’ Cot. [Here dag is an old name for a pistol.]
Shortened from F. pistolet, the same. B. We also find Ital.
pistolese, ‘a great dagger,’ in Florio; and it seems to be agreed that
the two words are closely connected; that the word pistolese is the
older one; and that the name was transferred from the dagger
to the pistol, both being small arms for similar use. The E. name
dag for pistol confirms this ; since dag must be the F. dague, a dagger.
y. The Ital. pistolese is known to have been named from a town in
Tuscany, near Florence, now called Pistoja. The old name of the
town must have been Pistolia; and this is rendered extremely
probable by the fact that the old Latin name of the town was
Pistorium, which would easily pass into Pistolia, and finally into
Pistoja. ‘ Pistols were first used by the cavalry of England about
1544;’ Haydn. Der. pistol, vb., Tw. Nt. ii. 5. 423 pistol-et.
Doublet, pistole.

PISTOLE, a gold coin of Spain. (F.—Ital.) In Dryden, The
Spanish Friar, A. v. Sc. 2. The dimin. form jpistolet is, in Beaum. and
Fletcher, The Spanish Curate, Act i. sc. 1 (Jamie). Yet the word is
not Spanish, but French. The forms Pistole and pistolet, in the sense
of ‘ pistole,’ are the same as pistole and pistolet in the sense of pistol.
- MF, pistolet, ‘a pistolet, a dag, or little pistoll, also, the gold coin
tearmed a pistolet;’ Cot. Diez cites from Claude Fauchet (died
1599) to the effect that the crowns of Spain, being reduced to a
smaller size than French crowns, were called pistolets, and the smallest
pistolets were called bidets; cf. ‘ Bidet, a small pistoll;” Cot. Thus
the name is one of jocular origin; and the words pistole and pistol
are doublets. Pistol, being more Anglicized, is the older word in
English.

PISTON, a short cylinder used in pumps, moving up and down
within the tube of the pump. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Bailey’s Dict.,
vol. ii. ed. 1731.—F. piston, ‘a pestell, or pounding-stick ;” Cot. In
mod. F. ‘a piston.’ =Ital. pistone, a piston ; the same word as pesione,
a large heavy pestle. =Ital. pestare, to pound.—Late L. pistare, to
pound ; allied to pistus, pp. of pinsere, pisere,to pound. See Pestle,
Pistil, Pea.

PIT, a hole in the earth. (L.) ME. pit, Wyclif, Luke xiv. 5; put,
Ancren Riwle, p. 58, 1.4. AS. pyt, pytt; Luke xiv. 5.—L. puteus,
a well, pit; Luke xiv. 5 (Vulgate). B. Perhaps orig. a well of pure
water, a spring ; and so connected with L. putus, pure, from the
same root as piirus; see Pure. Der. pit, verb, to set in competition,
a phrase taken from cock-fighting. ‘A pit is the area in which
cocks fight ; hence, to pit one against the other, to place them in
the same pit, one against the other, for a contest;’ Richardson.
The pit of a theatre was formerly called a cock-pit ; Hen. V, prol. 11.
Also pit-fall, Macb. iv. 2. 35; pit-man, pit-saw; cock-pit.

PITAPAT, with palpitation. (E.) In Dryden, Epilogue to
Tamerlane. A repetition of pat, weakened to pit in the first in-
stance. Sir T. More says the old folks ‘ walked pit-pat upon a paire
of patens;’ Works, p. 94d. See Pat.

PITCH (1), a black sticky substance. (L.) ME. pich, pych;
Rob. of Glouc. p. 410, 1. 8485; O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 251,
1. 24; older form pik, id. i. 269, 1. 22. AS. pic, Exod. ii. 3.—L. pic-,
stem of pix, pitch. Hence also G. pech. B. Allied to Gk. ricoa
(for wik-ya). Cf. Pine (1). Der. pitch, verb; pitch-y, All’s Well,
iv. 4.24. Also pay (2).

PITCH (2), to throw, to fall headlong, to fix a camp, &c. (E.)
Spelt pytche in Palsgrave. <A palatalized form of pick, to throw,
Cor. i. I. 204; esp. used of throwing a pike or dart. ‘I pycke with
an arrowe, Je darde;’ Palsgrave. It was particularly used of
forcibly plunging a sharp peg into the ground; hence the phrase ‘ to
pitch a camp, i.e. to fasten the poles, tent-pegs, palisades, &c. ‘At
the eest Judas schal picche tentis ;’? Wyclif, Numb. ii. 3, where the
later version has ‘ sette tentis.? The old pt. t. was pihte or pighte,
pp- piht, pight. ‘A spere that is pight into the erthe,’ Mandeville’s
Travels, ed. Halliwell, p. 183. ‘He pighte him on the pomel of his
heed ’=he pitched [fell] on the top of hishead; Chaucer, C. T. 2691
(A 2689). ‘Ther he pihte his stef’=there he fixed his staff ;
Layamon, 29653. Allied to pick, verb; and probably related to
pike. See Pick, Pike. Der. pitch, sb., Tw. Nt. i. 1. 123 pitch-
fork, allied to ME. pikforke =pick-fork, Prompt. Parv. ; pitch-pipe.

PITCHER, a vessel for holding liquids. (F.~OHG.—L.)
ME. picher, pycher; English Gilds, ed. Toulmin Smith, p. 354, 1. 123
pychere, Sir Perceval, 1. 454, in Thornton Romances, ed. Halliwell. =
OF. picher, pecher, a pitcher ; spelt pichier in Cotgrave, who gives it
as a Languedoc word. Cf. OProv. pichiers, pechiers (Bartsch); Prov.
pichié, pechié (Mistral) ; Haut-Maine piche; Span. and Port. pichel,
a tankard, Ital. pecchero, bicchiere, a goblet, beaker. —OHG. pechari
(G. becher).—Late L. bicarium, a goblet, beaker, wine-cup. The
suggested connexion with Gk. Bikes, an earthen wine-vessel, is by
no means certain. See Beaker, which isa doublet. Der. pitcher-
plant.


PITH


PITH, the soft substance in the centre of stems of plants, marrow.
(E.) ME, pith, pithe, Chaucer, C. T. 6057 (D 475). AS. pida,
4Elfred, tr. of Boethius, c. xxxiv. § 10; lib. iii. pr. 11.-4-Dnu. pit, pith;
MDnu. pitte (Hexham) ; Low G. peddik, pith (Bremen Worterbuch).
Der. pith-y, Tam. Shrew, iii. 1. 68; pith-i-ly, pith-i-ness 3 pith-less,
Pens VT, ii. 5.11.

PITTANCEH, an allowance of food, a dole, small portion. (F.)
ME. pitance (with one 7), pitaunce, P. Plowman, C. x. 92; Ancren
Riwle, p. 114, 1. 5. =F. pitance, ‘meat, food, victuall of all sorts,
bread and drinke excepted ;’ Cot. B. Of disputed etymology ;
cf. Span. pitanza, a pittance, the price of a thing, salary; Ital.
pietanza, a pittance, portion. In all probability the Ital. pietanza is
a popular corruption, due to a supposed connexion with piefd, pity,
mercy, as if to give a pittance were to give alms. The Lombard form
is still pitanza (Diez). Diez connects pitance with OF. pite, a thing
of little worth, which he further connects with petit, small; see
Piece. y. The Span. pitar means to distribute allowances of
meat, &c., and is clearly a connected word; this seems at once to
set aside any connexion with piety or pity. But Ducange gives the
Late L. pictantia as a pittance, a portion of food (given to monks) of
the value of a picta, which he explains to be a very small coin issued
by the counts of Poitiers (moneta comitum Pictavensium), This
answers to OF, pite, ‘ the half of a maille, a French farthing ;” Cot.
8. This brings us back to the same OF. pite, but suggests a different
origin for that word, viz. Late L. picta, a Poitiers coin. And this
L. picta is supposed to be due to Late L. Pictava, i.e. Poitiers (5th
cent.).

PITY, sympathy, mercy. (F.—L.) ME. pité, Floriz and
Blauncheflor, ed. Lumby, 529; Ancren Riwle, p. 368, 1. 14.—OF.
pite (pité), 13th cent. (Littre); pitet, 12th cent. (id.) —L, pietatem,
acc, of pietas; see Piety. Der. pity, verb, As You Like It, ii. 7.
117; piti-able, piti-abl-y, piti-able-ness ; piti-ful, All’s Well, iii. 2.130;
piti-ful-ly, piti-ful-ness ; piti-less, As You Like It, iii. 5. 40; piti-less-ly,
piti-less-ness ; pity-ing-ly. Also pite-ous, a corruption of ME, pit-ous,
Chaucer, C. T. 8956 (E 1080), spelt pitos, Rob. of Glouc., p. 204,
1. 4180, from OF. pitens, mod. F. piteux, ‘ pitiful, merciful,’ Cot. ;
from Late L. pietdsus, merciful. And hence piteous-ly.

PIVOT, a pin upon which a wheel or other object turns. (F.—
Ital.—Late L.) In Cotgrave.—F. pivot, ‘the pivot or, as some call
it, the tampin of a gate, or great doore, a piece of iron, &c., made,
for the most part, like a top, round and broad at one end and sharp
at the other, whereby it enters into the crappaudine [iron wherein the
pivot plays]; and serves as well to bear up the gate as to facilitate
the motion thereof;” Cot. Formed, with dimin. suffix -of, from Ital.
piva, a pipe. = Late L. pipa, a pipe ; connected with L. pipare, pipire,
to chirp as a bird; see Pipe. B. The Ital. piva meant (1) a pipe,
(2) a tube with a fine bore; and so came to mean a solid peg, as well
shown in the MItal. dimin. form pivolo, or piviolo, ‘a pin or peg of
wood, a setting or poaking sticke to set ruffes with, also a gardeners
toole to set herbes with called a dibble;’ Florio. [Much disputed ;
see Diez; and see the articles piva and pivolo or piviolo in Florio,

PIX, an old form of Pyx, q.v.

PIXY, a fairy (Scand.). ‘Ifa pixie, seek thy ring ;’ Scott, Pirate,
ch. 23 (song). Also pisky, which is an older form.—Swed. dial.
pysk, pyske, a little goblin (Rietz) ; cf. Norw. pjusk, an insignificant
person (Ross). See Notes on E, Etym., p. 218; and E. D. D.

PLACABLE,, forgiving, easy to be appeased. (L.) In Minsheu,
ed. 1627; and in Milton, P. L. xi. 151. Taken directly from L.
placabilis, easily appeased; formed with suffix -bilis from placare, to
appease. Allied to placére; see Please. Der. placabl-y, placable-
ness. Also placabili-ty, Sir T. Elyot, The Governor, b. ii. c. 6.

PLACARD, a bill stuck up as an advertisement. (F.—Du.) In
Minsheu, ed, 1627; he notes that it occurs in the 2nd and grd years
of Philip and Mary (1555, 1556).—F. placard, plaquard, ‘a placard,
an inscription set up; also a bill, or libell stuck upon a post; also,
rough-casting or pargetting of walls;’ Cot, The last is the orig.
sense, Formed with suffix -ard (of OHG. origin, from G. hart =E.
hard) from the verb plaquer, ‘to parget or to rough-cast, also, to clap,
slat, stick, or paste on ;’ Cot.— Du. plakken, to paste, glue; formerly
also ‘to dawbe or to plaister,’; Hexham. [The Du. plakkaat, a pla-
card, is merely borrowed back again from the French.] The Du.
plakken is prob. of imitative origin (Franck). Der. placard, verb.
And see plack, plaque, placket.

PLACE, a space, room, locality, town, stead, way, passage in a
book. (F.—L.—Gk.) In early use. In King Horn, ed. Lumby,
718.—F. place, ‘a place, room, stead, .. a faire large court ;? Cot.=
Folk-L. *plattia ; 1. platea, a broad way in a city, an open space,
courtyard. Sometimes platéa, but properly platéa, not a true L.
word, but borrowed. = Gk. wAareia, a broad way, a street ; orig. fem.
of mAatds, flat, wide.4-Lithuan. platus, broad; Skt. prthu-, large,
great;cf. Skt. prath, to spread out. And prob, allied to Flat.


PLAINT


Hence also plant, q.v. Der. place, verb, K. Lear, i. 4. 156 ; plac-er;
place-man, added by Todd to Johnson. And see plaice, plant.
Doublet, piazza.

PLACENTA, a substance in the womb. (L.) Called placenta
uterina in Phillips, ed. 1706.—L. placenta, lit. a flat cake.4-Gk.
mAaxkows, a flat cake; cf. mAdg, a flat surface. Der. placent-al.

PLACID, gentle, peaceful. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. R. iii, 217.
=F. placide, ‘calm ;’ Cot.—L. placidus, gentle, lit. pleasing. = L.
placére, to please; see Please. Der. placid-ly; placid-i-ty, directly
from L. placiditas, the F. placidité being late.

PLACK, a small copper coin, worth 4 pennies Scots. (F.—
Du.) First used, spelt plak, of a somewhat different coin, in the
reign of James III of Scotland (1460-88). Ducange has placa as the
Latinized form (1426).—<F. plaque, a coin; ‘En ce temps (1425)
couroit une monnoie a Paris nommee fplaques;’ qu. in Hatzfeld,
Also a flat plate (Cot.).—F. plaquer, ‘to lay flat upon;’ Cot.—Du.
plakken, to paste, glue, &c. Cf. MDu. placke, ‘a French sous;’
Hexham. See Placard.

PLACKET, an apron, petticoat, a woman; a slit in a petti-
coat. (Du.) See Troil. and Cress. ii. 3. 22; K. Lear, iii. 4. 100.
A variant of placard; seeN, E.D.—Du. plakkaat, a placard; from
Du. plakken, to stick up; with F. suffix -ard; see Placard.

PLAGIARY, one who steals the writings of another, and passes
them off as his own. (F.—L.) Spelt plagiatrie in Minsheu, ed. 1627,
with the same definition as in Cotgrave (given below). [Sir T.
Browne uses the word in the sense of plagiarism, Vulg. Errors, b. i.
c. 6. § 7, yet he has plagiarism in the very next section. Bp. Hall has
plagiary as an adj., Satires, b. iv. sat. 2.1. 84.]—F. plagiaire, ‘ one
that steals or takes free people out of one country, and sels them in
another for slaves;..also a book-stealer, a book-theef;’ Cot.—L.
plagiarius, a man-stealer, kidnapper.=L. plagium, kidnapping;
whence also plagidre, to steal or kidnap a free person ; lit. to ensnare,
net.—L. plaga,anet. Der. plagiar-ize, plagiar-ism, plagiar-ist.

PLAGUE, a pestilence, a severe trouble. (F.—L.) ME. plage
(not common), Wyclif, Rev. xvi. 21, to translate L. plagam ; the pl.
plagis (=plages, plagues) is in Wyclif, Gen. xii. 17, where the Vul-
gate has the L, abl. plagis.—OF. plage, plague (Godefroy). But the
E. word was prob. taken directly from Latin, and spelt with final -xe
at a later date.=L. plaga, a stroke, blow, stripe, injury, disaster.
Gk. mAny7, a blow, plague, Rev. xvi. 21. From the base mAny-,
as in mAny-7, a blow, and in mAnocey (for *mAny-yev), to strike; cf.
Lithuan. plakti, to strike; L. plangere, to strike. See Brugmann, i.
§ 569. @ The spelling plage occurs as late as in the Bible of 1551,
Rey. xvi. 21. The u was introduced to keep the g hard. Der.
plague, vb., Temp. iv. 192; spelt laghe in Caxton’s Reynard the Fox,
p- 70, 1. 9; plague-mark, plague-spot, And see Plaint.

PLAICH, a kind of flat fish. (F.—L.) ME. plaice, playce;
Havelok, 896. Spelt place, plaise in Minsheu, ed. 1627.— OF. plais,
noted by Littré, s. v. plie; he also gives plaise as a vulgar F. name of
the fish, the literary name being flie, as in Cotgrave.—Late L.
platisa, platissa (Voe. 40. 7, 94. 28) ; for L. platessa, a plaice (Lewis) ;
whence the F. forms by the regular loss of ¢ between vowels, and
before a stressed vowel. . So called from its flatness; from the base
PLAT, flat, which appears also in Gk. mAar-vs, flat, broad. See
Place. Cf. Flounder and Flawn.

PLAID, a loose outer garment of woollen cloth, chiefly worn by
the Highlanders of Scotland. (Gael.—L.) Spelt glad in Sir T.
Herbert, Travels, p. 313, who speaks of a ‘Scotch plad;’ also in
Phillips, ed. 1706, and in Kersey, ed. 1715. ‘ Heland [Highland]
plaidis ;’? Ane littil Interlud (Bannatyne MS.); 1. 32. Plaid is in
Johnson. = Gael. plaide, a blanket; cf. Irish plaide, a plaid, blanket.
B. Macleod and Dewar consider plaide to be a contraction of Gael.
(and Irish) peallaid, a sheep-skin. Cf. Gael, peallag, a shaggy hide,
alittle covering. These words are from Gael. (and Irish) peall, a skin,
hide, also a covering or coverlet. All from L, pellis, a skin ; cognate
with E. fell. See Fell (2). Der. plaid-ed.,

PLAIN, flat, level, smooth, artless, evident. (F.—L.) ME.
plein, plain. ‘Thing that I speke it moot be bare and pleyn;’
Chaucer, C, T. 11032 (F 720). ‘The cuntre was so playne;’ Will.
of Palerne, 2217. ‘ Upon the pleynz of Salesbury ;’ Rob. of Glouc.
p. 7.1. 155; where it is used as a sb.=—F. plain, ‘plain, flat;’ Cot. =
L. plan-um, acc. of planus, plain, flat. B. Idg. type *pla-nos; cf. Celtic
type *pld-ros, flat surface, W. Jlawr; see Floor. Prob. *pla- is
lengthened from *gel-; see méA-avos in Prellwitz. Der. plain, sb.,
plain-ly, plain-ness; plain, adv.; plain-dealer, Com. of Errors, ii. 2.
88 ; plain-deal-ing, adj., Much Ado, i. 3. 33; plain-deal-ing, sb.,
Timon, i. 1, 216; plain-hearted ; plain-song, Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 1. 134;
plain-spoken, Dryden, Preface to All for Love, § 3; plain-work.
Also ex-plain, And see plan, plane (1), planisphere, placenta, piano.

PLAINT, a lament, mourning, lamentation, (F. 1 ME.
pleinte, Havelok, 134; Ancren Riwle, p. 96, 1. 18. OF. pleinte (11th


455


456 PLAINTIFF


century, Littré), later plainte, ‘a plaint, complaint ;’ Cot.= Late L.
plancta, a plaint; closely allied to L. planctus, lamentation. Both
are allied to planctus (fem. plancta), pp. of plangere, to strike, beat,
esp.’ to beat the breast as a sign of grief, to lament aloud. A
nasalized form from the base PLAG, to strike; see Plague. Der.
plaint-iff, q.v., plaint-ive, q.v.; also com-plain. The verb ¢o plain,
i.e. to mourn, is perhaps obsolete; it is equivalent to F. plaindre
from L. plangere; see K. Lear, iii. I. 39.

PLAINTIFF, the complainant in a law-suit. (F.—L.) It
should have but one f. ME. fplaintif; spelt playntyf, Eng. Gilds,
ed. Toulmin Smith, p. 360, 1. 18.—F. plaintif, ‘a plaintiff ;’ Cot.
Formed with suffix -if (L. -iuus) from L. planct-us, pp. of plangere, to
lament, hence, to complain; see Plaint. Doublet, plaintive.

PLAINTIVE, mournful. (F.—L.) Really the same word as
the above, but differently used. In Daniel, Sonnet iv, To Delia.
=F. plaintif, fem. plaintive, adj., ‘lamenting, mournful ;’ Cot. See
Plaintiff. Der. plaintive-ly, -ness,

PLAIT, a fold, braid; to fold together, interweave. (F.—L.)
Minsheu, ed. 1624, has ‘ to platte or wreath.’ Shak. has plat, Romeo,
i. 4. 89. For plaited, in K. Lear, i. 1. 183, the quartos have pleated,
the folios plighted. Cotgrave translates F. plier by ‘ to fould, plait.’
ME. plaiten, pleten, verb; plait, sb. ‘Playte of a clothe, Plica;
Playtyd, Plicatus ; Playtyn, Plico;’ Prompt. Parv. The pt. t. plaited
is in P. Plowman, B. vy. 212; spelt pletede, id. A. v. 126. The verb
is formed from the sb., which alone is found in French.=OF. ploit,
pleit, plet, a fold (Burguy ; Godefroy gives ploit only); the mod. F.
word is pli; Littré, s.v. pli, gives an example of the use of the form
ploit in the 13th century.=Late L. plic’tum, for plicitum, by-form of
L. plicétum, acc. of plicdtus, pp. of plicare, to fold. The F. verb
plier =L. plicare, and also appears as ployer, ‘to plie,’ Cot. See Ply.
Der. plait-er. Doublets, pleat, plight (2).

PLAN, a drawing of anything on a plane or flat surface ; esp. the
ground-plot ofa building ;ascheme. (F.—L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706;
Pope, Essay on Man, i.6.—F. plan, ‘ the ground-plat of a building ;’
Cot.—F. plan, adj. (fem. plane), flat, which first occurs in the 16th
century (Littré) ; a ‘learned’ form of F. plain. A late formation
from L. planus, plain, flat; the earlier F. form being plain; see
Plain. Der. plan, verb, Pope, Satires from Horace, Ep. II. i. 374.
Hence plann-er.

PLANE (1), a level surface. (F.—L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706,
who speaks of ‘a geometrical plane,’ ‘a vertical plane,’ &c.—F.
plane, fem. of the adj. plan, flat ; with the E. sense of ‘a plane,’ it
occurs in Forcadel, fléments d’Euclide, p. 3 (Littré), in the 16th
century. See Plan. We also find E. plane as an adj., as ‘a plane
surface.’ See Plane (2). Der. plani-sphere, q.v.

PLANE (2), a tool; also, to render a surface level. (F.—L.)
1. The carpenter’s plane was so called from its use; the verb is older
than the sb. in Latin. We find ME. plane, sb., a carpenter’s tool, in
the Prompt. Parv. This is the F. plane (Cot.), from Late L. plana,
a carpenter’s plane (Lewis). 2. The verb is ME. planen, Chaucer,
C. T., D 1758; spelt planyn in the Prompt. Parv.=F. planer, to
plane. =—L. planare, to plane (Lewis), 4 Lewis gives Corippus as
the authority for the verb plandre; Prof. Mayor gives me a re-
ference to St. Augustine, de gen. c. Manich. I. § 13. See Plain.

PLANE (3), PLANE-TREE, the name of a tree, with spread-
ing boughs. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. plane; Wyclif, Gen. xxx. 37;
Squire of Low Degree, ed. Ritson, 1. 40; plane-leef, leaf of a plane,
Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 187, 1. 9.—F. plane, ‘the great maple; ’
Cot.—L. platanum, acc. of platanus, a plane.=Gk. mAdrayvos, the
oriental plane; named from its broad leaves and spreading form
(Liddell).—Gk. mAarvs, wide, broad. See Brugmann, i. § 444.
€ Sometimes called platane (an inferior form) from L. platanus ; ME.
platan, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, ii. 303.

PLANET, a wandering star, (F.—L.—Gk.) So called to dis-
tinguish them from the fixed stars. ME. planete, Rob. of Glouc.,
p- 112, 1. 2436.—OF. planete, 13th cent. (Littré); mod. F. planéte.—L.
planéta.— Gk. mAavarns, a wanderer; lengthened form of mAavjs, a
wanderer, of which the pl. mAdvyres was esp. used to signify the
planets. — Gk. tAavdw, I lead astray, cause to wander ; pass. mAavdopar,
I wander, roam.—Gk. mAdvn, a wandering about. Der. planet-ar-y,
Timon, iv. 3. 108; planet-oid (see Asteroid); planet-stricken or
planet-struck, see Hamlet, i. 1. 162.

PLANE-TREE; see Plane (3).

PLANGENT, clashing, dashing, resounding, striking. (L.)
Rare. In Sir H. Taylor, Philip van Artevelde, Part I,i. 1.97. L.
plangent-, stem of plangens, pres. pt. of plangere, to strike; see Plaint.

12 ANISPHERE, a sphere projected on a plane. (Hybrid; L.
and Gk.) ‘ Planisphere, a plain sphere, or a sphere projected in plano ;
as an astrolabe;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. A barbarous hybrid
compound, From plani-, for L. planus, flat; and sphere, a word of
Gk. origin. See Plain and Sphere.


PLAT

PLANK, a board. (F.—L.) ME. planke, Will. of Palerne,
2778; Rob. of Brunne, Handlyng Synne, 5261.— North F. (Picard)
planke ; Norm. dial. planque.—L. planca, a board, plank. So called
from its flatness; it is a nasalized form from the base PLAK, with
the idea of flatness. Cf. Gk. mAdg (gen. mAax-ds), a flat stone;
mAak-ivos, made of board. See Placenta. Der. plank, verb.
gar The Central F. form planche accounts for planched, Meas. for
Meas. iv. I. 30.

PLANT, a vegetable production, esp. a sprout, shoot, twig, slip.
(L.) ME. plante, Chaucer, C. T. 6345 (D 763). AS. plante; the
pl. plantan occurs in the entry ‘ Plantaria, gesawena plantan’ in Voc.
149. 22.—L. planta, a plant ; properly, a spreading sucker or shoot.
From the base PLAT, spreading, seen in Gk. mAards, spreading,
broad. See Place. @ The L. planta also means the flat sole of
the foot; hence ‘to plant one’s foot,’ i.e. to set it flat and firmly
down. Der. plant, verb, Chaucer, C. T. 6346 (D 764) ; AS. geplantian,
Mercian version of Psalm, ciii. 16; plant-er ; plant-at-ion, see Bacon,
Essay 33, Of Plantations, from L. plantatio, a planting, which from
plantare, to plant. Also plant-ing, plant-ain, planti-grade.

PLANTAIN (1), the name of a plant. (F.—L.) ME. plantain,
Chaucer, C. T. 16049 (G 581).—F. plantain, ‘ plantain, waybred ;’
Cot.—L. plantiginem, acc. of plantago,a plantain; Pliny. B. So
named from its flat spreading leaf, and connected with planta; see
Plant. So also arose the ME. name waybred, AS. wegbréde,
‘properly way-broad, but called way-bread,’ Cockayne’s A.S. Leech-
doms, vol. ii. Glossary; however, the AS. -bréde represents the sb.
brédu, breadth. So also the G. name wegebreit.

PLANTAIN (2), a tree resembling the banana. (F.—Span.—L.)
‘ Oranges and plantans, which is a fruit that groweth upon a tree; ”
Hakluyt, Voy. vol. ii. pt. 2, p. 129.—OF. plantain, variant of
platane, orig. a plane-tree (Godefroy). =—Span. plantano, a plantain ;
variant of platano, (1) a plane-tree, (2) a plantain. = L. platanum, acc.
of platanus, a plane. See Plane (3).

PLANTIGRADE, walking on the sole of the foot. (L.)
Scientific. Coined from planti-, for planta, the sole of the foot,
also a plant ; and grad-i, to walk. See Plant and Grade. For
the form planti-, cf. L. planti-ger, bearing shoots.

PLAQUE, an ornamental plate, a (metal) tablet for a wall.
(F.—Du.) Modern; F. plaque, sb.; from plaquer, vb., to plate;
MF. flaquer, to fix, fasten up.—Du. plakken, to paste up; see
Plack, Placard.

PLASH (1), a puddle, a shallow pool. (E.) ME. plasche, Allit.
Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 2798; Prompt. Parv. AS. plese, Birch,
Cart. Saxon. iii. 356; now Plash Park, near Cardington, Salop; cf.
EFries. plas, plasse, a shallow pool.-MDu. plasch; ‘een plas ofte
[or] plasch, a plash of water: een plasregen, a sudden flash [flush] of
raine; cf. plasschen in’t water, to plash, or plunge in the water ;’
Hexham. Hence OF. plascg, plassis, a pool (Godefroy). BCE,
also G. platschen, to splash, dabble, Dan. pladske (for *platske), to
splash, dabble about, Swed. plaska (for *platska), to dabble, showing
that a ¢ has been lost before s, the Du. plasch standing for *plat-sch.
y. The various forms are extensions from the base PLAT, to strike,
beat, appearing in AS. plettan, to strike with the palm, slap, John,
xix. 3; also in Swed. dial. pldtta, to strike softly, slap, whence the
frequentative pliéttsa, to tap with the finger-points (Rietz).

PLASH (2), another form of Pleach, q.v. In Nares.

PLASTER, a composition of lime, water, and sand, for walls ;
an external medical application for wounds. (L.—Gk.) ME. plastre,
Chaucer, C. T. 10950 (F 636). [This is a F. spelling, from OF.
plastre, used in the 13th and 14th century (Littré). The spelling
plaister in English answers to the occasional 14th cent. F. spelling
plaistre.| AS. plaster, a plaster for wounds; Cockayne’s Leech-
doms, i. 298, 1. 12.—L. emplastrum, a plaster; the first syllable
being dropped; cf. Late L. plastreus, made of plaster (Ducange). =
Gk. €umAaotpoy, a plaster; a form used by Galen instead of the
usual word €umAacroy, a plaster, which is properly the neut. of
éumdagros, daubed on or over.= Gk, éumAdocev, to daub on. Gk.
éu- for év, in, before the following 7; and mAdooev, to mould, form
in clay or wax. See In and Plastic. 4 Cf. ME. emplaster, sb.,
Relig. Antiq. i. 54. Der. plaster, verb, ME. plasteren, Prompt.
Parv., from MF. plastrer (F. pldtrer), ‘to plaister,’ Cot. Also
plaster-er, plaster-ing. And see piastre.

PLASTIC, capable of moulding; also, capable of being
moulded. (L.—Gk.) Used in the active sense by Pope, Essay on
Man, iii. 9; Dunciad, i. to1.—L. plasticus.4-Gk. tAaorixds, fit for,
or skilful in moulding. Formed with suffix -:«-os from mAaort-ds,
formed, moulded.=Gk. mwAdocew, to mould. B. Gk. wAdooeyv
appears to be put for *Adr-yew, and to be related to E. fold, vb.
Der. plastic-i-ty, from mod. F. plasticité (Littré).

PLAT (1), PLOT, a patch of ground. (E.) Now commonly
written plot, which is also the AS. form. Spelt plat in 2 Kings ix.


PLAT


26, A.V. ‘So three in one small plat of ground shall ly ;’ Herrick,
Hesperides ; to Anthea. ‘A garden platte ;’ Udall’s Erasmus, Luke
xxiii. 50, fol. 182, b. See further under Plot, Patch. ts The
spelling plat is prob. due to ME. plat, F. plat, flat; for which see
Plate.

PLAT (2), to plait. (F.—L.) In Shak. Romeo, i. 4. 89. The
same as Plait, q.v.

PLATAWNE, a plane-tree; see Plane (3).

PLATE, a thin piece of metal, flat dish. (F.—L.) ME. Plate,
Chaucer, C. T. 2123 (A 2121).—OF. and F. plate, in use in the 12th
century; see Littré. Hamilton, s.v. plat (flat), gives ‘ Vaisselle plate,
hammered plate; particularly, plate, silver plate.’ Plate is merely
the fem. of F. plat, flat. Cf. Late L. plata, a lamina, plate of metal ;
Ducange ; and esp. Span. plata, plate, silver (whence La Plata). But
the Span. word was derived from the French; Littré.—Late L.
platta, a lamina, ‘plate of metal;’ fem. of Folk-L. *plattus, flat ;
whence Du. and Dan. plat, G. and Swed. platt, are borrowed.
Allied to Gk. rAat-vs, broad ; see Place. Der. plate, vb., Rich. II,
i. 3. 28; plate-glass, plat-ing. And see platt-er, plat-eau, plat-form,
plat-ina, plat-it-ude.

PLATEAU, a flat space, tableland. (F.—L.) ‘A rising
ground or flattish hill... called a plateau ;’ Annual Register (1807),
p- I1, col. 2.—F. plateau; Cotgrave gives the pl. plateaux, ‘ flat and
thin stones.’ The mod. F. plateau also means ‘tableland;’ Hamilton.
OF. platel, a small plate, used in the 12th century; Littré. Dimin.
of plat, a platter, dish, which is a sb. made from the adj. plat, flat.
See Plate. Doublet, platter, q.v.

PLATFORM, a flat surface, level scaffolding. (F.—L.) In
Shak. meaning (1) a terrace, Hamlet, i. 2. 213; (2) a scheme, plan,
1 Hen. VI, ii. 1. 77.—F. plateforme, ‘a platform, modell ;’ Cot.—
F, plate, fem. of plat, flat; and forme, form; so that the sense is
‘ground-plan.’ See Plate and Form.

PLATINA, a heavy metal. (Span.—F.—L.) Added by Todd
to Johnson’s Dict.—Span. platina, so called from its silvery appear-
ance. =Span. plata, silver. See Plate. Now called platinum.

PLATITUDEH, a trite or dull remark. (F.—L.) Modern.
Not in Todd’s Johnson. =F, platitude, flatness, insipidity (Hamilton).
A modern word, coined (on the model of Jatitude) from F. plat, flat.
See Plate.

PLATOON, a group of men, sub-division of a company of
soldiers. (F.—L.) ‘ Platoon, a small square body of 40 or 50 men,’
&c.; Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1731. Adapted from F. peloton,
‘pronounced plo-tong, a ball, tennis-ball, group, knot, platoon ;’
Hamilton. Formed, with suffix -ov, from MF. pelote, a ball ; whence
also E. pellet. See Pellet.

PLATTER, a flat plate or dish. (F.—L.) ME. plater (with
one 7), Wyclif, Matt. xxiii. 25. AF. plater; N. Bozon, p. 33. A
parallel formation to OF. flatel, a plate (Burguy), which is the
origin of mod. F. plateau, still used in the sense of ‘ waiter, tray, tea-
board;’ Hamilton. See Plateau.

PLAUDIT, applause. (L.) The form plaudit is due to mis-
reading the L. plaudite as if it were an E. word, in which the final
e would naturally be considered as silent. Sometimes the pronuncia-
tion in three syllables was kept up, with the singular result that the
suffix -ité was then occasionally mistaken for the ordinary E. suffix
-ity. Hence we find 3 forms; (1) the correct Latin form, considered
as trisyllabic. ‘ After the plaudite stryke up Our plausible assente ;’
Drant, tr. of Horace, Art of Poetry, Av. (2) The form in -ity. ‘ And
give this virgin crystal plaudities;’ Cyril Tourneur, The Revenger’s
Tragedy, Act ii. sc. 1 (R.). (3) The clipped E. form. ‘Not only
the last plaudit to expect ;” Denham, Of Old Age, pt. iv. 1. 44.—L.
plaudite, clap your hands; a cry addressed by the actors to the
spectators, requesting them to express their satisfaction. It is the
imperative pl. of plaudere, to applaud, also spelt plddere; see
Plausible. Der. plaudit-or-y, an ill-coined word, neither French
nor Latin.

PLAUSIBLE, deserving applause, specious. (L.) In Shak. it
means ‘ contented, willing;’ Meas. iii. i. 253. Englished from L.
plausibilis, praiseworthy. Formed, with suffix -bilis, from plausi-,
for plausus, pp. of plaudere, plodere, to strike, beat, clap hands,
applaud. Der. plausibl-y, plausibili-ty, plausible-ness. And see
plaudit, ap-plaud, ex-plode.

PLAY, a game, sport, diversion. (E.) ME. play, Chaucer, C. T.
8906 (E 1330). AS. plega, a game, sport, Grein, ii. 361. B. We
may note how frequently the AS. plega was used in the sense of
fight, skirmish, battle. Thus e@sc-plega, ash-play, is the play of
spears, i.e. fighting with spears; sweord-plega, sword-play, fighting
with swords. Even in the Bible, 2 Sam. ii. 14, to play really means
to fight; but this is due to the use of Judere in the L. version;
Wyclif uses the same word. To play on an instrument is to strike
upon it. Cf. ‘¢ympanan plegiendra’= of them that strike the timbrels ;


PLEBEIAN


AS. version of Ps. Ixvii. 27, ed. Spelman. And again, ‘ plegad mid
handum’ =clap hands; Ps. xlvi.1. Thus the orig. sense of plega is
a stroke, blow, and plegian is to strike, to clap hands. Perhaps of
imitative origin. @] E. Miiller connects AS. plega with G. pflege,
care; the form answers, and the verb may have meant ‘to be busy
with.’ See note in N.E.D.; and see Plight. Der. flay, verb,
ME. pleyen, Chaucer, C. T. 3333, AS. plegian (above). Also play-
bill, -book, -fellow, -house (AS. pleg-hiis, in Mone, Quellen, p. 366),
-mate, -thing ; play-er, play-ing, play-ing-card; play-ful, ME. pleiful,
Old Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 205, 1. 20; play-ful-ly, -ness.
PLEA, an excuse, apology. (F.—L.) ME. plee, Chaucer, Parl.
of Foules, 485; ple, Rob. of Glouc. p. 471, 1. 9679; play, Eng.
Gilds, ed. Toulmin Smith, p. 350, 1. 13.— AF. flee, N. Bozon, p. 157;
OF. ple, plai, occasional forms of OF. plait, plaid, a plea. Littré
cites the pl. forms lez, plais, plaiz (12th century) from Ducange, s. v.
Placitum. Cotgrave gives plaid, ‘ sute, controversie, . . also a plea,
or a pleading, also, a court of pleading.’ Late L. placitum, a judge-
ment, decision, decree, sentence ; also a public assembly, conference,


457


-or council, so called because of the decisions therein determined on ;


L. placitum, an opinion. [The order of ideas is: that which is
pleasing to all, an opinion, decision, conference for obtaining
decisions, public court, law-coutt, proceedings or sentence in a law-
court, and finally pleading, plea. The word has run a long career,
with other meanings beside those here cited; see Ducange.]=L.
placitum, neut. of placitus, pp. of placére, to please; see Please.
Der. plead.

PLEACH, PLASH, to intertwine boughs in a hedge, to
strengthen a hedge by enweaving boughs or twigs. (F.—L.) ‘The
hedge to plash;’ Hood, The Lay of the Labourer, st. 5. ‘The
pleached bower;’ Much Ado, iii. 1. 7. ME. plechen, used in the
sense ‘to propagate a vine;’ Palladius on Husbandrye, ed. Lodge,
b. iii. 1. 330. = OF. plescier, plessier, later, plesser, ‘to plash, to bow,
fold, or plait young branches one within another, also, to thicken
a hedge or cover a walk by plashing;’ Cot. Norm. dial. plesser
(Moisy). Formed from a Late L. type *flectiare, later plessare, to
pleach; from Late L. *flectia, later plessa, a thicket of interwoven
boughs, occurring A.D. 1215 (Ducange). We also find flesseiwm,
a pleached hedge; and numerous similar forms. B. All from L.
plectere, to weave. Plec-t-ere is extended from the base PLEK, to
weave, appearing in Gk, mAéx-erv, to weave, and in L. flic-are, to
fold. See Ply, Plait. The form fleach answers to an OF. dial.
form plechier.

PLEAD, to urge an excuse or plea. (F.—L.) ME. pleden.
‘ Pledoures shulde peynen hem to plede for such ’=pleaders should
take pains to plead for such; P. Plowman, B. vii. 42. [We also
find the form fleten, id. vii. 39.] Also plaiden, Owl and Nightingale,
184.—OF. plaider, ‘ to plead, argue, or open a case before a judge,
also, to sue, contende, goe to law;’ Cot.—OF. plaid, a plea; see
Plea. @ The form pleten is due to OF. plet, an occasional form of
plaid which preserves the ¢ of L. placitum. Der. plead-er=ME.
pledour, as above, from F. plaideur, ‘a lawyer, arguer, pleader,’ Cot.
Also plead-ing, plead-ing-ly.

PLEASH, to delight, satisfy. (F.—L.) ME. plesen, P. Plowman,
B. xiv. 220; Chaucer, C. T. 11019 (F 707).—OF. plesir, plaisir,
mod. F. plaire, to please. L. placére, to please. Allied to placare,
to appease. Der. pleas-er, pleas-ing, pleas-ing-ly. Also pleas-ant,
ME. plesaunt, Wyclif, Heb. x. 8, from OF. plesant, pres. part. of
plesir, to please. Hence fleas-ant-ly, -ness; also pleasant-r-y,
Walpole, Anecdotes of Painting, vol. i. c. 3 (R.), from F. plaisan- .
terie, ‘jeasting, merriment,’ Cot. And see pleas-ure, plac-able, plac-id,
com-pla-cent, dis-please, plea, plead.

PLEASURE, agreeable emotion, gratification. (F.—L.) For-
merly plesure, as in The Nut-brown Maid (about A.D. 1500), 1. 93;
see Spec. of Eng. ed. Skeat, p. 102. Also pleasure, Skelton, Phyllyp
Sparowe, 1004 ; id. p. 147. Formed, by the curious change of -ir
into -ure, from ME. plesir (spelt plesyr), Flower and Leaf, 1. 113;
playsir, Caxton, Hist. Troye, leaf 331.—F. plaisir, pleasure; the
same change occurs in Jeis-wre, whilst in ¢reas-ure the suffix takes the
place of -or. The object seems to have been to give the word an
apparent substantival ending. B. Again, the F. plaisir is merely
a substantival use of the OF. infin. plaisir, to please; just as F.
loisir (leisure) is properly an infinitive also. See Please. Der.
pleasure, verb, in Tottell’s Miscellany, ed. Arber, p. 128, 1. 16 of
Poem on the Death of Master Deuerox; also pleasure-boat, pleasure-
ground; pleasur-able, a coined word; pleasur-abl-y, pleasur-able-ness.

PLEAT, the same word as Plait, q.v.

PLEBEIAN, pertaining to the common people, vulgar. (F.—L.)
In Shak. Cor. i. 9. 73 ii. 1. 10; &c.—OF. plebeien, mod. F. plébéien;
omitted by Cotgrave, but in use in the 14th century; Littré. Formed
with suffix -en (<L. -dnus) from L. plebeius, plebeian. = L. plébé-, old
stem of plébés, more usually plebs (stem plébi-), the people. B. Ple-bs


458 PLECTRUM


orig. meant ‘a crowd, a multitude,’ and is connected with plé-rique,
very many, plé-nus, full; Gk. wA7O0s, a multitude, Anp7s. full. See
Plenary. Der. plebeian, sb.

PLECTRUM, a small instrument for plucking the strings of a
lyre or harp. (L.—Gk.) L. plectrum.=—Gk. mAjxrpov, an instrument
to strike with.—Gk. mAnooew (for *mAny-yeuv), to strike; cf. pt. t.
mé-tAny-a. Allied to mAny-n, a stroke, L. plaga; see Plague.

PLEDGE, a security, surety. (F.-OLowG.) ME. flegge, a
hostage, Trevisa, iii. 129, ]. 6, and 321, 1. 8; Eng. Gilds, ed.
Toulmin Smith, p. 382, 1. 26; also a security, Prompt. Parv.—OF.
plege, ‘a pledge, a surety,’ Cot.; mod. F. pleige. Connected with
OF. plevir (Burguy), later pleuvir, ‘to warrant, assure,’ Cot. ; see
Replevy. B. Of uncertain etymology; but Kluge proposes to
derive it from OSax. plegan, to attend to, to promise, to pledge
oneself; cf. OHG. pflegan, to answer for (G. pflegen); also AS.
pléon, to risk; pleoh, risk (Franck). See Plight (1). Der. pledge,
verb, 3 Hen. VI, ili. 3. 2503 pledg-er.

PLEIAD, one of the group of stars in the constellation Taurus,
called the Pleiades. (L.—Gk.) ‘ The sweet influences of Pleiades ;’
Job xxxvili, 31.—L. Pléiades, pl. Gk. TAerddes, a group of seven
stars in the constellation Taurus; Ionic TAniades. (Not, as fabled,
allied to mAéecv, to sail.)

PLEIOCENE, more recent; PLEISTOCENE, most recent.
(Gk.) Terms in geology referring to strata. Coined from Gk.
mAciw-v, more, TAEioTO-s, most; and xavds, recent, new. B. Gk.
mAciwy, mA€ioTos are comp. and superl. forms from moAvs, much,
allied to mAé-ws, full; see Plenary. The adj. xa:vds is allied to
Skt. kanya, a maiden; Brugmann, i. § 647.

PLENARY, full, complete. (Late L.—L.) Spelt plenarie in
Minsheu, ed. 1627. Englished from Late L. pléndrius, entire,
occurring in St. Augustine (N. E. D.); which is extended, with suffix
-Grius, from L, plénus, full. B. L. plé-nus is connected with Gk. mAé-ws,
full, miu-rAn-w, I fill; from the base *plé, to fill, 4/PEL; cf. E.
Full, q.v. Der. fleni-potent-i-ar-y, q.v., pleni-tude, q.v., plent-y, q.v.
From the same root are com-plete, com-ple-ment, de-plet-ion, ex-plet-ive,
im-ple-ment, re-plete, re-plen-ish, sup-ple-ment, sup-ply, ac-com-plish,
pleb-eian, plu-ral, &c. Also (of Gk. origin) ple-o-nasm, ple-thora,
plei-o-cene, police. Also full, q.v.

PLENIPOTENTIARY, having full powers. (L.) Some-
times used as a sb., but properly an adj., as in ‘the plenipotentiary
ministers’ in Howell, Famil. Letters, bk. ii. let. 44. Dec. 1, 1643.
Coined from L. pléni-, for plénus, full; and potenti-, decl. stem of
potens, powerful; with suffix -drius. See Plenary and Potent.
@ Milton has plenipotent, P. L. x. 404.

PLENITUDH, fulness, abundance. (F.—L.) In Shak. Com-
plaint, 302.—OF. plenitude, ‘plenitude;’ Cot.—L. plénitido, fulness.
mL. pléni-, for plenus, full; with suffix -tudo. See Plenary,
Plenty.

PLENTY, abundance. (F.—L.) In early use. ME. fplenté,
plentee, Ancren Riwle, p. 194, 1.6.—OF. plente, plentet, later plenté,
‘plenty ;’ Cot.—L. plénitatem, acc. of plénitis, fulness. —L. pléni-, for
plénus, full; with suffix -tds. See Plenary, Plenitude. Der.
plente-ous, ME. plenteus, Rob. of Glouc. p. 23, 1. 531, frequently spelt
plentiuous (= plentivous), Wyclif, Matt. v. 12, 1 Thess. ili. 12, from
OF. plentivos; this form appears to be made with suffix -os (=L.
-dsus) from OF. plentif, answering to a L. form *plénitiuus. Hence
plenteous-ly, -ness. Also plentiful, Hamlet, ii. 2. 202; plenti-ful-ly,
~71€SS.

PLEONASM, redundancy of language. (L.—Gk.) Spelt pleo-
nasme in Minsheu, ed. 1627. — L. pleonasmus (Lewis). — Gk. mAeovacpés,
abundance, pleonasm. = Gk. mAcova¢ev, to abound, lit. to be more. =
Gk. mAégov, neut. of mAéwy, mAeiwy, more. See Pleiocene. Der.
pleonast-ic, from Gk. *mAeovaotixds, redundant ; pleonast-ic-al-ly.

PLESIOSAURUS, an extinct genus of Reptilia. (Gk.) The
name signifies ‘like a lizard.’=Gk. mAngio-s, near, allied to méAas,
near; and cavpos, a lizard.

PLETHORA, excessive fulness, esp. of blood. (Iu.—Gk.) ‘Ful-
nesse, in greke flethora, in latyne plenitudo;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of
Helth, b. iii. c. 1. The o is long. A Latinized spelling of Gk.
mAnOwpn, fulness. —Gk. 7A70-os, a throng, crowd; with the suffix
-w-pyn. B. Gk. 7A7q-Oos (like 7An-pns, full) is from the base mAy, seen
in wip-rAn-m, I fill; see Plenary. Der. plethor-ic.

PLEURISY, inflammation of the pleura, or membrane which
covers the lungs. (F.—L.—Gk.) [Quite different from plurisy, q.v.]
Spelt plewrisie in Baret, ed. 1580, and in Cotgrave.—MF. pleuresie,
‘a pleurisie;” Cot.—L. pleurisis, another form of pleuritis.— Gk.
mAevuptris, pleurisy.— Gk. mAeupa, a rib, the side, the ‘ pleura.’ Der.
pleurit-ic, from Gk, mAevpitixés, suffering from pleurisy ; pleurit-ic-al.
Also pleuro-pneumon-ia, inflammation of the pleura and lungs, from
Gk. mvevpor, a lung; see Pneumatic.

PLIABLE, PLIANT, PLIERS; see under Ply.


PLOT


PLIGHT (1), an engagement, promise; usually as a verb, to ©
pledge. (E.) ME. pliht, pligt (1) danger, Layamon, 3897; (2)
engagement, Story of Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 1269. AS.
pliht, risk, danger, used to translate L. periculum in A‘lfric’s Colloquy,
in the Merchant’s second speech ; whence the verb fliktan, to endanger
(and later, to promise under peril of forfeiture); see Toller. B. The
sb. plikt is formed with the substantival suffix -¢ (Idg. -to-) from the
strong verb pléon (<*pleh-an), to risk, imperil, in Aélfred’s tr. of
Gregory’s Pastoral Care, ed. Sweet, p. 229, 1. 20; the pt. t. pleah
occurs in the same, p. 37, 1. 7.4-OFries. plicht, peril, risk, care;
we also find the OFries. ple, pli, danger, answering to AS. plioh,
danger, in A‘lfred, tr. of Gregory, p. 393, 1.9; MDu. plicht, ‘ duty,
debt, obligation, administration, office, custom, or use ;’ Hexham;
cf. plegen, ‘to be accustomed, to experiment, or trie’ [i.e. to risk] ;
id.; G. pflicht, duty, obligation, faith, allegiance, oath; from the
OHG. strong verb plegan, to promise or engage to do. 4 The
base is pleh, whence *pleh-t>>plih-t ; perhaps the same base occurs in
pleg-an, toplay. Der. plight, verb, ME. plizten, plihten, P. Plowman,
B. vi. 35, AS. pliktan, weak verb, to imperil, Laws of King Cnut
(Secular), § 67, in Thorpe’s Ancient Laws, i. 410; plight-er, Antony,
is 132..126.

PLIGHT (2), to fold; as sb., a fold; also, a state, a condition.
(F.—L.) Shak. has ‘ plighted cunning,’ K. Lear, i. 1. 283 ; where the
quarto editions have pleated. Spenser has ‘ with many a folded
plight ;’ F. Q. ii. 3. 26; also plight (=plighted) as a pp. meaning
‘folded’ or ‘ plaited,’ F.Q. ii. 6. 7, vi. 7. 43. Palsgrave has: ‘I
plyght or folde ; I plyght a gowne, I set the plyghtes in ordre.’ B. The
word is really misspelt, by confusion with plight (1), and should be
plite, without gh. Chaucer has the verb flitez, to fold, Troilus, ii. 697,
1204. It is clearly a mere variant of plait or pleat, due to the feminine
form of the L. pp.; whereas plait is from the masculine. See Plait.
y. ME. plyte, state, condition, is the same word; ‘To bringe our
craft al in another plyte;’ Chaucer, C. T.,G 952. Palsgrave has:
‘ Plyte or state.” =A. plyte, state, condition; given by Godefroy as
a doubtful word in Littleton, Instit. 306; but it is merely the fem.
of OF. ploit, a fold, plait, also ‘ maniére d’étre, situation ;’ Godefroy.
See Littleton’s Tenures, ed. 1612, foll. 69 and 83 back; and see
Roquefort, who explains plyte, pliste, as ‘ condition, state.’ = Folk-L.
type *plecta, for plicita, by-form of plicata, fem. of plicdtus, pp. of
plicire, to fold. Cf. F. lit<L. lectum, QJ <‘ Plite of lawne, &c.,


seemeth to be a certaine measure, or quantitie thereof. Anno 3
Edw. IV, cap. 5 ;” Minsheu.
PLINTH, the lowest part of the base of a column. (L.—Gk.)


‘ Plinthe, the neather part of a pillars foot, of the forme of a four-
square bricke or tile;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627. Cotgrave gives F. plinthe,
‘a plinth, &c.—L. plinthus,—Gk. mdivOos, a brick or tile, a brick-
shaped body, a plinth. Cognate with E. Flint, q.v.

PLIOCENE; see Pleiocene,

PLOD, to trudge on laboriously, labour unintermittingly. (E.)
In Shak. Sonnet 50, Merry Wives, i. 3. 91, All’s Well, iii. 4.6. ‘The
primitive sense of glod is to tramp through the wet, and thence,
figuratively, to proceed painfully and laboriously ;* Wedgwood. It
particularly means to wade through pools ; the E. D.D. gives plodder,
mud; also, to walk through mud; load, plowd, to walk through
mire and water. The ME. sb. flod (dat. plodde) meant a filthy pool
or puddle; ‘In afoul glodde in the strete suththe me hym slong’=
people then threwe him into a foul puddle in the street; Rob. of
Glouc. p. 536, 1. 11077. Soalso Northern plud, a puddle; E. D. D.;
cf. Irish plod, plodan, a pool, standing water, plodach, a puddle; Gael.
plod, a pool, standing water, plodan, a small pool; the Irish and
Gael. forms being from ME. plod (Macbain). Cf. also EFries.
pludern, to splash about in water; Dan. dial. pludder, Dan. pladder,
mud; Low G. pladdern, to splash about in water (cf. plad, to wade,
in Nares). Of imitative origin; see Plash (1). Der. plodd-er, plodd-
ing, plodd-ing-ly,

LOT (1), aconspiracy, stratagem. (F.—L.) An early instance of
the word seems to be in Spenser, F. Q. vii. 6. 23 (about A.D. 1590) ;
he also has plot as a verb, id. iii. 11. 20. Perhaps shortened from
complét, used in exactly the same sense, both as a sb. and verb.
The sb. complét is in Shak. Rich. III, iii. 1. 192 ; and the pp. com-
plotted in Rich. II, i. 1. 96. We have numerous examples of the loss
of an initial syllable, as in fence for defence, sport for disport, story for
history. Shak. has both plot and complot, and both words are em-
ployed by him both as sb. and verb. Minsheu, ed. 1627, gives com-
plot, but does not recognise plot, except as a ground-plan. =F. com-
plot, ‘a complot, conspiracy ;’ whence comploter, ‘to complot, con-
spire,’ Cot. The OF. complot means (1) crowd, in the 12th century,
(2) a battle, (3) a plot; and is of disputed origin. B. Complot and
plot are nearly of the same date, and were sometimes associated.
Shak. has: ‘To glo, contrive, or cémplot any ill;’ Rich. IJ, i. 3. 189.
Chapman has: ‘All plots and cémplots of his villany;’ Alphonsus,


PLOT, PLAT


y.4. -y. But it isnot unlikely that plot was sometimes an abbre-
viation of plotform, a variant of platform, i.e. a plan, orig. a map or
sketch of a place ; it occurs in Gascoigne’s Art of Venerie, 1. 40 (1575).
It is certain that plat was used as an abbreviation of pla/form, a map;
as in Higgins, Mirror for Mag., ed. 1815, i. 315 (1574). Cf.‘Ilam
devising a platform in my head;’ Lyly, Campaspe, Act v. Sc. 4.
‘The platt and fabrick of our purpose ;” Letters of Eminent Men, ed.
Sir H. Ellis (Camden Soc.), p. 155. ‘The Captain did plat out and
describe the situation of all the ilands;’ Hakluyt, Voy. iii. 98 (we
now say plot out). See Platform; and see Notes on E. Etym.,

. 219. Der. plot, verb; plott-er.

PLOT (2), PLAT, a small piece of ground. (E.) A plot is a
patch of ground; and it also meant, in ME., a spot on a garment.
‘Many foule plottes’ = many dirty spots (on a garment) ; P, Plowman,
B. xiii. 318. {In the Prompt. Parv. p. 405, we are told that plot
means the same as flek; and we also find ‘ Plecke, or plotte, portiun-
cula. Way’s note adds that ‘Pleck is given by Cole, Ray, and
Grose as a North-Country word, signifying a place, and is likewise
noticed by Tim Bobbin;’ and he correctly refers it to AS. plec, Matt.
vi. 5 (Northumb. version).] The expression ‘ plot of floures faire’
occurs in the Flower and the Leaf, 1. 499 (15th century). AS. plot,
a patch of ground; A. S. Leechdoms, ed. Cockayne, iii. 286, 1. 19
(the same passage is in Schmid, Die Gesetze der Angelsachsen, App.
XI, 1. 5; p. 408, ed. 1858). Cf. Goth. plats, a patch, Mark ii. 21 ;
MDu. flets, ‘a peece or a patch of cloth;’ Hexham; Dan. flet, a
spot, plot; gres-plet, a grass-plot. We also find AS. splott, a plot
of land (Toller). 4 For the spelling plat, see Plat (1).

PLOUGH, an instrument for turning up the soil. (E.) ME.
plouh, plou, plow ; Chaucer, C. T. 889 (A 887); Havelok, 1017. The
traces of it in AS. are but slight; we find /6k=a plough-land, in
A.S. Leechdoms, ed. Cockayne, iii. 286, 1. 19, where is the phrase
‘ne plot ne pl6h’ =neither plot of ground nor plough-land. EFries.
plog.+-Icel. zlogr, a plough (the usual Norse word being ardr) ; Swed.
flog; Dan. plov. We find also OFries. ploch, G. pflug, OHG.
pfiuoc. The Lithuan plugas, Russ. pluge, a plough, are borrowed
words from the Teutonic. Der. plough, verb, Cor. iii. 1. 71;
plough-er, see Latimer’s Sermon on the Ploughers; plough-able;
plough-boy ; plough-iron, 2 Hen. IV, v. 1. 20; plough-man, ME. plow-
man, Chaucer, C. T., 531 (A 529); plough-share, spelt plowh-schare in
Trevisa, ii. 353, and derived from the verb to shear.

PLOVER, the name of a wading bird. (F.—L.) ME. plouer
(with w for v), P. Plowman’s Crede, ed. Skeat, 764; Gower, C. A.
iii. 33; bk. vi.943; Prompt. Parv.—OF. plovier, in the 13th century
(Littré), later pluvier, <a plover;’ Cot. Formed asif from a Late L.
type *pluvarius, equivalent to L. pluuialis, belonging to rain, because
these birds were said to be most seen and caught in a rainy season. =
L. pluuia, rain. =L. pluit, it rains. See Pluvial.  ‘ We derive it
from the F. gluvier, pour ce qu’on le prend mieux en temps pluvieux
qu’en nulle autre saison ;’ Belon, Oyseaux, 260; cited in Pennant,
Zoology, vol. ii (R.). Perhaps it was only a fancy. Wedgwood
remarks that the G. name is regenpfeifer, the rain-piper.

PLUCK, to pull away sharply, to snatch. (E.) ME. plukken,
P. Plowman, B.v. 591; xii. 249; Wyclif, Matt. xii. 1. AS. pluccian,
Matt. xii. 1.4-Du. plukken; Icel. plokka, plukka, perhaps a borrowed
word; Dan. plukke; Swed. plocka; G. pfliicken. B. Some think the
word to be not orig. Teutonic, but borrowed from Late L. *piluccdre
(whence Ital. piluccare, to pluck out hair), from L. filus, a hair; see
Pile (3). This is doubtful. Der. pluck, sb., a butcher’s term for
the heart, liver, and lights of an animal, prob. because they are plucked
out after killing it ; Skinner, ed. 1671, has ‘ pluck, a sheep’s pluck, i.e.
cor animalis,’ an animal’sheart. Hence pluck in the sense of ‘spirit,
courage;” whence the adj. plucky. Cf. the phrase ‘ fluck up thy
spirits,’ Tam. Shrew, iv. 3. 383 ‘ pluck up, my heart,’ Much Ado,
V. I. 207%

PLUG, a block or peg used to stop a hole. (Du.) Skinner, ed.
1671, has ‘a plug, or splug;’ but that the initial s is a true part
of the word may be doubted. The word is also in Hexham, ed.
1658, and was probably borrowed from Dutch.—MDu. plugge, ‘a
plugge, or a woodden pegg;’ also pluggen, ‘to plugge, or pegge;’
Hexham. Mod.Du. plug, a peg, bung. We find also Swed. plugg,
a plug; G. pflock, a wooden nail, plug, peg, pin; Low G. plugge,
plagge, a peg (Liibben). Der. glug, verb.

PLUM, the name of a fruit. (L.—Gk.) ME. ploume, plowme,
Prompt. Parv. ‘ Piries and plomtrees’ = pear-trees and plum-trees, P,
Plowman, B. v.16: AS. pliime, A‘lfric’s Grammar, ed. Zupitza, p. 20;
cf. pliim-sla, lit. plum-sloe, fliim-treow, plum-tree, in A‘lfric’s Gloss.,
Nomina Arborum. Here plam-sla translates L. priiniculus, and plim-
treow translates priunus. B. The AS. plime is a mere variation of L.
prina, pl. of primum, a plum, with change of r to /, and of x to m.
The change from r to / is very common, and hardly needs illustration ;
the Span. coronel =E. colonel ; cf. Westphal. plime, prime, a plum; and


PLUMP


L. plimum in the Corpus Glossary, 1. 1600. The change from to
m is not infrequent, as in lime-tree for line-tree, venom for L. uenénum,
vellum from ¥. velin, megrim from F. migraine. Thus plum is a
doublet of prune; see Prune, which is of Gk. origin. The Swed.
plommon, Dan. blomme, G. pflaume, are all alike due to priinum.
Der. plum-tree, as above ; plum-cake, plum-pudding. Doublet, prune


459


(2).

PLUMAGE, the whole feathers of a bird. (F.—L.) ‘Pruning
his plumage, cleansing every quill;’ Drayton, Noah’s Flood (the
dove); ¢lumage, Book of St. Alban’s, fol.a 7, back.=F. plumage,
‘feathers ;’ Cot.=—F. plume, a feather; see Plume.

PLUMB, a mass of lead hung ona string to show a perpendicular
direction. (F.—L.) ‘ Plumbe of leed [lead], Pluwmbum;’ Prompt.
Parv. The older spelling is plomb, shortened to plom in the comp.
plomrewle, a plumb-rule, Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, ed. Skeat, pt. ii.
§ 38, 1. 6.—F. plomb, ‘lead, also, a carpenter’s plummet or plomb-
line;’ Cot.—L. plumbum, lead. B. Probably cognate with Gk.
HOAcBos, péAvBbdos, lead. Der. plumb, verb, to sound the depth of
water with a plumb-line, from F. plomber, ‘to sound,’ Cot.; plumb-
line, plumb-rule, used by Cot. to translate F. plombet; plumb-er, also
spelt plummer, as by Cot. to translate F. plombier ; plumb-er-y, i.e.
plumber’s shop, Bp. Hall, Satires, Bk. v. sat. 1,1. 5 fromend. Also
plumb-e-an, plumb-e-ous, leaden, both formed from L. plumbeus, leaden.
Also plumb-ago, g.v.; plumm-et, q.v.; plump (2), plunge.

PLUMBAGO, black-lead. (L.) A mineral resembling lead,
but really different from it. In Ash’s Dict., ed. 1777, but only as a
botanical term, ‘lead-wort. —L. plumbago, a kind of leaden ore;
black-lead.—L. plumbum, lead. Cf. lumb-ago, from L. lumbus.

PLUME, a feather. (F.—L.) In Shak. Cor. iii. 3. 126; the
ME. pl. plumes occurs in Richard the Redeles, iii. 49. =F. plume, ‘a
feather, plume of feathers ;” Cot.—L. pliima, a small soft feather,
piece of down. . Prob. so called from its floating in the air;
from 4/PLEUGH, to fly; see Fly (1). Brugmann, i. § 681 (d).
Der. plume, verb, esp. in pp. plumed, K. Lear, iv. 2. 57, Oth. iii.
3- 349; plum-ose; also plum-age, q.v.

PLUMMET, a leaden weight, a plumb-line. (F.—L.) ME.
plommet, Wyclif, Deeds [Acts], xxvii. 28. = OF. plommet (Godefroy) ;
MF. plombet, ‘a plummet,’ Cot. Dimin. of plomb, lead; it thus
means ‘a small piece of lead.’ See Plumb.

PLUMP (1), full, round, fleshy. (E.) ‘ Plump Jack,’ 1 Hen. IV,
li. 4. 5273 ‘ plumpy Bacchus,’ Antony, ii. 7.121. ME. plomp, rude,
clownish (as in Dutch), Caxton, tr. of Reynard the Fox, ed. Arber,
p- 100, 1.12. The word is in rather early use as a sb., meaning
‘a cluster, a clump,’ applied either to a compact body of men, or to
a clump of trees. ‘ Presede into the plumpe’=he pressed into the
throng; Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 2199. Though it cannot be
traced much further back, the word may be E., as the radical verb
is preserved in the prov. E. plim, to swell, to swell out; used in
many dialects ; so also prov. E. plum, plump, to swell; see E. D.D.
B. Hence plump means orig. ‘swollen,’ and since that which is
swollen becomes tight and firm, we find plump further used in the
sense of ‘hard;’ as ‘the ways are plump’=the roads are hard
(Kent); E. D.S. Gloss. B. 11; C. 5. In Oxfordshire the word
plim is also used as an adj., in the sense of plump. The word ap-
pears in other Teutonic tongues. Cf. EFries. and Low G. plump,
bulky, thick. -- MDu. plomp, ‘rude, clownish, blockish, or dull;’
Hexham. This is a metaphorical use, from the notion of thickness;
Swed. plump, clownish, coarse; Dan. plump, clumsy, vulgar; G.
plump, heavy, clumsy, blunt. Der. plump-ly, plump-ness. Also
plump-er, a vote given at elections, when a man who has a vote for
two separate candidates gives a single vote to one, thus (in my
opinion) swelling out that candidate’s number of votes as compared
with the rest; see Todd’s Johnson. Also plump-y, as above. Also
plump, sb., a cluster, as above ; plump or plump out, verb, to swell out.

PLUMP (2), straight downward. (F.—L.) Formerly also plum,
plumb. ‘ Plumb down he drops,’ Milton, P. L. ii. 933; cf. ‘ Which
thou hast perpendicularly fell,’ K. Lear, iv. 6. 54. ‘They do not
fall plumb down, but decline a little from the perpendicular ;’
Bentley, Serm. 2 (Todd). Of French origin; but altered to plump
by the influence of plump (3) below. Really due to plumb, and
derived from F. plomb, L. plumbum, lead. ‘To fall like lead’ must
have been a favourite metaphor from the earliest times, and Diez
shows, in his article on Ital. piombare, to fall like lead, that this
metaphor is widely spread in the Romance languages. Cf. Ital.
cadere a piombo, to fall plump, lit. like lead; F. a plomb, ‘down-
tight ;? & plomb sur, ‘direct, or downright;’ Cot. See plumb in
N.E. D., and Plumb (above). aay

PLUMP (3), vb., to fall heavily down. (E.) ‘It will give you
a notion how Dulcissa plumps into a chair ;’ Spectator, No. 492.
Apparently of imitative origin; cf. prov. E. plump, a plunge ; also,
to plunge heavily, to sink. ME. plumpen; ‘ Plump hym in water ;


PLUNDER


Liber Cure Cocorum, p. 51.-+EFries. plumpen, to fall heavily,
plempen, to plunge into water; so also Du. plompen, G. plumpen,
Swed. plumpa, to fall heavily. Under the influence of this word, the
adv. plumb, ‘straight downward,’ became plump; see Plump (2).

PLUNDER, to rob, pillage. (G.) A note in Johnson’s Dict.
(ed. Todd) says that ‘ Fuller considers the word as introduced into
the language about 1642.’ R. gives a quotation for it from Prynne,
Treachery and Disloyalty, pt. iv. pp. 28, 29 (not dated, but after
A.D. 1642, as it refers to the civil war). He also cites a quotation
dated 16425 but it first occurs in 1632, in the Swedish Intelligencer,
ii. 179 (N.E.D.). Hexham, in his Du. Dict., ed. 1658, gives
MDu. plunderen, plonderen, ‘to plunder, or to pillage;’ the mod.
Du. spelling is plunderen. It is one of the very few G. words in
English, and seems to have been introduced directly rather than
through the Dutch. —G. fliindern, to plunder, pillage, sack, ransack ;
provincially, to remove with one’s baggage. Derived from the G.
sb. plunder, trumpery, trash, baggage, lumber; the E. keeping the
vowel of the sb. B. Connected with Low G. plunnen, formerly
also plunden, rags; Bremen Worterbuch. The orig. sense of the sb.
was ‘rags,’ hence, worthless household stuff ; the verb meant, accord-
ingly, to strip a household even of its least valuable contents. The
Dan. plyndre, Swed. plundra, Du. plunderen, are all alike borrowed
from the G. or Low G. @ See Trench, Eng. Past and Present.
He says that ‘ plunder was brought back from Germany about the
beginning of our Civil Wars, by the soldiers who had served under
Gustayus Adolphus and his captains.’ And again, ‘ on plunder,
there are two instructive passages in Fuller's Church History, b. xi.
§ 4, 33; and b. ix. § 4; and one in Heylin’s Animadversions there-
upon, p. 196.’ Der. plunder, sb., which seems to be a later word in
E., though really the original word ; plunder-er.

PLUNGE, to cast or fall suddenly into water or other liquid.
(F.—L.) ME. ploungen; ‘and wenen [imagine] that it be right
blisful thing to ploungen hem in voluptuous delyt;’ Chaucer, tr. of
Boethius, b. iit, pr. 2,1. 29.—F. plonger, ‘to plunge, dive, duck ;’
Cot. Formed from a Late L. type *plumbicare, not found, but the
existence of which is verified by the Picard plonguer, to plunge, dive,
due to the same form; see Diez, s.v. piombare. B. Thus plonger
is a frequentative of plomber, to cover with lead, to sound the depth
of water; from F. plomb, lead; see Plumb. Cf. Ital. piombare,
‘to throw, to hurle,...to fall heauilie as a plummet of leade ;’
Florio; also Roumantsch plumbar, to fall heavily (Carigiet). Cf.
AF. se plunge, plunges, Bestiary, 832. See also Plump(2). Der.
plunge, sb., plung-er, plung-ing.

PLUPERFECT, the name of a tense in grammar. (L.) In the
Grammar prefixed to Cotgrave’s F. Dict. will be found the expres-
sion ‘the preeterpluperfect tense;’ he gives ‘ }’avoies esté, I had been,’
asanexample. The E. word is a curious corruption of the L. name
for the tense, viz. plusquamperfectum. We have dropped the syllable
quam, and given to plus the F. pronunciation. = L. pliis, more; quam,
than ; and perfectum, perfect. See Plural and Perfect.

PLURAL, containing or expressing more than one. (F.—L.) A
term in grammar. In Shak. Merry Wives, iv. 1. 59. ME. plural;
“pe plural nombre;’ Trevisa, ii. 171, 1. 253 plurel, id. ii. 173, 1. 11.
=—OF, plurel (12th century, Littré); mod. F. pluriel. = L. pliralis,
plural ; because expressive of ‘more’ than one.—L. plir-, decl.
base of plus, more, anciently spelt plows. Connected with Gk. mAé-ws,
full, 7Aeiwy, more; see Plenary. Brugmann, ii. § 135. Der.
plural-ly, plural-ist, plural-ism. Also plural-i-ty, ME. pluralite, P.
Plowman, C. iv. 33, from F. pluralité, ‘plurality, or morenesse,’ Cot.,
which from L. acc. pliralitatem. And see plurisy.

PLURISY, superabundance. (L.; misformed.) Shak. has plurisy
to express ‘ plethora,’ Hamlet, iv. 7. 118. So also in Massinger, The
Picture, iv. 2 (Sophia): ‘A plurisy of ill blood you must let out.’
And in The Two Noble Kinsmen, v. 1. 66; and in Ford, Fancies
Chaste and Noble, A. iv.sc.1 ; ‘Into a plurisy of faithless impudence.’
Formed as if from L. pluri-, decl. stem of pliis, more; by an extra-
ordinary (prob. an ignorant) confusion with Pleurisy, q.v.

PLUSH, a variety of cloth-like velvet. (F.—L.) _‘ Waistcoats of
silk plush laying by ;” Chapman, tr. of Homer’s Iliad, b. xxiv, 1. 576.
And in Cotgrave.—F. peluche, ‘shag, plush;’ Cot. [Thus the E.
has dropped e; the word should be pelush. The form pluche occurs
in Walloon (Remacle) ; and Godefroy gives pluchine as a variant of
the dimin. form peluchine.| Cf. Span. pelusa, down on fruit, nap on
cloth; Ital. peluzzo, fine hair, soft down. All from the fem. of a
Late L. type *pilicius, hairy (not found), from L. pilus, hair. See
Peruke. q The Du. pluis, fluff, plush, G. pliisch, are mere bor-
rowings from French.

PLUVIAL, rainy. (F.—L.) Little used. ‘ Pluauiall, rainie;’
Minsheu, ed. 1627. —F. pluvial, ‘rainy;’ Cot.—L. pluuidlis, rainy. =
L. pluuia, rain. =L. plu-it, it rains. —4/PLEU, to float, swim. Cf.
Gk. mdéev, to swim, Brugmann, i. § 381. Der. We also find


460


POCK


pluvious, Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. v, c. 24, part 4, Englished
from L. pluuius, rainy. And see plover. i

PLY, to bend, to work at steadily, urge. (F.—L.) ME. plien, to
bend, Chaucer, C. T. 9045; to mould, as wax, id. 9304 (E 1169,
1430). Since moulding wax, &c. requires constant and continued
application of the fingers, we might hence obtain the metaphor of
toiling at; asin to ply a task, to ply an oar; but these extensions
are really due to the use of plien for ME. aplien, to apply.=F. plier,
‘to fold, plait, ply, bend, bow, turne ;’ Cot.—L. plicare, to fold.
Gk. mAéxew, to weave; Russ. pleste, to plait, wind; G. jlechten,
strong verb, to braid, plait, twist, entwine. All from 4/PLEK, to
weave, plait. Der. pli-able, spelt plyable in Fabyan’s Chron. b. i,
c.147, ed. Ellis, p. 133, 1. 31, from F. pliable, ‘ pliable,’ Cot.; pliabi-y,
pliabili-ty, pliable-ness ; pli-ant, Oth. 1. 3. 151, from F. pliant, pres. part.
of plier ; pliant-ly, pliant-ness or plianc-y ; pli-ers or ply-ers, pincers for
bending wire. From L. plicare we also have ap-ply, im-ply, re-ply 3
accom-plice, ap-plic-at-ion, com-plic-ate, com-plex, ex-plic-ate, ex-plic-it,
im-plic-ate, im-pli-cit, in-ex-plic-able, per-plex ; also de-ploy, dis-play,
em-ploy. Also sim-ple, sim-plic-ity, sim-pli-fy; dou-ble, du-plic-ity,
du-plic-ate ; tri-ple, tri-plet, tre-ble; quadru-ple, multi-ple, multi-ply,
&c. Also plait, pleach, pleat, plight (2), splay, sup-ple, sup-plic-ate,
sup-pli-ant, &c. And see flax. See also Apply.

PNEUMATIC, relating to air. (L.—Gk.) Bacon speaks of
‘ pneumaticall substance in some bodies;’ Nat. Hist. § 842.—L.
pneumaticus.— Gk. mvevparixés, belonging to wind, breath, or air.—
Gk. mvevpar-, stem of mvedpa, wind, air.—Gk. mvéev, to blow,
breathe ; for mvéfey (base mvev-). See Neesing. Der. pneumatic-
al, -al-ly 3 pneumatic-s. And see pneumonia.

PNEUMONIA, inflammation of the lungs. (Gk.) Modern.
Todd adds to Johnson only the word ‘ preumonicks, medicines for
diseases of the lungs ;’ but omits preumonia. The o is short.—Gk.
mvevpovia, a disease of the lungs.—Gk. mvevpoy-, stem of mvevpwv
(also mAevpwr), a lung. = Gk. mvéew, to breathe. See Pneumatic
and Pulmonary. Der. pneumon-ic.

POACH (1), to dress eggs.. (F.—OLow G.) Formerly poche.
‘ Egges well poched are better than roasted. They be moste hole-
some whan they be poched;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii,
c.17. Spelt potchin Palsgrave; Levins; Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 53 ; and
in Cotgrave. =F. pocher; Cotgrave gives ‘ Poché, poched, thrust or
digged out with the fingers; oeuf poché, a potched egge.’ Here two
verbs have been confused; for the former sense see Poach (2).
B. Littré unhesitatingly derives pocher from F. poche, a pouch,
pocket ; and Scheler explains that ‘a poached egg’ means ‘an egg
dressed in such a manner as to keep the yolk in a rounded form,’
and that the sense tests upon that of ‘pouch,’ In this view, it is, in
fact, ‘a pouched egg.’ Hatzfeld explains it still more simply by
supposing that the egg is likened to a pouch, because the art is to
dress it in such a way as not to let the yolk escape. Cf. ‘eyron en
poche,’ i.e. eggs in pouch; Two Cookery Books, ed. T. Austin,
p- 24. See Pouch.

POACH (2), to intrude on another's preserves, for the purpose
of stealing game. (F.—OLow G.) ‘ His greatest fault is, he hunts too
much in the purlieus. Would he would leave off poaching !’ Beaum.
and Fletcher, Philaster, iv. 1 (Thrasiline).—F. pocher; ‘ pocher le
labeur d’autruy, to poch into, or incroach upon, another man’s im-
ploiment, practise, or trade;’ Cot. B. There is here some
difficulty in assigning the right sense to F. pocher. Cotgrave gives
it only as meaning ‘to thrust, or dig at with the fingers ;” perhaps
from Low G. poken, to thrust into; see Poke (2). Cf. prov. E.
poach, to tread into holes. y. The MF. pocher is also spelt poucher,
as if from powce, the thumb; see Littré. Cf. Picard pocher, ‘ tater
un fruit avec le pouce ;’ peucher, ‘ presser avec le pouce;’ Corblet;
perhaps from L. pollicem, acc. of pollex, the thumb; cf. OF. pochier,
poucier, the thumb, from the L. adj. pollicaris. Der. poach-er.

POCK, a small pustule. (E.) We generally speak of ‘ the small’
pox ;’ but the spelling pox is absurd, since it stands for pocks, the
pl. of poch, a word seldom used in the singular. [We might as well
write sox asthe pl. of sock; indeed, I have seen that spelling used
for abbreviation.] The word pock is preserved in the adj. pocky,
Hamlet, v. 1. 181. The term small pox in Beaum. and Fletcher,
Fair Maid of the Inn, ii. 2 (Clown), is spelt pocks in the old edition,
according to Richardson. Cotgrave explains F. morbille by ‘ the
small pox,’ but in Sherwood’s Index it is ‘ the small pockes ;’ and
in fact, the spelling pocks is extremely common. The pl. was once
dissyllabic. Fabyan has: ‘he was vysyted with the sykenesse of
pockys;’ vol. ii. an. 1463, ed. Ellis, p. 653. ME. pokke, pl. pokkes,
P. Plowman, B. xx. 97. AS. poc, poce,a pustule. ‘ Gif poc s¥ on
€agan’=if there be a pustule on the eye; A.S. Leechdoms, ed.
Cockayne, iii. 4. The nom. pl. is poccas; Voc. 520. 25.4+EFries.
pok, pokke; Du. pok; G. pocke,a pock. Perhaps related to Poke (1),
with the notion of ‘bag.’ @[ Macbain derives Gael. bucaid, a pustule,


POCKET


from Brittonic L. buccdtus, from L. bucca, the puffed cheek. If
this be so, it is unconnected with E. pock, Der. pox (= pocks) ;
pock-y.

POCKET, a small pouch. (F.—Teut.) ME. poket, Prompt.
Pary. ‘Cered pokets’=small waxed bags; Chaucer, C. T, 16276
(G 808). From North F. (Norm, dial.) *poguette, variant of
pouquette, a little bag ; also in the form pouquet, m.; Moisy. Métivier
gives the modern Guernsey form as pougquette, dimin. of pougue, a
sack or pouch. He cites a Norman proverb: ‘ Quant il pleut le
jour Saint Marc, I] ne faut ni pougue ni sac’=when it rains on St.
Mark’s day (April 25), one wants neither poke nor bag. It is there-
fore a dimin. of O. North F. pogue, Parisian F. poche.—Icel. poki, a
bag; MDu. poke, a bag, Hexham; see Pouch, Poke (1). Der.
pocket, verb, Temp. ii. 1. 67 ; pocket-book, pocket-money.

POD, a husk, a covering of the seed of plants. (E.)  ‘£ Pod, the
husk of any pulse;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Perhaps it merely meant
“bag ;” being related to pad, a cushion, i.e. a stuffed bag, and to
pudding, of which the old meaning was ‘sausage,’ i.e. stuffed skin.
B. The nearest word, in form, is MDu. puden, pl. * huskes, pilles, or
shales,’ i.e. shells. Cf. also AS. puduc, a wen (Toller); Westphal.
puddek, a lump, a pudding ; Low G. puddig, thick, E. dial. poddy.
Der. pod-ware, plants having pods; R. Scot, Disc. of Witchcraft,
b. xii, c.6. See Pudding.

POEM, a composition in verse. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Hamlet, ii.
2, 419.—F. poéme, ‘a poeme;’ Cot.—L. poéma.—Gk. moinua, a
work, piece of workmanship, composition, poem.=—Gk. zoveiv, to
make; see Poet.

POESY, poetry,a poem. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. poesie, Gower,
C. A. ii. 36, bk. iv. 1038. =—MF. poésie,  poesie ;’ Cot.— L. poésin, acc.
of poésis, poetry. — Gk. moinots, a making, poetic faculty, poem. Gk.
movety, to make; see Poet. Der. Hence ‘a posy on a ring,’ Hamlet,
iii. 2. 162, because such mottoes were commonly in verse; see ex-
amples in Chambers, Book of Days, i. 221. Posy stands for poesy, by
contraction. See Posy.

PORBT, a composer in verse. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. poete, Wy-
clif, Deeds [Acts], xvii. 28; Gower, C. A. iii. 374, note; bk. viii.
2942*.—F. poéte, ‘a poet, maker;”’ Cot.—L. poéta.—Gk. mounrys, a
maker, composer, versifier; formed with suffix -rys (Idg. -¢a-) de-
noting the agent, from movety, to make. Der. poet-ic, Gk. mountikés ;
poetic-al, As You Like It, iii. 3. 16; poetic-al-ly; poet-ize, a coined
word. Also foet-aster, in Ben Jonson, as the name of a drama.
answering to a L. form *foétaster, formed from poét-a with the
double suffix -as-ter, with which cf. MF. poét-astre, ‘an ignorant
poet,’ Cot. Also poet-ess, North’s Plutarch, pt. ii. p. 25 (R.), formed
with F. suffix -ess(e)=L. -issa=Gk. -1a0a. Also poet-r-y, ME. poetrye,
Prompt. Parv., from MF. poéterie, ‘poetry,’ Cot. From the same
Gk. verb, onomato-peia, pharmaco-peia.

POIGNANT, stinging, sharp, pungent. (F.—L.) ME. poinant,
Chaucer, C. T. Pers. Tale, Group I, 130; now conformed to the F.
spelling.=F. poignant, * pricking, stinging,’ Cot.; pres. part. of F.
poindre, to prick.=L. pungere (pt. t. pu-pug-i), to prick ; base PEUG.
See Pungent, Point, Der. poignant-ly, poignanc-y. Doublet,

ungent, j

POINT, (1) a dot, prick; (2) a sharp end. (F.—L.) 1. ME.
point, Ancren Riwle, p. 178, 1. 7.—F. point (poinct in Cotgrave), ‘a
point, a prick, a centre;’ Cot.=—L. punctum, a point; orig. neut. of
pp. of pungere, to prick, pt. t. pupugi, See Pungent. 2.
ME. point, Chaucer, Good Women, 1795.—F. pointe, MF.
poincte, *the point of a weapon;’ Cot.—L. puncta, fem. of
pp- of pungere. The two forms are confused in E. Der. point,
verb, ME. pointen, P. Plowman, C. ix. 298; point-ed, point-ed-ly,
point-ed-ness ; point-er, a dog that points; point-ers, pl., the stars that
point to the pole, Greene, Looking-glass for London, ed. Collins,
li. 1. 67; point-ing ; point-less ; point-s-man, a man who attends to the
pointsonarailway. Also point-device, L. L. L. v. 1. 21, shortened form
of the phrase at point device=with great nicety or exactitude, as:
‘With limes [limbs] wrought at poynt-devys ;’ Rom. of the Rose,
I, 830; a translation of OF. @ point devis, according to a point [of
exactitude] that is devised or imagined, i.e. in the best way imagin-
able. (The OF. a point devis does not appear, but see a point in the
Supp. to Godefroy.) Also point-blank, with a certain aim, so as not
to miss the centre, which was a blank or white spot in the old butts
at which archers aimed ; Merry Wives, iii. 2. 34.

POISE, to balance, weigh. (F.—L.) ME. poisen, peisen, to
weigh, P. Plowman, B. v. 217 (and various readings).—OF. poiser
(Supp. to Godefroy, s.v. peser), later peser, ‘to peise, poise, weigh ;”
Cot. [Cf. OF. pois, peis, a weight; now spelt poids, by confusion
with L. pondus, from which it is zot derived. | —L. pensare, to weigh,
weigh out.=L. pensum, a portion weighed out as a task for spinners,
a task; Late L. pensum, pensa, a portion, a weight.—L. pensus, pp.
of pendere, to weigh, weigh out; allied to pendére, to hang; see


POLICE


Pendent, Pensive. Der. poise, sb., used in the sense of weight,
Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. end of c. 33. Also avoir-du-pois,
q.v. The form peise is from AF. peiser =OF. poiser.

POISON, a deadly draught. (F.—L.) Merely ‘a potion;’ the
bad sense is unoriginal. In early use; spelt poyson, Rob. of Glouc.
p- 122, 1. 2605 ; puisun, Hali Meidenhad, ed. Cockayne, p. 33, l. 16.
=F. poison, ‘poison;’ Cot.—L. pdtidnem, acc. of potio, a drink,
draught, esp. a poisonous draught.=L. pdtaire, to drink; potus,
drunken. B. Pdétus is formed with Idg. suffix -to- from pd-, a grade
of 4/PO, to drink; cf. Skt. pa, to drink; Gk. mé-c1s, drink, 7a-pa,
drink. Brugmann, i. § 172. Der. poison, verb, ME. poisonen, K.
Alisaunder, 600; potson-er, poison-ous, poison-ous-ly, -ness. Doublet,
potion.

POITREL, PHITREL, armour for the breast of a horse.
(F.—L.) Poytrell (Palsgrave); also pewtrel in Levins. [ME.
peitrel, Chaucer, C. T. 16032 (G 564).J—OF. poitral, MF. poictral,
poictrail, ‘a petrel for a horse ;’ Cot.—L. pectorale, belonging to the
breast ; neut. of pectordlis. See Pectoral, 4 The form peitrel is
from AF. peitrel, Gaimar, 6385.

POKE (1), a bag, pouch. (Scand.) ‘Two pigges in a poke’=
two pigs in a bag, Chaucer, C. T. 4276 (A 4278). Havelok, 555.
(Cf. Irish poc, a bag; Gael. poca, a bag; from E. or Scand.] Prob.
from Icel. poki, a bag; cf. MDu. poke, ‘a poke, sack,’ Hexham.


461


The relationship to AS. poha, pohha, a bag, is not clear. Der.
pock-et. Doublet, pouch.
POKES (2), to thrust or push, esp. with something pointed. (E.)


ME. poken, Chaucer, C. T. 4167 (A 4169); pukken, P. Plowman, B.
v. 620, 643. [Not in AS.; cf. Irish foc, a blow, a kick; Corn. poc,
a push, shove; Gael. puc, to push, justle; from E.j4Du. poken; E.
Fries. pokern, frequent., to keep on poking about; Low G. poken, to
thrust into; Pomeran. poken; G. pochen. Cf. MDu. poke, a dagger,
lit. ‘a thruster,’ Hexham. Teut. base *puk; perhaps imitative.
Der. poke, sb., pok-er ; and see puck-er.

POLACK, a Pole, an inhabitant of Poland. (Polish.) In Shak,
Hamlet, ii. 2. 63.—Pol. Polak, a Pole. Cf. Polska, Poland, = Pol.
pole; Russ. polé, a field, plain, flat country ; allied to E. field.

POLDAVY, POLEDAVY, a coarse cloth or canvas. (Breton).
See Nares, s.v. Polldavy; and Halliwell. Named from Bret. Powl-
david, a small village near Douarnenez, in Finistere.= Bret. poul,
pool; David, David.

POLS (1), a stake, long thick rod. (L.) ME. pole, P. Plowman,
B. xviii. 52. The E. long o presupposes an AS. a, as in stone from
AS. stan, &c. Thus pole=AS. pal. We find ‘ Palus, pal’ in Voc.
334. 2; where the a is long in both words. Merely a borrowed word,
from L. palus, a stake. Cf. W. pawl, a pole. See Pale (1).
@ Similarly the G. pfahl, a stake, is merely borrowed from the Latin,
Doublets, pale (1), pawl.

POLE (2), a pivot, either end of the axis of theearth. (F.—L.—
Gk.) ‘The north pole;’ L.L.L. v. 2.699. ME. pol, Chaucer, On
the Astrolabe, pt. i. § 14,1.6.—MF. pol, ‘a pole; pol artique, the
north pole;’ Cot.—L. polum, acc. of polus,a pole.=Gk. todos, a
pivot, hinge, axis, pole. = Gk. méAav, to be in motion ; the poles being
the points of the axis round which motion takes place. Allied to
Russ. koleso, a wheel, (4/QEL). Brugmann, i. § 652. Der. pol-ar,
Milton, P. L. v. 269, from L. polaris; hence polar-i-ty, polar-ize,
polar-iz-at-ion.

POLE-AXE, akind of ax. (E.; also L. and E.) Spelt polaxe in
Palsgrave. ME. pollax, Chaucer, C. T. 2546 (A 2544); Rich. Coer
de Lion, 6870. B. Axe (more correctly ax) is from AS. ax; see AX.
y- The prefix has changed ; orig. poll-ax, a weapon for striking one on
the poll or head. But later altered to pole-ax, and in the cognate
Westphal. pal-exe, it is clearly Westphal. pal, a pole; denoting an
ax fastenedto a pole. The Low G. pollewe (as if from polle, the poll,
the head) is also spelt bollexe, which seems to represent the obs.
E. bole-ax (N.E.D.), Icel. boléxi, from the bole of a tree. See Poll.

POLE-CAT, a kind of weasel which emits a disagreeable odour.
(Hybrid; F.—L. and E.) ME. folcat, Chaucer, C. T. 12789
(C 855); also pulkat, Voc. 601. 13. For the latter syllable, see Cat.
The former syllable, ME. pol-, pul-, represents the OF . pole, poule, a
hen ; the form pole occurs in OF, poletier, variant of pouletier, a seller
of poultry; and the mod. E. fozl-try is sounded with the pouwl-=
pole-in pole-cat. The pole-cat is well known as a chicken-thief; cf. the
quotation from Chaucer above. See further under Poult.

POLEMICAL, warlike, controversial (Gk.) In Blount’s.
Gloss., ed. 1674. Formed with suffix -al (=L. Giis), from Gk.
moAepuxds, warlike. Gk. méAeyos, war. B. Formed with suffix -e-pos
(like dy-e-pos = L. an-i-mus) from moA-; perhaps allied to L. pell-ere, to
drive. Der. polemic-al-ly; also polemic-s, from Gk. moAcmx-os.

POLICE, the regulation of a country with respect to the preser-
vation of order ; hence, the civil officers for preserving order. (F.—
L.—Gk.) The expression the police signifies the police-force, i...


A462 POLICY


the force required for maintaining police, or public order. The sb. is
in Todd’s Johnson; but we already find the expression ‘so well a
policed [regulated] kingdome’ in Howell, Instructions for Foreign
Travel, ed. Arber, p. 78, last line but one; A.D. 1642.—F. police,
* policy, politick regiment, civill government ;’ Cot.—L. politia. =
Gk. modrréia, citizenship, polity, condition of a state.—Gk. modi7ns,
a citizen, Gk. moAu-, for médus, a city ; with suffix -rys. PB. Related
to Gk. moA-vs, much; Skt. pur?-, a town. From the same root as
Plenary. With Skt. puri-, cf. Indian -poor in Bhurt-poor, Futteh-
poor, &c. Andsee Full. Der. polic-y, ME. policie, Chaucer, C. T.
12534 (C 600), answering to OF. policie (< L. politia), a learned
form of F. police. Also polity, in Hooker, Eccl. Polity, from L.
politia; polit-ic, spelt politick in Minsheu, from L. politicus, Gk.
aroditikds ; polit-ic-ly; politic-s, spelt politickes in Minsheu ; polit-ic-al,
Minsheu; polit-ic-al-ly ; polit-ic-i-an, used as adj. in Milton, Samson,
1195. And see acro-polis, metro-polis, cosmo-polite.

POLICY, a warrant for money in the public funds, a writing con-
taining a contract of insurance. (F.—Late L.—Gk.) [Quite distinct
from policy as connected with Police, q.v.] ‘A policy of insurance
is a contract between A and B;’ Blackstone. And see Phillips’
Dict., ed. 1706. The form is prob. due to confusion with policy in
the other sense, or the final syllable may have been due to the Span.
or Ital. form.—F. police, a policy; police d’assurance, policy of in-
surance; Hamilton. Cf. Span. poliza, a written order to receive a
sum of money; poliza de seguro, a policy of insurance; MItal. poliza,
a schedule (Florio); Ital. podizza, a bill, ticket, invoice. B. The
Port. form is apdlice, a government security (Vieyra) ; MSpan. pdli¢a
(Minsheu). These forms (and MItal. poliza, pélisa) prob. represent
Late L. apédissa, apédixa, ‘cautio de sumpta pecunia;’ Ducange.
‘Cf, Port. apodixe, a plain proof. All from Late Gk. dmddefis, a
showing forth, a proof.—Gk. dmodeixyy, I point out.—Gk. amd,
from, forth ; deixvups, I show. (See KGrting, § 6294.) 4 This is to
be preferred to the solution in Diez, who refers it to Late L. polypty-
chum, a register; Gk. moAvmtvxov, a piece of writing in many folds,
a long register; from woAv-, much, and mrvxo-, for mrvé, a fold, leaf,
mrvocev, to fold. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 220.

POLISH, to make smooth, glossy, or elegant. (F.—L.) ME.
polischen, Chaucer, C. T. 9456 (E 1582); sometimes contracted to
polschen, as in P. Plowman, B. v. 482. ‘A marble stone jolyshed ;’
Caxton, Reynard the Fox, ed. Arber, p. 11.—F. foliss-, stem of
polissant, pres. part. of polir, to polish. = L. polire, to polish, to make
smooth. Der. polish-er; also polite, in Phillips, ed. 1706, from L.
politus, pp. of polire ; polite-ly, polite-ness.

POLKA, a dance. (Polish.) Said to have been first danced by
-a Bohemian peasant-girl in 1831, and to have been named polka at
Prague in 1835.—Pol. Polka,a Polish woman. Similarly, another
dance is called the Polonaise, lit. Polish woman; another the
Crocovienne, lit. woman of Cracow; another the Mazurka, q.v.

POLL, the head, esp. the back of it, a register of heads or persons,
the voting at an election. (OLow G.) All the meanings are
extended from oll, the rounded part of the head; hence, a head,
person, &c. ME. pol, pl. polles, ‘Pol bi pol’=head by head,
separately, P. Plowman, B. xi. 57. ‘Bi pate ant by polle’=by pate
-and poll; Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 237, ina MS. of the reign of
Edw. II. [Not in AS.] An OLow G. word, found in MDu. jolle,
pol, or bol, ‘ the head or the pate,’ Hexham ; also in Low G. polle, the
head, Bremen Worterbuch; Swed. dial. pull (Reitz), Dan. puld (for
pull), the crown of the head. Cf. EFries. pol, round, full, fleshy.
Der. poll, verb, to cut off the hair, Num. i. 2, iii. 475; poll-tax, a tax
by the head, i.e. on each person. Also pole-axe, formerly pollax,
‘Chaucer, C. T. 2546, OLow G. pollexe, Bremen Worterbuch, from
OLow G. polle, the poll, head, and exe, an ax (later altered to
pole, with reference to the handle); hardly the same as Icel. boldxi,
which is rather an ax for lopping branches, from bolr, bulr, the
‘trunk of atree. Also poll-ard, used as a sb. in Bacon, Nat. Hist.
§ 424, and in Sir T. Browne, Cyrus Garden, c. iii, § 13, in which
the use of the suffix -ard gives the sense of ‘round-headed ;’ it is,
etymologically, the same as in drunk-ard, i.e. F. -ard, from OHG.
--hart, hard. And see Pole-axe,

POLLEN, the powder on the anthers of flowers. (L.) In John-
son; it is also used for fine flour.—L. pollen, pollis, fine flour. Con-
nected with Gk. mdAn, fine sifted meal ; L. pal-ea, straw ; pul-uis, dust.

POLLOCK, POLLACK, a kind of codfish, the whiting. (E.)
In Carew (Survey of Cornwall); Todd’s Johnson, Cf, Gael. pollag,
-a kind of fish, the gwyniad (i.e. whiting); Irish pullog, a pollock;
borrowed from E. Prob. from poll, the head (above); cf. E, poll-ard,
-which is a name of the chub. (Doubtful.)

POLLUTEH, to defile, taint, corrupt. (L.) In Shak. Lucrece,
854, 1063, 1726. Milton has pollute as a pp., Hymn on Christ’s
Nativity, 41 ; but we already find poluted in Skelton, Ware the Hauke,
44, 161, 1743 pollutyd in the Coventry Mysteries, p. 154}; and jolut


POLYTHEISM


in Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, bk. i. pr. 4. 180.—L. polliitus, pp. of
polluere, to defile.—L. pol-, a prefix, of which the older form was
por- or port-, towards; and *luere, to defile (distinct from Juere, to
wash), the origin of the sb. Jués, filth. Der. pollut-ion, Lucrece,
1157, from L. acc. pollitidnem.

POLO, a game; hockey on horseback, (Balti.) ‘It comes from
Balti; polo being properly, in the language of that region, the ball
used in the game;’ Yule. Balti is in the high valley of the Indus.

POLONY, a kind ofsausage. (Ital.) In Thackeray, Newcomes,
xviii. § 1, A corruption for Bologna sausage; which city is ‘famous
for sausages;’ Evelyn’s Diary, May 21, 1645. So also ‘ Bologna
sausages ;’ Chapman, The Ball, Act iii, And Bolony, Bologna;
Webbe’s Tray., ed. Arber, p. 30. See Hotten’s Slang Dict.

POLTROON, a dastard, coward, lazy fellow. (F.—Ital.—L.)
In Shak. 3 Hen. VI, i. 1. 62. Earlier, spelt pultrowne, in Skelton,
The Douty Duke of Albany, 1. 170.—F. poltron, ‘a knave, rascall,
varlet, scowndrell, dastard, sluggard ;’ Cot.—Ital. poltrone, ‘a pol-
troon, an idle fellow, a lazy companion, a dastard;’ Torriano. = Ital.
poltro, ‘a colt, ...also a bed or a couch;’ Florio. He also gives
poltrare, poltrire, poltreggiare, poltroneggiare, ‘to play the coward,
to loll or wallowe in idlenes, to lie idlie a bed.’ B. The old sense is
clearly a sluggard, one who lies in bed; from foltro, a bed, couch.
Poltro orig. meant ‘a colt;’ and afterwards a bedstead; cf. MF.
poutre, ‘a filly,’ Cot.; F. poutre, a beam, from the support it gives
(like E. clothes-horse).—Late L. pullitrum, acc. of pullitrus, a colt
(Ducange). —L. pullus, a colt, a foal; see Foal. For the change of
sense, cf, pulley, chevron. Der. poltroon-er-y, a clumsy word; it
should rather be poltroon-y=F. poltronie, ‘ knavery,’ Cot.

POLY.-, many; prefix. (L.—Gk.) L. poly-, for Gk. modv-, from
modv-, for roAvs, much. Cognate with Skt. puru-, much; and closely
allied to Gk. mAéws, full, and E. full; see Full.

POLYANTHUS, a kind of flower. (L.—Gk.) A kind of
primrose bearing many flowers; lit. ‘many-flowered.’ In Thomson,
Spring, 532. A Latinized form of Gk. moAvay60s, more commonly
moAvavOns, many-flowered. = Gk. moAu-, many; and dy@os, a flower.
See Poly- and Anther.

POLYGAMY, marriage with more than one wife. (F.—L.—
Gk.) Polygamie in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. polygamie, ‘ poligamy,
the having of many wives;’ Cot.—L. polygamia.=—Gk. modvyapia,
a marrying of many wives.—Gk. moAv-, much, many; and -yapia, a
marrying, from ydpos, marriage. See Poly- and Bigamy. Der.
polygam-ous, polygam-ist,

POLY GLOT, written in or speaking many languages. (Gk.)
Howell applies it to a man; ‘A polyglot, or linguist ;’ Familiar
Letters, b. ili. let. 8, near the end. Coined from poly-=Gk. modv-,
many ; and yA@tTa=~yA@aoa, the tongue. See Poly- and Glottis.

POLYGON, a plane figure having many angles. (L.—Gk.)
Spelt polygone in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. polyganum (White).
=—Gk. modAvywvov, a polygon.—Gk. moAv-, many; and ywy-la, a
corner, angle, allied to yévv, the knee; see Poly- and Knee. Der.
polygon-al, polygon-ous. Wealso find polygon-y, knot-grass, Spenser,
F. Q. iii. 5. 32, from L. polygonium or polygonon, Gk. modvyovov, knot-
grass, so called from its many bends or knots.

POLYHEDRON, a solid body with numerous sides. (Gk.)
Mathematical; coined from poly-=Gk. moAv-, many; and -€dpor,
from €dpa, a base, from €5-, cognate with E. sit. See Poly- and
Sit. Der. polyhedr-al.

POLYNOMIAL, an algebraical quantity having many terms.
(Hybrid; F.—L. and Gk.) Mathematical; an ill-formed word, due
to the use of binomial ; from F. polyndme, bindme, = Gk, modAv-, many;
and L. ndm-en, a name. It should rather have been polyndminal,
and even then would be a hybrid word. See Poly- and Binomial.

POLYPUS, an animal with many feet ; &c. (L.—Gk.) The
pl. polypi is in Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. ix. c. 30, near beginning. —
L. polypus (gen. sing. and nom. pl. polypi), a polypus. = Gk. moAvmos,
occasional form of moAvmous, lit. many-footed.— Gk. mwoAv-, many ;
and movs, cognate with E. foot. See Poly- and Foot. @ Cf. F.
polype, Ital. and Span. polipo; all false forms, due to treating the
Gk. ending -7ous as if it were -mos. Cf. poly-podi-um, a fern.

POLYSYLLABLE, a word of many syllables. (Gk.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. A coined word; ultimately of Gk.
origin. The spelling syllable is due to French. See Poly- and
Syllable. Der. folysyllab-ic, from L. polysyllabus= Gk. moAvovr-
AaBos, having many syllables.

POLYTECHNIC, concerning many arts. (F.—Gk.) From F,
polytechnique (1795). = Gk. moAv-, many ; and rexvx-ds, belonging to
the arts, from réxvn, art; see Technical,

POLY THEISM, the doctrine of a plurality of gods. (Gk.)
In Johnson’s Dict. Coined from Gk. moAv-, much, many ; and @e¢-ds,
a god; with suffix -ism=Gk. -icpos. See Poly- and Theism.


Der. polythe-ist, polythe-ist-ic-al,


Sa


POMADE, POMMADE


POMADE, POMIIADHE, a composition for dressing the
hair. (F.—Ital.—L.) Properly with two m’s. ‘ Pommade, an oynt-
ment used by ladies;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—F. pommade,
‘pomatum, or pomata,.an ointment;’ Cot. So called because orig.
made with apples; cf. F. pomme, an apple.=—Ital. pomada, pomata,
“a pomado to supple ones lips, lip-salue ;’ Florio, Formed with
participial suffix -ata from pom-o, an apple.—L. pomum, an apple,
the fruit of a tree. Doublet, pomatum, Ben Jonson, Sejanus, il. I,
which is a Latinized form. And see pome-granate, pomm-el.

POMANDER, a globe-shaped box for holding perfumes.
(F.—L. and Span.—Arab.) Spelt pomaunder, Skelton, Garl. of
Laurel, 1027; ‘Pommaundre, to smell to;’? Palsgrave. For po-
mamber ; spelt pomeamber in Bullein, Dial. against Fever (1578) ;
p- 49, 1. 25, but also pomeander, p. 53, 1. 29. ME. pomum ambre;
Medical Workes of 14th Cent., ed. Henslow, p. 122.—AF. pomme
ambre, for OF. pomme d’ambre, ‘apple of amber;” see my Notes on
E. Etym., p. 223. See Pommel and Amber.

POMEGRANATE, a kind of fruit. (F.—L.) ‘ Of pomegran-
ates ;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii.c. 7. ME. pome-garnade,
Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 15; pomgarnet, ‘Trevisa, i. 107, 1. 7.—
OF. pome grenate, which was turned into pome de grenate by some
confusion or misunderstanding of the sense. In Li Contes del Graal,
a poem of the 12th century, we find ‘ Dates, figues, et noiz mugates,

Girofle et pomes de grenates ;’ see Bartsch, Chrestomathie Frangaise,
col. 172, ll. 4,5. Cf. Ital. pomo granato, a pomegranate ; Florio. =
L. pomum, an apple; and granatum, used also alone to signify a
pomegranate. B. Granatum is neut. from grandtus, filled with
grains or seeds; the fruit abounding in hard seeds. Grdndtus is
formed, with pp. suffix -dius, from gran-um, a grain, seed. See
Grain.

POMMEL, a knob, the knob on a sword-hilt, a projection on
a saddle-bow. (F.—L.) ME. pomel, a boss; P. Plowman’s Crede,

1. 562.—OF. pomel (Burguy), later pommeau, ‘the pommell ofa
sword, &c.;? Cot. Lit. ‘small apple.? Formed with dim. suffix -el
(L, -ellus) from pomum, an apple. Der. pommel, verb, to beat with
the handle of a sword or any blunt instrument or with the fists. Cf.
‘[He].. . all too poumleed the same with his handes ;’ Udall. tr. of
Erasmus’s Apophthegmes, Aug. Czesar, § 7.

POMP, great display, ostentation. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. pompe,
in Chaucer, C. T., A 525.—F. pompe, ‘pomp ;’ Cot.=—L. pompa, a
solemn procession, pomp.= Gk. mop, a sending, escorting, solemn
procession.=Gk. méumev, to send. Der. pomp-ous, in Palsgrave,
from F. pompeux, L. pompdsus, full of pomp; pompous-ly, -ness;

omp-os-i-ty.

POMPELMOOSE, a shaddock. (Du.) In Stedman’s Surinam,
i, 22.—Du. pampelmoes, a shaddock (Calisch).

PONCHO, a sort of cloak, resembling a narrow blanket with
a slit in the middle for the head to go through. (Span. —Araucan.)
The form poncho is Spanish; but it is adapted from an Araucan
name pontho or poncho; D. D. Granada, Vocab. of La Plata words
(Montevideo, 1890). The Araucans are the Indians in the S. of
Chili. (Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 224.)

POND, a pool of water. (E.) ME. pond, ponde, Trevisa, i. 69,
1. 4; pl. pondus, id. i.61,1.5. Pond is a pool of standing water ;
strictly, one caused by damming water up. It is a variant of pound,
an inclosure. Thus the Irish pont (borrowed from E.) means both
‘a pound for cattle’ and ‘a pond.’ See Pound (2).

PONDER, to weigh in the mind, consider. (L.) ‘In balance of
unegall [unequal] weight he [Love] pondereth by aime;’ Surrey,
Description of the Fickle Affections, 1. 8; in Tottell’s Miscellany,
1557, ed. Arber, p. 6; and see Skelton, ed. Dyce, i. 132, 1. 1.
Lydgate has ponder, imp. s., in Assembly of Gods, 1. 134.—L.
ponderare, to weigh.=L. ponder-, decl. base of pondus, a weight ; see
Pound (1). Der. poxder-er. From the stem ponder- we also have
ponder-ous, Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. i. c. 1, from F. pon-
dereux, L. ponderdsus; ponder-ous-ly, -ness; ponderos-i-ty, from F.
ponderosité, ‘ ponderosity,’ Cot., from L. acc. ponderdsitatem. Also
ponder-able, in Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 27, part 11, from
L, ponderabilis, that can be weighed ; ponderabil-i-ty ; im-ponderable.

PONENT, western. (F.—L.) In Levins; and in Milton, P. L.
x. 704.=—F. ponent, ‘the west ;’ Cot.—L. panent-, stem of pres. part.
of ponere, to lay, abate; with reference to sunset. See Position.

PONIARD, a small dagger. (F.—L.; with G. suffix.) In Hamlet,
y. 2. 157.—F. poignard, ‘a poinadoe, or poniard;’ Cot. Formed,
with suffix -ard<OHG. hart (lit. hard), from F. poing, the fist.
Similarly, Ital. pugnale, a poniard, is from pugno, the fist. Cf. also
Span. pufio, fist, handful, hilt, pufial, a poniard, pufada, a blow
with the fist. B. The F. poing, Ital. pugno, Span. puto, are from
L. pugnus, the fist ; see Pugnacious.

PONTIFF, a Roman high-priest, the Pope. (F.—L.) The pl.
pontifes is in Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 771.—F. pontif, pontife, ‘a chief


POPE 463


bishop ;’ Cot.=L. pontificem, acc. of pontifex, pontufex, a Roman
high-priest ; in eccl. Lat.,a bishop.—L. ponti-, decl. stem of pons,
orig. a path, way, later a bridge; and -fex (stem -7ic-), a maker, from
facere, to make. Cf. Gk. méyros, the sea. Brugmann, i. § I40.
@ The reason for the name is not known; the lit. sense is ‘ path-
maker ;’ hence, perhaps, one who leads to the temple, or leads the
way in a procession. Der. pontific-al, in Levins, from F. pontifical,
L. pontificalis, from the stem pontific- 3 pontific-ate, from F. pontificat,
‘a prelateship,’ Cot., from L. pontificatus.

PONTOON, a buoyant vessel, for the quick construction of
bridges, (F.—L.—C.) Formerly ponton. <‘ Ponton, a floating
bridge;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.—F. ponton, ‘a wherry, or ferry-boat ;’
hence, a bridge of boats ; Cot.—L. pontdnem, acc. of ponto, a boat ;
hence, a bridge of boats. Of Celtic origin; see Punt.

PONY, a small horse. (F.—L.) In Johnson. Lxplained as ‘a
little Scotch horse” in Boyer’s Dict., A.D. 1727 (Wedgwood). —OF,
poulenet, a little colt (Godefroy); dimin. of powlain, a colt.—Late L.
pullanus, a colt (Ducange).—L. pullus, a foal. The ] is lost before
n, as in Colney Hatch. Cf. Lowl. Sc. powney. See Foal.

POODLE, a fancy dog with curly hair. (G.) One of the very
few G. words in English. Modern; not in Johnson. It occurs in
Miss Swanwick’s tr. of Goethe’s Faust, 1864, p. 37.—G. pudel
(Goethe), a poodle; Low G. pudel, pudel-hund, so called (it may be
presumed) because he looks fat and clumsy on account of his thick
hair; allied to Low G. pudeln, to waddle, used of fat persons; cf.
Low G. pudel-dikk, unsteady on the feet, puddig, thick; Bremen
Worterbuch. Danneil gives Low G. puddel, a little dog just be-
ginning to walk.

POOH, an interjection of disdain. (F.) Spelt puk/ Marston,
What You Will, A. ii. sc. 1. Adapted from MF. powac, ‘ faugh!’
Cot. Cf. Icel. pu, pooh! Cf. puf. ‘ Puf, said the foxe ;’ Caxton,
tr. of Reynard the Fox, ed. Arber, p. 59. So also buf! Chaucer,
C.T.7516 (D 1934) ; baw! P. Plowman, B. xi. 135. Due to blowing
away from one. See Puff.

POOL (1), a pond, small body of water. (E.) ME. fol, pool;
dat. pole, Layamon, 21748; pl. poles, Havelok, 2101. AS. pdl,
fElfred, tr. of Gregory’s Pastoral Care, ed. Sweet, p. 278, 1. 15.
[Irish poll, pull, a hole, pit, mire, dirt; Gael. poll, a hole, pit, mire,
bog, pond, pool; W. pwil, a pool; Corn. fol, a pool, pond, mire,
pit; Manx, poyl; Bret. poull; are all borrowed words.|4+Dnu. poel,
a pool; G. pfukl; OHG. pfuol. Teut. type *péloz; cf. Lith. bala,
aswamp, Brugmann, i. § 567.

POOL (2), the receptacle for the stakes at cards. (F.—L.) For-
merly also spelt poule, as in Todd’s Johnson. =F. poule, (1) a hen,
(2) a pool, at various games; Hamilton. It seems to be so named,
because the stakes are regarded as eggs, to be gained from the hen.
— Late L. pulla, a hen (Ducange) ; fem. of pullus, a young animal,
allied to Gk. m@Aos, and E. foal; see Foal, Pony.

POOP, the stern of a ship; a deck above the ordinary deck in the
after-part of a ship. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Shak. 1 Hen. IV, iii. 3. 29.
Surrey (iv. 746) has poupe to translate L. puppi in Virgil, An. iv.
554.—F. poupe, pouppe, ‘the poop or hinder part of a ship.’ = Ital.
poppa, poop (Hatzfeld).—L. puppim, acc. of puppis, the hinder part
ofaship,aship. Der. poop, verb, to strike a ship in the stern, to
sink it, Pericles, iv. 2. 25.

POOR, possessed of little, needy, weak. (F.—L.) In early use.
Also pover, as in Roy, Rede Me, ed. Arber, p. 76 (1528). ME.
poure (perhaps = povre), O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, 2nd Ser. p. 47,
1,18; Ancren Riwle, p. 260, 1. 3.—OF. povre, poor; cf. F. dial.
poure (Berry).—L. pauperem, acc. of pauper, poor. B. L. pau-per
means ‘ provided with little,’ or ‘ preparing little for oneself ;’ from
pau-, little, few, as seen in L. pau-cus, Gk. mav-pos, E. few; and -per,
providing, connected with L. par-are, to provide, prepare. Der.
poor-ly, poor-ness, poor-house, -laws, -rate, -spirited; poverty, q. Vv.

POP, to make a sharp, quick, sound; to thrust suddenly, move
quickly, dart. (E.) ‘ Pepped in between th’ election and my hopes;’
Hamlet, v. 2. 65. ‘A pops me out from 500 pound;’ K. John, i. 68.
‘To poppe, coniectare ;’ Levins. ‘I poppe, or stryke in-to a thyng ;’
Palsgrave. Chaucer has ‘ A joly popper, i.e. thruster, dagger;
C. T. 3929 (A 3931). The word is of imitative origin; and allied
to ME. poupen, to make a loud sound, as in blowing a horn; see
Chaucer, C. T. 15405 (B 4589). Hence powpe in the sense of ‘ pop-
gun;’ Prompt. Parv. Cf. Puff. Der. fof, sb.

POPE, the father of a church, the bishop of Rome. (L.)
ME. pope, Owl and Nightingale, 746. In Layamon, 14886, the
older version has the dat. papen, where the latter version has pope.
These forms show that the word was not taken from the F. pape, but
from AS. papa (dat. papan), which was borrowed immediately from
the Latin. The AS. homily on the Birthday of S. Gregory (ed.
Elstob) begins with the words‘ Gregorius se halga papa’ = Gregory,
the holy pope. =L. papa.-Gk. mama, mamma, voc. of mamas, manmas,


AGA - POPINJAY


papa, father. See Papa. Der. pope-dom, AS. papedim, A.S. Chron.,
an. 1124; pop-ich, Titus Andron., v. 1. 763 pop-er-y.

POPINJAY, a parrot ; a mark like a parrot, put on a pole to be
shot at; a coxcomb. (F.—G. and L.; with modified suffix.) ME.
popingay, Chaucer, C. T. 13299, where the Ellesmere MS. has paje-
iay (=papejay) ; Six-text ed., Group B, 1559. The pl. papeiayes
occurs in Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1465. Thus the is ex-
crescent, as in other words before a j-sound; cf. messenger for
messager, passenger for passager, &c. = AF, papeiay, Royal Wills, ed.
Nichols, p. 35 (1355); OF. papegai, papegay, ‘a parrot or popin-
jay; also a woodden parrat, . . whereat there is a generall shooting
once every year;’ Cot. Mod. F. papegai, papegaut; the last
spelling has a needless suffixed ¢, and is due to OF. papegau, found
in the 13th century (Littré). Cf. Span. papagayo (whence Arab.
babagha), Port. papagaio, Ital. papagallo, a parrot. B. It is clear
that we have here two distinct forms; (1) F. papegai, Span. papa-
gayo, papagaio, in which the base papa- is modified by the addition
of F. -gai, Span. -gayo, due to a popular etymology which regarded
the bird as chattering like the jay; and (2) OF. papegau, Ital.
papagallo, in which the bird is regarded as a kind of cock, L. gallus ;
and the latter form appears to be the older; i.e. jay was substituted
for ‘ cock,’ because the jay seemed to come nearer than the cock to
the nature of a parrot. y. I adopt the suggestion of Wedgwood,
that the syllables pa-pa- are imitative, and were suggested by the
Bavarian pappeln, pappelen, or pappern, to chatter, whence the sb.
pappel, a parrot, lit. a babbler ; Schmeller, i. 398, 399. 8. Bavar.
pappeln is cognate with E. Babble, q.v. Cf. bubblyjock (i.e. babble-
jack), the Lowland Scotch name for a turkey-cock ; so named from
the gobbling sound which it makes.

POPLAR, a kind of tall tree. (F.—L.) ME. poplere, Chaucer,
C. T. 2923 (A 2921); popler, Palladius on Husbandry, b. iii. 1. 194.
= OF. poplier (13th cent.), mod. F. peuplier, a poplar; Littré. Formed
with suffix -zer (L. -arius) from OF. *pople (not recorded), later form
peuple, ‘the poplar;’ Cot. Cf. prov. E. popple,a poplar; Nares, ed.
Halliwell. —L. populum, acc. of populus,a poplar. Cf. OF. popelin,
poupelin, a poplar; Godefroy.

POPLIN, a fabric made of silk and worsted. (F.) Added by
Todd to Johnson’s Dict.—F. popeline, of which an older form was
papeline, first mentioned in A.D. 1667 (Littré). B. Origin un-
known; it has been supposed to be connected with F. papal, papal,
because it may have been first made at Avignon, where there was
once a papal court, A.D. 1309-1408. ‘The chronology does not bear
out thissuggestion. Cf. Span. popelens, populina, poplin. sy. The
spelling papeline separates it from Poppeling or Popperingen, near
Ypres, in W. Flanders ; with which some would connect it.

POPPY, the name of a flower with narcotic properties. (L.)
ME. popi (with one p), Gower, C. A. ii, 102; bk. iv. 3007. AS.
popig; ‘Papauer, popig,’ Voc. 134. 33; also popeg, Voc. 16. 17.
Merely borrowed from L. papauer,a poppy, by change of u (w) to g,
and loss of -er.

POPULACH, the common people. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘And
calm the peers, and please the populace ;’ Daniel, Civil Wars, b. vii.
st. 78.—F. populace, ‘the rascall people ;’ Cot. Ital. popolazzo,
popolaccio, ‘the grosse, base, vile, common people; ’ Florio. Formed
with the depreciatory suffix -azzo, -accio, from Ital. popol-o, the
people.—L. populum, acc. of populus, the people ; see People.

POPULAR, belonging to, or liked by the people. (F.—L.)
In Temp. i. 2. 92.—F. populaire, ‘ popular;’ Cot.—L. popularis,
adj., from populus, the people; see People. Der. popular-ly, -i-ty,
=1Z0.

POPULATH, to people. (L.) In Levins, ed. 1570. ‘ Great
shoales of people, which goe on to populate;’ Bacon, Essay 58. —
Late L. populdtus, pp. of populare, to people ; (whereas the classical
L. populart means to ravage, destroy).—L. populus, people; see
People. Der. populat-ion, in Bacon, Essay 29, § 5, from Late L.
populationem, acc. of populatio, a population (White). Also popul-
ous. Rich. II, v. 5. 3, from F. populeux, ‘ populous,’ Cot., which
from L. populdsus, full of people ; popul-ous-ly, -ness.

PORCELATN, a fine kind of earthenware. (F.—Ital.—L.) In
Dryden, Annus Mirabilis, st. 29; spelt porcellan, Sir T. Herbert,
Travels, ed. 1665, pp. 391, 396; porcellane, Hakluyt, Voy. ii. 1.
229, 1. 4; and see extract from Florio below. Porcelain was so
named from the resemblance of its finely polished surface to that of
the univalve shell of the same name, called in English the Venus’
shell; as applied to the shell, the name goes back to the 13th
century, when it occurs in the F, version of Marco Polo in place of
the Ital. name (Littré). Cotgrave gives porcelaine, pourcelaine, * the
purple fish, also, the sea-snail, or Venus shell.’ =Ital. porcellana,
‘a purple fish, a kinde of fine earth called porcelane, whereof they
make fine China dishes, called porcellan dishes ;’ Florio, ed. 1598.
B. Again, the shell derived its name from the curved shape of its


Cy


PORPHYRY


upper surface, which was thought to resemble the raised back of
a little hog. [It is very easy to make a toy-pig with a Venus’ shell
and some putty; and such toys are often for sale.]—Ital. porcella,
‘a sow-pig, a porkelin ;’ porcello, ‘a yong hog, or pig, a porkelin;’
Florio, Dimin. of Ital. porco, a hog.—L. porcum, acc. of porcus,
a pig; see Pork.

PORCH, a portico, covered way or entrance. (F.—L.) ME.
porche, Rob. of Glouc., p. 271, 1. 5841.—F. porche, a porch.=L.
porticum, acc. of porticus, a gallery, arcade, porch ; for the letter-
changes, see Brachet. Cf. E. perch, from F. perche, L. pertica.
B. Sometimes derived from porti-, for porta, a gate, door; see Port
(3); but this is doubtful; see Walde. Doublet, portico.

PORCINE, relating to swine. (L.) In Todd’s Johnson, who
quotes an extract dated 1660.—L. porcinus, adj., formed from porcus,
a pig; see Pork.

PORCUPINE, a rodent quadruped, covered with spines or
quills. (F.—L.) a. In Shakespeare, old edd. have porpentine; a
spelling which also occurs in Ascham, Toxophilus, ed. Arber, p. 31.
Levins has porpin. Huloet has: ‘ Porpyn, beaste, havinge prickes
on his backe.’ The Prompt. Parv. has: ‘ Poork-poynt, porpoynte,
perpoynt, beste, Histrix;’ p. 409. ‘Porkepyn, a beest, pore espin;’
Palsgrave. B. We thus see that the animal had two very similar
names, (1) porkepyn, shortly porpin, easily lengthened to porpint by
the usual excrescent ¢ after x, and finally altered to porpentine as a
by-form of porkepyn; and (2) pork-point, porpoint; the latter of
which forms would also readily yield porpentine. y. Weconclude
that porpentine is late; that porkpotnt was little used, and simply
meant a § pork’ or pig furnished with points or sharp quills; and
that the modern porcupine is due (by substitution of obscure u for
obscure e) to the ME. form porképyn, pronounced in three syllables,
and with they long. 8. The ME. porképyn is obviously derived from
OF. pore espin, a word known to Palsgrave, A.D. 1530, but now
obsolete, and supplanted by jporcépic, in the 13th century pore espz
(Littré), a form whith is also given by Cotgrave, who has: ‘ Porc-
espi, a porcupine.’ e. Thus the OF. names for the animal were
also double; (1) porc-espi=porc-espic, the pig with spikes (see
Spike); and (2) pore-espin, the pig with spines. The English has
only to do with the latter, which, though obsolete in French, is pre-
served in Span. puerco espin, Port. porco espinho. . Finally, the
F. porc is from L. porcus; and OF. espin is a by-form of OF. espine
(F. épine), from L. spina, a thorn. See Pork and Spine.
@ Holland, in his tr. of Pliny, b. vili. c. 35, has pork-pen, where
pen, i.e. quill, is an ingenious substitution for -epine.

PORE (1), a minute hole in the skin. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. pore,
Prompt. Pary. p. 409; Lanfranc, Cirurgie, p. 43, 1.11. The pl,
poorus (=pores) is in Trevisa, i. 53.—F. pore, ‘a pore ;’ Cot.=—L.
porum, acc. of porus, a pore. Gk. wépos, a ford, passage, way, pore.
-4/PER, to fare; see Fare. Brugmann, i. § 474. Der. por-ous,
from F. poreux, ‘pory,’ Cot. ; porous-ly, -ness ; por-os-i-ty, pori-form.

PORE (2), to look steadily, gaze long. (E.?) ME. poren,
Chaucer, C. T. 185, 5877, 16138 (A 185, D 295, G 670). Ap-
parently a native word; cf. prov. E. pore, to cram, to thrust, to
intrude; North Fries. porre, to stick, stir, provoke; Du. porren, to
poke, thrust; EFries. puren, porren, to stick, thrust, bore, stir, vex ;
Low G. purren, to poke about, clean out a hole; Norw. fora, to
finger, poke, stir, thrust; W. Flem. peuren, to poke after (De Bo) ;
Swed. dial. pora, pura, para, to work slowly and gradually, to do
anything slowly; Rietz. B. The idea seems to be that of poking
or thrusting about in a slow and toilsome way, as in the case of
clearing out a stopped-up hole; hence to pore over a job, to be a
long while about it. y. We also find Gael. purr, to push, thrust,
drive, urge, Irish purraim, I thrust; from ME. pouren, poren; cf.
Lowl. Sc. porr, to stab.

PORK, the flesh of swine. (F.—L.) ME. pork, Rich. Coer de
Lion, 3049.—F. -porc, a pork, hog; also pork, or swines flesh;’
Cot.—L. porcum, acc. of porcus, a pig.4Lithuan. parszas, a pig
(Nesselmann), Irish orc, with the usual loss of initial p.4-AS. fearh,
a pig; whence E. farrow. Brugmann, i. § 486. See Farrow.
Der. pork-er, a young pig, Pope, tr. of Homer, Od. xvii. 201; lit.an
animal that supplies pork; substituted for the older term jork-et,
from OF. porguet, ‘a young pork,’ Cot., dimin. of pore. Also pore-
ine, q.v. And see porc-u-pine, por-poise, porc-el-ain.

PORPHYRY, a hard, variegated rock, of purple and white
colour. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. porphtrie, Chaucer, C. T. 16243
(G 775).=OF. *porphyrie (?), not found; Cotgrave has only por-
phyre, ‘porphiry;” but the E. form appears fuller and older. Ab-
breviated from L. porphyrites, porphyry.— Gk. woppupirns, porphyry ;
so named from its purple colour. Formed with suffix -i7ys, signify -
ing ‘resemblance,’ from moppup-, moppvpa, the purple-fish, purple-
dye ; cf. moppdpeos, purple; see Purple. Der. porphyrit-ic, from
L. porphyrit-es. ne partes


PORPOISE, PORPESS


PORPOISE, PORPESS, the hog-fish. (F.—L.) Spelt porpesse
in Ray, On the Creation, pt. i. (R.); porpaise, porpuis, in Minsheu ;
porcpisce, Spenser, Colin Clout, 1. 249. ME. purpeys, Prompt. Parv.
= AF. purpeys, Liber Albus, p. 236 ; porpeis (Godefroy, s. v. porpois) ;
OF. porpois, a porpoise ; a term now obsolete in F. (except Guernsey
pourpeis), and supplanted by the name marsouin (lit. mere-swine),
borrowed from G. meerschwein. For *porc-peis.=—L. porcum, acc. of
porcus, a pig; and piscem, acc. of piscis, a fish, cognate with E. jish.
See Pork and Fish. So also Mital. pesce-porco, ‘a sea-hogge,
a hogge-fish ;’ Florio. The mod. Ital. nameis porco marino, marine
pig; Span. puerco marino. Cf. Guernsey pourpeis, a porpoise.

PORRIDGE, a kind of broth. (F.—Teut.) InShak. Temp. ii. 1.
1o. Apparently it took the place of the older word pottage (Pals-
grave), ME. potage, occurring as early as in Ancren Riwle, p. 4125
whence also prov. E. poddisk, Cotgrave has F. potage, ‘ pottage,
porridge; formed, with suffix -age (L. -aticum) from Low L. pottus,
a pot, of Teut. origin. Low G. pott, Du. pot; see Pot. [There
was an intermediate form, represented by prov. H. poddisk and by
podeck in Tyndale’s Obedience of a Christian Man, 1528, fol. 109,
qu. in Brand’s Antiq., ed. Ellis, iii. 384.] . It may have been
influenced by ME. jorree, poré, also with the sense of ‘ pottage.’
We find, ‘ Porré, or purré, potage,’ Prompt. Parv.; and Way’s note
gives the spelling porray. Way adds: ‘this term implies generally
pease-pottage, still called in French purée; . . according to the
Ortus, it seems to have denoted a pottage of leeks; poratum est cibus
de poris factus, Anglicé porray;’ he also notes the Late L. form
porrata.= OF. porée, porrée, ‘ beets, also pot-herbs, and thence also,
pottage made of beets or with other herbs;’ Cot.=Late L. porrata
(also porrecta), broth made with leeks; Ducange. Cf. Ital. porrata,
leek-soup. Formed, with L. pp. fem. suffix -d/a, from L. porr-um
or porr-us, a leek. y- Porrum stands for an older form *porsum,
as shown by the cognate Gk. mpdcov,a leek. Der. porring-er, q. v.

PORRINGER, a small dish for porridge. (F.—Teut.) In
Shak. Tam. Shrew, iv. 3. 64; Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 31. ‘16
porengers, temp. Hen. VIII, in Strutt, Manners and Customs, iii.
65; poreger, Bury Wills, p. 115 (1522); porrynger, id., p. 136;
poddinger, id., p. 142. The last is the intermediate form between
pottanger and porringer. Suggested by, or corrupted from, pottanger
(Palsgrave), a dish for pottage ; spelt potenger ab. 1450, Excerpta
Historica, p. 418, ]. 1 (ed. 1831). For *potéager, with inserted 7, as in
messenger for messager. Cf. F. potager, ‘of, or belonging unto,
pottage;’ Cot. The ME. potagere meant ‘a maker of pottage;’
Piers Plowman, B. v. 157. See Porridge.

PORT (1), demeanour, carriage of the body. (F.—L.) ME. fort,
Chaucer, C. T..69, 138.—F. port, ‘the carriage, behaviour, or de-
meanor of a man;’. Cot. Cf. Ital. porto, carriage; Span. porte,
deportment. A sb. due to the F. verb porter, to carry.—L. poriare,
to carry. Allied to Fare. Der. port, verb, to carry, little used
except in the phr. ‘to fort arms,’ and in Milton’s expression ‘ ported
spears, P. L. iv. 980. Also port-able, Macb. iv. 3. 89, from L.
portabilis, that can be carried or borne; fort-able-ness ; port-age,
Prompt. Pary., from F. portage, ‘portage, carriage,’ Cot. Also
port-er, in the sense of ‘carrier of a burden’ (Phillips, ed. 1706),
substituted for ME. portour (Prompt. Parv.), from OF. portour, F.
porteur, ‘a carrier, Cot. And hence porter, the name of malt-
liquor, so called because it was a favourite drink with London
porters, supposed to be not older than A.D. 1750, see Todd’s
Johnson; also porter-age, a coined word. Port-folio, a case large
enough to carry folio paper in, a coined word, with which cf. F.
portefeuille. . Port-manteau, Middleton, Widow, iv. 2, from F. port-
manteau (Cot.), lit. that which carries a mantle (see Mantle) ; but
we also find port-mantua, Dryden, Kind Keeper, Act i. sc. 1, and
portmantue, used by Cot. to translate F. portmanteau; here port-
mantua is not quite the same word, but is derived from F. port-er
and Mantua, q.v.. Also port-mantle, Howell, Letters, vol. i. sec. 3,
let. 15. Also port-ly, Merc. of Ven. i. 1.93 port-li-ness. From the
L. portare we also have com-port, de-port, de-port-ment, dis-port (and
sport), ex-port, im-port, im-port-ant, pur-port, re-port, sup-port, trans-

ort,

PORT (2), a harbour, haven. (L.) ME. port; Rob. of Glouc.
speaks of ‘ the fif portes,’ now called the Cinque Ports, p. 51, 1. 1169.
The pl. porz (for ports) occurs in Layamon, 24415. AS. port; ‘to
Sam porte’=to the haven, A#lfred, tr. of Beda, b. iv. c. 1, near the
end:=L. portus, a harbour; cognate with E. Ford. B. Closely
allied to L. porta, a gate; see Port (3). Der. (from L. portus),
im-port-une, op-port-une.

PORT (3), a gate, entrance, port-hole. (F.—L.) ‘So, let the
ports be guarded ;’ Cor.i. 7.1. ME. port, Trevisa, tr. of Higden,
i. 213.—F. porte, ‘a port or gate;’ Cot.—L. porta, a gate.
8. Formed with suffix -ta from the base por- seen in Gk. mdpos, a
ford, way; from 4/PER, to pass through, fare, travel; see Fare.


POSE


@ Though port is not common in ME., there is an AS. form forte
(Grein), borrowed directly from L. porta. Der. port-er, ME. porter,
Floriz and Blauncheflur, ed. Lumby, 1. 138, from OF. gortier, L.
portarius (Lewis); whence (with fem. suffix -ess=F, -esse<L, -issa,
Gk. -toca), porter-ess, or shortly port-r-ess, Milton, P. L. ii. 746.
Also gort-al, Hamlet, iii. 4. 136, from OF. portal (Burguy), L.
portale, a vestibule, porch. Also fort-hole, Dryden, Annus Mirabilis,
st. 188. Also port-cullis, q.v. (but perhaps not portico, porch). And
see port (1), port (2), port (4), and porte.

PORT (4), a dark purple wine. (Port.—L.) So called from
Oporto, in Portugal; port being merely an abbreviation from Oporto
wine.= Port. o porto, the port; where o is the def. art.=Span. lo
<L. illum ; and porto is from L. portum, acc. of portus,a port. See
Port (2).

PORTCULLIS, a sliding door of cross-timbers pointed with
iron, let down to protect a gateway. (F.—L.) ME. pforte-colys,
Rom. of the Rose, 4168.— AF. porte colice, Excerpta Historica, p. 73
(A.D. 1250); OF. porte coleice (13th cent., Littré), later porte coulisse,
or simply cowlisse, ‘a portcullis;’ Cot.—F. porte, from L. porta, a
gate; and OF, coleice, answering to a Late L. *cdldticia (not found),
with the sense of flowing, gliding, or sliding, regularly formed from
cdlatus, pp. of célare, to flow, orig. to strain through a sieve. See
Port (3) and Colander and Cullis. We find the Late L. forms
coladissus, colacius, porta colacia (port-cullis) from the same source.

PORTE, the Turkish government. (F.—L.) The Turkish
government is ‘officially called the Sublime Porte, from the fort
(gate) of the sultan’s palace, where justice was administered ;’
Webster. See Port (3). It is ‘a perverted F. translation of
Babi Ali, lit. ‘‘the high gate,” the chief office of the Ottoman
government ;” Wedgwood. Cf. Arab. bab, a gate, ‘aliy, high;
Rich. Dict, pp. 224, 1027.

PORTEND, to betoken, presage, signify. (L.) In K. Lear, i.
2. 113 3; Spenser, F,Q. v. 7. 4.—L. portendere, to foretell, predict. =
L. por-, for OL. port, towards; and ¢endere, to stretch forth; so
that portend is ‘to stretch out towards,’ or point out. See Position
and Tend. Der. portent, Oth. v. 2. 45, F. portente, ‘a prodigious
or monstrous thing,’ Cot., which from L. portentum, a sign, token ;
formed from fortentus, pp. of portendere. Hence portent-ous, from F.
portenteux, ‘prodigious,’ Cot., which from L. portentdsus.

PORTER (1), a carrier. (F.—L.) See Port (1).

PORTER (2), a gate-keeper. (F.—L.) See Port (3).

PORTER (3), a dark kind of beer, orig. porter’s beer (Wedg-
wood) ; see Port (1).

PORTESSE, PORTOS, PORTOUS, a breviary. (F.—L.)
Spelt portesse in Spenser, F. Q. i. 4.19. ‘Poortos, booke, portiforium,
breviarium ;’ Prompt. Pary. ME. portous, portos, porthos, porthors,
P. Plowman, B. xv. 122, and footnotes ; and see note to the line for
further examples. All various corruptions of OF. porte-hors, i.e. that
which one carries abroad, a word compounded as the F. equivalent
of L. portifortum, a breviary. This OF. portehors is given by
Godefroy ; and occurs in La Clef d’Amors, 1. 102. Compounded of
F. porter, from L. portadre, to carry; and F. hors, older form /fors,
out of doors, abroad, from L. foris, abroad, ady., due to sb. pl. fores,
doors. See Port (1) and Door.

PORTICO, a porch. (Ital.—L.) In Chapman, tr. of Homer,
Od. iv. 405, 410.—Ital. portico.—L. porticum, acc. of porticus, a
porch; see Porch. Doublet, porch.

PORTION, a part, share. (F.—L.) ME. fortion, portioun,
porcioun, Wyclif, Luke xv, 12.—F. portion. L. portidnem, acc. of
portio, a share, lit. ‘a sharing;’ closely allied to part-, stem of pars,
a part; see Part. Der. portion, vb.; portion-ed, portion-er, portion-
less; and see apportion.

PORTLY, orig. of good demeanour; see Port (1).

PORTRAIT, a picture of a person. (F.—L.) In Shak. Merch.
of Ven. ii. 9. 54; spelt pourtraict, Spenser, F.Q. ii. I. 39.—MF.
pourtraict, ‘a pourtrait;’ Cot.—=MF. pourtraict, pourtrait, pp. of
pourtraire, to portray; see Portray.

PORTRAY, to draw, depict. (F.—L.) ME. purtreye, Chaucer,
C. T. 963 purtreyen, King Alisaunder, 1. 1520.—OF. portraire, later
pourtraire, ‘to pourtray, draw,’ Cot.; mod. F. portraire.=—Late L.
protrahere, to paint, depict; L. prdtrahere, to drag or bring forward,
expose, reveal.=L. prd-, forward; and trahere, to draw; see Pro-
and Trace (1). Der. portrait, q.v.; whence portraiture, ME. pour-
treture, Gower, C. A. ii. 83, bk. iv. 2421, from OF. portraiture, MF.


465


pourtraicture, ‘a pourtraiture,’ Cot., as if from L. protractura. And
see protract.
POSE (1), a position, attitude. (F.—L.—Gk.) We speak of


‘the pose of an actor;’ see Webster. Quite modern; not in Todd’s
Johnson ; but the word is of importance. =F. pose, ‘attitude, posture,’
Hamilton; MF. pose, ‘a pawse, intermission, stop, ceasing, repose,
resting ;’ Cot.<F. poser, ‘to place, set, put,’ Hamilton; ‘to put,


POSE


pitch, place, to seat, settle, plant, to stay, or lean on, to set, or lay
down;’ Cot.=—Late L. pausare, to cease; also, to cause to rest, and
hence used in the sense of L. ponere, to place (Ducange) ; L. pausare,
to halt, cease, pause, to repose (in the grave), as in the phr. pausat in
pace =(here) rests in peace (Lewis).—L. pausa, a pause ; a word of
Greek origin; see Pause. Cf. Ital. posare, to put, lay down, rest,
from posa, rest ; Span. posar, to lodge, posada, an inn. 4 One of the
most remarkable facts in F. etymology is the extraordinary substitu-
tion whereby the Late L. pausare came to mean ‘to make to rest, to
set,’ and so usurped the place of the L. pdnere, to place, set, with
which it has no etymological connexion. And this it did so
effectually as to restrict the F. pondre, the true equivalent of L.
ponere, to the sense of ‘to lay eggs;’ whilst in all compounds it
completely thrust it aside, so that compausare (i.e. F. composer) took
the place of L. componere, andso on throughout. 2. Hence the extra-
ordinary result, that whilst the E. verbs compose, depose, impose, pro-
pose, &c. exactly represent in sense the L. compénere, depodnere, im-
ponere, proponere, &c., we cannot derive the E. verbs from the L.
ones, since they have (as was said) no real etymological connexion.
Indeed, these words are not even of L. origin, but Greek. 3. The
true derivatives from the L. ponere appear in the verbs compound, ex-
pound, &c., in adjectives such as ponent, component, and in the substan-
tives, such as position, composition, deposition; see under Position,
Der. jose, verb, to assume an attitude, merely an E. formation from
the sb. pose, an attitude, and quite modern. Also (from F. poser)
the compounds ap-pose, com-pose, de-pose, dis-pose, ex-pose, im-pose,
inter-pose, op-pose, pro-pose, pur-pose, re-pose (in which the sense of
L. pausa appears), sup-pose, trans-pose.

POSH (2), to puzzle, perplex by questions. (F.—L. andGk.) ‘Say
you so? then I shall pose you quickly ;’ Meas. for Meas. ii. 4. 51.
Here, as in the case of peal, the prefixed syllable ap- has dropped
off ; the older form of the verb was commonly to appose, ME. apposez,
aposen ; see examples in N. E. D., or in Richardson, s.v. Appose. To
appose was to question, esp. in a puzzling way, to examine. ‘ When
Nicholas Clifforde sawe himselfe so sore aposed [posed, questioned],
he was shamfast;’ Berners, Froissart’s Chron. c. 373 (R.). ‘She
would appose mee touching my learning and lesson;’ Stow’s
Chronicle, an. 1043. And see Chaucer, C. T. 7179, 15831 (D 1597,
G 363); P..Plowman, B. i. 47, iii. 5, vii. 138, xv. 376. B. The
word appears at first sight to answer to F. apposer, but that verb is
not used in any such sense; and it is really nothing but a corruption
of oppose, which was used convertibly with it. Thus we find ‘A posen,
or oposyn, Opponere,’ Prompt. Parv., p. 13. ‘I oppose one, I make
a tryall of his lernyng, or I laye a thyng to his charge, Ze apose. I
am nat to lerne nowe to oppose a felowe, & apposer ung gallant ;’
Palsgrave. [Here the OF. aposer, apposer, is, in the same way, a
corruption of F. opposer.] ‘ Bot sche, which al honour supposeth,
The falsé prestés than opposeth [questions], And axeth [asks],’ &c. ;
Gower, C. A.i. 71, bk. i. 879. ‘y. The word arose in the schools;
the method of examination was by argument, and the examiner was
the umpire as to questions put by an opponent; hence to examine was
also to oppose, or pose. ‘Opponere, in philosophicis vel theologicis
disputationibus contra argumentari; argumenter contre quelqu’un;’
Ducange, ed. Migne. For the etymology, see Oppose. 6. Lastly,
the confusion can be accounted for, viz. by confusion of opponere, to
question, argue, with the word apposite, applied to a neat answer;
see Apposite, which really answers to L. appositus. Der. pos-er,
Bacon, Essay 32; on which Mr. Aldis Wright says: ‘an examiner,
one who poses or puts questions ; still in use at Eton and Winchester.’
Hence also ME. posen, to put a case, Chaucer, C. T. 1164 (A 1162).
Der. puzzle, q.v.

POSH (3), a cold in thehead. (C.) Probably obsolete ; noted by
Ray (1691). ME. pose, Chaucer, C. T. 4150 (A 4152). -AS. ge-pos,
a cough; ‘wid geposu, for coughs; L. ad tussim gravem;’ A.S.
Leechdoms, ed. Cockayne, i. 148. Not an E. word; but borrowed
from an OBritish word represented by W. pas or peswch, a cough;
allied to Irish cas-achdach, Russ. kash-ele, prov. E. hoas-t, a cough;
Skt. kas, to cough. (4/QAS; the g becomes ¢ in Irish, but p in
Welsh.)

POSITION, a situation, attitude, state, place. (F.—L.) In
Shak. Tw. Nt. ii. 5. 130. ME. posicioun, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius,
b. v. pr. 4, 1. 30.—F. position, ‘a position ;’ Cot.—L. positidnem, ace.
-of positio, a putting, placing; cf. L. positus, pp. of ponere, to place, put.
B. L. ponere (pp. positus) is generally thought to stand for *pos-sinere
(Bréal), where *pos- is a variation of what appears to be an old prep.
(port); and sinere (pp. situs) is to let, allow, on which see Site.
The prefix por-, port-, is prob. allied to Gk. mpori, towards. Der.
com-position, de-position, dis-position, im-position, inter-position, op-
position, pro-position, sup-position, trans-position. Also (from L.
ponere) pon-ent, com-ponent, de-ponent, ex-ponent, op-ponent; com-
pound, ex-pound, post-pone, And see ap-posite, com-posite, de-posit,


466


POST


ex-posit-or ; also post, positive, post-ure, com-fost, im-postor, pro-vost,
&c. ts And see remarks under Pose (1).
POSITIVE, actual, undoubted, decisive, certain. (F.—L.) The
lit. sense is ‘settled ;’ hence, certain. ME. positif, Chaucer, C. T.
1169 (A 1167).—F. positif, omitted by Cotgrave, but in use in the
14th century.—L. positiuus, settled, esp. by agreement.<L. positus,


pp. of ponere, to place; see Position. Der. positive-ly, -ness. Also
positiv-ism, due to Comte, born in 1798, died 1857,
POSNET, an iron pot, saucepan. (F.—Low G.) A dialect


word; see E.D.D. ME. posnet, Prompt. Parv.; Way’s note quotes
the form possenet from Horman ; spelt pocenet, Rel. Antigq. i. 54.
—OF. pogonet (Godefroy), dimin. of pogon, posson, a pot. = Late L.
type *pottidnem, acc. of *pottio; from Late L. pott-us, a pot.— Low
G. pott. See Pot,

POSSE, power. (L.) See Butler, Hudibras, iii. 2. 1166. ‘ Posse
comitatus, or power of the county ;’ Blount’s Nomo-lexicon, ed. 1691.
=—L. posse, to be able; used as sb. See Possible.

POSSESS, to own, seize, have, hold. (L.) The verb is probably
due to the sb. possession, which was in earlier use, occurring in
Chaucer, C. T. 2244 (A 2242), and in Robert of Brunne, tr. of Lang-
toft, p. 239, 1. 19. Possess is.extremely common in Shak.; see
L.L. L. v. 2. 383, &c.—L. possessus, pp. of possidére, to possess, to
have in possession. . Prob. derived from L. *fort-, towards; and
sedére, to sit, remain,. continue; as if the sense were ‘ to remain near,’
hence to have in possession. See Position, § B, and Sit. Der.
possess-ed, Much Ado, i. 1. 193 ; possess-or, Merch. Ven. i. 3. 75, from
L, possessor; possess-ive, from L. possessiuus; possessive-ly. Also
possess-ion, ME. possessioun, possession, as above, from F. possession,
‘possession,’ Cot., from L. acc. possessibnem. Also ME. possession-er,
P. Plowman, B. v. 144. :

POSSET, a drink composed of hot milk, curdled by some stron
infusion. (F,andE.) In Shak. Merry Wives, i. 4.8; v. 5. 180; Macb. ii.
2.6. ME. possyt, Voc. 666. 93 posset, Voc. 793. 153 poshet, Voc.
567.22; cf. MPs possette, ‘a posset of ale and mylke;’ Palsgrave
(not otherwise known). B. But we also find what is prob. an older
form ; ME. poshoote, Voc. 625. 18; poshote of milke, Cookery Books,
ed. Austin, p. 15 ; poshote of ale, id., p. 36. ‘y. The latter element
seems to be the ME. hote, E. hot; cf. ME. possot in Prompt. Pary.
But this leaves the former element unexplained, unless it can be
equated to Norm, dial. pous, pap, OF. pous, pouls, pols, L. puls, pap.
Cf. prov. E. pulse, pottage ; and (for the phonology) cf. ME. possen, to
push about, from OF. powlser (L. pulsare). (Cf. W. posel, curdled
milk, posset; Irish pusoid, a posset; from E.] Der. posset, vb., to
curdle, Hamlet, i. 5. 68.

POSSIBLE, that may be done, that may happen. (F.—L.) ME.
possible, Chaucer, C. T. 8832 (E 956).—F. possible, ‘likely, possible,’
Cot.=—L. possibilis, that may be done, possible. B. Not well formed ;
it should rather have been *fotibilis; the form jpossibilis is due to the
influence of posse, to be able, whence possum, I amable. L. possum
(short for potissum) is due to potis, powerful, properly ‘lord’ or
‘master,’ cognate with Skt. pati-, a master, owner, governor, lord,
husband, Lithuan. patis, a husband (Nesselmann), Russ. -pode as seen
in gos-pode, the Lord. Brugmann, i.§ 158. See Potent. And see
Host (1). Der. possibl-y; possibil-i-ty, ME. possibilitee, Chaucer,
C. T. 1293 (A 1291), from F. possibilité (Cot.), which from L. acc.
possibilitatem.

POST (1), a stake set in the ground, ‘a pillar.
pillar; see Chaucer, C. T. 214. In very early use; see Layamon,
28032. AS. post; ‘ Basis, post,’ Voc. 164. 32; and see Judges, xvi.
3.—L. postis, a post, a door-post. B. The orig. sense was ‘some-
thing firmly fixed ;’ cf. L. postus, a form used by Lucretius for positus,
pp. of ponere, to place, set; see Position, and see Post (2).

POST (2), a military station, a public letter-carrier, a stage on a
road, &c. (F.—L.) Shak. has post, a messenger, Temp. ii. I. 248;
a post-horse, Romeo, vy. 1.21. ‘A post, runner, Veredarius ;’ Levins,
ed. 1570. Post ‘ originally signified a fixed place, as a military post;
then, a fixed place on a line of road where horses are kept for
travelling, a stage, or station; thence it was transferred to the person
who travelled in this way, using relays of horses, and finally to any
quick traveller ;? Eastwood and Wright, Bible Wordbook. See Job,
ix. 25; Jer. li. 31. Four men are mentioned in 1491 as ‘lying as
posts,’ ie. messengers; Excerpta Historica, p. 113.—F. poste, masc.

‘a post, carrier, speedy messenger,’ Cot.; fem. ‘ post, posting, the
riding post, as also, the furniture that belongs unto posting ;’ id. Cf,
Ital. posta, a post, station; Span. posta, post, sentinel, post-house, post-
horses. = Late L. posta, a station, site ; fem. of postus, a shortened form
(used by Lucretius) of positus, placed,pp. of ponere,to place. See Posi-
tion, and Post (1), “Der. post, vb.,.L. L. L. iv. 3.188; post, adv.,in
the phr. ‘ to travel post ;’ post-boy, -chaise, -haste, -horse, -man, -mark,
-master, -office,-paid, -town. Also post-al, a modern coined word, from
| F. postal, also modern. Also post-age, an E. coinage, not used in


9


(L.) ME. post, a


POST-


French, but used by Dryden ; see his Spanish Friar, A. ii. sc. 2 (end).
And see post-illion..

POST-., prefix, after, behind. (L.) L. post, prep., after, behind.

POST-DATE, to date a thing after the right time. (L.) ‘ Those,
whose post-dated loyalty now consists only in decrying that action ;’
South, vol. iii. ser. 2 (R.), From Post-and Date. Similarly are
formed post-diluvial, post-diluvian, &c.

POSTERIOR, hinder, later, coming after. (L.) In Shak.
L.L.L. v. 1. 94, 96, 126.—L. posterior, comp. of posterus, coming
after, following. =—L. post, after; see Post-, prefix. Bacon, Nat.
Hist., end of § 115, has posteriour, answering to MF. posterieur, ‘ pos-
terior, hinder,’ Cot., from the L. acc. posteridrem. Der. posterior-s,
s. pl., for posterior parts ; posterior-ly, posterior-i-ty. And see posterity,
postern, posthumous, postil.

POSTERITY, succeeding generations, future race of people.
(F.—L.) Spelt posteritie, Spenser, Ruines of Rome, 434; posteryté,
in Caxton, Golden Legend, Adam, § 7.—MF. posterité, ‘ posterity ;’
Cot.—L. posterititem, acc. of posteritas, futurity, posterity. = L.
posteri-, for posterus, following after ; see Posterior.

POSTERN, a back-door, small private gate. (F.—L.) ME.
posterne, Rob. of Glouc. p. 19, 1. 447; spelt postorne, K. Alisaunder,
4593.—=OF. posterle, also posterne (by change of J to x), Burguy;
later poterne, ‘a posterne, or posterne-gate, a back-door to a fort,’
Cot.=—L. posterula, a small back-door, postern ; formed with. dimin.
suffix -la from fosteru-s, behind ; see Posterior.

POSTHUMOUS (better POSTUMOUS), born after the
father’s death, published after the author’s decease. (L.) The spell-
ing with h is false; see below. Shak. has Posthumus as.a name in
Cymb. i. 1. 41, &c. Sir T. Browne has ‘ posthumous memory ;’ Urn-
burial, c. v. § 12.—L. postumus, the last; esp. of youngest children,
the last-bomm; hence, late-born, and, as sb., a posthumous child.
B. In accordance with a popular etymology, the word was also
written posthumus, asif derived from post humum, lit. after the ground,
which was forced into the meaning ‘after the father is laid in the
ground or buried ;” and, in accordance with this notion, the sense of
the word was at last chiefly confined to such a usage. Hence also
the F. spelling posthume, Port. posthumo; but Span. and Ital. have
postumo ; all in the usual sense attached to E. posthumous. y. The L.
postumus =*post-tu-mus, a superlative formed from fost, behind; cf.
L. op-tu-mus, best. See Posterior. Der. post-humous-ly.

POSTIL, an explanatory note on the Bible, marginal note or
commentary. (F.—L.) ME. fostille, Wyclif, gen. prologue to
Isaiah, ed. Forshall and Madden, p. 225; the word is now obsolete,
except in theological writings. =F. postille, ‘a postill, glosse, com-
pendious exposition ;’ Cot.. [Hence, with prefix ap- (=L. ad before
p) was formed MF. appostille, ‘an answer to a petition, set down in
the margent thereof; and, generally, any small addition unto a great
discourse in writing ;” Cot.]—Late L. postilla, a marginal note in a
bible, in use A.D. 1228; Ducange. . The usual derivation, and
doubtless the correct one, is that of Ducange, viz. from L. post illa,
i.e. post illa verba, after those words ; because the glosses were added
afterwards. Cf. Ital. and Port. postilla, Span. postila, a marginal
note. Der. fostil, verb, to write marginal notes, to comment on,
annotate, Bacon, Life of Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 193, 1. 3.

POSTILLION, a post-boy, rider of post-horses in a carriage.
(F.—Ital.—L.) ‘Those. swift postillions, my thoughts;” Howell,
‘Famil. Letters, vol. i. let. 8; A.D. 1619. And in Cotgrave. = F.
postillon, ‘a postillon, guide, posts-boy;’ Cot. Introduced in the
16th cent. from Ital. ostiglione, ‘a postilion,’ Florio (and see
Brachet). Formed with suffix -iglione (=L. -il-i-dnem) from Ital.
post-a, a messenger, post; see Post (2).

POST-MERIDIAN, POMERIDIAN, belonging to the
afternoon. (L.) Howell uses the form pomeridian, speaking of his
‘privat pomeridian devotions ;’ Famil. Letters, vol. i. sect. 6. let. 32.
=—L. pomeridianus, also postmeridianus, belonging to the afternoon.
—L. post, after; and meridianus, belonging to midday. See Post-
and Meridian.

POST-MORTEM, after death. (L.) A medical term. —L.
post, after; mortem, acc. of mors, death. See Post- and Mortal.

POST-OBIT, a bond by which a person receiving money under-
takes to repay a larger sum after the death of the person who leaves
him money. (L.) A law term. Shortened from L. post obitum,
after death. See Post and Obit.

POSTPONE, to put off, delay. (L.) Postponed is in Blount’s
Nomolexicon, ed. 1691, q.v. ‘ Postpone, to let behind or esteem less,
to leave or neglect;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘Thow did postpone ;’
How Dumbar was desyred to be ane Freir, 1. 28. [Formerly, the form
was also postpose, which occurs in Howell, Famil. Letters, vol.i.sect. 4.
let. 15, cited by Richardson with the spelling postpone. This is from
F. postposer, ‘to set or leave behind;’ Cot. He also has: ‘ Post-
posé, postposed.’|—L. postponere, to put after.—L. post, after; and


POTATION 467


ponere, to put; see Post- and Posifion. Der. postpone-ment, a
clumsy word, with F. suffix -ment.

POSTSCRIPT, a part added to a writing after it was thought
to be complete. (L.) In Shak. Hamlet, iv. 7. 53. From L. post-
scriptum, that which is written after; from fost, after, and scriptus,

p- of scribere, to write. See Post- and Scribe.

POSTULATE, a proposition assumed without proof, as being
self-evident. (L.) ‘ Postulates and entreated maxims;’ Sir T.
Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. vi. c. 6. § 6.—L. postulatum, a thing de-
manded ; hence also, a thing granted; neut. of postuldtus, pp. of
postulare, to demand. B. It seems probable that postwlare stands
for *por-stlire, allied to poscere, for *por-scere, to ask. vy. It is
further proposed to assume for poscere a still older form *pore-scere,
thus bringing it into alliance with 4/PREK, to pray, whence Skt.
pracch, to ask, L. precari, to pray; see Pray. Brugmann, i.
§§ 483(7), 502. Der. postulate, verb, Sir T, Browne, Vulg. Errors,
b. ii. c. 3 [not 4], last section ; postulat-or-y, id. b. ii. c. 6. § 2.

POSTURE, position, attitude. (F.—L.) In Shak. Wint. Tale,
V. 3- 23.—F. posture, ‘posture;’ Cot.—L. fositiira, position,
arrangement; allied to posit-us, pp. of ponere, to place; see Position.
Der. posture-master ; posture, verb.

POSY, a verse of poetry, a motto, a bouquet or nosegay. (F.—
L.—Gk.) The word, in all its senses, is merely a contraction of
Poesy, q.v. 1. It was usual to engrave short mottoes on knives
and on rings; and as these were frequently in verse, they were called
posies. Thus, in Shak. Merch. Ven. v. 148, we have: ‘a ring...
whose posy was ... like cutler’s poetry Upon a knife, Love me, and
leave me not ;’ see note to the line in Wright’s edition. So also in
Hamlet, ‘the posy.of a ring ;’ ili. 2.162. See Chambers, Book of
Days, i. 221, for examples, such as ‘In thee, my choice, I do re-
joice;’ &c. As these inscriptions were necessarily brief, any short
inscription was also called a gosy, even though neither in verse nor
poetically expressed. Thus, Udall, on St. Luke, c. 23, v. 38,
speaking of the handwriting above the cross, calls it ‘a super-
scripcion or poisee written on the top of the crosse’ (R.). So also
in the following: ‘And the tente was replenished and decked with
this poysie, After busie laboure commeth victorious reste ;’ Hall’s
Chron. Hen. V, an. 7. § 2. And see Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 65,
1. 20.. [Another old name for a motto was a reason; see Fabyan’s
Chron. Hen. V, an. 8, ed. Ellis, p. 587.] 2. Mr. Wedgwood well
accounts for posy in the sense of bouquet, as follows: ‘A nosegay
was probably called by this name from flowers being used enig-
matically, as is still common in the East. Among the tracts men-
tioned in the Catalogue of Heber’s MSS., no. 1442, is ‘‘ A new yeares
guifte, or a posie made upon certen flowers presented to the Countess
of Pembroke; by the author of Chloris, &c.;’? see Notes and
Queries, Dec. 19, 1868 (4S. il. 577). So also in Beaum. and
Fletcher, Philaster, Act i. sc. I [sc. 2 in Darley’s ed.]; ‘‘ Then took
he up his garland, and did shew What every flower, as country
people hold Did signify ;” and see Hamlet, iv. 5.175.’ To this I
may add, that a posy was even sometimes expressed by precious
stones; see Chambers, as above. The line ‘And a thousand
fragrant posies’ is by Marlowe; The Passionate Shepherd, st. 3.
See Puttenham, Arte of E. Poesie, bk. i. c. 30. Doublet, poesy.

POT, a vessel for cooking, or drinking from. (E.) ME. pot, Ancren
Riwle, p. 368, 1. 21. [Cf. Irish pota, potadh, a pot, vessel; Gael.
poit; W. pot; allfrom E.J] AS. pott; Leechdoms, i. 378.4-EFries.
Du. pot; Low G. pott ; Icel. potir, Swed. potta, Dan. potte. Teut.
type *puttoz. Hence Low L. pozttus, also spelt potus (as if from L,
potare, to drink) ; F. pot, Bret. pod, Span. pote. @ The phrase
‘to go to pot” meant to be put into the cooking-pot; see Squire of
Low Degree, 448; my Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 226; Brand, Pop.
Antiq., 11. 58. Der. pot-ash, i.e. ash obtained from the fot, so called
because the alkaline salt was obtained by burning vegetable sub-
stances; Chaucer mentions fern-ashes, as used for making glass, C. T.
10569 (F 255); ‘ Pot-ashes (anno 12 Car. 2. cap. 4) are made of the
best wood or fern-ashes,’ Blount’s Nomolexicon, ed. 1691 ; perhaps
from Du. fotasch (from pot and asch, ashes), G. potiasche (from asche,
ashes) ; Latinized in the form fotassa, whence fotass-ium. We find
pot-asshes in. Arnold’s Chron. (1502); ed. 1811, p. 187. Also or-
herb, pot-hook, pot-sherd (see Sherd). Also pot, verb; pott-er, ME.
potter, Cursor Mundi, 16536 (cf. Irish potoir, a potter) ; potter-y, from
F, poterie (Cot.).. And see pot-een, pott-age, pott-le, pot-walloper.

POTABLE, that may be drunk. (F.—L.) In Shak. 2 Hen. IV,
iv. 5. 163.—F. potable, ‘potable, drinkable ;” Cot.—L. pdtabilis,
drinkable; formed with suffix -dilis from poda-re, to drink. = L. potus,
drunken; formed with suffix -tws from a base pa-, as in Gk. 7@-ya,
drink ; cf. Skt. pa, to drink, Gk. 7é-ros, a drinking, 7d-o1s, drink.
Der. potable-ness ; and see potation, potion.

POTASH, POTASSIUM; see under Pot.

POTATION, a draught. (L.) Not a F. word. In ee Oth.

pel mel)


468 POTATO


ii. 3. 56. Spelt potacion, Coventry Myst., p. 138.—L. potatidnem,
acc. of potatio, a drinking. —L. potare, to drink. =L. potus, drunken ;
see Potable.

POTATO, a tuber of a plant much cultivated for food; the plant
itself. (Span.—Hayti.) In Shak. Merry Wives, v. 5. 21. ‘ Potatoes,
natives of Chili and Peru, originally brought to England from Santa
Fé, in America, by Sir John Hawkins, 1563; others ascribe their
introduction to Sir Francis Drake, in 1586; while their general cul-
ture is mentioned by many writers as occurring in 1592;’ Haydn,
Dict. of Dates. They are also mentioned by Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s
Revels, Act ii. sc. I.—Span. patata, a potato ; also batata, which is
a better form.—Hayti batata. ‘Peter Martyr, speaking of Haiti,
says (in Decad. 2. c. 9), ‘‘Effodiunt etiam e tellure suapte natura
nascentes radices, indigenze batatas appellant, quas ut vidi insubres
napos existimayi, aut magna terree tubera.” .. . Navagerio, who was
in the Indies at the same time, writes in 1526, ‘‘ Io ho vedute molte
cose dell’ Indie ed ho ayuto di quelle radice che chiamano batatas, e
le ho mangiate; sono di sapor di castagno.” Doubtless these were
sweet potatoes or yams, which are still known by this name in
Spanish. —Wedgwood. Spelt botata (as a Hayti word) in R. Eden’s
books on America, ed. Arber, p. 131; also battata, p. 159.

POTCH, to thrust, poke. (F.—L.) In Shak. Cor, i. Io. 15.
merely a variant of Poach (2).

POTEEN, whisky illicitly distilled in Ireland. (Irish—E.) From
Trish portin, a little pot; dimin. of poite, a pot.—E. pot; see
Pot.

POTENT, powerful. (L.) In Shak. Temp. i. 2. 275. Rich.
gives a quotation from Wyatt, showing that the word was used in
1539.—L. potent-, stem of potens, powerful, pres. part. of possum, I
am able; see Possible. Der. potenc-y, Hamlet, iii. 4.170, a coined
word, due to L. potentia, power ; potent-ial, ME. potencyal, Chaucer,
House of Fame, b. iii. 1.5 [but only in Thynne’s edition of 1532,and
later edd.; MSS. poetical], from F. potentiel, ‘strong, forcible,’ Cot.,
which from L. potentidlis, forcible (only found in the derived ad-
verb potentialiter), formed with suffix -alis from the sb. fotentia ;
whence fotential-ly, potential-i-ty. Also potent-ate, L.L.L. v. 2. 684,
from F. potentat, ‘a potentate, great lord,’ Cot., which from Late L.
potentatus, a supreme prince (Ducange), from potentare, to exercise
authority (id.). Also ommni-potent, q.v.; and armi-potent, Chaucer,
C. T. 1984 (A 1982). Doublet, puissant, q.v.

POTHER, bustle, confusion, constant excitement. (E.) In Pope,
Horace, Sat. ii. 2.45. ‘To make a pother, to make a noise or bustle;’
Bailey’s Dict., vol.i.ed.1735. Older form pudder. ‘ Pudder, noise,
bustle; to keep a pudder about trifles;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Spelt
poother in ed. 1623 of Shak. Cor. ii. 1. 234 ; pudder in K. Lear, iii. 2.
50. ME. puderen, apparently in the sense ‘to poke about;’ see
Ancren Riwle, p. 214, note c. Another form is potter; ‘To potter,
to stir or disorder anything ;’ Bailey, vol. i. ‘ Potter, to stir, poke,
confuse, do anything inefficiently ;’ also ‘ Pother, to shake, to poke,
West;’ Halliwell. See Potter. The sense ‘to stir about’ seems
the orig. one; hence that of ‘turmoil’ as the result of stirring.
@ Prob. confused with poother, pudder, dust, dialect forms of powder ;
indeed, Butler has pother in Hudibras, i. 1. 32, but powder in the
same, ili. I. 1055. See Powder. And see Bother.

POTION, a drink. (F.—L.) In Shak. Romeo, v. 3. 244. ME.
pocion, K. Alisaunder, 3509.—F. potion, ‘a potion;’ Cot.—L.
potidnem, acc. of potio, a drink; see Poison. Doublet, poison.

POTTAGEH, broth, thick soup. (F.—Teut.) ME. potage, Ancren
Riwle, p. 412, 1. 27.—F. potage, ‘pottage, porridge ;’ Cot. Formed,
with suffix -age (L. -dticum), from F. pot, which is from a Teut.
source; see Pot. Doublet, porridge.

POTTER, to go about doing nothing. (E.) A provincial word,
but in common use. ‘ Potter, to go about doing nothing, to saunter
idly ; to work badly, do anything inefficiently ; also, to stir, poke,
North ; also, to confuse, disturb, Vorksh.;’ Halliwell. ‘ To stir or
disorder anything ;’ Bailey’s Dict., vol. i. ed. 1735. It is the fre-
quentative form, with the usual suffix -er, of E. put, to thrust; see
Put. Cf. also MDu. poteren, ‘to search one thoroughly’ (Hexham),
from the notion of poking a stick into every corner; Du. peuteren, to
fumble, to poke about; Norw. pota, MSwed. potta, to poke. See
Pother. And cf. E. dial. polter, to potter about.

POTTLE, a small measure, basket for fruit. (F.—Teut.) ME.
potel, to translate L. laguncula; Wyclif, Isaiah, x. 33.—OF. potel,
a small pot, a small measure (Godefroy) ; cf. AF. potel, Stat. Realm,
i. 321. Dimin. of F. pot, from Low G. pott; see Pot.

POTWALLOPER, lit. one who boils a pot. (Hybrid; E. and
F.—Tent.) ‘ Potwalloper, a voter in certain boroughs in England,
where all who boil (wallop) a pot are entitled to vote ;’ Webster.
Corrupted to pot-wabblers (Halliwell); also found as fot-walliners,
given as a Somersetshire word in Upton’s MS. additions to Junius
(Halliwell). Wallop, to boil fast, is from ME. walopen, to gallop.


POUND


Golding has: ‘ seething a-wallop,’ i.e. boiling rapidly; tr. of Ovid,
fol. 82. (Prob. confused with ME. wallen, AS. weallan, to boil.)
See Pot and Gallop.

POUCH, a poke, or bag. (F.—Scand.) ME. pouche, Chaucer, C.T.
3929 (A 3931).—OF. pouche, found in the 14th cent. as a variant
of poche, ‘a pocket, pouch, or poke;” Cot. See Littré; and pouche,
variant of Norm. dial, pougue,a pouch; Moisy. Of Scand. origin;
see Poke (1). Der. pouch, verb. Doublet, poke (1).

POULT, a chicken, fowl. (F.—L.) Poulé is used by W. King
(died A.D. 1712), in a poem on The Art of Cookery, 1. 33. Also in
Chapman, Revenge for Honour, i. 1. 21. ME. pulte, Prompt. Pary.
=F. poulet, ‘a chicken;’ Cot. Dimin. of poule, a hen. —Late L.
pulla, a hen; fem, of pullus, a young animal, cognate with E. Foal,
q.v- Der. poult-er, one who deals in fowls, 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 480,
ME. pulter, Prompt. Parv., AF. pulleter, Liber Albus, p. 465 ;
whence the later form poult-er-er (Dekker, Honest Whore, pt. ii, iii. 3),
by the unnecessary reduplication of the suffix -er, denoting the
agent. Also poult-r-y, ME. pultrie, Prompt. Parv., AF. poletrie,
pultrie, Liber Albus, p. 231, formed with F. suffix -er-ie, as in the
case of pant-r-y, &c. And see Pullet. Doublet, pullez.

POULTICH, a soft plaister applied to sores. (F.—L.) In Shak,
Romeo, ii. 5. 65. Gascoigne, Steel Glas, 997 (ed. Arber, p. 77),
has the pl. form pultesses. Burton has the pl. pultises, Anat. Mel. ii.
4.i.5. Formed, with suffix -ice (-esse, -is) from MF. pulte, ‘a poul-
tice,’ Cot.—L. pultem, acc. of puls, a thick pap, or pap-like substance.
+Gk. méAz7os, porridge. @ Godefroy also has OF. pols, pous, from
L. nom, puls, pap; sometimes used in the sense of ‘ poultice ;’ as,
‘Cil qui... metent .., lor fols mollificatives sor toutes plaies.’
Cf. Ital. poltiglia, <a pultis;’ Florio. The form may have been due
to L. pl. pultes. Der. poultice, verb.

POUNCE (1), to seize with the claws, as a bird, to dart upon
suddenly. (F.—L.) Orig. a term in hawking. A hawk’s claws
were called pounces, as in Spenser, F.Q.i. 11. 19 ; hence to pounce
upon, to seize with the claws, strike or pierce with them. G.
Douglas speaks of an eagle’s punsys, Ain. xiii, ch. 5 (nearend); and
a hawk’s pownces are mentioned in the Book of St. Alban’s, fol. a8.
The orig. sense of the verb was ‘ to pierce,’ to prick, to adorn with
pierced work. <A pounce is also a punch or stamp; see Nares. In
Chaucer, Pers. Tale, De Ira, Group I, 1. 421, we read of  pownsoned
and dagged clothynge’ in three MSS., whilst two others have
‘ pounsed and dagged clothyng.’ B. Here pownsoned has the same
sense, but is a derivative word, being made from the sb. pounson or
punsoun, a bodkin or dagger; for which see Barbour’s Bruce, i. 545,
and my note on the line. The form pounson answers to Late L.
acc. punctionem, OF. pongon, F. poingon, a punch or puncheon for
piercing holes. We must refer the verb pounsen and the sb. pounce to
the OF. pong-on (above). [The mod. F. poncer is related to Pounce
(2).] y. We have, however, parallel forms in other languages, viz.
Span. punchar, to prick, punch, puncha, a thorn, prickle, sharp point,
exactly equivalent to the pounce or talon of the hawk; mod. Proy.
pouncha, to prick; Ital. punzecchiare, to prick slightly (which pre-
supposes a form punzare, to prick); punzone, a puncher. 5. The
OSpan. puncar, Span. punchar, answer to a Late L. *punctiare, to prick,
not found, but readily formed from punctus, pp. of pungere, to prick..
See Point, Pungent, Punch (1).

POUNCE (2), fine powder. (F.—L.) Merely a doublet. of
pumice, and orig. used for powdered pumice-stone, but afterwards ex-
tended to other kinds of fine powder, and to various uses of it.
‘Long effeminate pouldred [powdered] pounced haire;’ Prynne,
Histrio-Mastix, pt. i. Act vi. sc. 15. ‘Pounce, a sort of powder
strew’d upon paper to bear ink, or to soak up a blot;’ Phillips,
ed. 1706.—F. ponce ; ‘ pierre ponce, a pumis stone,’ Cot. ‘ Ponce,.
pumice ;’ Hamilton.—L. paimicem, acc. of piimex, pumice ; whence
ponce (=pom’ce) is regularly formed. Der. pounce, to sprinkle with
pounce (F. poncer) ; pounce-box; pounc-et-box, 1 Hen. IV, i. 3. 38.
Doublet, pumice. f

POUND (1), a weight, a sovereign. (L.) The sense of ‘ weight’?
is the orig. one. ME. pund, later pound, frequently with the pl. the
same as the singular, whence the mod. phrase ‘a five-pownd note.’
‘An hundred pund’ =a hundred pounds, Havelok, 1633. AS. pund,
pl. pund, a weight, a pound; see Luke xix. 16, John xii. 3.—L.
pondé, a pound, used as an indeclinable sb., though orig. meaning
‘by weight;’ allied to pondus, a weight. Hence also were borrowed
G. pfund, &c. Allied to pendere, to weigh; and to pendére, to hang;
see Pendant. Der. pound-age; see Blount’s Nomolexicon, ed.
1691. And see ponder.

POUND (2), an enclosure for strayed animals. (E.) The same
word as pond. ‘Which thus in pound was pent;’ Gascoigne, A
Deuise for Viscount Mountacute ; see Gascoigne’s Works, ed. Haz-
litt, i. 84, 1. 1. Rich. has the reading pond. ME. pond; in the
comp. pond-folde (other readings ponfolde, punfolde, pounfolde, pyn=


POUND


fold), P. Plowman, B. v. 633; with the sense ‘ pinfold’ or ‘ pound.’

AS. pund, an enclosure; the compound pund-breche, explained by
infractura parci=the breaking into an enclosure, occurs in the Laws
of Hen. I., c. 40; see Thorpe’s Ancient Laws, vol. i. p.540. Hence
AS. forpyndan, to shut in, repress; Grein, i. 329, Cf. Icel. pynda,
to shut in, torment. [Irish pozt, a pound for cattle, a pond, is
borrowed from E.]. Der. pound, verb, Cor. i. 4. 173 im-pound.
Also gin-fold, K. Lear, ii. 2. 9, for pind-fold = pound-fold, as shown
by ME. pynfold cited above, the vowel 7 being due to the y in the
derived AS. pyndan; as also in pind-ar, q.v. Doublet, pond.

POUND (3), to beat, bruise in a mortar. (E.) Here the d is
excrescent ; it stands for pouz, from an older form pin. Cf. soun-d
for ME. sown; gown-d, vulgar form of gown. ME. pounen, to bruise,
Wyclif, Matt. xxi. 44, earlier version. AS. piinian, to pound, Liber
Scintillarum, p. 95, 1. 18; the pp. gepunod occurs as a various
reading for gecnucud (=knocked, pounded) in Cockayne’s Leech-
doms, i. 176, footnote 4. Der. pound-er.

POUR, to cause to flow, send forth, utter, flow. (F.—L.) ‘Ipoore
out the lycoure ;? Palsgrave. ME. pouren, P. Plowman, B. v. 220;
often used with out, Gower, C. A. i. 302; bk. iii. 679.. The orig.
sense in F. was to purify, clarify, esp. by wringing or squeezing out ;
ef. Lowl. Sc. poor, to drain off water, E. D. D.=OF. purer, to
clarify, also to pour out or to drip; so also depurer, to drip or run
out ; Norm. dial. purer, to pour, flow, drip, as in puis soit celle eaue
puree en un autre vaissel, let this water be then poured into another
vessel; Guernsey, j’o l’cidre qui pure dans l’auge, I hear the cider
pouring into the trough (Moisy).—Late L. purdare, to purify.—L.
purus, pure. @ The development of the vowel is exceptional ;
observe that it rimes with shower, flower, in Pope, Messiah, 13,
and in Gay, The Fan, i. 97; cf. E. flower from AF. flur; the sound
may have been affected by pore, sb., and pore, verb. See Pure.

POURPOINT, PURPOINT, a quilted doublet.. (F.—L.)
ME. purpoynt ; Paston Letters, i. 482.—F. pourpoint, ‘a dublet ;’
Cot. A corruption of OF. parpoint (Godefroy); by the frequent
confusion of pour and par.—Late L. perpunctum.=—L. perpunct-us,
pp- of perpungere, to pierce with a needle; hence, to quilt.—L. per,
through ; pungere, to prick. Cf. Norm. dial. parpointer, to quilt.

POURTRAY, the same as Portray, q.v.

POUT (1), to look sulky or displeased, to puff out the lips or
cheeks. (E.) In Shak. Cor. v. 1. 52. ME. powten, in Reliquize
Antique, ii. 211. [Cf. W. pwdu, to pout, to be sullen, which I
suppose to be a form borrowed from English.] For the derivative
eel-pout, see Pout (2) below. We also find Du. puit-aal, an eel-
pout, put, a frog (from its swollen shape); Swed. puta, a cushion,
Dan. pude,a pillow. Cf. Swed. dial. puta, to be blown out, to be
swollen out (Rietz). Der. pout (2), pout-er, pout-ing.

POUT (2), a kind of fish. (E.) ‘It has the power of inflating
a membrane which covers the eyes and neighboring parts of the
head ;’ Webster. ‘ Powt, or eel-powt ;’ Minsheu. ‘We find AS.
éle-putan, eel-pouts, in ALlfric’s Colloquy (Fisherman), in Voc. 94. 7.
Pita is lit. ‘pouter,’ from a verb *piutan, to pout, found in the
cognate Swed. dial. puta, to be blown out or inflated (Rietz) ; and
see EFries. put-al, an eel-pout, in Koolman. Cf. Skt. bud-bud-a-,
a bubble, from an imitative root BEU-; cf. the root BHEU in Gk.
gvodw, I puffout. @] The Sc. pout, chicken (Jamieson) = powlt, q.v.

POVERTY, the state of being poor. (F.—L.) In early use.
ME. pouerté (with w==v), O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 143, last
line. = OF. poverte, later povreté, ‘ poverty,’ Cot. Mod. F. pauvrete.
hee paupertatem, acc. of paupertas, poverty.—L. pauper, poor; see

oor.

POWDER, dust. (F.—L.) ME. poudre, Rob. of Glouc. p. 345,
1, 7080.—F. poudre, ‘powder,’ Cot., who also gives the spelling
pouldre, OF. poldre, puldre, in Burguy and Supp. to Godefroy.
Formed with excrescent d after 17; the oldest form is polre.—L.
puluerem, acc. of puluis, dust. Allied to pollen, fine meal, palea,
chaff;.Gk. maA-n, meal. See Pulverise. Der. powder, verb, ME.
pouderen, Rich. Redeles, Pass. i. 1. 46 ; powder-y.

POWER, might, ability, strength, rule. (F.—L.) ME. foér,
Popular Treatises on Science, ed. Wright, p. 133, 1. 36; also pouér,
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1654. Hence power, where the w is
used to avoid the appearance of an hiatus; Prick of Conscience,
5884.—AF. poér, Stat. Realm, i. 28; OF. poér, also) pooir, and (in
order to avoid hiatus) povoir, power; mod. F. pouvoir. The OF.
poér stands for poter, as shown by Ital. potere, power; cf. also Span.
poder, power. . The word is merely due to a substantival use of
an infinitive mood, as in the case of leisure, pleasure; the Ital. potere,
Span. poder, are both infinitives as well as sbs., with the sense ‘ to
be able.’ = Late L. potére, to be able, which (as shown by Diez) took
the place of L. posse in the 8th century. The L. posse is itself a con-
traction for pot-esse, used by Plautus and Lucretius; and fot-esse,
again, stands for poti-esse, to be powerful; from otis, powerful, and


PRANK


esse, to be. See Possible and Essence. Der. power-ful,
Spenser, F. Q. iv. 10. 36; power-ful-ly, power-ful-ness; power-less,
power-less-ly, power-less-ness. Doublet, posse.

POX, an eruptive disease. (E.) Written for pocks, pl. of pock, a
pustule ; see Pock. Cf. ‘small pockes;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of
Helth, bk. iv. [iii. in the head-line], ch. 6.

PRACTICH, a habit of doing things, performance. (F.—L.—
Gk.) Spelt practyse in Palsgrave. A back-formation from the verb
to practyse (in the same).—OF. practiser, to practise (Godefroy). =
Late L. type *practiciare, for Late L. practicare, to practise. = L.
practicus (below). B. But the older form of the sb. was praktike.
ME. praktike, Chaucer, C. T. 5769 (D187); practique, Gower, C. A.
ii. 89; bk. iv. 2612. —OF. practique, ‘ practise, experience,’ Cot.=—
L. practica, fem. of practicus.—Gk. mpaxtixés, fit for business,
practical ; whence 4 mpaxrixy (émaTjyn), practical science, practice.
— Gk. mpaxrés, to be done ; verbal adj. of mpdccew (=*mpaxyew), to
do, to accomplish. From a base mpa-«; Brugmann, ii. § 86
Der. practise, verb, K. John, i. 214, as above (cf. practisour=
practis-er, in Chaucer, C. T. 424); practis-er. Also practic-able,
used by Bp. Taylor, vol. iii. ser. 2 (R.), formed from MF. practiquer,
‘to practise, Cot.; hence practic-abl-y, practic-abil-i-ty ; also practic-
al, North’s Plutarch, pt. ii. p. 18 (R.), practic-al-ly, -ness. Also
practition-er, formed with a needless suffixed -er from the older term
practician, with the same sense (both practician and practitioner are
in Minsheu), from MF. practicien, ‘a practicer or practitioner in law,’
Cot. And see pragmatic.

PRASITOR, PRETOR, a Roman magistrate. (L.) In Shak.
Jul. Ces. i. 3. 143.—L. pretor, lit. a goer before, a leader; con-
tracted form of *pre-itor.—L. pre, before; and *itor, a goer, from
it-um, supine of ire, to go, which is from 4/EI, togo. See Pre- and
Itinerant. Der. pretor-ium, the pretor’s hall,.Mark xy. 16;
pretor-i-an; pretorship.

PRAGMATIC, well-practised, fit for business, active. (F.—L.—
Gk.) ‘ These pragmatic young men ;” Ben Jonson, The Devil is an
Ass, Act i. sc. 3, end of Fitzdottrel’s long speech. ‘ Pragmaticall,
practised in many matters;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. pragmatique ;
chiefly in the phrase la pragmatique sanction, ‘a confirmation of a
decree made in the councill of Basil,’ &c., Cot.=L. pragmaticus. =
Gk. mparyparixés, skilled in business. — Gk, mpayyar-, stem of mpayya
(=*mpax-pa), a deed, thing done. = Gk.mpacoew (=*mpak-yewv), to do ;
see Practice. Der. pragmatic-al, -al-ly. Note also praxis, an
example for exercise, from Gk. mpaéis, a deed, action.

PRAIRIE, an extensive meadow or tract of grass.
word imported from America in the 18th cent. ‘The wondrous,
beautiful prairies ;’ Longfellow, Evangeline, part ii. iv. 12.—F.
prairie, ‘a medow, or medow ground;’ Cot.=Late L. prataria,
meadow-land; used A.D. 832; Ducange.=L. prat-um, a meadow ;
with adj. fem. suffix -aria.

PRAISE, commendation, tribute of gratitude. (F.—L.) ME.
preis, preys, Chaucer, C. T. 14565 (B 3837). [The verb preisen, to
praise, is found much earlier, in the Ancren Riwle, p. 64, l. 22.]—
OF. preis, price, value, merit; from OF. preisier, to praise. —L.
pretiare, to price, prize, value; from pretium, price, value; see
Price. Der. prais-er ; praise-worthy, Much Ado, vy. 2. 90; pratse-
worthi-ness. Also ap-praise, dis-praise, ap-preci-ate, de-preci-ate; preci-
ous. Doublets, price, prize (2).

PRAM, a flat-bottomed boat. (F.—Du.—Slay.) . Spelt prame in
Johnson’s Dict.—F. prame (1752), Hatzfeld ; but AF. prame occurs
in The Earl of Derby’s Expeditions, p. 42, 1. 24.—Du. praam. =
OChSlavon. pram; Polish pram, a boat, vessel; from the Idg,.
PAR, whence also Goth. far-an, to travel, E. fare (Kluge).

PRANCE, to strut about ; in mod, E., to bound gaily, as a horse.
(E.) Spelt praunce in Spenser, where it is used of a giant stalking
along; F.Q.i. 7.11. In Shak. it is used of a young man, 1 Hen. V1,
ii. I. 24. The old sense is to strut about, as if for display ; and the
word is a variant of prank. Used of a horse, Skelton, Bowge of
Courte, 1. 411. ME. prauncen; ‘the horse may pryk and praunce,’
Lydgate, Horse, Sheep, and Goose, 1. 29. Also prancen, Gower,
C. A. ili. 413 bk. vi. 1191. Allied to prank (below) ; cf. Dan.
dial. prandse, pranse, to go proudly, as a prancing horse; pransk,
proud; Swed. dial. prdnga, Swed. prunka, to show off; Dan. dial..
pranje, pranne, to prance. So also MDu. pronken, ‘to make a fine
show, to brag, strut; Jangs straat gaan pronken, to strut along, to walk
proudly along the streets;’ Sewel. See Prank. Der. pranc-ing.

PRANK (1), to deck, to adorn. (E.) The old senses are to
display gaudily, set out ostentatiously, to deck, dress up. ‘Some
prancke their ruffes;’? Spenser, F. Q. i. 4. 14. ME. pranken;
‘ Prankyd, as clothes, plicatus,’ Prompt. Parv. ‘I pranke ones gowne,
I set the plyghtes [pleats] in order, ie mets les plies dune robe a poynt.
Se yonder olde man, his gowne is pranked as if he were but a yonge
man;’ Palsgrave. ‘Pranked with pletes;’ Skelton, Elinour Rum-


469


(Grakn a


470 PRANK


myng, 69; prank, a fold, pleat, Prompt. Parv. B. Closely connected
with prink, used in the same sense; see examples in Nares. ‘ But
marke his plumes, The whiche to princke he dayes and nights con-
sumes;’ Gascoigne, Weeds, Farewell with a Mischief, st. 6, ed.
Hazlitt. [Here Rich. reads pranke.| Prink is a nasalised form of
prick; cf. Lowland Scot. preek (lit. to prick), to be spruce; ‘a bit
preekin bodie, one attached to dress, self-conceited,’ Jamieson ;
prick-me-dainty, finical; prink, primp, to deck, to prick. See Prick.
y. Allied words are MDu. pronck, ‘shewe, or ostentation,’ Hexham;
proncken, to display one’s dress, pronckepinken, pronckeprincken, to
glitter in a fine dress, Oudemans. Without the nasal, we have
MDu. pryken, ‘to make a proud shew;’ Sewel. Cf. also Low G.
prunken, to make a fine show, prunk, show, display, Bremen Worter-
buch; G. prunk, show, parade; Dan. and Swed. prunk, show,
parade; and perhaps G. prangen, Dan. prange, to make a show.
8. The forms suggest a Teut. type *prenkan, str. vb. (pt. t. *prank,

p. *prunkanoz). Der. prank (2), prance.

PRANK (2), atrick, mischievous action. (E.) In Shak. Hamlet,
iii. 4. 2; K, Lear, i. 4. 259, Oth. ii. 1. 143 ; Skelton, Why Come Ye
Nat to Courte, 365. ‘ Pranke, tour, finesse ;’ Palsgrave. Mr. Wedg-
wood well says: ‘A prank is usually taken in a bad sense, and
signifies something done in the face of others that makes them stare
with amazement.’ It is, in fact, an act done ‘to show off;’ and is
the same word as prank, show ; see above.

PRATH, to talk idly. (Low G.) ME. praten, Lydgate, Minor
Poems, ed. Halliwell, p. 155; Coventry Plays, ed. Halliwell, 353
(Stratmann). Cf. MSwed. prata, to talk (Ihre) ; Dan. prate, to prate ;
also Swed. prat, Dan. prat, talk, prattle.—MDu. praten, ‘to prate,
Hexham; mod. Du. praatz, tattle; Low G. praten, to prate, praat,
tattle, Bremen Worterbuch. Perhaps of imitative origin, from a
base *prat. Der. prate, sb., prat-er, prat-ing. Also prati-le, Temp. iii.
I. 57, the frequentative form, with the usual suffix -le; cf. Low G.
prateln, to prattle (Schambach) ; prattle, sb., Rich. II, v. 2. 26;
prattl-er.

PRAWN, a small crustacean animal, like the shrimp. (Scand. ?)
ME. prane, Prompt. Parv. Of doubtful origin. Florio has: ‘ Par-
nocchie, a fish called shrimps or praunes;’ where parnocchie can
hardly be other than a dimin. form of L. perna, a sea-mussel (lit.
a ham), whence Mital. perma, ‘a shell-fish called a nakre or anarre,’
Florio; also Span. perna, flat shell-fish. But we cannot connect
prawn with L. perna. B. We find also prov. E. prankle, a prawn,
and prankle, to prance (Isle of Wight). This suggests a connexion
between prawn and prance ; with a possible allusion to its bright
appearance or quick movements; cf. Jutland pranni, to strut,
prannis, a showy person (Feilberg).

PRAY, to entreat, ask earnestly. (F.—L.) In early use. ME,
preien, preyen; O. Eng, Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 287, 1. 9; Havelok,
1440,— AF. and OF. preier, later prier, ‘to pray,’ Cot.=—L. preciri,
to pray.—L. prec-, stem of prex, a prayer; see Precarious. Der.
pray-er, ME. preiere, preyere, Chaucer, C.T. 231, 1206 (A 1204),
from OF. preiere, proiere, mod. F. priére (Ital. preghiera), from L.
prectria, fem. of precdrius; see Precarious. Hence prayer-ful,
prayer-less.

PRE, prefix, beforehand. (L.; or F.—L.) Used both as a F. and
L, prefix; OF. pre-, L. pre- (in pre-hendere), usually pre.=—L. pre,
prep., before; for *prai, a locative form. Closely connected with
pro; see Pro-. Also allied to the prefixes per-, para-, pur-.
Hence numerous compounds, of which several, like pre-caution, are
of obvious origin.

PREACH, to pronounce a public discourse on sacred matters.
(F.—L.) ME. prechen, Ancren Riwle, p. 70, ll. 22, 24.—OF,
prechier (prescher in Cot.), mod. F. précher. —L. predicare, to make
known in public, declare publicly.—L. pre, before, before men,
publicly ; and dicdre,to proclaim, allied to dicere, to say. See Pre-
and Diction. Der. preach-er, preach-ing ; preach-ment, 3 Hen. VI,
i. 4.72. Doublet, predicate, vb.

PREAMBLE, an introduction, preface. (F.—L.) ME. preamble,
Chaucer, C. T. 6413 (D 831).— OF. preambule, ‘ a preamble, preface,
prologue;’ Cot.—L. preambulus, adj.; from preambulare, to walk
before.=L. pre, before; and ambulare, to walk; see Pre- and
Amble. Der. preambul-at-ion, Chaucer, C. T. 6419 (D 837).

PREBEND, a portion received for maintenance by a member of
a cathedral church. (F.—L.) Defined in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—
OF. prebende, ‘a prebendry,’ Cot.; mod. F. prébende, a prebend. =
L. prebenda, a payment to a private person from a public source;
fem. of prebendus, fut. pass. part. of prebére, to afford, supply, give.
=L. pre, before; and habére, to have; whence prehibére, to hold
forth, proffer, offer, contracted to prebére. See Pre- and Habit.
Der. prebend-al; prebend-ar-y, Spenser, Mother Hubbard’s Tale,


422.
PRECARIOUS, uncertain, held by a doubtful tenure. (L.)


PRECOCIOUS


‘Powers which he but precartousty obeys;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. |
Errors, b. i. c. Io, near end of § 10. Formed (by change of -us.to
-ous, as in numerous instances) from L. precdrius, obtained by prayer,
obtained as a favour, doubtful, precarious.—L. precari, to pray. —L.:
prec-, stem of prex, a prayer.4-G. frag-en, to ask; Goth. frath-nan,
AS. frig-nan, to ask; Lith. praszyti; Russ. prosite; Pers. persidan ;’
Skt. pracch, to ask; W. erchi (for *perchi), to ask. (4/PREK)..
Brugmann, i. § 607. Der. precarious-ly, -ness.

PRECAUTION, a caution taken beforehand. (F.—L.) In
Minsheu, ed. 1627.—ME. precaution, ‘a precaution,’ Cot. Mod. F.:
précaution.=L. precautionem, acc. of precautio; comp. of pre, before,
and cautio,a caution; seé Pre- and Caution. Der. precautionary. \

PRECEDH, to go before. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, i. 1. 122; and
in Palsgrave.— MF. preceder, ‘ to precede,’ Cot. ; mod. F. précéder.
= L. precédere, to go before ; comp. of pre, before, and cédere, to
go; see Pre- and Cede. Der. preced-ence, L. L. L. iii. 83, from
MF. precedence, ‘ precedence,’ Cot., which from L. precédentia, a
going forward, an advance; preced-enc-y. Also precéd-ent, adj.,
Hamlet, iii. 4. 98, from MF. precedent, ‘ precedent, foregoing,’ Cot. ;
preced-ent-ly. Hence, with a change of accent, préced-ent, sb., Temp.
ii, I. 291 (spelt presidente, Skelton, ed. Dyce, i. 7,1. 23), precedent-ed,
un-precedent-ed; preced-ing. Also precess-ion, q.v-

PRECENTOR, the leader of a choir. (L.) In Todd’s Johnson,
with a quotation dated A.D. 1622.—L. precentor, a leader in music,
precentor.=L. pre, before; and cantor, a singer, from cantare, to
sing, chant; see Pre- and Chant.

PRECEPT, a rule of action, commandment, maxim. (F.—L.)
ME. precept, Wyclif, Acts, xvi. 24.—OF. precept; MF. precepte,
‘a precept,’ Cot.; mod. F. précepte.—L. preceptum, a precept, rule ;
orig. neut. of precepius, pp. of precipere, to take beforehand, also, to
give rules.=—L. pre-, before; and capere, to take; see Pre- and
Capture. Der. precept-ive; precept-ial, Much Ado, v. 1. 24;
precept-or, from Lx preceptor, a teacher ; precept-or-ial, precept-or-y,
precept-r-ess.

PRECESSION, a going forward. (L.) Chiefly in the phrase
precession of the equinoxes, defined in Phillips, ed. 1706. From L.
precessionem, acc. of pre@cessio, a late word; cf. precessus, pp. of
precédere; see Precede.

PRECINCT, a territorial district. (L.) Spelt precynct in Fabyan,
Chron. vol. i. c. 172, ed. Ellis, p. 168, 1. 273 precinct, Will of Hen.
VI, Royal Wills, ed. Nichols, p. 299.—Late L. precinctum, a boun-
dary ; Ducange. = L. precinctum, neut. of precinctus, pp. of precingere,
to enclose, surround, gird about.—L. pre, before, used as an aug-
mentative, with the sense of ‘fully ;’ and cingere, to gird; see Pre-
and Cincture.

PRECIOUS, valuable, costly, dear. (F.—L.) ME. precious,
P. Plowman, A. ii. 12 (footnote) ; Wyclif, 1 Pet. ii, 6.—OF. precios,
precieus, mod. F. précieux, precious. —L. pretidsus, valuable. = L. pre-
tium, a price, value; see Price. Der. precious-ly, -ness.

PRECIPICEH, a very steep place, an abrupt descent. (F.—L.)
In Minsheu, and in Shak. Hen. VIII, v. 1. 140.— MF. precipice, mod.
F. précipice (Littré).—L. precipitium, a falling headlong down; also,
a precipice.= L. precipiti-, decl. stem of preceps, head-foremost. = L..
pre, before; and capiti-, decl. stem of caput, the head; see Pre- and
Capital. Der. precipit-ous, Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 6.
last §, from MF. precipiteux, ‘headlong,’ Cot.; precipit-ous-ly, -ness.
Also precipit-ate, adj., properly a pp., from L. precipitare, to cast
headlong; used as a verb in Minsheu, and in Shak. K. Lear, iy. 6.
50; precipit-ate-ly ; precipit-ant; precipit-ance, precipit-anc-y; also pre-
cipit-at-ion, from MF. precipitation, ‘ precipitation,’ Cot.

PRECISE, definite, exact. (F.—L.) We find presysely, ady., in
Fabyan, Chron, vol. i.c. 245; ed. Ellis, p. 287, 1. 44.—OF. precis,
fem. precise, ‘strict, precise;’ Cot. Mod. F. précis. —L. precisus,
cut off, shortened, brief, concise ; the sense of ‘ strict’ arose from that
of ‘concise,’ because an .abstract is precise, to the exclusion of
irrelevant matter.—L. precidere, to cut off near the end.—L. pre,
before, in front ; and cedere, to cut. See Pre- and Cesura. Der.
precise-ly, -ness; precis-ion, a late word. Also precis-ian, a precise
person; a coined word; see Nares.

PRECLUDE, to hinder by anticipation, shut out beforehand.
(L.) First in 1618; used by Pope and Burke; see Todd’s Johnson
and Richardson,—L. precladere, to close, shut up, hinder from
access.=L,. pre, in front; and claudere, to shut; see Pre- and
Clause, Der. preclus-ion, preclus-ive.

PRECOCIOUS, premature, forward. (L.) ‘Many precocious
trees;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 6. part 4. [Evelyn, as
cited in R., uses precoce, answering to mod. F, précoce.] A coined)
word; from precoci-, decl. stem of precox, ripe before its time, pre~
mature; also spelt precoguus, precoquis.—L, pre, before ; and coquere,
to cook, to ripen; see Pre- and Cook. Der. precocious-ly, -ness 5
precoci-ty. Cee RL,


PRECONCEIVE


PRECONCEIVE, to conceive beforehand. (F.—L.) Used by
Bacon, Colours of Good and Evil, sec. 5, § 2. Coined from Pre-
and Conceive.. Der. preconcept-ion; from Pre- and Con-
ception.

PRECONCERT, to concert or plan beforehand. (F.—Ital.—
L.) ‘Some preconcerted stratagem ;’ Warton, Hist. of E. Poetry, iii.
138, ed. 1840. Coined from Pre- and Concert..

PRECURSOR, a forerunner. (L.) In Shak. Temp. i. 2. 201.
=L. precursor, a forerunner. L. pre, before; and cursor, a runner,
from currere, to run; see Pre- and Course. Der... precur-sor-y ;
note also precurse, a forerunning, Hamlet, i. 1. 121.

PREDATORY, given to plundering. (L.) Rich. gives a quota-
tion from Reliquiz: Wottoniane, p. 455. First in Puttenham, Arte
of E. Poesie, bk. i. c. 18. Englished from L. predatorius, plundering ;
from predator, a plunderer. = L. predari, to plunder, get booty. =L.
preda, prey, booty ; see Prey.

PREDECESSOR, one who has preceded another in an office.
(L.) In Shak. Hen. V, i. 1. 181; also an ancestor, Hen. V, i. 2.
248. Spelt predecessour (as if from F.) in Du Wes; printed with
Palsgrave, p. 897, I. 3.—_L. predécessor, a predecessor. —L. pre,
before; and décessor, one who retires from an office; cf. décessus,
pp. of décédere, to depart, which is compounded of dé, from, away,
and cédere, to go. See Pre-, De-, and Cede.

PREDESTINE, to destine by fate. (F.—L.) [We find ME.
predestinacioun in, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iv. pr. 6, 1. 19. Pre-
destinate is. well used as a pp. in: ‘ They were predestynate to suffre
yet more plagues,’ Hall’s Chron. Hen. V, an. 4. §2.] ‘From our
predistin’d plagues that priuileged be;” Drayton, Polyolbion, song 2.
Predistin’d is Englished from MF. predestiné, ‘predestined, pre-
destinated;’ Cot.—L. predestindtus, pp. of predestinire, to deter-
mine beforehand.=L. pre, before; and: destinare, to destine; see
Pre- and Destine. Der. predestin-ate, as above, from L. pre-
destinatus ;, predestin-at-or, predestin-at-ion, as above, from MF. pre-
destination. Also predestin-ar-i-an, a coined word.

PREDETERMINE, to determine beforehand. (F.—L.) ‘ But
he did not predetermine him to: any evil;’ Bp. Taylor, vol. i. ser. 9
(R.). Coined from Pre- and Determine. Der. predetermin-ate,

redetermin-at-ion.

PREDICATE, to affirm one thing concerning another. (L.) A
term in logic. ‘Which may as truely be predicated of the English
play-haunters now, as of the Romans then ;’ Prynne, Histrio-Mastix,
pt. i. Act vi.sc. 2 (R.).—L. predicatus, pp. of predicare, to publish,
proclaim; see Preach. Der. predicat-ion, predica-ble, predicat-ive.
Also predica-ment, one of the most general classes into which things
can be distributed ; see Tyndale, Obedience of a Christian Man
(1528), in Specimens of English, ed. Skeat, p. 176, 1. 317, from Late
L. predicimentum. Doublet, preach.

PREDICT, to tell beforehand, prophesy. (L.) In Milton, P.R.
iii. 356. Shak. has predict as a sb., with the sense of ‘ prediction ;’
Sonnet xiv. 8.—L. predictus, pp. of predicere, to tell beforehand. =
L. pre, before; and dicere, to say; see Pre- and Diction. Der.
predict-ion, Macb. i. 3. 55, from MF. prediction, ‘a prediction,’ Cot. ;
and this sb. probably suggested the verb to predict, as it is in earlier
use. Also predict-ive, from L. predictiuus.

PREDILECTION, a choosing beforehand, partiality, choice.
(F.—L.) A late word, added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. =F. pré-
dilection (first in 1519). Coined from L. pre, before, beforehand ;
and dilectio, choice, love, from diligere, to choose out from others, to
love. Diligere is compounded of di-, for dis-, apart ; and legere, to
choose. See Pre-, Dis-, and Legend.

PREDISPOSE, to dispose beforehand. (F.—L. and Gk.) In
Phillips, ed. 1706.—F. prédisposer (15 cent.). Coined from L. pre,
beforehand ; and F. disposer. See Pre- and Dispose. Der.
predispos-it-ion (but see Pose and Position, where the difference
in origin of these two words is explained).

PREDOMINATE, to rule over, reign. (L.) In Shak. Merry
Wives, ii. 2. 294; Timon, iv. 3. 142. Coined from Pre- and
Dominate. Der. predomin-ant, in Minsheu, ed. 1627, from domin-
ant-, stem of pres. part. of dominari, to rule; predomin-ance ; predomin-
anc-y, Bacon, Colours of Good and Evil, vii. § 3.

PRE-EMINENCH, eminence above the rest. (F.—L.) Spelt
preemynence in Palsgrave; preheminence, Bacon, Essay ix. § 12; pre-
emynence, Skelton, Why Come Ye Nat to Court, 406.—MF. pré-
eminence, ‘ preheminenee,’ Cot. [The insertion of h was due to a wish
to avoid the hiatus:]=—L. preéminentia, a surpassing, excelling. =L.
pre, before ; and @minentia, eminence; see Pre- and Eminence.
Der. pre-eminent, from L. preéminent-, stem of the pres. part. of pre-
éminére, to excel; pre-eminent-ly.

PRE-EMPTION, a purchasing before others. (L.) ‘Right of
preemption of first choice of wines in Bourdeaux ;’ Howell, Famil.
Letters, b. ii. let. 55 [xot 14]; dated 1634. Coined from L, pre,


PRELATE 47]


before; and emptio, a buying, allied to emptus or emtus, pp. of emere,
to buy; see Pre- and Example.

PRE-ENGAGE, to engage beforehand. (F.—L.) Todd gives
two quotations for this word from Dryden, both without references.
The former is from Cymon, 1. 246. From Pre- and Engage.
Der. pre-engage-ment.

PRE-EXIST, to exist beforehand. (L.) ‘ But if thy pre-existing
soul ;? Dryden, On Mrs. Killigrew, 1.29. From Pre- and Exist.
Der. pre-exist-ent, pre-exist-ence.

PREFACE, the introduction to a book. (F.—L.) In Shak.
1 Hen. VI, v. 5. 11; Chaucer, C.T., G 271.—OF. and MF. preface,
fem. ‘a preface,’ Cot.; mod. F. préface. Cf. Ital. prefazio, Span.
prefacio, corresponding to an OF. preface of the masc. gender.. ;
Suggested by L. prefatio, a preface, which produced the Ital. pre-
fazione and Span. prefacion, and would have given a F. form préfaison.
-L. prefari, to say beforehand. =L. pre, before ; and fari, to speak,
See Pre- and Fate. Der. preface, verb; prefat-or-y, as if from
a L. *prefatorius.

PREFECT, a governor, one placed in office, president. (F.—L.)
ME. prefect, Chaucer, C. T. 15830 (G 362), (where he is translating
from Latin). —OF. and MF. prefect ; mod. F. préfet.—L. prefectus, a.
prefect, one set over others.=L. pre, before; and factus, made, set,
pp. of facere, to make; see Pre- and Fact. Der. prefect-ship ;
also prefect-ure, from mod. F. préfecture, L. prefectiira, a prefectship.

PREFER, to regard before others, esteem more highly, to
advance or exalt. (F.—L.) Common in Shak. Cor. iii. 1. 152, &c.;
spelt preferre in Palsgrave.mOF. preferer, ‘to prefer, like better,’
Cot.=—L. preferre (pres. t. prefero), to carry in front; also to set in
front, prefer.—L. pre, before; and ferre, cognate with E. bear; see
Pre- and Bear (1). Der. prefer-able, from MF. preferable, ‘ pre-
ferrable,’ Cot., also written preferr-ible; prefer-abl-y, prefer-able-ness ;
prefer-ence, from MF. preference, ‘ preferment;’ Cot.; prefer-ment,
Otho 36%

PREFIGURE, to suggest by types. (F.—L.) ‘ Prefygured by
the temple of Solomon ;,’ Bale, Ymage of both Churches (1550), pt.
i (R.). From Pre- and Figure ; but suggested by Late L. pre-
Jjigurare (Lewis). Der. prejigure-ment, prefigurat-ion, prefigurat-ive.

PREFIX, e fix rit bo to eet ae  araed
Palsgrave. Spenser has the pp. prefixed, Sonnet 46,1..1; Lydgate
has prefyxyd, Assembly of the Gods, 549. This is due to the MF.
prefix, ‘prefixed, limited;? Cot.—L. prefixus, pp. of prefigere, to
fix in front.=L. pre, before; and figere, to fix; see Pre- and Fix.
Der. prefix, sb., lit. that which is. prefixed.

PREGNANT (1), pressing, urgent, cogent; as a proof or
reason. (F.—L.) ‘A preignant argument ;’ Chaucer, Troilus, b. iv.
1179.—OF. preignant, pregnant, ‘pregnant, pithy;” Cot. Here
preignant is the pres. pt. of OF. preindre, prembre, to press (Gode-
froy).—L.. premere, to press ; see Press.

PREGNANT (2), fruitful, with child; imaginative. (F.—L.)
In Milton, P. L. ii. 779.—L. pregnantem, acc. of pregnans, pregnant.
Pregnans has the form of a pres. part. from a verb *pregnare, to. be
before a birth, to be about to bear.—L. pre, before; and *gndare, to
bear, of which the pp. gndtus, usually spelt zdtws, born, is in common
use. See Pre- and Natal. Der. pregnant-ly; pregnanc-y, 2 Hen.
TV, P28 192%

PREHENSILE, adapted for grasping. (L.) Modern; not
in Todd’s Johnson. Coined with suffix -ilis from prehens-us, usually
prensus, pp. of prehendere, also prendere, to. lay hold of.=—L. pre-, for
pre, before; and (obsolete) -hendere, to seize, get, cognate with E.
get; see Pre- and Get. Der. prison, prize (1).

PRE-HISTORIC, before history. (F.—L.) Modern; from
Pre- and Historic.

PREJUDGE, to judge beforehand. (F.—L.) In Bacon, Life
of Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 8, 1. 17.—MF. prejuger, ‘to prejudicate,
prejudge,’ Cot.—L. preiidicare; from pre, before; and iadicare, to
judge; see Pre- and Judge. Der. prejudicate, All’s Well, i. 2. 8,
from L. preiidicitus, pp. of preitdicare; prejudicat-ion, prejudicat-
ive; and see prejudice.

PREJUDICE, a prejudgement, an ill opinion formed before-
hand. (F.—L.) In Shak. Hen. VIII, i. 1. 182, ii. 4.154. ME.
prejudice, Shoreham’s Poems (Percy Soc.), p. 36, 1. 21.—OF. pre-
judice, ‘a prejudice,’ Cot.—L. preitidicium, a judicial examination
previous to a trial; also, a damage, prejudice. —L. pre, before; and
tuidicium, a judgement. See Prejudge; also Pre- and Judicial.
Der. prejudice, verb, 1 Hen. VI, iii, 3. 91; prejudic-ial, 3 Hen. VI,
i. 1. 1443 prejudic-ial-ly.

PRELATE, a bishop, church dignitary. (F.—L.) In early use;
in Layamon, 24502; pl. prelaz (for prelats), Ancren Riwle, p. 10,
1. 8.—OF. prelat, ‘a prelate,’ Cot.—L. prelitus, set above, used as
pp. of the verb preferre, to prefer, advance, but from a different


| root.L. pre, before; and Jatus, for tlatus (=Gk. rAnrés), from


472 PRELIMINARY


4/TEL, to lift; see Pre- and Elate. Der. prelat-ic, little used ;
prelat-ic-al, Milton, Reason of Church Government, b. ii. sect. 3.
ch. 1 (R.); prelat-ic-al-ly; prelat-ist; prelac-y, Skelton, Why Come
Ye Nat to Courte, 500.

PRELIMINARY, introductory. (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. ‘Some preliminary considerations;’ Bp. Taylor, vol. iii.
ser. 3 (R.). Coined from Pre-, q.v., and MF. liminaire, ‘set before
the entry, or at the beginning of, dedicatory,’ Cot. From L. limi-
narem, acc. of limindris, of or belonging to a threshold, coming at the
beginning. = L. limin-, decl. stem of limen, a threshold, allied to limes,
a boundary; see Limit. Der. preliminari-ly.

PRELUDE, an introduction to a piece of music, a preface. (F.
—L.) The L. form preludium was once in use, and is the form given
in Minsheu, Cotgrave, and Blount. In Dryden, Britannia Rediviva,
187, prelude seems to be used as a verb.= MF. prelude, ‘a preludium,
preface, preamble,’ Cot. = Late L. *prélidium, *preludium, a prelude,
perhaps a coined word ; it is not in Ducange.=L. preliidere, to play
beforehand, also, to give a prelude beforehand, which is just Dryden’s
use of it.=L. pre, before; and Jidere, to play; see Pre- and
Ludicrous. Der. prelude, verb; prelus-ive, from pp. prelis-us,
with suffix -ive.

PREMATURE, mature before the right time, happening before
the proper time. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Not F., but
Englished from L. premdatirus, too early, untimely, premature. =L.
pre, before ; and maturus, ripe; see Pre- and Mature.  Cotgrave
only gives the MF. sb. prematurité, ‘prematurity. Der. premature-
ly, prematur-i-ty, premature-ness,

PREMEDITATE, to meditate beforehand. (L.) In Shak.
Hen. V, iv. 1. 170.—L. premedititus, pp. of premeditari; see Pre-
and Meditate. Der. premeditat-ion, in Sir T. Elyot, The Governour,
b.ii.c. I. § 13, from MF. premeditation, ‘ premeditation,’ Cot., from L.
acc. premeditationem.

PREMIER, chief or first, a chief, a prime minister. (F.—L.)
The law-phrase premier seisin, first possession, was in use in common
law; Minsheu notes this use of it, A.D. 1627. Rich. quotes ‘ the
Spaniard challengeth the premier place’ from Camden’s Remains, =
F. premier, ‘prime, first,’ Cot.=L. primdrium, acc. of primarius,
chief, principal; formed with suffix -drius from prim-us, first. See
Prime (1).. Der. premier-ship.

PREMISE, PREMISS, a proposition, in logic, proved or
assumed for the sake of drawing conclusions; one of the two pro-
positions in a syllogism from which the conclusion is drawn. (F.—
L.) The spelling premise. stands for premisse, the true F. spelling ;
the spelling premiss is perhaps due to the L. form, but may also be
for premisse. Minsheu has ‘the premises ;’ but the correct pl. pre-
misses is in Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iii, pr. 10, 1. 83.—OF.
premisse (mod. F. prémisse), omitted by Cotgrave, but in use in the
14th century (Littré).=—L. premissa (sententia being understood), a
premiss, lit. that which is sent or put before. L. pre, before; and
missus, pp. of mittere, to send; see Pre- and Missile. Der. pre-
mise, verb, orig. ‘to send before,’ as in Shak. 2 Hen. VI, v. 2. 41,
from F. pre- (<L, pre), before; and mis (fem. mise), pp. of mettre
(<L. mittere), to send, toput. Also premises, s. pl., the adjuncts of
a building, a sense due to the custom of beginning leases with the
premises setting forth the names of the grantor and grantee of the
deed, as well as a description of the thing granted; later, the sense
was transferred from the description of these to that of the thing
leased only, and came to be used in the present vague way; so in
Blount’s Nomolexicon, 1691. Wedgwood explains it more simply
‘from the use of the term in legal language, where the appurtenances
of a thing sold are mentioned at full in the first place, and subse-
quently referred to as the premises,’ i.e. the things premised or men-
tioned above. Thus, in Lady Margaret’s Will (1508) we find: ‘ All
which maners, londs, and tenements, and other the premisses, we late
purchased ;’ Royal Wills, ed. Nichols, p. 378. See examples in
Caxton’s print of the Statutes of Hen. VII; fol. a6, &c.

PREMIUM, profit, bounty, reward, payment for a loan, &c. (L.)
In Blount’s Gloss., where he not only explains it by ‘recompence,’
but notes the mercantile use of it in insurances. = L. premium, profit,
lit. ‘ataking before;’ for *pre-imium (<*pre-emium),.—L. pre, before;
and emere, to take, also to buy; see Pre- and Example.

PREMONISH, to warn beforehand. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627. A coined word, from pre-, before; and monish, a corrupted
form of ME. monesten, to warn, Wyclif, 2 Cor. vi. 1; just as admonish
is corrupted from ME. amonesten. See Pre-, Admonish, and
Monition. Der. premonit-ion, Chapman, tr.of Homer, Od. ii. 321,
coined from pre- and monition. Also premonit-ive; premonit-or, from
L. premonitor ; premonit-or-y, premonit-or-i-ly. Also premonish-ment
(obsolete), used by Bale (R.).

PRENTICE; short for Apprentice, q.v.

PREOCCUPY, to occupy beforehand. (F.—L.) In Shak. Cor.


PRESCIENCE


ii. 3. 240.— MF. preoccuper, ‘to preoccupate, anticipate,’ Cot.—L.
preoccupare; from pre, before, and occupare, to occupy; see Pre-
and Occupy. 4 The peculiar ending of occupy is discussed under
that word. Der. preoccupat-ion, from MF. preoccupation (Minsheu),
‘a preoccupation,’ Cot.; also preoccup-anc-y.

PREORDAIN, to ordain beforehand. (F.—L.) In Milton
P. R.i. 127. From Pre- and Ordain; cf. MF. preordonner, ‘to
preordinate, or fore-ordain,’ Cot. @ The adj. preordinate (L. pre-
ordinatus) occurs in Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. ii. c. 12. § 3;
and see Palsgrave. Der. preordin-at-ion, used by Bale (R.); MF.
preordination (Hatzfeld) ; from MF. pre- and ordination.

PREPARE, to make ready beforehand, arrange, provide. (F.—
L.) In the Bible of 1551, Luke iii. 4; and in Palsgrave.=MF.
preparer, ‘to prepare,’ Cot.=L. preparare; comp. of pre, before-
hand, and parare, to get ready ; see Pre- and Parade. Der. pre-
par-er, prepar-ed, prepar-ed-ly, -ness. Also prepar-at-ion, Sir T. Elyot,
The Governour, b. ii. c. I. § 1, from MF. preparation, ‘a prepara-
tion,’ Cot.; prepar-at-ive, ME. preparatif, Lydgate, Minor Poems,
p- 168, from MF. preparatif, ‘a preparative, or preparation,’ Cot. ;
prepar-at-ive-ly; prepar-at-or-y, suggested by MF. preparatoire, ‘a
preparatory,’ Cot. Also prepare, sb., 3 Hen. VI, iv. 1. 131.

PREPAY, to pay beforehand. (F.—L.) Modern; not in
Todd’s Johnson. From Pre- and Pay. Der. prepai-d, pre-pay-
ment, .

PREPENSE, premeditated, intentional. (F.-L.) 1. As if
from F. pre- (L. pre), beforehand, and F. penser, to think, 2. But
in the phrase ‘ malice prepense ;’ formerly written ‘ malice prepensed,
it is an altered form of AF. purpensé, pp. of purpenser, to meditate
on, with prefix pur- (F. pour-), from L. pro. See my Notes on
Eng. Etym., p. 230; Elyot’s Governor, ed. Croft, ii. 375; and the
Laws of Will. I. § 2. The expression ‘ prepensed murder’ occurs in


the Stat. 12 Hen. VII, cap. 7; see Blount’s Nomolexicon, ed. 1691.


‘Malice prepensed is malice forethought ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
See Pansy. Der prepense-ly.

PREPONDERATE, to outweigh, exceed in weight or influ-
ence. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. preponderatus, pp. of
preponderare, to outweigh.=—L. pre, before, hence, in excess ; and
ponderare, to weigh, from ponder-, decl. base of pondus, a weight ;
see Pre- and Ponder. Der. preponder-at-ion ; preponder-ant, pre-

onder-ance.

PREPOSITION, a part of speech expressing the relation be-
tween objects, and governing a case. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627; and in Palsgrave, p. xxiv.= MF. preposition, ‘a preposition,
in grammar ;’ Cot.—L. prepositidnem, acc. of prepositio, a putting
before ; in grammar, a preposition.—L. pre, before; and positio, a
putting, placing; see Pre- and Position. Der. preposition-al.

PREPOSSHSS, to possess beforehand, preoccupy. (L.) ‘ Pre-
possesses the hearts of His servants; ’ Bp. Taylor, vol. iii. ser. 10 (R.).
From Pre- and Possess. Der. prepossess-ing, prepossess-ion.

PREPOSTEROUS, contrary to nature or reason, absurd. (L.)
‘ Preposterouse, preeposterus ;’ Levins, ed. 1570.—L. preposterus, re-
versed, inverted ; lit. the last part forwards, hind side before.—L.
pre, before, in front; and posterus, latter, coming after; see Pre-
and Posterior. Der. preposterous-ly, -ness.

PREROGATIVE, an exclusive privilege. (F.—L.) In Spenser,
F.Q. iv. 12. 31; ME. prerogatif, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. I18.—
ME. prerogative, ‘a prerogative, privilege,’ Cot.—L. prerogatiua, a
previous choice or election, preference, privilege. Orig. fem. of
prerogatiuus, one who is asked for an opinion before others. —L.
pre, before; and -rogdatiuus, allied to rogatus, pp. of rogdre, to ask.
See Pre- and Rogation.

PRESAGE, an omen. (F.—L.) In Shak. King John, i. 28; as
a verb, Merch. Ven. iii. 2. 175.—MF. presage, ‘a presage, divining ;’
Cot.—L. presagium, a presage.—L. presagire, to perceive before-
hand.=L. pre, before ; and sagire, to perceive quickly. See Pre-,
Sagacious. Der. presage, verb, answering to MF. presagier ;
presag-er, Shak. Sonn. 23.

PRESBYTER, a priest, elder of the church. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Presby-
ters, or fatherly guides ;’ Hooker, Eccl. Polity, b. v. s. 78 (R.).=—L..
presbyter, — Gk. mpeaBurepos, elder ; comp. of mpécBus, old; see I Pet.
vy. I. Cf. L. priscws, ancient. See Priest. Der. Presbyter-ian, a
term applied to tenets embodied in a formulary A.D. 1560, Haydn,
Dict. of Dates, which see; Presbyter-ian-ism. Also presbyter-y,
1 Tim. iv. 14, where the Vulgate has presbyterium, from Gk. mpeo-
Burépiov.

PRESCIENCEH, foreknowledge. (F.—L.) In Chaucer, tr. of
Boethius, b. v. pr. 3, l. 17.— OF. prescience, ‘a prescience,’ Cot.
L. prescientia, foreknowledge.—L. pre, before; and scientia,
knowledge; see Pre- and Science. Der. prescient, Bacon (see R.),
a later word, from prescient-, stem of pres. part. of prescire, to know


_ beforehand.


PRESCRIBE


PRESCRIBE, to give directions, appoint by way of direction.
(L.) In Levins, ed. 1570.—L. prescribere, to write beforehand,
appoint, prescribe.—L. pre, before; and scribere, to write; see
Pre- and Seribe. Der. prescrib-er; prescript (= prescribed),
More’s Utopia (English version), b. ii. c. 5, ed. Arber, p. 89, from
L. pp. prescript-us; hence also prescript, sb., prescript-ible. Also
prescript-ion, Cor. ii. 1. 127, from MF. prescription, ‘a prescription,’
from L, acc. prescriptionem, from nom. prescriptio, a prescribing,
precept, whence the medical use readily follows. Also prescript-ive,
from L. prescriptiuus.

PRESENCE, a being present or within view, mien, personal
appearance, readiness. (F.—L.) ME. presence, Chaucer, C. T.
5095 (B 675).—OF. presence.—L. presentia, presence.—L. pre-
sent-, stem of presens, present; see Present (1). Der. presence-
chamber.

PRESENT (1), near at hand, in view, at this time. (F.—L.)
ME. present, Wyclif, 1 Cor. iii. 22,—OF. present.=L. present-,
stem of presens, present, lit. being in front, hence, being in sight. =
L. pre, before, in front; and -sens, being (cognate with Skt. sant-,
being), for *es-ens, pres. pt. of es-se, to be. (4/ES); see Pre-,
Absent, and Sooth. Der. present-ly, Temp. i. 2. 125; presence,
q.v. ; present (2), g.v-

PRESENT (2), to give, offer, exhibit toview. (F.—L.) ME.
presenten, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 63, 1. 21; Chaucer,
C. T. 12190 (C 256).—OF. presenter, ‘to present,’ Cot.—L. pre-
sentare, to place before, hold out, present; lit. ‘to make present.’ =
L. present-, stem of presens, present; see Present (1). Der.
present-er, present-able, present-at-ion, As You Like It, iv. 4. 112,
from MF, presentation, ‘a presentation,’ Cot., from L. acc. presenta-
lidnem ; present-ee, one who is presented to a benefice, from MF. pp.
presenté (Cot.) ; present-ment, Hamlet, iii. 4. 54, and (as a law-term)
in Blount’s Nomolexicon, ed. 1691. Also present, sb., ME. present,
Ancren Riwle, p. 114, 1. 2, p. 152, 1. 12; from OF. present, ‘a
present, gift,’ Cot.

PRESENTIMENT, a perceiving beforehand, a conviction of
some future event. (F.—L.) ‘A presentiment of what is to be here-
after;” Butler, Analogy of Religion, pt. i. c. 6. § 11. —OF. presenti-
ment, ‘a fore-feeling,’ Cot.; suggested by L. presentire, to perceive
beforehand ; see Pre- and Sentiment.

PRESERVE, to guard, keep, save. (F.—L.) ME. preseruen
(with w=v), Gower, C. A. iii. 221; bk. vii. 3856. —OF. preserver,
‘to preserve,’ Cot.—L. pre, beforehand ; and serudre, to keep; see
Pre- and Serve. Der. preserve, sb.; preserv-er ; preserv-at-ion,
Temp. ii. 1. 7, from OF. preservation, omitted by Cotgrave, but in
use in the 14th century (Littré); preserv-at-ive, Sir T. Elyot, The
Governor, b. iii. c. 4. § 1, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 91, from MF.
preservatif, ‘ preservative,’ Cot. ; preserv-at-or-y.

PRESIDH, to superintend, have authority over others. (F.—L.)
In Cotgrave. — MF. presider, ‘to preside, govern,’ Cot. —L. presidére,
to sit before or above, to preside over.—L. pre, before ; and sedére,
to sit, cognate with E. sit; see Pre- and Sit. Der. presid-ent,
Wyclif, Deeds [Acts], xxiii. 24, 26, from OF. president, ‘a president,’
Cot., from L. president-, stem of pres. part. of presidére ; president-
ship ; presidenc-y ; president-ial.

PRESS (1), to crush strongly, squeeze, drive forcibly, urge, push.
(F.-L.) ME. pressen, presen (with voiceless s), Chaucer, C. T.
2582(A 2580).—F. presser, ‘to press, strain,’ Cot.—L. pressare, to
press; frequentative formed from press-wm, supine of premere, to
press. Der. press, sb., ME. presse, Chaucer, Fortune, 1. 52, Ancren
Riwle, p. 168, last line, from F. presse, ‘a prease, throng,’ Cot. ;
press-er, press-ing, press-ing-ly ; press-ure, Prompt. Parvy., from OF.
pressure, ‘pressure,’ Cot., from L. pressiira, allied. to pp. pressus.
Also press-fat, a pressing-vat, Haggai,ii. 16; see Fat (2) and Vat.
Also print, im-print.

PRESS (2), to hire men for service, to engage men by earnest-
money for the public service, to carry men off forcibly to become
sailors or soldiers. (F.—L.) Itis certain, as Wedgwood has shown,
that press is here a corruption of the old word prest, ready, because
it was customary to give earnest-money to a soldier on entering
service, just as to this day a recruit receives a shilling. This
earnest-money was called prest-money, i.e. ready money advanced,
and to give a man such money was to imprest him, now corruptly
written impress. ‘ At a later period, the practice of taking men for
the public service by compulsion made the word to be understood as
if it signified to force men into the service, and the original reference
to earnest-money was quite lost sight of;’ Wedgwood. B. Prest
was once a common word for ready money advanced, or ready
money on loan. ‘And he sent thyder iii. somers [sumpter-horses]
laden with nobles of Castel [Castile] and floreyns, to gyve ix prest
[as ready money] to knyghtes and squyers, for he knewe well otherwyse
he sholde not haue them come out of theyr houses;’ Berners, tr. of


PRETERIT, PRETERITE 473


Froissart, vol. ii. c. 64 (R.). Requiring of the city a prest [an ad-
vance] of 6000 marks ;’ Bacon, Life of Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 18,
1. 28. See also Skelton, Colin Clout, 350-354, and Dyce’s note ;
North’s Plutarch, ed. 1594, p. 638. Both prest-money and imprest-
money are in Minsheu, ed. 1627; and Cotgrave explains MF. im-
prestance by ‘ prest, or imprest money, received and to be imployed
for another.’= MF. prester, ‘to lend, also, to trust out [advance] or
sell unto daies’ [unto an appointed time], Cot. Cf. OF. prest,

‘prest, ready, full dight, furnished, .. . prompt, nere at hand,’ id.
Ital. prestare, ‘ to lend,’ Florio; imprestare, ‘ to lend or give to lone,’
id. (Mod. F. préter.)—L. prestire, to come forward or stand
before, surpass, to become surety for, give, offer, furnish, provide.
—L. pre, before; and stare, cognate with E. stand; see Pre- and
Stand. Der. im-press, im-press-ment; also press-gang, q.v.

PRESS-GANG, a gang of men employed to ‘press’ sailors
into the public service. (F.—L.; and E.) In Johnson’s Dict.
This word seems to be of rather late formation, and also to be
associated with the notion of compulsion or pressing; at the same
time, it certainly took its origin from the verb press, in the sense of
‘to hire men for service;’ see therefore Press (2), as orig. quite
distinct from Press (1). Cf. press-money, K. Lear, iv. 6.87. And
see Gang.

PRESTIGE, a delusion; also, influence due to former fame or
excellence. (F.—L.) This word is in the very rare position of
having achieved a good meaning in place of a bad one; the reverse
is. more usual, as noted in Trench, Study of Words. Cf. mod. F.
prestige, ‘fascination, magic spell, magic power, prestige,’ Hamilton.
In some authors it had a bad sense, in E. as well as in F., but it is
not an old word with us. ‘ Prestiges, illusions, impostures, juggling
tricks ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.—F. prestige; Cot. gives pl. prestiges,
‘deceits, impostures, juggling tricks.’=L. prestigium, a deceiving
by juggling tricks, a delusion, illusion; we also find L. pl. prestigia,
tricks, deception, trickery. B. For *prestrigium, the second r
being lost; Brugmann, i. § 483.—L. prestringere, to bind fast, to
dull, dim, blind.=L. pre, before; and stringere, to bind. See
Stringent.

PRESTO, quickly. (Ital.—L.) ‘Well, you'll come? Presto!’
Ben Jonson, The Case is Altered, i. 1.—Ital. presto, adv., quickly. =
L. presto, at hand, ready, present.=L. pre, before; and stare, to
stand. See Pre- and State.

PRESUME, to take for granted, suppose, to act forwardly.
(F.—L.) ‘When she presumed tasten of a tree ;’ Occleve, Letter of
Cupid, st. 51.1. 355 (A.D. 1402). [Presumption, ME. presumcioun,
occurs earlier, spelt preswmciun, Ancren Riwle, p. 208, l. 20,]—OF.
presumer, ‘to presume, or think too well of himselfe, . .. to presume,
think, ween, imagine;’ Cot.—L. presiimere, to take beforehand,
anticipate, presume, imagine. = L. pre, before ; and stimere, to take;
where stimere is from emere, to take, buy; the prefix was prob.
subs-- See Pre- and Example. Der. presum-ing, presum-able,
presum-abl-y; presumpt-ion (as above), from OF. presumpcion (13th
cent., Littré), later presomption, ‘presumption,’ Cot., from L. pre-
sumptionem, acc. of presumptio, allied to presumptus, pp. of pre-
sumere, Also presumpt-ive, Daniel, Civil War, b. iii. st. 17, from
MF. presomptif, ‘likely,’ Cot.; presumpt-ive-ly; presumpt-u-ous,
Skelton, ed. Dyce, i. 131, 1. 160, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 175,
spelt presumptiouse in Levins, from OF. presomptiieux (13th cent.
presumpiuouse, 14th cent. presumptueux, Littré), which from L. pre-
sumptudsus, presumptidsus. Hence presumptuous-ly, -ness.

PRESUPPOSE, to suppose beforehand. (F.—L. and Gk.)
‘ Wherefore it is to presuppose ;? Fabyan, Chron. an. 1284-5, ed. Ellis,
p. 389; and in Palsgrave.—OF. presupposer, ‘to presuppose;’ Cot.
See Pre- and Suppose. Der. presuppos-it-ion (really from a
different root ; see Pose, Position). ;

PRETEND, to affect to feel, to feign. (F.—L.) ME. fre-
tenden, to lay claim, Chaucer, Troilus, b. iv. 1. 922.—OF. pretendre,
‘to pretend, lay claim to;’ Cot.—L. pretendere, to spread before,
hold out as an excuse, allege, pretend.—L. pre, before; and tendere,
to stretch, spread; see Pre- and Tend. Der. pretend-er, esp. used
of the Old and Young Pretenders, so called because they laid claim
to the crown. Also pretence, Mach. ii. 3.137 (first folio), a mistaken
spelling for pretense, from Late L. pretensus, pp. of pretendere (the
usual L. supine is pretentum, but tendere gives both texsum and
tentum) ; the right spelling pretense is in Spenser, F. Q. iv. 5. 23, with
which cf. pretensed, i.e. intended, in Robinson’s tr. of More’s Utopia,
ed. Arber, p. 20, 1. 7. Cf. MF. pretente, ‘a pretence ;’ Cot. Also
pretension, Bacon, Of a War with Spain (R.), formed as if from L,
type *pretensio.

PRETER., prefix, beyond. (L.; or F.—L.) OF. preter-, pre-
fix, from L. preter, beyond, which is a compar. form of pre, before,
with Idg. suffix -ter-.

PRETERIT, PRETERITEH, past; the past tense. (F.—L.)


ATA. PRETERMIT


ME. preterit, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. v. pr. 6, 1. 13.—OF. pre-

terit, m. preterite, fem. ‘past, overpast,’ Cot.—L. preteritus, pp. of

preterire, to pass by.—L. preter, beyond; and ire, to go, from
EI, to go.

PRETERMIT, to omit. (L.j In Minsheu, ed. 1627.—L.
pretermitiere, to allow to go past, let slip.—L. preter, past, beyond ;
and mittere, to let go, send; see Preter- and Mission. Der.
pretermiss-ion, from MF, pretermission, ‘a pretermission,’ Cot., from
L. acc. pretermissiénem.

PRETERNATURAL, supernatural, extraordinary. (L.) ‘Sim-
ple aire, being preternaturally attennated;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 30.
From Preter- and Natural. 4 So also preter-perfect, preter-
imperfect, preter-pluperfect.

PRETEXT, a pretence, false reason. (F.—L.) In Shak. Cor.
v. 6. 20.—MF. pretexte, m. ‘a pretext,’ Cot.—L. pretextum, a
pretext; orig. neut. of pretextus, pp. of pretexere, lit. ‘to weave in
front. —L. pre, before; and temere, to weave; see Pre- and
Text.

PRETOR, PRETORIAL:; see Pretor.

PRETTY, pleasing, tasteful, beautiful. (E.; or L.—Gk.) Spelt
pretie in Minsheu and Levins. ME. prati, praty, Prompt. Pary. ;
Destruction of Troy, ed. Panton and Donaldson, 2622, 10815, 13634.
The old senses are ‘comely’ and ‘clever,’ as used in the above
passages ; but the true sense was rather ‘tricky,’ ‘ cunning,’ or ‘ full of
wiles; ’ though the word has acquired a better sense, it has never
quite lost a sort of association with pettiness. AS. pretig, prettig,
tricky, deceitful; ‘ Wille ge béon preittige,’ tr. of L. ‘ Vultis esse
versipelles;’ A®lfric’s Colloquy, in Voc. 101. 1. A rare word;
formed with the usual suffix -ig (as in stdn-ig, E. ston-y) from a sb.
pret, preit, deceit, trickery; see prattas, as a gloss to L. artés (ina
bad sense), Mone, Quellen, p. 347, col. 1. So also we have Low-
land Scotch pratty, pretty, tricky, from prat, a trick, used by G.
Douglas (Jamieson).4-EFries. prettig, jocose, droll, pleasant, from
pret, a trick; W. Flem. prettig; Icel. prettugr, tricky, from prettr,
a trick, pretta, to cheat, deceive; Norweg. pretien, prettevis, tricky,
roguish, from pretta, a trick, piece of roguery, pretia, to play a trick
(Aasen). Soalso MDu. pratte, perte, Du. part, a trick, deceit. @] Pos-
sibly all from L. practica; cf. E. practice, in the sense of ‘ guile.’
Der. pretti-ly, spelt pretily, Court of Love, 420; pretti-ness, Hamlet,
iv. 5. 189; also pretty, adv.

PREVAIL, to overcome, effect, have influence over. (F.—L.)
Spelt prevayle in Levins; prewaile in Minsheu.— OF. prevail, 1 p. pr.
of prevaloir, ‘to prevaile,’ Cot.—L. praeualére, to have great power.
=L. pre, before, hence expressive of excess; and walére, to be strong,
have power; see Pre- and Valiant. Der. prevail-ing; preval-ent,
Milton, P. L. vi. 411, from L. preualent-, stem of pres. part. of pre-
ualére; preval-ence, from OF. prevalence (Cot.), from Late L. pre-
valentia, superior force; prevalenc-y. Also prevail-ment, Mids. Nt,
(Dye eye

PREVARICATE, to shift about, to quibble. (L.) ‘When any
of us hath prevaricated our part of the covenant,’ i.e. swerved from
it, Bp. Taylor, vol. ii. ser. 5 (R.). [Preuaricator and preuarication
are both in Minsheu’s Dict.; but not the verb.]=L. preudricatus,
pp- of preudricari, to spread the legs apart in walking, to straddle,
to walk crookedly; hence to swerve, shuffle, &c.=L. pre, before,
here used as an intensive prefix ; and udricus, straddling, extended
(with suffix -tc-) from warus, bent, grown awry (esp. of the legs).
Cf. L. Varus as a proper name, orig. a nickname. See Varicose.
Der. prevaricat-or ; prevaricat-ion, from MF. prevarication, ‘ prevari-
cation,’ Cot.

PREVENT, to hinder, obviate. (L.) The old sense is ‘to go
before, anticipate ;’ Tw. Nt. iii. 1. 94, Hamlet, ii. 2. 305; Spenser,
F, Q. vi. 1. 38, vi. 8.15; and in Palsgrave. Cf. MF. prevenir, ‘to
prevent, outstrip, anticipate, forestall;’ Cot.—L. preuent-us, pp. of
preuenire, to come or go before. —L. pre, before; and wenire, cognate
with E. come; see Pre- and Come. Der. prevent-ion, from MF.
prevention, ‘a prevention, anticipation, Cot. Also prevent-ive, adj.,
Phillips, ed. 1706, a coined word ; prevent-ive, sb.

PREVIOUS, going before, former. (L.) ‘Som previous medita-
tions;’ Howell, Famil. Letters, vol. i. sect. 6. let. 32, § 3; A.D.
1635. Englished (by change of -us to -ous, as in ardu-ous, 8&c.) from
L. preuius, on the way before, going before.=L. pre, before; and
uid, a way; see Pre- and Voyage. Der. previous-ly.

PREW ARN, to warn beforehand. (Hybrid; L. and E.) ‘ Comets
prewarn;’ Two Noble Kinsmen, y. 1.51. A coined word; see Pre-
and Warn,

PREY, booty, spoil, plunder. (F.—L.) ME. preie, preye, Rob.
of Glouc. p. 270, 1. 5466; p. 303, 1. 6163; praie, O. Eng. Homilies,
ed. Morris, i. 273, 1. 6.—OF. praie, preie; mod. F. proie, prey.—L.
preda, booty. B. Preda is thought to stand for *prai-hid-a, that
which is got or seized beforehand; from pre, before, and hed-, base


PRIG


of -hendere, to seize, cognate with E. get. Similarly prendere is short
for prehendere, as is well known. See Pre- and Get. See Pre-
datory. From L. preda we also have W. praidd, flock, herd, booty,
prey, Gael. and Irish spreidh, cattle of any kind. Der. prey, vb.,
Richs Uh, asx-qksa.

PRIAL, three of a sort, at cards. (F.—L.) An unmeaning
corruption of pair-royal. See Pair-royal in Nares, who fully illus-
trates it. Fuller has: ‘that paroyal of armies;’ Pisgah Sight of
Palestine, bk. iv. ch. 2. § 22.

PRICE, value, excellence, recompence. (F.—L.) ME. pris,
Havelok, 283; Ancren Riwle, p. 392, 1. 15.—OF. pris, preis ; mod.
F. prix.—L. pretium, price. See Precious. Der. price-less; prec-
i-ous, prize (2), verb. Doublet, praise.

PRICK, a sharp point, puncture, sting, remorse. (E.) ME.
prike, pricke, prikke, Ancren Riwle, p. 228, last line. AS. pricu, a.
point, dot, A£lfred, tr. of Boethius, b. ii. pr. 7, cap. xviii. § 13 prica,
a point, jot, tittle, Matt. v.18; prician, v., to prick, Alfric’s Hom.
ii. 88.44-MDu. prick, a prickle, whence mod. Du. prikkel; see
Kilian; Dan. prik, a dot; prikke, to mark with dots; Swed. frick,
a point, dot, prick, tittle; pricka, to point, to mark with pricks;
Low G. prik, a dot; prikken, to prick. Apparently from a Tent.
base *prek-, to prick, dot; cf. OSax. prek, a thorn (Gallée) ; MDu.
prekel, a prick (Hexham) ; Cornwall preckle, to prick. Der. prick,
verb, ME. priken, prikien, Havelok, 2639, P. Plowman, B. xviii. 11;
AS. prician (above); hence prick-er. Also prick-le, ONorthumb. pricle,
Matt. v. 18 (Lindisfarne MS.), a dimin. form, with the orig. sense
‘a little dot’ or ‘speck.’ Hence prick-l-y, which seems to be formed
from prickle rather than from prick with suffix -ly; prick-l-i-ness.
Also prick-et, Spenser, Shep. Kal., Dec. 1. 27, a buck in his second
year, so named from his young horns; also prick-song, Rom. and
Juliet, ii. 4. 21, for pricked song, i.e. song pricked down or written,
spelt prykked songe, Bury Wills, p. 18, l. 27.

PRIDEH, the feeling of being proud. (F.—L.?) ME. pride, pryde,
P. Plowman, B. v. 15 }.spelt pruzde, id. A. v.15; prude, id.C. vi. 118,
Ancren Riwle, p. 140, 1.6. AS. pryte, pride, Ailfric’s Homilies, ii.
220, 1.32. (Thus pride is a weakened form of prite.) B. The AS.
pryte is regularly formed from the adj. prut, proud, with mutation of
u to ¥; see Proud. We find also AS. pritung, pride; Mone,
Quellen, p. 355, col. 1. Cf Icel. prydi, an ornament, from pradr,
proud; both borrowed from E., but they exhibit the length of the
vowel. Der. pride, vb. reflexive.

PRIEST, a presbyter, one in holy orders, above a deacon and
below a bishop. (L.—Gk.) ME. preest, Chaucer, C. T. 505;
preost, Ancren Riwle, p. 16, l. 25. AS. préost, Laws of K. Edgar,
i. 2 (see Thorpe’s Ancient Laws, i. 262); and, earlier, in the Laws
of Ethelbert, § 1 (id. p. 2). Contracted from L. presbyter (<Gk.
mpeaButepos), as clearly shown by the OF. prestre (13th cent.), mod.
F. prétre; OSax. préstar, G. priester. Cf. Prester fohn in Mande-
ville’s Travels, where prester (like AS. préost) seems to have arisen
from *prev’ster, for *preb(y)ster, a mistaken form of presbyter.
B. TpecBdrepos is comp. of mpéo-Bus, Doric mpéo-yus, old; cf. L.
pris-cus, ancient. Der. priest-ess (with F. suffix) ; priest-hood, AS.
préost-had, 7Elfred, tr. of Beda, b. i. c. 7 (mear beginning); priest-
craft; priest-ly, Pericles, iii. 1. 703 priest-li-ness; priest-ridden.
Doublet, presbyter.

PRIG (1), to steal. (E.) Thisis a cant term of some antiquity ;
prig, sb., a thief, occurs in Shak. Wint. Ta. iv. 3. 108. It arose in
the time of Elizabeth, and is merely a cant modification of E. prick,
which orig. meant to ride, as in Spenser, F. Q. i. 1. 1, P. Plowman, B.
xviii. II, 25. Hence it came to mean to ride off, to steal a horse,
and so, generally, to steal. This we learn from Harman’s Cayeat,
1567, where we find: ‘to prygge, to ryde,’ p. 84, col. 3; and at p. 42:
‘a prigger of prauncers be horse-stealers; for to prigge signifieth in
their language to steale, and a prauncer is a horse.’ Again, at p. 43,
he tells how a gentleman espied a pryggar, and charged ‘this prity
prigging person to walke his horse well’ for him; whereupon ‘this
peltynge priggar, proude of his praye, walkethe his horse vp and
downe tyll he sawe the Gentleman out of sighte, and leapes him
into the saddell, and awaye he goeth a-mayne.’ ‘That is how it
was done. We find a similar weakening of & to g in Lowl. Sc.
prigga-trout, a banstickle, or stickleback (evidently for pricker-trout),
and in Lowl. Sc. prigmedainty, the same as prickmedainty, one who
dresses in a finical manner (or as we now say, a prig). Halliwell
also gives prygman, a thief, which occurs in Awdelay’s Fraternyte of
Vacabondes, ed. Furnivall, p. 3; and prig, to ride, in Dekker’s
Lanthorne, sig. C. ii. So also trigger stands for ¢ricker. __

PRIG (2), a pert, pragmatical fellow. (E.) ‘A cane is part of
the dress of a prig;’ Tatler, no. 77 (1709). From the verb to prick,
in the sense to trim, adorn, dress up ; Latimer (Works, i. 253, Parker
Soc.) speaks of women having ‘much pricking,’ and inveighs against
their ‘ pricking up of themselves.’ Cf. Lowl. Sc. prig-me-dainty for


PRIM


prick-me-dainty, a prig, which occurs in Udall, Roister Doister, ii. 3,
ed. Arber, p. 36. See Prig (1).

PRIM, precise, affectedly neat or nice. (F.—L.) Bailey (vol. i. ed.
1735) has: ‘to prim, to set the mouth conceitedly, to be full of
affected ways.’ Phillips, ed. 1706, has: ‘to prim, to be full of
affected ways, to be much conceited.’ An older example is prym,
sb. a neat girl, in Barclay’s Fifth Eclogue, cited in Nares. [From
the E. word are derived the Lowland Scotch primp (with excrescent
p), to assume prudish or self-important airs, to deck oneself in a stiff
and affected manner (Jamieson); and primzte, demure, in Burns,
Hallowe’en, st. 9.] B. The sense of ‘slender’ or ‘delicate’ is the
orig. one, as shown in Cotgrave.—MF. prim, masc., prime, fem.,
‘prime, forward ;’ also prin, ‘thin, subtill, piercing, sharp;’ also
prime, both masc. and fem., ‘thin, slender, exile, small; as cheveux
primes, smooth or delicate hair;? Cot. This last example comes
sufficiently near to the E. use. y. The MF. prim (corrupter form
prin) is from the L. masc. acc. primum; the form prime answers to
the L. fem. prima. The nom. case is primus, first, chief; see
Prime (1). So also mod. Prov. prim, m., primo, f., fine, delicate
(Mistral). Cf. also prov. E. prime, to trim trees; and the phrase
‘to prime agun;’ see Prime (2). 4 The sense of ‘thin’ as derived
from that of ‘first’ or ‘foremost’,is hard to account for; perhaps
there is an allusion to the growth of newly grown shoots and buds ;
cf. filer prim, ‘to run thin, or by little and little;? Cot. In E., it is
possible that the sense of prim was affected by some confusion with
the old verb prink, to adorn, dress well, be smart and gay, to be
pert or forward (Halliwell) ; which is merely a nasalised form of the
verb to prick, used in the sense of ‘to trim’ by Palsgrave and others ;
cf. Lowland Scotch prickmaleerie, stiff and precise, prickmedainty,
finical (Jamieson). Der. prim-ly, prim-ness.

RIME (1), first, chief, excellent. (F.—L.) ME. prime, pro-
perly an adj. (as in Temp. i. 2. 72), but almost always used of
‘prime,’ the first canonical hour, as in Ancren Riwle, p. 20, Chaucer,
C. T. 12596 (C 662), &c.—F. prime, ‘the first houre of the day,’
Cot. [A fem. form, the OF. masc. being prim.J—L. prima, i.e.
prima hora, the first hour; fem. of primus, first. B. Pri-mus is a
superl. form, and stands for *pris-mus; cf. pris-cus, ancient ; Brug-
mann, i. § 868, ii. § 72. The suffix is the same as in min-i-mus
(where -mzu- is the Idg. superl. suffix -mo-y appearing also in AS.
for-ma, Goth. fru-ma, first. See Prior. Der. prime, sb., as already
explained ; prime-number, prime-minister; prim-ar-y, Phillips, ed.
1706, from L. primarius; prim-ar-i-ly. Also prim-ate, ME. primat,
Layamon, 29736, from OF. primat, ‘a primat or metropolitan,’ Cot.,
which from L. primatem, acc. of primds, a principal or chief man;
primate-ship ; prim-ac-y, from AF. primacie, Polit. Songs, ed. Wright,
p- 311; cf. MF. primace, ‘primacy, Cot. Also prim-er, P. Plow-
man, C. vi. 46, from OF. primer, variant of premier (see Supple-
ment to Godefroy), from L. primdrius, primary; and hence, an
elementary book. Also prima-donna, from Ital. prima, first, chief,
and donna, lady, L. domina; see Dame. Also prim-al, Hamlet, iii.
3. 37; prim-y, id. i. 3. 73 prim-er-o,q.v. And see prim-eval, prim-
it-ive, primo-geni-ture, prim-ordial, prim-rose, prince, prior, pristine,
priest, presbyter, premier, and prime (2).

PRIME (2), to put powder on the nipple of a fire-arm, to make
a gun quite ready. (F.—L.) ‘Neither had any [of us] one piece of
ordinance primed ;’ Hakluyt’s Voyages, vol. ii. pt. ii. p. 61. It is
not quite clear how the word came into use; perhaps we may look
upon prime as expressing ‘to put into prime order,’ to make quite
ready ; from prime in the sense of ‘ready;”’ see Nares. But what-
ever the exact history may be, we may be sure that the etymology is
from the E. adj. prime. Cf. prov. E. prime, to trim trees (Halliwell).
See Prime (1),andPrim. Der. prim-ing.

PRIMERO, an old game at cards. (Span.—L.) Cotgrave
translates MF. prime by ‘primero at cards,” &c.; and see Shak.
Merry Wives, iv. 5. 104.—MSpan. primera, ‘the game called
Primero at cards, Minsheu (1623); the E. form being incorrect.
Fem. of Span. primero, first. But the game is obsolete, and little
is known about it; it probably derives its name from some chief or
principal card.=—L. primarius, primary; from primus, first; see
Prime (1).

PRIMEVAL, original, lit. belonging to the first age. (L.)
Also spelt primeval. In Pope, Dunciad, iv. 630. A coined word;
an older form was primevous, in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L,
primeuus, primeval. —L. prim-, for primus, first; and euum, an age.
See Prime (1) and Age.

PRIMITIVE, original, antiquated. (F.—L.) In Shak. Troil.
v. I. 60.—F. primitif, masc., primitive, fem., ‘ primitive,’ Cot.—L.
primitiuus, earliest of its kind; extended from primus, first. See
Prime (1). Der. primitive-ly, -ness.

PRIMOGENITURE, a being born first, the right of inherit-
ance of the eldest-born, (F.—L.) Blount, in his Gloss., ed. 1674,


PRISM 475


says that the word is used by Sir T. Browne; see his Vulgar Errors,
bk. vil. c. 5. § 2.—MF. primogeniture, ‘the being eldest, the title of
the eldest,’ Cot. Formed as if from a L. *primogenitiira. = L. primo-
genitus, first-born.—L. primo-, for primus, first ; and genitus, pp. of
gignere (base gen), to beget, produce. See Prime (1) and Genus.

PRIMORDIAL, original. (F.—L.) Used as a sb., with the
sense of ‘beginning,’ by Skelton, Why Come Ye Nat to Courte,
1. 486.—F. primordial, ‘ originall,’ Cot. =—L. primordidlis, original.
—L. primordium, an origin. =L. prim-, for primus, first; and ordiri,
to begin, allied to ordo, order. See Prime (1) and Order.

PRIMROSE, the name of aspring flower. (F.—L.) A. ‘Two -
noble primeroses;’ Ascham, Scholemaster, pt. i, ed. Arber, p. 66.
Cf. ‘ Prymerose, primula ;’ Prompt. Parv. =F. prime rose, lit. first rose,
so called because it comes early in the spring.=L. prima rosa; see
Prime (1) and Rose. B. The above is the popular and obvious
etymology of the word as i¢ stands; but primrose is, historically, a
corruption (due to popular etymology) of ME. primerole, a primrose,
Chaucer, C. T. 3268; from OF. primerole (Godefroy). This answers
to a Late L. type *primerula, a regular dimin. of Late L. primula, a
primrose (see Prompt. Parv.), now the botanical name. Again,
primula is a dimin. form from primus; see Prime (1), as before.

The name primrose was sometimes given to the daisy.

PRINCE, a chief, sovereign, son of a king. (F.—L.) ME,
prince, St. Marharete, ed. Cockayne, p. 2,1.15.—F. prince. Cf. Ital.
principe.—L. principem, acc. of princeps, taking the first place, hence,
a principal person. =L. prin- (for prim- before c), from primus, first ;
and capere, to take. See Prime (1) and Capital. Der. prince-
dom; prince-ly, Temp. i. 2. 86, prince-ly, adv., prince-li-ness. Also
princ-ess, ME. princesse, Prompt. Pary., from F. princesse, Cot. And
see Principal, Principle.

PRINCIPAL, chief. (F.—L. ME. principal, princypal, Rob.
of Glouc., p. 446, 1. 9154.—F. principal, ‘ principall,’ Cot. = L. princip-
Glis, chief; formed, with suffix -dlis, from princip-, stem of princeps;
see Prince. Der. frincipal-ly; principal-i-ty, ME. principalitee,
Prompt. Parv., from OF. principalité, which from L. acc. prin-
cipalitdtem, orig. meaning ‘excellence.’

PRINCIPLE, a fundamental truth or law, a tenet, a settled
tule of action. (F.—L.) Used by Spenser with the sense of
‘beginning;’ F.Q. v. 11. 2. The/ isan E. addition to the word, as
in participle, syllable.—¥. principe, ‘a principle, maxime; also, a
beginning,’ Cot.—L. principium, a beginning.—L. principi-, decl.
stem of princeps, chief; see Prince. Der. principl-ed, un-principl-ed.

P T, an impression, engraving, impression of type on paper.
(F.—L.) It would appear that print is short for emprint, or rather
for the F. form empreinte; cf. in emprinte, i.e. in print, in Dictes
and Sayings, pr. by Caxton, fol. 73 back,1. 3. The use of the word
is much older than the invention of printing. ME. printe, prente.
In Chaucer, C. T. 6186, Six-text, D 604, the Wife of Bath says:
‘J hadde the prente of seynt Venus seel.’? In three MSS. it is spelt
printe; in one MS. it is preente. It is also spelt preente, preynte in
the Prompt. Parv. ‘And to a badde peny, with a good preynte;’”
Plowman, C. xviii. 73. Formed, by loss of the first syllable, from
OF. empreinte, ‘a stamp, a print,’ Cot., in use in the 13th century
(Littré). OF. empreinte, fem. of empreint, pp. of empreindre, ‘to
print, stamp,’ Cot.—L. imprimere, to impress. = L. im-, for in before
p, upon; and premere, to press, See Im- (r) and Press. @ The
MDu. print, a print, was prob. borrowed from English rather than
from French. Der. print, verb, ME. preenten, Prompt. Pary., later
printe, Surrey, in Tottel’s Miscellany, ed. Arber, p. 7, 1.14. Also
print-er, print-ing, im-print.

PRIOR (1), former, coming before in time. (L.) The use of
prior as an adj. is modern; see example in Todd’s Johnson.—L.
prior, sooner, former. B. It is a comparative form from a positive
pris-; cf. Gk. mpd-rep-os, former, Skt. pra-ta-ma-, first ; and see Pro-.
Der. prior-i-ty, Cor. i. 1. 251, from F. priorité, ‘ priority,’ Cot., from
Late L. acc. priorititem. And see Prior (2), Pristine.

PRIOR (2), the head of a priory or convent. (F.—L.) Now
conformed to the L. spelling. ME. priour, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of
Langtoft, p. 333, 1. 10.—OF. priour, later prieur, ‘a prior,’ Cot.—
L. pridrem, acc. of prior, former, hence, a superior; see Prior (1).
Der. prior-ess, Chaucer, C. T. 118, from OF. prioresse, given. by
Littré, s.v. prieuwre. Also prior-y, ME. priorie, Havelok, 2581;
prior-ship.

PRISE, PRIZE, a lever. (F.—L.) ‘Prise, a lever;’ Halli-
well. It occurs in the legend of St. Erkenwald, 1. 70. Hence ‘to
prise open a box,’ or, corruptly, ‘to pry open.’ This seems to be
nothing but a derivative of F. prise in the sense of a grasp, or hold;
ef. prise, ‘a lock or hold in wrestling, any advantage,’ Cot.=F.
prise, fem. of pris, pp. of prendre, to seize. —L. prendere, prehendere,
to seize; see Prehensile. See Prize (1).

PRISM, a solid figure whose ends are equal and parallel planes,


476 PRISON


and whose sides are parallelograms. (L.—Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674.—L. prisma.—Gk. mpiopa (stem mpicpar-), a prism, lit. a
thing sawn off. —Gk. apie (for *mpic-ew), tosaw. (Gk.4/mpis). Der.
prism-at-ic, Pope, Essay on Criticism, 311; prism-at-ic-all, Blount ;
prism-at-ic-al-ly. A

PRISON, a gaol, a place of confinement. (F.—L.) ME. prison,
prisoun, Rob. of Glouc., p. 37, 1. 875; prisun, Ancren Riwle,
p- 126, 1.1; A. S. Chron. an. 1137.—OF. prisun, prison; F. prison,
‘a prison;’ Cot. Cf. OProv. preizos (Bartsch); Span. prision, a
seizure, prison; Ital. prigione.—L. acc. prensidnem, acc. of prensio, a
seizing; with loss of m before s. B. Prensio is short for prehensto,
formed from prehensum, supine of prehendere, toseize; seePrehensile.
Der. prison-er, Will. of Palerne, 1267 ; in Gen. and Exod., ed. Morris,
2042, it means ‘ the keeper of a prison,’ a gaoler.

PRISTINE, ancient, former. (F.—L.) In Mach. v. 3. 52.
[Formerly, the word pristixate was also in use; Sir T. Elyot, The
Governor, b. i. c. 2. § 13.]—MF. pristine, ‘former, old, ancient ;’
Cot.—L. pristinus, ancient, former. B. The syllable pris- occurs
also in pris-cus, ancient; cf. Gk. mpéo-Bus, old ; and see Prime (1).
y. The suffix -¢inus is the same as in cras-tinus, diti-tinus; perhaps
from ten-, base of ten-ére, to hold.

PRIVATE, apart, retired, secret, not publicly known. (L.)
Common in Shak.; and see Minsheu and Levins. —L. priudtus,
apart; pp. of priuare, to bereave, make single or apart.—L. priuus,
single. Der. private-ly, private-ness ; privat-ive, causing privation, in
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, from F. privatif, or directly from L.
priuatiuus ; privat-ive-ly ; privac-y, Minsheu, a coined word, the MF.
word being privauté (Cot.). Also privat-ion, from F. privation,
‘privation,’ Cot. Also privat-eer, in Phillips, ed. 1706, an armed
private vessel; acoined word. And see privilege, de-prive. Doublet,
privy, .v-

PRIVET, a half-evergreen shrub. (F.—L.) Also called prim-
print, prim, and primet. ‘ Mondthout, privet, prime-print, or white-
withbinde;’ Hexham’s Du. Dict. ‘ Priuet or primprint ;’ Holland’s
Pliny, Index to vol. ii. ‘Privet or primprint ;’ Topsell’s Hist. of
Serpents, p. 103 (Halliwell). ‘Priuet or primpriuet [misprinted
prunpriuet\ tree;’? Minsheu, ed. 1627. Cotgrave explains MF.
fresillon and troesne by ‘privet, primprint.’ Florio, ed. 1598,
explains Ital. ligustro by ‘the priuet or primeprint tree.’ In Tusser’s
Husbandry, ed. Herrtage (E.D.S.), § 15. st. 42, we find the forms
priuie and prim. In the Grete Herball (as cited in Prior, Popular
Names of British Plants), we find the form primet applied to the
primrose ; the confusion being due to the fact that the Lat. ligustrum
was applied to both plants. ‘Ligustrum, a primerose;’ Voc. 592.
41; so also OF. primerole, ‘ligustrum;’ Godefroy. B. It thus
appears that the orig. short name was prim, whence the dimin.
prim-et, corruptly priv-et, or (by elision of the e) prim’t or print.
The form prim-print (= prim-prim-et) isa reduplicated one. And the
syllable prim- is clearly due to a connexion with OF. primerole;
perhaps from association with spring-time. See Prime (1). y.
Sometimes said to be so named from its being formally cut and
trimmed; cf. prov. E. prime, to trim trees; see Prim; but this
seems to be baseless, and will not explain why the OF. name was
primerole. The mod. Prov. primet, adj., means ‘very small.’ @ No
connexion with the river called Pryfetes-fldd, A. S. Chron. an. 755,
or with Privet, near Petersfield, Hants.

PRIVILEGE, a prerogative, peculiar advantage. (F.—L.) ME.
priuilege (with u=v); earliest form priuilegie, A. S. Chron. an. 1137.
=OF. privilege, ‘a priviledge;’ Cot.=L. priuilégium, (1) a bill
against a person, (2) an ordinance in favour of a person, a privilege.
B. Properly a law relating to a single person.—L. priui- for priuus,
single; and Jégi-, decl. stem of lex, a law. See Private and
Legal.

PRIVY, private. (F.—L.) ME. priue, priuee (with u=v),
Layamon, 6877, later text.— OF. prive, preve (mod. F. privé); a pp.
form.—L. priudtus, private; see Private. Der. privy-council,
privy-council-lor, privy-purse, privy-seal. Also privy, sb., ME. priue,
priuee, Chaucer, C. T. 9828 (E 1954); privi-ly; privi-ty, ME. priuite
(= privitee), Ancren Riwle, p. 152, l. 14.

PRIZE (1), that which is captured from an enemy, that which is
won in a lottery or acquired by competition. (F.—L.) ‘As his
owne prize ;’ Spenser, F. Q. iv. 4. 8.—F. prise, ‘a taking, a seizing,
...a booty, or prize ;’ Cot. Orig. fem. of pris, pp. of prendre, to
take.—L. prendere, prehendere, to take, seize; see Prehensile.
Der. prize-court, -fighter, -money. ;

PRIZE (2), to value highly. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. i. 2. 168.
ME. prisen, to set a price on, Prompt. Parv.—F. priser, ‘ to prise,
esteem, .. . to set a price on.’=OF. pris, ‘a price, rate,’ id.; mod.
F. prix. =—L. pretium; see Price. Der. prize, sb., Cymb. iii. 6. 77.

PRIZE (3), to open a box; see Prise.

PRO., prefix, before, forward, in front. (L.; or Gk.; or F.—L.)


PROCRASTINATE


This prefix may be either F., L., or Gk. If F., it is from Latin. =
L. pro-, prefix, before; whence pré (=préd), an ablative form, used


as a preposition.-Gk. mpo-, prefix, and mpd, prep., before; Skt.


pra-, prefix; pra, before, away. All allied to E. for, prep.; see
For (1). Der. Cf. pre-, prefix; pro-ne, prow, provost, 8c.

PROA, PROW, PRAU, a small vessel or ship. (Malay).
Sir T. Herbert, Travels, ed. 1665, p. 385, notes praw as a Malay
word. ‘Prawes and boats ;’ (1599) J. Davis, Voy., Hakluyt Soc.
p- 143. It is gen. spelt proa in mod. books of travel.— Malay prau,
‘a general term for all vessels between the sampan or canoe, and the
kapal or squate-rigged vessel ;? Marsden’s Dict., p. 222.
PROBABLE, that may be proved, likely. (F.—L.) In Shak.
As You Like It, iii. 5. 11.—F. probable, ‘probable, proveable ;’ Cot.
=L. probabilem, acc. of probabilis, that may be proved; formed with
suffix -bilis from proba-re, to prove; see Prove. Der. probabl-y;
probabili-ty, from F. probabilité, ‘ probability;’ Cot. And see
probation.

PROBATION, a trial, time of trial or of proof. (F.—L.) In
Shak. even used with the sense of ‘ proof,’ Macb, iii. 1. 80. ME.
probacion, Caxton, Golden Legend, Of the Resurrection, § I1.—F.
probation, ‘a probation, proof;’ Cot.—L. probatidnem, acc. of pro-
batio, a trial, proof.—L. probare, to prove; see Prove. Der.
probation-al, probation-ar-y, probation-er. Also probate, proof of a
will ; ‘ probates of testaments,’ Hall’s Chron., Hen. VIII, an. 17, § 21,
from L. probatus, pp. of probare. Also probat-ive, probat-or-y. And
see probable, probe, probity.

ROBE, an instrument for examining a wound. (L.) ‘ Probe,
a chirurgians proofe,’ &c.; Minsheu, ed. 1627. Apparently a coined
word; cf. L. proba, a proof.—L. probare, to prove; see Prove.
@ Similarly, Span. ¢ienta, a probe, is from L. tentare, to search into.
Der. probe, verb, Dryden, Hind and Panther, iii. 80.

PROBITY, uprightness, honesty. (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674.—F. probité; (honesty ;’ Cot.=L. probitatem, acc. of pro-
bitas, honesty. —L. probi-, for probus, honest ; with suffix -tas. Root
uncertain. See Prove.

PROBLEM, a question proposed for solution, esp. a difficult
one. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. probleme, Chaucer, C. T. 7801 (D 2219).
= OF. probleme, ‘a problem,’ Cot. Mod. F. probléme.—L. probléma.
— Gk. 7pé8Anua, anything thrown forward, a question put forward
for discussion. Gk. mpd, forward; and BAjpa, a casting, formed
with suffix -ya from BA7-, lengthened grade of BeA-, whence also
Badrdev, to cast. See Pro- and Belemnite. Der. problemat-ic,
from the stem mpoBAnyat-; problemat-ic-al, -ly.

PROBOSCIS, the trunk of an elephant. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Their
long snoute or trunke, which the Latins call a proboscis ;’ Holland,
tr. of Pliny, b. viii. c. 7.—L. proboscis. = Gk. mpoBooxis, an elephant’s
trunk; lit. ‘a front-feeder.’ = Gk. mpd, before, in front; and Béoxer,
to feed. See Pro- and Botany.

PROCHED, to advance. (F.—L.) ME. proceden, Gower, C. A.
i. 17; prol. 405.—OF. proceder, ‘to proceed, Cot.—L. procédere. =
L. pré-, before; and cédere, to go; see Pro- and Cede. Der. pro-
ceed-ing, Two Gent. ii. 6. 41; proced-ure, from MF. procedure, ‘a
procedure,’ Cot.; proceed-s, sb. pl. Also process, ME. processe,
Chaucer, C. T. 2969 (A 2967), OF. proces (14th cent.), later procés
(mod. F. procés), ‘a proces or sute,’ Cot., from L. processum, acc.
of processus, a progress, which from processus, pp. of procédere. Also
process-ion, ME. processiun, processiun, Layamon, 18223, from F.
procession<L. acc. processionem, an advance. Hence process-
ion-al.

PROCLAIM, to publish, announce aloud. (F.-L.) ME. pro-
clamen, Gower, C. A. i. 6; prol. 88.—F. proclamer, ‘to proclame,’
Cot.—L. proclamare.=—L. pré-, before ; and clamare, to cry aloud;
see Pro- and Claim. Der. proclaim-er ; proclam-at-ion, All's Well,
i. 3. 180, from F. proclamation<L. acc. proclamationem.

PROCLITIC, a monosyllable which is so closely connected with
the following word as to have no independent accent. (Gk.) In
Greek grammar; from a form *mpoxaActikds, coined (like éyArtexés)
from mpoxAiveyv, to lean forward.—Gk. mpé, before, forward ; and
kAivey, to lean, cognate with E. Jean; see Lean (1).

PROCLIVITY, a tendency, propensity. (L.) Spelt procliuitie in
Minsheu, ed. 1627; he also has the obsolete adj. procliue =proclive,
Englished directly from L. prdcliuitas, a declivity, propensity. =
L. procliuus, sloping forward or downward.=L. prd-, before; and
cliuus, a slope, hill, allied to clinare, to bend, incline, which is
allied to E. lean. See Pro-, Declivity, and Lean (1).

PROCONSUL, orig. the deputy of a consul. (L.) In Cymb.
iii. 7. 8; and in Caxton, Golden Legend, St. John, §6.—L. proconsul.
-L. prd-, in place of; and consul; see Pro- and Consul.
@ Similarly, pro-pretor. Der. proconsul-ate, proconsul-ar.
PROCRASTINATE, to postpone, delay. (L.) In Shak. Com.
Errors, i. 1. 159. —L. procrastinat-us, pp. of procrastinare, to put off


PROCREATE


till the morrow, delay.=L. prd-, forward, hence, off ; and crastin-us,
put off till the morrow, belonging to the morrow. B. Crastinus is
compounded of cras, to-morrow, and -tinus, perhaps allied to ¢enus,
lit. stretching or reaching onward, from 4/TEN, to stretch. Der.
procrastinat-ion, from F. procrastination, ‘a procrastination, delay,’
Cot.<L. acc. procrastinationem ; procrastinat-or.

PROCREATEH, to generate, propagate. (L.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627.—L. procredtus, pp. of procreare, to generate, produce. = L, prd-,
forth; and credre, to create, produce; see Pro- and Create.
Der. procreat-ion, Chaucer, C. T. 9322 (E 1448), from OF. pro-
creation<L. acc. procreationem. Also procreat-or, procreat-ive; pro-
creant, Macb. i. 6. 8, from prdcreant-, stem of pres. part. of L.
procreare.

PROCTOR, a procurator, an attorney in the spiritual courts, an
officer who superintends university discipline. (L.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627. ME. proketour, spelt proketowre in Prompt. Parv., where it is
explained by L. précirator. And, whilst proctor is a shortened
form of prokétour (in three syllables), the latter is in its turn an
abbreviated form of prdctirator. Seefurtherunder Procure. Der.
proctor-ship; proctor-i-al ; proxy. Doublet, procurator.

PROCUMBENT, prostrate, lying on the ground. (L.) Kersey,
ed. 1715, gives procumbent leaves as a botanical term.—L. procumb-
ent-, stem of pres. part. of prdcumbere, to incline forward.=—L.
pro-, forward; and -cumbere, to lean or lie upon (only used in com-
pounds), a nasalized form of cubare, to lie down. See Pro- and
Incubus.

PROCUREH, to obtain, cause, get. (F.—L.) ME. procuren,
Rob. of Brunne, p. 257, 1. 20.—F. procurer, to procure, get.=L.
procirare, to take care of, attend to, manage.=—L. prd-, for, in be-
half of; and ciirdre, to take care of, from cura, care. See Pro- and
Cure. Der. procur-able, procur-er, procur-ess, procure-ment. Also
procur-at-or, ME. procuratour, also procutour, procatour, Chaucer,
C. T. 7178 (D 1596, Six-text edition), from OF. procurator,
in use in the 13th century (Littré), mod. F. procurateur, from
L. proctiratérem, acc. of procirator, a manager, agent, deputy,
viceroy, administrator; the more usual F. form is procureur (see
Cotgrave), and the more usual E. form is the much abbreviated
proctor, q.v. Also procurat-ion, Minsheu, ed. 1627, from F. pro-
curation, ‘a procuration, a warrant or letter of atturny,’ Cot. Also
Proxy, q.V-

PROD, a pointed stick for making holes, a skewer, peg. (Scand.)
A variant of brod, a goad, short nail, awl. ‘A brod, stimulus;’
Catholicon Anglicum (1483).— Norw. and MSwed. brodd, Icel. broddr,
a prick, goad; see Brad. Der. prod, vb. ‘ to poke.’

PRODIGAL, wasteful, lavish, (F.—L.) Spelt prodigall in
Levins and Palsgrave. ‘Some prodigallie spend and waste all their
gooddes;’ Golden Boke, c. 45. [The sb. prodegalite (so spelt)
occurs in Gower, C. A. ili. 153; bk. vii. 2026.) = F. prodigal,
‘prodigall,’ Cot.—Late L. *prédigalis, not found, though the sb.
prodigalitas occurs ; see Ducange.=L. prodigus, wasteful.—L. pré-
digere, to drive forth or away, squander, waste. = L. prod, forth, older
form of pré, allied to pro-, prefix; and agere, to drive. See Pro-
and Agent. Der. prodigal-ly; prodigal-i-ty, from F. prodigalité,
‘prodigality,’ from L. acc. prodigalititem.

PRODIGY, a portent, wonder. (F.—L.) In Shak. Jul. Ces. i.
3. 28, ii. I. 198. Formed from F, prodige, ‘a prodigy, wonder,’
Cot.; by the addition of the -y so often appearing in words bor-
rowed from French ; thus we have continency, excellency, fragrancy, as
well as continence, excellence, fragrance; the E. form answering to a
possible AF. form *frodigie.—L. prodigium, a showing beforehand,
sign, token, portent. . Of uncertain origin ; but prob. for prad-
agium, where préd, forth, before, is an old form of prd, before; and
*agium means ‘a saying,’ as in the compound ad-agium, a saying,
adage. Brugmann, i. § 759. In this case, the orig. sense is
‘a saying beforehand,’ hence a sign, prophecy, or token. See Pro-
and Adage. Der. prodigi-ous, Spenser, F. Q. iv. 1. 13, from F.
prodigieux, ‘ prodigious,’ Cot., which from L. prodigidsus; prodigious-
ly, -ness.

PRODUCE, to lead or bring forward, bear, yield, cause. (L.)
In Shak, All’s Well, iv. 1. 6; andin Palsgrave.—L. prddiicere, to
bring forward.—L. pré-, forward; and diicere, to lead, whence E.
duke. See Pro-, Duke. Der. produc-er; produce, sb., formerly
prodtice, as shown by an extract from Dryden, Ep. to John Dryden,
118, in Todd’s Johnson. Also produc-ible, produc-ible-ness. Also
product, sb., Pope, Messiah, 94, accented prodzict, Milton, P. L. xi.
683, from préductus, pp. of prodicere. Also product-ion, from F,


production, ‘a production, proof, evidence,’ Cot., which from L. acc.


productionem, orig. a lengthening, but in Late L., the production
of a document and even the document or proof itself. Also product-
ive, product-ive-ly, product-ive-ness.


PROEM, a prelude, preface, (F.—L.—Gk.) Chaucer has the


PROG


spelling proheme, C.T. 7919 (E 43), where the h is merely inserted
to keep the vowels apart. OF. proéme, ‘a proem, preface,’ Cot. ;
mod. F, proéme.—L. prowmium.—Gk. mpootjov, an introduction,
prelude.=Gk. mpd, before; and ofyos, a way, from oi-, 2nd grade
of 4/EI, to go, with Idg. suffix -mo-. See Pro- and Itinerant.

PROFANE, unholy, impious. (F.—L.) Commonly spelt pro-
phane in the 16th century; see Rich. II, v. i. 25 (first folio); and
Robinson’s tr. of More’s Utopia, ed. Arber, p. 145, l. 6.—F. profane,
‘prophane ;’ Cot.—L. prdfanus, unholy, profane. B. The orig.
sense seems to have been ‘ before the temple,’ hence, outside of the
temple, secular, not sacred.—L, prd-, before ; and fanum, a fane,
temple. See Pro-and Fane. Der. profane, verb, Rich. II, iii. 3.
813; profane-ly, profane-ness; profan-at-ion, Meas. for Meas. ii. 2. 128,
from F. profanation, ‘a prophanation or prophaning,’ Cot., from L.
acc. profanationem., Also profan-i-ty, Englished from L. prafanitas.

PROFESS, to own freely, declare openly, undertake to do.
(F.—L.) Not orig. from F. professer, for this is a late form, in
Palsgrave, The ME. word is professed, used as a pp.; ‘ Which in
hire ordre was professed,’ Gower, C. A. ii. 157; bk. v. 890. This is
Englished from OF. profes, masc., professe, fem., applied in the same
way ; ‘ Qui devant iert nonain professe’ = who was before a professed.
nun; Rom. de la Rose, 8844 (Littré).=—L. prafessus, manifest, con-
fessed, avowed; pp. of prdfitéri, to profess, avow.=—L. prd-, before
all, publicly ; and fatéri, to acknowledge. See Pro-and Confess.
Der. profess-ed (see above); profess-ed-ly ; profess-ion, ME. profes-
sioun, professiun, Ancren Riwle, p. 6,1. 20, from F. profession ; pro-
fess-ion-al, profess-ion-al-ly; profess-or, 1 Hen. VI, v. 1. 14, ME.
professour, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 7, from L. prdfessor, a public
teacher; profess-or-ial, profess-or-ship.

PROFFER, to offer, propose for acceptance. (F.—L.) ME.
profren (with one f), Chaucer, C. T. 8028 (E 152); proferen,
K. Alisaunder, 3539.—OF. profrir, porofrir (Godefroy), also AF.
profrer (Bozon). =OF. por-, prefix, L. pro; and ofrir, offrir, from L.
offerre, to offer. See Pro- and Offer. @ Not from MF. pro-
ferer, ‘to produce,’ Cot.; as the sense and usage show. The senses.
of proffer and offer are very near together. Der. proffer-er.

PROFICIENT, competent, thoroughly qualified. (L.) In Shak.
1 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 19. —L. prdficient-, stem of pres. part. of prdjicere,
to make progress, advance. —L. pré-, forward; and facere, to make;
see Pro-, Fact, and Profit. Der. projicience, proficienc-y.

PROFILE, an outline, the side-face. (Ital.—L.) [Nota F.,
but an Ital. word. The F. word was formerly spelt porfil or pourfil,
which forms see in Cotgrave; hence ME. purfiled, bordered, Chaucer,
C. T. 193.] ‘Draw it in profile ;? Dryden, Parallel of Poetry and
Painting, § 9. ‘Profile (Ital. profilo) that design which shows the
side, .. . a term in painting ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. = Ital. profilo,
‘a border, a limning or drawing of any picture;’ Florio. Hence
profilare, ‘to draw, to limne, to paint;’ id.—Ital. pro-, before
(=L. pré-); and filo, ‘a thread, a line, a strike’ [stroke], Florio ;
from L. filum, a thread. Thusthe sense is a ‘ front-line’ or outline.
See Pro- and File (1). @ The mod. F. profil is (like the E. word)
from theItalian. Der. profile, vb.; and see purl (3).

PROFIT, gain, benefit. (F.—L.) ME. projit, P. Plowman, B.
prol. 169.—F. profit, ‘profit;’ Cot. [Cf. Ital. projitto.|—L. pro-
fectum, acc. of prdfectus, advance, progress.—L. prdfectus, pp. of
proficere, to make progress, advance, be profitable.=L. prd-, before ;
and facere, to make; see Pro- and Fact. Der. profit, vb. ME.
profiten, Wyclif, Heb. iv. 2, from F. profiter ; profit-able, Wyclif,
2 Tim. iii. 16; profit-abl-y, profit-able-ness; profit-ing, profit-less.

PROFLIGATEH, dissolute. (L.) Minsheu gives; ‘to profligate,
to ouerthrow, to vndoe, to put to flight ;’ ed, 1627. But it is pro-
perly a pp. used asanadj. Cf. ‘thy father, ... which hath profligate
[put to flight] and discomfited so many of them ;’ Hall’s Chron.,
Hen. VI, an. 31.—L. prdfligdtus, pp. of prafligére, to dash to
the ground, overthrow; whence prdfligdtus, cast down, abandoned,
dissolute. —L. pré-, forward ; and fligere, to strike, dash. See Pro-
and Afflict. Der. profligate-ly, -ness, profligac-y.
PROFOUND, deep, low, abstruse, occult. (F.—L.) In Early
Eng. Poems and Lives of Saints, ed. Furnivall (Phil. Soc.), xvii. 221 ;
and in Fisher’s Works, ed. Mayor, p. 37, ll. 12, 16.—F. profond,
‘profound,’ Cot.=L. prafundum, acc. of prdfundus, deep. L. pro,
forward, hence, downward, far, deep; and fundus, the ground,
bottom, cognate with E. bottom. See Pro-, Found (1), and
Bottom. Der. profound-ly, profound-ness ; also profund-i-ty, for-
merly profoundyte, Fisher, On the Seven Psalms, Ps. cii., p. 138,
1. 28, from F. profondité, ‘ profundity,’ Cot. \ :
PROFUSE, liberal to excess, lavish. (L.) ‘A rhetoric so profuse ;
Chapman, tr. of Homer, Od. iii. 172. —L. profusus, pp- of profundere,
to pour out.—L. prd-, forth; and fundere, to pour; see Pro- and
Fuse. Der. profuse-ly, profuse-ness; profus-ion, from L. profisio.

PROG, to search for provisions ; as sb., provisions. (L.) The sb.


477


478 PROGENITOR


is from the verb. Orig. ‘to beg, demand ;’ see Todd’s Johnson.
App. a weakened form of ME. prokken; ‘ Prokkyn, or styfly askyn,
procor;’ Prompt. Parv. Prob. a monkish word; adapted from L.
procare, procdri, to demand.—L. procus, a suitor.—L. proc-, 2nd
grade of prec-, in prec-Gri, to pray. See Pray. Perhaps in-
fluenced by ME. précren, proker, to procure, obtain; see Gloss. to
Dest. of Troy and to Alexander and Dindimus, short for procuren ;
and a doublet of E. Procure.

PROGENITOR, a forefather, ancestor. (F.—L.) Now con-
formed to the L. spelling; but formerly progenytour, Sir T. Elyot,
Castel of Helth, b. ii.c. 7; Fabyan, Chron. an. 1336-7, ed. Ellis,
p- 416; Caxton, Reynard, p. 91.—F. progeniteur, ‘a progenitor,’
Cot.—L. progenitorem, acc. of prégenitor, an ancestor.—L. pro-,
before; and genitor, a parent, from 4/GEN, to beget, with suffix
denoting the agent; see Pro- and Genus. See Progeny.

PROGENY, descendants, a race, offspring. (F.—L.) ME.
progenie, Gower, C. A. ii. 166; bk. v. 11613 progenye, Wyclif, Gen.
xliii. 7.—OF. progenie, a progeny ;’ Cot.—L. prdégeniem, acc. of
progeniés, lineage, progeny.—L. pré-, forth; and stem gen-, as in
gen-us, kin, from 4/GEN, to beget. See Progenitor.

PROGNOSTIC, a foreshowing, indication, presage. (F.—L.—
Gk.) ‘The whiche. . they adjudged for pronostiguykys and tokens of
the kynges deth;’ Fabyan, Chron. b. i. c. 246; ed. Ellis, p. 289.—
OF. pronostique (14th cent.), prognostique, Cot.; mod. F. pronostic
(Littré).—L. progndsticon.—Gk. mpoyywortikdv, a sign or token of
the future.=—Gk. mpé, before; and yvworixdy, neut. of yyworikds,
good at knowing, which from yvwords, yywrds, known, yvova, to
know. See Pro- and Gnostic. Der. prognostic, adj. from Gk.
mpoyyworicos; prognostic-ate, spelt pronostycate in Palsgrave; pro-
gnostic-at-ion, spelt pronostication in Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth,
b. iii. c. 4, from OF. pronostication or prognostication, ‘a prognosti-
cation,’ Cot.; prognostic-at-or.

PROGRAMME, PROGRAM, a public notice in writing, a
sketch of proceedings. (F.—L.—Gk.) The etymological spelling is
programme, according to F. programme; but it is quite a modern
word. We find the L. form programma in Phillips, ed. 1706, and
in Todd’s Johnson. = Gk. mpé-ypaypa, a public notice in writing. = Gk.
mpoypapey, to give public notice in writing.—Gk. mpd, before,
publicly ; and ypapev, to write. See Pro- and Graphic.

PROGRESS, advancement. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. iii. 11.
20; Court of Love, 1067.—MF. progrez, ‘a progression, going for-
ward,’ Cot. Mod. F. progrés.—L. progressum, acc. of progressus,
an advance.=L. progressus, pp. of progredi, to advance.—L. pro-,
forward; and gradi, to walk, step, go. See Pro- and Grade.
Der. progress, vb., accented progress, K. John, v. 2.46; progress-ion,
Chaucer, C. T. 3015 (A 3013), from F. progression (not in Cotgrave,
but found in 1425, see Hatzfeld), from L. acc. progressidnem ;
progress-ton-al, Blount, ed. 1674; progress-ive, Phillips, ed. 1706;
progress-ive-ly, -ness.

PROHIBIT, to hinder, check, forbid. (L.) In Minshen, ed.
1627, and in Palsgrave.—L. prohibitus, pp. of prohibére, to prohibit ;
lit. to hold before or in one’s way.=L. prd-, before; and habére, to
have, hold; see Pro- and Habit. Der. prohibit-ion, Cymb. iii.
4. 79, from F. prohibition, ‘a prohibition,’ from L. acc. prohibitionem ;
prohibit-ive; prohibit-or-y, from L, prohibitorius.

PROJECT, sb., a plan, purpose, scheme. (F,—L.) In Shak.
Much Ado, ili. I. 55.—MF. project, ‘a project, purpose,’ Cot. Mod.
F. projet.=L. proiectum, acc. of proiectus, pp. of proicere (projicere),
to fling forth, cast out, hold out, extend; whence the sense to set
forth, plan, not found in classical Latin.=L. pré-, forward; and
iacere, to throw; see Pro- and Jet (i). Der. projéct, verb, to cast
forward, Spenser, F. Q. vi. 1. 45; also, to plan, accented project,
Antony, v. 2. 121 ; project-ion, also in the sense of ‘plan’ in Hen. V,
ji. 4. 46, from F. projection, ‘a projection, . . extending out,’ Cot.;
project-or ; project-ile, in Phillips, ed. 1706, a coined word.

» PROLATE, extended, elongated in the direction of the polar axis.

(L.) Chiefly in the phrase ‘ prolate spheroid,’ Bailey’s Dict., vol. i.
ed. 1735. ([Prolate is used as a verb by Howell; see Rich. and
Todd’s Johnson. |=—L. prdldtus, lengthened, extended. =—L. pra-, for-
ward; and /Jatus (for ¢latus), borne, from 4/TEL, to lift, bear; see
Pro- and Oblate.

PROLEPSIS, anticipation. (L.—Gk.) A rhetorical term; in
Phillips, ed. 1706. (Blount, ed. 1674, gives prolepsie, from MF.
prolepsie in Cotgrave.]—L. prolépsis.— Gk. mpoAnyus, an anticipation
or anticipatory allusion.—Gk. apé, before; and Ajyus, a seizing,
catching, taking, from Any-opat, fut. of AapBavey, to seize. See
Pro- and Catalepsy. Der. prolep-t-ic, as in ‘ proleptick disease,
a disease that always anticipates, as if an ague come today at
40clock, tomorrow an hour sooner,’ Phillips, ed. 1706, from Gk.
mpodnnrixés, anticipating ; prolep-t-ic-al, Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674 ;
prolep-t-ic-al-ly.


PROMONTORY


PROLETARIAN, belonging to the lower orders, vulgar. (L.)
‘Low proletarian tything men;’ Butler, Hudibras, i. I. 720.
Formed with suffix -ax from L. prélétari-us, a citizen of the lowest


before; and *olere, to grow, whence the inceptive form olescere,
appearing in ad-olescere, to grow up; see Adolescent, Adult.
Cf. sub-olés, ind-olés. Der. prolific-al, Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.

PROLIX, tedious, lengthy. (F.—L.) ‘A longe and prolixe ex-
hortacion;’ Hall’s Chron., Hen. VII, an. 6. § 3. G. Douglas has the
corrupt form prolixt, Palace of Honour, pt. ii. st. 18, ed. Smali. [The
sb. prolixity, ME. prolixitee, is in Chaucer, C. T. 10719 (F 405), and
Troilus, b. ii, 1. 1564.]—F. prolixe, ‘prolix,’ Cot.—L. prélixus,
extended, prolix. B. Prélixus must be compared with élixus,
soaked, boiled, allied to OL. lixa, water, and Jliqui, liquére, to flow.
We then get the true sense ; prdlixus means ‘that which has flowed
beyond its bounds,’ and the usual sense of ‘ broad’ or ‘extended’ is
clearly due to the common phenomenon of the enlargement of a
pond by rain.—L. prd-, forward ; and -lixus, supplying the place of
the unrecorded pp. of ligui, to flow. See Pro-and Liquid. Der.
prolix-i-ty (see above), from OF. prolixite, in use in the 13th cent.
(Littré) ; from L. acc. prolixitatem, Brugmann, i. § 665.

PROLOCUTOR, the speaker, or chairman of a convocation.
(L.) ‘ Prolocutour of the Conuocation house, is an officer chosen by
persons ecclesiasticall, publickly assembled by the Kings Writ at
euery Parliament ;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627.—L. prdlocuitor, an advocate.
=L. pré-, before, publicly ; and locuitor, a speaker, allied to locutus,

p- of logui, to speak. See Pro- and Loquacious.

PROLOGUE, a preface, introductory verses to a play. (F.—L.
—Gk.) ME. prologue, Gower, C. A. prol. And see MSS. of the
Cant. Tales.—F. prologue, ‘a prologue, or. fore-speech,’ Cot.=—L.
prologus. = Gk. mpéddoyos, a fore-speech. = Gk. mpd, before; and
Adyos, a speech ; see Pro- and Logic.

PROLONG, to continue, lengthen out. (F.—L.) ME. prolongen.
‘ Purlongyn or prolongyn, or put fer a-wey;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 417.
=—F. prolonger, ‘to prolong, protract,’ Cot.—L. prélongare, to pro-
long.=L. prd-, forward, onward; and longus, long. See Pro- and
Long. Der. prolong-at-tion, from F. prolongation, ‘a prolongation,’
Cot.; cf. L. pp. prdlongatus. Doublet, purloin.

PROMENADE, a walk, place for walking. (F.—L.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, we find both promenade and pourmenade. —
F. promenade, formerly pourmenade; Cot. gives only the latter form.
Formed from OF. pourmener or promener, to walk, both of which
forms are given in Cotgrave, the prefix being really the same (L.
pro) in either case. The suffix -ade is borrowed from the Prov.
suffix -ada, for L. -Gia, the fem. form of -dtus, the pp. suffix of the
ist conjugation. —L. prominare, to drive forwards, orig. to drive on
by threats.=—L. prd-, forward; and Late L. mindre, to drive on,
allied to L. minari, to threaten. See Pro- and Menace. Der.
promenade, verb. Cf. e-minent, im-minent.

PROMINENT, projecting, conspicuous, eminent, (F.—L.)
‘Some prominent rock ;’ Chapman, tr. of Homer, Iliad, xvi. 389. —
F, prominent,  prominent;’ Cot.—L. prominent-, stem of pres. part.
of prominére, to project. L. pré-, forth ; and -minére, to jut, project.
See Menace. Der. prominent-ly; prominence, from F. prominence,
‘a prominence,’ Cot.

PROMISCUOUS, mixed, confused. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627 ;
and in Cotgrave, to translate F. promiscué.=—L. promiscuus, mixed.
=L. pro-, lit. forward, but here of slight force; and misc-ére, to mix,
whence E. mix. See Pro- and Miscellaneous. Der. promis-
cuous-ly, ~ness.

PROMISE, an engagement to do a thing, an expectation. (F.—
L.) For promes or promesse. ‘And this is the promise that he hath
promised vs;’ Bible, 1551, 1 John, ii. 25. ‘Fayre behestis and
promysys;” Fabyan, Chron. an. 1336-7.—F. promesse, ‘a promise,’
Cot. [Cf Span. promesa, Ital. promessa, a promise.]—L. promissa,
fem. of prdmissus, pp. of prémittere, to send or put forth, to promise.
=L. pro-, forth; and mittere, to send; see Pro- and ssion,
Der. promise, verb (as above) ; promis-er, promis-ing, promis-ing-ly ;
promiss-or-y, formed with suffix -y (<L. -ius) from the (rare) L.
promissor, a promiser.

PROMONTORY, a headland, cape. (L.) In Shak. Temp. v.
46. Englished from L. prémontérium, a mountain-ridge, headland ;
cf. F. promontoire (Cot.).—L. prd-, forward; mont-, stem of mons, a
mountain ; and the adj. neut. suffix -drium. See Pro- and Mountain.


PROMOTE


PROMOTE, to further, advance, elevate. (L.) ‘A great fur-
therer or promoter ;’ Fabyan, Chron. an. 1336-7, ed. Ellis, p. 445.
‘He was promoted to so high an office ;’ Grafton, Chron. Hen. VI,
an. 14 (R.).—L. prdmétus, pp. of promouére, to promote, further. —
L. pré-, forward; and mouére, to move; see Pro- and Move.
Der. promot-er; promot-ion, ME. promocion, Prompt. Parv., from
F. promotion, from L, acc. promdtionem.
. PROMPT, prepared, ready, acting with alacrity. (F.—L.) ‘She
that was prompte and redy to all euyll;’ Fabyan, Chron. vol. i.
c. 116 ; ed. Ellis, p. 91, 1.1. Cf. ‘ Promptyd, Promptus ;” Prompt.
Pary. =F. prompt, ‘prompt ;’ Cot.=—L. promptum, acc. of promptus,
promtus, brought to light, at hand, ready, pp. of promere, to take or
bring forward.—L. prd-, forward; and emere, to take; whence
promere, for prod-imere. See Pro-and Example. Der. prompt-ly,
prompt-ness ; prompt, verb, ME. prompten, Prompt. Parv. ; prompt-er,
ME. promptare, Prompt. Parv. ; prompt-ing ; prompt-i-tude (Levins),
from F. promptitude, ‘ promptness,’ Cot., from Late L. promptitido,
which occurs A.D. 1261 (Ducange).

PROMULGATE, to publish. (L.) In Shak. Oth.i. 2.21; and
both as vb. and pp. in Palsgrave. = L. prémulgatus, pp. of promul gare,
to publish. B. Of unknown origin; the prefix is pro-, as usual.
Some refer it to OLat. promellere, ‘litem promouere,’ which is not
satisfactory. Der. promulgat-or, promulgat-ion.

PRONE, with the face downward, headlong, inclined, eagerly,
ready. (F.—L.) In Shak. Wint. Tale, ii. 1. 108.=—F. prone, ‘prone,
ready,’ Cot.=L. pronum, acc. of pronus, inclined towards. B. Pro-
nus has been compared with Ionic Gk. mpnvys, Doric mpavns, head-
long; and is connected with the prep. prd-, prod ; whence *prad-nus.
See Pro-. Der. prone-ly, prone-ness.

PRONG, the spike of a fork. (E.) ‘Iron teeth of rakes and
prongs;’ Dryden, tr. of Virgil, Georg. ii. 487. ‘A prong or pitch-
forke;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627. ‘A prongue, hasta furcata;’ Levins,
166. 47, ed. 1570. The ME, pronge,a pang, sharp pain (Prompt.
Pary.) is the same word. Cf. ME. pranglen, to constrain, Havelok,


639; from a Teut. base *prang-, to compress, nip, push, pierce.
Hence also Du. prangen, to press; G. pranger,a pillory; Goth. ana-


praggan (=ana-prangan), to press; Low G. prange, a stake; MDu.
prange, ‘a horse-mussle (muzzle) ; ashackle or a neck-yron; oppres-
sion or constraint;’ Hexham; Dan. prange, to crowd sail. See
Pang.

PRONOUN, a word used in place of a noun, to denote a person.


(F.—L.) In Ben Jonson, Eng. Grammar, c. xv; Shak. Merry


Wives, iv. 1. 41. Spelt pronowne in Palsgrave, p. xxiv. Com-


pounded of Pro- and Noun; and suggested by L. prondmen, a pro-


noun, or by F. pronom, a pronoun, found in 1482 (Hatzfeld). Cf.
Span. pronombre, Ital. pronome. Der. pronomin-al, from préondmin-,


-stem of L. prondmen.


PRONOUNCEH, to utter, express, speak distinctly. (F.—L.)
ME. pronouncen, Chaucer, C.T. 16767 (G 1299).—F. prononcer, * to


pronounce,’ Cot.—L. prdnuntidre, to pronounce. —L. pré-, forth ;


and nuntiare, totell. See Pro-and Announce. Der. pronounc-er,
pronounce-able, pronounc-ing ; pronunci-at-ion, from MF. pronontiation,
‘ pronunciation,’ Cot., from L. acc. pronuntiatioOnem.


. PROGEMIUM, a proem ; see Proem.


PROOF, a test, demonstration, evidence. (F.—L.) The vowel
has undergone some alteration ; we find the spelling profe in the
Bible of 1551, 2 Cor. ii. 9. ME. preef, in many MSS. of Wyclif,
2 Cor. ii. 9, later text, where the reading of the text itself is preuyng.
Earliest spelling preoue, Ancren Riwle, p. 52, 1. 13; where eo is put
for F. ew, as in E. people for F. peuple. =F. preuve, ‘a proofe, tryall,’
Cot.—Late L. proba, a proof (Lewis); which seems to be merely
formed from the verb probare, to prove; see Prove. Cf. Port. and
Ital. prova, Span. prueba, a proof,

PROP, a support, stay. (E.) The sb. appears earlier than the
verb. ME. proppe, a long staff; Prompt. Parv. [Whence were bor-
rowed Irish propa, a prop; propadh, propping; Gael. prop, a prop,


.support, prop, to prop, pp. propta, propped.] Not in AS.4Du.


proppe, ‘ an yron branch, proppen, to prop, stay, or beare up,’


. Hexham; and with a change of meaning to fastening or stopping
-up, Dan. prop, Swed. propp, G. pfropf, a cork, stopple, G. pfropfen,


to cram, stuff, or thrust into. All from a Teut. base *prup-, to stop
up, to support ; cf. MDan. pripfuld, Dan. propfuld, chokeful ; Swed.
dial. primpa, prippa, to cram (oneself). 4 In the sense of ‘ graft,’


G. pfropf is due to L. propago; see Propagate. Der. prop, verb.


PROPAGATE, to multiply plants by layers, extend, produce.
(L.) In Shak. Per. i. 2.73 ; and in Levins, ed. 1570. —L. propagatus,
pp. of prdpagare, to peg down, propagate by layers, produce, beget ;
allied to propaiges, propigo, a layer, and from the same root as
com-pages, a joining together, structure.—L. prd-, forward; and
-pag-es, a fastening, pegging, from pag-, base of pangere, to fasten,
set (hence, to peg down); see Pro- and Pact. Der. propagat-or ;


PROPOSE 479


propagat-ion, Minsheu; propagand-ism, propagand-ist, coined words
from the name of the society entitled Congregatio de Propaganda
Fide, constituted at Rome, A.D. 1622 (Haydn), And see prune (1).

PROPEL, to drive forward, urge on. (L.) ‘The blood... that
is propelled out of a vein of the breast ;’ Harvey (died 1657); cited
in Todd’s Johnson, without a reference. ME. propellen, Palladius
on Husbandry, bk. i. 1034. [But the word propulse was sometimes
used instead of it; see Richardson.]—L. prdpellere (pp. propulsus),
to propel.=L. pro-, forward; and fellere, to drive; see Pro- and
Pulsate. Der. propell-er; propuls-ion, propuls-ive, like the pp.
propulsus.

PROPENSITY, an inclination. (L.; with F. suffix). ‘ Pro-
pension or Propensity ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706, [The old word was
propension, as in Minsheu, and in Shak. Troil. ii. 2. 133, from F.
propension, ‘a propension or proneness,’ Cot.] A coined word, with
suffix -ity (F. -ité), from L. prdpens-us, hanging forward, inclining
towards, prone to; pp. of prdpendére, to hang forwards. =—L. prdé-,
forwards; and pendére, to hang; see Pro- and Pendent. And
see Prepense.

PROPER, one’s own, belonging to, peculiar, suitable, just,
comely. (F.—L.) ME. propre, whence propremen=proper man,
Ancren Riwle, p. 196, 1. 15 ; propreliche = properly, id. p. 98, 1. 11. —
F. propre, ‘ proper,’ Cot.—L. proprium, acc. of proprius, one’s own.
B. Etym. doubtful; Bréal connects it with the phr. pro priud, for
one’s own; from priuus, single, peculiar; whence also Private.
Der. properly ; also proper-ly, ME. propreté, Gower, C. A. i. 239; bk.
ii. 2377, from OF. propreté, explained as ‘fitness’ by Cotgrave, but
found in old texts with the sense of ‘ property’ (Littré), from L. acc.
proprietatem; see Propriety.

PROPHECY, a prediction. (F.—L.—Gk.) The distinction in
spelling between prophecy, sb., and prophesy, verb, is unoriginal
and arbitrary; both should be prophecy. ME. prophecie, Ancren
Riwle, p. 158, 1. 15.—OF. prophecie, variant of prophetie, a pro-
phesie,’ Cot.=—L. prophétia.—Gk. mpopnreia, a prediction. = Gk.
mpopyTys, a prophet; see Prophet. Der. prophesy, verb, ME.
prophecien, Trevisa, i. 421, 1]. 33.

PROPHET, one who predicts, an inspired teacher. (F.—L.—
Gk.) ME. prophete, Rob. of Glouc. p. 38, 1. 893; Ormulum, 5195.
=—OF. prophete.—L. prophéta.=Gk. mpopnrns, one who declares
things, an expounder, prophet.=Gk. mpé, publicly, before all; also,
before ; and 7-, base of gnyi, I say, speak ; with suffix -rns, de-
noting the agent. From 4/BHA, to speak; see Pro- and Fame.
Der. prophet-ess, prophet-ic, prophet-ic-al, prophet-ic-al-ly ; also pro-
phec-y, q.v.

PROPHYLACTIC, preventive, defending from disease. (F.—
Gk.) From F. prophylactique, employed by Rabelais; see Hatzfeld.
=—Gk. mpopudakrixés, guarding from.=—Gk. mpopvAdcce, to keep
guard before.=Gk. mpé, before; gudAdocew, to guard. See Phy-
lactery.

PROPINE, to drink to one’s health, give, offer. (L.—Gk.)
‘The lovely sorceress mix’d, and to the prince Health, joy, and
peace propin'd ;’ C. Smart, The Hop-garden, i. 228. —L. propinare,
to drink to one’s health, give. Gk. mpomivey, the same.—Gk. mpé,
before; miveyv, to drink,

PROPINQUITY, nearness. (F.—L.) ME. propinguitee,
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. ii. pr. 3,1. 24.— OF. propinguité (Gode-
froy).—L. propinguitatem, acc. of propinquitds, nearness.=L. pro-
pingui-, for propinguus, near, with suffix -tds. B. Propinquus =
*propi-n-cus, extended from prope, near. Der. from the same source,
ap-proach, re-proach, prox-imity.

PROPITIOUS, favourable. (L.) [The old adj. was propice,
from OF. propice, ‘ propitious ;’ see exx. in R.] In Minsheu, ed.
1627. Englished, by change of -ws to -ous, as in arduous, &c., from
L. propitius, favourable. B. Prob. a term of augury; it seems to
mean ‘flying forwards ;’ the form shows the derivation from pro-,
forwards, and petere, orig. to fly, from 4/PET, to fly. See Pro-
and Feather. Der. propitious-ly, -ness. Also propiti-ate, orig.
used as a pp., as in a quotation from Bp. Gardner, Explication of
the Sacrament, 1551, fol. 150, cited by R.; from L. propitidtus, pp. of
propitidre, to render favourable. Hence propitiat-ion, Minsheu, from
F. propitiation, ‘a propitiation,’ Cot.; propitiat-or-y, ME. propicia-
torie, Wyclif, Heb. ix. 5, from L. prdpitiatorium, Heb. ix. 5.

PROPORTION, relation of parts, equality of ratios, analogy,
symmetry. (F.—L.) ME. proporcioun, Chaucer, C. T. 11598
(F 1286).—F. proportion, ‘ proportion,’ Cot. —L. prdportidnem, acc.
of proportio, comparative relation. —L. prd-, before, here used to
signify as regards or in relation to; and portio, a portion, part; see
Pro- and Portion. Der. proportion, vb.; proportion-able, pro-
portion-abl-y, proportion-al, -al-ly, -ate, -ate-ly.

PROPOSE, to offer for consideration. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak.
Tam. Shrew, v. 2. 69. [We also find propone, whence proponing in


480 PROPOSITION


Sir T. More, Works, p. 1107 g; this is from L. propdnere, and is
really a different word; see Propound.] =F. proposer, ‘ to purpose,
also, to propose,’ Cot. Compounded of pro-, prefix; and F. poser,
which is not from L. pdnere, but is of Gk. origin, as shown under
pose; see Pro- and Pose. Littré remarks that in this word, as in
other derivatives of F. poser, there has been confusion with L. ponere.
Der. propos-er ; propos-al, spelt proposall in Minsheu, a coined word,
like bestow-al, refus-al, &c. Doublet, purpose (1), q.v. é= But
propound, proposition, are unrelated.

PROPOSITION, an offer of terms, statement of a subject,
theorem, or problem. (F.—L.) ME. proposicioun, in the phrase
looues of proposicioun, to translate L. panés prdpositidnis, Wyclif,
Luke vi. 4.—F. proposition, ‘a proposition,’ Cot.=L. prapositionem,
acc. of prdpositio, a statement; cf. prdpositus, pp. of propdnere, to
propound; see Propound. Der. proposition-al.

PROPOUND, to offer for consideration, exhibit. (L.) Used
as equivalent to propose, but really distinct, and of different origin.
Formed with excrescent d from the old verb to propone, Sir T. More,
Works, p. 1107 g. ‘ Artificially proponed and oppugned ;’ Hall’s
Chron. Hen. VII, an. 6. § 4. ‘The glorie of God propouned ;’ Bale,
Image, pt.iii (R.).—L. prdpdnere, to set forth.—L. prd-, forth; and
ponere, to put, set, pp. positus; see Pro- and Position. Der. pro-
pound-er ; proposit-ion, q.v. Also purpose (2), q.v.

PROPRIETY, fitness. (F.—L.) ‘ Proprietie, owing, specialtie,
qualitie, a just and absolute power over a free-hold;’ Minsheu.
I.e. it had formerly the sense of property, of which it is a doublet ;
see Robinson, tr. of More’s Utopia, ed. Lumby, p. 62, 1. 32.—F. pro-
prieté, ‘a property, propriety, .. . a freehold in; also, a handsome or
comely assortment, &c.;’ Cot.=L. proprietatem, acc. of proprietas,
a property, ownership; also proper signification of words, whence
the mod. sense.=L. proprius, one’s own. See Proper. Der.
propriet-or, an incorrect substitute for proprietary, from MF. proprie-
taire, ‘a proprietary, an owner,’ Cot., from L. proprietdrius, an
owner. Cf. also MF. proprietaire, adj. ‘ proprietary,’ Cot. Doublet,

roperty.
+ PROPULSION, PROPULSIVE; see Propel.

PROROGUEH, to continue from one session to another, defer.
(F.—L.) Spelt prorogue in Minsheu, ed. 1627; earlier spelling
proroge, Levins, ed. 1570; and in Hardyng, Chron, ch. 36. st. 3. =
F. proroger, ‘to prorogue, Cot.—L. prérogare, to propose a further
extension of office, lit. ‘to ask publicly ;’ hence to prorogue, defer. =
L. pré-, publicly; and rogdre, to ask; see Pro- and Rogation.
Der. prorog-at-ion, from F. prorogation, ‘a prorogation,’ Cot. ; from
L. acc. prorogationem.

PROS., prefix, to, towards. (Gk.) Properly Gk., but also ap-
pearing in F. and L. words borrowed from Gk.=Gk. mpés, towards ;
fuller form mpori, extended from mpé, before.4Skt. prati, towards ;
extended from pra, before, forward, away. See Pro-. Der. pros-
elyte, pros-ody, pros-opo-peia.

PROSCENIUM, the front part of a stage. (L.—Gk.) Not in
Todd’s Johnson; merely L. proscénium.—Gk. mpooxnyviov, the place
before the scene where the actors appeared.=Gk. mpd, before; and
oKnvn, a scene; see Pro- and Scene.

PROSCRIBE, to publish the name of a person to be punished,
to outlaw or banish, prohibit. (L.) In Levins, ed. 1570.—L. pro-
scribere, pp. proscriptus, lit. ‘to write publicly.’—L. prd-, forth,
publicly ; and seribere, to write; see Pro- and Seribe. Der. pro-
script-ion, Jul. Cees. iv. 1. 17, from F. proscription, ‘a proscription,’
Cot., from L. acc. proscriptidnem ; proscript-ive.

PROSE, straightforward speech, not poetically arranged. (F.—
L.) ME. prose, Chaucer, C. T. 4516 (B 96).—F. prose, ‘ prose,’ Cot.
=-L. présa, for prorsa, in the phr. prorsa oratio, straightforward (or
unembellished) speech; fem. of prorsus, forward, a contracted form
of prouersus, lit. turned forward.—L. pré-, forward; and uersus, pp.
of wertere, to turn. See Pro- and Verse. J The result, that prose
is partly derived from L. wersus, whence E. verse, is remarkable.
Der. prose, vb., pros-er, pros-y, pros-i-ly, pros-i-ness ; pros-a-ic, from
L. prosaicus, relating to prose.

PROSECUTE, to pursue, continue, follow after, sue. (L.) In
Levins, ed. 1570. Spelt proseguute, Robinson’s tr. of More’s Utopia,
ed. Lumby, p. 132, 1. 17, p. 133, 1. 32.—L. proseciitus, prosequiitus,
pp. of prosequi, to pursue ; see Pursue. Der. prosecut-ion, Antony,
iv. 14, 65, from L. acc. proseciitidnem; prosecut-or=L. proseciitor ;
prosecut-r-ix, formed with suffixes -r (<-or) and -ix, as in L. festat-
r-ix. Doublet, pursue.

PROSELYTE, a convert. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. proselite,
Wyclif, Deeds [Acts], ii. 10; afterwards conformed to the L,
spelling with y.—OF. proselite, ‘a proselite, Cot.—L. prosélytum,
acc. of prosélytus.— Gk. mpoondvtos, one who has come to a place,
hence, as sb. a stranger, esp. one who has come over to Judaism, a
convert, Acts ii. 10. Allied to Gk. perf. tense mpooeAnAvéa, znd aor.


PROTEST


mpoonrOov (=mpoc-ndvOov) ; of which the pres. tense (mpocépyopuar)
is from a different root.—Gk. mpés, to; and 7Av6-, as in 7AvOor,
I came, of which the fut. tense is é-Aevooua, from 4/LEUDH;
whence also Skt. ruk, orig. rudh, to grow, increase, Goth. liudan, to
grow. Der. proselyt-ise, proselyt-ism.

PROSODY, the part of grammar that treats of the laws of verse.
(F.—L.—Gk.) In Ben Jonson, Eng. Grammar, c. 1. Spelt prosodie
in Minsheu, ed, 1627; prosodye, Coventry Mysteries, p. 189.—F.
prosodie, in use in the 16th cent. (Littré).—L. prosddia. = Gk.
mpoowdia, a song sung to an instrument, a tone, accent, prosody. =
Gk. mpés, to, accompanying ; and #57, an ode, song; see Pros- and
Ode. Der. prosod-i-al, prosodi-c-al, prosodi-an, prosod-ist.

PROSOPOPGCEIA, personification. (L.—Gk.) Spelt prosopopeia,
Sir P. Sidney, Apology for Poetry, ed. Arber, p. 24.—L. prosdpo-
peia, = Gk. mpoownomoia, personification. = Gk. tpoownomoreiy, to per-
sonify.— Gk. mpoowmo-, for mpdowmoy, a face, person; and moveiy, to
make, B. Gk. mpdowmoy is from mpds, towards ; and w7-, stem of wp,
face, appearance. See Pros-, Optic, and Poet.

PROSPECT, a view, scene, expectation. (L.) In Shak. Much
Ado, iv. I. 231; and in Levins. —L. prospect-us, a look out, distant
view, prospect.=L. prospectus, pp. of prospicere, to look forward. =
L. pro-, before; and spicere, specere, to look; see Pro- and Spy.
Der. prospect, vb., in Levins; prospect-ive, ME. prospective, Chaucer,
C. T. 10548 (F 234), from F. prospective, ‘the prospective, perspec-
tive, or optick art,’ Cot., from L. adj. prospectiuus; prospect-ive-ly ;
prospect-ion ; also prospectus (modern) =L. prospectus.

PROSPEROUS, according to hope, successful. (L.) In Levins;
and in Surrey, tr. of Virgil, Ain. iv. 773 (L. text, 579). Englished, by
change of -us to -ous, as in arduous, &c., from L. prosperus, also spelt
prosper, according to one’s hope, favourable.—L. pré-, for, according
to; and spa-, weak grade of spé-, as in spé-s, hope ; with suffix -ro-.
B. Spés is related to E. speed; see Brugmann, i. § 156, ii. § 74.
Der. prosperous-ly; prosper, verb, Bible of 1551, 3 John, 2, and in
Palsgrave, from MF. prosperer, ‘to prosper,’ Cot., which from L.
prosperare, v., from prosper, adj. Also prosper-i-ty, in early use; ME.
prosperite, Ancren Riwle, p. 194, 1. 14, from OF. prosperité<L. acc.
prosperitatem.

PROSTHETIC, prefixed. (Gk.) Modern; as if for Gk.
mpooderikds, lit. disposed to add, giving additional power; allied to
Gk. mpdaGeros, added, put to; cf. mpdcdecis, a putting to, attaching.
=Gk, mpés-, to; O€-7ds, placed, put, verbal adj. from the base 6e-,
weak grade of @7-, to place; see Theme. Cf. Gk. ém-erieds=L.
adiectiuus.

PROSTITUTE, to expose for sale lewdly, to sell to lewdness,
devote to shameful purposes. (L.) Minsheu, ed. 1627, has prosti-
tute, verb, and prostitution. The verb is in Shak. Per. iv. 6. 201 ; and
in Palsgrave.=L. prostitit-us, pp. of prostituere, to set forth, expose
openly, prostitute.—L. prd-, forth; and statuere, to place, set; see
Pro- and Statute. Der. prostitute, sb.<L. prostitita, fem.;
prostitut-ion, from F. prostitution, ‘a prostitution,’ Cot., from L. ace.
prostitutiOnem ; prostitut-or = L. prostititor.

PROSTRATH, lying on the ground, bent forward on the
ground. (L.) ‘It is good to slepe prostrate on their bealies;’ Sir
T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 30. ‘ Prostrat byfore thi person’ ;
Coventry Mysteries, p. 75.—L. prostratus, pp. of prosternere, to throw
forward on the ground.=L. pré-, forward; and sternere, to throw on
the ground. See Pro- and Stratum. Der. prostrate, vb., Spenser,
F. Q. i. 12. 63 prostrat-ion, from F. prostration, ‘a prostrating,’ Cot.,
from L. acc. prostrationem.

PROTEAN, readily assuming different shapes. (L.—Gk.) ‘The
Protean transformations of nature ;’ Cudworth, Intellectual System,
p. 32 (R.). Coined, with suffix -az (<L. -anus), from L. Prote-us,
a sea-god who often changed his form; cf. Roy, Rede me, p. 118.=—
Gk. IIpwrevs, a sea-god ; cf. mparos, first, chief.

PROTECT, to cover over, defend, shelter. (L.) In Shak. Tw.
Nt. ii. 4. 75. [We find ME. frotectour, Henrysoun, Test. of
Creseide, 1. 556; proteccioun, Chaucer, C. T. 2365 (A 2363).J—L.
protect-us, pp. of protegere, to protect. L. prd-, before; and tegere,
to cover; see Pro- and Tegument. Der. profect-ion, from F.
protection, ‘protection,’ Cot., from L. acc. protectionem ; protect-ion-ist ;
protect-ive; protect-or, formerly protecteur, from F. protecteur, ‘a
protector,’ from L. acc. protectorem; protect-or-al, protect-or-ship,
protect-or-ate; protect-r-ess, ME. protectrice, Lydgate, A Ballad in
Commendacion of Our Ladie, 1. 57, from F. protectrice, ‘a protec-
trix,’ Cot., formed from the acc. case of a L. *prétectrix, a fem. form
similar to ¢estatrix. Also protégé, borrowed from mod. F’. protege,
pp. of protéger, to protect, from L, protegere ; fem. form protégée.

PROTEST, to bear public witness, declare solemnly, (F.—L.)
In Spenser, F. Q. ii. 10, 28, and Palsgrave; the sb. protest occurs in
The Tale of Beryn, ed. Furnivall, 1. 3905. —F. protester, ‘to protest,”
Cot.=L. protestare, protestari, to protest.=L. prd-, publicly; and


iby oe


PROTHALAMIUM


testari, to bear witness, from ‘¢estis, a witness. See Pro- and
Testify. Der. protest, sb., protest-er; Protest-ant, from F. pro-
testant, pres. part. of protester ; Protest-ant-ism ; protest-at-ion, Chaucer,
C. T. 3139 (A 3137), from F. protestation, ‘ a protestation,’ from L,
acc. protestatidnem.

PROTHALAMIUM, a song written on the occasion of a
marriage. (L.—Gk.) See the Prothalamion written by Spenser. =
Late L. prothalamium, or prothalamion.=Gk. mpoadamoy, a song
written before a marriage; not in Liddell and Scott, but coined (with
prefix mpo-) as a companion word to Epithalamium, q. y.

PROTOCOL, the first draught or copy of a document. (F.—L.
—Gk.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.—MF. protocole, also protecole, ‘ the
first draught or copy of a deed,’ Cot. (Cf. Ital. protocollo, ‘a booke
wherein scriveners register all their writings, anything that is first
made, and needeth correction;’ Florio.]=—Late L. prdtocollum. =
Late Gk. mpwrdxoAdov, not in Liddell and Scott, but explained by
Scheler. It meant, in Byzantine authors, orig. the first leaf glued on
to MSS., in order to register under whose administration, and by
whom, the MS. was written ; it was afterwards particularly applied
to documents drawn up by notaries, because, by a decree of Justinian,
such documents were always to be accompanied by such a first leaf
or fly-leaf. It means ‘first glued-on, i.e. glued on at the beginning.
=Gk. mpdro-, for mp@ros, first; and. koAAGy, to glue, from Gk.
x6dAa, glue. B. Gk. mp@ros is a superl. form from mpd, before ; see
Pro-. The root of #dAAa is unknown; cf. Russ. #/ez, glue.

PROTOMARTYR, the first martyr. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘The
holy prothomartyr seynt Alboon;’ Fabyan, Chron. vol. i. c. 151;
ed. Ellis, p.138.=— MF. protomartyre, ‘ the first martyr,’ Cot. = Late L.
protomartyr.=Gk. mpwrdpaptrup; coined from mp@ro-, for mpatos,
first, superl. of mpd, before; and pdprvp, a martyr, later form of
paprus, a witness. See Pro- and Martyr.

PROTOTYPE, the original type or model. (F.—L.—Gk.)
‘There, great exemplar, prototype of kings;’ Daniel, A Panegyric to
the King’s Majesty, 1.177. Andin Minsheu.—F. prototype, ‘ the first
form, type, or pattern of, Cot.—L. pradtotypum, neut. of prototypus,
adj., original. Gk. mpwrdrumoy, a prototype; neut. of mpwrdrumos,
according to the first form.=— Gk. mp@ro-, for mp@ros, first, superl. of
mp6, before; and tumos, a type. See Pro-and Type. 4 So also,
with the same prefix, we have proto-plasm, proto-phyte, &c.

PROTRACT, to prolong. (L.) ‘ Without longer protractyng of
tyme;’ Hall’s Chron., Henry VI. an. 38. § 6; and in Shak.—L.
protract-us, pp. of protrahere, to draw forth, prolong.=—L. pré-,
forth; and ¢rahere, to draw; see Pro-, Trace, Portray. Der.
protract-ion (not F.) ; protract-ive, Shak. Troil. i. 3. 20; protract-or.

PROTRUDE, to push forward, put out. (L.) In Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 20, § 4.—L. protridere, to thrust forth.=—L.
pro-, forth; and ¢ridere, to thrust, allied to E. threat; see Pro- and
Threat. Der. protrus-ion, coined from L. pp. protrisus; pro-
trus-ive,

PROTUBERANT, prominent, bulging out. (L.) ‘ Protuberant,
swelling or puffing up ;’ Blount’s Gloss.,ed. 1674. Phillips, ed. 1706,
has both protuberant and protuberance. The rare verb protuberate
sometimes occurs; see Rich.=L. prdtiberant-, stem of pres. part. of
protuberare, to bulge out.—L. prd-, forward; and ¢iber, a swelling ;
see Pro- and Tuber. Der. protuberance.

PROUD, haughty, arrogant. (E.; or F.?) ME. prud (with long ~),
Havelok, 302; Ancren Riwle, p.176,1. 17; later proud, P. Plowman,
B, iii. 178. Older form prut (with long ~), Ancren Riwle, p. 276,
1, 19; Layamon, 8828 (earlier text ; later text, prout). AS. priit,
proud ; a word of which the traces are slight; the various reading
prittne for ranene in the AS. Chron. an. 1006, is only found in MS. F,
of the 12th century ; see Earle, Two AS. Chronicles, notes, p. 336. It
occurs also in the Liber Scintillarum, § 17, p. 85, and § 46, p.152; and
we find the derived words pritung, pride, Mone, Quellen, p. 355, and
pryte in AElfric’s Homilies, ii. 220, formed by the usual yowel-change
from @ to y;see Pride. B. Moreover, we find Icel. pradr, proud,
borrowed from AS.; with which cf. Dan. prud, stately, magnificent.
y- Borrowed (according to Kluge) from OF. prod, prud (fem. prode,
prude), valiant, notable (taken in a bad sense); see further under
prowess. But the occurrence of pryte in Ailfric makes this very
doubtful. Der. proud-ly; also pride, q.v.

PROVE, to test, demonstrate, experience. (L.) In old authors,
it commonly means ‘to test,’ as ‘prove all things,’ 1 Thess. v. 21.
ME. prouen, preuen (with u for v), P. Plowman, B. viii. 120, A. ix.
11s. Older spelling preowen, Ancren Riwle, p. 390, 1. 22. AS.
profian (below). [Cf. also OF. prover, pruver, later prouver, ‘to
prove, try, essay, verifie, approve, assure, &c.’; Cot.]=L. probare, to
test, try, examine, orig. to judge of the goodness of a thing. =L.
probus, good, excellent. B. From the L. probare are also derived,
not only Port. grovar, Span. probar, Ital. provare, but also AS.
profian, Laws of Ine, § 20, in Thorpe’s Ancient Laws, i. 116, Du.


PROWESS 481


proeven, Icel. profa, Swed. profva, Dan. prove, G. proben, probiren.
The mod. E. prove seems to be due to AS., in which the o was
arbitrarily lengthened. Der. prov-able, prov-abl-y, provable-ness ; and
see proof, probable, probation, probe, probity, ap-prob-ation, ap-prove,
dis-ap-prove, dis-prove, im-prove, re-prove, re-prieve, re-pro-bate.

PROVENDER, dry food for beasts, as hay and corn. (F.—L.)
In Shak. Hen. V, iv. 2.58; Oth. i. 1.48. The final r is an OF. addi-
tion. OF. provendre (Godefroy) ; usually provende, ‘ provender,
also, a prebendry,’ Cot., whence ME. prouendé, provendeé, orig. a
trisyllabic word. Shak. has also the shorter form provand, Cor. ii.
1. 267. The ME. prouende also meant ‘ prebend,’ as in : ‘ Prouende,
rent, or dignité ;’ Rom. of the Rose, 6931. According to Stratmann,
provende occurs in the sense of ‘provender’ in Robert Manning’s
Hist. of England, ed. Furnivall, 1. 11188. [In OF. it also has the
sense of ‘ prebend ;’ see Littré.]—L. prebenda, a payment; in Late
L. a daily allowance of provisions, also a prebend ; Ducange. Fem.
of prebendus, pass. fut. part. of prebére, to afford, give; see Pre-
bend. @ Note also ME. prouendre, which meant ‘a prebendary,’
or person enjoying a prebend. See the passages quoted in Richard-
son, esp. from Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 81, 1. 2, p. 210,
1.27. But it also means ‘prebend ;’ as in Trevisa, tr. of Higden,
ie 7 Ns

PROVERB, a short familiar sentence, an adage, a maxim. (F.—
L.) ME. prouerbe (with u=v), Wyclif, John, xvi. 29. =F. proverbe,
‘a proverb.’=L. prouerbium, a common saying, proverb.=L. pré-,
publicly; and uerbum, a word. See Pro- and Verb. Der. pro-
verb-i-al, from L, prouerbialis, formed from prouerbi-um with suffix
-alis ; proverb-i-al-ly.

PROVIDE, to make ready beforehand, prepare, supply. (L.)
In Shak. Com. Errors, i, 1. 81; and in Palsgrave.—L. prouidére,
to act with foresight, lit. to foresee.=L. préd-, before; and uidére,
to see. See Pro- and Vision. Der. provid-er, Cymb. iii. 6. 53.
Also provid-ent, Skelton, ed. Dyce, i. 11, 1. 139, from L. prduident-,
stem of pres. part. of prouidére ; provid-ent-ly ; also provid-ence, ME.
prouidence, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. v. pr. 6, 1. 83, from F. provi-
dence. <L. prouidentia ; whence providenti-al, providenti-al-ly, Also
(like L. pp. prowis-us) provis-ion, Sir T. Elyot, The Governor, b. ii.
c. 12, § 4, from F. provision<L. acc. prouisionem ; provis-ion, verb,
provis-ion-al, provis-ion-al-ly ; provis-or, ME. prouisour, P. Plowman,
B. iy. 133, from F. proviseur, ‘a provider,’ Cot.<L. acc. prduisdrem ;
provis-or-y, provis-or-i-ly. Also provis-o, 1 Hen. IV, i. 3. 78, from the
Late L, law-phrase préviso guod=it being provided that, in use
A.D. 1350 (Ducange) ; pl. provisos. Doublet, purvey; doublet of
provident, prudent.

PROVINCE, a business or duty, a portion of an empire or state,
a region, district, department. (F.—L.) ME. prouynce, prouince
(with w«=v), Wyclif, Deeds [Acts], xxiii. 34.—F. province, ‘a pro-
vince,’ Cot.—L. prouincia, a territory, conquest. B. Of unknown
origin ; Bréal says that the primary sense was ‘ obligation ;’ possibly
from pro-, prefix, and wincire, to bind. (But see Walde.) Der.
provinci-al, Meas. for Meas. v. 3183 provinci-al-ly, provinci-al-ism.

PROVISION, PROVISO; see under Provide.

PROVOKE, to call forth, excite to action or anger, offend, chal-
lenge. (F.—L.) ME. prouoken, Prompt. Parv.=F. provoguer, ‘to
provoke,’ Cot.—L. prduocaére, to call forth, challenge, incite, pro-
voke.—L, prd-, forth ; and wocare, to call; allied to udc-, stem of
uox, the voice. See Pro- and Vocal. Der. provok-ing, provok-
ing-ly; provoc-at-ion, in Fabyan’s Chron. vol. i. c. 64, from F.
provocation, ‘a provocation,’ Cot., from L. acc. produocationem ;
provoc-at-ive, Henrysoun, Test. of Creseide, 1. 226; provoc-at-ive-
7€SS.

PROVOST, a principal or chief, esp. a principal of a college or
chief magistrate of a Scottish town, a prefect. (L.) ME. prouost
(with «=v), Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. i. pr. 4, 1. 43; prowest,
Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 268, 1. 7. AS. prafost, Exod.
v.15 3 profost, Allfric, Hom. ii.172. [Cf. MF. prevost, ‘the pro-
vost or president of a college ;’ Cot.]=L. prepositus, a prefect ; lit.
‘one who is set over,’ pp. of preponere, to set over. =L. pre, before ;
and ponere, to place. See Pre-and Position. 4 In Italian we
find both prevosto and preposto; showing that v is due to the older p.
Der. provost-marshal, provost-ship,

PROW, the fore-part of a ship. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627.— OF. proué (mod. F. prove), ‘the prow, or forepart of a ship;’
Cot. (Cf. Ital. proda, prua.]—L. prora, the prow of a ship; the
second r disappearing in order to avoid the double trill. [Cf. Prov.
Span., Port. proa, Genoese prua.J—Gk. mpgpa (also mpdipa), the
prow ; connected with mpd, before ; see Pro-.

PROWESS, bravery, valour. (F.—L.) Originally ‘ excellence.’
ME. prowes, prowesse, Rob. of Glouc. p. 12,1. 279; p. 112, 1. 2418;
pruesse, King Horn, ed. Lumby, 1. 556. OF. prouesse, ‘ prowesse,’
Cot.; formed with suffix -esse (<L. -itia) from OF, prou, brave,

bial


482 PROWL


mod. F. preux, ‘hardy, doughty, valiant, full of prowess;” Cot.
B. The etym. of OF. prow is much disputed; it occurs also in the
forms prod, prud, pros, proz, &c., fem. prode, prude; we also find
Proy. proz, Ital. prode. y. But, besides the adj. prou, we also
find a sb. prou, formerly prod, in the sense of § advantage ;’ thus bon
prou leur face=much good may it do them. This is the common
ME. prow, meaning profit, advantage, benefit, as in Chaucer, C. T.
12234, 13338 (C 300, B 1598). 5. It is certain that prowesse was
used to translate L. probitas, and that prow was used to translate
probus, but the senses of the words were, nevertheless, not quite the
same, and they seem to have been drawn together by the influence of
a popular etymology which supposed prow to represent probus. But
the d is very persistent ; we still find the fem. prude even in mod. E.,
and we must observe that Ital. prode means both ‘advantage’ and
‘valiant,’ whilst the F. prud’homme simply meant, at first, ‘ brave
man,’ e. It seems best to accept the suggestion that the word is
due to the L. prep. préd-, appearing in L. prdd-esse, to be useful to,
to do good, to benefit. This would also explain the use of OF.
prod, prou, as an adverb. Cot. has: ‘ Prow, much, greatly, enough ;’
cf. K6rting, § 7451. See Pro- and Prude.

PROWL, to rove in search of plunder or prey. (OLow G.) ‘To
proule for fishe, percontari; To proule for riches, omnia appetere ;’
Levins. ME. prollen, to search about; Chaucer, C. T. 16880
(G 1412). ‘ Prollyn, as ratchys [dogs that hunt by scent], Scrutor,’
Prompt. Parv. ‘ Prollynge, or sekynge, Perscrutacio, investigacio,
scrutinium ;’ id. § Purlyn, idem quod Prollyn;’ id. ‘I prolle, I go
here and there to seke a thyng, ze tracasse. Prolyng for a promo-
cyon, ambition ;’ Palsgrave. ‘Prolle, to search, or prowl about; to
rob, poll, or steal; to plunder;’ Halliwell. Of uncertain origin.
Perhaps, like plunder, it meant ‘to filch trifles;’ from Low G. prull,
prulle, a trifle, thing of small value (Bremen). Cf. Du. prul, ‘a
bawble’ (Sewel), prudlen, ‘lumber, luggage, pelf, trumpery, toys’
(id.); prullen-kooper, a ragman (Calisch); EFries. prille, priil,
a trifle.

PROXIMITY, nearness. (F.—L.) Spelt prowimitie in Minsheu,
ed. 1627.—F. proximité, ‘proximity ;’ Cot.=L. proximitatem, acc.
of proximitas ; formed with suffix -tas from proximi-, for proximus,
very near, which is a superl. form from prope, near; see Propin-
quity. Der. Also proxim-ate, rather a late word, see exx. in R.
and Todd’s Johnson, from L. proximaius, pp. of proximdare, to
approach, from proximus, very near; proxim-ate-ly.

PROXY, the agency of one who acts for another; also an agent.
(F.—Late L.—L.) § Vnles the King would send a proxie;’ Foxe,
Martyrs, p. 978, an. 1536 (R.). Proxy is merely a contraction for
ME. prokecye, itself a contracted form of procuracy, which is pro-
perly an agency, not an agent. ‘ Procurator is used for him that
gathereth the fruits of a benefice for another man; An. 3 Rich. II,
stat. I. cap. 2. And procuracie is used for the specialtie whereby he
is authorized, ibid;” Minsheu, ed. 1627. Procuracy is from AF.
procuracie, Liber Albus, p. 423, 1. I.—Late L. prdctratia, a late
form used as equivalent to L. proctiratio, amanagement. Similarly,
proctor is a contraction for prdctirator, a manager; see Proctor,
Procure, The contracted forms proketour and prokecye, later
proctor and promy, seem to have come into use at the close of the
14th century. Cf.‘ Prokecye, procuracia; Proketowre, Procurator;’
Prompt. Parv. Also prockesy, Palsgrave. It thus appears that the
syllable -ra- was dropped, whilst ~ was first weakened to e and
afterwards disappeared.

PRUDE, a woman of affected modesty. (F.—L.) In Pope, Rape
of the Lock, i. 63, iv. 74, v. 36; Tatler, no. 102, Dec. 3, 1709.—F.
prude, orig. used in a good sense, excellent, asin ‘ preude femme, a
chast, honest, modest matron,’ Cot. MF. prude; from OF. preuz,
objective case preu, valiant, excellent; the etymology of which is
discussed under Prowess, q.v. B. The mod. F. prud’ homme
arose from misunderstanding the OF. preu d@’homme ; and hence was
made a MF. preude femme, prude femme (for preu de femme) ; whence
the fem. form prude was evolved. See Hatzfeld. Der. prud-ish;
prud-ish-ly, Pope, Dunciad, iv. 194; prud-e-ry, Pope, Answer to
Mrs. Howe, 1. 1, from F. pruderie.

PRUDENT, discreet, sagacious, frugal. (F.—L.) ME. prudent,
Chaucer, C. T.12044 (C 110). —F. prudent, ‘ prudent,’ Cot.= L. pri-
dent-em, acc. of priidens, prudent. B. Priidens is a contracted form
of prouidens; see Provident. Der. prudent-ly; prudence, ME.
prudence, Wyclif, 1 Cor. i. 19, from F. prudence<L. priidentia;
prudenti-al, Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, coined from L. pritdentia.

PRUNE (1), to trim trees, divest of what is superfluous. (F.—
L.) The old form is proine, proin; see exx. of proin in Nares and
Jamieson. In Chaucer, C. T.9885 (E 2011), it is said of Damian,
when dressing himself up smartly: ‘He kembeth him [combs
himself], he proyneth him and pyketh,’ where the Harl. MS. has
pruneth. It here means to trim, trick out, adorn. Gascoigne speaks


PTARMIGAN


of imps, i.e. scions of trees, which ‘ growe crookt, bycause they be’
not proynd,’ i.e, pruned; Steel Glas, 458. It was esp. used of birds,
in the sense ‘to pick out damaged feathers and arrange the plumage
with the bill’ (Schmidt), Cymb. v. 4..118; cf. L.L. L. iv. 3. 183.
B. Tyrwhitt, with reference to proinen in Chaucer, says: ‘ It seems
to have signified, originally, to take cuttings from vines, in order to
plant them out. From hence it has been used for the cutting away
of the superfluous shoots of all trees, which we now call pruning ;
and for that operation, which birds, and particularly hawks, perform


upon themselves, of picking out their superfluous or damaged


feathers. Gower, speaking of an eagle, says: ‘‘ For there he pruneth
him and piketh As doth an hauke, whan him wel liketh;” Conf.
Amant. iii. 75 ; bk. vi. 2203.’ y. Hence the etymology is from
OF. proignier, to prune (Godefroy), Norm. dial. progner (Moisy) ;
the same as MF. provigner, ‘to plant or set a stocke, staulke, slip,
or sucker, for increase; hence to propagate, multiply,’ &c.; Cot.
Littré gives the Berry forms of provigner as preugner, progner,
prominer, ‘This verb is from the F. sb. provin, ‘a slip or sucker
planted,’ Cot. ; OF. provain (Hatzfeld) ; cf. Ital. propaggine, a vine-
sucker laid in the ground.=L. propaginem, acc. of propago, a layer,
sucker. See Propagate. Der. prun-er.

PRUNE (2), a plum. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Sir T. Elyot, Castel of
Helth, b. ii. c. 7.—F. prune, ‘a plum,’ Cot.=—L. prinum, a plum. =
Gk. mpovvoy, shorter form of mpovpvoy, a plum; mpovvos, shorter
form of mpodpvos, a plum-tree. Der. prun-ella, or prun-ello, Pope,
Essay on Man, iv. 204, the name of a strong woollen stuff of a dark
colour, so named from prinella, the Latinized form of F. prunelle,
a sloe, dimin. of prune. Doublet, plum.

PRURIENT, itching. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L.
pririent-, stem of priiriens, pres. part. of pririre, to itch, orig. to
burn; cognate with E. freeze; see Freeze. Brugmann, i. § 562.
Der. prurience, prurienc-y.

PRY, to search inquisitively. (F.—L.) ME. pryen, prien, Chaucer,
C. T. 3458; P. Plowman, B. xvi. 168; Will. of Palerne, 5019; Polit.
Songs, ed. Wright, p. 222, 1. 11. —=OF. prier, preer, preier, to pillage
[to search for plunder]. —Late L. prédare, to plunder, also to inyesti-
gate; Ducange.—L. preda, prey; see Prey.

PSALM, a sacred song. (L.—Gk.) ME. psalm, frequently salm,
in very early use, Layamon, 23754. AS. sealm; see Sweet’s AS.
Reader. =L. psalmus.— Gk. Warps, a touching, a feeling, esp. the
twitching of the strings of a harp; hence, the sound of the harp,
a song, psalm.—Gk. yaddAew, to touch, twitch, twang; from base
PSAL, for SPAL. Perhaps allied to Skt. sphalaya (with @), to
strike, to touch. See Prellwitz. Der. psalm-ist, Levins, F. psalmiste
(Cot.), from L. psalmista, Late Gk. Yadrmiorys; psalm-ody, spelt
psalmodie in Minsheu, F. psalmodie (Cot.), from Late L. psalmédia,
from Gk. ~adpwdia, a singing to the harp, whichis from Yadp-, stem
of Yadpés, and 87, a song, ode (see Ode) ; psalmodi-c-al, psalmod-
ist. Also psaltery, q.v.

PSALTERY, a kind of stringed instrument. (F.—L.—Gk.)
In Shak, Cor. v. 4. 52. ME. sautrie, Chaucer, C. T. 3213.—OF.
psalterie, in use in the r2th cent.; see Littré, s. v. psaltérion, which is
the mod. F. form.=—L. psaltérium.=Gk. pwadrnjpiov, a stringed in-
strument.=— Gk. ~aArnp, a harper; formed from ywaa-, base of pad-
Aew, to harp; with suffix denoting the agent. See Psalm. Der.
psalter, ME. sauter, Hali Meidenhad, ed. Cockayne, p. 3, from OF.
psaltier, ‘a psaulter, book of psalms,’ Cot. from L. psaltérium, (1) a
psaltery, (2) a song sung to the psaltery, the Psalter.

PSEHUDONYM, a fictitious name. (F.—Gk.) Modern; not in
Todd’s Johnson. Borrowed from F. pseudonyme, used by Voltaire,
A.D. 1772 (Littré). —Gk. pevddyvpos, adj., called by a falsename. =
Gk. evdo-, for Yevdos, a falsehood (cf. Wevdns, false); and dvupa,
dvoya, a name. B. The Gk. Yedbos is allied to Yvdpds (base yud-),
false ; and to Wv0-os, a lie, orig. a whisper; cf. yvOiCew, to whisper.
y- For the Gk. évoya, see Name. Der. pseudonym-ous.

PSHAW, interjection of disdain. (E.) ‘A peevish fellow .
disturbs all. .. with pishes and pshaws;’ Spectator, no. 438 (1712).
An imitative word, like pish ; from the sound of blowing. Cf. also

ooh.

PSYCHICAL, pertaining to the soul. (L.—Gk.) Modern;
formed with suffix -al from psychic-us, the Latinized form of Gk.
Yuxitds, belonging to the soul or life.=Gk. yvx-7, the soul, life,
orig. breath.—Gk. ywvyx-ew, to blow; extended from the base yv-,
from a 4/SPEU, to blow. Der. psycho-logy, where the suffix -logy
=Gk. suffix -Aoyia, from Adyos, discourse, which from Aéyewv, to
speak; hence, psycholog-i-c-al, -al-ly; psycholog-ist. Also met-em-
psychosis, q.v.

PTARMIGAN, a species of grouse. (Gaelic.) ‘The ptarmigan
grous’ is mentioned in an E. translation of Buffon’s Nat. Hist.,
London, 1792, vol. ii, p. 48. Formerly termagant. ‘Heath-cocks,


_ capercailzies, and termagants ;’ Taylor the Water-Poet, The Penniless


PTERODACTYL


Pilgrimage, 1618 (ed. Hindley); cited in Palmer’s Folk-Etymology,
p. 386. Spelt termigant in 1617; Newton, Dict. of Birds, p. 392.
The singular spelling ptarmigan, with a needless initial p, appears in
Littré’s Dict. Gael. tarmachan, ‘the bird ptarmigan;’ Irish ¢ar-
mochan, ‘ the bird called the termagant.’ I do not know the sense
of the word; the Gael. verb tarmaich means ‘to originate, be the
source of, gather, collect, dwell, settle, produce, beget.’ Cf. Olrish
tor-mag-im, | increase; cognate with L. mag-nus, great.

PTERODACTYL, an extinct reptile. (Gk.) Scientific. Coined
from Gk. mrepé-v, a wing; and dé«TvAos, a finger, a digit ; from the
long digit which helped to spread the wing. Gk. rrepdv is from mr-,
weak grade of 4/PET, to fly ; and see Dactyl.

PUBERTY, the age of full development, early manhood. (F.—
L.) Spelt pubertie in Minshen, ed. 1627.—F. puberté, ‘ youth,’ Cot.
= L. pubertatem, acc. of piibertas, the age of maturity. —L. pubes, the
signs of manhood, hair. . Allied to pa-pus, a boy, pu-pa, a girl;
from 4/PEU, to beget; see Puppet, Pupil. Der. pub-esc-ent,
arriving at puberty, from pibescent-, pres. part. of pubescere, inceptive
verb formed from sb. piib-es; pubescence. Cf. puerile.

PUBLIC, belonging to the people, general, common to all.
(F.—L.)  ‘ Publike toke his [its] begynnyng of people ;’ Sir T.
Elyot, The Governour, b. i. c. 1. § 2. And in Palsgrave. =MF.
public, masc., publique, fem., ¢ publick,’ Cot.—L. publicus, public;
OLat. poublicos, poplicos (in inscriptions). Formed from populus,
people; see People. Der. public-ly, public-house, public-ist, one
skilled in public law; public-i-ty, a modern word, from F. publicité,
coined as if from a L. acc. *publicitatem. And see public-an, public-
at-ion, publish. :

PUBLICAN, atax-gatherer ; inn-keeper. (L.) ME. publican,
‘Ormulum, 10147 ; spelt pupplican in Wyclif, Luke, iii. 12, where it
is used to translate L. publicdnus, with the sense of tax-gatherer.
[The sense of ‘inn-keeper’ is modern.]=—L. publicanus, a farmer of
the public revenue, from publicanus, adj., belonging to the public
revenue. Extended from publicus, public; see Public.

PUBLICATION, a publishing, that which is published. (F.
—L.) In Shak. Troil. i. 3. 326.—F. publication, ‘a publication,’
Cot.=—L. publicatiénem, acc. of publicitio.—L. publicare, to make
public. —L. publicus, public; see Public.

PUBLISH, to make public. (F.—L.) ME. publischen, pup-
lischen. He was riz3tful, and wolde not puplische hir;? Wyclif,
Matt. i. 19. Also publishen, Chaucer, C. T. 8291 (E415). This is
a new formation, conformed to other E. verbs in -isk, which are
usually formed from F. verbs in -ir making the pres. part. in -issant.
It is founded on F. publier, ‘to publish,’ Cot. —L. publicdre, to make
public. —L. publicus, public. See Public. Der. publish-er.

PUCEH, the name of a colour. (F.—L.) ‘ Puce, of a dark brown
colour;’ Todd’s Johnson.—F. puce, a flea; couleur puce, puce-
coloured; Hamilton. Thus it is lit. ‘flea-coloured.? The older
spelling of puce was pulce (Cotgrave).—L. piilicem, acc. of piilex,
a flea.4+-Gk. yvdda (=vA-ja), a flea. @ Todd wrongly says
that puce is the same as puke, an old word occurring in Shak. in
puke-stocking, 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 78. Todd also cites ‘Cloths...
puke, brown-blue, blacks’ from Stat. 5 and 6 Edw. VI, c. vi.
‘ Blackes, pukes, or other sad colours; ? Hakluyt, Voy. i. 357. ‘That
same gowne of puke ;’ Paston Letters, iii. 153. The form puke is
difficult to explain; the Picard and Walloon form of puce is puche.
See Puke.

PUCK, a goblin, mischievous sprite. (E.) In Shak. Mids. Nt.
Dr. ii. 1. 40. ME. pouke, P. Plowman, C. xvi. 164, on which
passage see my note. ft also appears in Richard Coer de Lion,
1, 566, in Weber, Met. Romances, ii, 25. AS. piica, a goblin; ‘lar-
bula, puca,’ OE. Glosses, ed. Napier, 23. 2; whence the dimin.
piel (Toller). Hence also were borrowed Irish puwea, an elf, sprite,
hobgoblin ; W. pwea, pwci, a hobgoblin.+Icel. puki, a wee devil, an
imp. See Pug.

PUCKER, to gather into folds, to wrinkle. (Scand.) ‘ Pucker, to
shrink up or lie uneven, as some clothes are apt to do;’ Phillips, ed.
1706. ‘Saccolare, to pucker, or gather, or cockle, as some stuffes do
being wet ;’ Florio, ed. 1598. ‘ He fell down; and not being able
to rise again, had his belly puckered together like a sachel, before the
chamberlain could come to help him;’ Junius, Sin Stigmatised
(1639), p. 19; in Todd’s Johnson. The allusion is here to the top
of a poke or bag, when drawn closely together by means of the
string ; cf. ‘to purse up the brows,’ from purse, sb., and Ital. saccolare
from sacco; and Norm. dial. pocher, to crease, to pucker, from
poche, a bag (Moisy). A frequentative form due to prov. E. pook,
poke, a bag; from Icel. poki, a bag. Cf. Norm. dial. pouque, a bag
(F. poche). See Poke (1). Der. pucker, sb.

PUDDING, an intestine filled with meat, a sausage; a soft kind
of meat, of flour, milk, eggs, &c. (E.) ME. pudding, P. Plowman,
B, xiii. 106; puding, as a gloss to tucetum, Wright’s Voc. p. 104


PUISSANT 483


(ab. 1200). The older sense was doubtless ‘bag,’ from a Teut.
base *pud-, to swell out, similar to *piz-, to swell out (see Pout).
Cf. AS. pud-uc, a wen (Toller); and see Poodle. Hence also
prov. E. puddle, short and fat, poddy, round. and stout in the belly,
pod, a large protuberant belly (Halliwell). Cf. also E. pad, pod ; see
Pad, Pod. B. The Low G. pudding has much the same sense
as E. pudding ; and is clearly related to Low G. pudde-wurst, a thick
black-pudding, and to puddig, thick, stumpy; Westphal. puddek,
a lump, a pudding. y. For the parallel base *put-, cf. Gael. put,
a buoy, an inflated skin; W. pwtog, a short round body; Corn.
pot, a bag, a pudding; all borrowed from Teutonic. The Irish
putog, Gael. putag, a pudding, are borrowed from E. pudding.

PUDDLE (1), a small pool of muddy water. (E.) ME. podel,
Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 54,1. 5. Spelt poddell in Pals-
grave. Dimin., with E. suffix -el, from AS. pudd, a ditch, a furrow
(Toller). Der. puddle (2).

PUDDLE (2), to make muddy; to make thick or close with
clay, so as to render impervious to water; to work iron. (E.) Shak.
has puddle, to make muddy or thick, Com. Err. v. 173; Oth. iii. 4.
143. Hence the various technical uses. From Puddle (1). Der.
puddl-er, puddl-ing.

PUERILEBE, childish. (F.—L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706. [Thesb.
puerility is in much earlier use, occurring in Minsheu, ed. 1627. ]
=—MF. pueril, omitted by Cotgrave, but in use in the 16th cent.
(Littré) ; mod. F. puéril.—L. puerilis, boyish.=L. puer, a boy, lit.
‘ one begotten.’ —4/PEU, to beget; cf. Skt. pota-, the young of any
animal, putra-,ason. Der. pueril-i-ty, from F. puerilité, ‘ puerility,’
Cot. So also puer-peral, relating to child-birth, from L. puerpera,
fem. adj., child-bearing; from puer-, stem of puer,a child, and parere,
to bear, produce, for which see Parent.

PUFF, to blow. (E.) ME. puffen, Ancren Riwle, p. 272, 1.1. Not
found in AS., but the vb. pyffaz, to puff, blow away (in Napier’s
Glosses) suggests a sb. *puf; ofimitative origin. Cf. G. puffen, to puff,
pop, strike, Dan. puffe, to pop, Swed. puffa, to crack, to push; also
W. puff, a puff,a sharp blast, pwfio, to come in puffs (borrowed
from E.). Also G. puff, a puff; puff! interjection, &c. Der. puff-er,
puff-er-y, puff-9, puff-i-ly, puff-i-ness. Also puff-in, q.v-

PUFFIN, the name of a bird. (E.) ‘ Puffin, afowle so called ;’
Minsheu, ed. 1627. ‘ Puffin, a sort of coot or sea-gull, a bird sup-
posed to be so called from its round belly, as it were swelling and
puffing out ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. And in Skelton, Phylyp Sparowe,
454. (The F. puffin is borrowed from E.) Puffin Island, near
Anglesea, abounds with these birds, or formerly did so; but the
W. name for the bird is gal. The reason assigned by Phillips is
prob. the right one; Webster thinks it is named from its peculiar
swelling beak, which somewhat resembles that of the parrot. The
suffix is apparently diminutival, answering to E. -e in kitt-en.

PUG, a monkey, small kind of dog. (E.) The orig. sense is
‘imp’ or ‘little demon,’ as in Butler, Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 3, 1. 635,
and in Ben Jonson’s play The Devil is an Ass, in which ‘ Pug, the
lesser devil,’ is one of the characters. A weakened form of Puck,


q.v. Cf. Dan. dial. puge, a ‘puck,’ sprite; and (perhaps) Dan. dial.
pugge,atoad. ‘A pug-dog is a dog witha short monkey-like face ;’
Wedgwood.


PUGGRY, PUGGERY, a scarf round the hat. (Hind.) From
Hind. pagy?, a turban (Forbes).

PUGILISM, the art of boxing. (L.) Pugilism and pugilist are
late words, added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. Coined from L. pugil,
a boxer. Allied to L. pig-nus, Gk. my-un, the fist. And see
pugnacious.

PUGNACIOUS, combative, fond of fighting. (L.) Rather
alate word. R. quotes ‘a furious, pugnacious pope as Julius II,’
from. Barrow, On the Pope’s Supremacy. [The sb. pugnacity is
in Bacon, Ady. of Learning, book II. viii. 4.] A coined word (with
suffix -ous=L, -dsus) from L. pugndci-, decl. stem of pugnax, com-
bative.=L. pugna-re, to fight, allied to pugnus, the fist; and Gk.
mvy-vn, the fist; mg, adv., with the fist. Der. pugnacious-ly; also
pugnacity, from L. acc. pugnacitatem. And see ex-pugn, im-pugn,
op-pugn, re-pugn-ant, pug-il-ist, poni-ard,

PUISNE,, inferior in rank, applied to certain judges in England,
(F.—L.) Alawterm. ‘ Puisne or punie, vsed in our common law-
bookes.. for the younger ; as in Oxford and Cambridge they call
Junior and Senior, so at Innes of Court they say Puisne and Ancient;
Minsheu, ed. 1627. The same'word as Puny, q.v.

PUISSANT, powerful, strong. (F.—L.) In Skelton, ed. Dyce,
i. 203, 1. 3 from bottom.. ‘ This is so pwyssant an enemy to nature ;’
Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iii. c. 12. =F. puissant, ‘ puissant,
mighty,’ Cot. Cf. Ital. possente, powerful.. B. The Ital. form
suggests that the F. word is formed froma barbarous L. type *possiens,
for *possens (stem possent-), substituted for the true form pofens,
powerful; see Potent. y. This barbarism was due to confusion

pil


PUKE


between the pres. part. potens and the infin. posse, to be able, have
power; see Possible. Der. puissant-ly ; puissance, Lydgate, Minor
Poems, p. 25, from F. puissance, power. Doublet, potent.

PUKE (1), to vomit. (E.?) In Shak. As You Like It, ii. 7. 144.
Prov. E. puke, E.D.D. Prob. imitative; and partly suggested by
the verb ¢o spew, with the same meaning. Cf. G. spucken, to spit.
See Spew, Spit; and cf. OF. esput, a spitting, L. spitare, to
spit.

PUKE (2), the name of a colour; obsolete. (MDu.) Explained
by Baret as a colour between russet and black. ‘ Pewke, a colour,
pers;’ Palsgrave. See Nares and Halliwell; and cf. Puce (above),
from which it certainly differs. It prob. referred at first to the
quality of the cloth ; see Privy Expenses of Eliz. of York, pp. 120,
254.—MDu. puijck, ‘wollen cloath, Hexham; puyck, pannus
laneus, Kilian ; Du. puik, choice, excellent.

PULE, to chirp as a bird, whine like an infant, whimper. (F.)
In Shak. Cor. iv. 2. 52; Romeo, iii. 5. 185.—F. piauler, ‘to
peep, or cheep, as a young bird; also, to pule or howle, as a young
whelp;”’ Cot. In Gascon, pioula. Cf. Ital. pigolare, to chirp,
moan, complain. These are imitative words; cf. L. pipilare, to chirp,
pipare, to chirp.

PULL, to draw, try to draw forcibly, to pluck. (E.) ME. pullen,
P. Plowman, B. xvi. 73; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 68. ‘And
let him there-in pudle’ =and caused him Zo be thrust into it ; lit. and
caused (men) to ¢hrust him into it; Legends of the Holy Rood, ed.
Morris, p. 60. Prob. an E. word; the AS. pullian and the pp.
Gpullod, given in Somner’s Dict., are correct forms; d&pzllud is in
AS. Leechdoms, i. 362, 1. ro. B. We find, also, Low G. pulen,
to pick, pinch, pluck, pull, tear, which is the same word; Brem.
Worterb. iii. 372; Dan. dial, pudle, to pull. Cf. also Low G. pullen,
to drink in gulps (E. to ¢ake a pull), Der. pull, sb., Chaucer, Parl.
of Fowls, l. 164.

PULLET, a young hen. (F.—L.) ME. folete (with one 2),
P. Plowman, B. vi. 282.—OF. jolete (13th cent., Littré), later
poulette, ‘a young hen,’ Cot. Fem. form of F. powlet, a chicken,
dimin. of pouwle, a hen.=Late L. pulla, a hen; fem. of padlus, a
young animal, cognate with E. Foal, q.v. Doublet, poult, q.v.

PULLEY, a wheel tuming on an axis, over which a cord is
passed for raising weights. (F.—L.—Gk.?) Spelt pulley in
Minsheu, ed. 1627; polley in Caxton, tr. of Reynard the Fox, ed.
Arber, p. 96, 1. 6 from bottom. ([But, in the Prompt. Parv., we
have the form foleyne; and in Chaucer, C. T. 10498 (F 184), we
find polyué (polivé), riming with dryué (drive). B. The last form is
difficult to explain ; but we may derive poleyne from F. poulain, ‘a
fole, or colt, also the rope wherewith wine is let down into a seller,
a pully-rope,’ Cot. ‘Par le poulain on descend le vin en cave ;’
Rabelais, Garg. i. 5 (Littré).— Late L. pullanum, acc. of pullinus, a
colt.=L. pullus, a young animal; see Pullet (above). Cf. Late L.
polanus, a pulley or pulley-rope. y. The transference of sense
causes no difficulty, as the words for ‘ horse’ or ‘goat’ are applied
in other cases to contrivances for the exertion of force or bearing a
strain; thus MF. powtre, a filly, also means ‘a beam’ (Cot.) ; and F.
chévre, a goat, also means a kind of crane. The Late L. words for
‘colt’ are remarkably numerous, including (besides pullanus) the
forms pulinus, pullenus, pulletrum, polassus, poledrus, polenus, poletus ;
also poleria, polina, a filly.] 8. But the mod. E. pulley is from F,
poulie,‘apulley;’ Cot. OF. poulie, polie, pollye, Supp. to Godefroy ;
cf. Late L. poledia, a crane, Ital. puleggia,a pulley. Perhaps from
Late L. *pélidia, pl. of *pdlidium, representing Late Gk. *mwAidior,
a little colt, dimin. of Gk. m@Aos, a colt. Cf. OF. poulier, a pulley,
answering to Late Gk. mwAdpioy, a little colt. 4 Diez derives
E. pulley from F. poulie, and then, conversely, F. poulie from E.
pull; which is very unlikely. G. Paris (Romania, July, 1898, p. 486)
suggests Gk. *roAidiov, dimin,. of méAos, a pivot, axis; see Pole (2).

PULMONARY, affecting the lungs. (L.) Blount, Gloss., ed.
1674, has pulmonarious, diseased in the lungs. Englished from L.
pulmonarius, belonging to the lungs, diseased in the lungs. =L,
pulmon-, stem of pulmo,alung. . The L. pulmo is cognate with
Gk. mAevyov, more commonly mvedpwy, a lung; the change to the
latter form being due to association with mvev-ya, breath, from
mvéev (for mvéFev), to blow. But pulmo (for *plu-mo?) and Gk.
mrevpov are from a root PLEU; whence also Lith. plauczei, pl. the
lungs (Prellwitz). Der. pulmon-i-c, from L. pulméni-, decl. stem of

ulmo.

PULP, the soft fleshy part of bodies, any soft mass. (F.—L.)
‘The pulpe or pith of plants ;’ Minsheu.—F. pulpe, ‘the pulp or pith
of plants ;’ Cot.—L. pulpa, the fleshy portion of animal bodies, pulp
of fruit, pith of wood. Der. pulp-y, pulp-i-ness; pulp-ous, pulp-
OUS-7€SS,.

PULPIT, a platform for speaking from. (F.—L.) ME. pulpit,
P. Plowman’s Crede, ed. Skeat, 1. 661; pulpet, Chaucer, C. T. 12325


4.34


PUN


(C 391).—OF. pulpite, ‘a pulpit,’ Cot.=L. pulpitum, a scaffold,
latform, esp. a stage for actors.

PULSATE, to throb. (L.) A modern word, directly from L.
pulsatus, pp. of pulsére, to beat. It is no doubt due to the use of the
sb. pulsation, in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, from F. pulsation; from
L. pulsatidnem, acc. of pulsatio, a beating ; from the same verb.
B. The orig. sense of pulsdre was simply ‘to beat;’ it isa frequenta-
tive verb, formed from puls-us, pp. of pellere, to drive. L. fello is
for *pel-no; cf. Gk. mid-va-pa, ‘I draw near quickly ;’ Brugmann,
ii. § 612. Der. pulsat-ion, as above; pulsat-ive, pulsat-or-y; pulse
(1), q.v- From the L. pellere we have also ap-peal, peal, com-pel,
dis-pel, ex-pel, im-pel, inter-pell-at-ion, pro-pel, im-pulse, re-peal, re-
pel, re-pulse ; and see pelt (1), pursy, pulse (1), push.

PULSE (1), a throb, vibration. (F.—L.) Puls in Palsgrave.
ME. pous (in which the / is dropped), P. Plowman, B. xvii. 66.=—F.
pouls, ‘the pulse,’ Cot.—L. pulsum, acc. of pulsus, a beating; also
the beating of the pulse, a pulse.— L. pulsus, pp. of pellere, to drive;
see Pulsate.

PULSE (2), grain or seed of beans, pease, &c. (L.) ME. puis.
‘ All maner fuls is goode, the fitche outetake’ =every kind of pulse
is good, except the vetch; Palladius on Husbandry, b.i. 1. 723. —L.
puls, a thick pap or pottage made of meal, pulse, &c., the primitive
food of the Romans before they became acquainted with bread
(White). Cf. Gk. 7éAros, porridge. 4 Perhaps through the inter-
mediate OF. pols, pous (Norm. dial. pouls), porridge; cf. Somersets.
pulse, pottage. Der. poultice, q.v.

PULVERISE, to pound to dust. (F.—L.) ‘To pulverate or to
pulverize, to beate into dust;” Minsheu, ed. 1627.—MF. pulverizer,
‘to pulverize,’ Cot. — Late L. puluerizare, to pulverise ; L. puluerare,
to scatter dust, also to pulverise.=L. puluer-, decl. base of puluis,
dust. The suffix -ise answers to the usual F. -iser (occasional -¢zer),
Late L. -izare, imitated from Gk. -.¢ev. B. L. puluis is allied to
L. pollis, pollen, fine meal; Gk. méAn, meal, dust. See Powder.

PUMA, a large carnivorous animal. (Peruvian.) ‘ The American
animal, which the natives of Peru call puma, and to which the
Europeans have given the denomination of lion, has no mane ;’ tr. of
Buffon’s Nat. Hist., London, 1792.— Peruvian puma.

PUMICE, a hard, spongy, volcanic mineral. (F.—L.) ME.
pomeys, pomyce, Prompt. Parv. [AS. pumic-stin, pumice-stone; Voc.
148. 3.] But the ME. pomyce is from OF. pomis (Godefroy). =—L.
pumicem, acc. of piumex, pumice. B. So named from its light,
spongy nature, resembling sea-foam. From an Idg. base *spozm-,
whence also AS. fam, foam; see Spume. Doublet, pounce (2).

PUMMEL, the same as Pommel, q. v.

PUMP (1), a machine for raising water. (F.—Teut.) ME.
pumpe, Prompt. Parv.=F. pompe, ‘a pump;’ Cot. Of Teut. origin.
— Low G. pumpe, a pump; of which a fuller form is plumpe, which is
likewise an imitative form. Cf. prov. G. plumpen, to pump. The
Low G. plumpen also means to plump, to fall plump, to move suddenly
but clumsily; so that the sense of ‘ pumping’ arose from the plunging
action of the piston or, as it is sometimes called, the plunger, esp.
when made solid, as in the force-pump. Allied to Plump (3), of
imitative origin. Cf. prov. E. plump, a pump, plumpy, to pump
(Cornwall); also Du. pomp, Swed. pump, Dan. pumpe, and even
Russ. pompa, a pump; all borrowed words from Teutonic. Also
the imitative forms Span. and Port. bomba,a pump, a bomb ; and
Hamburg piimpel, a piston (Richey). Der. pump, verb; spelt pumpe
in Palsgrave.

PUMP (2), a thin-soled shoe. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Mids.
Nt. Dr. iv. 2. 37; explained by Schmidt to mean ‘a light shoe, often.
worn with ribbons formed into the shape of flowers.’ So called
because worn for ‘pomp’ or ornament, by persons in full dress. =F.
pompe, ‘ pomp, state, solemnity, magnificence, ostentation ; & pied de
plomb et de pompe, with a slow and stately gate’ [gait]; Cot. The
use of this MF. proverb connects the word particularly with the foot
and its ornament. Cf. Low G. pump, pomp; whence pump-boxe,
old-fashioned large stockings (Bremen). See further under Pomp.

PUMPION, PUMPKIN, a kind of gourd. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Spelt pumkin in W. Dampier, A New Voyage (1699), i. 203. The
form pumpkin is a corruption from the older word pompon or pumpion,
in which the suffix, not being understood, has been replaced by the
E. dimin. suffix -kin. Pumpion is in Shak. Merry Wives, iii. 3. 43.
Better pompon, as in Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xix. c. 5. = MF. pompon,
‘a pumpion, or melon;’ Cot. [Ital. popone (Florio).] Formed,.
with inserted m, from L. pepdnem, acc. of pepo, a large melon,
pumpkin. Gk. 7énwy, a kind of melon, not eaten till quite ripe. =
Gk. mémwy, cooked by the sun, ripe, mellow; from the base mer-,
seen in rénrev, to cook; see Cook, and Pip (2).

PUN, to play upon words. (E.) ‘A corporation of dull punning
drolls ;? Dryden, Art of Poetry, 1. 358. The older sense of pun was.
to pound, to beat; hence to pun is to pound words, to beat them


PUNCH


into new senses, to hammer at forced similes. ‘He would pun thee
into shivers with his fist;? Shak. Troil. ii. 1. 42; and see Nares.
Pun is a dialect form of pound, to bruise; see Pound (3); cf.
Swed. dial. punna, to slap one playfully; pun, a playful slap on
the back (Rietz). Der. pun, sb., Spectator, no. 61; punn-ing ; pun-
ster, Guardian, no. 29, a coined word, like ¢rick-ster.

PUNCH (1), to pierce or perforate with a sharp instrument.
(F.—L.) ‘Punch, or Punching-iron, a shoemaker’s tool to make
holes with ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. In Shak. Rich. III, v. 3. 125.
ME. punchen, to prick; see Prompt. Parv. This verb seems to have
been coined from the older sb. punchion or punchon, spelt punchon in
Prompt. Pary., denoting the kind of awl used for punching or
perforating ; shortened to punche, spelt ponche, Wills and Inyent., i.
365 (1572). See further under Puncheon (1). Der. punch, a
kind of awl, as above. ¢> Distinct from punch (2), q. v.

PUNCH (2), to beat, bruise. (F.—L.) In the phrase ‘to punch
one’s head,’ the word is not the same as punch (1), but is a mere ab-
breviation of punish. In fact, ‘to punish a man about the head’ has
still the same meaning. This is clearly shown by the entries in the
Prompt. Parv., p. 416. ‘Punchyn, or chastysyn, punysshen, Punio,
castigo ;’ and again, ‘ Punchynge, punysshinge, Punicio.’ So also:
‘ Punchyth me, Lorde,’ i.e. punish me; Coy. Myst., p. 75. See
Punish. 4 For the suppression of the 7 in punish, cf. ME. pulshen,
to polish, P. Plowman, A. v. 257, foot-notes ; and vanshen, to vanish,
id. C. xv, 217. In the present instance, punchen was readily sug-
gested by the like-sounding word bunchen, with much the same
sense. Hence the entry: ‘ Punchyn, or bunchyn, Trudo, tundo;’
Prompt. Parv.

PUNCH (3), a beverage composed of spirit, water, lemon-juice,
sugar, and spice. (Hindi—Skt.) ‘Punch, a strong drink made of
brandy, water, lime-juice, sugar, spice, &c.;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.
Wedgwood cites two most interesting quotations. ‘At Nerule is
made the best arrack or Nepo da Goa, with which the English on
this coast make that enervating liquor called pounche (which is
Hindostan for five) from five ingredients ;’ Fryer, New Account of
East India and Persia, 1697. ‘Or to drink palepuntz (at Goa) which
is a kind of drink consisting of aqua-vitee, rose-water, juice of citrons,
and sugar ;’ Olearius, Travels to the Grand Duke of Muscovy and
Persia, 1669. It was introduced from India, and apparently by the
way of Goa; and is named from consisting of five ingredients. =
Hindi panch, five ; Bate’s Dict., 1875, p. 394; cf. Hindustani panj. =
Skt. panchan, five, cognate with E. five; see Five. @ Perhaps it is
interesting to observe that, whereas we used to speak of four elements,
the number of elements in Sanskrit is jive; see Benfey, p. 658, col. 2,
1.5; cf. Skt. pavichatva-, the five elements; pavichaka-, consisting of
five. It is, at any rate, necessary to add that the Hindi and Skt.
short a is pronounced like E. « in mud or punch; hence the E..spell-
ing. See Punch in Yule.

PUNCH (4), a short, hump-backed fellow in a puppet-show.
(Ital.—L.) In this sense, Punch is a contraction of Punchinello. In
the Spectator, no. 14, the puppet is first called Punchinello, and after-
wards Punch. ‘ Punch, or Punchinello, a fellow of a short and thick
size, a fool in a play, a stage-puppet ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. The pl.
Punchinellos occurs twice in Butler, Sat. on our Imitation of the
French, ll. 26, 99; it occurs as early as A.D. 1666 (Nares). B.
Punchinello is a corruption of Ital. pulcinello, by the change of J to x
(cf. Palermo from L. Panormus) ; and the E. sound of chi corresponds
to Ital. ci. Pulcinello was a character in Neapolitan comedy repre-
senting a foolish peasant who utters droll truths (Scheler) ; Baretti
and Meadows only give the fem. pulcinella, ‘ punch, buffoon of a
puppet-show.’ These are dimin. forms of Ital. pulcino, ‘a yoong
chicken,’ Florio; fem. pulcina. The latter form is from the same
source (with a different suffix) as Ital. pulcella, a girl, maiden
(®. pucelle), and all the words are from L. pullus, the young of any
animal, whence also F. poule (from Late L. pulla), a young hen.
Thus the lit. sense of Ital. pulcinello is ‘little chicken.’ See further
under Pullet. 4 Perhaps the E. form is due to confusion with
prov. E. punch, short, fat, punchy, pot-bellied (Halliwell) ; words
which are prob. closely connected with Bunch, q.v. ‘Did hear
them call their fat child Punch,...a word of common use for all
that is thick and short;’ Pepys’ Diary, Apr. 30, 1669. In the
phrase ‘ Punch and Judy,’ Fudy is the usual abbreviation from Fudith,
once common as a female name.

PUNCHEON (1), a steel tool for stamping or perforating; a
punch. (ONorth F.—L.) Our mod. sb. punch is a familiar contrac-
tion of puncheon, which occurs rather early. ME. punchon, Prompt.
Parv. Punsoune, a dagger, occurs in Barbour’s Bruce, i. 545; see my
note on the line. ONorth-F. ponchon (Supp. to Godefroy, s.v.
poingon), also poinchon (as in mod. Norman dial.) ; corresponding to
OF. poingon, MF. poinson, ‘a bodkin, also a puncheon, also a stamp,
mark, print, or seale;’ Cot. Mod. F. poingon; cf. Gascon paunchoun


PUNK 485,


(Moncaut), Prov. pounchoun (Mistral), Span. punzon, a punch; Ital.
punzone, ‘a bodkin, or any sharp pointed thing, also a piece [ wine-
vessel], a barell,’ Florio. —L. punctidnem, acc. of punctio, a pricking,
puncture; Diez remarks that this sb., which in L. is feminine,
changes its gender to masc. in F., &c., whilst changing its sense
from ‘pricking’ to the concrete ‘pricking-instrument.’ Allied to
punctus, pp. of pungere, to prick; see Pungent. Der. punch (1).
And see below.

PUNCHEOW (2), a cask, a liquid measure of 84 gallons.
(ONorth-F.—L.) ‘Butte, pipe, puncheon, whole barrell, halfe
barrell, firken, or other caske ;’ Hakluyt’s Voyages, vol. i. p. 273. —_
ONorth-F. ponchon (see Norm, dial. poinchon in Moisy, OF . poingon
in Supp. to Godefroy); MF. poinson, ‘a wine-vessell;’ Cot. B. It
is not certain that OF. poingon, MF. poinson, a bodkin, and poinson,
a cask, are the same word. It is gen. supposed that they are quite
distinct, owing to the wide difference in sense. But I am inclined to
think that F. poingon remains the same word in all its senses, the
wine-vessel being so named from the ‘stamp, mark, print, or seale’
upon it, the stamp being produced by a puncheon or stamping-
instrument. That is, I regard Puncheon (2) as identical with
Puncheon (1). Cf. MItal. punzone, ‘a bodkin, barell, hogshead
for wine, goldsmith’s pouncer, little stamp ;” Florio.

PUNCHINELLO, the same as Punch (4), q.v.

PUNCTATE, PUNCTATED, punctured. (L.) A botanical
term. Coined with suffix -ate (=L. -dtus) from L. punct-um, a point,
dot. See Puncture, Pungent.

PUNCTILIO, a nice point in behaviour. (Span.—L.) ‘ Your
courtier practic, is he that is yet in his path, his course, his way, and
hath not touched the punctilio or point of his hopes;’ Ben Jonson,
Cynthia’s Revels, Act ii. sc. 1 (Amorphus). Rather from Span.
puntillo, a nice point of honour, than from the equivalent Ital.
puntiglio. In fact, the word is spelt punctillo in Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674. Thec is an E. insertion, due to confusion with punctuate, &c.
The i represents the sound of the Span. JJ. B. Span. puntillo is a
dimin. of punto, a point.L. punctum, a point; see Point. Der.
punctili-ous, -ly, -ness.

PUNCTUAL, exact in observing appointed times. (F.—L.)
Minsheu, ed. 1627, has punctuall and the sb. punctualitie. See Trench,
Select Glossary.—F. ponctuel, ‘ punctuall,’ Cot. = Late L. *punctualis,
not recorded ; but the adv. punctudliter, exactly, occurs A.D. 14403
Ducange. = L. punctu-, for punctum, a point; with suffix -alis. (Per-
haps punctalis, from the stem punct-, would have been more correct.)
See Point. Der. punctual-ly, punctual-i-ty.

PUNCTUATEH, to divide sentences by marks. (L.) A
modern word; added by Todd to Johnson’s Dict. Suggested by
F. punctuer, ‘to point,. . mark, or distinguish by points;’ Cot.=
Late L. punctuare, to determine, define. Formed from L. punctu-,
for punctum, a point; see Point. (Perhaps punctate, from the stem
punct-, would have been a more correct form.) Der. punctuat-ion,
from F. punctuation, ‘a pointing ;’ Cot.

PUNCTURE, a prick, small hole made with a sharp point.
(L.) ‘ Wounds and punctures ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii.
c. 3. § 28. ME. puncture, Lanfrank, Science of Cirurgie, p. 16, 1. 9.
=—L. puncttira, a prick, puncture. Allied to punctus, pp. of pungere,
to prick; see Pungent, Point. Der. puncture, verb.

PUNDIT, a learned man. (Skt.) Not in Todd’s Johnson. = Skt.
pandita- (with cerebral m and d), adj., learned; sb. a wise man,
scholar. =Skt. punzd, to heap up or together. q@ The E. ~ repre-
sents Skt. short a, as in Punch (3).

PUNGENT, acrid to taste or smell, keen, sarcastic. (L.) In
Phillips, ed. 1706. Pungency occurs earlier, in Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674.—L. pungent-, stem of pres. part. of pungere, to prick, pt. t.
pu-pug-i, pp. punctus ; from the base PEUG, to prick. See Point.
Der. pungent-ly, pungenc-y. From the L. pungere we also have
point, with its derivatives; also punct-ate, q. v., punct-ilio, q. V.,
punct-u-al, q.v., punct-u-ate, q.v., punct-ure, q.v. Also com-punct-
ion, ex-punge, pounce (1), punch (1), puncheon (1). Doublet, poignant.

PUNISH, to chasten, chastise. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. punischen,
P. Plowman, B. iii. 78.—F. puniss-, stem of pres. part. of punir, to
punish. —L. piinire, to punish, exact a penalty; OLat. poenire.=L.
poena, a penalty.—Gk. mown, a penalty; whence E, Pain, q. v.
Der. punish-able, from F. punissable, ‘ punishable,’ Cot.; punish-
ment, L. L. L. iv. 3. 63, 2 coined word, substituted for ME. punicton
(spelt punyssyon in Berners, tr. of Froissart, v., ii. c. 39), which is
from F, punition, ‘a punishment,’ Cot., from L. acc. punitionem.
Also punish-er ; and (from L. piinire) im-punity. And see penance,
penitence, punch (2). oh far

PUNK, a prostitute. (Low G,) In Shak. Merry Wives, ii. 2. 141.
Cotgrave explains F. gouge as ‘ a souldier’s pug, or punk.’ Evidently
a slang word, and probably imported by soldiers from the Low


Countries. According to the Bremen Worterbuch, it may have


486 PUNKAH


come (ultimately) from Bremen ; for Punken-diek was the name of
a dike, with houses near it on the river Weser, in the eastern suburb
of Bremen, which was formerly notorious. for evil-livers ; whence
probably the E. word punk.. (According to Schmeller, the Bavarian
word punken meant a kind of cabbage.)

PUNKAH, a large fan. (Hind.—Skt.) Hind. pankha, a fan;
allied to pankh, a wing, feather; Forbes. =Skt.paksha-,a wing. Cf.
Pers. pankan, ‘a sieve, a fan;’ Rich. Dict. p. 338.

PUNT (1), a ferry-boat, a flat-bottomed boat. (L.—C.) ‘ Ulysses
in a punt, or small bottom;’ Holland’s Pliny, bk. 35, ch. x. p. 537 a.
AS. punt; ‘Pontonium, punt;’ Voc. 166. 2; ‘Caudex, punt ;’ Voc.
181. 31. (Caudex means a boat hollowed out of a tree.) Abbre-
viated from L. ponto, a punt, Czesar, Bellum Civile, iii. 29; also,
a pontoon. Of Celtic origin ; Celt. type *gontos ; Stokes-Fick, p. 62.
Given by Czesar as a Gaulish word.

PUNT (2), to play at the game of cards called basset. (F.—
Span.—L.) ‘I would punt no more;’ Pope, The Basset-table,
1. 68. ‘Punter, a term used at the game of cards called
basset ;” Phillips, ed. 1706.—F. ponte, ‘a punter; a punt;’ also
ponter, ‘to punt;’ Hamilton. Hatzfeld gives F. ponte as a term in
the game of ombre, meaning an ace of hearts or diamonds. = Span.
punto, a point, also, a pip at cards.—L. punctum, a point; see
Point. @ Perhaps immediately from Spanish.

PUNY, small, feeble, inferior in size or strength. (F.—L.) In
Shak. Rich. II, iii. 2. 86 ; also puisny, As You Like It, iii. 4. 46. And
see Trench, Select Glossary.=AF. puné, Year-books of Edw. I, i.
83; spelt puisne, iii. 317; MF. puisné, ‘puny, younger, born after,’
Cot. Mod. F. puiné, younger. Thus the lit. sense is ‘ born after;’
hence, younger, junior, inferior.—L. post natus, born after. See
Posterior and Natal. Doublet, puisne, q.v.

PUPA, a chrysalis. (L.) A scientific term.—L. pipa, a girl,
doll, puppet ; hence, the sense of undeveloped insect. Fem. of pipus,
a boy, child. Allied to pu-tus, pu-er, a boy; from 4/PEU, to beget;
see Puerile. Der. pup-il, pupp-et, pupp-y.

PUPIO (1), a scholar, a ward. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. ii.
8. 7.—MF. pupile, a pupill, ward;’ Cot. Mod. F. pupille. Pro-
perly a masc. sb.—L. pipillum, acc. of pipillus, an orphan-boy,
orphan, a ward; dimin. from pipus, a boy; see Pupa. Der.
pupil-age, Spenser, Verses to Lord Grey, 1. 2; pupill-ar-y, from F.
pupilaire, ‘ pupillary,’ Cot., L. pupillaris, belonging to a pupil. Also
pupil (2).

PUPIL (2), the central spot of the eye. (F.—L.) Spelt pupill
in Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 868.—F. pupille, the pupil (Hatzfeld).
A fem. sb.; which distinguishes it from the word above.=L.
pupilla, a little girl; also, the apple of the eye, or pupil. Fem. of
piupillus ; see Pupil (1). @ The name seems to be due to the
small images seen in the pupil; cf. the OE. phrase ‘to look babies
in the eyes.’

PUPPET, a small doll, little figure. (F.-L.) ME. jpopet,
King Alisaunder, 1. 335; Chaucer, C. T. 13631 (B 1891).—OF.
poupette, Godefroy; MF. poupette, ‘a little baby, puppet ;’ Cot.
Dimin. from L. puppa, a doll; variant of pupa; see Pupa.

PUPPY, (1) a whelp; (2) a dandy. (F,—L.) 1. In Shak.

Oth. i. 3. 341; a puppy-dog, K. John, ii. 460. Here (as in lev-y,
jur-y) the final -y answers to F. -ée.—F. poupée, ‘a baby, a puppet ;’
Cot. Here, by ‘ baby,’ Cotgrave means a doll; but it is clear that
in E. the word was made to mean a lap-dog; cf. ‘smale ladies
popis;’ Book of St. Alban’s, fol. f 4,back. The F. poupée (as if
from L.*puppata) is due to L. pipa; see Puppet. 2. In the sense
of ‘dandy,’ puppy occurs in the Guardian (Todd’s Johnson). ‘This
is the same word, used in contempt, as in Henry VIII, v. 4. 30;
perhaps affected by the MF. poupin or popin, ‘spruce, neat, trimme,
fine,’ Cot. Cf. se popiner, ‘to trimme or trick up himself,’ id. ;
mod. F. faire le poupin, to play the fop. This word answers to
a Late L. *puppinus (not found), and is a derivative from L. pipus,
a boy. Der. puppy-ism. Also pup, which is an abbreviation for
puppy ; whence pup, verb, formerly puppy, as in Holland, tr. of Pliny,
b. Xxx. c, I4.
‘PUR-., prefix. (F.—L.). E. pur- answers to OF. pur-, F. pour-,
prefix, which is the F. prep. pour, for, a curious variation of L. pré,
for. Thus pur- and pro- are equivalent ; and words like purvey and
provide are mere doublets. @ In the word pur-blind, the prefix
has a different value. ,

PURBLIND, nearly blind. (Hybrid; F.—L., and E.) This
word has suffered a considerable change of sense, almost parallel to
the strange change in the case of Parboil, q.v. The orig. sense
was wholly blind, as in Rob. of Glouc., p. 376, 1. 7713: ‘ Messolde
pulte oute bope is eye, and makye him pur blind’ = they should put
out both his eyes, and make him quite blind, See Spec. of Eng.
ed. Morris and Skeat, p. 14, l. 390. Sir T. Elyot writes poreblynde,
The Governour, b, iii. c. 3. § 3; so also in Levins. In Wyclif,


Phillips, ed. 1706.


PURL


Exod. xxi. 26, the earlier version has pure blynde, where the later has
oon ijed (i.e. one-eyed), and the Vulgate has luscos. So also ‘ pur-
blynde, luscus ;? Prompt. Party. Even in Shak. we have both senses :

(1) wholly blind, L. L. L. iii. 181, Romeo, ii. 1. 12; and (2) partly
blind, Venus, 679, 1 Hen. VI, ii. 4. 21. B. It is clear that
‘wholly blind’ is the orig. sense, and that which alone needs an
etymology; whilst ‘ partly blind’ is a secondary sense, due perhaps.
to some confusion with the verb to pore, as shown by the spelling
poreblind; or to a mistaken derivation from Gk. mwpés, blind.
Purblind=pure-blind, i.e. wholly blind; see Pure and Blind.
For the use of pure as an adv., cf. ‘pure for his love’=merely for
his love, Tw. Nt. v. 86. Der. purblind-ly, purblind-ness.

PURCHASE, to acquire, obtain by labour, obtain by payment.
(F.—L.) ME. purchasen, purchacen, Rob. of Glouc. p. t6, 1. 360;
Chaucer, C.T. 610 (A 608). The usual sense is ‘ to acquire.’ —OF.
purchacer, later pourchasser, ‘eagerly to pursue, . . purchase, pro-
cure,’ Cot.—OF. pur, F. pour, for; and chasser, to chase. Formed
after the analogy of F. poursuivre (Scheler). See Pur- and
Chase; also Pursue. Der. purchase, sb., ME. purchas, pourchas,
Chaucer, C. T. 258 (A 256), from OF. purchas, later pourchas,
* eager pursuit,’ Cot.; purchas-er, purchas-able.

PURE, unmixed, real, chaste, mere. (F.—L.) ME. pur, Rob.
of Glouc., p. 8,1. 184; where it rimes with fur=fire. Pl. puré (dis-
syllabic), Chaucer, C. T. 1281 (A 1279).—F. pur, masc., pure,
fem., ‘ pure,’ Cot.—L. piirum, acc. of purus, pure, clean.—4/PEU,
to purify, cleanse; cf. Skt. pu, to purify; see Fire. Der. pure-ly,
pure-ness; pur-ist, pur-ism (coined words); and see pour, purge,
pur-i-fy, pur-i-t-an, pur-i-ty, spurge. From the same root, fire,
bureau, com-pute, de-pute, dis-pute, im-pute, re-pute, am-put-ate, de-
put-y, count (2), 8c.

PURFLE, the older form of purl; see Purl (3).

PURGE, to purify, clear, carry away impurities. (F.—L.)
ME. purgen, Chaucer, C. T. 14953 (B 4143).—F. purger, ‘to
purge,’ Cot.—L. purgare, to cleanse, purge. B. L. purgare=
purigare (Plautus has expurigatio) ; from pir-, stem of purus, pure,
and -ig-, weakened form of ag- (ag-ere), to do, make, cause. See
Pure and Agent, Der. purg-at-ion, ME. purgacioun, Wyclif,
Heb. i. 3, from F. purgation< L. acc. purgationem, from purgare;
purgat-ive, orig. adj., Macb. v. 3. 55, from L. purgatiuus ; purgat-
or-y, ME. purgatorie, Ancren Riwle, p. 126, 1. 8, from F. purgatoire
(of which an old form was prob. *purgatorie), which from L. purga-
torius, adj., cleansing, purifying ; purgat-or-i-al; purg-ing, sb., ex-
purg-ate. And see spurge.

PURIFY, to make pure. (F.—L.) ME. purifien, Wyclif,
Deeds [Acts], xxi. 26. =F. purifier, ‘to purifie,’ Cot.—L. pirificare,
to make pure.—L. piri-, for piirus, pure ; and jic-, for fac- ( facere), to
make. Der. purifi-er, purify-ing; also purific-at-ion, ME. purifica-
cioun, Wyclif, John, iii. 25, from F. purification, from L. ace. purifi-
catiOnem ; purific-at-or-y, a coined word, as if from a L. adj.
*pirificatorius.

PURIM, an annual Jewish festival ; the feast of lots. (Heb. —
Pers.) In Esther, iii. 7; ix. 26.—Heb. purim, lots; pl. of pir, a
lot. Of Pers. origin (Gesenius).

PURITAN, one who pretends to great purity of life. (L.) The
name was first given, about A.D. 1564, to persons who aimed at
greater purity of life, &c., than others (Haydn). Frequently in
Shak. All’s Well, i. 3. 56, 98; Tw. Nt. ii. 3. 152, 155, 1593 Wint.
Tale, iv. 3. 46; Pericles, iv. 6.9. A barbarous E, formation, with
suffix -an (=L, -anus), from the word purit-y or the L. purit-as,
See Purity. Der. Puritan-i-c-al, Puritan-ism. J TheF. puritain
is borrowed from E.

PURITY, the condition of being pure, pureness. (F.—L.)}
ME. pureté, Ancren Riwle, p. 4,1. 21; the e (after 7) was afterwards
altered toi, to bring the word nearer to the L. spelling. =F. pureté,
‘purity,’ Cot.—L. pirititem, acc. of puritis, purity; formed with
suffix -tas from piri-, for piirus, pure; see Pure.

PURL (1), to flow with a soft murmuring sound. (Scand.)
‘ A pipe, a little moistened, .. maketh a more solemne sound, than
if the pipe were dry ; but yet with a sweet degree of sibillation, or
purling ;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 230. The word is rather Scand.
than E., being preserved in Norw. purla, to well up, MSwed. porla
(Ihre), Swed. porla, to purl, bubble as a stream. B. But it is
merely a frequentative form, with the usual suffixed -J from the
imitative prov. E. word pirr or purr, for which see Purr. Cf.
Irish and Gael. bururus, a purling noise, a gurgling; Du. borreden,
to bubble up, Low G. burreln, purreln, to bubble up, AS. bur-na,
a well; see Bourn (2). @ Purl, to curl, Shak. Lucr. 1407, is
from the rippling of a purling stream. J
PURL (2), spiced or medicated beer or ale. (F.—L.?) ‘ Purl,
a sort of drink made of ale mingled with the juice of wormwood ;’”
‘A double mug of purle;’ Spectator, no. 88.


PURL.


‘But I suppose the spelling to be a mistaken’‘one, due to confusion


with Purl (1). It should surely be earl, from F. perle, a pearl;
see Pearl. See perlé, adj., and perler, verb, in Littré. The word
was a term in cookery; thus sucre perlé is sugar boiled twice;
bouillon perlé, jelly-broth (Hamilton). So also Du. parelen, paarlen,
to pearl, sparkle, rise in small bubbles, like pearls (Calisch); G.
perlen, to rise in small bubbles like pearls, to pearl (Fliigel) ; perle,
a pearl, drop, bubble. Hence purl, a drink with bubbles on the
surface.

PURL (3), to form an edging on lace, to form an embroidered
border, to invert stitches in knitting. (F.—L.) ‘Needlework purled
with gold;’ An Eng. Garner, ed. Arber, ii. 37 (1532). Just as the
word aboye should be spelt pearl, it is found, conversely, that the
present word is often misspelt pearl; by the same confusion. It is
a contraction of the old word to purjfle, to embroider on an edge.
‘ Purfled with gold and: pearl of rich assay ;’ Spenser, F. Q. i.
2.13. ME. purfilen, Chaucer, C. T. 193.—OF. porfiler, later pour-
jiler. ‘Pourfiler dor, to purfle, tinsell, or overcast with gold
thread, &c.;’ Cot.—OF. por, F. pour, from L. pré, from (which is
often confused, as Scheler remarks, with F. par, L. per, throughout,
and such seems to be the case here); and F. filer, to twist threads,
from ji/, a thread. See Pur- and File (1). @ Cotgrave also
gives MF. pourfil in the sense of profile; profile and purl (3) are
really the same word, the difference in sense being due to the
peculiar use of the F. prefix pour- as if it were=L. per. To purl is
‘to work along an edge,’ or ‘to overcast all along with thread.’
Doublet, profile.

PURL (4), to upset. (E.) A slang term; a huntsman who is
thrown off his horse is purled or spilt. Prov. E. pirl, to spin round,
to tumble; E.D.D. Purl should rather be pirl; from ME. pirle,
a whirligig, formed by the frequentative suffix -1 from the imitative
word girr, to whirl. So also MItal. pirla, a whipping-top; pirlare,
‘to twirle round;’ Florio. Allied to Purl (1).

PURLIEVU, the borders or environs of any place (orig. only of.a
forest) ; esp. when used, as is usual, in the plural. (F.—L.) ‘In
the purlieus of this forest ;? As You Like It, iv. 3. 77. ‘ Purliew, or
Purlue, is all that ground neere any forest, which being made forest
by Henry II, Rich. I, or King John, were, by perambulations granted
by Henry III, seuered again from the same; Manwood, par. 2 of his
Forest Lawes, cap. 20, And he calleth this ground either powrallee,
i.e. perambulationem, or purlieuw and purluy, which, he saith, be but
abusively taken for pourallee;? Minsheu, ed. 1627. Manwood’s de-
finition is: ‘ Purliew is a certain territorie of ground adjoyning unto
the forest, meared [marked] and bounded with immoveable marks,
meeres, and boundaries ;’ Reed’s note on As You Like it. § Pur-
liew ; land which having once been part of the royal forest has been
severed from it by perambulationem (pourallée, OF. puralee) granted
by the crown. The preamble of 33 Edw. I. c. 5 runs: “‘Cume
aucune gentz que sount mys hors de forest par la puralee... aient
requis a cest parlement quils soient quites...des choses que les
foresters lour demandent.” In the course of the statute mention is
made of ‘‘terres et tenements deaforestes par la puralee.” ‘These
[lands] would constitute the purlien. A purlieu-man or purlie-man is
a man owning land within the purlieu, licensed to hunt on his own
land ;’ Wedgwood. f. It is thus clear that purliew was ‘land
set free’ from the forest laws, and hence called pur lieu (L. piirus
locus). y. The perambulation itself was denoted by the OF.
puratee or poralee. This OF. puralee appears to be a mere
translation of L. perambulatidnem, by that confusion whereby OF.
pur (F. pour), though really answering to L. pré, is made to do duty
for the L. per, as in several instances noted by Scheler. See AF.
pouralee (to translate perambulatio) in Liber Custumarum, p. 197;
from OF. pur=L. pro; and OF, alee, a going, for which see Alley.

PURLOIN, to steal, plagiarise. (F.—L.) In Shak. Lucrece,
1651. ME. purloynen; the pp. is ill spelt perloyned in the York Plays,
p- 271. Cf. ME. purlongen; ‘ Purlongyn, or prolongyn, or put fer awey,
Prolongo, alieno;’ Prompt. Parv. Thus the orig. sense is simply
to prolong, put away, keep back, or remove. [Cf OF. esloigner
(<L. élongire), ‘to remove, banish, drive, set, put, far away ;’
Cot.)—OF. porloignier, purloignier, to prolong, retard, delay;
Godefroy.=—L. prolongare, to prolong; see Prolong. Der. pur-
loin-er. Doublet, prolong.

PURPLE, a very dark-red colour. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Spenser,
F.Q. i. 2. 7. For ME. purpre, by change of r to J, as in ME.
marbre, now marble, and in Molly, Dolly, for Mary, Dorothy. The
ME. purpre is in early use, occurring in Layamon, 1. 5928.—OF.
porpre (13th cent., Littré), later pourpre, ‘purple,’ Cot. Cf. Ital.
porpora, Span. purpura.—L. purpura, the purple-fish, purple-dye. =
Gk. soppipa, the purple-fish; cf. G. moppdpeos, purple. B. The
orig. sense of Gk. mop pupeos, as an epithet of the sea, seems to have
been,‘ troubled’ or ‘raging,’ hence dark, and lastly purple. The sea


PURSUE


dark with storms was also called ofvop, wine-coloured, wine-dark ;
apparently from the dark shade of brooding clouds. Hence the ety-
mology is from Gk. ropgvpew, to grow dark, used of the surging sea ;
a reduplicated form (=*pop-pvp-ew =*pup-pup-euv) of Gk. pipes, to
mix up, mingle, confound, orig. to stir violently. Allied to Skt.
toot bhur, to be active, L. furere, to rage; see Fury. @ The AS.
purpur is borrowed directly from Latin. So also G. purpur, &c.
Der. purple, verb. And see porphyry.

PURPORT, to imply, mean, intend. (F.—L.) In Bacon, Life
of Hen, VII, ed. Lumby, p. 146, 1. 27. (And prob. a much older
word.) =OF. porporter, pourporter, to intend, whence the sb. purport,
tenour. Not in Cotgrave; but Godefroy gives the verb porporter,
pourporter, to declare, inform, and the sb. purport, tenour ; and notes
the phrase selon le purport, according to the purport.-—OF. pur,
F. pour, from L. prod, according to; and F. porter, to bear, carry,
from L. portare, to carry. A similar application of F. porter occurs
in E, import. See Pur- and Port(1). Der. purport, sb., used by
Spenser with the sense of ‘ disguise,’ F. Q. iii. 1. 52, the lit. sense ~
being rather ‘declaration’ or ‘ pretext.’

PURPOSS (1), to intend. (F.—L.—Gk.; with F. prefix.) ME.
purposen, Gower, C. A. i. 5, prol. 53.—OF. porposer (Godefroy), a
variant of proposer, to propose. Thus purpose and propose are
doublets; see Propose, which is strictly from L. pausare, of Gk.
origin, though there has been confusion with L. ponere. | Dis-
tinct in origin from Purpose (2), though much confounded with it
in association. Doublet, propose.

PURPOSE (2), intention. (F.—L.) Though from a different
origin, this sb. has become altogether associated with the verb to
purpose, owing to the extraordinary confusion, in French, of the
derivatives of pausare and ponere. ME. purpos, Chaucer, C. T. 3979
(A 3981) ; spelt porpos, Rob. of Glouc., p. 121, 1. 2572. —OF. pourpos
(of which another form was porpost), a resolution, design (Godefroy) ;
a variant of F. propos, ‘a purpose, drift, end,’ Cot.=L. propositum,
a thing proposed, design, resolution. L. prdpositus, pp. of propdnere,
to propose; see Propound. Der. purpose-ly, purpose-less ; also
a-propos, q.V.

PURR, PUR, to utter a murmuring sound, asacat. (E.) ‘A
pur .. of fortune’s cat;’ All’s.- Well, v. 2. 20; ‘ Pur, the cat is gray ;’
King Lear, iii..6. 47. An imitative word, not unlike buzz. Cf.
Scotch girr, a gentle wind, Icel. byrr, wind; also Irish and Gael.
burburus, a gurgling sound. Intended to imitate the sound ofa gentle
murmur. Der. pur-i (1), a frequentative form.

PURSH, a small bag for money. (L.—Gk.) ME. purs, burs;
Prompt. Parv. p. 417. Spelt sors, P. Plowman, A.y.110. In early
use; the pl. porses occurs in the later text of Layamon, 1. 5927. AS.
purs; Engl. Studien, xi. 65. [Cf. OF. borse (Burguy), later bourse,
‘a purse,’ Cot.]—Late L. bursa, a purse; Ducange.=Gk. Bupon, a
hide, skin; of which purses were made. 4 The change from initial
b to pis rare, but accords with Grimm’s Law, and we find similar
examples in E. apricot as compared with F. abricot, and mod. E.
gossip as compared with ME, gossib, Chaucer, C. T. 5825 (D 243).
Der. purs-er (doublet, burs-ar, q.v.); purs-er-ship; purse-proud ;
purse-bearer, Tw. Nt. iii. 3. 47. Also purse, verb, to wrinkle like a
bag drawn together, Oth. iii. 3. 113.

PURSLAIN, PURSLANE, an annual plant, sometimes used
in salads. (F.—L.) Spelt purselaine, Hakluyt’s Voyages, vol. ii. pt.
ii. p. 109, 1. 43; pourslane, Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 8.
ME. purslane, to translate L. portulaca, Prompt. Parv., p. 417.— OF.
porcelaine (Godefroy). [Cf. Ital. porcellana, ‘the hearbe called
purcelane ;’ Florio.] Formed from L. foreciléca, purslain, Pliny,
b. xx. c. 20; the usual form of the word being portulaca. Walde
derives portulaca from portula, dimin. of porta, a door, with reference
to some peculiarity of the seed-capsules.

PURSUE, to follow after, chase, prosecute. (F.—L.) ME.
pursuen, Wyclif, John, xv. 20, where the AV. has persecute; also in
P. Plowman, B. xix. 158.—OF. porsuir, poursuir; Norm. dial. por-
suir; mod. F. poursuivre, ‘to pursue, prosecute, persecute,’ Cot.
Cotgrave gives the spellings poursuir, poursuyr, and poursuivre, = OF,
pur, por,mod. F, pour, answering to L. pro-; and Late L. sequere,
in place of L. segui, to follow; so that pourswir=L. prosequi, to
prosecute. See Prosecute; also Pur- and Sue. f. Owing to
the confusion between the F. prefixes pour (pro) and par (per), the
verb poursuivre also had the sense of persecute; we even find in OF.
(11th cent.) the expression a persuir son apel=to pursue his appeal
(Littré), See Persecute. Der. pursu-er, which in Scots law
means ‘a, plaintiff,’ lit. a prosecutor. Also pursu-ant, ‘following,
according, or agreeable to,’ Phillips, ed. 1706, formed with the F.
pres. part. suffix -ant from OF. pursu-ir, though the usual form of
the pres. part. was pursuivant or poursuivant (see below) 3 pursu-ance,
Phillips, ed. 1706, apparently coined from the adj. pursuant. Also
pursuit, spelt poursuitt in Spenser, F. Q. ii. 4. 1, pursuyt in Trevisa,


487


488 PURSY


tr. of Higden, i. 195, from F. pourswite, fem. sb., a participial form
answering to L. fem. pp. proseciita; pursuiv-ant, an attendant on
heralds, lit. ‘one who is following,’ Rich. III, iii. 4. 90, ME. pur-
seuaunt, Chaucer, House of Fame, 1321, from F. poursuivant d’armes,
‘herauld extraordinary, or young herauld,’ Cot., from F. poursuivant,
pres. part. of poursuivre.

PURSY, short-winded. (F.—L.) In Shak. Timon, v. 4. 12.
Spelt pursy and pursif in Levins. ME. purcy (for pursy), Prompt.
Parv. —‘ Purcyfe, shorte-wynded, or stuffed aboute the stomacke,
pourcif;’ Palsgrave.—=MF. pourcif, in Palsgrave, as just cited ;
which is a variant (by change of J to r) of MF. poulsif, ‘ pursie,
short-winded,’ Cot. Mod. F. poussif. Formed, with suffix -if
(<L. -itius), from MF. poulser (mod. F. pousser), ‘to push,’ Cot.
Cotgrave also gives the form pousser, which he explains not
only by ‘to push,’ but also by ‘to breathe or fetch wind.’=L.
pulsare, to beat, push; see Push. ‘The word has reference to the
pantings or quick pulsations of breath made by a pursy person. Der.
pursi-ness.

PURTENANCH, that which belongs to; the intestines of a
beast. (F.—L.) In Exod. xii. g; the usual translation of the same
Heb. word being ‘inwards.’ Spelt pertenaunce in Coverdale’s trans-
lation. ‘* Portenaunce of a beest, fressevre;’ Palsgrave. In P. Plow-
man, B. ii. 103, where most MSS. have purtenaunces, MS. W. has
appurtinaunces. Thus purtenance is merely an abbreviation of appur-
tenance, from AF. apurtenance, Langtoft’s Chron., i. 438; variant of
apartenance (Burguy), from OF. apartenir, to appertain. Cotgrave
has: ‘appartenance, an appurtenance, an appendant.’ ££. The
variation in the syllable pur, par, is due to the frequent confusion
between OF. pur (L. pro), and par (L. per). In the present case,
the syllable is due to L. per. See Appurtenance, Appertain.

PURULENT, PURULENCE; see Pus.

PURVEY, to provide. (F.—L.) A doublet of provide. ME.
. purueien; porueien (with u=v), Rob. of Glouc. p. 39,1.911; Rob. of
Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 74.—AF. purveier, to provide, Liber
Custumarum, p. 216; OF. forvoir (Burguy), mod. F. pourvoir, to
provide. —L. prouidére; see Provide. B. The F. voir, to see, has
numerous forms in OF., such as veoir, veor, veir, veer, veeir, veier,
&c.; see Burguy. The E. spelling -vey answers to AF. veier; cf.
E. sur-vey. Der. purvey-ance, ME. porueance, Rob. of Glouc. p. 457,
1. 9387, from AF. purveaunce, Polit. Songs, p. 231, answering to
MF. pourvoyance, * providence, forecast,’ Cot.; and therefore a
doublet of providence. Also purvey-or, ME. purveour, P. Plowman,
B. xix. 255, footnote, from AF. purveour, Stat. Realm, i. 137 (1300),
answering to MF. pourvoyeur, ‘a provider or purveyor,’ Cot.
Doublet, provide.

PURVIEW, 2 proviso, enactment. (F.—L.) Now applied to
the enacting part of a statute as opposed to the preamble, and so
called because it formerly began with the words purveu est, it is pro-
vided. Spelt purview in Blount.=AF. purveu, Polit. Songs, p. 231;
MF. pourveu, provided, Cotgrave; mod. F. pourvu. Pp. of AF.
purveier, OF. porvoir, F. pourvoir; see Purvey.

PUS, white matter issuing from a sore. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.
[The adj. purulent is in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.]—L. pis (gen.
pir-is), matter.4-Gk. md-ov, matter; Skt. piiya-, pus; from pity, to
stink. =4/PEU, to be corrupt, stink ; whence also pu-trid, &c. Allied
to Foul. Brugmann, i. § 113. Der. pur-u-lent, from F. purulent,
‘mattary, corrupt,’ Cot., from L. pirulentus, full of matter, from the
stem piur- and suffix -lentus. Hence purulence.

PUSH, to thrust against, urge, drive forward. (F.—L.) ME.
possen, pussen; infin. posse, K. Horn, ed. Lumby, 1. 1011 ; pt. t. puste,
K. Horn, ed. Ritson, 1. 1079 ; possed, P. Plowman, B. prol. 151. At
a later time puss became push, by change of double s to sh, as in
anguish from anguisse, brush from F. brosse, embellish from F.
embelliss-, &c.= OF. pousser, MF. poulser, ‘to push, thrust,’ Cot. = L.
pulsare, to beat, strike, thrust; frequentative form of pellere (pp.
pulsus), to drive. See Pulse (1), Pulsate. Der. push, sb.,
Spenser, F. Q. i. 3. 355 push-ing; push-pin, L.L.L.iv. 3.169. @] The
prov. E. push, a pustule, is spelt poushe in Sir T. Elyot’s Castel of
Helth, bk. iii. c. 6; from the same verb.

PUSILLANIMOUS, mean-spirited. (L.) ‘ Womanish and
pusillanimous, Chapman, tr. of Homer, b, i. Commentary, note 7.
From L. pusillanimus, mean-spirited, by change of -ws to -ous, as
frequently ; the more usual form is pusillanimis.—L. pusill-, stem of
pusillus, very small; and animus, mind, soul. B. Pusillus is allied
to pusus, a little boy, pu-er,a boy; see Puerile. For L. animus,
see Animosity. Der. pusillanimous-ly, -ness, Also pusillanim-i-ty,
ME. pusillanimitee (shortened to pusillamité), Gower, C. A. ii. 12;
bk. iv. 314; from F. pusillanimité<L. acc. pusillanimitatem.

PUSS, a cat, a hare. (E.) Spelt pusse in Minsheu, ed. 162473 pus-


cat, in Friar Bacon’s Prophecie (Hazlitt, E. Eng. Popular Poetry,


iy. 274). This may be called an E. word, though it is widely


PUTTY


spread. Prob, imitative, from the sound made by a cat spitting
(Wedgwood). Soalso Du. poes, Low G. puus, puus-katte, a puss, puss-
cat; Swed. dial. pus, a cat (Rietz), &c.; Irish and Gael. pus, a cat.
B. That the word is imitative, appears from its occurrence in Tamil.
‘ Pusei, a cat, esp. in the S. Tamil idiom. In the Cashgar dialect of
the Affghan, pusha signifies a cat;’ Caldwell, Comp. Grammar of
Dravidian Languages, p. 465; cited in N. and Q., 3S. ix. 288.
Lithuan. puz, a word to call a cat.

PUSTULH, a small pimple. (F.—L.) ‘A pustule, wheale, or
blister; Minsheu, ed. 1627. ME. pustulis, pl., in Lanfrank, Science
of Cirurgie, p. 197, 1. 17.—F. pustule, ‘a push, blain, wheale, small
blister ;? Cot.—L. pustula, another form of pisula, a blister, pimple.
Allied to Lith. puslé, a bladder, pimple ; pdusti (1 pers. sing. puttw),
to blow; Gk. gucadis, pucKn, a bladder, pustule, pucaw, I blow,
Skt. pupphusa-, phupphusa-, the lungs. 4 Note that pustule has
nothing to do with pus, with which it is associated by Richardson,
and even in White. Der. pustul-ous, pustul-ate, pustul-ar.

PUT, to push, thrust, cast, set, lay, place, &c. (E.) ME. putten,
puten; pt. t. putte, pp. put, i-put; P. Plowman, A. iii. 75, B. ili. 84;
Havelok, 1033, 1051; the pt. t. putte occurs in Layamon, 18092.
AS. potian, to thrust; AZlfric’s Homilies, i. 522, 1. 25; also *putian,
whence the sb. putung, instigation (Napier). [Hence Gael. put,
to push, thrust; W. pwtio, to push, to poke; Corn. poof, to kick
like a horse.] The orig. sense seems to have been to push, cast; cf.
‘to put a stone.’+4-Du. poten, to plant, set; poot, a twig, MDu. fore,
a scion, plant (see Franck); NFries. putje, Dan. putie, to put, place;
Swed. dial. putta, to push; Pomeran. putten, to drive on. Der.
pott-er, verb, q.v.

PUTATIVE, reputed, supposed. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.
=F. putatif, ‘ putative, Cot.—L. putatiuus, imaginary, presumptive.
Formed with suffix -iwus; cf. L. putdtus, pp. of putire, to think.
The orig. sense was to make clean or clear; hence, to come to a
clear result. —L. putus, clean. (4/PEU.) Cf. Pure.

PUTREFY, to make or become cormpt. (F.—L.) ‘Grosse
meate... makyth putrifyed matter ;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth,
b. ii. c. 1. ‘Apte to receyue putryfaction;’ id. b. ii. c. 1. (The
spelling with i was prob. due to confusion with putrid.) =F.
putrejier, ‘ to putrifie,’ Cot. Formed by analogy with other verbs in
-fier as if from L. *putreficare; but the true L. forms are putrefacere,
to make putrid; and putrefieri, to become putrid. —L. putre-, as seen
in putrére, to be rotten, with which cf. puter, putris, rotten; and
facere, to make, or fieri, to become. See Putrid. Der. putrefac-
tion, from F. putrefaction, from L. acc. putrefactionem (Lewis) ;
regularly formed from putrefacere. Also putrefact-ive. Also putres-
cent, becoming putrid, from L. putrescent-, stem of pres. part. of
putrescere, inceptive form of putrére; whence putrescence.

PUTRID, stinking, rotten, corrupt. (F.—L.). In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674; and in Cotgrave.=F. putride, ‘ putride,’ Cot.—L.
putridus, putrid. Extended from L. putri-, decl. stem of put-er,
put-ris, rotten; allied to putrére, to be rotten. Allied to put-ére, to
stink; from 4/PEU, to stink. Cf. Skt. piy, to stink; see Pus and


Foul.

PUTTOCK, a kite, kind of hawk. (E.?) In Shak, Cymb. i. 1.
140; see Nares and Palsgrave. ME. puttocke, Book of St. Alban’s,
fol. b 2; potok, Voc. 762.5. Of unknown origin. It seems to have
been used in a contemptuous sense. AS. Puttoc occurs as a name or
nickname; Birch, Cart. Saxon., iii. 668.

PUTTY, an oxide of tin, or lead and tin, for polishing glass;
more commonly a cement of whiting and oil, for windows. (F.—
Low G.) ‘ Putty, a powder made of calcin’d tin;’ Blount's Gloss.,
ed. 1674. ‘ Putty, pottain, and pot-brass...seem all to mean the
same thing;’ Rich. Dict.; this opinion is supported by extracts
from Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxxiv. c. 9g, and Boyle, Works, i. 721.
Pliny explains that in brass-founding, it was often found desirable to
add to the ore collectaneum, i.e. bits of old vessels, called by Holland
‘ pottain or old metall,’ or ollaria, called by Holland ¢ pot-brasse;”
showing that pottain simply means the metal of old pots. B. The
difficulty is in the history of the word rather than in its etymology.
The old sense of it was ‘ powder made of calcin’d tin,’ as in Blount,
resembling what is now called putty powder. ‘ Putty powder, a pul-


verised oxide of tin sometimes mixed with oxide of lead; extensively


used in glass and marble works, and the best kinds are used for
polishing plate ;’ Weale’s Dict. of Terms used in the Arts, 4th ed.,
1873. The same work tells us that putty is ‘composed of whiting
and linseed oil, with or without white lead.’ It thus appears that
the successive senses are (1) calcin’d tin or oxide of tin, (2) the
same, with oxide of lead, or (3) with white lead, (4) a preparation
containing white lead, the name being continued even after the
white lead was omitted. The result is that the mixture now called
putty frequently contains nothing that could be called putty in the
older sense. y. Adapted from MF. fofée, * brasse, copper, tin,


ie a.


PUZZLE


pewter, &c., burnt or calcinated ; also, a pot-full of anything ;’ Cot.
The mod. F. potée means ‘ putty,’ showing a similar change of
meaning. ‘ Potee d’étain, tin-putty;’ Hamilton. The mod. F.
potée also means (as formerly), a potful. Cf. also MF. pottein,
‘broken pieces of metall, or of old vessels, mingled one with
another;’ Cot. Also MF. potlin, ‘solder of mettall;’ id. B. Potee
is formed with suffix -ée (<L. -ata), from F. pot, a pot, of Teutonic
origin; see Pot. Der. putty, vb.

PUZZLE, a difficult question, embarrassment, problem, per-
plexity. (F.—L. and Gk.) Asa verb in Shak. Hamlet, iii. 1. 80;
and it was prob. regarded as a frequentative form of pose, with suffix
-le. But this was not the way in which the word arose; and, in
fact, the suffix -Je is not usually added to words of F. origin. It
was orig. a sb., and stands for opposal, which is used in the ordinary
sense of ‘ opposition’ in Sir T. Herbert’s Travels, p. 81 (R.). Ithas
been shown, s.v. Pose, that pose is short for appose, which again is
a corruption of oppose. From the F. opposer was formed ME.
opposaile, a question for solution; whence mod. E. puzzle. ‘ And
to pouert she put this opposayle’ [question], Lydgate, Fall of
Princes, ed. Wayland, sig. B. iii, leaf Ixvi; cited in Dyce’s Skelton,
li. 304. Hence corruptly, apposaile. ‘Made ynto her this vncouth
apposayle, Why wepe ye so?’ id., sig. B. v, leaf cxxvili (Dyce).
‘Madame, your apposelle is wele infertid,’ i.e. your question is well
put; Skelton, Garland of Laurel, 1.141; where the MS. copy has
opposelle (Dyce). The ME. opposaile seems to have been a coined
word, like deni-al, refus-al, &c. The loss of the first syllable is due
to the loss of the same in pose. For the etymology, see Oppose,
Pose (2). See A Student’s Pastime, p. 129. Der. puzzle, verb.

PYGARG, a white-rumped antelope. (L.—Gk.) In Deut.
xiv. 5. ‘A kinde of fallow Deere called Pygargi;’ Holland, tr. of
Pliny, bk. viii. c. 53.—L. pygargus; Deut. xiv. 5.—Gk. muyapyos,
a kind of antelope. = Gk. mvy-7, rump ; dpyds, shining, white.

PYGMY, a very diminutive person or thing, (F.—L.—Gk.)
ME. pigmey, Trevisa, i. 11, 1. 7.—=MF. pygmé, adj., ‘dwarfie, short,
low, of a small stature;’ Cot.—L. pygmaeus, adj., dwarfish, pygmy-
like; from pl. Pymaei, the race of Pygmies. — Gk. Muypato, the race
of Pygmies, fabulous dwarfs of the length of a muyyn, which was
reckoned from the elbow to the fist or knuckles, containing about
133 inches. Gk. muyy, the fist ; allied to L. pugnus ; see Pugna-
cious.

PYLORUS, the lower orifice of the stomach, (L.—Gk.) In
Phillips, ed. 1706.—L. pyldrus.—Gk. muvAwpds, a gate-keeper; also
the pylorus, because it is gate-keeper to the intestines, or at the
entrance to them. Contracted from *mvAa-Fwpés (Prellwitz). — Gk.
mUA-a=TVA-n, a gate; and *Fuwpos, allied to otpos, a keeper, watcher.
B. The Gk. m¥A7q is perhaps allied to Gk. médus, a city ; see Prellwitz.
y. The Gk. odpos is from dpo-yar (=fFépopa), I heed, guard, from
4/ WER, to guard; see Wary. Der. pylor-ic.

PYRAMID, a solid figure with triangular sides meeting in an
apex, upon a triangular, square, or polygonal base. (L.—Gk.) The
word was rather taken directly from the Latin than from the French.
Thus Shak. has the sing. pyramis, 1 Hen. VI, i. 6. 21 ; pl. pyramides
(four syllables), Antony, v. 2.61; as well as pyramid, Macb. iv. 1.
57. Cotgrave strangely translates F. piramide by ‘a pyramides.’ =
L. pyramid-, stem of pyramis.—Gk. mupapis (gen. mupapidos), a
pyramid. Prob. of Egyptianorigin. Der. pyramid-al, pyramid-ic-al.

PYRE, a pile of wood for burning a body. (L.—Gk.) In Sir T.
Browne, Urn Burial, cap. v. § 13.—L. pyra.— Gk. mupd, a pyre ; allied
to mvp, fire; cognate with E. Fire, q.v. And see pyrethrum,
pyrelic, pyr-ttes, pyrotechnic.

PYRETHRUM, aplant; feverfew. (L.—Gk.) L. pyrethrum.
— Gk. mupeOpoy ; so named from the hot spicy taste of the root.=
Gk. mvp, fire. Doublet, pellitory (2).

PYRETIC, feverish, relating to fever. (Gk.) For pyrectic. =
Gk. mupextixos, feverish. Gk. mupésoev, to be in a fever; allied to
mupetos, burning, heat, fever.—Gk. mip, fire.

PYRITES, a stone which gives out sparks when struck with
steel. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Pyrites,a marchasite or fire-stone;’ Phillips, ed.
1706,—L, pyrites.— Gk. nupirns, a flint, pyrites; orig. an adj., be-
longing to fire. Gk. mvp, fire; cognate with E. Fire, q.v. Der.
pyrit-tc.

PYROTECHNIC, pertaining to fireworks. (Gk.) Pyrotech-
nick, adj., and pyrotechny are given in Phillips, ed. 1706. Coined
from Gk. mupo-, used in compounds in place of mip, fire, cognate
with E. fire; and rexwxés, artistic, technical, from réxvy, an art,
craft. See Fire and Technical. Der. pyrotechnic-s, pyro-techny
(short for pyrotechnic art); pyro-technist, So also pyro-meter, a fire-
measurer (see Metre) ; pyro-gen-ous, produced by fire, from Gk,
base yev, to produce (see Genus).

PYTHON, a large serpent. (L.—Gk.) ‘The raging Python;’
Prior, Hymn to the Sun, st. 3. —L. Python, a serpent slain by Apollo


QUADRILLE 489


ie i a Tlvdwy (the same). = Gk. Ivéw, a former name of
elphi.

PYX, the sacred box in which the host is kept after consecration ;
at the mint, the box containing sample coins. (L.—Gk.) Spelt
pixe in Minsheu, ed. 1627. Abbreviated from L. pyxis, a box.—
Gk. muéis, a box; so-called because orig. made of box-wood.= Gk.
mugos, box-wood. Allied to Box (1) and Box (2).


Q


QUACK (1), to make a noise like a duck. (E.) An imitative
word. ‘The goos, the cokkow, and the doke also So cryden “ kek /
kek!” “‘cuckow!” ‘* quek, quek!” hye; Chaucer, Parl. of Foules,
499. Here the cry kek! kek! is assigned to the cackling goose, and
quek ! quek! to the quacking duck. In Ch. C. T. 4150 (A 4152),
the dat. case guakke is used to mean ‘hoarseness.’4-Du. kwaken,
kwakken, to croak, quack, chat; G. guaken, to quack, croak; Icel.
kvaka, to twitter; Dan. kvekke, to croak, quack, cackle. Cf. L.
coaxare, to croak, Gk. xodg, a croaking; Lithuan. hwakéti, to croak ;


kwaks#i, to cackle. Cf. Cackle. Der. quack (2), q.v. Also
quail (2), q.v.

QUACK (2), one who cries up pretended nostrums. (Du.)
Abbreviated from the older word quacksalver (below). Hence


also quack, vb., to act as a quack, to sing the praises of a nostrum,
to pretend to medical skill. ‘To quack off universal cures ;’ Butler,
Hudibras, pt. iii. c. 1. 1. 330. We find also quack-salver, Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674, i.e. one who puffs up his salves or ointments,
borrowed from Du. kwak-zalver, a quack, charlatan, cf. Du. kvak-
zalven, to quack, puff up salves (see Salve) by quacking or prating
about them; see also guack-salvers, in Ben Jonson, Every Man,
ii. I. 1233 guack-doctor, a later word which took the place of
quack-salver, Pope, note to Dunciad, iii. 192. Hence also quack
=quack-doctor; guack-er-y.

QUADRAGESIMA, the forty days of Lent. (L.) ‘ Quadra-
gesima Sunday is six weeks before Easter;’ Tables in the Book of
Common Prayer. [Hence guadragesimal, adj.,=Lenten, Milton,
Areopagitica, ed. Hales, p. 5, 1.8.]—L. quadragésima, lit. ‘ fortieth,’
fem. of quadrdagésimus, fortieth; in late authors used to mean ‘ Lent.’
Older form guadragensumus (= *quadragenti-mus).=—L. quadraginia,
forty. L. guadr-us, square, fourfold, related to quater, four times,
quatuor, four; and -ginta, for *de-kin-ta, tenth, from decem, ten.
See Four and Ten; and Forty. Der. guadragesim-al.

QUADRAN GBB, a square figure, or plot of ground. (F.—L.)
In Shak. 2 Hen. VI, i. 3. 156; and in Levins.—F. quadrangle, ‘a
quadrangle ;? Cot.—L. guadrangulum, sb.; neut. of guadrangulus, -
four-cornered.—L. guadr-us, square, allied to guatuor, four; and
angulus, an angle. See Four and Angle. Der. quadrangul-ar.
Also quad, quod, a court (in Oxford), short for quadrangle.

QUADRANT, the fourth part ofacircle. (L.) Chiefly used of
an instrument for measuring angles (like a sextant), graduated with
degrees along the arc. ME. quadrant, Prompt. Parv.—L. quadrant.-,
stem of guadrans, sb., a fourth part. Formed like the pres. part. of
quadrare, to make square; from quadr-us, square, allied to quatuor ;
seeFour. Der. guadrant-al. From the same source are quarrel (2),
quarry (1), squad, squadron, square.

QUADRATEH, squared, well-fitted. (L.) Used as a vb. in
Levins ; as adj. and vb. in Minsheu; as sb. in Milton, P. L. vi. 62,
to mean ‘ square phalanx.’ = L. quadratus, squared, pp. of guadrare,
to make or be square. = L. guadrus, square; see Quadrant. Der.
quadrat-ic; quadrat-ure, Milton, P. L. x. 381; Ben Jonson, New
Inn, Av in.) sc.) 2.

QUADRENNIAL, once in four years. (L.) More correctly
quadriennial, as in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Formed with adj. suffix
-al (L. -Glis) from quadrienni-um, a space of four years, = L. quadri-,
for guadrus, square, fourfold; and annus,a year. See Quadrant,
Biennial, Annual.

QUADRILATERAL, having four sides. (L.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. guadrilater-us, four-sided; with suffix -al (=L.
-dlis).—L. quadri-, for guadrus, square; and later-, decl. stem of latus,
aside. See Quadrant and Lateral.

QUADRILLE, r. the name of a game at cards; 2. the name
of a dance. (F.—Span.—L.) The name of the dance dates from
about 1773; it is added by Todd to Johnson; so called because
danced by 4 persons, or by sets of four. Not improbably suggested
by the game at cards, which was a game for 4 persons with 40 cards;
see Pope, Moral Essays, iii. 76; Sat. i. 38. [But the Span. name
was affected by confusion with F. quadrille, ‘a squadron containing
25 (or fewer) souldiers,’ Cot.; borrowed from Ital. guadriglia, short


490 QUADRILLION


for MItal. squadriglia, ‘a route, a troop, a crue, a band of men,’
Florio; which is connected with Squadron, q.v.] On the other
hand, F. guadrille, the game at cards, was masc.; and like ombre, is
prob. of Span. origin. Span. cwadrillo, a small square, allied to
cuadrilla, ‘a meeting of fowr or more persons,’ Neuman.=—Span.
cuadra, a square.=L, qguadra, fem. of quadrus, fourfold; see
Quadrant. Cf. L. quadrula, a little square.

QUADRILLION, a million raised to the fourth power. (L.)
An oddly coined word; made by prefixing guadr- (short for guadrus,
square, fourfold) to -illion, which is the word million with the m left
out. See Billion and Quadrant.

QUADROON, the child of a mulatto and a white person.
(Span.—L.) Better guarteroon or quartroon ; and spelt guarteron in
1707. So called because of having black blood only in a fourth
part. Modem; and imported from America.—Span. cuarteron, the
child of a creole and Spaniard (Neuman); also, a fourth part.
Formed with suffixes -er- and -on from cwarto, a fourth part. =L.
quartum, acc. of quartus, fourth. See Quart, Quartern.

QUADRUPED, a four-footed animal. (L.) The adj. guadru-
pedal is in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 16743 quadruped, sb., is in Phillips,
ed. 1706; the pl. guadrupedes is in Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors,
bk. iii.c. 1. § 2.—L. quadruped-, stem of quadrupés, quadripés, four-
footed.—L. quadru-, fourfold, four times; and és, a foot. See
Quadrant andFoot. Der. quadruped-al.

QUADRUPLE, fourfold. (F.—L.) Asa verb in Chapman,
tr. of Homer, Iliad, i. 129. As adj. in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F.
quadruple, ‘ quadruple;’ Cot.—L. guadruplum, acc. of quadruplus,
fourfold. —L. guadru-, four times ; and -plus, signifying ‘fold.’ See
Quadrant and Double. Der. quadruple, verb. Also quadruplic-
ate, from L. quadruplicadtus, pp. of guadruplicadre, to multiply by four.
Cf. Complicate.

QUAFF, to drink in large draughts. (E.) In Shak. Tw. Nt.
i. 3. 14; &c, And in Levins. Apparently of Northern origin.
[In later times, it seems to have affected the spelling of the Lowl.
Se. quaich, quech, a cup, which became queff in 1711; see quaich in
Jamieson, and Quaigh.] ‘I quaught, I drinke all oute;’ Palsgrave.
Spelt guaft by Sir T. More; N. E.D. Later forms are quaf, quaff.
B. A Southern form of Lowl. Sc. waucht, to quaff, from waucht, sb.
a deep draught (Jamieson). From ONorthumb, *waht= AS. weaht,
moistened (Genesis, 1922), pp. of weccan, to moisten (Daniel, 577).
Cf. Icel. vekja, to moisten ; from vak-, base of vokr, moist ; Icel. vokva
sig, to moisten oneself, to drink, quaff. Allied to Du. wak, moist,
wak,aholeinice. See Wake (2). Der. quaff-er.

QUAGGA, a quadruped of the horse tribe. (Hottentot.) The
name is said to be Hottentot; and is supposed to be imitative, from
the noise made by the animal. The name is now current in the
Xosa-Kaffir form igwara, with clicking g and guttural r. See
Athenzeum, 19 May, I901; N. and Q. 9S. v. 3.

QUAGMIRE, boggy, yielding ground. (E.) In Shak. K. Lear,
ili. 4.54. From quag, variant of quake; and equivalent to quake-
mire; see Quake and Mire. ‘It is spelt guake-mire in Stanihurst’s
Deser. of Ireland, p. 20; qguave-myre, in Palsgrave;’ Halliwell, s. v.
quave-mire,q.v. Cf. ME. quauen (=quaven), to quake; P. Plowman,
B. xviii. 61. So also quagg-y (i.e. quak-y), adj., used of boggy

ound.

QUAIGH, QUAICH, a kind of drinking-cup in Scotland,
usually made of small wooden staves hooped together, with two
handles. (C.—L.) See Jamieson and E. D. D. First found as
quech in 1673.— Gael. cwach, a cup (cf. Olrish cuiach, W. cawg).—L.
caucus, a cup; cf. Gk. xavea, a cup. @ Also spelt quaff, as in
Smollett, Humphrey Clinker, Sep. 3, 1771.

QUAIL (1), to cower, shrink, fail in spirit. (F.—L.) An old
meaning of quail was ‘to suffer decline, pine, fail, wither away ;’
hence to faint, esp. used of the spirits. ‘My false spirits quail,’
Cymb. v. 5. 149; ‘their quailing breasts;’ 3 Hen. VI, ii. 3. 54.
‘ The braunch once dead, the budde eke nedes must quaile,’ i.e. die;
Spenser, Shep. Kal. November, 91. ‘This deuise guailed;’ Sir T.
More, Life of Rich. IIT, ed. Lumby, p. 65. The phonology shows that
the word was prob. of F. origin, and not from the ME. quelen (AS.
cwelan), to die; though this may have been confused with it.
B. And, in spite of the change in sense, I suppose it to be ultimately
the same word as the prov. E. quail, to curdle, used of milk; for
which see Prompt. Parv. p. 418, and Way’s note. [We also find
confusion between quwail, to fail, and quell, to kill, as in ‘to quail
and shake the orb,’ Antony, v. 2. 85. Cf. Devonshire queal, to faint
away ; Halliwell.] The ME. quailen, to curdle, coagulate, is from
OF. coailler, quailier, later cailler, to curdle (see Littré, and Supp.
to Godefroy); from L. codgulare; see Coagulate. y. Note Ital.
cagliare, MItal. quagliare, ‘to cruddle as milk, to begin to be
afraid ;’ Torriano. Meadows explains it by ‘to curdle, congeal; to
want courage, to begin to fear.’ é


QUARANTINE


QUAIL (2), a migratory bird. (F.—Low L.—Low G.) ME.
quaille, Chaucer, C. T. 9082 (E1206) ; guayle, Wright’s Vocab. i. 177,
1. 13.—OF. quaille (13th cent., Littré), mod. F. calle. Cf. Ital.
quaglia, a quail.eLow L. guaquila, a quail.eMDu. quackel, ‘a
quaile;’ Hexham. Lit. ‘a quacker.’=MDu. quacken, ‘to croake,’
id.; cognate with E. Quack (1), q.v.

QUAINT, neat, odd, whimsical. (F.—L.) ME. queznt, Chaucer,
C. T. 10553 (F 239); commonly with the sense of ‘famous, ex-
cellent.’ Also spelt guoynt, Rob. of Glouc. p. 72, 1. 1635. Also
cwoint, Ancren Riwle, p. 140, 1. 21; coint, coynt, Will. of Palerne,
653, 1981 ; koynt, 4090. —AF. queint, Vie de S. Tomas, i. 194; OF.
coint, ‘quaint, compt, neat, fine, spruce, brisk, trim;’ Cot. Cf. Ital.
conto, ‘ known, noted, counted ;’ Florio. Certainly derived from L.
cognitum, acc. of cognitus, known, well-known, famous; though
perhaps confused (more in F. than in E.) with L. comptus, neat,
adored, pp. of cdmere, to arrange, adorn. B. Cognitus is used as
the pp. of cognoscere, to know, and is compounded of co- (for com=
cum, with) and -gnitus (for -gnotus=gndtus), known, used as pp. of
gnoscere, noscere, to know; see Cognition, y. I may add that L.
cOmere=co-imere, comp. of co- (for com=cum), and emere, to take.
@ In F. the word took the sense of ‘trim,’ as noted; in E. it meant
famous, remarkable, curious, strange, &c. Der. quaint-ly, quaint-ness,
ac-quaint. : ‘

QUAKE, to shake, tremble. (E.) ME. quaken, Chaucer, C. T.
11172 (F 860); earlier cwakien, Ancren Riwle, p. 116, 1. 20. AS.
ewacian, to quake; /¥lfred, tr. of Orosius, b. ii. c. 6. § 3. Cf. AS.
eweccan, to wag, Mark, xv. 29. Also EFries. guakkelen, to be un-
steady. We find variants, such as guag, quap, quave, quab, all
meaning ‘to shake about,’ The author of P. Plowman has the
strong pt. t. guook; P. Pl., C. xxi. 64. Der. quak-er, q.v.

QUAKER, one of the Society of Friends. (E.) ‘ Quakers, orig.
called Seekers, from their seeking the truth, afterward Friends. Jus-
tice Bennet, of Derby, gave the Society the name of Quakers in 1650,
because G. Fox (the founder) admonished him, and those present, to
quake at the word of the Lord;’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates. But the
name seems to have been used a little earlier, in 1647. From the
vb. above; see Quake. Der. Quaker-ism.

QUALIFY, to render suitable, limit, abate. (F.—L.) Frequent
in Shak. Meas, i. 1. 66, &c.; and in Levins. Latimer has qualifyeth ;
Seven Sermons, ed. Arber, p. 107 (last line).—F. qualifier, ‘ to quali-
fie;’ Cot. =Late L. qualificére, to endue with a quality. —L. quali-,
for qualis, of what sort; and fic-, for fac-ere,to make. See Quality
and Fact. Der. qualific-at-ion, due to Late L. qudlificdt-us, pp. of
qualificare.

QUALITY, property, condition, sort, title. (F.—L.) ME.
qualite, qualitee, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 153, 1. 11.—F. qualité, ‘a
quality ;’ Cot. —L. qudlitatem, acc. of qudlitds, sort, kind. = L. qudli-,
for gualis, of what sort, allied to E. Which,gq.v. Der. qgualit-at-ive,
a coined word.

QUALM, a sudden attack of illness, prick of conscience. (E.)
ME. gualm, often in the sense of pestilence, mortal illness; Chaucer,
C. T. 2016 (A 2014). AS. cwealm, pestilence, Luke, xxi. 11.4+-OSax.
qualm, destruction, death; Du. &#walm, only in the sense ‘ thick
vapour,’ from its suffocating properties; Dan. kvalm, suffocating air ;
kvalme, qualm, nausea ; Swed. qvalm, sultriness; G. gualm, vapour.
Teut. type *kwal-moz, masc.; from *kwal, 2nd grade of *kwel-an-,
AS. cwelan, to die. Allied to Lith. gel-ti, to pain; gel-a, pain. From
Idg. root ¢(w)el ; see Brugmann, i. §656. Der. qualm-ish.

QUANDARY, an evil plight. (Perhaps L.) In Beaum. and
Fletcher, Knight of the Burning Pestle, Act i. sc. 1 (Humphrey).
‘Leaving this olde gentleman in a great guandarie;’ Lily, Euphues,
ed. Arber, p.45. Stanihurst has guwanddre (accent on a), Ain. iv. 1. 1,
ed. Arber, p. 94. Conjectured to be a corruption of some term of
scholastic Latin. Expressly said by Mulcaster, in 1582, to be a
word ‘of a Latin form, .. vsed English like;’ see A. J. Ellis,
E. E. Pronunciation, p. 912, col. 2. Perhaps for quantum dare,
‘how much to give.’

QUANTITY, size, bulk, large portion. (F.—L.) ME. guantite,
quantitee; Chaucer, C. T. 4662 (B 242).—F. quantité, ‘ quantity ;’
Cot.—L. quantitatem, acc. of quantitas, quantity.—L. guanti-, for
quantus, how much; with suffix -/as. Related to L. quam, and to
quis, who; see Who. Brugmann, i. § 413. Der. quantit-at-ive.

QUARANTINE, a space of forty days. (F.—Ital.—L.) Spelt
quarentine in Minsheu, who gives it the old legal sense, viz. a’ space
of forty days during which a widow might dwell unmolested in her
husband’s house after his decease. Blount gives this form and sense,
and derives it from OF. quarantine. He also gives quarantain,
meaning (1) Lent, (2) a forty days’ truce or indulgence, (3) ‘ the
forty days which a merchant, coming from an infected port, stays on
shipboard for clearing himself;’ the last sense being the usual one
in mod. E.—OF. quarantine (Roquefort), usually quarantaine, ‘Lent,


QUARREL


a term of forty days, &c.; Cot.—Ital. guarantina, also quarantana,
quarantena, the space of forty days that travellers from infected
places are forced to live in outhouses (Torriano).—Ital. guaranta,
forty, answering to F. quarante; this guaranta being nothing but a
shortened form of L. quadraginta, forty. See Quadragesima.
Cf. also Ital. fare la quarantana, ‘ to keepe lent, . . . to keepe fortie
daies from company, namely if one come from infected places, as
they vse in Italy;’ Florio. See Pepys, Diary, Nov. 26, 1663.

QUARREL (1), a dispute, brawl. (F.—L.) It should rather be
querrel, but has been assimilated in spelling to the word below.
ME. querele (with one r), Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iii. pr. 3, 1. 49.
=OF. querele, later querelle, ‘a quarrel;’ Cot. (He gives- both
forms.)=—L. gueréla, a complaint.—L. quert, to complain, lament.
See Querulous. Der. quarrel, verb, Romeo, i. 1. 39, 59, &c.;
quarrel-er ; quarrel-some, As You Like It, v. 4. 85; quarrel-some-ness;
quarrel-ous, Cymb. iii. 4. 162.

QUARREL (2), a square-headed cross-bow bolt. (F.—L.)
Nearly obsolete. In Spenser, F. Q. ii. 11. 24. ME. quarel, King
Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1594, 2781.—OF. quarrel, later quarreau,
‘a diamond at cardes, a square tile, a quarrell or boult for a crosse-
bow;’ Cot. Mod. F. carreau.= Late L. quadrellum, acc. of guad-
rellus, a quarrel, a square tile.=L. quadr-us, square; with dimin.
suffix. See Quadrant.

QUARRY (1), a place where stones are dug, esp. for building
purposes. (F.—L.) In Shak. Oth. i. 3.141. The proper sense is a
place where stones are squared for building purposes; hence, a place
where stones are procured which are afterwards squared for building ;
lastly, a place where stones are dug, without any reference to squar-
ing. A better form was quarrer, but we also find quarry; which is
distinct from quarry, sometimes used as a variant of quarrel, a square
pane of glass (Halliwell). ME.quarrere, quarrer, Will. of Palerne,
2232, 2281, 2319, 46923; spelt quarere, quarer, quarrye, quar in
Prompt. Pary.—OF. quarriere, ‘a quarry of stone;’ Cot. Mod. F.
carriére. = Late L. quadraria, a quarry for squared stones. = L.
quadrare, to square,— L. quadr-us, square; see Quadrant.
“| The sense was suggested by L. quadratarius, a stone-squarer,
a stone-cutter; from the samesource. Der. quarry, vb., quarry-man,
quarri-er.

QUARRY (2), a heap of slaughtered game.’ (F.—L.) In Shak.
Cor, i. 1. 202; Haml. v. 2. 375. ME. querré, Sir Gawain and the
Grene Knight, 1324; guirré, Sir Tristram, 499. Altered from OF.
cuiree (Supp. to Godefroy), curee, certain parts of a slain animal ;
the part which was given to the hounds. Cotgrave has: ‘ Curée,
a dogs reward, the hounds fees of, or part in, the game they have
killed.’ So called because wrapped in the skin; see Reliq. Antiq.
i, 153.—F. cuir, a skin, hide. —L. corium, skin. See Cuirass.

QUART, the fourth part of a gallon. (F.—L.) ME. quart,
quarte, Chaucer, C. T. 651 (A 649).—F. quarte, ‘a French quarte,
almost our pottle ;? Cot.—L. guaréa (i. e. pars), a fourth part; fem.
of guartus, fourth. Related to L. guatuor, cognate with E. Four,
q: Vv. Der. quart-an, quart-er, quart-ern, quart-ette, quart-o; and
see quatern-ary, qualern-ion, quatrain.

QUARTAN, recurring on the fourth day. (F.—L.) Said of an
ague or fever. ‘ Feuer quartain ;’ Cursor Mundi, 11828. ‘ Quarteyne,
fevyr, Quartana;’ Prompt. Parv,=F. gwartaine, quartan, only used
of a fever; in use in the 13th cent. ; Littré. = L. quartana (febris),
a quartan fever; fem. of guwartinus, belonging to the fourth;
formed with suffix -dus from quart-us, fourth ; see Quart.

QUARTER, a fourth part. (F.—L.) ME. quarter, Rob. of
Glouc. p. 528, 1. 10875.—OF. quarter (12th cent., Littré), also
quartier, as in mod. F,—L. quartarius, a fourth part, quarter of a
measure of anything ; formed with suffix -arius from quart-us, fourth ;
see Quart. Der. quarter-day, -deck, -ly, -master, -sessions, -staff.
Also quarter-n.

QUARTERN, a fourth of a pint, a gill. (F.—L.) Short for
quarteron. ME. quarteroun, quartroun, quartron, P. Plowman, B.
v. 217, and footnotes. = OF. quarteron, ‘a quarter of a pound, also
a quarterne ;’ Cot.—Late L. quarterdénem, acc. of quartero, a fourth
part of a pound; extended from Late L. quarter-us, which is
from guartus; see Quarter. Cf. Norm. dial. guarteron, a fourth

art.

QUARTET, QUARTETTE, a musical composition of four
parts. (Ital.—L.) First in 1790; the spelling guwartette is F., but
the word is really Italian. = Ital. gvartetto, a dimin. form from quarto,
fourth ; see Quart, Duet.

QUARTO, having the sheet folded into four leaves. (L.) In
Johnson. First in 1589. The word is due to the L. phr. in
quarto, i.e.in a fourth part of the orig. size; where quarto is the
abl. case of guartus, fourth; see Quart. Andsee Folio. Der.
quarto, sb.

-QUARTZ, a mineral composed of silica. (G.) Added by Todd


QUEASY 491
to Johnson. = G. guarz, rock-crystal; the G. z being sounded as ¢s.
MHG. quarz; of unknown origin,

QUASH, to crush, annihilate, annul. (F.—L.) ME. quaschen ;
see ‘ Quaschyn, quasso’ in Prompt. Parv. Properly transitive; but
used intransitively in P. Plowman, C. xxi. 64. And see Owl and
Nightingale, 1388.—AF. quasser, Year-books of Edw. I, 1292-3,
p. 111; OF. quasser, later casser, ‘to breake, . . quash asunder ;’ Cot.
(He gives both spellings.) =—L. guassare, to shatter; frequentative
of guatere (supine quassum), to shake. Root uncertain. q The
OF. guasser also means ‘to abrogate, annul’ (Cot.), as in E. ‘to
quash an indictment.’ The slight likeness to AS. cwisan, to break,
is accidental. Der. (from L. quatere) casque, cask, con-cuss-ion,
dis-cuss, per-cuss-ion.

QUASSTA, a South-American tree, (Personal name.) Added by
Todd to Johnson. Botanical names in -7a are formed by adding the
L. suffix -ia to a personal name, as in dahl-ia, fuchs-ia. Quassia was
named by Linnzeus after a negro named Quassi, who first pointed out
the use of the bark as a tonic about 1730; see the portrait of him in
Stedman’s Surinam, ii. 347. Waterton quotes a Barbadoes song in
Journey 4, cap. ii: ‘ Quashz scrapes the fiddle-string, And Venus
plays the flute ;” these lines are altered from the finale to G. Colman’s
Inkle and Yarico. Qwassi is, in fact, quite a common negro name,
generally given to one who is born on a Sunday. See Notes and
Queries, 6 S. i. 104, 141, 166; 8S. viii. 388; 9 S. iii. 146.

QUATERNARY, consisting of fours, (L.) Rare; see exx.
in Richardson. Cf. F. guaternaire, ‘every fourth day;’ Cot.=—L.
quaternarius, consisting of four each.=L. quatern?, pl., four at a
time ; from guwatuor, four; see Four.

QUATERNION, a band of four soldiers, a band of four. (L.)
In Acts, xii. 4 (A.V. and Wyclif); Milton, P. L. v. 181.=—L. quater-
nion-, stem of guaternio, used in Acts, xii. 4 (Vulgate); it means
‘the number four,’ or ‘a band of four men.’ = L. quaterni, pl.; see
Quaternary.

QUATRAIN, a stanza of four lines. (F.—L.) Used by
Dryden, in his letter to Sir R. Howard, prefixed to Annus Mirabilis,
which is written in quatrains.—F. quatrain, ‘a staffe or stanzo of
4 verses;’? Cot. Formed with suffix -ain (L. -dnus) from F. quatre
<L. quatuor, four. See Four.

QUATREFOIL, lit. having four leaves. (F.—L.) ‘With
quarter-foyles gilt;’ Fabyan, Hist., ed. Ellis (1811), p. 600. From
OF. quatre, four; and fol, a leaf.=L, quatuor, four; folium, a leaf;
see Foil.

QUAVER, to shake, to speak or sing tremulously. (E.) In
Levins; and in Minsheu, ed. 1627. It is the frequentative form, with
suffix -er, of guave. ME. guauen (with u=v), to tremble; Prompt.
Parv. And see P. Plowman, B. xviii, 61. It first occurs as a various
reading in St. Marharete, ed. Cockayne, p. 48, 1. 3 from bottom.
Allied to Low G. quabbeln, to tremble (Brem. Wort.), Norw.
kveppa, to be shaken (Aasen). Also to ME. quappen, to palpitate,
Chaucer, Troil. iii. 57, Legend of Good Women, 865. From
a base KWAF, variant of KWAP, to throb, which is parallel to
KWAK, to quake; see Quake. Der. quaver, sb., lit. a vibration,
hence a note in music. Also quiver (1), q.v.

QUAY, a wharf for vessels. (F.—C.) Spelt guay and kay in
Phillips, ed. 1706; key in Cotgrave; heie in Minsheu, ed. 1627.
ME. key, spelt keye, Eng. Gilds, ed. Toulmin Smith, p. 374, 1. 23;
and see Prompt. Parv.=AF. kate, Gloss. to Liber Albus; MF. quay
(F. quai), ‘the key of a haven;’ Cot. The orig. sense is ‘en-
closure,’ a space set apart for unloading goods, Of Celtic origin. =
Bret. #aé, an enclosure ; W. cae, an enclosure, hedge, field, of which
the old spelling was cai (Rhys); cognate with Olrish cae, a house ;
whence OlIr. cerdd-chae, ‘ officina.’ Celtic type *kaion, a house;
from the same root as E. home. Stokes-Fick, p. 65.

QUEAN, a contemptible woman, a hussy. (E.) In Shak. Merry
Wives, iv. 2. 180. A word very closely related to queen; the orig.
sense being ‘woman.’ The difference in spelling is due to a
difference in the length of the AS. vowel. The best passage to
illustrate this word is in P. Plowman, C. ix..46, where the author
says that in the grave all are alike; you cannot there tell a knight
from a.knave, or a queen from a quean. AS. cwene, a woman, quean ;
cognate with OHG. quena, and Goth. kwind, a woman. The former
e in cwene is short; whence, by lengthening, the Tudor E. ea. Teut.
type *kwen-dn-, a lengthened form of the stem *twen-=Idg. *g(w)en- 5
whence also Idg. *g(w)ena, as in Gk. yuv, Russ. jena, a wife, Irish
ben, Pers. zan,a woman. See Queen.

QUEASY, sickly, squeamish, causing or feeling nausea. (Scand. ?
or F,?) ‘ His queasy stomach;’ Much Ado, ii. 1. 399. ‘ A queysy
mete ;’ Skelton, Magnificence, 2295. ‘ Quaisyas meate or drinke is,
dangereux;’ Palsgrave. Quaysy is used as a sb., in the sense of
‘nausea,’ ‘in Polit., Religious, and Love Poems, ed. Furnivall,
p- 215, l. 22. Perhaps formed as adj. from a Scand. source. =


492 QUEEN


Norw. kveis, sickness after a debauch (Aasen) ; Icel. kueisa, a whit-
low, boil; idra-kveisa, bowel-pains, colic; Swed. dial. kvesa, a
pimple, soreness, blister. Cf. Swed. kudsa, to bruise, wound ; Low G.
quése, a blood-blister, quésig, troubled with blisters (Schambach).
B. But the form coisy also occurs, and the earliest sense seems to be
ticklish or unsteady; as in: ‘ here is a coysy werd’ (world) ; and
“the werlde is ryght qwesye ;’ Paston Letters, i. 497, iii. 4. This
points to a F. origin; cf. OF. coissié, coisié, wounded, injured
(Godefroy). y. Perhaps this is allied to MF. cuissant, ‘ smarting,
itching,’ and to F. cuire, ‘to seeth, boyle, bake, itch, smart,’ Cot.
Cf. Ital. cocere, cuocere, ‘to concoct, boyl, burn, grieve, molest;’
Torriano. From L. coguere, to cook. Der. queasi-ness, 2 Hen. IV,
ly eS INS

QUEEN, a woman, a female sovereign. (E.) ME. queen, queene ;
P. Plowman, C. ix. 46. AS. cwén (common).+Icel. svan, a wife;
Goth. kwéns, kweins, a woman, wfe. Teut. type *kwéniz, f.; from
the 3rd grade of Teut. base *kwen-, as seen in *kwen-n-, 2 woman ;
for which see Quean. Idg. type *g(w)éni-; whence also Skt.
~jani- (in compounds), wife. Der. queen-ly, queen-mother. Allied to

uean,

QUERBR, strange, odd. (0. LowG.) ‘A queer fellow;’ Spectator,
no. 474, § 2. Much earlier, in Dunbar’s Flyting: ‘ our awin queir
clerk ;* 1. 218. A cant word; and prob. introduced rather from
Low than High German.—Low G. queer, across; guere, obliquity.
In Awdeley’s Fraternity of Vagabonds, ed. Furnivall, p. 4, ‘a quire
fellow’ is one who has just come out of prison; cf. the slang phrase
“to be in queer street ;” and Low G. in der quere liggen, to lie across,
lie queerly.4-G. quer, transverse; querkopf, a queer fellow. The
OHG, form is twer, transverse; cf. Dan. ‘ver, cross-grained, sullen,
perverse (Larsen), Swed. ¢vdr, cross, rude; Icel. Averr, whence E.
thwart, See Thwart. Der. queer-ly, queer-ness.

QUELL, to crush, subdue, allay. (E.) ME. quellen, to kill;
Chaucer, C. T. 12788 (C 854). AS. cwellan, to kill, Grein, i. 174.4
OSax. quellian, to torment, causal of guelan, to suffer martyrdom ;
Du. kwellen, to plague, vex; Icel. kvelja, to torment ; Swed. gudlja,
to torment; Dan. kvele, to strangle, choke; to plague, torment.
B. Teut. type *kwaljan-, causal form, ‘to make to die;’ from *kwal,
2nd stem of *kwel-an-, to die. Allied to Lith. gel-ti, to pain; gel-a,
pain. From Idg. root *g(w)el ; Brugmann, i. § 656. See Qualm.

QUENCH, to extinguish, check, put out. (E.) ME. quenchen,
Wyclif, Matt. iii, 12. (Quench is formed from an obsolete verb
quink, to be put out, to be extinguished ; just as drench is from drink.)
AS. cwencan, in the comp. dcwencan, to extinguish utterly, Mark,
ix. 44. Causal of AS. cwincan; the pt. t. d-cwanc (=was extin-
guished) occurs in a various reading in A‘lfred, tr. of Beda, b. ii.
c. 7, ed. Whelock. B. Further, the verb cwincan is an extension
of a shorter form cwinan, to be extinguished (which is a strong verb,
with pt. t. cwan, pp. cwinen); hence ‘Set f¥r Gcewinen wees and
adweesced ’=the fire was put out and extinguished; Beda, ii. 7 (as
above). Cf. OFries. kwinka, to be extinguished. Der. guench-able,
-less.

QUERIMONIOUS, fretful, discontented. (L.) ‘Most queri-
moniously confessing ;’ Denham, A Dialogue, 1. 2, Formed with
suffix -ous (=F. -eux, L. -dsus) from guerimonia, a complaint.=—L.
gueri, to complain; with Idg. suffixes -mdn-ya. See Querulous,
Der. querimonious-ly, -ness.

QUERW, a handmill for grinding grain. (E.) ME. querne,
Chaucer, C. T. 14080 (B 3264). AS. cweorn, cwyrn, Matt. xxiv. 41.
+Du. kweern; Icel. kvern; Dan. kvern; Swed. qvarn; Goth.
kwairnus. Teut. base *kwer-n-, from Idg. root *g(w)er, to grind (?) ;
whence also Lith. gerna,a stone in a handmill; Russ. jerzov(e), a mill-
stone, Irish bro, W. breuan, a mill-stone; Skt. gravan-, a stone.
Bmgmann, i. § 670.

QUERULOUS, fretful. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1658. Englished
from Late L. queruldsus or L. guerulus, full of complaints. =—L. quer?,
to complain. The pt. t. guestus sum points to an older form *guesi.
+Skt. gvas, to pant, to hiss, to sigh.4/K WES, to wheeze; whence
also E. Wheeze, q.v. Der. querulous-ly, -ness, And see quarrel (1),
querimonious, cry.

QUERY, an inquiry, question. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.
Formerly quere, as used by Warner, Albion’s England, b. vi. c. 30,
1. 238; Ben Jonson, New Inn, A. ii.sc.2. Put for guere, seek thou,
inquire thou, 2 p. imp, of L. guerere, to seek. B. Querere is for
*quesere (= *quai-sere); cf. L. queso, I beg. Brugmann, ii. § 662.
Der. query, verb ; quer-ist ; also quest, q.v., quest-ion, quest-or. Also
(from querere), ac-quire, con-quer, dis-quis-it-ion, ex-quis-ite, in-quire,
én-quis-it-ive, per-quis-ite, re-quest, re-quire, re-quis-ite.

QUEST, a search. (F.—L.) In Levins. ME. queste, P. Plow-
man, B, xx. 161.—OF. qweste, ‘a quest, inquirie, search;’ Cot. F.
quéte,—Folk-L. questa; for L. quesita, a thing sought; fem. of
que@situs, pp. of guerere, to seek; see Query,


QUILL


QUESTION, an inquiry. (F.—L.) ME. questioun, Wyclif,
John, iii. 25.—F. question. —L. questidnem, acc. of guestio, a seeking,
a question ; formed with suffix -tio from gues-, base of *ques-ere, old
form of querere, to seek; see Query. Der. question, verb, Hamlet,
ii, 2. 2443 question-able, id. i. 4. 43 ; question-abl-y, question-able-ness $
question-less, Merch, Ven. i. 1. 1763 question-ist (Levins). Also guestor
(Levins), from L. questor ; qguestor-ship (id.).

QUEUE, a twist of hair formerly worn at the back of the head.
(F.—L.) In late use. Added by Todd to Johnson.=—F. queue, ‘a
taile:’ Cot. —L. cauda, a tail. See Cue.

QUIBBLE, an evasion, shift. (L.) ‘This is some trick; come,
leave your guiblins, Dorothy ;” Ben Jonson, Alchemist, iv. 4 (Face,
toDol). <A dimin. of guib, with suffix -le. ‘ Quib,a taunt or mock,’
Coles (Halliwell); but the word is not in ed. 1684 of Coles’ Dict.
Perhaps guib is a weakened form of guip or quippy. See Quip.
B. The peculiar sense of evasion is prob. due to association with
quiddity and quillet; see those words. Der. quibble, verb ; quibbl-er.

QUICK, living, moving, lively. (E.) ME. quik, Chaucer, C. T.
1017 (A rors). AS. cwic, sometimes cuc, Grein, i. 1755; also cwicu,
cticu.t-Du. kwik ; Icel. kuikr, kykr; Dan. kuik ; Swed. quick ; Prov. G.
queck, quick, quick, lively (Fliigel), B. All from a Teut. type
*kwikwoz, lively, which took the place of an older form *kwiwoz ;
this older type occurs in Goth. kwius, living, cognate with L. uiuus,
Lith. gywas, Russ. jivoi, alive, living ; Irish beo, W. byw, alive; Idg.
type *g(w)iwos. Further allied to Skt. iv, to live, L. wiwere, and
Gk. Bios, life. See Vivid. Brugmann, i. §§ 85, 318,677. Der.
quick, sb., quick-ly, quick-ness; quick-lime; quick-sand, 3 Hen. VI,
v. 4. 263 guick-silver, Chaucer, C. T. 16240 (G 772), AS. cwic-
seolfor ; quick-set, i.e. set or planted alive; guick-sighted. And see
quick-en. @ The prov, E. guitch-grass=quick-grass; it is also
spelt couch-grass, where couch is due to the occasional AS. ciicu.

QUICKEN, to make’ alive. (E.) ME. quikenen, quiknen,
Wyclif, John, vi. 643, Chaucer, C. T. 15949 (G 481). The true form
is guik-nen, and the suffix -zen=Goth. -zan, which was used only to
form intransitive verbs ; so that the true sense of guiknen is rather ‘to
become alive,’ as in King Lear, iii. 7. 39. But this distinction was
early lost, and the suffixes -iex, -nen were used as convertible. The
Goth. keeps them distinct, having gakwiu-jan, to make alive, gakwiu-
nan, to become alive. From AS. cwic, alive; see Quick. Cf. Icel.
kvikna, Swed. qvickna, intr., to quicken, come to life.

QUID, a mouthful of tobacco. (E.) A dialectal variant of cud ;
‘ Quid, the cud’ (Halliwell) ; AS. cwidu. It occurs in Bailey’s Dict.,
vol. ii. ed. 1731; and see E.D.D. See Cud.

QUIDDITY, a trifling, nicety, cavil. (L.) A term of the
schools. ‘Their predicamentes, . . guidities, hecseities, and relatives!’
Tyndal, Works, p. 104, col. 1, 1. 8 (and in Spec. of Eng., ed. Skeat,
p. 176, 1. 318). Englished from Late L. guidditds, the essence or
nature of a thing, concerning which we have to investigate ‘ what it
is’ (quid est).—L. quid, what, neuter of guis, who ; see Who.

QUIDNUNG, an inquisitive person. (L.) Applied to one
who is always saying—‘ what’s the news?’ ‘ The laughers call me
a quidnunc ;’ The Tatler, no. 10, § 2.—L. guid nunc, what now?

QUIESCENT, still, at rest. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
—L. quiescent-, stem of pres. part. of quiescere, to be at rest. See
Quiet. Der. quiescence.

QUIET, still, at rest, tranquil. (L.) ‘A quyet and a pesible
lijf;’ Wyclif, 1 Tim. ii, 2; where the Vulgate has guiétam. [Rather
from L. than from F.; the F, form is Coy, q.v.]=—L. quiétus, quiet ;
orig. pp. of *guiére, only used in the inceptive form quiescere, to rest.
Cf. quié-s, rest. B. Allied to OPers. shiyati-, a place of delight,
home; Pers. shad, pleased; and to E. While. Brugmann, i. §§
130, 675; Horn, § 767. Der. quiet, sb., ME. quiete, Chaucer, C. T.
9269 (E 1395) ; quiet, verb, 1 Hen. VI, iv. 1. 115 ; guiet-ly, quiet-ness ;
gquiet-ude, from Late L. quiétido (White), a contraction for *guietitudo.
Also quiet-us, a final settlement, from L. quiétus, adj.; qzuiet-ism,
guiet-ist. From L. quiescere we also have ac-quiesce; and see re-
quiem, quit, quite, re-quite, ac-quit, dis-quiet. Doublet, coy. :

QUILL (1), a feather of a bird, a pen. (E.) ME, quille, quylle.
‘They take a guil’ (tube?); Lydgate, Troy-book, fol. E 2, col. 2.
‘ Quylle, a stalke, Calamus;’ Prompt. Parv. Halliwell gives: § Quill,
the stalk of a cane or reed, the faucet of a barrel.’ This is a
difficult and doubtful word ; probably the sense of ‘ hollow stalk’ was
the original one. The word appears to be E., and of Teut. origin.
+Low G. kiil, a goose-quill (Berghaus) ; #i2 (Schambach) ; West-
phalian kwiele (Woeste) ; G. siel, Bavarian and MHG. kil,

QUILL (2), to pleat a ruff. (F.—L.; or E.) ‘What they called
his cravat, was a little piece of white linen guilled with great exact-
ness;’ Tatler, no. 257, Nov. 30, 1710. 1. Supposed to be so
called from being folded as if over quills; or, to form into small
folds resembling quills. See Quill (1). 2. Wedgwood quotes
from Métivier the Guernsey word enguiller, to pleat, gather, wrinkle,


QUILLET


which Meétivier derives from OF. cuillir, to gather, collect, cull;
whence also E, Cull, q.v. I do not know which is right. 4 The
phrase iz the quill, in Shaks. 2 Hen. VI. i. 3. 4, certainly means ‘in
the collection’ or ‘in a body ;’ where quill (variant of coi) is from
OF. cuillir, L. colligere, to collect, to cull.

QUILLET, a sly trick in argument. (L.) ‘His quiddities, his
quillets;’ Hamlet, v. 1. 108. There is also a form quiddit; the
N.E.D. cites from Greene (in Harl. Misc. ii. 232), ‘such quibs
and quiddits.’ Prob. quillet is for quiddit, shortened from quiddity ;
see Quiddity. Note that, in Torriano (1688) we find Ital, guidita,
guidditi, ‘the quiddity, the whatness, or substance of any thing;’
and, just below, quilita, quillita, ‘a quillity ;’ which seems to prove
the change from d to J.

QUILT, a bed-cover, a case filled with wool, flock, down, &c.
(F.—L.) ME. quilte, quylte. ‘Unum qguylt, York Wills, iii. 3
(1395). A. Neckam has L., culcitra, glossed by AF. guilte; Wright’s
Vocab. i. 100. ‘ Quylte of a bedde, Culcitra ;’ Prompt. Parv. = OF.
cuilte (12th cent., Littré, s.v. cowetée), also spelt cotre (Burguy), and
coutre, as in coutrepoincter, to quilt (Cotgrave).—L. culcita (also
culcitra, giving OF. cotre), a cushion, mattress, pillow, quilt. Root
uncertain. Der. guilt, verb. And see Counterpane (1).

QUINARY, consisting of or arranged in fives. (L.) The L.
form guindrius, as a sb., is in Phillips, ed. 1706; guinary is in
Cudworth’s Intellectual System, p. 625 (R.).—L. quindrius, arranged
by fives. = L. guini, pl. adj., five each. For *guinc-ni, where quinc=
quingue, five, which is cognate with E. Five, q.v. See Quin-
quagesima.

QUINCE, a fruit with an acid taste. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Romeo,
iv. 4.2. Spelt quince, wince, Pistill of Susan, 102 ; quence in Prompt.
Parv. [Cf. MF. coignasse, ‘a female quince, or pear-quince, the
greatest kind of quince ;* Cot.; coignacier, ‘the great, or pear, quince-
tree;’ id.] For quins; orig. the pl. of quin or quyne, a quince; but
the usual ME. form is coine, or coin; Rom. of the Rose, 1374. Cf.
guyns-tre, Voc. 573. 48; quoyn-tre, id. 646. 35. Walter de Bibbes-
worth has AF. coigner, glossed by coyn-tre, quince-tre; Wright’s
Vocab. i. 163. * Quyne-aple tre, coingz;’ Du Wes, in Palsgrave,
P. 9143 quynce, p. 260.—OF. coi, mod. F.coing, a quince. [Cf. Prov.
codoing, Ital. cotogna (Littré).]—L. *cotdnium, for *cyddnium ; (the
Ital. cofogna representing L. cydénia, a quince).—Gk. kvdwvia, a
quince-tree; xvdwvtoy phdov, a quince, lit. a Cydonian apple. = Gk.
Kvdavia, Kvdwvis, Cydonia, one of the chief cities of Crete, named
from the Kudwves (Cydones), a Cretan race. See Smith’s Classical
Dict.

QUINCUNX, an arrangement by fives. (L.) Applied to trees,
&c., arranged like the five spots on the side of a die marked 5. See
Sir T. Browne, Garden of Cyrus, c. 5. § 12. —L. quincunx, an arrange-
ment like five spots on a die.=L. quinc-, for quinque, five, cognate
with E. Fives; and uncia, an ounce, hence a small mark, spot on a
die; see Ounce (1).

QUININE, extract of Peruvian bark. (F.—Span.— Peruvian.)
Ab. 1820. Borrowed from F. quinine, an extension (with suffix
-ine<L. -ina) from F. guina.—Span. quina, quinaquina, a Span.
spelling of Peruvian kina, or kina-kina, which is said to mean ‘ bark,’
and is applied to that which we call Peruvian bark. Granada, in his
Vocab. Rioplatense, gives guina, a thorny shrub, good against fever ;
and quinaquina, a large tree with medicinal bark.

QUINQUAGESIMA, the next Sunday before Lent. (L.) So
called because about 50 days before Easter. = L. guinquagésima (diés),
fiftieth day ; fem. of guinquagésimus, fiftieth. = L. quingua-, for quingue,
five; and -gésimus, for *-gensimus, tenth, ultimately from decem, ten.
See Five and Ten.

QUINQUANGULAR, having five angles. (L.) Formed
from quinque, five, just as quadrangular is from quadrus, fourfold.
See Quadrangular.

QUINQUENNIAL, lasting five years, recurring in five
years. (L.) Formed from quinque, five, and annus, a year; see
Biennial.

QUINSY, inflammatory sore throat. (F.—Gk.) ‘The throtling
quinsey;’ Dryden, Palamon, 1682. A contraction of the older form
squinacy or squinancy, spelt syuinancie in Minsheu, ed. 1627. Sir T.
Elyot has ‘ sguynances, or quinces in the throte ;’ Castel of Helth, bk.
jii.c. 7. ME. squynacy, squynancy, Trevisa, iii. 335.—OF. quinancie
(Supp. to Godefroy, s.v. esqguinance); also squinancie; mod. F.
esquinancie, Cot. gives esquinance, ‘ the squincy or squinancy,’ and
squinance, ‘ the squinancy or squinzie.’ B. Formed (sometimes with
prefixed s- or es-, for OF. es-, L. ex, very) from Gk. xuvayx7, lit. a
dog-throttling,’ applied to a bad kind of sore throat.—Gk. xuv-,
stem of xvwv, a dog, cognate with E. Hound; and dyx-ev, to
choke, throttle, from ANGH, to choke; see Anger.

QUINTAIN, a post with arms, set up for beginners in tilting to
runat. (F.—L.) In As You Like It, i. 2. 263. ‘ When, if neede


QUIT 493


were, they could at quintaiz run ;’ Sidney, Arcadia, b.i (song, 1. 56).
ME. quaintan (for quintan), Destr. of Troy, 1627.—F. quintaine, ‘a
quintane, or whintane, for country youths to run at;’ Cot. Cf,
Prov. quintana, Ital. quintana (Littré). From Late L. quinténa,
a quintain, Matt. Paris, v. 367; also quintana, a quintain, also a
certain measure of land, also a part of a street where carriages could
pass (Ducange). B. The form of the word is so explicit that we
may connect it with L. quintaina, a street in the camp, which inter-
sected the tents of the two legions in such a way as to separate the
fifth maniple from the sixth, and the fifth turma from the sixth ; here
was the market and business-place of the camp (White). We can
hardly doubt that this public place in the camp was sometimes the
scene of athletic exercises and trials of skill, whence it is an easy
step to the restriction of the term to one particular kind of exhibition
of martial activity. And quintana is the fem. of guintinus, formed
with suffix -daus from quintus, fifth, which is for *quinc-tus, from
quingque, five. See Five. Picard guintaine; described by Corblet.

QUINTAL, a hundredweight. (F.— Span. — Arab. — L.)
‘Twelve pence upon euerie quintall of copper;’ Hakluyt’s Voyages,
i. 137, 1.18; also kintal, id. ii. (part 2). 162. Spelt guyntall, Pals-
grave.—F. guintal, ‘a quintal or hundred-weight;’ Cot.=Span.
quintal, a quintal, hundred-weight.— Arab. gintar, a weight of 100
pounds of twelve ounces each; Rich. Dict. pp. 1150, 737.—L.
centum, a hundred; see Cent. And see Kilderkin.

QUINTESSENCE, the pure essence of anything. (F.—L.)
‘ Aristoteles.. hath put down... for elements, foure; and for a
fifth, quintessence, the heavenly body which is immutable ;” Holland,
tr. of Plutarch, p. 662 (R.). Palsgrave has guyntessence. Misspelt
quyntencense, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 51. And see The Book of
Quinte Essence or the Fifth Being, about A.D. 1460, ed. Furnivall,
1866 (E. E. T.S.).—F. quintessence, ‘a quintessence, the vertue, force,
or spirit of a thing extracted ;’ Cot.—L. quinta essentia, fifth essence
or nature.—L. guinta, fem. of quintus (for *guinc-tus), from guinque,
five; see Five. And see Essence. 4 The idea is older than
Aristotle; cf. the five Skt. bhutam’s, or elements, which were earth,
air, fire, water, and zther. Thus the fifth essence is ether, the
most subtle and highest; see Benfey, Skt. Dict., p. 658, col. 1.

QUINTILLION, the fifth power of a million. (L.) Coined
from L. quint-us, fifth ; and -illion, part of the word million; see
Quadrillion, Billion.

QUINTUPLE,, fivefold. (F.—L.) In Sir T. Browne, Cyrus’
Garden, c. 5. § 3.—F. quintuple, in use in the 15th cent. (Hatzfeld), =
= L, *guintuplus, a coined word; formed from quintus, fifth, just as
duplus is from duo, two. See Quintessence and Double. Der.
quintuple, verb.

QUIP, 2 taunt, cavil. (L.) ‘This was a good guip that he gave
unto the Jewes;’ Latimer, Sermon on Rom. xiii. an. 1552 (R.).
Sir T. More has: ‘this goodly guyppe agaynste me ;’ Works, p. 709.
We also find guzppy, as in Drant’s tr. of Horace, bk. ii. sat. I.—
L. quippe, forsooth (used ironically), For *quid-pe; Brugmann,
i. § 585. Der. guibb-le, q. v.

QUIRE (1), a collection of so many sheets of paper, often 24.
(F.—L.) Also quair, as in The Kingis Quair, i.e. small book.
Spelt guayer, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, ii. 193. In the Ancren Riwle,
p- 248, last line but 1, we find the curious form cwaer, in the sense of
a small book or pamphlet.— AF. quaer, as a gloss to quaternus; A.
Neckam, in Wright’s Vocab. i. 116,1. 6; OF. quater (13th cent.,
Littré) ; spelt guayer, cayer, in Cotgrave, who explains it ‘a quire of
written paper, a peece of a written booke.’ Mod. F. cahier.—Late
L. quaternum, a collection of four leaves, a small quire; from L.
guaterni, nom. pl., four each, which from quatuor, four, cognate with
E. Four. Cf. Ital. guaderno, a quire of paper ; and the instance of
F, enfer from L. infernum shows that the suffix -zum would easily be
lost.

QUIRE (2), a band of singers. (F.—L.—Gk.) Another spelling
of Choir, q.v. Der. quir-ister (for chorister) ; Nares.

QUIRK, a cavil, subtle question. (Scand.—G.) In Minsheu,.
ed. 1627. The orig. sense seems to have been ‘ angle;” cf. prov. E.
quirk, a twist, a clock in a stocking, a quibble. ‘ The quiddities and
queerks of logique darke;’ .Drant, tr. of Horace, Sat. i. 5. Being
found in many dialects, it may be a Scand. word. . Prob. from
Icel. kuverk, the angle below the chin, the inner angle of an ax
(Vigfusson); Molbech gives Dan. guerk (kverk) as an angle in
a knee-timber of a ship (cf. E. quirk, an angle or groove in a
moulding); see N.E.D.and E.D.D.; Jutland kverke, the angle
between two rows of houses (Feilberg), Not of Scand. origin; but
borrowed from G. quer, transverse ; see Queer. Cf MHG. twerk,
G. zwerch, going across; AS. Jwearh; see Thwart. Distinct from
Icel. kverkr, pl., the throat.

QUIT, freed, released, discharged from. (F.—L.) In the phr. ‘ to
be quit,’ the word is really an adj., though with the force of a pp.


494 QUITE


The verb #o quit is derived from it, not vice versd@; as is easily seen
by comparing the F. quitter (OF. quiter) with F. qguitte (OF. quite).
In the phrases ‘guit rent’ and ‘quit claim,’ the old adjectival use is
retained, and the latter represents an OF. verb quite-clamer. More-
over, the adj. was introduced into E. before the verb, appearing as
cwite in the Ancren Riwle, p. 6,1. 12, Cf.‘ Tho was Wyllam our
kyng all qguyt of thulke fon,’ i.e. all free of those foes ; Rob. of Glouc.
p. 392, 1. 8062. [Hence was derived the verb quyten, to satisfy a
claim, pay for. ‘He mai guiten hire ale’=he will pay for her ale,
Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 190, 1. 77; and see Chaucer,
C.T. 772 (A 770).J—OF. quite, ‘ discharged, quit, freed, released ;’
Cot. Mod. F. guitte; Span, quito, quit.—Late L. quitus, quittus,
popular forms of L. quiétus, at rest, hence free, satisfied. Thus quit
is a shorter form of quiet. See Quiet. Der. quit, verb, from OF.
quiter, ‘to quit,’ Cot. (mod. F. quitter), And hence quitt-ance, ME.
quitaunce, spelt cwitaunce in Ancren Riwle, p. 126, 1. 7, from OF.
quitance, ‘an acquittance,’ Cot.; cf. Late L. quiétantia. And see
quite.

QUITE, entirely. (F.—L.) ME. quite, quyte. ‘And chaced
him out of Norweie guyte and clene;’ Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Lang-


toft, p. 50. This is merely an adverbial use of the ME. adj. quyte,
now spelt guit, ‘Thus the sense is ‘ freely,’ hence ‘entirely.’ See
Quit.


QUIVER (1), to tremble, shiver. (E.) Possibly allied to guaver,
q.v. It does not appear very early, yet is probably old. ‘A quiv’r-
ing dart ;’ Spenser, F.Q. iii. 5. 19. ‘I quyver, I shake ;’ Palsgrave.
‘Dido quyuered and shoke;’ Caxton, Eneydos, ch. 27, p. 103.
Allied to the obsolete adj. guiver, full of motion, brisk, Shak. 2 Hen.
TV, iii. 2. 301; which occurs, spelt cwiwer (=cwiver) in the Ancren
Riwle, p. 140, 1. 21; also as AS. cwifer, as in the ady. cwiferlice,
anxiously, eagerly ; Rule of St. Benet, ed. Schroer, p. 133, 1. 38.
Prob. of imitative origin; cf. quaver and quake. Cf. also EFries.
hwifer, lively, kwifern, to be lively (Koolman); MDu. kuyven,kuyveren,
to quiver (Kilian).

QUIVER (2), a case for arrows. (F.—OHG.) ‘ Thair arwes in
a quiuer sente;’ E. E. Metr. Psalter, x. 3. ‘ Quyver, Pharetra; ’
Prompt. Parv.<OF. cuivre, cuevre, coivre, a quiver. And see Diez,
Ss. V. couire.— OSax. cokar, a quiver; OHG. kohhar (cited by Diez),
mod. G, kécher, a quiver. Cognate with AS. cocur, cocer, a quiver,
Gen. xxvii. 3, Teut. type*ukuro-, whence Med. L. cucurum, a quiver.
Der. quiver-ed.

QUIXOTIC, absurdly chivalrous. (Spanish.) Formed as adj.,
with suffix -ic, from the name Don Quixote, or Quijote, the hero of
the famous novel by Cervantes. (The OSpan. « is now commonly
written as j; the sound of the letter is guttural, something like that
of G. ch.)

QUIZ, an eccentric person; one who ridicules oddities; a hoax.
(E.) Uistory obscure; said to have been coined by one Daly in
1791; yet already in 1782 Madame D’Arblay, Early Diary, p. 24,
has: ‘He’s a droll quiz.’ The toy also called a bandalore was
known as a quiz in 1790; which suggests a connexion with whiz.
It seems, in any case, to have been a coined word. Perhaps sug-
gested by in-quis-itive. See Davies, Supp. Glossary; Notes on E.
Etym., p. 238.

QUOIF, a cap orhood, (F.—MHG.—L.) In Shak. Wint. Tale,
iv. 4. 226. The same word as Coif, q.v.

QUOIN, a technical term, orig. a wedge. Used in architecture,
gunnery, and printing. (F.—L.) The orig. sense is ‘ wedge ;’ and,
as a verb, ‘to wedge up.’ ‘A printers guoyn, Cuneus ;’ Levins, 215.
17. Merely another spelling of Coin, q.v. A like change of c to
gu occurs in quoit, Der, quoin, verb.

QUOIT, COIT, a ring of iron for throwing at a mark in sport.
(F.—L.?) The older spelling is coit, .‘ Coyte, Petreluda ; Coyter, or
caster of a coyte, Petreludus;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘ Casting of coitis,’ Pecock’s
Repressor (A.D. 1449); in Spec. of Eng,, ed. Skeat, p. 51,170. AF.
coytes, pl. (1388); N.E.D. B. We find W. coetan, a quoit (where
W. oe=E. oi nearly) ; but this is borrowed from E., having no radical,
and therefore does not help us. y. We also find, on the other
hand, the Lowland Scotch coit, to justle or push about, occurring in
Fordun’s Scotichronicon, ii. 376; much like the OF. cotter. We
there read of a woman who ‘ Gangis cottand in the curt, hornit like
a gait’ [goat]. 5. The spelling coit suggests a F. origin; and
the word is prob. connected with the curious OF. cotter, to press,
to push, to hasten, incite, instigate (Burguy); cognate with mod,
Prov. coucha, couita, coita, to drive before one (Mistral) ; the Span.
coitarse is to hurry oneself, to hasten. If the OF. cotter could have
had the sense ‘ to drive,’ as seems possible, we may look on a quoit as
being a thing driven or whirled; but of this we have no evidence.
Coit, to push along the ice, as in the game of curling (Jamieson),
may have been the older sense in English, which may help. __e. The
origin of OF. coiter is very doubtful; hardly from L. coactére, to


RABBIT


force, from coactus, pp. of cdgere; see Cogent. It ought rather to
represent a Late L. type *coctare, a frequentative of L. coguere, to
cook, which in late authors also meant to harass or vex the mind
(Lewis). See Korting, § 2297. Der. guoit, verb, 2 Hen. IV, ii.


. 266.

‘QUORUM, a number of members of any body sufficient to trans-
act business. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. ‘Be of the guorum;’
Stat. of Hen. VII, fol. b5,1.6. It was usual to enumerate the mem-
bers forming a committee, of whom (in L., quorum) a certain number
must be present at a meeting. L..gudrum is the gen. pl. of gui, cog-
nate with E. who; see Who.

QUOTA, a part or share assigned to each member of a company.
(L.) Used by Addison; Spectator, No. 439, § 2.—L. quota (pars),
how great (a part), how much; fem. of guotus, how many. =L. quot,
how many; allied to gui, cognate with E. Who. Cf. Ital. quota, a
share (Baretti). Der. (from L. quotus) quote, q.v., @uoti-dian; (from
L. quot) quot-ient.

QUOTE, to cite, repeat the words of any one. (F.—L.)
Shak. Hamlet, ii. 1.112. Sometimes written cofe (Schmidt). —MF.
quoter, ‘to quote;’ Cot. Mod. F. coter, which is also in Cotgrave.
—Late L. quotdre, to mark off into chapters and verses; thus the
real sense of quote is to give a reference; see coted, Trevisa, tr. of
Higden, viii. 205 (L. guotavit). The lit. sense of guotare is ‘to say
how many,’ with reference to the numbering of chapters. —L. quota
(pars), fem. of guotus, how much, how many; see Quota. 4 Some-
times from L, guotare, immediately; esp. in early instances. Der.
quot-able, quot-er, quot-at-ion.

QUOTH,, he says, he said. (E.) Properly a pt. t., though some-
times used as a present. The form of the infin. is gueath, only used
in the comp. bequeath. ME. quoth, quod; Chaucer, C. T. 790 (A 788);
and common in both forms. AS. cwedan, to speak, say; pt.t. cw@d,
pl. cwédon; pp. cweden ; Grein, i.173.-4Icel. kveda; pt. t. kvad, pp.
kvedinn; OSax. guedan; OHG. quedan, pt. t. quat, quad; Goth.
kwithan, to say, pt. t. kwath. B. All from a Teut. type *kwethan-,
to say, pt. t. **wath, Allied to Skt. gad, to speak, gada-s, m. speech.
Der. quotha, for quoth he.

QUOTIDIAN, daily. (F.—L.) ME. quotidian, spelt cotidian,
Gower, C. A. ii. 142; bk. v. 464.— OF. cotidian (13th cent., Littré) ;
later quotidien, ‘daily ;’ Cot.—L. quotidianus, daily.—L. quoti-, for
quotus, how many; and di-és, a day; with suffix -daus. Hence
quotididnus =on however many a day, on any day, daily. See Quota
and Diurnal.

QUOTIENT, the result in arithmetical division. (F.—L.; or
L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. [Perhaps directly from Latin.]—F.
quotient, ‘the part which, in the division of a thing among many,
fals unto every ones share;’ Cot.—L. *quotient-, the imaginary
stem of L. guotiens, which is really an ady., and indeclinable ; it
means ‘ how many times.’=L. guot, how many; see Quota.


R


RABBET, to cut the edges of boards so that they overlap and
can be joined together. (F.—L.) ME. rabet, sb.; see Prompt.
Parv. ‘Many deep rabbotted incisions ;’ Holland, tr. of Plutarch,
p- 902 (R.). ‘ Rabettyng of bordes, rabetture;’ Palsgrave. The
Halifax gibbet, in Harrison’s Descr. of England, b. ii. c. 11, ed.
Furnivall, p. 2247, is described as having a block of wood ‘ which
dooth ride vp and downe in a slot, rabet, or regall betweene two
peeces of timber.’ Bailey has: ‘ Rabbet, to channel boards;’ and
also ‘Rebate, to channel, to chamfer.’ Apparently from OF.
rabatre, ‘to abate, deduct, diminish,’ Cot.; hence, to thin down;
mod. F, rabatire.—F. re- (L. re-), again, back; and OF. abatre, to
abate. See Abate. B. Confused, as above, with rebate, q.v.
Also, as shown by the spelling rabboted, with F. raboter, ‘to plane,
levell, make or lay even,’ Cot.; from F. rabot, ‘a joyners plane,’ id.
See Rebate.

RABBI, RABBIN, sir, a Jewish title. (L.—Gk. —Heb.) ‘ Rabi,
that is to seye maister;’ Wyclif, John, i.38. Also in the AS. ver-
sion. L. rabbi (Vulgate).—Gk. fpaBBi; John, i. 38.—Heb. rabbi,
lit. my master; from rad, great, or as sb. master, and 2,my. We
also find Rabboni, John, xx. 16; of similar import. ‘Rabbi was
considered a higher title than Rab; and Rabban higher than Rabbi ;’
Smith, Dict. of the Bible, q. v.— Heb. root rabab, to be great,
Cf. Arab. rabb, being great; or, as sb.,a master; rabbi, my lord ;
Rich. Dict. p. 719. The form rabbin is French. Der. rabbin-ic-al,
rabbin-ist.

RABBIT, a small rodent quadruped. (Walloon—MDu.) ME.
rabet; Prompt. Parv. The older word is cony. It is a dimin. form


In


RABBLE


only found in Walloon robett (Remacle) ; formed with F. suffix -et
from MDnu. robbe, ‘a rabet;’ Hexham; see also Kilian and De Bo.
Kilian also gives the dimin. form robbeken. Origin unknown; per-
haps cf. Norw. rabba, to snatch, snap up ; rabben, snatching, tearing,
quick (Ross). See Notes on E. Etym., p. 239.

RABBLE, a noisy crowd, mob. (MDu.) Levins has rabil, rable,
rablement. Ualliwell has: ‘ rabble, to speak confusedly,’ with an
example of ME. rablen used in the same sense; also: ‘ rabblement,
a crowd, or mob.’ ME. rabel, a rout, Gawain and the Grene
Knight, 1703,1899. So named from the noise which they make; cf.
MDu. rabbelen, ‘to chatter, trifle, toy;’ Hexham. So also prov. G.
rabbeln, to chatter, prattle; Fliigel. So also Gk. faBdooey, to
make a noise; whence dppdBag, a dancer, a brawler. The suffix -le
gives a frequentative force ; a rabble is ‘ that which keeps on making
a noise.’ And see Rapparee. Der. rabble-ment (with F. suffix),
Jul. Cesar, i. 2. 245.

RABID, mad, furious. (L.) ‘All the rabid flight Of winds
that ruin ships;’ Chapman, tr. of Homer, Odyss. b. xii. 1. 418.—
L. rabidus, furious. L. rabere, to rage; see Rage. Der. rabid-ly,
-ness. ;

RACA, a term of reproach. (Chaldee.) Matt. v.22. ‘Critics
are agreed in deriving it from the Chaldee réka, with the sense of
worthless ;” Smith, Dict. of the Bible.

RACCOON, RACOON, a carnivorous animal of N. America.
(N. American Indian.) It occurs in a tr. of Buffon, London, 1792.
The name of the animal in Buffon is raton; but this is only a
F. corruption of the native name, just as racoon is an E,
corruption. Spelt rackoon in Bailey, 1735. ‘ Arathkone, a beast
like a fox ;’ in a glossary of Indian words at the end of A Historie
of Travaile into Virginia, by Wm. Strachey ; ab. 1610-12 ; published
by the Hakluyt Society in 1849. ‘A beast they call aroughcun,
much like a badger;’ Capt. Smith, Works, ed. Arber, p. 59.
Evelyn speaks of ‘the Egyptian racoon;’ Diary, May 18, 1657.
From the old Virginian dialect of Algonquin. The F. raton is
assimilated to F. raton, a rat.

RACE (1), a trial of speed, swift course, swift current. (E.)
ME. ras, a Northern form. ‘Inavras;’ Met. Homilies, ed. Small;
p- 141. ‘In a raiss;’? Barbour, Bruce, v. 638. [The corresponding
Southern form is ME, rees, res (with long e), Gower, C. A. i. 335;
bk. iii. 167; Tale of Gamelyn, |. 543 (Wright), or ]. 547 (Six-text) ;
from AS. rés, a rush, swift course ; Luke, viii. 33.]4Icel. ras, a race,
running. Cf. Icel. rasa, torush headlong; Du. razen (G. rasen), to
tage. . The form of the Teut. base is *rés-. Cf. Gk. é-pw-7, a
quick motion. Der. race, verb ; race-course, race-horse, rac-er.

RACH (2), a lineage, family, breed. (F.) In Spenser, F. Q. i. 10. 60.
=F. race, ‘arace, linnage, family;’ Cot. Cf. Port. raga, Span. raza,
Ital. razza. Of unknown origin; not from OHG. reiza, a line, stroke,
mark; as suggested by Diez. See Korting (§ 7716), who suggests
rather a L. type *raptia. Der. rac-y, q.v.

RACH (3), a root. (F.—L.) ‘A race of ginger;” Wint. Tale,
iv. 3. 50; spelt raze, 1 Hen. IV, ii. 1. 27.—OF. rais, raiz, a root
(Burguy) ; cf. Span. raiz, a root.=L. radicem, acc. of radix, a root ;
see Radix.

RACEME, a cluster. (F.—L.) A botanical term; borrowed
from F, racéme, a cluster, in botany.—L. racémum, acc. of racémus,
a cluster of grapes. Der. racem-ed. Doublet, raisin,

RACK (1), a grating above a manger for hay, an instrument of
torture; a frame-work, a toothed bar. (MDu.) The word rack is
used in a great many senses, see Rack (2), &c., below; and, in
several of these, the origin is quite different. The word rack is seldom
to be found in early literature, in any sense. The oldest E. word
etymologically connected with rack (1) is AS, reccan, to stretch.
B. The radical sense of rack isto extend, stretch out ; hence, asa sb.,
that which is extended or straight, a straight bar (cf. G. rack, a rail,
bar; hence, a frame-work, such as the bars in a grating above
a manger, a frame-work used as an instrument of torture, a straight
bar with teeth in which a cog-wheel can work. The ME, forms are
rakke, rekke. ‘A peyre rakkes of yryne;’ E, Eng. Wills, ed. Furni-
vall, p. 56, 1. 27; ‘rakkes and brandernes of erne’ [iron] ; id., p. 57,
1. 273; A.D. 1424; ‘pro i. pari de rakkez,’ in a kitchen inventory,
York Wills, iii. 15; A.D. 1400, ‘A rakke, Preesepe,’ i.e. a rack for
hay; Prompt. Parv. ‘Rekke and manger’=rack and manger;
Romance of Partenay, 1. 913. =MDu. recke, a perch ora long pole,’
Hexham; Low G. rakk, a rack, frame-work for hanging things on,
a shelf (as in E.). Related words are Icel. rekja, to stretch, trace,
rekkja, to strain, rakr, straight; MDu. recken, ‘to stretch, reach out,
also to.racke,’ Hexham; Swed. rak, straight; G. rack, a rack, rail,
proy. G. reck, a scaffold, wooden horse, reckbank, a rack for torture,
recke, a stretcher, recken, to stretch. See below.

RACK (2), to stretch a person’s joints, to torture on the rack.

(MDu.) Allied to Rack (1) above. The verb seems to have been


RACY 495


introduced before the sb. ‘As though I had ben racked ;’ Skelton,
Phillip Sparowe, 1. 47. ‘Worthi to been enhangid .. Or to be
rakkid ;’ Lydgate, St. Edmund, ed. Horstmann, bk. ii. 277.—MDu.
racken, ‘to rack, to torture,’ variant of recken, ‘to racke,’ also ‘to
stretch, reach out, or to extend,’ Hexham; Low G. rekken, to stretch.
+lcel. rekja, to stretch; Goth. uf-rakjan, to stretch out ; AS. reccan,
to stretch, extend. Teut. type *rak-jan-, from *rak, 2nd grade of
Tent. *rek=Idg. 4/REG, as in Gk. dpéy-euv, to stretch, L. reg-ere;
see Regent. Brugmann, i. § 474. Der. rack, sb.; rack-rent, i.e.
a rent stretched to its full value, or nearly so.

RACK (3), light vapoury clouds, the clouds generally. (Scand.)
‘Still in use in the Northern counties, and sometimes there applied
to a mist;” Halliwell. Used in Shak. of floating vapour; see
Hamlet, ii. 2. 506, Antony, iv. 14.10, Sonnet 33,1. 6. So also (pro-
bably) in the disputed passage in the Tempest, iv. 156; where
Halliwell hesitates, though he gives instances of its use in earlier
English. Thus we find: ‘As Phebus doeth at mydday in the southe,
Whan every rak and every cloudy sky Is voide clene;’ Lydgate,
MS. Ashmole 39, fol. 51. ‘ The rac dryuez’ =the storm-cloud drives ;
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 433; a decisive passage. ‘A rac
{driving storm] and a royde wynde;’ Destruction of Troy, 1984.
‘The windes in the vpper region, which move the clouds above
(which we call the racke) and are not perceived below;’ Bacon,
Nat. Hist. § 115. [Frequently confused with reek, but this is quite
a different word.] It is the same word with wrack, and allied to
wreck ; but wrack is to be taken in the sense of ‘ drift,’ as rightly ex-
plained in Wedgwood.=—Norw. rak, Swed. dial. rak (Swed. urak,
Dan. vrag), wreckage, that which is drifted about ; cf. Icel. rek, drift,
motion; given in Vigfusson only in the sense ‘a thing drifted
ashore;” but Wedgwood cites isinn er i reki, the ice is driving;
skyrek, the rack or drifting clouds; cf. ‘racking clouds’ =drifting
clouds, 3 Hen. VI, ii. 1. 27. From Icet. reka, to drive, toss, thrust,
cognate with Swed. vraka, to reject, and E. wreak; see Wreak.
Cf. Swed. skeppet vraker, the ship drifts. Der. rack, for wrack; asin
the phr. ‘to go to rack and ruin;’ see Wrack.

RACK (4), to pour off liquor from the lees. (Prov.) See Halli-
well. In Minsheu, ed. 1627, who speaks of ‘rack wines, i.e. wines
cleansed and purged.’ ‘The reboyle to rakke to the lies;’ Russell,
Boke of Nurture, 115; in Babees Book, ed. Furnivall, p. 125.
Like some other words connected with the wine-trade, it is of
Gascon origin. = OProv. arracar, Prov. arraca (Gascony), to decant
wine (Mistral). Wedgwood quotes Languedoc araca le bi, to decant
wine. = Prov. raca, mod. raco, draco, lees, husks left after pressing out
wine or oil. Hence also MF. ragué; Cotgrave explains vin raqué as
‘small, or corse wine, squeezed from the dregs of the grapes, already
drained of all their best moisture.’ Of uncertain origin; but initial
d may have been dropped, asin Rankle, q.v. The mod. Prov. draco
answers to OF. drache, husks of grapes; perhaps of Teut. origin.
Cf. ME. drast, dregs (N. E. D.); and KGrting, § 3109.

RACK (5), a short form of Arrack, q.v. Cf. Span. raque,
arrack.

RACK (6), &c. We find (6) prov. E. rack, a neck of mutton;
from AS. hracca, neck, according to Somner; but this is prob. an
error. The AS, ‘ hreacca, occiput’ in OE. Texts (see p. 549) seems
to be miswritten for kzecca; still, we find ‘ Occiput, kracca,’ in Voc.
4603. 21. Also (7) rack, for reck, to care; see Reck. Also (8)
rack, a pace of a horse (Palsgrave) ; of uncertain origin. Also (9)
rack, a track, cart-rut ; cf. Icel. reka, to drive; see Rack (3).
RACKET (1), RAQUET, a bat with network in place of a
wooden blade. (F.—Span.—Arab.) ME. rakket. ‘Sa mony rak-
ketis;? Dunbar, Poem xiv. 1. 66 (ed. Small).—MF. raquetie, ‘a
racket;’ Cot. [The game of ‘fives, with the hands, preceded
rackets; to this day, tennis is called in French pawme = game of the
palm of the hand.]—Span. raqueta, a racket, battle-dore (Minsheu).
Perhaps from Arab. raha(¢), the palm of the hand; Rich. Dict.
p- 714. See Devic, in Supp. to Littré ; who suggests that the Span.
raqueta may have been confused with Port. rasqueta, the wrist, OF.
rachete, rasquette; which also is prob. of Arab. origin, viz. from
Arab. rusgh, the wrist joint; Rich. Dict. p. 733.

RACKET (2), a noise. (E.) ‘ After all this Racket ;’ Spectator,
no. 336, § 3. Of imitative origin; cf. prov. E. rattick, to rattle ;
rackle, noisy talk; also rabble. The Gael. racaid, racket, is merely
the E. word borrowed ; but cf. Irish racan, noise, riot; Gael. rac,
to make a noise like geese or ducks; Rouchi raque, ric-rac, words
imitating noises.

RACOON ; see Raccoon,

RACY, of strong flavour, spirited, rich. (F.—L. (?);_ with E.
suffix.) Racy means indicative of its origin, full of the spirit of its
race; and so is a derivative from Race (2); esp. in the sense of
a characteristic flavour or ‘raciness’ of a wine, supposed to be due
tothe soil ; see N. E. D. ‘ Fraught with brisk racy verses, in which we


496 RADDLE


The soil from whence they came taste, smell, and see;’ Cowley,
An Answer to a Copy of Verses sent me from Jersey, ll. 7, 8.
With respect to a pipe of Canary wine, Greedy asks ‘Is it of the
tight race?’ Massinger, New Way to pay Old Debts,i. 3. 10. Der.
raci-ness. @@ Probably sometimes used with some notion of
reference to L. radix; but race (2) is not derived from radix, which
appears only in Race (3).

RADDLE, red ochre; for marking sheep. (E.) Fitzherbert has
radel-marke, i.e. mark made with red ochre; Husbandry, § 52.
Allied to red; see Red. And see Ruddle.

RADIAL, RADIANT; see Radius.

RADICAL, RADISH: see Radix.

RADIUS, a ray. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1710. Chiefly used in
mathematics.=L. radius, a ray; see Ray. Der. radi-al, from F.
radial, ‘ of, or belonging to, the upper and bigger bone of the arme,’
Cot., formed with suffix -alis from L. radius, sometimes used to
mean the exterior bone of the fore-arm. Also radi-ant, spelt radyaunt
in Fisher, On the Seven Psalms, Ps. 130, ed. Mayor, p. 231, last line,
from radiant-, stem of pres. part. of L. radidre, to radiate, from
radius; and hence radi-ant-ly, radiance. Also radiate, from L.
radidtus, pp. of radidre. Also radiat-ion, in Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 125,
near the end, from F. radiation, ‘a radiant brightness,’ Cot., which
is from L. radiatidnem, acc. of radiatio, a shining, from radiare.

RADIX, a root, a primitive word, base of a system of logarithms.
(L.) LL. radix (stem radic-), a root; chiefly used as a scientific
term.4+Gk. jad:¢, a branch, rod. Cognate with E. Root, q.v.
Der. radic-al, spelt radycall in Sir T. Elyot, Castle of Helth, b. iii.
c. 3, from F, radical, ‘ radicall,’ Cot., formed with suffix -al (<L.
-alis) from rdadic-, stem of radix; radic-al-ly, radic-al-ness; also
radic-le, a little root, a dimin. form from the stem rddic-. Also
radish, called ‘ radishe rootes’ by Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth,
D. ii. c. 9, from F. radis, ‘a raddish root,’ Cot.; not a true F. word,
but borrowed from Prov. raditz (Littré), or from Ital. radice (Hatz-
feld), from L. radicem, acc. of radix. From L. radix we also have
e-radic-ate and rash (3). Doublets, radish, race (3).

RAFFLE, a kind of lottery. (F.—G.) ME. raffle (a game at
dice), Chaucer, C. T. Pers. Tale, De Avaritia ; Group I, 1. 793
(Six-text).— MF. rafle (spelt raffie in Cotgrave),‘a game at three
dice, wherein he that throwes all three alike, winnes whatsoever is
set ; also, a rifling ;’ Cot.—F. rafler, ‘ to catch, or seise on violently ;’
Cot. Perhaps from G. raffeln, to snatch up ; frequentative of raffen,
‘to raff, sweep, carry away, carry off hastily, Fliigel. Cognate
with Icel. hrapa, to hurry; see Rap (2). Der. raffle, verb.

RAFT, a collection of spars or planks, tied together to serve as
a boat. (Scand.) ME, raft; spelt rafte, and used in the sense of
‘spar’ or ‘rough beam;’ Avowing of Arthur, st. 25, in Robson’s
Met. Rom. p. 69. The orig. sense is ‘ rafter.” —Icel. raptr (pron.
raftr, in which r is merely the sign of the nom. case), a rafter; Dan.
raft, a rafter; see Rafter.

RAFTER, a beam to support a roof. (E.) ME. rafter,
Chaucer, C. T. 992 (A 990). AS. refter, AElfred, tr. of Beda, b. iii.
c. 16. An extension (with Idg. suffix -ro-) from the base RAFT
appearing in MSwed. raft, Dan. raft, Icel. rapir (rafir), a rafter,
beam. Again, Dan. raft is an extension (with suffix -to-) from the
base RAF related to Icel. raf, refr, a roof, which is cognate with
OHG. rafo, a spar, a rafter. Further allied to Gk. Epép-erv, to
cover; Gpopos, a roof. (4/REBH). Der. rafter, verb. And see
raft. @ It does not seem to be allied to roof, which has an
initial A; AS. hrof.

RAG, a shred of cloth. (Scand.) ME. ragge, Gower, C. A.i. 100;
bk. i. 1723. ‘A ragged colt’=a shaggy colt, King Alisaunder, 684.
We only find AS. raggie, adj. rough, shaggy; ‘Setosa, raggie,’
Mone, Quellen, p. 436; as if from a sb. *ragg. = Norw. ragg, rough
hair, whence ragged, shaggy (E. ragged); Swed. ragg, rough hair;
raggig, shaggy; Swed. dial. raggi, having rough hair, slovenly ;
Icel. rogg, shagginess; raggadr, shaggy. ‘Thus the orig. sense is
that of shagginess, hence of untidiness) Root unknown. The
tesemblance to Gk. fdxos, a shred of cloth, is accidental. Der.
ragg-ed, as above, also applied by Gower to a tree, Conf. Amant. ii.
177; bk. v. 15093 ragg-ed-ly, ragg-ed-ness; rag-stone (a rugged
stone), spelt ragston in Riley, Memorials of London, p. 262; rag-
wort, spelt rag-worte in Levins and in a Glossary (in Cockayne’s
Leechdoms) apparently of the 15th century.

RAGE, fury, violent anger. (F.—L.) ME. rage, King Alisaunder,
ed. Weber, 980.—F. rage.—L. rabiem, acc. of rabiés, madness, rage,
= L. rabere, to rave, to be mad. Der. rage, verb, rag-ing, rag-ing-
ly. Also en-rage, rave.

RAGOUT, a dish of meat highly seasoned. (F.—L.) Spelt
ragoo in Phillips and Kersey, to imitate the F. pronunciation.
Butler has ragusts, pl.; Hudibras, pt. ii. c. I. 598.—F. ragodt, a
seasoned dish.—F. ragotiter, to bring back to one’s appetite, with


RAKE


reference to one who has been ill.=L. re-, back; F. a<L. ad, to;
and gotit, taste; see Re-, A- (5), and Gout (2).

RAID, 2 hostile invasion, inroad. (North E.) A Northern border
word; and merely a doublet of the Southern E. road. Cf. ‘ That,
when they heard my name in any road, i.e. raid; Greene, George-a-
Greene, ed. Dyce, vol. ii. p. 169; ed. Collins, A. i. sc. 3. Jamieson
gives the Sc. pl. radis from Wyntown, viii. 34. 34. North. form of
AS. rad; cf. Icel. reid, a riding, a raid; Dan. red, Swed. redd, a
road. See Road, Ride. Doublet, road.

RAIL (1), a bar of timber, an iron bar for railways. (F.—L.)
ME. rail ; dat. raile, Gower, C. A. iii. 75; bk. vi. 2201. Not found
in AS.—OF.. reille, a rail, bar; Norm. dial. raile (Moisy).—L.
régula, a bar; see Rule. Cf. Low G. regel, a rail, a cross-bar;
Swed. regel, a bar, bolt; G. riegel, OHG. rigil, a bar; if these are
from Latin; but Franck (s.v. regel) considers them to be Teutonic,
and therefore distinct. Der. rail, verb, rail-ing, rail-road, rail-way.

RAT (2), to brawl, to use reviling language. (F.—L.) In Skel-
ton, Poems Against Garnesche ; see Skelton, ed. Dyce, i. 130, ll. 119,
137. ‘Rayler, a jestar, raillevr;’ Palsgrave.~F. railler, ‘to jest,
deride, mock ;’ Cot. [Cf. Span. rallar, to grate, scrape, molest,
vex; Port. ralar, to scrape; apparently from L. rallum, a scraper
(Pliny); for a Lat. type *rad-lum, from radere, to scrape. The
change of sense from scraping to vexing is in accordance with the
usual course of metaphors.} The F. railler answers to a Late L. type
*radulare, from L. radula, a scraper (Lewis), formed from radere, to
scrape. See Rase. See Littré and Scheler; and Korting, §§ 7719,
7733. Der. raill-er-y=F. raillerie, ‘jeasting, merriment, a flowt, or
scoff,’ Cot. Also rally (2).

RATL (3), a genus of wading birds. (F.) Given by Phillips, ed.
1710, as ‘a sort of bird.’ Spelt rayle in Levins, and in the Catholicon
Anglicum; but raale in the Book of St. Alban’s, fol. £7, back.
= OF. raale, raalle (Hatzfeld); MF. rasle, ‘the fowle called a rayle ;”
Cot. Mod. F. rdle. Littré notes raale as the 14th cent. spelling ;
also that the Picard form is reiJle, showing that the mod, E. word
agrees rather with the Picard than the Central F. form. . Pro-
bably the bird was named from its cry; but we can hardly connect
the form raale with the OF. raller, ‘to rattle in the throat,’ Cot.,
mod. F. raler.

RAIL (4), part of 2 woman’s night-dress. (E.) For hrail.
Obsolete; see Halliwell. ‘ Rayle fora womans necke, crevechief, en
quarttre doubles ;’ Palsgrave. ME. reel, Owl and Nightingale, 562 ;
see hrejel inStratmann. AS. hregl, hregl, swaddling-clothes, Luke,
ii. 12.4-OFries. hreil, reil,a garment; OHG. hregil, a garment,
dress. Teut. type *hragilom, neut. Root unknown.

RAIMENT, clothing. (F.—L. andScand. ; with F. suffix.) ‘ With
ruffled rayments ;’ Spenser, F. Q. i. 6.9. ME. raiment, Plowman’s
Tale, pt. iii. st. 30, 1. 936 (date uncertain), Short for arraiment, of
which the ME. form was araiment, and the initial a easily fell away.
‘Rayment, or arayment, Ormatus;’ Prompt. Pary. Cf. MF. arree-
ment, ‘ good array, order, equipage;’ Cot. See Array.

RAIN, water from the clouds. (E.) ME, rein; spelt reyne, P.
Plowman, B. xiv. 66. AS. regn, frequently contracted to réz, Grein,
i. 371.4-Du. regen; Icel., Dan., and Swed. regn; G. regen; Goth.
rign. B. All from Teut. types *reg-noz,m., *reg-nom,n. Prob.
not allied to L. rigare, to moisten; nor even to Lith. roké, sb.,
drizzling rain. Der. rain, verb, AS. hregnian, regnian, Matt. v. 45
(Northumb. version); rain-y, AS. rénig, Grein, i. 372; rain-bow,
AS. rénboga, Gen. ix. 13; rain-gauge.

RAINDEER, the same as Reindeer, q.v.

RAISE, to lift up, exalt. (Scand.) A Scand. word; the E. form
is rear. ME. reisen, Wyclif, John, xi. 11 ; spelt re33senn, Ormulum,
15599.—Icel. reisa, to raise, make to rise; causal of risa (pt. t. reis),
to rise. So also Dan. reise, Swed. resa, to raise, though these
languages do not employ the verb ‘ to rise;’ Goth. raisjan, causal of
reisan. See Rise. Doublet, rear.

RAISIN, a dried grape. (F.—L.) ME. reisin; spelt reisyn,
Wyclif, Judges, viii. 2 (later version) ; King Alisaunder, 5193. — OF.
raisin, ‘a grape, raisin, bunch, or cluster of grapes;’ Cot. Cf. Span.
racimo, a bunch of grapes.=— Folk L. ractmum, for L. racémum, acc.
of racémus, a bunch of grapes; see Raceme. Doublet, raceme.

RAJAH, aking, prince. (Skt.) In Sir T, Herbert’s Travels,
p. 53, ed. 1665. Of Skt, origin; from Skt. raja, nom., a king; from
the stem rajan, a king. The Skt. rajan is allied to L. rex; see
Regal. See Yule and Stanford Dict.

RAJPOOT, a prince. (Hind.—Skt.) Hind. rajpiit, a prince,
lit. the son of a rajah ; Wilson, Gloss. of Indian Terms, p. 434. —Skt.
raj-a, a king; putra-, a son; so that the lit. sense is ‘son of a king.’
See Yule and Stanford Dict.

RAKE (1), an instrument for scraping things together, smoothing
earth, &c. (E.). ME. rake, Chaucer, C..T. 289 (A 287). AS. raca,
to translate L. rastrum in Atlfric’s Gloss., 1. 9.4-Du. rakel, a dimin,


RAKE


form ; Dan, rage, a poker ; Swed. raka, an oven-rake (with base rak-) ;
allied to Icel. reka, a shovel, G. rechen, a take (with base rek-).
B. From the notion of collecting or heaping up. The root appears
in Goth. rikan (Teut. type *rekan-, pt. t. rak), to collect, heap up,
Rom. xii. 20. Perhaps allied to L. rog-us, a funeral pile. Der.
rake, verb, from Icel. raka, to rake,

RAKE (2), a wild, gay, dissolute fellow. (E.) ‘A gay, dissipated
rake;’ Sheridan, Duenna, ii. 3. First in 1653. Abbreviated from
rake-hell; which see in Nares. The latter is usually explained to be
a ‘corruption’ of ME. rakel, rash ; but the examples in the N. E. D.
show that this is unfounded. And in fact rake-hell is really com-
pounded of rake and hell. It arose from the phrase given in Udall,
Apophthegmes of Erasmus, p. 116 b:—‘Suche a feloe as a manne
should rake helle for. Hence it meant, as it were, the off-scouring
of hell, i.e. one who is very wicked. See Rake (1) and Hell.
Der. rak-ish, rak-ish-ly.

RAKE (3), the projection of the extremities of a ship beyond the
keel ; the inclination of a mast from the perpendicular. (Scand.) ‘In
sea-language, the rake of a ship is so much of her hull or main body,
as hangs over both the ends of her keel;’ Phillips,ed. 1710. — Evi-
dently from rake, to reach; Halliwell. Of Scand. origin; preserved
in Swed. dial. raka, to reach; raka fram, to reach over, project ; see
raka (3) in Rietz. The Dan. rage, to project, protrude, jut out, is
borrowed from G. ragen, to project; perhaps the Swed. word is the
same.

RAKEHELLD, a rascal. (E.) See Rake (2).

RAKYI, arrack, spirits. (Turk.— Arab.) See Stanford Dict. Turk.
raqi, arrack.= Arab. ‘araq, arrack. See Arrack.

RALLENTANDO, in music, a direction to play slower ; gradu-
ally. (Ital.—L.) Ital. rallentando, pres. part. of rallentare, to
slacken, retard. Ital. re-, again; and allentare, to slacken. =L, re-,
again; ad-, to; and lentare, to prolong, from lentus, slow. Cf.
relent, q. V-

RALLY (1), to gather together again, reassemble. (F.—L.)
Properly a trans. verb; also used as intransitive. Spelt rallie in Cot-
grave. It stands for re-ally; and Spenser uses re-allie nearly in the
same sense as rally; F. Q. vii. 6. 23. —F. rallier, ‘to rallie ;’ Cot. =
L. re-, again; ad, to; and ligare, to bind; see Re- and Ally. Cf.
prov. F. raller, to rally, grow convalescent; dial. de la Meuse
(Labourasse). 4 The form rely in Barbour’s Bruce, iii. 34, &c., is
used in the same sense; and is the same word, with the omission of
L. ad.

RALLY (2), to banter. (F.—Teut.) ‘Rally, to play and droll
upon, to banter or jeer ;’ Phillips,ed. 1710. He also gives : ‘ Rallery,
pleasant drolling.’ Here rallery is another form of raillery, and to
rally is merely another form of ¢o rail, which agrees more closely
with F. railler. See Rail (2).

RAM, a male sheep. (E.) ME. ram, Chaucer, C. T. 550 (A 548).
AS. ram, rom, Grein ; also ramm.+-Du. ram; OHG.ramm, Cf. Icel.
ramr, strong. Der. ram, verb, to butt as a ram, hence to thrust
violently forward, ME. rammen, Prompt. Parvy., p. 422. Also ramm-
ish, fetid, Chaucer, C. T. 16355 (G 887). Also ram-rod, ramm-er.

RAMADAN, a great Mohammedan fast. (Arab.) Spelt Rama-
zan, in Sandys, Trav., p. 56; see Stanford Dict. So called because
kept in the ninth month, named Ramadan, = Arab. Ramadan, pron.
Ramazan in Turkish and Persian. As it is in the ninth month of
the lunar year, it may take place in any season; but it is supposed
to have been first held in a hot season. The word implies ‘ con-
suming fire;’ from the Arab. root ramada, it was hot. See Devic
and Richardson.

RAMBLE, to stray, rove, roam. (E.) The frequentative of a
form rame, of which there are no clear traces. ‘ Rame, to gad about,
to sprawl, to spread out too much ;’ Holderness Glossary (E.D.S.) ;
but this is usually ream or raum. It does not occur till after 1600,
though we find ME, romblynge, rambling, as a variant of romynge,
roaming, in P, Plowman, C. vi. 11; cf. Shropsh. romble, to ramble.
Hence it may have arisen as a frequentative of roam. Nor is this
lower world but a huge Inn, And men the rambling passengers ;’
Howell, Poema, prefixed to his Familiar Epistles, and dated Jan. 1,
1641. And the pl. sb. rambles is in Butler, Hudibras, pt. iii. c. 2.
1016 (ed. Bell, vol. ii. p. 161, 1. 34). The 0 is excrescent; and
ram-b-le is for ramm-le. ‘Rammle, to ramble;’ Whitby Glossary.
@ Perhaps it has been somewhat influenced by the words ramp and
romp; the metaphorical sense ‘to wander in talk,’ presents no
difficulty. Der. ramble, sb., rambl-er, rambl-ing.

RAMIFY, to divide into branches. (F.—L.) ‘To ramify and
send forth branches;’ Sir T, Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 5. part 6.

=F, ramifier, ‘to branch, put out branches;’ Cot. Formed as if
from L, *ramificare; from rami-, for ramus, a branch ; and -ficare,
due to facere,tomake. B. Probably rdmus=*wrad-mus; allied to
Gk, fédapvos, a young branch; and to L, radix ; Brugmann, i. § 529,


RANCOUR 497


Der. ramific-at-ion (as if from L. *ramificare, whence sb. *raimifi-


ca-tio). Also (from L, ram-us) ram-ous, ram-ose, ram-e-ous,


RAMP, to leap or bound, properly, to climb, scramble, rear.
(F.—Teut.) ‘ Ramp, to rove, frisk or jump about, to play gambols
or wanton tricks ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706 ; and in Palsgrave. Not much
used, except in the deriv. rampant. ME. rampen, used by Chaucer
in the sense ‘ to rage, be furious with anger ;’ C.T. 13910 (D 3094).
Cf, mod. E. romp, which is the same word. Gower uses rampend,
rearing, said of a dragon, in the same way as the F. pp. rampant;
C.A. ili. 74; bk. vi. 2182. Cf. Prick of Conscience, 2225.—F.
ramper, ‘to creep, run, crawl, or traile itself along the ground; also,
toclimb;’ Cot. B. Froma Teut. source. Cf. Bavarian rampfen,
explained by Schmeller, ii. 96, by the G. raffen, to snatch. Scheler,
following Diez, says that the old sense of F. ramper was to clamber,
preserved in mod. F. rampe, a flight of steps; and that it is allied to
Ital. rampa, a claw, grip, rampare, to claw, and rampo, a grappling-
iron, y. The Ital. rampare (appearing in Proy. in the form rapar)
is, according to Diez, a nasalised form of rappare, only used in the
comp. arrappare, to snatch up, carry off, seize upon; and the base is
Teut. RAP, to be in haste, found in Low G. rappen, to snatch hastily
(Bremen Worterbuch), Dan. rappe, to hasten, make haste, Dan. rap,
quick, Swed. rappa, to snatch, rapp, brisk, G. raffen, to snatch;
see Rape (1). 6. But Korting derives Ital. rampa, a grip, from
Low G. ramp (Liibben), Bavar. rampf, a cramp, seizure; which is
allied to OHG. rampf, 2nd grade of OHG. rimpfan, to cramp. Cf.
Ripple (2), Rimple. Der. ramp-ant, chiefly used of a lion
rampant, as in Skelton, Against the Scottes, 135, from F. rampant,
pres. part. of ramper ; hence rampant-ly, rampanc-y.

RAMPART, a mound surrounding a fortified place. (F.—L.)
We frequently find also rampire, rampier, or ramper. Spelt rampyre,
Tottell’s Miscellany, ed. Arber, p. 172, 1. 18 (Assault of Cupid,
st. 5) ; rampart, Gascoigne, Fruites of Warre,st. 45. Rampire stands
for rampar (without the final ¢).— MF. rempart, rempar, ‘a rampier,
the wall of a fortresse ;’ Cot. Cf. remparer, ‘to fortifie, enclose
with a rampier;’ id. B. The OF. rempar, rampar (Supp. to
Godefroy), is the true form ; in rempart, the ¢ is excrescent. Rempar
corresponds (nearly) to Ital. riparo, a defence, and is a verbal sb.
from remparer, to defend, answering (nearly) to Ital. riparare, to
defend. sy. F. remparer is ‘to put again into a state of defence ;’
from re-, again, em- for ez, in, and parer, to defend, borrowed from
Ital. parare, which is from L. pardare, to prepare, make ready. The
Ital. riparare is the same word, with the omission of the preposition.
See Re-, Em-, and Parry.

RAMPION, a species of bellflower, sometimes used for salads.
(F.—L.?) In Tusser’s Husbandrie; § 40. Apparently evolved
from rampions, which was taken to be plural. =F. raiponce, ‘ram-
pions;’ Cot. The m may have been suggested by the Ital. ram-
ponzoli, pl. (Florio), Kluge, s.v. rapunzel, cites Late L. rapuncium,
which he connects with L. rapa, a turnip. So also in Korting,
§ 7759. Hatzfeld thinks the connexion with rapa unlikely,

RAMSONS, broad-leaved garlic. (E.) For hramsons. ‘ Allium
ursinum, broad-leayed garlic, ramsons ;’ Johns, Flowers of the Field.
Ramsons =rams-en-s, a double pl. form, where -en represents the old
AS. plural, as in E, ox-en, and -s is the usual E. plural-ending. We
also find ME. ramsis, ramzys, ramseys, Prompt. Parv. p. 4223; and
Way says that Gerarde calls the Allium ursinum by the names ‘ram-
sies, ramsons, or buckrams.’? Here again, the suffixes -is, -eys, -ies are
pl. endings. AS. hramsan, ramsons ; Gloss. to Cockayne, AS. Leech-
doms ; a pl. form, from sing. kramsa.4-OLow G. hramsa, sing. (Gal-
lée) ; Swed. rams-lok (lok=leek), bear-garlic; Dan. rams, or rams-
log (log = leek); Bavarian ramsen, ramsel (Schmeller) ; Lithuan.
kermuszé, kermuszis, wild garlic (Nesselmann). Further allied to
Gk. «pépvoy, an onion, Irish creamh, garlic, W. craf; Stokes-Fick,
p- 98; Brugmann, i. § 647. All from an Idg. base *krem- (*krom-).

RANCH, RANCHO, a cattle-breeding farm. (Span.— Teut.)
Ranch is the Anglicised form of Span. rancho, a mess, a set of persons
who eat together; applied in America to the ranchos, or rude huts
for herdsmen to lodge and mess together. Minsheu gives Span.
rancho with the sense of ‘a ranke, an order or place where euery one
is to keep or abide ;’ mod. rancheria, ‘a cottage where labourers
mess,’ Allied to F. rang; see Rank (1). From OHG. hring,


/a ring; also (like Span. rancho) a clear space in the midst of a ring
| of people.


So in Korting, § 8088. See my Notes on E, Etym.,
p- 241. ,
RANCID, sour, having a rank smell. (L.) A late word; in
Bailey, vol. i. ed. 1735; first found in 1646.—L. rancidus, rancid. =
L. *rancére, to stink; only used in the pres. part. rancens, stinking.
@ This word has probably influenced the sense of the E. adj. rank ;
see Rank (2). Der. rancid-ly, -ness ; also ranc-our, q.V.
RANCOUR, spite, deep-seated enmity. (F.—L.) ME, ran-


cour, Chaucer, C. T, 2786 (A 2784). — OF. rancour, ‘ rankor,


Kk


498 ‘RANDOM


hatred ;’ Cot.—L. rancérem, acc. of rancor, spite, orig. rancidness.
=L. *rancére, to be rancid; see Rancid. Cf. Norm. dial.
ranceur (Moisy). Der. rancor-ous, rancor-ous-ly.

RANDOM, done or said at hazard, left to chance. (F.—Teut.)
The older form is randon, or randoun; and the older sense is ‘force,’
impetuosity, &c., the word being used as a sb. It was often used
with respect to the rush of a battle-charge, and the like. ‘ Kyng
and duyk, eorl and baroun Prikid the stedis with gret raundoun ;’
King Alisaunder, 1. 2483. It often formed part of an adverbial
phrase, such as iz a randoun, in a furious course, Barbour’s Bruce, vi.
139, xvii. 694, xviii. 130; intill a randoun, id. xix. 596; in randoun
richt, with downright force, id. v. 632. So also at randon, orig. with
rushing force, hence, left without guidance, left to its own force,
astray, &c. ‘The gentle lady, loose at randon lefte, The greene-wood
long did walke, and wander wide At wilde adventure, like a forlorne
wefte ;’ Spenser, F. Q. iii. 10. 36. [The change from final -z to -m may
have been due to the influence of whilom, seldom ; so also ransom. ]—
OF. randon, ‘the swiftnesse and force of a strong and violent
stream; whence aller a grand randon, to goe very fast, or with a
great and forced pace;’ Cot. Thus the E. ady. at random answers
to F.@randon. _B. A difficult word ; Diez compares OF. randir,
to press on, Span. de rendon, de rondon, rashly, intrepidly, abruptly
(nearly like E. at random), OF. randonner, ‘to run swiftly, violently,’
Cot., and refers them all to G. rand, an edge, rim, brim, margin.
Hence also Ital. a randa, near, with difficulty, exactly ; of which the
lit. sense is ‘close to the edge or brim,’ Span. randa, lace, border of
a dress. y. The difficulty is in the connexion of ideas ; but Cot-
grave really gives the solution, viz. that randon refers to the force of
a brimming river. Whoever has to cross a mountain-stream must
feel much anxiety as to whether it is fl or not ; at one time it isa
mere rill, a few hours later its force sweeps all before it. ‘This com-
mon and natural solution is probably the right one. Cf. G. bis am
rande voll, full to the brim; am rande des Todes, on the brink of
death, at death’s door ; eine sache zu rande bringen, to bring a thing to
the brim, to fulfil or accomplish it. So also OF. sang respandus a
gros randons, blood shed ‘by great gushes, or in great quantity,’
Cot. ; lit. in brimming streams, 8. The G. rand is cognate with
AS. rand, rim, rim of a shield, verge (Grein), Icel. rénd, a rim, border,
Dan. rand, a rim, streak, Swed. rand, a stripe; all from a Teut.
base *rand-, Idg. *ram-t- (Kluge); allied to Rim and to Rind.
Cf. prov. G. ranft, a crust, a margin (Fliigel) ; OHG. ram/t, rind.

RANEE, RANI, a Hindoo queen. (Hind.—Skt.) Hind. rani,
queen (Forbes). =Skt. rdjni, queen; fem. of raja, king. See Yule.
See Rajah.

RANGE, to rank, or set in a row, to set in order, to rove. (F.—
OHG.) The sense of ‘to rove’ arose from the scouring of a
country by small troops or ranks of armed men; the orig. sense is
‘to set in a rank,’ to array. ME. rengen (corresponding to OF.
renger, the form used in the 14th cent., according to Littré), Rob.
of Brunne, p. 40,1. 26. § The helle liun rengeth euer abuten’ =the
lion of hell is always ranging (roving) about ; Ancren Riwle, p. 164.
Also rangen : ‘rangit all on raw,’ arrayed all in a row; Barbour,
Bruce, xi. 431.—F. ranger (OF. ranger, renger), ‘to range, rank,
order, array;’ Cot.—F. rang, ‘a ranke, id. See Rank (1).
Der. range, sb., Antony, iii. 13. 5. Also, rang-er, esp. one who
ranges a forest, Minsheu, ed. 1627 (see his explanation); rang-er-ship.

RANK (1), row or line of soldiers, class, order, grade, station.
(F.—OHG.) Spelt ranck, Spenser, F. Q. iii. 6. 35 (the verb ¢o
ranck is in the same stanza). [The ME. form is reng, Chaucer,
C. T. 2596 ; also renk, St. Brandan, ed. Wright, p. 12 (Stratmann); see
reng inStratmann. Reng became renk, altered afterwards to rank in
accordance with a similar change made in the F. original. ]=—OF.
reng, later rang, a ranke, row, list, range;’ Cot. He gives both
forms; and Godefroy (in Supp.) has renc, reng, rang. Scheler
gives the Picard form as ringue, Prov. renc. = OHG. hring or
hrinc, a ting ; cognate with E, Ring, q.v. And see Harangue.
The sense changed from ‘ring’ of men to a ‘row’ of men, or a
file irrespective of the shape in which they were ranged. The
Bret. renk is borrowed from OF., and the other Celtic forms from
F. or E, The G. rang is borrowed back again from F. rang.
Der. rank, verb (Spenser, as above); also range, q.v.; also ar-range,
de-range.

RANK (2), adj., coarse in growth, very fertile, rancid, strong-
scented. (E.) The sense ‘rancid’ or ‘strong-scented’ is late, and
perhaps due to association with L. rancidus, E. rancid, or with
OF. rance, ‘musty, fusty, stale,’ Cot.; but the sense may have been
developed independently of this. ‘As rank as a fox;’ Tw. Night,
ii. 5. 136. ME. rank, ronk. ‘Ronk and ryf;’ Allit. Poems, ed.
Morris, A. 843 (or 844). Often with the sense of ‘ proud’ or
“strong ;’ thus ronke is a various reading for stronge, Ancren Riwle,
p- 268, note c.


AS. rane, strong, proud, forward; Grein, ii. 363.4 |)


“RAP


Du. rank, lank, slender (like things of quick growth) ; MDu. ranck,
slender; Low G. rank, slender, grown high; whehce (perhaps),
NFries. rank, Icel. rakkr (for *rankr), straight, slender ; Swed. rank,
long and thin; Dan. rank, erect. B. Perhaps allied to OSax.
rink, AS. rine, a grown man, a warrior (N.E.D.). Apparently
from *renk, nasalised form of *rek, to stretch out; see Rack (2).

RANKLE, to fester. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Levins; spelt rankyll
in Palsgrave. It is rare in ME., but appears in Sir Beves of Hamp-
toun, ed. Kolbing, 2832; also in the Boke of St. Alban’s, fol. a 3,
back: ‘make the legges to rankle. The corresponding AF. verb
is rancler; the f. pp. ranclee, festered, occurs in the Life of Edw.
Confessor, 4166; whence aranclee, putrefied, in the same, 2615.
The verb is formed from the sb. rancle, a festering sore, Reliq. Antiq.
i. 52; from AF, rancle, Edw. Conf. 2677.—OF. rancle, raoncle,
forms which have lost an initial d. Godefroy gives draoncle, raoncle,
drancle, rancle, an eruption on the skin; and the verb draoncler,
rancler, to suppurate, rankle. = Late L. dracunculus, a kind of ulcer
or cancer; lit. ‘little dragon;’ called also dranculus morbus
(Ducange), as dragons were thought to be venomous. Dimin. from
L. draco, a dragon; see Dragon. See my Notes on E. Etym.,
p- 243. Corblet gives the Picard draoncler, to fester, and its
etymology.

RANSACK, to search thoroughly. (Scand.) ME. ransaken,
Chaucer, C. T. 1007 (A 1005); Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris,
2323.—Icel. rannsaka, to search a house, to ransack ; Swed. ransaka,
Dan. ransage.—Icel. rann, a house, abode; and -saka, allied to
sekja, to seek. B. The Icel. rann stands for rasn, by the assimi-
lation so common in Icelandic; and is cognate with Goth. razn,
a house, AS. ern, a cot; from Teut. base *ras, to dwell; see
Rest (1). Icel. sekja is cognate with AS. sécan, to seek; see
Seek. Cf. Guernsey and Norm. dial. ransaquer, Gael. rannsaich ;
from Scand. @ Not connected with AS. raz, Icel. ran, plunder,
which is quite different from Icel. rann.

RANSOM, redemption, price paid for redemption, release.
(F.—L.) ME. ransoun, raunson, Chaucer, C. T. 1178 (A 1176).
The change from final z to final m is not uncommon; cf. random.
Spelt raunsun, Ancren Riwle, p. 124, 1. 24.—OF. raenson (12th
cent., Littré), MF. rangon, ‘a ransome,’ Cot.—L. redemptionem,
acc. of redemptio, redemption, by the usual loss of d between two
vowels and preceding an accented syllable. See Redemption..
Der. ransom, vb. 3 ransom-er. Doublet, redemption.

RANT, to use violent language. (Du.) In Hamlet, v. 1. 307.
Also in the form rand; as in Marston, Malcontent, iv. 4.—MDu.
ranten; ‘randen, or ranten, to dote, or to be enraged ;’ Hexham.
Cf. Low G. randen, to attack any one, to call out to one; West-
phal. rantern, to prate; prov. E. randy, wild, unmanageable, mad.
+G. ranzen, to toss about, to make a noise, to couple (as animals).
Root uncertain. Der. rant-er.

RANTIPOLE, a romping child. (MDu. or Low G.) See
E.D.D. First known in 1700 (N. E. D.). The word is a mere
variant of frampold. ‘The former element appears in EFries. wrante-
pot, also frante-pot, a peevish man; cf. MDu. wranten, to chide,
MDu. wrantigh, quarrelsome. ‘The second element is prob. E.
poll, head. See Frampold. Rantipole also means a see-saw
(E. D. D.); the second element is then prob. E. pole.

RANUNCULUS, a genus of plants, including the buttercup.
(L.) In Evelyn’s Diary, Apr. I, 1644. =L. ranunculus, a little frog ;
also, a medicinal plant. Formed with double dimin. suffix -cu-lu-s
from ran-un-, extended from raza, a frog.

RAP (1), to strike smartly, knock; as sb., a smart stroke. (E. or
Scand.) ‘Rappe,a stroke;’ Palsgrave. ME. rap, sb., rappen, vb.,
Prompt. Parv. Cf. Dan. rap, a rap, tap; Swed. rapp, a stroke,
blow ; rappa, to beat; G. rappeln, to rattle. From a base RAP,
allied to RAT, the base of ratt-le; ofimitative origin. Cf. rat-a-tat-
tat, a knocking at a door. Der. rapp-er.

RAP (2), to snatch, seize hastily. (Scand.; partly L.) There is
some confusion in the forms and senses. a. The ME. rappen, to
hasten, is obsolete. It occurs in P. Plowm. A. iv. 23: ‘ rappynge
swipe,’ hastening greatly; related to Dan. rappe sig, to make haste,
Swed. rappa sig; and to Swed. rapp, quick, swift. Allied to Icel.
hrapa, MSwed. rapa, to hasten; whence ME. rapen, as in ‘rape pe
to shrifte,? hasten to confession; P. Plowm. B. v. 399; which is
also obsolete. B. We also find the allit. phrase rappe and rende,
to snatch up and carry off, as in Roy, Rede Me, ed. Arber, p. 74 ;
but Chaucer has rape and renne, C. T., G1422. Here rap answers
to Swed. rappa, to pilfer, allied to G. raffen, to snatch; but rape
seems to correspond to AF. raper, rapper, to seize upon, carry off,
which may be from L. rapere, to seize; see Godefroy. Palsgrave
has: ‘I rappe, I rauysshe;’ also, ‘1 rappe or rende, je rapine.”
y. Shak. has: ‘What, dear sir, thus raps you?’ Cymb. i. 6. 51,
Here the verb rap is almost certainly a back-formation from the


«


RAPACIOUS


pp. rapt (from L. raptus, pp. of rapere, above); cf. ‘ How our
partner ’s rapt!’ Macb. i. 3.142. See Rapt.

RAPACIOUS, ravenous, greedy of plunder. (L.) In Milton,
P.L.. xi. 258. ‘Who more rapacious ?’ Cowley’s Prose Works, ed.
Lumby, p. 68,1. 10. A coined word, formed with suffix -ows from
L. rapaci-, decl. stem of rapax, grasping. = L. rapere, to seize, grasp ;
see Rapid. Der. rapacious-ly, -ness; also rapac-i-ty, from F. rapa-
ité ‘rapacity,’ Cot., which from L. acc. rapacitatem.

RAPE (1), a seizing by force, violation. (L.) Levins has:
“@ rape, raptura, rapina;’ and ‘to rape, rapere.’ Caxton has:
‘murdre, rape, and treson ;’ Reynard the Fox, ed. Arber, ch. 33;
p- 95. The word is apparently from L. rapere, to seize; whence
_AF, rap, sb., rape, Stat. Realm, i. 211 (and see Britton) ; cf. F.
rapt, ‘a violent snatching,’ Cot. B. Perhaps affected by the
(obsolete) ME. rape, haste, occurring in the old proverb ‘ ofte rap
reweth’ =haste often repents, Proverbs of Hendyng, 1. 256, in Spec.
of Eng. ed. Morris and Skeat, p. 42. Chaucer accused Adam
Scrivener of ‘ negligence and rape,’ i.e. haste. And see King Hom,
-ed. Lumby, 1418; P. Plowman, B. v. 333; Gower, C. A. i. 296;
bk. iii. 517. From Icel. hrapa, vb., to hasten; cf. hrapadr, a hurry ;
Swed. rapp, Dan. rap, brisk, quick. See Rap (2). Der. rape,
verb.

RAPE (2), a plant nearly allied to the turnip. (L.) ME. rape,
Prompt. Parv.=L. rapa, a turnip, rape; also spelt rapum; whence
also MF. rave, ‘a rape;’ Cot.4-Gk. Janus, a turnip; cf. fagavis,
a radish; Russ. riepa, a turnip; G. riibe. Der. rape-oil, rape-cake.

RAPE (3), a division of a county, used in Sussex. (E.) Still in
use. It occurs in Arnold’s Chron. (1502), ed. 1811, p. 181; and
also in Domesday Book in the form rap (N.E.D.). It is prob. a
native word. It cannot be borrowed from Icel. hreppr, a district, as
suggested by Vigfusson. The spelling rope, occurring in 1380,
suggests an AS. form *rap; sothat a connexion with AS. rap, a rope,
is possible; cf. prov. E. rope, a measure, a rood (of land).

RAPID, swift. (F.—L.; or L.) In Milton, P. L. ii. 532, iv. 227.
=F. rapide, ‘ violent;’ Cot. [Or directly from Latin.]—L. rapidum,
acc. of rapidus, rapid, quick; lit. snatching away.—L. rapere, to
snatch, Brugmann, i. § 477. Der. rapid-ly, -ness; rapid-i-ty, from
F. rapidité< L. acc. rapiditatem. And see rap-ine, rav-age, rav-en (2),
rav-ine, rav-ish, rapt-or-i-al, rapt-ure, rapt.

RAPIER, a light, narrow sword. (F.) In Shak. Temp. v. 84.
In A.D. 1579, ‘the long foining rapier’ is described in Bullein’s
Dialogue between Sorenesse and Chirurge as ‘a new kynd of instru-
ment ;’ see note in Ben Jonson’s Every Man, ed. Wheatley, introd.
pp. xliv, xlv.—F. rapiere (mod. F. rapiére), ‘an old rusty rapier ;’
Cot. B. Of unknown origin, see Scheler and Littré; but Mr.
Wheatley’s note shows that, in 1530, Ja rapiere was ‘the spanische
sworde;’ see Supp. to Palsgrave, p. 908, 1. 1. This makes it
probable that Diez’s solution (rejected by Littré) is right, and that
rapiere is for raspiere, a name given in contempt, meaning a rasper
or poker. Hence also ‘a proking-spit of Spaine’ means. a Spanish
rapier (Nares). So also mod. Prov. raspiero, rapiero, a rapier, an old
sword (Mistral), allied to raspo, a rasp, a dough-knife (id.). Cf.
Span. raspadera, a raker (Neuman), from raspar, to rasp, scrape, file,
scratch ; also raspa, a shoemaker’s knife (Pineda), as well as a rasp;
see Rasp.

RAPINE, plunder, violence. (F.—L.) In Shak. Titus, v. 2. 59.
ME. rapyne, Hoccleve, De Regimine Principum, 4834.—F. rapine,
‘rapine, ravine,’ Cot.—L. rapina, plunder, robbery.—L. rapere, to
seize; see Rapid. Doublet, ravine.

RAPPAREE, an Irish robber. (Irish.) ‘The Irish formed
themselves into many bodies . .. called rapparees, &c.; Burnet,
Hist. of Own Time, b. v. an. 1690 (R.). ‘ Rapparees and banditti ;’
Bolingbroke, A Letter on Archbp. Tillotson’s Sermon (R.). = Irish
rapaire, a noisy fellow, sloven, robber, thief; cf. rapal, noise, rapach,
noisy. So also Gael. rapair, a noisy fellow. All perhaps from E.

-rabble. See Rabble.

RAPPEE, a kind of snuff. (F.-OHG.) Notin Todd’s Johnson.
*’Tis good rapee;’ Garrick, High Life below Stairs, A. i. Sc. 2.—=F.
rapé, lit. rasped; Littré quotes: ‘J’ai du bon tabac . .j’ai du fin et
du rapé;’ Lattaignant, Chanson. Pp. of raper, to rasp, of Teut.

-origin. See Rasp.

RAPT, carried away. (L.) ‘ Rapt in a chariot drawn by fiery
steeds; Milton, P. L. iii. 522. Where Higden (i. 196) has ‘ a Iove
raptam,’ the 15th c. E. trans, has ‘rapte by Iupiter.’=L. raptus, pp.
of rapere, to seize, snatch away; see Rapid. And see Rap (2).

RAPTORIAL, in the habit of seizing. (L.) Used of birds of
prey. Formed with suffix -al (<L. ~alis) from raptori-, decl. stem
of raptor, one who seizes.=L. rapere, to seize; see Rapture,
Rapid.

RAPTURE, transport, ecstasy. (L.) In Shak. Troil. ii. 2.
122; iii, 2.138. The word seems to.be a pure coinage; there is no


RASHER 499
F. rapture, nor Late L. raptura. Formed with suffix -ure (as in
conject-ure, &c.) from rapt-us, pp. of rapere, to seize; see Rapid.
Der. raptur-ous, raptur-ous-ly,

RARE, thin, scarce, excellent. (F.—L.) In Levins, ed. 1570.—
F. rare, ‘rare ;’ Cot.=—L, rarum, acc. of rarus, rare. Cf. Gk. apaids,
thin. Der. rare-ly, rare-ness. Also rari-fy, from MF. rarejier,
‘to rarifie,’ Cot., as if from L. *rareficare, but the classical L. word
is rarefacere, from facere, to make. Also rarefact-ion, from F. rare
faction, ‘a making thin,’ Cot.<L. acc. *rdrefactidnem, from rarefacere.
Also rar-i-ty, Temp. ii. 1. 58, from F. rarité, ‘ rareness, rarity,’ Cot.,
from L. acc. raritatem,

RASCAL, aknave, villain. (F.) ME. raskaille, used collectively,
‘the common herd,’ Morte Arthur, ed. Brock, 2881. See Prompt.
Parv., and Way’s note. ‘The route of rascaile,’ i.e. the rabble;
Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 276. ‘Certain animals, not
accounted as beasts of chace, were so termed; .. the hart, until he
was six years old, was accounted rascayle;’ Way. He also cites:
‘plebecula, lytell folke or raskalle; plebs, folk or raskalle. Cf.
‘ Rascall, refuse beest ;’ Palsgrave. B. As the word was a term
of the chase, and as it has the F. suffix -ail/le, it must needs be of F.
origin. AF. rascaille, Gaimar, 1826; AF. raskayle, rabble, Lang-
toft, i, 136 (F. racaille) ; OF. rascaille, rescaille (Supp. to Godefroy) ;
‘the rascality or base and rascall sort, the scumme, dregs, offals,
outcasts, of any company,’ Cot. y. Of unknown origin; but the
form rescaille suggests a comparison with mod. Prov. rascala, rescala,
rascalha (Mistral), to take off the inner skin of the chestnut, i.e. to
‘re-scale ;’ as if it were a sb. formed from OF. re-, again, and escaille,
a scale (F. écaille). UHatzfeld, s.v. écaille, notes that this is a Nor-
manno-Picard form. Cf. Seale (1). Moisy gives Norm. écaler, to
shell oysters, to break or tear to pieces. The sense of ‘ fragments’
or ‘second scalings’ would be appropriate; in fact, we find ME,
‘rascaly, or refuse, Caducum,’ in Prompt. Parv., and mod. F,
racaille, trash, rubbish. Der. rascal-ly, rascal-i-ty.

RASE, to scrape, efface, demolish, ruin. (F.—L.) Often spelt
raze, esp. in the sense to demolish; but it makes no real difference.
See Raze. ME. rasen, to scrape; Prompt. Parv.—F. raser, ‘to
shave, sheere, raze, or lay levell, to touch or grate on a thing in
passing by it,’ Cot.—Late L. rasdre, to demolish, graze; frequenta-
tive verb formed from rasum, supine of L. radere, to scrape.
Allied to rédere, to gnaw.—4/RAD, to scratch; cf. Skt. rad, to
split, divide, rada-s, a tooth. Fick, i. 739. Der. ras-ure, from F.
rasure, ‘a razing out,’ Cot. ; ab-rade ; e-rase, q.vV., e-ras-ure ; ras-or-
i-al, q.V.; raz-or, q.v.; rash (2), q.v. And see rodent, rat.
Doublet, raze.

RASH (1), hasty, headstrong. (E.) ME.rash, rasch, Allit. Poems,
ed. Morris, A. 1166 (or 1167). The final -sck suggests as AS. form
*rasc, with AS. sec=Scand. -sk, as usual.4-Dan. and Swed. rask, brisk,
quick, rash; Icel. rdéskr, vigorous; Du. rasch, quick; G. rasch,
quick, vigorous, rash; NFries. radsk, quick. Brugmann, i. § 795,
connects this word with OHG. rado, AS. rade, quickly. Der.
rash-ly, -ness; perhaps rash-er. Cf. rush (2).

RASH (2), a slight eruption onthe body. (F.—L.) In Johnson’s
Dict. ‘A pimple or a rash;’ Tatler, no. 38, § 11.—MF. rasche,
‘a scauld, or a running scurfe, or sore; a Languedoc word,’ Cot. ;
also spelt rasque. FF. rache, an eruption on the head, scurf (Littré).
Cf. Prov. rasca, the itch (Littré). So called because it is scratched ;
cf. Prov. rascar, Span. rascar, to scratch, scrape, formed from
a Late L. type *rasicare, to scratch, due to L. rdsum, supine of
radere, to scrape. See Rase.

RASH (3), to pull, or tear violently. (F.—L.) ‘ Rash, to snatch
or seize, to tear or rend ;’ Halliwell. ‘The second he took in his
arms, and rashed him out of the saddle;’ Arthur of Little Britain,
ed. 1814, p. 83 (R.). Cf. ME. aracen, afterwards shortened to
racen. ‘The children from hir arm they gonne arace,’ i.e. tore
away; Chaucer, C. T. 8979 (E 1103). ‘ Hur heere of can she race’
=she tore off her hair (Halliwell, s. v. race). —F. arracher, ‘to root
up, to pull away by violence,’ Cot. = L. exradicare = érddicare, to root
up; see Hradicate, Radix. )

RASH (4), a kind of inferior silk. (F.—L.) See exx. in Nares.
Adapted from F.; with sk for s. = MF. ras, ‘the stuffe called
serge. [The same as Ital. raso, ‘the stuffe called sattine ; also
shauen, smooth;’ Florio.] Named from its smoothness.—F. ras,
‘shaven ;’ Cot.=—L. rasus, pp. of radere, to scrape. See Rase.
@ Not from Ital. rascia, which Florio (perhaps wrongly) explains to
mean ‘ silke rash ;” see N. E. D.

RASHER, a thin slice of broiled bacon. (E.?) In Shak. Merch.
Ven. iii, 5. 28. ‘Rasher on the coales, guas: rashly or hastily
roasted ;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627. Thisetymology is prob. the right one ;
ef. ‘ rashed, burnt in cooking, by being too hastily dressed,’ Halliwell;


}and.see his examples. ‘In my former edition of Acts and Monu-


ments, so hastily rashed vp at that present, in such Sagar of
KK2


500 RASORIAL


time;’ Foxe, Martyrs, p. 645, an. 1439 (R.). See Rash(1). f. If
it meant ‘ slice,’ it is from rash, v., to cut, variant of Rase, q.v.

RASORIAL, the name of a family of birds. (L.) It includes
birds which, like hens, scrape the ground for food. Coined with
suffix -al (= L., -dlis) from rasori-, decl. stem of dsor, one who scrapes ;
see Razor.

RASP, to scrape, rub with a coarse file. (F.k-OHG.) ME.
raspen, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1545.—OF. rasper, mod. F.
raper, to rasp.—OHG. raspon, whence mod, G. raspeln, to rasp,
a frequentative form. Cf. OHG. hrespan, MUG. respen, to rake
together. Der. rasp, sb.; rasper; and perhaps rapier. Also rasp-
berry, q.V-

RASP-BERRY, a kind of fruit. (F.—OHG.; and E.) The
word berry is E.; see Berry. The old name was raspis-berry or
raspise-berry; see Richardson. ‘ Raspo, a fruit or berie called
raspise;’ Florio. ‘ The raspis is called in Latin Rubus Ideus ;’ Hol-
land, tr. of Pliny, b. xxiv. c. 14; thechapter is headed: ‘ Of Cynos-
batos, and the raspice.’ ‘ Ampes, raspises;’ Cot. B. Raspice,
raspise may have been due to MF. raspeux, ‘ rough as a raspe,’ Cot.;
but this should have given a form raspous. But the word was
evidently confused with the forms raspise, raspice, respice, which was
the name of a thin wine; spelt respice in The Squire of Low
Degree, 756. y- This is also a difficult form, but answers to
Late L. raspecia, raspis-wine, in Ducange; closely allied to Late L.
raspetum, and to OF. raspé, raspeit, with the same sense, in Supp. to
Godefroy; cf. Span. vino raspado, ‘a small liquor made by putting
water to the grapes after the wine is pressed out, and pressing them over
again ;’ Pineda. All from Late L. raspa, a grape (properly, pressed
grapes) ; cf. OF. raspe, pressed grapes (Supp. to Godefroy). The
connexion with E. rasp is shown by the Prov. raspa, to rasp, to
scrape the ground, to glean grapes (Mistral). Hence this form
raspise also goes back to the verb to rasp. 8. Lastly, raspise became
raspis, raspes, and was taken to be a pl. form, whence raspe, rasp.
Indeed, the prov. E. name for rasp-berries is rasps, to this day; and
raspes is used by Bacon, Essay 46. ‘The Ital. raspo also means a rasp.
See Rasp.

' RAT, a rodent quadruped. (E.) ME. rat, or ratte, P, Plowman,
B. prol.200. AS.ret, Ailfric’s Gloss., Nomina Ferarum; in Wright’s
Voc. p. 22, col. 2.44-MDu. ratte, ‘a ratt;’ Hexham; Du. rat ;
Dan. rotte; Swed. rdita; G. ratte, ratz. Cf. also Low L, ratus,
rato, Ital. ratto, Span. rato, ¥. rat. Also Irish and Gael. radan,
Bret. raz. B. Perhaps from 4/RAD, to scratch; see Rodent.
Cf. Skt. rada-s, a tooth, elephant; vajra-rada-s,a hog. Der. rat,
verb, to desert one’s party, as rats are said to leave a falling house.
Also rat’s-bane, ratten.

RATAFTA, the name of a liquor. (F.—Malay.) In Congreve,
Way of the World, i, 1. See Stanford Dict. ‘ Ratafiaz, a delicious
liquor made of apricocks, cherries, or other fruit, with their kernels
bruised and steeped in brandy ;’ Phillips, ed. 1710. —F’. ratajia, the
same; cf. F. ¢afia, rum-arrack. The etymology is perhaps that
pointed out in Mahn’s Webster. Malay aragq, ‘ arrack, a distilled
spirit,’ Marsden’s Dict., p. 5; and éafia, ‘a spirit distilled from
molasses (the French name for rum) ; arag bram tafia, three kinds
of spirit, enumerated in an old Malayan writing,’ id. p. 65. Again,
at p. 39 of the same we find araq, bram, tafia, arrack, bram, and
rum. Omitting bram, we have araq tafta, whence ratafia is an easy
corruption, esp. when it is remembered that araq is also called raq,
in Spanish raque, or in English rack; see Rack (5). B. The use
of both words together is explicable from the consideration that araqg
is a very general term, and is not a true Malay word, being borrowed
from Arabic; see Arrack. Thus ra/afia may mean ‘the rack (spirit)
called tafia.’

RATCH, a rack or bar with teeth. (G.?) ‘ Ratch, in clock-work,
a wheel with twelve large fangs,’ &c.; Phillips, ed. 1710. It is the
wheel which makes the clock strike. It seems to answer to G,
ratsche (N.K.D.). Weigand gives G. ratsche, a watchman’s rattle,
also, a clapper used during Passion Week instead of a bell in a clock-
tower. rom the verb ratschen, to rattle, MHG. ratzen, allied to G.
rasseln, to rattle, and to E. rattle; a verb of imitative origin. ‘The
‘Low G. ratsch means ‘ the sound made by tearing a thing forcibly.’
Cf, Bavarian rdtschen, to rattle, &c. in Schmeller. Hence also the
dimin. ratch-et, in watch-work, ‘the small teeth at the bottom of
the fusee or barrel that stop it in winding up’ (Phillips); but here
the -et is clearly due to the F. word rochet, as in la roue & rochet, the
ratchet-wheel of a clock (Hatzfeld); this is a different word, and
cognate with Ital. rocchetto, a bobbin to wind silk on, a rocket or
squib, the wheel ‘about which the cord or string of a clock goeth,’
Torriano. From OHG., rocco, G. rocken, a distaff; see Rock (3)
and Rocket,

RATE (1), a proportion, allowance, standard, price, tax. (F.—L.
In Spenser, F’, Q. iv. 8. 19, OF. rate, price, value (Roquefort); not


RATTLE


in Cotgrave.— L. rata, fem. of ratus, determined, fixed, settled, pp. of

reor, | think, judge, deem. Both ratum and rata occur as sbs, in
Late L. Cf. Brugmann, i. § 200. Der. rate, verb; rat-able, rat-
abl-y, rat-able-ness, rate-payer. And see ratio, ration, reason, rat-i-fy.

RATE (2), to scold, chide. (F.—L.) In Shak. Merch. Ven. i.
3. 108. Sometimes supposed to be a peculiar use of the word above,
as though to rate meant to tax, and so to chide. But, if this were so,
we should expect to find rate, to value, in earlier use; whereas, on
the contrary, the present word is the older of the two, being found in
the 14th century. Palsgrave distinguishes between ‘I rate one, I set
one to his porcyon or stynte,’ and ‘ I rate or chyde one.’ ME. raten,
to chide ; ‘ He shal be rated of his studying’ =he shall be scolded for
his studying, Chaucer, C. T. 3463. Moreover, we find the fuller
form araten, to reprove; see P. Plowman, B. xi. 98; ‘rebuked and
arated,’ id, xiy. 163.— OF. aratter, variant of areter, to accuse (Gode-
froy); also rater, variant of reter, repter, to accuse, blame (id.).—L.
*adreputare; from ad, to (prefix), and reputaire, to repute, which in
Late L. meant to impute to, ascribe to (Lewis). See Repute.

RATH, early, RATHER, sooner. (E.) Rather, sooner, earlier,
is the comp. form of rath, soon, now obsolete. We also find rathest,
soonest. ME, rath, early, ready, quick, swift, rathe, adv., soon;
comp. rather ; superl. rathest, soonest. ‘* Whyrise ye sorathe’ =why
rise ye so early, Chaucer, C. T. 3766 (A 3768). The word has lost
an initial %, and stands for hrath. AS. hrade, adv., quickly, comp.
hrador, superl. hradost ; from the adj. kred, hred, also written hred,
hred, quick, swift, Grein, ii. 99, 100.-4-Icel. hradr, swift, fleet; MHG.
hrad, quick ; (perhaps) Du. rad, swift.

RATIFY, to sanction, confirm. (F.—L.) In Levins; and in
Skelton, Colin Clout, 716. Spelt ratyfye in Palsgrave.—F. ratifier,
‘to ratifie ;’ Cot.— Late L. ratifictre, to confirm. —L, rati-, for ratus,
fixed; and -/icdre, for facere, to make. See Rate (1) and Fact.
Der. ratific-at-ion.

RATIO, the relation of one thing to another. (L.) Mathematical;
in Phillips, ed. 1706... ratio, calculation, relation; cf. L. ratus,
determined, pp. of reor, I think, deem. See Rate(1). Doublets,
ration, reason.

RATION, rate or allowance of provisions. (F.—L.) In Phillips,
ed. 1706.—F. ration, a ration ; see Littré. = L. ratidnem, acc. of ratio,
a calculation, reckoning ; so that a ration is a computed share for
soldiers, &c., according to the reckoning of their number; cf. ratus,
determined ; see Rate (1). Der. ration-al, reasonable, Minsheu, ed.
1627, from F. rational, ‘reasonable,’ Cot.; hence, ration-al-ly, ration=
al-ise, -ism, ~ist, -ist-ic ; ration-al-i-ty. Also ratio-cin-at-ion, Minsheu,
from F. ratiocination, ‘a discoursing, discussion,’ from L. ratio-
cindtionem, acc. of ratiocindtio, which from ratiocinadri, to reckon,
compute, a verb formed from the sb. ratiocinium, a computation =
ratio-ci-ni-um, formed by various suffixes from the base of ratio.
Doublets, ratio, reason.

RATLINES, RATLINS, RATTLINGS, the small trans-
verse ropes traversing the shrouds of a ship and forming a ladder.
(F.%) ‘ Rare-lines or Rattlings, in a ship, those lines with which are
made the steps ladderwise to get up the shrouds,’ &c.; Phillips, ed.
1710. But the old form was raddelyne, or radelynyng of the
shrowdes, Naval Accounts (1485-97), ed. Oppenheim, pp. 185, 277.
Perhaps the same as prov. E. raddlings, or raddles, long rods twisted
between upright stakes (which the ratlins resemble). Raddle appears.
to be the same word as radyll, the rail of a cart (Palsgrave). Per-
haps from AF, reidel, OF. ridelle, rudelle (Supp. to Godefroy, s.v.
ridelle), F. ridelle, ‘raile ofa cart,’ Cot. B. The Du. word is weeflijn,
i. e. weaving line or web-line, prob. because they cross the shrouds.
as if interwoven with them. Rare-lines, i.e. thin lines, is obviously
a corruption.

RATTAN, a Malacca cane. (Malay.) In Sir T. Herbert, Travels,
ed. 1665, p. 95. Spelt rattoon in Pepys, Diary, Sept. 13, 1660.
See Stanford Dict. Spelt ratan in Todd’s Johnson. = Malay rotan,
‘the rattan-cane, Calamus rotang ;’ Marsden’s Dict., p.152. Made
of the peeled stem of a climbing palm. — Malay rdaut, to peel, pare.

RATTEN, to take away a workman’s tools for not paying his
contribution to the trades’ union, or for having offended the union.
(F.—Late L.—Teut.) Modern; in Halliwell. The word was fre-.
quently used in connexion with Sheffield, where ratten is the local
word for a rat. ‘Ratten, a rat;’ Hunter’s Hallamshire Glossary.
The usual sense is ‘to do secret mischief,’ which is afterwards attri-
buted to the rattens or rats. ‘I have been rattened ; I had just put a
new cat-gut band upon my lathe, and last night the rats have carried
it off;’ Notes and Queries, 3 S. xii. 192; see E.D.D. B. The
prov. E. ratten is the same as ME. raton, ratoun, a rat, P. Plow-
man, B, prol. 158.—F. raton, ‘a little rat ;’ Cot.—Late L. ratonem,
acc. of rato, the same as ratus, a rat; a word of Teut. origin. See:
Rat.

RATTLE, to clatter, to makea din. (E.) For hrattle, initial


RAUCOUS


being lost. ME. ratelen, Arthur and Merlin, 7858 (Stratmann), =
AS. *hretelan, only preserved in AS. hretele, hratele, or hretelwyrt,
rattle-wort, a plant which derives its name from the rattling of the
seeds in the capsules; A. S. Leechdoms, ed. Cockayne, iii. 333.4
Du. ratelen, to rattle; ratel, a rattle; G. rasseln, to rattle; rassel, a
rattle. B. The form of the word is frequentative; and the sense is
“to keep on making a noise represented by the syllable hrat,’ this
syllable being of imitative origin ; allied to Gk. xpadaivey, to shake.
Cf. rat-a-tat-tat as the imitation of a knock ata door. So also Gk.
xpétos, a loud knock, xporeivy, to knock, make to rattle, xpotadifer,
to rattle; xpéradAov, arattle. Der. rattle, sb.; rattle-snake, a snake
with a rattle at the end of its tail; in Capt. Smith’s Works, ed.
Arber, p. 955; also rattle-traps, small knick-knacks, from traps
= goods; see Trap (2).

RAUCOUS, hoarse. (L.) Added by Todd to Johnson.=L,
raucus, hoarse; by changing -us to -ous (as often). Allied to L.
rauus, hoarse, Skt. ru, to sound; cf. Rumour. Der. razc-ity,
Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 700.

RAUGHT, pt. t. and pp. of Reach, q. v.

RAVAGE, plunder, devastation, ruin. (F.—L.) The sb. is the
more orig. word. Both sb. and verb are in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F.
ravage, ‘ravage, havocke, spoil;’ Cot. Formed, with the usual
suffix -age (<L. -Gticum), from rav-ir, to bear away suddenly; the
sb. rav-age was esp. used of the devastation caused by storms and
torrents; see Littré.—Folk L. *rapire, for L. rapere, to seize,
snatch, bear away; see Ravish. Der. ravage, vb., from F.
ravager, ‘to ravage,’ Cot.; ravag-er.

RAVE, to be mad, talk likea madman. (F.—L.) ME. raven,
Chaucer, C. T. 16427 (G 959).—OF. raver, cited by Diez (s.v.
réver), as a Lorraine word ; the derivative ravasser, ‘to rave, to talk
idly,’ is given in Cotgrave, who also explains resver (F. réver) by ‘ to
raye, dote, speak idly.’ Godefroy has OF. resver, raver, rever, to
stroll about, also to rave ; cf. F. raver, dial. dela Meuse (Labourasse) ;
mod. Prov. rava, to rave (Mistral), |B. The word presents great
difficulties ; see réver in Diez and Scheler; but the solution offered
by Diez is plausible, viz. that OF. raver is allied to Span. rabiar, to
rave, both verbs being formed from the Late L. and Span. rabia,
tage, allied to L. rabiés, rage. From L. rabere, to rage. See Rage.

RAVEL, to untwist, unweave, entangle. (MDu.) The orig.
‘sense has reference to the untwisting of a string or woven texture, the
ends of the threads of which become entangled together in a confused
mass. To unravel is to disentangle, to separate the confused threads.
‘The ravelled sleave [the entangled floss-silk] of care ;’ Macb. ii. 2.
37. To ravel out is hardly to disentangle (as in Schmidt), but
rather to unweave. £ Must I ravel out My weaved-up folly ;’ Rich. II,
iv. 228; cf. Haml. iii. 4. 186; and see examples in Richardson. ‘To
rauell or untwist ;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627.—MDu. ravelen, ‘to ravell, or
cadgell,’ Hexham; he also explains verwerren by ‘to embroile,
to entangle, to bring into confusion or disorder, or to cadgill.’ The
same as mod, Du. rafelen, EF ries. rafeln, to fray out, to unweave ;
Low G., reffeln, to fray out, ravel, pronounced rebeln or rebbeln in
Hanover and Brunswick (Bremen Worterbuch) ; Pomeranian rabbeln,
uprabbeln, to ravel out; Low G. rebbeln ut, to ravel out (Danneil).
We even find AS. a-rafian, to unravel ; Gregory’s Pastoral Care, ed.
Sweet, p. 245, 1.22. Der. un-ravel.

RAVELIN, a detached work in fortification, with two embank-
ments raised before the counterscarp.. (F.—Ital.) ‘In bulwarks,
rav'lins, ramparts for defence ;’ Ben Jonson, Underwoods, xiii, On
the Poems of Sir J. Beaumont, 1. 4.—F. ravelin, ‘a ravelin;’ Cot.
Cf. Span. rebellin, Port. rebelim, Ital. rivellino, a ravelin. B. It is
supposed that the Ital. word is the original, as seems indicated by
the old spelling in that language.—MItal. ravellino, revellino, ‘a
rauelin, a wicket, or a posterne-gate; also the uttermost bounds of
the wals of a castle, or sconces without the wals;” Florio. sy. But
the origin of the Ital. word is unknown. The suggestion, from L.
re-, back, and uallum, a rampart, is unlikely ; see Korting, § 8046.

RAVEN (1), a well-known bird. (E.) For hkraven, an initial h
being lost. ME. raven, Chaucer, C, T. 2146 (A 2144). AS. hrejfn,
hrefn, a raven, Grein, ii. 100.4-Du. raaf, raven ;,Icel. hrafn; Dan.
ravn; OLow G. hraban (Gallée) ; G. rabe, OHG. hraban. Teut.
type *hrabnoz, m. B. No doubt named from its cry. Cf. L. crepare,
to rattle.

‘ RAVEN (2), to plunder with violence, to devour voraciously,

(F.—L.) Quite unconnected with the word above, and differently
pronounced. The verb is made from an obsolete sb., viz. ME.
ravine, plunder, which accounts for the spelling ravin in Shak. Meas.
for Meas. i. 2. 133. ‘Foules of ravyne’=birds of prey, Chaucer,
Parl. of Foules, 1. 323. So also rayne, plunder, Ch. tr. of Boethius,
b.i. pr. 4, 1. 513 rauiner, a plunderer, id. b.i. pr. 3,1. 57.—AF. ravine,
plunder; Liber Custumarum, p. 18, l. 26; OF. _ravine, rapidity,
‘impetuosity (Burguy); mod. F. ravine; see Ravine. [This OF,


REACH


ravine must orig. have had the sense of plunder, as in AF.]=L.
rapina, plunder, pillage; see Rapine. Der. raven-ing ; raven-ous,
ME, ravynous, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 159, from F. ravineux,
‘ravenous, violent, impetuous, like a forcible stream,’ Cot.; raven-
ous-ly, -ness. Note that ME. ravine, mod. E. ravine, and E. rapine
are all one and the same.

RAVINE, a hollow gorge among mountains, (F.—L.)
Modern; added by Todd to Johnson.—F. ravine, a hollow worn
away by floods; explained by Cotgrave to mean ‘a great floud, a
ravine or inundation of waters ;’ showing that, even in E., a ravine
was a flood. In still older French, it means impetuosity, violence.
—L. rapina, plunder, hence violence; see Rapine. And see
Raven (2).

RAVISH, to seize with violence, fill with ecstasy, (F.—L.)
ME. rauischen (with u for v), Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. i. pr. 3,
1. 25; rawuissen, id. b. iv. pr..5, 1.16; b. i. met. 5,1. 3.—F. raviss-,
stem of pres. part. of ravir, to ravish, snatch away hastily. Cf. Ital.
rapire.— Folk L. *rapire, for L. rapere, to snatch; with a change of
conjugation; see. Rapine, Rapid. Der. ravish-er, ravish-ing,
Mach. il. 1. 553 ravish-ment, All’s Well, iv. 3. 281, from F. ravisse-
ment, ‘a ravishing, a ravishment,’ Cot.

RAW, uncooked, unprepared, sore. (E.) For hraw, an initial h
being lost. ME. raw, K. Alisaunder, 4932. AS. kréaw; spelt
hréw, Cockayne’s Leechdoms, i. 254, 1. 4.44Du. raauw; Icel. hrar;
Dan. raa, raw, crude; Swed. rd, raw, green ; OHG. r@o (declined as
rawer, rouwer), MHG. rou, G. rok. ‘Teut. types *hrawoz, *hr@woz.
B. Allied to L. criidus, raw, and to Skt. kriira-, sore, cruel, hard; also
to Gk. “péas (for *«péFas), raw flesh, Skt. kravya-, raw flesh ; L. cruor,
blood; Russ. krove, Lith. kraujas, Irish cra, W. crau, blood. Brug-
mann, i. § 492, (4/KREU.) See Crude. Der. raw-ly, raw-ness,
raw-boned,

RAY (1), a beam of light or heat. (F.—L.) ME. ray, Early E.
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, A 160. The pl. ‘rayes or beames’ occurs
in Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. ii. c, 12. § 2.—OF. raye, ‘a ray,
line,’ Cot.; mod. F. rat. Cf. Span. rayo, Ital. raggio.—L. radium,
acc. of radius, a ray, radius. Doublet, radius.

RAY (2), a class of fishes, such as the skate. (F.—L.) ME.
raye. ‘Hec ragadia, raye;* Wright’s Vocab. i. 222, col. 2, 1. 2.—
AF. raie, Liber Albus, p. 234; OF. raye, ‘a ray, skate,’ Cot.;
mod. F. raie.—L. radia, a ray; Pliny, ix. 24.

RAY (3), a dance. (MDu.) ‘Pipers of the Duche tonge, To
lerne . . reyes;’? Chaucer, Ho. Fame, 1236. — MDnu. rey, reye, ‘a
round dance;’ Hexham. Dnu. rei; see Franck.

RAY AH, a person, not a Mahometan, who pays the capitation-
tax; a word in use in Turkey. (Arab.) In Byron, Bride of Abydos,
ii. 20, It may be explained as. ‘ subject,’ though the real meaning
is ‘a flock, or pastured cattle.— Arab. ra‘iyah, a flock; from ra‘y,
pasturing, feeding, tending flocks ; Rich. Dict. pp. 716, 739. Doublet,
ryot, q. Vv.

RAZEH, to lay level with the ground, destroy. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Meas, ii, 2. 171. Also ‘to graze, strike on the surface,’ Rich. III,
iii.2, 11. Also ‘to erase,’ K. Lear, i. 4. 4. All various uses of
the verb which is also spelt rase; see Rase. Der. raz-or, q.v.,
ras-ori-al, q. v.

RAZOR, a knife for shaving. (F.—L.) ME. rasour, Chaucer,
C. T. 2419 (A 2417). Lit. ‘a shaver;’ OF. rasor, rasour, from F.
raser, to shave; closely allied to mod. F. rasoir, from Late L.
rasobrium. See Rase, Raze. Der. razor-strop.

RAZZIA, a sudden raid. (F.—Arab.) . F. razzia, razia; bor-
rowed from an Algerine razia, a peculiar pronunciation of Arab.
ghazia, a raid, an expedition against infidels (Devic) ; cf. Arab.
ghazi, a hero, a leader of an expedition. Arab. ghazw, making war;
Rich. Dict., pp. 1041, 1059.  @ Spelt ghrazzie in 1826 (N. E. D.).

RE-, RED.-, prefix, again. (F.—L.; or L.) F. re-, red-; from
L. re-, red-, again. The form re- is most common, and is prefixed
even to E. words, as in re-bellow, re-word (Shak.), but this is unusual ;
remarkable words of this class are re-mind, re-new. The form red-
occurs in red-eem, red-integrate, red-olent, red-dition. ‘The true ety-
mology of this prefix is still unsolved. 4 As this prefix can be
arbitrarily set before almost any verb, it is unnecessary to give all the
words which are found with it. For the etymology of re-address, re-
adjust, re-arrange, re-bellow, 8&c., &c., see the simple forms address,
adjust, arrange, 8c.

REACH (1), to attain, extend to, arrive at, gain. (E.) ME,
rechen, pt. t. raghte, raughte, pp. raught; P, Plowman, B. x1. 353;
Chaucer, C. T. 136. We even find raught in Shak. L. L. L. iv. 2.
41, &c.. AS. récan, récean, to reach; pt. t. r&hte; Grein, ii. 364.
+Du. reiken; OF riesic reka, retsia, resza; G. reichen. B. Further
connected with the rare sb. ge-réc, occasion, due time, occurring in


501


“Ps. ix. 9, ed. Spelman. This would give the orig. sense ‘to seize
‘the opportunity’ or ‘to attain to;’ Teut. type *raikjan-. Perhaps


502 REACH


allied to rice, sb., power, and to the adj. rice, powerful; G. reich,
kingdom. Der. reach, sb., Oth. iii. 3, 219; also a ‘stretch’ of
a river.

REACH (2), to try to vomit; see Retch.

READ, to interpret, esp. to interpret written words. (E.) ME.
reden, pt. t. redde, radde, pp. red, rad; P. Plowman, B. iii. 334;
Chaucer, C. T. 6371, 6373 (D 789, 791). AS. rédan, to discern,
advise, read ; a weak verb, pt. t. rédde, pp. geréd, Grein, ii. 366.
Allied to AS. réd, counsel, advice, id. 365. Also to AS. rédan,
to advise, persuade; a strong verb, with the remarkable redupli-
cated pt. t. réord. B. This strong verb answers to Goth. rédan,
in comp. garédan, to provide, a strong verb; also to Icel. rada, to
advise, pt. t. r@d, pp. radinn; also to G. rathen, pt. t. rieth, pp.
gerathen. Observe also G. berathen, to assist. All ultimately from
the Teut. type *r@dan-. Allied to Skt. radh, to make favourable,
propitiate, to be favourable to; Russ. radiete, to take care. Brug-
mann, i. § 136,149. Der. read-able, read-abl-y, read-able-ness ; read-
er, oe read-ing-book, read-ing-room. Also ridd-le.

READY, dressed, prepared, prompt, near. (E.) ME. redi, redy;
spelt redi, Layamon, 8651 (later text read) ; redi}?, Ormulum, 2527.
AS. r@de, ready, Grein, ii. 366. [In this instance the suffix -e was
turned into -i by confusion with the AS. suffix -ig (answering to
ME. -i, -y, E. -y)]. The MSwed. adj. reda, ready, is cognate, and
is connected with reda, to prepare. So also Dan. rede, ready;
OHG. reiti, ready ; mod. G. bereit, B. Thelcel. greidr (=ga-reidr),
teady, only differs in the prefix and suffix; so also Goth. garaips,
commanded. These adjectives are closely related to Icel. reidi,
harness, outfit, implements, gear, and to OHG. reita, Icel. reid, a
raid. We may look upon ready as expressing either ‘ prepared for
a taid’ or ‘prepared for riding, equipped.’ All from a Teut. base
raid, 2nd stem of Teut. *reidan-, to ride; see Ride, Raid. Cf.
G. fertig, ready; from fahren, to go. @ The use of ready in the
sense of ‘ dressed’ is found as late as the beginning of the 17th cen-
tury. ‘Is she ready?’=is she dressed; Cymb. ii. 3. 86. Der.
readi-ly, readi-ness, ready-made.

REAL (1), actual, true, genuine. (L.) Spelt reall in Levins ;
and in Tyndall’s Works, p. 104, col. 1, 1. 5, where it is opposed to
nominall, ME. real; Prompt. Parv. The famous disputes between
Realists and the Nominalists render it probable that the word was
taken immediately from the familiar Late L. realis rather than the
MF. real, ‘reall,’ given by Cotgrave. The mod. F. form is reel,
also given by Cotgrave. B. The Late L. redilis, ‘ belonging to the
thing itself,’ is formed from ré-, stem of és, a thing, with suffix
-alis.4Skt. rai-, property, wealth; cf. ra, to give, bestow. Der.
real-ly; real-ise, from MF. realiser, ‘to realize, Cot.; real-is-able;
real-is-at-ion, from MF. realisation, ‘a realization, a making reall,
Cot.; real-ism, real-ist, real-ist-ic; real-i-ty, from F. realité (Littré).

REAL (2), a small Spanish coin. (Span.—L.) In Swinburne’s
Travels through Spain (1779), letter 9, p. 56. And see Stanford


Dict.—Span. real, lit. ‘a royal’ coin.—L. régdlis, royal. See
Regal.
REALGAR, red arsenic. (F.—Span.—Arab.) | A term in


chemistry and alchemy. Spelt resalgar, Chaucer, C.T. Group G,
1, 814 (1. 16282).—F. réalgar; cf. the Low L. risigallum.=—Span.
rejalgar.= Arab. rahj al-ghar, powder of the mine, mineral powder.
= Arab. rahj, dust, powder; al, the; and ghar, a cavern, hence a
mine. See Rich. Dict., pp. 759, 1040. This etymology is due to
Dozy.; and see Deyic, supp. to Littré.

REALM, a kingdom. (F.—L.) ME. realme, Gower, C. A. iii.
199; bk. wii. 3179; ryalme, Sir Gawain and the Grene Knight,
1. 691 ; reaume, Will. of Palerne, 1964; rewme, Rom. of the Rose,
495. = OF. realme, reaume, roialme (Burguy); mod. F. royaume,
a kingdom ; answering to a Late L. form *régalimen (not found). =
L. régalis, regal; see Regal.

REAM, a bundle of paper, usually twenty quires. (F. —Span.—
Arab.) In Skelton, Works, i. 131, 1.174; spelt reme. Spelt reame,
in Minsheu, ed. 1627, and in Levins. We even find ME, reeme in
Prompt. Pary. p. 429; and ‘j rem papiri’ in the Earl of Derby’s
Expeditions, 1390-3 (Camd. Soc.), p. 154.=— OF. raime, rayme,
(Littré), a ream; mod. F. rame, Palsgrave has: ‘ Reame of paper,
ramme de papier.’ — Span. resma, ‘a reame of paper;’ Minsheu.
(Cf. Ital. risma.)— Arab. rizma(t), (pl. rizam), a bundle, esp. a
bundle of clothes ; Rich. Dict. p. 731. See Littré, Devic’s supp. to
Littré, and Scheler’s note on Diez; all agree that this etymology has
been completely established by Dozy. Devic remarks that we even
find the F. expression ‘ coton en rame, cotton in a bundle, and that
it is hopeless to connect this, as Diez proposes, with the Gk. dp:6pds,
number. Cotton paper was manufactured in Spain, where it was
introduced by the Moors.

REAP, to cut, as grain, gather a crop. (E.) ME. repen, some-
‘times a strong verb ; pt. t. rep, pl. ropen, P. Plowman, B, xiii. 374;


REBATE


pp. ropen, Chaucer, Leg. of Good Women, 74. OMerc. reopan,
Vesp. Psalter, Ps. 125.5; AS. repan, pt. t. rep, pt. t. pl. r@pon.
(But a commoner form is AS. ripan (pt. t.rap) ; allied to E, ripe ; see
Ripe. The occurrence of these two strong verbs with the same
sense is remarkable. |-4-Pomeran. reepex, to reap.

REAR (1), to raise. (E.) ME. reren, Rob. of Glouc, p. 28, 1. 657.
AS. réran, to rear, Deut. xxviii. 30. The form réran exhibits the
common substitution of r for s, and is cognate with Icel. reisa (mod.
E. raise). It is the causal of rise; and means ‘to make to rise.’
Tent. type *raisjan-, from *rais, 2nd stem of *reisan-, to rise. See
Rise. Doublot, raisé.

REAR. (2), the back part, last part, esp. of an army. (F.—L.)
‘To the abject rear;’ Troil. iii. 3. 162. But usually in phr. ‘in the
rear, Hamlet, i. 3. 34. ME. rere, but perhaps only in the com-
pounds rereward (see Rearward) and arere, adv., also spelt arrere,
P. Plowman, B. v. 354.—OF-. riere, ‘backward, behind,’ Cot. The
ME. arere, in the rear, answers to OF. ariere (Burguy), F. arriére,
‘behind, backward,’ adv.=L. retro, backward; whence ad retro>
OF. ariere. See Retro-. Der. rear-admiral, rear-guard, rear-rank;
also rear-ward, q.V.

REAR (3), insufficiently cooked. (E.) (For hrear.) Obsolete,
except provincially. Dryden has: ‘roasted rare;’ Baucis and
Philemon, 98. ME. rere; Prompt. Parv., p. 430, ‘If they [eggs]
be rere ;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii.c. 17. AS. hrér, half-
cooked, AS. Leechdoms, ed. Cockayne, ii. 272. Cf. Skt. grat, to
cook.

REARMOUSEBH, the same as Reremouse, q.v.

REARWARD, the rear-guard. (F.—L. andG.) Spelt rereward,
1 Sam, xxix. 2, Isaiah lii. 12, lviii. 8 ; this is merely the old spelling
preserved. [Not to be read re-reward, as is sometimes done.] ME.
rerewarde, Gower, C. A. i. 220; bk. ii. 1827; Morte Arthure, ed.
Brock, 1430. Cf. AF. rerewarde, a rearguard, Langtoft, i. 18; rere-
gard, id., ii, 282. Short for arere-warde, compounded of ME. arere,
behind, and warde,a guard; see Rear (2) and Ward. Warde is
an OF. form of garde; cf. arriere-garde, ‘the reregard of an army,’
Cot. Doublet, rear-guard.

REASON, the faculty of mind by which man draws conclusions
as to right and truth, motive, cause, justice. (F.—L.) ME. resoun,
Chaucer, C. T. 37; reisun, Ancren Riwle, p. 78, last line. —OF.
raisun, reson; mod. F. raison.—L. ratidnem, acc. of ratio, reckon-
ing, reason; allied to L. ratus, pp. of reor, think. See Rate (1).
Der. reason, verb, reason-er, reason-ing ; reason-able, ME. resonable,
P. Plowman, C. i, 1763; reason-abl-y, reason-able-ness. ‘ Doublet,
ration.

REASTY, rancid, as applied to bacon. (F.—L.) ‘ Much bacon
is reastie;’ Tusser, Husbandry, § 20. 2. ‘ Restie, attainted;’ Baret.
ME. reest, also resty; Prompt. Pary. In Wright’s Vol. of Vocab.
i, 155, the AF. chars restez is glossed by resty flees, i.e. flesh. Hence
resty is from AF. resté, left over, not eaten; and therefore not fresh.
= OF. rester, to remain; see Rest (2). 4 Sometimes ingeniously
altered to rusty ; ‘ you rusty piece of Martlemas bacon ;’ Middleton,
A Fair Quarrel, iv. 1. N.B. I now find that Wedgwood gave the
same solution long ago.

REATA, a rope of raw hide, for picketing animals; a lariat.
(Span.—L.) Spelt riata by Bret Harte; Cent. Dict.; Stanford
Dict.—Span. reata, a rope for tying.—Span. reatar, to tie.—L. re-,
back; aptare, to fit together; see Apt. :

REAVE, to rob, take away by violence. (E.)- Not common in
mod, E., except in the comp. be-reave, and in the pt. t. and pp. reft.
‘ Reaves his son of life;’ Shak. Venus, 766. And see Com. Errors,
i,t. 116, Much Ado, iv. 1. 198; &c. ME. reuen (with u=v), Chaucer,
C. T, 4ooo (B 3288)%. pp. raft, reff, 11329 (F. 1017).gee
réafian, to spoil, despoil, Exod. iii. 22; lit. to take off the clothes,
despoil of clothing or armour.=AS. réa/, clothing, spoil, plunder,
Exod, ili. 22.— AS, *réaf, 2nd stem of *réof-an, to deprive, a strong
verb (pt. t. rédf, pp. rofen), only in the comp. biréofan, beréofan
(Grein). Cf. Icel. raufa, to rob, from sb. rauf, spoil; which from
rjufa (pt. t. rauf, pp. rofinn), to break, rip up, violate; G. rauben,
to rob, from raub, plunder. Cf. Goth. biraubon, to despoil. B, All
from the Teut. strong verb *reudan-, pt. t. *raud. Allied to L. rum-
pere, to break; see Rupture. Brugmann, i. § 466. Der. be-reave;
and see robe, rob. Doublet, rod.

REBATE, to blunt the ‘edge of a sword. (F.—L:) In Shak.
Meas. i. 4. 60. ME. rebate=abate, Coventry Mysteries, p. 76,—
OF. rebattre (Hatzfeld); MF. rebatre, ‘to repell, repulse, beat or
drive back again;’ Cot. =—F.re- (L. re-), back; and OF, batre (mod. F.
battre), to beat, from L. battere, batere, popular forms of batuere, to
beat. Der. (from OF. batre) a-bate, q.v. _ Also rebate, sb., discount ;
rebate-ment, a diminution, narrowing, I Kings, vi..6, margin, where
the A. V. has “narrowed rests.’ Cf. also rebato, rabato, a kind of
ruff, Much Ado, iii, 4. 6, where the final -o seems to be an E,


REBECK


addition, as the word is not Span. or Ital., but French; from F.
rabat, ‘a rebatoe for a womans ruffe’ (Cot.), which from rabattre, to
turn back, for re-abattre.

REBECK, a three-stringed fiddle. (F.— Arab.) ‘And thejocund
rebecks sound ;” Milton, L’Allegro, 94. Hugh Rebeck is a proper
name in Romeo, iv. 5. 135. An old woman is called ‘an old
rebekke, and again, ‘an old ribybe, in Chaucer, C. T. 7155, 6959
(D 1573, 1377).—OF. rebec, ‘the fiddle tearmed a rebeck;’ Cot.
Also spelt rebebe (Hatzfeld, Roquefort).— Arab. rabab, rababa(t), a
tebeck, an instrument played with a bow; Devic.

REBEL, adj., rebellious, opposing or renouncing authority.
(F.—L.) The verb is from the sb., and the sb. was orig. an adj.
ME. rebél, rebellious, Rob. of Glouc, p. 72, 1.1625. ‘ And alle that
he rébel founde;’ King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, |. 3033. ‘Avaunt!
rebél !’ Lydgate, Minor Poems, Percy Soc., p. 35.—F. rebelle, adj.,
rebellious, wilful.=L. rebellem, acc. of rebellis, rebellious, lit. re-
newing war.=—L. re-, again ; and bell-um, war. See Re-, Belli-
gerent, and Duel. Der. rebel, verb, Barbour, Bruce, x. 129
(Edinburgh MS.); rebell-ion, Wyclif, 3 Kings, xi. 27, from F. re-
bellion, ‘ rebellion,’ Cot.; rebell-i-ous, Rich. II, v. 1.53 rebell-t-ous-ly,
“Ness.

REBOUND, to bound back. (F.—L.) ‘I rebounde, as a ball
dothe, je bondys;’ Palsgrave. And in Surrey, The Lover describes
his state, 1, 19; in Tottell’s Misc., ed. Arber, p. 24. Trevisa has
reboundynge, sb., tr. of Higden, i. 189.—F. rebondir, ‘ to rebound, or
leap back ;’ Cot.—F. re-, back; and bondir,to leap, bound. See
Re- and Bound (1). Der. rebound, sb., Antony, v. 2. 104; and in
Palsgrave.

REBUFF, a sudden check or resistance, repulse. (Ital.) ‘The
strong rebuff of some tumultuous cloud;’ Milton, P. L. ii. 936.—
Ital. rebuffo, ribuffo, ‘a check, a chiding, a taunt, a skoulding, a rating ;’
connected with Ital. ribuffare, ‘to check, to chide;’ Florio. Mod.
Ital. ribuffo, a reproof; ribuffare, to repulse.=Ital. ri- (<L. re-),
back ; and buffo, a puff, a word of imitative origin, like E. puff. See
Re- and Puff. Der. rebuff, verb.

REBUKE, to reprove, chide. (F.—L.) ME. rebuken, P. Plow-
man, B. xi. 419. —AF. rebuker, Langtoft, ii. 108; ONF. rebuker, to
defeat (a plan), Chardry, Vie des Set Dormans, 1. 1589; rebukier,
OF. rebuchier, the same (Godefroy).—OF. re- (L. re-), again; and
ONF. bucquer, buskier, OF. buschier, to beat, to knock, orig. to cut
trees, to cut logs for the fire, to lop (Godefroy, s. v. buschier), mod. F.
biicher, ‘ to rough-hew, to destroy,’ Hamilton. B. This OF. buschier,
F. bicher, is from OF. busche, F. briche, a log ; from Late L. busca,
alog (Ducange). Cf. Picard busker, buker, to beat, strike, knock
(Corblet); Walloon busquer, buquer, to strike, buque, a log (Sigart) ;
Norm. dial. baguette, a billet. Orig. ‘to cut back.’ Der. rebuke, sb.,
Sir Degrevant, 863 ; rebuk-er.

REBUS, an enigmatical representation of words by pictures of
things. (L.) ‘As round as Gyges’ ring, which, say the ancients,
Was a hoop-ring, and that is, roundasa hoop. Lovel. You willhave
your rebus still, mine host;’ Ben Jonson, New Inn, Act i. sc. 1.
‘ Excellent have beene the conceipt[s] of some citizens, who, wanting
armes, have coined themselves certaine devices as neere as may be
alluding to their names, which we call rebus;? Henry Peacham
(1634), The Gentleman’s Exercise, p. 155, § 2, B. 3. It refers to
representing names, &c., by things; thus a bolt and ¢un expresses
Bolton; and so on.—L, rébus, by things, by means of things ; abl. pl.
of rés, a thing; see Real. 4 Cf. omnibus.

REBUT, to oppose by argument or proof. (F.-MHG.; with L.
prefix.) ‘Rebutit of the prey ’=driven away from the prey, repulsed ;
Dunbar, The Golden Targe, 1. 180.—AF. reboter, OF. rebouter, ‘to
repulse, foyle, drive back, reject,’ &c.; Cot.=F. re-(=L. re-), back ;
and bouter, to thrust. See Re- and Butt (1). Der. rebuti-er, a
plaintiff's answer to a defendant’s rejoinder, a law term.

RECALL, to call back. (Scand.; with L. prefix.) In Shak.
Lucrece, 1671. From Re-and Call. Der. recall, sb., Milton, P. L.
y. 885.

RECANT, to retract an opinion. (L.) ‘Which duke... did
recant his former life ;’ Contin. of Fabyan’s Chron., an. 1553; ed.
Ellis, p. 712.—L. recantare, to sing back, re-echo, also to recant,
recall (Horace, Od. i. 16. 27); the orig. sense was perhaps to reverse
a charm.=—L, re-, back ; and cantare, to sing ; see Re- and Chant.
Der. recant-er, recant-at-ion.
word cant, and renders the derivation of cant from L. cantére mor
easy and probable.

RECAST, to cast or mould anew. (Scand.; with L. prefix.)
Also, to throw back again; ‘they would cast and recast themselves
from one to another horse;’ Florio, tr. of Montaigne, bk. i. c. 48.
From Re- and Cast.

RECEDE, to retreat. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1658. = L. recédere, to
give ground, retreat. See Re- and Cede. Der. recess, in Hall,


@> This throws some light on the


RECKON 503


Hen. VIII, an. 34. § 7, from L. recessus, a retreat, which from
recessus, pp. of recédere. Also recess-ion, from L. recessio.

CEIVE, to accept, admit, entertain. (F.—L.) ME. receiuen,
receyuen (with u for v). ‘He that receyweth other recetteth hure ys
recettor of gyle;’ P. Plowman, C. iv. 501.— AF, receiv-,a stem of
receivre, OF. regoivre; mod, F. recevoir. = L, recipere (pp. receptus), to
teceive. = L. re-, back; and capere, to take; with the usual vowel-
change from a to i in composition. See Re- and Capacious.
Der. receiv-er. Also receipt, ME. receit,; Chaucer, C. T. 16821
(G 1353), from AF. receite, Year-books, 1304-5, p. 295, OF.
recete, recepte, recoite (Littré), MF. recepte, ‘a receit,’ Cot., mod. F. re-
cette<L, recepta, a thing received, fem. of receptus. And see receptacle,
recipe.

RECENT, new, fresh, modern. (F.—L.) In Minsheu.—MF.
recent (F. récent), ‘recent, fresh.’=—L. recent-, stem of recens, fresh,
new. Der. recent-ly, -ness.

RECEPTACLE, a place in which to store thingsaway. (F.—L.)
In Shak. Romeo, iv. 3. 39.—MF. receptacle, ‘a receptacle, store-
house,’ Cot.—L. receptdculum, a receptacle; formed with dimin.
suffixes -cu-lo- from receptare, frequentative form of recipere, to re-
ceive; see Receive. Der. (like pp. receptus) recept-ion, formerly
a term in astrology, Gower, C. A. iii. 67, bk. vi. 1962, from F.
reception, ‘a reception,’ Cot., from L. acc. receptidnem; also recept-
ive, from OF, receptif (Godefroy); hence recept-iv-i-ty, from mod. F.
réceptivité, a coined word.

RECESS, RECESSION ; see Recede.

RECHEAT, a signal of recall, in hunting. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Much.Ado, i. 1. 242.—AF, rechet, ONorth F. rechet, variant of
recet, a retreat, hence, a note of retreat; see Godefroy, and cf. Norm.
dial. recheveir, to receive (Moisy).—L. recepium, acc. of receptus, a
retreating, a retreat.—L. receptus, pp. of recipere, to receive; see
Receive. Influenced by OF. racheter (< L. re-ad-captire), to
reassemble, to rally (Godefroy).

RECIPH, a medical prescription. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706;
he rightly explains that it is so called because it begins with the
word recife, i.e. take so and so.. B. Jonson has the pl. recipes,
Alchemist, ii. 1. 443.—L. recipe, imp. sing. of recipere, to take. See
Receive. So also recipi-ent, one who receives, from the stem of
the pres. part. of recipere.

RECIPROCAL, acting in return, mutual. (L.) In King Lear,
iv. 6. 267. Formed by adding -al to L. reciproc-us, returning,
alternating, reciprocal; whence also MF. reciproqgue, and obsolete
E. reciprogue, of which see examples inR. Lit. ‘ directed backwards
and forwards ;’ from L. *re-co-, backwards, and *pro-co-, forwards,
allied to procul, afar off. Brugmann, ii. § 86. Der. reciprocal-ly;
also reciproc-ate, given in Phillips as a grammatical term, from rect-
procatus, pp. of rectprocare, to go backwards and forwards, to recipro-
cate; reciproc-at-ion, from F. reciprocation, ‘a reciprocation, returning,’
Cot.; reciproc-i-ty, from mod. F. reciprocité.

RECITE, to repeat aloud, narrate. (F.—L.) In Levins, ed.
1570. ‘ Reciteth in the gospell;’ Caxton, Golden Legend, St. John
Evang. § 5.—F. reciter, ‘to recite, repeat,’ Cot.—L. recitare, to re-
cite; see Re- and Cite. Der. recit-al, North’s Plutarch, p. 14(R.),
recit-er 3 recit-at-ion, from F, recitation, in use in the 15th cent. (Littré),
though omitted by Cotgrave ; recit-at-ive, mod. F. récitatif, from Ital.
recitativo, recitative in music.

RECK, to regard. (E.) ME. rekken, frequently also recchen,
Chaucer, C. T. 1400, 2259; P. Plowman, B. iv.65. The vowel has
been shortened, being orig. long. AS. reccan, also récan (for *rdcian) ;
‘pu ne récst’=thou carest not, Mark, xii. 14.4-OSax. rokian ; Icel.
rekja; Pomeran. réken; MHG. ruochen, OHG. rohhjan, ruohhjan, to
reck, heed, have a care for. B. The é results, as usual, from 6
followed by : in the next syllable. The verb is a denominative, i.e.
from asb. The sb. exists in MHG. ruoch, OHG. ruah, ruoh, care,
heed, answering to a Tent. type *rdk-oz, m. ‘From Teut. *rok-, 2nd
grade of *rak-, as seen in Icel. rok, a reason, AS. racu, account,
reckoning, OSax. raka, an affair, OHG. rahha, subject, thing. See
Reckon. Der. reck-less, AS. recceléas, Ailfred, tr. of Gregory’s
Pastoral Care, ed. Sweet, p. 4, 1. 23, spelt réceléas, id. p. 5, 1. 23; cf.
Du. roekeloos ; reck-less-ly, reck-less-ness.

RECKON, to count, account, esteem. (E.) ME. rekenen,
reknen ; Chaucer, C. T.'1956 (A.1954); P. Plowman, B. ii. 61. AS.
ge-recenian, to explain, Grein, i. 440; the prefixed ge-, readily added
or dropped, makes no real difference. A derivative verb ; allied to
AS. ge-reccan, reccan, to tule, direct, order, explain, ordain, tell;
Grein, i. 440, ii. 369.4-Du. rekenen; (whence Icel. reikna, Dan.
regne, Swed. réiema); G. rechnen, MHG. rechenen, OHG. rehhanon,
to compute, reckon. B. All from Teut. base *rak-, as in AS, rac-u,
account, Icel. rdk, neut. pl., a reason, ground, origin, cognate with
MHG. racha, OHG. rakha, a thing, subject. Der. reckon-er; also
reck-on-ing, cognate with G. rechnung.


504 - RECLAIM


RECLAIM, to tame, bring into a cultivated state, reform. (F.—_


L.) ME. recleimen, reclaimen, esp. as a term in hawking; Chaucer,
C. T. 17021 (H y2).—OF. reclaim-, a stem of reclamer, ‘to call
often or earnestly, exclaime upon, sue, claime;’ Cot. Mod. F.
réclamer.—L. reclamare, to cry out against. L. re-, back, again ;
and clamare, to cry out. See Re- and Claim. Der. reclaim-able ;
also reclam-at-ion, from MF. reclamation, ‘a contradiction, gain-
saying,’ Cot., from L. acc. reclamationem, a cry of opposition.

RECLINE, to lean back, lie down. (L.) In Milton, P. L. iv.
333.—L. reclinare, to lean back. =L. re-, back; and clinare, to lean,
cognate with E. Lean (1).

RECLUSE, secluded, retired. (F.—L.) ME. reclus, masc.;
Fifty Early E. Wills, ed. Furnivall, p. 7,1. 31 (1395). The form
recluse is properly feminine, and it first appears with reference to
female anchorites. ME. recluse, Ancren Riwle (Rule of Female
Anchorites), p. 10, 1. 5.—OF. reclus, masc., recluse, fem., ‘closely
kept in, or shut up as a monk or nun;’ Cot. Pp. of OF. reclorre,
‘to shut or close up again;’ Cot.—L. recliidere, to unclose, but in


late L. to shut up.—L. re-, back ; and claudere, to shut. See Re-
and Clause.
RECOGNISE, to know again, acknowledge. (F.—L.) In


Levins. The MF. verb is recognoistre in Cot. mod. F. reconnaitre.
The E. verb is not immediately derived from this, but is merely made
out of the sb. recognisance, which was in rather early use, and occurs
in Chaucer as a legal term, C. T. 13260 (B 1520). —AF. reconisaunce,
Stat. Realm, i. 53 (1283); OF. recoignisance (13th cent., Littré),
later recognoissance, ‘a recognizing, also an acknowledgement of
tenure,’ Cot.—OF. reconoissant, pres. part. of reconoistre (F. recon-
naitre).—L,. recognoscere.mL. re-, again; and cognoscere, to know.
See Re- and Cognisance. Der. recognis-able; also recognit-ion,
in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, from L. acc. recognitidnem, nom. recog-
nitio, allied to recognit-us, pp. of recognoscere. And see reconnoitre.

RECOIL, to start back, rebound. (F.—L.) ME. reécoilén, used
transitively, to drive back, Ancren Riwle, p. 294, 1. 6. Also recule ;
‘I recule, I go back, ie recule;’ Palsgrave. Cf. AF. pres. pt.
recuillant, Langtoft, ii. 176.—F. reculer, ‘to recoyle, retire, defer,
drive off,’ Cot. Lit. to go backwards.—F. re- (=L. re-), back;
and cul, the hinder part, from L. ciilum, acc. of ciilus, the hinder part,
the posteriors. Der. recoil, sb., Milton, P. L. ii. 880.

RECOLLECT, to remember. (F.—L.) Used in Shak. in the
lit. sense ‘to gather,’ to collect again, Per. ii.1.54. From Re- and
Collect. Der. recollect-ion.

RECOMMEND, to commend to another. (F.—L.) ME.
recommenden, ,Chaucer, C. T. 16012 (G 544). From Re- and
Commend}; in imitation of F. recommander, ‘to recommend,’ Cot.
Der. réecommend-able, recommend-at-ion, recommend-at-or-y.

RECOMPENSE, to reward, remunerate. (F.—L.) ME. re-
compense, Gower, C, A. ii. 278; bk. v. 4505.—OF. recompenser (F.
récompenser), ‘to recompence;’ Cot.—L. re-, again; and compen-
sare; see Re- and Compensate. Der. recompense, sb., Timon, v. I.


153.

RECONCILE, to restore to friendship, cause to agree. (F.—L.)
ME. reconcilen, Gower, C. A. iii. 138 ; bk, vii. 1578. — OF. reconcilier,
‘to reconcile, Cot.—L. reconciliare, to reconcile, lit. to bring into
counsel again. See Re- and Conciliate. Der. reconcil-er, recon-
cil-able ; reconciliat-ion, from OF. reconciliation (Cot.)<L. acc. re-
conciliatiOnem,

RECONDITE,, secret, profound. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706. =
L. reconditus, put away, hidden, secret; pp. of recondere, to put
back again.=L. re-, again; and condere, to put together. B. The
L. condere (in which the prefixis con-, for com-=cum, with), contains
the weak grade of the 4/ DHE, to put, place. Brugmann, i. § 573.
Cf. abs-cond. And see Do.

RECONNOITRE, to survey, examine from a military point
of view. (F.—L.) ‘She reconnoitres fancy’s airy band;’ Young,
Night Thoughts, Nt. ii. 1.265. See Spectator, no. 165, § 5.—OF.
reconoistre (Littré), mod. F. reconnaitre, ‘to recognize;.. also, to
take a precise view of;’ Cot. See Recognise. Der. recon-
naiss-ance, from mod. F. reconnaissance ; of which recognisance is a
doublet.

RECORD, to register, enrol, celebrate. (F.—L.) ME. recorden,
to repeat, remind, Ancren Riwle, p. 256, 1. 10; Chaucer, C. T. 831
(A 829).—OF. recorder, ‘to repeat, recite, report,’ Cot.—L. recor-
dare, more usually recordari, to call a thing to mind.—L. re-,
again; and cord-, stem of cor, the heart, cognate with E. heart.
See Re- and Heart. Der. record, sb., Chaucer, C. T. 7631 (D
2049), from OF. record, ‘a record, witnesse,’ Cot.; record-er,
record-er-ship.

RECOUNT, to tell again, narrate. (F.—L.) In Skelton, Philip
Sparowe, 1. 613. ‘Who may recounte,’ &c.; Caxton, G. Legend, St.
Pawlyne, § 8.—OF. reconter, to tell again (Godefroy). From Re-


RECTILINEAL, RECTILINEAR


and Count. ‘The F. conter often has the sense ‘to relate;’ the F.
compound verb is written raconter, which Cotgrave explains by ‘to
tell, relate, report, rehearse;’ where the prefix ra- represents L.
re-ad-.

RECOUP, to diminish a loss by keeping back a part as a claim
for damages. (F.—L. and Gk.) Spelt recoupe in Phillips, ed. 1706 ;
whom see. It means lit. to secure a piece or shred.—F. recoupe, ‘a
shred,’ Cot.mF. recouper, to cut again. F, re- (=L, re-), again;
and couper, to cut, a word of Gk. origin. See Re- and Coppice.

RECOURSE, a going to or resorting to for aid. (F.—L.) ME.
recours, Chaucer, C. T. 10389 (F 75).—F. recours, ‘a recourse,
refuge,’ Cot.—L. recursum, acc. of recursus, a running back, re-
turn, retreat.=—L. recursus, pp. of recurrere. See Recur and
Course.

RECOVER, to get again, regain. (F.—L.) ME. recoeuren (with
u for v), P. Plowman, B. xix. 239; also recoweren, rekeueren, id. C.
xxii. 245; King Alisaunder, 5835.—OF. recovrer, recuvrer (Burguy),
F. recouvrer, ‘to recover ;” Cot.=L. recuperdre, to recover; also to
recruit oneself. B. A difficult word; zot connected with Sabine
cuprus, good. Also spelt reciperare, and extended from recipere, like
tolerdre from tollere. From re-, back again, and capere, to take.
Cf. Brugmann, i. § 244 (4). For the vowel zw, cf. oc-cup-are. Der.
recover-able; recover-y, All’s Well, iv. 1. 38. Doublet, re-
cuperate.

RECREANT, cowardly, apostate. (F.—L.) ME. recreant,
Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 9, l. 24; recreaunt, P. Plowman,
B. xviii. 100.—OF. recreant, ‘tired, toyled, faint-hearted,’ Cot. ;
properly the pres. part. of recroire, ‘to beleeve again ; also, to restore,
deliver, or give back ;’ id.; (hence, to give in). And cf. MF, recreu,
‘tired, wearie, faint-hearted,’ id. B. The pres. part. recreant and
pp. recreu partook of the sense of Late L. recrédere, from which
MF. recroire is derived. This verb, lit. to believe again, or to alter
one’s faith, was also used in the phrase se recrédere, to own oneself
beaten in a duel or judicial combat. The same sense reappears
in Ital. ricreduto, ‘a miscreant, recreant, a misbeleeving wretch;’
Florio. = L. re-, again ; and crédere, to believe; see Re- and Creed.
Der. recreanc-y. And see mis-creant.

RECREATION, amusement. (F.—L.) ME. recreation, Gower,
C, A. iii. 100; bk. vii. 477.—F. recreation, ‘recreation, pastime ;’
Cot.= L. recreationem, acc. of recredtio, recovery from illness (Pliny) ;
cf. L. recredtus, pp. of recreare, to refresh, revive; whence the sense
of to amuse by way of invigorating the system or mind. Lit. ‘to
create anew.’ See Re- and Create. Der. recreate, in Palsgrave,
from L. pp. recredtus. Also recreat-ive.

RECRIMINATEH, to accuse in return. (L.) In Phillips, ed.
1706.—L. re-, again; and crimindtus, pp. of crimindri, to accuse of
crime; from crimin-, stem of crimen; see Crime. Der. recrimin-at-
ion, from MF. recrimination, ‘a recrimination,’ Cot.; recriminat-or-y,
recriminat-ive.

RECRUDESCENCEH, a reopening, renewal. (L.) In North’s
Examen, ed. 1740, p. 632. From L. recriidescent-, stem of pres.
part. of recridescere, to become raw again, to open again (as a
wound). = L. re-, again; and criidus, raw; see Crude.

RECRUIT, to enlist new soldiers. (F.—L.) ‘To recrute and
maintain their army when raised;’ Prynne, Treachery and Dis-
loyalty, pt. iv. p. 33 (R.). ‘A recruit [supply] of new people;”
Howell, Famil. Letters, vol. i. pt. i. let. 38, § 7.—F. recruter, not
given in Cotgrave, but explained by Littré by ‘to levy troops.’ He
tells us that it is an ill-formed word, first found in the 17th century.
Formed from *recrute, a mistaken or provincial form for recrue, fem.
of recri, pp. of recrottre, to grow again. See also Hatzfeld. The
sb. recrut occurs in Roumansch. B, The word recrue is used asasb.,
and means ‘a levy of troops.’ [The ¢ appears in MF. recroist, ‘a re-
increase, a new or second growth,’ Cot.; cf. recroisire, ‘ to re-encrease,”
id.J—F. re-, again; and croé#tre (OF. croistre), to grow.—L. re-,
again; and crescere, to grow; see Re- and Crescent. Der.
recruit, sb. recruit-er, recruit-ing.

RECTANGLE, a four-sided figure, of which all the angles are
right angles. (F.—L.) In Phillips, ed. 1658; he says it was used to
denote a right angle. =F, rectangle, ‘a strait or even angle;’ Cot. =
L. rectangulus, having a right angle. = L. rect-us, right ; and angulus,
an angle; see Rectify and Angle. Der. rectangl-ed, rectangul-ar.

RECTIFY, to make right, adjust. (F.—L.) ‘To rectyfye and
amend;’ Skelton, Colin Clout, 1265. ME. rectifien, Lanfrank,
Cirurgie, p. 80, 1. 3.—F. rectifier, ‘to rectifie;? Cot.—Late L.
rectificare, to make right.=L. recti-, for rectus, right, cognate with
E. right; and -fic-, for fac-ere, to make. See Right and Fact.
Der. reciifi-able, rectific-at-ion, rectifi-er.

RECTILINEAL, RECTILINEAR, bounded by right or
straight lines. (L.) | Spelt rectiineal in Phillips, ed. 1706. Formed
with suffix -al (<L. -dlis) or -ar (<L. -Gris) from rectiline-us,


RECTITUDE


rectilineal.=L. recti-, for rectus, right; and line-a, a line.
Right and Line.

RECTITUDE, uprightness. (F.—L.) ‘ By the rectitude of his
justice ;” Golden Book, let. 11 (R.).—F. rectitude, omitted by Cot-
grave, but used in the 14th cent. (Littré).—L. rectitiido, straightness,
uprightness ; formed with suffix -¢aido from recti-, for rectus, straight,
cognate with E. Right, q.v. 4 So also rect-or, lit. a ruler, All’s
Well, iv. 3. 69, from L. rector, a ruler; which is for *reg-tor ; from
regere, to rule; see Regiment. Hence rector-ship, Cor. ii. 3. 213;
rector-ate, rector-al, rector-y,

RECUMBENT, lying back or upon, reclining. (L.) Recumbency
is in Phillips, ed. 1710. Recumbent seems later; it is in Cowper, The
Needless Alarm, 1. 47.—L. recumbent-, stem of pres. part. of recum-
bere, to recline.=L. re-, back; and see Incumbent. Der. re-
cumbenc-y.

RECUPERATIVE, tending to recovery. (L.) Recuperable, i.e.
recoverable, is in Levins, but is now disused. Recuperacion (sic) is
in Caxton, Godeffroy of Boloyne, p. 4, 1. 16. Recuperator is in
Phillips, ed. 1706. Recuperative appears to be modern. = L, recupera-
tiwus, (properly) recoverable. =L. recuperatus, pp. of recuperare, to
recover; see Recover.

RECUR, to resort, return to the mind, happen again at stated
intervals. (L.) In Phillips, ed.1706. Recurrent is in Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674.—L. recurrere, to run back, return, recur.—L. re-, back;
and currere, to run; see Re- and Current. Der. recurr-ent, from
the stem of the pres. part.; whence recurr-ence ; also recourse, q.V.

RECUSANT, opposing an opinion, refusing to acknowledge
supremacy. (F,—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.—=MF. recusant, ‘re-
jecting, refusing,’ Cot.; pres. part. of recuser,—L. reciisare, to reject ;
properly, to oppose a cause or opinion.=—L. re-, back, hence, with-
drawing from; and cawssa, a cause; see Re- and Cause. f. The
same change takes place in accuse (accusdre), also from L. cazssa.
Der. recusanc-y.

RED, one of the primary colours. (E.) ME. reed (with long
vowel), sometimes rede, red; Chaucer, C. T. 637. AS. réad, red;
Grein, ii. 373.44+Du. rood; Icel. raudr; Dan. rod; Swed. rod; G.
roth; Goth. rauds. B. All from Tent. type *raudoz; Idg. type
*roudhos. Further allied to Skt. rudhira-, blood, Gk. épevOev, to
redden, épvOpds, red, Irish and Gael. ruadh, W. rhudd, L. ruber, red.
Note also the strong verb appearing as AS. réodan, Icel. rjoda (pt. t.
raud), to redden. (4/REUDH.) Der. red-ly, red-ness; redd-en
(with -en as in strength-en, length-en); redd-ish, redd-ish-ness; red-
breast (a, bird with red breast), Skelton, Phillip Sparrow, 399, Lyd-
gate, Floure of Curteisie, st. 9; red-shank (a bird with red shanks or
legs); red-start (a bird with a red tail, from AS. steort, a tail, Exod.
iv. 4), in Levins; red-hot, red-heat, red-lead, red-letter, red-tape.
Allied words are ruby, rubescent, rubric, ruddy, russet.

REDACT, to reduce, to edit. (L.) Becon has redact in the sense
‘reduced ;’ Works, i. 46 (Parker Soc.).—L. redactus, pp. of redigere,
to bring back, reduce.—L. red-, back; and agere, to bring; see
Agent. Der. redact-ion.

REDDITION, a rendering, restoring. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave ;
and Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. reddition, ‘a reddition;’ Cot.=—L. red-
ditiénem, acc. of redditio, a rendering; cf. redditus, pp. of reddere,
to restore; see Render, Der. reddit-ive. ~

REDEEM, to ransom, atone for. (F.—L.) Lit. to buy back.
Latimer has redemed and redeming, sb., Seven Sermons, ed. Arber,
p. 202. Wyclif has redempcion, Luke, i. 68. —F. redimer, ‘to redeem,
ransom,’ Cot. [But the change of vowel is remarkable ; perhaps
partly due to L. emere.|—L. redimere, to buy back, redeem. = L. red-,
back; and _emere, to buy, orig. to take, from 4/EM, to take. See
Re- and Example. Der. redeem-er, redeem-able; redempt-ion,
from F. redemption< L. acc. redemptidnem, nom. redemptio, allied to
redempt-us, pp. of redimere; redempt-ive, redempt-or-y. Doublet (of
redemption), ransom,

REDGUM, a disease of infants. (E.) Fully explained in my
_Notes to P. Plowman, C. xxiii. 83, p. 444. ME. reed gounde,
Prompt. Parv.— AS. réad, red; gund, matter of a sore.

REDINTEGRATION, renovation. (L.) Minsheu has redin-
tegration and redintegrate, vetb.—L. redintegratio, sb.; allied to
redintegratus, pp. of redintegrare, to restore, renovate.—L. red-,
_.again; and integrare, to renew, from integr-, for integer, whole. See
Re- and Integer.

REDOLENT, fragrant. (F.—L.) In the Tale of Beryn, ed.
Furnivall, 1. 2765. = MF. redolent, ‘redolent ;’ Cot. — L. redolent-, stem
.of pres. part, of redolére, to emit odour.=L. red-, again ; and olére,
to be odorous. See Re- and Olfactory. Der. redolence, Lydgate,
Assembly of Gods, 1611; redolenc-y.

REDOUBLE, to double again. (F.—L.) ‘I redoubyll, Idoubyll
agayne, je redouble ;’ Palsgrave.—F. redoubler ; from re- and doubler,
to double. See Re- and Double,


See


REEL 505


REDOUBT, an intrenched place of retreat. (F.—Ital.—L.) Used
by Bacon, according to Todd’s Johnson; Ben Jonson has redouts;
Under-woods, Ixxxix; 1.8. Phillips, ed. 1706, gives the spellings
reduit (which is a F. form) and reduct (which is Latin), =F. redoute.
=Ital. ridotto, ‘a withdrawing-place ;’ Florio. Formed assb. from
ridotto, ‘reduced, brought or led vnto, brought back safe and sound
againe;” Florio. This is the same word as ridutto, pp. of ridurre,
to bring back, bring home. = L. rediicere, to bring back ; see Reduce.
@ The spelling redoubt is due to confusion with MF. redoubter, to
dread, as if a redoubt were a place into which men retire out of fear!
See Redoubtable.

REDOUBTABLE, terrible. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave; the verb
to redoubt, to fear, was formerly in use, as in Minsheu. ME. re-
doutable, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iv. pr. 5, 1. 6.—OF. redoutable ;
MF. redoubtable, ‘redoubtable,’ Cot.—OF. and F, redouter, to fear.
See Re- and Doubt.

REDOUND, to abound, be replete with, result. (F.—L.) ‘ Re-
dounding teares ;’ Spenser, F.Q. i. 3.8. ‘ I redownde, je redonde;’
Palsgrave. And in Caxton, Siege of Troye, lf. 205, back, 1.19.—F.
redonder, *to redound ;’ Cot.=—L. redundire, to overflow, abound.
-L. red-, again, back, hence over; and undare, to surge, flow,
abound, from uwxda, a wave. See Re- and Undulate. Der. re-
dund-ant, from the stem of the pres. part. of redundare ; redund-ant-
ly, redund-ance, redund-anc-y.

REDRESS, to set right again. (F.—L.) ME. redressen,
Chaucer, C. T. 8307 (E. 431).—F. redresser, ‘to redresse, straighten,’
Cot.=F. re- (<L. re-) again; and dresser; see Re- and Dress.
Der. redress, sb., Skelton, Magnificence, 2438 ; redress-ible, redress-ive.

REDUCEH, to bring down, subdue, arrange. (L.) In Palsgrave.
Used in the sense ‘to bring back ;’ Rich. III, v. 5. 36. —L. rediicere,
to bring back, restore, reduce.—L. re-, back ; and dicere, to lead,
bring. See Re- and Duct, Duke. Der. reduc-ible, spelt reduce-
able in Levins; also reduct-ion, from MF. reduction, ‘a reduction,
reducing, Cot., from L. acc. reductidnem, from nom. reductio, allied
to reduct-us, pp. of rediicere.

REDUNDANT ; see under Redound.

REDUPLICATE, to multiply, repeat. (L.) In Levins. =L.
reduplicitus, pp. of obsolete reduplicare, to redouble. See Re- and
Duplicate.

RE-ECHO, to echo back. (L. and Gk.) In Spenser’s Fairie
Queene, Mutability, c. vi. st. 52. From Re- and Echo.

REECHY, dirty. (E.) Lit. ‘smoky;’ another form of reeky.
In Shak. Cor. ii. 1. 225, Hamlet, iii. 4. 184; Much Ado, iii. 3. 143.
Cf. ‘Auld reekie’ as a name for Edinburgh. See Reek.

REED, a common name for certain grasses. (E.) ME. reed,
Wyclif, Matt. xi. 7. AS. hréod, Matt. xi. 7.44-Du. rie¢; G. riet, ried.
Teut. type *kreudom, neut. Der. reed-ed, reed-y.

REEF (1), a ridge of rocks. (Du.) Formerly rif. ‘A riff or
ridge of rocks;’ Dampier’s Voyages, vol. i. an. 1681; pp. 47, 50
(R.}. Of late introduction. = Du. rif, a reef, riff,sand. Sewel (ed.
1754) explains it by ‘a flatinsea, a rif’ Hexham has rif, riffe, ‘a
foard, or a shallow place.’+Icel. rif, a reef in the sea; Dan. rev, a
reef, bank; cf. revle, a shoal; Swed. ref, a sandbank; Pomeran.
reff. The G. riff, a reef, is prob. borrowed from Dutch. B. The
Du. and Icel. rif, Dan. rev, n., may represent a Teut. type *rebjom,
n. Perhaps allied to Rib, q.v. Cf. Norw. ribbe, a mountain-ridge,
MF, cost¢e, ‘a rib, also a little hill, or descent of land;’ Cot. Der.
reef-y.

REEF (2), a portion of a sail that can be drawn close together.
(Du.) Fully explained in Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘Up, aloft, lads;
come, reef both topsails;’ Dryden, Enchanted Island, Acti. sc. 1
(R.). ME. riff, Gower, C. A. iii. 341; bk. viii. 1983.— Du. reef,
‘a riff in a sail;? Sewel, ed. 1754. MDu. rif, also rift (Kilian).
‘ Een rif van een zeyl inbinden, to binde up a peece ofa saile when the
wind blowes too hard;’ Hexham. Hence is formed Du. reven, to
reeve. ++ Low G. reff, riff, a little sail, which is added to a large one
when there is little wind; cf. reffen, to reeve; EFries. ref, réf;
Pomeran. raff, a little extra sail, a bonnet ; Swed. ref, a reef; refva,
to reeve ; Dan. reb, a reef; rebe, to reeve; Icel. rif, a reefin a sail.
Of uncertain origin ; cf. Icel. reifa, to swaddle, AS. réfan, to wrap
up. Der. reef, verb; also reeve, verb, q.v.

REEK, vapour, smoke. (E.) ME. reke, Cursor Mundi, 2744;
where the Trinity MS. has reech. AS. réc, vapour; Grein, ii. 369 ;
OMere. réc (O. E. Texts) ; OFries. réh.4-Du. rook; Icel. reykr; Swed.
rok; Dan.rég; G.rauch; OHG. rouk. B. Teut. base *rauk-; from
*rauk, 2nd grade of the str. vb. *rewkan-, to smoke, as in AS.
réocan, Icel. rjuka, OHG. riokhan, G. riechen. Brugmann, i. § 217.
Der. reek, verb= AS. récan, weak verb (Grein) ; reek-y ; also reech-y,


q.v.
REEL (1), a small spindle for winding yarn. (E.) ME. rele.
‘Hoe alabrum, a rele ;? Wright’s Voc., p. 269, col. 1. At p. 180 of


506 REEL


the same vol., alabrum is again glossed by reele. AS. hréol ; ‘ alibrum
(sic), hreol ;’ Wright’s Voc. p. 59; riul, p. 66. Ducange explains the
Late L. alabrumasareel. {Not Icel. hrzil or rell, a weaver’s rod or
sley; EFries. rél; North Fries. reel (Outzen). Kluge derives AS.
hréol from a form *hrdehil, but this would give a form *hrél; see Eng.
Studien, xi. 512.] Der. reel, verb, ME. relien, relen, orig. to wind on
a reel (P. Plowman, C. x. 81, Prompt. Pary.), hence to turn round
and round (Allit. Poems, C. 147), and so to stagger, Temp. v. 279.
‘ They relyd bacward;’ Malory, Morte Arthur, bk. vii. c. 16, 1. 49.
Cf. NFries. reele, to wind ona reel. it Not allied to roll.

REEL (2), a Highland dance. (Scand.?) Commonly called ‘a
Scotch reel.’? Todd gives the following : ‘ Geilles Duncane did goe
before them, playing this rei/l or daunce upon a small trump ;’ News
from Scotland (1591), sig. B. iii; hence Gael. righil, a reel, a
Scottish dance; also written ruithil. Perhaps a Scand. word. Cf.
Dan. dial. riel, riil, a reel, dance; described at length by Molbech,
but perhaps from E. So also Norw. ril (pron. riil); Aasen. Or
possibly from reel, verb; see Reel (1).

RE-ELECT, RE-EMBARK, RE-ENACT, RE-EN-
FORCH, RE-ENTER, RE-ESTABLISH, RE-EX-
AMINE; see Elect, Embark, &c.

REEST, the mould-board or breast of a plough. (E.) Also
(wrongly) wreest; see ED.D. AS. réost; ‘sules réost, dentale ;’
Bosworth.+OLow G. rioster, a share-beam (Gallée).

REEVE (1), to pass the end of a rope through a hole or ring.
(Du.) A nautical word; not in Todd’s Johnson.—Du. reven, to
reeve.= Du. reef, a reef; because a reeved rope is used for reefing.
See Reef (2). @ The pt.t. is usually rove; but this is a mere
invention, as the verb, like all other verbs derived from sbs., is pro-
perly a weak one; made by analogy, like hove from heave.

REEVE (2), an officer, steward, governor. (E.) See Chaucer’s
Reve’s Tale. AS. geréfa, an officer, governor; Grein, i. 441. The
orig. sense was perhaps ‘ numberer’ or registrar (of soldiers); as if
for *ge-réf-ja, from -rdf, a host (as in secg-rdf), a host of men. Cf.
OHG. *ruoba, ruova, a number. See Kemble, Saxons in England,
ii. 154. @ Not allied to G. graf. Der. borough-reeve, port-reeve ;
sheriff, q.V-

REEVE (3); a bird, the female of the ruff; see Ruff (2).

REFECTION, refreshment, a repast. (F.—L.) ‘With a litle
refection ;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. iii. c. 22. § 4; Caxton,
Siege of Troy, leaf 81, 1. 6.—F. refection, ‘a refection, repast ;’
Cot.—L. refectidnem, a restoring, refreshment ; lit. a remaking; cf.
L. refectus, pp. of reficere, to remake, restore.—L. re-, again, and
facere, to make. See Re- and Fact. Der. refector-y, Dryden,
Hind and Panther, iii. 530, spelt refectorie in Minsheu, from Late L.
refectorium, a hall for meals in a convent.

REFEL, to refute. (L.) In Shak. Meas. v. 94; and Palsgrave. =
L. refellere, to show to be false, refute. —L. re-, back again, in reply ;
and fallere, to deceive, &c. See Re- and Fail, False.

REFER, to reduce, assign, direct to an umpire. (F.—L.) ‘ Re-
ferre you’=betake yourself; Henrysoun, Test. of Creseide, st. 43,
1. 297. —OF. referer (14th cent., Littré), F. référer, to refer.—L. re-
ferre, to bear back, relate, refer.—L. re-, back; and ferre, cognate
with E. bear. See Re- and Bear (1). Der. refer-able, also spelt
referr-ible (see exx. in N.E.D.) ; refer-ee, in which the suffix answers to
F, pp. suffix -é, as in other cases; refer-ence, Oth. i. 3. 238; refer-
end-ar-y, i. e. a referee, Bacon, Essay 49, from MF. referendaire, which
see in Cotgrave.

REFINE, to purify, make elegant. (F.—L.) In Spenser,
Hymn 2,1. 47. Coined from re- and jine, but imitated from F.
raffiner, ‘to refine, Cot. The F. raffiner is from re- and affiner, ‘ to
tefine, to fine as metalls,’ Cot.; where af- = L. af-, for ad, to, before
F following ; also -finer is due to F. jin, fine. The E. word ignores
thesecondelement. See Re- and Fine (1). Der. refin-er, refin-er-y ;
also refine-ment, imitated from F. raffinement, ‘a refining,’ Cot.

REFLECT, to throw or bend back, to ponder, think. (L.) In
Shak, Rich. III, i. 4. 31. ‘I reffecte, as the sonne beames do;’
Palsgrave. [The sb. reflexion is in Chaucer, C. T. 10544 (F. 230).]
—L. reflectere, to bend backwards.—L. re-, back ; and flectere, to
bend. See Re-and Flexible. Der. reflect-ing; reflect-or; re-
fective, also reflect-ion, for reflex-ion ; reflex-ive, from F. reflexif, ‘ re-
flexive, reflexing,’ Cot. ; reflect-ive-ly, -ness; reflex,adj., from L. reflexus,
pp. of reflectere ; reflex-ible, reflex-ibil-i-ty.

REFLUENT, flowing back. (L.) Rare; in Pope, Odyss.
v. 550.—L. refluent-, stem of pres, part. of refluere, to flow back.
=—L. re-, back; and fluere, to flow; see Re- and Fluent. Der.
reflux, sb., in Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 194; from F. reflux, ‘the
ebbe of the sea,’ Cot. ; see Flux.

REFORM, to shape anew, amend. (F.—L.) ME. reformen,
Gower, C. A. i. 273; bk. ii. 3404. I. reformer, ‘to reforme, Cot. =
L. re-, again ; and formare, to form, from forma, form; see Re- and


REFUSE


Form. Der. reform-er; reform-at-ion, Skelton, Garland of Laurel,
411, from F. reformation, ‘reformation,’ Cot.<L. acc. reforma-
tidnem, from reformare ; reform-at-ive, reform-at-or-y.

REFRACT, to bend aside rays of light. (L.) ‘ Visual beams
refracted through another’s eye;’ Selden, Introd. to Drayton’s Poly-
olbion (R.).—L. refractus, pp. of refringere, to break back, hence, to
turn aside.=L. re-, back; and frangere, to break; see Fragile.
Der. refract-ion, Chapman, Monsieur D’Olive, Act ii. sc. 1 (Van-
dome’s 6th speech), from F’. refraction, ‘a rebound,’ Cot.; refract-ive,
refract-ive-ness. Also, refract-or-y, Troil. ii. 2. 182, a mistaken form
for refractary, from MF. refrectaire, ‘refractary,’ Cot.<L. refracta-
rius, stubborn, obstinate. Hence refract-or-i-ly, refract-or-i-ness.
Also refrang-ible, a mistaken form for refring-ible, from L. refringere ;
refrang-ibil-i-ty, Phillips, ed. 1706; cf. mod, F. réfrangible, réfrangi-
bilité; but the F. words were borrowed from English works on
optics. And see refrain (2).

REFRAGABLE, that may be refuted. (L.) In Bailey; who also
has refragability ; see Irrefragable.

REFRAIN (1), to restrain, forbear, (F.—L.) ME. refreinen,
refreynen ; Wyclif, James, i. 26.—OF. refrener, ‘to bridle, repress ;’
Cot. [Cf. E. ordain<F. ordener.|—L. refrénare, to bridle, hold in
with a bit. L. re-, back; and frénum, a bit, curb, pl. fréna, curb and
reins, a bridle. B. The L. fré-nwm may be for L. *frend-num ; from
frendere,to champ. 4 As Littré well remarks, Cotgrave also has
MF. refreindre, ‘to bridle, restraine, hold in;’ this is from L. re-
fringere, to break back, and it seems probable that refrener and
refreindre were sometimes confused ; see Refract and Refrain (2).

REFRAIN (2), the burden of a song. (F.—L.) ME. refraine,
Chaucer, Troil. ii. 1571. The sb. refraining, i.e. singing of the
burden of a song, occurs in the Rom. of the Rose, 749. =F. refrain ;
‘refrain d'une balade, the refret, or burden of a ballade,’ Cot. Cf.
Prov. refranhs, a refrain, refranher, to repeat (Bartsch) ; mod. Prov.
refrin, refrein, refrain Mistral) ; Port. refrdo, Span. refran, a pro-
verb, short saying incommon use. So called from frequent repetition ;
the OF. refreindre, to hold in, pull back (Cotgrave), is the same
word as Prov. refranher, to repeat; both are from L. refringere, to
break back, hence, to pull back (and so to come back to, to repeat).
B. So also the MF. refret, OF. refrait (12th c.), used in the same
sense (whence E. refret, as in Cotgrave above), is from the L. re-
fractus, pp. of refringere; see Refract. y. The Prov. refranhs has
its a from L. frangere. Korting, § 7894.

REFRESH, to enliven, revive. (f.—L. and G.) ME. refreshen,
refreschen; Chaucer, C. T. 5620 (D 38); Gower, C. A. ili. 25; bk.
vi. 710.—OF. refreschir, ‘ to refresh, coole ;’ Cot.=F. re-(=L.re-),
again; and OHG. frise (G. frisch), cognate with E. fresh, q. v.
@ The element /resh is, in fact, also native English; but the com-
pound refresh was nevertheless borrowed from French, as shown
further by the early use of the derived sb. refreshment. Der. refresh-
ment, in the Testament of Love, pt. iii. ch. 7, 1. 31, OF. refresche-
ment; cf. MF. refreschissement, ‘a refreshment,’ Cot.

REFRIGERATE, to cool. (L.) ‘Their fury was asswaged
and refrigerate ;’ Hall, Chronicle, Henry VII, an. 4. § 1; where it is
used asa pp. Spelt refrigerat, Caxton, G. Legend, St. Silvester, § 1.
—L. refrigeratus, pp. of refrigerare, to make cool again. —L. re-,
again; and frigerare, to cool, from frigus, sb., cold. See Re- and
Frigid. Der. refrigerat-or, refrigerat-ion, refrigerat-ive, refrigerat-
or-y; also refriger-ant, from the stem of the pres. part. of refrigerare.

REFT, pt. t. and pp. of Reave, q.v.

REFUGE, a shelter, retreat. (F.—L.) ME. refuge, Chaucer,
C. T. 1722 (A 1720).—F. refuge, ‘a refuge,’ Cot.=L. refugium, an
escape, a refuge.=L, refugere, to flee back, retreat. —L. re-, back ;
and fugere, to flee. See Re- and Fugitive. Der. refug-ee, Dryden,
tr. of Juvenal, Sat. iii. 129, from F. réfugié, pp. of se réfugier, to
take shelter.

REFULGENT, shining, brilliant. (L.) In Ben Jonson, The
Barriers, Opinion’s 4th speech. L, refulgent-, stem of pres. part. of
refulgére, to shine back, glitter.—L. re-, back ; and fulgére, to shine.
See Re- and Fulgent. Der. refulgent-ly, refulgence.

REFUND, to repay. (L.) | ‘Refund, to melt again, reflow, cast
out again, pay back ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. [The sense answers
to that of MF. refonder, ‘ to restore, pay back,’ Cot. Perhaps it was
borrowed from French, and accommodated to the L. spelling.]=L.
refundere, to pour back, restore. = L. re-, back ; and fundere, to pour.
See Re- and Fuse (1). Perhaps allied to refuse, q.v.

REFUSE, to reject, deny a request. (F.—L.) ME. refusen,
Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 103, 1 21.—OF. refuser, ‘to
refuse,’ Cot. Cf. Port. refusar, Span. rehusar (for refusar), Ital.
rifusare. B. Of disputed origin. Diez supposes it to have arisen
as another form of refute (L. refutare), by confusion with L. recisare,
to refuse. But Scheler well suggests that F. refuser clearly answers
toa Late L. form *refisdre, a frequentative form of refundere (pp.


REFUTE


refusus). The L. refundere meant to pour back, repay, restore, give
back ; and the sense of ‘ refusing’ may have arisen from giving back
a present. See above. Cf. confuse. Korting, § 7897. Der. réfuse,
sb. (Levins), ME. refuce, Prompt. Parv., from MF. refus, ‘ refuse,
outcasts, leavings,’ Cot.; from the vb. Cf. OF. mettre en refus,
faire refus a, to abandon, reject (Godefroy). Also refus-al (Levins),
‘in which the suffix was added by analogy with propos-al, &c.

REFUTE, to oppose, dispose. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627.—MF. refuter, ‘to refute, confute” Cot.—L. refutare, to repel,
repress, rebut, refute. The orig. sense was probably ‘to pour back.’
See Re- and Confute; also Futile. Der. refut-able ; refut-at-ion,
from MF. refutation, ‘a refutation,’ Cot.; refut-at-or-y, from L. adj.
refitatorius.

REGAIN, to gain back. (F.—L. and Teut.) The sb. regainyng
is in Hall’s Chron. Hen. VI, an. 15. § 5.—MF. regaigner, ‘to
regaine;’? Cot.; F. regagner.—¥F. re- (=L. re-, again); and MF.
gaigner (F. gagner), to gain, a word of German origin, as shown
under Gain (2).

REGAL, royal, kingly. (F.—L.) Regall occurs as a sb. in The
Plowman’s Tale, st. 19, 1. 202; and as an adj. in Levins, ed. 1570.
— MF. regal, ‘ regall, royal,’ Cot. —L. régalis, royal, kingly. =L. rég-,
stem of rex, a king, with suffix -dlis.—L. regere, to rule.=4/REG,
to stretch, to govern; whence Skt. raj, to govern. Cf. Skt. rajan-,
a king; Olrish ri, a king. Brugmann, i. §§ 135, 549c. Der.
regal-ly, regal-i-ty; also regal-ia, q.vy. From the same root are
numerous words, such as cor-rect, di-rect, e-rect, rectangle, rect-itude,
rect-ify, rect-or ; rajah; reach, right, rack (1); rig-id, reg-ent, regi-
cide, regi-men, regi-ment, reg-ion, reg-ular, regnant, reign, rule; also
dress, address, adroit, alert, dirge, escort, insurgent, insurrection, inter-
regnum, real (2), realm, resource, resurrection, rule, sortie, source, surge,
unruly; cf. rajah, rich, right. Doublet, royal.

REGALE, to entertain, refresh. (F.—Ital.?) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. —F. régaler, to entertain; see Littré. Cotgrave only gives
se regaler, ‘to make as much account of himself asif he were a king;’
evidently in order to connect the word with F. régal, regal, royal;
but this can hardly be right. Godefroy has OF. regallir, to feast.
B. The word offers great difficulties, Minsheu’s Span. Dict. gives
regalar, ‘to cocker, to make much of, to melt.’ Diez takes the
sense ‘to melt’ to be the orig. one; whence to warm, cherish, enter-
tain. He makes the Span. regalar=L. regelare, to thaw, to melt,
supposing that it was a very old word, adopted at a time when g had
the same sound before both a ande. The L. regelare is from re-,
again, back, and geldre, to freeze; the orig. sense being ‘to unfreeze,’
i.e. to thaw. See Re- and Gelatine. y. But Hatzfeld connects
F, régaler with Ital. regalare, to give presents to, from gala, mirth ;
cf, Span. gala, parade. See Gala. See further in Diez, Korting,
and Littré. Der. regale-ment.

REGALITIA, insignia of a king. (L.) In Blount (1656). Merely
L. régélia, lit. royal things, neut. pl. of régalis, royal; see Regal.

REGARD, to observe, respect, consider. (F.—L. and OHG.)
In Palsgrave, spelt regarde. The sb. regard seems to be in earlier
use in E., occurring in Chaucer, in the phr. at regard of, Pers. Tale,
(Six-text, Group I, 788); but the verb is the orig. word in French, =
F. regarder, ‘to look, eye, see, view;’ Cot.—F. re-, again; and
garder, ‘to keep, heed, mark;’ Cot. See Re-and Guard. Der.
regard, sb., as above; regard-er; regard-ful ; regard-ful-ly, Timon,
iv. 3. 81; regard-less, regard-less-ly, -ness. Doublet, reward, vb.

REGATTA, a rowing or sailing match. (Ital.) Properly a
rowing match; a Venetian word, as explained in the quotation from
Drummond’s Travels, p. 84, in Todd’s Johnson; a book which Todd
dates A.D. 1744, but Lowndes in 1754. —Ital. regatta, rigatta, ‘a
strife or contention for the maistrie;’ Florio. Cf. MItal. rigattare,
‘to wrangle, sell by retail as hucksters do, to contend, to cope or
fight;’ Florio, This is allied to Span. regatear, to haggle, retail

rovisions, also to rival in sailing (Neuman); Span. regateo, a
Bapaling, a regatta. Of unknown origin,

REGENERATE, to renew, produce anew. (L.) In Caxton,
G. Legend, St. Genevefe, § 2.—L. regenerdtus, pp. of regenerare, to
generate again. =L. re-, again ; and generdre; see Re- and Gene-
rate. Der. regenerat-ion, ME. regeneracioun, Wyclif, Matt. xix. 28,
from OF. regeneration (14th cent., Littré)<L. acc. regenerationem ;
regenerat-ive.

REGENT, invested with authority for an interim period. (F.—
L.) In Skelton, Against the Scottes, 1. 114.—MF. regent, ‘aregent,
protector, vice-gerent;’ Cot.—L. regent-, stem of pres. part. of
-regere, to rule. See Regal. Der. regent-ship; also regenc-y,

.formed with suffix -y from F, regence, ‘the regency,’ Cot.


REGICIDKH,, the slayer of a king; or, the slaying of a king.


.(F.—L.) 1. The former is the older sense. ‘ Regicide, a king-
killer ;’ Minsheu.=F. regicide, omitted by Cotgrave, but cited by
:Minsheu. Coined from L. régi-,.from rex, a king; and -cida, a


REIGN 507


slayer, as in fratri-cida, mairi-cida, See Fratricide, Matricide,
Parricide. 2. The latter answers to a word coined from L. régi-
and -cidium, a slaying, Der. regicid-al.

REGIMEN, a prescribed rule, rule of diet. (L.) In Phillips,
ed. 1706; ME. regimen, Lanfrank, Cirurgie, p. 60.—L. regimen,
guidance ; formed with suffix -men from regere, to rule; see Regal.

REGIMENT, a body of soldiers commanded by a colonel.
(F.—L.) Shak. has it in this sense, All’s Well, ii. 1. 42; and also
in the sense of ‘government,’ or sway; Antony, iii. 6.95. Inthe
latter sense, the word is old, and occurs in Gower, C. A. i. 218; bk.
ii. 1751. — MF, regiment, ‘a regiment of souldiers,’ Cot. In older F.,
it meant ‘government ;’ see Littré.—L. regimentum, rule, govern-
ment; formed with suffixes -men-to- from regere, to rule; see
Regimen, Regal. Der. regiment-al.

REGION, a district, country. (F.-L.) ME. regioun, King
Alisaunder, 1. 82.— MF. region, ‘a region,’ Cot. —L. regidnem, acc. of
regio, a direction, quarter, district (Bréal).= L. regere, to rule, direct.
See Regal.

REGISTER, a written record of past events. (F.—L.) ME.
registre, P. Plowman, B. xx. 269.—F. registre, ‘a record, register ;’
Cot. Cf. Ital. and Span. registro, Port. registro, registo, the last
being the best form.—Late L, registrum, more correctly regestum,
a book in which things are recorded (regeruntur) ; see Ducange. =
L. regestum, neut. of regestus, pp. of regerere, to record, lit. to bring
back.=L. re-, back; and gerere, to bring; see Re- and Jest.
Der. register, verb, L.L. L. i. 1. 2, and in Palsgrave ; registr-ar, ME.
registrere, P, Plowman, B. xix. 254; registr-ar-ship ; registr-ar-y (Late
L. registrar-tus) ; registr-y; registr-ai-ion.

REGLET, a strip of wood, less than type-high, used in printing
for making blanks between lines. (F.—L.) F. réglet (Hatzfeld) ;
dimin. of régle, a rule.—L. régula, a rule; see Rule.

REGNANT, reigning. (L.) Mere Latin. =L. regnant-, stem of
pres. pt. of regndare, to reign. =L. regnum, a kingdom; see Reign.
Der. regnanc-y.

REGRESS, return. (L.) In Shak. Merry Wives, ii. 1. 226; and
in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—L. regressus, a return.—L. regressus, pp.
of regredi, to go back.—L. re-, back; and grad?7, to go. See
Re- and Grade. Der. regress, verb; regress-ion (L. regressio) ;
regress-ive.

REGRET, sorrow, grief. (F.—L. and Scand.?) The verb is in
Pope, Epitaph on Fenton, 1. 8. ME. regretten, The Pearl, 243.
The sb. is in Spenser, F. Q.i. 7.20. ‘Hie regrate And still mourning;’
Henrysoun, Test. of Creseide, st. 57, 1. 397.—F. regret, ‘ desire,
wille, also griefe, sorrow ;’ Cot. He also gives: @ regret, ‘ loathly,
unwillingly, with an ill stomach, hardly, mauger his head, full sore
against his will;’ Cot. Cf. regretter, ‘to desire, affect, wish for,
bewaile, bemoane, lament;’ id. The F. regretter corresponds to an
OF. regrater, of which Scheler cites two examples; cf. AF. regretant,
pres. pt., bewailing, in Wace, St. Nicholas, 1. 187. B. The
etymology is much disputed; but, as the word occurs in no other
Romance language, it is prob. of Teut. origin, the prefix re- being,
of course, Latin. Perhaps from the Scand. verb which appears in
Icel. grata, to weep, bewail, mourn, Swed. grdta, Dan. grede, allied
to Goth. grétan, AS. grétan, ME. greten, Lowland Sc. greit. See
Greet (2). Wedgwood well cites from Palsgrave: ‘I mone as a
chylde doth for the wantyng of his nourse or mother, je regrete.’
Others suggest L. requiritari, but quiritart became F. crier; see
Cry. See the whole discussion in Scheler; and Korting, § 7989.
Der. regret, verb, as above; regretful, regret-ful-ly.

REGULAR, according to mle. (L.) ‘And as these chanouns
regulers, i.e. regular canons; Rom. of the Rose, 6694. Rather
directly from L. reguldris than from OF. regulier. —L. régula, a rule.
L. reg-ere, to rule, govern; see Regal. Der. regular-ly; regular-
i-ty, from OF. regularité (14th cent., Littré); regwl-ate, from L.
regulatus, pp. of regulare; regul-at-ion, regulat-ive, regulat-or.

REHEARSE, to repeat what has been said. (F.—L.) ME.
rehercen, rehersen; P. Plowman, C. xviii. 25; A.i. 22.—OF. reherser,
‘to harrow over again,’ Cot.; better spelt rekercer, as in AF. rehercer,
to repeat, in A Nominale, ed. Skeat, 1. 405. From the sense
of harrowing again we easily pass to the sense of ‘ going again over
the same ground,’ and hence to that of repetition. Cf. the phrase
‘to rake up an old story.’ =F. re- (=L. re-), again; and hercer, ‘to
harrow,’ Cot., from herce, a harrow. The sb. herce, whence E. hearse,
changed its meaning far more than the present word did; see Re-
and Hearse. Der. rehears-al, spelt rehersall in Palsgrave; ME.
rehersaille, Chaucer, C. T., G 852.

REIGN, rule, dominion. (F.—L.) ME. regne, Chaucer, C, I.
1638 ; spelt rengne, King Horn, ed. Lumby, 901, 908. = OF. regne, ‘a
realme,’ Cot.=L. regnum, a kingdom.=—L. reg-ere, to rule; see
Regal. Der. reign, verb, ME, regnen, Havelok, 2586, from OF.
regner, from L, regnare, to reign. And see reg7-ant.


508 REIMBURSE


REIMBURSE, to refund, repay for a loss. (F.—L. and Gk.)


In Cotgrave; and in Phillips, ed. 1706. An adaptation of F. rem-
bourser, made more full in order to be more explicit; the F. prefix
rem- answering to L. re-im-, where im- stands for ix before 6 follow-
ing. ‘Rembourser, to re-imburse, to restore money spent;’ Cot. For
the rest of the word, see Purse. Der. reimburse-ment, from F. rem-
boursement, ‘a re-imbursement ;’ Cot.

REIN, the strap of a bridle. (F.—L.) ME. reine, reyne, King
Alisaunder, 786. —OF. reine, ‘ the reigne of a bridle;’ Cot. Mod. F.
réne. The OF, also has resne, redne, corresponding to Ital. redina,
and to Span. rienda (a transposed form, for redina); and these
further correspond to a Late L. type *retina (MItal. retina), easily
evolved from L. retinére, to hold back, restrain, whence was formed
the classical L. retinaculum, a tether, halter, rein. See Retain.
Der. rein, verb, rein-less.

REINDEER, RAINDEER, a kind of deer. (Scand. and E.)
Spelt raynedere, Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 922. Perhaps the obscure
word ron, in An Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 92, 1. 71, means
a reindeer, as suggested by Stratmann. Formed by adding deer (an
E. word) to Icel. kreinn, a reindeer, answering to MSwed. ren, and
to AS. hrain, in Aflfred’s tr. of Orosius, i. 1. § 15. [The AS. hran
accounts for ME. ron (above).] We find also Dan. rensdyr, Du.
rendier, G. rennthier, all borrowed forms. A genuine Teut. word, as
the forms show. Teut. type *hrainoz. B. Diez refers us to the
Lapp and Finnish word raingo, but this is a mere misspelling of
Swed. renko, lit. ‘rein-cow,’ the female of the reindeer. The true
Lapp word for reindeer is patso, and the word reino, pasturage or
herding of cattle, does not help us.

REINS, the lower part of the back. (F.—L.) ME. reines; spelt
reynes in Wyclif, Wisdom, i. 6, later version ; reenus, earlier version.
— OF. reins, ‘the reines;’ Cot.—L. rénés, s. pl., the kidneys, reins,
loins. Hardly allied to Gk. ppv, the midriff; pl. ppéves, the parts
about the heart or liver. See Frenzy. Der. rez-al.

REINSTATE, REINVEST, REINVIGORATE, RE-
ISSUE, REITERATE; sce Instate, Invest, &c.

REJECT, to throw away or aside. (F.—L.) ‘I rejecte, I caste

awaye, je rejecte;’ Palsgrave, ed. 1530.—MF. rejecter; mod. F. re-
jeter. The F. word was spelt rejecter in the 16th century, and our
word seems to have been borrowed from it rather than from Latin
directly ; the still older spelling in OF. was regeter.— OF. re- (=L.
re-), back; and OF. geter, getter, mod. F. jeter, to throw, from L.
zactare. See Re- and Jet (1). Cf. L. rejectus, pp. of reicere, to
reject, compounded of re- and iacere,to throw. Der. reject-ion, from
MF. rejection, ‘a rejection;’ Cot.

REJOICE, to feel glad, exult. (F.—L.) ME, reioisen, reioicen
(with i=7), to rejoice ; Chaucer, C. T. 9867 (E 1993); P. Plowman,
C, xviii. 198. —OF. resjois-, stem of pres. part. of resjotr, mod. F.
réjouir, to gladden, rejoice.—OF. re- (=L. re-), again; and -esjoir
(mod. F. éjouir), to rejoice, used reflexively. B. Again, the OF. esjoir is
from L, ex-, and the vb. joir (mod. F. jouwir), derived, like Ital. godere,
from L. gaudére, to rejoice. See Re-, Ex-, and Joy. Der. rejoic-
ing, rejoic-ing-ly.

REJOIN, to join again. (F.—L.) Esp. used in the legal sense
‘to answer toa reply.’ ‘I rejoyne, as men do that answere to the
lawe and make answere to the byll that is put up agaynst them ;’
Palsgrave.—F. rejoign-, a stem of rejoindre, ‘to rejoine;’ Cot.
See Re- and Join. Der. rejoinder, Sir T. Elyot, The Governour,
b. i. c. 14. § 8, which is the F. infin. mood used substantively, like
attainder, remainder.

REJUVENATE, to make young again, (L.) From L. +e-,
again; and iuuen-, for iuwenis, young; with pp. suffix -dtus. See
Juvenile.

RELAPSE, to slide back into a former state. (L.) As sb. in
Minsheu, ed. 1627, and in Shak. Per. iii.2. 110. Cotgrave translates
the MF. relaps by ‘relapsed.’ [There is no classical L. sb. relapsus. ]
=—L. relapsus, pp. of relabi, to slide back. See Re- and Lapse.
Der. relapse, sb.

RELATE, to describe, tell. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. iii. 8. 51;
and in Palsgrave. =F. relater, ‘to relate;’ Cot.— Late L. relatare, to
relate.—L. relatum, used as supine of referre, to relate; which is,
however, from a different root.<L. re-, back; and latum, supine,
latus, pp., for tlatus, pp. of tollere, to lift, bear. See Re-; and see
Elate. Der. relat-ed; relat-ion, P. Plowman, C. iv. 363, from F.
relation, ‘a relation,’ Cot. ; relat-ive, ME. relatif, P. Plowman, C. iv.
391, from F. relatif; relat-ive-ly.

RELAX, to slacken, loosen. (L.) In Milton, P. L. vi. 599.
[Bacon has relax as an adj., Nat. Hist. § 381.]—L. relaxdre, to re-
lax.—L. re-, back; and laxdre, to loosen, from laxus, loose; see
Re- and Lax. Der. relax-at-ion, in Minsheu, from F. relaxation,
“a relaxation,’ Cot. Doublet, release.

RELAY (1), a set of fresh dogs or horses, a fresh supply. (F. —


RELIQUARY


L.) Orig. used of dogs. ‘What relays set you? None at all, we
laid not In one fresh dog ;” Ben Jonson, Sad Shepherd, Act i. sc. 2.
ME. relaye, in the same sense, Chaucer, Book of the Duchess, 362. —
F. relais, a relay; par relais, ‘by turnes, i.e. by relays, Cot. He
also gives: ‘ chiens de relais, dogs layd for a backset,’ i.e. kept in
reserve ; ‘chevaux de relais, horses layed in certain places on the
highway, for the more haste making.’ He explains relais as ‘a seat
or standing for such as hold chiens de relais,’ i.e. a station. See OF.
relais, that which remains, in Godefroy. |B. The word presents
some difficulty. Mr. Wedgwood quotes from Torriano: ‘ Cani di
rilasso, fresh hounds laid for a supply set upon a deer already hunted
by other dogs.’ Also spelt rilascio, and allied to Ital. rilasciare
(from L, relaxare), OF. relaissier, to relinquish, and E. Relax,
Release, q.v. Korting, § 7930. Cf.‘ a redais, spared, at rest, that
is not used,’ Cot. y. It will be seen that relay was a new singular,
due to a mistaken notion that the F. relais was a plural. So also
in French, an OF. verb relayer was made out of a false sing. *relai.
The OF. relais, though usually sing., is sometimes treated as a
plural, preceded by des instead of Je. See Relish.

RELAY (2), to lay again. (Hybrid; L. and E.) Simply com-
pounded of Re- and Lay; and distinct from the word above.

RELEASE, to set free, relieve, let go. (F.—L.) ME. relessen,
P. Plowman, B. iii. 58; relesen, Chaucer, C. T. 8029 (E 153).=OF.
relessier, MF. relaisser, ‘to release,’ Cot.—L. relaxare, to relax; see
Relax. Der. release, sb., OF. reles, for relais. Doublet, relax.

RELEG ATH, to consign to exile. (L.) ‘ To relegate, or exile ;’
Minsheu, ed. 1627.—L. relegdtus, pp. of relegare, to send away,
dispatch, remove.—L. re-, back, away; and legare, to send. See
Re- and Legate. Der. relegat-ion, from MF. relegation, ‘a relega-
tion,’ Cot.

RELENT, to grow tender, feel compassion. (F.—L.) In The
Lamentacion of Mary Magdalene, st. 70,1. 489. Altered from F.
ralentir, ‘to slacken, . to relent in;’ Cot. Cf. L. relentescere, to
slacken. =F. re- and a (shortened to ra-), from L, re- and ad-; and
lentus, slack, slow, also tenacious, pliant, akin to E. lithe; see Lithe.
The L. relentescere is simply from re- and lentus, omitting ad. Der.
relent-less, -ly, -ness.

RELEVANT, relating to the matter in hand. (F.—L.) ‘To
make our probations and arguments relevant ;” King Chas. I, Letter
to A. Henderson, p. 55 (R.). It means ‘assisting’ or helpful. =F.
relevant, pres. part. of relever, ‘to raise up, also to assist ;’ Cot.—
L. releuare, to lift up again.—L. re-, again ; and lewdare, to lift, from
leuis, light; see Re- and Levity. Der. relevance, relevanc-y ; ir-
relevant.

RELIC, a memorial, remnant, esp. a memorial of asaint. (F.—L.)
Chiefly in the plural; ME. relykes, s. pl., Rob. of Glouc. p. 177,
1. 3688 ; Chaucer, C. T. 703 (A 701). —F. reliques, s. pl., ‘reliques ;’
Cot. = L. religuids, acc. of reliquie, pl., remains, relics. = L. relinquere
(pt. t. reliqui, pp. relictus), to leave behind.=L. re-, back, behind ;


and linguere, to leave, allied to E. Joan. See Re- and Loan. And
see Relinquish, Relict. Der. reliqu-ar-y, q. v.
RELICT, a widow. (F.—L.) In Phillips, ed. 1658. First in


1545(N.E.D.). —OF-. relicte, f.,a widow (Godefroy). = L. relicta, fem.
of relictus, left behind, pp. of relinguere; see Relic, Relinquish.

RELIEVE, to ease, help, free from oppression. (F.—L.) ME.
releuen (with «=v), P. Plowman, B. vii. 32; Chaucer, C. T. 4180
(A 4182). —F. relever, to raise up, relieve,’ Cot.—L. releuare, to
lift up.=L. re-, again; and leudre, to lift, from Jeuis, light. See Re-
and Lever. Der. relief, ME. relief, Gower, C. A. iii. 23, bk. vi.
640; from OF. relef, mod. F, relief, a sb. due to the verb relever ;
hence bas-relief; also rilievo, from Ital. rilievo, the relief or pro-
jection of a sculptured figure. And see relev-ant.

RELIGION, piety, the performance of duties to God and man.
(F.—L.) In early use. Spelt religiun, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris,
ii. 49, 1. 13; Ancren Riwle, p. 8.—F. religion. L. religidnem, acc.
of religio, piety. Allied to religens, fearing the gods, pious. [And
therefore not derived from religare, to bind.} The opposite of nég-
ligens, negligent; see Neglect. Allied also to di-ligens, diligent.
B. ‘It is clear that ddéyw is the opposite of L. nec-lego [neglego,
negligo}, and Oe@v Omy ove ddéyovres (Homer, IL. xvi. 388) is
the exact counterpart of L. religens and religio;’ Curtius, 1. 454.
Thus religion and neglect are from the same root LEG, which
appears also in Gk. ddéyetv, to have a care for, to heed; cf. also Gk.
dAyos, care, sorrow. Der. religion-ist; religi-ous, from F, religieux,
‘religious,’ Cot., which from L, religidsus; religi-ous-ly.

RELINQUISH, to leave, abandon. (F.—L.) In Levins, ed.
1570.—MF. relinguiss-, stem of pres. part. of relinguir (Burguy) ; cf.
Norm. dial. relenguir (Moisy).— L. relinquere, to leave ; by a change
of conjugation, of which there are several other examples. See
Relic. Der. relinguish-ment.

RELIQUARY, a casket for holding relics. (F.—L.) In


-RELIQUE


Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—F. reliquaire, ‘a casket wherein reliques
be kept;’ Cot.—Late L. reliquiare, neut. sb., or reliquidrium, a
teliquary; Ducange.—L. religuia-, stem of reliquia, relics. See
Relic.

RELIQUE, the same as Relic, q. v. ‘

RELISH, orig. an after-taste; hence, as verb, to have a pleasing
taste, to taste with pleasure. (F.—L.) The verb is in Shak. Temp.
v. 23; Wint. Tale, v. 2. 132. The sb. is in Tw. Nt. iv. 1. 64; and
in Palsgrave. ME. reles, an after-taste, Sir Cleges, 208 ; reles, ‘ tast
or odowre,’ Prompt. Parv.—OF. reles, relais, that which is left be-
hind; also a relay; see Relay (1). Cf. mod. Prov. relais, a slight
return of a disease. See Notes on Eng. Etym. p. 246.

RELUCTANT, striving against, unwilling. (L.) In Milton,
P. L. iy. 311.—L, reluctant-, stem of pres. part. of reluctare, reluctiri,
to struggle against.=L, re-, back, against ; and luctari, to struggle,
wrestle, from Jucta, a wrestling. B. Luc-ta stands for *lug-ta; cf.
Gk. Avy-i¢ev, to bend, twist, writhe in wrestling, overmaster; Lith.
lugnas, flexible. (4/LEUG.) Der. reluctant-ly, reluctance, Milton,
P. L. ii. 3373 reluctanc-y.

RELY, to rest or repose on, trust fully. (F.—L. ; influenced by E.)
The mod. sense suggests that it is a barbarous word, compounded of
L. re- and E, lie, verb, to rest ; but if this were so, the pt. t. would
be relay, and the pp. relain. Shakespeare is an early authority for
it, and he always uses it with the prep. ow (five times) or upoz (once).
He also has reliance, followed by on, Timon, ii. 1. 22. So also to
rely on, Drayton, Miseries of Q. Margaret, st. 123 ; Dryden, Epistle to
J. Dryden, 1309; relying in, P. Fletcher, Eliza, an Elegy, 1. 34; reliers on,
Beaum. and Fletcher, Woman’s Prize, i. 3 (Petruchio’s 24th speech).
Thus to rely on often suggests the notion of to lie back on, to lean
on. f. But the right origin is rather the OF. relier, from the L.
religare, lit. to bind again. —L. re-, again; and ligare, to bind; see
Ligament. The E. verb signified at first ‘to rally,’ whence the
sense of to trust to, depend upon, &c. F. Hall, in his work on
Eng. adjs. in -able, givesexamples. Thus we find: ‘ Therefore[they |
must needs relye their faithe upou the sillie ministers;? H. T.; in
Anth. Wotton’s Answer to a Popish Pamphlet, 1605, p. 19.
‘ Whereon these [men]... rest and relye themselves ;” A World of
Wonders, 1607; p. 21. Der. reli-able, a compound adj. which has
completely established itself, and is by no means a new word, to
which many frivolous and ignorant objections have been made; it
was used by Coleridge in 1800, in the Morning Post of Feb. 18; see
F, Hall, On Eng. Adjectives in -able, with special reference to Re-
liable, p. 29. Hence reli-abil-i-ty, used by Coleridge in 1816; reii-
able-ness, also used by the same writer. Also reli-ance, in Shak., as
above, from OF. reliance (<L. religantia), in Godefroy. Also
reli-er, as above.

REMATHN, to stay or be left behind. (F.—L.) Spelt remayne in
Palsgrave. Due to the OF. 1 p. pres. sing. je remain; cf. the
impers. verb il remaint, as in the proverb ‘ beaucoup remaint de ce que
fol pense, much is behind of that a fool accounts of, a foole comes
ever short of his intentions,’ Cot. The infin. remaindre is preserved in
our sb. remainder; cf. E. rejoinder from F. rejoindre, E. attainder
from F. attaindre. Cf. L. remanet, it remains; remanére, to remain.
=—L. re-, behind; and manére, to remain; see Re- and Manor.
Der. remains, s. pl., Titus Andron., i. 81; remain-der, Temp. v. 13,
see above. And see remnant.

REMAND, to send back. (F.—L.) ‘ Wherevpon he was re-
maunded ;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart, v. ii. c. 206 (R.). = OF. remander,
‘to send for back again ;’ Cot.—L. remandare, to send back word.
=—L. re-, back; and mandare, to enjoin, send word ; see Re- and
Mandate.

REMARK, to take notice of. (F.—L. and Teut.) Shak. has
remark’d, Hen. VIII, v. 1. 33; and remarkable, Antony, iv. 15. 67.—
F, remarquer, ‘to mark, note, heed;’ Cot.—L. re-, again; and
marquer, to mark, allied to marque, sb.,a mark, OF. merc (Hatzfeld) ;
which is from G. marke, cognate with E. mark; see Re- and Mark
(1). Der. remark-able, from F. remarquable, ‘remarkable,’ Cot. ;
remark-abl-y; remark-able-ness.

REMEDY, that which restores, repairs, or heals. (F.—L.) ME.
remedie, Chaucer, C. T. 1276 (A 1274); Ancren Riwle, p. 124, 1. 22.
=AF, remedie, Stat. Realm, i. 28 (1275); cf. MF. remede, mod. F.
reméde, a remedy. ([Cf. OF. remedier, verb, to remedy.]—L.
remedium, a remedy; lit. that which heals again. L. re-, again;
and medéri, to heal; see Re- and Medical. Der. remedy, verb
(Levins, Palsgrave), from F. remedier ; remedi-able (Levins) ; remedi-al,
a coined word ; remedi-al-ly.

REMEMBER, to recall to mind. (F.—L.) ME. remembren,
Chaucer, C. T. 1503 (A 1501).—OF. remembrer, used reflexively,
*to remember;” Cot. Formed, with excrescent 6 after m, due to
stress, from L. rememordri, to remember; which gave rise to *re-
mem’ rer in OF.=L., re-, again; and memorare, to make mention of,


REMUNERATE


from memor, mindful. See Re- and Memory. Der. remembr-
ance, Chaucer, C. T. 8799 (E 923), from F. remembrance; remem-
branc-er, Mach. iii. 4. 37.

REMIND, to bring to the mind again. (Hybrid; L. and E.) A
barbarous compound; from L. re-, again; and E. mind. Rather a
late word ; in Bailey’s Dict. vol. ii. ed. 1731. See Re- and Mind.

REMINISCENCE, recollection. (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. Spelt reminiscens, Puttenham, E. Poesie, ed. Arber, b. iii.
C. 255 p. 312. —MF-. reminiscence, ‘ remembrance of things ;’ Cot.=—L.
reminiscentia, remembrance.—L, reminiscent-, stem of pres. part. of
reminisci, to remember, an inceptive verb, with suffix -sci.L. re-,
again; and min-, as in me-min-i, I remember, think over again,.
from 4/MEN, to think. Allied to Gk. pé-pov-a, I yearn, Skt. man,.
to think. Brugmann, i. § 431 (2). See Re- and Mental.

REMIT, to pardon, abate. (L.) ‘ Whether the consayle be good,
I remytte [leave] it to the wyse reders;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Gover-
nour, b. ill. c. 27 (mear the end). ‘ Remyttinge [referring] them
. .. to the workes of Galene;’ id., Castel of Helth, b. iii. c. 1r.—L,
remittere, to send back, slacken, abate. —L. re-, back; and mittere,.
to send; see Re- and Mission. Der. remitt-er, remitt-ance, re-
mitt-ent ; remiss, adj. (spelt remysse, Barclay, Ship of Fools, ii. 243),
from L. remissus, pp. of remittere ; remiss-ly, remiss-ness ; remiss-ible,
from L. remissibilis; remiss-ibil-i-ty; remiss-ive. Also remiss-ion,.
ME. remission, Ancren Riwle, p. 346, 1. 21, from MF. remission
(Cot. )}<L. acc. remissionem, from nom. remissio.

REMNANT, a remainder, fragment. (F.—L.) ME. remenant,
remenaunt, King Alisaunder, 5707.—OF. remanant, MF. remenant,
remanent, ‘a remnant, residue;’ Cot.—L. remanent-, stem of pres.

art. of remanére, to remain; see Remain.

REMONSTRATHE, to adduce strong reasons against. (L.) See
Trench, Select Glossary. See Milton, Animadversions upon the
Remonstrant’s Defence. The sb. remonstrance is in Shak. Meas. v.
397-—Late L. remonstratus, pp. of remonstrare, to expose, exhibit ;.
used A.D. 1482 (Ducange); hence, to produce arguments. =L. re-,
again ; and monstrare, to show, exhibit; see Re- and Monster.
Der. remonstrant, from the stem of the pres. part.; remonstrance,
from MF. remonstrance, ‘a remonstrance,’ Cot., Late L.remonstrantia.

REMORA, the sucking-fish. (L.) ‘A little fash, that men call
remora;’ Spenser, Visions of the World’s Vanitie, 1. 108. Cf. MF.
remore, ‘the suck-stone; a little fish, which cleaving to the keele of
a ship, hinders the course of it;’ Cot. Such was the old belief. = L.
remora, a hindrance, delay; afterwards used as the name of the fish. .
=L. re-, back; and mora, delay.

REMORSE, pain or anguish for guilt. (F.—L.) ME. remors.
‘But for she had a maner remors ;’ Lydgate, Storie of Thebes, pt.
iii (Of the wife of Amphiorax). ‘Som remors of conscience ;’
Chaucer, Troil. i, 554.—OF. remors, ‘remorse;’ Cot.—Late
L. remorsus (also remorsio), remorse; Ducange.—L. remorsus,
pp. of remordére, to bite again, vex.—L. re-, again; and mordére, to
bite; see Re- and Mordacious. 4 Chaucer has the verb remord
(<OF. remordre), tr. of Boethius, b. 4, pr. 6, 1. 182. Der. remorse-
ful, Rich. III, i. 2, 156; remorse-ful-ly ; remorse-less, Hamlet, ii. 2.
609 ; remorse-less-ly, -ness.

REMOTE, distant. (L.) In Spenser, F. Q. iii. 4.6. [Cf MF.
remot, m., remote, f., ‘remote, removed;’ Cot.] Directly, from L.
remotus, pp. of remouére, to remove; see Remove. Der. remote-ly,
-ness; also remot-ion=removyal, Timon, iy. 3. 346.

REMOUNT, to mount again. (F.—L.) Also transitively, to-
cause to rise again, as in ME, remounten, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius,
b. iii. pr. 1, 1. 6.—F. remonter, ‘to remount,’ Cot.—F. re-, again;
and monter, to mount; see Re- and Mount (2).

REMOVE, to move away, withdraw. (F.—L.) ME. remeuen
(remeven), Chaucer, Troil. i. 691, where remeve rimes with preve, a
proof. Just as we find ME. remeven for mod. E. remove, so we find
ME. preven for mod. E. prove, preve for proof. Palsgrave uses
remeve and remove convertibly : ‘1 remeve, as an armye. . . removeth
from one place to another.’ = OF, removoir, ‘to remove, retire ;’ Cot.=—
F. re-, again; and OF. movoir, to move; see Re- and Move. @ The
ME. remewen, to remove, Chaucer, C. T. 10495 (F 181), has nearly
the same sense, butis quite a different word, answering to OF. remuér,
‘to move, stir,’ Cot., from L. re- and miitére, to change. Der.
remov-able (Levins), remov-abil-i-ty ; remov-al, a coined word ; remov-
er, Shak. Sonn. 116, remov-ed-ness, Wint. Tale, iv. 2. 41. Also
remote, q.vV. "

REMUNERATE, to recompense. (L.) In Shak. Titus, i. 398.
=-L. remuneratus, pp. of remiinerare, remiinerari, to reward. = L. re-,
again; and miinerare, miinerari, to discharge an office, also to give,
from miner-, decl. stem of minus, a gift. See Re- and Munificent.
Der. remuner-able, remunerat-ion, L. L. L. iii. 133, ME. remuneracion, .
Dictes, pr. by Caxton, fol. 6, from MF. remuneration, ‘a remunera--
tion,’ Cot.<L. remiinerationem, acc. of remiineritio; remunerai-ive.


509


510 RENAISSANCE


RENAISSANCE, a revival; esp. used of the revival of the
classical art and letters, chiefly at the end of the fifteenth century.
(F.—L.) Also called renascence, which is the L. form.=—F. renais-
sance, a new birth; Cot.—L. re-, again; and mascentia, birth (Vitru-
vius), from nascent-, pres. pt. stem of masci, to be born; see
Nascent.

RENAL, pertaining to the reins. (F.—L.) Medical. —MF. renal,
‘belonging to the kidneyes;’ Cot.—L. réndlis, adj., formed from
rén-és, the reins: see Reins.

RENARD, a fox; see Reynard.

RENASCENT; from Re- and Nascent.

RENCOUNTER, RENCONTRE, a meeting, collision,
chance combat. (F.—L.) Now commonly rencantre; formerly ren-
counter, used as a verb by Spenser, F. Q. i. 4. 39; and asa sb., ili.
I. 9.—F. rencontre, ‘a meeting, or incounter . . by chance;’ Cot.
Cf. rencontrer, verb, ‘to incounter, meet;’ id. Contracted forms
for *reéncontre, *reéncontrer.—F. re- (=L. re-), again ; and encontrer,
to meet ; see Re- and Hncounter. 4 Hence the spelling reencounter
in Berners, tr. of Froissart, v. ii. c. 29 (R.).

REND, to tear, split. (E.) ME. renden, pt. t. rente, pp. rent;
Chaucer, C. T. 6217 (D 635). AS. hrendan, rendan, not common,
In the ONorthumb. versions of Luke, xiii. 7, succidite [cut it down}
is glossed by hrendas vel scearfadS in the Lindisfarne MS., and by
ceorfas vel rendas in the Rushworth MS. Again, in Mark, xi. 8, the
L. cedebant [they cut down] is glossed by gebugun vel rendon. ‘Thus
the orig. sense seems to be to cut or tear down.4OFries. renda,
randa, to tear, break. B. The AS. hrendan answers to a theoretical
form *hrandian, which may be connected with hrand, the pt. t. of
hrindan, to push (Grein), Icel. krinda, to push, kick, throw, which may
be referred to 4/QERT, to cut. Cf. Skt. kvt, to cut down (base of
the present tense, kynta); Lithuan. kirsti, to cut, hew (see kertu in
Nesselmann). Cf. also Skt. kyntana-m, neut. sb.,a cutting. Der.
rent, sb., Jul. Cesar, iii. 2. 1793 rent, vb., ME. renten, Chaucer,
Leg. Good Women, 843; both formed from the pp. rent.

RENDER, to restore, give up. (F.—L.) ME. rendren, P. Plow-
man, B. xv. 601.—F. rendre, ‘to render, yield;’ Cot.—Late L.
rendere, nasalised form of L. reddere, to restore, give back. =L. red-,
back; and dare, to give. See Re-, Red-, and Date (1). Der.
render-ing. Also rent (2), q.v.; redd-it-ion 3 rendez-vous, q.v.

RENDEZVOUS, an appointed place of meeting. (F.—L.)
In Hamlet, iv. 4. 4. =F. rendezvous, ‘a rendevous, a place appointed
for the assemblie of souldiers;? Cot. A substantival use of the
phrase rendez vous, i. e. render yourselves, or assemble yourselves, viz.
at the place appointed. B. Rendez is the imperative plural, 2nd
person, of rendre, to render; and vous (<L. ws) is the pl. of the 2nd
pers. pronoun. See Render.

RENEGADE, RENEGADO, an apostate, vagabond. (Span.
—L.) Massinger’s play called The Renegado was first acted in 1624.
In Shak. Tw. Nt. iii. 2. 74, the first folio has ‘a verie Renegatho;’ a
spelling which represents the sound of the Spanish d. The word
was at first renegado, and afterwards renegade by loss of the final
syllable. Span. renegado, ‘an apostata,’ Minsheu; lit. one who has
denied the faith; pp. of renegar, ‘ to forsake the faith,’ id. Late L.
renegare, to deny again.=L. re-, again; and negare, to deny; see
Re- and Negative. 1. The word was not really new to the
language, as it appears in ME. as renegat ; but the ME. renegat having
been altered to runagate, the way was cleared for introducing the
word over again; see Runagate. 2. The odd word renege (with
g hard), in King Lear, ii. 2. 84,=Late L. renegare; cf. ME. reneye,
P. Plowman, B. xi. 120; from OF. reneier. Doublet, runagate.

RENEW, to make new again. (Hybrid; L. and E.) ME.
renewen, Wyclif, 2 Cor. iv. 16 ; where the L. renouatur is translated
by is renewid, From Re- and New. Der. renew-al, a coined
word ; renew-able, also coined. Doublet, renovate.

RENNET (1), the prepared inner membrane of a calf’s stomach,
used to make milk coagulate. (E.) ‘ Renet, for chese, coagulum ;’
Levins, ME. rennet; ‘ Lactis, rennet, or rennynge;’ Voc. 591.19;
ef. 574. 13. The word is found with various suffixes, but is in each
case formed from ME. rennen, to cause to run, because rennet
causes milk to run, i. e. to coagulate or congeal. This singular use of
E. run in the sense ‘to coagulate’ is not always noticed in the
Dictionaries. Pegge, in his Kenticisms (E. D. S. Gloss. C. 3) uses it ;
he says: ‘ Runnet, the herb gallium [ Galium verum], called in Derby-
shire erning, Anglice cheese-runnet ; it runs the milk together, i.e.
makes it curdle.’ ‘ Earn, Fearn, to coagulate milk; earning, yearn-
ing, cheese-rennet, or that which curdles milk;’ Brockett. Here
earn (better ern) is put, by shifting of r, for ren; just as AS. yrnan
(irnan) is a causal form of rinnan, torun. Cf. Gloucestersh. running,
rennet (E. D. S. Gloss. B. 4). ‘ Renlys, or rendlys, for mylke, [also ]
renels, Coagulum ;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘As nourishing milk, when runnet
is put in, Runs all in heaps of tough thick curd, though in his nature


‘Father.


REPAST


thin ;’ Chapman, tr. of Homer, Il. v, near the end. So also AS. |
“rynning, coagulum ; gerunnen, coagulatus ;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 27,
last line, i. 28, first line. All from AS. rinnan, torun. See Run.
+MDu. rinsel, runsel, or renninge, ‘curds, ot milk-runnet,’ Hexham ;
from rinnen, ‘ to presse, curdle;’ id. Cf. geronnen melck, ‘ curded or
rennet milke;’ id. Cf. G. rinnen, to run, curdle, coagulate.

RENNET (2), a sweet kind of apple. (F.—L.) Formerly spelt
renat or renate, from a mistaken notion that it was derived from L.
rendtus, renewed or born again. ‘The renat, which though first it
from the pippin came, Grown through his pureness nice, assumes
that curious name;’ Drayton, Polyolbion, song 18; 1. 671.—F.
reinette, rainette, a pippin, rennet; Hamilton. Scheler and Littré
agree to connect it with MF. rainetie, ‘a little frog’ (Cot.), the dimin.
of raine, a frog, because the apple is speckled like the skin of a
frog. (So also Hatzfeld.} From L. rana, afrog. See Ranunculus.

RENOUNCE, to give up, reject, disown. (F.—L.) ME. re-
nouncen, Gower, C. A. i. 258; bk. ii. 2931.—F. renoncer, ‘to
renounce;” Cot.—L. renuncidre, better renuntidre, to bring back a
report, also, to disclaim, renounce.=L. re-, back; and nuntiare, to
bring a message, from nuntius, a messenger; see Re- and Nuncio.
Der. renounce-ment, Meas. for Meas. i. 4. 353 renunciation, q. V.

RENOVATE, to renew. (L.) In Thomson’s Seasons, Winter,
704; Hakluyt, Voy. ii.1.37. The sb. renovation is in Bacon, Life of
Henry VII, ed. Lumby, p. 203, 1. 33.—L. renoudtus, pp. of renouare,
to renew. =—L. re-, again; and nouus, new, cognate with E. xew; see
Re-and New. Der. renovat-ion, from MF. renovation, ‘a renovation,’
Cot. ; renovat-or. Doublet, renew.

RENOWN, celebrity, fame. (F.—L.) ME. renoun, Chaucer,
C. T. 14553 (B 3825); Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 131, 1.5 ;
King Alisaunder, 1448. [But also renomé, renommé, in three syllables,
with final e as F. é€; Gower, C. A. ii. 43; bk. iv. 1250; Barbour’s
Bruce, iv. 7745 renownee, Barbour’s Bruce, viii. 290.] In Bruce, ix.
503, one MS. has the pp. renownit, spelt renommyt in the other. — AF.
renoun, Lib. Custum. p;23 ; OF. renon; MF. renom [also renommeée],
‘renowne, fame;’ Cot. Cf. renommé, ‘renowned, famous;’ Cot.
[Cf. Port. renome, renown ; Span. renombre, renown, also a surname ;
and Span. renombrar, to renown.|=F. re- (=L. re-), again; and
AF. noun, F. nom, a name; hence renown =a renaming, repetition or
celebration of aname. See Re-and Noun. Der. renown, verb, in
Barbour, as above.

RENT (1), a tear, fissure, breach. (E.) See Rend.

RENT (2), annual payment for land, &c. (F.—L.) In early use;
occurring, spelt rente, in the A. S. Chron. an. 1137; see Thorpe’s
edition, p. 383, 1. 12.—F. rente, ‘rent, revenue;’ Cot. Cf. Ital.
rendita, rent; which shows the full form of the word. From a
nasalised form (rendita) of L. reddita, i. e. reddita pecitinia, money
paid; fem. of redditus, pp. of reddere, to give back, whence F. rendre,
and E. render. Rent=that which is rendered; see Render. Der.
rent-er, rent-roll; also rent-al, P. Plowman, B. vi. 92.

RENUNCIATION, a renouncing. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave. It
is neither true F. nor true L., but prob. taken from F., and modified
by a knowledge of the L. word. =F. renonciation, ‘a renunciation ;”
Cot.—L. renuntiationem, acc. of renuntiatio, a renouncing; cf. re-
nuntiatus, pp. of renuntiare ; see Renounce,

EPAIR (1), to restore, fill up anew, amend. (F.—L.) ‘ The
fishes flete with new repaired scale;’ Lord Surrey, Description of
Spring, 1. 8.—OF. reparer, ‘to repaire, mend;’ Cot.—L. reparare,
to get again, recover, repair.—L. re-, again; and pardre, to get,
prepare; see Re- and Parade. Der. repair, sb., repair-er 3 repar-
able, in Levins, from MF. reparable, ‘repairable,’ Cot., from L.
reparabilis ; repar-abl-y ; repar-at-ion, Palsgrave, from MF. reparation,
‘a reparation,’ Cot.; repar-at-ive.

REPAIR (2), to resort, go to. (F.—L.) ME. repairen, Chaucer,
C. T. 5387 (B 967).—F. repairer, ‘to haunt, frequent, lodge in;’
Cot. Older form repairier (Burguy) ; cf. Span. repatriar, Ital. ripatri-
are, to return to one’s country.=L. repatridre, to return to one’s
country.=—L. re-, back; and patria, one’s native land, from patri-,
decl. stem of pater, a father, cognate with E. father. See Re- and
Der. repair, sb., Hamlet, v. 2. 228.

REPARTEE, a witty reply. (F.—L.) A misspelling for
repartie or reparty, ‘Some reparty, some witty strain;’ Howell,
Famil. Letters, b. i. sect. 1. let. 18.—F. repartie, ‘a reply ;’ Cot.
Orig. fem. of reparti, pp. of MF. repartir, ‘to redivide, to answer a
thrust with a thrust, to reply;’ Cot.=F. re- (=L. re-), again; and
partir, to part, divide, also to dart off, rush, burst out laughing, from
L. partire, partiri, to share, from part-,stem of pars, apart. See Re-
and Part.

REPAST, a taking of food; the food taken. (F.-L.) ME,
repast, P. Plowman, C. x. 148; Gower, C. A. iii. 25 ; .bk. vi, 698.—
OF. repast (Littré), later repas, ‘a repast, meale;’ Cot.=—F. re-
(=L.re-), again; and OF. past, ‘a meale, repast,’ Cot., from L. pastum,


REPAY


acc. of pastus, food; cf. pastus, pp. of pascere, to feed. See Re- and
Pasture. Der. repast, vb., Hamlet, iv. 5. 157.

REPAY, to pay back, recompense. (F.—L.) Spelt repaye in
Palsgrave. OF. repayer, to pay back; given in Palsgrave and in
use in the 15th cent. (Littré); obsolete. See Re- and Pay. Der.
repay-able, repay-ment.

REPEAL, to abrogate, revoke. (F.—L.) ME. repele(n), Hoc-
cleve, Reg. of Princes, 2960. AF. repeler, Langtoft, ii. 352. Altered
(by putting re- for F. ra-) from OF. rapeler, F. rappeler, ‘to
repeale, revoke,’ Cot.—F.r-, for re- (=L. re-), again, back ; and OF.
apeler, later appeler, to appeal. Thus repeal is a substitution for re-
appeal ; see Re- and Appeal. Der. repeal, sb., Cor. iv. I. 41;
spelt rapeell, i.e. recall, Caxton, Troy-book, fol. 294, bk.; repeal-er,
repeal-able.

REPEAT, to say or do again, rehearse. (F.—L.) ‘I repete,
I reherce my lesson, je repete ;? Palsgrave.— MF. repeter, ‘ to repeat ;’
Cot.—L. repetere, to attack again, reseek, resume, repeat; pp.
repetitus.=L.re-,again ; and petere, toseek; see Re- and Petition.
Der. repeat-ed-ly, repeat-er ; repet-it-ion, from MF. repetition, ‘a re-
petition,’ Cot., from L. ace. repetitionem.

REPEL, to drive back, check. (L.) ‘I repelle, I put backe
(Lydgat) ;’ Palsgrave, who thus refers us to Lydgate. —L. repellere,
to drive back; pp. repulsus.—L. re-, back; and pellere, to drive ; see
Re- and Pulse. Der. repell-ent, from the stem of the pres. part. ;
repell-er ; and see repulse.

REPENT, to feel sorrow for what one has done, to rue. (F.—L.)
ME. repenten, King Alisaunder, 4224.—F. repentir, reflexive verb,
“to repent;’ Cot.=L. re-, again; and Folk-L. *penitire, for L.
penitére, used impersonally in the sense ‘repent;’ see Re- and
Penitent. Der. repent-ant, ME. repentant, Rob. of Glouc., p. 291,
1, 5917, from F. repentant, pres. part. of repentir ; repent-ance, Rob.
of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 55, from F. repentance.

REPERCUSSION, reverberation. (¥.—L.). ‘That, with the
repercussion of the air ;? Drayton, The Owl ; 1. 1137. ‘Salute me with
thy repercussive voice ;’ Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s Revels, Act i. sc. I
(Mercury). — MF. repercussion, ‘ repercussion ;” Cot.—L. acc. reper-
cussionem ; see Re- and Percussion. Der. refercuss-ive, from MF.
repercussif, ‘repercussive,’ Cot.

REPERTORY, a treasury, magazine. (F.—L.) Formerly also
a list, index. ‘A repertorie or index ;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxx.
c. 1 (Of Hermippus). Altered from MF. repertoire, ‘a repertory,
list, roll;’ Cot.=L. repertérium, an inyentory.—L. repertor, a dis-
coverer, inventor ; cf. repertus, pp. of reperire, to find out, invent. = L.
re-, again; and parire (Ennius), usually parere, to produce; see Re-
and Parent. -

REPETITION ; see under Repeat.

REPINE, to be discontented. (L.) Spelt repyne in Palsgrave ;
compounded of re- (again) and pine, to fret. No doubt pine was, at
the time, supposed to be a true E. word, its derivation from the Latin
having been forgotten. But, by a fortunate accident, the word is not
hybrid, but wholly Latin. See Re- and Pine (2).

REPLACH, to put back. (F.—L.) ‘To chase th’usurper, and
replace their king;’ Daniel, Civil War, b. iii.st. 30. From Re- and
Place. Suggested by F. remplacer, ‘to re-implace;’ Cot. Der.
replace-ment.

REPLENISH, to fill completely, stock. (F.—L.) ME. re-
plenissen, ‘ Replenissed and fulfillid ;? Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. i.
pr. 4, l. 197.—OF-. repleniss-, stem of pres. part. of replenir, to fill up
again (Burguy) ; now obsolete. —L. re-, again; and a L. type *plénire,
formed as a verb from flénus, full. See Re- and Plenitude.
Der. replenish-ment. And see replete.

REPLETEH, quite full. (F.—L.) Chaucer has replete, C. T.
14963 (B 4147); repletion, id. 14929 (B 4113).—MF. replet, m.,
replete, f., ‘repleat ;” Cot.—L. replétum, acc. of replétus, filled up,
pp. of replére, to fill again.—L. re-, again; and plére, to fill; see
Plenary. Der. replet-ion, from MF. repletion, ‘ a repletion,’ Cot.

REPLEVY, to get back, or return, goods detained for debt, on
a pledge to try the right ina law-suit. (F.—L.and Teut.) ‘ Replevie,
to redeliver to the owner upon pledges or surety; it is also used for
the bailing a man ;’ Blount, Nomolexicon, ed. 1691. Spelt replevie,
Spenser, F. Q., iv. 12. 31. Butler has replevin as a verb, Hudibras,
The Lady’s Answer, l. 4.—F. re- (=L. re-), again; and plevir, ‘to
warrant, be surety, give pledges, Cot. The E. word follows the
form of the pp. plevi. Cf. AF. replevi, pp., replevied, Stat. Realm,
i, 361 (1311). See Re- and Pledge. Der. replev-in, properly a
sb., from F. re- and OF. plevine, ‘a warranty,’ Cot.

REPLY, to answer. (F.—L.) ME. replien, replyen; Chaucer,
Prol. to Legend of Good Women, 343.—OF. replier, the old form
which was afterwards replaced by the ‘ learned’ form refliquer, to
reply.=L. replicare (pp. replicatus), to fold back; as a law term,
to reply.=L. re-, back; and plicare, to fold. See-Re- and Ply.


REPRISAL “GET


Der. regly, sb., Hamlet, i. 2. 121; replic-at-ion, Chaucer, C. T. 1848
(A 1846) ;<L. ace. replicatidnem, from nom. replicatio, a reply, a law-
term, as at first introduced. Also replica, a copy, lit. a repetition, from
Ital. replica, a sb. due to replicare, to repeat, reply.

REPORT, to relate, recount. (F.—L.) ME. reporten, Chaucer,
C, T. 4572 (B 152).—F. reporter, ‘to recarrie, bear back ;’? Cot. =L.
reportare, to carry back. See Re-and Port (1). Der. report, sb.,
Chaucer, Troilus, i. 593; report-er.

REPOSE, to lay at rest, to rest. (F.—L. and Gk.) ‘ A mynde
With vertue fraught, reposed, voyd of gile;’ Surrey, Epitaph on Sir
T, W., 1. 24; Tottell’s Misc., ed. Arber, p. 29.—F. reposer, ‘to
repose, pawse, rest, or stay,’ Cot. Cf. Ital. riposare, Span. reposar,
Port. repousar, Prov. repausar (Bartsch) ; all answering to Late L.
repausare, whence repausditio, a pausing, pause (White).=—L. re-,
again; and pausdre, to pause, from pausa, a pause, of Greek origin ;
see Re-and Pause. € This word is of much importance, as it
appears to be the oldest compound of pausare, and gave rise to the
later confusion between L. pausdre (of Gk. origin), and the pp.
positus of L. ponere. See Pose. Der. repose, sb., Spenser, F. Q.
ili, 4. 6, from F. repos, ‘repose,’ Cot. ; repos-al, King Lear, ii. 1. 70.

REPOSITORY, a place in which things are stored up, store-
house. (F.—L.) Spelt repositorie in Levins and Minsheu, Altered
from MF. repositoire, ‘a store-house,’ Cot. —L. repositérium, a reposi-
tory. Formed with suffix -dr-i-um from reposit-us, pp. of repdnere, to
lay up. See Re- and Position.

REPOUSSE, raised in relief by being beaten up from the under
side ; said of metal-work. (F.—L.) F. repoussé, lit. pushed back ;

p. of repousser. =F. re-, back ; and pousser, to push ; see Push.

REPREHEND, to blame, reprove. (L.) ME. reprehenden,
Chaucer, Troilus, i. 510. It must have been taken from L., as the
OF. form was reprendre in the 12th century.—L. reprehendere (pp.
reprehensus), to hold back, check, blame.=L. re-, back; and pre-
hendere, to hold, seize. See Re- and Comprehend. Der. repre-
hension, Chaucer, Troil. i. 684, prob. direct from L. acc. reprehen-
sionem, though the OF. reprehension occurs in the 12th century
(Hatzfeld) ; reprehens-ive; reprehens-ible, from L. reprehensibilis;
reprehens-ibl-y, And see reprisal.

REPRESENT, to describe, express, exhibit the image of, act
the part of. (F.—L.) ME. representen, Rom. of the Rose, 7402.
= OF. representer, ‘to represent, express;’ Cot.=L. representare,
to bring before one again, exhibit. —L. re-, again ; and presentare,
to present, hold out, from present-, stem of presens, present. See
Re-and Present (1). Der. represent-able, represent-at-ion, represent-
at-ive.

REPRESS, to restrain, check. (F.—L.) ME. repressen, Gower,
C. A. iii. 166; bk. vii. 2410. Coined from Re- and Press (1),
with the sense of L. reprimere, pp. repressus. Der. repress-ion,
repress-ive. And see reprimand.

REPRIEVE, to delay the execution of a criminal. (F.—L.)
In Spenser, F. Q. iv. 12.31. It is formally the same word as reprove,
of which the ME. form was commonly repreuen (=repreven), with
the sense to reject. Palsgrave has repreve for reprove. ‘The stoon
which men bildynge repreweden’=the stone which the builders
rejected; Wyclif, Luke, xx. 17. Cf. OF. repreuve, 3rd pers. sing.
indic. of reprover (F. réprouver), to reprove. Cf. Schwan, § 348 (4).
B. But the sense is really due to the obs. verb Zo repry, as in ‘ they
were repryed,’ lit. ‘taken back,’ but used to mean ‘ reprieved ;’”
Fabyan, Chron., ed. Ellis, p. 389. And again, ‘the sayd Turbyr-
uyle was repryed to pryson;’ id. p. 672.—OF. repris, pp. of
reprendre, ‘ to resume, receive, take back; also to reprehend ;” Cot.
See Reprehend, Reprisal. Der. reprieve, sb., Cor. v. 2. 53.
Doublet, reprove.

REPRIMAND, a reproof, rebuke. (F.—L.) In the Spectator,
no. 112.—F. réprimande, formerly reprimende, ‘a check, reprehension,
reproof,’ Cot.—L. reprimenda, a thing that ought to be repressed ;
fem. of fut. part. pass. of reprimere, to repress; see Re- and Press
(1). Der. reprimand, verb.

REPRINT, to print again. (F.—L.) Prynne refers to a book
‘printed 1599, and now reprinted 1629;’ Histrio-mastix, part i.
p- 358 (R.). From Re-and Print. Der. reprint, sb.

REPRISAL, anything seized in return, retaliation. (F.—Ital.—
L.) It means ‘a prize’ in Shak. 1 Hen. IV, iv. 1. 118. Spelt re-
prisels, pl., in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—MF. represaille, ‘a taking or
seising on, a prise, or a reprisall;” Cot. [The modern vowel is
due to the obsolete verb reprise, to seize in return, Spenser, F. Q. iv.
4. 8, from the pp. repris of OF. reprendre<L. reprehendere.|—
MItal. ripresaglia, ‘booties, preyes, prisals, or anything gotten by
prize, bribing, or bootie;’ Florio.=Ital. ripresa, ‘a reprisall or


‘taking again ;’id. Fem. of ripreso, pp. of riprendere, ‘ to reprehend,
_also to take again, retake ;’ id.—L.-reprehendere; see Reprehend,
“Reprieve. And see Prize (1).


512 REPROACH


REPROACH, to upbraid, revile, rebuke. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Meas. for Meas. vy. 426. The sb. is spelt reproche in Skelton, Bowge
of Courte, 1. 26. We find ME. reproce, sb., Early E. Psalter, xxx
(xxxi). 14; and reprocen, vb., id., xxxiv (xxxv). 8.—F. reprocher, ‘to
reproach, . .. object or impute unto,’ Cot.; whence the sb. reproche,
‘a reproach, imputation, or casting in the teeth;’ id, Cf. Span.
reprochar, vb., reproche, sb.; Prov. repropehar, to reproach (cited by
Diez). We also find Prov. repropchiers, reprojers, sb., a proverb
(Bartsch). B. The etymology is disputed, yet is hardly doubtful ;
the Late L. appropiare became OF. aprocher and E. approach, so that
reproach answers to a L. type *repropiare, not found, to bring near to,
hence to cast in one’s teeth, impute, object. From L. re-, again;
and propi-us, adv., nearer, comp. of prope, near; see Propinquity.
See Diez, who shows that other proposed solutions of the word are
phonetically impossible. ‘y. Scheler well explains the matter, when
he suggests that *repropiare is, in fact, a mere translation or equiva-
lent of L. obicere (objicere), to cast before one, to bring under one’s
notice, to reproach. So also the G. vorwerfen, to cast before, to
reproach. §. And hence we can explain the Prov. repropchiers, lit.
a bringing under one’s notice, a hint, a proverb. Der. reproach,
sb.; reproach-able, reproach-abl-y; reproach-ful, Titus Andron., i.
308 ; reproach-ful-ly.

REPROBATE, depraved, vile, base. (L.) Properly a pp. used
as an adj., Trevisa, tr. of Higden, vi. 407; also in L.L. L. i. 2..64;
also as sb., Meas. iv. 3. 78.—L. reprobatus, censured, reproved, pp.
of reprobare; see Reprove. Der. reprobat-ion, a reading in the
quarto editions for reprobance, Oth. v. 2. 209, from MF. reprobation,
omitted by Cotgrave, but in use in the 14th cent. (Hatzfeld)<L. acc.
reprobationem.

REPRODUCEH, to produce again. (L.) In Cotgrave, to trans-
late F. reproduire. From Re- and Produce. Der. reproduct-ion,
reproduct-ive.

REPROVE, to condemn, chide. (F.—L.) ME. reprouen (re-
proven), P. Plowman, C. iv. 389. [Also spelt repreuen; see Re-
prieve.]—OF. reprover, mod. F. réprouver, to reprove; Littré. =
L. reprobare, to disapprove, condemn. =L. re-, again; and probare,
to test, prove; hence ‘to reprove’ is to reject on a second trial, to
condemn. See Re-and Prove. Der. reprov-er; reprov-able, re-
prov-abl-y. Also reproof, ME. reprove, reproef, Gower, C. A. iii.
230, bk. vii. 4108; see Proof. And see reprob-ate. Doublet,
reprieve.

REPTILE, crawling, creeping. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave. ME.
reptil, Gower, Conf. Amant. iii, 118; bk. vii. 1o1I.—F. reptile,
‘reptile, creeping, crawling;’ Cot.=—L. reptilem, acc. of reptilis,
creeping ; formed with suffix -ilis from rept-us, pp. of répere, to creep.
+Lithuan. reploti, to creep (Nesselmann). Der. reptil-i-an.

REPUBLIC, a commonwealth. (F.—L.) Spelt republique in
Minsheu, ed. 1627.— MF. republique, § the commonwealth ;’ Cot.—L.


réspublica, a commonwealth; for rés publica, lit. a public affair. See
Real and Public. Der. republic-an, republic-an-ism.
REPUDIATE, to reject, disavow. (L.) In Levins. Used asa


pp. or adj. in Harding’s Chron. ch. go, st. 4.—L. repudiatus, pp. of
repudiare, to put away, reject.—L. repudium, a casting off, divorce,
lit. a rejection of what one is ashamed of.—L. re-, away, back; and
pud-, base of pudére, to feel shame, pudor, shame; cf. pro-pudium, a
shameful action. Der. repudiat-or ; repudiat-ion, from MF. repudia-
tion, ‘a refusall,’ Cot.

REPUGNANT, hostile, adverse. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627; and in Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. ii. c. 11. § 4. The
word is rather F. than L.; the sb. repugnance is in Levins, ed. 1570,
and occurs, spelt repuagnaunce, in Skelton, Garland of Laurell, 211.
The verb ¢o repugn was in rather early use, occurring in Wyclif, Acts,
v. 39; also in Palsgrave.— MF. repugnant, pres. part. of repugner,
‘to repugne, crosse, thwart ;’ Cot.—L. repugnare, lit. to fight against.
=—L. re-, back, hence against; and pugnare, to fight; see Re- and
Pugnacious. Der. repugnance, from MF. repugnance, ‘repug-
nancy,’ Cot.

REPULSE, to repel, beat off. (L.) Surrey translates L. repulsi
in Virgil, Ain. ii. 13, by repulst. ‘Oftentymes the repulse from
promocyon is cause of dyscomforte ;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth,
b. iii. c. 12.—L. repulsus, pp. of repellere, to repel; see Repel.
B. The sb. answers to L. repulsa, a refusal, repulse; orig. fem. of
the pp. repulsus. Der. repulse, sb., as above; repuls-ive, -ly, -ness;
repuls-ion.

REPUTE, to estimate, account. (F.—L.) ‘I repute, I estyme,
or judge, Te repute;’ Palsgrave. The sb. reputation is in Chaucer,
C. T. 12536 (C 602).—OF. reputer, ‘to tepute;’? Cot. (And in
Godefroy.)—L. reputare, to repute, esteem,=—L. re-, again; and
putire, to think; see Re- and Putative. Der. reput-able, reput-
abl-y, reput-able-ness ; reput-ed-ly; reput-at-ton, from MF. reputation,
‘reputation, esteem,’ Cot, Also repute, sb., Troil. i. 3. 337.


~\ re


RESEMBLE


REQUEST, an entreaty, petition. (F.—L.) ME. requeste,
Chaucer, C. T. 2687 (A 2685).—OF. requeste, ‘a request ;’ Cot. —
L. requisita, a thing asked, fem. of pp. of reguirere, to ask; see Re-


and Quest; and see Require. Der. request, verb, Two Gent. ©


1sgn3

REQUIEM, a mass for the repase of the dead. (L.) ‘The
requiem-masse to synge;’ Skelton, Phylyp Sparowe, 401. The Mass
for the Dead was so called, because the anthem or officium began
with ‘Requiem eternam dona eis, Domine,’ &c.; Procter, On the
Common Prayer.=L. requiem, acc. of requiés, rest.—L. re-, again;
and guiés, rest; see Re- and Quiet. And see Dirge.

REQUIESCENCE, repose, quiet. (L.) From L. re-, again;
and quiescentia, quietness, from guiescent-, stem of pres. part. of
quiescere, to rest; see Quiescent.

REQUIRE, to ask, demand. (F.—L.) Spelt reguyre in Pals-
grave. ME. requiren, Chaucer, C. T. 8306 (E 430); in 1. 6634
(D 1052), we find requere, riming with there. The word was taken
from F., but influenced by the L. spelling. MF. requerir, ‘to re-
quest, intreat,’ Cot.; OF. reguerre, with 1 pers. sing. ind. reguier.=
L. requirere, lit. to seek again (pp. requisitus).—L. re-, again; and
querere, to seek; see Re- and Quest. Der. reguir-able; require-
ment, a coined word; requis-ite, adj., Wint. Tale, iv. 4. 687, from L.
pp. requisitus ; requis-ite, sb., Oth. ii. 1. 251 ; reguis-it-ion, from MF.
requisition, ‘a requisition,’ Cot.; reguis-it-ion-ist.

REQUITEH, to repay. (F.—L.) InShak. Temp. v. 169. Surrey
(Ain. ii. 205) translates si magna rependam (Ain. ii. 161) by ‘ requite
thee large amendes.’ The word ought rather to be requit ; cf. ‘ hath
requit it, Temp. iii. 3. 71. But just as gate occurs as a variant of
quit, so requite is used for requit; see Re- and Quit. Der. requii-
al, Merry Wives, iv. 2. 3.

REREDOS, a screen at the back of an altar. (F.—L.) ‘A
reredosse in the hall;’ Harrison, Desc. of Eng. b. ii. c. 12; ed.
Furnivall, p. 240. Hall, in his Chronicle (Henry VIII, an. 12.
§ 22), enumerates ‘ harths, reredorses, chimnays, ranges;’ Richardson.
Spelt reredos, Earl of Derby’s Expeditions in 1390-3 (Camd. Soc.),
p. 219, 1. 8. Compounded of rear, ME. rere, i.e. at the back, and
F. dos (<L. dorsum), the back; so that the sense is repeated. See
Rear (2) and Dorsal.

REREMOUSE, REARMOUSE, a bat. (E.) Still in use in
the South and West of England; E.D.D. The pl. reremys occurs
in Rich. the Redeles, ed. Skeat, iii. 272. AS. hréremiis, a bat;
Wright’s Vocab., p. 77, col. 1, last line. B. Apparently due to a
popular etymology (like prov. E. /litter-mouse, a bat) from the
flapping of the wings; from AS. hréran, to agitate, a derivative of
hror, motion (with the usual change from 6 to @), allied to hrdr, adj.,
active, quick; see Grein, ii. 102, 108. Cf. Icel. hrera, G. riihren,
to stir; Icel. krera tungu, to wag the tongue. B. But the early
form is hréatha-miis, a bat; Epinal Gloss., 978; spelt hraedemuus,
Corpus Gloss., 2103; hreadaemus, hreadamus, Ep. Gl. 1098. Cog-
nate with OLow G. hréda-miis, a bat (Gallée),

REREW ARD, the same as Rearward, q. v.

RESCIND, to repeal, annul. (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674.—F. rescinder, ‘to cut or pare off, to cancell;’ Cot.—L. re-
scindere, to cut off, annul.=L. re-, back; and scindere (pp. scissus),
to cut; see Re- and Schism. Der. resciss-ion, from MF, rescision,
‘a rescision, a cancelling,’ Cot., from L. acc. rescissiénem.

RESCRIPT, an official answer, edict. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave. =
MF. rescript, ‘a rescript, a writing back, an answer given in writing ;’
Cot.—L. rescriptum, a rescript, reply; neut. of rescriptus, pp. of
rescribere, to write back; see Re- and Scribe.

RESCUE, to free from danger, deliver from violence. (F.—L.)
ME, rescouen, rescowen, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iv. met. 5, 1. 15.
= OF. rescourre, ‘to rescue;’ Cot. [The same word as Ital. ri-
scuotere.|= Late L, rescutere, which occurs A.D. 1308 (Ducange) ; it
stands for reéxcutere. So also the OF. rescousse, a rescue, answers to
Late L. rescussa<L. reéxcussa, fem. pp. of the same verb; and mod.
F. recousse is from recussa, the same sb. with the omission of ex.
B. From L, re-, again; and excutere (pp. excussus), to shake off,
drive away, comp. of ex, off, and quatere, to shake; see Re-, Ex-,
and Quash. Der. rescue, sb., ME. rescous, Chaucer, C. T. 2645
(A 2643), from the OF. rescousse, ‘rescue,’ Cot. @ We find AF.
rescure, vb., Vie de St. Auban, and rescusse, id. In the Coventry
Myst., p. 114, is the sb. rescw. Either this sb. was formed anew
from the vb., or the AF. rescusse (ME. rescous) was supposed to be
apl.form. Mrs, Quickley says: ‘bring a rescue or two;’ 2 Hen. IV,
ii. I. 62. :

RESEARCH, a careful search. (F.—L.) ‘Research, a strict
inquiry ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. From Re- and Search. Cf. MF.
recerche, ‘a diligent seareh,’ Cot.; Norm. dial. recerche; mod. F-.
recherche.


RESEMBLE, to be like. (F.—L.) ME. resemblen, Gower, C. A.


RESENT


iii, 1175 bk. vii.982,—_ OF. resembler, ‘to resemble ;’ Cot.
ressembler.=F. re-, again; and sembler, ‘ to seem, also to resemble,
id.—L, re-, again; and similare, more generally simulare, to imitate,
copy, make like, from similis, like; see Re- and Similar. Der.
resembl-ance, ME. resemblaunce, Gower, C. A. ii. 83, bk. iv. 2424,
from OF. resemblance, ‘ a resemblance ;’ Cot.

RESENT, to take ill, be indignant at. (F.—L.) Orig. merely to
be sensible of a thing done to one; see Trench, Select Glossary. In
Joseph Beaumont, Psyche, canto iv. st.156. Used in the modern
sense, Milton, P. L. ix. 300. ‘To resent, to be sensible of, or
to stomach an affront;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Blount’s Gloss. has
only the sb. resentment, also spelt ressentiment.=MF. resentir,
ressentir. ‘Se ressentir, to taste fully, have a sensible apprehension
of; se ressentir de iniure, to remember, to be sensible or desire a re-
venge of, to find himself aggrieved at a thing;’ Cot. Thus the orig.
sense was merely ‘to be fully sensible of,’ without any sinister
meaning. =F, re-, again; and sentir, to feel, from L. sentire, to feel ;
see Re- and Sense. Der. resent-ment, from F. ressentiment; re-
sent-ful, -ly.

RESERVE, to keep back, retain. (F.—L.) ME. reseruen (with
u=v), Chaucer, C. T, 188.—OF. reserver, ‘to reserve, Cot.—L.
reseruare, to keep back. =L. re-, back; and serudre, to keep; see
Re- and Serve. Der. reserve, sb., from OF. reserve, ‘ store, a
reservation,’ Cot.; reserv-ed, reserv-ed-ly, -ness; reserv-at-ion; also
reserv-oir, a place where any thing (esp. water) is stored up, Evelyn’s
Diary, 17 Oct., 1644, from F. reservotr, ‘a store-house,’ Cot., which
from Late L. reseruatorium (Ducange).

RESIDE, to dwell, abide, inhere. (F.—L.) See Trench, Select
Glossary. In Shak. Temp. iii. 1. 65. [The sb. residence is much
earlier, in Chaucer, C. T. 16128 (G 660).]—MF. resider, ‘to reside,
stay,’ Cot.—L. residére, to remain behind, reside.—L. re-, back; and
sedére, to sit, cognate with E. sit; see Re- and Sit. Der. resid-ence,
as above, from F. residence, ‘a residence, abode,’ Cot.; resid-ent,
Bermers, tr. of Froissart, vol. ii. c. 210, and c. 129 (R.); resid-ent-i-al,
resid-enc-y; resid-ent-t-ar-y. And see resid-ue.

RESIDUE, the remainder. (F.—L.) ME. residue, P. Plow-
man, B. vi. 102. AF. residue, fem., Royal Wills, p. 39 (1360); cf.
MF. residu, ‘the residue, overplus,’ Cot.—L. residuum, a remainder ;
neut. of residuus, remaining ; the AF. residue answers to the fem.
residua. =, resid-ére, to remain, also to reside; see Reside. Der.
residu-al, residu-ar-y. Doublet, residuum, which is the L. form.

RESIGN, to yield up. (F.—L.) ME. resignen, Chaucer, C. T.
5200 (B 780). = OF. and MF. resigner, ‘to resigne, surrender ;” Cot.
=L. resignare, to unseal, annul, assign back, resign. Lit. ‘to sign
back or again.’ See Re- and Sign. Der. resign-at-ion, from MF.
resignation, ‘a resignation;’ Cot.

RESILIENT, rebounding. (L.) ‘ Whether there be any such
resilience in Eccho’s;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 245.—L. resilient-, stem
of pres. part. of resilire, to leap back, rebound. —L. re-, back; and
salire, to leap; see Re- and Salient. Der. resilience. Also result, q.v.

RESIN, ROSIN, an inflammable substance, which flows from
trees. (F.—L.—Gk.) Resin is the better form. ‘ Great aboundance
of rosin ;’ Holland, tr. of Plutarch, b. xvi. c. 10. ME. roseyne, Earl
of Derby’s Expeditions, 1390-3 (Camden Soc.), p. 64, 1. 63 recy,
recyne, Wyclif, Jer. li. 8.— OF. resine, ‘rosin;’ Cot. Mod. F. résine;
Norman dial. rousine (Moisy). —L. résina, Jer. li. 8 (Vulgate); Late
L. rosina, Voc.'714. 32. B. Borrowed from Gk. pytivy (with long 2),
resin, gum from trees. For the change from 7 to s, cf. Doric ¢ari
as compated with Attic pyci, he says, and Gk. ov for L. zu, thou.
Moreover, there is a place called Retina, of which the mod. name is
Resina (White). y. Perhaps allied to Gk. féev, to flow; see
Prellwitz. Der. resin-ous, from MF. resineux, ‘full of rosin,’ Cot.;
resin-y.

RESIST, to stand against, oppose. (F.—L.) Spelt resyste in
Palsgrave; resyst in Skelton, On the death of Edw. IV, 1. 11; resyste
in Caxton, G. Legend, St. Peter, § 4.—OF.- resister, ‘to resist ;’
Cot.—L. resistere, to stand back, stand still, withstand.=L. re-,
back; and séstere, to make to stand, set, also to stand fast, a causal
verb formed from stare, to stand, cognate with E. stand. See Re-
and State. Der. resist-ance, ME. resistence, Chaucer, C. T. 16377
(G 909), from OF. resistence (later resistance, as in Cotgrave, mod.
F, résistance), which from L. resistent-, stem of pres. part. of resistere ;
resist-ible, resist-ibil-i-ty, resist-less, resist-less-ly, resist-less-ness.

RESOLVE, to separate into parts, analyse, decide. (L.) Chaucer
has resolued (with ~=v) in the sense of ‘ thawed; ’ tr. of Boethius,
b. iv. met. 5,1. 20. —L. resoluere, to untie, loosen, melt, thaw. =—L. re-,
again; and soluere, to loosen; see Re- and Solve. Der. resolv-
able; resolv-ed; resolv-ed-ly, All’s Well, v. 3. 3323 resolv-ed-ness.
Also resolute, L.L.L. vy. 2. 705, from the pp. resoltitus ; resolute-ly,
resolute-ness ; resolut-ion, Macb. v. 5. 42, from MF, resolution, ‘a
resolution,’ Cot.


Mod. F.


REST 513
RESONANT, resounding. (L.) In Milton, P. L. xi. 563.—L.


resonant-, stem of pres. part. of resonare, toresound. Cf, MF. reson-
nant, ‘resounding ;’ Cot. See Resound. Der. resonance, sug-
gested by MF. resonnance, ‘ a resounding ;’ Cot.

RESORT, to go to, betake oneself, have recourse to. (F.—L.)
©Al I refuse, but that I might resorte Unto my loue;’ Lamentation
of Mary Magdalene, st. 43, 1. 299; Hoccleve, Reg. of Princes, 1397.
The sb. resort is in Chaucer, Troilus, iii. 134.—OF. resortir, later
ressortir, ‘to issue, goe forth againe, resort, recourse, repaire, be
referred unto, for a full tryal,..to appeale unto; and to be re-
moveable out of an inferior into a superior court ;’ Cot. (It was
thus a law term.) Hence the sb. resort, later ressort, ‘the authority,
prerogative, or jurisdiction of a sovereign court,’ Cot. Cf. Late L.
resortire, to be subject to a tribunal. It looks like a compound of
L. re-, again; and sortirz, to obtain; as if to re-obtain, gain by
appeal; and this may have affected the sense. The L. sorfiri is lit.
‘to obtain by lot ;’ from sorti-, decl. stem of sors,a lot. See Re-
and Sort. B. But this does not well account for the development
of the senses ; and it is probable that the Ital. risorto, jurisdiction,
is allied to Ital. risorto, pp. of risorgere (L. resurgere), to rise again ;
see Resurrection. So also MF. ressort means ‘the spring of
a lock,’ Cot.; and F. sortir means ‘to go out.’ The latter is from
*surctus, short for surrectus, pp. of surgere, to rise. Cf. MSpan.
surtir, ‘to rise, to rebound ;’ Minsheu. See sortire in Diez, Sortir (1)
and (2) in Hatzfeld, and Korting, § 8018. See Source. Der. resort,
sb., as above.

RESOUND, to echo, sound again. (F.—L.) The final d is ex-
crescent after z, as in the sb. sound, a noise. ME. resounen, Chaucer,
C. T. 1280 (A 1278).—OF. resonner, resoner, omitted by Cotgrave,
but in use in the 12th cent. (Littré) ; mod. F. résonner. = L. resonare.
=L. re-; and sonare, to sound, from sonus, a sound; see Re- and
Sound (3). Der. reson-ant, q.v.

RESOURCKH, a supply, support, expedient. (F.—L.) In Cot-
grave, to translate F. ressource ; he also gives the older form resource,
‘a new source, or spring, a recovery. The sense is ‘new source,
fresh spring ;’ hence, a new supply or fresh expedient. Compounded
of Re- and Source.

RESPECT, regard, esteem. (F.—L.) In The Court of Love (not
earlier than A.D. 1500), 1. 155.—F. respect, ‘respect, regard ;’ Cot.
=L. respectum, acc. of respectus, a looking at, respect, regard. = L. re-
spectus, pp. of respicere, to look at, look back upon.=L. re-, back;
and specere, to see, spy. See Re- and Spy. Der. respect, verb,
Cor. iii. I. 307, and very common in Shak.; respect-able, from F.
respectable, ‘ respectable,’ Cot. ; respect-abl-y, respect-abil-i-ty ; respect-
ful, respect-ful-ly ; respect-ive, from F. respectif, ‘respective,’ Cot. ;
respect-ive-ly, Doublet, respite.

RESPIRE, to breathe, take rest. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. iii.
3. 36.—F. respirer, ‘to breathe, vent, gaspe ;” Cot.=L. respirare, to
breathe. =L. re-, again; and sfirare, to blow; see Re- and Spirit.
Der. respir-able, respir-abil-i-ty ; respir-at-ion, from F. respiration, ‘a
respiration,’ Cot.; respir-at-or, respir-at-or-y.

RESPITE, a delay, pause, temporary reprieve. (F.—L.) ‘Thre

dayes haf respite;? Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 275, 1. 2.
Better spelt respit (with short 2). —OF. respit (12th cent.), ‘a respit,
a delay, a time or term of forbearance ; a protection of one, three, or
five yeares granted by the prince unto a debtor,’ &c.; Cot. Mod. F.
répit. The true orig. sense is regard, respect had to a suit on the
part of a prince or judge, and it is a mere doublet of respect.— L. acc.
respectum; see Respect. Der. respite, verb, Chaucer, C. T. 11886
(F 1582). Doublet, respect.
-RESPLENDENT, very bright. (L.) (Not from OF., which
has the form resplendissant; see Cotgrave.) ‘ Resplendent with glory;’
Craft of Lovers, st. 5, 1.3; in Chaucer’s Works, ed. 1561, fol. 341.—
L. resplendent-, stem of pres. part. of resplendére, to shine brightly,
lit. to shine again. L, re-, again ; and splendére, to shine; see Re-
and Splendour. Der. resplendent-ly, resplendence.

RESPOND, to answer, reply. (F.—L.) ‘For his great deeds
respond his speeches great,’ i.e. answer to them; Fairfax, tr. of Tasso,
b. x. c, 40.—OF. respondre, ‘to answer; also, to match, hold cor-
respondency with;’ Cot.—L. respondére (pp. responsus), to answer.
=L. re-, back, in return; and spondére, to promise; see Re- and
Sponsor. Der. respond-ent, Tyndall, Works, p. 171, col. 2, 1. 47,
from L, respondent-, stem of pres. part. of respondére ; response, ME.
response, spelt respons in Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 98, 1.14,
from OF. response, ‘an answer,’ Cot., from L. responsum, neut. of
Pp. responsus 3; respons-ible, respons-ibl-y, respons-ibil-i-ty ; respons-ive,
Hamlet, v. 2. 159, from MF. responsif, ‘responsive, answerable,’
Cot. ; respons-ive-ly. Also cor-respond, q. V. i vee

REST (1), repose, quiet, pause. (E.) ME. reste (dissyllabic),
Chaucer, C. T. 9729 (E 1855). ‘The finale is here due to the form
of the oblique cases of the AS. sb. AS. rest, rest, ae sb., rest,

L


514 REST


quiet; but the gen., dat., and acc. sing. take final -e, making reste,
reste; see Grein, ii. 372.4-Du. rust; Dan. and Swed. rast; Icel.
rost, the distance between two resting-places, a mile; Goth. rasta,
a stage of ajourney,a mile; OHG. rasta, rest; also, a measure of
distance. B. From the Teut. type *rast-ja, fem., ‘a halting-place;’
from Teut. base *ras, to dwell, as seen in Goth. raz-ns, a house.
See Ransack. Brugmann, i. § 903 c. Cf. W. aros, to tarry;
Stokes-Fick, p. 235. Der. rest, verb, AS. restan, Grein, il. 3735
rest-less, rest-less-ly, rest-less-ness.

REST (2), to remain, be left over. (F.—L.) Perhaps obsolete;
but common in Shak. ‘ Nought rests for me but to make open pro-
clamation ;’ 1 Hen, VI, i. 3. 70. The sb. rest, remainder, is still
common ; it occurs in Surrey, tr. of Virgil, Ain. ii. 856 (651 of the
L. text).—F. rester, ‘to rest, remaine;’? Cot.—L. restare, to stop
behind, stand still, remain.—L. re-, behind, back; and stare, to
stand, cognate with E. stand; see Re- and Stand. Der. rest, sb.,
as above, from F. reste, ‘a rest, residue, remnant ;’ Cot. And see
rest-ive, ar-rest, Rest-harrow (Baret) =arrest-harrow (F. arréte-beuf).
And see reasty.

RESTAURANT, a place for refreshment. (F.—L.) Borrowed
from mod, F. restaurant, lit. ‘restoring ;’ pres. part. of restaurer, to
restore, refresh; see Restore. Cot.has: ‘ restaurant, a restorative.’

REST-HARROW ; see under Rest (2).

RESTITUTION, the act of restoring. (F.—L.) ME. restitu-
cion, P. Plowman, B. v. 235, 238. —OF. restitution, ‘a restitution. =
L. restititidnem, acc. of restitiitio, a restoring; cf. restititus, pp. of
restituere, to restore.—L. re-, back; and statuere, to place; see Re-
and Statute. Der. restitue, verb, in P. Plowman, B. v. 281 (obso-
lete); from F. restituer.

RESTIVE, unwilling to go forward, obstinate. (F.—L.) Some-
times confused with restless, though the orig. sense is very different.
In old authors, it is sometimes confused with resty, adj., as if from
rest (1); but properly resty or restie stands for OF. restif (F. rétif).


‘The restiff world;’ Dryden, Hind and Panther, iii. 1026. ‘Grow
5 2 : eee
restie, nor go on;’ Chapman, tr. of Homer, Iliad, v. 234. ‘ When
there be not stonds, nor restiveness in a man’s nature;’ Bacon,


Essay 40, Of Fortune. See further in Trench, Select Glossary. =
OF. and MF. restif, ‘ restie, stubborn, drawing backward, that will
not go forward;’ Cot.—F. rester, ‘to rest, remain;’ Cot. See
Rest (2). @ Thus the true sense of restive is stubborn in keeping
one’s place ; a restive horse is, properly, one that will not move for
whipping; the shorter form resty is preserved in prov. E. rusty,
testive, unruly (Halliwell) ; to turn rusty is to be stubborn, Der.
restive-ness.

RESTORE, to repair, replace, return. (F.—L.) ME. restoren,
Rob. of Glouc., p. 500, 1. 10287.—OF. restorer (Burguy), also MF.
restaurer, ‘ to restore,’ Cot. = L. restaurare, to restore. = L. re-, again;
and *staurare (not used), to set up, establish, make firm, a verb
derived from an adj. *stawrus=Gk, oravpéds, that which is firmly
fixed, a stake. Cf. Skt. sthavara-s, fixed, stable. Idg. root *stez,
allied to4/STA, tostand. Brugmann,i. § 198. See Re- and Store.
Der. restor-at-ion, ME, restauracion, Gower, C. A. iii. 23, bk. vi. 637,
from F. restauration, from L. acc. restauratidnem; restor-at-ive, ME.
restauratif, Gower, C. A. iii. 30, bk. vi. 859. Also restaur-ant,


q.v.

RESTRAIN, to hold back, check, limit. (F.—L.) ME. re-
streinen, restreignen, Gower, C. A. iii. 206, bk. vii. 3396; Chaucer,
C. T. 14505 (B3777).—OF. stem restraign-, as in restraign-ant, pres.
pt. of restraindre, ‘to restrain’ Cot.; mod. F. restreindre.em L. re-
stringere, to draw back tightly, bind back.=—L. re-, back; and strin-
gere, to draw tight; see Re- and Stringent. Der. restraint,
Surrey, Prisoned in Windsor, 1. 52, from MF. restraincte, ‘a re-
straint,’ Cot., fem. of restrainct, old pp. of restraindre. Also restrict,
in Foxe’s Acts and Monuments, p. 1173 (R.), from L. restrictus, pp.
of restringere ; restrict-ion, tr. of More’s Utopia, ed. Arber, b. ii (Of
their iourneyng), p. 105, 1. 9, from F. restriction, ‘a restriction,’
Cot. ; restrict-ive, restrict-ive-ly.

RESULT, to ensue, follow as a consequence. (F.—L.) In Levins,
ed. 1570.—MF. resulter, ‘to rebound, or leap back; also, to rise of,
come out of ;’ Cot.—L. resultére, to spring back, rebound; fre-
quentative of resilire, to leap back; formed from a pp. resultus, not
in use. See Resilient, Der. result, sb., a late word ; result-ant, a
mathematical term, from the stem of the pres. part.

RESUME, to take up again after interruption, (F.-L.) ‘I
resume, I take agayne;’ Palsgrave.—MF, resumer, ‘to resume ;’
Cot.=—L. restimere, to take again.—L. re-, again; and simere, to
take. See Assume. Der.resum-able, resumpt-ion, formed from L.
resumptio, which is from the pp. resumptus,

RESURRECTION, a rising again from the dead. (F.—L.)
ME, resurrectioun, resurexioun; P. Plowman, B. xviii. 425.—OF.
resurrection, ‘a resurrection,’ Cot.=L. acc. resurrectionem, fromnom.


“RETIRE


resurrectio; cf. resurrectus, pp. of resurgere, to rise again.=L. re-,
again; and surgere, to rise; see Re- and Source. :

RESUSCITATE, to revive. (L.) Orig. a pp. as adj.,as in:
‘our mortall bodies shal be resuscitate ;’ Bp. Gardner, Exposicion,
On the Presence, p. 65 (R.). ‘ Resuscitate from death to lyfe ;’ Hall,
Chron., Hen. VII, an. vii. § 9.—L. resuscitatus, pp. of resuscitare, to
raise up again.=L. re-, again; and suscitare, to raise up, for *sub-
citare, compounded of sub, up, under, and cifare, to summon, rouse.
See Re-, Sub-, and Cite. Der. resuscitat-ion; resuscitat-ive, from
MF. resuscitatif, ‘ resuscitative,’ Cot.

RET, to steep flax-stems in water. (MDu.) Also rait; E.D. D.=
Du. reten, to ret, break, soak hemp; MDnu. reten, reeten. Cf.
Pomeran. réten, Swed. réta, Norw. réyta, to ret; Dan. dial. rode.
Lit. ‘to make rotten;’ formed by mutation from Teut. *rawt-, second
grade of Teut. *reut-an-, to rot. See Rotten.

RETAIL, to sell in small portions. (F.—L.) In Shak. L.L, L.
y. 2, 317. Due to the phrase to sell by retail. ‘Sell by whole-sale
and not by retaile ;’ Hakluyt, Voyages, vol. i. p. 506, 1.34. To sell
by retail is to sell by ‘the shred,’ or small portion.—OF. retaille
(Hatzfeld); MF. retail, ‘a shred, paring, or small peece cut from
a thing;’ Cot.—OF. retailer, ‘to shred, pare, clip;’ id.=—F. re-
(=L. re-), again; and ¢ailler, to cut; see Re- and Tailor. Der.
retail, sb. (which is really the more orig. word) ; cf. AF. a retail,
by retail; Stat. Realm, i. 178 (1318). Cf. de-tail.

RETAIN, to hold back, detain. (F.—L.) In Skelton, Phylyp
Sparrow, l. 1126. ‘ Of them that list all uice for to retaine;’ Wyatt,
Sat. ii. 1. 21. Spelt retayne in Palsgrave; reteyne, Caxton, Godfrey
of Bologne, p. 88, 1. 28.—OF. reteing, retien, as in I p.s. pres. of
retenir, ‘ to retaine, withholde ;’ Cot. = L. retinére, to hold back. = L.
re-, back; and tenére, tohold; see Re-and Tenable. Der. retain-
able; retain-er, Hen. VIII, ii. 4.1133; retent-ion, q.v., retin-ue, q.v.

RETALIATH, to repay..(L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. =
L. retaliatus, pp. of re¢aliare, to requite, allied to /alio, retaliation in
kind. Cf. L. lex talidnis, the law of retaliation. B. It is usual to
connect these words with L. ¢dlis, such, like; but they are obviously
allied to W. zal, payment, Irish taille, wages, Gael. taileas, wages ;
Corn. taly, to pay. Hence retaliate=repay. Der. retaliat-ion, a
coined word ; retaliat-ive, retaliat-or-y.

RETARD, to make slow, delay, defer. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627, ‘ To retarde you;’ A.D. 1467; Excerpta Historica, p. 187. —:
MF. retarder, ‘to foreslow, hinder ;’ Cot. =L. retardare, to delay. —
L. re-, back; and ¢ardadre, to make slow, from ¢ardus, slow. See
Re- and Tardy. Der. retard-at-ion.

RETCH, REACH, to try to vomit. (E.) Sometimes spelt
reach, but quite distinct from the ordinary verb fo reach. In Todd’s
Johnson; without an example. ‘Reach, to retch, to strive to vomit;’
Peacock, Gloss. of words used in Manley and Corringham (Lincoln).
AS. hr@can, to try to vomit; whence: ‘ Phtisis, wyrs-hrécing,’ Voc.
113. 8; also Aréc-gebrec, Voc. 112. 30. From AS. hkraca, spittle,
A.S. Leechdoms, ii. 260.+-Icel. hrejka, to retch; from hraki, spittle.
Prob. of imitative origin.

RETENTION, power to retain, or act of retaining. (F.—L.)
In Shak. Tw. Nt. ii. 4. 99; v. 84.—MF. retention, ‘a retention ;’
Cot. — L. retentionem, acc. of retentio, a retaining; cf. retentus, pp. of
retinere; see Retain. Der. retent-ive, retent-ive-ly, -ness.

RETICENT, very silent. (L.) Modern; the sb. reticence is in
Holland, tr. of Plutarch, p. 841 (R.).—L, reticent-, stem of pres.
part. of reticére, to be very silent.—L. re-, again, hence, very much;
and ¢acére, to be silent ; see Re- and Tacit. Der. reticence, from
MF. reticence, ‘ silence,’ Cot., from L. reticentia,

RETICULE, a little bag to be carried in the hand. (F.—L.)
Modern; not in Todd’s Johnson. Borrowed from F. réticule, a net
for the hair, a reticule; Littré.—L. réticulum, a little net, a reticule ;
double dimin. (with suffix -cw-lu) from réti-, decl. stem of réte, a net.

Formerly also ridicule, both in F. and E., by confusion with
ridicule (Littré). Cf. prov. F. rédicule, a reticule, dial. of Verdun
(Fertiault); and Rouchi (Hécart). Der. reticul-ar, reticul-ate,
reticul-at-ed ; also reti-ar-y, i.e. net-like; reti-form, in the form of
a net; also reti-na, q.v.

RETINA, the innermost coating of the eye. (L.) Called ‘ Reti-
formis tunica, or Retina, in Phillips, ed..1706. So called because it
resembles a fine network, A coined word; from ré/i-, decl. stem of
réte, a net; see Reticule.

RETINUE, a suite or body of retainers. (F.—L.) ME. retenue,
Chaucer, C. T. 2504 (A 2502). —OF. retenue, ‘a retinue ;’ Cot.; fem.
of retenu, pp. of retenir, to retain; see Retain.

RETIRE, to retreat, recede, draw back. (F.—L. and Teut.) In
Shak, Temp. iv. 161.—OF. retirer, ‘to retire, withdraw ;’ Cot.—F,
re-, back; and ¢irer, to draw, pull, pluck, a word of Teut. origin.
See Re- and Tirade, Der. retire-ment, Meas. for Meas. v. 130,
from F. retirement, ‘a retiring,’ Cot.


RETORT


RETORT, a censure returned ; a tube used in distillation. (F. —
L.) In both senses, it is the same word. The chemical retort is so
called from its ‘twisted’ or bent tube; a retort is a sharp reply
‘twisted’ back or returned to an assailant. ‘ The retort courteous;’
As You Like It, v. 4. 76. ‘She wolde retorte in me and my mother;’
Henrysoun, Test. of Creseide, st. 41, 1. 286.—F. retorte, ‘a retort,
or crooked body,’ Cot. ; fem. of retort, ‘twisted, twined, . . retorted,
violently returned, id. ; pp. of retordre, ‘to wrest back, retort ;’ id.
=—L. retorquére (pp. retortus), to twist back,=L. re-, back; and
torgueére, to twist; see Re- and Torsion.

RETOUCH, RETRACE; from Re- and Touch, Trace.

RETRACT, to revoke. (F.—L.) In Levins, ed. 1570. [The
remark in Trench, Study of Words, lect. iii, that the primary mean-
ing is ‘ to reconsider,’ is not borne out by the etymology; ‘to draw
back’ is the older sense.|=—MF. retracter, ‘to recant, revoke,’ Cot.
—L. retractare, to retract; frequentative of retrahere (pp. retractus),
to draw back.=—L. re-, back; and trahere, to draw; see Re- and
Trace. Der. retract-ion, from MF. retraction, ‘a retraction,’ Cot.;
retract-ive, retract-ive-ly ; also retract-ile, i.e. that can be drawn back,
a coined word. And see retreat.

RETREAT, a drawing back, a place of retirement. (F.—L.)
Spelt retreit in Levins, ‘ Betre is to make a beau retret’=it is better
to make a good retreat; Gower, C. A. iii. 356; bk. viii. 2416. —OF.
retrete (Littré), later retraite, spelt retraicte in Cotgrave, ‘a tetrait,
a place of refuge ;’ fem. of retret, retrait, pp. of retraire, ‘to with-
draw ;’ Cot.=L. retrahere, to draw back; see Retract. Der.
retreat, verb, Milton, P. L. ii. 547.

RETRENCH, to curtail expenses. (F.—L.) In Phillips, ed.
1706.—MF. retrencher, ‘to cut, strike, or chop off, to curtall,
diminish ;’ Cot. Mod. F. retrancher.—F. re- (=L. re-), back ; and
OF. trencher, ‘to cut;’ Cot. SeeRe-and Trench. Der. retrench-
ment, Phillips.

RETRIBUTION, requital, reward or punishment. (F.—L.)
In Minsheu, ed. 1627. Spelt retrybucion, Caxton, G. Legend,
Pentecost, § 3.—MF. retribution, ‘a retribution, requitall ;’ Cot.
= L. retribiitionem, acc. of retribiitio, recompense; cf. retribiitus, pp.
of retribuere, to restore, repay.=L. re-, back; and ¢ribuere, to assign,
give; see Re- and Tribute. Der. retribut-ive.

RETRIEVE, to recover, bring back to a former state. (F.—L.
and Gk.) ‘TI retreve, I fynde agayne, as houndes do their game, je
retrouue;’ Palsgrave. lLevinshas: ‘retrive, retrudere ;’ he must mean
thesame word. Spelt retriue, Book of St. Albans, fol. b 4; cf. retriuer,
a Tetriever (dog), id. fol. b3, back. Just as in the case of contrive,
the spelling has been altered ; probably retreve was meant to repre-
sent OF. retreuve, a stem of the OF. retrover, later retrouver.—F.
retrouver, ‘to find again;’ Cot.—F. re-, again; and trouver, to
find. See Contrive and Trover. Thus the successive spellings
are retreve (for retreuve), retrive, retrieve. Der. retriev-er, retrievable.

RETRO., backwards, prefix. (L.; or F.—L.) L. retrd-, back-
wards. A comparative form, with comp. suffix -érd, as in ul-trd,
ci-trd, in-tro; from red- or re-, back. Thus the sense is ‘ more
backward.’ See Re-. Cf. Goth. -Jrd in Ja-fré, thence ; Brugmann,


il. § 75.

RETROCESSION, a going back. (L.) A coined word, and
not common; see an example in Richardson. As a math. term, in
Phillips, ed. 1706. Formed with suffix -ion (=F. -ion, L. -idnem)
like retrocess-us, pp. of retrocédere, to go backwards; see Retro-
and Cede. @ The classical L. sb. is retrdcessus.

RETROGRADE, going backwards, from better to worse. (L.)
In early astronomical use, with respect to a planet’s apparent back-
ward motion. ME. retrograd, Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, ed. Skeat,
pt. ii. § 4, 1. 33; § 35, 1. 12.—L.retrégradus, going backward; used
of a planet. =L. retrogradi, to go backward.=L. retrd-, backward ;
and gradi, to go; see Retro- and Grade. Der. retrograde, verb,
from MF. retrograder, ‘to recoyle, retire,’ Cot. ; retrogress-ion, in
Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. vi. c. 3, last section, as if from L.
*retrogressio (but the classical form is retrdgressus), like retrdgressus,
pp. of retrdgradi. Hence retrogress-ive, -ly. Also retrograd-at-ion,
Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. ii. c. 17, from MF. retrogradation, ‘a retro-
gradation,’ Cot., formed from retrogradatus, pp. of retrdgradare,
collateral form of retrégradi.

RETROSPECT, a contemplation of the past. (L.) Used by
Steele in The Spectator, no. 374, § 1. Pope has retrospective, adj.,
Moral Essays, Ep. i. 1. 99. Swift has retrospection (Todd; no
reference). ‘ Retrospect, or Retrospection, looking back;’ Phillips, ed.
1706. Coined from L. retrospectus, unused pp. of retrospicere, to
look back. =L. retrd-, backward ; and specere, to look; see Retro-
and Spy.

RETROUSSE, turned up at the end, as a nose. (F.) Modern.
=F. retroussé, pp. of retrousser, to turn up; lit. to truss up. =F, re-,
again ; and trousser, to pack; see Truss,


REVERE 515


RETURN, to come back to the same place, answer, retort.
(F.—L.) ME. returnen, retournen, Chaucer, C. T. 2097 (A 2095);
Rom. of the Rose, 382, 384.—F. retourner, ‘to return;’ Cot.=—F.
re-, back; and tourner, to tum; see Re- and Turn. Der. return,
sb., King Alisaunder, ]. 600, Der. return-able.

REUNION, REUNITE; see Re- and Unit. .

REVEAL, to unveil, make known. (F.—L.) Spelt revele,
Spenser, F, Q. iii. 2. 48.—MF. reveler, ‘to reveale;’ Cot.—L.
reuélare, to unveil, draw back a veil.—L. re-, back; and uélare, to
veil, from wélum, a veil; see Re- and Veil. Der. revel-at-ion,
ME. reuelacioun, Wyclif, Rom. xvi. 25, from MF. revelation, ‘a re-
velation,’ Cot., from reuélationem, acc. of reuélatio, allied to reuélatus,
pp. of reuélare.

REVEUGLE, an alarum at break of day. (F.—L.) ‘Sound a
reveillé, sound, sound ;’ Dryden, The Secular Masque, 61. ‘Save
where the fife its shrill revei//é screams ;’ Campbell, Gertrude, pt.
ili, st. 7. ‘So soon love beats revellies in her breast;’ Davenant,
Gondibert, b. iii. c. 5. st. 1. A trisyllabic word. ‘The true F. word
is réveil, an awaking, reveille ; as in batire le réveil, sonner le réveil,
to beat, to sound the reveille (Hamilton). But the E. word was
originally reveillez; see Brand’s Antiq. ed. Ellis, ii. 176. This was
taken as a pl. form, and the final z was dropped. = MF. resveillez vous,
awake ye; imper. pl. of resveiller, to awake, arouse. Cf. MF.
resveil, ‘a hunt’s-up or morning-song for a new married wife, the
day after the marriage.’ =F, re- (=L. re-), again; and OF. esveiller,
to waken (Cot.), from Late L. *exuigilare, not found, but a mere
compound of ex, out, and wigilare, to wake, watch, from uigil, wake-
ful. See Re-, Ex-, and Vigil. @ See the full account in Notes
on E., Etym., p. 247. The F. reveillez is used as a sb., in the E.
sense, in the dialect of Forez, near Lyons (Graz).

REVEL, to carouse, indulge in boisterous festivities, to frolic.
(F.—L.) ME. revelen; Poems and Lives of Saints, ed. Furnivall,
xxx. 15. —OF. reveler, to rebel, revolt, also to rejoice noisily, rejoice
greatly (Godefroy). = L.rebellare, to rebel; see Rebel. Der.revel,sb.,
ME. reuel (=revel), Chaucer, C. T. 2719 (A 2717), Legend of Good
Women, 2255; P. Plowman, B. xiii. 442; Will. of Palerne, 1953.
{On the strength of Chaucer’s expression, ‘And made revel al the
longe night’ (C. T. 2719), Tyrwhitt explained revel as ‘an enter-
tainment, properly during the night.’ This is an attempt at forcing
an etymology from F. réveiller, to wake, which is wrong. In Will.
of Palerne, 1953, the revels are distinctly said to have taken place iz
the forenoon ; and in Chaucer, Legend of Good Women, 2255, we
read that ‘ This revel, full of songe and ful of daunce, Lasteth a fourte-
night, or litel lasse,’ which quite precludes a special reference to the
night. ]=OF, revel, which Godefroy explains by ‘ rebellion, revolt,
pride, also great rejoicing, joy, amusement.’ ‘ Plains est de joie et
de revel’=is full of joy and revelry; Le Vair Palefroy, 1. 760;
Roquefort. ‘ La dougors de tens novel Fait changier ire en revel’
= the sweetness of the fresh season changes anger into sport; Bartsch,
Chrestomathie, col. 323, 1. 28. Also revell-er, ME. revelour, Chaucer,
C.T. 4389 (A 4391); revel-ry. @ Note also ME. revelows, full
of revelry, full of jest, Chaucer, C. T. 12934 (B 1194)=OF.
reveleux, revelos, riotous. Korting, § 7826.

REVENGE, to injure in return, avenge. (F.—L.) In Palsgrave.
‘To revenge the dethe of our fathers;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart,
vol. ii. c. 240 (R.).—OF. revengier (Supp. to Godefroy, s.v. re-
vancher) ; MF. revenger (Palsgrave), later revencher, ‘ to wreak, or
revenge himselfe,’ Cot., who gives the form revengé for the pp. ;
mod. F. revancher; whence the phrase ex revanche, in return, tomake
amends ; by a bettering of the sense. =F. re-, again; and venger, older
form vengier, to take vengeance, from L, windicare. See Re- and
Vengeance; also Avenge, Vindicate. Der. revenge, sb.,
Spenser, F. Q. i. 6. 443 revenge-ful, Hamlet, ili. 1. 126; revenge-
ful-ly ; revenge-ment, 1 Hen. IV, ili. 2. 7. Doublet, revindicate.

REVE fy income. (F.—L.) Lit. ‘that which comes back or
is returned to one.’ Often accented revénue; Temp. i. 2. 98.—OF.
revenue, ‘revenue, rent ;’ Cot. Fem. of revenu, pp. of revenir, to re-
turn, come back. =F. re-, back; and venir, to come.—L. re-, back ;
and wenire, to come, cognate with E. come, See Re- and Come.

REVERBERATS, to re-echo, reflect sound. (L.) In Levins, ed.
1570.—L. reuerberatus, pp. of reuerberare, to beat back.—L. re-,
back ; and uerberare, to beat, from werber, a scourge, lash, whip ; cf.
Gk. f4880s,a rod. Der. reverberat-ion, ME. reuerberacioun, Chaucer,
C. T. 7816 (D 2234), from F, reverberation, ‘a reverberation,’ Cot.,
from L. acc. reuerberationem. Also reverberat-or-y; and reverb (a
coined word, by contraction), K. Lear, i. 1. 156.

REVERE, to venerate, regard with awe. (F.—L.) Notanearly
word, to reverence being used instead. In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
=—MF. reverer (mod. révérer), ‘to reverence,’ Cot.—L, reueréri, to
revere, stand in awe of.=L, re-, again (here intensive) ; and ueréri,
to fear, feel awe (corresponding to the E, phrase to es wary, to

L12


516 REVERIE, REVERY


beware), from the same root as wary. See Re- and Wary. Der.
rever-ence, in early use, ME. reuerence, Rob. of Glouc., p. §53,
1.11547, King Alisaunder, 793, from OF. reverence, ‘ reverence,’
Cot., from L. reuerentia, respect. Hence reverence, vb., Minsheu,
ed. 1627, P. Plowman, C. xiv. 248, from OF. reverencer, ‘to rever-
ence,’ Cot.; reverenti-al, from MF. reverential, ‘ reverent,’ Cot. Also
rever-ent, Chaucer, C. T. 8063 (E 187), from OF. reverent (14th
century, see Littré, s.v. révérend), which from L. reuerendus, fut.
pass. part. of reueréri: later form rever-end, Frith’s Works, p. 105,
col. 2, 1. 40.-

REVERIE, REVERY, a dreaming, irregular train of thought.
(F.—L.?)  ‘ When ideas float in our mind without any reflection or
regard of the understanding, it is that which the French call resvery ;
our language has scarce aname forit ;? Locke, Human Understanding,
b. ii. c.. 19 (R.). ‘In a reuerrye;’ Godfrey of Boloyne, ch. 116;
p-174. AF. reverye, raving ; Langtoft, ii. 168. —F. réverie, formerly
resverie, ‘a raving, idle talking, dotage, vain fancy, fond imagina-
tion;’- Cot.—F. réver, formerly resver, ‘to rave, dote, speak idly,
talke like an asse;’ id. B. The F. réver has the same sense as
the Lorraine rdver, whence E. rave; see Rave. Hence the form
ravery, raving, rage, as a variant of revery (N.E.D.). Korting,
§ 7697.

REVERSE, opposite, contrary, having an opposite direction.
(F.—L.) The adj. use seems to be the oldest in E. ; it precedes the
other uses etymologically. ME. reuers (=revers). ‘A vice reuers
unto this’=a vice opposite this; Gower, C. A. i. 167; bk, ii. 222.
‘ Al the reuers seyn’=say just the contrary ; Chaucer, C. T. 14983
(B 4167).—OF. revers, ‘ strange, uncoth, crosse;’ Cot. L. reuersus,
lit. turned back, reversed, pp. of rewertere, to turn backward, return.
=—L. re-, back ; and wertere, to turn; see Re- and Verse. Der.
reverse, verb, Gower, C. A. i. 3; prol. 30; reverse, sb., Merry Wives,
ii. 3. 27, from F. revers, ‘a back blow,’ Cot. Cf. F. les revers de
fortune, ‘the crosses [reverses] of fortune;’ id. Also revers-ion,
Levins, from MF. reversion, ‘ a reverting,’ Cot.; hence revers-ion-ar-y.
Also revers-al, Bacon, Life of Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 15, 1. 26;
revers-ible. And see revert.

REVERT, to return, fall back, reverse. (F.—L.) In Spenser,
F. Q. iv. 6. 43. Also in Caxton; see gloss. to Eneydos.—MF.
revertir, ‘ to revert, returne;’ Cot. =L. type *revertire, for L. reuertere,
to return; see Reverse. Der. revert-ible.

REVIEW, to view again, look back on, examine carefully. (F.—
L.) ‘To reuiew, to recognise, or revise ;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627. And
see Shak. Sonn. 74; Wint. Tale, iv. 4.680. From Re- and View.
Der. review, sb., review-er, review-al.

REVILE, to calumniate, reproach. (F.—L.) ME. reuilen (with
u=v), Gower, C. A. iii. 247, bk. vii. 4635 ; Rob. of Brunne, tr. of
Langtoft, p. 161, 1. 11. AF. reviler (Gower); OF. reviler, to
revile (Godefroy).—F. re- (L. re-), again; and F. wil, from L.
uilis, cheap, of small value. Cf. OF. aviler (mod. F. avilir), ‘to
disprise, disesteeme, imbase, make vile or cheap,’ &c.; Cot.; where
the prefix is F. a, L. ad.. See Vile. Der. revil-er.

REVISE, to review and amend. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627.—MF. reviser, to revise; omitted by Cotgrave, but in early
use (Littré).—L. rewtsere, to look back on, to revisit. L. re-, again ;
and uisere, to survey, frequent. form of widére (supine wisum), to see.
See Re- and Vision. Der. revise, sb., revis-al, revis-er ; revis-ion,
from F. revision, ‘a revision, revise, review,’ Cot.

REVISIT, to visit again. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, i. 4.53. From
Re- and Visit.

REVIVE, to return to life, consciousness, or vigour, recover.
(F.—L.) «In Palsgrave; and in K. Lear, iv. 6. 47. «‘ His spyrite
reuyued ;’ Caxton, G. Legend, Joseph, § 14. Also used actively,
as: ‘to revive the ded’ =to reanimate the dead; Spenser, F. Q. ii. 3.
22.—F. revivre, ‘to revive, recover, return unto life,’ Cot.—L.
reuiuere, to live again.=L. re-, again; and wiuere, to live; see Re-
and Vivid. Der. reviv-al, revival-ist, reviv-er. Also reviv-ify, from
re- and vivify; reviv-i-fic-at-ion,

REVOKE, to repeal, recall, reverse. (F.—L.) Levins, ed. 1570,
has both revoke and revocate.. ‘I revoke, je reuocque ;’ Palsgrave.
Spelt revoke, Dictes, pr. by Caxton, fol. 24, 1. 11.—MF, revocquer
(omitted by Cotgrave), to revoke; mod. F. révoquer.—L. reuocire,
to call back. L. re-, back; and wocdre, to call. See Re- and
Voice. Der. revoc-at-ion, from MF. revocation, ‘a revocation,’
Cot., from L. ace, rewocitidnem; revoc-able, from MF. revocable,
‘revokable,’ Cot., from L. reuocabilis ; revoc-abl-y; ir-revoc-able.

REVOLT, a turning away, rebellion. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Shak,
Merry Wives, i. 3. 111.—MF. revolte, ‘a revolt, a rebellion, Cot.—
Mital. revolta (mod. rivolta), ‘a revolt, turning, an ouerthrow;’
Florio, Fem. of revolto, ‘turned, revolted, ouerthrowne, ouerturned,’
&c.; Florio, This is the pp. of revolvere, ‘to revolve, ponder, turne,
ouerwhelme ;’ id. See Revolve. Der. revolt, verb, K. John, iii.


RHEUM


I. 257, from MF. revolter, MItal. revoltare; revolt-er; revolt-ing,
revolt-ing-ly. ;

REVOLVE, to roll round, move round a centre. (L.) ‘ This
meditacion by no waie reuolue ;’ Test. of Love, b. i; ch. 8, 1. 4.2L.
reuoluere, to roll back, revolve.=L. re-, back;.and woluere (pp.
uolatus), to roll. See Re- and Voluble. Der. revolv-er; revolut-
ion, ME. reuolucion, Gower, C. A. ii..61, bk. iv. 1783, from OF.
revolution, from L. acc. reuoliutidnem, nom. reuoliitio, a revolving,
allied to reuolitus, pp. of reuoluere. Hence revolution-ar-y, -ise, -ist.
And see revolt. ;

REVULSION, a tearing away, sudden forcing back. (F.—L.)
Used by Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 66, to mean the withdrawal of blood
from one part to another in the body.= MF. revulsion, ‘a revulsion,
plucking away ; also, the drawing or forcing of humours from one
part of the body into another;’ Cot.—=L. reuulsidnem,' acc. of
reuulsio, a-tearing away; cf. reuulsus, pp. of reuellere, to pluck
back.=L. re-, back; and wellere, to pluck. Der. revuls-ive. And
see con-vulse.

REWARD, to requite, recompense, give in return. (F.—L. and
Teut.) ME. rewarden, verb, P. Plowman, B. xi. 129, Wyclif, Heb.
xi. 26. Also reward, sb., used exactly in the sense of regard, of
which it is a mere doublet. ‘Took reward of no man’=paid regard
to no one, P. Plowman, C. v.40; see Chaucer, Legend of Good
Women, prol. 399; Hampole, Pricke of Conscience, 1881; Will. of
Palerne, 3339.—AF. rewarder, Langtoft, i. 176; OF. rewarder, the
same as regarder, to regard (Burguy).—OF. re- (=L. re-), back;
and warder, the same as garder, a word of Teut. origin. See Re-
gard, Guard, Ward. The orig. sense is to mark or heed, as a
lord who observes a vassal, and regards him as worthy of honour or
punishment; hence, to requite. Der. reward, sb., OF. reward, the
same as regard. . € Not connected with guerdon, as suggested im
Richardson. Doublet, regard.

REYNARD, RENARD, a fox. (F.—Teut.) In Dryden, The
Cock and the Fox, 581, 662, 721, 768, 794, 805. ‘ Hyer [here]
begynneth thystorye [the history] of reynard the foxe ;’ Caxton, tr. of
Reynard the Fox, A.D. 1481. See the Introductory Sketch to The
History of Reynard the Fox, ed. Arber.— MF, renard, regnard (mod.
F, rénard), ‘a fox;’ Cot. B. Of Teut. origin; the famous epic is
of Low G. origin, and was composed in Flanders in the 12th cen-
tury; see the edition, by Herr Ernst Martin, Paderborn, 1874, of
Willems, Gedicht von den vos Reinaerde (poem of the fox Reynard).
Thus the E. and F. words are due to the Flemish name reinaerd or
reinaert, This isthe same asthe OHG. reginhart, used as a Christian
name, meaning literally ‘strong in counsel,’ an excellent name for the
animal. y. The OHG. regin, ragin, counsel, is the same as Goth.
ragin, an opinion, judgement, advice, decree. This is not to be con-
nected with L. regere, to rule, but with Skt. rachand, orderly arrange-
ment, from rach, to arrange; see Uhlenbeck. §. The OHG. hart,
strong, lit. hard, is cognate with E. Hard, q.v. The OHG.!
reginhart became later reinhart, a reynard, fox. We also meet
with the mod. G. reinecke, a fox; this is a dimin. of Rein-.

RHAPSODY, a wild, disconnected composition. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Ben Jonson uses ‘a rhapsody Of Homer’s’ to translate Iliacum car-,
men, Horace, Ars Poetica, 1. 129. Spelt rapsodie in Minsheu, ed.
1627.—F. rapsodie, ‘a rapsodie,’ Cot.—L. rhapsddia.— Gk. faywdia,
the reciting of epic poetry, a portion of an epic poem recited at
a time, also, a rhapsody, tirade. = Gk. faywdds,.one who stitches or
strings songs together, a reciter of epic poetry, a bard who recites
his own poetry. The term merely means ‘ one who strings odes or
songs together,’ without any necessary reference to the actual stitch-
ing together of leaves.—Gk. fay-, stem of fut. tense of pare, to
stitch together, fasten together ; and #57, an ode, for which see Ode.
Der. rhapsodi-c, Gk. pawwbin6s, adj., rhapsodi-c-al, rhapsodi-c-al-ly ;
rhapsodi-st, sb.

RHETORIC, the art of speaking with propriety and elegance.
(F.—L.—Gk.) ME. retoryké (4 syllables), Chaucer, C. T. ‘7908
(E 32). OF. rhetorique, ‘rhetorick,’ Cot.—L. rhétorica, for rhétorica
ars, i.e. rhetorical art; fem. of rhétoricus, rhetorical. — Gk. pytopixn,
for pyTopikh réxvn, i.e. rhetorical art; fem. of pntopixds, rhetoricals
—Gk. pnropt-, decl. stem of f77wp, an orator. For *fpq-Twp, re-
lated by gradation to cipew (for *Fép-yew), to say, of which the pt. t.
is ei-pn-xa. Formed with the suffix -rwp (=L. -tor) of the agent ;
the sense being ‘speaker.’ - B. The base of eipew is Fep=4/WER,
to speak; whence also the E. verb and word; see Verb, Word.
See Curtius, i. 428. Der. rhetoric-al, -al-ly; rhetoric-ian.

RHEUM, discharge from the lungs or nostrils caused by a cold.
(F.—L.—Gk.) | Frequent in Shak. Meas. iii. 1. 31; &c.  ‘ Reumes
and moystures do increase ;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 24.
Spelt rewme, Palsgrave.—OF. reume, MF. rheume, ‘a rheume,
catarrh;’ Cot. (F. rhume).—L. rheuma. — Gk. pedua (stem fevpar-),
a flow, flood, flux, rheum.=—Gk. fev-, occurring in pev-ooua, fut. te


RHINOCEROS


of peew, to flow, which stands for *opeFecv ; the base of the verb being
*gpev-, to. flow, cognate with Skt. sru, to flow.—4/SREU, to flow;
see Stream. Brugmann, i. § 462; Fick, i. 837; Curtius, i. 439.
Der. rheum-y, Jul. Ceesar, ii. 1. 266; rheumat-ic, Mids, Nt. Dr. ii. 1.
105, from L. rhewmaticus, from Gk. pevpatitds, adj. ; rheumat-ic-al ;
rheumat-ism, from L. rhewmatismus, from Gk. pevpatiopés, liability to
theum.

RHINOCEROS, a large quadruped. (L.—Gk.) In Shak.
Macb. iii: 4. 101. Named from the remarkable horn (sometimes
double) on the nose.—L. rhinoceros (Pliny).—Gk. fivdsepws, a
thinoceros, lit. ‘ nose-horned.’ = Gk. f.vo-,decl. stem of fis (gen. pivés),
the nose; and «ép-as, a horn, allied to E. horn; see Horn. ¢@ See
the description of the rizxocertis and monoceros, supposed to be different
animals, in K. Alisaunder, 6529, 6539; cf. Wright, Popular Treatises
on Science, p. 81.

RHIZOME, a root-like stem. (F.—Gk.) Modern; in botany. =
F. rhizome. — Gk. fiCwpa, root. = Gk. frfovv, to cause to take root. =
Gk. pita, root ; see Root.

RHODODENDRON, a genus of plants with evergreen leaves.
(L.—Gk.) Lit. ‘rose-tree.’ In Phillips, ed. 1706. —L. rhododendron
{Pliny).—Gk. poddéderSpor, lit. ‘rose-tree.’= Gk. fodo-, for pddor, a
rose; and dévépov, a tree. PB. As to fddov, see Rose. Aév-dpov
appears to be a reduplicated form, connected with Spits, a tree, and
therefore with E. tree; see Tree.

RHODOMONTADE; the same as Rodomontade, q. v.

RHOMB, RHOMBUS, a quadrilateral figure, having all its
sides equal, but not all its angles right angles, (F.—L.—Gk.; or
L.—Gk.) The F. form rhomb is now less common than the L. form
rhombus; but it appears in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, and in Milton,
P.R. iii. 309.—F. rhombe, ‘a spinning wheel; also, a figure that
hath equall sides and unequall angles, as a quarry of glass,’ &c.;
Cot.—L. rhombus.=Gk. pduBos, anything that may be spun or
twirled round, a spinning-wheel; also a rhomb, or rhombus, from a
certain likeness to a whirling spindle, when the adjacent angles are
very unequal. —Gk. féuBev, to revolve, totter. Allied to Wrinkle
_ (Prellwitz). See also Rumb. Der. rhomb-ic; rhombo-id, i.e.

thomb-shaped, from fduBo-, for pduBos, and «f5-os, form, shape;
rhombo-id-al. Doublet, rumb, q. v.

RHUBARB, the name of an edible plant. (F.—Late L.—Gk.)
Spelt reubarbe by Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iv. c. 1; also
Reubarbarum, id. b, iii. c. 6; rubarbe, Skelton, Magnificence, 2385 ;
rubarb, Libell of E. Policy, 1. 362.—OF. reubarbe, MF. rheubarbe,
Srewbarb;’ Cot. Mod. F. rhubarbe. Cf. Ital. reobarbaro, rhubarb ;
spelt rabbarbaro in Florio. The botanical name is rhéum.=— Late L.
rheubarbarum ( =rhéum barbarum), used by Isidore of Seville (Brachet).
= Gk. pjov BapBapoy, rhubarb; ‘lit. ‘the Rkéum from the barbarian
country.’. B. Gk. fjoy is an adjectival form, from £4, the Rha-
plant, i.e. reubarb, which was also called Rka& Ponticum; and Rha
took its name from the Rha or Volga, the name of a river in Pontus.
Cf. the Linnzan name Rkéum Rhaponticum, which is tautological.
‘Huic Rha uicinus est amnis, in cujus superciliis quedam uegetabilis
eiusdem nominis gignitur radix, proficiens ad usus multiplices me-
delarum ;”), Ammianus Marcellinus, xxii. 8. 28; a passage which
Holland translates by: ‘Neere unto this is the river Rha, on the
sides whereof groweth a comfortable and holsom root, so named,
good for many uses in physick.’ See Taylor’s Words and Places,
Lewis’s Lat. Dict (s. v. rha), and Richardson.

RHUMB, the same as Rumb, q. v.

RHYME, the same as Rime (1), q.v.

RHYTHM, flowing metre, true cadence of verse, harmony.
(F.—L.—Gk.) Formerly spelt rithme, as in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F.
rithme, ‘rime, or meeter;’? Cot.—L. rhythmum, acc. of rhythmus.=
Gk. fvOpyés, measured motion, time, measure, proportion ; Ionic form,
fuopés. Cf. Gk. fvous, a stream, pdya, a stream, furds, flowing; all
from the base fv-; cf. péew (for *cpéFev), to flow.—4/SREU, to
flow; see Rheum, Brugmann, ii. § 72, iii..§ 691. @ See also
Rime (1). Der. rhythm-ic, Gk. puOpinds; rhythm-ic-al.

RIATA ; see Reata.

“RIB, one of the bones from the back-bone encircling the chest.
(E.) ME. ribbe, Rob. of Glouc., p. 22, 1) 518; P. Plowman, B. vi.
180, AS. ribb, Gen. ii. 21.44-Du. rib; Icel. rif; Swed. ref-been, a
rib-bone; Dan. rib-been; Pomeran. ribbe; OHG. rippi, G. rippe.+
Russ, rebro. - B. The AS. ribb answers to a Teut. type *reb-jom, neut.
Perhaps allied to G. reb-e, a tendril; from the notion of winding
round (Kluge). Cf. OHG. hirni-reba, the brain-pan, skull. Der.
rib, verb; ribb-ing; spare-rib; rib-wort, Palsgrave, a plantain, called
simply ribbe (rib) in AS. ;. see A. S. Leechdoms, Glossary.

RIBALD, a low, licentious fellow. (F.—Teut.) ME. ribald, but
almost always spelt ribaud, P. Plowman, B, xvi. 151, v. 512; King
Alisaunder,.1578); pl. ribauz, O, Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 279,
Jast line but one,—OF. ribald, ribaud (ribauld in Cot.), a ribald,


RICK


ruffian ; mod. F. ribaut. The Late L. form is ribaldus ; see Ducange.
And see a long note in Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, 1839, p. 369.
We also find Late L. ribalda, fem., a prostitute. B. The suffix
-ald shows the word to be Teutonic; it answers to OHG. wait,
power, and was (1) a common suffix in Frankish proper names, and
(2) a common suffix in F. words, where it is used as a masc. termina-
tion denoting character, and commonly has a depreciatory sense,
as in the present instance. sy. Diez connects ribald with OHG.
hripa, MUG. ribe, a prostitute, and cites from Matthew Paris:
‘fures, exules, fugitiui, excommunicati, quos omnes ribaldos Francia
uulgariter consueuit appellare.’ Hence also OF. riber, to be wanton ;
which fully explains the sense. Cf. Korting, § 4019. Der. ribaldry,
ME. ribaldrie, commonly written ribaudie, P. Plowman, C. vii. 435.

RIBAND, RIBBAND, RIBBON, a narrow strip, esp. of
silk. (F.) Spelt riband from a fancied connexion with band, with
which it may possibly be connected; also ribband, Spenser, F. Q.
iv. 10.8, But the d is excrescent and is not always found in the ME.
period, though occurring in the Prompt. Parv. ME. riban, P. Plow-
man, B, ii. 16; ‘with ribanes of red golde’=with golden threads.
‘Ragges ribaned with gold’=rags adorned with gold thread; Rom.
of the Rose, 4752. Again, in Rom. of the Rose, 1077, Riches wears
a purple robe, adorned with orfreis (gold-embroidery) and ribaninges.
[Irish ribin, a ribbon; ribe, a flake, a hair, a ribbon; Gael. ribean, a
riband, fillet, rib, ribe, a hair, rag, clout, tatter, gin, snare, whence
also ribeag, a hair, little hair, small rag, tassel, fringe, bunch of any-
thing hairy; W. rhibin, a streak, rhib, a streak, are all from ME.
riban.|  B. From F. ruban, spelt riban in 1394 (Supp. to Godefroy),
ruben in Cotgrave, rubant in Palsgrave. The form riban occurs also
in mod. Proy., and in the Norman and Guernsey dialects (Mistral,
Moisy, Métivier). Ducange also gives the form reband; see Voc.
792. 20. y. The suffix seems to be Du. and G. band, a band; see
Band (1). The ri- or re- perhaps occurs in EFries. rif-band, ref-
band, a reef-band (Koolman). The old sense of reef (in a sail) was
‘strip;’ cf. MSwed. rif, ‘fascia;’? Swed. dial. rejv, Norw. reiv, a
swaddling-band, lit. ‘ strip.’

RIBIBE, the same as Rebeck, q. v.

RICH, a kind of edible grain. (F.—Ital.—L.—Gk.—OPers.)
In Shak. Wint. Tale, iv. 3. 41; spelt rize in Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 49;
rice in Levins; ryce in Palsgrave. ME. ryz, Mandeville, ch. 31,
p- 310. = OF, ris, ‘ rice,’ Cot. ; mod. F. riz. = Ital. riso. =L. oryza, rice.
=Gk. dpufa, also dpu(oy, rice; both the plant and grain. B. Doubt-
less borrowed from an OPers. form, preserved in the Pushto
(Afghan) wrijzey, wrijey, rice (Raverty). Hence also Arab. uruzz,
ruzz, whence Span, arroz, rice. ~ Allied forms are Pers. birinj,
Armenian brinj, rice; Skt. vrihi-, rice. (Horn, § 208; Yule.)

RICH, wealthy, abounding in possessions. (E.) ME. riche (12th
cent.), O. Eng. Homilies, i. 53,1. 10; Ancren Riwle, p. 66; Laya-
mon, 128. (Not borrowed from F., but an E. word.) AS. rice,
tich, powerful; Luke, i. 52; Mark, x. 25. The change from final ¢
to ch is just as in Norwich from Nordwic, pitch from AS. pic, &c.;
see Matzner, i. 145.4-Du. rijk; Icel. rikr; Swed. rik; Dan. rig;
Goth. reiks; G. reich.’ B. All from a Tent. type *rikjoz, lit. power-
ful, ruling; from the base *rik- as seen in Goth. rezks, a ruler.
This is cognate with the Celtic base *rig-, as in Gaulish rix, a king
(cf. Olrish rz (gen. rig), a king, W. rhi, a chief); unless the Teut.
reiks is merely borrowed from the Celtic rix (for *ré*), as Uhlenbeck
suggests, All from 4/REG, to rule; see Regent, Brugmann, i.
§§ 135, 549c. 4 The fact that the word might have come into the
language from F, riche, which is from MHG. riche (G. reich), does
not do away with the fact that it has always existed in our language.
But the deriv. riches is really of F. origin; see Riches. Der.
richly, AS. riclice, Luke, xvi. 19; rich-ness, ME. richnesse, Rob. of
Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 155, 1.14. Also -ric in bishop-ric, where
-ric-= AS.‘rice, a kingdom, dominion; cf. Icel. riki, Goth. reiki, G.
reich, sb., dominion, allied to L. reg-num and E. realm.

RICHES, wealth. (F.—OHG.) Now often regarded as a pl.
sb. - Shak. has it as a pl. sb., Timon, iv. 2. 32, Per. i. 1. 52; but
usually as a sing sb., Oth. ii. 1. 83, iii. 3. 173, Sonnet 87. ME.
richesse, a sing. sb.; ‘ Mykel was the richesse, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of
Langtoft, p. 30, 1.24. The pl. is richesses, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 24,
1. 21; Ancren Riwle, p. 168,'l. 13. The word first appears (spelt
riches) in Layamon, 8091.—F. richesse, ‘riches, wealth;’ Cot.
Formed with suffix -esse (cf. Port. and Span. riqu-eza, Ital. ricch-ezza)
from the adj. riche, rich. MHG. riche, OHG. rihkhi (G. reich), rich;
cognate with E. Rich, q.v. oe

RICK, a heap or pile of hay or wheat. (E.)_The mod. E, rick is
from AS. krycce, as in corn-hrycce, a corn-rick ; A£lfric’s Hom. ii. 178.
It also occurs as reek. ME. reek, Prompt. Parv. p. 428, col. 1, last
line; AS. hréac, to translate L. aceruus, a heap; Voce 313. 33.
Icel. kraukr, a rick, small stack. Teut. types *hruk-jon-, *hraukoz,
m. Cf, Olrish cruachk, a heap; and see Ridge. Brugmann, i.


517


518 RICKETS
§ 637. Doublet, prov. E. ruck, a heap, the Scand. form; see
Ruck (2).


RICKETS, a disease of children, accompanied with softness of
the bones and great weakness. (E.) The name was first given to
this disease, about 1620, by the country-people in Dorsetshire and
Somersetshire. This we learn from a treatise by Dr. Glisson, De
Rachitide, cap. 1. He used the form rachitis (it should have been
rhachitis) to denote the fact that it is sometimes accompanied by
spinal disease, or, in Greek, pax@ris, founded on Gk. faxis, the spine.
This was easily confused with the prov. E. rick, wrick, to sprain,
twist, wrench; whence the form rickets. ‘Cavil 7. Hospitals
generally have the rickets... . Answer. Surely there is some other
cure for a ricketish body than to kill it ;’ Fuller, Worthies of England,
1662 ; repr. 1840, vol. i. p. 47. A still earlier notice of rickets is in
Fuller, Meditations on the Times (first pub. 1647), xx. p. 163, in
Good Thoughts, &c., Oxford, 1810; see N. and Q. 6S. ii. 219. The
prov. E. ‘rickety (unsteady) table’ is well known. B. Formed,
with pl. suffix -ets, from E. wrick, ME. wrikken, to twist, used in
the phr. ‘to wrick (i.e. to twist) one’s ancle.’ Thus the word
denotes a disease accompanied by distortion. ‘The deuel wrikked
her and ther,’ i.e. the devil (when seized by St. Dunstan) twisted
hither and thither; Spec. of Eng., ed. Morris and Skeat, p. 22,1. 82.
Allied to AS. wringan, to wring; see Wring.4+Du. wrikken, to
stir to and fro; de bank wrikt nog, ‘the bench stands totteringly
still’ (i. e. is rickety); Sewel. See Wriggle.

RICOCHET, the rebound of a cannon-ball fired at a slight eleva-
tion. (F.—Prov.—L.) Not in Todd’s Johnson.—F. ricochet, ‘the
sport of skimming a thin stone on the water, called a Duck and a
Drake;’ Cot. Rabelais (Pantagruel, iii. 10) has chanson du ricochet,
which Cot. explains: ‘an idle or endlesse tale or song ;’ and Hatzfeld
as: ‘a song with much repetition.’ Littré quotes from a writer of the
15th century: ‘ Mais que il cede je cederai, et semblablement respond
Yautre, et ainsi est Ja fable du ricochet. . There is also a F. verb
ricocher, to ricochet, make ducks and drakes; and Scheler and Littré
derive ricochet from ricocher. But Hatzfeld says that the derivation
tuns the other way. sy. However, mod. Prov. has the F. sb. ricou-
chet, and the vb. ricouca, recauca, to skip, to repeat ; from L. re- and
Prov. couca, cauca, to tread upon, from L. calcare ; and, as L. recal-
eadre means to tread upon again, to retrace, and also to repeat, the
sense of ‘repetition’ is easily explained from the L. source. Thus
ricocher is from Prov. ricouca; cf. MF. caucher, to tread (L. calcare).
Der. ricochet, verb.

RID (1), to free, deliver. (E.) ME. ridden, to separate two com-
batants, Gawain and the Grene Knight, 2246; also to deliver, O. Eng.
Homilies, i. 273; also spelt redden, id. ii. 19, 1. 20. (Rid stands for
red, and that for hred), AS, hreddan, to snatch away, deliver; Grein,
ii. 101.44 OF riesic hredda; Du. redden ; Dan. redde; Swed. radda;
G. retten. Teut. type *hrad-jan-, a causal form. Cf. Skt. grath, to
untie, loose. Der. ridd-ance, Spenser, Daphnaida, 364; a hybrid
word, with F. suffix -ance (L. -antia).

RID (2), to clear, esp. land. (Scand.). Prov. E. rid, to remove
litter, to grub up. ME. ruden (pt.t. rid). ‘The schal ruden thine
weie to-fore the,’ who shall clear thy way before thee; O. E. Homi-
lies, ii. 133.—Icel. rySja, to rid, to clear out; Dan. rydde, to clear,
grub up land. EFries. and Low G. riiden. Teut. type *rud-jan-;
from *rud-, weak grade of *reud-an- (G. reuten), to clear out.
Confused with Rid (1).


RIDDLE (1), a puzzling question, enigma. (E.) The word has.


lost a final s, and stands for riddles, with a plural riddles-es, if it were
rightly formed. The loss of s was easy and natural, as it must have
appeared like the sign of the plural number. ME. redels; we find F.
un devinal explained by a redels in Wright’s Vocab. i. 160.
kynge putte forth a rydels,’ other MSS. redels ; Trevisa, iii. 181 ; and
see P. Plowman, B. xiii. 184. AS. rédels, also rédelse, pl. rédelsan,
fElfred, tr. of Boethius, c. xxvii. § 3 (bk. iii. pr. 4), c. xxxv. § 5 (bk.


ili. pr. 12), where it means ‘ ambiguity.’ ‘The pl. rédelsas also occurs, '


Numb. xii. 8, where the A. V. has ‘dark speeches.’ The lit. sense
is ‘something requiring explanation.’ Formed with suffixes -el-s
(for -isloz) from AS. réd-an, to read, interpret; we still use the phr.
“to read a riddle.” See Read.4Du. raadsel (for *raad-is-lo-), from
raden, to counsel, to guess; G. rdthsel (for *rath-is-lo-), from rathen.
Also O. Low G. radislo (Gallée).. Der. riddle, verb.


ME. ridil, Prompt. Parv. p. 433.


hrider, Voc. 1. 12. Cognate forms appear in Irish creathair, Gael.


criathar, Corn. croider; L. cribrum, a sieve. Lit. sense ‘ separater.’ |


All from the Idg. 4/QREI, to separate; cf. Gk. x«pi-vav. See
Critic. Der. riddle, verb; cf. AS. kridian, to sift, Luke xxii. 31,
RIDE, to be borne along, esp. on a horse. (E.) ME. ryden, pt. t.


‘The’


| q.v.
RIDDLE (2), a large sieve. (E.) For hriddie, by loss of initial h. | i
The suffixes -i2 (or -el) and -er |
being of equal force, we find the corresponding word in the AS. |
hridder, a vessel for winnowing corn; Voc. 141. 123; older form |


RIFLE


rood, pp. riden (with short); Chaucer, C. T. 94, 169, &c. AS,
ridan, pt. t. rad, pp. riden, Grein, ii. 378. 4+ Du. rijden; Icel. rida;
Dan. ride; Swed. rida; G. reiten; OHG, ritan. Teut. type *reid-
an-. Cf. also Olrish riad-aim, I drive, ride; also L. réda (a Celtic
word), a four-wheeled carriage. From 4/REIDH. Brugmann, i.
§ 210. Der. ride, sb., rid-er, rid-ing ; also bed-ridden, q. v., raid, q. Ve,
ready, q.v., road, q.v. And see Palfrey.

RIDGE, anything resembling the top of a quadruped’s back, an
extended protuberance. (E.) ME. rigge, a back, esp. a quadruped’s
back, King Alisaunder, 5722 ; whence mod. E. ridge. The Northern
form is rig. We find ‘upon his rig’=upon his back, Havelok,
1755. Wealso find rug, Ancren Riwle, p. 264; pl. rugges, Layamon,
540. The double form is due to the AS. y. AS. kryeg, the back of
a man or beast; Grein, ii. 109. 4 Du. rug, back, ridge; Dan. ryg ;
Swed. rygg; Icel. hryggr; G. riicken; OHG. hrukki. The Teut.
type answering to AS. hkrycg is *hrug-joz,m. Cf. Olrish croccenn,
(1) hide, (2) the back; Skt. krusich, to be crooked. Der. ridg-y.
Doublet, rig (3).

RIDIGULOUS, laughable, droll. (L.) In Shak. Temp. ii. 2.
169. Englished (by the common change from -ws to -ous) from L,
ridiculus, laughable.—L. ridére, to laugh; see Risible. Der.
ridiculous-ly, -ness. Also ridicule, orig. ridicle, as in Foxe, Acts and
Monuments, pp. 132, 747 (R.), from L. ridiculum, a jest, neut. of
ridiculus, but changed to ridicule by confusion with F. ridicule, ridicu-
lous, which is not a sb. but an adj.

RIDING, one of the three divisions of the county of York.
(Scand.) For thriding ; the loss of the th being due to the mis-
division of the compound word North-thriding ; cf. East-thriding, and
West-thriding. Blackstone explains the thridings; Comment. ;
Introd. § 4. And note that the word thriding was Latinised as
tridingum, Liber Custumarum, p. 353. Cf. Estriding (for Est-triding’)
in Birch, Cartul. Saxon. iii. 676.—Icel. Aridjungr, the third part of
a thing, the third part of a shire ; see Cleasby and Vigfusson. = Icel.
Aridi, third, cognate with E. Third, q.v. Cf. Norweg. tridjung,
a third part, from ¢ridje, third; Aasen.

RIFE, abundant, prevalent. (Scand.) ME. rif (with long 2), also
rife, rive, ryfe, ryue; adv. rine, ryue. ‘Pere was sorwe riue’=there
was abundant sorrow, Will. of Palerne, 5414. ‘ Balu per wes riue’
=evil was abundant there; Layamon, 20079. Late AS. rife,
Leechdoms, iii. 164.—Icel. rifr, munificent, abundant; cf. rifligr,
large, munificent ; MSwed. rif, rife. B. Allied to MDnu. rijf, rijve,
‘abundant, copious, or large,’ Hexham; Low G. rive, abundant,
munificent, extravagant. Cf. Icel. reifa, to bestow, reifir, a giver;
reifr, glad. Der. rife-ly, rife-ness.

RIFF-RAFF, refuse, rubbish, the off-scourings of the populace.
(F.—Teut.) ‘Lines, and circles, and triangles, and rhombus, and
rifferaffe ;’ Gosson, School of Abuse, 1579, ed. Arber, p. 49, 1. 26.
Due to ME. rif and raf, every particle, things of small value. ‘ The
Sarazins, ilk man, he slouh, alle rif and raf’ = He slew the Saracens,
every man of them, every particle of them; Rob. of Brunne, tr. of
Langtoft, p.151. And again: ‘ That noither he no hise suld chalange
rif no raf’ =That neither he nor his should claim a single bit of it ;
id.p. 111, 1. 2.—F. rif et raf; as, ‘Il ne luy lairra rif ny raf, he will
strip him of all;” Cot. Cf. Walloon rif, raf; WFlem. rifraf. So
also: ‘On n’y a laissé ne rifle, ne rafle, they have swept all away,
they have left no manner of thing behind them ;’ id. The lit. sense
of rif is ‘a piece of plunder of small value;’ it is closely related to
F. rifler, ‘to rifle, ransack, spoile, make havock or clean work,
sweep all away before him;’ id. So also MF. raffler, ‘ to rifle, ravage,
to sweep all away,’ id. The connected E. words are Rifle (1) and
Raffle, qg.v. Cf. MItal. raffola ruffola, ‘by riffraffe, by hooke or
crooke, by pinching or scraping;’ Florio.

RIFLE (1), to carry off as plunder, spoil, strip, rob. (F.—Teut.)
ME. riflen, P. Plowman, B. v. 234.—OF. and MF. rifler, ‘to rifle,
ransack, spoile, make havock,’ Cot. Norm. dial. rifler (Dumeéril).
A word prob. due to the Norse sea-kings. Formed asa frequentative
from Icel. hrifa, to catch, to grapple, seize, rifa (usu. spelt hrifa), to
pull up, scratch, grasp ; related to which are hrifsa, to rob, pillage,
hrifs, sb., plunder. @ The F. rifler (from Icel. krifa) and rafler
(from G. raffen) were not connected in the first instance, but the
similarity of sound drew them together, as recorded in the E. rif-raff,
Der. rifl-er.

RIFLE (2), a musket with a barrel spirally grooved to give the
bullet a rotary motion. (Low G.) A modern word; rifle and rifle-
man appear in Todd’s Johnson, ed. 1827. ‘ Rifled arms were known
on the continent about the middle of the 17th century; they do nat
appear to have been introduced into the British service till the time
of the American revolutionary. war;’ Engl. Cycl. B. The sb. rifle


| is a short form for rifled gun, and is due to the technical word riffe, to
groove; particularly, to groove in a spiral manner. = Low G. rifeln,


EFries. riffeln, to furrow, chamfer ; .EFries. riffel, a grove ; cf. Dan.


RIFT


rifle, to rifle, rifle, a groove; Swed. reffla, to rifle; cf. reffelbdssa, a
rifled gun. = Low G. (E'Fries.) rifen, to scratch; Swed. rifva, to scratch,
tear, grate, grind; Icel. rifa, to rive; see Rive. So also G. riefe,
a furrow, riefen, to rifle (from Low G.). 4 The AS. geriffian does
not correspond to E, rifle, but to the old verb rivel, to wrinkle; see
Rivel. It is, however, a related word. Der. rifle-man.

RIFT, a fissure. (Scand.) In Spenser, F. Q.i. 2. 30. ME.
reft, Rom. of the Rose, 2661; ryfte, Prompt. Parv. p. 433.— Dan.
rift, a rift, rent, crevice, from rive, to rive; Norw. rift, a rift; Icel.
ript, a breach of contract, from rifa, to rive. Cf. Swed. refva, a rift,
strip, cleft, gap ; from Swed. rifva, to tear, rive. See Rive. Der.
rift, verb, Temp. v. 45, spelt ry/t in Palsgrave.

RIG (1), to fit up a ship with tackle. (Scand.—Low G.) Also to
dress up a person, but this is the jocular use of the word, and not the
old sense, as supposed by Johnson. In Shak., only in the nautical
sense; Temp. i. 2. 146, v. 224, &c. ‘High riggéd ships;’ Surrey,
tr. of Virgil, iv. 525; L. text, celsas naues, Ain. iv. 397. ‘I rygge
a shyppe, I make it redye;’ Palsgrave. Of Scand. origin ; the traces
of the word are slight. Norweg. rigga, to bind up, wrap round ; in
some districts, to rig a ship; rigg, sb., rigging of a ship; Aasen.
Cf. Swed. dial. rigga ¢a, to harness a horse, put harness on him. Allied
to Pomeran. rigen, Westphal. riggen, to tack together; Du. rijgen,
to tack together, reef sails, from rij, a row; G. rethen, to tack
together, to arrange, from reihe, a row. Cf. Low G. rige, a row,
rank, arrangement. See Row (1). Der. rig, sb., rigg-ing.

RIG (2), a frolic, prank. (E.?) ‘Of running sucha rig ;’ Cowper,
John Gilpin. ‘Rig, a frolic;’ Halliwell. Riggish, wanton; Shak.
Antony, il, 2. 245. The verb rigge, to be wanton, occurs in Levins,
col. 119, 1. 6. Certainly connected with Wriggle. Cf. Norw.
rigga, to rock; EFries. wriggen, to wriggle; Du. wrikken, to stir to
and fro, wriggelen, to wriggle. And see Rickets.

RIG (3), a tidge. (E.) ‘ Amang the rigs o’ barley;’ Burns. ME.
(Northern) rig, a ridge; see Ridge.

RIGADOON, a lively dance for a single couple. (F.— Prov.)
‘Irish jig, and ancient rigadoon;’ Byron, The Waltz, 110. In
Bailey (1735).—F. rigaudon, rigodon ; spelt rigodon in 1696 (Hatz-
feld). Said to be from Rigaud, the name of a dancing-master
(Hatzfeld). Rigaud is a Prov. name, and Mistral, s. v. Rigaudoun,
a tigadoon, says that Rigaud, the dancing-master, lived at Marseilles,
and that the dance was prohibited by the parliament of Provence in
1664 (April 3).

RIGHT, erect, straight, correct, true, just, proper, exact. (E.)
ME. right, Wyclif, Matt. iii. 3; &c. AS. riht, adj., Grein, ii. 378. +
Du. regt; Icel. réttr (for *rehtr); Dan. ret; Swed. rat; G. recht,
OHG. reht; Goth. raihkts. B. All from Teut. type *rehtoz, Idg. type
*rektos, as in L, rectus. Cf. also W. rhaith, sb., right, Olrish recht,
law. The Idg. *rekios is for *reg-tos, from 4/REG, to rule. See
Regent. See Rectitude. Der. right, adv., AS. rihte; right,
sb., AS. riht; right-ly, right-ness, AS. rihtnes ; right, verb, AS. rihtan ;
right-ful, P. Plowman, B. prol, 127; right-ful-ly, right-ful-ness. Also
right-eous, well known to be a corruption of ME. rightwis, Pricke of
Conscience, 9154, AS. rihiwis, Grein, ii. 381, a compound of rih¢ and
wis = wise, i.e. wise as to what is right. Palsgrave has the curious
intermediate form ryghtuous. Hence right-eous-ly, AS. rihtwislice
(Grein) ; right-eous-ness, ME. rightwisnesse, Wyclif, Matt. vi. 1, Luke,
i. 75, AS. rihtwisnes (Grein). From the same root are rect-i-tude,
rect-i-fy, rect-or, rect-angle, rect-i-lineal, as well as reg-al, reg-ent, &C. ;
also cor-rect, di-rect, e-rect. Also regent.

RIGID, stiff, severe, strict. (L.) In Ben Jonson, Epistle to a
Friend, Underwoods, lv. 17.—L. rigidus, stiff.—L. rigére, to be stiff.
‘Brugmann, i. § 875. Der. rigid-ly, -ness, rigid-i-ty. Also rig-our,
‘Chaucer, C, T. 11087 (F 775), from OF, rigour (mod. F. rigueur)
<L. rigorem, acc. of rigor, harshness; rigor-ous, Cor. iii. 1. 267, from
F. rigoreux, ‘rigorous,’ Cot. ; rigor-ous-ly, -ness,

RIGMAROLE, a long unintelligible story. - (Hybrid: E. and
F.—L.) The word is certainly a corruption of ragman-roll, once
‘a very common expression for a long list of names, hence a long
‘unconnected story. See my note to P. Plowman, C. i. 73, where it
occurs as rageman 3; Anecdota Literaria, by T. Wright, 1844, p. 83,
where a poem called Ragman-roll is printed ; Wright’s Homes of
Other Days, p. 247; Jamieson’s Dict., where we learn that the
Scottish nobles gave the name of ragman-rolls to the collection of
deeds by which they were constrained to subscribe allegiance to
‘Edw. J, a.p. 1296; Towneley Mysteries, p. 311, where a catalogue
of sins is called a rolle of ragman; Skelton, Garl. of Laurell, 1. 1490,
‘and Dyce’s note; P. Plowman’s Crede, 1. 180 ; Cowel’s Law Dict.,
and Todd’s Johnson, s.v. rigmarole. Also the long note on ragman-
roll in Halliwell. B. The precise meaning of ragman (oldest
spelling rageman, but apparently with hard g) is not known. It
first occurs as ‘the name given to a statute of 4 Edw. I (appointing
justices to hear and determine complaints.of injuries done within 25


RIND | 519


years previous), and to certain articles of inquisition associated with
proceedings of Quo Warranto under this statute ;’ N.E.D., q.v.
We also find rageman used to mean the devil; see P. Plowman, C.
xix. 122, and the note. y. The word roll is F.; see Roll, With
raggeman we may perhaps compare Icel. ragmenni, a craven person,
coward, ragmennska, cowardice; from Icel. ragr, a coward, and
madr (=mannr), a man, Cf. Swed. raggen, the devil; Rietz cites
ON. ragvetir, an evil spirit, lit. ‘a cowardly wight,’ where veitr is
our E, wight=G. wicht in bosewicht, a bad spirit. To call a person
ragr was to offer him the greatest possible insult. q The word
roll was sometimes pronounced row (see Jamieson) ; hence we find
in Levins, ed. 1570: ‘ Ragmanrew, series,’ where rew=row.

RIGOL, a circlet. (Ital.—G.) In Shak. 2 Hen. IV, iv. 5. 36.—
Ital. rigolo, ‘a little wheel under a sledge;’ Torriano, Dimin.
from Ital. rigo, riga, a line.—=OHG. riga, a line, also, a circum-
ference of a citcle (G. reihe). Allied to E. row; see Row (1). See
Notes on E. Etym., p. 249.

RILE, to vex; see Roil.

RILL, a streamlet, small brook. (Low G.) ‘The bourns, the
brooks, the becks, the rills, the rivulets;’ Drayton, Polyolbion,
Song i. 78. (He also has the dimin. rill-et in the same Song, 1. 264.)
= Low G. rille, used in the sense of a small channel made by rain-
water running off meadows, also, a rill; see Bremen Worterbuch. So
also EFries. and Dan. dial. rille, a streamlet. B. Rille would appear
to be a contraction from Teut. *ridele, a dimin. of AS. ride or ride,
a stream, a common word; cognate with O, Low G. ride, a water-
course, NFries. ride or ride, a stream or rill. y. The AS. ¢ in ride
was probably long,:as there are numerous streams in N. Germany
with the name reide (Leo); and Halliwell gives South E. rithe,
a small stream. Robin (p. 432) gives the Norm. dialect risle, rille,
as the name of a small stream, which appears in old charters as
Ridula, Risila, Risla. See my Notes on E. Etym., p. 249. Cf. L.
ri-uus, a stream. Der. rill-et, rill, verb.

RIM, a border, edge; verge. (E.) 1. ME. rim, rym. “Rym of
a whele ;’ Prompt. Parv. AS. rima, rim; in the comp. s@-rima, sea-
shore, lit. sea-rim ; A.S. Chron. an. 897; see Sweet, A. S. Reader.
Cf. W. rhim, rhimp, rhimyn, a rim, edge.+Icel. rimi, a strip of land.
Perhaps allied to G. rand, a rim; andto Rind (Kluge). Brugmann,
i. § 421. 2. We also find rim used in the sense of peritoneum or
inner membrane of the belly, as in Shak. Hen. V, iv. 4. 15; and see
Pricke of Conscience, 1. 520, Sir Gawain and the Green Knight,
1343; the sense may be ‘border,’ hence envelope or integument.
Cf. EFries. rim, rim, margin, border.

RIME (1), verse, poetry ; the correspondence of sounds at the
ends of verses, (F.—L.—Gk.) Usually spelt rhyme, by confusion
with rhythm, which is a-later form of the same word. But the ME.
form was rime; and I have not found an instance of the spelling
rhyme before A.D. 1550; or hardly so soon. Dr. Schmidt omits to
state that the first folio of Shak. has the spelling rime, Two Gent. of
Verona, iii. 2. 69, Merry Wives, v. 5.95, L.L.L.i. 2. 190; &c. It
is rime in Minsheu, ed. 1627, and in Cotgrave; ryme in Palsgrave.
ME. rime, ryme, Chaucer, C. T. 13639 (B 1899).—OF. rime, F.
rime, found in the 12th cent. (Hatzfeld). From L. acc. rhythmum,
which became fem.; from nom. rhkythmus.—Gk. fv0uds, measured
motion, time, measure; see Rhythm. From the same classical
source was derived MHG. rim, in the sense of verse ; which is quite
a distinct word from OHG, rim, a number, cognate with AS. rim,
number, which is of true Teutonic origin, and cognate with W. rhif,
number. The OF. rime, in very early use, was the source of Ital.,
Span., Port. rima; and even of Du. rijm, G. reim, Icel. rima. Der.
rime, verb (usually rhyme), ME. rymen, rimen, Chaucer, C. T. 1461
(A 1459) 3 rimeless (usually rhyme-less); rim-er (usually rhymer),
spelt rimer in the first folio ed. of Shak. Antony, v. 2. 2153; rime-ster
(usually rhyme-ster), the suffix of which is discussed under Spinster.

RIME (2), hoarfrost, frozen dew. (E.) The word has lost initial
h, and stands for hrime. ME, rime, ryme. ‘ Ryme, frost, pruina;’
Prompt. Parv. AS. hkrim, to translate L. pruina; Ps. cxviii. 83, ed.
Spelman (margin).4Du. rijm; Icel. hrim; Dan. ritm; Swed. rim.
Cf. also G. reif, MHG. rife, OHG. hrifo, hoar-frost; Du. rip,
hoar-frost. Der. rim-y.

RIMER, a tool for enlarging holes in metal. (E.) From AS.
ryman, to enlarge, make room. AS. riim, room; see Room.

RIMPLE, to ripple, as the surface of water. (E.) ‘The rimpling
of the brook ;’ Crabbe, Parish Register, pt. 1 (ed. 1802). Cf. ME.
rimpled, wrinkled ; Rom. Rose, 4495. From AS. hrymp-, mutated
form of hrump-, weak grade of hrimpan, to wrinkle; cf. the gloss:
‘rugosa, pere gehrumpnan;’ Voc. 521.10. See Ripple (2). ;
RIND, the external covering, as the bark of trees, skin of fruit.
(E.) ME. rind, rinde; Ancren Riwle, p. 150, ll. 4, 8. AS. rinde,
the bark of a tree, Voc. 216.5; also, a crust (of bread), AElfric’s
Hom. ii. 114, last line but one.-+MDnu. rinde, ‘the barke of a tree ;’


520 RINDERPEST


Hexham; G. rinde, OHG. rinta, f.
and to Rim (Kluge).

RINDERPEST, an infectious disease of cattle. (G. and L.)
Modern. =G. rinderpest, cattle-disease.—G. rinder, pl. of rind, an
ox; and pest, a pest, plague, from L. pestis. Rind is allied to E.
rother ; see Rother and Pest.

RING (1), a circle. (E.) For hring, initial h being lost. ME.
ring, Chaucer, C. T. 10561 (F 247). AS. hring ; Grein, ii. 106.4
Du. ring; Low G. ring, rink, Bremen Worterbuch ; Icel. hringr;
Swed. and Dan. ring; G. ring, OHG. hrinc. Teut. type *hrengoz ;
Idg. type *krenghos. Allied by gradation to the Idg. type *khronghos,
as in OBulg. krggi, Russ. krug(e), a ring, circle. See also
Rank, Harangue. Note that the e of Teut. *hrengoz is pre-
served in Finn. rengas, a ring, an early loan-word from Teutonic
(Streitberg). Der. ring, verb, K. John, iii. 4. 31; ring-dove, so
named from the ring on its neck ; ring-ed ; ring-lead-er, 2 Hen. VI,
ii, I. 170; ring-let, used to mean ‘a small circle,’ Temp. v. 37;
ring-straked, i.e. streaked with rings, Gen. xxx. 35; ring-worm, a
skin disease in which rings appear, as if formed by a worm, Levins,
ed. 1570. Doublet, rink.

RIN G (2), to sound a bell, tinkle. (E.) ME. ringen, Chaucer, C.T.
3894. AS. hringan, to clash, ring; byrnan hringdon, breastplates
clashed, Beowulf, 327, ed. Grein; ringden fa belle, they rang the
bells, A.S. Chron. an. 1131. The verb is weak, as in Scand., but
mod. E, has pt. t. rang, pp. rung (by analogy with sing’); we also
find pp. rongen, rungen, in Allit. Morte Arthure, Il. 462, 976, 1587.
+Du. ringen; Icel. hringja; cf. hrang, sb., a din; Dan. ringe;
Swed. ringa. Imitative. Der. ring, sb., ring-er.

RINK, a space for skating on wheels, a course for the game of
curling. (E.) The former use is modern; the latter is mentioned in
Jamieson’s Dict. It appears to be a dialectal variant of ring; com-
pare the use of ring in the compound prize-ring. As to the form,
we may compare the Low G. rink used as a variant of ring; see the
Bremen Worterbuch; NFries. rink, variant of ring; and vulgar E.
anythink =anything. See Ring (1).

RINSE, to cleanse with clean water, make quite clean. (F.—L.?)
Prov. E. rinch, rench; E.D.D. ‘He may rynse a pycher ;’ Skelton,
Magnificence, 2194. ‘ Rynce this cuppe ;’ Rel. Antiq. i. 7, col. 1.
6 Rense thyn teyth; ’ Medical Works of 14th cent., ed. Henslow, p. 35,
1. 13.— OF, raincer (Littré), MF. rinser, ‘to reinse linnen clothes;’
Cot. ; mod. F. rincer. B. Of doubtful origin. The forms rincer,
raincer, seem to be contractions of OF. recincier, to rinse (Godefroy) ;
cf. Picard rechincher, to rinse. Ké6rting (§ 7988) derives this OF.
verb from a L. type *requinquiare, due to L. guinguare, to cleanse,
purify, a verb cited in the 4th century (Lewis). Cf. mod. Prov.
rinsar (Mistral); OProv. rezensar (Bartsch),

RIOT, tumult, uproar. (F.) ME. riote, Chaucer, C. T. 4390;
Ancren Riwle, p. 198, last line. =F. riote, ‘a brabbling, brawling ;’
Cot. Cf. Prov. riota, dispute, strife (Bartsch) ; Ital. riot¢a, quarrel,
dispute, riot, uproar. B. The orig. sense seems to be ‘ dispute ;’
of uncertain origin. See Diez and Korting. Der. riot, verb, ME.
rioten, Chaucer, C. T. 4412 (A 4414), from F. rioter, ‘to chide,’
Cot. ; riot-er, ME. riotour, Chaucer, C. T. 12595 (C 661) ; riot-ous,
id. 4406, from F. rioteux ; riot-ous-ly, -ness.

RIP, to divide by tearing open, cut open, tear open for searching
into. (Scand.) ‘Rip up griefe;’ Spenser, F. Q.i. 7. 39. [It does
not seem to be the same word as ME. rippen, used in the Ormulum
in the sense of ‘seize;’ this is a variant of ME. ruppen, to rob,
Layamon, 10584, and allied rather to G. rupfen, to pluck, than to
the present word.] It corresponds to ME. ripen, used in the
secondary sense of to grope, probe, search into, also used occasion-
ally (like the mod. word) with the prep. up. ‘Rypande .. the
reynes and hert’=searching the reins and heart (said of God), Allit.
Poems, B. 592. ‘To rype uvpe the Romaynes’=to search out the
Romans, Morte Arthure, 1877. ‘The riche kinge ransakes ., and
up rypes the renkes’=the rich king seeks for and searches out the
men, id. 3940. ‘To ripe thair war’=to search their ware (where
two MSS. have ransake), Cursor Mundi, 4893. ‘I rype in olde maters,
je fouble;’ also, ‘I ryppe a seame that is sowed;’ Palsgrave.
A Northern word, of Scand. origin. Norweg. ripa, to scratch,
score with the point of a knife (Aasen) ; Swed. dial. ripa, to scratch,
also to pluck asunder (cf. E. rip open), Rietz; Swed. repa, to
scratch, to ripple flax ; repa upp, to rip up; repa,sb., ascratch; Dan.
oprippe, to rip up; WF lem. open-rippen, to rip up; Low G., repen, to
ripple flax (Liibben). Allied to Ripple (1), and Ripple (3).
Der. rip, sb.; ripp-le (1), q. v-, ripple (3), q.v.

RIPE, developed, mature, arrived at perfection. (E.) ME.
ripe, rype, Chaucer, C. T. 17032 (H 83). AS. ripe; ‘and swa swa
ripe yro fortreddon’=and trod [all] down like ripe com; Aélfred,
tr. of Beda, i. 12. This adj. signifies ‘ fit for reaping,’ and (like the
sb. rip, harvest) is derived from the strong verb ripan, to reap; see


Prob. allied to G. rand, a rim,


RISK


Reap.+Du. rijp; whence rijpen, to ripen; G. reif, OHG. rif;


whence reifen, to ripen. Der. ripe-ly, -ness; also ripen, verb, from
AS. ripian, Gen. xvili. 12.

RIPPLE (1), to pluck the seeds from stalks of flax by drawing
an iron comb through them. (E.) A Northern word; see Jamieson.
ME. ripplen, ripelen. ‘ Rypelynge of flax, or other lyke, Avulsio;’
Prompt. Parv. ‘ Hoc rupeste, a repylle-stok,’ i.e. an implement for
cleaning flax; Voc. 795.16. An early example is ripling-combe, in
A Nominale, ed. Skeat, 1.545. Thecleaning of flax was also termed
ribbing (a weakened form of ripping); see Prompt. Parv., p. 432,
note 2. B. Ripple is not to be taken as the frequentative form of
rip, but as formed from the sb. ripple, a flax-comb (Jamieson); and
this sb. is derived from rip- (weak grade of the strong AS. verb
rip-an, to reap, cut) by help of the suffix -Je, sometimes used to
express the instrument by which a thing is done, as in beet-le=a
beat-er ; stopp-le, used for stopping, lad-le, used for lading out,
gird-le, used for girding. So ripple=an instrument for ripping off
the flax-seeds; cf. Swed. repa, to ripple flax; see Rip.4+Du. repel,
a ripple, from repen, to beat flax (Hexham); whence repelen, to
ripple; Low G. repe, a ripple, in the dialect of Brunswick called
repel, reppel, Bremen Worterbuch; Pomeran. rdpeln, to ripple flax.
The Dn. repel is from the 2nd grade *raip- (Franck) of Teut. *reipan-,
to reap; see Ripe. Cf. G. riffél, a ripple; whence riffeln, to strip
flax. See Ripple (3).

RIPPLE (2), to cause or show wrinkles on the surface, like
running water. (E.) The essential idea in the rippling of water is
that it shows wrinkles on the surface. The earliest quotation in
Richardson and Johnson is the following: ‘ Left the Keswick road,
and turned to the left through shady lanes along the vale of Eeman,
which runs rippling over the stones;’ Gray, to Dr. Wharton,
Oct. 18,1769. But Dampier has: ‘a great ripling ;’ A New Voyage
(1699); ii. pt. 2. p. 10. As, pointed out by Richardson, it is a
by-form or contraction of the older verb to rimple ; ‘ As gilds the
moon the rimpling of the brook,’ Crabbe, Parish Register, part 1,
ed. 1807; where the edition of 1834 has rippling. ME. rimplen, to
wrinkle, whence the pp. rymplyd, explained by ‘ Rugatus’ in Prompt.
Pary.; cf. ‘a rimpled vecke’=a wrinkled old woman, Rom. of the
Rose, 4495. This verb is from the sb. rimple or rimpil ; ‘ Rympyl, or
rymple, or wrynkly, Ruga;’ Prompt. Parv.—AS. hrympel, to trans-
late L. riga, a wrinkle, in a gloss; Voc. 531. 4 (where it is mis-
written hrypel). See Rumple.+-MDu. rimpel, ‘a wrinckle, or
a folde, Hexham; rimpelen, ‘to wrinckle;’ id. B. The AS.
hrympel is from the weak grade (hrump-) of hrimpan, to wrinkle, of
which the pp. ge-hrumpen occurs in a gloss; Voc. 521. 10..-OHG.
hrimfan, MHG. rimpfen, to bend together, crook, wrinkle; cf.
mod.G. riimpfen, to crook, bend, wrinkle. From Teut. base *hremp-.
Cf. the similar base *kremp-, as in Crimp, q.v. Der. ripple, sb.

RIPPLE (3), to scratch slightly. (Scand.) In the Whitby
Glossary, by F. K. Robinson (E. D.5.). ‘Having slightly rippled
the skin of his left arm;* Holland, tr. of Ammianus, p. 264; see
Trench, Select Glossary (where it is wrongly connected with the
word above). ‘“ipple, rescindere;’ Levins. This is merely a
frequentative (or diminutive) form of Rip, q.v.

RISE, to ascend, go upward. (E.) ME. risen, pt. t. roos (pl.
risen), pp. risen; Chaucer, C. T. 825, 1501 (A 823, 1499). AS.
risan, pt. t. ras (pl. rison), pp. risen ; Grein, ii. 382.4-Du. rijzen, orig.
‘to move,’ and in MDu. ‘to fall,’ contrary to the E. sense; Icel.
risa; OHG. risan, to move up, rise; also to move down, fall;
Goth. reisan, pt. t. rais (pl. risum), pp. risans; only in the
comp. ur-reisan. B. All from Teut. type *reisan- (pt. t. rais, pp.
risenoz), to slip away, orig. expressive of motion only; cf. Skt. r2,
to distil, ooze (we speak of the rise of a river); see Rivulet.
The MDu. rijzen also means ‘to fall;’ het loof rijst, the leaves
fall (Hexham). Der. rise, sb., Hen. V, iv. I. 289; a-rise, q. Vv. ;
ris-ing, a tumult, also a tumour, Levit. xiii. 2; also raise, q.v.,
rear, q.V.

RISIBLH, laughable, amusing. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.
=F. risible, ‘fit or worthy to be laughed at;’ Cot.—L. risibilis,
laughable. = L, risi-, from ris-um, supine of ridére, to laugh; with
suffix -bilis. See Ridiculous. Der. risibl-y, risibil-i-ty. From the
same L, verb (pp. risus) are ar-ride (rare, = L. arridére, to laugh at),
de-ride, de-ris-ion, de-ris-ive, ir-ris-ion, rid-ic-ul-ous.

RISK, hazard, danger, peril. (F.—Ital.—L.) Spelt risque in
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—F. risque, ‘perill;’ Cot. (Cf. Ital. risico,
(in Ariosto, risco), formerly risigo, as in Florio; Span. riesgo, risk ;
Late L. risigus, riscus, risk.] Borrowed from Ital. risico (rischio,
risigo), hazard, peril (Torriano). This seems to be the same word
as Span. risco, a steep abrupt rock; from whence the sense of
‘danger’ may easily have arisen among sailors. Hence Span.
arriesgar (arriscar in Minsheu), to venture into danger, lit. ‘to go
against a rock,’ where the prefix ar- stands for L. ad- before r follow-


RISSOLE


ing, as usual; also arriscado, bold, forward (lit. venturesome); Ital.
arrischiarsi, to venture oneself, arrischiato, hazardous. —L. resecare,
to cut back, to cut off short or abruptly; whence the Span. sb. risco
(Ital, risico) was formed in the same way as E. scar, an abrupt rock,
is formed from the root of the verb to skear or cut off.—L. re-, back ;
and secare, to cut ; see Re- and Section. B, This suggestion is due
to Diez; he supports it by citing mod. Prov. rezegue, risk, rezegd, to
cut off; resega, risk, also a saw, in the dialect of Como; Port. risco,
risk, also a rock, crag, also a dash with the pen, riscar, to raze out
with the pen (<L. resesdre, i.e. to cut out). And cf. Ital. risico,
tisk, with risega, a jutting out, risegare, risecare, to cast off; &c.
@ Devic suggests a connexion with Arab, rizq, riches, good fortune,
Rich, Dict. p. 731, but a risk is bad fortune; and, when he cites the
Span. arriesgar as showing a prefix ar-= Arab. def. article al-, he
forgets that the verbal prefix better represents the L. ad. Besides,
the Ital. word is risico, spelt risigo in Florio. Mistral has mod. Proy.
risque, risco, risk; Gascon arrisque. See Kérting, § 7995. Der.
risk, verb, risk-y.

RISSOLEH, a dish of minced meat or fish with bread-crumbs, &c.,
fried. (F.—L.) AF. russole, Chron. Monasterii de Abingdon, ed.
Stevenson, ii. 308. Mod. F.rissole ; OF. roissole (Godefroy), roussole.
=—L. type *russeola; from L. russeus, reddish, or rather brownish ;
from the colour. = L. russus, red; see Russet.

RITH, a religious ceremony. (L.) ‘ With sacred rites ;’ Spenser,
F. Q. i. 12. 36.—L. ritus, a custom, esp. a religious custom. Cf.
Skt. riti-, a going, also way, usage, manner; from 77, to go, flow. =
a REI, to go, run, let flow. Cf. Brugmann, ii. § 498. 4 The F. rit
or rite seems to have been little used ; though found as rit in the 14th
cent. (Hatzfeld). Der. ritu-al, from F. ritual, ‘rituall,’ Cot., from
L. ritu-dlis, from ritu-, stem of ritus; ritu-al-ly; ritu-al-ism, ritu-
al-ist.

RIVAL, a competitor. (F.—L.) For the sense, see Trench,
On the Study of Words. In Shak. Two Gent. ii. 4. 174. —F. rival,
sb., ‘a rival, corrival, competitor in love;’ Cot.—L, riualis, sb., one
who uses the same brook as another, a near neighbour, a rival. —L.
riudlis, adj., belonging to a brook, = L. riu-us, a brook, stream; with
suffix -alis. See Rivulet. Der. rival, adj., rival, verb, K. Lear,
1. 1. 1943 rival-ry,a coined word.

RIVH, to split, tear, slit, rend. (Scand.) ME. riven, ryuen (with
u=v), Chaucer, C. T. 12762 (C 828).—Icel. rifa, pt. t. reif, pp.
rifinn (=E. riven), to rive, tear; Dan. rive; Swed. rifva, to scratch,
tear. B. Allied to Gk. épefmev, to throw or dash down, tear down;
L. ripa, a bank, a shore. Teut. base *reif-; Idg. base *reip-. Der.
rif-t, q.v. And see riffle (2), rivel; also riv-er.

RIVED, to wrinkle. (E.) ‘Praise from the rivell’d lips of
toothless, bald Decrepitude ;’ Cowper, Task, b. ii. 1. 488. ‘And
rivell’d up with heat;’ Dryden, Flower and the Leaf, 378. ME.
riuelen (with u for v); ‘ Al my face... So riueled;’ Gower, C. A.
iii. 370; bk. viii. 2829. AS. ge-riflian, to wrinkle (Napier’s Glosses) ;
rifelede, gloss on L. rugosus (id.). A frequentative form ; from *ri/-,
weak grade of Teut. *rezf-an-, as seen in Icel. rifa, to rive; see
above. Cf. AS. gerifod, wrinkled, A‘lfric’s Hom. i. 614.

R, a large stream of running water. (F.—L.) ME. riuer

(with u=v) ; Chaucer, C. T. 3026 (A 3024); Rob. of Glouc., p. 1, 1.14.
—AF. rivere; OF. riviere, mod. F. riviére,a river, stream. It is the
same word as Span. ribera, a shore, strand, sea-coast, Port. ribeira, a
meadow near the bank of a river (whence ribeiro, a brook), Ital.
riviera, a shore, a bank, also a river.=—Late L. riparia, (1) sea-shore
or river-bank, (2) a river (Ducange) ; fem. of riparius, adj., formed
from ripa,a bank. Allied to Gk. épim-vn, a broken cliff, scaur (hence,
a steep edge or bank), from the base REIP, to rive, rend, tear off,
seen in Gk. épeimev, to tear down, and in E, rive; see Rive. Cf.
E. rift, a fissure, from the same source. Der. river-horse, the hippo-
potamus, Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. viii. c. 25. Also (from L. ripa)
ar-rive,q.v. > Not allied to rivulet.

RIVET, an iron pin for fastening armour, &c. together. (F.—
Scand.) ‘The armourers, With busy hammers closing rivets up;’
Hen. V, iv. chor. 13. ‘With a palsy-fumbling at his gorget Shake
in and out the rivet;’ Troil.i. 3.175. Ryvet, revet, Palsgrave. ME.
ryvette; Voc. 573. 37.—F. rivet, ‘the welt of a shooe,’ Cot. It also
meant a rivet, as in the Supp. to Godefroy. Cf. Walloon rivet, a
running noose (Sigart). In Hamilton’s F. Dict. rivet is explained by
“rivet,’? and marked as a farrier’s term.=F. river, ‘to rivet, or clench,
to fasten or turne back the point ofa naile, &c.; also, to thrust the
clothes of a bed in at the sides;’ Cot.. B. The word is Scand., as
shown by the Aberdeen word riv, to rivet, clench, Shetland riv, to sew
coarsely and slightly ; which see in Jamieson.=Icel. rifa, to tack
together, sew loosely together; rifa saman, to stitch together, an
pis Cy which occurs in the Edda, i. 346.440. Low G. ridilon,
rebolon, to- patch, sew together (Gallée). Perhaps allied to Icel.
reifa, to swaddle. Der. rivet, verb, Hamlet, iii. 2. 90; Palsgrave


ROB


3


521


has: ‘I revet a nayle, He riue;
it wyll holde faste.’

RIVULET, a small stream, (L.) In Milton, P. L. ix. 420;
Drayton, Muses’ Elysium, Nymph. 6. 1.90. Not F., but an E.
dimin., formed with suffix -et from L. rzwul-us,a small stream, dimin.
of riuus, a stream, river. Cf. Ital. rivoletto (Torriano). See Rival.
Der. (from L. riu-ws) riv-al, q.v., de-rive,q.v. And see rite.

RIX-DOLLAR, the name of a coin. (Du.—G.) ‘He accepted
of a rix-dollar ;” Evelyn’s Diary, Aug. 28, 1641 ; Evelyn was then at
Leyden. = Du. rijks-daalder, arix-dollar. Hexham gives rijcksdaelder,
‘a rix-daller, a peece of money of five schillings, or 50 stivers.’=G.
reichsthaler, ‘a dollar of the empire.’=G. reichs, gen. case of reich,
empire, allied to reich, rich, powerful ; and zhaler, a dollar; see Rich
and Dollar.

ROACH, a kind of fish. (F.—Teut.) Allied to the carp, but
confused with the ray and the skate; fish-names being very vaguely
used. ME. roche. ‘ Roche, fysche, Rocha, Rochia;’ Prompt. Parv.
= ONorth F.and Walloon roche, OF. roce, MF. rosse (Cot.). = MDu.
roch, ‘a fish called a scait;” Hexham; Du.rog.4-Dan. rokke, a ray ;
Swed. rocka, a ray, thorn-back ; Low G. ruche, whence G. roche,
a roach, ray, thorn-back; cf. AS. reokhe, a kind of fish. Teut. base
*ruhh-; Franck. Cf. AS. rik, rough.

ROAD, a way for passengers. (E.) Also used of a place where
ships ride at anchor; this is the same word, the F. rade being bor-
rowed from Teutonic. Also used in the sense of raid or foray ; 1 Sam.
xxvii. 10. Shak. has the word in all three senses; (1) Much Ado, v.
2. 33; (2) Two Gent. i. 1. 53; (3) Cor. iii. 1.5. ME. roode (for
ships), Prompt. Parv.; rode (for horses); Cursor Mundi, 11427.
AS. rad, a journey, riding expedition, road; Grein, ii. 362. [The
sense of ‘road’ only appears in compounds ; as swan-rad, swan-road,
i.e. the sea; Beowulf, 200.] From the 2nd grade of Teut. *reid-an-,
to ride; cf. AS. rad, pt. t. of ridan, to ride; see Ride. Der. road-
stead, road-way, road-ster (for the suffix, see Spinster) ; alsoin-road.
Doublet, raid.

ROAM, to rove about, to ramble, wander. (F.—L.) ME. romen,
P. Plowman, B, xi. 124; K. Alisaunder, 7207; Seven Sages, 1429
(in Weber’s Met. Romances, vol. iii); Havelok,64; Will. of Palerne,
1608. Prob. coined from F. Rome, Rome; from L. Roma. Due to
the frequent pilgrimages to that great city. Cf. OF. romier, a pilgrim
to Rome; OF. romel, a pilgrim, romeree, a pilgrimage; Span.
romero, a pilgrim. So also not only the Ital. romeo, a pilgrim, is
derived from Roma, Rome, and denoted a pilgrim to Rome; but even
in P. Plowman we have religious romares=religious pilgrims, B. iv.
120, which the author probably himself regarded as an equivalent to
Rome-renneres=runners to Rome, B. iv. 128 (only 8 lines below).
Cf. OF ries. rumera, rumfara, a pilgrim to Rome. Der. roam-er.

ROAN, the name of a mixed colour, bay, sorrel, or chestnut, with
grey hairs interspersed. (F.—Span.—L.) ‘ Roen, colour of an horse,
rover ;’ Palsgrave. In Shak. Rich. II, v. 5.78; 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4.
120. Explained by Schmidt as ‘dark dappled-bay.’—OF. roan; as
in ung destrier roan, a roan horse, Supp. to Godefroy; MF. rowén ;
‘Cheval rouén, a roane horse,’ Cot.; mod. F. rowan. —Span. roano,
sorrel-coloured, roan; OSpan. raudano,—L. type *ravidanum; from
Late L. ravidus, grey (Ducange).—L. rauus, gray-yellow, tawny.

ROAN-TREE, ROW AN-TREE, the mountain ash. (Scand.)
A Northern term, and of Scand. origin. Spelt roun-tree, roan-tree,
rowan-tree in Jamieson. —Swed. roux, MSwed. rénn, runn (Ihre), the
mountain-ash; Dan. réz, the service, sorb, mountain-ash; Icel.—
reynir, the same. Also Norw. rogn, raagn, raun; Swed. dial.
radgna, the roan-tree. The Icel. reynir is for *reydnir, from *raudnir,
a deriv. of raudr, red (Noreen, § 232). From the colour of the
berries. See Red.

ROAR, to cry allow, bellow. (E.) ME. roren, Wyclif, Rev. x.
3. AS. rarian, AElfric’s Homilies, i. 66, 1. 18; and in Sweet’s A. S.
Reader.--MDu, reeren, Hexham; MHG. réren. Cf. Lithuan. ré-jz,
I scold, chide; Brugmann, ii. §§ 465, 741. Imitative. Der. roar,
sb.; roar-ing, But not up-roar.

ROAST, to cook meat before a fire. (F.—G.) ME, rosten,
Legends of the Holy Rood, ed. Morris, p. 58, 1. 504; Legend of St.
Christopher, 1. 203; Chaucer, C. T. 385 (A 383).—OF-. rostir, ‘to
rost, broile, tost,’ Cot. Mod. F. ré“r. Prob. from OHG. réstan, to
roast, a weak verb formed from rdésé, a grate, gridiron. B. We also
find Irish roistin, a gridiron, rosdaim, I roast, rost, roast meat; Gael.
rost, roist, W.rhostio; all borrowed from E,; and Bret. roséa, from F.
Der. roast, sb.; roast-meat (=roast-ed meat).

ROB (1), to plunder, steal, spoil. (F.—OHG.) In early use.
ME. robben, Havelok, 1958; Ancren Riwle, p. 86, 1. 13.—OF.
robber, ‘to rob,’ Cot. Usually spelt rober. The orig. sense was to
despoil the slain in battle, to strip, disrobe; so that the verb is
merely formed from the sb. robe, spelt robbe in Cotgrave, a robe.
See Robe. @ The E. verb reave (usually bereave) is formed, in


also: ‘ Ryvet this nayle, and then


522 ROB


a precisely similar way, from the AS. sb. réaf, clothing. Der. rodb-er,
ME. robbour, Rob. of Glouc., p. 94, 1. 2091, from OF. robbeur, ‘a
robber,’ Cot. ; robb-er-y, ME. roberie, O.Eng. Homilies, ii. 61, 1. 27,
from OF, roberie, F. robberie, ‘robbery,’ Cot. Doublet, reave.

ROB (2), a conserve of fruit. (F.—Span.—Arab.—Pers.) In
Phillips (1706).—F. rob, ‘the juice of black whortleberries pre-
served ;’ Cot.—Span. rob, juice of fruit thickened with honey. =
Arab, rubb, ‘a decoction of the juice of citrons and other fruits,
inspissated juice, rob;’ Rich. Dict.; p. 719.—Pers. rub (the same) ;
Devic.

ROBBINS, ROBINS, ropes for fastening sails. (E.) Lowl. Sc.
raibandis, pl., Complaint of Scotland, ed. Murray, p. 40, 1. 30.
EFries. rd-band, where ra=yard of a ship. Cf. Icel. ra, Dan. raa,
Swed. rd, G. rahe, yard; and see Band (1). Cf. G. ragen, to
project. See my Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 252.

ROBE, a garment, dress. (F.-OHG.) ME. robe, Rob. of Glouc.,
p- 313, l. 6390; P. Plowman, B. ii. 15.—F. robe, a robe ; spelt robbe
in Cotgrave.—MHG. roub, roup, OHG. raup (G. raub), booty, spoil ;
hence, a garment, because the spoils of the slain consisted chiefly of
clothing.4AS. réaf, spoil, clothing; Icel. rau, spoil. Teut. type
*raubom, neut.; from *raub, 2nd grade of Teut. *reub-an-, to reave ;
see Reave. Der. robe, verb; rob-ed, K. Lear, iii. 6. 38. Also
rob (1), q. Vv.

ROBIN, a singing-bird, the red-breast. (F.-OHG.) ‘ Robyn
redbrest;’ Skelton, Phyllyp Sparowe, 399; Holland’s Howlat,
1.647. ‘ The most familiar of our wild birds, called Robin red-breast,
from Robin (the familiar version of Robert), on the same principle
that the pie and the daw are christened Mag (for Margery) and Fack.
In the same way the parrot takes its name from Pierrot, the familiar
version of Pierre;” Wedgwood. Robin Hood is mentioned in P.
Plowman, B. v. 402.—F. Robin, a proper name (Cotgrave); a pet
name for Robert, which was early known in England, because it was
the name of the eldest son of Will. I. B. Robert isa Frankish name,
from OHG, Ruodperht (G. Ruprecht, whence our Rupert), meaning
‘ fame-bright,’ i.e. illustrious in fame. y. The syllable perht is cog-
nate with E, Bright, q.v. The syllable Ruod- is cognate with
Icel. hrddr, praise, fame; it occurs also in Rud-olf, Rud-iger, Ro-ger.
Cf. Goth. hrétheigs, victorious, triumphant, 2 Cor. ii. 14. And see
Hobgoblin.

ROBUST, vigorous, in sound health, (F.—L.) ‘A _ robust
boysterous rogue knockt him down;’ Howell, Famil. Letters, b. i.
sect. 3. let. 21; dated 1623.—F. robuste, ‘ strong, tough ;’ Cot. =L.
robustus, strong; formed by adding -tus (Idg. -to-) to OL. rdbus
(later robur), strength. Der. robust-ly, robust-ness. Also (obsolete)
robust-i-ous, Shak. Haml. iii, 2. 10, better spelt robusteous, as in
Blount, directly from L. rdbusteus, oaken (hence, strong), by the
change of -zs into -ovs, as in numerous other words.

ROC, a huge bird. (F.—Pers.) Inthe Arabian Nights’ Entertain-
ment. =F. rock (Littré).— Pers. rukh, the name of a huge bird; per-
haps of Assyrian origin (Devic). Cf. Nis-roch, 2 Kings, xix. 37.

ROCHET, asurplice worn by bishops. (F.—OHG.) Inthe Rom.
of the Rose, 4754.—F. rochet, ‘a frock, loose gaberdine;. . also,
a prelates rochet;’ Cot. MHG. roc (G. rock), a coat, frock.4-Du.
rok, OFries. rokk, AS. roce, Icel. rokkr. Teut. type *rukkoz, masc.,
a coat, frock.

ROCK (1), a large mass of stone. (F.) The pl. rockes or rokkes
occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 11305 (F 993).—OF. roke (13th cent.
Littré) ; also rogue, commonly roche, a rock; the masc. form roc is
later, and only dates from the 16th century. Cf. Guernsey rogue,
‘Walloon roc, Languedoc roguo (D’Hombres), Prov. roca, Span. roca,
Port. roca, rocha, Ital. rocca, roccia, a rock. Also Late L. rocca;
Ducange. (The Celtic forms are borrowed from E. or F.) We also
find late AS. stan-roce (Napier’s Glosses). Of unknown origin.
@| The ME. roche, in Gower, C. A. i. 314 (bk. iil. 1048), is from F,
roche. Der. rock-pigeon, -salt, -work; rock-y, rock-i-ness.

ROCK (2), to move backward and forward, to cause to totter, to
totter. (E.) ME. rokken, Chaucer, C. T. 4155 (A 4157); Ancren
Riwle, p. 82,1.19. AS. roccian (Clark Hall) ; NFries. rocke; O. Low
G. rukkian (Gallée).4-Dan. rokke, to rock, shake; allied to Dan.
rykke, to pull, tug, from ryk, a pull, a tug ; Swed. dial. rukka, to wag,
to rock, allied to zycka, to pull, ryck, a pull, jerk. Cf. Icel. rykkja,
to pull roughly and hastily, rykkr, a hasty pull, also a spasm,
Also G. riicken, to move by pushing ; from ruck, a pull, jolt, jerk,
Du. ruk, a jerk. Teut. types *rukkdjan-, *rukkjan-, to jolt, jerk
(Franck). The base *rukk (for *runk?) may be related to *renkan-, to
shake, as seen in Swed. dial. rinka, to shake (pt. rank, supine runkit),
Rietz; Swed. runka, to shake, rankig, rickety (Widegren). Der.
rock-er, rock-ing-chair.

ROCK (3), a distaff. (Scand.) In Dryden, tr. of Ovid, Metam.
b. viii., Meleager, 1. 257. ME.rokke. ‘ Rokke, ofspynnyng, Colus ;’
Prompt. Pary.—Icel. rokkr, a distaff; Swed. rock; Dan. rok.+-G.


ROGUE


rocken, MHG. rocke, OHG. roccho, a distaff; Du. rok, rokken.
type *rukkon-,m. Der. rock-et (1), q.v.


Teut.


q
ROCKET (1), a kind of fire-work. (Ital.—G.) In Skinner’s _


Dict., ed. 1671. Dekker has the pl. rockets; London Triumphant,
speech of Envy (1612).=—Mltal. rocchetto, ‘a bobbin to winde silke
upon ; also, any kinde of squib of wilde fier ;’ Florio. The rocket
seems to have been named from its long thin shape, bearing some
resemblance to a quill or bobbin for winding silk, and so to a distaff.
The Ital. rocchetto is the dimin. of rocca, ‘a distaffe or rocke to
spinne with;’ Florio. MHG. rocke, a distaff; see Rock (3).

ROCKET (2), a plant of the genus Eruca. (F.—Ital.—L.) In
Levins. Spelt rokat in Sir T. Elyot, Castle of Helth, b. ii. c. 9. =F.
roguette, ‘the herb rocket;” Cot.—Ital. ruchetta, ‘the herb called
rocket;’ Florio. Dimin. of ruca, eruca, rocket, Baretti; (only the pl.
eruche appears in Florio).—L. érica, a sort of cole-wort; whence
also the G. rauke, rocket.

ROCOCO, a variety of ornamentation, characterized by mean-
ingless scrolls and shell-work. (F.) F. rococo; of the time of
Louis XIV. Playful variant from the base of F. roc-aille, rockiness,
rock-work (Hatzfeld).—F. roc, rock; see Rock.

ROD, a slender stick. (E.) ME. rod, Gower, C. A. i. 3103 bk.
iii, g10. Chaucer has lym-rod, a rod covered with bird-lime, C. T.,
B 3574. The word is a mere variant of rood, by a shortening of the
vowel-sound of which we have a few other examples, viz. in gosling
from AS. gosling, blossom from AS. bléstma, fodder from AS. fodor ;
not very dissimilar are blood, mother, from AS. bléd, médor. In the
Owl and Nightingale, 1. 1644 (or 1646), we have rod used in the
sense of rood or gallows. ‘Thou seist that gromes the i-fod, An
heie on rodde the an-hod’ =thou (the owl) sayest that men take thee,
and hang thee high on a rod (rood). See further under Rood. Cf.
Pomeran. rode, a rod; MDu. roede, a rod. Doublet, rood.

RODENT, gnawing. (L.) A scientific term.—L. rddent-, stem
of pres. part. of rddere, to gnaw. Akin to rddere, to scratch; see
Rase. Cf. Skt. rada-s, a tooth. Der. (from L. rédere) cor-rode,
e-rode. And see rostrum, rat.

RODOMONTADSH, vain boasting. (F.—Ital.) ‘Crites. And
most terribly he comes off, like your rodomontado;’ Ben Jonson,
Cynthia’s Revels, Act v. sc. 2, ‘And triumph’d our whole nation
In his rodomant fashion ;’ id., Masque of Owls, Owl 5.—F. rodomont-
ade, ‘a brag, boast;’ Cot.—Ital. rodomontada, ‘a boaste, brag ;’
Florio, A proverbial expression, due to the boastful character of
Rodomonte, in the Orlando Furioso of Ariosto, bk. xiv; called Roda-
monte by Bojardo, Orlando Innamorato, ii. 1. 56. Said to be coined
from Lombard rodare (=Ital. rotare), to turn about, and monte, a
mountain. See Rotary and Mount (1).

ROE (1), a female deer. (E.) ME. ro; Chaucer, C. T. 4084
(A 4086), purposely gives the Northern E. raa. AS. raha, ra, m.;
r®ge, f. (so that ME. ro was masc.). See’ Voc. 11. 33.4Icel. ra;
whence rabukkr, a roe-buck; Dan. raa; whence raabuk, a roe-buck,
raadyr, roe-deer ; Swed. rd ; whence rabock, roe-buck ; Du. ree; reebok,
roe-buck; O. Low G. rého, m. (Gallée); G.reh; rehbock. Teut. base
*raihon-, m.; of unknown origin. Der. roe-buck, ME. roobukke,
Trevisa, i. 337; see Buck.

ROE (2), the eggs or spawn of fishes. (Scand.) The form roe isin
Shak. Rom. ii. 4. 39. But it is due to a curious mistake. The true
form is roan (with oa as in oak), but it seems to have been regarded.
as a plural, like omen, eyne (eyes), shoon (shoes), so that the x was
dropped. This is unusual (perhaps unique) in the case of apparent
plurals in -ex or -z, but common with plurals (or rather supposed
plurals) in -s; as shown under cherry, sherry, pea. ‘ Roan, the roe of
a fish;’ Peacock’s Glossary (Lincoln). ‘ Rownd, roe,’ Whitby
Glossary ; where the word has actually acquired an excrescent d.
ME. rowne, Prompt. Parv.=Icel. hrogn, Dan. rogn, Swed. rom, roe,
spawn.+G. rogen, roe (whence F. rogue, roe). B. Teut. type *hrug-
on-, or *hrugno-, masc.

ROGATION, supplication. (F.—L.) Particularly used in the
phr. Rogation-days ; see the Prayer-book ; Hooker, Eccl. Polity, b. v.
s. 41, Foxe, Acts and Monuments, p. 914, Hen. VIII (R.). Also
‘ Rogation weke ;’ Palsgrave. =F. rogation ; pl. rogations, ‘ rogation-
daies;’? Cot.—L. régatidnem, acc. of rogdtio, a supplication, an
asking. = L, rogiire, toask. Der. rogation-days. Also (from rogdre)
ab-rogate, ar-rogate, ar-rogant, de-rogate, inter-rogate, pre-rogat-ive,
pro-rogue, super-e-rogat-ion, sur-rogate. Bee Si

ROGUE, aknave, vagabond. (F.—Low G.) The word sometimes
meant merely a wandering mendicant; see K. Lear, iv. 7. 39, and
Trench’s Select Glossary. Shak. also has roguing’, roguish, vagrant ;
Per, iv. 1. 97; K. Lear, iii. 7, 104. _ Cotgrave has: ‘ Roder, to roam,
wander, vagabondize it, rogue abroad.’ But the E. roguish also has
the sense of arch,-pert, and this can only be due to F. rogue, ‘arro~
gant, proud, presumptuous, malapert,. saucie, rude, surly;’ Cot.
Thus the sense of ‘surly fellow’ would seem to be the original one,


ROIL, RILE


easily transferred to beggars as a cant term; and then the verb /o
rogue abroad would mean ‘to go about as a beggar.’ B. That a
rogue Was a common cant term may be seen in Harman’s Caueat,
ed. Furnivall; he devotes cap. iv (pp. 36-41) to the description of
‘a roge,’ and cap. v to the description of ‘a wylde roge.’ He con-
cludes by saying: ‘I once rebuking a wyld roge because he went
idelly about, he shewed me that he was a beggar by inheritance ; his
grandfather was a begger, his father was one, and he must nedes be
one by good reason.’ y. The F. rogwe is referred by Diez to Icel.
hrokr, but this word means lit. ‘a rook,’ and secondarily, a croaker,
long-winded talker; which does not suit the sense. It answers
rather to Low G. rook, which not only means the bird, but also an
arch-thief (Brem. Wort.). Cf. E. rook, to cheat ; and Dan, raage, a
took. See Rook (1). Der. rogu-ish, -ly, -ness; rogu-er-y.

ROIL, RIGLH, to vex. (F.2—L.%) Rile seems to be the same
word as roil, to vex; similarly foil, soil, are occasionally pronounced
tile, sile. But the old word roil seems to show two distinct meanings :
(1) to disturb, vex, trouble, and (2) to wander about, to romp. I
have given examples in my note to P. Plowman, C. vi. 151; and
five occur in Davies, Suppl. Glossary. ‘The lamb down stream
roiled the wolf’s water above;’ North, Examen, p. 359 (1740).
Proy. E. roil, rile, to make turbid, ‘to scold; E.D.D. Evidently of
F. origin. Perhaps from OF. roeillier, roelier, roillier, to roll about,
to roll the eyes, to beat (Godefroy); mod. F. rouiller, to roll the
eyes; MF. rouiller, to pummel (Cot.). From a Lat. type *rotelliare,
to roll.—L. rotella, dimin. of rota, a wheel; see Rotary.

ROISTERING, turbulent, blustering. (F.—L.) Todd cites
from Swift (no reference): ‘Among a crew of roist’ring fellows.’
Shak. has rotsting, Troil. ii. 2. 208; and Levins has royst, vb. We
have Udall’s play of Roister Doister, written before 1553; and the sb.
roister is in the Mirror for Magistrates (Nares). Roister, a bully, a
tuffian or turbulent fellow, seems to be the orig. word which gave
rise to the verb rotst on the one hand, and the adj. roistering, i.e.
tuffianly, on the other.—F. rustre, ‘a ruffin, royster, hackster, swag-
gerer, sawcie fellow;”’ Cot. This Littré explains as being another
form of OF. ruste, a rustic, the r being ‘epenthetic.’=—L. rusticum,
acc. of rusticus, rustic, hence clownish. See Rustic.

ROLL, to turn on an axis, revolve, move round and round. (F.—
L.) In early use; ME. rollen, Layamon, 22287, later text; Chaucer,
C. T. 12772 (C 838). Partly (see Hatzfeld) from OF. roler, roller,
later rouler, to roll.=Late L. rotulare, to roll, revolve.=L. rotula,
a little wheel ; dimin. of rota, a wheel. And partly from OF, roeler,
to roll, from the sb. roele, a little wheél.—L. rotella, dimin. of the
same L. rota. See Rotary. Der. roll, sb., ME. rolle, Ancren
Riwle, p. 344, l. 11, from OF. rolle, later roule,‘ a rowle,’ Cot., which
from Late L. rotulum, acc. of rotulus, a roll (preserved in the phrase
custos rotuldrum). Also roll-er, roll-ing, roll-ing-pin, rolling-press,
Also (from F. roule) roul-eau, roul-ette. Also cont-rol, q. v.

ROMANCEH, a fictitious narrative. (F.—L.) The French origi-
nals from which some E. poems were translated or imitated are often
referred to by the name of the romance. Rob. of Glouc. (p. 487,
1. 9987), in treating of the history of Rich. I, says there is more about
him ‘in romance ;’ and, in fact, the Romance of Richard Cuer de
Lion is extant in E. verse; see Weber’s Met. Romances. =OF.
romanz, romans, a romance (Godefroy). This peculiar form is
believed to have arisen from the Late L. adv. rémdnicé, so that
romanicé loqui was translated into OF. by parler romans. It then
became a sb., and passed into common use. The Prov. romans
occurs (1) as an adj.=L. Rdmanus, (2) as a sb., the ‘Roman’
language, and (3) asasb.,aromance. . By the ‘Roman’ language
was meant the vulgar tongue used by the people in everyday life, as
distinguished from the ‘ Latin’ of books. We now give the name of
Romance Languages to the languages which are chiefly founded on
Latin, or, as they are also called, the Neo-Latin languages. y. The
Late L. Rémanicé, i.e. Roman-like, is formed from the adj. Romanus,
Roman.=—L. Réma, Rome. Der. romance, verb, romanc-er. Also
(from Rdménus) Roman, Roman-ist, Roman-ism, Roman-ise; also
roman-esque, from F. romanesque, ‘Romish, Roman,’ Cot., from Ital.
Romanesco, Romanish. Also (from Roma) Rom-ish. And see
Romaunt.

ROMAUNT, a romance. (F.—L.) The Romaunt of the Rose,
usually attributed to Chaucer, though only 1705 lines of it are really
his, is a well-known poem. It is a translation of the French poem
Le Roman de ta Rose. Thus romaunt answers to F. roman. The
final ¢ is found in F. as well as E.; the OF. form was (in the oblique
case) romant, or even roumant. Another OF. form of the same
word was romanz (whence E, romance), so that romanz, roman,
romant are three forms of the same word. See further under
Romance, Der. romant-ic, spelt romantick in Phillips, ed. 1706,
from mod. F. romantigue, romantic, an adj. formed from romant,
another form of roman, as explained above; romant-ic-al-ly.


ROOST 523


ROMMANY, gipsy ; a gipsy; see Rum (2).

ROMP, to play noisily. (F.—Teut.) In the Spectator, no. 187,
we find ‘a romping girl,’ and rompishness. The older spelling was
Ramp, q.v. The intermediate form raumpe occurs in Caxton’s
print of Malory’s Morte Arthure, bk. ix. c. 1, with reference to
a ‘raumpynge lyon.’ Der. romp, sb., Tatler, no. 15, romp-ish, romp-
ish-ly, romp-ish-ness.

RONDEAU, a kind of poem. (F.—L.) Borrowed from mod.
F. rondeau, The ME, word was Roundel,q.v. Doublet, roundel.

RONYOWN, a mangy person. (F.) In Shak. Merry Wives, iv. 2.
195; Macb. i. 3.6. Prob, formed (with suffix -on) from MF, rongze,
F. rogne, ‘scurf, scabbiness, the mange;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. rogna,
scab ; Span. roza, scab, dirt, fraud ; Port. rozha, scab, craftiness ; mod.
Proy. rougno, scab; meichanto rougno, ‘mauvais dréle,’ Mistral,
From a Late L. type *rdnea; Korting, § 8141.

ROOD, the holy cross; a measure of land. (E.) The same word
as rod, as shown under Rod. Hence its use as a measure of land,
because measured with a measuring-rod or ‘ pole,’ of the length of
5% yards, giving a square rod of 30} square yards, and a square rood
of 40 square rods, or a quarter of an acre. For the sense of ‘ cross,’
see Legends of the Holy Rood, ed. Morris. AS. rad, a gallows,
cross, properly a rod or pole; Matt. xxvii. 40, John, xix. 17.--
OFries. rode, OSax. rdda, gallows, cross; Du. roede, a rod, perch,
wand, yard; G. ruthe, OHG. ruota, a rod, arod of land. ‘Teut. type
*roda, fem., a rod, a pole. The prime grade is *rad-. Der.
rood-loft (Nares).

ROOF, the covering of a house. (E.) For hroof, initial 2 being
lost. ME. rof, Havelok, 2082; rhof, Ormulum, 11351, AS. hraf,
a roof, Mark, ii. 4; OF ries. hkrafi4-Du. roef,a cabin; Icel. hrdf, a
shed under which ships are built or kept. Teut. type *hrdfo-, Idg.
type *krapo-. Cf. Irish cré, a hovel; W. craw, a pig-sty ; Bret. crow,
a stable; Stokes-Fick, p. 96. Der. roof, verb; roof-ing, roof-less.

ROOK (1), a kind of crow. (E.) ME. rook, Prompt. Parv. AS.
hroc; Ps. 146, 10; ed. Spelman.+Icel. Arokr; Dan. raage; Swed.
rdka; MHG. ruoch, OHG. hruoh ; cf. G. ruchert, a jackdaw (Fliigel).
Teut. type *krdkoz,m. B. The word means ‘croaker;’ cf. Goth.
hriikjan, to crow as a cock; Gk. kpu&Cev (for *xpwy-yew), tocaw. A
word of imitative origin. Der. rook-er-y.

ROOK (2), a castle, at chess. (F.—Pers.) ‘Roke of the chesse,
roc;’ Palsgrave. ME. rook, Prompt. Pary. =F. roc, ‘a rook at chesse,’
Cot. [Cf. Span. rogue, Ital. rocco.]|—Pers. rokhk, ‘the rook or
tower at chess;’ Rich. Dict. p. 727. The remoter origin of this
word is unknown; Devic cites d’Herbelot as saying that in the
language of the ancient Persians, it signified ‘a warrior’ who sought
warlike adventures, a sort of knight-errant. The piece was orig.
denoted by an elephant carrying a castle on his back; we have
suppressed the elephant. There seems to be nothing to connect this
with the famous bird called the roc or rukh; except that the same
form rukh, in Persian, means ‘a hero, -a knight-errant (as in
d’Herbelot), a rhinoceros, the name of a bird of mighty wing, a
beast resembling the camel, but very fierce,’ &c.; Rich. (as above).

ROOM, space, a chamber. (E.) The older meaning is simply
‘space ;’ hence a place at table, Luke, xiv. 7. ME. roum; ‘ and hath
roum and eek space,’ Chaucer, Legend of Good Women, 1999. AS.
rim; ‘nzfdon rum’=they had no room, Luke ii. 7. We also find
AS. rim, adj., spacious; ‘se weg is swide ram’=the way is very
broad or spacious, Matt. vii. 13.4-Du. ruim, adj., spacious; sb.,
room ; Icel. riimr, spacious; rim, space; Dan. and Swed. rum, adj.
and sb.; Goth. rims, adj. and sb., Matt. vii. 13; Luke, ii..7; G.
raum, OHG. rim, space. B. All from the Teut. type *rumoz, adj.,
spacious; whence the sb. forms are derived. Allied to L. ris, open
country, Russ. raviina, a plain, Zend ravank, wide, free, open, ravan,
a plain; Fick, i. 197; Olrish roe, a plain. See Rural. Der.
room-y, Dryden, Annus Mirabilis, st. 153, 1. 609, a late word, sub~
stituted for the ME. adj. roum (room) ; room-i-ly, room-i-ness. Also
room-th (Nares), obsolete. Also rumm-age, q.v.

ROOST, a place where fowls rest at night. (E.) Frequently
applied to the perch on which fowls rest; as to which see below.
Most common in the phr. fo go to roost, i.e. to seek a sleeping-place.
‘They go to roust;’ Skelton, Elynour Rummyng, 191. ‘ Roost for
capons or hennes;’ Palsgrave. AS. hrdst; Lye gives henna hrost, a
hen-roost; Geréfa, § 11 (in Anglia, ix. 262); and hrdsé appears
again (in composition) in an obscure passage in the Exeter-book ;
see Grein. B. We also have OS. hrdst in the Heliand, 2316, where
the palsied man healed by Christ is let down through the roof; or,
as in the original, churh thes hiises hrdst, through the wood-work of
the house-top.4-MDnu. roest, or hinnen-kot, ‘a hen-roest;’ roesten,
‘to goe to roest, as hens;’ Hexham. y. In the Heliand, the sense
of hrdst comes close to that of ‘roof;’- and it is certainly related to
Goth. hrét, Icel. krot, a roof; cf..also Lowl. Scotch roost, the inner
roof of a cottage, composed of spars reaching from one wall to the


ROOT


other (Jamieson). ‘The orig. roosting-place for fowls was on the
rafters of the inner roof. ‘This is how roost acquired the sense of
perch. Der. roost, verb.

ROOT (1), the part of a plant in the earth, which draws up sap
from the soil, a source, cause of a matter. (Scand.) ME. rote,
Chaucer, C. T. 2; Ancren Riwle, p. §4, 1. 12.—Icel. rdt, a root; Swed.
rot; Dan. rod. B. Hence Icel. rota, to root up, rout up, as a
swine, corresponding to prov. E. wrout, to dig up like a hog (E. D.S.
Gloss. B. 7), ME. wroten, a word used by Chaucer of a sow, Persones
Tale (Six-text, Group I, 157), AS. wrdtan; see Root (2). This
proves that the Icel. rd¢ stands for *wrdt, it being a characteristic of
that language to drop w in the (initial) combination wr. y: Fur-
ther, rd¢ is allied to Goth. waurts, a root, AS. wyrt, a wort, a root;
see Wort. It is also cognate with L. rad-ix, a root ; the Teut. base
*wrol- answering to L. *(w)rad-. See Radix, Rhizome. Brug-
mann, i. § 350(2). Der. root, verb, Wint. ‘Tale, i. I. 25; also root,
ivb., in the sense ‘to grub up,’ see Root (2); root-less, root-let.
Doublets, radix, wort.

ROOT (2), ROUT, to grub up, as ahog. (E.) In Shak. Rich.
Ill, i. 3. 228. AS. wrdtan, to grub up, A‘lfric’s Grammar, ed.
Zupitza, p. 176, l, 12.4-MDu. wroeten, ‘to grub or root in the earth
as hogs doe;’ Hexham; Icel. rdta, to grub up, from rét, a root;
Dan. rode, to root up, from rod, a root. See Root (1).

ROPE, a thick twisted cord. (E.) ME. rope, roop; spelt rop,
Rob. of Glouc., p. 448, 1. 9212. AS. rap, Judges, xv. 14, xvi. 9.
Du. reep; Icel. reip; Swed. rep; Dan. red; G. reif, a circle, hoop
(of a barrel), ring, wheel, ferrule; occasionally, a rope; Goth.
skauda-raip, shoe-latchet. B. All from the Teut. base *raip-,
prob. with the sense of ‘strip,’ whence ‘string.’ Perhaps from the
2nd grade of Teut. *reip-an-, to cut (pt. t. *raip); see Reap
(Franck). And cf. Ripe, Rip. Der. rope, vb., rop-er, a rope-
maker, P. Plowman, B. v. 336, rop-er-y, rope-maker, rope-walk; also
rop-y, adj., stringy, glutinous, adhesive, lit. rope-like, Skelton, Elinour
Rummyng, 24; rop-ing, Hen. V, iii. 5. 23; stirrup, q.v.

ROQUELAURE, a kind of cloak. (F.) In Gay’s Trivia, i. 51.
Named after the duke of Roquelaure (ab. 1715) ; Todd’s Johnson.

RORQUAL, a kind of large whale. (F.—Scand.) F. rorqual
(Littré).—Norw. réyrkval (Aasen); prob. short for réyder-kval,
“reddish whale;’ from Norw. raud, red, and kval,a whale, Cf. Icel.
reyOr-hvalr ; from raudr, red, and hvalr, whale.

ROSH, the name of a flower. (L.—Gk.—OPersian.) ME. rose ;
the old plural was rosez, as in Ancren Riwle, p. 276,112. AS.
rose, pl. rosan; Grein, ii. 384.—L. rosa, a rose. B. This is not
a true L. word, but borrowed from Gk. fddov, a rose, whence a
form *fodia (not found), Aolic *fofa>L. rosa; cf. L. Clausus
with Claudius. y- Again, the Gk. fd50v, AZolic form Bpddoy (for
*Fpddov), is not a Gk. word, but borrowed from OPers. varia,
a rose; whence also the Armen. and Arab. ward. Rich. Dict.
1638; altered in mod. Persian to the form gil; for which see
Julep. (Horn, § 927; Brugmann, i. 772b.) Der. ros-ac-e-ous,
from L. rosdceus (Pliny); ros-ar-y, ME. rosarie, Chaucer, C. T.
16897 (G 1429), from OF. *rosarie (not recorded), later form rosaire,
from Late L. rosdrium, a chaplet, also the title of a treatise on
alchemy by Arnoldus de Villa Nova and of other treatises ; ros-e-ate,
a coined word; ros-ette, from F. rosette, ‘a little rose,’ Cot. ; rose-
water, rose-wood, ros-y, ros-i-ness,

ROSEMARY, a small evergreen shrub. (F.—L.) In Skelton,
Garl. of Laurel, 980; and in Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 9.
Gower has the form rosmarine, C. A. iii. 132 (bk. vii. 1407), where
the L. marginal note has rosa marina. —OF. rosmarin, ‘ rosemary,’
Cot. (and in Hatzfeld) ; mod. F. romarin. — L. résmarinus, rdsmarinum,
rosemary ; lit. marine dew, or sea-dew; called in Ovid rés maris,
Metam. xii. 410. —L. rds, dew; and marinus, marine.4 Russ. rosa, dew;
Lithuan. rasa, dew (Nesselmann).-+4-Skt. rasa-s, juice, essence ; cf. ras,
to taste. And see Marine. @ Named from some fancied con-
nexion with ‘sea-spray;’ in English, it seems to have been altered
‘to rosemary from a popular etymology connecting rose with Mary.
ROSIN, the same as Resin, q. v.

ROSTER, a military register. (Du.) The o is properly long;
pron. roaster.—Du. rooster, a gridiron; also, ‘a list, roll, table’
(Calisch); said to be from the resemblance of the lines in a list to
the bars of a gridiron.— Du. roosten, to roast ; see Roast.

ROSTRUM, a platform for an orator to speak from. (L.)
“Before the Rostra;’ P. Holland, tr. of Suetonius, Nero, ch. 13.
€ Rostrum, the beak of a bird, prow of a ship, nose of an alembic;’
Phillips, ed. 1706. —L. rostrum, a beak, prow ; pl. rostra, the Rostra,
an erection for speakers in the forum, so called because adorned with
the beaks of ships taken from the Antiates, A.U.C. 416; Livy, viii.
14 (White). For *rdd-trum, as being the organ wherewith the bird
pecks.—L. rddere, to gnaw, peck; see Rodent. Der. rostr-ate,
rostri-form.


524


- ROTTEN


ROT, to putrefy. (E.) A weak verb; pt. t. rotted; pp. rotted, as
in Shak. Mid. Nt. Dream, ii. 1.95. This pp. is little used, its place
being supplied by rotten, a Scand. form; see Rotten. ME. roten,
rotien, Chaucer, C. T. 4405 (A 4407); pt. t. rotede, Genesis and
Exod., ed. Morris, 3342; pp. roted, Will. of Palerne, 4124. AS.
rotian, pt. t. rotode, pp. rotod; Exod. xvi. 24.44Du. rotten; OHG.
rozén, B. Further allied to Icel. rotna, Swed. ruttna, Dan.
raadne, to become rotten, verbs which are allied to the old strong
pp. appearing in Icel. rotinn, Swed. rutten, Dan. raaden, rotten.
See Rotten, which belongs to a more original type. Der. rot, sb.,
dry-rot. /

ROTARY, turning like a wheel. (L.) A modern coined word ;
in Bailey’s Dict., vol. ii. ed. 1731. As if from a L. type *rotarius,
from rota, a wheel.4Gael. and Irish roth, W. rhod, a wheel;
Lithuan. ratas,a wheel; pl. ratai, a cart, wheeled vehicle ; G. rad,
a wheel. Cf. Skt. ratha-s, a car, chariot, vehicle. All from4/RET,
to run along; as in Olrish rith-im, I run; Lith. ritu, I roll, turn
round; Brugmann, i. § 159. Der. rot-ate, from L. rotatus, pp. of
rotare, to revolve like a wheel; roft-at-ion, from L. acc. rotatidnem ;
rot-at-or-y, formed with suffix -y from L. rotator, a whirler round.
And see rotund-i-ty, rond-eau, round, round-el, rund-let, roué, roll,
row-el, rouleau, roulette.

ROTE (1), routine, repetition of the same words. (F.—L.) ‘And
euery statute coude he plaine bi rote’=and he knew the whole of
every statute by rote; Chaucer, C. T. 329. ‘[He] can nou3t wel
reden His rewle.. . but be pure rote’=he cannot well read the rule
of his order except merely by rote; P. Plowman’s Crede, 377.—OF.
rote (Godefroy), mod. F. route, a road, way, beaten track; Norm.
dial. rote, a little path (Duméril). Hence the dimin. OF. rotine,
mod. F, routine, as in the proverbial expression par rotine, ‘by rote;’
Cot. Hence by rote=along a beaten track, or with constant
repetition ; see Rut (1). B. The orig. sense of OF. rote is ‘a
great highway in a forest,’ Cot., cognate with Ital. rotta, which,
however, means a breaking up, a rout, defeat. The OF. rote is
really the fem. of rot, old pp. of rompre, to break, and thus rove=L.
rupta, lit. broken. As Diez says, the F. route, a street, way =wia
rupta, a way broken through, just as the OF. brisée (lit. broken)
means a way. Orig. applied to a way broken or cut through a
forest.=L. rupta, fem. of ruptus, pp. of rumpere, to break; see
Rupture. @ By rote has nothing to do with OF. rote, a musical
instrument, as some suppose; see Rote (2). By way of further
illustration, we may note that the Dict. of the French Academy
(1813) gives: ‘Router, habituer quelqu’un a une chose, l’y exercer.
Les cartes se routent, pour dire qu’on a beau les méler, les mémes
combinaisons, les mémes suites de cartes reviennent souvent.’ And
again: ‘ I] ne sait point de musique, mais il chante par routine ;’ id.
The latter passage expressly shows that to sing by rote is to sing
without a rausical instrument. Der. ro¢-ed, Cor. iii. 2.553; cf. ‘1
roote in custome, je habitue,’ Palsgrave. Doublets, route, rout (1),
rut (1).

ROTE (2), the name of an old musical instrument. (F.—G.—C.)
‘Wel coude he singe and plaien on a rofe;’ Chaucer, C. T. 236.
‘Playing on a rote;’ Spenser, F. Q, iv. 9. 6.—OF. rote, a musical
instrument mentioned in Le Roman de la Rose, as cited by Roque-
fort. Burguy explains that there were two kinds of roftes, one a sort
of psaltery or harp played with a plectrum or quill, the other much
the same as the F. vielle, which Cotgrave calls ‘a rude instrument
of music, usually played by fidlers and blind men, i.e. a kind of
fiddle, [Roquefort absurdly connects rote with the L. rofa, as if it
were a kind of hurdy-gurdy, which it never was, and this has pro-
bably helped on the notion that E. rote in the phr. by rote must also
have to do with the turning of a wheel, which is certainly not the
case.]—OHG. hrota, rota, MHG. rotte, a rote; spelt chrotta in Low
Lat. (Ducange). Of Celtic origin; Olrish crot, W. crwth, Gael.
cruit, a harp, violin; see Crowd (2). Stokes-Fick, p.99. > See
Lacroix, Arts of the Middle Ages, p. 217 of E. translation.

ROTHER, an ox. (E.) In Shak. Timon, iv. 3. 12. ME.
rotheren, pl., P. Ploughman’s Crede, 431; ruderen, pl., Layamon, 8106.
Late AS. hriideru, pl., Kemble, Cod. Dipl. iv. 275. Earlier AS.
hrider, hryder. (Bosworth) ; and in comp., krid-. The base hrid- is
for *hrinth-, cognate with G. rind, ox. Teut. type *hrinthis, n., ox
(Kluge). The ME. rother, Du. rund, are (more probably) connected
with Teut. type *hkrunthis, n.; see Kluge and Franck. Perhaps
allied to AS. hrindan (pp. krunden), Icel. hrinda, to push, to thrust;
see Rend. And see Runt. See my Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 253.

ROTTEN, putrid. (Scand.) ME. roten, Chaucer, C. T. 4404
(A 4406); Ancren Riwle, p. 84, note d, where the text has roted. —
Icel. rotinn, rotten; Swed. rutten; Dan. raaden. _ B. Apparently
Icel. rotinn is the pp. of a lost verb *rjdta, pr. t. *raut, to wet, to
decay, allied to AS. réofan, OHG. riuzan, to weep, shed tears.
Teut. type *reutan-, pt. t. *raut, pp. *rutanoz. From 4/REUD;


ROTUNDITY


whence also Lith. rauddti, Skt. rud, to weep, L. rudere, to bellow.
See Ret. And see Rot. Der. rotten-ness,

ROTUNDITY, roundness. (F.—L.) In K. Lear, iii. 2. 7.
Adapted from F. rotondité, Cot.—L. rotunditatem, acc. of rotunditas,
roundness.=L. rotundus, round; see Round. Der. (from L.
rotundus), rotund ; rotund-a, a round building.

ROUBLE, RUBLE, a Russian coin. (Russ.) Spelt rubble,
Hakluyt’s Voyages, vol. i. p. 2563; roble, id. i. 280, under the date
Aug. I, 1556.—Russ. ruble, a ruble, 100 copeks; worth about 3s. 4d.
Perhaps from Pers. ripiya, a rupee (Miklosich), See Rupee.

ROUE, a profligate. (F.—L.) Merely F. rové, lit. broken on the
wheel; a name given, under the regency (A.D. 1715-1723), to the
companions of the duke of Orleans, men worthy of being broken on
the wheel ; a punishment for the greatest criminals. Pp. of rouer,
lit. to turn round (L. rotare).—F. roue, a wheel. = L. rota, a wheel.
See Rotary.

ROUGE, red paint. (F.—L.) Modern; added by Todd to
Johnson. =F. rouge, red.=L. rubeum, acc. of rubeus, red ; whence
rouge is formed like rage from L. rabiem (Littré). Allied to ruber,
ted; see Red, Ruby. Der. rouge, verb.

ROUGH, shaggy, not smooth, uneven, violent, harsh, coarse,
rugged. (E.) In Chaucer, C. T. 3736 (A 3738), the MSS. have
rough, rogh, row. Other spellings are ruk, rugh, ru, rou, ru}; see
Stratmann, s. v. ruh. AS. ruh, rough, hairy; Gen. xxvii. 113; also
rug. Cf. AS. riwan, pl.; Gen. xxvii. 23.4-Du. ruig, hairy, rough,
harsh, rude; MDu. ru (Oudemans); Dan. ru; Low G.ruug (Bremen
Worterbuch) ; OHG. rik, MHG. rich, hairy; G. rauh, rough.
Also Skt. riksha-, rough. B. Cf. also Lithuan. rawkas, a fold,
wrinkle, rukti, to wrinkle; the orig. sense may have been uneven,
like something wrinkled. 4] Distinct from raw. Der. rough-ly,
-ness; rough, verb, rough-en; rough-hew (rougheheawe in Palsgrave) ;
rough-ish, rough-rider. And see rug.

ROULEAU, a roll of coins in paper. (F.—L.) See Stanford
Dict. In Pope, The Basset-table, 1.81. From F. rowleau, ‘a roll of
paper;” Cot. Rouleau stands for an OF. *roulel, *rolel, in Froissart
ee aie a diminutive from OF. role, later rowle, a roll; see
Roll.

ROULETTE, a game of chance. (F.—L.) See Sandford
Dict. From F. roulette; named from the ball which rolls on a
turning table. For *rouelette, OF. ruelete (Hatzfeld) ; dimin. of
rouelle, alittle wheel, dimin. of rove, a wheel (L. rota). See Rowel.

ROUN, ROWN, ROUND, to whisper. (E.) Shak. has
rounded, whispered, K. John, ii. 566; but thed is excrescent. ME.
rounen, Chaucer, C. T. 5823 (D 241); P. Plowman, B. iv. 13.
AS. riinian, to whisper; rinedon=L. susurrabant, Ps. xl. 8, ed.
Spelman. = AS. riiz, a rune, mystery, secret colloquy, whisper; see
Rune.

ROUND, circular, globular. (F.—L.) ME. round, Chaucer,
C. T. 3932 (A 3934). = OF. roond, mod. F. rond, round. = L.
rotundus, round; formed, with suffix -vndus, from rof-a, a wheel;
see Rotary. Der. round, sb., round, verb; round-about, in Levins;
round-head, from the Puritan fashion of having the hair cut close
to the head; round-house; round-ish, round-ly, round-ness. Also
round-el, q.v., rond-eau, q.v., rund-let, q.v.

ROUNDEL, a kind of ballad, (F.—L.) The mod. F. form is
rondeau; see Rondeau. ME. roundel, Chaucer, C. T. 1531
(A 1529); Legend of Good Women, 423.—OF. rozdel, later ron-
deau, which Cotgrave explains as ‘a rime or sonnet that ends as it
begins.’ For a specimen of a roundel, in which the first two lines
recur after the fifth, see Chaucer’s poem of Merciless Beauty. So
called from the first line coming round again. Dimin. from F.
rond, round; see Round. Der. roundel-ay, Spenser, Shep. Ka-
lendar, June, 49, from F. rozdelet, dimin. of OF. rondel (Cot.) ; the
E. spelling is prob. due to confusion with Jay, a song.

ROUSH (1), to raise up, excite, awaken, rise up. (Scand.) ‘To
rouse a deare’ [deer]; Levins. It.was a term of the chase; cf.
Rich, I, ii. 3.128. ‘Some like wilde bores, late rowz’d out of the
brakes ;’ Spenser, F. Q. ii. 11. 10. But it was orig. intransitive.
‘I rowse, I stretche myselfe;’ Palsgrave.—Swed. rusa, to rush;
rusa fram, to rush forward ; rusa upp, to start up; MSwed. rusa, to
rush, go hastily (Ihre); Dan. ruse, to rush. - Allied to AS. hkréosan,
to tush, also to fall down, ‘to come down with a rush;’ Grein,
ii. 104. B. Teut. base *hreus-; the orig. sense was prob. to start
forward suddenly, to burst out. See further under Rush (1), which
is not quite the same word as the present, but allied to it. Hence
also rouse is to wake a sleeper, viz. by a sudden movement. Der.
a-rouse, with’a prefix suggested by a-rise.

ROUSSE (2), a drinking-bout. (Scand.) In Shak. Hamlet, i. 2.
127; i. 4.83 ii. 1.583; Oth. ii. 3. 66.—Swed. rus, a drunken fit,
drunkenness; rusa, to fuddle; Dan. rus, intoxication, sove rusen ud
(to sleep out one’s rouse), to sleep oneself sober. ‘We find also Du.


ROWLOCK, ROLLOCK, RULLOCK 525


roes, drunkenness ; eenen roes drinken (to drink a rouse), ‘to drink
till one is fuddled’ (Sewel) ; but it does not seem to be an old word
in Dutch, being omitted by Hexham. Cf. EFries. riise, noise,
uproar, ‘row;’ riisen, to make a noise; Low G. rise, noise.
q That we got the word from Denmark is shown by a curious
quotation in Todd’s Johnson: ‘Thou noblest drunkard Bacchus,
teach me how to take the Danish rowza;’ Brand’s Pop. Antiq. ii.

228 (ed. Bohn, ii. 330). See Row (3).

ROUT, (1) a defeat, (2) a troop or crowd of people. (F.—L.)
Notwithstanding the wide difference of sense, the word is but one.
More than that, it is the same word as Route, q.v. 1. Shak. has
rout, i.e. disordered flight, 2 Hen. VI, v. 2. 31; Cymb. v. 3.41; and
rout, verb, to defeat and put to disorderly flight, Cymb. v. 2. 12.
This does not seem to occur much earlier. 2. ME. route, a
number of people, troop, Chaucer, C. T. 624 (A 622), Will. of
Palerne, 1213; Layamon, 2508, later text.—F. route, ‘a rowt, over-
throw, defeature; . . also, a rowt, heard, flock, troope, company,
multitude of men or beasts; . . also, a rutt, way, path, street,
course; ° Cot.=—L. rupta, fem. of ruptus, broken. . The different
senses may be thus explained. 1. A defeat isa breaking up of a host,
a broken mass of flying men. 2. A small troop of men is a frag-
ment or broken piece of an army ; and the word is generally used in
contempt, of a company in broken ranks or disorderly array.
3. A route was, originally, a way broken or cut out through a wood
or forest. See Route. 4 The G. rotte, a troop, is merely bor-
rowed from the Romance languages. Cf. Ital. rota, Span. rota,
a rout, defeat.. It is remarkable that the mod. F. route has lost the
senses both of ‘ defeat’ and ‘troop.’ Der. rout, verb, as above.

ROUTE, a way, course, line of march. (F.—L.) Not much
used in later authors, but it occurs very early. ME. route, spelt rute,
Ancren Riwle, p. 350, 1. 1.—F. route, ‘a way, path, street, course . .
also, a glade in a wood;’ Cot. B. The sense of ‘glade’ is the
earliest ; it meant a way broken or cut through a forest. = L. rupia,
fem. of ruptus, pp. of rumpere, to break. See Rote (1), Rout,
Rupture. Der. rout-ine. Doublets, rote (1), rout, rut (1).

ROUTINE, a beaten track, a regular course ofaction. (F.—L.)
Modern.—F. routine, a usual course of action; lit. a small path,
pathway; dimin. of route, a route, way; see Route.

ROVER, a pirate, wanderer. (Du.) ME. rover, rovare. ‘ Robare,
or robbar yn the see, rovare, or thef of the se, Pirata;’ Prompt.
Parv. p. 437. ‘A rovere of the see;? Gower, C. A.i. 359; bk. iii.
2369.— Du. roover, ‘a rober, a pyrate, or a theef;’ Hexham.= Du.
rooven, to rob. = Du. roof, ‘spoile;’ id. B. The Du. roof is cognate
with AS. réaf, spoil, plunder. See Reave, Rob. Der. rove, verb;
‘To roue, robbe, Rapere; to rove about, Errare, vagari;’ Levins.
The second sense was easily developed; the sb. rover is the older
word in English though etymologically due to the verb. The Icel.
rafa, to rove, stray, is prob. not related.

ROW (1), aline, rank, series. (E.) ME. rowe, Amis and Amiloun,
1900 (Weber’s Met. Rom. vol. ii); rewe, Chaucer, C. T. 2868
(A 2866) ; raw, Barbour’s Bruce, v. 590. AS. raw, r@w, a row; a
scarce word. ‘pPanon on pa réwe;’ Kemble, Cod. Diplom. v. 275;
‘on .. hege-réwe, to the hedge-row, id. ii. 54. Allied to Du. rz,
MDu. rijg, rijge (Oudemans), Low G. rige, rege, G. reihe, a Tow.
The G., reihe is from OHG. rihan, to string together, to arrange
things (as beads) by passing a string or rod through them; a strong
verb, of which the Teut. type is *reihwan-, pt. t. *raihw, whence the
sb. *rai(g)wd, f., Teut. type of AS. raw, a form which occurs in A.S.
Leechdoms, ii. 238. . Further allied to Skt. rékhd, a line; from root
*reikh, with labio-velar kh.

ROW (2), to propel a boat with oars. (E.) ME. rowen, Polit.
Songs, ed. Wright, p. 254; Wyclif, Luke, viii. 26. AS. rowan, to
row, sail, Luke, viii. 23, 26.4-Du. roezjen; Icel. réa; Swed. ro;
Dan. roe; MHG. riiejen. Allied to Olrish ram, L. rémus, an oar;
and further, to Skt. aritra-, a rudder, orig. a paddle; Lithuan. :ré,
torow; Gk. éperpés, a paddle, oar.4/ERE. Der. row, sb., row-er.
Also rudder, q. v.

ROW (3), an uproar. (Scand.) Shortened from rowse, drunkenness,
uproar, the older form being obsolete ; see Todd’s Johnson. The loss
of s is as in pea, cherry, sherry, &c. See Rouse (2).

ROW AN-TREE, the same as Roan-tree, q. v.

ROWEL, a little wheel with sharp points at the end of a spur.
(F.—L.) ‘A payre of spurres, with a poynte without a rowell ;’
Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. ii. c. 245. (R.) ‘ Rowell of a spurre;’
Palsgrave. =F. rouelle, ‘a little flat ring, a wheele of plate or iron, in
horses bitts;’? Cot. [He gives mollette as the MF. word for a
rowel ; on the other hand, Spenser uses rowel for a part of a horse’s
bit; F. Q. i. 7. 37.]—Late L. rofella, a little wheel, dimin. of rota,
a wheel; see Rotary.

‘ROWLOCK, ROLLOCK, RULLOCK. (E.) The history of
this word is imperfectly known; in Ashe’s Dict. (1775) it is oddly


526 ROYAL


spelt rowlack. It is an alteration of oar-lock, due to confusion
with the vb. to row. See OarlockinN.E. D. The true AS. word
was drloc (Ettmiiller); we find ‘columbaria, ar-locu, Voc. 288. 6.
Hence ME. orlok, Liber Albus, pp. 235, 237, 239. This word is
compounded of AS. ar, an oar, and loc, cognate with G. loch, a hole,
as is evident from comparing G. ruderloch or rudergat, a rowlock,
rullock, or oar-hole. The AS. loc is also allied to AS. loca= the
modern E. Jock, in the sense of ‘ fastening; and is derived from Joc-,
weak grade of the strong verb Jiican, to lock, fasten; see Lock (1).
The orig. oar-fastenings or rullocks were, at least in some cases,
actual holes; and hence at a later period we find them called oar-
holes. In a Nominale pr. in Voc. 737. 32, we find: § Hoc columber,
are-hole,’ whereupon the editor notes that it means ‘an air-hole,
a small unglazed window.’ ‘This is wrong; are is the Northern form
of oar, and columber is for L. columbare. In Hexham’s Du. Dict. the
MDnu, riemgaten and roeygaten are explained by ‘ the oare-holes to put
out the oares.’ Hence, in the word rullock, we know that -lock
signifies ‘hole.’ And, as to the whole word, I believe it to be
nothing but another form of ME. orlok, i.e. oarlock. The shifting of
ry is common in English ; and, in this instance, it was assisted by
confusion with the verb zo row, and (possibly) with the MDu. roeygat.
If so, the spelling rowlock is merely due to popular etymology ; it
does not express the pronunciation. Worcester’s Dict. gives the
form rollock.

ROYAL, kingly. (F.—L.) ME. real, Chaucer, C. T. 1020
(A 1018), where some MSS. have roial.—OF. real, roial; spelt royal
in Cotgrave, and explained as ‘ royall, regall, kingly.’ =L. régalis,
regal, royal; see Regal. Der. royal-ist; royal-ty, ME. realte,
Gower, C. A. iii. 220; bk. vii. 3810, from OF. realte, reialte, spelt
royaulté in Cotgrave, from L. acc. régalitatem. And see real (2).
Doublet, regal.

RUB, to move over a surface with pressure, scour, wipe. (E.)
ME. rubben, Chaucer, C. T. 3745 (A 3747); P. Plowman, B. xiii. 99.
Not in AS. Cf. EFries. rubben, Dan. rubbe, Norw. rubba, to rub, to
scrub. Also Norw. rubben, rough, uneven; EFries. rubberig, rough ;
Du. robdbelig, ‘rugged,’ Sewel. Also W. Flem. wrobbelen, wrubbelen,
to scrub, wash clothes by rubbing. The Teut. base is apparently
*wreub. Der. rub, sb., Macb. iii. 1.134; rubb-er. ¢@ Not con-
nected with G. reiben, which is from a Teut. base *wreid; cf. Du.
wrijven, torub, But they may be parallel formations.
-RUBASSE, a variety of rock-crystal, with a red tinge. (F.—L.)
F. rubace; from the base of L. rub-eus, reddish ; see Ruby.

RUBBISH, broken stones, waste matter, refuse; nonsense.
(AF.—Scand.) Proy. E. rubbage, as in Norfolk (Forby). Palsgrave
has ‘robrisshe of stones, plastras;’ and Cotgrave explains the F.
plastras by ‘rubbish, clods or pieces of old and dry plaister.’ Hor-
man, in his Vulgaria (as cited by Way, note to Prompt. Parv., p. 435)
says that ‘ Battz [brick-bats] and great rubbrysshe serueth to fyl up in
the myddell of the wall.’ These quotations show that rubbrish was
used in the exact sense of what we now usually call rubble; and the
two words, rubble and rubbish, are closely connected. . In the form
rubbrish, the latter r is intrusive, since it disappears in earlier, as well
as in later English. The ME. form isrobows, orrobeux; as, ‘ Robows,
or coldyr, Petrosa, petro, where coldyr is an old word for rubble;
Prompt. Parv. Way adds: in the Wardrobe Account of Piers
Courteys, Keeper of the Wardrobe 20 Edw. IV (1480), occurs a pay-
ment to ‘ John Carter, for cariage away of a grete loode of robeux,
that was left in the strete after the reparacyone made uppon a hous
apperteigning untothe same Warderobe;’ Harl. MS. 4780. y. The
spelling robeux furnishes the key to the solution of the word. It is
an AF. plural form, from a sing. *robel, i.e. rubble. Here *robel is
exactly the ME, robel (see Rubble), and the pl. robeux (or robeaux)
became robows, as in the Prompt. Parv., and was easily corrupted
into rubbage and rubbish, and even into rubbrish (with intrusive r).
In this view, rubbish is the pl. of rubble, and was accordingly at first used
in the same sense. 6. At what time the word robeux first appeared
in English I have no exact means of knowing, but I find an earlier
trace of it in the fact that an allied word was Latinised as rubbdsa
(as if it were a neuter plural), in accordance with its plural form, as
early as A. D. 1392 or 1393. Blount, in his Nomolexicon, s. v. lastage,
cites an act against throwing rubbish into the Thames, in which are
the words ‘aut fimos, fimaria, sterquilinia, sordes, mucos, rubbosa,
lastagium, aut alia sordida;’ Claus. 16 Rich. II. dors. 11. And
this rubbdsa answers to the AF. robous, robouse, rubbish, in the Liber
Albus, pp. 579, 581. See further below.

RUBBLE, broken stones, rubbish. (Scand.) ‘Rubble, or
rubbish;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627. ‘Rubble, or rubbish of old houses ;’
also, ‘carrie out rubble, as morter, and broken stones of old build-
ings ;’ Baret’s Alvearie, ed. 1580. ME. robell ; ‘Oon parte of lyme
and tweyn of robell have;’ Palladius, bk. i. 340. Grammatically,
rubble seems to be the singular of robeux, the old form of rubbish ; see


RUE


above. The traces of the word are sliglit, but it seems to be of
Scand. origin. Norw. rubl (Ross), with the same sense as rubb
(below); cf. Du. robbelig, rugged (Sewel) =prov. E. rubbly, lumpy,
gritty. Norw. rubb (Aasen), in the phr. rubb og stubb; Dan. rub, in
the phr. rub og stub, ‘bag and baggage;’ including even articles of
the least value; Icel. rubdi, rubb, rubbish, refuse. Stub=a stub,
bit, piece. So prov. E. stoup and roup, ‘entirely,’ or ‘every Dit.’
Prob. Dan. rub orig. meant ‘a broken bit,’ a lump.

RUBRIC, a direction printed in red. (F.—L.) ME. rubryke, St.
Cuthbert, 1318 (Surtees Soc.). The rubrics in the Book of Common
Prayer, and (earlier) in the Missal, 8&c., were so called from being
usually written or printed in red letters. [ME. rubriche, Chaucer,
C. T. 5928 (D 346); this is an OF. form; cf. rubriche, ‘rudle,
oaker ;’ Cot.] =F. rubrique, ‘a rubrick ; a speciall title or sentence of
the law, written or printed inred;’ Cot.=L. rubrica, red earth; also
a rubric, a title of law written in red. Formed as if from an adj.
*rubricus, extended from rubri-, from ruber, red; see Ruby.

RUBY, a red gem. (F.—L.) ME. ruby, P. Plowman, B. ii. 12.
— OF. rubi (13th cent., Littré), also rubis, ‘a ruby, Cot. [The s is
the old sign of the nom. case, and is still preserved in writing, though
not pronounced.] Cf. Span. rubi, rubin, Port. rubim, Ital. rubino,
a ruby; Late L. rubinus. Allied to L. rubeus, red, ruber, red; cf.
rubére, to be red. Allied to Gk. épu@pds, red; see Rouge, Red.
Der. (from L. rub-ére) rub-esc-ent, growing red, from the pres. part.
of inceptive vb. rubescere; rub-i-c-und, ruddy, from F. rubicunde, very


red (Cot.), which from L. rubicundus, very red, with suffixes -c- and


-undus ; rub-r-ic,q.v. Also e-rub-esc-ent.

RUCK (1), a fold, plait, crease. (Scand.) ‘ Ruck, a fold or plait,
made in cloth by crushing it ;’ Yorksh. Gloss., A.D. 1811 (KE. D. S.
Glos. B. 7).—Icel. krukka, a wrinkle on the skin, or in cloth; cf.
hrokkinn, curled, wrinkled, pp. of krékkva, to recoil, give way, also
to curl; Norw. rukka, a wrinkle. Cf. Swed. rynka, Dan. rynke, a
wrinkle, also to gather, wrinkle. From Teut. base *hrenk (Noreen).
Der. ruck-le, to rumple\ Halliwell).

RUCK (2), a heap. (Scand.) Cf. Norw. and MSwed. ruka, a
heap; also Icel. hraukr, a rick. See Rick.

RUDD, a fish like a roach. (E.) ‘A kind of bastard small Roach

- men call them Ruds;’ I. Walton, Angler, ch. 17. Named
from the deep red colour of the lower fins. Cf. AS. rud-u, redness ;
see Ruddy. MDan. rude, a rudd; Dan. rudskalle.

RUDDER, the instrument whereby a ship is steered. (E.) Orig.
a paddle, for rowing as well as steering ; hence the etymology. ME.
roder, or (more usually) rother, Gower, C. A. i. 243; bk. ii. 2494;
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 419. AS. réder, a paddle; ‘Palmula,
rddres bled’ =blade of a paddle; ‘ Remus, stéor-rofer,’ lit. a steering-
paddle; Voc. 167. 1,166.13. B. Here rd-der =rowing-implement ;
from AS. rdw-an, to row, with suffix -der (Idg. -ter-), denoting the
agent or implement.4-Du. roer (for *roder), an oar, rudder; Swed.
roder, also contr. to ror; Dan. ror (for *roder); G. ruder. See
Row (2).

RUDDOCK, a red-breast. (E.) ME. ruddok, Chaucer, Parl. of
Foules, 1. 349. AS. rudduc; Voc. 131, 26; allied to rud-ig, ruddy.
Hence W. rhuddog, Corn. ruddoc, a red-breast. See Ruddy.

RUDDY, reddish. (E.) ME. rody, P. Plowman, B. xiii. 99;
rodi, Wyclif, Matt. xvi. 2. AS. rudig, in Napier’s Glosses; formed
with suffix -ig from rud-, weak grade of réodan, to redden. Allied to
AS. réad, red; see Red. Cf. Icel. rodi, redness, allied to raudr,
red. @ We also find AS. rudu, i.e. redness, applied to the com-
plexion (of-the face), Voc. 156. 19; this is ME. rode, complexion,
Chaucer, C. T. 3317. Der. ruddi-ly ; ruddi-ness, Wint. Tale, v. 3.
81. Also ruddle, a kind of red earth; spelt ruddel in Holland, tr. of
Pliny, bk. xxxv. ch. 6. § 1.

RUDE, rough, uncivil, harsh. (F.—L.) ME. rude, Chaucer,
C. T. 14814 (B 3998); Cursor Mundi, 23911.—F. rude, ‘ rude;’
Cot.—L. rudem, acc. of rudis, rough, raw, rude, wild, untilled. Allied
to L. raudus, rough ore; Russ. ruda, ore; Icel. raudi, red iron ore
(from raudr, red); Skt. léha-s, iron. Allied to Red. Der. rude-ly,
rude-ness; also rudi-ment, As You Like It, v. 4. 31=F. rudiment
(omitted by Cot., but in use in the 16th century, Littré), from L.
rudimentum, a thing in the rough state, a first attempt ; rudiment-al,
rudiment-ar-y. Also e-rud-ite, e-rud-it-ion. ;

RUE (1), to be sorry for. (E.) For *hrue, initial h being lost.
ME. rewen, Chaucer, C. T. 1865 (A 1863); Havelok, 967. AS.
hréowan, Grein, ii. 104. 4 OSax. hrewan; OHG. hriuwan, G. reuen,
B. AS. kréowan is a strong verb, with pt. t. hréaw; so also OSax.
hrewan, pt. t. hrau; Teut. type *hrewwan-; pt. t. *hraw(w), to pity ;
whence also Icel. kryggr, grieved, afflicted, hrygd, ruth, grief, sorrow.
Der. rue-ful, P. Plowman, B, xiv. 148; rue-ful-ly ; rue-ful-ness, ME.
reoufulnesse, Ancren Riwle, p. 368, 1. 13. And see ruth,

RUE (2), a plant with bitter taste, (F.—L.—Gk.) _ ME. rue,


Wyclif, Luke, xi. 42.—F. rue, ‘rue, herb grace;’ Cot.=L. rita,


RUFF


rue; Luke, xi. 42.—Gk. sur7, rue; a Peloponnesian word. 4] The
AS. ride (Luke, xi. 42) is merely borrowed from L. rita.

RUFF (1), a kind of frill, formerly much worn by both sexes. (E.)
In Shak. Tam. of the Shrew, iv. 3. 56; Spenser, F.Q. i. 4.14. Also
asa verb: ‘ Whilst the proud bird, ruffing [ruffling ] his fethers wyde ;’
F, Q. iii. 11. 32. ‘ Ruffe of a shirt; Levins. Pl.ruffes; Gascoigne,
Steel Glas, 1. 373. B. So called from its uneven surface; perhaps
a shortened form of Ruffle (1). Der. ruff (2).

RUFF (2), the name ofa bird, (E.?) Said to be so named from
the male having a ruff round its neck in the breeding season; see
Ruff (1); which I doubt. The female is called a reeve, apparently
formed by vowel-change ; this is a very remarkable form, but has not
been explained. Cf. ‘ The pheasant, partridge, godwit, reeve, ruffe,
raile ;’ Herrick, A Panegyric to Sir L. Pemberton, 1. 65. The AS.
form should be *rdf, fem. *réfe.

RUFF (3), a fish. (E.) ME. ruffe, Prompt. Parv., p. 438. Lit.
‘rough ;’ from the spines on the back. Cf, Ital. aspredo (<L. asper,
rough), ‘a fish called a ruffe;’ Florio.

RUFF (4),a game at cards. (F.) Mentioned in Cotgrave, and
in Florio (1598); and see Nares. Now applied to the act of trump-
ing instead of following suit, but orig, the name of a game (called
also trump) like whist. Evidently a modification of F. ronfle, ‘ hand-
ruffe, at cards ;’ jouer a la ronfle, ‘ to play at hand-ruffe, also to snore;’
Cot. So also Ital. ronfa, ‘a game at cards called ruffe or trumpe ;’
ronfare, ‘to snort, snarle ; also, to ruff or trump at cards;’ Florio.
Prob. of jocular origin, the trumping (when perhaps unexpected)
being likened to a snarl, or the spitting of a cat; cf. ronfamenti,
‘snortings, snarlings, or tuffings of a cat;’ Florio. Of imitative
origin ; cf. Ital. ronzare, ‘to humme or buzze,’ Florio ; Span. roncar,
“to snore, also, to threaten, boast, brag,’ Cf. brag as the name of a
game, slam, also a game, and trump, i.e. triumph,

RUFFIAN, a bully, violent, brutal fellow. (F.—Ital. —Teut.)
‘A commune and notable rufian or thefe;’ Sir T. Elyot, The
Governour, b. ii. c. 12. § 7.—MF,. rufien, ruffien, ‘a bawd, a pandar,’
Cot.—Ital. ruffiano, roffiano, ‘a pandar, a ruffian, a swaggrer,’
Florio. = Late L. type *ruffanus; formed with L. suffix -anus from
Low G. ruffel-n, to act as pandar; see Ruffle (2). Cf. MDu.
roffen, to pandar (Oudemans). Der. ruffian-ly, ruffian-ism.

RUFFLE (1), to wrinkle, disorder a dress. (E.) ,I raffle clothe
or sylke, I bring them out of their playne foldynge, Fe plionne ;’
Palsgrave. ME. ruffelen; ‘ Ruffelyn, or snarlyn (i.e. to entangle or
run into knots], Inzodo, illagueo;’ Prompt. Parv. The pp. ruffeld
occurs in the Cursor Mundi, 26391. The word is probably E.; it
is parallel to MDu. ruyffelen, ‘ to ruffle, wrinckle, or crumple,’ Hex-
ham; cf. ruyffel, ‘a wrinckle, a crumple, or a ruffle,’ id. Also
EFries. ruffeln, to pleat. The verb may be from the sb. ruffle; and
both from Teut. *ruf-, weak grade of Teut. *reufan-, to break, tear;
see Reave. B. The Lithuan. ruple, the rough bark on old trees, is
a cognate word; so also is rauple, a rough scab or blister; both of
which are allied to Lithuan. rupas, rough, uneven. See Ruff (1).
Der. ruffle, sb., a wrinkle, a ruff (unless the vb. is from the sb.).

RUFFLE (2), to be noisy and turbulent, to bluster. (MDu.) ‘To
ruffie in the commonwealth of Rome;’ Titus Andron. i. 313. Cf.
‘the rugie [bustle] .. . of court;’ Shak. Lover’s Complaint, 58.
‘Twenty or more persons were sleyne in the ruffle;’ Hall’s Chron.
Hen. VIII, an. 19. § 18. Nares has: ‘ A ruffler, a cheating bully, so
termed in several acts of parliament,’ particularly in one of the 27th
year of Hen. VIII, as explained in Harman’s Caveat, ed. Furnivall,
p. 29. They were highway robbers, ready to use violence; any law-
less or violent person was sonamed. It seems to have been a cant
term, not in very early use; and borrowed, like several other cant
terms, from the Low Countries. —MDu. roffelen, to pandar, of which
the shorter form roffer is also found (Oudemans); so also Low G,
ruffelx, to pandar, to reproach, ruffeler, a pimp, a person who carries
on secret intrigues (Bremen Worterbuch) ; prov. G. ruffelz, to pimp
(Fliigel) ; Dan. ruffer, a pandar, from Low G. roffen, ruffen, to be
lewd (Liibben). B. The words rugf-ler and ruff-ian are closely re-
lated and mean much the same thing; see Ruffian. Der. rvff-er,
as above.

RUG, a coarse, rough woollen covering, a mat. (Scand.) ‘ Ap-
parelled in diuers coloured rugs;’ Hakluyt’s Voyages, vol. ii. pt. ii.
p- 87, last line but one. ‘Irish rug,’ Baret (1580). —Swed. rugg,
rough entangled hair; cf. MSwed. rugg-ig, rough, hairy; Icel. régg,
shagginess, See Noreen, § 246. 2. The orig. sense of Swed. rugg
was, doubtless, simply ‘ rough,’ as it is cognate with Low G. ruug,
Du. ruig, rough; EFries. rug, rough, ruge, roughness, a rough side
of a skin, ruger, a furry animal (as a cat). Allied to AS. ruk
(gen. ruwés), rough; Skt. ratska-, rough; see Rough. And see
Rugged. Der. rugg-ed; also rug-headed, Rich. I, ii, 1. 156.

RUGGED, rough, shaggy. (Scand.) ME, rugged, Prompt.


Parv. Chaucer has ruggy, C. T. 2885 (A 2883). The latter form


RUMB, RHUMB 527


is from Swed. ruggig, rugged, rough, hairy; cf. rugga, to raise the
nap on cloth, i. e. to roughen it. —Swed. rugg, rough entangled hair ;
orig. ‘rough,’ cognate with E. Rough, q.v. See also Rug. Der.
rugged-ly, rugged-ness,

RUGOSE, full of wrinkles. (L.) The form rugosous is in Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674 ; Phillips has the sb. rugosity. —L. rigdsus, wrinkled.
—L. raga, a wrinkle. Cf, Lith, ravkas, a wrinkle, runk-t, I grow
wrinkled. Brugmann, ii. § 628. Der. rugos-i-ty.

RUIN, destruction, overthrow. (F.—L.) ME. ruine, Chaucer,
C. T. 2465 (A 2463). —F. ruine, ‘ruine;? Cot.—L. ruina, overthrow.
—L. ruere, to fall down, tumble, sink in ruin, rush. Cf. Gk, é-pueuv,
to drag, pull down; Brugmann, ii. § 529. Der. ruin, verb, Rich. II,
iii. 4. 453 ruin-ous, Timon, iv. 3. 465, from F. ruineux, ‘ruinous,’
Cot.; rain-ous-ly. Also ruin-ate (obsolete), Titus Andron. v. 3. 204.

RULE, a maxim, state, order, government. (F.—L.) ME. rezle,
Chaucer, C.T. 173. Earlier riwle, as in the Ancren Riwle=Rule of
(female) Anchorites.— AF. reule, OF. riule, reule; mod. F. régle, a
rule. =—L. regula, a rule (whence also was borrowed AS. regol, a
tule).—L. regere, to govern; see Regent. Der. rule, verb, ME.
reulen, earlier riwlen, Ancren Riwle, p. 4; rul-er, rul-ing.

RUM « (1), a kind of spirituous liquor. (E.) In Dampier’s Voy-
ages; Voyage to Campeachy, an. 1675; see quotation in R. [We
find also Port. rom, Span. ron, Ital. rum, F. rhum; allfromE.] For-
merly rumbo, as in Smollett, Peregrine Pickle, ch. ii and ch. ix (1751).
The earliest form was rumbullion. A MS.‘ Description of Barbados’
in Trin. Coll., Dublin, written ab. 1651, says:—‘ The chief fudling
they make in the island is Rumbullion, alias Kill-devil,. . made of
sugar-canes distilled, a hot, hellish, and terrible liquor.’ Later, it
was called rumbowling (Cent. Dict.), and then shortened to rumbo,
and to rum, Rumbullion isa Devon. word meaning ‘ great tumult,’
or disturbance; perhaps allied to prov, E. rumpus, an uproar, ram-
page, and romp; or else allied to E. rumble. See my Notes on E.
Etym., p. 253; and N. Darnell Davis, in The Academy, Sept. 5,
1885. @ The F. name is guildive, a modification of E. Kill-devil
(above).

RUM (2), strange, queer. (Hindi.) ‘ Rwm, gallant; a cant word ;’
Bailey’s Dict., vol. i. ed. 1735. I suppose that rum means no more
than ‘ Gypsy ;” and hence would mean ‘ good’ or ‘ gallant’ from a
Gypsy point of view, and ‘strange’ and ‘suspicious’ from an out-
sider’s point of view. Hence rome bouse, wine, Harman’s Caveat, ed.
Furnivall, p. 83, spelt rambooz in Phillips; rome mort, the queen, id.
p. 84 (where mort=a female). Cf. rom, a husband, a Gypsy, rém-
mani, adj. Gypsy. The Gypsy word rom answers to the Hindi word
dom (with initial cerebral d); see English-Gipsy Songs, by Leland,
Palmer, and Tuckey, pp. 2,269. Cf. Skt. domba- (with cerebral d),
‘a man of a low caste, who gains his livelihood by singing and
dancing ;’ Benfey. Also Hindustani dom, ‘the name of a low caste,
apparently one of the aboriginal races;’ H. H. Wilson, Gloss. of
Indian Terms, p. 147.

RUMB, RHUMB, a line for directing a ship’s course on a
map; a point of the compass. (F.—Span.—L.—Gk.) This is
a very difficult word, both to explain and derive. The view which 1
here present runs counter to that in Littré and Scheler, but is recog-
nized as possible by Diez. ‘ Rumb or Rhumb, the course of aship.. .
also, one point of the mariner’s compass, or 11} degrees... Rumb-
line, a line described by the ship’s motion on the surface of the sea,
steering by the compass, so as to make the same, or equal angles
with every meridian. These rumbs are spiral lines proceeding from
the point where we stand, and winding about the globe of the earth,
till they come to the pole, where at last they lose themselves; but in
Mercator’s charts, and the plain ones, they are represented by straight
lines,’ &c.; Phillips, ed. 1706. These lines are called rumb-lines.
See Rumb in the Engl. Encyc. (Div. Arts and Sciences), where it is said
to be a Portuguese word, and where we find: ‘a rumb certainly
came to mean any vertical circle, meridian or not, and hence any
point of the compass... . To sail on a rumb is to sail continually on
one course. Hence a rumb-line is a line drawn in [on?] the sphere,
such as would be described by a moving point which always keeps
one course; it is therefore the spiral of Mercator’s projection, and is
that which is also called the loxodromic course.’ It is spelt roomb,
roumb, and roumbe in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. rumb, ‘a roomb, or
point of the compasse, a line drawn directly from wind to wind ina
compasse, travers-boord, or sea-card;’ Cot. He adds the phr.
voguer de rumb en rumb, ‘to saile by travers.’=—Span.. (and Port.)
rumbo, ‘a course, a way ; rumbo derecho, the right course ;’ Minsheu’s
Span. Dict., ed. 1623; also, a point of the compass, intersection of


| the plane of the horizon, represented by the card of a compass, the


course of a ship; Neuman.. Cf. Port. rumbo, rumo, a ship’s course;
quarto do rumo, a point of the compass; Ital. rombo.=—L. rhombum,
acc, of rhombus, a magician’s circle, a rhombus (Lewis).—Gk.
fopBos, a top, a magic wheel, whirling motion of a top, swoop of an


528 RUMBLE


eagle; also, arhombus; see Rhomb. __B,, In this view, the sense
of circular or spiral motion comes first ; then the delineation of such
motion on a chart; and lastly, the sense of a point of a compass;
which is the simple and natural order. Milton has the very word
rhomb in the sense of the revolution of the sphere; see Paradise
Lost, viii. 134, and uses wheel asa synonym. ‘That the word arose
among the early Spanish and Portuguese navigators, is in the highest
degree probable. The view taken by Scheler and Littré seems
to me obviously wrong; they refer F. rumb (also spelt rum) to the
Du. ruim, E. room, on the ground that a rumb is the ‘room’ or
space between two winds; thus taking the last sense first. I cannot
find that the Du. ruim ever had this sense; indeed Sewel, as late as
1754, can only render rumb into Dutch by een punt van’t kompas; and
Hexham mentions no such use of the MDu. ruym. Perhaps Littré
and Scheler are thinking of quite another matter, viz. the MF. rum,
‘the hold of a ship,’ Cot. This is certainly the Du. rim, since
Sewel gives the very phrase ruim van een schip, the hold of a ship,
i.e. its room, capacity for stowage. Korting, § 8063. Der. rumb-
line. Doublet, rhomb.

RUMBLE, to make a low and heavy sound. (E.) ME. romblen,
to mutter, Chaucer, C. T. 14453 (B 3725); to rumble like thunder,
Legend of Good Women, 1218. Cf. prov. E. rommile, to speak low
or secretly (Halliwell) ; rummle, to rumble; id. The word romblen
likewise stands for romlen, the 6 being excrescent, as usual after m;
and the suffix -/en has the usual frequentative force. Thus the word
signifies ‘to repeat the sound rom or rum;’ from the base RUM,
significant of a low sound ; whichis from 4/REU, to make a humming
or lowing noise. Cf. Skt. ru, to hum, to bray; L. ad-riim-are, to
make a murmuring noise (Festus); see Rumour.+Du. rommelen,
to rumble, buzz; Low G. rummeln, rumpeln, to rumble; Dan. rumie,
to rumble. And cf. Swed. ramla, to rattle, Ital. rombare, to rumble,
hum, buzz; MDu. rammelen, ‘to make a noise, or to rumble,’ Hex-
ham. Der. rumble, sb., rumbl-ing.

RUMINATE, to chew the cud, meditate. (L.) ‘Lethym...
ruminate it in his mynde a good space after ;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of
Helth, b. iii. ch. 11. =—L. riimindtus, pp. of riminare or riiminari, to
chew the cud, ruminate.=L. riimin-, decl. stem of rumen, the throat,
gullet; cf. rimdare, used (according to Festus) in the same sense as
ruminare. Cf. also L. riigire,to roar, bray. From 4/REU, to hum,
bray. See Rumble, Rumour. Der. ruminat-ion, As You Like
It, iv. 1. 19, from L. acc. ruiminationem ; also rumin-ant, from the
stem of the pres. part. of riminare.

RUMMAGE, to search thoroughly among things stowed away.
(E.; with F. suffix.) ‘Searcheth his pockets, and takes his keyes,
and so rummageth all his closets and trunks;? Howell, Famil.
Letters, vol. i. sect. 5. let. last. ‘This is altogether a secondary sense ;
the word is merely due to the sb. room-age, formed by suffix -age (of
F. origin) from E, room, space. Roomage is a similar formation to
stowage, and means much the same thing. It is an old nautical term
for the close packing of things in a ship; hence was formed the verb
to roomage or romage, i.e. to find room for or stow away packages ;
and the mariner who attended to this business was called the roomager
or romager. B. The history of the word is in Hakluyt’s Voyages.
‘To looke and foresee substantially to the roomaging of the shippe ;’”
vol.i. p. 274. ‘They might bring away [in their ships] a great deale
more then they doe, if they would take paine in the romaging ;’
vol. i. p. 308. ‘The master must pronide a perfect mariner called a
romager, to raunge and bestow all merchandize in such place as is
conuenient ;’ vol. iii. p. 862. ‘To rummage (sea-term) to remove
any goods or luggage from one place to another, esp. to clear the
ship’s hold of any goods or lading, in order to their being hand-
somely stowed and placed; whence the word is us’d upon other
occasions, for to rake into, or to search narrowly;’ Phillips, ed.
1706. Spelt rumidge in ed. 1658. See further under Room. Cf. Du.
ruim, toom, also the hold of a ship; rucmen, to empty, clear, lit. to
make room. Der. prov. E. rummage, litter, lumber, rubbish, as
after a clearance.

RUMMER, a sort of drinking-glass. (W.Flem.—Du.) ‘Rummer,
a sort of drinking-glass, such as Rhenish wine is usually drunk in;
also, a brimmer, or glass of any liquor filled to the top;’ Phillips,
ed. 1706. ‘Rhenish rummers walk the round;’ Dryden, Ep. to Sir
G. Etherege, 1. 45.—W. Flem. rummer, rommer (De Bo); Du.
roemer, romer, a wine-glass (Sewel) ; spelt roomer in Hexham ; Low
G. romer, a sort of large wine-glass (Brem. Worterbuch). So also
G. rémer; Swed. remmare. [The G. rdmer also means ‘ Roman;’
and some say that the glasses were so called because used in former
times in the Romersaal at Frankfort, when they drank the new
emperor’s health; but this is an error; see Franck.] From Du.
roem, boasting, praise; hence ‘a glass to drink in praise of a toast ;’
Franck. Cf, G. ruhm, praise; OSax. hrém; also Icel. hrddr, praise,
Aros, praise ;' Gk. «npvg, a herald. And note O. Low G. hrdmian,to


RUNG


praise (Gallée). Der.rumkin, romekin, W.F lem. rummerken, dimin.
of rummer (above).

RUMOUR, report, current story. (F.—L.) ME. rumour,
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. ii. pr. 7, 1. 8t.—AF. rumour, Liber
Albus, p. 462; F. rumeur, ‘a rumor;’ Cot.—L. acc. riimoérem, from
nom, rumor, a noise, rumour, murmur. Cf. L. rumificire, to pro-
claim ; rumitare, to spread reports; all from the base ri-m-, signifi-
cant of a buzzing sound.—4/REU, to make a humming or braying
noise. See Rumble. Der. rumour, verb, Rich. III, iv. 2. 51.

RUMP, the end of the backbone of an animal with the parts
adjacent. (Scand.) ME, rumpe, Prompt. Parv.=Icel. rumpr; Swed.
rumpa; Dan. rumpe.4+-MDu, rompe, ‘the bulke of a body or corps,
or a body without a head;’ Hexham; Du. romp; Low G. rump,
trunk (of the body); G. rumpf. The orig. sense was ‘stump ;’ cf.
Norw. ramp, an old tree-stem. Der. rump-steak.

RUMPLE, to wrinkle, crease. (E.) Cotgrave explains F: foupir
by ‘to rumple, or crumple. The ME. form is rimplen ; rimple and
rumple are allied forms, like wrinkle and prov. E. runkle. Of these,
rimple is derived from the AS. hrimpan, to wrinkle, and rumple from
hrump-, weak grade of the same; see further under Ripple (2).
+MDu. rompelen, or rompen, ‘to wrinckle,’ Hexham; rompel, or
rimpel, ‘a wrinckle;’ id. And. cf. G. riimpfen, to crook, bend,
wrinkle; OHG. hrimfan, strong vb. Teut. base *hremp-; cf.
Olrish cromm, W. crwm, bent. Der. rumple, sb.

RUN, to move swiftly, flee, flow, dart. (E.) ME. rinnen, rennen,
pt. t. ran, pp. runnen, ronnen; Chaucer, C. T. 4098, 4103 (A 4100,
4105). The mod. E. verb has usurped the vowel of the pp. through-
out, except in the pt. t. ran. By the transposition of r, we also find
ME. ernen, eornen, to run; Ancren Riwle, pp. 42, 74, 80, 86, 332,
360. AS. rinnan, pt. t. rann, pp. gerunnen; Grein, ii. 382; also
found in the transposed form irnan, yrnan, pt. t. arn; id. 146.4-Du.
rennen; Icel, renna, rinna; Dan. rinde (for *rinne) ; Swed. rinna;
Goth. rinnan; G. rennen. Teut. type *rennan-, pt. t. *rann, pp.
*runnanoz. See Brugmann, i. § 993; ii. §654. Der. run, sb., Tam.
Shrew, iv. 1.16; run-away, Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 4053 runn-er, runn-
ing. Also runn-el, a small stream, Collins, Ode on the Passions,
1. 63 (AS. rynel) ; run, a-small stream. Also renn-et (1); old form
also runn-et.

RUNAGATE, a vagabond. (F.—L.) In Ps. Ixviii. 6, Prayer-
Book version ; Shak. Rich. III, iv. 4. 465. ‘The A.V. has rebellious,
as in Isaiah xxx. 1, which is quoted by Latimer (Remains, p. 434) in
this form : ‘“‘ Wo be unto you, runagate children;” Bible Word-book.
In the Coventry Mysteries, p. 384, it is written rexogat: ‘‘ Ys there
ony renogat among us;”’’ id. B. It so happens that gate in
many E. dialects signifies a way; whilst at the same time the ME.
verb rennen passed into the form run, as at present. Hence the ME.
renegat, a renegade, was popularly supposed to stand forrenne a gate,
i.e. to run on the way, and was turned into rumagate accordingly ;
esp. as we also have the word runaway. But it is certain that the
orig. sense of ME. renegat was ‘ apostate’ or ‘ villain;’ see Chaucer,
C. T. 5353 -(B 934).—OF. renegat, ‘a renegadoe, one that ab-
jures his religion;’ Cot.—Late L. renegdtus, pp. of renegare, to
deny again, to deny the faith. See Renegade. 4 It is re-
markable that when renegate had been corrupted into runagate, we
borrowed the word over again, in the form renegade, from Span.
renegado.

RUNDLET, RUNLET, a small barrel. (F.—L.) Runlet is
a later form, corrupted from the older rundelet or runlet; spelt rundlet
in Levins, ed. 1570. ‘ Rundelet, or lytle pot, orcula ;’ Huloet (cited
by Wheatley). ME. rondelet (1393); in Wylie, Hist. Hen. IV.
iv. 179. ‘ Roundlet, a certaine measure of wine, oyle, &c., con-
taining 183 gallons; An. 1. Rich. III. cap. 13; so called of his |
roundness ;” Minsheu. Formed with dimin. suffix -et from OF.
rondelle, rondele, a little tun (Godefroy); cf. rondelle, a buckler or
round target (shield), in Cotgrave. This is again formed, with
dimin. suffix -ele, -elle, from ronde, a circle, or from rond, round ; see
Round.

RUNE, one of the old characters used for inscriptions cut upo
stone. (E.) ME, rune, counsel, a letter, Layamon, 25332, 25340,
32000 ; later roun, whence roun or round in Shakespeare ; see Roun.
AS. rim, a rune, mystery, secret colloquy, whisper ; Grein, li. 385.
The orig. sense seems to be ‘ whisper’ or * buzz;’ hence, a low talk,
secret colloquy, a mystery, and lastly a writing, because written
characters were regarded as a mystery known to the few.-++Icel. Tun,
a secret, a rune; Goth. rama, a mystery, counsel; OHG. rina, a
secret, counsel, whence G. raunen, to whisper ; Olrish run, W.
rhin, a secret. Idg. type *rand, fem. Cf. Gk. épevvaw, I search
out ; €pevva, f., an inquiry. Der. run-ic, roun. ;

RUNG, one of the rounds of a ladder. (E.) Also a staff (Halli- .
well); one of the stakes of a cart, a spar (Webster). ME. ronge,
P. Plowman, B. xvi. 44; Chaucer, C. T. 3625 (where Tyrwhitt’s


RUNNEL


edition wrongly has renges for ronges). AS. hrung, apparently a
pole supporting the tilt of a cart; Grein, ii. 109.4-MDu. rozge,

‘the beam upon which the coulter of a plough, or of a wagon rests;’
Hexham; G. runge, a short thick piece of iron or wood, a pin, bolt;
Goth. hrugga (=*hrunga), a staff, Mark, vi. 8. [We find also
Irish ronga, a rung, joining spar, Gael. rong, a joining spar, rib of
a boat, staff; borrowed from English.] Cf. also Icel. rong, a rib in
a ship. The sense seems to have been ‘rounded staff.’ Prob.
connected by gradation with AS. hring, a ring ; see Ring.

RUNNEL, a small stream; see Run.

RUNT, a bullock, heifer. (Du.) Florio (1598) has ‘a runt,a
bullocke ;’ s.v. Giowenco.—MDu. rund, ‘a runt, a bullock,’ Hex-
ham; Du. rund. From Teut. base *hrunth-, weak grade of *hrinth-,
*hrenth-; see Rother. See my Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 255.

RUPEE, an Indian coin, worth about two shillings. (Hind. —Skt.)
‘In silver, 14 roopees make a masse;’ Sir T. Herbert, Travels, ed.
1665, p. 46; cf.p.67. The gold rupee is worth about 29s. = Hindustani
rupiyah, a rupee; Rich. Arab. and Pers. Dict. p. 753. =—Skt. riuipya-m,
neut, sb., silver, wrought silver, or wrought gold; orig. neut. of
ripya-s, adj., handsome.—Skt. ripa-m, n., natural state, form,
beauty. Allied by gradation to Skt. varpas, form, figure (Uhlenbeck).

RUPTURE, a bursting, breach, breakage. (F.—L.) ‘No peryll
of obstruction or rupture ;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 32.
=F. rupture, ‘a rupture, breach;’ Cot.=—L. ruptira, fem. of fut.
part. of rumpere (pt. t. rip), to break, burst.=— 4/REUP, to break,
violate, rob; cf. Lithuan. rupas, rough, AS. réofan, to reave, Skt.
rup, to confound, /up, to break, destroy, spoil. Brugmann, i. § 466.
See Reave. Der. rupture, verb. From the same root are ab-rupt,
bank-rupt, cor-rupt, dis-ruption, e-ruption, inter-rupt, ir-ruption, pro-
eee (1), route, rout, rut. Also loot; and perhaps ruff,
ruffie (1).

RURAL, belonging to the country. (F.—L.) ‘In a person rurall
or of a very base lynage ;” Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b.i. c. 3. § 3.
ME. rurall, Lydgate, Assembly of Gods, 1724.—F. rural, ‘rurall ;’
Cot.=—L. riralis, rural. =L. rur-, for rus (gen. riris), the country; see
Rustic. Der. rural-ly, rural-ise.

RUSA, a kind of deer. (Malay.)
Babirusa.

RUSH, a trick. (F.—L.) Used by Ray; Works of Creation,
p- 137 (Cent. Dict.). Phillips, ed. 1706, gives the adj. rusy, full of
tricks. =F. ruse, a stratagem.—F, ruser, ‘to beguile, use tricks ;’
Cot. B. This F. ruser is a contraction of OF, reiiser, to refuse,
recoil, retreat, escape; hence, to use tricks for escaping (Burguy). =
Late L. type *refiisare, to refuse (Hatzfeld, Korting, § 7897). See
Refuse. @ But Scheler derives it from L. reciisare, to refuse, with
loss of c as in OF. seiir, F. stir, from L. seciirus. See Recusant.

RUSH (1), to move forward violently. (E.) ME. ruschen, rushen,
Chaucer, C. T. 1641; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 368; Sir Gawayn
and the Grene Knight, 2204. Partly from AS. hryscan, to rustle
shrilly, roar (as wind); Napier’s Glosses, i. 3740, 5006.-4--MSwed.
ruska, to rush; Ihre gives the example: ‘ Tha kommo the alle
ruskande inn,’ then they all came rushing in; Chron. Rhythm. p. 40.
This is clearly connected with MSwed. rusa, to rush; whence E.
Rouse (1), q.v. Another sense of MSwed. ruska (like G. rauschen)
is to rustle. So also Low G. rusken, (1) to rustle, (2) to rush about,
Bremen Worterbuch ; cf, Du. ruischen, to murmur as water, to rustle;
Pomeran. ruuschen, to make a noise in running about. Der. rush, sb.

RUSH (2), a round-stemmed plant of grass-like aspect, common
in wet ground. (E.) Proy. E. risk, resh, rash, ME. rusche, rische,
resche, P. Plowman, B. iii. 141. AS. risce, resce,resc, Gloss. to A.S.
Leechdoms; oldest form rise (O.E. Texts) Cf. Low G. rusk,
risch, a rush, Brem. Worterbuch; Du. rusck, rush; EFries. riiske ;
NFries, rusken, pl. rushes. |B. Some think these are non-Teutonic
words, and perhaps merely borrowed from L. ruscum, butcher’s
broom ; yet the sense is very different, and rask, resh, cannot come
from ruscum. y. Rather cf. OHG. rasc, rash, quick, MHG. resch,
quick, MHG., risch, quick, rosc, quick, lively; EFries. rask, rash,
quick, risk, quick, upright, slender; Low G. rusch, quick (Liibben).
I take rush to be a native name for a plant of quick, upright, slender
growth. See Rash. 4 Not connected with Goth. raus,G. rohr,a
reed, Der, rush-y. Also bul-rush, ME. bulrysche, Prompt. Parv.
p- 244; in which word the first part is prob. Icel. bolr, bulr, a stem,
trunk, Dan. bul, trunk, stem, shaft of a column, Swed. da/, a trunk, so
that the sense is ‘stem-rush,’ from its long stem; see Bulwark,
Bole; cf. bull-weed ( =bole-weed, ball-weed), knapweed ; bulrush often
means the reed-mace. Also rush-candle, Tam. Shrew, iv. 5. 14;
rush-light.

RUSK, a kind of light, hard cake or bread. (Span.) ‘The lady
sent me divers presents of fruit, sugar, and rusk ;’ Ralegh, cited by
Todd (no reference), ‘A basket-full of white ruske;’ Hakluyt,
Voy. ii. pt. 1. p. 186.—Span. rosca de mar, sea-rusks, a kind of


Malay rusa, a deer; see


SABBATH 529


biscuit, Meadows; rosea, a roll of bread, Minsheu, ed. 1623.
Minsheu also has rosquete, a pancake, rosquilla, ‘a clue of threed,
a little roll of bread, also lying round like a snake.’ Cf, Port.
rosca, the winding of a serpent, a screw; fazer roscas, to wriggle.
Thus the rusk was orig. a twist, a twisted roll of bread. Origin
unknown (Diez).

RUSSET, reddish-brown; a coarse country dress. (F.—L.) ME.
russet, P, Plowman, A. ix. 1; B. viii. 1.— AF. russet, Stat. Realm,
i, 381 (1363); ‘ma robe de rausset,’ Royal Wills, p. 30 (1360) ; OF.
rosset, rousset (Godefroy); MF. rousse¢, ‘russet, brown, ruddy ;’
Cot. Hence applied to a coarse brown rustic dress. Dimin. of
F. roux (fem. rousse), ‘reddish ;? Cot.—L, russus, reddish. B. <L:
russus is from a type *rudzko- (Brugmann, i. § 759); from the base
rudh appearing in Gk. é-pv0-pés, red; see Red, Ruddy. Der.
russet-ing, a russet apple.

RUST, a reddish-brown coating on iron exposed to moisture. (E.)
Prov. E, roust (Yks.). ME. rust, Wyclif, Matt. vi. 19, 20; roust,
Trevisa, tr. of Higden, iii. 445. AS. rast, rust; whence rastig,
trusty, Atlfred, tr. of Orosius, b. v. c 15. § 4.4-Du. roest; Dan.
rust; Swed. rost; G. rost. Teut. type *rasto-; for Idg. *rudhs-to-,
from Teut. base rud-, Idg. base rudhk-; see Ruddy. Brugmann,
i. § 759 (mote). Allied to AS. rud-u, ruddiness, and to E.
ruddy and red; cf. Icel. ryd, rust, lit. redness; MHG. rof, rust,
allied to G. roth, red. So also Lithuan. rudis, rust, ridas, reddish ;
W. rhwd, rust. See Red. Der. rust, verb; rust-y, AS. ristig, as
above ; rust-i-ly, rust-i-ness.

RUSTIC, belonging to the country. (F.—L.) Spelt rusticke,
Spenser, F’. Q. introd. to b. iii. st. 5. =F. rustique, ‘rusticall;’ Cot. =
L. rusticus, belonging to the country ; formed with double suffix
-ti-cus from ris, the country. B. The L. ris is thought to be
allied to Russ. raviina, a plain, Zend ravan, a plain, and to E.
room; see Room. Der. rustic-al-ly, rustic-ate, rustic-at-ion ; rustic-
i-ty, from F. rusticité, ‘rusticity,’ Cot. And see rur-al, roister-ing.

RUSTLE, to make a low whispering sound. (LowG.) In
Shak. Meas. for Meas. iv. 3. 38. The form is frequentative; and
it seems best to connect it with the base rus-; see Rouse. Du.
dial. russeln, to rustle as clothes do (Molema); Low G.and Pomeran.
russeln, to rustle. Also MDu. ruyselen, ‘to rustle, Hexham; also
spelt reuselen. Der. rustle, sb.; rustl-ing.

RUT (1), a track left by a wheel. (F.—L.) ‘And as from hills
rain-waters headlong fall, That all ways eat huge ruts;’ Chapman,
tr. of Homer, Iliad, iv. 480. The word is merely a less correct spel-
ling of route, i.e. a track. F. route, ‘a rutt, way, path, street,..
trace, tract, or footing, Cot. See Route. Der. rut, verb.

RUT (2), to copulate, as deer. (F.—L.) ME. rutyen, rutien;
P. Plowman, C. xiv. 146; cf. iz rotey tyme=in rut-time, id. B. xi.
329. Like other terms of the chase, it is of Norman-French origin.
The ME, rotey answers to OF. ruté, spelt ruité in Cotgrave; he
gives venaison ruiteé, venison that’s killed in rut-time. The verb rutien
is formed from the sb. ru¢.—F’. rut (so spelt even in the 14th century,
Littré), also ruit, as in Cotgrave, who explains it by ‘the rut of
deer or boars, their Inst, and the season wherein they ingender.’ =
L. type *rugitum, for L. riigitum, acc. of riigitus, the roaring of
lions ; hence, the noise of deer in rut-time. Cf. F. ruir, ‘to roar,’
Cot., from L. rigire, to roar.—4/REU, to make a noise, whence
also Lithuan. raja, rutting-time; see Rumour.

RUTH, pity, compassion. (Scand.) ME, reuthe, rewthe, Chaucer,
C. T. 916 (A 914); reouthe, Ancren Riwle, p. 32, 1.8; p. 54, 1.12.
Formed like the Scand. sb., but with a vowel borrowed trom the
E. verb to rue.=Icel. hryggd, hrygd, affliction, sorrow. Cf. Icel.
hrygegr, grieved, sorrowful. — Teut. base HREU, to grieve, appearing
in AS. kréowan, to rue; see Rue (1). Der. ruth-less, Meas. for
Meas. iii. 2. 121; ruth-ful, Troilus, v. 3. 48.

RYE, a kind of grain. (E.) ME. reye, Chaucer, C. T. 7328
(D 1746); ruje, Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p.152. AS. ryge, Voc.
47-4.4+-Du. rogge; Icel. riigr; Dan. rug; Swed. rég; G. roggen,
OHG. rocco. Further allied to Lithuan. pl. sb. ruggez, rye; OPruss.
rugis; Russ. roj(e), rye. Streitberg, § 131. Der, rye-grass.

OT, a Hindoo cultivator or peasant. (Hind.—Arab.) Hind.
raiyat, H. H. Wilson; p. 433. From Arabic. See Yule. The
same word as Rayah, q. v.


SA or.


SABAOTH, hosts, armies. (Heb.) In phr. ‘the Lord of Sabaoth;’
Rom. ix. 29; James, v. 4.—Heb. ¢sebadth, armies ; pl. of ésaba, an
army. = Heb. ¢saba, to go forth as a soldier.

SABBATH, the day of rest. (L.—Gk.—Heb.) ME. sabot,
Wyclif, Mark, ii. 27; Cursor Mundi, 11997.—L. sabbatum, — Gk,


Mm


530 ': SABLE.


odBBatov.= Heb. shabbath, rést, sabbath, sabbath-day. = Heb. shab-
ath, to rest from labour. @ The mod, E. word is a compromise
between sabbat (the L. form) and shabbath (the Heb. form). Der.
Sabbat-ar-i-an, sabbat-ic-al.

SABLE, an animal of the weasel kind, with dark or black fur;
also, the fur, (F.—Slavonic.) ME. sable, Chaucer, Compl. of
Mars, 284; the adj. sabeline occurs much earlier, O. Eng. Homilies,
ed, Morris, i. 181, 1. 362.—OF. sable, the sable (Burguy); ‘the
colour sables, or black, in blazon;’ Cot. Cf. Low L. sabelum, the
sable ;. sabelinus, sable-fur, whence the OF, sebelin, ME. sabeline ;
the mod. F. zibeline (from Ital.), properly an adj., is also used for
the animalitself. Of Slavonic origin. — Russ. sobol(e), the sable, also
a boa or fur tippet; Pol. sobol. Cf. Turk, samir, sable; Rich. Dict.
p- 943. Der. sable, sb. and adj. The best fur being black, sable
also means black, as in heraldry; see Hamlet, ii. 2. 474, iii. 2. 137,
iv. 7.81. So ‘sable and asure ;’ Caxton, tr. of Reynard, c. 32, ed.
Arber, p. 81 (1481). f It is sometimes said that the name of the
sable is taken from Siberia, where it is found. The Russ. sobole,
a sable, does not resemble Sibire, Siberia; nor does the adj. form
sabeline (in OF.) approach Sibirskit or Sibiriak’, Siberian.

SABOT, a wooden shoe. (F.) From F. sabot, a word of un-
known origin.

SABRE, SABER, a kind of sword. (F.—G.—MGk.?) A late
word, ‘Sable or Sabre, a kind of simetar, hanger, or broad sword ;’
Phillips, ed. 1706; MDu. sabel, ‘a sable, or short broad sword ;’
Hexham. =F. sabre, a sabre. = G. sibel (formerly also sabel), a sabre,
falchion. B. Thus Diez, who says that at least the F. form was
borrowed from German; cf. Ital. sciabla, sciabola, Span. sable.
y. He adds that the G. word was also borrowed; and compares
Hungarian szdblya, Seryian sablja, Wallachian sabie, a sabre. All
(according to Diez) from MGk, (ads, crooked. I find Hung.
szablya, a sabre, szabni, to cut, szabo, a cutter, in Dankovsky,
Magyar Lexicon, 1833, p. 327; at p. 862, Dankovsky considers
szabni, to cut, to be of Wallachian origin. Der. sabre-tash, F.
sabretache, from G, sdbeltasche, a sabretash, loose pouch hanging
near the sabre, worn by hussars (Fliigel) ; from G. sdbel, a sabre,
and tasche, a pocket.

SACCHARINE, sugar-like. (F.—L.—Gk.—Skt.) In Todd’s
Johnson.—F. saccharin, ‘of sugar;’ Cot. Formed with suffix -in
(=L. -inus) from L. sacchar-on, sugar (Pliny).—Gk. od«yxapor,
sugar. = Pali sakkhara, for Skt. carkara, candied sugar; see Sugar.

SACERDOTAL, priestly. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. —
F. sacerdotal, ‘sacerdotall;’ Cot. — L. sacerdétalis, belonging to a priest.
= L. sacerdot-, stem of sacerdés, a priest; lit. ‘ presenter of offerings
or sacred gifts’ (Corssen).—L. sacer, sacred; and dare, to give
(Bréal) ; cf. L. dds (gen. ddtis), a dowry, from the same verb. The
fem. form sacerdota, a priestess, occurs in an inscription. See Sacred
and Date (1). Brugmann, i. § 241 (a). Der. sacerdotal-ly, -ism.

SACHEM, a W. Indian chief. (Amer. Indian.) In Phillips
(1658). ‘The Massachusets call .. their kings sachemes ;’ Capt.
Smith, Works, ed. Arber, p. 939. See Sagamore.

SACK (1), a bag. (L.—Gk.—Heb.—Egyptian.) ME. sak,
Chaucer, C. T. 4019 (A 4021). AS. sacc, Gen. xlii. 25, 28.—L.
saccus. = Gk. odxkos. = Heb. sag, stuff made of hair-cloth, sack-cloth ;
also, a sack for corn. B. A borrowed word in Hebrew, and
prob. of Egyptian origin; cf. Coptic sok, sack-cloth, Gen. xxxvii. 34,
Matt. xi. 21; see Peyron’s Coptic Lexicon. E. Miiller cites sak as
being the A‘thiopic form. y. This remarkable word has travelled
everywhere, together (as I suppose) with the story of Joseph; the
reason why it is the same in so many languages is because it is, in
them all, a borrowed word from Hebrew. We find Du. zak, G.
sack, Icel. sekkr, Swed. sikk, Dan. sek, Goth. sakkus (sack-cloth,
Matt. xi. 21), Ital. sacco, Span. and Port. saco, F. sac, Irish and
Gael. sac, W. sach. And see Sack (2). Der. sack-cloth, Gen.
xxxvii. 34; ME. sakcloth, Lydgate, Assembly of Gods, 290; sack-ing,
cloth of which sacks are made, coarse stuff ; sack-full. Also sack (2),
q.v.; satch-el,q.v. Doublet, sac, a bag or receptacle for a liquid,
borrowed from F. sac.

SACK (2), plunder; as a verb, to plunder. (F.—L.—Gk.—
Heb.—Egyptian.) ‘The plenteous houses sackt;’ Surrey, Eccle-
siastes, c. v.; 1. 45. Formed from the sb. sack, pillage. ‘And
Helen, that to utter sack both Greece and Troié brought ;’ Turber-
vile, Dispraise of Women, st. 34.—F. sac, ‘a sack, waste, ruine,
havock, spoile;’ Cot: Cf.-F. saccager, ‘to sack, pillage,’ Cot. ;
also MF. sacquer, ‘to draw hastily, to pull out speedily or apace ;’
Cot. We also find Low L. saccadre, to put into a bag; a common
word; and Low L. saccus, a garment, robe, treasure, purse. fB. There
seems to be little doubt that the F. sac, pillage, is connected with,
and due to, the F. sac, a sack, from L. saccus; see Sack (1). The
simplest solution is that in Wedgwood, ‘from the use of a sack in
remoying plunder ;’ though the sense is probably rather metaphorical


SACRIFICE


than exact. In the same way we talk of bagging, i.e. pilfering a


thing, or of pocketing it, and of baggage as a general term, whether ~


bags be actually used or not. Thus Hexham gives MDu. zackez,
‘to put in a sack, or fill a sack;’ zacken ende packen, ‘to put up
bagg and baggage, or to trusse up.’ Cotgrave has: ‘ a sac, & sac,
the word whereby a commander authorizeth his souldiers to sack
a place.’ y. The use of MF. sacguer (OF. sachier) is remarkable,
as it seems to express, at first sight, just the opposite to packing
up; but perhaps it meant, originally, to search in a sack, to pull out
ofa purse ; for the sacking of a town involves. the two processes :


(1) that of taking things out of their old receptacles, and (2) that


of putting them into new ones; note the Low L, saccus in the
senses of ‘treasure’ and ‘purse.’ Burguy notes that the OF. desacher,
lit. to draw out of a sack, was used in the same way as the simple
verb, 5. It deserves to be added that Cotgrave gives 17 pro-
verbs involving the word sac, clearly proving its common use in
phrases. One of them is: ‘ On luy a donné son sac et ses quilles, he
hath his passport given him, he is turned out to grazing, said of a
servant whom his master hath put away ;’ hence the E. phrase, ‘ to
give one the sack,’ And again: ‘ Acheter un chat en sac, to buy
a pig in a poak.’

SACK (3), the name of an old Spanish wine. (F.—L.) See the
account in Nares. He notices that it was also called seck, a better
form: ‘It is even called seck, in an article cited by bp. Percy from
an old account-book of the city of Worcester: “ Anno Eliz. xxxiiij.
Item, for a gallon of claret wine, and seck, and a pound of sugar.”’”
Spelt secke, A. Borde, Dyetary, ch. x. ed. Furnivall, p. 255 (1542).
By Sherris sack, Falstaff meant ‘sack from Xeres,’ our sherry; see
Sherry. Sack was a Spanish wine made from grapes dried by the
sun, and so sweet rather than dry in the mod. E. sense. See Min-
sheu; and note to Tw. Night, ed. W. A. Wright; A. ii. sc. 3. 178.
=F. sec, dry; in the phrase vin sec; Sherwood (in his index to
Cotgrave) has: ‘Sack (winé), vin d’Espagne, vin sec.’ Cf. Span.
seco, dry.—L, siccumacc. of siccus, dry. @ We may note Du. sek,
sack, a sort of wine (Sewel), as illustrating the fact that sack stands
for seck ; this also is from F. sec. So also G, sekt, sack; Swed. seck
(Widegren).

SACKBUT, a kind of wind instrument. (F.—L.— Gk. —Chaldee.)
In Dan. iii. 5. The sack-but resembled the modern trombone, and
was a wind instrument ; but the word is used to translate the Chald.
sabbeka@ (with initial samech), Gk. capBvxn, L. sambiica, which was
a stringed instrument. And these forms must be regarded as giving
the real origin of the E. word, which was borrowed from French.
Thus Ascham has: ‘lutes, harpes, ail maner of pypes, barbitons,
sambukes ;’ ‘Toxophilus, ed. Arber, p. 39. And in Dan. iii. 5, Wyclif
has sambukes.—OF. sambuque (Roquefort).—I.. sambica. —Gk.
capBvnn. = Chald. sabbeka (as above); Dan. iii. 5. B. Sir T. Elyot
mentions sackbottes as wind instruments, Castel of Helth, b. ii. ch. 33.
=F. saguebute, a sackbut, trombone, Littré ; a popular perversion, due
to confusion with OF. saqgueboute, which was really a lance with a hook,
for pulling a man off his horse (Godefroy), and then applied to a
trombone from its being drawn in and thrust out (F. sacqguer, to pull,
bouter, to push). y: A similar perversion occurs in Span. saca-
buche (nautical word), a tube or pipe which serves as.a pump; also,
a sackbut (Neuman) ; as if from Span. sacar, to draw out, with
reference to the tube of the instrument; and buche, the maw, crop,
or stomach of an animal, and, colloquially, the human stomach.
Hence the suggestion in Webster, that sacabuche means ‘ that which
exhausts the stomach or chest ;’ a name possibly given (in popular
etymology) from the exertion used in playing it.

SACR ZN T, a solemn religious rite, the eucharist. (L.) ME.
sacrament, Chaucer, C, T. 9576 (E 1702).—L. sacramentum, an en-
gagement, military oath; in ecclesiastical writers, a mystery, sacra-
ment. Formed with suffix -mentumfrom sacrare, to dedicate, consecrate,
render sacred or solemn.=L. sacr-, for sacer, sacred; see Sacred.
Der. sacrament-al, sacrament-al-ly,

SACRED, made holy, religious. (F.—L.) Sacred is the pp.
of ME. sacren, to render holy, consecrate, a verb now obsolete. We
find sacreth=consecrates, in Ancren Riwle, p. 268, 1.5. The pp.
i-sacred, consecrated, occurs in Rob. of Glouc. p. 330 (1. 6762),
where the prefix i- (=AS. ge-) is merely due to the Southern dialect.
‘He was... sacryd or enoynted emperoure of Rome;’ Fabyan’s
Chron. cap. 155, last line. [Hence too sacring-bell, Hen. VIII, iii.
2. 295.]—OF. sacrer, ‘to consecrate ;’ Cot.<L. sacrare, to conse-
crate.—L, sacr-, for sacer, sacred, holy,—L. base sac-, appearing in
a nasalised form in sancire, to render inviolable, establish, confirm ;
see Saint. Brugmann, ii. § 744. Der. sacred-ly, sacred-ness ;
and see sacra-ment, sacri-fice, sacri-lege, sacrist-an, sext-on; sacer-
dotal ; con-secrate, de-secrate, ex-ecrate, ob-secrate ; sanct-i/y.

SACRIFICE, an offering to a deity. (F.—L.) ME. sacrifise,
Ancren Riwle, p. 138, ll. 9, 113 also sacrifice..=¥. sacrifice, ‘a sacrir


Set slg


SACRILEGE


fice ;’ Cot.—L, sacrificium, a sacrifice, lit. a rendering sacred; cf.
sacrificare, to sacrifice, = L. sacri-, for sacro-, from sacer, sacred; and
facere, to make; see Sacred and Fact. Der. sacrifice, vb.,
sacrific-er ; sacrific-er ; sacrifici-al,

SACRILEGE, profanation of what is holy. (F.—L.) ME.
sacrilege, Gower, C. A. il. 374, ll. 5, 143 bk. v. 7165, 7174.—MF.
sacrilege, ‘a sacriledge, or church-robbing ;’ Cot. = L. sacrilegium, the
tobbing of a temple, stealing of sacred things.—L. sacrilegus, a
sacrilegious person, one who steals from a temple.—L. sacri-, for
sacro-, from sacer, sacred ; and Jegere, to gather, steal, purloin; see
Sacred and Legend. Der. sacrileg-i-ous, Macb. ii. 3. 72, a coined
word ; sacrileg-i-ous-ly, -ness.

SACRISTAN, SEXTON, an officer in a church who has
charge of the sacred vessels and vestments, (F.—L.) The cor-
ruption of sacristan into sexton took place so early that it is not easy
to find the spelling sacristan, though it appears in Blount’s Glosso-
graphia, ed. 1674. Cf. ME. sekesteyz in Rob. of Brunne, Handlyng
Synne, 1, 11100. The duties of the sacristan have suffered altera-
tion; he is now the grave-digger rather than the keeper of the
vestments. The form sexteyz is in Chaucer, C. T. 13942 (B 3126) ;
the collateral form Saxton survives as a proper name; I find it in
the Clergy List for 1873. =F. sacristain, ‘a sexton, or vestry-keeper,
in a church ;’ Cot. Formed as if from Late L. *sacristanus, but the
usual word is simply sacrista, without the suffix; cf. ‘ Sexteyne,
Sacrista,’ Prompt. Parv.; and see Ducange. Formed with suffix
-ista (= Gk. -taT7s) from L. sacr-, from sacer, sacred ; see Sacred.
Der. sacrist-y, from F, sacristie, ‘a vestry, or sextry in a church,’
Cot.; cf. ‘ Sextrye, Sacristia,’ Prompt. Parv.

SAD, heavy, serious, sorrowful, (E.) ‘Sadde, tristis ;”? Levins.
ME. sad, with very various meanings; Halliwell explains it by
‘ serious, discreet, sober, heavy (said of bread), dark (of colour),
heavy, solid, close, firm (said of iron and stone).’ The W. sad
means ‘ firm, steady, discreet ;? and may have been borrowed from
E. during the ME. period. B. But the oldest meaning is ‘ sated.’
Thus, in Layamon, 20830, we have ‘sad of mine londe’=sated, or
tired, of my land. Hence seem to have resulted the senses of
satisfied, fixed, firm, steadfast, &c.; see examples in Stratmann and
in the Glossary to Will. of Palerne, &c. The mod. E. sad is from
the sense of sated, tired, weary. AS. sed, sated, satiated; Grein,
li. 394.--OSax. sad, sated ; Icel. saddr, old form sadér, sated, having
got one’s fill; Goth. saths, full, filled, sated; G. satz, satiated, full,
satisfied, weary. y- All from the Teut. pp. type *sa-doz, sated,
Fick, iii. 318. Cognate words are found in Lithuan. sotus, satiated ;
Russ. szitost’, satiety; L. satur, sated, also deep-coloured (like E.
sad-coloured), well filled, full; Olrish sd-ith, satiety, sa-thech, sated;
Gk. d-yevar, to satiate. From4/SA, SA, to satiate; Brugmann,
i. §196. See Satiate, Satisfy. q In no way connected with
set, which is quite a different word ; nor with L. sédare, which is
allied to E. set. Der. sad-ly, -ness. Also sadd-en, verb, from ME.
sadden, to settle, confirm, P. Plowman, B. x. 242; cf. AS. gesadian,
to fill (Grein), AS. sadian, to feel weary or sad, Alfred, tr. of
Boethius, cap. xxxix. § 4.

SADDLE, a leathern seat, put on a horse’s back. (E.) ME.
sadel (with one d), Chaucer, C. T. 2164 (A 2162). AS. sadol ;
Grein, ii. 387.4-Du. zadel; Icel. sodull ; Swed. and Dan. sadel; G.
sattel; OHG., satul, Cf. also Russ. siedlo; L. sella (for *sed-la),
B. Teut. type *saduloz. The form of the word is abnormal ; some
suppose it not to be Teutonic, but borrowed from some other Idg.
language, probably Slavonic. Cf. Lower Sorbian sodlo, a saddle;
OSlav. sedlo, a saddle. We may safely refer it, and all its cognates
(or borrowed forms), to 4/SED, to sit; cf. (Vedic) Skt. sad, to sit
down, Skt. sadas, a seat, abode, Der. saddle, verb, AS. sadelian,
/Elfric’s Grammar, ed. Zupitza, p. 165, 1. 10; saddl-er, saddl-er-y;
saddle-bow, ME. sadel-bowe, Proverbs of Alfred, 1. 229.

SADDUCEE, the name of a Jewish sect. (L.—Gk.—Heb.)
The ME. pl. Saduceis is in Wyclif, Deeds [Acts], xxiii. 8 ; &c. —L. pl.
Sadducei,— Gk. pl. SadSovmator.— Heb. pl. tsedugim, in the Mishna;
see Smith, Concise Dict. of the Bible. Supposed to mean ‘the
righteous.’ From the Heb. root tsadag, to be just.

SAFE, unharmed, secure, free from danger. (F.—L.) ME. sauf,
Will. of Palerne, 868, 1329; we also find the phr. sauf and sound, id,
868, 2816. =F. sauf, ‘safe ;’ Cot. L. saluwm, acc. of saluus, whole,
safe. Brugmann, i. § 860c. Der. safe-ly, safe-ness; safe, sb.; safe-
conduct, Hen. V, i. 2. 297, ME. sauf conduit, Gower, C. A. ii. 160;
bk. v. 994; safe-guard, Rich. III, v. 3. 259. ME. sauf-garde, Cax-
ton, tr. of Reynard, ch. 3; vouch-safe, q.v. Also safe-ty, K. John,
ili. 3. 16, suggested by F. sauvete, ‘safety,’ Cot., from Late L. acc.
saluitatem. And see Salvation, Sage (2), Salute, Save.

SAFFRON, the name of a plant. (F.— Arab.) ‘Maked geleu
mid. saffran’=made yellow with saffron; O. Eng. Homilies, ed.
Morris, ii. 163, 1. 32.—AF. saffran, Liber Albus, p. 224; F. safran,


SAKE 531


saffran, saffron; Cot.= Arab, za‘faran, saffron; Palmer’s Pers. Dict.
col. 321.

SAG, to droop, be depressed. (Scand.) Prov. E. sag, seg- ME.
saggen, Prompt. Parv. p. 440.—Norw. sakka, sekka, to sink; Swed.
sacka, to settle, sink down; Dan. sakke (as a nautical term), to have
stern-way; Jutland sakke, to sink, settle down (Kok); whence Du.
zacken, to sink. B. The MSwed. sacka is used of the settling of
dregs; so also Low G. sakken, in the Bremen Worterbuch. Rietz
gives Swed. dial. sakka, to sink; sakka, to sag, droop. Cf. Icel.
sakka,a plummet. All from the Scand. base *sakk-, a form allied
to *sank-, 2nd grade of Teut. *senxkan-, to sink ; see Sink.

SAGA, a tale, story. (Scand.) The E. word is saw. Saga is
merely borrowed from Icel. saga, a story, tale; cognate with E,
saw; see Saw (2).

SAGACIODS. (L.) In Milton, P. L. x. 281. Coined, asif from
L. *sagacidsus, from sagdci-, decl. stem of sagax, of quick perception,
keen, sagacious; from a base SAG, to perceive clearly, perhaps to
scent. Cf. sagire, to perceive by the senses. Allied to Seek, q. v.
Brugmann, i. § 187. @ Not allied to Sage (1). Der. sagacious-ly,
sagacious-ness, Also sagac-i-ty, in Minsheu, ed. 1627, formed (by
analogy) from L. sagGcitds, sagacity. And see pre-sage.

SAGAMORE, a W. Indian chief. (Amer. Indian.) In Phillips
(1658). ‘A tall savage. . He wasa sagama;’ Capt. Smith, Works,
ed. Arber, p. 754. The name of a chief among some American
Indian tribes. _ Micmac sakamow, a chief (S. T. Rand). See
Sachem.

SAGE (1), discerning, wise. (F.—L.) In Shak. Tw. Nt. iii. 4.
413.—F. sage, ‘sage, wise;’? Cot. [Cf. Span. sabio, Ital. saggio,
wise.|= Late L. *sabium, not found, for L. sapium, acc. of sapius,
wise; only found in comp. ze-sapius, unwise (Petronius).—L. sapere,
to be wise; see Sapience. {f Not allied to Sagacious, Der.
sage, sb., sage-ly, sage-ness.

SAGE (2), the name of a plant. (F.—L.) ME. sauge, sawge;
Prompt. Parv.=AF. sauge, Voc. 555. 13: spelt saulge in Cot.=L.
saluia, sage; so called from its supposed healing virtues. = L. saluus,
sound, in good health; see Safe.

SAGITTARIUS, the archer. (L.) The name of a zodiacal
sign. In Phillips (1658).=—L. sagittarius, an archer. = L. sagitta, an
arrow.

SAGO, a starch prepared from the pith of certain palms. (Malay.)
See Yule. Mentioned in the Annual Register, 1766, Chronicle,
p- 110; see Notes and Queries, 3. Ser. viii. 18. Spelt. sagu, and
called a Javanese word ; Hakluyt, Voy. iii. 742. — Malay sagu, sagt,
‘sago, the farinaceous and glutinous pith of a tree of the palm kind
named rumbiya ;’ Marsden’s Malay Dict. p. 158.

SAHTB, sir, master; a title. (Hind.—Arab.) Spelt sakab in
Fryer’s New Acct. of E. India (1673); p. 417 (Yule). = Hind. sahib,
lord, master, companion (Forbes). = Arab. saib, lord, master ; orig.
‘companion ;’ Rich. Dict. p. 924.

SATL, a sheet of canvas, for propelling a ship by the means of
the wind. (E.) ME. sei/, seyl, Chaucer, C. T. 698 (A 696) ; Havelok,
7ir. AS. segel, segl (Grein).+Du. zeil ; Icel. seg? ; Dan. seid; Swed.
segel; G. segel. B. All from Teut. type *seglom, n., a sail (Fick, iii,
316); which Fick ingeniously connects with Teut. base SEG=
4 SEGH, to bear up against, resist ; so that the sail is that which resists
or endures the force of the wind. Cf. Skt. sak, to bear, undergo, endure,
be able to resist; Gk. éxew, to hold, €xev vjas, to urge on ships,
Od. ix. 279; from the same root. Der. sail, verb; sail-cloth, sail-er,
sail-or (spelt saylor in Temp. i. 2. 270, doubtless by analogy with
tail-or, though there the ending in -or is justifiable, whilst in sazl-or
it is not); sail-ing; also sail-yard, AS. seglgyrd, Voc. 288. Io.

SAINFOIN, a perennial herb, cultivated as a forage plant.
(F.—L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.—F. sain foin, sainct foin, ‘Spanish
trefoly ;’ Cot.; s.v. Foin.=—L. sdnum fenum, lit. healthful hay.=—L.
sdnum, n. of sdnus, sane, healthful; fenum, hay. 4 Turned into
saint foin, ‘holy hay,’ by popular etymology. See Hatzfeld.

SAINT, aholy man. (F.—L.) ME. seint, saint, seinte; ‘seinte
paul’=Saint Paul, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i. 131, 1. 15.—
AF, seint ; F. saint. L. sanctum, acc. of sanctus, holy, consecrated. =
L. sanctus, pp. of sancire, to render sacred, make holy. Allied to L.
sac-er, sacred ; whence Sacred, Sacerdotal. Der. saint-ed, saint-
like.

SAKE, purpose, account, cause, end. (E.) ME. sake, purpose,
cause ; ‘for hire sake’ = for her (its) sake ; Ancren Riwle, p. 4, 1. 16.
It also means dispute, contention, law-suit, fault. ‘ For desert of
sum sake’ =on account of some fault; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, C.
84. AS. sacu, strife, dispute, crime, law-suit, accusation (Bosworth).


_+Dnu. zaak, matter, case, cause, business, affair; Icel. sdk, a charge,
‘guilt, crime; Dan. sag; Swed. sak; G. sache.


B. All from Teut.
type *saka, f., a contention, suit at law (Fick, iii. 314), from the


base SAK, appearing in. Goth. sakan (a strong verb, pt. t. sdk),.to


Mm 2


532 SAKER


contend, rebuke. Hence also Goth. sakjé, strife, Perhaps allied to
Olrish saig-im, I say, I speak. Der. seek, q.v.

SAKER, a kind of falcon; a small piece of artillery. (F.—Span.
—Arab.) ‘Sacres, wherewith they shot;’ Hakluyt, Voy. ii. 1. 79.
The gun was named after the falcon, ‘Sacre, a hauke;’ Palsgrave.
= MF. sacre, ‘asaker ; the hawk, and the artillery so called; ’ Cot.
= Span. sacre; in both senses. Arab. sagr, a hawk; Rich. Dict.
p. 938. Not of L. origin (Engelmann). See Devic; and Korting,
§ IgI4.

SALAAM, SALAM, peace; a salutation. (Arab.) ‘ This low’
salam;’ Byron, Giaour, see note 29; and in Herbert’s Travels,
ed. 1665, p. 142.— Arab. salam, ‘saluting, wishing health or peace;
a salutation; peace;’ Rich. Dict. p. 842.—Arab. salm, saluting ;
id. p. 845. Cf. Heb. shelém, peace; from the root shalam, to be
safe.

SALAD, raw herbs cut up and seasoned. (F.—Ital.—L.) ME.
salade, Flower and the Leaf, 1, 412.—F. salade, ‘a sallet of herbs ;’
Cot.—MlItal. salata, ‘a salad of herbes;’ Florio. Fem. of Ital.
salato, ‘salt, powdred, sowsed, pickled, salted;’ Florio, This is
the pp. of salare, ‘to salt;’ id.—Ital. sal, sale, salt.—L. sal, salt.
See Salt.

SALAMANDER, a reptile. (F. —L.—Gk.) InShak. 1 Hen. IV,

lil. 3. 53.=F. salamandre, ‘asalamander;’ Cot.—L. salamandra.
= Gk. cadapdvipa, a kind of lizard, supposed to be an extinguisher
of fire. An Eastern word; cf. Pers. samandar, a salamander; Rich.
Dict. p. 850.
-SALARY, stipend. (F.—L.) ME. salarye, P. Plowman, B. v.
433.— AF. salarie, Liber Albus, p. 48; F. salaire, ‘a salary, stipend ;’
Cot.=L. salarium, orig. salt-money, or money given to the soldiers
for salt. —L. salarium, neut. of salarius, belonging to salt; adj. from
sal, salt. See Salt. Der. salari-ed.

SALAH, a selling for money. (E.) ME. sale, Prompt. Parv. AS.
sala, a sale; Voc. 180. 16.4-Icel. sala, fem., sal, neut., a sale, bar-
gain ; Swed. salu; Dan. saly. OHG. sala. Orig. ‘a handing over,’
or ‘delivery.’ Hence sell, v.; see Sell. Der. sale-able, sales-man ;
hand-sel or han-sel.

SALIC, SALIQUE, pertaining to the Salic tribe of the Franks.
(F.—OHG.) In Shak. Hen. V, i. 2. 11.—F. Salique, belonging to
the Salic tribe (Littré). The Salic tribe was a Frankish (High Ger-
man) tribe, prob. named from the river Sala (now the Yssel, flowing
into the Zuyder Zee). There are several rivers called Saale or Saar;
cf. Skt. salila-m, sarira-m, flood, water.

SALIENT, springing forward. (L.) In Pope, Dunciad, ii. 162.
But the older form was saliant (Skinner, Phillips), which was an
heraldic term for animals represented as springing forward; and this
was due to F. saillant, pres. part. of saillir, to leap; corresponding
to L. salient-, pres. part. of L. salire, to leap, sometimes used of
water. =4/SAL, to leap; whence Gk. &AAopat, Lleap. Brugmann, i.
§ 514 (3). Der. salient-ly. From the same root are as-sail, as-sault,
de-sult-or-y, ex-ult (for ex-sult), in-sult, re-sili-ent, re-sult, sally, sal.-.
mon, salt-at-ion; salt-ire, q.v.

SALINE, containing salt. (F.—L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706; and
see Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. =F. salin, fem. saline, saline; Littré. =
L. salinus, only found in neut. salinum, a salt-cellar, and pl. saline,
salt-pits.—L. sal, salt. See Salt.

SALIVA, spittle. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.—L. saliva, spittle ;
whence also Olrish saile, W. haliw, saliva. Der. saliv-ate, saliv-at-
ion; saliv-al, saliv-ar-y.

SALLET, a kind of helmet. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Shak. 2 Hen. VI,
iv. 10. 12; and in Baret (1580). Palsgrave has: ‘Salet of har-
nesse, salade.’ ‘A salett with a vysour;’ York Wills, iii. 205 (1472);
salet, Paston Letters, i. 265 (1454). Sallet is a corruption of salade,
due to the fact that a salad of herbs was also called sallet.=MF.
salade, ‘a salade, helmet, headpiece; also a sallet of herbs;’ Cot.
{Here the spellings salade and sallet are interchanged ; however, the
two words are of different origin.]—Ital. celata, a helmet. =—L.
celata, that which is engraved or ornamented; Diez cites cassis
celata, an ornamented helmet, from Cicero. [Cf. Span. celar, to
engrave, celadura, enamel, inlaying, celada, a helmet.]_ L. celia is
the fem. of the pp. of celare, to engrave, ornament.—L. celum,
a chisel, graver; allied to cedere, to cut. Brugmann,i. § 944. See
Cesura.

SALLOW (1), SALLY, a kind of willow. (E.) ME. salwe,
Chaucer, C. T. 6237 (D655). ‘ Salwhe, tree, Salix;’ Prompt. Parv.
OMere. salh; AS. sealh; we find ‘ Amera, sealh; Salix, welig’ men-
tioned together in Voc. 269. 35, 36. The suffix -ow=ME. -we=
AS. -ge, suffix of the dat. case from nom. in -h, just as E. farrow is
from AS. fearh, and the prov. E. barrow-pig from AS. bearh. In
Lowland Sc. the word became sauch, saugh, by loss of l.4Icel. selja;
Swed. salg, sdlj; Dan. selje; G. sahlweide (OHG. salahd, whence F,
saule), the round-leayed willow; see Fick, iii, 320.4L. salix, a


SALTIER, SALTIRE


willow; Gael. seileach, a willow; Irish sail, saileach; W. helyg, pl.,
willows; Gk. éAi«n, a willow.

SALLOW (2), of a pale, yellowish colour. (E.) ME. salow (with
one 1); we find: ‘ Salwhe, salowe, of colour, Croceus;’ Prompt. Parv.
p- 441. AS. salu, sallow, Grein, ii. 388; whence the compounds
saloneb, with pale beak, salupad, with pale garment, sealobrin,
sallow-brown; id.4Du. zaluw, tawny, sallow; Icel. sél-, yellowish ;
MHG. sal, OHG. salo, dusky (whence F. sale, dirty). Teut. type
*salwoz. Brugmann, i. § 375 (9). Der. sallow-ness.

SALLY, to rush out suddenly. (F.—L.) ‘ Guyon salied forth to
land ;’ Spenser, F. Q. ii, 6. 38. ME. salien, to dance, is the same
word; Prompt. Parv. p. 441; P. Plowman, B. xiii. 233.—F. saillir,
‘to go out, issue, issue forth; also to leap, jump, bound ;’ Cot.=—L.
salire, to leap; see Salient. Der. sally, sb., with which cf. F.
saillie, ‘a sally,’ Cot.; from the fem. of the pp. sailli, Also sally-
port, a gate whence a sally may be made.

SALMAGUNDI, a seasoned hodge-podge or mixture. (F.—
Ital.—L.) ‘ Salmagundi, or Salmigund, an Italian dish made of cold
turkey, anchovies, lemmons, oil, and other ingredients; also, a kind
of hotch-potch or ragoo,’ &c.; Phillips, ed. 1706. But the form is.
French. =F. salmigondis ; spelt salmigondin in Cotgrave, who describes
the dish. B. Etym. disputed; but probably of Ital. origin, as stated


by Phillips. We may fairly explain it from Ital. salami, pl. of


salame, salt meat, and condito, seasoned. ‘This is the more likely,
because the pl. salami was once the term in use. Thus Florio has;
‘ Saldmi, any kinde of salt, pickled, or powdred meats or souse,’ &c.
y. This also explains the F. salmis (not in Cotgrave), which has.
proved a puzzle to etymologists; I think we may take salmis
(=salted meats) to be a double plural, the s being the F. plural, and
the z the Ital. plural; that is, the Ital. salami became F. salmi, and
then the s was added. 6. The derivation of Ital. salami is clearly
from L. sal, salt, though the suffix is obscure; cf. L. salgama, pl.,.
pickles. The F. -gondi, for Ital. condito (or pl. conditi), is from L,
conditus, seasoned, savoury, pp. of condire, to preserve, pickle, season.
Thus the sense is ‘ savoury salt meats.’

SALMON, a fish. (F.—L.) ME. saumoun, King Alisaunder,
1. 5446 ; salmon, salmond, Barbour’s Bruce, ii. 576, xix. 664; samon,.
Trevisa, i. 335. [The introduction of the/ is due to our knowledge
of the L. form ; we do not pronounce it.]—OF. saumon, spelt saulmon
in Cot.—L. salménem, acc. of salmo, a salmon. B. It has been:
conjectured that salmo means ‘leaper;’ from salire, to leap; which
well accords with the fish’s habits. See Salient. (Otherwise in.
Walde.) Der. salmon-leap, ME. samoun-lepe, Trevisa, i. 369.

SALOON, a large apartment. (F.—OHG.) A late word; added
by Todd to Johnson.—F. saloz, a large room.=—F. salle, a room,
chamber. = OHG. sal (G. saal), a dwelling, house, hall, room.+Icel..
salr, a hall; AS. sel, sele,a house, hall. The orig. sense is ‘ abode ;”
cf. Goth. saljan, to dwell.

SALT, a well-known substance. (E.) ME. salt, P. Plowman, B.
xv. 423. OMerc. salt; O. E. Texts; AS. seal, Grein, ii. 434.4+Du.
zout (with w for 7); Icel. salt; Dan. and Swed. salt; G. salz; Goth.
salt, B. All from Teut. adj. type *sal-toz, salt; Fick, iii. 321. On
comparing this with L. sal, salt, we see that the Teut. word is *sal-
toz, where -foz is the usual Idg. pp. suffix, of extreme antiquity..
Accordingly we find that AS. sealt (E. salz) is also used as an adj.,
in the sense of ‘salted’ or ‘full of salt,’ as in sealt weter=salt


water; Grein, ii: 434. So also Icel. saltr, adj., salt; Du. zoué, adj. 5.
y. Removing the


Dan. and Swed. salt, adj.; W. hall-t, L. sal-sus.
suffix, we find cognate words in L. sal, salt, Gk. GAs, Russ. sol(e), W.
halan, Olrish salann, salt. Brugmann,i.§ 182. Der. salt-ly, salt-
ness ; salt-cellar, q.v.; salt, vb., salt-er, salt-ish, salt-less, salt-mine, salt-


pan; salt-petre,q.v. Also (from L. sal) sal-ine, sal-ary, sal-ad, sauce,.


sausage, salmagundi,

SALTATION, dancing. (L.) Rare; in Sir T. Browne, Vulgar
Errors, bk. v. c. 3. § 2. Formed (by analogy with F. words in -io)
from L. saltatio, a dance, a dancing. = L. saltare, to dance, frequent.
of salire,to leap; seeSalient. Der. saltat-or-y, from L, saltatorius,
adj. Cf. saltire.

SALT-CELLAR, a vessel for holding salt. (E.; and F.—L.)
The word salt is explained above. Cellar is an absurd corruption of


AF, saler, Lib. Custumarum, p. 461 ; equivalent to F.saliére. Thus.


we find: ‘ Saliere, a salt-seller;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. saliera, a salt-cellar.
‘ Hoc selarium, celare ;’ Voc. 658. 16. ‘A saltsaler of sylver;” A.D.
1463, in Bury Wills, ed. Tymms, p. 23, 1. 8. Formed from L. sal,
salt; see Salary and Salt. Hence  salt-cellar=salt-salt-
holder; a tautological expression.

SALTIER, SALTIRE, in heraldry, a St. Andrew’s cross. (F.—
L.) Spelt sawtyre, Caxton, Golden Legend, St. Alban, § 1. St.
Andrew’s cross is one in this position X ; when charged on a shield,.
it is called a saltier. The ME. sawtyre is due to an AF. *sautier,
representing Late L. saltarium, a piece of wood placed transversely,


oat 5 >


SALT-PETRE


‘which men (but not cattle) could get over; from L. saltare, to dance
(hence, to jump over); see below. In the Roll of Caerlaverock
(1300), 1. 13, the form is sautour, variant of sauteur (Godefroy),
a saltire, also used like Late L. saltarium, Still commoner is the OF.
sautoir, a saltire; MF. saultoir, ‘Saint Andrew’s crosse, tearmed
so by heralds;’ Cot. The old sense’ of OF. sautoir was stirrup
(Littré, s. v. sautoir) ; the cross seems to have been named from the
position of the side-pieces of a stirrup, formerly made in a triangle A ;
or it may have been suggested by the saltarium. = Late L. saltatorium,
a stirrup, a common word; Ducange.=—L. saltatdrius, belonging to
dancing or leaping, suitable for mounting a horse.—L. saltator, a
dancer, leaper. = L. saltare, to dance, leap ; frequentative of salire ; see
Salient. 4 Inthe Book of St. Alban’s, pt. ii. fol. £5, we find ME,
sawtre, OF. saultier, and Late L. saltazorium, all meaning ‘ saltire.’

SALT-PETRHE, nitre. (F.—L. and Gk.) In Shak. 1 Hen.
IV, i. 3. 60. For the former part of the word, see Salt. The E.
word is a modification of ME. salpeter, Chaucer, C. T., G 808. —
OF. salpetre (Supp. to Godefroy).—Late L. salpetra, salt-petre,
which represents L. sal petre, lit. ‘salt of the rock.’ Lastly, L.
petra is from Gk. wétpa, a rock; see Petrify.

SALUBRIOUS, healthful. (L.) <A lateword. In Phillips, ed.
1706. Coined as if froma L, *saliibridsus, extended from L. salubris,
healthful. B. The suffix -bris is explained in Brugmann, ii. § 77.
y. Sala- is the base of salu-ti-, stem of saliis, health; and is allied
to saluus, sound, in good health, whence E. safe; see Safe. Der.
salubrious-ly, Also salubri-ty, Minsheu, from F. salubrité (Cot.), from
L. acc. saliibritatem.

SALUTARY, healthful, wholesome. (F.—L.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674.—F. salutaire, ‘healthful;’ Cot.—L. salutaris,
healthful. —L. salat-, stem of salus, health (above).

SALUTE, to wish health to, to greet. (L.) In Spenser, F. Q.
i. I. 30; and in Palsgrave.—L. saliitare to wish health to, greet. =
L. salait-, stem of salis, health (above). Der. salutat-ion, ME.
salutacioun, Wyclif, Luke, i. 41, from F. salutation (Cot.), from L.
acc, salutationem. And see Salutary.

SALVAGE, money paid for saving ships. (F.—L.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. —OF. and MF. salvage ; ‘ droict de salvage, a tenth
part of goods which were like to perish by shipwrack, due unto him
who saves them ;’ Cot.=—OF. salver, F. sauver, to save.—L. saludre,
to save ; see Save.

SALVATION, preservation. (F.—L.) ME. sauacioun, Chaucer,
C. T. 7080(D 1498) ; spelt sawwacion, Ancren Riwle, p. 242, 1. 26.—
OF. sauvacion; F. salvation.=—L. saludtiénem, acc. of saludtio, a sav-
ing. — L. saludare, to save; see Save.

SALVE, ointment. (E.) ME. salue (=salve), Chaucer, C. T.
2714 (A 2712); older form salfe, Ormulum, 6477. OMerc. salf,
salb, O. E. Texts; AS. sealf, Mark, xiv. 5; John, xii. 3.4-Du. zal/;
G. salbe. B. AS. sealfis from the Teut. type *salda, f., Fick, iil.
321. The orig. sense was prob. ‘ oil’ or ‘ grease ;’ it answers in form
to Gk, damn, an oil-flask, related by gradation to the rare Gk. word
éAros, oil, in Hesychius; cf. also Skt. sarpis, clarified butter. 4 The
-ve is due to AS. sealf-e, gen., dat., and acc. of sealf. Der. salve,
verb, from AS. sealfian, cognate with Goth. salbdn.

SALVER, a plate on which anything is presented. (Span. —L.)
Properly salva, but misspelt salver by confusion with the old word
salver in the sense of ‘preserver,’ or one who claims salvage for
shipping. This is shown by the following. ‘ Salver, from salvo, to
save, is a new fashioned piece of wrought plate, broad and flat, with
a foot underneath, and is used in giving beer, or other liquid thing,
to save or preserve the carpit or clothes from drops ;’ Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. This invented explanation does not affect the etymology.
Span. salva, a salver, a plate on which anything is presented ; it
also means ‘ pregustation, the previous tasting of viands before they
are served up.’ There is also the phrase hacer salva, ‘to taste meat
or drinke, . . as they do to princes ;’ Minsheu’s Span. Dict: (1623).
We also find the dimin. salvilla, a salver.—Span. salvar, ‘to save,
free from risk; to taste, to prove the food or drink of nobles;’
Neuman. =L. saludre, to save; see Save, Safe. 4 Mr. Wedg-
wood says: ‘as salva was the tasting of meat at a great man’s table,
salvar, to guarantee, to taste or make the essay of meat served at
table, the name of salver is in all probability from the article having
been used in connexion with the essay. The Ital. name of the essay
was credenza, and the same term was used for a cupboard or side-
board ; credentiere, credenzere, a prince’s taster, cup-bearer, butler, or
cupboard-keeper (Florio). F. credence d’argent, silver plate, or a
cupboard of silver plate; Cot.’ Thus a salver was the name of
the plate or tray on which drink was presented to the taster, or. to the
drinker of a health.

SALVO, a general discharge of guns, intended as a salute.
(Ital.—L.) So spelt in 1733 (Stanford Dict.) ; but more correctly
salva, in 1591.—Ital. salva, ‘a sauing, keeping; a volie or tire of


SAND 533


ordinance ;* Florio.—L. saluare, to save, keep; salué, hail!=L,
saluus, safe. See Safe.

SAMBO, the offspring ofa negro and a mulatto. (Span. —L.—Gk.)
In An Eng. Gamer, ed. Arber, v. 95, the men of a certain tribe are
called samboses. And see Stedman’s Surinam, i. 89.—Span. zambo,
formerly gambo (Pineda), bandy-legged ; used as a sb. as a term of
contempt. = Late L. scambus.— Gk. cxapBds, crooked ; said of the legs
(Diez).

SAME, of the like kind, identical. (E.) ME. same, Chaucer,
C. T. 16923 (G 1455). AS. same, only as adv., as in swa same swa
men, the same as men, just likemen; Alfred, tr. of Boethius, c. xxxiii.
§ 4 (bk. iii. met. 9). The adjectival use is Scand.; cf. Icel. samr,
Dan. and Swed. samme, the same.4~-OHG, sam, adj., sama, adv.;
Goth. sama, the same ; cf. samana, together.4Russ. samuii, the same;
Gk. 6pds; Skt. sama-, even, the same. From the same base is the
Skt. sam, with (Vedic); also the L. simul, together, similis, like
(whence E. Simultaneous, Similar); also Gk. dpoios, like
(whence E. Homoeopathy). See Curtius, i.4o0o. Der. same-ness ;
and see semi-, similar, simulate, semblance, as-semble, dis-semble, re-
semble, Also some, -some.

SAMITH, a rich silk stuff. (F.-—L.—Gk.) ME. samit, spelt
samyte, Ly beaus Disconus, 833 (ed. Ritson, vol. ii); King Alisaunder,
1027. And see two examples in Halliwell, who explains it by ‘a
very rich silk stuff, sometimes interwoven with gold or silver thread.’
= OF. samit, a silk stuff; Burguy. See samy in Cotgrave. = Late L.
examitum, samite; Ducange.= Late Gk. é¢apirov, cited by Burguy,
supposed to have been a stuff woven with six threads or different
kinds of thread; from Gk. é€, six (cognate with E. six), and piros, a
thread of the woof. See Dimity, which is a word of similar origin.
The mod. G. sammet, sammt, velvet, is the same word.

SAMOVAR, a kind of tea-urn. (Russ.) It occurs in 1884. —
Russ. samovar’, a tea-urn; see Stanford Dict. Said to be of Tatar
origin (Cent. Dict.).

SAMPAN, a kind of skiff, used in the East. (Malay —Chinese.)
Spelt champana in 1516 (Yule). The Stanford Dict. quotes sampan,
as occurring in 1622.—Malay sampan.—Chin. sanpan, lit. ‘three
boards.’ Yule notes that another boat is called in Chinese wupan,
i.e. ‘five boards.’

SAMPHIRE, the name of a herb. (F.—L. and Gk.) Spelt
sampire in K, Lear, iv. 6. 15; and in Minsheu, ed. 1627; and this is
a more correct spelling, representing a former pronunciation. So
also Sherwood, in his index to Cotgraye, who gives herbe de S. Pierre
as a F. equivalent. Spelt sampier in Baret (1580), which is still
better.—F. Saint Pierre, St. Peter; Cotgrave, s.v. herbe, gives:
‘ Herbe de S. Pierre, sampite.’=L, sanctum, acc. of sanctus, holy ; and
Petrum, acc. of Petrus, Peter, named from Gk. rérpos, a stone, 7é7pa,
a rock.

SAMPLE, an example, pattern, specimen. (F.—L.) ME. samfle,
Cursor Mundi, 9514; spelt asaumple (for esaumple), Ancren Riwle,
p- 112, 1, 16.—OF. essemple, example,—L. exemplum. See Example,
Doublets, exsample, example. Der. sampler, Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 2.
205, from OF. examplaire (14th cent., Littré), another form of OF,
exemplaire, ‘a pattern, sample, or sampler,’ Cot., from L. exemplar.
See Exemplar, which is a doublet.

SANATORY, healthful. (L.) Not in Todd’s Johnson. [Phillips
has the allied word sazative, used of medicinal waters, now nearly
obsolete ; it occurs in Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 787.] Coined as if from
a L. *sainatorius, extended from sdndtor, healer. We find also L.
sdnatiuus, healing, = L. sdndre, to heal,—L. sanus, in good health;
see Sane.

SANCTIF'Y, to consecrate. (F.—L.) Spelt sanctifie, Tyndall’s
Works, p. 11, col. 2, 1. 65 seintefie, Gower, C. A. ili. 234; bk. vii.
4247.—F. sanctifier, ‘to sanctifie;’ Cot. L. sanctificare, to make holy.
=L. sancti-, for sanctus, holy; and -jic-, for facere, to make. See
Saint and Fact. Der. sanctific-at-ion, from F. sanctification (Cot.) ;
sanctifi-er.

SANCTIMONY, devoutness. (F.—L.) In Shak. Troil. v. 2.
139.—MF. sanctimonie; Cot. = L., sanctimdnia, sanctity. — L. sancti-, for
sanctus, holy; with Idg. suffixes -mdn-, -ya. See Saint. Der.
sanctimoni-ous, -ly, -ness.

SANCTION, ratification. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave.—F. sanction,
‘sanction ;’ Cot.=L. sanctidnem, acc. of sanctio, a sanction; cf.
sanctus, pp. of sancire, to render sacred. See Saint.

ANCTITY, holiness. (L.) As You Like It, iii. 4.14. Formed
(by analogy) from L. sanctitatem, acc. of sanctités, holiness, = L,
sancti-, for sanctus, holy ; see Saint.

SANCTUARY, a sacred place. (F.—L.) ME. seintuarie, a
shrine; Chaucer, C. T. 12887 (C 953). = AF. saintuarie, Stat. Realm,
i. 298 (F. sanctuaire), a sanctuary.—L. sanctuarium, a shrine.=L.,
sanctu-s, holy ; see Saint.

SAND, fine particles of stone. (E.) ME. sand, sond, Chaucer,


534 SANDAL


€. T. 4929 (B 509). AS. sand; Grein, ii. 390.4-Du. zand; Icel.
sandr; Swed. and Dan. sand; G. sand; Bavarian sambd. B. All
from the Teut. types *sam(a)doz, m.; *sam(a)don, n. Idg. type
*samadhos; cf. Gk: dpabos, sand. Brugmann,i. § 421. Der. sand-
eel, -glass, -heat, -martin, -paper, -piper, -pit (Palsgrave), -stone;
sand-y, AS. sandig ; sand-i-ness.

SANDAL, a kind ofshoe. (F.—L.—Gk.—Pers.) ME. sandalies,
pl., Wyclif, Mark, vi. 9.—F. sandale, ‘a sandall, or sendall ;” Cot. =
L. sandalia, pl. of sandalium.=Gk. cavddd.oy, dimin. of odvdadoy
(ZEolic capBadov), a wooden sole bound on to the foot with straps,
a sandal. Supposed to be of Pers. origin; cf. Pers. sandal, a sandal,
sort of slipper, Rich. Dict. p. 853.

SANDAL-WOOD, a fragrant wood. (F.—L.—Gk. — Pers. —Skt.)
¢ Sandal or Saunders, a precious wood brought out of India ;’ Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. Spelt sanders in Cotgrave, and in Baret (1580) ;
this form seems to be an E. corruption. F. sandal, ‘ sanders, a sweet-
smelling wood brought out of the Indies ;” Cot. Also santal (Hatz-
feld).—Late L. santalum.—Gk. cdvradov, cdvdadov. = Pers. sandal ;
also chandal, ‘ sandal-wood;’ Rich. Dict., p. 544. Also spelt chandan,
id.—Skt. chandana-, sandal, the tree; which Benfey derives from
chand, to shine, allied to L. candére.

SAND-BLIND, semi-blind, half blind. (E.) In Shak., Merch.
Ven. ii. 2. 37. A corruption of sam-blind, i.e. half-blind. ME.
sam-, as in sam-rede, half red, sam-ripe, half ripe, P. Plowman, C, ix.
311, and footnote. AS. sam-, as in sam-cucu, half alive, Luke, x. 30.
The AS. sam- is cognate with L. sémi-, Gk. jyu- ; see Semi-, Hemi-.

SANDWICH, two slices of bread with ham between them. (E.)
So called from John Montague, 4th Earl of Sandwich (bom 1718,
died 1792), who used to have sandwiches brought to him at the
gaming-table, to enable him to go on playing without cessation.
Sandwich isa town in Kent; AS. Sandwic=sand-village.

SANE, of sound mind. (L.) A late word. In Todd’s Johnson.
=L. sdmus, of sound mind, whole. Prob. allied to Icel. sdx, G.
stuhne, atonement (Kluge). Der. sane-ness ; san-at-ive, san-at-or-y (see
Sanatory) ; saz-i-ty, Hamlet, ii. 2. 214, formed (by analogy) from
L. acc. sainitatem ; san-i-ta-ry,a coined word ; san-icle, q. v.

SANGUINE, ardent, hopeful. (F.—L.) The use of the word is
due to the old belief in the ‘four humours,’ of which blood was one;
the excess of this humour rendered people of a hopeful ‘ tempera-
ment’ or ‘complexion.’ ME. sanguin; ‘Of his complexion he was
sanguin ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 335 (A 333).—F. sanguin, ‘sanguine,
bloody, of a sanguine complexion;’ Cot.—L. sanguineum, acc. of
sanguineus, bloody.=L. sanguin-, stem of sanguis, blood. Root un-
certain, Der. sanguine-ly, -ness; sanguin-e-ous, Englished from L.
sanguineus ; sanguin-ar-y, Dryden, Hind and Panther, pt. iii. 1. 679,
from F, sanguinaire, ‘ bloudy,’ Cot. from L. sanguindarius.

SANHEDRIM, the highest council of the Jews. (Heb. —Gk.)
In Todd’s Johnson, who cites from Patrick’s Commentary on Judges,
iv. 5. Spelt saxhedrin, Purchas’s Pilgrimage, bk. ii. ch. 12. § 3.
=Late Heb. sanhedrin, not a true Heb. word.—Gk. ovvédpov, a
council; lit. a sitting together, sitting in council. = Gk. ovv, together;
and éépa, a seat, from €(ouat (fut. €5-ovpar), I sit, cognate with E, sit,
See Syn- and Sit.

SANICLE, a plant of the genus Sanicula. (F.—L.) ME. sanycle,
Voc. 613. 33.— OF. sanicle (Hatzfeld). = Late L. sanicula, named from
healing wounds. —L. sanus, whole ; see Sane.

SANITARY, SANITY ; see Sane.

SAWS, without. (F.—L.) In Shak. As You Like It, ii. 7. 166. —
F. sans (OF. sens), without; the final s is unoriginal (see Diez). =
L. sine, without.—L. si ne, if not, unless, except.

SANSKRIT, lit. ‘symmetrical language.’ (Skt.) ‘The word
Sanskrit (Skt. samskrta) is made up of the preposition sam, “ together,”
and the pp. kyta-, ‘‘ made,” an euphonic s being inserted. ‘The com-
pound means “carefully constructed,” ‘‘symmetrically formed” (con-
Jectus, constructus). In this sense, it is opposed to the Prakrit (Skt.
prakyia-), “common,” “natural,” the name given to the vulgar
dialects which gradually arose out of it, and from which most of the
languages now spoken in upper India are more or less directly de-
rived; * Monier Williams, Skt. Grammar, p. xix. Sam is allied to
E. same; and ky, to make, to L. creare; see Same and Create.

- SAP (1), the juice of plants. (E.) ME. sap, Kentish zep, Ayenbite
of Inwyt, p. 96, 1. 5. AS. sep, sap; Grein, ii. 397.44-MDn. sap,
‘ sap, juice, or liquor ;’ Hexham; OHG. saf; G. saft (with added 2),
Not connected with Gk. é7és, juice ; but perhaps borrowed from L.
sapa, new wine boiled thick. Der. sap-less, sapp-y, sapp-i-ness; sap-
ling, a young succulent tree, Rich. III, iii. 4.71; sap-green.

SAP (2), to undermine. (F.—Late L.) ‘Sapping or mining;’
Howell, Famil. Letters, vol. ii. let. 4.— MF. sapper (F. saper), ‘to
undermine, dig into;’ Cot.—OF, sappe (15th cent., Littré), a kind
of hoe; mod. F. sape, an instrument for mining. Cf. Span. zapa, a
spade; Ital. zappa, ‘a mattocke to dig and delue with, a sappe;’ |


~SARDINE


Florio; Late L. sapa, a hoe, mentioned A.D. 1183 (Ducange).
B. Diez proposes to refer these words to Gk. cxanavy, a digging-tool,
a hoe; from oxanrev, to dig. He instances Ital. zolla, which he
derives from OHG. skolla (with z from sk). Der. sapp-er. :

SAPAJOU, a spider-monkey. (F.—Brazil.) F. sapajou; of
Brazil. origin (Hatzfeld). It occurs in French in 1614.

SAPID, savoury. (L.) Sir T. Browne has sapidity, Vulg. Errors,
b. iii. c. 21. § 6; and sapor, id. § 8. All the words are rare.—L.
sapidus, savoury.—L. sapere, to taste, also, to be wise. See Sa-
pience. Der. sapid-i-ty; also sap-or, from L. sapor, taste. And
see savour, in-sipid. -

SAPIENCE, wisdom. (F.—L.) [The adj. sapient is a later
word.] ME. sapience, P. Plowman, B. iii. 330; Gower, C. A. ii. 167 ;
bk, v. 1205.—F*. sapience, ‘sapience ;’ Cot.—L. sapientia, wisdom. —
L. sapient-, decl. stem of pres. part. of sapere, to be wise, orig. to
taste, discern. Der. (from L. sapere) sapi-ent, K. Lear, iii. 6. 24;
sapi-ent-ly, sage (1); and see sapid.

SAPONACEHOUS, soapy. (L.—Teut.) In Bailey’s Dict., vol.
ii. ed. 1731. Coined asif from L. *sapondceus, soapy, from L. sapon-,
stem of sdpo, soap (Pliny). B. It is doubtful whether séfo (Gk.
canwy) is a L. word; it is the same as E. soap, and was probably
borrowed from Teutonic (not Celtic, as Pliny inadvertently says) ;
see Soap. See Pliny, Nat. Hist. bk. xxviii. c. 12.

SAPPHIC, a kind of metre. (L.—Gk.) ‘Meter saphik;’ Ge
Douglas, Palace of Honour, pt. ii. st. 4.—L. Sapphicus, Sapphic,’
belonging to Sappho, the poetess.—Gk. Sampw, a poetess born at
Mitylene in Lesbos, died about 592 B.c. Situs

SAPPHIRE, a precious stone. (F.—L.—Gk. —Heb.—Skt.) ME.
saphir, Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 96, 1. 115. =F. saphir,
‘a saphir stone;’ Cot.—L. sapphirus.—Gk. campepos, a sapphire.
— Heb. sappir, a sapphire (with initial samech).—Skt. ganipriyam, a
sapphire ; lit. ‘ beloved of Saturn ;’ gems being often connected with
names of planets. Skt. gani-s, Saturn; and priya-s, dear, from pri,
to love. (Uhlenbeck.) Cf. Pers. saffir, a sapphire; Rich. Dict.,
p. 836. See the note in Schade, O. H. G. Dict., p..1412.

SARABAND, a kind of dance. (F.—Span.—Pers.) In Ben
Jonson, The Devil is an Ass, iv. 1 (Wittipol). Explained as ‘a
Spanish dance’ in Johnson. = F. sarabande (Littré). — Span. zarabanda,
a dance; of Moorish origin. Supposed to be from Pers. sarband,
of which the lit. sense is ‘a fillet for fastening the ladies’ head-dress ;’
Rich. Dict. p. 822.—Pers. sar, head, cognate with Gk. «dpa ; and
band,a band. See Cheer and Band (1).

SARACEN, one of an Eastern people. (L.—Gk.—Arab.) ME.
saracen, Rich. Coer de Lion, 2436; sarezyn, 2401.—L. saracénus, a
saracen ; from Late Gk. Sapaxnvds ; lit. ‘ one of the eastern people.’
— Arab. shargiy, oriental, eastern; sunny; Rich. Dict. p. 889. Cf:
Arab. sharg, the east, the rising sun; id. From Arab. root sharaga,
itrose. (Doubtful ; see note in Gibbon, Rom. Empire, c. 50.) Der:
Saracen-ic; also sarcen-et, g.V.3 sirocco, q.v. :

SARCASM, a sneer. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674.—=F. sarcasme, ‘abiting taunt;’ Cot.—L. sarcasmus, sarcasmos.
— Gk. capxacpés, a sneer. Gk. capxa fer, to tear flesh like dogs, to
bite the lips in rage, to sneer. = Gk. cape-, stem of odpé, flesh. Der.
sarcas-t-ic, Gk, capkaotixds, sneering ; sarcas-t-ic-al-ly.

SARCENET, SARSNET, a fine thin silk. (F.—L.—Arab.)
In Shak. 1 Hen. IV, iii. 1. 256. Spelt sarzinett in 1373; Wardrobe
Acct. 47 Edw. III; N. and Q. 8S. i. 129. —OF. sarceneé, a stuff
made by the Saracens (Roquefort). Formed from Low L., saracéni-
cum, sarcenet (Ducange).=Low L. Saracéni, the Saracens; see
Saracen.

SARCOPHAGUS, a stone receptacle for a corpse. (L.—Gk.)
In Holland, tr. of Plinie, b. xxxvi. c. 17; it was the name of a kind
of lime-stone, so called ‘ because that, within the space of forty daies
it is knowne for certaine to consume the bodies of the dead which
are bestowed therein.’ —L. sarcophagus.—Gk. capkopayos, carni-+
vorous, flesh-consuming; hence a name for a species of lime-stone,
as above. = Gk. capxo-, from adpf, flesh (see Sarcasm); and
gpayety, to eat, from 4/BHAG, to eat.

SARDINE (1), a small fish. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Cotgrave. ME.
sardyn, Earl of Derby’s Exped. (C.S.), p. 228, 1. 31.—F. sardine,
also spelt sardaine in Cotgrave, and explained as ‘a pilchard,
or sardine.’= L. sardina, also sarda, a sardine. —Gk. capdivn, cdpda,
a kind of fish ; explained as ‘a kind of tunny caught near Sardinia’
(Liddell). Perhaps named from Gk. Sapd, Sardinia.

‘SSARDINE (2),.a precious stone. (L.—Gk.) ME. sardyn,
Wyclif, Rev. iv. 3; AF. sardine, Gaimar, 1. 4888.—L. *sardinus,
the L, equivalent of Gk. capdivos. The Vulgate has sardinis in
Rey. iv. 3 as a gen. case, from a nom. sardo. = Gk. oapdivos, a sar
dine stone, Rev. iv. 3. Also capdw; also capiiov. So called from
Sardis, capital of Lydia in Asia Minor, where it was first found ;)
Pliny, b. xxxvii.c. 7. Der. sard-onyx, q.v. 3 i


SARDIUS


SARDIUS, a gem. (L.—Gk.) In Rev. xxi, 20.—L. sardius
(Vulgate).—Gk. cdpévos, Rev. xxi. 20; the same as cdpdiov, a gem
of Sardis (above). See the note in Schade, O. H.G. Dict., p. 1418.

SARDONIC, sneering, said of a laugh or smile. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Only in the phr. ‘ Sardonic laugh’ or ‘ Sardonic smile.’ In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674, it is a ‘ Sardonian laughter.’ So also ‘Sardonian
smile ;” Spenser, F. Q. v. 9. 12.— F. sardonique, used in the 16th cent.
(Littré) ; but usually MF. sardonien. Cotgrave has: ‘ris sardonien,
a forced or causelesse mirth.’=L. Sardonicus, for the more usual
Sardonius, Sardinian. = Gk. capddvios, also capdavios ; hence capdavroy
yeAay, to laugh bitterly, grimly. ‘Prob. from caipev (to draw back
the lips and show the teeth, grin); others write capdémos, deriving it
from capddémor, a plant of Sardinia (Sapdw), which was said to screw
up the face of the eater, Servius, on Virg. Ecl. vii. 41, and in Latin
certainly the form Sardonius has prevailed;’ Liddell. ‘Immo ego
Sardois uidear tibi amarior herbis;” Virgil (as above).

SARDONYX, a precious stone. (L.—Gk.) In Holland, tr. of
Plinie, b. xxxvii. c. 6.—L. sardonyx.— Gk. capddvug, the sard-onyx,
i.e. Sardian onyx.—Gk. capd-, for Sdpdes, Sardis, the capital of
Lydia; and évvg, the finger-nail, also an onyx. See Sardine (2)
and Onyx. See the note in Schade, O. H. G. Dict., p. 1420.

SARGASSO, gulf-weed, a kind of sea-weed. (Port.) ‘Sargasso,
for many miles floating upon the western ocean ;’ Sir T. Browne,
Garden of Cyrus, ch. iv. § 13. = Port. sargago, sea-weed, sea-wrack. =
Port. sarga, a sort of grapes. The gulf-weed has berry-like air-
vessels, and is also called the sea-grape.

SARK, a shirt. (Scand.—Slavonic.) ME. serke, P. Plowman,
B. v. 66; serk, Havelok, 603.—Icel. serkr, a shirt; Swed. sark; Dan.
serk. [Also AS. serc, serce (Bosworth) ; but sark is from Norse. ]—
Slav. type *sorka; whence OSlav. sraka, a garment, Russ. sarochka,
a shirt (Miklosich).

SARONG, a kind of body-cloth orkilt. (Malay.—Skt.) Modern.
= Malay sdrung. —Skt. sdraiiga-s, gdraiga-s, adj. variegated; sb. a
garment. —Skt. ¢ara-s, variegated. See Yule.

SARSAPARILIA, the name of a plant. (Span.) ‘ Sarsa-
parilla, a plant growing in Peru and Virginia .. commonly called
prickly bind-weed ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Spelt sassaparilla in Capt.
Smith, Works, ed. Arber, p. 582.—Span. zarzaparilla. B. The
Span. zarza means ‘ bramble,’ and is of Basque origin, from Basque
sartzia, a bramble; see Larramendi’s Dict., p. 506. y. The
origin of the latter part of the name is unknown; it has been sup-
posed that parilla stands for parrilla, a possible dimin. of parra, a
vine trained against stakes or against a wall. Others ascribe the
name to a physician surnamed Parillo.

SARSNET; see Sarcenet.

SASH (1), a case or frame for panes of glass, (F.—L.) ‘A
Jezebel .. appears constantly dressed at her sash;’ Spectator, no.
175 (A.D. 1711). ‘ Sash, or Sash-window, a kind of window framed
with large squares, and corruptly so called from the French word
chassis, a frame; Phillips, ed. 1706.—MF. chassis, ‘a frame of
wood for a window;’ Cot.; F. chassis. Extended from OF. chasse
(F. chasse), a shrine, case,—L. capsa, a box, case; see Chase
(3), Case (2). 4 The F. chassis was formerly represented by E.
chassis, a window-sash (N.E.D.); and the F. chasse by Lowl. Sc.
chess, a sash (E. D. D.).

SASH (2), a scarf, band. (Pers.) Formerly spelt shask, with the
sense of turban. ‘His head was wreathed with a huge shask or
tulipant [turban] of silk and gold ;’ Sir T. Herbert, Travels, 1638,


p-. 191; cited in Trench, Select Glossary. See also Sandys, Trav.


(1632), p. 63. ‘All these Tulbents [turbans of Turks] be of pure
white ; but the. . Christians . . weare Shasses, that is, striped linnen
.. wound about the skirts of a little cap;’ Fynes Moryson, Itin.
(1617), pt. iii. bk. 4, ch. 2, p. 174. ‘So much for the silk in
Judzea, called shesh in Hebrew, whence haply that fine linen or silk
is called shashes, worn at this day about the heads of Eastern people;’
Fuller, Pisgah Sight of Palestine, b. ii, c. 14, § 24. But it does not
seem to be a Hebrew word. ‘Trench, in his Eng, Past and Present,
calls it a Turkish word; which is also not the case. The solution
is, that the word is Persian. = Pers. skast, ‘a thumb-stall worn by
archers, . . a girdle worn by the Magi, &c., Rich. Dict. p. 891.
In Vullers’ Pers. Dict. ii. 425, 426, we find: shkest, a thumb, archer’s
thumb-ring (to guard the thumb in shooting), a fish-hook, plectrum,
fiddle-string, scalpel; also ‘cingulum idolatorum et igniscultorum,’
i.e. a girdle worn by idolaters and fire-worshippers, thus accounting
for our sash, ~

SASSAFRAS, a kind of laurel. (F.—Span.—L.) In Phillips,
ed. 1706. ‘The tree that is brought from the Florida, whiche is


called sassafras ;’ J. Frampton, Joyfull Newes (1577), fol. 46.—F.


sassafras. Span. sasafras, sassafras; from MSpan. sassifragia, the
herb saxifrage (Minsheu); we find also Span, salsafras, salsifrax,
salsifragia, saxifrage (Neuman), all various corruptions of «sassi-


SATURNINE 535


fragia. ‘ The same virtue was attributed to sassafras as to saxifrage,
of breaking up the stone in the bladder;’ Wedgwood. | See
Saxifrage.

SATAN, the devil. (Heb.) Lit. ‘the enemy.’ Called Sathanas
in Wyclif, Rev. xii. 9; spelt Satanas in the Vulgate; and Zaravdas in
the Greek. — Heb. satan, an enemy, Satan; from the root satan (with
sin and teth), to be an enemy, persecute. Der. Satan-ic, Satan-ic-al.

SATCHEL, a small bag. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb,—Egyptian.)
ME. sachel, Wyclif, Luke, x. 4.—AF. sachel (Bozon); OF. sachel,
a little bag (Roquefort, with a citation).—L. saccellum, acc. of
saccellus, dimin. of saccus, a sack, bag; see Sack.

SATE, SATIATE, to glut, fill full, satisfy. (F.—L.) In Hamlet,
i. 5. 56; we find sated, Oth. i. 3. 356. Sateis for *satie.— OF. satier, to
satiate (Godefroy).—L. satiare, to satiate. Sated was used like
satiate in a participial sense, i.e. with the sense of satiated. B. We
find saciate thus used in Du Wes, Sup. to Palsgrave, p. 1077, 1. 21.
Cf. ‘ That satiate yet unsatisfied desire ;? Cymb. i. 6. 48.—L. satidtus,
pp. of satidre, to sate, satiate, fill full, Cf. L. satur, full; sat, satis,
sufficient. Allied to E.sad; seeSad. Der. satiat-ion; sat-i-e-ty, from
F, satieté, ‘satiety, fulnesse,’ Cot., from L. satietdtem, acc. of satietas.
Also sat-is-fy, q. V. 3 Sat-ire, q.v., sat-ur-ale, q.¥., soil (3), q. v.

SATELLITE, a follower, attendant moon. (F.—L.) ‘Satellite,
one retained to guard a man’s person, a yeoman of the guard, ser-
geant, catchpoll;’ Blount, ed. 1674.—F. satellite, ‘a sergeant, catch-
pole, or yeoman of the guard ;’ Cot.—L. satellitem, acc. of satelles,
an attendant, life-guard. Pope uses the L. pl. satellites (four syllables),
Essay on Man, i. 42.

SATIN, a glossy silk. (F.—L.) ME. satin, Chaucer, C. T.
4557 (B 137).=—F. satin, ‘satin;’ Cot. [Cf. Ital. setino, ‘a kind of
thin silke stuffe;’ Florio. Also Port. setim, satin.] = Late L. sdtinus,
sétinus, satin (Ducange). Extended from L. séta, a bristle; we find
the Late L. sé¢a in the sense of silk (Ducange) ; also Ital. sea, ‘ any
kind of silke,’ Florio. B. Similarly Span. pelo, hair, also means
fibre of plants, thread of wool or silk, &c.; and the L. séta or saeta
was used of the human hair as well as of the bristles of an animal ;
see Diez. Allied to AS. sada, a cord, a snare; see Brugmann, i. § 209.
Der. satin-et, satin-y, satin-wood,.

SATIRE, a ridiculing of vice or folly. (F.—L.) In Shak. Much
Ado, v. 4. 103.—F. satire; Cotgrave has: ‘ Satyre, a satyr, an invec-
tive or vice-rebuking poem.’ =L., satira, also satura, satire, a species
of poetry orig. dramatic and afterwards didactic, peculiar to the
Romans (White). B. It is said that the word meant ‘a medley,’
and is derived from satura lanx, a full dish, a dish filled with mixed
ingredients ; satura being the fem. of satur, full, akin to satis, enough,
and to satiadre, to satiate ; see Sate. Der. satir-ic-al, spelt saturicall,
Skelton, ed. Dyce, i. 130, 1. 139; satir-ise, satir-ist.

SATISFY, to supply or please fully. (F.—L.) ‘Not al so
satisfide;’ Spenser, F. Q. i. 5.15. ‘I satysfye, I content, or suffyce,
Te satisfie;’ Palsgrave.— OF. satisfier, to satisfy (as in Palsgrave) ;
afterwards displaced by satisfaire; see Littré. Formed as if from
a Late L. *satisficadre, substituted for L. satisfacere, to satisfy. —L.
satis, enough; and facere, to make. See Sate and Fact. Der.
satisfact-ion, ME. satisfaccioun, Wyclif, 1 Pet. iii. 15, from F. satis-
faction, ‘satisfaction,’ Cot.; satisfact-or-y, from F.  satisfactoire,
‘satisfactory,’ Cot.; satisfact-or-i-ly, -ness,

SATRAP, a Persian viceroy. (F.—L.—Gk.—Pers.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. We find ME. satraper, Allit. Romance of Alexander,
1913, 1937-—F. satrape, ‘a great ruler;’ Cot.—L, satrapam, acc. of
satrapes; we also find nom. satraps (acc. satrapem).—Gk. satparns,
the title of a Persian viceroy or governor of a province. B. Cer-
tainly an OPers. word, Littré, citing Burnouf (Yagna, p. 545),
compares the Gk, pl. éfa:@pamevovres, found in inscriptions (Liddell
and Scott give the form é¢arpdmys), and the Heb. pl. achashdarpnim,
satraps. = OPers. khsatra-pava, guardian of a province; from khsatra,
province, and fa, to protect ; F. Spiegel, Die altpersischen Keilin-
schriften, p. 26. Cf. Skt. Askatra-, dominion, allied to kskaya, to
tule; and pa, to protect.

SATURATE, to fill to excess. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.—
L. saturatus, pp. of saturare, to fill full. L. satur, full; allied to
satis, enough ; see Sate. Der. satur-at-ion ; satur-able,

SATURDAY, the seventh day of the week. (L. and E.) ME.
Saterday, P. Plowman, B., v. 14, 367, AS. Seter-deg, Luke, xxiii.
54; also spelt Setern-deg, Exod. xvi. 23; Seternes deg, rubric to
Matt. xvi. 28, xx. 29. The name Seter or Setern is borrowed from
L. Saturnus, Saturn; cf. L. Saturni diés, Saturday; Du. zaturdag
Saturday. See Saturnine, i

SATURNINE, gloomy of temperament. (F.—L.) ‘ Saturnine,
of the nature of Saturn, i.e. sterne, sad, melancholy ;’ Minsheu, =
MF. Saturnin, a form noticed by Minsheu; and Littré has saturnin
as a medical term, with the sense of ‘relating to lead; lead being
a symbol of Saturn. The more usual form is F. Saturnien, ‘sad,


536 SATYR


sowre, lumpish, melancholy ;’ Cot. Both adjectives are from L.
Saturnus, the god Saturn, also the planet Saturn. B. The peculiar
sense is due to the supposed evil influence of the planet Saturn in
astrology; see Chaucer, C. T. 2455-2471. y. Sadturnus (OL.
Saeturnus) is said to mean ‘ the sower;’ cf. sé-men, seed; from the
root sé-, to sow; see Seed. Der. (from Saturnus) Saturn-alia, s. pl.,
the festival of Saturn, a time of licence and unrestrained enjoyment ;
Saturn-ian, pertaining to the golden age of Saturn, Pope, Dunciad,
i. 28, iii. 320, iv. 16. Also Satur-day, q.v.

SATYR, a sylvan god. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Hamlet, i. 2.
140.—F. satyre, ‘a satyr, a monster, halfe man halfe goat ;” Cot.=—
L. satyrus. — Gk. cdrupos, a Satyr, sylvan god, companion of Bacchus.
Der, satyr-ic.

SAUCE, a liquid seasoning for food. (F.—L.) ME. sauce,
Chancer, C. T. 353; P. Plowman, B. xili. 43.—F. sauce, ‘a sauce,
condiment ;’ Cot.=L. salsa, a salted thing; fem. of salsus, salted,
salt, pp. of salire, to salt.=—L. sal, salt; see Salt. Der. sauce-pan ;
sauc-er, a shallow vessel orig. intended to hold sauce, L. L. L. iv. 3.
98; we find Late L. salsdrium, glossed by ME. sauser, in Alex.
Neckam, in Wright’s Vocab. i. 98, 1. 5 ; sauce, verb, to give a relish
to, often used ironically, as in As You Like It, iii. 5. 69 ; sauc-y, i.e.
full of salt, pungent, Twelfth Nt. iii. 4. 159; sazc-i-ly, K. Lear, i. 1.
22, ii. 4. 413 sauc-i-ness, Com. Errors, ii. 2. 28. Also saus-age, q.v.

SAUNTER, to lounge. (F.—L.) ‘ By sauntering still on some
adventure ;’ Hudibras, pt. iii. c. 1. 1. 1343 (ed. Bell, ii, 111), Not
in early use. We find however, in the Romance of Partenay, ed.
Skeat, 1. 4653, that Geoffrey ‘santred and doubted,’ i.e, hesitated
and doubted as to whether he was of the lineage of Presine. And
see gloss. to York Mystery Plays. In the dialect of Cumberland the
word is santer. ‘Santer, saunter; [also], an oald wife santer=an
unauthenticated tradition ;’ Dickinson’s Cumberland Glossary.
B. From AF. sauntrer, to venture forth, to go forth. It occurs in
the Year-book of Edw. III, of the 11-12 year of his reign, p. 619
(Rolls Series) ; where we find mention of a man ‘ ge sauntre en ewe,’
who ventures upon the water, or who puts to sea. It represents a
Late L. form *ex-adventurare, to venture out. See Ex- and
Adventure. The ME. auner, adventure, is not uncommon. See
Notes on E. Etym., p. 256. Der. saunter-er.

SAURIAN, one of the lizard tribe. (Gk.) A modern geological
term; formed from Gk. cavp-a or caip-os, a lizard; with suffix -ian

=L., -i-anus).

SAUSAGE, an intestine of an animal, stuffed with meat salted
and seasoned, (F.—L.) Better sausige. Spelt saulsage, Gascoigne,
Art of Venerie; Works, ed. Hazlitt, ii. 308, 1. 3 from bottom;
sausedge in Palsgrave.— AF. *sauciche (Guernsey sauciche) ; F. saucisse
(also saulcisse in Cotgrave), ‘a saucidge;’ Cot.—Late L. salsicia,
fem. of salsicius, adj. (Georges), made of seasoned meat; a sausage.
Cf. ‘ Salcice, Gallice sauchises ;’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 128,1. 1.— L.salsi-,
for salsus, salted; with suffix -ci-a. See Sauce. See Notes on E.
Etym., p. 257.

SAUTERNE, a kind of wine. (F.) From Sauterne, a place in
France, in the department of Gironde.

SAVAGE, wild, fierce, cruel. (F.—L.) Lit. it merely means
‘living in the woods,’ rustic; hence, wild, fierce; spelt salvage,
Spenser, F. Q. iv. 4. 39; &c. ME. sauage (with u=v), King Ali-
saunder, 1. 869; spelt salvage, Gower, ii. 77; bk. iv. 2202.—OF.
salvage, savaige, mod. F. sauvage, ‘savage, wild;’ Cot. And see
Burguy. = L. siludticus, belonging toa wood, wild. =—L. silua, a wood.
See Silvan. Der. savage-ly, -ness.

SAVANNA, SAVANNAH, a meadow-plain of America.
(Span.—Carib.) ‘Savannahs are clear pieces of land without
woods ;* Dampier, Voyages, an. 1683 ; ed. 1699, i. 87; R. Eden, ed.
Arber, p. 148.—Span. sabana (with 6 sounded as bi-labial v), a large
plain ; said to be of Caribbean origin (Oviedo). | @ The Span. is
sabdna (whence F. savane) ; distinct from sdbana, a sheet for a bed,
an altar-cloth, which is from L. sabana, orig. pl. of sabanum, a linen
cloth, towel. — Gk. oaBavor, a linen cloth, towel.

SAVE, to rescue, make safe. (F.—L.) ME. sauuen (=sauven),
Ancren Riwle, p. 98, 1. 10; sauen (=saven), Chaucer, C. T. 3534.—
F. sauver, ‘to save;’ Cot.—L. saludre, to secure, make safe, —L.
saluus, safe; see Safe. Der. sav-er, save-all, sav-ing, sb., sav-ings-
bank, a bank for money saved; sav-i-our, ME, saveoure (=saveour),
P. Plowman, B. y. 486, from OF. saveor, salveor (Burguy), from L.
acc. saluatérem, a saviour. Also save, prep., ME. saue (=save),
P. Plowman, B. xvii. 100, from F. sawf, in such phrases as sauf mon
droit, my right being reserved; see Cotgrave. Also sav-ing, prep.,
K. John, i. 201.

SAVELOY, CERVELAS, a kind of sausage, (F.—Ital.—L.)
Now corruptly spelt saveloy, but formerly cervelas or cervelat, The
spelling cervelas is in Phillips, Kersey, and Ashe; Bailey, ed. 1735,
has: ‘ Cervelas, Cervelat, a large kind of Bolonia sausage, eaten cold


SAY


in slices.’= MF. cervelat (now cervelas), ‘an excellent kind of drie
saucidge,’ &c.; Cot.—Ital. cervelatia, a thick short sausage. So
called because it contained pigs’ brains (Zambaldi).—Ital. cervello,
brain. = L. cerebellum, dimin. of cerebrum, brain; see Cerebral.

SAVIN, SAVINE, SABINHE, an ever-green shrub. (L.) ME.
saveine, Gower, C. A. iii. 130; bk. vii. 1353. AS. safine, sauine,
savine ; A.S. Leechdoms, ed. Cockayne, i. 34.—L. sabina, or Sabina
herba, savin; lit. Sabine herb (F. sabine). Fem. of Sabinus, Sabine,
The Sabines were a people of central Italy.

SAVORY, a plant of the genus Satureia. (F.—L.) ME. sauereye ;
‘Satureia, sauereye’; Voc. 609. 32.—OF. savereie (Godefroy). = L.
saturéia, savory. . We find also MF. savorée, ‘the herb savory ;’
Cot. App. due to confusion with MF. savourée, fem. of savouré,
‘savoury, that hath a good smack or taste;’ Cot. ; orig. fem. pp. of
MF. savorer, ‘to savor;’ Cot.—OF. savour, savour; see Savour.

SAVOUR, odour, scent, taste. (F.-L.) ME. sauour (savour),
Chaucer, C. T. 15697, 15711 (G 229, 243).—OF. savour (Burguy) ;
saveur, ‘savour;” Cot.—L. sapdrem, acc. of sapor, taste. —L. sapere,
to taste; see Sapid. Der. savour, vb., ME. saueren, Wyclif,
Rom. xii. 3; savour-y, ME. sauery, Wyclif, Mark, ix. 49; savour-
i-ness ; savour-less.

SAVOY, a kind of cabbage. (F.) ‘Savoys, a sort of fine cabbage,
first brought from the territories of the dukedom of Savoy ;’ Phillips,
ed. 1706.

SAW (1), an instrument for cutting, with a toothed edge. (E.)
ME. sawe, P. Plowm. Crede, 1. 753; Voc. 628. 12. AS. saga;
‘Serra, saga;’ Voc. 151. 2.4-Du. zaag; Icel. sig; Dan. sav; Swed.
sdg; G. sdége. B. All from Tent. type *saga, f., lit. ‘a cutter;’
from Teut. base *sag, 2nd grade of Teut. root *seg, to cut. = 4/SEQ, to
cut; cf. L. secare,to cut; see Secant. Der. saw, verb, ME. sawen,
sawyn, Prompt. Pary.; saw-dust, saw-fish, saw-mill, saw-pit; also
saw-y-er (formed like bow-y-er from bow, the y being due to a ME.
verb *saw-i-en =saw-en), spelt sawer, Wright’s Vocab. i. 212, col. 2;
sawyer, Caxton, Godfrey of Boloyne, ch. 57. Also see-saw, q.V.

SAW (2), a saying; maxim. (E.) In As You Like It, ii. 7. 156.
ME. sawe, Chaucer, C. T. 1165 (A 1163). AS. sagu, a saying;
Grein, ii. 387. Allied to AS. secgan, to say.-+lIcel. saga, a saga,
tale; Dan. and Swed. saga; G. sage. See Say. Doublet, saga.

SAXHORN, a kind of horn. (F. and E.) Named after the in-
ventor, Adolphe Sax, a Frenchman; ab. 1840.

SAXTIFRAGE, a genus of plants. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave and
Minsheu and Palsgraye. =F. saxifrage, ‘the herb saxifrage, or stone-
break;* Cot.—L. saxifraga, spleen-wort (White). The adiantum
or ‘maiden-hair’ was also called saxifragus, lit. stone-breaking,
because it was supposed to break stones in the bladder. ‘ They
have a wonderful faculty ... to break the stone, and to expel it out
of the body ; for which cause, rather than for growing on stones and
rocks, I believe verily it was .. called in L. saxifrage;’ Pliny,
b. xxii. c. 21 (Holland’s translation). = L. saxi-=saxo-, for saxum, a
stone, rock; and frag-, base of frangere, to break, cognate with E.
break. Doublet, sassafras.

SAXON, the name of one of a certain Teutonic race. (L.— Tent.)
Late L. Saxonés, pl. Saxons; also Saxo, sing., a Saxon.—AS,
Seaxan, pl., Saxons; so called because armed with a short sword. =
AS. seax, OFries. sax, a knife; lit. ‘cutter;’ cf. L. saxum, a stone
implement. —4/SEQ, to cut; see Secant. Brugmann, i. § 549 c.

SAY (1), to speak, tell. (E.) ME. seggen, P. Plowman, B. v.
617; also siggen ; and often seien, sein, seyn, sain, Chaucer, C. T. 1153
(A II51); saye, seie, id. 781. AS. secgan, secgean, to say (pt. t.
segde, sede, pp. gesegd, sed), Grein, li. 421.41 cel. segja; Dan.
sige; Swed. saga; G. sagen; OHG. sagén. B. All these are weak
verbs, from a Teut. base *sag, allied to Idg. 4/SEQ, to say. Cf.
Lithuan. sakyti, to say, sakau, I say; Gk. évveme (for *év-cen-€) ;
OL. in-sec-e, imp. s., tell, say. And see Sweet, N. E. Gram., § 1293.
From the same root is W. heb, an utterance ; see Stokes-Fick, p. 296.
Der. say-ing, L. L. L. i. 2. 21; sooth-say-er; and see saga, saw (2).

SAY (2), a kind of serge. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Say, a delicate serge
or woollen cloth ;’ Halliwell. ‘Saye clothe, serge ;’ Palsgrave. ME.
saie; in Wyclif, Exod. xxvi. 9, the later version has say where the
earlier has sarge, i.e. serge. — OF. saie; Cotgrave has saye, ‘a long-
skirted jacket, coat, or cassock ;’ also sayete, ‘ the stuffe sey.’ [Florio
has Ital. saio, ‘a long side coate,’ and saietta, ‘a kind of fine serge or
cloth for coates; it is also called rash.’ Neuman has Span. saya,
sayo, a tunic; sayefe, a thin light stuff.]  B, The stuff say was so
called because used for making a kind of mantle called in L. sagum
(pl. saga, as f. sing. >F. saie); cf. Late L. sagum (1), a mantle, (2)
a kind of cloth (Ducange).—Gk. odyos, a coarse cloak, a soldier’s
mantle; cf. cay or gayn, harness, armour, ga@yya, a pack-saddle,
also a covering, a large cloak. These Gk. words are not of Celtic
origin, as has been said, but allied to Gk. adrreav (fut. odfw), to
pack, to load. See Prellwitz, See Sumpter,


¢


SAY.


SAY (3), to try, assay. (F.—L.) In Pericles, i. 1. 59; asa sb., in
K. Lear, v. 3. 143. Merely an abbreviation of Assay or Essay ;
see Essay.

SBIRRO, an Italian police-officer. (Ital—L.—Gk.) Modern.
Byron has the pl. sbirri; The Two Foscari, A. ii. sc. 1 (Marina).
=Ital. sbirro (with unoriginal s); formerly birro, ‘a catchpoale,’
Florio. So called from wearing a cloak.=L, birrus, a cloak to
keep off rain ; by-form of burrus, ‘ reddish’ (because of its colour), =
Gk. muppés, reddish. Gk. adp, fire. See Bureau. (PI. sbirri.)

SCAB, a crust over a sore. (Scand.) ME. scab, Chaucer, C. T.
12292 (C 358). Of Scand. origin; as.shown by the sc=sk.— Dan.
and Swed. skabb.4-AS. sceab, sceb (whence E. shabby). B. The lit.
sense is ‘itch ;’ something that is scratched; cf. L. scabiés, scab, itch,
from scabere, to scratch. From the Teut. base *skad-, to scratch,
whence mod. E. shave; see Shave. Der. scabb-ed, scabb-y, scabb-i-
ness. Also shabb-y, q.v.

SCABBARD, a sword-sheath. (F.—Teut.) Spelt scabberd in
Baret (1580). Scabbard is a corruption of ME. scaubert (v. r. scau-
berc), Rob. of Glouc. p. 273, 1. 5538. In Prompt. Parv. p. 443, we
find all three forms, scawberk, scawbert, scauberd. The form scau-
berk also appears as scaberke, Trevisa, v. 373; and is palatalised to
scaberge, Romance of Partenay, 2790. B. Scauberk is obviously,
like hauberk, a French word of Teutonic origin; but it does not appear
in O. French texts; except that Wedgwood cites vaginas, glossed by
AF, escaubers, from Johannes de Garlandia. Godefroy quotes the
same; from a sing. form escauberc ; where -berc (as in OF. hau-berc)
means ‘protection.’ [Note that the OF. halberc or hauberc, a
hauberk, is also spelt haubert, just as scauberk is also scaubert ; and
corresponding to the form scaberge we have haberge-on.| _y. ‘The
prefix appears to answer to OF. escale, mod. F. écale, a scale, husk,
derived from OHG, scala, G. schale. G. schale means a shell, peel,
husk, rind, scale, outside, skull, cover of a book, haft (of a knife),
bowl, vase. In composition schal means cover or outside; as in
schalbrett, outside plank (of a tree), scha/holz, outside of a tree cut
into planks, schalwerk, a lining of planks. Cf. schalen, to plank,
inlay; messer schalen, to haft knives. 8. The prob. sense is ‘ scale-
protection,’ or ‘cover-cover ;’ it is one of those numerous redupli-
cated words in which the latter half repeats the sense of the former.
The notion of putting a knife into a haft is much the same as that of
putting a sword into a sheath. I conclude that scabbard =scale-berk,
with the reduplicated sense of ‘cover-cover.’ See Seale (1) and
Hauberk, Distinct from scabbard, variant of scale-board, a very
thin board. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 257.

SCABIOUS, a plant. (F.—L.) ME. scabiose; Voc. 609. 36.—
MF. and F. scabieuse, f.—L. scabidsa (herba), a plant supposed to
be good for skin-eruptions. = L. scabiés, an itch. = L. scabere, to scrape,
scratch. Cf. E. scabrous, rough, F. scabreux, from L. scabrosus, rough,
from scaber, rough.

SCAFFOLD, a temporary platform. (F.—Gk. and Teut.) ME.
scaffold, scafold, Chaucer, C. T. 2533, 3384.—ONorth F. *escafalt,
found as escafaut, mod. F. échafaud. A still older form was escadaf-
fault (Ducange), for *escadafalt; with which cf. Span. catafalco, a
funeral canopy over a bier, Ital. catafalco, a funeral canopy, stage,
scaffold (whence mod. F, catafalque) ; showing that the form arose
from prefixing es- (from L. ex, prep.) to the form cadafalt, the
equivalent of Span. and Ital. catafalco. B. The word catafalco is a
hybrid one; the orig. sense was ‘a wooden erection crowning walls,
and projecting from them on both sides; thence the besieged com-
-manded assailants beneath;’ N. E. D., s.v. catafalgue. Perhaps
from Gk. xara, down; and OHG. balcho, OSax. balko, a balk, a
beam. y. But Hatzfeld derives F. chafaud (the equivalent of Ital.
catafalco) from Gk. xara, down, and a Late L. type *falicum, from
‘L. fala, a kind of scaffold. (Doubtful.) Der. scaffold, verb;
-scaffold-ing.

SCALD (1), to burn with a hot liquid, to bun. (F.—L.) ME.
scalden, pp. yscalded, Chaucer, C, T. Six-text, A 2020; Tyrwhitt (1.
2022) reads yskalled, but the 6 best MSS. have yscalded. ‘ Schaldinde
water, scalding water;’ Ancren Riwle, p. 246, 1. 3.—ONorth F.
escalder, corresponding to OF. eschalder (Marie de France, Equitan,
261), later form eschauder, ‘to scald;” Cot. Norm. dial. écauder
(Moisy); mod. F, échauder.—L. excaldare, to wash in hot water. =
L. ex, out, very; and caldus, hot, contracted form of calidus, hot;
_ef. calére, to be hot. See Ex- and Caldron. Der. scald, sb.

- SCALD (2), scabby. (Scand.) In Shak. Hen. V, v. 1. 5. Con-
tracted form of scalled, i.e. afflicted with the scall; see Scall, ME.
.scalled, Chaucer, C. T, 629 (A 627). Cf. Dan. skaldet, bald.

SCALD (3), a Scandinavian poet. (Scand.) ME. scald, Ormulum,
2192.—Icel. skald, a poet; older form skald (Noreen). Perhaps
-allied to scold; but the long vowel is against this.

SSCALE (1), a shell, small thin plate or flake on a fish, husk.
({F,—OHG,) ME, scale; ‘ fisshes scales,’ Gower, C. A. i. 275 ; bk. ii,


SCAMMONY 537


3456; scale (or shale), the shell of a nut, P. Plowman, C. xiii. 145,
and footnote.—OF. escale (F. écale).—OHG. scala (G. schale), a
scale, husk.-AS. scealu, a shell or husk; Dan. and Swed. skal,
a shell, pod, husk. Cf. Goth. skalja,a tile. [The AS. form gave
the ME. form shale; with sh. } B. All from Tent. type *skala, f.,
lit. ‘a flake,’ that which can be peeled off; from Teut. base *skal,
and grade of strong verb *skel-an-, to cleave, divide; see Skill.
Der. scale, verb; scal-ed, scal-y, scal-i-ness, Allied to Seale (2),
Shell, Seall, Scull, Skill. And see scall-op, scal-p. Doublet,
shale.

SCALE (2), a bowl or dish of a balance. (F.—Teut.) ME.
skale, schale (also scoale), a bowl, Ancren Riwle, p. 214, note i;
scale, Layamon, 5368. [The form scoale is from Icel. skal, scale. |
= OF. escale, a cup (Godefroy). —Icel. skal, Dan. skaal, Swed. skal,
a bowl; cf. Du. schaal, scale, bowl. Allied to Seale (1); being
from Teut. base *skél-, 3rd grade of Teut. *skelan-, to cleave
(above). Der. scole (obsolete); as in ‘ Lanx, the scole of a balance,’
Nomenclator, 1585 (Nares, ed. Wright and Halliwell); ‘Then Jove
his golden scoles weighed up;’ Chapman, tr. of Homer, Iliad,
b. xxii. 1. 180; answering to the ME. form scoale above.

SCALE (3), a ladder, series of steps, graduated measure, gra-
dation. (L.) ME. scale, Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, pt. i. § 12.
Borrowed immediately from L. sca/a, usually in pl. scale, a flight of
steps, ladder. (Hence also F. échelle.) B, L, sca-la represents
*scan(t)sla, i.e. *scand-sla, that by which one ascends or descends;
cf. L. scandere, to climb; see Scan. Brugmann, i. § 414. Der.
scale, verb, to climb by a ladder; Surrey translates ‘Herent
parietibus scale, postesque sub ipsos Nituntur gradibus’ (Aineid, ii.
442) by ‘ And rered vp ladders against the walles, Under the win-
dowes scaling by their steppes ;’ clearly borrowed from Ital. scalare,
to scale. See Escalade.

SCALENE, having three unequal sides, said of a triangle. (L.—
Gk.) Phillips, ed. 1706, has: ‘Scalenum, or Scalenous Triangle.’ —
L. scalénus, adj. Gk. oxaAnvds, scalene, uneven. Perhaps allied to
oKodtds, crooked.

SCALL, a scab, scabbiness, eruption on the skin. (Scand.) In
Levit. xiii. 30. ‘Thou most haue the skalle ;’ Chaucer, Lines to Adam
Scrivener. Gen. used with ref. to the head. ‘On his heued he has
the skalle ;? Cursor Mundi, 11819.—Icel. skalli,a bare head. The
lit. sense may be ‘having a peeled head;’ cf. Swed. skallig, bald,
skala, to peel. If so, it is nearly related to Dan. and Swed. skal, a
husk; see Seale (1). Der. scald (2), q.v.

SCALLION, a plant allied to the garlic and onion. (F.—L.—
Gk. —Pheenician.) Phillips, ed. 1706, gives both scallion and shalot.
ME. scalone, P. Plowman, C. ix. 310.—ONorth F. escalogne, a
scallion; see further under Shallot.

SCALLOP, SCOLLOP, a bi-valvular shell-fish, with the edge
of its shell in a waved form. (F.—Tent.) Holland’s Pliny, b. ix.
c. 33, treats ‘ Of Scallops.” ME. scalop (with one 7), Prompt. Parv.,
p- 442.— OF. escalope, a shell ; a word used by Rutebuef; see quota-
tions in Godefroy ; and ef. F. escalope in Littré. B. Of Tent. origin ;
cf. MDu. schelpe (Du. schelp), a shell; Hexham. Hexham has also:
‘ S. Jacobs schelpe,S. James his shell ;’ and the shell worn by pilgrims
who had been to St. James’s shrine was of the kind which we call ‘a
scallop-shell;? Chambers, Book of Days, ii. 121. Thus Palsgrave
has: ‘ scaloppe-shell, quocquille de saint Iacques.’ Cf. G. schelfe,
ahusk. -y. The forms schel-pe, schel-fe are extensions from the form
which appears in E. as shell; see Seale (1), Shell. Der. scallop,
verb, to cut an edge into convex lobes or scallop-like curves. And
see Scalp,

SCALP, the skin of the head on which the hair grows.
(Scand.) ‘Her scalpe, taken out of the charnel-house ;’ Sir T. More, |
p.- 57a. ME. scalp, ‘ And his wiknes in his scalp doune falle;’ ~
Early Eng. Psalter, ed. Stevenson, vii. 17; where scalp means the ‘,
top of the head, Lat. wertex. Evidently a Scand. word, due to a form
allied to that whence we also have MDu. schelpe, a shell, and OF.
escalope, a shell; see Scallop. B. We may compare MSwed.
skalp, a sheath, Icel. skalpr, a sheath; Dan. dial. skalp, a husk, pod.
y- The orig. sense is shel or scull (head-shell) ; and the word is allied
to scale; see Scale(1). Florio has Ital. scalpo della testa, ‘ the skalp
of ones head ;’ but this is merely borrowed from Teutonic. Der.
scalp, verb; which may have been confused with L. scalpere (see
Scalpel).

SCALPEL, a small surgeon’s knife for dissecting. (L.) . Phillips,
ed. 1706, has scalper or scalping-iron; Todd’s Johnson has scalpel.
Scalpel is from L. scalpellum,a scalpel; dimin. of scalprum,a knife. =
L. scalpere, to cut, carve, scratch, engrave; (whence E. scalping-iron).
Allied to L. sculpere; see Sculpture.

SCAMBLE; see Scamper, Scramble, Shamble.

SCAMMONY, a cathartic gum-resin. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt
scamony in Arnold’s Chron. (1502), ed, 1811, p. 164, 1. 16; skamonye,


538 SCAMP


Libell of Eng. Policy, 1. 360.—OF. scammonie, scammonée, ‘scam-
mony, purging bind-weed ;” Cot.—L. scamménia. —Gk. oxappwvia,
or rather cxapwvia, scammony, a kind of bind-weed. It grows in
Mysia, Colophon, and Priene, in Asia Minor; Pliny, b. xxvi, c. 8.

SCAMP; see Scamper.

SCAMPHR, to run with speed, flee away. (F.—L.) ‘ We were
forc’d to... scamper away as well as we could;’ Dampier’s
Voyages, an. 1685 (R.). The suffix -er is, as usual, frequentative, so
that the orig. form is scamp; but this is only found as a sb. in the
sense of ‘ worthless fellow,’ or ‘ cheat,’ though the orig. meaning is
merely ‘ fugitive’ or ‘ vagabond,’ one given to frequent shifts or de-
campings. = ONorth F., escamper, or rather s’escamper, ‘to scape,
flies’ Cot.; OF. eschamper (Godefroy).—L. ex, out; and campus, a
field, esp. a field of battle. A parallel formation to decamp, q. v.
See Ex- and Camp. Der. scamper, sb.

SCAN, to count the measures in a poem, to scrutinise. (L.) In
Shak. Oth. iii. 3. 245; Skelton, Bowge of Court, 245. In common
use in the pp., which was frequently spelt scand, as in Spenser, F. Q.
vii. 6. 8, where it is used in the sense of ‘ climbed.’ The verb should
rather have been scand, but the pp. was formed as scand (for scanded),
and then the final d was taken to be the pp. termination, and was
accordingly dropped.—L. scandere, to climb; also, to scan a verse.
Cf. Skt. skand, to spring, ascend. Der. scans-ion, formed (by analogy)
from L. scansio, a scanning, like the pp. scansus. Also scans-or-i-al,
formed for climbing, from scansdrius, belonging to climbing. From
the same root, a-scend, a-scent, de-scend, de-scent, con-de-scend, tran-
scend ; scale (3), e-sca-lade. See notes on E. Etym., p. 259.

SCANDAL, opprobrious censure, disgrace, offence. (F.—L.—
Gk.) ME. scandal; spelt scandle, Ancren Riwle, p. 12,1. 12.—F.
scandale, ‘a scandall, offence;’ Cot. We also find OF. escandle
(Burguy) ; whence ME, scandle.=L. scandalum.=Gk. oxdydadov, a
snare; also scandal, offence, stumbling-block. The orig. sense
seems to be that of oxayv5dAnOpoy also, viz. the spring of a trap, the
stick on a trap on which the bait was placed, which sprang up
and shut the trap. Prob. from 4/SQAND, to spring up; see Scan.
Der. scandal-ise, from F. scandaliser, formerly scandalizer, ‘ to scan-
dalize,? Cot. Also scandal-ous, from F. scandaleux, ‘scandalous,
offensive,’ Cot. ; scandal-ous-ly, -ness. Doublet, slander.

SCANSION, SCANSORIAL; see Scan.

SCANT, insufficient, sparing, very little. (Scand.) ME. scant,
Prompt. Pary. Chaucer speaks of ‘the inordinate scantnesse’ of
clothing; Pers. Tale, De Superbia (Six-text, I 414). Scant has been
substituted for scamt.—Icel. skamt, neut. of skammr, short, brief;
whence skamta, to dole out, apportion meals (and so, to scant or
stint). Cf. also Icel. skamir, sb., a dole, share, portion (hence, short
or scant measure). In Norwegian, the m¢ changes to vt, so that we
find skantad, pp. measured or doled out, skanta, to measure narrowly,
reckon closely; skant, a portion, dole, piece measured off (Aasen).
The m is preserved in the phrase ‘to scamp work,’ i.e. to do it in-
sufficiently, and in the proy. E. skimping, scanty (Halliwell). Der.
scant, adv., Romeo, i. 2. 1043 scant, verb, Merch. Ven. ii. 1. 17;
scant-ly, Antony, ili. 4. 6; scant-y, scant-i-ly, scant-i-ness.

SCANTLING, a piece of timber cut of a small size, sample,
pattern. (F.—L.—Gk.; with L. prefix.) Here -ing is for -on. Pals-
grave has scantlon. ME. scantilone, Rom. Rose, 7064; skantulon,
Voc. 606.16. The word has doubtless been confused with scan¢ and
. scanty; but the old sense is ‘pattern,’ or ‘sample,’ or a small piece ;
with reference to the old word cantle. As used inShak. (Troil. i. 3.
341) and in Cotgraye, it is certainly allied to OF. eschanteler,
and answers to ONorth F. escantillon, corresponding to OF. eschan-
tillon, ‘a small cantle or corner-piece, also a scantling, sample,
pattern, proof of any sort of merchandise;’ Cot. Cf.also F. eschante-
ler, ‘to break into cantles,’ to cut up into small pieces ; Cotgrave,
Burguy.—OF. es-, prefix, from L. ex, out; and ONorth F. cantel
(Burguy), a cantle, corner, piece, OF. chantel, chanteau, ‘a corner-
peece, or piece broken off from the corner;? Cot. Hence E. canzle,
scantle, Hen. IV, iii. 1.100. See Cantle. @ Cf. ME. scaztilon,
a measure, Cursor Mundi, 2231.

SCAPE (1), a leafless stalk bearing the fructification. (L.)
Modern. —L. scapus, a shaft, stalk, stem ; allied to Sceptre.

SCAPE (2), short for escape, ‘Help us to scape ;’ Chaucer, C. T.,
A 3608. See Escape.

SCAPEGOAT, a goat allowed to escape into the wilderness,
(F.—L.; and E.) Levit. xvi. 8. From scape and goat; scape being
a mutilated form of escape, in common use; see Temp. ii. 2. 117, &c.
See Escape and Goat. So also scape-grace, one who has escaped
grace or is out of favour, a graceless fellow.

SCAPULAR, belonging to the shoulder-blades, (L.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. [He also gives it as a sb., equivalent to the word
generally spelt scapulary; see below.J—Late L, scapularis, adj.
formed from L. pl. scapule, the shoulder-blades, from a sing. scapula,


SCARF


not in use. Der. scapular-y, spelt scapularie in Minsheu, a kind of
scarf worn by friars and others, so called from passing over the
shoulders; ME. scaplorye, scapelary, Prompt. Parv., chapolory, P.
Plowman’s Crede, 1. 550; from F. scapulaire, Late L. scapuldre.

SCAR (1), the mark of a wound, blemish. (F.—L.—Gk.)
‘ Scarre of a wounde, covsture;’ Palsgrave. Spelt skarre, Gascoigne,
Fruites of Warre, st. 40, and st. 90; ME, scar, Wyclif, Lev. xxii. 22.
- MF. escare, ‘a skar or scab;’ Cot. [Cf. Span. and Ital. escara,
scar, scurf, crust.]—L. eschara, a scar, esp. one produced by a burn.
=- Gk. éoydpa, a hearth, fire-place, grate for a fire, brazier, scar of a
burn. Der. scar, verb, Rich. III, v. 5. 23.

SCAR (2), SCAUR, a rock. (Scand.) ME. scarre, Wyclif,
1 Kings, xiv. 5 ; skerre (Halliwell) ; Lowland Sc. scar, scaur (Jamie-
son); Orkney skerry, a rock in the sea (id.).—Icel. sker, a skerry,
isolated rock in the sea; Dan. skjer, Swed. skar. Cf. Icel. skor, a
rift in arock. So called because ‘cut off’ from the main land or
‘cut down;’ see Shear. Doublet, skare; and cf. score.

SCARAB, a beetle. (F.—L.) ‘They are the moths and scarabs
of astate;’ Ben Jonson, Poetaster, iv. 6. 16.—MF. scarabee (Hatz-
feld),—L. scarabeum, acc. of scarabeus,a beetle. Der. scarab-ee
(F.) ; scarab-eus (L.). iat

SCARAMOUCH, 2a buffoon. (F.—Ital.—Teut.) ‘ Scaramouch
and Harlequin at Paris;’ Dryden, Kind Keeper, A.i.sc. 1. ‘Th’
Italian merry-andrews took their place . . . Stout Scaramoucha with
rush lance rode in;’ Dryden, Epilogue to Silent Woman, spoken by
Mr. Hart, ll. 11-15. ‘ Scaramoche, a famous Italian zani, or mounte-
bank, who acted here in England 1673;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674-
Blount, writing at the time, is certainly right. The name was taken
from a famous Italian buffoon, mentioned again in the Spectator, no.
283. He died at Paris in 1694; Chambers, Book of Days, ii. 671.
His name was (rightly) Scaramuccia, altered by Dryden to Scara-
moucha, and in French to Scaramouche (Littré).—F. scaramouche.—
Ital. Scaramuccia, proper name; lit. ‘a skirmish,’ a word derived
from Teutonic; see Skirmish.

SCARCE, rare, not plentiful. (F.—L.) ME. scars, Rob. of
Glouc. p. 334, 1. 6862. Chaucer has the adv. scarsly, C. T. 585
(A 583).—ONorth F. escars (Burguy), OF. eschars, ‘scarce, needy,
scanty, saving, niggard ;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. scarso, scarce; mod. F. échars
(Littré). B. Derived by Diez from Late L. scarpsus, shorter form of
excarpsus, used A. D. 805 as a substitute for L. excerptus, pp. of ex-
cerpere, (prob. also excarpere in Low Latin), to pick out, select, extract.
The lit. sense is selected, extracted, or picked out, hence ‘select,’
and so scarce; and Diez remarks that excarpsus is found just with the
sense of Ital. scarso.—L. ex, out; and carpere, to pluck, allied to E.
harvest. See Excerpt; also Ex- and Harvest. Der. scarce-ly,
ME. scarse-liche, K. Alisaunder, 3552; scarce-ness, Deut. viii. 9, ME.
skarsnesse, Gower, C. A. il. 284; bk. v. 46745 scarc-i-ty, ME. scarseté,
K. Alisaunder, 5495, from OF. escarsete (escharsete in Burguy).
q Cf. AF. escars, niggard, Philip de Thaun, Bestiary, 602 ; and AF.
escarseté, scarcity, Political Songs, ed. Wright, p. 186.

SCARE, to frighten away. (Scand.) ME. skerren, skeren, Prompt.
Parv. p. 4573 Destruction of Troy, 13404. Cf.‘ the skerre hors’ =
the scared horse, Ancren Riwle, p. 242, note d. The ME, verb.
appears to be formed from the adj. skerre, scared, timid. = Icel. skjarr,
shy, timid; skjarrt hross, a shy horse, just like ME. skerre hors, and
Sc. scar, skair, timorous (Jamieson). Cf. Icel. skirra, to bar, prevent;
reflexive, skirrask, to shun, shrink from ; skirrast vid, to shrink from;
Norw. skjerr, shy, skjerra, to scare; Swed. dial. skjarra, to scare.
Further connexions doubtful. Der. scare-crow, something to scare
crows away, Meas. for Meas. ii. I. 1.

SCARF (1), a light piece of dress worn on the shoulders or about
the neck, (Du.—Low G.) Spenser has scarfe, F. Q. v. 2. 3; and
so in Baret.—Du. scherf, a shard, a shred; the sense being supplied
from Low G. scherf, a military scarf, girdle (Brem. Wort.) ; or we
may say that the Low G. word was influenced by Du. pronunciation.
B. Wealso find the form skarp ; as in ‘ with a skarpe about her neke ;’
Machyn’s Diary (C.S.), p. 180 (1558). This is borrowed from
ONorth F. eskarpe (Godefroy), MF. escharpe, ¢a scarf, baudrick ;’
Cot. It also meant a scrip fora pilgrim, and is derived from MDu.
schar pe, schaer pe, scer pe, a scrip, pilgrim’s wallet (Oudemans) ; Low G.
schrap, a scrip (Bremen Worterbuch); and see Serip, Scrap.
y. With Du. scherf, a shard, shiver, fragment, cf. G. scherbe,
a fragment, also ‘a scarf’ in the sense of scarf (2) below. This
suggests that the form skarp was influenced by scarf(2). @] The
G. scharpe, a scarf, sash, Swed. sharp, Dan. skjerf, skjerf, are not
true Teut. words, but borrowed from French. Der. scarf, verb,
Hamlet, v. 2. 133 scarfskin, the epidermis or outer skin (Phillips),
Doublets, scrip, scrap.

SCARF (2), to join pieces of timber together. (Scand.) ‘In the
joining of the stern, where it was scarfed;’ Anson’s Voyage, b. ii.
c.7(R.).. The pp. skarvyd occurs in 1531-2; Strutt, Manners and


SCARF


Customs, iii. 53. And in Phillips, ed. 1706. The word is Swedish.
=Swed. skarfva, to join together, piece out.=Swed. skarf, a scarf,
seam, joint; cf. scarfyxa, a chip-axe.4Bavarian scharben, to cut a
notch in timber, G,. scharben, OHG. scarbén, to cut small. From
Tent. *skard, 2nd grade of *skerdan-, to cut; asin AS. sceorfan (pt. t.
scearf), to scrape. Cf. Du. scherf, a shard; see Scarf (1).

SCARF (3), a cormorant. (Icel.) A local name; also, corruptly,
scarth, scart. = Icel. skarfr, Swed. skarf, Dan. skarv, a cormorant.
+G. scharbe, OHG. scarba.

SCARIF'Y, to cut the skin slightly. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Of Scari-
Sying, called boxyng or cuppyng;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth,
b. ili. c. 7.—F. scarifier, ‘to scarifie;? Cot.—L. scarificare, to scarify,
scratch open ; longer form of scarifare, which also occurs (Lewis).
B. Not cognate with, but absolutely borrowed from Gk. cxapipdopar,
I scratch or scrape up.=Gk. oxdptpos, a style for drawing outlines
(a sharp-pointed instrument). Cognate with L. scribere, to write;
see Scribe. Der. scarific-at-ion, from F. scarification (Cot.).

SCARLET, a bright-red colour. (F.—Pers.) ME.  scarlat,
O. Eng. Miscellany, p. 92, 1. 69; skarlet, p. 168, 1. 103 scarlet, P.
Plowman, B. ii. 15.—OF. escarlate, ‘scarlet ;’ Cot. [Mod. F. écar-
late; Span. escarlata; Ital. scarlatto.|—Pers. sagalat, siqalat, or
suglat, scarlet cloth. Cf. Pers. sag/dtiin, saglatin, scarlet cloth, saglaz,
cloth; Rich. Dict. p. 837. B. The Pers. saglatin is clearly the
origin of ME, ciclatoun, Chaucer, C. T. Group B, 1924, on which
see my note, and Col. Yule’s note to his edition of Marco Polo, i. 249.
He remarks that sugla¢ is applied, in the Punjab trade returns, to
broad-cloth ; it was used for banners, ladies’ robes, quilts, leggings,
housings and pavilions. We find also Arab. sagarla¢, a warm woollen
cloth ; Rich. Dict. p. 836; also Arab. séglat, a fine painted or figured
cloth, a canopy over a litter. It seems to have been the name of a
stuff, which was frequently of a scarlet colour; and hence to have
become the name of the colour. Cf. ‘ scarlet reed ;’ Chaucer, Prol.
456. So also Telugu sakalati, sakalatu, woollen or broad-cloth;
Wilson, Gloss, of Indian Terms, p. 455. This can hardly be from
English, as Wilson suggests, but corresponds to the Pers. and Ital.
forms. 4 The Turkish zsterlaz, scarlet, is merely a loan-word from
Italian; Zenker, p. 49. Der. scarlet-runner,a climbing plant with
scarlet flowers; scarlat-ina, a disease named from the scarlet rash
which accompanies it, Ital. scarlattina, from Ital. scarlatto, scarlet.

SCARP, part of a fortification. (F.—Ital.—Teut.) Formerly
written scarf, as in Cotgrave, but this is an E. adaptation, by con-
fusion with scarf. ‘Scarp, the inward slope of the moat or ditch of
a place;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.—F. escarpe, ‘a scarf, or little wall
without the main rampire of a fort;’ Cot. Ital. scarpa, ‘a counter-
scarfe or curtein ofa wall;’ Florio. B. Perhaps from OHG. scarpon,
to cut; with regard to the steep face presented. Or from Du. scherp,
Low G. scharp, sharp; cognate with E. Sharp, q.v. Der. counter-
scarp, escarp-ment,

SCATCHES, stilts. (F.-Low G.) See Skate (2).

SCATHE, to harm, injure. (Scand.) In Romeo, i. 5. 86. ME.
scapen, Prompt. Pary. [The sb. scathe, harm, is in Chaucer, C. T.
448 (A 446); Havelok, 2006.] The sc (=sk) shows that the word
is Scand., not E.—Icel. skada; Swed. skada; Dan. skade.4AS.
sceadan, pp. scod; G. and Du. schaden; Goth. gaskathjan, str. vb.,
pt. t. gaskoth, pp. gaskathans, B. All from Teut. base *skath, to
harm; Fick, iii. 330. Cf. Gk. d-oxn67s, unharmed. Brugmann,
i.§ 791. Der. scathe, harm, injury, also spelt scath, Rich. III, i.
3. 317, from Icel. skadi; scath-ful, Tw. Nt. v. 593 scathe-less, or
scath-less, ME. scatheles, Rom. of the Rose, 1550.

SCATTER, to disperse, sprinkle. (E.) ME. scateren (with one
t), Chaucer, C. T. 16382 (G 914) ;- skatered, pt. t., Early E. Psalter,
xvii. 15. The frequentative of prov. E. scat, (1) to scatter, (2) to

break to pieces, to shatter. Scatter is the Northern form corre-
sponding to E. Shatter, q.v.. Cf. Gk. oxedavvum, I sprinkle,
scatter, oxédaars, a scattering, L. scandula, a shingle for a roof, Skt.
kshad, skhad, to cut. Der. scatter-ling, a vagrant, one of a scattered
tace, Spenser, F. Q. ii. 10.63. Doublet, shatter, q.v-

SCAUP-DUCK, a duck so named because she frequents musse/-
scaups or mussel-scalps, i.e. beds of rock or sand on which mussels

collect ; see Newton, Dict. of Birds. (Scand. and E.) Scalp (see
E.D.D.) means (1) skull, head . . (4) a bank of sand or mud un-
covered at low tide, esp. a mussel-bed. Scaup is a dialectal variant
of Scalp, q. v.

SCAUBR;; see Sear (2).

SCAVENGER, one who cleans the streets. (ONorth F.—Teut.)
Spelt scavengere, Bp. Hall, Satires, b. iv. sat. 7. 1. 48. The word
appears in the Act of 14 Ch. IJ, cap. 2 (Blount). As in the case of
messenger (for messager) and. passenger (for passager), the 7 before
g is intrusive, and scavenger stands for scavager. B. The scavager
was an officer who had formerly. very different duties; see Riley’s
tr. of Liber Albus, p. 34, which mentions ‘the scavagers, ale-con-


SCHISM


ners, bedel, and other officials.’ Riley says: ‘ scavagers, officers
whose duty it was originally to take custom upon the scavage, i.e.
inspection of the opening out, of imported goods, At a later date,
part of their duty was to see that the streets were kept clean; and
hence the modern word scavenger, whose office corresponds with that
of the rakyer (taker) of former times.’ As a fact, the old word for
scavenger is always rakyer; see P. Plowman, v. 322, and note. That
the scavagers had to see to the cleansing of the streets, is shown in
the Liber Albus, p. 313. Wedgwood cites the orig. French, which
has the spelling scawageour. Y. Scavage or scawage is an AF.
derivative, signifying ‘inspection;’ formed, with the suffix -age
(< L. -aticum), from ONorth F. escauwer, to look, inspect. =OSax.
skawon, to behold; cognate with AS. sceGwian, to look at, and E.
show. See Blount’s Nomolexicon, where the various spellings
scavage, schevage, schewage, and scheawing (showing) are cited; he
says: ‘In a charter of Hen, II it is written scewinga and (in Mon.
Ang. 2 par. fol. 890 b.) sceawing, and elsewhere I find it in Latin
tributum ostensorium. Some of these forms are due to confusion
with ME. schewen, to show. See further in Riley, p. 196, ‘ Of
scavage;’ again, ‘Scauage is the shewe,’ &c., Arnold’s Chron.
(1502), ed. 1811, p. 99,1. 13; and see Sceawing in the Glossary to
Diplomatarium A“vi Saxonici, ed. Thorpe. See Show. And see
Notes on E, Etym., p. 259.

SCENE, stage of a theatre, view, spectacle, place of action. (L. —
Gk.) Common in the dramatists. ‘ A scene, or theater ;’ Minsheu.
The old plays, as, e.g., that of Roister Doister, have the acts and
scenes marked in Latin, by Actus and Scena or Scena; and we cer-
tainly Anglicised the Latin word, instead of borrowing the F. one,
which Cotgrave actually omits.—L. scéna.—Gk. oxnvy, a sheltered
place, tent, stage, scene ; cf. Skt. chhaya (for *sk@ya), shade. Der.
scen-ic, Gk. oxnvikds; scen-er-y, written scenary by Dryden (R.),
from L. scéna@rius, belonging to a play.

SCENT, to discern by the smell, (F.—L.) The spelling is
false; it ought to be sevt, as when first introduced. A similar false
spelling occurs in scythe; so also we find scite for site, scituation for
situation, in the 17th century, ‘To sent, to smell;’ Minsheu, ed.
1627. ‘I sent the mornings ayre;’ Hamlet, i. 5. 58 (ed. 1623).
‘ Delycious of sent;’ Barclay, Ship of Fools, i. 100.—F, sentir, ‘to
feel, also to sent, smell;’ Cot.—L. sentire, to feel, perceive. See
Sense. Der. scent, sb., spelt sent, i.e. discernment, Spenser, F. Q.
i. I. 43, last line; and in Barclay (above).

SCEPTIC, doubting, hesitating; often as sb. (F.—L.—Gk.)
‘ The Philosophers, called Scepticks ;” Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, s.v.
Sceptical.=F, sceptique, ‘one that is ever seeking, and never finds ;
the fortune, or humour of a Pyrrhonian philosopher ;’ Cot.—L.
scepticus.= Gk. oxenrinds, thoughtful, inquiring ; oxerriol, pl., the
Sceptics, followers of Pyrrho (died abt. B.c. 285). — Gk. root *skep-,
as In oxénropa, I consider, Allied to Scope. Der. sceptic-al
(Blount) ; sceptic-ism.

SCEPTRE, a staff, as a mark of royal authority. (F. —L.—Gk.)
ME. ceptre, Chaucer, C. T. 14379 (B 3563).—F. sceptre, ‘a royall
scepter;’ Cot.=L. scéptrum.—Gk. oxjmrpoy, a staff to lean on;
also, a sceptre.=Gk. oxnmrev, to prop; also, to lean on, Cf.
oxnnrds, a gust or squall of wind; o«nmrev is also used in the sense
to hurl, throw, shoot, dart. Allied to L. scapus, a shaft, stem. Der.
sceptr-ed, Rich. II, ii. 1. 40.

SCHEDULE, an inventory, list. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. L.L.L.
i. 1. 18; spelt scedude in the first folio.— MF. schedule, or cedule, ‘a
schedule, scroll, note, bill;? Cot.—L. schedula, a small leaf of
paper; dimin. of scheda, also scida (Cicero, Att. i. 20 fiz.), a strip
of papyrus-bark. B, The Gk. oxé5n, a tablet, leaf, may have been
borrowed from L. scheda (see Liddell); but we find also Gk. oxid5n,
a cleft piece of wood, a splint, which is the true original of L.
scida. (ChisnotaLatinsymbol.) From Gk. oxifev (= *oxid-yew),
to cleave; from 4/SKHEID, to cleave ;. cf. Skt. chhid, to cut. See
Schism.

SCHEME, a plan, purpose, plot. (L.—Gk.) ‘ Scheme (schema),
the outward fashion or habit of anything, the adorning a speech with
rhetorical figures;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Borrowed directly,
as a term in rhetoric, from L. schéma. = Gk. oxjpa, form, appearance 5
also, a term in rhetoric. Gk. oxy-, base of oxn-ow, future of €xev,
to hold, have. The orig. base is cex-; from 4/SEGH, to hold;
whence also Skt. sak, to bear, endure, Der. scheme, vb.; schem-er,
schem-ing. And see sail, hectic.

SCHERZO, a playful movement in music. (Ital.—Teut.) Modern,
=—Ital. scherzo, play, sport.—MHG. (and G.) scherz, sport. Der.
scherz-ando, playfully.

SCHIEDAM, Holland gin. (Du.)
Rotterdam.

SCHISM, a division, due to opinion. (F.—L.—Gk.) Tyndall
has ‘ schismes that were among our clergy;’ Works, p. 176, col. 1.


539


Made at Schiedam, near


540 SCHIST


ME, scisme, Gower, C. A. i, 15; prol. 348. —F. schisme, MF. scisme,
‘a scisme, a division in, or from, the church ;’ Cot.—L. schisma. =
Gk. cyxiopa, a rent, split, schism.—Gk. cxifeyr (fut. cxic-w, base
axis-), to cleave. —4/SKHEID, to cleave; Skt. chhid, L. scindere, to
cut. Der. schism-at-ic, from MF. scismatique, ‘scismaticall,’ Cot.,
L. schismaticus, Gk. cxtcpatixés, from oxiopar-, stem of cxicpa;
hence schism-at-ic-al, -ly. And see schist, schedule, ab-scind, re-scind.
SCHIST, rock easily cleft, slate-rock. (Gk.) In geology. —Gk.
axoTos, easily cleft. —Gk. cxi{av, to cleave. See Schism.

SCHNAPPS, aname for spirit, esp. gin. (G.—Du.) G. schnapps.
= Du. sats, a dram, lit. mouthful. Du. snappen, to snap up. See
Snap.

SCHOOL (1), a place for instruction. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. scole,
Chaucer, C. T, 125; Layamon, 9897. The sch=ME,. sc (=sk)
shows that this form is of F. origin, not from Latin before the
Conquest.—AF. escole, Stat. Realm, i. 103 (1285); OF. escole.=L.
schola, a school. Gk. oxoAn, rest, leisure, spare time, employment
of leisure, disputation, philosophy, a place where lectures are given,
aschool. The orig. sense is a resting or pausing; from the base
oxo-, a grade of cxe- (in oxé-ors), allied to €yev, to hold, check,
stop.—4/SEGH, to hold; see Scheme. Der. school, verb, As
You Like It, i. 1. 173; schol-ar, ME. scoler, Chaucer, C. T., A 260,
from AF, escoler, altered to scholar to agree with L. adj. scholaris ;
scholar-ly, scholar-ship ; schol-ast-ic, from L. scholasticus =Gk. sxoAa-
otuxds ; schol-i-um, a Latinised form of Gk. oxédcov, an interpretation,
comment, from oxoAn in the sense of ‘ discussion ;’ scholi-ast, from
Gk. oyodtacrns, a commentator; scholi-ast-ic. Also school-man,
school-master, school-mistress.

SCHOOL (2), a shoal of fish. (Du.) ‘A scole of Dolphins ;’
Sandys, Trav., p. 100.—Du. school visschen, ‘a shole of fishes ;’
Sewel. See Scull (3), Shoal (1).

SCHOONER, SCOONER, a two-masted vessel. (Scand.)
The spelling schooner is a false one; it should be scooner. The
mistake is due to a supposed derivation from the Du. schooner,
a schooner, but, on the contrary, the Du. word (like G. schoner) is
borrowed from E. There is no mention of Du. schooner in Sewel’s
Du. Dict., ed. 1754. The E. schooner occurs in Ash’s Dict., ed.
1775; and earlier in the following: ‘ Went to see Captain Robinson’s
lady ... This gentleman was first contriver of schooners, and built
the first of that sort about 8 years since;’ extract from a letter
written in 1721, in Babson’s Hist. of Gloucester, Massachusetts ;
cited in Webster’s Dict., whence all the information here given is
copied. ‘ The first schooner . . . is said to have been built in Gloucester,
Mass., about the year 1713, by a Captain Andrew Robinson, and to
have received its name from the following trivial circumstance: When
the vessel went off the stocks into the water, a bystander cried out,
‘“©O how she scoons/” [i.e. glides, skims along]. Robinson in-
stantly replied, ‘‘.A scooner let her be ;” and from that time, vessels
thus masted and rigged have gone by this name, The word scoon is
popularly used in some parts of New England to denote the act of
making stones skip along the surface of water. .. . According to the
New England records, the word appears to have been originally
written scooner ;> Webster. The New England scoon was imported
from Clydesdale, Scotland; being the same as Lowland Sc. scon,
“to make flat stones skip along the surface of water; also, to skip
in the above manner, applied to flat bodies ; Clydesdale; Jamieson.
So also seun in E. D. D.=Icel. skunda (trans.), to speed, to hasten.
Allied to Shunt, q. v. @= As a rule, derivations which require
a story to be told turn out to be false; in the present case, there seems
to be no doubt that the story is true.

SCHORL, black tourmaline. (F.—G.) F. schorl (Littré).—G.
schoérl, schorl.

SCIATIC, pertaining to the hip-joint. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Sciatick
vein;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.  Veyne that is clepid sciatica; ’
Lanfrank, Cirurgie, p. 177. [The sb. sciatica is in Minsheu, ed.
1627.)—F. sciatique, ‘of the sciatica; veine sciatique, the sciatica
vein, seated above the outward ankle;’ Cot.—Late L. sciaticus,
corruption of L. ischiadicus, subject to gout in the hip (White).—
Gk. icsx.aéinds, subject to pains in the loins. =Gk. icxiad-, stem of
ioxuas, pain in the loins. Gk. icxioy, the socket in which the thigh-
bone turns. Der. sciatica, fem. of L, sciaticus.

SCIENCE, knowledge. (F.—L.) ME. science, Chaucer, C. T.
11434 (F 1122); P. Plowman, B. x. 214.—F. science, ‘ science ;’
Cot.—L. scientia, science, knowledge.=L. scient-, stem of pres. part.
of scire, to know, orig. to discern. Der. scienti-fic, from F, scientifique,
* scientificall,’ Cot., from L. scientificus, made by science, where the
suffix -ficus is from facere, to make; scientific-al, -ly. Also a-scit=tt-
i-ous, scio-l-ist.

SCIMETAR, CIMETER, acurved sword. (F. or Ital. — Pers. ?)
Spelt semitar, used of a pointed sword ; Titus Andron, iv, 2. 91.—F.
cimelerre, ‘a scymitar, or smyter, a kind of short and crooked sword,


SCOLD


much in use among the Turks ;’ Cot. This accounts for the spelling
cimeter. Also Ital. scimitarra, scimitara, ‘a turkish or persian crooked
sword, a simitar;’ Florio. This accounts for the spelling scimetar.
B. It was fully believed to be of Eastern origin. If so, it can hardly
be other than a corruption of Pers. shimshir, shamshir, ‘a cimeter,
a sabre, a sword, a blade ;’ Rich. Dict. p. gog. Lit. ‘ lion’s claw.’ =
Pers. sham, a nail; and shér, a lion; id. pp. 907, 921; Vullers, ii.
464. y. The Span. is cimitarra, explained by Larramendi from
Basque cimea, a fine point, and zarra, belonging to; prob. a mere
inyention, like his Basque etymology of cigar.

SCINTILLATION, a throwing out of sparks. (F.—L.) In
Minsheu, ed. 1627. [The verb scintillate is much later.]—F. scintil-
lation, ‘a sparkling ;’ Cot.—L. seintillationem, acc. of scintillatio. =
L. scintillare, to throw out sparks.—L. scintilla, a spark; a dimin.
form, as if from *scivta. Perhaps allied to AS. scin-an, to shine; see
Shine. Der. stencil, tinsel.

SCIOLIST, one whose knowledge is superficial. (L.) ‘Though
they be but smatterers and meer sciolists;’ Howell, Famil. Letters,
b. iii, let. 8 (about A.D, 1646). Formed with suffix -is¢ (L. -ista, Gk.
-.oTs) from L. sciolus, a smatterer. Here the suffix (in scio-dus) has
a dimin. force, so that the sense is ‘knowing little.’ = L. scius, knowing.
= L. scire, to know ; see Science.

SCION, a cutting or twig for grafting; a young shoot, young,
member of a family. (F.—L.) Spelt scion, Minsheu, ed. 1627.
Also spelt sion, syon, ction, ‘Syon, a yong sette,’ i.e. slip or graft;
Palsgrave. ‘Cyun of a tre, Surculus, vitulamen;’ Prompt. Parv.
Spelt siouz, Poems and Lives of Saints, ed. Furnivall, xxxv. 74.—F.
scion, ‘a scion, a shoot, sprig, or twig;’ Cot. Spelt ciov in the 13th
cent. (Littré) ; Picard chion. Diez connects it with F. scier, MF.
ster, to cut, to saw, which is from L. secare, to cut. If so sct-on
means ‘a cutting,’ just as a slip or graft is called in E. a cutting,
and in G. schnittling, from schnitt, a cut. See Section. (Doubtful.)

SCIRRHOUS, pertaining to a hard swelling. (L.—Gk.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Englished as if froma L. *scirrhdsus, adj.
formed from scirrhus, a Late L. medical term given in Blount and
Phillips, used in place of L. scirrhéma, a hard swelling. — Gk. oxippos,
better oxipos, a hardened swelling, a ‘scirrhus ;’ also called oxippwpa,
or okipwpya; from the adj. oxpés, hard.

SCISSORS, a cutting instrument with two blades fastened
together at the middle. (F.—L.) Spelt cissers in Levins; sycers in
Palsgrave. ‘ Cysowre, forpex;’ Prompt. Parv. ME. sisoures (riming
to houres), Chaucer, House of Fame, 690.—OF. cisotres, shears,
scissors (Roquefort). [The more usual F. form is ciseaux, ‘ sizars or
little sheers ;’ Cot, The latter is the pl. of céseau, older form cise,
a chisel, cutting instrument. See Chisel.]—L. cisdrium, a cutting
instrument (Vegetius).—L, cis-, for c@s-, as in cesus, pp. of cedere,
to cut. B. It is clear that the mod. E. spelling of scissors is
due to a supposed etymology (historically false) from L. scissor,
a cutter, allied to scissus, pp. of scindere, to cleave. It is re-
markable, however, that the’ L. scissor meant ‘a person who cuts,’
a carver, a kind of gladiator (White); whilst the Late L. scissor
meant a carver, a butcher, and scisor meant a coin-engraver, a tailor.
y. There is absolutely not the slightest evidence for the use of
scissor for a cutting instrument, and still less for the use of a plural
scissores, which could only mean a couple of carvers, or butchers,
or tailors. But popular etymology has triumphed, and the spelling
scissors is the result. @ With L. scindere we may connect ab-
seind, ab-scissa, re-scind; and see schism. With L. cedere we may
connect circum-cise, con-cise, de-cide, de-cis-ion, ex-cis-ion, fratri-cide,
homi-cide, in-cise, infanti-cide, matri-cide, parri-cide, pre-cise, regi-cide,
sui-cide ; ces-ura; chisel, scissors. For the derivatives of secare, see
Section.

SCOFF, an expression of scorn, a taunt. (Scand.) ME. scof,
skof, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 128, 1. 3 from bottom; ‘nom a skof’=
took it in scorn, K. Alisaunder, 6986; skof, id., 667. Cf. OFries.
schof, a scoff, taunt (Richtofen),—MDan, skof, skuf, a scoff; skuffe,
to scoff, mock (Kalkar); Swed. dial. skoff-, as in skoffs-ord,
words of abuse, skoffsera, to abuse (Rietz); cf. Icel. skaup, later
skop, mockery, ridicule, Cf. also MDu. schobben, schoppen, to scoff,
mock (Hexham); Icel. skeypa, skopa, to scoff. B. The orig. sense
was probably ‘a shove’ or ‘a push;’ cf. Swed. skuff, a push;
MHG., schupfen, to push, allied to E. shove. See Shove. Or
allied to Gk. oxwm-rev, to mock. Der. scoff, verb, Rich. II, iii. 2,
163; scoff-er, As You Like It, iii. 5. 62. a

SCOLD, to chide, rail at. (E.?) ME. scolden, P. Plowman, B. ii.
81; scolde, sb., a scold, id, xix, 279. Not in AS, Hardly an E,
word; perhaps Frisian, From the weak grade *skald of the Teut,
strong verb *skeldan-, to scold (pt. t. *skald, pp. *skeld-anoz). It
appears as OFries. skelda, Du. schelden, G. schelten, to scold ; cf. Dan.
weak verb skjelde, skelde, to scold. Perhaps allied to OSax. scaldan,
to push off a boat (Kluge); OHG, scaltan, the same. Der. scold,


SCOLLOP


sb., Tam. Shrew, i. 2. 188, and in Palsgrave and P. Pl. (as above);
scold-er, And see scald (3).

SCOLLOP, the same as Scallop, q.v.

SCONCES (1), a small fort, bulwark. (F!—L.) In Shak. Hen. V,
iii. 6. 76; also applied to a helmet, Com. Errors, ii, 2, 37; and to
the head itself, Com. Errors, i. 2. 79. [Cf. MDu. schantse(Du.schans),
‘a fortresse, or a sconce;’ Hexham; Swed. skans, fort, sconce,
steerage; Dan. skandse, fort, quarter-deck ; G. schanze, a sconce, fort,
redoubt, bulwark; but none of these words are original. | B. All
from OF. esconse, a hiding-place, sconce; orig. fem. of escons, pp. =
L. absconsa, fem. of absconsus, used (as well as absconditus) as pp. of
abscondere, to hide; see Abscond. The Span. esconder, Ital.
ascondere, to hide, are directly from the infin. abscondere; with the
reflexive sense, we find Span. esconderse, to hide oneself; and the E.
to ensconce oneself simply means to lie hid in a corner, or to get into
asecure nook. y. Diez derives the Ital. scancia, a book-case, from
Bavarian schanz=G. schanze, which is doubtless right ; but the G.
schanze may be none the less a borrowed word. It is singular that
we also find G. schanze in the sense of ‘chance;’ and there can be
no doubt as to its being borrowed from F. when used in that sense;
for it is then from OF. or E. chance, chance. And see Sconce (2).
Der. ensconce, coined by prefixing enx-; see En-.

SCONCE (2), a candle-stick, (F.—L.) Palsgrave has: ‘ Scons,
to sette a candell in, anterne a mayn. ME. sconce. ‘ Sconce, Sconsa,
vel absconsa, lanternula;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 450. ‘ Hee absconsa, a
scons;’ Voc, 721.12. This clearly shows that the word was used
to mean a concealed or closely covered light; as we also find from
Roquefort.—OF, esconse, a dark lantern, L. absconsa; Roquefort.
=—L. absconsus, pp. of abscondere; see Abscond. And see
Sconce (1).

SCONE, SCON, a thin soft cake of wheat or barley-meal.
(Dan.—Low G.) The pl. sconnis is in Douglas, tr. of Virgil, Ain.
vii. 109. —M Dan. skon-roggen, a muffin of bolted rye-flour (Kalkar).
— Low G. schén-roggen, in Hamburg, a three-cornered loaf or bun. =
Low G. schon, schoon, fine; roggen, rye.

SCOOP, a hollow vessel for ladling out water, a large ladle. (F.
—Scand.) ME. scope. ‘Scope, instrument, Vatila, Alveolus ;’
Prompt. Parv. The pl. scopes, and the verb scopen, to ladle out
water, occur in Manning’s Hist. of England, ed. Fumivall, 8164,
8168 (Stratmann).—OF. escope (F. écope), a scoop (Hatzfeld). =
Swed. skopa, a scoop; MSwed. skopa, with sense of L. haustrum
(thre).4-MDnu, schoepe, a scoop, Hexham; MHG, schuofe. Cf. G.
schopfen, to draw water.—Teut. *skdp, 2nd grade of Teut. *skap-, as
in OSax. skeppian (for *skap-jan), Du. scheppen, OHG. schephan (pt. t.
scuof), to draw up water. Der. scoop, vb., ME. scopen, as above ;
coal-scoop.

SCOPE, view, space surveyed, space for action, intention. (Ital.
—Gk.) In Spenser, F. Q. iii. 4.52. ‘Wherein ... we haue giuen
ouer large a skope;’ Gascoigne’s Works, ed. Hazlitt, i. 460. Florio
has Ital. scopo, ‘a marke or but to shoote at, a scope, purpose, intent.’
We seem to have taken it from Ital., as it is not a F. word, and has
a more limited sense in Gk.—Gk. oxomés, a watcher, spy; also
a mark to shoot at.—Gk. *skop-, second grade of *skep-, as in
oxéntopat, I consider, see, spy. Cf. Sceptic.

SCORBUTIC, pertaining to, or afflicted with scurvy. (Low L.—
Scand.?) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, we find ; ‘ Scorbute (scorbutus),
the disease called the scurvy; scorbutical, pertaining, or subject to
that disease.’ Cf. ‘the Scuruie or Scorbute;’ Purchas’s Pilgrimage,
bk. ix. c. 13. § ii (1617); p. 1086. Formed with suffix -ic from
Low L. scorbitus, a Latinized form which some think was de-
rived from MDu. scheuren, to break, and bot, a bone (Weigand) ;
which is very unlikely. B. It appears rather to have been formed
with L. suffix -atus (cf. ac-iitus) from Swed. skorf (Dan. skurv,
ME. scurf), ise. ‘scurf;” so that scorbiitus would express (1)
scurvy, adj., and (2) scurvy, sb. This L. form was further debased
so as to give Low G. schorbock, scurvy, also spelt scharbuuk,
scharbock ; see Bremen Worterbuch, s.v. scharbuuk. Cf. MDu.
scheur-buyck, ‘the scurvie in the gumms,’ Hexham; Dn. scheurbuik.
Also G. scharbock, scurvy, tartar on the teeth. y. The Low G.
schtirbuuk is due to a popular etymology; viz. from scheren, to
separate, part aside, tear, rupture, and buuk, the belly; so also Du.
scheur-buik, from scheuren, to tear, rend, crack, and buik, the belly.
The verbs are allied to E. Shear. The Low G. buuk, Du. buik, G.
bauch, are the same as Icel. biikr, the trunk of the body, for which
see Bulk (2), _But see Scurvy. Der. scorbutic-al.

SCORCH, to burn slightly, burn the surface of athing. (F.—L.)
ME. scorchen, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, bk. ii. met. 6, 1. 18 (foot-
note), as a variant of scorklen; Romans of Partenay, 3678.—OF.
escorcher, escorcer, ‘to flay or pluck off the skin;’ Cot. Cf. Span.
escorchar, Ital. scorticare, to flay. B. These are due to Late L.
excorticare, to take off the skin; Ducange.=L, ex, off; and cortic-,


SCOUNDREL 541


stem of cortex, bark, rind, husk. But the peculiar’sense was prob.
due to confusion with ME. scorklen, to scorch (above), and ME.
scorened, dried up, parched, Ormulum, 8626. These words seem to
be of Scand. origin, and allied to Norw. skrokkna, to shrivel, skrokken,
shrunken; which are further allied to Shrink. Perhaps further
confused with ME, scorch (scortch), to score, scratch; see Notes on
E. Etym., p. 259. Cf.. prov. E. scorch, to shrivel up, and scorch, to
scratch. See Scotch.

SCORE, a notch or line cut; a reckoning; twenty. (Scand.) ME.
score; ‘ten score tymes;’ P. Plowman, B. x. 180. It is supposed
that, in counting numbers by notches on a. stick, every twentieth
number was denoted by a longer and deeper cut or score. At
Lowestoft, narrow passages cut in the side of the slope towards
the sea are called scores. AS. scoru, twenty ; which occurs, according
to Napier, in a MS. of the AS. version of the Rule of St. Bennet,
but is borrowed from Scandinavian.=Icel. skor, skora, a score,
notch, incision; Swed. skdra, Dan. skaar, the same. From Teut.
*skor-, weak grade of *skeran-, to shear, cut; see Shear. Der.
score, to cut, Spenser, F. Q. i. 1. 2; also to count by scoring,
Chaucer, C. T. 13346 (B 1606).

SCORIA, dress, slag from burnt metal. (L.—Gk.) In Holland,
tr. of Pliny, b. xxxiii. c. 4.—L. scdria.—Gk. oxwpia, filthy refuse,
dross, scum. = Gk. ox@p, dung, ordure.4-AS. scearn, dung.

SCORN, disdain, contempt. (F.-—OHG.) .ME. scorn ‘(dat.
scorne), O. Eng. Homilies, ii. 169, 1. 1; schorz (scharn), Ancren
Riwle, p. 126, 1.24; (skarn), Ormulum, 4402; (scarn), scorn, Laya-
mon, 17307.—OF. escorne, scorn; Cot.—OF. escorner, to humiliate,
mock at; orig. ‘to deprive of horns ;’ from L, ex, out (of), and cornu,
ahorn, . But the ME. scarn in the same sense is from the OF.
escarn, scorn, derision, Burguy; whence OF. escarnir, escharnir, to-
deride. We find OF. pp. pl. escharnys, glossed by E. scornid, in
Wright’s Vocab. i. 144, 1. 8. Cf. Ital. scherno, derision. —OHG.
skern, mockery, scurrility ; whence OHG. scernén, to deride. Der.
scorn, verb, ME. scornen, P. Plowman, B. ii. 81; skarnen, Ormulum,
7397, from OF. escarnir, escharnir; also scorn-ful, K. Lear, ii. 4.
168 ; scorn-ful-ly; scorn-er, P. Plowman, B. xix. 279:

SCORPION, a stinging insect, a sign of the zodiac. (F.—L.—
Gk.) ME. scorpion, K. Alisaunder, 5263.—F. scorpion, ‘a scorpion ;’
Cot.=—L. scorpidnem, acc. of scorpio, another form of scorpius, a
scorpion,=Gk. oxopmios, a scorpion, a prickly sea-fish, a prickly

lant.

SCOTCH, to cut with narrow incisions. (Scand.) In Shak. Cor.
iv. 5. 198; Macb. iii. 2. 13; cf. scotch, sb., a slight cut, Antony, iv.
7.10. ME. scocchen; as in ‘ scocched it with knyues,’ cut it about
with knives ; Hoccleve, De Regim. Princ., p. 134, 1. 3727. In the
Babees Book, p. 80, we find : ‘ With knyfe scortche not the boorde,’
do not score the table with your knife. It seems to be an extension
from scor-en, to score, affected by the verb scorch, to flay; perhaps
even by the verb scutch. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 259. See
Score. Cf. prov. E. scorch, to scotch; in E.D.D.

SCOT-FREEH, free from payment. (Hybrid; F.—Teut. and E.)
Scot means ‘ payment ;’ we frequently find scot and lot, as in Shak.
1 Hen. IV, v. 4. 115; Ben Jonson, Every Man, ed. Wheatley, iii. 7.
11; see a paper by D. P. Fry on‘scot and lot, Phil. Soc, Trans. 1867,

. 167. The phrase occurs in Thorpe, Ancient Laws, i. 491, in the
Laws of Will. I. § v; ‘omnis Francigena, qui tempore Eadwardi
propinqui nostri fuit in Anglia particeps consuetudinum Anglorum,
quod ipsi dicunt an hlote et an scote, persolvat secundum legem
Anglorum.’ Here ax=on, in, by. See also Liber Albus, ed. Riley,
pp. 128, 269. Scot is a F. form.—AF, and OF. escot (F. écot),
a payment, esp. a payment into a common fund, into which it is
shot ; whence escotter, ‘ every one to pay his shot, or to contribute
somewhat towards it,’ Cot.; diszer a escot, ‘a dinner at an ordinary,
or whereat every guest pays his part,’ id.; so that scot=a tavern-
score, is certainly the same word; cf. ‘Simbolum, escot de taverne,’
Wright’s Voc. i. 134.—Icel. skot, a shot, a contribution. Du. schot ;
G. schoss, a scot, shot; AS. sceot, which gave the form shot.=—Teut.
*skut-. weak grade of *skeut-an-, to shoot. See Shoot. 4 The
phrase scot and lot, as a whole, presents some difficulty, and has been
variously interpreted; the lit. sense is ‘contribution and share ;’ 1
suppose that originally scot meant a contribution towards some
object to which others contributed equally, and that Jot meant the
privilege and liability thereby incurred; mod. E. subscription and
membership. See Mr. Fry’s paper, which is full of information.
Doublet, shot.

SCOUNDREL, a rascal, worthless fellow. (E.) In Shak, Tw.
Nt. i. 3. 36; and in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Not common in old
authors; used by Cotgrave to translate F. maraud. Formed, with


-agential suffix -el, from prov. E. and Scottish skunner or scowner, to.


loathe, shun ; also, to cause loathing; with excrescent ¢ after x. ‘ This .
word scunner was also used as a sb., to express an object of dislike.


542 SCOUR


B. Thus Brockett gives: ‘Scunner, to nauseate, feel disgust, to |


loathe, to shy, as a horse in harness. It is also applied, figuratively,
to a man whose courage is not at the sticking place, one who shrinks
through fear.’ So also Jamieson has; ‘ Scunner, Scouner, to loathe,
shudder, hesitate, shrink back through fear; Scunner, Skonner, sb.,
loathing, a surfeit; also, any person or thing which excites disgust.’
Also: ‘Scunner, vb. trans., to disgust, cause loathing.’ To which
_the suffix -el has been added; cf. cocker-el. ‘y. The verb scunner is
the frequentative form from a verb=AS., scunian, to shun; the sk
sound being preserved (as usual) in the North of England. Hence
scoun-d-r-el =scun-er-el, one whom one constantly shuns, or merely
‘a shunner,’ a coward. ‘The word is rather Scand. than E.; having
sc, not sk, In Barbour’s Bruce, xvii. 651, we have: ‘And skunnyrrit
tharfor na kyn thing’=and did not shrink through fear one bit on
that account; where the Edinb. MS. has scounryt; showing that
skunnyr=scouner. And again, in the same, v. 211, where one MS.
has schonand (shunning), the other has skownrand (scunnering), both
words meaning ‘ dreading ;’ showing that skowner is the frequenta-
tive of scun=shun. Cf. Icel. skunda, to speed, to hasten, Swed. dial.
skunna sig, to hasten away. See Shun.

SCOUR (1), to cleanse by hard rubbing, to make bright. (L.)
ME, scouren; ‘scowryn awey ruste;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘As any bason
scoured newe;’ Rom. of the Rose, 540. Cf. OF. escurer, ‘to scowre;’
Cot.; also Span. escuwrare; Mltal. scurare, ‘to skoure dishes, to
tub or cleanse harnesse,’ Florio. [Hence also Swed. skura, Dan.
skure, to scour; the word not occurring in Icelandic. ]—L. excirare,
to take great care of, of which the pp. exciirdtus occurs in Plautus;
see Diez,—L. ex, here used as an intensive prefix; and ciirare, to
take care, from ciira, care. See Ex- and Cure. @ The ow in
ME. scouren is much better explained by supposing a derivation
from L. exctirare directly ; or rather, from Late L. scurare, to scour
(Duc.), a monkish form of the same. Der. scour-er.

SCOUR (2), to run hastily over. (F.—L.) ‘ When swift Camilla
scours the plain ;’ Pope, Ess. on Criticism, 372. ‘ Apon the moss a
scurrour sone fand he; To scour the land Makfadgane had him send ;’
Blind Harry, Wallace, vii. 796.—OF. escourre, escorre, to run, run
out.—L. excurrere, to run out, make excursions. L. ex, out ; currere,
to run. See Excursion. Der. ME. scurr-our (=scour-er) ; cf.
Ital. scorridore, a scout. See Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 261; and
p. 264 (s. v. Scur).

SCOURGE, a whip, instrument of punishment. (F.—L.) ME.
scourge, Wyclif, John, ii. 15; schurge, O. E. Homilies, i. 283, 1. 11;
Ancren Riwle, p. 418.— AF. escorge, Langtoft, ii. 430; OF. escorgie
(see Littré), mod. F. escourgée, écourgée, a scourge. Cot. has escourgée,
*a thong, latchet, scourge, or whip.’ Cf. MItal. scoria, ‘a whip,
scourge,’ scoriare, ‘to whip,’ scoriata, scoriada, ‘a whipping; also,
the same as scoria,’ i.e. a whip; Florio. B. The Mltal. scoriata
answers to L. excoridéa, lit. flayed off, hence a strip of skin or shred
of leather for a whip ; pp. of excoridre, to strip off skin. =—L. ex, off;
and corium, skin; see Ex- and Cuirass. =§y. We might explain
the MItal. verb scoriare directly from L. excoriare, to excoriate, to
flay by scourging. Der. scourge, ME. scourgen, Rob. of Glouc.
p. 263, 1. 5304.

SCOUT (1), a spy. (F.-L.) ME. scoute (spelt scout, but
timing with owte), Seven Sages, ed. Wright, 1. 2218.—OF. escoute,
“a spie, eaye-dropper, also, a scout, scout-watch;” Cot. Verbal sb.
from escouter, ‘to hearken;’ id.—L. auscultire, to hearken; see
Auscultation. B. The transfer in sense, from listening to
spying, causes no difficulty ; the OF. escoute means both listener
and spy.

SCOUT (2), to ridicule, reject an idea. (Scand.) In Todd’s
Johnson ; noted as a vulgar word. Cf. Lowland Scotch scout, ‘to
pour forth any liquid forcibly ;? Jamieson. The latter sense is closely
related to shoot.—Icel. skita, skiti, a taunt; cf. skita, to jut out,
allied to skota, skotra, to shove, skot-yrdi, scoffs, taunts, and to the
strong verb skjota (pt. t. skaut, pl. skutu, pp. skotinn), to shoot. Cf.
Swed. skjuéa, (1) to shoot, (2) to shove, push; skjuta skulden pd, to
thrust the blame on; Dan. skyde, (1) to shoot, (2) to shove; skyde
skylden paa, to thrust the blame on; skyde vand, to repel water. Thus
the sense is to shoot, push away, reject. See Shoot.

SCOUT (3), a projecting rock. (Scand.) In place-names, as
Rayen-Scout. ‘The steep ridges of rocks on Beetham-fell (West-
moreland) are called scouts;’ A Bran New Wark (E. D.S.), 1. 193,
footnote. —Icel. skiita, to jut out; see Scout (2).

SCOWL, to look angry, to lower or look gloomy. (Scand.)
ME. scoulen ; spelt scowle, Prompt. Parv. The devils who gather
round a dying man are said to ‘skouwl and stare ;’ Pricke of Conscience,
2225.— Dan. skule, to scowl, cast down the eyes. Cf. Icel. skolla, to
skulk, keep aloof, skolli, a skulker, a fox, the devil; Du. schuilen, to
skulk, lurk, lie hid. That these are connected words is shown by
Low G. schulen, to hide oneself, not to. let oneself be seen, and the


SCRAWL


prov. G. (Ditmarsch) schulen, to hide the eyes, to look slily as if
peeping out of a hiding-place, look out. B. From the sb. seen
in EFries. schiil, Du. schuil, Dan. skjul, shelter (whence Dan. skjule,
to hide), Icel. skjol, a shelter, cover, Teut. base *skeul-, *skul-; from
a/SKEU, to cover. Thus the sense is ‘to peep out of a hiding-
place,’ or to look from under the covert of lowering brows. Der.
scowl, sb.; also sczl-k, q. v.

SCRABBLE,, to scrawl. (Scand.) In 1 Sam. xxi. 13 ; where the
marginal note has ‘made marks.’ Cf. prov. E. scrabble, to scratch,
frequentative of scrab, to scratch, i.e. to scrape (Halliwell). — Norw.
skrabba, to scrape (Ross); Dan. skrabe, to scrape; Du. schrabben.
Variant of prov. E. scrapple, to scrape (E. D. D.); which is a
frequentative of Scrape, q.v. Cf. scrabble, to scribble; E.D.D.

SCRAGGY, lean, rough. (Scand.) Cotgrave translates F.
escharde by ‘a little, lean, or skraggie girle, that looks as if she were
starved.’ Cf. Prov. E. scrag, a crooked, forked branch, also, a lean
thin person (Halliwell) ; skrags, the ends of sticks. Allied to
prov. E. scrog, a stunted bush, scroggy, abounding in underwood,
scrogs, blackthorn, scroggy, twisted, stunted, scrog-legs, bandy-legs
(id.). ME. scroggy, covered with underwood, or straggling bushes.
‘The wey toward the Cite was strong, thorny, and scroggy;’ Gesta
Romanorum, ed. Herrtage, p. 19, l. 19.—Swed. dial. skragger, a
weak old man, skragga, to walk with difficulty; Norw. skragg, a
poor weak creature, skraggen, scraggy (Ross). Cf. Icel. skroggsligr,
scraggy; North Fries. skrog, a lean man; Dan. skrog, a carcase,
a poor creature. See Shrug, Sarink, Der. scraggi-ness.

SCRAMBLE, to catch at or strive for rudely, struggle after,
struggle. (E.) ‘And then she’ll scramble too;’ Beaum. and Fletcher,
Mons. Thomas, i. 3. ‘I'll scramble yet amongst them;’ id. Captain,
ii. I (Jacomo). ‘The cowardly wretch fell down, crying for succour,
and scrambling through the legs of them that were about him ;’
Sidney, Arcadia, b. ii. (R.). _Not found in ME, A frequentative
form of prov. E. scramb, to pull, or rake together with the hands,
scramp, to catch at, to\snatch at; E.D.D. It may also be regarded
as a nasalised form of prov. E. scrabble, to scramble (Somersets.),
allied to scraffie, to scramble, and scrapple, to grub about,
which is the frequentative of prov. E. scrap, to scratch. Halliwell
cites ‘to scrappe as a henne dose’ from a MS. Dict. of A.D. 15403
which is merely E. scrape. Andsee Scrabble. Der. scramble, sb. ;
scrambl-er.

SCRANNEL, thin, poor, wretched. (Scand.) In Milton, Lycidas,
124. Cf. prov. E. scrannel, lean, wretched, weak (of the voice) ;
scranny, meagre, =Swed. dial. skran, weak; Norw. skran, thin, lean,
dry ; skranaleg, lean (Ross); Dan. skranten, sickly, weakly. Cf.
Swed. dial. and Norw. skrinn, thin, lean, weak, dry. And cf. AS.
scrimman (pt. seramm), to shrink.

SCRAP, a small piece, shred. (Scand.) ME. scrappe. ‘And
also 3if I my3t gadre eny scrappes of the releef of the twelf cupes,’
i.e. any bits of the leavings of the twelve baskets (in the miracle of
the loaves) ; Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 15. (Rather Scand. than E.)
=Icel. skrap, scraps, trifles, from skrapa, to scrape, scratch; Dan.
skrab, scrapings, trash, from skrabe, to scrape; Swed. afskrap,
scrapings, refuse, dregs, from skrapa, to scrape. See Scrape.

SCRAPH, to remove a surface with a sharp instrument, shave,
scratch, save up. (Scand.) ME. scrapien, scrapen, also shrapien,
shrapen (Stratmann). ‘But ho so schrape my mawe’=unless one
were to scrape my maw; P. Plowman, B, v. 124. Spelt shreapien,
Ancren Riwle, p. 116, 1.15. (Rather Scand. than E.)—Icel. skrapa,
to scrape; Swed. skrapa; Dan. skrabe.4+-Du. schrapen, to scrape.
From Teut. *skrap-, 2nd grade of the strong vb. *skrep-an-, to scrape,
as in AS. screpan, pt. t. screp, to scratch ; O. E. Texts. Der. scrap-
ing, scrap-er ; also scrap, q.v., scrabb-le, q. v., scramb-le, q. V.

SCRATCH, to scrape with a pointed instrument or with the nails.
(a. Scand.; 2. MDu.—MHG.) Scratch has resulted from the confusion
of ME. scratten, to scratch, with ME. cracchen, with the same sense.
1. ME. scratten, to scratch, Prompt. Parv. ; Pricke of Conscience,
7378; Ancren Riwle, p. 186, note b. This form scratten appears to
be for s-kratten, made by prefixing AF. es- (for L. ex), intensive
prefix, to the Swed. kratta, to scrape (see below). 2. ME. cracchen,
P. Plowman, B. prol. 154, 186. Apparently for *cratsen.—MDu.
kratsen, to scratch (Hexham); whence Du. krassen, Swed. kratsa,
and Dan. kradse, to scrape.=MHG. kratzen, OHG. chrazzon, to
scratch.-Swed. kratta, to rake, scrape, scratch, ef. kratta, sb., a
rake. All from a Teut. base *krat, perhaps from a Tent. str.


vb. *kret-an- (pt. t. *krat, pp. *krot-anoz); cf. Icel. #rot-a, to en-


grave. @ Hence scratten and cracchen are from the same base
and mean much the same thing, so that confusion between them
was easy enough. Der. scratch, sb., scratch-er. Doublet, grate (2).

SCRAWL, to write hastily or irregularly. (E.) A late word,
used by Swift and Pope (Rich., and Todd), The aw (=aw) denotes


a long vowel or diphthong; better spelt scrall, with a as in all,


SCREAM


*To serall, or scrawl, to scribble, to write after a sorry careless
manner;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. It appears to be a contraction of
Serabble, q.v. Cf. also E. scribble, and prov. E. scribble-scrobble,
scribbling (North) ; and North Fries. skrawe, by-form of skrape, to
scrape. Or perhaps prov. E., from Dan. skrolle, a poor worthless
«book (Larsen); MDan. skrold, a diffuse, poor letter (Kalkar).
;\B. The form seems due to confusion with prov. E. scrawl, to
\crawl (West) in Halliwell; he cites ‘ To scrall, stir, motito’ from
“Coles, Lat. Dict. To which add: ‘ The ryuer shall scraule [swarm]
with frogges,’ Exod. viii. 3; in Coverdale’s version. This word is
merely E. crawl, with prefixed s (AF. es-, L. ex) added in some cases
with the idea of giving greater emphasis; seeCrawl. Der. scrawl,
sb., scrawl-er.

SCREAM, to cry out shrilly. (Scand.) ME. scremen, Polit.
Songs, p. 158, 1.9; screamen, Hali Meidenhad, p. 37, last line but
one. = Icel. skrema, to scare, terrify; Swed. skraémma, Dan. skremme,
to scare. B. Hence it appears that the E. word has preserved
what was doubtless another sense of these Scand. words, viz. ‘to
cry aloud,’ as the means of imposing or of expressing terror; we still
commonly use scream with especial reference to the effects of sudden
fright. Cf. Swed. skrdn, a scream, skrana, to scream, to whimper,
which is merely a parallel form; Jutland skreme, to whine, to speak
hoarsely (Kok). Cf. Sereech, Shriek. Der. scream, sb.

SCREECH, to shriek, cry aloud. (Scand.) ‘ Whilst the screech-
owl, screeching loud;’ Mids. Nt. Dr. v. 383; where the first folio has
seritch-owle, scritching. Also spelt scrike, Spenser, F. Q. vi. 4. 18.
Baret (1580) has seriek. ME. scriken, skryken, schrichen, schriken,
Chaucer, C. T. 15406 (B 4590); spelt shkriken, O. E. Homilies, ii.
181, 1.2, Also skriche, Seven Sages, ed. Weber, 1290. Cf. Lowl.
Sc. scraik. —Icel. skrekja, to shriek; cf. skrikja, to titter (said of
suppressed laughter); Swed. skrika, to shriek; Dan. skrige, to
shriek ; skrige af Skrek, to shriek with terror. Cf. Gael. sgriach,
sgreuch, to screech, scream. See Shriek.4+Gk. xpi(eyv (for *piy-
yew), to shriek; xpiy-n, xpuy-wos, a shrieking. Der. screech, sb.,
answering to Swed. skrik, Dan. skrig, Irish sgreach, Gael. sgreuch ;
also screech-owl. And see shrike. Doublet, shriek, which is merely
a variant, due to the alteration of sc to sh at the beginning and the
preservation of & at the end.

SCREED, a shred, a harangue. (E.) The Northern form of
Shred, q. v.

SCREEN, that which shelters from observation, a partition;
also, a coarse riddle or sieve. (F.—Teut.) 1. ME. scren; spelt
serene, Prompt. Parv., p. 450; Wright’s Vocab. i. 197, col. 2.—OF.
escren (Littré); MF. escran, ‘a skreen to set between one and
the fire, a tester for a bed;’ Cot. Mod. F. écran, Also found as
OF. escranne (Godefroy). Prob. from OHG. skrank, G. schranke,
a barrier, rail, fence, limit, place railed off. In the sense of coarse
sieve, it is spelt skreime in Tusser’s Husbandry, sect. 17, st. 16
(E. D. S.), and is the same word as the above. ‘A screen for
gravel or corn is a grating which wards off the coarser particles
and prevents them from coming through ;’ Wedgwood. Der.
screen, verb, Hamlet, iii. 4. 3.

SCREES, the loose débris on the side of a mountain. (Scand.)

For sereethes, the th being lost as in clothes. =Icel. skrida, a land-slip
on a hill-side.—Icel. skrid-, weak grade of skrida, to creep, glide ;
cognate with Dan. skride and G. schreiten. See E. D. D., s.v.
scree, and s.v, scriddan ; and Notes on E. Etym., pp. 262, 263.
. SCREW (1), a cylinder with a spiral groove or ridge on its sur-
face, used as a fastening or as a mechanical power. (F.—L.?) Better
spelt serue, as in Cotgrave; the spelling screw is due to association
with dew, flew, &c. Spelt screw in Minsheu, ed. 1627. ME. screw;
‘unum screw ferreum;’ York Wills, i. 194 (1393).—OF. escroe,
Godefroy ; MF. escroue, ‘a scrue, the hole or hollow thing wherein
the vice of a presse, &c. doth turn ;’ Cot. Mod. F. écrou. B. OF
uncertain origin. Diez derives it from L. scrobem, acc. of scrobs,
a ditch, trench, also a hole; but the derivation (in Kluge) from L.
scrofa, a sow, is far more likely ; from the action of sows in rooting
things up. Cf. ‘scrobs: fossa quam scrofe maxime faciunt .. Hic
serobs, a swyn-wroting ;’ Cathol. Anglicum, p. 99, note 11. The
Teut. words (G. schraube, Du. schroef, Low G. skruve) seem to be
late and unoriginal. See Scrofula. @ For the loss of /, see
Scroyles. The E. word is certainly from the F.,as Scheler rightly
remarks, Der. screw, verb, Macb. i. 7. 60; screw-driv-er, screw-
propell-er, screw-steamer.

SCREW (2), a vicious horse. (E.) A well-known term in modern
E., not noticed in Johnson or Halliwell. The same word as shrew,
a vicious or scolding woman, spelt screwe in Political Songs, ed.
Wright, p. 153, 1. 13; and cf. prov. E. screw-mouse, a shrew-mouse.
See Shrew. The sc (for sh) is due to Scand. influence. Doublet,
shrew.


SCRIBBLE, to write carelessly. (L.; with E. suffix.) ‘ Scribled


SCROYLES 543


forth in hast at aduezture ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 36¢. Formed
with the frequentative suffix -le from scribe, sb., or from L, scribere,
to write. Similarly, we find G, schreibler, a scribbler, from schreiben,
to write, See Seribe. Der. scribble, sb., scribbl-er.

SCRIBE, a writer, a clerk, an expounder of the Jewish law. (L.)
First in use as a scriptural term, and taken directly from Latin ;
Littré does not trace the F, scribe beyond the 16th century. ME.
scribe, Wyclif, Matt. viii. 19.—L. scriba, a writer, Matt. viii. 19
(Vulgate),—L. scribere, to write (pp. scriptus), orig. to scratch marks
on a soft surface, to cut slightly. Cf.Scarify. Der. scribb-le, q.v.;
aad see scrip (2), script, script-ure, scriv-en-er. Also (from L. scribere),
a-scribe, circum-scribe, de-scribe, in-scribe, pre-scribe, pro-scribe, sub-
scribe, tran-scribe (for trans-scribe); also (from pp. scriptus) a-script-
ion, circum-script-ion, con-script, de-script-ion, in-script-ion, manu-script,
non-de-script, pre-script-ion, pre-script-ive, pro-script-ion, post-script, re-
script, sub-script-ion, super-script-ion, tran-script, tran-script-ion, &c.
Also shrive, shrift, Shrove-tide.

SCRIMMAGE, the same as Skirmish, q. v.

SCRIP (1), a small bag or wallet. (E.) ME. scrippe, King
Horn, ed. Lumby, 1061; Chaucer, C. T. 7319 (D 1737). AS.
scripp, ZElfric, Hom. i. 394.4Icel. skreppa, a scrip, bag; Norweg.
skreppa, a knapsack (Aasen); Swed. dial. skrappa, a bag (Rietz),
Swed. skrappa, a scrip; MSwed. skreppa (Ihre); Low G. schrap, a
scrip (Brem. Wort.) ; NFries. skrap. ‘The orig. sense is ‘ scrap,’ be-
cause made of a scrap or shred of skin or other material. See Scrap,
Searf (1). The sound of the AS, se was affected by the Norse sk.

SCRIP (2), a piece of writing, a schedule. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Mids. Nt. Dr. i. 2. 3. The same word as script, the ¢ dropping off in
common talk; see Script.

SCRIPT, a piece of writing. (F.—L.) ‘This loving script ;’
Beaum. and Fletcher, A Wife for a Month, i. 2.—MF. escript, ‘a
writing ;” Cot. =—L. scriptum, a thing written, neut. of scriptus, pp. of
scribere, to write; seeScribe. Der. manu-script, re-script, tran-script.

SCRIPTURH, writing, the Bible. (F.—L.) Scripture, in the
sense of ‘ bible,’ is short for holy scripture, or rather, The Holy Scrip-
tures. ME. scripture; the pl. scripturis is in Wyclif, Luke, xxiv. 27.
—OF. escripture, ‘ writ, scripture, writing;’ Cot.—L. scriptira, a
writing; cf. L. scriptirus, fut. part. of scribere, to write ; see Scribe.
Der. scriptur-al.

SCRIVENER, a scribe, copyist, notary. (F.—L.) Properly
a scriven; the suffix -er (of the agent) is an E. addition. ME.
skrivenere, Lydgate, Complaint of Black Knight, st. 28, l. 194;
formed with suffix -ere from ME. scriueyn, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 44,
1. 30.—OF. escrivain, ‘a scrivener;’ Cot. [Cf, mod. F. écrivain,
Span. eseribano, Ital. scrivano.|— Late L. scribaénum, acc, of scribanus,
a notary; extended from scriba, a scribe ; see Scribe.

SCROFULA, a disease characterised by chronic swellings of the
glands. (L.) Called ‘ the king’s evil,’ because it was supposed the
touch of a king could cure it; see Phillips, Dict., &c. In Phillips,
ed. 1706; Blount (1674) has the adj. scrofulous.—L. scréfula;
usually in pl. scrdfule, scrofulous swellings. The lit. signification of
scrofula is alittle pig; dimin. of scrdfa, a breeding sow. The reason
for the name is not certainly known, but perhaps it is from the
swollen appearance of the glands. It is remarkable that the Gk.
name (xorpades) for swollen or scrofulous glands appears to be simi-
larly connected with yoipos, a pig. PB. The L. scréfa has been
explained as ‘a digger,’ from the habit of swine, who are fond of
‘rooting’ or turning up the earth; allied to scrobis, a ditch. But
we can hardly connect -df- with -ob-. Der. scroful-ous; and see
screw (1).

SCROLL, a roll of paper or parchment, a schedule. (F.—Teut.)
Scroll, formerly also scrow/, is a contraction of scrow-el, a dimin. form
(with suffix -el) of scrowe or scroue, the earlier form of the word.
ME. scrowle, Voc. 682. 26; but the ME. scroue, scrowe, is older.
Palsgrave (A. D. 1530) gives both scrolle and scrowe, and equates both
to F. rolle. Fabyan also has both forms: ‘ He [Rich. II.] therfore
redde the scrowle of resygnacyon hymselfe,’ an. 1398 (ed. Ellis, p. 547) ;
‘ wherefore, knowynge that the sayd Baylly vsed to bere scrowys an
prophecye aboute hym,’ an. 1449 (id. p. 624). ME. scroue, scrowe ;
spelt scrow, Prompt. Pary. ; pl. scrowis, Wyclif, Matt. xxiii. 5 (earlier
version only) ; scrowe, Ancren Riwle, p. 282, last line. —OF. escroue,
‘a scrowle;’ Cot. Spelt escroe in the 14th cent. (Littré); mod. F.
écrou; the Low L. escréa occurs A.D. 1386 (Ducange). To which
must be added that the dimin. form escroele actually occurs, in the
sense of strip, as cited by Littré, s. v. éerow; thus proving the origin
of E. scroll beyond all doubt. 8. Of Teut. origin. — MDu. schroode,
a strip, shred, slip of paper (Oudemans) ; allied to schroden, to cut
off (id.). Cf OHG. scrat, the same; and E. screed. See Shred,
Shard.

SCROYLES, scabby fellows, rascals. (F.—L.) In King John,
ii, 1.373; and see Nares. —OF. pl, escroelles (see écrouelle in Hatzfeld),


544 SCRUB


MF. escrouelles,‘the king’s evil,’ Cot.; i.e.scrofula; hence, men afflicted
with scrofula, Late L. type *scrdfellas, acc. pl. ; for L. scrdfulas, acc.
pl. of scrafula. See Scrofula. See Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 263.

SCRUB (1), brushwood. (Scand.) Prov. E. scrub; and cf. Worm-
wood Scrubbs. The Scand. equivalent of E. shrub,—MDan. skrubbe,
Dan. dial. skrub, brushwood; Norw. skrubba,dwarf cornel. See Shrub.
Der. scrubb-y, dwarfed, mean; scrub-bed, insignificant, Merch. Ven.
vy. 162. And note Lowl. Sc. scrubber, ‘a handful of heath tied
tightly together for cleaning culinary utensils;’ Jamieson. Prob.
allied to scrub (2), as broom is to the plant so called. Cf. serublanda,
i.e. scrub-land; Liber Custumarum, p. 658.

SCRUB (2), to rub hard. (Scand.) ME. scrobben. to rub downa
horse; King Alisaunder, 4310. Not foundin AS.—MDan. skrubbe;
Swed. skrubba, to scrub; cf. Dan. skrubbet, rough, ‘ scrubby.’--Du.
schrobben, to. scrub, wash, rub, chide; Low G. schrubben; NF ries.
skrobbe. According to Franck, it is allied, by gradation, to Du. and
EFries. schrabben, to scratch; see Scrabble, Scrape. And see
Scrub (1).

SCRUFF, SCRUF'T, the nape of the neck.
scuff, scuft. See Scuft.

SCRUPLH, a small weight, a doubt, perplexity, reluctance to
act. (F.—L.) ‘A serupil weieth a peny; ili. scrupilis maken a
dragme;’ Medical Workes, ed. Henslow, p. 131. ‘It is no con-
sience, but a foolish scruple;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 1435 c.
‘Would not haue bene too scrupulous ;’ Frith, Works, p. 143, col. 2.
—F. scrupule, ‘a little sharp stone falling into a mans shooe, and
hindering him in his gate [gait]; also, a scruple, doubt, fear,
difficulty, care, trouble of conscience; also, a scruple, a weight
amounting unto the third part of a dram;’ Cot. —L. scriipulum, acc.
of scriipulus, a small sharp stone; hence, a small stone used asa
weight, a small weight; also, a stone in one’s shoe, an uneasiness,
difficulty, small trouble, doubt. Dimin. of scripus, a sharp stone.
Scrii-pus is allied to scri-ta; see Scrutiny. Der. scruple, vb., to
make a scruple of; scrupul-ous, from F. serupu-leux, ‘scrupulous,’ Cot.,
from L. scriipuldsus 3 scrupul-ous-ly, -ness.

SCRUTINY, a strict examination, careful inquiry. (L.) Spelt
scruteny, Skelton, Garl. of Laurel, 782; cf. MF. serutine, ‘a scrutiny ;’
Cot. Englished from L. scritinium, a careful inquiry.=L. scrutari,
to search into carefully, lit. to search among broken pieces.=L.
scriita, broken pieces, old trash; allied to AS. scréade, a shred; see
Shred. Der. scrutin-ise, scrutin-eer. And see in-scrut-able.

SCOD, to run quickly, run before the wind in a gale. (Scand.) In
Shak. Venus, 301. ‘Scuddyng from place to place;’ Udall, tr. of
Erasmus’ Apophthegmes, Pompeius, § 2, We also have proy. E.
scud, a slight rapid or flying shower of rain (Shropshire, and else-
where) ; Lowland Se. scuddin-stanes, thin stones made to skim the
surface of water, as an amusement, answering exactly to Dan. skud-
steen,a stone quoit. A frequentative of scud is prov. E. scuttle, to walk
fast, to hurry along, often used with precisely the same force as scud ;
also scuddle, to runaway quickly, is given in Bailey, vol. i. ed. 1735.
Hence scud is a weakened form of seut or scoot; cf. prov. E. ‘to go
like scooter, i.e. very quick, East’ (Halliwell); and scoot is only a
Scand. equivalent of shoot. Precisely the same voicing of ¢ to d occurs
in Danish, and the nautical term to seud is of Danish origin. — Norw.
skudda, to push, shove; cf. Dan. skyde, to shoot, to push, to shove ;
skyde i fro, to run to seed; skyde vand, to repel water; skyde over
steun (lit. to shoot over the stem), to shoot ahead, i. e. scud along, as
a nautical term; Dan. skud-, a shooting, used in compounds, as in
skud-aar, leap-year, skud-steen, a ‘scudding-stane.’ Cf. Swed. dial.
skudda, to shoot the bolt of a door; Swed. skutta, to leap, Swed. dial.
skuta, a sledge (Rietz), allied to Swed. skjuta, to shoot, and to Icel.
skjota, to shoot, also to slip or scud away, abscond. See Shoot.
Der. scutt-le (3), q.y.

SCUFFLE, to struggle, fight confusedly. (Scand.) In Beaum.
and Fletcher, Philaster, v. 1. The frequentative form of scuff, pre-
served in prov. E. scuff, to shuffle in walking, West; Halliwell. —
Swed. skuffa, to push, shove, jog; allied to E. skove.4-MDu. schuf-
felen, to drive on, also, to run away, i.e. to shuffle off; allied to Du.
schuiven, to shove. Thus to scuffle is‘to keep shoving about.’ See
Shuffle, Shove. Der. scuffle, sb., Antony, i. 1. 7.

SCUFT, SCUFF, SCRUFT, SCRUFTF, the nape of the
neck. (Scand.) The orig. form seems to have been scuft; a form
which occurs even in Gothic. ‘ Scuft of the neck ;’ Grose’s Gloss.
(1790).—ONorse skopt (pron. skoft), hair of the head; mod. Icel.
skott, a fox’s tail; NFries. skuft, nape of a horse’s neck.+G. schopf,
a tuft of hair; OHG. scuft, hair; Goth. skuft, hair of the head.
Allied to Sheaf; cf. Icel. skau/, a fox’s brush. ,

SCULK, SKULK, to hide oneself, lurk. (Scand.) ME. sculken,
skulken, Pricke of Conscience, 1788; Gower, C. A. ii. 93; bk. iv.
2720; whence the sb. scolkynge, Rob. of Glouc. p. 256, 1. 5130,—
Dan. skulke, to sculk, slink, sneak ; Norw. skulka; Swed. skolka, to


More correctly


SCUR.


play the truant. Allied to Icel. skolla, to sculk, keep aloof. Ex-
tended from the Teut. base seen in Du. schuilen, Low G. schulen, to
sculk, to lurk in a hiding-place; allied to Dan. skjul, Icel. skj6l, a place
of shelter; see further under Scowl, which exhibits the shorter form.

SCULL (1), the cranium ; see Skull.

SCULL (2), a small, light oar. (Scand.) ‘ Scull, a little oar, to
row with; Sculler, a boat rowed with sculls, or the waterman that
manages it;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Also in the phrase ‘ rowing scull,’
Hudibras, pt. 1. c. 3,1. 351. We also find ‘the old sculler,’ i.e.
Charon; Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s Revels, i. 1 (Cupid’s 7th speech).
Dryden oddly uses sculler with the sense of ‘ boat ;’ tr. of Virgil,
Georg. b. iv. 1. 735. ‘ Scull to rowe with, auiron ; Scullar, batellier ;’
Palsgrave. ‘To rowe .. with a skulle;’ Piers of Fulham, 1. 275;
in Hazlitt’s Early E. Pop. Poetry, ii. 12. B. Prob. named:from the
slightly hollowed blades. G. Douglas has scull in the sense of
‘cup;’ tr. of Virgil, bk. iii. ch. 1. 1.125. Cf. Swed. skdl, a basin,
bowl; ufvud-skal, scull (of the head) ; vdg-skal, the scale of a
balance; skalig, concave. Also Norw. skul, a husk, shell of fruit.
Larsen gives Dan. skullermand, a waterman. Der. scull, verb;
scull-er as above. See Skull.

SCULL (3), a shoal of fish. (Du.)? In Shak. Troilus, v. 5. 22.
ME. sculle, Prompt. Pary. A variant of School (2), q.v.

SCULLERY, a room for washing dishes, and the like. (F.—L.)
Sherwood’s Index to Cotgrave has: ‘The scullery, escueillerie.’
Spelt scollery; Cavendish, Life of Wolsey, ed. F. S. Ellis, p. 23.
Formed with suffix -ze (cf. pantr-y) from OF. escuelier, one who has
charge of the dishes and plates (Godefroy) ; cf. escuelerie, the office of
keeping the dishes (id.).— Late L. scutellarius, the same (Ducange). =
L. scutella, a dish (whence OF. escuelle, F. écuelle); dimin. of scutra,
a tray. Godefroy also has esquelier (=escuelier); hence ME.
‘ sqwyllare, dysche wescheare,’ i.e. dish-washer; in Prompt. Parv.
Cf. ‘ The sguyler of the kechyn;’ Rob. of Brunne, Handlyng Synne,
1. 5913. ‘ The pourvayours of the buttlarye [buttery] and . . of the
squylerey ;’ Ordinances and Regulations of the Royal Household,
4to, 1790, p. 77; ‘ Sergeaunt-squylloure, in the same, p.81. Andsee
Halliwell. Scullion is of different origin ; see below.

SCULLION, a kitchen menial. (F.—L.) In Shak. Haml. ii. 2.
616. ‘Their smooked scolions faces, handes, and feete;’ Barnes,
Works, p. 341, col. 2. ‘ Scoulyon of the kechyn, soutllon;’ Palsgrave.
This word has undoubtedly been long understood as if it were con-
nected with scwzdlery, and the connexion between the two words in
the popular mind may have influenced its form and use. But it is
impossible to connect them etymologically ; and Wedgwood well
says that ‘ it has a totally different origin,’ which he points out. = MF.
escouillon, ‘a wispe, or dishclout, a maukin or drag, to cleanse or
sweepe an oven ;’ Cot. ‘In the same way malkin, mawkin, is used
both for a kitchen-wench and for the clout which she plies;* Wedg-
wood. B. The MF. escouillon is the same as escouvillon, Cot. The
latter form answers to Span. escobillon, asponge fora cannon ; formed
with suffix -on (L. -idnem) from escobilla, a small brush, dimin. of
escoba (OF. escouve), a brush, broom, which is cognate with Ital.
scopa, a broom, a birch-tree.= L. scdpa, used in pl. scope, thin twigs,
a broom of twigs. Allied to L. scdpus, a stem, stalk; andto Sceptre.

SCULPTURE, the art of carving figures (F.—L.) ME.
sculpture, Gower, C. A. ii. 83; bk. iv. 2422. —F. sculpture, for which
Littré cites nothing earlier than the 16th century; but it must have
been in earlier use; see Hatzfeld.—L. sculptura, sculpture; cf. L.
sculptuirus, fut. part. of sculpere, to cut out, carve in stone; allied to
scalpere, to scratch, grave, carve, cut; whence E. scalp-el. Der.
sculpture, verb; sculpt-or, from L. sculptor ; sculptur-al.

SCUM, froth, refuse on the surface of liquids. (Scand.) * Scome
or scum of fletynge [floating], Spuma;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘Scummyn
lycurys, Despumo ; > id. Dat. scome, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 44, l. 23.
—Dan. skum, scum, froth, foam; Icel. skim, foam (in Egillson’s
Dict.) ; Swed. skum.4-OHG. sciim, G. schaum (whence F. écume) ;
Du. schuim.  B. Lit. ‘a covering.’ —4/SKEU, to cover; Fick, iii.
336. @ The L. spuma is related to E. foam, not to seum. Der.
scum, verb ; scumm-er ; skim.

SCUPPER, a hole in the side of a ship to carry off water from
the deck. (F.—Scand.) ‘Scuppers, the holes through which the
water runs off the deck;’ Coles, ed. 1684. Called scoper-holes ;
Phillips (1706). ‘Our galley’s scupper-holes;’ Marston, Antonio
and Mellida, i. 1. 13. ‘ Skopper-lethers and skopper-nayles ;’ Naval
Accounts (1497); p. 298. The sense is ‘ scooper-hole.’=OF. escope,
escoppe, a scoop for baling out water (Supp. to Godefroy).—Swed.
skopa, a scoop. Cf. MDu. schoepe, a shovel; Hexham. See
Scoop. Cf. Prov. E. scupper, a scooper, a Scoop; scuppit, a small
shovel or scoop.

SCUR, to run rapidly over. (F.—L.)
corn;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Bonduca, i. 1.
skirr and scour; see Scour (2). Der. scur-ry.


*Scur o'er the fields of
The same word as


a a hae
é ee


SCURF


SCURF, small flakes of skin ; flaky matter on the skin. (Scand.)
ME. seurf. ‘ Scurf of scabbys, Squama;’ Prompt. Parv.; Cursor
Mundi, 11823.—Swed. skorf; Dan. skurv, scurf; Icel. skurfur, pl.+-
AS. scurf, scurf (from Norse), A. S. Leechdoms, i. 116. Cf. ‘mycel
sceorfa on his heafde hzfde’ = he had much scurf on his head;
félfred, tr. of Beda, b. v. c. 2. Du. schurjt, scurf; G. schorf.
B. From Tent. *skurf-, weak grade of *skerfan-, as in AS. sceorfan
(pt. t. scearf, pt. t. pl. scurfon), to scarify, gnaw. Der. scur-fy,
scurf-i-ness, Also scurv-y, q.v.

SCURRILE, buffoon-like. (L.) In Shak, Troil. i. 3. 148.=L.
scurrilis, buffoon-like.=L. scurra, a buffoon. Allied to OHG.
scern, derision ; see Scorn. Der, scurril-i-ty, L. L. L. iv. 2. 55, from
L. acc. scurrilitaitem ; scurril-ous, Wint. Tale, iv. 4. 2153; scurril-
ous-ly,

SCURVY, afflicted with scurf, mean. (Scand.) ‘ All scurwy with
scabbes;’ Skelton, Elinour Rumming, 140. The same word as
scurfy, with change from f to v; cf. Swed. skorfvig, scurfy, from
skorf, scurf. See Scurf. Hence, asa term of contempt, vile, mean,
Temp. ii. 2. 46, and very common in Shak. Cf. Low G. schorjig,
schorvig’, adj. ; from schorf, scurf; Dan. skurvet, scurfy. Der. scurvy,
Phillips, ed. 1706, the name of a disease, from the pitiful condition
of those afflicted with it; and hence, probably, the Low L. medical
term scorbitus; see Scorbutic. Also scurvi-ly, -ness.

SCUTAGE, a tax on a knight’s fee. (Late L.—L.) See Cowel’s
Interpreter and Blount’s Nomolexicon.—Med. Latin sciutagium, a
form of *scitaticum, due to OF. esewage, with the same sense. = L.
scutum, a shield. See Esquire.

SCUTCH, to dress flax. (F.—Scand.) From the sb. scutch, an
instrument for beating flax; Cent. Dict.—OF. escouche, eschuche, a
swingle (Godefroy); Norm. dial. écouche, écoche (Moisy). Cf.
escucher, vb.; Wright, Voc. i. 156.—Norw. skuku, skoka, a swingle.
Otherwise in Hatzfeld ; s. v. écouche.

SCUTCHEON, a painted shield. (F.—L.) ME. scotchyne,
scochone, Prompt. Pary. The same as Escutcheon, q.v.

SCUTIFORM, shield-shaped. (F.—L.) In Blount, ed. 1674.
§ Scutiforme os, the whirl-bone of the knee ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. — MF.
scutiforme, ‘fashioned like a scutcheon, shield-fashion;’ Cot.=—L.
sciiti-, for sctitum,a shield ; and form-a, form, shape: see Escutcheon
and Form,

SCUTTLE (1), a shallow basket, a vessel for holding coal. (L.)
ME. scotille. ‘Hec scutella, a scotylle;” Wright's Vocab. i. 257,
col. 1. A Northern form. Cf. Icel. skutill; AS. scutel, a dish,
bowl. ‘Catinus, scutel ;? Wright’s Voc. i. 290, col. 1.—L. scutella,
a salver or waiter; dimin, of scutra, a tray, dish, or platter, also spelt
scuta. Der. coal-scuttle. Doublet, skillet.

SCUTTLE (2), an opening in the hatchway of a ship. (F.—
Span.—Teut.) ‘ Scutdles, square holes, capable for the body of a man
to pass thorough at any hatch-way, or part of the deck, into any room
below; also, those little windows and long holes which are cut out
in cabbins to let in light;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. And in Cotgrave.
‘ The skottelles of the haches;’ Naval Accounts (1497); p- 323.—
MF. escoutilles, pl., ‘the scuttles, or hatches of a ship; th’overtures
or trap-doors, whereat things are let down into the hold ;’ Cot.
Mod, F. écoutille. Span. escotilla, escotillon, ‘a hole in the hatch of a
ship, also the hatch itselfe,” Minsheu. B. The word appears to be
Spanish; and we find another form in escotadura, the large trap-door
of a theatre or stage (Neuman). Another sense of escotadura is the
sloping of a jacket or pair of stays; and the form of the word is such
as to be due to the verb escotar, to cut out a thing so as to make it
fit, to slope, to hollow out a garment about the neck (a different
word from Span. escotar, to pay one’s reckoning, for which see Scot-
free). The orig. sense is ‘to cut a hole in a garment to admit the
neck,’ from the sb. escote, the sloping of a jacket, a tucker such as
women wear above the bosom. This sb. is derived, as Diez points
out, from the Teutonic; cf. Goth. skauts, the hem of a garment, Du.
schoot, the lap, the bosom, G, schooss, the same; so that the orig.
sense of Span. escote is ‘a slope to fit the bosom,’ a hole for the neck.
@ Soin Diez; see Sheet. Der. scuttle, verb, to sink a ship by
cutting scuttles or holes in it.

SCUTTLE (3), to hurry along, scud away. (Scand.) Cf. Swed.
skutta, to leap; Swed. dial. skutta, to take a long jump; allied to
scuddle (Bailey), which is the frequentative of Scud, q.v. ‘How
the misses did huddle, and scuddle, and run ;” Anstey’s New Bath
Guide, letter 13 (Davies). Davies also gives scutter, a hasty run.

YTHE, a cutting instrument for mowing grass. (H.) The
intrusion of the letter ¢ is due to false spelling; it should be sythe or
sithe. Spelt sythe in L.L.L. i. 1. 6 (first folio, ed. 1623). ME.
sithe, P. Plowman, C. iv. 464; syfe, Havelok, 2553. AS, side, sie,

a scythe; ‘ Falcastrum, siJe,’ Wright’s Vocab. i. 85, 1.3. The AS.
si§e is for sigde (a form actually found in the Epinal gloss), and the
long z shows the loss of g; it means ‘the cutting instrument.’ From


SEARCH 545,


the Teut. base SEG, to cut=4/SEQ, to cnt. See Saw (1),
Section. Fick, iii. 314.4-Du. zeis; Icel. sigdr, sigd, a sickle ; Low
G. seged, segd, also seed, seid, a kind of sickle; Brem. Worterbuch.
From the same root we have OHG. segansa, MHG. segense, G. sense,
a scythe; OHG. sek, MHG. sech, a ploughshare; as well as E. saw,
sickle. Der. scythe, verb, Shak. Complaint, 1. 12 ; scythe-tusked, Two
Noble Kinsmen, i. 1. 79.

SE-, away, apart, prefix. (L.) From L. sé-, short for séd, without,
which is retained as a prefix in sed-ition. Séd is mentioned by
Festus as having been used with the sense ‘ without.’ Der. se-cede,
se-clude, se-cret, se-cure, sed-ition, se-duce, se-gregate, se-lect, se-parate ;
and see sever.

SEA, a large lake, ocean. (E.) ME. see, Chaucer, C. T. 3033
(A 3031). AS. s#, sea, lake.4-Du. zee; Icel. ser; Dan. sé; Swed.
sjo; G. see; Goth. saiws, B. All from a Teut. type *saiwiz, sea.
Der. sea-board, from F. bord, the shore = Du. boord, edge, brim (see
Border) ; sea-coast, sea-faring, sea-girt, -green, -horse, -kale, -king,
-level, -man, -man-ship, -mark, -room, -serpent, -shore, -sick, -side,
-unicorn, -urchin, -ward, -weed, -worthy; &c.

SEAL (1), a stamp for impressing wax, impressed wax, that which
authenticates. (F.—L.) ME. seel (better than sele), Chaucer, C. T.
10445 (F 131). ‘Seled with his seale,’ Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Lang-
toft, i. 29, 1. 12,—OF. seel, ‘a seal, or signet;’? Cot. Mod. F.
sceau; Span. sello, sigilo; Ital. sigillo.=L. sigillum, a seal, mark ; lit.
‘a little sign;’ allied to signum,a sign, mark; see Sign. Der.
seal, verb, ME. selen, as above ; seal-engraving, seal-ing-wax.

SEAL (2), a sea-calf, marine animal. (E.) ME. sele, Havelok,
755; which represents AS. séole, dat. of AS. seolh, a seal; Grein, ii.
438.+4-Icel. selr; Dan. sel; also selhund (seal-hound) ; Swed. s;al,
sjalhund; OHG. selah. Teut. type *selhoz.

SEAM (1), a suture, a line formed by joining together two pieces,
a line of union. (E.) ME. seem, Wyclif, John, xix. 23. AS. séam,
fElfric’s Hom. i. 20,1. 4 from bottom.4+Du. zoom; Icel. saumr 3 Dan.
and Swed. sém; G. saum. B. All from a Teut. type *saumoz, m.,
a sewing, suture (Fick, iii. 325); formed, with suffix -moz, from saz,
and grade of root *seu, *siw; Idg. root SIW, to sew. Cf. L. su-ere,
to sow, Skt. sti-tra-,a thread; see Sew. Der. seam-less, seam-y;
also seam-str-ess, q.v.

SEAM (2), a horse-load. (Late L.—Gk.) ME. seem; dat. seme,
P. Plowman, B. iii. 40. AS. s@am. Borrowed (like G. saum) from
Late L. sauma, late form of sagma, a horse-load.—Gk. odypa, a
pack-saddle. See Sumpter.

SEAMSTRESS, SEMPSTRESS, a woman who sews seams.
(E.; with F. suffix.) ‘Seamster, and Seamstress, a man or woman
that sows, makes up, or deals in linnen-clothes ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.
Only seamster is given in Minsheu, ed. 1627. The suffix -ess is a F.
fem, suffix, F. -esse (from L. -issa, Gk. -1cca), as in princ-ess, mar-
chion-ess. ME. semster, Destruction of Troy, ed. Panton and Donald-
son, 1. 1585. AS. séamestre. We find; ‘Sartor, seamere,’ and
‘ Sartrix, seamestre;’ Wright’s Vocab, i. 74. [Whence s#mestres,
Diplomatarium Aivi Saxonici, ed. Thorpe, p. 568, 1. 10.] Formed
from AS. séam, a seam, by the addition of the AS. suffix -estre, ex-
plained under Spinster. See Seam (1).

SEANCE, a sitting, session. (F.—L.) Modern.—F. séance, a
session. = F’. séant, pres. pt. of seoir, to sit. = L. sedére, tosit. See Sit.

SEAR, SERE, withered. (E.) Spelt sere, Spenser, Shep. Kal.
Jan. 37. ME. seer; spelt seere, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 18,
l. 25; seer, Rom. Rose, 4749. AS. séar, sere; best preserved in the
derived verb; see below.--ODu. sore, dry (Oudemans) ; zoor, ‘dry,
withered, or seare;? Hexham; Low G. soor, dry; Brem. Wort.
B. Teut. type *sauzoz; Idg. type *sawsos, Allied to Russ. suxoe,
dry; Lith. sawsas, dry; Gk. avos (for *cavaos), dry; Skt. gush (for
*sush), to become dry. (4/SEUS.) From the same root is Gk.
ate, to parch, avotnpés, dry, rough, whence E, austere. The Zend
hush, to dry, proves that SEUS is the root; Curtius,i. 490. Brug-
mann, i. § 213. Der. sear, verb, to dry up, cauterise, render
callous, Rich. III, iv. 1. 61, ME. seeren, Prompt. Parv., AS. séarian,
to dry up, to wither or pine away, AElfred, tr. of Orosius, iv. 6. 15.
See Austere ; and Sorrel (2).

SEARCH, to seek, examine, explore. (F.—L.) ME. serchen,
Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 268, last line but one; better
spelt cerchen, as in Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 159, Mandeville’s
Travels, p. 315.—AF, cercher, Stat. Realm, i. 219; sercher, id. 274.
—OF. cercher (Burguy); mod. F. chercher, to seek. Cf. Norm.
dial. sercher, cercher, Ital. cercare, to seek, to search; Prov. cercar,
cerquar, sercar, to search (Bartsch); Span. cercar, to encircle,
surround. = L,. circare, to go round; hence, to go about, explore. = L,
circus, a circle, ring; circum, round about. See Cireum-, Circus,
Ring. Note AF. sercker, ME. serchen; A Nominale, ed. Skeat,
ll. 434, 435. Der. search, sb., Temp. iii. 3. 10; search-ing’, search-er,
search-warrant, Also re-search, shark.

Nn


546 SEASON


SEASON, proper time, fit opportunity. (F.—L.) ME. sesoun,
Chaucer, C. T. 1045 (A 1043); P. Plowman, B. prol. 1; seysoun,
King Alisaunder, 5251.—OF. seson, seison, saison; mod. F. saison,
‘season, due time ;’ Cot. Cf. Span. sazon, Port. saz@o, sezdo;
OProv. sadons, sasos, sazos (Bartsch).—Late L. satidnem, acc. of
satio, a season, time of year, occurring A.D. 1028 (Ducange). The
same as L, satio, a sowing, planting, Verg. Georg. i. 215, ii. 319
(hence, the time of sowing or spring-time, which seems to have been
regarded as the season, par excellence). Allied to L. satus, pp. of
serere,to sow. From 4/SE, to cast, sow; whence also seminal, seed,
sow. See Sow (1). 4 Besides the word season, we also find Span.
estacion, used in the sense of ‘season’ or time as well as ‘station;’
and Ital. stagione, ‘a season or time of the yeere,’ Florio. These
are, of course, from L. statidnem, acc. of statio, a station, hence
applied, we must suppose, to the four stations, stages, or seasons of
the year; see Station. And it is probable that the use of this word
affected and extended the senses of season. I have been informed
that the prov. E. season is still occasionally used in Kent in the sense
of ‘sowing-time.’ Moreover, AF. seson occurs with the sense
“sowing-time;’ see Royal Wills, ed. Nichols, pp. 34, 35. Der.
season, verb, Merch. Ven. v. 107, Ascham, Toxophilus, b. ii., ed.
Arber, p. 124; season-able, season-abl-y, season-able-ness; also season-
ing, that which ‘seasons,’ or makes food more suitable and palat-
able.

SEAT, a chair, bench, &c., to sit on. (Scand.) ME. sete; spelt
seete, Wyclif, Rev. ii. 13.—Icel. seti, a seat; Swed. sate; Dan. sede.
=Icel. sat-, 3rd grade of sitja, to sit; see Sit. [The usual AS.
word is setl, for which see Settle.]4+-MDu. saet, sate; MHG. sdze.
Der. seat, verb, Macb.i. 3. 136; dis-seat, Macb. v. 3. 21; un-seat.

SEBACEOUS, pertaining to tallow, fatty. (L.) From L.
sebace-us, fatty.—L. sébum, tallow, fat. Prob. allied to E. soap.
See Soap.

SECANT, a line that cuts another, or that cuts a circle. (L.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. secant-, stem of pres. part. of secare,
to cut; see Section. (4/SEQ.) Brugmann, i. § 635. See Saw,
Scythe, Sickle, Sedge.

SECEDE, to withdraw oneself from others, go apart. (L.) A
late word; in Todd’s Johnson.—L. sécédere, pp. sécessus, to go
away, withdraw.—L. sé-, apart; and cédere, to go, go away. See
Se- and Cede. Der. seced-er; also secess-ion, in Minsheu, ed.
1627, from L, acc. sécessidnem, nom. sécessio, formed from pp.
Sécessus,

SECLUDE, to keep apart. (L.) ‘ Secluded from the Scriptures ;’
Frith’s Works, p. 3, col. 2.—L. séclidere, to shut off.—L. sé-, apart ;
and claudere, to shut; see Se- and Clause, Close (1). Der.
seclus-ion, formed like séclisus, pp. of sécludere.

SECOND, next after the first, the ordinal number corresponding
to two. (F.—L.) ME. second; spelt secounde, Wyclif, John, iv. 54;
secunde, Rob. of Glouc. p. 282, 1. 5724. Not a very common word,
as other was usually employed instead, in early times; second being
the only ordinal number of F. origin. (See Other.)—F. second,
masc., seconde, fem., ‘second ;’ Cot.= L. secundus, following, second ;
so called because it follows the first. Formed from sec-, from the
base of segui, to follow, with gerundive suffix, with the force of a
pres. part. Brugmann, ii. § 69 (2). See Sequence. Der. second,
sb., used with reference to minutes, or first small subdivisions of an
hour, &c., from F, seconde, ‘the 24 part of a prime, a very small
weight used by goldsmiths and jewellers,’ Cot. Also second, verb,
Merry Wives, i. 3. 114; second-er; second-ar-y, second-ar-i-ly, Tyndall,
Works, p. 120, col. 1; second-ly; second-hand, i.e. at second hand;
second-sig ht.

SECRET, hidden, concealed, unknown. (F.—L.) Spelt secrette
in Palsgrave. The ME. form is almost invariably secree, Chaucer,
C. T. 12077 (C 143); spelt secre, P. Plowman, A. iii. 141; but we
find secret in P. Plowman, B. iii. 145, C. iv. 183.—OF. secret (fem.
secrete, Burguy), ‘secret;’ Cot.—L. sécrétus, secret; orig. pp. of
sécernere, to separate, set apart.—L. sé-, apart; and cernere, to
separate, sift; see Se- and Concern. Der. secret, sb., ME. secree,
Chaucer, C. T. 16915 (G 1447), from L. sécrétum, sb., orig. neuter
of sécrétus; secret-ly, secret-ness; secrec-y, Hamlet, i. 2. 207, a coined
word, by analogy with constancy, &c.; secrete, verb, formed from L.
sécrétus, considered as pp. of secernere ; secret-ion, from MF. secretion,
“a separating, also a thing separated or set apart,’ Cot.; secret-ive,
secret-ive-ly, secret-ive-ness, secret-or-y; also secret-ar-y, q. Vv.

SECRETARY, orig. a private amanuensis, confidant. (F.—
L.) The sense of the word is now much widened; it is frequently
used where little privacy is intended. In Shak. Hen. VIII, ii. 2. 116,
iv. I. 102. Palsgrave has: ‘Secretarye, secretayre ;’ secretarye also
occurs in a 15th-century poem called The Assemble of Ladies, 1. 337.
=F, secretaire, ‘a secretary, clerk ;’? Cot.— Late L. sécrétarium, acc.
of sécrétarius, a confidential officer; cf. L. sécrétarium, a secret place,


SEDITION


consistory, conclave.=L. sécrét-us, secret; with suffix -Grius; see
Secret. Der. secretary-ship; secretari-al.


SECT, a party who follow a particular teacher, or hold particular °


principles, a faction. (F.—L.) It is tolerably certain that the sense
of the word has been obscured by a false popular etymology which
has connected the word with L. secdre, to cut; and itis not un-
common for authors to declare, with theological intolerance and in
contempt of history, that a sect is so called from its being ‘cut off’
from the church. But the etymology from secdre is baseless. Pals-
grave well defines secte as ‘a company of one opynion.’ ME. secte,
used convertibly with sute (=suite) in P. Plowman, C. viii. 130,
B. v. 495 ; see my note on the line. Both secte and sute are here
used in the sense of ‘ suit of clothes.’ =F. secte, ‘a sect or faction ;
a rout or troup ; a company of one (most commonly bad) opinion ;’
Cot. = Late L. secta, a set of people, a following, suite; also, a quality
of cloth, a suit of clothes; also, a suit or action at law; L. secta,
a party, faction, sect, lit. ‘a following.’=L. sec- (as in sec-undus),
base of segui, to follow, with suffix -ta. Cf. Gk. érérns, a follower,
attendant, from €ropat, I follow; see secta in Bréal, s. v. seguor. See
Sequence. Der. sect-ar-y, Hen. VIII, v. 3. 70, from F. sectaire,
‘a sectary, the ringleader, professor, or follower of a sect,’ Cot.;
sect-ar-i-an, sect-ar-i-an-ism. Doublets, sept, set.

SECTION, a cutting, division, parting, portion. (F.—L.) In
Minsheu, ed. 1627, and Cotgrave. =F. section, ‘a section, cutting.’ =
L. sectidnem, acc. of sectio, a cutting ; cf. sectus, pp. of secdre, to cut.
= 4/SEQ, to cut; whence also Russ. sieche, to hew, Lithuan. sykis,
a stroke, cut, and E. saw, sickle, scythe, sedge. Brugmann, i. § 635.
Der. section-al, section-al-ly; also sec-tor, from L. sector, a cutter,
used in Late L. to mean a sector (part) of a circle; seg-ment, q. v.
From the same root are sec-ant, co-sec-ant ; bi-sect, dis-sect, inter-sect,
tri-sect ; in-sect; also saw, sickle, sedge, scythe, risk.

SECULAR, pertaining ‘to the present world, not bound by
monastic rules. (F.—L.) In Levins. ME. secular, seculer, seculere ;
Chaucer, C. T. 9127, 15456 (E 1251, B 4640).— AF. seculer, Year-
books of Edw. I, i. 59, 133; MF. seculier, ‘secular, lay, temporall ;”
Cot.—L. seculdris, secular, worldly, belonging to the age.—L.
seculum, a generation, age. B. Better written séculum; from
VSE, to sow (Bréal); see Sow. Der. secular-ly, -ise, -is-at-ion, -ism.

SECURE, free from care or anxiety, safe, sure. (L.) In Levins;
accented sécure in Hamlet, i. 5. 61.—L. séciirus, free from care. = L.
sé-, free from ; and cura, anxiety; see Se- and Cure. Der. secure-
ly, -ness; secur-able; secur-i-ty, from MF. securité, ‘ security,’ Cot.,
from L. acc. séciiritatem. Doublets, sicker, sure.

SEDAN, SEDAN-CHAITR, a portable vehicle, carried by two
men. (F.) In Dryden, tr. of Juvenal, sat. i. 186. Named from
Sedan, a town in France, N.E. of Paris; first seen in England, A.D.
1581; regularly used in London, A. D. 1634 (Haydn). Evelyn speaks
of ‘ sedans, from hence [Naples] brought first into England by Sir
Sanders Duncomb;’ Diary, Feb. 8, 1645. Cf. F. sedan, cloth made
at Sedan (Littré).

SEDATE, quiet, serious. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706; Blount (ed.
1674) has sedateness and sedation, of which the latter is obsolete. =
L. sédaétus, composed, calm; pp. of sédare, to settle, causal of
sedére, to sit, cognate with E. sit; see Sit. Der. sedate-ly, -ness.
Also sedat-ive, i.e. composing, from F. sédatif, ‘ quieting, asswaging ;’
Cot. And see sedentary, sediment, see (2).

SEDENTARY, sitting much, inactive. (F.—L.) Spelt seden-
tarie, Minsheu, ed. 1627 ; and occurring in Cotgrave. =F. sédentaire,
‘ sedentary, ever-sitting ;’ Cot. = L. sedentarius, sedentary. = L. sedent-,
pres. part. of sedére, to sit, cognate with E. sit; with suffix -drius;
see Sit. Der. sedentari-ly, -ness.

SEDGE, a kind of flag or coarse grass in swamps. (E.) ME.
segge, Prompt. Parv.; Voc. 570. 48. The pl. segges occurs as late
as in Baret (1580). Segge represents AS. secge, g., dat., and acc. of
secg, sedge; Gloss. to A.S, Leechdoms, vol. iii.4-Low G., segge, sedge ;
in the dialect of Oldenburg; Bremen Worterbuch. And ef. Irish
seasg, seisg, sedge; W. hesg. B. The AS. cg=gg; Teut. type
*sag-jd, f.; lit. sense, ‘ cutter,’ i.e. sword-grass, from the sharp edge
or sword-like appearance; cf. L. gladiolus, a small sword, sword-
lily, flag. From the Teut. base *say-, 2nd grade of Teut. root *sex,
to cut=4/SEQ, to cut; see Saw (1), Section. Der. sedg-ed,
Temp. iv. 129; sedg-y.

SEDIMENT, dregs, that which settles at the bottom of a liquid.
(F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.—MF. sediment, ‘a sitting or setling
of dregs;’ Cot.—L. sedimentum, a settling, subsidence.—L. sedére,
to sit, settle; with suffix -mentum. See Sit. Der. sediment-ar-y.

SEDITION, insurrection, rebellious conduct against the state.
(F.—L.) ME. sedicioun, Wyclif, Mark, xv. 7, in some MSS.; others
have seducioun. = OF. sedition, ‘a sedition, mutiny ;’ Cot. —L,
séditidnem, acc. of séditio, dissension, civil discord, sedition. .. Lit.
‘a going apart,’ hence dissension; just as amb-ition is ‘a going


SEDUCE


about,’ =L,. séd-, apart; and it-wm, supine of ire, to go, from 4/EI,
to go, See Se- and Ambition, Der. sediti-ous, Com. Errors, i.
1. 12, from MF. seditiewx, ‘ seditious,’ Cot. ; sediti-ous-ly,
‘SEDUCEH, to lead astray, entice, corrupt. (L.) In Levins, ed.
1570; Fryth’s Works, p. 95, l. 16; Surrey, Ps. 73, 1. 5 from end. =
L. sédicere, to lead apart or astray; pp. séductus.—L. sé-, apart ;
and diicere, to lead; see Se- and Duct. Der. seduc-er; seduce-ment,
a coined word; seduct-ion, from MF, seduction, ‘ seduction,’ Cot.,
from L. acc. séductidnem, allied to the pp. séductus. Also seduct-
ive, a coined word, from the pp. séductus ; seduct-ive-ly,

SEDULOUS, diligent, constantly attentive. (L.) Used by Bp.
Taylor, vol. iii. ser. 4 (R.). [The sb. sedulityis in Minsheu and Cot-
grave.| Englished from L, sédulus, diligent, by change of -us into
-ous, aS in arduous, &c. Cf. séduld, ady. busily ; from sé, apart from,
and dold, abl. of dolus, fraud. Brugmann, i. § 244. Der. sedulous-
ly, -ness; also sedul-i-ty, from MF, sedulité, ‘sedulity,’ Cot., from L.
acc. sédulitatem.

SHE (1), to perceive by the eye. (E.) ME, seen, sen, se; pt. sei,
sey, say, seigh, sigh, sei?, saugh, sauhk, saw; pp. sein, sejen, sen, seien,
seie; Chaucer, C. T. 193, &c. AS. séon; pt. t. séah, pl, sdwon,
pp. gesegen, gesewen; Grein.4-Du. zien, pt. t. zag, pp. gezien ; Icel.
sjd, pt. t. sd, pp. séun; Dan. se; Swed. se; OHG. sehan ; G. sehen ;
Goth. saihwan, pt. t. sahw, pl. séhwum, pp. saihwans. B. All from
a Teut. type *sehwan- (pt. t. *sahw); Fick, iii. 315; Brugmann,
i. § 665. Der. se-er, lit. one who sees, hence, a prophet, 1 Sam.
ix. 9, spelt sear in the edit. of 1551; see-ing. And see sight.

SEE (2), the seat of a bishop. (F.—L.) Used by Spenser in the
sense of ‘seat’ or throne; F. Q. iv. 10. 30. ME. se, Chron. of
England, 363, in Ritson, Met. Rom. vol. ii; Trevisa, tr. of Higden,
ii. 119; P. Pl. Crede, 558.—OF. sed, se, a seat, see (Burguy). = L.
sédem, acc. of sédes, a seat. = L. séd-, as in séd-i, pt. of sedére, to sit ;
cognate with E. Sit, q. v.

SEED, a thing sown, germ, first original or principle, descendants.
(E.) ME. seed, Chaucer, C. T. 598 (A 596). AS. s@d, seed ;
Grein, ii. 394.4-Du. zaad; Icel. sedi, sad; Dan. sed; Swed. sad;
G. saat. Cf. Goth. mana-séths, the world, lit. ‘man-seed;’ L. sé-
men, seed. The AS, s#@d answers to the Teut. type *s@-dom, neut. ;
from Teut. *s@-=Idg. SE,to sow. See Sow. Der. seed-bud, -ling,,
-lobe, -s-man, -time; also seed-y, looking as if run to seed, hence
shabby.

SEEK, to go in search of, look for, try to find. (E.) ME.
seken, Chaucer, C. T. 17. AS. sécan, to seek, pt. t. sdhte, pp.
gesoht ; Grein, ii..418.4Du. zoeken; Icel. sekja, written for soekja;
Dan. soge ; Swed. sdka; OHG. suohhan, MHG. suochen, G. suchen;
Goth. sdkjan; Teut. type *sdk-jan-; from *sdk-=Idg. sag-, as in L.
sag-ire, to perceive, Gk. #yéopuar, I consider. Cf. Olrish sagim, I
seek for. Seek is a weak verb, with mutation from 6 to é in the
infin. mood. Der. seek-er, be-seech.

SEEL, to close up the eyes. (F.—L.) ‘Come, seeling night ;’
Macb. iii. 2. 46. Spelt cele in Palsgrave. Orig. a term in falconry,
to close up the eyelids of a hawk (or other bird) by sewing up the
eyelids; see Sealed-dove in Halliwell, and seel in Nares. = MF. siller ;
‘stller les yeux, ‘to seel, or sow up, the eie-lids, thence also, to hood-
wink, blind;’ Cot. Also spelt ciller, ‘to seele or sow up the eie-
lids;’ id. The latter is the better spelling. —OF. cil, ‘the brimme
of an eie-lid, or the single ranke of haire that growes on the brim ;’
id.=—I. cilium, an eye-lid, an eye-lash; perhaps allied to Gk. 7a
xvAa, the parts under the eyes. See Supercilious,

SEEM, to appear, look. (E.) The old sense ‘to be fitting’ is
preserved in the derivative seemly. ME. semen, Chaucer, C. T.
10283 (E 2409). AS. séman, geséman, to satisfy, conciliate ; Grein.
Hence the idea of ‘suit,’ whence that of ‘appear suitable,’ or simply
‘appear.’ These senses are probably borrowed from the related
adj. seemly, which is rather Scand. than E.; see Seemly.+Icel.
sema, for soema, to honour, bear with, conform to; closely related
to semr, adj., becoming, fit, and to séma, to beseem, become, befit.
f. Here é is (as usual) the mutation of 6, and the Teut. type is
*s6m-jan ; from som, and grade of sam-,as in E. same; cf. Icel.
soma, to beseem, and Icel. sama, to beseem, samr, same; see further
under Seemly. Der. seem-ing; also seem-ly, q.v.; be-seem, q.v-

SEEMLY, becoming, fit. (Scand.) ME. semlich, Ancren

Riwle, p. 94, note 7; semli, semely, Chaucer, C. T. 753 (A 751).—
Icel. semiligr, seemly, becoming ; a longer form of semr, becoming,
fit, with suffix -ligr answering to AS. -/ic, like, and E, -ly; where
sem- isthe mutated form of *sdm- (as in Icel. sdma, to befit), 2nd
grade of *sam-, as in Icel. sama, to beseem, befit, become ; cognate
with Goth. samjan, to please, lit. ‘to be the same,’ hence to be like,
to fit, suit, be congruent with.—Icel. samr, the same, cognate with
E. Same, q.v.  @ Thus seemly=same-like, agreeing with, fit;
and seem is to agree with, appear like, or simply, to appear; the
AS. s@man, to conciliate, is the same, with the act, sense ‘to make


SELDOM 547


like,’ make to agree. Der. seemly, adv. (for seem-li-ly); seemli-ness,
Prompt. Pary.

SEER, a prophet, lit. ‘one who sees.’ (E.) See See.

SEESAW, motion to and fro, or up and down. (E.) In Pope,
Prol. to Satires, 323. A reduplicated form of saw; from the action
of two men sawing wood (where the motion is up and down), or
sawing stone (where the motion is to and fro), See Saw (1). It
is used as adj., verb, and sb,; the orig. use was perhaps adjectival,
as in Pope.

SEETOHE, to boil. (E.) The pt. t. sod occurs in Gen. xxv. 29 ;
the pp. sodden in Exod. xii. 9. ME. sethen, Chaucer, C. T. 385
(A 383); pt. t. sing. seeéh, id. 8103 (E 227), pl. sothen, soden,
P. Plowman, B. xy. 288, C. xviii. 20; pp. soden, sothen, id. B.
xv. 425. AS. séodan, pt. t. séad, pp. soden; Grein, ii. 437.4-Du.
zieden; Icel. sj50a, pt. t. saud, pl. sudu, pp. sodinn ; Dan. syde; Swed.
sjuda; OHG. siodan; G. sieden. Teut. type *seuthan-, pt. t. *sauth,
pp. *sud-anoz. Allied to Goth. sauths, sauds, a burnt-offering,
sacrifice, Mark, xii. 33. Der. sod, suds,

SEGMENT, a portion, part cut off. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.
=—L. segmentum, a piece cut off; for *sec-mentum.—L. sec-dre, to cut;
with suffix -mentum; see Section.

SEGREGATEH, to separate from others. (L.) Not common.
In Sir T. More, Works, p. 428d; where it occurs as a pp., meaning
‘separated.’=—L. ségregatus, pp. of ségregire, to set apart, lit. ‘to
set apart from a flock.’=L. sé-, apart; and greg-, stem of grex,
a flock; see Se- and Gregarious. Der. segregat-ion, from MF.
segregation, ‘a segregation,’ Cot., from L, acc. ségregatidnem.

SEGUIDILLA, a lively Spanish dance. (Span.—L.) Moore
has the F. form seguadille; Remember the Time, 1. 5.—Span.
seguidilla, a merry Spanish tune and dance, with a refrain. Dimin.
of seg'uida, a continuation, succession (of the refrain). —Span. seguir,
to follow. =—L. seqgui, to follow. See Sequence.

SHIGNIOR, a title of honour. (F.—L.) ME. seignour, King
Alisaunder, 1458; the derived word seignory is much commoner,
as in Rob. of Brunne, p. 24, 1. 18, Rob. of Glouc. p. 186, 1. 3858.—=
OF. seignour, MF. seigneur, ‘a lord, sir, seignior ;’ Cot. —L. senidrem,
acc. of senior, elder, hence, an elder, a lord; see Senior. Der.
seignior-y, as above, from OF, seignorie, MF. seigneurie, ‘ seigniory,’
Cot.

SEINE, a large fishing-net. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. seyne; Wright’s
Vocab. i. 159.—F. seine. —L. sagéna,—Gk. oaynvn, a large fishing-
net.

SEIZE, to lay hold of, grasp, comprehend. (F.—-OHG.) ME,
saysen, seysen, orig. a law term, to give seisin or livery of land, to put
one in possession of, also to take possession of; hence, to grasp; see
Havelok, 251, 2513, 2518, 2931.—OF, seisir, saisir, to put one in
possession of, take possession of (Burguy). = Low L. sacire, to take
possession of, Usually referred to Teut,*satjan-, OHG. sazzan (Goth.
satjan, AS, settan), to set, put, place, cognate with E.Set. This may
have given the Low L. form, though it would not give the OF. form
directly. Der. seiz-er, seiz-able, a coined word ; seiz-ure, Troil, i. 1. 57,
a coined word, answering to the F. infin. saisir just as pleasure does
to plaisir. Also seis-in, seiz-in, possession of an estate, a law term,
ME. seisine, spelt seysyne in Rob. of Glouc. p. 382, 1. 7851, from
OF, seisine, the same as saisine, ‘ seisin, possession,’ Cot.; where the
suffix -ine answers to L. -ina; cf. Ital. sagina, seisin, possession.

SEJANT, sitting; aterm inheraldry. (F.—L.) AF. seiant, pres.
pt. of AF. seier, variant of OF. seoir, to sit (Godefroy). —L, sedére, to
sit. See Séance, Sit.

SELAH, a pause. (Heb.) In Ps. iii, 2; and elsewhere in the
psalms. The meaning of the word is unknown, and cannot be
certainly explained. Usually taken to indicate ‘a pause.’ See
Smith, Dict. of the Bible.

SELDOM, rarely, not often. (E.) ME. seldom, P. Plowman,
A. viii. 1243 selden, B, vii. 137; selde, Chaucer, C. T. 1541 (A 1539).
AS. seldan, seldon, seldum, seldom; Grein, ii. 426. B. The AS.
seldum is formed with an adverbial suffix -~m which was orig. the in-
flectional ending of the dat. plural; just as in hwil-um, mod, E, whil-
om, lit. ‘at whiles’ or at times, wundr-um, wondrously, lyt/-um, little,
micl-um, much, and the like; see March, A.S. Gram. § 251. This
form easily passed into seldon or seldan, just as AS, onsundr-on,
asunder, stands for on sundrum. yy. This takes us back to an ad). se/d,
rare, only found as an adverb. ‘ Pet fole wundrap pes pe hit seldost
gesihS’=the people wonder at that which it most seldom sees;
ZElfred, tr. of Boethius, cap. xxxix. § 3; where seldost is the superl.
form of the adverb. We also find such compounds as seld-cud, rare,
seld-sine, seldom seen; Sweet, A. S, Reader. Du. zelden, ady.; Icel,
sjaldan, ady., seldom ; Dan. sjelden, adv. ; Swed. sallan (for saldan),
adyv.; G. selten; OHG. seltan, 8. All these are adverbial forms
froma Teut. adj. *seldoz, rare, strange, appearing in Goth, silda- in
comp. silda-leiks, wonderful, orig. perhaps ‘ of strange form.’

NnQ


548, SELECT


SELECT, choice. (L.) In Shak. Haml. i. 3. 74._L. sélectus,
select, chosen ; pp. of séligere, to choose.—L. sé-, apart; and legere,
to choose. See Se- and Legend. Der. select-ness; also select,
verb, Cor. i. 6. 815 select-ion, sb., from L. acc. sélectidnem.

SELF, one’s own person. (E.) ME. self, sometimes used in the
sense of ‘same’ or ‘very;’ dat. selue; ‘right in the selve place’=
just in the very place, Chaucer, C. T. 11706 (F 1394). AS. self, also
seolf, silf, siolf, sylf, self; Grein, ii. 427, where numerous examples
are given. Du. zelf; Icel. sjalfr; old form sjelfr; Dan. selv ; Swed.
sjelf; Goth. silba; G. selbe, selb-st. The origin is unknown. Der.
self-denial, self-evident, self-existent, self-possession, self-righteous, self-
same, self-sufficient, self-willed. Also self-ish, in Hacket’s Life of
Archbp. Williams, pt. ii. p. 144 (Trench, Eng. Past and Present) ;
self-ish-ness, Butler, Hudibras, pt. i. c. 2.1. 1052. Also my-self, AS.
min self, where min is the possessive pron. of the 1st person; ¢hy-sel/,
AS. pin self, where fin is the possessive pron. of the second person ;
him-self, where the AS. phrase is hé self, nom., his selfes, gen., him
selfum, dat., hine selfne, acc. (see Grein); her-self, due to AS. hyre
selfre, dat. fem.; &c. For the use of these forms in ME. and AS.,
see examples in Stratmann and Grein. Also selv-age, q. Vv.

SELL (1), to hand over or deliver in exchange for money or some
other valuable. (E.) ME. sellen, Wyclif, Luke, xii. 33; séllen,
Matt. xix. 21. AS. sellan, sillan, syllan, to give, hand over, deliver ;
Grein, ii. 429.+-Icel. selja, to hand over to another; Dan. seilge;
Swed. salja; MHG. sellen ; OHG. saljan.4-Goth. saljan, to bring an
offering, to offer a sacrifice. B. All from a Teut. type *saljan-, to
offer, deliver, hand over. This is a causal form, allied to the sb.
which appears in E. as Sale, q.v. Der. seller.

SELL (2), a saddle. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. ii. 2. 11, 3. 12.
ME. selle, a seat, Wyclif, 2 Macc. xiv. 21.—OF. selle, ‘a stool,
a seat, also, a saddle;’ Cot.=—L. sella, a seat. For *sed-la,
from sedére, to sit; see Settle (1), and Sit. Brugmann, i.
§ 475.

SELVAGE, SEL VEDGE, a border of cloth, forming an edge
that needs no hem. (Du.) In Exod. xxvi. 4, xxxvi. 11; spelt
seluege in the edit. of 1551; selvage in G. Douglas, Prol. to Aen. xii.
1. 16. It merely means self-edge, but it was borrowed from Dutch.
‘ The self-edge makes show of the cloth ;’ Ray’s Proverbs, ed. 1737.=—
MDu. selfegge, the selvage, spelt selfegghe in Kilian; from se//, self,
and egge, edge. [The more usual Du. word is zelfkant, for selfkant.]
‘Egge,an edge, or a selvage; kant, the edge, brinke, or seame of
anything; de zelfkant, the selvage of cloath;’ Hexham. See Self
and Edge.

SEMAPHORE, a kind of telegraph. (F.—Gk.) A late word, not
in Todd’s Johnson. A F.name (ab. 1803) for a telegraph worked with
arms projecting from a post, the positions of the arms giving the
signals, Coined from Gk. ofa, a sign; and $opda, a carrying, from
épey, to bear, carry, cognate with E. Bear, vb.

SEMBLANCE, an appearance. (F.—L.) ME. semblaunce, Rom.
of the Rose, 425.—OF. semblance, ‘ a semblance, shew, seeming ;’
Cot. Formed, with suffix -ance (=L. -antia) from sembl-er, ‘to seem,
or make shew of; also, to resemble;’ Cot.—L. simulare, to assume
the appearance of, simulate; see Simulate. Cf. re-semblance.

SEMI-, half. (L.) LL. sémi-, half; reduced to sém- in L. sémésus.
+Gk. ju-, half; AS. sam-, half; as in sam-wis, half wise, not very
wise; Grein, ii. 388, 390; Skt. sam, half; which Benfey connects
with samya-, equality, from sama-, even, same, equal, like, cognate
with E. Same. Thus semi- denotes ‘in an equal manner,’ referring
to an exact halving or equitable division ; and is a mere derivative of
same. Doublet, hemi-.

SEMIBREVE, half a breve, a musical note. (Ital.—L.)
From Ital. semibreve, ‘a semibriefe in musike;’ Florio, ed. 1598. —
Ital. semi-, half; and breve, a short note. See Semi- and Breve.
@ Similar formations are seen in semi-circle, semi-circumference, semi-
colon, semi-diameter, semi-fluid, semi-quaver, semi-tone, semi-transparent,
semi-vocal, semi-vowel ; all coined words, made by prefixing semi-, and
presenting no difficulty.

SEMINAL, relating to seed. (F.—L.) Sir T. Browne has
seminality, sb., Vul. Errors, b. vi. c. I. § 3.=MF. seminal, adj. ‘ of
seed;’ Cot.—L. sémindlis, relating to seed. —L, sémin-, stem of
sémen, seed. = L. base sé-, appearing in sé-wi, pt. t. of serere, to sow;
and suffix -men. Serere is cognate with E. Sow, q.v. Der. semin-
ar-y, q. v. Also semin-at-ion (rare), from L. sémin-dtio, a sowing,
which from sémindre, to sow, derived from sémen.

SEMINARY, a place of education, (L.) The old sense was
a seed-garden. * Asconcerning seminaries and nourse-gardens ;’ Hol-
land, tr. of Pliny, b. xvii. c. 10.—L. séminarium, a seed-garden,
nursery garden, seed-plot; neut. of sémindrius, belonging to seed. =
L. s@min-, stem of sémen, seed ; and suffix -drius. See Seminal.
‘SEMOLINA, large grains left after the finer flour has passed
through the sieve. (Ital.—L.) Modern; for semolino, Ital. semolino,


‘


SENNIGHT


m., small seed, paste for soups, dimin. of semola, bran. =L. simila, fine
wheaten flower.4Gk. cepuidadis, the same. See Simnel.

SEMPITERNAL, everlasting. (F.—L.) In Minsheu and Cot-
grave. Altered from F. sempiternel, ‘sempiternall ;’ Cot. L. sempi-
tern-us, everlasting ; with suffix -alis.—L,. sempi-, for semper, ever;
with suffixes -ter- and -nus; cf. moc-tur-nus (for *noct-tur-nus) from
the stem zoct-. B. L. sem-per is perhaps for *sem-perti, ‘in one
(continuous) part, in one sequence, ever;’ from sem- ‘one,’ as in
semel, once, and *perdz, allied to ‘ part.’ . Brugmann, i. § 1023 (12)
li. § 160 (1).

SEMPSTER, SEMPSTRESS, the same as Seamstress, q.v.

SENARY, belonging to six. (L.) The senary scale (scale by
sixes) is a mathematical term.=L. séndarius, consisting of six each.
=—L. séni, six each; for *sex-ni.mL. sex, six, cognate with E. six;
see Six.

SENATE, a council of elders. (F.—L.) ME. senat; spelt
senaht, Layamon, 25388.—OF. senat, ‘a senat;’ Cot.=L. sendtum,
acc. of senatus, the council of elders.—L. sen-, base of sen-ex, old,
sen-ium, old age; with pp. suffix -Gtus; so that sen-adtus=grown old,
Cf. Vedic Skt. sana-, old (Benfey), OGk. évos, old; Goth. sin-eigs,
old, sin-ista, eldest; Olrish sev; Irish and Gael. sean, W. hen, old.
See Senior. Der. senat-or, ME. senat-our, Chaucer, C. T. 5430:
(B roro), from OF, senatour (Littré), from L, acc. senatorem; altered
to senator to make it like the L. nom. case. Hence senator-ship,
senator-i-al, senator-i-al-ly, Brugmann, i. § 117.

SEND, to cause to go, despatch. (E.) ME. senden, pt. t. sende,
sente; pp. sent; Chaucer, C. T. 5511 (B I0gr), AS. sendan, pt. t.
sende, pp. sended, Grein, ii. 431.4-Du. zenden; Icel. senda; Dan.
sende; Swed, sinda; Goth. sandjan; MHG, senten, G.senden, Teut.
type *sandjan, for *santhjdn-, by Verner’s Law; from *santh, and
grade of *senthan-, to go. Hence send is a causal verb; lit. ‘to make:
to go.” B. The Teut. *senthan-, to go, pt. t. *santh, is a lost str. vb.
of which the prime grade appears in Goth. sinths (for *senthoz), AS.
sid (for *sind), a Journey, way ; Teut. type *senthoz, m.; Idg. *sentos,.
a way, as seen in Olrish sét (for *sent), W.hynt, Bret. hent (for *sent),
a way. Cf. G. gesinde, followers; Goth, gasinthja, a travelling
companion. See Sense.

SENDAL, CENDAL, a kind of rich thin silken stuff. (F.—
Low L.—Skt.) See Sendall and Cendal in Halliwell. ME. sendal,
P. Plowman, B. vi. 11; Chaucer, C. T. 442 (440).—OF. sendal
(Roquefort) ; also cendal (Burguy). Cf. Port. cendal, fine linen or
silk ; Span. cendal, light thin stuff ; Ital. zendalo, zendado, ‘a kind of
fine thin silken stuffe, called taffeta, sarcenett, or sendall,’ Florio. =
Low L. cendalum; also spelt cendale, cendatum, sendaitum, sendadum,
cindadus, cindatus, Cf. also Gk. ow wy, finelinen, So called because
brought from India, —Skt. sindhu-, the river Indus, the country along
the Indus, Scinde. See Indigo.

SENESCHAL, a steward. (F.—Teut.) In Spenser, F. Q. iv.
I. 12, ME. seneschal, P. Plowman, C. i. 93,.—OF. seneschal, ‘a
seneschall, the president of a precinct;’ Cot. Cf. Span. senescal,
Ital. siniscalco, a seneschal, steward. The orig. signification must
have been ‘old (i. e. chief) servant,’ as the etymology is undoubtedly
from the Goth. sins, old (only recorded in the superl. sin-ista, eldest),
and skalks, a servant. The Goth. sins is cognate with L. sen-ex, old. -
The word mar-shal is a similar compound. See Senior and
Marshal.

SENILE, old. (L.) A late word; in Todd’s Johnson. =—L.
senilis, Old.—L. sen-, base of sen-ew, old, with suffix -ilis. See
Senior. Der. senil-i-ty. :

SENIOR, elder, older. (L,) In Shak. L. L. L. i. 2. 10; cf.
senior-junior, L. L. L. iii. 1825; spelt seniour, Tyndale, Mark, vii. 3
(1526); senyor, Monk of Evesham (ab. 1412), c. x, ed. Arber, p. 31.
-L. senior, older; comparative from the base sen-, old, found in
sen-ex, Old, sen-ium, old age. From the Idg. type *senos, old; see
Senate. Der, senior-i-ty. Doublets, signor, senor, seignior, sire,
Sire ‘
SENNA, the dried leaflets of some kinds of cassia, (Ital.— Arab.)
Spelt seza in Phillips, ed. 1706; the older name is seny or senie, ME.
senee, Libell of E. Policy, 1. 362, which is a F, form, from OF. senné
(Cot.). Minsheu’s Span. Dict. has ‘ sen, seny ;’ ed. 1623.— Ital. sena
(Florio). Arab. sana, senna; Palmer’s Pers. Dict., col. 361; Rich.
Dict. p. 851.

SENNET, a signal-call on a trumpet. (F.—L.) In stage-direc-
tions ; see King Lear, i. 1. 33, and Wright’s note. And see Nares.
Also spelt cynet, sinet, synnet, signate,—OF, sinet, senet, segnet (Gode-
froy, s.v. segnet), lit. a signet, a little sign (hence, signal); dimin.
of F. seing, signe.—L. signum, a sign; see Sign, See Notes on
Eng. Etym., p. 264. 3

SENNIGHT, a week. (E.) Spelt senyghtin Palsgrave; synyght,
Sir Amadas, 590 (Weber) ; a contraction of seven night ; see Seven.
and Night,


SENSE


SENSE, a faculty by which objects are perceived, perception, dis-
ernment. (F.—L.) It does not appear to be in early use; Pals-
grave gives sensualness and sensualyte, but not sense. Levins has
sensible and sensual, but also omits sense. Yet it is very common in
Shakespeare. ‘And shall sensive things be so sencelesse as to resist
sence?” Sir P, Sidney, Arcadia, poem ix. 1.137; ed. Grosart, ii. 25.—
F, sens, ‘sence, wit ;’ Cot.—L. sensum, acc. of sensus, feeling, sense ;
cf, sensus, pp. of sentire, to feel, perceive. B. From the Idg. base
*sent-, to direct oneself towards, whence also not only G. sinn, sense,
G. sinnen, to think over, reflect upon, but also Idg. *sentos, a way,
and E, send; see Send. Der. sense-less, sense-less-ly, sense-less-ness ;
sens-ible, Gower, C. A, iii. 88; bk. vii. 127, from F. sensible, ‘sen-
sible,’ Cot., from L, sensibilis; sens-ibl-y, sensible-ness, sensibil-i-ty.
Also sens-it-ive, from F. sensitif, ‘ sensitive,’ Cot. sens-it-ive-ly, sens-
it-ive-ness ; sens-at-ion, Phillips, from L. *sensatio, a coined word from
L. sensatus, endued with sense ; sezs-at-ion-al, sens-at-ion-al-ism. Also
sens-or-i-um, from Late L. sensdrium, the seat of the senses (White) ;
sens-or-i-al. And see sens-ueal, sent-ence, sent-i-ment. From the same
source we also have as-sent, con-sent, dis-sent, re-sent ; in-sens-ate,
non-sense, pre-sent-i-ment, scent.

SENSUAL, affecting the senses, given to the pleasures of
sense. (L.) In Levins; Palsgrave has senswalness and sensualyte
(sensuality) in his list of sbs.; and sensvall in his list of adjectives.
From Late L. sensualis, endowed with feeling; whence sensudlitas,
sensibility (White), Formed (with suffix -dlis), from sensu-, for
sensus, sense; see Sense. Der. sensual-ly; sensual-i-ty, from F.
sensualité, ‘sensuality,’ Cot.; sensual-ness, sensual-ise, sensual-ism,
sensual-ist. Also sensu-ous, a coined word, used by Milton; see Rich.
and Todd’s Johnson.

SENTENCE, an opinion, maxim, decree, series of words con-
taining a complete thought. (F.—L.) ME. sentence, Ancren Riwle,
p. 348, 1. 14.—F. sentence, ‘a sentence,’ Cot.—L. sententia, a way of
thinking, opinion, sentiment. For *sentientia, from the stem of the
pres. part. of sentire, to feel, think; see Sense. Der. sentence, vb.,
Meas. for Meas. ii. 2. 55 3 sententi-ous, As You Like It, v. 4. 66,
from F. sententiewx, ‘sententious,’ Cot., from L. sententidsus; sen-
tenti-ous-ly, -ness. Also sentient, feeling, from stem of pres. part. of
sentire, to feel. |

SENTIMENT, thought, judgement, feeling, opinion. (F.—L.)
ME. sentement, Chaucer, Prol. to Legend of Good Women, 1. 69.
[Afterwards conformed to a supposed L, form *sentimentum, not
used.|—OF. sentement, ‘a feeling;’ Cot.; F. sentiment. Formed
as if from L. *senti-mentum, a word made up of the suffix -mentum
and the verb senti-re, to feel. See Sense. . Der. sentiment-al,
sentiment-al-ly, sentiment-al-ism, -ist.

. SENTINEL, one who keeps watch, a soldier on guard. (F.—
Ital.—L.) Spelt centonell, Spenser, F. Q. i. 9. 41 3 centronel, Mar-
lowe, Dido, ii. 1. 3233 sentinel, Macb. ii. 1. 53.— MF. sentinelle,
“a sentinell, or sentry;’ Cot.—Ital. sentinella, ‘a watch, a sentinell,
a souldier which is set to watch at a station;’ Florio, Cf. Span.
centinela, a sentinel; MF. sentinelle, a watch-tower (Godefroy).
Usually explained from L, sentire, to perceive; as if a sentinel? meant
a watcher, scout; but this doesnot account for the -in-. See Korting,

§§ 8597, 8611. B. Derived by Wedgwood from OF, sentine, a path
(Roquefort), due to L. sémita, a path; this does not help us; for the
word is Italian, not French. At the same time, it would be possible
to derive the form centronel (in Marlowe) from OF, sentron, a path
(Godefroy). See Sentry, y- Perhaps from Ital. sentina, in the
sense of ‘rascal rout of camp-followers,’ or ‘a place where such used
to congregate ;’ if the sentinel had to watch them; see Florio and
Lewis.

SENTRY, a sentinel, soldier on guard. (F.—L.) Spelt sentrie,
in Minsheu, ed. 1627 ; senteries, pl., Milton, P. L. ii. 4125; sentry in
Cotgrave, s.v. sentinelle. Perhaps from MF. sentier, adj., ‘ of, or in,
apath;’ Cot. Or from OF, senteret, a path; with reference to the
‘sentinel’s beat, or his guarding the approaches, The former answers
to Late L. sémitarius, adj- (Lewis); whence the neuter sémitarium (F.
sentier), a path (Ducange),—L. sémita (whence OF, sente), a path.
Der. sentry-box.

SEPAL, a calyx-leaf, division of a calyx; in botany. (F.—L.)
F, sépale, a sepal. Coined (to pair with pet-al, F. pétale) by
taking part of L. sép-ar, separate, and adding -ale, Thus sepal is
(practically) short for *sépar-al, where sépar- was regarded as a part
of L. sépar-dre, to separate. See Separate.

SEPARATE, to part, divide, sever. (L.) We should have
expected to find separate first used as a pp., in the sense ‘ set apart ;’
‘but I find no very early example, Levins, Shakespeare, and Min-
‘sheu recognize only the verb, which occurs as early as in Tyndale,
‘Workes, p. 116, col. 2; see Richardson. = L. séparatus, pp. of séparare,
‘to separate.—L. sé-, apart; and parare, to provide, arrange. See
Se-and Parade, Pare. Der. separate, adj., from pp. séparatus ;


SEQUENCE 549


separate-ly; separat-ion, from MF. separation, ‘separation,’ Cot.;
separat-ism, separat-ist. Also separ-able, from L. séparabilis; separabl-y.
Doublet, sever.

SEPIA, ink from the cuttlefish. (L.—Gk.) LL. sépia.— Gk,
onmia, cuttlefish, sepia,

SEPOY, one of the native troops in India. (Pers.) ‘Sepoys (a
corruption of sipaki, Hindostanee for a soldier), the term applied to
the native troops in India ;” Haydn, Dict. of Dates. The word is,
however, a Persian one. = Pers, sipahi, ‘a horseman, one soldier ;’
properly an adj., ‘ military, belonging to an army;’ Rich. Dict.
p- 807.—Pers. sipah, supah, an army ; stpah, supah, sapah, an army ;
id. pp. 807, 808; Horn, § 699. q@ The Pers. @ being sounded
nearly as E. au in maul, the spelling sepoy gives the right sound very
nearly.

SEPT, a clan. (F.—L.) It is chiefly used of the Irish clans.
Spenser has ‘ the head of that sept ;’ and again, ‘whole nations and
septs of the Irish ;’ View of the State of Ireland, Globe ed., p. 611,
col. 1. ‘The Irish man..termeth anie one of the English sept,’ &c. ;
Holinshed, Descr. of Ireland, cap. 8. ‘Five of the best persons of
every sept’ [of the Irish] ; Fuller’s Worthies ; Kent (R.). ‘All of the
old Irish septs of Ulster;’ Clarendon, Civil Wars, iii. 430 (R.).
Wedgwood says: ‘aclan or following, a corruption of the synony-
mous sect.” He cites from Notes and Queries (2nd Series, iii. 361,
May 9, 1857), two quotations from the State Papers, one dated A. D.
1537, which speaks of ‘M’Morgho and his kinsmen, O’Byme and his
septe, and another dated A.D. 1536, which says ‘there are another
secte of the Berkes and divers of the Irishry towards Sligo.’ = OF. septe,
variant of secte, a sect; Supp. to Godefroy. See Sect. Wedg-
wood adds; ‘The same corruption is found in Proy. cepte. ‘‘ Vist
que lo dit visconte non era eretge ni de lor cepte” =seeing that the
said viscount was not heretic nor of their sect ; Sismondi, Litt, Pro-
ven¢. 215.’ Ducange has Late L. septa for Ital. setta (<L. secta).
@ Perhaps influenced by L. septum, an enclosure ; from sépire, s€pire,
to hedge in, from sépes, sepes, a hedge. Doublet, sect.

SEPTEMBER, the ninth month. (L.) ME. Septembre, Chaucer,
On the Astrolabe, pt. i. § 10.1. 3. Itseems to be meant for the Latin,
not the French form; the other months being mostly named in Latin.
—L. September, the name of the seventh month of the Roman year. =
L. septem, seven, cognate with E, seven; and the suffix -ber, of uncertain
origin. See Seven.

- SEPTENARY, consisting of seven. (L.) In Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, iv. 12, 12, A mathematical term.—L. septénarius,
consisting of seven.—L. septéni, pl., seven apiece, by sevens ; for
*septem-ni. = L,. septem, seven, See Seven.

SEPTENNIAQL, happening every seven years, lasting seven
years. (L.) Used by Burke; see Todd’s Johnson. Formed, with
suffix -al, from L, septenni-um, a period of seven years. = L. septenni-s,
adj., of seven years.—L. sept-, for septem, seven; and annus, a year.
See Seven and Annual. Der. septennial-ly.

SEPTIC, putrefying. (Gk.) Modern.—Gk. onmrixés, charac-
terised by putridity.—Gk, onmrés, rotten; from onmeyv, to cause
to rot.

SEPTUAGENARY, belonging to seventy years. (L.) In Sir
T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 9, § 4, last line. — L. septudgénarius,
belonging to the number seventy.—L. septudgéni, seventy each;
distributive form of septudgintd, seventy.—L. septua-, due to septem,
seven ; and -ginta=-cinta, short for *decinta, tenth, from decem, ten,
See Seven and Ten. Der. septuagenari-an, So also septuagesima,
lit. seventieth, applied to the Third Sunday before Lent, about 70
days before Easter; from L. septudgésima (diés), fem. of septudgési-
mus, seventieth, ordinal of septuaginta, seventy. Also septua-gint, the
Greek version of the Old Testament, said to have been made by 70
translators ; used by Burnet (Johnson).

SEPULCHRE, a tomb. (F.—L.) ME. sepulcre, in early use ;
O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, ii. 95, 1. 11.—OF. sepulcre, MF.
sepulchre, ‘a sepulcher, tomb ;? Cot.—L. sepulcrum (also ill-spelt
sepulchrum), a tomb.—L. sepul-, appearing in sepul-tus, pp. of sepe-
lire, to bury; with suffix-crum, Der. sepulchr-al, from F. sepulchral,
‘sepulchral,’ Cot.; also sepult-ure, Rob. of Glouc. p. 166, 1. 3466,
from MF, sepulture, ‘sepulture, a burying,’ Cot., from L. sepultura,
burial, due to pp. sepultus. ,

SEQUEL, consequence, result. (F.—L.) Spelt seguele in Levins,
and by Surrey; see Tottell’s Miscellany, ed, Arber, p. 218, 1. 8;
and in Dictes and Sayings, pr. by Caxton, fol. 3 b, 1. 10.—OF.
sequele, ‘a sequell;’ Cot.—L. seguéla, that which follows, a result.
— L. sequi, to follow; see Sequence.

SEQUENCE, order of succession, succession. (F.—L.) In
Shak. K, John, ii. 96; Gascoigne, Works, ed. Hazlitt, i. 422, 1. 5.—
OF, sequence, ‘a sequence at cards;’ sequences, pl., ‘answering
verses,’ Cot.; with which cf. the passage in Gascoigne. = L. sequentia,
sb., a following. = L. sequent-, stem of pres. part. of sequi, to follow.


550 SEQUESTER


—4/SEQ, to follow; whence Skt. sack, to follow; Lith. sek-ti, to


follow, Irish seich-im, I follow; Gk. éropa,I follow. Der. sequent,
following, from the pres. part. of segui. Also (from sequi) con-sec-ut-
ive, con-sequ-ence, ex-ec-ute (for ex-sec-ute), ex-egu-ies (for ex-sequ-ies),
ob-sequ-ies, per-sec-ute, pro-sec-ute, sequ-el, sequ-ester, sub-sequ-ent.
Also as-soc-iate, dis-soc-iate, soc-iable, soc-ial, soc-iety; intrin-sic.
Also sect, sec-ond, sue, en-sue, pur-sue, puresuiv-ant; suit, suit-a-ble,
suit-or, suite, pur-suit. See Sue. Brugmann, i. § 118.

SEQUESTER, to set aside or apart. (F.—L.) ‘ Him hath God
the father specially seguestred and seuered and set aside ;’ Sir T. More,
Works, p. 1046 f. And see sequestration in Blount’s Nomolexicon.
We find also: ‘ Hic sequestarius, a sequesterer,’ in the 15th century;
Wright’s Vocab. i. 210, col. 2; and see Wyclif, 1 Macc. xi. 34.—MF.
sequestrer, ‘to sequestrer (sic), or lay aside;’ Cot.—L. sequestrare, to
surrender, remove, lay aside; cf. L. sequester, a mediator, agent or
go-between, also a depositary or trustee. Allied to seqgui, to follow
(Bréal). Der. sequester-ed, set apart, retired ; sequester, sb., seclusion,
Oth. ili. 4. 40; also sequestr-ate, sequestr-at-or, sequestr-at-ion.

SEQUIN, a gold coin of Italy. (F.—Ital.—Arab.) Also spelt
chequin, Shak. Pericles, iv. 2.28; also zechin, which is the Ital. form.
=F, sequin, ‘a small Italian coin;’ Cot.—Ital. zecchino, ‘a coin of
gold currant in Venice;’ Florio.—TItal. zecca, ‘a mint or place of
coyning;’ id.= Arab. stkka(t), pronounced sikkah, ‘a die for coins;’
Rich. Dict. p. 838. Hence also sicca rupee (Yule).

SERAGLIO, a place of confinement, esp. for Turkish women.
(Ital.—L.) A. The peculiar use of this word, in mod. E., is due
toa mistake. The orig. sense is merely an enclosure, and it was
sometimes so used. ‘I went to the Ghetto [in Rome], where the
Jewes dwell as in a suburbe by themselves . . I passed by the Piazza
Judea, where their seraglio begins; for, being inviron’d with walls,
they are lock’d up every night ;’ Evelyn, Diary, Jan. 15, 1645. We
find it in the modern sense also: ‘ to pull the Ottoman Tyrant out of
his seraglio, from between the very armes of his 1500 concubines;’
Howell, Foreign Travel (1642), sect. ix; ed. Arber, p. 45.—Ital.
serraglio, ‘an inclosure, a close, a padocke, a parke, a cloister or
secluse ;’ Florio, ed. 1598. B. There was at that date no such
restricted use of the Ital. word as our modern sense indicates.
Cotgrave, indeed, translates MF. serrail by ‘ the palace wherein the
great Turk mueth up his concubines;’ yet he also gives serrail d’un
huis, the bolt of a door, which is the older sense. y. The Ital.
serraglio is formed with suffix -aglio (L. -dculum) from the verb
serrare, ‘to shut, lock, inclose;’ Florio. Cf. Late L. seracula, a
small bolt.=Late L. serare, to bar, bolt, shut in.=—L. sera, a bar,
bolt. =—L. serere, to join or bind together; see Series, B. It is
clear that the modern use of seraglio was due to confusion with Pers.
(and Turkish) saray or serai, ‘a palace, a grand edifice, a king’s
court, a seraglio;’ Rich. Dict. p. 821. See Hom, § 727. It is
equally clear that the Pers. word is not the real source of the Italian
one. See Serried.

SERAT, a court for the accommodation of travellers, a caravan-
seray. (Pers.) Also used to mean ‘seraglio,’ as in Byron, The
Giaour: ‘ When Leila dwelt in his Serai.’ From Pers. serai, lit. a
palace. Horn, § 727. See Seraglio, B.

SERAPH, an angel of the highest rank. (Heb.) Spenser has
seraphins, Hymn of Heavenlie Beautie, 1. 94. The A. V. has
seraphims, Isa. vi. 23; seraphim being the Hebrew plural, out of
which has been evolved the E. sing. seraph. = Heb. seraphim, seraphs,
exalted ones. ‘ Gesenius connects it with an Arabic term meaning
high or exalted; and this may be regarded as the generally received
etymology ;’ Smith, Dict. of the Bible. Cf. Arab. shara/, ‘ being
high or noble;’ Rich. p. 888. Der. seraph-ic, seraph-ic-al, seraph-
ic-al-ly,

SERASKTER, a Turkish general. (F.—Turk.—Pers. and Arab.)
In Byron, Don Juan, viii. 98.—F. sérasquier (Littré).— Turk.
ser‘ask(ijer, general (where the i is slight). Pers. ser, head; and
Arab. ‘asker, army (Devic) ; i.e. ‘head of the army.’

SERH (1), withered; the same as Sear, q. v.

SERE (2), a bird’s claw; the catch of a gunlock. (F.—L.) For
‘bird’s claw,’ see sere in Nares. ‘ Tickled [read tickle, i.e. ticklish]
o’ the sere ;’ Hamlet, ii. 2. 337 (see Wright’s note) ; i.e. like a gun-
lock of which the catch is easily released. MF. serre, ‘a hawkes
talon,’ Cot. ; because it holds fast.—F. serrer, ‘to bind fast, lock ;’
Cot.=L. serrare, to lock; see Serried.

SERECLOTH, waxed cloth; see Cerecloth, Cere.

SERENE, calm. (L.) In Milton, P. L. iii. 25, v. 123, 734.—L.
serénus, bright, clear, calm (of weather). See Brugmann, i. § 920 (4).
Der. serene-ly, -ness ; seren-i-ty, from MF. serenité, ‘serenity,’ Cot.,
from L. acc. serénitatem. Also seren-ade, in Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674, from MF. serenade (Cot.), which from Ital. serenata, ‘ music
given under gentlewomens windowes in a morning or euening,’
Florio ; properly pp. of Ital. serenare, ‘to make cleere, faire, and


SERVAL


lightsome, to looke cheerfullie and merrilie,’ id. Milton uses the
Ital. form serenate, P.L. iv. 769. Hence serenade, verb. 2 >

SERF, a slave attached to the soil. (F.—L.) Given in Ash’s
Dict., ed. 1775. It occurs in Caxton’s Golden Legend, St. John
Evang., § 5.—F. serf, ‘a servant, thrall;’ Cot. L. seraum, acc. of
seruus, a slave; see Serve. Der. serf-dom, a coined word, with E.
suffix -dom.

SERGE, a cloth made of twilled worsted or silk. (F.—L.—Gk.—
Chinese.) Now used of stuff made of worsted; when of silk, it is
called silk serge, though the etymology shows that the stuff was orig.
of silk only. In Shak. 2 Hen. VI, iv. 7. 27.—F. serge, ‘the stuff
called serge;’ Cot.—L. sérica, fem. of séricus, silken; we also find
sérica, neut. pl., silken garments.—L. Séricus, of or belonging to the
Séres, i.e. Chinese. Gk. =fpes, pl. Chinese. Cf. onp, a silkworm.
From the Chinese se, sei, silk. See Silk.

SERGEANT, SERJEANT, a lawyer of the highest rank;
a non-commissioned officer next above a corporal, (F.—L.) Orig. a
law-term, in early use. ME. sergantes, pl., officers, O. Eng. Homi-
lies, ed. Morris, li. 177, 1. 2; sergeant, Chaucer, C. T. 311 (A 309).
= OF. sergant, serjant (Burguy), later sergent, ‘a sergeant, officer ;’
Cot.=— Late L. seruientem, acc. of seruiens, a servant, vassal, soldier,
apparitor; Ducange. The Late L. seruiens ad legem=sergeant-at-
law. =L. seruiens, pres. part. of seruire, to serve; see Serve. Der.
sergeant-major, sergeanc-y, sergeant-ship. Doublet, servant. ‘

SERIES, a row, order, succession, sequence. (L.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. seriés, a row, series.=L. serere, pp. sertus, to
join together, bind.+-Gk. eipev, to fasten, bind (for *oépyev; cf.
Lith. séris, thread ; Icel. sdrvz, a necklace; Skt. sarit, thread). Der.
seri-al, arranged in a series ; modern, not in Todd’s Johnson ; hence
serial-ly. Der. (from same root) ser-aglio, serr-i-ed. Also (from pp.
sertus) as-sert, con-cert, de-sert (1), dis-sert-at-ion, exert (for ex-sert),
in-sert.

SERIF, the short cross-line at the end of a stroke of a printed
letter. (Du.) Létters made without this cross-stroke are called sans-
serif (from F. sans, without). Most probably, ser- represents the E.
(or F.) equivalent of Du. schr- in schreef, a dash, a short line; MDu.
schreve, a line. Allied to OHG. screvon, to scratch, incise. Cf.
Low G. schreve, a line to mark how far one goes; aver’n schreve,
over (beyond) the stroke, too far.

SERIOUS, weighty, solemn, in earnest. (F.—L.) ‘So serious
and ernest remembrance;’ Sir T. More, p. 480g. ‘Seryouse, ernest,
serieux ;’ Palsgrave.=OF. seriewx (mod. F. sérieux), omitted by
Cotgrave, but recorded by Palsgrave, and in use in the 14th cent.
(Littré).— Late L. séridsus, serious; Ducange.—L. sérius, grave,
earnest. 8. Root uncertain; the long e in sérius induces Fick to
compare it with G. schwer (OHG. swari), weighty, heavy; cf.
Lith. swarts, heavy ; see Fick, i. 842. Der. serious-ly, -ness.

SERMON, a discourse on a Scripture text. (F.—L.) ME. ser-
moun, sermun; in early use; see Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris,
p. 186, title. The verb sermonen, to preach, occurs in O. E. Homilies,
1.81.1. 14.—F. sermon, ‘a sermon;’ Cot.—L. sermonem, acc. of
sermo, a speech, discourse. For *swer-mo ; and allied to E. Swear.
See Walde, Et. Dict.

SEROUS, adj. ; see Serum.

SERPENT, a reptile without feet, snake. (F.—L.) ME. serpent,
Chaucer, C. T. 10826 (F 512).—F. serpent, ‘a serpent;’ Cot.—L.
serpentem, acc. of serpens, a serpent, lit. a creeping thing ; pres. part.
of serpere, to creep.=4/SERP, to creep ; whence Skt. sp, to creep,
Gk. éprev, to creep, Skt. sarpa-, a snake. Brugmann, i. § 477.
Der. serpent-ine, adj., Minsheu, from F. serpentin, L. serpentinus ;
serpent-ine, a name for a kind of gun, Skelton, ed. Dyce, i. 124,


l. 159.

SERRATED, notched like a saw. (L.) A botanical term ; see
examples in R.=—L. serratus, notched like a saw. =—L. serra, a saw.
Der. serrat-ion.

SERRIED, crowded, pressed together. (F.—L.) ‘ Their serried
files;’ Milton, P. L. vi. 599. Spelt serred in Blount. =F. serrer, ‘to
close, compact, presse neer together, to lock ;’ Cot. —Late L. serare,
to bolt.—L. sera, a bar, bolt.—L. serere, to join or bind together ;
see Series ; and cf. Seraglio.

SERUM, whey, the thin fluid which separates from the blood
when it coagulates. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.—L. serum, whey,
serum.+Gk. épds, whey ; Skt. sara(s), adj. flowing; sb. whey. (But
see Brugmann, i. § 466.) Der. ser-ous. )

SERVAL, the S. African tiger-cat. (F.—Port.—L.) A name
now applied to the tiger-cat of S. Africa. But in a tr. of Buffon
(1792), ch. xx, we read :—‘ The maraputia, which the Portuguese in
India call serval (says Vincent Maria) is a wild and ferocious animal,
much larger than the wild cat.’ The word is therefore Portuguese.
Vieyra gives lobo cerval, ‘the lynx ;’ where lobo means wolf (L. lupus),
and cerval (like Span. cerval) is said to be an adj., from cerva, a hind,


SERVE


=L. cerua,ahind. Cf. L. lupus cerudrius (F. loup cervier), a lynx
(Pliny) ; because it hunts deer. See Hart.

SERVE, to attend on another, wait upon obediently. (F.—L.)
' ME. seruen, Havelok, 1230; seruten, Ancren Riwle, p. 12, 1. 4 from
bottom. =F. servir, to serve.=L. seruire, to serve. Cf. L. seruus, a
servant, slave, serudre, to keep, protect. Der. serv-ant, ME. seruaunt,
seruant, Chaucer, C. T. 11104 (F 792); Ancren Riwle, p. 428, 1. 9,
from F. servant, serving, pres. part. of servir, to serve; serv-er;
serv-ice, ME. seruise, Layamon, 8071, from OF. servise, service, from
L., seruitium, service, servitude ; service-able, Levins; dis-service. Also
serv-ile, Levins, from L, seruilis; servile-ly, servil-i-ty ; serv-it-or, prob.
suggested by F. serviteur, ‘a servant, servitor’ (Cot.), rather than
borrowed directly from L, seruitor ; serv-it-ude, spelt servitute, Chaucer,
C. T. 8674 (E 798), from F. servitude, from L. acc. seruitidinem.
Also serf, sergeant ; con-serve, de-serve, dis-serve, mis-serve, ob-serve,
pre-serve, re-serve, sub-serve; de-sert (2), un-de-serv-ing, un-de-serv-ed,


&e.

SERVICE-TREE, a kind of wild pear-tree. (L. andE.) Here
service is a curious substitution for ME. serves (in Northern dialect
servis), which is the pl. of a form *serf or *serve (not used) repre-
senting the AS. syrfe, a service-tree, also called in AS. syrf-tréow.
Here syrf is not an E. word, but adapted from L, sorbus, a service-
tree. The ME. serves=L. sorba, berries of the same. For details
see Notes on Eng. Etym., p. 266.

SESSION, the sitting or assembly of a court. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Oth. i. 2. 86.—F session, not noticed by Cotgrave, though in use in
the rath cent. (Littré). = L. sessidnem, acc. of sessio, a sitting, session ;
cf. sessus, pp. of sedére, to sit, cognate with E. Sit, q.v.

SET (1), to place, fix, plant, assign. (E.) ME. setten, pt. t. sette,
pp. set. ‘Thei setter Jhesu on hym;’ Wyclif, Luke, xix. 35. AS.
settan, to set; Grein, ii. 432. Causal of AS, sittan, to sit; for
*satian, from sat, oldest form of pt. t. of sittan. See Sit.4+Du.
zetten ; Icel. setja; Dan. setie; Swed. sdtte; G. setzen; Goth. satjan.
Teut. type *satjan-; from *sat, 2nd grade of *setjan-, to sit. Der.
set, sb., Rich. III, v. 3. 193 set-off, sb., sett-er, sb., sett-ing. Also
sett-ee, a seat with a long back (Todd’s Johnson), of which the origin
is by no means clear; it seems to be an arbitrary variation of the
prov. E. settle, used in the same sense, with a substitution of the
suffix -ee for -le ; this suffix (=F. -é, L. -atus) is freely used in English,
as in refer-ee, trust-ee; but it makes no good sense here. See
Settle (1).

SET (2), a number of like things. (F.—L.) ‘A set of beads ;’
Rich. II, iii. 3.147. When we speak of ‘a se¢ of things,’ this is a
peculiar use of Sect, q.v. (Not allied to the verb ¢o set.) —OF.
sette, variant of OF. secte, a sect; Supp. to Godefroy.—L. secta,


which often had the sense of ‘set’ in old wills. Cf. Ital. setta. See
my Notes on E. Etym., p. 269. A set=a suit; see Suit.
SETON, an artificial irritation under the skin. (F.—L.) ‘Seton,


is when the skin of the neck, or other part, is taken up and run thro’
, with a kind of pack-needle, and the wound afterwards kept open
with bristles, or a skean of thread, silk, or cotton,’ &c.; Phillips, ed.
1706.—F', sétoz, in use in the 16th cent.; Littré cites ‘ une aiguille 4
seton enfilée d’un fort fil?=a needle with a seton, threaded with a
strong thread ; where seton isathickthread. Formed froma Late L,
type *séto (acc. sétanem) ; derived from L. sé¢a, a bristle, thick stiff
hair, which in Late L. also meant silk (Ducange). See Satin.

SETTEH, a kind of seat. (E.) ‘ The soft settee”; Cowper, The
Task, i. 75; see under Set (1).

SETTLE (1), a long bench with a high back. (E.) Also used
generally in the sense of ‘seat’ or ‘bench;’ see Ezek. xliii. 14, 17,
20, xlv. 19. ‘Setle,a seat ;? E.D.S. Gloss.B.17. ME. setel, sezil.
‘Opon the se#il of his magesté’=upon the seat of His majesty, i.e.
upon His royal seat ; Pricke of Conscience, 6122. ‘On pe se¢le of
unhele’=in the seat of ill-health; O. Eng. Hom, ii. 59. AS. se¢l,
a seat, Grein, ii. 432.-4-Goth, sit/s, a seat, throne; OHG. sezzal; G.
sessel; Du. zetel. B. All from Teut. root *sez, Idg. 4/SED, to sit ;
cf. L. sel-la (for *sed-la), whence E, sell, a saddle; see Sell (2)
and Sit. Der. setéle (2). Doublet, sell (2).

SETTLE (2), to fix, become fixed, adjust. (E.) Two distinct
words have been confused ; in the peculiar sense ‘ to compose or ad-
just a quarrel,’ the source is different from that of the commoner
verb, andmoreremote. A. ME. setlen, trans. to cause to rest, intrans.
to sink to rest, subside. ‘Til pe semli sunne was se¢led to reste’ =
till the seemly sun had sunk to rest, Will. of Palerne, 2452. ‘Him
thoughte a goshauk. .. Sedlith on his beryng’=it seemed to him
that a goshawk settles down on his cognisance (?), King Alisaunder,
484; and see ]. 488. AS. setlan, to settle down, to fix. ‘ Sela sk-
mearas’= the mariners fix (or anchor) their vessels (Grein).. Cf. AS.
setl-gang, the going to rest of the sun, sunset ; from AS, se¢el, a seat ;
Grein, ii. 432. Thus the lit. sense of se¢#le is ‘to take a seat’ or ‘to
set as in a fixed seat.’ See Settle (1), 3B. At the same time, the


\ SEWER 551


_ peculiar sense ‘to settle a quarrel’ appears to have been borrowed
from ME. sajilen, sahtlen, saujtlen, to reconcile, make peace, P.


Plowman, B. iv. 2 (footnote). ‘Now saghtel, now strife’ =now we
make peace, now we strive; Pricke of Conscience, 1470. Sa3tled=


appeased, reconciled, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 230, 1139. AS.


sahtlian, to reconcile; ‘gdde men. .. sahtloden heom’=good men
reconciled them; A. S. Chron. an. 1066; MS, Land 636, ed. Thorpe,
i. 337; see also p. 384, l. 19.— AS. sah, reconciliation; A. S. Chron.
ed. Thorpe, i. 385, 1. 2; a word borrowed from Icel. satt, sett, re-
conciliation, peace; which Noreen (§ 73) connects with L. sanctus,
holy. Also sometimes spelt seht, the verb occurring as sehélian
(Toller). B. That these two verbs were actually confused, we have
evidence in the fact that, conversely, the ME. sa3tlen, to reconcile,
was also used in the sense of subside or become calm. ‘pe se
saztled therwith’=the sea subsided; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, C.
232. We even find the intermediate form sattle ; ‘Muche sor3e
penne satteled vpon segge Jonas’=much sorrow then settled on the
man Jonah; id. C. 409. Der. setétl-er; settle-ment, with F. suffix
-ment,

SEVEN, a cardinal number, six and one. (E.) ME. seuen,
seuene; P. Plowman, B. iv. 86. The final -e is prob. the mark of a
pl. form; both forms occur. AS. seofon, also seofone, seven; Grein,
ii. 437; the final -e marks the plural, and is unoriginal; early form,
sibun.4-Du. zeven ; Icel. sj6, sjau; Dan. syv ; Swed. sju; OHG. sibun,
G. sieben; Goth. sibun.4-L. septem; Gk. émrd; W. saith; Gael.
seachd; Irish seacht; Russ. sem(e); Lithuan. septyni; Skt. saptan.
B. All from Idg. type *septam, seven; origin unknown. Der. seven-
fold, AS. seofon-feald ; seven-teen, AS, seofon-tyne, from seofon, seven,
and ¢yn, ten; seven-teen-th, AS. seofon-téoda, but formed by analogy,
by adding -th to seventeen; seven-ty, AS. hundseofontig (by dropping
hund, for which see Hundred) ; seven-ti-eth. Also seven-th, formed
by adding -th; AS. seofoda.

SEVER, to separate, cut apart. (F.—L.) ‘I sever, I departe
thynges asonder, Je separe ;? Palsgrave. ME. seueren, Gawain and
the Grene Knight, 1797.—OF, sevrer (Burguy). Cf. Ital. severare,
sevrare.=L. séparare, to separate; see Separate. Der. sever-al,
sever-al-ly, of which Sir T. More has sewerally, Works, p. 209h;
from OF. several, Late L. séparale, a thing separate or a thing that
separates (Ducange) ; as if from a L. adj. *séparalis. Also severance ;
dis-sever; dis-sever-ance; cf. OF. dessevrance (Burguy). Doublet,
separate.

SEVERE, austere, serious, strict. (F.—L.) In Shak. Oth. ii. 3.
got.= OF, severe, ‘ severe,’ Cot.; mod. F. sévére. = L. sewérus, severe ;
orig. reverenced, respected (of persons), hence serious, grave (in
demeanour). Der. severe-ly ; sever-i-ty, from MF. severité, ‘severity ;’
Cot.

SEW (1), to fasten together with thread. (E.) Pronounced so.
ME. sowen, P. Plowman, B. vi. 9; more commonly sewen, id. C. ix.
8; Wyclif, Mark, ii. 21. AS. stwian, Mark, ii. 21; Gen. iii. 7.4
Icel. syja; Dan. sye; Swed. sy; OHG, siuwan, stwan; Goth. siujan.
+L. suere; Lithuan. suti; Russ. shit(e); Skt. stv, to sew, whence
stitra-, thread. Cf. Gk. sao-cvew, to sew together. And see
Hymen. 6. All from the 4/SIW, to sew; Fick, i. 229. Der.
sew-er, sew-ing ; also seam, q.v.

SEW (2), to follow; the same as Sue, q.v.

SEWER (1), an underground passage for water, large drain.
(F.—L.) Frequently spelt shore, which represented a common
pronunciation ; still preserved in Shore-ditch = sewer-ditch, in London.
Spelt sure, Troil. y. 1. 83, ed. 1623. [To be kept distinct from the
verb sew, to drain, to dry. ‘Sewe ponds’=drain ponds, Tusser’s
Husbandry, cap. 15. § 17 (E. D.S.); p. 32. Note also sew, sb., as
in ‘the towne sinke, the common sew,’ Nomenclator, ed. 1585, p. 391;
cited in Halliwell, s.v. seugh. These are prob. from OF. essuier,
esuer, to dry (Burguy) ; gen. used in the sense ‘to wipe dry,’ but the
true etym. sense is to drain dry, deprive of moisture, as in English.
Cot. has essuier, ‘to dry up.’—L. exsiicdre, exsuccdre, to deprive of
moisture, suck the juice from.=—L. ex, out, away; and sicus, juice,
moisture, from the same root as L. siigere, to suck, and E. suck; see
Suck.] B. But sewer, sb., is really an adaptation of OF. seuwiere,
a sluice of a fishpond, for letting off water; also spelt sewiere; see
examples in Godefroy, s. vy. sewiere, and in Ducange, s. v. seweria. =
L. *ex-aqudria; like E. ewer from L. agudria. Cf. Late L. exagua-
torium, a channel for draining ; from ew out, and agua, water. Der.
sewer-age ; also sew-age, formed directly from the verb sew.  @] The
F. suffix -age in these words is an indication of the F. origin of sew
and sewer. .

SEWER (2), the officer who formerly set and removed dishes,
tasted them, &c. (F.—L.) In Halliwell. Baret (1580) has: ‘ The
Sewer of the kitchin, Anteambulo fercularius ; The Sewer which tasteth
the meate, Escuyer de cuisine.’ ‘ Seware, at mete, Depositor, dapifer,
sepulator ;’ Prompt. Parv., p. 454. On the same page we haves


552 SEX

“Sewyn, or sette mete, Ferculo, sepulo;’ and: ‘Sew, cepulatum.’
A. It is therefore clear, that, in the 15th century, the word sew-er
was regarded as being formed from a verb to sewe, that had really
been evolved from sewer, sb. But we find, in the N. E. Dict., s. v.
asseour, that the two forms asseour and sewer were used to denote
“one who sets meat ona table;’ evidently allied to sewyn, to set
meat, above. Of these asseour is the fuller form.= OF. asseour, used
in speaking of the service of a table; ‘gui fait asseoir ;’? Godefroy. =
OF. asseoir, to seat, set.—L. assidére, to sit beside, to attend upon ;
cf. Assiduous. = L. ad, near ; and sedére, to sit, cognate with E. sit.
Hence sewer is ‘one who sets a table ;’ of F. origin ; possibly confused
with the native sb. sew, pottage, from AS. séaw, juice.

SEX, the distinction between male and female, characteristics of
such a distinction. (F.—L.) In Shak. Temp. iii. 1. 49.—F. sexe, ‘a
sex, or kind;’ Cot.=—L. sexum, acc. of sexus, sex. Cf. secus, n., Sex.
Perhaps orig. ‘a division ;’ from secdre, to cut. Der. sex-u-al, a late
word, from L. sexu-Glis, formed with suffix -Glis from sexu-, decl.
stem of sexus; sex-u-al-ly, sex-u-al-i-ty.

SEXAGENARY, belonging to sixty. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.
=—L. sexagénarius, belonging to sixty.—L. sexagéni, sixty each; dis-
tributive form from sexagintd, sixty.—L. sex, six; and -ginta, for
-cinta, short for *decinta, tenth, from decem, ten. See Six and Ten.
Der. sexagenari-an, Phillips.

SEXAGESIMA, the second Sunday before Lent. (L.) So
called because about the sixtieth day before Easter. In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674 and earlier, in Prayer-books.—L. sexagésima, lit.
sixtieth; agreeing with diés, day, understood. Fem. of sexagésimus,
sixtieth. Allied to sexaginta, sixty. See Sexagenary. Der.
sexagesim-al.

SEXENNTAL, happening every six years, lasting six years.
(L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Formed, with suffix -al, from
L. sexenni-um, a period of six years.—L.sex, six; and annus, a year
(becoming enni- in composition). See Six and Annals. Der.
sexennial-ly.

SEXTANT, the sixth part of a circle. (L.) Chiefly used to
mean an optical instrument, furnished with an arc extending to
a sixth part ofa circle. But in earlier use in othersenses. ‘ Sextant,
a coin less than that called quadrant by the third part .. the sixth
part of any measure;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —L. sextant-, stem
of sextans, the sixth part of an as, a coin, weight. Formed with
suffix -ans (like that of a pres. part. of a verb in -dre) from sext-,
stem of sextus, sixth, ordinal of sex, six. See Six. Der. (from
sext-us) sext-ile, Milton, P. L. x. 659; also sextuple, q.v.

SEXTON, a sacristan; see Sacristan.

SEXTUPLE, sixfold, having six parts. (L.) * Whose length. .
is sextuple unto his breadth;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iv. c. 5.
§ 12. Coined from sextu-s, sixth, just as guadru-ple is from guadru-
(used for guartus) with the sense of fourth. The suffix -ple answers
to L. -plic-, stem of -plex, as in du-plex, com-plex. See Quadruple
and Sextant.

SFORZANDO, with special emphasis; in music. (Ital.—L.)
Ital. sforzando, lit. ‘ constraining’ or ‘ forcing ;’ pres. part. of sforzare,
to force, lit. ‘to force out.’—L. ex, out, strongly (whence Ital. s-) ;
and Late L. fortia, force (Ital. forza), from L. fortis, strong. See


wo


SHABBY, mean, paltry. (E.) Merely a doublet of scabby, by
the usual change of AS. sc to E. sk. Shabby is the native E. equiva-
lent of the Scand. scabby. ‘They were very shabby fellows, pitifully
mounted, and worse armed ;’ Lord Clarendon, Diary, Dec. 7, 1688.
Cf. ‘They mostly had short hair, and went in a shabbed condition ;’
A. Wood, Athen. Oxon. Fast. ii. 743 (Todd). We find shabbyd for
scabbed in P. Plowman, C. x. 264. From AS. sceab, sceb, a scab, itch.
See Seab. Der. shabbi-ly, shabbi-ness.

SHACKLE, a fetter, chain to confine the limbs, clog. (E.) ME.
schakkyl, schakle, Prompt. Parv.; pl. scheakeles, Ancren Riwle, p. 94,
1,25. AS. sceacul, abond ; Voc. 107. 10. For an older form *scacul.
+Icel. skokull, the pole of a carriage; Swed. skakel, the loose shaft
of a carriage; Dan. skagle, a trace (for a carriage); MDu. schakel,
“the links or ringes [read link or ring] of a chaine;’ schakelen van een
net, ‘the masches [meshes] of a net;’ Hexham. . The orig. sense
is a loose band or bond, hence a trace, single link of a chain, loose-
hanging fetter. Perhaps named from its shaking about, as distinct
from a firm bond; cf. Low G.schake, shank, From AS. sceacan,
scacan, to shake. See Shake. Cf. Icel. skdkull, from skaka;
Dan, skagle, from skage, to shift, orig. to shake; Swed. dial. skak,


SHAKE


a chain, link (Rietz). Der. shackle, verb, ME. schaklen, Prompt.
Parv.

SHAD, a fish. (E.) ‘Like bleeding shads ;” Beaum. and Fletcher,
Love’s Cure, Act ii. sc. 2 (Clara). ‘And there the eel and shad
sometimes are caught;’ John Dennys, Secrets of Angling (before
A.D. 1613); in Eng. Garner, ed. Arber,i.171. ‘A shadde, a fishe,
acon;’ Levins. AS. sceadd, a shad; Thorpe, Diplom. A“vi Saxonici,
Pp: 544. Cf. prov. G. schade, a shad (Fliigel). We also find Irish
and Gael. sgadan, Olrish scatdn, with the sense of ‘herring;’ W.
ysgadan, pl. herrings.

SHADDOCK, a tree of the orange genus; also its fruit. (E.)
Sir H. Sloane mentions the shaddock-tree in his Catalogus Plantarum
(1696). In Stedman’s Surinam (1796), i. 22, he tells us that it was
brought to the W. Indies by a Captain Shaddock ; this was in the
17th century (before 1696).

SHADE, SHADOW, obscurity, partial darkness. (E.) These
are but two forms of one word; the latter form representing the dat.
case. ME. schade, Will. of Palerne, 22; schadue, id. 754. From
AS. sceadu, shadow, fem. (Grein, ii. 398, 401), we have the ME.
schade, E. shade. From AS. dat. sceadwe we have ME. schadwe, E.
shadow ; cf. also ME. scheadewe, Ancren Riwle, p. 190, 1. 24.4-Du.
schaduw, shadow; G. schatten, shade; OHG. scato (gen. scateweés),
shade; Goth. skadus.+- Irish and Gael. sgath, shadow, shade,
shelter; OlIrish scdth, Corn. scod, shade ; Gk. oxdros, cxotia, dark-
ness, gloom. _B. All from Idg. base *sko¢-. Der. shade, verb,
Court of Love, 1. 1272; shad-er; shad-y, Spenser, F. Q. i. I. 73
shad-i-ly, -ness; shadow, verb, ME. schadowen, Allit. Poems, ed..
Morris, A. 42, AS. sceadwian, scadwian, Ps. xc. 4 (ed. Spelman) ; over-
shadow, AS. ofersceadwian, Mark, ix. 7; shadow-y, ME. shadewy,
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iii. pr. 4, 1. 40. Doublet, shed (2).

SHADOOF, a contrivance for raising water. (Arab.) From
Arab. shadaf (not in Rich. Dict.) ; an Egyptian-Arabic word ; see
Lane’s Modern Egyptians.

SHAFT, an arrow;.smoothed pole, column, cylindrical entrance
toa mine. (E.) The orig. sense is ‘shaven’ rod, a stick smoothed
into the shape of a spear-pole or an arrow. ME. shaft, schaft, an
arrow, Chaucer, C. T. 1364 (A 1362); Parl. of Foules, 180. AS,
sceaft, a shaft of a spear, dart; Grein, ii. 403. For scaf-t, formed
with suffix -t (Idg. -to-) from scaf-, stem of pp. of scafan, to shave;
see Shave.+Du. schacht (for schaft, like Du. lucht for luft, air) ;
from schaven, to smooth, plane; Icel. skapt, better skaft, a shaved
stick, shaft, missile; Dan. skaft, a handle, haft; Swed. skaft, a
handle; G. schaft. Teut. types *skaf-toz, m., *skaf-tom, n. Prob.
further allied to Gk. oxfm-rpov, a sceptre, Dor. oxGr-rov, a staff,
sceptre; L. sc@p-us, a shaft, stem, stalk. 4/SQAP ; as in Lith. skap-
oti, to shave, cut. @ The ME. schaft, in the sense of ‘ creature,’
is from AS. sceppan, to shape, make; see Shape. Der. shaft-ed.

SHAG, rough hair, rough cloth. (E.) ‘ Of the same kind is the
goat-hart, and differing only in the beard and long shag about the
shoulders ;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. viii. c. 33 (Of the shag-haired
and bearded stagge like toa goat). ‘ With rugged beard, and hoarie
shagged heare;’ Spenser, F, Q.iv.5.34. Shak. has shag for shaggy,
Venus, 295 ; also shag-haired, 2 Hen. VI, iii. 1. 367. I know of
no instance in ME. AS. sceacga; ‘Coma, feax, sceacga ; Comosus,
sceacgede;’ Voc. 379. 41; 380. 14.4Icel. skegg, Swed. skigg, a
beard; Dan. skjeg, a beard, barb, awn, wattle; cf. Icel. skaga, to
jut out, project; whence also Icel. skagi, a low cape or head-land
(Shetland skaw). The orig. sense is ‘roughness.’ See Shaw.
Der. shagg-y, shagg-i-ness; also shagg-ed, as above. Shag tobacco
is rough tobacco; cf. Shakespeare’s ‘fetlocks shag and long;’
Venus, 295.

SHAGREEW, a rough-grained leather, shark’s skin. (F.—
Turkish.) ‘ Shagreen, a sort of rough-grained leather;’ Phillips,
ed. 1706. He also spells it chagrin.=F. chagrin, shagreen. It was
orig. made of the skin (of the back only) of the horse, wild ass, or
mule; afterwards, from the skin of the shark. See the full account
in Devic, Supp. to Littré. — Turk. saghri, saghri, the back of a horse ;
also, shagreen, Zenker, Turk. Dict. p. 561; and Devic. Cf. Pers.
saghri, shagreen ; Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 354. See Chagrin,

SHAH, a king of Persia. (Pers.) Spelt shaw in Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674, and in Herbert’s Travels, ed. 1665.— Pers. shah, a king;
Palmer, Pers. Dict. col. 374. Remarkably shortened from OPers.
khsayathiya, a king; prob. orig. an adj., signifying ‘mighty;’ and
formed (with lengthened @) from khsayathi, might, sb.; allied to
Skt. Ashatra-m, dominion,—OPers, khsi (Skt. kshi), to rule, have
power. Cf. Gk. xrdopa, I possess. Horn, § 772; Brugmann, i,
§ 920. Der. check, check-er, check-ers, check-mate, chess; also pa-sha
or pa-cha. Doublet, check, sb. :

SHAKE, to agitate, jolt, keep moving, make to tremble ; also to
shiver, tremble, (E.) ME. schaken, shaken; pt. t. schook, shook,
Chaucer, C. T, 2267 (A 2265); pp. schaken, shaken, shaké, id. 408,


f


SHAKO


AS. sceacan, scacan, pt. t. scdc, pp. sceacen, scacen; Grein, ii. 401.
+Icel. skaka, pt. t. skok, pp. skakinn ; Swed, skaka; Dan. skage, to
shift, veer. Teut. type *skakan-. Cf. also Skt. khaj, to move to and
fro, hence, to churn ; from 4/SKAG, to move to and fro. Fick,
iii. 329, i. 804. Der. shake, sb., a late word, Herbert, Church
Porch, st. 38 ; shak-y, shak-i-ness; shack-le. Also Shake-speare. Also
shock, q.v., shog, q.v-, jog, q.V., shank, q. v.

SHAKO, a kind of military cap. (F.—Hung.—Slav.) Modern;
F. shako or schako (Littré). Hungarian csako (pron. chaako), a cap,
shako ; see Littré and Mahn’s Webster. Spelt ¢sakd, and explained
as a Hungarian cap, in Dankovsky’s Magyar Lexicon, ed. 1833,
p. 900. He supposes it to be of Slavonic origin, not a real Magyar
word. Miklosich (p. 27) gives the OSlav. form as cakoninzi.

SHALE, a rock of a slaty structure. (G.) A term of geology,
borrowed (like gneiss, quartz, and other geological terms) from
German. = G, schale, a shell, peel, husk, rind, scale ; whence schal-
gebirge, a mountain formed of thin strata. Cognate with E. shale, a
shell, Shak. Hen. V, iv. 2. 18; prov. E. shale, thin strata (E. D. D.) ;
also with scale; see Scale (1). Der. shal-y. Doublet, scale (1).

SHALL, I am bound to, I must. (E.) ME. shal, schal, often
with the sense of ‘is to;’ Chaucer, C. T. 733 (A 731) ; pt. t. sholde,
scholde, shulde (mod. E. should), id. 964 (A 962). AS. sceal, an old
past tense used as a present, and thus conjugated ; ic sceal, Pu scealt,
hé sceal; pl. sculon, sculun, or sceolun. Hence was formed a pt. t.
scolde, or sceolde, pl. sceoldon. The form of the infin. is seulan, to
owe, to be under an obligation to do a thing; Grein, ii. 413.
Hence mod. E. J shall properly means ‘I am to,’ I must, as dis-
tinguished from Z will, properly ‘I am ready to,’ I am willing to;
but the orig. sense of compulsion is much weakened in the case of
the first person, though its force is retained in ¢hou shalt, he shall,
they shall. The verb following it is put in the infin. mood ; as, ic
sceal gan=JI must go; hence the mod. use as an auxiliary verb.
Du. zk zal, I shall; ck zoude, I should; infin. zadlen; Icel. skal, pl.
skulum; pt. t. skyldi, skyldu; infin. skulu; Swed. skall; pt. t. skulle ;
infin. skola; Dan. skal; pt. t. skulde; infin. skulle; G. soll, pt. t.
sollte; infin. sollen (the k being lost, as in Dutch); Goth. skal, pl.
skulum ; pt. t. skulda ; infin. skulan. B. All from Teut. type *skal,
Z owe, am in debt, am liable ; a sense which is clearly preserved in
AS. scyld, guilt, i.e. desert of punishment, G. schuld, guilt, fault,
debt. We also find Lithuan. skeli, I am indebted, skelét:, to owe,
be liable. See Fick, iii. 334. y. Probably further allied to L.
scelus, guilt, and Skt. skkal, to stumble, err, fail.

SHALLOON, a light woollen stuff. (F.) ‘Szalloon, a sort of
woollen stuff, chiefly used for the linings of coats, and so call’d from
Chalons, a city of France, where it was first made;’ Phillips, ed.
1706. We find chalons, i.e. a coverlet made at Chalons, even in
Chaucer, C. T. 4138 (A 4140),—F. Chalons, or Chalons-sur-Marne,
a town in France, 100 miles E. of Paris, ‘Sa seule robe. . était de
ras de Chalons;’ Scarron, Virg. iv. (Littré, s.v. ras, §.9). Cf AF.
Chalouns, cloth of Chalons, Liber Albus, pp. 225, 231. Chalons
takes its name from the tribe of the Catalauni, who lived in that
neighbourhood.
~SHALLOP, a light boat. (F.—Du.) In Spenser, F. Q. iii. 7. 27.
-F. chaloupe, ‘ashallop, or small boat ;’ Cot.—Du. sloep, a sloop ;
MDnu. sloepe, ‘a sloope;’ Hexham. @ Hence also Span. chalupa
(also Port. chalupa), ‘a small light vessel, a long boat,’ Neuman.
Mingheu’s Span. Dict., ed. 1623, has chalupa, ‘a flat-bottomed boat.’
‘The occurrence of shallop in Spenser’s F. Q. shows that it is rather
an old word in our own language. The Ital. form is scialuppa.
Doublet, sloop, q.v.

SHALLOT, SHALOT, a kind of onion. (F.— L.—Gk.—Heb.)
Added by Todd to Johnson ; it is also spelt eschalot, — MF. eschalote,
eschalotie, ‘a cive or chive,’ i.e. a kind of onion; Cot. Mod. F.
échalote. The form eschalote is a variant, or corruption, of OF.
escalogne, a shallot ; Roquefort.=L. ascalénia, a shallot; fem. of
Ascalénius, adj., belonging to Ascalon, ‘ Ascalonia, little onions or
scalions, taking that name of Ascalon, a city in Jury;’ Holland, tr.
of Pliny, b. xix. c. 6.—Gk. “Acxddwy, Ascalon, one of the chief
cities of the Philistines, on the W. coast of Palestine; Smith, Class.
Dict.— Heb. Ashgelén. See Joshua, xiii. 3; &c.

SHALLOW, not deep. (E.) ME. schalowe. ‘ Schold, or schalowe,
no3te depe;” Prompt. Parv. p. 447; Trevisa, ili. 131, 1. 7; shald,
Barbour, Bruce, ix. 354. Not found in AS.; but evidently from a
base *sceal-, which occurs again in ME, schol-d, schal-d (above), of
which the AS. form was sceald, shallow. This AS. sceald is not in
the Dictt., but frequently occurs in A.S. Charters; as shown by
Mr. Stevenson, Phil. Soc. Trans., 1895-8, p. 532. Thus, in Birch,
Cart. Saxon. ii. 485, we find: ‘ on scealdan ford ;’ and in the same,
i. 593, we have: ‘ zt scealdan flzote. AS. sceald represents a Teut.
type *skal-dz (Idg. type *skaltds). Cf. also prov. E. shall, shaul,
shallow. Perhaps allied to Low G. schaal, schalig, G. schal,


SHAMPOO


insipid, stale, said of liquids when little is left in the vessel.
shallow-ness. And see shoal (2).

SHALM, the same as Shawm, q. v.

SHAM, to trick, verb; a pretence, sb. (E.) ‘ Sham, pretended,
false ; also, a flam, cheat, or trick; 7'o sham one, to put a cheat or
trick on him ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘A meer skam and disguise ;’
Stillingfleet, vol. iv. ser.g (R.). ‘They.. found all this a skam;’
Dampier’s Voyages, an. 1688 (R.). Earlier, in 1677, we find:
‘ Shamming is telling you an insipid, dull lye with a dull face, which
the sly wag the author only laughs at himself; and making himself
believe ’tis a good jest, puts the sham only upon himself;’ Wycherley,
The Plain Dealer, iii. 1. We find also the slang expression ‘to
sham Abraham ’=to pretend to be an Abraham-man, or a man from
Bedlam hospital ; see Abraham-men in Nares, and in Hotten’s Slang
Dictionary. To sham appears to be merely the Northern E. form of
to shame, to put to shame, to disgrace, whence the sense ‘to trick’
may easily have arisen. Sham for shame is very common in the
North, and appears in Brockett, and in the Whitby, Mid-Yorkshire,
Swaledale, and Holderness Glossaries (E.D.S.). ‘ Wheea’s sham is
it’=whose fault is it? Whitby Gloss. Cf. Icel. skomm, a shame,
outrage, disgrace. SeeShame. @ The explanation in North’s
Examen, 1740, p. 256, is neither clear nor helpful; he confuses
sham with ashamed.

SHAMBLE, to walk awkwardly. (E.) A weakened form of
scamble, to scramble; cf. prov. E. scambling, sprawling, Hereford
(Hall.). ‘By that shambling in his walk, it should be my rich old
banker, Gomez;’ Dryden, Span. Friar, Act i. sc. 2. Scamble, to
scramble, struggle, is in Shak. Much Ado, v. 1. 94; K. John, iv.
3. 146; Hen. V,i.1. 4. It seems to be anE. word; see Skamble and
Scamble in the E.D.D. But it is difficult to find cognate words in
other languages. Cf. skimble-skamble, wandering, wild, confused,
1 Hen. IV, iii. 1, 154.

SHAMBLHS, stalls on which butchers expose meat for sale ;
hence, a slaughter-house. (L.) ‘ As summer-flies are in the shambles ;’
Oth. iv. 2. 66. Shambles is the pl. of shamble, a butcher’s bench or
stall, lit. a bench; and skamble is formed, with excrescent 6, from
ME. schamel, a bench, orig. a stool ; see Ancren Riwle, p. 166, notee.
AS. scamel, a stool; fot-scamel, a foot-stool; Matt. v. 35.—L.
scamellum, a little bench or stool (White) ; allied to scamnum, a step,
bench, scabellum, a foot-stool. The orig. sense is ‘prop.’ Cf. L.
scapus, a shaft, stem, stalk ; Gk. oxnmrev, to prop, also to throw.
Brugmann, i. § 241 (a).

SHAME, consciousness of guilt, disgrace, dishonour. (E.) ME.
schame, shame, Wyclif, Luke, xiv. 9. AS, sceamu, scamu, shame ;
Grein, ii. 403.4Icel. skémm (stem skamm-) a wound, shame; Dan.
skam3 Swed. skam; G. scham. B. Teut. type *skama, f., shame ;
Fick, iii. 332. Allied to Goth. skanda, shame, G. schande. Der.
shame, verb, AS. sceamian, scamian, Grein; shame-ful, spelt scheome-
ful, Ancren Riwle, p. 302, 1. 23 ; shame-ful-ly, shame-ful-ness ; shame-
less, AS. scam-léas, Aélfred, tr. of Gregory’s Past. Care, c. xxxi (ed.
Sweet, p. 204) ; shame-less-ly, shame-less-ness ; also shame-faced, q. v.
And see sham.

SHAMEFACED, modest. (E.) <A corruption of shamefast,
by a singular confusion with face, due to the fact that shame is
commonly expressed by the appearance of the face; see Face. We
find shamefastness in Spenser, F. Q. iv. 10. 50; shame-faced in Shak.
Rich. III, i. 4.142, where the quarto ed. has shamefast (Schmidt).
ME. schamefast, shamefast, Chaucer, C. T. 2057 (A 2055). AS.
scamfest, Alfred, tr. of Gregory’s Past. Care, c. xxxi (ed. Sweet,
p- 204).— AS. scamu, shame ; and fest, fast, firm; see Shame and
Fast. Der. shamefaced-ness.

SHAMMY, SHAMOY, a kind of leather. (F.—G.) So called
because formerly made from the chamois. ‘ Skamois, or Chamois, a
kind of wild goat, whose skin, being rightly dressed, makes our true
Shamois leather ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ‘ Shamoy, or Shamoy-
leather, a sort of leather made of the skin of the Skamoys ;’ Phillips,
ed. 1706.—F. chamois, ‘a wilde goat, or shamois; also the skin
thereof dressed, and called ordinarily shamois leather ;’ Cot. Cf. F.
chamoiser, to prepare chamois leather; Littré. See Chamois.
@ Taylor professes to correct this etymology, and, without a word
of proof, derives it ‘from Samland, a district on the Baltic,’ with
which it has but two letters, a and m,in common. There is no
difficulty, when it is remembered that shamoy-leather could only have
been prepared from the chamois a¢ first; other skins were soon
substituted, as being cheaper, when a larger demand setin. I see no
force in Wedgwood’s objection, that chamois skins were too scarce
for general use. Imitations are always common. Cf. G. gemsen-
leder, chamois leather ; from gemse, a chamois!

SHAMPOO, to squeeze and rub the body of another after a hot
bath ; to wash the head thoroughly with soap and water. (Hindu-
stani.) A modern word; the operation takes its name from the


553


Der.


554 SHAMROCK


squeezing or kneading of the body with the knuckles, which forms
a part of it, as properly performed.— Hind. champna, ‘(1) to join,
(2) to stuff, thrust in, press, to shampoo or champoo;’ Shakespear,
Hind. Dict. ed. 1849, p. 846. The initial letter is rightly cz, as in
church. Yule notes that E. shampoo may represent Hind. champo,
the imperative of the above verb.

SHAMROCK, a species of clover. (C.) ‘Yf they founde a
plotte of water-cresses or shamrokes ;’ Spenser, View of the State of
Treland, Globe ed., p. 654, col. 2.—Jrish seamrog, trefoil, dimin.
of seamar, trefoil ; Gael. seamrag, shamrock, trefoil, clover.

SHANK, the lower part of the leg, a stem. (E.) ME. skanke,
schanke, Havelok, 1903. AS. sceanca, scanca; John, xix. 31, 32.
Esp. used of the bone of the leg.4-Du. schonk, a bone; Dan. skank,
the shank ; Swed. skank, leg. Allied to G. schinken, the ham, schenkel,
the shank, leg ; Low G. schake, shank. Perhaps ultimately related
to Shake. Der. skink-er, nun-cheon.

SHANTY, a hut. (Irish.) From Irish sean, old, and toigh,
a house. Similar compounds, beginning with sean, are common in
Trish ; and the compound seantoigh, an old ruinous hut, is in actual
use (Archiv f.n. Sprachen, cvii. 112),

SHAPE, to form, fashion, adapt. (E.) Formerly a strong verb.
ME. shapen, schapen; pt. t. shoop, Chaucer, C. T. 16690 (G 1222);
pp. shapen, shape, id. 1227 (A 1225). A new formation from the
ME. sb. schap (AS. ge-sceap) ; or from the pp., on the analogy of
sceacan, to shake. The AS. verb is scieppan, sceppan, which has
a weak infin. (= Goth. skapjan or ga-skapjan). But the verb is strong,
with pt. t. scop, scedp, and pp. scapen, sceapen.+lIcel. skapa, pt. t.
skép; Swed. skapa; Dan. skabe; G. schaffen, to create; pt. t. schuj,
pp. geschaffen; cf. Goth. gaskapjan. Teut. type *skapan- (also
*skapjan-), pt. t. *skop. Cf. Lith. skabézi, to cut, hew. Brugmann,i.
§ 7oI. Der. shape, sb., AS. gesceap, a creature, beauty, Grein;
shap-able ; shap-er ; shapely, ME. schaply, Chaucer, C. T. 374 (A 372) ;
shape-li-ness ; shape-less, shape-less-ness. Hence also the suffix -ship,
AS. -scipe (as in friend-ship, i.e. friend-shape), cf. G. freund-schaft ;
and the suffix -scape in land-scape, q.v.

SHARD, SHERD, a fragment. (E.) Commonly in the comp.
pot-shard. ‘Shardes of stones, Fragmentum lapidis; a shard of an
earthen pot ;’ Baret (1580). The pl. skards is in Hamlet, v. 1. 254.
ME. scherd, Prompt. Pary. p. 445. AS. sceard, a fragment; A‘lfred,
tr. of Boethius, c. xviii. § 1 (bk. ii. pr. 7); cf. sceard, cut, notched.
Lit. ‘cut thing;’ from Teut. *skar, 2nd grade of *sker-an-, to cut.
See Shear. Cf. Icel. skard, anotch, skardr, sheared, diminished.

SHARE (1), a portion, part, division. (E.) Spelt sckare in Pals-
grave; very rare in ME. in this sense ; schar, i.e. the groin, Wyclif,
2 Kings, ii. 23, is the same word. AS, scearu, arare word ; occurring
inthe comp. Jand-scearu, a share of land; Grein. From Teut. *skar,
2nd grade of *sker-an-, to shear; see Shear. And see below.
Der. share, verb, Spenser, F. Q. iv. 8. 5; shar-er, share-holder.

SHARE (2),a plough-share. (E.) ME. schare, share; P. Plow-
man, B. ili. 306. AS. scear, a plough-share; Ailfric’s Gloss., Ist
word. From Teut. *skar, 2nd grade of *sker-an-, to shear; see
Shear.

SHARK, a voracious fish, hound-fish. (F.—L.) The name of
the fish is from the Tudor E. verb shark, to prowl; to shark for a
dinner, to try to get one; to shark for a living. ‘Because they
should not think I came to skarke Only for vittailes;’ Times’
Whistle (E. E. T.S.), p. 85. ‘They shark for a hungry diet ;’ Ben
Jonson, Mercury Vindicated. Prob. from North F. (Picard) cherquier,
equivalent to OF. cercher (E. search), mod. F. chercher. Cf. cher-
cher le broust, ‘to hunt after feasts;’ Cot. Godefroy has two
exx. of the spelling cherquier. Cf. also Ital. cercare del pane, ‘to
shift for how to five,’ i.e. to shark (Torriano).—L. circare, to go
round, go about. = L, cireus,a ring; see Cireus. And see Search.
Thus shark is only a variant of search, but was used in a special
sense. Hence shark (1), a greedy fellow, one who lives by his wits,
described in ch. 14 of Earle’s Micro-cosmographie (1628); (2) a
greedy fish (in Florio, s. vy. Citaro). Der. shark-ing, voracious,
greedy, prowling; one of the Dramatis Persone of Love’s Cure (by
Beaum. and Fletcher) is ‘ Alguazeir, a sharking panderly constable ;’
shark up=to snap up, Hamlet, i. 1. 98. And hence shark=a
sharper, asaslang term. ¢ > Some connect the last word with G.
schurke, a rogue; but without any attempt to explain the difference
of vowels. Sewel’s Du. Dict. has: ‘schurk, a shark, a rascal;’ but
this is merely a translation, not an identification.

SHARP, cutting, trenchant, keen, severe, biting, shrewd. (E.)
ME. sharp, scharp, Chaucer, C. T. 1653. AS. scearp; Grein, ii. 404.
+Du. scherp; Icel. skarpr ; Swed. and Dan. skarp; G. scharf. Teut.
type*skarpoz. Perhapsallied to scrape. See Scrape. Der. sharp-ly,
sharp-ness; sharp-er, one who acts sharply, a cheat; skarp-set,
-sighted, -witted; sharp-en, to make sharp, Antony, ii. 1. 25.

HATTER, to break in pieces. (E.) The Southern E. form of


SHEAR


scatter; with a difference of meaning. ME. schateren, to scatter, to
dash, said of a falling stream ; Gawayn and Grene Knight, 2083.
AS. scaterian, to scatter, squander; A. S. Chron. an. 1137. Milton
uses shatter with the sense of scatter at least twice; P. L. x. 1066,
Lycidas, 5 ; so also prov. E. shatter, to scatter (Kent). See Scatter.
Doublet, scatter.

SHAVE, to pare, strip, cut off in slices, cut off hair. (E.) ME.
shaven, schaven, formerly a strong verb; pt.t. schoof (misspelt schoofe),.
Wyclif, 1 Chron. xix. 4, earlier text; the later text has skauyde.
The strong pp. shaven is stillin use. AS. sceafan, scafan; pt. t. scdf,
pp- scafen; the pt. t. scdf occurs in Aélfred, tr. of Beda, b. i. c. 1,
near the end,-+-Du. schaven, to scrape, plane wood ; Icel. skafa ; Swed.
skafva, to scrape; Dan. skave, to scrape; Goth. skaban, 1 Cor. xi. 6;
G. schaben. B. All from Teut. base SKAB, answering to 4/ SQAP,
to cut, dig, whence Lithuan. skapoti, to shave, cut, Russ. skopite, to
castrate, Gk. oxanrey, to dig. Brugmann, i. §§ 569, 7or. Der.
shav-er, shav-ing; also shave-l-ing, with double dimin. suffix, expres-
sive of contempt, applied to a priest with shaven crown, in Bale,
King John, ed, Collier, p. 17, 1.16. Also scab, shab-by, shaf-t.

SHAW, athicket, small wood. (E.) ME. schawe, shawe, Chaucer,
C. T. 4365 (A 4367). AS. scaga, a shaw; Diplomatarium Atvi
Saxonici, ed. Thorpe, p. 161, l. 5.4Icel. skogr, a shaw, wood;
Swed. skog; Dan. skov. Allied to Icel. skagi, a ness (Noreen) ;
NFries. skage, a nook of land; cf. Icel. skaga, to jut out. Allied to
Shag.

SHAWL, a covering for the shoulders. (Pers.) Added by Todd
to Johnson’s Dict. Pers. shal, ‘a shawl or mantle, made of very fine
wool of a species of goat common in Tibet ;” Rich. Dict. p. 872.
See Yule. The Pers. @ resembles E. aw, showing that we borrowed
the word immediately from Persian, not from F. chdle.

SHAWM, SHALM, a musical instrument resembling the
clarionet. (F.—L.—Gk.) It was a reed-instrument. In Prayer-
Book version of Ps. xcviii. 7. ‘ With shaumes and trompets, and with
clarions sweet ;’ Spenser, F. Q. i. 12. 13. The pl. form skalmyes
occurs in Chaucer, House of Fame, iii. 128. Shalmye appears to
have been abbreviated to skalme, shaume.—OF. chalemie, ‘a little
pipe made of a reed, or of a wheaten or oaten straw ;’ Cot. Also
chalemelle, chalumeau; Cot. All allied to F.chaume (for *chalme),
straw, a straw.=L. calamus, a reed; borrowed from Gk., the true
Lat. word being culmus.=Gk. nddAapos, a teed; Kaddyn, a stalk or
straw of corn. Cognate with E.Haulm,q.v. 4 The G. schalmei
is also from French. Doublet, haulm.

SHH, the fem. of the 3rd pers. pronoun. (E.) ME, she, sche,
sheo; Chaucer, C. T. 121; sho, Havelok, 125; scho, id. 126; also
sce, A. S. Chron. an. 1140. In the Northumbrian dialect, we find
ME. scho used as a dem. pronoun, though the AS. séo is the fem. of
the def. article. B. The AS. séo should have become see, but this.
form never occurs ; rather it became sié (John iv. 23, Lindisfarne
MS.); whence (perhaps influenced by the Icel. dem. pron. sja, that)
came Northumb. ME. scho, sho; and this seems to have suggested the
Midland sche, she, the true Southern forms being heo, he, which
actually occur, and were easily confused with he, masc. sy. The AS.
séo, fem. of se, used as def. article, was orig. a demonstrative pro-
noun, meaning ‘ that.’-4-Du. zij, she; Icel. su, sja, fem. of sa, dem.
pron.; G. sie, she; Goth. sd, fem. of sa, dem. pron. used as def.
article; Gk. 7, fem. of 6, def. art.; Skt. sa, she, fem. of sas, he,
For Icel. sja, see Noreen, § 399. And see Sweet, E. Gr. § 1068.

SHEAF, a bundle of things collected together, esp. used of
grain. (E.) ME. scheef, shef (with long e), Chaucer, C. T. 104,
AS. scéaf, Gen. xxxvii. 7 ; spelt scéabin the 8th cent., Corpus Gloss.,
197.4-Du, schoof; Icel. skauf; G. schaub, ‘The sense of ‘ sheaf” is
a bundle of things ‘shoved’ together. Teut. type *skawoz, m.
From *skaub, and grade of *skiiban-, to shove; see Shove. 4 The
pl. sheaves answers to AS, pl. scéafas. Der. sheaf, verb, As You
Like It, iii. 2, 113 3 sheaf-y.

SHEAL, a temporary summer hut. (Scand.) In Halliwell;
Jamieson has also sheil, shielling, sheelin ; spelt shieling in Campbell,
O’Connor’s Child, st. 3. Spelt scheiJl, Henrysoun, Upland Mouse,
st. 6. Connected in the Icel. Dict. with Icel. skali, Norweg. skaale,
a hut; but rather from Icel. skjdl, a shelter, cover, Dan. skjul, a
shelter, Swed. skjul, a shed, shelter; cf. Icel. skyli, a shed, shelter,
skyla, to screen, shelter, skyling, a screening. These words are from
the 4/SKEU, to cover; cf. Skt. skw, to cover; Fick, iii. 337. See
Sky. @ For the form, cf. Icel. skjéla, a pail or bucket, called
in Scotland a skiel or skeel.

SHEAR, to cut, clip, shave off. (E.) ME. scheren, sheren, pt. t,
schar, shar, pp. schoren, now contracted to shorn; Chaucer, C. T,
13958 (B 3142). AS. sceran, sciran, pt. t. scer, pl. sc@ron, pp,


scoren; Gen. xxxviii. 13; Diplomatarium Aivi Saxonici, ed. Thorpe, «


p. 145, 1. 14.4-Du. scheren; Icel. skera; Dan. skere; G. scheren, Teut,
type *skeran-, pt. t. *skar, pp. *skor-anoz. Allied to Olrish scar-aim,


SHEATH


I separate; Gael. sgar, to sever; W. ysgar,to part; Gk. refpew (for
onepyev).—4/SQER, to cut. Brugmann, i. § 631. Der. shear-er ;
shears, ME. sheres, P. Plowman, C. vii. 75, pl. of shear = AS. sceara,
used to translate L. forfex, Voc. 336. 27; shear-ling,a sheep only
once sheared, formed with double dimin. suffix -l-ing, Allied words
are Scar (2), Share, Sheer (2), Shard, Shore, Short, Score,
Skerry, and others.

SHEATH, a case for a sword or other implement, case, scab-
bard. (E.) ME. schethe, Wyclif, John, xviii. 11. AS. sc#d, scéd,
scéad, a sheath; Grein, ii. 399.-4-Du. scheede; Icel. skeidir, fem. pl.;
Dan. skede ; [Swed. skida]; G. scheide. Teut. type *skaitha, f., orig.
‘that which separates,’ applied to the husk of a bean, as in Swed.
skida, which also means ‘a husk.’ Since such a husk has two sides,
we see why the Icel. skeidir is only used in the plural ; and these
sides of a case must be separated before a knife or sword can be
introduced, if the material of the scabbard is at all loose. All from
Teut. base *skaith- [except Swed. skid-a<weak grade *skith-]; for
which see Shed (1). Der. sheathe, verb, Macb. v. 7. 20; spelt
shethe in Palsgrave; sheath-ing.

SHEAVE, a wheel of a pulley. (E.) A technical term; see
Webster. A variant of proy. E.: shive, a slice (Halliwell) ; see
E.D.D., and see further under Shive, Shiver (2).

SHEBEEN, a liquor-shop. (Irish,—E.) Apparently a dimin.
(with suffix -av) of Irish seapa, a shop. —E. shop; see Shop.

SHED (1), to part, scatter, cast abroad, pour, spill. (E.) The
old sense ‘to part’ is nearly obsolete, except in water-shed, the
ridge which parts river-systems. ‘Shed, to distinguish,’ Ray, Gloss.
B. 15 (E. D.S.). Spelt skead in Baret (1580). ME. scheden, Rob.
of Glouc. p. 57, 1. 1332; P. Plowman, B. vi. 9; pt. t. shadde, shedde,
P. Plowman, B. xvii. 288; pp. shad, Gen. and Exodus, ed. Morris,
148; also shed. AS. sceddan, scidan, to part, separate, distinguish
(hence, to scatter); pt. t. scéd, scéad, pp. sceaden, scaden; a strong
verb; Grein, ii. 398 ; but we find the weak pt. t. skadde and the pp.
shad as early as in the Ormulum, ll. 3200, 4939. The vowel of the
mod. E. word has been shortened, as in red from AS. réad, bread from
bréad, and head from héafod ; this shortening began in the weak pt. t.
shedde and the pp. shed.4OSax. skédan, OF ries. skétha, scéda, to part ;
G. scheiden; Goth. skaidan. Cf. Lithuan. skédziu, I separate; L.
scindere, Gk. oxifev, to cleave, split, part. All from Teut. base
*skaith, varying to *skaid (see Shide) ; allied to Idg. base *skhid,
to cleave. See Brugmann, i. §§ 201, 599. Der. shedd-er.

SHED (2), a slight shelter, hut. (E.) Allied to shade. ‘Sheds
stuffed with lambs and goats ;’ Chapman, tr. of Odyssey, ix. 314;
cf. prov. E. cow-shade, a cow-shed (Leic.), It appears to bea Kentish
form, like OKentish bend for band, mere for mare, leddre for ladder,
&c. ; see Introd. to Ayenbite of Inwyt, ed. Morris, pp. v, vi. In
the same work, p. 95,1. 28, we find ssed (=shed) for shade; ssede,
dat. p. 97, 1. 1; and ssed in the sense of ‘shadow,’ p. 137, 1. 15.
AS. scead, sced, shade; fig. shelter (Toller) ; allied to AS. sceadu,
shade. See Shade. B. Or shed may be a Kentish form of
proy. E. shud, a shed (E. D. D.), ME. schudde, a shed, Prompt.
Parv., which answers to an AS. form *scydd.

SHEEN, fairness, splendour. (E.) ‘ The sheen of their spears ;’
Byron, Destruction of Sennacherib. And in Hamlet, iii. 2.167. But
properly an adj., signifying ‘ fair,’ as in Spenser, F. Q. ii. 1. 10, ii, 2.
40. ME, schene, adj., fair, beautiful, Chaucer, C. T. 974 (A 972).
AS, scéne, scéone, scione, scyne, fair; Grein, ii. 416. Lit. ‘showy,’ fair
to sight, and allied to Show, q.v. (But doubtless frequently
supposed to be allied to shine, which the vowel-sound shows to be
impossible; observe the cognate forms.)-4-OSax. scdni, adj.; Du.
schoon, adj.; G. schon, adj.; Goth. skauns, beautiful. Teut. type
*skau-niz (Kluge); or *skau-n-joz (Streitberg). See Fick, iii. 336.

SHEEP, a well-known animal. (E.) ME. scheep, sheep, pl. scheep,
sheep; Chaucer, C.T. 498 (A 496). AS. scéap, scép, pl. scéap, scép, a
neuter sb., which is unchanged in the plural, like deer ; Grein, ii. 404.
+OSax. skip; Du. schaap, a sheep, a simpleton; G. schaf; OHG.
scaf. Teut. type sképom, n. Origin unknown; the Pol. sko#, Lith.
skapas, sheep, are borrowed from Teutonic. Der. sheep-cote, sheep-
fold; sheep-ish, -ly, -ness; sheep-master, shearer, -shearing, -walk.
Also shep-herd.

SHEER (1), bright, clear, pure, simple, perpendicular. (Scand.)
© A sheer descent’ is an unbroken one, orig. a clear one; the old
meaning being ‘ bright.’ And see Trench, Select Glossary. ‘ Sheer,
immaculate, and silver fountain ;’ Rich. JI, v. 3.61. ME. scheere,
shere. ‘The shere sonne;’ Lydgate, Storie of Thebes, pt. i (How
Edipus expouned the probleme). (Rather Scand. than E, The
initial sk is due to AS. scir (below).] = Icel. skerr, bright, clear; Swed.
skar ; Dan. sker, bright, pure; Teut. type *skairiz. Allied to Icel.
skirr, clear, bright (which is cognate with AS. scir, bright (Grein),
Goth. skeirs, G. schier); Teut. type *skeiroz. B. Here *skai-riz is
from *skai-, the 2nd grade, and *skei-roz from *skei-, the prime grade,


SHELF 555


of Idg. root SKEI, to shine. Cf. Icel. sh@-na (= AS. sci-nan), to shine ;
so that the orig. sense is ‘shining.’ See Shine. Der. sheer, adv. ;
also Sheer-Thursday, the old name of Maundy Thursday, lit. ‘ pure
Thursday ;’ cf. Icel. skira, to cleanse, baptize, Skirdagr or Skiripors-
dagr, Sheer-day or Sheer-Thursday, Dan. Skertorsdag. See my note
on P. Plowman, B. xvi. 140; p. 379 of ‘ Notes.’

SHEER (2), to deviate from one’s course. (Du.) A nautical
term. ‘Among sea-men, aship is said to sheer, or go sheering, when
in her sailing she is not steadily steered, &c. ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. —
Du. scheren, to shear, cut, barter, jest; to withdraw, or go away ; to
warp, stretch. ‘ Scheerje van hier, away, get you gone;’ Sewel,
This answers to mod. E. sheer off! Thus sheer is only a particular
use of Du. scheren, cognate with E. Shear. So also G. schere dich
weg, get you gone; schier dich aus dem Wege, out of the way !
(Fliigel).

SHEET, a large piece of linen cloth; a large piece of paper; a
sail; a rope fastened to a sail. (H.) ME. schete, shete, Chaucer,
C. T. 4138 (A 4140). AS. scéte, scyte; ‘Sindo, scyte,’ Voc. 124. 243
‘Sindonem, scétan’ (Kentish Glosses), Voc. 86. 35 ; ‘Sandalium, scéte,’
Corpus gloss., 1776. ‘On scéfe minum,’ in my bosom (L, iz sinu meo) ;
Ps, Ixxxviii. 49, ed. Spelman. ‘ Onclénre sc¥tan befeold ’ = enfolded
in a clean sheet; Gospel of Nicodemus, c. xiii. ed. Thwaites, p. 6.
‘On scétan bewunden,’ wound in a sheet; The Shrine, p. 60.
Sheet answers to the Kentish and OMerc. form scée, not to
Wessex scyte. The sense of ‘ bosom’ is due to the use of scyve to
signify the fold of a garment. It is closely allied to AS. scéat,a much
commoner word, meaning (1) a projecting corner, angle, nook of
ground, (2) fold of a garment; Grein, ii. 405. B. The orig. sense is
‘projection,’ or ‘that which shoots out,’ then a corner, esp. of a
garment or of a cloth; after which it was extended to mean a whole
cloth or sheet. The nautical senses are found in AS. sceéita, ex-
plained ‘ pes veli;’ scéat-line, explained ‘ propes,’ Voc. 288. 24, 25.
y. The vowels é, y, are due to a mutation from éa; and all may be
compared with AS. scéat, pt. t. of scéotan, to shoot; see Shoot.
Cognate with the form scéat- are Icel. skaut, a sheet, corner of a
square cloth, corner, sheet or rope attached to the corner of a sail,
skirt or sleeve of a garment, a hood ; Swed. sko#, the sheet of a sail;
Du. schoot, a shoot, sprig, sheet, bosom, lap; G. schoosz, flap of
a coat, lap, bosom; Goth. skauts, the hem of a garment; all from
Teut. *skaut, 2nd grade of *skeutan-, to shoot; see Shoot. Der.
sheet, verb, Hamlet, i. 1. 115, Antony, i. 4. 65; sheet-ing ; sheet-
lightning, lightning which spreads ont like a sheet. Also sheet-
anchor, the same as shoot-anchor, an anchor to be shot out or
lowered in case of great danger; ‘This saying they make their
shoot-anker, Abp. Cranmer, Ans, to Bp. Gardiner, p. 117 (cited by
Todd); also in Roister Doister, i. 1. 28, The form sheet-anchor is
due to ME. schéten, to shoot; see Shoot.

SHEIK, a chief. (Arab.) In books of travel. = Arab. sheikh, an
elder, a chief; Palmer’s Pers. Dict. col. 394; shaykhk, a venerable
old man, a chief; Rich. Dict. p.g20. The orig. sense is ‘ old.’

SHEKEL, a Jewish weight and coin, (Heb.) See Exod.
xxx. 13. The weight is about half an ounce; the value about
half a crown.=Heb. sheqel, a shekel (weight).—Heb. skagal, to
weigh. [Both ees are short.]

SHEKINAH, SHECHINAGH, the visible glory of the Divine
presence. (Heb.) Not in the Bible, but in the targums ; it signifies
the ‘dwelling’ of God among His people. = Heb. shek(h)inah,
dwelling, the presence of God. = Heb. shkak(h)an, to dwell.

SHELDRAKE, a kind of drake. (E.) ME. scheldrak; ‘Hic
umnis, scheldrak ;’ Voc. 762. 39. For sheld-drake, i.e. variegated or
spotted drake; hence the ME, form shelde-drake, Rel. Antiq. ii. 82,
col. 2. ‘Sheldapple {prob. for sheld-dapple}, the chaffinch;’ Halli-
well. ‘Sheld, flecked, party-coloured;’ Coles’ Dict., ed. 1684.
Sheld in this case is just the same as ME, sheld, a shield; and the
allusion is, probably, to the ornamentation of shields, which is
doubtless of great antiquity. The AS. scyld or scild is a shield; but
is also used, in a curious passage, to denote a part of a bird’s
plumage. ‘Is se scyld ufan freetwum geféged ofer pees fiigles bec”
=the shield above is curiously arranged over the bird’s back ; Poem
on the Pheenix, 1. 308 (Grein). So also Icel. skjéldungr, a sheldrake,
allied to skjéldottr, dappled, from skjéldr, a shield, spot, patch; Dan.
en skjoldet ko, a brindled cow, from skjold, a shield; G. schildern, to
paint, depict, from G. schild, a shield, escutcheon. See Shield.

SHELF, a ledge, flat layer of rock. (E.) ME. schelfe, shelfe; pl.
shelves, Chaucer, C. T. 3211. AS. seylfe (for sciife), a plank or
shelf; Grein, ii. 416.4-Low G. schelf, a shelf, Bremen Worterbuch ;
allied to schelfern, to scale off, peel. Cf. Lowland Sc. skelve, a thin
slice, skelve, to separate in laminze (Jamieson) ; Du. schilfer, a scale;
prov. G. schelfe, a husk, shell, paring; schelfen, schelfern, to peel off.
Closely allied to shell and scale; the orig. sense is ‘a husk,’ thence
a flake, slice, thin board, flat ledge, layer. See Shell, The Gael.


556 SHELL ‘°


sgealb, a splinter, or (as a verb) to split, is from the same root.
@ We occasionally find shelf, not only in the sense of a layer of
tock, but in the sense of ‘sand-bank’ or ‘shoal.’ Dryden speaks of
“a shelfy coast? as equivalent to ‘shoaly ground;’ tr. of Virgil,
En. v. 1125,1130. He adds that Atneas ‘steers aloof, and shuns
the shelf,’ 1. 1132. There is confusion here with the verb to
Shelve, q.v. Cf. ‘ shelvy and shallow,’ Merry Wives, iii. 5. 15.

SHELL, a scale, husk, outer covering, a bomb. (E.) ME. schelle,
shelle; P. Plowman, B. v. 528; Gower, C. A. iii. 76; bk. vi. 2228.
AS. scell, scyll; Grein, ii. 399.4-Du. schel; Icel. skel; Goth. skalja,
a tile; Luke, v. 19. Teut. type *skalja, f. The sense is ‘thin
flake;’ cf. Swed. skala, to peel off; see Skill. And see Scale
(1). Der. shell-fish, -work; shell, verb; shell-y.

SHELTER, a place of protection, refuge, retreat, protection.
(E.) This curious word is perhaps due to a corruption of ME.
sheld-trume, a body of troops used to protect anything, a guard,
squadron. The corruption took place early, possibly owing to some
confusion with the word sguadron (of F. origin), with which it seems
to have been assimilated, at least in its termination, Thus sheld-
trume soon became scheldtrome, sheltrome, sheltrone, sheltroun, the force
of the latter part of the word being utterly lost, so that at last -roun
was confused with the common suffix -er, and the word shelter was
the result. B. See examples in’ Stratmann, s. v. schild. To which
add: schiltrum, Barbour’s Bruce, xii. 429; scheltrone, sheltron,
sheltrun, Allit. version of Destruction of Troy, 3239, 5249, 5804,
10047 ; Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 1813, 1856, 1992, 2106, 2210,
2922. It occurs also in Trevisa’s description of the battle of
Hastings, and was quite a common word, known from Aberdeen to
Cornwall. Loss of the true form caused loss of the true sense, so
that it came to mean only a place of protection, instead of a body-
guard or squadron. Note the use in P. Plowman, B. xiv. 81:
‘make owre faithe owre scheltroun,’ make our faith our defence. Also:
* scheltrun schoutis to shelde,’ shelter to keep off showers (Halliwell).
A sense of its derivation from shield survives in modern use. From
AS, scild-truma, lit. a shield-troop, troop of men with shields or
selected for defence; compounded of AS. scild, a shield, and
truma, a band of men, Jos. xi. 10. The word ¢ruma does not
appear to be a mere modification of the L. turma, but is allied to
AS. trum, firm, getrum, a cohort, band of men (Grein); and to E.
trim. See Shield and Trim.

SHELVE, to slope down, incline downwards gradually. (E.)
We speak of a shelving shore, i. e. a shallow or sloping shore, where
the water’s depth increases gradually. ‘The shore was shelvy and
shallow ;’ Merry Wives, iii. 5.15. We have shelving in Two Gent.
of Verona, ili. 1. 115, which is explained by Schmidt as ‘ projecting
like a shelf.’ It seems to be from shelf, sb., but the connexion is
not clear. <A shelf sometimes meant a'sand-bank; and the sense of
‘slope’ may refer to the sloping sides of the same. Cf. ‘tawny
sands and shelves;’ Milton, Comus, 117. ‘ What bark beares sayle
in tempeste on the shelues?’ Higgins, Mirror for Magistrates;
Severus, st. 8. In Lowl. Sc. we find shelf, a shelf, a ledge in a
cliff, and skelve, vb., to shelve, to tilt; also skelyy, adj., applied to
rocks that form a shelf or ledge. B. Torriano explains MItal.
stralare by ‘to shelve or go aside, aslope, awry ;’ a sense which may
have been suggested by MDu. scheel, awry, G. schel, scheel, Bavar.
schelb, awry. See Shelf,

SHEPHERD, a sheep-herd, pastor. (E.) ME. schepherd, shep-
herd, Chaucer, C. T. 506 (A 504). AS. scéaphyrde, a keeper of
sheep, Gen. iv, 2.—AS. scéap, a sheep; and hyrde, a herd, i.e.
ea See Sheep and Herd (2). Der. shepherd-ess, with
F. suffix.

SHERBET, akind of sweet drink. (Arab.) In Herbert’s Travels,
ed. 1665, pp. 203, 327 ; Sandys, Trav., p. 136. — Arab. sharbat, a drink,
draught, sherbet, syrup; Rich. Dict. p. 887.—Arab. root skariba, he
drank; id. Allied to syrup, q.v. Also to shrub, in the term ‘ rum-
shrub;’ see shrub (2).

SHERD, SHARD, a fragment. (E.) See Shard,

SHERE-THURSDAY; see Sheer (1).

SHERIFF, an officer in a county who executes the law. (E.)
ME, shirreve, Chaucer, C. T. 361 (A 359). AS. sctr-geréfa, a shire-
reeve. In Atlfric’s Glossary we find; ‘Consul, geréfa;’ also ‘ Pro-
consul, under-geréfa;’ also ‘Preetor, burh-geréfa;’ and ‘ Preses,
scir-geréfa;’ Voc. col. 110,— AS. scir, a shire; and ge-réfa, a reeve,
officer; see Shire and Reeve. Der. sheriff-ship, sheriff-dom.
Also sheriff-al-ty, generally written skrievalty, spelt shkrevalty in
Fuller, Worthies of England (R.); the suffix is F.,as in common-al-ty,
Dryden has the extraordinary adj. shriev-al, The Medal, 14.

SHERRY, a wine of Spain. (Span.—L.) Formerly sherris,
2 Hen. IV, iv. 3.111. The final s was dropped, from a fancy that it
was the pl. ending, just as in the case of pea for pease, &c. So called
from the town of Xeres, in Spain, whence it was brought. There


SHILLYSHALLY


are two towns of that name; but the famous one is Xeres de la
Frontera, in the province of Sevilla, not far from Cadiz. The
Spanish x is now a guttural letter (like G. ch) ; but formerly was
like the E. sh. B. Dozy shows that Xeres=L. Cesaris, by loss of
the syllable -ar-, much as C@sar Augusta became, by contraction,
Saragossa; see Dozy, Recherches sur Vhistoire et la littérature de
lEspagne, Leyden, 1860, i. 314. Cesaris is the gen. case of L.
Cesar. Der. sherris-sack, i.e. dry sherry, 2 Hen. IV, iv. 3. 104;
see Sack (3).

SHEW, the same as Show, q. v.

SHIBBOLETH,, the criterion or test-word of a party. (Heb.)
In Milton, Samson Agonistes, 289. See the story in Judges, xii. 6.
— Heb. shibbéleth, (1) an ear of corn, (2) a river. From the obsolete
root shabhal, to increase, grow, flow. @ Any word beginning with
sh would have done as well to detect an Ephraimite.

SHIDE, a thin piece of board. (E.) ‘ Shide, a billet of wood,
a thin board, a block of wood; still in use ;’ Halliwell. Spelt shyde
in Palsgrave. ME. shide, schide, Gower, C.A. i. 314; bk. ili. 1033;
P. Plowman, B. ix. 131. AS, scid, a billet of wood, in a gloss ; Voc.
266. 33; whence scid-weall, a fence made of palings; Voc. 146. 28.
+Icel. skid, a billet of wood; G. scheit, the same. Cf. Olrish sciath,
a shield. From the same root as Sheath and Shed, Fick,
ili. 335. Thus the orig. sense is ‘a piece of cleft wood, a log,
billet.”. Doublet, skid.

SHIELD, a piece of defensive armour held on the left arm. (E.)
ME. schelde, sheelde, Chaucer, C. T. 2506 (A 2504). AS. scild,
sceld, a shield ; Grein, ii. 407.4-Du. schild ; Icel. skjoldr, pl. skildir ;
Dan. skjold; Swed. skold; Goth. skildus; G. schild. B. All from
a Teut. type *skelduz,a shield; Fick, iii. 334. The root is doubtful ;
it is usual to connect it with shell and scale, as denoting a thin piece
of wood; cf. Lith. skelti, to split. Fick suggests a connexion with
Icel. skedla, skjalla, to clash, rattle, from the ‘ clashing of shields’ so
often mentioned ; cf. Gaschelle, a bell, allied to schallen, to resound.
This seems unlikely. Der. shield, verb, K. Lear, iv. 2. 67 ; shield-
bearer, shield-less. Also shel-ter, q. v., shill-ing, q. Vv.

SHIELING, the same as Sheal, q. v.

SHIFT, to change, change clothes, remove. (E.) The old sense
was ‘to divide,’ now lost. ME. schiften, shiften, to divide, change,
remove. In the Prompt. Parv. p. 446, it is explained by ‘part
asunder,’ or ‘deal,’ i.e. divide, as well as by ‘ change.’ ‘ Hastilich
he schifte him’=hastily he removed himself, changed his place,
P. Plowman, B, xx. 166. And see Chaucer, C. T. 5686 (D 104).
AS. sciftan, scyftan, to divide; ‘béo his ht gescyft swide rihte’=
let his property be divided very justly; Laws of Cnut (Secular),
§ 71; in Thorpe, Ancient Laws, i. 414, 1. 1.44-Du. schiften, to
divide, separate, turn ; Icel. skipta (for skifta), to part, share, divide ;
also to shift, change; so that the mod. use of shift is prob. Scandi-
navian ; Swed. skifta, to divide, to change, shift; Dan. skifte (the
same). . The sense of ‘ divide’ or ‘ part’ is the orig. one. Allied
to Icel. skifa, to cut into slices, Icel. skifa, a slice, and prov. E. shive,
a slice. See Shiver (2). Cf. also Icel. skipa, to arrange, appoint ;
which may have influenced the sense. Der. shift, sb., a change,
Timon, i. 1. 84; esp. a change of linen, and commonly restricted to
the sense of chemise ; shéft-less ; shift-y.

SHILLELAGH, an oaken stick used as a cudgel. (Irish.) In
The Rejected Addresses (Living Lustres, st. 9). Named from Shille-
lagh, a barony in Wicklow famous for oaks, The Irish name Siol-
Elaigh means ‘the descendants of Elach.’=TIrish siol, seed, descen-
dants; and Elach, proper name. See Joyce, Irish Local Names,
The Olrish si/, seed, is from 4/SE, to sow.

SHILLING, a silver coin worth 12 pence. (E.) ME. shilling,
shillyng ; P. Plowman, B. xii. 146. AS. scilling, scylling, Luke, xv. 9.
+Du. schelling; Icel. skillingr; Dan. and Swed. shilling; Goth.
skilligg's (for skillings); G. schilling, B. The suffix -l-ing is a double
diminutive, the same as in AS. feord-ling (or feord-ing), a farthing.
The base is perhaps SKEL, to divide, as in Lith. skel-ti, to split, Icel.
skilja, to divide; see Skill. y: The reason for the name is not
certain; Ihre suggests that the old coins were marked with a cross,
for the convenience of dividing them into four parts, as suggested by
the AS. name feordling, a fourth part or farthing. It is more likely
that the word merely meant ‘small piece,’ as AS. stycce, a mite
(Mark, xii. 42), merely means a ‘bit’ or ‘small piece.’ 8. The
derivation from SKEL is strongly supported by the occurrence of
Swed. skiljemynt, Dan. skillemynt, in the sense of ‘ small change’ or
‘small money;’ and by the occurrence of numerous other derivatives
from the same base. Cf. Gk. «ép-pa, small coin, from Keipew, to
cut.

SHILLYSHALLY, to act irresolutely. (E.) Coined from the
phr. shill I, shall I, which is a reduplicated form of shall J, used
interrogatively. ‘I thought it would be foolish to stand shilli shalli
any longer;’ Macklin, Love 4 la Mode, Act i; Sir Callaghan


Say att


SHIMMER


(reads a letter), And in Congreve, Way of the World, iii. 3 (Sir
Wilfull).

SHIMMER, to glitter, shine faintly. (E.) ME. skimeren; whence
shimeryng, Chaucer, C, T. 4295 (A 4297); spelt shemering in Tyr-
whitt. AS. scimrian, to glitter (Toller). It is the frequentative
form of scimian, to shine, Luke, xvii. 24 (Lindisfarne MS.), and
Grein, ii, 408.— AS. sctma, a light, brightness, Grein, ii. 408. From
the base sci- of sci-nan, to shine; see Shine.4+Du. schemeren, to
glimmer; Swed. skimra, to glitter; G. schimmern, to glimmer ; from
OHG. sciman, to shine, scimo, a bright light. And cf. Icel. skim,
skima, a gleam of light, Goth. skeima, a torch or lantern; Irish
sgeimh, sgiamh, beauty, Olrish sctam.

SHIN, the large bone of the leg, front of the lower part of the
leg, (E.) ME. shine; dat. shinne, Chaucer, C. T. 388; pl. shinnes,
id. 1281 (A 386,1279). AS. scinu, Voc. 216. 3 ; ‘ Tibiae, scina, od8e
scin-ban’ [shin-bones]; id. 160.19. Allied to AS. scia, shin, O. E.
Texts, p. 54; so that the Teut. base is *skei-.4-Du. scheen; Swed.
sken-ben, shin-bone; Dan. skinne-been, shin-bone; G. schiene; OHG.
scina, scena, . Origin uncertain; but note the use of G. schiene, a
splint, an iron band, Dan. skinne, the same, Dan. hiulskinne, the tire
of a wheel. It is probable that shiz and skin are allied; the orig.
sense may have been ‘ thinslice ;’ from 4/SQEI, to cleave, split ; cf.
L. dé-sci-scere, to separate oneself from. ‘The shin-bone[is] so called
from its sharp edge, like a splint of wood. The analogous bone
in a horse is called the splint-bone ;’ Wedgwood. See Skin.

SHINE, to gleam, beam, glow, be bright. (E.) ME. schinen,
shinen; pt. t. schone (better schoon), Wyclif, Matt. xvii. 2, pl. shinen
(with short 2), Gower, C. A, iii. 68; bk. vi. 1985; pp. shinen (rare).
AS. scinan, pt. t. scan, pp. scinen, to shine, Grein, ii. 408.4Du.
schijnen; Icel. skina; Dan. skinne; Swed. skina; Goth. skeinan; G.
scheinen, Teut. type *skeinan-. B, All from Teut. base SKEI, to
shine; cf. Skt. chhaya-, faint light. Der. shine, sb., Timon, iii. 5.
101; shin-y, Antony, iv. 9. 3. Also sheer (1), shimmer.

SHINGLE (1), a wooden tile. (L.) Formerly a common word;
a shingle was a piece of wood, split thin, and cut into a square
shape; used like modern tiles and slates, esp. for the fronts of houses.
ME. shingle; spelt shyngil, K. Alisaunder, 2210; hence ‘shkyngled
shippe,’ P. Plowman, B. ix. 141. ‘Scindula, shyngul;’ Voc. 610.
13. A corrupt pronunciation for shindle or shindel, as shown by the
corresponding G. schindel, a shingle, splint. [Both E. shingle and
G. schindel are non-Teutonic words.]—L, scindula (as if from scin-
dere, to cleave); but really a later spelling of scandula, a shingle,
wooden tile. Minsheu (1627) has the form shindle; andsee Holland,
tr. of Pliny, bk. xvi. c. 10: Of Shindles.

SHINGLE (2), coarse round gravel on the sea-shore. (E.) I
find no early use of the word. Phillips, ed. 1706, notes that shingles
is ‘the name of a shelf or sand-bank in the sea, about the Isle of
Wight ;’ which is a confused statement. But the older spelling was
chingle (with ch). G. Douglas has ‘a dry chyngill or bed of sand,’
tr. of Virgil, Ain. bk. x. ch. 6.34. Cf. prov. E. chingle, shingle;
Lowl. Sc. chingle, sometimes pronounced channel. Prob. from the
vb. to chink, from the sound made when one walks on it. B. Per-
haps influenced (as to sound) by the synonymous Norw. singl or
singling, coarse gravel, small round stones (Aasen) ; named from the
crunching noise made in walking along it. Cf. Norw. singla, to
make a ringing sound, like that of falling glass or a piece of money
(Aasen) ; Swed. dial. singla, to ring, rattle; singel-skalla, a bell on a
horse’s neck, singel, the clapper of a bell (Rietz). The verb singla
is merely the frequentative of Swed. dial. singa, Swed. sjunga, Icel.
syngja, to sing; see Sing.

SHINGLES, an eruptive disease. (F.—L.) ‘ Shingles, how to be
cured ;’ Index to vol. ii of Holland’s tr. of Pliny, with numerous
references, It is a peculiarity of the disease that the eruption often
encircles the body like a belt, for which reason it was sometimes
called in Latin zona, i.e, a zone, belt. A form of sengles, pl. of the
old word sengle, a girth. —ONorth F. chengle, chingle; OF. cengle, ‘a
girth ;’ also spelt sangle, ‘a girth, a sengle;’ Cot. See cengle in
Godefroy. Mod. F. sangle.—L. cingula, a belt, girdle. = L, cingere,
to surround; see Cineture. Cf. the old word surcingle, a long
upper girth (Halliwell).

IP, a vessel, barge, large boat. (E.) ME. schip, ship; pl.
shippes, Chaucer, C, T. 2019 (A 2017). AS. scip, scyp, pl. scipu;
Grein, ii. 409.4+-Du. schip; Icel. skip; Dan. skib ; Swed. skepp; Goth.
skip; G. schiff; OHG. scif. B. All from Teut. type *skipom, n.
Root unknown. Der. ship, verb, Rich. II, ii. 2. 42; shipp-er; ship-
board, ship-broker, -chandler, -man, -master, -mate, -ment (with F.
suffix -ment); ship-money, -wreck, -wright, -yard; shipp-ing. And
see equip. Doublet, skiff; (of shipper), skipp-er, q.v.

SHIRE, a county, division of land. (E.) ME. schire, shire;
Chaucer, C. T. 586 (A 584). AS. scir, A. S. Chron. an. 1010;
older sense, office, charge, administration; see Bosw. and Toller,


SHOAL 557


A. S. Dict. ‘Procuratio, sciir ;? Voc. 40. 32 (8th century). Allied
to OHG, scira, business; see Schade. Root unknown. The vowel-
sound shows that it is in no way allied to Shear or Share, as
has been repeatedly alleged. Note that the oldest sense is ‘ busi-
ness.” Cf, AS. scirian, to distribute, assign, appoint, allot; G.
schirrmeister, a steward; anschirren, to harness a horse. See Notes
on E, Etym., p. 270. Der. sher-iff, for shire-reeve, see sheriff; also
shire-mote, for which see meet.

SHIRK, to avoid, get off, slink from. (F.—L.) Formerly spelt
sherk, which appeats to be merely the same word as shark, to cheat,
swindle; see Nares. Abp. Laud was accused of fraud in contracting
for licences to sell tobacco; and it was said of him, ‘ that he might
have spent his time much better... than thus sherking and raking in
the tobacco-shops ;’ State-Trials, 1640, Harbottle Grimstone (R.).
See Shark. So also clerk as compared with Clark, a proper name;
ME. derk=mod. E. dark; ME. berken, to bark, &c.; also mod. E.
shirt from ME. sherte. Shirk =sherk, shark; E. D.D.

SHIRT, a man’s garment, worn next the body. (E.) ME. schirte,
shirte, also sherte, shurte. Spelt shirte, Havelok, 768 ; sherte, Chaucer,
C. T. 1566; shurte, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, ii. 139, 1. 16.
AS. seyrte (Toller).— AS. scort, short.4-Icel. skyrta, a shirt, kirtle;
Swed. skjorta; Dan. skjorte; G. schurz, schiirze, an apron; cf.
schiirzen, to tuck up. B. So called from its being orig. a short gar-
ment; see Short. Der. shirt-ing, stuff for making shirts. Doublet,
skirt.

SHITTAH-TREE, SHITTIM-WOOD. (Heb. — Egyptian.)
Shittim is a plural form, referring to the clusters of groups of the
trees ; we find shittim-wood in Exod, xxv. 10, &c. The sing. shittah-
tree only occurs once, Isaiah, xli. 19.—Heb. shittah, pl. shitttm, a
kind of acacia. [The medial letter is teth, not tau.] For *shintah ;
ef. Arab. sant, a thorn, acacia; Rich. Dict., p. 853. Of Egypt.
origin. Egypt. shonte, shonti; Gesenius, ed. 8, p. 830.

SHIVE, a slice; SHEAVE, a pulley; see Shiver (2).

SHIVER (1), to tremble, shudder, quiver. (E.) Spelt sheuer
(=shever) in Baret (1580). This word seems to have been assimi-
lated to the word below by confusion. It is remarkable that the
ME. forms are distinct, viz. (1) cheueren or chiueren (chiveren), to
tremble, and (2) sheweren or shiueren, to splinter. Whereas the
latter word truly begins with sk, the present word is alliterated with
words beginning with ch, and is spelt with ch, appearing as chiueren,
cheueren, and chiuelen. ‘ Lolled his chekes; Wel sydder than his
chyn, pei chiweled for elde’=his cheeks lolled about, (hanging down)
even lower than his chin; and they shivered through old age; P.
Plowman, B. vy. 193 (where other MSS. have chyueleden, cheuerid).
‘Achilles at tho choise men cheuert for anger’ =Achilles shivered
(shook) with anger at those choice men; Destruction of Troy, 9370.
‘And I haue cheweride for chele’?=and I have shivered with cold;
Morte Arthure, 3391. ‘ The temple-walles gan chivere and schake ;’”
Legends of the Holy Rood, p. 144, 1. 386. ‘ Chyuweren in yse’=to
shiver in ice; O. Eng. Miscellany, p. 177, 1.142. ‘Heo quakeden
and chyuereden faste,’ they quaked and shivered fast; South E.
Legendary, p. 210,1.1. — B. The persistence of the initial ch is re-
markable; and takes us back to an earlier form *keveren, *kiveren,
to shake continually, the suffix -er being frequentative. From an
AS. base *cef- or *cif- (Teut. *ked or *kid), of which we have no
clear trace; perhaps cf. Du. kevelen, to move the jaw continually.
Prob. an imitative word, like guiver. Perhaps cf. also Norw. and
Swed. dial. sippa, to snatch, twitch with the limbs, quiver convulsively
(Aasen, Rietz). 4 The resemblance to MDu. schoeveren,‘ to shiver,
or to shake’ (Hexham), appears to be accidental.

SHIVER (2), a splinter, small piece, esp. of wood. (E.) The
verb ¢o shiver means to break into shivers or small pieces; the sb.
being the older word. A shiver is a small piece, or small slice ; gen.
now applied to wood, but formerly also to bread. ME. shiver (with
u=v); ‘And of your softe breed [bread] nat but a shiwere ;’ Chaucer,
C. T. 7422 (D 1840). The pl. scifren, shivers, pieces of wood, is in
Layamon, 45373; spelt sciwren (=scivren), id. 27785. B. Shiver is
the dimin. of shive, a slice; ‘ Easy it is of a cut loaf to steal a shive,
Titus Andron. ii, 1.87. Spelt ‘a skeeve of bread ;* Warner’s Albion’s
England (R.). ‘A shive, or shiuer, Segmen, segmentum ;’ Baret
(1580). This shive is the same as the technical E. word sheave, a
pulley, orig. a slice of a tree, disc of wood. Notin AS. Cf, EFries.
schife, schive, schif, NFries. skiv, skeev.4-Icel. skifa, a slice; cf.
skifa, to cut into slices; Du. schiif, Dan. skive, Swed. skifua, G.
scheibe, aslice. y. Teut. base *skeib; Idg. root *skeip; whence Gk.
okoin-os, a potter’s disc (Hesychius). ‘The G. schiefer, a slate, a
splinter, is a related word, from the same base; and note OHG.
scivero, a shiver. Der. shiver, verb, ME. schiueren, shiueren, Chaucer,
C. T. 2607 (2605) ; shiver-y, easily falling into fragments. And see
Shift.

SHOAL (1), a multitude of fishes, a troop, crowd. (E.) Gen.


SHOAL


applied to fishes, but also to people. ‘A shole of shepeheardes ;’
Spenser, Shep. Kalendar, May, l. 20. The same word as AS. scolw,
or sceolu, a troop, throng, crowd. [Distinct from AS, scél, school ;
see School.] . A Germanic word; cf. OSax. skola,a troop. Cf.
‘a scoll of fysh;’ Book of St. Alban’s, f 7, col. 1. So also Du.
school, a shoal; and the sailors’ phrase ‘a school of fishes,’ given by
Halliwell as a Lincolnshire word. So also Irish sgol, ‘a scull or
great quantity of fish.’ See Scull (3). Teut. type *skula, f., prob.
‘a division ;’ from *skul-, weak grade of *skel-an-, to divide. Der.
shoal, verb, Chapman, tr. of Homer’s Iliad, b. xxi. 1. 191.

SHOAL (2), shallow; a sandbank, (E.) Properly an adj. mean-
ing ‘shallow ;’ and, indeed, it is from the same base as shallow.
Spelt shole, adj., Spenser, On Mutability, c. vi. st. 40. Spelt schold
(an older form), in the Prompt. Parv., which has: ‘ Schold, or
schalowe, no3te depe.’ The orig. final d is also found in Lowland
Sc. schald, shallow, also spelt schawd. ‘Quhar of the dik the
schawdest was’ =where was the shallowest part of the dike, Barbour’s
Bruce, ix. 354; where the Edinb. MS. has shaldest. Another Sc.
form is shaul; as ‘shaul water maks mickle din,’ Sc. proverb, in
Jamieson. The forms shawl, shoal result from the loss of the final d.
AS. sceald, shallow; found in place-names. ‘On scealdan ford,’ to
the shallow ford; Birch, Cart. Sax. ii. 485 ; whence Shalford, Surrey.
See Shallow. Cf. Pomeran. scholl, shallow water. Hence the use
of shoal as a sb., meaning (1) a shallow place; (2) a sandbank, from
its sloping. It has the former sense in Hen. VIII, iii. 2. 4375 the
latter in Macb.i. 7.6. Cf. shold, a sandbank; Hakluyt, Voy. iii.
547. Der. shoal, verb, to grow shallow; shoal-y, adj., Dryden, tr.
of Virgil, Ain. v. 1130; shoal-i-ness.

SHOAR, a prop; the same as Shore (2).

SHOCK (1), a violent shake, concussion, onset, offence. (E.) We
find only ME. schokken, verb, to shock, jog, move or throw with
violence, Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 1759, 3816, 3852, 4114, 4235.
Not found in AS.; but the form is English. Cf. EFries. schokken,
to shock, jolt. Also Du. schok, a shock, jolt; schokken, to jolt,
agitate, shake; Icel. skykkr, a jolt, only used in dat. pl. skykkjum,
tremulously ; Low G. schokken, schukken; OHG. scoc, sb. (whence F.
choc, sb., choquer, vb.) ; Low G. schocken, to swing (Liibben), whence
G. schaukel, a swing. See Du. schok in Franck. Der. shock, sb.,
shock-ing. Doublet, shog, q.v.

SHOCK (2), a pile of sheaves of corn, (E.) ‘A shocke of
corne in the field;’ Baret (1580). ME. schokke, Prompt. Parv. ;
pl. schockes, Nominale, ed. Skeat, 1.314. Not foundin AS. How-
ever, it is found in MDu. schocke, ‘a shock, a cock, or a heape,’
Hexham; whence schocken, ‘to shock, to cock, or heape up. So
also Swed. skock, a crowd, heap, herd. The orig. sense must have
been a heap violently pushed or tossed together, from MDnu. schocken,
Du, schokken, to jolt, move, agitate; and the word is doubtless allied
to Shock (1). Similarly sheaf is formed from the verb shove.
B. A shock (cf. Dan. dial. shok, NFries. skock, a set of 6 sheaves)
generally means 12 sheaves; but G. schock, Dan. skok, Swed. skock
mean threescore or 60,

SHOCK (3), a rough, shaggy-coated dog. (E.) A not uncommon
name foradog. Spelt shough in Macb. iii. 1.94. ‘My little shock ;’
Nabbes’ Bride, 1640, sig. H (Halliwell). Shock-headed is rough-
headed, with shaggy or rough hair. Perhaps from shock, a heap,
pile (above).

SHODDY, a material obtained by tearing into fibres refuse
woollen goods. (E.) Prob. so called from being, at first, the waste
stuff shed or thrown off in spinning wool (Chambers). Cf. Devon
shod, shed, spilt; ME. schode, division of the hair, Chaucer, C. T.
2009 (A 2007); Lowland Sc. shoad, a portion of land. See Shed.
@ Another similar material is called mungo; perhaps ‘ mixture,’ from
AS. ge-mang, a crowd, lit. a mixture; allied to mingle.

SHOE, a covering for the foot. (E.) ME. scho, shoo, Chaucer,
C. T. 255 (A 253); pl. shoon, schon, shon, Will. of Palerne, 14,
Havelok, 860; also sceos, O. Eng. Homilies, i. 37, 1. 4 from bottom.
AS. sced, pl. sceds, Aélfric’s Gloss., in Wright’s Vocab. i. 26, col. 1.
We also find pl. gescy, Matt. iii. 11; and gescygian, verb, to shoe,
Diplomatarium, p. 616.4-Du. schoen; Icel. skor, pl. skiar, skor;
Swed. and Dan. sko; Goth. skéhs; G. schuh, OHG. scoh, scuoch.
The Teut. type is *skohoz, m. Der. shoe, verb, K. Lear, iv. 6. 188 ;
shod (for shoe-d); shoe-black, -horn.

SHOG, to shake, jog, move off or away. (E.) ‘Will you shog
off?” Hen. V, ii. 1.47. ‘I shogge, as a carte dothe,’ i.e. jolt; Pals-
grave. ‘The boot . . was schoggid with wawis ;”’ Wyclif, Matt. xiv.
24. Avariant of ME. schokken, to shock, jolt. See Shock (1).

SHOOT, to dart, let fly, thrust forward. (E.) Palsgrave has
shote; but ME. has the by-form shéten, schéten; spelt shete, Chaucer,
C. T. 3936 (A 3938). Just as ME. chesen, to choose, is from AS.
ceosan, whilst E. choose represents cedsan (with e6 for é0), so here.
The mod. E. shoot is from AS, scedtan, but ME, scheten is from AS.


558


SHOVE


scéotan, to shoot, dart, rush; pt. t. scéat, pp. scoten. (The pp. scoten is
preserved in shotten herring, a herring that has spent its roe, 1 Hen. IV,
li. 4. 143.)-4-Du. schieten, pt. t. schoot, pp. geschoten; Icel. skjota,
pt. t. skaut, pp. skotinn; Dan. skyde; Swed. skjuta; G. schiessen. All
from a Teut. type *skewtan-, pt. t. *skaut, pp. *skutanoz. Brugmann,
i. § 623. Der. shoot, sb., ME. schote, Morte Arthure, 3627 ; off-shoot,
q. v.; shoot-er, L. L. L. iv. 1. 116; shoot-ing ; and see shot, shut,
shutt-le, sheet, scot, scud, skitt-ish, skitt-les.

SHOP, a stall, a place where goods are sold. (E.) ME.
schoppe, shoppe, Chaucer, C. T. 4420 (A 4422). AS. sceoppa, a stall -
or booth; but used to translate L. gazophilacium, a treasury, Luke,
xxi, 1. Allied to AS. scypen, a shed for cattle; ‘ne scypene his
néatum ne timbrep’=nor builds sheds for his cattle, Alfred, tr. of
Beda, b. i. c. 1.44Low G. schup, a shed; Brem. Wéorterb.; G.
schuppen, a shed, cart-house; OHG. scopf, whence OF. eschoppe,
eschope, ‘a little low shop,’ Cot. Der. shop, verb; shop-lift-ing, stealing
from shops, for which see Lift (2); shop-walker.

SHORE (1), the boundary of land adjoining the sea or a lake,
a strand. (E.) ME. schore, Allit. Poems, A. 230; Gawain and the
Grene Knight, 2161. Notin AS. The orig. sense is ‘ edge,’ or part
shorn off; from scor-en, pp. of sceran, to shear. Cf. scoren clif
(=shorn cliff), a precipice, Atlfred, tr. of Gregory’s Past. Care, c. 33,
1. 4; mod. E. Shorncliff (Kent). See Shear, Score. Der. shore,
verb, to set on shore, Wint. Tale, iv. 4. 869.

SHORE (2), SHOAR, a prop, support. (E.) ME. schore.
‘ Schore, under-settynge of a thynge pat wolde falle, Suppositorium ;’
Prompt. Pary. ‘ Hit hadde shories to shoue hit vp’=it (a tree) had
props to keep it up; P. Plowman, C. xix. 20. Shorier is a sb.
formed from schorien, verb, to under-prop, which (by its form) is a
denominative verb from the sb. schore. Not found in AS,; but an
E. word. Cf. EFries. schdr, schore,a prop. Cf. AS. scorian, to pro-
ject, jut out.4-Du. schoor, a prop; MDu. schooren, to underprop.
Cf, also Icel. skorda, a stay, prop, esp. under a ship or boat when
ashore; whence skorda;yerb, to under-prop, shore up ; Norw. skorda,
skora, a prop (Aasen). Der. shore, verb.

SHORE (3), a corruption of Sewer, q. v.

SHORT, curt, scanty, not long, cut down, insufficient. (L.) ME.
schort, short, Chaucer, C. T. 748 (A 746). AS. sceort, short, Grein,
ii. 407. Cf. Icel. skorta, to be short of, to lack, skortr, shortness,
want; OHG. scurz, short. ‘Teut. type *skurtoz; which looks like a
derivative (with suffix -toz) from the weak grade of Teut. base *sker-,
to shear; see Shear. Cf. also Icel. skardr, diminished, cut down,
@ But as the G. kurz, short, is from L, curt-us, short, it is usual to
explain E. short as if from a Late L. type *ex-curtus ; from the same
Idg. 4/SQER. Der. short-ly, adv., ME. shortly, Chaucer, C. T.
717 (A 715), from AS. sceortlice; short-ness; short-coming, -hand,
-sight-ed, -wind-ed, Also short-en, verb, cf. ME. shorten, Chaucer,
C. T. 793 (A 791), AS, sceortian (Bosworth); where, however,
the mod. final -en does not really represent the ME. suffix -en,
but is added by analogy with ME. verbs in -zen, such as waknen, to
waken; this suffix -en was at first the mark of an intransitive verb,
but was afterwards made to take an active force.

SHOT, a missile, aim, act of shooting. (E.) ME. schot, shot,
a missile, Chaucer, C. T. 2546 (A 2544). AS. ge-sceot; ‘nim pin
gesceot’ = take thy implements for shooting; Gen. xxvii. 3. Cf. AS.
scot-, stem of pp. of scéotan, to shoot; see Shoot,4OFries. skot, a
shot 3 Icel. skot, a shot, a shooting; Du. schot, a shot, shoot; G.
schoss, schuss,a shot. All from Teut. *skut-, weak grade of *skeutan-,
to shoot. A doublet of scot, a contribution; see Scot-free. Der.
shot, verb, to load with shot; shott-ed.

SHOULDER, the arm-joint, joint in which the arm plays. (E.)
ME. shulder, shuldre, Havelok, 604. AS. sculder, sculdor, Gen. ix.
23.4-Du. schouder; Swed. skuldra; Dan. skulder; CG. schulter.
Perhaps allied to OHG. skerti, the shoulder. Root unknown. Der.
shoulder, verb, Rich. III, iii. 7. 128; shoulder-blade, -belt, -knot.

SHOUT, a loud outcry. (E.) Spelt shoute, showte in Palsgrave.
ME. shouten, Chaucer, Troil. ii. 614. The AS. form *sciitian does
not occur. Perhaps we may compare it with Icel. skiita, skiti, a
taunt. (The Icel. skita, vb., means to jut out.) See Scout (2).
Der. shout, sb. shout-er,

SHOVE, to push, thrust, drive along. (E.) ME. shouen, schouen ; |
‘to shoue hit vp’=to prop itup; P. Plowman, C. xix. 20. The usual
strong form is schouuen, showuen (with latter u=v), Chaucer, C. T.
3910 (A 3912), pt. t. skof (printed shove in some editions), id. Parl.
of Foules, 154; pp. shouen (shoven), shoue, id, C. T. 11593 (F 1281).
AS. sciifan, pt. t. scéaf, pl. seufon, pp. scofen, Grein, ii. 412,4-Du.
schuiven ; Icel. skiifa, skyfa; Dan. skuffe; Swed, skuffa; G. schieben,
pt. t. schob, pp. geschoben; OHG. sciupan ; Goth, skiuban, ‘Teut. type
*skeuban-, or *skiiban, pt. t. *skaub, pp. *skubanoz. Allied to Lith,
skubiis, quick, hasty, industrious; Skt. kshubh, to become agitated ;
the causal form signifies to agitate, shake, impel; hence kshobha-,


SHOVEL


agitation, Thus the primary sense was ‘to shake’ or ‘ push.’ Der.
shove, sb.; shove-groat, a game in which a groat (piece of money) was
shoved or pushed about on a board ; also skov-el, q.v.; sheaf, q.v.

SHOVEL, an instrument with a broad blade and a handle, for
shoving and lifting ; a sort of spade. (E.) ME, schouel (with u=
v). ‘With spades and with schoueles;’ P. Plowman, B. vi. 192.
AS. scoff; ‘Trulla, scoff,’ Wright’s Voc. i. 289. Cf. AS. scof-, base
of pp. of sciifan, to shove ; with suffix -/.4-Du. schoffel ; Westphal.
schufel; cf. G. schaufel. See Shove. Der. shovel, verb, Wint. Tale,
iv. 4. 469. Also shovel-er, a kind of duck, Holland, tr. of Pliny,
b. x. c. 40; shouelar, Skelton, i. 63; named from its broad beak.

SHOW, SHEW, to exhibit, present to view, teach, guide, prove,
explain. (E.) Shew is the older spelling ; sometimes skew is used to
denote the verb, and show for the sb., but without any difference of
pronunciation in mod. English. ME. schewen, shewen; Chaucer,
C. T. 9380 (E 1506) ; P. Plowman, B.i. 2. AS. scéawian, to look, see,
behold; the later sense is to make to look, point out. ‘Scéawiad pa
lilian’=behold the lilies ; Luke, xii. 27.4-Du. schouwen, to inspect,
view; Dan. skue, to behold; G. schauen, to behold, see. Cf. Goth.
us-skaws, cautious, wakeful. Teut. base *skaw-; Idg. base *sgou;
cf. Gk. @vo-cxdos, an inspector of an offering; L. cau-ére, to take
heed, cau-tus, watchful; Gk. xoéw, I observe; Skt. kav-i-, wise.
From the same root we have cau-tious. Brugmann, i. §§ 163, 639.
Der. show, sb., ME. schewe, Prompt. Parv.; show-bill; shew-bread,
Exod. xxv. 30; show-y, Spectator, no. 434; show-i-ly; show-i-ness ;
shee-n 3 scav-enger.

SHOWER, a fall of rain. (E.) Orig. a monosyllable, like
flower. ME. shour, schour, Chaucer, C. T. 1. AS. setir, Grein, ii.
414.4+-Du. schoer; Icel. skir; Swed. skur; Goth. skira, a storm;
skiira windis, a storm of wind, Mark, iv. 37; G.schauer; OHG. scir.
Teut. type *sku-roz, m. Perhaps allied to Lith. szay-ti, to shoot.
Brugmann, i. § 627 (1). Cf. Lith. szaurys, north wind. Der. shower,
verb, Hen. VIII, i. 4. 63; shower-y.

SHRAPNEL, a bursting shell charged with bullets. (E.)
Named after the inventor, Gen. Shrapnel, who died in 1842. See
Dict. Eng. Biog. The date of the invention is about 1803; it was
used in 1804,

SHRED, a strip, fragment, piece torn or cut off. (E.) The
vowel was once long, as in the variant screed (Halliwell). ME.
shréde, Havelok, 99. AS. scréade, a piece, strip. ‘ Sceda, scréade;’
also ‘Presegmina, preecisiones, scréadan’ (plural); Voc. 164. 6;
151. 20; whence AS. scréadian, to shred.-MDu. schroode (Kilian) ;
whence schkrooder, ‘a lopper or pruner of trees,’ Hexham; G. schrot,
a piece, shred, block; whence schroten, to grind, cut, saw. . All
from a Teut. base *skraud, 2nd grade of *skreud-; for which see
Shroud. Allied to L. scriita, broken pieces; see Scrutiny.
Der. shred, verb, ME. shredden, Chaucer, C. T. 8013 (E 227), AS.
scréadian ; also scroll, q.v. Doublet, screed.

SHREW, a scold, scolding woman. (E.) ME. shrewe, schrewe,
adj., wicked, bad; applied to both sexes. The Wife of Bath said
her fifth husband was ‘the moste shrewe,’ the most churlish of all;
Chaucer, C. T. 6087 (D 505). Cf. P. Plowman, B. x. 437; Prompt.
Parv. Spelt shrewe, Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 154, 1.4. AS.
scréawa, a shrew-mouse; ‘Mus araneus, scréawa;’ Voc. 122. 20.
Somner explains scréawa as ‘ a shrew-mouse, which, by biting cattle,
so envenoms them that they die,’ which is, of course, a fable. But
the fable is very old; the L. name araneus means ‘ poisonous as
a spider ;’ and Aristotle says the bite of the shrew-mouse is dan-
gerous to horses, and causes boils; Hist. Anim. viii. 24. ‘In Italy
the hardy shrews are venomous in their biting;’ Holland, tr. of
Pliny, b. viii. c. 58. B. The ME. schrewen, to curse, whence E. be-
shrew, is merely a derivative from the sb., with reference to the
language used by a shrew. . @| Wedgwood refers to a curious
passage in Higden’s Polychronicon, i. 334. The L. text has mures
nocentissimos, which Trevisa translates by wel schrewed mys=very
harmful mice. Der. shrew-d, be-shrew; also shrew-ish, Com. Errors,
iii, 1. 2; shrew-ish-ly, -ness; also screw (2).

SHREWD, malicious, wicked; cunning, acute. (E.) The older
sense is malicious, mischievous, scolding or, shrew-like, as in Mids.
Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 323, &c. ME. schrewed, shrewed, accursed, depraved,
wicked ; ‘ schrewede folk’ =wicked people, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius,
bk. i. pr. 4. 1. 136; cf. schrewednesse, wickedness, id. 1. 139.
Schrewed is lit. ‘accursed,’ pp. of schrewen, ‘to curse, beshrew;
Chaucer, C. T. 15432 (B 4616) ; and the verb is formed from the
ME. adj. schrewe, evil, malicious; see Shrew. Der. shrewd-ly,
-NESS.

SHREW-MOUSE, an animal like a mouse; see Shrew.

SHRIEK, to screech, cry aloud, scream. (E.) A doublet of
screech. Spenser has shriek, F. Q. vi. 4. 8; but also scrike, vi. 4. 18.
Baret (1580) has scriek. ME. skriken, Chaucer, C. T. 15406 (B 4590) ;
where other spellings are schrichen, schriken; also shryke, Polit.


SHROVE-TIDE, SHROVE-TUESDAY 559


Songs, p. 158. An E, form. See Screech. Der. shriek, sb.,
Macb. iv. 3. 168. Also shrike, q. v. Doublet, screech.

SHRIEVALTY, sheriffalty ; see Sheriff.

SHRIFT, SHRIVE; see Shrove-tide.

SHRIKE, the butcher-bird, (E.) Named from its shrill cry. A
native form; AS. scric, Voc. 52.13. Cf. Westphal. schrik, a shrike;
Icel. skrikja, a shrieker, also, the shrike or butcher-bird, from skrikja,
to titter, but properly to shriek, and allied to Icel. skrekja, to screech.
See Shriek, Screech.

SHRILL, acute in sound, piercing, loud. (E.) ME. shril, schril;
pl. shrille, Chaucer, C. T. 15401 (B 4585); also shirle, in Levins and
Palsgrave. The Southern form of Lowland Sc. skirl, a shrill ery;
skirl, to cry shrilly. Cf. AS. scralletan, to make a loud outcry (Grein).
Also Low G. schrell, shrill, Bremen Worterbuch ; prov. G. schrill,
shrill, schrillen, to sound shrill (Fliigel). B. The form skirl is
Scand. ; cf. Norw. skryla, skrela, to cry shrilly. y. From Teut.
root *skrel, to cry loudly; AS. scrall-etan is from the second grade
*skral. 8. We also find a Teut. str. vb. *skell-an-, to resound
(OHG, scellan), pt. t. *skall; whence not only G, schallen, to resound,
schall, an echo, but also ME. schil, shil, shrill. We find the adv.
shulle, shrilly (with various readings schille, schrille), in P. Plowman,
C. vii. 46. The base SKEL is also represented by the Icel. strong
verb skjalla, skella, pt. t. skall, pp. skolinn, Cf. Lithuan. skaliti, to
bark, give tongue, said of ahound. Der. shrill-y, shrill-ness.

SHRIMP, a small shell-fish. (E.) ME. shrimp, Chaucer, C. T.
13961 (B 3145). Cf. Lowland Sc. scrimp, to straiten, pinch;
scrimp, scanty; ‘ scrimpit stature’ =dwarfish stature, Burns, To Jas.
Smith, 1.14. Itis an E. word; but, instead of *scrimpan, we find
AS. scrimman, used as equivalent to scrincan, to shrink, A. S.
Leechdoms, ii. 6, 1. 15. Shrimp is just a parallel form to shrink.
B. Rietz makes no doubt that there was an OSwed. skrimpa, to
contract, a strong verb, as well as a shorter form skrina. Traces
of OSwed. skrimpa occur in Swed. skrumpen, Dan. skrumpen,
shrivelled. Dan. dial. skrimpe, a lean cow; Norw. skrampen,
lean, skrampa, skrumpa, an old lean animal (Ross). See Shrink.
y. Even in English we have clear traces of the same strong verb,
since (besides shrimp) we find prov. E. shrammed, benumbed with
cold, prov. E. skrump, to shrug, shrink, and scrump, to shrivel.
So also G. schrumpel, a wrinkle, schrumpfen, to shrink; MHG.
schrimpfen, to shrink; Westphal. schrempen, to shrivel. Cf. Westphal.
krimpe, a shrimp.

SHRINE, a place in which sacred things are deposited, an altar,
(L.) ME. schrin; dat. schryne, K. Alisaunder, 4670. AS. scrin,
the ark (of the covenant), Jos. iii. 8, iv. 7.—L. scrinium, a chest,
box, case. Der. en-shrine.

SHRINK, to wither, contract; to recoil. (E.) ME. shrinken,
to contract, draw together; pt. t. shronk, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius,
b. i. pr. 1, 1.953 pp. shrunken, Gower, C. A. i. 98; bk. i. 1683. AS.
scrincan, pt. t. scranc, pp. scruncen, to contract, shrivel up; chiefly in
comp. for-scrincan, pt. t. forscranc, Mark, iv. 6.4¢-MDu. schrinken,
‘to grow lesser or to shrinke,? Hexham. And cf. Swed. skrynka, a
wrinkle ; skrynkla, to wrinkle, to rumple ; Norw. skrékka, to shrink.
Teut. type *skrinkan-, pt. t. *skrank, pp. *skrunkanoz, to shrivel,
wrinkle, draw together; parallel to the base appearing in Shrimp,
q. v.; and see Scraggy. Further allied to Shrug.

SHRIVE, to confess; see Shrove-tide.

SHRIVEL, to wrinkle, crumple up. (E.) Shak. has shrivel up,
Per. ii. 4.9. It does not seem to appear in Middle English. It is
a frequentative form, with the usual suffix -el, from an AS. base
*scruf- ; as shown by the cognate Swed. dial. skryvla, to shrivel up,
to wrinkle; and skryvla, a wrinkle. Allied to Swed. skrof, Swed.
dial. and Norw. skrov, a carcase; prov. E. scriff, scruff, to shrink
together. Possibly alliedto Shrub (1). Cf. scrubby.

SHROUD, a garment, the dress of the dead. (E.) The word
had formerly the general sense of garment, clothing, or covering.
ME. shroud, schroud, P, Plowman, B. prol. 2; shrud, Havelok, 303.
AS. scriid, a garment, clothing, Grein, ii. 412.4-Icel. skrad, the
shrouds of a ship, furniture of a church; Norweg. skrud, dress,
ornament ; Dan. and Swed. skrud, dress, attire. B. Closely allied
to skred; and the orig, sense was a shred or piece of cloth or stuff,
a sense nearly retained in that of winding-sheet. Chapman has
shroud in the very sense of shred or scrap of stuff, tr. of Homer’s
Odyssey, b. vi. 1. 274. Moreover, a shred is a piece roughly cut off ;
cf. G. schrot, a cut, a piece, schroten, to cut. The Teut. base is
*skreud, to cut; the 2nd grade *skraud appears in Shred. Der.
shroud, verb, AS. scrydan, Matt. vi. 30; en-shroud. Also shrouds,
s. pl., K. John, v. 7. 53, part of the rigging of a vessel. —

SHROVE-TIDE, SHROVE-TUESDAY, a time or day
(Tuesday) on which shrift or confession was formerly made. (L. and
E.) Shrove-tide is the tide or season for shrift; Shrove-Tuesday is the
day preceding Ash Wednesday or the first day of Lent. Shrove is


560 SHRUB


here used as a sb., conformed to shkrove, the pt. t. of the verb ¢o


shrive; except in the two above compounds, the sb. invariably takes
the form shri/t. B. The verb ¢o shrive (pt. t. shrove, pp. shriven) is
ME. schriven, shriven, of which we find the pt. t. skrof, shroof in
P. Plowman, B. iii. 44 (footnote), and the pp. shriuen in Chaucer,
C. T. 7677 (D 2095). AS. scrifan, to shrive, to impose a penance
or compensation, to judge; pt. t. scraf, pp. scrifen; Grein, ii. 411.
Tent. type *skreiban-, pt. t. *skraib, pp. *skribanoz. y. But although
it thus appears as a strong verb, it does not appear to be a true
Teut. word. It was rather borrowed (at a very early period) from
L. scribere, to write, to draw up a law (hence, prescribe) ; whence
also G. schreiben (also conjugated as a strong verb), to write. See
Scribe. B. The sb. shrift is ME. shrift (dat. shrifte), P. Plowman,
C. xvii. 30; AS. scrift, confession, Laws of Aithelred, pt. v. § 22,
pt. vi. § 27, in Thorpe, Anc. Laws, i. 310, 322 ; and just as the AS.
verb scrifan is due to L. scribere, so AS. scrift may be due to the
L. pp. seriptus. The Icel. skript or skrift, Swed. skrift, Dan. skrifte,
shrift, are all borrowed from AS.

SHRUB (1), a low dwarf tree. (E.) ME. shrob, schrub, P. Plow-
man, C.i. 2. AS. scrybb, a shrub; see Bosworth-Toller, and Mr.
Stevenson’s remarks in Phil. Soc. Trans. 1895-8, p. 536. (Cf. E.
shut, from AS. scyttan.) We also have the place-name Wormwood-
scrubbs, near London.+-Norweg. skrubba, the dwarf cornel (Aasen).
Dan. dial. skrub, brushwood ; MDan. skrubbe, a thicket (Kalkar).
B. Cf. also prov. E. shruff, light rubbish wood, scroff, refuse of wood.
Possibly related to Shrivel. Der. skrubb-y; shrubb-er-y, a coined
word, by the analogy of vin-er-y, pin-er-y, and the like. Also scrub,


ave

‘SHRUB (2), a drink made of lemon-juice, spirit, sugar, and water.
(Arab.) Chiefly made with rum. In Johnson’s Dict.— Arab. shirb,
shurb, a drink, a beverage.— Arab. root shariba, he drank; Rich.
Dict. p. 887. Doublet, syrup. And see sherbet.

SHRUG, to draw up, contract. (Scand.) In Temp. i. 2. 367;
Cor. i. 9g. 4. Generally used of drawing up the shoulders, but the
true sense is to shrink. ‘The touch of the cold water made a pretty
kinde of shrugging come over her body ;’ Sidney’s Arcadia, b. ii. ed.
1638, p. 138. ‘ Shruggyn, Frigulo;’ Prompt. Parv. An adaptation
(with sk for sk) from the Scand., as shown by gg<kk<nk. Cf.
Dan. skrugge, skrukke, to stoop; skruk-rygget, humpbacked; Swed.
dial. skrukka, skruga, to huddle oneself up, to sit in a crouching
position, allied to skrinka, to shrink (Rietz); see Shrink. Cf.
Icel. skrukka, an old shrimp; Norw. skrukken, shrunken.

SHUDDER, to tremble with fearor horror. (OQLowG.) ‘Alas!
they make me shoder;’ Skelton, Colin Clout, 68. ME. shoderen,
schuderen ; pt. t. schoderide, Morte Arthure, 2106; pres. part. schud-
rinde, Seint Margaret, ed. Cockayne, p. 15, 1. 12. Not found in
AS. It is a frequentative verb, formed with the usual suffix -er from
the Teut. base *skud-, to shake, appearing in OSaxon skuddian.
€ Skuddiat it fan iuwun skéhun’=shakeit [the dust] from your shoes;
Heliand, 1948. MDu. schudden, ‘to shake or to tremble,’ Hexham;
he also gives ‘ schudden een boom, to shake a tree, schudden van koude,
to quake for colde ; schudden het hooft, to shake or nod ones head;
schudderen, to laugh with an open throate that his head shakes;’
Dan. dial. skuddre, to shake (one) violently ; EFries. schiidden, to
shake, schiiddern, to tremble, shudder.4-OHG. scuttan, G. schiitten,
to shoot corn, pour, shed, discharge ; schiittern, to shake, tremble,
quake. The G. schaudern is borrowed from Low G. schuddern.
Der. shudder, sb.

SHUFFLE, to push about, practise shifts. (Scand.) ‘ When
we have shuffled off [pushed or shoved aside] this mortal coil ;’
Hamlet, iii. 1.67. Merely a doublet of Scuffle, and the frequenta-
tive of shove; but of Scand., not E. origin, as shown by the double /.
The sh is modified from Scand. sk. Cf. EFries. schuffeln, to shuffle
along, from schufen, to shove, push. The sense is ‘to keep pushing
about,’ as in ‘ shuffle the cards.’ [It seems to have taken up some-
thing of the sense of shiftiness, with which it has no etymological
connexion.] See Scuffle, Shove. Der. shuffle, sb.; shuffl-er.

SHUN, to avoid, keep clear of, neglect. (E.) ME. shunien,
shonien, P. Plowman, B. prol. 174. AS. scunian, not common except
in the comp. o#-scunian, to detest, refuse, reject, Gen. xxxix. 10. In
Ps. Ixix. 2, ed. Spelman, the L. revereantur is translated by andracian,
with the various readings sconnyn, forwandian, and scunian. ‘The pp.
gescunned is in Diplomatarium Atvi Saxonici, ed. Thorpe, p. 318, last
line. Cf. prov. E. scun, toshun; scunner, to loathe; see Scoundrel.
Der. shun-less, Cor. ii. 2. 1163 schoon-er ; scoundrel.

SHUNT, to turn off upon a side-rail. (E.) As a word used
on railways, it was borrowed from prov. E. shunt, to turn aside.
But the word itself is old. ME. shunten, to start aside, Gawayn and
the Grene Knight, 1902; schounten, schownten, schonten, schunten,
Morte Arthur, 736, 1055, 1324, 1759, 2106, 2428, 3715, 3816, 3842;
shunt, Destruction of Troy, 600, 729, 10377, 10998. ‘If at 3e


ca


SIBYL


shap 3ow to shount’ =if ye intend to escape; Wars of Alexander,
2143; and see Ancren Riwle, p. 242, note d. B. Shunten seems
to be a modification of shunden, being easier to pronounce quickly.
The orig. sense is to speed, hasten, flee, escape. AS. scyndan, to
hasten (Beowulf, 2570), also to urge, incite.Icel. skunda, to speed.
It seems to be a nasalised form of Seud.

SHUT, to fasten a door, close. (E.) ME. shutten, shitien. ‘To
close and to shutte;’ P. Plowman, B. prol. ros. ‘ The 3atis weren
schit’ =the gates were shut; Wyclif, John, xx. 19. AS. scyttan, to
shut ; ‘sero, ic scytte sum loc odde heepsige,’ i.e. I shut a lock or
hasp it ; Aélfric’s Grammar, ed. Zupitza, p.220. To shuta door was
to fasten it with a bolt or sliding bar, called a shuttle or shitile (see
Shuttle), which took its name from being shot across. We still
say ‘to shoot a bolt.” The AS. scyttan stands for *scut-ian (by the
usual change from z to y) ; derived from Teut. *skut-, weak grade of
*skeutan-, to shoot. See Shoot.4Du. schutten, to shut in, lock
up; schut, a fence, screen, partition, MDu. schwt, an atrow, dart
(Hexham), from schieten, to shoot; G. schiitzen, to protect, guard,
shut off water; schutz, a guard, sluice, flood-gate, OHG. seuz, a
quick movement, from schiessen, OHG. sciozan, to shoot. Der.
shutt-er; shutt-le, q. v.

SHUTTLE, an instrument for shooting the thread of the woof
between the threads of the warp in weaving. (E.) In Job, vii. 6.
So called from its being shot between the threads. ‘ An honest
weaver. . As e’er shot shuttle;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, The Coxcomb,
Act v. sc. 1. Also spelt shittle; in Palsgrave, ‘shyétell for a wevar.’
ME. schitel; spelt scytyl, Prompt. Parv. p. 447, also schetyl, id.
p- 470, 1, 2. The same word as ME. schitel, a bolt of a door,
similarly named from its being shot across. ‘ Schyttyl, of sperynge
[sparring, barring], Pessulum;’ Prompt. Parv. The AS. form was
scyttel (also scytel), in the sense of bar, bolt; also found in the longer
form scyttels, pl. scyttelsas. See Toller. B. The word scyttel or
scytel (for *skut-il-) is trom Teut. *skut-, weak grade of *skeut-an, AS.
scedtan, to shoot; see Shut, Shoot.4+Dan. skytte, skyttel, a shuttle;
Swed. dial. skyttel, skottel; cf. Du. schiet-spoel, a shuttle, lit. ‘ shoot-
spool,’ Swed. skottspole, a shuttle, ‘shoot-spool.’ Der. skuttle-cock,


q. v.
SHUTTLE-COCK, a piece of wood or cork stuck with

feathers, used as a plaything. (E.) Spelt shyttelcocke in Palsgrave ;

shuttelcock, Spenser, Mother Hubbard’s Tale, 804. Prob. called

cock from being stuck with feathers and flying through the air.

{Not shuttle-cork, as Todd fancies, contrary to evidence and pro-

bability ; for they were most likely at first made of wood, and struck

with a wooden battledore. See Strutt, Sports and Pastimes, bk. iv.

ch. 1. § 22.] Called shuttle from being shot backwards and forwards _
like a weaver’s shuttle. ‘ Schytle, chyldys game, Sagitella ;” Prompt.

Parv. See Shuttle; and see Skittles.

SHY, timid, cautious, suspicious. (Scand.) In Shak. Meas. iii.
2. 138; v.54. ME. skyg, scrupulous, careful to shun (evil), Allit.
Poems, B. 21. It is rather a Scand. than an E. word, with sk for sk;
we also find ME. schey, skey, shy (said of a horse), Prompt. Parv.
P- 444; spelt scheouh (also of a horse), Ancren Riwle, p. 242, I. 9;
answering to the rare AS. scéoh, timid, Grein, ii. 405.— Dan. sky,
shy, skittish ; Swed. skygg, skittish, starting, shy, coy; Swed. dial.
sky, the same (Rietz).--EFries. schdi; Du. schuw; G. scheu, shy,
timid, MHG. schiech. Teut.types *skeuh-joz, *skeuh-oz B. Hence
OHG. sciuhan, to frighten, or (intransitively) to fear, shy at, whence
(through the French) we have E. eschew. Der. shy-ly, shy-ness; shy,
verb (cf. Swed. sky, to shun); and see eschew, skew.


> ae


SIAMANG, a large ape. (Malay.) Malay sidmang.

SIB, related. (E.) In Spenser, F. Q. iii. 3.26. See further under
Gossip. Der. gos-sip.

SIBILANT, making a hissing sound. (L.) We call s and z
‘ sibilant ’ letters. Bacon has‘ sibilation or hissing sound ; ’ Nat. Hist.
§ 176.—L. sibilant-, stem of pres. part. of sibilare, to hiss. = L. stbilus,
adj. hissing ; formed from a base *sib-, which is probably imitative
of a whistling sound. Der. sibil-at-ion. ‘

SIBYL, a pagan prophetess. (L.—Gk.) Shak. has both Sibyl
and Sybilla; Oth. iii. 4. 70; Merch. Ven. i. 2. 116. Cotgrave has :
‘ Sybille, Sybill, one of the 10 Sybille, a prophetesse.’ Trevisa
translates L. Sibylla by Sibil ; ii. 399. The word was rather borrowed
directly from L. than through the F., being known from Virgil. -L.
Sibylla, a Sibyl; Virgil, Ain. vi. 10.—Gk. 2iBvAAa, a Sibyl. Origin
uncertain; see Max Miiller, Lectures, 8th ed, i. 109. Postgate


SICCA


compares it with L. per-sibus, very wise (Festus) and L. sap-ere, to
be wise ; so that ci8-vAAa would mean ‘ wise woman.’ Der. sibyil-
ine, adj.; from L. Sibyllinus,

SICCA, in phr. sicca rupee, newly coined rupee. (Hind.—Pers.—
Arab.) Hind. sikka, a die for coining. = Pers. sikka(h), the same. =
Arab. sikka(h), the same. Rich. Dict. p. 839. See Sequin.

SICK, affected with disease, ill, inclined to vomit. (E.) ME.
stk, sek; pl. seke, Chaucer, C, T. 18. AS. séoc; John, xi. 1.4-Du.
ziek; Icel. sjukr; Dan. syg; Swed. sjuk; G. siech; Goth. siuks.
B. All from a Teut. type *sewkoz, ill; from the Teut. base *seuk-, to
be sick or ill, appearing in the Goth. strong verb siukan, to be ill,
pt. t. sauk, pp. sukans. Fick, iii. 325. Der. sick-ness, AS. séocnes,
Matt. viii. 28; sick-en, verb (intrans.), Macb. iv. 3. 173, (trans.)
Hen. VIII, i. 1. 823 sick-sh, -ly, -ness; sick-ly, adj.. ME. sekly, Will.
of Palerne, 1505 ; sick-li-ness, Rich. II, ii. 1. 142.

SICKER, SIKER, certain, secure. (L.) Stker is a well-known
Lowland Sc. word. ME. siker, Chaucer, C. T. 11451 (F 1139);
Layamon, 15092. AS. sicor. Not a Teut. word, but borrowed from
a Late L. sécurus, for L. séctirus; see Secure. The OFries.
siker, sikur, Du. zeker, G. sicher (OHG. sichur), Swed. sdker, Dan.
sikker, W. sicr, are all borrowed from the Latin, which accounts
for their strong likeness in form to one another. Doublets, secure,
sure, “

SICKLE, a hooked instrument for cutting grain. (L.) ME.
sikil, Wyclif, Mark, iv. 29. AS. sicol, Mark, iv. 29.—L. secula, a
sickle (White) ; formed, with suffix -w-la of the agent, from sec-are,
to cut; see Secant. @ The G. sichel is also from Latin; the
native words from the same root are saw (1), scythe, and sedge.

SIDE, the edge or border of a thing, region, part, party. (E.)
ME. side, syde, P. Plowman, B. prol. 8; Chaucer, C. T. 560(A 558).
AS. side, John, xix. 34, xx. 20.4-Du. zijde; Icel. stéa; Dan. side;
Swed. sida; G. seite, OHG. sita. Teut. type *siddn-, f. It is pro-
bable that the orig. sense was ‘that which is extended,’ as it certainly
seems to be closely connected with AS. sid, long, wide, spacious,
ME. siid, spelt syyd in the Prompt. Parv., but now obsolete; Icel.
sir, long, hanging down. Der. side-board, Milton, P. R. ii. 350;
side-box, one-sid-ed, many-sid-ed, side-saddle, side-ways, side-wise, sid-ing.
Also side, verb, Cor. i. I. 197, iv. 2. 23 side-ling, side-long, adv.,
Milton, P. L. vi. 197, ME. sideling, sidlinges, spelt sydlyngs, Morte
Arthur, 1039, where the suffix -ling or -long is adverbial, as explained
under Headlong. Hence sidelong, adj. Also a-side, q.v., beside,
q.v. Also side-s-men, officers chosen to assist a churchwarden,
Blount, Nomolexicon, where a ridiculous explanation from syzods-
men (!) is attempted, quite unnecessarily ; see Notes and Queries,
5 S.xi. 504. They were also called side-men or quest-men; Halliwell.
Cf. L. assessor, one who sits beside another.

SIDEREAL, starry, relating to the stars. (L.) Milton has
sideral, P. L. x. 693. Phillips, ed. 1706, has sidereal, siderean.
Sideral is from L. siderdlis, and is a correct form ; sidere-al is coined
from L. sidere-us, adj. All from sider-, for *sides-, stem of sidus,
a constellation, also, a star. Der. (from L. stdus) con-sider.

SIEGE, a sitting down, with an army, before a fortified place, in
order to take it. (F.—L.) The lit. sense is merely ‘seat;’ see
Trench, Select Glossary. We find it in this sense in Shak. Meas. iv.
2. Iol; Spenser, F. Q, ii. 2. 39. ME. sege, (1) a seat, Wyclif,
Matt. xxv. 31; (2) a siege, Barbour’s Bruce, iv. 45, ix. 332. In
Ancren Riwle, p. 238, 1. 1,sege means ‘a throne.’ = AF. sege, Gaimar,
3110, also siege; OF. siege, masc., a seat, throne; mod. F. siége.
Cf. Ital. sedia, fem., seggio, masc.,a chair, seat. Not immediately
from L, sedes, but from a verb answering to a L. type *sedicare ; we
find also Late L. assedium, a siege, which (like L. obsidium, a siege)
is from L. sedére, to sit, cognate with E. Sit, q.v. Der. be-siege.

SIENNA, a pigment used in painting. (Ital.) Raw sienna and
burnt sienna are the names of two pigments, made from earth, and
properly from earth of Sienna, which is the name of a place in Tus-
cany, due S. of Florence.

STERRA, a chain of hills. (Span.—L.) Span. sierra, a saw,
ridge of hills.=L. serra, asaw. See Serrated.

SIESTA, orig. a noon-day nap. (Span.—L.) ‘ What, sister, at
your siesta already?’ Elvira, A.i; Dodsley’s Old Plays, ed. Hazlitt,
xy.22. Now usually applied toa nap in the afternoon. —Span. siesta,
‘the hottest part of the day, the time for taking a nap after dinner,
generally from 1 to 3 o’clock ;” Neuman.=L. sexta, i.e. sexta hora,
sixth hour, noon; reckoning from 6 A.M.; so that the orig. sense
was ‘noonday nap. Sexfa is fem. of L. sextus, sixth. L. sex, six;
see Six. Fora shifting of time in the reverse direction, see Noon.

SIEVE, a strainer for separating coarse particles from fine ones.
(E.) ME. sive, Chaucer, C. T. 16408 (G 940) ; her-seve, a hair-sieve,
Liber Cure Cocorum, ed. Morris, p. 7. AS. sife; ‘Cribra, vel
cribellum, sife,’ Voc. 330. 32; spelt sbi in the 8th cent., id. 16. 3.4
Du. zeef; G. sieb, MHG. sig. Teut. types *sides, *sidos,n. Cf. Lith.


SILK 561


sijoti, to sift. Perhaps allied to AS. sikan, séon, G. seiken, to filter.
See Kluge. Der. sif-t, q. v.

SIFT, to separate particles as with a sieve. (E.) ME. siften,
Chaucer, C. T. 16409 (G. 941); sive (=sieve) being in the line above.
AS. siftan, syftan, Exod. xii. 34.— AS. sif-e, a sieve.4-Du. ziften, to
sift, zift, a sieve; from zeef, asieve. See Sieve. B. We also find
Dan. sigte, to sift, sigte, sb., a sieve or riddle ; Swed. sikéa, to sift,
sikt, a sieve; Icel. sikta, sigta, to sift; all from G. sichten, to sift;
which again is from Du. ziften.

SIG-H, to inhale and respire with a long deep breadth. (E.) ME.
sighen, sizen, siken; in P. Plowman, B. xviii. 263, we have syked, with
various readings sijede, sijzhede ; also syhede, sizte, id. C. xxi. 276;
sighte, Chaucer, Troil. iii. 1080. The ME. stken thus made sigh-te
as one form of the pt. t., whence a new infin. sigh-en was evolved by
back-formation. From AS, sican, to sigh; A‘lfred, tr. of Orosius,
ii. 8; ed. Sweet, p. 92, 1. 35. It is a strong verb; pt. t. sac, pp.
sicen ; with a frequentative form siccettan, to sigh, sob. B. Prob. of
imitative origin; cf. Swed. sucka, Dan. sukke, to sigh, groan. Der.
sigh, sb., ME. sike, Chaucer, C. T, 11176 (F 864).

SIGH-CLOUT;; see Notes on E. Etym., p. 271.

SIGHT, act of seeing, that which is seen, view, spectacle. (E.)
ME. sight, Chaucer, C. T. 4982 (B 562). AS. siht, or rather ge-siht,
fElfred, tr. of Boethius, b. v. pr. 4; cap. xli. § 4. But it is almost
always spelt gesihd, gesiehd, gesyhd ; Grein, i. 454. From Teut.type
*seh-ipa, fem, (Sievers) ; allied to séox (Goth. saihwan, for *sehwan),
to see; see See.4--Dnu. gezigt; Dan. sigte; Swed. sigt; G. sicht;
OHG. stht. Der. sight, verb ; sight-ed, Wint. Tale, i. 2. 388; sight-
hole, 1 Hen. IV, iv. 1. 71; sight-less, Mach. i. 5. 50; sight-ly,
K. John, ii. 143; sight-li-ness.

SIGN, a mark, proof, token, omen, notice. (F.—L.) ME. signe,
Chaucer, C. T. 10365 (F 51); Ancren Riwle, p. 70, 1. 1.—OF. signe,
‘a signe, mark;” Cot.—L. signum, a mark, token, Brugmann, i.
§ 762 (3). Der. sign, verb, K. John, iv. 2. 222; sign-board, sign-
manual, sign-post. Also sign-at-ure, from F. signature, ‘ a signature,’
Cot.; from L. signatira, from signare, to sign, from signum. And
see sign-al, sign-et, sign-i-fy, re-sign.

SIGNAL, a token, sign for giving notice. (F.—L.) ME.
signal, Gower, C. A. iii. 57; bk. vi. 1668.—F. signal, ‘a signall;’
Cot.= Late L. signdle, neut. of L. signalis, belonging to a sign. —L.
signum,a sign; see Sign. Der. signal, verb; signal-ly, signal-ise.

SIGNET, a seal, privy-seal. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, v. 2. 49;
and in Palsgrave. ME. signett, Mandeville, Trav. c. viii. p. 82.—F.
signet, ‘a signet, seal, stamp;’ Cot. Dimin. of F. signe; see Sign.

SIGNIFY, to indicate, mean. (F.—L.) ME. signifien; spelt
signefye, Rob. of Glouc. p. 345, 1. 7075. And see O. Eng. Miscel-
lany, ed. Morris, p. 28, ll. 3, 8, II, 12.—F. signifier, ‘to signifie,
betoken ;” Cot.=—L. significare, to show by signs.=L. signi-, for
signum, a sign; and -7ic-, for facere, to make ; see Sign and Fact.
Der. signific-ant, from L. significant-, stem of pres. part. of significare ;
hence significant, sb., 1 Hen. VI, ii. 4. 26; significance, from F. signt-
jicance (Cot.), a false form which supplanted the true OF. signifiance
(Cot.), whence ME. signefiance, O. Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, p. 28,
1, 20, all from L. significantia; significat-ion, ME. significacioun,
Chaucer, C. T. 14985 (B 4169), from F. signification< L. acc. signi-
ficationem ; signific-at-ive, from L, significatiuus.

SIGNOR, SIGINNIOR, sir. (Ital.—L.) Spelt signior, Two Gent.
iii. I. 279; &c.—Ital. signore, sir, a lord.—L. senidrem, acc. of senior,
an elder; see Senior. q Cf. ME. seignour, King Alisaunder,
1458; from French. Span. sefior, fem. sefiora. Der. signor-a, from
Ital. signora, a lady, fem. of signore. Doublets, sir, sire, sefior, senior,
Ssergnior.

SILENCE, stillness, muteness. (F.—L.) In early use. ME.
silence, Ancren Riwle, p. 22, 1. 6.—F. silence, ‘silence,’ Cot. = L.
silentium, silence, a being silent.—L. silent-, stem of pres. part. of
silére, to be still.4-Goth. silanz, only in the compound aza-silan, to
become silent, Mark, iv. 39. Thus the baseis SIL. Der. silent (in
later use, though etymologically a more orig. word), L. L. L. ii. 24,
from L. silent-, stem of pres. part. of silere ; silent-ly.

SILEX, flint, quartz. (L.) Merely L. sélex, flint (stem silic-).
Brugmann, i. § 980. Der. silic-a, silic-i-ous, coined from the stem.

SILHOUETTE, a shadow-outline or profile filled in with a dark
colour. (F.) This cheap and meagre form of portrait, orig. made
by tracing the outline of a shadow, thrown on to a sheet of paper,
was named, in derision, after Etienne de Silhouette, minister of
finance in 1759, who introduced several reforms which were con-
sidered unduly parsimonious. See Trench, Eng. Past and Present ;
Sismondi, Histoire des Frangais, tom. xix. pp. 94, 95. 5

SILK, the delicate, soft thread produced by certain caterpillars,
and the stuff woven from it. (L.—Gk.—Chinese.) ME. silk, Chaucer,
C. T. 10927 (F 613). AS. seole (for *siluc, as meolc for *miluc), silk.
‘Bombix, seolc-wyrm ; Sericum, seolc ;? Wright’s Vocab. i. 40, col. 1.

00


562 SILL


Cf. Icel. silki, Swed. silke, Dan. silke; all of which, like AS. seolc, are
adaptations of L. séricum, silk, by the common change of r into /,
B. L. séricum is the neut. of Séricus, of or belonging to the Séres. =
Gk. Sfpes, pl., the name of the people from whom the ancients first
obtained silk; gen. supposed to be the Chinese. Professor Douglas
writes: ‘The L. Séres and Séricum are probably derived from the
Chinese word for silk, which is variously pronounced se (English e),
sei, sai, sat, sz’, &c.; see Williams, Chin. Dict, p. 835.’ Cf. Max
Miiller, Lectures, ii. 182. sy. Kluge derives Icel. silki from Slavonic ;
but Miklosich derives OSlav. shelkd, Russ. shelk’, from the Scandina-
vian. The true source is L. séricum, whence also Olzish siric, silk.
Der. silk-mercer, silk-weaver ; silk-worm, AS. seolc-wyrm, as above ;
silk-en, AS. seolcen, Voc. 151.93 silk-y, silk-i-ness. Also serge, q.V.

SILL, the timber or stone at the foot of a door or window. (E.)
The true sense seems to be ‘ base’ or ‘ basis;’ sometimes ‘ floor.’
ME. sille, sylle. ‘Sylle of an howse, Silla, soliva;* Prompt. Parv.
Spelt selle, Chaucer, C. T. 3820 (A 3822), which is a Kentish form.
AS. syll, a base, support. ‘ Basis, sy] ;’ Voc. 8.27; in a later gloss:
¢ Bassis, sulle ;’ Voc. 552.12.4-Icel. syll, svill, a sill, door-sill; Swed.
syll; Swed. dial. svill (Rietz) ; Dan. syld, the base of a frame-work
building; G. schwelle, OHG. swelli, a sill, threshold, beam. Cf.
Goth. gasuljan, to found, lay a foundation for, Matt. vii. 25 ; Luke,
vi. 48. B. The OHG. swelli is from a Teut. base *swal, but AS.
syll from a weak grade *swul; implying a strong verb *swel-an-, to
found (?), pt. t. *swal, pp. *swulanoz. AS. syll represents *swul-ja,
fem. sy. The connexion with L. solea, the sole of the foot, is doubt-
ful. @ Not to be confused with AS. syl, a pillar, column, in
fElfred, tr. of Orosius, b.i. c. I. § 4; this is a different word, with
a different sense, though possibly connected; it answers to G. sdule,
a pillar. Der. ground-sill, q. v.

SILLABUB, SYLLABUB, a mixture of wine with milk and
sugar. (E.) Spelt séd/ibub in Minsheu, ed. 1627, who derives it from
swilling bubbles. But the formis corrupt, a better form being sillibouk.
‘ Sillibouke or sillibub, Laict aigre ;’ Sherwood, index to Cotgrave.
Cotgrave gives: ‘Laict aigre, whay; also, a sillibub or merri-
bowke.’ Halliwell gives ‘ sillybauk, a sillabub,’ as a Lincolnshire
word. It is obvious that a corruption from bowk to bub is easy,
whereas a change from bub to bouk is unlikely. We may therefore
assume sillibouk as the older form, at the same time noting that
another name for it is merribouk. Cf. ‘merrybauks, a cold posset,
Derbyshire ;? Halliwell. B. The prov. E. bouk is a well-known
word for ‘ belly ;’ Mr. Peacock notes bowk as the Lincolnshire form ;
so that merri-bouk=‘ merry belly,’ and perhaps siélli-bouk =‘ happy
belly,’ from an old sense of silly (below). Itis evidently a jocose name.

SILLY, simple, harmless, foolish. (E.) The word has much
changed its meaning. It meant ‘timely ;’ then lucky, happy, blessed,
innocent, simple, foolish. ME. sely, Chaucer, C. T. 3601, 4088
(A 4090), 5952 (D 370); Havelok, 477; P. Plowman’s Crede, 442 ;
and see sely, seely, seilye in Gloss. to Spec. of English, ed. Skeat.
AS. sélig, more usually gesélig (the prefix ge- making no difference),
happy, prosperous, fortunate; see Sweet, A. S. Reader. Formed
with the common adj. suffix -ig (E. -y) from AS. s#l, a time, season,
occasion, happiness (very common); Grein, ii, 395.4-Du. zalig,
blessed ; Icel. sell, blest, happy; sela, bliss; Swed. sail, blest,
happy; G. selig, OHG. salik, good, excellent, blest, happy ; Goth.
séls, good, kind.  B. All from a Teut. base *s#/-: of unknown
origin. Der. silli-ly, -ness.

SILO, a pit for storing grain or fodder. (Span.—L.—Gk.) Span.
silo, ‘a granier to lay up corne in;* Minsheu (1623).—L. sirum,
acc. of sirus. Gk. otpds, a pit for keeping corn in. Der. en-sil-age.

SILT, sediment, sand left by water that has overflowed. (Scand.)
ME. silte, badly spelt cilte. ‘ Cilte, soonde [sand], Glarea ;’ Prompt.
Parv. p. 77. It can hardly be other than the MSwed. sylta, mud,
also a marshy place (Ihre) ; Dan. syl¢, a salt marsh (Larsen); Dan.
dial. sylz, a stretch of low coast-land, over which the sea sometimes
flows; Norw. sylta, the same (Ross). Cf. Low G. suite, a brine-pit ;
G. siilze, brine, also brine-pit. All froma Teut. base *sult-, which is
a weakened form of *salt-, i.e. salt. See Kluge. So also we find
Du. zilt, adj. salt, related to Du. zout, salt; and AS. syltan, to salt,
from sealt, salt. Cf. prov. E. silt, a salting-tub. It must have re-
ferred orig. to salt deposited as a sediment by sea-water in brine-pits
or very shallow pools.

SILVAN, SYLVAN, pertaining to woods. (L.) ‘All sylvan
offsprings round;’ Chapman, tr. of Homer, Od. xix. 599. [The
spelling with y is false, and due to the habit of spelling L. silva
with y, in order to derive it from Gk. #An, a wood, with which it is (at
most) only cognate.]=—L. siluanus, belonging to a wood, chiefly used
of the wood-god Silvanus. = L, silua, a wood.4-Gk. tn, a wood (?),
The relationship of the L. and Gk. words is doubted by some, and
the root is uncertain; see Brugmann, i. § 102 (1), note. Der, (from
L. silua) savage, q.v.


SIMPER


SILVER, a well-known white metal. (E.) ME. silver, Chaucer,
C. T. 16707 (G 1239). OMerc. sylfur, Matt. x. 9 (Rushworth MS.);
AS. seolfor; early form siolofr.4-Du. zilver; Icel. silfr; Dan. solv;
Swed. silfver; G. silber ; Goth. silubr.4-Russ. serebro. The origin is
wholly unknown; Uhlenbeck thinks the Tent. forms are from Slavonic.
Miklosich (p. 336) gives the Slav. type as *sirebro, with varying
forms in all the Slay. languages. Der. silver, verb; silver-ing ;
silver-ling, a small piece of silver, with double dimin. -/-ing (as in
duck-l-ing), Isaiah, vii, 23, also in Tyndale’s version of Acts, xix. 19,
and Coverdale’s of Judges, ix. 4, xvi. 5, the AS. form being sylfring,
Gen. xly. 22; silver-smith; silver-y. Also silver-n, adj., in some MSS.
of Wyclif, Acts, xix. 24, AS. sylfren, Gen. xliv. 2. @f A possible
guess is that which derives silver from Gk. *advBn, old form of
*AAUVBy, a town on the S. coast of the Black Sea, which, according to
Homer (Iliad, ii. 857), was the home of silver.

SIMILAR, like. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627, and in Cot-
grave.—F. similaire, ‘similar;’ Cot. As if from L. *stmildris, ex-
tended from simil-is, like, by the suffix -aris. Allied to simul, to-
gether, Gk. dua, together, and E. same; from the Idg. base *samo-,
the same; see Same. Cf. Olrish samail, W. hafal, like; Gk. dards,
even. Also L. sem-el, once, Goth. sim-lé, once; Gk. dma, once, év,
neut., one; &c. Der. similar-ly, similar-i-ty; also simile, q.v.,
simili-tude, g.v. And see simul-ate, simul-ta-ne-ous, semblance, as-
semble, dis-semble.

SIMTLE, a comparison. (L.) In Shak. As You Like It, ii. 1.
.=L. simile, a like thing ; neut. of similis, like; see Similar.
SIMILITUDH, a comparison, parable. (F.—L.) ME. simili-
tude, Chaucer, C. T. 10794 (F 480); Wyclif, Luke, viii. 4.—F.
similitude, ‘a similitude;’ Cot.=—L. similitudinem, acc. of similitido,
likeness. = L. similis, like; see Similar.

SIMIOUS, monkey-like. (L.) Coined from L. simia, an ape. =
L. sitmus (Gk. otpés), flat-nosed.

SIMMER, to boil gently. (E.) Formerly also simber (see
Richardson) and simper, Halliwell cites: ‘ Simper, to simmer, East ;’
also ‘ the creame of simpering milke, Florio, p. 189,’ which is wrong
as regards the edit. of 1598, which has: ‘Cremore, the creme or
simpring of milke when it seethes.’ ‘I symper, as lycour dothe on
the fyre byfore it begynneth to boyle;’ Palsgrave. A frequentative
form, with the usual suffix -er, and with excrescent ~ or 6 in some -
authors, from a base *simm or *symm, imitative of the sound of gentle
boiling. Cf. Dan. summe, G. summen, Swed. dial. summa, to hum,
to buzz; Bavar. semmern, to whimper.

SIMNEL, a kind of rich cake. (F.—L.) See Simnel in Halliwell.
ME. simnel, Prompt. Parv.; simenel, Havelok, 779.—OF. simenel,
bread or cake of fine wheat flour; Roquefort.— Late L. siminellus,
bread of fine flour ; also called simella; Ducange. B. Here siminellus
stands for *similellus, as being easier to pronounce ; both *stmil-ellus
and simel-la being derived from L. simila, wheat flour of the finest
quality. Allied to Gk. cepidadss, fine flour. And cf. G. semmel,
wheat-bread.

SIMONY, the crime of trafficking in ecclesiastical preferment.
(F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) In early use; spelt symonye, O. Eng. Mis-
cellany, ed. Morris, p. 89, 1. y.=—F. simonie, ‘simony, the buying or
selling of spirituall functions or preferments ;’ Cot. Late L. simdnia ;
Ducange. Named from Simon Magus (Gk. Sipov), because he
wished to purchase the gift of the Holy Ghost with money; Acts,
viii. 18.—Heb. Shim‘dn, Simeon, Simon, lit. hearing, obedience;
one who hears.= Heb. root shama‘,to hear. Der. simoni-ac} simon?-
ac-al. z

SIMOOM, a hot, poisonous wind. (Arab.) See Southey, Thalaba,
b. ii, last stanza, and the note.= Arab. samtum, a sultry pestilential
wind, which destroys travellers; Rich. Dict. p.850. So called from
its poisonous nature. = Arab, root samma, he poisoned ; id. p. 847.

SIMPER, to smile sillily or affectedly, to smirk. (Scand.) ‘Yond
simpering dame;’ K. Lear, iv. 6.120. ‘With a made countenance
about her mouth, between simpering and smiling ;’ Sidney, Arcadia,
b.i. (R.). Cotgrave explains F. coguine by ‘a begger woman, also a
cockney, simperdecockit, nice thing.’ We find traces of it in Norweg.
semper, fine, smart (Aasen); Dan. dial. semper, simper, ‘affected, coy,
prudish, esp. of one who requires pressing to eat: as, she is as semper
as a bride;’ Wedgwood. Also MSwed. semper, one who affectedly
refrains from eating. B. All these are formed (with a suffix -er
which appears to be the same as the E. suffix -er of the agent) from
a base *simp-, which is a nasalized form of *sip-. Without the nasal,
we find MSwed. sipp (also simp), a woman who affectedly refuses to
eat (Ihre) ; Swed. sipp, adj., finical, prim ; Dan. s¢ppe, a woman who
is affectedly coy (Molbech). And note particularly Low G. sipp, ex-
plained in the Bremen Worterbuch as a word expressing the gesture
of a compressed mouth, and affected pronunciation ; a woman who
acts thus affectedly is called Yumfer Sipp, Miss Sipp, and they say of
her, ‘She cannot say sipp.’ Also Low G..den Mund sipp trekken, to


SIMPLE


make a small mouth; De Bruut sitt so sipp, the bride sits so prim.
Of imitative origin. @ We find also prov. G. zimpern, to be
affectedly coy, zipp, prudish, coy (Fliigel); but these are most
likely borrowed from Low German, as the true High G. z answers
to E.¢. Der. simper, sb.

SIMPLE, single, elementary, clear, guileless, silly. (F.—L.) In
early use. ME. simple, The Bestiary, 1. 790; in O. Eng. Miscellany,
ed. Morris.—F. simple, ‘simple;’ Cot.—L. simplicem, acc. of sim-
plex (stem simplic-), simple; lit. ‘ one-fold” as opposed to duplex,
two-fold, double. — L. sim-, appearing also in L. sin-guli, one by one,
sem-per, always alike, sem-el, once, sim-ul, together; and -plic-, as in
plic-are, to fold. See Simulate and Ply. Der. simple-ness,
simpl-y. Also simples, s. pl., simple herbs; whence simpl-er, simpl-
ist, both in Minsheu, ed. 1627. Also simplic-i-ty, Mids. Nt. Dr. i. 1.
171, from F. simplicité, from L. acc. simplicitatem; simpli-fy, in
Barrow’s Sermons, vol. ii. ser. 34 (Todd), a coined word, answering
to late F. simplifier (Littré), where the suffix -fer=L. -jicare, from
facere, to make; see Fact. Hence simplific-at-ion. Also simple-
ton, q.v. Brugmann, i. § 431 (1).

SIMPLETON, a foolish fellow, (F.—L.) ‘A country farmer
sent his man to look after an ox; the simpleton went hunting up and
down;’ L’Estrange (Todd’s Johnson). ‘O ye pitiful sémpletons ;’
Lady Alimony (1659), A. v.sc. 2. Formed with the F. suffix -on
(<L. acc. -duem) from F. simplet, masc., simplette, fem., a simple
person (Littré). Cotgrave only gives the fem. simplette, ‘a little,
simple wench, one that is apt to believe, and thereby soon deceived ; ’
but Godefroy has OF. simplet, simple, credulous; and Corblet has
Picard simplet, a foolish person. Cf. Span. simplon, a simpleton.
These are formed from simple, simple, with the dimin. suffix -et or
-ette. Thus simple-t-on exhibits a double suffix -t-on, which is very
tare; yet there is at least one more example in the old word musk-et-
oon, a kind of musket, F. mousqu-et-on. B. There is also a phrase
simple tony, with the same sense, as in Falstaff’s Wedding, by
Kenrick, A. iv. sc. 4 (near the end); A.D. 1766. But this seems to
be later. We also find Tony (for Anthony) used in the same sense of
‘foolish fellow ;’ as in Middleton, The Changeling, i. 2. Cf. prov. E.
idle-ton, in E. D. D.

SIMULATE, to pretend, feign. (L.) Shak. nas simulation, Tw.
Nt. ii. 5. 151. Simulate first occurs with the force of a pp. ; ‘ because
they had vowed a simulate chastyte;’ Bale, Eng. Votaries, pt. ii (R.).
—L. simulatus, pp. of simulare, also simildre, to feign, pretend, make
like. —L. similis, like. See Similar. Der. simulat-ion, from F.
simulation, ‘simulation,’ Cot., from L. acc. simulationem, a feigning ;
simulat-or. Also dis-simulat-ion. And see semblance, as-semble, dis-
semble. Also simultaneous.

SIMULTANEOUS, happening at the same moment. (L.)
“Whether previous or simultaneous ;* Hammond’s Works, vol. iv.
ser. 2(R.); p. 570 (Todd). Englished directly from Late L. simul-
tdneus, by change of -uvs to -ous, as in ardu-ous, strenu-ous, &C.
Formed from Late L. simult-im, at the same time, by analogy with
LL. moment-dneus; and cf. E. instantaneous. B. The Late L. simultim
is extended from L. simul, together, with adv. suffix -tim, as in minuta-
zim. See Simulate, Similar. Der. simul-taneous-ly.

SIN, wickedness, crime, iniquity. (E.) ME. sinne, synne; pl.
synnes, Wyclif, Matt. ix. 2, 5,6. AS. synn, sinn; gen., dat., and
acc. synne; Grein, ii. 518.4-Du. zonde; Icel. synd, older form syxd;
Dan, and Swed. synd; G. stinde, OHG. suntea. B. Thus the AS.
synn represents a Teut. type *sundja, fem., or rather an Idg. type
*santja ; where *sant is the weak grade of sent : sont. It is the abstract
sb. allied to L. sons (stem sonii-), sinful, guilty, orig. ‘ being,’ real;
and Curtius refers this (along with Icel. sannr, true, very, Goth.
sunja, the truth, sooth) to the 4/ES, to be; remarking that ‘ the
connection of son(z)s and sonticus with this root has been recognized
by Clemm, and established (Studien, iii. 328), while Bugge (iv. 205)
confirms it by Northern analogies. Language regards the guilty
man as the man who it was;’ Gk. Etym.i.470. Cf. Ion. Gk. é-év7-,
stem of éwy (for *to-wv), being; pres. pt. of eiui, 1am. See Sooth.
Der. sin, verb, ME, sinnen, but also singen, sungen, sinegen (see
P. Plowman, A. ix. 17, B. vili. 22, C. xi. 23), from AS. syngian,
gesyngian, Grein, ii. 519. Also sin-ful, AS. synfull (Grein); sin-
Sul-ly, sin-ful-ness ; sin-less, AS. synléas; sin-less-ly, sin-less-ness ; sinn-
er, sin-offering.

SINCE, after that, from the time that, past, ago. (E.) Since is
written for sins, to keep the final s sharp (voiceless); Just as we
write pence for pens, mice for mys, twice for twies, and the like. Again,
sins is an abbreviation of ME. sithens, also spelt sithence in later
English, with the same intention of showing that the final s was
voiceless. Sithence is in Shak. Cor. iii. 1. 47; All’s Well, i. 3. 124;
sithens in Spenser, F. Q. i. 4. 51. B. Next, the word sithen-s
arose from the addition of -s or -es (common as an-adverbial ending,
as in need-s, twi-es, thri-es) to the older form sithen, which was


sometimes contracted to siz.


SINGE 563


We find sifen, Havelok, 3993 sithen,
Wyclif, Luke, xiii. 7; sith, Chaucer, C. T, 5234 (B 814); and see
numerous examples in Stratmann, s. v. sijJan. y. Lastly, sithen or
sifen is for sifpen, the oldest ME. form, whence were made sien,
sitthen, sithen-es, sithen-s, as well as (by loss of -n or -er) sithe, seppe,
sith, and (by contraction) sin or sen.—AS. siddan, siddon, syddan,
seoddan, sioddan, after that, since (very common), Grein, ii. 445.
This sid8ax is a contraction from sid dan, for sid don, after that;
where dor, that, is the instrumental case masc. of the demonstrative
pronoun, also used as a def. article, for which see That. The AS.
si0, after, used as a prep., was orig. an adj., meaning ‘ late,’ but here
represents a comparative adv., meaning ‘later, after.’ We find sid,
after, later, both as adj. and adv., Grein, ii. 444. [Not the same
word as AS. sid, journey, time (Grein, ii. 443), which is cognate with
Goth. sinth, discussed under Send.| This AS. sid is cognate with
Goth. seithus, late, whence the adv. seithu, late, Matt. xxvii. 57,
John, vi. 16; also with G. seit, OHG. sit, after. The G. seit-dem,
since, is exactly the AS. sid-dan; in Gothic we find a somewhat
similar compound in the expression zi thana-seiths, no longer, Mark,
ix. 8. Other allied words are Olrish sir, long, W. hir, long, tedious ;
L. séro, late, Skt. sayam, ady. in the evening. Stokes-Fick, p. 294;
Sievers, §§ 323, 337-

SINCERE, true, pure, honest, frank. (F.—L.) ‘Of a very sincere
life ;’ Frith’s Works, p. 117, last line. = OF. sincere, syncere, ‘ sincere ;’
Cot. Mod. F. sincére. —L. sincérus, pure, sincere. If, as some have
thought, sincérus means sine céra, ‘without wax,’ it was. orig.
applied to honey (Bréal). Der. sincere-ly; sincer-i-ty, from F.
sincerité, ‘ sincerity,’ Cot., from L. acc. sincéritatem.

SINCIPUT, the fore-part of the head, from the forehead to the
top. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706. Used as distinct from occiput, the
back part of the head. The lit. sense is ‘ half-head’ =L. sinciput,
half a head; contracted from sémi-, half; and caput, the head.
Brugmann, i, § 121. See Semi- and Capital. Compare
Megrim.

SINDER, the correct spelling of Cinder, q.v. ‘Thus all in
flames I sinder-like consume;’ Gascoigne, Dan Bartholomew; Works,
i, 117. ‘Synders of the tyre;’ Palsgrave. Note that the AS. sinder
is cognate with Gk. dv@pag, coal; from the common base *sendhro-
(Prellwitz).

SINE, a straight line drawn from one extremity of an are or
sector perpendicular to the radius at the other extremity. (L.) In
Phillips, ed. 1658. Englished from L. sizus, a bosom, properly a
curve, fold, coil, curl, esp. the hanging fold of the upper part of a
toga. The use of the word in the math. sense is peculiar. We may
note the Arab. jayb, ‘cutting, traversing,’ as also haying (like L.
sinus) the two meanings of ‘ breast of a garment’ and ‘sine’ in geo-
metry. The L. sinus may have translated the Arabic. Doublet,
Sinus, Q.V.

SINECURH, an ecclesiastical benefice without the cure of souls,
salary without work. (L.) ‘ One of them is in danger to be made
a sine cure;’ Dryden, Kind Keeper, Act ii. sc. 2. Englished from
L. sine cura, without cure of souls.—L. sine, prep. without, lit. ‘if
not,’ compounded of si, if, and ze, not; and curd, abl. case of cura,
cure; see Cure. Der. sinecur-ist, one who holds a sinecure.

SINEW, a tendon, that which joins a muscle toa bone, (E.)
ME. sinewe ; spelt synewe, Prompt. Parv. AS. sinu, seonu, sionu (dat.
sinwe),a sinew; Grein, ii. 439.4-Du. zenww; Dan. sene; Swed. sena; G.
sehne; OHG. senawa, senewa,senuwa. Andcf. Icel. sin,asinew, pl. sizar.
B. The Teut. type is *sizawa, f. Perhaps allied to Skt. sndva(s), a
tendon, which (however) answers better to G. schnur, a string. Der.
sinew, verb, 3 Hen. VI, ii. 6. 91; sinew-y, L. L.L. iv. 3. 308.

SING, to resound, to utter melodious sounds, relate musically or
in verse. (E.) The orig. sense is simply to ring or resound. ‘We
hear this fearful tempest sing;’ Rich. II, ii. 1. 263. ME. singen,
pt. t. sang, song’, pl. sungen, pp. sungen, songen ; Chaucer, C. T. 268,
1511 (A 266, 1509). AS. singan, pt. t. sang, pl. sungon, pp. sungen ;
Grein, ii. 452.-4-Du. zingen, pt. t. zong, pp. gezongen; Icel, syngja,
pt. t. saung, sing, pp. sunginn; Dan. synge; Swed. sjunga; Goth.
siggwan (written for *singwan); G. singen.  B. All from Idg. root
*sengh(w), with labio-velar gh; so that the Gk. dugy, voice, may be
related. Brugmann, i. §§ 676, 797. Der. sing-er, in place of the
AS. sangere (which would have given a mod. E, songer) ; see Song-
stress. Songer, Sanger, Songster, Sangster occur as surnames. Also
sing-ing, sing-ing-master, sing-song ; singe. And see Song.

SING, to scorch, burn on the surface. (E.) Forsenge. ME.
sengen; spelt seengyn, Prompt. Parv.; senge, Chaucer, C. T. 5931
(D 439). The curious pp. seind occurs as a substitute for senged;
Chaucer, C. T. 14851 (B 4035). AS. sengan, to singe, burn;
occurring in the comp. besengan, /Elfred, tr. of Orosius, ii, 8. § 43
A.S. Leechdoms, ed. Cockayne, ii. 124, 1. 18. In Matt. xiii. 6,
the Lindisfarne MS. has besenced (for besenged), scorched, burnt or
00 2


564 SINGLE


dried up. The AS. sengan stands for *sang-ian, causal of singan
(pt. t. sang), to sing. Thus the lit. sense is to make to sing,’ with
reference to the singing or hissing noise made by singed hair, and
the sound given out by a burning log; see Sing.+Du. zengen,
to singe, scorch, causal of zingen; to sing; G. sengen, to singe,
scorch, parch, burn, causal of singen, to sing. Cf. Icel. sangr,
singed, burnt.

SINGLE, sole, separate, alone. (L.) ‘So that our eye be single ;’
Tyndale’s Works, p. 75, col. 1. He refers to Matt. vi. 22, where the
Vulgate has simplex, and Wyclif has simple.—L. singulus, single,
separate, in Late Latin; in classical Latin we have only the pl. singuli,
one by one. B. Singuli stands for *sin-culi or *sin-cli, where *sin-
corresponds to s¢m- in sim-plex, and is allied to sem-el, once, and to E.
same; see Simple, Same. Der. single, verb, L.L.L. v. 1. 85;
singl-y; single-ness, Acts, ii. 46; single-heart-ed, single-mind-ed ; also
single-stick, prob. so called because wielded by one hand only, as
distinguished from the old guarter-staff, which was held in both
‘hands. And see singul-ar. @ Spelt sergle in ME, and OF.

SINGULAR, single, alone, uncommon, strange, (F.—L.)
ME. singuler; Gower, C. A. iii. 184; bk. vii. 2931. ‘A singuler
persone’ =an individual, Chaucer, Tale of Melibee, Group B, 2625.
=F. singulier, ‘singular, excellent;’ Cot.—L. singularis, single,
separate. Formed with suffix -adris from singul-i, one by one; see
Single. Der. singular-ly; singular-i-ty, from F. singularité, ‘ singu-
larity, excellence,’ Cot., from L..acc. singuldritatem.

SINISTER, on the left hand, inauspicious, evil. (F.—L.)
Common as an heraldic term. ‘Some secret sinister informacion ;’
Sir T. More, Works, p. 1447 b. ‘ By eny sinistre or euil temptacion ;’
Dictes of Philosophers, pr. by Caxton, fol. 7, 1. 27.—F. sinistre,
‘sinister, unlucky ;’ Cot.—L. sinistrum, acc. of sinister, left, on the
left hand, inauspicious or ill-omened, as omens on the left hand
were supposed to be. Cf. Dexter. Der. sinistr-ous, sinistr-al.

SINK, to fall down, descend, be overwhelmed ; also, to depress.
(E.) We have merged the transitive and intransitive forms in one;
properly, we ought to use sink intransitively, and the trans. form
should be sench or senk; cf. drink, drench. 1, ME, sinken, intrans.,
pt. t. sank, pp. sunken, sonken. The pt. t. sank is in P. Plowman,
8. xviii. 67. This is the original and strong verb. AS. séncan, pt. t.
sanc, pl. suncon, pp. suncen; Grein, ii. 451.-4-Du. zinken ; Icel. sokkva
(for *sinkva), pt. t. sokk (for *sank), pp. sokkinn; Dan. synke; Swed.
sjunka; G. sinken; Goth. sigkwan, siggkwan (written for *sinkwan,
*singkwan). Teut. type *senkwan-. Brugmann, i. § 421 (3).
2. The trans. form appears in the weak ME. senchen, not common,
and now obsolete. ‘ Hi bisenched us on helle’=they will sink us
into hell; O. Eng. Homilies, i. 107, 1.18. AS. sencan, to cause to
sink; ‘bisenced on s&s grund’=caused to sink (drowned) in the
bottom of the sea, Matt. xviii. 6. For *sancian, formed from the
2nd grade sanc, as in the pt. t. of sincan, to sink. Cf. Goth, sagg-
kwan, causal form of siggkwan. This verb still exists in Swed. sanka,
Dan. senke, G. senken, to immerse.4Lith. sekti (pres. senkw), to be
drained away; cf. Skt. sich, to sprinkle. Brugmann, i. § 677;
Streitberg, § 203. Der. sink-er. Also sink, sb., a place where refuse
water sinks away, but orig. a place into which filth sixks or in which
it collects, Cor. i. 1. 126.

SINOPLE, green, in heraldry. (F.—L.—Gk.) English heralds
call ‘ green’ vert; the term sinople is rather F. than E. It occurs in
Caxton, tr. of Reynard the Fox: ‘of gold, of sable, of siluer, of
yelow, asure, and cynope, thyse sixe colowrs;’ ed. Arber, p. 85;
and, spelt cimople and distinguished from grene, in Lydgate, Siege of
Troy, b. ii. c. 11; fol. G1.—F. sizople, ‘sinople, green colour in
blazon ;’ Cot.—Late L. sindpis, signifying both reddish and greenish
(Littré).—L. sindpis, a kind of red ochre, used for colouring. = Gk.
owomis, owwmen, a red earth found in Cappadocia, and imported
into Greece from Sinope.—Gk. Siwy, Sinope, a port on the S.

coast of the Black Sea.

' SINUS, a bay of the sea, &c. (L.) Phillips, ed. 1706, gives;
‘Sinus, ..agulph or great bay of the sea....In anatomy, sinus is
taken for any cavity in or between the vessels of an animal body. In
surgery, it is when the beginning of an imposthume or ulcer is nar-
row, and the bottom large,’ &c.—L. sinus, the fold of a garment, a
bay, the bosom, a curve; &c. Der. sinu-ous; ‘a scarfing of silver,
that ran sinuously in works over the whole caparison,’ Chapman,
Mask of the Middle Temple, § 5; from F. sinuéucx, ‘intricate,
crooked, full of hollow turnings, windings, or crinkle-crankles,’
Cot. ; from L. sinudsus, winding, full of curves. Hence sinuos-i-ty,
from F. sinuosité, a hollow turning or winding; Cot. Also sinu-ate,
witha waved margin (botanical) ; stmu-at-ion ; in-sinu-ate, in-sinu-at-ion.
Doublet, sine.

‘SIP, to sup or drink in small quantities, to taste a liquid, (E.)
ME. sippen, Chaucer, C. T. 5758 (D 176). It answersto AS. sypian,
to absorb moisture. (Toller), derived from sup-, weak grade of


SIRRAH


sipan, to sup; see Sup. And cf. Sop:4+MDu. sippen, ‘to sip, to.
sup, to tast little by little,’ Hexham; from MDu. zuypen, Du. zuipen,.
to sup; Swed. dial. syppa, to sup. Der. sip, sb.; sipp-er. And see
sipp-et.

SIPHON, a bent tube for drawing off liquids. (F.—L.—Gk.)
In Phillips, ed. 1706.—F. siphon, ‘the cock or pipe of a conduit,’
&c.; Cot. (He notes its use by Rabelais.) —L. siphdnem, acc. of
sipho, a siphon. — Gk. ci¢wy, a small pipe or reed.

SIPPET, a little sip, a little sop. (E.) Properly, there are two
separate words. 1. A little sip. ‘And ye wyll gyue me a syppfet
Of your stale ale;’ Skelton, Elinour Rummyng, 367. This is the
dimin. of sip; with suffix -et, of F. origin. 2. A little sop, a piece
of sopped toast. ‘Green goose! you’re now in sippets;’ Beaum.
and Fletcher, Rule A Wife, iv. 1, last line. This seems to be


more immediately from AS. sypian, to absorb moisture ; and allied -


to sop. Palsgrave has: ‘ Syppet, a litell soppe.’

SIR, SIRE, a respectful title of address. (F.—L.) Sire is the
older form. _ ME. sire, as in ‘ Sire Arthure,’ Layamon, 22485.—AF.
sire, Polit. Songs, p. 232 (before. 1307) ; F. sire, ‘sir, or master ;”
Cot. Formed from L. senior, nom., lit. older; the F. seigneur being
due to the accus. senidrem of the same word. It is now well estab-
lished that the L. senior produced an OF. senre, of which sire is an
attenuated form; the same word appears in the curious form sendra
in the famous Oaths of Strasburg, A.D. 842; see Bartsch, Chrest,
Frangaise, col. 4, 1.17. See Littré, Scheler, and Diez. B. The
last remarks that the word is prob. of Picard or Northern origin,
since Picard sometimes putsr for dr or nr, as in terons for tiendrons,
tere for ¢endre. @ It may be added that this word gave the old
French etymologists a great deal of trouble; the word was ever
written cyre to make it look like the Gk. «vpios, a lord! The
Proy. sira, sire, Span. ser, Ital. ser, are merely borrowed from
French; and Icel. stra, from Proy. or E.; see Sirrah. Doublets,
senior, seignior, sefior, signor ; though these really answer only to the
acc. form senidrem. »

SIRDAR, a military commander. (Hind.—Pers.) Used in 1808
(Yule).— Hind. sardar (Forbes).— Pers. sardar, a chief.— Pers. sar,
head (cf. Gk. #dpa, Skt. giras) ; -dar (suffix), possessing, holding.

STREW, a fabulous nymph who, by singing, lured mariners to
death. (L.—Gk.) ME. serein, which is from OF. sereine, ‘a mer-
maid, Cot. ‘Men clepen hem sereizs in Fraunce;’ Rom. of the Rose,
684. But we took the mod. E. word immediately from the Latin.
Spelt siren, Com. of Errors, iii, 2. 47.— L. sirén.—Gk. cepny, anymph
on the S. coast of Italy, who enticed seamen by the magic sweetness
of her song, and then slew them. At first the sirens were but two in
number; Homer, Od. xii. 39, 167. It also means a wild bee, a
singing-bird, B. Usually derived from cepa, a cord, rope, as if
they enticed mariners by pulling them; this is more likely to be
a bad pun than an etymology. ‘The orig. sense was probably ‘ bird ;*
see an article on ‘Sirens,’ by J. P. Postgate, in the Journal of
Philology (Cambridge), vol. ix. Cf. G. schwirren, to chirp.

SIRLOIN, an inferior spelling of Surloin, q. v.

SIRNAME, a corruption of Surname, q.v.

SIROCCO, a hot, oppressive wind. (Ital.—Arab.) In Milton,
P. L. x. 706. Spelt xirocgue by E. G., tr. of Acosta, bk. iii. ch. 5
(1604). =Ital. sirocco, ‘the south-east wind;’ Florio, Cf. Span.
siroco.= Arab. sharg, the east; Rich. Dict. p. 889. The etymology
is well discussed in Devic, Supp. to Littré, who remarks that the
introduction of a vowel between r and g, when the Arabic word was
borrowed by European languages, presents no difficulty. Or there
may have been some confusion with the closely-allied word shuriq,
rising (said of the sun). The Eastern wind in the Mediterranean is
hot and oppressive. Arab. root skaraga, (the sun) arose; Rich,
Dict. p. 889. See Saracen.

SIRRAH, a term of address, used in anger or contempt. (Prov.
—F.—L.) Common in Shak. Temp. v. 287; &c. Schmidt re-
marks that it is never used in the plural, is used towards compara-
tively inferior persons, and (when forming part of a soliloquy) is
preceded by ah; as ‘ah, sirrah;’ As You Like It, iv. 3. 166; ‘ak,
sirrah, quoth-a, 2 Hen. IV, y. 3. 17; cf. Romeo, i. 5. 31, 128. Min-
sheu has: ‘ Sirra, a contemptuous word, ironically compounded of
Sir and a, ha, as much as to say ah, sir, or ah, boy.’ Minsheu is not
quite right ; for the form sira is Provengal. It is also spelt sirrha in’
Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxxv. c. 10 (in a story of Apelles), ed. 1634,
vol. ii. p. 538, 1. 7 from bottom. = Prov. sira, sirrah, a term of con-
tempt; formerly sir, in a good sense ; borrowed from F, in the 15th
cent., or earlier. Not the true OProy. form (which was senher, with
variants), but borrowed from F, sire. =—L. senior; see Sir. B. The
fact that it was used contemptuously is the very thing that shows its
Prov. origin ; for Mistral (s.v. sire) quotes from Thierry to show
that sire (formerly sira) was a term of contempt applied by the men,
of Provence to the lords and governors from Paris. When St, Louis


SIR-REVERENCE


_{Louis IX) was taken prisoner in the. 13th century, the men of
Marseilles sang a Te Deum for their deliverance (for the time) from
the government of these sires. For two good examples of the offen-
sive use of Prov. sira by two men who are disputing, see Bartsch,
‘Chrest. Prov. (1875), 397- 34, 398. 13.

SIR-REVERENCEH, save your reverence. (L.) InShak. Com.
Errors, iii. 2.93. See Save-reverence in Nares, who shows that it was
used also in the form save-reverence and save-your-reverence; the latter
is in Romeo, i. 4.42. ‘This word was considered a sufficient apology
for anything indecorous;’ Nares. A translation of L. salud reuerentia,
reverence to you being duly regarded. =—L. salud, fem. abl. of saluus,
safe; and reuerentia, abl. of reuerentia, reverence; see Safe and
Reverence.

-SIRUP, another spelling of Syrup, q. v.

SISKIN, a migratory song-bird. (Du.—Low G.—Slavonic.)
Mentioned in a tr. of Buffon, Nat. Hist., London, 1792, ii. go; and
in Kilian. Spelt siskex in Phillips (1658). The Carduelis spinus;
better Spirus viridis (Newton) ; also called aberduvine; also Fringilla
spinus.—MDu. cijsken, sijsken, Anglice siskin (Kilian); later Du.
cysje (Sewel), with dimin. suffix -je for the older dimin. suffix -ken ;
Du. sijge (Calisch). = Low G. zieske, ziseke (Bremen). = Polish czyzik,
dimin. form of czyZ,a siskin; cf. Sloven. chizhek, Russ. chij’. See
Miklosich, p. 36. @ Thus the Du. form should have been cijske ;

_ it was a mistake to turn -ke into the dimin. suffix -ken ; and a greater
one to substitute -je.
SISTER, a girl born of the same parents with another. (E.)
ME. suster, Chaucer, C. T. 873 (A 871); rarely sister, syster, as in
Prompt. Parv., and in Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 766. It is
extremely remarkable how the Scand. form sister has modified the
E. form suster. AS. sweostor, swuster (whence ME, suster) ; Grein,
li. 509; modified by Icel. systir, Swed. syster (Dan. sdster).4-Du.
zuster ; Goth. swistar; G. schwester; OHG. swester, swister. B. The
Teut. forms are all from the base *swestr-, answering to an Idg. base
*swesr- (without the ¢), Further related to Lithuan. sessdz (gen.
sesseres) ; L. soror (for older *swesor) ; Skt. svasé, nom.; Olrish
siur ; W. chwaer. Der. sister-hood, -like, -ly; sister-in-law. Also
€ou-sin, q. V.

SIT, to rest on the haunches, rest, perch, brood. (E.) ME. sitten,
pt. t. sat; pl. seten, Chaucer, C. T. 10406 (F 923 where Tyrwhitt
prints saten); pp. sete, siten, id. 1454 (where Tyrwhitt prints sitten).
AS. sittan, pt. t. set, pl. séton, pp. seten; Grein, ii. 454.4-Du.
zitten ; Icel. sitja, pt. t. sat, pp. setinn; Dan. sidde; Swed. sitta;
Goth, .sitan; G.-sitzen; OHG. sizzan, Teut. type *setjan-, pt. t.
*sat, pp. *setanoz. . From Idg.4/SED, to sit, whence Skt. sad,
Gk. €Copat (for €5-yopar), L. sedére, Lithuan. sédéti, Russ. sidiet(e),
to sit. Der. sitt-er, sitt-ing. Also (from L. sedére) as-sess, as-sid-
uous, as-size, dis-pos-sess, dis-sid-ent, in-sid-ious, pos-sess, pre-side, re-
side, re-sid-uwe, sed-ate, sed-entary, sed-iment, sess-ile, sess-ion, sub-side,
sub-sid-y; super-sede; also siege, be-siege, seize, size (1), size (2),
siz-ar. Also (from Gk. €(opar) octa-hedron, tetra-hedron, poly-hedron,
cath-(h)edral ; chair, chaise. Also (from Teut. SET) set, settle (1) ;
settle (2), in some senses; also seat, dis-seat, un-seat, soot; and see
saddle.

_ SITE, a locality, situation, place where a thing is set down or
fixed. (F.—L.) ‘After the site, north or south ;’? Chaucer, On the
Astrolabe, pt. ii. c. 17.—F. site, MF. sit, ‘ Sit, a site, or seat ;’ Cot.
—L. situm, ace. of situs, a site. Perhaps allied to L. situs, pp. of
sinere, to permit, of which an older meaning may have been to put,

place. So Bréal. But see Brugmann, i. §§ 761, 920; where situs,

sb., is compared with Gk. «riows, a foundation, and Skt. kshiti-, an
abode, from kshi, to dwell. The L. ponere (=*po-sinere) is certainly
a derivative of sinere. Der. situ-ate, situ-ation (see below) ; also the
derivatives of ponere, for which see Position. € We frequently
find the odd spelling scite.

.SITH, since. (E.) In Ezek. xxxv. 6. See Since.

. SITHE, the correct spelling of Scythe, q. v.

SITUATH, placed. (L.) In Shak. L. L. L.i. 2. 142.—Late L.
situdtus, pp. of situare, to locate, place; a barbarous word, found
A.D. 1317 (Ducange).=—L. situ-, stem of situs, a site; see Site.
Der. situat-ion, 2 Hen. IV, i. 3..51, from. F. situation, ‘a situation,’
Cot.

SIX, five and one. (E.) ME. six, sixe, P. Plowman, B. v. 431.
AS. six, sy, siex ; Grein, ii. 454.-4-Du. zes ; Icel., Dan., and Swed.
sex; G. sechs; OHG. sehs ; Goth. saihs.--Russ. shest(e) ; W. chwech ;
Gael. and Irish se; L. sex; Gk. €& (for *oe€);. Lithuan. szeszi;
Pers. shash; Palmer’s Dict. col. 382; Skt. skash. Idg. type *sweks.
See Brugmann, ii. § 170. Der. six-fold, six-pence. Also six-teen,
AS. six-tine, six-tyne (see Ten); six-teen-th; six-ty, AS. six-tig
(see Forty); six-ti-eth; six-th, AS. six-ta, whence ME. sixte,
sexte, Gower, C. A. iii. 121, bk. vii. 1082; P. Plowman, B. xiv.
300, now altered to sixth by analogy with four-th, seven-th, eigh-th,


SKATE, SCATE 565.


nin-th, ten-th, just as fif-th is altered from AS. fif-ta. Also (from L:
sex) sex-agenarian, sex-agesima, sex-ennial, sex-tant, sex-tuple.

SIZAR, a scholar of a college in Cambridge, who pays lower fees
than a pensioner or ordinary student. (F.—L.) Spelt sizer in Todd’s
Johnson. ‘There was formerly a considerable difference in the social
rank of a sizar, who once had to perform certain menial offices. At
Oxford the corresponding term was servitor, defined by Phillips as
‘a poor university scholar that attends others for his maintenance.’
Formed from the sb. size. ‘Size is a farthings worth of bread or
drink, which scholars in Cambridge have at the buttery, noted
with the letter S., as in Oxford with the letter Q. for half a
farthing, and Qa. [Quadrans] for a farthing. And whereas they say
in Oxford, to battel in the buttery-book, i.e. to set down on their
names what they take in bread, drink, butter, cheese, &c., in
Cambridge they call it sizing ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. The
word size is also in Minsheu, and is a mere abbreviation of assize,
i.e. quantity or ration of bread, &c. ‘ Assise of bread, i.e. setting
downe the price and quantitie of bread;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627. See
Assize, and Size (1).

SIZE (1), an allowance or ration of food; hence, generally,
magnitude. (F.—L.) ‘To scant my sizes,’ K. Lear, ii. 4. 178; see
Sizar. ‘ Syse of bredde and ale;’ Palsgraye. Size is merely short
for assize, ME. assise, the usual old word for an allowance, or settled
portion of bread, &c., doled out for a particular price or given to a
dependent. We even find it used, at a very early period, almost as
a general word for provisions. ‘ Whan ther comes marchaundise,
With corn, wyn, and steil, othir [or] other assise;’ K. Alisaunder,
7074. Hence size came to mean dimension, magnitude, &e., as at
present ; also bulk, as in Merry Wives, ili.5.12. For the etymology,
see Assize. Der. siz-ar, q.v.

SIZE (2), weak glue, a stiffening gluey substance. (Ital. —L.)
In Minsheu, ed. 1627. ‘ Syse for colours;’ Palsgrave. Hence blood-
sized, rendered sticky with gore; Two Noble Kinsmen, i. 1. 99;
‘o’er-sized with coagulate gore, Hamlet, ii. 2. 484. Cotgrave has:
“assiette & dorer, size to gild with, gold size.’ . It is not a F. word,
but borrowed, like some other painters’ terms, from Italian. Ital.
sisa, ‘a kind of syse or glew that painters vse;” Florio, ed. 1598.
And Ital. sisa is an abbreviation of assisa, ‘size that painters. vse;
also, an assise or manner; also, a liuerie, a guise or fashion, an assise
or session;” id. He also gives assisare, ‘to sise, to sesse, to assise,
to sute well ;’ and assiso, ‘seated, situated.’ Assésa is the verbal sb:
from. assisare, which in its turn is from assiso, pp. of assidere, to
situate. The sense is ‘that which makes the colours lie flat,’ so that,
in Florio’s phrase, they ‘sute well.’ The Ital. assidere is from L.
assidére, to sit at or near.=L. ad, near; and sedére, to sit, cognate
with E, Sit. We speak of ‘making a thing si#,’ which is just the
idea here required. 4 Thus sise (2), size (1), and assize are all,
really, the same word. See Size (1), and Assize.

SJAMBOK, a whip. (Cape Du.—Malay.—Pers.) Modern.
The Cape Du. sjambok seems to have been adopted from Malay
chabok (Port. chabuco). = Pers. chabuk, alert, active; as sb., a horse-
whip. See N. and Q., 9S. iv. 456; Chawbuck in Yule, and Chabouk,
Chawbuck in N. E. D.

SKAIN, SKENE, SKEIN, a dagger, knife. (Irish.) ‘ Skain,
a crooked sword, or scimetar, used formerly by the Irish;° Halli-
well. He cites the expression ‘ Iryshmen, armed. . with dartes and
skaynes” from Hall, Hen. V, an. vi. § 3. ‘Carrying his head-peece, his
skeane, or pistoll;’ Spenser, State of Ireland; Globe ed., p. 631,
col. 2. ‘Skeyne, a knyfe;’ Palsgrave. ‘j. baslard vocatum Iresch
skene;*” (1472), York Wills, iii. 202.—Irish (and Gael.) sgian, a
knife; Olvish scian.4-W. ysgien, a slicer, scimetar ; cf. ysgi, a cutting
off, a parer. B. Apparently from a base *ské; cf. Gk. oxaw, 1
scratch. See Stokes-Fick, p. 309. Der. (possibly) skains-mate, a
companion in arms, comrade, Romeo, ii. 4. 162 ; but see Skein.

SKATE (1), a large flat fish of the ray family. (Scand.) Spelt
scate in Levins, ed. 1570. ME. scate, Prompt. Parv.=Icel. skata, a
skate; Norweg. skata (Aasen) ; Dan. skade. We find also Irish and
Gael. sgat, a skate (from E.). 4 The AS. sceadd is a shad, not a
skate.

SKATE (2), SCATE, a frame of wood (or iron) with a steel
ridge beneath it, for sliding on ice. .(Du.—F.—Low G.) The word
should be skates, with a pl. skateses ; the final s has been mistaken for
the pl. suffix, and so has dropped off, just as in other words ; see Pea,
Sherry, Cherry. Nares quotes the pl. sca/zes in 1695. Spelt
scheets in Evelyn’s. Diary, Dec. 1, 1662; skeates in Pepys’ Diary,
same date. ‘Scate, a sort of pattern, to slide upon ice ;’ Phillips,
ed. 1706, Cotgrave explains OF. eschasses by ‘stilts, or scatches to
goon;’ here scatches is merely another form of skateses; * the point
in which stilts and skates agree is that they are both contrivances
for increasing the length of stride,’ Wedgwood.—Du. schaatsen,
‘skates,’ Sewel; where -en is the pl. suffix, so that the word itself is


566 SKEIN, SKAIN


schaats, as in ‘ schaatsryder, a skates-slider;’ Sewel [misprinted
schaarsryder by an obvious error]. MDnu. schaetsen, ‘skates [with]
which they slide upon the yce in Holland;’? Hexham, ed. 1058. —
OF. eschace (with ce pron. as ¢se), a stilt (12th cent.) ; whence F.
échasse.= Low G. type *skak-ja@ (Latinised as scacia in Ducange), a
shank, leg; Low G. schake, the same. Compare E. skank, which in-
serts the nasal sound x; see Shank, Note the Low G. phrase de
schaken voort teen, to go swiftly, lit. ‘to pull one’s shanks out ;’ and
AS. sceacan, scacan, to shake, to go swiftly, to flee; see Shake,
with which E. shank is allied. As to the sense, the words scatches
and skates merely mean ‘shanks,’ i.e. contrivances for lengthening
the leg. 4 The Dan. skéite, a skate, older form skejte (Kalkar) is
from E.; the Swed. word is skridsko or skid (see Skid).

SKEIN, SKAIN, a knot of thread or silk. (F.—C.?) Gene-
rally defined as ‘a knot of thread or silk,’ where probably ‘ knot’
means a quantity collected together; a skein is a quantity of yarn,
folded and doubled together. ‘ Layde downe a skeyne of threde, And
some a skeyne of yarne;’ Skelton, Elinor Rumming, 310. ME.
skeyne, Prompt. Pary.=OF. escaigne (Godefroy), a skein (1354);
MF. escaigne, ‘a skain;’ Cot. Prob. of Celtic origin; cf. Irish
sgainne, ‘a skein or clue of thread.’ Cf. Gael. sgeinnidh, flax or
hemp thread, small twine. If these are true Celtic words, they
may be allied to Gk. oxoivos, a rope, a cord (Macbain). Der.
(perhaps) skains-mates, companions in winding thread, companions,
Romeo, ii. 4. 162; but see Skain. This solution is advocated in
Todd’s Johnson, which see; and cf. the phrase ‘as thick [intimate]
as inkle-weavers,’ i.e. weavers of tape.

SKELETON, the bony frame-work of an animal. (Gk.) § Skelitons
of ev’ry kinde;’ Davenant, Gondibert, ii. 5. st. 32. See Trench,
Select Glossary. Spelt skeleton, sceleton in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
= Gk. oxederov, a dried body, a mummy; neut. of oxederés, dried
up, parched.= Gk. oéAdew (for oxéA-yew), to dry, dry up, parch.
Der. skeleton-key.

SKELLUM, a cheat. (Du.—G.) ‘A Dutch skelum;’ Coryat’s
Crudities; in Addit. to Nares.=Du. schelm, ‘a rogue, a villaine;’
Hexham.=G. schelm, a rogue; OHG., scelmo, scalmo, a pestilence,
carrion; hence a rogue (as a term of abuse). See Notes to Eng.
Etym., p. 271.

SKEPTIC, the same as Sceptic, q.v.

SKERRY, an insulated rock. (Scand.) In Scott, The Pirate;
song in ch. xii.—_Icel. sker (dat. skeri), a skerry; see Sear (2).

SKETCH, a rough draught of an object, outline. (Du.—Ital. —L.
—Gk.) In Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘To make a sketch ;’ Dryden, Parallel
between Painting and Poetry (R.). Not used much earlier. — Du.
schets, ‘a draught, scheme, model, sketch;’ Sewel. [The E. sketch
is a mere corruption of the Du. word, and stands for skets.] The
same word as G, skizze, a sketch; which was prob. borrowed from
the Dutch, who, as being fond of painting, introduced the term from
the Italian. At any rate, both Du. schets and G. skizze are from Ital.
schizzo, ‘an ingrosement or first rough draught of anything ;’ Florio.
=—L. schedium, an extemporaneous poem, anything hastily made.=
L. schedius, adj., made hastily.=Gk. oxédi0s, sudden, offhand on
the spur of the moment; also near, close to. Cf. Gk. cxeddv, near,
hard by, lit. “holding to.’ These words, like oyé-o1s, habit, state,
oxe-Tt-k6s, retentive, are from the Gk. base cxe-, to hold, appearing
in Gk. cxetv (=cyxé-ev), 2 aorist infin. of éxev, to hold, and in E.
sche-me. SeeScheme. f. Thus scheme and sketch, the meanings
of which are by no means remote, are from the same root, but by
different paths. Der. sketch, verb; sketch-y, sketch-i-ness.

SKEW, oblique, wry. (MDu.) ‘To look skew, or a-skew, to
squint or leer;’ Phillips,ed. 1706. It seems first to have been used
chiefly asa verb. ‘ To skue, or walk skuing,, to waddle, to go sideling
along;’ Phillips. ‘To skewe, linis oculis spectare;’ Levins, ed.
1570. ‘ Our service Neglected and look’d lamely on, and skew’d at;’
Beaum. and Fletcher, Loyal Subject, A. ii. sc. I (Putskie), ‘This
skew’d-eyed carrion ;’ id., Wild-goose Chase, iv. 1 (Mirabel). ME.
skewen, to turn aside, slip away, escape; Morte Arthure, ed. Brock,
1562. Prob. of MDu. origin; not from Icel. skeifr, awry.=MDu.
schouwen, ‘to avoid or to shunne,’ also as Du. schuwen, Hexham;
Low G. schouen, schuwen, to avoid.4-OHG. sciuhen, MHG. schiuhen,
to avoid, get out of the way, G. scheuen, to shun, avoid (whence G.
scheu, shy); derived from the adj. appearing as MHG. schieck,
timid. Thus ME. skewen, to escape, is really the verb corresponding
to the adj. shy; to skew or skue is to shy as a horse, to start aside
from. Cf. WFlem. schui, schu, shy ; schuien, schuen, to avoid. See
further under Shy, Hschew. Der. a-skew, q.v. Also skew-
bald.

SKEWBALD, piebald. (Hybrid; MDu. azdC.) In Halli-
well. It means marked or spotted in askew or irregular manner.
From Skew and Bald, q.v. And cf. pie-bald. @f We find, how-
ever, ME. skewed, piebald (see Stratmann) ; perhaps from, skew, ME.


SKIN


variant of skie, acloud, sky. If this is right, then skew-bald is con-
nected with Sky rather than Skew.

SKEWER, a pin of wood or iron for holding meat together-
(Scand.) In Dryden, tr. of Homer, Iliad, i. 633. Spelt skwer in
1411 ; Nottingham Records, vol. ii. Skewer is a by-form of prov. E.
skiver, a skewer, E.D.D; cf. skiver-wood, dogwood, of which skewers
are made; Halliwell. And skiver is the Northern form of shiver, a
splinter of wood, dimin. of Icel. skifa, Swed. skifva, a slice, a shive ;
see Shiver (2). The form skiver corresponds to Dan. skifer,
Swed. skiffer, a slate, MDan. skever; MDu. scheversteen, ‘a slate or
a slate-stone,’ Hexham; similarly named from its being sliced into
thin flakes. Cf. Dan‘ dial. skivrt, small sticks ; Norw. skivra, to cut
into splinters (Ross). 4 The spelling skiver occurs in W. Dampier,
A New Voyage (1699); vol. ii. pt. 1, p. 31. Doublet, shiver (2).
Der. skewer, verb.

SKID, a contrivance for locking the wheel of a carriage. (Scand.)
Halliwell gives: ‘ skid-pan, the shoe with which the wheel of a car-
riage is locked.’ Ray has: ‘To skid a wheel, rotam sufflaminare,
with an iron hook fastned to the axis to keep it from turning round
upon the descent of a steep hill; Kent.’ The latter sense is merely.
secondary, and refers to a later contrivance; the orig. skid was a
kind of shoe placed under the wheel, and in the first instance made
of wood. [The word skid is merely the Scand. form corresponding
to the ME. schide, a thin piece of wood; see Shide.] —Icel. skid, a
billet of wood; also, a kind of snow-shoe; Norw. skid, a snow-shoe
(Aasen) ; MSwed. sid, a thin flat piece of wood (Ihre) ; Swed. skid,
‘a kind of scate or wooden shoe on which they slide on the ice,”
Widegren.

SKIFF, a small light boat. (F.—Ital.—OHG.) ‘ Olauus fled in
a litle skiffe;’ Hakluyt’s Voyages, vol. i. p. 14. And in Minsheu.
= MF. esquif, ‘a skiffe, or little boat, Cot.—Ital. schifo, ‘a skiffe ;”
Florio. OHG. skif, schif, G. schiff, a ship; cognate with E. Ship,
q.v. Der. skiff, verb, to cross in a skiff, Two Noble Kinsmen, i. 3.
37. Doublet, skip.

SKILL, discernment, discrimination, tact. (Scand.) ME. sii,
gen. in the sense of ‘reason,’ Ancren Riwle, p. 204, 1. 22; shile, id.
p- 306, 1. 17, —Icel. skil, a distinction, discernment ; cf. skilja, to part,
separate, divide, distinguish; Dan. skjel, a separation, boundary,
limit ; cf. skille, to separate ; Swed. skal, reason ; cf. skilja, to separate.
B. From «/SQEL, to separate, divide, orig. to cleave, as appears by
Lithnan. skelti, to cleave. Cf. Swed. skala, to peel. See Shell,
Scale. Der. skil-ful, ME. skilfulle, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Lang-
toft, p. 311, 1. 173 skil-ful-ly, skil-ful-ness ; skil-less, Ormulum, 3715 ;
skill-ed, i.e. endowed with skill, Rich. III, iv. 4.116. Also shill,
verb, in the phr. i¢ skills not =it makes no difference, Tam. Shrew, iii.
2. 134; from Icel. skilja, to separate, which is frequently used im-
personally, with the sense ‘it differs.’

SKILLET, a small pot. (F.—L.) In Othello, i. 3. 273. Spelt
skellet, Skelton, Elinour Rumming, 250. Halliwell explains it as a
small iron or brass pot, with a long handle. = OF. escuellette, ‘a little
dish;’ Cot. Dimin. of OF. escuelle, a dish.=L. scutella, a salver ;
dimin. of scutra, scuta, a tray, dish, platter. Hardly allied to sciitum, a
shield. Doublet, scuttle (1). @@ The Suffolk word skillet, mean-
ing a thin brass perforated implement used for skimming milk (Moor,
Nall), perhaps acquired its peculiar sense from confusion with the
Icel. skilja, to separate; but the sense of ‘dish’ will suffice, as the
orig. skimmer must have been a simple dish. The fancy in Phillips,
that a skillet [except when it means ‘ a bell”] is derived from Late L.
skeletta, a little bell [from Du. schel, a bell], on the ground that
skillets are made of bell-metal, is to be rejected. Othello’s helmet
can hardly have been made of bell-metal, and a skillet is usually of
brass or iron.

SKIM, to clear of scum, to pass lightly over a surface. (Scand.)
‘Skim milk;’ Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1.36. A derivative of scum; the
change of vowel from x to i (y) is precisely what we should expect ;
but we only find a change of this character in the cognate EFries.
schiimen, to skim; and G. schaumen, to skim, from schaum, scum.
Of Scand. origin; cf. Dan. skumme, to skim, from skum, scum;
Swed. skumma mjélk, to skim milk, from skum, scum. The right
form appears in MSwed. skymma, to overshadow, from skumm,
obscurity; which seems to be from the same root as skum, scum.
Note also Dan. dial. skimmed, a thin film on milk; and even Irish
sgem-im, I skim, from sgeim, foam, scum. See Scum. 4 We
find a similar vowel-change in dint, ME. dunt; in jill, derived from
full; in list, verb, from lust, sb. ; in trim, verb, from AS. trum; &c.
Der. skimmer ; skim-milk, i.e. skimmed milk.

SKIMP, to curtail, stint. (Scand.) See E. D. D.; and cf. scrimp,
which may have affected it. It seems to be founded on Icel. skemma,
to shorten; from skamr, short. See Scant. So also Eng. dial.
skimp, to joke, is from NFries. skempe, Icel. skemta, to amuse.

SKIN, the natural covering of the body, hide, bark, rind. (Scand.)


SKINK


ME. skin, Chaucer, C. T. 3809 (A 3811); bere-skin or beres skin, a
beat-skin, id. 2144 (A 2142). Spelt skize, Rel. Ant. ii. 79, col. I.—
Icel. skinn, a skin; Swed. skinn; Dan. skind. . The Icel. skinn
stands for *skinf-, by the assimilation common in that language; so
also the Swed. skinn. Teut. type *skinfJom, neut.; Idg. type
*skéntom. Hence also G. schinden, to skin, flay; OHG. scintan,
scindan, sometimes a strong verb, with pt. t. schant, pp. geschun-
den, Cf. also W. cen, skin, peel, scales; ysgen, dandriff. Der. skin,
verb, Hamlet, iii. 4. 147 ; skin-deep ; skinn-er ; skin-flint, a miser who
would even skin a flint, if possible; skinn-y, Macb. i. 3. 453 shkinn-i-
mess.

SKINK (1), to draw or serve out wine. (Scand.) Obsolete.
Shak. has under-skinker, 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 26. Dryden has skinker,
tr. of Homer, Iliad, i. 803. —Icel. skenkja, to serve drink; cognate
with AS. scencan, The latter verb is fully explained under
Nunchion, q.v.

SKINK (2), a kind of lizard. (Gk.) ‘Th’ Alexandrian skink ;’
Sylvester, tr. of Du Bartas, i, 6 (C.D.).—Gk. oxiyxos, a kind of
lizard ; whence L. scincus (Pliny, viii. 25); written scinke in Holland’s
translation; spelt scinc, scinque in Cotgrave.

SKIP, to leap lightly, pass over quickly. (Scand.) ME. skippen,
Chaucer, C. T. 3259; King Alisaunder, 768; pt. t. skipte, P. Plow-
man, B. xi. 103; scep, skyp, scope, Cursor Mundi, 19080. Of Scand,
origin. Cf. Swed. dial. skopa, to skip, leap (as an animal), dance
(Rietz) ; who cites MSwed. skuppa, skoppa, in the same sense; Norw,
skopa, to skipaway (Ross); MDan. skobe,todance, skip (Kalkar). Icel.
skoppa, to spin like a top, whence skoppara-kringla, a top, North E.
scopperil spinner, a teetotum (Whitby Glossary), named from its
skipping about. And cf. MHG. sciften, to gallop. (The E.: is for
y, mutation of u.) Perhaps MSwed. pp represents mp; cf. Swed.
dial. skimpa, skumpa, to jump about. Der. skip, sb., skipp-ing-rope.

SKIPPER, the master of a merchant-ship. (Du.) ‘In ages
pass’d, as the skipper told me, ther grew a fair forrest in that channel
where the Texel makes now her bed;’ Howell, Famil. Letters,
vol. i. let. 5, dated from Amsterdam, April 1, 1617. Thus Howell
picked up the word in Holland. Found much earlier, spelt skypper ;
Earl of Derby’s Expeditions (1390); Camden Soc., p. 37.—Du.
schipper, ‘a marriner, a shipper, a saylour, a navigatour ;? Hexham.
Formed, with suffix -er (=E. -er) of the agent, from Du. schip,
cognate with E. Ship, q.v. So also Swed: skeppare, from skepp,
a ship (Thre).

SKIRMISH, an irregular fight, contest. (F.—OHG.) Also
spelt scrimmage; and even scaramouch is but the Ital. form of the
ME. sb. ‘This sb. appears as ME. scarmuch, a slight battle,
Chaucer, Troil. ii. 934. Spelt scarmoge, Spenser, F. Q. ii. 6. 34.—
OF. escarmouche, ‘a skirmish, bickering ;’ Cot. B. But the mod.
form of the sb. is due to the ME, verb skirmishen, spelt skirmysshe in
Trevisa, tr. of Higden, iv. 399.—OF. eskermiss-, a stem of eskermir,
to fence, to fight ; whence also the ME. skirmen, to fence or skirmish ;
the pt. t. skirmden occurs very early, in Layamon, 8406. Cf. MF.
escrimer, ‘to fence, or play at fence, also, to lay hard about him ;’
Cot.—OHG. scirman, MHG. schirmen, to defend, fight; especially,
to defend oneself with a shield. —OHG. scirm, schirm, G. schirm, a
shield, screen, shelter, guard, defence. y. It thus appears that the orig.
sense of skirmish is ‘to fight behind cover,’ hence to take advantage
of cover or slight shelter in advancing to fight. 6. Diez and Scheler
show clearly that the F. escarmouche, Ital. scaramuccia, are due to
OHG. skerman, which is a mere variant of scirman. ‘The ending of
Ital. scaramuccia is a mere suffix; we find also Ital. scherm-ugio,
a skirmish, scherm-ita, fencing, schermire, schermare, to fence, schermo,
a defence, arms; also OF. escarm-ie, answering to Ital. scherm-ita.
Der. skirmish-er, Doublets, scrimmage, scaramouch,

SKIRR, the same as Scur, q.y.

SKIRRET, SKERRET, a plant like the water-parsnep. (F.—
Span.—Arab.) ME. skyrwyt; Voc. 567. 31; 580. 38. Also skirwhit.
skirwhite ; Sinonima Bartolomei, ed. Mowat, p. 20, ]. 4; p. 33, 1. 25.
Spelt as if from Icel. skir hvitr, pure white. But this is probably
a popular etymology ; prob. adapted from OF, eschervis (Godefroy) ;
MF, chervis, ‘the root skirret or skirwicke;’ Cot. The OF. eschervis
is from Span. chirivia; from Arab. karawia (Devic); which is also
the origin of our word caraway. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 271.
And see Caraway.

SKIRT, the part of a garment below the waist, edge, border,
margin. (Scand.) This is a doublet of shirt, but restricted to the
sense of the lower part of the shirt or garment. Spelt skort, Hall’s
Satires, b. iv. sat. i. 1. 28. ME. skyrt. ‘ Skyrt of a garment, Trames;’
Prompt. Parv.—Icel. skyrta, a shirt, a kind of kirtle; Swed. skjorta,
MDan. skyrt, Dan. skjorte,a shirt. B. The cognate G. schurz has
the sense of ‘apron;’ and special attention was called to the lower
part of the shirt by the etymological sense, which signifies ‘a short
garment ;’ see Shirt. And see remarks on Kirtle. The general


SKY 567


sense of ‘edge’ comes from that of ‘ lower edge,’ or place where the
garment is cut short. Der. skirt, verb, Milton, P. L. v. 282.

SKIT, a taunt, a lampoon; see Skittish (below).

SKITTISH,, frisking, full of frisks, said of a horse or unsteady
person, fickle. (Scand.) ‘ Unstaid and skittish in all motions else ;’
Tw. Nt. ii. 4.18. ‘Some of theyr skyttyshe condycyons;’ Fabyan’s
Chronicle, an. 1255-6, ed. Ellis, p. 339. ‘Thy skittish youthe ;’
Hoccleve, de Regim. Principum, 590. Formed from the verb éo skit,
a Lowland Sc. word, meaning ‘to flounce, caper like a skittish horse,’
Jamieson. Of Scand. origin. We find nearly related words in Swed.
skutta, to leap, Swed. dial. skutta, skotta, to leap, Swed. dial. skytta,
to go a-hunting, to be idle, skyt#la, to run to and fro; all of which
(as Rietz says) are mere derivatives from Swed. skjuta, to shoot. To
skit is a secondary verb, of Scand. origin, from the verb to shoot ;
and means to be full of shootings or quick darts, to jerk or jump
about; hence the adj. skittish, full of frisks or capers. Cf. ‘If she
skit and recoil,’ i.e. is shy; Chapman, May Day, ii. 3. See further
under Shoot. B. We may also note Swed. skytt, Icel. skyti, skytja,
skytta, Dan. skytte, an archer, marksman (lit. ‘a shooter’), whence
the verb ¢o skit also means ‘to aim at’ or reflect upon a person.
‘Skit, verb, to reflect on;’ E.D.S. Gloss. B.1; a.p. 1781. We
even find MDan. skytte-vers, a jeering verse (Kalkar), This
explains the sb. skit, ‘an oblique taunt,’ Jamieson. Cf. Dan. skotte
til, to cast a sly look at (Larsen) ; AS. on-scyte, an attack, a calumny.
Vigfusson notices E. skit with reference to Icel. skit, skiita, sketing,
a scoff, taunt ; perhaps these also may be referred to the same prolific
Teut. base *skeut-. @ The surname Skeat, ME. skeet, swift, in King
Alisaunder, 5637, Icel. skjdtr, swift, fleet, is likewise from Icel. skjota.
to shoot; and is closely related.

SKITTLES, a game in which wooden pins are knocked down
by a ball. (Scand.) Formerly keels or kayles or kails; see Kails.
Also kettle-pins or skittle-pins. Todd cites: ‘When shall our kittle-pins
return again into the Grecian skyttals?’ Sadler, Rights of the King-
dom, 1649, p. 43. Halliwell gives kettle-pins, skittles. ‘ The Grecian
skyttals’ is an invention, evidently suggested by Gk. oxurdAn, a stick,
staff, from which Sadler probably imagined that skittles was ‘ de-
rived,’ in the old-fashioned way of ‘ deriving’ all English words from
Latin and Greek. As hittle-pins never came from Greek, there is no
reason why it should be expected to ‘return’ to it. B. From
comparison of skittles with kittle-pins, we may infer that the old name
was skittle-pins, i.e. pins to be knocked down by a shittle or projectile.
Skittle is, in fact, a doublet of shuttle, signifying, originally, anything
that could be shot or thrown; thus the ME. schitel meant the bolt
of a door. Cf. ME. schytle, a child’s game, L. sagitella, Prompt.
Pary. ; though there is a doubt whether this refers to skittles or to
shuttle-cock. y- Shuttle is the English, but skittle the Scand. form.
= Dan. skyttel, a shuttel, Swed. dial. skyttel, skéttel, an earthen ball
for a child’s game (Rietz); MDan. skyttel, a shuttle, an earthen or
stone ball to play with; skyttelleg, the game of skittles, skyttelbane,
a skittle-track ; Icel. skutill, an implement shot forth, a harpoon, a
bolt or bar of a door.= Teut. and Icel. skut-, weak grade of the
strong verb skjéta, to shoot, cognate with E. Shoot, q.v. And
see Shuttle. Also see Skittish. It follows that the skztéle
was orig. the ball which was aimed at the pins or ‘ skittle-pins ;’
and the skittle-alley was the course along which the ball ran.

SKUA, a bird, a kind of gull. (Scand.) |‘ Lestris cataractes, the
common skua ;’ Engl. Encycl. s.v. Laride. Shetland skoo:; Faroese
skiir (1604); see Newton, Dict. of Birds; Dan. skwa (Larsen).
Apparently a corruption of Icel. skiifr, a skua; also called skimr,
‘the skua, or brown gull;’ Icel. Dict. Isuppose the reference is to
the colour; cf. Icel. skiimi, shade, dusk; Swed. skum, dusky ;
Norweg. skum, dull, dusky, chiefly used of the weather, but sometimes
of colour. Perhaps allied to Sky.

SKUE, old spelling of Skew, q.v.

SKULK, the same as Sculk, q.v.

SKULL, SCULL, the bony casing of the brain, the head,
cranium. (Scand.) ME. skulle, sculle, Chaucer, C. T. 3933 (A 3935) 3
spelt schulle, Ancren Riwle, p. 296, 1. 4; scolle, Rob. of Glouc. p. 16,
1. 374. Named from its shell-like shape. —Swed. dial. skulle, variant
of skollt, scull; Norw. skulé, scull. From Teut. *skul, weak grade of
*skelan- (pt. t. *skal), to cleave, divide. From the base *skal we
have Swed. hufvud-skalle, the skull, Dan. hjerne-skal, skull. See
further under Scale (2). Der. scull (2), q.v. ; also skull-cap.

SKUNK, a N. American quadruped. (N. American Indian.)
Modern ; imported from N. American. ‘Contracted from the Abenaki
seganku;’ Webster. But this is an incorrect form of segongw; see
N. and Q., 10S. iii. 386. Abenakiisa dialect of the Algonquin race
of N. American Indians, spoken in Lower Canada and Maine.

SKY, the clouds, the heavens. (Scand.) ME. skie, skye, in the
sense of ‘ cloud ;’ Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii. 510. Used in the mod.
general sense, King Alisaunder, 318.—Icel. sky, a cloud; Dan, and


568 SLAB


Swed. sky, a cloud. Allied to AS. scéo, OSax. scio,a cloud ; AS. sciia,
sctiwa, a shade, Grein, ii. 412; Icel. skuggi, shade, shadow. All
from the 4/SQEU, to cover; whence also scu-m, show-er, hide, and
ob-scu-re; Fick, iii, 337. Cf. Skt. sku, to cover; L. ob-scu-rus.
Der. sky-blue, -lark, -light, -rocket, -sail; sky-ward, toward the sky.
Also sky-ey, adj., Meas. for Meas. iii. 1. 9. ;

SLAB (1), a thin slip or flat piece of stone or wood. (F.—Teut.)
Now gen. used of stone; but formerly also of timber. ‘Slab, the
outside plank of a piece of timber, when sawn into boards;’ Ray,
North-Country Words, ed. 1691; also written slap (Halliwell).
Also used of pieces of tin; Ray, Account of Preparing Tin. ‘Saue
slab of thy timber for stable and stie;’ Tusser, Husbandry, sect. 16,
st. 35. (E.D.S.) ME. slab, rare; but we find the expression
“a slab of ire,’ i.e. a piece of iron, in Popular Treatises on Science,
ed. Wright, p. 135,1. 141. Cf. also Prov. E. slappel, a piece, part,
or portion, given as a Sussex word in Ray’s South-Country Words;
also slape, a flag-shaped slate (E. D. D.).. The form slape was prob.
the original one.=OF. esclape, ‘ éclat; de menus esclapes de bois,’
i.e. thin slabs of wood (Godefroy). Hence Low L. sclapa, a shingle
(Ducange). Cf. Proy. esclapo, a piece of cut wood, esclapa-bos, a
wood-cutter, and esclapa, vb., to split wood (Mistral) ; Ital. schiap-
pare, to cleave wood (Florio). Perhaps from the prefix es- (L. ex),
an intensive; and Low G. klappen, to clap, to make an explosive
sound (hence, to cleave noisily) ; cf. G. klaffen, to split. See Korting,
§ 5282. Cf. Helat.

SLAB (2), viscous, slimy. (Scand.) ‘ Make the gruel thick and slab;’
Macb. iv. 1. 32. ‘Slabby, sloppy, dirty;’ Halliwell. From prov.
E. slab, a puddle; whence, probably, Irish slab, slaib, Gael. slaib,
mire, mud left on the strand of a river; Gael. slaibeach, miry. —Icel.
slabb, dirt from sleet and rain; Swed. dial. and Norw. slabb, MDan.
slab, mire (whence slab, slippery). Cf ME. slabben, to wallow;
EFries. slabben, Du. slabben, to lap up ; Swed. dial. slabba, to splash,
to soil. And see Slabber (below).

SLABBER, to slaver, to let the saliva fall from the mouth, to
make wet and dirty. (E.) The forms slabber, slobber, slubber, are
mixed up. Slubber (q.v.) is the Scand. form. Again, we have also
the form slaver; also of Scand. origin; see Slaver. ‘ Her milke-
pan and creame-pot so slabbered and sost’ [dirtied] ; Tusser’s Hus-
bandry, April, sect. 48, st. 20. (E.D.S.) ME. slaberen. ‘Then
come sleuthe al bislabered’=then came Sloth, all be-slabbered ;
P. Plowman, B. v. 392; where another MS. has byslobred. Not
found in AS. A frequentative form, with the usual suffix -er, from

| ME. slabben: ‘hy ine helle slabbeth,’ they wallow in hell; Shore-
ham’s Poems, p. 151; see Slab (above). Cf. MDan. slabre, to
‘slabber ; Swed. dial. slabbra i seg, to eat greedily and carelessly ;
EFries. and Westphal. slabbern, to lap, sup, or lick up; Low G.
slabbern, slubbern, to slabber, lap, sip, frequent. of slabben, to lap; G.
schlabbern, schlabben, to lap, to slabber. Also MDu. slabben, be-
slabben, to slaver; een slabbe, or slab-doeck, a child’s bib, or slavering
clout [where doeck=G, tuch, cloth]; Hexham. Hexham also gives
slabben, ‘ to lappe as dogges doe in drinking, to sup, or to licke;’
with the frequentative slabberen, ‘to sup up hot broath.’ So also prov.
E. slap, to slop; Dan dial. slabbe, slappe, to lap up. Of imitative
origin ; cf. slobber, slubber, slaver.

SLACK, lax, loose. (E.) ME, slak. ‘ With slakke paas’ =with

slow pace; Chaucer, C. T. 2903 (A 2901). AS. sleac, slack, slow,
Grein, ii. 455. ‘Lentus, vel piger, sleac;’ Voc. 170. 1.4-Icel. slakr,
slack ; whence slakna, to slacken, become slack; Swed. and Dan.
slak; Provincial G. schlack, slack (Fliigel); MHG. slach, OHG.
slah. B. All from a Teut. type *slakoz. Allied to Lag and to
Lax. Brugmann, i. § 193. Der. slack-ly, slack-ness. Also slack,
verb, Oth. iv. 3. 88, spelt slacke in Palsgrave; of which slake is
a doublet; see Slake. Also slack-en, properly ‘to become slack,’
though often used in the trans. sense; the ME. form is slekken
(Stratmann). Also slag, q. v., slug, q. v-
SLADE, a dell, glade, valley. (E.) Common in prov. E.; also
in the form slad. ‘My smoother s/ades;’ Drayton, Polyolbion,
Song 13; 1. 28 from end. Gower has the pl. slades; Conf. Amant.
ii. 93; bk. iv. 2727. AS. sled (dat. slade), a strath, a valley.
Westphal. slade, a ravine; Dan. dial. slade, a flat piece of land;
Norw. slade, a slope, sladna, to slope down; Aasen says there is
evidence of a strong verb with the stems “sled, *slad, *s/od, to slope;
parallel to Slide. See Sled.

SLAG, the dross of metal, scoria. (Swed.) ‘ Another furnace
they have, .. . in which they melt the slags, or refuse of the litharge;’
Ray, On the Smelting of Silver (1674); in reprint of Ray’s Glos-
saries, Glos. B. 15, p. 10. (E. D.S.) It also occurs in Stanyhurst,
tr. of Virgil (1582), AEn. iii. 576; ed. Arber, p. 89,1.4. The word
is Swedish. Swed. slagg, dross, dross of metal, slag; jiérnslagg,
dross of iron; slaggvarp, a heap of dross and cinders (Widegren) ;
allied to Norw. slagga, to flow over.


So called from its flowing |


SLANG


over when the metal is fused ; cf. Icel. slagna, to flow over, be spilt;
slag, slagi, wet, dampness, water penetrating walls. Cf. Dan,
slakker, slag (Larsen); Low G. slakke, G. schlacke, scoria. These
suggest a connexion with Slack. @ Not allied to Swed. slag, a
blow. Der, slagg-y.

SLAKE, to slacken, quench, mix with water. (E.) To slake or
slack lime is to put water to it, and so disintegrate or loosen it.
‘Quick-lime, taken as it leaves the kiln, and thrown into a proper
quantity of water, splits with noise, puffs up, produces a large dis-
engagement of vapour, and falls into a thick paste ;’ Weale, Dict.
of Terms in Architecture, &c. Slake is an older spelling than slack
(verb), of which it is a doublet. ME. slaken, to render slack, to
slake. ‘His wrappe for to slake;’ Will. of Palerne, 728; spelt
slakie, Layamon, 23345, later text. AS. sleacian, to grow slack or
remiss ; found in the comp. Gsleacian, A‘lfric’s Homilies, i. 610,
1, 16, ii. 98, 1. 15.— AS. sleac, slack; see Slack. Perhaps affected
by the cognate MDu. slaken, ‘to slack, let slip, soften, become
liquid.’ B. There is also a ME. slekken, to quench, extinguish,
Prompt. Parv. This is from AS. sleccan, Grein, ii. 455, which is a
causal form. Cf. Icel. slékva, to slake; which, however, was orig. a
strong verb, with pp. slokinn; still it is from the same Teut. base
*slak-. Also Swed. slacka, to quench, put out, allay, slack; a causal
form, from slak, slack.

SLAM, to shut with violence and noise. (Scand.) ‘To slam one,
to beat or cuff one strenuously, to push violently; he slamm’d-to
the doors; North;’ Grose’s Provincial Glossary, ed. 1790. — Norweg.
slemba, to smack, bang, bang or slam a door quickly ; also spelt
slemma, slamra; Swed. dial. slémma, to slam, strike or push hastily,
to slam a door (Aasen, Rietz); Icel. slamra, slambra, to slam,
Cf. Swed. slamra, to prate, chatter, jingle ; slammer, a clank, noise.
To slam is to strike smartly, and is related to Slap; see Slap. Of
imitative origin; note prov. E. slam-bang, slap-bang, violently ;
Halliwell.

SLANDER, scandal, calumny, false report, defamation. (F.—
L.—Gk.) A doublet»of scandal, as will appear. ME. sclaundre,
Chaucer, C. T, 8598 (E 722); sclaundre, Wyclif, Matt. xiii. 41; K.
Alisaunder, 757.—OF. esclandre, ‘a slander;’ Cot. (We find the
OF. forms escandele, escandle, escandre (Burguy) ; and lastly, by in-
sertion of J, the form esclandre.) =—L. scandalum ; see Scandal. Der.
slander, verb, ME. sclaundren, Wyclif, Matt. xiii. 21; slander-er ;
slander-ous, from OF. esclandreux (Cot.); slander-ous-ly, Doublet,
scandal.

SLANG, low, vulgar language, a colloquial and familiar mode of
expression. (Scand.) Not in early use. In the Slang Dict., the
earliest known instance is given as follows. ‘Let proper nurses be
assigned, to take care of these babes of grace [young thieves]...
The master who teaches them should be a man well versed in the
cant language commonly called the slang patter, in which they should
by all means excel;’ Jonathan Wild’s Advice to his Successor;
London, J. Scott, 1758. The same Dict. gives: ‘Slang, to cheat,
abuse in foul language; Slang-whanger, a long-winded speaker; also,
out on the slang, to travel with a hawker’s licence; slang, a watch-
chain, a travelling-show.’ [But the existence of this book (of 1758)
is doubted. In 1762, Foote has: ‘ ay, but that’s all slang [pretence],
I suppose ;’ The Orators, A. i. sc. 1.] Probably derived from slang,
2nd grade of the verb to sling, i. e. to throw, cast. This is shown by
Wedgwood, following Aasen. B. We find, for example, Norweg.
sleng, a slinging, also an invention, device, stratagem; also, a little
addition, or burthen of a song, in verse and melody ; eétersleng (lit.
after-slang), a burthen at the end ofa verse of a ballad; slenga, to
dangle (which shows why slang sometimes means a watch-chain);
slengja, to sling, cast, slengja kjeften (lit. to sling the jaw), to use
abusive language, to slang; slengjenamn, a nickname (lit. a slang-
name), also, a name that has no just reason ; slengjeord (lit. a slang-
word), an insulting word or allusion, a new word that has no just
reason, or, as Aasen puts it, fornermelige Ord eller Hentydninger, nye
Ord som ikke have nogen rigtig Grund, ‘The use of slang in the sense
‘to cheat’ reminds us of Icel. slyngr, slunginn, versed in a thing,
cunning. And that all the above Norweg. and Icel. words are deri-


vatives from sling is quite clear; see Sling. I see no objection to \


this explanation. Note also Swed. slanger, gossip. @[ Taylor,
in his Words and Places, gives, without any proof or reference,
the following explanation. ‘A slang is a narrow strip of
waste land by the road-side, such as those which are chosen
by the gipsies for their encampments. [This is amplified from
Halliwell, who merely says: ‘Slang, a narrow piece of land,
sometimes called slanket.’]| To be out on the slang, in the lingo used
by thieves and gipsies, means to travel about the country as a hawker,
encamping by night on the roadside slangs. [Amplified from the
Slang Dict., which says not a word about these night-encampments,
A travelling-show was also called a slang. It is easy to see how the


SLANT


term slang was transferred to the language spoken by hawkers and
itinerant showmen.’ To this I take exception; it is not ‘easy to
see.’ On the other hand, it is likely that a slang (from the verb sling,
to cast) may have meant ‘a cast’ or ‘a pitch ;’ for both cast and pitch
are used to mean a camping-place, or a place where a travelling-show
is exhibited; and, indeed, ‘a narrow slip of ground’ is also called
a slinget or slanget ; E. D. D.

SLANT, to slope. (Scand.) ‘ Fortune beginneth so to slant,’ i. e.
fail; Libell of E. Policie, 1.757. We also have slant, adj. sloping ;
the verb should rather take the form ¢o slent. Lowland Sc. sclent,
sklent, sklint, to give a slanting direction, to dart askance (in relation
to the eyes), to pass obliquely, to render sloping (Jamieson). ME.
slenten, to slope, to glide; ‘it [a blow] slented doune to the erthe,’
Malory, Morte Arthure, bk. xvii. c. 1; leaf345. ‘A fote ynto the
erthe hyt sclente ;? MS. Camb. Ff. ii. 38, fol. 113; cited in Halliwell,
p. 711. [The insertion of c, as in sclenten, occurs again in ME.
sclendre for mod. E. slender.)—Norw. slenta, to fall aside, or fall
slanting (Ross); Swed. dial. slenta, slénta, lit. ‘to cause to slide ;’
causal form of the strong verb slinta (pt. t. slant, pp. sluntit), to slide,
slip with the foot (Rietz). Cf. MSwed. slinta, to slip with the foot
(Ihre) ; Swed. slinta, to slip, miss one’s step, to glance (as a chisel
on a stone), to slip or glance (as a knife) ; Widegren. Also MDan.
slanten, slack ; slente, to slip aside, be slack ; Swed. slutta ( =slunta),
to slant, slope. B. The E. adj. slant, sloping, answers to the Swed.
dial. slant, adj. slippery, esp. used of a path; the connexion between
sloping and slippery, in this case, is obvious. Der. slant-ly, slant-
wise; also a-slant, q. Vv.

SLAP, to smack, to strike with the flat open hand. (E.) Rare in
literature; but we find ME. s/appe, sb., a smart blow; Palladius on
Husbandry, b. iv. 1. 763. It seems to be an E. word; it occurs
both in Low and High German.+Low G. slapp, the sound of a blow,
a sounding box on the ears. ‘Slapp! sloog ik em an de snute, E hit
him on the snout, slap!’ Bremen Worterbuch; G. schlapp, interj.,
slap! schlappe, sb.,aslap; schlappen, verb, toslap. [Quite a different
word from Swed. slapp, lax, loose, Dan. slap, slack, &c.] B. An
imitative word, to express the sound of a blow; allied to slam; cf.
prov. E, slam-bang, slap-bang, violently (Halliwell). Der. slap, sb.,
ME. slappe, as above ; slap, adv., slap-bang, violently.

SLASH, to cut with a violent sweep, cut at random or violently.
(F.—Teut.) ME. slashen; rare. In Wyclif; 3 Kings, v. 18, the
L. dolauérunt is translated by han ouerscorchide in the earlier text,
with the various reading haz slascht; the later text has hewiden.
‘ Hewing and slashing ;’ Spenser, F. Q.ii. 9. 15. ‘Here’s snip, and
nip, and cut, and slish, and slash;’ Tam. Shrew, iv. 3. 90. ‘ But
presently slash off his traitorous head ;”’ Green, Alphonsus, Act ii;
ed. Dyce, vol. ii. p. 23. ‘Slash, a cut or gash, Vorksh. ;” Halliwell,
Slashed sleeves are sleeves with gashes in them, as is well known,
OF, esclachier, to break in pieces (Godefroy).—OF. es- (<L. ex),
very; and Teut, type *klakjan, MHG. klecken, to break with a
‘clack ;’ cf. F. claque,a clack, from MHG. klac, a clack, sudden
noise. See Korting, § 5280. B. Perhaps confused with OF.
escleschier, esclicier, to slice; see Slice. @ The Swed. slaska, to
splash, accounts only for prov. E. slashy, wet, Lowland Sc. slash,
to work in wet, slatch, to dabble in mire, sclatch, to bedaub; which
are words unrelated to the present one, but allied to prov. E. slosh
and slush. Der. slash, sb. Slash, to whip, is perhaps an intensive
form of Lash, q. v.

SLAT, a long, narrow strip of wood, a lath. (F.—Teut.) The
same word as Slate (below). Cf. prov. E. slat, a slate ; ME. slat,
a slate, Prompt. Paryv.

SLATE (1),a well-known stonethat is easily split,a piece of such
stone. (F.—Teut.) ME. slat, usually sclat, Wyclif, Luke, v. 19.


So called from its fissile nature. —OF. esclat, ‘a shiver, splinter, or,


little piece of wood broken off with violence; also a small thin lath
or shingle,’ Cot. [A shingle is a sort of wooden tile.] = OF. esclater ;
whence s’esclater, ‘to split, burst, shiver into splinters;’ Cot. This
answers to a Late L. type *ex-clapitare, to break with a clap; from
L. ex, very, and Low G. klapp, a clap, klappen, to clap. KOrting,
§ 5282. See Slab (1). The OF. esclat=mod. F. éclat; hence
éclat is the same word. Der. slate-pencil, slat-er, slat-ing, slat-y.
Doublets, éclat, slat.
. SLATE (2), to set on a dog, to bait, damage, abuse. (E.) ‘ Of
bole slating, bull-baiting; King Alisaunder, 200. AS. sletan, to
cause to rend.=— AS. slat, 2nd grade of slitan, to slit, tear; see Slit.
SLATTERN, a sluttish, untidy woman. (Scand.) It is used
both by Butler and Dryden; Todd’s Johnson (no reference). The
final -z is difficult to account for; it is either a mere addition, as in
bitter-n, or slattern is short for slatierin’ =slattering ; unless it was
borrowed directly from MDan. slatten, untidy, dirty; slatten-
spad, a slattern (Kalkar). Ray, in his North-Country Words,
has: ‘Dawgos, or. Dawkin, a dirty slatternly woman.’ Kersey


SLEAZY 569


(1721) has: Slattern, a slattering woman.’ Grose’s Supp. (1790)
has slatterkin. The word is formed from the verb #o slatter, to
waste, use wastefully, be untidy. ‘ Slatter, to waste; or rather,
perhaps, not to make a proper and due use of anything ; thus they
say, take care, or you'll slatter it all away; also, to be negligent and
slovenly; * Halliwell. ‘Slatter, to wash in a careless way, throwing
the water about ;’ Forby. Slatter is the frequentative (with the
usual suffix -er) of prov. E. slat, to splash, to dash; cf. Icel, sletta, to
slap, dab (liquids). Perhaps from s/a¢t-, as seen in Norw. sletta, str.
verb (pt. t. slatz), to dangle, to hang loose (as clothes do) ; also, to
be idle (Aasen) ; by-form of s/enta, to slip, fall aside; see Slant.
Allied words are Dan. slat, a slop ; slat, slatten, slattet, loose, flabby ;
slattes, to become slack ; slatte, a slattern; Low G. slatje, a slattern.
Also Icel. slattari, a tramp. Der. slatiern-ly. = Distinct from
slut, but perhaps allied to it.

SLAUGHTER, a slaying, carnage, butchery. (Scand.) ME.
slaghter, Pricke of Conscience, 3367; also slautir, spelt slawtyr in
Prompt. Parv. The word is strictly Scand., from Icel. s/atr, a slaugh-
tering, butcher’s meat, whence slatra, verb, to slaughter cattle. See
Noreen, § 224. If the E. word had been uninfluenced by the Icel.
word, it would have taken the form slaght or slaught; in fact, the
commonest forms in ME. are sla3t, Rob. of Glouc. p. 56, 1. 1286;
slawhte, Gower, C. A. i. 348; directly from AS. sleaht, Grein, ii. 455.
B. The AS. sleaht is cognate with Du. and Swed. slagt, G. schlacht.
Teut. types *slah-toz, m., *slah-ta, f., a slaying (Fick, ili. 358); the
Icel. slatr is a neut. sb., closely related, with the same sense. yy. All
from the base SLAH, whence E. slay; see Slay. Der. slaughter,
verb, K. John, iii. 1. 302; slaughter-man, -house ; slaughter-ous, Macb.
v. 5.14; slaughter-er.

SLAVE, a serf, one in bondage. (F.—L.—Gk.—Slavonic.) In
Chaucer, Troil. iii. 391. In A Deuise of a Maske for the right
honourable Viscount Mountacute, Gascoigne introduces the words
slaue and slaueries; see Works, ed. Hazlitt, i. 82, 1]. 15, 20; i. 81,
1. 13.—F. esclave, ‘a slave;’ Cot.—Late L. sclavus, a Slavonian
captive, a slave.— Late Gk. S«AdBos, “EcxAaBjvos, a Slavonian, one
of Slavonic race captured and made a bondman. ‘ From the Euxine
to the Adriatic, in the state of captives or subjects . . . they [the
Slavonians] overspread the land ; and the national appellation of the
Slaves has been degraded by chance or malice from the signification
of glory to that of servitude;’ Gibbon, Decline of the Roman
Empire, c. 55. . Gibbon here supposes slave to be allied to Russ.
slava, glory, fame; but the true origin of Slavonian is unknown;
Miklosich, p. 308. Der. slave, verb, K. Lear, iv. I. 713 slav-er,
slav-er-y, slav-ish, -ly, -ness; slave-trade; also en-slave.

SLAVER, to slabber. (Scand.) ‘ His mouthe slavers;’ Pricke
of Conscience, 784. Slaveryt [for slaveryth] is used to translate F.
bave; Walter de Bibbesworth, l. 12, in Wright’s Vocab. i. 143.—Icel.
slafra, to slaver ; cognate with Low G. slabbern, to slaver, slabber;
see Slabber. Der. slaver, sb., from Icel. slafr (also slefa), sb.;
slaver-er. Doublet, slabber.

SLAY (1), to kill. (E.) Orig. to strike, smite. ME. sleez, slee,
Chaucer, C. T. 663 (A 661) ; pt. t. slouk, slou (slew in Tyrwhitt), id.
989 (A 987); pp. slain, id.994 (Agg2). AS. sléan (contracted form
of *slahan), to smite, slay; pt. t. slok, slog, pl. slogon; pp. slegen ;
Grein, ii. 455, 456.-4-Du. slaan, pt. t. sloeg, pp. geslagen; Icel. sla;
Dan. slaae; Swed. sla; Goth. slahan; G. schlagen; OHG. slahan.
B. All from Teut. type *slah-an-, to smite; Fick, iii. 358. Cf.
Olrish ‘slig-im, I strike. Der. slay-er, ME, sle-er, Chaucer, C. T.
2007 (A 2005); also slaugh-t-er,q.v.; slay (2), q..v. 3 sledge-hammer,


Ven a
SLAY (2), SLEY, a weaver’sreed. (E.) ‘ Slay, an instrument
belonging to a weaver’s loom that has teeth like a comb;’ Phillips.
‘ Slay, a wevers tole;’ Palsgrave. = AS. sl#@; ‘Pe([c]tica, sl#;” Voc.
262. 21 ; also slege, Voc. 188. 5; also (in the 8th century) ‘ Pectica, ~
slahae, id. 39. 19. So called from its striking or pressing the web
tightly together.— AS. *slak-, base of sléan, to strike, smite; see
Slay (1). ‘Percusso feriunt insecti pectine dentes;” Ovid, Metam.
vi. 58. Cf. Icel. sl@, a bar, bolt. See Camb. Phil. Trans. 1899,
p- 139 (231). ;

SLEAVE, SLEAVE-SILK, soft floss silk. (Scand.—G.)
‘Ravell’d sleave,’ i.e. tangled loose silk, Macb. ii. 2. 37. See-Nares
and Halliwell. — Dan. dial. sléve, a knot, twist, tangle (in thread); Dan.
dial. sléfgarn, yarn that runs into knots; Dan. sldife, a bow, a knot;
EFries. sléve, sléfe, a slip-knot.—G. (dial.) schldéufe, a slip-knot ;
with the same sense as G. schleife (Kluge). Cf. OHG. sloufan,
causal of sliofan, to slip. See Slip.

SLEAZY, poor, light, said of a material. (Silesia.) ‘Such sleazy
stuff ;? Howell’s Letters, vol, i. let. 1.. ‘ Sleazie Holland, common
people take to be all forrain linnen, which is sleight [slight] or ill
wrought ; whenas that only is properly Slesia or Silesia linnen cloth,
which is made in, and comes from the Countrey Silesia in Germany ;’


570 SLED, SLEDGE, SLEIGH


Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1681. In fact, it is called Silesia still; see
Silesia in C. D., where the name is said to be used in the United
States; but it is used in England also.

SLED, SLEDGE, SLEIGH, a carriage made for sliding over
snow orice. (Du.) ME. slede, Prompt. Parv. PI. sledis, Wyclif,
1 Chron. xx. 3; spelt sleddis in the later text. —MDnu. sledde, a sledge;
Du. slede. We also find Icel. sledi, Swed. slade, Dan. slede. These
forms are evidently from a Teut. root *sled, whence would be formed
the 2nd grade *slad, and a weak grade *slud, giving the strong verb
*sledan-, pt. t. *slad, pp. *sludanoz ; quite distinct from E. slide, though
a parallel formation and having a similar sense. Franck connects Du.
slede with E. slide, without explaining the vowel. But it is obvious
that the Norw. slodde, a kind of rude sledge (Larsen), cannot be re-
lated to the form slide.. Cf. Irish and Gael. slaod, a sledge, from slaod,
to slide. . The different spellings may bethusexplained. 1. The
right form is sled. 2. The form sledge (perhaps from the pl. sleds)
appears to be due to confusion with the commoner word sledge in
the sense of ‘hammer;’ see Sledge-hammer. 3. The form sleigh
is due to contraction by the loss of d, Thus the Norwegian and
Low G. have both slede and slee; so also Du. sleekoets, a sleigh-
coach, stands for sledekoets. The final gh is unmeaning.

SLEDGE-HAMMER, a mallet or heavy hammer. (E.)
Properly sledge ; sledge-hammer means ‘hammer-hammer,’ and shows
reduplication. Sledge represents ME. slegge, Romans of Partenay,
3000; Trevisa, tr.of Higden, vi. 199. AS. slecg (dat. slecge), a heavy
hammer; Voc. 448. 1. Lit. ‘a smiter;’ for *slag-ja, fem.; from
slag-, for slah-, base of AS. sléan, to smite, slay ; see Slay (1).4Du.
slegge, slei, a mallet; Swed. sliégga, a sledge; Icel.sleggja. Cf. also
G. schligel, Du. slegel,a mallet; from the same verb. We even find
G. schlag-hammer, with hammer suffixed, as in English.

SLEEK, SLICK, smooth, glossy, soft. (Scand.) ‘I slecke, I make
paper smothe with a sleke-stone, Je fais glissant ;’ Palsgrave. ‘ And
if the cattes skyn be slyk and gay;’ Chaucer, C. T. (D 351), Elles-
mere MS.; other readings slike, sclyke. Tyrwhitt prints sleke, l. 5933.
Spelt slike, adv., smoothly, Havelok, 1157. There is no AS. slic
(see Napier); only AS. slician, to make smooth. —Icel. slikr, sleek,
smooth ; whence s/iki-steinn, a fine whetstone (for polishing). Cf.
MDu. sleyck, ‘plaine, or even;’ Hexham. f. The Du. s/ijk, Low G.
slikk, G. schlick, grease, slime, mud, are closely related words; so
also is the strong verb which appears in Low G. sliken (pt. t. sleek,
pp. sleken), G. schleichen (pt. t. schlich, pp. geschlichen), OHG. slihhan,
to slink, crawl, sneak, move slowly (as if through mire) ; see Slink.
The Teut. type of the verb is *sle:kan-, pt. t. *slaik, pp. *slikanoz.
The orig. sense of sleek is ‘greasy,’ like soft mud. In exactly the
same way, from the base *s/ip, we have Icel. sleipr, slippery (North
E. slape), and slipa, to make smooth, to whet, Du. slijpen, to polish,
G. schleifen, to glide, to whet, polish.

SLEEP, to slumber, repose. (E.) ME. slepen, Chaucer, C. T. Io.
Properly a strong verb, with pt. t. slép, which has become slep in
Proy. E., and occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 98. AS. sl&€pan, slépan, pt.t.
slép; Grein, ii. 455.4-Du. slapen; Goth. slépan, pt. t. sai-slép (with
reduplication); G. schlafen; OHG. slafan. B. In connexion with
these is the sb. which appears as E. sleep, AS. sl@p, Du. slaap, Goth.
sléps, G. schlaf, OHG. slaf; of which the orig. sense is drowsiness,
numbness, lethargy; as shown more clearly by the related adjective
in Low G. slapp, G. schlaff’, lax, loose, unbent, remiss, flabby. Cf.
Russ. slabuii, weak, feeble, faint, slack, loose; also L. labi, to glide;
labare, to totter. The Teut. type of the sb. is *s/#@poz, m.; and of
the verb, *s/@pan-. Brugmann, i. §§ 200, 567. Der. a-sleep, q.v.;
sleep-er, sleep-less, sleep-less-ly, sleep-less-ness; sleep-walk-er, sleep-
walk-ing ; sleep-y, sleep-i-ly, -ness.

SLEEPER, a block of wood on which rails rest. (E.) From
the verb above, Cf. F. dormant, a sleeper, from dormir, to sleep.
And see Coles.

SLEET, rain mingled with snow or hail. (E.) ME. sleet, Chaucer,
C. T. 11562 (F 1250). The word is English; answering to OMerc.
*sléte, AS. *sliete, *slyte, not found. Cf. EFries. slaite, hail; Low G.
sloten, pl., hailstones (Liibben) ; G. schlosse, hailstone. The E. word
would result regularly from the Teut. type *slautja, orig. sense un-
known. Cf. Norw. slitr, sleet (Ross); from the related Teut. base
*sliit- (appearing in the Du. sluiten, to close, shut; so that the orig.
sense may have been ‘ blinding,’ or closing the eyes).

SLEEVE, part of a garment, covering the arm. (E.) ME. sleeve,
sleue (with *w=v); Chaucer, C. T. 193. OMerc. slef; AS. slyf (for
earlier slief). ‘On his twa sléfan,’ in his two sleeves; Blickling
Hom., p. 181, 17. ‘On his twam slyfum’=in his two sleeves;
fElfric’s Homilies, i. 376.  Sléf-léas, sleeveless; Voc. 151. 35.
‘Manica, slyf;’ id. 328. 13; pl. slyfa, id. 125. 5. We also find the
verb sléfan, to put on, to clothe; Life of St. Guthlac, c. 16. The
long e (@) results from a mutation of AS. éa=Teut. au, pointing back
to a Teut. type *slaudja, f., from Teut. root *sleub-, variant of *sleup-,


SLIM


whence MHG. sloufe, a cover, allied to MHG. sloufen, to let slip, to
cover. Cf. Goth. sliupan (pt. t. slaup), to slip, creep into. It is.
thus allied to slip; from the slipping off and on of the sleeve, in
dressing and undressing; compare the history of Smock. See
Slip, and Slop (2).4-MDnu. sloove, ‘a vaile, ora skinne ; the turning
up of anything ;’ whence s/ooven, ‘to turne up ones sleeves, to cover
ones head;” Hexham. Also MDu. sleve, ‘asleeve,’ id.; G. schlaube,
a husk, shell (Fliigel). Der. sleeve-less, AS. sléfléas, as above..
Horne Tooke explains a sleeveless errand (Troil. v. 4. 9) as meaning”
‘without a cover or pretence,’ which is hardly intelligible ; I suspect
it to mean simply ‘imperfect,’ hence ‘ poor,’ like a garment without
sleeves; cf. AS. sléfléas, said of a garment. We find: ‘slevelesse
wordes,’ Usk, Test. of Love, ii. 8. 77; ‘sleeveless rhymes,’ Hall,.
Sat. iv. I. 34; ‘a sleveles reson,’ Rel. Antiq. i. 83; ‘ any. sleeuelesse
excuse ;’ Lyly’s Euphues, p.114. In each instance it means ‘imper-
fect, poor.’

SLEIGH, the same as Sled, q.v. Modern; Du. slee, for slede..
The gh is unmeaning. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 273.

SLEIGHT, cunning, dexterity. (Scand.) ME. sleighte, Chaucer,.
C. T. 606 (A 604) ; sleizte, sleithe, P. Plowman, C. xxii. 98; sleizpe,.
Will. of Palerne, 2151; slehJe, Layamon, 17212 (later text, where
the first text has liste, the E. word), = Icel. slegd (for slegd), slyness,,
cunning. Formed, with suffix -d, from slegr (for slegr), sly ; see


Sly. Swed. slégd, mechanical art, dexterity (which is one sense of


E. sleight); from slog, handy, dexterous, expert; Widegren..
B. Thus sleight (formerly sleighth) is equivalent to sly-th, i.e. slyness..
Der. sleight-of-hand. See Sloid.

SLENDER, thin, narrow, slight, feeble. (F.—-OLow G.) ME.
slendre, Chaucer, C. T. 589 (A 587), Richard Cuer de Lion, 3530. —
OF. esclendre, ‘ sklendre,’ Palsgrave, p. 323.—MDu. slinder, ‘slender,
or thinne;’ Hexham. The same word is also used as.a sb., mean-
ing ‘a water-snake ;’ whilst slinderen or slidderen means ‘to dragge
or to traine.’ Allied to G, schlender, the train of a gown, an easy
lounging walk ; schlendern, to saunter, loiter ; also to Low G. slender,
a long, easy, trailing gown, slizdern, to slide on the ice, as children
do in sport. B. Prob. nasalised derivatives from the base of the
verb zo slide; see Slide. But to some extent confused with Du.
slenteren, to saunter along, and Swed. slinta, to slip, glance; see
Slant and Slim. Der. slender-ly, -ness.

SLEUTH-HOUND. Explained under Slot (2).

SLICE, a thin, broad piece. (F.—OHG.) The sb. slice seems to
be older than the verb. ME. slice, sclice, a thin piece, shiver, splinter.
‘ They braken speres to sclyces;’ King Alisaunder, 3833. —OF. esclice,
a shiver, splinter, broken piece of wood; from the verb esclicier, to
slit, split, break (Godefroy). = OHG. *slizjan, slizzen, related to slizan,
to slit; cognate with E. Slit, q.v. Der. slice, verb; ‘sliced into
pieces,’ Chapman, tr. of Homer’s Iliad, b. xxii. 1. 298; slic-er.

SLICK, the same as Sleek, q. v.

SLIDE, to glide, slip along, fall. (E.) ME. sliden, slyden,,
Chaucer, C. T. 7958 (E 82); pt. t. slood, Wyclif, Lament. iii. 53,
later text; pp. sliden, spelt slyden, ibid., earlier text. AS. slidan, pt. t.
slid, pp. sliden; only found in compounds. The pt. t. e¢-slad is in
fElfric’s Homilies, ii. 512, 1, 10; the pp. a-sliden in the same, i. 492,
l. 11. From the Teut. base SLEID, to slide (Fick, iii. 359) ; whence
also AS. slide, a slip, slidor, slippery, Icel. slidrar, fem. pl., a.
scabbard (into which a sword slides); G. schlitten, a sledge,
schlittschuh, a skate (lit. slide-shoe) ; MDnu. slinder, a water-snake,
slinderen, slidderen, ‘to dragge or to traine, Hexham; &c. See
Slender. . Further related to Irish and Gael. slaod, to trail,
Lithuan. siidus, slippery. Der. slide, sb., slid-er; also sled, sledge,
or sleigh (under Sled); also slender, q. v.

SLIGHT, trifling, small, weak, slender. (OLow G.) ME. sli3t,
sly3t. ‘So smope, so smal, so seme s/y3¢,’ said of a fair young girl ;.
Allit. Poems, A. 190. ‘The orig. sense is even, flat, as a thing
made smooth, = MDu. s/ich?, ‘ even, or plaine ;’ slecht, ‘ slight, simple,
single, vile, or of little account ;’ slecht ende recht, ‘ simple and right,
without deceit or guile;’ Hexham. Thus the successive senses are
flat or even, smooth, simple, guileless, vile ; by a depreciation similar
to that which changed the sense of silly from that of ‘guileless” to
that of ‘half-witted.’ The verb ¢o slight was actually once used in
the sense of ‘ to make smooth ;’ thus Hexham explains MDu. slichten
by ‘to slight, to make even or plaine.’4+OLow G. slig, even, smooth,
simple, silly, poor, bad; Icel. s/étr, flat, smooth, slight, trivial,
common; Dan. set, flat, level, bad; Swed. s/dt, smooth, level, plain,
wretched, worthless, slight; Goth. s/aihts, smooth; Luke, tly Grakes
schlecht, bad; OHG. sleht, smooth; G. schlicht, smooth, sleek, plain,
homely, B. All from Teut. type *sleh-toz, smooth. Of doubtful
sted Der. slight-ly, slight-ness; slight, verb, to consider as worth-

ess. ;

SLIM, weak, slender, thin, slight. (Du.) Not in early use,
Noticed in Skinner’s Dict., ed. 1671, as being in common use in


Pe


SLIME


Lincolnshire. Halliwell has: ‘Slim, distorted or worthless, sly,
cunning, crafty, slender, thin, slight;” also slam, tall and lean, the
slope of a hill. The orig. sense was ‘lax’ or ‘bending,’ hence
‘oblique,’ or ‘transverse;’ then sly, crafty, slight, slender (in the
metaphorical sense of unsubstantial) ; and hence slender or slight in
the common sense of those words. Thus Barrow, On the Pope’s
Supremacy, says: ‘that was a slim [slight, weak] excuse ;’ Todd.
Perhaps the earliest instance in which it approaches the modern
sense is: ‘A thin slim-gutted fox made a hard shift to wriggle his
body into a henroost ;’ L’Estrange [in Todd]. Perhaps the use of
the word has been influenced by confusion with the (unrelated) word
slender, which sounds somewhat like it. ‘Slim, naughty, crafty,
Lincolnsh.; also, slender;’ Bailey, vol. i. ed. 1735.—MDu. slim,
“awry, or byas-wise; craftie,’, Hexham; [Dan. and Swed. slem, bad,
vile, worthless; from German]; G. schlimm, bad, evil, sad, unwell,
arch, cunning. Der. slim-ness.

SLIME, any glutinous substance, viscous mire, mucus, (E.) ME.
slime, slyme, or slim (with long) ; Gower, C. A. iii. 96 ; bk. vii. 338;
spelt slim, Ancren Riwle, p. 276, 1. 18. AS. slim; as a various
reading in Ps, Ixviii. 2 (Spelman).4Du. slijm, phlegm, slime; Icel.
slim ; Swed. slem; Dan. slitm, mucus; G. schleim. Cf. L. lima, a file;
limare, to file smooth; and Jimus, mud. Brugmann, i. § 877.
Allied to Lime (1) and Loam. Der. slim-y, slim-i-ness.

SLING, to fling, cast with a jerk, let swing. (Scand.) ME. slingen;
pt. t. slang, Shoreham’s Poems, ed. Wright, p. 132, 1. 2; pp. slongen ;
Sir Percival, 672, in the Thornton Romances, ed. Halliwell. — Icel.
slyngva, slongva, pt. t. sling, slaung, pp. slunginn, to sling, fling,
throw; MDan. slinge, to sling, cast, twist; Swed. dial. slinga (pt. t.
slang), to sling. Cf. Dan. slynge, weak verb; Swed. slunga, weak
verb.4G. schlingen, pt. t. schlang, pp. geschlungen, to wind, twist,
entwine, sling. Teut. type *slengwan-; pt. t. *slang. Allied, for-
mally, to Lith. slinkti, to creep. Brugmann, i. § 424 (4). @ AS.
slingan (rare), to creep, seems to bea variant of slixcan (below). Der.
sling, sb., King Alisaunder, 1191}; sling-er. Also slang, q.v.

SLINK, to sneak, crawl away. (E.) ‘That som of 3ew shall be
ti3t feyn to sclynk awey and hyde;’ Tale of Beryn, 3334. AS.
slincan, Gen. vi. 7. A nasalised form of an AS. *slican, to creep,
not found, but cognate with the strong Low G. verb silken (pt. t.
sleek, pp.sleken) and the G. schleichen (pt. t. schlich, pp. geschlichen), to
slink, crawl, creep, move slowly; see Sleek: Cf. Swed. dial. slinka
(pt. t. slank), to hang loose, toslip. B. The AS. slincan was a strong
verb ; we still use s/unk as the past tense ; see Titus Andron. iv. I. 63.
Allied to Skt. lag, to limp, L. languére, to be languid. Perhaps
allied to Sling. ;

SLIP, to creep or glide along, to slink, move out of place, escape;
also, to cause to slide, omit, let loose. (E.) We have confused the
strong (intransitive) and weak (transitive) forms; or rather, we have
preserved only the weak verb, with pt. t. slipped, pp. slipped or slipt.
The strong verb would have become *slipe, pt. t. *slope, pp. *slippen,
long disused ; but Gower has him slipeth (used reflexively), riming
with wipeth, C. A. ii 347; bk. v. 6530. Gower also has he slipte
(wrongly used intransitively), from the weak verb slippen; C. A,
ii. 72; bk. iv. 2109; the pp. slipped (correctly used) is in Sir Gawayn
and the Grene Knight, 244. ME. slippen, transitive weak verb,
derived from an AS. strong verb *slipan (not found; pt. t. *slap,
pp. *slipen), to slip, glide. The AS. adj. sliper, slippery, is from
the weak grade of the pp.; it occurs in A‘lfric’s Homilies, ii. 92,
1.16. [It must further be remarked that there is another form of
the verb, with a different root-vowel, occurring as AS. slupan (pt. t.
sléap, pp. slopen); Grein, ii. 457.|4-Du. slippen (weak), to slip,
escape; Dan. slippe (pt. t. slap), to let go, also to escape; Swed.
slippa (weak), to get rid of, also to escape; OHG. slipfan, MHG.
slipfen, to glide away ; a weak verb, from OHG. slifan, G. schleifen,
to slide, glance, also to grind, whet, polish (i.e. make slippery or
smooth). In the last sense, to polish, we find also Du. slijpen,
Swed. slipa, Dan. slibe, Icel. slipa ; the forms require careful arrange-
ment. B. All these are from a Teut. base *sleip-, to slip, glide.
But .the usual form of the base is *slewp; whence Goth. slixpan
(pt. t. slaup, pp. slupans), to slip or creep into, 2 Tim. iii. 6; AS.
slipan, as above; Du. sluipen, to sneak; G. schlupfen, to slip, glide.
The base *sleup corresponds to an Idg. base SLEUB, whence L.


lab-ricus, slippery ; see Lubricate. Cf. Brugmann, i. §§ 553, 563. .


Der. slip, sb. ; slip-knot, slip-shod ; also slipp-er, a loose shoe easily
slipped on, K. John, iv. 2. 197, called in AS. slype-scok, a slip-shoe ;
Voc. 277. 29. Also slipp-er-y, adj., formed by adding -y (=AS,
-ig) to ME. sliper (AS. sliper), slippery, which occurs, spelt slipper,
as late as in Shak. Oth. ii. 1. 246, and Spenser, Shep. Kal., Nov.
153; slipper-i-ness. Also slope, q. V., sleeve, q. V., slops, q. V.

SLIT, to split, tear, rend, cut into strips. (E.) Just as we make
slip do duty for two forms slip and slipe (see Slip), so we use sli¢ in
place of both slit and slite. ME. slitten, weak verb, Chaucer, C. T.


SLOPE 571


14402 (B 3674); from sliten, strong verb, whence the pp. slityx
(with short 7), Prompt. Parv. The latter is derived from AS. slitan,
pt. t. slat, pp. sliten (short i); Grein, ii. 456.+4-Icel. slita, pt. t. sleit,
PP. slitinn, to slit, rend; Dan. slide; Swed. slita, to tear, pull, wear;
Du. slijten, to wear out, consume; OHG. slizan, G. schleissen, to
slit, split; whence the weak verb schlitzen, to slit, slash, cleave.
B. All from Teut. type *sleitan-, pt. t. *slait, pp. slitanoz. Der. slit,
sb., AS. slite, Matt. ix. 16. Also slice, q. v.

SLIVER, a splinter, twig, small branch broken off, slice. (E.)
In Hamlet, iv. 7. 174. ME, sliver, Chaucer, Troil. iii. 1013.
Sliver is the dimin. of slive, just as shiver is of shive, and splinter of
splint. Prov. E. slive, a slice, chip, from the verb slive, to cut or.
slice off; Halliwell. ‘I slyve a.. floure from his braunche;’.
Palsgrave. The verb slive is ME, sliuen, to cleave, spelt slyvyn in
Prompt. Parv.=—AS. slifan (pt. t. slaf, pp. slifen), to cleave; as in
to-slaf, Voc. 406. 29. This verb appears to be exactly parallel to
AS. slitan (pt. t. slat, pp. sliten) ; see Slit.

SLOBBER, to slabber, drivel, do carelessly. (E.) ME. sloberen
(Stratmann). A variant of Slubber, q.v.

SLOE, a small sour wild plum. (E.) ME. slo, pl. slon (with
long 0), King Alisaunder, 4983. AS. sla, pl. slain. ‘Moros, sldn ;’
Voc. 269. 7. Also slak, sing.; A.S. Leechdoms, ii. 32.4-Du. slee,
formerly sleeuw; Dan. slaaen; Swed. slan; G. schlehe; OHG. sléha.
Teut. type *slatha, Fick comparesit with Lithuan. slywa,a plum; Russ.
sliva, a plum; the suffixes do not correspond. B. Sloe is ‘ the
small astringent wild plum, so named from what we call setting the
teeth on edge, which in other languages is conceived as blunting
them; see Adelung;’ Wedgwood. Cf. MDu. sleeww, ‘sharpe or
tart;’ slee or sleeuw, ‘ tender, slender, thinne or blunt ;’ de sleeuwig-
heydt der tanden, ‘the edgnesse or sowrenesse of the teeth ;” Hexham.
The Du. sleeuw is the same word as E. slow; as if the sloe is the
slow (i.e. tart) fruit. But the forms do not correspond (except in
Dutch) ; and it can hardly be right. y. The Russ. sliva seems to be
related to L. Jiw-idus, blue; with reference to the colour; and sloe
may be connected with divid likewise.

SLOGAN, a Highland war-cry. (Gaelic.) Englished from Gael.
sluagh-ghairm, ‘the signal for battle among the Highland clans.’
=—Gael. sluagh, a host, army (W. Jlu, Olrish shiag); and gairm,
a call, outcry, from gairm, to call, cry out, crow as a cock. Cf.
Trish gairm, W. garm, outcry; Olrish gair, W. gawr, clamour,
allied to L. garrire, to prate. See Stokes-Fick, pp. 106, 320. The
sense is ‘ cry of the host.’

SLOID, SLOYD, mechanical skill, esp. in wood-carving.
(Swed.) Modern. Swed. sléjd, sleight, skill; cognate with E.
sleight, q.v.

SLOOP, a one-masted ship. (Du.—Low G.) ‘Sloop, a small
sea-vessel ;” Phillips, ed. 1706. Mentioned in Dampier, Voyages,
an. 1680 (R.); and in Hexham.=Du. sloep ; MDnu. sloepe, sloepken,
‘a sloope, or a boate,’ Hexham, ed. 1658. From Low G. sluup,
slupe, a sloop; whence also F, chaloupe, whence E. shallop; see
Shallop. The Low G. sb. is usually derived (as in the Bremen
Wart.) from Low G. slupen, to glide along, orig. to slip ; see Slip.
Shallop seems to be older than sloop, as far as English usage is
concerned. Doublet, shallop.

SLOP (1), a puddle, water or liquid carelessly spilt. (E.) ME.
sloppe, a pool, Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 3923. AS. -sloppe, -slyppe,
the sloppy droppings of a cow; occurring in ci-sloppe, a cow-slop
(now cowslip), and oxan-slyppe, an ox-slop (now oxlip) ; Voc. 135. 26.
We also find AS. slype, a viscid substance, A. S. Leechdoms, ed.
Cockayne, ii. 18, 1. 27, spelt siipe in the next line. B. From
Teut. *slup, AS. slop-, weaker grade of slipan, to slip; see Slip.
‘ pa weard heora heorte ¢d-slopen’=then was their heart dissolved,
made faint; Joshua, v. I. y- Similarly, slop (2) is from a closely
related verb. Perhaps slop, a pool, merely meant ‘a slippery place,’
a place slippery with wet and mire. Der. slop, verb, to spill
water, esp. dirty water; slopp-y, slopp-i-ness, Also cow-slip, q.V.,
ox-(s)lip, q.v.

SLOP (2), a loose garment. (Scand.) Usually in the pl. slops,
large loose trousers, 2 Hen. IV, i. 2. 34. ME. sloppe, Chaucer,
C. T. 16101 (G 633). We find ‘in stolum vel on oferslopum’ =in
stoles or over-slops, as a gloss to iz stolis in the Northumbrian
version of Luke, xx. 46. The word is Scand. rather than E., the
AS. word being oferslype (dative case), AElfric’s Homilies, i. 456,
1. 19.—Icel. sloppr, a slop, gown, loose trailing garment; whence
yfirsloppr, an outer gown or over-slop.=Icel. slup-, weak grade of
sleppa, to slip, a strong verb; so called from its looseness or its
trailing on the ground. Cf. Du. slefen, to trail on the ground.
Related to the AS. type *slipan (?) ; see Slip. Cf. Streitberg, § 203.

SLOPE, an incline. (E.) ‘Slope, or oblique;’ Minsheu. ME.
slope. ‘For many times I have it seen That many have begiled been
For trust that they have set in hope Which fell hem afterward


572 SLOT:


a-slope;’ Rom. of the Rose, 4464. Here a-slope, lit. on the slope,
means ‘ contrary to expectation,’ or ‘in a disappointing way.’ It is
the same idiom as when we talk of ‘ giving one the slip.’ It isa
derivative of the verb ¢o slip; formed from the Teut. *slup- (in AS.
slop-en, pp.), weaker grade of the verb appearing as AS. slupan ;
see Slip. Thus a-slope is ‘ready to slip;’ and slope means an
‘incline.’ Der. slope, verb, Macb. iv. 1. 57; a-slope.

_ SLOT (1), a broad, flat wooden bar which holds together larger
‘pieces, bolt of a door, (Du.) ‘Still in use in the North, and
applied to a bolt of almost any kind;’ Halliwell. ‘Slotte of a
dore, locquet ;? Palsgrave. Spelt slot, sloot; Prompt. Parv. = Du. s/oZ,
a lock (Sewel) ; de sloten van kisten, ‘the locks of chests;’ de sloten
van huysen, ‘the closures of houses;’ Hexham. The Du. slot also
means a castle. From Teut. *slu¢- (Du. slot-), weak stem of Teut.
*slutan- (Du. sluiten), to shut (pt. t. sloot, pp. gesloten). So also
OF ries. slot, from sluta, to shut; Low G. slot, from sliiten. B. The
Tent. type *sliitan-, to shut, appears in Du. sluiten; OF ries. sluta ;
Low G. sluten ; Swed. sluta (pt. t. slét, pp. sluten); G. schliessen,
MHG. sliezen, OHG. sliozan. y. Cognate with L. claudere, to
shut ; from4/SKLEUD; Brugmann, i. § 795 (2). See Close (1).
@ Slot, with the sense of groove or slit, appears to be from Du.
sloot, Low G. sloot, a ditch, trench, furrow; perhaps so called from
its use as enclosing a field or piece of land ; from sloot, 2nd grade of
the same verb. Or perhaps the sense was affected by ME. sliten
(pt. t. sloor), to slit.

SLOT (2), the track of a deer. (AF.—Scand.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674.—AF. esclot, the track of a deer (Godefroy).
Modified from ME. slooth, sléth; also spelt sleuth, as in the deri-
vative Lowland Sc. slewth-hound (Jamieson). ME. sleuth, a track,
Barbour’s Bruce, vii. 21; whence slewth-hund, sleuth-hund, slooth-
hund, a hound for tracking deer, id. vi. 36, 484, 669. Also sloth,
Cursor Mundi, 1254; Ormulum, 1194.—Icel. slod, a track or trail
in snow or the like; cf. sleda, to trail, sledur, a gown that trails on
the ground. Swed. dial. slo, a track; prov. E. slood, a cart-rut.

SLOTH (1), laziness, sluggishness. (E.) Lit. ‘slowness.’ ME.
slouthe, Chaucer, C. T. 15726 (G 258). For *slow-th; formed
directly from the adj. slow. In P. Plowman, B. v. 392, we find
the form sleuthe, from AS. sléwd, sloth; from AS. slaw, slow (with
mutation). Der, sloth, sb., an animal (below) ; sloth-ful, 1 Hen. VI,
iii, 2. 7; sloth-ful-ly ; sloth-ful-ness.

SLOTH (2), a name sometimes given to the glutton (Gulo
luscus); but usually to a S. American tardigrade edentate mammal
that moves with difficulty on the ground. (E.) The same word as
sloth (1) above. Prob. suggested. by Span. perezoso, (1) slothful,
(2) a sloth (Neuman, s.v. Sloth). Phillips (1706) has: ‘ Pigritia,
slothfulness ; also an American beast call’d a Sloth.’

SLOUCH, to have a clownish look or gait. (Scand.) Now a verb ;
but formerly also a sb. ‘Slouch, a great, vnwieldie, ill-fashioned
man ;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627. ‘Slouch, a great lubberly fellow, a meer
country-bumpkin ;’ Phillips. The ch is fork; Levins has: ‘Slouke,
iners, ignarus.’ Cf. also Lowl. Sc. sloatch, slotch, a lazy. fellow. —
Icel. slokr, a slouching fellow ; Norw. sldk, a lazy fellow; cf. sloka,
to be sluggish (Aasen) ; also sldkje, the same as sldk (Ross) ; Swed.
sloka, to hang down, droop, flag, slokig, hanging, slouching. = Icel.
*slok-, 2nd grade of *slak-, as in slakr, slack. See Slack. 4 Per-
haps influenced by OF, eslocher, eslochier, to loosen, also, to become
loose (Godefroy) ; from L. ex, and G, locker, loose.

SLOUGH (1), a hollow place filled with mud, a mire. (E.)
ME. slogh, slough, Chaucer, C. T. 7147, 14804 (D 1565, B 3988).
AS. slék (stem slég); Kemble’s A. S. Charters, 59, 123, 354, 554
(Leo). The formation of slough is precisely parallel to that of
clough, which is related to the OHG. hlingo, with the same sense.
In like manner, the AS. sldh is due to an older form *slowh, corre-
sponding to a Tent. base *slony-, for *slany-, from the strong verb
which appears in the G. schling-en, to devour; so that the original
sense was ‘that which swallows up.’ B. Similarly, G. schlund,
a chasm, gulf, is derived from MHG. slinden, to devour, with a like
sense; and Schmeller gives Bavar. schlung, with the same sense as
G. schlund, i.e. a chasm; so also Bavar. schlunk=G. schlund;
ef. Westphal. slexke, a ravine. The long o in slak shows the loss of x.
See Clough. And see schlingen in Kluge; where it appears to be
doubtful if the sense ‘ to devour’ is of early date.

SLOUGH (2), the cast-off skin of a snake; the dead part which
separates from a sore. (Scand.) Pronounced sluf, Spelt slougth,
Stanyhurst, tr. of Virgil, A£n. ii. 483; ed. Arber, p. 58. ME. slouh,
slow, Pricke of Conscience, 520 (footnote), where it is used in the
sense of caul or integument. ‘ Slughe, squama; slughes of eddyrs
(snakes), exemie;’ Cathol. Anglicum, p. 345; see the note.
Spelt sZughe, slohu, slou3e, in the sense of skin of a snake; Cursor
Mundi, 745. From its occurrence in these Northern poems we
may presume that the word js Scandinavian. It answers in form


SLUG


to MDan. slug, a gap, opening, mouth, swallow; Dan. dial. slug,
‘slough on an animal’s horn. The Swed. dial. sluv, slough, is
a different word. B. [With the latter form sluv we may compare
Low G. slu, sluwe, a husk, covering, the pod of a bean or pea, husk
of anut; answering to the Cleveland word slough, the skin of a goose-
berry (Atkinson) ; MDu. sloove, ‘a vaile ora skinne;’ Hexham; ef.
slooven, ‘to cover ones head;” id.; G. schlaube (provincial), ‘a
shell, husk, slough.’ The etymology of the latter set of forms is from
the Teut. base *sleub, noticed under Sleeve, q.v. ‘The sense is
‘that out of which a snake slips,’ or a loose covering. ] y- But
the E. slough and Jutland slug are allied to Dan. slug, gullet, sluge,
to swallow; Norw. sluka, Low G. ‘sluken, G. schlucken, to swallow,
and, further, to G. schlauch, a skin, bag; MHG. slick, a skin, bag.
Cf. Olrish slucc-im, I swallow. :

SLOVEDN, a careless, lazy fellow. (Du.) Spelt sloven, slovyn, in
Palsgrave. ‘Some sluggysh slouyns, that slepe day and nyght ;’
Skelton, Garland of Laurel, 191. ME. sloveyn, Coventry Myst.
p. 218. The suffix -eyx=F. -ain, from L. -dnus, as in ME, scriv-ein
=OF. escriv-ain, from Late L. scrib-anus; see Scrivener, This
OF. suffix may have been added at first to give the word an ad-
jectival force, which would soon be lost.=MDu. sof, sloef, ‘ a care-
less man, a sloven, or anastie fellow,’ Hexham; whence sloefack-
tiglick, ‘negligent, or slovenly,’ id. We also find the verb sloeven,
“to play the sloven;’ id. Sewel gives Du. slof, careless ; slof, sb., an
old slipper, slof, sb., neglect, sloffen, to draggle with slippers.-4-Low G.
sluf, slovenly ; sluffen, sluffern, to be careless; sluffen, to go about in
slippers, sluffen, slippers. . Der. sloven-ly, sloven-li-ness.

SLOW, tardy, late, not ready. (E.) ME. slow, Wyclif, Matt.
xxv. 26; slaw, Prompt. Parv. (where it has the sense of blunt, or
dull of edge). AS. slaw, Matt. xxv. 26,4-Du, sleeww; Icel. sler,
sljor ; OSax. sléu; OHG. sléo, blunt, dull, lukewarm. Teut. type
*slaiwoz, blunt, weak, slow; ,Fick, iii. 358. Some think it allied
to L. Jeuus, Russ. lievuii, Gk. Aas, left (of the hand); which is
doubtful. Der. slow-ly, slow-ness.. Also slo-th (for slow-th), q. v.

SLOW-WORM, a kind of snake. (E.) The allied words show
that it cannot mean ‘slow worm,’ but the sense is rather ‘ slayer’ or
‘striker, from its (supposed) deadly sting. Indeed, the Swedish
word is equivalent to an E. form worm-slow, i.e. ‘worm-striker’ or
stinging serpent, showing clearly that the word is compounded of
two substantives. It was (and still is) supposed to be very poison-
ous. J remember an old rime: ‘If the adder could hear, and the
blind-worm see, Neither man nor beast would ever go free.’ But it is
quite harmless. Lowl. Sc. slayworm. ME. slowerme, Voc. 571. 333;
slowurme, id. 766. 15. AS. sla-wyrm. We find: ‘Stellio, sla-wyrm;’
Voc. 122. 15; 321. 26. Here sla is (I suppose) contracted from
slah-, from *slahan, usually sléan, to smite; the sb. slag-a, a striker,
occurs in Exod. xxii. 2; see Slay.4+Swed. sid, usually ormsld,
a blindworm (where orm=E. worm); from sld, to strike (Rietz,
p. 618, where the dialectal form slo is given) ; Norweg. slo, a blind-
worm; also called ormslo (Aasen); from slaa, to strike. Cf.
Icel. slegr, kicking, vicious (as a horse); from sla, to strike.
(Doubtful.) Quite distinct from Swed. slé, blunt, dull, the
cognate form with slow.

SLOYD, the same as Sloid, q. v.

SLUBBER, to do carelessly, to sully. (Scand.) ‘I slubber, I
fyle [defile] a thyng ;’ Palsgrave. And see Shak. Merch. Ven. ii. 8.
39; Oth. i. 3. 227.—Dan. slubbre, to slabber ; Swed. dial. slubbra, to


be disorderly, to slubber, slobber with the lips, a frequentative verb


with suffix -ra (for -era) from slubba, to mix up liquids in a slovenly
way, to be careless (Rietz).4-Du. slobberen, ‘to slap, to sup up;’
Sewel ; Low G. slubbern, to lap, sip. From the weak grade (*slub-)
of *slab- in slabber; see Slabber.

SLUDGE, soft, greasy mud. (E.) ME. sluche; Destr. of Troy,
1. 12529; apparently a corrupt form of sliche, with the same sense,
spelt slicche, id.,1. 13547; prov. E. slutch, also sleech, sletch, slitch.
North E, slik, Barbour, Bruce, xiii. 352. An E. word; cognate with
North Fries. slick, EFries. slik, slime.4-Du. slijk, prov, G. schlick,
grease, Westphal. slick. See Sleek. The x may be due to proy.
E. slud, mud, mire, Icel. sludda, a clot of mucus.

SLUG, to be inactive. (Scand.) ‘To slug in slouth ;’ Spenser,
F. Q. ii, 1. 23. ME. sluggen, Prompt. Parv.; where we also find
slugge, adj., slothful; s/uggy, adj., the same; sluggydnesse, slugnes,
sloth. Sluggi, adj., Ancren Riwle, p. 258. ‘I slogge, I waxe slowe,
or draw behind ;’ Palsgrave. ‘The verb is now obsolete. — Dan. slug,
voiced form of sluk, appearing in slugéret, slukéret, with drooping
ears; Swed. dial. slogga, to be sluggish ; allied to Norweg. sloka, to
go heavily, to slouch, Swed. sloka, to hang down, droop. Cf. Icel.
slokr, a slouching fellow; and see Slouch. Note also Low G.
slukkern, slakkern, to totter, slukk, melancholy, downcast ; from the
weak grade of slakk, slack. See Slack, Der. slugg-ish, Spenser,
F. Q. i. 5. 10; slugg-ish-ly, slugg-ish-ness.. Also slugg-ard, Rich. II,


ee aie)


SLUG-HORN


vy. 3. 225, with the F. suffix -ard (=OHG. -hart, cognate with E,
hard); slugg-ard-y, ME. slogardie, Chaucer, C. T. 1044 (A 1042).
Also slug’, sb.

SLUG-HORN. (C.) An absurd perversion, by Chatterton
(Battle of Hastings, pt. ii. st. 10) and Browning (Childe Roland) of
Lowl. Sc. slogorne, in G. Douglas, tr. of Aeneid, bk. vii. c. xi. 1. 87.
And slogorne is a bad spelling of slogan, a battle-cry; see Slogan.
Hence a ‘ slug-horn’ is not a horn, but a cry; L. ‘tessera.’

SLUICE, a sliding gate in a frame for shutting off, or letting out,
water; a floodgate. (F.—L.) In Shak. Venus, 956; Lucrece,
1076. ME. scluse, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 255.—OF. escluse, ‘a sluce,
floudgate ;’ Cot. Cf. Span. esclusa, a sluice, floodgate.—Late L.
exclisa, a floodgate ; lit. ‘shut off (water) ;? Hist. Mon. de Abingdon,
ii. g2.—L. exclisa, fem. of excliisus, pp. of exclidere, to shut out;
see Exclude.

SLUMBER, to sleep lightly, repose. (E.) The 6 (after m) is
excrescent. ME. slumeren, Bestiary, 576; slumberen, slombren, P.
Plowman, A. prol, 10, B. prol. 10. Frequentative form of ME.
slumen, to slumber, Layamon, 17995, 18408, 32058, And this verb
is from the sb. slume, slumber, spelt sloumbe in Allit. Poems, C. 186.
AS. slima, sb., slumber ; Grein, ii. 457. This is formed, with the
substantival suffix -ma, from a Teut. base *sleu-, to be silent; cf.
Goth. slawan, to be silent, from the 2nd grade *slau-.-+ Du. sluimeren ;
Dan. slumre, frequentative of slumme, to slumber; Swed. slumra,
verb; slummer, sb.; G. schlummern, verb; schlummer, sb. Der,
slumber, sb., slumber-er, slumber-ous,

SLUMP, a sudden fall, failure in stocks. (E.) From prov. E.
slump, to fall suddenly, esp. into a ditch. Cf. Swed. and Dan. slump,
a chance, an accident, Low G. slump. Ofimitative origin; cf. Norw.
slump, the noise made by plumping into water. See Slip.

SLUMS, dirty back-streets. (E.) Prob. allied to prov. E. slump,
a muddy place, and (by gradation) to prov. E. slamp, wet, Low G.
slam, mire (Liibben) ; Dan. and Swed. slam, from G. schlamm, mire.
Cf. Bavarian schlumpen, to be dirty; prov. E. slammock, a slattern ;
Low G. slummerke, a slattern (Schambach).

SLUR, to soil, contaminate, reproach, pass over lightly with slight
notice. (MDu.) ‘With periods, points, and tropes he slurs his
crimes ;’ Dryden (in Todd). ‘They impudently slur the gospel ;’
Cudworth, Sermons, p. 73 (Todd). ‘ Without some fingering trick
or slur;’ Butler, Misc. Thoughts; Works, éd. Bell, iii. 176. Cf.
ME. sloor, slore, mud, clay, Prompt. Pary.; whence slooryyd, muddy,
id. Proy. E. slur, thin washy mud; Halliwell, Forby. The orig.
sense is ‘to trail,’ or draggle; hence, to pass over in a sliding or
slight way, also, to trail in dirt, to contaminate.—MDu. slewvren,
slooren, to drag, trail, Du. slewren, to trail; cf. MDnu. sloorigh, ‘ filthie,’
Hexham. Also Low G. sliiren, sloren, to draggle, Swed. dial. slora,
to be negligent; Norw. slora, to be negligent, to sully; EFries.
sluren, sliiren, to go about carelessly and noisily. From a base
*sleu-; perhaps the same as that in Slumber (Franck). Der.
slur, sb.

SLUSH, mire, mud. (Scand.) Perhaps from MDan, slws, (1)
sleet; (2) mud (Kalkar); Dan. dial. sluus, sleet. Or rather from
Norw. slusk, mud, dirty roads or weather (Ross); related by grada-
tion to Swed. slask, sloppiness, wet weather, slaska, to splash, to
dabble in water; cf. prov. E. slosk, slush; slash, to splash.

SLUT, a slovenly woman, slattern. (Scand.) ME. slutte, Coven-
try Plays, 218 (Stratmann) ; and in Palsgrave. ‘ Slutte, Cenosus,
Cenosa;’ Prompt. Pary. Slutte occurs also in Hoccleve, Letter of
Cupide, st. 34; 1. 237. Hence sluttish, Chaucer, C. T. 16104
(G 636).—Swed. dial. slé#a, an idle woman, slut, slater, an idler ;
Norweg. slot¢, anidler. Cf. Icel. slota, to droop, Swed. dial. slota,
to be lazy, Norweg. sluta, to droop; allied to Dan. slat, loose,
flabby, slatte, a slattern (Ferrall). B. The root-verb appears in
Norweg. sletta (pt. t. slatt, pp. slottet), to dangle, hang loose like
clothes, to drift, to idle about, be lazy (Aasen); and # represents zz.
Cf. Swed. dial. slixta (pt. t. slant, pp. sluntit), to slide, glide, slip
aside, with its derivatives slanta, to be idle, and slunt, ‘a lubber,
lazy sturdy fellow,’ Widegren, sy. Thus E. slattern and Dan. slatte
may be referred to slatt, slant, 2nd grade of sletta, slenta (whence also
Icel, slentr, sloth); while E. slut, Norw. slott, may be referred to sloté-,
slunt-, weak grade of the same; cf. Low G. sluntje,aslut. All from
the Teut. str. vb. *slentan-, to slip aside, pt. t. *slant, pp. *sluntanoz.
See Slant. Der. slutt-ish, -ly, -ness.

SLY, cunning, wily. (Scand.) ME, sleigh, Chaucer, C. T. 3201;
sley, Havelok, 1084; sleh, Ormulum, 13498.—Icel. slegr (for slegr),
sly, cunning; Swed. s/ég, cunning, dexterous. The Icel. slegr is
from a Teut. type *sldg-joz (Noreen, § 360), where *s/og- may
represent the 2nd grade of Teut. *slahan-, to strike; see Slay.
‘From the use of a hammer being taken as the type of a handicraft ;’
Wedgwood; and see Fick, iii. 358, who adduces G,. verschlagen,


cunning, crafty, subtle, sly, from the sameroot. @] But Swed. slug, | B, All from »/SMERD; see Fick, i. 836.


SMART


cunning, Dan. slu, Du. shuw, G. schlau, sly, are unrelated. Der.
sli-ly, sly-ness. Also sleight (i.e. sly-th), q. v.

SMACK (1), taste, flavour, savour. (E.) ME. smak, a taste;
Prompt. Pary. AS. sme@c, taste; Grein, ii. 457 3 whence the verb
smecgan, smeccan, to taste. ‘ Gusto, ic gesmecge, Voc. 109. 11;
ic smecce, A‘lfric’s Grammar, ed. Zupitza, p. 166, 1. 6.4-MDu.
smaeck, ‘tast, smaek, or savour;” smaecken, ‘to savour,’ Hex-
ham; Du. smaken, to taste; [Dan. smag, taste, smage, to taste,
Swed. smak, taste, smaka, to taste, from Low G. smakk, taste;] G.
geschmack, taste, schmecken, to taste. Der. smack, verb.

SMACK (2), a sounding blow. (Scand.) We find smack, sb., a loud.
kiss, Tam. Shrew, iii. 2. 180. But the word does not seem to be at
all old, and its supposed connexion with Smack (1) is disproved
by the forms found. It has been confused with it, but is quite dis-
tinct. It seems to be of imitative origin, and may be an E. word,
unless borrowed from Scandinavian. B. The related words are
Swed. smacka, to smack [distinct from smaka, to taste]; Swed. dial.
smakka, to throw down noisily, smakk, a light quick blow with the
flat hand, smakka, to hit smartly ; Dan. smekke, to slam, bang [dis-
tinct from smage, to taste], sm@k, a smack, rap (distinct from smag,
taste]. Also Low G. smakken, to smack the lips (distinct from
smekken, to taste]; MDu. smacken, Du. smakken, to cast on the
ground, fling, throw [distinct from Du. smaken, to taste]; Du. smak,
aloud noise. And see Smash. Apparently of imitative origin, as
seen in Du. smak, Dan. smek; allied to Lith. smog-ti, to strike,
smack ; smag-dti, to strike with a whip. Cf. knack, crack, Der. smack,
verb; cf. smatt-er, q. v., smash, q. V.

SMACK (3), a fishing-boat. (Du.) In Sewell’s Du. Dict.
Doubtless borrowed from Dutch, like hoy, skipper, boom, yacht, &c.
=—MDnu. smacke, ‘a kind of a long ship or boate,’ Hexham; smak,
‘a hoy, smack,’ Sewel, ed. 1754.-4+ Low G. smakk,asmack. B. Gene-
rally supposed to be a corruption for szack, allied to snake; cf.
AS. snacc, a smack, small vessel, A. S. Chron. an. 1066, in the Laud
MS., ed. Thorpe, p. 337; Icel. szekkja,a kind of sailing-ship, so
called from its snake-like movement in the water. So also Swed.
sniacka, Dan. snekke (or snekke).  { For the interchange of sm- and
sa-, see Smatter.

SMALL, little, unimportant. (E.) ME. smal; pl. smale,
Chaucer, C. T. 9. AS. smel, small, thin; Grein, ii. 457.4+-Du.,
Dan., and Swed. smal, narrow, thin; Goth. smals, small; G. schmai,
narrow, thin, slim. Teut. type *smaloz. Further allied to Icel.
smali, small cattle, sheep; Gk. pfjAov, a sheep; Russ. maluii, small.
@ We also find Icel. smar, Dan. smaa, Swed. smd, OHG. smahi,
small. Der. smail-ness; small-pox (see Pox) ; smail-age, q.v.

SMALLAGE, celery. (Hybrid; E.andF.—L.) In Minsheu,
ed. 1627. ‘Smallage, a former name of the celery, meaning the small
ache or parsley, as compared with the great parsley, olus airum. See
Turner’s Nomenclator, A.D. 1548, and Gerarde’s Herbal ;’ Prior,
Popular Names of British Plants. ME. smalege, Voc. 711. 15;
smalache, Lanfrank, Cirurgie, p. 94.—AS. smel, small (see above) ;
and F. ache, parsley, from L. apium, parsley.

SMALT, glass tinged of a deep blue, used as a pigment. (Ital. —
OHG.) ‘Smalt, a kind of blew powder-colour, us’d in painting ;
blue enamel ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706, Also in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
=Ital. smalio, ‘amell [enamel] for goldsmiths,’ Florio; allied to
smalzo, butter. = Low G. smalé (Liibben), dial. form of G. schmalz,
fat, butter; OHG. *smalzi, smelzi, smalt. From the 2nd grade (smalz)
of OHG. smelzan, str. vb., to become liquid; whence also OHG.
smelzen, G. schmeltzen, weak vb., tosmelt. See Smelt(1). 4 The
Du. smalé (in the present sense) is borrowed from Italian, See
Weigand.

SMARAGDUS, a precious stone, emerald. (L.—Gk.—Skt.—
Semitic.) Also smaragd; ME. smaragde, An O. E. Miscellany,
p- 98, 1.174. =—L. smaragdus.—Gk. opaparydos, an emerald; also found
in the form pdparydos, which is from Skt. marakata(m), marakta(m),
an emerald. Hence (says Uhlenbek) a Prakrit agma maragado, lit.
emerald stone (from Skt. agmd, a stone); whence Gk. *cpapdpaysos,
shortened to opdpaydos by loss of -pa- (repeated). Further, the Skt.
marakata(m) is from Semitic *baragt, as in Heb. bareget, an emerald,
from barag, to flash. See Schade, OHG, Dict., p. 1430. See
Emerald. Doublet, emerald.

SMART, to feel a pain, to be punished, (E.) ME. smerten,
Havelok, 2647; spelt smeorten, Ancren Riwle, p. 238, last line.
Once a strong verb; the pt. t. smeart occurs in O. Eng. Homilies, ii.
21, 1.27. AS. smeortan (Toller). The AS. pt. t. would be *smeart,
and the pp. *smorten.+-Du. smarten, to give pain; smart, pain; Dan,
smerte, vb, and sb.; Swed. smdrta, vb. and sb.; OHG, smerzan,
sometimes used as a strong verb (pt. t. smarz), G. schmerzen, to
smart; OHG. smerza, G. schmerz, smart, pain.-++L. mordere (with
lost initial s), to bite, pain, sting; Skt. mrd, to rub, grind, crush,
Whence also Gk.


573


574 SMASH


opepSaréos, terrible. See Mordacity. Der. smart, sb., ME. smert,
Chaucer, C. T. 3811 (A 3813); also smart, adj., ME. smerte, i. e.
painful, Havelok, 2055. ‘The use of the adjective has been extended
to mean pungent, brisk, acute, lively, witty. Hence smart-ly, smart-
72€SS.

‘SMASH, to crush, break in pieces. (E.) A late word, added by
Todd to Johnson. According to Webster, it is used by Burke. It
is well known in the North (see Brockett and Jamieson), and is clearly
a dialectal word transferred to more polite speech. Prob. due to E.
mash, to mix up; by prefixing s-, intensive prefix, from OF. es-, L.
ex. And prob. influenced by prov. E. smatzer, in the sense ‘ to smash.’
See Smattering. @ We may perhaps also notice the prov.
Swed. smiska, to slap, occurring in the very sense of ‘to smash glass’
or to smash a window-pane, which is the commonest use of the word
in ordinary E. conversation. Still nearer is the Norw. smaska, to
smash ; sla z smask, to break to bits (Ross). Cf. Smack (2).

SMATTERING, a superficial knowledge. (Scand.) From the
old verb to smatter, to have a slight knowledge of; the orig. sense
was ‘to make a noise;’ also, ‘to prate.’? ‘I smatter of a thyng, I
have lytell knowledge in it;’ Palsgrave. ‘For I abhore to smatter
Of one so deuyllyshe a matter;’ Skelton, Why Come Ye Nat to
Courte, 711. ME. smateren, to make a noise; Songs and Carols, ed.
Wright, no. Ixxii (Stratmann).,—Swed. smattra, to clatter, to crackle.
+G. schmettern, to smash, to resound. From a repetition of the
imitative sound smat; cf. Smack (2). Cf. MHG. smeizen, to prattle.
[Parallel to prat-ile, chat-ter. Note also Swed. szatira, Dan. snadre,
to prattle; Swed. snakka, Dan. snakke, to prate, G. schnacken.]

SMEAR, to daub with something greasy or sticky. (E.) ME.
smerien, smeren, Ormulum, 994; also smirien; also smurien, Ancren
Riwle, p. 372, 1.6. AS. smerian, Ps. xliv. 9; smyrian, Mark, xvi. I.
A weak verb, from the sb. smerzu, fat, Levit. vili. 25, whence ME.
smere, fat, fatness, Genesis and Exodus, 1573.4-Du. smeren, to
grease, from smeer, fat; Icel. smyrja, to anoint, from smjér, smor,
grease; Dan. smore, from smor, sb.; Swed. smérja, from smor, sb.;
G. schmieren, from schmeer, sb., OHG. smero. B. The general
Teut. form of the sb. is *smerwom, n., fat, grease; Fick, iii. 356;
allied to which are Goth. smairthr, fatness, smarna, dung. All from
a base SMER;; cf. Lithuan. smarsas, fat; Gk. pvpoy, an unguent;
Olrish smir, marrow; W. mér, marrow. Der. smear, sb., at present
signifying the result of smearing, and a derivative of the verb; not
in the old sense of ‘ grease.’ And see smir-ch.

SMELL, an odour. (E.) ME. smel, Chaucer, C. T. 2429
(A 2427), Ancren Riwle, p. 104, 1.16; also smul, O. Eng. Homilies,
ii. 99,1. 1. Not found in AS., but prob. a true Eng. word. Allied
to Du. smeulen, ‘to smoke hiddenly,’ i.e. to smoulder; EFries.
smalen, Low G. smelen, to smoulder. B. The idea is evidently taken
from the vapour given off by smouldering wood. See further under
Smoulder. Der. smell, verb, ME. smellen, Chaucer, C. T. 3691,
smullen, O. Eng. Hom. ii.-35, 1. 3.

SMELT (1), to fuse ore. (Scand.) In Phillips, ed. 1706 ; but not
noticed by Skinner, ed. 1671. I have little doubt that the word is
really Swedish, as Sweden was the chief place for smelting iron ore,
and a great deal of iron is still found there; (cf. Slag). —Dan.
smelte, to fuse, smelt; Swed. smdilta, to smelt, run, liquefy; smalta
malm, to smelt ore; Widegren.-MDu. smilten, smelten, ‘to melt,
mollifie, make liquid, or to found;’ Hexham. (Note here the use
of found where we should now say smelt). G. schmelzen, OHG.
smalzjan, to smelt. B. All these are secondary or weak verbs,
connected with an older strong verb appearing in the Swed. smalca,
to melt, i.e. to become liquid, for which Rietz gives the pt. t. smalt
and supine smultij, and cites OSwed. smdlta (pt. t. smalt, pp.
smultin). Italso appears in G. schmelzen (pt. t. schmoilz), to melt, dis-
solve, become liquid; Westphal. smelten (pt. t. smalt). y. From
the Teut. str. vb. *smeltan- (pt. t. *smalt, pp. *smultanoz) ; whence
also MDnu. smalt, ‘ grease or melted butter ;’ smalts, smalsch, ‘ liquid,
soft, or fatt’? (Hexham); OHG. smailz, fat, grease; see Smalt.
5. We may also compare Gk. péASopar, I become liquid ; Gk. péASdev,
to melt, render fluid. Brugmann, i. § 475. See Melt. Der.
smalt, q.v.; enamel,q.v. And see mute (2).

SMELT (2), a kind of fish. (E.) ME. smelt, Prompt. Parv. AS.
smelt. ‘Sardina, smelt,’ in a list of fish; Voc. 262. 4; ‘ Sardas,
smeltas,’ id. 45. 3.-4-Dan. smelt; Norweg. smelta (1), a mass, lump ;
(2) the name of various kinds of small fish, as Gadus minutus, also a
small whiting. B. The name prob. means ‘smooth ;’” cf. AS. smeolt,
smylt, serene, smooth (of the sea), orig. liquid; from the verb to
smelt ; see Smelt (1). Also prov. E. smelt, a smooth spot on water
(as caused by oil); smolt, smooth, shining, polished; smout (for
smolt), the fry of salmon, The sand-smelt is also called silver-sides
(C. D.). See Smolt.

SMEW, a small diving-bird. (E.) Also called smee (E. D. D.),
and smeeth or smeath. Drayton has‘ the smeath;’ Polyolbion, song


SMOKE


25, 1.67. [We find also EFries. smént, Du. smient, smew. The Du.
smient is explained as ‘small duck,’ from ODnu. *smehi-anud, small
duck; where sméhi is cognate with OHG. smahi, Icel. smar, small;
and *anud (*anid) is cognate with AS. ened, G. ente, duck. Cf. G.
schmalente, small wild-duck.] But smeeth resembles AS. sméde,
smooth; and smee may be the prov. E. smee, smooth,

SMILE, to laugh slightly, express joy by the countenance. (Scand.)
ME. smilen, Chaucer, C. T. 4044 (A 4046); Will. of Palerne, 991.
Not a very old word in E.—Swed. smila, to smirk, smile, fawn,
simper; Dan. smile.4-MHG. smielen, smieren, smiren, to smile; L.
mirari, to wonder at; mirus, wonderful; cf. also Gk. peddaw, I
smile; Skt. smi, to smile; Russ. smiekh’, alaugh. (4/SMEI.) Der.
smil-er, Chaucer, C. T. 2001 (A 1999); smile, sb., St. Brandan,
1. 80; see smir-k.

SMIRCH, to besmear, dirty. (E.) ‘ And with a kind of umber
smirch my face ;’ As You Like It, i. 3. 114. Allied to the old word
smore. ‘I smore ones face with any grease or soute [soot], or such
lyke, Ie barbouille ;’ Palsgrave. And since smore is related to smear,
itis clear that smirch (palatalised form of smer-k) is an extension
from ME. smeren, to smear; see Smear.

SMIRK, to smile affectedly, smile, simper. (E.) ME. smirken;
St. Katharine, 356. AS. smercian, A‘lfred, tr. of Boethius, cap. xxxiv.
§ 12 (lib. iii. pr. 11). Cf. ONorthumb. smerdon, ‘ deridebant ;’
Matt. ix. 24; MHG. smieren, tosmile; see Smile. Der. smirk, sb.;
also obsolete adj. smirk, trim, neat, Spenser, Shep. Kal., Feb. 1. 72.

SMITH, to strike, beat, kill. (E.) ME. smiten, pt. t. smat, smot,
pp: smiten. The pt. t. is spelt smoot, Wyclif, Luke, xxii. 50; with pl.
smyten (=smiten), id. xxiii. 48. AS. smitan, pt. t. smat, pp. smiten ;
Grein, ii. 458.4-Du. smijten; MSwed. smita, to smite; Dan. smide,
to fling; G. schmeissen, to smite, fling, cast; OHG. smizan, to throw,
to stroke, to smear. Cf. Goth. bismeitan, to anoint, besmear, John,
ix. 11, PB. The orig. sense would appear to be ‘ to rub’ or smear
over, a sense which actually appears in the OHG. and Gothic; and
even in AS. this sense is the usual one; note MSwed. smeta, tosmear
(Ihre), Icel. smita, to steam from being fat or oiled. ‘The connexion
between ‘to rub’ and ‘to smite’ is curious, but the former sense is
satirical ; we had the phrase ‘ to rub down with an oaken towel, i.e. to
cudgel; and, in the Romance of Partenay, 1. 5653, a certain king is
said to have been ‘so well anoynted’ that he had not a whole piece of
clothing left upon him; the orig. French text says that he was biex
oingt. Der, smit-er.

SMITH, a worker in metals. (E.) ME. smith, Chaucer, C. T.
2027. AS. smid; Grein, ii. 457.4+Du. smid; Icel. smidr ; Dan. and
Swed. smed ; G. schmied; MHG. smit, smid; Goth. -smitha, in comp.
aiza-smitha, copper-smith. . All from the Teut. type *smithoz, a
smith; Fick, iii. 357. [It was once usual to explain this (after the
method of Horne Tooke, which is known to be wrong) as he that
smiteth, from ‘the sturdy blows that he smites upon the anvil;’
Trench, Study of Words. But there is no support for this notion to
be had from comparative philology.] yy. Cf. further Icel. smid,
smith’s work; Du. smijdig, G. ge-schmeidig, malleable (with 7).
From the obs. Teut. str. vb. *smeithan-, pt. t. *smaith, pp. *smidanoz,
to forge, only preserved in Swed. dial. smida, to forge (pt. t. smed,
pp- smiden), Rietz; and in OSwed. smifa, to forge (Noreen). Hence,
as weak verbs, Swed. smida, Dan. smede, to forge. Cf. also OHG.
smida, metal, Gk. opt-An, a graver’s tool. (4/SMEI.) Brugmann,
i. § 849. Der. smith-y, ME. smidée, Ancren Riwle, p. 284, 1. 24, AS.
smidde, Voc. 141.223 Icel. smidja. Also gold-smith, silver-smith ; 8c.

SMOCK, a shirt for a woman. (E.) ME. smok, Chaucer, C. T.
3238. AS. smoc. ‘Colobium, smoc vel syrc’ [sark]; Voc. 125. I.
For smoce ; Teut. type *smuguoz; and so called because ‘ crept into;’
from “smug, weak grade of *smeug, to creep; cf. smogen, pp. of the
strong verb smigan, occurring in Atlfred, tr. of Boethius, cap. xxiv.
§ 1 (lib. iii. pr. 2). Cf. Shetland smook, ‘to draw on, as a glove ora
stocking ;’ Edmondston.+Icel. smokkr, a smock; allied to smoginn,
pp. of smjiga, ‘to creep through a hole, to put on a garment which
has only a round hole to put the head through.’ Cf. MSwed. smog,
a round hole forthe head; Ihre. Also Icel. smeygja, to slip off one’s
neck, causal of smjiga; OF ries. in-smuge, sb., a creeping into. See
further under Smug and Smuggle. Brugmann, i. § 899 (1).

SMOKE, vapour from a burning body, esp. wood or coal. (E.)
ME. smoke, Chaucer, C. T. 5860 (D 278). AS. smoca (rare). ‘Pone
wlacan smocan waces flesces’=the warm smoke of weak flax; Be
Domes Dege, ed. Lumby, 1. 51. Cf. AS. smoc-, stem of smocen, pp.
of the strong verb sméocan (pt. t. sméac), to smoke, reek, Matt. xii.
20. [Hence also the various forms of the sb., such as sméac, smyc ;
the latter occurs in A®lfric’s Homilies, ii. 202, 1. 4 from bottom,
The secondary verb smocigan (derived from the sb. smoca) occurs on
the same page, l. 24.]-4+Du. smook, sb.; Dan. smog, sb.; smoge, weak
verb, to smoke; G. schmauch, smoke. _B. All from a Teut. str.
vb. *smeuk-an-, pt. t. *smauk, pp. *smukanoz. Cf. Lith, smaug-iu,


SMOLT


Ichoke ; alliedto Gk. cpdxev (2 aor. é-cpvy-nv), to burn slowly ina
smouldering fire. Brugmann, i. § 849. Der. smoke, vb., AS. smoci-
gan, as above ; smok-er, smok-y, smok-i-ness.

SMOLT, a salmon in its second year, when it has assumed its
silvery scales. (E.) From AS. smolt, serene, gentle; the prov. E.
smolt not only means fair, serene, but also smooth, shining, and
polished. See Smelt.

SMOOTH, having an even surface. (E.) ME. smothe, Rom. of
the Rose, 542; alsocommon in the form smethe, due to vowel-change
from 6 to @ (=é), Rob. of Glouc. p. 424, 1. 8781; Pricke of Con-
science, 6349. AS. sméde, Luke, iii. 5, where the Northumb.
versions have smoede; cf. ‘ Aspera, unsmdde,’ Voc. 350. 293 un-smodi,
Corpus Gloss., 232. The preservation of the (older) vowel 6 in mod.
E. is remarkable. B. The form smdéde, with long o, shows that (as
in other, tooth, goose) an m has been lost; the form of the base is
*smonth-, for an older form *smanth-, corresponding to an Idg. base
*smant, y. This Idg. base is remarkably exemplified in the G.
Schmant (Bavar. schmand), a dialectal word corresponding to late
MHG., smant, cream; allied to Bohem. smetana, cream; Miklosich,
p. 189. Cf. Skt. manthaya-, butter; from manth, math, to churn.
The Hamburgh sméden, to smoothe (Richey) may be related. Der.
sniooth, verb, from the adj.; cf. AS. smédian, Voc. 130. 363 smooth-
ly ; smooth-ness, AS. smédnys, Voc. 177. 5.

SMOTHER, a suffocating smoke, thick stifling dust. (E.)
Smother stands for smorther, having lost an r, which was retained
even in the 14th century. ME. smorther; spelt smorfre, smorpur,
P. Plowman, C. xx. 303, 305 (some MSS. have smolder, id. B. xvii.
321). Smor-ther is ‘ that which stifles ;’ formed, with the suffix -ther
(Idg. -ter) of the agent, from AS. smor-ian, to choke, stifle, Matt.
xiii. 7 (Rushworth MS.), preserved in Lowland Sc. smoor, to stifle ;
see Burns, Brigs of Ayr, 1. 33. B. Cognate with AS. smorian are
Du. smoren, to suffocate, stifle, stew, and G. schmoren, to stew. Cf.
MDnu. smoor, ‘smoother, vapour, or fume’ (Hexham); Du. smeuren,
to smother. Apparently from a root *smeur, from an older root
SMEU; see Smoulder, Smoke. Der. smother, verb, ME. smor-
theren, O. Eng. Homilies, i. 251, 1.7. And see smoulder.

SMOULDER, to burn with a stifling smoke. (E.) ‘I smolder,
as wete wood doth; J smolder one, or I stoppe his brethe with
smoke ;’ Palsgrave. ME. smolderen, Allit. Poems, B. 955; from
the sb. smolder, a stifling smoke. ‘ Smokeand smolder,’ P. Plowman,
B. xvii. 321; where the later text has ‘smoke and smorfer’ (=E.
smother), id. C. xx. 303; and see Palladius on Husbandry, i. 929.
[The Dan. smuldre, to crumble, moulder, from smul, dust, may be
ultimately related, but is not the original of the E. word, being too
remote in sense.] . The E. smoulder (for *smol-ther) is closely
connected with Low G. smélen, smelen, to smoulder, as in dat holt
smelet weg=the wood smoulders away (Bremen Worterbuch) ; Du.
smeulen, ‘to smoak hiddenly,’ Sewel; Low G. sméln, to give out
fumes (Danneil). See Smell. From a root *smeul, from an older
root SMEU; see Smother (above). ,

SMUDGE, to sully, to smear with dirt. (Scand.) ME. smogen,
in Halliwell; a voiced form of smutch. Cf. Dan. smuds, smut, dirt,
smudse, to soil; from G. schmutz, smut, dirt; MHG. smuz. Also
ME. smod, dirt, Allit. Poems, ii. 711 ; EFries. and Low G. smudden,
to soil; Du. smoddig, dirty. See Smut.

SMUG, neat, trim, spruce. (Low G.) In Shak. Merch. Ven. iii,
1. 49; &c. ‘I could have brought a noble regiment Of smug-skinnde
Nunres into my countrey soyle ;’ Gascoigne, Voyage into Holland,
A.D. 15723; Works, i. 393. Spelt smoog, Stanyhurst, tr. of Virgil,
En. ii. 484; ed. Arber, p. 59. voiced form of smuk.=—MDan.
smug, smooth, pliable (Kalkar); and Outzen (s. v. smock) notices
a South Dan. form smugg; from Low G. smuk, neat, trim; cf.
MDu. smucken, ‘to be smugg,’ Hexham. Hence also G. schmuck,
trim, spruce. B. The MHG. smucken meant not only to clothe, adorn,
but also to withdraw oneself into a place of security, and is an in-
tensive form from the older strong verb smiegen, to creep into (G.
schmiegen, to wind, bend, ply, cling to). This MHG. smiegen is
cognate with AS. smigan, to creep. y. This links smug with smock,
which has the same change from ¢ to &, as shown under that word.
A smock, orig. so named from the hole for the neck into which one
crept, became a general term for dress, clothes, or attire, as in the
case of G. schmuck, attire, dress, ornament, adornment, &c.; and
smug is merely the corresponding adjective, meaning ‘ dressed,’ hence
spruce, neat, &c. See further under Smock and Smuggle.

SMUGGLE, to import or export secretly, without paying legal
duty. (Low G.) Phillips, ed. 1706, gives the phrase ‘to smuggle
goods.’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, has: ‘Smuglers, stealers of cus-

toms, well known upon the Thames.’ Sewel’s Du. Dict., ed. 1749,
gives : ‘ Sluyken, to smuckle ; sluyker, asmuckler.’ [The word is not
Dutch, the Du. smokkelen, to smuggle, being modern, and unnoticed
by Sewel and Hexham. It is, however, plainly a sailor’s word, and


SNAP


of Low G. origin. ]— Low G. smuggeln (whence also Dan. smugle), to
smuggle ; a frequentative form (with usual suffix -Je) from the weak
grade of the old strong verb found in Norweg. smjuga (pt. t. smaug’),
to creep; whence also Dan. i smug, adv., secretly, privately, and
smughandel, contraband trade. Closely allied to Dan. smége, a
narrow (secret) passage, Swed. smuga, a lurking-hole (Widegren),
Icel. smuga, a hole to creep through, smugall, smugligr, penetrating.
B. All from the weak grade of the strong verb found in Icel. smjiga
(pt. t. smaug, pl. smugu, pp. smoginn), to creep, creep through a
hole, put on a garment which has only a round hole to put the head
through ; cf. Swed. smyga, to sneak, to smuggle. Cognate with AS.
smigan, to creep (pt. t. sméag, pl. smugon, pp. smogen); MHG.
smiegen, strong verb, to press into (Fick, iii. 357); all from Teut.
base SMEUG, to creep. Cf. Lithuan. smukti, to glide (pr. t. smunkw,
I glide), i-smukti, to creep in. See Streitberg, § 203, note 1, Der.
smuggl-er ; see smock, smug.

SMUT, a spot of dirt, esp. of soot. (E.) From the base smut-,
ME. smot-, as in i-smotted, smutted, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 359 ;
bi-smot-ered, besmutted, Chaucer, C. T. 76. Cf. G. schmutz, dirt.
B. Hence the form smutch. ‘ Smutche on ones face, barboyllement;’
Palsgrave. ‘Hast smutched thy nose;’ Winter’s Tale, i. 2. 121.—
Swed. smuts, smut, dirt, filth, soil; whence smutsa, verb, to dirt, to
sully. Cf. Dan. smuds, filth; whence smudse, to soil, dirty, sully.
The Dan. form (not old) resembles E. smudge, to smear, to soil
(Halliwell), and ME. smoge, with the same sense (id.); see
Smudge. jy. The Swed. smuts, Dan. smuds, were borrowed from
G. schmutz (above). 4 Perhaps allied to Du. smet, a spot, and to
ME. smitten, to contaminate ; from a base *smet. Der. smut, verb;
smutt-y, smutt-i-ly, smutt-i-ness.

SNACK, a part, portion, share; see Snatch.

SNAFFLE, a bridle with a piece confining the nose, and with a
slender mouth-piece. (Du.) ‘A bitte or a snaffe;’ Baret (1580).
Short for snaffle-piece=nose-piece. ‘ With a snaffle and a brydle;’
Sir T. More, Works, p. 1366 e. And in Shak. Antony, ii. 2. 63.
‘A snaffle, Camus; to snaffle, rudere ;’ Levins, = Du. szavel, a horse’s
muzzle; MDu. snabel, snavel, ‘ the nose or snout of a beast or a fish;’
Hexham. Dimin. of MDu. snabbe, snebbe, ‘the bill or neb of a
bird ;’ id.-G. schnabel, bill, snout ; Lith. szapas, a bill. Allied to
Web, q.v. And see Snap.

SNAG, an abrupt projection, as on a tree where a branch has
been cut off, a short branch, knot, projecting tooth. (Scand.)
‘Which with a staffe, all full of litle sxags;’ Spenser, F. Q. ii.
II. 233 cf. iv. 7. 7. [The word knag, which has much the same
sense, occurs as knagg in Swedish; see Knag.] Hence the prov. E.
verb snag, to trim, to cut off the twigs and small branches from
a tree; the tool used (a kind of bill-hook) is called a snagger;
hence also the Kentish szaggle, to nibble (Halliwell). —Norw. szag,
a projecting point or end, a spike; cf. Norw. szage, a projecting
tongue of land; Icel. snag-hyrndr, with spiky horns; Icel. sxagi,
a clothes-peg ; Norw. szaga, to stick out (Ross).

SNAIL, a slimy creeping gastropod. (E.) ME. snayle, Prompt.
Parv. Thez (y) is due to an earlier g, precisely as in hail (1), nail.
AS. snegl, snegel; Voc. 121. 31, 321. 29; snegl, Voc. 30. 18.
Snegl (=*snag-il) is a diminutive, with g for c, from AS. snzaca,
a snake, a creeping thing ; see Snake. ‘The lit. sense is ‘a small
creeping thing,’ or little reptile. Cf. ME. snegge (proy. E. snag),
a snail, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 32; and G. schnecke, a snail, Swed.
sniicka.+Icel. snigill, a snail; Dan. snegl, a snail; Swed. snigel,
a slug; Westphal. szdel, a snail; Low G. snigge, a snail; NFries.
snegge. Teut. types *snagiloz, snegiloz, masc. See Noreen, § 252.

SNAKE, a kind of serpent. (E.) The lit. sense is ‘ a creeping
thing,’ which is also the sense of serpent and of reptile. ME. snake,
Wyclif, Rom. iii. 13. AS. szaca, to translate L. scorpio, Luke, x. 19.
The sense is ‘creeper, but the related verb is only found in
OHG. snahhan, pt. t. snuoh, which presupposes a Teut. type *snak-
an-, to creep, pt. t. *szdk.+4-Icel. snakr; also sndkr, Dan. snog,
Swed. snok (from the base *snok); MDu. snake, a snake. And cf.
Skt. n@ga-s,a serpent. See Sneak. Der. snail.

SNAP, to bite suddenly, snatch up. (Du.) In Shak. Much Ado,
v. I. 116. ‘A snapper-up of unconsidered trifles;’ Wint. Tale, iv.
3. 26. ‘I snappe at a thing to catche it with my tethe ;’ Palsgrave.
Not an old word. = Du. sxappen, to snap, snatch ; ‘ to snap up, orto
intercept,’ Hexham.+ Dan. sxappe, Swed. snappa, from Low G, snap-
pen; G. schnappen, MHG. snappen, tosnap,snatch. B. All from Tent.
base *szap; see Snaffle. Der. sxapp-ish, i.e. ready to bite orsnap ;
snapp-ish-ly, -ness. Also snap-dragon, a plant, so called because the
lips of the corolla, when parted, szap together like a dragon’s
mouth ; also a game in which raisins are sapped out of a flame, as
if from a fiery dragon. Also snap-hance, a fire-lock (Nares), from
Du. sxaphaan, a fire-lock, MDu. snaphaen, ‘a robber that snaps
upon one in the highway, or a sxap-haunce’ (Hexham) ; from Du.


575


576 SNARE


snappen, to snap, and haan, a cock, also a cock of a gun, allied to
E. Hen, q.v. Also snaff-le, q.v. And see snip. @> It may be
added that there may have been an old strong Teut. vb. *sned-az,

t.t. *svab, pp. *snubanoz. Rietz, indeed, gives a similar verb as
still found in Swed. dialects, viz. infin. snippa, pt. t. suapp, old pp.
snuppit, with the sense to snap, to snatch. This at once accounts for
E. snip; cf. also snub, and snuff (2), to snap or snip off the end of
the wick of a candle. And cf. Snip, Snatch.

SNARE, a noose, trap. (E.) Properly a noose, a trap formed
with a looped string. ‘ Hongide himself with a snare;’ Wyclif,
Matt. xxvii. 5. AS. smear, a cord, string; Grein, ii. 459.4-Du.
snaar, a string; Icel. snara, a snare, halter; Dan. snare; Swed.
snara; OHG. snarahha, a noose; cited by Fick, iii. 350, Curtius,
i. 392. B. From the Teut. base *svarh- (the k being preserved in
OHG.); and this is from the 2nd grade of the Teut. strong verb
*snerhan-, appearing in OHG. snerhan, to bind tightly, to twist
tightly; whence also Icel. szara, to turn quickly, twist, wring
(though this is a weak verb). y. The Teut. SNERH answers to
Idg. SNERK, to draw together, contract, whence Gk. vapxn, cramp,
numbness; see Narcissus. 8. The Idg. SNERK is an ex-
tension from 4/SNER, to twist, wind; whence Lithuan. zer-ti, to
thread a needle, draw into a chain. ¢. And we may further note
the Olrish snathe, thread ; from the 4/SNE, to wind, spin, whence
L. nére, to spin, G. schnur, a string. Cf. Skt. smava(s), a tendon,
sinew. Der. szare, verb, Temp. ii. 2. 174, ME. smaren, Prompt.
Parv.; svar-er, en-snare. Also (obsolete) snar-l, a noose, Trevisa,
ii. 385.

SNARL, to growl as a surly dog. (E.) In Shak. K. John, iv.
3.150. The -J is a frequentative suffix; the sense is ‘to keep on
snarring.’ ‘1 snarre, as a dogge doth under a door whan he sheweth
his tethe, Palsgrave ; spelt svar, Spenser, F. Q. vi. 12. 27. Of
OLow G. origin; perhaps E., though not found in AS. Cf. MDu.
snarren, ‘to brawl, to scould, or to snarle ;? Hexham; G. schnarren,
to rattle the letter R, to snarl, speak in the throat; MHG. szar,
a growling. Cf. also Icel. sxérgla, to rattle in the throat; snérgl
(pronounced svérl), a rattling sound in the throat. Evidently
telated to Sneer 3; and see Snort.

SNATCH, to seize quickly, snap up. (E.) ME. snacchen, Wars
of Alisaunder, 6559; spelt sxecchen, Ancren Riwle, p. 324, 1. 27.
Snacchen is a palatalised form of *szakken, and may be considered as
an E. word, though not found in AS. The & is preserved in the sb.
snack, a portion, lit. a snatch or thing snatched up; Lowland Scotch
snak, a snatch made by a dog at a hart, a snap of the jaws, Douglas,
tr. of Virgil, xii. 754 (L. text). ‘ Sack, a share; as, to go snacks
with one;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.-Du. sxakken, to gasp, desire, long,
aspire; ‘de Visch snackt na het water, the fish gasps for water ;’
Hexham. B. From a Teut. base *sxak-, to catch at with the
mouth, move the jaws, parallel to *szap- (as in E. snap). These
bases are imitative, with the notion of a movement of the jaws.
Der. snatch, sb.; body-snatcher. Also snack, sb., as above. Also
prov. E. sneck, the ‘snap’ or latch of a door.

SNEAK, to creep or steal away slily, to behave meanly. (E.)
In Shak. Troil. i. 2. 246. Variant of ME. sniken. ‘ Sniked in ant
ut neddren’=adders creep in and out; O. Eng. Homilies, i. 251 ;
which is from AS. snican, to creep; Grein, ii. 459. Supposed to be
a strong verb (pt. t. *szac, pp. *snicen) ; the Icel. pp. snikinn occurs,
from an obsolete verb *snika, with the sense of covetous, hankering
after. We also find Icel. sxtkja (weak verb), to hanker after, to beg
for food silently, as a dog does; Dan. snige sig, to sneak, slink.
Also Swed. dial. sniga, to creep, strong verb (pt. t. szeg); snika, to
hanker after, strong verb (pt. t. snek). B. All from a Teut. verb
*sneikan- (pt. t. *snak, pp. snikanoz), to creep. Cf. Irish and Gael.
snaigh, snaig, to creep, crawl, sneak (from E.). The mod. E. sneak
would result from an AS. *suécan, a derivative from the second
grade *sndc; whence also ME. snoken, to creep about; Wyclif,
Works, ed. Arnold, ii. 83. Der. snake, q.v., snail, q.v.

SINNEAP, to pinch, check. (Scand.) See Snub.

SNEER, to express contempt. (Scand.) ‘Sveer, to laugh foolishly
or scornfully;’ Phillips, ed. 1706; prov. E. sneering-match, a grin-
ning.match (Forby). Rare. ME. sneren,to deride.  ‘ pai snered me
with snering swa, Bot gnaisted over me with thaire tethe tha’ =they
derided me so with sneering, also they gnashed upon me with their
teeth; Early Eng. Psalter, ed. Stevenson (Surtees Soc.), Ps. xxxiy.
16; and see Ps, ii. 4.—Dan. snerre, to grin like a dog; Hunden
snerrede ad hem, the dog showed its teeth at him (Molbech); cf.
MDan. szarre, the same. Closely allied to the obsolete E. szar;
for which see Snarl.

SNEEZE, to eject air rapidly and audibly through the nose. (E.)
‘Looking against the sunne doth induce sneezing;’ Bacon, Nat.
Hist. § 687. ME. snesen, Trevisa, v. 389 (Stratmann). In Chaucer,
Group H, |. 62 (1. ryorr, ed. Tyrwhitt), the right reading is fneseth,


SNOOZE


not sneseth. But snesen is doubtless either a modification of /nesen,
or a parallel form to it; the initial s is perhaps due to Dan. szuse, to
sniff, for which see Snout. B. We find also fnesynge, violent
blowing, Wyclif, Job, xli. 9. — AS. fréosan, to sneeze; whence
fnéosung, sternutatio; Voc. 162. 40. Allied to AS. fnest, a puff,
blast, Grein, i. 3073; Icel. fnasa, to sneeze, snort.--Du. fniezen, to
sneeze ; Swed. fnysa, Dan. fnyse, to snort. -. y. We thus arrive at
a Teut. base *fneus-, Idg. PNEUS, evidently a mere variant of
HNEUS, to sneeze, Fick, iii. 82; for which see Neese. Cf. Gk.
amvew, L breathe; see Pneumatic. Der. sneeze, sb. And see
meese.

SNIFF, to scent, draw in air sharply through the nose. (Scand. )
Not common in old books. Johnson defines snuff, sb., as ‘ resent-
ment expressed by snifting.” ME. sneuien or sneuen (with u=v),
O. Eng. Homilies, ii. 37, 1. 25 ; ii. 207, 1. 16; this would give a later
E. *sneeve, whence was formed sneevle, to snivel, given in Minsheu.
—Icel. *snefja, a lost verb; whence the pp. szafdr, sharp-scented,
(Acts, xvii. 21) ; snefill, a slight scent; Dan. smive, to sniff, snuff.
Note MDan. snifte (Kalkar), Dan. snéfte, to sniff (whence E. szift,
above), from MDan. snift, air, breath. And cf. Icel. sxippa, to
sniff with the nose, szapa, to sniff. Der. sziff, sb.; sniv-el, q.v.

SNIP, to cut off, esp. with shears or scissors. (Du.) Shak. has
snip, sb. L.L. L. iii. 22; also snipt, pp., All’s Well, iv. 5. 2. He
connects it with sxap, L.L. L. v. 1. 63.— Du. snippen, to snip, clip.
Allied to Du. szappen, ‘to snap up, or to intercept,’ Hexham ; see
Snap.+EFries. snzippen; Low G. snippeln, to cut small; G.
schnippen, to snap; schnappen, to snap, to catch. Cf. also EFries.
snip, sharp; snip, snippe, a small piece of land; Hamburg schnippen,
to cut into small bits (Richey). 4 It has probably been influenced
in use by the similar word zip. Der. snip, sb.; snipp-et, a small
piece, dimin. of szip, sb., Butler’s Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 3.1.824. Also
snip-snap, Pope, Dunciad, ii. 240.

SNIPH, a bird with a long bill, frequenting marshy places.
(Scand.) ME. snype. ‘Snype, or snyte, byrde, Ibex;’ Prompt.
Parv. ‘ Hic ibis, or hic ibex, a szype;’ Voc. 7oI. 39. ‘Snipe, or
snite;’ Baret (1580). [Snipe and site are parallel names for the
same bird; it is possible that the vowel of snipe has been affected by
that of suite, which is the older word, found as AS. snite, Voc. 3. 28.]
=—Icel. szipa, a snipe, found in the comp. myri-snipa, a moor-snipe.
Cf. Dan. sneppe, a snipe, Swed. snappa, a sandpiper; from Du. snip,
snep, MDu. snippe, sneppe, snipe (Hexham); G. schnepfe, snipe.
B. The word means ‘a snipper’ or ‘asnapper;’ the standard form
appears in MDu. sneppe, formed by the addition of a suffix -fe (for
-ya) and yowel-change, from the Teut. base SNAP, to snap up; see
Snap. Cf. MDu. szabbe, snebbe, ‘the bill of a bird,’ Hexham;
a word with the same sense of ‘ snapper.’ See Snaffle.

SNITE (1), to wipe the nose. (E.) See Snout.

SNITE (2), a snipe. (E.) See under Snipe.

SNIVEL, to sniff continually, to have a running at the nose, to
whimper. (Scand.) Formerly snevil; spelt sneuyll, Skelton, Colin
Clout, 1223. ME. sneuelen (with u=v), P. Plowman, B. v. 135,
footnote; other MSS. have nyuelynge, neuelynge. Also snuvelen
(Stratmann); answering to an AS. form *suyflan; whence the
derived sb. snyflung, in Napier’s additions. — AS. szoff, mucus; A.S.
Leechdoms, ii. 24. Cf. Low G, snuven, to sniff; Swed. snéfla, Dan.
snovle, to snuffle, which is a parallel form; see Snuffle. And cf.
Snuff. Der. snivell-er, snivel, sb.

SNOB, a vulgar person. (Scand.) ‘That old szob;’ Howard,
The Committee (1665); A. iv. sc. r (Song). Prov. E. snob, a
vulgar ignorant person; orig. a journeyman-shoemaker (Suffolk) ;
see E. D. D. ‘Snap, a lad or servant, now mostly used ludicrously ;”
Thoresby’s letter to Ray, 1703 (E.D.S. Gloss. B. 17); ‘ Snape, a
pert youth, North,’ Halliwell. Lowland Sc. sxab, a shoemaker’s or
cobbler’s boy (Jamieson). Of Scand. origin. Dan. dial. snopp,
snupp, bashful, silly; MDan. sxab, foolish (Kalkar); Icel. snapr,
a dolt, idiot, with the notion of impostor or charlatan, a boaster,
used as a by-word; Swed. dial. sndpp, a boy, anything stumpy.
The same Icel. word means the pointed end of a pencil ; both senses
may be explained from Swed. dial. sndppa, to cut off, make stumpy,
hence to snub. Cf. Swed. sxopen, out of countenance, ashamed.
See Snub, Snubnosed.

SNOOD, a fillet, ribbon. (E.) ‘Her satin snood;’ Sir W. Scott,
Lady of the Lake, c. i. st. 19; and see note 25 (31). ME. sndd (12th
century); Voc. 540. 39. AS. sndd. ‘Vitta, sndd;’ Voc. 107. 35.
The orig. sense is ‘a twist ;’ cf. Olrish sndthe, thread ; from the Idg.
root *sné, *sna, to spin, to twist; whence also G. schniur, a string.
Cf. Skt. sndva-s, a tendon, a muscle; Gk. véw, I spin, vfjua, thread,
L. nére, to spin. Note W. noden, a thread; ysnoden, a fillet. See
Snare. ‘

SNOOZE, to doze, to nap. (Scand.) _Rietz gives Swed. dial.
snusa, (1) to take snuff; (2) to draw breath loudly in sleep, like a


SNORE


SOAR 577


child. Cf. Dan. snuse, to snuff, to sniff, to poke one’s nose into a| SNUFF (1), to sniff, draw in air violently through the nose, to


thing; just as the prov. E. szoozle not only means ‘to doze,’ but also
‘to sniff and poke with the nose,’ like a dog. Cf. also Low G. suuss,
with the same sense as svute, a snout; snusseln, to poke with the
nose; W. Flem. snutsteren, snoesteren, to sniff after, like a dog.
Allied to Dan. and Swed. szus, snuff; and prob. of imitative origin,
like Sniff, Snuff.

SNORE, to breathe hoarsely in sleep. (E.) ME. snoren, Chaucer,
C. T. 5210 (B 790). Substituted for *fnoren. Cf. AS. fnora, as in
6 Sternutatio, fnora ;? Wright’s Voc. 48.14. The change from fx to
sn occurs again in the case of the allied word sneeze (AS. fnéosan).
In Chaucer (as above), MS. E. has snoreth, MS. C. has snortith, and
MSS. Hn. Cp. have fnorteth. 8. Formed from the weak grade
Snor- (<*fnus), as seen in fnor-en, pp. of fnéosan, to sneeze; pre-
cisely as the word /rore, frozen (Milton, P. L. ii. 595) is the pp. of
fréosan, to freeze. See further under Sneeze; and Notes on E.
Etym., p. 273. Influenced by Snort. Der. szore, sb., snor-er.

SNORT, to force air violently through the nose, as a horse.
(Scand.) ME. snorten, tosnore, Chaucer, C. T. 4161 (A 4163). Cf.
Low G. snurten, snarten, to make an explosive noise. From the base
*snur-; as in Low G. snurren, to hum; MDu. saorren, to murmur,
Cf. also (with & for 2) Dan. snorke, to snort; Swed. snorka, to threaten
(orig. to snort, fume, be angry); Du. szorken, to snore, snort; G.
schnarchen, to snore, snort, bluster; Swed. szarka, to snore; proy.
E. sxork, to snort. Andsee Snarl. Der. snori-er; snort, sb.

SNOT, mucus from the nose. (E.) ME. snotte, snothe, Prompt.
Pary. AS. ge-snot; A. S. Leechdoms, ii. 54. OF ries. snotte.4+-Du.
snot; Low G. snotte; Dan. snot. Supposed to be allied to the pp.
snoten of a lost strong verb, which would appear as AS. *sniitan;
see further under Snout.

SNOUT, the nose of an animal. (E.) ME. snoute, Chaucer,
C. T. 14911 (B 4095); saute, King Horn, ed. Lumby, 1082. AS.
*sniit ; whence snytan, vb., to snite, was formed by vowel-change;
see Snite. EFries. sniite.4-Swed. smut, a snout, muzzle; Dan.
snude; Low G. snute; Westphal. sniite; Du. sauit, G. schnauze.
B. From a Teut. str. vb. *sniitan-, to sniff, pt. t. *snaut, pp. *snutanoz,
From the prime grade *swiut- we have E. snout; also Icel. snyta, to
wipe the nose, Swed. szyta, Dan. snyde, the same, AS. snytan, whence
E. snite, to blow the nose (Halliwell). From the 2nd grade we have
G. schnauze; and from the weak grade E. snot, mucus. y, We find
shorter forms in Dan. szue, to sniff, snuff, snort, Low G. szau, prov.
G. schnau, a snout, beak; all from a base SNEU. And it is clear
that prov. G. schnuff, a snout, E. snuff, sniff, snivel, Dan. snuse, to
snuff or sniff, go back to the same base, which seems to have indicated
a sudden inspiration of the breath through the nose. Cf, Lithuan.
snukkis, a snout.

SNOW, a form of frozen vapour. (E.) ME. snow; hence sxow-
white, Chaucer, C..T. 8264 (E 388). AS. snaw; Grein, ii. 458,.4Du.
sneeuw ; Icel. sner, snjar, snjor ; Dan. snee ; Swed. snd; Goth. snaiws ;
G., schnee.4-Lithuan. snégas; Russ. snieg’; L. nix (gen. niuis) ; Gk. acc.
vipa, whence mds, a snow-flake; Irish and Gael. sneachd ; W. nyf.
B. All from the 4/SNEIGwH, to snow, whence L. xingit, it snows
(with inserted 7), Lithuan. snigti, sningti, to snow, Greek veiper,
vipe, it snows, Zend. gnizk, to snow; Fick, i. 828. Brugmann, i.
§ 394. Der. snow, verb; snow-blind, -drift, -drop, -plough, -shoe,
-slip; also snow-y, snow-i-ness. 3

SNUB, to check, scold, reprimand. (Scand.) ‘To szub one, to
take one up sharply;’ Phillips, ed. 17063 spelt suubbe in Levins, ed.

1570. Another form is sneb or snib; spelt szebbe, Spenser, Shep.
Kal. Feb. 1. 126; snzb, id. Mother Hubberd’s Tale, 372. ME. sxibben,
Chaucer, C. T. 523.—Dan. sxubbe, to nip off, to snub (Larsen) ; also
snibbe, ‘to set down, blow up,’ i. e. reprimand (whence E. szib) ; Swed.
snubba, to snub, to check; NFries. szubbe, Icel. snubba, to snub,
chide. The orig. sense was to snip off the end of a thing; cf. Icel.
snubbottr, snubbed, nipped, the pointed end being cut off; Swed.
dial. snubba, to snip or clip off; EFries. szubbeln, to snatch away, to
snap. B. A form allied to szub appears in sneap, to check, pinch,
nip, L.L. L.i. 1. 100; Wint. Tale, i.2.13. This is from Icel. sneypa,
orig. to castrate, then used as a law-term, to outrage, dishonour, and
in mod. usage to chide or snuba child; whence sneypa, a disgrace.
This is a related word, and cognate with Swed. sndpa, to castrate,
Swed. dial. sndppa, to cut off, to snuff a candle; Icel, snupra, to snub,
chide. Der. snub, sb.; also sxub-nosed, q. v.

SNUB-NOSED, having a short nose. (Scand. and E.) Added
by Todd to Johnson. It means, literally, with a short or stumpy
nose, as if cut off short. Cf. suubbes, s. pl., the short stumpy pro-
jections on a staff that has been roughly cut and trimmed, Spenser,
F.Q. i. 8..7. Snub is from the Swed. dial. suwbba, to clip, snip;
whence Swed. dial. szubba, 2 cow without horns or with cut horns,
Icel. suubbatir, snipped, clipped, with the end cut off. See Snub
above. And see Nose.


smell. (Du.) ‘ As if you snuffed up love by smelling love;’ L.L.L.
iii, 16. Spelt sauffe in Levins, ed. 1570; snoffe and snuffe in Pals-
grave.=MDu. snuffen, ‘to snuffe out the filth out of one’s nose’
(Hexham); cf. Du. suf, smelling, scent, snuffelen, to smell out;
allied to MDu. snuyven, Du. snuiven, to snort.--Swed. snufva, a cold,
catarrh ; snufven, a sniff or scent of a thing ; Swed. dial. snxavla, snofla,
snuffia, to snuffle (which is the frequent. form) ; Dan. snévle, to snuffle ;
G. schnauben, schnaufen, schnieben, to snuff, snort; from a Teut. base
*sneud-; Idg. base *sneup-. We also find G. schnupfen, a catarrh,
schnupfen, to take snuff; prov. G. schnuffeln, schniiffeln, to snuffle, to
smell (Fliigel). Der. snuff-le, the frequentative form; snuff, sb.,
powdered tobacco ; suuff-box, snuff-y.

SNUFF (2), to snip the top off a candle-wick. (E.) ME. suuffen,
to snuff out a candle, Wyclif, Exod. xxv. 38, note y (later version) ;
the earlier version has: ‘ where the snoffes ben quenchid’= where
the candle-snuffs are extinguished. B. This form snuffen is a
parallel form to *snuppen, *snoppen, which agrees with prov. E. snop,
to eat off, ascattle do young shoots (Halliwell). —Swed. dial. sxdppa,
to snip or cut off, esp. to snuff a candle (Rietz) ; cf. Norw. sxuppa,
snubba, to dock, cut off a top (Ross); supp, a stump (Aasen) ;
Hamburg sniiffe, the peak of a shoe (Richey); Dan. snubbe, to
nip off, the same word as E. snub; see Snub. Der. snuff (of a
candle), sb., ME. snoffe, as above; snuff-dishes, Exod. xxv. 38;
snuff-ers, Exod. xxxvii. 23.

SNUG, comfortable, lying close and warm. (Scand.) ‘ Where
you lay snug ;’ Dryden, tr. of Virgil, Past. iii. 24. Shak. has ‘ Snug
the joiner ;’ Mids. Nt. Dr. i. 2. 66. Cf. prov. E. snug, tight, hand-
some, Lancashire (Halliwell) ; szog, tidy, trimmed, in perfect order
(Cleveland Glossary). Of Scand. origin; cf. Icel. snoggr, smooth,
said of wool or hair; MSwed. snygg, short-haired, smooth, trimmed,
neat, Swed. snygg, cleanly, neat, genteel; Norweg. szégg, short,
trim; Dan. sndg (also snyg), neat, smart, tidy (Molbech); EFries.
sniigge, snigge, smooth, neat. Cf. Norw. snxugga, to arrange, get
ready. . The orig. sense was ‘trimmed’ or ‘cropped;’ cf. prov.
E. snag, to trim; South E. swig, to cut or chop off, whence Devon.
snig, close and private (i. e. snug); see Halliwell. See Snag. Der.
snug -ly, snug-ness.

SO, thus, in such a manner or degree. (E.) ME. so, Chaucer, C. T.
11; Northern sa, Barbour’s Bruce (passim) ; also swa, Chaucer, C. T.
4028 (A 4030), where the Northern dialect is imitated. AS.swd, so;
Grein, ii. 497.4 Du. zoo; Icel. sua, later svd, svo, so; Dan. saa; Swed.
sa; G. so; Goth. swa, so; swé, just as; swa-swé, just as, Teut. types
*swé, swo, swa. Cf. Gk. ds. B. From an oblique case of the Teut.
*swaz, Idg. *swos, one’s own (a reflexive pronominal base) ; whence
Skt. sva-, one’s own self, own, L. suus, one’s own. Thus so=‘ in
one’s own way.’ See Prellwitz (s. v. ws); Brugmann, i. § 362.

SOAK, to steep in a fluid. (E.) It also means to suck up, im-
bibe. ‘A sponge, that soaks up the king’s countenance ;’ Hamlet,
iv. 2.16. ‘This is the orig. sense ; the word is a derivative of to suck.
ME. soken, (1) to suck, (2) to soak; ‘Sokere, or he that sokythe,
sugens;’ Prompt. Pary. ‘ Sokyn yn lycure, as thyng to be made softe,’
id. From AS. socian, to soak, tr. and intr.; see Bosworth-Toller.
Allied to AS. soc-, weak grade of saican, to suck. Cf. AS. dasiican,
asiigan, to suck dry, whence the pp. Gsocene, dsogene; Grein, i. 43.
B. There is also the sb. soc, or gesoc, a sucking, Gen. xxi. 7, 8. See
Notes on E. Etym., p. 273. See Suck. Der. soak-er.

SOAM, a horse-load. (Late L.—Gk.) The Western E. equivalent
of E. seam, AS, seam; see Seam (2).

SOAP, a compound of oil or fat with soda or potash, used for
washing. (E.) ME. sopge, Rob. of Glouc. p. 6, 1.143. [The long o
is due to AS. @, as in stone from AS. stan, &c.] AS. sape, soap;
fElfric’s Homilies, i. 472, 1. 6.4+-Du. zeep; [Icel. sapa, Dan. seve,
Swed. sépa ; borrowed from AS.]; G. seife, OHG. seifa. B. Teut.
type *saipon, f.; from *saip, 2nd grade of Teut. *seipan, to trickle
(MHG. sifen, Low G. sipen, to be moist, OFries. stpa) ; see Seife in
Kluge. y. The L. sdpo (see Pliny, xxviii. 12. 51) was borrowed
from the Teutonic, not (as Pliny says) from Celtic. (From the L.
acc, saponem came F. savon, Ital. sapone, Span. xabon, &c.) The
truly cognate L. word would appear to be sébum, tallow, grease. The
W. sebon, Gael. siopunn, siabunn, Irish siabunn, seem to be borrowed
from the L. acc. saponem. Der. soap, verb; soap-y.

SOAR, to fly aloft. (F.—L.) ME. sorex. ‘As doth an egle,
whan him list to sore;’? Chaucer, C. T. 10437 (F 123). A term of
hawking, and accordingly of F. origin. =F. essorer, ‘ to expose unto,
or lay out in, the weather ; also, to mount or sore up;’ Cot. Cf.
Ital. sorare, ‘to soare in the aire;’ Florio.—Late L. *exaurare (not
found), to expose to the air; regularly formed from ex, out; and
aura, a breeze, the air. £. The Lat. aura was probably borrowed
from Gk. aipa, a breeze; it is formed with the suffix -ra, from AW,
to blow. The 4/AW is allied to /WE, to blow; see Air.


EP


578 SOB


SOB, to sigh convulsively, with tears. (E.) ME. sobben. ‘Swowed
and sobbed and syked’ [sighed]; P. Plowman, B. xiv. 326. Related
to AS. siofian, séofian, to lament; Atlfred, tr. of Boethius, c. xxxvi.
§ I, lib. iv. pr. 1; from “sud, weak grade of *sewd, variant of Teut.
*seup, to sup, suck in, ‘The word represents the convulsive sucking
in of air. B. This is clearly shown by the allied G. seufzen,
MHG. siuften, stiften, OHG. sufton, to sigh, formed from the OHG.
sb. sift, a sigh, sob; this sb. being again related to OHG. siifan, to
sup, sip, cognate with E. sup; see Sup. So also Icel. syptir
(=syftir), a sobbing. Der. sob, sb.

SOBER, temperate, sedate, grave. (F.—L.) ME. sobre, Chaucer,
C. T. 9407. —F. sobre, ‘sober;’ Cot.—L. sobrium, acc. of sdbrius,
sober. Compounded of sé-, prefix; and -brius, as in é-brius, drunken ;
both possibly related to the rare L. bria, a wine-vessel. The pre-
fix sd-, as in sd-cors, signifies apart from, or without; and sdbrius,
not drunken, is thus opposed to ébrius. S6- is related to sé-, which
before a vowel appears as séd-, as in séd-itio, lit. ‘a going apart.’
See Se-, prefix, and Ebriety. Der. sober-ly, sober-ness; also
sobrie-ty, from F. sobrieté, ‘sobriety,’ Cot., from L. ace. sdbrietatem.

SOBRIQUET, a nickname, assumed name. (F.—L. and C.)
Sometimes spelt soubriquet, but sobriquet is the mod. F. form.
Modern, not in Todd’s Johnson. Borrowed from F. sobriquet, ‘a
surname, nickname, a quip or cut given, a mock or flowt bestowed,
a jeast broken on a man;’ Cot. Another form is sotbriguet, also in
Cotgrave. f. Etym. disputed and uncertain. Cotgrave also spells
the word soubriquet, and Littré and Scheler note the occurrence of
soubzbriquet in a text of the 14th century with the sense of ‘a chuck
under the chin.’?” Here sovbz (mod. F. sous) answers to L. subtus,
below; and briquet isthe Norm. dial. form of F. brechet, brisket; see
Moisy. Hence sobriquet, properly a knock on the breast, hence, a
chuck under the chin, and then ‘a quip or cut given, a mock or
flout, a jeast broken on a man,’ [finally] ‘a nickname;’ Cotgrave.
‘Percussit super mentonem faciendo dictum le soubriquet;’ Act
A.D. 1355 in Archives du Nord de la France, iii. 35. ‘Donna deux
petits coups appeléz soubzbriquez des dois de la main soubz le men-
ton;’ Act A.D. 1398, ibid. in Ducange, s.v. Barba. In the
same way soubarbe, ‘the part between the chin and the throat, also
a check, twitch, jerk given to a horse with his bridle, endurer une
soubarbe, to indure an affront;’ Cot. If so, the sense is ‘ chuck
under the chin,’ hence, an affront, nickname. At the same time,
Cotgrave’s sotbriquet must be due to some popular etymology (prob.
from sot, foolish).

SOC, SOCAGE, law-terms. (E.) See Soke.

SOCIABLE, companionable. (F.—L.) In Shak. K. John, i. 188.
=F, sociable, ‘sociable ;’ Cot.—L. sociabilis, sociable; formed with
suffix -bilis from socid-re, to accompany. =L. socius, a companion,
lit. ‘a follower.’ =L. base soc-, second grade of seg-, appearing in
sequi, to follow; all from 4/SEQ, to follow; see Sequence. Der.
sociabl-y, sociable-ness, sociabili-ty. From L. socius is also formed the
adj. socialis, whence E. social, with the adv. social-ly, also social-i-ty,
social-ise, social-ist, social-ism. Also socie-ty, L.L.L., iv. 2. 166,
from MF. societé, ‘ society,’ Cot., which from L. acc. societatem. Also
dis-sociate, as-sociate.

SOCK, a sort of half stocking, buskin. (L.) ME. socke, Prompt.
Parv.; see Way’s note. AS. socc; ‘Soccus, soce;’ Voc. 47. 22.—L.
soccus, a. light shoe, slipper, sock, worn by comic actors, and so taken
as the symbol of comedy, as in Milton, L’Allegro, 132. Der. sock-et.

SOCKET, a hollow into which something is inserted. (F.—Du.)
‘Soket of a candylstykke or other lyke;’ Prompt. Parv. ME.
soket, King Alisaunder, 4415.=OF. soket, given by Roquefort only
as (1) a dimin. of F. soc, a ploughshare, and (2) a dimin, of F.
souche, a stump or stock of atree. B. [Of these, the F. soc is of
Celtic origin; cf. W. sweh, a (swine’s) snout, a ploughshare (Thur-
neysen, p. 112), and with this word we have here nothing to do.]
But souche appears in the Norman dial. as chougue (see Moisy), and is
allied to the Ital. ciocco, a stump or stock of a tree; see Florio, Cf.
Walloon sokett, a stump; F. dial. soguette, a stump of dead wood,
patois de la Meuse (Labourasse); MF. chouquet, ‘a block ;’ Cot.;
OF. chocquet, a support (socket) for an arblast (Godefroy); F. dial.
chouquet, a block on which one cuts wood, dimin. of chouque, a
stump, patois du pays de Bray (Decorde) ; Picard choke, a block
(Corblet); Walloon chogue, stump of a tree (Sigart). Prob. of
Teut. origin; perhaps from MDnu. schocke, ‘a shock, a cock, or a
heape,’ Hexham. See Shock (2). 4 The Du. sch- may have
caused difficulty ; hence Ital. zocco=ciocco. Note ‘une souche de
fourment,’ a shock of corn; Supp. to Godefroy.

SOD, turf, a surface of earth covered with growing grass. (E.)
“A sod, turfe, cespes;’ Levins, ed. 1570. Perhaps so called because
the turf was used as fuel for boiling (Weigand) ; or because sodden.
Cf. AS. ge-sod, a cooking; sod-en, pp. of séodan, to seethe. That the
connexion with the verb to seethe is real is apparent from the cognate


SOIL


terms.4-Du. zode, sod, green turf; MDu. zode, ‘seething or boiling,’
also, ‘a sodde or a turfe;’ Hexham. Also contracted to zoo in both
senses ; ‘zoo, a sod; het water is aan de zoo, the. water begins to
seeth ;” Sewel. Note also MDu. sood, a well (Hexham) ; so named
from the bubbling up of the water, and cognate with AS, séad,a well,
a pit, from the same verb (seethe).4-EFries. sod, a well ; sode, a cut
turf, also boiling, cooking; Dan. dial. sodd, saadd, a sod; OFries.
satha, sada, sod, turf, allied to sath, sad, a well ; Low G. sode, sod,
allied to sood, a well; G. sode, sod, turf, allied to G. sod, broth, also,
a bubbling up as of boiling water. See Seethe, Suds.

SOD, SODDEN;; see under Seethe.

SODA, oxide of sodium. (Ital.—L.) Modern; added by Todd
to Johnson. = Ital. soda, soda; MItal. soda, ‘a kind of fearne ashes
wherof they make glasses;’ Florio. Fem. of Ital. sodo, ‘solide,
tough, fast, hard, stiffe;’ Florio. This is a contracted form of Ital.
solido, solid; see Solid. So called, apparently, from the firmness or
hardness of the products obtained from glass-wort; cf. OF. soulde,
‘saltwort, glasswort,’ from the L. solida (fem. of solidus), which
Scheler supposes must have been the L. name of glass-wort. B. Note
that the Span. name for soda is sosa, which also means glass-wort;
but here the etymology is different, the name being given to the plant
from its abounding in alkaline salt. Sosa is the fem. of Span. soso,
insipid, orig.‘ salt;’ from L. salsus,salt; see Sauce. Der. sod-ium,
a coined word.

SODER, the same as Solder, q.v.

SODOMY, an unnatural crime. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) In Cot.
Cf. ME. sodomyte, Lydgate, Assembly of Gods, 708; also sodomite,
Cursor Mundi, 1. 27950. —F. sodomie, ‘ sodomy;’ Cot. So called
because it was imputed to the inhabitants of Sodom; Gen. xix. 5, =
F. Sodome, Sodom.=—L. Sodoma.=Gk. Sé5opa.—Heb. Seddm (with
initial samech) ; explained to mean ‘ burning’ in Stanley’s Sinai and
Palestine, cap. vii; but this is quite uncertain. Gesenius gives the
sense ‘ enclosure.”

SOFA, a long seat ‘with stuffed bottom, back, and arms. (Arab.)
‘He leaped off from the sofa in which he sat;’ Guardian, no. 167
[zot 198], Sept. 22, 1713. The story here given is said to be trans-
lated from an Arabian MS. ; this may be a pretence, but the word is
Arabic. = Arab. suffa(t), suffak, ‘asopha, a couch, a place for reclining
upon before the doors of Eastern houses, made of wood or stone;’
Rich. Dict., p. 936.— Arab. root saffa, to draw up in line, put a seat
to a saddle; ibid.

SOFFIT, the under side of an architrave or arch, also a ceiling.
(F.—Ital.—L.) F. soffite (Hatzfeld).—TItal. soffitta, a garret, a ceil-
ing (Barretti). Orig. fem. of the pp. soffitto, fixed beneath ; from
sof- (from L. sub, under), and fitto, pp. of figgere, to fix, from L.
figere, to fix. Thus it is (practically) a doublet of suffix.

SOFT, easily yielding to pressure, gentle, easy, smooth. (E.)
ME. softe, Wyclif, Matt. xi. 8; Chaucer, C. T. 12035 (C 101).
AS. sdfte, gen. used as an ady., Grein, ii. 464. The adj. formis com-
monly séfte (id. 423), where the 6 is further modified to @.4-OSax.
safto, softly, only inthe compar. saftur, Heliand, 3302; G. sanft,
soft; OHG. samfto, adv., softly, lightly, gently; Du. zacht (for
*zaft), whence G. sacht. Teut.type *samftoz; from *samjan- (Goth.
samjan), to please. Cf. Olrish s@im, mild, sam, rest; Gk. fjpepos,
tame, mild ; Skt. saman, mildness. Der. soft-ly, ME. softely (three
syllables), Chaucer, C. T. 4209 (A 4211) ; soft-ness, Layamon, 25549.
Also soft-en, in which the final -ez is added by analogy with length-en,
&c.; the ME. soften would only have given a later E. verb ¢o soft;
cf. softed in Ancren Riwle, p. 244, 1. 27. The right use of soften is
intransitive, as in Shak. Wint. Tale, ii. 2. 40.

SOHO, a cry of sportsmen, to call attention to the hunted animal.
(F.) ‘Soho! soho!’ Two Gent. of Verona, iii. 3. 189. ME. soho,
King Alisaunder, 3712. A better form is sa ho, as in Middleton,
Trick to Catch the Old One; A. iv. sc. 4. ‘Sohow is [as] moche to
say as sahow ; for because that it is short [i.e. easier] to say, we say
alwey sohow ;’ Venery de Twety, in Relig. Antiq. i. 154; ‘sa, sa, cy,
adesto, sohow,’ id. 152.—F. ¢a, ‘hither, . . follow hoe, come after,’
Cot.; and ho/ interj. The F. ga is from the popular L. ecce hac,
behold! this way! See Hatzfeld.

SOIL (1), ground, mould, country. (F.—L.) ME. soile; spelt
soyle, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1039.—AF. soil, Year-books of
Edw. I (1304-5), p. 533 (1305), p. 9; (allied to OF. soel, suel, MF.
sueil, ‘the threshold of a door ;’ Cot., from L. solium).=L. solea, a
covering for the foot, a sole, sandal, sole of the foot, timber on
which wattled walls are built. The Late L. solea also means ‘soil, or
ground,’ by confusion with L. solum, ground, whence F, sol, ‘ the soil,
ground;’ Cot. B. We cannot derive E. soil from F. sol, on account
of the diphthong; but it makes little difference, since L. solea, sole
of the foot, and solum, ground, are closely connected words. y. The
root of L. sol-ea, sol-um is uncertain; they may be allied to Sill.
Doublets, sole (1), sole (2). Ti. ;


SOIL


SOIL (2), to defile, contaminate. (F.—L.) ME. soilen, Ancren
Riwle, p. 84, 1.23; P. Plowman, B. xiv. 2. The sense is to cover with
mire; to take soil, lit. to betake oneself to muddy water, was a term
of the chase; see Halliwell. .‘ To go to soyle’ was said of the hart ;
Book of St. Albans, fol. e 4, back. —AF. soyler, Walter de Bibbes-
worth, in Wright’s Vocab. i. 171; OF. sodlier (12th cent., Littré), F.
souiller, ‘to soil,’ Cot.; whence ‘se souiller (of a swine), to take
soile, or wallow in the mire;’ id. —OF. soil, souil ; ‘ soil, or souil de
sanglier, the soile of a wilde boare, the slough or mire wherein he
hath wallowed;’ Cot. Cf. MItal. sogliare, ‘to sully, defile, or pol-
lute,’ Florio; also sogliardo (mod. Ital. sugliardo), ‘ slovenly, sluttish,
or hoggish ;’ id. Diez also cites Prov. solk, mire, sulhar, to soil ;
and sulha, a sow, which last is (as he says) plainly derived from L.
sucula, a young sow, dimin. of sus,a sow. SeeSow. 8. Similarly,
he explains the F. souid from the L. adj. suillus, belonging to swine,
derived from the same sb.—L. sis, a sow; see Sow. Korting,
§ 9247- y- It will be observed that the difference in sense be-
tween soil (1)=ground, and soil (2), sb.=mire, is so slight that the
words have doubtless frequently been confused, though really from
quite different sources. There is yet a third word with the same
spelling ; see Soil (3). Der. soil, sb., a spot, stain, a new coinage
from the verb ;-the old sb. soil, a wallowing-place (really the original
of the verb), is obsolete. ¢s> The AS. sol, mire, is not the orig.
of E. soil, but of prov. E. soal, sole, a dirty pool, Kent; E, D.S.
Gloss. C. 3. See Sully.

SOIL (3), to feed cattle with green grass, to fatten with feeding.
(F.—L.) See Halliwell; the expression ‘ soiled horse,’ i.e. a horse
high fed upon green food, isin King Lear, iv. 6.124. [Quite dis-
tinct from the words above.] Also spelt soul ; Halliwell gives ‘ soul,
to satisfy with food.’=OF. soeler, saoler (Supp. to Godefroy, s. v.
saouler) ; cf. AF. sauler, P. de Thaun, Bestiary, 1. 527, later saowler,
“to glut, cloy, fill, satiate;’ Cot. Mod. F. sotiler.— AF. saul, satis-
fied, Vie de St. Auban; OF. saol, adj. (Burguy), later saoul, ‘full,
cloied, satiated, Cot. Mod. F, sotil.—L. satullum, acc. of satullus,
filled with food; a dimin. form from satur, full, satiated, akin to
satis, enough. See Sate, Satiate, Satisfy.

SOIREE, an evening party. (F.—L.) Borrowed from French.
‘A friendly swarry ;’. Pickwick Papers, c. 36; spelt soiree in the
heading to the chapter.—F. soirée, ‘ the evening-tide,’ Cot.; hence a
party given in the evening. Cf. Ital. serata, evening-tide. Formed
as a fem. pp. from a (supposed) Late L. verb *sérare, to become
late; from L. sérus, late in the day, whence Ital. sera, F. soir,
evening. Cf. Olrish sir, W. hir, long.

SOJOURN, to dwell, stay, reside. (F.—L.) | ME. soiornen,
Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 3, last line; sosournen, Chaucer,
C. T. 4568 (B 148). (Here 1=j.)—AF. sojourner, Stat. Realm,
i. 277 (1336); OF. sojorner, sojourner, to sojourn ; also spelt sejorzer,
sejourner (Burguy). Mod. F. séjourner; cf. Ital. soggiornare. This
verb answers to a Late L. type *subdiurnare, composed of L. sub,
under, and diurnare, to stay, last long, derived from the adj. diurnus,
daily ; see Sub- and Diurnal or Journal. Der. sojourn-er;
sojourn, sb., K. Lear, i. 1. 48, ME. soiorne, sotorn, Barbour’s Bruce,
ix. 369, vii. 385. The AF. sb. appears both as sojourn and
sojour.

SOKE, SOC, a franchise, land held by socage. (E.) ‘ Soc, signi-
fies power, authority, or liberty to minister justice and execute laws ;
also the shire, circuit, or territory, wherein such power is exercised
by him that is endued with such a priviledge or liberty;’ Blount’s
Nomolexicon, ed. 1691. [Blount rightly notes the word as ‘Saxon,’
but under socage gives a wrong derivation from F. soc, a plough-share. |
‘ Sac and Sdc; sac was the power and privilege of hearing and de-
termining causes and disputes, levying of forfeitures and fines, exe-
cuting laws, and administering justice within a certain precinct; see
Ellis, Introduction to Domesday Book, i. 273. _ Sdc or Sdcn was
strictly the right of investigating or seeking, or, as Spelman defines
it, Cognitio quam dominus habet in curia sua, de causis litibusque
inter vassallos suos exorientibus. It was also the territory or pre-
cinct in which the sacu and other privileges were exercised; Gloss.
to Thorpe’s Diplomatarium, at p. 369 of which we find: ‘ic an
heom. perofer saca and sdcna’=I grant them thereover the privileges
of sacu and sdécn. See further in Schmidt, Die Gesetze der Angel-
sachsen, ed. 1858, p. 653. ‘ Soka, sute of court ; and therof cometh
Sokene ; but Sokene otherwhile is for to aske lawe in the gretter court ;’
Trevisa, tr. of Higden, ii. 95. £. Etymologically, sac (AS. sacu) is
the same word as E. sake; the orig. sense is ‘contention,’ hence a
law-suit, from AS. sacan, to contend; see Sake. Soken (AS. sdcn,
sdcen) is ‘an enquiry;’ closely connected with mod. E. seek, to in-
vestigate, and derived from AS. sdc, 2nd grade of sac-, as seen in sdc,
pt. t. of the same verb sacan; see Seek. Cf. Goth. sdkns, enquiry ;
sokjan, to seek; sakan, to contend. Hence Portsoken (ward) in
London, which Stow explains by ‘ franchise at the gate.’ Der. soc-


SOLE 579


age, a barbarous law-term, made by adding the F. suffix -age (L.
-aticum) to AS. sdc-. (The o is long.)

SOLACE, a comfort, relief. (F.—L.) ME. \solas, King Ali-
saunder, 1. 15; Chaucer, C. T. 13712 (B 1972).—OF. solaz, solace;
Burguy. (Here z=¢s.)—L. sdlacium, a comfort ; as if from an adj.
*solax; allied to the verb sdlari, to console, to comfort. Allied to
L. sollus, Gk. 6Aos, whole (Bréal, Prellwitz) ; Skt. sarva(s), whole.
Der. solace, verb, ME. solacen, P. Plowman, B. xix. 22, from OF.
solacier, solacer, to solace (Burguy). And see coz-sole.

SOLAN-GOOSE, the name of a bird. (Scand. and E.) The E.
goose is an addition; the Lowland-Scotch form is soland, which
occurs in Holland’s poem of the Houlate (Owlet), about A. D. 1450;
1, yoo. [Here the d is excrescent, as is so commonafter 2 ; cf. sound
from F, son,]—Icel. sila, also haf-stila, a gannet, solan goose (see
below) ; Norweg. swla, havsula, the same (Aasen). The Norweg. hav
(Icel. haf) means ‘ sea.’ B. As the Icel. sila is feminine, the
definite form is stiJan=the gannet; which accounts for the final 2 in
the E. word. Similarly, Dan. sol =sun, but solex =the sun ; whence
the Shetland word sooleex, the sun (Edmonston).

SOLAR, belonging to the sun. (L.) ‘The solar and lunary
year ;” Ralegh, Hist. of the World, b. ii. c. 3 (R.).—L. sdlaris, solar.
=—L. sol, the sun.+Icel. s6/; Goth. sauid; Lithuan. sdulé; Russ.
solnisé;. W. haul (for saul) ; Irish stil; Gk. fAvos, Homeric éAtos,
Doric déAtos, Cretan dBédtos (with long a); cf. Skt.su#ra(s). Brug-
mann, i. § 481. Der. sol-stice, q. v.

SOLDER, a cement made of fusible metal, used to unite two
metallic substances. (F.—L.) Sometimes spelt soder, and usually
pronounced sodder [sod‘ur]. Rich. spells it soulder, ‘To soder such
gold, there is a proper glue and soder;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny,
b. xxxili.c.5. ‘ I sowder a metall with sowlder, Ie soulde ;’ Palsgrave.
ME. sowdere ; sb. ‘Soldatura, sowdere;’ Voc. 612. 33.—OF, soudure
(14th cent., Littré), later also souldure, ‘a souldering, and particularly
the knot of soulder which fastens the led [lead] of a glasse window ;’
Cot.. Mod. F. soudure, solder; Hamilton.—OF. souder, soulder
(orig. solder), ‘to soulder, consolidate, close or fasten together ;’
Cot. [Hence also ME, souden, sowden, to strengthen ; ‘anoon hise
leggis and hise feet weren sowdid togidere;’ Wyclif, Acts, ili. 7.]—
L. solidare, to make firm.=L. solidus, solid, firm; see Solid. And
see Soldier. Der. solder, verb, formerly soder, as above. «> It
is usual to derive, conversely, the sb. solder from the verb; this is
futile, as it leaves the second syllable entirely unaccounted for. The
OF. verb souder yielded the ME. verb souden, as shown above, which
could only have produced a modern E, verb sod or sud. Inno case
can the E. suffix -er be due to the ending -er of the F. infinitive.
The French for what we call solder (sb.) is soudure, and in this we
find the obvious origin of the word. The pronunciation of final -ure
as -er occurs in the common word figure, pronounced [fig'er], whicb
is likewise from the F. sb. figure, not from a verb.

SOLDIER, one who engages in military service for pay. (F.—
L.) The common pronunciation of the word as sodger [soj‘ar] is pro-
bably old, and may be defended, the 7 being frequently dropped in
this word in old books. [Compare soder as the usual pronunciation
of solder; see the word above.] ME. soudiour, Will. of Paleme,
3954; souder, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p.109,1.14; schavaldwr,
sodiour, souldier, Barbour’s Bruce, v. 205, and various readings. So
called from their receiving soulde (i.e. pay). ‘He wolde paye them
their souldye or wagis .. . [he] hadde goten many a souldyour ;’
Reynard the Fox (Caxton’s translation), ed. Arber, p. 39.=—OF.
soldier (Burguy), also soldoier, surdoier ; Cot. has souldoyer, ‘a soul-
dier, one that fights or serves for pay.’ Cf. OF. soulde, ‘pay or
lendings for souldiers;” id. Also F. soldat,a soldier. B. Of these
words, OF. soldier answers to Late L. soldarius, a soldier; cf.
‘ Soldarius, a sowdeour ;’ Voc. 612. 32. The OF. soulde is from Late
L. soldum, pay; and F. soldat =soldatus, pp. of Late L. soldare, to
pay. All from Late L. solidus, a piece of money, whence is derived
(by loss of the latter part of the word) the OF. sol, ‘the French
shilling,’ Cot., and the mod. F. sou. We still use L. s. d. to signify
libre, solidi, and denarii, or pounds, shillings, and pence. The orig.
sense was ‘solid’ money.—L. solidus, solid; see Solid. Der.
soldier-like, soldier-ship, soldier-y.

SOLE (1), the under side of the foot, bottom of a boot or shoe.
(L.) ME. sole. ‘Sole of a foot, Planta; Sole of a schoo, Solea;’
Prompt. Parv. AS. sole, pl. solen (for solan). ‘ Solen, sole ;’ Voc.
125. 25.—L. solea, the sole of the foot or of a shoe.—L. solum, the
ground. See Soil (1). Doublet, soil (1), which is the F. form,
Der. sole, verb.

SOLE (2), a kind of flat fish. (F.—L.) ME. sole. ‘ Sole, fysche,
Solia ;? Prompt. Pary. ; cf. AF. soel, Liber Albus, p. 244. —F. sole,
‘the sole-fish ;” Cot.—L. solea, the sole of the foot, the fish called
the sole. The sole of the foot is taken as the type of flatness. See
Sole (1).

Ppa


580 SOLE


SOLE (3), alone, only, solitary, single. (F.—L.) ME. sool,
Lydgate, Troy-book, bk. i. ch. i. 1. 29; AF. sole, f., Liber Albus,
p- 219.—OF. sol, mod. F. seul, sole.—L. sdlum, acc. of sélus,
alone. Perhaps the same word as OL. sollus, entire, complete in
itself (hence alone); Bréal. Or allied to L. sd- (in sd-brius) and
sé-d- in séd-itio (Walde); see Sober. Der. sole-ly, sole-ness. From
L. sdlus are also de-sol-ate, soli-loquy, sol-it-ar-y, soli-tude, solo.

SOLECISM, impropriety in speaking or writing. (F.—L. —Gk.)
In Minsheu and Cotgrave. = MF. soloecisme, ‘a solecisme, or incon-
gruity ;’? Cot.=—L, solecismum, acc. of solecismus.—Gk. codonopds,
sb. Gk. coAoxifev, to speak incorrectly. Gk, adj. odAou«os, speak-
ing incorrectly, like an inhabitant of SéAoz (Solo?) in Cilicia, a place
colonised by Athenian emigrants, who soon corrupted the Attic
dialect which they at first spoke correctly. Others say it was
colonised by Argives and Lydians from Rhodes, who spoke a corrupt
dialect of Greek. See Diogenes Laertius, i. 51; and Smith, Class.
Dict. Der. solec-ist, solec-ist-ic-al.

SOLEMN, attended with religious ceremony, devout, devotional,
serious. (F.—L.) ME. solempne. ‘In the solempne dai of pask;’
Wyclif, Luke, ii. 41. Hence solempnely, adv., Chaucer, C. T. 276
(A 274).—OF. solempne (Roquefort); the mod. F. has only the
derivative solennel.=L. sdlemnem, acc. of sdlemnis, later forms
solennis, sollennis, as if it meant occurring annually like a religious
rite, religious, festive, solemn; from soll-us, entire, complete, and
annus, a year, which becomes -enxnus in composition, as in E. bi-
ennial, tri-ennial, But the latter part was orig. -emnis, perhaps from
amb-, around. . The OL. sollus is cognate with W. holl, entire,
Gk. ddAos (Ion. obAos), whole; Skt. sarva(s), all, whole. Brugmann,
i. § 417. Der. solemn-ly, solemn-ness ; solemn-ise, spelt solempnyse in
Palsgrave; solemn-is-er, solemn-is-at-ion; also solemn-i-ty, ME.
solempnitee, Chaucer, C. T. 2704 (A 2702).

SOL-FA, to sing the notes of the gamut. (L.) ME. solfye, solfe ;
P. Plowman, B. v. 423; Reliquize Antique, i. 292. ‘They. . solfa
so alamyre’=they sol-fa so a-la-mi-re; Skelton, Colin Clout, 107.
To sol-fa is to practise singing the scale of notes in the gamut, which
contained the notes named wt, re, mi, sol, fa, la, si, ‘These names are
of Latin origin; see Gamut. Der. solfeggio, from Ital. solfeggio,
sb., the singing of the sol-fa or gamut. Also sol-mi-s-at-ion, a word
coined from the names of the notes sol and mi.

SOLICIT, to petition, seek to obtain. (F.—L.) ME. soliciten ;
spelt solycyte in Caxton, tr. of Reynard the Fox, ed. Arber, p. 70, 1. 24.
= MF. soliciter, ‘to solicit;’ Cot.—L. sollicitare, to agitate, arouse,
excite, incite, urge, solicit. L. sollicitus, lit. wholly agitated, aroused,
anxious, solicitous.—L. solli-, for sollus, whole, entire; and citus,
pp- of ciére, to shake, excite, cite; see Solemn and Cite. Der.
solicit-at-ion, Oth. iv. 2. 202, from MF. solicitation, ‘a solicita-
tion,’ Cot. Also solicit-or (solicitour in Minsheu), substituted for
MF. soliciteur, ‘a solicitor, or follower of a cause for another,’
Cot.; from L. acc. sollicitatorem. And see Solicitous. (Spelt
solliciter in F.)

SOLICITOUS, very desirous, anxious, eager. (L.) In Milton,
P. L. x. 428. Englished from L. sdlicitus, better spelt sollicitus, by
change of -us to -ous, as in ardu-ous, strenu-ous, &c. See Solicit.
Der. solicitous-ly ; solicit-ude, q.v.

SOLICITUDH, anxious care, trouble. (F.—L.) In Sir T.
More, Works, p. 1266 h.= MF. solicitude, ‘ solicitude, care;’ Cot. =
L. sdlicitidinem, acc. of sdlicituido (better sollicitudo) anxiety.—L.
sollicitus, solicitous ; see Solicitous,

SOLID, firm, hard, compact, substantial, strong. (F.—L.) ME.
solide, Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, pt. i. §17, 1. 15.—F. solide, ‘solid;’
Cot. = L. solidum, acc. of solidus, firm, solid. Allied to Gk. dAos, whole,
-entire, and Skt. sarva(s), all, whole; see Solemn. Der. solid-ly,
solid-ness. Also solid-ar-i-ty, ‘a word which we owe to the F. Com-
munists, and which signifies a fellowship in gain and loss, in honour
and dishonour, ..a being, so to speak, all in the same bottom,’
Trench, Eng. Past and Present; Cotgrave has the adj. solidaire,
“solid, whole, in for [or] liable to the whole.’ Also solid-i-fy, from
mod. F, solidifier, to render solid; solid-i-fic-at-ion. Also solid-i-ty,
from F’. solidité, which from L. acc. soliditatem. From L. solidus
are also con-solid-ate, con-sols, sold-er (or sod-er), sold-ier, soli-ped.
And cf. catholic (from Gk. ddos), holo-caust.

SOLILOQUY, a speaking to oneself. (L.) Spelt soliloguie in
Minsheu, ed. 1627. Englished from L. sdliloguium, a talking to
oneself, a word formed by St. Augustine; see Aug. Solilog. ii. 7,
near the end.—L. sdli-, for sdlus, alone; and logui, to speak; see
Sole (3) and Loquacious. Der. solilogu-ise, a coined word.

SOLIPED, an animal with an uncloven hoof. (F.—L.) ‘ Solipeds
or firm-hoofed animals;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulgar Errors, b. vi.c. 6. § 9.
A contraction for solidiped, which would be a more correct form. =
OF. solipede (Godefroy); F. solipéde (Hatzfeld).— L. solidiped-, stem
of solidipés, solid-hoofed, whole-hoofed; Pliny, x. 65; x. 73.—L.


SOME


solidi-, for solidus, solid; and pés, a foot, cognate with E. foot; see
Solid and Foot.

SOLITARY, lonely, alone, single. (F.—L.) ME. solitarie,
P. Plowman, C. xviii. 7.—AF. solitarie, Langtoft’s Chron. i. 176 ;
usually solitaire, as in mod. F.=L. sdlitarium, acc. of sdlitarius,
solitary. itatari


from sdli-, for sdlus, alone; see Sole (3). Cf. eredit-ary, milit-ary
from the stems herédit-, milit-; also propriet-ary, similarly formed
from the sb. proprietas. Der. solitari-ly, -ness. Also solitaire, from
F. solitaire. And see soli-tude, sol-o.

SOLITUDE, loneliness. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. —F.
solitude, ‘ solitude ;? Cot. =. sdlitido, loneliness. = L. sdli-, for sdlus,
sole ; with suffix -tuido. See Sole (3).

SOLO, a musical piece performed by one person. (Ital.—L.)
‘Solos and sonatas;’ Tatler, no. 222; Sept. 9, 1710.—Ital. solo,
alone. = L, sdlum, acc. of sdlus, sole ; see Sole (3).

SOLMISATION, a singing of sol-mi; see Sol-fa.

SOLSTICH, one of the two points in the ecliptic at which the
sun is at his greatest distance fromthe equator ; the time when the
sun reaches that point. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. solstice,
‘ the solstice, sun-stead, or stay of the sun;’ Cot.—L. solstitium, the
solstice; lit. a point (in the ecliptic) at which the sun seems to stand
still. L. sd, the sun; and *sétit-um, for statum, supine of sistere, to
make to stand still, a reduplicated form from stare, to stand, cognate
with E. stand; see Solar and Stand. Der. solstiti-al, adj., from
MF. solstitial or solsticial (Cot.) 3 F. solsticial.

SOLUBLE, capable of being dissolved. (F.—L.) Spelt soluble
and solubil in Levins, ed. 1570,—F. soluble (13th cent., Littré).—L.
solubilem, acc. of solubilis, dissolvable. Formed, with suffix -bilis,
from soli-, found in solu-tus, pp. of soluere, to solve, dissolve; see
Solve. Der. solubili-ty, a coined word.

SOLUTION, a. dissolving, resolving, explanation, discharge.
(F.—L.) ME. solucion, Gower, C. A. ii. 86; bk. iv. 2515; it was
a common term in alchemy.=—F. solution, ‘a discharge, resolution,
dissolution ;’ Cot.=L. soliitionem, acc. of solitio, lit. a loosing; cf,
solit-us, pp. of soluere, to loose, resolve, dissolve; see Solve.

SOLVE, to explain, resolve, remove. (L.) Not an early word.
In Milton, P. L. viii. 55.—L. soluere, to loosen, relax, solve; pp.
solitus. A compound verb; compounded of so-, allied to seé-,
apart ; and Jwere, to loosen. For the prefix, see Sober. Luere is
from Ju-, weak grade of LEU, to set free, appearing also in Gk.
Av-ev, to set free, release; see Lose. Brugmann, i.§ 121. Der.
solv-able, from F. solvable, orig. ‘payable,’ Cot. Also solv-ent,
having power to dissolve or pay, from L. solwent-, stem of pres.
part. of soluere; and hence solv-enc-y. Also solv-er; ab-solve, ab-
solute, as-soil; dis-solve, dis-solute; re-solve, re-solute, And see
soluble, solution.

SOMBRE, gloomy, dusky. (F.—L.) <A late word; in Todd’s
Johnson. =F. sombre, ‘close, dark, cloudy, muddy, shady, dusky,
gloomy ;’ Cot. It answers to Span. adj. sombrio,adj., shady, gloomy,
from the sb. sombra, shade, dark part of a picture, also a ghost. So
also Port. sombrio, adj., from sombra, shade, protection, ghost. And
cf. Span. a-sombrar, to frighten, terrify ; mod. Prov. soulowmbrous,
dark. B. Diez refers these words to a L. form *sub-umbrare, to
shadow or shade; a conjecture which is supported by the occur-
rence of Prov. sotz-ombrar, to shade (Scheler). There is also an
OF. essombre, a dark place (Burguy), which is probably due to a
L. form *ex-umbrare, and this suggests the same form as the original
of the present word, a solution which is adopted by Littré. We
may conclude that sombre is founded upon the L. wmbra, a shadow,
with a prefix due either to L. ex or to L. sub. See Korting, § 9211.
See Umbrage. Der. sombre-ness.

SOMBRERO, a broad-brimmed hat. (Span.—L.) ‘ With
a great Sombrero or shadow ouer their heads;’ Hakluyt, Voy. ii.
pt. I. p. 258.—Span. sombrero. Span. sombra, shade (above).

SOME, a certain number or quantity, moderate in degree. (E.)
ME. som, sum; pl. swmme, somme, some. ‘Summe seedis’=some
seeds ; Wyclif, Matt. xiii. 4. ‘ Som in his bed, som in the depe see’
=one man in his bed, another in the deep sea; Chaucer, C. T. 3033
(A 3031). AS. sum, some one, a certain one, one; pl. sume, some ;
Grein, ii. 493.4Icel. sumr; Dan. somme, pl.; Swed. somlige, pl.
(=some-like) ; Goth. sums, some one; OHG. sum. . All from
a Teut. type *swmoz, some one,.a certain one} from sum-, weak
grade of *sam-, as in E. same; see Same. The like change from
a to «(o) occurs in the suffix -some, which see. Der. some-body,
Merry Wives, iv. 2. 1213 some-how; some-thing=AS. sum ding;
some-time, ME. somtime, Chaucer, C. T. 1245 (A 1243); some-times,
formed from sometime by the addition of the adverbial suffix -s, the
sign of the gen. sing., not of the nom. pl. (cf. need-s, whil-s-t, twi-ce,
8c.) ; some-what, ME. somhwat, Ancren Riwle, p. 44.1. 9=AS. sum


-SOME


hwet; some-where, ME. som-hwer, Ormulum, 6929; some-whither,
Titus Andron. iv. I, 11.
-SOME, suffix. (E.) AS. -sum, as in wyn-sum (lit. love-some), E.


win-some, <A stronger grade of the same suffix appears in Icel. /rid-
samr, peaceful, G. lang-sam, slow. See Some, above; and see
Same.


SOMERSAULT, SOMERSET, a leap in which a man turns
heels over head. (F.—Prov.—L.) Commonly pronounced summer-
set, where -set is an unaccented form of ~-sault or -saut. Spelt sum-
mersaut in Drayton’s Polyolbion, song 6. 1. 52; somersault in
Palsgrave ; somersaut in Harington’s Ariosto, xxxv. 68 (Nares) ; see
further in Rich. and Nares.—OF. sombresaut (in 1393, Supp. to
Godefroy), MF. soubresault, ‘a sobresault or summersault, an active
trick in tumbling ;’ Cot. ; F. soubresaut. — Prov. sobresaut (Hatzfeld) ;
cf. Ital. soprasalto; where sopra=‘ above, ouer, aloft, on high,’ and
salto=‘a leape, a skip, a iumpe, a bound, a sault;’ Florio,—L.
supra, above ; and saltum, acc. of saltus, a leap, bound, formed like
saltus, pp. of salire, to leap. See Supra and Salient.

SOMNAMBULIST, one who walks in his sleep. (L.3 with
Gk. sufix.) A coined word ; an early example is given in Todd’s
Johnson, from Bp. Porteus’ Sermons, A.D.1789. The suffix -ist =F.
-iste, from L. -ista=Gk, -corns; asin bapt-ist.—L. somn-us, sleep;
and ambul-are, to walk. See Somniferous and Ambulation.
Der. somnambul-ism.

SOMNIFEROUES, causing sleep. (L.) ‘ Somniferous potions;’
Burton, Anat. of Melancholy, pt. i. sect. 2. memb. 1, subsect. 5.
Coined by adding suffix -ous (properly=F. -eux, from L. -dsus) to
L. somnifer, sleep-bringing. = L. sommni-, for somnus, sleep ; and -fer,
bringing, from ferre, to bring, cognate with E. Bear, verb. B. The
L. somnus represents an older form *swepnos, cognate with Skt.
svapna-, sleep, and allied to sop-or, sleep ; from 4/SWEP, to sleep ;
see further under Soporiferous. Brugmann, i. § 121.

SOMNOLENCKH, sleepiness. (F.—L.) ME. somnolence,
spelt sompnolence, Gower, C. A. ii. 92 ; bk. iv. 2703. —F. somnolence
(Littré) ; OF. somnolence (Hatzfeld).—L. somnolentia, also somnu-
lentia, sleepiness. = L. somnulentus, sleepy ; formed with suffix -lentus
(as in ému-lentus, drunken) from somnu-s, sleep, allied to sopor, sleep;
see Somniferous, Soporiferous. Der. somnolent, adj., from
F. somnolent, L. somnulentus.

SON, a male child or descendant. (E.) ME. sone (properly a
dissyllable) ; Chaucer, C. T. 79 ; older form suze, Ancren Riwle, p. 26,
I. x. AS. sunu,a son; Grein, ii. 496.4-Du. zoon; Icel. sunr, sour ;
Dan. séx; Swed. son; G. sohn; OHG. sunu; Goth. sunus. Teut.
type *sunuz. Cf. Lithuan. sinus; Russ. suin’; Gk. vids (for *auds) ;
Skt. stinu-, a son, from Skt. sti, su, to beget, bear, bring forth; cf.
Olrish suth, birth. Brugmann, i. §§ 104, 292. Thus son=one who
is begotten, a child. Der. son-in-law; son-ship; a coined word.

SONATA, a kind of musical composition. (Ital.—L.) ‘An
Italian sonata ;’ Addison, Spectator, no. 179. ‘Of a sonata, on
his viol;’ Prior, Alma, iii. 436.—Ital. sonata, ‘a sounding, or fit
of mirth;’ Florio. Hence used in the technical sense. = L. sonata, fem.
of sondtus, pp. of sondre, to sound; see Sound (3), and Sonnet.

SONG, that which is sung, a short poem or ballad. (E.) ME.
song, Chaucer, C. T. 95. AS. sang ; varied to song ; Grein, ii. 390.
Cf. AS. sang, 2nd grade of singan, to sing; see Sing.+Du. zang ;
Icel.séngr ; Swed. sdng; Dan. and G. sang; Goth. saggws (= sangws).
Cf. Gk. dun, voice. Der. song-ster, used by Howell, L’Estrange,
and Dryden (Todd, no references); from AS. sangystre (better
sangestre), Voc. 308. 12, as a gloss to L. cantrix ; formed with double
suffix -es-tre from sang, a song; as to the force of the suffix, see
Spinster. Hence songstr-ess, Thomson’s Summer, 746; a coined
word, made by needlessly affixing the F. suffix -esse (L. -issa, from
Gk. -caaa) to the E. songster, which was orig. used (as shown above)
as a feminine sb, Also sing-song, Fuller’s Worthies, Barkshire (R.);
a reduplicated form.

SONNET, a rimed poem, of fourteen lines. (F.—Ital.—L.) In
Shak. Two Gent. iii. 2,69. See ‘Songes and Sonettes’ by the Earl
of Surrey, in Tottell’s Miscellany. =F’. sonnet, ‘a sonnet, or canzonet,
a song (most commonly) of 14 verses;’ Cot.—Ital. sonetto, ‘a
sonnet, canzonet;’ Florio, Dimin. of sono, ‘a sound, a tune;’
Florio. = L. sonum, acc. of sonus, a sound; see Sound (3). Der.
sonnet-eer, from Ital, sonettiere, ‘a composer of sonnets,’ Florio; the
suffix -eer (Ital. -iere) is due to L. suffix -Grius.

SONOROUS, loud-sounding. (L.) Properly soxdrous ; it will
probably, sooner or later, become sdnorous. ‘Sondrous metal ;’
Milton, P. L. i. 540; and in Cotgrave. Doubtless taken directly
from the L. sondrus, loud-sounding, by the change of -us to -ous, as
in arduous, strenuous, and numerous other words. [The F. sonoreux,
‘sonorous, loud,’ is in Cotgrave; this would probably have produced
an E. form sdnorous, the length of the Latin penultimate being lost
sight of.]}=—L. sonor (gen. sozdr-is), sound, noise; allied to sonus,


SOPHIST


sound; see Sound (3). Der. sonorous-ly, -ness.
sonowre occurs in the Book of St. Albans, fol. d 3.

SOON, immediately, quickly, readily. (E.) ME. sone (dissyllabic) ;
Chaucer, C. T. 13442 (B 1702). AS. sdxa, soon; Grein, ii. 465.4
OSax. sana, sino; also OF ries. san, sdn; OSax. san; OHG. sin.
B. We find also Goth. suns, soon, at once, immediately, Matt. viii. 3.

SOOT, the black deposit due to smoke. (E.) ME. sot (with
long 0); King Alisaunder, 6636. AS. sdt, soot; ‘ Fuligine, soote,’
Voc. 404. 32; we also find ge-sdtig, adj. sooty (Toller).+Icel. sot;
Swed. sot; Dan. sod (for sot).4-Lithuan. sddis, soot; usually in the
pl. form sddzei ; whence the adj. sodzotas, sooty, and the verb apsddinti,
to blacken with soot, besmut. B. The Lithuan. form is valuable as
showing that the form soot is truly Teutonic; and suggests a deriva-
‘tion from Idg. séd-, the 6-grade of 4/SED, to sit, rest upon. See
Sit. (Noreen, § 146; Streitberg, § 95.) Der. soot-y, scot-i-ness.

SOOTH, adj., true; sb., truth. (E.) The adjectival sense is the
older one. ME. soth (with long o), adj., true; Pricke of Conscience,
7687. Commoner as a sb., meaning ‘the true thing,’ hence ‘ the
truth ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 847 (A 845). AS. sdd, adj., true (very
common); Grein, ii. 460, Hence sdd, neuter sb., a true thing, truth ;
id. 462. The form sd0 stands for *san¥, the x being lost before the ¢h,
as in 760, a tooth, which stands for */and.+Icel. sannr (for *sandr);
Swed. sanz; Dan. sand. B. All from Teut. type *santhoz, true;
Fick, iii. 318; Idg. type *sontos, short for *es-oné-, orig. signifying
‘being,’ or ‘that which is,’ hence that which is real, truth; a present
participial form from the 4/ES, to be. The same loss of initial e
occurs in the L. -sezs as found in pre-sens (stem pre-sent-), preserved
in E, pre-sent; and again in the Skt. satya-, true (for *es-ant-ya) ; so
also we have G. sind=L. sunt =Skt. santi, they are, all answering to
Idg. *esanti, The meaning ‘true,’ ‘ real,’ appears already in the
Skt. participle sat, a weaker form of sont= (e)sont, y. Hence we
conclude that the very interesting word sooth meant orig. no more
than ‘being,’ and was at first the present participle of ES, to be.
See Are, Essence, and Suttee. Der. /or-sooth, =for a truth,
AS. for s6d, as in ‘ wite pti for sod’ =know thou for a truth, Alfred,
tr. of Boethius, lib. ii. pr. 2, cap. vii. § 3. Also sooth-fast, true
(obsolete), from AS, sddfest, Grein, ii. 463, where the suffix is the
same as in stead-fast and shame-fast (now corrupted to shame-faced).
And see sooth-say, and soothe.

SOOTHE, to please with gentle words or flattery, to flatter,
appease. (E.) The orig. sense is ‘to assent to as being true,’ hence
to say yes to, to humour by assenting, and generally to humour.
‘Sooth, to flatter immoderatelie, or hold vp one in his talke, and
affirme it to be true, which he speaketh ;’ Baret (1580). ‘Is’t good
to soothe him in these contraries?’ Com. of Errors, iv. 4.82. ‘ Sooth-
ing the humour of fantastic wits ;” Venus and Adonis, 850. Cf. the
expression ‘words of sooth,’ Rich. II, iii. 3. 136. ‘I shall sooth it,”
I must confirm it, Faire Em, A. iii. sc. 11. ME, sodiex, to confirm,
verify ; whence ‘sodet, confirmed, O. Eng. Homilies, i. 261,1.8. AS.
ge-sddian (where the prefix ge- makes no difference), to prove to be
true, confirm; Dooms of Edwardand Guthrum, sect. 6, in Thorpe’s
Ancient Laws, i. 170. Cf. AS. gesdd, a parasite, flatterer, in a gloss
(Bosworth), — AS, sod, true; see Sooth. Cognate verbs occur in
the Icel. saxna, Dan. sande, to verify, confirm.

SOOTHSAY, to foretell, tell the truth beforehand. (E.) In
Shak. Antony, i. 2.52. Compounded of sooth and say; see Sooth
and Say. We find the sb. soothsayer, spelt zof-zigger (in the
OKentish dialect) in the Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 256, 1. 3 from
bottom; spelt sothsaier, Gower, C. A. iii. 164; bk. vii. 2348. We
also find the AS. sb. sddsegen, a true saying, in A‘lfric’s Homilies, ii.
250, 1. 11; and the adj. sd¥sagol, truth-speaking, Voc. 316.9. Der.
sooth-say-er ; sooth-say-ing, Acts, xvi. 16.

SOP, anything soaked or dipped in liquid to be eaten. (E.) ME.
sop, soppe; ‘a sop in wyn,’ Chaucer, C. T. 336 (A 334); spelt soppe,
P. Plowman, B. xv. 175. AS. *soppe, not found; but we find the
strong form sopp (Napier’s Glosses, 56. 10); the derived verb soppi-
gan, to sop, A. S. Leechdoms, ii. 228, last line; and the compound
sb. sop-cuppe (written sdp-cuppe), a sop-cup, in Thorpe’s Diploma-
tarium fyi Saxonici, pp. 553, 554; so that the word is certainly
English. From Teut. *swp-, weak grade of siipan-, to sup, as seen
in AS. stipan, to sup; see Sup.+Icel. soppa, f., a sop; soppa af vine
=a sop in wine; cf, sopinn, pp. of supa, to sup; cf. also sopi, a sup,
sip, mouthful. Cf. MDu. soppe,‘asop;’ Hexham. 4 Soup isa
F. form from the same root, and has been borrowed back again into
some Teutonic tongues, as e.g. in the case of G. suppe, soup, broth.
Der. sop, verb, spelt soppe in Levins, from AS, soppigan, to sop, men-
tioned above. Also sopp-y, soaking, wet ; sops-in-wine (see Nares).
Also milk-sop = one who sups milk; see Milksop. And see Soup.

SOPHIST, a captious reasoner. (F.—L.—Gk.) Bacon refers to
the Sophists; Adv. of Learning, bk. ii.c.xiv.§ 6. But the form most
in use in old authors was not sophist, but sophister. Frith has sophisme,


581
The ME. form


582 SOPHY


sophistry, and sophister all in one sentence; Works, p. 44, col. 2.
Shak. has sophister, 2 Hen. VI, v. 1. 191; Palsgrave has sophyster.
The final -er is needlessly added, just as in philosoph-er, and was
due to an OF. form sophistre (sofistre in Godefroy, x. 689), substi-
tuted for the true form sophiste.—F. sophiste, ‘a sophister ;’ Cot.=
Late L. sophista.=. Gk. cogiorns, a cunning or skilful man; also, a
Sophist, a teacher of arts and sciences for money; see Liddell
and Scott.=Gk. gopi¢ey, to instruct, lit. to make wise.—Gk.
copés, wise.. Brugmann, i. § 339. Der. sophist-r-y, ME. sophis-
trie, Chaucer, Leg. of Good Women, 137, from F. sophisterie,
‘sophistry,’ Cot. Also sophist-ic, from L. sophisticus, which from
Gk. copiartinds ; sophist-ic-al, sophist-ic-al-ly; sophist-ic-ate, used in
the pp. sophisticatid by Skelton, Garland of Laurell, 110, from Late L.
sophisticatus, pp. of sophisticare, to corrupt, adulterate ; cf. ‘ sophisticate
and countrefeted ;’. Maundeville, Tray. ch. v. p. 52. Also sophism
(used by Frith as above), from F. sophisme, ‘a sophisme, fallacy,
trick of philosophy,’ Cot., which from L. sophisma=Gk. odgucpa,
a device, captious argument. Also philo-sophy, q.v.

SOPHY, a (former) title of the Shah of Persia. (Pers.—Arab,)
In Shak. Merch. Ven. ii. 1. 25; Tw. Nt. ii. 5. 197.— Pers. Safi, used
as a title, A.D. 1505-1736; ‘so named from Ismael Safi, the first
monarch of this house .. from a private ancestor of that prince,
called Safiyu’d’din (the purity of religion), who was contemporary
with Tamerlane ;’ Rich. Dict. p. 938.—Arab. safiy, pure. . @ Not
to be confused with Suji,a Moslem mystic; from Arab. suifiy, in-
telligent. See Devic; and Notes on E. Etym., p. 273. But see
Yule, who says that Safi was also a Suji (devotee).

SOPORIFEROUS, causing or inducing sleep. (L.) ‘£ Sopori-
ferous medicines;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 975. Coined by adding the
suffix -ous (properly=F. -eux, from L. -dsus) to L. soporifer, sleep-
inducing. = L. sopdri-, decl. stem of sopor, sleep ;. and -fer, bringing,
from ferre, cognate with E. Bear, verb. . L. sopor is from
WA SWEP, to sleep, appearing in Skt. svap, to sleep, Gk. tmvos, sleep,
AS. swefen, a dream; see Brugmann, i. § 551. See soporific and
somniferous,

SOPORIFIC, inducing sleep. (L.) ‘ Soporific or anodyne vir-
tues ;’ Locke, Human Understanding, b. ii. c. 23 (R.). A coined
word, as if from L. *sopdrificus ; from sopdri-, decl. stem of sopor,
sleep ; and -/icus, causing, from facere, to make. See Soporiferous
and Fact. And see Somniferous.

SOPRANO, the highest kind of female voice. (Ital.—L.) A
musical term. = Ital. soprano, ‘ soveraigne, supreme, also, the treble in
musicke;’ Florio. Late L. superanus, sovereign; see Sovereign.
Doublet, sovereign.

SORB, the fruit of the service-tree. (F.—L.) Palsgrave has:
‘Sorbe, a kynde of frute, [F.] sorbe. —L. sorbum, the fruit of the
service-tree ; cf. sorbus, the service-tree. See Service-tree.

SORCERY, casting of lots, divination by the assistance of evil
spirits, magic. (F.—L.) ME. sorcerie, Chaucer, C. T. 5175 (B755) ;
King Alisaunder, 478.—OF. sorcerie, casting of lots, magic. OF.
sorcier, a sorcerer.=Late L. sortidrius, a teller of fortunes by the
casting of lots, a sorcerer; Late L. sortidre, to cast lots, used A.D.
1350 (Ducange); cf. L. sortiri, to obtain by lot.—L..sorti-, decl.
stem of sors, a lot; see Sort. Der: sorcer-er, Shak. Temp. iii. 2.
49, where the final -er is needlessly repeated, just as in poulter-er,
upholster-er ; the form sorcer would have sufficed to represent the OF.
sorcier mentioned above; cf. ME. sorser (for sorcer), a sorcerer;
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1579. Also sorcer-ess, coined as a fem.
form of sorcer-er by the addition of -ess (F. -esse, Lat. -issa, Gk. -tcoa)
to the short form sorcer as appearing in sorcer-y; the ME. sorceresse
occurs in Gower, C. A. iii. 49; bk. vi. 1434; from AF. sorceresse,
French Chron. of London (Camden Soc.), p. 3. -

SORDID, dirty, mean, vile. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. v. 5. 23.
—F*. sordide, ‘sordid ;’ Cot.—L. sordidus, vile, mean, orig. dirty. =
L. sordi-, from sordés, dirt, smuttiness, orig. blackness; allied to
Russ. sor’, filth. See Brugmann, i. p. 1092. Der. sordid-ly, -ness.

SORE, wounded, tender or susceptible of pain, grieved, severe.
(E.) ME. sor (with long 0), grievous, Ancren Riwle, p. 208, 1. 2;
commoner as sore (dissyllabic), adverb, Chaucer, C. T. 7961 (E85).
AS. sar, painful; Grein, ii. 391; the change from 4 to long o being
regular, as in stone, bone, from AS. stan, ban.4-Du. zeer, sore; also
as adv. sorely, very much ; Icel. sdrr, sore, aching ; Swed. sdr ; OHG.
sér, wounded, painful; cf. OHG. séro, mod. G. sehr, sorely, ex-
tremely, very; G. ver-sehren, to wound, lit. to make sore. . All
from Teut, type *sairoz, sore ; Fick, iii. 313. Cf. Olrish saeth, sdeth,
tribulation. Der. sore, ady., ME. sore, AS. sare, Grein; sore-ly,
sore-ness.. Also sore, sb., orig. a neuter sb., and merely the neuter of
the adjective, occurring in AS. sar (Grein), cognate with Du. zeer,
Icel. sar, Swed. sdr, Goth. sair, OHG. sér, all used as sbs. Also
Sorr-y, q.V«


SORREL (1), a plant allied to the dock, (F.-MHG.) ‘ Sorell,


SORTIE


an herbe;’ Palsgrave.= OF. sorel, ‘the herb sorrell or sour-dock ;”
Cot.. Mod. F. surelle (Littré). So named from its sour taste;
formed with the suffix -el (L. -ellus) from MHG. sur (G. sauer),
sour, cognate with E. Sour, q.v. Hence also we find AS. sire,
sorrel, Cockayne’s Leechdoms, Gloss. to vol. ii; from AS. sir,


sour.

SORREL (2), of a reddish-brown colour. (F.—Teut.) ‘ Sorrell,
colour of an horse, sorrel ;’ Palsgrave. He also gives: ‘ Sorell, a
yonge bucke;’ this is properly a buck of the third year, spelt sorel,
L. L. L. iv. 2.60, and doubtless named from its colour. ME. sowreld,
Book of St. Albans, fol. e 4.— OF. sorel, a sorrel horse ; Chanson de
Roland, 1379. A dimin. form from OF. sor, a sorrel horse, id. 1943; F.
saur, adj. ‘ sorrell of colour, whence harenc saur, a red herring,’ Cot.
Hence saure, sb. m., ‘asorrell colour, also, a sorrell horse;’ id. Cf.
Ital. soro, a sorrel horse, also spelt sawro; see Diez.— Low G. soor,
sear, dried, dried or withered up; Du. zoor, ‘dry, withered, or seare,”
Hexham; cognate with E. Sear, adj., q.v. The reference is to the
brown colour of withered leaves; cf. Shakespeare’s ‘the sear, the
yellow leaf,’ Macb. v. 3.23. The F. harenc saur, explained by Cot-
grave as a red herring, meant originally a dried herring; indeed
Cot. also gives F. sorer, ‘ to dry in the smoak,’ formed from Low G.
soor. See soures, sorrels; Chaucer, Book of the Duchess, 429.

SORROW, grief, affliction. (E.) . ME. sorwe, Chaucer, C. T.
1221 (A 1219); also sorje, Will. of Shoreham, p. 32,1.7. AS. sorg,
sorh, sorrow, anxiety; gen. dat. and acc. sorge (whence ME. sorje,
sorwe); Grein, ii. 465.4Du. zorg, care, anxiety; Icel. sorg, care ;
Dan. and Swed. sorg; G. sorge; Goth. saurga, sorrow, grief; whence
saurgan, to grieve. B. All from Teut. type *sorga, f., care, solici-
tude; Fick, iii. 329. Related to Lithuan. sirgti (1 p. s. pr. sergz),
to be ill, to suffer; whence sarginti, to take care of a sick person,
like G. sorgen, to take care of. And cf. Olrish -serg, sickness.
y- It is quite clear that sorrow is entirely unconnected with sore, of
which the orig. Teut. type was *sairoz, from a 4/SEI (probably ‘ to
wound’); but the two words were so confused in English at an early
period that the word sorry owes its present sense to that confusion ;
see Sorry. Der. sorrow-ful, answering to AS. sorgful, Grein, ii.
466 ; sorrow-ful-ly, sorrow-ful-ness.

SORRY, sore in mind, afflicted, grieved. (E.) Now regarded as
closely connected with sorrow, with which it has no etymological
connexion at all, though doubtless the confusion between the words
is of old standing. The spelling sorry with two r’s is etymologically
wrong, and due to the shortening of the 0; the o was orig. long ;
and the true form is sor-y, which is nothing but the sb. sore with the
suffix -y (AS. -ig), formed exactly like ston-y from stone, bon-y from
bone, and gor-y from gore (which has not yet been turned into gorry).
We find the spelling soarye as late as in Stanyhurst, tr. of Virgil,
fEn. ii. 651, ed. Arber, p. 64, 1. 18. The orig. sense was wounded,
afflicted, and hence miserable, sad, pitiable, as in the expression ‘in
a sorry plight.’ Cf. ‘a salt and sorry [painful] rheum;’ Oth. iii.
4.51. ME. sory (with long o and one r), often with the mod. sense
of sorrowful; ‘Sori for her synnes,’ P. Plowman, B. x. 75. Also
spelt sary, Pricke of Conscience, 3468. AS. sdarig, sad; ‘sarig for
his synnum’=sorry for his sins, Grein, ii. 392; sdr-nys, sorrow,
lit. soreness, A®lfric’s Saints’ Lives, vi. 321. Cf. sa@r-lic, lit. sore-
like, used with the same sense of ‘sad.’ Formed with suffix -zg' (as.
in stan-ig =ston-y) from AS. sar, a sore, neut. sb., due to the adj.
sar, sore. See Sore. Cognate words appear in Du. zeerig,, full of
sores, Swed. sdrig, sore; words which preserve the orig. sense. Der.
sorri-ly, sorri-ness.

SORT, a lot, class, kind, species, order, manner. (F.—L.) ‘ Sorte,
a state, sorte;’ Palsgrave. A fem. sb., corresponding to which is
the masc. sb. sort, a lot, in Chaucer, C. T. 846 (A 844). —OF. sorte,
sb. fem. ‘sort, manner, form, fashion, kind, quality, calling ;” Cot.
Related to F. sort, sb. masc. ‘a lot, fate, luck,’ &c.; id. Cf. Ital.
sorta, sort, kind, sorte, fate, destiny ; Florio gives only sorte, ‘ chance,
fate, fortune, also the state, qualitie, function, calling, kinde, voca-
tion or condition of any man,’ whence the notion of sort (=kind)
easily follows. ‘Sort was frequently used in the sense of a company,
assemblage (as in Spenser, F. Q. vi. 9. 5), as Jot is in vulgar lan-
guage ;’ Wedgwood. All the forms are ultimately due to L. sortem,
ace. of sors, lot, destiny, chance, condition, state. Probably allied
to serere, to connect, and to seri@s, order; see Series. Brugmann,
i. § 516(1). Der. sort, verb, L. L. L. i. 1. 2615 as-sort, q.v. 3 con-
sort, q.v. Also sort-er, sb.; sort-ance, 2 Hen. IV, iv. I. 11; sore-
er-Y, .V-

SORTIE, a sally of troops. (F.—L.) A modern military term,
and mere French. =F. sortie, ‘an issue, going forth;’ Cot. Fem. of
sorti, ‘issued, gone forth,’ id.; which is the pp. of sortir, ‘to issue,
sally,’ id. Cf. Span. surtida, a sally, sortie ; from. Span. surtir, ‘ to-
tise, rebound,’ Minsheu, obsolete in this sense. Also Ital. sortita, a
sally; from sortire, to make a sally, go out. 8. According to.


SOT


Diez and others, Ital. sortire, to sally, is quite a different word from
sortire, to elect (the latter being plainly connected with L. sor¢irz,
to obtain by lot); whereas Ital. sortire, to sally, MSpan. surtir, to
rise, answer to a L. type *surrectire, to rouse or rise up, formed
from surrectum, supine of surgere, to rise; see Source. We may
further note Ital. sorto, used as the pp. of sorgere, to rise; showing
that the contraction of *surrectire to sortire presents no difficulty ;
cf. Span. surto, pp. of surgir, to rise; and see Resort.

SOT,-a stupid fellow, a drunkard. (E.) ME. sof, in early use ;
Layamon, 1442; Ancren Riwle, p. 66,1. 1; in the sense of ‘foolish.’
We find soéscipe =sot-ship, i.e. folly, in the A.S. Chron. an. 1131;
ed. Earle, p. 260, 1.8. Spelt sott, AElfric, Saints’ Lives, 13. 132.
The entry ‘ Sottus, soz,’ is in an A. S. Glossary of the 11th century;
in Voc. 316. 7; also ‘Stolidos, sof,’ in Napier’s Glosses, 56. 173.
Prob. a true Teut. word, though first appearing in the Late L.
sottus, ab. A.D. 800 (Ducange) ; whence also F. sot. B. We also
find MDu. zot, ‘a foole or a sot, Hexham; and MHG. sote.
y. Franck connects it with Du. zwet-sen, to tattle, to brag, G.
schwatzen, to tattle; from *so¢-, weak grade of *swet-. It is known
that Theodulf, bishop of Orleans, punned upon the words Scotus
and sottus (Scot and sof), in a letter to Charles the Great; see
Ducange, s. v. sottus. @ Distinct from Span. zote, a blockhead,
Ital. zotico, for which see Korting, § 4700. Der. sott-ish, sott-ish-ly,
sott-ish-ness.

SOU, a French copper coin, five centimes. (F.—L.) Merely bor-
rowed from F. sow; Cotgrave uses sous as an E. word.—OF. sol,
later sow, ‘the sous, or French shilling, whereof ten make one of
ours;’ Cot. The value varied. —L. solidus, adj. solid; also, as sb.,
the name of a coin, still preserved in the familiar symbols /. s. d. (=
librze, solid?, denarii). See Solid and Soldier. Der. soldier, q.v.

SOUBRETTEH, a maid-servant, in French comedy. (F.—Prov.
—L.) F-. soubrette (see Hatzfeld).— Prov. soubreto, fem. of soubret,
affected ; allied to soubra, vb., to pass over, leave on one side, also
to exceed, surpass. = L. superadre, to surpass, surmount. =—L. superus,
upper ; allied to super, above; see Super- (prefix). Cf. the E.
phr. ‘a superior person.’

SOUBRIQUET, a nickname; see Sobriquet.

SOUCHONG,, a kind of tea, (Chinese.) Yule (p. 691) explains
it from Cantonese siu-chung, for Chin. siao-chung, ‘little sort.’
Douglas (Dict. of Amoy vernacular) gives it as sid-chidng-té,
souchong tea; and explains chiong as meaning, literally, ‘ seed.’

SOUGH, a sighing sound, as of wind in trees. (Scand.) Stany-
hurst has sowghing, sb., tr. of Virgil, Atn. ii, 631, ed. Arber, p. 63.
‘ My heart, for fear, gae sough for sough;’ Burns, Battle of Sheriff-
muir, 1.7. Wealso find ME. swough, Chaucer, C. T. 1981 (A 1979),
3619; better swogk, as in Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 759, where it
has the sense of ‘swaying motion;’ formed as a sb. from the AS.
verb swogan, to sound, resound, make a noise, as in swogad windas=
the winds whistle; Grein, ii. 516. [The AS. sb. is swég, with
mutation of 6 to é.] ‘Cf. OSax. swégan, to rustle (Heliand); Icel.
-sugr, as in arn-sigr, the rushing sound of an eagle’s wings.
Probably (like sigh, sob) of imitative origin. See Surf.

SOUL, the seat of life and intellect in man. (E.) ME. soule,
Chaucer, C. T. go1o (E1134); also saule, Layamon, 27634; gen,
sing. sowle, Gower, C. A. i, 39; prol. 1052; pl. soulex, Ancren
Riwle, p. 30, 1.16. AS. sdwel, sawol, siwul ; also sawl, sawle ; gen.
sing. sawle; Grein, ii, 392.4+Du. ziel; Dan. sjel; Swed. sjal; G.
seele; Goth, saiwala. _B. All from Teut. type *saiwaldn-, f., the
soul. See Brugmann, i. § 200. Der. soul-ed, high-soul-ed, soul-less.

SOUND (1), adj., whole, perfect, healthy, strong. (E.) ME.
sound, Chaucer, C, T. 5570 (B 1150). AS. sund, sound; Grein, ii.
494.4-Du. gezond (with prefix ge-); Swed. and Dan. sund; G.
gesund (with prefix ge-). By some connected with L. sanus, used
with like meanings; seeSane. But it is rather for *swundoz, from
the weak grade swunf- of Teut. *swenp-, whence Teut. *swenfoz,
Goth. swinths, AS. swif, strong. Der. sound-ly, sound-ness.

SOUND (2), a strait of the sea, narrow passage of water. (E.)
ME. sound, King Horn, 628, in Ritson’s Met. Romances, ii. 117 ;
spelt swnd, Cursor Mundi, 621. AS. sund, (1) a swimming, (2)
power to swim, (3) a strait of the sea, so called because it could be
swum across; Grein, ii. 494. Hence AS. sund-hengest, a ‘sound-
horse,’ i.e. a ship.+-Icel., Dan., Swed., and G. sund. B. From
the Teut. type *swum-doz; formed, with suffix -doz, from swum-,
weak grade of AS. swimman, to swim; see Swim. Fick, iii. 362.
Der. sound, the swimming-bladder of a fish; spelt sounde, Prompt.
Paryv. p. 466; this is merely another sense of the same word;
Shetland soond; MDan. sund; ct. Icel. sund-magi, lit. sound-maw,
the swimming-bladder of a fish.

SOUND (3), a noise. (F.—L.) The final d@ (after x) is ex-
crescent, just as in the vulgar gownd for gown, in the nautical use of
bound for ME, boun. (ready), and in the obsolete round, to whisper,


SOUTH 583


for roun, ME, soun, Chaucer, C. T. 4983 (B 563); King Ali-
saunder, 772; spelt son, Will. of Palerne, 39.—F. son, ‘a sound ;’
Cot. =—L. sonum, acc. of sonus, a sound.4Skt. svana-, sound; AS.
ge-swin (<*swen-), melody. From 4/SWEN, to sound, resound;
cf. Skt. svan, to sound; Fick, i. 256. Brugmann, ii. § 519. Der.
sound, verb, ME. sounen, Chaucer, C. T. 567 (A 565), from F.
sonner, L. sondre. Also see son-ata, sonn-et, son-or-ous, per-son,
par-son, as-son-ant, con-son-ant, dis-son-ant, re-son-ant, re-sound,
unt-SON.

SOUND (4), to measure the depth of water with a plummet, to
probe, test, try. (F.—Scand.) ‘I sownde, asa schyppe-man sowndeth
in the see with his plommet to knowe the deppeth of the see, He
pilote;’ Palsgrave. ME. sounden, Chaucer, Troil. ii. 535.—F.
sonder, ‘to sound, prove, try, feel, search the depth of;’ Cot., cf.
sonde, ‘a mariner’s sounding-plummet,’ id. B. Diez supposes
that this answers to a L. form *subundare, to submerge; a similar
contraction possibly occurs in the instance of sombre as connected
with sub umbra, If so, the etymology is from L. sub, under; and
unda, a wave; see Sub- and Undulate. y. But the Span.
sonda means, not only a sounding-line, but also a sound or channel ;
and it is far more likely that the F. sonder was from the sb. sonde,
and that this was taken from the Scand. word sund, a narrow strait
or channel of water; see Sound (2). This seems to be corroborated
by the following entries in Atlfric’s Glossary, pr. in Voc. 182. 34,
35: ‘Bolidis, sundgyrd;’ and ‘Cataprorates, sund-line.’ So also:
‘ Bolidis, sundgyrd in scipe, d00e rap, i. met-rap’ =a sounding-rod in
a ship, or a rope, i.e. a measuring rope; id. 358.17. Here bolidis
represents Gk, BoAis (gen. BoAidos), a missile, a sounding-lead ; and
sund-gyrd =sound-yard, i.e. sounding-rod. Similarly swad-line must
mean a sounding-line, let down over the prow («ard mpépayv).
Moreover sund-gerd is a very old word, as it occurs in the Corpus
Gloss. 319 (8th cent.). There is always a probability in favour of
a nautical term being of Scand. or E. origin. But it is remarkable
that there is no trace of the verb except in French, Span., and
Portuguese; so that we may have taken the verb from French ;
while this again was borrowed from the Scand. suzd=AS. sund,
asound. Der. sound-ing.

SOUNDER, a herd of wild swine. (E.) ‘ Sownder, a term used
by hunters for a company of wild Bores;’ Phillips (1658). [Not
a single boar, as sometimes erroneously said.] ME. sounder,
Gawain and Grene Knight, 1440. AS. sainor; ONorthumb. sizor,
Luke, viii. 32; OMerc. stizer, Matt. viii. 32 (Rushworth MS.).
+OHG. swaner, a sounder. See Notes on E, Etym., p. 274.

SOUP, the juice or liquid obtained from boiling bones, &c.,
seasoned. (F.—Teut.) In Pope, Moral Essays, iv. 162.—F. soupe,
‘a sop, potage or broth, brewis;’ Cot.=—F. souper, ‘to sup;’ Cot.
— Low G, supen, to sup; cf. Du. zuipen, AS. siipan; see Sup.

SOUR, having an acid taste, bitter, acrid. (E.) ‘Sour dou3,’
leaven; Wyclif, Matt. xiii. 33. AS. str; ‘sir meolc’=sour milk,
Voc. 129. 1.4-Du. zuur; Icel. sirr; Dan. suur; Swed. sur; OHG.
stir; G. sauer, B. All from Teut. type *siiroz, sour; Fick,
iii. 327. Further related to W. sur, sour; Russ. surovuii, raw,
coarse, harsh, rough; Lithuan. surus, salt. Brugmann, i. § 114.
Der. sour-ly, sour-ness; sour, verb, Cor. v. 4. 18; sour-isk.. Also
sorr-el (1).

SOURCE, rise, origin, spring. (F.—L.) ME. sours, Chaucer,
C. T. 7925 (E 49); said of the ‘rise’ of a bird in flight, id, 7520
(D 1938).—OF-. sorse, surse, sorce, surce, later source, ‘a source,’ Cot.
Here sorse is the fem. of sors, the old pp. of sordre (mod. F. sourdre),
to rise. The OF. sordre is contracted (with intercalated d) from
L. surgere, to rise. See Surge. Der. re-source; and see sortie,
re-surrection, souse (2).

SOUSE (1), pickle. (F.—L.) ‘A soused [pickled] gurnet ;’
I Hen. IV, iv. 2. 13. ME. sowse, souse. ‘Succidium, Anglice
souse;’ Voc. 614. 20. Hence also ME. sowser, another form of
saucer; id. 661.17. In fact, souse is a mere doublet of sauce.—OF.
sause, later sauce, ‘a sauce;’ see Sauce. Der. souse, verb, to
pickle, immerse in brine. ‘I sowse fyshe, I laye it in sowse to pre-
serve it;’ Palsgrave.

SOUSE (2), SOWSH, to swoop down upon. (F.—L.) ‘Spread
thy broad wing, and souse on all mankind;’ Pope, Epil. to Satires,
Dial. ii. 15. See Shak. K. John, v. 2. 150; Spenser, F. Q. i. 5. 8.
It was a term of falconry, and orig. applied, not to the downward,
but the upward rapid flight of a bird of prey; see Chaucer, C, T.
7520 (D 1938); House of Fame, ii, 36; where it is spelt sours.
But the r is lost in the Book of St. Albans, fol. d 1, back, where
a hawk is said to take a bird ‘ at the mount or at the souce.’ This
ME, sours is the same word as the mod. E. source. See Source.
See Notes on E. Etym., p. 275. @ Quite distinct from Swed.
susa, to rustle, G. sausen, 8c.

SOUTH, the point of the compass where we see the sun at


584 SOUVENIR


mid-day. (E.) ME. south, Chaucer, C. T. 4913 (B 493). AS. sid,
Grein, ii. 492; also siJa, sb. masc., the south, southern region;
sudan, ady., from the south.-Du. zuid, south ; zuider, southern (as
in Zuider Zee, southern sea); zuiden, the south; Icel. sudr, old
form also sunnur, south; sunnan, adv., from the south; cf. sudrey,
southern island, pl. Sudreyjar, Sodor, the Hebrides.4-Dan. syd,
south, sdnden, southern; Swed. syd, south, sdder, the south,
sunnan, the south; OHG. sund, south, mod. G. siid; OHG. sundan,
the south, also, from the south, G. stiden. 8B. All from the Teut.
base *sunth- ; perhaps allied to Sun, q.v. @ The loss of z before
th is regular in AS.; so that sud is for *sundé. Der. south-east,
south-east-ern, south-east-er-ly; south-west, south-west-ern, south-west-
er-ly; south-ward (see Toward). Also south-ern, ME. sothern,
Chaucer, C. T. 17353 (I 42), AS. siderne (Grein) ; cognate with
Icel. sudrenn and OHG. sundréni; see Northern. Hence south-
er-ly, for south-ern-ly. Also southernwood, a kind of wormwood,
AS. siderne wudu, as coming from southern Europe.

SOUVENTR, a remembrancer, memorial. (F.—L.) Modern. =
F, souvenir, sb., ‘a remembrance;’ Cot. It is merely the infin. mood
souvenir, ‘to remember,’ used substantively ; cf. Leisure, Pleasure.
—L. subuenire, to come up to one’s aid, to occur to one’s mind. =L.
sub, under, near; and wenire, cognate with E. come; see Sub- and
Come.

SOVEREIGN, supreme, chief, principal. (F.—L.) The g is
well known to be intrusive; as if from the notion that a sovereign
must have to do with reigning. We find ‘ soueraigne power ;’
Hamlet, ii. 2. 27 (first folio); but the spelling with g does not seem
to be much older than about A.D. 1570, when we find soveraygne in
Levins. Palsgrave (A.D. 1530) has soverayne. ME. souerein (with
u=v), Chaucer, C. T. 6630 (D 1048).—OF. soverain (Burguy) ;
later souverain, ‘ soveraign, princely;’ Cot.—Late L. acc. super-
dnum, chief, principal; formed with suffix -duus from L. super,
above; see Super-. Der. sovereign, sb.,a peculiar use of the adj. ;
sovereign-ty, ME. souerainetee, Chaucer, C. T. 6620 (D 1038),
from OF. soverainete, later souveraineté, ‘soveraignty,’ Cot. See
Soprano.

SOW (1), to scatter seed, plant. (E.) ME. sowen, Wyclif, Matt.
xili. 3 ; strong verb, pt. t. sew, id. xiii. 31 ; pp. sowen, sowun, id. xiii.
Ig. AS. sdwan, pt. t. séow, pp. sdwen; Grein, ii, 392. The longa
becomes long o by rule; the pt. t. now in use is sowed, but the
correct form is sew (in prov. E.); the like is true for the verb to
mow (AS, mawan).4+Du. zaaijen; Icel. si; Dan. saa; Swed. sd;
OHG, sawen, G. stien; Goth. saian. B. All from a Teut. root
*s@-=Idg.4/SH, to sow. Further related to W. hau, to sow;
Lithuan, séti (pres. sing. séju, I sow); Russ. sieiat(e), to sow; L.
serere (pt. t. sé-wi, pp. sa-tum); Gk. tinue (for *oi-on-m), I send,
throw. The orig. sense of the root was prob. ‘to cast.’ Brugmann,
T. §§ 132, 310. Der. see-d, q.v.; and, from the same root, se-min-al,
dis-se-min-ate,

SOW (2), a female pig; an oblong piece of metal in a lump larger
than a pig of metal. (E.) ME. sowe, Chaucer, C. T. 2021 (A 2019) ;
spelt zoje (for soghe), Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 613 swwe, Ancren
Riwle, p. 204. The w is substituted for an older g. AS. sugu,
contracted form si; Grein, ii. 492.4-Du. zog; Icel. syr; Dan. so;
Swed. sugga, so; OHG. sti; G. sau. Also W. hwch; Irish suig;
L, stis; Gk. 6s or ots; Zend. hu, a boar (Fick, i. 80r). All from
the 4/SU, to produce; as in Skt. sw, to generate, to produce, siish,
to bring forth; from the prolific nature of the sow. 2. In the
sense of ‘a large mass of metal,’ see explanation under Pig; we
find ‘sowe of leed’ in Palsgrave. Der. sow-thistle, sowethystell
(Palsgrave); AS. sugefistel, Gloss. to vol. iii. of A. S. Leechdoms,
ed. Cockayne; also soil (2). And see swine.

SOW ANS, SOWENS, flummery ; made by steeping the husks
of oatmeal in water. (C.) ‘Sowens, with butter instead of milk to
them, is always The Halloween Supper ;’ Burns, note to last st. of
Halloween. Pronounced (suu‘onz).—Gael. siighan, ‘the juice of
sowens;’ Macleod. = Gael. stigh, juice; allied to sigh, vb., to drain,
to suck in. +L. sigere, to suck; AS. siican, to suck ; cf. AS. socian,
to soak. The sense is ‘ soakings.’

SOY, a kind of sauce. (Japanese.) ‘Japan, from whence the true
soy comes ;’ W. Dampier, A New Voyage, ed. 1699, ii. pt. 1. p. 28.
And see tr. of Thunberg’s Travels, vol. iv. p. 121, ed. 1795 (Todd).
‘The Japanese... prepare with them [the seeds of the Dolichos
soja, a kind of bean] the sauce termed sooja, which has been cor-
rupted into soy;’ English Cyclopedia. The Japanese word is
properly shdyu, which is the name for the sauce made from a bean
called daidzu, See Notes on E, Etym., p. 277; C. P. G. Scott,
Malayan Words, p. 65.

SPA, a place where there is a spring of mineral water. (Belgium.)
Called spaw in Johnson’s Dict., and in Bailey, ed. 1735. The name,
now generally used, is taken from that of Spa, in Belgium, S.W. of


SPANGLE


Liége, where there is a mineral spring, famous even in the 17th cen-
tury. ‘The spaw in Germany ;” Fuller's Worthies, Kent. ‘ Spaw,
Spa, a town in Liege, famous for medicinal waters ;’ Coles’ Dict.,
ed. 1684. ‘ The Spawe ;’ Gascoigne, Works, ed. Hazlitt, i. 376 (1572).

SPACE, room, interval, distance. (F.—L.) ME. space (dis-
syllabic), Assumption of Mary, ed. Lumby, 178; Chaucer, C. T. 35.
—F. espace, ‘space ;’ Cot. L. spatium, a space; lit. ‘that which is
enlarged ;’ cf. Skt. sphay, to swell, increase, sphata-, enlarged. See
Speed. Der. space, verb ; spac-i-ous, from F. spacieux (for which
Cot. has ‘ spatieux, spacious’), from L. spatidsus, roomy; spac-i-
ous-ly, spac-i-ous-ness. @ The prefixed e in F. espace is due to the
difficulty of sounding words beginning with sp in French ; in English,
where there is no such difficulty, the e is dropped.

SPADE (1), an instrument to dig with. (E.) ME. spade (dis-
syllabic), Chaucer, C. T. 555 (A 553); Ancren Riwle, p. 384, 1. 16.
AS. spedu; ‘ Vanga, vel fossorium, spedu;’ Voc. 333. 39; later
spade, id. 550. 26. Also spadu, id. 106. 19.4-Du. spade; Icel. spadi ;
Dan. and Swed. spade; G. spate, spaten; Gk. oan, a broad blade,
of wood or metal, a spatula, blade of an oar, blade of a sword,
spathe or sheath of a flower (whence L. spatha was borrowed, which
further gave rise to F. épée, OF. espee, a sword). Der. spade (at
cards) ; spaddle, the same word as paddle (2), q.v.; spat-u-la, q.v.;
spad-ille, spelt spadillio in Pope, Rape of the Lock, iii. 49, the ace of
spades at the game of quadrille, F. spadille, borrowed from Span.
espadilla, a small sword, the ace of spades, dimin. of spada, a sword,
from L. spatha<Gk. onan. And see epaulet.

SPADE (2), a suit at cards. (Span.—L.—Gk.) The name
spade is really a substitution for the Spanish name espada, meaning
(1) a sword, (2) a spade at cards ; compare the etymology of spadille,
given under Spade (1). The Spanish cards have swords for spades ;
see Strutt, Sports and Pastimes, b. iv. c. 2, § 20; Archeologia, viii.
135. @ Spade (1) and spade (2) are cognate, though one is E.,
and the other Gk. :

SPALPEEN, a mean fellow. (Irish.) ‘The poor harvest-men
who now pass in troops from Ireland to England are now called
spalpeens, with a show of contempt or disrespect ;’ MS. ab. 1740, in
N. and Q. 3 S. viii. 307. And see under Buckeen in Davies, Suppl.
Glossary. Sometimes introduced into novels relating to Ireland. =
Irish spailpin, a mean fellow, rascal, stroller; from spailp, a beau,
also pride, self-conceit.-Gael. spailpean, a beau, fop, mean fellow;
from spailp, pride, self-conceit; cf. spailp, verb, to strut, walk
affectedly.

SPAN, to measure, extend over, grasp, embrace. (E.) ME,
Spannen, very rare. ‘Thenne the kinge spanes his spere’=then the
king grasps his spear; Avowyng of Arthur, st. xiii. l. 1. AS. spannan
(pt. t. spénn), to bind; gespannan, to bind, connect ; Grein, ii. 467, i.
456.>-OHG. spannan, to extend, connect, a strong verb, pt. t. spian ;
hence G, spannen, weak verb, Further related words appear in the
Du. spannen, pt. t. spande (weak), but pp. gespannen (strong), to
stretch, span, put horses to; Dan. spende (for spenne), to stretch,
strain, span, buckle; Swed. spanza, to stretch, strain, draw, extend ;
Icel. spenna (=spannja, a causal form), to span, clasp. 8. All
from the Teut. verb *spannan-, to extend, orig. a reduplicating verb
with pt. t. *spespann ; Fick, iii. 352. The base SPAN is extended
from 4/SPA, to span, extend; cf. Gk. omdev, to draw, draw out;
Brugmann, ii. § 661. Perhaps allied to Spin. Der. span, sb., a
space of about g inches, the space from the end of the thumb to the
end of the little finger when the fingers are most extended, also, the
stretch of an arch or a space of time, from AS. span (better spann) ; we
find ‘ span, vel hand-bred’ = span, or hand-breadth, in Voc. 158.11; so
also Du. span, Icel. spinn, Dan. spand (for spann), Swed. spann, G.
spanne. Hence span-long, Ben Jonson, Sad Shepherd, Act ii. sc. 2,
1. 23 from end ; span-counter, a game, 2 Hen. VI, iv. 2. 166. @ For
span-new, see that word, which is unconnected with the present one.

SPANCEL, a kind of fetter for a horse or cow. (E.) Ray has:
‘ Spancel, a rope to tye a cow’s hinder legs ;’ as a N. Country Word.
From ME. spann-en, to tie, fasten; and the equivalent of AS. sal,
ME. sol, prov. E. sole, a rope. The latter vowel is prob. due to AS.
s#l-an, vb., to tie (for *sal-ian), or to Ice]. seid, a rope; cf. prov. E.
seal, to bind with a rope.-4-Du. spansel, G. spannseil, a spancel. See
Notes on E. Etym., p. 277.

SPANDREL, the triangular space included between the arch of
a doorway, &c., and a part of a rectangle formed by the outer mould-
ings over and beside it. (F.—L.) History obscure ; an architectural
term. Older forms spaundre (Halliwell); splaundrel (Ogilvie’s
Dict.). Lit. ‘level space.’ From OF. esplan-er, to flatten, to level.
—L. ex, out; and plandre, to make flat, from planus, flat; see
Plain and Esplanade. The F. sb. was prob. founded on Ital.
spianatura, a levelling (Barretti).

SPANGLE, a small plate of shining metal. (E.) ME. spangel,
of which the sense seems to have been a lozenge-shaped spangle


SPANIEL


used to ornament a bridle; see Prompt. Parv., p. 313, note 3, and
p. 467, note 1. It is the dimin. of spang, a metal fastening ; with suffix
-el (which is commonly French, but occasionally English, as in kern-
el from corn). ‘Our plumes, our spangs and al our queint aray ;’
Gascoigne, Steel Glas, 377; ‘ With glittering spangs that did like
starres appeare,’ Spenser, F. Q. iv. 11. 45. AS. spange, a metal
clasp or fastening, Grein, ii. 467; also gespong, id. i. 456.4-MDu.
spange; ‘een spange van metael, a thinne peece of mettle, or a
spangle ;> Hexham; ‘een spange-maecker, a buckle-maker or a
spangle-maker,’ id.; Icel. spéxg, explained by ‘ spangle,’ though it
seems rather to mean a clasp; G. spange, a brooch, clasp, buckle,
ornament. f. Cf. Gk. opnx-odv, to bind tight, pinch in; optyyev,
to bind tight, opry«77p, a lace, band.

SPANIEL, a Spanish dog. (F.—Span.—L.) ME. spaniel,
Chaucer, C. T. 5849; spelt spaynel in five MSS., Group D, 267;
spanejeole, Voc. 638. 10. Cf. ME. Spaynyell, a Spaniard, Trevisa,
tr. of Higden, iv. 419.—OF. espagneul, ‘a spaniel ;’ Cot.—Span.
espaviol, Spanish. Span. Espavia, Spain.=L. Hispania, Spain, The
origin of the name of the country is unknown,

SPANK, to beat or slap. (E.) ‘Spank, a hard slap; to move
energetically ; Spanker, a man or animal very large, or excessively
active; Spanking, large, lusty, active, &c.; Halliwell. An E. word,
though not found in old authors.4-NFries. and Dan. spanke, to strut,
to stalk ; Low G. spakkern, spenkern, to run and spring about quickly.
B. From a Teut. base SPAK, significant of quick motion or violent
action; cf. EFries. spaken, to split, burst with heat. Der. spank-er,
an after-sail in a barque.

SPAN-NEW, entirely new. (Scand.) ME. spannewe, Havelok,
968 ; Chaucer, Troilus, iii, 1665; spon-neowe, K. Alisaunder, 4055.
(The term is prob. Scand., not E.; otherwise we should rather have
expected a form spoon-new or spon-new, ‘spoon-new,’ which is the cor-
responding E. form, as will appear.)=Icel. spannyr, also spanjr,
span-new ; compounded of spann, a chip, shaving, made by a plane,
knife, or axe; and xyr, new, cognate with E. New,q.v. Another
sense of Icel. spdnn is a spoon ; see Spoon.4+MHG. spanniiwe ; from
MHG. span, G. span, a chip, splinter, and ntiwe or neu, new. B. We
also use the phrase spick and span new, which is also of Scand. origin;
see the very numerous phrases of this character in Swed. dialects, as
given by Rietz, who instances spik-spangende ny, completely new,
answering to Swed. 7ill splint och span ny, with its varying forms
Spingspangande ny, sprittsprangande ny, splittspangande ny, and 18
more of the same character. So also Du. spikspeldernieww, lit. spick-
and-spill-new; since speld is a spill or splinter. So also Swed.
spillerny, lit. spill-new. So also Dan. splinterny, lit. splinter-new.
The Swed. and Du. spik are forms of Spike; hence spick and span
new=spike and chip new. All the terms ‘signify fresh from the
hands of the workman, fresh cut from the block, chip and splinter
new ;’ Wedgwood.

SPAR (1), a beam, bar, rafter; a general term for yards, gaffs,
&c. (E.) ME. sparre (dissyllabic), Chaucer, C. T. 992 (A 990).
The AS. sb. is not found, but the word is doubtless E.; we find the
derived verb sparrian, to fasten with a bar, to bolt, as in ‘ gesparrado
dure ’=the door being fastened, Matt. vi. 6 (Lindisfarne MS.).4-Du.
spar; Icel. sparri; Dan. and Swed. sparre; OHG. sparro; MHG.
sparre; G. sparren. Cf. also Gael. and Irish sparr, a spar, joist,
beam, rafter (from E.). _B. The orig. sense seems to have been
stick or pole; perhaps related to Spear, g.v. Der. spar, verb, to
fasten a door, bar it, P. Plowman, B. xix. 162 (footnote).

SPAR (2),a kind of mineral. (E.) An old prov. E. mining-term ;
spelt sparr in Manlove’s Liberties and Customs of the Lead-mines,
A.D. 1653, 1. 265 (E. D. S. Gloss. B. 8). AS. sper, found in the
compound sper-stan (spar-stone) ; ‘ Creta argentea, sper-stan ;’ Voc.
146. 23; ‘ Gipsus, speren,’ id. 24. 20 (8th cent.). Cf. G. sparkalk,
plaster. B. The true G. name is spat or spath; which is a different
word. Der. sparr-y.

SPAR (3), to box with the hands, dispute, wrangle. (F.—Teut.)
“To sparre, as cocks do, confligere ;’ Levins (1570). It was thus a
term in cock-fighting, and orig. used of striking with the spurs, as
cocks do. OF, esparer, ‘to fling or yerk out with the heels, as a
horse in high manage ;’ Cot. Mod. F. éparer, little used (Littré) ;
which Littré connects with Ital. sparare, of which one sense is ‘to
kick ;’ but this must be a different word from Ital. sparare (=L.
exparare), to unfurnish, to let off a gun. B. I suppose OF.
esparer to be of Teut. origin; cf. Low G. sparre, sb., a struggling,
striving, Bremen Worterbuch, iv. 945. Cf. G. sich sperren, to strug-
gle against, resist, oppose. Perhaps allied to Lithuan. spirti, to
stamp, kick, strike out with the feet, resist. See Spur, Spurn.
Der. sparr-er, sparr-ing.

SPARABLE, a kind of headless nail used for boots. (E.) A
contraction of sparrow-bill; the old name. ‘And sparrowbils to
clout Pan’s shoone;’ (1629) T. Dekker, London’s Tempe (The Song).


SPATTER


SPARE, frugal, scanty, lean, (E.) ME. spar (rare) ; ‘ vpon
spare wyse€ =1in a sparing manner, temperately; Gawain and the
Grene Knight, gor. AS. sper, spare, sparing, as a gloss to L. parcus,
Liber Scintillarum, Pp: 52, 1.6; also found in the compounds sfer-
hynde, sparing, sper-lic, frugal, spernis, frugality, all in various
glosses (Leo); the derived verb sparian, to spare, is not uncommon;
Grein, ii. 467.4Icel. sparr, sparing; Dan. spar- in sparsom, thrifty;
Swed. spar- in sparsam ; G. spar- in spirlich. Cf. L. parum, little,
parcus, sparing, parcere, to spare; which seem to have lost initial s.
Der. spare, verb, ME. sparen, Chaucer, C. T. 6919 (D 1337), from
AS. sparian (Grein), as above; cognate with Du. and G. sparen, Icel.
and Swed. spara, Dan. spare, and perhaps allied to L. parcere. Also
spare-ness, spare-rib; spar-ing, spar-ing-ly.

SPARK (1), asmall particle of fire. (E.) ME. sparke, Havelok, gt.
OMere. sperca, Voc. 46.8; AS. spearca, Alfred, tr. of Boethius, lib. iii.
c, 123 cap, xxxv. § 5.4-MDu. sparcke (Hexham); Low G. sparke;
Brem. Wort. B. Perhaps so called from the crackling of a fire-
brand, which throws out sparks ; Icel. spraka, Dan. sprage, to crackle.
Cf, Lithuan. spragéti, to crackle like burning fir-wood, Gk. opdpayos,
a cracking, crackling. Brugmann, i. § 531. Der. spark-le, a little
spark, with dimin. suffix -/e for-el (cf. kern-el from corn), ME. sparcle,
Chaucer, C. T. 13833 (B 2095); also spark-le, verb, ME. sparklen,
C. T. 2166 (A 2164).

SPARK (2), a gay young fellow. (Scand.) In Shak. All’s Well,
il, 1,25. The same word as prov. E. sprack, lively. ME. sparklich,
adv., also spelt sprackliche; P. Plowman, C. xxi. 10, and footnote. =
Icel. sparkr, lively, sprightly ; also sprekr. Hence Icel. sprekligr,
whence ME. sprackliche, adj..-Swed. dial. spriker, sprak, sprag,
cheerful, talkative (Rietz) ; Norweg. sprek, ardent, cheerful, lively
(Aasen). B. Perhaps the orig. sense was ‘talkative,’ or ‘noisy ;’
cf. Speak, and Spark (1). @f The prov. E. sprack is pronounced
strag by Sir Hugh, Merry Wives, iv. 1. 84.

SPARROW, a small well-known bird. (E.) ME. sparwe, Chau-
cer, C. T. 628 (A 626)5 sparewe, Wyclif, Matt. x. 29. OMerc.
*sparwa; AS. spearwa, Matt. x. 29.4Icel. spérr (rare); Dan. spurv ;
Swed. sparf; OHG. sparo (gen. sparwen), also sparwe; MHG. spar;
whence G. sper-ling, a sparrow, with double dimin. suffix -l-ing;
Goth. sparwa,. 6 All from Teut. type *sparwon-, m., a sparrow ;
lit. ‘a flutterer;’ from 4/SPER, to quiver, hence, to flutter; see
Spar (3). Cf. Lithuan. sparnas, a bird’s wing, a fish’s fin, the leaf
of a folding door (from the movement to and fro). Der. sparrow-
hawk, ME. sperhauke, P. Plowman, B. vi. 199, AS. spearhafoc, Voc.
132. 26; cf. Icel. sparrhaukr (where sparr- is the stem of sporr),
Swed. sparfhok (from sparf), Dan. spurvehdg (from spurv).

SPARVER, SPARVISE, the canopy or tester of a bed. (F.}
In 1473: ‘j sparvour with j pelew’ [pillow] ; York Wills, iii. 216.
See Nares, = OF, espervier, esprevier, ‘ensemble des piéces qui com-
posent le coucher,’ Godefroy; but it may mean ‘ canopy.’ Apparently
the same as OF. espervier, a sparrow-hawk, also ‘a sweep-net’ (Cot.) ;
hence, a canopy. Cf. Ital. sparauiere, ‘any kinde of hauke; also
a sparvise of a bed;’ Florio.

SPARSE, thinly scattered. (L.) Modern; yet the verb sparse,
to scatter, occurs as early as 1536 (see Todd); and Spenser has
‘spersed ayre, F. Q. i. 1. 39.—L. sparsus (for *sparg-sus); pp. of
spargere, to scatter, sprinkle, —4/SPERG, to sprinkle; an extension
of 4/SPER, to scatter (Gk. omeipew, for *omép-yev) ; see Sperm.
Der. sparse-ly, -ness. Also a-sperse, di-sperse, inter-sperse.

SPASM, a convulsive movement. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Those who
have their necks drawne backward . . with the spasme;’ Holland’s
Pliny, b. xx. c. 5; ed. 1634, ii. 41 d; ME. spasme, Lanfrank,
Cirurgie, p. 309, 1. 19.—F. spasme, ‘the cramp;’ Cot.=—L. spasmum,
acc. of spasmus. = Gk. oracpds, a spasm, convulsion. Gk. ondaev, to
draw, pluck. =4/SPA, to draw. Der. spasm-od-ic, formed with suffix
-ic from Gk, adj. onacpws-ns, convulsive ; spasm-od-ic-al, spasm-od-ic-
al-ly,

SPAT (1), a blow, aslap. (E.) In Cent. Dict. Of imitative origin ;
cf. slap, pat.

SPAT (2), the young of shell-fish. (E.) In Cent. Dict. Formed
from spat-, to eject, the base of spatter ; see Spatter.. And compare
Spot; also Du. spat, a spot, speck, splash.

SPATE, a river-flood. (F.—Teut.) ‘ While crashing ice, borne
on the roaring spate;’ Burns, Brigs of Ayr. And see Jamieson. Cf.
Irish speid (borrowed from E, spate), a great river-flood. Also spelt
speit, G, Douglas has spat, a torrent; cf. Verg. Ain. ii. 496.—AF.
*espeit OF. espoit, a spouting out (Godefroy).—EFries. spetten,
speuten, spoiten, WF lem. speeten, Du. spuiten, to spout; see Spout.

SPATS, gaiters. (E.) Shorter for spatterdashes, gaiters to keep off
the spatterings of mud that are dasked against the wearer; cf. dash-
board or splash-board of a carriage.

SPATTER, to besprinkle, spit or throw out upon. (E.) 1. ‘Which
th’ offended taste With spattering noise rejected;’ Milton, P. L. x.


585


586 SPATULA


567. Here Milton uses it for sputter, the frequentative of Spit (2),
q. Vv. 2. The usual sense is ¢o be-spot, and it is a frequentative
form, with suffix -er, formed from a base spat-; cf. prov. E. spat, to
spit; EFries. spatten, to burst, fly out, spirt.4-Du. spatten, to throw,
spatter, splash. Cf. Gk. opevddvn, a sling.

SPATULA, a broad-bladed knife for spreading plasters. (L.—
Gk.) Spelt spatule in Holland’s Pliny, b. xxiii. c. 7 [mot 17], 1. 24
from the end. ThisisF. spatule, asin Cot.—L. spatula, also spathula ;
dimin. of spatha, an instrument with a broad blade.=Gk. oan,
a broad blade, a spatula, a paddle; cognate with E. Spade (1), q.v.

SPAVIN, a swelling near the joints of horses, producing lameness.
(F.—Teut.) In Shak. Hen. VIII, i. 3. 12. ME. spaveyne, ‘ horsys
maledy ;’ Prompt. Parv.—OF. esparvin (13th cent., in Hatzfeld),
MF. esparvain, ‘a spavin in the leg of a horse,’ Cot. Cf. MItal.
spavano, ‘a spavin,’ Florio ; Ital. spavenio ; Span. esparavan (1) spavin,
(2) a sparrow-hawk ; Port. esparava@o; mod. F. éparvin. B. A com-
parison of the forms (of which MItal. spavano is for sparvano) shows
that they answer to a Late L. type *sparvanus, parallel to Late L.
sparvarius, a sparrow-hawk (F. éparvier).
formed with suffix -drius from OHG. sparwe, a .sparrow*(or is
Latinised from OHG. sparwari, a sparrow-hawk, which comes to
the same thing), so LatevL. *sparvanus is formed with suffix -axus
Aromshewsame base (sparwe). The lit. sense is, accordingly, ‘spar-
tow-like,’ from the hopping or bird-like motion of a horse afflicted
with spavyin. The OHG. sparwe is cognate with E. Sparrow, q.v.
@ Ménage, who is followed by Diez and Littré, gives much the same
explanation, but says that the disease is named from the sparrow-
hawk (not the sparrow) because the horse lifts up his legs after the
manner of sparrow-hawks. It is obvious that the sparrow is
much more likely than the sparrow-hawk to have been the subject of
a simile, and it is also clear that sparvanus may have been formed
from sparwe directly. It makes better sense.

SPAW, the same as Spa, q. v.

SPAWL, spittle. (E.) ‘In the sfawl her middle finger dips;’
Dryden, tr. of Persius, ii. 63. AS. spald, Elene, 300 (sic in MS.);
variant of OMerc. spadl, Matt. xxvii. 30; AS. spatl, spittle, allied to
spéttan, to spit. See Spit (2).

SPAWN, the eggs of fish or frogs. (F.—L.) ‘ Yourmultiplying
spawn ;’ Cor. ii. 2. 82. ‘Spawne of a fysshe;’ Palsgrave. The
verb occurs in Prompt. Parv., p. 467: ‘Spawnyn, spanyn, as fyschys,
Pisciculo.’ Short for *spaunden, and certainly (as Wedgwood sug-
gests), from OF. espandre, ‘to shed, spill, poure out, to spread, cast,
or scatter abroad in greatabundance;’ Cot. (So also Ital. spandere,
to spill, shed, scatter.) |B. The etymology is proved by a gloss in
Wright’s Voc. i. 1643 cf. N. and Q.6S. v. 465. The AF. phrase
‘Soffret le peysoun en ewe espaundre,’ i.e. let the fish spawn in the
water, occurs there ; and espaundre is glossed by scheden his roune, i.e.
shed his roe, in the MS.; though misprinted scheden him frome.
From L. ex-pandere; see Hxpand, Der. spawn-er.

SPAY, to render sterile. (F.—L.—Gk.) See Todd’s Johnson. =
OF. *espeer, not found; [but of the same form as OF. espeer, to
pierce with a sword (Godefroy), from OF. espee (=Ital. spada),
a sword], Hence the OF. *espeer would represent the Late L.
spadare, for spadonare, to geld. —L. spad-o (gen. spadonis), a eunuch.
= Gk. ondadwy, a eunuch. = Gk. ond-ev, to draw, tear, rend.

SPEAK, to utter words, say, talk. (E.) This word has lost an
r, and stands for spreak. We can date the loss of the r as having
taken place before A.D. 1100. The MSS. of the A.S. Gospels have
sometimes sprecan and sometimes specan, so that the letter was fre-
quently dropped as early as the 11th century, though it appears
occasionally in the atest of them; the same is true for the sb.
spr&c or spc, mod. E. speech (for spreech); see John, iv. 26, &c.
ME. speken, pt. t. spak, pp. spoken, spoke; Chaucer, C. T. 792, 914
(A 790, 912). AS. sprecan (later specan), pt. t. sprec (later spec),
pp: sprecen; Grein, ii, 472.4-Du. spreken; OHG. sprehhan; G.
sprechen, pt. t. sprach. B. All from Teut. base SPREK, to speak,
of which the orig, sense was merely to make a noise, crackle, cry
out, as seen in Icel. spraka, Dan, sprage, to crackle, Dan. sprekke, to
crack, burst; see Spark (1). Cf. Gk. opdpayos, a cracking, crack-
ling. Cf. Lowland Sc. crack, a talk, Der. speak-er ; speak-er-ship ;
speech, q.v.3 spokes-man, q.v.

SPEAR, a long weapon, spiked pole, lance. (E.) ME. spere
(dissyllabic), Chaucer, C. T. 2551 (A 2549). AS. spere, John, xix.
34-4+Du. speer; Icel. spjor; Dan. spear; G. speer; OHG. sper.
Cf. L. sparus, a small missile weapon, dart, hunting-spear. Perhaps
related to spar, a beam (hence, a pole). See Spar (1). Der.
spear-man, Acts, xxiii, 23; spear-grass, 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 340;
spear-mint ; spear-wort, AS. sperewyrt, A. S. Leechdoms, Gloss. to
vol. iii.

SPECIAL, particular, distinctive. (F.—L.) ME. special, speciale,
Ancren Riwle, p. 56, 1. 22. Short for especial; see Especial;


And just as sparvariusis,


SPEED


and Species (below). Der. spfecial-ly, special-i-ty, specialty.
Doublet, especial. 4

SPECIES, a group of individuals having common character-
istics, subordinate to a genus,a kind. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627;
the ME, form was spice (see Spice). —L. speciés, a look, appearance,,
kind, sort.=L. specere, to look, see.4--OHG. spehon (G. spahen), to
spy. Cf. Skt. pag, spag, to spy.—4/SPEK, to see. Brugmann,
i. § 551. See Spy. Der. speci-al, q.v. Also specie, money in
gold or silver, a remarkable form, evolved as a sing. sb. from the old
word species=‘ money paid by tale,’ as in Phillips, ed. 1706;
probably by confusion with the L. ablative specié, as if paid in
specié=paid in visible coin. Also speci-fy, q.v., speci-men, q.vV.
speci-ous, q.v. Also especi-al (doublet of special) ; fronti-spiece, q.v-
Doublet, spice.

SPECIFY, to particularise. (F.—L,) ..MEsspecifien, Gower,
C. A. i. 33; prol. 866.—OF. specifier, * to specify, particularize ;’
Cot.— Late L. *specifieaire;tovspecify (Ducange) ; pp. specificdtus, —
L. adj. «specifiews, specific, particular.—L, speci-, for speciés, a


dand; and -ficus, i.e, making, from L. facere, to make; see


Species and Fact. @ It thus appears that specific is a more
orig. word, but specify is much the older word in English. Cf.
specific, MF. specifique, ‘ speciall,’ Cot., from L. specificus, special, as
above ; whence spfecific-al, specific-al-ly, specific-ate, specific-at-ion.
And hence specify, verb (as above).

SPECIMEN, a pattern, model. (L.) ‘ Specimen, an example,
proof, trial, or pattern ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. specimen, an
example, something shown by way of sample.=L. speci-, for specere,
to see; with suffix -men. See Species.

SPECIOUS, showy, plausible. (F.—L.) ME. specious, sightly,
beautiful; see Trench, Select Glossary.—MF. specieux, ‘specious,
fair;’ Cot.—L. specidsus, fair to see.mL. specit-, for specere, to
behold ; with suffix -dsus; see Species. Der. specious-ly, -ness.

SPECK, a small spot, blemish. (E.) Specke in Levins, ed. 1570.
‘ Speckid sheep,’ i.e. spotted sheep; Wyclif, tr. of Gen. xxx. 32.
‘ Spekke, clowte, Pictacium,’ i.e. a patch; Prompt. Pary. AS.
specca, a spot, mark, pl. speccan ; ‘ Note, speccan,’ Voc. 34. 25. Cf.
Low G. spaken, to be spotted with wet, spakig, spotted with wet; Brem.
Wort. iv. 931; MDu. spickelen, ‘to speckle, or to spott,’ Hexham.
B. The MDu. spickelen is obviously the frequentative of MDu. spicken,
to spit, and Wedgwood’s suggestion that ‘the origin lies in the
figure of spattering with wet’ is prob. correct. Cf. Du. spikkel,
a speckle, spot. Hardly allied to L. pingere, to paint (Franck).
Der. speck, verb, Milton, P. L. ix. 429. Also speck-le, a little spot,
dimin. form, Spenser, tr. of Virgil’s Gnat, 250; cf. Du. spikkel, a
speckle. Hence speckle, verb.

SPECTACLE, a sight, show. (F.—L.) ME. spectacle, Wyclif,
I Cor. iv. 9.—F. spectacle, ‘a spectacle;’ Cot.=—L. specticulum, a
show. Formed with suffixes -cu-lu- (<-cu-lo-) from L. specta-re, to
see.=—L. spectum, supine of specere, to see; see Species. Der.
spectacles, pl. glasses for assisting the sight, pl. of ME. spectacle,
a glass through which to view objects, Chaucer, C. T. 6785
(D 1203); hence spectacl-ed, Cor. ii. 1. 222. Andsee spectator, spectre,
speculate.

SPECTATOR, a beholder. (L.; or F.—L.) In Hamlet, iii.
2. 46; spelt spectatour, Spenser, F. Q. ii. 4. 27. [Perhaps from F.
spectateur, ‘a spectator;’ Cot.]—L. spectator, a beholder; formed
with suffix -for from specti-re, to behold.—L. spectum, supine of
specere, to see; see Spectacle, Spy.

SPECTRE, a ghost. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. R. iv. 430.—F.
spectre, ‘an image, figure, ghost;’ Cot.—L. spectrum, a vision.
Formed with suffix -trum from spec-ere, to see; see Spectacle,
Spy- Der. spectr-al. Doublet, spectrum, a mod. scientific term,
directly from L. spectrum.

SPECULAR, suitable for seeing, having a smooth reflecting
surface. (L.) ‘This specular mount;’ Milton, P. R. iv. 236.—L.
specularis, belonging to a mirror.= L. speculum, a mirror. = L, spec-ere,
to see; seeSpy. @ Milton’s use of the word is due to L. specula,
fem. sb., a watch-tower, a closely allied word. Der. specul-ate,
from L, speculdtus, pp. of speculari, to behold, from specula, a watch-
tower; hence specul-at-ion, Minsheu, ed. 1627, from F. speculation,
‘speculation,’ Cot., which from L. acc. speculationem; specul-at-
or =L.speculator ; specul-at-ive, Minsheu, from L. speculatiuus. We
also use specul-um=L, speculum, a mirror.

SPEECH, talk, language. (E.) ME. speche (dissyllabic),
Chaucer, C. T. 8729 (E 853). For spreche, by loss of r. AS. spéc,
later form of spréc; Grein, ii. 471.—AS. spréc-, 3rd grade of
sprecan, to speak; see Speak.4+Du. spraak, from spreken; G.
sprache, from sprechen. Der. speech-less, Merch. Ven. i. 1. 164;
speech-less-ly, -ness.

SPEED, success, velocity. (E.) The old sense is ‘success’ or
‘help.’ ME. sped (with long e) ; ‘iuel sped’=evil speed, ill suc-


SPEIR


cess, Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 310. AS. spéd, haste, suc-
cess; Grein, ii. 467. Here é is due to 6, by the usual change (as in
foot, AS. fot, pl. feet, AS. fét), and spéd is due to a Teut. type
*spodiz.4-OSax. spod, success (Heliand); Du. spoed, speed; OHG.
spuot, spot, success. B. All from Teut. type *spédiz, speed,
success (Fick, iii. 355). Here the -di- is a suffix, answering to Idg.
-ti- (by Verner’s law). Allied to Skt. spha-ti-, increase, growth;
and sphd-ta-s, pp. of sphay, to increase, enlarge; Benfey, p. 1087.
y- The AS. spéd is, accordingly, from the AS. strong verb spowan, to
succeed, Grein, ii. 471; and the OHG. spuot is allied to the verb
spuon, to succeed, an impersonal weak verb. 8. Further allied to
L. spatium, room, spés, hope, prosper, prosperous, Lithuan. spétas,
leisure, opportunity. Brugmann, i. §§ 156, 223 (3, note). Der.
speed, verb, AS. spédan, weak verb, pt. t. spédde, Grein, ii. 468 ;
~speed-y, AS, spédig, id.; speed-i-ly, speed-i-ness.

SPEER, to ask. (E.) See Spur.

SPELICANS,.a_ game played with thin slips of wood. (Du.)
Imported from Holland, ‘which is famous for toys. Englished from
MDu. spelleken, a small pin (Hexham); formed with the MDu.
dimin. suffix -ken (=G, -chen, E. -kin) from’ MDu. spelle, a pin,
splinter of wood, allied to E. Spell (4), q.v.

SPELL (1), a form of magic words, incantation. (E.) ME. spel,
dat. speile, Chaucer, C. T. 13821 (B 2083). AS. spel, spell, a saying,
story, narrative; Grein, ii. 469.4Icel. spjall, a saying; OHG. spel,
a narrative ; Goth. spill, a fable, tale, myth. Teut. type *spellom, n.
Der. spell (2), q.v.; go-spel, q.v.

SPELL (2), to tell the names of the letters of a word. (F.—Teut.)
ME. spellen; ‘Spellyn letters, Sillabico; Spellynge, Sillabicacio ;
Spellare [speller], Sillabicator;’ Prompt. Pary. ‘ Lere hem litlum
and lytlum ... Tyl pei couthe speke and spelle,’ &c.=teach them by
little and little till they could pronounce and spell; P. Plowman,
B. xv. 599, 600. —OF, espeler, ‘to spell, to speale, to join letters or
syllables together ;’ Cot. Of Teut. origin. From Du. spellen, to
spell; the same as AS. spellian, to relate, declare, tell, speak;
MHG. sfellen, to relate, Goth. spillén, to narrate. All these are
denominative verbs ; thus Du. sfellen is from OSax. spel, a word
(see Heliand, 572); AS. spellian is from AS. spell, a tale; and
Goth. sgillon, from spill, a fable; see Spell (1), q@ E. spell does
not appear to be directly from AS. spellian, but seems rather to have
been borrowed from French. Certainly the word was sooner or later
confused with the old and prov. E. sped, in the sense of a splinter of
wood, as though to spell were to point out letters with a splinter
of wood. Thus Palsgrave has ‘ festue to spell with ;’ where festue
is F. festu, ‘a straw, rush, little stalk or stick’? (Cot.), from L.
festiica ; and Halliwell cites from a Dict. written about A.D. 1500
the entry ‘ To speldyr, Syllabicare,’ agreeing with the form ‘ spelder
of woode’ in Palsgrave ; indeed, speldren, to spell, occurs in the
Ormulum, 16347, 16440. So even in Hexham’s MDu. Dict. we
have ‘ spelle, a pin,’ with a striking resemblance to ‘ spellen, to spell
letters or words.’ See Spell (4). Der. spell-er, spell-ing., spell-ing-book.

SPELL (3), a turn of work. (E.) ‘To Doa Spell, in sea-language,
signifies to do any work by turns, for a short time, and then leave it.
A fresh spell, is when fresh men come to work, esp. when the rowers
are relieved with another gang ; o give a spell, isto be ready to work
in such a one’s room;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Not found in ME., but
it is almost certainly due to AS. spelian, to supply another’s room, to
act or be proxy for (Bosworth). Whelock, in his edition of A‘lfred’s
tr. of Beda, p. 151, quotes the following sentence from a homily :
‘Se cyning is Cristes sylfes speligend’ =the king supplies the place of
Christ himself. So also the following: ‘ Nzs Séah Isaac ofslegen,
ac se ramm hine spelode’ = Isaac, however, was not slain himself, but
the ram supplied his place, or took his spell; A‘lfric’s Hom. ed.
Thorpe, ii. 62. Cf. AS. gespelia, a vicar, deputy (Toller). B. The
AS. spelian is perhaps allied to spilian, to play, to sport; and the
latter is cognate with Du. spelen, G. spielen, to play, act a part;
these being denominative verbs, formed from the sb. which appears
as Du. spel, G. spiel, OHG. spil, a game.

SPELL (4), SPILL, a thin slip of wood, splinter; a slip of
paper for lighting candles. (E.) This word has been assimilated to
the verb éo spell, from the use of a slip of wood, in schools of the
olden times, to point out letters in a book. See remarks on Spell (2).
The true form is rather speld. ME. speld,a splinter; pl. speldes,
splinters of a broken spear, Will. of Palerne, 3392 ; hence the dimin.
spelder, a splinter-(Palsgrave), spelt spildur, Avowynge of Arthur,
xiii. 6. AS. speld, a torch, spill used as a torch (Bosworth).-4-Du.
speld, a pin (cf. spil, the pin of a bobbin, spindle, axis); Icel.
speld, speldi, a square tablet, orig. a thin slice of board ; spilda,
a flake, a slice; Goth. spilda, a writing-tablet; MHG. spfelte, a
splinter. B. All from the Teut. verb *spaldan- (G. spalten), to
cleave ; a reduplicating verb, like OHG. spaltan, to cleave, split.
Cf. Shetland sgeld, to split (Edmondston) ; Skt. sphat (for *sphalz),


SPHINX


to burst open. See Spelicans, Spill (2). Thus the orig. sense
is ‘ that which is split off,’ a flake, slice, &c. Der. spelicans, q.v.

SPELT, a kind of corn. (L.) Called ‘ spe/¢ corne’ in Minsheu,
ed. 1627.. Not found in ME. AS. spelt, ‘Faar [i.e. L. far],
spelt;’ Voc. 273. 20. Cf. Du. spelt; G. spelz, spelt, All from
Late L. spelta, spelt (ab. A.D. 400) ; whence also Ital. spelta, spelda,
F. épeautre, spelt.

SPELTER, pewter, zinc. (Low G.) ‘ Spelter, a kind of metall,
not known to the antients, which the Germans call zinc ;’ Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. I cannot find an early example of the word, but
it is prob. Teutonic, in any case, and occurs again in Low G.
spialter, pewter, Bremen Worterbuch; cf. Du. spiauter, MDu.
speauter, from OF. espeautre (Godefroy); which suggests an older
form *espeltre. It is obviously allied to Ital. peltro, pewter, and to
E. pewter. See (in Ducange) Late L. pestrum (error for peltrum ?)
and peutreum. WHexham has: ‘ Peauter, or Speauter, Pewter, or
fine Tinne.’ Godefroy has OF. pialtre (12th cent.), s.v. peautre ; and
note that the earlier forms are without the initial s- or es-. See
Pewter ; where correct the note that initial s has been lost.

SPENCER, a short over-jacket. (F.—L.) Much wom about
A.D. 1815 ; see Notes and Queries, 4 S. x. 356. ‘ Two noble earls,
whom, if t.quote, Some folks might call me sinner, The one invented
half a coat, The otherhalf-a=dinner.;’ Epigram quoted in Taylor,
Words and Places, The reference is to Earl 'Spencerrand Earl Sand-
wich. It thus appears that the spencer was named after the cele-
brated Earl Spencer, viz. John Charles Spencer, third earl, born 1782,
died 1845. See further under Spend.

SPEND, to lay out (money), consume, waste. (L.) ME.
spenden, Chaucer, C. T. 302 (A 300). AS. spendan; occurring in
the compounds G-spendan and for-spendan ; see examples in Sweet’s
A.S. Reader. Not an AS. word, but merely borrowed from Late
L. dispendere, to spend, waste, consume. Cf. Late L. dispendium,
dispensa, expense, of which the shorter forms spendium, spensa are
also found. We also find Late L. spendibilis monéta, spending
money, i.e. money for current expenses, occurring as early as
A.D. 922 (Ducange). So also Ital. spendere, to spend, spendio,
expense, where spendio = L. dispendium. Observe also OF. de-
spendre, ‘to dispend, spend, expend, disburse,’ Cot.; despenser, ‘to
dispend, spend,’ id.; despensier, ‘a spender, also a cater [caterer],
or clarke of a kitchin,’ id. B. In exactly the same way, the OF.
despensier became ME. spencere or spensere, explained by cellerarius
in the Prompt. Pary., and now preserved in the proper name Spencer
or Spenser, formerly Despenser, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, iv. 33,
translates L. dispensator by spenser. Hence even the buttery or
cellar was called a spence, as being under the control of this officer ;
‘ Spence, botery, or celere,’ Prompt. Pary. y. The L. dispendere is
compounded of dis-, apart, and pendere, to weigh; see Dis- and
Pendant. @ The etymology sometimes given, from L. ex-
pendere, is less likely; the s here represents dis-, not ex-; precisely
the same loss occurs in sport for disport. Der. spend-er ; spend-thrift,
i.e. one who spends what has been accumulated by thrift, Temp.
ii. 1. 24; spencer (above).

SPERM, animal seed, spawn, spermaceti. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME,
sperme, Chaucer, C. T. 14015 (B 3199).—F. sperme, ‘ sperm, seed ;’
Cot.—L. sperma. = Gk, onéppa, seed. = Gk. omeipev (=o7ép-yev), to
sow; orig. to scatter with a quick motion of the hand. (4/SPER.)
And see Sparse. Der. spermat-ic, Gk. omeppar-i-xés, from
omeppar-, stem of omépya; spermat-ic-al. Also sperm-oil, sperm-
whale; spermaceti, spelt parmacett in 1 Hen. IV, i. 3. 58, from L.
sperma céti, sperm of the whale, where céti is the gen. case of
cétus = Gk. «fjros, a large fish ; see Cetaceous. And see spor-ad-ic,
spore.

SPEW, SPUE, to vomit. (E.) ME. spewen, P. Plowman, B. x.
40. AS. speowan, spiwian, weak verbs; spiwan, strong verb, pt. t.
spaw, pp. spiwen; Grein, ii. 470. Cf. MDu. spouwen (Hexham) ;
Icel. spyja; Dan. spye; Swed. spy; OHG. spiwan; G. speien; Goth.
speiwan.4+-L. spuere; Lithuan. spjauti; Gk. mrvev (for *omdey).
B. All from 4/SPIW, to spit forth. Expressive of the sound of
spitting out; cf. puke (1), spit (2). Brugmann, i. § 567.

SPHERE, a globe, orb, circuit of motion, province or duty. (F.
—L.—Gk.) ME. spere, Chaucer, C. T. 11592 (F 1280). Later sphere,
Spenser, F. Q. i. 10. 56.— OF. espere, a sphere (Littré); MF. sphere,
‘a sphere ;’ Cot.=L. sphera.=Gk. opaipa, a ball, globe. B. Gk.
opaipa =*opdp-ya =*ondp-ya ; perhaps ‘ that which is tossed about ;’
see Spar (3). Der. spher-ic, Gk. oparpixds, like a sphere ; spher-tc-
al, spher-ic-al-ly, spher-ic-i-ty ; spher-o-id, that which is like a sphere,
from o¢aipo-, for spaipos, round, and «ldos, form, shape, appearance
(from 4/WEID, to see). Hence spheroid-al.

SPHINX, a monster with a woman’s head and the body of a
lioness, who destroyed travellers that could not solve her riddles.
(L.—Gk.) ‘Subtle as Sphinx ;’ L. L. L. iv. 3. 342. Spelt Spinx by


587


588 SPICE


Lydgate, Storie of Thebes, pt. i.—L. sphinx (gen. sphingis). = Gk.
opiyé (gen. opryyés), lit.‘the strangler,’ because she strangled the
travellers who could not solve her riddles; from Gk. ogiyyev, to
throttle, strangle. J But most likely, this is merely a popular
etymology, and the word is foreign to Greek. In fact, the legend is
Egyptian; Herodotus, ii. 175, iv. 79.

SPICH, an aromatic vegetable for seasoning food, a small quantity
or sample. (F.—L.) A doublet of species. ‘Spice, the earlier form
in which we made the word our own, is now limited to certain
aromatic drugs, which, as consisting of various kinds, have this name
of spices. But spice was once employed as species is now;* Trench,
Select Glossary, q.v. ‘ Species, used by the druggists of the Middle
Ages for the four kinds of ingredients in which they traded—saffron,
cloves, cinnamon, nutmegs;’ Bréal, Semantics. ME. spice.

‘Absteyne 30u fro al yuel spice,’ Wyclif, 1 Thess. v. 22; where the
Vulgate has ‘ab omni sfecié mala.’ In early use. ‘ Hope is a swete
spice;’ Ancren Riwle, p. 78, last line. = OF. ‘ espice, spice ;’ Cot.
L. speciem, acc. of speciés, a kind, species; in Late Latin, a spice,
drug; see Species. Der. spice, verb; spic-ed, Chaucer, C. T. 528
(A 526) ; spic-er, an old word for spice-seller, answering to the mod.
grocer, P. Plowman, B. ii. 2255; spic-er-y, from OF. espicerie, ‘a
spicery, also spices,’ Cot. ; spic-y, spic-i-ly, spic-i-ness,

SPICK AND SPAN-NEW, quite new. (Scand.) In North’s
Plutarch, p. 213 (R.); Howell, Famil. Letters, vol. i. sect. 4, let. 2
(Jan. 20, 1624). Lit. ‘spike and spoon new,’ where spike means a
point, and spoon a chip; new as a spike or nail just made and a chip
just cut off. See further under Span-new. And see Spike and
Spoon.

SPIDER, an insect that spins webs. (E.) ME. spither, spelt
spipre, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 164, 1. 6 from bottom. Apparently
this is the sense of AS. spider, A. S. Leechdoms, iii. 42; with -der
for -per; from *spin-fer; the loss of x before J being of regular
occurrence in AS. As -Jer (Idg. -ter) is an agential suffix, the sense
would be spinner, which is also a name for the spider; see E. D. D.
From the verb to spin; see Spin.+Dnu. spiz, a spider; Dan. spinder
(for spinner), a spider, from spinde (for spinne), to spin; Swed.
spinnel, a spider, from spfinna, to spin; G. spinne, a spider, spinner.

SPIGOT, a pointed piece of wood for stopping a small hole in a
cask. (Prov.—L.) ME. spigot, Wyclif, Job, xxxii. 19. Spelt
spygotte, Voc. 724. 103 spyket, id. 573. 30. A term due to the
Bourdeaux wine-trade. Apparently from an OProv. “*espigote ;
Mistral gives the mod. Prov. espigoun, espigou, the step of a ladder,
the bar of a chair, also a spigot. Evidently derived from OProv.
espiga, mod. Prov. espigo, an ear of corn. All from L. spica, an
ear of corn; see Spike. Cf. also OF. espigeot, a bad ear of com
(Godefroy) ; Walloon spigot, the peak of a shoe. Also Port. espicho,
a spigot; from L. spiculum, a little spike, point, dart, dimin. of
spica (above). ‘Torriano gives Ital. spigo, spico, the herb spikenard,
also a spigot. @ The Irish spiocaid, W. ysbigod, are from E.

PIKE (1), a sharp point, large nail. (Scand.) ‘Iron for
spikes ;*’ Bacon, Advice to Sir G. Villiers (R.). ‘Spykynge, nayle ;’
Prompt. Parv. Somner gives an AS. spicing, a large nail; from
A.S. Leechdoms, iii. 200. From Icel. spk, Swed. spik, a spike;
cf. Low G. spike, a wooden peg (Schambach); Du. spijker, a nail.
Thought to be distinct from Spike (2), and allied, by gradation,
to Spoke, q.v. Der. spike, verb, spiked, spik-y.

SPIKE (2), an ear of corn. (L.) ME. spik, P. Plowman, C. xiii.
180.—L. sfica, an ear of corn. Der, spike-nard, q.v.; spig-ot, q. Vv.

SPIKENARD, an aromatic oil or balsam. (Hybrid; F.—L.
and ¥,—L.—Gk.—Pers.) _‘ Precious oynement spikenard ;’ Wyclif,
Mark, xiv. 3; where the Vulgate has ‘alabastrum unguenti zardi
spicati pretiosi.’ [Thus spike-nard should rather be spiked nard; it
signifies nard furnished with spikes, in allusion to the mode of
growth. ‘The head of Nardus spreads into certain spikes or eares,
whereby it hath a twofold vse, both of spike and also of leaf; in
which regard it is so famous;’ Pliny, Nat. Hist. b. xii. c. 12 (in
Holland’s translation).] However, we borrowed it from OF. spigue-
nard (Godefroy). = L. spica, an ear of corn; and nardi, gen. of xardus,
nard; see Nard. The L. sficatus, furnished with ears, is derived
from spica, an ear of corn; see Spike (2).

SPILE, a peg for a vent-hole. (E.) Not in Todd’s Johnson; but
in many E, dialects; seeE.D.D. Cognate with Du. spijl, a spile,
bar; Low G. spile,a bar, also a skewer (Schambach) ; cf. G. speiler,
askewer. Teut. types *spi-1d, *spi-lo- (Franck) ; allied to Spire (1).

SPILL (1), a splinter, thin slip of wood. (E.) ‘Spills, thin slips
of wood or paper, used for lighting candles;’ Halliwell. ‘The
spill of wood;’ Holland’s tr. of Pliny, bk. viii. c. 16; i. 203. ME.
spille; Life of Beket, ed. W. H. Black, 1845, 1. 850: ‘hit nis not
worp a spille’=it is not worth a splinter or chip. The same word
as Spell (4), g.v.

SPILL (2), to destroy, mar, shed. (Scand.) Often explained by


SPINSTER


‘spoil,’ with which it has no etymological connexion. It stands for
spild, the Id having passed into Jl by assimilation. ME. spillen,
commonly in the sense to destroy or mar; also, intransitively, to
perish ; see Chaucer, C. T. 6480, 5235 (D 898, B 815); Hamlet, iv.
5.20. In mod. E., only to shed, pour out, effuse. Cf. AS. spillan,
to destroy; Grein, ii. 470; apparently borrowed from Icel. spilla,
to destroy; Swed. spilla (Dan. spilde, for *spille), to spill. ‘These
are assimilated forms, with JJ for /d; as shown by the (native) AS.
spildan, to destroy, OSax. spildian. Teut. type *spelth-jan- ; allied to
G. spalten, to split. Cf. Skt. sphat, sphut, to burst; Brugmann, i.
§ 530. See Spell (4). Der. spill-er ; spil-th (=AS. spild), Timon,
ii. 23069:

SPIN, to draw out into threads, cause to whirl rapidly. (E.) The
second sense comes from the rapid motion of the spinning-wheel.
The former sense is original. ME. spinnen, strong verb, pt. t. span,
Pp. sponnen; P. Plowman, B. v. 216. AS. spinnan, pt. t. spann, pp.
spunnen; Matt. vi. 28.4-Du. spinnen; Icel. and Swed. spinna; Dan.
spinde (for spinne) ; G. spinnen; Goth. spinnan (pt.t. spann). B. All
from Teut. base *spen-, to draw out. Allied to Lith. pin-ti, to
weave; OSlav. peti, to stretch out (span); Miklosich, p. 237. See
Span, a related word. Der. spinn-er; spinn-ing ; spin-d-le, q.v.;
spin-ster, q.v.3 Spt-der, q.V.

SPINACH, SPINAGE, an esculent vegetable. (F.—Span. —
Arab.—Pers.) ‘Spinage is a ‘‘ voiced” form of spinach, as it was
formerly written. Spelt spixache in Levins, ed. 1470. ‘ Spynnage,
an herbe, espinars;’ Palsgrave. ME, speneche; MS. Harl. 2378,
p- 247; in Henslow, p. 113.— OF, espinache, espinage (also espinoche) ;
Godefroy. [Cf. Ital. spinace, ‘the hearbe spinage,’ Florio; mod. F.
épinard (with excrescent d), OF. espinars, espinar (Cotgrave).] = Span.
espinaca.== Arab. aspanakh, isfanaj; of Pers. origin (Devic). B. But
referred, by popular etymology, to L. spina, a thorn, a prickle; be-
cause ‘the fruit is a small round nut, which is sometimes very prickly ;’
Eng. Cyclopedia. See Spine.

SPINDLE, the pin or stick from which a thread is spun. (E.)
The d is excrescent, as is so common in English after n; cf. soun-d,
thun-d-er; and spindle stands for spin-le, ‘Spinnel, a spindle;
North;’ Halliwell. In Walter de Bibbesworth (in Wright’s Vocab.
i. 157, 1. 6) we meet with ME, spinel, where another MS. has
spindele, AS. spinl; ‘ Fusus, spinl,’? Wright’s Voc. i. 82, col. I ; 281,
col. 2. Formed, with suffix -2, denoting the agent, from AS. spinn-
an, to spin; see Spin.--MDnu. spille (Hexham) ; by assimilation for
*spinle ; OHG. spinnila, MHG. spinnel; whence G. spindel (with in-
serted d), as well as G. spille (by assimilation). Der. spindle-shanks,
with shanks as thin asa spindle. Spindle-tree (Euonymus), because
used for spindles or thin rods, named in German spindelbaum for a
like reason; from its use for making skewers it was formerly called
prick-wood, i.e. skewer-wood, or prick-timber; see prickwood and
spindle tree in Phillips. Also spindl-y, thin (like a spindle or
skewer).

SPINDRIF'T, spray blown from the tops of waves by a strong
wind. (Hybrid; L. and E.) A variant of spoon-drift (Worcester) ;
and spoon (as in Bailey) is for spoom, before d. Hence it is really
spoom-drift, i. e. spume-drift, from L. spiima, foam. See Spoom.

SPINH#, a prickle, the backbone of an animal. (F.—L.) ‘ Roses,
their sharp spines being gone;’ Two Noble Kinsmen, first line. =
MF. espine, ‘a thorn, prick, prickle;? Cot.—L. spina, a thorn,
prickle ; also, the spine, the backbone. Closely allied to L. spica,
an ear of corn; see Spike (2). @ Observe that, in the sense of
‘backbone,’ the word is Latin, rather than French; from the use of
Latin in medical treatises. Der. spin-al; spin-y, spin-i-ness ; spin-ous ;
spin-ose ; also spin-et, q.V.; spinn-ey, q.V. :

SPINET, a kind of musical instrument, like a harpsichord,
(F.—Ital.—L.) Obsolete. It was so called because struck with
a spine or pointed quill. In Phillips, ed. 1706.—MF. espinette, ‘a
paire of virginals;’ Cot. — Ital, spinetta, ‘a paire of virginals; also,
a little tap, spigot, or gimblet, a prick, a thorne;’ Florio. Dimin.
of Ital. spina, a thorn.=L., spina, a thorn; see Spine.

SPINK, a finch, small bird. (Scand.) Lowland Sc. and prov. E.
spink, chiefly used of the goldfinch. ME. spink. ‘Hic rostellus,
Anglicé, spynke;’ Voc. 640. 38.—Swed. dial. spink, a field-fare,
sparrow 3 gul-spink, a goldfinch (Rietz); Dan. dial. spinke, Norweg.
spikke (by assimilation for spinke), a small bird, sparrow, finch.+
Gk. ontyyos, a finch; cf. oie, to pipe, chirp as a small bird.
Also oni¢a, a finch; oniv-os, a small bird, Doublet, finch.

SPINNEY, a kind of thicket. (F.—L.) ‘Or shelter’d in York-
shire spinneys;’ Hood, Miss Kilmansegg, Her Accident, st. 4. See
Spinet in Nares. ME. spenné, Gawain and Grene Knight, 1709, =
OF. espenei, espinoi, m., Godefroy; cf. MF. espinoye, ‘a thicket,
grove, or ground full of thorns, a thorny plot 3? Cot.—L. spinétum,
a thicket of thorns.=L. spina, a thorn; see Spine.

SPINSTER, a woman who spins, an unmarried female. (E.)


SPIRACLE


Formerly in the sense of a woman who spins. ‘She spak to spynne-
steres to spynnen it oute;’ P. Plowman, B. v. 216. Formed from
the verb to spiz (AS. spinnan) by means of the suffix -estre (mod. E.
-ster). @J This suffix (often imperfectly explained) presents no real
difficulty; it is due to the conjunction of the Idg, suffixes -es- and
-ter; cf. L. min-is-ter. B. This AS. suffix -es-tre was used to denote
the agent, and was conventionally confined to the feminine gender
only, a restriction which was gradually lost sight of, and remains
only in the word spinster in mod. English. Traces of the restriction
remain, however, in semp-ster-ess or sempstress, and song-ster-ess OF
song'stress, where the F. fem. suffix -ess has been superadded to the E.
fem. suffix -ster. The restriction was strictly observed in AS., and is
retained in Dutch; cf. Du. spin-ster, a spinster, zangster, a female
singer (fem. of zanger), bedriegster, a female impostor (fem. of
bedrieger), inwoonster, a female inhabitant (fem. of inwoner); S&c.
y. Examples in AS. are the following: ‘Textrix, webbestre,’ a
webster, female weaver, fem. of ‘Textor, webba,’ answering to
Chaucer’s webbe (Prol. 364), and the name Webb. ‘ Citharista, hear-
pestre,’ a female harper, fem. of ‘ Citharedus, hearpere,’ a harper ;
Voc. 190. 6. So also: ‘Fidicen, fidelere; Fidicina, jipelestre ;
Saltator, hleapere; Saltatrix, hleapestre;’ id. 311. 24, 32. A strik-
ing example is afforded by AS. witegestre, a prophetess, Luke, ii. 36,
the word being almost always used in the masc. form witega, a
prophet. See further under Spin.

SPIRACHLA, a breathing-hole, minute passage for air. (F.—L.)
ME. spyrakle, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 408.—F. spiracle, ‘a
breathing-hole 3’ Cot.=—L. spirdculum, an air-hole; formed with
suffix -cu-lum, from spirdre, to breathe; see Spirit.

SPIRE (1), a tapering body, sprout, point, steeple. (E.) ME.
spire, used of a blade of grass or young shoot just springing out of the
ground, ‘ Thilke spire that in-to a tree shulde wexe,’ Test. of Love,
bk. iii. ch. v. 1.9. ‘Oras an ook comth of a litel spyr ;’ Chaucer,
Troilus, ii. 13353 spelt spir, P. Plowman, C. xiii. 180, AS. spir
(rare) ; ‘hréodes sir,’ a spike (or stalk) of a reed, A.S. Leechdoms,
ii. 266, 1. 10.4-Icel. spira, a spar, a stilt; Dan. spire, a germ, sprout ;
Swed. spira, a sceptre, a pistil; G. spiere, a spar; Westphal.
spir, a blade of grass. Distinct from Spire (2); but allied to
Spike (1), Spile. Der. spire, verb, to germinate, spring up,
Spenser, F. Q. iii. 5. 52, spelt spyer in Palsgraye; spir-y, spelt spirie
in Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 592.

SPIRE (2), a coil, wreath. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Amidst his circling
spires;’ Milton, P. L. ix. 502, [Perhaps directly from L. spira.]—
F, spire, ‘a rundle, round, or circle, a turning or winding compasse ;’
Cot.—L. spira, a coil, twist, wreath.—Gk. omeipa, a coil, wreath.
For *onép-ya. From 4/SPER, to wind or twine round; whence also
Gk. onup-is, a basket, omdp-rov, arope. Der. spir-al, from F. spiral,
‘circling,’ Cot., L. spiralis ; spir-al-ly; spir-y, Dryden, tr. of Virgil,
Georgic i. l. 334.

SPIRIT, breath; the soul, a ghost, enthusiasm, liveliness, a
spirituous liquor. (F.—L.) The lit. sense is ‘ breath,’ but the word
is hardly to be found with this sense in English. ME. spirit,
Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, l. 203; pl. spirites, Chaucer, C. T.
1371 (A 1369).—OF, espirit (Littré), later esprit, ‘the spirit, soul,’
Cot.=—L. spiritum, acc. of spiritus, breath, spirit.—L. spirdre, to
breathe. Der. spirit-ed, Hen. V, iii. 5. 213; spirit-ed-ly, -ness; spirit-
less, 2 Hen. IV, i. 1. 705 spirit-stirring, Oth. iii. 3. 3525 spirit-u-al,
from I", spirituel, ‘ spirituall,’ Cot., from L. spiritu-dlis, formed with
suffix -dlis from spiritu-, decl. stem of spiritus; spiritu-al-ly; spiritu-
al-i-ly, ME. spiritualte, P. Plowman, B. v. 148; spiritu-al-ise, spiritu-
al-ism, spiritu-al-ist ; spiritu-ous. Also (from L, spiradre) a-spire, con-
spire, ex-pire (for ex-spire), in-spire, per-spire, re-in-spire, re-spire,
su-spire, tran-spire; also di-spirit; and see spir-a-cle, spright-ly.
Doublet, sprite.

SPIRT, the same as Spurt, q. v.

SPIT (1), a pointed piece of wood, skewer, iron prong on which
meat is roasted. (E.) ME. spite, spyte. ‘And yspited him thoru-out
mid an yrene spite;’ Rob. of Glouc. p. 207; 1. 4213. See also
Octovian Imperator, 1, 122, in Weber, Met. Romances, vol. iii.—
AS. spitu, a spit; ‘ Veru, spitu;* Voc. 127. 11; later spite, id. 548.
25.4Du. spit; Dan, spid; Swed. spett; MHG. spiz, G. spiess, a spit.
Teut. type *spituz,m. Cf. G. spitze, a point, top. Der. spit, verb,
ME. spiten, spyten, asin Rob. of Glouc., above. Also prov. E. spit,
the depth a spade goes in digging, about a foot (Halliwell), with
reference to the point, i. e. blade of the spade; cf. AS, spittan, to dig,
spit-el, a kind of spade, Du. spitten, to dig (lit. to spit) ; quite distinct
from spade.

SPIT (2), to throw out from the mouth. (E.) Spelt spet in Baret
(1580). ME. spitten, P. Plowman, B. x. 40; pt. t. spette, Wyclif,
John, ix. 6. AS. spittan, Matt. xxvii. 30 (Rushworth MS.) ; akin to
spw#tan, with the same sense, pt. t. sp#tfe, Mark, xv. 19, John, ix. 6;
as if froma Teut. root *speit-. Apparently allied to Icel. spyta;


SPLENDOR, SPLENDOUR 589


Dan. spytte, to spit, to sputter; Swed. spotta; prov. G. spiizen (with
which cf. G. spucken in the same sense); though these are from
a Teut. base *sput-, allied to Spout. Perhaps both these Teut. bases
are allied to an Idg. root *spyai; whence E. spew. See Brugmann,
§§ 279 (1), 299, 567. Der. spitt-le, spytiell in Palsgrave, formerly
spettle (Baret), also spatile, spelt spatyll in Palsgrave, spotil in Wyclif,
John, ix. 6; AS. spatl, John, ix. 6; spitt-oon, not in Todd’s Johnson,
an ill-coined word. | @] Note that spat is not the orig. past tense of
spit, but is due to AS. sp&tte above, used with the same sense as the
true pt. t. spit (Meas. for Meas. ii. 1, 86).

SPITCH-COCK, orig. to split a fat eel, and broilit on a skewer.
(G.) The pp. spitch-cock’d occurs in 1651, in T. Cartwright, The
Ordinary ; in Dodsley’s Old Plays, ed. Hazlitt, xii. 239. See exx. in
Palmer, Folk-Etym., where it occurs also as spits-cocked. Here spits-
is from MUG, spiz, a spit, as in MHG, spiz-braten, G. spiess-braten,
meat roasted on a spit; and G. kochen, to cook. It merely means
‘ spit-cooked ;” cf. Du. spit-aal, ‘a spitch-eel ;’ Kalisch.

SPITE, vexation, grudge, ill-will. (F.—L.) ME. spyt; ‘boute
spyt more ’= without further injury, Gawayn and Grene Knight, 1444.
It is merely a contraction of ME, despit, mod. E. despite. This is
best shown by the phrase iz spite of, formerly ix despite of, as in Shak.
Merry Wives, v. 5. 132, Much Ado, ii. 1. 398, iii. 2. 68, iii. 4. 89, &c.
So also we have sport for disport, spend for dispend, ME. spenser for
dispenser, And observe ME. spitous, Rom. of the Rose, 979, as a
form of despitous, Chaucer, C. T. 6343 (D 761). See further under
Despite. Der. spite, verb, Much Ado, v. 2. 70}; spite-ful, Macb.
iii. 5. 12, short for despiteful, As You Like It, v. 2. 86; spite-ful-ly,
ess,

SPITTLE (1), saliva, (E.) See Spit (2).

SPITTLE (2), a hospital. (F.—L.) ‘A spittle, hospitall, or
lazarhouse;’ Baret, 1580. ME. spitel. Spitel-vuel =hospital evil, i.e.
leprosy ; Ancren Riwle, p. 148, 1. 8.—OF. ospital (Burguy), the same
as OF. hospital, a hospital ; see Hospital. 4 The loss of initial o
must have been due to an E. accent on the 7; cf. W. yspytty, a spittle
(from E.); Icel. spital. Doublet, hospital.

SPLASH, to splash about water or mud, to bespatter. (Low G.)
‘To splash, to dash any liquid upon; Splashy, wet, watry;’ Bailey’s
Dict., vol. i. ed. 1731. Coined by prefixing s (OF. es-=L. ex, used
for emphasis, as in sywench (Richardson) for quench), to plash, in the
same sense. ‘ Plashy waies, wet under foot 3 to plash in the dirt; all
plash’d, made wet and dirty; to plasha traveller, to dash or strike up
the dirt upon him;’ MS. Lansd. 1033, by Bp. White Kennett, died
A.D. 1728. Stanyhurst (1582) has flash for ‘a splashing noise ;’ tr.
of Virgil (Afn, i. 115), ed. Arber, p. 21,1.17. ME. plasche, a pool;
Allit. Morte Arthure, 2798. Cf. Low G. plasken, tosplash ; short for
*platsken, as shown under Plash (1), q.v.; cf. MDu. plasch, a pool.
Der. splash, sb.; splash-y; splash-board, a board (in a vehicle) to
keep off splashes. ;

SPLAY, to slope or slant (in architecture); to dislocate a
shoulder-bone. (F.—L.) A contraction of display; cf. sport for
disport, spite for despite, spend for dispend, &c. ‘The sense ‘to dis-
locate’ is due to the fact that display formerly meant to carve or cut
up a crane or other bird, by disjointing it and so displaying it upon
the dish in several pieces. ‘ Dysplaye that crane;’ ‘splaye that
breme ;’ The Boke of Keruynge, pr. in 1513, repr. in 1867; see The
Babees Boke, ed. Furnivall, p. 265. ‘In architecture, to display is to
open out, hence to slope the side of a window, &c. ‘And for to
splaye out hir leves on brede;’ Lydgate, Complaint of Black Knight,
1. 33. ‘Here colere splayed,’ her collar displayed; Cov. Myst.
p- 242. See further under Display. Der. splay-foot-ed, in Minsheu,
and in Ford, The Broken Heart, Act v. sc. 1.1. 13, i.e. with the foot
displayed or turned outward, as if dislocated at the knee-joint ; short-
ened to splay-foot, as in ‘ splay-foot rhymes,’ Butler, Hudibras, pt. i.
c. 3. 1. 1923 splay-mouth, a mouth opened wide in scorn, a grimace,
Dryden, tr. of Persius, sat. 1, 1. 116.

SPLEEN, a non-glandular, highly vascular organ situate in the
abdomen, supposed by the ancients to be the seat of anger and ill-
humoured melancholy. (L.—Gk.) ME. splen, Gower, C. A. iii. 99 ;.
bk. viie 449.—L. splén.—Gk. ondny, the spleen.Skt. plihan-,
plihan-, the spleen (with loss of initial s). The true L. word is lien
(with loss of initial sp). Brugmann, i. § 549 (c). Der. splen-et-ic,
from L, splénéticus ; splen-et-ic-al, splen-et-ic-al-ly; splen-ic, from L,
splénicus 3 spleen-it-ive, Hamlet, y. 1. 285 ; spleen-ful, 2 Hen. VI, iii.
2.128; spleen-y, Hen, VIII, iii. 2. 99.

SPLENDOR, SPLENDOUR, magnificence, brilliance. (L.;.
or F.—L.) Spelt splendor in Minsheu, ed. 1627. According to
Richardson, it is spelt splendour in Ben Jonson, Elegy on Lady Jane
Pawlet, in Underwoods, no. 100, 1. 32.—F. splendeur, ‘splendor,
light ;? Cot.—L. splendorem, acc. of splendor, brightness. [Or di-
rectly from L. nom. splendor.| = L. splendére, to shine. Root unknown.
Der. splend-id, Milton, P. L. ii. 252, directly from L, splendidus,


590 SPLENT


shining, bright; splend-id-ly. Also splend-ent, spelt splendant in
Fairfax, tr. of Tasso, b. viii. st. 84, 1. 3, but from L. splendent-, stem
of pres. part. of splendére. And see re-splendent.

SPLENT, the same as Splint, q. v.

SPLEUCHAN, a tobacco-pouch. (Gael.) In Burns, Death and
Dr. Hornbook, st. 14.—Gael. spliuchan, a tobacco-pouch; Irish
spliuchan, a bladder, pouch, purse.

SPLICE, to join two rope-ends by interweaving the strands.
(Du.) In Phillips, ed. 1706. Like many sea-terms, borrowed from
Dutch.—MDu. sflissen, ‘to wreathe or lace two ends together, as of
a roape;’ Hexham. So named from the splitting of the rope-ends
into separate strands before the splicing is begun; from Du. sflitsen,
to splice (which is really the older form). Formed by the addition
of s to split-, weak grade of Du. splijten, to split, MDu. splijten
(Hexham). See Split. Cf. Dan. splidse, spledse, to splice (voiced
form of Du. splitsen) ; splitte, to split. Cf. Swed. splissa, to splice;
G. splissen, to splice, spliss, a cleft, spleissen, to split. Der. splice,
sb., Phillips, ed. 1706.

SPLINT, SPLENT, a thin piece of split wood. (Scand.) For-
merly usually splent. ‘A little splent to staie a broken finger ;’ Baret
(1580). ‘Splent for an house, laite;’ Palsgrave. It also meant a
thin steel plate, forarmour. ‘ Splent, harnesse for the arme, garde de
bras;’ Palsgrave. ME. sflent, Lanfrank, Cirurgie, p. 63; Morte
Arthure, ed. Brock, 2061; answering to OF. esplente, a thin steel
plate (Godefroy).—Swed. splint, a kind of spike; esp. (in nautical
language) a forelock, i. e. a flat piece of iron driven through the end
ofa bolt, to secure it. Soalso Dan. splint, asplinter; NFries. splint,
splenn.4+Low G. splinte, a forelock; G. splint, a thin piece of iron
or steel, a forelock, perhaps borrowed, Cf. Swed. splinta, to splinter ;
ultimately allied to Dan. splitte, Swed. splitta, to split. See Split.
Der. splint-er, Beaum. and Fletcher, Maid in the Mill, Act i. sc. 3
(Ismenia), to split into shivers, a frequentative form (with the usual
frequentative suffix -er) from Swed. splinta, to split, shiver; we
actually find the frequentative form in Dan. splintre, to splinter, Du.
splinteren, to splinter. Also splint-er, sb., a shiver, small piece or
chip, Cor. iv. 5. 115, with which cf. Du. and EFries. splinter, a
splinter, splinterig, full of splinters; splint-er-y, adj. Also splint-
armour, armour made with long and narrow overlapping plates.

SPLIT, to cleave lengthwise, to tear asunder, rend apart. (Du.)
Spelt split in Minsheu, ed. 1627; Shak. Winter’s Tale, i. 2. 349.
[Palsgrave has: ‘I splette a fysshe a-sonder, Fe ouuers ;’ but this is
rather ME. splatten, to lay open, lay flat, asin Palladius on Husbandry,
b. ii. 1. 123. ]—MDu. spiitten, to split ; cf. Dan. splitte, to split; Swed.
dial. splitta, to disentangle or separate yarn (Rietz). From the weak
grade split- of the Teut. strong verb *spleitan-, as seen in OFries.
splita, Westphal. splitan, Du. splijten, tosplit; G. spleissen. We also
find Dan. split, Du. spleet, a slit, split, rent, Swed. split, discord (a
sense not unknown to English), G. spleisse, a splinter, a shiver, MDu.
splete, ‘a split or a cleft’ (Hexham). Compare also prov. E. sprit,
to split, Swed. spricka, to split. Der. split, sb.; also splint, q.v.,
splice, q.v.

SPLUTTER, to speak hastily and confusedly. (E.) Added by
Todd to Johnson ; and see Halliwell. A by-form of sputter, which
is the frequentative, with the usual suffix -er, of spout, to talk fluently,
orig. to squirt out; see Sputter and Spout. In the sense ‘to
talk,’ the latter word occurs in Beaum. and Fletcher, The Coxcomb,
Act iv. sc. 4: ‘ Pray, spout some French, son.’ To sflutter is to talk
so fast as to be unintelligible. The old Leicest. word spiréle, to
sprinkle, used by Drayton (Evans) is similarly formed as the fre-
quentative of Spurt. Cf. Low G. sprutten, to spout, spurt, sprinkle.

SPOIL, to plunder, pillage. (F.—L.) ME. spoilen, Wyclif,
Mark, iii. 27. [The sb. spoile occurs even earlier, in King Alisaunder,
986.)—F. spolier, ‘to spoile, despoile ;? Cot.—L. spoliare, to strip
of spoil, despoil.—L. spolium, spoil, booty; the skin or hide of an
animal stripped off, and hence the dress of a slain warrior stripped
from him. Root uncertain. Some have connected it with Gk.
oKvadov, spoil. q It is probable that spoil has been to some
extent confused with its compound de-spoil, g.v. Cf. ‘ Dyspoylyn or
Spoylyn, Spolio;’ Prompt. Parv. Der. spoil, sb., ME. spoile, as
above ; spoil-er ; spoli-at-ion, from F. spoliation, ‘a spoiling,’ Cot.,
from L. acc. spoliationem ; spoli-ate (rare), from pp. spolidtus.

SPOKE, one of the bars of a wheel, from the nave to the rim.
(E.) ME. spoke, Chaucer, C. T. 7839 (D 2257). AS. spdca, pl.
spacan ; ‘ Radii, spacan,’ Voc. 106. 28. [The change from 4 to long
o is perfectly regular; cf. stan, a stone, ban, a bone.]4-Du. speek,
a spoke; G. speiche, OHG. ‘speicha. Teut. types *spaikon-, *spaikdn-;
allied by gradation to spike; see Spike (1). Der. spoke-shave
(Palsgrave).

SPOKESMAN, one who speaks in behalf of others. (E.) In
Shak. Two Gent. ii. 1. 152; and in Exod. iv. 16 (A.V.). The form
at the word is hardly explicable ; we should rather have expected to


SPORADIC


meet with speak-s-man, formed by analogy with hunt-s-man, or else
with speech-man. As it is, the pp. spoke (for spoken) has been sub-
stituted for the infin. speak; see Speak and Man.

SPOLIATION., (F.—L.) See under Spoil.

SPONDEE,, in classical poetry, a foot containing two long sylla-
bles. (L.—Gk.) Called spondeus in Puttenham, Art of Eng. Poesie,
ed. 1589, pt. ii. c. 3. Ben Jonson has: ‘ The steadie spondges’ to
translate ‘Spondzeos stabiles’ in his tr. of Horace’s Art of Poetry,
1, 266. Englished from L. spondeus or spondéus.— Gk. omovdetos, in
metre, a spondee, so called because slow solemn melodies, chiefly in
this metre, were used at onovdai.—Gk. orovdai, a solemn treaty
or truce; pl. of oovdy, a drink-offering, libation to the gods (such
as were made at a treaty).—Gk. omovd-, 2nd grade of orévday, to
pour out, make a libation. Perhaps allied to Sponsor. Brug-
mann, I. § 143, ii. § 802. Der. spond-a-ic, L. spondaicus, Gk.
orovderakds.

SPONGE, the porous framework of an animal, remarkable for
sucking up water. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. sponge, Ancren Riwle,
p- 262, ]. 2.—OF. esponge, ‘a spunge,’ Cot. Mod. F. éponge.—L.
spongia.=Gk. oroyyd, a sponge; another form of omdyyos (Attic
opéyyos), a sponge.+-L. fungus, a fungus, from its spongy nature.
q Also AS. sponge, Matt. xxvii. 48, directly from Latin. Der.
sponge, verb; spong-y, spong-i-ness; also sponge-cake; spunk, q.v.
Allied to fungus.

SPONSOR, a surety, godfather or godmother. (L.) In Phillips
ed. 1706.—L. sponsor, a surety, one who promises for another; cf.
spons-us, pp. Of spondére, to promise. Probably allied to Gk.
onovéai, a treaty, truce, and omévdew, to pour a libation, as when
making a solemn treaty; see Spondee. Der. sponsor-i-al, sponsor-
ship. And see spouse, Also (from L. spondére) de-spond, re-spond,
cor-re-spond.

SPONTANEOUS, voluntary, acting on one’s own impulse.
(L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Englished from L. spontaneus,
willing; by change of -us into -ous, as in arduous, strenuous, &c.
Formed with suffix -dxeus from spont-, appearing in the gen. spontis
and abl. sponte of a lost sb. *spons. Sponte is used to mean ‘ of one’s
own accord;’ and spontis occurs in the phrase swe spontis esse, to be
at one’s own disposal, to be one’s own master. Der. spontaneous-ly ;
spontane-i-ty, a coined word.

SPONTOON, a half-pike formerly used by officers of infantry.
(F.—Ital.—L.) ‘ You have never a spontoon in the house?’ Foote,
Mayor of Garrat, i. 1.—F. sponton, esponton (Hatzfeld).—Ital. spon-
tone, ‘a gleaue, a iauelin, a partisan ;’ Florio. It was orig. a blunted
weapon. = Ital. spontare, ‘to abate the edge or point of anie weapon ;’
Florio. — Late L. *expunctare, to blunt a point (Korting). = L. ex, off,
away; and punctum, a point. See Ex- and Point.

SPOOL, a reel for winding yarn on. (MDu.) ME. spole, Prompt.
Parv. p. 470; also in W. de Bibbesworth, in Wright’s Voc. i. 157.
Imported from the Netherlands, with the Flemish weavers. —MDu.
spoele (Hexham); Du. spoel, a spool, quill; Low G. spole (Bremen
Worterbuch).+4-Swed. spole, a spool, spoke; Dan. spole; G. spule, a
spool, bobbin, quill; OHG,. spuolo, spuola. Perhaps allied to Icel.
spolr (base spal-), a rail, a bar.

SPOOM, to run before the wind. (L.) An old sea-term; see ex-
amples in Nares. Lit. ‘to throw up foam’ by running through the
water, As Nares remarks, it means to sail steadily rather than
swiftly. From spume, foam (L. spiima); seeSpume. Corruptly
also spoon ; ‘ spooning before the wind,’ Capt. Smith, Works, p. 878.
Hence spoondrift>spindrift. See Spin-drift.

SPOON, an instrument for supping liquids. (E.) The orig. sense
was simply ‘a chip,’ then a thin slice of wood, lastly a spoon (at
first wooden). ME. spon (with long 0), Chaucer, C. T. 10916
(F 602). AS. spén, a chip, a splinter of wood; see examples in
Bosworth. In Voc. 149. 30, the L. fomes, a chip for firewood, is
glossed by ‘ geswxlud spoon, vel tynder,’ i.e. a kindled chip, or
tinder.4-Du. spaan, a chip, splint; Icel. span, sponn, a chip, shaving,
spoon; Dan. spaan, a chip; Swed. span, a chip, splint; G. spahn,
OHG. span, a very thin board, chip, splint, shaving. B. The Teut.
type is *spénuz, a chip. Cf. Gk. ognv, a wedge. Der. spoon-bill,
a bird; spoon-ful, spelt spoonefull in Minsheu, ed. 1627, sponeful in
Sir T. More, Works, p. 617 (R.). ME. sponful, in MS. Harl. 2378,
p- 25 (see Henslow, Med. Wks., p. 78); the pl. is spoonfuls, see exx.
in R.; spoon-meat, Com. of Errors, iv. 3. 61. Brugmann, i. § 552.

SPOOR, a trail. (Du.) Modern; not in Todd’s Johnson. Intro-
duced from the Cape of Good Hope. = Du. spoor, a spur ; also a trace,
track, trail. Cf. Low G. spaor,a spoor (Danneil), Allied to Speir
and Spur.

SPORADIC, scattered here and there. (Gk.) ‘ Sporadici Morbi,
diseases that are rife in many places;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. It thus
arose as a medical term. The Late L. sporadicus is merely borrowed
from Gk. omopadix«ds, scattered.—Gk. omopad-, stem of omopas,


SPORE


scattered.=Gk. omop-, 2nd grade of omeipewv, to sow, to scatter
abroad. See Sperm.

SPORE, a minute grain which serves as a seed in ferns, &c.
(Gk.) Modern and botanical. —Gk. omédpos, seed-time ; also, a seed.
= Gk. omop-, 2nd grade of omeipew, tosow. See above.

SPORRAN, a leathern pouch, worm with the kilt. (Gael.—L.—
Gk.) In Scott’s Rob Roy, c. xxxiv.— Gael. sporan, a purse, pouch
worn with the kilt; Irish sparan, a purse, a pouch; Mlrish sboran ;
for *s-burr<*burs, from L. bursa, a purse, from Gk. Bupon, a hide;
see Purse (Macbain).

SPORT, play, mirth, merriment, jest. (F.—L.) ‘Sporte, myrthe ;’
Palsgrave. Merely a contracted form of disport, desport, by loss of
di- or de-; just as we have splay for display, spend for dispend. Strat-
mann cites sport as occurring in the Coventry Plays, ed. Halliwell,
p. 185. Disport is in Chaucer, C.T. 777 (A 775); see further under
Disport. Der. sport, verb, spelt sporte (also disporte) in Palsgrave ;
sport-ing ; sport-ful, Tw. Nt. v. 373; sport-ful-ly, sport-ful-ness;
sport-ive, All’s Well, iii. 2. 109, sport-ive-ly, -ness; sport-s-man
(coined like hunt-s-man), sport-s-man-ship.

SPOT, a blot, mark made by wet, a discoloured place, small
space, stain. (E.) ME. spot, Prompt. Paryv. ; pl. spottes, P. Plowman,
B. xiii. 315. [I suspect that spat in Ancren Riwle, p. 104, note e, is
a misprint for swat.) Prob. a native word; cf. EFries. spot, a spot,
MDnu. sfotten, to spot, stain. Also Norw. spott, a spot, also a small
piece of land, Icel. spotti, spotir, a small piece, bit. Perhaps also
allied to Swed. spott, spittle, spotta, to spit. (Distinct from G. spoét,
mockery, derision.) Apparently from Teut. *sput-, weaker grade of
*sputan-, to spout. See Spout. Der. spot, verb, chiefly in the pp.
spott-ed, as in Spenser, F. Q, i. 6. 26, Wyclif, Gen. xxx. 35; spott-y,
spott-i-ness ; spot-less, Rich. II, i. 1. 178, spot-less-ly, spot-less-ness.
And see spatt-er.

SPOUSE, a husband or wife. (F.—L.) One of the oldest words
in the language of F. origin. ME. spuse, fem. sb., O. Eng. Homilies,
ed. Morris, ii. 13, 1. 5; the comp. sb. spishdd, spousehood, also
occurs in the 11th century, O. Eng. Hom, i, 143, 1. 24, having
already acquired an E. suffix. The form is rather fem. than masc.
= OF. espous (Burguy), later espoux (époux), ‘a spouse, bridegroome,’
Cot. ; fem. form espouse (épouse), ‘ a spouse, a wife;’ id. The former
answers to L. sponsum, acc. of sponsus, a betrothed, a bridegroom ;
the latter to sponsa, fem,, a betrothed woman.—L. sponsus, pro-
mised, pp. of spondére, to promise; see Sponsor. Der. espouse,
verb, q.v.; also spous-al, ME. spousaile, Gower, C. A. i. 181; bk.
ii. 642; a doublet of espousal, ME. espousaile, Gower, C. A. ii. 322;
bk, v. 5815; see under espouse.

SPOUT, to throw out a liquid violently, to rush out violently as
a liquid from a pipe. (E.) ME. spouten, Chaucer, C. T. 4907
(B 487). Prob. from an AS. form *spitan, not found. But cf. Du.
uit-spuiten, to spout out (with ui=AS. a, by rule); also Swed. sputa,
given by Widegren as equivalent to Swed. spruta, to squirt, spout,
spurt; MDu. spuyten, ‘to spout out water,’ Hexham. Also Icel.
spyta, to spit, sputter. The Teut. type is *spitan-, to spit out, with
a weaker grade *sput-; see Franck. q It is probable that spout
is a by-form of sprout; compare D. spuit, a spout, squirt, syringe,
fire-engine, with Swed. spruta, a squirt, syringe, fire-engine. See
Sprout. For loss of r after sp, cf. speak. Der. spout, sb., ME.
spoute, spelt spowte in Prompt. Parvy. And see sputter.

SPRACK, SPRAG, quick, lively. (Scand.) See Spark (2).

SPRAIN, to overstrain the muscles of a joint. (F.—L.) A late
word. Phillips, ed. 1706, gives it as asb. The older word with
much the same sense is s/rain ; and sprain is related to OF. espreindre
just as strain is to OF. estreindre. = OF. espreign-, a stem of espreindre,
‘to press, wring, strain, squeeze out, thrust together;’ Cot. Mod.
F. épreindre.=—L, exprimere, to press out ; whence espreindre is formed
by analogy with F. forms from L. verbs in -ingere. =—L. ex, out; and
premere, to press; see Ex- and Press. And cf. Express. Der.
sprain, sb.; cf. OF. espreinte, ‘a pressing, straining,’ Cot., from the
pp. espreint.

SPRAT, a small sea-fish. (E.) ME, spro¢ or sprotte. ‘Hec
epimera, a sprott,’ in a list of fishes; Voc. 704. 39; also ‘ Emiperus,
sprot;’ Voc. 580. 6. AS. sprott(Toller). Cf. AS. sprot, a sprout, twig.
+Du sprot, ‘a sprat, a fish;’ Hexham. He also gives ‘sprot, a
sprout, or a sprigg of a tree, or the younge of every thing ;’? which
is the same word. ‘Sprat, a small fish, considered as the fry of the
herring ;? Wedgwood. Cf. prov. E. sprats, smallwood (Halliwell) ;
lit. sprouts. All from Teut. *sprut- (AS. sprot-), weak grade of
*spriitan-, to sprout; with the sense of ‘fry,’ or young one. See
Sprout.

SPRAWL, to toss about the limbs, stretch the body carelessly
when lying. (E.) ME. spraulen, Gower, C. A. ii. 5; bk. iv. 111
(footnote); Havelok, 475. AS. spreawlian; Toller cites ‘Spreawlige,
palpitet.’+4-Norw. sprala, Dan. spreile, sprelde, Swed. dial. sprala,


SPRINGAL 591


spralla, NFries. sprawie. Perhaps allied to Swed. sprattla, to sprawl;
or to Icel. sprokla, spraukla, to kick with the feet, to sprawl. If
so, a dental or guttural has been lost before 7.

SPRAY (1), foam tossed with the wind. (Low G.) ‘Commonly
written spry. ‘‘ Winds raise some of the salt with the spray;”
Arbuthnot ;” Johnson’s Dict. But no example of the spelling spry
is given, and it is not easy to find one. Bailey has spray (1735).
From Low G. sprei, a slight drizzle (Schambach); in Coburg, spre;
cf. Bavar. spr@en, to drizzle (Schmeller), Thiiringen sprahen (Hertel),
MHG. sprajen, sprewen; allied to G. spriihen, to drizzle, to form
spray, Du. sproeien (see Franck).

SPRAY (2), a sprig or small shoot of a tree. (E.) ME. spray,
Chaucer, C. T. 13700 (B 1960); Floriz and Blancheflur, ed. Lumby,
275; answering to AS. *spreg, allied to sprec,a shoot, spray; cf.
Dan. sprag,, a sprig, spray (Molbech) ; Swed. dial. spragge, spragg, a
spray (Rietz). B. Allied to Icel. sprek, a stick (whence smd-sprek,
small sticks, twigs, sprays) ; AS. sprec, a shoot; ‘ Sarmentum, spraec;’
Voc. 44. 29. Cf. Lithuan. sprogti, to crackle, split, sprout or bud
as a tree; whence sproga, a rift, a sprig or spray of a tree, spurgas,
a knot or eye ina tree. Also Gk. dondparyos, asparagus, of which
the orig, sense was perhaps merely ‘sprout’ or shoot. See Brug-
mann, i. 523, 531. Doublet, sprig (and perhaps asparagus).

SPREAD, to scatter abroad, stretch, extend, overlay, emit, diffuse.
(E.) ME. spreden, pt. t. spradde, spredde, pp. sprad, spred, P. Plow-
man, B. iii. 308; pt. t. spradde, Gower, C. A. i. 182; bk. ii. 684.
AS. sprédan, to spread out, extend, a rare word. It occurs as
gespraed, imper. sing. = extend thou, stretch out, in the Northumb.
version of Matt. xii. 13 ; and the comp. ofer-sprédan, to spread over,
is in the Rule of St. Bennet, ed. Schroer, p. 109, 1. 7.4-Du. spreiden,
to spread, scatter, strew; Low G. spreden, spreén, spreien; G.
spreiten. ‘Teut. type *spraidjan-, a causal form, from the older base
SPREID, to become extended, spread out. Der. spread, sb. ;
over-spread.

SPREE, a merry frolic. (Scand.?) Modern and colloquial. Sir
W. Scott has spree, St. Ronan’s Well, ch. xx. § 11; also spray,
Introd. to Legend of Montrose. Cf, Irish spre, a spark, flash of fire,
animation, spirit. Cf. Irish sprac, a spark, life, motion, spraic,
strength, vigour, sprightliness, Gael. spraic, vigour, exertion, spracadh,
sprightliness ; not Celtic, but from Icel. sprekr, lively. See Spry.
See Notes on E. Etym., p. 278.

SPRIG, a spray, twig, small shoot of a tree. (E.) ME. sfrigge,
a rod for beating children, stick ; P. Plowman, C. vi. 139 (footnote).
Allied to AS. sprec, a spray, twig; Voc. 44. 29.4-Icel. sprek, a stick ;
Low G. sprikk, a sprig, twig, esp. a small dry twig or stick; EFries.
sprikke, sprik, a stick, twig. Allied to Dan. sprag, aspray (Molbech) ;
see further under Spray (2).

SPRIGHTLY, SPRITELY, lively. (F.—L. ; with E. suffix.)
The common spelling sprightly is wrong; gh is a purely E, com-
bination, whereas the present word is French. The mistake was
due to the very common false spelling spright, for sprite, a spirit;
see Sprite. The suffix -ly is from AS. -lic, like; see Like. Der.
spright-li-ness,

SPRING, to bound, leap, jump up, start up or forth, issue. (E.)
ME. springen, strong verb, pt. t. sprang, pp. sprungen, sprongen ;
Chaucer, C. T. 13690 (B 1950). AS. springan, sprincan; pt. t.
sprang, spranc, pp. sprungen. The spelling springan is the usual one,
Matt. ix. 26. But we find sprincd=springs, Alfred, tr. of Boethius,
cap. xxv (lib. iii, met. 2). And in Matt. ix. 26, where the AS.
version has ‘pes hlisa sprang ofer eall pat land’=this rumour
spread abroad over all the land, the Northumbrian version has
spranc.4+Du. springen, pt. t. sprong, pp. gesprongen; Icel. springa,
to burst, split; Swed. springa; Dan. springe; G. springen. B. All
from the Teut. type *sprengan-, pt. t. *sprang, pp. *sprunganoz.
Allied to Gk. omépxev, to drive on; Brugmann, i. § 602.
(o/SPERGH.) y. We still say of a cricket-bat that is cracked
or split, that it is sprung; and cf. Prov. E. (Eastern) sprinke, a crack
or flaw (Halliwell), where we even find the original E. final &; also
Essex sprunk, to crack, split, E. Anglian sprank, a crack; E.D. D.
The sense ‘ to split, burst’ is that of Icel. springa. Der. spring’, sb.,
a leap, also the time when young shoots spring or rise out of the
ground, also a source of water that wells up, a crack in a mast, &c. ;
spring-y ; spring-bok, a kind of antelope, from Du. bok, a he-goat, a
buck ; spring-halt (in horses), Hen. VIII, i. 3. 13; spring-time, As
You Like It, v. 3. 203 spring-flood, ME. spring-flod, Chaucer, C. T.
11382 (F 1070); spring-tide; day-spring, off-spring, well-spring. Also
springe, a snare that is provided with a flexible rod, called a springe
in ME., as in P. Plowman, B, v. 41. And see sprink-le. @J To
spring a mine is to cause it to burst; cf. Swed. spranga, to cause to
burst, causal of springa, to burst.

SPRINGAL, a youngster. (E.; with F. suffix.) In Spenser,
F, Q. v.10. 6. Spelt springall in Minsheu; spring-ald in Levins


592 SPRINKLE


(1570), From spring, i.e. to be alert ; with suffix -ald, of F. origin,
from OHG. -wald, as in her-ald, &c.

SPRINKLE, to scatter in small drops. (Du.?) In Spenser,
F. Q. iii. 12. 13. A better form is sprenkle, written sprenkyll by
Palsgrave, and sprenkelyn in the Prompt. Parvy. Perhaps borrowed
from Du. sprenkelen, to sprinkle. Cf. G. sprenkeln, to speckle,
from MHG. sprenkel, a spot, allied to Icel. sprekla, Swed. sprakla,
a little spot. See Kluge, s.v. sprenkel (who denies a connexion
with spring). It seems to be allied to Skt. pr¢-ni-, speckled ; see
Perch (2). Brugmann,i.509(1). 4 Distinctfrom ME. sprengen,
to scatter, cast abroad, sprinkle. ‘Sprenged ou mid hali water’
=sprinkle yourselves with holy water, Ancren Riwle, p. 16, 1. 9.
From AS. sprengan, to sprinkle, scatter abroad, Matt. xxv. 24,
Exod. xxiv. 8; A.S. Leechdoms, ed. Cockayne, i. 264, 1.15. This
sprengan is the causal of AS. springan, to spring, leap abroad,
regularly formed by the change of a (in the pt. t. sprang) to e, as if
for *sprangjan. See Spring. Der. sprinkle, sb., a holy-water
sprinkler, see Spenser, F. Q, iii. 12. 13 5 sprinkl-er.

SPRINT, to run at full speed; see Spurt (2).

SPRIT, a spar set diagonally to extend a fore-and-aft sail. (E.)
The older sense is merely a pole or long rod, and an older spelling
is found in ME. spret. ‘ A spret or an ore’=a sprit or an oar; Will.
of Palerne, 27543; spelt spreot, King Alisaunder, 858. AS. spréot,
a pole. ‘Contus, spréot;’ Voc. 139. 39; cf. 14. 22. ‘ Trudes,
spréotas,’ in a list of things belonging to a ship; id. 166.15. The
orig. sense is ‘a sprout,’ or shoot, hence a branch, pole, &c. Allied
to AS. spritan, to sprout, cognate with G. spriessen; see further
under Sprout.4-Du. spriet, a sprit; MSwed. sprofe; Dan. spryd,
sprod. Der. sprit-sail, bow-sprit. Doublet, sprout.

SPRITE, SPRIGHT, a spirit. (F.—L.) The false spelling
spright is common, and is still in use in the derived adj. sprightly.
Spelt sprite in Spenser, F. Q. i. 1. 40, 43; but spright, id. i. 2. 2.
‘ Legions of sprighis,’ id. i. 1. 38. ME. sprit, sprite, spryte; ‘the
holy spryte,’ Rich. Coer de Lion, 394.—F. esprit, ‘ the spirit,’ Cot. =
L. spiritum, acc. of spiritus. It is a doublet of Spirit, q.v. Der.
spright-ly or sprite-ly ; spright-ed, haunted, Cymb. ii. 3.144; spright-
ful or sprite-ful, K. John, iv. 2. 1773 spright-ful-ly, Rich. II, i. 3. 3;
spright-ing, Temp. i. 2. 298. Doublet, spirit.

SPROUT, to shoot out germs, burgeon, bud. (E.) Spelt sprut
in Fitzherbert, Husbandry, § 13, 1. 38 (E.D.S.). ME. spruten,
Cursor Mundi, 112163 O. Eng. Homilies, ii. 217, 1. 23. From AS.
spritan, found in the pp. G-sproten; OFris. sprita, strong verb,
Pp. spruten, to sprout (Richtofen).4-Low G. spriiten, to sprout ;
Du. spruiten; G. spriessen, to sprout, pt. t. spross, pp. gesprossen.
The cognate Swed. spruta is only used in the sense to spout or
squirt out water, and perhaps is the word whence E. spout is derived,
by loss of r; see Spout, Spurt (1). B. All from a Teut. type
*spritan-, pt. t. *spraut, pp. *sprutanoz. We may also notice that
E. sprout as a sb. is related to Du. spruit, Icel. sproti, G. spross,
a sprout; cf. also AS. sprot, sprota,a sprout; and that E. sprit, q.v.,
is allied to the same words. Cf. Goth. sprautd, quickly. Der.
sprout, sb, And see spout, sprit, sprat.

SPRUCE, fine, smart, gaily dressed. (F.—G.) InShak. L. L.L.
v. I. 14; and in Minsheu, ed. 1627. ‘It was the custom of our an-
cestors, on special occasions, to dress after the manner of particular
countries. The gentlemen who adopted that of Prussia or Spruce
seem, from the description of it, to have been arrayed in a style, to
which the epithet spruce, according to our modern usage, might have
been applied with perfect propriety. Prussian leather (corium
Pruscianum) is called in Baret by the familiar name of spruce;’
Richardson ; see Baret, art. 781. Richardson then quotes from Hall’s
Chron. Hen, VIII, an. 1, § 25, as follows: ‘ And after them came
syr Edward Haward, than Admyral, and wyth hym Syr Thomas
Parre, in doblettes of crimosin veluet, voyded lowe on the backe,
and before to the cannell-bone, lased on the breastes with chaynes of
siluer, and ouer that shorte clokes of crimosyn satyne, and on their
heades hattes after dauncers fashion, with feasauntes fethers in
theim: They were appareyled after the fashion of Prusia or
Spruce.’ There may have been special reference to the leather
worn ; the name of spruce was certainly given to the leather because
it came from Prussia, Levins has: ‘ Corium pumicatum, Spruce ;’
col. 182, 1. 14. ‘Spruce leather, corruptly so called for Prussia
leather ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘ Spruce leather, graauw leer, Pruysch
leer,’ i.e. gray leather, or Prussian leather ; Sewel’s Eng.-Du. Dict.,
1749. [E. Miiller objects that it is difficult to see why Prussia
should always be called Spruce, not Pruce, in this particular in-
stance; but the name, once associated with the leather, would easily
remain the same, especially as the etymology may not have been
very obvious to all. It is a greater difficulty to know why the s
should ever have been prefixed, but it may be attributed to the
English fondness for initial s; or it may have arisen from the G.


SPUNK


das Preussen.| It is sufficient to make sure that Spruce really did
mean Prussia, and really was used instead of Pruce. Of this we
have positive proof as early as the 14th century. ‘ And yf ich sente
ouer see my seruaunt to brugges, Oper in-to prus my prentys’=and
if I sent my servant over the sea to Bruges, or sent my apprentice to
Prussia ; P. Plowman, C. vii. 279; where two MSS. read spruce for
prus, and one MS. has pruys-/ond = Prussian land, the land of Prussia.
In the corresponding passage of P. Plowman, B. xiii. 393, three
MSS. have pruslonde, pruys londe, and pruce-lond respectively; but
a fourth has spruce-land, Pruce is the form in Chaucer, C. T. 53
(a well-known passage). B. Further, we find Sprwys-chyst (Spruce
chest) in Paston Letters, iii. 407, but prowce-kyst in Records of
Nottingham, ii. 86; spruce hutche in the Bury Wills (1493), p. 82,
but pruce hutche (1448), p. 12. And Prussia is called Sprucia as
late as 1614; see Eng, Garner, ed. Arber, iv. 329, 345. y. We
conclude that to dress sprucely was to dress after the Prussian man-
ner; that Spruce was early used in place of Pruce, particularly with
reference to Prussian leather ; and consequently that spruce is due to
OF. Pruce, mod. F. Prusse, Prussia.— G. Preussen, Prussia (or from
an older form of the same). Der. spruce-ly, spruce-ness.

SPRUCE-BEER, a kind of beer. (G.; confused with F. and E.)
‘ Spruce-beer, a kind of physical drink, good for inward bruises ;’
Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘ Spruce-beer, and the beer of Hambur ;’ Colyn
Blowbol’s Testament, 332, in Hazlitt, E. Eng. Popular Poetry, i. 106.
‘ Essence of spruce is obtained from the young shoots of the black
spruce fir... . Spruce beer is brewed from this essence, ... The
black beer of Dantzig is similarly made from the young shoots of
another variety of fir;’ Eng. Cycl., Supp. to Arts and Sciences.
‘A decoction of the young shoots of spruce and silver fir was much
in use on the shores of the Baltic as a remedy in scorbutic, gouty,
and rheumatic complaints. The sprouts from which it was made
were called sprossen in German and jopen in Dutch, and the de-
coction itself sprossen-bier [in German] or jopenbier [in Dutch].
From the first of these is spruce-beer. See Beke in N.andQ. Aug. 3,
1860. And doubtless the spruce-fir, G. sprossenjichte, takes its name
as the fir of which the sprouts are chiefly used for the foregoing
purpose, and not from being brought from Prussia, as commonly
supposed ;’ Wedgwood. B. The above explanation may be ad-
mitted; but with the addition that the reason why the G. word
sprossen-bier was turned into spruce-beer in English is precisely
because it was commonly known that it came from Prussia; and
since sprossen-bier had no sense in English and was not translated
into sprouts-beer, it was natural to call it Spruce-beer, i.e. Prussian
beer. The facts, that Spruce meant Prussia as early as the 14th
century, and that spruce or spruce-leather was already in use to signify
Prussian leather, have been proved in the article above; see Spruce.
Thus spruce-beer for sprossen-bier was no mere corruption, but a
deliberate substitution. Accordingly, we find in Evelyn’s Sylva,
ch. 22, the remark: ‘For masts, &c., those [firs] of Prussia which
we call Spruce.’ y. With this understanding, we may admit that
spruce-beer is one of the very few words in English which are derived
immediately from German. = G. sprossenbier, spruce-beer, lit. ‘sprouts-
beer;’ G. sprossenfichte, spruce-fir ; sprossenessenz, spruce-wine. =G.
sprossen, pl. of sprosse, a sprout, cognate with E. sprout; and bier,
cognate with E. beer; see Sprout and Beer. Note also Du. joopen-
bier, ‘ spruce-beer ;’ Sewel’s Du. Dict. ed. 1754. The word spruce=
Prussia, is French, from G. (das) Preussen, as shown above.

SPRY, active, nimble, lively. (E.) Added by Todd to Johnson.
Given by Halliwell as a Somersetsh. word, but general ; see E. D. D.
Perhaps E. Cf. Swed. dial. sprygg, very lively, skittish (as a horse),
Rietz; allied to Swed. dial. sprag, sprék, or spraker, spirited,
mettlesome. Compare also prov. E. sprag (Halliwell) ; and sprack.
active, a Wiltshire word. See Spree and Spark (2).

SPUD, an instrument for weeding. (Scand.) See E. D. D. It
formerly also meant a knife or dagger; see Nares. ME. spudde,
‘cultellus vilis;’ Prompt. Parv. Prob. from Dan. spyd, MDan.
spyd, spjud 3 cognate with Swed. spjut, Icel. spjot, a spear, lance.+
G. spiess, a lance. @ Distinct from Spit (1).

SPUH, the same as Spew, q.v.

SPUME, foam. (L.) Not common. ME. spume, Gower, C. A.
ii. 265; bk. v. 4122.—L. spuma, foam. For *spoima; Brugmann,
i. § 791. Allied to Skt. phéna-, foam, Russ, piena, foam, AS. fam ;
see Foam. Der. spoom, verb, q.v.3 pum-ice,q.v.; pounce (2), q.v.
Doublet, foam.

SPUNK, tinder; hence, a match, spark, spirit, mettle. (C.—L.
—Gk.) Also sponk; see examples in Jamieson and Halliwell. ‘In
spunck or tinder ;’ Stanyhurst, tr. of Virg. Ain. i. 175; ed. Arber,
p- 23. The orig. sense is tinder or touchwood. = Irish sponc, Gael.
spong’, sponge, tinder, touchwood ; applied to touchwood from its
spongy nature. =L. spongia, a sponge ; hence pumice-stone, or other
porous material. = Gk. onoyyia, ondyyos, a sponge; see Sponge,


SPUR


SPUR, an instrument on a horseman’s heels, for goading on a [
rapidly and indistinctly. (E.)


horse, a small goad. (E.) ME. spure, spore, Chaucer, C. T. 475
(A 473); P. Plowman, B. xviii. 12, AS. spura, spora. ‘Calcar,
spura;’ Voc. 275.33. Cf. hand-spora, a hand-spur, Beowulf, 986
(Grein).4-Du. spoor, a spur; allied to spoor, a track; see Spoor;
Icel. spori; Dan. spore; Swed. sporre; OHG. sporo; MHG. spor;
G, sporn. B. All from *spor-, weak grade of Teut. *sper-an-, to
kick. Brugmann, i. § 793 (2). From4/SPER, to quiver, to jerk,
which appears in G. sick sperren, to struggle against; one sense of
this root is to kick, jerk out the feet, as in Lithuan. spirti, to resist,
to kick out as a horse; cf. Skt. sphur, sphar, to throb, to struggle.
Hence the sense of spur is ‘kicker.’ y. A closely allied word
occurs in AS. spor, a foot-trace, Du. spoor, Icel. spor, G. spur (see
Spoor); whence was formed the verb appearing as AS, spyrian,
Icel. spyrja, G. spitren, to trace a foot-track, to investigate, enquire
into, represented by Lowland Sc. speir, to enquire, ask, search
out. Der. spur, verb, ME. spurien, sporien, Layamon, 21354,
Romance of Partenay, 4214. Also spur-wheel; and see spoor, speir,
Spurn.

SPURGE, a class of acrid plants. (F.—L.) ‘Spurge, a plant,
the juice of which is so hot and corroding that it is called Devil’s
Milk, which being dropped upon warts eats them away ;’ Bailey’s
Dict., vol. i. ed. 1735. And hence the name. ME. sporge, Prompt.
Parv.; spowrge, Voc. 645. 15.—AF. spurge, a form given in Voc.
557-7; more commonly OF. espurge, ‘ garden spurge ;’ Cot.—OF,
espurger, ‘to purge, cleer, cleanse, rid of; also, to prune, or pick
off the noysome knobs or buds of trees;? Cot. Hence, to destroy
warts. =L. expurgare, to expurgate, purge thoroughly.—L. ex, ont,
thoroughly ; and purgare, to purge; see Ex- and Purge.

SPURIOUS, not genuine. (L.) In Milton, Samson, 301.
Englished from L. spurius, false, spurious, by the common change of
-us to -ous,as in arduous, &c. The orig. sense is ‘ of illegitimate
birth ;’ perhaps allied to Gk. omopa, seed, offspring, omeipev, to sow
(Corssen); seeSperm. Der. spurious-ly, -ness.

SPURN, to reject with disdain. (E.) Properly ‘to kick against,’
hence to kick away, reject disdainfully. ME. spurnen, to kick
against, stumble over, Ancren Riwle, p. 188, 1. 2. ‘Spornyng, or
Spurnyng, Calcitracio;? Prompt. Pary. AS. sfornan, spurnan,
gespornan, to kick against; cf. also @t-spornan, Matt. iv. 6, John,
xi. g. <A strong verb; pt. t. spearn, pl. spurnon, pp. spornen.+Icel.
sperna, pt. t. sparn, to spurn, kick with the feet; L. spurnere, to
spurn, despise (a cognate form, not one from which the E. word is
borrowed, for the E. verb is a strong one). B. All from the Idg.
base *sperz, to kick against, an extension from 4/SPER, to quiver,
jerk, also to kick against; see Spur and Spar (3). Der. spurz,
sb., Timon, i, 2. 146 ; Chevy Chase (oldest version), near the end.

SPURRY, the name ofaherb. (F.—G.—Late L.) In Cotgrave.
= MF. spurrie, ‘spurry or frank, a Dutch herb, and an excellent
fodder for cattle;? Cot. By ‘Dutch’ he prob. means ‘ German ;’
we find Du. spurrie, ‘the herb spurge,’ in Hexham; but this can
hardly be other than the F. word borrowed. The etymology of the
F. word is doubtful, but it may be German, as Cotgrave seems to
suggest. We find in German the forms spark, spergel, sporgel, all
meaning spurry.—Late L. spergula; A.D. 1482 (Weigand). It
looks as if it might be connected with L. spargere, to scatter.

SPURT (1), SPIRT, to spout, jet out, as water. (E.) ‘ With
toongé three-forcked furth spirts fyre;’ Stanyhurst, tr. of Virgil, Ain.
ii. ed. Arber, p. 59. The older meaning is to sprout or germinate,
to grow fast; as in Hen. V, iii. 5.8. We even find the sb. spirt, a
sprout ; ‘ These nuts... haue in their mids a little chit or spirt;’
Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xv.c. 22. Cf. ‘from Troy blud spirted;’
Stanyhurst, tr. of Virgil, Ain. i. ed. Arber, p. 35. By the common
metathesis of r (as ME, brid for bird) spurt stands for sprut; as in
ME. sprutten ; ‘Pe widi pet sprutted ut’ =the willow that sprouts or
shoots out; Ancren Riwle, p. 86. AS. spryttan, spritten; ‘ spritte
s€o eorde growende gers’=let the earth shoot out growing grass;


Gen, i. 11. A causal verb, allied to the AS. strong verb spriitan, to
sprout; see Sprout. Cf. prov, E, sprit, to sprout; E.D.D.; and
see Spout,


SPURT (2), a violent exertion. (Scand.) Used by Stanyhurst in
the sense of ‘space of time;’ as, ‘Heere for a spirt linger,’ tr. of
Virgil, Amn. iii. 453. Not the same word as the above, though
perhaps confused with it.—Icel. sprettr, a spurt, spring, bound, run ;
from the strong verb spretta (pt. t. spratt), to start, to spring;
to spout out water; also to sprout. Cf. Swed. spritta, to start,
startle; prov. E. sprit, to run quickly a short way (E.D.D.), The
Teut. base is *sprent (tt<nt); hence also E. sprint, to run a quick
short race; which is the doublet of spurt, vb., to run fast. Cf. Swed.
dial. sprinnta, to burst (as a bud); to run fast, tojump. The orig.
n of the base SPRENT is also preserved in prov. E. sprunt, a con-
yulsive struggle, Warwickshire (Halliwell).


also |
| squalidus, stiff, rough, dirty, foul.=L. squalére, to be stiff, rough, or
| parched, to be dirty.


SQUALL 593


SPUTTER, to keep spouting or jerking out liquid, to speak
‘ And lick’d their hissing jaws, that
sputter’d flame ;’ Dryden, tr. of Atneid, ii, 279 (ii. 211, Lat. text).
The frequentative of Spout, q.v.; so that the sense is ‘to keep on
spouting.’ From sput-, weaker grade of Teut. *spitan-, to spout.
Cf, Du. dial. (Groningen) spéttern, to sputter; Low G. sputtern;
Norw. sputra,to spout.  @] Not to be confused with spatter, which
is a different word, and allied to spor.

SPY, to see, discover. (F.-OHG.) Short for espy. ME. spien,
Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 40, 1.14. [The ME. sfie, sb., a
spy, occurs in Floriz and Blancheflur, ed, Lumby, 1. 332.] Thesame
word as ME, espien, Chaucer, C. T. 4744 (B 324); House of Fame,
1. 706. — OF, espier, to espy.—OHG. spehin, MHG, spehen (mod. G.
spahen), to watch, observe closely..-L. specere, to look; Skt. pag,
spag, to spy; used to form some tenses of dy¢, to see. —4/SPEK, to
see; Brugmann, i. § 551. Der. spy, sb., as above; spy-glass; also
(from espy) espi-on-age, espi-al, From L. specere we have spice, spec-i-
es, spec-i-al, espec-t-al, spec-i-men, spec-i-fy, spec-i-ous, spec-u-late ;
au-spice, con-spic-u-ous, de-spic-able, fronti-spiece, per-spic-u-ous, su-spic-
i-ous, tran-spic-uous 3; de-spise, de-spite; a-spect, circum-spect, ex-pect, in=
spect, intro-spect-ion, per-spect-ive, pro-spect, re-spect, dis-re-spect, ir-re-
spect-ive, retro-spect, su-spect, spect-a-cle, spect-a-tor, spect-re, spect-rum ;
also spite, respite.

SQUAB, 1. to fall plump; 2. a sofa; a young bird. (Scand.)
‘ Squab, an unfledged bird, the young of an animal before the hair
appears (South) ; a long seat, a sofa; also, to squeeze, beat (Devon) ;’
Halliwell, Halliwell also cites from Coles: ‘A sguob to sit on, pul-
vinus mollicellus;’ this is not in the edition of 1684. Sguab, a sofa, is
in Pope, Imitation of Earl of Dorset, 1. 10. Johnson also explains
squab as ‘unfeathered ; fat, thick and stout;’ and gives squab, adv.,
‘with a heavy, sudden fall, plump and flat,’ with a quotation from
Lestrange’s Fables: ‘ The eagle took the tortoise up into the air, and
dropt him down, squab, upon a rock ;’ also squab, verb, to fall down
plump or flat; cf. prov. E. sguap, to strike. In all senses, the word
is of Scand. origin. 1. The Swed. dial. sgvapp, a word imitative of
a splash (Rietz), explains Lestrange’s sgyuab and the verb ‘to fall
plump,’ hence to knock, beat; cf. G. schwapp, a slap, E. swap, to
strike; see Swap and Squabble. 2. The senses ‘ fat,’ ‘ unfledged,’
and ¢ soft” (as a sofa) are best explained by Swed. dial. syvabb, loose
or fat flesh, sgvabba, a fat woman, sqvabbig, flabby; from the verb
appearing in Norweg. sqvapa, to tremble, shake (hence, to be flabby).
Cf. also Norweg. kveppa (pt. t. kvapp), to slip suddenly, shake,
shudder, and the ME. guappen, to throb, mentioned under Quaver,
q.v. And note Icel. kuvap, jelly, jelly-like things. See, in Rietz, the
Swed. dial. str. vb. skvimpa (pt. t. skvamp, pp. skuumpen), to shake,
agitate; and cf. Swed. sgvalpa, MDan. skvalpe, to shake.

SQUABBLE,, to dispute noisily, wrangle. (Scand.) In Shak.
Oth. ii. 3. 281.—Swed. dial. skvabbel, a dispute, a squabble (corre-
sponding to a verb *skvabbla, not given); Rietz. Allied to Swed.
dial, skvappa, to chide, scold slightly, lit. make a splashing; from
the sb. skvapp, a splash, an imitative word from the sound of
dabbling in water; Rietz. Cf. Icel. skvampa, to paddle in water.
We may also further compare Norweg. svabba, to dabble in water
(Aasen), prov. E. swap, a blow, the noise of a fall, to strike swiftly,
swab, to splash over, swabble, to squabble, swobble, to swagger in a
low raanner (East). ‘ Swablynge, swabbyng, or swaggynge;’ Prompt.
Parv. Also G. schwabbeln, to shake fluids about. See Swap.
@ The interchange of initial sgz and sw is common; Levins writes
squayne for swain. Der. squabble, sb., squabbl-er.

SQUAD, a small troop. (F.—Ital.—L.) We speak of ‘ an awk-
ward squad,’ = MF, esquadre, escadre, ‘a squadron of footmen ;’ Cot.
=Ital. sgvadra, ‘a squadron;’ Florio. See Square, Der. squad-
r-O?n.

SQUADRON, a troop of soldiers, a body of cavalry, number
of ships. (F.—Ital.—L.) In Oth. i, 1. 22; Spenser, F. Q. ii. 8. 2.—
MF. esguadron, ‘a squadron, a troope of souldiers ranged into a
square body or battalion,’ Cot.—Ital, sguwadrone, ‘a squadrone, a
troupe or band of men;’ Florio. The augmentative form (with
suffix -one<L. acc. -dnem) of Ital. squadra, ‘a squadron, also a
square, squire, or carpenter’s ruler, also a certain part of a company
of souldiers of 20 or 25 [25 is a square number], whose chiefe is a
corporal;’ id. Doubtless so called, at first, from a formation into


| squares; see further under Square. And see squad.


SQUALID, filthy, dirty. (L.) In Spenser, F. Q. v. 1. 13-—L.


Bréal connects it with sgua-ma, a shell; but


cf. Russ. kal’, ordure. Der. squalid-ly, -ness. Also squal-or (rare),
from squal-ére.
SQUALL, to cry out violently. (Scand.) ‘The raven croaks,


the carrion-crow doth squall ;? Drayton, Noah’s Flood, 1. 150 from


-end.—Icel. skvala, to squeal, bawl out; skval,a squalling; Swed,


Qq


594 SQUANDER

sqvala, to stream, gush out violently; sgval, an impetuous running of
water; sqval-regn, a violent shower of rain (whence E. squail, sb., a
burst of rain) ; Dan. sqgvaldre, to clamour, bluster; sqgvalder, clamour,
noisy talk. Cf. Swed. dial. skvala, skvdla, to gush out with a violent
noise, to prattle, chatter; Gael. sgal,a loud cry, sound of high wind,
sgal, to howl; cf. W. chwalu, to babble. | B. From a base *skwal,
expressive of the outburst of water; allied to: Teut. base SKAL, to
resound, as in G. schallen, Icel. skjalla (pt.t.skall). Der. squall, sb.,
as above; sqguail-y. And see squeal.

SQUANDER, to dissipate, waste. (Scand.) Now used only of
profuse expenditure, but the orig. sense was to scatter or disperse
simply, as still used in prov. E. * His family are all grown up, and
squandered [dispersed] about the country,’ Warwicksh. (Halliwell).
« Squandered [scattered] abroad ;? Merch. of Ven. i. 3. 22. ‘Spaine
. . » hath many colonies to supply, which lye squandered up and
down ;’ Howell, Foreign Travel, sect. ix,-ed. Arber, p. 45. ‘All
along the sea They drive and squander the huge Belgian fleet ;* Dry-
den, Annus Mirabilis, st. 67. Mr. Wedgwood’s solution of this
curious word is probably the right one, viz. that it is a nasalised
form (as if for *sguanter) of Northumb. squatter, squather, to scatter,
dissipate, or squander, to act with profusion (Jamieson). This is
the same as prov. E. swatter, swather, to throw water about, as geese
do in drinking, also, to squander, waste; also as prov. E. swattle, to
drink as ducks do water, to waste; see E.D.D. These are fre-
quentatives from Dan. sgvatte, to splash, spurt; figuratively, to
dissipate, squander ; cf. sgvat, sb., a splash. So also Swed. squattra,
to squander, lavish one’s money (Widegren) ; frequentative of squdtta,
to squirt (id.); Swed. dial. skwdtta, a strong verb (pt. t. skwatt,
supine skwutiid), to squirt. Note also Icel. skvetta, to squirt out
water, properly of the sound of water thrown out of a jug, skvetir, a
gush of water poured out. The d appears in MDu. swadderen, ‘to
dabble in the water as a goose or duck,’ Hexham; and in Swed. dial.
skvadra, verb, used of the noise of water gushing violently out of a
hole (Rietz). The ward is now used metaphorically, but the orig.
sense was merely to splash water about somewhat noisily. The
Icel. skvetta is for *skwenta (Noreen); and may even be allied to Gk.


onévbev, to pour out. A somewhat similar word is E. scatter. Der.
squander-er.
‘SQUARE, having four equal sides and angles. (F.—L.) ME.


square (dissyllabic), Chaucer, C. T. 1078 (A 1076); Cursor Mundi,
19843.— OF. esquarré, ‘square, or squared,’ Cot.; esguarre, sb., a
square, or squareness. ‘The sb. is the same as Ital. sguadra, ‘a
squadron, also a square, squire, or carpentet’s ruler;’ cf. Ital.
squadrare, ‘to square,’ id. All formed from a Late L. verb *exquad-
rare, not found, but a mere intensive of L. guadrare, to square, make
four-comered, by prefixing the prep. ex. ‘The verb quadrare is from
qguadrus, four-cornered, related to quatuor, four, cognate with E.
four. See Ex-, Quarry, Quadrant, and Four. Der. square,
sb., square, verb, square-ly, -ness. Also squire (2), q.v. squad,
squadr-on.

SQUASH, to crush, to squeeze flat. (F.—L.) a. No doubt
commonly regarded as an intensive form of quash; the prefix s-
answering to OF. es-=L. ex-. Cf. OF. esguasser, to break in pieces ;
from es- (L. ex), intensive prefix, and guasser, casser, to break; see
Quash. f. But it commonly keeps the sense of ME. squachen,
Barlaam and Josaphat, 1. 663, pr. in Altenglische Legenden, ed. Horst-
mann, p. 224. —OF. esquacher, to crush (Roquefort, who gives a quota-
tion) ; also spelt escacher, ‘ to squash, beat, batter, or crush flat ;’ Cot.
Mod. F. écacher. ‘This answers to Span. acachar, agachar, only used
reflexively, in the sense to squat, to cower (Diez). The F. cacher
answers to a Late L. type *co-act-icare, to press together (KOrting,
§ 2272). The prefix es-=L. ex-, extremely; hence es-cacher is ‘ to
press extremely,’ crush flat, squash.eL. ex-; and coact-us, pp. of
cogere (=co-agere), lit. to drive together; see Ex-, Cogent; also
Con- and Agent. And see Squat, a closely allied word. Der.
squash, sb., a soft, unripe peascod, Tw. Nt. i. 5. 166.

SQUAT, to cower, sit down upon the hams. (F.—L.) ‘To
squatie'as a hare doth ;’ Minsheu,ed. 1627. Here squat is to lie flat,
as if pressed tightly down; and the old sense of squat is, occasionally,
to press down, crush, much like the sense of Squash, which is a
closely related word. [This is well exemplified in Spanish; see
below.] ‘His grief deepe squatting,’ where the L. text has premit;
Stanyhurst, tr. of Virgil, Ain. i. 209. ME. squatien, to press or
crush flat. ‘The foundementis of hillis ben togidir smyten and
squat’ =the foundations of the hills are smitten together and crushed ;
Wyclif, 2 Kings, xxii. 8. “* Sgwat sal he hevedes’=he shall crush
the heads (L. conguassabit capita), Early Eng. Psalter, ed. Stevenson,
Ps. cix. (or cx.) 6. This explains proy. E. squat, to make flat, and
squat, adj., flat. It is important also to note that guat is used in the
same sense as squat ; indeed, in the Glossary to the Exmoor Scolding,
the word sqguat'is explained by ‘to guat down;’ which shows that


SQUIB


the s- in squat is a prefix, — OF, esquatir, to flatten, crush (Roquefort).
= OF, es-, from L. ex-, extremely; -and guatir, to press down, hence,
reflexively, to press oneself down, to squat, cower. ‘Ele se quatist
deles lun de pilers’=she squatted down beside one of the pillars;
Bartsch, Chrestomathie Frangaise, col. 282, 1. 16. The correspond-
ing word is Span. acachar, agachar, whence acacharse, ‘to crouch,
lie squat’ (Meadows), agacharse, ‘to stoop, couch, squat, cower’
(id.). Minsheu’s M. Span. Dict. has: ‘ agachar, to squat as a hare or
conie.’? Without the prefix, we find Span. cacho, gacho, bent, bent
downward, lit. pressed down; Ital. guatto, ‘squatte, husht, close,
still, lurking’ (Florio), guattare, ‘to squat, to husht, to lye close’
(id.). Diez shows that OF. quatir and Ital. guatto are due to L.
coact-us, pressed close together (whence also F. se cacher, to squat,
cacher, to hide). ‘Thus the etymology of squat is from L. ex-, co-
for cum, together, and act-us, pp. of agere, to drive. See Ex-,
Con-, and Agent; and see Squash. Der. sqguatt-er. (> Any
connexion of sguat with Dan. sqvatte, to splash, is entirely out of
the question; the E. word related to Dan. sqvatie is Squander,


vs

SQUAW, a female, woman. (N. Amer. Indian.) It occurs in
J. Mather, Remarkable Providences (1684); repr. by Offor, p. 33.
‘ Squaw, a female, woman, in the language of the Indian tribes of the
Algonkin family. — Massachusetts squa, eshgua; Narragansett sguaws 5
Cree iskwew ; Delaware ochqueu and khqueu; used also in compound
words (as the names of animals) in the sense of female ;’ Webster;
and Cent. Dict.

SQUEAK, to utter a shrill sharp cry. (Scand.) In Hamlet, i. 1.
116. ‘The squeaking, or screeking of a rat ;’ Baret (1580). —MSwed.
sgweka, to squeak (Ihre); Swed. sguaka, to croak; cf. Norweg.
skvaka, to cackle (Aasen) ; Icel. skvakka, to give a sound, as of water
shaken in a bottle, skak, a noise. And cf. Swed. sguvala, to squeal.


Allied to Squeal, Quack, Cackle ; expressive of the sound made.


So also G. quaken, to quack; qudken, quieken, to squeak. Der.
squeak, sb. }

SQUEAL, to utter a shrill prolonged sound. (Scand.) In Jul.
Cees. ii, 2. 24. ME. sguelen, Cursor Mundi, 1. 1344.—MSwed.
sgwela, to squeal (Ihre) ; Swed. sgudla, to squeal; Norweg. skvella,
to squeal (Aasen). Used as a frequentative of sgueak; the sense is
‘to keep on squeaking ;’ see Squeak. 4 Notwithstanding the
close similarity, sguall is not quite the same word, though the words
are now confused. Both, however, are expressive of continuous
sounds. See Squall. Der. squeal, sb.

SQUEAMISH, scrupulously fastidious, over-nice. (F.) ‘To be
sguamish, or nice, Delicias facere;’ Baret (1580). ME. skeymous,
sweymous. ‘ Sweymous, or skeymouse, Abhominativus;’ Prompt. Parv.,
p- 482; also written gueymows, p. 419. Sguwaimous, in Chaucer,


C. T., A 3337, means fastidious, sparing, infrequent, with occasional —


violent exceptions; see 1. 3805 (A 3807).
dus;’ Catholicon Anglicum (1483); squaymus, Trevisa, tr. of
Higden, vii. 461; sqgueymous, Lay Le Freine, 62. In a version of
the Te Deum from a 14th-century primer given by Maskell (Mon.


* Squaymose, verecun-


Rit. ii. 12) we have ‘ Thou were not skoymus of the maidens wombe ;” —


see Notes and Queries, 4S. iii. 181.— AF. *eskeimous (with AF. ei
for F. 07), spelt escoymous in Bozon, Contes Moralisés, p. 158, with
the sense of ‘sparing in eating, fastidious, nice as to food.’ Of
unknown origin. It might answer, as to form, to a Late L. type
*schématosus, or *schémosus (since L. é@ gave AF. ei, F. of; Schwan,
§§ 39, 299); from Late L. schéma, fashion, manner; from Gk,
oxnpa, a scheme, figure, mien, air, fashion; the sense being ‘ full of
airs or affectations.’ See Scheme. Der. squeamish-ly, -ness.

SQUEEZE, to crush or press tightly, to crowd. (E.) * To sguise,
or thrust together ;’ Baret (1580). The initial s is prefixed for
emphasis, being due to the OF. es-<L. ex-, an intensive prefix; to
squeeze=to queeze out. Late ME. queisen; ‘queyse out the jus’=
squeeze out the juice, Reliq. Antique, i. 302. It answers, in form,
to OMerc. cwésan, for AS. cwiesan, to squeeze, crush, generally
written cwysan, and used in the compound ¢écwysan, to crush to
pieces, squeeze to death, Ailfric’s Homilies, i..60; ii. 26, 166, 294,
510. Also ewésan; in Luke, xx. 18, where the earlier version has
tocwyst (for td-cwysd), the latter has 2dcwést (for tocwésd). B. Cognate
with Low G. quésen (Brem. Worterbuch).
Der. squeeze, sb.

SQUIB, (1) a paper tube, filled with combustibles, like a small
rocket ; also (2) a lampoon. (Scand.) 1. ‘ Can he tie sguibs i’ their
tails, and fire the truth out?’ Beaum. and Fletcher, The Chances, v.
2.6. A squibbe, a ball or darte of fire;’ Minsheu, ed, 1627. Spenser
has it in the curious sense of ‘ paltry fellow,’ as a term of disdain ;
Mother Hubbard’s Tale, 371. Squibs were sometimes fastened
slightly to a rope, so as to run along it like a rocket ;.« The squib’s
tun to the end of the line, and now for the cracker’ [explosion];
Dryden, Kind Keeper, Act y. sc. 1. ‘Hung up by the heels like


Froma Teut. root *kweus. :


SQUID.


meteors, with sgzibs in their tails ;” Ben Jonson, News from the New
World (2nd Herald).  B. Squib is a voiced form of sguip, and
prov. E, squib, to squirt, answers to Norw. skvipa, to squirt (Ross).
It seems to be allied to swip, a word significant of swift smooth
motion. Cf. ME. squippen, swippen, to move swiftly, fly, sweep,
dash; ‘the sguyppand water’=the dashing or sweeping’ water,
Anturs of Arthur (in Three Met. Romances), st.v. ‘When the
saul fra the body swippes,’ i.e. flies; Prick of Conscience, 1. 2196.
* Tharfor pai swippe [dart] purgh purgatory, Als a foul [bird] that
Jiyes smertly ;’ id. 1. 3322. ‘Iswipt ford’=hurried away, snatched
away, Ancren Riwle, p. 228, 1.4. Swip is from Icel. suipa, to flash,
dart, of a sudden but noiseless motion; suipr, a swift movement,
twinkling, glimpse; Norweg. svipa, to run swiftly (Aasen) ; cf. also
Dan, svippe, to whisk, to run (Larsen). The Teut. base SWIP was
also used to express the swift or sweeping motion of a whip; asin AS.
swipe, a whip (John, ii. 15), Du. zweep, a whip, G. schwippe, a
whip-lash. Note also Dan. suippe, to crack a whip, svip, an instant,
7? et svip, in a trice, Swed. dial. suipa, swepa, to sweep, swing, lash
with a whip. y. All from Teut. base SWEIP, to move with
a turning motion, move swiftly, sweep along (Fick, iii. 365); see
further under Swift. Cf. ‘swypyr, agilis’ in Prompt. Parv. 2. A
squib also means a political lampoon; but it was formerly applied,
not to the lampoon itself, but to the writer of it. The squibs are
those who, in the common phrase of the world, are call’d libellers,
lampooners, and pamphleteers; their fireworks are made up in
paper ;’ Tatler, no.88; Nov. 1,1709. It has been noted above that
Spenser uses squib as a term of derision. 3. The sense of child’s
squirt is directly from Norw. skuipa, to squirt (above).

SQUID, a kind of cuttlefish. (Scand.) So named from its squirt-
ing out sepia; cf. prov.. E. sguiddle, to squirt. A voiced form,
with d for Scand. z; allied to Swed. dial. sqvitta, strong verb, to
squirt ; Icel. skvetta, to squirt out. (Teut. base *skwet.)

SQUILL, a genus of bulbous plants allied to the onion. (F.—L.—
Gk.) ME. squille. ‘ Squylle, herba, Cepa maris, bulbus;* Prompt.
Parv. = MF. sguille, ‘the squill, sea-onion ; also, a prawn, shrimp ;’
Cot.—L. sqguilla, also scilla, a sea-onion, sea-leek ; a kind of prawn.
= Gk. oxidda, a squill; cf. cxivos, a squill.

‘SQUINANCY, the old spelling of Quinsey, q.v.

SQUINT, to look askew. (E.?) Palsgrave has ‘a-squynte, en
lorgnant;’ p. 83%. The earliest quotation is the following:
« Biholded o luft and asguint?=looks leftwards and askew; Ancren
Riwle, p. 212, 1. 4. Apparently due to asquint (above), with loss of
a; see Asquint in N.E.D. It is improbable that itis anative word,
but it is difficult to say how we came by it. It seems to be allied to
askance; see Askance in N.E.D. _ B. Cf. Dan. paa skins, aslant ;
Swed. dial. p& skoéns, aslant ; Low G. schiens, schiins, obliquely ; Du.
schuin, oblique, wry, schuinen, to slope; schuinte, obliquity; ix de
schuinte, aslant; EF ries. schiin, oblique, schiinte; obliquity.

SQUIRE (1), the same as Esquire, q.v. (F.—L.) It occurs,


spelt sguiere,as early as in King Horn, ed. Lumby, 1. 360. Doublet,°


esquire.

SQUIRE (2), a square, a carpenter’s rule. (F.—L.) In Shak.
L.L.L.v. 2.474. ME. squire, Floriz and Blancheflur, ed. Lumby,
325.—OF. esquire, MF. esquierre, ‘a rule, or square ;’ Cot. Mod. F.
équerre. Merely another form of OF. esguarre, asquare; see Square.
Doublet, square, sb.

SQUIRREL, a nimble, reddish-brown, rodent animal. (F.—L.—
Gk.) ME. squirel (with one r), Seven Sages, ed. Weber, 1. 2777.
Also scurel. ‘ Hic scurellus, a sewrelle;? Voc. 759.29. — OF. escurel,
escuirel (Godefroy) ; spelt escuriew in Cotgrave. Mod. F. écureuil. =
Late L. sctrellus (as above), also scuriolus (Ducange). For *scitirel-
lus, *scitiriolus, diminutives of sctiéirus, a. squirrel. Gk. oxiovpos,
a squirrel; lit. ‘shadow-tail,’ from his bushy tail.=Gk. om-, for
oxia, a shadow, and ovpd, a tail. But this explanation of the Gk.
word is prob. due to popular etymology. The AF. form was
esquirel ; Liber Albus, pp. 225, 231.

SQUIRT, tojet, throw or jerk out water. (E.) ‘I squyrte with
a sqguyrte, aninstrument ;’ Palsgrave. The prov. E. swirt, to squirt,
is the same word, with sw for squ;. we even find bilagged wit swirt-
ing = dirtied with squirting, in Walter de Bibbesworth, Wright’s
Voc. i. 173, 1.1. Cf. Low G. swirtjen, to squirt; orig. an. extension
of swiren, to whirr, turn about quickly, G. schwirren; see Swarm.
So also EFries. kwirtjen, to squirt out, to dart about, from kwirt,
turning quickly about; see Whir. Der. squirt, sb., in Palsgrave.

STAB, to pierce with a sharp instrument. (Scand.) ‘I stabbe in
with a dagger or any other sharpe wepyn;’ Palsgrave. ME. stabbe,
sb.; ‘ Stabbe, or wownde of smytynge, Stigma;’ Prompt. Parv.
Apparently from Swed. dial. stabbe, a thick stick or stump; Icel.
stabbi, a stub, stump, allied to stafr, a staff; Dan. dial. stabb, a
short peg. Cf. Irish stobaim, I stab; Gael. stob, to thrust or fix
a stake in the ground, to stab, thrust, from stob, a stake, a pointed iron


STAGNATE 595


or stick, a stub or stump. This Gael. stobis similarly borrowed from
Icel, stobbi,a stub; see Staff, Stub. Der. stab, sb., Temp. iii. 3. 63«

STABLE (1), a stall or building for horses. (F.—L.) ME.
stable, King Alisaunder, 778.— OF. estable,‘a stable;’? Cot. Mod. F.
étable. —L. stabulum, a standing-place, abode, stall, stable. Idg. type
*stadh-lom ; cf. AS. stad-ol, a foundation, support, position. See
Stall. Brugmann, §§ 483 (9), 573. Formed with suffix -b(~)lum
(b<dh), from the weak grade of stare, to stand, cognate with E.
Stand, q.v. Der. stable, verb, stabl-ing.

STABLE (2), firm, steady. (F.—L.) ME. stable, Rob. of
Glouc., p. 54, 1.1245.—OF. estable, stable (Burguy).=L. stabilem,
acc. of stabilis, stable, standing firmly; formed with suffix ~bilis
from the weak grade of std-re, to stand, cognate with E. Stand,
q.v. Idg. type *stadhlis. Der. stabl-y; stable-ness, Macb. iv. 3. 92;
stabili-ty, spelt stabilytye, Wyatt, tr. of Ps. 38, coined from L.
stabilitas, firmness. Also stablish, ME, stablisen, Chaucer, C. T. 2997
(A 2995), the same word as establish, q.v.

STACK, a large pile of wood, hay, corn, &c. (Scand.) ME.
stac, stak, ‘ Stackeor heep, Agger ;’ Prompt. Parv. Stac in Havelok,
814, is prob. merely our stack. [Stacke, Chaucer, Persones Tale, De
Luxuria (Tyrwhitt), is an error for stank; see Group. I, 841.]—Icel.
stakkr, a stack of hay; cf. Icel. stakka, a stump, as in our chimney-
stack, and in stack, a columnar isolated rock; Swed. stack, a rick,
heap, stack ; Dan. stak. B. The Teut. type is *staknoz (Noreen).
The sense is ‘a pile,’ that which is set up; the allied E. word is
Stake, q.vy. Cf. Russ. stog’;a heap, a hay-rick. Der. stack, verb,
as in Swed, stacka, Dan. stakke, to stack ; stack-yard, answering to Icel.
stak-garér, a stack-garth (garth being the Norse form of yard) ; also
hay-stack, corn-stack,

STAFF, a long piece of wood, stick, prop, pole, cudgel. (E.) |
ME, staf, pl. staves (where u=v). ‘Ylyk a staf;’ Chaucer, C. T. |
594 (A 592). ‘Two staves ;’ P. Plowman, B. v. 28. AS. stef, pl.
stafas, Exod. xxi. 19, John, vii. 15. The pl. stafas also meant
letters of the alphabet; this meaning seems to have originated
staves as a musical term.-Du. staf; Icel. stafr, a staff, also a
written letter (see Icel. Dict.) ; Dan. stab, stav; Swed. staf; G. stab;
Goth. stafs, a letter; hence, an element, rudiment, Gal. iv. 3. B. The
word is allied to O. Church Slav, stobordé, a pillar, Lith. stobrys,
a stump of a tree; from.an Idg. root STEBH, whence Skt. stambh,
to make firm, set fast. Cf. EFries. staf, unmoved. See Stub,
Stab. Der. distaff (for dis-staff),.q.v. Doublet, stave, sb., q.v.

STAG, a male deer. (Scand.) Late AS. stagga, from Norse; as
in ‘regalem feram, quam Angli staggon appellant;’ Thorpe, Anc.
Laws, i, 429. The word was also applied to the male of other
animals. ‘ Stagge, ceruus;’ Levins. ‘ Steggander [ =steg-gander,
male gander], anser;’? id. Lowland Sc. stag, a young horse;
prov. E, stag, a gander, a wren, a cock-turkey.—Icel. steggr, steggi,
a he-bird,a drake, a tom-cat. Teut. type *stagjoz. Not allied to
Icel. stiga. Der. stag-hound.

STAGH, a platform, theatre; place of rest on a journey, the dis-
tance between two such resting-places. (F.—L.) ME. stage, Floriz
and Blancheflur, ed. Lumby, 255; King Alisaunder, 7684.—OF.
estage, ‘a story, stage, loft, or height of a house; also a. lodging,
dwelling-house 3’ Cot. Mod. F. étage; Ital. staggio, a prop ; Prov.
estatge, a dwelling-place (Bartsch). Formed as if from a L. type
*staticum (not found), a dwelling-place; allied to L. stat-wm, supine
of stare, to stand, with suffix -icum. See Stable (1), Stand. Der.
stage-coach, a coach that runs from stage to stage; stage-player ;
stag-ing, a scaffolding.

STAGGER, to reel from side to side, vacillate ; also, to cause to
reel, to cause to hesitate. (Scand.) ‘I staggar, I stande not sted-
fast;’ Palsgrave. Stagger is a weakened form of stacker (spelt
stakker in Palsgrave), ME. stakeren. ‘She rist her up, and stakereth
heer and there;’ Chaucer, Legend of Good Women, 1. 2687.—Icel.
stakra, to push, to stagger; frequentative of staka, to punt, to push,
also, to stagger; cf. Norw. stakra, staka, to stagger ; Swed. dial.
stagra; Dan. dial. stagle, stagge. Perhaps staka, to push, is allied
to Swed, stake, a stake; see Stake. Cf. Dan. stage, to punt with
a pole, from stage, a pole, a stake. Thus the orig. sense was
‘to keep pushing about,’ to cause to vacillate or reel; the intran-
sitive sense, to reel, is later.4-MDu. staggeren, to stagger as a
drunken man (Hexham); frequent. of staken, staecken, to stop or
dam up (with stakes), to set stakes, also ‘to leave or give over
worke,’ id. In this latter view, to stagger might mean ‘ to be always
coming to a stop,’ or ‘often to stick fast.’ Either way, the etymology
is the same. Der. staggers, s. pl., vertigo, Cymb. v. 5. 234.

STAGNATE, to cease to flow. (L.) A late word; stagnate and
stagnant are in Phillips, ed. 1706.—L. stagnaius, pp. of stagnare, to
be still, cease to’ flow, to form a still pool.—L. stagnum, a pool, a
stank, See Stank. Der. staguat-ion ; also stagnant, from L. stag-
nant-, stem of pres. pt. of stagnare. Also stanch, q.v. :


Qq 2


596 STAID


STAID, steady, grave, sober. (F.—MDu.) It may be observed
that the resemblance to steady is accidental, though both words are
ultimately from the same root, and so have a similar sense. Staid
stands for stay’d, pp. of stay, to make steady ; and the actual spelling
stay'd is by no meansuncommon. ‘ The strongest man o’ th’ empire,
Nay, the most stay’d . . . The most true;’ Beaum. and Fletcher,
Valentinian, v. 6. 11. ‘The fruits of his stay’d faith;’ Drayton,
Polyolbion, song 24 (R.). Spenser even makes the word dissyllabic ;
‘Held on his course with stayéd stedfastnesse,’ F, Q. ii. 12. 29. See
Stay (1). Der. staid-ly, staid-ness.

STALIN, to tinge, dye, colour, sully. (F.—L.) An abbreviation
of distain, like sport for disport, spend for dispend. ME. steinen,
Gower, C. A. i. 225, bk. ii. 1963; short for disteinen, Chaucer,
Legend of Good Women, 255.—OF. destein-, a stem of desteindre,
‘to distain, to dead or.take away the colour of;’ Cot. ‘I staynea
thynge, Ze destayns,’ Palsgrave. Thus the orig. sense was ‘to spoil
the colour of,’ or dim; as used by Chaucer.—L, dis-, away; and
tingere, to dye. See Dis- and Tinge. Der. stain, sb.; stain-less,
Tw. Nt. i. 5. 278.

STATR, a step for ascending by. (E.) Usually in the plural.
{The phrase ‘a pair of stairs’ =a set of stairs; the old sense of pair
being a set of equal things; see Pair.] ME. séeir, steire, steyer.
‘Ne steyers to steye [mount] on;’ Test. of Love, i. 1.44. ‘Heih is
pe stetre’=high is the stair; Ancren Riwle, p. 284, 1. 8; the pl.
steiren occurs in the line above. AS. st#ger, a stair, step; ‘ Ascen-
sorium, st#ger,) Voc. 126. 9. [The g passes into y as usual, and
just as AS. deg became day, so AS. st#ger became séayer, steyer,
steir.] The lit. sense is ‘a step to climb by,’ ‘a mounter;’ formed
(with mutation of a to #) from stag, 2nd grade of stigan, to climb.
+Du. steiger, a stair; allied to stegel, a stirrup, steg, a narrow
bridge ; all from stijgen, to mount. Cf. also Icel. stigi, stegi, a step,
ladder (whence prov. E. stee, a ladder), stigr, a path, foot-way (orig.
an uphill path), from stiga, to mount; Swed. steg, a round of a
ladder, stege, a ladder, from stiga, to mount; Dan. stige, a ladder,
sti, a path, from stige, to mount; G. sfeg, a path, from steigen, to
mount. f. All from Teut. str. vb. *steigan-, to climb, pt. t. *staig,
pp. *stiganoz; from Idg. 4/STEIGH, to climb, ascend, whence also
Skt. stigh, to ascend, Gk. oreixerv, to ascend, march, go, Goth. steigan,
to ascend; also E. stile, q.v., stirrup, q.v. Der. stair-case; stair-
work, Wint. Tale, iii. 3. 75.

STAITHE, a landing-place. (E.) <A provincial word; also
spelt staith, stathe (Halliwell). AS. sted, a bank, shore (Grein) ;
also AS. sted, Thorpe, Diplomatarium Evi Saxonici, p. 147, l. 5.
Cf. Icel. sto3, a harbour, road-stead; MDu. stade, a haven. Allied
to Stead, q.v.

STAKE, a post, strong stick, pale. (E.) ME. stake, Chaucer,
C. T. 2620 (A 2618). AS. staca, a stake, Atlfred, tr. of Orosius,
b. v. cap. §; also a sharply pointed pin, Thorpe, Diplomatarium,
p- 230, 1.14. The latter sense is important, as pointing to the etymo-
logy. From the Teut. base *stak, 2nd grade of the strong verb
*stekan-, to pierce, stick into. See Stick (1). Thus, the orig.
sense is ‘ a piercer,’ the suffix -a marking the agent, asin AS. hunt-a,
a hunter; hence a pin, a sharply pointed stick.4-MDu. stake, staeck,
‘a stake or a pale, a pile driven into water, a stake for which one
playeth;’ Hexham (Du. staak). Cf. steken, to stab, put, stick, prick,
sting; id.4Icel. stjaki, a stake, punt-pole; Dan. stage, a stake;
Swed. stake, a stake, a candle-stick. - And cf. G. stachel, a prick,
sting, goad. B. The sense of a sum of money to be played for may
be borrowed from Dutch, being found in MDutch, as above. It
occurs in Wint. Tale, i. 2. 248; and the phr. até stake or at the stake
occurs five times in Shak. (Schmidt). In this sense, a stake is that
which is ‘ put’ or pledged; cf. MDu. hemselven in schuldt steken, ‘to
runne himself into debt ;’ Hexham. @ A closely allied word is
stack, a pile, a thing stuck up; see Stack.

STALACTITE, an inverted cone of carbonate of lime, hanging
like an icicle in some caverns. (F.—Gk.) Modern. Byron (wrongly)
has stylact-i-tes (4 syllables); The Island, iv. 7. 23.—F. stalactite
(A.D. 1752). So called because formed by the dripping of water.
Formed, with suffix -ite (Gk. -itys), from oraAanr-ds, trickling; cf.
orakakris (base oradaxt5-), that which drops.—Gk. oraddev
(=o7addy-yev), to drop, drip ; lengthened form of oraAdev, to drip.
See Stalagmite.

STALAGMITHE, a cone of carbonate of lime on the floor of
a cavern formed by dripping water. (F.—Gk.) Modern.=—F,
stalagmite. Formed with suffix -ite (Gk. -irns), from orddayp-a,
a drop; from oradd{ev (=oraddy-yev), to drip. See Stalactite.

STALE (1), too long kept, tainted, vapid, trite. (F.—Teut.)
1. Stale is also used as a sb., in the sense of urine. Palsgrave gives
it in this sense; and see escloy in Cotgrave. Mares do not stop to
stale; see Holland’s Pliny, i. 222.—OF. estaler, to make water (in
Godefroy, s. v. esfaler (2), but wrongly explained). Of Teut. origin.


_ STALLION


Cf. EFries. and Low G. stallen, Swed. stalla, to put into a stall, also
to stale (as cattle and horses); Dan. stalde, to stale (as a horse),
also to stall-feed. From Stall, sb. 2. Stale, adj., is in Chaucer,
C. T. 13694 (B 1954), as applied to ale. We may explain sfale,
adj., as ‘too long exposed for sale,’ as in the case of provisions left
unsold ; cf. MF. estaler, ‘to display, lay open wares on stalls’ (Cot.),
from estal, ‘ the stall of a shop, or booth, any place where wares are
laid and shewed to be sold.’ But since this F. estal is merely
borrowed from the Teutonic word stall, it comes to much the same
thing. Cf. MDu. séel, stale; stel-bier, stale beer; stel-pisse, urine
(Hexham); Du. stel, a stall. See Korting, §§ go14, gor5.
@ Wedgwood, following Schmeller, explains stale, sb., from stopping
the horse to let him stale; and cites Swed. stdlla en hest, to stop a
horse. But, here again, the Swed. s¢dlla is derived from Swed. stall,
orig. a stopping-place ; while ‘ to stale’ is Swed. stalla. Der. stale,
verb, Antony, ii. 2. 2403; stale-ness, Per. v. 1. 58.

STALE (2), a decoy, snare. (E.) ‘Still as he went, he crafty
stales did lay;’ Spenser, F. Q. ii. 1. 4. Note AF. estale, a decoy-
bird (Bozon). Adapted from AS. stal-, as in stel-hran, a decoy
reindeer, allied to ME. stale, theft; hence stealth, deceit, slyness,.
or a trap; it occurs in Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 9,1. 24. Compare the
phrase cumen bi stale=to come by stealth, to surprise; O. Eng.
Homilies, i. 249, 1. 20. From AS. sétalu, theft, Matt. xv. 19.—
Teut. *stal, 2nd grade of *stelan-, as in AS. stelan, to steal; see
Steal.

STALE (3), STEAL, a handle. (E.) Chiefly applied to the
long handle of a rake, hoe, &c.; spelt Steale in Halliwell. Stale
also means a round of a ladder, or a stalk (id.). ME. stale. ‘A
ladel ... with a long stele’ (2 MSS. have stale); P. Plowman, C.
xxii. 279. From AS. stela, stela, steola; the dat. pl. stelum (in
another MS. stelum) occurs in A. S, Leechdoms, ed. Cockayne, i.
154, in the sense of ‘stalks.’ Du. steel, a stalk, stem, handle. [G..
stiel, MHG, stil, a handle, seem distinct.] Allied to s#ilZ and
stall ; the stale being tlie handle whereby the tool is firmly held. Cf.
further Gk. oradis, a stake to which nets are fastened, oreAcdv,
oretheov, oreAcéy, a handle or helve of an ax. See Stalk. Der.
stalk (1) and (2), q.v.

STALK (1), a stem. (E.) ME. stalke, of which one sense is.
the stem or side-piece of a ladder. ‘To climben by the ronges
[rungs] and the stalkes ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 3625. A dimin. form, with
suffixed -ke, of ME. stale, stele, a handle, AS. stela, stela, a stalk ;.
see Stale (3). [Icel. stilkr, a stalk, goes with G. stiel.] Cf.
also Gk. oréAexos, a trunk, stem (of a tree), allied to oreAcdy, a
handle. Der. stalk (2), q.v-

STALK (2), to stride, walk with slow steps. (E.) ME. stalken,
to walk cautiously. ‘ Stalkeden ful stilly ;’ Will. of Palerne, 2728.
‘With dredful foot [timid step] then stalketh Palamoun;’ Chaucer,
C. T. 1481 (A479). AS. stealcan, to go warily; stealcung, a stalk-
ing. These forms are in Toller, with references for bestealcian and
stealcung ; Somner gives the forms stelcan and stelcung.+4 Dan. stalke,
to stalk. Cf. AS. stealc, lofty, high (Grein), The notion is that of
walking with lifted feet, so as to go noiselessly ; the word is prob.
connected with Stilt, q.v., and with Stalk (1) above. Halliwell
has Stalk, the leg of a bird; stalke, to go slowly with, a quotation
from Gower, C. A. i. 187; also stilt, the handle of a plough, which
(like stalk) is an extension of Steal; see Stale (3). We may explain
stalk, verb, as to walk on lengthened legs or stalks, to go on tiptoe
or noiselessly. Der. stalk-er; stalk-ing-horse, a horse for stalking
game, explained in Dictionarium Rusticum, 1726, quoted at length
in Halliwell. ;

STALL, a standing-place for cattle, shed, division of a stable, a
table on which things are exposed for sale, a seat in a choir or
theatre. (E.) All the senses are from the notion of a fixed or settled
place or station. Indeed, station is from the same root. ME. séal;
dat. stalle, Chaucer, C. T. 8083 (E 207). AS. steal, steall, a place,
station, stall; Grein, ii. 480; also ste, id. 477.4-Du. stal; Icel..
stallr, a stall, pedestal, shelf; cf. stalli, an altar; Dan. stald (for
stall), a stable; Swed. stall; G. stall; OHG. stal. Teut. type *stalloz,
perhaps for *stad-loz ; cf. E, stead, Gk. ora0-yds, a stall ; L. stab-ulum
(for *stadh-lom). See Stead. Brugmann, i. § 593 (4). Der.
stall-age, from MF. estallage, ‘ stallage,’ Cot., where estal, a stall,
is borrowed from Teutonic, and the suffix -age answers to L. -aticum,
Also stall, verb, Rich. III, i. 3. 206; stall-ed, fattened in a stall,
Prov. xv. 17, from Swed, stalla, Dan. stalle, to stall-feed, feed in a
stall. Also stall-feed, verb; stall-fed, Chapman, tr. of Homer,
Odys. xiv. 161. Also stall-i-on, qg.v. Doublet, stable.

STALLION, an entire horse. (F.—OHG.) Spelt stalland in
Levins, with excrescent d; stallant in Palsgrave, with excrescent ¢.
ME. stalon, Voc. 638. 3; Gower, C. A. iii. 280; bk. viii. 160.—OF,
estalon, ‘ astalion for mares;’ Cot. Mod. F. étalon; cf. Ital. stallone,
a stallion, also a stable-man, ostler. So called because kept in a


~ STALWART |.


stall and not made to work; Diez cites eguus ad stallum from the
Laws of the Visigoths.—OHG. sral, a stall, stable; cognate with
E. Stall (above). B. The i may have been suggested by the Ital.
stallione, given by Torriano as a variant of stallone, and explained
by ‘a horse long kept in the stable without being ridden or used ;
also, a stallion.’

‘STALWART, sturdy, stout, brave. (E.) A corruption of ME.
stalworth, Will. of Palerne, 1950; Pricke of Conscience, 689; Have-
lok, 904. The intermediate form stalward occurs in Trevisa, tr. of
Higden, iii. 439 (note). It is noticeable that e sometimes appears
after the 7; as in stelewurde, O. Eng. Hom, i. 25, 1. 12; stealewurde,
Juliana, p. 45, 1. 11; stalewurde, St. Margaret, p. 15, 1. 3 from
bottom. AS. stelwyrde (plural), A. S. Chron. an. 896. _B. In the
A.S. Chron, it is applied to ships, and means ‘serviceable ;’ we are
told that the men of London went to fetch the ships, and they broke
up all they could not remove, whilst those that were serviceable
(stelwyrde) they brought to London. Sievers shows that the @ was
long (A. S. Grammar, § 202); and st@l- is contracted from stafol-,
just as ge-stélan is for ge-stafol-ian, and stalian for staBolian, The
AS. stafol means ‘foundation,’ and stafolwyrde means ‘firm.’ Cf.
AS. stadol-fest, stedfast. For the latter part of the word, see

_ Worth, Worthy..

STAMEN, one of the male organs of a flower. (L.) The lit.
sense is ‘thread.’ A botanical term. [The pl. stamina, lit. threads,
fibres, is used in E. (almost asa sing. sb.) to denote firm texture, and
hence strength or robustness.]—L. stamen (pl. stamina), the warp in
an upright loom, a thread. Lit. ‘that which stands up;’ formed
with suffix -men from stare, to stand; see Stand. Cf. Gk. orjpa,
a stamen ; also iorés, a warp, from the same root. Der. stamin or
zammy.

STAMIN, TAMINE, TAMINY, TAMIS, TAMMY,
a kind of stuff. (F.—L.) The correct form is staminz or stamine ;
Palsgrave has stamyne ; the other forms are corruptions, with loss of
initial s, as in tank (for stank). ME. stamin, Ancren Riwle, p. 418,
1. 20.—OF. estamine, ‘the stuffe tamine;’ Cot.—L. staimineus, con-
sisting of threads.—L. stamin-, decl. stem of stamen, a thread,
stamen ; see Stamen.

STAMMER, to stutter, to falter in speech. (E.) ME. stameren,

in Reliquize Antique, i. 65; Arthur and Merlin, 2864 (Stratmann).
AS. stomrian (for stamrian), to stammer, The Shrine, p. 42. Formed
as a verb from AS, stamer or stamur, adj., stammering. ‘ Balbus,
stamer,’ Voc, 161. 373 ‘ Balbus, stamur,’ id. 314. 38; stamor, id. 275.
20. ‘The suffix -er, -wr, or -or is adjectival, expressive of ‘fitness or
disposition for the act or state denoted by the theme;”’ cf. bit-or,
bitter, from bitan, to bite; March, A. S. Grammar, § 242. Thus
stamer signifies ‘disposed to come to a stand-still,’ such being_ the
sense of the base stam-, which is an extension of the 4/STA, to
stand; cf. prov. E. stam, to amaze, confound, related by gradation
to G. stumm, dumb.4Du. stameren, stamelen, to stammer; Icel.
stamr, stammering; stamma, stama, to stammer; Dan. stamme, to
stammer; Swed. stamma-(the same); G. stammern, stammeln (the
same), from OHG. stam, adj., stammering; Goth. stamms, adj.
stammering, Mark, vii. 32. Der. stammer-er.
- STAMP, to strike the foot firmly down, tread heavily and vio-
jently, to pound, impress, coin. (E.) ME. stampen, Chaucer, C. T.
12472 (C 538). ‘And stamped heom in a mortar;’ King Ali-
saunder, 332. AS. stempen, for *stampian; A.S. Leechdoms, ed.
‘Cockayne, i. 378, 1. 18.4-Du. stampen; Icel. stappa (for *stampa, by
assimilation) ; Swed. stampa; Dan. stampe ; G. stampfen (whence OF.
estamper, F. étamper); cf. G. stampfe, OHG. stamph, a pestle for
pounding.+Gk. oréyBev,to stamp. Der. stamp, sb., Cor. ii. 2. 111;
stamp-er ; also stamp-ede, q.v.

STAMPEDE, a panic, sudden flight. (Span.—Teut.) ‘ Stamp-
ede, a sudden fright seizing upon large bodies of cattle or horses, ...
leading them to run for many miles; hence, any sudden flight in
consequence of a panic;’ Webster. Thee represents the sound of
Span. 7.—Span. (and Port.) estampido, ‘a crash, the sound of any-

. thing bursting or falling;’ Neuman. Formed as if from a verb
*estampir, akin to estampar, to stamp, ‘The reference appears to be
to the sound caused by the blows of a pestle upon a mortar. The
‘Span. estampar is of Teut. origin; see Stamp.

STANCE, a station, site ; see Stanza.

- STANCH, STAUNCH, to stop the flowing of blood. (F.—L.)
ME. staunchen, to-satisfy (hunger), Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iii.
pr. 3; b. iii, met. 3; to quench (flame), Gower, C. A. i. 15;
prol. 345.—OF. estancher, ‘to stanch, stop an issue of blood, to
slake or quench hunger, thirst, &c.;’ Cot. Cf. Walloon stanchi
(Remacle), Span. estancar, to stop, check. Late L. stancare, to stop
‘tthe flow of blood. The Late L. stancare is a variant of a Late L.
type *stagnicare, from L. stagnare, also used in the same sense of to
stop the flow of blood (Ducange). See Stagnate. Korting (§ 9009),


STANK 597’


suggests that the sense may have been influenced by G. stange, a bar.
Der. stanch or staunch, adj., firm, sound, spelt stanche in Palsgrave:
(p. 325); Phillips (ed. 1706) gives stanch, ‘ substantial, solid, good,
sound ;’ this is derived from the verb, which Baret (1580) explains
by ‘to staie, or stanch blood, . . also to staie, to. confirme, to make
more strong;’ it was suggested by the F. pp. estanché, ‘ stanched,
stopped, stayed’ (Cot.), or (as a nautical term) by OF. estanche,
water-tight (Supp. to Godefroy), mod. F. étanche; cf. Span. stanco,
water-tight, not leaky, said of a ship. Hence stanch-ly or staunch-
ly; stanch-ness or staunch-ness. Also stanch-less, Macb. iv. 3. 78.

STANCHION, a support, an upright beam used as a support, a
bar. (F.—L.) ‘ Stanchions (in a ship), certain pieces of timber which,
being like pillars, support and strengthen those call’d waste-trees ;’
Phillips, ed. 1706. Spelt stanchon, staunchon in Palsgrave. =
ONorth F. estanchon, Norm. dial. étanchon; MF. estangon, estanson,
‘a prop, stay;’ Cot. MF. estangon (mod. F. étangon) is not derived
from OF. estancher, to stanch, also used (by confusion) in the sense
‘to -prop;’ but is a dimin. of OF. estance, a situation, condition
(Burguy), also used, according to Godefroy, in the sense of stanchion.
= Late L. stantia, a house, chamber (Ducange) ; lit. ‘that which
stands firm.’ = L. stazt-, stem of pres. part. of stare, to stand, cognate
with E, Stand. See Stanza.

STAND, to be stationary or still, to rest, endure, remain, be firm,
&c. (E.) ME. standen, pt. t. stood, stod, pp. stonden, standen. The
pp. stonden is in Chaucer, C. T. 9368 (E 1494); and in the Earl of
Tolouse, 1, 322, in Ritson’s Met. Romances, vol. iii. AS. standan,
stondan, pt. t. stdd, pl. stddon, pp. standen; Grein, i. 475.4-Icel.
standa; Goth. standan, pt. t. stéth. Cf. Du. staan, pt. t. stond; G.
stehen, pt. t. stand; Swed, std, pt. t. stod. Teut. type *standan-,
pt. t. *stdth; base *“stadh, *stad, the being orig. characteristic of
the present tense. Allied to L. stare; Gk. eorny (I stood); Russ.
stotat(e), to stand; Skt. stha, to stand. All from Idg.4/STA, to
stand; one of the most prolific roots. See State. Der. stand, sb.,
Merch. Ven. v. 77; stand-er, Troil. iii. 3. 843 stand-er-by (the same
as by-stand-er), Troil. iv. 5. 190; stand-ing, Wint. Tale, i. 2. 431;
stand-ing-bed, Merry Wives, iv. 5. 73; standish (for stand-dish), a
standing dish for pen and ink, Pope, On receiving from Lady Shirley
a Standish and two Pens; spelt standysshe in Cavendish, Life of
Wolsey, ed. Ellis, p. 92. Also under-stand, with-stand. Also (from
L. stdre) sta-ble (1), sta-ble (2), sta-bl-ish, e-sta-bl-ish, stage, staid,
sta-men, con-sta-ble, stay (1) 3 ar-re-st, contra-st, ob-sta-cle, ob-ste-tric,
re-st (2); (from supine stat-um) state, stat-us, stat-ion, stat-ist, stat-ue,
stat-ute, estate, armi-stice, con-stit-ute, de-stit-ute, in-stit-ute, inter-stice,
pro-stit-ute, re-in-state, re-stit-ut-ion, sol-stice, sub-stit-ute, super-stit-ion ;
(from pres. part., base stant-) circum-stance, con-stant, di-stant, ex-
tant (for ex-stant), in-stant, in-stant-an-e-ous, in-stant-er, stanz-a, sub-
stance, sub-stant-ive. Also (from L. sistere, causal of stare) as-sist,
con-sist, de-sist, ex-ist (for ex-sist), in-sist, per-sist, re-sist, sub-sist.
Words of Gk. origin are sta-t-ics, apo-sta-sy, ec-sta-sy, meta-sta-sis,
sy-st-em,

STANDARD, an ensign, flag, model, rule, standing tree. (F.—
L.) ME. standard, in early use; it occurs in the A. S. Chronicle,
an. 1138, with reference to the battle of the Staxdard. —OF. estan-
dart, ‘a, standard, a kind of ensigne for horsemen used in old time ;
also the measure... which we call the Standard;’ Cot. But also
spelt estendart, Supp. to Godefroy, in the sense of ‘ flag, ensign.’
The two forms represent two different ideas; but they were early
confused; see Standardum in Ducange. 1. The former refers rather
to the pole on which the flag was borne; and was formed with
suffix -art (=G. -hart, suffix, the same word as hart, adj., cognate
with E. hard, Brachet, Introd. § 196) from OHG. stand-an, to stand,
now only used in the contracted form stehen, This OHG. standan
is cognate with E. Stand, q.v. 2. The OF. estendard (also in Cot-
grave) is from OF. estendre<L. extendere, to extend; see Extend.
This is supported by the Ital. form stexdardo and the Prov. esten-
dart-z (Bartsch). On the other hand, we have E. standard, Span.
estandarte; and the E. standard of value and standard-tree certainly
owe their senses to the verb to stand. So also MDu. standaeri,
‘a standard, or a great ensigne, a pillar or a column, a mill-post;’
Hexham. F

STANG, a pole, stake. (Scand.) Spelt stangue in Levins (with
added -ue, as in tongue). ME. stange, Gawain and Green Knight,
1614. [Rather from Scand. than from AS, steng (Grein).]—Icel.
sténg (gen. stangar), a pole, stake; Dan. stang ; Swed. sténg.+-Dn.
stang ; G.stange. From the 2nd grade of the verb sting ; see Sting.
Cf. Icel. stanga, to goad. {

STANK, a pool, atank. (F.—L.) A doublet of tank, of which
it is a fuller form. Once a common word; see Halliwell. ME.
stank; ‘spelt stanc, Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B, 1018 ;, see Spec. of
English, pt. ii. p. 162, 1. 1018.—OF. estanc (Sup. to Godefroy),
also estang, ‘a great pond, pool, or standing’ water;’ Cot. Cf.


598 STANNARY


Walloon stank, Prov. estanc, Span. @stanque, Port. tanque. In-

directly from L. stagnum, a pool of stagnant or standing water ;

affected by the vb. *stagnicare, to render stagnant, for which see

Stanch. See Stagnate, Stanch, Tank. Der. stagn-ate,

stanch, stanch-ion. Doublet, tank.

STANNARY, relating to tin-mines. (L.) ‘ The Stannary courts
in Devonshire and Cornwall;’ Blackstone, Comment. b. iii. c. 6 (R.).
‘ Stannaries in Cornwall;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627.—Late L. stannaria,
a tin-mine (Ducange).=—L. stannum, tin; also, an alloy of silver and
lead ; which seems to be the older sense, Pliny, b. xxxiv. c. 16.
B. Also spelt stagnum, whence stagneus, adj.; and it is thought to
be another sense of L. stagnum, a pool, applied perhaps to a mass
of fused metal. Cf. Ital. stagno, tin, also, a pool. See Stank.
Cf. Corn. stean, W. ystaen, Bret. stean, Irish stan, Gael. staoin, Manx
stainney; all from L. stannum, tin. And see Tin.

STANZA, a division of a poem. (Ital.—L.) Used by Drayton
in his Pref. to the Barons’ Wars. We find stanzo (mod. editt.
stanza) and stanze (now stanza) in Shak. As You Like It, ii. 5. 18,
L.L.L. iv. 2. 107; Minsheu has stanze, ed. 1627. ‘ Staffe in our
vulgare poesie . . . the Italian called it stanza, as if we should say a
resting-place ;? Puttenham, Art of Eng. Poesie, ed. 1580, b. ii. c. 2.
=Ital. stanza, MItal. stantia, ‘a lodging, chamber, dwelling, also a
stance or staffe of verses or songs ;’ Florio. So named from the stop
or halt at the end of it.—Late L. stantia, an abode. L. stant-, stem
of pres. part. of stare, to stand, cognate with E. Stand, q.v. And
see Stanchion. Doublet, stance, a station, site; OF. estance<L.
stantia.

STAPLE (1), a loop of iron for holding a pin or bolt. (£.)
ME. stapel, stapil; spelt stapylle in the Prompt. Parv.; stapil, stapul
in Cursor Mundi, 8288 ; s¢apel, a prop or support for a bed, Seven
Sages, ed. Weber, 201. AS. stapul. ‘Patronus, stapul;’ Voc.
126. 8. (Here patronus=a defence; the gloss occurs amongst
others having reference to parts of a house.) ‘The orig. sense is
a prop, support, something that furnishes a firm hold, and it is
derived from the base *stap- of the AS. strong verb steppan, to step,
to tread firmly. Cf. E. stamp; and see Step. And see Staple (2).
+Du. stapel, a staple, stocks, a pile, allied to stappen, to step;
MDnu. stapel, ‘ the foot or trevet whereupon anything rests;’ Hex-
ham; Dan. stabel, a hinge, a pile; Swed. stapel, a pile, heap, stocks,
staple or emporium; cf. stappla, to stumble (frequentative form) ;
G. staffel, a step of a ladder, a step; provincially, a staple or em-
porium ; stapel, a pile, heap, staple or emporium, stocks, a stake;
cf. stapfen, stappen, to step, to strut.

STAPLE (2), a chief commodity, principal production of a
| country. (F.—Low G.) ‘A curious change has come over this
word ; we should now say, Cotton is the great staple, i.e. the estab-

lished merchandise, of Manchester; our ancestors would have reversed
' this and said, Manchester is the great staple, or established mart, of

cotton;” Trench, Select Glossary. ‘Staple signifieth this or that
towne, or citie, whether [whither] the Merchants of England by
common order or commandement did carrie their woolles, wool-fels,
cloathes, leade, and tinne, and such like commodities of our land,
for the vtterance of them by the great’ [wholesale]; Minsheu, ed.

1627. ME. staple, a market; Trevisa, tr. of Higden, viii. 488, 571.
' =OF. and MF. estaple, later estape, ‘a staple, a mart or generall

market, a publique store-house,’ &c.; Cot. Mod. F. étape.—LowG.

stapel, a2 heap, esp. one arranged in order, a store-house of certain

wares in a town, where they are laid in order; whence such wares

were called stapel-waaren; Brem. Worterbuch, q.v. This is the

same word as Staple (1), the meanings of which are very various ;
it has the sense of ‘heap’ in Du., Dan., Swed., and G., though
not in English; showing that this particular use of the word was
derived through the French. Prob. the word came into use, in
the special sense, in the Netherlands, where were the great com-
mercial cities.  @ It is clear that the F. word was of Low G.,
not High G., origin. The word stapel, in mod. G., is clearly bor-
rowed from Low G., the true G. form being staffel. As E. Miiller
well remarks, the successive senses were prop, foundation or
support, stand for laying things on, heap, heaped wares, store-
reer The one sense of ‘ firmness’ or ‘ fixedness’ runs through all
these.

STAR, a heavenly body, not including the sun and moon. (E.)
ME. sterre, Chaucer, C. T. 2063 (A 2061). AS. steorra; Grein,
ii. 482.4-Du. ster (in composition, sterre); OHG. sterro. (There
are also forms with final -v- (-na), viz. Icel. stjarna, Swed. stjerna,
Dan. stjerne, Goth. stairno, G. stern.) +L. stella (for *ster-la, a dimin.
form; the L. asérum is borrowed from Gk.); Gk. dornp, gen.
dorép-os, with prosthetic a; Corn. and Bret. steren ; W. seren (for
*steren) ; Skt. tara (for *stara). Original sense uncertain; though
some connect it with Skt. sv, to spread, hence, to sprinkle (light) ;
Max Miiller, Lect. on Lang, ii. 237 (8th ed.). Cf. Brugmann,


STARK-NAKED


i. § 473 (2). Der. star, verb; star-fish,- star-gaz-er, star-light >
starr-ed; starr-y ; day-star, lode-star. And see aster, stellar. !

STARBOARD, the right side of a ship, looking forward. (E.)
Spelt starboord in Minsheu, ed. 1627. ME. sterebourde, Morte
Arthur, 745; stereburde, id. 3665. AS. stéorbord, A®lfred, tr. of
Orosius, b. i. c. I, where it is opposed to becbord, i.e. larboard; see
Sweet’s A. S. Reader. There is no doubt that stéorbord=steer-
bord, and that the steersman stood on the right side of the vessel
to steer; in the first instance, he used a paddle, not a helm. The
Icel. stjOrm means steerage, and the phr. @ stjorn, lit. at the helm
(or steering-paddle), means on the right or starboard side. Thus.
the derivation is from AS. stéor, a rudder (whence also s¢éor-
mann, a steersman) and bord, a board, also the side of a ship; see
Steer and Board.+Du. stuurboord, from stuur, helm, and boord,
board, also border, edge; Icel. stjornbordi, starboard, from stjorn,
steerage, and bord, a board, side of a ship; cf. boréi, a border;
Dan. styrbord, from styr, steerage, and bord; Swed. styrbord (the
same).

STARCH, a gummy substance for stiffening cloth. (E.) ‘ Starche
for kyrcheys,’ i.e. starch for kerchiefs; Prompt. Parv. So named
because starch or stiff; starch being properly an adjective, represent-
ing ME. sterch, strong, O. E. Misc., ed. Morris, p. 156, 1.11. AS.
*sterce, adj., from stercan, to strengthen, stiffen; which appears in
sterced-ferhd, strengthened in mind (Grein, ii. 480). The vb. stercaz
(for *starc-ian) is regularly formed from OMerc. *starc, AS. stearc,
rigid; see Stark. Cf. G. stdrke, (1) strength, (2) starch; from
stark, strong. Der. starch, adj., in the sense of ‘formal,’ due
rather to starch, sb., than to ME. sterch; rare; see an example
in Todd’s Johnson; hence starch-ly, formally, and starch-ness; also
starch-y. Also starch, verb, to stiffen with starch, as in ‘ starched
beard,’ Ben Jonson, Every Man out of his Humour, A. iv. sc. 4
(Carlo).

STARE (1), to gaze fixedly. (E.) ME. staren, Chaucer, C, T.
13627 (B 1887). AS. starian, to stare; Grein, ii. 477. A weak
verb, from a Teut. type *staroz, adj., fixed; appearing in AS. ster-
blind, quite blind; cf. G. starr (for *star-roz), stiff, inflexible, fixed,
staring; cf. Icel. stara, to stare; Low G. and Du. staren, OHG,
starén, to stare. Prob. allied to Gk. orepeds, oreppés, firm.
@ Hence to stare is also ‘to be stiff, as in ‘makest ... my hair
to stare,’ Jul. Cesar, iv. 3. 280. Der. stare, sb., Temp. iii. 3. 95.
And see sterile, stereoscope.

STARE (2), to shine, glitter. (E.) ME. staren. ‘Staryn, or
schynyn, and glyderyn, Niteo, rutilo;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘ Starynge, or
schynynge, as gaye thyngys, Rutilans, rutulus;’ id. We still speak
of staring, i.e. very bright, colours. “The same word as Stare (1).
The Prompt. Parv. also has: ‘ Staryz withe brode eyne, Patentibus
oculis respicere.’ From the notion of staring with fixed eyes we
pass to that of the effect of the stare on the beholder, the sensation
of the staring look. See Stare (1). @ No original connexion
with star, of which the ME. form was séerre.

STARE (3), a starling; see Starling.

STARK, rigid, stiff; gross, absolute, entire. (E.) ‘Stiff and
stark ;” Romeo, iv. 1.103. ME. stark, stiff, strong, Chaucer, C. T.
9332 (E1458). AS. steare (for *starc), strong, stiff; Grein, ii. 481.
+Du. sterk; Icel. sterkr; Dan. sterk ; Swed. and G. stark. B. In
most of these languages, the usual sense is ‘strong ;’ but the orig,
sense may very well have been rigid or stiff, as in English; cf. Goth,
gastaurknith, lit. becomes dried up, used to translate Gk. énpatverat
in Mark, ix. 18; and Lithuan. strégti, to stiffen, to freeze, become
rigid; also Russ. strogii, severe, Pers. suturg, big, strong. The Idg.
form of the root is STREG, extended from 4/STER, to be fixed; cf.
Gk. orep-eés, firm, MDu. sterren, ‘to be stiffe or stubborne, Hexham.
See Stare (1). Der. stark-ly, Meas. for Meas. iv. 2. 70; stark-ness.
Also stark, adv., wholly,as in stark mad. Also starch,q.v. ¢ But
not stark-naked, q.v.

STARK-NAKED, quite naked. (E.) In Tw. Nt. iii. 4, 274;
spelt starke-naked, Palsgrave, p. 842. This phrase is doubtless now
used as if compounded of stark, wholly, and zaked, just as in the case
of stark mad, Com. of Err. ii. 1. 59, v. 281 ; but itis remarkable that
the history of the expression proves that it had a very different origin,
as regards the former part of the word. It is an ingenious substitu-
tion for start-naked, lit. tail-naked, i.e. with the hinder parts exposed.
Startnaked occurs in The Castell of Love, ed. Weymouth, 1. 4313
also in the Ancren Riwle, pp. 148, 260, where the editor prints s/erc-
naked, steorc-naked, though the MS, must have stert-naked, steort-naked,
since stark is never spelt steore. The same remark applies to steorc-
naket in St. Marharete, p. 5, 1. 19, where the editor tells us (at p. 109)
that the MS. may be read either way. In St. Juliana, pp. 16, 17,
we have steort-naket in both MSS. B. The former element is, in
fact, the ME. ‘stert, a tail, Havelok, 2823, from AS. steoré, a tail,.
Exod. iv. 4. It is still preserved in E. redstart, i.e. red tail, as the


"1


STARLING


name of a bird.-Du, sfer¢, a tail; Icel. stertr; Dan. stjert; Swed.
stjrt; G. sterz. Cf. Gk. orép@n, a spike. | @f The phrase was
éarly misunderstood ; see Trevisa, iii. 97, where we have stret3t blynde
= wholly blind, with the various readings start blynde and stark blynde ;
here start-blynde is really nonsense. There is also stareblind, Owl and
Nightingale, 1. 241, AS. sterblind, Voc. 45. 22; but this answers to
Dan. sterblind, from ster, a cataract in the eye. We may also note
prov. G. sterzvoll (lit. tail-full), wholly drunk, cited by Schmeller,
Bavar. Dict. col. 785, 1. 48.

STARLING, the name of a bird. (E.) In Shak. 1 Hen. IV, i.
3. 224. ME. sterlyng, Voc. 640. 7; formed (with double dimin.
suffix -l-ing) from ME. stare, a starling, Chaucer, Parl. of Foules,
1. 348. AS. ster, a starling. ‘Turdus, ster;’ Voc. 132. 8;
*Sturnus, ster ;’ id, 48. 16. It also means a sparrow, Matt. x. 29
(Lind. MS.). We also find the forms stern, stearn, meaning ‘a
tern.’ ‘ Beatica, stearn,’ Voc. 8. 36; ‘Stronus [stornus ?], stern,’ id.
132. 7.4Icel. starri, stari; Dan. ster; Swed. stare; G. staar. Cf.
L. sturnus, a starling. See Tern.

START, to move suddenly, to wince, to rouse suddenly. (E.) ME,
sterten, Chaucer, C. T. 1046 (A 1044). We also find stert, sb., a start,
quick movement, Chaucer, C. T., A. 1705; Havelok, 1873. The
verb does not appear in AS., but we find the pt. t. s¢irte, Havelok,
873; spelt sturte, storte in Layamon, 23951. We may call it an E.
word ; the AS. form may have been *styrtan (for *sturt-jan) ; from a
Teut. base *s¢er¢, Stratmann cites an Olcel. sterta, but I cannot find
it; there are traces of it in Icel. stertimadr, a man who walks proudly
and stiffly, and Icel. wppstertr, an upstart, both given in Egilsson.
B. Allied words are Du. storten, to precipitate, plunge, spill, tall,
tush; Dan. styrze, to fall, precipitate, hurl; Swed. storta, to cast
down, ruin, fall dead; G. stiérzen, to hurl, precipitate, ruin, overturn.
Note also Swed. dial. s¢jarta, to run wildly about (Rietz); Low G.
steerten, to flee; MDu. steerten, to flee, to run away. The G. stirzen
is derived from the sb. sturz, a sudden fall, tumble, precipice, water-
fall, from a Teut. base *stert ; cf. Norw. sterten, adj., striving against.
But the further history is obscure. Der. sfart, sb., ME. stert, as
above ; start-er; start-up, an upstart, Much Ado, i. 3. 693 up-start,
q.v. Also start-le, the frequentative form, ME. stertlen, to stumble
along, Debate of Body and Soul,1. 120, pr. in Alteng. Sprachproben,
ed. Matzner, i. 94, and in Mapes’ Poems, ed. Wright, p. 335; from
AS. slearilian, to stumble.

STARVE, to die of hunger or cold, to kill with hunger or cold.
(E.) Orig. intransitive, and used in the general sense of ‘to die,’
without reference to the means. ME, steruen (with u=v), strong
verb; pt. t. starf, Chaucer, C. T. 935 (A 933), pp. sforuen, or
i-storuen, id. 2016 (A 2014). AS. steorfan, to die, pt. t. stear/, pp.
storfen ; ‘stearf of hungor,’ died of hunger, A, S. Chron. an. 1124.
Hence was formed the AS. weak verb sterfan, to kill, weak vb.,
appearing in the pp. asterfed, Matt. xv. 13 (Rushworth gloss.). The
mod. E. has confused the two forms, making them both weak.4Du.
sterven, pt. t. stierf, storf; G. sterben, pt.t. starb. Teut. type *sterban-,
pt. t. *sfard. Der. starve-l-ing, with double dimin. suffix, expressive
of contempt, 1 Hen. IV, ii. 1. 76. Also starv-ation, a hybrid form,
but now common, used by Mr. Dundas, the first Viscount Melville,
in an American debate in 1775. ‘ That it then jarred strangely on
English ears is evident from the nickname Starvation Dundas, which
in consequence he obtained. See Letters of H. Walpole and Mann,
vol. H. p. 396, quoted in N. and Q. no. 225;” Trench, Eng. Past
and Present. ;

STATE, a standing, position, condition, an estate, province, rank,
dignity, pomp. (F.—L.) See Trench, Sel. Glossary. ME. séat,
Ancren Riwle, p. 204.—OF. estat, ‘ estate, case, nature,’ Cot.—L.
statum, acc. of status, condition, — L, s‘atum, supine of stare, to stand ;
cognate with E. stand; see Stand. From STA, to stand. Der.
state, verb (late) ; stat-ed, stat-ed-ly, state-ment (a coined word) ; state-
paper, stale-room, &c. ; state-s-man, coined like hunt-s-man, sport-s-
man ; states-man-like, states-man-ship. Also state-ly, ME. estat-lich,
C. T. 140, a hybrid compound; séate-li-ness. And see stat-ion, stat-
ist, stat-ue, stat-ure, stat-ute. Doublets, estate, stat-us.

STATICS, the science that treats of the properties of bodies at
test. (Gk.) Spelt staticks in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Formed as a
pl. from the adj. statick. ‘The statick aphorisms of Sanetorius;” Sir
T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, bk. iv. c. 7. § 2.—Gk. orazixés, at a stand-
still; 4 ora7viKy (sc. émorHpn), statics. — Gk. orar-ds, placed, stand-
ing, verbal adj. from ora-, weak grade of the root of tornm, I stand.
=—4/STA, to stand; see Stand. Der. hydro-statics.

STATION, a standing, post, assigned place, situation, rank,
(F.—L.): ME. station, Gower, C. A. ili. 91; bk. vii. 204. =F. station,
‘a station;” Cot.=L. séatidnem, acc. of statio, a standing still, =—L.
statum, supine of stare, to stand; see State. Der. station-ary, from
MF. stationnaire (Cot.), L, adj. stationarius. Also station-er, a book-
seller, Minsheu (1627), spelt stacyoner in Palsgrave, but orig. merely


STAY 599


one who had a séation or stand in a market-place for the sale of books;,
see Trench, Select Glossary ; hence stationer-y.

STATIST, a statesman, politician. (F.—L.; with Gk. suffix.)
So in Shak. Hamlet, v. 2. 33. A hybrid word, coined from the sb.
state by adding -ist (F. -iste<L. -ista<Gk. -1orys). See State.
Der. stat-ist-ic, i.e, relating to the condition of a state or people;
whence statistic-s (like static-s from static).

STATUE, an upright image. (F.—L.) Sometimes séatué (tri-
syllabic), in which case it is generally printed statwa in mod. edd. of
Shakespeare, as if from L, statva directly, But Cotgrave writes,
statué for the MF. form. However, statua occurs in Bacon, Essays
27, 37, 45- ME. statue, Chaucer, C. T. 14165 (B 3349).—OF.
stalué, a statue; Cot.—L, statua, a standing image.=L., statu-, decl.
stem of s¢atus, a standing, position; see State. Der. statu-ar-y, from
MF. statuaire, ‘a statuary, stone-cutter,’ Cot., from L, statudrius, a
maker of statues (Pliny); statu-ette, from Ital. statuetta, dimin. of
statua ; statu-esque, formed with the F. suffix -esque=Ital, -esco<L.
-1SCUus.

STATURE, height. (F.—L.) Used with special reference to.
the upright posture of a human being. ME. stature, Chaucer, C. T.
8133 (E 257). F. stature, ‘stature,’ Cot.—L. statira, an upright
ey height, growth.—L. stat-wm, supine of stare, to stand; see

ate,

STATUS, condition, rank. (L.) A late word; not in Todd’s
Johnson. =L. status, condition ; see State. Doublets, state, estate.

STATUTE, an ordinance. (F.—L.) ME. statute, Gower, C. A.
i, 2173 bk. ii. 1741.—F. statut; Cot.—L. statitum, a statute ; neuter
of statutus, pp. of statuere, to set, establish. —L. statu-, decl. stem of
status, state; see State. Der. statut-able, a coined word; statut-
abl-y; statut-ory, a coined word. Here belong also con-stitute, de-
stitute, in-stilute, pro-stitute, sub-stitute ; re-stitut-ion.

STAUNCH, adj. and verb; see Stanch.

STAVE, one of the pieces of a cask, a part of a piece of music, a
stanza. (E.) 1. Merely another form of staf’, due to the dat. sing.
staue (=stave), Owl and Night., 1165, and the pl. staves (=staves),
Wyclif, Mark, xiv. 48. Perhaps the special sense is rather Scand.
than E. Cf. Icel. star, a staff, also a stave; Dan. stav, a staff, stave,
a stave. 2. A stanza was formerly called a staff, as forming a part
of a poem ; prob. suggested by the older use of AS. staf, Icel. stajr,
G. buchstab, in the sense of a letter or written character. Cf. Icel.
stef, a stave in a song; Goth. stafs, a letter, element, rudiment, Gal,
iv. 3. ‘ Staffe in our vulgare poesie I know not why it should be so
called, vnless it be for that we vnderstand it for a bearer or supporter
of a song or ballad;’ Puttenham, Art of Eng. Poesie, b. ii. c. 2.
See Staff. Der. stave, verb; usually to stave in, to break into a
cask, or to stave off, to ward off as with a staff; the verb readily puts
v for f, as in strive from strife, live from life. Doublet, staff

STAVESACREH, a species of larkspur; Delphinium staphisagria.
(F.—L.—Gk.) Marlowe has stavesaker ; Dr. Faustus, i. 43; see
Nares. Englished from MF. staphisaigre, ‘stavesaker, lice-bane ;’
Cot.=—L. staphisagria.—Gk. oragts dypia; where @ypia is the fem.
of dyptos, wild, from dypés, a field (E, acre) ; and oradis is for daragis,
raisins.

STAY (1), to remain, abide, wait, prop, delay. (F.—MDnu.)
‘ Steyyn [=stayen], stoppyn, styntyn, or cesyn of gate, Restito,
obsto;’ Prompt. Parvy. The pt.t. stayd occurs in London Lick-
penny, st. 2.—OF. estayer, ‘to prop, shore, stay, underset ;* Cot.
Mod. F. étayer. == OF. estaye, sb. fem., ‘a prop, stay, supporter, shore,
buttresse.” This is mod. F. éai, a prop; used as a masc. sb., by
confusion with the nautical term éfai; see Stay (2). Thus the orig.
use was to support, whence the senses to hold, retain, delay, abide,
were easily deduced. B. The OF. estaye is from MDnu. stade, or
staeye, a prop ora staye;” Hexham. Healso gives sfaey, ‘stay, or
leisure ;* geen stacy hebben, ‘to have noe time or leisure.’ So also
mod. Du. stade, in the phr. te stade komen, to come in due time (lit.
‘to the right place’).--OHG. stata, a fit place or time, opportunity.
These words are closely allied to Du. stad, a town; Dan. stad, a
town; Swed. stad, a town; G. stadi, a town, statt, a place, stead ;
Goth. staths,a place, stead. Alsoto E. sfaithe and stead; see Stead.
y- The loss of medial d is common in Dutch, and occurs in many
words; e.g. broér for broeder, a brother (Sewel), ¢eer for teder or
teeder, tender (id.). Der. stay, sb., spelt sfaye in Wyatt, tr. of Ps. 130
(R.), from OF. estaye, as above; this is really a more orig. word in
F., though perhaps later introduced into English, Also staid, q. v.;
for stay’d= stayed, pp. Also stay-s, pl., lit. supports; it is remarkable
that bodice is also, properly, a plural form. r

STAY (2), as a nautical term, a large rope supporting a mast. (E,)
Rare in old books, Cotgrave uses it to translate MF. estay, which is
the same word, the F. word being of Teut. origin. ME, stey; “one

foresteye, one couple of baksteye;* Riley, Memorials of London,
Pp. 370 (1373). AS. steg, a stay; in a list of the parts of a ship in


600 STEAD


Voc. 288.26. ‘The change from AS. steg to E. stay isjust the same |
as that from AS. deg to E. day.4-Du. stag; Icel., Dan., and Swed, |


stag; G. stag. Perhaps from Teut. *stah- = Idg. *stak-, to resist ; see
Steel. 4 It is difficult to say whether this KE. stay is a survival of
AS. steg, or is from OF. estaye, a prop; see Stay (1). Der.
stay-sail,

STEAD, a place, position, place which another person had or
might have. (E.) ME. stede, in the general sense of place. ‘In
twenti stedes’=in twenty places; Havelok, 1846.
place; Grein, ii. 478.. Closely allied to AS. sted, sted, a bank,
shore ; see Staithe.4+Dn. stede, stee,a place; MDu. stede, a farm.


Closely allied to Du, stad, a town ; Icel. stadr, a stead, place, stada, |


a place; Dan. and Swed. stad, a town; Dan. sted, a place; G. stadt,
statt, a town, place; OHG., stat; Goth. staths, a stead, place. Cf.
L. statio, a station; Gk. oraois; Skt. sthiti-, a standing, residence,
abode, state. AllalliedtoStand,q.v. Der. stead fast, q.v., stead-y,
q.v., home-stead, q.v.; bed-stead, And see stay (1), staithe, station.

STEADFAST, STEDF AST, firm in its place, firm, constant,
resolute. (E.) ME. stedéfast, appearing as a trisyllable in Gower,
C. A. iii, 1153 bk. vii. 906; and in the Ormulum, 1. 1597. AS.
stedefest, firm in one’s place, steadfast; Battle of Maldon, 127, 249;
see Sweet’s A. S. Reader.= AS. stede, a place; and fest, fast. See
Stead and Fast.4+-MDnu. stedevast, ‘steadfast,’ Hexham; from MDu,
stede, a farm (orig. a place), and vast, fast; Icel. stadfastr, from stadr,
a stead, and fastr, fast; Dan. stadfast.

STEADY, firm, fixed, stable. (E.) Spelt stedye in Palsgrave.
A new formation from ME. sted-e, a stead; with suffix -y (AS. -ig) ;
suggested by stead-fast. The AS. word is steddig, steady, appearing
in unsteddig, unsteady, giddy, Atlfric’s Homilies, i. 480, last line,
Cf. MDu. stedigh, ‘continuall, firme,’ Hexham; from sfede, a stead,
Also Icel. stddugr, steady, stable, from sfadr, a place; Dan. stadig,
steady, from stade, a stall, stad, a town, orig. a place; Swed. stadig,
from stad, a place; G. stdtig, continual, from séatt, a place. Der.
steadi-ly, -ness. Also steady, verb.

STEAK, a slice of meat, esp. beef, ready for cooking. (Scand.)
ME. steike; spelt steyke in Prompt. Parv.=Icel. stetk, a steak; so
called from its being roasted, which was formerly done by placing it
upon a wooden peg before the fire; cf. Icel. steikja, to roast, esp. on a
spit or peg; cf. stikna, to be roasted or scorched. In the words
stetkja, stikna, the ‘ei and i indicate a lost strong verb.’ The weak
grade of this lost strong verb appears in the AS. stic-ian, to stick;
see Stick (1). And cf. Icel. stika, a stick, stika, to drive piles. A
steak is a piece of meat, stuck on a stick to be roasted.4-Swed. stek,
roast meat; steka, to roast; cf. stick, a stab, prick, sticka, to stick,
stab; Dan. steg (for *stek), a roast ; ad vende steg, to turn the spit ;
stege, to roast ; cf. stik,astab, sttkke, to pierce ; sttkke astick, Der.
beef-steak ; whence F. bifteck.

STEAL, to take away by theft, to thieve. (E.) ME. stelen,

Chaucer, C. T. 564 (A 562); pt. t. stal, id. 3993 (A 3995); pp.
‘stolen. AS. stelan, pt. t. steal, pl. st@lon, pp. stolen; John, x. 10.4
Du, stelen ; Icel. stela; Dan. stjzle; Swed. stjala; G. stehlen; OHG.
stelan; Goth. stilan. Teut. type *stelan-, pt. t. *stal, pp, *stulanoz.
B. Connexion with Gk. orépowa:, I am deprived of, orepew, I de-
prive, is doubtful, but is accepted by some. Der. steal-th, ME.
stale, Rob. of Glouc. p. 197, 1. 40573; cf. Icel. stuldr, Swed. stéld,
-theft. Hence stealth-y, stealth-i-ly, -ness. Also stale (2).
_ STEAM, vapour. (E.) ME. steem, which also meant a flame or
blaze. ‘Steem, or lowe of fyre, Flamma; Steem, of hotte lycure,
‘Vapor ;’ Prompt. Parv. [In Havelok, 591, stem is a ray of light,
described as resembling a sun-beam. ‘ Two stemynge eyes’=two
flaming eyes; Sir T. Wiat, Sat. i. 53.] AS. steam, a vapour, smell,
smoke; Grein, ii. 480.4-Du, stoom, steam, Teut. type *staumoz, m.;
»as if from a base *steu-. Root unknown. Can it be allied to
Stove? Der. steam, verb, ME. stemen, Chaucer, C. T. 202, AS.
stéman, as in be-stéman, Grein, i. 94; steam-boat, -engine; steam-er,
steam-y.

STEARINE, STEARIN, one of the ingredients of animal
fats. (F.—Gk.) Modern; F. stéarine; formed, with suffix -ine, from


.Gk, oréap, tallow, hardened fat. Allied to Gk. o77-vaz, to stand, be


‘firm, Brugmann, ii. § 82. See Statics.

STEATITE, soap-stone, a variety of talc. (F.—Gk.)
Modern; F, stéatite; formed with suffix -ite (Gk. -crns) from Gk.
oTéat-, aS in oréat-os, gen. of oréap, fat (above).

, STEED, a horse, esp. a spirited horse. (E.) ME. stede, Chaucer,
-C. T. 13831 (B 2093); Havelok, 1675. AS. stéda, masc., a stud-


horse, stallion, war-horse; Atlfric’s Homilies, i. 210, 1. 14; also’


(gestéd-hors, used as convertible with s¢éda in A‘lfred’s tr. of Beda, b, ii.


¢..13, where it is also opposed to myre, a mare, as being of a different |


-gender. Cf. AS, stédmyre, a stud-mare, Laws of Alfred (political),
.§ 16, in Thorpe, Ancient Laws, i. 71. B..By the usual vowel
change from 6 to é (as in fot,.a foot, pl. fet, feet, and in a great


AS. stede, a |


_ STEEP


number of instances), sééda (for *stdd-jon-) is derived from stdd, a.
stud; with the addition of the masc. nom. suffix -a (from -jon)..
Thus stéd-a=‘studder,’ i.e. stud-horse or stallion, for breeding foals,.
See Stud (1). Allied to G, stute, a mare, Icel. stedda, a mare,
stodhesir, a stallion, stddmerr, a stud-mare or brood-mare.

STEEL, iron combined with carbon, for tools, swords, &c. (E.)
ME, steel, Chaucer, C. T. 10300 (E 2426). Also spelt stiel, Gower,
C. A. vi. 1814; style, Sir Ferumbras, 4433. OMerc. stéli; Epinal
Gloss. 49; AS. style, Grein, ii. 490; and in the compounds s¢yl-ecg,
steel-edged, and s‘Vlen, made of steel; Grein, ii. 490. “The OMerc.
stéli is for *stehli, from *stahli-; see below.4-Du. staal; Icel. stal;
Dan. staal; Swed. stal; G. stahl, contracted from OHG, stakal.
B. The OHG. form furnishes the clue to the etymology; all the
forms are due to Teut. types *stahlo-, *stahli-, formed from the Teut.
base STAH, answering to an Idg. base STAK, to be firm or still,
appearing in Skt. stak, to resist, Zend stay-ra-, strong (Horn, § 714),
and esp. in OPruss. panu-stakla, steel for kindling fire. Thus the
long vowel in steel is due to loss of h before 1. Der. steel, verb, from
AS. stylan, to steel; cf. Icel. stela, to steel (derived from stal by the
usual yowel-change), G. stahlen (from stahl).

STEELYARD (1), a meeting-place, in London, for German
merchants from the Hanse towns. (E.) ‘Next to this lane [Cosin
Lane], on the east, is the Steelyard, as they term it, a place
for merchants of Almayne [Germany], that use to bring hither . .
steel, and other profitable merchandises;’ Stow’s Chronicle, ed.
Thoms, p. 67; see the whole passage. The Steelyard was a factory
for the Hanse Merchants, and was in Dowgate ward. That the
English really called this place the steel-yard appears from a docu-
ment dated 1394, in which it is Latinised as Curia Calibis (= Chaly-
bis); see N. and Q. 10S. vi.413. In 1475 it is ‘called the Stilehofe,
otherwise called the Stileyerd.’ Here stile is a ME. variant of steel ;
see above. ‘The marchauntes of the styliarde’ are mentioned in
Fabyan’s Chron., an, 1527-8. And see Stilyard in Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. B. But itis explained, in the Bremen Worterbuch, that
the Low G. name was Staal-hof, for which ‘steel-yard’ was a mis-
taken substitution; kof being correctly translated by ‘yard.’ The
mistake obviously arose from the fact that both Low G. staal and
MDnu. stael had a double meaning, viz. (1) steel, and (2), sample,
pattern; and the Jatter was really meant. Both Low G. staal, a
sample, and MDnu. stael, a sample, are from OF. estaler, to display
wares on a stall (OF. estal).—Du. stal, G, stall, a stall; see Stall.
y- Cf. Du. staal-hof, ‘ pattern-office, where the samples of cloth were
stamped ;’ Calisch.

STEELYARD (2), a kind of balance, with unequal arms.
(E.) The form is due to a popular etymology from steel and
yard, as if ‘a bar of steel.’ But, as a fact, it was merely shortened
from stilyard-beme, meaning the ‘ beam’ or balance used in the Steel-
yard (as explained above). Hence the word yard, oddly enough,
does not refer to the shape of the balance, but to the place wherein it
was used; so that it is derived from yard (1), not from yard (2).
‘The beam of le Hanzes Hangis, called the Stilliarde Beme;’ Letters
and Papers Foreign and Domestic, Henry VIII, vol. v. p. 104, col. 2;
see N. and Q, 10S. vi. 331. Later shortened to stilliard; Cotgrave,
s.v. Crochet, calls it ‘a Roman beame or s¢elleere;’ Phillips (1706)
has s¢elleer; and Torriano, s.v. stadera, has ‘a pair of stilliards.’
Hence prov. E. séillur, stuliard.

STEENBOK, a S. African antelope. (Du.) Du. steenbok, lit,
‘rock-goat.’ = Du. seen, stone, rock; and bok, he-goat. See Stone
and Buck (1).

STEEP (1), precipitous. (E.) ME. step, steep. ‘Theo path..
was narwe and stepe;’ King Alisaunder, 7041. AS. siéap, steep,
high, lofty; Grein, ii. 481. Cf. Icel. steypdr, steep, rising high.
Both AS. stéap and Icel. steypdr are from a common Teut. base
*staup. B. The Icel. steypdr is allied to steypa, to overthrow, cast
down, lit. to make to stoop, causal of the rare verb stupa, to stoop,
which is the same word as Swed. stupa, (1) to fall, (2) to tilt. Cf.
Swed. stupande, sloping, stupning, a leaning forward; whence it
appears that steep is allied to stoop, and meant, originally, tilted for-
ward, sloping down. So also Norweg. stupa, to fall, tumble head-
long, stup, a steep cliff. See Stoop (1), and Stoup. Der, steep-
ly, -ness; steep-le, q.v.; steep-y, Timon, i. 1. 743 steep (2). -

STEEP (2), to dip or soak in a liquid. (Scand.) ME. stepen,
‘ Stepyn yn water or other licure, Infundo, illiqueo;’ Prompt. Parv.
Spelt stege, Palladius, b. ii. 1. 281.—Icel. steypa, to make to stoop,
overturn, to pour out liquids, to cast metals; causal of stupa, to
stoop; see Stoop, and see Steep (1). So also Swed. stopa, to cast
(metals), to steep, to sink; s/épa korn, ‘to steep barley in water’
(Widegren); Dan. stébe, to cast, mould (metals), to steep (com),
stéb, the steeping of grain, steeped corn. The succession of senses is :
to make to stoop or overturn, to pour out or cast metals, to pour
water over grain.


STEEPLE


STEEPLE, a pointed tower of a church or building. (E.)
ME. stepel, Rob. of Gloucester, p. 528, 1. 10860. AS. s/¥pel, a lofty
tower, Luke, xiii. 4; the Hatton MS. has stépel. So called from its
* steepness,’ i.e. loftiness or height; from AS. sféap, lofty, high,
mod. E. steep. The vowel-change from éa to Merc. @, Wessex ie,
later y, is regular; see Steep (1). Also spelt stéapol; OE. Texts,

. 616. Der. steeple-chase, modern, not in Todd’s Johnson.

STEER (1), a young ox. (E.) ME. steer, Chaucer, C. T. 2151
(A 2149). AS. stéor ; ‘ Juvencus, vel vitula, steor;’ Voc. 120. 28.4
Du. and G. stier, a bull; Icel. stjérr; Goth. stiur. Teut. type
*steuroz,m. Another Teut. type is *theuroz, from Idg. *teuros; as
in Icel. Ajorr, Swed. tjur, Dan. tyr, a steer; allied (by gradation) to
L. taurus, Gk. tavpos, from Idg. *tauros. B. The orig. sense is
‘full-grown’ or ‘large,’ as in Skt. sthila- (for sthura-), great, large,
powerful, sthura-, a man, sthiiri, a pack-horse; cf. Zend staora-,
Pers. sutir, a beast of burden. Brugmann, i. §§ 196, 230; Horn,
§ 720.. yy. We even find the allied adj. in Teutonic, viz. AS. stdr,
large, Icel. stérr, Dan. and Swed. stor; Idg. type *sthar-os, large.
Thus a steer is a firm, full-grown animal, esp. a young bull. See
also Steer (2). Der. stir-k, a young bullock or heifer (Jamieson),
AS. styric, Luke, xv. 23, formed with dimin. suffix -ic, and consequent
vowel-change from €éo to 4.

STEER (2), to direct, guide, govern. (E.) ME, steren, P. Plow-
man, B. viii. 47. AS. stéoran, styran, to direct, steer, Grein, ii. 481,
491.4+Du. sturen; Icel. styra; Dan. styre; Swed. styra; G. steuern,
OHG. stiurjan, stiuran ; Goth. stiurjan, to establish, confirm. B. All
from the Teut. weak verb *steur-jan-, to steer (orig. to strengthen,
confirm, hence, hold fast, direct). This is a denominative verb,
from the sb. of which the base is *stewr-, a rudder (lit. that which
holds fast). This sb. is now obsolete in E., but appears in Chaucer
as stere, C. T. 4868 (B 448); AS. stéor, Du. stuur, a rudder, Icel. styri,
a rudder, Dan. styr, steerage, G. steuer, a rudder, OHG. stiura, a
prop, a staff, a paddle or rudder. It is still retained in E. in the
comp. star-board, i.e. steer-board, AS. stéor-bord (rudder-side of a
ship). y- Closely allied to this sb. is Icel. staurr, a post, stake,
Gk. oravpés, an upright pole or stake. Noreen, § 143; Brugmann,
i. § 198. The Teut. sb. meant, accordingly, a pole to punt with or
a paddle to keep the ship’s course right, then a rudder; whence the
verb to steer, to use a stake or paddle, to use a helm. Der. steer-
age, Romeo, i. 4. 112, with F. suffix; steer-s-man, Milton, P. L. ix.
513, formed like huné-s-man, sport-s-man; also star-board, q.V.,
stern,q.v. And see Store.

STELLAR, belonging to the stars. (L.). ‘Stellar vertue;’
Milton, P. L. iv. 671.—L. stellaris, starry.—L. stella, a star; short
for *ster-la, a contracted dimin. from the same source as E. star; see
Star. Der. (from stella) stell-ate, stell-at-ed; stell-ul-ar, from the
dimin. s¢ellula, a little star. Also stell-i-fy, obsolete; see Chaucer,
Ho. of Fame, ii. 78.

STEM (1), the trunk or stalk of a tree or herb, a little branch.
(E.) ME. stem, a trunk of a tree, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft,
p. 296, 1.8. AS. st@efn, stefn, stemn, (1) a stem of a tree, (2) the
stem or prow of a vessel, (3) a stem or race of people, Grein, ii. 479.
[The change from fx to mz is regular; so also AS. hlafmesse is now
Lammas.) We also find a weak form stefna, stefna, a stem or prow
of a ship (Grein). Both these forms are apparently allied to AS.
stef, a staff; a stem of a tree is the staff or stock, or support of it ;
the stem of a vessel is the upright postin front of it. See further
under Staff.4Du. stam, a trunk, stem, stock; steven, prow; Icel.
stafn, later stamn, the stem of a vessel (from stafr, a staff), also
written stefni, stemnt, also stofn, stomn, the stem of a tree; Dan.
stamme, the trunk of a tree; steun, the prow ofa vessel; Swed. stam,
trunk; staf, prow; framstam, fore-stem, prow, bakstam, back-stem,
stern; G. stamm, a trunk ; steven or vorder steven, the stem, prow-post ;
cf. hinter steven, stern-post.

STEM (2), the prow of a vessel. (E.) Spelt stam in Morte Ar-
thure, 1. 3664; but this is rather the Scand. form; the pl. stemmes is
in Baret (1580). It is precisely the same word as when we speak of
the stem of a tree; see further under Stem (1). q As the orig.
signification was merely ‘ post,’ there was no particular reason (be-
yond usage) why it should have been used more of the prow-post
than of the stern-post ; accordingly, the Icel. stafz sometimes means
‘prow,’ and sometimes ‘stern; * and in G, the distinction is made by
saying vorder steven (fore-stem) for stem or prow-post, and hinter
steven (hind-stem) for stern or stern-post.

STEM (3), to check, stop, resist. (E.) ‘Stem, verb, to oppose (a
current), to press forward through ; /o stem the waves, 3 Hen. VI, ii.
6. 36; stemming it, J. Caesar, i. 2. 109 5 ’ Schmidt, Shak. Lexicon. Cf.
Teel, stemma, to dam up; Dan. stemme, to stem ; G. stemmen, to dam
up water. Teut. type *s¢emjan-; a verb derived (by vowel-change of
a to e) froma base *stam-, with the idea of ‘ obstruction;’ see
Stammer,


STEPPE 601
STENCH, a bad smell. (E.) ME. stench, Rob. of Glouc. p. 405,


1. 8354. AS. stenc, dat. stence, a strong smell, common in the sense
of sweet smell or fragrance; Grein, ii. 479.— AS. stanc, 2nd grade of
stincan, to smell, to stink; see Stink. [Stench from stink, like
drench from drink.|4-G. ge-stank, a stench (from stinken).

STENCIL, to paint or colour in figures by means of a stencilling-
plate. (F.—L.) In Webster; he defines a stencil (as a stencilling-
plate is sometimes called) as ‘a thin plate of metal, leather or other
material, used in painting or marking; the pattern is cut out of the
plate, which is then laid flat on the surface to be marked, and the
colour brushed over it.’ Various guesses have been made at the ety-
mology of this word, all worthless. I think it probable that to
stencil is from OF. estenceler, to sparkle, also to cover with stars, to
adorn with bright colours (Godefroy), MF. estinceller, ‘to sparkle,
...to powder, or set thick with sparkles;’ Cot. It was an old
term in heraldry. Littré gives a quotation of the 15th century;
‘L’aurmoire estoit tute par dedans de fin or estincelee’ =the box (?)
was all (covered) within with fine gold scattered in stars. This
peculiar kind of ornamentation (star-work) is precisely what
stencilling must first have been used for, and it is used for it still.
Since the pattern is cut quite through the plate, it must all be in
separate pieces, so that no better device can be used than that which,
to quote Cotgrave, is set thick with sparkles. Cf. ‘ With his sternes
[stars] of gold, stanseld on-stray,’ i.e. stencilled at random; Aunters
of Arthure, st. 31.—OF. estencele, a spark; in Walter de Bibbes-
worth, in Wright’s Vocab, i. 171. —L. type *stincilla, mistaken form
of L. scintilla, a spark. See Scintillation; also Tinsel. 4 The
note to Aunters of Arthur, st. 31, quotes from the Wardrobe accounts
of Edw. III: ‘harnesium de bokeram albo, extencellato’ cum
argento,’ i. e. starred with silver.

STENOGRAPHY, short-hand writing. (Gk.) Not a very new
word; spelt stexographie in Minsheu, ed. 1627. Coined from Gk.
orevo-, for orevds, narrow, Close ; and -ypagia, writing (as occurring
in épOoypadpia, orthography), from ypadew, to write. Der. steno-
graph-er, stenograph-ic, -ic-al, -ic-al-ly,

STENTORIAN, extremely loud. (Gk.) See Ben Jonson, Staple
of News, very near the end; and Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674; he
tightly explains it with reference to the voice of Stentor.=—Gk.
=révtwp, Stentor, a Greek at Troy, famous for his loud voice, Homer,
Tliad, v. 785.—Gk. orév-ev, to groan, make a noise; with suffix
-rwp of the agent, as in L. ama-tor, a lover. —4/STEN, to make
a noise; cf. Skt. stan, to sound, to thunder. Cf. E. stun. Stentor=
Stunner,

STEP, a pace, degree, round of a ladder, foot-print. (E.) ME.
steppe, in the sense of foot-step, Ywaine and Gawin, 288g, in Ritson’s
Met. Romances, vol. i; Mandeville’s Travels, ed. Halliwell, p. 81.
OMere. stepe (Sweet); AS. stepe, a pace, Jos. x. 12.—AS. steppan,
to go, advance, a strong verb with a weak infinitive, pt. t. stdp, pp.
stapen. The pt. t. stop occurs frequently; see Grein, ii. 476. :
The orig. sense is ‘to set the foot down firmly ;’ from a Teut. base
STAP; see further under Stamp, which is merely the nasalised
form, Allied to Du. stap, G. stapfe, a footprint, footstep. Der.
foot-step; door-step ; stepp-ing-stone, in Wright’s Voc. i. 159, where it
is miswritten seping-stone, by an obvious error.

STEPCHILD, one who stands in the relation of child through
the marriage of a parent. (E.) The pl. step-childre occurs in Early
Eng. Psalter, ed. Stevenson, Ps. xciii. 6. Stepmoder is in Gower,
C. A. i. 1043 bk. i. 1844. AS. stéopcild, Exod. xxii. 22; John,
».4. 18, q.v. For cild, see Child. B. The prefix stéop- occurs
aiso in stéopbearn, a stepbairn, stepchild, stéopfeder, stepfather,
stéopmdder, stepmother, sféopsunu, stepson, and stéopdohior, step-
daughter; see Voc. 9. 10; 34. 27; 22. 233 88. 20. y. The
sense of stéop is ‘ orphaned,’ or ‘ deprived of its parent ;’ so that it
was first used in the compounds stepchild, stepbairn, stepson, step-
daughter, and afterwards extended, naturally enough, so as to form
the compounds stepfather, stepmother, to denote the father or mother
of the child who had lost one of its first parents. Thus the Lat.
‘Fiant filii ejus orfani’ is translated in the Vespasian Psalter by
‘sien. bearn his dsféapte;’ Ps. cviii. 9, ed. Sweet. ‘ Astépnes,
orbatio,’ occurs in a gloss (Bosworth). 8. The Teut. type is
*steupoz, adj., with the sense of ‘ orphaned’ or ‘ deprived ;’ the root
is unknown ; Fick, iii. 347. We only know that it is wholly un-
connected with step abové; it may, however, be related to Stoop (1),
q-V-+Du. stiefkind; so also stiefzoon, stiefdochter, stiefvader, stief-
moeder ; Icel. stjiipbarn, a step-bairn ; so also s/jupson, -ddttir, -fadir,
-modvir ; Dan. sfedbarn, a corrupt form ; Swed. s/s/barn ; G. stiefkind ;
so also stiefsohn, -tochter, -vater, -mutier ; cf. OHG. stiuf->G. stief-,
and OHG. s/iufan, to deprive of parents, also to deprive of children.
See also Steep (1). abt

STEPPE, a large plain. (Russ.) In Webster. Perhapsin Mids.
Nt. Dream, ii. 1. 69, such being the reading of the first quarto ;


602 STEREOSCOPE


most edd. have steep. — Russ. stepe (with final e mute), a waste, heath,
steppe.

STTEREOSCOPE, an optical instrument for giving an appearance
of solidity. (Gk.) Modern. First constructed in 1838. Coined
from Gk. oreped-, for orepeds, stiff, hard, firm, solid; and cxor-eiv, to
behold. B. Gk. orepeds is cognate with G. starr, stiff, and perhaps
with Skt. sthira-s, firm ; and oxomeiy is allied to oxémropa, I look
round; see Stare (1) and Scope or Sceptic. Der. stereoscop-ic,
-ic-al, -ic-al-ly.

STEREOTYPE, a solid plate for printing. (Gk.) ‘Stereotype
was invented (not the thing, but the word) by Didot not very long
since ;” Trench, Eng. Past and Present, 4th ed. 1859. —Gk. o7eped-,
for orepeds, hard, stiff; and type. See Stereoscope and Type.
Der. stereotype, verb.

STERILE, unfruitful, barren. (F.—L.) Spelt sterid in Levins.
— MF. sterile, ‘sterile ;’ Cot.—L. sterilem, acc. of sterilis, barren.
From the base STER appearing in Gk. orepeds, oreppés, hard, stiff,
firm, sterile; cf. G. starr, rigid; for which see Stare (1). Cf. also
Gk. oreipa (for *orép-ya), a barren cow; Goth. staird, a barren
woman. Brugmann, i. § 838. A séerile soil is a hard, stony, unpro-
ductive one. Der. séeril-i-ty, from F. séerilité, ‘ sterility,’ Cot., from
L. acc. sterilitatem.

STERLING, genuine, applied to money. (E.) ME. séarling,
sterling, Chaucer, C. T. 12841 (C 907); P. Plowman, B. xv. 342;
Rob. of Glouc. p. 294,1. 5949. In all these passages it is a sb.,
meaning ‘a sterling coin,’ a coin of true weight. Thus Rob. of
Glouc. speaks of ‘ Four pousend pound of sterlynges.’ Of E. origin;
the MHG. sterlinc, cited by Stratmann, is borrowed from it. First
applied to the E. penny, then to standard current coin in general.
Wedgwood cites from Ducange a statute of Edw. I, in which we
meet with ‘ Denarius Anglize, qui vocatur Sterlingus ;’ also a Charter
of Hen. III, where we have ‘In centum marcis bonorum nouorum
et legalium sterlingorum, tredecim solid. et 4 sterling. pro qualibet
marca computatis.’ That is, a mark is 13s. and 4d., a sterling being
here a penny. B. Wedgwood adds: ‘The hypothesis most
generally approved is that the coin is named from the Easterlings
or North Germans, who were the first moneyers in England.
Walter de Pinchbeck, a monk of Bury in the time of Edw. I, says:
“sed moneta Angliz fertur dicta fuisse a nominibus opificum, ut
Floreni a nominibus Florentiorum, ita Sterlingi a nominibus Ester-
lingorum nomina sua contraxerunt, qui hujusmodi monetam in Anglia
primitus componebant.”’ This notable passage proves only that
the name Esterlingi, as applied to a people, goes back to the
14th century; and it is difficult to prove that it is much older.
y. But Ducange quotes from a document dated 1184, which has: ‘in
Anglia unus sterlingus persolvetur.’ Indeed, the E. sterling is even
older than this, as Wace (d. ab. 1180) has: ‘ por ses es¢érlins rece-
voir;’ Roman de Ron, 6873. 5. The word appears to be native
English ; there are two theories as to its origin. (1) From AS.
*steorling, ‘little star,’ with reference to a very small star on some
early coins, as, e.g. on some of Will. I1; or (2) from AS. sterling,
a starling (Clarke Hall), ME. sterling (Voc. 640. 7, 761. 28; Cursor
Mundi, 1789), dimin. of AS. ster, ME. ster (Voc. 542. 45), a star-
ling; see Starling. Ducange quotes from Lyndwode to the effect
that the reference may be to the four birds conspicuous on most coins
of Edward the Confessor.

STERN (1), severe, harsh, austere. (E.) ME, sterne, Wyclif,
Luke, xix. 21, 22; also sturne, Rob. of Glouc. p. 27, 1.628. AS.
styrne, stern, Grein, ii. 492; where we also find styrn-méd, of stern
mood, stern-minded, styrnan, to be severe. [The AS. y often be-
comes ME. uw, as in AS. wyrm, ME. wurm, a worm; AS. fyrs, ME.
furs or firs, furze. Certainly stern should rather be spelt sturn; it
has been assimilated to the word below. Still we find the AS. y
becoming mod. E. e in kernel< AS, cyrnel.| Teut. type *sturnjoz.
Perhaps allied to OHG. stornén, to be astonished, sturni, stupor.
B. The suffix -z- is adjectival (Idg. -zo-), as in L. Africa-nus; the
base stur- seems to be the weak grade of the base STER, as seen in
Gk. orep-eds, solid, stiff. Cf. Goth. and-staurran, to murmur
against, G. storrig, morose, stubborn, séarr, stiff, rigid; Du.
stuursch, stern; Icel. stara, to mope. See Stare (1). The idea of
sternness is closely allied to those of stiffness and austerity of
manner. Der, slern-ly, -ness.

STERN (2), the hinder part of a vessel. (Scand.) ME. sterne,
P. Plowman, B. viii. 35, footnote; other MSS. have stere, steere,
stiere, meaning a rudder. Spelt steorne, a rudder, id. A. ix. 30. —Icel.
stjorn, a steering, steerage ; hence the phr. sitja vid stjorn, to sit at
the helm ; whence stern became recognised as a name for the hinder
part of the vessel. Extended from stjor- (occurring in sfjéri, a steerer,
tuler), which answers to ME, stere, a rudder. See Steer (2).
‘Compare Icel. stjérnbordi with E. starboard (=steer-board). Thus
stern is allied to steer, in the obsolete sense of ‘rudder.’ Der. stern-


STICK


most ; stern-sheets, whete sheet had once (I suppose) the nautical
sense of ‘ rope.’

STERNUTATION, sneezing. (L.) In Sir T. Browne, Vulg.
Errors, b. iv. c. 9, 1. 1.—L. sterniitatiOnem, acc. of sternitatio, a
sneezing. = L. sterniitare, to sneeze, frequent. of sternuere, to sneeze.
Allied to Gk. mrapyvo@a, to sneeze. B. The bases ster-, rrap-,
seem to be from an imitative base *fster-, expressive of sneezing-
Der. sternutat-or-y.

STERTOROUS, snoring. (L.) Modern. Coined (as if from
L. *stertordsus) from stertere, to snore. Prob. of imitative origin ; cf.
Sternutation. Der. stertorous-ly.

STETHOSCOPE, the tube used in auscultation, as applied to
the chest. (Gk.) Added by Todd to Johnson. Modern; lit. ‘ chest-,
examiner. Coined from Gk. o7700-, for or7O0s, the chest; and
oKom-ely, to consider, examine. B. The Gk. o77@0s is allied to
Skt. stana-s, the female breast, a nipple. Cf. Gk. ornviov =orH00s
(Hesychius). For-scope, see Scope or Sceptic. Der. stethoscop-ic.

STEVEDORE, one whose occupation it is to load and unload
vessels in port. (Span.—L.) Webster has stevedore, which is a well-
known word in the mercantile world, and steve, verb, to stow, as
cotton or wool in a vessel’s hold. The word is Spanish, Spain being
a wool-producing country and once largely engaged in sea-traffic. —
Span. estivador, ‘a packer of wool at shearing ;’ Neuman. It may
also mean a stower of cargo, as will be seen. Formed with suffix
-dor (<L. acc. -térem) from estiva-r, to stow, to lay up cargo in the
hold, to compress wool.=—L. stare, to crowd together, press to-
gether; allied to Stiff. The verb appears also in Ital. stivare, to
press close, Port. estivar, to trim a ship. There is also a verbal
sb., viz. Ital. stiva, ballast of a ship, Span. estiva, the stowage of
goods in a ship’s hold, MF. estive, ‘the loading or lading of a
ship;’ Cot. From the same root are stip-end, stip-ul-at-ion, con-stip-
ate, co-stive.

STEW (1), to boil slowly with little moisture. (F.—Teut.) ME.
stuwen. ‘ Stuwyn, or stuyn mete, Stupho; Stuwyn or bathyn, or stuyn
in a stw, Balneo;’ Prompt. Parv. The older sense was to bathe; and
the verb was formed from the old sb. stew in the sense of bath or
hot-house (as it was called), which was chiefly used in the pl. stews,
with the low sense of brothel-house. See Liber Albus, ed. Riley,
p- 277 (242 in the translation). The old spelling of the pl. sb. was
stues, stuwes, stewes, stives, stuyves, stywes, P. Plowman, B. vi. 72,
A. vii. 65, all variously Anglicised forms of OF. estuve, of which
Cotgrave explains the pl. estuves by ‘stews, also stoves or hot-
houses.’ [Cf. Ital. stufa, Port. and Span. estufa, a stove, a hot-
house; mod. F. étuve. | B. Of Teut. origin. The OHG. form is
stupa, a hot room for a bath; the mod. G. stube merely means a room
in general. The corresponding E. word is Stove, q.v. We may
particularly note MDu. stove, ‘a stewe, a hot-house, or a baine’
[bath], een stove om te baden, ‘a stewe to bathe in;’ Hexham. The
stews in Southwark were chiefly filled with Flemish women. Der.
stew, sb., in the sense of stewed meat; this is merely a derivative
from the verb. The pl. sb. stews is treated of above; cf. ‘The
bathes and the stewes bothe,’ Gower, C. A. iii. 291; bk. viii. 484.

STEW (2), afish-pond. (Du.) ME. stewe, Chaucer, C. T., A 350,
= MDu. stouwen, to drive forward ; Du. stouwen, stuwen, to stow; cf,
Low G. stau, a dam, stauen, to keep water back. Allied to Stow.

STEWARD, one who superintends another’s estate or farm. (E.)
ME. stiward, Havelok, 666 ; Ancren Riwle, p. 386, 1. 5 from bottom.
AS. stigweard, in a will (Toller); also stiweard, Voc. 223. 7; spelt
stiward, A.S. Chron. an. 1093,and.an.1120. ‘Economns, stiward;’
Voc. 129. 13 ; also in Thorpe, Diplomatarium, p. 570, 1.12. The
full form of the word was stigweard, lit. a sty-ward; from AS.
stig-o, a sty, and weard, a guardian, warden, keeper. The orig.
sense was one who looked after the domestic animals, and gave
them their food; hence, one who provides for his master’s table,
and generally, one who superintends household affairs for another.
See Sty and Ward. _ B. For the change of sound, cf. the name
Seward, formerly Siward, Macb. iii. 6. 31. The Icel. stivardr, gen.
assigned as the origin of E. steward, occurs but rarely; the Icel.
Dict. gives but one reference, and adds the remark that it is ‘ from
the English.’ y- Grein (ii. 484) draws especial attention to the
parallel form stigwita, also stiwita, in the same sense of steward,
the suffix being the AS. wita, a wise man, one who is skilled. Der.
steward-ship, Luke, xvi. 2; steward-ess, with F. suffix.

STICK (1), to stab, pierce, thrust in, to fasten by piercing; to
adhere. (E.) The orig. sense is to stab or pierce (cf. sting’), hence
to fasten into a thing by thrusting it in; hence, the intransitive use,
to be thrust into a thing and there remain, to cling or adhere, to be
set fast, stop, hesitate, &c. Two verbs are confused in mod. E., viz.
(1) stick, to pierce, and (2) stick, to be fixed in, 1. STRONG
FORM. ME: steken, strong verb, to pierce, fix, pt. t. stak, Rom. of
the Rose, 458; pp. steken, stiken, stoken (see Stratmann), also stoke,


STICK


Gower, C. A. i. 60, bk. i. 538 ; which=mod. E, stuck. This answers
to AS. *stecan, not found; pt. t. *stac, pp. *stecen; a strong verb,
which does not appear in AS., though found both in OFries. steka,
and in OSaxon, where we find the pt. t. stak, Heliand, 5707. And
compare Sting. Cognate words are Low G. steken, to pierce,
stick, pt. t. stak, pp. steken; and G. stechen, to sting, pierce, stick,
stab, pt. t. stach, pp. gestochen. Teut. type *stekan-, pt. t. *stak,
pp. *stakanoz; transferred to the e-series from the older type
*steikan-, pt. t. *staik, pp. *stikanoz. Cf. Goth. staks, a mark,
stigma ; stiks, a point, a moment of time. B. The latter strong
verb is from the Idg. 4/STEIGw, to pierce (Brugmann, i. § 633) ;
whence Gk. ori(ev (=orly-yew), to prick, L. instigdre, to instigate,
Skt. tigma-, sharp, ti, to be sharp, tejaya, to sharpen ; see Stigma,
Instigate, Sting. 2. WEAK FORM. ME. stikien, to be in-
fixed, to stick into, cling to, adhere; a weak verb; also used in
atrans. sense. ‘And anoon he stykede faste’=he stuck fast, Seven
Sages, ed. Wright, 12463 pp. ystiked, Chaucer, C, T. 1565. AS.
stician, pt. t. sticode, both trans. and intrans., Grein, ii. 482. Cog-
nate words are Icel. stéka, to drive piles, Dan. stikke, to stab, Swed.
sticka, to stab, sting, stitch, prick, G. stecken, to stick, set, plant,
fix, also, to stick fast, remain. Thus the sense of ‘stick fast’
appears in G. as well as in E,, but G. restricts the strong form
stechen to the orig. sense, whilst stecken has both senses. Der.
stick (2), q.v.; stick-y, spelt stickie in Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 583, stick-
i-ness ; stick-le-back, q.v.; stitch, q.v.; and see sting, stang, stack,
stake, steak. From the same root are di-sting-uish, di-stinct, ex-
ting-uish, ex-tinct, in-stinct, pre-stige, in-stig-ate, sti-mu-late, style (1),
stig-ma.

* STICK (2), a staff, small branch of a tree. (E.) ME. stikke,
Chaucer, C. T. 16733 (G 1265). AS. sticca, a stick, also a peg or
nail, Judges, iv. 21, 22. So called from its piercing or sticking into
anything; the orig. sense was ‘ peg,’ then any small bit of a branch
ofatree. ‘Se ¢eldsticca sticode purh his heafod’ =the tent-peg stuck
through his head, Judges, iv. 22.4-Icel. stika, a stick; EFries. stikke,
stik; allied to Du. stek, G. stecken, a stick. See Stick (1), Steak,
and Stake. Der. stick-le-back. And see stitch. Also single-stick;
see under quarterstaff.

STICKLEBACK, a small fish. (E.) So called from the
stickles or prickles on its back ; cf. thornback. ME. stykylbak, Reliq.
Antiquz, i. 85. Corruptly sticklebag, Walton’s Angler, p. i. c. 5
(R.) ; and still more corruptly ¢ittlebat (Halliwell). In the Prompt.
Parv., and in Voc. 610. 30, there is mention of a fish called a
stikling or stykelyng. The sb. stikel or stickle is from AS. sticel,
a prickle, sting, used of the sting of a gnat in A‘lfred, tr. of Boethius,
b. ii. pr. 6, cap. xvi. § 2.—AS. stician, to stick; just as prickle is
from prician, to prick. See Stick (1) and Stitch. The suffix -e/
denotes the instrument ; it is not (in this case) a diminutive, as is
often imagined; see March, A. S. Grammar, § 228. For back, see
Back. Cf. Du. stekelvisch, a stickleback; MDu. stickel, ‘a prick
or a sting ;” Hexham; also EFries. stikel, a thorn.

STICKLER, (formerly) one who parts combatants or settles dis-
putes between two men fighting. (E.) Nearly obsolete; once com-
mon; see Halliwell, Nares, and Trench, Select Glossary. ‘ Like
sticklers of the war ;’ Dryden, Oliver Cromwell, 41. Now only used
in the sense of a man who insists on etiquette or persists in an opinion.
See Troil. v. 8. 18, The verb ¢o stickle meant to part combatants,
act as umpire. ‘I styckyll betwene wrastellers, or any folkes that
prove mastries [try conclusions] to se that none do other wronge, or
I parte folkes that be redy to fyght;’ Palsgrave. It is common to
explain this word (with profound disregard for the 7 in it) by saying
that the umpire must have parted combatants by means of sticks, or
else that the umpire arbitrated between men who fought with single-
sticks, Both assertions are mere inventions; and a séickle is not a
stick at all, but a prickle. If this were the etymology, the word
would mean ‘ one who uses prickles.’ B. It is probable that stickle
represents the once common ME. stighilen or stightilen, to dispose,
order, arrange, govern, subdue, &c, It was commonly used of a
steward, who disposed of and arranged everything, and acted as a
master of the ceremonies; see Will. of Palerne, 1199, 2899, 3281,
3841, 5379; Destruction of Troy, 117, 1997, 2193, 13282; Gawayn
and Grene Knight, 2137; &c. ‘ When pay com to pe courte, keppte
wern pay fayre, Sty3tled with pe steward, stad in pe halle;’ Allit.
Poems, B. 90. ‘To sty3tle the peple’=to keep order among the
people; P. Plowm. Crede, 315; and cf. P. Plowman, C. xvi. 40,
We also find stighill (without ¢), York Myst. (glossary) ; and the sb.
is stiteler in the Cov. Myst. p. 23. y. This ME. sét3¢len is the fre-
quentative of AS. stiktan, stihtian. ‘Willelm weolde and stihte
Engleland’ = William ruled and governed England, A. S. Chron, an,
1086 (Thorpe renders it by ‘ held despotic sway’).4-MDu. stichten,
‘to build, edefie, bound, breed or make (a contention), impose or
make (a lawe),’? Hexham; mod. Du. stichten, to found, institute,


STILL 603.


establish, excite, edify. Further allied to Dan. stifte, to found,
institute, establish; stifte forlig=to reconcile, stifte fred=to make
peace (just exactly ¢o stickle) ; Swed. stifta, also stikta, similarly used ;
G, stiften, to found, institute, cause, excite; Freundschaft stiften=to
make friendship. Cf. also Icel. sté¢# (from *stihti-), a foundation,
base. Kluge derives stih-, stif-, from a Teut. base *stihw (=Idg.
*stiq), to build, found; cf. OSax. stihtan, to build.

STIFF, rigid, obstinate, formal. (E.) The vowel was once long ;
and remains so in North E. stive, muscular, and in the derivative
stifle. ME. stif, Chaucer, C. T. 7849 (D 2267); the superl. is spelt
styuest, steuest, steffest, stiffest, P. Plowman, C. vii. 43. AS. stif,
stiff (Toller); this form is verified by the derivatives s¢iffan and.
Gstifian. ‘ Heora hand Gstifedon’ = their hands became stiff ; Aélfric’s
Homilies, i. 598, 1. 11. ‘ Obrigesco, ie stife,”’ Voc. 118. 20.4-Du.
stijf, stiff, hard, rigid, firm; Dan. stiv; Swed. styf; Low G. stif
ea ; Westphal. stif. [The G. steifis supposed to be borrowed
rom Low G.] B. Allied to Lithuan. stipras, strong, stipti, to be
stiff, L. stipes, a stem, trunk of a tree, stipare, to pack tight ; stipulus,
firm. See Stipulation. Der. stiff-ly, -ness, stiff-en (Swed. stifna,
Dan. stivne), Hen. V, iii. 1. 7, stiff-neck-ed, Acts, vii. 51; stif-le.

STIFLE, to suffocate. (Scand.) ‘ Stil, Stifle, suffocare ;’
Levins. ‘Smored [smothered] and stifled ;’ Sir T. More, Works,
p- 68 f.—Icel. stiffa, to dam up, prop. used of water; hence, to
block up, choke; Norweg. stivla, to stop, hem in, check, lit. ‘to
stiffen ;’ cf. sttvra, to stiffen ; both are frequent. forms of st’va (Dan.
stive), to stiffen. [Cf. also ME, stiuen, to stiffen, Will. of Palerne,

3033; Swed. styfva, Du. stijven; G. steifen, to stiffen.] All these
words are derived from the adj. appearing as AS. s¢i/, stiff; the vowel
of which was once long, and is still so in prov. E. Halliwell gives
‘ Stive, strong, muscular, North;’ which is nothing but ME. styue,
an occasional spelling of stiff; see Stiff. The loss of the adj.
‘stiff? in Icel. is remarkable, as it is preserved in Swed., Dan., and
Norwegian; the Olcel. form was s/if, cited by E. Miiller. | We
cannot derive stifle from the verb stive, to pack close, the change
from v to f being contrary to rule; but it is very probable that stifle
has been frequently confused with stive, which, though it properly
means to pack close, came to have much the same sense, as in proy.
E. stivy, close, stifling (Worcestershire). Stive isa F. word, from
OF. estiver<L. stipare, to compress, pack tight, as explained under
Stevedore. Note that E. sti# and L. stipare are closely related
words, from the same root.

STIGMATISBH, to brand with infamy, defame publicly. (F.—
Late L.—Gk.) ‘Stigmatised with a hot iron;’ Burton, Anat. of
Melancholy, p. 470 (R.). [Shak. has stigmatic, naturally deformed,
2 Hen. VI, v. 1. 2153 stigmatical, Com. Errors, iv. 2. 22.]—F. stig-
matiser, in Cotgrave stigmatizer, ‘to brand, burn, or mark with a red
hot iron, to defame publicly.’—Late L. stigmatizére, to mark; see
Higden, ii. 146.— Gk. orvyparicey, to mark or brand. = Gk. oreypar-,
base of oriyya, a prick, mark, brand, From the base o7ty-, as in
otifev (=orTly-yev), to prick. From Idg. 4/STEIGw, to prick;
whence also E. stick; see Stick (1), Der. (from Gk. ortypart-)
stigmat-ic, stigmat-ic-al. We also use now stigma, sb., from Gk.
oriypa.

STILE (1), a step or set of steps for climbing over a fence or
hedge. (E.) ME. stile, style, Chaucer, C. T. 10420 (F 106). AS.
stigel, a stile; Thorpe, Diplomatarium, p. 146, 1.6. Formed with
suffix -e, denoting the means or instrument, from stig-, weak grade
of AS. stigan, to climb, mount. See Sty (1). The AS. stigel first
became séijel, and then stile; so also AS. tigul became mod. E. Zile.
+OHG. stigila, a stile (obsolete), from OHG. stzgan, to climb;
MDnu,. stichel (Hexham). And cf. Shetland stiggy, a stile (Edmons-
ton); from the same root.

STILE (2), the correct spelling of Style, q.v.

STILETTO, a small dagger. (Ital.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627;
Heywood, Eng. Traveller, A.i.sc, 2. = Ital. stiletto, ‘a little poyniard ;”
Florio. Dimin. of stilo, MItal. stillo, now a gnomon, formerly a dagger
(Florio). = L, stilum, acc, of sti/us, a style; see Style (1).

STILL (1), motionless, calm, silent. (E.) ME. stille, Chaucer,
C. T. 11782 (F 1472). AS. stille, still, Grein, ii. 484. Allied to
AS. stillan, verb, to rest, be still, id.; lit. ‘to remain in a stall or
place ;” a sense well shown by the ady. s¢il/=continually. Teut.
type *steljoz ; allied to AS. s¢ellan, to place. From Teut. base *séal-,
as in AS. steal, stel, a place, station, stall; see Stall.4Du. stil,
still, séillen, to be still; stellen, to place, from séal, astall; Dan. stile,
still, hushed, sti/le, to still, also, to set, post, station, put in place,
allied to stald (formerly séa/l), a stall; Swed. stilla, still, sti//a, to
quiet, allied to stall; G. still, still, stillen, to still ; stellen, to place,
from stall. The sense of s¢ill is ‘ brought to a stall or resting-place.’
Der, still, adv., ME. séille, silently, Havelok, 2997, from AS. stille
(Grein); this adverb has preserved the sense of ‘continually’ or
‘abidingly,’ and has come to mean always, ever, as in the strange


604 STILL


compound séill-vexed=always vexed, Temp. i. 2. 229. Also still,
verb, AS. stillan; stil-ly, adj., ME. stillich (=still-like), Layamon,
2374; stil-ly, adv.; still-ness; still-born, 2 Hen. IV, i. 3. 64; siill-
stand, 2 Hen. IV, ii. 3. 643 stand-still.

STILL (2), to distil, to trickle down. (L.; or F.—L.) In some
cases, still represents L. stilare, to fall in drops; as, e. g., in Spenser,
F. Q. iv. 7. 35. Cf. ‘stile hem in a stillatory;’ Medical Works of
the 14th Century, ed. Henslow, p.117. But it is more often a mere
contraction for distil, just as sport is for disport, spend for dispend, and
spite for despite. ‘Thus Tusser writes: ‘The knowledge of stilling is


one pretie feat;’ May’s Husbandry, st. 33; where séilling plainly
Der. s/ill, sb., an apparatus for


stands for distilling. See Distil.
distilling, equivalent to ME. s¢illatorie, in the same sense, Chaucer,
C. T. 16048 (G 580), answering to a Late L.- *stillatdrium, from
stillare. And see di-stil, in-stil.

STILT, a support of wood with a foot-rest, for lengthening the
stride in walking. (Scand.) ME. stilte. ‘ Stylte, calepodium, ligni-
podium ;’ Prompt. Parv.—Swed. stylta, Dan. stylte; cf. Norweg.
stylira, a stilt, Dan. s¢ylte, to walk on stilts, also to stalk, walk slowly.
We also find Swed. dial. sty/t, a prop (Rietz).4+Du. sfel¢, a stilt;
Westphal. stelte; G. stelze, a stilt; OHG. stelza, a prop, a crutch.
B. We may particularly note Lowl. Sc. stult, a crutch; this, like
Swed. szylta, is from the Scand. base stult-, as in Swed. dial. stullta,
to stagger about, S. Swed. stulta, the same (Moller).
this form to have arisen from the addition of -t- to the base stull-, as
seen in Swed. dial. stull-a, stul-a, tostagger about. Cf. OHG. stullan
(pt. t. stul/a), to come to a halt, to stop, allied to OHG. stulla, a
moment (whence Ital. ¢ra-studlo, ‘a pastime, quietnes,’ Florio). From
the weak grade *stull of a lost Teut. strong verb *stlan, pt.t. *stall,
pp. *stullanoz; Grimm, Gram. ii. 57. Prob. the AS. styltan, to be
amazed, hesitate (come to a stand), is closely allied. 5. We can
then explain Du. stelt, G. stelze, as allied to G. gestalt, shape, form,
allied to OHG. stellan, to place, fix, cause to halt (pp. gestalt).
Der. stilt-ed.

STIMULATES, to instigate. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
[The sb. stimulation is in Minsheu, ed. 1627.]—L. stimulatus, pp. of
stimuldre, to prick forward.—L. stimulus, a goad; perhaps for
*stimmulus, for *stig-mulus; and formed with suffixes -mu-lo-, from
*stig-, weak grade of 4/STEIGw, to stick, to prick; see Stick (1).
Der. stimulat-ion, from F. stimulation, ‘a pricking forward,’ Cot. ;
stimulat-ive; stimulant, from L. stimulant-, base of pres. part. of
stimulare. We also now use L, stimulus as an E. word.

STING, to prick severely, pain acutely. (E.) ME. stingen, strong
verb; pt. t. stang’, stong; pp. stungen, stongen, Chaucer, C. T. 1081
(A 1079). AS. stingan, pt. t. stang, pp. stungen; Grein, ii. 484.4
Dan. stinge ; Swed. stinga; Icel. stinga, pt. t. stakk (for *stang), pp.
stunginn. Cf. Goth, ws-stiggan (for us-stingan), to push out, put out,
Matt. v.29. Teut. type *stengan-, pt. t.*stang, pp. *stunganoz. Per-
haps allied, ultimately, to Stick (1); cf. prov. E. stang, a pole,
with E. stake. SeeStang, Stake. Der. sting, sb., AS., Dan., and
Swed. sting. Also sting-y, q.v.

STING Y, mean, avaricious. (E.) Pronounced (stinji). ‘ Stingy,
niggardly;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘A stingy, narrow-hearted fellow ;’
L’Estrange (Todd). It is the same word as prov. E, stingy [pro-
nounced stizji], common in Norfolk in the sense of ‘nipping, un-
kindly,’ and esp. used of a cold East wind. Forby defines it: (1)
‘cross, ill-humoured, (2) churlish, biting, as applied to the state of
the air. See Stingy in Ray’s Glossary (E. D.S. B. 16), and my notes
upon it, esp. at p. xix; see also E.D.D. It is merely the adj.
formed from sting, sb., by the addition of -y, and means (1) stinging,
keen, (2) churlish; by an easy transition of sense, which is exactly
parallelled by the Swed. sticken, pettish, waspish, fretful, from sticka,
to sting. Cf. MDan, stinge, adj., contrary to. B. The sounding of
8 as j causes no difficulty, as it is still common in Wiltshire, where
a bee’s sting is called a stinge [stinj]; cf. also Shropsh. stinge, a
grudge; as ‘I ow’d him a stinge.’ See Sting. Der. stingi-ly,
~nNeSS.

_ STINK, to smell strongly. (E.) ME. stinken, strong verb; ptt.
‘stank, stonk; Chaucer, C. T. 14535 (B 3807); pp. stonken, AS.
‘stincan, pt. t. stanc, stonc, pp. stuncen, Grein, ii. 484. This verb not
only means to stink, or to be fragrant, but has the singular sense of
to rise as dust or vapour. ‘ Dust stone to heofonum’ = dust rose up
to heaven.4-Du. stinken ; Icel. stokkva, pt.t. stokk (for *sténk), pp.
stokkinn (for *stonkinn), to spring up, take to flight; the pp. stokkinn
means bedabbled, sprinkled; Dan. stinke; Swed. stinka; G. stinken.
Cf. Goth. stiggkwan (=*stingkwan), to strike, smite, thrust; whence
bistugghw, a cause of offence, 2 Cor. vi. 3. The form of the Teut.
base is *stengg. Possibly allied to L. -stinguere, as in ex(s)tinguere,
to thrust out; and if so, allied further to 4/STEIGw, to pierce, as in
L. in-stig-are, to instigate. 4 There are difficulties as to the sense;
and it is not certain that the Icel. and Goth. forms belong here. If


y. I suppose |


STITH


As to the possible


not, then the connexion with L. -stinguere fails.
Der. stink, sb.,


connexion with Gk. ta-yyés, rancid, see Prellwitz.
stink-pot ; also stench, q.v.

STINT, to limit, restrain. (E.) Properly ‘to shorten,’ or ‘ curtail.’
ME. séinten, stynten, gen, in the sense to stop, cause to cease, P. Plow-
man, B. i. 120; also, intransitively, to pause, id. v. 585. Allied to
ME. stenten, to cease, Chaucer, C. ‘T. 905 (A 903). AS. styntan, to
make dull, Voc. 25. 28; for-styntan (=L. contundere), in a gloss
(Bosworth). [Also gestentan, to warn, perhaps to restrain, A‘lfric’s
Homilies, i. 6, 1. 24.] The proper sense is rather ‘ to make dull,’ as
it is a causal verb, formed (by vowel-change from to y) from the
adj. stunt, dull, obtuse, stupid, Matt. v. 22; cf. stuntscipe, folly,
Mark, vii. 22.4-Icel. stytéa (by assimilation for *stynta), to shorten,
from the adj. stuttr (for *stuntr), short, stunted ; Swed. dial. stynta,
to shorten, from stunt, small, short (Rietz) ; Norweg. stytia, stutta,
to shorten, tuck up the clothes, from sfutt, small, short (Aasen) 5 cf.
Dan. dial. stynte, to crop. . The E. word comes nearer to the
sense of the Icel. word; the AS. stunt is used metaphorically, in the
sense of ‘short of wit.’ However, fo stint is certainly formed from
Stunt by vowel-change; see further under Stunted.

STIPEND, a salary, settled pay. (L.) ‘ Yearly stipendes;’ Ascham,
Toxophilus, b. ii. ed. Arber, p. 130.—L. stipendium, a tax, impost,
tribute, stipend. For *stip-pendium or *stipi-pendium, a payment of
money ; from séip- or stipi-, base of s¢ips, small coin or a contribution
in small coin, and -pendium, a payment, from pendere, to weigh ont,
to pay. For pendere, see Pendant. Der. stipendi-ar-y, from L.
stipendiarius, receiving pay.

STIPPLE, to engrave by means of dots. (Du.) Added by Todd
to Johnson’s Dict. he calls it a modern term in art.=— Du. stippelen,
to speckle, cover with dots. —Du. stippel, a speckle, dimin. of stip, a
point. Hexham gives stip, stup, or stippelken, ‘a point, or a small
point;’ also stippen, ‘to point, or to fixe 3? stippen or sticken met de
naelde, ‘to stitch with the needle,’ stip-naelde, ‘a stitching-needle.’
Allied to Low G, stippelen, to drip as raindrops (Danneil); stippen,
to speckle; G. steppen, to stitch, G. stift, a peg, pin.

STIPULATION, a contract, agreement. (F.—L.) In Minsheu,
ed. 1627. [The verb éo stipulate is prob. later, but is used by Cot-
grave to translate F. s/ipuler.|—F. stipulation, ‘a stipulation, a cove-
nant ;’ Cot.=—L. stipulationem, acc. of stipulatio, a covenant, bargain.
=L. stipulari, to settle an agreement, bargain; lit. to make fast. —
OL. stipulus, fast, firm; ‘ stipulum apud ueteres firmum appella-
batur,”’ Justiniani Institutiones, iii. 15 (Lewis). Allied to stipes, a
post; and to E. Stiff. Der. (from L. stipulatus, pp. of stipular?)
stipulate, verb. ts The story about stipula, a straw, noticed in
Trench, Study of Words, is needless; stipulate simply keeps the sense
of the root. It may be noted that L. stipula=E. stubble.

STIR, to rouse, instigate, move about. (E.) ME. stiren, sturen
(and even steren, but properly always with one r), Chaucer, C. T,.
12280, 16746 (C 346, G1278). AS. styrian, to move, to stir, Gen.
vii. 21, ix. 3; Grein, ii. 491. [Various forms are given in Ettmiller,
which seem to have been altered and accented in order to bring the
word into connexion with steer; but its true connexion is rather
with storm. Grein keeps styrian, to stir, and styran, stieran, to
steer, quite distinct.] Allied to Icel. styrr, a stir, disturbance, Du.
storen, to disturb, interrupt, vex, Swed. stéra, G. stéren, to disturb,
OHG, steren, stdren, to scatter, destroy, disturb, Tent. types
*sturjan-, *staurjan- (Franck). See Storm. Der. stur-geon; and
see stor-m.

STIRK, dimin. of Steer (1), q.v.

STIRRUP, a ring or hoop suspended from a saddle. (E.) For
sty-rope, i.e. a rope to climb by; the orig. stirrup was a looped rope
for mounting into the saddle. Spelt styrop in Palsgrave. ME. stirop,
Chaucer, C. T. 7247 (D 1665). AS. stirap. ‘Scansile, stirap;’
Voc. 120. 2; fuller form stigrap, id. 332. 11.—AS. stig-, weak
grade of stigan, to climb, mount; and rap,a rope. See Stile (1)
or Sty (1), and Rope.+-MDnu. stegel-reep, or steegh-reep, ‘a stir-
rope-leather,’ Hexham. [This is another use of the word ; that
which we xow call¢ stirrup is called in Du. stijbeugel, i.e. ‘ the little
bow or loop whereby to mount.’] Similarly formed from Du.
stijgen, to mount, and reep,a rope. Also Icel. stig-reip, from stiga
and reip; G. stegreif, a stirrup, from steigen and reif; cf. steigbugel,
a stirrup.

STITCH, a pain in the side, a passing through stuff of a needle
and thread. (E.) The sense of ‘pain in the side,’ lit. pricking
sensation,’ is old. ME. stiche. ‘ Styche, peyne on pe syde ;’ Prompt.
Parv. AS. stice, a pricking sensation; A.S. Leechdoms, i. 370.
§ 10.— AS. stician,to prick, pierce ; see Stick (1). So also G. stich,
a prick, stitch, from stechen, to prick ; also sticken, to stitch, from the
same. Der. stitch, verb; also stich-wort, a herb good for the stitch,
spelt stichworte in Palsgrave ; stitch-er, stilch-er-y, Cor. i. 3.75. — *

STITH, an anvil. (Scand.) ‘ Vulcan’s sith ;’ Hamlet, iii, 2. 89;


ae


STIVER ©


some edd. have stithy. ME. stith, Chaucer, C. T. 2028 (A 2026);
Havelok, 1877.—Icel. stedi, an anvil. Allied to stadr, a place,
i.e. fixed stead ; and so named from its firmness.4-Swed. stad, an
anvil; MDu. sfiet. From the same root as Stead, q.v. Der.
stith-y, also used with the sense of anvil, like ME. stethi, Cursor
Mundi, 23237.

STIVER, a Dutch penny. (Du.) In Evelyn’s Diary, Oct. 2, 1641.
Also in Arber’s Eng. Garner, iii. 404 (ab. 1594).— Du. stuiver, for-
merly stuyver, ‘a stiver, a Low-Countrie peece of coine, of the value
of an English penny ;’? Hexham. B. Hence G. stiiber, a stiver.
Perhaps the orig. sense was ‘ bit’ orsmall piece. Franck connects it
with Low G, stuuf, stumpy ; Icel. stafr, a stump, st7fa, to cut off.

STOAT, an animal of the weasel kind. (E.) ‘Stoat, a stallion-
horse, also, a kind of rat;’ Bailey’s Dict., vol. i. ed. 1735. Spelt
stote, Phillips, 1706; Levins, 1570. Cf. prov. E. stoot (Suffolk) ;
stot (Hants.), a weasel (E. D.D.) ; also sfof, stote, a young bull,
a young horse (E. D.D.). ME. stot; in the Coventry Mysteries,
ed. Halliwell, p. 218, 1. 14, a scribe says to the woman taken in
adultery : ‘ Therfore come forthe, thou stynkynge sfott;’ and in 1. 19:
‘To save suche sfotiys, it xal [shall] not be.’ Here the sense is
probably stoat. The ME. stof means (1) a stoat, (2) a horse or
stallion, (3) a bullock; see Chaucer, C. T. 617 (A 615); and my
note to P. Plowman, C. xxii. 267. The reason is that the word is
a general name for a male animal, and not confined to any one
kind ; the word stag is in the same case, meaning a hart, a gander,
and a drake; see Stag. The pl. s/oftes, stallions, occurs in the Owl
and Nightingale, 495; AS. stottas, ‘equi uiles’ (Napier). Allied to
Icel. stuitr, a bull; Swed. stut, a bull, also a hard blow with a rod;
Dan. stud, a bullock; Swed. dial. stu¢, (1) a young ox, (2) a young
man; Norweg. stut, (1) a bullock, (2) an ox-horn. From *stut-;
weak grade allied to Teut. *stautan-, to push, strike. Cf, Du.
stootex, to push, thrust, whence Du. sfooter, sb., a thruster, also
a stallion, stootig, adj., butting, goring; Swed. sfofa, to push, Dan.
stode, G. stossen (strong verb), Goth. stawtan, to strike. See
Stutter.

STOCCADO, STOCCATA, a thrust in fencing. (Ital. — Teut.)
Stoccado, Merry Wives, ii. 1. 234. Stoccata, Romeo, iii. 1. 77. Stoc-
cado is an accommodated form, prob. from MF. estoccade, with the
same sense, with a final o to imitate Spanish ; cf. Shakespeare’s barri-
cado with E. barricade. {The true Span. form was estocada, ‘a stocada
or thrust with a weapon ;” Minsheu.] Stoccata is the better form. =
Ital. stoccata, ‘ a foyne, a thrust, a stoccado given in fence;’ Florio.
Formed as if from a fem. pp. of a verb *stoceare, which is made
from the sb. stocco, ‘a truncheon, a tuck, a short sword, an arming
sword;’ Florio.—G. stock, a stick, staff, trunk, stump; cognate
with E. Stock, q.v. And see Stoke. Cf. MDu. stock, ‘a stock-
rapier ;’ Hexham.

STOCK, a post, stump, stem, &c. (E.) In all its senses, it is the
same word. The sense is ‘a stump;’ hence a post, trunk, stem
(metaphorically a race or family), a fixed store or fund, capital,
cattle, trunk or butt-end of a gun; the pl. stocks signify a place
where a criminal is set fast, or a frame for holding ships fast, or
public capital. See Trench, Study of Words, which partly follows
Horne Tooke’s Diversions of Purley, pt. ii. c. 4. ME. stok, trunk of
a tree, Pricke of Conscience, 676; pl. stokkes, the stocks, P. Plowman,
B. iv. 108. AS, stoce, a post, trunk; Deut. xxviii. 36, 64.-4-Du.
stok, stick, handle, stocks; MDu. stock ; whence MDu. stockduyue,
a stock-dove, stockvisch, stock-fish; stockroose, ‘a rose so called
beyond the sea,’ i.e. stocks; Hexham; Icel, stokkr, trunk, log,
stocks, stocks for ships; Dan. stok, a stick; Swed. stock, a beam,
log; G. stock; OHG. stock, Teut. type *stukkoz, m. The orig.
sense may have been ‘ stump of a cut tree;’ cf. AS. stycce, G, stick,
a bit, fragment ; also Low G. stuke, a stump, Norw. stavka, tostrike,
hack. Some connect it with Skt. uj, to strike; just as Icel. stazfa,
to push, is allied to Skt. ud, to strike. Der. stock, verb, ME.
stokken, Chaucer, Troilus, b. iii. 1. 3803 stock-broker 3 stock-dove,
Skelton, Philip Sparowe, 1. 429; stock-exchange, stock-holder, stock-
jobbing ; stock-fisk (prob. from Du. stokvisch), Prompt, Parv., and
Temp. iii. 2. 793; stock-ish, i.e. log-like, Merch, Ven: v. 81 ; stock-
still, i.e. still as a post (cf MDu. stock-stille, ‘ stone-still, or im-
moveable,’ Hexham) ; stock, a flower, called stocke-gyllofer (stock-
gilliflower) in Palsgrave ; stock-ing, q.v., stoke, q.v. Also stocc-ado,
stocceata. ,

STOCKADBE, a breast-work formed of stakes stuck in the ground.
(Span.—Teut.) A modern word ; it occurs in Mason’s Eng. Garden,
b. ii, 1. 293, spelt stoceade (A.D. 1777). The pl. stockadoes occurs
ab. 1602; see Arber, Eng. Garner, vii, 175. A mistaken form, due
to association with stock.—Span. estacada, ‘a place palisadoed, or
hemm/’d in with stakes;’ see Don Quixote, pt. ii. c. 66 (Pineda). =
Span. estaca, a stake. MDu. stake, a stake ; see Stake. See Notes
on E, Etym. p. 283.


STOOL 605


STOCKING, a close covering for the foot and leg. (E.) ‘A
stocking, or paire of stockings ;’? Minsheu, ed.1627. Formerly called
stocks ; ‘ Our knit silke stockes, and Spanish lether shoes ;’ Gascoigne,
Stele Glas, 1. 375. ‘He rose to draw on his strait stocking's, and, as
the deuill would, he hit vpon the letter, bare it away in the heele of
his stocke,’ &c. ; Holinshed, Chron. of Ireland, an. 1532 (R.). ‘Un
bas de chausses, a stocking, or nether-stock 3’ Cot. Healsohas: ‘ Un
bas de manches, a half-sleeve ;? which we may compare with ‘ Manche
Lombarde, a stock-sleeve, or fashion of halfe sleeve ;’ id. B. ‘ The
clothing of the legs and lower part of the body formerly consisted of
a single garment, called hose, in F. chausses. It was afterwards cut
in two at the knees, leaving two pieces of dress, viz. knee-breeches,
or, as they were then called, upper-stocks, or in F. haut de chausses,
and the zetherstocks or stockings, in F. bas de chausses, and then
simply bas. In these terms, the element stock is to be understood in
the sense of stump or trunk, the part of a body left when the limbs
are cut off. In the same way G. strumpf, a stocking, properly sig-
nifies a stump ;’ Wedgwood. Similarly, a sfock-sleeve is a truncated
sleeve, a half-sleeve. y. To this I may add that stock-ing is a
dimin, form; the ether-stock being the smaller portion of the cut
hose; it was sometimes called stock simply, but also nether-stock or
stock-ing (=little stock) ; and the last name has alone survived. See
Stock.

STOIC, a disciple of Zeno. (L.—Gk.) Spelt Stoick, Milton,
P. R. iv. 280; cf. Stoa, id. 253. From L. Stoicus.—Gk. Srwixés,
a Stoic; lit. belonging to a colonnade, because Zeno taught under
a colonnade at Athens, named the Peecilé (mo«idn).—Gk. o7od
(Ionic ovod, Attic orwa), a colonnade, place enclosed by pillars.
The Ionic oroa is for *orof-ya; allied to ord-Aos, a pillar. See
Style (2). Der. stoic-al, stoic-al-ly, stoic-ism.

STOKER, one who tends a fire. (Du.) We have now coined
the verb to stoke, but only the sb. appears in Phillips, Bailey, &c.
‘ Stoaker, one that looks after a fire and some other concerns in a
brew-house ;” Phillips, ed. 1706, The word is Dutch, and came in
asa term in brewing. Du. stoker, ‘a kindler, or a setter on fire ;’
Hexham. = Du, stoken, ‘to make or kindle a fire, to instigate, or to
stirre up;’ id. [This is the same word as OF. estoguer, ME. stoken,
to stab; see Chaucer, C. T., Group A, 2546 (Six-text), altered in
Tyrwhitt to stike, 1. 2548.] Allied to MDnu. stock, a stick, stock,
also a stock-rapier (stabbing rapier); no doubt from the use by the
stoker of a stock (thick stick) to stir the fire with and arrange the
logs. The MDnu. stock (Du. stok) is cognate with E. Stock, q.v.
Der. stoke, in the mod. sense (as distinct from ME. stoken, to stab,
which is from OF. estoquer).

STOLE, a long robe, a long scarf for a priest. (L.—Gk.) In
very early use. AS. stole; ‘Stola, stole;’ Voc. 327. 23.—L. stola.
= Gk. o7oA7, equipment, a robe, a stole. Gk. oroA-, 2nd grade of
oréAAe, to equip, lit. to set in order.

STOLID, dull, heavy, stupid. (L.) A late word. ‘Solid,
foolish;’? Bailey, vol. i. ed. 1735.—L. stolidus, firm, stock-like ;
hence, dull, stupid. Prob. allied to L. stul-tus, foolish; see
Stultify. And see Stout. Der. séolid-i-ty, coined from L.
stoliditas,

STOMACH, a more or less sac-like portion of the body, wherein
food is digested. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. stomak, Prompt. Parv. [Now
accommodated to the Gk. spelling.]=F. estomac, spelt estomach in
Cotgrave. = L. stomachum, acc. of stomachus. = Gk. orépaxos, a mouth,
opening, the gullet, the stomach; dimin. of o7rdyua, the mouth.
Brugmann, i. § 421 (5). Der. stomach, verb, to resent, Antony, iii.
4. 12; from the use of stomach in the sense of anger, 1 Hen. VI, iv.
I. 141 ; stomach-er, an ornament for the breast, Wint. Tale, iv. 4. 226 ;
Paston Letters, iii. 325 ; stomach-ic.

STONG, a hard mass of mineral matter, piece of rock, a gem.
(E.) ME. ston, stoon, Chaucer, C. T. 7997 (E 121). AS. staz
(common); the change from @ to long o is usual, as in bau, a bone,
bar, a boar.4+Du. steex; Icel. steinn; Dan. and Swed. stex; G.
stein; Goth. stains. B. All from Teut. type *stainoz, m. Cf.
Russ, stiena, a wall; Gk. oria, a stone, pebble. Curtius, i. 264.
Der, stone, verb; stone-blind, as blind as a stone; sfome-bow, used for
shooting stones, Tw. Nt. ii. 5. 513 stone-chat, a chattering bird ;
stone-crop, Baret (1580), ME. ston-croppe, Voc. 712. 353 stone-cutter,
K. Lear, ii. 2. 633 stone-fruit 3 stone-still, K. John, iv. 1. 77 ; stone-
ware; stone’s cast or stone’s throw, the distance to which a stone can
be cast or thrown; ston-y, AS. stanig; ston-y-heart-ed, 1 Hen. IV,
li. 2. 28. Also stan-iel, q. v.

STOOK, a number of corn-sheaves;. usually twelve. (Scand.)
Also stouk, in Proy. E.; see E. D. D. Spelt stowke in Cathol.
Anglicum (1483) ; q.v.—Swed. dial. stuke, a shock of sheaves; Dan.
dial. stuke (Kok).4-Low G. stuke, a heap, a shock. Allied to E.
Stake, Stock, q.v. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 284.

STOOL, a seat without a back. (E.) ME. stoo/, Prompt. Parv. ;


STOOP


dat. stole, P. Plowman, B. v. 394. AS. stél, a seat, a throne ; Grein,
ii. 485.4-Du. stoel, a chair, seat, stool; Icel. stall; Dan. and Swed.
stol, a chair; Goth. stdls, a seat; G. stukl, OHG. _stuol, stual.
Teut. type *s¢dloz,m. Teut. d=Idg. a. From4/STA, to stand,
stand firm, Brugmann, i. § 191; Streitberg, § 153 (5). Cf.
Stow, Stand. Der. stool-ball, a game played witha ball and one
or two stools, Two Noble Kinsmen, v. 2; see stool-ball in Halliwell.

STOOP (1), to bend the body, lean forward, condescend. (E.)
ME. stoupen, Wyclif, John, xx. 5. AS. stupian, Ailfred, tr. of
Orosius, b. vi. c. 24. § 1.44+MDu. stuypen, ‘to bowe;’ Hexham;
Icel. stupa (obsolete) ; Swed. stupa, to fall, to tilt; cf. stupande,
sloping, stupning, a leaning forward. B. From a Teut. base
*stip, apparently meaning to lean forward; see steep (1) and
steep (2), the latter of which is the causal of stoop. And perhaps
the step- in step-child is from the same root. Der. steep (1);
steep (2).

STOOP (2), a beaker; see Stoup. 4

STOP, to obstruct, hinder, restrain, intercept, tocease. (L.) ME.
stoppen, Ancren Riwle, p. 72,1. 19. AS. stoppian, in the comp. for-
stoppian, to stopup; A. S. Leechdoms, ii. 42. Soalso Du. stoppen, to
fill, stuff, stop; Swed. stoppa, to fill, stuff, cram, stopup; Dan. stoppe,
to fill, stuff, cram, &c.; G. stopfen; OSax. stuppon, Ps. 57. 5. Not
a Teut. word, but the same as Ital. stoppare, to stop up with tow,
Late L. stuppare, to stop up with tow, also used in the general sense
of cram, stop. . All from L. stupa, stuppa, the coarse part of flax,
hards, oakum, tow; cognate with Gk. orimn, orimmn, with the same
sense. Hence also E. Stuff. Der. stop, sb., K. John, iv. 2. 239;
stop-cock; stopp-age (with F. suffix), stopp-er; also stopp-le, ME.
stoppel, Prompt. Pary. (with E. suffix, signifying the instrument).
Doublets, estop, to impede, bar, a law term, borrowed from AF.
estoper (mod. F. étouper), from Late L. stuppare, as above; also stuff,
verb.

STORAX, a resinous gum. (L.—Gk.) In Holland, tr. of Pliny,
b. xii. c. 25, heading. = L. storax, styrax.— Gk. orvpag, a sweet-smell-
ing gum produced by the tree called crvpag ; Herodotus, iii. 107.
STORE, provision, abundance, stock. (F.—L.) ME. stor, sfoor,
Chaucer, C. T. 600 (A 598); Rob. of Glouc. p. 395, 1. 8138; the de-
tived verb storen occurs as early asin Layamon, 1. 13412, later text.
‘ Stoor, or purvyaunce, Staurum;’ Prompt. Parv.—OF. estor, store,
provisions (Godefroy).—Late L. staurum, the same as instaurum,
store, = L. instaurare, to construct, build, restore, renew; Late L.
instaurare, to provide necessaries. Cf. OF. estorer, ‘to build, make,
edifie; also to store; ’ Cot.—L.in, prep. as prefix; and *staurdre, to
set up, place, found also in the comp. restaurare,to restore. B. This
form *staurare, orig. ‘to erect,’ is due to a lost adj. *staurus, allied
to Skt. sthavara-s, fixed, stable, and Gk. oravpés, an upright pole
or stake, orig. ‘upright.? See Steer (2). Brugmann, i. § 198.
Der. store, verb, ME. storen, OF. estorer, as above; stor-age, with
ee -age<L. -aticum; store-house; also re-store, q.v.3; stor-y

2), q.v-

STORK, a wading bird. (E.) ME. stork, Chaucer, Parl. of
Foules, 361. AS. storc, Voc. 13. 7.4-Du. stork ; Icel. storkr; Dan.
and Swed. stork; G. storch, OHG. storah, stork. B. Root uncertain ;
but almost certainly the same word as Gk. rdpyos, a large bird (vul-
ture, swan); Fick, iii. 346; which Fick considers as allied to E.
stark, as if the orig. sense were ‘the strong one.’ Cf. Pers. suturg,
large. See Stark. Der. stork’s-bill, a kind of geranium, from the
shape of the fruit.

STORM, a violent commotion, tempest. (E.) ME. storm,
Chaucer, C. T. 1982 (A 1980). AS. storm, Grein, ii. 485.--Icel.
stormr; Du., Swed., Dan., storm; G. sturm. Teut. type *stur-moz,
m. Allied to Stir, q.v. We also find Gael. and Irish stoirm, Bret.
stourm, a storm (borrowed forms). Der. storm, verb, AS. styrman,
with vowel-change; storm-y, storm-i-ness.

STORY (1), a history, narrative. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. storie,
Chaucer, C. T. 1203, 15503 (A 1201,G 35); Havelok, 1641; Ancren
Riwle, p. 154, 1. 24.—AF. storie (Bartsch) ; OF. estoire, a history, a
tale; F. histoire, history.—L. historia.— Gk. isropia, history; see
History. Der. stori-ed, i.e. painted with stories, representing tales,
Milton, Il Pens. 159; cf. MF. historié, ‘ beautified with story-work,’
Cot. Doublet, history.

STORY (2), the height of one floor in a building, a set of rooms
at one level. (F.—L.) Bacon, in his Essay 45 (On Building), speaks
of ‘ the first story,’ ‘the under story,’ ‘the second story,” &c. ‘A
floure [floor] or stuorie;’ R. Eden, First Three Books on America
(1526); ed. Arber, p. 257. In Rob. of Gloucester, p. 181, 1. 3756
(footnote), the word storys seems to mean ‘ buildings;’ but other
MSS. have a verb here. Orig. ‘a thing built; it represents OF.
estorée,a thing built. ‘ Estorée, built, made, erected, edified; also
furnished, stored;’ Cot. This is the pp. of estorer, to build,
to store ; see Store. @ Wedgwood adds; ‘I cannot find that


606


STRAIGHT


estorée was ever used in the sense of E. story.’ This is prob. right;
the sense in E. seems to have been at first simply a thing built,
a building ; the restriction of the word to one floor only is peculiar to
English. Just in the same way, a floor is properly only a boarded
(or other) covering of the ground, but was used, by an easy extension
of meaning, as synonymous with story. Cf. Picard chambre étorée,
a furnished room (Corblet). There can be little doubt as to the
derivation. Der. clear-story or clere-story, Skelton, Garland of
Laurel, 479, a story lighted with windows, as distinct from the blind-
story, as the triforium was sometimes called (Lee, Gloss. of Litur-
gical Terms (Oxford), Glossary, p. 57).

STOT, (1) a stallion; (2) a bullock. (E.) See Stoat.

STOUP, STOOP, a vessel or flagon. (Scand.) In Hamlet, y. 1.
68. ME. stope. ‘Hec cupa, a stope;’ Voc. 728. 28. Lowl. Sc.
stowp, Dunbar, ed. Small, p. 161.—Icel. staup, a knobby lump, also
a stoup, beaker, cup.-+- Du. stoop ; Low G. stoop; AS. stéap, a beaker,
cup; MHG. stou/, G. stawf, a cup. [Or else, from the MDnu. stoop. |
The Teut. base is *staup-; cf. Icel. steypa, to cast metals, pour out,
&c. See Steep (1) and Stoop. @ The Latinised form stopa
occurs in 1390, in the Earl of Derby’s Accounts (Camden Soc.),
p- 9, 1. 23. This looks more like the Du. form. For the form
stoop, cf. E. loose<Icel. laus.

STOUT, bold, strong, robust. (F.—OLow G.) ME. stout,
Chaucer, C. T. 547 (A 545).—OF. estouz, stout, furious, also rash,
stupid (Burguy).—MDu. stolt, stout, ‘stout, bolde, rash; ’ Hexham.
Low G. stolt, the same ; cognate with G. stolz, proud. B. Perhaps
a Teut. word; or else early borrowed from L. stultus, foolish. It
answers better, in sense, to L. stolidus, firm. Der. stout, sb., a strong
kind of beer; stout-ly, -ness.

STOVE, a hot-house, an apparatus for warming a room. (E.) |
‘This word has much narrowed its meaning; [a] bath, hot-house . .
was a stove once;”’ Trench, Select Glossary. ‘A stoue, or hot-
house ;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627. AS. stofa; ‘ Balneum, stofa,’ Voc. 8. 33.
+MDnu. stove, ‘ a stewe, a hot-house, ora baine;’ Hexham; Low G.
stove, stave, the same; Icel. stofa, stufa, a bathing-room with a stove,
aroom; G, stube,a room; OHG. stupa, a heated room. B. Root
unknown; supposed to be a Teut. word, but even this is doubtful.
Cf. Ital. stufa, Span. estufa, F. étuve. See Stew. 4 Perhaps lost
in ME., and re-introduced from Dutch.

STOVER, fodder for cattle. (F.-L.?) In Shak. Temp. iv. 63.
ME. stouer (with v=), Seven Sages, ed. Weber, 2606. —OF-. estover,
estovoir, necessaries, provisions ; orig. the infin. mood of a verb which
was used impersonally with the sense ‘it is necessary;’ Burguy,
Diez. On the difficult etymology see Diez, who refers it to L. studére,
to study, endeavour, desire; see Student. Or perhaps from L. esé¢
opus, there is need (‘Tobler).

STOW, to arrange, pack away. (E.) ME. stowen, Allit. Poems,
B113. Lit. ‘to put in a place;’ cf. ME. stowe, a place, Layamon,
1174. AS. stdwigan, Voc. 43.12. From AS. stow, a place, Mark, i.
45; OFries. sto, a place. We also find Icel. std, in the comp. eldsto,
a fire-place, hearth. Cognate with Lithuan. stowa, the place in which
one stands; from s¢ézi, to stand. B. All from the ./STA, to
stand; see Stand. Der. stow-age, with F. suffix, Cymb. i. 6. 192 ;
whence Low L. stowagium, Earl of Derby’s Accounts (1394) ; Cam-
den Soc. p. 155, 1. 32. Also be-stow, q. v.

STRADDLE, to stand or walk with the legs wide apart. (E.)
In Baret, ed. 1580. Spelt striddil and stridle in Levins, ed. 1570.
The frequentative of stride, used in place of striddle. See Stride,
Cf. prov. E. striddle, to straddle ; Halliwell.

STRAGGLE, to stray, ramble away. (Scand.) Formerly stragle,
with one g, Chapman, tr. of Homer, Iliad, b. x. 1.158; and in Min-
sheu, ed. 1627; and in Baret (1580), Palsgrave has stragler, sb.
Cf. Norw. stragla, to walk unsteadily and with difficulty ; frequent.
of MDan. strage, to rove, wander. Allied to strackle; cf. prov. E.
strackling, a loose wild fellow (North) ; strackle-brained, dissolute,
thoughtless ; Halliwell. Apparently the frequentative of ME. stra-
ken, to go, proceed, roam ; ‘ pey ouer lond strakch” = they roam over
the land; P, Plowman’s Creed, 1. 82; and ef. Cursor Mundi, 1. 1845,
Trin. MS. ‘To strake about, circumire;’ MS. Devonsh. Gloss.,
cited in Halliwell. Cf.also prov, E. strag, a vagabond; Icel. strakr,
a vagabond. @ Not allied to stray. Der. straggl-er,

STRAIGHT, direct, upright. (E.) Spelt strayght in Palsgrave.
It is identical with ME. s¢rei3t, the pp. of strecchen, to stretch. ‘ Sithe
thi flesche, lord, was furst perceyued And, for oure sake, laide strei3t
in stalle;’ Political, Religious, and Love Poems, ed. Furnivall, p, 252,
1. 46. AS. streht, pp. of streccan, to stretch; see Stretch. 2. The
adverbial use is early ; ‘ William strei3¢ went hem to ;’ Will. of
Palerne, 1. 3328; spelt straght, Gower, C. A. iii. 36; bk. vi, 1030.
Der, straight-ly, straight-ness ; straight-forward, -ly; straight-way=
in a straight way, directly, spelt streightway, Spenser, F,Q. i, 10, 63;
straight-en, verb, a late coinage. tar Distinct from strait,


STRAIN


STRAIN (1), to stretch tight, draw with force, overtask, constrain,
filter, (F,—L.) ME, streinen, Chaucer, C. T. 9627 (E 1753).—OF.
estraign-, estreign-, a stem of estraindre, estreindre, MF. estraindre,
‘to straine, wring hard;’ Cot.—L, stringere, to draw tight; pt. t.
strinxi, pp. strictus, See Stringent. Der. strain, sb., strain-er ;
con-strain, di-strain, re-strain; and see strait, stringent, strict.

STRAIN (32), a race, stock, breed. (E.) ‘The noblest of thy
strain;’ Shak, J. Cesar, v.1. 59. ME. streen; Chaucer, C. T.,
E157. AS. stréon, gain, product, whence, in ME., lineage, progeny,
asin Layamon, 2737; whence strtenan, strynan, to beget, Cf. OHG.
striunan, to acquire.

STRAIT, strict, narrow, rigid, (F.—L.) ME. streit, Chaucer, C, T.
1743; Layamon, 22270.—Al. estreit, Bozon, p. 1243 OF. estroict,
‘strait, narrow, close, strict;’ Cot. Mod. F. étroit.—L. strictum,
ace. of strictus, strict, strait. See Strict. Der. strait, sb., used to
translate MF, estroict, sb., in Cotgrave; strait-ly, -ness; strait-laced ;
strait-en, a coined word, Luke, xii. 50, Doublet, strict,

STRAND (1), the beach of the sea or of a lake. (E.) ME.
strand, often strond, Chaucer, C. T. 5245 (B 825). AS. strand,
Matt, xiii, 48.4-Du, strand; Icel. strond (gen, strandar), margin,
edge; Dan., Swed., and G, strand. Root unknown. Der. strand,
verb; cf. Du. stranden, ‘to arrive on the sea-shoare,’ Hexham.
STRAND (2), one of the smaller strings that compose a rope.
(F.—OHG.,) ‘ Strand, in sea-language, the twist of arope;° Phillips,
ed, 1706, The d is excrescent, as commonly in E, after x final.
Spelt strain, Hakluyt, Voy. iii, 108.—ONorman F. estran, a strand ;
Wace, Rom. de Brut, 11486; see Moisy.—OHG. streno (G. strihne),
acord, Cf. MDu. strene, a string (Kilian); Du. streen, ‘a skain,’
Sewel. Parallel to Du. striem, OHG, strimo, a stripe.
STRANGE, foreign, odd. (F.—L.) ME. strange, Rob. of Glouc.
p. 16, 1. 379; Chaucer, C. T. 1. 13. OF. estrange, ‘strange ;” Cot.
[Mod. F. étrange; Span. extratio, Ital. estranio, estraneo.|)—L. ex-
trainenm, acc. of extrdneus, foreign; lit. ‘that which is without.’ =
L. extrd, without, outside; see Extra. Der. strange-ly, -ness ;
strang-er, from OF, estrangier, ‘a stranger,’ Cot. Also estrange, q.v.
Doublet, extraneous,

STRANGLE, to choke. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME, stranglen, Have-
lok, 640. — OF .estrangler, ‘to strangle, choake ;’ Cot. = L. strangulare,
to throttle, choke.—Gk. orpayyaddav, to strangle; also o7pay-
yadlCav,— Gk, orpayyadn, a halter. —Gk. orpayyds, twisted. Allied
to Strict ; and see below. Der. strangl-er ; strangulat-ion, from F.
strangulation, ‘a strangling,’ Cot., from L. acc. strangulationem.

STRANGURY, extreme difficulty in discharging urine. (L.

—Gk.) In Ben Jonson, The Fox, A, ii. sc. 1.—L. strangiiria. = Gk.
orpayyoupia, retention of the urine, when it falls by drops. —Gk.
orpayy-, base of arpayf, that which oozes out, a drop; and odp-or,
urine, The Gk. orpayé is allied to orpayyds, twisted, compressed.
See Strangle and Urine,

STRAP, a narrow strip of leather. (L.) Frequently called a
strop in prov. E., and this is the better form, ME. strope, a noose,
loop; ‘a rydynge-knotte or a strope,? Caxton, tr. of Reynard the
Fox, ed. Arber, p. 33. ‘A thonge, . . a strope, or a loupe,’ Elyot,
15593 cited in Halliwell. AS. stropp. ‘Struppus, strop, vel ar-
widde;’ Voc. 181, 42.—L. struppus,a strap, thong, fillet. From the
same L, word are borrowed Du, strop, a halter, F. érope, &c.
Doublet, strop.

STRAPPADO, a species of torture. (Ital.—'Teut.) In 1 Hen. IV,
ii, 4. 262. The word has been turned into a Spanish-looking
form, but it is rather Italian, In exactly the same way, the Ital.
stoccata also appears as stoccado; see Stoccado.—Ital. strappata,
a pulling, wringing; the strappado. Ital. strappare, to pull, wring.
= High-German (Swiss) strapfen, to pull tight, allied to G. straff,
tight (Diez). From Low G. or Du.; cf. Du. straffen, to punish,
from straf, severe. Cf, EFries. strabben, to be stiff ; strabbig, strappig,
severe.

STRATAGEM, an artifice, esp. in war. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt
stratageme, Sir P. Sidney, Apology for Poetry, ed. Arber, p. 37.—
MF, s/ratageme, ‘a stratagem ;’ Cot.—L. stratégéma.—Gk. orparn-
ynpa, the device or act of a general.—Gk. orparnyds, a general,
leader of an army.—Gk. orpar-ds, an army; and dy-«yv, to lead,
B. The Gk. orparés means properly an encamped army, from its
being spread out over ground, and is allied to Gk. orépyuju, I spread
out, and L, sternere; see Stratum. The Gk. dye is cognate with
L. agere; see Agent. Der. strateg-y, from Gk. orparnyia, general-
ship, from arparny-ds, a general ; strateg-ic, Gk, orparnyixds ; strateg~
ie-al, -ly; strateg-ist.

STRATH, a flat valley. (C.) In Leslie, Hist. Scotland (1595);

. 12, Common in Scot. place-names, as Strath-spey, valley of the
Boe .— Gael. srath, a flat valley, low-lying country beside a river;
Trish srath, sratha, fields beside a river, bottom of a valley; W.
ystrad, Allied to Stratum,


STRESS 607


STRATUM, a layer, esp. of earth or rock. (L.) In Thomson,
Autumn, 745.<L. stratum, that which is laid flat or spread out,
neut. of straius, pp. of sternere. Allied to Gk. ordpvuju, I spread
out; Skt. stv, to spread. —4/STER, to scatter, spread out. Der.
strati-fic-at-ion, strat-i-fy, coined words. And see street, con-ster-nat-
ion, pro-strate, strat-agem; also strew, straw.

STRAW, a stalk of corn when thrashed. (E.) ME. straw,
Chaucer, C, T. 11007 (F 695); also sére, stree, id. 2920 (A 2918).
AS. streaw, streow; see Toller; it also occurs in streawberige, a
strawberry, Voc. 298. 11, and in the derivative streaw-ian, streow-ian,
to strew, as below.4Dnu. stroo; Icel. stra; Dan. straa; Swed. stra;
G. stroh, OHG, strow, strau. Allied to Goth. straujan, to strew.
From Teut. base *strau- (cf. Lat. pt. t. straué), extended from
WSTER, to spread out, scatter. Der. straw-y; strew, verb, q.v.3
straw-berry, AS. streawberige, as above, from its propagation (or
strewing) by runners. See Stratum.

STRAY, to wander, rove, err. (F.—L.) ME. straien: the deri-
vative a-straied, pp., is in Gower, C. A. ii. 132; bk. v. 145; and see
the Prompt. Parv. OF’. estraier, to stray. See Diez, who compares
Prov. estradier, one who roves about the streets or ways, one who
strays, from Prov. estrada, a street; also OF, estree, a street. This
is confirmed by MItal. stradiotto, ‘a wandrer, gadder, traueller,
earth-planet, a highwaie-keeper,’ Florio; from Ital. strada, a street.
B. Thus the lit. sense is ‘to rove the streets.’ All from L, strata, a
street; see Street. Cf. mod. F. batteur d’estrade, a loiterer
(Hamilton), Der. stray, sb., oddly spelt streyue, strayue, in P.
Plowm. B. prol. 94, C. i. 92, old form also estray (Blount, Nomo-
lexicon), AF. estray (Britton), from OF, estrater, to stray, as above.

STREAK, a line or long mark on a differently coloured ground.
(Scand.) ME. streke, Prompt. Parv.; prob. of Scand. or Low G.
origin. Swed. streck, MSwed. strek, a stroke, streak, line; Norw.
strek, streek (cf. EFries. streke, Du. streek) ; Dan. streg. From Teut.
*strik, weak grade of *stretkan-, to strike; see Strike. Bp. We
also find the (native) ME. strike, a stroke, Chaucer, On the Astrolabe,
pt. i. § 7; AS. strica (cognate with G. strich, Goth. striks, a stroke
with the pen); from *sérik-, weak grade of Teut. *streikan-; see
Strike. Further allied to L. striga, a line, furrow, and to L.
stringere; see Stringent. q@ It may be noted that ME. striken
sometimes means to go or come forward, to proceed, advance; see
Gloss. to Spec. of Eng., ed. Morris and Skeat, and P. Plowman,
B. prol. 183. A streak is properly a stroke made by sweeping
anything along. Der. streak, verb, Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 257;
streak-y.

STREAM, a current or flow. (E.) ME. streem, Chaucer, C. T.
466, 3893 (A 464, 3895). AS. stréam, Grein, ii. 488.4Du. stroom ;
Icel. straumr; Swed. and Dan. strom; G. strom; OHG. straum,
stroum,  B. All from the Teut. type *strau-moz, m. The word
means ‘that which flows,’ from the Tent. base STREU, to flow.
The Idg. root is 4/SREU, to flow; cf. Skt. sru, to flow, Gk. péev
(for opéFew), to flow, Irish sruaim, a stream. The ¢ seems to have
been inserted, for greater ease of pronunciation, not only in Teutonic,
but in Slavonic; cf. Russ. struia,a stream. See Rheum, Brug-
mann, i. §§ 462, 816. From the same root we have rheum, rhythm,
ruminate, catarrh. Der. stream, verb, ME. stremen, streamen, Ancren.
Riwle, p. 188, note e; stream-er, Hen. V, iii. chor. 6; stream-l-et,
a double diminutive ; stream-y. :

STREET, a paved way, a road in a town. (L.) ME. strete,
Wyclif, Matt. xii. 19. AS. str@t, Grein, ii. 487.—L. strata, for
strata uia, a paved way ; strata is fem. of stratus, pp. of sternere, to
strew, scatter, pave.—4/STER, to spread out; see Stratum.
q@ The G, strass is likewise borrowed from Latin; so also Ital.
strada, &c. Der. stray, q.v.

STRENGTH, might. (E.) ME. strengthe, Chaucer, C. T. 84.
AS. strengdu, Grein, ii. 487 ; for *strang-i-du. — AS, strang, strong;
see Strong. Der. strength-en.

STRENUOUS, vigorous, active, zealous. (L.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627. Englished from L. strénuus, vigorous, active. Allied to Gk.
orpnyys, strong, ornpifev, to make firm, orepeds, firm; see Stereo-
scope. Der. strenuous-ly, -ness.

STRESS, strain, force, pressure. (F.—L.) 1. Used in the sense
of distress, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 321, last line. ‘ Stresse,
or wed take [pledge taken] by strengthe and vyolence, Vadimonium ;’
Prompt. Parv. Here stresse is obviously short for ME. destresse, in
the sense ‘ distress for rent;’ and sfress may sometimes be taken as
a short form of distress; see Distress. 2. ‘ Stresse, or streytynge,
Constrictio;’ Prompt. Parv, ‘I stresse, I strayght one of his liberty
or thrust his body to-guyther, Ze estroysse;’ Palsgrave. This is from
OF, estrecier (later estrecir, estroissir), ‘to straiten, pinch, contract,
bring into a narrow compass,’ Cot. This answers to a Folk.-L.
type *strictidre, not found, a derivative of strictus, drawn together ;
see Strict, We may regard s¢ress as due, in general, to this verb,


608 STRETCH


or else to *di-strictiadre; it comes to much the same thing. 4 The
loss of the initial di- occurs also in sport, splay, spend, &c.; and is
therefore merely what we should expect.

STRETCH, to draw out, extend. (E.) ME. strecchen, Chaucer,
C. T. 15937 (G 469); pt. t. straughte, id, 2918 (A 2916); pp.
straught or streight, whence mod. E. straight. AS, streccan, John,
xxi. 18; pt. t. strehte, Matt. xxi. 8; pp. streht. Formed as a causal
verb from AS. strec, strec, strong, violent, of which the pl. strece
occurs in Matt. xi. 12, and the form strec, severe, in Gregory’s Past.
Care, c. xvii (heading), ed. Sweet, p. 107. The sense of stretch is,
accordingly, to make stiff or hard, as in tightening a cord.Du.
strekken; Dan. strekke, to stretch; strek,a stretch; Swed. stracka;
G. strecken, from strack, adj., tight, straight ; cf. stracks, straightway,
immediately. Cf. also L. stringere, to draw tight, which is related ;
Gk. otpayyés, twisted tight. Other nearly related words are string
and strong; also strain, strait, stringent, strangle, strict. Der. stretch,
sb., stretch-er, straight.

STREW, STRAW, to spread, scatter loosely. (E.) Spelt
straw, Matt. xxi. 8. ME. strawen, strewen, Chaucer, C. T. 10927
(F 613). AS. streawian, streowian, Matt. xxi. 8; Mark, xi. 8; streaw,
straw; see Straw.+Dnu. strooijen, to scatter; allied to stroo, straw.
Cf. Icel. stra, Swed. stré, Dan, stroe, G. streuen, to strew ; also Goth.
straujan, to strew (pt. t. strawida). The last of these is froma Teut.
base *strau, extended from 4/STER, to strew, spread; as in L.
ster-n-ere (pt. t. strdut); Gk. orép-v-vyu, Ispread; Skt. sv, to spread.
See Stratum. Brugmann, i. § 570. Der. be-strew.

STRIATED, streaked, marked with streaks. (L.) Scientific and
modem. = L. striatus, pp. of stridre, to furrow or channel. =L. stria,
a furrow, channel, groove.-+-G. strieme, a stripe.

STRICKEN, advanced (in years); see Strike.

STRICT, strait, exact, severe, accurate. (L.) In Meas. for Meas.
i. 3. 19.—L. strictus, pp. of stringere, to tighten, draw together; see
Stringent. Der. strict-ly, -ness; strict-ure, from L. strictira,
verbal sb. allied to strict-us, pp. of stringere. Der. stress. Doublet,
strait, adj.

STRIDE, to walk with long steps. (E.) ME, striden, Cursor
Mundi, 10235; Layamon, 17982; pt. t. strade, Ywaine and Gawin,
3193, in Ritson’s Met. Rom. vol.i; cf. bestrode, bestrood, in Chaucer,
C. T. 13831 (B 2093). AS. stridan, to stride; rare, but in Epinal
Glos. 1086; the pt. t. be-strad is in AElfric’s Hom. ii, 136. Pt. t.
strad, pp. striden, as shown by mod. E. strode, and the derivative
striddle, cited under Straddle. 8. That the word should have
meant both to strive and to stride is curious; but is certified by the
cognate Low G. striden (pt. t. streed, pp. streden), meaning (1) to
strive, (2) to stride; with the still more remarkable derivative be-
striden, also meaning (1) to combat, (2) to bestride, as in dat Peerd
bestriden, to bestride the horse ; Bremen Worterbuch, pp. 1063, 1064.
[Precisely the same double meaning reappears in Low G. streven,
(1) to strive, (2) to stride, and the sb. streve, (1) a striving, (2) a
stride.
together ;’ which points to the meaning of stride as originating from
the contention of two men who, in walking side by side, strive to
outpace one another, and so take long steps. ] y. Other cognate
words are Du. strijden (pt. t. streed, pp. gestreden), G. streiten (pt. t.
stritt, pp. gestritten), Dan. stride (pt. t. stred), only in the sense to
strive, to contend; cf. also the weak verbs, Icel. s¢riéa, Swed. strida,
to strive. Teut. type “streidan-, pt. t. *straid, pp. *stridanoz. Cf.
Skt. sridh, to assail. Der. stradd-le, q.v.; stride, sb.; a-stride, adv.,
King Alisaunder, 4445; be-stride.

STRIDENT, grating, harsh. (L.) Dryden has: ‘And stridor
of her wings ;’ tr. of Virgil, xii.1258. Chapman has: ‘ grasshoppers
are stridulous;’ tr. of Homer’s Iliad, iii. commentary, note 2.
Strident seems to be modern.—L. strident-, stem of pres. pt. of
stridére, also stridere, to creak, rattle, grate; of imitative origin.
Cf. Gk. rpigew, to creak. Der. stridor, sb., from L. stridor, a creak-
ing; strid-ulous, adj., from L. strid-ulus, creaking, harsh.

STRIFE, contention, dispute, contest. (F.—Scand.) In early
use ; Layamon, 24966, later text; Ancren Riwle, p. 200, last line
but one. — OF. estrif, ‘ strife, debate;’ Cot.—Icel. s¢rid, strife, con-
tention ; by the change of ¢h to f, as in Shakespeare’s fill-horse for
thill-horse; strida, to strive; weak verb allied to Du. strijden, to
strive, AS. stridan, to stride; see Stride (above).4OSax. and
OF ries. strid, strife; Du. strijd; Dan. and Swed. strid; G. streit;
OUHG. strit. Der. strive, q. v.

STRIGIL, a flesh-scraper. (L.) L. strigilis; allied to stringere,
to graze; see Strike.

STRIKH, to hit, dash, stamp, coin, give a blowto. (E.) ME,
striken, orig. to proceed, advance, esp. with a smooth motion, to flow ;
hence used of smooth swift motion, to strike with a rod or sword.
* Ase strem pat strikep stille’=like a stream that flows gently; Spec.
of Eng., ed. Morris and Skeat, p. 48, 1. 21. ‘Strek into a studie’ =


_Norw. stripa, to grip, to throttle (pt. t. straup).


Hexham notes MDu. streven, ‘to force or to strive, to walke |


STROKE


fell into a study ; Will. of Palerne, 4038. ‘Amous... Stroke forth
sternly’ =a mouse advanced boldly ; P. Plowman, prol. 183. Strong’
verb, pt. t. strak, strek, strok, mod. E. struck ; pp. striken, later stricken,

mod. E. struck. The phr. ‘stricken in years’ =advanced in years;

Luke, i. 7. AS. strican, to go, proceed, advance, pt. t. strac, pp.

stricen. ‘ Rodor striced ymbiitan’=the firmament goes round, i.e. :
tevolves; Grein, ii. 489.4-Du. strijken, to smooth, rub, stroke, spread,

strike; G. streichen, pt. t. strich, pp. gestrichen, to stroke, rub,

smooth, spread, strike. B. Teut. type *streikan-, pt. t. *straik, pp.

*strikanoz. Cf. Goth. striks, a stroke, dash with a pen, cognate

with L. striga, a row, a furrow. [We also find Icel. strjuka, pt. t.

strauk, pp. strokinn, to stroke, rub, wipe, to strike, flog; Swed.

stryka, to stroke, wipe, strike, rove; Dan. stryge, the same ; from a

related type *streukan- (with a different gradation). | y. The Idg.

root is STREIG, related to L. stringere, which is equivalent to AS.

strican, when used in the sense to graze, or touch slightly with a

swift motion. But L. stringere,to draw tight, seems to bea different

word; see Stringent. Der. strik-er, strik-ing ; also stroke, q.v.;

streak, q.v. Also strike, sb., the name of a measure, orig. an instru-

ment with a straight edge for levelling (striking off) a measure of
grain; ME, strik, Liber Albus, p. 243.

STRING, thin cord. (E.) ME. string, streng, Chaucer, C. T.
7649 (D 2067). AS. streng, John, ii. 15. From its being strongly
or tightly twisted ; allied to AS. strang, strong, violent. 4-Du. streng ;
cf, streng, adj., severe, rigid; Icel. strengr, string; strangr, strong;
Dan. streng, Swed. strang, G. strang, string. Cf. Gk. orpayyaan,
a halter ; from orpayyds, hard twisted. See Strong. Der. string,
verb, properly a weak verb, being formed from the sb., but the pp.
strung also occurs, L. L. L. iv. 3. 343, formed by analogy with flung
from fling, and sung from sing. And Dryden has the pt. t. strung,
Epist. to J. Dryden, 1. 89. Also string-ed; string-y ; bow-string ;
heart-string.

STRINGENT, urgent, strict. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.—L.
stringent-, stem of pres, part. of stringere, to draw tight, compress,
urge, &c.; pp. strictus. From the Idg. root STREIG, to draw or
twist tight. See Strong. Der. stringent-ly, stringenc-y; and see
strict, strait, a-stringent, a-striction, strain, con-strain, di-strain, re-
strain, stress, di-stress,

STRIP, to tear off, skin, render bare, deprive, plunder. (E.) ME.
stripen, strepen, Chaucer, C. T. 1008, 8739 (A 1006, E 863) ; pt. t.’
strepte, spelt strupte, Juliana, p. 63, 1. 16; pp. strept, spelt i-struped,
Ancren Riwle, p. 148, note g. AS. striepan, strypan, in comp.
bestrypan, to plunder, A. S. Chron. an. 1065.4-Du. stroopen, to
plunder, strip; EFries. stropen ; MDu. stroopen, ‘to flea [flay], to
skin, or to pill,” Hexham ; OHG, stroufen. Teut. type *straupjan- ;
from *straup, 2nd grade of the strong verb *streupan-; for which cf.
Der. The sb.
strip, a piece, is often understood as being ‘a piece stripped off;’


_ but it seems to belong rather to stripe (below).


STRIPE, a streak, a blow with a whip. (Du.) Not a very old
word, and apparently borrowed from Dutch; prob. because con-
nected with the trade of weaving. ME. stripe, Prompt. Parv.=MDu.
strippe, as in stripp-kleedt, ‘a parti-coloured sute,’ Hexham ; cf. Du.
streep, a stripe, streak.-+-Norw. stripa, Dan. stribe, a stripe, streak ;
Low G. stripe, a stripe, strip; s¢ripen, to stripe; striped Tug, striped
cloth; G. streifen, MHG. streif, a stripe, streak, strip. Cf also
Olrish sriab, a stripe. Similarly E. streak is connected with E.
strike; from the mark of a blow. Der. stripe, verb. Also sérip,
which is rather a variant of s/ripe than allied to strip, vb. Cf. Low
G. stripe, (1) a stripe, (2) a strip of cloth; Prov. E. stripe, a strip 5
stripe, a stream, of which strippet (noted under Stripling) is a
diminutive.

STRIPLING, a youth, lad. (E.) In Shak. Tam. Shrew, i. 2.
144. ‘He is but an yongling, A stalworthy séryplyng ;’ Skelton, Why
Come Ye Nat to Courte, 345. Also ME. striplynge, Mandeville,
Trav. ch. 27, p. 278. A double dimin. from stripe; the sense 1s
‘one as thin as a stripe,’ a growing lad not yet filled out. Cf. “you
tailor’s yard, you sheath, you bow-case;’ 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 273.
Similarly a strippet is a very narrow stream; ‘a little brooke or
strippet ;’? Holinshed’s Descr. of Scotland, c. 10. § 2. See Stripe.’

STRIVE, to struggle, contend. (F.—Scand.) ME. striven, a.


| weak verb, pt. t. strived, Will. of Palerne, 4099. Made into a strong


verb, with pt. t. strof, Chaucer, C. T. 1040 (A 1038); mod. E.
strove, pp. striven; by analogy with drive (drove, driven). — OF.
estriver, ‘to strive,’ Cot. OF. estrif, strife. See Strife.

| STROKE (1), a blow. (E.) ME. strok, strook, Chaucer, C. T.
1709. From AS. strac, 2nd grade of strican, to strike ; with the
| usual change of ato longo. See Strike. So also G. streich, a
' stroke, from G. streichen, to stroke, to whip.

| . STROKE (2), to rub gently. (E.) ME. stroken, Chaucer,
.C. T. 10479 (F 165). AS. stracian, to stroke; /Elfred, tr. of.


STROLL


Gregory’s Past. Care, ed. Sweet, p. 303, 1.10. A causal verb; from
strac, 2nd grade of AS. strican, to go, pass swiftly over, mod. E.
strike. See Strike. SoalsoG. streicheln, to stroke, from streichen,
to rub, strike.

STROLL, to rove, wander. (F.—Teut.) A late word. When
stroulers durst presume to pick your purse;’ Dryden, 5th prol. to
Univ. of Oxford, 1. 33. ‘ Knowing that rest, quiet, and sleep, with
lesser meat, will sooner feed any creature than your meat with liberty
to run and s¢roy/e about ;’ Blith’s Husbandry, 1652 ; cited by Wedg-
wood. Formed by prefixing s- (for OF. es-, L. ex) to Zroll, in the
sense to range, rove. Cotgrave has MF. froller (F. tréler), ‘to
trowle, raunge, or hunt out of order,’ of hounds; cf. Norm. dial.
treuler, to wander; dial. of Verdun fréler, trauler, to rove;
Guernsey ¢étreulat (=estreulé), adj., idle, vagabond (Métivier) ;
Picard ¢roleuse, a wandering woman (Corblet); see Troll.
Schmeller gives the forms strdlen, strolen, to stroll, as Bavarian ; and
Wedgwood quotes Swiss strielen, strollen, strolchen, to rove about.
Ross has Norw. s¢rolla, to go about wilfully and idly. Der. stroll,
sb.; stroll-er.

STRONG, forcible, vigorous, energetic. (E.) ME. strong,
Chaucer, C. T. 2137 (A 2135), &c. ‘Strong and stark ;* Hayelok,
608. AS. strang, strong; Grein, ii, 485.4-Du. streng; Icel. strangr;
Dan. streng; Swed, strang; OHG. strang, strangi, G. streng’, strict.
B. All from Teut. types *strangoz, *strangjoz, adj., strong. Cf.
Gk. orpayyés, tightly twisted, whence otpayydAn, a halter (E.
string), and L. stringere, in the sense ‘to draw tight; hence
the identity in meaning between L. strictus and G. streng. Der.
strong-ly, strong-hold; string, q.v.; streng-th, q.v.; strength-en.
Related words are stringent, strain, strict, strait, stretch, straight,
strangle, &c.

STROP, a piece of leather, &c. for sharpening razors. (L.)
Merely the old form of strap ; from L. struppus ; see Strap.

STROPHEH, part of a song, poem, or dance. (Gk.) Formerly
used also as a rhetorical term ; ‘ Strophes, wilely deceits, subtilties in
arguing, conversions, or turnings;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—Gk.
orpopy, a turning, twist, trick; esp. the turning of the chorus,
dancing to one side of the orchestra; hence, the strain sung during
this evolution; the strophé, to which the antistrophe answers. — Gk.
orpop-, 2nd grade of orpéepev, to turn. Der. anti-strophe, apo-strophe,
cata-strophe, epi-strophe.

STROW, the same as Strew, vb., q. v.

STRUCTURE, a building, construction, arrangement. (F.—L.)
In Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. structure, ‘a structure ;’ Cot.—L. struc-
tira, a building ; allied to structus, pp. of struere, to build, orig. to
heap together, arrange. From the base STREU, allied to Goth.
straujan, G. streuen, to strew, lay; allied to 4/STER, to spread ont.
Der. (from séruere) con-strue, con-struct, de-stroy, de-struction, in-
struct, in-stru-ment, mis-con-strue, ob-struct, super-structure.

STRUGGLE, to make great bodily efforts. (Scand.) ME.
strogelen, Chaucer, C. T. 10248 (E 2374). Palsgrave not only
gives: ‘I stroggell with my bodye,’ but also: ‘I strogel/, I mur-
mure with wordes secretly, je grommelle.’ The latter, however, is
merely a metaphorical sense, i.e. to oppose with words instead of
deeds. ME. strogelen is a frequentative verb formed from the
Scand. base s¢rug-, appearing in Swed. dial. strug, contention, strife,
dispute ; Rietz notes that draga i strug, to draw with difficulty, is
used of horses. Related words are Swed. dial. struug, revengeful,
Norw. stru, refractory, Dan. dial. struende, reluctantly. B. The
Idg. form of the root is STREUGH ; or with loss of s,s TREUGH ;
the latter appears in Icel. Jriiga, Swed. truga, to force, compel, AS.
pryccan, to force, G. drucken, to print; and in EFries. ériiggeln, to
struggle against, as a restive horse; cf. MDu. ¢ruggelen, Du.
troggelen, to beg persistently, Der. struggle, sb.

STRUM, to thrum on a piano. (Scand.) ‘The strum-strum [a
musical instrument] is made like a cittern;’ Dampier’s Voyages, ‘an.
1684; see A New Voyage (1699), i. 127. The word is imitative,
and made by prefixing s- (F. es-, from L. ex), intensive prefix, to the
imitative word trum, variant of thrum, asin Low G. trummen, Du.


trommen, to drum. Cf. Norw. strumla, to rumble, rattle. See
Thrum and Drum, So alsos-plash for plash.
STRUMPET, a prostitute. (F.—L.; or F.—Teut.) ME.


strompet, P. Plowman, C. xv. 42; also spelt strumpet, Polit. Songs,
p- 153 (temp. Edw. II). 1. If the m in this word be an
E. addition, it is a strengthened form of *s¢rup-et, in which the -et is
a F. dimin. suffix; and the derivation is from OF. strupe, noted by
Roquefort as a variant of OF. stupre, concubinage.=L. stuprum,
dishonour, violation, B. The curious position of the r causes no
difficulty, as there must have been a Late L. form *strupare, used
conyertibly with L. stupraére. This is clear from Ital. strupare,
variant of stuprare, Span. estrupar, variant of estuprar, to ravish, and
from the OF. sérupe quoted above, Perhaps the E, word was


STUD 609


formed directly from an OF. *strupée, from Late L. *strupita=
stuprata, fem. of the pp. of stuprare. The verb stuprare is from the
sb. stuprum. y- We find also Irish and Gael. striopach, a strum-
pet; this is to be referred to the same Late L. *strupare. The
history is unknown. 2. The form of the word answers better to
MDnu. strompe, Low G. strump, a stocking (but there is no con-
nexion) ; or to Norw. strumpen, adj., stumbling (Ross), Low G. strum-
pen, strumpeln, to stumble; strumpelig, staggering, tottery in gait ;
MDa. strompelen, ‘to stagger, to trip, or to reele,’ Hexham. We
might perhaps then explain strumpet as ‘one who trips,’ or makes
a false step. The above words are allied to G. strampeln, to kick.
It is remarkable that the prov. E. (Hants.) strumpet means a fat,
hearty child, esp. a baby ; where the sense ‘ little kicker’ is appro-
priate. A Germanic origin seems probable.

STRUT (1), to walk about pompously. (Scand.) ME. strouten,
to spread out, swell out. ‘ His here [hair] strouted as a fanne large
and brode ;” Chaucer, C. T. 3315. ‘ Strowtyn, or bocyn owt [to boss
out, swell out], Turgere;’ Prompt. Parv. In Havelok, 1779, to
stroute is to make a disturbance or to brag. = Dan. strutie, strude, to
strut, Swed. dial. strutta, to walk with a jolting step (Rietz). The
Norweg. strut means a spout that sticks out, a nozzle; the Icel.
stritr is a sort of hood sticking out like a horn; the Swed. stru¢ is
a cone-shaped piece of paper, such as grocers put sugar in. The
orig. notion of strué seems to be ‘to stick out stiffly;’ cf. prov. E.
strut, rigid. Note further Low G. strut, rigid, stiff, G. strauss,
a tuft, bunch, strotzen, to be puffed up, to strut. The prov. E.
strunt, to strut (Halliwell), is a nasalised form of strut. Der.
strut, sb.

STRUT (2), a support for a rafter, &c. (Scand.) ‘ Strut, with
carpenters, the brace which is framed into the ring-piece and principal
rafters ;? Bailey, vol. ii. ed. 1731. The orig. sense is a stiff piece of
wood; cf. Low G, sétruti, rigid; prov. E. strut, rigid. It is,
accordingly, closely allied to Strut (1).

STRYCHNINE, a violent poison. (Gk.) Modern. Formed
with suffix -ize (F. -ine, L. -ina, -inus) from Gk. orpvxvos, nightshade,
poison.

STUB, the stump of a tree left after it is cut down. (E.) ‘Old
stockes and stubs of trees ;’ Spenser, F. Q. i. 9. 34. ME. stubbe,
Chaucer, C. T. 1980 (A 1978). AS. stybb, stubb (Toller); spelt
stub in Birch, Cart. Saxon. i. 316, iii. 353; EFries. stubbe. From
a base *stuf-.4-Du. stobbe; Icel. stubbi, stubbr; Dan. stub; Swed.
stubbe. _ B. Allied to Icel. stéfr,a stump ; and Gk. ordmos, a stub,
stump; Skt. s¢wupa-s, m., a heap. Allied to Stump. Der. stub,
verb, to root out stubs; stubb-y, stubb-ed, stubb-ed-ness; and see
stubb-orn, stump.

STUBBLE, the stalks of cut com. (F.—L.) ME. séobil,
Wyclif, Job, xiii. 25; Chaucer has stubbel-goos, C. T. 4351. =—OF.
estouble, ‘stubble,’ Cot. ; also estuble (Littré, s. v. éteule). = Late L.
stupula, stupla, stubble, a variant of L. stipula, stubble, due to the
influence of Low G. stoppel, stubble (Liibben) ; Du. and EFries.
stoppel, cognate with MHG. stupfel, OHG. stupjila, stubble.

STUBBORN, obstinate, persistent. (E.) ME. stoburn, also
stiborn. ‘Styburne, or stoburne, Austerus, ferox,’ Prompt. Parv. ;
stiborn, Chaucer, C. T. 6038 (D 456). Cf. styburnesse, sb., Prompt.
Parv. As the AS. y is represented in later English both by z and z
(as in AS. cyssan=E. hiss, AS. fyrs=E. furze) we at once refer
stibborn or stubborn to AS. stybb, a stub, with the sense of stub-like,
hence immovable, stiff, steady, &c. B. The suffix -ornz is to be
regarded as adjectival, and stands for -or, the -z being merely added
afterwards, by taking stubor-ness as stubborn-ness ; -or being the same
adj. suffix as in AS. bit-or, E. bitt-er. We should thus have, from
AS. styb, an adj. *stybor =stub-like, stubborn, and the sb. *stybornes.
y- This is verified by the forms in Palsgrave; he gives the adj. as
stoburne, but the sb. as stubbernesse and stubblenesse, the latter of
which could have arisen from an AS. form *stybol, with suffix -o/ as
in wac-ol, vigilant. @ The suffix -ern in north-ern admits of a
different explanation. Der. stubborn-ly, -ness.

STUCCO, a kind of plaster. (Ital—-OHG.) In Pope, Imit.
of Horace, ii. 192.—Ital. stucco, * glutted, gorged, . . dride, stiffe, or
hardned; also, a kind of stuffe or matter to build statue or image-
worke with, made of paper, sand, and lyme, with other mixtures; the
imagerie-work at Nonesuch in England in the inner court is built of
such;* Florio. —OHG. stucchi, a crust; Graff, vi. 631 (Diez),
the same as G. stiick, AS. stycce, a piece (hence, a patch). Allied to
Stock.

STUD (1), a collection of breeding-horses and mares. (E.) ME.
stod, Gower, C. A. iii. 204; bk. vii. 33453 cf. stod-mere, a stud-
mare, Ancren Riwle, p. 316, 1.15. AS. s¢dd, a stud ; spelt stood,
Voc. 119. 39; stod, Thorpe, Diplomatarium, p. 574, l. 20.--Icel.
std; Dan. stod ; G. gestiit ; MHG. stuot. Cf. Russ. s¢ado, a herd or
drove ; Lith. stodas, a drove of horses. B. All from Teut. base

Rr


610 STUD


*s¢5-d- ; the orig. sense is ‘an establishment,’ as we should call it;
from 4/STA, to stand. Der. stud-horse ; also steed, q.v.

STUD (2), a nail with a large head, large rivet, double-headed
button. (E.) Astud is also a stout post; ‘the upright in a lath
and plaster wall, Halliwell. Also, a stiff projection, a boss, &c.
ME. stode; L. bulla is glossed ‘a stode,’ also ‘nodus in cingulo,’
Voc. 623. 33 ‘stode, or stake, Palus;’ Voc. 600. 4. AS. studu,
a post, A’lfred, tr. of Beda, 1. iii. c. 10; written stwJu in one MS.+
Dan. stéd, in the sense of stub, stump; Swed. stod, a prop, post;
Icel. stod, a post; whence stoda, stydja, to prop; G. stiitze, a prop.
B. The Teut. base is *stw-, weak grade of *steu-, Idg. 4/STEU ; cf.
Gk. ord-Aos, a pillar, orav-pds, a stake, Skt. sthiina, a post; Gk.
otv-ev, to erect. Der. stud, verb; studd-ed, Shak. Venus, 37.

STUDENT, a scholar, learner. (L.) In Shak. Merry Wives, iii.
1. 38.—L. student-, stem of pres. part. of studére, to be eager about,
to study. B. Some have thought that studére is allied to Gk.
omevdev, to hasten, to be eager about; but this is very doubtful,
though the senses of L. studium and Gk. omovdn are curiously
similar ; see Curtius, ii. 360. See Study.

STUDY, application to a subject, careful attention, with the
wish to learn, (F.—L.) ME. studie, Will. of Palerne, 2981, 4038,
4056.—AF. estudie; OF. estudie, later estude, mod. F. étude, study
(Littré).—L. studium, eagerness, zeal, application, study. Der.
study, verb, ME. studien, Chaucer, C. T. 184; studi-ed; studi-ous,
from F, studieux, ‘studious,’ from L. studidsus ; studi-ous-ly, -ness.
Also studio, Ital. studio, study, also a school, from L. studium.

STUFF, materials, household furniture. (F.—L.) 1. See Luke,
xvii, 31 (A.V.). ‘The sayd treasoure and stuffe;’ Fabyan’s Chron.
c. 123, § 2. ME. stuf; ‘Stuf, for a chapman;’ Lydgate, Minor
Poems, p. 166. — OF, estoffe, ‘ stuffe, matter;’ Cot. [Mod. F. étoffe;
Ital. stoffa; Span. estofa, quilted stuff; Walloon stog’ (Rémacle).]
Derived from L. stiapa, stuppa, the coarse part of flax, hards, oakum,
tow (used as material for stuffing things or for stopping them up);
but, instead of being derived directly, the pronunciation of the L.
word was Germanised before it passed into French. See Diez.
Hence also G. stoff, stuff; but English retains the L. p in the verb
to stop; see Stop. 2. The sense of the L. word is better shown
by the verb to stuff, i.e. to cram. Skelton has the pp. stuffed,
Bowge of Court, 180; pres. t. stuffeth, Trevisa, tr. of Higden,
vii. 401. —OF. estoffer, ‘ to stuffe, to make with stuffe, to furnish or
store with all necessaries;’? Cot. This answers to G. stopfen, to
fill, to stuff, to quilt (note the Span. estofa, quilted stuff, above),
which is a Germanised pronunciation of Late L. stupare, stuptare,
to stop up with tow, to cram, to stop; see Stop. 38. We also
use E. stuff-y in the sense of ‘close, stifling ;’ this sense is due to
OF. estouffer, ‘to stifle, smother, choake, stop the breath,’ Cot.
Mod. F. éouffer. The etymology of this last word is disputed;
Diez derives it from OF. es- (<L. ex-) prefix, and Gk. tipos, smoke,
mist, cloud, which certainly appears in Span. tufo, warm vapour
from the earth. Scheler disputes this view, and supposes OF.
estouffer to be all one with OF. estoffer ; which seems reasonable.
In E., we talk of ‘ stopping the breath’ with the notion of suffocating.
Littré says that the spelling étouffer is in Diez’s favour, because the
F. word for s/op is étouper, with p, not f; but this is invalidated by
his own derivation of F. étoffe from L. stapa. In E., we seem to
regard all the senses of stuff as belonging to but one word ; ‘I stuffé
one up, I stoppe his breathe;’ Palsgrave. See Korting, §§ 3538,
9136.

STULTIFY, to cause to seem foolish, (L.) A mod. word;
coined (as if with F, suffix -/y, F. -fier) from a L. form *stulttjicare,
to make foolish. L. stulti-, for stultus, foolish; and -ficare, for
Jfacere, to make. B. The L. stultus is closely allied to stolidus,
with the like sense of fixed, immovable ; hence, stupid, dull, foolish.

See Stolid. Der. stultific-at-ion, also a coined word.

STUMBLE, to strike the feet against obstacles, to trip in walk-
ing. (Scand.) ME, stumblen, Wright’s Voc. i. 143, 1. 20; stomblen,
Chaucer, C. T. 2615 (A 2613). The 6 is excrescent, as usual after
m, and the better form is stomelen, or stumlen. In the Prompt. Parv.
pp: 476, 481, we have stomelyn, stummelyn, with the sbs. stomelare or
stumlere, and stomelynge or stumlynge. The form stomeren also occurs,
in the same sense, in Reliquize Antique, ii. 211 (Stratmann). B. The
forms stomelen, stomeren (stumlen, stumren), are frequentatives from a
base stum-, which is a weak grade allied to the base stam-, as seen
in Goth. stamms, stammering, and E. stammer. The word seems to
be of Scand. origin. Dan. dial. stwmle, Icel. stumra, to stumble ;
Norweg. stumra, the same (Aasen) ; cf. Swed. dial. stambla, stammla,
stomla, stammra, to stumble, to falter, go with uncertain steps
(Rietz).  y. Thus the word is related to stammer, with reference to
hesitation of the step instead of the speech; cf. E. falter, which ex-
presses both. Cf. OSax.,. Mid. Dan., OHG. stum, mute. See
Stammer. 4 TheG., stiimmeln, to mutilate, isnot the same thing,


STUTTER


though it is an allied word; it means to reduce to a stump, from G,.
stummel, a stump, dimin. of a word not now found in G., but repre-
sented by Norweg. stumme, a stump, allied to. G. stamm, a stock,
trunk ; we are thus led back to the base of stem (1). Der. stumble,
sb., stumbl-er, stumbl-ing-block, 1 Cor. i. 23.

STUMP, the stock of a tree, after it is cut down, a stub. (Scand.)
ME. stumpe, Prompt. Parv.; stompe, Joseph of Arimathea, 681.
Not found in AS.—Icel. stwmpr, Swed. and Dan. stump, a stump,
end, bit.4-EFries. stump; MDu. stompe, Du. stomp; G. stumpf,
a stump, trunk, stem. Allied to G. stumpf, blunt, stumpy; Du. stomp,
blunt, dull; Skt. stambha-s, m., a post. Allied to Stamp and
Staple and Stub. Der. stump, verb, to put down one’s stumps, in
cricket.

STUN, to make a loud din, to amaze with a blow. (E.) ME.
stonien, Romance of Partenay, 2940; stownien, Gawayn and Grene
Knight, 301. AS. stunian, to make a din, resound, Grein, ii. 490.
Cf. AS. gestun (the prefix ge- making no difference), a din, Grein, i.
459. Cf. pt. t. d-sten (rugiebam) in the Blickling Glosses.+Icel.
stynja, to groan; stynr, a groan; G. stéhnen, to groan. . From Teut.
*stun-, weak grade of Idg. 4/STEN, as in Lithuan. stenéti, Russ.
stenat(e), Gk. orévew, to groan, Skt. stan, to sound, to thunder. Brug-
mann, i. § 818 (2). See Stentorian.

STUNTED, hindered in growth. (Scand.) ‘Like stunted hide-
bound trees;’ Pope, Misc. Poems, Macer, 1. 11. Allied to the AS,
adj. stunt, dull, obtuse, stupid, hence, metaphorically, short of wit;
also, not well grown; but this sense seems to be Scandinavian. The
proper form of the verb is stint, made from stunt by vowel-change ;
see Stint. Cf. Icel. stuttr (for *stuntr by assimilation), short,
stunted ; MSwed, stunt, cut short (Ihre); showing that the peculiar
sense is rather Scand. than E. See E. D. D.

STUPEFY, to deaden the perception, deprive of sensibility.
(F.—L.) Less correctly stupify. Spenser has stupefide, F. Q. v. 3.
17.—F. stupéfier, to.stupefy, found in the 16th cent., but omitted by
Cotgrave (Littré). This verb is due to the F. pp. stupéfait, formed
from L. stupefactus, stupefied; there being no such L. word as stupe-
ficare, but only stupefacere, and even the latter is rarely found except
in the pp. and in the pass. form.—L. stupe-, allied to stupére, to be
amazed; and facere (pp. factus), to make. See Stupendous and
Fact. Der. stupefact-ion, from F. stupéfaction, from L. acc, stupe-
factidnem; also stupefact-ive.

STUPENDOUS, amazing. (L.) In Milton, P. L. x. 351.
Englished from L. stupendus, amazing, to be wondered at, fut. pass.
part. of stupére, to be amazed, to be struck still with amazement.
Note Skt. stubh, stumbh, to stupefy (Benfey). Der. stupendous-ly,
-ness; also stup-or, sb., Phillips, ed. 1706, from L. stupor, sb., amaze-
ment ; and see stwp-id, stupe-fact-ion.

STUPID, insensible, senseless, dull. (F.—L.) In Wint. Tale,
iv. 4. 409.—F. stupide, ‘stupid;’ Cot.—L. stupidus, senseless. = L.
stupere, to be amazed; see Stupendous. Der. stupid-ly, stupid-
ness; also stupid-i-ty, from F. stupidité, ‘stupidity,’ Cot., from L. acc.
stupidititem,

STURDY, resolute, stout, firm. (F.—Teut.?) The sense of the
word has suffered considerable change; it seems to have been influ-
enced by some notion of relationship with stout, with which it is
not connected. ‘The true sense is rash or reckless. ME. sturdy, in-
considerate, Chaucer, C. T. 8574 (E 698); stordy, stourdi, Rob. of
Glouc. p. 157, 1. 3287; stourdy, p. 186, 1. 3842.—OF. estourdi,
‘dulled, amazed, astonished . . heedless, inconsiderate, unadvised,
. . rash, retchless, or careless;’ Cot. Pp. of estourdir, ‘ to astonish,
amaze;’ id. Mod. F. étourdir; Span. aturdir, Ital. stordire, to stun,
amaze, surprise. B. Of unknown origin; Korting mentions the
suggestion of a derivation from OHG. sturzan (for *sturtjan), to over-
throw, averb allied to OHG. sturz, a fall; Du. stortez, to spill, shed,
hurl down, ruin. This is allied to E. start-le, to astonish. See
Start. Cf. ME. sturt, impetuosity. Der. sturdi-ly, -ness.

STURGEON, a large fish. (F.—OHG.) ME. sturgiun, Have-
lok, 753.—OF. esturgeon, estourgeon, ‘a sturgeon;’ Cot.; Low L.
sturionem, acc. of sturio, a sturgeon. B. Of Teut. origin; the lit.
sense is ‘stirrer,’ from its habits. ‘From the quality of floundering
at the bottom it has received its name; which comes from the G,
verb stéren, signifying to wallow inthe mud;’ E. tr. of Buffon, pub.
at London, 1792. —OHG. sturo, sturjo, MHG. stiir, G. stér, a stur-
geon; cf. OHG. sétéren, to spread, stir, G. stéren, to trouble, disturb,
rake, rammage, poke about. SoalsoSwed. and Dan. szér, a sturgeon ;
Swed. stéra, to stir. This etymology is favoured by the AS. form of
the word, viz. styria, a sturgeon, also spelt styriga, Voc. 16. 13; 261.
31. This word seems to mean ‘stirrer,’ from AS, s¢yrian, to stir,
agitate ; see Stir. The AS. styria is the oldest known name of the
fish; it occurs in the Epinal Glos., no. 809.

STUTTER, to stammer. (E.) In Minsheu, ed: 1627. It is the
frequentative of sfut, which was once commonly used in the same


STY


sense. ‘Her felow did stammer and stut;’ Elynour Rummyng,
1. 339. ‘I stutte, I can nat speake my wordes redyly ;’ Palsgrave.
ME. stoten; the F. s’yl ne bue is glossed ‘bote he stote’=unless he
stutter; Wright’s Voc. i. 173, 1.6. Cf. EFries. stuttern, to stutter ;
Du. stotteren. From Teut. *stut-, weak grade of Teut. root *steut- ;
cf. Du. stuiten, to stop. ‘The second grade stau- occurs in Icel. stauta,
to beat, strike, also, to read stutteringly ; Swed. stota, to strike, push,
hit against ; Dan. stdde, to push, jolt, jog, trip against, stumble on;
G. stossen, to strike; Goth. stautan, to strike. B. Thus the orig.
sense of stud is to strike, strike against, trip; and stutter =to keep on
tripping up. From 4/STEUD, to strike; whence also L. zundere,
to beat (pt. t. tu-tud-i), Skt. tud, to strike, the initial s being lost in
Skt.and L. See Brugmann, i. §818(2). Der. stutter-er, stutter-ing.
From the same root are con-tuse, ob-tuse; also stoat, q.v., stot.

STY (1), an enclosure for swine. (E.) ME, stie, stye, Chaucer,
C. T. 7411 (D 1829). Sti, Ancren Riwle, p. 128, 1.1. AS, stigo, a
sty. In a glossary printed in Voc. 271, we find : ‘ Incipit de suibus,’
followed by: ‘ Vistrina, st#go;’ where a sty is doubtless meant.
Older form stigu, a pen for cattle; Voc. 7. 35.-4Icel. stia, sti, a sty,
akennel ; svinsti, a swine-sty; stia, to pen; Dan. sti, a path, also,
a sty, pen; Swed. stia, ‘a sty, cabbin to keep hogs or geese in;
whence gdsstia (a goose-pen), svinstia (a swinesty),’ Widegren ;
MSwed. stia, stiga (Ihre); Swed. dial. sti, steg, a pen for swine,
goats, or sheep (Rietz). Rietz also cites Du. svijn-stijge.4-G. steige,
a stair, steps, stile, stair-case; also a hen-roost, chicken-coop;
OHG. stiga, a pen for small cattle. B. Teut. types *stiga, stiga,
a pen for cattle; Fick, i. 348. Ihre notes that the word was used to
mean a pen for any kind of domestic animal; and its application to
pigs is prob. later than its other uses. The reason for the name is not
clear, though it may have been from the ladder-like arrangement of
the laths of a hen-coop, or the use of laths or sticks placed in rows;
cf. Gk. arotyos below. Just as Ettmiiller derives AS. stigo from
stigan, to climb, so Rietz derives Swed. stia from stiga, to climb, and
Fick (iii. 348) derives G. steige from G. steigen, to climb. y. The
verb to sty, ME. stijen, to climb, was once common in E,, but is now
obsolete ; the forms of it are AS. stigan, Du. stijen, Icel. stiga, Swed.
stiga, Dan. stige, G. steigen, Goth. steigan, and it is a strong verb.
Further cognate with Gk. oreixev, to climb, to go; from the second
grade is the sb. orotxos, a row, a file of soldiers, also (in Xenophon)
a row of poles with hunting-nets into which the game was driven
(i.e. a pen or sty).—4/STEIGwH, to climb; Fick, i. 826; Brug-
mann, i. § 632. Der. (from same root) sty (2), stile (1), stirrup,
stair, acro-stic, di-stich, ve-stige.

STY (2), a small inflamed tumour on the edge of the eye-lid.
(E.) The AS. name was stigend. This is shown by the entry ‘ Or-
deolus, stigend’ in Voc. 114.10; where ordeolus=L. hordeolus, a sty
in the eye. This stigend was orig. the pres. part. of stigan, to climb,
rise, and signifies ‘ rising,’ i.e. swelling up. For the verb stigan, see
Sty (1). B. We also meet with ‘ styanye, or a perle in the eye,’
Prompt. Parv.; ‘the styonie, sycosis,’ Levins, ed. 1570 (which is a
very late example) ; also ‘ Styony, disease growyng within the eye-
liddes, sycosis,’ Huloet (cited in Wheatley’s ed. of Levins). Cf. prov.
E. stine, styon, a sty; also stiony, which seems to have been resolved
into sty-on-eye in some dialects; see E. D. D. y. Cognate words
are Low G. stieg, stige,a sty in the eye, from stigez, to rise; EFries.
stiger; Norweg. stig, stigje, sty, also called stigkdyna (where kéyna=
a pustule), from the verb stiga, to rise.

STYLE (1), a pointed tool for engraving or writing, mode of
writing, manner of expression, way, mode. (F.—L.) ME. stile,
Chaucer, C. T. ro419 (F 105), where it rimes with stile in the sense
of way over a hedge.—MF. stile, style, ‘a stile, form or manner of
indicting, the pin of a pair of writing tables;’ Cot.—L. séilus, an
iron-pointed peg used for writing on wax tablets; also, a manner of
writing. Perhaps allied to L. sti-mulus. @ The spelling style is
false ; it ought to be stile. The mistake is due to the common error
of writing the L. word as stylus. This error was due to some late
writers who imagined that the Gk. o7iAos, a pillar, must be the
original of L. stilus.  B. But note, that when the E. styleis used, as


it sometimes is, in botany or dialling, it then represents the Gk. |


atvaos; see Style (2). Der. style, verb, styl-ish, -ly, -ness.
STYLE (2), in botany, the middle part of a pistil of a flower.
(Gk. 1. ‘Style, or stylus, among herbalists, that: middle bunching
out part of the flower of a plant, which sticks to the fruit or seed ;’
Phillips, ed. 1706. —Gk. ortdos, a pillar, a long upright body like a
pillar ; cf. Skt. sthand, a pillar, post; from 4/STEU, to erect ; cf. Gk.
orvey, to erect.
2. Another sense may be noted; ‘in dialling, style is a line whose
shadow on the plane of the dial shows the true hour-line, and it is the
upper edge of the gnomon, cock, or needle ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.
Here style orig. meant the gnomon itself, and answers rather to Gk.
o7Tvdos than to L. stilus. Some difficulty has resulted from the need-


Not connected with L. stilus, as is often imagined. |


SUBJECT


less confusion of these two unrelated words.
to the pin of a dial.

STYPTIC, astringent, that stops bleeding. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt
styptick in Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxiv. c. 13, and in Cotgrave.
ME, stiptik, Lanfrank, Cirurgie, p. 98, 1. 16.—F. styptigue, ‘ styptick,’
Cot. —L, stypticus, Gk. orumrixés, astringent. —Gk. ordpewv, to con-
tract, draw together, also, to be astringent ; allied to cords, contrac-
tion; and prob. to E. Stop.

SUASION, advice. (F.—L.) In Sir T. More’s Works, p. 157,
1, 5.—F. suasion, ‘ persuasion,’ Cot.—L. sudsidnem, acc. of sudsio,
persuasion; allied to L. sudsus, pp. of suddére, to persuade; allied to
L. suduis (for *swad-vis), sweet. See Suave. Der. suas-ive, a
coined word ; suas-ive-ly, suav-ish-ness ; see also dis-suade, per-suade.

SUAVE, pleasant, agreeable. (F.—L.) Not common; the
derived word suavity is in earlier use, in Cotgrave.=F. suave, ‘ sweet,
pleasant,’ Cot.—L. suauis, sweet; for *swad-vis, and allied to E.
Sweet, q.v. Brugmann,i. § 187. Der. suav-ity, from F. suavité,
‘suavity,’ Cot., from L. acc. suduitatem.

SUB-, a common prefix. (L.; or F.—L.) L. sub-, prefix (whence
F. sub-); L. sub, prep., under. The L. sup-er, above, is certainly a
comparative form from sub (orig. *sup), and corresponds, in some
measure, to Skt. wpari, above. As to the connexion of super with
upari there can be no doubt, but the prefixed s in L. s-uper is difficult ;
perhaps it resulted from a prefixed ex, prep.; cf. Gk. é¢-dmep0e ;
Brugmann, i. § 761. Certainly L. super is allied to E. over. See
further under Over. B. ‘ Sub, it is true, means generally below,
under; but, like the Gk. hypé (76), it is used in the sense of ‘ from
below,’ and thus may seem to have two meanings diametrically
opposed to each other, below and upward. Submittere means to place
below, to lay down, to submit ; sublevare, to lift from below, to raise
up. Summus, a superl. of sub, hypatos (Umaros), a superl. of hypd
(vd), do not mean the lowest, but the highest;’ Max Miiller,
Lectures, ii. 310, ed. 1875. AndseeHypo-, Hyper-. = y._ Sub-,
prefix, becomes suc- before c following, suf- before /, sug- before g,
sum- before m, sup- before p (though sup is rather the orig. form),
sur- before r. And seeSus-. Der. sub-ter-, prefix; sup-er-, prefix ;
sup-ra-, prefix; sur-, prefix (French); and see sum, supreme, soprano,
sovereign, sup-ine. Doublet, hypo-, prefix.

SUBACID, somewhat acid. (L.) Richardson gives an example
from Arbuthnot, Of Aliments, c. 3.—L. subacidus, somewhat acid,
lit. ‘under acid.? See Sub- and Acid.

SUBALTERN, subordinate, inferior to another. (F.—L.) ‘ Sub-
altern magistrates and officers of the crown;’ Sidney, Arcadia, b. iii.
(R.). ‘ Subalterne, ynder another ;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627.— F. subalterne,
adj., ‘subalterne, secondary;’ Cot.—L. subalternus, subordinate. =
L. sub, under, and alter, another; with adj. suffix -nus (Idg. -no-),
See Sub- and Alter. Der. subaltern, sb., a subordinate; for sub-
altern officer.

SUBAQUEOUS, underwater. (L.) In Pennant’s Brit. Zoology,
on swallows (R.). A coined word; from L. sub, under, and agua,
water; see Sub- and Aquatic. The true L. word is subaqudneus.

SUBDIVIDE, to divide again into smaller parts. (L.) ‘ Sub-
divided into verses;’ Fuller's Worthies, Kent (R.).—L. subdiuidere,
lit. to divide under. See Sub- and Divide. Der. subdivis-ion.

SUBDUB, to reduce, conquer, tame, soften. (F.—L.) In Pals-
grave; and in Sir T. More, Works, p. 962a, 1.4. The ME. form
was soduen, and this was afterwards altered to subduen for the greater
clearness, by analogy with the numerous words beginning with swb-.
We find ‘schal be sodued’ in Trevisa, iii. 123, 1. 7, where two other
MSS. have soduwed, sudewide, but Caxton’s (later) edition has sub-
dued, See also the same, ii. 153, 407; iii. 19; &c. The pt. t.
sodu-ed was adapted from AF. *subdut, occurring in the pl. subduz
(=subduts), ‘subdued ;’ Stat. Realm, i. 339 (A.D. 1353). Late L.
*subdutus, for L. subditus, subdued, pp. of subdere, to subdue, subju-
gate.—L,, sub, under; -dere, to put, from the weak grade of 4/DHE,
to put. @ For the form *subdutus, cf. Late L. *perdutus (Ital.
perduto, F, perdu), and such Ital. past participles as cad-uto (from
cad-ere), ved-uto (from ved-ere), ten-uto, sap-uto, bev-uto, &c. | It is
impossible to derive subdue from L. subdicere, with an alien sense.
Der. subdu-er, subdu-al, subdu-able.

SUB-EDITOR; from Sub- and Editor.

SUBJACENT, lying beneath. (L.) In Boyle’s Works, vol. i.
p- 177 (R.). =L. subiacent-, stem of pres. part. of subiacére, to lie
under.—L, sub, under; and iacére, to lie. Jacére is allied to iacere,
to cast, throw. See Sub- and Jet (1); and see Subject.

SUBJECT, laid or situate under, under the power of another,
liable, disposed, subservient. (F.—L.) The spelling has been
brought nearer to Latin, but the word was taken from French. The
OF. word was also, at one time, re-spelt, to bring it nearer to Latin.
ME. suget, adj., Wyclif, Rom. xiii. 1; sugget, subget, sb., Chaucer,
C. T. 8358 (E 482). —OF, suget (Hatzfeld), later subject, ‘a subject,

Rra


611


Der. styl-ar, pertaining


612 SUBJOIN


wassall;’ Cot. Mod. F. sujet.—L. subiectus, subject ; pp. of subicere,
to place under, put under, subject.—L. sub, under; and éacere, to
cast, throw, put. See Sub- and Jet (1). Der. subject, sb., ME.
subget, as above ; subject, verb, spelt subiecte in Palsgrave ; subject-ion,
ME. subiectioun, Chaucer, C. T. 14384 (B 3656), from OF. subiec-
tion, * subjection,’ Cot., from L. acc. subiectiOnem ; subject-ive, from L.
subiectiuus ; subject-ive-ly, subject-ive-ness ; subject-iv-i-ty, a late coinage.

SUBJOIN, to join on at the end, annex, affix. (F.—L.) In Cot-
grave. = MF. subioign- (subjoign-), a stem of MF. subioindre, ‘ to sub-
join;’ Cot.—L. subiungere, to subjoin. See Sub- and Join, And
see subjunct-ive.

SUBJUGATEH, to bring under the yoke. (L.) In Palsgrave.
=—L. subiugitus, pp. of subiugare, to bring under the yoke.=L, sub-,
under ; and iwgum, a yoke, cognate with E. yoke, and allied to iungere,
to join (above); see Sub- and Yoke. Der. subjugat-or, from L.
subiugator ; subjugat-ion, from F. subjugation, ‘a subduing,’ Cot.,
from L. acc. *subiugdtidnem, not used.

SUBJUNCTIVE, denoting that mood of a verb which ex-
presses contingency. (L.) Spelt subiunctiue, Minsheu, ed. 1627;
Palsgrave, p. 380. —L. subiunctiuus, subjunctive, lit. joining on at the
end, from its use in dependent clauses. =L. subiunct-us, pp. of sub-
iungere, to subjoin; see Subjoin.

SUBLEASEH, an under-lease. (F.—L.; with L. prefix.) From
Sub- and Lease.

SUBLET, to let, as a tenant, to another. (Hybrid; L. and E.)
From Sub- and Let (1).

SUBLIME, lofty, majestic. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. v. 8. 30.
[As a term of alchemy, the verb ¢o sublime is much older; Chaucer
has subliming, C. T. 16238 (G 770); also sublimatorie, id. 16261
(G 793); these are rather taken directly from L. sublimare and sub-
limatorium than through the F., as it was usual to write on alchemy
in Latin.]=—F. sublime, ‘ sublime,’ Cot.—L. sublimis, lofty, raised on
high. B. A difficult word; prob. it means passing under the lintel
or cross-piece of a door, hence reaching up to the lintel, tall, high ; if so,
the part -/imis is connected with limen, a lintel, or a threshold, See
Brugmann, ii. § 12 (stems in-n-), See Sub- and Limit. Der.
sublime-ly ; sublim-i-ty, from F. sublimité, ‘ sublimity,’ Cot., from L.
acc. sublimitatem. Also sublime, verb, in alchemy=L. sublimare,
lit. to elevate ; sublim-ate, verb and sb., sublim-at-ion, sublim-at-or-y.

SUBLUNAR, under the moon, earthly. (L.) In Milton, P. L.
iv. 777. Coined from Sub- and Lunar. Der. sublunar-y, Howell,
Instructions for Foreign Travel (1642), sect. vi. parag. 7.

SUBMARINE, under or in the sea. (Hybrid; L. and F,—L.)
Rich. gives a quotation from Boyle’s Works, vol. iii. p. 342. It
occurs in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, where it is said to have been used
-by Bacon, Coined from Sub- and Marine.

SUBMERGE, to plunge under water, overflow with water.

(F.—L.) In Shak. Antony, ti. 5. 94. —F. submerger, ‘ to submerge ;’
Cot. —L. submergere (pp. submersus); see Sub- and Merge. Der.
submerg-ence ; submers-ion, from F. submersion, ‘a submersion,’ Cot.,
from L. acc. submersidnem ; also submerse, from the pp. submersus;
-submers-ed,
' SUBMIT, to refer to the judgment of another, yield, surrender.
(L.) ‘I submyt myselfe, Ie me submets;’ Palsgrave. ‘ Ye been sub-
mitted ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 4455 (B 35). It may have been taken from
F. in the first instance, but, if so, was early conformed to the L.
spelling. — L. submittere, to let down, submit, bow to.—L. sub-, under,
down; and mittere, to send (pp. missus); see Sub- and Missile.
Der. submission, AF. submission, MF. soubmission,‘ submission,’ Cot.,
from L. acc, submissiénem ; submiss-ive, -ly, -ness; submiss, Spenser,
F. Q. iv. 10. 51, from L. pp. submissus.

SUBORDINATE, lower in order or rank. (L.) ‘Inferior and
subordinate sorts ;? Cowley, Essay 6, Of Greatness (R.). ‘ His next
subordinate ;’ Milton, P. L. v. 671. Coined from Late L. subordina-
tus, pp. of subordinadre, coined from sub ordinem, under the order or
rank. . Ordinem is the acc. of ordo, order, rank. See Sub- and
Order. Der. subordinate, as sb., subordinate-ly; subordinat-ion,
Howell, Instructions for Foreign Travel (1642), sect. vi. parag. 8;
whence in-subordinat-ion.

SUBORN, to procure privately, instigate secretly, to cause to
commit perjury. (.—L.) In Spenser, F..Q. i. 12.34. Sir T. More
has subornacion, Works, p. 211 h.= F. suborner, ‘to suborn,’ Cot.—L.
‘subornare, to furnish or supply in an underhand way or secretly. —L,
sub, under, secretly; and ornare, to furnish, adorn. See Sub- and
Ornament. Der. suborn-er; subornat-ion, from F. subornation, 6a
subornation,’ Cot.

SUBPGGSNA, a writ commanding a person to attend in court
under a penalty. (L.) Explained in Minsheu, ed. 1627; and much
older. —L. sub pend, under a penalty. —L. sub, under; and pena, abl.
of pena, a pain or penalty. See Sub-and Pain. Der. sub-pena,
werb., to serve a subpoena,


SUBTER-


SUBSCRIBE, to write underneath, to sign one’s name to. (L.}
¢ And subscribed their names yndre them ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 3 h.
‘My lettre subscribed ;’ Will of Hen. V; Royal Wills, p. 238.—L.
subscribere, to write under, sign one’s name to.=—L. sub, under;
and scribere, to write. See Sub- and Scribe. Der. sub-scrib-er ;
subscript, from the pp. subscriptus ; subscript-ion, from MF. soubscrip-
tion, ‘a subscription or subscribing,’ Cot., from L. acc. subscriptionem.

SUBSECTION, an under-section, subdivision of a subject.
(Hybrid; L. and F.-L.) From Sub- and Section.

SUBSEQUENT, following after. (L.) In Shak. Troil. i. 3.
334, and Milton, Samson, 325.—L. subsequent-, stem of pres. part. of
subsequi, to follow close after.—L. sub, under, close after; and segwi,
to follow. See Sub- and Sequel. Der. subsequent-ly.

SUBSERVE, to serve subordinately. (L.) In Milton, Samson,
57. Englished from L. subseruire, to serve under a person.—L.
sub, under; and seruitre, to serve; see Sub- and Serve. Der.
subservi-ent, from L, subseruient-, stem of pres. part. of subseruire ;
subservient-ly, subservience.

SUBSIDH, to settle down. (L.) Dryden has subsides, tr. of Virgil,
fEn. i, 212; Phillips, ed. 1706, has subside, subsidence. L. subsidere,
to settle down.—L. sub, under; and sidere, to settle, allied to
sedére, to sit, which latter is cognate with E. sit. For *si-zd-ere,
where zd- is the weak grade of the root SED, to sit. See Sub- and
Sit. Der. subsid-ence, from L. subsidentia, a settling down. And
see subsidy.

SUBSIDY, assistance, aid in money. (F.—L.) In Shak. 2.
Hen. VI, iv. 7.25; 3 Hen. VI, iv. 8.45. ME. subsidie, The Crowned
King, I. 36, in App. to P. Plowman, C-text, p. 525; the date of the
poem is ab. A.D. 1415.—AF. subsidie (in Godefroy); though the
usual F. form is subside, as in Cotgrave and Palsgrave. = L. subsidium,
a body of troops in reserve, aid, assistance. The lit. sense is ‘that
which sits [remains] behind or in reserve;” from L. sub, under,
behind, and sedére, to sit, cognate with E. sit; see Sub- and Sit;.
and see Subside... Cf. L. pre-sidium, ob-sidium, from the same
verb. Der. subsidi-ar-y, from L. subsidiarius, belonging to a reserve ;
subsid-ise, a coined verb.

SUBSIST, to live, continue. (F.—L.) In Shak. Cor. v. 6. 73.—
F. subsister, ‘to subsist, abide;’ Cot.—L. subsistere, to stand still,
stay, abide. L. sub, under, but here used with very slight force ; and
sistere, orig. to set, make to stand, but also used in the sense to.
stand. Sistere is the causal of stare, to stand (cf. Gk, torn, for
*oi-orn.); and stare is from 4/STA, to stand; see Sub- and
Stand. Der. subsist-ence, from F. subsistence, ‘subsistence, con-
tinuance,’ Cot., from L. subsistentia ; subsist-ent, from the stem of the
pres. part. of subsistere.

SUBSOITL, the under-soil. (Hybrid; L. and F.—L.) From Sub-
and Soil.

SUBSTANCEH, essential part, matter, body. (F.—L.) ME. sub-
stance, substaunce, Chaucer, C. T. 14809 (B 3993).—F. substance,
‘substance ;’ Cot.—L. substantia, essence, material, substance. = L,
substant-, stem of pres. part. of substare, to be present, exist, lit. to
stand beneath.—L. swb, beneath; and stare, to stand, from 4/STA,
tostand. SeeSub-andStand. Der. substanti-al, ME. substancial,
Gower, C. A. iii. 92; bk. vii. 226; from F. substantiel, from L.
adj. substantidlis; substanti-al-ly; substanti-ate, a coined word. Also
substant-ive, ME. substantif, P. Plowman, C. iv. 345, from F. sub-
stantif (Littré), from L. substantiuus, self-existent, that which denotes.
existence, used of the ‘ substantive’ verb esse, and afterwards extended,
as a grammatical term, to nouns substantive as distinct from nouns
adjective.

SUBSTITUTE, one person put in place of another. (F.—L.)
Orig. used asa pp. ‘ This pope may be deposed, and another substi-
tute in his rome;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 1427 f. Hence used as a
verb. ‘They dyd also substytute other;’ id. p. 821 d.—F. substitut,
‘a substitute ;’ Cot.—L. substititus, one substituted; pp. of sub-
stituere, to lay under, put in stead of. L. sub, under, in place of;
and statuere, to place, pp. statitus; see Sub- and Statute.
Der. substitute, verb, as above; substitut-ion, Gower, C. A. iii.
178, bk. vii. 2769, F. substitution (Cot.), from L. acc. substi/a-
tidnem.

SUBSTRATUM, an under stratum. (L.) LL. substratum, neut.
of substritus, pp. of substernere, to spread under. See Sub- and
Stratum,

SUBTEND, to extend under or be opposite to. (L.) Phillips,
ed. 1706, gives subtended and subtense as mathematical terms; subtense-
is in Blount, ed. 1674.—L. subtendere (pp. subtensus), to stretch be-
neath. L. sub, under ; and ¢endere, to stretch ; see Sub- and Tend..
Der. subtense, from pp. subtensus. And see hypotenuse.

SUBTER-, under, secretly. (L.) Formed from L. sub, under, by
help of the suffix -ter, which is properly a comparative suffix, as in
in-ter; see Inter-, Other.


SUBTERFUGE


SUBTERFUGE, an evasion, artifice to escape censure. (F.—L.)
In Bacon, Life of Hen. VII, ed. Lumby, p. 182, 1. 18.—F. subter-
Suge, ‘a subterfuge, a shift ;? Cot.—Late L. subterfugium, a subter-
fuge (Ducange).=—L. subterfugere, to escape secretly.—L. subter,
secretly ; and fugere, to flee; see Subter- and Fugitive.

SUBTERRANEAN, SUBTERRANEOUS, underground.
(L.) Both forms are in Phillips, ed. 1706. Blount, ed. 1674, has
subterrany and subterraneous. Bacon has subterrany, Nat. Hist. § 603.
Both are formed from L. subterraneus, underground ; the former by
adding -an (=L. -dnus) after -e-, the latter by changing -zs to -ous.
= L. sub, under; and terr-a, the earth; with suffix -dn-eus. See
‘Sub- and Terrace.

SUBTLE, fine, rare, insinuating, sly, artful. (F.—L.) Pronounced
[set'l]. The word was formerly spelt without 6, but this was some-
‘times inserted to bring it nearer to the L. form. We also meet with
the spellings subtil, subtile. ME. sotil, sotel, Chaucer, C. T. 1056,
2051; the Six-text edition has the spellings so7il, sotyl, subtil, subtile,
sotel, soutil, Group A, 1054, 2049.—OF. sutil, soutil (Burguy), later
subtil, ‘subtill,’? Cot.—L. subtilem, acc. of subtilis, fine, thin, slender,
precise, accurate, subtle. B. It is gen. thought that the orig. sense
‘of subtilis was ‘finely woven ;’ cf. sub, beneath (=closely ?), and
téla, a web. See Sub- and Toil (2). Der. subtl-y (sometimes
subtile-ly), subtle-ness (sometimes szbtile-ness) ; also subtle-ty or subtil-ty,
ME. soteltee, sotelte, P. Plowman, C. xv. 76, from OF. sofilleté
(Littré), also subsilité, from L, ace. subtilitatem. @ Note that the
pronunciation without 6 agrees with the orig. ME. form.

SUBTRACT, to take away a part from the whole. (L.) In
Minsheu, ed. 1627. —L. subtract-us, pp. of subtrahere, to draw away
underneath, to subtract.—L. swb, under ; and zrakhere (pp. tractus), to
draw. See Sub- and Trace. Der. subtract-ion (as iffrom F. *sub-
traction, not used), from L. acc. subtractidnem; subtract-ive; also
subtrahend, in Minsheu, a number to be subtracted, from L. subtra-
hend-us, fut. pass. part. of subtrahere.

SUBURB, SUBURBS, the confines of a city. (F.—L.) Com-
monly used in the pl. form. ‘The swburbes of the towne;’ Fabyan’s
Chron. c. 219; Chaucer, C. T., G657.— AF. suburbe, Stat. Realm,
i. 97 (1285).—L. suburbium, the suburb of a town. —L. sub, under
(here, near) ; and urbi-, decl. stem of urbs, a town, city; see Sub-
and Urban. Der. suburb-an, from L. suburbanus.

SUBVENTION, a subsidy, a pecuniary grant inaid. (F.—L.)
In Cotgrave. =F. subvention, ‘ subvention, help, aid ; also, a subsidy ;’
Cot.—L. subuentidnem, acc. of subuentio, assistance; cf. subuentus,
pp- of subuenire, to come to one’s aid, assist, relieve, succour.—L.
sub, under (by way of help); wenire, to come. See Sub- and
Venture. Der. We also find subvene, vb., from subuenire; and
the adj. subvent-itious.

SUBVERT, to overthrow, ruin, corrupt. (F.—L.; or L.) ME.
subuerten, Wyclif, Titus, iii, 11.—F. subvertir, ‘to subvert ;’ Cot. =
L. subuertere (pp. subuersus), to tur upside down, overthrow, lit. to
turn from beneath. —L. sub, from under; and vxertere, to turn. See
Sub- and Verse. Der. subvers-ion, AF. subversion, Stat. Realm,
i. 300, F. subversion, ‘a subversion,’ Cot., from L. acc. subuersionem ;
subvers-ive.

SUCCEED, to follow next in order, take the place of, to pros-
per. (F.—L.) Better spelt succede, ME. succeden, Chaucer, C. T.
8508 (E 632).—F. succeder, ‘to succeed;” Cot.=L. succédere
(pp. suécessus), to go beneath or under, follow after. =—L. swe- (for
sub before c), under; and cédere, to go; see Sub- and Cede.
Der. success, an issue or result, whether good or bad (now chiefly
only of a good result), as in ‘good or ill successe,’ Ascham, School-
master, pt. i, ed. Arber, p. 35, from MF. succes, ‘ success,’ Cot.,
from L. successum, acc. of successus, result, event; success-ful,
success-ful-ly, Also success-or, ME. successour, Rob. of Glouc.
p- 507, 1. 10440, F. successeur, from L. acc, successdrem, one who
succeeds ; success-ion, F. succession, ‘succession,’ Cot., from L. acc.
successionem 3 success-ion-al; success-ive, F. successif, ‘successive,’
from L. successiuus ; success-ive-ly. Also succed-an-e-ous, explained
by Phillips, ed. 1706, as ‘succeding, or coming in the room of
another,’ from L. suecédaneus, that which supplies the place of
another ; succed-an-e-um, sb., neut. of succédaneus,

SUCCINCT, concise. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627. = L. succinctus,
prepared, short, small, contracted ; pp. of suecingere, to gird below,
tuck up, gird up, furnish. —L. sac- (for sub before c), under, below ;
and cingere, to gird; see Sub- and Cincture. Der. succinct-ly,
succinct-ness.

SUCCORY, chicory. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Of cykorie or suckorie,
Sir T. Elyot, Castle of Helth, b. ii. c. 8. Minsheu gives succory,
cichory, and chicory. Succory is a corruption of cichory, now usually
called chicory; see Chicory.

SUCCOUR, to assist, relieve. (F.—L.) ME. socouren, Will. of
Palerne. 1186.—OF. sucurre, soscorre (Burguy), MF, secourir, as in


SUDS 613


Cotgrave; this change to e is no improvement.—L. subcurrere,
succurrere, to run under, run up to, run to the aid of, aid, succour. —
L. sub, under, up to; and currere, to run; see Sub- and Current.
Der. succour-er, Also succour, sb., ME. sucurs, Ancten Riwle,
p- 244, 1. 9, from OF. socors, later secours,as in Cotgrave, from L,
subcursus, succursus, pp. of succurrere. @ The spelling is prob.
due to that of the AF. swccour, sb., in Langtoft’s Chron. i. 302, also:
spelt soccours, i. 16; and not from AF, sucure, vb., as used in the
Vie de St. Auban.

SUCCUBA, a wanton female demon, (L.) In Beaum. and
Fletcher, Knight of Malta, v. 2 (Norandine).=—L. swecuba.—L.
succubare, to lie under.= L. suc- (for sub), under ; cubare, to lie down.
See Sub- and Covey. Der. succubus, a masc. form; Webster,
Westward Ho, iv. 2.

SUCCULENT, juicy. (F.—L.) In Minshen, ed. 1627.—F.
succulent, ‘ succulent ;’ Cot.=—L. succulentus, sticulentus, full of juice ;
formed with suffix -lentus from succu-s, sticu-s, juice (the gen. is sace?,
but there is a collateral form with u-stem, found in the gen. pl.
sucuum). Allied to E. Suck.

SUCCUMB, to yield. (L.) In Butler, Hudibras, pt. i. c. 3,
1. 459. —L, succumbere, to lie or fall under, yield. L. suc- (for sub
before ¢), under; and *cumbere, to lie, a nasalised form allied to
cubare, to lie. See Sub- and Incubus, Incumbent, Covey.

SUCH, of a like kind. (E.) ME. swulc, swilc, swilch, swich, such
(with numerous other forms, for which see Stratmann). We find
swule, swile in Layamon, 31585, 13753 swilch, Reliquize Antique,
i. 131 3 swich, such, Chaucer, C. T. 3 (see Six-text). It will thus be
seen that the orig. 2 was lost, and the final ¢ palatalised to ch.
The forms swule, swile are from AS. swylc, swilc, swelc, such,
Grein, ii. 513.4-OSax. sulik ; OFries. selic, selk, sullik, sulch, suk ;
Du. zulk; Icel. slikr; Dan. slig; Swed. slik; MSwed. salik (Ihre) ;
G. solch; OHG. solich; Goth. swaleiks. B. The Goth. swaleiks
is simply compounded of swa, so, and Jeiks, like; and all the Teut.
forms admit of a similar explanation. Thus such is for so-like, of
which it is a corruption. See So and Like; and cf. Which.

SUCK, to draw in with the mouth, imbibe, esp. milk. (E.)
ME. souken, Chaucer, C. T. 8326 (E 450); once a strong verb,
with pt. t. sek or sec, Ancren Riwle, p. 330, 1. 6, pp. z-soke (for
i-soken), Trevisa, iii. 267, 1. 12. AS. saican, strong verb, pt. t.
séac, pp. socen ; Grein, ii. 492; Deut. xxxii. 13 ; Luke, xi. 27. [There
is also a form sigan, and there is a double form of the Teut. base,
viz. SEUK and SEUG. Of the former, we find examples in AS.
stican, E. suck, cognate with L. sigere. Of the latter, we have
examples in AS. sugar, Icel. sjiiga, siga (pt. t. saug, pp. soginn),
Dan. suge, Swed. suga, G. saugen, OHG., stigan; which is the pre-
vailing type in Teutonic.] We find also W. sugno, to suck, sug,
juice; Irish sughaim, I suck in, sugh, juice; Gael. sug, to suck,
sugh, juice; cf. L. sticus, suceus, juice. The Idg. root of E.
suck is SEUG. See Brugmann, i. § 112.. The word succulent is
related. Der. suck, verb, suck-er, sb.; suck-le, Cor. i. 3. 44, a fre-
quentative form, with the usual suffix -le; suck-l-ing, ME. sokling
or sokeling, spelt sokelynge in Prompt. Parv., formed with dimin.
suffix -ing from the form sokel =one who sucks, where the -el is the
suffix of the agent (so that it is hardly a parallel form to duck-l-ing,
which is merely a double dimin. from duck). Also honey-suckle, q.V. 5
suc-t-ion, q.V.3 soak, q.V.

SUCTION, the act or power of sucking. (F.—L.) In Bacon,
Nat. Hist., § 191.—F. suction, ‘a sucking;’ Cot. Formed, as if
from L. *suctio; cf. suctus, pp. of stigere, to suck; see Suck.

SUDATORY, asweating bath. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
Rare. Rich. gives an example from Holyday, Juvenal, p. 224.—L.
sudatorium, asweating-bath ; neut. of sudatorius, serving for sweating.
=—L. sidatéri-, decl. stem of stiddtor, a sweater. L. sidare, to
sweat, allied to E. Sweat, q.v.; with suffix -tor of the agent. See
sudorific.

SUDDEN, unexpected, abrupt, hasty. (F.—L.) ME. sodain,
sodein, soden, Chaucer, C. T. 4841 (B 421); sodeynliche, suddenly,
King Alisaunder, 3568.—OF. sodaim, sudain, mod. F. soudain,
sudden. Cf. Prov. soptament, suddenly (Bartsch) ; Ital. swbitano
(also subitaneo). = Late L. *subitdnus, for L. subitaneus, sudden ; ex~
tended from, subitus, sudden, lit. ‘that which has come stealthily,’
orig. pp. of subire, to go or come stealthily.— L. sub, under, stealthily ;
and tre, to go, from 4/EI, to go, See Sub- and Itinerant. Der.
sudden-ly, -ness.

SUDORIFIC, causing sweat. (F.—L.) ‘ Sudorifick herbs;’
Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 706.—F. sudorifique, causing sweat, Cot.—L.
siidorificus, the same. —L. siiddri-, decl. stem of sédor, sweat ; and
-ficus, making, from facere, to make. SeeSweatand Fact. Der.
sudorific, sb.; and see sudatory. ;

SUDS, boiling water mixed with soap. (E.) ‘Sprinkled With
suds. and dish-water;’ Beaum, and Fletcher, Wit without Money,


614: SUE


A. iii. sc. 1. Suds means ‘things sodden;’ and is formed as a pl.
from sud, derived from Teut. *sud-, the weak grade of Teut.
*seuthan-, to seethe; see Seethe. Hence Gascoigne uses suddes
metaphorically, in the sense of ‘ worthless things;’ see Gascoigne’s
Works, ed. Hazlitt, ii. 310, 1. 9. In the suds=in the middle of
a wash, is a proverbial expression for being in a sulky temper; cf.
prov. E. sudded, flooded. Cf. MDu. Zode, a seething, boiling,
Hexham; Icel. sod, water in which meat has been sodden; and
see Sod.

SUE, to prosecute at law. (F.—L.) The orig. sense is merely to
follow; it was technically used asa law-term. Spelt sewe in Pals-
grave. ME. suen, Wyclif, Matt. viii. 19, 22; also sewen, suwen,
P. Plowman, B. xi. 21; swwen, Ancren Riwle, p. 208, 1. 5.—OF. su-
(as in pr. pl. su-ent, pres. pt. su-ant), a stem of OF. sivir, siuwir,
suivir (Godefroy, with several other forms), mod. F. suvre, to
follow. Cf. Prov. segre, seguir (Bartsch), Ital. seguire, to follow. =
Late L. sequere, to follow, substituted for L. segui, to follow ; see the
changes traced in Brachet. See Sequence. Der. en-sue, q.v., pur-
sue; suit, suite, q.v.

SUET, the fat of an animal about the kidneys. (F.—L.) ME.
suet. ‘ Swéte [where w=uu], suét (due sillabe), of flesche or fysche
or oper lyke, Liguamen, sumen;’ Prompt. Parv. Formed with dimin.
suffix -et from OF. sez, Norman sie, Walloon sew (Littré), mod. F.
suif, suet, fat. Cf. Span. sebo; Ital. sevo, ‘ tallow, fat, sewet,’ Florio.
=L. sébum, also séuum, tallow, suet, grease. Prob. allied to L. sapo,
soap; see Soap.

SUFFER, to undergo, endure, permit. (F.—L.) ME. soffren,
suffren, in early use; Chaucer, C. T. 11089 (F 777); Layamon,
24854 (later text).—OF. soffrir, suffrir, mod. F. souffrir. = Folk-L.
*sufferire, for L. sufferre, to undergo, endure. = L. suf- (for sub before
Ff), under ; and ferre, to bear, cognate with E. bear. See Sub- and
Bear (1). Der. suffer-er, suffer-ing ; suffer-able; also suffer-ance
or suff-rance, ME. suffrance, Chaucer, C. T. 11100 (F 788), OF.
soffrance, later souffrance, ‘sufferance,’ Cot., from Late L. sufferentia
(Ducange).

SUFFICE, to be enough. (F.—L.) ME. suffisen, Chaucer,
C. T. 9908 (E 2034).—F. suffis-, occurring in suffis-ant, stem of
pres. part. of suffire, to suffice; cf. ME. suffisaunce, sufficiency,
Chaucer, C. T. 492 (A 490), from F. suffisance, sufficiency. —L.
sufficere, lit. to make or put under, hence to substitute, provide,
supply, suffice.—L, swf- (for sub before f), and facere, to make; see
Sub- and Fact. Der. suffici-ent, Merch. Ven. i. 3. 17, from L.
sufficient-, stem of pres. part. of sufficere; suffici-ent-ly; sufficienc-y,
Meas. for Meas. i. I. 8.

SUFFIX, a letter or syllable added to a word. (L.) Modern;
used in philology. —L. suffixus, pp. of suffigere, to fasten on beneath.
= L. suf- (for sub before /), and figere, to fix; see Sub- and Fix.
Der. suffix, verb.

SUFFOCATE, to smother. (L.) Orig. used asa pp. ‘ Mayhe
be suffocate,’ 2 Hen. VI, i. 1. 124.—L. suffocatus, pp. of suffocare, to
choke. Lit. ‘to put something under the gullet, to throttle.’ =L.
suf- (for sub- before p), and fauc-, stem of faucés, s. pl., the gullet,
throat. [The same change from az to 6 occurs in fécale, a.neck-
cloth.] Perhaps allied to Skt. bkaka, a hole, the head of a fountain.
Der. suffocat-ion, from F. suffocation, * suffocation,’ Cot., from L. acc.
suffocitionem.

SUFFRAGE, a vote, united prayer. (F.—L.) In Shak. Cor.
ii, 2.142; Caxton, Siege of Troy, fol. 51b, 1. 103 sofragys, pl.,
Monk of Evesham (ab. 1482), c. 44, ed. Arber, p. 92.—F. suffrage,
‘a suffrage, voice;’ Cot.—L. suffragium, a vote, voice, suffrage.
Suffrigium has been ingeniously explained as ‘a broken piece’
such as a pot-sherd, &c., whereby the ancients recorded their votes
(Vaniéek, Bréal). If this be right, suf- is the usual prefix (=sub),
and -fragivm is connected with frangere, to break, cognate with E.
Break. Cf. L. nau-frigium, a ship-wreck. B. But Walde
connects it with L. frag-or, noise, din, i.e. outcry ; and further,
with AS. spréc, E. speech; see Speech. Der. suffrag-an,
ME. suffragan, Trevisa, ii. 115, 1.9, from F. suffragant, ‘a suffra-
gant, or suffragan, a bishop’s deputy,’ Cot., from L. suffragant-,
stem of pres. part. of suffragarz, to vote for, support, assist ; but
Supregan may also represent the Late L. suffradganeus, a suffragan
bishop.

SUFFUSE, to overspread or cover, as with a fluid. (L.) ‘Her
suffused eyes ;’ Spenser, F. Q. iii. 7. 10.—L. sufftsus, pp. of suffund-
ere, to pour beneath, diffuse beneath or upon.=—L. suf- (for sub
before f), and fundere, to pour; see Sub-and Fuse. Der. suffus-
ion, from F. suffusion, ‘a suffusion, or powring upon,’ Cot., from L.
acc. suffusiOnem.

SUFI, a Moslem mystic; see under Sophy.

SUGAR, a sweet substance, esp. that obtained from a kind of
cane. (I’,—Span,— Arab, —Pers.—Skt.) ME. sugre, Chaucer, C. T.


~ SULKY


10928 (F 614); in P. Plowman, B. v. 122, two MSS, read suere, of
which sugre is a ‘voiced’ form.—F. sucre, ‘sugar;’ Cot.=—Span.
azucar, sugar, = Arab. sakkar, sokkar, sugar; Palmer’s Pers. Dict.,
col. 357, Freytag’s Arab. Dict. ii. 334.5; whence, by prefixing the
article al, the form assokkar, accounting for the prefixed a in the
Span. form. = Pers. shakar, sugar; Palmer’s Pers. Dict., col. 385. —
Skt. garkara, gravel, a soil abounding in stony fragments, clayed or
candied sugar; Benfey, p. 936. Prob. allied to Gk. xpoxdaAn, a
pebble on the sea-shore. 8. From the Pali form sakkhara@ are
derived Gk. cdxyap, cdeyapov, and L. saccharum. It is a mistake
to derive F. sucre (as Brachet does) from L. saccharum directly.
See Saccharine. Der. sugar, verb, Palsgrave; sugar-y, sugar-
cane, sugar-candy (see candy) ; sugar-loaf, Paston Letters, iii. 37.

SUGGEST, to introduce indirectly, hint. (L.) In Shak. Rich. II,
i. I. 101, iii. 4. 75.—L. suggestus, pp. of suggerere, to carry or lay
under, furnish, supply, suggest.—L. sug- (for sub before g); and
gerere, to carry; see Sub- and Jest. Der. suggest-ion, Chaucer,
C. T. 14727 (B 3607), from F. suggestion, ‘a suggestion, from L.
acc. suggestionem; suggest-ive, a coined word ; suggest-ive-ly.

SUICIDE, self-murder; one who dies by his own hand. (F.—L.)
The word was really coined iz England, butonaF.model. Seenote
at the end of the article. In Blackstone’s Commentaries, b. iv. c..14
(R.)3 in the latter sense. Rich. gives a quotation for it, in the
former sense, from a tr. of Montesquieu, The Spirit of Laws, b. xiv.
c. 13; the first E. translation appeared in 1749, immediately after its
appearance in France. Littré says that suicide is in Richelet’s Dict.
in 1759, and is said to have been first used in French by Desfontaines
not much earlier (1738). As remarked under Homicide, the same
form has two senses, and two sources. 1. F. suicide, a coined word,
from L, sui, of oneself, gen. case of sé, self; and -cidium, a slaying
(as in homi-cidium), from cedere, to slay. 2. F. suicide, coined
from L, sui, of oneself, and -cida, a slayer (as in homi-cida), from
cedere, to slay. Der. suicid-al, -ly. @ Trench, in his English
Past and Present, observes that Phillips notices the word, as a mon-
strous formation, in 1671, long before its appearance in French ;
and it is given by Blount, ed. 1674. It seems to have been suggested
by the queer words swist, a selfish man, and swicism, selfishness,
which had been coined at an earlier date, and were used by Whitlock
in an essay entitled The Grand Schismatic, or Suist Anatomised ;
cf. his Zootomia, 1654. The word is clumsy enough, but we
may rightly claim it. Littré’s objection, that the form of the
word is plainly French, is of no force. We had the words homi-
cide, patri-cide, matri-cide, fratri-cide, already in use; and swi-cide
was coined by analogy with these, which accounts for the whole
matter simply enough. It may be added that, though the translator
of Montesquieu uses the word, the original has only Vhomicide de
soi-méme.

SUIT, an action at law, a petition, a set, as of clothes. (F.—L.)
ME. suite, Chaucer, C. T. 2875 (A 2873).—=F. suite (also suétte in
Cotgrave), ‘a chase, pursuit, suit against, also the train, attendants,
or followers of a great person;’ Cot.—Late L. type *sequita,
variant of secta (L. sectita), a following, a sect (whence the sense
of suite or train); in Late L. extended to mean a suit at law, a
series, order, set, a suit of clothes, &c.; see Ducange. From the
base of segu-i, to follow, as noted under Sect, q.v. Cf. ‘ secta
vestium,’ a suit of clothes; Liber Albus, p. 29. ‘Sex cochliaria
eiusdem sect@,’ six spoons of the same set ; York Wills, iii. 3 (1395).
Der. suit, verb, to clothe, As You Like It, i. 3. 118, also to fit,
adapt, agree, accord, id. ii. 7. 81, Macb. ii. 1. 60; ‘to suit is to
agree together, as things made on .a common plan,’ Wedgwood.
Also suit-or, L.L. L. ii. 34; sait-able, Timon, iii. 6. 92, sat-abl-y,
suit-able-ness, Doublets, suite, q.v., sect, sept, set (2). san

SUITE, a train of followers. (F.—L.) ‘ With fifty in their
suite to his defence ;’ Sidney (in Todd’s Johnson; no reference). =F.
suite; see further under Suit, of which suite is a doublet.

SULCATED, furrowed, grooved. (L.) ‘Sulcate, to cast up in
furrows, to till;’ Blount, ed. 1674. Chiefly scientific. = L. sulcatus,
pp. of sulcare, to furrow.= L. sulcus, a furrow.--Gk. 6Axdés, a furrow,
from éAKev, to draw along; cf. AS. sulh, a plough.

SULKYY, obstinate, silently sullen. (E.) The word is rare in old
books, and the Dictionaries omit it, till we come to Todd’s Johnson,
where ‘the sulkiness of my disposition’ is quoted from a Letter of
Gray to Dr. Clarke, A.D. 1760, It is an incorrect form, and should
rather be sulken ; it arose from misdividing the sb. sulken-ness as sulke-
nness, by analogy with happi-ness from happy, &c. The sb. appears
as a-swolkenesse, i.e. sloth, O. Eng. Hom. i. 83, 1.25; and is not un-
common in AS., which also has the true old form of the adj.— AS.
solcen, orig. slothful, remiss; in the comp. dsolcen, slothful, remiss,
lazy, Aélfric’s Homilies, ed. Thorpe, vol. i. p. 306, 1. 11, p. 340, last
line; also ii. 220, 1.'23, where it means ‘disgusted.’ The sb. dsolcen-
nes-is quite a common word ; see Ailf. Hom. i. 602, 1. 8, ii. 46,1. 11,


-SULLEN -


ii, 218, 1, 22, ii. 220, L 21; Thorpe, Diplomatariumi, p. 240, 1.12;
the sense comes very near to that of mod. E. sulkiness. ‘ Accidiosus,
vel tediosus, asolcen;’? Voc. 190. 14. Another trace of AS, solcen
occurs in the comp. besolcen, used as a pp., with the sense of ‘ stupe-


fied;’ Aélfred, tr. of Gregory’s Past. Care, c. 35, ed. Sweet, p. 238,


1.3. B. We further know that solcen was the pp. of a strong verb
seolcan (pt.t. sealc, pp. solcen), appearing in the comp. @seolcan (pt. t.
asealc, pp. dsolcen), for which Leorefers to Elf. Hom. ii. 592, the re-
ference, unluckily, being wrong. We find the verb again, spelt
Gsealcan, in Czedmon, ed, Grein, 2167; see Grein,i. 41. y. There
is even a cognate OHigh G., word, viz. the verb arselhan, Graff, vi.
216, where the prefix ar-=AS. d-. Thus the Teut. type is *sekan-,
from a base *selk-, answering to an Idg. base SELG. 8. It is
remarkable that the Skt. szj means ‘to let loose, abandon,’ and the
pp: syshta is ‘abandoned,’ which comes very near the sense of AS.
solcen. Der, sulki-ness, really for sulken-ness, as explained above.
¢@~ Ettmiiller, p. 753, gives a form dswolcen, but the MS. has Gsolcen,
Liber Scint. § 16, p. 79, 1. 5; also Gsolcenysse, id. § 24, p. 98, 1. 1.

SULLEN, gloomily angry, morose. (F.—L.) ME. solein, solain,
orig. merely ‘solitary,’ then ‘hating company,’ or morose, as ex-
plained in the Prompt. Parv. ‘ Soleyne of maners, or he that lovythe
no cumpany, Solitarius;’ Pr. Pary. A mess of meat for one person
was also called soleyne, as explained.on the same page. ‘ By hym-
self as a soleyne,’ i.e. a lonely person; P. Plowman, B. xii. 205. In
the Rom. of the Rose, 3896, solezz means ‘sullen,’ but in Chaucer,
Book of the Duchess, 982, and Parl. of Foules, 607, it means
‘solitary’ or ‘ lonely.” OF. solaiz, lonely, solitary, of which the only
trace I find is in Roquefort, where solain is explained as ‘a portion
served out to a religious person,’ a pittance, doubtless a portion for
one; so also in Ducange, s. v. solatium (5). E. Miiller and Mahn
cite Proy. sola, solitary. These Romance forms presuppose a
Late L. *sdlanus, solitary, but it does not occur ; however, it is a mere
extension from L. sdlus, sole, alone; see Sole. Cf. OF. soltain,
solitary (Burguy), which answers, similarly, to a Late L. *solitanus.
Der. sullen-ly, -ness.

SULLY, to tarnish, spot, make dirty. (F.—L.) Shak. has sullied,
Sonnet 15; also the infinitive form sully; Merry Wives, ii. 1. 102.
[We also find the ME. solwed, soiled, Cursor Mundi, 1. 22491, spelt
sullowed in 1608 (Nares). From ME. solwen, spelt solwyn, solowyn
in Prompt. Parv., to soil, bemire; from AS. solw-e, g., d., and
acc. of solu, f., mire, by-form of AS. sol, mire (below). And also
ME. sulien; whence sulie}=sullieth, Owl and Nightingale, 1238 ;
pp- ysuled =sullied, P. Plowman’s Creed, 752, Ancren Riwle, p. 396,
1.1. AS. sylian, to sully, defile with dirt or mud. ‘Sio sugu hi wile
sylian on hire sole zfter Sem Se hio ASwegen bid’=the sow will
wallow [lit. sully herself] in her mire after she is washed; Ailfred,
tr. of Gregory’s Past. Care, ed. Sweet, c. liv. p. 419,1.27. This
form is from AS. sol, mire, mud, for which see the quotation
above.+Swed. séla, to bemire; Dan. séle, to bemire, sdle, sél,
mire; Goth. bisauljan, to sully, render impure; G. siiklen, to sully,
sich herum siihlen, to wallow, from sukle, slough, mire, MHG. sol,
mire. Cf, Norw. sala, mire. | B. Nevertheless, the modern verb
to sully is a doublet of the earlier verb ¢o soil. = MF. souiller, ‘ to soil,
slurry, durty, smutch; se souiller, (of a swine) to wallow in the
mire ;’ Cot.—OF. soul, for which see Soil (2). Doublet, soi (2).

SULPHOR, brimstone. (L.) [ME. soulfre (an OF. form, cf. F.
soufre) ; Chaucer, Ho. of Fame, iii. 418.] In Spenser, F. Q.i. 5. 31.
A term in alchemy, from L, sulphur, also spelt sulfur. Der. sulphur-
e-ous, from L, sulphureus or sulfureus, adj.; sulphur-ous, from F.
sulphureux, ‘sulphurous,’ Cot., from L. adj. sulphurdsus or sulfurdsus ;
also the coined words sulphur-ic, sulphur-et, sulphur-ett-ed, and sulph-
ate (used for *sulphur-ate).

SULTAN, an Eastern ruler, head of the Ottoman empire. (F.—
Arab.) In Shak. Merch. Ven. ii. 1. 26.—F. sultan, ‘a sultan or
souldan,’ Cot.—Arab. sultan, victorious, also a ruler, prince; cf.
sultat, dominion ; Rich. Dict. pp. 843, 844. B. The word occurs
early, in the ME. form soudan, Chaucer, C. T. 4597 (B 177); this
is from OF. soudanz, souldan, both in Cotgrave, which are derived
from the same Arab, word. Der. sultan-ess, with F. suffix;
sultan-a, Dryden, Kind Keeper, i. 1, from Ital. sudtana, fem. of sultano,
a sultan, from Arab. sultan.

SULTRY, SWELTRY, very hot and oppressive. (E.) Sultry
and sweltry, both in Phillips, ed. 1706, are the same word; the latter
being the fuller and older form. Shak. has seltry, Hamlet, v. 2. 101 ;
also swelter’d =caused to exude by heat, Macb. iv.1.8. The we has
passed into «; cf. so from AS. swa, and mod. E. sword, where the w
isentirely lost. The -y (=AS. -ig)is an adjectival suffix, and sweltr-y
is short for swelter-y, formed from the verb to swelter. ‘ Sweltrynge
or swalterynge, or swonynge, Sincopa,’ Prompt. Parv.; where the
sense is ‘a swooning with heat.’ ‘ Swalteryn for hete, or febylnesse, or
other cawsys, or swownyn, Exalo, sincopizo,’ id..p. 481, B. Again,


SUMMON 615


swelter is a frequent. form (with the usual suffix -er) from ME.
swelten, to die, also to swoon away or faint. ‘Swowe or swelte’=
swoon or faint, P. Plowman, B. v. 154. From AS. sweltan, to die,
Grein, ii. 505.4-Icel. svelta, to die, starve (pt. t. svalz, pl. sultu, pp.
soltinn ; Dan. sulte; Swed. svalta; Goth. swiltan, to die. Cf. Icel.
sultr, Dan. sult, hunger, famine; from the weak grade *swult>*sult.
Also OHG. schwelzan, to burn, to be consumed by fire or love.
y- All from Teut. base *swelt-, to die; prob. an extension of the
base *swel-, to burn, glow, be hot, from which the E. word has un-
doubtedly received its present sense; this appears in AS. swelan, to
burn, ME. swelez, swalen, prov. E. sweal, to waste away under the
action of fire, allied to G. schwelen, to burn slowly, schwiil, sultry,
with the extended forms OHG. swilizo, heat, swilizdn, to burn slowly ;
Lith. swil-ti, to shine, burn. Der. szdltri-ness.

SUM, the amount, whole of a thing, substance, total, summary,
fulness, (F.—L.) ME. somme, Chaucer, C. T. 11537 (F 1225).—
AF, summe, a sum, Vie de St. Auban, ed. Atkinson; F. somme, ‘a
summe of money,’ Cot.—L. summa, sum, chief part, amount; orig.
fem. of summus, highest, chief, principal. Suwmmus stands for *sup-
mus, uppermost, superl. form from *szp, old form of sub (cf. szp-er) ;
the sense of ‘under’ and ‘over’ are curiously mixed; see Sub-.
Allied to Gk. éma-ros, highest, with a different suffix. Brugmann,
i. § 762. Der. sum, verb, ME. sommen, Trevisa, iii, 261, 1. 15, F.
sommer, from L. summdare3; summ-at-ion, from F. sommation, ‘the
summing of money,’ Cot., due to L. summdare; summ-ar-y, sb.,
answering to F. sommaire, ‘a summary,’ Cot., from L. summdarium,
a summary, epitome, which presupposes an adj. *summéarius;
summary, adj., answering to F. sommaire, adj., ‘summary,’ Cot. ;
summ-ar-i-ly, summ-ar-i-ness; summ-ar-ise, a coined word. Also
summ-it, q.v. And see supreme, sovereign, soprano.

SUMACH, a tree. (F.—Span.—Arab.) ‘Sumach or Sumack, a
kind of rank-smelling shrub that bears a black berry made use of by
curriers to dress their leather ;”’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Spelt sumack,
sumake, sumaque in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, with a similar definition.
ME. sumac, Lanfrank, Cirurgie, p. 218, 1. 19.—F. sumac, formerly
spelt swmach; Littré. Span. zumaque. = Arab. summagq, a species of
shrub; Rich, Dict. p. 847. Another Arab. name is samagqil (id.) ;
this will account for another F. form sommail, noticed by Littré.

SUMMER (1), the warmest season of the year. (E.) ME. somer,
sumer (with one m), Chaucer, C. T. 396 (A 394). AS. sumor,
sumer, Matt. xxiv. 32.4-Du. zomer3; Icel. sumar; Dan. sommer ;
Swed. sommar; G. sommer; OHG, sumar,  . From a Tent. type
*sum-rus, m. (Franck) ; connected with Irish and OWelsh ham, W.
haf, summer (the initial # standing, as usual, for s), Skt. sama, a
year, Zend hama,summer. Brugmann, i. § 436. Der. summer, verb,
to pass the summer, Isaiah, xviii. 6; sammer-house, Amos, iii. 15.

SUMMER (2), a beam. (F.—Low L.—Gk.) See Sumpter.

SUMMERSET, the same as Somersault, q.v.

SUMMIT, highest point, top. (F.—L.) In Shak. Haml. i. 4. 70,
iii. 3. 18; K. Lear, iv. 6. 57. Caxton has sommete, Godfrey of
Boloyne, p. 251, 1. 21.—F. sommet, ‘the top,’ Cot. Dimin., with
suffix -ef, of OF. som, the top, esp. of a hill; see Burguy, Littré. =
L. summum, highest point, neut. of summus, highest; see Sum.

SUMMON, to cite to appear, call with authority. (F.—L.) The
examples in the Glossary to Layamon, s.v. somnien, show that two
distinct words were early confused, viz. AS. sammian, somnian, to
collect together (a derivative verb from saman, together, from sam,
together) and OF. somoner, semoner, mod. F. semondre. But since
summons, sb., and summoner are both F. words, and the word to
summon properly belongs to the law-courts, we need only here con-
sider the F. form. We find Jet somony=caused to attend, in Rob. of
Glouc. p. 377, 1. 7739; and the word somne in Chaucer, C. T. 6943
(D 1361), clearly refers to the mod. E. sense of summon, though its
form would suit the AS. somnian. equally well. —OF. somoner
(Roquefort), in which form it is rare, having been early corrupted to
semoner or semondre. Cotgrave gives F. semondre, ‘to bid, invite,
summon, warn, cite.’ Littré gives an 11th-cent. example of the
form sumoner; and Roquefort gives an excellent example in which
the OF. somoner is used with the orig. sense of ‘to admonish,’ the
word somonoit being used to translate L. admonéret ; Dial. de Saint
Grégoire, liv. 2. chap. 5. Cf. Prov. somonre, to summon, a common
word (Bartsch).—L. swmmonére, to remind privily.—L. swm- (for
sub before m) ; and monére, to advise; see Sub- and Monition.
Der. summon-er, ME. sompnour, Chaucer, C. T. 625 (represented by
mod, E. Sumner as a proper name), also somonour, P. Plowman,
B. iii. 133 (footnote), from the AF. sumenour, Laws of Will. I. § 47,
MF. semonneur, ‘a summoner, citer, apparitor,’ Cot. Also sum-
mon-s, ME. somouns, Allit. Morte Arthure, 91, from the AF, somonse,
f. Stat. Realm, i. 29 (1295), MF. semonce, ‘a warning, citation,
summons,’ Cot. ; Littré explains that the F. semonce, formerly semonse
(somonse), is the fem. of semons (somons), the pp. of semondre (so-


$


616 SUMPITAN


mondre), tosummon. Cf. Prov. somonsa, a summons, cited by Littré ;
we also find Prov. somos, somosta, semosta used in the same sense.
> Thus the s at the end of summons is not due to the L. sum-
moneas, as some have supposed.

SUMPITAN, a blow-pipe. (Malay.) Malay sumpitan. — Malay
sumpit (also menyumpit), to blow; with suffix -an.

SUMPTER, a horse for carrying burdens, a pack-horse. (F.—
Late L.—Gk.) Two forms of the word were once in use, viz. ME.
somer, King Alisaunder, 850, and sumpter, id. 6023. ‘The former,
once the commoner form, is now lost; but it is necessary to ex-
plain it first. 1. From OF, somier, sommier (Burguy), a pack-horse ;
formed, with suffix -ier of the agent, from OF. somme, some, saume,
sume, a pack, burden. [Cotgrave gives OF. sommier, ‘a sumpter-
horse, also the piece of timber called a summer.’]= Late L. salma,
corrupt form of sagma,a pack, burden; whence sagmdrius, salmarius,
a pack-horse (>F. sommier).—Gk. odypa, a pack-saddle. —Gk.
odtrev (=*odx-yey, fut. odfw), to pack, put a burden on a horse,
fasten on a load, orig. to fasten. Allied to Gk. ody, housings,
oayos, a soldier’s cloak. 2. The etymology of sumpter is similar ;
it orig. meant, not the horse, but the horse’s driver; and such is the
sense in King Alisaunder, 6023, where the sumpters are reckoned
among the squires and guides belonging to an army. Hence, also,
the mod. E. sumpter-horse, i. e. a baggage-carrier’s horse, the addi-
tion of horse being necessary to the sense, whereas the ME. somer
was used alone, in the same sense. Sumpter is, accordingly, from
OF. sommetier, a packhorse-driver (Roquefort). This answers to a
Low L. *sagmatarius, not found, but formed from the Gk. caypar-,
the true stem of cdyya, just as sagmdrius is formed from odypa.
3. The E. word summer, noticed by Cotgrave (above) as meaning ‘a
beam,’ is worth notice. It occurs in Barbour’s Bruce, xvii. 696, and
is given in Halliwell; being so called from its bearing a great burden
or weight; cf. Norman dial. sommier, a summer (Duméril). Hence
also the E. breast-summer (gen. pronounced bressomer), defined in
Webster as ‘a summer or beam placed breast-wise to support a
superincumbent wall.’ ¢- Note that swmpter in K. Lear, ii. 4. 219,
does not mean ‘ a packhorse,’ but a packhorse-driver.

SUMPTUARY, relating to expenses. (L.) In Cotgrave, to
translate E. somptuaire. It is rather Englished from L. sumptudarius,
belonging to expenses, than borrowed from French. Formed, with
suffix -Grius, from sumptu-, decl. stem of sumptus, expense, cost; see
Sumptuous.

SUMPTUOUS, expensive, costly. (F.—L.) ‘ Sumptuous ex-
penses of the meane people;’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii.
c. 28.—F. somptueux, ‘sumptuous,’ Cot. —L. swmptudsus, costly. = L.
sumptu-, decl. stem of sumptus, expense, cost.—L. sumptus, pp. of
sumere, to take, spend, consume. B. Samere (*sups-emere) is a
derivative of emere, to buy, orig. to take. Brugmann,i.§ 240. See
Sus- and Example. Der. sumptuous-ly, -ness,

SUN, the celestial body which is the source of light and heat.
(E.) ME. sone, two syllables, Chaucer, C. T. 7. AS. sunne, a
fem. sb., Exod. xvi. 21, xvii. 12 (common).4+Du. zo, fem. sb.; Icel.
sunna, fem., only in poetry, the common word being sdl; G. sonne,
fem., OHG. sunna; Goth. sunna, masc., sunnd, fem. B. The Teut.
type is *sunndn-, fem. Here -ndn is a suffix (as in Teut. *ster-non-,
a star) ; and the base *swn- is the weak grade of a root *swen, which
is prob. allied to the root *sadu, *su, ‘to shine,’ whence Goth.
sau-il, L. sd-l, the sun, Icel. sd-1, the sun. See Solar. Der. sun,
verb ; sun-beam, AS. sunnebéam; sun-burnt; sun-rise, spelt sonne ryse
in Palsgrave; sun-set, spelt sonne sette in Palsgrave, ONorthamb.
sun-set, Matt. xxiv. 27 (Lindisfarne MS.). Also Sun-day, AS. sunnan
deg, lit. ‘day of the sun,’ where swnnan is the gen. case. Other com-
pounds are sun-fish, -flower, -shine, -stroke, sunn-y, sun-less, sun-ward ;
and see south.

SUNDER, to part, divide. (E.) ME. sundren, Ancren Riwle,
p- 270, last line. AS, sundrian, gesundrian, Grein, i, 4593; also
syndrian, in comp. dsyndrian, Matt. x. 35; lit. ‘to put asunder.’ =
AS. sundor, ady., asunder, Grein, ii. 495.-+-Icel. sundra, to sunder,
from sundr, ady., asunder; Dan. soxdre, to sunder, from séxder,
ady.; Swed. sdndra, from sénder, adv.; G. sondern, from sonder,
adj., separate. And cf. Goth, sundré, adv., separately; Du. zonder,
conj., but. B. All allied to Gk. d-rep (for *santer), without, Skt.
san-utar, aside, far from (Macdonell) ; so that -der in sun-der, adv., is
a suffix. Further allied to Olrish sain, separate, L. sin-e, without.
Brugmann, i. § 500, Der, a-sunder, q.v.; sundr-y, adj., separate,
hence several, divers, ME. sundry, sondry, Chaucer, C. T. 4601
(B 181), from AS. syndrig, Luke, iv. 40, for *sunderig, and formed
with suffix -ig (mod. E. -y) from sundor, adv., as above.

SUP, to imbibe, as a liquid, gradually; also, to eat a supper. (E.)
Once a strong verb; the short z is prob. due to association with
supper,q.v. ME, soupen, P. Plowman, B. ii. 96, vi. 220, AS. stipan
(strong verb, pt. t. séap, pl. supon, pp. sopen), AZ lfred, tr. of Gregory’s


SUPERFINE


Past. Care, c. 58, ed. Sweet, p. 447, 1. 1.4-Du. zuipen ; Low G. supen;
Icel. stipa (pt. t. saup, pp. sopinn); Swed. supa; OHG. sufan.
B. All from Teut. type *stipan- (pt. t. saup, pp. supanoz), to drink in,
sup up. @ Partly from OF. souper, to sup; it makes but slight
difference. Der. sup, sb., sop, sip; also soup, q.v., supp-er, q.v.

SUPER., prefix, above. (L.) LL. super, above, prep.; orig. a
comparative form of *sup, orig. form of sub; see Sub-. Orig. a loca-
tive case of superus, adj., upper (for s-wperus, where s- is a weak form
of ex); whence Superior.+Gk. irép, above; orig. a locative
case of Umepos, upper, comparative from ind (E. hypo-); see Hyper-,
Hypo-; allied to Skt. upari, above, locative of Vedic upara-,
compar. of wpa, near, close to, under. See Over. Der. super-ior,
supreme, in-super-able ; super-b, super-n-al. Doublet, hyper-, prefix.
And see supra-, prefix.

SUPERABOUND, to be more than enough. (F.—L.) In
Cotgrave; and Howell, Famil. Letters, b. iv. let. 39, § 3.—F. super-
abonder, ‘to superabound,’ Cot.—L. superabundare, to be very
abundant.=L, super and abundare; see Super- and Abound.
Der. superabundance, from F, superabondance, ‘ superabundance,’ Cot.,
L. superabundantia; also superabundant, adj., from the stem of the L.
pres. part.; superabundant-ly,

SUPERADD, to add over and above. (L.) In Phillips, ed.
1706; and earlier, see Richardson. —L. superaddere; see Super-
and Add. Der. superaddit-ion (not in Cotgrave).

SUPERANNUATEH, to disqualify by length of years. (L.)
Bacon has superannate=to live beyond the year, used of annual
plants; Nat. Hist. § 448. This is cited by Richardson, who mis-
spells it. Howell has ‘ superannuated virgin ;’ Famil. Letters, vol. i.
let. 12; A.D. 1619. Blount, ed. 1674, has both superannate and
superannuate. An ill-coined word, prob. suggested by annu-al, annu-
ity; Bacon’s superannate is countenanced by Late L. superannatus,
that has lived beyonda year; hence F. suranner, ‘ to passe or exceed
the compass of a year; also, to wax very old;’ Cot. Thus super-
annuate is for superannate ; coined from super, above, and annus, a
year. See Super- and Annual. Der. superannuat-ion.

SUPERB, proud, magnificent. (F.—L.) Quite a late word; in
Prior, Alma, c. i. 1. 383.—F. superbe, ‘proud;’ Cot.—L. superbum,
acc. of superbus, proud. B. Lit. ‘one who thinks himself (or is)
above others;’ for *super-fu-os, ‘being above,’ from super, above,
and fue, as in L. fu-i, I was. Brugmann, ii. § 4. See Super-,
Der. superb-ly.

SUPERCARGO, an officer in a merchant-ship. (L.; and Span.
—C,) ‘Supercargo, a person employed by the owners of a ship to
go a voyage, to oversee the cargo,’ &c. ; Phillips,ed. 1706. Partially
translated from Span. sobrecargo, a supercargo, by substituting L,
super for Span. sobre, which is the Span. form of the same word.
See Super- and Cargo.

SUPERCILIOUS, disdainful. (L.) ‘ Supercilious air ;? Ben Jon-
son, Underwoods, xxxii (Epistle to a Friend, Master Colby), 4. 19.
Coined with suffix -ous (F. -eux, L. -dsus) from L. supercili-um, (1) an
eyebrow, (2) pride, haughtiness, as expressed by raising the eyebrows.
= L. super, above; and cilium, an eyelid, perhaps allied to Gk. ra
«va, the parts under the eyes (Prellwitz). Der. supercilious-ly,
-meSS.

SUPHREMINENT, excellent above others. (L.) In Chap-
man, tr. of Homer, Odys. b. vi. 1. 305.—L. superéminent-, stem of
pres. part. of swperéminére, to be eminent above others. See Super-
and Hminent. Der. supereminence, from MF, supereminence, ‘ super-
eminence,’ Cot., from L. superéminentia.

SUPEREROGATION, doing more than duty requires. (L.)
‘Works of supererogation;* Articles of Religion, Art. 14 (1562).
From Late L. superérogatio, that which is done beyond what is due.
= L. superérogare, to pay out beyond what is expected.—L. super,
above, beyond; @, out; and rogare, to ask. The L. érogdre=to lay
out, expend money (lit. to ask out, require). See Super-, E-, and
Rogation.

SUPEREXCELLENT, very excellent. (L.; and F.—L.)
Used by Spenser in a postscript to a letter to G. Harvey (R.).—L.
super, above; and MF. excellent; see Super- and Excellent,

SUPERFICIBS, the surface of a thing. (L.) In Minsheu, ed.
1627 3 and in Cotgrave, to translate F, superficie and surface.—L,
superficiés, upper face, surface. = L. super-, above; and faciés, a face;
see Super- and Face. Der. superfici-al, in Lydgate, Assembly of
the Gods, 1. 538, from F. superficiel, ‘superficiall,’ Cot., from L.
superficidlis ; superfici-al-ly, -ness; also superfici-al-i-ty, spelt super-
ficialyte in Palsgrave, from MF, superjicialité, recorded by Palsgrave.
Doublet, surface.

SUPERFINE, extremely fine. (L.; and F.—L.) ‘Many
inuentions aré so superyine 3’ Gascoigne, Works, ed. Hazlitt, i. 500;
also in Steel Glas, &c., ed. Arber, p. 31. Coined from super and
Jjine; see Super- and Fine (1), re


SUPERFLUOUS


SUPERFLUOUS, excessive. (L.) ‘A superfluous abundaunce ;’
Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iii.c. 1. [Palsgrave gives superjiue
as an E, word, from F. superflu, superfluous.] Englished from L.
superfluus, overflowing.—L. super, over; and fluere, to flow; see
Super- andFluent. Der. superfluous-ly ; superflu-i-ty, ME. super-
Sluite, Gower, C. A. ii. 201, bk. v. 2217, from F. superfluité, ‘super-
fluity,’ Cot., from L. acc. superfluitatem.

SUPERHUMAN, more than human. (L.; and F.—L.) Spelt
superhumane in Phillips, ed. 1706. Coined from Super- and
Human.

SUPERIMPOSE, SUPERINCUMBENT, SUPERIN-
DUCE; see Super- and Impose, Incumbent, Induce.

SUPERINTENDENT, an overseer. (F.—L.) In Minsheu,
ed. 1627.—MF, superintendant, ‘a superintendent, Cot.—L. super-
intendent-, stem of pres. part. of superintendere, to superintend.=L.
super, over, above; and intendere, to attend to, apply the mind. See
Super- and Intend. [The verb superintend is directly from the
Latin.] Der. superintendence, from MF. superintendance, ‘a super-
intendency,’ Cot.

SUPERIOR, higher in rank, &c. (F.—L.) Now spelt so as to
resemble Latin; spelt superyour in Palsgrave; superior in Caxton,
Golden Legend, Adam, § 6.—MF. superieur, ‘ superiour,’ Cot. =—L.
superiorem, acc. of superior, higher, comp. of superus, high, which is
itself an old comp. form from sub (orig. *sup). Hence sup-er-ior is a
double comparative; see Super-andSub-. Der. superior-i-ty, from
MF. superiorité, ‘superiority,’ Cot., from Late L. acc. superidritatem.

SUPERLATIVE, superior, extreme, supreme. (F.—L.) In
Minsheu, ed. 1627; and in Palsgrave, p. xxviii.—F. superlaitif,
‘superlative,’ Cot.—L. superlatiuus, superlative, as a gram. term. =
L. superlat-us, excessive ; with suffix -iuus, lit. ‘ carried beyond,’ ex-
aggerated.—L. super, beyond; and ldtus, carried, or borne. Latus<
*ztlatus; see Super- and Tolerate. Der. superlative-ly.

SUPERNAL, placed above, heavenly. (F.—L.) ‘ Supernal
judge ;’ K. John, ii, 112. MF, supernel, ‘supernall,’ Cot. As iffrom
Late L. *superndlis, not in use; formed with suffix -alis from supern-
us, upper, extended by help of suffix -xws from super, above ; see
Super-.

SUPERNATURAL, miraculous. (F.—L.) In Mach. i. 3. 130;
and in Palsgrave.—MF, supernaturel, ‘supernaturall ;’ Cot. See
Super- and Natural. Der. supernatural-ly.

SUPERNUMERARY, above the necessary number. (F,—L.)
In Cotgrave. — MF. supernumeraire, ‘ supernumerary,’ Cot. = L. super-
numera@rius, excessive in number.—L, super, beyond; and numer-us,
number; see Super- and Number.

SUPERSCRIPTION, something written above or without.
(F.—L.) ME. superscriptioun, Henrysoun, Test. of Creseide, 1. 604.
— MF. superscription, ‘a superscription;’ Cot. Late L. superscriptio-
nem, acc. of superscriptio, a writing above, Luke, xxiii. 38 (Vulg.) ; cf.
superscriptus, pp. of superscribere, to write above. = L. super, above ;
and scribere, to write; see Super- and Scribe. @ The verb
superscribe is coined directly from L. superscribere.

SUPERSEDE, to displace by something else, to come in place
of something else. (F.—L.) The word has much changed its
meaning, both in L. and E. Supersede in old authors means to de-
sist, forbear, stay proceedings, &c. Thus Rich, quotes from the
State Trials, 19 Hen. VIII, an, 1528: ‘He [Hen. VIII] desired the
bishop of Paris to certify Francis, that if the Pope would supersede
from executing his sentence, until he had indifferent [impartial]
judges sent who might hear the business, he would also supersede
from the execution of what he was deliberated to do in withdrawing
his obedience from the Roman see.’ ‘ Supersede, to suspend, demurr,
put off or stop an affair or proceeding, to countermand ;’ Phillips.
Thus, the sense was to stay a proceeding, whence, by an easy
transition, to substitute some other proceeding for it. A writ of
supersedeas is, in some cases, a writ to stay proceedings, and is men-
tioned in P. Plowman, C. iii. 187, on which see my note.—OF,
superseder, superceder (mod. F. superséder), ‘to surcease, leave off.
give over;’ Cot.—L. supersedére, pp. supersessus, lit. to sit upon,
also to preside over, to forbear, refrain, desist from.—L. szper,
above; and sedére, cognate with E. sit. See Super- and Sit,
Der. supersession, from MF. supersession, ‘a surceasing, giving over,
the suspension of an accompt upon the accomptant’s humble suit ;’
Cot.—L. *supersessidnem, acc. of *supersessio, not used, but regularly
formed like supersessus, pp. of supersedére. Doublet, surcease, q.v.

SUPERSTITION, excessiveness in religious worship or belief.
(F,—L.) Skelton has supersticyons, s. pl., Philip Sparowe, 1. 1350;
the adj. superstitious occurs in Acts, xvii. 22, in the Bible of 1551 and
in the A. V.; also, spelt sepersticious, in Lydgate, Storie of ‘Thebes,
pt. iii, How the bishop Amphiorax, &c,—F’. superstition, * supersti-
tion;’ Cot.—L. superstitidnem, acc. of superstitio, a standing still
over or near a thing, amazement, wonder, dread, religious scruple. =


SUPPLY 617


L, superstit-, stem of superstes, one who stands near, a witness. —L.
super, near, above ; and statwm, supine of stare, to stand, which is
cognate with E. stand. See Super- and Stand. Der. superstiti-
ous, as above, from F’. superstitieux, * superstitions,’ Cot., from L. adj.
superstitiosus ; superstiti-ous-ly,

SUPERSTRUCTURE, the upper part of a building. (L.)
‘In som places, as in Amsterdam, the foundation costs more than
the superstructure ;’ Howell, Famil. Letters, vol. i. sect. 2. let. 15,
May 1, 1622. From Super- and Structure.

SUPERVENE, to occur or happen in consequence of, to oc-,
cur, happen. (L.) ‘ Supervening follies ;’ Bp. Taylor, vol. i, ser. 12
(R.).—L. superuenire, to come upon or over, to come upon, to
follow $ pp. superuentus, = L. super, over, upon, near; and zenire, to
come, cognate with E. come. See Super- and Venture or
Come. Der. supervent-ion, regularly formed like the pp. super-
uentus.

SUPERVISE, to inspect, oversee. (L.) In Shak. L.L. L, iv. 2.
135.—L. super, above; and uisere, to survey, formed from wis-wm,
supine of widére, tosee. See Super- and Visit or Vision. Der.
supervise, sb., Hamlet, v. 2, 23; supervis-or, Oth. iii. 3. 395 (First
Quarto) 3 swpervis-ion, ibid. (Folio editions) ; swpervis-al.

SUPINE, lying on one’s back, lazy. (L.) Sir T. Browne has
supinity, Vulg. Errors, b. i. c. 5, § 3. § Supine felicity ;’ Dryden,
Astrea, 107. As a term in grammar; Palsgrave, p. xxxvii.—L.
supinus, backward, lying on one’s back; extended, with suffix -inus,
from *sup, orig. form of sub, under, below; hence, downward. Cf.
sup-er, from the same source. So also Gk. Uarios, bent backwards,
backward, lying on one’s back, from t7é, under, See Sub-. Der.
supine, sb.. as a grammatical term, L. supinum, of which the applied
sense is not very obvious (perhaps positive, absolute, like Gk. @érixov,
absolute, as applied to verbal forms); supine-ly, supine-ness; also
supin-i-ty, as above, prob. obsolete.

SUPPER, a meal at the close of a day. (F.—Teut.) ME, soper,
super; spelt super, Havelok, 1762.—OF. soper, super, later souper,
‘a supper;’ Cot. It is the infin. mood used as a substantive,
exactly as in the case of dinner.—OF. soper, super, later souper, to
sup, to eat a meal of bread sopped in gravy, &c. [Cf. OF. sope, soupe,
later soupe, ‘a sop, a piece of bread in broth, also pottage or broth,
wherein there is store of sops or sippets,’ Cot.]—Low G. supen, to
sup or sip up; Icel. supa, Swed. supa, to sup; cognate with E, Sup,


q. Vv.

SUPPLANT, to take the place of, displace, undermine. (F.—
L.) ME. supplanten, Gower, C. A. i. 239, bk. ii. 2369.—F. sup-
planter, ‘to supplant, root or trip up;’ Cot.—L. supplantare, to put
something under the sole of the foot, to trip up the heels, overthrow.
—L. sup- (sub); and planta, the sole of the foot, alsoa plant. See
Sub- and Plant. Der. supplant-er, spelt supplantour, in Gower,
C. A. i. 261, bk. ii. 3024.

SUPPLE, pliant, lithe, fawning. (F.—L.) ME. souple, Chau-
cer, C. T. 203; Rob. of Glouc. p. 223, 1. 4577.—F. souple, spelt
soupple in Cotgrave, who explains it by ‘ supple, limber, tender,
pliant.’=—L. supplicem, acc. of supplex, in the old orig. sense of
‘bending under,’ hence submissive, which is the usual sense in
Latin. The OF. soplier, vb., also kept the orig. sense, though the
classical L, supplicare only means to beseech; hence Cotgrave has
“sousplié, bent or bowed underneath, subject unto.’  B. The for-
mation of souple from supplicem is precisely like that of E. double
from duplicem, treble from triplicem, simple from simplicem. ‘y. The
L. supplex is from sup- (sub) and the base plic-, as seen in plic-Gre, to
fold. See Sub- and Ply; alsoSupplicate. Der. supple-ness.

SUPPLEMENT, that which supplies, an addition. (F.—L.)
In Skelton, Garl. of Laurell, 415.—F. supplément, ‘a supplement ;’
Cot.=—L. supplémentum, a supplement, filling up.=L. supplé-re, to
fill up; with suffix -men-tum.—L. sup- (sub), up; and plére, to fill;
see Supply. Der. supplement-al, supplement-ar-y.

SUPPLIANT, entreating earnestly. (F.—L.) In Rich. II, v.
3. 75.—F. suppliant, ‘suppliant;’ Cot. ; pres. pt. of supplier, “humbly
to pray,’ id.—L. supplicire, to supplicate; see Supplicate.
Doublet, supplicant. :

SUPPLICATEH, to entreat. (L.) In Blount, ed. 1674; it
seems to be quite a late word, though supplication, spelt supplicacion,
is in Gower, C. A. iii. 348, bk. viii. 2184, and supplicant in Shak.
Complaint, 276.—L. supplicdt-us, pp. of supplicare, to supplicate, —
L. supplic-, stem of supplex, bending under or down, hence beseech-
ing, suppliant; see Supple. Der. supplic-ant, from the stem of
the pres. pt. of supplicare; supplicat-or-y; supplicat-ion (as above),
from F, supplication, ‘a supplication,’ Cot., from L. acc. supplicationem.
Also suppliant, q.v.

SUPPLY, to fill up a deficiency. (F.—L.) In Shak. Tw. Nt.
i. 1. 38. Levins (1570) spells it supploy, and Huloet has supploye ;
Palsgrave has supplye.—OF, supploier; F. suppléer, ‘to supply ;’


618 SUPPORT


Cot.—L. supplére, to fill up.—L. sup- (sub), up; and plére, to fill;
see Sub- and Plenary. Der. supfly, sb., Hamlet, ii. 2.24; and
see supple-ment.

SUPPORT, to endure, sustain. (F.—L.) ME. supporten,
Wyclif, 2 Cor. xi. 1.—F. supporter, ‘to support;’ Cot.—L. sup-
portare, to carry, bring, or convey to a place; in Late L., to endure,
sustain. L. sup- (sub), near; and portare, to carry; see Sub- and
Port (1). Der. support, sb., ME. support, Gower, C. A. iii. 193,
bk. vii. 3207, from F. support, ‘a support,’ Cot. ; support-er, support-
able, support-abl-y.

SUPPOSE, to assume as true, imagine. (F.—L. amd Gk.) ME.
supposen, Chaucer, C. T. 6368 (D 786). —F. supposer, ‘to suppone,
to put, lay, or set under, to suborn, forge; also to suppose, imagine ;’
Cot.=—F. sup-, prefix<L. sup- (sub), prefix, under; and F, poser, to
place, put. Thus the orig. sense is ‘ to lay under, put under,’ hence
to substitute, forge, counterfeit ; all of which are senses of L. sup-
ponere. B. The F. poser is not from L. ponere, but from Gk.,
though it (with all its compounds) took up the senses of L. ponere.
See further under Pose; and note Cotgrave’s use of the verb to
suppone, now obsolete. Der. suppos-er, suppos-able; but not sup-
position, q.v.

SUPPOSITION, an assumption, thing supposed. (F.—L.) In
Shak. Merch. Ven. i. 3. 18.—F. supposition, omitted by Cotgrave, but
in use in the 14th cent. (Littré).—L. suppositidnem, acc. of suppositio,
properly ‘ a substitution,’ but extended in meaning according to the
extension of meaning of the verb suppdnere (pp. suppositus) from
which it is derived.=L. sup- (sub), under, near; and ponere, to
place; see Sub-. and Position. Der. supposit-it-i-ous, spurious,
substituted, from L. suppositicius, formed with suffix -ic-i-us from
supposit-, stem of pp. of suppdnere, of which one sense was ‘ to.sub-
stitute,’ Also supposit-or-y, as in ‘suppositoryes are used where the
pacyent is weake,’ Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iii. c. 5, from
L. suppositorius, that which is placed underneath. (See note on
Suppose.)

SUPPRESS, to crush, keep in, retain, conceal. (L.) The in-
stance of suppressed, cited by Rich. from Lydgate, Storie of Thebes,
pt. ii, The Answer of Ethiocles, is not to the point; it is clearly an
error for surprised. For the verb suppress, see Palsgrave.—L. sup-
pressus, pp. of supprimere, to press under, suppress.—L. sup- (sub),
under ; and premere, to press; seeSub-and Press. Der. suppress-
or, L. suppressor; suppress-ion, printed supression in Sir T. More,
p- 250 f, from F. suppression, ‘ suppression,’ Cot., from L. acc. sup-
pressionem. Also suppress-ive, a coined word.

SUPPURATHE, to gather pus or matter underneath. (L.) In
Minsheu, ed. 1627.—L, suppurdtus, pp. of suppiirare, to gather pus
underneath.—L. sup- (sub), beneath; and pur-, decl. stem of pis,
matter; see Sub- and Pus. Der. suppurat-ion, from F. suppura-
tion, ‘a suppuration,’ Cot., from L. acc. suppiratidnem 3 suppurat-ive,
adj., from F. suppuratif, ‘ suppurative,’ Cot., a coined word.

SUPRA., prefix, above. (L.) L. supra-, prefix; from supra,
ady. and prep., short for swperi, the orig. form, Lucretius, iv. 674;
Se: abl. fem. of swperus, adj., above. =L. super, above ; see Super-,

ULp-.

SUPRAMUNDANES,, situate above the world. (L.) ‘Supra-
mundane deities ;’ Waterland, Works, i. 86 (R.); and in Blount, ed.
1674. A coined word; from Supra-and Mundane. Jf Simi-
larly formed is supralapsarian, antecedent to the fall, from supra,
above, and /aps-wm, acc. of laps-us, a fall; with suffix -arian; see
Lapse.

SUPREME, greatest, most excellent. (F.—L.) Accented
suipreme, Cor. iii. 1. 110; usually supréme, K. John, iii. 1. 155.—F.
supreme, omitted by Cotgrave, but in use in the 16th cent. (Littré) ;
now written supréme. = L. suprémus, supreme, highest. Formed
with superl. suffix -mus from *supré-,an adverb allied to L. super,
above. Brugmann, ii. § 75. See Super-. Der. supreme-ly; also
suprem-a-cy, K. John, iii. 1. 156 (cf. F. suprématie, Littré, not in Cot-
grave), a word arbitrarily formed on the model of primacy (OF.
primacie, Late L. primatia) from primate.

SUR- (1), prefix. (L.) For sub- before r following; see Sub-,
Only in sur-reptitious and sur-rogate,

SUR- (2), prefix. (F.—L.) F. sur, prep., contr. from L. super,
upon, above. Exx. sur-cease, sur-charge, sur-face, &c.

SURCEASE, to cease, to cause to cease. (F.—L.) Itis obvious,
from the usual spelling, that this word is popularly supposed to be
allied to cease, with which it has no etymological connexion. It is
a corruption of sursis or sursise, and is etymologically allied to
supersede. It was very likely misunderstood from the first, yet
Fabyan spells the word with s for c, correctly. ‘ By whiche reason
the kyngdome of Mercia surseased, that had contynued from their
firste kynge ;’ Fabyan, Chron. c. 171, § 5. ‘To sursese and leve of’
[leave off}; Paston Letters, i. 390. B. But the verb is really due


SURF


to the sb. swrcease, a delay, cessation, which was in use as a law-
term, and prob. of some antiquity in this use, though I do not know
where to find an early E. example. It occurs in Shak. Macb.


i. 7. 4, and (according to Richardson) in Bacon, Of Church Con-


troversies ; Nares cites an example from Danett’s tr. of Comines
(published in 1596 and 1600),—AF. sursise, a surcease , ‘ Ki le cri
orat e sursera, la sursise enuers li rei amend;’ in Latin, ‘qui,
clamore audito, insequi supersederit, dé sursisa erga regem emendet ;’
Laws .of Will. I, § 50; F. sursis, masc., sursise, fem., ‘surceased,
intermitted ;’ Cot. Littré quotes ‘ pendant’ ce swrsis’=during this
delay, from Ségur, Hist. de Nap. x. 2. Sursis is the pp. of AF.
surseer (pr. pl. subj. szrseis-ent), Stat. Realm, i. 49, 300; MF.
surseoir, ‘to surcease, pawse, intermit, leave off, give over, delay or
stay for a time,’ Cot.—L. supersedére, to preside over, also to for-
bear, refrain, desist from, omit; see Supersede. The word also
appears in F. as superséder, spelt also superceder in Cotgrave, and
explained by ‘to surcease, leave off, give over.’ This shows that
not only was surcease wrongly connected in the popular mind with
cease, but that, even in F., superséder was similarly connected with
L. cédere, from which cease is derived. Der. surcease, sb., really the
older word, as shown above.

SURCHARGE, an over-load. (F.—L.) ‘A surcharge, or
greater charge;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 228.—AF. surcharge, Year-
books of Edw. I. 1304-5, p. 453; F. surcharge, ‘a surcharge, or a
new charge ;’ Cot.—F. sur, from L. super, over ; and charge, a load;
see Sur- (2) and Charge. Der. surcharge, vb., from F. surcharger,
‘to surcharge ;” Cot.

SURCINGLE, a girth for a horse, a girdle. (F.—L.) ‘Sur-
senglys and crowpers’ {cruppers]; Malory, Morte Arthure, bk. vii.
ch. 16; leaf 119, back.—OF. sourcengle, surcengle (Godefroy), MF.
sursangle, ‘a sursengle, or long girth;’ Cot.—F. sur-, above; and
OF. cengle, ‘a girth,’ Cot.—L. super, above; and cingula, a belt.
See Sur-.and Shingles.

SURCOAT, an outer garment. (F.—L. and G.) ME. surcote,
Chaucer, C. T. A 617.—AF. surcote, Liber Custumarum, p. 226.
See Sur- (2) and Coat.

SURD, inexpressible by a rational number or having no rational
root. (L.) Cotgrave translates nombre sourd by ‘a surd number.’
A term in mathematics, equivalent to ¢rrational, in the math. sense. =
L. .surdus, deaf; hence, deaf to reason, irrational. The word is
frequently applied to colours, when it means dim, indistinct, dull;
thus surdus color=a dim colour, Pliny, Nat. Hist. b. xxxvii. c. 5.
So likewise L. sordére=to be dirty. See Sordid. Brugmann, i. § 362.
Der. surd, adj., irrational; absurd, q.v.

SURE, certain, secure. (F.—L.) See Trench, Select Glossary.
ME. sur, Will. of Palerne, 973; seur, Seven Sages, ed. Weber, 2033.
— OF, sur, seitr, oldest form segur (Burguy); mod. F, seir.—L. séciirus,
secure, sure; see Secure. Der. sure, adv., sure-ly; sure-ty, ME.
seurte, Will. of Palerne, 1463, also seurtee, Chaucer, C. T. 4663
(B 243), from OF. seiirte, segurtet, from L. acc. séctiritatem. Hence
sure-ti-ship, Prov. xi. 15. Doublets, secure, sicker. 5

SURF, the foam made by the rush of waves on the shore. (E.)
This is a difficult word, being disguised by a false spelling; the r is
unoriginal, just as in the word hoarse, which is similarly disguised.
The spelling surf is in Defoe, Robinson Crusoe, ed. 1719, pt. i, in
the description of the making of the raft. ‘My Raft was now strong
enough ... my next care was . . . how to preserve what I laid upon
it from the Surf of the Sea.’ But the earlier spelling is suf, with
the sense of ‘rush,’ in a remarkable passage in Hakluyt’s Voyages,
ed. 1598, vol. ii. pt. i. p. 227, where we are told that certain small
rafts are carried to the shore by the force of the in-rushing wave;
‘the Sugfe of the Sea setteth her [the raft’s] lading dry on land.’
So also: ‘so neere the shore, that the counter-suffe of the sea would
rebound against the shippes side ;’ id. iii. 848. B. This suffe is,
I believe, a phonetic spelling of the word usually spelt sough, i.e.
‘rush’ or ‘rushing noise ;’ see sough o’ the sea in Jamieson, who
also spells it souf and sowch. And see sough, souff, suff, in E. D. D.
The word sough has lost a w after the s; the Middle-English
spelling is swough or swow, in the sense of ‘rush,’ or ‘rushing
sound.’ ‘For swoughe of his dynttez’=for the rushing sound of
his blows; Morte Arthure, 1127. But it was particularly used of
the swaying or rushing of the sea; ‘ with the swoghe of the see’=
with the swaying motion [surf] of the sea; id. 759. Halliwell notes
prov, E. swowe, ‘to make a noise, as water does in rushing down
a precipice; also, to foam or boil up,’ &c. Cf. ‘ swowynge of
watyre,’ rushing of water, accompanied by noise; Morte Arthure, 931.
y. The ME. verb swowen or swo3en answers to AS, swogan, to make
a rushing noise, &c., treated of under Swoon, q.v. The derived
sb. in AS. took the form swég (with vowel-change from 6 to 2), and
this word answers in force, though not in form, to E. sough. Hence
a secondary form swégan, with much the same sense as the primary


SURFACE


verb swagan. In Luke, xxi. 25, we might almost translate swég by |


surf; ‘for gedrefednesse s&s swéges and ypa’=for confusion of the
sound [surf] of the sea and waves; L. pree confusione sonifus maris.
In #lfric’s Hom. i. 566, 1. 7, we have: ‘com séo s& f&rlice swé-
gende,’ which Thorpe translates by ‘the sea came suddenly sounding ;’
but it rather means rushing in, as appears by the context. In
fElfric’s Hom, i. 562, 1.14, we read that a spring or well of water
‘ swégde iit, i.e. rushed out, or gushed forth, rather than ‘ sounded
out,’ as Thorpe translates it. 8. There is thus plenty of authority
for the use of ME. sough with the sense of ‘ rush’ or ‘ noisy gush,’
which will well explain both Hakluyt’s suffe and mod. E. surf.
I believe this will be found to be the right explanation, e. We
may connect surf with Norweg. sog in some of its senses, viz. (1) a
noise, tumult, rushing sound; and (2) a current in a river, the
inclination of a river-bed, where the stream is swift, i.e. a rapid.
[This is distinct from Norweg. sog in the sense of ‘ sucking.’ ]
@ The usual explanation of surf from F. surflot [L. super-fluctus],
‘the rising of billow upon billow, or the interchanged swelling of
severall waves,’ as in Cotgrave, is unlikely; for (1) it interprets fas
equivalent to a whole word, viz. F. lot, and (2) it is contradicted by
the form suffe, which involves no + at all.

SURF ACH, the upper face of anything. (F.—L.) In Minsheu,
ed. 1627.—F. surface, ‘the surface, the superficies;’ Cot. Not
directly derived from L. superjicies, but compounded of F. sur (from
L. super, above), and face (from L. faciem, acc. of faciés, the face) ;
see Sur- (2) and Face. However, it exactly corresponds to L.
superficiés, which is compounded in like manner of super and faciés.
Hence the words are doublets, Doublet, superjicies.

SURFEIT, excess in eating and drinking. (F.—L.) ME. surfet,
P. Plowman, A. vii. 2523 surfait, id. B. vi. 267.—AF. surfet, a
surfeit, A Nominale, ed. Skeat, 1. 343; OF. sorfait, excess (Bur-
guy); orig. pp. of sorfaire, later surfaire, ‘to overprise, to hold
at an overdeer rate;’ Cot.—OF, sor, F. sur, from L. super, above ;
and F. fait (pp. of faire), from L. factus (pp. of facere), to make,
hence, to hold, deem. See Sur- (2) and Fact. Der. surfeit, verb,
spelt surfet in Palsgrave; surfeit-ing, sb.

SURGE, the swell of waves, a billow. (F.—L.) The orig. sense
was ‘arising’ or rise, or source. ‘All great ryuers are gurged and
assemblede of diners surges and springes of water ;’ Berners, tr. of
Froissart, vol. i. c. r (R.). ‘ Wyndes and sourges;’ Sir T. Elyot,
Castel of Helth, bk. ii. c. 14. ‘Thus with a surge of teares be-
dewde ;’ Turbervile, The Louer to his carefull Bed. ‘ Surge of the
see, wague;’ Palsgrave. Coined from OF. stem sowrge-, as in sourge-
ant, pres. pt. of sourdre, to rise.—L. surgere, to rise. Cf. MF.
sourgeon, ‘the spring of a fountain, or the rising, boyling, or
sprouting out of water in a spring,’ Cot., which is likewise derived
from the same L. verb. The proper F. sb. is source, E. source; see
Source, B. The L. surgere makes pt. t. surrexi, showing
that it is contracted from surrigere; from L. sur- (for sub before
r), and regere, to rule, direct ; thus the orig. sense was ‘to direct or
take one’s way from under,’ hence to rise up. See Sub- and
Regent.. Der. surge, verb, surg-y. Also (from surgere) in-surg-
ent, re-surrect-ion, source, re-source, sortie.

SURGEON, a chirurgeon, one who cures diseases by operating
upon the patient. (F.—L.—Gk.) A very early contraction of
chirurgeon. ME, surgien, P. Plowman, B. xx. 3083; surgeyn, surgen,
id. C, xxiii. 310, 313 ; spelt cirurgian, Rob. of Glouc. p. 566, 1. 11925.
=—OF. surgien (Godefroy) ; variant of cirurgien, serurgien, a sur-
geon; see Littré, s.v. chirurgien; the AF. forms surigien, surrigien,
sirogen, cyrogen, all occur in Langtoft, Chron. ii. 104, 158; and
surgion is in Britton, 1. 34.—OF. cirurgie, later chirurgie, surgery ;
with suffix -er<L. -anus. See further under Surgery.

SURGERY, the art practised by a surgeon, operation on a
patient. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. surgerie, Chaucer, C. T. 415 (A 413). A
variation of OF. cirurgie, sirurgie, later form chirurgie, surgery. We
have, in fact, turned cirurgy or sirurgyinto surgery; perhaps through
a form surgeon-ry; for the spelling surgenry occurs as a reading in
P. Plowman, B. xvi. 106.—Late L. chirurgia.=Gk. xe.povpyia, a
working with the hands, handicraft, skill with the hands. = Gk. xeipo-,
from xp, the hand ; and épyev, to work, allied to E. work; see
Chirurgeon and Work. Der, surgeon, short for cirurgien, old
form of chirurgeon. Der. surgi-c-al, short for chirurgical, formed
with suffix -al (F. -el, L. -alis) from Late L. chirurgic-us, an extended
form of chirurgus =Gk. xepovpyés, working with the hand, skilful ;
hence surgi-c-al-ly.

SURLOIN, the upper part of a loin of beef. (F.—L.)  Fre-
quently spelt sirloin, owing to a fable that the loin of beef was
knighted ‘ by one of our kings in a fit of good humour ;’ see Johnson.
The ‘king’ was naturally imagined to be the merry monarch
Charles II, though Richardson says (on no authority) that it was ‘ so
entitled by King James the First.’ Both stories are discredited by


SURRENDER 619


the use of the orig. F. word surlonge in the fourteenth century; see
Littré. Indeed, Wedgwood cites ‘A surloyn beeff, vii.d.’ from an
account of expenses of the Ironmongers’ Company, temp. Henry VI;
with a reference to the Athenzeum, Dec. 28, 1867 (p. 902). Cot-
grave explains MF’. haut coste by ‘ a surloine.’ = F. surlonge, ‘a sirloin,’
Hamilton; see Littré for its use in the 14th cent.=F. sur, from L.
super, above, upon; and Jonge, aloin; see Super- and Loin.

SURLY, morose, uncivil. (E.) In Shak. K. John, iii. 3. 42; &c.
‘ The orig. meaning [or rather, the meaning due to popular etymo-
logy] seems to have been sir-like, magisterial, arrogant. ‘* For
shepherds, said he, there doen leade As Lordes done other-where...
Sike syrlye shepheards han we none;” Spenser, Sheph, Kal. July,
185-203. Ital. signoreggiare, to have the mastery, to domineer ;
signoreggevole, magisterial, haughty, stately, surly; Altieri. Faire
du grobis, to be proud or surly, to take much state upon him;
Cotgrave:’—Wedgwood. I give the quotation from Cotgrave
slightly altered to the form in which it stands ined. 1660. As to the
spelling, it is remarkable that while Spenser has syrlye, the Glosse to
the Sheph. Kal. by E. K. has ‘ surly, stately and prowde.’ Drant
(1566) has ‘ His surly corps in rytche array ;’ tr. of Horace, Sat. 3.
Minsheu has surlie. Cotgrave has; ‘ Sourcilleux, ... surly, or proud
of countenance.’ It answers to prov. E. soorlike, ill-tempered, cross,
surly, lit. ‘sour-like’ (E. D. D.); and thez has been shortened before
rl, as in burly from an AS. form *bir-lic; see Burly. Cf. prov. E.
sour, ill-tempered, surly, cross (E.D.D.); and Baret has ‘sowre,
morose.’ See Sour. Cf. G. saver, sour, surly; MSwed. sur (the
same); Swed., Dan. syrlig, sourish. And note ME. surdagh, sour
dough; Voc. 663. 22. Der, surli-ly, surli-ness,

SURMISE, an imagination, suspicion, guess. (F.—L.) Levins
has surmise both as sb. and vb.; so has Baret (1580). Caxton has:
‘xxxm li. that he had surmysed on hym to haue stolen;’ Golden
Legend, Th. Becket, § 4, Halliwell gives the obs. verb surmit, with an
example, = OF. surmise, an accusation, charge (Roquefort) ; properly
fem. of surmis, pp. of surmettre, to charge, accuse, lit. ‘to put upon,’
hence to lay to one’s charge, make one to be suspected ot.—F. sur,
from L. super, upon, above; and F. mettre, to put, from L. mittere,
to send; see Super- and Mission. Der. surmise, verb; surmis-al,
Milton, Church Government, ii., Int.

SURMOUNT, to surpass. (F.—L.) ME. surmounten, spelt
sormounten, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iii. pr. 8,1. 19.—F. sur-
monter, ‘to surmount;’ Cot. From Sur- (2) and Mount (2).
Der. surmount-able, in-surmount-able.

SURNAME, a name added to the Christian name. (Hybrid ;
F.—L,; and E.) In Trevisa, iii. 265, 1.10. See Trench, Study of
Words. <A partial translation of ME. surnom, spelt sournoun in
Chron. of Eng. 982 (in Ritson, Met. Romances, ii. p. 311), from F.
surnom, ‘a surname ;’ Cot.=F, sur, from L. super, over, above; and
E. name, See Super- and Name; and see Noun. So also Span.
sobrenombre, Ital. soprannome. Der. surname, verb.

SURPASS, to go beyond, excel. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q.i.
10. 58.—F. surpasser, ‘to surpasse,’ Cot. From Sur- (2) and Pass.
Der. surpass-ing, surpass-able, un-surpass-able,

SURPLICE, a white garment worn by the clergy. (F.—L.)
Spelt surplise, surplys, in Chaucer, C. T., A 3323. =F. surplis, ‘ a sur-
plis;’ Cot.—Late L. superpelliceum, a surplice.=L. super, above ;
and pelliceum, neut. of pelliceus, pellicius, made of skins; see Super-
and Pelisse. Cf. ‘ surplyce, superpellicium ;’ Prompt. Parv. So
also Span. sobrepelliz.

SURPLUS, overplus, excess of what is required. (F.—L.) ME.
surplus, Gower, C. A. iii. 24; bk. vi. 682. —F. surplus, ‘a surplusage,
overplus ;’ Cot.—L. super, above; and plus, more; see Super- and
Plural. Der. surplus-age, Spenser, F. Q. ii. 7.18; Lydgate, Storie
of Thebes, pt. iii, Of a tame tiger, &c.; see Richardson. 4

SURPRISE, a taking unawares. (F.—L.) In Shak. Mer. Wives,
v. 5. 131. The verb (though from the F. sb.) occurs earlier, Rom.
of the Rose, 3235.—OF-. sorprise, surprise (Burguy), MF. surprinse,
‘a surprisall, or sudden taking;’ Cot. Properly fem. of sorpris,
surpris (surprins in Cot.), pp. of sorprendre, surprendre, ‘to surprise,
to take napping,’ Cot.=F. sur, from L. super, above, upon ; and
prendre, from L. prehendere, to take; see Super- and Prehensile.
Cf. Ital. sorprendere, to surprise. Der. surprise, verb, surpris-al (in
Cotgrave, as above), sumpris-ing, -ing-ly.

SURREBUTTER; see Surrejoinder.

SURREJOINDER, a rejoinder upon, or in answer to, a re-
joinder. (F.—L.) ‘The plaintiff may answer the rejoinder by a
surrejoinder; upon which the defendant may rebut ; and the plaintiff
answer him by a surrebutter;’ Blackstone, Comment., b. iil. ¢, 20
(R.). And in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. The prefix is F. sur, upon,
hence, in answer to; see Sur- (2) and Rejoin. And see Rebut.

SURRENDER, to render up, resign, yield. (F.—L.) ‘I sur-
render ie surrends:’ Palsgrave.= OF. surrendre, to deliver up into


620 SURREPTITIOUS


the hands of justice, Roquefort, Palsgrave ; not in Cotgrave. =F. sur,
upon, up; and rendre, torender; see Sur-(2) and Render, Der.
surrender, sb., Hamlet, i. 2. 23.

‘SURREPTITIOUS, done by stealth or fraud. (L.) ‘ A soden
surrepticious delyte ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 1278 (miscalled 1276) g.
—L. surreptitius, better surrepticius, stolen, done stealthily.—L.
surrepl-um, supine of surripere, to pilfer, purloin.=L. sur- (for sub
before r), under, secretly; and rapere, to seize. See Sur- (1) and
Rapid. Der. surreptitious-ly.

SURROGATE, a substitute, deputy of an ecclesiastical judge.
(L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. surrogatus, pp. of surrogare,
to substitute, elect in place of another.—L. sur- (for sub before r),
under, in place of; and rogdre, to ask, elect. See Sur- (1) and
Rogation. ,

SURROUND, to encompass. (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.
Altered in sense by association with round; but the orig. sense was
“to overflow.’ ‘The waters more abounded, And . . all abroad
surrounded ;’ Marlowe, tr. of Ovid, bk. iii. Elegy 6. ‘ Oultrecouler, to
surround or overflow ;’ Cot. Orig. swround (with one r) : ‘ by then-
crease of waters dyuers londes and tenementes in grete quantite ben
surounded and destroyed ;’ Stat. of Hen. VII (1489) ; pr. by Caxton,
fol. c 7.—OF. souronder, soronder, surunder, to overflow (Godefroy).
iL. super, over; undare, to flow, from unda, a wave. So also red-
ound, ab-ound, from OF. red-onder, ab-onder. See Notes on E. Etym.,

. 286.

*SURTOUT, an overcoat, close frock-coat. (F.—L.) In Dryden,
tr. of Juvenal, Sat. iii. 250. ‘ Surtoot, Surtout, a great upper coat ;’
Phillips, ed. 1706. Worn over all. =F. sur ‘out, over all. —L. super
totum, over the whole ; see Super- and Total.

SURVEILLANCE, inspection. (F.—L.) Modern; not in
Todd’s Johnson.—F. surveillance, superintendence ; Hamilton. =F.
surveillant, pres. part. of surveiller, to superintend.—F. sur, from
L. super, over; and veiller, from L. wigilare, to watch; see Sur- (2)
and Vigil. F. veillance<L. uigilantia.

SURVEY, to look over, inspect. (F.—L.) ‘To suruey, or
ouersee ;’ Minsheu, ed. 1627. ‘The obs. sb. surveance, surveyaunce, is
in Chaucer, C. T. 12029 (C 95).—AF. surveier, Liber Albus, 512. —
F. sur, over; and OF, veeir, veér, later veoir, ‘to see,’ Cot.=—L.
super, over; and uidére, to see; see Super- and Vision. And see
Supervise. Der. survey, sb., All’s Well, v. 3. 163 survey-or
(survyowre in Prompt. Parv.), AF. surveour, Stat. Realm, i. 289
(1340), survey-or-ship.

SURVIVE, to overlive, outlive. (F.—L.) Spelt survyve in
Palsgrave.—F. survivre, ‘to survive ;’ Cot.=—L. superuiuere, to outlive.
—L. super, above ; and wiwere, to live; see Super- and Victual.
Der. surviv-al, a coined word, Chapman, tr. of Homer, Odys. b. i.
638; surviv-or, Hamlet, i. 2.903 surviv-or-ship.

SUS,, prefix. (L.) L. sus-, prefix; for *sups, an extended form of
*sup, old form of sub, under; so also Gk. ty-1, aloft, ty-os, height,
from i7-6; see Sub-. Der. sus-ceptible, sus-pend, sus-pect, sus-tain.

SUSCEPTIBLE, readily receiving anything, impressible. (F.—
L.) In Cotgrave.—F. susceptible, ‘susceptible, capable;’ Cot.—
L. *susceptibilis, ready to undertake. — L. suscepti-, for susceptus, pp. of
suscipere, to undertake; with suffix -bilis.—L. sus-, for *sups-, exten-
sion of *sup, orig. form of swb, under; and capere, to take ; see Sus-
and Captive. Der. susceptibili-ty, a coined word; susceptive, from
L. *suscepttuus, capable of receiving or admitting.

SUSPECT, to mistrust, conjecture. (F.—L.) See Trench,
Select Glossary. The word was orig. a pp.,as in Chaucer, where it
is used adjectivally, with the sense of ‘ suspicious,’ C. T. 8417 (E 541).
=F. suspect, ‘suspected, mistrusted ;’ Cot.—L. suspectus, pp. of sus-
picere, to look under, look up to, admire, also to mistrust. —L. sw-,
for sus-, *sups-, extension of *szp, orig. form of sub, under; and
specere, to look; see Sub- and Spy. Der. suspic-i-on, ME, sus-
pecioun, K. Alisaunder, 453, OF. suspezion (Burguy), later souspegon,
“suspition,’ Cot. (mod. F. soupgon), from L. suspicidnem, acc. of
suspicio, suspicion; hence szwspic-i-ous, ME. suspecious, Chaucer, C. T.
8416 (E 540); suspic-i-ous-ly, -ness. tar Observe that the old
spellings suspecion, suspecious, have been modified so as to accord
more closely with the L. originals.

SUSPEND, to hang beneath or from, to make to depend on,
delay. (F.—L.) ME. suspenden, Rob. of Glouc., p. 563, 1. 11818.
=F, suspendre, ‘to suspend ;’ Cot.—L. suspendere (pp. suspensus), to
hang up, suspend. = L. sus-, for *sups-, extension of *sup, orig. form
of sub, under; and pendere, to hang; see Sus- and Pendant.
Der. suspend-er. Also suspense, properly an adj. or pp., asin Spenser,
F. Q. iv. 6. 34, from F. suspens, ‘doubtful, uncertain,’ Cot., from L.
pp. suspensus, suspended, wavering, hesitating ; swspens-ion, from F.
suspension, ‘a suspension or suspending,’ Cot., from L. acc. suspen-
sidnem ; suspens-or-y, from MF, suspensoire, ‘ hanging, suspensory, in
suspence,’ Cot.; suspens-or-y, sb., a hanging bandage, &c.


SWAGGER
SUSPICION ; see under Suspect.


SUSTAIN, to hold up, bear, support. (F.—L.) ME. susteinen,


susteynen, Rob. of Glouc., p. 111, 1. 2412.—AF, sustein-, a stem of
OF. sustenir, sostenir, spelt soustenir in Cot.; mod. F. soutenir. —L.
sustinére, to uphold. —L. sus-, for *sups-, extension of *sup, orig. form
of sub, up; and tenére, to hold; see Sus- and Tenable. Der.
sustain-er, sustain-able; also sustenance, ME. sustenaunce, Rob. of
Glouc., p. 41, 1. 975, from OF. sustenance, spelt soustenance in Cot-
grave, from L. sustinentia; also sustent-at-ion, Bacon, Essay 58, from
L. acc. eustentationem, maintenance, from sustentare, frequent, form of
sustinére (pp. sustentus).

SUTLER, one who sells provisions in a camp. (Du.) In Shak.
Hen. V, ii. 1. 116.—Du. soetelaar (Sewel), usually zoetelaar; in
Hexham zoetelaer, ‘a scullion, or he that doth the druggerie in a
house, a sutler, or a victualler.’ Formed with suffix -aar of the
agent (cf. L. -arius) from zoetelen, ‘to sullie, to suttle, or to vic-
tuall;’ Hexham. B. This frequent. verb is cognate with Low G.
suddeln, to sully, whence suddeler, a dirty fellow, scullion, and some-
times a sutler (Brem. Wort.) ; Dan. sudle, besudle, to sully, G. sudeln,
to. sully, daub. All these are frequent. forms, with the usual fre-
quent. suffix -el-; the simple form appears in Swed. sudda, to daub,
stain, soil; whence Swed. dial. sudda, sb., a dirty woman (Rietz).
These are obviously connected with Icel. suddz, steam from cooking,
drizzling rain, suddaligr, wet and dank; all from Teut. *sud-, weak
grade of Teut. verb *seuthan-, to seethe (Icel. sjoa), Further allied
to E. suds, a derivative of seethe; with which cf. G. sud, a seething,
brewing, sudel, a puddle, sudeln, to daub, dabble, sully, sudelkoch, a
sluttish cook; all from the same weak grade. The ¢ (for d) is
abnormal, and due to High G. influence. Cf. Bavarian szttern,
sottern, to boil over, MHG. sut, boiling liquid.

SUTTEE, a widow who immolates herself on the funeral pile of
her husband ; also the sacrifice of burning a widow. (Skt.) ‘The E.
w represents Skt. short a, which is pronounced like « in mud. The
word is properly an epithet of the widow herself, who is reckoned as
‘true’ or ‘ virtuous’ ifshe thus immolates herself.—Skt. sati, a vir-
tuous wife (Benfey, p. 63, col. 2); fem. of sant-, being, existing, true,
right, virtuous. Sant- is short for *as-ant-, pres. part. of as, to be.—
«/ ES, to be; see Sooth and Is.

SUTURE, a seam, (F.—L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F, suture,
‘a suture or seam;’ Cot.—L. sitiira, a suture; cf. situs, pp. of
suere, to sow; cognate with E. Sew.

SUZERATIN, a feudal lord. (F.—L.) Not in Johnson; used by
Scott, Quentin Durward, ch. 35.—F. suzerain, ‘ sovereign, yet subal-
tern, superior, but not supreme;’ Cot. A coined word; made from
F. sus (L. stisum or sursum, above), in the same way as sovereign is
made from L. super; it corresponds to a Late L. type *stiserdnus, for
*surseranus. B. The L. sursum is contracted from *su-uorsum,
where su- is for sub, up, and worsum (E. -ward) means ‘turned,’ from
L. uertere, to turn; see Sub-and -Ward, suffix. Der. suzerain-ty,
from F. suzeraineté, ‘ soveraigne, but subaltern, jurisdiction,’ Cot.

SWAB, to clean the deck of a vessel. (Du.) Shak. has swabber,
Temp. li. 2. 48; whence the verb to swab has been evolved. Thesb.
is borrowed directly from Du. zwabber, ‘a swabber, the drudge of a
ship ;’ Sewel. Cf. Du. zwabberen, to swab, do dirty work.+Swed.
svabb, a fire-brush, svabla, to swab; Dan. svabre, to swab; G,
schwabber, a swabber, schwabber-stock, a mop-stick ; schwabbern, to
swab. Cf. also Norw. svabba, to splash about, Pomeran. swabbeln,
to splash about; Low G. swappen, to shake about (said of liquids;
Danneil); G. schwabbeln, to shake to and fro. Allied to Lith.
stip-ti, to rock; Slovenian svep-ati, to totter (Miklosich, p. 330).
Of imitative origin. Cf. ME. quappen, to palpitate; E. swap, swash.
Der. swabb-er. :

SWADDLE,, to swathe an infant. (E.) ‘I swadell a chylde;’
Palsgrave. Also spelt swadil, swadle in Levins. Swadel stands for
swathel, and means to wrap in a swathel or swaddling-band. ME.
swepelband, a swaddling-band; spelt suefelband, suadiling-band,
swapeling-bonde in Cursor Mundi, 1343; whence the pp. suedeld,
swetheled=swaddled, id. 11236.—AS. swedel, a swaddling-band ;
spelt swaedil in the Corpus Gloss., 833. The sense is ‘ that which
swathes ;’ formed with suffix -el, -il (Idg. -lo-), representing the agent,


from the verb to swathe; see Swathe. Der. swaddl-ing-band;_


swaddl-ing-clothes, Luke, ii. 7.

SWAGGER, to hector, to be boisterous. (Scand.) In Shaks.
Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 1.79. ‘To swagger in gait is to walk in an affected
manner, swaying from one side to the other ;? Wedgwood. It is the
frequentative of swag, now almost disused. ‘1 swagge, as a fatte
persons belly swaggeth as he goth;’ Palsgrave. ‘Swag, to hang
loose and heavy, to sag, to swing about;’ Halliwell. Norweg.
svagga (Ross), allied to svaga, to sway; Aasen, Cf. Icel. sveggja,
to cause to sway; Norw. svagg (Ross), Dan. sugg, a big, thumping
fellow (Larsen). Allied to Sway. Der. swagger-er.


SWAIN


_ SWAIN, a young man, peasant. (Scand.) ME. swain, Chaucer,
C. T. 4025 (A 4027); swein, Havelok, 273. [The form is Scand.,
not E.; the AS. form was swan, Grein, ii. 500, which would have
given a mod. E. swone, like stone from stax. We do, indeed, find
swein in the A.S. Chron. an. 1128, but this is borrowed from Scand. ]
—Icel. sveinn, a boy, lad, servant ; Dan. svend, a swain, journeyman,
servant ; Swed. sven, a young man, a page.-+Low G. sween, a swine-
herd, Hannover (Brem. Wort.); OHG. swein,a servant. B. The
Teut. type is *swainoz; which may (formally) be allied by gradation
to AS. swin, a swine, with the sense of ‘swine-herd;’ as in Low G.
sween. But if it be allied to Lith. swaine, a sister-in-law, it is from
another source. Der. boat-swain, cox-swain.

SWALLOW (1), a migratory bird. (E.) ME. swalowe, Prompt.
Pary.; Chaucer, C. T. 3258. AS. swalewe,a swallow; Voc. 132.
28.4+Du, zwaluw; Icel. svala, for *svalva, gen. svdlu; Dan. svale ;
Swed. svala; G. schwalbe; OHG. swalawa. B. The Teut. type is
*swalwon, f. Cf. EFries. swalke, Low G. swaalke, a swallow.
The prob. sense is ‘tosser about,’ or ‘mover to and fro;’
allied to Gk. cadevev, to shake, to move to and fro, to toss like a
ship at sea; odAos, the tossing rolling swell of the sea. See Swell.
Fick, i. 842. Cf. MDu. swalpen, ‘to flote, to tosse, beate against
with waves,’ swalpe, a tossing, swalcke, a swallow; Hexham.

SWALLOW (2), to absorb, ingulf, receive into the stomach.
(E.) ME. swolowen, swolwen, Chaucer, C. T. 16985 (H 36); also
swolhen, Juliana, p. 74, 1. 4; swoljhen, Ormulum, 10224 (written
swolljhenn inthe MS.). Thus the final w stands for an older guttural.
It is a secondary form, modified from the AS. strong verb swelgan,
to swallow, pt. t. swealg, pp. swolgen; Grein, ii. 505.-4-Du. zwelgen ;
Icel. svelgja, pt. t. svalg, pp. solginn; also as a weak verb; Dan.
svelge; Swed. svilja; G. schwelgen, to eat or drink immoderately.
The strong and weak forms are confused. The strong verb is of
the Teut. type *swelgan-; pt. t. *swalg, pp. *swulganoz. Der.
ground-sel, q. Vv. :

SWAMP, wet spongy land, boggy ground. (E.) Not found in
old books. ‘Swamp, Swomp, a bog or marshy place, in Virginia or
New England ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. This points to its being a prov.
E. word. According to Rich., it occurs in Dampier’s Voyages, an.
1685. Prob. a native word.+Du. zwamp, a swamp (Calisch).
With a change to a weak grade, we have prov. E, sump (for *swump),
a puddle, G, sumpf, a swamp (whence Du. somp). We also find
prov. E. swank, swang, a swamp; Norw. and Swed. dial. swank.
Connexion with Dan. and Swed. svamp, a sponge, fungus, AS.
swamm, G. schwamm, Goth. swamms, sponge, is not clear. Cf. Gk.
coppés, spongy. Der. swamp, vb., swamp-y, swamp-i-ness.

SWAN, a large bird. (E.) ME. swan, Chaucer, C. T. 206. AS.
swan, Grein, ii. 500.4-Du. zwaan; Icel. svanr; Dan. svane; Swed.
svan; G. schwan. The Teut. types are *swanoz, *swanon-. ‘The
form suggests connexion with Skt. swan, to resound, sound, sing; cf.
L. sonare, tosound. ‘ Argutos.. olores;’ Vergil, Ecl. ix. 36.

SWAN-HOPPING, taking up swans to mark them. (E.)
A mistaken form of swan-upping (Halliwell). Swans, esp. on the
Thames, are annually taken up for the purpose of marking them by
certain nicks made upon their bills. That the old word was really
upping is shown by a tract dated 1570, printed in Hone’s Every-day
Book, vol. ii. col. 958-962. In sect. 8 there is mention of ‘the
upping-daies.’ Insect. 15—‘ the swan-herdes . . shall vp no swannes,’
&c. In sect. 14—‘that no person fake vp any cignet unmarked ;’
and in sect. 28—‘the maister of the swannes is to have for every
white swanne and gray upping, a penny.’

SWAP, to strike. (E.) ME. swappen; ‘ Swap of his heed’ =strike
off his head; Chaucer, C. T. 15834 (G 366). ‘ Beofs to him swapte’
=Beofs went swiftly to him; Layamon, 26775 (later text). An E.
word.+EFries. swappen, to strike noisily, from swap, the sound of a
blow ; prov. G. (dial. of Thiiringen, by L. Hertel) schwappen, to
make swinging movements, to cut; G. schwapp, schwapps, Low G.
swaps, inter}. slap, smack! crack! said of a blow. Imitative; cf.
E. slap, whap, prov. E. swack, a blow. Cf. Swoop.

SWARD, green turf, grassy surface of land. (E.) It formerly
meant also skin or covering; the green-sward is the turfy surface of
the land; the prov. E. sward-pork is bacon cured in large flitches or
flakes (Halliwell, Forby). ‘ Swarde, or sworde of flesch, Coriana ;
Swarde of pe erpe, turfeflag, or sward of erth, Cespes;’ Prompt. Pary.
pp- 482, 506. AS. sweard, skin; Voc. 265. 9.--Du. zwoord, skin of
bacon; Icel. svérdr, skin, hide of the walrus, sward or surface of the
earth; jardar-svérdr, earth-sward, grassvordr, grass-sward; Dan.

Jlesksver, flesh-sward, skin of bacon; gronsver, green-sward; G.
schwarte, rind, bark, skin, outside-plank. B. The Tent. type
perhaps is *swarduz, with the sense of ‘rind.’ Roct unknown. Der,
sward-ed, green-sward.

SWARM, a cluster of bees or insects. (E.) ME, swarm, Chaucer,
C. T. 15398 (B 4582); AS. swearm (Bosworth).4-Du. zwerm; Icel.


SWEAR 621


svarmr; Dan. sverm; Swed. svdrm; G. schwarm; MUG. swarm.
B. Teut. type *swarmoz, where -moz is a noun-suffix, as in bloo-m,
doo-m, ‘The sense is ‘that which hums,’ from the buzzing made by
a swarm of bees. Cf. Lithuan. surma,a pipe or fife, from the sound
it makes; Russ. sviriele, a pipe, G. schwirren, to buzz, whiz, surren,
to hum, buzz.—4/SWER, to hum, buzz; whence Skt. svy, to sound,
svara-, a sound, voice; L. swsurrus, a hum, whisper. Brugmann, i.
§ 375 (8). Der. swarm, verb, AS. swierman, swyrman, A, S. Leech-
doms, i. 384, 1. 21. And see swear.

SWART, SWARTHY, black, tawny. (E.) The proper form
is swart; thence a less correct form swartk was made, occurring in
Chapman, tr. of Homer, Odyss. b. xix. 1. 343; and hence swarth-y
(=swart-y) by the help of suffix -y (AS. -ig) occasionally added to.
adjectives (as in murk-y). Shak. has swarth, Titus, ii. 3. 723 swarthy,
Two Gent. ii. 6. 26; swarty, Titus, ii. 3. 72, in the quarto editions.
ME, swart, spelt swart in Rob. of Glouc., p. 490, 1. 10049. AS.
sweart, black; Grein, ii, 507.4-Du. zwart; Icel. svartr; Dan. sort;
Swed, svart ; G. schwarz; OHG, swarz, suarz; Goth. swarts. B. The
Teut, type is *swartoz; allied to L. sordes, dirt, sordidus, dirty, and
prob. to L. swrdus, dim-coloured. The Norse god Surér, i.e. Swart,
is the god of fire; this suggests a connexion with Skt. svar, the
sun. Perhaps swar-t meant ‘blackened by fire’ Der. swarth-y
or swart-y, as above; swarth-i-ly, swarth-i-ness, And see serene,


solar.

SWASH, to strike with force. (E.) ‘Thy swashing blow,’
Romeo,i. 1.70. Swashing is also swaggering, and a swasher is a
swaggerer, a bully; As You Like It, i. 3. 122, Hen. V, iii..2. 30.
Of imitative origin; cf. Swed. dial. svasska, to make a ‘ squashing’
or ‘swashing’ noise, as when one walks with water in the shoes.
(Rietz). B. By the interchange of fs and sk (as in prov. E. axe=to
ask), svasska stands for *svak-sa, an extension from a base SWAK.
Norweg. svakka, to make a noise like water under the feet; Aasen.
Cf. prov. E. swack, a blow or fall, swacking, crushing, huge; swag,
the noise of a heavy fall (Halliwell). Der. swash-buckler, in Fuller,
Worthies of England, iii. 347 (Cent. Dict.); one who strikes his
buckler with a swashing blow, hence, a noisy ruffian.

SWATH, a row of mown grass. (E.) ME. swathe. ‘A mede
. + + In swathes sweppen down’=a meadow, mown (lit. swept)
down in swaths; Allit. Morte Arthure, 2508. ‘Cam him no fieres.
swade ner’ =no track (or trace) of fire came near him; Genesis and
Exodus, ed. Morris, 3786. AS. swed, swadu, a track, trace, Grein,
ii, 500, 501. EFries. swad.4+Du. zwaad, a swathe; also zwad,
zwade, ‘a swath, a row of grass mowed down,’ Sewel; G. schwad, a
row of mown grass. . The sense ‘ row of mown grass’ is the orig.
one, whence that of track or foot-track easily follows. This appears
by comparing Low G. swad, a swath, with swade, a scythe; see
Brem, Worterbuch, pt. iv. 1107, where the EFriesic swade, swae,
swah, a scythe, is also cited, y. The earliest meaning may have
been a ‘shred’ or ‘slice;’ cf. Norw. swada, vb. act. and neut., to
shred or slice off, to flake off. See Du. zwad in Franck.

SWATHE, to bind in swaddling-cloths, to bandage. (E.) Shak.
has swath, (1) that which the mower cuts down with one sweep of
the scythe, Troil. v. 5.25; (2) aswaddling-cloth, Timon, iv. 3. 252;
also swathing-clothes, 1 Hen. IV, iii. 2.112; swathing-clouts, Haml.
ii, 2. 4013 enxswathed, Complaint, 49. ME. swathen, pt. t. swathed,
Cursor Mundi, 11236. From a base swad- ; whence also AS. swedian,
in comp. beswedian, to enwrap, John, xix. 40 (Lindisfarne MS.) ;
A. S. Leechdoms, ii. 18,1. 8; and AS. swed-el, sw@d-il, a swaddling
band; see Swaddle. @ Perhaps (see Swath) the AS. swad-
meant orig. a shred; hence (1) as much grass as is mown at once,
(2) a shred of cloth used as a bandage. Der. swadd-le (for
swath-le).

SWAY, to swing, incline to one side, influence, rule over. (E.,
ME. sweyen, Gawain and Green Knight, 1429; Allit. Poems, ed.
Morris, C. 151. It also means to go, walk, come, Allit. Poems,
B. 788, C. 4293 spelt sweje, id. C. 72,236. Cf. Swed. svaja, to jerk ;.
Dan. svaie, to swing to and fro, to sway; Du. zwaaijen, to sway,
swing; EFries. swaien, Low G. swajen. B. All from the Teut. base
SWAG, to sway, swing, well preserved in Norweg. svaga, to sway,
swing, reel, stagger (Aasen). Allied to Swagger; and perhaps
even to Swing. Der. sway, sb., Jul. Cesar, i. 3.3, ME. sweigh,.
Chaucer, C. T. 4716 (B 296).

SWEAL,, to singe, scorch slightly. (E.) See under Sultry.

SWEAR, to affirm to be true, to affirm with an oath, to use oaths
freely. (E.) ME, sweren, strong verb, pt. t. swor, swoor, Rob. of
Glouc. p. 33, 1.776; pp. sworen, sworn, Havelok, 439. AS. swerian,
pt. t. swor, pp. sworen, to swear, Grein, ii. 506. We also find AS.
swerian, with the simple sense of speak or declare, conjugated as a
weak verb, particularly in the comp. axdswerian, to declare in return,
to answer. The orig. sense was simply to speak aloud, declare.-++
Du. zweren, pt. t. zwoor, pp. gezworen; Icel. sverja, pt. t. sor, pp»


622 SWEAT


svarinn; Dan. sverge; Swed. svdrja; G. schwéren. And cf. Goth.

swaran, Icel. svara, Dan. svare, Swed. svara, to answer, reply.

B. All from 4/SWER, to hum, buzz, make a sound; whence also

Skt. suv, to sound, to praise, svara-, sound, a voice, tone, accent, L.

susurrus, a humming, and E. swarm; see Swarm. Brugmann, i.
121. Der. swear-ing, for-sworn; an-swer.

SWEAT, moisture from the skin. (E.) ME. swoot (Tyrwhitt
prints swede), Chaucer, C. T. 16046 (G 578); whence the verb sweten,
id. 16047 (G 579). AS. swat, Grein,ii. 501. (By the usual change
from a@ to long o, AS. swat became ME. swoot, and should have been
swote in mod, E.; but the word has been altered in order to make
the sb. accord with the derived verb, viz. AS. sw@tan, ME. swéten,
mod. E. sweat, with the ea shortened to the sound of e in Jet (ME.
léten< AS. l@tan). The spelling swet would, consequently, be better
than sweat, and would also be phonetic.)4-Du. zweet; Icel. sveiti;
Dan. sved; Swed. sveit; G. schweiss; OHG. sweiz. B. The Teut.
stem is *swaito-, sweat, cognate with Skt. svéda-; sweat; from Teut.
base SWEIT, to sweat, of which we find (weak-grade) traces in
Icel. sviti, sweat, G. schwitzen. This answers to Idg. 4/SWEID, to
sweat, whence Skt. suid, to sweat, L. sudor (for *swoidor), sweat, Gk.
id-pws, sweat, W. chwys, sweat. Brugmann, i. § 331c. Der. sweat,
verb, AS, sw@tan, as above ; sweat-y, sweat-i-ness; and see sud-at-or-y,
sud-or-t-fi-c.

SWEEP, to brush, strike with a long stroke, pass rapidly over.
(E.) ME. swepen, Chaucer, C. T. 16404 (G 936); pp. sweped, Pricke
of Conscience, 4947. A weak secondary verb from the base
sw&p-, as in swepd, 3rd p.s. pres. t. of AS. swapan, to sweep, a
strong verb with pt. t. sw@op, Grein, ii. 500. Cf. ge-sw#pa, pl.
sweepings, Voc. 464.20. [This AS. swapan is represented in mod. E.
by the verb to Swoop, q.v.] Cf. also OFries. swépa, to sweep ;
EFries. swépen (pt. t. swép-de), to swing, sway, vibrate. Also
MSwed. swepa, Swed. sopa, Icel. sépa. From Teut. base *swaip,
and grade of Teut. root *sweip. See Swipe. Cf. Icel. sveipa, to
sweep along, a wk. vb., from an old verb svipa (pt. t. sveip); also
OHG. sweifan (pt. t. swief), whence G. schweifen, to rove, stray,
sweep along. Brugmann, i. § 7OI. Der. sweep, sb., Timon,
1, 2. 1373 sweep-er, chimney-sweep-er (often used in the forms sweep,
chimney-sweep, cf. AS. hunta, ME. hunte, a hunter); sweep-ings;
sweep-stake, the same as swoop-stake, sweeping off all the stakes at
once, Hamlet, iv. 5. 142, whence sweep-stakes, sb., the whole money
staked at a horse-race that can be won or swept up at once.

SWEET, pleasing to the senses, esp. to the taste. (E.) ME.
swete, Chaucer, C, T. 3206; with the by-forms swofe, sote, id. 3205.
AS. swéte, Grein, ii. 506.-4-OSax. swoti; Du. zoet; Icel. setr, seir ;
Dan. sod; Swed. sot; G. siisz; OHG. suozi; Goth. sits. B. The
AS. é is a modified 6; cf. the 6 in Dan. séd, Swed. sét. The AS.
swete is for *swotjoz, adj.; where *swot- is the 2nd grade of *swat-,
answering to Idg.4/SWAD, to please, to taste nice, whence also
Skt. suvad, svad, to taste, to eat, to please, svddu-, sweet, Gk. 75vs,
sweet, L. suduis (for *suaduis), pleasant, suadere, to persuade. ‘Der.
sweet-ly, sweet-ness $ sweet-bread, the pancreas of an animal, so called
because sweet and resembling bread; sweet-briar, Milton, L’ Allegro,
47 ; sweets, pl. sb., Cor. iii. 1. 157 ; sweet-ish, sweet-ish-ness ; sweet-en,
to make sweet, Rich. II, ii. 3. 13 ; sweet-en-er, sweet-en-ing ; sweet-ing,
formed with a dimin. suffix -ing, a term of endearment, Oth. ii. 3. 252,
also a kind of sweet apple, Romeo, ii. 4. 83 ; sweet-pea, sweet-potato ;
sweet-william, Bacon, Essay 46, § 6 (from thename William). Also
sweet-meat, lit. sweet food, chiefly in the pl., ME. swete metes,
Henrysoun, Test. of Creseide, 1. 420; see Meat. And see sweet-
heart, below.

SWEETHEART, a lover or mistress. (E.). Used as a term
of endearment. The derivation is simply from sweet and heart; it
is not an absurd hybrid word with the F. suffix -ard (=OHG. -har‘?),
as has been supposed. Creseide calls Troilus her ‘ dere herte’ and
her ‘ swete herte’ both; Chaucer, Troil. iii, 1181-1183. Again, he
calls her my sweté herté deré, id. iii. 1210; and in the last line of
bk. iii we read: ‘Is with Creseide his owén herté sweté” Further
examples are needless, but may easily be found in the same poem
and elsewhere.

SWELL, to grow larger, expand, rise into waves, heave, bulge
out. (E.) ME, swellen, strong verb, pt. t. swal, Chaucer, C. T.
6549 (D 967), pp. swollen, id. 8826 (E950). AS. swellan, pt. t.
sweall, pp. swollen, Exod. ix. 10; Grein, ii. 505.4+Du. zwellen, pt. t.
zwoll, pp. gezwollen; Icel. svella, pt. t. sval, pp. sollinn; Swed.
svilla; G. schwellen. B. All from Teut. type *swellan-, pt. t.
swall, pp. *swullanoz. Cf. Goth. uf-swalleins, aswelling up. Brug-
mann, i. § 903. Perhaps allied to Gk. cadevev, to toss, wave,
Der. swell, sb., Antony, lii. 2. 493; swell-ing. Also sill, q.v.,
ground-sill,

SWELTER, to be faint with heat, also, to cause to exude by
excess of heat. (E.) See further under Sultry.


‘ SWING


SWERVE, to depart from a right line, turn aside. (E.) Palsgrave
has swarve. ME. sweruen (swerven), Gower, C. A. iii. 7, 92; bk. vi. -
168, bk. vii. 232. Once a strong verb, with pt. t. swarf, swerf (Strat-
mann). AS. sweorfan, to tub, to file, to polish, pt.-t. swearf, pp.


sworfen, Grein, ii. 509; whence the sb. geswearf, geswyrf, filings,
A.S. Leechdoms, i. 336, note 15.4-Du. zwerven, to swerve, wander,
rove, riot, revel ; OSax. swerban, pt.t. swarf,to wipe; OF ries. swerva,
to rove; Icel. sverfa, to file; pt. t. svarf, pp. sorfinn; Goth. bi-swairban,
to wipe, af-swairban, to wipe off. B. Teut. type *swerban-, to
wipe, pt. t. *sward, pp. *swurbanoz. Cf. EFries. swarven, to wander,
Swed. svarfva, to turn; also prov. E. swarve in the sense of ‘to
climb a tree devoid of side-boughs,’ by swarming up it. ;

SWIF'T, extremely rapid. (E.) ME. swift, Chaucer, C. T. 190.
AS. swift, Grein, ii. 513. From swif-, weak grade of AS. swifan, to
move quickly, with suffixed -¢ (Idg. -tos, participial). Cf. Icel.
svifa, to rove, turn, sweep; OHG. sweibén, to move or turn quickly.
Teut. base *sweid. Cf. Teut. base *sweip ; see Sweep. Der. swift,
sb., swift-ly, -ness. And see swivel.

SWILL, to wash dishes; to drink greedily. (E.) The proper
sense is to wash dishes. ME. swilien, swilen; ‘dishes swilen’=
wash dishes, Havelok, gi9. AS. swilian, to wash, in the Lambeth
Psalter, Ps. vi. 6 (Bosworth). Der. swill, hog’s-wash, whence swill-
ing-tub, Skelton, Elinor Rummyng, 173. Hence the verb to swill,
to drink like a pig, as in ‘ the boar that .. . swills your warm blood


like wash,’ Rich. III, v. 2. 9; there is no reason for connecting -


swill with swallow, as is sometimes done. Hence swill-er.

SWIM (1), to move to and fro on or in water, to float. (E.)
ME. swimmen, Chaucer, C. T. 3575. AS. swimman, pt. t. swamm,
swomm, Grein, ii. 515.4-Du. zwemmen; Icel. svimma, pt. t. svamm,
pp. summit; Dan. svimme; Swed. simma; G. schwimmen, pt. t.
schwamm. B. All from Teut. type *swemman-, pt. t. *swamm, pp.
*swummanoz. Der. swim, sb., swimm-er, swimm-ing, swimm-ing-ly.

SWIM (2), to be dizzy. (E.) ‘My head swims’=my head is
dizzy. The verb is from the ME. swime, sb., dizziness, vertigo, a
swoon; spelt swyme, suime, Cursor Mundi, 14201; swym, Allit.
Morte Arthure, 4246. AS. swima, a swoon, swimming in the head,
Grein, ii. 515; whence aswamian, verb, to fail, be quenched, and
aswéman, verb, to wander, id. i. 43, 44.-4-Du. zwijm, EFries. swim,
a swoon; cf. Icel. svimi, a swimming in the head; whence svezma,
verb, to wander about; Dan. svimle, to be giddy, svimmel, giddiness,
besvime, to swoon ; Swed. svimma, to be dizzy. B. The AS. swima
probably stands for swi-ma; the base is swi- (Teut. *swei-) ; whence
also OHG. swinan, to decrease, disappear; to which are allied
Swed. svindel, dizziness, G. schwindel, dizziness, schwinden, to disap-
pear, dwindle, decay, fail, schwindsucht, consumption ; Swed. for-
svinna, to disappear, Icel. svina, to subside (said of a swelling).
The primary sense is that of failing, giving way. Der. swin-dler, q.v.

SWINDLER, a cheat. (G.) ‘ The dignity of the British mer-
chant is sunk in the scandalous appellation of a swindler ;’ V. Knox,
Essay 8 (first appeared in 1778); cited in R. One of our few loan-
words from High-German.=—G. schwindler, an extravagant projector,
a swindler.=G. schwindeln, to be dizzy, to act thonughtlessly, to
cheat. = G. schwindel, dizziness. = G. schwinden, to decay, sink, vanish,
fail; cognate with AS. swindan (pt. t. swand), to languish. See
Swim (2). Der. swindle, verb and sb., evolved from the sb.
swindler rather than borrowed from G.

SWINE, a sow, pig; pigs. (E.) ME. swin, with long 7, pl.
swin (unchanged). ‘ He sleep as a swyn’ (riming with wyn, wine) ;
Chaucer, C. T. 5165 (B 745). ‘A flocke of many swyne ;’ Wyclif,
Matt, viii. 30. AS, swin, pl. swin, Grein, ii. 515. The AS. swiz is
a neuter sb. with a long stem, and therefore unchanged in the plural,
by rule.4-Du. zwijn, a swine, hog; Icel. svin, pl. sviz, neuter sb. 5
Dan, sviin, neut., pl. sviin; Swed. svin, neut.; G. schwein, OHG.
swin's Goth. swein, neut. Teut. type *swinom, neut. Cf. Russ.
svin(e)ya, a swine, dimin. svinka, a pig, svinoi, adj., belonging to
swine, svinina, pork. __B. Fick conjectures that the form was orig.
adjectival, like that of L. suinus, belonging to swine, an adj. noted
by Varro (Vanitek, p. 1048); this adj. is regularly formed from
sus,a sow. See Sow (2). Brugmann, i. § 95. Der. swin-ish, -ly,
-ness; swine-herd, ME. swyyne-herd, Prompt. Parv.; swine-cote, ME.
swyyne-kote, id.; swine-sty, ME. swinysty, id., spelt swynsty, Pricke of
Conscience, 9002.

SWING, to sway or move to and fro. (E.) ME. swingen, strong
verb, pt. t. swang, swong, pp. swungen; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris,
A. 1058 (or 1059), Havelok, 226. AS. swingan, pt. t. swang, pp.
swungen, to scourge, also, to fly, flutter, flap with the wings ;
Grein, ii. 515.-4-Swed. svinga, to swing, to whirl; Dan. svinge, to
swing, whirl; G. schwingen, to swing, soar, brandish; also, to
swingle or beat flax; pt. t. schwang. Cf. also Goth. afswaggwjan,
to cause to doubt or despair. B. All from Teut. base *swengw-
Tdg. *sweng. Der. swing, sb.; swinge, q.v.; swingle, q.v. °


SWINGE


_ SWINGE, to beat, whip. (E.) In Shak. Two Gent. ii. 1. 88,
&c. ME. swengen, to beat; see Prompt. Pary. AS. swengan, to
shake, toss; cf. sweng, a stroke, blow ; see Bosworth. AS, swengan
is the causal form of swingan, to swing, to flourish a whip, to beat.
See Swing.

SWINGLE, a staff for beating flax. (MDu.) ‘To swingle, to
beat,-a term among flax-dressers;’ Phillips. The verb is ME.
swinglen, Reliquize Antique, ii. 197; formed from the sb. sqwingle.
In Wright’s Voc. i. 156, near the bottom, we find swingle, sb.,
swinglestok, sb., and the phrase ‘to swingle thi flax.’ From MDnu.
swingelen, or swingen, ‘to beate flax;’ Hexham. Cf. Du. zwingel,
a swingle for flax, a flail; zwingelen, to swingle; also AS. swingele,
a scourging; Laws of Ine, § 48, in Thorpe, Anc. Laws, i. 132;
from AS. swing-an, to beat, to swing. A swingle is ‘a swinger,’
a beater; and swingle, verb, is ‘to use a swingle. See Swing.
Der. swingle, verb. Also swingle-tree, q.y.

SWINGLETREE, the bar that swings at the heels of the
horses when drawing a harrow, &c. (E.) See Halliwell. Also
applied to the swinging bar to which traces are fastened when a
horse draws a coach. [Corruptly called single-tree, whence the term
double-tree has arisen, to keep it company. ‘A single-tree is fixed
upon each end of another cross-piece called the double-tree, when
2 horses draw abreast,’ Haldeman (in Webster).] ME. swingle-tre,
spelt swyngletre in Fitzherbert, On Husbandry, §15 (E.D.S.). The
word tree here means a piece of timber, as in ax/e-tree. The word
swingle means ‘ a swing-er,’ a thing that swings ; so named from the
swinging motion, which all must have observed who have sat behind
horses drawing a coach. See Swingle, Swing.

“SWINK, to toil; obsolescent. (E.) Once an extremely common
word; Milton has ‘ swink’d hedger’=hedger overcome with toil,
Comus, 293. ME. swinken, pt.t. swank, Havelok, 788 ; pp. swunken,
Ormulum, 6103. AS. swincan, pt. t. swanc, pp. swuncen, to toil,
labour, work hard. This form, so curiously like AS. swingan,
pt. t. swang, pp. swungen, is pethaps a parallel form to it. Cf. Du.
zwenk, a swing, a turn; G. schwanken, to totter, stagger, falter.

SWIPE, to strike with a sweeping stroke. (E.) Cf. prov. E.
swipple, the striking part of a flail, Thez has prob. been lengthened;
ef. ME. swipe, swip, a stroke, Layamon, 7648; swippen, vb., to
swipe, strike, Layamon, 878. AS. swipian, swippan, to beat (Grein) ;
swipe, a whip. From *swip-, weak grade of Teut. *swetpan-; see
Sweep. Cf. Icel. suipa, to whip; supa, a whip.

SWIRL, to whirl in an eddy. (Scand.) ‘Swirl, a whirling wavy
motion, East;’ Halliwell. A prov. E. word, now used by good
writers, as C. Kingsley, E. B. Browning, &c.; see Webster and
Worcester. — Norweg. svirla, to wave round, swing, whirl (Aasen),
frequent. of sverra (Dan. svirre), to whirl, turn round, orig. to make
a humming noise. Cf. Swed. svirra, to murmur; G. schwirren, to
whir; Skt. svv, to sound, Formed from the Idg. root SWER, to
hum, just as whir-l is from whir; see further under Swarm.

SWITCH, a small flexible twig. (Du.—G.) In Romeo, ii.
4. 73; Dr. Schmidt notes that old editions have swits for the pl.
switches. Not found in ME., and perhaps borrowed from Du. in the
16th cent. Switch or swich is a palatalised form of swick.—MDu.
swick, ‘a scourge, a swich, ora whip;’ Hexham. It also means a
wooden vent-peg (Hexham); Low G. swikk, zwikk, a twig, a vent-
peg. Not a Low G. word, but borrowed from High G. = Bavarian
zwick, the lash of a whip, or a stroke with the same; variant of
G. zwecke, a tack, a small wooden peg; Bavar. zweck, a splinter,
a tapering piece of wood. From MHG., zwec, a nail, bolt, peg,
esp. a peg in the centre of a target, called in E. the prick or the pin,
which explains why G. zweck means ‘an aim.’ Further allied to
G. zwicken, to pinch, to tweak; which is allied to E. twitch; see
Kluge. The fact that the MDnu. s in this word answers to High
G. z=Low G. ¢, is pointed out by Franck. No other E, word has
initial s from #7. @f Icel. svigi, a switch, seems to be unrelated.
Der. switch, verb.

SWIVEL, a ring or link that turns round on a pinor neck. (E.)
Spelt swivell in Minsheu, ed. 1627. Not found in ME.; it corre-
sponds to an AS. form *swifel, not found, but regularly formed, with
the suffix -el of the agent, from the weak grade (swif-) of AS, swifan,
to move quickly, revolve; for which see Swift. Related words are
Icel. sveifa, to swing or spin in a circle, like a top, svif, a swinging
round, from svifa, to ramble, to turn. The sense is ‘that which
readily revolves.’ Cf. Brugmann, i. § 818 (2).

-SWOON, to faint. (E.) ME. swownen, Chaucer, C. T. 5478
(B 1058); also swoghenen, King Alisaunder, 5857; also swowenen
(Stratmann). A comparison of the forms shows, as Stratmann
points out, that the standard ME. form is *swo3nen, the } being
represented either by gh, w, or ~; and this is a mere extension of a
form *swojen, with the same sense. The z is the same formative
element as is seen in Goth. verbs ending in -nan; cf. E. awaken from


SYCOPHANT 623


awake, &c. B. The form *swo3en appears, slightly altered, as

swowen (with w for 3), to swoon, P. Plowman, B. v. 154, xiv. 326;
also as sowghen, soghen, to sigh deeply, Romans of Partenay, 1944,
2890. ‘This is a weak verb, closely allied to the ME. strong verb
swo3jen, to make a loud or deep sound, to sigh deeply, droop, swoon,
pt. t. swe}, pp. iswojen or iswowen. ‘Sykande ho sweje doun’=
sighing, she drooped down; Gawain and Green Knight, 1796.
‘ Adun he feol iswo3e’=down she fell in a swoon, King Horn, ed.
Lumby, 428. From AS. swogan, to move or sweep along noisily, to
sough, to sigh, orig. used esp. of the wind. ‘Swagad windas’=the
winds sough, Grein, ii. 516; cf. dswogen, pp. choked, Ailfred, tr. of
Gregory’s Past. Care, § 52, ed. Sweet, p. 411, 1.17. Mr. Cockayne
points out that the form geswowung,a swooning, occurs in A, S.
Leechdoms, ii. 176, 1. 13; and that in Atlfric’s Hom. ii. 356, we
find: ‘Se leg. . geswogen betwux Sam ofslegenum’=he lay ix a
swoon amongst the slain. Here AS. geswogen>ME. iswo3en, as
cited above. This AS. swogan is represented by mod. E. Sough,
q.v. It will thus be seen that the final x is a mere formative
element, and unoriginal. Cf. Low G. swégen, to sigh, swugten, to
sigh, also to swoon; Brem. Wort. Der. swoon, sb. Also swoun-d,
with excrescent d, and soun-d, with loss of w. Palsgrave has ‘I
swounde,’ i.e. I swoon.

‘SWOOP, to sweep along, to descend with a swift motion, like
a bird of prey. (E.) Shak. has swoop, sb., Macb. iv. 3. 219. ME.
swopen, usually in the sense to sweep. In Chaucer, C. T. 16404,
where Tyrwhitt prints swepe, the Corpus MS. has swope (Group G,
1. 936); two lines lower, in place of ysweped, the Lichfield MS. has
yswopen. The ME. swopen was orig. a strong verb, with pt. t. swep,
and pp. yswopen (as above). AS. swiapan, to sweep along, rush;
also, to sweep; a strong verb, pt. t. swéop, pp. swapen; Grein, il.
500. ‘Swapendum windum’=with swooping (rushing) winds;
fElfred, tr. of Beda, iii. 16, ed. Smith, p. 542, 1. 37. ‘Swift wind
swaped’=a swift wind swoops; /¥lfred, tr. of Boethius, met. vii
(b. ii, met. 4). (The AS. @ became ME. open 6, but this became
close 6 under the influence of the w.)+4-Icel. sveipa, to sweep, swoop ;
cf. sveip, pt. t, of an obsolete strong verb svip~a; sveipinn, pp. of the
same. Also Icel. sdpa, weak verb, tosweep. And cf. G. schweifen,
to rove, ramble; Goth. sweipains, in the comp. midja-sweipains, a
deluge, Luke, xvii. 27. B. The AS. swapan answers to a Teut.
*swaipan-, from the Tent. root *sweip, for which see Swipe. Der.
swoop, sb. 3; also sweep, q.v.; and see swift, swiv-el.

SWORD, an offensive weapon with a long blade. (E.) ME.
swerd, Chaucer, C. T., A 1700. AS. sweord, Matt. xxvi. 47.4-Du.
zwaard; Icel. sverd; Dan. sverd; Swed. svird; G. schwert. The
Teut. type is *swerdom, neut. Of unknown origin. Der. sword-
cane, -fish, -stick ; sword-s-man, formed like huni-s-man, sport-s-man ;
sword-s-man-ship.

SYBARITH, an effeminate person. (L.—Gk.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674; he also has the adj. Sybaritical, dainty, effeminate.
= L. Sybarita.—Gk. SuBapirns, a Sybarite, an inhabitant of Sybaris,
a luxurious liver, voluptuary; because the inhabitants of this town
were noted for voluptuousness. The town was named from the
river Sybaris (Gk. SvBapis),on which it was situated. This river
flows through the district of Lower Italy formerly called Lucania.
Der. Sybarit-ic, Sybarit-ic-al.

SYCAMINE, the name of a tree. (L.—Gk.—Heb. ?) In Luke,
xvii. 6 (A.V.). = L. sycaminus,— Gk. cvxdpivos; Luke, xvii. 6. It is
gen. believed to be the mulberry-tree, and distinct from the sycamore ;
Thomson, in The Land and the Book, pt. i.c. 1, thinks the trees
were one and the same. . That the word has been confused with
sycamore is obvious, but the suffix -ize (-cvos) is difficult to explain.
Thomson’s explanation is worth notice; he supposes it to be nothing
more than a Gk. adaptation of the Heb. plural. The Heb. name for
the sycamore is shigmah, with the plural forms shzgmoth and shiqmim ;
from the latter of these the Gk. oveadyuvos may easily have been
formed, by partial confusion with Gk. ovépopos, a sycamore; see
Sycamore.

SYCAMORE, the name of a tree, (L.—Gk.—Heb.?). The
trees so called in Europe and America are different from the Oriental
sycamore (Ficus sycomorus). ‘The spelling should rather be sycomore ;
Cotgrave gives sycomore both as an E, and a F. spelling. Spelt
sicomoure in Wyclif, Luke, xix. 4.—L. sycomorus.— Gk. ovxdpopos,
as if it meant ‘fig-mulberry’ tree. As if from Gk. ovxo-, decl. stem
of odrov, a fig; and pdpoy, a mulberry, blackberry ; but it seems to
have been a popular adaptation of Heb. shigmahk, sycamore. See
Sycamine.

SYCOPHANT, a servile flatterer. (L.—Gk.) See Trench,
Select Glossary; he shows that it was formerly also used to mean
‘an informer.’ ‘That sicophants are counted iolly guests;’ Gas-
coigne, Steel Glas, 207. Cotgrave gives the F. form as sycophantin.
= Li sycophanta, an informer, tale-bearer, flatterer, sycophant. = Gk,


624 SYLLABLE


oveopayrns, lit. ‘a fig-shower,’ said to mean one who informs against
persons exporting figs from Attica, or plundering sacred fig-trees ;
hence, 2 common informer, slanderer, also, a false adviser. ‘The
lit. signification is not found in any ancient writer, and is perhaps
altogether an invention;”’ Liddell and Scott. That is, the early
history of the word is lost, but this does not affect its obvious
[perhaps only a popular] etymology.—Gk. cixo-, decl. stem of
ovKov, a fig; and -pavrns, lit. a shower (appearing also in iepopdytns,
one who shows or teaches religious rites), from ¢aivey, to show.
See Sycamore and Phantom. Der. sycophant-ic, -ic-al, -ism ;
sycophanc-y.

SYLLABLE, part of a word, uttered by a single effort of voice.
(F,—L.—Gk.) ME, sillable, Chaucer, C. T. 10415 (F tor). —OF.
sillabe (Littré), later syllabe and syllable, with an inserted unoriginal
1.—L. syllaba. = Gk. ovdAaB7, lit. ‘that which holds together,’ hence
a syllable, so much of a word as forms a single sound.—Gk. ovaA-
(for ovy before following A), together; and Aaf-, base of AapwBaver,
to take, seize (aorist infin, AaBety). See Syn- and Cataleptic.
Der. syllab-ic, from Gk. ovAdaBinds, adj.3 syllab-ic-al, syllab-ity.
Also syllabus, a compendium, from Late L. syllabus, a list, syllabus
(White), from Late Gk. avAAaBos, allied to cvAAaB7.

SYLLOGISM, a reasoning from premises, a process in formal
logic. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. silogime, Gower, C. A. iii. 366; bk.
vili. 2708. — OF. silogime (Littré), later sillogisme, spelt syllogisme in
Cotgrave. —L. syllogismum, acc. of syllogismus, = Gk. avAAoyo pds, a
reckoning all together, reckoning up, reasoning, syllogism. —Gk.
avddAoy-iCouat, I reckon together, sum up, reason.—Gk. ovA- (for
ovv before A following), together; and AoyiCoua, I reckon, from
Ady-os, a word, reason, reasoning. See Syn- and Logic. Der.
syllogise, spelt sylogyse in Lydgate, Assembly of the Gods, 19.
From ovaAdAoyit-opa ; syllogis-t-ic, from L. syllogisticus<Gk. avAdoy-
tats ; syllogis-t-ic-al, -ly.

SYLPH, an imaginary being inhabiting the air. (F.—Gk.) ‘Ye
sylphs and sylphids;’ Pope, Rape of the Lock, ii. 73; and see Pope’s
Introduction to that poem (A.D. 1712). Pope tells us that he took
the account of the Rosicrucian philosophy and theory of spirits from
a French book called Le Comte de Gabalis.=—F. sylphe, the name
given to one of the pretended genii of the air; Hatzfeld quotes Jes
sylfes from a work of the 16th or 17th century.—Gk. oiAg7, used by
Aristotle, Hist. Anim. 8. 17. 8, to signify a kind of beetle or grub.
B. It is usually supposed that this word suggested the name sylph,
which is used by Paracelsus. The other names of genii are gnomes,
salamanders, and nymphs, dwelling in the earth, fire, and water re-
spectively; and, as all these names are Greek, it is likely that sylph
was meant to beGreekalso. The spelling with y causes no difficulty,
and is, indeed, an additional sign that the word is meant to be
Greek. It is not uncommon to find y (called in F. y Grec) used in
words derived from Gk., not only where it represents Gk. v, but
even (mistakenly) where it represents Gk.«1; thus syphon occurs
instead of siphon both in F. and E, y. Littré (followed by Hatz-
feld) accounts for the word quite differently. He says that F. sylphe
is a Gaulish (Celtic) word signifying genius, and that it is found in
various inscriptions as sa7i, syl7i, sylphi, or, in the feminine, as suleve,
sulevie (which are, of course, Latinised and plural forms) ; he cites
‘ Sulfis suis qui nostram curam agunt,’ Orel. Helvet. 117. And he
supposes that Paracelsus revived these names. Scheler, on the
contrary, has no doubt that the word is Greek. Der. sylph-id, from
F. sylphide, a false form, but only explicable on the supposition that
the word sylph was thought to be Gk., and declined as if the nom.
was ofAdgus (stem aiAgub-).

SYDLVAN, a common mis-spelling of Silvan, q. v.

SYMBOL, a sign, emblem, figurative representation. (F.—L.—
Gk.) See Trench, Select Glossary, In Shak. Oth. ii. 3. 350.—F.
symbole, ‘a token, &c.; Cot.—L. symbolum,. — Gk. avpBodor, a token,
pledge, a sign by which one infers a thing.=Gk. cupBddadAay (aor.
infin. cvpBadcty), to throw together, bring together, compare, infer.
=- Gk. cvp- (for ovv before 8), together; and BadAev, to throw. See
Syn-. Der. symbol-ic, from Gk. cupBorsKds, adj.; symbol-ic-al, -ly;
symbol-ise, from F. symboliser, spelt symbolizer in Cot., and explained
by ‘to symbolize ;’ symbol-is-er; symbol-ism, symbol-ist.

SYMMETRY, due proportion, harmony. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt
simmetrie in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. symmetrie, ‘simmetry,’ Cot. =
L. symmetria. — Gk. ovpperpia, due proportion. = Gk. o¥pper pos, adj.,
measured with, of like measure with. = Gk. ovp- (for cvy before FE),
together; and pérpov, a measure. See Syn- and Metre. Der.
symmetr-ic-al, a coined word ; symmetr-ic-al-ly ; symmetr-ise, a coined
word.

SYMPATHY, a feeling with another, like feeling. (F.—L.—
Gk.) Spenser has sympathie and sympathize, Hymn in Honour of
Beautie, ll. 199 and 192.—F. sympathie, ‘sympathy ;’ Cot. —L. sym-
pathia.—Gk. ovprddea, like feeling, fellow-feeling. Gk. ovyradys,


SYNECDOCHE


adj., of like feelings. Gk. cvp- (for ovy before 7), together; and
na6-, base of 7a6-eiy, aor. infin. of macxev, to suffer, experience, feel.
See Syn- and Pathos. Der. sympath-et-ic, a coined word, sug-
gested by pathetic; sympath-et-ic-al, -ly; sympath-ise, from F. sym-
pathiser, ‘to sympathize,’ Cot.; sympath-is-er.

SYMPHONY, concert, unison, harmony of sound. (F.—L.—
Gk.) There was a musical instrument called a symphony, ME. sim-
phonie or symphonye ; see my note to Chaucer, C. T. Group B,
1. 2005. And see Wyclif, Luke, xv. 25.—F. symphonie, ‘harmony ;’
Cot.—L. symphonia, Luke, xv. 25 (Vulgate).—Gk. cupgpwvia, music,
Luke, xv. 25.=—Gk. ovpudavos, agreeing in sound, harmonious. =
Gk. ovp- (for ovy before ¢), together; and pwvety, to sound, pav7,
sound. See Syn- and Phonetic. Der. symphoni-ous ; symphon-ist,
a chorister, Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.

SYMPOSIUM, a merry feast. (L.—Gk.) Blount, Gloss., ed.
1674, has symposiast, ‘a feast-master,’ and symposiagues, ‘books
treating of feasts.” Symposium is in Sidney, Apol. for Poetrie, p. 57.
=—L. symposium.—Gk. ovpnéoiov, a drinking-party, banquet. = Gk.
oup- (for avy before 7), together; and the base mo-, to drink, appear-
ing in pt. t. wé-mw-xa, I drank, aor. é-1d-Onv, I drank, and in the sb.
mo-o.s, drink. See Syn- and Potable.

SYMPTOM, an indication of disease, an indication. (F.—L.—
Gk.) Properly a medicalterm. In Cotgrave, to translate MF. sympt-
ome. = L. symptoma. = Gk. ovpnrwpa, anything that has befallen one,
a casualty, usu. in a bad sense. = Gk. ouprinrev, pt. t. cup-7é-mTwKa,
to fall together, to fall in with, meet with.<Gk. ovp- (for ovv
before 7), together, with ; and winrev (mi-rr-ew) to fall, from 4/ PET,
to fall. See Syn- and Asymptote. Der. symptomat-ic, Gk.
ovpnTwpatikés, adj., from cuumTwpat-, stem of cvuntw-ya; sympto-
mat-i-cal, -ly. ;

SYN., prefix, together. (L.—Gk.; or F.—L.—Gk.) A Latinised
spelling of Gk. avy, together. Cf. Gk. évv, together; a form not
clearly explained. B. The ‘prefix ovy becomes ova- (syl-) before
l, ovp- (sym-) befores, m, ~, and ph, and ov- (sy-) before s or z;
as in syllogism, symbol, symmetry, sympathy, symphony, system, syzygy.

SYNA:RESIS, the taking of two vowels together, whereby they
coalesce into a diphthong. (L.—Gk.) A grammatical term. Spelt
sineresis in Minsheu.—L. syna@resis.—Gk. ocvvaipeots, lit. a taking
together. — Gk. ody, together ; and aipeows, a taking, from aipeiy, to
take. See Syn-and Heresy. Cf. Dieresis.

SYNAGOGUE, a congregation of Jews. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
synagoge, Wyclif, Matt. iv. 23.—F. synagogue, ‘a synagogue ;’ Cot.
=L. synagoga. = Gk. ovvaywyn, a bringing together, assembly, con-
gregation. = Gk. ovy, together; and dywyn (=dy-wy-7), a bringing,
from dye, to bring, drive; a reduplicated form, from 4/AG, to
drive.

SYNALGEPHA, a coalescence of two syllables into one.
(L.—Gk.) A grammatical term; in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L.
synalepha.= Gk. svvadoipy, lit. a melting together. — Gk. ovv, to-
gether; and dAcipeay, to anoint with oil, to daub, blot out, efface,
whence dAop7, fat. The Gk. dAcipew is allied to Alm-os, fat; cf.
Skt. lip, to besmear, anoint.

SYNCHRONISM, concurrence in time. (Gk.) Blount, ed,
1674, says the word is used by Sir W. Raleigh. = Gk. cvyxpomopds,
agreement of time.= Gk. avyxpov-os, contemporaneous ; with suffix
-topos, from -iCev.— Gk. ovy- (written for ody before x), together ; and
xpovos, time. See Syn- and Chronicle. Der. synchronous, adapted
from Gk. ovyxpovos, adj.

SYNCOPATE, to contract a word. (L.—Gk.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. syncopdtus, pp. of syncopare, of which the
usual sense is ‘to swoon.’ =L. syncopé, syncopa, a swooning; also
syncope, as a gram. term.=Gk. ovyxom, a cutting short, syncope in
grammar, a loss of strength, a swoon.—Gk. ovy- (written for ovv
before #), together; and xom-, base of xdomrev, to cut. See Syn-
and Apocope. Der. syzcopat-ion, a musical term, which Blount
says is in Playford’s Introd. to Music, p. 28. Also syncope, as a
grammat. term, also a swoon, spelt sincopin (acc.), Lanfrank, p. 205,
from L. syncopé<iGk. ovyxomn, as above.

SYINDIC, a government official, one who assists in the trans-
action of business. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt sindick in Minsheu, ed,
1627.—F, syndic, ‘a syndick, censor, controller of manners ;’ Cot. =
L. syndicus.—Gk. ovvéitos, adj., helping in a court of justice; as
sb., a syndic.—Gk. ody, with; and dixn, justice. The orig. sense
of dix-n is a showing, hence a course, custom, use, justice; from
Siun-, weak grade of 4/DEIK, to show. See Syn- and Diction.
Der. syndic-ate, a coined word. f

SYNECDOCHE, a figure of speech whereby a part is put for
the whole. (L.—Gk.) Spelt sivecdoche in Minsheu, ed. 1627; but
synecdoche, Caxton, Golden Legend, The Resurrection, § I.—L.
synecdoché. = Gk. ovvexdox7, lit. a receiving together. — Gk, ovverdéxo-
pat, I join in receiving. = Gk. ovv, together ; and é«déxopuau, I receive,


SYNOD


compounded of é«, out, and déyopiau (Ionic Sé*opar), I receive, from
A DEK, to take. See Syn-, Ex-,

SYNOD, a meeting, ecclesiastical council, (F.—L.—Gk.)
€ Synodes and counsayles ;” Sir T. More, Works, p. 406 h. =F’. synode,
a synod; Cot.—L. synodum, acc. of synodus.—Gk. avvodos, a
meeting, lit. a coming together. = Gk. avy, together ; and 656s, a way,
here, a coming, from 4/SED, to go. See Method, Der. synod-ic,
from Gk. ovvodicds, adj. 3 synod-ic-al, synod-ic-al-ly.

SYNONYM, a word having the same sense with another.
(F.—L.—Gk.) The form is French ; in old books it was usual to
write syxonima, which, by a curious blunder, was taken to be a fem.
sing. instead of a neut. pl., doubtless because the L. synonyma was
only used in the plural; and, indeed, the sing. is seldom required,
since we can only speak of synonyms when we are considering more
words than one. Synonima is used as a sing. by Cotgrave and
Blount. =F. syxonime, ‘a synonima, a word having the same signifi-
cation which another hath;’ Cot. —L. syndnyma, neut. pl., synonyms;
from the adj. syzdnymus, synonymous. = Gk. cvywvvpos, of like meaning
or like name. = Gk. ov, with; and dévoya, a name, cognate with E.
name; see Syn- and Name. Der. synonymous, Englished from L,
adj. syndnymus, as above ; synonymous-ly; synonym-y, L. syndnymia,
from Gk. cvvwvvpia, likeness of name.

SYNOPSIS, a general view of a subject. (L.—Gk.) Spelt
sinopsis in Minsheu, ed. 1627,—L. synopsis.= Gk. avvoyis, a seeing
all together.—Gk. ovv, together; and dus, a seeing, sight; cf.
d~-opat, fut. from base ém-, to see. See Syn- and Optics. Der.
synopt-ic, from Gk. adj. cvvorrixds, seeing all together; synopt-ic-
al, -ly.

SYNTAX, the arrangement of words in sentences. (L.— Gk.)
In Ben Jonson, Eng. Grammar, b. ii. c. 1; spelt sintaxis in Minsheu,
ed. 1627.=—L. syntaxis.=Gk. cvvragis, an arrangement, arranging.
= Gk. cv, together; and 7aéis, order, from téocey (for *rax-yew),
to arrange. See Syne and Tactics. Der. syntact-ic-al, due to
Gk. ovvraxrés, adj., put in order ; syntact-ic-al-ly.

SYNTHESIS, composition, combination. (L.—Gk.) In Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674, s.v. Synthetical.—L. synthesis.—Gk. ovvOects, a
putting together.—Gk. ov, together; and 6éo1s, a putting; see
Syn- and Thesis. Der. syzthet-ic-al, due to Gk. adj. cvvOetiKds,
skilled in putting together, from ovv@érns, a putter together, where
6e- is the weak grade of 67-, to put, and -77s is the suffix denoting the
agent (Idg. -ta-); synthet-ic-al-ly.

SYPHON, SYREN, inferior spellings of Siphon, Siren,
q.v. Cot. has the F. spelling syphon; also siphon.

SYRINGE, a tube with a piston, for ejecting fluids. (F.—L.
—Gk.) The g was prob. once hard, not as 7. Cot., however,
already has siringe.— MF. syringue, ‘a siringe, a squirt ;’ Cot.—L.
syringem, acc. of syrinx, a reed, pipe, tube.—Gk. cdpyg, a reed,
pipe, tube, shepherd’s pipe, whistle. From the Gk, base cup-, to
perforate; with suffix -y£ as in Pdpp-ryé, mAaor-vyé. Brugmann,
i, § 230. Der. syring-a, a flowering shrub so named because the
stems were used for the manufacture of Turkish pipes; see Eng,
Cycl., s.v. Syringa.

SYRUP, SIRUP, a kind of sweetened drink. (F.—Span.—
Arab.) ‘Spicery, sawces, and siropes ;? Fryth’s Works, p.99, col. 1.
= MF. syrop, ‘sirrop;* Cot. Mod. F.sirop; OF. ysserop (Littré). =
MSpan. xarope, a medicinal drink (Span. jarope) ; the OF. ysserop is
due to_a Span. form axarope, where a represents al, the Arab.
article.— Arab. shardb, shurab, wine or any beverage, syrup; lit. a
beverage ; Rich. Dict. p. 886,—Arab. root shariba, he drank; id.
p. 887. See Sherbet.

SYSTEM, method. (L.—Gk.) It is not an old word in F.,
and seems to have been borrowed from Latin directly. _ Spelt systeme
in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. systéma.—Gk. ovornua (stem
ovoTnpat-), a complex whole, put together; a system.—Gk. ov-
(for ovv before o), together; and the base orn-, to stand; with
suffix -par- (Idg. -mant-). The base o7y- occurs in otjva, to
stand; from 4/STA, to stand; see Stand. Der. system-at-ic,
from Gk. adj. ovornpyarixds, adj., formed from ovornpart-, stem of
avoTnpua; system-at-ic-al, -ly; system-at-ise, a coined word ; system-
at-is-er.

SYSTOLE, contraction of the heart, shortening of a syllable.
(Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Englished (with y for v) from
Gk. cvorody, a contracting, drawing together.—Gk. ovarod-, and
grade of ovoréAAev, to draw together, contract.— Gk. ov- (for ovv
before c), together ; and o7réAAewv, to equip, setin order. See Syn-
and Stole.

SYZYGY, conjunction. (Gk.) A modern term in astronomy, =
Gk. ov(vyia, union, conjunction. «Gk. od{vyos, conjoined, — Gk, ov-
(for avv before ¢), together ; and (vy-, weak grade of Cev-yvupu, I join
(cf. Géyov, a yoke), from the 4/YEUG, to join. See Syn- and
Yoke; and.compare Conjunction.


TABOUR, TABOR


eo ag ol


TAB, a small flap or strip, usually attached at one end, (E.)
Prob. allied to tape; cf. AS. teppe, a tape, fillet. See Tape.

TAB 1» a sleeveless coat, formerly worn by ploughmen,
noblemen, and heralds, now by heralds only. (F.—L.?) ME. éa-
bard, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 280, 1. 2; Chaucer, C, T.
543 (A 541).—OF. dabart, tabard; see a quotation in Roquefort with
the spelling ¢abart; mod. F. tabard (Hamilton, omitted in Littré).
Ducange gives an OF. form ¢ribart. Cf. Span. and Port. ¢abardo ;
Ital. ¢abarro, The last form (like MF. ¢abarre in Cotgrave) has lost
a final dor # [The W. zabar is borrowed from English.] Wealso
find a MHG. tapfart, taphart; and even a mod. Gk. raymdpiov.
B. Etym. unknown ; Diez suggests L. ¢apét-, stem of tapéte, hangings,
painted cloths; but this is unlikely. Cf. MItal. and L. ¢rabea, a
robe of state.

TABBY, a kind of waved silk. (F.—Span.—Arab.) Chiefly
retained in the expression ‘ a ¢abby cat,’ i. €. a cat brindled or diversi-
fied in colour, like the markings on tabby. ‘ Tabby, akind of waved
silk ;” Phillips, ed. 1706.—F. zabis, in use in the 15th century
(Littré) ; also OF. atabis, Godefroy. Span. zadi, a silken stuff; Low
L. (or rather OSpan.) attabi, where at was supposed (but wrongly)
to represent the Arab. article al, and so came to be dropped. Cf.
‘j panno Aitaby’ (mispr. Accaby); Earl of Derby’s Expeditions,
Camden Soc., p. 283, 1. 24.— Arab. “uéabi, a kind of rich undulated
silk; Rich. Dict. p. 992. See Devic, who calls it an Arab. word
(Rich. marks it Pers.). He adds that it was the name of a quarter
of Bagdad where this silk was made (Defrémery, Fournal Asiatique,
Jan, 1862, p. 94); and that this quarter took its name from prince
Attab, great-grandson of Omeyya (Dozy, Gloss. p. 343). Hence
perhaps tabin-et, spelt cabbinet in Webster, and explained, as ‘a more
delicate kind of tabby ;” from Ital. ¢abin-o, tabine, tabby (Torriano).
But Trench, Eng. Past and Present, tells us that it was named from
M, Tabinet, a French Protestant refugee, who introduced the making
of ¢abinet in Dublin; for which statement he adduces no reference or
authority. Cf. tabine, in ‘ Cloth of tissue or ¢abine,’ Middleton, Any-
thing for a Quiet Life, ii. 2 (C. D.).

TABERNACLE, a tent used as a temple, a tent. (F.—L.)
ME. tabernacle, Rob. of Glouc. p. 20,1. 466.—=F. tabernacle, ‘ a taber-
nacle,’ Cot.=L, zabernaculum, double dimin. of taberna, a hut, shed ;
see Tavern.

TABID, wasted by disease. (F.—L.) Rare; in Phillips, ed. 1706.
=F, tabide, consuming, wasting; Cot.—L. ¢abidus, wasting away,
decaying, languishing. = L. tabés, a wasting away; ¢abére, to waste
away, languish. Allied to Gk. t7xev, in the same sense; and to E.
thaw. See Thaw. Der. tabe-fy, to cause to melt, Blount’s Gloss.,
from MF, ¢abifier, to waste (Cot.), due to L. ¢abefacere, to cause
to melt.

TABLE, a smooth board, usually supported on legs. (F.—L.)
ME. ¢able, Chaucer, C. T. 355 (A 353).=—F. ¢able. —L. tabula, a
plank, flat board, table. Der. zable-s, pl. sb., a kind of game like
backgammon, played on flat boards, Rob. of Glouc. p. 192, 1. 3965 ;
table, verb, Cymb. i. 4. 6; ¢able-book, Hamlet, ii. 2. 1363; table-talk,
Merch. Ven. iii. 5. 933 ¢able-land, land flat like a table; ¢abl-et,
Cymb, v. 4. 109, from F. ¢abletie, ‘a little table,’ Cot., dimin, of F,
table, Also ¢abul-ar, tabul-ate, from L. tabula. Also ¢abl-eau,
borrowed from F, ¢ableau, dimin. of table. Also taffer-el, q.v.; en-
tabla-ture.

TABOO, TABU, to forbid approach to, forbid the use of.
(Polynesian.) ‘ T'aboo, a political prohibition and religious consecra-
tion interdict, formerly of great force among the inhabitants of the
islands of the Pacific ; hence, a total prohibition of intercourse with,
or approach to anything ;’ Webster. ‘South-Sea-Isle ¢aboo;’ Tenny-
son, Princess, iii, 261. Kotzebue mentions the ‘ 7'abu, or interdict ;’
New Voyage round the World, 1830, ii. 178. The E. pron. of New
Zealand (Maori) -tapu, consecrated or forbidden ; pron, ¢ambz in the
Solomon Isles. See E. E. Morris, Austral. Dict.

TABOUR, TABOR, a small drum. (F.—Span:—Arab.) ME.
tabour, Havelok, 2329.—OF. and MF, ¢abour,‘a drum, a tabor;’
Cot. Mod, F. tambour ; Littré gives the spellings tabur, 11th cent. ;
tabour, 13th to 16thcentury. Cf, Prov. tabor, tanbor (cited by Littré) ;
Span. tambor, MSpan. atambor (Minsheu) ; Ital. samburo. The F.
word was most likely borrowed from Span. tambor, also called
atambor, where the prefix a- stands for the Arab. def. art. al, showing
that the word was borrowed from the Moors. = Arab, fambir, ‘a kind
of lute or guitar with a long neck, and six brass strings; also, a
drum;’ Rich. Dict., p. 976. He gives it also as a Pers. word, and


8s


625


626 TABULAR, TABULATE


Devic seems to think that the word was borrowed from Persian.
The initial letter is the 19th of the Pers. alphabet, sometimes written
th, not the ordinary 4. Onthe same page of Rich. Dict. we also find
Pers. fumbuk, a trumpet, clarion, bagpipe, fambal, a small drum ; also
Arab. ¢abl, a drum, a tambourin, Pers. ¢ablak, a. small drum, p. 964.
Also Pers. ¢abir (with the ordinary ¢), a drum, kettle-drum, a large
pipe, flute, or hautboy, p. 365; ¢aburak, a drum, tabour, tambourin,
a drum beaten to scare away birds, p. 364. See the account in
Devic, who considers the form fambir as derived from Pers. ¢abir ;
and the form ¢abirak to be dimin. of Pers. *tabir, a form not found.
B. It will be observed that the sense comprises various instruments
that make a din, and we may note Port. atabale, a kettle-drum, from
a for al, the Arab. article, and Pers. gambal,a drum. All the above
words contain a base tab, which we may regard, with Mr. Wedgwood,
as being of imitative origin, like the English dub-a-dub and tap. This
is rendered likely by the occurrence of Arab. Zabfabat, the sound
made by the dashing of waterfalls ; Rich. Dict. 963; cf. Arab. fabbal,
a drummer, ibid. Der. ¢abor-er, Temp. iii. 2. 160; tabour-ine,
Antony, iv. 8. 37, from F. zabourin, ‘a little drum,’ Cot.; ¢abour-et,
Bp. Hall, Sat. iv. 1. 78, a dimin. form; shortened to ¢abret, Gen.
xxxi. 27. And see tambourine.

TABULAR, TABULATE; see Table.

TACHE (1), a fastening. (F.—Teut.) In Exod. xxvi. 6. ‘A
tache, a buckle, a claspe, a bracelet, Spinter;’ Baret, s.v. Claspe.
A palatalised form of tack ; cf. beseech for beseek, church for kirk, &c. ;
esp. the derived words att-ach, de-tach. Minsheu, ed. 1627, gives:
*To tache, or tacke.’ ME. tache, Voc. 564.2. We find AF. taches,
pl., pegs, Year-books of Edw. I., 1304-5, p. 53.—OF. zache, a nail,
fastening (Godefroy).—EFries. (Low G.) éake, a point, prick, thorn,
allied to tak, takke, a pointed thing, a twig; Low G. ¢akk, a pointed
thing. See Tack.

TACHE (2), a blot, blemish; see Tetchy.

TACIT, silent. (L.) In Milton, Samson, 430. No doubt directly
from L., though Cot. gives F. zacite, ‘silent.’—=L. ¢acitus, silent.
= L. ¢acére, to be silent. Cognate with Goth, thahan, to be silent,
Icel. Jegja, Swed. tiga, to be silent. Der. ¢acit-urn, from F. taci-
zurne, ‘silent,’ Cot. ; tacit-urn-i-ty, Troilus, iv. 2. 75, from F, tacitur-
nité, ‘taciturnity, Cot.; from L. acc. taciturnitatem. Also re-ticent.

TACK, asmall nail, a fastening; to fasten. (F.—Teut.) ME. takke.
‘Takke, or botun, Fibula,’ Prompt. Parv.; where we also find:
‘ Takkyn, or festyn to-gedur, or some-what sowyn to-gedur.’ The sb.
is spelt tak, Legends of Holy Rood, ed. Morris, p.145,1.419. [The
Irish taca, a peg, pin, nail, fastening ; Gael. ¢acaid, a tack, peg, stab ;
Breton tach, a nail, ¢acha, to fasten with a nail, are borrowed words. |
‘=O. North F, tague (OF. tache), a fastening, nail (Godefroy) ; a peg,
clothes-peg (Moisy, s.v. taque).—EFries. and Dan. takke, Low G.
takk, a tine, a pointed thing; Westphal. ¢acke, a tack; G. zacke,a
tooth, tine, prong, twig. Allied to EFries. tak, a twig, a bough, Du.
tak, atwig. 2. The nautical use of tack is from the same source.
‘In nautical language a tack is the rope which draws forward the
lower corner of a square sail, and fastens it to the windward side
of the ship in sailing transversely to the wind, the ship being on the
starboard or larboard tack according as it presents its right or left
side to the wind; the ship is said to tack when it turns towards the
wind, and changes the ¢ack on which it is sailing ;? Wedgwood.
See Tache (1) and Zigzag. Cf. to tack, to sew slightly, fasten
slightly. Der. ache, q.v.; and see tack-le. Also tack-et, a small
nail (Levins).

TACKLE, equipment, implements, gear, tools. (Low G.) ME,
takel, Chaucer, C. T. 106; Gen. and Exodus, ed. Morris, 883 ; zakil,
the tackle of a ship, Gower, C. A. iii., bk. viii. 470.—Low G.
takel, tackle; takeln, to equip; MDu. ¢aeckelen, the tackling of ships,
taeckel, ‘munition, riggings,’ Hexham; Du. ¢akel, tackle, takelen, to
rig ; whence Swed. and MSwed. zackel, tackle of a ship (Ihre), tackla,
to rig; Dan. takkel, tackle, takle, to rig. |B. The suffix -el is used
to form substantives from verbs, as in E. se#t-le, sb., a thing to sit on,
from sit, stopp-le from stop, shov-el from shove, shutt-le from shoot,
gird-le from gird, and denotes the implement. Tack-le is that which
zakes or grasps, holding the masts, &c. firmly in their places; from
Icel. taka, MSwed. taka (mod. Swed. ¢aga), to take, seize, grasp,
hold, which had a much stronger sense than the mod. E. éake; cf,
Icel. tak, a grasp in wrestling, taka, a seizing, capture; and observe
the wide application of tackle in the sense of implements or gear.
Cf. MDu. ¢aeckel, ‘a rope to drawe a boate ;’ Hexham. y- Often
derived from W. ¢acl, an instrument, tool, tackle; but the W. word
was borrowed from E. Der. tackl-ing, Rich. III, iv. 4. 233.

TACT, peculiar skill, delicate handling. (L.) Modern; Webster
gives examples from Macaulay. Todd says: ‘ Tact, touch, an old
word, long disused, but of late revived in the secondary senses of
touch, as a masterly or eminent effort, and the power of exciting
the affections. He then cites a passage containing ‘ sense of fact,’


TAIL


i.e. touch, from Ross, Arcana Microcosmi (1652), p. 66.—L. tactus,
touch.=L. z¢actus, pp. of tangere, to touch; see Tangent. Der.
tact-able, that may be touched, Massinger, Parl. of Love, ii. 1. 8, a
coined word, made to rime with ¢ractable; tact-ile, from L. tactilis,
tangible; tact-ion, a touching, Blount.

TACTICS, the art of arranging or manceuvring forces. (Gk.)
‘ And teaches all the ¢actics;’ Ben Jonson, Staple of News, iv. 1
(Lickfinger).—Gk. raxtixa, sb. pl., military tactics.—Gk. tax7ixds,
adj., fit for arranging, belonging to tactics.—Gk. raxtés, ordered,
arranged ; verbal adj. from taccewv (<rdx-yev), to arrange, order.
Of uncertain origin; Curtius, ii. 328. The base is either TAK,
Fick, i. 588; or TAG (Prellwitz). Der. ¢actic, adj., from Gk.
takrikos ; tactic-i-an, a coined word.

TADPOLE, a young frog in its first stage, having a tail. (E.)
‘Young frogs, . . . whiles they be tadpoles and have little wriggling
tailes;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxxii. c. 10. ME. ¢adpolle, Voc.
766. 20; taddepol, 569. 7. Called bull-head in Cotgrave ; he has:
‘Chabot, the little fish called a gull, bull-head, or miller’s thumbe;
also the little water-vermine called a bull-head.? Also: ‘ Testard,
the pollard, or chevin fish, also the little black water-vermine called
a bull-head.’ Observe that F. chabot is from L. caput, a head (cf. L,
capito, a fish with a large head); that ¢estard is from OF. teste, a
head; that chevin is from F. chef,a head ; and that bull-head contains
the E. head; the striking feature about the ¢adpole is that it appears
nearly all head, with a little tail attached which is afterwards
dropped. See Wedgwood, who adducesalso E. dial. poll-head, Low].
Sc. pow-head, a tadpole (which merely repeat the notion of head), E.
dial. polwiggle, pollywig, a tadpole, with which we may compare
wiggle or waggle, to wag the tail. |B. Hence tad-pole=toad-poll,
the toad that seems all poll; see Toad and Poll. The former part
is from AS. ¢dd-ige, a toad, with loss of suffix, and shortening of @
before dp.

TAEL, a Chinese weight, about 11 0z.; the chief Chinese money
of account. (Malay.)», Called Jiang in Chinese ; see Yule. A Malay
word. = Malay zahil, a certain weight.

TANIA, a fillet, a tape-worm. (L.—Gk.) L. ¢aenia. —Gk.
ravia, a band, fillet, strip. = Gk. 7eivew, to stretch. Allied to Thin.

TAFFEREL, TAFFRAIL, the upper part of the stern of
a ship. (Du.—L.) ‘ Tafferel, the uppermost part, frame, or rail
of aship behind, over the poop;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. — Du. tafereel,
a pannel, a picture; Hexham explains it by ‘a painter’s table or
board,’ and adds the dimin. tafereelken, ‘a tablet, or a small board.’
The ¢affrail is so called because it is flat like a table on the top, and
sometimes ornamented with carved work; cf. G. ¢afele’, boarded
work, flooring, wainscoting. B. The Du. éafer-eel stands for
*tafel-eel, a dimin, from Du. tafel, a table ; just as G. tdfelei is from
G. tafel, a table. The Du. and G. éafel are not to be considered as
Teut. words; the MHG. form is ¢avele, OHG. tavela, borrowed from
L. tabula, a table. See Table. @ The spelling ¢affrail is prob.
due to confusion with E. rail.

TAFFETA, TAFFETY, a thin glossy silk stuff, with a wavy
lustre. (F.—Ital.—Pers.) ‘ Tafata, a maner of sylke, taffetas ;’
Palsgrave. ME. taffata, Chaucer, C. T. 442 (A 440). Taffata
occurs in 1324; Wardrobe Acct. 18 Edw. II. 24. 17, Q. R.; see
N. and Q. 8 S. i. 129.—F. ¢affetas, ‘taffata;’ Cot.—Ital. taffeta,
‘taffeta ;’ Florio.— Pers. ¢aftah, ‘twisted, woven, a kind of silken
cloth, taffeta; Rich. Dict. p. 356.—Pers. ¢aftan, to twist, to spin,
curl, &c.; see Horn, § 372. See Tapestry.

TAG, a point of metal at the end of a lace, anything tacked on at
the end of a thing. (Scand.) ‘An aglet or tag of a poynt;’ Baret,
ed. 1580. ‘Are all thy points so voide of Reasons taggs?’ Gas-
coigne, Fruites of War, st. 61. A ‘point’ was a tagged lace; cf.
‘ Tag of a poynt, Ferretum ;’ Levins. Swed. tagg, a prickle, point,
tooth; Norw. ¢agge, a tooth, cog.--Pomeran. tagg, a point, tack;
Low G. ¢akk, a point, tooth. B. The Low G. takk is the same
word as E, tack, a small nail, and G. zacke, a tooth, tine, prong.
See Tack, Tache. Der. tag, verb; ¢ag-rag, used by Stanyhurst
(tr. of Virgil, ed. Arber, p. 21) to mean ‘ to small pieces,’ but usual
in the sense of ‘ every appendage and shred,’ a shortened form of tag
and rag, as in ‘they all came in, both tagge and ragge,’ Spenser,
State of Ireland, Globe ed., p. 662, col. 2. So also tag and rag,
Whitgift’s Works, i. 315 (Parker Soc.). So also zag-rag-and-bobtail,
where bobéail = short or bunchy tail, from 60, a bunch; see Bob.

T ATI: (1), the end of the back-bone of an animal, a hairy ap-
pendage, appendage. (E.) ME. dail, tayl, Chaucer, C. T. 3876
(A 3878). AS. tegl, tegel, a tail, Grein, ii. 523.4cel. tagl, Swed.
tagel, hair of the tail or mane; Goth. ¢agl, hair, Mark, i. 6; G,
zagel, a tail. B. Root uncertain; it has been compared with Skt.
daca, the fringe ofa garment. Der. tail-piece, a piece or small draw-
ing at the tail or end of a chapter or book. Also #ail-ed, Rich. Coer
de Lion, 1. 1868.


TAIL:


TAIL (2), the term applied to an estate which is limited to
certain heirs, (F.—L.) Better spelt ¢aille. ‘This limitation, or
taille, is either general or special ;’ Cowel, in Todd’s Johnson ; see
the whole article.=—F, ¢aille, ‘a cutting,’ &c.; Cot.; see Tally.

TAILOR, one who cuts out and makes cloth garments. (F.

—L.) Properly ‘a cutter.” ME, tailor, taylor, Rob. of Glouc.
p- 313, 1. 6394.—OF. tailleor, later tailleur, ‘a cutter;’ Cot.=F.
tailler, to cut; cf. F. ¢aille, an incision, a slitting. = Late L. ‘aleare, to
cut; cf. ¢@lea, a thin rod, stick, also a cutting, slip, layer (an
agricultural word). See Diez, who cites from Nonius, 4. 473;
‘taleas scissiones lignorum vel presegmina Varro dicit de re rust.
lib. I.; nam etiam nunc rustica voce intertaleare dicitur dividere vel
exscindere ramum.’ This verb intertaleare is preserved in the
Span. extretallar, to slash. Der. tailor-ing. And see tally, de-tail,
en-tail, re-tail.

TAINT, a tinge, dye, stain, blemish. (F.—L.) In Shak. Macb.
iv. 3. 124. Cf. ME. taint, taynt, a disease in hawks; Book of
St. Albans, fol. b 2, back.—F. teint; MF. teinct, ‘a tincture, die,
stain;’ Cot.=F. teint, pp. of teindre, ‘to stain,’ id.—L. tingere ; see
Tinge. Der. taint, vb., Romeo, i. 4. 76. @ Perhaps confused
with attaint, from tangere.

TAKE, to lay hold of, seize, grasp, get. (Scand.) ME. taken,
pt. t. tok, pp. taken, Chaucer, C. T. 572 (A 570); pp. ¢aké, id.

2649 (A 2647). Late AS. taken, A.S. Chron. an.1127. Not a true
AS. word, but borrowed from Norse.—Icel. taka, pt. t. ¢6k, pp.
tekinn, to lay hold of, seize, grasp (a very common word); Swed.
taga, MSwed. taka; Dan. tage.4Goth. tékan, pt. t. tattok, pp.
tekans, to touch. Der. tak-ing, tak-ing-ly. Allied words are tack,
tache, tag, tack-le, attach, at-tack, de-tach.

TALC, a mineral occurring in thin flakes. (F.—Span. — Arab.)
“ Oil of talc ;? Ben Jonson, Epigram to the Small-pox; Underwoods,
ii. 11. And see Nares.—F. tale (Cot.).—Span. ¢alco.— Arab. talgq,
‘talc, mica;’ Rich. Dict. p. 974.

TALE, a number, reckoning, narrative. (E.) ME. ¢ale; see

Chaucer, Cant. Tales. AS. tel, a number, talu, a narrative; Grein,
ii, 521.4-Dnu. zaal, language, tongue, speech; Icel. zal, talk, a tale;
tala, a number, a speech; Dan. f#ale, speech; Swed. zal, speech,
number; G. zahl, number; OHG. zala. It is probable that Goth.
antals, uninstructed, ¢alzjan, to instruct, are related words. Der.
tale-bear-ing, tale-bear-er, tell-tale (Sherwood’s Index to Cotgrave
has ‘ a ¢ale-bearer or tell-tale’) ; tale-tell-er, P. Plowman, B. xx. 297.
Also tell, q.v., talk, q.v.

TALENT, a weight or sum of money, natural gift or ability,
inclination. (F.—L.—Gk.) See Trench, Study of Words, and
Select Glossary. We derive the sense of ability from the parable in
Matt. xxv, our alents being gifts of God. The ME. ¢alent occurs
in the sense of will or inclination, from the figure of the inclination
or tilting of a balance. ME. talent; whence mal-talent, ill-will,
Rom. of the Rose, 273, 330; and see Wyclif, Matt. xxv. 153 King
Alisaunder, 1280, —F’. talent, ‘a talent in mony ; also will, desire, an
earnest humour unto;’ Cot. =—L. zalentum. — Gk. Tédavrov, a balance ;
a weight, weight or sum of money, talent. Named from the notion
of lifting and weighing; allied to rdAas (stem tadavyt-), bearing, en-
during, L. toll-ere, to lift, sustain, Skt. zwl, to lift, weigh, zalana-,
lifting, ‘ula, a balance, weight. All from 4/TEL, to lift. See
Tolerate. Der. talent-ed, endued with talent, added by Todd to
Johnson, with the remark that the word is old; he gives a quotation
from Archbp. Abbot, in Rushworth’s Collections, p. 449; which
book first appeared between 1659 and 17o1, and treats of matters
from 1618-1648 ; see an excellent note on talented in Modern English,
by F. Hall, p. 70. Brugmann, i. § 580.

TALISMAN, a spell. (Span.—Arab.—Gk.) ‘In magic, Zalis-
man, and cabal;’ Butler, Hudibras, pt.i.c. 1.1.530. The F. is
also talisman, but is a late word; both F. and E. words were prob.
taken directly from Spanish.—Span. ¢alisman, a magical character ;
also a doctor of the Mohammedan law, in which sense Littré notes
its use in French also.—Arab. Zilsaman, properly the pl. of zilsam,
or Zilism, ‘ a talisman or magical image, upon which, under a certain
horoscope, are engraved mystical characters, as charms against en-
chantment;’ Rich. Dict. p. 974.—Gk. réAcopa, a payment; used
in Late Gk. to mean initiation or mystery (Devic); cf. reAeopds, an
accomplishment or completion. Gk. reAgetv, to accomplish, fulfil,
complete, end; also, to pay.—Gk. réAos, end, completion ; also,
initiation into a mystery ; whence the sense of the derived sb. réAeopa.
Der. talisman-ic. _

TALK, to discourse. (E.) ME. talken, Wyclif, Luke, xxiv. 15 ;
and much earlier, in St. Marharete, p. 13, Ancren Riwle, p. 422.
Cf. EFries. talken, to talk; talke, a short tale. We may note that
the Harl. MS. actually has talken in Chaucer, C. T., where the Six-
text (A 772) has ¢alen in all the MSS. And we may compare the
Low G. taalke, (1) ajackdaw, (2)a talkative woman. B. Apparently


‘1691.


TAMBOUR


extended (like wal-k, q.v.) from AS. tal-, as in ¢al-u, a tale, tal-ian,
to account, with suffix -k, which seems to give a frequentative force.
Cf. Icel. ¢al-a, Swed. tal-a, Dan. tal-e, to talk. See Tale. So
also AS. tam-c-ian, to tame (Napier) ; from fam, tame. Der.
talk-er; talk-at-ive, a strangely coined word, spelt ¢alcatife in The
Craft of Lovers, st. 4, pr. in Chaucer’s Works, ed. 1561, fol. 341.
Hence talk-at-ive-ly, -ness.

TALL, high in stature, lofty. (E. or C.) Two distinct words
appear with this spelling; (1) ¢all, in the sense of ‘serviceable,’ or
‘valiant,’ which is obsolescent ; and (2) fall, in the sense of ‘high in
stature.’ 1. The former is English ; see Trench, Select Glossary.
ME. tal. ‘Tal, or semely, Decens, elegans;’ Prompt. Pary. ‘So
humble and ¢al/e;’ Chaucer, Compl. of Mars, 1. 38, where the sense
appears to be ‘ obedient or docile, or obsequious.’ In old plays it
means ‘ valiant, fine, bold, great;’ Halliwell. In the Plowman’s
Tale, st. 3, untall seems to mean ‘ poorly clad.’ Allied to AS. ge-tal,
quick, prompt; AS. -t@l, as in léof-tel, friendly. Also to OHG.
gi-zal, quick ; and further, to Goth. tals, only used in the comp.
un-tals, indocile, uninstructed. Note also the forms un-tala, un-tale,
bad, used to gloss mali in the Northumb. Gospels, Matt. xxvii. 23.
2. Perhaps, in the sense of ‘lofty,’ the word may be Celtic. We
find zal, tall, high, both in W. and Cornish; Williams instances tal
carn, the high rock, in St. Allen. It is remarkable that the Irish
talla means ‘ meet, fit, proper, just.’ Further light is desired as to
this difficult word. Der. ¢all-ness.

TALLAGE, a tribute; see Tally.

TALLOW, fat of animals melted. (E.) ME. ¢algh, Reliquiz
Antig. 1. 53; zalw3, Eng. Gilds, p. 359, 1. 11; talwgh, Rich. Coer
de Lion, 1552. Cf. EFries. talg, allig, tallow.4+MDu. talgh, talch,
tallow, Hexham; mod. Du. zalk, Low G. talg; Dan. and Swed.
talg ; Icel, tolgr, also t6lg, tolk. ‘The G. talg is borrowed from
Low G. B. There is an AS. ¢elg, telg, a stain, dye, but its
connexion with allow is very abate If tallow meant ‘ hardened’
fat, cf. Goth. zulgus, steadfast, firm. See Stearine.

TALLY, a stick cut or notched so as to match another stick,
used for keeping accounts; an exact match. (F.—L.) ME. Zaiile,
Chaucer, C. T. 572 (A 570); whence Zaillen, verb, to score on a
tally, P. Plowman, B. v. 429.—F. taille, ‘a notch, nick, incision,
notching, nicking; ... also, a tally, or score kept on a piece of
wood ;’ Cot.=F. ¢ailler, to cut.—Late L. taledre, to cut; cf. L.
talea, a slip of wood; see Tailor. It is probable that the final -y
in ¢all-y is due to the frequent use of the F. pp. éaillé, ‘ cut, nicked,
notched,’ as applied to the piece of wood scored, in place of the sb.
taille. The final -y in lev-y, jur-y, pun-y is likewise due to the F.
pp. suffix. Der. ¢ally, verb; zally-shop. Also tallage, a tribute;
ME, taylage, Chaucer, The Former Age, 54; OF. faillage
(Godefroy); from F. Zailler, to cut, ‘also, to levy tributes on,’
Cot. And see en-tail, de-tail, tail-or.

TALMUD, the body of Hebrew laws, with comments. (Chaldee.)
See Talmud in Index to Parker Society. Spelt talmud, thalmud in
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674; ¢almud in Minsheu, ed. 1627; thalmud in
Cotgrave. = Chaldee ¢almid, instruction, doctrine; cf. Heb. zalmid,
a disciple, scholar, from lamad, to learn, limmad, to teach.

TALON, the claw of a bird of prey. (F.—L.) Spelt ¢alant in
Palsgtave (with excrescent ¢ after). He gives: ‘ Talant of a byrde,
the hynder clawe, ¢alon.’ Thus the talon was particularly used of
the bird’s hind claw. ME, ¢alon, Allit. Romance of Alexander,
54543 taloun, Mandeville’s Travels, in Spec. of Early English, part II.,
p. 174, 1. 130.—F. ¢alon, ‘a heel;’ Cot.—Late L. talonem, acc. of
talo, a heel. = L. talus, heel.

TAMANDUA, an ant-eater. (Brazil.) From Guarani taman-
dud (where @ is nasal) ; see Granada, Vocabulario Rioplatense.

TAMARIND, the fruit of an E. Indian tree. (F. —Span. — Arab.
and Pers.) Spelt tamarinde in Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. iii.
c. 6.— MF, tamarind, ‘a small, soft, and dark-red Indian date ;’ Cot.
Also tamarinde, ‘the Indian date-tree ;’ id. Span. zamarindo. (Cf.
Ital. ¢amarindo; Florio gives the Ital. pl. zamarindi, and Minsheu
the Span. pl. ¢amarindos, without mention of the sing. form.) = Arab.
tamr, a ripe date, a dry or preserved date ; and Hind, India; whence
tamr’ul Hind, a tamarind, lit. date of India; Rich. Dict. pp. 446,
The Arab. tamr is allied to Heb. ¢amdr, a palm-tree, occurring
in the Bible as Tamar, a proper name. The word Hind is borrowed
from Persian (which turns initial s into k), and is derived from Skt.
sindhu-, the river Indus; see Indigo.

TAMARISK, the name of a tree. (L.) Spelt famariske in
Minshen, ed. 1627. Cf. MF. tamaris, ‘tamarisk,’ in Cot.; but the
E. word keeps the k.=L. ¢amariscus, also tamarix, tamaricé, a
tamarisk. (The Gk. name is pupixy.) Hardly a L. word; perhaps
due to, or connected with Skt. zamdlaka-s, tamdla-s, a tree with a
dark bark ; allied to amas, darkness ; Fick, i. 593. See Dim.

TAMBOUR, a small drum-like circular frame, for embroidering.

88 2


627


628 TAME


(F. —Span.—Arab.—Pers.?) In Todd’s Johnson.—F, ¢ambour, a
drum, atambour; broder au tambour, to do tambour-work; Hamilton.
See further under Tabour. Der. tambour-ine, spelt tamburin in
Spenser, Shep. Kalendar, June, 1. 59, from F. ¢ambourin, a tabor
(Hamilton), dimin. of F. tambour.

TAME, subdued, made gentle, domesticated. (E.) ME. tame,
Wyclif, Mark, v. 4. AS. tam, Matt. xxi, 5 ; whence temian, vb.,
to tame, in A#lfric’s Colloquy (section on the Fowler), in Voc. p. 95.
+Dnu. tam; Icel. tamr ; Swed. and Dan. tam; G. zahm. Cf. Goth.
gatamjan, to tame ; a causal verb. B. All from Teut. type *tamoz,
tame. Allied to Skt. dam, to be tame, also to tame, Gk. dapderv,
L. domare, totame. Der. tame, vb. ; tame-ly, -ness ; tam-er, tam-able ;
also (from same root) daunt, q.v., in-dom-it-able.

TAMMY, the same as Stamin, q.v. See Tamine in Nares.

TAMPER, to meddle, practise upon, play with. (F.—L.) ‘You
have been ¢ampering, any time these three days Thus to disgrace
me;” Beaum. and Fletcher, The Captain, iv. 2 (Jacomo). The same
word as temper, but used in a bad sense; to zemper is to moderate,
allay by influence, but is here made to mean to interfere with, to
influence in a bad way. Prob. Southern F. Mistral gives tampera
as the Limousin form of mod. Prov. ¢empera, vb., to temper. Godefroy
has ¢amprure asa variant of OF. tempreure, moderation. See Temper.
Doublet, temper.

TAMPION, a kind of plug. (F.—Teut.) ‘ Zampyon for a gon
[gun], tampon ;’ Palsgrave.—F. tampon, ‘a bung or stopple; ’ Cot.
A nasalised form of ¢apon, ‘a bung or stopple;’ id. Formed with
suffix -on (L. -dnem) from OF. tampe, tape, a bung. Cotgr. gives
the Picard vb. taper (or tapper), ‘to bung, or stop with a bung.’=
Du. zap, ‘a bunge or a stopple,’ Hexham; Low G. ¢appe, a tap,
bung. See Tap (2).

TAN, oak-bark or other bark used for converting hides into
leather. (F.—G.) The sb. is, etymologically, the orig. word, but
is rarely seen in books ; Levins has only tan asaverb. Rich. quotes
‘skinnes in ¢an-tubs’ from Hakluyt’s Voyages, vol. iii. p. 104.
The ME. tannen, verb, to tan, occurs in Eng. Gilds, p. 358, 1. 16,
and the sb. zanner is common, asin P. Plowman, C. i. 223, &c.—F
tan, ‘the bark of a young oak, wherewith leather is tanned ;’ Cot.
Cf. Bret. ann, an oak, occasionally used (but rarely) with the sense
of tan ; Legonidec.—G. ¢anne, a fir-tree; the names of oak and fir
seem to have been confused; the OHG. ¢anna meant both ‘ fir’ and
‘oak’ (Kluge). A High G. form; cf. Du. den, a fir-tree, MDu.
dan, ‘abies,’ in Mone, Quellen, p. 302; Low G. danne, a fir-tree
(Liibben). Cf. Skt. dhanva, a bow. Der. tan, verb, as above;
zann-er ; tann-er-y, from F. tannerie, ‘tanning, also a tan-house,’
Cot. Also zann-ic, a coined word; ¢ann-in, F. tanin (Hamilton),
a coined word ; ¢an-ling, one scorched by the sun, Cymb, iv. 4. 29.
Also tawn-y, q.v. Also tan, to beat; Norm. dial. tanner la peau, to
tan one’s skin; Dubois.

TANDEM, applied to two horses harnessed one before the other
instead of side by side. (L.) So called because harnessed at length,
by a pun upon the word in university slang Latin. =L. tandem, at
length. L. tam, so, so far; and suffix -dem, allied to -dam in
qui-dam.

TANG (1), a strong or offensive taste, esp. of something ex-
traneous. (Scand.) ‘Itis said of the best oyl that it hath no tast, that
is, no fang, but the natural gust of oyl therein ;’ Fuller, Worthies,
England (R.). ME. ¢ang, a sting; Cath. Angl. (1483). See
Tang (2). Soalso ME. tongge, ‘scharpnesse of lycure in tastynge ;’
Prompt. Pary. Cf. MDu. anger, ‘sharpe, or tart upon the tongue;
tangere kaese, tart or byting cheese;’ Hexham. The lit. sense of
tanger is ‘ pinching ;’ from Du. ¢ang,a pair of tongs, pincers, nippers ;
cognate with E. tongs. See E.D.D. Cf. MHG. zanger, sharp,
sharp-tasted; AS. ge-tingan, to press hard upon (pt. t. ge-tang).

TANG (2), the part of a knife which goes into the haft, the
tongue of a buckle, the prong of a fork. (Scand.) See Halliwell;
who cites: ‘A tange of a knyfe, piramus;? see Cath. Angl. (1483).
It also means a bee’s sting. ‘ Pugio,atange;’ Voc. 703.27. * Tongge
of a bee, Aculeus; Tongge of a knyfe, Pirasmus;? Prompt. Parv.—
Icel. tangi, a spit or projection of land; the pointed end by which
the blade of a knife is driven into the handle, allied to zéng (gen.
tangar), a smith’s tongs; ¢engja, to fasten. So called because it is
the part nipped and held fast by the handle; so the tongue of a buckle
(corrupted from tang of a buckle) nips and holds fast the strap; the
bee’s sting nips or stings. The form ong in the Prompt. Pary.
answers to the sing. of E. tongs. See Tongs.

TANG (3), to make a shrill sound. (E.) Shak. has it both as
sb. and verb. ‘A tongue with a tang, i.e. with a shrill sound,
Temp. ii. 2.52. ‘Let thy tongue tang,’ i.e. ring out; Tw. Nt. ii.
5. 163, iii. 4. 78. An imitative word, allied to ting, whence the
frequentative ingle; also to tink, whence the frequent. timkle. Cf.

Proy. E, ting-tang, the saints-bell; tingle-tangle, a small bell, which


TANSY


occurs in Randolph’s Amintas (1640); Halliwell. So also MDu.
tinge-tangen, totinkle; Hexham. Cf. MF. tantan (=tang-tang), ‘the
bell that hangs about the neck of a cow;’ Cot. See Tingle,
Tinker, Twang. :

TANG (4), sea-weed; see Tangle.

TANGENT, a line which meets a circle, and, being produced,
does not cut it. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. tangent-,
touching, stem of pres. part. of tangere (base tag-), to touch; pp.
tactus.4-Gk. base tay-, to touch, seen in reraywy, taking. Der.
tangent-i-al, in the direction of the tangent, Tatler, no. 43 ; tangenc-y ;
also (from pp. ¢actus) tact. And see tang-ible, task, taste, tax. Also
attain, attainder, attaint, con-tact, con-tagion, con-taminate, con-tiguous,
con-tingent, entire, in-teger, redintegration.

TANGIBLE, perceptible by the touch, that can be realised.
(F.—L.) In Cotgrave.=F. ¢angible, ‘tangible ;’ Cot.—L. tangibilis,
touchable; formed with suffix -bilis from tangere, to touch; see Tan-
gent. Der. ¢angibl-y, tangibili-ty.

TANGLE, to interweave, knot together confusedly, ensnare.
(Scand.) ‘I ¢angell thynges so togyther that they can nat well be
parted asonder, Fembrouille;’ Palsgrave. Levins has the comp.
entangle, To tangle is ‘to keep twisting together like sea-weed ;’
a frequentative verb from tang, sb. (also tangle, sb.), sea-weed,
a Northern word. Cf. zangle, a stalk of sea-weed; in Leslie’s Hist.
of Scotland, i. 62 (1596; S.T.S.).—Dan. tang, Swed. dng, Icel.
pang, kelp or bladder-wrack, a kind of sea-weed ; whence the idea of
confused heap. We also find the dimin. Icel. Aéngull, sea-weed ;
Norw. tongul, a tangle-stalk. Cf. Norman dialect tangon (a Norse
word), explained by Métivier as Fucus flagelliformis. (The G.
tang, sea-weed, was borrowed from Scand. ; for it begins with ¢, not
d.) All from Teut. base *thang-; see Tight. B. We also find
tangle in the sense of sea-weed (Halliwell); and the verb to tangle
may have been made directly from it. It makes no great difference ;
cf. Icel. Jongull, as above; Norw. tengel, a stalk of sea-weed. Der.
tangle, sb., which seems to be a later word than the verb, Milton,
P. L. ix. 632; en-tangle, q.v.

TAWNIST, a presumptive heir to a prince. (Irish.) Spelt ¢anistih
in Spenser, View of Ireland, Globe ed., p. 611.— Irish tanaiste, the
presumptive or apparent heir to a prince. = Olrish ¢anaise, second in
rank, See Macbain. Der. ¢anist-ry, a coined word, to signify the
custom of electing a ¢anist; also in Spenser, as above.

TANK, a large cistern, (Port.—L.) In Sir T. Herbert, Travels,
ed. 1665, p. 66; and at p. 43 in another edition (Todd). Also in
Dryden, Don Sebastian, ii. 2, The same word as Stank, q.v.
The form tank is Portuguese, which is the only Romance language
that drops the initial s,— Port. zanque, a tank, pond; the same word
as Span. estangue, OF. estanc, Prov. estanc, stanc, a pond, dam of
water; from Port. and Span. estancar, to stanch, stop.—Late L.
stancare, to stanch. Ultimately from L. stagnum, a pool; see
Stank, Stanch, Stagnant. 4 See Tank in Yule.

TANKARD, a large vessel for holding drink. (F.—Tent.)
ME. tankard, used to translate L. amphora, Voc. 563. 28; also in
Lydgate, Ballad of Jack Hare, st. 2; and in Prompt. Parv.=MF.
tanquard, ‘a tankard, in Rabelais;’ Cot. Cf. MDu. zanckaert, ‘a
wodden [wooden] tankard,’ Hexham; a word borrowed from F.
B. The suffix -ard is common in OF., showing that the word was.
really, at some time, French. [Irish ¢ancard must have been
borrowed from E.] Prob. from Swed. stdnka, ‘a large wooden can”
(Widegren), ‘a tankard’ (Oman); with F. suffix -ard. The Swed.
stanka is a dimin. of stdnna, standa, a vat (Rietz) ; note the aa in
Norw. ¢aankar (also tankar), an oil-can. Cf. also Westphal. stande,
stanne, a vessel broader at the bottom (Woeste); Low G. stande
(corruptly, sfanne), the same; whence E. standard, a tankard, a
standing bowl. ‘Frolic, my lords, and let the standards walk;’
Greene, A Looking-glass, ed. Dyce, p.141. See Notes on E. Etym.,
p- 290. All from the vb. Zo stand.

TANSY, a tall plant, with small yellow flowers. (F.—Late L.
—Gk.) ME. ¢ansaye,a tansy-bed; ‘Hoc tansetum, tansaye,’ Voc.
712. 33. ‘ Tansey, an herbe, tanasie,’ Palsgrave. = OF. ¢anasie, as in
Palsgrave, later ¢anaisie, ‘the herb tansie;’ Cot. Other forms are
OF. athanasie, Cot.; MItal. atanasia, ‘the herb tansie,’ Florio ; Port.
atanasia, athanasia. [Late L. tanacétum (spelt tansétum above)
means properly ‘a bed of tansy;’ as remarked in Prior, Popular
Names of British Plants.] The OF. athanasie, MItal. atanasia, and
Port. atanasia, athanasia, answer to a L. form athanasia, which is
only the Gk, dé@avacia, immortality, in Latin spelling. B. Priorsays
that athanasia was ‘the name under which it was sold in the shops
in Lyte’s time.’ The plant is bitter and aromatic, and was (and is)
used in medicine, whence, probably, the name. Prior thinks there
is a reference to ‘Lucian’s Dialogues of the Gods, no. iv, where
Jupiter, speaking of Ganymede, says to Mercury, dare avo, & ‘Epya,
kat movra Ths abavagtas dye oivoxongovTa Hiv, take him away, and


TANTALISE


when he has drunk of immortality, bring him back as cupbearer to
us: the a@avacia here has been misunderstood, like duBpoocia in other
passages, for some special plant.’ Cf. MItal. atanato, ‘the rose
campion,’ Florio; lit. ‘the immortal.” sy. The Gk. déavacia is
allied to d@d4varos, immortal; from 4, negative prefix, and davety,
2 aor. of Ovnoxew, to die. See Lyte’s Dodoens, bk. i. c. 10,

TANTALISE, to tease or torment, by offering something that is
just out of reach and is kept so. (Gk.) ‘ What greater plague can
hell itself devise, Than to be willing thus to ¢antalize?’ Answer to
Ben Jonson’s Ode (Come leave the loathed Stage), by T. Randolph,
st. 2; printed in Jonson’s Works, after the play of The New Inn.
Formed with the suffix -ise (F. -iser, L. -izare, Gk. -:¢ewv) from the
proper name Tantal-us, Gk, Tdyrados, in allusion to his story. The
fable was that he was placed up to his chin in water, which fled
from his lips whenever he desired to drink. This myth perhaps re-
lates to the sun, which evaporates water, but remains, as it were,
unsated. Allied to rayraAevew, to sway to and fro, and to ra4A-avTor,
a balance; see Talent. Der. tantal-ism (with F. suffix -isme<L.
-isma<Gk, -:opa), Beaum. and Fletcher, Wit at Several Weapons,
act ii. sc. 2, 1. 10 from end.

TANTAMOUNT, amounting to as much, equal. (F.—L.) Rich.
points out, by 2 quotations from Bp. Taylor, Episcopacy Asserted,
§§ g and 31, that it was first used as a verb; which agrees with the
fact that amount was properly at first a verb. It meant ‘to amount
to as much.’= AF. tant amunter, to amount to as much, Yearbooks
of Edw, I., 1292-3, p. 313 cf. F. tant, so much, as much; and E.
Amount, q.v. £B. The F. ¢ant is from L. tantum, neut. of tantus,
so great ; formed from pronominal base #o-, he, the, so as to answer
to guantus, from the base guo-, who. See The.

TAP (1), to strike or knock gently. (F.—Teut.) ME. cappen,
to tap; the imperative appears as ¢ep (for fap), Ancren Riwle, p. 296,
1. 4; cf. tappe, sb., a tap, Gawain and the Grene Knight, 2357.—F.
taper, tapper, ‘to tap, strike, hit, bob, clap;’ Cot.. Of Teut. origin;
Low G, (and G.) tappen, to grope, to fumble, EFries. tappen, to tap,
tap, a light blow. So also Icel. tapsa, to tap. Prob. of imitative
origin ; cf. Russ. ¢opate, to stamp with the foot; Malay ¢abah, to beat
out corn, ¢apuk, to slap, pat, dab (Marsden’s Dict. pp. 69, 77) ; Arab.


¢abl, a drum; E. dub-a-dub, noise of a drum, E, dab, a pat. Der.
tap, sb. And see tip (2).
TAP (2), a short pipe through which liquor is drawn from a cask,


a plug to stop a hole in a cask. (E.) ME. tappe, Chaucer, C. T.
3890. AS. teppa, a tap (Toller); whence teppere, one who taps
casks; ‘Caupo, tabernarius, teppere, Voc. 129. 9.4-Du. tap, sb.,
whence zappen, verb; Icel. tappi, sb., tappa, vb.; Dan. tap, sb.;
tappe, vb.; Swed. tapp, a tap, handful, wisp, whence ¢appa, vb. ;
G. zapfen, sb. and vb.; OHG. zapho, sb. B. Teut. type *tappon-.
The Swed. tapp means a wisp, handful, and G, zapfen is bung,
stopple, Prob. the orig. idea (as Wedgwood suggests) was a bunch
of some material to stop a hole with, a tuft of something. We may
connect it, as Fick does, with E. top, G. zopf; the G. zopf means a
top of a tree, a weft or tuft of hair, a ‘ pig-tail;’ and the Icel. ¢oppr
means, first of all, a tuft or lock of hair. Der. tap, vb., Merry
Wives, i. 3. 11; t¢ap-room; tap-root, a root like a tap, i.e. conical,
cf. G, zapfen, a tap, cone of a fir, zapfenwurzel, a tap-root. Also
tapster, ME. tapstere, Chaucer, C. T. 241, AS. teppestre, Allfric’s
Grammar, ed. Zupitza, p. 36, 1. 13, a fem. form of AS. teppere,
a tapper, as above; for the suffix -ster, see Spinster. Also ¢ampion,
q.v. “And see Tip (1).

TAPH, a narrow band or fillet of woven work, used for strings,
é&c. (L.—Gk.) ME. tape, Chaucer, 'C. T. 3241; also ¢appe. ‘Hec
tenea, tappe;’ in a list of ornaments, Voc. 655. 15.
tape, fillet. ‘Tenia, teppan vel dol-smeltas,’ where teppan is a pl.
form; Voc. 107. 33. The orig. sense may have been ‘a strip of
stuff ;’ it is closely allied to AS. teppet, a tippet, ME. tapet, a piece
of tapestry ; and the use of the pl. eppan is suggestive of strips of
stuff or cloth. Not an E. word, but borrowed from L. zapéte, cloth,
hangings, tapestry, a word borrowed from Greek. See Tapestry,
Tippet. In like manner we find OHG. éepih, teppi (mod. G.
teppich) tapestry, with the same sense as OHG. /epid, from the same
L. word. Der, tape-worm,

TAPER (1), a small wax-candle. (H.) ME. ¢aper, Rob. of
Glouc., p. 456, 1. 9350. AS. fapor, taper,.a taper; Voc. 267. 12;
202. 35. Cf. Irish ¢apar, a taper; W. ¢ampr, a taper, torch.

TAPER (2), long and slender. (E.) ‘ Her ¢aper fingers ;’ Dry-
den, tr. of Ovid, Metam. bk. i. 1.676. Here the fingers are likened
to ¢apers or small wax-candles ; and the word is nothing but a sub-
stitution for taper-like. "This appears more clearly from the use of
taper-wise, i. e. in the form of a taper, in Holland’s tr, of Pliny, b. xvi.
¢. 16: ‘the French box [box-tree] ... groweth taper-wise, sharp
pointed in the top, and runneth vp to more than ordinarie height.’
As wax tapers were sometimes made smaller towards the top, the


AS. teppe, a


TARE 629


word ¢aper meant growing smaller towards the top, not truly cylin-
drical; whence the adj. tapering with the sense of ¢aper-like, and
finally the verb to ¢aper. Note also ‘ tapering top’ in Pitt, tr. of
Net eta: bk. v. 1. 489 of L. text. Der. taper-ing, taper, vb.

TAPESTRY, a kind of carpet-work, with wrought figures, esp.
used for decorating walls. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘A faire and pleasaunt
lodginge, hanged with riche Aresse or ¢apestrie;’ Sir T. Elyot, The
Governonr, b, jii.c. 2. § 3. Lydgate has ¢apcery ; Minor Poems, p. 6.
Tapestrye is a contraction of tapisserye ; Palsgrave gives: ‘ Tappysserye
worke, fapisserie.’ =F. tapisserie, ‘tapistry;” Cot.—F. ¢apisser, ‘to
furnish with tapistry;* id. =F. apis, ‘tapistry hangings;’ id, (Cf.
Span, fapiz, tapestry, tapete, small floor-carpet ; Ital. ¢appeto, a car-
pet, ¢appezzare, to hang with tapestry; d¢appezzeria, tapestry.) —
Late L. ¢apétium, tapestry (Korting); cf. ¢apéte, cloth, hangings. =
Gk. ramjrioy, dimin. of rams, a carpet, woollen rug. Cf. Pers. taba-
stah, a fringed carpet or cushion, Rich. Dict., p. 362; 2abtdan, to spin ;
taftah, taffeta; see Taffeta. Horn, § 372. Thus the Gk. word is
prob. of Pers. origin. See also Tape, Tippet. Der, We say ‘on
the apis ;’ from F. zapis, carpet.

TAPIOCA, the glutinous and granular substance obtained from
the roots of the Cassava plant of Brazil. (Port.—Brazilian.) Not in
Todd’s Johnson. ‘ The fecula or flour [of the cassava]. . is termed
mouchaco in Brazil. , . . When it is prepared by drying on hot plates, it
becomes granular, and is called ¢apioca;’? Eng. Cyclopedia, art.
Tapioca. = Port. tapioca. Brazilian zipioka, ‘the Tupi-Guarani [Bra-
zilian] name of the poisonous juice which issues from the root of the
manioc [cassava] when pressed ;’ Littré. [He refers to Burton, ii. 39,
who follows The Voyage to Brazil of the Prince de Wied-Neuwied,
i, 116.) B. The Tupi (native Brazilian) tipi-dka means ‘dregs
squeezed out ;’ from 7ipi, ‘residue, dregs,’ and the verbal root og,
6k, to take by force, pluck, pull, hence also, to squeeze (Cavalcanti).
See Notes on E, Etym., p. 340.

TAPTIR, an animal with a short proboscis, found in S, America.
(Brazilian.) Called the ¢apir or anta in a tr. of Buffon’s Nat. Hist.,
London, 1792, i. 250; where the animal is said to be a native of
Brazil, Paraguay, and Guiana.—Brazilian ¢apira, tapyra, a tapir.
See Notes on E. Etym., p. 340.

TAR, a resinous substance of a dark colour, obtained from pine-
trees. (E.) ME. ¢erre, Prompt. Parv.; spelt ¢arre, P. Plowman,
C. x. 262. AS. teorz, tar; the dat. teorwe occurs in A. S. Leechdoms,
li. 132, 1, 5; also spelt ¢erz in a gloss (Bosworth) ; also tyrwa, Gen.
vi. 143; Exod. ii. 3. We also find the comp. scip-teora, -teara, -tara,
-tera, ship-tar (Toller).4-Du. teer; Icel. ¢jara; Dan. tje@re; Swed.
tiara. And cf. G. theer, prob. borrowed from Low G. tar or Du. Zeer.
[We find also Irish ¢earr, borrowed from E.; as the word is cer-
tainly Teutonic.] 8B. We also find Icel. ¢yri, tyrfi, a resinous fir-
tree; whence ¢yrvidr, tyrvitré, with the sense of ‘tar-wood.’ Allied
to Lithuan. darwa, derwa, resinous wood, particularly the resinous
parts of the fir-tree that easily burn (Nesselmann) ; and this is allied
to Russ. drevo, a tree, derevo, a tree, wood, timber, W. derw, an oak-
tree, and E. Tree, q.v. sy. Thus the orig. sense was simply ‘ tree’
or ‘ wood,’ esp, resinous wood, as most in request for firing; hence
the resin or tar itself. Der. ¢arr-y; also ¢ar-pauling, q. v.

TAR (2), a sailor; in Swift’s Poems, To the Earl of Peter-
borow, st. 11. It is simply short for Tarpauling, q.yv.

TARANTELLA, the name of a dance. (Ital.) Both Ital,
tarantella, the dance, and Ital. ¢arantola, a tarantula or large spider,
derive their names from Taranto, a town in S. Italy (L. Tarentum).

TARAXACUM, the dandelion. (Arab.) ‘ Taraxacum or Tarax-
acon, the herb dandelion or sow-thistle;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. The
common dandelion is Leontodon taraxacum, ‘The etymology of this
strange word is given by Devic, Supp. to Littré. He shows that it
is not Greek, but Arabic or Persian, We find Pers. zarkhashgin,
wild endive; Rich. Dict. p. 967; but Devic says he can only find, in
Razi, the statement that ‘the ¢arashagiq is like succory, but more
efficacious,’ where he thinks we evidently ought to read farashagiin,
and to explain it by dandelion or wild succory. In Gerard of Cre-
mona he finds Arab. ¢arasacon, explained as a kind of succory 3
and a chapter on ¢araxacon in a Latin edition of Avicenna, Basle,
NEOSa pe 32.

TARBOOSH, a round cap much worm by Arabs and Turks,
(Arab.—Pers.) Arab. ¢arbish, a kind of red cap (Devic). Devic
takes it to be of Pers, origin. = Pers. sar-pdsh, a head-dress ; properly,
for women. = Pers, sar, head ; pdsk, a. cover; see Rich. Dict., pp. 340,
818, 822.

TARDY, slow, sluggish, late. (F.—L.) In Shak. As You Like
It, iv, 1. 51.—F. ¢ardif, ‘tardy,’ Cot. Cf. Ital. ¢ardivo, tardy.
These forms correspond to Late L. *tardiuus, formed with suffix
-iuus from L. tard-us, slow. Der, tardi-ly, -ness; (from L, tardus)
re-tard,


TARE (1), a plant like the vetch, (E.) ME. tare, Chaucer, C, T.


TARE


3998 (A 4000); pl. ¢aris, i.e. darnel, Wyclif, Matt. xiii. 25. Pals-
grave has: ‘taare, a corne lyke a pease, lupins;’ also: ‘tarefytche
{ =tare-vetch], a corne, lupyn.’ The mod. E. zare is, in fact, short
for ¢are-vetch, lit. ‘wheat-vetch,’ or ‘ darnel-vetch.’+-MDu. ¢erwe,
Du. ¢arwe, Low G. ¢arve, wheat. Cf, Lithuan. dirwa, a corn-field,
Skt. dirva, a kind of grass. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 291.

TARE (2), an allowance made for the weight of the package in
which goods are contained, or for other detriment. (F.—Span.—
Arab.) A mercantile term; explained in Phillips, ed. 1706.—F.
tare, ‘losse, diminution, . . waste in merchandise by the exchange
or use thereof;’ Cot.—Span. ¢ara, tare, allowance in weight. (Cf.
Ital. and Port. fara, the same.) = Arab. farha (given by Devic) ; from
tarh, throwing, casting, flinging. Richardson, Pers. Dict. p. 967,
gives Arab. Zirh, turrah, thrown away, from fark. The orig. sense is
‘that which is thrown away,’ hence loss, detriment. From the Arab.
root ¢araha, he threw prostrate, threw down; Rich., as above.

TARGET, a small shield, buckler, a mark to fire at. (F.—
Scand.) The mark to fire at is named from its resemblance to a
round shield. It is remarkable that the g is hard ; indeed, the pl. is
spelt zargattes in Ascham, Toxophilus, bk. i. ed. Arber, p. 69, 1. 28;
and we find ¢ergate in Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, bk. i. c. 18, § 2.
‘This may be accounted for by derivation from OF. targwuete, a small
shield (Godefroy) ; dimin. of OF. ¢argue, as in Cot. [The mod. F.
targe is from OF. targe (with g =E.7); but cf. mod. Prov. ¢argueto,
dimin. of ¢argo, OProv. ¢arga.] We also had ¢arge as a F. word,
Rob. of Glouc., p. 361, 1. 7462 ; and see Chaucer, C. T. 473 (A 471).
The dimin. suffix -et is the usual F. dimin. so common in E.=Icel.
targa,a target, small round shield; OHG. zarga, a frame, side of
a vessel, wall; G. zarge, a frame, case, side, border. Cf. also AS.
targe, a round shield, pl. ¢argan, A.D. 970; Thorpe, Diplomatarium,
p- 516. [We find also F. targe, ‘a kind of target or shield,’ Cot. ;
Port. ¢arja, an escutcheon on a target, a border; Span. ¢arja, a
shield; Ital. ¢arga, a buckler; words which Diez explains to be of
Teut. origin.) The Irish and Gael. ¢argaid, a target, shield, must
have been taken from ME. targat; cf. Rhys, Lect. ii. q Among
the words of Teut. origin Diez includes the Port. and Span. adarga;
the Port. adarga is a short square target, and the Span. adarga is ex-
plained by Minsheu to be ‘a short and light target or buckler, which
the Africans and Spaniards doe vse.’ But this word is plainly
Moorish, the a being for al, the Arab. article, and the etymology is
from Arab. darga(t), daraga(t), ‘a shield or buckler of solid leather ; ’
Rich. Dict., p. 664. Note the Late L. adarca, a shield (1099) in
Ducange ; and the Late L. ¢archeta, a target (1443). Itis remarkable
that Cotgrave explains F. ¢arge as ‘a kind of target or shield, almost
square, and much in use along the Spanish coast, lying over against
Africk, from whence it seems the fashion of it came.? He seems to
be thinking only of the Moorish square shield; but the OF. zarge
is as old as the 11th cent., and the AS. ¢arge as old as the roth;
so that the Teut. and Moorish words would seem to be distinct. But
if the AS. sarge can be of Moorish origin, the G. zarge is prob.
unrelated.

TARGUM, a Chaldee paraphrase of the Old Testament.
(Chaldee.) See Targums in Index to Parker Society. In Phillips,
ed. 1706. ‘The Thargum or paraphrase of Jonathan ;’ Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. i. c. 1. § 4.— Chaldee zargiim, an interpretation; from
targeém, to interpret (Webster). Cf. Arab. tarjuman, an interpreter ;
for which see Dragoman,

TARIFF, a list or table of duties upon merchandise. (F.—Span.
—Arab.) ‘ Tariff, a table made to show. ..any multiple or pro-
duct ... a proportional table...a book of rates agreed upon for
duties,’ &c.; Phillips, ed. 1706.—MF. ¢ariffe, ‘arithmetick, or the
casting of accompts;’ Cot.—Span. zarifa, a list of prices, book of
rates. = Arab. ¢a‘rif, giving information, notification (because a tariff
does this); Rich. Dict. p. 416.— Arab. ‘irf, knowing, knowledge;
from Arab. root ‘arafa, he knew; Rich. Dict. p. 1003. See further
in Devic, Supp. to Littré.

TARLATAN, a kind of thin muslin, (F.) F. ¢arlatane,
formerly spelt ¢arnatane, in 1723 (Hatzfeld). Of unknown origin.
‘*TARN, a small lake, a pool. (Scand.) In Levins. ME. terne,
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B. 1041. —Icel. ¢jérn (gen. ¢jarnar), a tarn,
pool; Swed. dial. t¢jarn, tarn, a tarn, pool without inlet or outlet
(Rietz) ; Norweg. tjorn, tjonn, kjonn, tjodn, kjodn, a tarn (Aasen). Cf.
Skt. dara-, a cavity.

*TARNISG, to soil, diminish the lustre of, to dim. (F.—OHG.)
Also to grow dim, as in Dryden, Absalom and Achitophel, 249;
this appears to be the orig. sense in E.—F. ¢erniss-, stem of pres.
part. of se ¢ernir, ‘to wax pale, wan, discoloured, to lose its former
luster ;’ Cot. Cf. terni, pp. ‘wan, discoloured, whose luster is lost;’
id.—MHG. ternen, OHG. tarnan, to obscure, darken; cf. tarnhut,
tarnkappe, a hat or cap which rendered the wearer invisible. From
OHG. éarni, secret (whence F. terne, dim).4+-AS. dernan, dyrnan, to


630


TARTAN


hide, Gen. xlv. 1; causal verb from derne, dyrne, hidden,’ secret,
Grein, i. 214; and this adj. is cognate with OSax. derni, OFries.
dern, hidden, secret. See Darn.

TARPAULING, TARPAULIN, a cover of coarse canvas,
tarred to keep out wet. (Hybrid; E. azd L.) Tarpawling is in
Dryden, Annus Mirabilis, st. 148. It was once oddly used to
denote also a sailor, whence our modern ¢ar, in the same sense,
tather than from an extension of ¢ar to mean a man daubed with
tar; though it makes little ultimate difference. ‘ Tarpawling, or
Tarpaulin, a piece of convass tar’d all over, to lay upon the deck of
a ship, to keep the rain from soaking through; also a general name
for a common seaman, because usually cloathed in such canvass ;’
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674; Phillips, ed. 1706. And see Trench,
Select Gloss., who gives two quotations for tarpaulin =sailor, viz.
from Smollett, Rod. Random, vol. i. c. 3, and Turkish Spy, letter 2.
The pl. ¢arpaulins occurs in Lady Alimony, Act iii. sc. 1; in
Hazlitt’s Old Plays, xiv. 325 (1659). Compounded oftar and palling.
B. A palling is a covering, from pall, verb, to cover, which from
pall, sb., L. palla; see Pall. ‘Come, thick night, And pall thee in
the dunnest smoke of hell;’ Macb.i. 5.52. ‘ Pauling, a covering
for a cart or waggon, Lincolushire ;’ Halliwell.

TARRAGON, the name of a plant. (Span.—Arab.—Gk.)
‘ Tarragon, a certaine hearbe, good to be eaten in sallads with let-
tuce;’ Baret (1580); Taragon in Levins.—Span. ¢taragona (Diez) ;
usually ¢aragontia; Minsheu also gives the form taragoncia, which
he explains by ‘an herbe called dragons.’ [Hence also F. targon,
‘the herb tarragon ;’ Cot.]= Arab. tarkhin, ‘dragon-wort ;” Rich.
Dict. p. 389.—Gk. dpaxwy, a dragon; see Dragon. See Devic,
s.v. estragon. Thus the strange form ¢arragon is nothing but dragon
in a form changed by passing through an Oriental language, and
decked in Spanish with a Latin suffix (viz. -tia). The botanical
name is Artemisia dracunculus, where dracunculus is a double dimin.
from L. acc. draconem.

TARRE, to incite»set on. (E.) In Shak. Hamlet, ii. 2. 37.
ME. tarien, terien, to provoke ; see Tarry (below).

TARRY, to linger, loiter, delay. (E.) The present form is
due to ME. ¢arien, to irritate, provoke, worry, vex; later, to hinder,
delay ; affected by ME. targen, to delay. The mod. sense goes with
the latter form. 1. ME. zarien, terien, to irritate, vex, provoke.
‘I wol nat ¢arien you, for itis pryme;’ Chaucer, C. T. 10387 (F 73),
where it may fairly be explained by ‘delay.’ In the Prompt. Pary.
we have: ‘¢eryyn, or longe abydyn, Moror, pigritor;’ but also ‘ teryyz,
orertyn, Irrito.’ AS. ¢ergan, to vex; a rare word. Trevisa has ¢arry,
to provoke, annoy; tr. of Higden, v. 355. ‘ Tredad pec and tergad
and heora torn wrecad’=they will tread on thee and vex thee and
wreak their anger; Guthlac, 1. 259. Usually tirgan.4-MDu. tergen,
‘to vexe’ (Hexham); Low G. targen, tarren, to provoke. So also
prov. G. zergen, Dan. terge, to irritate; answering to a Teut.
type *targjan-; to which Russ. dergat(e), to pluck, pull, draw, may
be related. 2. ME. ¢argen, to delay, tarry. ‘That time thought
the king to targe no lenger;’ Alexander, fragment A, 1. 211, pr.
with Will. of Palerne.—OF. zarger, to tarry, delay; allied to ¢arder,
with the same sense; Cot.—Late L. ¢ardicare, an extension of L.
tardare (=F. tarder), to delay.= L. tardus, slow ; see Tardy.

TART (1), acrid, sour, sharp, severe. (E.) ‘ Very ¢arte vinegar ;’
Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. iii. c. 22. § 11. Spelt ¢arfe also in
Palsgrave. ‘ Poudre-marchant tart’ =a sharp (tart) kind of flavouring
powder; Chaucer, C. T. 381 (A 383). AS. -zeart, tart, sharp,
severe; /Elfric’s Hom. ii. 344, 1. 4 from bottom ; ii. 590, 1. 4 from
bottom. Perhaps lit. ‘tearing,’ just as bitter is from the notion of
biting. AS. *tar (ter), pt. t. of teran, to tear; see Tear (1). Der.
tart-ly, -ness.

TART (2), a small pie. (F.—L.) ME. farte; pl. tartes, Rom.
of Rose, yo41.— OF. ¢arte, ‘a tart;’ Cot. Perhaps so called from
the paste being twisted together ; it seems to be the same word as
F. tourte, a tart, OF. torte, a kind of bread; whence the dimin.
forms fortel, a cake (Roquefort), zorteau, a pancake (Cotgrave).
Godefroy gives also OF. zarteau, a little tart, with the same sense
as torteau. [So also Ital. ¢artera, ‘a tarte,’ Florio, ¢orta, a pie,
tart, Span. ¢orta, a round cake; Du. ¢aart, Dan. terte, G. torte, not
Teutonic words.]=L. zorta, fem. of tortus, twisted, pp. of zorquere,
to twist; see Torture. Der. zart-let, from F. ¢arteletie, ‘a little
tart ;’ Cot.

TARTAN, a woollen stuff, chequered, much worn in the High-
lands of Scotland. (F.—L.—Tatar.) In Jamieson; spelt ¢artane in
1474; also blew ¢artane; at first all of one colour; the chequered
patterns are comparatively modern. Spelt ¢ar¢ar in 1488. Borrowed
from French. At first applied to various cloths from the East, and
also to fine silk ; see my note to Piers Plowman, C, xvii. 299. AF,
tartayn; as in ‘un vestiment de blank ¢artayn;’ Will of Lady
Clare (1355), in Royal Wills, p. 31.—Late L. *Tartanus, by-form


:


s
a


TARTAR


of Tarténus, as in ‘de pannis Tartenis;” Liber Custumarum, p. 209.
B. More commonly Tartarinus (OF. Tartarin), Tatar [Tartar] cloth ;
a general term for various Eastern cloths, including such as came
through Tartary from China; see Marco Polo, ed. Yule. Cf. ‘ the
third [standard] was of yelowe ¢arterne ;’ Hall’s Chron., Hen. VII,
an. I. § 3. ‘ Corteyns of grene fartren,’ in 1453 ; Cambridge Antiq.
Soc., vol. iv. p. 357; ‘aulter clothes of grene ¢artren;’ ibid. ‘ Blue
tartourne ;? Cambridge Churchwardens’ Accounts, ed. J. E. Foster,
p- 7 (1504). ‘Hec linostema, ¢arteryne;’ Voc. 655. 6. y. The
form zartar is from OF. Tartaire, Late L. Tartara; with the same
meaning. All from the name of the country; see Tartar (2).

TARTAR (1), an acid salt which forms on the sides of casks
containing wine; a concretion which forms on the teeth. (F.—Low
L.—Arab.) This is one of the terms due to the alchemists.
Called sal tartre in Chaucer, C. T. 16278 (G 810); and simply
tartre, id. 16281 (G 813). —F. ¢arire, ‘tartar, or argall, the lees or
dregs that stick to the sides of wine-vessels, hard and dry like a crust;’
Cot. — Low L. tartarum (perhaps confused with Tartarus, whence the
mod. E, spelling ¢artar).— Arab. durd, ‘dregs, sediment, the tartar
of wine, the mother of oil ;? Rich. Dict. p. 662 ; where it is marked
as a Pers. word, though, according to Devic, of Arab. origin. Rich.
also gives Pers. durdi, Arab. durdiy, ‘sediment, dregs ;’ p. 663.
Note also Arab. darad, a shedding of the teeth, darda, a toothless
woman; which Devic explains with reference to the tartar on teeth.
Der. tartar-ic, tartar-ous.

TARTAR (2), a native of Tartary. (Tatar.) Chiefly used in the
phr. ‘to catch a Tartar,’ to be caught in one’s own trap. ‘The
phrase is prob. owing to some particular story ;’ Todd’s Johnson,
with the following quotation. ‘In this defeat they lost about 5000
men, besides those that were taken prisoners :—so that, instead of
catching the Tartar, they were catched themselves ;’ Life of the
Duke of Tyrconnel, 1689. ‘ Tartar, a native of Tartary,... the
people of which are of a savage disposition : whence the proverbial
expression to catch a Tartar, i.e. to meet with one’s match, to be
disappointed, balked, or cowed ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Shak. has
‘the Tartar’s bow,’ Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 101. Sir J. Mandeville pro-
fessed to have travelled in Tartarye; see prol. to his Travels. See
Trench, Eng. Past and Present, where he explains that the true
spelling is Tatar, but the spelling Tartar was adopted from a false
etymology, because their multitudes were supposed to have pro-
ceeded out of T’artarus or hell.= Pers. Tatar, ‘a Tartar, or Scythian;’
Rich. Dict. p. 351; a word of Tatar origin.

TARTAR (3), Tartarus, hell. (L.—Gk.) ‘To the gates of
Tartar ;? Tw. Nt. ii. 5. 225.—L. Tartarus. = Gk. Taprapos, Tartarus,
the infernal regions; apparently conceived to be a place of extreme
cold. Cf. Gk. raprapiGay, to shiver with cold. Der. ¢artar-e-ous,
‘the black tartareous cold;’ Milton, P.L. vii. 238; tartar-e-an, id.ii. 69.

TASK, a set amount of work imposed upon any one, work. (F.—
L.) Lit. a tax. ME, task, taske, Cursor Mundi, 5872.—ONorth F.
tasqgue, Norm. dial. tasque, OF. tasche, ‘a task;’ Cot. Mod. F.
tdche.= Late L. tasca, a tax; the same word as taxa, a tax. (For
a similar metathesis cf. E. ask with prov. E. ax.)—L. taxdre, to
rate, value; see Tax. Der. task, vb., task-er, sb.; ‘to task the
tasker, L. L. L. ii. 20; task-master, Milton, Sonnet i.14. Doublet,
tax.

TASSEL (1), a hanging ornament consisting of a bunch of silk
or other material. (F.—L.) ME. fassel, a fastening of a mantle,
consisting of a cord ending in a tassel, Cursor Mundi, 4389. Cf. ‘a
Mantle of Estate, . . . with strings dependant, and ¢asselled;’ Guillim,
Display of Heraldry (1664), p. 271 ; a wood-cut on p. 272 shows the
tassel, ornamented with strings and dots, that divide it into squares
like the ace on a die.mOF. tassel, a fastening, clasp; mod. F.
tasseau, only in the sense of bracket. We. also find Late L. ¢assellus,
used in the Prompt. Pary. as equivalent to E. zassel. The OF. tassel
also meant a piece of square stuff, used by ladies as an ornament;
see Godefroy. Cf. Ital. ¢assello, a collar of a cloak, a square. —L.
taxillum, acc. of taxillus, a small die; dimin. of ¢a@lus, a knuckle-
‘bone, also a die orig. made of the knuckle-bone of an animal. We
may conclude that the zassel was a sort of button made of a piece of
squared bone, and afterwards of other materials. B. The curious
form taxillus shows that ¢alus is a contraction for *taxlus; origin
unknown. Taxillus may have been confused with L. ¢essel/a, dimin.
of tessera, a die; cf. the entry: ‘Tessera, ¢aso/,’ Epinal Gloss. 998.
See Notes on E. Etym.; p. 292. Der. ¢assell-ed, ME, tasseled,
Chaucer, C. T. 3251.

-TASSEL (2), the male of the goshawk. In Shak. Romeo, ii. 2.
160. The same as Tercel, q.v.

TASTE, to handle, to try, to try or perceive by the touch of the
tongue or palate, to eat a little of, to experience. (F.—L.) Thesense
of feel or handle is obsolete, but the ME. tasten meant both to feel
and to taste. ‘I rede thee lat thyn hand upon it falle, And taste it


TATTOO. 631


wel, and ston thou shalt it finde ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 18970 (G 502).
‘Every thyng Himseolf schewith in ¢astyng;’ King Alisaunder, 4042.
= OF. ¢aster, ‘to taste or take an assay of; also, to handle, feele,
touch ;’ Cot. Mod. F. ¢der; Ital. tastare, ‘to taste, to assaie, to
feele, to grope, to trye, to proofe, to touch;’ Florio. We find also
Late L. ¢axta, a tent or probe for wounds; whence Ital. fasta, ‘a
tent that is put into a sore or wound, also a taste, a proofe, a tryall,
a feeling, a touch;” Florio. |B. The Late L. ¢axta is short for
*taxita, and prob. points, as Diez says, to a Late L. verb *taxitare,
not found, but a mere iterative of L. ¢axare, to feel, to handle
(Gellius), This ¢axGre (<*tagsire) is an intensive form of tangere
(pp. tactus), to touch; see Tax, Tangent. Hence the orig. sense
of taste was to keep on touching, to feel carefully. Der. taste, sb.,
ME. taste, Gower, C. A, iii, 32; bk. vi. 9253 ¢ast-er, tast-able,
taste-ful, taste-ful-ly; taste-ful-ness, taste-less, -less-ly, -less-ness3
tast-y, tast-i-ly. :

TAT, to make trimming. (Scand.) North E. ¢at, to entangle.
Cf. MSwed. zdite, Dan. dial. tat; Norw. ¢aatt, a thread, a strand of
a rope, whence Norw. ¢eita, to interweave. Also Icel. attr, Swed.
tat, Dan. tot, a filament ; G. docht, a wick.

TATTER, a shred, loose hanging rag. (Scand.) ‘Tear a passion
to tatters ;” Hamlet, iii. 2. 11 ; spelt ¢otters in quarto edd. So also
totters in Ford, Sun’s Darling, i. 1, 2nd Song; and see ¢ottered in
Nares. It is remarkable that the derived word tattered occurs
earlier, spelt zatered, P. Plowman’s Crede, 753, where it means
‘jagged ;” ¢atird, ragged, Pricke of Conscience, 1537.—Icel. ¢oturr,
pl. totrar, better spelt ¢d¢turr, pl. tottrar; the pl. signifies tatters,
rags; Norweg. éotra, pl. totror, tottrur, also taltra, tultre, pl. taltrar,
tultrer, tatters, rags.-- Low G. taltern, tatters, rags; to taltren riten,
to tear to tatters; zaltrig, tattered; EF ries. talte, a rag. Bett
will be seen that an 7 has been lost; and this is why the Icel. word
should be spelt with double z; for totturr =*tolturr, by assimilation.
Hence ¢atter stands for *talter ; the assimilation of J¢ to tt being due
to Scand. influence. I suppose ¢atter to be closely allied to ¢otter=
to wag, vacillate, shake about; and that fatter meant orig. a
shaking rag, a fluttering strip. At any rate, totter is in the like case
as regards letter-change, since it stands for folter. See Totter.
@ We find also AS. tettec, tettic, a rag; the relationship of which
is not clear. Der. tatter-ed, as above ; tatter-demallion, Massinger,
Virgin Martyr, iii. 3 (Hircius) ; see my Notes on E. Etym., p. 292.

TATTLE, to talk idly, prattle. (E.) In Shak. Much Ado, ii.
1,11. ‘ Every zattling fable ;’ Spenser, Mother Hubbard’s Tale, 724.
ME. fotelen, variant of tateren, to tattle, Prompt. Parv.; pp. 498,
487. We may consider it E.; it is closely allied to #ittle, to tell
tales, talk idly, which is equivalent to ME. titeren, whence titerere
(also zitelere), a tatler, teller of tales, P. Plowman, B. xx. 297. The
verbs tatt-le, titt-le, and ME. tat-eren, tit-eren, are all frequentatives,
from a base TAT, expressive of the sound of talking or repeating
the syllables ta ta ta (Wedgwood). Allied words are Du. fateren,
to stammer, MDu. ¢ateren, ‘to speake with a shrill noise, or to sound
taratantara with a trumpet,’ Hexham; Low G, fateln, to gabble as
a goose, to tattle; ziteltateln, to tittle-tattle, ¢ateler, a tattler ; ¢aat-
goos, a gabbling goose, chatterer ; ¢a¢erletdt, an interjection, the noise
of a child’s trumpet ; and even Ital. ¢attamella, chat, prattle, tattame-
lare, to prattle, which clearly show the imitative origin of the word.
Allied to Titter, q.v. Der. tattle, sb. 3 tittle-tattle, sb. and vb., see
Wint. Tale, iv. 4. 248; tiddle-taddle (Fluellen’s pronunciation),
Hen. V, iv. 1. 71. And see ¢wadd-le (formerly wattle).

TATTOO (1), the beat of drum recalling soldiers to their
quarters. (Du.) ‘If they hear but the ¢attoo;’ Prior, Alma, c. i.
454. ‘Tattoo, Taptoo (also Taptow), the beat of drum at night for all
soldiers to repair to their tents in a field, or to their quarters; also
called The Retreat;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘To beat the ¢apiow, de
Aftogt. slaan ;’ Sewel, Eng.-Du. Dict., 1754. A later edition (in
1766) has; de taptoe slaan, ‘to beat the tap-tow.’ ‘The ¢aptoo is
used in garrisons and quarters by the beat of the drum ;’ Silas Taylor,
On Gavelkind, ed. 1663, p. 74.— Du. taptoe, tattoo (Calisch) ; whence
de taptoe slaan, to beat the tattoo.—Du. ¢af, a tap; and éoe, put to,
shut, closed. The sense is ‘ the tap is closed ;’ cf. Du. Is de deur toe
=is the door closed? doe het boek toe=shut the book; haal’t venster
toe=shut the window (Sewel). Hexham has toe slaen, to shut, con-
clude. The /attoo was thus the signal for closing the taps of the
public-houses. B. So also G. zapfenstreich, the tattoo (lit. tap-
stroke), where zapfen is a tap of a cask; and Low G. fappenslag, the
tattoo (lit.a tap-shutting). Cf. Low G. tappen to slaan=to close
a tap, an expression used proverbially in the phrase Wi wilt den
Tappen to slaan=we will shut the tap, put the tap to, i.e. we will
talk no more of this matter. This last expression clearly shows that
‘a tap-to’ was a conclusion, a time for shutting-up. q ‘I do not
think that Span. ¢apatan, the sound of a drum, has anything to do


| with the present matter.  -. <


632 TATTOO


TATTOO (2), to mark the skin with figures, by pricking in
colouring matter. (Tahitian.) ‘They have a custom ... which they
call ¢attowing. ‘They prick the skin so as just not to fetch blood,’ &c. ;
Cook, First Voyage, b. i. c. 173 id. ib. b. iii.c.g (R.). Cookis
speaking of the inhabitants of Tahiti.—Tahitian ¢atau, signifying
tattoo-marks on the human skin; derived from za, a mark, design ;
see Littré, who refers us to Berchon, Recherches sur le Tatouage.
See E. E. Morris, Australasian Dict. ; Notes on E. Etym., p. 293.

TAUNT, to scoff, mock, tease. (F.—L.) ‘I ¢awnte one, I check
hym, Je farde ;’ Palsgrave. ‘Smacco,...a check or tant ina woord
or deede;” Florio. The old sense had less of mockery in it, and
sometimes meant merely to tease. ‘For a proper wit had she,...
sometime taunting without displesure and not without disport;’ Sir
T. More, Works, p.57b. Perhaps the vb. is dueto thesb. ‘ Which
liberall taunte that most gentill emperour toke in so good part ;’ Sir
T. Elyot, The Governour, b. ii. c. 5. § 17. *Gave me a ¢aunte, and
sayde I was to blame;’ Skelton, Bowge of Courte, 70. a, The verb
answers in form, but hardly in sense, to OF. ¢anter (Burguy), occa-
sional form of tenter, ‘to tempt, to prove, try, sound, essay, attempt ;
also to suggest, provoke, or move unto evill;’ Cot. From L. tentare,
to try, prove, test, attack, assail, agitate, disquiet, &c. See Tempt.
B. We may rather, perhaps, look upon the sb. as the original; it
may have arisen from the phrase taunt pour taunt, i.e. tit for tat.
This occurs in: ‘ Geuyng vnto the same taunt pour taunte, or one for
another;’ Udall, tr. of Erasmus’ Apophthegmes, Diogenes, § 68.
Cf. also : ‘ Mery conceipted and full of pretie ¢auntes ;’ id., Philippus,
§ 29. If this is right, taunt arose from F, tant, so much. = L. tantum,
neut. of ¢antus,so much. Cf. ME. ataunt, as much as (F. autant) ;
N.E.D. Godefroy has OF. tante donner, to give such great blows.
Der. taunt-er, taunt-ing-ly.

TAURUS, the bull; the 2nd zodiacal sign. (L.) In Chaucer,
On the Astrolabe, pt. i. § 8, 1. 2.—L. taurus, a bull.4-Gk. ratpos, a
bull.4AS. s#éor, a young ox, a steer; see Steer (1). Der. taur-ine,
from L. taurinus, adj., belonging to bulls.

TAUT, tight, firm. (E.) ME. dogt, toght. ‘Made it toght,’ i.e.
made it sure; Allit, Poems, A. 522. ‘ With bely stif and toght As
any tabour ;? Chaucer, C. T., D 2267. It seems to be the weak pp.
of ME. ¢o3en, to pull, tow, tug; so that the orig. sense was ‘ pulled
tight.’ See Tow (1). See Notes on E. Etym., p. 294.

TAUTOLOGY, needless repetition, in the same words, (L.—
Gk.) ‘With ungratefull tautologies;’ Fuller’s Worthies, Kent (R.)
=—L. tautologia (White).—Gk. rairodoyia, a saying over again of
the same thing.=—Gk. ravrodAdyos, repeating what has been said. =
Gk, zat7é6, contracted from 76 airé, or 76 airév, the same; and
-Aoyos, speaking, allied to Aéyev, to speak, for which see Legend.
Der. tautolog-ic, tautolog-ic-al, -ly; tautolog-ise.

TAVERN, an inn, house for accommodating travellers and sell-
ing liquors. (F.—L.) ME. ¢auerne (with w=v), Rob. of Glouc.
Pp. 195, 1, 4024.—F. taverne, ‘atavern;’ Cot. —L. taberna, a hut, orig.
a hut made of boards, a shed, booth, tavern. Usually said to be
allied to L. tab-ula, a plank, board; see Table, But Walde takes
it to stand for *traberna; from trabs,a beam; see Trave.

TAW (1), THEW, to prepare skins, so as to dress them into
leather, to curry, to toil. (E.) Spelt tawe and tewe; Levins. Pals-
grave has both ‘I ¢awe leather’ and ‘ I ewe leather.’ ME. tewen, to
prepare leather, Prompt. Parv.; fawen, Ormulum, 15908. AS.
tawian, to prepare, dress, get ready, also, to maltreat. ‘Séo deoful
éow tawode,’ =the devil maltreated you; /#lfric’s Hom. ii. 486, 1. 4
from bottom. ‘ T6 yrmde getawode’=reduced to poverty; S. Vero-
nica, p. 34, 1. 18. Cf. getawe, implements, Grein, i. 462.4-Du.
touwen, to curry leather; OHG. zouwan, to make, prepare ; Goth,
ga-téwjan, to appoint, zaujan, to do, cause. See Tool, Der. taw-
yer, ME. tawier, tawer, Wyclif, Deeds, ix. 43, early version, where
the later version has curiour, i.e. currier ; cf. bow-yer, law-yer.

TAW (2), a game at marbles. (Gk.) ‘A game of marbles not
unlike our modern taw ;’ The Tatler, no. 112, Dec. 27, 1709. In
the United States, ¢aw means ‘a line or mark from which the players
begin a game of marbles;’ Webster. A similar mark is also called
atee. ‘The easiest way of marking an exact spot on the ground is to
draw the letter T, which defines the point where a stroke meets a
cross-stroke. The T is named ¢ee in English, and ¢az in Greek.
Hence ‘¢au and chuck-farthing ’ in Additions to Nares. See Notes on
E. Etym., p. 294.

TAWDRY, showy, but without taste, gaudy. (E.) ‘A tawdrie
lace ;’ Spenser, Shep. Kal., April, 135 ; ‘a tawdry lace,’ Wint. Tale,
iv. 4. 2533; ‘tawdry-lace,’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Faithful Shep-
herdess, Act iv. sc. 1 (Amarillis). ‘Seynt Audries lace, cordon ;’
Palsgrave, Thus it was first used in the phr. tawdry lace=a rustic
necklace; explained in Skinner (following Dr. Hickes) as being a
necklace bought at St. Awdry’s fair, held in the Isle of Ely (and else-
where) on St. Awdry’s day, Oct. 17. (See Palsgrave, as above.)


TEAL


Wedgwood doubts the ancient celebrity of this fair (which I do not),
and accepts in preference the alternative account in Nares, that St.
Audry ‘ died of a swelling in the throat, which she considered as a
particular judgment, for having been in her youth much addicted to
wearing fine necklaces ;’ see Nich. Harpsfield, Hist. Eccl. Anglicana,
Sec. Sept. p. 86; Brady, Clavis Calendaria, Oct. 17. B. In any
case, Tawdry is a contraction from St, Audry; and Audry is a cor-
ruption of Etheldrida, the famous saint who founded Ely Cathedral.
y-. Again, Etheldrida is the Latinised form of the AS. name Ael-
Pry; see Sweet, O. E. Texts, p. 638. From AS. eel, noble; and
pry6 or Sryp, strength. The latter element is allied to the OHG.
word which appears in the name Ger-trude. See Thridhr in Schade.
In the Latin text of Beda, Hist. Eccl. iv. 3, it is spelt Aedilthryd.
See Notes on E. Etym., p. 295.


TAWNY, a yellowish brown. (F.—Teut.) Merely another spell- —


ing of tanny, i.e. resembling that which is tanned by the sun, sun-
burnt. By heraldic writers itis spelt tenmy or tenné. ‘Tawny . ; in
blazon, is known by the name of ¢enne;’ Guillim, Display of
Heraldry, sect. i. cap. 3. ME. tanny. ‘ Tanny colowre, or tawny ;’
Prompt. Parv. ‘Unum goun de ¢awné;’ Excerpta Historica, p. 24
(1375).=F. tanné, ‘tawny;’ Cot. Itis the pp. of F. tanner, taner,
to tan.—F. tan, tan; see Tan. Der. tawni-ness. Doublet, tenné
or tenny.

TAX, a rate imposed on property, anything imposed, a task.
(F.—L.) ME. tax, Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 151, l. 4 (temp.
Edw. I]).=—F. axe, ‘a taxation;’ Cot.=—F. ¢axer, ‘to tax, rate,
assess ;’ Cot.=L. ¢axGre, to handle ; also to rate, value, appraise ;
whence Late L. taxa, arating, a taxation. For *tagsdre; from tag-,
the base of tangere, to touch; see Tangent, Tact. Der. tax, verb,
F. taxer 3 tax-able, tax-abl-y; tax-at-ion, from F. taxation, ‘a taxation,’
from L. acc. taxatidnem. Doublet, zask.

TAXIDERMY, the art of preparing and stuffing the skins of
animals, (Gk.) Modern; coined from Gk. ragi-, decl. stem of Tééis,
order, arrangement; and dépya, a skin. PB. Tagis (<*rax-ys) is
from tdooev (<*rax-yewv), to arrange; see Tactics. Gk. dépya,
a skin, is that which is form or flayed off; formed with suffix -ya
from dép-ev, to flay, cognate with E. tear; see Tear (1). Der.
taxiderm-ist.

TAZZA, a cup, bowl. (Ital.—Arab.—Pers.) Ital. tazza, a cup,
bowl (F. zasse).— Arab. fass, tassa(t), a cup, bason; Rich. Dict.,
p- 970. Derived by Devic from Pers. ¢as¢, a cup; Rich. gives Pers.
tasht, a bason; p. 403. So Horn, § 389. Cf. also Pers. ¢as, a cup;

- 355-

PRA, an infusion made from the dried leaves of the Zea-tree, a
shrub found in China and Japan. (Chinese.) Formerly pronounced


tay [tei], just as sea wascalled say; it rimes with obey, Pope, Rape of -


the Lock, iii. 8,and with away, id. i.62. ‘I did send for a cup of tee
(a China drink) of which I never had drank before ;’ Pepys, Diary,
Sept. 28, 1660. Also spelt cha in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, with a
reference to Hist. of China, fol. 19; also chau, Dampier’s Voyages,
an. 1687(R.). ‘ Thatexcellent. , China drink called by the Chineans
tcha, by other nations Tay, alias tee;’ The Gazette, Sept. 9, 1658 5
qu. in N, and Q. 8S. vi. 266. Prof. Douglas writes: ‘ The E. word
tea is derived from the Amoy pronunciation of the name of the plant,
which is ¢é. In the other parts of the empire it is called ch’a, ts’a,
&c.; see Williams, Chinese Dict., p. 5. Cf. ¢é, tea; Chinese Dict.
of the Amoy Vernacular, by Rev. C. Douglas, 1873, p. 481. This
accounts for the old spelling cha, and for the Ital. cia, tea. Cf. F.
thé, G. thee, pronounced as tea was in Pope’s time. So also Malay
téh, tea; Marsden, Malay Dict., p. 97. Der. tea-caddy; see Caddy.

TEACH, to impart knowledge, show how to do. (E.) ME,
techen, weak verb, pt. t. taughté (properly dissyllabic), Chaucer, C. T.
499 (A 497); pp. taught. AS. t#can,t#cean, to show, teach, pt. t.
tehte, pp. t#ht, get#ht; Grein,ii.522. Formed (with change of a to
& before j, as in Teut. *taikjan-) from tac- (Teut. *zaik-) base of AS.
tacen, a token. From 4/DEIK, to show; cf. G. zeigen, to show;
see further under Token. Der. teach-able, teach-able-ness, teach-er.

TEHAK, an E. Indian and African tree, with very hard wood.
(Malayalam.) Modern; notin Todd’s Johnson. — Malayalam iékka,
the teak tree; Tamil ékku; H. H. Wilson, Gloss. of Indian Terms,
p- 516. The best zeak is from the mountains of the Malabar Ghauts ;
also found on the Coromandel coast ; Eng. Cycl.

TEAL, a web-footed water-fowl. (E.) Teale; Levins. ME. tele,
Prompt. Parv.; Squire of Low Degree, 1. 320, in Ritson, Met. Rom.
vol. ili. p. 158; used to translate OF. cercele in Walter de Bibbes-
worth, pr. in Wright’s Voc. i. 151, 1. 12; i. 165, 1. 15. This takes
us back to the close of the 13th cent., and the word is prob. E.;
certainly Low German, in any case.4Du. faling, teling, a generation,
production, also, teal; derived from ¢elen, to breed, produce ; i.e. if
teling is the same word in both senses. MDu. teelingh, a teal (Kilian),
Cf. MDnu. ¢eelen, to propagate, to till; Low G. éeling, a progeny,


TEAM


telen, to breed, The AS. base would be *##/-; see Du. ¢aling in
Franck. Perhaps connected with the verb to 7zilJ; see Till (1).
Der. atteal, a kind of teal, N. E. D.; Prof. Newton, Dict. of Birds,
cites a ‘Scandinavian’ form atieling-and; s.v. Teal.

TEAM, a family ; a set; a number of animals harnessed in a row.
(E.) ME. tem, teem, team; ‘a teme [of] foure gret oxen,’ P. Plow-
man, B. xix. 257; tem=a family, Rob. of Glouc. p. 261, 1. 5241.
AS. téam, a family, offspring, Genesis, 1613; Grein, ii. 526.4-Du.
toom, the rein of a bridle ; the same word, from the notion of guiding ;
Icel. taumr, a rein; Low G. toom, a progeny, team, also, a rein;
Dan. témme, Swed. tom, a rein; G. zaum, a bridle) MHG. zoum.
Teut. type *tau-moz, for *taug-moz (Noreen) ; from *tauk, 2nd grade
of *teuh-an-, to draw, lead. See Tow (1). From Idg. 4/DEUK.
But see Brngmann, i. § 630. In the sense of ‘zeam of horses,’ the
AS. form is ge-tyme; Luke, xiv. 19. Der. teem, verb, q.v. Also
team-ster (Webster, not in Johnson), with suffix -ster; for which see
Spinster.

TEAPOY, a small tripod table. (Hybrid; Hind. and Pers.) Also
tepoy, tinpoy (1844); see Yule. Hind. zin, three (Forbes); and Pers.
pai, foot (Palmer).

TEAR (1), to rend, lacerate. (E.) ME. ¢eren, strong verb, pt. t.
tar, Seven Sages, ed. Weber, 1. 472, pp. tore, id. 782. AS. teran,
pt. t. ter, pp. toren, Grein, ii. 525.4-Goth. ga-tairan, to break, de-
stroy, pt. t. ga-tar ; Lithuan. dirti, to flay; Gk. déperv, to flay; Russ.
drat(e), to tear ; cf. dira, a rent, a hole ; Zend dar, to cut ; Pers. dari-
dan, to tear; Skt. daraya, to tear; cf. W. dar-n, a fragment. ‘Teut.
type *teran-, pt. t. *tar, pp. *taranoz. Idg. 4/DER, to burst, tear
open. The G. zehren, Low G. teren, Icel. tera, to consume, are weak
verbs, from the same root. Brugmann, i. § 594. Der. dear, sb.
(Goth. gataura), Chevy Chase, 1. 134, in Spec. of Eng. ed. Skeat,
p- 75. Also ¢ar-z (1); and (from same root) epi-der-mis, taxi-der-my.

TEAR (2), a drop of the fluid from the eyes. (E.) ME. Zere,
Chaucer, C. T. 8960 (E 1084). AS. ééar, t#r, Grein, ii. 526; also
teagor ; ONorthumb. teher.+Icel. tar ; Dan. taar, zaare; Swed. zar ;
Goth. zagr; OHG. zahar, pl. zaheri, whence G. zahre. B. All
from a Teut. base *tah-r-, Idg. *dak-r-. Further allied to OL.
dacrima, usually lacrima, lacruma (whence F. larme), a tear; Gk.
daxpu, Saxpvov, Sdxpuya, a tear; W. dagr, a tear; Olrish dér.
Brugmann, i. § 178. Der. tear-ful, 3 Hen. VI, v. 4. 8; tear-ful-ly,
tear-ful-ness; tear-less, And see train-oil,

TEASE, to comb or card wool, scratch or raise the nap of cloth;
to vex, plague. (E.) ME. éesex, Cathol. Anglicum ; also ¢aisen, of
which the pp. ¢aysed is in Gawain and the Grene Knight, 1169. But
the more common form is ¢osen or toosen, ‘They ¢oose and pulle ;’
Gower, C. A. i. 17; Prol. 400. ‘ Tosynz, or tose wul’ [tease wool];
Prompt. Parv. We also find ¢o-tosex, to tease or pull to pieces, Owl
and Nightingale, 1. 70. AS. ¢#saz,to pluck, pull, A‘lfric’s Grammar,
ed. Zupitza, p.170,1.13. The ME. zosex would answer to a by-form
*tasan, not recorded.4-MDu. zeesen, to pluck ; wolle teesen, ‘ to pluck
wooll,’ Hexham; Dan. tese, tesse, to tease wool; Bavarian zaisen, to
tease wool, Schmeller; he also cites MHG. zeisen, to tease, a strong
verb, with pt. t. zies, pp. gezeisen, B. The form of the base is
Teut.*teis. Der. teas-el, q. v.

TEASEL, a plant with large heads covered with crooked awns
which are used for teasing cloth. (E.) ME. tesel, Voc. 559. 7; also
tasel, P. Plowman, B. xv. 446. AS. ?#sl, t#sel, a teasel, A. S.
Leechdoms, i. 282, note 26. Formed with suffix -J (-i-) from
t®s-an, to tease; the sense is ‘an instrument to tease with.’ See
‘Tease.

TEAT, the nipple of the female breast. (F.—Low G.) [Also
called zit, which is the native word.] ME. ¢ete, Chaucer, C. T.
3704; also ¢ette, Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 2621.— OF. zete,
teat; F. tette, teat. Low G. zitte, MDu. titte, a teat; Hexham.+
G. zitze. [Cf. also Span. teta, Ital. tetta, words of Teut. origin. ]
Also W. did, didi, a teat. These words have much the appearance
of being reduplicated from a base TI (Idg. DI). B. Besides these,
there is a second form represented by Gk. ri76n, 7:7@ds; of these the
Gk. tit6n, Tvr8ds, have been explained from 4/DHEI, to suck ;_ cf.
Skt. dhé, to suck, Goth. daddjan, to suckle, See Tit (2).

TEAZLE, the same as Teasel, q.v.

TECHNICAL, artificial, pertaining to the arts, (Gk.; with L.
suffix.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. Formed with suffix -al (<L.
-alis), from Gk. rexvix-ds, belonging to the arts,=Gk. 7éxv7, art;
allied to réxrwv, a carpenter.—4/TEK, to prepare, get ready; cf.
Skt. taksh, to prepare, form, cut wood, ¢akshan-, a carpenter; see
Text. Der technical-ly, technical-i-ty; techno-logy, with suffix=
Gk. -Aoyia, from Aéyew, to speak. Also (from the same source)
archi-tect, pyro-technic; and see text, text-ure,

TECHY, the same as Tetchy, q.v.

TED, to spread new-mown grass, (Scand.) ‘I teede hey, I tourne
it afore it is made in cockes;’ Palsgrave. .‘ To tedde and make hay ;’


—


TEETOTUM, TOTUM 633


Fitzherbert, Book of Husbandry, § 25. ‘Gras .. unteddid;’ Wyclif's
Works, ed. Arnold, ii. 301.—Icel. zedja (pp. ¢addr), to spread
manure; from ¢ad, manure. Cf. Icel. zada, hay grown in a well-
manured field, a home-field; /0du-verk, making hay in the in-field.
Also Norw. tedja, to spread manure; from fad, manure; Aasen. So
also Swed. dial. ¢ada, vb., from zad.4- Bavarian zetten, to strew, to let
fall in a scattered way, Schmeller, p. 1159; cf. G. verzetteln, to
scatter, spill, disperse. Cf. also MHG. zetten, to scatter, derived
from OHG. zata, allied to zota (mod. G. zotte, a rag); see Schade.
B. All these words can be derived from asb. of which the Teut. base
is *tad-. Cf. Gk. dar-éovat,I distribute. Cf. Tod.

TEDIOUS, tiresome, from length or slowness, irksome. (L.)
Spelt ¢edyouse in Palsgrave. Coined immediately from L. tedidsus,
irksome.=—L. ¢edium, irksomeness.—L. tedet, it irks one. Der.
tedious-ly, -ness, We also use ¢edium, the sb.

i, a mark, a starting-point. (E.) From the use of a T to
mark an exact spot. Cf. tee-totum; and see Taw (2).

TEEM (1), to bring forth, bear, or be fruitful; be pregnant, full,
or prolific. (E.) ‘Hyndre [her] of zeming;’ Sir T. More, Works,
p- 644g. ME. zemen, to produce, Ancren Riwle, p. 220, 1. 15,
Obviously from ME. ¢eme,ateam, a progeny; see Team. ‘The AS.
verb is tieman, tyman, to teem, Gen. xxx. 9; formed (with the usual
vowel-change from @a to ze, later ¥) from AS. téam, a team, a pro-
geny. ‘Teut. type *taumjan-, vb., from *taumoz, sb.

TEEM (2), to think fit, (OLow G.) Rare, and obsolete; but
Shak, has the comp. beteem, to be explained presently. ‘I coulde
teeme it [think fit] to rend thee in pieces;’ Gifford’s Dialogue on
Witches, A.D. 1603. ‘Alas, man, I could teeme it to go;’ id. See
both quotations in full, in Halliwell, s.v. Teem.—Low G. tamen,
temen, to fit; also, to allow; as, ‘ He ¢amet sik een good Glas Wien,
he allows himself a good glass of wine;’ allied to betamen, to be fit,
and to ¢dmen, to tame; EFries. temen, to find fitting, to allow one-
self, B. Related words are easily found, viz. in Goth. gatémiba,
fitly, from the strong verb gatiman (pt. t. gatam), to suit, agree with;
Luke, v. 36; Du. ¢amen, ‘to be comely, convenient, or seemely,’
Hexham ; tamelick, or tamigh, ‘ comely, convenient,’ id.; whence heé
betaem#, ‘it is convenient, requisite, meete, or fitting,’ id.; mod. Du.
betamen, to beseem ; G. ziemen, to be fit; ziemlich, passable, lit. suit-
able ; OHG. zeman, to fit, closely related to zeman, zamjam, to tame.
Allied to Tame, q.v. 2. We can now explain beteem in Shak,
Mids. Nt. Dr. i. 1. 1313 Hamlet, i. 2,141. It means to make or
consider as fitting, hence to permit, allow; a slightly forced use of
the word, In Golding’s translation of Ovid’s Metamorphoses, A.D.
1587, we have ‘could he not beteeme’ =he did not think fit, would
not deign; the L. text has dignatur, Metam. x. 158. Spenser uses it
still more loosely: ‘So woulde I... Beteeme to you this sword’ =
permit, grant, allow you the use of this sword; F, Q. ii. 8. 19.

THEM (3), to empty, pour out. (Scand.) See Halliwell. —Icel.
zema, to empty, from ¢émr, empty ; Dan. zémme, to empty, from zom,
empty; Swed. ¢omma, from tom; see Toom,

TEEN, vexation, grief. (E.) In Shak. Temp.i. 2.64; &c. ME,
tene, Chaucer, C. T. 3108 (A 3106). AS, déona, accusation, injury,
vexation, Grein, ii, 528.-= AS, zéon, contracted from ¢ikan, to accuse;
see Grein, ii. 532,s.v. ¢ikax. [To be distinguished from zéon (=
téohan), to draw.|+4-Goth. gateihan, to tell, announce, make known
to, point out (as distinct from gatiuhan, to lead); G. zeihen, to
accuse (as distinct from ziehen, to draw).+L. dicare, to make known.
=~ DEIK, to show. See Token. 4 The successive senses of
teen are making known, public accusation, reproach, injury, vexation.
We have indication and inditement from the same root. The word
teen also occurs as Old Saxon Ziono, injury 3 Icel. ¢jdn, loss.

THETOTALLER, a total abstainer, (F.—L.; with E. prefix
and suffix.) A dzeetotaller is one who professes ¢otal abstinence from all
spirituous liquors; the orig. name was fofal abstainer. The adj. tee-
total is an emphasized form of otal, made on the principle of redupli-
cation, just as we have L. ¢e-tigi as the perfect of ¢angere. The word
‘originated with Richard Turner, an artisan of Preston, who, con-
tending for the principle at a temperance meeting about 1833, asserted
that “nothing but ¢e-te-total will do.” The word was immediately
adopted. He died 27 Oct., 1846. These facts are taken from the
Staunch Teetotaller, edited by Joseph Livesey, of Preston (an origin-
ator of the movement in August, 1832), Jan. 1867 ;’ Haydn, Dict.
of Dates. And see Teetotum. @ Teetotal may have been sug-
gested by ¢eetotum. InN. and Q, 5 S.y. 18, it is asserted that fee-
total was in use, as an intensive of ¢otal, before 1832. F

TEETOTUM, TOTUM, a spinning toy. (L:) Not in Todd’s
Johnson. Ihad a #eetotum (about A.D, 1840) with four sides only,
marked P (Put down), N (Nothing), H (Half), T (Take all). These
were very common, and the letters decided whether one was to put
into the pool or to take the stakes. (Strutt gives the same account,
in his Sports and Pastimes, bk. iv. c. 4. § 6.) I suppose that these


634 TEG


letters took the place of others with Latin explanations, such as P
(Pone), N (Nil), D: (Dimidium), T (Totum). The toy was named,
accordingly, from the most interesting mark upon it ; and was called
either a totum or a T-totum. Ash’s Dict., ed. 1775, has: ‘ Totum,
from the Latin, a kind of die that turns round, so called because
the appearance of one lucky side [that marked T] entitles the player
that turned it to the whole stake.’ ‘ Totwm,a whirl-bone, a kind of
die that is turned about;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Dunbar alludes to
this game: ‘ He playis with totum, and I with nichil ;’ Works, ed.
Small, p. 106, 1. 74. Teetotums are now made with the thickest
part polygonal, ‘not square, which entirely destroys the original
notion of them; and they are marked with numbers instead of
letters. — L. ¢dtum, the whole (stake) ; neut. of totus ; see Total.

THG, a young sheep of the first year, a ewe. (Scand.) Pl. zeggys;
Skelton, Against Garnesche, 31. Cf. Swed. ¢tacka, a ewe (Widegren,
Thre).

TEGUMENT, a covering. (L.) Rare; commoner in deriv. in-
tegument. In Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 6. § 5. L. tegu-
mentum (also tegimentum, tegmentum), a covering.=L. tegere (for
*stegere), to cover.-Gk. oréyew, to cover.—4/STEG, to cover ;
whence also Skt. sthag, to cover, Lithuan. stégt:, to thatch; OlIrish
tech, W. ¢y, a house. Brugmann, i. § 632. And see Thatch.
Der. in-tegument; also (from tectus, pp. of tegere), de-tect, pro-tect ;
and see tile, toga, thatch, deck.

TEHIL-TREBE, a linden tree. (F.—L.; and E.) ‘A teil-tree;’
Isaiah, vi. 13 (A.V.). — OF. ¢eil, the bark of a lime-tree (Roquefort) ;
cf. mod. F, ¢ille, bast. [The added word tree is E.] — L. tilia, a lime-
tree; also, the inner bark of a lime-tree.-+- Irish ¢ei/e,

TEIND, a tithe. (Scand.) A Lowl. Sc. form. ‘ Bot tak his
teind;’ Sir D. Lyndesay, The Monarche, bk. iii. 4690. —Icel. tiund,
a tenth, tithe. —Icel. fiz, ten; see Ten.

TELEGRAPH, an apparatus for giving signals at a distance, or
conveying information rapidly. (Gk.) Modern; in Richardson’s
Dict. M. Chappe’s telegraph was first used in France in 1793; see
Haydn, Dict. of Dates. Coined from Gk. 77Ae, afar off; and
ypapev, to write. The Gk. 77A¢, T7A0v, afar, are from an adj. form
*77-Aos, not in use. Gk. ypddew is cognate with Carve. Der.
telegraph-ic, telegraph-y, telegraph-ist. Also tele-gram, a short
coined expression for ‘telegraphic message,’ from ypaypa, a letter of
the alphabet, a written character. So also ¢ele-phone; from Gk.
pwvn, voice, sound.

TELESCOPE, an optical instrument for viewing objects at a
distance. (Gk.) Galileo’s telescopes were first made in 1609.
Milton alludes to the ¢elescope, P. R. iv. 42. Coined from Gk, rie,
afar; and oxometv, to behold; see Telegraph and Scope. Der.
tele-scop-ice So also ¢tele-pathy, sympathy at a distance; from Gk.
-radeia, from-7d6os, suffering, feeling.

TELL, to count, narrate, discern, inform. (E.) ME. ¢ellen, pt. t.
tolde, pp. fold; often in the sense ‘to count,’ as in P. Plowman,
B. prol. 92. ‘Shal ¢edle tales tweye;’ Chaucer, C. T. 794 (A 792).
AS. tellan, to count, narrate; pt. t. fealde, pp. teald; Grein, ii. 524. A
weak verb, formed from the sb. ¢alu, a tale, number; so that ¢ellan
is for */aljan, with mutation of a to e. See Tale.+Du. Zellen,
from tal, sb.; Icel. telja, from tala, sb. ; Dan. ¢elle, from tal; Swed.
talja, from tal; G. zahlen, from zahl. Der. tell-er ; tell-tale, Merch.
Ven. v. 123.

TELLURIC, belonging to the earth. (L.) Rare, and scientific.
Coined with suffix -c (L. -cus), from L. telliri-, decl. stem of tellus,
earth. Allied to Irish ¢alamh, Olrish ¢alam, earth, Skt. zala-m,
surface. Der. ¢elluri-um, a rare metal, discovered in 1782 (Haydn).

TEMERITY, rashness. (F.—L.) Spelt ¢emeritie in Minsheu, ed,
1623.—MF. temerité, ‘temerity,’ Cot.—L. temeritatem, acc. of
temeritas, rashness.—L. temeri- for *temerus, rash, only used in the
adv. vemere, rashly. The orig. sense of ¢emere is ‘in the dark,’
hence blindly, rashly ; cf. Skt. ¢amas, dimness, darkness, gloom.

TEMPER, to moderate, modify, control, qualify, bring to a
proper degree of hardness. (L.) ME, temprien, tempren, Rob. of
Glouc., p. 72, 1. 1684; Gower, C. A. i. 266; bk. ii. 3178. AS.
temprian, for which see Toller,—L. éemperare, to apportion, mode-
rate, regulate, qualify ; allied to zemperi or tempori, adv., seasonably,
and to tempus, fit season, time. See Temporal. (Perhaps modi-
fied by MF’. temperer, to temper;-also from L. ¢emperare). Brug-
mann, ii. § 132. Der. ¢emper, sb., Oth. v. 2. 253, Merch. Ven. i. 2.
20 (see Trench, Study of Words, and cf. L. temperiés, a tempering,
tight admixture) ; temper-ance, ME. temperaunce, Wyclif, Col. iii. 12,
from F. temperance< L. temperantia; temper-ate, Wyclif, 1 Tim. iii. 3,
from L, temperdatus, pp. of temperare; temper-ate-ly, temper-ate-ness ;
temper-at-ure, from F. temperature, ‘a temper, temperature,’ Cot ,
from L. temperatira, due to temperdre; temper-a-ment, in Trench,
Select Glossary, from L. /emperdmentum. Also dis-temper, q.v., at-
zemper. Doublet, tamper. . 5 i.


TEN


TEMPEST, bad weather, violent storm, great commotion. (F.—
L.) ME. tempest, Rob. of Glouc. p. 50, 1. 1151.— OF. tempeste, ‘a
tempest, storm, bluster;’ Cot. Mod. F. tempéte. = Late L. *tempesta,
not found (though tempestus, adj., and tempestare, verb, bot.fappear) ;.
for L. tempestas, season, fit time, weather, good weather; also bad
weather, storm; allied to ¢empus, season, time; see Temporal.
Brugmann, ii. §§ 102, 132. Der. tempest, verb, Milton, P. L. vii.
412, from MF. ¢empester, ‘to storm;’ Cot. Also tempest-u-ous,
1 Hen. VI, v. 5. 5, from MF. tempestuéux, ‘ tempestuous,’ Cot., from
L. tempestudsus ; tempestuous-ly, -ness,

THEMPLBE (1), a fane, edifice in honour of a deity or for religious
worship. (L.) ME. temple, Chaucer, C. T. 10167, 10169 (E 2293,
2295). AS. templ, tempel (common), John, ii. 20,—L. templum, a
temple. Formed (with excrescent p after m) from an older form
*tem-lum (Walde).-Gk. ztéyevos, a sacred -enclosure, piece of
ground cut off and set apart for religious purposes; allied to Gk.
Téu-v-ey (fut. Teu@), to cut. Der. templ-ar, one of a religious order
for the protection of the ¢emple and Holy Sepulchre, founded in
1118, suppressed in 1312 (Haydn), ME. ¢emplere, P. Plowman,
B. xv. 509, from Late L, zemplarius (Ducange). Also templet, a
pattern or model indicating the outline of a baluster, &c., from F.
templet, the same (Littré), dimin. of F. temple, in the same sense,
from L, ¢emplum, a small timber, the same word as templum, a
temple. Also con-templ-ate, q. v.

TEMPLE (2), the flat portion of either side of the head above
the cheek-bone. (F.—L.) Gen. used in the plural. ME. zemplys,
pl., Voc. 626. 16. Gower has ¢emples, C. A. iii. 370; bk. viii.
1, 2819.—m OF, temples, ‘the temples ;’ Cot.; Norm. dial. temples;
Mod. F. zempe, sing. Formed, with the common change from r to
1, from L. tempora, pl., the temples. Der. tempor-al, adj., from F,
temporal, ‘ of or in the temples,’ Cot., from L. zempordlis, (1) temporal,
(2) belonging to the temples.

TEMPORAL (1), pertaining to this world only, worldly, secular.
(F.—L.) ME. temporal, Wyclif, Matt. xiii. 21.—OF. temporal,
usually ¢emporel, ‘temporall;’ Cot.—L. ¢empordlis, temporal. = L.
tempor-, for tempus, season, time, opportunity. Der. temporal-ly;
temporal-i-ty, spelt temporalitie, Sir T. More, Works, p. 232 e, from
Late L. ¢empordlitis, revenues of the church (Ducange). Also
tempor-ar-y, Meas. for Meas. v. 145 (where it seems to mean respect-
ing things not spiritual), from L. tempordrius, lasting for a time;
zempor-ar-i-ly, tempor-ar-i-ness, Also tempor-ise, Much Ado, i. 1.
270, from F. zemporiser, ‘to temporise it, to observe the time,’ Cot. ;
tempor-is-er, Wint. Tale, i. 2. 302. Also con-tempor-an-e-ous, con-
tempor-ar-y, ex-tempore.’ And see temper, tempest, tense (1).

TEMPORAL (2); for which see Temple (2).

TEMPT, to put to trial, test, entice to evil. (F.—L.) ME.
tempten, Ancren Riwle, p. 178. = OF. tempter, later tenter, ‘to tempt,
prove, try, sound, provoke unto evill;’ Cot.—L. temptare, oc-
casional spelling of tentaire, to handle, touch, feel, try the strength
of, assail, tempt. Frequentative of zendere, to stretch (pp. tentus) ;
Bréal. [But temptare may have been written as tentare by error ; if
so, the words are unconnected.| _ Der. tempt-er, Wyclif, Matt. iv. 3 ;
tempt-r-ess, Ford, The Broken Heart, v. 1, from MF. ¢enteresse, ‘a
tempteresse, a woman that tempts,’ Cot. ; ¢empt-ing, tempt-ing-ly ;
tempt-at-ion, ME. temptacioun, Wyclif, Matt. xxvi. 41, from OF.
temptation, usually tentation, ‘a temptation, Cot., from L. acc.
tentatidnem, Also at-tempt. Doublet, ¢ent (2), vb.

TEMULENT, drunken. (L.) Rare.—L. ¢émulentus, drunken.
Allied to zémétum, intoxicating drink. See Abstemious. Cf. Skt.
tamya, to be exhausted.

TEN, twice five. (E.) ME, zen, Wyclif, Matt. xxv. 1. OMerc.
tén; AS. tien, tyn. Usually tyn, Matt. xxv. 1.44-Du. tien; Icel.
tiu, ten, tigr,a decade; Dan. ¢i; Swed. tio; Goth. taihun; G. zehn,
OHG. zehan.4L. decem (whence F. dix, Ital. dieci, Span. diez) ;
Gk. Séca; Lithuan. dészimtis; Russ. desiat(e); W. deg; Irish and
Gael. deich; Pers. dah (Palmer’s Dict. col. 278); Skt. daga.
B. All from Teut. type *tehan; Idg. type *dekam. Brugmann,
ii, § 174. Origin unknown, Der. ¢en-fold, O. Eng. Homilies,
ii. 135, 1. 19 (see Fold); ten-th, ME. tenJe, Will. of Palerne, 4715,
also teonfe, O. Eng. Homilies, i. 219, 1. 17; also ¢ende, Ormulum,
2715, due to a confusion of AS. /éoda, tenth, with Icel. tiundi,
tenth; the true E. word is “the, q.v. Hence ¢enth-ly. From the
same base we have decim-al, decim-ate, duo-decim-al, deca-de, deca-gon,
deca-hedron, deca-logue, deca-syllabic, decem-vir, dec-ennial, do-deca-
gon, do-deca-hedron, dime. @ The suffix -teen, ME. -tené (dissyl+
labic), answers to OMerc. -/éne, AS. -tiéne, -tyne, as in eahta-tyne,
eighteen, Judg. iii. 14; formed by adding the pl. suffix -e to ¢én or
yn, ten. Hence thir-teen (AS. préotyne); four-teen (AS. féower-
tyne); fif-teen (AS. fif-tyne) ; six-teen (AS. six-ijyne); seven-teen
(AS. seofon-tyne) ; ‘eigh-teen, miswritten for eight-teen (AS. eahta-
tyne) ; nine-teen (AS. nigon-tyne). QJ The suffix -ty, ME. -ty=


TENABLE
AS. -tig, as in twen-ty (AS. twén-tig), &c. This suffix appears
also in Icel. sex-tigir, sex-tugr, sex-togr, sixty, and in Goth. saihs-
tigjus, G. sech-zig, sixty, &c.; all from a Teut. base *tegu-, allied
to Ten.
TENABLE, that can be held, kept, or defended. (F.—L.) In


Hamlet, i. 2. 248.—F. tenable, ‘holdable;’ Cot. Coined from F.
tenir, to hold.=L,. tenére, to hold, keep, retain, reach, orig. to


stretch or extend, a sense retained in per-tinére, to extend through to. |


—4/TEN, to stretch, extend; see Thin. Cf. Gk. reivey (for
*rév-yev), to stretch, Skt. an, to stretch. Der. (from L. tenére)
abs-tain, abs-tin-ence, ap-per-tain, ap-pur-ten-ance, attempt, con-tain,
con-tent, con-tin-ent, con-tin-ue, coun-ten-ance, de-tain, de-tent-ion,
dis-con-tin-ue, dis-con-tent, dis-coun-ten-ance, enter-tain, im-per-tin-
ent, in-con-tin-ent, lieu-ten-ant, main-tain, main-ten-ance, mal-con-
tent, ob-tain, per-tain, per-tin-ac-i-ous, per-tin-ent, pur-ten-ance, rein,
re-tain, re-tent-ion, re-tin-ue, sus-tain, sus-ten-ance, sus-tent-at-ion; and
sée ten-ac-i-ous, ten-ac-i-ty, ten-ant, tend (with its derivatives), tend-er,
tend-on, ten-dril, ten-e-ment, ten-et, ten-on, ten-or, tent (2), ten-u-ity,
ex-ten-u-ate, ten-ure, tempt, tent-acle, tent-at-ive. And see tone.

TENACIOUS, holding fast, stubborn. (L.) ‘So tenacious of
his bite;’ Howell, Famil. Letters, b. ii. let. 2, July 3, 1635.
Coined as if from L. *tenacidsus, from tendci-, decl. stem of tenax,
holding fast. —L. tenére,to hold. See Tenable. Der. tenacious-ly,
-NeSs.

TENACITY, the quality of sticking fast to. (F.—L.) Spelt
tenacitie in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—MF. tenacité, ‘ tenacity ;’ Cot.—L.
tenacitaitem, acc. of tendcitis.—L. tendci-, decl. stem of tenax; see
Tenacious.

TENANT, one who holds land under another. (F.—L.)
ME. tenant, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 19, 1. Io.—F.
tenant, holding ; pres. part. of ¢enir, to hold; see Tenable. Der.
tenanc-y, Bp. Hall, Satires, b. iv. sat. 2, 1. 25 from end ; tenant-able,
tenant-less, tenant-ry (a coined word). Also lieu-tenant, q.v. And
see tenement.

TENCH, a fish of the carp kind. (F.—L.) ME. tenche, Prompt.
Parv.=OF. tenche, ‘a tench;’ Cot. Mod. F. tanche.—L. tinca, a
tench. Cf. Gascon éenco, a tench.

TEND (1), to aim at, or move towards, to incline, bend, to con-
tribute to a purpose. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, ili. 1. 170.—F. tendre,
‘to tend, bend;’ Cot. L. tendere, to stretch, extend, direct, tender.
Allied to tenére,to hold; see Tenable. From 4/TEN, to stretch;
see Thin. Brugmann, ii. § 696 (3). Der. tend-enc-y, formed by
adding -y to the obsolete sb. ¢endence, signifying ‘ inclination,’ for
which see Richardson; and the sb. tendence was coined from L,
tendent-, stem of the pres. part. of tendere. Also tense (2); tend-er
(2). Also (from L. ¢endere, pp. tensus and tentus), at-tend, tend (2),
at-tent-ion, co-ex-tend, con-tend, dis-tend, ex-tend, ex-tens-ion, ex-tent,
in-tend, in-tense, in-tent, ob-tend, os-tens-ible, os-tent-at-ion, por-tend,
pre-tend, pro-tend, sub-tend, super-in-tend ; and see tense (2), tens-ile,
tender (3), tend-on, tent (1), tent-er, toise. Doublet, tender (2).

TEND (2), to attend, take care of. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, i. 3.
83, Much Ado, i. 3.17. Coined by dropping the initial a of OF.
atendre, to wait, attend. It is, in fact, short for Attend, q.v. Der.
tend-ing, sb. (for attending), Macb.i. §. 36; tend-ance (for attendance),
Timon, i. 1. 57. And see tender (3).

TENDER (1), soft, delicate, fragile, weak, feeble, compassion-
ate. (F.—L.) ME. tendre, Ancren Riwle, p. 112, 1. 11.—F. tendre,
‘tender ;’ Cot. Formed (with excrescent d after ~) from L. tene-
rum, acc. of tener, tender; orig. thin, fine, allied to tenuis, thin.
-4(/TEN, to stretch; see Thin. Der. tender-ly, -ness; tender-
heart-ed, Rich. II, iii. 3. 160; tender-heft-ed, K. Lear, ii. 4. 176
(Folio edd.), where heft=haft, a handle; so that tender-hefted=
tender-handled, tender-hilted, gentle to the touch, impressible ; see
Haft.' Also tender, vb., to regard fondly, cherish, Rich. II, i. 1. 32,
and in Palsgrave ; a word which seems to be more or less confused
with tender (2), q.v. Hence tender, sb., regard, care, K. Lear,
i, 4. 230. And see tendr-il.

TENDER (2), to offer, proffer for acceptance, show. (F.—L.)
In Shak. Temp. iv. 5.—F. tendre, ‘to tend, bend,.. . spread, or dis-
play .. also, to tender or offer unto ;” Cot.—L. zendere, to stretch,
&c. See Tend (1), of which tender is a later form, retaining the r
of the F, infinitive; cf. attainder=F. attaindre. Der. tender, sb., an
offer, proposal. Doublet, tend (1).

TENDER (3), a small vessel that attends a larger one with
stores; a carriage carrying coals, attached to a locomotive engine.
(F.—L.) ‘A fireship and three tenders ;’ Dampier's Voyages, an.
1685 (R.). Merely short for attender = attendant or subsidiary
vessel; see Tend (2).

TENDON, a hard strong cord by which a muscle is attached to
a bone. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave.—F. tendon, ‘a tendon, or taile of a
muscle;’ Cot. Cf. Span. tendon, Port. tend@o, Ital, tendine,a tendon.


TENSE 635


From a Late L. type *tendo, with gen. case both ¢enddnis and ten-
dinis ; formed from L, tendere, to stretch, from its contractile force.
See Tend (1). Der. tendin-ous (R.), from F. tendineux, ‘of a
tendon ;’ Cot.

TENDRIAL, the slender clasper of a plant, whereby it clings to a
support. (F.—L.) Spelt ¢exdrell in Minsheu, ed. 1627; and in
Drant, tr. of Horace, Bk. ii. Sat. 4, fol. G 8, back (1566). In
Milton, P. L. iv. 307. Shortened from MF. ¢endrillons, s. pl. ‘ ten-
drells, little gristles;’ Cot. Or from an OF. *tendrille or *tendrelle,
not recorded. Cot. also gives F. tendron, ‘a tender fellow, a car-
tilage, or gristle ; also a ¢endrell, or the tender branch or sprig of
a plant.’ Allthese forms are from F, tendre, tender ; see Tender (1).
So also Ital. tenerume, a tendril, from ¢enero, tender. @ Not from
tenére, to hold, nor from zendere, to stretch.

TENEBROUS, TENEBRIOUS, gloomy, dark. (F.—L.)
Tenebrous is in Cotgraye, and in Hawes, History of Grand Amour
(1555), ch. 3 (Todd). ‘ Tenebrious light’ is in Young, Night
Thoughts, Night 9, 1. 966. The latter is a false form.—F. tene-
breux, ‘tenebrous ;’ Cot.=L. zenebrdsus, gloomy. =L, tenebre, s. pl.,
darkness. Allied to Skt. tamisra-, darkness, tamas, gloom. 4/TEM,
to choke. Brugmann, i. §§ 413, 590.

TENEMENT, a holding, a dwelling inhabited by a tenant.
(F.—L.) ME. tenement, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 34,
last line. =F’. cenement, ‘a tenement, inheritance,’ &c. ; Cot. = Late L.
tenementum, a holding, fief; Ducange.—L. tenére, to hold; see
Tenable and Tenant. Der. tenementi-al, adj.

TENET, a principle which a person holds or maintains. (L.)
‘ The tenet must be this;” Hooker, Eccl. Polity, b. viii. (R.).—L.
tenet, he holds; 3 p.s. pres. tense of tenére, to hold; see Tenable.
Cf, audit, habitat, exit, and other similar formations.

TENNIS, a game in which a ball is driven against a wall (or
over a cord) by rackets, and kept continually in motion. (F.—L.)
First mentioned in Gower’s Balade to King Henry IV, st. 43,1. 295;
printed in Chaucer’s Works, ed. 1532, fol. 377, col. 2; ed. 1561,
fol. 332, col. I, where it is spelt zennes; but the Trentham MS. has .
tenétz. Other spellings are tenets, tenyse. ‘ Teneys, pley, Teniludus,
manupilatus, tenisia. Teneys-pleyer, Teniludius;’ Prompt. Parv.-
Spelt texyse, Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b.i. c.27,§ 7. ‘ Tenyse-
ball, pelote : Tennys-play, jeu de la paulme;’ Palsgrave. Turbervile
has a poem ‘to his friend P., Of Courting, Trauailing, and Tenys.”
It is spelt tenes in 1494; Excerpta Historica, p. 98. B. The AF.
tenetz, F. tenez (<L. tenétis, 2 p. pl. indic. of tenére, to hold) was
also used for L. tenéte, 2 p. pl. imperative; with the sense ‘take
this ;? and we may conjecture that it was used by the player who
served, like our ‘ play!’ @ This seems the only possible ex-
planation of the form tené/z, which was accented on the 2nd syllable,
as the rhythm shows :—‘ Of the ¢exéiz to winne or lese a chace.’
The word (as a sb.) is AF., not OF. In N. and Q.9S. ix. 27, is
the following note. ‘M. Jusserand quotes from Lusus Puerilis,
Paris, 1555, and deduces that the excipe of Cordier and the accipe of
Erasmus were the Latin version[s] of the French tevez, an exclama-
tion used in commencing play.’ The AF. tevez, ‘take or receive
this,’ is addressed to one person only in the Chanson de Roland, 387.

TENIY, the colour of orange, in heraldry. (F.—G.) Also
spelt ¢enney, tawney; see Boutell’s Heraldry. —OF. ¢enné, variant
of tané, tanné, tawny, tan-coloured (Godefroy). The same word as
Tawny, q.v.

TENON, the end of a piece of wood inserted into the socket or
mortice of another, to hold the two together. (F.—L.) In Levins.
ME. tenown, tenon; Prompt. Parv.=F. tenon, ‘a tenon; the end of
a rafter put into a morteise ; tezons, pl. the vice-nailes wherewith the
barrel of a piece is fastened unto the stock; also the (leathern)
handles of a target;’ Cot. All these senses involve the notion of
holding fast. Formed, with suffix -on (L. acc. -dxem), from ¢en-ir, to
hold.—L. tenére; see Tenable.

TENOR, the general course of a thought or saying, purport ;
the highest kind of adult male voice. (F.—L.) ME. tenour.
‘Tenour, Tenor;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘ Anothir lettre . . of a more
bitter zenour ;’ King Alisaunder, 2977. ‘Many. . ordenauzcis were
made, wherof the texoure is sette out in the ende of this boke;’
Fabyan’s Chron. an. 1257, ed. Ellis, p. 343. ‘ Tenour, a parte in
pricke-songe, teneur;’ Palsgrave.—F. feneur, ‘the tenor part in
musick; the tenor, content, stuffe, or substance of a matter; ’
Cot.=—L,. tendrem, acc. of tenor, a holding on, uninterrupted course,
tenor, sense or tenor of a law, tone, accent.—L. tenére, to hold;
see Tenable. @ The old (and proper etymological) spelling
is tenour, like honour, colour, &c. The texor in music (Ital. tenore)
is due to the notion of holding or continuing the dominant note
(Scheler). ; k
TENSE (1), the form of 2 verb used to indicate the time and
state of the action. (F.—L.) In Levins, Spelt ¢ence and tense by


636 TENSE


Palsgrave, On the Verb. Shoreham has f#ense, in the sense of
‘time ;’ p. 39. In Chaucer, C. T. 16343 (G 875), the expression
“that futur temps’ ought to be explained rather as ‘that future zense’
than ‘that future time ;’ see my note on the line. =F. ¢emps, time,
season ; OF, tens (Burguy). —L. tempus, time; also a tense of a verb;
see Temporal.

TENSE (2), tightly strained, rigid. (L.) ‘Her forehead was
tenses’ Goldsmith, Vicar of Wakefield, ch. 28, § 1.—L. tensus,
stretched, pp. of tendere; see Tend (1). Der. tense-ly, -ness; tens-
zon, in Phillips, ed. 1706, from L. tensidnem, acc. of tensio, a stretching;
zensor, in Phillips, used as a variant of extensor; tens-ile, in Blount,
ed. 1674, a coined word; ¢ens-i-ty, a coined word. Also in-tense, toise.

TENT (1), a pavilion, a portable shelter of canvas stretched
out with ropes. (F.—L.) ME. tente, Rob. of Glouc., p. 203,
1. 4156.—F, ¢ente, ‘a tent or pavillion; ’ Cot.—Late L. tenta, a tent ;
Ducange. Properly fem. of ¢entus, pp. of tendere, to stretch; see
Tend (1). Obviously suggested by L. tentdrium, a tent, a derivative
from the same verb. Der. fent-ed, Oth. i. 3.85.

TENT (2), a roll of lint used to dilate a wound. (F.—L.) See
Nares. Properly a probe; the verb zo ¢ent is used for to probe,
Hamlet, ii. 2.626. ME. tente. ‘ Tente of a wownde or a soore,
Tenta;’ Prompt. Parv. =F. tente, ‘a tent fora wound;’ Cot. Due
to the L. verb ¢entare, to handle, touch, feel, test; cf. F. tenter, ‘to
tempt, to prove, try, sound, essay;’ Cot. See Tempt. Cf. Span.
tienta, a probe, diento, a touch. Der. tent, verb, as above.

TENT (3), a kind of wine. (Span.—L.) ‘ Tent or Tent-wine, is
a kind of Alicant, ...and isa general name for all wines in Spain
except white; from the Span. vino Zinto, i.e. a deep red wine; ’
Blount, ed. 1674.—Span. vino tinto, red wine ; tinto, deep-coloured,
said of wine. =—L. tinctus, pp. of tingere, to dye; see Tinge.

TENT (4), care, heed. (F.—L.) ‘Took ¢ent;’ Burns, Death and
Doctor Hormbook, st. 3. Short for atzent or attention ; see Attend.
Der. tent, verb.

TENTACLE, a feeler of an insect. (L.) Modern. Englished
from Late L. *tentaculum, which is also a coined word, formed from
tentare, to feel; see Tempt. Cf. L. spiraculum, from spirare.
Der. tentacul-ar.

TENTATIVE, experimental. (L.) ‘ Falsehood, though it be
but ¢entative;* Bp. Hall, Contemplations, b. xx. cont. 3. § 21.—L.
tentatiuus, trying, tentative. L. tentatus, pp. of tentare, to try ; see
Tempt.

TENTER, a frame for stretching cloth by means of hooks. (F.—
L.) Properly texture; but a verb zent was coined, and from it a sb.
tenter, which took the place of texture. ‘The verb occurs in P. Plow-
man, B. xv. 447; or rather the pp. ytented, suggested by L. tentus.
ME. tenture. ‘ Tenture, Tentowre, for clothe, Tensorium, extensorium,
tentura;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘ Tentar for clothe, tend, tende ; Texterhoke,
houet ;’ Palsgrave.—F. tenture, ‘a stretching, spreading, extending ;’
Cot.=—L. tentira, a stretching ; cf. tentus, pp. of tendere, to stretch ;
see Tend (1). Der. tenter-hook, spelt tenterhoke in Palsgrave, a hook
orig. used for stretching cloth.

TENUITY, slenderness, thinness, rarity. (F.—L.) Spelt tenuitie
in Minshen, ed. 1627.—MF. zenuité, ‘tenuity, thinness ;’ Cot.—L.
tenuitatem, acc. of, tenuitas, thinness. —L. tenuis, thin.—4/TEN, to
stretch ; see Thin. Der. (from L. ¢enuis) ex-tenu-ate. _

TENURE, a holding of a tenement, (F.—L.) In Hamlet, v.
I. 108.—F. tenure, ‘a tenure, a hold or estate in land;’ Cot. = Late
L. tentira (in common use); Ducange.=—L, tenére, to hold; see
Tenable.

TTEOCALLI, a Mexican temple. (Mexican.) Mex. teocalli.— Mex.
zeotl, a god (which loses in composition) ; and calli, a house.

TEPID, moderately warm. (L.) In Milton, P. L. vii. 417.—L.
tepidus, warm.—L. tepére, to be warm.—4/TEP, to be warm, to
glow ; whence Skt, tap, to be warm, to warm, to shine, fapas, fire;
Russ. zopit(e), to heat ; Irish #2, hot. Der. tepid-i-ty, from MF. tepidité,
“luke-warmnesse,’ Cot., as if from L. acc. *tepiditatem; tepid-ness,

TERAPHIM, idols, images, or household gods, consulted as
oracles. (Heb.) See Judges, xvii. 5, xviii. 14; Hosea, iii. 4 (A.V.).
= Heb. teraphim, s. pl., images connected with magical rites.

TERCH, the same as Tierce, q. v.

TERCEL, the male of any kind of hawk. (F.—L.) Corruptly
spelt tassel, Romeo, ii. 2. 160; rightly ¢ercel, Troilus, iii, 2. 56. See
Tassel in Nares, ME. tercel ; ‘ the tercel egle,’ Chaucer, Assembly of
Fowls, 393. Also tercelet, a dimin. form; Chaucer, C. T. 10818
(# 504).— OF, tercel, tiercel (Godefroy), whence MF. dimin. tiercelet,
“the tassell, or male of any kind of hawk, so tearmed because he is,
commonly, a third part lesse then the female;” Cot. Cf. Ital. zerzolo
(now spelt ¢erzuolo), ‘a tassell-gentle of a hanke;’ Florio. Derived
(with dimin. suffix -e2) from OF. tiers, tierce, third ; just as Ital. ¢erzolo
is from Ital. ¢erzo, third. —L. zertius, third; see Tierce and Three.
| Burguy gives a different reason, viz. that, in popular opinion,


TERN


every third bird hatched was a male; he refers to Raynouard’s Pro-
yencal Dict., v. 412. Either way, the etymology is the same.

TEREBINTH, the turpentine-tree. (L.—Gk.) Teribinth; in
Spenser, Shep. Kal., July, 86.—L. cerebinthus. — Gk. repéBivOos, the
turpentine-tree. Der. turpent-ine.

TEREDO, a wood-worm. (L.—Gk.) L. terédo.—Gk. repnddv,
a wood-worm; so named from boring into wood. = Gk. rep-, base of
tetpew (for *rép-yerv), to bore. See Trite, Termite.

TERGIVERSATION, a subterfuge, fickleness of conduct.
(F.—L.) In Cotgrave.—F. tergiversation, ‘ tergiversation, a flinch-
ing, withdrawing ;’ Cot. Lit. a turning of one’s back.=L. ¢er-
giuersationem, acc. of dergiuersatio, a subterfuge. L. tergiuersari, to
turn one’s back, decline, refuse, shuffle, shift.—L. tergi-, for tergum,
the back ; and wersari, to turn oneself about, pass. of wersare, to turn
about, frequentative of uertere (pp. wersus), to turn; see Verse.

TERM, a limited period, a word or expression. (F.—L.) ME,
terme, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 316, 1. 21.—F. terme, ‘a -
term, time, or day ; also, a tearm, word, speech; ’ Cot.—L. ¢erminum,
acc. of terminus, a boundary-line, bound, limit (whence also Ital. ¢er-
mine, termino, Span. termino). Cf. OL. termen, with the same sense ;
Gk. réppa, a limit.m4/TER, to pass over, cross, fulfil; cf. Skt.
taraya, to cause to pass over. Der. zerm, vb., Temp. v. 15; and see
termination. Also (from L. ¢erminus) termin-al, adj., from L. ter-
minalis; con-termin-ous, de-termine, ex-termin-ate, pre-de-termine.
And (from the same root) en-ter; thrum (1).

TERMAGANT, a boisterous, noisy woman. (F.—Ital.—L.)
ME. Termagant, Termagaunt, Chaucer, C. T. 13739 (B 2000). Ter-
magant was one of the idols whom (in the medieval romances) the
Saracens are supposed to worship; see King of Tars, in Ritson’s
Metrical Romances, ii. 174-182; Lybeaus Disconus, in the same,
ii. 55. See Nares, who explains that the personage of Termagant
was introduced into the old moralities, and represented as of a
violent character. In Ram Alley, we have the expression: ‘that
swears, God bless us;-Like a very ¢ermagant ;’ Dodsley’s Old Plays,
ed. Hazlitt, x. 322; and see Hamlet, ili. 2.15. So also: ‘this hot
termagant Scot;’ 1 Hen. IV, v. 4.114. It has now subsided into
the signification of ascolding woman. ‘So must all our tavern ¢ar-
magons be used, or they'll trepan you;’ Lady Alimony, Act i. sc. 4
(1659). The name is a corruption of OF. Tervagant, Tervagan, or
Tarvagan; spelt Teruagant in Layamon’s Brut, 1. 5353, where he is
a Roman (!) god; and Tervagan in the Chanson de Roland, 1. 611,
where it signifies a Saracen idol.—Ital. Trivigante, the same,
Ariosto, xii. 59 (see Nares, s.v. Trivigant); more correctly, Triva-
gante. It has been suggested that Trivagante or Tervagante is the
moon, wandering under the three names of Selene (or Luna) in heaven,
Artemis (or Diana) in earth, and Persephone (Proserpine) in the lower
world. Cf. dea trivia as an epithet of Diana. =L. zer, thrice, or Zri-,
thrice ; and wagant-, stem of pres. part. of wagari, to wander. See
Ternary and Triform, and Vagabond. @ See also my note
to the line in Chaucer and Tyrwhitt’s note; Ritson, Met, Rom,
iii. 260; Quarterly Review, xxi. 515; Wheeler, Noted Names of
Fiction; Trench, Select Glossary; &c. Perhaps Ital. Trivigante is
of Eastern origin.

TERMINATION, end, limit, result. (F.—L.) In Much Ado,
ii, 1. 256, where it is used with the sense of term, i.e. word or ex-
pression.=F. zermination, ‘a determining, limiting ;’ Cot.=L. fer-
minatioOnem, acc. of termindtio, a bounding, fixing, determining. =L.
terminare, to limit. =L. terminus, a bound, limit; see Term. Der.
termination-al. Also (from L. termindre) termin-ate, termin-able, ter-
min-at-ive, terminat-ive-ly. We also use L. terminus, sb., as an E.
word; Marlowe, Dr. Faustus, A. ii. sc. 2.

TERMITE, a white ant. (F.—L.) F. dermite, used in 1812
(Hatzfeld),—L. termitem, acc. of termes, more commonly ¢armes, a
wood-worm. Allied to zerédo, a wood-worm; from the same root.
See Teredo.

TERN, an aquatic fowl. (Scand.) Not in the old dictionaries.
I find it in a translation of Buffon’s Nat. Hist., London, 1792; and
it was, doubtless, in much earlier use.—Dan. derne, terne, a tern ;
Swed. ¢drza; Icel. Jerna, a tern, occurring in the local name Jerney
(tern-island), near Rejkjavik in Iceland. Widegren’s Swed. Dict.
(ed. 1788) has tdrna, ‘ tern.’ B. It is remarkable that Dan. zerne,
Swed. ¢arna, Icel. Berna, also mean a hand-maid, maid-servant; cf.
G. dirne ; but the words are unrelated (see dirne in Kluge). J The
scientific L. name Sterna was taken from E. stern, a name for the
black tern used by Turner (1544). ‘The field is Azure, a Cheuron
betweene three Sternes,’ the said birds being figured in the accom-
panying wood-cut; Guillim, Display of Heraldry, ed. 1664, p. 216.
Evidently from AS, stearn; ‘ Beacita, vel sturnus, stearz,’ in a. list
of birds, Voc. 131, 11; ‘ Beacita, stearn ;” Corpus Gloss., 284. The
forms stern, stare (for starling), and L. sturnus, are related ; and so

| also (with loss of initial s) Icel. Jerna, Dan. terne, Swed. tarna, ‘The


TERNARY


form fern is Scand., because the cognate E. form would be *thern or
stern. Cf. Norfolk starn, atern; E. D. D.

TERNARY, proceeding by, or consisting of threes. (L.) ‘A
senary, and a ¢#ernary;’ Holland, tr. of Plutarch, p. 652 (R.)=—L.
ternarius, consisting of threes. = L. zerni, pl., by threes. Allied to ¢er,
thrice, and to /rés, three ; the latter being cognate with E. zhree. See
Three. Der. (from L. ¢erni), tern-ate, arranged in threes, a coined
word,

TERRA-COTTA, a kind of hard pottery. (Ital.—L.) From
Ital. terra cotta, baked (lit. cooked) earth.—L. ¢erra, earth (see
eo) ; cocta, fem. of coctus, cooked, pp. of coguere, to cook; see
Cook.

TERRACE, a raised level bank of earth, elevated flat space.
(F.—Ital.—L.) Frequently spelt ¢arras, as in Spenser, F. Q. v.
Q. 21; here ar is put forer, as in parson for person, Clark for clerk ; &c.
= MF. terrace, F. terrasse, ‘a plat, platform, hillock of earth, a terrace,
or high and open gallery;’ Cot.TItal. ¢erraccia, terrazza, ‘a ter-
race;’ Florio. Formed with suffix -accia, usually with an augmenta-
tive force, from Ital. zerr-a, earth.= L. zerra, earth, B. L. terra
stands for an older form *¢ersa, and signifies dry ground or land, as
opposed to sea. Allied to Gk. tapads (Attic tappés), a stand or
frame for drying things upon, any broad flat surface ; tépreo@a, to
become dry, dry up. Also to Irish zir, land, ¢irmen, main land, tirim,
dry ; W. éir, land ; Gael. zir, land (whence ceanntire, headland, land’s
end, Cantire). Cf. also L. ¢orrere, to parch.—4/TERS, to be dry;
whence Skt. zvsh, to thirst, Goth. thaursus, dry, G. diirr, dry. See
Thirst and Torrid. Brugmann,i. § 881. Der. ¢erra-cotta, q. v.
Also ¢err-aqueous, consisting of land and water; see Aqueous. And
see ferr-een, terr-ene, terr-estri-al, terr-i-er, terr-it-or-y. Also fumi-tory,
in-ter, medi-terr-an-e-an, tur-meric.

TERREEN, TUREEN, a large dish or vessel, esp. for soup.
(F.—L.) Both spellings are poor; it should rather be terrine;
tureen is the commoner, and the worse, spelling. So called because
orig. made of earthenware. Spelt ¢ureen, Goldsmith, The Haunch
of Venison; ¢errine in Phillips, ed. 1706.—F. ¢errine, ‘an earthen
pan;’ Cot, Formed, as if from a L. adj. *terrinus, earthen, from
terra, earth; see Terrace.

TERRENEH, earthly. (L.) In Shak, Antony, iii. 13. 153.—L.
terrénus, earthly. —L. terra, earth; see Terrace.

TERRESTRIAL, earthly. (L.) Spelt, erestryall, Skelton,
Of the Death of Edw. IV, 1.15. Coined by adding -al (L. -alis) to
L. terrestri-, decl. stem of terrestris, earthly. —L. terra, earth with
suffix -st-tri-; see Terrace.

TERRIBLE, awful, dreadful. (F.—L.) Spelt ¢erryble in Pals-
grave.=F. ¢errible, ‘terrible;’ Cot. —L. zerribilis, causing terror.=
L. terrére, to terrify; with suffix -bilis, Allied to L. Zerror, terror:
see Terror. Der. éerribl-y, terrible-ness.

TERRIER, a kind of dog; also a register of landed property.
(F.—L.) In both senses, the word has the same etymology.
1. ME. éerrere, terryare, hownde, Terrarius;’ Prompt. Parv. The
dog was so called because it pursues rabbits, &c., into their burrows.
Terrier is short for zerrier-dog, i.e. burrow-dog.—F. ¢errier, as in
chien terrier, ‘a terrier ;’ Cot. = Late L. erririus, belonging to earth.

=. terra, earth. Cf. MF. zerrier, ‘the hole, berry, or earth of a
conny or fox, also, a little hillock ;’ Cot. = Late L. terrarium, a little
hillock ; hence, a mound thrown up in making a burrow, a burrow.
2. A legal term; spelt ¢errar in Blount’s Nomolexicon; ¢errere, Bury
Wills, p. 78 (1478). =F. papier terrier, ‘the court-roll or catalogue
of all the names of a lord’s tenants,’ &c.; Cot.—Late L. terrarius, as
in ¢errdrius liber, a book in which landed property is described.
Formed with suffix -drivs from L. terr-a, as above. See Terrace.

TERRIFIC, terrible, inspiring dread. (L.) Spelt ¢errifick, Mil-
ton, P. L. vii. 497. —L. ¢errificus, causing terror. = L. ¢erri-, appearing
in ferri-tus, pp. of ¢errére, to frighten; and -ficus, causing, from
facere, to make; see Terror and Fact. Der. zerrific-ly. Also
terrify, formed as if from a F. *terrifier (given in Littré as a new
coinage), from L. ¢errificare, to terrify.

TERRINE, the same as Terreen, q. v.

TERRITORY, domain, extent of land round a city. (F.—L.)
In As You Like It, iii. 1.85 ¢errytorie in Caxton, Siege of Troy,
lf. 68, back. Adapted from F. ¢erritoire, ‘a territory;’ Cot.—L.
territorium, a domain, the land round a town, Formed from L.
terra, land; as if from a sb. with decl. stem ¢erritéri-, which may be


explained as possessor of land. See Terrace. Der. ¢erritori-al,
J | ruption of ¢eston (sometimes ¢estoon), which was ‘ a brass coin covered


adj.

TERROR, dread, great fear, (F.—L.) Formerly written ¢er-
rour, All’s Well, ii. 3. 4 (first folio); but also terror, Meas. for Meas.
i, 1. 10; ii. 1. 4 (id.). ME. ¢errour, Libell of E. Policy, 1. 935.—F.
terreur, ‘terror;’ Cot.—L. terrérem, acc. of terror, dread. Allied
to terrére, to frighten, to scare; orig. to tremble. B. Terrére
stands for *tersére (like terra for *tersa); cognate with Skt. ras, to


TESTER, 637


tremble, be afraid, whence ¢rasa-, terror; Gk. rpéev (for *rpéc-euv),
to tremble; Lithuan. ¢riszéti, to tremble, Russ. triast(e’, to shake,
shiver. Allied to Tremble, Brugmann, ii. § 657. Der. zerror-
ism. And (from same root) ¢erri-ble, terri-fic, de-ter.

TERSH, concise, compact, neat. (L.) ‘So ¢erse and elegant were
his conceipts and expressions;’ Fuller, Worthies, Devonshire (R.).
Used also in the sense of smooth: ‘ many stones also, . . although
terse and smooth ;’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 4. § 3.—L.
tersus, wiped off, clean, neat, pure, nice, terse. Tersus is pp. of
tergere, also tergére, to wipe, rub off, wipe dry, polish a stone
(whence Sir T. Browne’s use of terse), Der. terse-ly, -ness.

TERTIAN, occurring every third day. (F.—L.) Chiefly in the
phr. zertian fever or tertian ague. ‘A feuer terciane ;’ Chaucer, C. T.
14965 (B 4149). =F. ¢ertiane, ‘a tertian ague;’ Cot.—L. ¢ertiana, a
tertian fever; fem. of ¢ertidnus, tertian, belonging to the third. —L.
tertius, third, = L, ter, thrice ; trés, three, cognate with E. Three, q. v.
And see Tierce.

TERTIARY, of the third formation. (L.) Modern.=L. ter-
tidrius, properly containing a third part; but accepted to mean
belonging to the third.—L. ¢erti-us, third; with suffix -drius ; see
Tertian.

TESSELATE, to form into squares or lay with checker-work.
(L.) Chiefly used in the pp. tesselated, which is given in Bailey’s
Dict. vol. ii. ed. 1731. ‘ Tesseled worke;’ Knolles, Hist. of the
Turks, 1603 (Nares).—L. ¢essellaius, furnished with small square
stones, checkered. = L. ¢essella, a small squared piece of stone, a little
cube, dimin. of ¢essera, a squared piece, squared block, most com-
monly in the sense of a die for playing with. B. Root uncertain ;
sometimes referred to Gk. récoapes, four, from its square shape ; but
such a borrowing is very unlikely, and a zessera was cubical, having
six sides.

TEST, a pot in which metals are tried, a critical examination,
trial, proof. (F.—L.) The ¢est was a vessel used in alchemy, and
also in testing gold. ‘ Test, is a broad instrument made of maribone
ashes, hooped about with iron, on which refiners do fine, refine, and
part silver and gold from other metals, or as we use to say, put them
to the test or trial;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ME. test, Chaucer,
C. T. 16286 (G 818).—OF. test, mod. F. ¢ét, a test, in chemistry
and metallurgy (Hamilton). Cf. OF. teste, sometimes used in the
sense of skull, from its likeness to a potsherd; mod. F. ¢éte. It is
probable that OF. test and teste were sometimes confused; they
merely differ in gender; otherwise, they are the same word. Test
answers to a L. testi, testum, an earthen pot (Lewis); whilst ¢este
answers to Late L. ¢esta, used to denote a certain vessel in treatises.
on alchemy ; a vessel called a esta is figured in Theatrum Chemicum,
iii. 326. In Italian we find the same words, viz. testo, ‘ the test of
silver or gold, a kind of melting-pot that goldsmiths vse,’ Florio ;
also testa, ‘a head, pate, . . a fest, an earthen pot or gallie-cup,
burnt tile or brick, a piece of a broken bone, a shard of a pot or tile.’
B. All allied to L. testa, a brick, a piece of baked earthenware,
pitcher, also a potsherd, piece of bone, shell of a fish, skull. Some
make it an abbreviation of *tersta, i.e. dried or baked, with reference
to clay or earthenware; allied to terra (<*tersa), dry ground, =
A TERS, to be dry; see'Terrace. Or perhaps cognate with Pers,
tasht, a bason; see Tazza. Der. ¢est, verb; cf. ‘ tested gold,’ Meas.
for Meas, ii. 2. 149. Also ¢est-ac-e-ous, test-er, test-y, q. V.

TESTACEHOUS, having a hard shell. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. Englished from L. testaceus, consisting of tiles, having
* shell, testaceous.—L. testa, a piece of dried clay, tile, brick. See

est.

TESTAMENT, a solemn declaration in writing, a will, part of
the bible. (F.—L.) ME. testament, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft,
p- 20,1. 9; Ancren Riwle, p. 388.—F. testament, ‘a testament or
will;”’ Cot.—L. ¢estémentum, a thing declared, last will. =—L. ¢esta-ri,
to be a witness, depose to, testify; with suffix -mentum.—L. testis,
a witness. Root uncertain. Der. ¢estament-ar-y; in-test-ate, q. v.;
test-at-or, Heb. ix. 16, from L. testator, one who makes a will;
testatr-ix, L, testatrix, fem. form of testator. And see testify, testimony.
(From L. testis) at-test, con-test, de-test, pro-test.

TESTER, a sixpence; a flat canopy over a bed or pulpit. (F.—
L.) 1. The sense ‘sixpence’ is obsolete, except as corrupted to:
tizzy; see Shak. 2 Henry IV, iii. 2. 296. The ¢ester was so called
from the head upon it; it is a short form of ¢esterne, as in Latimer’s.
Sermons, 1584, fol. 94 (Todd). Again, ¢estern is, apparently, a cor-


with silver, first struck in the reign of Hen. VIII. The name was.
given to shillings and sixpences, and Latimer got into trouble by
referring to the newly coined shilling or feston; see Latimer, Seven
Sermons, ed. Arber, p. 85, where it is spelt ¢estyow. In 1560 the
teston of 6d. was reduced to 44d. The name ¢eston was given to the
new coins of Louis XII. of France because they bore the head of that


TESTICLE


prince; but Ruding observes that the name must have been applied
to the E. coin by mere caprice, as all money of this country bore the
head of the sovereign;’ H. B. Wheatley, note to Ben Jonson, Every
Man in his Humour, iv. 2. 104, where teston occurs. =F. teston, ‘a
testoon, a piece of silver coin worth xviijd. sterling ;’ Cot.—OF.
teste,a head ; mod. F. téte.—L. testa, of which one sense was ‘ skull; ’
see further under Test. 2. ‘Testar for a bedde;’ Palsgrave.
[Allied to ME, ¢ester, a head-piece, helmet, Chaucer, C. T. 2501
(A 2499).] Cf. ‘Teester of a bed;’ Prompt. Parv.—OF. testre,
tester of a bed (Godefroy) ; cf. MF. destiere, ‘ any kind of head-piece ;’
Cot. OF. teste, a head; as above.

TESTICLE, a gland in males, secreting seminal fluid. (F.—L.)
In Cotgrave.=F. zesticule, ‘a testicle ;’ Cot.=L. testiculum, acc. of
testiculus, dimin, of ¢estis, a testicle.

TESTIFY, to bear witness, protest or declare. (F.—L.) ME.
testifien, P. Plowman, C. xiii. 172.—F. ¢estifier, ‘to testify ;? Cot.—
L. testificari, to bear witness. = L. testi-, decl. stem of fests, a witness ;
and -fic-, for facere, to make; see Testament and Fact. Der.
testifi-er.

TESTIMONY, evidence, witness, (L.) In K. Lear, i. 2. 88.
Englished from L. ¢estimonium, evidence.=L. testi-, decl. stem of
testis, a witness; see Testament. The suffix -monium=Idg. -mon-
yo-. @ The F. word is ¢émoin, OF. tesmoing. Der. testimoni-al,
in Minsheu, from F. zestimonial, ‘a testimoniall,’ Cot.; from L.
testimonialis, adj.

TESTY, heady, fretful. (F.—L.) In Palsgrave; and in Jul. Czs.
iv. 3. 46. ME. Zestif, Chaucer, C. T., A 4004.—OF. *testif (not
found) ; allied to MF. t#estu, ‘ testy, heady, headstrong ;’ Cot.—OF.
teste, the head; mod. F. zéte. See Test. Der. testi-ly ; testi-ness,
Cymb. iv. 1. 23.

TETANUS, a disease characterised by rigid spasms. (L.— Gk.)
Late L. tetanus.—Gk. Téravos, a strain, convulsive spasm ; allied to
tetayds, adj., stretched. Reduplicated forms (with prefix 7e-)
eed to reivecy (for *rév-yewv), to stretch.—4/TEN, to stretch. See

hin.

TETCHY, TECHY, touchy, fretful, peevish. (F.—Low G.)
In Rich. III, iv. 4. 168; Troil. i. 1.99; Rom. i. 3. 32. The sense
of tetchy (better zechy) is full of etches or teches, i.e, bad habits,
freaks, whims, vices. The adj. is formed from ME. tecche or tache,
a habit, esp. a bad habit, vice, freak, caprice, behaviour. ‘ Tetche,
tecche, teche, or maner of condycyone, Mos, condicio;’ Prompt.
Pary. ‘A chyldis ¢atches in playe, mores pueri inter ludendum ;’
Horman, Vulgaria; cited by Way. ‘ Offitie, crafty and deceytfull
taches;’ Elyot’s Dict. ‘ Of the maners, ¢acches, and condyciouns of
houndes ;’ MS. Sloane 3501,c. xi; cited by Way. ‘Desires ¢acches’
=the father’s habits; P. Plowman, B. ix. 146. Techches, vices;
Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 32, 1.15.—OF. ache, ‘a spot, staine, blemish ;
also, a reproach, disgrace, blot unto a man’s good ‘name ;’ Cot.
Also spelt taiche, teche, teque, tek, a natural quality, disposition, esp.
a bad disposition, vice, ill habit, defect, stain (Burguy). Mod. F.
zache, only in the sense of stain, mark. [Cf. Ital. tacca, a notch,
cut, defect, stain, Port. and Span. ¢acha, a defect, flaw, crack, small
nail or tack.] Of Low G. origin. See Tache (2) and Tack.
Cf. at-tach and de-tach, from the same source. We even find the
E. form tack, a spot, stain; Whitgift’s Works, ii. 84 (Parker Soc.).
@ Now corrupted to touch-y, from the notion of being sensitive to
the touch. ‘This is a mere adaptation, not an original expression ;
see Touchy. (The double form in OF., viz. tache, teche, causes
difficulty and doubt ; two or more sources may have been confused
together. See KGrting, §§ 9331, 9346, 9420.)

TETHER, a rope or chain for tying up a beast. (E.) Formerly
written zedder, ‘Live within thy ¢edder,’ i.e. within your income’s
bounds; Tusser, Husbandry, sect. 10, st. g (sidenote). ‘ Teddered
cattle,’ id. sect. 16, st. 33 (E.D.S. p. 42). ME, ¢edir; ‘Hoc liga-
torium, a ¢edyre;’ Wright’s Voc. i. 234, col. 2, Not found earlier
thanthe 15th century. Thecorresponding AS. form would be *ééoder,
as shown by OFries, tiader, tieder, N¥Fries. tjodder, tjudder, Fries.
tiidder ; cf. also Mid. Du. tuyer, ‘a line, a shackle, or roape to tye
beasts in a pasture;” Hexham, B. We might explain the AS.
*téoder as standing for *téoh-der; from the base téoh-=G. zieh-, to
draw; cf. Goth. ziwhan, to pull, cognate with L. diic-ere. If this be
right, the original sense was ‘ puller;’ from its restraint. Cf. OHG.
zeotar, MHG., zieter, a thill, shaft (ofa cart). y. We also find Icel.
tjodr, a tether, Low G. tider, tier, a tether, Norw. tjoder (Aasen),
Swed. ¢juder, Dan. toir; all similarly formed. See Tie. The
suffix -der answers to Gk. -rpov, L. -trum, and denotes the agent.
Cf. Bahder, p. 147; Brugmann, ii. § 62. Der. tether, verb.

TETRAGON, a figure with four angles. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Tetra-
gonal, that is, four-square, as a ¢etragon or quadrangle ;’ Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674.—MF. tetragone, adj., ‘of four corners;’ Cot.—L.
detragonus, — Gk. terpaywv-os, four-angled, rectangular, square. = Gk.


638


ay Ee


tétpa-, for 7€Tapa-, prefix allied to rérrapes, Attic form of réaoapes,
four, which is cognate with E. Four, q.v.; and yovia, an angle,
corner, allied to Gk. yévv, a knee, cognate with E. Knee. Cf. L.
prefix quadri-, similarly related to quatuor, four. Der. tetragon-al,
adj., as above.

TETRAHEDRON, a pyramid, a solid figure contained by
four equilateral triangles. (Gk.) Spelt tetraedron and tetrahedron in
Phillips, ed. 1706.—Gk. rérpa-, prefix allied to téooapes, four; and


-€5pov, from €dpa, a base, which from €6-, cognate with E. sit. See
Tetragon ; and see Four and Sit. Der. tetrahedr-al, adj.
TETRARCH, a governor of a fourth part of a province. (L.


—Gk.) ME, ¢etrark (ill spelt tetrak), Wyclif, Luke, ix. 7.—L.
tetrarcha, Luke, ix. 7.—Gk. rerpdpxns, a tetrarch.—Gk. rerp-, pre-
fix allied to réocapes, four; and d&px-ev, to be first. Cf. Skt. ark, to
be worthy. See Tetragon; also Four and Arch-. Der. tetrarch-
ate; tetrarch-y, Gk. retpapxia.

TETRASYLLABLE, a word of four syllables. (F.—L.—
Gk.) A coined word; from MF. ¢etrasyllabe, ‘ of four syllables ;’
Cot. = Late L. zetrasyllabus (not in Ducange).— Gk. rerpacvAdaBos,
of four syllables. Gk. rérpa-, prefix allied to réacapes, four; and
ovAAaby, a syllable. See Tetragon; also Four and Syllable.
Der. tetrasyllab-ic,

TETTER, a cutaneous disease. (E.) In Hamlet, i. 5.71; and in
Baret (1580). ME. ¢eter, Trevisa, ii. 61. ‘ Hec serpedo, a tetere ;’
Voc. 791.14. AS. ¢eter. ‘Impetigo, zeter;’ Voc. 26.12. Cf. G.
zittermal, a tetter, ring-worm, serpigo; OHG. zitaroch (Bavar.
zitteroch). Allied to L. derbidsus, scabby ; Skt. dadru-, a tetter.

TEUTONIC, pertaining to the Teutons or ancient Germans,
(L.—Teut.) Spelt Teutonick in Blount, ed. 1674.—L. Teutonicus,
adj., formed from Teutones, the Teutons, a people of Germany. The
word Teutones means no more than ‘men of the nation;’ or ‘the
people,’ being formed with L. suffix -ones (pl.) from *teuta, pre-
Teutonic form of Goth. ¢hiuda, a people, nation; cf. Irish ¢uath, a
people. See further under Dutch. Brugmann, i. § 218.

TEW, to taw, to scourge. (E.) A variant of Taw, q.v.

TEXT, the original words of an author; a passage of scripture.
(F.—L.) ME. texte, Chaucer, C. T. 17185 (H 236).—F. texte, ‘a
text, the originall words or subject of a book;’ Cot.—L. textum,
that which is woven, a fabric, also the style of an author; hence, a
text, Orig. neut. of textus, pp. of texere, to weave.+Skt. zaksh, to
cut wood, prepare, form. Furtherallied to Technical, q.v. Der.
text-book ; text-hand, a large hand in writing, suitable for the text of
a book as distinct from the notes; text-u-al, ME. ¢extuel, Chaucer,
C. T. 17184 (H 235), from F. ¢extuel, ‘of, or in, a text,’ Cot.,
coined as if from a Late L. *textudlis, adj.; textu-al-ly, textu-al-
ist. And see text-ile, text-ure below. From the same root are #ech-
nic-al, q.v.; con-text, pre-text. Also sub-tle, toil (2), tissue; and
cf. toxicology.

TEXTILE, woven, that can be woven. (L.) ‘The warp and
the woofe of zextiles;’ Bacon, Nat. Historie, § 846.—L. extilis,
woven, textile.—L. zextus, woven, pp. of texere; see Text. See
also texture, tissue.

TEXTURE, anything woven, a web, disposition of the parts.
(F.—L.) In Cotgrave.=—F. texture, ‘a texture, contexture, web; ”
Cot.—L, ¢extura, a web; cf. textus, pp. of texere, to weave; see
Text. And see zextile above.


‘Ta


TH. This is a distinct letter from ¢, and ought to have a distinct
symbol. Formerly, we find AS, p and & used (indiscriminately) to
denote both the sounds now represented by #h; in Middle-English,
3 soon went out of use (it occurs in Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris),
whilst ) and zk were both used by the scribes. The letter p was
assimilated in shape to ¥, till at last both were written alike; hence
y®, yt (really the, that) are not unfrequently pronounced by modern
Englishmen like ye and yaz; it is needless to remark that y* man was
never pronounced as ye man in the middle ages.

For greater distinctness, the symbol 8 will be used for AS. words
(and th for ME. words) corresponding to mod. E. words with the
‘voiced’ ¢h, as in thou; and the symbol p for AS, and ME. words
corresponding to mod. E. words with the ‘ voiceless’ ¢h, as in thin.
It is useful to note these three facts following. 1. When Zh is initial,
it is always voiceless, except in two sets of words, (a) words etymo-
logically connected with ¢hat; and (b) words etymologically con-
nected with thou. 2. When ¢h is in the middle of a word or is final,
it is almost always ‘voiced’ when the letter e follows, and not
otherwise; cf. breathe, with breath. A remarkable exception occurs


THALER


in smooth. 8. No word beginning with tk (except thurible, the base
of which is Greek) is of Latin origin; most of them are E., but
some (easily known) are Greek; thummim is Hebrew. Inthe G.
thaler (below), the hk is sounded as ¢.

THALER, a dollar. (G.) G. thaler, a dollar; see Dollar.

THAN, a conjunction placed, after the comparative of an adjective
or adverb, between things compared. (E.) Frequently written then
in old books; extremely common in Shakespeare (1st folio). ME.
thanne, thonne, thenne; also than, thon, then. AS. Donne, than;
“betera donne Seet réaf’=better than the garment; Matt. vi. 25.
Closely allied to the demonst. pronoun; see That. See March,
A. S. Grammar, § 252.4-Du. dan, than, then; Goth. zhan, then,
when, allied to the demonst. pron. with neut. thata; G. dann, then,
denn, for, then, than, allied to der. Cf. L. tum, then; -tud in L.
is-tud. J The same word as then; but differentiated by usage.

THANE, a dignitary among the English. (E.) In Macb. i. 2.
45. ME. pein, Havelok, 2466. AS. pegen, Jegn, often Jen (by con-
traction), a thane; Grein, ii. 578.4-Icel. Jegn ; G. degen, a warrior.
Teut. type *thegnédz, m. Allied to Gk. réxvoy, a child, which is
from vex-, as in rex-eivy, 2nd aorist infin. of tixrev, to beget.
(/TEK.) Brugmann, ii. § 66.

THANK, an expression of good will; commonly used in the pl.
thanks, (E.) Chaucer uses it in the sing. number. ‘And haue a
pank ;’ C. T. 614 (A 612). So also Gower: ‘ Althogh I may no
fonk deserve;’ C. A. i. 66; bk. i. 738. AS. Aanc, often also onc,
thought, grace or favour, content, thanks. The primary sense of
‘thought’ shows that it is closely allied to Think, q.v. The verb
fancian, to thank (Mark, viii. 6), is a derivative from the sb.4Du.
dank, sb., whence danken, vb.; Icel. Jokk (<pink), gen. Jakkar,
whence Jakka, vb.; Dan. zak, sb., whence takke, vb.; cf. tanke,
a thought, idea; Swed. tack, sb., whence ¢acka, vb.; Goth. thagks
(for *thanks), thank, Luke, xvii. 9, where the s is the usual suffix of
the nom. sing. ; cf. thagkjan, to think ; G. dank, sb., whence danken,
verb. Teut. type *thankoz, m.; from *thank, 2nd grade of *thenkan-,
to think; see Think. Der. thank, verb, as above; thank-ful,
AS. fancful, spelt doncful and glossed ‘ gratiosus, Voc. 191. 15;
thank-ful-ly, thank-ful-ness ; thank-less, Cor. iv. 5. 76, thank-less-ly,
thank-less-ness, thank-offer-ing, thank-worthy, 1 Pet. ii, 19. Also
thanks-giving, i.e. a giving of thanks, L. L. L. ii, 193 ; thanks-giver.

THAT, demonst. and rel. pronoun and conjunction. (E.) ME.
that. AS. Bet, orig. neut. of demonstrative pronoun, frequently
used as neut. of the def. article, which is merely a peculiar use of the
demonst. pronoun, [The masc. sé, and fem. séo, are from a different
base; see She.] In late MSS., we meet with a corresponding
masc, form de, as in ‘de hearpere’=the harper, A®lfred, tr. of
Boethius, c. xxxv. § 6, lib. iii, met. 12, where the Cotton MS. has
“se hearpere.’ Also with a corresponding late fem. form déo, as in
‘a 8éo0 sawul hebban sceal’=which the soul is to have; Adrianus
and Ritheus, in Ettmiiller’s A. S. Selections, p. 40, 1. 43. The neut.
det is from the Teut. pronominal base THA=Idg. TO, meaning
‘he’ or ‘that.? The suffix -¢ in tha-t is merely the mark of the
neut. gender, as in wha-t from who, i-¢ (formerly hi-t) from he; it
answers to L, -d as seen in is-tu-d, qui-d, i-d,illu-d.  B. From Idg.
TO are Skt. ¢at, it, that, and numerous cases, such as ¢am, him (acc.
masc.), tam, her (acc. fem.), ‘2, they, &c. Also Gk. 7é, neut. of def.
art., and the gen. ro¥, rijs, dat. rO, 7H, acc. Tév, THY, Td, Sec. Also
the latter part of L. is-te, is-ta, is-tud, So also Lithuan. fas, m., ¢a,
f., tai, n., that; Russ. zot’, masc., ¢a, fem., zo, neut., that; Du. de,


masc. and fem., the; dat, conj., that; Icel. Jat, neut., the; Dan.


den, masc. and fem., det, neut., the; Swed. den, masc. and fem., det,
neut., this; G. der, masc., die, fem., das, neut., the ; dass, conj., that ;
Goth. thata, neut. of def. article.

For the purposes of E. etymology it is necessary to give the AS.
def. art. in full. It is as follows, if we put sé and séo (the usual
forms) in place of de, déo, SING. NOM. sé, séo, det; GEN. des, d&re,
es; DAT. dam, dére, dam; ACC. done, ba, bet; INSTRUMENTAL,
oy (for all genders). PLUR. NOM. AND ACC. 043 GEN. dara; DAT. dam.
@ Allied words all begin with ‘ voiced’ #k; as there, than, then,
the (1), the (2), they, their, them; thence, thither; these, those,
thus.

THATCH, a covering for a roof. (E.) A palatalised form of
thak. Cf. prov. E. thack, a thatch, thacker, a thatcher; ME. Jak,
‘Prompt. Parv. AS. Jec (dat. Aece), thatch, Grein, ii. 564; whence
peccan (for *pac-ian), to thatch, cover, Grein, ii. 577.-4-Du. dak, sb.,
whence dekken, verb (whence E. deck is borrowed); Icel. Jak, sb.,
pekja, v.; Dan. tag, sb., tekke, v.; Swed. tak, sb., takke, v.; G. dach,
s., decken, v. Teut. type *Jak-om, neut. From *fak, 2nd
grade of Teut. root *thek, to cover = Idg. of TEGw, STEGw;; cf. Gk.
Téyos, variant of oréyos, a roof. From the same root we have Skt.
sthag, to cover, Gk. oréyev, to cover, L. tegere, to cover, Lithuan.,
stégti, to cover, Olrish tech, Irish teagh, a house, Gael. teach, tigh,


THEIR 639


ahouse, Gael. a stigh, within (i.e. under cover), W. 77, a house.
Der. thatch, vb., as above; thatch-er, spelt thacker, Pilkington’s
Works, p. 381 (Parker Soc.). Also (from L. tegere) teg-u-ment, tile.
Also (from Du. decken) deck. Brugmann, i. § 632.

THAUMATURGY, magic. (Gk.) Cf. F. thaumaturgie (1878) ;
Hatzfeld. — Gk. Oavparoupyia, a working of wonders. —Gk. @avyar-,
stem of @atua, a wonder, marvel; and épy-oy, a work, cognate
with E. Work, q.v.

THAW, to melt, as ice, to grow warm after frost. (E.) Prov. E.
thow, rhyming with snow. ME. jowen, in comp. of-Jowed, pp.
thawed away, Chaucer, House of Fame, iii. 53. Spelt Jowyn,
Prompt. Parv. AS. Jawian; ‘se wind td-wyrpd and Jawad’ =the
[south] wind disperses and thaws; Popular Treatises on Science,
ed. Wright, p. 17, last line. A weak verb.4-Dnu. dooijen, to thaw;
cf. dooi, thaw; Icel. Jeyja, to thaw; Aa, a thaw, thawed ground ;
cf. Jeyr, a thaw; Dan. tie, to thaw; 7, a thaw; Swed. Zéa, to
thaw; 76, a thaw. Cf. MHG. douwen, G. verdauen, to concoct,
digest. B. Prob. allied to L. tabés, a melting, zabescere, to dissolve,
Gk. rHxew, to melt; Skt. tdya-, water; W. ¢awdd, melted, toddi, to
melt. & > In no way connected with dew,

THE (1), def. article. (E.) ME.the. AS. de, substituted in Late
AS, for sé, the nom, masc. of the def. article; the m. sé, f. seo, being
replaced by m. de, f. deo, by the influence of neut. d@¢, and the forms
of the oblique cases. Thus we find de hearpere=the harper; see
quotation under That. The real use of AS. de was as an inde-
clinable relative pronoun, in extremely common use for all genders
and cases ; see several hundred examples in Grein, ii. 573-577. See
further under That.

THE (2), in what degree, in that degree. (E.) Whenwe say ‘ the
more, the merrier’ we mean ‘in what degree they are more numerous,
in that degree are they merrier.’ This is not the usual def. article,
but the instrumental case of it. ME. the; as in ‘neuer the bet’=
none the better, Chaucer, C. T. 7533 (D 1951). AS. dy, di, as in
dy bet=the better; see numerous examples in Grein, ii. 568. This
is the instrumental case of the def. article, and means ‘on that
account’ or ‘on what account,’ or ‘in that degree’ or ‘in what
degree.’ Common in the phrase for 67, on that account; cf. for
hwy, on what account. See That; and see Why.+Goth. thé,
instrumental case of def. article; Icel. Avi, Ai, dat. (or inst.) case of
fat. Cf. Skt. zéna, instr. case of tad, sometimes used with the sense
of ‘ therefore ;’ Benfey, p. 349, s.v. fad, sect. iv.

THEATRE, a place for dramatic representations. (F.—L.—
Gk.) ME. theatre, Chaucer, C. T. 1887 (A 1885); spelt zeatre,
Wyclif, Deeds [Acts], xix. 31.—MF. theatre, ‘a theatre ;’ Cot. =
L. theatrum.=—Gk. Oéarpoy, a place for seeing shows, &c.; formed
with suffix -rpoy (agential) from Oed-opa:, I see. Cf. O€a, a view,
sight, spectacle; see Prellwitz. Der. theatr-ic-al, adj., theatr-ic-al-ly ;
theatr-tc-al-s, s. pl. ; amphi-theatre. And see theorem, theo-ry.

THEE (1), acc. of Thou, pers. pron., which see.

THEE (2), to prosper, flourish, thrive. (E.) Obsolete; ME.
eon, usually Je or pee, Chaucer, C. T. 7789 (D 2207). ‘ Theen, or
thryvyn, Vigeo;’ Prompt. Parv. AS. Jéox, Aion (for *Jihan), pt. t.
jah, féah, pp. figen, Jogen, also ge-fungen, to thrive.4+Goth. therhan,
to thrive, increase, advance; Du. gedijen, to thrive, prosper,
succeed ; G. gedeihen, OHG. dihan, to increase, thrive. Another
allied form is OSax. ge-Jengian, to fulfil, The old AS. pp. gefungen
shows that the AS. *Zikan resulted from an earlier form *Jinhan ;
from the Teut. root *Jinx, *Penx, answering to Idg.4/TENK;
which appears in Lith. fenka, it suffices; whence also Olrish focad,
prosperity, W. tynged, luck; cf. Lith. tekti, to suffice (pres. t. tenkic,
Ihave enough). Brugmann, i. § 421 (3). See Tight.

THEF'T, the act of thieving, stealing. (E.) ME. Jefte, Chaucer,
C. T. 4393 (A 4395). Theft is for thefth, as being easier to pro-
nounce, AS, Jiefde, Jéofde, Ayfde (with f sounded as v, and 6
voiced), theft; Laws of Ine, §§ 7 and 46; Thorpe, Ancient Laws,
i, 106, 130. Formed with suffix -(‘)de (Idg. -i#a) from AS. Jéof, Jiof,
or Jéf, a thief, or from éofian, to steal; see Thief.4OFries.
thiufthe, theft; cf. thiaf, a thief ; Icel. Ayfd, sometimes Jy/ft; cf. Aja/r,
a thief.

THEIR, belonging to them. (Scand.) The word their belongs to
the Northern dialect rather than the Southern, and is rather a Scand.
than an AS. form. Chaucer uses hire or here in this sense (< AS.
hira, of them); C. T. 32. ME. ¢thair, Pricke of Conscience, 52,
1862, &c, ; thar, Barbour, Bruce, i. 22, 23 ; Jere, Ormulum, 127.
The word was orig. not a possess. pron., but a gen. plural ; more-
over, it was not orig. the gen. pl. of ke (he), but of the def. article. —
Icel. Jeirra, Olcel. Jeira, of them; used as gen. pl. of hann, hon, pat
(he, she, it), by confusion ; it was really the gen. pl. of the def. article,
as shown by the AS. forms. (The use of that for it is a Scand.
peculiarity, very common in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambs.)+AS.
dra, also dara, gen. pl. of def. art.; see Grein, ii. 565; G.der, gen.


640 THEISM


pl. of def. art. ; Goth. zhizé, fem. thizd, gen. pl. of sa, so, thata. See
further under They and That. Der. their-s, Temp. i. 1. 58;
spelt Je33ress, Ormulum, 2506 ; cf. Dan. deres, Swed. deras, theirs ;
formed by analogy with our-s, your-s.

THBISM, belief in the existence of a God. (Gk.) ‘ All religion
and theism ;’ Pref. to Cudworth, Intellectual System (R.). Coined,
with suffix -isom (Gk. -topos), from Gk. 6e-ds, a god. Prob. for *6ea-ds;
cf. Olrish dess, God (Stokes-Fick, p. 151) ; also Gk. 6é0-paros, spoken
by a god. See Prellwitz. q Not related to L. deus. Der. the-ist
(from Gk. eds) ; the-ist-ic, the-ist-ic-al; a-the-ist, q.v.; apo-the-os-is,
q. y. And see theo-crac-y, theo-gon-y, theo-log-y, the-urg-y.

THEM, objective case of They, q.v. Der. them-selves.

THEME, a subject for discussion. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. teme,
P. Plowman, B. iii. 95, v. 61, vi. 23. Ata later period spelt theme,
Mids. Nt. Dr. v. 434.—OF. teme, MF. theme, ‘a theam,’ Cot.=—L.
thema. = Gk. 0€ua, that which is laid down, the subject of an argu-
ment.=Gk. base 6e-, to place, weak grade of 6n-, as in Ti@nm, I
place. —4/DHE, to place, put; whence Skt. dha, to put; &c. See
Thesis.

THEN, at that time, afterward, therefore. (E.) Frequently spelt
than in old books, as in Shak. Merch. Ven. ii. 2. 200 (First folio) ;
it rimes with began, Lucrece, 1440. Orig. the same word as han,
but afterwards differentiated. ME. thenne, P. Plowman, A.i. 56;
thanne, B. i. 58. AS. denne; also danne, donne, then, than; Grein,
li. 562, 563. See Than.

THENCE, from that place or time. (E.) ME. thennés (dis-
syllabic), Chaucer, C. T. 4930 (B 510); whence (by contraction)
thens, written thence in order to represent that the final s was voice-
less, and not sounded as z. Older forms ¢honne, thenne, thanne, Owl
and Nightingale, 132, 508, 1724; also thanene, Rob. of Glouc.,
p- 377, |. 7743. Here thanne is a shorter form of thanene (or
thanen) by the loss of x. AS. danan, danon, thence; also dananne,
danonne, thence, Grein, ii. 560, 561. It thus appears that the fullest
form was dananne, which became successively thanene, thanne, thenne,
and (by addition of s) thennes, thens, thence. S was added because
-es was a favourite ME. adverbial suffix, orig. due to the genitive
suffix of sbs. Again, da-nan, Ja-nan-ne, is from the Teut. base
THA=Idg. TO, he, that; see That. March (A. S. Grammar,
§ 252) explains -zan, -nanne, as an oblique case of the (repeated)
adj. suffix -za, with the orig. sense of ‘ belonging to;’ cf. L. super-
no-, belonging (super) above, whence the ablative adverb super-ne,
from above. He remarks that belonging to and coming from are
near akin, but the lost case-ending inclines the sense to from.
*The Goth. in-nana, within, ut-ana, without, hind-ana, behind, do
not have the plain sense from. Pott suggests comparison with
a preposition (Lettish xo, from). Here belong éast-an, from the
east; @ft-an, aft; feorr-an, from far; &c.? Compare also
Hence, Whence.+G, dannen, OHG. dannana, thence; from
G. base da-. Der. thence-forth, thence-forward, not in early use.

THEOCRACY, the government of a state immediately by God ;
the state so governed. (Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—Gk.
Geoxparia, the rule of God; Josephus, Against Apion, ii. 16 (Trench,
Study of Words). Formed (by analogy with demo-cracy, aristo-
eracy, &c.), from Gk. Oco-, for 6eds, a god; and -«paTia, -Kparea (as
in dnuo-xparia, Snuo-Kparea), i.e. government, power, from xparus,
strong, allied to E. hard. See Theism and Hards; and see
Democracy. Der. theocrat-ic, theocrat-ic-al,

THEODOLITE, an instrument used in surveying for observing
angles and distances. (Gk.) In Blount, ed. 1674. Certainly of
Gk. origin.
one. Hopton, in his Topographicall Glasse (1611) defines it as
‘an instrument consisting of a planisphere and an alhidada,’ i.e.
a revolving rule with sights, and spells it Theodelitus; N. and Q.
3S. iv. 51. In Pantometria, by T. Digges, 1571, ch. 27 of booki
is headed ‘The composition of the instrument called Theodelitus,’
and begins: ‘ It is but a circle divided into 360 grades or degrees,’ &c.
Prof. Adams informs me that the method of subdividing the degrees
of the circle was known to the Greeks, and is well explained in
Rathbone’s Surveying, ed. 1616. Also spelt theodolet, theodelet,
theodolit; the last occurs in 1784; N. and S. vii. 412.
It seems to be taken (we know not why) from the OF. Theodolet,
Theodelet, the name of a treatise, lit. ‘a work by Theodulus.’
Godefroy quotes ‘Cathonnet, Theodelet, bien gloses,’ i.e. a work by
Cato, a work by Theodulus, well glossed (1408). It was usual to
add -et in this manner; thus Esop-et meant a work by “sop, viz.
his ‘ Fables.’ One Theodolet, viz. the Ecloga Theoduli, is mentioned
by Rabelais (I. xiv); when Gargantua was instructed in Latin
literature, he read ‘ Donat, le Facet, Theodolet,’ &c. This Ecloga
Theoduli was a poem in Latin hexameters, containing a dispute
between Truth and Falsehood. But it is more likely that the re-
ference in this instance is to a mathematician named Theodulus;


The original theodolite was not quite like the present —


THERMOMETER


see N. and Q. 3S. vii. 337, 428, &c. The name Theodiilus meant
‘servant of God;’ from 6¢o-, for 6eds, God; and SodAos, a servant.
For the suffix -et, cf. Pamphlet.

THEHOGONY, the part of mythology which taught of the
origin of the gods. (L.—Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ‘The
theogony in Hesiod ;’ Selden, Illustrations to Drayton’s Polyolbion,
song Ir (R.). Englished from L. theogonia.=Gk. Oeoyovia, the
origin of the gods; the title of a poem by Hesiod. =Gk. 6c0-, for
eds, a god; and -yovia, origin, from ‘yov-, 2nd grade of the Gk.
base yev-, to beget, from 4/GEN, to beget. Cf. Gk. yévos, race,
éyevouny, I became. See Theism and Genus. Der. theogon-ist,
a writer on theogony.

THEOLOGY, the science which treats of the relations
between God and man. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. theologie, Chaucer,
Persones Tale, 3rd pt. of Penitence (Group I, 1043).—MF. theologie,
‘theology ;’ Cot.<L. theologia.—Gk. Geodoyia, a speaking about
God.= Gk. OeoAdyos, adj., speaking about God.—Gk. 6eo-, for Oeds,
a god; and Aoy-, 2nd grade of Aéyerv, to speak. See Theism and
Logic. Der. theologi-c, theologi-c-al, theologi-c-al-ly; theolog-ise,
ist; theologi-an,

THEORBO, a kind of lute. (Ital.) Formerly also theorba:
theorbo in Drayton, Polyolbion, song iv. 363.—Ital. ziorba; the th
being due to the occasional F. spelling ¢héorbe, for téorbe. Named
after its inventor (Zambaldi).

THEOREM, a proposition to be proved. (L.—Gk.) In Phillips,
ed. 1706. ‘More theoremes ;’ Marston, What You Will, A. iv. sc. 1.
= L. thedréma. = Gk. Oewpnyua, a spectacle; hence, a subject for con-
templation, principle, theorem. Formed with suffix -ya (-pat-) from
Gewpeiv, to look at, behold, view.—Gk. Oewpds, a spectator. = Gk.
6<@-yar, Oedo-par, 1 see; with suffix -pos (Idg.-ro-). See Theatre.
And see Theory.

THEORY, an exposition, speculation. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt
theorie in Minsheu. [The ME. word was ¢heorike, as in Chaucer,
On the Astrolabe, prol’59; Gower, C. A. iii. 86; bk. vii.61. This
is F, ¢heorique, sb. fem.=L. thedrica, adj. fem., the sb. ars, art, being
understood, See Nares.]—MF. theorie, ‘theory ;’ Cot.=—L. theoria.
= Gk. dewpia, a beholding, contemplation, speculation. = Gk. Oewpds,
aspectator;see Theorem, Der. ¢heor-ise, theor-ist ; also theor-et-ic,
Gk. Oewpnrids, adj.; theor-et-ic-al, -ly.

THERAPEUTIC, pertaining to the healing art. (F.—L. —Gk.)
Spelt therapeutick, Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674; and see Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. iv. c. 13. § 26.— MF. therapeutique, ‘ curing, healing ;’
Cot. =—L. therapeutica, fem. sing. of adj. therapeuticus, healing ; the
sb. ars, art, being understood.—Gk. Oepamevrixés, inclined to take
care of, tending. Gk. @epamevrns, one who waits on a great man,
one who attends to anything.= Gk. Oepamevery, to wait on, attend,
serve.=Gk. Oepan-, stem of Oépay, a rare sb., for which the more
usual form Oepdmwy, a servant, is used. The stem Oep-am- means,
literally, one who supports or assists; from base 0ep-=Idg. DHER,
to support; cf. Skt. dhy, to bear, maintain, support, dharitri, a
supporter. Der. therapeutic-s, s. pl.

THERE (1), in that place. (E.) ME. ther, Chaucer, C. T. 433
written ¢har in Barbour’s Bruce. AS. der, der, Grein, ii. 564; better
written J#r, dér, with long vowel. The base is Teut, THA=Idg.
TO, he, that; see That. March, A. S. Gram. § 252, explains the
suffix -r as the locative case of the comparative suffix -ro-; cf. Skt.
upa-ri, Gk. tre-p, L. supe-r, Goth. ufa-r, AS. ofe-r, E. ove-r.--Du.
peed Vere Dan. and Swed. der; Goth. thar; G. da, OHG.
dar. Cf. Here and Where.

THERE- (2), as a prefix. (E.) In there-fore, there-by, &c, It will
suffice to explain ¢here-fore. This is ME. therforé, with final -e, asin
Ormulum, 2431, where we find : ‘ therforé se33dé sho piss word.’ For
AS.d#r-,see above. For the prep. fore (allied to for), see Grein, ii. 320.
It thus appears that the final e in therefore is not wrong, but therefore
and therefor are equivalent. —B. Similar compounds are there-
about or (with added adverbial suffix -s) there-about-s, there-after,
there-at, there-by, there-from, there-in, there-of, there-on, there-through,
there-to, there-unto, there-upon, there-with. The construction with d#r
before a preposition occurs even in AS. ‘ When a thing is referred
to, Jér is generally substituted for Ait with a prep., the prep. being
joined on to the d#r; e. g. on hit becomes V#ron ; Curfon hie Szet of
beorhtum stane, gesetton hie d#ron sigora Wealdend=they cut it
[the tomb] ont of the bright rock, they placed in it the Lord of
victories ;’ Sweet, A. S. Grammar, 2nd ed. p. xci.

THERMOMETER, an instrument for measuring the variations
of temperature. (Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed, 1674; and in Evelyn’s
Diary, July 13, 1654. First invented atout 1597 (Haydn), Coined
from Gk. Oeppo-, for Oepyds, hot, warm; and pérpov, a measure, a
measurer, for which see Metre. B. The Gk. Oepyds is allied to
L. formus, warm, and to Skt. gharma-, heat, Der. thermometr-ic,
-ic-al, -ic-al-ly ; and see iso-therm-al,


THESAURUS


‘THESAURUS, a treasury of knowledge, esp. a dictionary.
(L.—Gk.) A doublet of Treasure, q. v.

THESE, pl. of This, q.v. ME. ¢hise, these, a new pl. of this.
The old pl. (AS. Aas) has become the mod. E. those. See Those.

THESIS, a statement laid down to be argued about, an essay on
a theme. (L.—Gk.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627.—L. thesis. —Gk. Oé€os,
a proposition, statement, thing laid down. For *6e-7-s, allied to
Ge-rés, placed, verbal adj. from the base 6e-, weaker form of 67-, as
in 7i-Oy-u, I put, place. See Theme. Der. anti-thesis, apo-thesis,
epen-thesis, hypo-thesis, meta-thesis, para-thesis, paren-thesis, pros-thesis,
pro-thesis, syn-thesis. From the same root are apo-the-c-ar-y, ana-the-
ma, epi-the-t, the-me, the-s-au-rus, treasure.

THEURGY, supernatural agency. (L.—Gk.) Rare. A name
applied to a kind of magic said to be performed by the operation of
gods and demons. Rich. gives an example from Hallywell’s Melam-
pronvea (1682), p. 51. Englished from L. theurgia, Latinised form
of Gk. Oeouvpyia, divine work, magic. =Gk. 6e0-, for Oeds, a god ; and
épy-ov, work, cognate with E. work. See Theism and Work.
Der. theurgi-c, theurgi-c-al.

THEWS, I. sb., sinews, strength, habits, manners. (E.) ‘ Thews
and limbs;’ Jul. Cees. i. 3. 813 cf. Haml. i. 3.12. ME. ewes, i.e.
habits, manners, Chaucer, C. T.9416 (E1542). ‘Alle gode Jeawes,’
all good virtues; Ancren Riwle, p. 240, 1. 16. The sing. Jeauwe
(dat. case) occurs in Layamon, 1. 6361, with the sense of sinew or
strength ; on which Sir F. Madden remarks: ‘This is the only
instance in the poem of the word being applied to bodily qualities.
Cf. Scotch thowles, feeble.” In other passages it occurs in the pl.
peauwes, pewes, \l. 2147, 6899, 7161, with the usual sense of mental
qualities. Of course, as in all metaphorical expressions, the sense
of ‘ bodily strength’ is the orig. one, and that of ‘ mental excellence’
is secondary. AS. Jéaw, habit, custom, behaviour; the pl. Jéawas
signifies manners; Grein, ii. 584.4-OSax. thaw, custom, habit.
OHG. dau, discipline. B. The Teut. base is ¢hau-, allied to Skt.
tavas, strong; zu, to be strong. The sense of bulk, strength, sur-
vives in Scotch thowless, thewless, thieveless, for which Jamieson gives
a wrong etymology (from AS. Aéow, a servant). The remarks in
Trench, Select Glossary, are due to a misapprehension of the facts.
From the Idg. 4/TEU, to be strong; see Thigh, Tumid.

THEY, used as pl. of he, she, it. (Scand.) The word they (in ME.)
is chiefly found in the Northern dialect ; Barbour uses nom. thai, gen.
thair, dat. and acc. thaim or tham, where Chaucer uses nom. they,
C. T. 18, gen. here, hire, hir, id. 588 (A 586), dat. and acc. hem, id.
18. The Ormulum has Ze}, they, Jep3re, their, of them, Je33m, dat.
and acc., them. Of these forms, hem survives only in the mod.
prov. E. ’em, as in ‘I saw ’em go;’ whilst the gen. here is lost.
Again, here and hem (AS. hira or heora, heom or him) are the true
forms, properly used as the pl. of ze, from the same base; whilst
they, their, them are really cases of the pl. of the def. article. B. The
use is Scand., not E.; the AS, usage confines these forms to the def.
article, but Icelandic usage allows them to be used for the personal
pronoun.=Icel. Jeir, nom.; Jeirra, gen.; peim, dat.; used to mean
they, their, them, as the pl. of hann, hon, he, she. The extension of
the use of dat. them to its use as an accusative is precisely parallel to
that of him, properly a dat. form only. The Icel. acc. is Ja, but
Danish and Swedish confuse dat. and acc. together. Cf. Dan. and
Swed. de, they; dem (dat. and acc.), them. Also Dan. deres, their,
theirs; Swed. deras, their, theirs.-AS. Ja, nom. ; Jara, J#ra, gen.;
pam, fem, dat. ; Grein, ii.568. [The AS. acc. was Jd, like the nom.;
cf. prov. E. ‘I saw they horses,’ i.e: those horses.] These forms Ja,
para, Bim, are cases of the plural of the def. art.; from Teut. THA
=Idg. TO, pronom. base of the 3rd person. See That. 4 This
explains they, their, them; their was orig. only the gen. pl., just like
our, your. Their-s occurs as fe}}ress, in the Ormulum, 2506, and
may be compared with Dan. deres, Swed. deras, theirs.

THICK, dense, compact, closely set. (E.) ME. Jikke, Chaucer,
C. T. 1058 (A 1056). AS. Aicce, thick, Grein, il. 590.4-OSax.
thikki; Du. dik; Icel. Aykkr; Dan. tyk; Swed. tjok, tjock; G. dick,
OHG. dicchi. B. The Teut. type is *¢hikwuz (Kluge). Further
allied to Gael. and Irish tiugh, thick, fat, dense, W. ¢ew, thick,
plump; from Celtic type *tegus. Further connexions doubtful.
Der. thick-ly, thick-ness, AS, picnes, Mark, iv. 5; thick-ish, thick-en,
Macb. iii. 2. 50, properly intransitive, like Goth. verbs in -naz,
formed by analogy with other verbs in -ez, or borrowed from Icel.
Jykkna, to become thick (cf. AS. Jiccian, to make thick, A®lfric’s
Gram, ed. Zupitza, p. 220); thick-et, L. L. L. iv. 2. 60, AS. iccet,
of which the pl. Aiccetu occurs in Ps, xxviii. (xxix.) 8 to translate L.
condensa ; thick-head-ed; thick-skin, sb, Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 13.

THIEF, one who steals. (E.) Pl. thieves. ME. Jeef, Wyclif,
Matt. xxvi. 55; pl. Jewes, id. Mark, xv. 27. AS. féof, pl. Jéofas,
_Grein, ii. 588.4-Du. dief; Icel. Ajafr; Dan. tyv; Swed. tjuf; G.
dieb, OHG. diub; Goth. thiubs. B. All from Teut. type *theufoz;


THINK 641


perhaps related to Lithuam. ¢upéi, to squat or crouch down (i.e.
to hide oneself) ; see Kluge. Der. theft, q. v.; thieve, AS. ge-Jéofian,
Laws of Ine, § 48, in Thorpe, Ancient Laws, i. 133; ¢hiev-ish,
Romeo, iv. 1. 79; thiev-er-y, Timon, iv. 3. 438, a coined word (with
F. suffix -erie).

THIGH, the thick upper part of the leg. (E.) ME. Jih, Laya-
mon, 26071 ; Jei}, Trevisa, iv. 185; but the guttural is often dropped,
and a common form is fi or Jy, Prompt. Parv., or Je, Havelok, 1950.
AS. Jédh, or Jeo, Grein, ii. 588.4Du. dij; Icel. 2/5, thigh, rump;
OHG. deoh, dioh. B. The Teut. type is *theukom, n. The orig.
sense is ‘ the fat, thick, plump part ;’ cf. Icel. 4j0,the rump. Closely
allied to Lithuan. zaukas, fat of animals, twkti, to become fat, sukinti,
to fatten ; Russ. tuk’, fat of animals, ¢uchnit(e), to fatten. From an.
Idg. base TEUK, extension of 4/TEU, to increase, be strong, swell;
see Thews, Thumb, Tumid.

THILL, the shaft of a cart. (E.) ‘Thill, the beam or draught-
tree of a cart or waggon, upon which the yoke hangs; Thiller or
Thill-horse, the horse that is put under the thill;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.’
Hence jill-horse, for thill-horse, Merch, Ven. ii. 2. 100; il for thill,
Troil. iii. 2. 48. ME. fille. ‘Thylle, of a carte, Temo; Thylle-
horse, Veredus;’ Prompt. Parv. AS. fille, glossed by tabulamen,
Voc. 282. 2, where the sense seems to be ‘board’ or ‘ trencher ;’
fille meant a thin slip of wood, whether used for a thill or for a
wooden platter. We also find: ‘ Tabulatorium, wah-fyling, id.
147. 31; also: ‘Area, breda filing, vel flor on t0 perscenne,’
i.e. a thilling of boards, or floor to thrash on, id. 14.4Icel. filja,
a plank, planking, esp. in a ship, a bench for rowers, deck;
Swed. zilja, a plank, floor; MHG. dille, OHG. dilla, thili, G. diele,
a board, plank; Du. deel, a plank. Teut. types *theljon-, f.,
*thelom, n. Allied to Olrish alam, earth, L. ¢ellus, earth, Lith.
tille, a little plank in the bottom of a boat, Skt. ¢ala-m, bottom,
floor, surface. See Deal (2). Der. thill-horse, as above.

THIMBLH, a metal cover for the finger, used in sewing, (E.)
Though now worn on the finger, similar protections were once worn
on the ¢humb, and the name was given accordingly. ME. imbil.
‘ Thymbyl, Theca;’ Prompt. Parv. Formed (with excrescent }, as
in thumb itself) from AS. Jymel, a thumb-stall; A. S. Leechdoms, ii.
150, 1.6. Teut. type *thimiloz. Formed with suffix -(2)lo-, indica-
tive of the agent, or in this case of the protector, from AS. piima, a
thumb; see Thumb. Thimble=thumb-er; formed by vowel-
change.

THIN, extended, slender, lean, fine. (E.) ME. inne, Chaucer,
C. T. 9556 (E 1682); Aunne, Ancren Riwle, p. 144, 1. 13. AS.
Pynne, Grein, ii. 613.-4-Du. dun ; Icel. Junnr; Dan. tynd (for *tynn) ;
Swed. tunn; G. diinn; OHG. dunni.4-W. teneu; Gael. and Irish
tana; Russ. tonkii; L. tenuis; Gk. tavads, slim; Skt. tanu-, thin ;
Pers. tanak, slender (Horn, § 397). B. All from the sense ‘ out-
stretched,” as in Gk. ravads. From 4/TEN, to stretch; cf. Skt.
tan, to stretch, Goth. uf-thanjan, AS. apenian, to stretch out, L. ten-
d-ere. Der. thin-ly, thineness; thinn-ish; thin, verb. From same
root are ten-uity, at-ten-uate, ex-ten-uate ; tena-ble, q. v.; tend (1), q.V-

THINE, THY, poss. pron. belonging to ‘ thee.” (E.) ME. thin,
with long z, and without final e; gen. thines, dat. thine, nom. and
ace. pl. thine; by loss of n, we also have ME. thi=mod. E. thy.!
The z was commonly retained before a vowel; ‘ This was ¢hiz ooth,'
and min also certeyn;’ Chaucer, C. T. 1141 (A 1139). ‘To me,
that am zy cosin and zhy brother,’ id. 1133 (A 1131). AS. di, poss.
pron., declined like an adjective; derived from 0%, gen. case of 0%,
thou; see Thou.-+lcel. Jinn, pin, Pitt, poss. pron. ; from fin, gen. of
fu; Dan, and Swed. din, poss. pron. ; G. dein, from deiner, gen. of
du; Goth. theins, from theina, gen. of thu. Der. thy-self (=thine
self), lit. ‘ self of thee.’

THING, an inanimate object. (E.) ME. Jing, Chaucer, C. T.
13865 (B 2127). AS. Jing, a thing; also, a cause, sake, office,
reason, council ; also written Jincg, pinc, Grein, ii. 592.4-Du. ding ;
Icel. Jing, a thing; also, an assembly, meeting, council; Dan. and.
Swed. ting, a thing; also, an assize; G. ding, OHG. dinc. Teut.
type *thingom,n. Prob. allied to Goth. theihs, season, time (hence,
time for meeting). And further, to AS. Aéon, pt. t. Aak, to prosper,
succeed, thrive. See Thee (2). Der. any-thing, ME. any Jing ; no-
thing, ME. no thing; also hus-tings, q. Vv.

THINK, to exercise the mind, judge, consider, suppose, purpose,
opine. (E.) ME. fenken, to think, suppose, also Jenchen, as in
Chaucer, C. T. 3253. Orig. distinct from the impers. verb. Jinken,
explained under Methinks; but confusion between the two was
easy andcommon. Thus, in P. Plowman, A. vi. 90, we have J Jenke,
written Z Jinke in the parallel passage, B. v. 609. [The pt.t. of both
verbs often appears as Joughte, pp. ought. Strictly, the pt. t. of
think should have become thoght, and of me-thinks should have become
me-thught, but the spellings ogh and ugh are confused in modern
E. under the form ough.] AS. Jencan, encean, to think, pt. t. Johte ;

Tt


642 THIRD


Grein, ii. 579.


know; Dan. tenke; Swed. tanka; G. denken, pt. t. dachte.4 Goth.
thaghjan (=thankjan), pt. t. thahta. Teut. type *thankjan; from
*‘hank, 2nd grade of the root *thenk, Idg. *teng; whence also OL.
tongére, to think (from the 2nd grade *fong). See Thank. Der.
thought, sb., q.v. Also be-think, vb. Allied to thank.

THIRD, the ordinal of the number three. (E.) For thrid. ME.
pridde, Chaucer, C. T, 12770 (C 836) ; spelt Jirde, Seven Sages, ed.
Wright, 1. 49. AS. Jridda, third; Grein, ii. 499.—AS. fAréo, fri,
three; see Three.4Du. derde; Icel. Jridi; Dan. tredje; Swed.
tredje; G. dritte; Goth. thridja.4-W. tryde, trydydd; Gael. and Irish
treas; Russ. tretii; Lithuan. tréczias; L. tertius; Gk. tpiros; Skt.
trtyja-. Der. third-ly; and see riding.

THIRL, to pierce. (E.) See Thrill.

THIRST, dryness, eager desire for drink, eager desire. (E.)
ME. Jurst, P. Plowman, B. xviii. 366; various readings Aruste, Jrist,
prest. AS. Jurst, Grein, ii. 611; also Jyrst, Jirst, id. 613 ; whence
pyrstan, verb, id.614.4+Du. dorst, whence dorsten, verb ; Icel. Jorsti,
whence Jyrsta, vb.; Dan. zérst, whence ¢érste, vb.; Swed. ¢érst,
whence Zérsta, vb.; G. durst, whence dirsten; Goth. Jaurstei, sb.
B. The Goth. thaurstei (=thorste?) is from the Goth. weak stem
thaurs-, as seen in -thaurs-ans, pp. of (ga)thairsan (pt. t. chars), to be
dry (with Goth. ai for Teut. e); the suffix -teéi=-ti. The Tent.
*thers-an-, vb., is cognate with Gk. répo-ec0a, to become dry, Tepo-
aivew,to dry up, wipe up, L. éorrére (for *torsére), to parch, terra
(for *tersa), dry ground; cf. Skt. ¢rsh, to thirst; ¢arsha-, thirst.
(o/TERS). Allied to Terrace and Torrid. Der. thirst, vb., as
above; thirst-y, AS. purstig, Grein, ii. 611; thirst-i-ly, thirst-i-ness.
And (from the same root) terr-ace, torr-id, test, toast, tur-een.

THIRTEEN, three and ten. (E.) ME. frettene, P. Plowman,
B. v. 214. AS. Aréoténe, Jréotyne, Grein, ii. 599.— AS. fréo, three ;
and én, tyn, ten; with pl. suffix -e. See Three and Ten.4+Du.
dertien ; Icel. frettin; Dan. tretten; Swed. tretton; G.dreizehn. All
similar compounds. Der. zhirteen-th, AS. Jréotéoda (Grein), Icel.
prettandi ; but the x, dropped in AS., has been restored.

THIRTY, three times ten. (E.) ME. Jritti, Wyclif, Luke, iii.
23; pretty, firty, Prompt. Parv., p. 492. AS. Aritig, Jrittig, Grein,
ii. 601; the change of long i to short 7 caused the doubling of the ¢.
=—AS. fri, variant of Aréo, three; and -tig, suffix denoting ‘ten;’
see further under Three and Ten.4+Du. dertig ; Icel. Arjatiu; Dan.
tredive; Swed. trettio; G. dreiszig. All similar compounds. Der.
thirti-eth, AS. pritigoda.

THIS, demonst. pron. denoting a thing near at hand. (E.) 1. SIN-
GULAR FORM. ME. ¢his, Chaucer, C. T. 1576 (A 1574) ; older form
thes, Ancren Riwle, p. 170, 1. 12. AS. des, masc.; déos, fem.; dis,
neuter; see Grein, ii. 581.4-Du. deze; Icel. Jessi, masc. and fem. ;
fetta, neuter; G. dieser; MHG. diser; OHG. deser. B. This is
most likely an emphatic form, due to suffixing an emphatic particle to
the pronominal base THA. 2. PLURAL FORMS. The mod. E.
pl. form is these; those being only used as the plural of that. This
distinction is unoriginal; both ¢hese and those are varying forms of
the plural of ¢his, as will at once appear by observing the numerous
examples supplied by Stratmann. B. The ME. word for ‘ those’
was tho or thoo, due to AS. da, nom. pl. of the def. article; in
accordance with this idiom, we still have the common prov. E. ‘they
horses’=those horses; it will be easily seen that the restriction of
the form ¢hose (with 0) to its modern use was due to the influence of
this older word ¢ho. For examples of tho=those, see Wyclif, Matt.
TV Tsuba ted y. It remains to give examples of the ME. pl.
forms of this. Layamon has Jas, Jes, pes, peos, pus, ll. 476, 1038,
2219, 3816; alle os=all these, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. Io, 1. 17; Jos
word=these words, Owl and Nightingale, 139; Aese wordes=these
words, P. Plowman, B. prol. 184; Ause wordes=these wordes, id. C.
i. 198. Cf. AS. das, d#s, these, pl. of des, this, Grein, ii. 581. Of
these forms, das became those, while d#s assisted in forming these ; we
also find ME. this-e, i. e. this, with the pl. suffix -e.

THISTLE, a prickly plant. (E.) ME. jJistil, spelt thystylle in
Prompt. Parv.; where we also find sowthystylle=sow-thistle. AS.
pistel ; ‘Cardu[uls, Jistel,’? Voc. 11. 13.4-Du. distel; Icel. istill;
Dan. tidsel ; Swed. tistel; G. distel; OHG. distil, distula. B. The
i was once long, as in some E. and G. dialects; cf. Somersets.
daash-l, a thistle, EF ries. dissel. Teut. types *Jistiloz, m.; *Sistila, f.
Perhaps allied to Goth. at-thinsan, to pull towards one; from
its catching the clothes of the passer-by. Cf. Tonsil. Der.
thistl-y.

THITHER, to that place. (E.) ME. thider (cf. ME. fader,
moder for mod. E. father, mother); Chaucer, C. T. 1265 (A 1263),
AS. dider, dyder, thither; Grein, ii. 590. Cf. Icel. Jadra, there;
Goth. thathré, thence. Skt. ¢atra, there, thither. Formed from
‘Teut. THA =Idg. TO, demonst. pronom. base, for which see That ;


A weak verb, allied to Aanc, sb., (1) a thought, |
(2) a thank ; see Thank.+Icel. Jekkja, old pt. t. atti, to perceive, |


THOSE


with a suffix like L. -troinul-tro. Compare Hither and Whither
Der. thither-ward, AS. Jiderweard, Grein, ii. 591.

THOLE (1), THO » 2 pin or peg in the side of a boat to
keep the oars in place. (E.) Commonly called a thole-pin, though
the addition of pin is needless. ME. thol, tol. ‘ Tholle, carte-pynne,
or tol-pyn, Cavilla;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘ Tholle, a cartpynne;’ Pals-
grave. AS. Jol; ‘Scalmus, thol,’ Corpus gloss., 1820 (8th cent.)--
Du. dol, ‘a thowl;’ Sewel; Icel. Aollr, a fir-tree,a young fir, also
a tree in general, as ask-follr, ash-tree, alm-follr, elm-tree; also a
wooden peg, the thole of a row-boat. Cf, Icel. Aoll (gen. fallar),
a young fir-tree; Dan. fol, a stopple, stopper, thole, pin; Swed. zal,
a pine-tree ; Swed. dial. ¢dlJ, the same (Rietz) ; Swed. zull, a thole.
And cf. Norweg. ¢all, toll, a fir-tree, esp. a young fir-tree; toll,
a thole (Aasen). B. Teut. base *thul-, weak grade allied to *}al-,
as in Jal-lar, gen. of Icel. Aéll (above); and perhaps to *thel-; see
Thill, Der. thole-pin.

THOLE (2), to endure, suffer. (E.) In Levins. Obsolete in
books, but a good word; it still occurs in prov. E. ‘ He that has a
good crop may ¢hole some thistles;’ North-Country Proverb, in
Brockett. ME. Jolien, Jolen, Chaucer, C. T. 7128 (D 1546). AS.
folian, to suffer, endure, tolerate; Grein, ii. 594.4-Icel. Aola, the same;
Dan. taale; Swed. tala; MHG. dolen, doln; OHG. dolén, whence
MHG. duld, G. geduld, patience; Goth. ¢hulan, __B. All from a
Teut. base *Jul-, weak grade of Idg. 4/TEL, to bear; allied to Skt.
tul, to lift, Gk. rAjvat, to suffer; L. tollere, tolerare; see further
under Tolerate.

THONG, a strip or strap of leather. (E.) Spelt thwangue in
Levins. For thwong; the w is now lost. ME. Awong, Wyclif, John,
i. 27; we also find Juong, Jong, Rob. of Glouc. p. 116, 1. 2497. AS.
wang ; in sced-fwang =shoe-thong, John, i. 27. The change from a
to o before » is common, as song<AS. sang; strong<AS. strang.
+Icel. Avengr, a thong, latchet ; esp. ofa shoe. From *thwang, 2nd
grade of Teut. *thwengan-, to constrain. The verb from which it is
derived will be found under T'winge, q. v.

THORAX, the chest of the body. (L.—Gk.) A medical term.
In Phillips, ed. 1706; Blount gives the adj. thorachique.—L. thorax
(gen. thdracis), the breast, chest, a breast-plate.=—Gk. Owpaf (gen.
Owpakos), a breast-plate; also, the part of the body covered by the
breast-plate. |B. The orig. sense is ‘ protector’ or ‘ defender ;’ the
Gk. @wpax- answers to Skt. dharaka-, a trunk or box for keeping
clothes, lit. a protector or preserver; 4/DHER, to bear, hold; see
Firm. Der. thoraci-c, from the decl. stem thdraci-.

THORN, a spine, sharp woody spine on the stem of a plant, a
spiny plant. (E.) ME. Jorn, Wyclif, Matt. xxvii. 29. AS. Jorn,
Matt. xxvii. 29.4+Du. doorn; Icel. Jorn; Dan. torn; Swed. térne;
G. dorn; Goth. thaurnus. And cf. Russ. ¢érn’, the black-thorn,
térnie, thorns; Polish tarn, a thorn. Also Skt. ¢yna-, a grass-blade.
Teut. type *thurnuz, m.; from the base THER=Idg. 4/TER, to


bore, pierce, so that the sense is‘ piercer.’ See further under Trite. ~


Der. thorn-y, cf. AS. Jorniht, thorny, Voc. 139.18; thorn-less. Also
thorn-back, the name of a fish which has spines on its back, ME.
pornebake, Havelok, 759.

THOROUGH, going through and through, complete, entire.
(E.)
spelt Jorz as early as in Havelok, 631, and Aurukh in the Ancren
Riwle, p. 92, 1.17. Shak. has thorough as a prep., Merry Wives, iv.
5. 32, Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 3 (where the folios and 2nd quarto have
through) ; also as anadv., ‘it pierced me thorough,’ Pericles, iv. 3. 35 3
and even as an adj., L. L. L. ii. 235. The use of it as an adj. pro-
bably arose from the use of throughly or thoroughly as an ady. in
place of the adverbial use of through or thorough. Cf. ‘ the feast was
throughly ended ;’ Spenser, F. Q. iv. 12. 18. We find thorough as a
sb., in the sense of ‘ passage,’ J. Bradford’s Works, i. 303 (Parker
Society). The old sense of through is still preserved in thorough-fare,
i.e. through fare. See Through. Der. thorough-ly, thorough-ness ;
thorough-bred, thorough-going, thorough-paced. Also thorough-bass,
which prob. means ¢hrough-bass, the bass being marked throughout
by figures placed below the notes; and ¢horough-fare, i. e. through-
fare, Cymb. i. 2, 11, Milton, P. L. x. 393.

THORP, THORPE, a village. (E.) Best spelt ¢horp. In
Fairfax, tr. of Tasso, b. xii, st. 32. ME. Jorp, Chaucer, C. T. 8075
(E199). AS. Jorp, asa place-name, A. S. Chron. an. 963. Itmeans
a village.-Du. dorp, a village; Icel. Jorp; Dan. torp, a hamlet ;
Swed. torp, a little farm, cottage; G. dorf; Goth. Jaurp, a field,
Nehem. v.16, . The Teut. type is *thurpo-. Allied to Lithuan.
troba, a building, house. Also to Irish treabh, ‘ a farmed village
[meaning, I suppose, a village round a farm], a tribe, family, clan ;’
Gael. ¢reabhair, s. pl. (used collectively), houses ; W. tre/, a home-
stead, hamlet, town; Idg. type *¢rebo-. Brugmann, i. § 553.

THOSE, now used as the pl. of that, but etymologically one of
the forms of the pl. of ¢his. (E.) See This.


It is merely a later form of the prep. through, which was ©


ae


THOU


“THOU, the second pers. pronoun. (E.) ME. thou. AS. dii.+
Icel. Ju; Goth. Ju; Dan., Swed., and G. du; (lost in Dutch); Irish
and Gael. 7u; W. #; Russ. tui; L. tu; Gk. ov, rv; Pers. ti;
Palmer’s Pers, Dict. col. 152; Skt. ¢vam (nom. case). Brugmann,
li. § 440. Der. thine, q.v., often shortened to thy.

THOUGH, on that condition, even if, notwithstanding. (Scand.)
It would be better to spell it thogh, in closer accordance with the pro-
nunciation; but it seems to have become a fashion in E. always to
write ough for ogh, and not to suffer ogh to appear. ME, thogh,
Chaucer, C. T. 727 (A 729); the Ellesmere MS. has thogh, the
Camb. MS. has ¢how, and the Petworth MS. has foo; the rest, though,
thoughe. [Older spellings, given by Stratmann, are Jah, Jaih, peah,
peh, pez, pa;, pauh, pau, pei, pei}, peizh, where some of the forms, as
peh, fe>, pet, peizh are from AS. déah, déh, Grein, ii. 582.) The
later ME. thogh answers to Icel. Jd.4-Du. doch, yet, but; Dan. dog;
Swed. dock; G. doch, OHG. doh; Goth. thauh. B. All from the
Teut. type *thau-h, in which -% is an enclitic, answering to L. -que,
Idg. *gue. *Thau- is probably related to the Skt. tw, ‘but.’ Inthe
D. and G. doch, the short o is due to loss of emphasis. Der.
al-though, q.v.

THOUGHT, the act or result of thinking, an idea, opinion,
notion. (E.) Better spelt thoght; the introduction of u is due to the
prevalence of forms with ough. ME. Ser RY the pl. Jou tis
is in Wyclif, 1 Cor. iii. 20. AS. Joht, also gefoht, as in Luke, ii. 35.
Lit. ‘a thing thought of, or thought upon ;’ cf. AS. iar! or Joht,
pp. of Jencan, to think ; Grein, ii. 579. See Think.+lIcel, Aatti,
potir, thought; allied to Jekkja, to know, pt. t. Aazti, the pp. not
being used; G. ge-dacht, cf. gedacht, pp. of denken, to think; Goth.
thiihtus, thought, allied to thugkjan, to seem, and thagkjan, to think ;
where thugk- (=thunk-) is the weak grade of thagk- (=thank-).
Der. thought-ful, ME. fohtful, Ormulum, 3423; thought-ful-ly,
thought-ful-ness ; thought-less, -less-ly, -less-ness.

THOUSAND, ten hundred. (E.) ME. Jousand, Chaucer, C. T.
1956 (A 1954). AS. pisend, Grein, ii. 611.44-Du. duizend; Icel.
pusund; also fishund, pishundrad ; Dan. tusind; Swed. tusen (for
tusend); G. tausend; Goth. thiisundi. We also find Lithuan. zuk-
stantis, a thousand; Russ. ¢uisiacha, a thousand. B. The word is
not yet explained; in Icel. Aus-hund, the syllable kund=AS. hund,
a hundred, and is due to popular etymology; which may, however,
prove to be correct. See the long discussion of Goth. thiisundi in
Schade, OHG. Dictionary. It is suggested that the sense was
‘ great hundred ;’ the prefix Jus- being allied to Skt. zavas, strong;
Streitberg, § 129 (5). Cf.also OPruss. téisimtons,a thousand. Der.
thousand-th, a late word, formed by analogy with four-th, &c.;
thousand-fold, ME. Jusendfald, St. Katherine, 2323.

THOWL, the same as Thole (1), q.v.

THRALL, a slave. (Scand.) ME. fral, Chaucer, C. T. 12123
(C 189). ONorthumb. drel, Mark, x. 44; not an AS. word, but
borrowed from Norse. =Icel. Jrell, a thrall, serf, slave; Dan. tral;
Swed. ¢ral. Teut. type *thrahiloz, m. (base *thrah-); and allied
‘to OHG. drigil, drégil, a slave, a thrall; lit. ‘a runner,’ i.e. one
who runs on messages. Formed from the Teut. base THREG, to
run, whence also Goth. thragjan, AS. frégan, to run. Cf. AS.
_prag, prah, a running, coutse. Further connexions uncertain;

perhaps allied to L. trahere, to draw, or to Celto-L. vertraga,
a greyhound; see Feuterer. The Gk. zpéx-ev, to run, is of un-
certain origin. Der. thral-dom, ME. Jraldom, Layamon, 29156;
from Icel. Jreldémr, thraldom ; the Icel. suffix -démr being the same
.as the AS. suffix -dom.

THRASH, THRESH, to beat out grain from the straw.” (E.)
‘The spelling with e is the older. ME. Jreschen, Jreshen, Chaucer,
‘C. T. 538 (A 536). For ferschen, by metathesis of r. AS. Jerscan,
firscan, Grein, ii. 581. A strong verb, pt. t. Aersc, pp. forscen.

The ME. pp. Aroschen occurs in the Ormulum, 1. 1530; and
idrosschen in the Ancren Riwle, p. 186, 1. 18.4-MDu. derschen
(Hexham); Du. dorschen; Icel. Areskja; Dan.terske; Swed. troska;
G. dreschen; Goth. thriskan, pt. t. thrask, pp. thruskans. B. All
from Teut. type *threskan-, pt. t. *thrask, pp. *thruskanoz; to beat
noisily. Allied to Lithuan. tarszkéti, to rattle, clap; ¢raszkéti, to
rattle, make a cracking noise; Russ. ¢reskai(e), to burst, crack,
crackle, tresk’, a crash. From an Idg. base *tresk-, to crack, burst,
crackle; then to strike, thrash. Fick cites OSlavonic ¢roska, Lat.
‘fulmen ;’ which suggests the rattling of thunder; whence, perhaps,
the noise of the flail. Der. thrash-er or thresh-er, ME. freschare,
-Prompt. Parv. ; thrash-ing or thresh-ing ; thrashing-floor or thresh-
ing-floor, Ruth, iii. 2. Also thresh-old, q.v.
HRASONICAL, vain-glorious. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. L. L.L.

v. 1.14; As You Like It, v. 2. 34. A coined word, as if with

suffix -al (L. -alis) from a L, adj. *Thrasonicus ; but the adj. really
in use was Thrasonianus, whence MF. Thrasonien, ‘ boasting, Thraso-
like;’ Cot. Formed, with suffix -cus (or -anus), from Thrasoni-,


THRESHOLD


dec]. stem of Thraso, the name of a bragging soldier in Terence’s
Eunuchus, Evidently coined from Gk. @pac-vs, bold, spirited.—
“7 DHERS, to be bold; cf. Skt. dharsha-, arrogance, dhysh, to be
bold; see Dare (1).

THRAVE, a number of sheaves of wheaf. (Scand.) See Nares.
Generally 12 or 24 sheaves. The pl. ¢hreaves=clusters or handfuls
of rushes, is in Chapman, Gent. Usher, ii. 1 (Bassiolo). ME. Jraue,
preue, P. Plowman, B, xvi. 55. The late AS. pl. Areues occurs in
Birch, Cart. Saxon. iii. 367.—Icel. Aref, a thrave, number of
sheaves; Dan. trave, a score of sheaves; Swed. ¢trafve, a pile of
wood, Cf. Swed. dial. trave, a thrave; trafve, 24 or 30 sheaves in
a shock (F. Moller); NFries. trav.

THREAD, a thin twisted line or cord, filament. (E.) ME.
preed, pred, Chaucer, C. T. 14393 (B 3665). The e was once long;
the Ellesmere and Hengwrt MSS. have the spelling tkreed. AS.
red, a thread; Atlfred, tr. of Boethius, c. xxix. § 1 (b. iii. pr. 5).
Lit. ‘that which is twisted.’=AS. Jrawan, to twist, also to throw;
see Throw.+Du. draad, thread ; cf. draaijen, to twist, turn; Icel.
praor; Dan. traad; Swed. trad; G. draht, drath, wire, thread ;
OHG. drat, wire. Teut. type *Jr@-duz; cf. Gk. tpij-o1s, a boring
through, a hole. Der. thread, verb, Rich. II, v. 5. 173 thread-y,
i.e. thread-like. Also thread-bare, so bare that the component
threads of the garment can be traced, ME. Jredbar (freedbare in the
Hengwrt MS.), Chaucer, C. T. 262 (A 260). Doublet, thrid.

THREAT, a menace. (E.) ME. fret; the dat. rete occurs in
The Owl and Nightingale, 1. 58; hence the verb Areten, Chaucer,
Legend of Good Women, 754 ; also the verbfretenen, Wyclif, Mark,
i. 25. [The latter is mod. E. threaten.| AS. Jréat, (1) a crowd,
crush, or throng of people, which is the usual meaning, Grein, ii.
598; also (2) a great pressure, calamity, trouble, and hence, a threat,
rebuke, Grein, ii. 598, 1.1. The orig. sense was a push as of a crowd,
hence pressure put upon any one. Cf. AS. fréat, pt. t. of the strong
verb fréotan, appearing only in the impersonal comp. Gfréotan, to
afflict, vex, lit. to press extremely, urge.-+-Icel. Arjdta, pt.t. Araut, pp.
frotinn, to fail, lack, come short; used impersonally. (The orig.
sense was perhaps to urge, trouble, whence the sb. Jraut, a hard task,
struggle) ; Goth. ¢hriutan, only in the comp. wsthriutan, to use de-
spitefully, trouble, vex greatly; OHG. driozan, in the comp.
ardriozan, MHG. erdriezen, impers. verb, to tire, vex; also appearing
in G. verdriessen (pt. t. verdross), to vex, trouble. B. Hence AS.
préat, a crush, Teut. type *thrautoz, m., is from Teut. *thraut, 2nd
grade of *threutan-, to crowd. Allied to L. triidere, to push, shove,
crowd, urge, press upon (cf. érudis, a pole to push with) ; also to
Russ, ¢rudit(e), to make a man work, to trouble, disturb, vex.
(4/ TREUD, to push, urge.) Der. threat, verb, K. John, iii. 1. 347,
ME, Jreten (as above), AS. Jréatian (weak verb), Grein, ii. 598;
also threat-en, ME. fretenen (as above), AS. fréatnian ; threat-en-ing,
threat-en-ing-ly. From the same base, abs-truse, de-trude, ex-trude,
in-trude, ob-trude, pro-trude. Cf. thrust.

THREE, two and one. (E.) ME. fre, Wyclif, Matt. xviii. 20.
AS. fréo, Matt. xviii. 20; other forms Jrio, Ari, Ary, Grein, ii. 599.
+Du. drie; Icel. Jrir (fem. Arjar, neut. Jriv) ; Dan. tre ; Swed. tre;
Goth. threis; G. drei.4-Irish, Gael., and W. zri; Russ. tri; L. érés,
neut, ¢ria; Gk. rpeis, neut. tpia; Lithuan. trys (stem éri-); Skt.
masc. nom. pl. ¢rayas. Idg. masc. nom. pl. *éreyes. Brugmann,
ii. § 167. . Der. three-fold, AS. frifeald, friefeald, Alfred, tr. of
Boethius, c. xxxiii. § 4 (b. iii. met. 9); ¢hree-score, Much Ado, i.
I. 201; also thri-ce, q.v.; and see thir-d, thir-teen, thir-ty. From
the same source are #ri-ad, tri-angle, tri-nity, tri-pos, &c. See Tri-.
Also tierce, terc-el, ter-t-ian, ter-t-i-ar-y.

THRENODY, a lament, song of lamentation. (Gk.) | Shak.
even ventures upon ¢hrene, Phoenix,].49. Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674,
has both ¢hrene and threnody. Englished from Gk. 6pnvq@dia, a
lamenting. Gk. @pijv-os, a wailing, lamenting, sound of wailing,
funeral dirge (cf. @pé-ouat, I cry aloud); and #57, an ode, from
deiderv, to sing. See Drone (1) and Ode.

THRESH, the same as Thrash, q.v.

THRESHOLD, a piece of wood or stone under the door or at
the entrance of a house. (E.) The word is to be divided thresh-old,
where -old was (by popular etymology) supposed to stand for wold
(wood). (Shak. has old =wold, K. Lear, iii. 4.125.) ME. Jreshwold,
reswold, Chaucer, C. T. 3482; resshewold, P. Plowman, B. v. 3573
priswald, Voc. 667. 14. AS. Jerscold, Deut. vi. 9 (where the w does
not appear; later form Jerscwald, as in ‘ Limen, Jerscwald ;’ Voc.
280. 15. Supposed to mean ‘the piece of wood which is beaten”
by the feet of those who enter the house, the thrash-wood.= AS,
persc-an, to thresh, thrash ; and wald, weald, a wood, hence a piece
of wood. B. But this was a popular etymology; King Alfred
has Jerscold simply; tr. of Gregory’s Pastoral Care, p. 77, 1. 22.
This form represents Teut. *Jresko-dlo- (Sievers) ; cf. OHG. drise-
u-fli, a threshold. Here *Jresko- is from Teut. baie to thrash ;

A


643


644 THRICE


but -d/o- represents the Idg. suffix -tro-. See my Principles of Eng.
Etymology, i. § 228 (#). The Icel. Jreskjéldr, a threshold, is spelt
in various ways; cf. Swed. zrdskel.

THRICH, three times. (E.) The final -ce is for s; it is a mere
device for showing that the final sound is voiceless, i.e. sounded as
s and not as z. So also the pl. of mous(e) is written mice; &c.
Thrice stands for thris, contracted form of ME. Jriés or Aryés, a word
which was formerly dissyllabic: ‘ And Aryés with hir sperés clater-
inge,’ Chaucer, C. T. 2956 (A 2954). B. Again, Jrie-s was
formed (with adverbial suffix -s, orig. the suffix of the gen. case) from
an older form Jrié, also dissyllabic ; the words on-ce, twi-ce originating
in a similar manner. The form frie is in Layamon, 17432, earlier
text; and Jries in the same, 26066, later text.— AS. Jriwa, thrice,
Exod. xxiil. 14; Grein, ii. 601.— AS. fri, three. See Three.

THRID, a thread. (E.) In Dryden, Hind and Panther, iii. 278.
The same as Thread, q.v. Der. thrid, verb, Dryden, Palamon and
Arcite, 1. 495.

THRIFT, frugality. (Scand.) ME. Jrift, Chaucer, C. T. 16893.
=Icel. Jrift, thrift, where the ¢ is added to the stem; we also find
prif, thriving condition, prosperity. —Icel. Jrif-, weak grade, as seen
in frif-inn, pp. of Arifa, only used in the reflex. Jrifask, to thrive ;
see Thrive. Cf. Dan. triv-else, prosperity, with a different suffix.
The suffix -¢ is from the Idg. suffix -to-. Cf. thef-t.

THRILL, THIRL, to pierce. (E.) Spenser uses thrill in the
unmetaphorical sense, to pierce with an arrow; F. Q. iii. 5. 20, iv. 7.
31; hence the metaphorical use, as in F. Q. iv. 1. 49. Thirl is an
older spelling of the same word. ‘ Thyrlyn, thryllyn, or peercyn,
Penetro, terebro, perforo;’ Prompt. Parv. ME. Jirlen, Chaucer,
C. T. 2712 (A 2710); jJrullen, Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 339;
purlen, Ancren Riwle, p. 392, 1. 24. AS. Ayrlian, to pierce through,
spelt Jirlian, Exod, xxi. 6, Levit. xxv. 10, Again, Ayrlian is a
shorter form for Jyrelian; we find the sb. Ayrel-ung, a piercing, in
®lfred, tr. of Gregory’s Past. Care, c. xxi, ed. Sweet, p. 153, last
line, and the verb durh-dyrelian, to pierce through (throygh-thirl),
two lines further on. The verb Jyrelian is a causal verb, from the
sb. Ayrel, a hole (caused by boring), A‘lfred, tr. of Boethius, c. xxxiv.
Rept (D. dil. pre 11). B. Lastly, Ayrel is also found as an adj.,
with the sense of bored or pierced. ‘ Gif monnes péoh bid Ayrel’
(various reading Jyrl) =if a man’s thigh be pierced ; Laws of A‘lfred,
§ 62, in Thorpe, Ancient Laws, i. 96. This is equivalent to the
cognate MHG. durchel, pierced, an adj. derived from durch, prep.,
through; similarly, AS. Ayrel stands for *Jyrhel (from *}urh-il-),
derived (with the usual vowel-change from u to y) from AS. Jurh,
through. y. We thus see that AS. Ayrl meant ‘ going through,’
and hence, ‘a hole ;’ whence the verb was formed. See Through.
Cf. Irish tar, through. @ The Du. drillen is from dril (MDu.
drille), a hole; and drille must have been a derivative from the old
form of Du. door, through; cf. OSaxon ¢hurh, through. Der.
thrill, sb.,a late word ; thrill-ing, pres. part. asadj. Also nos-tril, q.v.
Doublet, drill (from Dutch).

THRIVE, to prosper, flourish, be successful. (Scand.) ME.
priuen (with u=v), Chaucer, C. T. 3677 (A 3675); Havelok, 280;
Ormulum, 10868. A strong verb; pt. t. Jraf, Ormulum, 3182,
prof, Rob. of Glouc. p. 11,1. 240; pp. Jriuen.—Icel. Jrifa, to clutch,
grasp, grip, seize; hence Jrifask (with suffixed -sk =szk, self), lit. to
seize for oneself, to thrive. [It is suggested in the Icel. Dict. that
frifask is not connected with frifa, but the transition from ‘ seizing
to oneself’ to ‘thriving’ is easy, and, as both are strong verbs,
conjugated alike, it is hardly possible to separate them. Cf. Norw.
triva, to seize, trivast, to thrive; and Widegren has Swed. trifven,
thrifty, active, diligent, coinciding with the Icel. pp. Arifinn, from
frifa; and even Icel. Jrifinn also means ‘ thrifty.’] The pt. t. is
Preif, and the pp. Jrifinn; hence the sb. Arif, prosperity, and E.
thrif-t.4-Dan. trives, reflex. verb, to thrive ; whence ¢rivelse, pros-
perity ; Swed. trifvas, reflex. verb, to thrive ; cf. ¢refnad, prosperity.
Der. thriv-ing-ly; thrif-t, q.v.; thrif-ty, ME. Jrifty, Chaucer, C. T.
12905 (B 1165); ¢hrift-i-ly, thrift-i-ness; thrift-less, thrift-less-ly,
thrift-less, -ness.

THROAT, the forepart of the neck with the gullet and wind-
pipe, the gullet. (E.) ME. frote, Ancren Riwle, p. 216, 1.4. AS.
Arote, throat, Ailfred, tr. of Boethius, c. xxii, § 1 (bk. iii, pr. 1) ; also
protu, prota; ‘Guttur, Jrotu,’ Voc. 157. 41; *Guttur, Jrota,’ id.
306. 13.4-OHG. drozza, MHG. drozze, the throat ; whence G. drossel,
throat, throttle. B. Referred in Ettmiiller to AS. Aréotan (pp.
proten), to press; a verb treated of s.v. Threat. But it is more
likely that an initial s has been lost, and that AS. rote is allied to
Du. strot, the throat, MDnu. stroot, strot, ‘the throat or the gullet,’
Hexham, stroote, ‘the wesen [weasand] or the wind-pipe,’ id. So
also OFries. strotbolla=AS. frotbolla, the gullet or windpipe; and
cf. Ital. strozza, the gullet, a word of Teut. origin. We must there-
fore refer it to a Teut. base *stru¢-; anda connexion with E. strut


THROUGH


is possible. The reference may be to the ‘ prominence’ or swelling
in the throat below the chin. Cf. Icel. roti, a swelling; Jritza, to
swell. See Thropple. Der. ¢hrott-le, the wind-pipe, dimin. of
throat; thrott-le, verb, to press on the windpipe, ME. Jroélen,
Destruction of Troy, 12752. Also thropple, q.v.

THROB, to beat forcibly, as the heart. (E.) ME. Jrobben, rare.
‘With Arobbant herte’ =with throbbing heart; P. Plowman, A. xii.
48. The word must be either E. or Scand., as it begins with J; but
it appears neither in AS. nor in the Scand. languages. We must call
it E. B. Allied to Russ. ¢repet(e), palpitation, throbbing, trembling,
fear ; trepetat(e), to throb, palpitate with joy; and prob. to trepat(e),
to beat hemp, also to knock softly. Also to L. trepidus; see
Trepidation. Der. zhrob, sb., Spenser, Shep. Kal. May, 208.

THROEH, pang, pain, agony. (Scand.) ME. frowe. ‘ Throwe,
Erumpna;’ Prompt. Parv. And see Jrowes, pl., pangs, O. Eng.
Homilies, ed. Morris, ii. 181, 1. 2.—Icel. Ara, a throe, pang, long-
ing; Norw. zraa, longing, traa, to long for; MSwed. érd, longing,
tra, to long for, to pine away (Swed. ¢rana). Cf. OHG. dréa, burden,
suffering, druoén, drdén, to suffer; AS. Jrowian, to suffer. Base
*thraw-, from Idg. root *treu; cf. L. trux, fierce. See Truculent.
Cf. also Icel. Areyja, endurance, Jreyja, to long for.

THRONE, a royal seat, chair of state. (F.—L.—Gk.) Now
conformed to the Gk. spelling. ME. ¢rone, Wyclif, Matt. v. 34.—
OF. ¢rone (13th cent.), spelt zhrone in Cot.; mod. F. tréne.—L.
thronum, acc. of thronus, Matt. v. 34.—Gk. @pdvos, a seat, chair; lit.
a support. —4/DHER, to hold, support ; whence also Gk. Opavos, a
bench, Ion. @pHvvus, a stool.

THRONG, a great crowd of people. (E.) ME. rong, Allit.
Poems, ed. Morris, B. 135 ; Jrang, Pricke of Conscience, 4704. AS.
ge-frang, a throng, Grein, i. 473; where the common prefix ge-
makes no difference. AS. Jrang, 2nd grade of the strong vb. Jringan,
to crowd, to press (pp. Arungen), Mark, v. 24.-4-Du. drang, a crowd,
from dringen, to crowd; Icel. Jréng, a throng; G. drang, a throng,
from drang, 2nd grade of dringen (pp. drungen), to crowd, press.
Cf. Dan. trang, Swed. trdng, adj., pressed close, tight, proy. E.
throng, adj., busy; Goth. ¢hreihan (pp. thraihans), to throng, press
round (for *¢hrinhan). B. All from the Teut. strong verb *threnxan-,
to throng, from Idg. root *trenk; whence Lithuan. trenkti, to jolt, to
push, ¢ranksmas, a tumult; and even L. ¢runcus, maimed, mutilated.
Brugmann, i. § 144 (1). Der. throng, verb, ME. Jrongen, Morte
Arthure, ed. Brock, 3755.

THROPPLE, THRAPPLE, the wind-pipe. (E.) Spelt
thrapple by Johnson, who gives it as a Lowland Sc. word; better
thropple, see Halliwell and Jamieson. Halliwell gives also ¢hropple,
to throttle; a derived sense. Thropple is usually said to be a
corruption of AS. Arotbolla, the wind-pipe, also the gullet; which
requires rather violent treatment to reduce it to the required form.
The AS. Jrotbolla survived for a long time; Palsgrave gives:
‘ Throtegole or throtebole, neu de la gorge, gosier.’ The usual sense
of AS. bolla is ‘bowl;’ see Throat and Bowl (2), Bole.

THROSTLE, the song-thrush. (E.) ME. Jrustel, Chaucer,
C. T. 13703 (B 1963). ‘Mavis’ is glossed by ‘a throstel-kok’ in
Walter de Bibbesworth; Wright’s Voc. i. 164, 1.1. AS. rostle ;
‘ Merula, Jrostle,’ Voc. 286. 20; spelt Jrosle (by loss of #), id. 132. 25.
+MHG. zrostel. Teut. type *thrustla, fem.; Idg. type *tarzd-la, f.
Allied to L. turdus, a thrush ; also to Icel. Aréstr (gen. frastar), Swed.
and Norw. ¢rast, a thrush (from *Jrast, 2nd grade of a Teut. root
*prest); cf. OPruss. ¢resde, a thrush. Also, with initial s, Lith.
strazdas, m., strazda, f.,a thrush. See further under Thrush (1).
Throstle has a variant throshel, ME. thrusshil, Prompt. Parv. Brug-
mann, i. §§ 818 (2), 882.

THROTTLE, the wind-pipe. (E.) See Throat.

THROUGH, from beginning to end, from one side to the other,
from end to end. (E.) For the form thorough, see Thorough.
ME. Jurn, Juruh, Ancren Riwle, p. 92, ll. 12,17. Other forms are
pur}, purw, purch, purgh, porw, poruh, foru, &c.; see Stratmann,
Also fruh, Reliquize Antique, i. 102, by metathesis of r; and hence
mod. E. through. AS. Jurh, prep. and ady., through, Grein, li. 607,
610; ONorthumb. Jerk, Matt. xxvii. 18 (Lindisfarne MS.).4-Du.
door; G. durch, OHG. durh, duruh. Teut. type *Jurk. Allied to —
Goth. thairh (for *Jerh), through, B, The Goth. zhairko, a hole,
is prob. connected with ¢hairh; and the AS. fyrel, a hole, is a
derivative from jurh, through; as shown under Thrill, The
fundamental notion is that of boring or piercing; and we may
refer through to the 4/TER, to bore, as in L, ¢erere, to bore, Gk,
reipav (for *rép-yewv). See Trite. Cf. through with Irish far,
beyond, over, through, ¢ri, through, ¢air, beyond; L. ¢r-ans, across;
Skt. ¢iras, through, over. Brugmann, i. § 527. Der. through-ly,
thoroughly (see Thorough); through-out, ME. puruhut, Ancren
Riwle, p. 212, l. 23, with which cf. G. durckhaus, a similar compound,.
And see Throw.


THROW


THROW, to cast, to hurl. (E.) One sense of the word was to
twist or wind silk or thread ; hence #hrowster, asilk-winder ; ‘ Throw-
star, devideresse de soye;’ Palsgrave. The orig. sense was to turn,
‘twist, whirl ; hence a turner’s lathe is still called a throw (Halliwell).
iME. Jrowen, pt. t. rew, P. Plowman, B. xx. 163; pp. Arowen, Wyclif,
Matt. xiv. 24 (earlier version), now contracted to thrown. AS. Jrawan,
to twist, whirl, hurl; pt.t. Jréow, pp. drawen ; a verb which, strangely
enough, israre. ‘Contorqueo, ic samod Jrawe,’ i.e. I twist together,
occurs in /llfric’s Grammar, ed. Zupitza, p. 155, ]. 16. . The pt. t.
préow =turned itself, occurs in Aélfric’s Homilies, ii. 510, 1. 8. Leo
quotes, from various glossaries: ‘ge-fradwan, torquere; d-frawan,
‘crispare ; ed-}rawan, to twist double ; rawing-spinl, a throwing (or
winding) spindle.’ The orig. sense is still preserved in the derived
-word thread =that which is twisted. PB. Allied to G. drehen, OHG.
drajan, to turn, whirl, Du. draaijen, to turn, twist, whirl; *all from
Teut. base *Jr#-=Idg. base *tré-, as in Gk. tpn-rés, bored through,
Tpj-wa, a hole, rpy-ow, fut. of re-rpaive, to bore through., The
grade *ter occurs in L. ter-ere, Gk. teipew (for *rép-yew), to bore.
(ATER). Der. throw, sb., throw-er; and see threa-d.

THRUM (1), the tufted end of a weaver’s thread;" coarse yarn.
,(E.) See Thrum in Nares. In Shak. Mids. Nt. Dr. v. 291. , ME.
prum. ‘Thrumm, of a clothe, Filamen;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘‘ Hoc
licium, a throm;’ Voc. 728.17. AS. Arum, found in tunge-prum, a
‘ligament of the tongue; A. S. Leechdoms, i. p. Ixxiv. 1. 9; p. Ixx.
Jl. 9. Allied to Icel. Arémr (gen. Jramar), the edge, verge, brim of
a thing (hence the rough edge of a web); Norweg. trém, tram,
zrumm, edge, brim (Aasen); Swed. dial. tromm, trumm, trom, a
stump, the end ofa log (Rietz) ; MDu. drom, or drom-garen [thrum-
yarn}, ‘ thred on the shittle of a weaver ;’ Hexham; Du. dreum; G.
zrumm, end, thrum, stump of a tree. B. Allied to Gk. 7ép-ya,
end, L. ter-minus, end, limit; see Term. Der. thrumm-ed, Merry
Wives, iv. 2. 80.

THRUM (2), to strum, play noisy music. (Scand.) ‘ This single
thrumming of a fiddle;’? Beaum, and Fletcher, Woman’s Prize, i. 1
(Jaques). —Icel. Aruma, to rattle, to thunder; cf. Jrymr, an alarm, a
noise; Dan. ¢romme, a drum; Swed. trumma, to beat, todrum. See
Trumpet and Drum.

THRUSH (1), a small singing-bird. (E.) ME. fArusch. ‘ Bope
pe prusche and pe frustele’=both the thrush and throstle, Will. of
Palerne, 820. AS. Arysce, spelt Aryssce in Voc. 286. 23; Arisce, id.
260. 30.4--OHG. drosca, a thrush; whence G. drossel. B. The
AS. word answers to the Teut. type *thruskjon-, f. Allied to
Throstle, gq. v.

_THRUSH (2),a diseasemarked bysmall ulcerations in the mouth.
(Scand.) ‘ Thrush,a disease in the mouth, esp. of young children ;’
Phillips, ed, 1706. The form shows that the word is English or
Norse, as it begins with zk. From ONorse *ruskr, thrush ; whence
MDan. torsk, Dan. troske, the thrush on the tongue, Swed. forsk,
Swed. dial. ¢résk (Rietz) ; Norw. trausk, trosk, trésk, thrush (Ross).
Prob. the same as Norw. trausk, variant of frausk, frosk, a frog ;
frosk, the thrush. In the same way, Gk. Barpaxos and L, rana

meant (1) a frog, (2) a disease of the tongue (Falk).

THRUST, to push forcibly. (Scand.) ME. Jrusten, but more
commonly fristen, as in Havelok, 2019, and sometimes fresten, as in
Chaucer, C. T. 2614 (A 2612). The form thrust is properly of
Scand. origin.—Icel. Jrysta, to thrust, compress, press, force, com-
pel; Norw. ¢rysta, to thrust. The Teut. base is *Jrust, perhaps for
*prut-st ; prob. allied to Icel. Jraut, a struggle, and to L. trid-ere,
to thrust, to push. See Threat. Der. thrust, sb., Oth. v. 1. 24.

THUD, a dull sound resulting from a blow. (E.) In Burns, Battle
of Sheriffmuir, 1. 8. Also used by G. Douglas and others (Jamie-
son); and see Notes and Queries, 4S. i. 34, 115, 163, 231, 275.
Allied to AS. Ayddan, to strike, thrust, push.

THUG, an assassin. (Hindustani.) Modern.— Hind. thag, thug
(with cerebral ¢h), a cheat, knave, imposter, a robber who strangles
travellers; Marathi thak, ¢chag, the same; H. H. Wilson, Gloss. of
Indian Terms; p. 517. And see Yule.

THUMB, the short, thick finger of the hand. (E.) ME. fombe,
Chaucer, C. T. 565 (A 563); formed with excrescent 5 (after 7)
from the earlier Aume, Ancren Riwle, p. 18, 1. 14. AS. Aama, the
thumb; ‘Pollex, Juma,’ Voc. 40. 22.4-Du. duim; Swed. tumme;
OUG. dimo, G. daumen. Cf, Icel. Jumall, the thumb of a glove;
Dan, tommel-finger, thumb. _B. Teut. type *thi-mon-, m., thumb,
lit. ‘the thick finger;’ Fick, iii. 135. From Teut. base THEU=
4 TEU, to swell, grow large; see Tumid. Cf. Tuber. Der.
thumb-kin, a dimin, of thumb, but used as equivalent to thumb-screw,
an instrument of torture for compressing the thumb (Webster) ; thumb-
ring, 1 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 365; also thimb-le, q. v.

THUMMIM, perfection. (Heb.) We have urim and thummim,
Exod. xxviii. 30, Ezra, ii. 63, &c. The literal sense of these difficult
words is, probably, ‘fires (or lights) and perfections,’ but the Heb.


THWART 645.


pl. need not be exactly kept to in English; ‘light and perfection”
would probably be the best E. equivalent ; Smith, Dict. of the Bible.

— Heb. tummim, pl. of 16m, perfection, truth (with initial tax). — Heb.
root ¢amam, to be perfect. See Urim.

THUMP, to beat heavily. (E.) In Rich. III, v. 3. 334; and in
Spenser, F. Q. vi. 2. 10. ‘Thomp! thomp!’ Bale, Kynge Johan,
p. 53 (C.S.). An imitative word; from the sound of a blow. Cf.
EFries. dump, a thump; also Icel. dumpa, to thump, Swed. dial.
dompa, to thump, dumpa, to make a noise. Of imitative origin.
Der. thump, sb., thump-er.

THUNDER, the lond noise accompanying lightning. (E.) For
thuner; the d after x is excrescent. ME. foner, Iwain and Gawain,
1, 370, in Ritson, Met. Romances, i. 16; more commonly onder or

under, Chaucer, C. T. 494, 6314 (A 492, D 732). AS. Junor,
thunder, Grein, ii. 606. Allied to AS. Aunian, to rattle, thunder;
Grein, ii. 606. Cf. AS. ge-jun, a loud noise, in a gloss (Bosworth).
+ Du. donder ; Icel. Jarr (for Jonr), Thor, the god of thunder; with
which cf. Dan. torden, Swed. tordén, thunder; G. donner, OHG.
thonar, thunder. . All from Tent. base *¢hun-, to thunder (Fick,
iii. 130) =Idg. *tun-. We have further allied words in L. ¢onare, to
thunder, ¢onitru, thunder, Skt. tan, to sound; from Idg. 4/TEN, to
sound, by-form of 4/STEN, to thunder, make a noise, appearing in
Skt. stan, to sound, sigh, thunder, stanita-, thunder, stanana-, sound,
groaning, Gk, orév-ev, to groan, Lithuan. stenéti, to groan, Russ.
stenat(e), stonat(e), to groan, moan; see Stun and Stentor. Der.
thunder, verb, AS, Junrian, Grein; thunder-bolt, Temp. ii. 2. 38 (see
Bolt); thunder-stone, J. Cees. i. 3. 49; thunder-stroke, Temp. ii. 1.
204; thunder-struck, Milton, P. L. vi. 858; thunder-ous, id. P. L. x.
702; thunder-er, id. P. L. vi. 491. Also Thurs-day, q.v. See
Brugmann, i. § 818(2).

THURIBLE, a censer for burning frankincense. (L.—Gk.) ‘A
pot of manna, or ¢hurible;’ Bp. Taylor, Rule of Conscience, b. ii.
c. 2 (R.). Phillips, ed. 1706, has only the L. form thuribulum.
Englished from L. zhiribulum, also spelt turibulum, a vessel for hold-
ing frankincense. = L. ¢hiri-, tuiri-, decl. stem of thiis or tus, frankin-
cense; with suffix -bulum, as in fundi-bulum (from fundere). This
sb, his is not a true L. word, but borrowed from Gk. 6v-és, incense.

—Gk. 6v-e:v, to offer part of a meal to the gods, by burning it, to
sacrifice. Cf. Skt. dhuma-, smoke; L. fiimus, smoke, which is the
native L, word from the same root as Gk. 6ués. = 4/ DHEU, to shake,
blow, fan a flame. See Fume. Der. (from L. thiri-), thuri-fer,
one who carries incense; where the suffix -fer = bearing, from ferre,
to bear. From the same root as thyme and fume.

THURSDAY, the fifth day of the week. (Scand.) The day of
the god of thunder, the Scand. Thor. ME. Jurs-dei, Ancren Riwle,
p- 40, l. 7; forsday, Joresday, Jursday, P. Plowman, B, xvi. 140, and
footnotes; (spelt Aunres-dei, Layamon, 13929).—AS. Jures deg,
Thursday. = AS. Aires, gen. of fir, Thor; and deg, day. Borrowed
from Icel. Jors-dagr, Thursday; from Jérs, gen. case of Jorr, Thor,
thunder; dagr, a day. So also are compounded Du. Donderdag,
Swed. and Dan. Torsdag, G. Donnerstag and the (native) AS. Junres
deg. All aretranslations of L. diés Iouis, Jupiter’sday. See Sweet,
Hist. E. Sounds, § 578. And see Thunder.

THUS, in this manner. (E.) ME. thus, Chaucer, C. T. 1880


(A 1878). AS. dus, thus, so, Grein, ii. 611.4-OFries. and OSax.
thus, thus; Du. dus. Of obscure origin; prob. allied to That; and
perhaps to This.


THWACK, WHACK, to beat severely. (E.) In Levins, and
in Shak. Cor. iv. 5. 189. ‘If it be a thwack’ [blow]; Beaum. and
Fletcher, Nice Valour, iii. 2 (Lapet). Tusser has thwack as a verb;
Husbandry, § 18, st. 3 (E.D.S.). Prob.. of imitative origin. Cf.
Icel. Ajokka, to thwack, thump; Ajaka, the same; proy. G. wackeln,
to cudgel. B. For the change from thwack to whack, see Whittle.
@ It does not agree, in form or sense, with ME. zhakken, to stroke,
asin: ‘When Nicholas had doon thus euery del,.And ¢hakked her
about the lendes wel;’ Chaucer, C. T. 3304; AS. Aaccian, to stroke,
said of stroking a horse; Alfred, tr. of Gregory’s Past. Care, c. 41,
ed. Sweet, p. 303, 1. Io.

THWAITE, a clearing. (Scand.) Common in place-names, in
Cumberland, as in Esthwaite, Legberthwaite, &c.; see Taylor's
Words and Places, c.8; Gent. Maga. Nov. 1856, p. 530. InN.
and Q. 3S. x. 68, an example of thwayt is given, as occurring in the.
16th century.—Icel. Aveit, a paddock, &c., orig. a ‘cutting,’ i.e. a
clearing ina wood. As if from *Jveit, 2nd grade of a strong verb
*bvita, to cut; not found, but the same word as AS. Awitan, to cut;
for which see Whittle (1). Cf. Norw. ¢veit, a cut, also a small
clear space (Aasen) ; prov. Sw. ¢veit, a chip, -tveta, a suffix in place-
names (Rietz) ; Dan. dial. ved. .And see Doit.

THWART, transversely, transverse. (Scand.) Properly an adv.,
as used by Spenser: ‘ Yet whether ¢hwart or flatly it did lyte’ [light,
alight]; F. Q. vi. 6,30, He also has it as a prep.: ‘¢hwart her


THWITE


Niorse’=across her horse, F. Q. iii. 7. 43. The ME. use shows
clearly that the word was used adyerbially, esp. in certain phrases,
and then as an adj. ; the verbal use was the latest of all. ME. Awert,
pwart. ‘Andelong, nouht ouer-Awert’ =endlong, not across; Have-
lok, 2822. ‘ Ouerthwart and endelong’ =across and endlong, Chaucer,
C. T. 1993; Awertouer, Ancren Riwle, p. 82,1. 12; Awert ouer Je
ilond, Trevisa, v. 225; ‘His herte 80 wurd dwert’=his heart then
became perverse, Genesis and Exodus, 3099. The word is of Scand.
origin, as it is only thus that the final -t can be explained. The AS.
for ‘perverse’ is Aweorh, Grein, ii. 612, cognate with which is Icel.
fverr, masc., the neut. being Avert. The sense of Averr is across,
transverse, whence wm Jvert=across, athwart; taka Jvert, to take
athwart, to deny flatly; storm mikinn ok vedr Jvert=a great storm
and adverse winds.+Dan. iver, adj., transverse; tvert, adv., across ;
Swed. ¢vdr, adj., cross, unfriendly, ¢vdrt,adv., rudely. Allied to Du.
dwars, adj. and adv., cross, crossly; AS. Aweorh, perverse, transverse
(as above); MHG. dwerch, twerch, G. zwerch, ady., across, awry,
askance, obliquely; Goth. ¢hwairhs, cross, angry.  . All from
Teut. base *Jwerh, transverse, also cross, angry; answering to Idg.
base *twerg. Allied to L. ¢orquére, to twist; Skt. tarku-, a spindle.
Brugmann, i. § 593 (3). Allied to Twirl; and see Torsion.
Der. thwart, verb, ME. Awerten, Genesis and Exodus, 1324; also
a-thwart, q.v. And see Queer.

THWITEH, to cut. (E.) Obsolete.
Thwaite and Whittle.

THY, shorter form of Thine, q.v. (E.) Der. zhy-self, AS. pin
self, where both Jim and self are declined, the gen. being ines selfes;
see Grein, ii. 427, s. v. self.

THYME, a fragrant plant. (F.—L.—Gk.) The this pronounced
as t, because the word was borrowed from F. at an early period.
ME. tyme, Prompt. Parv., p. 494.— OF. tym, F. thym, ‘the herb time;’
Cot.—L. thymum, acc. of thymus, thyme.—Gk. Ovpos, Odpor, thyme ;
from its sweet smell; cf. Gk. @vos, incense, and L. fumus, smoke. See
Thurible. (4/DHEU). Der. thym-y, Gay, Fable 22,1. 11.

THYROID, a term in anatomy. (Gk.) Lit. ‘shield-shaped.’
For thyreoid.=—Gk. Ovpeoeins, shield-shaped (Galen). = Gk. Oupeo-, for
Oupeds, a stone against a door; also, ashield, from @vpa, a door; and
eidos, form. See Door and Idyll.

THYRSUS, a long wand, an attribute or emblem of Dionysus or
Bacchus. (L.—Gk.) Herrick has ¢hyrse: ‘Shake the ¢hyrse,” A
Lyrick to Mirth, 1. 8.—L. ¢hyrsus, a stalk, stem.=Gk. Ovpcos, the
same. See Torso.


646


AS. Awitan, to cut. See


leat a


TIARA, a round wreathed ornament for the head. (L.—Gk.—
Pers.?) In Dryden, tr. of Virgil, vii. 337; and used by Tyndale;
see Index to Parker Soc. publications. [The form #ar in Milton,
P. L. iii. 625, is from F. tare, given in Cotgrave.]—L. tiara, Virg.
fEn. vii. 247.—Gk. tidpa, tiapas, the Persian head-dress, esp. on
great occasions; see Herodotus, i. 132, vii. 61, vili. 120 ; Xenophon,
Anab, ii. 5. 23. And see Smith’s Dict. of Antiquities. B. Clearly
not a Gk. word, and presumably of Persian origin. The modern
name is Pers. ¢a@j, ‘a crown, a diadem, a crest ;’ see Rich. Pers. Dict.
p- 351, where the tiara is described. Cf. tajwar, ‘wearing a crown,
crowned ;’ id. p. 352.

TIBERT, a name for a cat. (F.—Teut.) Alluded to as Tybalt
in Shak. Romeo, iii. 1. 80. See Nares. ‘ T'ybert the catte;’ Caxton,
tr. of Reynard the Fox, ch. iii. Low G. Tibeert (Willem, author of
Reynard). This answers to AS. Théod-beorht, from théod, people,
and beorht, bright. B. But Tybalt is rather from OF. Thibaut, a
form of Theobald, answering to AS. Théod-beald, from beald, bold.
See Teutonic; and Bright, Bold.

TIBIA, the large bone of the leg. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706. A
medical term. = L. ¢ibia, the shin-bone. Der. ¢ibi-al.

TIC, a convulsive motion of certain muscles, esp. of the face, a
twitching. (F.—Teut.) Borrowed from F. tic, a twitching; and
chiefly used of the tic doloureux, painful twitching, the name of a
nervous disease ; where doloureux=L. dolordsus, painful, from dolor,
pain. The F. ¢ic was formerly esp. used with respect to a twitching
of the muscles of horses (see Littré), and is the same word as MF,
ticqg, or tiguet, ‘a disease which, on a sudden stopping a horses
breath, makes him to stop and stand still ;’ Cot. Cf. prés du tiquet
de la mort, ‘near his last gasp ;’ id. The F. zic also means a vicious
habit ; cf. Ital. tiechio, a ridiculous habit, whim, caprice. B. Of
Teutonic origin; guided by the etymology of caprice, Diez suggests
a prob. origin from OHG. zikin, a kid, dimin. of OHG. ziga, G.


TIDINGS


ziege, a goat, cognate with AS. ticcen, a goat, Gen. xxxviil, 19.
y. But rather from MHG. ¢uc, a quick movement, or Low G. tukken,
to twitch; perhaps allied to Low G. twikken, to twitch. And see
Tick (4).

TICK (1), a small insect infesting dogs, &c. (E.) °A tick in a
sheep ;’ Troil. iii. 3. 315. ME. tyke (dat. case), in Polit. Songs,
p- 238, 1. 4, ina poem of the time of Edw. II. Spelt teke, Voc. 565.
47. AS, ticia, Erfurt Glossary, 1130. Hence the F. ¢igue was
borrowed.4-MDu. éeke, ‘a tike, or a doggs-lowse;” Hexham ; Low
G. teke, tike; G. ziicke, zecke, a tick (whence Ital. zecca). Allied to
Lith. dygus, sharp, dég-ti, to sting (Franck).

TICK (2), the cover into which feathers are put, to serve for a
bed. (L.—Gk.) ‘Quilts, zicks, and mattrasses;’ Holland. tr. of
Pliny, b. xix, c.1.§ 2. ‘ And of federbeddes rypped the tekys & helde
theym in the wynde, that the fethers myght be blowyn away ;’
Fabyan’s Chron., an. 1305-6, fol. Ixxx; ed. Ellis, p. 414. Spelt
ticke in Palsgrave. The spelling teke used by Fabyan is Englished
from L. théca, a case, which became Late L. ¢écha, a linen case, a
tick (Ducange) ; also ¢éca, as in Prompt. Pary.,s.v. ¢eye. ‘ The teke
of a bed, Teca culcitaria,’ Levins; the L.¢h being sounded as #.
[From the same L. théca was derived the F. aie, spelt taye in Cot-
graye, and explained as ‘any filme or thin skin,’ whence une taye.
d@’oreiller, ‘a pillowbeer,’ i.e. a pillow-case.]—=Gk. @nxn, a case to
put anything into; derived from the base 67- as seen in Ti-Oy-pu,
I place, put.=4/DHE, to put; see Theme. q The Du. tik,
a tick, is likewise from L. théca. Der. tick-ing.

TICK (3), to make a slight recurring noise, to beat as a watch.
(E.) Todd cites from Ray, Remains, p. 324, ‘the leisurely and con-
stant tick of the death-watch.’ The word is prob. imitative, to ex-
press the clicking sound, cf. click; or it may have been suggested
by Tick (4),q.v. Cf. G, ticktack, pit-a-pat; F. tictac, the ticking
of a clock. \

TICK (4), to touch lightly. (E.) There isa game called ¢ig, in
which children endeavour to ¢ouch each other; see Halliwell. This
was formerly called tick. ‘At hood-wink, barley-break, at tick, or
prison-base ;’ Drayton, Polyolbion, song 30, 1.132. ME. tek, a light
touch. ‘Tek, or lytylle towche, Tactulus;” Prompt. Parv. Not
found earlier, except in the frequentative form éikelen; see Tickle.+
Du. tik, a touch, pat, tick; tikken, to pat, to tick; Norw. tikka, to
touch lightly ; Low G. tikk, a light touch with the tip of the finger ;
metaphorically, a moment of time. ‘Zk quam up den Tikk daar, I
came there just in the nick oftime;’ Bremen Worterbuch. . Ap-
parently a lighter form of the Teut. base */ak-, to touch, just as zip
(in 4ip and run) is a weakened form of tap, made by the substitution
of a lighter vowel. See Take. Der. tick-le, q.v.

TICK (5), credit; see Ticket.


’ TICKET, a bill stuck up, a marked card, a token. (F.—G.) In


Minsheu, ed. 1627, and in Cotgrave.—MF. etiquet, ‘a little note,
breviate, bill or ticket; especially such a one as is stuck up on the
gate of a court, &c., signifying the seizure, &c. of an inheritance by
order of justice;’ Cot. This is the masc. form of étiquette (formerly
estiquete, Littré), a ticket.—G. stecken, to stick, put, set, fix; allied
to E. Stick, q.v. And see Etiquette. Der. tick-et, vb. Also
tick, credit, by contraction for ticket; ‘taking things to be put into a
bill, was taking them on ticket, since corrupted into tick,’ Nares ; he
gives examples, showing that ¢ick occurs as early as 1668, and that
the phrases upon ticket and on ticket were in use.

TICKLE, to touch slightly so as to cause to laugh. (E.) ME.
tikelen, tiklen, Chaucer, C. T. 6053 (D 471). Not found earlier, but
the frequentative from the base zék-, to touch lightly ; see Tick (4).
We also find ME. Zikel, adj., unstable, ticklish, easily moved by a
touch, Chaucer, C. T. 3428; from the same source. Cf. Icel. hitla,
to tickle ; similarly formed from a base *kit-. Der. tickl-er ; tickl-ish,
Troil. iv. 5. 61, formed by adding -ish to ME. tikel above; tickl-ish-
ly, -ness.

TIDE, season, time, hour; flux or reflux of the sea. (E.) ME.
tide, Chaucer, C. T. 4930 (B 510); the usual sense is ‘season’ or
hour ; hence the time between flux and reflux of the sea, and, finally,
the flux or reflux itself. AS. tid, time, hour, Mark, xiii. 33.4-Du.
tijd; Icel. #0; Dan. and Swed. tid; G. zeit; OHG. zit. p. All
from Teut. type *#i-di-, time, division of time, portion of time.
Allied to Time, q.v. Der. fide, vb., to happen, Mids. Nt. Dr.
v. 205, ME. tiden, Chaucer, C. T. 4757 (B 337), AS. ge-tidan, to
happen, John, v. 14; hence be-tide, q. v. Also morning-tide, morrow-
tide, even-tide, harvest-tide, &c.; tide-mill, tide-table ; tide-waiter, an
officer who waits for the arrival of vessels with the ide, to secure pay-
ment of duties ; ¢ide-way ; tid-al, adj., tide-less ; tid-ings, tid-y.

TIDINGS, things that happen; usually, information respecting
things that happen. (Scand.) Not an E. word, but adapted from
Norse. ME. tidinde, Layamon, 2052, altered in the later text to
tidinge; spelt tipennde (for tipende), Ormulum, dedication, 1. 158.


TIDY?


AS. tidung, tidings; A. S. Chron. an. 995. —Icel. ¢idindi, neut. pl.,
tidings, news; also spelt ¢idenda, The word may have originated
from a pres. part. *tidandi of a verb *¢ida, to happen, with the same
sense as AS, zidan; and this verb is from Icel. i, sb., tide, time,
cognate with AS. tid; see Tide. The finals is an E. addition, to
show that the word is a pl. form; the ME. tiding or tithing (without
s) is not uncommon; see Chaucer, C. T. 5146 (B 726). Cf. Dan.
tidende, tidings, news ; Du. tijding ; G. zeitung. Noreen, § 150 (2).

TIDY, seasonable, hence, appropriate, neat. (E.) ME. tidy.
‘Tidy men;’ P. Plowman, B. ix. 104; ‘fe tidy child;’ Will. of
Palerne, 160. Formed with suffix -y (<AS. -ig) from ME. tid (AS.
tid), time; see Tide.4Du. tijdig, timely, from tijd; Dan. and
Swed. tidig, timely, from tid; G. zeitig. Der. tidi-ness.

TIE, a fastening, band; to fasten, bind. (E.) 1. ME, ti3en, verb,
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, A. 464; tyex, P. Plowman, B. i. 96; tei3en,
teyen, id. A. 94. The ME. forms ti3en, tyen answer to AS, tiegan, to
tie, fasten, spelt tigan, Matt. xxi. 2. The forms ¢eijen, teyen answer
to an Anglian form ¢égan, 2. The verb is an unoriginal form, due to
the sb. teze. ‘ And ¢ezex heom to-gadere mid guldene zejen’ = and tie
them together with golden ties; Layamon, 20997, 20998. The cor-
responding AS, word is /éag, or rather ¢éah (stem ¢éag-), a rope; see
Grein. Again, weread : ‘habbad langne ¢ige to geléafan trimminge’
=they have a long-lasting tie for the establishment of the faith ;
Ailfric, Of the New Test., ed. De L’Isle, p. 27, last line; here ¢ige
=tyge (with mutation). Cf. Icel. taug, a tie, string; tygill, a string.
B. The form zé@ah corresponds to téah, pt. s. of téohan, to tow, pull,
draw, drag; so that a ¢ie means that which draws things together.
For the strong verb ¢éohax or téon (pt. t. éah, pl. tugon, pp. togen),
see Grein, ii. 527. It is cognate with Goth. tiuhan (pt. t. taxh, pp.
tauhans), to tow, tug, pull, and toG.ziehen. See further under Tow
(1). y. Thus #ie, vb., is from ¢ie, sb.; and the latter is ultimately
from Teut. *tawk, 2nd grade of the Teut. base TEUH = Idg. 4/DEUK,
asin L. dicere, to draw. Cf. Tether.

TIER, a rank, row. (F.—Teut.?) ‘ Tire (or teer of ordnance, as
the seamen pronounce it), a set of great guns on both sides of a ship,
lying in a rank,’ &c.; Phillips, ed. 1706. Spelt tire, with the same
sense of ‘row of guns,’ in Milton, P. L. vi. 605. We find ‘tyres of
batterie,’ i.e. rounds of shot, Life of Lord Grey (ab. 1575), p. 20
(Camden Soc.). Also‘ tyre of ordinance,’ Florio, s. v. tiro. = OF. tire,
tiere,a rank, row, series (Godefroy) ; cf. Prov. tietra, mod. Prov. téero,
tieiro, a row, series. Perhaps of Teut. origin; see Korting, § 9464.
And cf. attire, q.v. J Distinct from Late L. tirare, to draw, pull,
extend, hurl; whence also Ital. ¢irare, Span. Port. Proy. tirar.

TIERCE, TERCE, one of the canonical hours, a cask holding
a third of a pipe; a sequence of three cards of a colour; a thrust in
fencing. (F.—L.) In all its senses, it meant orig. ‘third;’ as the
third hour, third of a pipe, third card, third sort of thrust. ME.
tierce; ‘ At howre of tyerse,’ Myrour of Our Lady, ed. Blunt, p. 13,
1. 21; spelt ¢zerce, Wyclif’s Works, ed. Matthew, p. 41.—F. tiers,
masc., tierce, fem., ‘third ;’ tiers, m., ‘a tierce, third, third part ;’
Cot.=—L. tertius, masc., tertia, fem., third; the ordinal corresponding
to trés, three, which is cognate with E. Three, q. v.

TIERCEL, the same as Tercel, q. v.

TIFF (1), to deck, dress out. (F.—O. LowG.) ME. tiffen ; Will.
of Palerne, 1. 1725; tiffung, finery, Ancren Riwle, p. 420, note a.
= OF. and MF. tiffer, tifer (more commonly atiffer, attiffer), ‘to deck,
prancke, trick, trim, adorn;” Cot. Of Low G. origin; cf. Du. ippen,
to cut, clip (lit. to cut off the ¢ip of the hair, to trim) ; Low G. tippen,
to touch lightly, as with the tips of the fingers. These verbs are
from Du, tip, Low G. tipp, sb. a tip. See Tip (1). Cf. prov. E.
tippy, smart, fine (Brockett, Halliwell). So also Swed. tippa, to
touch gently, from “pp, sb. See F. attiffer in Scheler.

TIFF (2), a pet, fit of ill-humour; also, liquor, drink. (Scand.)
‘My lord and I have had another little—#i7, shall I call it? it came
not up to a quarrel ;’ Richardson, Grandison, iv. 291 (1754, ed.
1812). Spelt zif¢ in Jamieson and Brockett. ‘Small acid 7ifF;’
J. Phillips, The Splendid Shilling ; where it means ‘ drink.’ Spelt
tiffe in Brome, To his University Friend, 1661, where it means ‘ thin
small beer’ (Halliwell, Richardson), The orig. sense is ‘a sniff;’
hence (1) an expression of indignation; (2) a sup or draught of beer
(see Halliwell), or the beer itself. Norweg. tev, a drawing in of the
breath, scent, smell, esp. a bad smell; teva, to puff, sniff, smell ;
Swed. dial. sav, smell, scent, taste ; Icel. Jefr, asmell, efa, to sniff.
Hence zif really stands for thiff, the old Scand. th being turned into
z, as in tight. B. This etymology is at once verified by the
Norweg: derivatives zeft, sb. a scent, and tefta, verb, to scent, which
explain the North E. “ft. Wedgwood well remarks: ‘a tiff or fit of
ill humour must be explained from snuffing or sniffing the air.’ Cf,
AS. pefian, to pant. See Tiffin.

TIFFANY, a kind of thin silk, gauze. (¥.—Late L.—Gk.)
*Velvets, tifinies, jewels, pearls ;’ Fletcher, The Noble Gentleman,


TILL 647


A.i, sc. 1, Lit. ‘a dress for Twelfth Night,’ i.e. a holiday dress, gay
dress. Tiffany was formerly a Christian name, esp. for a woman born


on Twelfth Day; see Bardsley, Dict. of Surnames. OF. Tiffanie


(and numerous other forms, as Theophanie); see Godefroy, s.v.
Tifaigne, a name for Twelfth Day.=Late L. Theophania, lit. ‘ mani-
festation of God;’ another name for Epiphany. = Gk. 6ed-s, God;
paveia, appearance, from gaiverv, to show. See Epiphany.

TIFFIN, luncheon. (Scand.) An Anglo-Indian word, but origi-
nally provincial English. Wedgwood says it ‘is the North-country
tifing (properly sipping), eating or drinking out of due season.’ This
is quoted from Grose, Lexicon Balatronicum (1785); see Tiffin in
Yule, and 7if in Davies, Supplementary Glossary. The latter has ‘a
tiff [draught] of punch;’ Fielding, Amelia, bk. viii. ch. 10. Low-
land-Scotch has the verb 7ift, to quaff, from the sb. #ift, a drink;
corresponding to which we have prov. E. #iff, to quaff; whence
the sb. tifin’ =tiffing, a quaffing, a drinking; hence, a luncheon,
See Tiff (2).

TIGER, a fierce beast of prey. (F.—L.—Gk.—Pers.) ME. tigre,
Chaucer, C. T. 1657.—F. tigre, ‘a tiger;’ Cot.—L. tigrem, acc. of
tigris, = Gk. Tiypis. B. Said to be of Pers. origin; according to
Littré, named from its ‘swiftness,’ the tiger being compared to an
arrow. So also Mandeville (Trav. ch. xxx. p. 305) has: ‘ tigris,
that is, faste rennynge.’=Zend. tighri, an arrow; from tighra,
sharp, pointed ; words cited by Fick, i. 333. Hence mod. Pers.
tir, ‘an arrow, also the river Tigris, so named from its rapidity; ’
Rich, Dict. p. 473. Horn, § 406. Allied to Skt. tigma-, sharp,
tigmaga-, flying swiftly, from ¢ij, to be sharp. All these words have
lost initial s; #ij being allied to Gk. orifav (=oriy-yew), to
prick. 4/STEIG, to stick, prick; see Stigma. Der. tigr-ess,
tiger-ish,

TIGHT, close, compact, not leaky. (Scand.) It should rather be
thight, as in the dialect of Orkney; the change from ¢h to ¢ is
common in Scandinavian, since neither Danish nor Swedish admits
of initial hk, which is only preserved in Icelandic. The 7h still
exists also in prov. E. thite, ‘ tight, close, compact, East;’ Halli-
well. ME. ¢i3¢; whence #i3#li, closely, Will. of Palerne, 66; also
pi3zt, spelt thykt, in the Prompt. Pary., which has: ‘ Thyht, bool, not
brokyn, Integer, solidus; also: ‘Thyhtyn, or make thyht, Integro,
consolido.’ Hence prov. E. theat, firm, close, staunch, spoken of
barrels when they do not run (Halliwell). So also: ‘as some tight
vessel that holds against wind and water;’ Bp. Hall, Contemplations,
Ruth ; bk. xi. cont. 3. § 11. It is spelt zith four times in Beaum.
and Fletcher; see Nares.—Icel. éttr (for *Jihktr), tight, esp. not
leaking, water-tight, whence /étta, to make tight; Swed. tat, close,
tight, solid, thick, hard, compact, whence #ata, to make tight, tata,
to become tight (E. zighten used intransitively) ; Dan. tet, tight,
close, dense, compact, water-tight, used as a naut. term in ted til
Vinden, close to the wind ; tette, to tighten; NFries. ¢acht (variant
ticht), tight. B. The substitution of ME. 3 for Icel. 2 is curious ;
the E. has preserved the old guttural, which in the Icelandic is no
longer apparent. Teut. type *Jihtoz, for *Jinxtoz, *Jenxtoz ; whence
also G. dicht, tight, compact, Du. digt, tight, compact (where the
guttural is also preserved). Allied to Lith. tenku, I have enough,
tankus, close, tight ; Pers. tang, tight. See Thee (2). Der. tight-ly,
tight-ness; tight-en, properly intransitive like Swed. ¢aéna, but used,
by analogy, in the sense ‘ to make tight.’ Brugmann, i. § 577.

TIKE, a dog; contemptuously, a low fellow. (Scand.) ME.
tike, tyke; P. Plowman, B. xix. 37 ; Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 3642.
=Icel.and Norw. zik, Swed. tik, a bitch ; Dan. dial. ziig, a male dog.

TILE, a piece of baked clay for covering roofs, &c. (L.) ME.
tile, Chaucer, C. T. 7687 (D 2105). A contracted form of tigel,
the long i being due to loss of g. Spelt tigel, Genesis and Exodus,
2552; tejele, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 167,1.13. AS. tigele; pl.tygelan,
Gen. xi. 3; hence #igel-wyrhta, a tile-wright, a potter, Matt. xxvii. 7.
=L. dégula, a tile, lit. ‘that which covers;’ formed with suffix -l@
from tegere, to cover.—4/STEG, to cover; see Tegument. Der.


| tile, verb, til-er, til-ing; also til-er-y, imitated from F, tuilerie, which


is from F, twile, L. tégula, a tile.
TILL (1), to cultivate. (E.) ME. tilien, Rob. of Glouc. p. 21,
1. 488. AS. zilian, teolian, to labour, endeavour, strive after, to till


land; Grein,ii. 533. The orig. sense is to strive after, or aim at ex-


cellence. = AS. zi, good, excellent, profitable ; Grein, ii. 532 ; cf. ¢,
sb., goodness. Allied to il/, preposition; see Till (2).4Du. delen,
to breed, raise, till, cultivate; G. zielen, to aim at, from ziel, OHG.
zil, an aim, mark ; cf. Goth. ga-tils, fit, convenient. Further allied to,
Olrish dil, pleasant. Der. till-er, till-age; also ¢il-tk, Temp. ii.
I. 152, from AS, #il-d, cultivation, crop, A. S. Chron. an. 1098; cf.
Dn. teelt, a crop.

TILL (2), to the time of, to the time when. (Scand.) A Norse
word; orig. used as a preposition, then as a conjunction. ME.
til, prep., to, occurring (rarely) even in Chaucer, where it seems to


648 TILL


be put for to because it is accented and comes before a vowel.
‘Hoom #il Athénés whan the play is doon;’ C. T. 2964 (A 2966).
As a rule, it is a distinguishing mark of works in the Northumbrian
dialect, such as Barbour’s Bruce, where zil occurs for ¢o throughout.
Somner cites ‘ cwed il him h&lend ’ =the Saviour said to them, with-
out a reference; but he really found ‘ cued til him Se hélend,’ Matt.
xxvi. 31, in the ONorthumb. (not the AS.) version. =Icel. z:/, till, to,
prep. governing the genitive; Dan. ¢il; Swed. dill; in very common
use ; it even answers to E. ¢ooin phrases such as#il ungr, too young ;
zil gamall, too old. B. Quite distinct from Zo, and orig. a case
of tili or tili, sb., in the sense of ‘aim’ or ‘bent,’ whence the
notion of ‘towards’ was easily developed. ‘The Icel. #il frequently
expresses ‘ purpose,’ as in ¢il hvars=for what purpose. ‘The sb.
is rare in Icel., though it occurs in @-tili, a mischance; but OHG.
zil, G. ziel, aim, purpose, is a common word; so also is the closely
allied AS. adj. il, suitable, fit (cognate with Goth. ga-tils, fit,
convenient), as well as the AS. adv. ¢ela, teala, excellently, Grein,
ii. 524. See Till (1). Der. uz-til, q.v.

TILL (3), a money-box or drawer in a tradesman’s counter. (E.)
The proper sense is ‘ drawer,’ something that can be ‘ pulled ’ in and
out. Dryden uses ¢iller in this sense, tr. of Juvenal, Sat. vi. 384,
where Zill-er is just parallel to draw-er, Cotgrave explains F. layette
by ‘a ill or drawer ;’ also, ‘a box with zills or drawers.’ Palsgrave
has: ‘ Tyll of an almery, lyette’ [sic]; an almery being a kind of
cupboard or cabinet. Cf. also prov. E. iiller, a till, a place for
money; E. D. D. Thus the word is by no means modern; and,
just as drawer is from the verb zo draw, so Ziller is from ME. tillen, to
draw, pull, allure, now obsolete, but once not uncommon, ‘To the
scole him for to ¢ille’=to draw (or allure) him to school, Cursor
Mundi, 12175. ‘The world... tyl him drawes And tilles’ =the
world draws and allures to itself, Pricke of Conscience, 1183; and
see Seven Sages, ed. Wright, 1563, and esp. Rob. of Glouc. p. 115,
1. 2492, where it occurs in a literal, not a metaphoricalsense. Spelt
also tullen ; the pt. t. tulde=drew, is in Ancren Riwle, p. 320, l. 13.
AS. tyllan, appearing only in the comp. for-tyllan, with the apparent
sense of draw aside, lead astray, Grein, i. 332. AS. tyllan answers
to Teut. type *tul-jan-; but the root does not appear. Allied to
Toll (2). See Tiller.

TILLER, the handle or lever for turning a rudder. (E.) Cf.
prov. E. ¢iller, the stalk of a cross-bow, the handle of any implement
(Halliwell). Phillips has itin the usual sense. ‘ Tiller, in a boat,
is the same as helme in a ship;’ Coles, ed. 1684. ‘The Ziller of
their helme was burst ;’ Hakluyt, Voy. iii. 111. The word means
“pull-er’ or handle; from ME. Zillen, to pull, draw; see further
under Till (3).

TILT (1), the canvas covering of a cart or waggon. (E.) ME.
teld, a covering, tent, Layamon, 31384; a later form was ¢elé.
‘ Telte or tente;*” Prompt. Pary.; hence our zilz, AS, teld ; whence
geteld, a tent, Gen. xviii. 1; the prefix ge- making no difference.
MDn. telde, telte,a tent; Hexham; Icel. ¢jald; Low G. telt (whence
Dan. ¢elt; Swed. alt); G. zelt. B. It thus appears that the form
zil¢ (with final ¢ for d) may have been due to Dutchinfluence. From
the Teut. strong verb *teldan-, to cover, spread over (pt. t. *¢ald);
found in AS. be-teldan, ofer-teldan, both strong verbs. If the reference
is to covering over with boards, connexion with Gk. 5€Ar-os, a writing-
tablet, is possible (Prellwitz).

TIT (2), toride in a tourney, thrust with a lance; to cause to heel
over. (E.) Ini Hen. IV, ii. 3.95. But the verb was orig. intransi-
tive, meaning ‘ to totter, toss about unsteadily ;’ whence theactive use
of ‘ cause to totter, upset,’ was evolved. The intrans. sense occurs at
least as late as Milton, and is still in use when we say ‘ that table
will tilt over.’ ‘The floating vessel... Rode tilting o’er the waves ;’
Milton, P.L. xi. 747. ME. tilten, to totter, fall; ‘ pis ilk toun schal
tylte to grounde,’ Allit. Poems, C. 361. B. The lit. sense is ‘ to
be unsteady,’ formed from AS. ¢ealz, adj., unsteady, tottering, un-
stable ; see Sweet’s A.S. Reader, § xv. 74. Hence the verb *tiel¢an,
*tyltan, to totter, would be regularly formed, with the usual vowel-
change from ea to ie (y).4-Icel. ¢élta, to amble as a horse; cf.
Milton’s use of tilting above; Norw. ¢ylta, to walk on tiptoe ; Swed.
tulta, to waddle. Cf. Totter. Der. tilt, sb., tilt-ing; tilt-hammer,
a hammer which, being tilted up, falls by its own weight. Also
zott-er, q.v.

TILTH, sb. (E.) See Till (1).

TIMBER, wood for building. (E.) The bd is excrescent, as usual
after m, but occurs very early, ME. timber, Chaucer, C, T. 3666.
AS. timber, stuff or material to build with; Grein, ii. 534.4-Du.
timmer, ‘ timber or structure;”? Hexham; Icel. ¢imbr; Dan. témmer ;
Swed. timmer; G. zimmer; a room; also timber. Cf. also Goth.
timrjan, to build, témrja, a builder. B. All from Teut. type *tim-
rom<*tem-rom, n., timber; formed with agential suffix -ro from
Teut. base TEM=4/DEM, to build, as seen in Gk, déu-ev, to


TINGLE


build; see Dome. Brugmann, i. § 421(8).
dome, dom-icile, dom-estic, major-domo.

TIMBREL,, a kind of tambourine. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Spenser,
F. Q. i. 12. 7. Dimin., with suffix -1 (= -el), from ME. timber, used
in the same sense, Gower, C. A. ili. 63; bk. vi. 1844.—F. zimbre,
‘the bell of a little clock ;? Cot.; OF. zymbre, a timbrel, as shown
by a quotation in Diez.=—L. tympanum, a drum.—Gk. tvpmavoy, a
kettle-drum ; see Tympanum. Cf. ‘Hoc timpanum, a tymbre ;’
Voc. 616. 28.

TIME, season, period, duration of life, &c. (E.) ME. dime,
Chaucer, C. T. 35, 44. AS. dtma, time, Grein, ii. 534.4-Icel. zimi ;
Dan. time; Swed. timme, an hour. B. The Tent. type is
*ti-man-, Closely allied to *ti-di-, tide, time, from which it only
differs in the suffix. See Tide. Der. time, verb, cf. ME. timen, to
happen, AS. getimian ; time-ly, adj., Mach. iii. 3. 7; time-ly, adv.,
Macb, ii. 3. 513 time-li-ness; time-honoured, -keeper, -piece, -server,
-table, -worn.

TIMID, afraid, fearful. (F.—L.) ‘The timid friend;’ Pope,
Prol. to Satires, 343. [The sb. timidity is earlier, occurring in Cot-
grave.|=F. zimide, ‘timorous;’ Cot.—L. zimidus, full of fear. =
L. timére, to fear; see Timorous. Der. timid-ly, -ness; timid-i-ty,
from F. zimidité, ‘ timidity,’ Cot., from L. acc. timiditatem.

TIMOROUS, full of fear. (L.) The Court of Love begins:
‘ With zimerous herte;’ but this is quite a late poem. Fabyan has
timerousnesse, Chron. cap. 1753; Sir T. Elyot has ¢imerositie, The
Governour, b. i. c. xxi. § 4. [There is no F. timoreux.| Coined, as
if from L. adj. *timordsus, fearful, a word not used.=L. zimor, fear;
timére, to fear. B. Prob. allied to Skt. am, to become breathless,
to be distressed, to be exhausted. Der. ¢imorous-ly, timorous-ness ;
(from same root) tim-id, in-tim-id-ate.

TIN, a silvery-white metal. (E.) ME. tix, Chaucer, C. T. 16296
(G 828). AS. tin; ‘stagnum, ¢iz,’ A‘lfric’s Gram. (ed. Zupitza),
p- 15, 1. 11; whence” stagneus, zizen’ as an adj., ibid.-Du. ¢in ;
Icel. tin; Dan. tin; Swed. tenn; G. zinn. B. All from Teut.
type *tino-, tin. Possibly connected with Teut. *taino-, a rod, for
which see Mistletoe; cf. G. zain, an ingot, a bar of metal.
y- Quite distinct from L. stagnum, stannum, tin, whence W. ystaen,
Corn. stean, Bret. stéan, Irish stan, F. étain, are all borrowed; see
Rhys, Lectures on Welsh, Appendix C. Der. zin-foil, spelt tynfoyle
in Levins, i.e. tin-leaf; see Foil (2).

TINCTURE, a shade of colour, a solution. (L.) In Shak. Two
Gent. iv. 4. 160. ME. tincture, Lanfrank, Cirurgie, p. 180, 1. 6.
Englished from L. tincttra, a dyeing; cf. tinctus, pp. of tingere, to
tinge; see Tinge. Der. tincture, verb. Shak. also has tinct, sb.,
a dye, Hamlet, iii. 4. 91, from pp. tinctus.

TIND, to light or kindle. (E.) Also spelt size. Now obsolete,
except in proy. E. Spelt inde in Minsheu, ed. 1627. ME. tenden,
Wyclif, Luke, xi. 33. AS. tendan, to kindle; chiefly in comp.
on-tendan, Exod. xxii. 6.4-Dan. tende; Swed. tanda; Goth. tandjan.
B. These are verbs of the weak kind, from the base of a Teut.
lost strong verb *tendan-, making *fand in the pt. t., and *tundanoz
in the pp. y:. From the weak grade of the same strong verb was
formed E, tinder, q.v.

TINDER, anything used for kindling fires from a spark. (E.)
ME. tinder, Layamon, 29267; more often tunder, tondre, P. Plow-
man, B. xvii. 245. AS. tyzdre, Voc. 266. 39; tynder, id. 33. 41.
Cf. OHG. zuntira, tinder. Teut. type *tund-ir-dn-, f.; from *tund-,
weak grade of a lost strong verb *tendan-, to kindle, whence the weak
verb tendan, to kindle; see Tind.+Icel. tundr, tinder ; cf. tendra, to
light a fire, zandri, fire; Dan. tonder; Swed. tunder; G. zunder; cf.
anziinden, to kindle.

TINE (1), the tooth or spike of a fork or harrow. (E.) Formerly
lind; cf. wood-bine for wood-bind. ME. tind, spelt tynde, Allit.
Poems, ed. Morris, A. 78; ‘ ¢yndis of harowis,’ Allit. Romance of
Alexander, 3907, 3925. AS. ¢ind, pl. tindas, Salomon and Saturn,
ed. Kemble, p. 150, l. 25.4Icel. zindr, a spike, tooth of a rake or
harrow ; Swed. tinne, Dan. dial. tind, the tooth of a rake; MHG.
zint. Teut. type *tendoz, m.; allied to L. dens (acc, dent-em), a
tooth; see Tooth. Cf, Skt. danta-, a tooth; hasti-danta-, a pe
to hang clothes on. Der. tin-ed.

TINE (2), to kindle; see Tind.

TINE (3), to lose. (Scand.) ‘ His blisse gan he tyne;’ P. Plow-
man, B. i. 112.—Icel, t¥na, to lose.—Icel. ¢6n, loss, damage ;
cognate with AS, zéona, harm, loss; see Teen.

TINGE, to colour, dye. (L.) ‘ Tinged with saffron;’ Holinshed,
Desc. of Scotland,c.7. The pp. form ¢inct is in Spenser, Shep. Kal.
November, 107.—L, tingere (pp. tinctus), to dye, stain.-Gk.
réyyeuv, to wet, moisten, dye, stain. Cf. OHG. thuncon, G. tunken,
to dip, steep; from the weak grade (tung-) of4/TENG. Der.
tinge, sb., tinct-ure, q.v.; also taint, tent (3), tint, stain, mezzo-tinto,


INGLE, to thrill, feel a thrilling sensation. (E.) Spelt tingil


Der. (from same root)


TINKER


in Levins. ME. tinglen. In Wyclif, 1 Cor. xiii. 1, we have: ‘a
cymbal t¢ynkynge,’ where other readings are tynclynge and tinglinge.
Tingle is merely a weakened form of tinkle, being the frequentative
of ting, a weakened form of tink. ‘ Cupyde the kynge tynkyng a syluer
bel;’ Test. of Creseide, st. 21 (Thynne). ‘To ding, tinnire; to
tingil, tinnire ;’ Levins. Cf. ting-tang, the saint’s-bell (Halliwell) ;
* Sonner, to sound, .. to ting, as a bell, Cot. To make one’s ears
tinkle or tingle is to make them seem to ring; hence, to ¢ingle, to
vibrate, to feel a sense of vibration as when a bell is rung. Hence
‘bothe his eeris shulen tynclen;’ Wyclif, 1 Sam. iii. 11. See
Tinkle, Tinker. _B. But prob. affected by prov. E. ting, to
sting, a by-form of sting. Cf. proy. E. tingling, sharp ; MDu. tingel,
a nettle; tingelen, ‘to sting with nettles ;’ Hexham.

INKER, a mender of kettles and pans. (E.) ME. tinkere,
P. Plowman, A. v. 160; B. v. 317. So called because he makes a
tinking sound; from ME, tinken, to ring or tinkle, ‘A cymbal
tynkynge;’ Wyclif, 1 Cor. xiii. 1. Of imitative origin; cf. MDu.
tinge-tangen, to tingle (Hexham); also MDu. Zintelen, ‘ to ring,
tingle, or make a noise like brasse’ (id.), where mod. Du. has
tintelen only in the sense to tingle or sparkle. Cf. EFries. tinken,
tingen, tengen, to make a bell ring; L. tinnire, to tinkle, ring,
tintinnum, a tinkling; F. dinter, ‘to ting, ring, tinkle,’ Cot., whence
les oreilles me tintent, ‘mine eares tingle or glow,’ id. ; F. tintin, tinton,
‘the ting of a bell,’ id. Cf. Tudor E. tinkler, a tinker (Levins).
@ Grimm’s law does not necessarily apply to words so directly
imitative as this.

TINKILE, to jingle. (E.) ME. tinklen, whence ‘a cymbal
tynclynge, in some MSS. of Wyclif, 1 Cor. xiii. 1; frequentative of
ME. tinken, to ring. See further under Tinker and Tingle.

TINSEL, gaudy ornament, showy lustre. (F.—L.) ‘¢ Tinsill
clothe,’ Baret, ed. 1580; cf. Much Ado, iii. 4.22. ‘Under a duke, no
man to wear cloth of gold zinsel ;’ Literary Remains of K. Edw. VI,
an. 1551-2; cited in Trench, Select Glossary, q.v. ‘A gowne of
silver tyncell;’ Excerpta Historica, p. 288 (ab. 1516). ‘ Tinsell
(dictum a Gall. estincelle, i. scintella,a sparke). It signifieth with vs,
a stuffe or cloth made partly of silke, and partly of gold or siluer, so
called because it glistereth or sparkleth like starres ;’ Minsheu, ed.
1627. [Minsheu’s etymology is correct; the OF. estincelle, later
étincelle, lost its initial syllable just as did the F. estiquet or étiquet,
which became ticket in English.]— MF. estincelle, étincelle, ‘a sparke
or sparckle of fire, a twinkle, a flash;’ Cot.—L. scintilla, a spark;
which seems to have been mispronounced as “*séincilla. Scintilla is
dimin. from a form *scinta, a spark, not used. Allied to AS.
scinan, to shine; see Shine. Der. tinsel, adj., i.e. tinsel-like ;
tinsel-slippered, Milton, Comus, 877. And see stencil.

TINT, a slight tinge of colour. (L.) 1. For dénct, which was the
older form of the word; Hamlet, iii. 4. 91. ‘The first scent of
a vessel lasts, and the tinct the wool first receives ;’ Ben Jonson,
Discoveries, Preecipiendi Modi. ‘A rosy-tincted feature is heav'n’s
gold ;’ Drayton, K. John to Matilda, 1.57. Cf. tinct = dyed ; Spenser,
Shep. Kal. Nov. 107.—L. tinctus, pp. of tingere, to tinge; see
‘Tinge. 2. But the mod. tint, as a term in painting, was prob.
borrowed directly from Ital. #énta, a tint. —L. ¢incta, fem. of tinctus,
pp- (as before). Der. tint, verb.

TINTINNABULATION, the ringing of bells. (L.) See
E. A..Poe, The Bells. Formed from L. tintinnabulum, a bell. = L.
tintinnare, to clink, to ring; reduplicated form, from zinzire, to ring,
to tinkle. Of imitative origin; cf. tink-le, ting-le.

TINY, very small. (F.—L.?) In Shak. Tw. Nt. v. 398, 2 Hen. IV,
v. I. 29, vy. 3. 60, K. Lear, iii. 2. 74, where it is always preceded by
little ; the old editions have tine or tyne. He speaks of ‘a little
tine boy’ (twice), ‘ my little zyne thief,’ and ‘ pretty little tine kick-
shaws. The word was formerly spelt tine or tyne; we find ‘littel
tyne child,’ in a Coventry pageant pr. by Sharp; see note to Cov.
Myst., ed. Halliwell, p.414. ‘ A litill tyxe egg,’ Wars of Alexander,
507. It is almost always preceded by Jittle, and was once a sb.
“He was constreynd. . . A /ytyll tyne abak to make a bew retret,’
Lydgate, Assembly of Gods, 1063 ; ‘ A lytyll tyne his ey castyng
hym besyde, id. 1283. ‘Sir, I pray you a dytyll tyne stande backe ; ’
Skelton, Garl. of Laurel, 505. And later, we find: ‘Thou hast
striken the Lord of Learne A litle tinye above the knee;’ Percy
Folio MS., i. 192. The sense seems to be ‘a little bit ;’ and the
form corresponds to OF. tinee, lit. ‘a tub-full” from OF. tine, a
vat, tub, basin, bowl.—Late L. ¢ixa, a wine-vessel (Lewis). See
Notes on E. Etym., p. 300.

TIP (1), the extreme top, the end, (E.) ‘The ¢ippe of a staffe ;”
Levins. ME. ¢yp, Prompt. Parv. ‘Uort pe nede tippe’=until the
extremity of need, i.e. until [there be] extreme need, Ancren Riwle,
p- 338, 1. 19. Prob. E., though not found in AS.4Du. Zip, tip, end
point; Low G. zipp, tip, point; up den Tipp van ter Tied, in the very
nick of time, Brem. Wort.; NFries. tipp, tipphken, a tip; Dan. tip,


TIRE


tip; Swed. tif, end, point, extremity; G. zipfel, a dimin. form.
Allied to Du. and EFries, ¢epel, a teat, EFries. tippel, a point.
Cf. MDu. tip-ken, a teat. Der. tip, verb, to place on the tip of,
chiefly in the pp. dipped, as in Chaucer, C. T. 14909 (B 4093) ; hence
the sb. tipped-staf, i.e. spiked or piked staff, Chaucer, C. T. 7319
(D 1737); and hence (just as piked-staff became pike-staff) tip-staff,
a term afterwards applied to ‘ certain officers that wait on the judge
bearing a rod tipt with silver,’ Phillips; also to other officers who
took men into custody. Cf.‘ I typpe a staffe with yron;’ Palsgrave.
Also tip-toe; cf. on tiptoon=on tip-toes, Chaucer, C. T. 15313
(B 4497) 3 tipp-le.

TIP (2), to tilt, cause to slant or lean over. (E.) Gen. in the phr.
to tip up =to tilt up, or tip over=to overturn. It is a weakened form
of tap, as in tip (i.e. tap) and run, a game. Thus ¢ip up is to tilt up
by giving a slight tap, or by the exercise of a slight force; cf. tip for
tap (blow for blow), Bullinger’s Works, i. 283, now dit for tat.
From the sense of slight movement we can explain the phrase fo tip
the wink =to make a slight movement of the eye-lid, sufficient to warn
a person; it occurs in Dryden, tr. of Juvenal, Sat. vi. 202. Johnson
gives: ‘tif, to strike lightly, to tap;’ with an illustration from
Swift : ‘he zips me by the elbow.’ Palsgrave has: ‘I type ouer, I
ouerthrowe or ouerwhelme, $e renuerse. <‘ Tip, a fall;’ Bradford’s
Works, ii. 104 (Parker Soc.). Not in AS. ME. tippen, tipen. ‘ Tipe
doun 3onder toun;’ Allit. Poems, C. 506. Cf. EFries. tippen, to
tap lightly.4-Swed. ¢ippa, ‘to tap, to tip, to strike gently, to touch
lightly ; see Johnson’s E. Dict.;’ Widegren. Der. tip, sb., a slight
tap, wink, hint ; zip-cat.

TIPPET, a cape, a cape of a cloak. (L.—Gk.) Also ¢epet, as
in Babees Book, ed. Furnivall, p. 301, 1.92. ‘Teppet of velvet ;’
Paston Letters, iii. 325. ME. zipet, tepet, Chaucer, C. T. 233. AS.
teppet. ‘Sipla, an healf hruh ¢eppet,’ i.e. a half rough tippet ;
Voc. 152.143 (Vestium nomina). [We also find AS. teppe, a fillet
or band; ‘Tenia, teppan, vel dol-smeltas,’? Voc. 107. 33; where
teppan is the nom. plural. Not E. words, but borrowed.]—L. tapéte,
cloth, hangings. —Gk. ramyt-, stem of tdmns, a carpet, woollen rug.
See Tape, Tapestry.

TIPPLE, to drink in small quantities, and habitually. (Scand.)
Shak. has tippling, Antony, i. 4.19. ‘To tipple, potitare;’ Levins,
ed. 1570. A Scand. word; still preserved in Norweg. ¢ipla, to drink
little and often, to tipple (Aasen). Itis the frequent. of Norw. dippa,
to drip from a point or tip; Swed. dial. tippa, to drip, from Zipp,
a tip; cf. Du. zepel, a nipple, teat. See Tip (1). Der. ¢ippl-er,
tippl-ing.

TIPSY, intoxicated. (Scand.) In Shak. Mid. Nt. Dr. v. 48.
The formation of the word is difficult to explain, but it is clearly
related to Tip (2),q.v. It means ‘ likely to tip over,’ or ‘ unsteady ;’
ready tofall. Cf. ME. tipen, to upset. Cf. trick-sy, and other words
with suffix -sy, in F, Hall, Modem English, p. 272. B. Wedgwood
cites Swiss zips, a fuddling with drink, ¢ipseln, to fuddle oneself,
betipst, tipsy. These words present a remarkable likeness, especially
as the E. and Swiss words can only be cognate, and neither language
can easily have borrowed from the other; moreover, the Swiss words
seem to be allied rather to ¢ipple and to zip (1), than to zip (2).
Cf. prov. E. tippy, tippity, easily upset. Der. tipsi-ly, -ness.

TIRADE, a strain of censure or reproof. (F.—Ital.) Modern.
=F, tirade, ‘a draught, pull, . . a shooting ;” Cot. Hamilton ex-
plains F. tirade by ‘a passage, a tirade or long speech (ina play).’
The lit. sense is a drawing out, a lengthening out.—Ital. ¢irata,
a drawing, a pulling.=TItal. ¢irare, to pull, draw, pluck, snatch.
From Late L. zirare, to pull, draw ; of unknown origin; whence also
F. tirer.

TIRE (1), to exhaust, weary, fatigue, become exhausted. (E.)
ME. firen, teorian, not a very common word. Stratmann refers us
to the Towneley Mysteries, p. 126; and to p. 5 of a Fragment
printed by Sir Thos. Phillips, where occur the words him teoreS his
miht=his might is exhausted. It occurs also in the compound
atieren, as: ‘gief mihte pe ne atiered’ =if might (or power) fail thee
not, i. e. if thy power be not tired out ; O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris,
ii, 29,1. 25. AS. ¢yrigan; as in ‘Séah pii ge-tyrige,’ though thou
grow weary ; Alfred’s tr. of Boethius, ch. xl (bk. v. pr.1). The y is
a mutation from éo, as in ¢éorian, (1) to be tired, be weary, (2) to tire,
fatigue; Grein, ii. 529. B. It is remarkable that the dictionaries
frequently refer tire (in the sense to be weary) to AS. tirigan, which.
is not the same thing, but related rather to Tarre, q.v. That
téorian is the real equivalent of E. tire may be seen by examining the
uses of #Zorian, getéorian, and dtéorian, One example may suffice.
‘Téorode hwepre . . strong . . werig pes weorces’ =nevertheless
the strong one tired, being weary of the work; Exeter Book, ed.
Thorpe, p. 436, Riddle lv, 1.16. ‘ Fatigatus, atered;’ Voc. 170, 30.
Further connexions doubtful; it can hardly be allied to E. tear, vb.,
or to G. zekren. Sweet marks the e long (téoran); cf. OLow G.


649


650 TIRE


tinrung, lassitude (Gallée). Der. tir-ed, tir-ed-ness,. tire-some, tire-


SOMmeé-72ESS.

TIRE (2), a head-dress; as a verb, to adorn or dress the head.
(F.—Teut.?) ‘She . . tired her head ;’ 2 Kings, ix. 30. The examples
show that this is an abbreviation for attire. See esp. Prompt. Pary.
p- 494: ‘Tyre, or a-tyre of wemmene, Mundum muliebris.’ Again,
in Will. of Palerne, 1147, we have atir, but in 1. 1725 we have tyr;
cf. ‘in no gay tyr,’ Alexander and Dindimus, 883; ‘ tidi a-zir,’ id. 599.
B. We have also the verb #o tire, 2 Kings, ix. 30; cf. ‘ Attouré, tired,
dressed, attired, decked,’ Cot. The ME. verb was atiren, whence
atired, pp., Will. of Palerne, 1228. However, the sb. appears
earlier than the verb, being spelt atyr, with the sense ‘ apparel ;’
Layamon, 3275, latertext. See Attire.

TIRE (3), a hoop of iron that binds the fellies of wheels to-
gether. (F.—Tent.?) ‘ Tire, the ornament or dress of womens heads ;
also, the iron band of a cart-wheel;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘The
mettall [a kind of iron] is brittle and short . . suchas will not serue
one whit for stroke and nail to bind cart-wheels withall, which ¢ire
indeed would [should] be made of the other that is gentle and pliable;’
Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxxiv.c.14. [Here stroke=strake, rim of a
wheel; see Halliwell. | B. The history of the word is obscure; it
seems to me that the word is identical with Tire (2), the wheel-band
‘being likened to a woman’s fire. Tire meant to dress or arrange; ‘I
tyer an egge, Ie accoustre; I tyer with garmentes,’ &c.; Palsgrave.
To attire once meant to equip, or to furnish (N_E«D2). ~@ I have
no belief in Richardson’s jest-like»suggestion, that a tire is a ti-er,
because it ¢es the. wheel'together. The ME. t¢e3ere or tyere nowhere

“eecurs in connexion with a wheel.

TIRE (4), to tear a prey, as is done by predatory birds. (F. — Late
L.) In Shak. Venus, 56; 1 Hen. VI,i. 1. 269. ME. siren, to tear a
prey, only used of vultures, &c.; see Chaucer, Troilus, i. 787; tr. of
Boethius, b. iii. met. 12, 1. 30.—F. ¢irer, ‘to draw, drag, . . pull,
pluck, tug, twitch;’ Cot.—Late L. firare, to draw, extract ; Du-
cange. See Tirade.

TIRE (5), atrain. (F.—LateL.) Only in Spenser, F. Q. i. 4. 35.
=F. tire, ‘a draught, pull, . . stretch . . reach, gate, course, or
length and continuance of a course;’ Cot.—F. zirer, to draw; see
Tirade.

TIRO, TYRO, a novice. (L.) Usually misspelt tyro. § Tyro, a
new fresh-water soldier, a novice, apprentice;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.
‘ That timorous ¢yro should dare ;’ Blennerhasset, Introd. in Mirror
for Magistrates (1578). In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674, it appears as
tyrone, evidently from Ital. ¢irone, ‘a milkesop,’ Florio, answering to
L. ace. tirdnem.—L. tiro, a recruit, novice, tiro. Root uncertain.
Der. tiro-cinium, a first campaign, school, apprenticeship; the title
of a poem by Cowper.

TISIC, phthisis. (F.—Gk.) Spelt tysyke, Skelton, Magnificence,
561. See Phthisis.

TISSUE, cloth interwoven with gold or silver. (F.—L.) ME.
tissew, a ribband, Chaucer, Troil. ii. 639.—F. tiss, ‘a bawdrick, rib-
bon, fillet, or head-band of woven stuffe;’ Cot. Also issu, m.,
tissue, f., ‘ woven, plaited, interlaced;’ id. Tissz was the old pp. of
tistre (mod. F, tisser), to weave. = L. texere, to weave; see Text.

TIT (1), a small horse or child. (Scand.) ‘The fits are little
worth; Dryden, tr. of Ovid, Metam. ix. 14; where ¢it means ‘a
little girl” ‘ A little ¢it,’ a small horse ; Holinshed, Desc. of Ireland,
c. ii (R.). —Icel. tittr, a tit, bird (now obsolete) ; the dimin. ¢itlingr,
a sparrow, is still in use; Norweg. zita, a little bird, small trout
(Aasen). The orig. sense is merely something small; cf. prov. E.
titty, small ; tiddy-wren,a wren (Halliwell). Der. tit-ling, a sparrow,
from Icel. titlingr, as above, with double dimin. suffix -/-ing. Also
tit-lark, q.v., tit-mouse, q. V.

TIT (2), a teat. (E.) ME. titte; pl. tittes, Ancren Riwle, p. 330,
l. 5. AS. sit, titt, Voc. 88. 24; pl. tittas (Toller).-Low G. titte,
MDnu. titte, G. zitze; cf. Welsh, did, didi, a teat. See Teat.

TIT FOR TAT, blow for blow. (E.) In Holinshed,
Chron., ed. 1808, vi. 298. Perhaps a corruption of tip for tap, where
tipis a slight tap ; Bullinger’s Works, i. 283 (Parker Society). ‘That
which requireth zip for tap;’ Gascoigne, Works, i. 463. See Tip
(2). B. Or it may be from the proverb—‘ To give one éint for tant,’
in Walker’s Proverbs (1672); see Hazlitt’s Proverbs. And tint for
tant seems to be an E. version of F. tant pour tant, lit. ‘so much for so
much.’ Tit for tat isin Heywood’s Prov. (1546) ; repr. 1874, p. 109.

TITAN, the sun-god. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. Rom. ii. 3. 4; &c.
Spelt Tytan, Lydgate, Compl. of Black Knight, 1. 28.—L. Titén,
Titanus; whence Titani, descendants of Titan, giants. —Gk. Tirdyv,
the sun-god, brother of Helios.4-Skt. ¢itha, fire; in the dict. by
Bohtlingk and Roth, ili. 327. —4/TEITH, to burn. Der. titan-ic, i.e.
gigantic. Also ¢itan-ium, a metal.

TITHE, a tenth part, the tenth of the produce as offered to the
clergy. (E.)' ME. tithe, Chaucer, C. T. 541 (A 539). The proper


\ from L. tituldre, verb, to give a title to.


TO-


sense is ‘tenth;’ hence tenth part. [Another spelling is ¢ethe, as in
‘the tethe hest’=the tenth commandment, Will. of Shoreham, p. 101,
1.1; AS. oda, tenth.] B. The form tithe answers to AS. suffix
-tigoda, as in twen-tigoda, twentieth. Also spelt -teogoda, OMerc.
-tegda; allied to Gk. déxaros, tenth, from déxa, ten, see Ten. We
also have ¢en-th, in which z is retained; so that tenth and tithe are.
doublets. Cf. Icel. ¢iund, tenth, tithe; see Decimal. Der. tithe,
verb, ME. tithen, tethen, P. Plowman, C. xiv. 73, AS. t@odian, Matt.
xxiii. 23; dith-er, Chaucer, C. T. 6896; tith-ing, ME. ¢ething, a
district containing ten families, Rob. of Glouc. p. 267, 1. 5402.

TITILLATION, a tickling. (F.—L.) [The verb Zitillate is in
later use ; cf. ‘ titillating dust,’ Pope, Rape of the Lock, v. 84.] The
sb. is in Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 766.—F. titillation, a tickling ; Cot. =
L. titillatiénem, acc. of titillatio, a tickling. = L. titillare, to tickle.

TITLARK, a kind of lark. (Scand. and E.) Lit. ‘small lark ;’
see Tit and Lark.

TITLE, an inscription set over or at the beginning of a,book, a
name of distinction. (F.—L.) ME. title, Chaucer, *C.~T. 14328
(B 3512); Wyclif, John, xix. 19. —OF-. title ;amod-¥. titre, by change
from / to r.—L. titulum, acc. of titudus,a superscription on a tomb,
altar, &c.; an honourable designation. Der. title, verb; titl-ed,
All’s Well, iv..2.924 title-deed ; title-page, Per. ii. 3. 4; titul-ar, from
F. didudaire, ‘titular, having a title,’ Cot., as if from L. *titwdris,
Hence titular-ly, titular-y.
See also Tittle.

TITLING, a small bird. (Scand.) See Tit.

TITMOUSEH, a kind of small bird. (Scand. and E.) Not con-
nected with mouse; the true pl. should be ¢itmouses, yet titmice is
usual, owing to confusion with mouse. In Spenser, Shep. Kal.,
Noy. 26, it is spelt titmose. ME. titmose; spelt tytemose, Prompt.
Parv. ; ¢tmase, Voc. 640. 28. Compounded of #i#, small, or a small
bird, Icel. zittr (see Tit); and AS. mdse, a name for several kinds of
small birds. B. The AS. mdse occurs in: ‘Sigatula, frec-mase ;
Parra, col-mdase; Parrula, spic-mdse,’ all names of birds ; see Voc. 286.
13-15. Thea is long, as shown by the ME. -mose.4-Du. mees, a tit-
mouse; G. meise, a titmouse; OHG. meisa; Icel. meisingr (F.
mésange). Teut. type *maison-, f. The sense was prob. ‘twitterer ;”
cf. L. maerére (for *maesére, cf. pp. maes-tus), to lament, mourn
(Franck), Cf. also L. merula (for *mis-ula), from the weak grade
*mis; see Merle.

TITTER, to giggle, laugh restrainedly. (E.) Cf. twitter. In
Pope, Dunciad, iv. 276. The same as ME. titeren, to chatter,
prattle, tell idle tales, whence titerere, a teller of tales, P. Plowman,
B. xx. 297. A frequentative form from a base TIT, expressive of
repeating the sound #i, just as tattle expresses the repetition of ¢a.
See further under Tattle. Cf. Twitter. Der. titter, sb.

TITTLE, a jot, small particle. (F.—L.) ME. Zitel, titil, used by
Wyclif to translate L. apex; Matt. v.18; Luke, xvi. 17. [Really a
doublet of #itle.]—OF. title, a title; (F. titre, a title); MF. tiltre,
titre, ‘a tittle, a small line drawn over an abridged word, to supply
letters wanting; also a title,’ &c.; Cot.—L. titulum, acc. of titulus,
a title, used by Petronius in the sense of sign or token.  B. In
Late L. titulus must have meant a mark over a word in writing, as
this sense appears again in Span. tilde, Port. il, a stroke over a
letter such as the mark over Span. #; also in the Catalan Zilla,
Wallachian title, a mark of an accent, cited by Diez, s.v. tilde.
The latter forms are unmistakably Latin. See Title. @ Not
allied to Zit.

TITTLE-TATTLE, prattle. (E.) See Wint. Tale, iv. 4. 248.
A reduplicated form of fattle. Note the use of titelere, also spelt
titerere, a prattler, P. Plowman, B. xx. 297. See Tattle and
Twaddle; and see Titter.

TO, in the direction of, as faras. (E.) ME. ¢o, Chaucer, C. T-
16; and, as sign of the gerund, 13, 17; now considered as the sign
of the infin. mood, the gerundial use being nearly lost. AS. 40, prep.;
also a sign of the gerund as distinct from the infin. mood; Grein,
ii, 536-542.4-Du. toe; G. zu; MHG. zuo, ze; OHG. za, ze, zi, zuo.
+Russ. do, 1o, up to. Supposed to be further related to Gk. -de,
towards, as in oi#dv-5e, homewards; see Cuttius, i. 289. Perhaps
also to Olrish do, to; OWelsh di (mod. W. i), to; W. dy- as a
prefix; see Rhys, Lectures on W. Philology. Doublet, Zoo, q. v.
And see to- (2), to-ward, to-day, to-night.

TO- (1), prefix, in twain, asunder, to pieces. (E.) Retained in
the phr. all to-brake =utterly broke asunder, Judges, ix. 53. With
regard to the dispute as to whether it should be printed all to-brake
or all-to brake, it is certain that only the former is e¢ymologically
correct; but the phrase was already so ill understood in the Tudor
period that such a mistaken use as all-to brake was possible, though
it is charitable to give our translators the benefit of the doubt. It is
purely a question of chronology. At first the prefix to- was used
without al/; later, a// was often added as well, not only before the


TO-


prefix to-, but before the prefixes for- and b7- also; next, all was con-
sidered as in some way belonging to ¢o, as if all-to were short for
altogether (which it is not), and consequently all-to appeared as a
sort of adverb, and was considered as such, apparently, by Surrey
and Latimer. It would be difficult to find any clear example of this
latest use before A.D. 1530. It began with AS, #d-, prefix; appear-
ing in /6-beran, to bear apart, remove; 46-berstan, to burst asunder ;
t0-bléwan, to blow asunder, dissipate; ¢0-brecan, to break asunder ;
and in nearly 7ifty other verbs, for which see Grein, ii. 542-549. We
may particularly note ‘hyra setlu he 70-brec’=he brake in pieces
their seats, Matt. xxi. 12. 2. ME. éo-, prefix; appearing in fobeatan,
to beat in pieces, tobiten, to bite in pieces, ¢obreken, to break in
pieccs ; and in nearly a hundred other verbs; for which see Strat-
mann’s Dict., 3rd ed., pp. 565-568. We may particularly note ‘al
his bondes he ¢o-brak for ioye’=all his bonds he brake in twain for
joy; Will. of Palerne, 3237. B. It should also be observed that
most verbal prefixes (such as for-, be-) were usually written apart
from the verb in old MSS.; ignorance of this fact has misled many.
Good examples of the addition of al as an intensive, meaning
‘wholly,’ are the following. ‘[He] al ¢o-tare his a-tir pat he to-tere
mi3t;’ Will. of Palerne, 3884; ‘al for-waked’ = entirely worn out with
lying awake, id. 790; ‘al bi-weped for wo’ =all covered with tears
for wo, id. 661; ‘al is to-brosten thilke regioun,’ Chaucer, C. T.
2759 (A 2757); ‘he suld be soyne to-fruschit al’ =he would soon be
dashed in pieces, Barbour, Bruce, x. 597. The last instance is par-
ticularly instructive, as al follows the pp. instead of preceding it.
8. All-to or al-to, when (perhaps) misunderstood. ‘To-day redy
ripe, to-morowe all-to-shaken ;’ Surrey, Sonnet 9, last line. ‘ We be
fallen into the dirt, and be all-to-dirtied;’ Latimer, Remains, p. 397
(Parker Soc.). ‘Smiling speakers . . love and aill-to love him;’
Latimer, Sermons, p. 289. ‘The last instance isa clearone. Spenser
has all to-torne, F. Q. v. 9. 10, and all to-worne in the same stanza ;
all to-rent, F. Q, iv. 7. 8. Milton has all-to-ruffled, Comus, 380;
this is a very late example. B. Etymologically, the AS. #6- is cog-
nate with OFries, zo-, te-; OHG. zar-, zer-, mod. G. zer-, as in
zerbrechen, to break in pieces, pt. t. zerbrach (=to-brake). The
sense of this prefix is ‘in twain,’ or ‘asunder ;’ but it is difficult to
connect it with AS. ¢wd, two, or even with L. dis-.

TO- (2), prefix, to. (E.) Besides the prefix ¢o- (=in twain) dis-
cussed above, we also have the prep. ¢o in composition in some
verbs, &c. Of these compounds, we still use ¢o-ward, q.v. Others
are obsolete; the chief are the sbs. tocume, advent, toflight, a refuge,
tohope, hope, toname, a nick-name ; and the verb ¢one3hen, to approach,
Wyclif, Judith, xiv. 14. See Stratmann. And see Today.

TOAD, an amphibious animal. (E.) ME. tode ; spelt toode, Prompt.
Parv., p. 495 ; tade, Pricke of Conscience, 6900. AS. tadige ; ‘ Buffo,
tadige, Voc. 122. 11. Also fadie, id. 321. 23. Root unknown.
The Dan. tudse, Swed. tassa, a toad, must be from a different root.
Der. tad-fole, q.v.; also toad-stool, spelt todestoole, Spenser, Shep.
Kal., Dec. 69, and in Palsgrave; toad-flax; toad-eater, formerly an
assistant to a mountebank (see Wedgwood, and N. and Q. 3rd S. i.
128, 176, 236, 276, v. 142), now shortened to ¢oady; toad-stone, Sir
T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 13, § 3.

TOAST (1), bread scorched before the fire. (F.—L.) ME. ¢ost,
toost, whence the verb ¢osten, to toast ; see Prompt. Parv. p. 497-—
OF. Zoster, to toast (Godefroy) ; the usual OF. sb. was ¢ostée, ‘a toast
of bread;’ marked as a Picard word in Cotgrave. = L. tostus, pp. of
torrére, to parch; see Torrid. Cf. Span. ¢ostar, /orrar, to toast,
tostada, a toast, slice of toasted bread; Port. fostado, toasted, Zostar,
torrar, to toast. Der. toast, verb; toast-er, toast-ing-iron, K. John,


iv. 3. 99.

TOAST (2), a person whose health is drunk. (F.—L.) It was
formerly usual to put toasted bread in liquor; see Shak. Merry
Wives, iii. 5. 3. The story of the origin of the present use of the
word is given in the Tatler, no. 24, June 4,1709. ‘ Many wits of the
last age will assert that the word, in its present sense, was known
among them in their youth, and had its rise from an accident at the
town of Bath, in the reign of king CharlestheSecond. It happened
that, on a public day, a celebrated beauty of those times was in the
Cross Bath, and one of the crowd of her admirers took a glass of the
water in which the fair one stood, and drank her health to the com-
pany. There was inthe place a gay fellow half fuddled, who offered
to jump in, and swore, though he liked not the liquor, he would have
the toast. He was opposed in his resolution; yet this whim gave
foundation to the present honour which is done to the lady we men-
tion in our liquors, who has ever since been called a ¢oast.”. Whether
the story be true or not, it may be seen that a foast, i.e. a health,
easily took its name from being the usual accompaniment to liquor,
esp. in loving-cups, &c.
Brand’s Pop. Antiq. ii. 340. Der. toast, vb.; toast-master, the
announcer of toasts at a public dinner.


| is extracted which becomes ¢oddy;’


| Rich. Dict. p.. 353. a pecul
(cerebral) sound, which has come to be represented by d in English.
| Cf. Skt. tala-, the palmyra tree.

As to this putting of toast into drinks, see |
heed Mar. 22,1675. Compounded of fo, prep., and do, verb. See
} Ado.


TO-DO 651


TOBACCO, a narcotic plant. (Span.—Hayti.) Formerly spelt
tabacco, Ben Jonson, Every Man, i. 4 (last speech). See remarks in
Wheatley’s Introduction to Ben Jonson, Every Man in his Humour.
Harrison fixes on 1573 as the date when the smoking of tobacco be-
came general in England. Spelt ¢abacco in Hakluyt, Voy. ii. 2. 158.
Cotgrave mentions tobacco, s.y. Nicotiane.—Span. tabaco, tobacco.
Las Casas (Hist. of the Indies) says that tabaco was the name ot the
tube or pipe in which the Indians or Caribs smoked the plant, trans-
ferred by the Spaniards to the herb itself. Oviedo (1535) says
tabaco is a Hayti word; see Oviedo, ed. 1851, Madrid, iv. 96. So.
also Clavigero, in his Conquest of Mexico (E. transl. i. 430), says:
‘tabaco is a word taken from the Haitine language,’ i.e. the language
spoken in the island of Hayti or St. Domingo. Der. tobacco-n-ist, a
coined word, orig. used, not of the seller (as now), but of the smoker
of tobacco; see examples in Trench, Select Glossary ; tobacco-pipe.

TOBOGGAN, a kind of snow-sledge. (Amer. Indian). Said to
be a Canadian perversion of an American Indian odabagan, a sledge.
S. T. Rand, in his Micmac Vocabulary, gives the Micmac form as
tobaakun (=tobakun), a sled. Micmac is a language belonging to
the Algonkin family.

TOCHER, a dowry. (Gaelic.) ‘Hey for a lass wi’ a tocher;’
Burns (Song). = Gael, and Irish ¢ochar, a dowry, assigned portion. =
Olrish tochur, a putting, assigning ; tochurim, I put. —Olrish ¢o-, do-,
to, prep. and verbal prefix ; cuir-im, I put, assign.

OCSIN, an alarm-bell, or the sound of it. (F.—Teut. and L.)
Added by Todd to Johnson. He quotes: ‘The priests went up into


‘the-steeple, and rang the bells backward, which they call tocksaine,


whereupon thespeople .-.-flocked together;’ Fulke, Answer to P.
Frarine (1580), p. 52.— MF. toquesing, ‘an allarum bell;or the ring-
ing thereot;’ Cot. Mod. F. tocsiz (see Littré).—OF. toguer, ‘to
clap, knock, hit,’ Cot.; and OF. sing (Norm. dial. sin), ‘a sign,
mark, . . also a bell or the sound of a bell, whence ocsing, an alarum
bell;’ id. Thus it means ‘a striking of the signal-bell.’ B. The
Norm. dial. toguer, Picard toker, are variants of F. toucher, to touch ;
see Touch, The OF. sing, mod. F. signe, is from L. signum, a
mark, hence a signal, signal-bell; see Sign. Cf. AF. sein, a bell;
Liber Albus, p. 119, Thus toc-sin=touch-sign. See Tucket.

TOD, a bush; a certain measure of wool; a fox. (Scand.) ‘An
yuie todde,’ an ivy-bush; Spenser, Shep. Kal., March, 67. ‘ Wulle
is bought by the sacke, by the ¢od, by the stone;” Arnold’s Chron.
ed, 1811, p. 191. Palsgrave has ‘ Todde of woll’ =tod of wool; and
‘tode of chese’=tod of cheese. See Nares. Tod, a fox, occurs in
Ben Jonson, Pan’s Anniversary, hymn 4; and see Jamieson’s Sc.
Dict. The fox is supposed to be so named from his bushy tail. =
Icel. toddi (nearly obsolete), a tod of wool; a bit, a piece.+-Du.
todde, a rag; EFries. todde, a bundle; G. zotte, zote, a tuft of hair
hanging together, a rag, anything shaggy. Allied to EFries. sodden,
to trail, to draw along, drag after one. Perhaps allied to Ted.

TODAY, this day. (E.) Compounded of éo, prep., and day, The
etymology is obscured by the disuse of the prep. ¢o in the old sense
of ‘for;’ thus to day=for the day; to night=for the night; &c.
Stratmann cites me ches him to kinge=people chose him for king,
Rob. of Glouc. p. 302; yeuen to wyue=to give to wife, Chaucer,
C. T. 1862 (A 1860). See particularly the article on AS. 76 in
Grein, p. 540: he gives examples of to dege, for the day, today ;
t6 dege dissum, for this day, today; 20 midre nihte, to or at midnight ;
t0 morgene=for the morn, to-morrow. Hence our fo-day, to-
morrow, to-night, and prov. E. to-year, i.e. for the present year, this
year; ME. oyere, Chaucer, C. T., 3750 (D 168).

TODDLE, to walk unsteadily, as a child. (E.) Given as a
Northern word by Todd, in his additions to Johnson. The same as
Lowl. Sc. zo##le, to walk with short steps; Jamieson. Further, foftle
is equivalent to otter, the frequentative suffixes -/e and -er being
equivalent; see Totter.+Swed. zulia, to toddle; the spelling with
Z is duly explained s.v. totter. And cf. G. (Bavar.) zotteln, to
toddle, though probably formed in another way.

ODDY, a mixture of spirits. (Hindustani.—Pers.) ‘ The toddy-
tree is not unlike the date or palm;’ Sir T. Herbert, Travels, p. 29


| (R.).— Hindustani ¢a7i, tadi, ‘ vulgarly toddy, the juice or sap of the


palmyra-tree and of the cocoa-nut [which] when allowed to stand
.. becomes a fiery and highly intoxicating spirit ;’ H. H. Wilson,
Glossary of Indian Terms, p. 510.—Hind. tay, ‘a palm-tree, . .
most appropriate to the Palmyra, from the stem of which the juice
id.— Pers. tar, ‘a species of
palm-tree from which an intoxicating liquor, toddy, is extracted ;”
The r in the Hind. word has a peculiar


TO-DO, stir, bustle. (E.) ‘What a éo-do is here!” Evelyn,


652 TOE


TOBE, one of the five small members at the end of the foot. (E.)
ME. ‘oo, pl. toon, Chaucer, C. T. 14868 (B 4052). AS. 2a, pl. tan
or zaan, Laws of AXthelbirht, §§ 70, 71, 72, in Thorpe, Ancient Laws,
i. 20. This is a contracted form, standing for tahe; OMerc. ¢akae,
Corpus Gloss. 141.-4-Du. teen; Icel. ¢a, pl. ter; Dan. taa, pl. ¢aaer ;
Swed. 7a; G. zehe; OHG. zéha, a toe, also a finger. We also find
OLow G. téwa, a toe (Gallée); with w(<gw)forh(<hw). B. All
from Teut. type *taihwon-,f. Possibly allied to L. digitus (<*dic-
itus), a finger (Walde). See Digit and Token. 4 Distinct from
zoe in mistletoe. Der. to-ed, having toes,

TOFFEE, TOFF'Y, a coarse kind of candy, made of sugar or
molasses, &c. (F.—Malay.) In the United States, it is usually taffy.
=F. ¢afia, a spirit made from molasses; in use in 1722 (Hatzfeld).
= Malay ¢afia, the same. See Ratafia.

TOF'T, a green knoll, open ground, homestead. (Scand.) ME.
zoft, a knoll, P. Plowm. B. prol. 14. Late AS. zoft (Toller). —Icel.
topt (pron. toft), also ¢upt (pron. tuft), toft, tomt (the oldest spelling),
a place to build on; Swed. ¢omt, the site of a building. Perhaps
for *tumft-<*tum-f(e)t-, cognate with Gk. 6a-meSor, soil, floor ; lit.
“site for building.’ From the weak grade of *dem, to build (Gk.
déu-erv) ; and *pedom, as in Gk. médov, ground, earth, See Dan.
tomt in Falk.

TOGA, the mantle of a Roman citizen. (L.) Whether ¢oge =toga
really occurs in Shakespeare is doubtful. Phillips gives it in his
Dict.—L. toga, a kind of mantle, lit. a covering. = L. tog-, 2nd grade
of tegere, to cover; see Tegument.

TOGETHER, in the same place, at the same time. (E.) ME.
to-gedere, to-gedre, to-gidere, P. Plowman, B. prol. 46% togideres, id.
xvi. 80. We even find the compound altogedere as early as in the
Ancren Riwle, p. 320, 1.25. For the spelling with d, cf. ME. fader,
a father, moder,a mother. AS. 10-gedere, t0-gedre ; together, Grein,
ii. 544.— AS. 0, to; and gador, together, Grein, i. 491; see further
under Gather. Der. al-together.

TOIL (1), labour, fatigue; as a verb, to labour. (F.—L.)
ME. toil; the dat. zoile, in Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 1802, means
a tussle or struggle. ‘And whan these com on ther was so grete
toile and romour of noyse that wonder it was to heere, and therwith
aroos so grete a duste;’ Merlin, ed. Wheatley, p. 393, 1. 1. Lowl.
Sc. tuyll, disturbance; Bernardus, &c., ed. Lumby, p. 24, 1. 45
(HE. E. T.S.); tuyll, vb., to trouble, id. p. 27,1. 123. Thus the old
sense was rather turmoil or disturbance than labour. Cf. AF. toy/,
glossed ‘strif,’ Walter de Bibbesworth ; in Wright, Vocab. 147, l. 3.
Also AF. toiler, to strive; A Nominale, ed. Skeat, 1. 131. B. As
to the verb fozlen, its meaning was also different from that of mod.
E. toil. We find: ‘reuliche toyled to and fro’=ruefully pulled
or tugged to and fro, Debate between Body and Soul, 1. 368, in
Matzner, Sprachproben, i. 100. Also: ‘tore and ¢oyled’=torn and
pulled about or spoilt, Legends of the Holy Rood, ed. Morris, p. 143,
1. 372.. We may also note Lowland Sc. tuéll, toil (Jamieson); and
perhaps Sc. tuiljie, tuilyie, a quarrel, broil, struggle, is closely re-
lated, as well as tul}e, to harass, occurring in Barbour’s Bruce, iv.
152, where the Edinb. MS. has the pp. ¢oil/3it.  y. The origin seems
to be found in OF, ¢oillier, MF. touiller, ‘ filthily to mix or mingle,
confound or shuffle together ; to intangle, trouble, or pester by scurvy
medling, also to bedirt, begrime, besmear, smeech, beray ;’ Cot.
The origin of this F. word is obscure; but Hatzfeld derives it from
L. tudiculare, to stir up (correctly, as it seems).—L. tudicula, a
machine for bruising olives, dimin. of tudes, a mallet. —L. ¢ud-, as in
tu-tud-i, pt. t. of tundere, to beat. @ Sometimes derived from MDnu.
zuylen, ‘to till, or to manure lands,’ Hexham; cf. zwyl, sb., ‘ tilling
or manuring of lands,’ id.; but it seems impossible to explain the
senses of ME. ¢oilen from this source only. Der. toil-some, Spenser,
F. Q. ii. 12. 29; toél-some-ness.

TOIL (2), a net or snare. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, iii. 2.362. The
pl. ¢oyles is in Spenser, Astrophel, 97.—F. ¢oile, ‘cloth, linen cloth,
also, a staulking-horse of cloth; toile de araigne, a cob-web; pl.
toiles, toils, or a hay to inclose or intangle wild beasts in;’ Cot.—
L. téla, a web, thing woven; for *tex-la.—L. texere, to weave; see
Text. Der. foil-et (below).

TOILET, TOILETTE, a small cloth on a dressing-table ;
hence, a dressing-table, or the operation of dressing. (F.—L.)
‘ Toilet, a kind of table-cloth,.. made of fine linnen, &c. spread upon
a table... where persons of quality dress themselves ; a dressing-
cloth;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Spelt foylet in Cotgrave. =F, toilette, ‘a
toylet, the stuff which drapers lap about their cloths, also a bag to
put nightcloths in;’ Cot. Dimin. of toile, cloth; see Toil (2).

TOISH, a French measure of length. (F.—L.) It contains 6 feet,
and a little over 44 inches. =F. toise, ‘ a fadome, a measure contain-
ing six feet in length;’Cot. Cf. Ital. tesa, a stretching. —L. tensa,
sc. brachia, the [length of the] outstretched arms, neut. pl. of pp. of
tendere, to stretch. See Tense (2).


TOM


TOKAY, a white wine. (Hungary.) Mentioned in Townson’s
Travels in Hungary (1797) ; see quotation in Todd’s Johnson. Also
in Fielding, The Miser (1732), A. iii. Sc. 3. So named from Tokay,
a town in Hungary, at some distance E.N.E. from Pesth.

TOKEN, a mark, sign, memorial, coin. (E.) ME. foken,
Chaucer, C. T. 13289 (B 1549). The o answers to AS. @, as usual.
AS. taicen, tacn, a very common word ; Grein, ii. 520.-4-Dnu. teeken,
a sign, mark, token, miracle; Icel. takn, zeikn ; Dan. tegn ; Swed.
tecken ; G. zeichen; Goth. taikns, Teut. types *taiknom, n., *taikniz,
fem.; allied to Teach. The base *taik answers to Idg. *doig, 2nd
grade of *deig, which seems to be a variant of Idg. 4/DEIK, to
show, indicate; cf. L. dig-nus, worthy. Brugmann, i. § 762 (3).
Cf. Index, Diction. Cf. L. in-dic-are, to point out, AS. ¢ihan,
Goth. gateihan, to show, G. zeigen, to show. Der. be-token.

TOLERATE, to bear, endure, put up with. (L.) ‘To éollerate
those thinges ;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. ili. c. 14, § 2.—L.
tolerdtus, pp. of tolerare, to endure; allied to ¢ollere, to lift, bear. =
VTEL, to lift, bear; cf. Skt. tui, to lift, Gk. rAjvat, to suffer, AS.
folian, to endure, L. ldtus, pp. (for tlatus). See Thole (2). Der,
tolera-ble, from F. tolerable, ‘tollerable,’ Cot., from L. ¢olerabilis,
that can be endured; foler-abl-y, toler-able-ness; toler-at-ion, from
F. toleration, omitted by Cotgrave, but in use in the 16th cent.
(Littré), from L. acc. tolerationem, endurance ; ‘oler-ance, from MF.
tolerance, ‘tolleration, sufferance,’ Cot., from L. ¢olerantia, suff-
rance; ¢oler-ant, from the stem of the pres. part. of folerare. From
the same root are a-tlas, tal-ent, ex-tol; e-late, col-late, di-late,
ob-late, pre-late, pro-late, re-late, trans-late, legis-late, ab-lat-ive,
super-lat-ive.

TOLL (1), a tax for the privilege to use a road or sell goods ina
market. (L.—Gk.) ME. ?ol, tribute, Wyclif, Rom. xiii. 7. AS. ¢oll,
Matt. xvii. 25.4-Du. ¢ol; Icel. ¢ollr; Dan. told (for *toll) ; Swed.
tull ; G. zoll. B. All from Teut. type *tulloz,m.; which might
be explained as<*tulnoz, from the weak grade *tul- (with suffix -zoz)
of Teut. *zel-, the root of Tale. But the existence of by-forms, as
AS. toln, a toll (whence Zoln-ere, a toller), OSax. ¢olna, toll, OFries.
tolne, OHG. zollan-tuom, as well as OHG. zolanari, MDu. tollenaer,
a toller, suggest that all these were borrowed from Late L. tollonium,
for L. telénium; from Gk. reA@moy, a toll-house, Matt. ix.9. Cf.
also F. tonlieu, a toll; from Late L. tonleium, toleneum, for L. telé-
nium. y. The Gk. reAdmoy is from réAos, a tax, toll, allied
to L. tollere, to take, and Gk. réAavroy (see Talent) ; a distinct
word from 7véAos, with the sense of ‘end.’ Der. ‘oll, verb, ME.
tollen, Chaucer, C. T. 564 (A 562); éoll-er, ME. follere, P. Plow-
man, B. prol. 220; tol-booth, ME. tolbothe, Wyclif, Matt. ix. 9;
toll-bar, -gate, -house.

TOLL (2), to pull a large bell; to sound as a bell. (E.) We now
say ‘a bell folls,’ i.e. sounds, but the old usage was ‘to Zo// a bell,’
i.e. to pull it, set it ringing, as in Minsheu, Skinner, and Phillips.
The latter explains ¢o toll a bell by ‘to ring a bell after a particular
manner,’ It is remarkable that the sense of ‘sound’ occurs as early
as in Shakespeare, who has, ‘ the clocks do oll ;’ Hen. V, chorus to
activ. 1.15. Yet we may be satisfied that the present word, which
has given some trouble to etymologists, is rightly explained by
Nares, Todd, and Wedgwood, who take Zoll to be the ME. follen,
to pull, entice, draw, and Wedgwood adds: ‘ To fol/ the bells is
when they ring slowly to invite the people into church.’ _ The double
sense of foll is remarkably shown by two quotations given by
Richardson from Dryden, Duke of Guise, Act iv: ‘Some crowd the
spires, but most the hallow’d bells And softly told for souls departing
knells:’ and again: ‘ When hollow murmurs of their evening-bells
Dismiss the sleepy swains, and ¢o/l them [invite them] to their cells.’
Minsheu has: ‘ To foll a bell,’ and ‘to ¢olle, draw on or entice.’ See
examples in Nares and Todd. B. ME. ¢ollen. ‘ Tollyn, or
mevyn, or steryn to doon, Incito, provoco, excito;’ Prompt. Parv.
‘Tollare, or styrare to do goode or badde, Excitator, instigator ;’ id.
‘{[He] ¢ollyd [drew] hys oune wyf away;’ Seven Sages, ed. Wright,
3052. ‘This zolleth him touward thee’=this draws him towards
you; Ancren Riwle, p. 290, 1. 5. There is a long note on this
curious word, with numerous examples, in St. Marharete, ed. Cock-
ayne, p. 110; the oldest sense seems to be to coax or fondle, entice,
draw towards one. y. All is clear so far; but the origin of ME.
tollen is obscure; we may suppose it to be nearly related to AS.
fortyllan, to allure, Grein, i. 332; cf. ME. tullen, to entice, lure,
Chaucer, C. T. 4132 (A 4134). See Till (3).

TOLU, a kind of resin, (S. America.) Also called Tolu balsam or
balsam of Tolu, ‘Balme..from.. Tollu, not farre from Cartha-
gene;’ E. G., tr. of Acosta, Hist. Indies (1604), bk. iv. ch. 28.
Named from Toluw, a place on the N.W. coast of New Granada, in
S. America.

TOM, a pet name for Thomas. (L.—Gk.—Heb.) Spelt Thomme,
P. Plowman, B. v. 28.—L. Thdmas.—Gk. Owpas, Matt. x. 3. Lit,


= Soe


" *
= rtetae


TOMAHAWK


“twin ;’ cf. Heb. mim, pl., twins. This is why Thomas was also
called Didymus; from Gk. di5vpos, a twin. Der. tom-boy, tom-cat,
zom-tit.

TOMAHAWE, a light war-hatchet of the N. American Indians.
(W. Indian.) Capt. J. Smith has: ‘ Tomahacks, axes;’ in his
Vocabulary of Indian words; Works, p. 44. From the Algonkin
tomehagen, Mohegan tumnahegan, Delaware tamoihecan, a war-
hatchet (Webster) ; Micmac tumigun (S.T. Rand). ‘Explained by
Lacombe from the Cree dialect; ofamahkuk, knock him down;
otamahwaw, he is knocked down ;’ Cent. Dict.

TOMATO, a kind of fruit, a love-apple. (Span.—Mexican.)
‘ Tomates, which are . . very wholesome;’ E. G., tr. of Acosta,
Hist. Indies (1604); bk. iv. ch. 20. From Span. (and Port.)
tomate, a tomato; we probably used final o for e because o is so
common an ending in Spanish. Borrowed from Mexican ¢omatl.

TOMAUN, a Persian gold coin. (Pers.—Mongol.) Worth about
7s. 6d. ‘A Toman is five markes sterlin;’ Sir T. Herbert, Trav.
(1638), p. 225 (Yule). — Pers, tuman, ‘a gold coin worth about Ios. ;’
Palmer. From a Mongol word meaning ‘ten thousand ;’ spelt
zoman by Marco Polo, bk. i. ch. 54 (Yule).

TOMB, a grave, vault for the dead. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. toumbe,
tombe, Chaucer, C. T. 10832 (F 518) ; tumbe, Layamon, 6080, later
text.—OF. tumbe; F. tombe, ‘a tombe;’ Cot.—L. tumba, a tomb
(White). —Gk. r¥pBa, for the common’ form tvyBos, a tomb, sepul-
chre; properly a burial-mound.+Irish tomm, a little hill; Skt.
tumga-, prominent, a height. Brugmann, i. § 103. Prob. allied to
L. tumulus (Curtius, ii, 139); see Tumulus. Der. tomb-less,
Hen. V, i. 2. 229; tomb-stone 3 en-tomb.

TOMBAC, TOMBACK, a variety of brass. (F.—Port.—
Malay.—Skt.) F. tombac (Hatzfeld).—Port. tambaca, ‘tambac,’
Vieyra ; (and see Yule). — Malay tambaga, copper. = Skt. tamraka-m,
copper (Benfey).

TOMBOY, a rude girl. (L.—Gk.—Heb.; and E.) In Shak.
Cymb. i. 6. 122, From Tom and Boy. @ So also tom-cat,
tom-tit, tom-fool.

TOME, a volume of a book. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674; and in Cotgrave.—F. tome, ‘a tome, or volume;’ Cot.=
L. tomum, acc. of tomus, a volume.—Gk. répos, a section; hence,
avolume. From top-, 2nd grade of reyu-, as in Tép-vetv, to cut.
4/ TEM, to cut, whence L. tondére, to shear; see Tonsure. Der.
(from same root) ana-tom-y, a-tom, en-tom-o-logy, epi-tom-e, litho-
tom-y, phlebo-tom-y, zoo-tom-y.

TOMORROW, on the morrow, on the morn succeeding this one.
(E.) ME. ¢o marwe, P. Plowman. B.ii. 43. From fo, prep., with the
sense of ‘for’ or ‘on;” and morwe, morrow. So also AS. 76 morgen ;
Luke xiii. 32 (MS. A.). See Today and Morrow.

TOMTIT, a small bird. (L.—Gk.—Heb.; and Scand.) In the
Tatler, no. 112; Dec. 27,1709. From Tom and Tit, q.v.

TOMTOM, a kind of drum. (Bengili.) From Bengali ¢antan,
vulgarly zom-tom, a small drum, esp. one beaten to bespeak notice
to a public proclamation; laxly applied to any kind of drum;
H. H. Wilson, Gloss. of Indian Terms, p. 509.

TON, TUN, a large barrel; 4 hogsheads ; 20 hundredweight.
(C.) We use tox for a weight; and ¢un for a cask; but the word is
all one. Properly a large barrel, hence, the contents of a large
barrel; and hence, a heavy weight. ME. tonne, Chaucer, C. T.
3892. AS. tunne, a barrel; ‘Cupa, zunne, Voc. 123. 93 ‘ Cuba,
tunne, id. 16, 21 (8th cent.) ; the pl. zunnan is in the A. S. Chron.
an. 852. We find also Du. tov, a tun; Icel. and Swed. tunna, Dan.
donde, a tun, cask; G. tonne, a cask, also a heavy weight; Low L.
tunna, tonna, whence F. tonneau, ‘a tun,’ Cot., Irish, and Gael.
tunna, Irish tonna, W. tynell, a tun, barrel. B. The Low L.
tunna, a cask, written tunne, occurs in the Cassel Glossary of the
oth century; see Bartsch, Chrest. Franc. col. 2,1.15. It is sup-
posed to be of Celtic origin; from the Olrish fon, a skin, a hide,
hence ‘a wine-skin ;’ cognate with OGael. tonn, W. tonz, skin, hide.
Celtic type *tunna, f. (Macbain; Stokes-Fick, p. 135). @ This
explains AS. ¢yncen, a small wine-skin, used to support a swimmer ;
Aélfred’s Orosius, ii. 4; ed. Sweet, p. 72, 1. 30. Der. tonn-age,
a coined word; ¢unn-el,q.v. Doublet, tun, q.v.

TONE, the sound emitted by a stretched string, the character of
a sound, quality of voice. (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt foone in Levins,
In Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 112, ME. ton, Reliquize Antique, i. 292
(riming with nz, noon),—F, ton, ‘a tune or sound;’ Cot.—L.
tonum, acc. of fonus, a sound. —Gk. révos, a thing stretched, a rope,
sinew, tone, note; from the sound of a stretched string. —Gk. rov-,
and grade of rev-, Idg. 4/TEN, to stretch ; Skt. tan, to stretch, Gk.
teive, to stretch; see Tend (1). Der. tone, vb. ; ton-ed; ton-ic,
increasing the tone or giving vigour, a late word, from Gk. tomsés,
relating to stretching. Also a-ton-ic, bary-tone, mono-tone, oxy-tone,
semi-tone ; in-tone. _Doublet, zune, q.v,


TOOT 653


TONGS, an instrument consisting of two jointed bars of metal,
used for holding and lifting. (E.) In Spenser, F. Q. iv. 5. 44. But
earlier, the singular form tonge or tange is usual. ME. tange, tonge.
‘Thu tuengst parmid so dop a tonge’=thou twingest therewith as
doth a tong; Owl and Nightingale, 156. AS. tange; ‘ Forceps,
tange,’ Voc. 336.25. Also spelt fang, AElfric’s Grammar, ed.
Zupitza, p. 67, 1. 3.4-Du. tang, a pair of tongs or pincers; Icel.
tong (pl. ¢angir); Dan. tang; Swed. idng; G. zange. B. All
from Tent. type *tanga, f., with the sense ‘a biter’ or ‘nipper ;’ cf.
E. nippers, pincers (Fick, iii. 116). From the base *¢ang-, nasalised
form of *tah- (Idg. *dak-), to bite. —4/DENK, to bite; cf. Gk.
dae-vev, to bite (from the weak grade), Skt. davig, dag, to bite,
damga-, a bite, davgaka-, a crab(apincher). In particular, cf. OHG.
zanga, a pair of tongs, with OHG. zanger, biting, pinching. See
Tang (1), Tough. Brugmann, i. § 420, 431 (3).

TONGUE, the fleshy organ in the mouth, used in tasting, swal-
lowing, and speech. (E.) ‘The spelling with final -we is of Norman
origin, to show that the ~g was not palatalised; cf. F. langue; a
better spelling is tong, as in Spenser, F. Q., introd. to b. i. st. 2.
ME. tunge, tonge, Chaucer, C. T. 267 (A 265). AS. tunge,a tongue,
Luke, i. 64.4-Du. tong; Icel. and Swed. tunga; Dan. tunge; G.
zunge, OHG. zunga; Goth. tuggd (=*tungd). B. All from Teut.
type *tungon-,f. Further related to OL. dingua, L. lingua (whence
F. langue), the tongue. Allied to Lingual. Brugmann, i. § 441.
Der. tongue, vb., Cymb. v. 4. 148; tongu-ed; tongue-less, Rich. II,
i. 1. 105; tongue-tied, Mids. Nt. Dr. v. 104. From the same root
are lingu-al, ling-o, langu-age.

TONIC, strengthening. (Gk.) See Tone.

TONIGHT, this night. (E.) See Today.

TONSIL, one of two glands at the root of the tongue. (F.—L.)
‘ Tonsils or almonds in the mouth ;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxiv.
c. 7. §1.—F, tonsille; tonsilles, pl., ‘ certain kernels at the root of the
tongue ;” Cot.—L. ¢onsilla,a sharp pointed pole stuck in the ground
to fasten vessels to the shore; pl. zomsille, the tonsils. ‘ There is.
one [Latin] sb. in -l-, viz. L. ¢dlés, pl. m. ‘* wen on the neck ;”’ for
*tons-li-, from tens-, ‘‘ to stretch,” Goth. at-thins-an, to draw towards
one, Lith. ¢s-z’, to stretch by pulling ; fonsille, “ tonsils,” points to
an older form *fons-lo- or *tons-la;’ Brugmann, ii. § 98. Cf.
Thistle.

TONSURE, a clipping of the hair, esp. the corona of hair worn
by Romish priests. (¥.—L.) ME. tonsure, Gower, C. A. iii. 291;
bk. viii. 482. —F. tonsure, ‘a sheering, clipping, the shaven crown
of a priest ;’ Cot.—L. ¢onstira, a clipping; cf. tonsus, pp. of tondére,
to shear, clip. Cf. Gk. révdew, to gnaw ; for *réy-5-ew; ultimately
allied to Gk. répvey, to cut; see Tome.

TONTINE,, a certain financial scheme, the gain of which falls to
the longest liver. (F.—Ital.) See Haydn’s Dict. of Dates, and
Littré. First started at Paris, about A.D. 1653.—F. ¢ontine, a ton-
tine. Named from Lorenzo Tonti, a Neapolitan, who originated
the scheme.

TOO, more than enough, likewise. (E.) The emphatic form of
to, prep. ME. to; ‘to badde’=too bad; Will. of Palerne, 5024.—
AS. t6, too; Grein, ii. 542, q.v. The same word as #0, prep., but
differently used. See To.

TOOL, an instrument used by workmen. (E.) ME. fol, tool; pl.
toles, tooles, P. Plowman, A. xi. 133; B.x.177. AS. 7ol, a tool;
fElfric’s Hom. ii. 162, 1. 125 spelt tool, Voc. 116. 353 ¢ohl, id.
429. 15.--I cel. ¢d/, neut. pl., tools. B. Teut. type *tolom, n.; for
*tou-lom ; where *tou- is related to *tau-, *taw-, as in AS. tawian,
to prepare, dress, get ready; so that fool is the instrument by
which this is done. Cf. Goth. ¢aujan, to make, cause, and E. ¢aw,
tew, to work hard, to dress leather; see Taw. The Teut. base
*tau- seems to be connected with a Skt. root du or du, to work.
y: ‘ This root is not recognized by Skt. grammarians, but it has to be
admitted by comparative philologists. There is the verb duvasyatz
in the Veda, meaning to worship, a denominative verb derived from
divas, Dtwvas meant, originally, any opus operatum, and presupposes.
a root du or du, in the sense of actively or sedulously working. It
exists in Zend as du, todo. With it we may connect Goth. tawaz,
the G. zauen (Grimm, Gram. i. 1041), Goth. ¢awi, work, &c. See
my remarks on this root and its derivatives in the Veda in my
Translation of the Rig-Veda, i. 63, 191 ;’ Max Miiller, letter to The
Academy, July, 1874. See duvds in Uhlenbeck, p. 128. As to the
connexion of tool with Goth. zaujan, see Streitberg, § 85.

TOOM, empty. (Scand.) Common in Lowland Scotch; ‘toom
dish’=empty dish; Burns, Hallowe’en, 1.12 from end. ME. fom,
toom. ‘Toom, or voyde, Vacuus;’ Prompt. Parv, Not an AS.
word, though the ady. ¢dme occurs once (Grein).—Icel. mr, empty ;
Swed. and Dan. tom. Cf. OHG. zuomig, empty. The Teut. type is.
*tOmoz, adj., empty. Der. teem (3), q. v.

TOOT (1), to peep about, spy. (E.) A form of Tout, q.v,


654 TOOT


TOOT (2), to blow a horn. (Scand.) ‘To ¢we in a horn, cornu-
cinere ;’? Levins. Notan AS. form, which would have given theet or
thout; but borrowed from a dialect which sounded ¢h as ¢. = MSwed.
and Norw. zuta, to blow a horn. Cf. EFries. and Low G. tuten, to
toot, MDu. zuyten, ‘to sound or winde a cornet, Hexham ; Du. foet-
horen, a bugle-horn; Swed. tjuta, to howl; Dan. tude, to howl, blow
a hom; Icel. Ajata, strong verb, pt. t. aut, to whistle as wind, sough,
resound; also, to blow a horn; AS. Jéotan, to howl, make a noise;
Grein, ii. 589 ; also AS. Autan (Toller) ; MHG. diezen, OHG. diozan,
to make a loud noise; Goth. ¢hut-haurn, a trumpet. B. All from
Teut. base *theut, to make a noise, resound; of imitative origin.
The Idg. form of the root agrees with that of L. tundere (<*teud), to
strike; but this may be accidental.

TOOTH, one of the small bones in the jaws, used in eating; a
prong. (E.) ME. ¢oth, tooth; pl. teth, teeth, spelt ed, Ancren Riwle,
p- 288, 1. 3 from bottom. AS. 760, pl. 2éd and zd8as, Grein, il. 543.
Here a short o has been lengthened, with ultimate loss of x before th
following; 260 stands for *tond, for *tand; cf. OSax. tand.4+Du.
tand; Icel. tonn, gen. sing. tann-ar ; Dan. tand; Swed. tand; G,
zahn; MHG. zan, OHG. zand. B. All from Teut. type *tanth-us,
m.; cf. (from the weak stem) Goth. zunthus, a tooth. From the Idg.
bases *dent-, *dont-, we have L. dens (stem dent-), W. dant, Gk.
ddovs (stem dddvr-), Lithuan. dantis, Skt. danta-, a tooth. And cf.
Pers. dandan, a tooth. y. The Idg. *dont-, for *ed-dnt-, is a pres.
participial form from 4/ED, to eat; see Hat. Der. zooth, verb,
spelt tothe, Fitzherbert, Husbandry, § 24,1. 7; tooth-ed; tooth-ache,
Much Ado, iii. 2. 21 ; tooth-less, Prompt. Parv. ; tooth-drawer, Prompt.
Parv. ; zooth-pick, All’s Well, i. 1. 171 ; tooth-some, i.e. dainty, nice,
not an early word. Brugmann, ii. § 126. See Tine (1).

TOP (1), the highest part of anything, the summit. (E.) ME.
top; top ouer tail=head over heels, Will. of Palerne, 2776. AS.
top; ‘ Apex, summitas galez, helmes top, Voc. 143. 26.4-Du. top;
Icel. zoppr, a tuft, lock of hair, crest, top; Dan. top, a tuft, crest, top ;
Swed. topp, a summit ; G. zopf, a tuft of hair, pigtail, top of a tree ;
OHG. zoph. B. All from Teut. type *tuppoz, m., a peak, top;
allied to E. tap, a spike fora cask. Cf. G. zapfen, a peg, tap, also
a fir-cone; Norweg. ¢opp, a top, a bung (Aasen).. Der. top, verb,
Mach. iv. 3. 57; top-dressing ; top-gallant-mast, for which Shak. has
top-gallant, Romeo, ii. 4. 202 ; top-full, K. John, iii. 4. 180; top-less,
Troil. i. 3. 1523 ¢op-mast, Temp. i. 1. 37; top-sail, Temp. i. I. 7;
top-m-ost, really a double superl. form, see Aftermost; topp-le, to
tumble, be top-heavy, and so fall headlong, Macb. iv. 1. 56. Also
top-sy-turvy, q. V.

TOP (2), a child’s toy. (F.—G.) In Shak. Merry Wives, v. 1. 27.
ME. top, a child’s toy; King Alisaunder, 1727. Late AS. topp;
Anglia, i. 465.—AF. *top or *tope; only found in the OF. dimin. oper,
tupet. ‘ Trocus, topet;’ Glasgow MS., in Godefroy; he also gives
tupet, a top, and fopier, to spin like a top, like MF. toupier, Cot. ; cf.
F. toupie, a top, and MF. tupin, a pipkin, Cot.—MHG. topf, a top;
also, a pot, a scull (the humming-top being like a round pot).4-Low
G. dop, a shell; MDu. dop, doppe, a top (also top, from HG.) ;
MDnu. dof, a shell, doppe, a little pot, pipkin; EFries. dop, doppe, a
shell. Allied to ME. doppen, to dive, to dip (a water-pot), WF lem.
doppen, to dip, to plunge in (De Bo). Cf. Dip. q Or from
OLow G. top; from the same MHG. fopf.

TOPAZ, a precious stone. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. ¢opas, whence
Chaucer’s Sir Topas; spelt tupace,O. Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris,
p- 98,1.172.—OF-. topase, ‘topase, a stone ;’ Cot. = L. topazus, topazon,
topazion, a topaz.—Gk. témafos, romaciov, the yellow or oriental
topaz. B. According to Pliny, b. xxxvii. c. 8, named from an
island in the Red Sea called Topazas, the position of which was
‘conjectural;’ from Gk. roma¢ev, to conjecture! But this is a
popular etymology. It is probable that the name is of Eastern
origin; cf. Skt. tapas, fire, tap, to shine. See Schade, OHG. Dict.,
p- 1432.

TOPER, a great drinker. (F. or Ital.—Teut.) ‘Tope, to drink
briskly or lustily ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘The jolly members of a
toping club ;’ Butler, Epigram on a Club of Sots, 1.1. ‘ Tope /
here pledge me! (drinks) ;’ Etheredge, The Comical Revenge, A. ii.
sc. 3. Certainly connected, as Wedgwood shows, with F. ¢dper, to
cover a stake, a term used in playing at dice; whence ¢6fe ! interj.
(short for je ¢dpe, lit. I accept your offer), used in the sense of good !
agreed! well done! It came to be used as a term in drinking,
though this only appears in Italian. ‘ According to Florio [i.e. in
ed. 1688] the same exclamation was used for the acceptance of a
pledge in drinking. [Hegives] : topa, a word among dicers, as much
as to say, I hold it, done, throw! also by good fellows when they are
‘drinking; I'll pledge you;’ Wedgwood. B. Of Teut. origin;
from the striking together of hands or glasses; cf. Picard ¢oper, to
strike hands in bargaining, Ital. in-toppare, to strike against an
obstacle. Originally from.the act of placing together the ¢ops of the,


H


TORMENTIL


thumbs, at the same time crying zopp/ See ¢opp in Ihre, Outzen, and
the Bremen Worterbuch. Cf. Top (1). .

TOPIARY, adj. (L.—Gk.) Topiary work is a term applied to
clipped trees and shrubs, in landscape gardening. =—L. ‘topidrius,
belonging to landscape gardening. = L. ¢opia, fancy gardening. —.Gk.
Tonos, a place, a district.

TOPIC, a subject of discourse or argument. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Properly an adj. ; Milton has ‘a ¢opic folio’ =a common-place book ;
Areopagitica, ed. Hales, p. 40, 1. 27, on which see the note. ‘ Topicks
(topica), books that speak of places of invention, or that part of logick
which treats of the invention of arguments;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674. Spelt topickes in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. topiques, ‘topicks,
books or places of logicall invention ;’ Cot.—L. topica, s, pl., the
title of a work of Aristotle, of which a compendium is given by
Cicero (White).— Gk. tom«és, adj., local; also concerning Témo: or
common-places. Aristotle wrote a treatise on the subject (ra roma).
— Gk. rémos, a place. Der. topic-al (Blount), ¢opic-al-ly; and see
topo-graphy.

TOPOGRAPHY, the art of describing places. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Spelt topographie in Minsheu, ed. 1627.—F. topographie, ‘ the de-
scription of a place;’ Cot.—L. topographia.—Gk. tomoypapia, a
description of a place; Strabo. —Gk. romo-, for témos, a place ; and
ypapev, todescribe. See Topic andGraphic. Der. topograph-er,
formed with E. suffix -er from Gk. tonoypdd-os, a topographer,
describer of places; topograph-ic, topograph-ic-al, -ly.

TOPPLE, to fall over. (E.) See Top (1).

TOPSYTURVY, upside down. (E.) Examples show that -sy
does xot stand for side, as the word is sometimes written ; for zopsyteruy
is the older form. In Stanyhurst’s tr. of Virgil, ed. Arber, we have
top-turuye, P. 33, 1. 13; topsy-turuye, p. 63, 1. 25; and top-syd-turuye,
p- 59, 1. 23. Topside-turvey occurs twice (at least) in the play of
Cornelia, printed in 1594, in Act i, and Act v; see Dodsley’s Old
Plays, ed. Hazlitt, vol. v. p. 186, 1. 1, p. 250, 1. 15. Much earlier, we
find ‘ He tourneth.all thynge topsy tervy;’ Roy, Rede Me and Be
Not Wroth, ed. Arber, p. 51,1. 25 (printed in 1528). And Palsgrave
(1530) has ¢opsy tyrvy, p. 843, col. I. B. In Trench, Eng. Past
and Present, we are told that zopsy turvy is a corruption from topside
the other way ; to which the author adds: ‘ There is no doubt of the
fact ; see Stanihurst’s Ireland, p. 33, in Holinshed’s Chronicles.’
After searching in three editions of Holinshed, I find, in the reprint
of 1808, at p. 33, that Stanihurst has the equivalent expression topside
the other waie ; to which may be added that Richardson quotes topside
tother way from Search’s Light of Nature, vol. ii. pt. ii.c. 23. y. But
this only proves that such was a current explanation of the phrase in
the time of Stanihurst and later. It can hardly be doubted that topsy
tervy stood for top-so-tervy ; just as upside-down was originally «p-so-
down, i.e. ‘up as (if) down.’ Hence the derivation is from Zo, so,
and the old verb ¢erve, to overturn, orig. ‘to roll back;’ see Terve
in my Gloss, to Chaucer, and ¢opsy-turvy in my Notes on E. Etym.,
p. 303. Cf. Lowl. Sc. our-tyrve, to turn upside down (Jamieson) ;
ourtirvit, upset, turned over, Book of the Houlate, 837; ouer-terue, to
overthrow ; Hoccleve, De Regim. Princ., st. 259, 1. 1811. G. Dou-
glas has ¢irvit, stripped, despoiled, to translate L. detraxerat, Ain.
vy. 260. Allied to AS. tearflian, to turn, roll over; Low G, éarven,
to roll or turn up a cuff; OHG. zerben, umbi-zerben, to turn oneself
round,

TORCH, a light formed of twisted tow dipped in pitch, a large
candle. (F.—L.) ME. ¢orche, Floriz and Blancheflur, 1. 238.—F.
torche, ‘a link; also, the wreathed clowt, wisp, or wad of straw,
layed by wenches between their heads and the things which they
carry onthem;’ Cot. [Cf. Ital. sorcia, a torch, torciare, to twist ;
Span. entorchar, to twist, antorcha, a torch.)—Late L. tortica, a
torch; cf. also fortisius, occurring A.D. 1287; also fortius, &c. All
various derivatives from L. tort-us, pp. of torquére, to twist; see
Torture. A torch is simply ‘a twist.’ Der. torch-light.

TOREADOR, a bull-fighter. (Span.—L.) In use in 1618 (Stan-
ford Dict.)=—Span. zoreador.—Span. ¢orear, to fight bulls. Span.
toro, a bull.=L. taurus, a bull; see Taurus.

TORMENT, anguish, great pain. (F.—L.) ME. torment, Rob.
of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 148, 1. 6, where it means ‘ a tempest ;’
also tourment, K. Alisaunder, 5869.—OF. torment, ‘ torment ;’ Cot.
Mod. F. tourment.—L. tormentum, an instrument for hurling stones,
an instrument of torture, torture. Formed with suffix -men-tum from
tor- (for fore-), base of torquére, to twist, hurl, throw; see Torture.
Der. torment, verb, ME. tormenten, Rob. of Glouc. p. 240, 1. 14 (ed.
Wright, p. 349, l. 36) ; corment-ing-ly ; torment-or, ME, tormentour,
Chaucer, C. T. 15995 (G 527); also torment-er. And see tormentil,

TORMENTIL, the name of a herb. (F.—L.) In Levins.
Spelt turmentyll ; Palsgrave.—F. tormentille, ‘tormentile ;? Cot.—
Late L. tormentilla; Voc. 713.6. Cf. Ital. tormentilla, ‘ tormentill,’
Florio. Said to be so called because it relieved tooth-ache, an


TORNADO


idea which is at least as old as the 16th century; see Littré.—OF.
torment, great pain, an ache; see Torment.

TORNADO, a violent hurricane. (Span.—L.) ‘ Tornado (Span.
tornada, i.e. return, or turning about) is a sudden, violent, and
forcible storm .. . at sea, so termed by the marriners ;’ Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. But this is only a popular etymology; due to
misapprehension of the form of the word. ‘ Ternados, that is, thun-
drings and lightnings;’ Hakluyt, Voy. iii. 719.—Span. tronada, a
thunder-storm,=—Span. ¢rozar, to thunder.—L. ¢onare, to thunder.
See Thunder.

TORPEDO, the cramp-fish; a kind of eel that produces numb-
ness by communicating an electric shock. (L.) ‘Like one whom
a torpedo stupefies ;” Drummond, sonnet 53 ; and see Gosson, School
of Abuse, p. 56.—L. torpédo, numbness ; also, a torpedo, cramp-fish.
= L. torpére, to be numb; see Torpid.

TORPID, sluggish, lit. numb. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674.—L. torpidus, benumbed, torpid.—L. torpére, to be numb, to be
stiff. Cf. Lith. “pti, to grow stiff; Russ. terpnute, to grow numb.
Der. torpid-ly, torpid-ness, torpid-i-ty; torp-or, L. torpor, numbness,
inactivity ; also torp-esc-ent, from the stem of pres. part. of torpescere,
to grow torpid, inceptive form of torpére; torp-esc-ence.

TORQUE, a twisted metal ornament, esp. for the neck. (L.)
Englished from L. torques, a torque.—L. torguére, to twist; see
Pike Or from OF. torque, the sime (Supp. to Godefroy). See

ort.

TORRENT, a boiling, rushing stream. (F.—L.) In Shak.
J. Ces. i. 2, 107.—F. torrent, ‘a torrent, land-flood.’ =L. zorrentem,
acc. of torrens, hot, boiling, raging, impetuous ; and as a sb. a tor-
rent, raging stream. Orig. pres. part. of ¢orrére, to parch, dry up;
see Torrid. Der. (obs.) torrent-yne, a trout; Babees Book, p. 173,
note 4.

TORRID, parching, violently hot. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave.—
F. torride, ‘ torrid, scorched, parched;’ Cot.=—L. torridus, parched.
=L. torrére, to parch, dry up. B. Torrere stands for *torsére,
like terra for *tersa; from 4/TERS, to be dry; see Terrace and
Thirst. Cf. Gk. répcec@at,to become dry. Der. torr-ent, torre-fy,
to make dry, from F. ¢orrefier, ‘to scorch,’ Cot. ; torre-fact-ion, from
L. torrefactus, pp. of torrefacere, to make dry, dry up.

TORSION, a violent twisting, twisting force. (F.—L.) A late
word, In Johnson. =F. sorsion, ‘a winding, wrying, wresting ;’ Cot.
=-L. torsionem, acc. of torsio,a wringing.=L. torquére (pt. t. torst),
to twist; see Torture.

TORSK, a fish of the cod family. (Scand.) From Dan. and
Swed. torsk; Icel. Jorskr, a cod-fish; whence also G. dorsch. Per-
haps named from its being dried; cf. Swed. torr, Dan. dor, Icel. Jurr,
dry. Cf. Torrid.

TORSO, the trunk of a statue. (Ital.—L.—Gk.) A late word; not
in Todd’s Johnson. Ital. torso, a stump, stalk, core, trunk.=—L.
thyrsum, acc. of thyrsus, a stalk, stem of a plant; a thyrsus. —Gk.
Ovpoos, a straight stem, stalk, rod. See Thyrsus.

TORT, a wrong. (F.—L.) ‘Fraud or ¢ort;’ Spenser, F. Q. iv.
8. 31.—F. tort, a wrong, harm; also pp. of F. éordre, to twist. —L.
tortus, pp. of L. torquére, totwist. Cf. Irish tore, W. torch, a wreath ;
Russ. trok’, a girth ; Gk. arpaxros, a spindle; Skt. tarku-, a spindle.
=4/TERQ, to twist. See Torture.

TORTOISE, a reptile. (F.—L.) ME. ¢ortuce, Prompt. Parv. ;
tortoise, in Temp. i. 2. 316. We also find ME. ¢ortu, Knight de la
Tour, ch.xi. 1.2, 1, The latter form is immediately from MF. ¢ortué,
a tortoise (now fortwe); with which cf. Span. sortuga, a tortoise;
both from Late L. tortica, tartiica, a tortoise, for which Diez gives
a reference. So also Mital. tartuga (Florio); now corrupted to
tartaruga. 2. The E. tortoise answers to an OF. form, not re-
corded, but cognate with Prov. ¢ortesa, atortoise (Diez). Inall these
instances the animal is named from its crooked or twisted feet, which
are very remarkable; cf. OF. fortis (fem. tortisse), ‘crooked ;’ Cot.
Both Late L. tort-tica and Prov. tort-esa are formed as if from L.
tort-us, pp. of torguére, to twist; see Torture.

TORTUOUS, crooked. (F.—L.) ME. ¢ortuos, Chaucer, On
the Astrolabe, pt. ii. c. 28, 1. 19.—F. tortwéux, ‘full of crookedness
or crookings ;” Cot.—L. tortudsus, twisting about, crooked. = L. tort-
us, pp. of torquére, to twist; see Torture. Der. tortuous-ly, -ness.

TORTURE, a wringing pain, torment, anguish. (F.—L.) In
Shak, All’s Well, ii. 1. 177, &c.—F. sorture, ‘torture;’ Cot.—L.
tortura, torture; allied to L. tortus, pp. of torguére, to twist, whirl.
See Tort. Der. (from L. torguére) torch, tor-ment, tor-s-ion, tort-
cise, tort-u-ous ; con-tort, de-tort, dis-tort, ex-tort, re-tort ; also tart (2),
tormentil,

TORY, a Conservative in English politics. (Irish.) ‘Tory, an
Irish robber, or bog-trotter; also a nick-name given to the stanch
Royalists, or High-flyers, in the times of King Charles II. and
James II.;’ Phillips, ed, 1706. As to the use of the name, see


TOUCH


Trench, Select Glossary, and Todd’s Johnson. First used about
1680. Dryden even reduplicates the word into ¢ory-rory. ‘ Before
George, I grew ¢ory-rory, as they say,’ Kind Keeper, i. 1; ‘ Your
tory-rory jades,’ id. iv. 1. By this adj. he appears to mean ‘ wild.’
‘Tories was a name properly belonging to the Irish bogtrotters, who
during our Civil War robbed and plundered, professing to be in arms
for the royal cause; and from them transferred, about 1680, to those
who sought to maintain the extreme prerogatives of the Crown ;’
Trench, Select Glossary. Trench cites ‘the increase of tories and
other lawless persons’ from the Irish State Papers, Jan. 24, 1656.
In Irish the word means ‘ pursuer ;’ hence, I suppose, it was easily
transferred to bogtrotters and plunderers.—Irish ¢oiridhe, also
toruighe, a pursuer; cf. torachd, pursuit, search, for, a pursuit, dili-
gent search, also pursuers; foireacht, pursuit, search; toirighim, I
fancy, I think, I pursue, follow closely. Cf, Gael. zoir, a pursuit,
diligent search, also pursuers; ¢orachd, a pursuit with hostile in-
tention, strict search. From Olrish toracht (for *do-fo-racht), pur-
suit; where do (to) and fo (under) are prefixes; and racht is from
REG, as in L. reg-ere, to direct, Irish rig-im, I stretch out (Mac-
bain). Der. Tory-ism.

TOSH, to pull, or pluck; see Tease, Touse.

TOSS, to jerk, throw violently, agitate, move up and down vio-
lently. (Scand.) ‘I ¢osse a balle;’ Palsgrave.—Norw. fossa, to
sprinkle, strew, spread out; hence, ‘to foss hay.’ Allied to Dan.
dial. zusse, to stir, move, shake ; also to E. Touse, q.v.; and to Low
G., teusen, to toss (hay). @ W. Zosio, to toss, is from E.; not a
Celtic word. Der. toss, sb.; toss-pot, Tw. Nt. v. 412.

TOTAL, complete, undivided. (F.—L.) ‘ Thei toteth [look] on
her summe ofall ;’ Plowman’s Tale, pt. i. st. 46. We still use swum
total for total sum, putting the adj. after the sb., according to the F.
idiom. = F. otal, ‘the totall, or whole sum ;’ Cot.—Late L. té¢élis,
extended from L. zdtus, entire. Der. otal-i-ty, from F. #otalité, ‘a
totality ;’ Cot. Also sur-tout.

TOTEM, a natural object, usually an animal, used as a badge or
token of a clan, among N. American Indians. (Amer. Indian.)
‘Each his own ancestral totem;’ Longfellow, Hiawatha, xiv. Said
to be from the Algonquin ofem, with a prefixed poss. pron.; giving
nt’otem, ‘my totem ;’ Cent. Dict.

TOTTER, to be unsteady, stagger. (E.) For ‘olter, by assimila-
tion; it is related to zilt (ME. tulten, tilten) ; and means to be always
tilting over, to be ready to fall at any minute. ‘ Where home the
cart-horse ¢olters with the wain;’ Clare, Village Minstrel, Rural
Evening, 1.20. ‘The #oltering [jolting] bustle of a blundering trot ;’
id., Rural Morning, 37. Cf. prov. E. ¢olter, to struggle, flounder
about (Halliwell). Trevisa, ii. 387, has : ‘men ¢otrede peron [swung
upon ropes] and meued hider and pider ;’ here the/is dropped. The
form ¢oléer occurs twice in the King’s Quhair, by James I of Scotland ;
but not as a verb, as Jamieson wrongly says. ‘On her folter quhele’
=on her [Fortune’s] tottering wheel, st. 9; where folter is an adj.
‘So ¢olter quhilum did sche it to wrye’=so totteringly (unsteadily)
did She (Fortune) cause it (her wheel) to go aside, st. 164; where
tolter is an adverb. The suffix -er is here adjectival; ¢olter means
‘ready to tilt.’ Precisely the same loss of/ occurs in ¢at¢er (also spelt
totter), arag; see Tatter. . Again, folter is a frequent. related
to ME, ¢ulten, to totter or tilt over; ‘Feole temples per-inne tulien
to pe eorpe’=many temples therein tottered (fell) to the earth;
Joseph of Arithmathie, ed. Skeat, 100. Twulten is another form of
tilten; see Tilt (2). But it is important to remark that the word
totter itself is allied to AS. ¢ealtrian, to totter, vacillate, Grein, ii.
526; formed from the adj. ¢ealz, tottery, unstable; id. Add, that
we have the cognate MDu. fouteren, ‘to tremble,’ Hexham; for
*tolteren, like Du. goud for gold. Hence Du. outer, a swing; like
the Norfolk teeter-cum-tauter, a see-saw ; cf. tytter-totter, a see-saw
(Ralsgrave, p. 282). Further allied to Bavar. zelter-n, to hobble
along. Der. zotter-er. Note also toft-y (i.e. ¢olty, tilty), unsteady,
Chaucer, C. T. 4251 (A 4253); Spenser, F. Q. vii. 7. 39. And
see toddle.

TOUCAN, a large-beaked tropical bird. (F.—Brazilian.) Littré
gives a quotation of the 16th century. ‘Ila veu aux terres neufves
un oiseau que les sauvages appellant en leur gergon [jargon] toucan,’
&c.; Paré, Monstr. app. 2.. The form foucan is F., as above. =
Brazil. tucana, toucan, Hist. Nat. Brasilize (1648), p. 217. According
to Burton, Highlands of Brazil, i. 40, the bird is named from its cry.
The Guarani form is said to be tucd (whence Port. tucano); Granada
gives the Guarani form as tied (with % and @ both nasal).

TOUCH, to perceive by feeling, handle, move influence. (F.—
Teut.) ME. touchen, King Alisaunder, ed. Weber, 1195.— TF’. toucher,
to touch. (Cf, Ital. ¢occare, Span., Port., and Prov. tocar, to touch ;
also OF. toguer, ‘to clap, knock, or hit against;’ Cot. To touch a
lyre is to strike the strings, or rather to twitch them; so also Ital.
toccare il liuto, to twang the lute; Florio gives ‘to strike, to smite,


655


656 TOUCH-WOOD


to hit,’ as senses of toccare.]—Teut. type *tukkon, represented by
Low G. tukken, and OHG. zucchen, mod. G. zucken, to draw with a
quick motion, to twitch; cf. MDu. tocken, tucken, to touch (Hex-
ham). ‘This is an intensive form, from the weak grade (*tuh-) of
Teut. *teuhan-, as seen in Goth. tiuhan, AS. téon (<*téohan), to
pull, to draw, cognate with OHG. ziohan, G. ziehen, and therefore
with L. dacere, to draw; see Tuck (1), Tow (1), and Duke.
The Teut. base */ukk- arose from the Idg. *duk-n-; Brugmann, i.
§ 421 (7). Der. touch, sb., As You Like It, iii, 4. 15 ; touch-ing’, i.e.
relating to, orig. pres. part. of the verb touchen, Chaucer, C. T. 7872
(D 2290), spelt touchende (which is a pres. part. form) in Gower
C. A. p. 249, 1. 2 of Macaulay’s edition, but spelt touchinge in
Pauli’s edition, i. 307, bk. iii. 842; touch-ing, adj., touch-ing-ly,
touch-stone, a stone for testing gold, Palsgrave; touch-hole, Beaum.
and Fletcher, Custom of the Country, iii. 3. 8. Also ¢oc-sin, q.v.,
tuck-et.

TOUCH-WOOD, wood used (like tinder) for taking fire
from a spark, (F.—Teut.; and E.) We find ‘ Peace, Touchwood !’
in Beaum. and Fletcher, Little French Lawyer, Act ii (Cleremont).
Capt. Smith has: ‘smal peeces of touchwood;’ Works, p. 74.
Apparently, wood that catches fire at the touch of a spark; cf. touch-
box, box for priming, touch-pan, pan of a flint-lock musket, touch-hole
ofa gun. Probably influenced by ME. zache, in the sense of touch-
wood or tinder; Piers Plowman, C. xx. 211.

TOUCHY, apt to take offence. (F.—Low G.) ‘ You're touchy
without all cause;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Maid’s Tragedy, ili. 2
(Melantius). Doubtless often used as if derived from touch; but
really a corruption of Tetchy, q. v.

TOUGH, firm, not easily broken, stiff, tenacious. (E.) ME.
tough, Chaucer, Book of the Duchesse, 531. AS. 70h, tough; Voc.
29. 39.4-Du. zaai, flexible, pliant, tough, viscous, clammy; Low G.
taa, tage, tau, tough; G. zahe, zaéh, tough, tenacious, viscous, MHG.
z@he,OHG. zahi. B. Teut. type *tanxuz, later *tahuz ; allied to
AS. ge-teng-e, close to, oppressive, OSax. bi-teng-i, oppressive. The
orig. sense is ‘holding tight’ or ‘tenacious;’ cf. Tongs. 4 The
Teut. type regularly becomes *tanh, *tonh, tok in AS.; cf. Tooth.
Der. tough-ly, tough-ness, tough-ish ; also tough-en, formed like height-
en, &C.

TOUR, a going round, circuit, ramble. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ Tour, a
travel or journey about a country;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.—F. tour, ‘a
turn, round, compasse,..a bout or walk;’ Cot. Cf. Prov. tors,
also torns,a turn; Bartsch, Chrest. Provencgale. Tour is a verbal
sb. from tourner, to turn; it is a short form of ¢ourn (as the Prov.
form shows), in the sense of ‘a turn;’ the final x being lost. —L.
tornum, acc. of tornus.s—Gk. tépvos, a lathe. See Turn. Der.
tour-ist.

TOURMALINE, thenameofa certain mineral. (F. —Cingalese.)
First brought from Ceylon by the Dutch in 1703; see tr. of Beck-
mann, Hist. of Inventions, ed. 1846, vol. i. 89.—F. tourmaline;
formed from the native name in Ceylon, where it was called ¢dramalli.
This name is explained (vaguely) as ‘a general name for the
cornelian ;’ Clough, Singhalese Dict. (1830), ii. 246.

TOURNAMENT, TOURNEY, a mock fight. (F.—L.—Gk.)
So named from the swift turning of the horses in the combat. Cot-
grave has F. tournay, ‘a tourney ;’ Chaucer has ¢urneyinge, sb.,
C. T. 2559 (A 2557). ME. ¢urnement, Ancren Riwle, p. 399, l. 5
from bottom.—OF. ¢ornoiement, a tournament (Burguy). Formed
with suffix -ment (L. -mentum) from OF. tornoier, to joust.=OF.
tornoi, a tourney, joust; properly, a turning about.—OF. torner, to
turn; see Turn, 2. Tourney is from AF. torney=OF. tornoi, a
tourney (above) ; see forney in Stat. Realm, i. 230.

TOURNIQUET, a bandage which is tightened by turning a
stick round to check a flow of blood. (F.—L.—Gk.) Properly the
stick itself. ‘ Tourniquet, a turn-still (sic); also the gripe-stick us’d
by surgeons in cutting off an arm;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. =F. tourniquet,
‘the pin of a kind of fiddle, that which the fiddler turns with his
hand as he plays;’ Cot. He refers, apparently, to a sort of hurdy-
gurdy, of which the F. name was vielle. ‘ Tourni-qu-et is formed, with
dimin. suffixes, from fourner, to tun; see Turn. [N.B. turn-still=
turn-stile, a sense of F’, tourniquet. |

TOUSE, to pull about, tear or rend. (E.) In Shak. Meas. v. 313.
Spenser has ¢ouse in the sense to worry, to tease; F. Q. ii. 11. 33.
ME. zisen, in comp. ¢0-tusen, to pull about (Stratmann). It answers
to EFries, ¢uisen, N Fries, fuse, to tear, pull, rend. Cf. Low G. éuseln,
G. zausen, to touse. Der. ‘ous-er; spelt also Towzer, as a dog’s
name; also fous-le, tuss-le; and cf. toss.

TOUT, to look about, solicit custom. (E.) ‘A ¢outer is one who
looks out for custom;’ Wedgwood. We often shorten the sb. to
tout. But ¢out is properly a verb, the same as prov. E. toot, ME.
toten, to peep, look about, P. Plowman’s Crede, 142, 168, 339, 425.
‘ Totehylle, Specula;’ Prompt. Pary.; whence Tothill, a look-out hill


TOWEL


(W. Twthill, at Carnarvon). Also foot, to look, search, pry ; Index
to Parker Soc. publications; Tusser’s Husbandry, § 94, st. 2; Peele,
Arraignment of Paris, i. 2. See Toot in E.D.D., and in Nares.
The latter has: ‘The tradesmen of Tunbridge Wells were used
formerly to hunt out customers on the road, at their arrival; and
hence they were called ¢ooters.’ AS. t0tian, to project, stick out;
hence, to peep out; ‘ pa heafdu ¢dtodun iit’ =the heads projected out ;
fElfred, tr. of Gregory’s Past. Care, c. xvi, ed. Sweet, p. 104, 1. 5.
The orig. sense was ‘to project;’ hence, to put out one’s head,
peep about, look all round; and finally, to tout for custom. Der.
tout-er.  ¢ ‘ Tout and touter are found in no dictionaries but those
of very recent date; yet these words were in use before 1754. See
S. Richardson, Correspondence, &c., vol. iii. p. 316;” F. Hall, Mod.
English, p. 134. Distinct from zoo¢, verb, to blow a horn.

TOW (1), to tug or pull a vessel along. (E.) ME. towen, to3en;
Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, C. 100; Layamon, 7536 (later text). AS.
togian, to tug, draw (Toller); whence the sb. zoh-line, a tow-line,
tow-rope, Voc. 182. 32. Cf. OFries. zoga, to pull about.-+-Icel.
toga, to draw, pull; tog, a cord, a tow-rope; MHG. zogen, OHG.
zogon, to tear, pluck, pull. B. Derived from Teut. *tuh- (>*tug-),
weak grade of *tewhan-, to draw; as seen in AS. togen, pp. of the
strong verb zéohan, té@on, to pull, draw, which is cognate with G.
ziehen, OHG. ziohan, Goth. tiuhan, todraw. All from the Teut. base ~
TEUH, to draw (Fick, iii. 122), answering to 4/DEUK, as seen in
L. dicere, to draw.  @ F. tower, to tow, is of Teut. origin. Der.
tow-boat, -line, -rope; tow-age, Blount’s Nomolexicon, 1691. And
see tie, tug.

TOW (2), the coarse part of flax or hemp. (E.) ME. tow or towe,
P. Plowman, B. xvii. 245; Tyrwhitt prints tawe in Chaucer, C, T.
3772 (A 3774). AS. tow (tow ?) ; it occurs in tow-lic, tow-like, fit for
spinning. ‘Textrinum opus, towlic weorc;’ Voc. 125. 20; the next
entries being ‘Colus, distef, and ‘Fusus, sfinl,’ i.e. distaff and
spindle. Again, we find: ‘tow-his of wulle’=a tow-house or
spinning-house for wool, id. 186. 29; see the footnote. And see
tow-creft, skill in spinning (Toller). Tow was, in fact, orig. the
working or spinning itself, the operation of spinning; whence it
came to be applied to the material wrought upon. Hence we find
getawa, implements (Grein) ; and the word is brought into close con-
nexion with E. taw and ¢ew. See further under Tool, Taw.+
MDnu. touw, or werck, ‘towe;’ Hexham; touwe, ‘ the instrument of a
weaver,’ ouwen, ‘to tanne leather,’ i.e. to taw; id., Icel. #0, a tuft of
wool for spinning; vinna td, to dress wool. (Quite distinct from
Icel. og, goat’s hair.) Cf. Low G. tou, touw, implements; also
Goth. tawi, a work, a thing made, ¢awjan, to make. Similarly G.
werg or werk, tow, is merely the same word as werk, a work.

TOWARD, TOWARDS, in the direction of. (E.) As in
other cases, towards is a later form, due to adding the adverbial
suffix -es (orig. the mark of a gen. case) to the shorter ¢oward. In
Layamon, 566, we have ‘ foward Brutun’ =toward Brutus; inl. 515,
we have ‘him towardes com’=he came towards him. The AS.
toweard is used as an adj. with the sense of ‘future,’ as in: ‘on
tOweardre worulde’=in the future world, in the life to come; Mark,
x. 30. Hence was formed téweardes, towards, used as a prep. with
a dat. case, and commonly occurring after its case, as ‘€ow
/oweardes’ =towards you, Aélfred, tr. of Boethius, c, xxxix. § I (b. iv.
met. 4). B. Compounded of ¢d, to (see To) ; and weard in the sense
of ‘becoming’ or ‘tending to.’ Weard only occurs as the latter
element of several adjectives, such as afweard (lit. off-ward), absent;
afterweard, afterward; andweard, present; foreweard, forward, in
front; inmanweard, inward; niderweard, netherward; ufanweard,
upweard, upward; titanweard, outward; widerweard, contrary; and
in the adverbs hiderweard, hitherward, Jiderweard, thitherward; see
Ettmiiller’s Dict., p. 107. y. Cognate with Icel. -verdr, similarly
used in the adj. aitanverdr, outward, and in other adjectives; also
with MHG. -wert, whence G. vorwarts, forwards, and the like; also
with Goth. -wairths, as in andwairths, present, 1 Cor. vii. 26;
also allied to L. uersus, towards, which is often used after its case.
8. And just as L. wersus is from uertere, to turn, so AS. weard
is from the cognate verb weorJan (pt. t. weard), to become. See
further under Worth (2), verb. e. We may note that ward can
be separated from /o, as in to you-ward =toward you, 2 Cor. xili. 3 ;
see Ward in The Bible Word-book, ed. Eastwood and Wright.
Also that toward is properly an adj. in AS., and commonly so used
in later E., as opposed to froward; it is common in Shakespeare.
Der. toward-ly, Timon, iii. 1. 37; toward-ness, toward-li-ness. And
(with the suffix -ward) after-ward, back-ward, east-ward, for-ward,
fro-ward, home-ward, hither-ward, in-ward, nether-ward, north-ward,
out-ward, south-ward, to-ward (as above), thither-ward, up-ward,
west-ward, whither-ward. :

TOWEL, a cloth for wiping the skin after washing. (F.—OHG.)
ME. dowaille, Floriz and Blancheflur, 563; towaille, Chaucer, C. T.


TOWER


14663 (B 3935).—F. ¢owaille, ‘a towel,’ Cot.; OF. ¢oaille. [Cf.
Low L. toacula; Span. toalla; Ital. zovaglia. All of Teut. origin.]
= OHG. twahila, dwahila, MHG. dwehele, G. zwehle,a towel. mOHG.
twahan, MHG., dwahen, to wash.+Icel. Ava (pp. Aveginn), to wash;
Dan. toe; AS. Awéan (contr. for *Awahan), to wash; Goth. thwahan,
to wash. And cf. AS. Jwéle, a towel (O. E. Texts) ; Awéal, a bath ;
Du. dwaal, a towel; dweil, a clout, whence prov. E. dwile, a clout,
coarse rag for rubbing. B. All from Teut. base THWAH, to
wash. N.B. The AF. form owayle occurs in A Nominale, ed. Skeat,
1. 498. Der. towell-ing, stuff for making towels.

TOWER, a lofty building, fort, or part of a fort. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Spelt tur in the A. S. Chron. an. 1097.—OF. tur, later tour, ‘a
tower ;’ Cot.—L. turrem, acc. of ¢urris, a tower.—Gk. tupots, TUppis,
a tower, bastion. We also find Gael. forr, a hill or mountain of an
abrupt or conical form, a lofty hill, eminence, mound, tower, castle ;
Trish tor, a castle; cf. prov. E. (Devon.) for, a conical hill, a word
of Celtic origin. ‘Scopulum, torr;’ Voc. 147. 38. Cf. Skt. torana-,
an arch. Der. tower, verb; tower-ed, tower-ing, tower-y.

TOWN, a large village. (E.) The old sense is simply ‘ enclo-
sure ;’ it was often applied (like Lowland Sc. tooz) to a single farm-
house with its outbuildings, &c. ME. toun, Wyclif, Matt. xxii. 5.
AS. tin, Matt. xxii. 5 ; where the L. text has uillam. The orig.
sense is ‘ fence ;” whence the derived verb zynan, to enclose.-+- Du. tuin,
a fence, hedge; Icel. zu, an enclosure, a homestead, a dwelling-
house; G. zaun, OHG, ziin, a hedge. B. All from Teut. type
*tiinoz, m., a hedge, enclosure. Cognate words appear in Irish and
Gael. dun, a fortress, W. din, a hill-fort (whence dinas, a town) ; this
Celtic word is conspicuous in many old place-names, such as Augusto-
diinum, Camalo-dinum, &c. Lit.‘ fastness;’ allied to Irish dur, firm,
strong, L. durus, hard, lasting ; Gk. 6v-vayus, strength. See Dure.
Brugmann, i. § 112; ii. § 66. Der. town-clerk, -crier, -hall, -house,
-ship, -talk ; also towns-man (=town’s man), towns-folk (= town’s-folk).
Also town-ish, Sir T. Wyat, Sat. i. 4.

TOXICOLOGY, the science which investigates poisons. (Gk.)
Modern; not in Johnson. Coined from Gk. roftxd-v, poison for
smearing arrows with ; and -Aoyia, from Adyos, a discourse, Aéyerv, to
say (see Logic). Tofixov is neut. of rogixds, adj., belonging to
arrows or archery; from 7ééov, a bow, lit. a piece of shaped wood.
Perhaps from 4/TEKS, to cut, hew, shape; cf. Skt. taksh, to cut.
See Technical. Or allied to L. taxus,a yew. Der. toxicologi-c-al,
toxicolog-ist.

TOXOPHILITEH, a lover of archery. (Gk.) Coined from
Gk. 76f0-v, a bow, and @uA-eiy, to love; with suffix -ite, Gk. -:77s.
See above.

TOY, a plaything ; also, as a verb, to trifle, dally. (Du.) ‘ Any
silk, any thread, any toys for your head;’ Wint. Tale, iv. 4. 326.
‘On my head no ¢oy But was her pattern ;” Two Noble Kinsmen, i.
3. This is only a special sense. ‘ Any folysshe zoy;’ Barclay, Ship
of Fools, i. 176. Palsgrave has: ‘ Toy, a tryfell;’ also, ‘I ¢oye, or
tryfell with one, I deale nat substancyally with hym; I /oye, I playe
with one; He doth but ¢oye with you, Jd ne fait que se jouer auecques
vous. Not in ME.=—Du. tig, tools, utensils, implements, stuff, re-
fuse, trash; which answers to Palsgrave’s definition as ‘a trifle.’
The sense of plaything occurs in the comp. sfeeléuig, playthings,
child’s toys ; lit. ‘stuff to play with.’ Sewel gives: ‘Speeltuyg, play-
tools, toys;’ also: ‘Op de tuy houden, to amuse,’ lit. to hold in
trifling, toy with one; also: ‘ een tuyg op zy, silver chains with a
knife, cissars, pincushion, &c. as women wear,’ which explains the
Shakespearian usage.-++-Low G. tiig, used in all the senses of G. zeug ;
Icel. tygi, gear; Dan. ¢0i, stuff, things, gear; dum tdi, stuff and non-
sense, trash ; whence /egetoi, a plaything, a toy, from lege (= prov.
E. laik), to play; Swed. zyg, gear, stuff, trash.4-G. zeug, stuff, matter,
materials, lumber, trash ; whence spielzeug, toys; MHG. ziuc, stuff,
materials. B. Connected by some with the strong Teut. verb
*teuhan- (Goth. tinhan, AS. téon, OHG. ziohan, G, ziehen), to draw,
cognate with L. diicere, to lead (4/DEUK); which may be cor-
rect. @ The pronunciation of oy in zoy is an attempt at imitating
the pronunciation of Du. zwig, just as hoy, a sloop, answers to the
Flemish hui; see Hoy (1). Der. toy-ish.

TRACK (1), a track left by drawing anything along, a mark left,
a footprint. (F.—L.) ME. ¢race, King Alisaunder, ed. Weber,
77713 Pricke of Conscience, 4349.—F. trace, ‘a trace, footing, print
of the foot; also, a path or tract ;’ Cot. [Cf, Ital. traccia, a trace,
track; Span. ¢raza, a first sketch, outline.}] A verbal sb., from MF.
tracer, verb, ‘to trace, follow, pursue ;’ of which another form was
MF. trasser, ‘to delineate, score, trace out ;’ Cot. Cf. Ital. trac-
ciare, to trace, devise; Span. trazar, to plan, sketch. These verbs
are all formed (as if from a Late L. *tractiare) from tract-us, pp. of
trahere, to draw, orig. to drag with violence. See Trait. Der.
trace, verb, ME. tracen, Chaucer, Parl. of Foules, 54 (less common
than the sb.), directly from F, tracer, to trace, as above; trac-er,


-(=either trade’s union or trades’ union).


TRADE


trace-able, trac-ing; trac-er-y, a coined word, in rather late use.
Also (from L, trahere) trace (2), tract (1), tract (2), tract-able, tract-
ile, tract-ion, tract-ate, trail, train, trait, treat, treat-ise, ¢reat-y; also
abs-tract, at-tract, con-tract, de-tract, dis-tract, ex-tract, pro-tract, re-
tract, sub-tract ; en-treat, es-treat, mal-treat, por-trait, por-tray or pour-
tray, re-treat.

TRACE (2), one of the straps by which a vehicle is drawn.
(F.—L.) ‘ Trace, horse harnesse, trays;’ Palsgrave. MF. ¢raice:
‘ Trayce, horsys harneys, Tenda, traxus, restis, trahale;’ Prompt.
Pary. Evidently from the OF. rays, cited by Palsgrave, which is
a pl. form equivalent to F, traits, pl. of trait. In Walter de Bibbes-
worth, we find : ‘ Les trays si unt braceroles,’ and bracerolesis glossed
by ‘ henekes (?) of ¢rays;’ Wright, Vocab. i. 168. Golding has trace
as a plural; tr. of Ovid, Met. ii.; fol. 16 b (1603). Cf. ‘ for v pair
trays, for the king’s car; Privy Purse Exp. of Eliz. of York (1480),
p. 123. Cotgrave gives as one sense of ¢rait (which he spells ¢raict)
that of ‘a teame-trace or trait, the cord or chain that runs between
the horses, also the draught-tree ofa caroch.’ Thus ¢race=F. traits ;
so that races is a double plural. See Trait.

TRACHEA, the wind-pipe. (L.—Gk.) In Phillips, ed. 1607. —
L, trachéa; also trachia. The latter form is given in White. =Gk.
Tpaxeta, lit. ‘ the rough,’ from the rings of gristle of which it is com-
posed ; tpayxeia is the fem. of tpaxvs, rough, rugged, harsh. Allied
to 7Té-Tpnx-a, perf. tense of Opdccay, tapdoceyv, to disturb. Der.
trache-al,

TRACK, a path, course. (F.—Teut.) Confused with ¢racé in
old authors; also with ¢race both in old and modern authors. Min-
sheu has: ‘ A trace, or tracke ;’ Cotgrave explains F. trac by ‘a track,
tract, or trace.’ In Shak. Rich. II, iii. 3. 66, Rich. III, v. 3. 20, the
folios have ¢ract for track; and in Timon, i. I. 50, the word trac¢ is
used in the sense of trace. ‘The ¢rak of his hors;’ Malory, Morte
Arthure, bk. x. c. 14. These words require peculiar care, because
trace and tract are really connected, but ¢rack is not of L. origin, and
quite distinct from the other two words.=F. trac, ‘a track, tract, or
trace, a beaten way or path, a trade or course.’ Cf. Norm. dial.
trac, a track; Walloon zrak, a stage, or distance along aroad. The
sense of ‘beaten track’ is the right one; we still use that very
phrase. Of Teut. origin. —MDu. ¢reck, Du. trek, a draught; from
trekken, to draw, pull, tow, travel, march, &c., MDu, trecken, ‘to
drawe, pull, or hale,’ Hexham; also MHG. trecken, to draw, a
secondary verb formed from the OHG. strong verb ¢rekhan, to scrape,
shove, draw. As the last is a strong verb, we see that ¢rack is quite
independent of the L. trahere. Note that NFries. has ¢racke for Du.
trekken. Der. track, verb; track-less, Cowley, The Muse, l. 25.

TRACT (1), continued duration, a region. (L.) Often confused
both with ¢race and track; it is related to the former only; see
Trace (1). ‘This in ¢racte of tyme made hym welthy :’ Fabyan,
Chron. c. 56.—L. tractus, a drawing out; the course of a river, a
tract or region,—L. ¢ractus, pp. of trahere, to draw; see Trace (1).
And see Tractable.

TRACT (2), a short treatise. (L.) An abbreviation for ¢ractate,
which is now little used. ‘ Tractate, a treatise ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674.—L. tractatum, acc. of tractdtus, a handling, also a treatise,
tractate, or tract. See Tractable. Der. tract-ar-i-an, one who
holds opinions such as were propounded in ‘ T'racts for the Times,’ of
which go numbers were published, A. D. 1833-1841 ; see Haydn, Dict.
of Dates.

TRACTABLBE, easily managed, docile. (L.) InShak.1 Hen. IV,
iii. 3. 194.—L. tractabilis, manageable, easily wrought. = L. tractare,
to handle, frequent. of trahere (pp. tractus), to draw. See Trace
(1). Der. tractabl-y, tractable-ness, tractabili-ty. Also (like L. pp.
tractus) tract-ile, that may be drawn out; tract-ion, from F. traction,
‘a draught or extraction,’ Cot.; ¢ract-ive, drawing or pulling ; ¢ract-
or (see Webster). Also ¢ract-ate, for which see T'ract (2).

TRADE, way of life, occupation, commerce. (E.) ‘ Properly
that path which we ¢read, and thus the ever recurring habit and
manner of our life;’? Trench, Select Glossary. It once meant, liter-
ally, a path; ‘ A common Z#rade, to passe through Priams house ;’
Surrey, tr. of Virgil, Ain. ii. 593. Not common; the usual ME.
words are ¢red and #rod, both in the sense of footmark, Ancren Riwle,
p- 380, note g. But we find the exact form in the ME. trade, Sir
Guy (Caius MS.), 4731, the prov. E. ¢rade (E. D. D.), and Low G.
trade, Swed. dial. trad, a beaten track ; from the 2nd grade of the vb.
All from AS. tredan, to tread; see Tread. Der. trades-man, i.e.
trade’s-man, one who follows a trade; trades-woman ; trades-union
Also trade, vb., trad-ed,
K. John, iv. 3. 109; ¢rad-er, 1 Hen. IV,i. 2. 141. Also trade-wind,
a wind blowing in a constant direction, formed from the phr. to blow
trade =to blow always in the same course; ‘the wind blowing trade,’
Hakluyt’s Voyages, iii. 849; the word ¢rade-wind is in Dryden,
Annus Mirabilis, last line but one.


657


8p yt


658 TRADITION


TRADITION, the handing down to posterity of unwritten
practices or opinions. (L.) ME. tradicioun, Wyclif, Col. ii. 8.
Formed directly from L. trdditio, a surrender, delivery, tradition (Col.
ii. 8). [The F. form of the word gave us our word treason.] Cf. L.
tradit-us, pp. of tradere, to deliver; see Traitor. Der. tradition-al.
Doublet, treason.

TRADUCH, to defame. (L.) In Shak. All’s Well, ii. 1. 175.
In the Prologue to the Golden Boke, traduce occurs in the sense of
translate, and traduction is translation. = L. traducere, to lead across,
transfer, derive ; also, to divulge, convict, prove guilty (whence our
use to defame). —L. zrd-, for trans, across; and dicere, to lead; see
Trans- and Duke. Der. traduc-er.

TRAFFIC, to trade, exchange, barter. (F.—Ital.) In Shak.
Timon, i. 1. 158; Macb. iii. 5. 4; we have also the sb. zraffic, spelt
traficke in Spenser, F. Q. vi. 11. 9. —F. trajiquer, ‘ to traffick, trade ; ’
Cot. We find also F. trajique, sb. ‘ traffick ;’ id. Ital. ¢rafficare, to
traffic, manage (¢rajicare in Florio). Cf. Span. ¢raficare, trafagar ;
Port. ¢rajicar, trafeguear, to traffic, to cheat. Also Ital. traffico
(trajico in Florio), Span. trajico, trafago, traffic, careful management ;
Port. ¢rajico, trafego, traffic. B. Origin unknown. It has been
proposed to derive it from Heb. ¢raffik,a late Heb. rendering of late
Gk. rpomaixds; which again is a Gk. rendering of L. wictoriatus, the
name of a silver coin bearing the figure of Victory (Lewis). See
Atheneum, Apr. 7, 1900. Der. traffic, sb.; traffick-er, Merch. Ven.
Ti Oy OP

TRAGACANTH, a gum obtained from several shrubs of the
genus Astragalus, (F.—L.—Gk.) In Bailey, vol. ii (1731), who
explains it by ‘gum dragon;’ where dragon is due to the old name
dragagant, from MF. dragagant in Cotgrave. =F. tragacanthe (Hatz-
feld), the name of a shrub.—L. ¢ragacantha, the tragacanth-shrub ;
cf. tragacanthum, also draganium, gum tragacanth. = Gk. rpaydkavéa,
astragalus, lit. ‘goat-thorn.’=Gk. tpay-os, a goat; and dsavOa, a
thorn, from d«-is, a sharp point.

TRAGEDY, a species of drama of a lofty and mournful cast.
(F.—L.—Gk.) ME. tragédie; see Chaucer’s definition of it, C. T.
13979 (B 3163).—MF-. tragedie, ‘a tragedy;’ Cot. = L.tragedia. — Gk.
Tpaywoia, a tragedy. ‘ There is no question that tragedy is the song
of the yoat; but why the song of the goat, whether because a goat
‘was the prize for the best performance of that song in which the
germs of the future tragedy lay, or because the first actors’ were
dressed, like satyrs, in goat-skins, is a question which has stirred
abundant discussion, and will remain unsettled to the end;’ Trench,
Study of Words, lect. v. The latter theory now finds most favour.
A third theory is thata goat was sacrificed at the singing of the song ;
a goat, as being the spoiler of vines, was a fitting sacrifice at the
feasts of Dionysus. In any case, the etymology is certain. Gk.
Tpaywods, lit. ‘a goat-singer,’ a tragic poet and singer.= Gk. tpay-os,
a he-goat ; and #dés, a singer, contracted from dovdés ; seeOde. Der.
tragedi-an, All’s Well, iv. 3. 299, apparently a coined word, not bor-
rowed from French. Also ¢rag-ic, 2 Hen. IV, i. 1.61, from F.
tragique, ‘ tragicall, tragick,’ Cot., L. tragicus, Gk. rpayikds, goatish,
tragic, from tpay-os, a goat. Hence ¢ragic-al, -al-ly, -al-ness.

TRAIL, to draw along the ground, to hunt by tracking. (F.—L.)
ME. trailen. In Wyclif, Esther, xv. 7, later version, we find: ‘ but
the tother of the sernauntessis suede the ladi, and bar vp the clothis
fletinge doun in-to the erthe;”* where, for fletinge, some MSS. have
trailinge, and the earlier version has flowende = flowing. Cf.
‘Braunches doo traile ;’ Palladius, iii. 289, p.71. ‘ Traylyn as clopys,
Segmento;’ Prompt. Parv. We have also ME. traile, sb. ‘ Trayle,
or trayne of a clothe;’ Prompt. Parv. So also: ‘ Trayle, sledde
[sledge], traha; to Trayle, trahere, Levins, ed. 1570. John de
Garlande, in the 13th cent., gives a list of ‘instrumenta mulieribus
convenientia;’ one of these is ¢rahale, of which he says: ‘ Trahale
dicitur a traho, Gallice ¢raail;’ Wright’s Voc. i. 134. Palsgrave
has: ‘I ¢rayle, lyke as a gowne dothe behynde on the grounde;’
also ‘I ¢rayle, as one trayleth an other behynde or at a horse-tayle.’
— OF. trailler, to tow a boat (Supp. to Godefroy) ; MF. trailler, ‘ to
wind a yarn; also, to traile a deer, or hunt him upon a cold sent ;’
Cot. = OF, traille, a tow-rope (Supp. to Godefroy) ; also, a ferry-boat
with a cord,=—L. ¢ragula, a drag-net, sledge; cf. traha, a sledge. =
L. trahere, to draw ; see Trait. Andcf.Train. Cf. MDnu. treylen,
“to drawe, or dragge a boate with a cord, Hexham; borrowed (like
MDu. treyn, a train) from French.

TRAILBASTON, alaw-term. (F.—L.) See Blount’s Nomo-
lexicon, ed. 1691, and Spelman. ‘There were justices of traylbaston,
appointed by Edw. I. [‘ The common people in those days called
them ¢ray-baston, quod sonat trahe baculum;’ Blount. . Roquefort
divides the word as ¢ray-le-baston. It would seem that the word was
considered as a compound of OF. tray (=L. trahe), give up, and
baston, a wand of office, because many unjust officers were deprived of
their offices.] But this view is proved to be wrong by the passage


TRAM


from Langtoft’s Chronicle printed in Polit. Songs, ed. Wright, p. 318 ;
on which see Wright’s note, p. 383. The Anglo-F. word was
traylbastoun, traylebastoun or trayllebastoun, meaning ‘ trail-stick’ or
‘ stick-carrier ;’ (id. pp. 231, 233, 319); and the name was given to
a particular set of lawless men, who carried sticks, and committed
acts of violence. Against these the articles of trailbaston were
directed; and the justices of trailbaston tried them. The Outlaw’s
Song (Polit. Songs, p. 231) is explicit; he says that these articles
were unreasonable ; for if he merely gives his servant a buffet or two,
the servant will have him arrested, and he will be heavily fined.
Mr. Wright notes that some have supposed (quite wrongly) that the
name was given, not to the outlaws, but the judges. For the form
of the word, compare MDu. kolf-drager, a sergeant, lit. “club-bearer.’
See Trail and Baton.

TRAIN, the hinder part of a trailing dress, a retinue, series,
line of gun-powder, line of carriages; as a verb, to trail, to allure,
educate, discipline. (F.—L.) ME. train, sb., spelt trayn, with the
sense of plot, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 295, 1. 22; ¢rayne,
id. p. 263, 1. 235; ‘treson and ¢rayne,’ Morte Arthure, ed. Brock,
4192; ME. ¢raynen, verb, to entice, id. 1683.—F. ¢rain, m., ‘a
great man’s retinue, the train or hinder part of a beast; . . work,
dealing, trade, practise ;’ Cot. Also ¢raine, f., ‘a sled, a drag or
dray without wheels, a drag-net,’ id. Also trainer, verb, ‘to traile,
drag, draw;’ id. OF. ¢rakin, train, a train of men; ¢rahiner,
trainer, verb; cf. Late L. trahindre, to drag; occurring A.D. 1268.
=-Late L. traginare, to draw along (Schwan); evidently founded
upon L. trahere, to draw; see Trace, Trail. Cf. AF. treine, pp.
dragged along, Liber Custumarum, p. 284. Der. ¢rain-er; train-
band, i.e. train’d band, a band of trained men, Cowper, John Gilpin,
st. I, and used by Dryden and Clarendon (Todd) ; ¢rain-bear-er.
@ But not tratn-oil.

TRAIN-OIL, oil procured from the blubber or fat of whales by
boiling. (Hybrid; Du.; and F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt ¢rane-oyle, Hak-
luyt’s Voyages, i. 477, last line; ¢rayne oyle, Arnold’s Chron. p. 236.
In Hexham’s Du. Dict., ed. 1658, we find: ‘ Traen, trayne-oile made
of the fat of whales.’ Also: ‘¢raen, a tear; liquor pressed out by
the fire.” Cf. mod. Du. traan, a tear; traan, train-oil. We thus see
that the lit. sense of rain is ‘ tear,’ then, a drop of liquor forced out
by fire; and lastly, we have ¢rain-oil, or oil forced out by boiling.
Cf. Dan. and Swed. zraz, train-oil, blubber, G. ¢hran, all borrowed
from Dutch; cf. G. thrane, a tear, also a drop exuding from a vine
when cut. So also Low G, éraan, train-oil ; trane, a tear; very well
explained in the Bremen Worterbuch. Similarly, we use E. zear in
the sense of ‘a drop’ of some balsams and resins, &c. B. The Du.
traan (equivalent to OHG. trahan below) is the only form for ‘ tear’
used in Dutch; the G. ¢hrdne is really a pl. form, due to MHG.
triihene, pl. of trahen, OHG. trahan, a tear. It has been thought
that the OHG. trahan is allied to E. tear ; but the connexion is not
clear. @ It thus appears that ¢raiz-oil is a tautological expression ;
accordingly, we find ¢rane, train-oil, in Ash’s Dict., ed. 1775.

TRAIT, a feature. (F.—L.) Given in Johnson, with the remark
‘scarcely English.’=F. ¢rait, ‘a draught, line, streak, stroak,’ Cot.
He also gives the MF. spelling ¢raict. =F. trait, formerly also traict,
pp. of traire, to draw.—L. tractus, pp. of trahere, to draw; see
Trace (1).

TRAITOR, one who betrays, a deceiver. (F.—L.) ME. traitour,
spelt ¢traitoure, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 61, 1. 125; treitur,
O. Eng. Homilies, i. 279, 1. 22.—OF. traitor, traiteur, a traitor. =—L.
traditérem, acc. of traditor, one who betrays. L. tradere, to hand
over, deliver, betray. —L. ¢ra-, for trans, across, overt ; and -dere, for
dare, to give; (hence tra-didi, pt. t., is due to dedi, I gave). See
Trans- and Date. Der. traitor-ous, 1 Hen. VI, iv. 1. 173; ¢raitor-
ous-ly ; traitr-ess, All’s Well, i. 1.184. From the same source are
tradit-ion, treason, be-tray.

TRAJECTORY, the curve which a body describes when pro-
jected. (F.—L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706. Suggested by MF. ¢rajec-
toire, ‘casting, thrusting, sending, transporting ;’ Cot. Formed as
if from a L. *traiectorius, belonging to projection ; formed from 7ra-
iectus, pp. of traicere (trdjicere), to throw, cast, or fling over or
across. —L. ¢rd-, for trans, across; and iacere, to cast. See Trans-
and Jet. Der. traject, which is perhaps the right reading for
tranect in Merch. of Ven. iii. 4. 53; from MF. éraject, ‘a ferry, a
passage over,’ Cot., which from L. ¢raiectus, a passage over. Shake-
speare would have written ¢raiect, which was made into ¢ranect, a false
form.

TRAM, a coal-waggon, a carriage for passengers running on iron
rails. (Scand.) There have been frequent inquiries about this word ;
see Notes and Queries, 2 Ser. v. 128, xii. 229, 276, 358; 4 Ser. xii.
299, 420; 6 Ser. ii. 225, 356. A ¢ram is an old Northern word for
a coal-waggon, esp. such a one as ran upon rails. In N. and Q.,
2 Ser. xii, 276, J. N. quoted an Act of Parliament for the year 1794,


TRAMMEL


for the construction of ‘an iron dram-road, tram-road, or railway’
between Cardiff and Merthyr Tydvil; but the date 1794 should
have been 1820. Jn N. and Q., 65S. ii. 356, A. Wallis stated that
‘tramways were in use in Derbyshire before 1790; one of planks
and log-sleepers was laid between Shipley coal-pit and the wharf
near Newmansleys, a distance of 14 miles, and was discontinued
in the above year.’ [About A.D. 1800, a Mr. Benjamin Outram
made certain improvements in connexion with railways for common
vehicles, which gave rise to the fiction (ever since industriously
circulated) that ¢ram-road is short for Outram road, in ignorance of
the fact that the accent alone is sufficient to show that Outram, if
shortened to one syllable, must become Out rather than ram or tram.]
Brockett’s Glossary (3rd ed. 1846) explains that a tram is the
Northern word for ‘a small carriage on four wheels, so distinguished
from a sledge. It is used in coal-mines to bring the coals from the
hewers to the crane. 8B. The word is clearly the same as Low-
land Scotch zram, ‘(1) the shaft of a cart or carriage of any kind,
(2) a beam or bar,’ Jamieson. Dunbar has barrow-tram; Of the
same James Dog, 1. 19. Cf. proy. E. zram, a small milk-bench
(Halliwell) ; which was orig. a plank of wood. It was prob. used
first of the shaft of a small carriage, and then applied to the small
carriage itself, esp. such a one as was pushed or drawn by men or
boys in coal-pits. This notion is borne out by the cognate Low G.
traam, a word particularly used of the handles of a wheel-barrow or
the handles by which a kind of sledge was pushed ; Bremen Worter-
buch, ed. 1771. In N. and Q., 6S. ii. 498, J. H. Clark notes that
‘the amendinge of the higheway or z¢ram from the Weste ende of
Bridgegait, in Barnard Castle’ occurs in a will dated 1555 ; see
Surtees Soc. Publications, vol. xxxviii. p. 37. Here a ¢ram prob.
means a log-road. ‘The word is Scandinavian. = Norw. ¢ram, a door-
step (of wood) ; ¢raam, a frame ; Swed. dial. tromm, a log, stock of
a tree; also a summer-sledge (sommarslade); also trémm, trumm
(Rietz) ; MSwed. tram, trum, a piece of a large tree, cut up into
logs. The orig. sense is clearly a beam or bar of cut wood, hence
a shaft of a sledge or cart, or even the sledge itself. Cf. EFries.
trame, a step of a ladder, handle of a barrow; Low G. ¢raam, a
balk, beam, esp. one of the handles of a wheel-barrow, as above;
also MDu. drom, a beam (obsolete); Hexham, Also OHG. dram,
tram, a beam, once a common word; see Grimm’s Dict. ii. 1331,
1332. The last form may account for the variation dram-road, in
the Act of Parliament cited above; and it has been already observed
that a dramroad or tramroad might also be explained as a log-road.
y. The comparison of Swed. tromm with Du. drom shows that the
original Low G. initial letter must have been #h; which is proved
by the Icel. Aram-valr, lit. ‘a beam-hawk,’ a poet. word for a ship.
5. The Swed. dial. ¢rumm (above) further resembles G. trumm, lump,
stump, end, thrum, fragment, and suggests a connexion with
‘Thrum (1), to which Icel. Jram- is related by gradation. Hence,
the orig. sense was ‘end;’ then fragment, bit, lump, log, plank,
shaft, &c. Der. tram-road, -way.

TRAMMELL, a net, shackle, anything that confines or restrains.
(F.—L.) ME. tramayle, ‘grete nette for fyschynge;’ Prompt.
Parv. Spenser has ¢ramels, nets for the hair, F. Q. il. 2. 15.—MF.
tramail, ‘a tramell, or a net for partridges;’ Cot. Cf. F. trameau
(answering to an older form *¢ramel), ‘a kind of drag-net for fish, a
trammell net for fowle ;’ this comes still nearer to Spenser’s ¢ramel,
Cf. Ital. tramaglio, a drag-net, trammel ; Port. trasmalho, Span. tras-
mallo, a trammel or net ; Gascon ¢ramail; mod. F. trémail. = Late L.
tramacula, tramagula, a trammel, occurring in the Lex Salica, ed.
Hessels and Kern, xxvii. 20, col. 154; cf. coll. 158,161. The word
has numerous other forms, such as tremacle, tremale, trimacle, &c., in
other texts of the Lex Salica. Kern remarks: ‘ tremacle, &c. is a
diminutive, more or less Latinised. The Frankish word must have
differed but slightly, if at all, from the Drenthian (N. Saxon) zreemke
(for tremike, tramike), a trammel. Both the English and Drenthian
word point to a simplex trami or tramia ;’ col. 501. . This assumes
the word to be Teutonic, yet brings us back to no intelligible Teut.
base; nor does it account for the Ital. form. Diez takes it to be
Latin, and explains ¢remacula from L. tri-, thrice, three times, and
macula, a mesh or net, as if it meant treble-mesh or treble-net.
He remarks that a similar explanation applies to Trellis, q.v.
[This account is accepted, without question, by Scheler, Littré, and
Hatzfeld.] It is to be further noted that, according to Diez, the
Piedmontese trimaj is explained by Zalli to mean a fish-net or bird-
net made of three layers of net of different-sized meshes; and that
Cherubini and Patriarchi make similar remarks concerning the
Milanese tremagg and Venetian ¢ramagio. y. As to L. tri-, see
Three; as to L. macula, see Mail (1). The Span. ¢rasmadllo is an
altered form, as if from trans maculam, across the net, which is not
very intelligible. See Korting, § 9739.

TRAMONTANES, foreign. (F.—Ital.—L.) The word is pro-


TRANSCEND 659


perly Italian, and only intelligible from an Italian point of view;
it was applied to men who lived beyond the mountains, i. e. in France,
Switzerland, Spain, &c. It came to us through the French, and was
at first spelt ¢ramountain, ‘The Italians account all tramountain
doctors but apothecaries in comparison of themselves;’ Fnller,
Worthies, Hertfordshire (R.).—MF. tramontain, ‘ northerly;’ Cot.
=—Ital. ¢ramontano, pl. tramontani, ‘those folkes that dwell beyond
the mountaines;’ Florio, = L. ¢ransmontanus, beyond the mountains,
=L. trans, beyond; and mont-, stem of mons, a mountain; see
Trans- and Mountain. Cf. Ultramontane.

TRAMP, to tread, stamp. (E.) ME. trampen. ‘Trampelyn,
trampyn, Tero;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘He zrampith with the foot;’
Wyclif, Prov. vi. 13. Not in AS., but prob. E. ; it is foundin G. and
Low G., whence the Scand. forms. Cf. Low G, and G. ¢rampen, tram- .
peln, to stamp; Dan. trampe, Swed. trampa, to tread, trample on.
From the Teut. base TRAMP, to tread, occurring as the 2nd grade
of the Goth, strong verb ana-trimpan. ‘Managei ana-tramp ina’=
the multitude pressed upon him, lit. trampled on him, Luke, vy. 1.
B. This is a nasalised form of the Teut. base TRAP, to tread; see
Trap (1). Der. ¢ramp, sb., a journey on foot; ¢ramp-er, a vagrant
(see Johnson); also tramp, a shortened familiar form of ¢ramper,
both forms being given in Grose’s Dict. of the Vulgar Tongue, 1790.
And see tramp-le.

TRAMPLE, to tread under foot. (E.) ME. trampelen;
Prompt. Parvy. The frequentative of Tramp, q.v. The sense is,
accordingly, ‘to keep on treading upon.’ Cf. Low G. trampeln, G.
trampeln, to trample, stamp ; from Low G. and G. trampen, to tramp
or stamp.

TRAM-ROAD, TRAM-WAY ; see Tram.

TRANCE, catalepsy, ecstasy, loss of self-consciousness. (F. —L.)
ME. trance, Chaucer, C. T., A 1572. =F. transe, ‘extreme fear, dread,
...atrance or swoon;’ Cot. A verbal sb. from the OF. transir,
of which Cot. gives the pp. ¢ransi, ‘fallen into a trance or sown,
astonied, amazed, half dead.’—L. transire, to go or pass over ;
whence Ital. ¢ransire, ‘to goe foorth, passe ouer; .. also to fall ina
swoune, to dye or gaspe the Jast;’ Florio. [This shows that transire
came to have the sense of ‘die’ or ‘swoon;”’ similarly the OF.
trespasser (our trespass) commonly means ‘to die.’]—L. trans,
across; and ire, to go; see Transit. Der. en-trance (2). Also
tranc-ed, K. Lear, v. 3. 218.

TRANQUIL, quiet, peaceful. (F.—L.) In Shak. Oth. iii. 3.
348. [The sb. ¢ranquillity is in much earlier use; we find ME.
tranquillitee, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. ii. pr. 4, 1. 99.)—F. tran-
quille, ‘calm;’. Cot.—L. tranguillus, calm, quiet, still, Prob.
associated with qui-és, rest; compare -guillus with E. while. Der.
tranquil-ly ; tranquill-i-ty, from F. tranquillité, ‘tranquillity,’ Cot.,
from L. ace. tranquillitatem. Also tranquill-ise, Thomson, Castle
of Indolence, c. ii, st. 19.

TRANS.-, beyond, across, over. (L.) L. érans-, prefix; also. as
prep. trans, beyond. Trans is the pres. part. of a verb *trare, to
cross, go beyond, only occurring in in-trare, ex-trare, pene-trare.
Cf. Skt. ¢ara-, a crossing over. Brugmann, ii. § 579. Allied to
Term. B. The comp. suffix -ter (in Latin) is prob. from the
same root ; cf. pre-ter, sub-ter, in-ter-ior, &c. Incomposition, trans-
becomes tran- in tran-quil, tran-scend, tran-scribe, tran-sept, tran-spire,
tran-substantiate ; and ira- in tra-dition, tra-duce, tra-jectory, tra-
montane (though the last is only an Ital., not a Latin spelling) ; also
in tra-verse, tra-vesty.

TRANSACTION, the management of an affair. (F.—-L.) In
Cotgrave.—F. transaction, ‘a transaction, accord, agreement ;’ Cot.
=—L. ¢ransactidnem, acc. of transactio, a completion, an agreement ; cf.
L. transactus, pp. of transigere, to drive or thrust through, also to
settle a matter, complete a business.—L. ¢rans, across, through ;
and agere, to drive; see Trans- and Act. Der. transact-or, in Cot.,
to translate F. zransacteur, but perhaps directly from L. ¢ransactor,
a manager. Hence was evolved the verb ¢ransact, Milton, P, L.
vi. 286.

TRANS-ALPINE, beyond the Alps. (F.—L.) ‘ Transalpine
garbs;” Beaum. and Fletcher, The Coxcomb, i. 1.—F. ¢ransalpin,
‘forraign ;? Cot.=—L. ¢ransalpinus, beyond the Alps.=—L. trans,
beyond; and Alp-, stem of Alpés, the Alps; with suffix -inws. See
Trans- and Alp. So also ¢rans-atlantic, a coined word, ‘used
by Sir W. Jones in 1782; see Memoirs, &c., p. 2173’ F. Hall, Mod.
English, p. 275.

TRANSCEND, to surmount, surpass. (L.) In Gawain Douglas,
Palace of Honour, pt. ii. st. 18.—L. ¢ranscendere, to climb over,
surpass.—L, érans, beyond ; and scandere, to climb. See Trans-
and Sean. Der. transcend-ent, used by Cot. to translate F. éran-
scendant ; transcend-ent-ly, transcendence, All’s Well, ii. 3. 40, from
L. sb. transcendentia ; transcend-ent-al, given as a mathematical term
in Phillips, ed. 1706; transcend-ent-al-ly, -ism, -ist.

UU 2


660 TRANSCRIBE


TRANSCRIBE, to copy out. (L.) In Minsheu, ed. 1627; and in
Cot., to translate F. ¢ranscrire.—L. transcribere (pp. transcriptus), to
transfer in writing, copy from one book into another. =L. trans,
across, over; and scribere, to write; see Trans- and Scribe.
Der. transcrib-er, Tatler, no. 271, §. 3; transcript, in Minsheu, from
L. pp. transcriptus; transcript-ion.

TRAWNSEPT, the part of a church at right angles to the nave.
(L.) Lit. ‘a cross-enclosure.’ Not an old word; and coined.
Oddly spelt transcept in Wood’s Fasti Oxonienses, vol. ii. (R.); of
which the first edition appeared in 1691-2.—L. ¢ran-, for trans,
across; and septum, an enclosure. Septum is from septus, pp. of
sépire or sepire, to enclose; from sepés, a hedge.

TRANSFER, to transport, convey to another place. (L.) In
Shak. Sonnet 137. Cot. gives F. pp. transferé, ‘ transferred; ’ but the
E. word was prob. directly from L. transferre, to transport, transfer.
= L. trans, across; and ferre, to carry, cognate with E. bear. See
Trans- and Bear (1). Der. transfer-able, also spelt transferr-ible
(quite needless) ; transfer-ence, transfer-ce.

TRANSFIGURE, to change the appearance of. (F.—L.) ME.
transfiguren, Chaucer, C. T. 1107 (A 1105).—F. ¢ransfigurer, ‘ to
transfigure;’ Cot.—L. ¢ransfigirare, to change the figure of.—L.
trans, across (hence implying change); and jigira, figure, outward
appearance. See Trans- and Figure. Der. transfigurat-ion,
from F, transfiguration, ‘a transfiguration,’ Cot., from L. acc. ¢rans-
Jigtirationem.

TRANSFIX, to fix by piercing through. (L.) ‘ Quite through
transfixed with a deadly dart ;’ Spenser, F. Q. iii. 12. 21.—L. trans-
jixus, pp. of transfigere, to thrust through. See Trans- and Fix.

TRANSFORM, to change the form of. (F.—L.) ME. trans-
formen, Wyclif, 2 Cor. iii. 18.—F. transformer, ‘to transform ;’ Cot.
= L. ¢ransformare, to change the form of.=L. trans, across (imply-
ing change); and forma, form. See Trans- and Form. Der.
transformat-ion, from F. transformation, ‘a transformation,’ Cot.,
from L. acc. transfor matidnem.

TRANSFUSE, to cause to pass from one person or part into
another, to make to imbibe. (L.) In Milton, P. L. iii. 389, vi. 704.
—L. transfisus, pp. of transfundere, to pour out of one vessel into
another, to decant, transfuse. = L. trans, across; and fundere, to pour ;
see Trans- and Fuse. Der. transfus-ion.

TRANSGRESSION, violation of a law, sin. (F.—L.) ‘For
the rage of my transgression ;’ Lydgate, Storie of Thebes, pt. iii
(How the Child was slain by a serpent),—F. transgression, ‘ a trans-
gression, trespasse ;’ Cot.—L. transgressidnem, acc. of transgressio,
a passing over, transposition, also a transgression of the law; cf.
transgressus, pp. of transgredi, to step over, pass over.—L. trans,
across; and gradi, to step, walk; see Trans- and Grade. Der.
transgress-or, formerly transgressour, Fabyan, Chron. an. 1180, ed.
Ellis, p. 299, from F. ¢ransgresseur, ‘a transgressor,’ Cot., from L.
acc. transgressorem. Hence was made ¢ransgress, verb, used by Tyn-
dall, Works, p. 224, col. 1,1. 3 from bottom. > Observe zres-
pass, a similar formation to ¢rans-gress.

TRANSIENT, passing away, not lasting. (L.) In Milton, P. L.
xil. 554. Suggested by L. ¢ransiens, of which the oblique-case stem
is transeunt-, not transient-. [Cf. ambient, from ambire, which is
conjugated regularly.] Transiens is the pres. part. of ¢ransire, to go
across, to pass away.—L. trans, across; and ire, to go, from 4/EI,
to go. See Trans- and Itinerant. Der. transient-ly, -ness.
Also (like pp. ¢ransitus) transit, in Phillips, ed. 1706, shortened
from L. transitus,a passing over; transit-ion, Phillips, from L. acc.
transitionem, a passing over, a transition; ¢ransit-ion-al; transit-ive,
from L. transitiuus, a term applied to a transitive or active verb;
transit-ive-ly, -ness; transit-or-y, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 128,
suggested by F. transitoire, ‘transitory, Cot., from L. transitorius,
liable to pass away, passing away; ¢transit-or-i-ly, -ness. And see
trance.

TRANSLATE, to transfer, move to another place, to render into
another language. (F.—L.) ME. translaten, to remove, Gower,
C. A. i. 261; bk. ii, 3044.—F. translater, ‘to translate, . . reduce,
or temove;’ Cot.—Late L. ¢ranslatare, to translate, in use in the
12th century. —L. ¢ranslatus, transferred; used as the pp. of ¢rans-
Jerre, but really from a different root.—L. trans, across; and latus,
carried, borne, for *éldtus, from 4/TEL, to lift, bear, whence L.
tollere, to lift. See Trans- and Tolerate. Der. translat-ion, ME.
translacioun, Chaucer, C. T. 15493 (G 25), from F. translation, ‘a
translation,’ Cot., from L. translatidnem, acc. of translatio, a trans-
ference, transferring.

TRANSLUCENT, clear, allowing light to pass through. (L.)
In Milton, Comus, 861.—L. ¢ranslicent-, stem of pres. part. of
translicére, to shine through.—L. trans, through; and lucére,
to shine; see Trans- and Lucid. Der. ¢translucent-ly, trans-
lucence.


TRANSPORT


‘TRANSMARINE, beyond the sea. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,


ed. 1674,.—L. transmarinus, beyond sea.=L. trans, beyond; and
mar-e, sea; with suffix -inws. See Trans- and Marine.

TRANSMIGRATION, the passing into another country or
state of existence. (F.—L.) Spelt ¢ransmygracioun, Trevisa, i. 33,
1, 20. —F. transmigration, ‘a transmigration, a flitting or shifting of
aboad ;’ Cot.—L. transmigrationem, acc. of transmigratio, a remoy-
ing from one country to another.—L. ¢ransmigrare, to migrate
across, from one place to another. See Trans- and Migrate.
Der. (from L. pp. ¢ransmigratus) transmigrate, Antony, ii. 7. 51 ;.
transmigrat-or, transmigrat-or-y,

TRANSMIT, to cause or suffer to pass through, to deliver. (L.)
In Holland, tr. of Plutarch, p. 576 (R.).—L. ¢ransmittere, to cause
to go across, send over, dispatch, transmit.—L. trans, across; and
mittere, to send; see Trans- and Mission. Der. transmitt-al,
transmitt-er ; transmiss-ion, Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 2, from L. acc. trans-
missionem ; transmiss-ible, from F. transmissible, ‘ transmittable,’ Cot. ;
transmiss-ibil-i-ty.

TRANSMUTEH, to change to another form or substance. (L.)
‘(He] transmutyd the sentence of deth vnto perpetuyte of pryson ;’
Fabyan, Chron.c. 159. [The ME. form was ¢ransmuen, or trans-
mewen, Chaucer, C. T. 8261 (E 385), from F. ¢ransmuer, ‘to change
or alter over,’ Cot., from L. transmutare.| —L. transmiitare, to change
into another form. —L. trans, across (implying change) ; and mitare,
to change; see Trans- and Mutable. Der. transmut-able;
transmut-at-ion, spelt transmutacioun, Chaucer, C. T. 2841 (A 2839),
from F. ¢rans-mutation, ‘a transmutation, alteration,’ Cot., from
L. acc. trans-miitationem.

TRANSOM, a thwart-piece across a double window; the lintel
over a door; in ships, a beam across the stern-post to strengthen the
after-part. (L.) ‘ Transome, or lintell ouer a dore;’ Baret, ed. 1580.
‘The ¢transome of a bed, trabula;’ Levins. ‘ Meneau de fenestre, the
transome, or cross-bar of a window;’ Cot. ‘ Beames, prickeposts,
groundsels, summers, or dormants, ¢ransoms, and such principals ;’
Harrison, Desc. of England, b. ii. c. 12, ed. Furnivall, p. 233.
Spelt ¢rampsom, meaning the part of the bedstead between the two
headposts, Bury Wills, p. 23 (1463); spelt ¢rawnsom, Paston Letters,
iii. 407. [Halliwell notes the spelling ¢ransumpt, but this is a
corrupt form; the real meaning of ¢ransumpt is a copy of a record ;
see Transumptin Cot. Webster says it is sometimes spelt sransummer,
but I can nowhere find it, and such a spelling is obviously due to.
confusion with summer, a beam, as used in the above quotation from
Harrison. | B. It is a corruption of L. transtrum, used as an
architectural and nautical term. It means precisely a transom, in
all its senses.
ex pariete in parietem porriguntur ; ’ ‘ Transoms


Festus (White).


est vox Architectonica et transversas trabes notat, Vitruvio ¢ranstra ;”


Skinner, 1671 Cooper’s Thesaurus (1565) explains L. ¢ranstrum
by ‘a ¢ransome going ouerthwarte an house.’ Florio explains MItal.
transtri as ‘ crosse or overthwart beames, ¢ranstroms;’ and trasto as
‘a transome or beame going crosse a house.” —y. ‘The L. transtrum
is derived from L. trans, orig. ‘going across’ (see 'Trans-) ; -trum


is a suffix, denoting the agent, as in ard-trum, that which ploughs.


Hence ¢rans-trum =that which goes across; cf. in-trans, going in.
TRANSPARENT, clear, allowing objects to be seen through.


F.—L.) In Shak. L. L. L. iv. 3. 31.—F. transparent, ‘transparent,
P P


clear-shining ;’ Cot.—L. ¢rans, through; and pdarent-, stem of pres.
part. of parére, to appear; see Trans- and Appear. Der. zrans-
parent-ly, -ness ; transparenc-y.


TRANSPICUOUS, transparent, translucent. (L.) In Milton,


P.L. viii. 141. Coined, as if from L. *transpicuus, from L. tran-


spicere, to see or look through; see Conspicuous, Perspicuous.:


=. trans, through; and specere, to look; see Trans- and Spy.
TRAWNSPIERCE, to pierce through. (F.—L.) Used by Dray-
ton; Civil War, bk. vi. last stanza.—F. transpercer, ‘to pierce
through;’ Cot. See Trans- and Pierce.


TRANSPIRE, to pass through the pores of the skin, to become:


public, or ooze out. (L.) In Milton, P. L. v. 438.—L. tran-, for
trans, through; and spirdre, to breathe, respire. See Trans- and
Spirit. Der. sranspir-at-ion, from F. transpiration, ‘a transpira-
tion, evaporation,’ Cot. This sb. prob. really suggested Milton’s
verb. k
TRANSPLANT, to plant in a new place. (F.—L.) In Cot-
grave. =F, ¢ransplanter, ‘to transplant ;’ Cot.—L. ¢ransplantare.—
L. ¢rans, across, implying change; and plantare, to plant. See
Trans-and Plant. Der. transplant-at-ion, from F. transplantation,
‘a transplantation,’ Cot. ;
TRANSPORT, to carry to another place, carry away by passion
or pleasure, to banish. (F.—L.) In Spenser, Hymn 4, Of Heavenly
Beauty, 1. 18.—F. ¢ransporter, ‘to transport, transfer;’ Cot.—L.
transportare, to carry across.— L, tras, across ; and portare, to carry.


‘Transtra et tabule nauium dicuntur et tigna, que


** 5
{eugtenl


TRANSPOSE


See Trans- and Port (1). Der. transport, sb,, Pope, Windsor
Forest, 90; ¢ransport-able; transport-ance, Troil. iii. 2. 12; trans-
port-at-ion.

TRANSPOSE, to change the position of, change the order of.
(F.—L. and Gk.) ME. transposen, Gower, C. A. ii. 90; bk. iv.
2656.—F. zransposer, ‘to transpose, translate, remove;’ Cot. See
Trans- and Pose. Der. transpos-al.

TRANSPOSITION, a change in the order of words, &c.
(F.—L.) In Cotgrave.—F. transposition, ‘a transposition, removall
out of one place into another;’ Cot. See Trans- and Position.
@ Not ultimately connected with transpose, which is from a different
source.

TRANSUBSTANTIATION, the doctrine that the bread and
wine in the Eucharist are changed into Christ’s body and blood.
(F.—L.) In Tyndall, Works, p. 447, col. 2; he also has transub-
stantiated, id. p. 445, col. 2.—F. ¢ransubstantiation; Cot.—Late L.
transubstantiationem, acc. of transubstantiatio; see Hildebert, Bp. of
Tours, Sermon 93. Hildebert died in 1134 (Trench, Study of Words).
Cf. Late L. transubstantiadtus, pp. of transubstantiare, coined from trans,


across (implying change), and substantia, substance. See Trans-
and Substance.
TRANSVERSE, lying across or cross-wise. (L.) ‘But all


things tost and turned by ¢ransverse,’ Spenser, F. Q. vii. 7.56; where
by transverse=in a confused manner, or reversedly. —L. transuersus,
turned across; hence, athwart. Orig. pp. of transuwertere, to turn
across. See Trans- and Verse. And see Traverse. Der.
transverse-ly.

TRAP (1), an instrument or deyice for ensnaring animals. (E.)
ME. trappe, Chaucer, C. T. 145. AS. treppe, a trap; AElfric’s
Colloquy (Fowler); for *treppe; cf. be-treppan, to entrap; A. S.
Chron. an. 992. But the pronunciation has perhaps been affected
by F. trappe, a trap, a word of Teut. origin.4--MDu. trappe, ‘a trap
to catch mice in;? Hexham; OHG. trapa, trappa, a snare, trap
[whence Low L. trappa, Ital. trappa, F. trappe, Span. ¢trampa, a trap
(Diez)}. B. Orig. sense ‘step; the ¢rap is that on which an
animal steps, or puts its foot, and is so caught. Cf. Westphal.
trappe, a step; Du. trap, a stair, step, kick; G. treppe, a flight of
steps; Swed. ¢rappa, a stair; allied to Du. ¢rappen, to tread on,
EFries. and Low G, trappen, Norw. trappa, to tread on, trample.
Allied to Tramp. The nasalised form tramp appears in Span.
irampa, a trap. Der. trap, verb, spelt trappe in Palsgrave; trap-
door, a door falling and shutting with a catch; also en-trap, q. v.
Also zrap-ball or trap-bat, a game played with a ball, bat, and a
trap which, when lightly tapped, throws the ball into the air. And
see trap (3).

TRAP (2), to adorn, or ornament with gay dress or clothing.
(F.—Teut.) The pp. trapped occurs in Chaucer: ‘Upon a stede
bay, trapped in stele,’ C. T. 2159 (A 2157); and see 1. 2892
(A 2890). This is formed from a sb. trappe, meaning the trappings or
ornaments of a horse. ‘Mony trappe, mony croper’ = many a
trapping, many a crupper; King Alisaunder, 3421. ‘Upon a stede
whyt so milke; His trappys wer off tuely sylke;’ Rich. Cuer de Lion,
1515; where ¢wely means ‘scarlet.’ Coined, with unusual change
from dr to ¢r (by sound association with z¢rap (1)), from F. dra,
cloth; as shown by Chaucer’s use of ¢rappure, trappings of a horse,
C. T., A 2499, from OF. drapure, trappings of a horse (Godefroy).
We also find Late L. ¢rapus, cloth (usually drappus), Span. and Port.
trapo, cloth; Late L. ¢trappatira, a horse’s trappings. See Drape.
B. Cf. F. draper, ‘to dress, or to full cloath; to beat, or thicken, as
cloath, in the fulling.’ Possibly for *traper; in which case it may
come from Low G. and Du. trappen, to tread upon, trample on
(hence, to full cloth), See Trap (1). Der. trapp-ings, s. pl., orna-
ments for a horse, Shak. Venus, 286, hence, any ornaments, Hamlet,
i. 2. 86. Also rattle-traps, q. v.

TRAP (3), a kind of igneous rock. (Swed.) Modern. So called
because such rocks often appear in large tabular masses, rising above
each other like steps (Webster). —Swed. ¢rappa, a stair, or flight of
stairs, ¢rapp, trap (rock) ; Dan. trappe, a stair, trap, trap.4-Du. trap,
astair, step; G. treppe, a stair. See Trap (1) and Tramp.

TRAPAN, the same as Trepan (2), q.v.

TRAPEZIUM, a plane four-sided figure with unequal sides.
(L.—Gk.) In Phillips, ed. 1706. Also in M. Blundevile’s Exer-
cises, 1594, fol. 36b (wrongly marked 39b).—L. trapezium, = Gk.
Tpameiov, a small table or counter; a trapezium, because four-sided,
like suchatable. Dimin. of rpdme(a, atable, esp.adining-table. Cf.
dpyupore(a,i.e. silver-footed, as an epithet of Thetis. — Gk. rpa-, allied
to Terpa-, prefix signifying ‘ four,’ as in TeTpd-ywvos, four-cornered,
from rérrapes, Attic for réooapes, four; and mé(a, a foot, for *1éd-ya,
an allied word to -rovs (stem 1o06-), a foot, which is cognate with E.
foot. See Tetragon and Foot. Der. trapezo-id, lit. ‘trapezium-
like,’ from rpdme(o-, for tpamre(a, and el6-os, form; trapezo-id-al.


TRAVERSE 661


Also trapeze, from F. trapéze, the name of a kind of swing: for
athletic exercise, so called from being sometimes made in the shape
of a trapezium, as thus: 4. The F. trapéze is from L. trapezium.

TRAPPINGS, horse-ornaments; see Trap (2).

TRAPPIST, a member of a certain monastic body. (F.) ‘Named
from the village of Soligny-la-Trappe, in the department of Orne,
France, where the abbey of Ja Trappe was founded in 1140;’ Cent.
Dict.

TRASH, refuse, worthless stuff. (Scand.) In Shak. Temp. iv. 223;
Oth. iii. 3. 157; hence used of a worthless person, Oth. ii. 1. 312,
v. 1. 85. The orig. sense is clippings of trees, as stated by Wedg-
wood, or (yet more exactly) the bits of broken sticks found under
trees in a wood, and collected for fire-wood. Wedgwood quotes
from Evelyn as follows, with a reference to Notes and Queries, Juner1,
1853: ‘Faggots to be every stick of three foot in length—this to
prevent the abuse of filling the middle part and ends with trask and
short sticks.’ Hence it came to mean refuse generally ; Cotgrave
explains meniiailles by ‘small ware, small trash, small offals.’ Of
Scand. origin. Cf. Icel. ¢ros, rubbish, leaves and twigs from a tree
picked up and used for fuel, whence trosna, to become worn out, to
split up as a seam does; cf. ¢rassi, a slovenly fellow, trassa, to be
slovenly. Norweg. ¢rask, trash, scraps (Ross); ¢ras, small pieces
(Ross) ; érasa, a rag, tatter (Ross); zrase, the same; also ¢ros, fallen
twigs, half-rotten branches easily broken, allied to trysja, to break
into small pieces, to crackle. Swed. ¢rasa,arag,a tatter; Swed. dial.
trase, a rag; trds, a heap of sticks, a worthless fellow (which is one
sense of Cleveland trash), old useless bits of fencing. B. Rietz
points out the true origin; he adduces Swed. dial. s/@ i tras, to break
in pieces, which is obviously the same phrase as Swed, sld i kras, to
break in pieces ; the substitution of tr for kr being a Scan. peculiarity,
of which we have an undoubted example in Icel. ¢rani, Swed. trana,
Dan. ¢rane, all variants of the word which we spell crane ; see Crane.
Hence the etym. is from Swed. krasa, Dan. krase, to crash, as a
thing does when broken; see Crash. ‘The Icel. form tros answers
to Swed. krossa, to bruise, crush, crash, a collateral form of rasa;
cf. Orkney truss, refuse, also proy. E. ¢rous, the trimmings of a
hedge (Halliwell). sy. Thus trash means ‘crashings,’ i.e. pieces
that break off short with a snap or crash, dry twigs; hence also
a bit of torn stuff, a rag, &c. @ This throws no light on érash,
as in Shak. Temp. i. 2. 81; which has prob. a different origin,
perhaps trace (2). Der. trash-y.

TRAVAIL, toil, labour in child-birth, (F.—L.) ME. ¢rauail
(with w for v), Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 130, 1. 32.—=F. travail, ‘ travel,
toile, labour, business, pains-taking;’ Cot. [Cf. Ital. travaglio,
Span. zrabajo, Port. trabalho, Prov. trabalhs (Bartsch), toil, labour ;
orig. an obstacle or impediment, which is still a sense of Span.
trabajo.| According to P. Meyer (Romania, xvii. 421) it answers to
Late L. trepalium, a kind of rack for torturing martyrs (Ducange) ;
perhaps made of three beams (tres pali). Others equate it to Late
L. *trabaculum, which might have been formed from L. ¢rab-, base
of L. trabs, trabes, a beam. Cf. L. trabale, an axle-tree; and see
Trave. 4 The W. zrafael, travail, is borrowed from English.
Der. travail, verb, ME. trauaillen, King Alisaunder, 1612, Old Eng.
Miscellany, p. 34, l. 3, from F. ¢ravailler, ‘to travell, toile, also
to harry, weary, vex, infest ;” Cot. Doublet, travel.

TRAVE, a beam, a shackle. (F.—L.) ‘ Trave, a frame into which
farriers put unruly horses;” Halliwell. ‘ Trave, Travise, a place
enclosed with rails for shooing an unruly horse ;’ Bailey, vol. i. ed.
1735. ‘ Trave, a trevise or little room made purposely to shoo un-
broken horses in;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ‘Treuys, to shoe a
wylde horse in, zrauayl a cheual;’ Palsgrave. ME. traue (with u
for v) ; ‘And she sprong as a colt doth in the éraue;’ Chaucer, C. T.
3282.—OF. trave, a beam, Godefroy; traf, a beam, given in the
Supp. to Roquefort; usually ref, ‘the beam of a house;’ Cot.
[Cf. MItal. traue, ‘any kinde of beame;’ Florio.]=—L. trabem, acc.
of trabes or trabs,a beam. Der. archi-trave, q.v.

TRAVEL, to journey, walk. (F.—L.) Merely the same word
as travail; the two forms are used indiscriminately in old editions of
Shakespeare (Schmidt). So also ¢ravail, to travel; in Ben Jonson,
Every Man, ii. 5. 32. ‘The word forcibly recalls the toil of travel in
former days. See Travail. Der. travel, verb; travell-er, L.L. L.
iv. 3. 308. Doublet, travail,

TRAVERSE, laid across; as sb., a cross, obstruction, a thing
built across ; as a verb, to cross, obstruct, deny an argument, also to
pass over a country. (F.—L.) ‘Trees . . hewen downe, and laid
trauers, one ouer another ;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. ii. c. 186
(R.). ‘Smote his hors ¢rauerse;’ Malory, Morte Arthure, bk. x.
c. 65. Gower has frauers as a sb., meaning ‘ cross’ or impediments,
in the last line but 14 of his Conf. Amantis. =F. ¢ravers, m., traverse,
f., ‘ crosse-wise, overthwart;’ Cot. (Hence the sb. ¢raverse, ‘a cross-
way, also . . a thwart, . . let, bar, hinderance ;’ id. ; also the verb


662 TRAVERTINE, TRAVERTIN


traverser, ‘to thwart or go overthwart, to crosse or passe over,’ id.)
= L. ¢ransuersus, turned across, laid athwart; pp. of transuertere, to
turn across; see Transverse. Der. traverse, verb, in Malory,
M.A. bk. x. c. 30, from F. traverser, as above; travers-er.

TRAVERTINE, TRAVERTIN, a kind of white lime-stone.
(Ital.—L.) Used for building. Spelt Treuertino, R. Eden, Three
Books on America, ed. Arber,p. 367. = Ital. travertino, MItal. tivertino,
‘a kind of stone to build withall’ (Florio). —L. Tibertinus, belonging
to Tibur, the modern Tivoli.

TRAVESTY, a parody. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘ Scarronides, or Virgile
Travestie, being the first book of Virgils Aineis in English Burlesque ;
London, 1664;’ by Charles Cotton. Probably ¢ravestie is here used
in the lit. sense of ‘disguised,’ or as we should now say, ¢ravestied.
It is properly a pp., being borrowed from F. travesti, pp. of se tra-
vestir, ‘to disguise or shift his apparell, to play the counterfeit ;’
Cot.—Ital. ¢ravestire, ‘to disguise or shift in apparel, to maske;’
Florio.=L. trans, prefix, lit. across, but implying change; and
uestire, to clothe. The verb westire is from the sb. zestis, clothing.
See Trans- and Vest. Der. travesty, verb.

TRAWL, to fish with a drag-net. (F.—Teut.) ‘ Trawler-men, a
sort of fishermen that us’d unlawful arts and engines, to destroy the
fish upon the river Thames; among whom some were styl’d hebber-
men, others tinckermen, Petermen, &c.;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.—OF.
trauler, to go hither and thither (Roquefort) ; Walloon érauler, the
same (Sigart); mod. Prov. traula; also OF. zroller, mod. F. éréler,
to drag about; Hamilton. See Troll. @ Quite distinct from
trail.

TRAY, a shallow vessel, a salver. (E.) ‘A éreie, or such hollowe
vessel . . that laborers carrie morter in to serue tilers or plasterers ;’
Baret, ed. 1580.. ME. treye ; ‘ Bolles, ¢reyes, and platers,’ i. e. bowls,
trays, and platters; Rich. Cuer de Lion, 1. 1490. AS. ¢ryg, written
trig; A. S. Leechdoms, ii. 340. Derived, by mutation, from AS. trog,
a trough; see Trough. Cf. Low G. ¢riigge (Stratmann); deriv. of
trog, trough; Icel. ¢rygill, a little trough, tray ; Swed. dial. trygel,
Norw. irygel. @ The alleged AS. treg is an error for frog; but
treg might be a Kentish form of ¢ryg, and would give ME. trey.

REACHERY, faithlessness, trickery of a gross kind. (F.—L.)
ME. trecherie, spelt treccherye, P. Plowman, B. i. 196; older spelling
tricherie, id. A.i. 172; Ancren Riwle, p. 202, 1. 18.—OF. trecherie,
tricherie, Godefroy ; MF. tricherie, ‘whence, as it seems, our ¢rechery,
cousenage, deceit, a cheating, a beguiling ;’ Cot.—OF. trechier, tri-
chier, MF. tricher, ‘to cousen, cheat, beguile, deceive;’ id. Cf. Ital.
treccare, to cheat; Prov. trickaria, treachery, trichaire, a traitor. =
Late L. *triccare, for tricare, to dally (Ecclus. xxxii. 15), L. tricari,
to make difficulties. — L. trice, pl., difficulties, wiles ; see Intricate.
See Korting, § 9727. But prob. confused with’ Du. tek, a stroke;
see further under Trickery. Der. treacher-ous, Spenser, F. Q.
i. 6. 41, spelt trecherous, Pricke of Conscience, 4232, coined by adding
the suffix -ovs to the old word ¢recher, a traitor, spelt trichour in Rob.
of Glouc. p. 455, 1. 9329, ¢recchour in Wyclif’s Works, ed. Matthew,
p- 239, 1.6; treacherous-ly, -ness. Korting, § 9727.

TREACLE, the syrup drained from sugar in making it. (F.—L.
—Gk.) ME. itriacle, a medicament, a sovereign remedy (very
common), P. Plowman, C. ii. 147, B. i. 146; see my note on it, ex-
plaining the matter. It had some resemblance to the¢reacle which
has inherited its name.— OF, triacle, ‘treacle,’ Cot. The J is unori-
ginal; ¢riacle is only another spelling of OF. theriaque, ‘treacle ;’
Cot.—L. ¢hériaca, an antidote against the bite of serpents, or against
poison ; also spelt thériacé.—Gk. Onpiaxds, belonging to wild or
venomous beasts ; hence @npiakd @appyaxa, antidotes against the bite
of venomous animals; and (no doubt) *@ypiaxq, sb. sing. fem., in the
same sense, whence L. thériacé. — Gk. @npiov, a wild animal, poison-
ous animal ; dimin. of @jp,a wild beast, Molic pnp ; cf. Russ. zvier(e),
a wild beast ; Lith. wéris,a wild beast ; L. ferus. Brugmann, i. § 319.

TREAD, to set down the foot, tramp, walk. (E.) ME. treden;
pt. t. trad, Ormulum, 2561; pp. troden, treden, Chaucer, C. T. 12646
(C 712). AS. tredan, pt. t. tred, pp. treden, Grein, ii. 550.4Du.
treden; G. treten, pt. t. trat, pp. getreten. We find also Icel.
troda, pt. t. ¢rad, pp. trodinn; which accounts for our pp. trodden;
Dan. trede; Swed. tréda; Goth. trudan, to tread, pt. t. trath. Teut.
type *tredan-, pt. t. *trad, pp. *trudanoz. Der. tread-le or tredd-le,
the same as ME, tredyl, a step, AS. ¢redel ; ‘Bases, tredelas vel
stepas, i.e. steps; Voc. 117.6. Also tread-mill; trade, q.v.

TREASON, a betrayal of the government, or an attempt to over-
throw it. (F.—L.) ME.. traison, treison; spelt trayson, Havelok,
444; treisun, Ancren Riwle, p. 56, 1. 17.—OF. ¢raison, mod. F.
trahison, treason, betrayal. = L. acc. traditionem, betrayal. = L. tradere,
to deliver, betray; see Traitor. Der. ¢reason-able, treason-abl-y,
Doublet, tradition.

TREASURE, wealth stored up, a hoard. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME.
zresor, occurring very early, in the A. S, Chron. an. 1137.—OF,


TREMBLE


tresor, mod. F. ¢résor, treasure. (Cf. Ital. tesoro, Span. tesoro, Port.
thesouro, spelt without r after t.]—L. thésaurum, acc. of thésaurus, a
treasure. = Gk. @joaupés, a treasure, a store, hoard; formed (it is not
very clear with what suffixes) from the base @7-, to lay up, as seen in
tiOny, I place, lay up; or from @no-, as in the future @7c-w. See
Theme, Thesis. Der. treasure, verb, Shak. Sonnet 6; -treasur-er,
from F. ¢resorier, spelt thesorier in Cot., and explained by ‘a
threasurer ;’ ¢reasur-y, ME. tresorie, tresorye, Rob. of Glouc. p. 274,
1. 5540, contracted from OF. ¢resorerie, spelt thresorerie in Cotgrave,
so that ¢reasury is short for ¢reasurery. Also treasure-trove, i.e.
treasure found; see Trover. Doublet, thesaurus.

TREAT, to handle in a particular manner, to entertain, manage
by applying remedies, discourse of. (F.—L.) ME. treten, Wyclif,
Mark, ix. 32; Chaucer, C. T. 12455 (C 521).—F. traiter, to treat. —
L. tractare, to handle; frequent. form of trakere (pp. tractus), to
draw; see Trace. Der. ¢reat-ment, from F. traitement; treat-ise,


ME. tretis, Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, prol. 1. 8, from OF. #retis, -


treitis, traictis (see traictis in Roquefort), meaning (a thing) well
handled or nicely made, attractive, admirable, an adj. which was even
applied by Chaucer to the Prioress’s nose, C. T. 152, and answering
to a Late L. form *tractitius. Also treat-y, ME. tretee, Chaucer, C. T.
1290 (A 1288), from F. ¢raité (¢raicté in Cotgrave), ‘a treaty,’
properly the pp. of ¢raiter, to treat, and therefore ‘a thing treated of.”

TREBLE, threefold; the highest part in music. (F.—L.) Why
the highest part in music is called freble is not clear; it is usually
explained as being the third part, after the tenor and alto. In this.
sense, it is the same word as when it means /riple. Indeed, we find
triple used by Fairfax in the musical sense of treble. ‘The human
voices sung a #riple hie ;’ Fairfax, tr. of Tasso, b. xviii. st. 24. Pals-
grave has: ‘ Treble of a song, le dessus; Treble-stryng of an instru-
ment, chanterelle.’ Reginald atte Pette, in 1456, bequeathed 6s. 8d.
towards the making of a new bell called trebyll; Testamenta Vetusta,
ed. Nicholas, p. 286. ME. ¢reble, threefold, Gower, C. A. iii. 159;
bk. vii. 2202. — OF. zreble, triple (Burguy). = L. triplum, acc. of triplus,
triple. See Triple. For the change from 7 to 4, cf. E. double, due
to L. duplus. Der. treble, verb, Temp. iii. 1. 221; trebl-y. Doublet,
triple.

TREDDLBE, the same as Treadle ; see Tread.

TREE, a woody plant, of a large size. (E.) ME. tree, tre; also
used in the sense of timber. ‘ Not oneli vessels of gold and of siluer,
but also of tree and of erthe;’ Wyclif, 2 Tim. ii. 20. AS. ¢réo,
treow, a tree, also dead wood or timber; Grein, ii. 551.-4-Icel. zré ;
Dan. tre ; Swed. trad, timber; ¢rdd, a tree, a corruption of ¢rdet, lit.
‘the wood,’ with the post-positive article; Goth. ¢riu (gen. triwis), a
tree, piece of wood. B. All from Teut. type *trewom, n., a tree,
Fick, iii. 118; further allied to Russ. drevo, a tree, W. derw, an oak,
Trish. darag, darog, an oak, Gk. dpds, an oak, Skt. dru-, wood; cf.
Gk. ddpu, a spear-shaft, Skt. diru, wood, a species of pine. y. Ben-
fey connects Skt. dru- and déru with the root 4/DER, to tear, rend,
whence E. tear; see Tear (1); so also Fick, i. 615, 616. The ex-
planation is that it meant a piece of cleft wood; cf. Gk. d5épev, to
flay, E. ¢ear, to rend. But this is improbable. Brugmann, i. § 486.
Der. zre-én, adj., made of wood, or belonging to a tree, Spenser,
F. Q.i. 7. 26, Cursor Mundi, 123923; with suffix -ex asin gold-en,
wood-en. Also tree-nail, a peg, a pin or nail made of wood, a nautical
term. And see rhodo-den-dron, dryad.

TREFOTL, a three-leaved plant such as the white and red clover.
(F.—L.) Given by Cot. as the tr. of F. trefie.— AF. zrifoil; in a
Vocabulary pr. in Voc. 556. 33, we find AF. zrifoil answering to L.
trifolium and E. wite clouere [white clover].—L. ¢rifolium, a three-
leaved plant, as above.—L. ¢ri-, prefix allied to ¢rés, three; and
folium, a leaf; see Tri- and Foil.

TRELLIS, a structure of lattice-work. (F.—L.) ME. #relis.
‘ Trelys, of a wyndow or other lyke, Cancellus;’ Prompt. Parvy.=—F.
treillis, ‘a trellis ;’ Cot.=—F. ¢reiler, ‘to grate or lattice, to support
or underset by, or hold in with, crossed bars or latticed frames ;” Cot. ;
F. treille, ‘an arbor or walk set on both sides with vines, &c. twining
about a latticed frame;’ id.—Late L. ¢trichila, tricla, a bower,
arbour, or summer-house. Origin doubtful. ¢@> Quite distinct
from F, treillis, sackcloth, OF. treilis, treslis, adj., applied to armour
covered with a sort of lattice-work, Late L. trislicium, a covering of
sackcloth.—L. ¢rés, three ; licium, a thread. But the suffix -is in the
former OF. treillis seems to have been due to association with this
latter word. Der. zrellis-ed.

TREMBLE, to shiver, shake, quiver. (F.—L.) ME. tremblen,
P. Plowman, B. ii. 235.—F. ¢rembler, ‘to tremble ;’ Cot. The d is
excrescent, as is common after m. — Late L. tremulare, to hesitate, lit.
to tremble. —L. ¢remulus, trembling. =L. trem-ere, to tremble, with
adj. suffix -u/-us.4-Lithuan. trim-ti, to tremble; Gk. rpéyu-ev, to
tremble. —4/TREM, to tremble; Fick, i. 604; Brugmann, i. § 474.
Der. érembl-er, trembi-ing-ly, From L. tremere are also trem-or, in


-: -


den


TRENCH


Phillips, borrowed from L. tremor, a trembling ; trem-end-ous, also in
Phillips, from L. tremendus, that ought to be feared, fut. pass. part.
of tremere; trem-end-ous-ly ; trem-ul-ous, Englished from L. ¢remulus,
as above ; trem-ul-ous-ly, -ness,

TRENCH, a kind of ditch or furrow. (F.—L.?) ME. ¢renche,
Chaucer, C. T. 10706; (F 392). Shortened from F. trenchée, ‘a
trench,’ Cot., lit. a thing cut.—F. trencher (now spelt ¢rancher), ‘to
cut, carve, slice, hack, hew;’ Cot. Cf. Span. ¢trinchea, a trench,
trinchar, to carve, trincar, to chop; Port. trinchar, to carve, trincar,
to crack asunder, break; Ital. trimcea, a trench, frinciare, to cut,
carve. B. There is no satisfactory solution of this word; see
Littré, Scheler, and Diez. Prob. Latin; apparently from Late L.
trencare, to cut, substituted for L. truncare, to lop, from truncus, the
trunk of a tree. We may notice, in Florio, Ital. ¢rincare, ‘to trim or
smug up,’ drinci, ‘gardings, fringings, lacings, iaggings, also cuts,
iags, or snipsin garments.’ Der. trench, verb, Macb. iii. 4. 27, from
trencher, to cut; ¢rench-ant, cutting, Timon, iv. 3. 115, from F,
trenchant, pres. part. of trencher ; trench-er, a wooden plate for cutting
things on, ME. trenchere, Voc. 610. 17, from F. trenchevir, ‘a
trencher,’ Cot., OF. ¢rencheor. Cf. Trinket (1).

' TREND, to turn or bend away, said of direction or course. (E.)
See Nares. ‘The shoare ¢rended to the southwestward;’ Hakluyt,
Voyages, i. 276, § 7. ‘By the trending of the land [you] come
backe ;’ id. i. 383. ME: ¢renden, to roll or turn about. ‘Lat hym
rollen and trenden,’ &c. ; Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iii. met. 11. 1. 2.
The word is E., being formed from the same source as AS. trendel,
a circle, a ring, esp. a ring seen round the sun, A. S. Chron. an. 806;
cf. AS. tryndel, a ring. Allied words are Dan. #rind, adj. round,
trindt, adv. around, trindes, to grow round; Swed. ¢rind, round,
cylindrical ; OFriesic trind, trund, round ; see Trundle. Cf. trendil,
a hoop, mill-wheel, ¢rezdle, to trundle, in Levins, ed. 1570; ¢rindals,
rolls of wax, Cranmer’s Works, ii. 155, 503 (Parker Soc.). All from
the Teut. str. vb. *trend-an-, to roll; whence AS. trendan, to roll
(Napier), and G@-trend-lian, to roll.

. TRENTAL, a set of thirty masses for the dead. (F.—L.) See
the poem of St. Gregory’s Trental, in Polit. Relig. and Love Poems,
ed. Furnivall, p. 83, and my note on P. Plowman, C. x. 320. See
Spenser, Mother Hubbard’s Tale, 453; and see Nares. —OF. trentel,
trental, a trental, set of thirty masses; Roquefort. Cf. Low L.
trentale, a trental.—F. ¢rente, thirty.—L. triginta, thirty.—L. ¢ri-,
thrice, allied to ¢rés, three; and -ginta, i.e. -cinta, short for *decinta
: = *decenta, tenth, from decem, ten. See Three and Ten.

- TREPAN (1), a small cylindrical saw used in removing a piece
of a fractured skull. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. trepane, Lanfrank, Cirur-
gie, p. 127. Spelt ¢trepane in Cot.—MF. ¢trepan, ‘a trepane, an
instrument having a round and indented edge,’ &c.; Cot.—Late L.
trepanum (for *trypanum), — Gk. tpvmavoy, acarpenter’s tool, a borer,
augur; also a surgical instrument, a trepan (Galen). — Gk. tpuma@yv, to
bore. = Gk. tpi7a, tpimn, a hole. Ultimately from 4/TER, to pierce ;
as in L. ¢erere, to bore, Gk. relpew (for *rép-yeuv).

TREPAN (2), TRAPAN, to ensnare. (F.—Teut.) In Butler,
Hudibras, pt. il. c. 3.1.617. Usually spelt trepan, as in Phillips, by
a ridiculous confusion with the word above. Rightly spelt ¢rapan in
South’s Sermons, vol, y. ser. 3 (R.), and in Anson’s Voyages, b.i.c. 9
(R.). ‘ Forthwith alights the innocent ¢rapann’d ;’ Cotton, Wonders
of the Peak, 1681, p. 38 (Todd). ‘For fear his words they should
trapan;’ Tom Thumb (1630); in E. Eng. Pop. Poetry, ii. 247.
Not an old word. — OF. trappan, asnare or trap for animals (Roque-
fort) ; he also gives ¢rapant, a kind of trap-door ; OF. trapan, trapant,
a plank (Godefroy).—Late L. ¢rapentum, a plank for a trap-door. =
F. trappe, a trap.—OHG. trappa, a trap; see Trap (1). q The
E. word is now only used as a verb, but it must have come in as a
sb. in the first instance, as it is used by South: ‘It is indeed a real
trapan,’ i. e. stratagem, Serm. ii. 377; ‘ Nothing but gins, and snares,
and ¢rapans for souls,’ Serm. iii. 166 (Todd). The last quotation
puts the matter in avery clearlight. Cotgrave has the verb aztrapper,
and the sbs. trape, trapelle, attrapoire.

TREPANG;; see Tripang.

TREPHINE, an improved form of the trepan. (F.—L.—Gk.)
F. tréphine; in Littré; not in Hatzfeld. An arbitrary variant of
trépan; see Trepan (1).

TREPIDATION, terror, trembling, fright. (F.—L.) In Milton,
P. L. iii. 483, where it is used inan astronomical sense. ‘ A continual
trepidation,’ i. e. trembling motion, Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 137.—F. tre-
pidation, ‘ trembling, terrour;”’ Cot.—L. trepidatidnem, acc. of trepi-
datio, alarm, a trembling. =L. trepidare, to tremble.—L. ¢repidus,
agitated, disturbed, alarmed. Allied to OSlav. ¢repetu, to tremble,
Russ. trepetat(e), Skt. tarala-s, trembling. See Brugmann, ii. § 797
(note). Der. (from L. trepidus) in-trepid.

TRESPASS, a passing over a boundary, the act of entering
another man’s land unlawfully, a crime, sin, offence, injury. (F.—L.)


TRIAD 663


ME. trespas, Rob. of Glouc. p, 505, 1. 10403, where it means ‘sin.’

— OF. trespas, a crime (Burguy) ; also ‘a decease, departure out of
this world, also a passage;’ Cot. (The lit. sense is ‘a step beyond
or across,’ so that it has direct reference to the mod. use of trespass in
the sense of intrusion on another man’s land. Cf. Span. ¢respaso,
a conveyance across, also a trespass; Ital. ¢rapasso, a passage, di-
gression.) The sb. is from trespass, verb, ME. trespassen, Wyclif,
Acts, i. 25.—OF. trespasser, ‘ to passe over,’ Cot., also to trespass
(Burguy).—L. zrans, across; and Late L. passare, to pass, from
pass-us, a step; see Trans- and Pass. Der. trespass-er, ME.
trespassour, P. Plowman, C. ii. 92; also ¢respass-offering.

TRESS, a curl or lock of hair, a ringlet. (F.—Late L.—Gk,)
ME. tresse, Chaucer, C. T. 1051 (A 1049) ; the pp. ¢ressed, adorned
with tresses, is in King Alisaunder, ]. 5409.—F. tresse, ‘a tresse or
lock of haire;’ Cot. He also gives ¢resser, ‘to plait, weave, or
make into tresses.’ (Cf, Ital. treccia, a braid, knot, curl; pl. treccie,
‘plaites, tresses, tramels, or roules of womens haires;’ Span. ¢renza,
a braid of hair, plaited silk.) B. The orig. sense is ‘a plait.’ =
Late L. tricia, variant of trica, a plait. Gk. rpixa, in three parts,
threefold (Diez); from the usual method of plaiting the hair in three
folds, = Gk. 7pr-, thrice ; allied to 7peis, three, cognate with E. Three,
q.v.  ¥. This is borne out by the Ital. ¢riza, a lace, loop, allied to
trino, threefold, from L. érinus, threefold. Der. tress-ed, as above.
Also tress-ure, q. V.

TRESSURE, a kind of border, in heraldry. (F.—Late L.—
Gk.) In Phillips, ed. 1706, and in works on heraldry.— MF.
trescheur, ‘a tresseur, in blazon;’ Cot. =F. tresser, ‘to plait, weave ;’
Cot. =F, tresse, a tress or plait of hair; see Tress. I find ‘ Hoc
tricatorium, Anglice, ¢ressure;’ and again, ‘Hec ¢rjcatura, Anglice,
tresewyr, Voc. 656. 17, 792. 18. Here ¢ricatura is merely a
Latinised form of the F. word, the F. ¢resser being Latinised as
tricare.

TRESTLE, TRESSEL, a movable support for a table, frame
for supporting. (F.—L.) ‘ Trestyll for a table, tresteau;’ Pals-
grave, ‘ Hic tristellus, Anglice, treste;’ Voc. 656. 28. ‘ Hic tris-
tellus, a trestylle;’ id. 723. 33. The pl. érestelys, i.e. trestles, occurs
in Bury Wills, ed. Tymms, p. 23, 1. 6, in a will dated 1463; and
ME. pl. ¢resteles is in Rich. Coer de Lion, 102.—OF. tres¢el, spelt
tresteau, treteau in Cot., and explained ‘a tresle for a table, &c., also
a kind of rack, or stretching torture.’ Mod. F. ¢réteau (see Littré).
= Late L. *transtellum, for L. transtillum, dimin. of transtrum, a
little cross-beam. See Transom. @ This Late L. form should
rather have given OF. ¢rastel; but we find F. ¢res- for L. ¢rans- in
our zres-pass. We must by no means neglect Lowland Sc. #raist,
trast, a trestle, trast, a beam, North E. ¢ress, a trestle (Brockett),
Lance. érest, a strong large stool (Halliwell), and ME. treste, a trestle,
above. These are from OF. ¢raste, a cross-beam (Roquefort), the
same word as MItal. ¢rasto, ‘a bench of a gallie, a transome or
beame going cross a house,’ which is obviously from L. ¢ranstrum.
See Transom. Scheler takes the same view, proposing a Late L.
*transtellum, as a parallel form to ¢ranstillum, in order to give the
exact OF. form. Cotgrave’s explanation of the word as meaning a
rack is much to the point ; a rack requires two cross-beams (¢ranstilla)
to work it, these beams being turned round with levers, thus pulling
the victim by means of ropes wound round the beams. And note
trestelli fortes, strong trestles, in John de Garlande; in Wright,
Vocab. i. 132.

TRET, an allowance to purchasers on consideration of waste.
(F.—L.) ‘Tret, an allowance made for the waste, . . which is
always 4 in every 104 pounds;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Alsoin Blount’s
Nomolexicon, ed. 1691. It appears much earlier. ‘ For the éret of
the same peper,’ i.e. pepper; Arnold’s Chron. (1502), repr. 1811,
p- 128.—AF. *tre¢e, f., answering to F. ¢raite just as AF. tret (Gloss.
to Britton) answers to F. trait; cf. F. ¢raite, ‘a draught, . . also, a
transportation, vent outward, shipping over, and an imposition upon
commodities ;’ Cot. This F. ¢ratte answers to L. zracta, fem. of
tractus, pp. of trahere, to draw; see Trace. Cf, MItal. ¢rasza, ‘leaue
to transport merchandise, also a trade or trading;’ Florio. Also
Late L. ¢racta, a payment on exports (Ducange).

TREWS, an old form of Trousers, q. v.

TREY, three, at cards or dice. (F.—L.) ‘Two treys;’ L. L. L.
v. 2. 232. And in Chaucer, C. T. 12587 (C 653).—AF. ¢reis ;
OF. trei, treis (mod. F. trois), three. = L. trés, three; see Three.

TRI., relating to three, threefold. (L. or Gk.; or F.—L. or Gk.)
F. and L. éri-, three times, prefix related to L. ¢ri-a, neut. of ¢rés,
three, cognate with E. Three, q.v. So also Gk. 7pr-, allied to rpi-a,
neut., or Tpeis, m., three. Peat

TRIAD, the union of three. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘This is the
famous Platonical ¢riad;’ More, Song of the Soul (1647), preface
(Todd), =F. ériade, ‘three;’ Cot.—L. ériad-, stem of trias, a triad.
= Gk. zpids, a triad. Gk, rpi-, from tpeis, three; see Tri-,


664 TRIAL


TRIAL, a test; see Try.

TRIANGLE, a plane, three-sided figure. (F.—L.) ME. triangle ;
Lanfrank, Cirurgie, p. 215. ‘T7ryangle, triangle ;’ Palsgrave.=F.
triangle, ‘a triangle;’ Cot.—L. triangulum, a triangle; neut. of
triangulus, adj., having three angles.—L. ¢ri-, three; and angulus,
an angle; see Tri- and Angle. Der. triangl-ed; triangul-ar, used
by Spenser (Todd), from F. triangulaire, ‘ triangular,’ Cot., from L.
trianguldris ; triangul-ate, a coined word ; triangul-at-ion.

TRIBE, a race, family, kindred. (F.—L.) Gower, C. A. iii. 230
(bk. vii. 4118), has the pl. ¢ribes.=—F. tribu, ‘a tribe,’ Cot.=L.
tribu-, decl. stem of tribus, a tribe ; cf. Umbrian ¢rifo. B. A tribus
is supposed to have been, in the first instance, one of the three
families of people in Rome, their names being the Ramnes, Tities,
and Luceres. The etymology is thought to be from L. tri- (akin to
trés, three), and -bus, family, from 4/BHEU, to be; cf. Gk. pu-An, a
tribe, family, from the same root. See Tri- and Be. But Brug-
mann thinks this unlikely; ii. § 104. Rather, allied to W. tref, a
homestead; see Thorpe. Der. trib-une, q.v.; cri-bute, q. Vv.

TRIBRACH, a metrical foot consisting of three short syllables.
(L.—Gk.) Written ¢ribrachus or tribrachys in Phillips, ed. 1706 ;
and tribrachus in Puttenham, Art of Poetry, b. ii. c. 3.—L. tribrachys,
= Gk. rpiBpaxus, a tribrach.=Gk. zpi-, akin to zpeis, three; and
Bpaxus, short. See Brief.

TRIBULATION, great affliction, distress) (F.-L.) ME.
tribulacioun, spelt tribulaciun, Ancren Riwle, p. 402, |. 24.—F. ¢ribu-
lation, ‘tribulation;’ Cot.—L. fribulatidnem, acc. of tribulatio,
tribulation, affliction; lit. a rubbing out of corn by a sledge. =—L.
tribulare, to rub out corn, to oppress, afflict.—L. ¢ribulum, a sledge
for rubbing out corn, consisting of a wooden platform studded
underneath with sharp flints or iron teeth.—L. éri-, base of tri-wi,
tri-tum, pt. t. and pp. of derere, to rub; with suffix -bulwm denoting
the agent (as in werti-bulum, that which turns about, a joint). See
further under Trite.

TRIBUNE, a Roman magistrate elected by the plebeians. (F.—
L.) ME. éribun ; pl. tribunes, Wyclif, Mark, vi. 21.—F. tribun.=—L.
tribunum, acc. of tribiinus, a tribune, properly the chief of (or elected
by) a ¢ribe; also a chieftain, Mark, vi. 21.—L. ¢ribu-, decl. stem of
tribus, a tribe; with suffix -nus (Idg. -no-). See Tribe. Der.
tribune-ship. Also tribun-al, Antony, iii. 6. 3, from L. tribinal, a
dee platform on which the seats of ¢ribunes, or magistrates, were
placed.

TRIBUTE, homage, contribution paid to secure protection. (F.
—L.) ME. ¢ribut, Wyclif, Luke, xxiii. 2; Gower, C. A. ii. 74, 1. 7.
=F. tribut, ‘tribute;’ Cot.—L. tribiétum, tribute ; lit. a thing con-
tributed or paid ; neut. of ¢ribatus, pp. of tribuere, to assign, impart,
allot, bestow, pay; orig. to allot or assign (to a tribe?). Perhaps
(says Bréal) from L. tribu-, decl. stem of tribus, a tribe; see Tribe.
Der. tribut-ar-y, ME. tributairie, Chaucer, C. T. 14594 (B 3866),
from AF. *tributarie, F. tributaire, ‘tributary,’ Cot., from L. ¢ribi-
tarius, paying tribute. Also at-tribute, con-tribute, dis-tribute, re-
tribut-ion.

TRICE (1), a short space of time. (Low G.) Inthe phrases in a
trice, Twelfth Nt. iv. 2. 1335 on a trice, Temp. v. 238; in this trice
of time, K. Lear, i. 1. 219. ‘And wasteth with a trice;’ Turbervile,
To his Friend, &c., st. 5. Now only in the phr. ix a trice, i.e.
suddenly. ‘Subitement, swiftly, quickly, speedily, ix a trice, out of
hand;’ Cot. ME. at a tryse, at a (single) pull. ‘The howndis
that were of gret prise Pluckid down dere all at a tryse; Ipomydon
with his houndis thoo Drew downe bothe buk and doo ;’ Ipomydon
(ed. Weber), 392. Here ¢ryce (tryce) is a verbal sb. from the verb
trysen, trycen, to pull, haul; Chaucer, C. T. 14443 (B 3715). See
further under Trice (2). @ The later phrase in a trice bears a
remarkable resemblance to the Span. en um tris, We find Span, tris,
noise made by the breaking of glass; also, a trice, a short time, an
instant ; venir en un tris, to come in an instant; estar en un tris, to be
on the verge of (Neuman). So also Port. triz, a word to express
the sound of glass when it cracks; estar por hum triz, to be within a
hair’s breadth, to have a narrow escape; ex hum triz, in a trice.
But it does not appear that we could have borrowed such a phrase
from Spain. It occurs as early as in Skelton, Philip Sparowe, 1131.

TRICE (2), TRISH, to haul up or hoist. (Low G.) ‘ Trise
(sea-word), to hale up anything into the ship by hand with a dead
rope, or one that does not run in a block or pulley;’ Phillips, ed.

1706. ME, Zricen, trisen, to pull, haul; Chaucer, C. T. 14443
(B 3715). ‘ They ¢trisen vpe thaire saillez,’ Morte Arthure, ed. Brock,
832. A nautical term; of Low G. origin; and the sense noted by
Phillips is unoriginal, as it must once have meant to haul by help of
a pulley, and not only without it. Cf. ME. ¢ryys, (and, with a
final 7) tryyste, ‘troclea,’ Prompt. Parv. —Low G. trissen, tritsen, to
trice up; from ¢risse, tritse, a hauling-rope (which explains the sense
given by Phillips), also a pulley (Liibben). Cf. also (from Low G.)


TRICKLE


Swed. zrissa, a sheave, pulley, truckle, zriss, a spritsail-brace; Dan.
tridse, a pulley, whence tridse, verb, to haul by means of a pulley,


to trice; Norweg. ¢riss, trissel, a pulley, or sheave in a block; Swed.


dial. trissa, a roller, also a shoemaker’s implement, a little round
wheel with teeth on it. Note also Low G. ¢risel, a whirling round,
giddiness, in the Bremen Worterbuch; where also are cited OG.
tryssen, to wind, and Hamburg drysen, up drysen, to wind up, dryse-
blok, the block of a pulley, like Dan. tridseblok.

TRICENTENARY, a space of 300 years. (L.) Modern.
From Tri- and Centenary.

TRICK (1), a stratagem, clever contrivance, fraud, parcel of cards
won at once. (F.—L.) Common in Shakespeare. ‘A rick,
facinus;’ Levins, ed. 1570. ‘It were but a schoole-trick,’ Spenser,
Mother Hubbard’s Tale, 512. ‘Suche unknyghtly ¢trikkes ;’ Hoc-
cleve, De Reg. Princ. 2286. —ONorth F. triqgue (for OF. triche); cf.
Norm. dial. ¢rigue, a trick (Moisy, ed. 1895). Godefroy gives the
vb. triguier, and Moisy has Norm. dial. triguier, for OF. trichier, to
trick, deceive. Cf. ME. trichen, to deceive, cozen, trick, occurring
early in the 14th century, Polit. Songs, p. 69, 1. 7. This ME.
trichen is from OF. trichier, trechier, explained under Treachery.
B. Some of the senses are due to Du. trek. ‘Thus Shakespeare has
trick in the sense of lineament, K. John, i. 85; this is precisely
the Du. trek. ‘De trekken van’t gelaat, the lineaments of the face ;’
Sewel. Cf. Du. ‘ een slimmetrek, a cunning trick ; Iemand eenen trek
speelen, to play one a trick; de kap trekken, to play tricks, play the
fool;’ Sewel. sy. The Du. trek (treek), a trick (borrowed from, or
suggested by the ONorthF. ¢rigue) is properly distinct from, but
was easily confused with Du. trek, a pull, draught, tug; from the
verb trekken, to draw, pull. We find also OFries. trekka or tregga,
NFries. ¢recke, tracke (Outzen), Low G. trekken, Dan. trekke,
MHG. trecken, to draw, drag, pull. The MHG. trecken is a causal
form, from the strong verb found as MHG. érechen, OHG. trehhan,
to push, shove, also to pull. Der. trick-er, trick-ster; trick-er-y
(doublet of treachery, g.v.); trick-ish, trick-ish-ly, trick-ish-ness ; also
tricks-y, full of tricks (formed by adding -y to the pl. ¢ricks), Temp.
v. 226. And see trigger, trick (2), trick (3).

TRICK (2), to dress out, adorn. (F.—L.) ‘ Which they trick up
with new-tuned oaths;’ Hen. V, iii. 6. 80. ‘To ¢rick, or trim,
Concinnare ;’ Levins, ed. 1570. Minsheu also has the word, but it
is not a little strange that Blount, Phillips, Coles, and Kersey
ignore trick, in whatever sense. [It is remarkable that ¢rick appears
early as an adjective, synonymous with neat or trim. ‘ The same
reason IJ finde true in two bowes that I haue, wherof the one is quicke
of caste, ¢ricke, and trimme both for pleasure and profyte;’ Ascham,
Toxophilus, ed. Arber, p. 28. So also in Levins. But this is prob.
a different word; cf. Lowl. Sc. ¢rig, neat, trim.] The verb is a
derivative from the sb. ¢rick, above, which obtained many meanings,
for which see Schmidt’s Shak. Lexicon. For example, a trick meant
a knack, neat contrivance, custom, particular habit, peculiarity, a
trait of character or feature, a prank, also a toy or trifle, as in ‘a
knack, a toy, a trick, a baby’s cap,’ Tam. Shrew, iv. 3.67. Cf. MF.
trique-nisques, ‘trifles;’ Cot. Hence to trick, to use a neat con-
trivance, to exhibit a trait of character, to have a habit in dress.
Compare Trick (3), below. Der. trick-ing, ornament, Merry Wives,
iv. 4. 79.

TRICK (3), to delineate arms, to blazon; an heraldic term. (Du.)
This is the true sense in Hamlet, ii. 2.479. It is much clearer in the
following. ‘There they are ¢rick’d, they and their pedigrees; they
need no other heralds;’ Ben Jonson, The Poetaster, i. 1 (Tucca).—
Du. trekken, formerly trecken, ‘to delineate, to make a draught or
modell, to purtray;’ Hexham. Tricking is a kind of sketching.
This is only a particular use of Du. ¢rekken, to pull or draw; cf. our
double use of draw. See Trick (1), § y. ite

TRICKLE, to flow in drops or in a small stream. (E.) ME.
triklen. In Chaucer, C. T. 13604 (B 1864), two MSS. have értkled,
two have striked or stryked, and one has strikled; Tyrwhitt prints
trilled. ‘ With teris ¢rikland on hir chekes;’ Ywaine and Gawain,
1558; in Ritson, Met. Romances, i. 66. ‘The teeris ¢rikilen dowun;’
Polit., Religious, and Love Poems, ed. Furnivall, p. 207, 1. 47.
‘Teres trekyl downe be my face;’ Cov. Mysteries, p. 72. In all
these passages the word is preceded by the sb. eres, pronounced as
a dissyllable, and such must often have been the case; this caused a
corruption of strikelen by the loss of initial s; the phrases the Zeres
strikelen and the teres trikelen being confused by the hearer. Trickle
is clearly a corruption of s¢rikelen, to flow frequently or to keep on
flowing, the frequent. of ME. striken, to flow. ‘Ase strem that
strikep stille’ =as a stream that flows quietly; Specimens of English,
ed. Morris and Skeat, p. 48, 1. 21.—AS. strican, to move or sweep
along, to hold one’s course, Grein, ii. 489. This is the same word
as AS. strican, to strike; see Strike. Cf. mod. E. streak; to trickle
or strickle is to flow in a course, leaving a streak behind ; G. streichen,


TRICOLOR


to move onward, rove, sweep on. The loss of s was facilitated by
association with trill (Dan. ¢rille), to roll.

TRICOLOR, the national flag of France, having three colours, red,
white,andblue. (F.—L.) Theflag dates from 1789. = F. tricolore, short
for drapeau tricolore, the three-coloured flag.—F. tricolor, the three-
coloured amaranth (Hamilton).—L. ¢ri-, prefix, three; and coldrem,
ace. of color, colour. See Tri- and Colour. Der. ¢ri-colour-ed.

TRIDENT, a three-pronged spear. (F.—L.) In Temp. i. 2.
206.—F. trident, ‘ Neptune’s three-forked mace ;’ Cot. —L. tridentem,
acc. of ¢ridens, an implement with three teeth, esp. the three-pronged
spear of Neptune.=—L. ¢éri-, three; and dens, a tooth, prong. See
Tri- and Tooth.

TRIENNIAL, happening every third year, lasting for three
years. (L.) A- coined word, made by adding -al (L. -dalis) to L.
trienni-um, a period of three years. It supplanted the older word
triennal, of F. origin, which occurs early, in P. Plowman, B. vii.
179; this is from F. triennal, ‘ triennal,’ Cot., formed by adding -al
to L. adj. ¢rienn-is, lasting for three years. B. Both triennium and
triennis are from L, #ri-, three, and annus, a year; see Tri- and
Annual. Der. triennial-ly.

TRIFLE, anything of small value. (F.—L.) The spelling with i
is remarkable, as the usual ME. spelling was ¢rufle. Spelt try/yl,
Rob. of Brunne, Handl. Synne, 5031; but ¢rufle, Rob. of Glouc.
p- 417, l. 8613; trufle (one MS. has érefle), P. Plowman, B. xii. 140;
also id. B. xviii. 147 (other MSS. have éryfule, truyfle); also id. C.
xv. 83 (other MSS. trefele, trifle). Spelt troffle (also zreffe), P. Plow-
man’s Crede, 352. There is the same variation of spelling in the
verb; the proper ME. form is ¢ruflen, spelt trufly, Ayenbite of Inwyt,
p. 214; ¢rofle, Morte Arthure, ed. Brock, 2932, trifelyn, Prompt.
Parv. ‘Trufa,a trefele; Trufo, to trefele;’ Voc. 617. 42, 43. The
sb. is the more orig. word; we find ‘feos ant odre truffles pet he
bitrufled monie men mide’=these and other delusions that he be-
guiles many men with, Ancren Riwle, p. 106, 1.7. The old sense
was a delusion or trick, a sense still partly apparent in the phr. ‘ to
-trifle with.’= OF. trujle, truffle, mockery, raillery (Godefroy ; who
quotes ‘ Nuga, truffle’ from a glossary); variant of truffe, ‘a gibe,
mock, flout, jeast, gullery; also, a most dainty kind of round and
russet root, which grows in forrests or dry and sandy grounds,’ &c. ;
Cot. He refers to a truffle. That truffle and trifle are the same
word, or rather that both senses of F. ¢ruffe arose from one form, is
admitted by Burguy, Diez, and Littré. It is supposed that a truffle
became a name for a small or worthless object, or a subject for
jesting. Similarly, in English, the phrases not worth a straw, not
worth a bean, not worth a cress (now turned into curse) were pro-
verbial ; so also ‘ a fico for the phrase,’ or ‘a fig for it.’ See further
under Truffle. Cf. WFlem. truffel, trijfel, false news (De Bo).
Note also: ‘ Mantiglia, a kinde of clouted creame called a foole or
a trifle,in English; Florio. Der. trifle, verb, ME. truflen, as above;
trifl-er, trifl-ing, trifl-ing-ly.

TRIFOLIATE, three-leaved. (L.) Modern.—L. ¢ri-, three;
and folidtus, leaved, from folium, a leaf; see Trefoil.

TRIFORIUM, a gallery above the arches of the nave and
choir of a church. (L.) From L. ¢ri-, for “és, three; and fori-s, a
door, an opening. @ Now usually built with but ‘wo arches or
openings (within a third) ; but some early examples had three such.
See wood-cut in Cent. Dict.

TRIFORM, having a triple form. (L.) In Milton, P. L. iii.
730.—1. triformis; often applied to the moon or Diana. —L. ¢ri-,
three; and form-a, form; see Tri- and Form.

TRIGGER, a catch which, when pulled, lets fall the hammer or
cock of a gun. (Du.) A weakened or ‘ voiced’ form of tricker. In
Butler, Hudibras, pt. i. c. 3,1. 528, Bell’s edition, we find: ‘The
trigger of his pistol draw.’ Here the editor, without any hint and
free from any conscience in the matter, has put trigger in the place
of tricker ; see the quotation as it stands in Richardson and Todd’s
Johnson. Spelt ¢ricker in Farquhar, Recruiting Officer, i. 1 (1706).
—Du. trekker, a trigger ; formerly trecker, ‘a drawer, a haler, ora
puller,’ Hexham.—Du. ¢rekken, to pull, draw; see Trick (3).
Der. trig, vb., to skid a wheel (Phillips).

TRIGLYPH, a three-grooved tablet. (L.—Gk.) <A term m
Doric architecture. In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. triglyphus ;
Vitruvius, iv. 2 (White).—Gk. rpiyAudos, thrice-cloven ; also, a tri-
glyph, three-grooved tablet. —Gk. tpt-, three ; and yAvpeuv, to carve,
hollow out, groove, which is allied to E. cleave; see Cleave (1).
Der. triglyph-ic.

TRIGON, a combination of three zodiacal signs, so as to form an
equilateral triangle. (L.—Gk.) ‘The fiery trigon ;’ Shak. 2 Hen. IV,
ii. 4. 288. The combination of Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius was the
‘fiery’ trigon.=L. ¢rigdnum, a triangle, trigon.—Gk. rpiywvov, a
triangle, nent. of rpiywvos, three-cornered. — Gk. rpe-, for rpeis, three ;
ywv-ia, an angle, akin to yévv, a knee. Cf. Trine.


TRINITY 665


TRIGONOMETRY, the measurement of triangles. (Gk.)
Shak. has ¢rigon, i.e. triangle, 2 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 288. In Phillips,
ed. 1706. Coined from Gk. tpiywvo-, for rpiywvov, a triangle; and
-peTpia, Measurement (as in geo-metry, 8&c.), from péTpov, a measure.
B. Tpiywvoy is properly neut. of tpiywvos, three-cornered ; from 7pt-,
three, and ywv-ia, an angle, akin to yévv,a knee. See Tri-, Knee,
and Metre. Der. trigonometri-c-al, -ly,

TRILATERAL, having three sides. (L.) In Phillips, ed.
1706. Coined with suffix -al (L. -dlis) from L. ¢trilater-us, three-
sided.—L, tri-, three ; and Jater-, decl. stem of Jatus, a side; see
Tri- and Lateral.

TRILINGUAL, consisting of three languages. (L.) Coined
with suffix -al (L. -alis) from L. trilingu-is, triple-tongued, speaking


three languages. L. ¢ri-, three ; and lingua, a tongue. See Tri-
and Lingual.
TRILITERAL, consisting of three letters. (L.) A term


applied to Hebrew roots. From Tri- and Literal.

TRILL (1), to shake, to quaver. (Ital.)
stress ¢rills her lay;’ Thomson, Summer, 746. ‘His ¢rills and
quavers;’ Tatler, no. 222, Sept. 9, 1710. Phillips, ed. 1706, gives:
‘ Trill, a quavering in musick,’ and rightly notes that it is an Ital.
word, like many other musical terms. — Ital. ¢rillare, to trill, shake,
quaver ; ¢rillo, sb., a trill, shake. A word of imitative origin,
meaning ‘to say tril. Cf. Span. ¢rinar, to trill, Hence are derived
E, trill, Du. trillen, G. trillern, &c. Der. trill, sb.

TRILL (2), to turn round and round. (Scand.) Perhaps obsolete,
but once common. ‘ As fortune ¢rills the ball ;’ Gascoigne, Fruits of
War, st. 67. ‘ To dril, circumuertere ;’ Levins. ‘I tryll a whitlygig
rounde aboute, Fe pirouette;’ Palsgrave. ME. trillen, Chaucer,
C. T. 10630 (F 316). —Swed. trilla, to roll, whence ¢rilla, a roller ;
Dan. #rille, to roll, trundle, whence ?rille, a disc, trillebor, a wheel-
barrow. Perhaps allied to E. drill; but this is by no means certain.
It may be allied to Low G. trisedn, to turn round; see Trice (2).

TRILL (3), to trickle, to roll. (Scand.) In Spenser, F. Q. ii. 12.
78; K. Lear, iv. 3.13. ‘With many a teere ¢rillyng on my cheeke ;’
Chaucer, C. T., 7246, D 1864 (Corpus MS.). = Dan. ¢rille, to roll, to
trickle (as tears), Larsen ; Swed. trilla ned, to roll down. This is
merely a particular use of Trill (2).

TRILLION, a million raised to the third power. (F.—L.) A
coined word, said in Todd’s Johnson to have been invented by Locke.
Composed of ¢r-, for ¢tri-, three ; and -/lion, the latter part of the
word million. See Tri- and Million; and see Billion.

TRILOBITE, a kind of fossil. (Gk.) Named from its three
lobes. = Gk. rpi-, for Tpeis, three ; AoB-ds, a lobe; -17-ns, suffix.

TRILOGY, a series of three tragedies or poems. (F.—Gk.)  F.
trilogie (1812); Hatzfeld. = Gk. rprroyia.— Gk. rpi-, for rpeis, three ;
-orvia, from Ady-os, a tale, story ; see Logic.

TRIM, to put in due order, to adjust, to deck, dress, arrange.
(E.) ‘1 ¢rymme, as a man doth his heare [hair];’ Palsgrave. ME.
trumen, trimen,a rare word. ‘ Ich iseo goddseolf mid his eadi engles
bitrumen pe abuten’=I see God Himself with His blessed angels
be-trim [surround] thee about; St. Marharete, p. 20,1. 3. ‘ Helle
hundes habbed bitrumet me’=hounds of hell have surrounded me ;
id. p. 6,1. 4 from bottom. AS. trymian, trymman, to make firm,
strengthen (a common word), Grein, ii. 554; also, to set in order,
array, prepare, Blickling Homilies, p. 91, 1. 31; p. 201, 1.35. The
orig. sense is preserved in our phrase ‘to ¢rim a boat,’ i.e. to make
it steady; hence to put in perfect order. Formed (by the regular
vowel-change from x to y) from the Teut. type of AS. trum, adj.,
firm, strong, Grein, ii. 553.4~+Low G. ¢rim; only in the derivative
betrimmed, betrimmd, decked, trimmed, adorned ; ¢rimmke, an affected
or over-dressed person. Root uncertain. Der. trim, sb., Cor.i.
9. 62; trim, adj. (with the vowel 7 of the derived verb), Much Ado,
iv. I. 3233 trim-ly, trim-ness; trimm-er, trimm-ing ; also be-trim,
verb, Temp. iv. 65.

TRIMETER, a division of a verse consisting of three measures.
(L.—Gk.) In Ben Jonson, tr. of Horace, Art of Poetry, 1. 333. —L.
trimetrus, Horace, Art of Poetry, ll. 252, 259.—Gk. rpiperpos, con-
sisting of three measures. = Gk. rpi-, three; and pérpoy, a measure,
metre. See Tri- and Metre.

TRINH, a certain aspect of the planets. (L.) In Milton, P. L.
x. 659. ‘T'ryne in trone;’ Coy. Myst., p. 88. ‘Trine, belonging
to the number three; as, a ¢rine aspect, which is when 2 plants are
distant from each other [by] a third part of the circle, i.e. 120
degrees. It is noted thus A, and accounted by astrologers an aspect
of amity and friendship ;’ Phillips. —L. trizws, more common in pl.
trini, three by three. For *tris-nus, allied to zrés, three. Brugmann,
ii. § 66. See Tri-andThree. Der. trin-al, Spenser, F. Q.i.12. 39.
Also trin-i-ty, g.v-

TRINITY, the union of Three in One Godhead. (F.—L.)
ME. trinitee, Chaucer, C. T. 7406 (D 1824); Ancren Riwle, p. 26,


‘ The sober-suited song-


e
TRINKET


1, 10.—OF. trinite, later trinité.—L. trinitatem, acc. of trinitas, a
triad. =—L. trinus, threefold; see Trine. Der. Trinity-Sunday;
Trinit-ar-i-an, Trinit-ar-i-an-ism.

TRINKET (1), a small ornament. (F.—L.?) We find ME.
“trenket, sowtarys knyfe,’ i.e. a shoemaker’s knife, Prompt. Parv.
¢ Trenket, an instrument for a cordwayner, batton a torner [soulies];’
Palsgrave. Way, in his note to Prompt. Pary., says: ‘In a Nomi-
nale by Nich. de Minshull, Harl. MS. 1002, under pertinentia
allutarii, occur :—Anserium, a schavyng-knyfe; Galla, idem est,
trynket; also, under pertinentia rustico, occur :—Sarculum, a wede-
hoke; Sarpa, idem est, trynket This shows that a trynket was a
general name for a sort of knife, whether for shoemaking or weed-
ing. Palsgrave gives the spelling ¢rynket as well as trenket. We
may fairly z assume that ¢rinket was also used to denote a toy-knife,
such as could be worn about the person, and that for three reasons.
These are: (1) the sense of something worn about the person still
clings to trinket at this day; (2) trinket, as used by old authors,
means sometimes a tool or implement, sometimes a knife; and (3)
toy-knives were very commonly given as presents to ladies, and
were doubtless of an ornamental character, and worn on the person.
As early as Chaucer’s time, the Friar had his tippet ‘ farsed [stuffed]
ful of knives And pinnes, for to giuen faire wiues.’ A few examples
of the use of the word may be added. ‘ The poorer sort of common
souldiers haue euery man his leather bag or sachell well sowen
together, wherin he packs up all his trinkets ;’ Hakluyt’s Voyages,
i, 62. ‘What husbandlie husbands, except they be fooles, But
handsome have storehouse for zrinkets and tooles?’ Tusser, Husb.
§ 53. 13. Todd cites from Arbuthnot: ‘She was not hung about
with toys and trinkets, tweezer-cases, pocket-glasses.” More extracts
would probably make this matter clearer. B. The etymology of
trinket, formerly zrenket, in the sense of ‘ knife,’ is from ONorth F.
trenquet, variant of OF. ¢ranchet, a small knife (see Supp. to
Godefroy). = ONorth F. ¢renquer, occurring in trenquefile, variant of
tranchefile (Godefroy), so that trenquer is a variant of OF. tranchier,
trenchier, to cut. Cf. Span. ¢rinchete, a shoemaker’s paring-knife,
tranchete, a broad curvated knife, used for pruning, a shoemaker’s
heel-knife; mod. F. tranchet, a shoemaker’s knife; OF. ¢rinchet,
supp. to Godefroy, s.v. ¢ranchet. And cf. Span. trinchar, to cut.
See further under Trench, y. Perhaps we may also note MItal.
trincare, ‘to trim or smug up,’ whence Zrincato, ‘fine, neat, trim,’
Florio. This seems allied to ¢rinci, ‘ fringings, lacings, cuts, or
snips in garments,’ id.; and to ¢rinciare, to cut, allied to Span.
trinchar, as above. 5

TRINKET (2), TRINQUET, the highest sail of a ship.
(F.—Ital.—L.) In Hakluyt, Voy. iii. 411. Spelt ¢rinkette in
Minsheu, ed. 1627. ‘ Trinquet, is properly the top or top-gallant on
any mast, the highest sail of a ship ;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —
F. trinquet, ‘the top or top-gallant,’ &c. (asin Blount); Cot.—Ital.
trinchetto, ‘a small saile in a ship called a trinket;’ Florio. [Or
from Span. ¢ringuete, a trinket.] Prob. from L. ¢riquetrum, acc. of
triquetrus, three-cornered (with reference to lateen sails). Prob.
from L, Zri-, allied to ¢rés, three; and *quatrus, quadrus, square,
hence ‘ cornered.’ Cf. L. quater, four times, guatuor, four. @] The
mmay have been due to association with Span. ¢rinca, a rope for
lashing fast ; trincar, to keep close to the wind; poner la vela a la
trinca, ‘to put a ship that the edges of the sailes may be to the
wind ;’ Minsheu.

TRINOMIAL, in mathematics, an expression consisting of
three terms. (L.) Not a good form; it should rather have been
trinominal. Coined, in imitation of binomial, from ¢tri-, three; and
nomi-, for ndmini-, decl. stem of ndmen, a name. See Tri- and
Nominal; and Binomial.

TRIO, in music, a piece for three performers. (Ital. —L.)
Modern ; added by Todd to Johnson. Ital. trio, a trio, three parts
together. =L. ?ri-, three, allied to trés, three; see Tri- and
Three.

TRIP, to move with short, light steps, to stumble, err; also, to
cause to stumble. (F. —Teut.) ME. trippen; ‘This hors anon gan
for to zrippe and daunce ;’ Chaucer, C. T. 10626 (F 1312).—OF.
treper (Wace), triper, tripper, to dance; Norm. dial. ¢riper. —MDu,
trippen, ‘to tread under foot ;’ trippelen, ‘to trip or to daunce;
Hexham. Cf. LowG. trippeln, to trip ; Swed. ¢rippa, to trip ; Dan.
trippe, to trip, trip, a short step; Icel. ¢rippi, a young colt (from its
tripping gait), The base ¢rip-is a lighter form oftrap-, as in MDu.
trappen, to tread under foot ; the nasalised form appears in Tramp,

q-v. Der. trip, sb., Tw. Nt. v. 170; tripp-ing-ly, Hamlet, iii. 2. 2.

"TRIPANG, TREPANG, ancdible sea-slug. (Malay.) Malay
tripang.

TRIPARTITE, divided into three parts, having three cor-
responding parts, existing in three copies. (L.) In Shak. 1 Hen. IV,
ili. 1.80. ‘ Indentures ¢rypartyte indented ;’ Bury Wills, ed. Tymms,


666


TRITON


p. 57, in a will dated 1480.—L. ¢ri-, three ; and partit-us, pp. of
partiri, to part, divide, from parti-, decl. stem’ of pars, a part. See
Tri- and Part.

TRIPE, the stomach of ruminating animals, prepared for food.
(F.) ME. éripe, Prompt. Parv.; King Alisaunder, 1. 1578. =F.
tripe, tripe. Cf. Span. and Port. ¢ripa, Ital. ¢tripta. Of unknown
origin, We also find Irish ¢riopas, s. pl., tripes, entrails; W. ¢ripa,
the intestines; Bret. s¢ripen, tripe, more commonly used in the pl.
stripennou, stripou, the intestines.

TRIPHTHONG, three vowel characters representing a single
sound. (Gk.) Little used; coined in imitation of dipkthong, with
prefix tri- (Gk. tpi-), three, instead of di- (Gk. &:-), double. See
Tri- and Diphthong. Der. triphthong-al.

TRIPLE, threefold, three times repeated. (F.—L.) In Shak.
Mid. Nt. Dr. v. 391. [Rich. refers us to Chaucer, tr. of Boethius,
b. iv. met. 7, 1. 26, but the reading there is treble, a much older
form.J=F. triple, ‘ triple, threefold ;” Cot.—L. triplus, triple. = L.
tri-, three; and -plus, related to ie plenus, full. See Tri- and
Double. Der. tripl-y; tripl-et, formed in imitation of doubl-et.
Doublet, treble.

TRIPLICATE, threefold. (L.) In mathematics, a triplicate ratio
is not the ratio of 3 to 1, but the ratio of two cubical numbers, just
as the duplicate ratio is a ratio of squares. In Phillips, ed. 1706.—
L. triplicatus, pp. of triplicare, to treble. = L. tri-, three; and plic-are,
to fold, weave. See Tri- and Ply. Der. triplicat-ion, from L. acc.
triplicationem, Also triplex, from L. triplex, threefold, Tw. Nt. v. 41 5
triplic-i-ty, Spenser, F. Q. i. 12. 39.

TRIPOD, anything supported on three feet, as a stool. (L.—Gk.3
or Gk.) In Chapman, tr. of Homer, Iliad, b. ix. 1. 127; where it
was taken directly from Gk. Also in Holland, tr. of Plutarch, 1102,
where we find ‘tripode or three-footed table’ (R.). ME. tripod,
Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 179.—L. ¢ripod-, stem of tripiis. —Gk.
Tpitrous (stem tprmod-), three-footed; or, as sb., a tripod, a three-
footed brass kettle, a three-legged table.—Gk. tpi-, three ; and mous
(stem 7o05-), a foot, cognate with E. foot; see Tri- and Foot.
Der, tripos (for L, nom. tripiis, Gk. rpimovs), an honour examination
at Cambridge, so called at present because the successful candidates
are arranged in ¢hree classes; but we must not forget that a ¢ripos
sometimes meant an oracle (see Johnson), and that there was for-
merly a certain scholar who went by the name of ¢ripos, being other-
wise called prevaricator at Cambridge or terre filius at Oxford; he
was a master of arts chosen at a commencement to make an ingenious
satirical speech reflecting on the misdemeanours of members of the
university, a practice which gave rise to the so-called ¢ripos-verses,
i.e. facetious Latin verses printed on the back of the tripos-lists
(after 1798). The orig. reference was to the Tripus on which the
M.A. sat; and the lists were named from the verses which took
the place of his speech. See Phillips, ed. 1706, ‘ Wits, .. who
never. . were at all inspired from a Tripus’s, Terre-ilius’s, or Pre-
varecator’s speech ;’ Eng. Garner, vii. 267 (1670). Doublet, ¢rivet.

TRIPTYCH, a picture in three compartments. (Gk.) Fre-
quently, the two side-pictures can be folded over the central one,
which is of double their breadth. = Gk. rpizrvxov, neut. of TpinTUxXOos,
threefold, or consisting of three layers. —Gk. vpi-, for Tpeis, three;
TTUXN, a fold, from mrvoceyv (for *r7vx-yev), to fold.

TRIREME, a galley with three ranks of oars. (L.) ‘ Thucydides
writeth that Aminocles the Corinthian built the first ¢rireme with thre
rowes of oars to a side;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. vii. c. 56.—L.
trirémis, a trireme.= L. trirémis, having three banks of oars. = L. éri-,
three ; and rémus, an oar. B. The L. trirémis corresponds to Gk.
Tpinpyns, a trireme; Thucydides, ers. y. The L. rémus=OL.
resmos, is allied to ‘Gk. éperpds, a rudder, orig. a paddle. The Gk.
ép-etpos, like -np-ns in rpinpys, is allied to E. rudder and row. See
Row (1).

TRISH, the same as Trice (2); q.

TRISECT, to divide into three ea parts. (L.) Coined (in
imitation of bi-sect) from L. ¢ri-, three ; and sect-um, supine of secare,
to cut. See Tri-, Section, Bisect, Der. trisect-ion.

TRIST, the same as Tryst, q

TRISYLLABLE, a word ot cee syllables. (F.—L.—Gk.)
From Tri- and Syllable ; ; see Dissyllable. Cotgrave gives.
F. trisyllabe, adj., of three syllables. Der. ¢risyllab-ic, trisyllab-ic-
al, -ly.

TRITE, wom out by use, hackneyed. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674. bie tritus, worn, pp. of terere, to rub, to wear. +Russ.
teret(e), to rub; Lithuan. ¢riti, to rub; Gk. reipew (for *rép-yetv), =
TER, to rub. Der. trite-ly, -ness. ” Also trit-ur-ate, tri-bul-at-ion,.

q. Vv. And see ¢ry. From the same root, con-trile, de-tri-ment,

TRITON, a marine demi-god. (L.—Gk.) In Shak. Cor. iii, r.
89.=—L. Triton. Gk. Tpirwy, a Triton. Cf. Irish ¢riath, the sea;
Skt. ¢rita-, the name of a deity.


TRITURATE

TRITURATEH, to rub or grind to powder. (L.) Blount, ed.
1674, has ¢riturable and trituration. Perhaps the sb. ¢rituration was
first introduced from the F, sb. trituration, ‘a crumming, crumbling,’
Cot.=—L. tritiratus, pp. of tritirare, to thrash, hence to grind. =L,
tritura, a rubbing, chafing; formed like the fut. part. of terere, to
tub; see Trite. Der. triturat-ion, tritur-able.

TRIUMPH, joy for success, rejoicing for victory. (F.—L.—Gk.)
ME. triumphe, Chaucer, C.T. 14369 (B3553). = OF. triumphe,triomphe,
‘atriumph;’ Cot.=—L. ¢riumphum, acc. of triumphus, a triumph, or
public rejoicing for a victory.—Gk. OpiauBos, a hymn to Bacchus,
sung in festal processions to his honour; also used as a name for
Bacchus. Der. triumph, verb, L. L. L. iv. 3. 35; triwmph-er, Titus
Andron. i, 170; ¢riumph-ant, Rich. III, iii. 2. 84, from the stem of
the pres. part. of L. triumphare, to triumph; ¢riumph-ant-ly; also
triumph-al, from L, triumphalis, belonging to a triumph. Doublet,
trump (2). (Perhaps L. triumphus is a native word.)
TRIUMVIR, one of three men in the same office or government.
(L.) Shak. has triumvirate, Antony, iii. 6. 28; and even triumuiry,
L.L. L. iv. 3. 53.—L. triwmuir, one of three men associated in an
office. A curious form, evolved from the pl. triumuiri, three men,
which again was evolved from the gen. pl. trium uirdrum, so that
trium is the gen. pl. of trés, three; whilst wir, a man, is a nom. sing.
See Three and Virile. Der. triumvir-ate, from L. triumuiratus,
the office of a triumyir.

TRIUNH, the being Three in One. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.
Coined from L. ri-, three; and anus, one, cognate with E. one. See
Tri- and One.

TRIVET, TREVET, a three-legged support. (L.) ‘A triuetie,
tripes;’ Levins. In the Bury Wills, ed. Tymms, p. 82, we find
trevid under the date 1493, and the pl. trewettis at p. 100, under
the date 1504. AS. trefet, Cart. Saxon., ed. Birch, iii. 367.—L.
tripedem, acc. of tripés, having three feet.—L. tri-, three, and és,
a foot, cognate with E. foot. Doublet, tripod, which is a Greek
form.

TRIVIAL, common, slight, of small worth. (F.—L.) In Shak.
All’s Well, v. 3.61. It also meant trite or well-known ; see Trench,
Select Glossary.=—F. ¢rivial, ‘ triviall, common;’ Cot.=L. triuiialis,
that which belongs to the cross-roads, that which may be picked up
anywhere, ordinary, common-place.=—L. triuia, a place where three
roads meet. = L. ¢ri-, three; and wia, a way; see Tri- and Voyage.
Der. trivial-ly, -ness.

TROCHEEH, a metrical foot of two syllables, a long one followed
by a short one. (L.—Gk.) Spelt ¢rocheus in Puttenham, Art of
Poetry, b. ii. c. 3; now shortened to trochee.—L. trocheus.— Gk.
Tpoxatos, running; also a trochee, from its tripping measure. = Gk.
Tpoxés, a running.=Gk. tpéxeuv, to run. The form of the root
appears to be DHREGH. Der. trocha-ic, from Gk. rpoxaixds.
And see truck (2).

TROGLODYTE, a dweller in a cave. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘ These
savages ... flew away at last into their caves, for they were ¢roglo-
dites;’ Howell, Foreign Travel, sect. x; ed. Arber, p. 51. And see
Trevisa, tr. of Higden, i. 159. —F. ¢roglodyte, used by Montesquieu,
and doubtless somewhat older than his time.—L. trdglodyta.=Gk.
TporyAodvTns, one who creeps into holes, a cave-dweller; Herod. iv.
183.—Gk. tpwyAo- for TpwyAn, a hole, a cave; and 6v-ev, to enter,
creep into; with suffix -rys, of the agent. B. Tpw&yAn is from Gk.
Tpwy-ev, to gnaw, to bite, hence to gnaw a hole; whence also
Trout.

TROLL, to roll, to sing a catch, to fish for pike with a rod of
which the line runs on a reel, (F.—Teut.) ME. ¢rollen, to roll;
Prompt. Pary. To ¢roll the bowl, to send it round, circulate it; see
Troul in Nares. To troll a catch is, probably, to sing it irregularly
(see below); to troll, in fishing, is prob. rather to draw the line
hither and thither than to use a reel; see Trawl.—MF-. troller,
which Cot. explains by ‘hounds to ¢rowle, raunge, or hunt out of
order;’ to which he subjoins the sb. ¢rollerie, ‘a trowling or dis-
ordered ranging, a hunting out of order ;’ this shows it was a term
of the chase. Roquefort gives OF. trauler, troller, to run hither and
thither; cf. mod. F. zréler, to lead, drag about, also to stroll about,
to ramble. = G. trollen, to roll, to troll; cognate with MDu. drollen,
‘to troole,? Hexham; Low G. drulen, to roll, troll, Bremen WoOrter-
buch. Prob. allied to EFries. drallen, to turn, to roll; and to
Drill (1). @ Distinct from trail. Der. ¢roll-er; also troll-op,a
stroller, slattern, loitering person, where the suffix is obscure ; perhaps
suggested by gallop. Phillips gives ¢roll about, ‘to ramble up and
down in a careless or sluttish dress;’ also ¢rollop, ‘ an idle, nasty
slut.” And see ¢ruil.

TROMBONE, a deep-toned bass instrument of music. (Ital. —
G.—Slav.) Not in Todd’s Johnson. =Ital. ¢rombone, a trombone,
trumpet, sackbut; augmentative form of tromba, a trumpet; see
Trump (1).


TROUBADOUR 667


TRON, a weighing-machine. (F.—L.) See Riley, tr. of Liber
Albus, pp. 124, 199, 548; hence tronage, pp. 199, 215. The tron
was gen. used for weighing wool. The Tron Church in Edinburgh
is so called from being situate near the site of the old weighing-
machine. We read of ‘Tronage and Poundage’ in Amold’s
Chronicle, ed. 1811, p. 100; where we also find: ‘ To ¢ronage per-
teinen thoos thingis that shal be weyen by the ¢rone of the kynge.’
— AF. trone,a weighing-machine, Liber Albus, p. 246; and Latinised
as Low L. ¢rona (in Ducange) ; cf. OF. trosnel, a dimin. form in
Godefroy. = L. trutina, a pair of scales. Cf. Gk. rpuvravn, a tongue
of a balance, a pair of scales. Der. tron-age; with F. suffix -age<L,
-aticum.,

TROOP, acompany, especially of soldiers, a crew. (F.) In Shak,
Temp. i. 2. 220.—F. troupe, ‘a troop, crue;’ Cot. OF. zrope, in
use in the 13th cent., Littré; cf. Span. tropa, MItal. troppa, ‘a
troupe,’ Florio; mod. Ital. truppa; Late L. troppus. B. Origin
doubtful; perhaps from Norw. orp, a flock, a crowd, Icel. Jorp; cf.
Icel. Ayrpast,to throng. Korting, § 9520. Der.troop, verb, Romeo,
i. 5. 50; hence ¢roop-er, moss-troop-er.

TROPH, a figure of speech. (L.—Gk.) In Levins; and in Sir T.
More, Works, p. 1340 a.—L. ¢ropus, a figure of speech, a trope. = Gk.
Tponos, a turning, a turn, a turn or figure of speech. = Gk. rpo7-, 2nd grade
of rpémev, to turn.-OL. érepere, to turn. Der. trop-ic, g.v. Also
trop-ic-al, i. e. figurative ; tropo-log-ic-al, expressed in tropes, Tyndall,
Works, p. 166, col. 1 (see Logic). Also helio-trope. And see
trophy, troubadour, trover.

TROPHY, a memorial of the defeat of an enemy, something
taken from an enemy. (F.—L.—Gk.) Formerly spelt ¢rophee, as
in Cotgrave, and in Spenser, F. Q. vii. 7. 56.—F. trophée, ‘a trophee,
a sign or mark of victory;’ Cot.—L. tropeum, a sign of victory. =
Gk. rpématoy, rpomatov, a trophy, a monument of an enemy’s defeat,
consisting of shields, &c., displayed on a frame. Neut. of tpomatos,
adj., belonging to a defeat. Gk. tpom7, a return, a putting to flight
of an enemy by causing them to turn.—Gk. tpom-, 2nd grade of
Tpéme, to turn; see Trope. Der. trophi-ed.

TROPIC, one of the two small circles on the celestial sphere,
where the sun appears to turn, after reaching its greatest declination
north or south; also one of two corresponding circles on the terres-
trial sphere. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. ¢ropik, Chaucer, On the Astro-
labe, pt. i.c. 17,1. 8.—F. tropique, ‘a tropick;’ Cot.=—L,. ¢ropicum,
acc. of tropicus, tropical.=Gk. tpoms«os, belonging to a turn;
6 tpomxds KvKXos, the tropic circle. Gk. rpéos, a turn; see Trope.
Der. tropic, adj.; tropic-al, tropic-al-ly,

TROT, to move or walk fast, run as a horse when not going at
full pace. (F.—L.?) ME. ¢rotten, Chaucer, C. T. 9412 (E 1538) ;
P. Plowman, B. ii. 164.—F. ¢rotter, ‘to trot;’ Cot. OF. troter,
13th cent.; Littré. We also find OF. trotier, a trotter, messenger,
Late L. trotarius; and this answers so nearly to L. folitarius, going
at a trot, that it is usual to suppose OF. /roter to result from a Late
L. *tolutare, to trot, by the common change of / into r, and loss of o.
B. Tolutérius is derived from toliitim, ady., at a trot, used of horses.
The lit. sense is ‘ with a lifting up of the feet.’ —L. ¢ollere, to lift ;
see Tolerate. y. This etymology is accepted by Diez, Scheler,
and Littré ; but some compare MHG. trotten, to run, perhaps allied to
G. treten, to tread; MDu. #ratten, ‘to goe, to pace, or to trot;’
Hexham. G. treten is cognate with E. tread. Der. trot, sb.,
trott-er.

TROTH, truth, fidelity. (E.) In Shak. Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 2. 36.
ME. trowbJe, Ormulum, i. 44. Formed from the verb Trow, q. v.
Der. troth-ed, Much Ado, iii. 1. 38; ¢roth-plight, a plighting of troth,
Wint. Tale, i. 2. 278; troth-plight =troth-plighted, Wint. ‘Vale, v. 3.
151. Also be-troth, q. v.

TROUBADOUR, a Provengal poet. (Prov.—L.—Gk.) See
Warton, Hist. of Eng. Poetry, sect. iii. And see Littré, Roquefort,
and Raynouard. Troubadour does not seem to be the right Proy.
word, but a F. modification of it. The Prov. word is ¢trobador (Littré),
or (very commonly) trobaire; see Bartsch, Chrest. Provengale.
From a L. type *tropatorem, acc. of *tropator ; from a verb *tropare,
formed from L, tropus, which was used by Venantius Fortunatus
(about A.D. 600) with the sense of ‘a kind of singing, a song,’
White; and see Ducange. This is only a peculiar use of L. tropus,
which usually means a trope; see Trope. B. The Late L. *éro-
pare would have the exact sense ‘ to make or write, or sing a song’
which is so conspicuous in OF, ¢rover (F. trouver), Prov. trobar,
Port. and Span. ¢rovar, Ital. trovare; for, though the mod. F. trouver
means ‘to find’ in a general sense, this is merely generalised from
the particular sense of ‘to find out’ or ‘ devise’ poetry; cf. Port.
trova, a rime, trovar, to make rimes, ¢rovador, a rimer; Span. trova,
verse, ¢rovar, to versify, also to find; ¢rovador, a versifier, finder ;
trovista, a poet; Ital. zrovare, ‘to finde, to deuise, to inuent, to
imagine, get, obtain, procure, seeke out,’ Florio. It may be added


668 TROUBLE


that, even in Gk., rpdmos was used with reference to music, to signify
a particular mode, such as rpdémos Avéios, the Lydian mode, &c.
y. As regards the letter-changes, a L. p rightly gives Ital. » and Prov.
b, as in Ital. arrivare=Prov. arribar<L. adripare (see Arrive).
Cf. also Prov. trobaire, a troubadour; from L. nom. *tropator.
See Trover.

TROUBLE, to agitate, disturb, confuse, vex. (F.—L.) ME.
troublen, Wyclif, Mark, ix. 19; ¢rublen, Ancren Riwle, p. 268, 1. 20.
—OF. trubler, trobler, later troubler, ‘to trouble, disturb;’ Cot.
Formed as if from a Late L. *turbulare,a verb made from L. éurbula,
a disorderly group, a little crowd of people (White), dimin. of zurba,
a crowd. In fact, we find OF. ¢orbleur, one who troubles. [From
the L. turba we have also the verb turbare, to disturb, with much
the same sense as F. troubler.| B. The L. ¢urba, a crowd, confused
mass of people, is cognate with Gk. tupBy, also written odpBy, dis-
order, throng, bustle; whence rupBa¢ev, to disturb. See Turbid.
Der. trouble, sb., spelt torble, turble in Prompt. Parv., from OF.
troble, truble, later trouble, ‘ trouble,’ Cot. ; trouble-some, Mer. Wives,
i. I. 3253 ¢roubl-ous, 2 Hen. VI,i. 2. 22. Also ¢urb-id, turb-ul-ent,
q.v. Also (from L. turbare) dis-turb, per-turb.

TROUGH, a long hollow vessel for water. (E.) ME. trogh,
trough, Chaucer, C. T. 3627. AS. troh or trog (gen. troges), a
trough or hollow vessel; used by /£lfred in the sense of a little boat,
tr. of Orosius, b. ii. c. 5. § 7 (end). ‘Littoraria, ¢roh-scip, i.e. a
little boat, Voc. 166. 4; ‘ Canthera, ¢rog,’ id. 12. 12.4-Du. trog;
Icel. trog ; Dan. trug; Swed. trdég; G. trog, MHG. troc. We find
also G. truhe, OHG. truha, a chest or trunk. Teut. type *érugéz,
Idg. type *drukés, m.; from *Idg. dru-, as in Skt. dru, a tree; with
adj. suffix. Thus the sense is ‘wooden;’ see Tree. Der. tray.

TROUNCH, to beat, castigate. (F.—L.) ‘But the Lord
trounsed Sisara and all his charettes;’ Bible, 1551, Judges, iv. 15.
Lit. ‘ to beat with a truncheon.’ =OF. trons, m. a truncheon; Zronce,
f., variant of OF. tronche, ‘a great piece of timber,’ Cot., allied to
F. tronc, a trunk; cf. also F. tronson, mod. F. trongon, ‘a truncheon
or little trunk, a thick slice,’ id. See Truncheon and Trunk.
Cf. also F. ¢roncir, ‘to cut or break off in two,’ Cot. ; Span. ¢rozzar,
to shatter.

TROUSERS, TROWSERS, a garment worn by males on
the lower limbs. (F.—L.—Gk.) The form trousers does not seem
to be old; Richardson quotes ‘by laced stockings and ¢rowzers’
from Wiseman’s Surgery, b.i. c. 18; Wiseman died in 1676. In
older books the word appears without the latter r, in the forms
troozes, trouses, &c., and even trooze; cf. Lowland Sc. trews. We
find, however, the curious and corrupt form strossers in Shak. Hen. V,
lil. 7. 57, where most mod. editions have trossers, though the same
form occurs also in Dekker and Middleton ; see Dyce’s Glossary to
Shakespeare. B. The word was particularly used of the nether
garments of the Irish; Nares cites, from Ware’s Antiquities of
Ireland, ‘their little coats, and strait breeches called trouses.’ ‘Their
breeches, like the Irish ¢rooze, have hose and stockings sewed to-
gether;’ Sir T. Herbert, Travels, p. 297 (Todd); or p. 313, ed.
1665. Hence Irish ¢rius, triubhas, trousers; MIrish ¢ribus; Gael.
triubhas.. Herbert also has the spelling troozes, p. 325, ed. 1665.
‘The poor trowz’d Irish there;’ Drayton, Polyolbion, song 22.
Cf. also: ‘ And leaving me to stalk here in my ¢rowses,’ Ben Jonson,
Staple of News, i. 1 (Pennyboy junior). ‘Four wild Irish in
trowses ;? Ford, Perkin Warbeck, iii. 1; stage direction. =F.
trousses, s. pl., trunk-hose, breeches (Hamilton ; see also Littré).
Trousses is the pl. of zrousse, a bundle, a ‘truss,’ formerly also a
case, such as ‘a quiver for arrows;’ Cot. Hence #rousses became
a jecular term, used esp. of the breeches of a page (Littré), and
was so applied by the English to the Irish garments. =F. trousser,
‘to trusse, pack, tuck, bind or girt in, pluck or twitch up ;’ Cot.
These senses help to explain the sb. See further under Truss.
Der. trosseau, q.v.

TROUSSEAU, a package; esp. the lighter articles of a bride’s
outfit. (F.—L.—Gk.) Modern; yet it is not a little remakable that
trusseaus, i.e. packages, occurs in the Ancren Riwle, p. 168, 1. 1.—
F. trousseau, ‘a little trusse or bundle ;’ Cot.; OF. troussel, dimin.
of F. trousse, a truss, bundle; see Truss.

TROUT, a fresh-water fish. (L.—Gk.) ME. troute, spelt trowte
in the Prompt. Parv. AS. truht: ‘ Tructa, truht,’ Voc. 180. 37.
—L. tructa (whence also F. ¢ruite); also tructus.—Gk. tpwxrns, a
gnawer, lover of dainties; also a sea-fish with sharp teeth.=Gk.
Tpwy-ev, to gnaw; with suffix -ryjs of the agent. As the sense is
“enawer’ or ‘nibbler,’ it was easily applied to fish of various kinds.
Ct. Troglodyte.

TROVER, the gaining possession of goods, by finding or other-
wise. (F.—L.—Gk.) ‘Zrover is the name of an action, which a
man hath against one who, having found any of his goods, refuseth
to deliver them upon demand ;’ Blount’s Nomolexicon, ed. 1691. In


TRUCE


Butler, Hudibras, pt. iii. c.3,1.648. An old law-term, in early use,
as shown by the spelling. OF. trover, later trouver, to find. It -
answers in form to the Late L. *tropare, orig. used in the sense
to find out poetry, to invent, devise, which was a sense of OF.
trover, and prob. the orig. one. See further under Troubadour.
Hence ¢reasure-trove, treasure found, where trove is now bar-
barously pronounced as a monosyllable, though it stands for OF.
trove (trove), pp. of trover, to find; see Blackstone, Commentaries,
b.i.c. 8. Der. con-trive, re-trieve.

TROW, to believe, think, suppose to be true. (E.) In Luke, xvii.
g (A.V.). ME. ¢rowen, Chaucer, C. T. 693 (A 691). OFries.
trouwa, EFries. trden, to believe. AS. triwian, to trow, trust ;
from Teut. base *tri-. We also find AS. tréowian, to believe,
allied to ¢réow, sb., faith, and to tréowe, adj., true ; from the Teut. base
*trew(w). Cf. Icel. ¢rtia, to trow, zrir, true; Dan. troe, to trow,
tro, true; Swed. tro, to trow; Low G. trouen, to trow, trou, true;
Du. trouwen, to marry, trouw, true; G. trauen, OHG. triwén, to
trust; Goth. zrauan, to believe. See True.

TROWEL, a tool used in spreading mortar and in gardening.
(F.—L.) ME. érwel ; ‘a truel of [a] masoun ;’ Wyclif, Amos, vii. 7,
earlier version ; the later version has ¢rulle. ‘Hec trolla, a trowylle;’
Voc. 728. 29. Spelt ¢rowell in Palsgrave.—F. ¢ruelle, a trowel,
spelt ¢ruele in the 13th cent. (Littré).—Late L. ¢ruella, a trowel, in
use A.D. 1163 (Ducange); cf. L. ¢ralla, a small ladle, scoop, fire-
pan, trowel. A dimin. of L. trua, a stirring-spoon, skimmer, ladle.
See Twirl.

TROWSERS, the same as Trousers, q.v. y

TROY-WEIGHT, the weight used by goldsmiths. (F.; and E.)
Spelt troie-weight in Minsheu, ed. 1627. Troy weyt; Paston Letters,
iii. 297. ‘The received opinion is that it took its name from a
weight used at the fair of Troyes; this is likely enough; we have
the pound of Cologne, of Toulouse, and perhaps also of Troyes.
That there was a.very old English pound of 12 oz. is a well-
determined fact, and also that this pound existed long before the
name Troy was given to it, [is] another .. The ¢roy-pound was men-
tioned as a known weight in 2 Hen. V. cap. 4 (1414), and 2 Hen. VI,
cap. 13 (1423),’ &c.; Eng. Cyclopedia. And see Haydn, Dict. of
Dates. This explanation is verified by the expression ‘a Paris pece
of syluer weyng bee the weyght off troye viij. vuncis;’ Arnold’s
Chronicle, ed. 1811, p. 108; at p. IgI, it appears simply as ‘ troy
weyght.’ As early as 1392-3, we find ‘ponderis . . de Troye;’
Earl of Derby’s Expeditions (C. S.), p. 100, 1. 28. Troyes is a town
in France, to the S.E. of Paris. Cotgrave, s.v. livre, mentions the
pounds of Spain, Florence, Lyons, and Milan; and explains Ja livre
des apothecaries as belonging to ‘ Troy weight.’

TRUANT, an idler, a boy who absents himself from school with-
out leave. (F.—C.) ME. ¢ruant, Gower, C. A. ii. 13; bk. iv. 342.
The derived sb. ¢rewandise occurs as early as in the Ancren Riwle,
p- 330, l. 2.—AF. truaunt, Boeve de Haumtone, ed. Stimming, 1. 281 ;
Vie de St. Auban; F. ¢ruand, ‘a common beggar, vagabond, a rogue,
a lazie rascall;’ Cot. He also gives the adj. truand, ‘beggarly,
rascally, roguish.’ [We find also Span. truhan, Port. truhGo, a
buffoon, jester.} Of Celtic origin. W. ¢ruan, wretched, truan,
a wretch; cf. ¢ruedd, wretchedness, ¢rueni, pity, trugar, compas-
sionate, ¢ruenus, piteous. Corn. iru, interj. alas ! woe ! ¢roc, wretched.
Breton ¢ruez, truhez, pity, ¢rueza, to pity; truant, a vagabond,
beggar, of which Legonidec says that, though this particular form
is borrowed from French, it is none the less of Celtic origin, and
that, in the dialect of Vannes, a beggar is called ¢ruek. Irish trogha,
miserable, unhappy; ¢roighe, grief; tru, lean, piteous; ¢ruadh, a
poor, miserable creature ; ¢ruagh, pity, also poor, lean, meagre; &c.
Gael. truaghan, a poor, distressed creature ; truaghanta, lamentable,
from truagh, wretched; cf. ¢rwas, pity, trocair, mercy. B. Thus
the F. zruand is formed, with excrescent d, from the sb. which
appears as W. iruan, Gael. truaghan, a wretched creature ; which
sb. was orig. an adj. extended from the shorter form seen in W. ¢ru,
Corn. troc, Irish trogka, Gael. ¢truagh, wretched; Olrish truag;
Celtic type *trougos, wretched (Stokes-Fick, p. 138). Allied to
Gk. orpevy-opvat, I am wretched, I feel distress.

TRUCH, a temporary cessation of hostilities, temporary agree-
ment. (E.) The etymology is much obscured by the curious modern
spelling; it is really a plural form, and might be spelt ¢rews, i.e.
pledges, pl. of érew, a pledge of truth, derived from the adj. true.
This comes out clearly in tracing the ME. forms. ME. ériwes, Rob.
of Glouc. p. 488, 1. 10005 ; treowes, K. Alisaunder, 2808; trewes,
Rich. Coer de Lion, 320%. ‘ Truwys, irwys, or truce of pees ;’
Prompt. Parv. All these are pl. forms; the sing. ‘rewe, a truce,
pledge of reconciliation, occurs in P. Plowman, B. vi. 332, Morte
Arthure, ed. Brock, 879.— AS. tréow, a compact, promise, pledge,
faith (Grein); cf. AS. trzowa, by-form triwa, used in the sense of
compact in Gen. xvii. 19; it also means faith, Mark, xi. 22. Allied


TRUCK


to AS. tréowe, true; see True. Cf. AF. trues, truce, Gaimar, 567 ;
triwes, id. 3046; trewe, sing., Stat. Realm, i. 300 (1344).

TRUCK (1), to barter, exchange. (F.—Teut.) ‘ All goods,
wares, and merchandises so trucked, bought, or otherwise dis-
pended ;’ Hakluyt’s Voyages, i. 228. Just above, on the same
page, we have: ‘by way of marchandise, ¢rucke, or any other re-
spect.’ ME. trukken, Prompt. Pary.; and even in Ancren Riwle,
p- 408, 1. 15.— AF. troguier, La Clef d’Amors, 1. 1067 ; F. troguer,
‘to truck, chop, swab, scorce, barter;’ Cot. Cf. Span. (and Port.)
trocar, to barter ; Ital. ¢ruccare,‘ to truck, barter;’ Florio. £.From
OF. troque, sb., barter (1537), Godefroy; MF. troc, trog, ‘a bar-
tering ;’ Cot. And the Vocab. du Haut Maine has tric pour troc,
a simple exchange; and we find Norm. dial. faire la troque, to
barter ; Walloon trouk po trovk, a simple exchange (Rémacle). A
North F. form; the Central F. trocher occurs in 1434 (Ducange,
s.v. Trocare).—WFlem. trok, truk, sale; used with regard to the
(good or bad) ‘sale’ of goods, trokken, to procure goods. The
WFlem. rok and trokken are used in all the senses of Du. #rek,
trekken (De Bo). Cf. Du. trek, demand, quick sale ; ix trek zijn, to
be in vogue; from ¢rekken, vb., to draw. See Trigger. Der.
truck, sb., as above, from F. ¢rog, ‘a truck, or trucking,’ Cot. ; cf.
Span. trueca, trueque, barter, Port. ¢roco, the change of a piece of
gold or silver, roca, barter. Also ¢ruck-age. See Notes on
EK. Etym., p. 307.

TRUCK (2), a small wheel, a low-wheeled vehicle for heavy
articles. (L.—Gk.) ‘In gunnery, trucks are entire round pieces of
wood like wheels fixed on the axle-trees of the carriages, to move
the ordinaunce at sea ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. He also gives: ‘ trochus,
a wheel, a top for children to play with.’ Truck is an English
adaptation of L. ¢rochus, now disused in its L. form. =Gk. rpoxés,
a runner, a wheel, disc. —Gk. tpoy-, 2nd grade of rpéxeuv, to run;
see Trochee. Der. truck-le, alittle wheel, answering to L. trochlea;
Phillips gives : ‘trochlea, a truckle or pulley, . . which is one of the
six mechanical powers or principles ;’ showing that the L. form
trochlea was once in use. Baret has: ‘ Puilie, trochlea; a truckle,
or pullie.’ Cotgrave explains F. jabot by ‘a truckle or pully;’ and
the word occurs rather early, as shown under Truckle, verb.
Hence truckle-bed, a bed that runs on small wheels and can be
pushed under another bed, Romeo, ii. I. 39; see Nares. And see
truckle below.

TRUCKLE, to submit servilely to another. (L.—Gk.)
‘Truckle, to submit, to yield or buckle to;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.
Not an old word; Todd’s Johnson has: ‘Shall our nation be in
bondage thus Unto a nation that ¢ruckles under us?’ Cleayeland
(no reference). Also: ‘For which so many a legal cuckold Has
been run down in courts and ¢ruckled;’ Butler’s Hudibras, Part iii.
c. I. 1.613. To truckle under is a phrase having reference to the
old truckle-bed, which could be pushed under another larger one;
and the force of the phrase is in the fact that a pupil or scholar
slept under his tutor on a truckle-bed. See Hall’s Satires, b. ii. sat. 6,
where he intentionally reverses the order of things, saying that a com-
plaisant tutor would submit ‘to lie upon the ¢rackle-bed, Whiles his
young maister lieth o’er his head.’ Warton, in his Hist. of Eng.
Poetry, ed. 1840, iii, 419, has a note upon this passage in which he
proves that such was the usual practice both at Oxford and Cam-
bridge, citing: ‘ When I was in Cambridge, and lay in a trundle-bed
under my tutor, Return from Parnassus (1606), Act ii. sc. 6
(Amoretto). He quotes from the statutes of Magdalen College,
Oxford, 1459, the statute: ‘Sint duo lecti principales, et duo lecti
rotales, ¢rookyll-beddys vulgariter nuncupati;’ cap. xlv. He adds:
‘And in the statutes of Trinity College, Oxford, given [in] 1556,
troccle-bed, the old spelling, ascertains the etymology from ¢roclea,
a wheel.’ In fact, this shows how the words truckle and truck (2)
came to be taken immediately from the Latin ; they originated at the
universities. @ No connexion with AS. ¢rucian, to fail, which
does not in any way explain the word or its use.

TRUCULENT, fierce, barbarous, cruel. (F.—L.) In Cot-
grave. — MF.¢ruculent, ‘truculent, cruell ;’ Cot. = L. truculentum, acc.
of truculentus, cruel; extended from ¢rux (gen. truc-is), fierce, wild.
Perhaps the orig. sense was ‘threatening ;’ cf. G. droken, MHG.
drouwen, OHG. drauwen, to threaten, AS. Aréagan, to threaten.
Der. truculent-ly, truculence.

TRUDGE, to travel on foot slowly, march heavily. (F.—
Teut.?) In Shak, it means to run heavily, trot along or away;
Merry Wives, i. 3. 91; iii. 3. 13 3 Romeo, i. 2. 345 i. 3. 34. ‘May
from the prison ¢rudge;’ Turbervile, That Lovers must not despair,
st. 6. ‘And let them trudge hence apace ;’ Bale, Apologie, fol.
6.(R.). ‘1 trudgde about from gate to gate ;’ Mirror for Magistrates
(Alurede). Perhaps it meant to go about like a vagabond or idle
beggar. =F. trucher, to beg idly (16th cent.), Littré; Picard trucher,
to beg; Norm. dial. ¢rucher, to sponge upon, Of Teut. origin; cf.


TRUMPERY 669


Low G. truggeln, to beg fawningly; Du. troggelen, to beg, to
wheedle; MDu. truggelen, ‘to trugge up and downe a begging,’
Hexham; WFlem. troggelen, to walk with difficulty, De Bo (who
notices that in Limburg it is pronounced ¢ruggelen or trukkelen) ;
EFries. triiggeln, to press back, also to beg with importunity.
From Teut. base Jrig-, to press; as in Icel. Jriga, Swed. truga,
Dan. true, to press. @ Florio has Ital. truccare, ‘ to trudge, to skud,
or pack away.’ Cf. grudge<OF. groucher. (Doubtful.)

TRUE, firm, established, certain, honest, faithful. (E.) ME.
trewe (properly dissyllabic), P. Plowman, B. i. 88. AS. tréowe, true,
also spelt trywe, Grein, ii. 552. Cf. AS. tréow, trjw, truth, pre-
servation of a compact.+-Du. frouw, true, faithful; ¢roww, fidelity ;
Icel. tryggr, trir, true; Dan. tro, true; tro, truth; Swed. trogen,
true; tro, fidelity; G. treu, OHG. triwwi, true; treue, OHG.
triuwa, fidelity; Goth. triggws, true; triggwa, a covenant; cf.
trauan, to trow, trust, be persuaded. B. The Teut. type appears.
to be *trewwoz, adj., ‘ believed in, relied upon ;’ from Idg. 4/DREU,
to rely upon, trust in; whence also Lith. dri-tas, firm, OPrussian
druwis, druwi, belief, druwit, to believe. Der. tru-ly, tru-ism (a
coined word); also tru-th, ME. trewthe, trouthe, Chaucer, C. T.
10877 (F 563), AS. tréowdu, Exod. xix. §, cognate with Icel. trygg0;
hence truth-ful, -ly, -ness. Also troth (doublet of truth), trow,
tru-st.

TRUFFLE, a round underground edible fungus. (F.—L.) In
Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘A dish of ¢rufles;’ Evelyn, Diary, Sept. 30,
1644.— MF. truffle, another spelling of truffe, ‘a most dainty kind
of round and russet root;’ Cot. Cf. Span. trufa, a truffle; also a
cheat (see Trifle). We also find F. ¢artoufle in the same sense;
Ital. tartufo, a truffle; tartuji bianchi, white esculent roots, i.e.
potatoes. B. The F. trugfe, Span. trufa, is supposed to be derived
from L. tuber, a tuber, esculent root, a truffle (Juv.v. 116); the neut.
pl. ¢uébera would give a nom. fem. *tufre (whence trufe by shifting
of r) as in other instances; e.g. the L. fem. sing. antiphona=Gk.
neut. pl. dvripwra. y. That this is the right explanation (for
which see Diez and Scheler) is rendered almost certain by the Ital.
form tariufo (also tartufola), where ¢ar- stands for L. terre (of the
earth), and zartufo is from terre tuber. Florio gives Ital. tartuffo,
tartuffola, ‘a kinde of meate, fruite, or roote of the nature of potatoes
called traffles [truffles?]; also, a kind ofartichock.’ Brugmann de-
tives Ital. -tufo (in tar-tufo) from an Oscan-Umbrian dialect ; i. § 413
(8). 8. From the Ital. ¢artufola is derived (by dissimilation of
the double #) the curious G. kartoffel, a potato ; of which an earlier
form was tartuffel. See furtherunder Tuber. Doublet, trifle, q.v.

TRULLI, a drab, worthless woman. (G.) In Shak. Antony, iii.
6. 95; and in Levins. ‘ The Governour [of Brill, in Holland] was
all bedewed with drinke, His ¢ruls and he were all layde downe to
sleepe;’ Gascoigne, Voyage into Holland, a. p. 1572; Works, ed.
Hazlitt, i. 391. We should expect to find it a Du. word, but it is
German, imported, perhaps, by way of Holland, though not in Hex-
ham’s or Sewel’s dictionaries.—G. ¢rolle, trulle, a trull (whence
Walloon ¢rowille (Sigart), Picard troule,the same. It is a fem. form,
allied to MDu. drol, m., ‘ a pleasant or a merrie man, or a gester,’
Hexham, and to Dan. ¢trold, Swed. and Icel. ¢rol/, a merry elf ;
see Droll. The orig. sense was merely a merry or droll companion.
TRUMP (1), a trumpet, kind of wind instrument. (F.—G.—Slav.)
ME. trumpe, trompe, Chaucer, C. T. 676 (A 674); Rob. of Brunne,


‘tr. of Langtoft, p. 30, 1. 13. =F. ¢rompe, ‘a trump, or trumpet ;” Cot.
(Cf. Span., Port., and Prov. trompa, Ital. tromba.]—OHG. trumpa,


trumba, a trumpet (Hatzfeld). Of Slavonic origin.—OSlav. type
*tromba (Miklosich) ; evidenced by OSlav. and Polish tra(m)ba, with
the former a nasal, Slovenian ¢romba, troba, a trumpet ; Russ. truba,
a pipe, a tube, a trumpet. Der. trump-et, ME. trompette, Gower,
C. A. iii. 217; bk. vii. 3744; from F. ¢rompette, ‘a trumpet,’ Cot.,
dimin. of F. trompe ; trump-et-er, from F. trompeteur, ‘a trumpeter,’
Cot. Also trumpet-fish; trumpet-tongued, Macb,i. 7.19. And see
trumpery.

TRUMP (2), one of the suit of cards that takes any other suit.
(F.—L.) Well known to be a corruption of ¢riwmph ; see Latimer’s
Sermons (Parker Society), i. 1, 8, 13, and Foxe’s remarks on them,
id. vol. ii. p. xi. Triumph in Shak. Antony, iv. 14. 20, prob. means


a trump-card ; see Nares. =F’. ¢riomphe, ‘ the card-game called ruffe,
‘or trump; also the ruffe or trump at it;’ Cot. See Triumph.


Der. trump, verb; trump-card.


| TRUMPERY, falsehood, idle talk, trash. (F.—L.) In Temp.


Caxton has tromperye, meaning ‘ deception ;’


iv. 186 ; and in Levins. \ ‘
The proper sense is deceit, or some-


Godfrey of Bulloigne, p. 238.


‘thing deceptive, hence imposture, &c. =F. tromperie, ‘a craft, wile,.
‘fraud ;’ Cot.—F. tromper, ‘to cousen, deceive,’ id.


B. Littré says


‘that the orig. sense was to play on the trump or trumpet; thence


arose the phrase se tromper de quelqu’un, to play with any one, to
amuse oneself at his expense ; hence the sense to beguile, cheat.


TRUMPET


This seems to be the right and simple solution ; and Littré also quotes,
s. Vv. trompette (1), the [15th cent.| phrase me joues tu de la trompete?
are you playing the trumpet with me, i.e. are you playing with me,
which confirms it, See further under Trump (1).

TRUMPET, the dimin. of Trump (1), q. v.

TRUNCATE, to cut off short. (L.) Phillips has ‘ truncated
pyramid or cone.’ = L, truncatus, pp. of truncare, to cut off, reduce to
a trunk.—L. ¢runcus, a trunk, stock ; see Trunk. Der. truncat-ion,
from I, ¢roncation, ‘a truncation, trunking, mutilation, cutting off,’
Cot., from L, acc. truncatidnem.

TRUNCHEON, a cudgel, short staff. (F.—L.) ME. ¢ron-
choun, Chaucer, C. 'T, 2617 (A 2615), where it means the shaft of a
broken spear; so also ¢ronchon, King Alisaunder, 3745.—ONorth F.
tronchon (Norm. dial.); see Moisy and Godefroy; OF. trongon ;
MF, tronson, ‘a truncheon, or little trunk, a thick slice, luncheon, or
piece cut off;’ Cot. Mod. F. ¢rongon. Dimin. of F. trone, ‘trunck,
stock, stemme ;’ Cot.; see Trunk. Der. éruncheon-er, Hen. VIII,


670


V. 4. Bd.

TRUNDLE, a wheel, anything round; to roll. (F.—Low G.)
Now chiefly used only as a verb, to roll round ; the sb. occurs in
trundle-bed, a bed running on wheels, ¢rundle-tail, a round tail of a
dog; cf. AS. tryndyled, rounded; Voc. 152. 5. [We also find:
‘ Trendyll, sb,, tournouer;’ Palsgrave. ‘I ¢ryndell, as a boule or a
stone dothe, Ye roulle;’ id. ME. ¢trendil, sb., trendelen, verb.
‘ Trendyl, troclea;’ ‘ T'rendelyn a rownd thynge, Trocleo, volvo,’
Prompt. Parv. ; from AS. trendel, a circle ; see further under Trend. |
B. The vowel is due to borrowing from MF. (Picard) zrondeler, ‘to
trundle,’ Cot.; Walloon ¢rondeler, to roll (Sigart). Of Low G.
origin ; cf. Low G. tréndeln, Pomeran. triindeln, to trundle a hoop. =
Teut. *trund-, weak grade of a lost str. vb. *trendan-, to roll (pt. t.
*trand) ; whence also AS. sin-tryndel, a large round shield ; OF ries.
trund, round. Cf. NFries., Swed., Dan. ¢rind, round, The ME.
trenden, to turn, roll, is a secondary verb from *trand, 2nd grade of
*trendan-. See Trend. Der. trundle-bed, see quotation s. v. truckle ;
trundle bedstead occurs in Bury Wills, ed. Tymms, p. 220, 1. 11, ina
will dated 1649; ¢rundle-tail, a cur, Beaum. and Fletcher, Love’s
Cure, iii. 3.16, according to Richardson, but Darley’s ed. has ¢rindle-
tail; see, however, K. Lear, iii. 6. 73.

TRUNK (1), the stem of a tree, proboscis of an elephant, shaft of
a column, chest for clothes. (F.—L.) ‘A cheste, or ¢runke of clene
syluer ;’ Fabyan, Chron. cap. 131, fol. Ixvii, ed. Ellis, p. 113. ME.
tronke, a body without limbs; Caxton, Golden Legend, Saul, § 3.
— I. ¢ronc, ‘the truncke, stock, stemme, or body of a tree; also a
trunk, or headlesse body; also, the poor man’s box in churches’
[whence E. trunk =box]; Cot.—L. truncum, acc. of truncus, a trunk,
stem, trunk of the body, piece cut off. Spelt froncus in Lucretius,
i. 354.3 cf. ¢runcus, adj., maimed, mutilated. See Brugmann, i. § 144.
it~ ‘The elephant’s trunk owes its name to an error (see below). The
AF. trunk, a trunk of a tree, is in Wm. of Wadington’s Manuel, 1. 11090.
Der. trunk-ed, having a trunk; ¢runk-line (of a railway); trunk-hose,
trunk-breeches (see Nares), short wide breeches, reaching a little above
or sometimes below the knee, and striped, meaning (I suppose)
trunked hose, i.e. cut short (cf. ¢runked=truncated, Spenser, F. Q.
ii. 5. 4). Also ¢runc-ate, q.v., trunch-eon, q.V., trunn-ion, q. V.,
trounce, q.V-

TRUNK (2), the proboscis of an elephant. (F.—G.—Slay.) In
Holland, tr. of Pliny, bk. viii. c. 7. A mistaken form of ¢rump ;
which was confused with trunk, because the latter was sometimes
used with the notion of a (hollow) stem ora ‘tube,’ which was also a
sense of trump (Palsgrave). Cf. F. trompe, ‘a trump, or trumpet;

. also, the snowt of an elephant,’ Cot. See Trump (1). For
trunk, a speaking-tube, see Ben Jonson, Epiccene,i. 1. Halliwell
gives both ¢runk and trump, as meaning ‘a pea-shooter;’ and notes
the corrupt use of ¢runk to mean a trumpat cards. See Trunk (1).

TRUNNION, one of the stumps or round projections on each
side of a cannon, on which it rests in the carriage. (F.—L.) In
Phillips, ed. 1706.—F. d¢rognon, ‘the stock, stump, or trunk of a
branchless tree;’ Cot. Dimin, of ¢ron, ‘a piece of anything, a
trunk, stem,’ &c.; Cot. This is a shortened form of ¢ronc, due per-
haps (as Diez suggests) to misdividing the derived word ¢roxgon as
tron-¢on; in any case ¢ron and trone meant the same thing, as Cot-
grave tells us. Cf. Ital. troncone, from tronco. See Trunk.

TRUSS, to pack, bind up, fasten as in a package or in bundles.
(F.—L.—Gk.) ME. trussen, P. Plowman, B, ii. 218; Ancren Riwle,
p. 322, 1.6. [The sb. ¢russe, a package, is in the Prompt. Parv.,
Pp. 504.) — OF, trusser, trosser (also tourser, torser), MF. trousser, ‘to
trusse, pack, bind or girt in;’ Cot. ‘The old spelling ¢orser (tourser,
torser in Godefroy) is supposed to be due to Late L, tursus, L. thyrsus,
a stalk.—Gk. @dpoos, a stalk, stem; see Thyrsus, See Karting,
§ 9606. Hence OF, tourse, a bundle, toursel, trousel, a little bundle,
F. trousseau, @ The idea seems to be that of ‘gathering stalks


’


TUBER


together,’ as in making up a bunch of flowers, &c.
‘a stem or stalke of any herbe;’ Florio. Der. truss, sb., ME. trusse,
as above. Also ¢rous-ers, q. V., trouss-eau, g.V.

TRUST, confidence, belief, credit, ground of confidence. (E.)
ME. trust, Ancren Riwle, p. 202,1. 7. AS. *trast, not found; cf.
tréows-ian, to pledge oneself, truiw-ian, to trust.4-OFries. trast; Icel.
traust, trust, protection, firmness ; Dan. and Swed. zrést, comfort, con-
solation.-G. zrost, consolation, help, protection; Goth. trausti, a
covenant; Eph.ii.12. B. The Teut. base of the Icel. form is *¢raus-
to-, formed with Idg. suffix -to- from *trau-s-, extended from *trau-, as
seen in Goth. trau-an, to believe, to trust ; see True, Trow. Der.
trust, verb, ME. trusten, O. Eng. Homilies, i. 213, 1. 75 trust-er ;
trust-ee, one who is trusted, a coined word, with the suffix -ee=F. é
(L. -atus) ; trust-ful, 1 Hen. 1V, ii. 4.434, trust-ful-ly, trust-ful-ness ;
trust-less, Shak. Lucrece, 2 ; ¢rust-y, ME. ¢rusti, Ancren Riwle, p. 334,
1, 213 trust-i-ly, trust-i-ness ; trust-worthy (not in Todd’s Johnson),
trust-worthi-ly, trust-worthi-ness. Also mis-trust, q.v., tryst, q.V.

TRUTH, sb.; see True. Doublet, zroth.

TRY, to test, sift, select, examine judicially, examine experi-
mentally ; also, to endeavour. (F.—L.) The old sense is usually
to sift, select, pick out. ME. ¢rien, tryen, P. Plowman, B. i. 205.
‘Tryin, tryyn, Eligo, preéligo, discerno;’ Prompt. Parv. =F. rier,
“to pick, chuse, cull out from among others;’ Cot. Cf. Prov. ériar,
to choose, ¢ria, choice (Bartsch). —Late L. ¢ritare, to triturate; cf.
Ital. ¢ritare, ‘to bruze, to weare, .. . also to grinde or thresh corne,’
Florio. = L. tritus, pp. of ¢erere, to rub, to thresh corn; see Trite.
B. Diez explains it thus: L. ¢erere grdnum is to thresh corn; the
Prov. triar lo gra dela palha is to separate the corn from the stalk ;
to which he adds other arguments. It would appear that the
meaning passed over from the threshing of corn to the separation of
the grain from the straw,’and thence to the notion of selecting,
culling, purifying. Cf. Ital. ¢ritare, ‘to crumble, grind; to ponder,
consider, sift, scan,examine;’ Baretti. To try gold is to purify it;
cf. ‘tried gold, Merch. Ven. ii. 7. 53; ‘the fire seven times tried
this ;’ id. ii. 9.63. Der. ¢ry,sb., Timon, v. 1.11. Also try-ing;
try-sail, a small sail tried when the wind is very high. Also #ri-al,
a coined word, spelt ¢riall in Frith’s Works, p. 81, col. 1.

TRYST, TRIST, an appointment to meet, an appointed meet-
ing. (F.—Scand.) See Jamieson’s Scottish Dictionary. A ‘¢rist
(ME. trist, trister) was an appointed station in hunting, a place where
aman was stationed to watch. ‘Lo, holde thee at thy ¢riste cloos,
and I Shal wel the deer unto thy bowe dryve;’ Chaucer, Troil.
ii. 1534. ‘To ¢riste was he set, forto waite the chance;’ Rob. of
Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 94. Spelt ¢ryster, Gawain and Grene
Knight, 1712; ¢ristre, Ancren Riwle, p. 332. Hence the phr. ¢o
hold trist, to keep trist, to bide trist, to stay where placed, or to come
to an appointed place. ‘ Halden #riste,’ O. Eng. Met. Hom., ed.
Small, p. 82.—OF. triste, tristre, station to watch (in hunting),
ambush (Godefroy) ; Low L. ¢rista. Prob. of Scand. origin ; cf. Icel.
treysta(st), to trust to, rely upon; Swed. ¢résta, Dan. trdste, to trust ;
see Trust. Hence ME. ¢rist, trust. ‘Lady, in yow is all my
tryste;’ Erl of Tolous, 550, in Ritson, Met. Romances, vol. iii.

TSAR, a better spelling of Czar, q.v.

TUB, a kind of vessel, a small cask. (O. Low G.) ME. tubbe,
Chaucer, C. T. 3621. Not improbably a term introduced by Flemish
brewers.=MDu. tobbe, dobbe,‘ a tubbe ;’ Hexham; mod. Du. Zobbe ;
EFries. tubbe; Low G, zubbe, a tub, esp. a tub in which orange-trees
are planted. @ The G. zuber, cognate with Low G. tover, means
a two-handled vessel, and is the same as OHG. zupar, zubar ; this
is derived from zwi, later zwei, two, and the suffix -bar (as in frucht-
bar, fruit-bearing) from OHG. beran, peran, to bear.. Thus G. zu-ber
= Low G. #é-ver, (=two-bearing), i.e. a vessel borne or carried by
two handles. But this throws no light on ¢ub, since zubbe and tover
are a long way apart. Der. ¢ubb-y, tub-like.

TUBE, a pipe, long hollow cylinder. (F.—L.) In Milton, P. L.
iii. 590. —F. tube, a conduit-pipe;’ Cot. —L. zubum, acc. of tubus, a
pipe, tube; akin to ¢uba, a trumpet. Der. tub-ing, a length of tube;
tubul-ar, from L. tubul-us, dimin. of tubus; tubul-at-ed, from L.
tubulatus, formed like a pipe.

TUBER, a knob on a root, a rounded root. (L.) ‘ Tuber, a
truffle, a knot in a tree,’ &c.; Phillips, ed. 1617.—L. zuber, a bump,
swelling, tumour, knob on plants, a truffle. To be divided as ¢u-b-er
(cf. L. plu-u-ia, rain, with plu-it, it rains) ; allied to ‘u-m-ere, to
swell ; so that aber is lit. ‘a swelling.” See Tumid. Brugmann,
i. § 413 (8). Der. ¢uber-cle, from F. tubercle, ‘the small rising or
swelling of a pimple,’ Cot., from L. ¢iéber-cu-lum, double dimin. of
tiber ; whence tubercul-ar, tubercul-ous<F. tuberculeus, ‘ swelling,’
Cot. Also tuber-ous (Phillips), from F. tubereux, ‘swelling, bunchy,’
Cot., from: L. tiberdsus, full of swellings; also zuber-ose (Phillips),


Cf. Ital. zorso,


‘directly from L. zuberdsus, Also tuberosa (Phillips), fem. of L.


tuberdsus, as the name of a flower: now duberose (often absurdly


TUCK


pronounced as zube-rose!). Also truffle, q. v. ; trifle, q. v. 3 pro-tuber-
ant,

TUCK (1), to draw close together, fold or gather in a dress.
(OLow G.) ME. tukken. ‘ Tukkyn vp, or stykkyn vp, trukkyn vp
or stakkyn vp, Suffarcino;’ Prompt. Parv. Chaucer has tukked, i. e.
with the frock drawn up under the girdle, C. T. 623; also y-tukked,
7319 (D 1737). Not an E, word, but borrowed from abroad. = Low
G. tukken, tokken, to pull up, draw up, tuck up; also to entice; allied
to Low G, tuken, to ruck up, lie in folds, as a badly made garment.
The same word as MDnu. ¢ocken, ‘ to entise,? Hexham ; MSwed. tocka,
to draw towards one.+G, zucken, OHG. zucchen, to draw or twitch
up, to shrug.  B. Teut. base *¢ukk-; intensive form from the weak
grade (*tuh) of *tewhan-, the strong verb appearing as Goth. tivhan,
AS. tedn, G. ziehen, to draw; see Touch. Allied to Tug. The
verb means ‘ to draw up with a zug or twitch,’ to hitch up. Der.
tuck, sb., a fold; tuck-er, a piece of cloth tucked in over the bosom.
t> ME. trukken, in Prompt. Parv. as above, is a Scand. word ;
Swed. trycka, Dan. trykke, to press, squeeze; cf. G. driicken.

TUCK (2), a rapier. (F.—Ital.—G.) ‘ Dismount thy tuck; Tw.
Nt. iii. 4. 244. A fencing term, and, like other such terms, an Ital.
word, but borrowed through French. Just as E. ¢icket is from F.
estiquet or ¢tiquet, so tuck is short for étoc, occasional form of MF.
estoc, ‘ the stock of a tree; ... also a rapier, or tuck; also a thrust ;’
Cot.—TItal, s¢occo, ‘a truncheon, a tuck, a short sword ;’ Florio, —G.
stock, a stump, stock, stick, staff; cognate with E. Stock, q.v.

TUCK (3), beat of drum, blow, stroke. (F.—Teut.) ‘ Hercules
it smyttis with a mighty towk;’ G. Douglas, tr. of Virgil, AXn. viii ;
ch, iv, 119.—Picard (or Walloon) toguer, toker, ONorthF. touquer,
to touch, strike; variant of I’. zoucher, to touch ; see below.

TUCKER, a fuller. (F.—Teut.) ME. ¢okker, lit. ‘ beater ;’
though the cloth was worked up with the feet; P. Plowman, A. prol.
100. = ONorth F, touquer (above). = Low G. tukken, to beat, to touch.
See Notes on E. Etym., p. 308.

TUCKHET, a flourish on a trumpet. (F.—Teut.) In Hen. V,
iv. 2. 35. The form answers to ONorthF. *towket, for OF.
touchet, a blow; given in Godefroy. The sense answers to that
of Ital. toccata, a prelude to a piece of music (Torriano); Florio
only gives toccata, ‘a touch, a touching ;’” but he notes ¢occo di cam-
pana (lit. a touch of the bell), ‘a knock, a stroke, a knell or peale,
or toule upon the bells.’ Toccata is properly the fem. of the pp. of
toccare, to touch; of Teut. origin. See Touch. And compare
Toesin.

TUESDAY, the third day of the week. (E.) ME. Tewesday ;
spelt Tewisday in Wyclif’s Select Works, ed. Arnold, ii. 75, 1. 14.
AS. Tiwes deg, Mark, xiv. 1, rubric. Lit. the day of Tiw, of which
Tiwes is the gen. case.4-Icel. T'ys dagr, the day of Tyr; where T'ys
is the gen. of Tyr, the god of war; Dan. Tirsdag; Swed. Tisdag ;
G. Dienstag, MUG. Zistag, OHG. Zies tac, the day of Ziu, god of
war. B. The AS. Tw (Icel. Tyr, OHG. Ziu) answers to the L,
Mars as far as the sense goes; but the name itself answers to Skt.
deva-s, god; allied to L. deus, and to L. Zu- in Iu-piter, Gk. Zeds,
Skt. Dyaus, and means ‘the shining one.’ 4 A translation of L.
diés Martis.

TUFA, a soft stone, usually calcareous. (Ital.—L.) Not from Ital.
tufa, ‘volcanic earth;’ Baretti. But an error for ¢ufo, ‘a kind of
porous stone ;’id.—L. tdfus, tophus. Cf. Gk. répos, tufa. 4 Also
written tuff, from MF, tuf, tuffe (from Ital. zufo), ‘a kind of soft
and brittle stone ;’ Cotgrave,

TUFT (1), a small cluster or knot, crest. (F.—Teut.) ‘With a
knoppe, othir-wyse callyd a tufft;’ Bury Wills, ed. Tymms, p. 36,
in a will dated 1463. ‘A tuft (or zoft) of heres’=a tuft of hairs;
Chaucer, C. T. 557 (A 555). The proper form should rather be
tuff, as in prov. E. tuff, a lock of hair (Halliwell), Lowland Sc. zug’,
a tuft of feathers (Jamieson), Howell has ¢zffs, pl. ; Famil. Letters,
i. let, 25. Cf. W. tw (from E.). The final ¢ was due to confusion
with Tuft (2), q.v.; or it may have been excrescent. =I’. ¢ouffe ;
“touffe de cheveux, a tuft or lock of curled hair; ’ Cot. [He also gives
touffe de bois, ‘ a hoult, a tuft of trees growing near a house ;’ which
was easily altered to ¢uft (2) below.] Of Teut. origin; cf. Swed.
dial. zuppa, a tuft, fringe; Icel. zoppr, a top, tuft or lock of hair,
horse’s crest; MDu. fof, ‘ a tuft of haire, a top,’ Hexham; G. zopf.
Tf so, tuft is a doublet of top (1). 2. Otherwise, F’. touffe may be
from Late L. ¢ifa, a kind of standard, perhaps a tuft; said to be
from AS. Jif, a tuft (see Toller), Cf. Swed. tofva, a tuft, matted
hair; EFries. ¢iéf-ke, a little tuft; Swed. zofs, a tuft. Perhaps also
MDu. tuyf,a Turkish turban (Hexham); called in E, a tuff (Nares).
Der. tuff-et, Norm. dial. touffette, a little tuft, a bow of ribbon
(Moisy) ; dimin. of touffe (above).

TUFT (2), a plantation, clump of trees. (F.—Teut.) ‘The tuft
of olives ;? Shak. As You Like It, iii.5. 75. Halliwell gives : ‘ Tut,
a plantation.’ It seems to be the same as ¢u/t (1); and is sufficiently


TUMP 671


explained by Cotgrave’s ‘ touffe de bois, a hoult or tuft of trees grow-
ing near a house ;’ see Tuft (1). Perhaps sometimes confused with
Toft, q. v.

TUG, to pull, drag along. (Scand.) ME. ¢oggen, Prompt. Parv.;
Ancren Riwle, p. 424, last line but one, where it means to sport or
dally. A verb formed from Icel. tog, MSwed. tog, a rope to pull by;
or, as a secondary verb, from the weak grade (*tuh, *tug) of the
strong verb which appears as Icel. tjaga (pp. tog-inn), AS. téon, G.
ziehen, Goth. tivhan, to draw, whence a great number of derivatives
have arisen. One of these derivatives, to tow, comes very near to
tug in sense. See Tow (1). Allied to EFries. tokken, to pull, tug;
Low G, tukken, to pull up, draw up; cf. Low G. togg, a pull, a tug
(Danneil). Cf. also MDu. foge, ‘a draught of beere,’ Hexham; G.
zug, a pull, tug, draught; Icel. ¢éggla, to tug. Der. tug, sb.
Allied to tuck (1).

TUITION, care and instruction of the young. (F.—L.) ‘ Tuicyon
and gouernaunce;’ Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. i. c. 6; ME.
tuicion, Libell of Eng. Policy, 1. 1138.—F. tuition, ‘ tuition, protec-
tion;’ Cot.—L. tuitidnem, acc. of tuitio, protection; cf. twit-ws, pp.
of tuért, to watch, protect. Der. in-tuition; and see tu-tel-age,
tu-tor.

TULIP, the name of a flower. (F. —Ital.—Turk.—Pers.) In Ben
Jonson, Pan’s Anniversary (Shepherd),—=MF. ¢ulippe, also tulipan,
‘the delicate flower called a tulipa, or tulipie, or Dalmatian Cap ;’
Cot. So called from its likeness to a turban. —Ital. tulipa, tulipano,
a tulip.—Turk. ¢udbend, vulgar pronunciation of dulbend, a turban ;
Zenker’s Turk. Dict. p. 433.— Pers. dulband,a turban. (See Turban
in Yule.) See Turban. Doublet, turban.

TULLE, a kind of silk open-work or lace. (F.) Named from
Tulle, in the department of Corréze, France; where it was first
made (Littré).

TULWAR, an Indian sabre. (Hind.) From Hind. éalwar, tar-
war, a sword (Forbes),

TULY, red or scarlet. (F.—L.) ‘ Off mely silk ;’ Rich. Coer de
Lion, 67, 1516; and see Halliwell. —OF. tieulé, of the colour of
a tile; i.e. red (Godefroy).—OF. tiewle, F. tuile, a tile. —L. tégula,
atile. See Tile.

TUMBLE, to fall over, fall suddenly, roll over. (E.) ME.
tumblen, Wyclif, Matt. xiv. 6, in one MS. of the later version; zom-
blen, King Alisaunder, 2465. Frequentative form (with the usual -/-
for -el-) of tumben or tomben; in Trevisa, iv. 365, we have Je wenche
pat tombede (various reading tomblede) ; Stratmann.=— AS. iumbian, to
tumble, turn heels over head, Matt. xiv.6; in some old pictures of
this scene, Herodias’ daughter is represented as standing on her head.
+ Du. tuimelen, to tumble; MDu. tumelen (Hexham), also tommelen,
tummelen, id. ; G, taumeln, tummeln, to reel, to stagger ; OHG. timon,
to turn round and round, whence ¢wmari, a tumbler, acrobat (an
OLow G. form, acc. to Gallée); Dan. zwmle, Swed. tumla, to tumble,
toss about. The F. zomber is of Teut. origin. B. It will be ob-
served that, contrary to Grimm’s law, the word begins with ¢ both
in German and English; this points to borrowing, and suggests that
the G. word is of Low G, origin. Der. tumble, sb.; tumbl-er, an
acrobat, L. L. L. iii. 190, which took the place of AS. tumbere ;
‘Saltator, tumbere,’ Voc. 150. 20; cf. ‘Saltator, a tumbler, in a
Nominale of the 15th century, id. 696. 35; also ¢umbl-er, a kind of
drinking-glass, orig. without a foot, so that it could not be set down
except (inverted) when empty. Also tumb-r-el (see Nares), spelt
tumrell-cart in Palsgrave (for which he gives twmbreau as the F.
equivalent), from OF’, zambrel, tumberel, later tumbereau, ‘a tumbrell,’
Cot., also spelt tomberel, tombereau (Cot.), lit. a tumble-cart, or two-
wheeled cart which could be tumbled over or upturned to deposit
the manure with which it was usually laden ; derived from F. tomber,
to fall, a word of Teut. origin, as above. Cf, AF. twmberel, a tum-
brel, Stat. Realm, i. 218.

TUMEFY, to cause to swell, also to swell. (F.—L.) Spelt
tumify in Phillips, who also has the sb. twmefaction. =F. tumefier, ‘ to
make to swelle, or puffe up ;’ Cot.— Late L. *tumeficare, for L. tume-

facere, to tumefy, make to swell.—L. tume-, for tumére, to swell;
and facere, to make; see Tumid and Fact. Der. tumefaction,
as if from L. *tumefactio (not used), like tumefactus, pp. of ¢ume-
Facere.

TUMID, inflated, bombastic. (L.) In Milton, P. L. vii. 288.
= L. tumidus, swelling. = L. tumére, to swell. = 4/TEU, to swell, in-
crease; whence also Gk. t¥-An, TU-Aos, a swelling. Cf. Skt. tu, to
be powerful, to increase. Brugmann, i. § 413 (8). Der. zumid-ly,
-ness. Also (from tumére) tum-our, a swelling, Milton, Samson,
185, from F, tumeur, ‘a tumor, swelling,’ Cot., from L. acc. tumdrem.
And see ¢um-ult, tum-ul-us, From the same root are tu-ber, pro-
tuber-ant, truffle, trifle, thumb.

TUMP, a hillock. (C.) The W. ¢wmp; a tump, may be from E.
But the word is prob. Celtic; from W. tom, Gael. and Irish fom,


672 TUMULT


ahillock; allied to Gk. rvpBos, L. tumulus, a mound. See Tumulus,
Tomb.

TUMULT, excitement, uproar, agitation. (F.—L.) In K. John,
iv. 2. 247; tumulte in Levins. =F. tumulte, ‘a tumult, uprore;’ Cot.
= L. tumultum, acc. of tumultus, x restless swelling or surging up, a
tumult.=—L. tum-ére, to swell; cf. tumulus, of which twmultus seems
to be an extended form; cf. Skt. tumula-m, n., tumult ; zumula-,
adj., noisy, tumultuous. See Tumulus, Tumid. Der. tumult,
verb, Milton, tr. of Ps, ii. 1; ¢umult-u-ar-y, from F. tumultuaire,
‘tumultuary,’ Cot., from L. ¢umultuadrius, hurried. Also tumult-u-
ous, Rich. II, iv. 140, from F, tumudtueux, ‘tumultuous,’ Cot., from
L. tumultudsus, full of tumult, which from z¢umultu-, decl. stem of
tumultus, with suffix -dsus ; twmultuous-ly, -ness.

TUMULUS, a mound of earth over a grave. (L.) A late
word ; not in Todd’s Johnson. =L. tumulus, a mound ; lit. a swelling.
=L. tum-ére, to swell; see Tumid. And see Tump.

TUN, a large cask; see Ton.

TUNE, tone, sound, melody, a melodious air. (F.—L.—Gk.)
‘With many a tun and many a note;’ Gower, C. A. iii. 303;
bk. viii. 830. —AF. tun, Life of Edw. Conf. p.18; F. ¢ov, ‘a tune, or
sound ;’ Cot.—L. tonum, acc. of tonus, a sound. = Gk. révos, a tone;
see Tone. 4 The old word tune was afterwards re-introduced as
tone, which is a later form. Der. tune, verb, Two Gent. iv. 2. 25;
tune-able, Mids. Nt. Dr. i. 1. 1843; tun-er, Romeo, ii. 4. 30; tune-
ful, Spenser, Tears of the Muses, 27; tune-ful-ly ; tune-less, Spenser,
Sonnet 44.

TUNGSTEN, a very heavy metal. (Swedish.) Also called
wolfram, and scheelium (from the discoverer). ‘From tungstate of
lead, Scheele in 1781 obtained tungstic acid, whence the brothers
De Luyart in 1786 obtained the metal;’ Haydn, Dict. of Dates.
‘The name indicates heavy stone, in consequence of the high specific
gravity of its Swedish ore;’? Engl. Cycl. The word is Swedish. =
Swed. ¢ungsten, compounded of tung, heavy; and sten, a stone.
Ferrall and Repp’s Dan. Dict. gives the very word ¢ungsteen, tung-
sten, from similar Danish elements, viz. tung, heavy, and steen.
B. Swed. stex, Dan. steen, are cognate with E. Stone. Swed. and
Dan. tung are the same as Icel. Jungr, heavy ; whence Jungi, a load,
funga,to load. Cf. Lithuan. zanku, 1 become fat, infin, tukti.

TUNIC, an under-garment, loose frock. (L.) Introduced directly
from the Latin, before the Norman conquest. AS. tunice, tunece.
‘Tunica, tunice;’ also ‘ Tonica, twnece;’ Voc. 151.8; 268. 1.—L.
tunica, an under-garment of the Romans, worn by both sexes ; whence
also F. tunigue (Cot.). Perhaps of Semitic origin; see Gk. xivoyv in
Prellwitz. Der. tunic-le, P. Plowman, B. xy. 163, from OF. ¢unicle
(Roquefort) < L. tunicula, dimin. of tunica. Also tunic-at-ed, a
botanical term, from L. ¢unicatus, provided with a coating; from
tunica in the sense of coating, membrane, or husk.

TUNNEL, a hollow vessel for conveying liquors into bottles,
a funnel, a passage cut through a hill. (F.—C.) Formerly, when a
chimney meant a fireplace, a tunnel often meant a chimney, or flue.
‘ Tonnell to fyll wyne with, antonnoyr;’ Palsgrave. ‘ Tonnell of a
chymney, tuyau;’ id. Hence the sense of flue, shaft, railway-tunnel.
—OF. tonnel (Burguy), later tonneau, ‘a tun, or (generally) any
great vessel, or piece of cask for wine, &c., as a tun, hogshead, &c.,
also a tunnell for partridges;’ Cot. The tunnel for partridges was
a long tunnel or covered passage made of light wire, strengthened
with hoops, into which partridges were decoyed, and could not
afterwards escape. Cf. prov. E. zwnnel, a funnel, an arched drain;
OF. tonnelle, with like senses (Godefroy). The word evidently
once meant a sort of cask, then a hooped pipe or funnel, then a flue,
shaft, &c. Inthe Bury Wills, ed. Tymms, p. 20, we find (in 1463)
‘my newe hous with the iij. zwzuys of chemeneyis;’ Mr. Tymms re-
marks (p. 241): ‘The passage of the chimney was called a tunnel
till the beginning of the present century, and the chimney-shaft
is still called a tun.’ B. F. tonneau is the dimin. of F. tonne, ‘a tun;’
Cot. Ultimately of Celtic origin; see Ton. Cf. AF. ¢ovel, a tun;
Stat. Realm, i. 156 (1309) ; ¢ovel, a tunnel (for birds), Bozon, p. 173.
Der. tunnel, verb; modern.

TUNNY, the name ofa fish. (F.—Prov.—L.—Gk.) ‘A tuny
fish, chunnus;’ Levins. Palsgrave gives ‘ Tonny, fyshe’ without any
F. equivalent. The final -y is an E. addition. —F. thon, ‘a tunny
fish,’ Cot. = Prov. ton (mod. Prov. oun); see Hatzfeld.=L. thunnum,
acc. of thunnus, a tunny; also spelt thynnus.— Gk. Ovvvos, a tunny ;
also spelt 6vvos. Lit. ‘the darter,’ the fish that darts about (cf. E.
dart). Cf. Gk. @dvey, allied to @vev, to rush along. =4/DHEU, to
shake, blow, rush; see Dust.

TUP, a ram. (Scand.) ME. tuppe; Palladius on Husbandrie,
viii. 71; ‘ Vervex, a tuppe;’ Voc. 698. 29. Prob. a transferred
name; cf. Swed. and Norw. tupp, a cock, allied to Dan. ¢op, a cock’s
crest, Icel. zoppr, a top, a crest. See Top.

TURBAN, a head-covering worn in the East. (F.—Ital.—


TURKEY


Turkish.—Pers.) Spelt turbant, Fairfax, tr. of Tasso, b. xvii. st. 10 >


turribant, Spenser, F. Q. iv. 11. 28; turband, Cymb. iii. 3. 6.
‘Nash, in his Lenten Stuffe (1598) has zurbanto;’ F. Hall, Mod.
English, p. 112. [Todd remarks that it is spelt zalibant in Putten-
ham, Art of Poesie (1589), and tulipant repeatedly in Sir T. Herbert's
Travels, As a fact, Puttenham has ¢olibant, Art of Poesie, b. iii.
c. 24; ed. Arber, p. 291. These forms with J are really more correct,
as will be seen, and answer to the occasional F. form folopan, given
in Cotgrave as equivalent to turbant.]—MF. turbant (given by Cot-
grave, s.v. tolopan), but usually urban, ‘a turbant, a Turkish hat ;”
Cot.=—Ital. turbante, ‘a turbant,’ &c.; Florio.—Turkish tulbend,
vulgar pronunciation of Turkish dulbend, a turban; a word borrowed
from Persian; Zenker’s Dict., p. 433, col. 3.—Pers. dulband, a tur-
ban; Rich. Dict., p. 681. Viillers, in his Etym. Pers. Dict. i. 893,
col. 2, says that dulband seems to be of Hindustani origin ; cf. Hind.
dulband, a turban; Shakespeare, Hind. Dict. p. 1059. But this
is doubtful. See Turban in Yule. See tulip.

TURBARY, a right of digging turf, or a place for digging it.
(F.—Teut.) ‘ Turbary (turbaria) is a right or interest to dig turves
on another man’s ground;’ Blount, Nomolexicon (1691).—OF.
torberie, Low L. turbaria, the same.—OHG. *turba, older form of
zurba, turf; see Turf. Cf. AF. turberie, Year-books, 1304-5, p. 485.

TURBID, disordered, muddy. (L.) ‘Lees do make the liquor
turbide ;’ Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 306.—L. turbidus, disturbed. —L. tur-
bare, to disturb.—L. ¢urba, a crowd, confused mass of people; see
Trouble. Der. turbid-ly, -ness,

TURBINE, a hydraulic wheel, wheel driven by water. (F.—
L.) Used in various ways.—F. turbine, a hydraulic wheel; MF.
turbine, a whirlwind (Cot.)—L. zurbinem, acc. of turbo, a wheel, a
top, a whirlwind ; cf. turbare, to disturb.

TURBOT, a flat, round fish, (F.—L.) ME. ¢urbut, Prompt.
Parv. ; Havelok, 754; spelt turbote, Wright’s Voc. i. 189. —F. turbot,
‘the turbot-fish ;’ Cot. According to Diez, formed with suffix -ot
from L. ¢urb-o, a whipping-top, a spindle, a reel ; from its rhomboidal
shape. This is verified by two facts: (1) the L. rkombus, a circle,
a turbot, is merely borrowed from Gk. fdpuBos, a top, wheel, spindle,
having, in fact, just the same senses as L. turbo: and (2) the Late L.
turbo was.used to mean a turbot; thus we have: ‘ Twrbut, turtur,
turbo,’ Prompt. Pary. We also find Irish ¢urbit, a turbot, a rhom-.
boid, Gael. turbaid, W. torbwt; but it is a borrowed word in Celtic.
Cf. ‘The Lozange..Rombus..the Turbot;’ Puttenham, Arte of
E. Poesie, bk. ii. c. 11 (12). Also AF. turbut, Liber Albus, p. 234.

TURBULENT, disorderly, restless as a crowd, producing
commotion. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, iii. 1. 4.—F. ¢urbulent, ‘ turbulent,
blustering ;’ Cot. —L. turbulentus, full of commotion or disturbance.
=—L. turb-are, to disturb.—L. ¢urba, a crowd of people; see
Trouble. Der. zurbulent-ly; turbulence, Troil. v. 3. 11, from F,
turbulence (which Cotgrave omits, but see Littré), which from L.
turbulentia; also turbulenc-y, from L. turbulentia.

TUREEN, the same as Terreen, gq. v.

TURF, the surface of land matted with roots of grass, &c., sward,
sod, peat. (E.) ME, turf, sometimes ¢orf; pl. turues (=turves),
Havelok, 939; Chaucer, C. T. to10g (E 2235). AS. turf (dat.
tyrf), turf, A. S. Chron. an. 189 (Laud MS.).
turf,’ Voc. 146. 13; pl. tyrf, id. 236. 18.4-Du. turf, peat; Icel. torf,
a turf,sod, peat; Dan. zérv ; Swed. zorf; OHG. zurba, turf (the mod.
G. torf being borrowed from Low German). B. All from Teut.
base *¢ard-; and allied to Skt. darbha-,a kind of grass, Benfey, p. 388;
so called from its being twined or matted together, from Skt. dybh,
to string, to bind. =4/DERBH, to wind, twine, knit together. Der.
turf-y, Temp. iy. 62.

TURGID, swollen, pompous, bombastic. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674.—L. turgidus, swollen, extended. —L. zurgére, to swell out.
Der. turgid-ly, -ness, turgid-i-ty, Also turg-esc-ence, Sir T. Browne,
Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 7, part 5, formed as if from L. *turgescentia,
swelling up, from turgescere, inceptive form of turgére.

TURKEY, the name of a bird. (F.—Tatar.) ‘ Turky-cocke, or
cocke of India, auis ita dicta, quod ex Africa, et, ut nonnulli volunt
alii, ex India vel Arabia ad nos illata sit; Belg. Indische haen, Teut.
Indianisch hun, Calekuttisch hun, i.e. Gallina Indica seu Calecuttensis,
Ital. gallo, o gallina d’India, Hispan. pauon de las Indias, Gall.
poulle d’Inde, &c.; Minsheu, ed. 1627. ‘A turkie, or Ginnie henne,


‘Belg. Indisch hinne, Teut. Indianisch henn, Ital. gallina d’India,


Hispan. gallina Morisca, &c.; id. Turkey in Shak. means (1) the
bird, 1 Hen. IV, ii. 1. 29; (2) adj. Turkish, Tam. Shrew, ii. 355 ;
hence he also says turkey-cock, Tw. Nt. ii. 5. 36. ‘ Meliagrides,
Birdes that we call hkennes of Ginnie or Turkey hennes;’ Cooper's
Thesaurus, ed. 1565. Turkeys were ‘unknown in Europe until in-,
troduced from the New World;’ see Trench, Study of Words. The
date of their introduction was about 1530(Beckmann).. As they were
strange birds, they were hastily called Turkey-cocks and Turkey-hens,


So also: ‘Gleba, .


TURMERIC


by which it was merely meant that they were foreign; it must be re-
membered that Turkey was at that time a vague term, and often
meant Tartary. ‘ Turkie, Tartaria;’ Levins. Similarly, the French
called the bird powle d’Inde, whence mod. F. dinde, a turkey; Cot-
grave gives: ‘ Dindar, Indar, a turkey-cock.’ Minsheu, in his Span.
Dict., gives § gallina Morisca,a hen of Guynie, gallina de India, a
Turkie hen;” whilst in his Eng. Dict. (as quoted above) he calls
gallina Morisca, the turkey-hen ; showing that he was not particular.
The German Calecutische hahn, a turkey-cock, means ‘a cock of
Calicut, not *Calcutta;” a name extremely wide of the mark.
B. The E. Turkey, though here used as an adj. (since turkey is short
for zurkey-cock or turkey-hen) was also used as a sb., to denote the
name of the country.=F. Turquie, *Turkie,’ Cot.—F. Turc, m.,
Turque, f., ‘Turkish? id.—Tatar ¢urk, orig. meaning ‘brave.
[The Turkish word for Turk is ‘osma@nli.] Cf. Pers. Turk, ‘a Turk,
comprehending likewise those numerous nations of Tartars ... who
claim descent from Turk, the son of Japhet.... Also a Scythian,
barbarian, robber, plunderer, villain, vagabond ;’ Richardson’s Dict.,
p- 392. Hence Pers. Turki, ‘Turkish, Turk-like;’ id. p. 393. (See
Turkey in Yule.) @ So also maize was called Turkey wheat, F. bled
de Turquie; Wedgwood. Der. turg-uoise, q.v.

TURMERIC, the root of an E. Indian plant, used as a yellow
dye, and in curry-powder. (F.—L.—Arab.?) Spelt turmerick in
Phillips, ed. 1706; also in Ben Jonson, Cynthia’s Revels, v. 2
(Perfumer). A gross corruption of the F. name.—F, ¢erre-mérite,
turmeric; not given in Littré under ¢erre, but under Curcuma he says
that the root is called in commerce ‘safran des Indes, et curcuma,
dite terre-mérite, quand elle est réduite en poudre.’ = L. zerra merita ;
turmeric ‘is likewise called by the French zerra merita; Curcuma,
hzec Gallis zerra merita male dicitur,’ see Royle, Antiquity of Hindoo
Medicine, p. 87; (Eng. Cycl. Division Arts and Sciences). I suppose
it means ‘excellent earth;’ as if from L. ¢erra, earth, and merita,
fem, of meritus, pp. of meréri, to deserve. But ¢erra merita is hardly
Latin, and is doubtless a barbarous corruption; perhaps of Arab,
karkam, kurkum, saffron or curcuma (whence Span. and Port. cur-
cuma, turmeric) ; Rich. Dict., p. 1181.

TURMOIL, excessive labour, tumult, bustle; as a verb, to harass.
(F.—L.?) ‘ The turmoyle of his mind being refrained ;” Udal, on St.
John, c. 11 (R.). The pp. éurméild occurs in Spenser, F. Q. iv. 9. 39;
and turmdil-éd in Shak. 2 Hen. VI, iv. 10. 18. ‘At seas turmdylde
fiue days with raging winde;’ Mirror for Mag., Brennus, st.9. The
origin is somewhat doubtful; the form is prob. corrupt, the latter
part of the word being perhaps due to E. moi/, q.v., and the former
part assimilated to turn. B. It has been suggested that it may have
something to do with MF. trameul, tremouille, ‘the hopper of a
mill,’ Cot., also called ¢remie, and prob. so called from being in con-
tinual movement, from L. ¢remere, to tremble, shake. But the old
accent on the latter syllable suggests that tur- is a mere prefix, and
may represent the OF, intensive prefix zra- or ¢res- (both from L,
trans); as in OF. tres-batre, tra-batre, to beat extremely (Godefroy).
If so, the sense is ‘to moil (or harass) greatly.’ See Moil.

TURN, to cause to revolve, transfer, convert, whirl round, change.
(L.—Gk.) ME. tournen, tornen, turnen; Ormulum, 169; cf. F.
tourner, OF , torner, turner, to turn. But it occurs in late AS, as
turnian, tyrnan (Toller); so that it was taken directly from L.
tornare, to turn in a lathe, to turn.—L. ¢ornus, a lathe, turner’s
wheel. = Gk. tépvos, a carpenter’s tool to draw circles with, com-
passes, whence ropvevecy, to turn, work with a lathe. Allied to Gk.
topos, adj. piercing, reipewy, to pierce, L. ¢erere, to rub.—4/TER, to
rub, hence to bore a hole; see Trite. Der. turn, sb., turn-er ;
turn-er-y, from F. tournerie, ‘a turning, turner’s work ;’ turn-ing,
turn-ing-point ; turn-coat, Much Ado, i. 1.125; turn-key, one who
turns a prison-key, a warder; turn-pike, q.v.3; turn-sol, a helio-
trope, or flower that turns with the sun, OF. ¢orme-sol (Supp. to
Godefroy), from L. sél, the sun; turn-spit, one who turns a spit;
turn-stile, a stile that turns, Butler’s Hudibras, pt. i. c. 3, 1. 23;
turn-stone, a small bird that turns over stones to find food; turn-
table, a table that turns. Also (from torndre) tour, tour-na-ment,
tour-ni-quet.

TURNIP, TURNEP, a plant with a round root, used for food.
(F.—L.; and L.) The pl. turneps is in Holland, tr. of Pliny,
b. xviii. c. 133 spelt turnepes in Sir T. Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii.
c.g. 1. The latter part of the word is nep or nepe. We find ‘ wild
nepe, Cucurbita, brionia’ in Prompt. Parv. p. 528. ‘Hoc bacar,
nepe;’ Voc. 64%. 17.. ‘As a nepe white’=as white as a turnip;
Destruction of Troy, 3076. This is from AS. x#@p, a turnip, bor-
rowed from L, xdpus, a kind of turnip. ‘Napus, n#p; Rapa, nép;’
Voc. 135. 30, 37. Hence the etymological spelling should rather
be ¢urnep than turnip, and we know that the latter part of the word
is from Latin. Cf. Irish and Gael. xeip, a turnip. 2. The former
part of the word is less obvious; but it is most likely F. ¢owr in the


‘TUSK. 673


sense of ‘ wheel, to signify its round shape, as if it had been ‘turned.’
Cotgrave gives, among the senses of ¢our, these: ‘also a spinning--
wheel, a turn, or turner’s wheel.’ Or it might be the E. turn, used
in a like sense; Cotgrave also gives: ‘ Tournoir, a turn, turning-
wheel, or turners wheel, called a lathe or lare.’? It makes but little
difference, since F. ¢owr is the verbal sb. of ¢ourner, to turn; see.
Tour, Turn. Cf. Ital. ¢orno, ‘a turne, a turners or spinners
wheele, Florio; W. ¢urx, a turn, also round (from E.); Irish.
turnapa, a turnip, turnoir, a turner (from E.).

U » & gate set across a road to stop those liable to
toll. (F.—L.) The name was given to the toll-gate, because it took
the place of the old-fashioned turn-pike, which had three (or more)
horizontal bars or pikes (sharp at one end) revolving on a central
post. For the difference between a turn-pike and a turn-stile, see
figs, 266, 267, in Boutell’s Heraldry. Jamieson cites ¢wrn-pyk from.
Wyntoun, viii. 38. 74. The word occurs in Cotgrave, who trans-
lates F. tour by ‘a turn,...also, a ¢urn-pike or turning-stile’ So
also: ‘I move upon my axle like a ¢urnpike ;’ Ben Jonson, Staple
of News, iii. r (Picklock) ; see Nares. The word zurn-pike was also
used in the sense of chevaux de Frise, as in Phillips, ed.1706. From
Turn and Pike, Der. turn-pike-gate, turn-pike-road,

TURPENTING, the resinous juice of the terebinth tree, &c.
(F.—L.—Gk.) In Levins, ed. 1570. ME. turbentine, Mandeville’s
Tray, ch. v. p. 51.—MF. turbentine, ‘turpentine ;? Cot.=—L. terebin-
thus, a terebinth-tree; whence the adj. éerebinthinus, made from the
terebinth-tree.—= Gk. repeBivOivos, made from the tree called repé-
Buw6os; see Terebinth. Cf. Norm. dial. turbentine (Moisy).

TURPITUDEH, baseness, depravity. (F.—L.) In Shak. Troil.
v. 2. 112.—F. ¢urpitude, * turpitude;’ Cot.—L. turpitido, baseness.
—L. turpi-, decl. stem of turpis, base; with suffix -tudo. B. The
L. turpis is ‘shameful;’ cf. Skt. trap, to be embarrassed, be ashamed;
causal, ¢rapaya, to make ashamed ; ¢rapa, shame.

TURQUOISE, TURQUOIS, TURKOISE, TURKIS,
a preciousstone. (F.—Low L.—Tatar.) In Cotgrave; also Palsgrave
has: * Tourques, a precious stone, fourquois. Turcas, a turquoise,
Bale’s Works, p. 607 (Parker Soc.).—F. éurquoise, ‘a turquois, or
Turkish stone;” Cot. Zurquoise is the fem. of Turguois, ‘Turkish,
id.; cf. MItal. T'urchesa, ‘a blue precious stone called a Turkoise ;’
Florio. The sense is Turkish; the Late L. ¢urchesius is found with
the sense of turquoise in A.D. 1347 (Ducange). The F. Turquois
is an adj. form, from Low L. Turcus, a Turk, which is from Tatar
turk, a Turk; see Turkey.

TURRET, a small tower. (F.—L.) ME. ¢ouret, Chaucer, C. T.
1909 (A 1911); ¢oret, Prompt. Pary.=—F. tourette, ‘a turret or small
tower;’ Cot. Dimin. of F. tour (OF. tor, tur), a tower. = L. turrem,,
acc. of ¢urris,a tower; see Tower. Cf. AF. turette, French Chron.
of London, p. 49. Der. ¢urret-ed.

TURTLE (1), a turtle-dove, kind of pigeon. (L.) ME. éurile,
Chaucer, C. T. 10013 (E 2139). AS. ¢urtle. ‘Turtur, turtle ;’
Voc. 132. I.—L. ¢urtur, a turtle; with the common change from
rtol. Hence also G. turtel-taube, a turtle-dove; Ital. ¢ortora, tor-
tola, a turtle. B. The L. ¢ur-tur is of imitative origin; due to
a repetition of éur, imitative of the coo of a pigeon. Cf. Du. hirren,
to coo.

TURTLE (2), the sea-tortoise. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.
This word is absolutely the same as the word above. It occurs,
according to Richardson, in Dampier’s Voyages, an. 1687 ; see ed.
1699, i. 395. The islands called Tortugas in Spanish were called
Tortles in English, because turtles bred there; Eng. Garner, ed.
Arber, v. 121; vii. 355, 357-8. The English sailors having a difficulty
with the Portuguese ¢artaruga, a tortoise or turtle, and the Span.
tortuga, tortoise, turtle, overcame that difficulty by substituting the
E. turtle, with a grand disregard of the difference between the two
creatures. The Span. and Port. names did not readily suggest the
E. tortoise; whereas ¢artaruga could easily become *tortaluga, and
then *tortal for short. See Tortoise.

TUSH, an exclamation of impatience. (E.) Common in Shak.
Much Ado, iii. 3. 130; &c. Holinshed (or Stanihurst) gives the
form ¢wish. ‘There is a.. disdainfull interiection vsed in Irish
called boagh, which is as much in English as ¢wish;’ Holinshed,
Desc. of Ireland, c. 8 (R.). Twish is expressive of disgust ; cf. pish;
also tut. Note also Low G. tuss, silence! Dan. éysse, to be silent ;
tys, hush! NFries. ¢iiss, hush ! tiisse, tiische, to command silence.
See Tut.

TUSK, a long pointed tooth. (E.) Shak. uses the pl. form
tushes, Venus, 617,624. ME. tusk, tusch, tosch ; spelt tosche, Prompt.
Parv. ; we even find the pl. twxes in K. Alisaunder, 6547. AS. tusc,
almost. always spelt tux, esp. in the pl. zuwas, just as AS. fisc is
often spelt fix; here «=cs, by metathesis of se, Spelt ¢w«, translated
‘grinder’ by Thorpe, Ancient Laws, i. 95, § 49. ‘Canini, vel
colomelli, mannes tuxas;’ Voc. 157. 31.--4+OF ries. tusk, tosch; EF ries.

X X


674. TUSSLE


tisk ; Icel. toskr. Perhaps the AS. form was orig. tusk (with long
«). Hardly alliedto Tooth; see Brugmann, i. § 795. Der. tusk-ed,
tusk-y.

TUSSLE, to scuffle. (E.) Allied to tousle, to disorder, frequent.
of Touse, q.v. Cf. Westphal. ¢usseln, to pull about; Dan. dial.
tusse, to move about, to confuse. And cf. Toss.

TUSSOCK, a clump or tuft of growing grass. (Scand. ?) Latimer
has: ‘¢ussocks nor tufts;’ see Todd’s Johnson. The suffix -ock is
a diminutive, as in hill-ock. Cf. Swed. dial. tuss, a wisp of hay
(Rietz) ; and cf. E. touse, Dryden has ¢tuzzes, i.e. tufts or knots of
hair; tr. of Persius, iv. go.

TUT, an exclamation of impatience. (E.) Common in Shak.
Merry Wives, i. 1. 1173 &c. ‘And that he said. . Tut, tut, tut ;”
State Trials, Hen. VIII, an. 1536; Q. Anne Boleyn (R.). Cf. F.
trut, ‘an interjection importing indignation, tush, tut, fy man;’ Cot.
‘ Ptrot, skornefulle word, or ¢ru¢;’ Prompt. Pary., p. 415. And cf.
‘Tush.

TUTELAGH, guardianship. (L.; with F. suffix.) ‘The tutelage
whereof,’ &c.; Drayton, Polyolbion, song 3; 1. 218. Coined with F.
suffix -age (<L. -aticum) from L. tutéla, protection; see Tutelar.

TUTELAR, protecting, having incharge. (L.) ‘ Tutelar god
of the place ;’ Ben Jonson, Love’s Triumph through Callipolis, In-
troduction.=L. ¢atéaris, tutelar.=L. tatéla, protection; allied to
tiitor, a protector; see Tutor. Der. tutelar-y, from F. ¢tutelaire,
“tutelary, garding ;” Cot.

TUTOR, an instructor, teacher, guardian. (F.—L.) For ¢utour,
the older form. ME, ¢utour, P. Plowman, B. i. 56.—F. tuteur,
“a tutor;’ Cot.=L. tutdrem, acc. of tutor, a guardian; allied to
L. tat-us (short for tuitus), pp. of tuéri, to look after, guard; see
Tuition. Der. tutor, verb, L.L.L. iv. 2. 775; tutor-ship, tutor-age,
tutor-i-al.

TUTTY, a collyrium. (F.—Pers.) ‘ Tutie, 2 medicinable stone
or dust ;’ Blount (1681). ME, ¢udie, Lanfrank, Cirurgie, p. 95.
= MF. tuthie, ‘a medicinable stone or dust, said to be the heavier
foile of brasse, cleaving to the upper sides and tops of brasse-melting
houses;’ Cot. F. tautie. Pers. tutiya, tutty; Rich. Dict. p. 461.
Cf. Skt. tuttha-m, blue vitriol (Benfey).

TWADDLE,, to tattle, talk unmeaningly. (E.) Formerly éwatile.
“No gloasing fabil I twattle;’ Stanyhurst, tr. of Virgil, Atn. ii; ed.
Arber, p. 46. ‘ Vaynelye toe wattle,’ id. AEn. iv; p. 101. <A col-
lateral form of Tattle, q.v. So also ¢wittle-twatile, sb., used by
L’Estrange (Todd’s Johnson) as equivalent to ¢it/le-tattle. Cf. ‘such
fables ¢witled, such untrue reports ¢watled ;’ Stanihurst, Desc. of
Treland, ed. 1808, p. 48. Cf. AS. twedding, adulation (Napier).
Der. twaddle, sb., twaddl-er.

TW AIN, two; see under Two.

TWANG, to sound with a sharp noise. (E.) ‘Sharply éwanged
off ;’ Tw. Nt. ili. 4.198. ‘To Twangue, resonare ;’ Levins. ‘To
twang, as the string of an instrument ;’ Minsheu. A collateral form
of tang, used with the same sense; see Tang (2), Tingle. It
represents the ringing sound of a tense string. Der. twang, sb.

TWHAK, to twitch, pull sharply, pinch. (E.) In Hamlet, ii. 2.
601. <A better form is ¢wick; cf. prov. E. twick, a sudden jerk
(Halliwell). ME. ¢wikken, Prompt. Parv. p. 505. AS. twiccian
(pt. t. wice-ode), ‘The Shrine, ed. Cockayne, p. 41. Besides which,
we find AS. angel-twicca =a hook-twitcher, the name of a worm used
as bait for fishing; Voc. 320. 32. Twitch is a palatalised form of
it; see Twitch.4Low G. twikken, to tweak, nip; G. zwicken, to
pinch, nip ; whence zwick, a pinch, zwick bei der Nase, tweak by the
nose; also G. zwacken, to pinch, to twitch. Cf. Twinge. Der.
tweak, sb.

TWEEZERS, nippers, small pincers for pulling out hairs. (F.—
Teut. ; with E. suffix.) ‘ Handkerchers, rosaries, tweezers ;’ Middle-
ton, Span. Gipsy, ii. 1. The history of this word is remarkable ;
it exhibits an unusual development. A tweez-er or twees-er is, pro-
perly, an instrument contained in a ¢weese, or small case for instru-
ments. And as the ¢weese contained tweesers, it was also called a
tweeser-case ; hence it is that we find tweese and tweeser-case used as
synonymous terms. ‘ Tweezers, nippers or pincers, to pull hair up by
the roots; Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘Then his tweezer-cases are incom-
parable; you shall have one not much bigger than your finger, with
seventeen several instruments in it, all necessary every hour of the day;’
Tatler, no. 142; March 7, 1709-10. This shows that a tweezer-
case Was a case containing a great number of small instruments, of
which what are zow specifically called tweezers was but one. See
another quotation under Trinket (1). B. Next, we observe
that the proper name for such a case was a tweese, or a pair of
tweeses; probably a pair of tweeses means that the case was made
double, folding up like a book, as some instrument cases are made
still. ‘Drawing a little penknife out of a pair of tweezes I then
chanced to have about me;’ Boyle, Works, ii. 419 (R.). ‘I have


TWICE —


sent you by Vacandary the post, the French bever [hat] and éweeses’
you writ for;’ Howell, Familiar Letters, vol. i.let. 17; May 1, 1620.
‘A Surgeon’stweese, or box of instruments, pannard de chirurgien ;’
Sherwood, index to Cotgrave. C. Lastly, the word /weese is a-
new pl. formed from twee, short for etwee, from MF. estwy (mod. F.
étui). ‘ Estuy, a sheath, case, or box to put things in, and more
particularly, a case of little instruments, or sizzers, bodkin, penknife.
&c., now commonly tearmed an ettwee;’ Cot. And again: ‘ Pen-
narol de Chirurgien, a chirurgian’s case or ettwy ; the box wherein he
carries his instruments ;’ id. ence ¢wee; ‘sure I have not dropt
my ¢wee;’ Hoadly, The Suspicious Husband, A. ii. sc. 2 (1747). Here
we see that the F. estwy was pronounced ef-wee; then the initial e
(for es) was dropped, just as in the case of Ticket and Tuck (2) ;
then twee became twees or tweese, probably because the case was
double; then it was called a pair of tweeses, and a particular im-
plement in it was called a tweezer or tweezers, prob. from some con-
fusion with the obsolete ¢wich, tweezers ; see additions to Nares, by
Halliwell and Wright. The most remarkable point is the double
addition of the pl. form, so that ¢wee-s-es is from twee; this can be
explained by the common use of the plural for certain implements,
such as shears, scissors, pliers, snuffers, tongs, scales, nippers, pincers, &c.
So far, the history of the word is quite clear, and fully known. D. The
etymology of OF. estuy or estwi is difficult; it is the same as Span.
estuche, a sCissors-case, also scissors (note this change of sense), Port.
estojo, a case, a tweezer-case, Low Lat. estugium, a case, box, oc-
curring A.D. 1231 (Ducange). We also find MItal. stuccio, stucchio,
‘a little pocket-cace with cisors, pen-knives, and such trifles in them,’
(sic) Florio; whence (with prefix a- <<L. ad) Ital. astuccio, a small
box, case, sheath. The form stucchio does not seem to have been
observed before; perhaps it helps the etymology, proposed by Diez,
from MHG. stiiche, OHG. sticha, a cuff, a muff (prov. G. stauche,
a short and narrow muff).4Icel. stuka, a sleeve. If so, the orig.
case for small instruments'‘was a muff, or a cuff, or a part of the
sleeve. Korting,.§ 9128.

TWELVE, two’and ten. (E.) ME. twelf; whence also twelf-e,
twel-ue (=twel-ve),a pl. form and dissyllabic. It was not uncommon
to use numerals in the pl. form of.adjectives; cf. E. five (=/i-vé),
from AS. fif. ‘ Twelue winter’=twelve years, P. Plowman, B. v.
196, where two MSS. have twelf. We have, in the Ormulum, the
form twellf, 11069; but also ¢wellf-e (dissyllabic), 537. AS. ¢welf,
also zwelfe, Grein, ii. 556.4-OFris. twelef, twilif, twelf, tolef; Du.
twaalf ; Icel. tdlf; Dan. tolv; Swed. tolf; G. zwolf; OHG. zwelif;
Goth. twalif. B. All from the Teut. type twalif, as in Gothic.
Here iwa- is two; see Two. ‘The suffix -lif is the Teut. equivalent
(but from another root Jeip, to stick, remain, Jeave) to the Lithuan.
-lika occurring in dwy-lika, twelve. The Lithuan. -lika is due to
the adj. lékas, signifying ‘what is over,’ or ‘remaining over;’ see
Nesselmann, p. 365. In fact, the phr. antras ékas, lit. ‘second one
over,’ is used as an ordinal, meaning ‘twelfth.’ Lékas is from Lith.
lik-ti, to leave, allied to L. linguere. See Eleven. Brugmann,
ii. § 175. Der. twelf-th, used instead of twelft (ME. twelfte, AS.
twelfta, Grein, ii. 556) by analogy with seven-th, eigh-th, nin-th, 8c. ;
hence twelfth-day, twelfth-night (often called twelfday, twelfnight, as
in Shakespeare’s play of ‘ Twelfe Night’); twelve-month, ME. twelf-
monthe, P. Plowman, C. vii. 80.

TWENTY, twice ten. (E.) ME. twenty, Chaucer, C. T.
17118 (H 169). AS. twentig, Grein, ii. 557. Prob. for twen-tig=
twegen-tig; from AS. twegen, twain, and the suffix -tig, cognate
with Goth. ¢igjus, Gk. Sexas, a decade, a collection of ten things ;
allied to E. ten, Goth. taihun, Gk. déea. See Two and Ten.4+Du.
twintig ; Icel. tuttugu ; Goth. twaitigjus, Luke, xiv. 31; G. zwanzig,
MHG., zweinzic, OHG. zueinzuc. All similarly formed. B. So
also L. ui-ginti, twenty; from wi- (for *dui, twice, related to duo,
two), and -ginti (for *-centi, short for decenti, tenth, from decem, ten) ;
whence F. vingt, twenty, &c. Der, twenti-eth, AS. twentigoda,
Exod. xii. 18.

TWIBILL, TWYBILL, a two-edged bill or mattock. (E.)
Still in use provincially ; see Halliwell. In Becon’s Works, ii. 449;
Parker Society. ME. ¢wibil; spelt ¢wybyl, Prompt. Parv. AS.
twibille or twibill, ‘ Bipennis, twibille, vel stan-ex [stone-axe]; Fal-
castrum, bill;’ Voc. 141. 27, 28. Also: ‘ Bipinnis, dwibill ;’
id. 361. 6.—AS. twi-, double; and bill, a bill. See Twice and
Bill. :

TWICE, two times. (E.) For ME. twiés or twyés, formerly
dissyllabic; the word has been reduced to a single syllable, and the
final -ce is a mere orthographical device for representing the fact that
the final s was voiceless, and not sounded as z. ‘ He ¢wyés wan
Jerusalem the citee ;? Chaucer, C. T. 14153 (B 3337). AS. twiges;
A.S. Chron. an. 1120 (Laud MS.). This is a genitive form,
genitives being often used adverbially ; the more common AS. word
is zuwa, Luke, xviii. 12, older form twiwa, twice, Aélfred, tr. of


TWIDDLE


Orosius, b. v. c. 2.§ 7. Both ¢wi-ges and twi-wa are from the base
zwi-, double; only used as a prefix, answering to Icel. tvi-, L. bi- (for
*duis), Gk. &-, Skt. dvi-, and allied to twa, two 3; see Two. Cf.
prov. E. twi-bill, a mattock (above), ¢wi-fallow, to till ground a
second time; and see Twilight.

TWIDDLE, to twirl idly. (Scand.) As in the phr. ‘ to dwiddle
one’s thumbs,’ From Norw. vidla, variant of tvilla, to mix up by
stirring round; and villa is a mere variant of f¢virla, with the same
sense ; see Aasen and Ross. See Twirl. (Prob. tvir-la>ivil-la>
*tvil-da or tvid-la.) Cf. mod. Icel. kalla, to call; pronounced
(kad-la).

TWIG (1), a thin branch, small shoot of a tree. (E.) ME. twig,
spelt ¢wyg in Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 22, 1.5; pl. ¢wigges, Chaucer,
Persones Tale, De Superbia (I 390). AS. twig, pl. twigu, a twig;
Northumb. twigge, pl. twiggo, John, xv. 5.4+-Westphalian ‘wich,
twick; Du. twijg; G. zweig. B. From the AS. base ¢wi-, double,
because orig. applied to the fork of a branch, or the place where a
small shoot branches off from a larger one. In fact ¢wi-g is cognate
with Skt. dvi-ka-, ‘consisting of two,’ Gk. d:00ds, double, twofold.
Brugmann, ii. § 166. A similar explanation applies to ME. ¢wist,
often used in the sense of twig or spray, as in Chaucer, C. T. 10223
(E 2349). Cf. G. zwiesel, a forked branch; and see Twilight,
Twice, Twist, Two.

TWIG (2), to comprehend. (E.) Ofig. to observe, mark, take
note of; as in ‘ Now ¢wig him; now mind him ;’ Foote, Mayor of
Garratt (1763), il. 2. Cf. prov. E. twig, a glance; zwig, to pull
quickly ; twick, to twitch; twitch, to snatch, pinch, also to hold
tight, to nip. See E. D. D. B. Otherwise, twig may be from
the Irish ¢uig-im, I understand, discern; Stokes-Fick, p. 50.

TWILIGHT, the faint light after sunset or before sunrise. (E.)
ME. twilight, spelt twyelyghte in Prompt. Pary. The AS. zwi-, pre-
fix, means ‘ double,’ like Icel. zvt-, Du. twee-, G. zwie-; but it is here
used rather in the sense of ‘ doubtful’ or ‘half.’ The ideas of double
and half are liable to confusion; cf. AS. twéo, doubt, from the
hovering between two opinions; see Doubtand Between. B. Pre-
cisely the same confusion appears in German ; we there find zwiefach,
double, zwielicht, twilight, zwiesel, a branch dividing into two ends,
zwietracht, discord, all with the prefix zwie-=AS. twi-. The prefix
is related to Two; cf. Twice, Twig. Andsee Light. By way
of further illustration, Ifind MDu. tweelicht, twylicht, ‘twilight,’ Hex-
ham ; cf. Du. twee, two, tweedubbel, twice double, &c. Also Low G.
twe-lecht; AS. twéone-léoht, twilight, Voc. 175. 34. But this last
would only give a mod. E. form tweenlight, and does not account for
the form twilight.

TWILL, an appearance of diagonal lines in textile fabrics pro-
duced by causing the weft-threads to pass over one and under two
warp-threads, instead of over one and under one. (E.) Added by
Todd to Johnson; Lowland Sc. éweel, tweil, tweal (Jamieson), ‘De
i, mappa mensali de ¢will,’ York: Wills, iii. 14 (1400) ; ‘ panno vocato
twylled,’ id. iii. 71 (1423). The form is very old, and has reference
to a peculiar method of doubling the warp-threads, or taking two
of them together. From AS. ¢wilic (Toller), OLowG. dwili, adj.,
woven with double thread, twill (Gallée). Cognate with G. zwillich,
‘ticking,’ MHG. zwilich, zwilch, OHG. zwi-lth, ‘two-threaded ;’ a
word suggested by L. bilix, two-threaded, from bi-, double, and
lictum, a thread. See EFries. ¢willen, to double, in Koolman.
Formed, like twig, twine, twist, from the Teut. base ¢wi-, double,
appearing in AS, ¢wi-, Du. twee-, G. zwie-, all allied to Two, q.v.
We also find: ‘ Trilicis, prylen hreegel,’ i.e. a garment woven with
three threads, corresponding to an E. form “*thrill; Voc. 151. 34.
And see Twilight, Twice. Der. will, verb. @ Twilled in
Temp. iv. 64, is yet unexplained, Ray tells us that North E. zwill
means a spool, and is a corruption of guill (see E. D. D.). I doubt
it as regards this passage; the Swed. dial. ‘will is to turn round
like a spindle, to become entangled, as thread (Rietz); Norweg.
zvilla is to stir milk round and round, also to twist into knots, as a
thread; ¢villa, sb., is a twist or knot ina thread. And the Norw.
verb ¢villa is merely an assimilated form of Norw. ¢virla, to twirl,
to turn round; like prov. E. ¢well, to turn a spadeful over (E. D. D.).
I explain pioned as ‘ dug out,’ and willed as ‘turned over;’ said of
excavated trenches with sloping sides, on which the mud is laid.
See the context. Halliwell gives willy, to turn reversedly.

TWHLN, one of two born at a birth. (E.) ME. twin, adj.,
double. ‘Iosep gaf ile here twinne scrud’=Joseph gave each of
them double raiment, ‘ changes of raiment,’ cf. Gen. xlv. 22. ‘ Piss
twinne seollpe’=this double blessing, Ormulum, 8769. AS. ge-
twinn-as, pl., twins (Bosworth) ; ‘ bini, getwinne ;’ Atlfric’s Grammar,
ed. Zupitza, p. 13, 1. 14; ‘gemellus, getwin ;” Corpus Gloss., 12.
+lcel. tvinnr, tvennr, two and two, twin, in pairs; cf. tvinna, to
twine, twist two together. We also find Dan. tvilling, Swed. tvilling,
a twin, perhaps for *tvinling, by assimilation; cf. ME. twinling,


TWIRL


Bavar. zwin-ling, G, zwil-ling, a twin. Due to AS, twi-,double ; see
Twibill, + Lithuan. dwyni, twins, sing. dwynys; from dwi, two,
The z seems to give a collective force, as in Goth. éweihnai, two
apiece, Luke, ix. 3; L. dizi, two at a time. Hence twin, by two at
a time, orig. an adj., as above. Der. twin, verb, Wint. Tale, i. 2. 67.

T'WINE, to double or twist together; as sb., a twisted thread.
(E.) ME. twinen, to twine; pp. twyned, P. Plowman, B. xvii. 204.
In Layamon, 14220, the later text has ‘a ¢wined pred,’ where the
earlier text has ‘ a twines preed’=a thread of twine. The supposed
AS. ¢winan is unauthorised, but the verb was early coined from the
sb. twin, a twisted thread, curiously used to translate L. bysso in
Luke, xvi. 19 (as if from L. bis, twice).4-Du. ¢wijn, twine, twist,
whence /wijnen, to twine; Icel. tvinni, twine, whence ¢vinna, to twine;
Dan. tvinde (for *tvinne), to twine; Swed. tvinntrad, twine-thread,
tvinna, to twine; also Du. tweern, twine, G. zwirn. B. All from
Teut. type *twis-no->*twiz-no-, double; the iz becomes? in AS, twin,
Du. twijn; the zn becomes xm in Icel. and Swed. ; and the z becomes
rin Du. and G. The base *twis- occurs in Goth. twis-, prefix, and
in E. twis-t; cf. L. bis (for *dwis), Gk. 5is, Skt. duis, twice. Brug-
mann, i. § 903 (c, note 2).

TWINGE, to affect with asudden, sharp pain, tonip. (E.) ME.
twengen, weak vb. (ng =nj), to twinge, tweak; Owl and Night., 156.
Cf. ‘ Whil pat twinges me the foe’ = while the foe afflicts me; E. Eng.
Psalter, ed. Stevenson, Ps. xli. 10. Causal of ME. twingen, str. vb. ;
‘Tam meked and ¢wungen smert, id. Ps, xxxvii. 9. AS. twengan,
weak yb. (Toller) ; for earlier *Jwengan, causal of *Jwingan, whence
the derived word Thong. For change of thw- to tw-, cf. twirl
below, q.v. Itis preserved in OFriesic thwinga, also twinga, dwinga,
to constrain, pt. t. ¢wang, twong, pp. twongen.--OSax. thwingan, in
the pp. bithwungan, oppressed ; Dan. tvinge, to force, compel, con-
strain ; Swed. tvinga, to force, bridle, restrain, compel; Icel. Auinga,
to oppress; Du. dwingen, to constrain, pt. t. dwong, pp. gedwongen ;
G. zwingen, pt. t. zwang, pp. gezwungen. B. All from the Teut.
type *Jwengan- (pt. t. *Awang’), to constrain, compel; whence also the
secondary verbs appearing in G. zwdngen, to press tightly, constrain,
and ME. twengen, to press tightly, tweak, or twinge (as above), and
in the Life of St. Dunstan, 1. 81: ‘he twengde and schok hir bi pe
nose’ =he twinged and shook her by the nose, Spec. of English, ed.
Morris and Skeat, p. 22. The mod. E. ¢winge answers rather to this
secondary or causal form than to the strong verb ; just as in the case
of swinge, due to the strong verb swing. y. Cf. Lithuan. ¢wenkii,
to be hot, to smart; ¢wankas, sultry. (4/TWENK). Der. twinge,
sb. Also thong, q. v.

TWINKILE, to shine with a quivering light. ME. zwinkilen,
Chaucer, C. T. 269 (A 267). AS. zwinclian, to twinkle, shine faintly,
ftlfred, tr. of Boethius, c. xxxv. § 33 b. iii. pr. 12. Twinkle is a fre-
quentative from a form twink, appearing in ME. twinken, to blink,
wink ; Prompt. Parv., p. 505. . And again, ¢wink is a nasalised form
of AS. twiccan, to twitch ; see Tweak, Twitch. The sense is to
keep on twitching or quivering, hence to twinkle.--Bavar. zwinkern,
frequentative of zwinken, to blink. Der. twinkle, sb.; twinkl-er.
Also twinkl-ing, sb., a twitch or wink with the eye, ME. twinkeling ;
‘ And in the twinkeling of a loke’ [look, glance], Gower, C. A. i. 144,
bk. i. 3033; this is from ME. ¢winkelen in the sense to wink, as: ‘he
twinclep with the e3en’=he winks with the eyes, Wyclif, Prov. vi. 13
(earlier version) ; see ¢wink, sb., a twinkling, in Shak. Temp. iv. 43.

TWINTER, a beast two winters old, (E.) ‘Five dwinteris
britnit he ;’ G. Douglas, tr. of Virgil, bk. v. ch. ii. 105. AS. twi-
wintre, adj.. of two years.=AS, ¢wi-, double (see Twibill) ; and
winter, a winter, a year.

T WIRE, to peep out. (E.) In Shak. Son. 28. Recorded in the
cognate Bavarian zwiren, zwieren, to peep out (Schmeller); MHG.
zwieren, to peep out (Schade). Not in Chaucer, as Nares asserts ;
but known in proy. E. (E. D. D.).

TWIRL, to whirl, turn round rapidly. (Scand.) Twirl stands for
thwirl, as twinge (q. v.) for thwinge. ‘ Leave twirling of your hat ;’
Beaum. and Fletcher, Rule a Wife, Act ii. sc. 3 (Altea); twyrle,
Fitzherbert, Husb., § 55, 1. 1.—Norw. ¢virla, to twirl (Ross).
Twir-l is a frequentative form, from Teut. *AJwer-an-, AS. Jwer-an,
to agitate, turn; it means ‘to keep on turning,’ and is used of rather
violent motion. The AS. Aweran only occurs in the afweran, to stir
round, to churn, and ge-Aweran, to churn (Toller). We have also
the derived sb. Awiril, supposed to mean the handle of a churn,
which was steadily turnedround. We find: ‘ Lac, meolc [milk] ; Lac
coagolatum, molcen [curdled milk; Verberaturium, Jwiril ; Caseum,
cyse (cheese],’ &c.; Voc. 280. 27-33. Slight as these traces are, they
are made quite certain by the cognate words ; it may be necessary to
observe that, in AS. Awir-il, the final -i/ denotes the implement, and
is an agential suffix, distinct from the frequentative -Jin twirl. Cf. Du.
dwarlen, to whirl; whence dwarlwind, a whirlwind (the Du. d=AS.
p). That the Z is frequentative, appears at once from the Low G,

XxX 2


675,


676 TWIST


dweerwind, 2 whirlwind, as well as from MHG. dwer(e)n, OHG.
dweran, tweran, strong verb, to turn round swiftly, to whirl, to mix
up. From the Teut. type *thweran-, to stir round (pt. t. *¢hwar) ;
whence also Icel. Jvara, Norw. évare, AS. pwére, OHG. thwiril,
MHG. twirl, G. quirl, a stirring-stick. Note also EFries. dwireln,
dwirlen, to twirl, dwarrel, a whirl, from dweren, to turn. From Idg.
aTWER, whence also Gk. rop-vvn, L. trua, a stirrer. See
Trowel.

TWIST, to twine together, wreathe, turn forcibly. (E.) ME.
twisten, Chaucer, C. T. 10880 (F 566) ; O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris,
ii. 213. Not found in AS., but regularly formed from a sb. ¢wist, a
rope, occurring in the comp. mest-twist, a stay, a rope used to stay
a mast. ‘Parastates, mest-twist,’? Voc. 182. 8; one sense of Gk.
napacrarns is a stay. Again, ¢wis-t is formed, with suffix -¢, from
AS. *twis-, double, explained under Twine. The suffix -¢ is the very
common Idg. suffix -to-. We should also notice ME. ¢wist, a twig,
i.e. forked branch, branch dividing into two; see under Twig.+ Du.
twisten, to quarrel; from twist,a quarrel. This is thesame form, but
used in quite a different sense, from the notion of two persons con-
tending; cf. Du. tweespalt, discord, tweedragt, discord, tweestrijd, a
duel; Dan. ¢viste, to strive, from ¢vist, strife; the Dan. ¢vist also
means a twist; Swed. vista, to strive, from /vis¢, strife; G. zwist, a
twist, also discord, whence zwistig, discordant. And cf. Icel. ¢vistr,
the two or ‘deuce’ in card-playing. Der. ¢wist, sb. (really an older
word, as appears above); ¢wist-er. Cf. obsol. zwiss-el, a double
fruit (Nares), from AS. twisel, double.

TWIT, to remind ofa fault, reproach. (E.) For twite ; the i was
certainly once long, which accounts for the extraordinary form twight
(miswritten for ¢wite, like delight for delite) in Spenser, F. Q.
v. 6.12, where it rimes with light and plight. Palsgrave has the
queer spelling ¢whyte, prob. a misprint for ¢wyte, as it occurs im-
mediately before zwyne and under the heading ‘T before W: I
twhyte one, I caste hym in the tethe or in the nose, Fe luy reproche ;
this terme is also northren.’ The orig. length of the vowel leaves no
doubt that zwite is due to ME. atwiten, to twit, reproach, by loss of
initial a; this verb is used in much the same way as the mod. E.
word, and was once common; Stratmann gives more than 12 ex-
amples. ‘ Imputo, to a-twyte;’ Voc. 589. 17. Spelt attwyte, Ayen-
bite of Inwyt, p. 198, 1.16 ; whence atuytinges, twittings, reproaches,
id. p. 194, 1. 6. ‘Pat atwytede hym’=that twitted him, Rob. of
Glouc. p. 33, 1. 782. AS. etwitan, to twit, reproach; see Sweet,
AS. Reader, and Grein. [We also find AS. ed-witan with the same
sense, but the prefix differs.]—AS. @#, at, prep. often used as a pre-
fix; and witanx, to blame, the more orig. sense being to behold,
observe, hence to observe what is wrong, take notice of what is amiss ;
Grein, li. 724. For the prefix, see At. The AS. witan is cognate
with Goth. weitjan, occurring in idweitjan, to reproach (= AS.edwitan),
and in fairweitjan, to observe intently. AS. witan, Goth. weitjan, are
allied to AS. and Goth. witan, to know, and to L. uid-ére, to see. =
a WEID, to see; see Witand Vision. Cf. Du. wijten, to reproach,
G. ver-weisen.

TWITCH, to pluck, snatch, move suddenly. (E.) ME. ¢wicchen,
a palatalised form of twikken, to tweak. ‘ Twikkyn, twychyn, or sum-
what drawyn, Tractulo;’ Prompt. Pary. We find also the comp.
verb ¢o-twicchen, to pull to pieces, O. Eng. Homilies, i. 53, 1.4; with
the pt. t. to-¢wizte, spelt to-twizt, Will. of Palerne, 2097. Similarly
the simple verb zwicchen makes the pt. t. ¢wi3te, and pp. ¢wizt. This
explains twight=twitched, pulled, Chaucer, C. T. 7145 (D 1563).
For the form, cf. AS. angel-twicce, prov. E. angletwitch, an earth-worm
(for fishing). See Tweak. Der. twitch, sb.3 twitch-er.

TWITTER, to chirp as a bird, to feel a slight trembling of the
nerves. (E.). ME. zwiteren ; whence ‘ pilke brid. . twitereth’ =that
bird twitters, Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. iii. met. 2, 1.21. Twitter
is a frequentative from a base ¢wit, and means ‘to keep on saying
twit;’ and twit is a lighter or weakened form of twat, appearing in
the old word twatt-le, now twaddle; see Twaddle. Again, twaddle
is related to tattle; and astwitter : twattle :; titter ; tattle. All these
words are of imitative origin.-G. zwitschern, to twitter; Bavar.
zwitzern, And cf. Du. kwetteren, to twitter, warble, chatter; Dan.
kvidre, Swed. quittra, to chirp, twitter. ‘Der. twitter, sb. 7 The
sense of trembling may follow from that of tremulous sound ; but a
twitter of the nerves may be due to the influence of ME. twikken, to
tweak or twitch.

TWO, TWAIN, one and one. (E.) The difference between two
and twain is one of gender only, as appears from the AS. forms.
Twain is masc., whilst ¢wo is fem, and neuter; but this distinction
was early disregarded. ME. tweien, tweije, twein, tweie, twei, twey,
&c.; also ¢wa, two, in which the w was pronounced ; the pronuncia-
tion of two as too being of rather late date. ‘ Us tweyne’=us twain,
us two, Chaucer, C, T. 1136 (A 1134). ‘Sustren two’ =sisters two,
id. 1021 (A 1019). Our poets seem to use ¢wain and two indiffer-


TYRANT


ently. ‘AS. zwegen, masc. nom. and acc. ; ¢wd, fem. nom. and acc. +
twa, tu, neut. nom. and acc. ; twegra, gen. (all genders); ¢wam, dat.
(all genders). The neut. ¢z already shows an occasional loss of w;
and even in AS. twa was used instead of twegen when nouns of
different genders were conjoined ; see Grein, ii. 556.-4-Du. twee; Icel.
tveir, acc. tvad, tvo; Dan. to; Norw. tvo; Swed. tvd, tu; Goth. twai,
masc., twos, fem., twa, neut.; gen. ¢waddje, dat. twaim ; acc. twans,
twos, twa; G. zwei; also zween, only in the masc. gender ; also zwo,
fem. (rare); OHG. zwéné, zwa, zwo, zwet.4Irish da; Gael. da, do ;.
W. dau, dwy; Russ. dva; Lithuan. du,m., dwi, f.; L. duo (whence F.
deux, Ital. due, Span. dos, Port. dous, E. deuce); Gk. 500; Skt. duvaiu,
dua. B. All from the Idg. type *dwo-, *duwo-; Brugmann, ii.
§ 166. y: In composition, we find, as a prefix, AS. ¢wi- (E. twi-
in twi-ce, twi-light), Icel. tvi-, Du. twee-, Dan. and Swed. tve-, G.
zwie-, L. bi- (for *dui-), Gk. &i- (for *5ft-), Skt. dvi-, dua-; also E..
twis- (L. bis), as in ¢twis-t; see Twine. Der. iwo-edged; two-fold, a
modern substitution for ME. ¢wifold, Early Eng. Psalter, ed. Steven-
son, Ps. cviii. 29, AS. twifeald, spelt twigfeald in Gen. xlili. 15, so.
that zwo-fold should rather. be twy-fold. Also a-two, ME. a two,
Chaucer, C. T. 3569, AS. on ¢u, Grein, ii. 556, so that the prefix a-=
on; see A- (2). Also twain (as above), twe-lve, twen-ty, twi-bill, twi-
ce, twi-light, twill, twig, twin, twine, twist; bi-, prefix; bis-, prefix, in
bis-sextile; di-, prefix, dia-, prefix, dis-, prefix. Also deuce (1).

TYBALT, the ‘ prince of cats.’ (AF.—Low G.) See Shak.
Romeo, iii. 1.80.— AF, Tebalt, Tebaud. = OSax. Thiod-bald, Theobald.
=OSax. zhiod, people, bald, bold. See Tibert.

TYMPANUM, the hollow part of the ear, &c. (L.—Gk.) In.
Phillips, ed. 1706. [He also gives: ‘ Tympan, the drum of the ear,
a frame belonging to a printing-press covered with parchment. .. ~
pannel of a door,’ &c.; this is from F. tympan, ‘a timpan, or tim-
brell, also a taber; . . also, a printer’s timpane,’ &c.; Cot.]=—L.
tympanum, adrum; area of a pediment (in architecture) ; panel of a
door. = Gk. tdymavoy, a drum, roller, area of a pediment, panel of a.
door. Formed with inserted » from the rarer t¥zavov, a drum. —
Gk. rum-, base of rumrew, to strike, beat, beat a drum; see Type.
And see Timbrel. Der. tympan-y, a flatulent distension of the
belly, Dryden, Mac-Flecknoe, 194, from Gk. tupmavias, a kind of
dropsy in which the belly is stretched tight like a drum; the F. form
tympanie is given in Sherwood’s index to Cotgrave; Palsgrayve has E.
lympan.,

TYPE, a mark or figure, emblem, model, a raised letter in
printing. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Rich. III, iv. 4, 244; and in
Spenser, F, Q. Introd. to b.i. st. 4.—F. type, a type; in Sherwood’s
index to Cotgrave.=L. typum, acc. of typus, a figure, image, type.—
Gk. -rém0s, a blow, the mark of a blow, stamp, impress, mark, mould,
outline, sketch, figure, type, character of a disease.= Gk. rum-, base
of runrev, tostrike, beat. Allied to Skt. twp, ump, to hurt ; and to
Gk, orug-ediCav, to strike. (4/STEU). B. We also find Skt. zud,
L. tundere (pt. t. tu-tud-i), to strike. These are from a base *steud-,
to strike ; whence Goth. stautan, to strike. Cf. Brugmann, i. § 818
(2). Der. ¢yp-ic, from Gk. tum«ds, typical, figurative; typ-ic-al,
typ-ic-al-ly ; typi-fy, a coined word, Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii.
c. 5, § 13 type-founder, type-metal; also typo-graphy, orig. in the


sense of ‘figurative description,’ Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b.i.c. 8.


§ 15, where the suffix is from Gk. ypagpev, to write; typo-graph-ic,.
typo-graph-ic-al, -ly; typo-graph-er. And see tympanum, thump.

TYPHOON, a violent whirlwind or hurricane. (Arab.—Gk.)
[ The word has been claimed as Chinese, from the Chinese za, ‘ great,”
and fang (Cantonese fung), ‘wind;’ as if ‘great wind” But this
seems to be a late mystification, and unhistorical.] In old authors,
the forms are éuffon, tuffoon, tiphon, &c. Spelt touffon, and explained
as ‘an extraordinary storme at sea;’ Hakluyt, Voy., ii, 1. 2395
tuffoons, pl., W. Dampier, New Voyage (1699), ii. I. 35. (See
Typhoon in Yule).— Arab. zufan, a hurricane, storm; Rich. Dict.,.
p- 466.—Gk. rupav, better rupws, a whirlwind. Allied to rv¢gos,
smoke, cloud ; see Typhus.

TYPHUS, a kind of continued fever. (L.—Gk.) Added by
Todd to Johnson. Todd says it is ‘one of the modern names given
to low fever” =—L. typhus; a Latinised form from the Gk.—Gk.
Tvpos, smoke, cloud, mist, stupor, esp. stupor arising from fever; so-
that ‘ typhus fever’ = stupor-fever.= Gk. rupey, to raise a smoke, to.
smoke. Allied to 6v-pés, vigour, courage, 6%-ev, to rush along ; from
“DHE, to blow, fana flame, shake; see Fume. Der. typhous,
adj.; ¢ypho-id, resembling typhus, from Gk. rdpo-, for rpos, and
«i8-os, resemblance, from eiSoua:, I seem; see Idol.

TYRANT, a despotic ruler, oppressive master. (F.—L.—Gk.)
The word was not originally used ina bad sense; see Trench, Study
of Words. The spelling with y is modern, and due to our know-
ledge of Gk.; the word was really derived from French, and might
as well have i. ME. ¢irant, but spelt tyrant in Rob. of Glouc. p.
374, l. 7689 ; tiraunt in Chaucer, prol. to Legend of Good Women,,


TYRO


1. 374. —OF-. tiran, also tiranz, whence an oblique case tirant; also
spelt tyran, tyrant; see Littré. Cotgrave gives: ‘ Tyran, a tirant.’ =
L. tyrannum, acc. of tyrannus.—Gk. tvpavvos, a lord, master, an
absolute sovereign; later, a tyrant, usurper. Prob. orig. an adj.
signifying kingly, lordly, in a good sense; as in the tragedians.
Der. tyrann-y, ME. tyrannie or tirannye, Chaucer, C. T. 943 (A 941),
from F. tyrannie, ‘ tyranny,’ Cot., L. tyrannia, Gk. rupavvia, sovereign
sway; also tyrann-ic, F. tyrannique, L. tyrannicus, Gk. tupavvikds ;
tyrann-ic-al, Cor. iii. 3. 2 5 tyrann-ic-al-ly, tyrann-ous, Meas. for Meas.
iv. 2. 87, a coined word ; tyrann-ous-ly; tyrann-ise, K. John, v. 7. 47,
from F. zyrannizer, ‘to tyrannize, to play the tirant,’ Cot., as if from
L. *tyrannizdre= Gk. rupavvifew, to take the part of a tyrant (hence
to act as one).
TY RO, a gross misspelling of Tiro, q. v.


U


UBIQUITY, omnipresence. (F.—L.) In Becon’s Works, iii.
450, 524 (Parker Soc.); and in Cotgrave. =F. ubiquité, ‘an ubiquity;’
Cot. It answers to L. *ubiquitatem, acc. of *ubiquités, a coined
‘word, coined to signify ‘a being everywhere,’ i.e. omnipresence. = L.
ubique, wherever, also, everywhere.—L. ubi, where; with suffix -que,
answering to Gk. re, and allied to L. guis, Gk. ris, and E. who.
B. Ubi is short for cubz, appearing in ali-cubt, anywhere, né-cubi,
nowhere; and *cubz stands for *quu-bt, where -b2 is a suffix as in 2-02,
there. Cf. Skt. ku-, as in ku-ha, where; also Oscan pu-f, Umbrian
pu-fe, where. Brugmann, i. § 667. Der. ubiquit-ous, -ous-ly.

UDDER, the breast of a female mammal. (E.) ME. vwddir
(=uddir) ; ‘Iddyr, or vddyr of a beeste;’ Prompt. Parv. AS. ader,
in a Gloss. to Prov. vii. (Bosworth); cf. L. aberibus in Prov. vii. 18
(Vulgate) ; see Kentish Glosses, 203.4+-M Du. uder, uyder (Hexham) ;
Du. uijer ; Low G. tider (Danneil) ; Icel. yagr (an abnormal form;
for *judr); Swed. jufver, jur; Dan. yver (cf. North E. yure, a
Scand. form) ; G. euter, OHG. witar. Teut. type *adro-; Idg. type
*idhro-. Further cognate with L. aber (for *udher), Gk. od@ap (gen.
ovaros), Skt. uidhar, an udder. Der. (from L. iber) ex-uber-ant.

UGLY, frightful, hateful. (Scand.) ME. ugly, Chaucer, C. T.
8549 (E 673); spelt uglike, Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 2805.
We also find ugsom, frightful, Destruction of Troy, 877.—Icel.
uggligr, fearful, dreadful, to be feared.—Icel. ugg-r, fear; with
suffix -ligr=AS, -lic=E. -like, -ly. Cf. Icel. ugga, to fear. Ap-
parently allied to Icel. agi, whence E. awe. Also to Goth. dgan, to
fear, dgjan, to terrify. See Awe. Der. zgli-ness, spelt uglynes,
Pricke of Conscience, 917, where it is used to translate L. horror.

UHLAN, ULAN, a lancer. (G.—Polish—Turkish.) Modern.
‘Each Hulan forward with his lance!’ Scott, Field of Waterloo,
x. 5.—G. uhlan, a lancer.—Pol. wlan, an uhlan; not of Polish
origin. B. According to Heyse, uhlans were a kind of light
cavalry of Tataric origin, first introduced into European armies in
Poland; the Polish wlan, a lancer, having been borrowed from Turkish
oglan, also olan, a youth, lad. Of Tataric origin. From Tatar
oglan, a son, child ; formerly also a Mogul title. See Zenker, Turk.
Dict., p..124; Pavet de Courteille, Dict. Turk-Oriental, p. 68.

UKASE, an edict of the Czar. (F.—Russ.) Modern.=F. ukase.
— Russ. ykaz’, an ordinance, edict ; cf. ykazuivat(e), ykazat(e), to indi-
cate, show, order, prescribe.—Russ. y-, prefix; kazat(e), to show.
The Russ. y-, Church Slav. w-, is allied to Skt. ava, away, off; and
kazat(e) is the Ch. Slay. kazati,to show. Brugmann,i. § 163 (note),
§ 616.

ULCER, a dangerous sore. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, iv. 7. 124.—
MF. wlcere (Cot.), mod. F. wlcére, ‘an ulcer, a raw scab.’=L. zlcer-,
decl. stem of wlcus, a sore; cf.Span. and Ital. ulcera, an ulcer.+-Gk.
€Axos, a wound, sore, abscess; Skt. argas, hemorrhoids. Der.
ulcerat-ion, from F, ulceration, ‘an ulceration,’ Cot., from L. acc.
ulcerationem; ulcer-ate, from L. wlceratus, pp. of ulcerare, to make
sore; wlcer-ous, Hamlet, iii. 4. 147, from L. adj. ulcerdsus, full of
sores.

ULLAGE, the unfilled part of a cask. (Prov.—L.)- ‘ Ullage of a
Cask, is what a cask wants of being full;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. A
Prov. word ; due to the wine trade. = Proy. u/hage (given by Mistral
Ss. v. uiage), a filling up of a cask; OF. eullage (Roquefort) ;
ouillage (Godefroy).—Prov. wha, OProv. ulhar (in Mistral, s. v.
uia), to fillup; OF. eullier, ouillier; MF. oeiller, to fill up wine
vessels, Cot. The Late L. type is *oculdre, to fill up to the oculus,
the eye, or orifice. L. oculus, the eye; see Ocular. We also find
OF. aouillier, as if for *adoculare. Cf. MF. oeillade, an amorous
look, oeil, the eye (Cot.).


| Cot,; and see Sombre,


UMBER 677


ULTERIOR, further, more remote. (L.) A late word; added
by Todd to Johnson.—L. zlterior, further ; comp. of uJter, beyond,
on that side, an old adj. only occurring in the abl. ultra (=altra
parte) and ultrd, which are used as adverbs with the sense of beyond ;
ultra is also used as a preposition, B. Ul-ter is also a comparative
form (ud-ter-ior being a double comparative, like ex-ter-ior from ex) ;
cf, OL. wis, beyond, allied to OL. ollus, that, yon, olle (=ille), he.
Hence wl-ter=more that way, more in that direction. y- OL.
ollus is for *olnus; cf. Skt. arana-s, foreign, far, yon. Brugmann,
i. § 163. Der, wlira-, prefix, q.v.; ultim-ate, q.v. Also outrage,
utterance (2).

ULTIMATE, furthest, last. (L.) ‘The ultimate end of his
presence ;’ Bp. Taylor, Of the Real Presence, s. 1. (R.).—L. ulti-
matus, pp. of ultimare, to come to an end, to be at the last.=L.
ultimus, last. Ul-ti-mus is a superl. form (like of-ti-mus, in-ti-mus),
formed from the base w/- appearing in wl-ter, ul-ter-ior; see Ulterior.
Der. ultimate-ly ; also ultimat-um, from L. ultimatum, neut. of pp.
ultimatus. Der, pen-ultimate, ante-pen-ultimate.

ULTRA-, beyond. (L.) L. wltra-, prefix; ultra, beyond, adv.
and prep., orig. abl. fem. of OL. wlier, adj.; see Ulterior. @ The
F. form is outre, Ital. oltra, Span. ultra.

ULTRAMARINE, beyond sea; as sb., sky-blue. (Ital. —L.)
‘ Ultramarine, that comes or is brought from beyond sea; also, the
finest sort of blew colour used in painting ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706; spelt
ultramarin in ed, 1658. And used by Dryden, On Painting, § 354
(R.), who talks of ‘ wltramarine or azure.’ ‘ Asure, . . such as the
paynters caule Azurro Oltramarino, that is, Asure of beyonde the
sea ;” Eden, Three E. Books on America, ed. Arber, p. 366 (1555).
The word is Ital. (the Ital. oltra being altered to L. ultra). = Ital.
oltra marino, of beyond the seas (Florio). Cf. Span. wltramarino,
beyond sea, foreign; also as sb. ‘ultramarine, the finest blue
colour, produced by calcination from lapis lazuli;’ Neuman. =L.
ultra, beyond; mar-e, sea; and suffix -inws. See Ultra- and Marine.
t= So called because lapis lazuli was a foreign production ; see
Azure.

ULTRAMONTANE, beyond the Alps. (F.—Ital.—L.)
‘ Ultramontanes, a name given by the Italians to all people living on
the hither side of the Alps, who, with respect to their country, are
beyond those mountains ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. ‘He is an ultramon-
tane;’ Bacon, Observations on a Libel (R.).—F. ultramontain, ap-
plied by the French to the Italians themselves, as being beyond the
Alps from the French side, and in use as early as the 14th cent.
(Littré), This is also the E. view of the word, which is used with
reference to the Italians, esp. to those who hold extreme views as to
the Pope’s supremacy. =Ital. oltramontano, beyond the mountains;
Late L. ultramontanus, coined in imitation of classical L. tramon-
tanus.=L, ultra, beyond; and moxt-, stem of mons, a mountain;
with suffix -dxus. See Ultra- and Mountain; and see Tra-
montane. Der. wltramontan-ist, -ism (F. ultramontanisme).

ULTRAMUNDANE, beyond the limits of our solar system,
beyond the world. (L.) ‘ Imaginary wltramundane spaces ;’ Boyle’s
Works, vol. v, p. 140 (R.). And in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —L.
ultramundanus, beyond the world. =L. «tra, beyond; and mundanus,
worldly, from mundus, world. See Ultra- and Mundane.

UMBEL, a form of flower in which a number of stalks, each
bearing a flower, radiate from a centre. (L.) . Phillips, ed. 1706,
gives it in the form umbella; it has since been shortened to umbel.
Florio gives Ital. umbella, “a little shadow, . . also the round tuft or
head of fenell or dill.’ So called from its likeness in form to an
umbrella,—L. wmbella, a parasol; Juvenal, ix. 50, Dimin. of
umbra, a shade. See Umbrella. Der. umbelli-fer-ous, bearing
umbels (Phillips), coined with suffix -fer-ows, as in cruci-ferous, from.
L. suffix -fer, bearing, and E. -ous (F. -euwx, L. -dsus). Doublet,
umbrella.

UMBER, a species of brown ochre, (F.—Ital.—L.) In Shak.
As You Like It, i. 3. 114. =F. ombre, used shortly for ¢erre d’ombre,
“beyond-sea azur, an earth found in silver mines, and used by
painters for shadowings ;? Cot. [As ‘ beyond-sea azur’ is properly
ultramarine, it must here be differently applied. |= Ital. ombra, used
shortly for terra @ombra, umber. Torriano has ‘ ¢erra d’ombra,
a kind of earth found in silver-mines used by painters for shadowings,’
Lit. ‘earth of shadow,’ i.e, earth used for shadowing ; cf. Ital. om-
breggiare, to shadow. The Ital. ombra is from L, wmbra, shadow ;
see Umbrage. @ See Wedgwood (p. 746), who notes that
‘the fable of the pigment taking its name from Umbria [which is
only a guess by Malone] is completely disproved by the Span.
name sombra (shade); sombra di Venecia, Venetian umber ; sombra
de hueso, bone-umber,’ Some paintings of the Venetian school in the
Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, are remarkable for their wmbered
or sombre appearance. Cf, also F, ombré, ‘ umbered or shadowed,’


678 UMBILICAL


UMBILICAL, pertaining to the navel. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave.
= MF. umbilical, ‘ umbilicall, belonging to the nayell;’ Cot.—-MF.
umbilic, ‘the navell or middle of ;’ id. —L. wmbilicum, acc. of umbi-
licus, the navel, middle, centre. Allied to Gk. duadds, the navel ;
umbilicus being really an adjectival form, from a sb. *umbilus = 6p-
gpardés. Cf. L. umbo,a boss. Allied to Skt. xabhi-, navel; and E.
Navel, q.v. All from a common root *enebh (Uhlenbeck).

UMBLE-PIE, pie containing the wmbles or numbles (entrails) of
deer. (F.—L.) ‘The vmblis of venyson;’ Skelton, Garland of
Laurell, 1240. See further under Numbles, And see Umbles
in Nares.

UMBRAGEH, a shade or screen of trees, suspicion of injury,
offence. (F.—L.) The proper sense is ‘shadow,’ as in Hamlet, vy.
2.125; thence it came to mean a shadow of suspicion cast upon a
person, suspicion of injury, &c. ‘It is also evident that St. Peter did
not carry himself so as to give the least overture or umbrage to make
any one suspect he had any such preéminence;’ Bp. Taylor, A Dis-
suasive from Popery, p. i. § 8 (R.); and see Trench, Select Glos-
sary.=—F. ombrage (also umbrage), ‘an umbrage, shade, shadow;
also jealousie, suspition, an incling of; whence donner ombrage a, to
discontent, make jealous of ;’ Cot. =F. ombre, a shadow ; with suffix
-age (<L. -aticum) ; cf. L. umbraticus, belonging to shade, =—L, umbra,
a shadow. Der. umbrage-ous, shadowy, from F.ombrageux, ‘ shady,
... umbragious,’ Cot. ; wmbrageous-ly, -ness, And see umb-el, umber,
umbr-ella, sombre.

UMBRELLA, a screen carried in the hand to protect from
sunshine or rain, (Ital.—L.) Now used to protect from rain, in
contradistinction to a parasol; but formerly used to protect from
sunshine, and rather an old word. Cotgrave translates F. ombraire
by ‘an umbrello, or shadow,’ and F. ombrelle by ‘an umbrello.’
‘Now you have got a shadow, an umbrella, To keep the scorching
world’s opinion From your fair credit ;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Rule
a Wife, iii. 1. 2.—Ital. wmbrella (see below) ; better spelt ombrella,
‘a fan, a canopie, . . also a kind of round fan or shadowing that they
vse to ride with in sommer in Italy, a little shade ;’ Florio. Dimin.
of Ital. ombra, a shade.—L. umbra, a shade; see Umbrage.
@ The true classical L, form is wmbella; umbrella is an Ital. di-
minutive, regularly formed from ombra; the spelling with w is found
even in Italian. Florio has uwmbella, umbrella, ‘a little shadow, a
little round thing that women bare in their hands to shadow them ;
also, a broad brimd hat to keepe off heate and rayne; also, akind of
round thing like a round skreene that gentlemen vse in Italie in time
of sommer.’ This account of the word, in the edition of Florio of
1598, clearly implies that the word wmbrella was not, in that year,
much used in English ; for he does not employ the word. Doublet,
umbel.

UMPIRE, a third person called in to decide a dispute between
two others. (F.—L.) This curious word has lost initial 2, and
stands for zwmpire, once a common form, See remarks under the
letter NN. Spelt umpire in L.L.L.i. 1. 170. ME. nompere or
noumpere. ‘N(o)wmpere, or owmpere, Arbiter;? Prompt. Pary. Spelt
noumpere, nounpere, nounpier, P. Plowman, B. v. 337; nompeyr,id. C,
vii. 388 ; zoumpere, id. A. y. 181. In Wyclif, Prologue to Romans,
ed. Forshall and Madden, p. 302, 1. 24, we have xoumpere, where six
MSS. read umpere. It also occurs, spelt xompere, in the Testament of
Love, bk. i. ch. 2. 1, 96. Tyrwhitt shows (in his Glossary to
Chaucer) that the L. impar was sometimes used in the sense of
arbitrator, and rightly suggests a connexion with mod. F. nonpair,
odd. fp. The ME. xompere exactly represents the OF, form xomper,
peerless (Godefroy). Later, it occurs in Cotgrave as xompair,
‘ peerless, also odde ;’ and an earlier spelling nonper is given by
Roquefort, with the sense of peerless. It is simply a compound of
F, on, not, and OF. per, a peer, an equal; from L. non, not, and
par, equal; see Non- and Peer (1). y. The OF. nonper became
nomper regularly, since z before p becomes m, as in hamper<hanaper ;
see Hamper (2). It may also be noted that it is not the only
ME, word in which the same F. prefix occurs, since we also have
ME. nonpower, i.e. lack of power, in P. Plowman, C. xx. 292, spelt
nounpower, noumpower, and even vnpower. ‘The last form suggests
that the loss of initial x was due to some confusion between the F.
non and E. un-, with much the same negative sense. Hence a num-
pire or an umpire was a non-peer or an un-peer, orig. the former.
8. The sense is curious; but the use of L. zmpar, lit. odd, in the
sense of arbitrator or umpire sufficiently explains it; the wmpire is
the odd man, the ¢hird man, called in to settle a dispute between
two others. It may also be noted that pair and peer are doublets.

UN- (1), negative prefix. (E.) Prefixed to substantives, ad-
jectives, and adverbs; distinct from the verbal prefix uz- below.
ME. un-, AS. un-; very common as a neg. prefix.+-Du. on-; Icel.
ii- or d- (for un-) ; Dan. u-; Swed. o-; Goth. un-; G. un-.4-W. an- ;
Trish an-, in-; L. in-; Gk. dv-, a-; Zend. an-, a-; Skt. an-, a-.


UNCIAL


B. All from Idg. *an, negative prefix; cf. Brugmann, i. § 432<
Allied to Skt. za, not; Goth. zi, not, Lith. x@; also to L. é, not,
Gk. vn-, neg. prefix.

B. It is unnecessary to give all the words in which this prefix
occurs; it is used before words of various origin, both English and
French. The following may be noted in particular. 1. It occurs
in words purely English, and appears in many of these in Anglo-
Saxon; Grein gives AS. words, for example, answering to un-clean,
un-even, un-fair, un-whole, un-smooth, un-soft, un-still, un-wise. Some
compounds are now disused, or nearly so; such as un-bold, un-blithe,
un-little, un-right, un-sad, un-slow (all in Grein). In the case of past
participles, the prefix is ambiguous; thus un-bound may either mean
‘not bound,’ like AS. unbunden; or it may mean ‘ opened’ or ‘re-
leased,’ being taken as the pp. of wnbind, verb. 2. Un- is frequently
prefixed to words of F. origin ; examples such as un-feyned (unfeigned)
and ua-stable occur in Chaucer; we even find un-famous in House of
Fame, iii. 56, where we should now say zot famous. Palsgrave has
un-able, un-certayne, un-cortoyse (uncourteous), un-gentyll, un-gracy-
ous, un-honest, un-maryed, un-parfyte (imperfect), un-profytable, un=
raysonable (unreasonable). 3. In some cases, such as un-couth, the
simple word (without the prefix) is obsolete ; such cases are discussed
below.

UN- (2), verbal prefix, expressing the reversal of an action. (E.)
In the verb to ua-lock, we have an example of this; it expresses the
reversal of the action expressed by Jock; i.e. it means to open again
that which was closed by locking. ‘This is quite distinct from the
mere negative prefix, with which many, no doubt, confound it. ME,
un-, AS. un-; only used as a prefix in verbs.-Du. ont-; as in ont-
laden, to unload, from laden, to load; G. ent-, as in ent-laden, to un-
load ; OHG. ant-, as in ant-lihhan, to unlock; Goth. and-, as in and-
bindan, to unbind. _B. It is precisely the same prefix as that which
appears as an- in E. an-swer, and as and- in AS. and-swarian ; and it
is cognate with Gk. dy7t-, used only in the not very different sense
of ‘in opposition-to;’ thus, whilst E. w-say is to reverse what is
said, to deny it, the Gk. dy7i-Aéyew is to with-say or gain-say, to
deny what is said by others. See Answer and Anti-. B. Itis
unnecessary to give all the words with this prefix; I may note that
Grein gives the AS. verb corresponding to E. un-do, viz. undon, with
which cf. EFries. und-don, unt-ddn, Du. ontdoen; also un-tynan, to
unfasten, open, now obsolete; Bosworth gives wnxbindan, to unbind,
unfealdan, to unfold, unliican, to unlock, and a few others, but verbs
with this prefix are not very numerous in AS. sy. However, it was
so freely employed before verbs of French origin, that we have now
many such words in use; Palsgrave has wn-arm, un-bend, un-bind, un-
boukell (unbuckle), un-bridle, un-clasp, &c., with others that are
obsolete, such as un-custume, to disuse a custom, 6. The most
common and remarkable of the mod. E. verbs with this prefix are:
un-bar, -bend, -bind, -bolt, -bosom, -brace, -buckle, -burden, -button, -case,
-chain, -clasp, -close, -clothe, -coil, -couple, -cover, -curl, -deceive, -do,
-dress, -earth, -fasten, -fetter, -fix, -fold, -furl, -gird, -hand, -harness,
-hinge, -hook, -horse, -house, -kennel, -knit, -knot, -lace, -lade, -learn,
-limber, -load, -lock, -loose, -make, -man, -mask, -moor, -muffle, -muzzle,
-nerve, -pack, -people, -ravel, -rig’, -robe, -roll, -roof, -root, -saddle, -say,
-screw, -seal, -seat, -settle, -sex, -shackle, -ship, -stop, -string, -thread,
-tie, -tune, -twine, -twist, -warp, -weave, -wind, -wrap, -yoke. See
further under the simple words. @ Note the ambiguity in the case
of past participles; for which see under Un- (1).

UN-} (3), prefix. (E.) See Unto, Until.

UNANELED, without having received extreme unction. (E.;
and L.—Gk.) In Hamlet,i. 5.77. Lit. ‘not on-oiled.’— AS. un-,
not; and ME. an-eled, pp. of anelien, anelen, to give extreme unction
to; Rob. of Brunne, Handling Synne, 11269 (1303). The verb is
from ME. az (AS. oz), on, upon; and elien, to oil, regularly formed.
from AS. ele, sb., oil. The AS. ele is not a Teut. word, but
borrowed from L. olewm, oil, Gk. €Aaov. See Un- (1), On, and
Oil. Cf. also anoil, v., which see in N.E.D. ‘I aneele,. .1
anoynt .. with holy oyle;’ Palsgrave.

UNANIMOUS, of one mind. (L.) ‘ The universall and wnani-
mous belief ;? Camden, Hist. of Q. Elizabeth, an. 1588 (R.). Eng+
lished (by change of -zs to -ous, as in arduous, &c.), from L. unani-
mus, of one mind. = L. din-us, one ; and animus, mind; see Unit and
Animosity. Der. unanimous-ly; also unanim-i-ty, spelt unanimitee
in The Libell of Englishe Policye (A.D. 1436), 1. 1068 (quoted in
Hakluyt’s Voyages, i. 206), from F. unanimité, omitted by Cotgrave,
but in use in the 14th century (Littré), from L. acc. uxanimitatem,
due to the adj. unanimis, by-form of uinmanimus,

UNCIAL, pertaining to a certain style of writing. (L.) ‘ Uncial,
belonging to an ounce or inch;’ Blount, ed. 1674. Applied to a
particular form of letters in MSS. from the 4th to the 9th centuries.
The letters are of large size, and the word signifies ‘ of the size of an
inch.’ Phillips gives uzcial only in its other sense, viz. ‘belonging


UNCLE


to an-ounce.’ Cotgrave gives F. oncial, ‘weighing as much as an
ounce;’ but he also gives lettres onciales, ‘ huge letters, great letters.’
=—L. uncialis, belonging to an inch, or to an ounce.—L,. wncia, an
inch, an ounce. See Inch and Ounce (1). @ ‘The term uncial
was orig. a misapplication of St. Jerome’s expression Jitterae unciales,
*‘inch-high,” i.e. large, handsome letters ;’ Cent. Dict. See Jerome’s
Prologue to the book of Job (near the end).

UNCLE, the brother of one’s father or mother. (F.—L.) ME.
uncle, uncle ; Rob. of Glouc. p. 58, 1. 1337. —AF. uncle, Gaimar, 188 ;
F. oncle, ‘an uncle ;’ Cot.—L. auunculum, acc. of auunculus, a mother’s
brother; auunculum was shortened to unculum, whence F. oncle.
The lit. sense is ‘little grandfather;’ it is a double dimin. (with
suffixes -cu-lu-) from auus, a grandfather. Allied to Goth. awa,
a grandmother, Lith. avynas, an uncle, W. ewythr, an uncle.
Brugmann, i. § 330. 4 The G. onkel is also from Latin. The E.
nuncle, K, Lear, i. 4. 117, is due to the phrase my nuncle, corrupted
from mine uncle.

UNCOMEATABLE, unapproachable. (E.; with F. suffix.)
In the Tatler, no. 12. A strange compound, with prefix wn- (1) and
suffix -able, from Come and At.

UNCOUTH, unfamiliar, odd, awkward, strange. (E.) The lit.
sense is simply ‘unknown;’ hence strange, &c. ME. uncouth,
strange, Chaucer, C. T. 10598 (F. 284). A common word; see
Stratmann. AS, uacid, unknown, strange (common) ; Grein, ii. 616.
= AS. wn-, not; and cud, known, pp. of cunnan, to know, but used
as an adj.; Grein,i.172. See further under Can (1); and see Un-
(1). The Lowland Sc. unco’ is the same word; and, again, the
prov. E. unked or unkid (spelt unkard in Halliwell), strange, unusual,
odd, also lonely, solitary, corresponds to ME. unkid, ‘not made
known,’ where kid (= AS. cyded) is the pp. of the causal verb cydan,
to make known, a derivative from cud by vowel-change from a to 7;
Grein, i. 181,

UNCTION, an anointing, a salve; also, warmth of address,
sanctifying grace. (F.—L.) In Shak. Hamlet, iii. 4. 145, iv. 7. 142.
.*His inwarde vaccion wyl worke with our diligence ;’ Sir T. More,
Works, p. 763 a. ME. uncioun; spelt vnccioun, Trevisa, i, 113.—
F. onction, ‘unction, an anointing;’ Cot.—L. unctidnem, acc. of
unctio, an anointing; cf. unctus, pp. of ungere, to anoint; see
Unguent. Der. unctu-ous, Holinshed, Desc. of Britain, c. 24 (R.),
Trevisa, i. 113, also spelt vactious, Timon of Athens, iv. 3. 195 (first
folio), and even vzcteous, Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxxiv. c. 12,
p- 510, from F. onctueux, ‘ oily, fatty,’ Cot., from Late L. unctudsus
(Ducange); due to L. unctu-, decl. stem of unctus (gen. unctis),
an anointing. Hence unctu-os-i-ty, from F. onctuosité, ‘ unctuositie ;’
Cot.

UNDER, beneath, below. (E.) ME. under, under, Chaucer,
C. T. 1697. AS. under; Grein, ii. 617.4-Du. onder; Icel. undir ;
Swed. and Dan. under; Goth. undar; G. unter; OHG, untar.
B. Further allied to Skt. adharas, lower; and to adhas, prep. under,
adv. below; L. infra, beneath. Brugmann, i. § 446; ii. § 75.
@ For the phrase under way, see Way.

UNDEBR., prefix, beneath. (E.) The same word as the above.
Very common; the chief words with this prefix are under-bred,
-current, -done, -gird (Acts, xxvii. 17), under-go (AS. undergain, Bos-
worth), under-graduate, i.e. a student who is under a graduate, one
who has not taken his degree, under-ground, -growth, under-hand,
ady., secretly, Spenser, F. Q. iv. 11. 34, also as adj., As You Like It,
i, I. 146, under-lay (AS. underlecgan, Ailfric’s Grammar, ed. Zupitza,
p- 190, 1. 5), under-lie (AS. underlicgan, Bosworth), under-line. Also
under-ling, Gower, C. A. iii. 80 (bk. vi. 2350), Layamon, 19116,
.with double dimin. suffix -l-ing. Also under-mine, Wyclif, Matt.
-vi. 20, early version; wnder-m-ost, with double superl. suffix, as
explained under Aftermost 3 under-neath, ME. vndirne}, Chaucer,
tr. of Boethius, b. iii. pr. 5, 1. 15, compounded like Beneath,
q.v. Also under-plot, sb., -prop, vb., -rate, -sell; -set, Ancren Riwle,
p- 254, 1.5; under-sign; under-stand, q.v.3; under-state; under-take,

.v.; under-tone, -value, -wood (Ben Jonson), -write, -writer.

UNDER\N, a certain period of the day. (E.) The time denoted
by wndern differed at different periods. In Chaucer, C. T. 15228
(B 4412), it denotes some hour of the fore-noon, perhaps about 11
o'clock. ‘At uzdren and at midday,’ O. Eng. Miscellany, p. 33;
with reference to the parable of the Labourers in the Vineyard.
-¢Abuten undern deies’=about the undern-tide of the day, Ancren
_Riwle, p. 24; where perhaps an earlier hour is meant, about 9 A.M.
AS. undern; whence undern-tid, undern-tide, Matt. xx. 3; here it
-means the third honr, i.e. 9 A.M.+-Icel. uxdorn, mid-afternoon ; also
mid-forenoon; MHG. undern, OHG. untorn, a time of the day;
.Goth. uwndaurni-; only in the compound undaurni-mats, a morning-
meal, Luke, xiv. 12. |B. The true sense is merely ‘intervening
period,’ which accounts for its vagueness; this sense does not ap-


-pear in under, prep., but suggests a connexion with L, infer, between,


‘ UNION 679


Skt. antar, within. Cf. L. internus, inward. The word is by no
means obsolete, but appears in various forms in prov. E., such as
aandorn, aunder, orndorns, doundrins, dondinner, all in Ray, aunder
in Halliwell, &c. (Here Nares is wrong.)

UNDERSTAND, to comprehend. (E.) ME, vuaderstanden,
understanden, a strong verb; the pp. appears as understanden, Pricke
of Conscience, 1. 1681. The weak pp. understanded occurs in the
Prayer-book. AS. understandan, lit. to stand under or among, hence
to comprehend (cf. L. intel-ligere); /Elfred, tr. of Boethius, b. iv.
pr. 6, c. xxxiy. § 8.—AS. uader, under; and standan, to stand; see
Under and Stand. So also MSwed. wndersta, from under and
std, to stand; see Ihre. Another AS, word, with the same prefix
and the same sense, is undergitan (lit. to underget), John, viii. 27,
xii. 16. Der. understand-ing, spelt onderstondinge, Ayenbite of
Inwyt, p. 24, 1. 8.

UNDERTAKE, to take upon oneself, attempt. (Hybrid; E.
and Scand.) ME. undertaken, strong verb; pt. t. vudertok, see Have-
lok, 377. It first appears in the Ormulum, 1]. 10314. The latter
part of the word is of Scand. origin; see Under and Take.
B. The word is a sort of translation of (and was suggested by) the AS.
underniman, to understand, receive, Matt. xix. 12, and AS, underfon,
to receive, Matt. x. 40, John, xviii. 3. Neither of these words have
precisely the same sense, but both ziman and fon have the sense of E.
take (Icel. taka), Der. underiak-ing, Haml. ii. 1. 1043 undertak-er,
orig. one who takes a business in hand, Oth. iv. 1. 224, Tw. Nt.
iil. 4. 349.

UNDULATE, to wave, move in waves. (L.) In Thomson,
Summer, 982. Phillips, ed. 1706, has undulate only as a pp.
Blount, ed. 1674, gives undulated and undulation. L. undulatus, un-
dulated, wavy.—L. *undula, a little wave; not used, but a regular
dimin. of umda, a wave, properly ‘ water.’ B. Unda is a nasalised
form, like OPruss, unds, water, allied to Gk. vSwp, water, and to E.
water, Cf. Skt. udan, water, und, to wet; Lithuan. wandiz, water ;
Russ. voda, water.—=4/WED, to wet; see Water. Brugmann,
i. §§ 102, 594. Der. undulat-ion (Phillips); undulat-or-y. Also

(from unda) ab-ound, ab-und-ant, in-und-ate, red-ound, red-und-ant,
super-ab-ound, surr-ound.

UNEATH, scarcely, with difficulty. (E.) Obsolete; in Spenser,
F. Q. i. 9. 38; misused, with the sense ‘almost,’ id. i.12. 4. ME.
vnefe, Gawain and the Grene Knight, 134. AS. wnéade, with diffi-
culty, Gen. xxvii. 30; adv. from adj. unéade, difficult, Grein, ii. 620.
— AS. wn-, not; and éade, easy, smooth, common also in the ady.
form éade, easily, Grein, i. 254; we also find éde, Vde, easy, id. i. 230,
ii. 767.4-OSax. 007, easy. Some further compare it with the OHG.
odi, desert, empty, G. ode, deserted, desolate; Icel. audr, empty ;
Goth, auths, authis, desert, waste. But it is probable that these
words, though similar in form, are of independent origin.

UNGAINLY, awkward. (Hybrid; E. and Scand.) ME. un-
geinliche, used as an adv., awkwardly, horribly, St. Marharete, ed.
Cockayne, p. 9, 1. 14. Formed by adding -Jliche (-ly) to the adj.
ungein, inconvenient, spelt ungayne in Le Bone Florence, 1. 1421, in
Ritson, Met. Romances, iii. 60.— AS. un-, not, see Un- (1); and
Icel. gegn, ready, serviceable, convenient, allied to gegna, to meet,
to suit, gegn, against, and E. again; see Again. Cf. Icel. geiguiligr,
meet; dgegn (ungain), ungainly, ungentle. Der. ungainli-ness.
@ We also find AS. gegne in a gloss:, ‘Compendiose, breuiter,

egne;’ Voc. 207.17. Perhaps the word is of native origin..

UNGUENT, ointment. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —L.
unguentum, ointment.—L. unguent-, stem of pres. part. of unguere,
ungere, to anoint.+Skt. a7j, to anoint, smear. Brugmann, i. § 398.
Der. (from ungere, pp. unctus) unct-ion, q.v.; also oint-ment,
an-oint,

UNICORN, a fabulous animal with one horn. (F.—L.) ME.
unicorne, Ancren Riwle, p. 120, l. 9.—AF. wnicorne, Psalm xxi. 22 ;
F. unicorne, ‘an unicom;’ Cot.=—L. inicornem, acc. of inicornis,
adj., one-horned.—L. ani-, for ino-, decl. stem of dnus, one;
and corn-u, a horn, cognate with E. horn. See Unity and Horn.

UNIFORM, consistent, having throughout the same form or
character. (F.—L.) Spelt wniforme in Minsheu, ed. 1627; wniform
in Cotgrave.—F. uniforme, ‘uniform,’ Cot.—L. aniformem, acc. of
uniformis, having one form.=L. aini-, for ano-, decl. stem of anus,
one; and form-a,a form; see Unity and Form. Der. uniform,
sb., a like dress for persons who belong to the same body; uniform-
ly; uniform-i-ty, from F. uniformité, ‘uniformity,’ Cot., from L, ace.
uniformitatem,

UNILITERAL, consisting of one letter. (L.) The only such
words in E, are a, 7, and O. Coined from L. tni-, for uno-, decl.
stem of dinus, one; and Jitter-a, a letter; with suffix -al; cf. bi-literal,
tri-literal,

UNION (1), concord, harmony, confederation in one. (F.—L.)
Spelt vzyon, Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol, ii. c. 233 (R.).=—F. union,


680 UNION


“an union;’ Cot.=L. dniduem, acc. of unio, oneness. L. tin-us, one,
cognate with E. One, q.v. And see Unity.

UNION (2), a large pearl. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, v. 2. 283.—
AF. union; Bestiary, 1482. Really the same word as the above;
the L. aio means (1) oneness, (2) a single pearl of a large size.
Onion is also the same word. See above ; andsee Onion. Doublet,
onion.

UNIQUE, single, without a like. (F.—L.) Modern; added
by Todd to Johnson.—F. unique, ‘single,’ Cot.=L. dnicum, acc. of
unicus, single. = L. tini-, for uno-, decl. stem of tinus, one; with suffix
-~cus (Idg. -ko-). See Unity.

UNISON, concord, harmony. (F.—L.) ‘In concordes, dis-
cordes, notes and cliffes in tunes of wnisonne ;? Gascoigne, Grene
Knight’s Farewell to Fansie, st. 7; Works, i. 413. Spelt vuysoune,
York Plays, p. 209, 1. 262.—MF. unisson, ‘an unison;’ Cot. [The
spelling with ss is remarkable, as it is not etymological. ]—L. anisonum,
acc. of dinisonus, having the same sound as something else. —L. ani-,
for ino-, decl. stem of tinus, one; and sozus, asound. See Unity
and Sound (3). Der. umison-ous ; wni-son-ant (from sonant-, stem
of pres. part. of sondre, to sound); uni-son-ance.

UNIT, a single thing, person, or number. (F.—L.) Not de-
rived from L. aitum, which would mean ‘ united,’ but a purely E.
formation, made by dropping the final letter of wnit-y. ‘ Unit, Unite,
or Unity, in arithmetic, the first significant figure or number I; in
Notation, if a number consist of 4 or 5 places, that which is outer-
most towards the right hand is called the Place of Unites ;’ Phillips,
ed. 1706. ‘The number 1 is still called unity. See Unity.

UNITE, to make one, join. (L.) ‘I vnyte, I bringe diverse
thynges togyther in one;’ Palsgrave.—L. dnit-us, pp. of anire, to
unite. = L. an-us, one; see Unity.

UNITY, oneness, union in one, concord. (F.—L.) ME. vuitee,
unite, unite, Gower, C. A. iii. 181 (bk. vii. 2836); P. Plowman, C. vi.
Io.—=AF. unité, Stat. Realm, i. 186 (1322); F. wnité, ‘an unity ;’
Cot.—L. tnitatem, acc. of tinitas, oneness. L. tini-, for tino-, decl.
stem of uius, one; with suffix -tas. The L. aaus is cognate with E.
One, q.v. Der. unit-ari-an, a coined word, added by Todd to
Johnson ; hence unit-ari-an-ism. Doublet, unit,q.v. We also have
(from L. un-us) un-ite, un-ion, uni-que, uni-son, uni-vers-al, uni-corn,
uni-form, uni-literal, uni-vocal,; also un-animous, dis-un-ite, dis-un-ion,
re-un-ite, re-un-ion, tri-une, onion. Also null, q.v.; an-nul, q.v.

UNIVERSAL, comprehending the whole, extending to the
whole. (F.—L.) ME. vaiuersal ; spelt universal, Gower, C. A. iii. 91 ;
(bk. vii. 215).—F. universel (sometimes universal in the 14th century),
“vniversall,’ Cot.—L. dniuersdlis, belonging to the whole.—L.
ainiuersum, the whole; neut. of tiniuersus, turned into one, combined
into a whole.=L. dni-, for tino-, decl. stem of inus, one; and wersus,
pp. of uertere, to turn; see Unity and Verse. Der. wniversal-ly,
universal-i-ty, wniversal-ism. Also (from F. univers<L. tuiniuersum)
universe, Henry V, iv. chor. 3; also univers-i-ty, a school for universal
knowledge, ME. vniuersite, used in the sense of ‘ world’ in Wyclif,
James, iii.6, AF. université, Yearbooks of Edw. I, 1304-5, p. 429,
from F. université, ‘ university, also an university,’ Cot., from L. acc.
ainiuersitatem.

UNIVOCAL, having one voice, having but one meaning. (L.)
Now little used; it is the antithesis of egui-vocal, i.e. having a
variable meaning. In Bp. Taylor, Rule of Conscience, b. ii. c. 3 (R.).
Cf. F. univogue, ‘of one onely sence ;’ Cot. = L. tinizoc-us, univocal ;
with suffix -alis, = L. uni-, for tino-, decl. stem of timus, one; and zoc-,
allied to udx, voice, sound. See Unity and Voice.

UNKEMPT, not combed. (E.) In Spenser, F. Q. ili. 10, 29;
and Shep. Kal. November, 51; in both places in the metaphorical
sense of rough or rude. <A contracted form of wnxkembed. From un-,
not; and ME. kembed, kempt, combed, Chaucer, C. T. 2145 (A 2143).
Kembed is the pp. of kemben, to comb, P. Plowman, B, x. 18.— AS.
cemban, to comb; Atlfric’s Grammar, ed. Zupitza, p. 168, 1. 6;
formed (by vowel-change of a to e) from AS. camb, a comb; see
Comb.

UNLESS, if not, except. (E.) Formerly written ozless, onlesse,
with o; Horne Tooke remarks: ‘I believe that William Tyndall ..
was one of the first who wrote this word with a ~;’ and he cites:
‘The scripture was geven, that we may applye the medicine of the
scripture, every man to his own sores, unlesse then we entend to be
idle disputers ; ’ Tyndal, Prol. to the 5 books of Moses. Horne Tooke
gives 16 quotations with the spellings onles and onlesse; the earliest
appears to be: ‘It was not possible for them to make whole Cristes
cote without seme, ovlesse certeyn grete men were brought out of the
way ;’ Trial of Sir John Oldcastle, an. 1413. We may also note:
‘That, lesse than synne the soner swage, God wy]l be vengyd,’ &c. ;
Coventry Myst. p. 40. Also: ‘ Charitie is not perfect onles that it be
burninge,’ T. Lupset, Treatise of Charitie, p.8. ‘ Onles that ye tary
ouer longe ;’ Malory,Morte Arthur, bk. x.c. 20. [But Horne Tooke’s


UPAS


own explanation of the phrase is utterly wrong.] Palsgrave, in his
list of conjunctions, gives onlesse and onlesse that. B. Thus the
full phrase was ox lesse that; but that was soon dropped. Here on is the
preposition ; and desse is mod. E. Jess; see On and Less. The sense
is ‘in less than,’ or ‘on a less supposition.’ Thus, if charity be
(fully) burning, it is perfect; ix a less case, it is imperfect. The use
of on in the sense of iz is extremely common in ME., as in on liue=
in life (see Alive), on sleep=in sleep (see Asleep) ; and see numer-
ous examples in Stratmann. On Jess or in less is similar to at least, at
most. @ Matzner, and Mahn (in Webster, 1864) wrongly explain un-
in unless as a negative prefix ; this is contrary to all the evidence, and
makes nonsense of the phrase. Morris (Hist. Outlines of Eng.
Accidence, p. 332) rightly gives on Jesse as the orig. form, but does
not explain it.

UNRULY, disregarding restraint. (Hybrid; E. and F.—L, ; with
E. suffix.) In James, iii. 8 (A.V.), where Wyclif has unpesible; here
the E. version translates the Gk. dwardoxeroyv, i.e. that cannot be
tuled. Thus wnruly is for unrule-ly ; it doesnot seem to be a very old
word, though going back to 1483; the Cathol. Anglicum has:
‘ Reuly, tranquillus ;’ and ‘ wnrewely, inquietus ;’ also ‘ reule, regula;
reule, regulare. Cf. ‘Ye. . vnrulilye haue ruled;’ Sir J. Cheke,
Hurt of Sedition (R.) Cotgrave translates F. moderé by ‘ moderate,
quiet, ruly, temperate, orderly.” From Un- and Rule; with suffix
-ly. @ It is remarkable that the ME. wnro, unrest, might have
produced a somewhat similar adj., viz. unroly, unrouly, restless.
[But Stratmann gives no example of the word, and the vowel-sound
does not accord; so that any idea of such a connexion may be re-
jected. This ME. waro is from AS. wn-, not, and row, rest (Grein,
li. 384), cognate with Icel. rd, G. ruhe, rest.] We must also note
that unruled occurs as equivalent to wnruly, as in ‘theyse varulyd
company,’ Fabyan, Chron. an. 1380-1. Der. unrili-ly, -ness.

UNTIO, till, to. (E. and Scand.) ME. until, P. Plowman, B. prol.
227; Pricke of Conscience,’555 3; spelt onéil, Havelok, 761. A substi-
tuted form of unto,due to the use of the Northern E. til for to; the two
latter words being équivalent in sense. ME. zil (E. ill) is of Scand.
origin, as distinguished from zo (=AS. i0). See Till (2), and see
further under Unto.

UNTO, even to, to. (E.) Not found in AS. ME. unto,
Chaucer, C. T. 490 (A 488) ; earlier in Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Lang-
toft, p. 1, 1.7. It stands for *und-to; where ¢o is the usual E. prep.
(AS. 76), and undis the OFries. und (also ont), unto, OSax. und, unto
(whence OSax. unt, shortened from uzd-te, unto, where 4e= AS. £0, as
well as untd, unto, shortened from und-id), *‘ Forun folk untd =folk
went unto him; Heliand, 2814. So also Goth. und, unto, until, as
far as, up to; ‘und Bethlahaim’=unto Bethlehem, Luke, ii. 15 ;
whence unté (=und zé), until. [Itis remarkable that a closely related
word is common in AS. in a different form, viz. 6d, for an older
*anth. | B. The Goth. und is the weak-grade form answering to
the Goth. and-, prefix, cognate with Gk. dyzi, so that the un- in un-to
is allied to the verbal prefix un-; see Un- (2). And see Until,

UP, towards a higher place, aloft. (E.) ME. vp, up; common.
AS. up, upp, up, adv. ; Grein, ii. 630.4-Du. op; Icel. upp; Dan. op;
Swed. upp; Goth. inp; OHG. af. B. AS. upp<the Teut. type


*upp-, from Idg. *up-n- ; and thus allied to Teut. *u/,as seen in Goth. |


uf, under, wf-ar, over (comparative form), and in E. over; further
allied to Gk. im6, under, Skt. wpa, near, on, under. See the account
under Over. Der. upp-er, ME. upper, King Alisaunder, 5691 ;
Chaucer uses over in the same sense, as in ouer lippe = upper lip, C. T.
133. Hence upper-most (not an old form), as in ‘euen vpon the
uppermoste pinnacle of the temple,’ Udall, On St. Luke, iv. 9; this is
not a correct form, but made on the model of Aftermost, q.v.
Also up-most, Jul. Cees. ii. 1. 24, which appears to be simply a con-
traction for uppermost, though really a better form. And see Up-
below, and Upon; also Open.

UP, prefix. (E.) The same word as the above, The chief words
in which it occurs are: up-bear, up-bind, up-braid, g.v.3; up-heave,
Shak. Venus, 482; up-hill; up-hoard, Hamlet, i. 1. 136; up-hold, up-
holsterer, g. V.; up-land, up-land-ish= ME. vplondysche in Prompt.
Parv. ; up-lift, Temp. iii. 3. 68; up-right, AS. upriht, uppriht, Grein,
ii. 6325 up-ris-ing, L. L. L. iv. 1. 2, with which cf. ME. uprysynge,
resurrection, Rob. of Glouc. p. 379, 1. 77923; up-roar, q.vV.; up-root,
Dryden, St. Cecilia’s Day, 49; up-set=set up, Gower, C. A. i. 53
(bk. i. 339), also to overset, id. iii, 283 (bk. viii. 244) ; up-shot, Ham-
let, v. 2. 395 3 up-side ; up-side-down, q.v.3 up-start, g.v.; up-ward,
AS. upweard, Grein, ii. 6323; up-ward-s, AS. upweardes, adv., ibid.

UPAS, the poison-tree of Java. (Malay.) Not in Todd’s John-
son; the deadly effects of the tree have been grossly exaggerated. —
Malay ipas, ‘a milky juice extracted from certain vegetables,
operating, when mixed with the blood, as a most deadly poison,
concerning the effects of which many exaggerated stories have been
related; seé Hist. of Sumatra, ed. 3, p. 110. Pithn uipas, the poison-


UPBRAID


tree, arbor toxicaria Macassariensis ;” Marsden, Malay Dict. p. 24.
The Malay piihun or pithn means ‘tree ;’ id. p. 239. Now com-
monly pronounced pdhun ipoh, ‘ upas tree.’

UPBRAID, to reproach. (E.) ME. upbreiden, to upbraid; we
also find upbreid, sb., a reproach. ‘The deuyls ranne to me with
grete scornes and vpbraydys;’ and again, ‘wykyd angelles of the
deuylle vpbreydyn me;’ Monk of Evesham, c. 27; ed. Arber, p. 67.
Up-breiding, sb., a reproach, occurs in Layamon, 19117 ; also upbreid,
upbreid, sb., id. 26036. AS. up-bregdan; found in the equivalent
form up-gebrédan, to upbraid, in Wulfstan’s Homilies, ed. Napier,
p- 249.—AS. upp, up; and bregdan, brédan, to braid, weave, also to
lay hold of, pull, draw, used (like Icel. bregda) in a variety of senses ;
so that up-braid is simply compounded of Up and Braid (1), q. v.
The orig. sense of upbraid was prob. to lay hands on, lay hold of,
hence to attack, lay to one’scharge. Cf. ‘ Bregded sona féond be am
feaxe’=he shall soon seize the fiend by the hair, Salomon and
Saturn, ed. Grein, 99; and see bregdan in Grein, i. 138. Cf. Dan.
bebreide, to upbraid, which only differsin the prefix (Dan. be- =E. be-).
Der. upbraid-ing, sb., as above.

UPHOLSTERER, one who supplies beds and furniture. (E.)
Formerly called an upholder. An equivalent form was upholdster,
used by Caxton (see Prompt. Parv., p. 512, note 2), with suffix -ster
for -er; see -ster. Hence, by a needless addition’ of -er (as in
poult-er-er), was made wupholdster-er, whence the corrupt form up-
holsterer, by loss of d after 1. ‘ Upholdster or upholsterer, a trades-
man that deals in all sorts of chamber-furniture ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.
Already spelt upholstar in Palsgrave. ME. vpholder, a broker, a
tradesman, P. Plowman, B. y. 325; C. xiii. 278. At the latter refer-
ence we read: ‘ Vpholderes on the hul shullen haue hit to selle’ =
upholders on the hill [Cornhill] shall haveit tosell. It is clear from
this and from my note to P. Plowman, C. vii. 377, that the upholder
was a broker or auctioneer ; so that the name may have arisen from
his holding up wares for inspection while trying to sell them. ‘The
derivation is from Up and Hold. Cf. ‘ Vpholdere, pat sellythe smal
thyngys;’ Prompt. Parv. Der. upholster-y, a coined word, from the
form upholster.

UPON, on, on the top of. (E.) ME. upon, upon, prep., Chaucer,
C. T. 111. AS. uppon, upon, Gen. xxii. 2; also uppan, Matt. xxi.
44.—AS. upp, up, above, adv. ; and on, an, on. See Up and On.
+Icel. up a, upp Gd, upon; where upp=AS. upp, and @ (for an) = AS.
on; Swed. pa, upon, clearly a shortened form of upp 4, where d=E.
on; Dan. paa, upon.

UPROAR, a tumult, clamour, disturbance. (Du.) In Acts, xvii.
5, Xix, 40, xx. I, xxi. 31, 38; in Shak. Lucrece, 427, we have: ‘his
eye .. . Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins ;’ where there is no
notion of zoise, but only of excitement or disturbance. ‘To haue all
the worlde in an vprore, and vnquieted with warres;’ Udall, on
St. Mark, preface, fol. vi, 1. 9. Spelt wprore in Levins. It is a cor-
rupt form, due to confusion with E. roar, with which it has no real
connexion; it is not an E. word at all, but borrowed from Dutch.
— Du. oproer, ‘ uprore, tumult, commotion, mutiny, or sedition ; oproer
maken, to make an vprore; ofroerigh, seditious, or tumultuous; ’
Hexham.—Du. of, up; and roeren, to stir, move, touch; so that
uproer =a stirring up, commotion, excitement. [Formerly also spelt
rueren (Hexham) ; the Du. oe is pronounced as E. 00; Du. boer=E.
boor. |4-Swed. uppror, revolt, sedition ; allied to upp, up, and réra, to
stir; Dan. oprér, revolt ; oprore, to stir up, from of, up, and rére, to
stir; G. aufrukr, tumult; aufriikren, to stir up, from G. auf, up, and
rihren, to stir. B. The verbappearsas Du. roeren, Swed. réra, Dan.
rore, Icel. hrera, G. ruhren, AS. hréran, OSax. hrorian, to stir; and is
the same word as rear- or rere-in E. rearmouse, reremouse, a bat; see
Reremouse. y. The AS. hréran, to stir, agitate, is from hrar,
motion, allied to hrér, adj., active (with the usual change from 6 to
2); the Swed. uppror preserves the orig. unmodified 6, Perhaps
allied to Skt. gra, to boil. See Crater. Der. uproar-i-ous, an
ill-coined word; uproar-i-ous-ly, -ness,

UPSIDE-DOWN, topsyturvy. (E.) ‘Turn’d upside-down to
me ;’ Beaum. and Fletcher, Wit at Several Weapons, v. 1 (Gregory).
‘I torne upsyde downe;’ Palsgrave, p. 760. From up, side, and
down, But it is remarkable that this expression took the place of
ME. vp so doun, once a common phrase, as in Wyclif, Matt. xxi.12,
Luke xv. 8; Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. ii. pr. 5.1. 91, b. v. pr. 3.
1. 60; this is composed of up, so, and down, where so has (as often)
the force of as, or as it were, i.e. up as it were down.

UPSTART, one who has suddenly started up from low life to
wealth or honour. (E.) In Shak. 1 Hen, VI, v. 7. 87. A sb. coined
from the verb upstart, to start up; the pt. t. upstart is in Spenser,
F. Q.i. 1.16. From Up and Start; see note to Start, § y.
‘UPWARD, UPWARDS; see Up and -ward, suffix.
“URBANE, pertaining to a city, refined, courteous, (L.) Spelt
vrbane in Levins, ed. 1570.—L, urbdnus, belonging to a city.—L.


- USE


urb-s, a city. Der. urban, belonging toa city (which is only another
spelling of the same word); sub-urban, q.v. And see below.

URBANITY, courteousness. (F.—L.) Spelt vrbanitie in
Levins, ed. 1570.— 1}. urbanité, ‘ urbanity, civility ;? Cot. —L. urbani-
tatem, acc, of urbdnitas, city-manners, refinement.—L. urbdni-, from
urbanus, urbane; with suffix -tds; see Urbane.

URCHIN, a hedgehog; a goblin, imp, a'small child. (North F.
—L.) In Shak. it means (1) a hedgehog, Temp, i. 2. 326, Titus, ii.
3- 101; (2) a goblin, Merry Wives, iv. 4. 49. Spelt urchone in
Palsgrave. ME. urchon, urchone, Prompt. Parv., see the note; also
spelt irchon, Early E, Psalter, Ps. ciii. 18 (1. 42); see Specimens of
English, ed. Morris and Skeat (Glossary),—ONorth F. herichun,
Marie (Fable 62); cf. Picard irechon; Walloon xurechon, irchon
(Sigart) ; Rouchi wrchon (Hécart); Norm, dial. kérichon; also OF.
iregon, a hedgehog; also spelt herigon, erigon (Burguy); mod. F,
hérisson. Formed, with dimin. suffix -on (as if from a L. acc. *érici-
dnem), from L, éricius, a hedgehog. B. Ericius is a lengthened
form from ér (gen. éris), a hedgehog; for *hér, and cognate with
Gk. xnp, a hedgehog. The Gk. y7p is allied to xdp-ag, a pointed
stake, xap-dooeuw, to scratch (see Character); and further, to L.
horrére, to be bristly, hirsiitus, bristly, Skt. kysk, to bristle. Named
from its sharp prickles.

URE, practice, use. (F.—L.) Obsolete, except in the derivative
in-ure; and cf. man-ure. The real sense is work, practice; and, as
it often has the sense of use, Richardson and others confuse it with
use or usage ; but it has no connexion with those words. It was once
a common word; see examples in Nares. ‘To put in vre, in usum
trahere;’ Levins, 193.17. ‘Ivre one, I accustume hym to a thyng;’
Palsgrave. ME. ure; ‘ Moche like thyng I haue had in vre;’ Reme-
die of Loue, st. 23, pr. in Chaucer’s Works, ed. 1561, fol. 323. [Dis-
tinct from ME. vre = good luck. | — OF. eure, wevre, ovre, work, action,
operation. L. opera, work. See further under Inure, Manure,
and Operate. Doublet, opera.

URGE, to press earnestly, drive, provoke. (L.) Levins, ed. 1570,
has both urge and urgent.—L. urgére, to urge, drive. For
*uurg-ére, where uurg- is the weak grade of *uerg-. Allied to
Gk. cipyew (for *éFepyew), to repress, constrain, Lithuan. werz-iu,
I press tight, Goth. wrikan, to persecute. = 4/WERG, to compel; see
Wreak. Brugmann,i.§ 350. Der. urg-ent, from L. urgent-, stem
of pres. part. of urgére; urgent-ly, urgenc-y.

URIM, lit. lights. (Heb.) Only in the phr. urim and thummim ;
see Thummim, The lit. sense is ‘lights,’ though the word may
be used in the sing. sense ‘ light.’ = Heb. arim, lights, pl. of ar, light.
= Heb. root ar, to shine.

URINE, the water separated by the kidneys from the blood.
(F.—L.) In Macb. ii. 3. 32; and in Chaucer, C. T. 5703 (D 121).
=F. urine, ‘urine;’ Cot,—L. aria, urine ; where -ina is a suffix.
Gk. otdpov, urine ; Skt. vari, water; var, water. Allied to Icel. ar,
drizzling rain; ver, the sea; AS. wer, the sea. B. Orig. sense
‘water.’ Der. urin-al, ME. urinal, Chaucer, C. T. 12239 (C 305),
Layamon, 17724, from F. urinal (Cot.); urin-ar-y, from F. urinaire
(Cot.).

URN, a vase for ashes of the dead. (F.—L.) ME. urne, urne,
Chaucer, Troil. v. 311.—F. wrne, ‘a narrow necked pot, or pitcher
of earth ;’ Cot.—L. urva, an urn. For *urc-na; and allied to L.
urc-eus, a pitcher. Brugmann, i. § 756.

URSINE, of or belonging to a bear. (L.) Modern; not in
Todd’s Johnson. —L. ursinus, bear-like.—L. ursus, a bear. Allied
to Gk. dpxros, a bear; W. arth, Skt. rksha-s, a bear; see Arctic.
Brugmann, i. § 598.

US, the objective case of we. (E.) ME. vs, ous, us; used both as
ace, and dat. AS. ds, dat. 3 ds, wsic, ussic, acc. pl., us (Grein).4-Du.
ons; Icel. oss, dat. and acc. pl.; Swed. oss; Dan. os; G. uns; Goth.
uns, unsis, dat. and acc. pl. . All from a Teut. base *uns-.
Cf. L. nds, Skt. nas; also Gk. juds, Skt. asman, us. Brugmann, i.
§ 437 (2)3 ii. § 436.

USH (1), sb., employment, custom. (F.—L.) ME. vse, use ; pro-
perly us, as in Ancren Riwle, p. 16, 1. 7; the word being mono-
syllabic. AF. us (Havelok, 860), OF. (and F.) ws, use, usage
(Burguy); spelt uz in Cotgrave.—L. disum, acc. of asus, use; cf.
usus, pp. of ati, to use. Der. use, vb., ME. vsen, usen, Layamon,
24293, from F. user, to use, from Late L, asare, to use, for *tsari,
frequentative form of wiz, to use, Also us-able, from the verb Zo use ;
us-age, ME. vsage, usage, King Alisaunder, 1, 1286, from AF. usage
(Stat. Realm, i. 100), F. usage, ‘usage,’ Cot. Also useful, use-ful-ly,
use-ful-ness ; use-less, use-less-ly, use-less-ness ; all from the sb. use.
Also us-u-al, Hamlet, ii. 1, 22, from L. asudlis, from iisu-, decl. stem
of disus ; us-u-al-ly. And see usurp, usury, utensil, utility. Also ab-use,
dis-use, mis-use, ill-use, per-use. ,

USE (2), profit, benefit. (F.—L.) When zse is employed, in
legal documents, in the special sense of ‘ benefit,’ it is a modernised


681


682 USHER


spelling of the Anglo-F. form of the L. opus, employment, need.
Cf. Anglo-F. oes, use, profit, Annals of Burton, pp. 474, 482, A.D.
1258; oeps, Liber Custumarum, p. 202; Statutes of the Realm,
i. 144, A.D. 1299; woes, service, Vie de St. Auban, 1554. A good
example is the following : ‘ Que il feist a sun oes guarder,’ which he
caused to be kept for his own wse; Roman de Rou, 2336. See oes,
zes, eus, obs, in Bartsch.

USHER, a door-keeper, one who introduced strangers. (F.—L.)
ME. vuschere ; ‘ Vschere, Hostiarius’ [i.e. ostiarius]; Prompt. Parv.
‘That doré can non huissher schette’ [shut]; Gower, C. A. i. 231
(bk. ii, 2130). AF. usser, Gaimar, 5995; OF. wssier, uissier
(Burguy) ; also huissier, ‘an usher, or door-keeper of a court, or of
a chamber in court ;’ Cot.=—L. ostiadrium, acc. of ostidrius, belonging
to a door, or (as sb.) a door-keeper. — L. ostium, a door, an entrance ;
extended from és, a mouth; see Oral. Cf, OPruss. azsto, a mouth.
Der, usher, verb, L. L. L. v. 2. 3285 usher-ship.

USQUEBAUGH, whiskey. (Irish.) In Ben Jonson, The Irish
Masque ; Beaum. and Fletcher, Scornful Lady, ii. 3 (Savil) ; Ford,
Perkin Warbeck, iii. 3.—Irish uwisge beatha, usquebaugh, whiskey,
lit. ‘water of life;’ cf. L. aqua wite, ¥. eau-de-vie.—Irish uisge,
water, whiskey (see Whiskey); and beatha, life, Olrish bethu,
allied to’Gk. Bios, L. wita, life, and E. quick (see Quick). Brugmann,
i. §§ 85, 368.

USURP, to seize to one’s own use, take possession of forcibly.
(F.—L.) Spelt wsurpe in Palsgrave; ME. usurpen, Chaucer,
Astrolabe, prol. 42.—F. usurter, ‘to usurpe,’ Cot.—L. isurpare, to
employ, acquire; and, in a bad sense, to assume, usurp. B. Bréal
suggests a formation from a sb, *tsu-rapus (*isu-ripus?), one who
seizes for his own use. Cf. L. surpere for surripere. Der. usurp-er;
usurp-at-ion, from F. usurpation, ‘a usurpation,’ Cot., from L. acc.
usur pationem.

USURY, large interest for the use of money. (F.—L.) ‘Userer,
usurier; Usery, usure;’ Palsgrave. ME. vsure, of which vsury was
another form. ‘Ocur, or vsure of gowle, Usura;’ Prompt. Parv.
p- 362; vsurye, id. p. 513. Spelt vsurie, P. Plowman, B. v. 240;
userie, id. C. vii. 239. Here vsurie seems to. be a by-form of vsure.
=F. usure, ‘the occupation of a thing, usury ;’ Cot.—L. dasiira, use,
enjoyment ; also, interest, usury.—L. as-wm, supine of azz, to use;
see Use. Der. usur-er, ME. vsurere, Prompt. Parv., F. usurier,
from L. istrarius.

UT, the first note of the musical scale. (L.) In Shak. L. L. L. iv.
2.102. Cf. F. and L. wt, the same. See Solfa.

UTAS, the octave of a feast. (F.—L.) Also utis, 2 Hen. IV, ii.
4. 22; where it means ‘ the time between a festival and the eighth
day after it, merriment ;’ Schmidt. ‘ Ufas of a feest, octaues ;’ Pals-
grave. ME. was, Trevisa, vii. 259. Uvtas is shortened from AF.
utaves, utavs, Yearbooks of Edw. I., 1302-3, p. 407; 1292-3, p. 753
corresponding to OF. oitauves (Burguy), oitieves (Roquefort), the
pl. of oitawve, octave, or eighth (day). Uvzas occurs in the statute
concerning General Days in the Bench, 51 Hen. III, i.e. a.p.
1266-7 (Minsheu). ‘ El dyemanche des oitieves de la Resurrection’ =
on the Sunday of the octaves of the resurrection; Miracles de S.
Louis, c. 39 (Roquefort). The OF. oitauve is from the L. octava
(diés), eighth day; cf. OF. ott, oyt, uit (mod. F. huit), from L. octo,
eight. ‘Thus wéas is, as it were, a pl. of octave; see Octave.

UTENSIL, an instrument or vessel in common use. (F.—L.)
‘All myn hostilmentis, vtensiles,’ &c.; Bury Wills, ed. Tymms, p. 94;
in a will dated 1504. ‘Alle the vtensyl of myn hows;’ Early E.
Wills, ed. Furnivall, p. 18 (1411).—MF, uensile,. ‘an utensile;’
Cot.—L. atensilis, adj., fit for use; whence wensilia, neut. pl.,
utensils. B. L. wtensilis is for *utent-tilis, formed with suffix -tilis
(as in fer-tilis, fic-tilis) from dtent-, stem of pres. part. of ati, to use;
see Use. The mod. F, is ustensile (corruptly).

UTERINE, born of the same mother by a different father. (F.—
L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. ME. uterynes, pl. Trevisa, v. 29.
= MF. wterin, ‘of the womb, born of one mother or damme;’ Cot.
=—L. uterinus, born of the same mother.=L, uterus, the womb. Cf.
Gk. torépa, the womb; Skt. udara-, belly. Brugmann, i. § 706.

UTILISE, to put to good use. (F.—L.) Not in Todd’s Johnson;
quite modern.—F. utiliser, to utilise; a modern word (Littré),
Coined, with suffix -iser (<L. -izdre=Gk. -Gew), from L. adil-is,
useful; see Utility.

UTILITY, usefulness. (F.—L.) ME. viilité, Chaucer, On
the Astrolabe, pt. ii. § 26. 1. 16.—F. wtilité, ‘utility;’ Cot.=L.
uitilitatem, acc, of wtilitas, usefulness. —L. wtili-, decl. stem of dtilis,
useful ; with suffix -as.—L. ati, touse; see Use. Der. wtilit-ar-i-an,
a modern coined word.

UTMOST, outmost, most distant, extreme. (E.) ME. utemest,
orig. trisyllabic; spelt wtemeste in Layamon, 11023; oztemeste in
Rich. Coer de Lion, 2931; utmeste, Trevisa, vi. 359. From AS.


VACILLATION


[We also find the mutated forms Ytemest, ytmest, Grein, ii. 777.].
This word is therefore a doublet of outmost; see Out. On the
double suffix, see Aftermost; utmest became utmost by confusion
with most. We also find utt-er-most; see Utter (1).

UTOPIAN, imaginary, chimerical. (Gk.) An adj. due to Sir
T. More’s description of Utopia, an imaginary island situate nowhere,
as the name implies. Coined (by Sir T. More, a.D. 1516) from Gk,
ov, not; and rém-os, a place; see Topic.

UTTER (1), outer, further out. (E.) ME. viter, utter; whence
was formed a superlative vtter-est, used in the def. form vttereste by
Chaucer, C. T. 8663 (E 787). AS. uttera (which occurs as well as
itera), compar. adj, formed from #i#,-adv., out; see Out. Thus.
utter is a doublet of outer. Der. utter-ly; utter-most (see Utmost).
And see wtter (2). '

UTTER (2), to put forth, send out, circulate. (E.; perhaps con-
fused with F.—L.) ME. uttren, attributed to Chaucer, C. T.
16302, in Thynne’s edition (1532), but every one of the MSS. in the
Six-text edition has outen, Group G, 1. 8343 so also the Harl. MS.
Hence there is really no authority for supposing that Chaucer used
the word. The verb outex, which he really uses, is to put ont, to.
‘out with,’ as we say; answering to AS. atian, vb., to put out,
expel; from a, out; see Out. B. The verb outre, to utter,
speak, occurs frequently in the Romance of Partenay, ll. 1024, 1437,.
1563, 2816, 3156, &c. It is possible that the r was suggested by
OF. outrer, to go beyond, surpass, finish (Godefroy); cf. F.
outre, beyond; see Utterance (2). And this last partly owed
its form to Utter (1). Cf. AS. utian, to put out, eject; Laws of
the Northumb, Priests, § 22, in Thorpe’s Ancient Laws, ii. 294.
Der. utter-able ; utter-ance, Hamlet, iii. 2. 378.

UTTERANCES (1), an uttering; see Utter (2); as above.

UTTHERANCKE (2), extremity. (F.—L.) Only in the phrases.
to the utterance, Macb. ili. I. 723 at utterance, Cymb. ill. I. 73.
ME. oultrance; in Lydgate, Siege of Troy, bk. i. ch. 2; fol. b 4,
back, col. 1: ‘Unto oultrance with these bulles to fyght.’=F.
outrance, MF. oultrance, ‘extremity;’ Cot. ‘Combatre a oultrance,
to fight it out, or to the uttermost;’ id.—F. outre (oultre in Cotgrave),
beyond; with suffix -ance.—L, ultra, beyond; see Outrage.

UVULA, the fleshy conical body suspended from the soft palate.
(L.) In Cotgrave, to translate F. wuule,—Late L. avula, dimin. of
uiua,a cluster, grape, also the uvula.4-Lith. #ga,a berry. Brugmann,
i. § 223(2).

UXORIOUS, excessively fond of a wife. (L.) In Ben Jonson,
Silent Woman, iv. 1 (Otter).—L. wxdrius, belonging to a wife; also,
fond of a wife.=L. uxdri-, decl. stem of uxor, a wife. Der. uxorious-


ly, -ness.


V. In Middle-English, v is commonly written «in the MSS., though
many editors needlessly falsify the spellings of the originals to suit a
supposed popular taste. Conversely, « sometimes appears as v, most
often at the beginnings.of words, especially in the words vs, vse, uf,
un-to, under, and vn- used as a prefix. The use of v for w, and con-
versely, is also found in early printed books, and occurs occasionally
down to rather a late date. Cotgrave ranges all F. words beginning
with v and u under the common symbol V. We may also note that
a very large proportion of the words which begin with V are of
French or Latin origin; only vane, vat, vinewed, vixen, are English.

VACATION, leisure, cessation from labour. (F.—L.) In Pals-
grave, spelt vacacion, ME. vacacioun, Chaucer, C. T., D 683.—F.
vacation, ‘a vacation, vacancy, leisure ;’ Cot. —L. wacdtionem, acc, of
uacatio, leisure ; cf. wacdtus, pp. of uacare, to be empty, to be free
from, to be unoccupied. See Vacuum. Der. vacant, in early use,
in Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 110, 1. 15, from F. vacant,
‘vacant,’ Cot., from the stem of the pres. part. of L. wacare ; hence
vacanc-y, Hamlet, iii. 4. 117; vacate, vb., a late word, from uacatus,

p. of wacdre. And see vac-uum,

VACCINATE, to inoculate with the cow-pox. (L.) ‘Of
modern formation, from the inoculation of human beings with the
variole vaccine, or cow-pox.... Dr. Jenner’s Znguiry was first pub-
lished in 1798 ;’ Richardson. Coined, as if from the pp. of *uaccinare,
to inoculate, from L. waccinus, belonging to cows.—L. wacca, a cow.
Cf. Skt. vagd, a cow. It prob. means ‘ the lowing animal ;’ cf. Skt.
vag, to cry, to howl, to low. Der. vaccinat-ion ; also vaccine, from L.
uaccinus,

VACILLATION, wavering, unsteadfastness. (F.—L.) ‘No
remainders of doubt, no vacilation;’ Bp. Hall, The Peace-maker,


tite-m-est, double superl. from it, out, also found as ie, adv. out. | § 15 (R.). And in Blount.—F. vacillation, ‘a reeling, staggering,


Zz


VACUUM


wagging;” Cot.=L. uacillitidnem, acc. of uacillatio, a reeling,
wavering ; cf. wacillatus, pp. of uacilliire, to sway to and fro, waver,
yacillate. Formed as if from an adj. *uacillus, from a base uac-. =
/WAQ, to bend, sway to one side; cf. Skt. vazk,to go tortuously,
to be crooked, vakra-, bent; AS. woh, crooked. Der. vacillate, from
L. pp. wacillatus ; alate word. Cf. woo.

‘VACUUM, an empty space. (L.) It was supposed that nature
abhorred a vacuum; see Cranmer’s Works, i. 250, 330 (Parker
Society).—L. uacuum, an empty space; neut. of uwacuus, empty.
Allied to L. uwacare, to be empty; see Vacation.+W. gwag,
empty. Der. vacu-i-ty, in Cotgrave, from F. vacuité, ‘ vacuity,’ Cot.,
from L. acc. wacuitdtem.

VADE, to wither. (Du.—F.—L.) In Shak. Pass. Pilgrim, 131,
170, 174, 176; Spenser, F. Q. v. 2. 40.—MDu. vadden, ‘to fade ;’
Hexham. = OF. fader, to fade; see Fade.

VAGABOND, adj., wandering ; as sb., a wandering, idle fellow.
(F.—L.) Spelt vacabonde in Palsgrave; he gives the MF. form as
uacabond ; so also ‘ Vacabonds, vagabonds,’ Cot. Rich. cites vaga-
bunde from the Bible (1534), Gen. iv. 12; spelt vacabund in the edit.
of 1551. Also vacabonde, Caxton, Siege of Troy, fol. 334, back. =
F. vagabond, ‘a vagabond,’ Cot. Wealso find OF. vacabond (Gode-
froy).—L, wagabundus, adj., strolling about. Formed, with suffix
-b-undus (a gerundive form), from uwagd-ri, to wander.=—L. vagus,
wandering; see Vague.

VAGARY, a wild freak, a whim. (L.) In The Two Noble
Kinsmen, iy. 3. 54 (82); figaries, pl., Ford, Fancies Chaste and
Noble, iii. 3. Also vagare, sing., a trisyllabic word, in Stanyhurst,
tr. of Virgil, Ain. b, ii, ed. Arber, p. 44,1.10. Perhaps orig. a verb ;
see below. Apparently borrowed directly from L. wagari, to
wander; and, in any case, due to this verb. Cf. F. vaguer, ‘ to
wander, vagary, gad, range, roam, Cot.; also Ital. vagare, ‘to
wander, to vagarie, or range,’ Florio. We have instances of F, in-
finitives used as sbs. in attainder, remainder, leisure, pleasure. See
above.

VAGRANT, wandering, unsettled. (F.—OHG.) ‘A vagarant and
wilde kinde of life;’ Hakluyt’s Voyages, i. 490; quoted by Richard-
son, who alters vagarant to vagrant ; but vagarant is, I think, quite
right. Cf. vagarantes, vagrants, Harman’s Caveat, p. 19. It corre-
sponds to Anglo-F. wakerant, a vagrant, vagabond ; see Liber Albus,
p- 275. Also found as AF. and OF. waucrant, pres. pt. of OF.
walcrer, to wander about. Spelt wacrant, Tristan, ii. 75, 80; Bozon,
p- 72; walcrant, Horn, fol. 8, back, col. 2, See walcrer, wacrer,
vacrer, in Godefroy. Of Germanic origin; cf. MLow G. welkern,
MHG. walgern, to walk about; allied to OHG. walkan, walchan,
to move oneself about, to full cloth; cognate with E. walk, AS.
wealcian. See Walk. Der. vagrant,sb., vagranc-y. J Doubtless
confused with L. wagdri, to wander ; but not derived fromit. Roque-
fort notes the use of OF. wakerant to translate L. waga in Prov.
vii. 10. See Notes on E, Etym., p. 311.

VAGUE, unsettled, uncertain. (F.—L.) It seems to have been
first in use as a verb, parallel in use to vagary, q.v. ‘ Doth vague
and wander ;’ Holland, tr. of Plutarch, p. 231 (R.); ‘To vague and
range abroad;’ id. p. 630 (R.). Asan adj. itis later. ‘Vague and
insignificant forms of speech ;’ Locke, Human Understanding, To
the Reader (R.). =F. vaguer, ‘to wander; vague, wandering ;’ Cot.
=L. wagari, to wander; from uagus, adj., wandering. B. Con-
nected by Fick, iii. 761, with AS, wancol, unsteady; from 4/WAG,
a by-form of 4/WAQ, to swerve, for which see Vacillate. Der.
vague-ly, -ness; and see vag-abond, vag-ar-y. From the same L.
uagari we have extra-vagant.

VAIL (1), the same as Veil, q. v.

VAIL (2), to lower. (F.—L.) In Merch. Ven. i. 1. 28, &c.; and
not uncommon. A headless form of avail or avale, in the same sense.
‘T avale, as the water dothe whan it goeth downewardes or ebbeth,
FJauale;’ Palsgrave.=¥F. avaler (in Cot. avaller), ‘to let, put, lay,
cast, fell down,’ Cot. See further under Avalanche. Der. vail,
sb., Troil. v. 8. .7.

VAIL (3), a gift to a servant. (F.—L.) Dryden has the pl. vails;
tr. of Juvenal, Sat. iii. 1.311. ‘ Vails, profits that arise to servants,
besides their salary or wages;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. A headless form
of avail, sb., in the sense of profit, help. ‘Avayle, sb., prouffit ;’
‘Palsgrave.. ‘ Vaile my prejeres’=let my prayers avail, Wyclif, Jer.
Xxxvii. 19, earlier version. See Avail.

VAIN, empty, fruitless, unreal, worthless ; also, conceited. (F.—
L.) ME. vain, vein, veyn, Chaucer, C. T. 15965 (G 497).=—F. vain,
‘yvain;’ Cot.—L. udnum, acc. of uanus, empty, vain. Brugmann, i,
§ 414 (3). Der. vain-ly, -ness; also the phr. in vain, a translation
.of F, en vain (Cot.). Also vain-glory, ME. veingloire, Gower, C, A.
i. 132, b. i. 2677 ; vain-glori-ous, -ly, -ness, Also van-i-ty, q.v.; vaunt,
q.v.; van-ish, q.v.

. VATR, a kind of fur. (F.—L.). A common term in ‘heraldry ;


VALIANT


whence the adj. vairy or verry, given in Phillips, ed..1706, and spelt
varry in Blount. ME, veir, Reliquize Antique, i. 121; Rob. Man-
ning, ed. Furnivall, 1. 615.—¥F. vair, ‘a rich fur of ermines,’ &c. ;
Cot.—L. varius, variegated. See Minever and Various. Cf.
Late L. varium, vair; Gloss. to Liber Custumarum. Der. vair-y,
adj., from F. vairé, ‘ verry, diversified with argent and azure;’ Cot,
Also mine-ver.

VALANCE, a fringe of drapery, now applied to a part of the
bed-hangings. (F.—L.) In Shak. Tam. Shrew, ii. 356; he also has
valanced=fringed, Haml. ii. 2. 442. ‘Rich cloth of tissue, and
vallance of black silk;’ Strype, Eccles. Mem., Funeral Solemnities of
Henry VIII, Cf. ‘A subtil kerchef of Valence;’ Chaucer, Assembly
of Foules, 272. Florio (1598) has Ital. ‘ Valenzana, a kind of saye,
serge, or stuffe to make curteins for beds with; Valenzana del letio,
the valances of a bed.’ .Torriano (1688) has Valenza as well as
Valenzana in the former sense, and Valenzane for Valenzana in the
latter one. Prob. named from Valence in France, not far to the S.
of Lyons, where silk is made even to this day ; Lyons silks are well-
known. Sir Aymer de Valence, whose widow founded Pembroke
College, Cambridge, may have taken his name from the same place.
Valence=L. Valentia, a name given to more towns than one, and
clearly a derivative of walére (pres. part. walent-), to be strong ; whence
also the names Valens and Valentinian; see Valiant. J See Todd;
Johnson derives Valence from Valencia in Spain, which was also
famous for silk. Mahn (in Webster) derives valance (without evi-
dence) from a supposed Norm. F, valaunt, answering to F. avalant,
pres. part. of avaler, to let fall; for which see Avalanche.

VALE, a valley. (F.—L.) ME. val, as a various reading for
ualeie (valley), in Legends of the Holy Rood, p. 22, 1. 47.—F. val,
‘a vale;? Cot.—L. uwallem, acc. of wallis,a vale. Der. vall-ey, q.v. ;
also a-val-anche, vail (2).

VALEDICTION, a farewell. (L.) ‘He alwayes took this
solemn valediction of the fellowes;’ Fuller, Worthies; Shropshire
(R.). Englished from a supposed L. *walédictio, coined like ualé-
dictus, pp. of ualédicere, to say farewell. —L. walé, farewell; and
dicere, to say. B. L. ualé, lit. ‘be strong, be of good health,’ is
the 2 pers. sing. imp. of walére, to be strong. See Valiant and
Diction. Der. valedict-or-y.

VALENTINE, a sweetheart ; also a love-letter sent on Feb. 14.
(F.—L.) In Nares and Brand. See Hamlet, iv. 5. 48,51. Named
from St. Valentine’s day, when birds were supposed to pair; see
Chaucer, Assembly of Foules, 309, 322, 683; Spenser, F. Q. vi. 7.
32.—F. Valentin. = L. Valentinus,—L, ualent-, stem of pres. part. of
ualére, to be strong; see Valiant.

VALERIAN, the name of a flower. (F.—L.) ‘ Valeryan, an
herbe;’ Palsgrave. And in Chaucer, C. T., G 800.—F. valeriane,
‘garden valerian;”’ Cot.—Late L. waleriana, valerian. B. Orig.
unknown; waleriana is the fem. of Valeridinus, which must mean
either ‘ belonging to Valerius’ or ‘belonging to Valeria, a province
of Pannonia. Both names are doubtless due to L. walére, to be strong,
whence many names were derived; see Valance, Valentine, and
Valiant.

VALET, a man-servant. (F.—C.) In Blount, ‘The king made
him his vale¢t;’ Fuller, Worthies, Yorkshire. Valet-de-chambre
occurs in Vanbrugh, The Provoked Wife, Act v. 3.—F. valet, ‘a
groom, yeoman, &c.,’ Cot.; valet de chambre, ‘a chamberlain,’ id.
The same word as Varlet, q.v.

VALETUDINARY, sickly, in weak health. (F.—L.) In Sir
T. Brown, Vulg, Errors, b. iv. c. 13, § 26.—F. valétudinaire, ‘sickly ;’
Cot.=L. ualétidinadrius, sickly.—L. ualétiidin-, stem of ualétido,
health, whether good or bad, but esp. bad health, feebleness; with
sufix -drius.=L,. walé-re, to be in good health; with suffix -tudo.
See Valiant, Der. valetudinari-an, adj. and sb.; as sb. in Spec-
tator, no. 25; valetudinari-an-ism.

VALHALLA, the hall of the slain. (Scand.) In Scand. mytho-
logy, the place of immortality for the souls of heroes slain in battle.
The spelling Valhalla is hardly correct; it is probably due to Bp.
Percy, who translated M. Mallet’s work on Northern Antiquities ;
see chap. v of the translation. —Icel. valhéll (gen. valhallar), lit. the
hall of the slain. =Icel. valr, the slain, slanghter; and hol or hall,
a hall, cognate with E. Hall, B. The Icel. valr is cognate with
AS. wel, slaughter, the slain, also a single corpse; prob. allied to
OHG. wuol, slaughter, AS. wol, disease. It was thought that the
dead were selected from the field of battle by the deities called in
Icelandic Valkyrjur and in AS. Weleyrigan, lit. ‘ choosers of the
slain.’ See Valkyria.

VALIANT, brave. (F.—L.) ME. valiant, Rob. of Brunne, tr.
of Langtoft, p. 9, ]. 4; p. 177, 1. 3.—F. vaillant, ‘valiant ;’ Cot.
Also spelt valané in OF., and the pres. part. of the verb valoir, ‘to
profit, serve, be good for;’ id.—L. ualére, to be strong, to be worth.
Allied to E, Wield, q.v. Der. vasiant-ly, -ness; and see vale-


683


684 VALID.


diction, Val-ent-ine, vale-tu-din-ar-y, val-id, val-our, val-ue ; also a-vail,
counter-vail, pre-vail, con-val-esce ; equi-val-ent, pre-val-ent, in-val-id.

VALID, having force, well-founded, conclusive. (F.—L.) In
Cotgrave.—F. valide, ‘valid, strong, weighty;’ Cot.=L. uwalidus,
strong.=—L. walére, to be strong; see Valiant. Der. valid-ly;
valid-i-ty, Hamlet, iii. 2. 199, from F. validité, ‘ validity,’ Cot., from
L. acc. ualiditatem.

VALISE, a travelling-bag, small portmanteau. (F.—Late L.)
“Seal’d up In the vallies of my trust, lock’d close for ever;’ Ben
Jonson, Tale of a Tub, A. ii. sc. 1 (Metaphor).=—F. valise, ‘a male,
cloak-bag, budget, wallet;’ Cot. The same word as Span. balija,
Ital. valigia (Florio), with the same sense. Corrupted in G. into
felleisen (Diez). — Late L. valisia (1401), Ducange; also spelt
valixia (id.). | B. Etym. unknown, Diez imagines a Late L. form
*yidul-itia, made from L. uidulus, a leathern travelling-trunk ; which
at any rate gives the right sense. Devic (Supp. to Littré) suggests
Pers. walichah, ‘a large sack,’ or Arab. waliha(t), ‘a corn-sack ;”
Rich. Dict. p. 1657.

VALKYRIA, one of the handmaidens of Odin. (Scand.) Icel.
ualkyrja, a goddess ; lit. ‘ chooser of the slain ;’ pl. valkyrjur. = Icel.
val, acc. of valr, the slain (AS. wel) ; and -kyrja, f., a chooser, from
kur- (<*kuz-), weak grade of kjdsa, to choose, cognate with E.
choose. Cf. AS. walcyrge, Corpus gloss., 2017.

VALLEY, a vale, dale. (F.—L.) ME. valé, Assumption of
St. Mary, ed. Lumby, |. 590; waleie, Legends of the Holy Rood, p. 22,
1, 47.—OF. valee (F. vallée), a valley; Burguy. This is parallel to
Ital. vallata, a valley, and appears to mean, literally, ‘formed like a
vale,’ or ‘ vale-like.’ Formed, with suffix -ee (<L. -ata), from F.
val, a vale; see Vale.

VALOUR, courage, bravery. (F.—L.) Spelt valoure, King
Alisaunder, 2530. — OF. valor, valur, F. valeur, ‘value, worth, worthi-
nesse;”’ Cot.—L. waldrem, acc. of ualor, worth; hence, worthiness,
courage.=L. ualére, to be strong, to be worth; see Valiant.
Der. valor-ous, 2 Hen. IV, ii. 4. 236, from F. valeureux, ‘ valorous,
valiant,’ Cot.; valor-ous-ly.

VALUE, worth. (F.—L.) ‘All is to him of o [one] value,’
Gower, C. A. iii. 346 (bk. vili. 2121).—F. valué, fem., ‘ value ;’
Cot. Fem. of valu, pp. of valoir, to be worth.eL. ualére, to be
worth. Der. value, verb, in Palsgrave; valu-able ; value-less, K. John,
iii. I. 101; valu-at-ion, a coined word.

VALVE, one of the leaves of a folding-door, a lid which opens
only one way, one of the pieces of a (bivalve) shell. (F.—L.)
* Valves, folding-doors or windows;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.
Valves, pl., doors, Trevisa, iv. 499.—F. valve, ‘a foulding, or two-
leayed door, or window;’ Cot.—L. walua, sing. of walue, the leaves
of a folding-door, Allied to L. uoluere, to roll, turn round about;
from the revolving of the leaves on their hinges. See Voluble.
Der. valv-ed, valv-ul-ar ; bi-valve, uni-valve.

VAMBRACEH, VANTBRACEH, armour for the fore-arm.
(F.—L.) ‘Plate, cum vambrace et rerebrace;’ York Wills, i.
I7I (1392). The word properly signifies ‘fore-arm.’ It is short for
avant-brace.=— MF, avant-bras, ‘a vambrace, armour for an arm;
also, the part of the arm which extends from the elbow to the wrist ;’
Cot.—F. avant, before; bras, the arm.—L. ab ante, from before, in
front; brachium, arm (of which the pl. brachia gave OF. brace, arm ;
see Scheler). See Van (1), Vamp, Vamplate. @ The
armour for the upper arm was called a rere-brace, i.e. rear-brace.

VAMP, the fore-part or upper leather of a boot or shoe. (F.—L.)
ME. waumpé (dissyllabic). ‘ Hosen widuten wampez’=hose without
vamps; Ancren Riwle, p. 420, 1. 3. [Another copy has uamped;
Reliq. Antiquze, ii. 3.] ‘Vampe, or uaumpe of an hoose, Pedana ;’
Prompt. Parv. ‘Hoc antepedale, Anglice wampe’ [for vampé];
Wright’s Voc. i. 197, col. 1. ‘Hec pedana, Anglice wampay,’ id.
201, col. 2.—MF. avant-pied, ‘the part of the foot that’s next to the
toes, and consisteth of five bones;’ Cot. (Hence E. vampé, vamp ;
by loss of initial a, change of ntp to mp, and suppression of the un-
stressed termination.)—F. avant, before; and pied, the foot. For
F. avant, see Advance or Van (1). The F. pied is from L.
pedem, acc. of pés,a foot; see Foot, é> This etymology is
verified by the fact that the word also appears as vauntpe. ‘ Vauntpe
of a hose, wantpie ;’ Palsgrave (where the final d is dropped, as well
as the initial a, in the F. form). So also ME. vampay, above, and
later vampay (Phillips). Godefroy has OF. avantpied, a kind of
sandal. Der. vamp, verb, to mend with a new vamp, Beaum. and
Fletcher, Bonduca, Act i. sc. 2 (Petillius); hence vamp up=to
patch up, vamp, to improvise a musical accompaniment.

VAMPIRE, a ghost which sucks the blood of men, a blood-
sucker. (F.—G.—Servian.) In Todd’s Johnson. ‘ Of these beings
many imaginary stories are told in Hungary; Ricaut, in his State of
the Greek and Armenian Churches (1679), gives a curious account
of this superstitious persuasion, p. 278;’ Todd. Todd also cites;


VANTAGE


‘ These are the vampires of the publick, and riflers of the kingdom ;”
Forman, Obs. on the Revolution in 1688 (1741), p. 11.—F. vampire.
—G. vampyr (Fliigel).—Servian vampir, a werwolf, blood-sucker,
Popovi¢, Servian Dict.; cf. Polish upior, upir, a vampire. Prob. of
Turkish origin; from N. Turk. uber, a witch (Miklosich). Der.
vampire-bat; so named by Linnzeus.

VAMPLATE, an iron plate protecting a lance. (F.—L.) ‘Pro
uno pare de schynbaldes, aliter vamplattes;’ York Wills, iii. 73
(1423). From F. avant, in front, fore; and plate. See Vam-
brace.

VAN (1), the front of an army. (F.—L.) In Shak. Antony, iv.
6. 9. An abbreviated form of van-guard, vant-guard, or avant-
garde, also spelt van-ward, vaunt-warde, ‘ And when our vauntgard
was passed the toune;’ Holinshed, Chron. Edw. III, an. 1346.
‘ And her vantwarde was to-broke;’ Rob. of Glouc. p. 362, 1. 7478;
the pl. vantwardes occurs, id. p. 437, 1.9006. Spelt vaunt-warde,
vaun-warde, auaunt-warde, P. Plowman, C. xxiii. 94.—OF. avant-
warde, later avant-garde, ‘the vanguard of an army;’ Cot. Here
avant is from L. ab ante, ‘from in front;’ see Advance. And
see Guard, Ward.

VAN (2), a fan for winnowing, &c. (F.—L.) ‘His sail-broad
vans,’ i.e. wings; Milton, P. L. ii. 927. —F. van, ‘a vanne, or winnow-
ing sieve ;’ Cot.—L. wannum, acc. of uannus,a fan; see Fan. L.
uannus is for *cuannus; cf. OHG. hwennen (for *hwanjan), to swing,
vibrate. Brugmann, i. § 357. (Doubtful; it may be allied to L.
uentus, wind.) Der. van, v.,to winnow, spelt vanze in Levins, from
F. vanner, ‘to vanne;’ Cot. Doublet, fan.

VAW (3), a caravan or large covered wagon for goods. (F.
—Pers.) A modern abbreviation for caravan, just as we now use
bus for omnibus, and wig for periwig. See Caravan. ‘The little
man will now walk three times round the cairawan;’ Dickens, Going
into Society. ‘Carry me into the wan ;’ ibid.

VANDAL, a barbarian. (L.—Teut.) See Vandalick and Vandal-
ism in Todd’s Johnson. —L. Vandalus, a Vandal, one of the tribe of
the Vandali, whose name means, literally, ‘the wanderers;’ see
Pliny. Vandali answers to AS. pl. Wendlas (sing. Wendil-). Cf.
Icel. Vendill (also Vandill), a proper name. Cf. G. wandeln, to
wander ; a frequentative verb cognate with E. Wander, q.v. Der,
Vandal, adj.; Vandal-ic, Vandal-ism.

VANE, a weather-cock. (E.) Also spelt fane (cf. vat, vetch); it
formerly meant a small flag, pennon, or streamer; hence applied to
the weather-cock, from its likeness to a small pennon. ‘Fane ofa
stepylle;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 148; andsee Way’snote, ‘ Chaungynge
as a vane’ (other MSS. jane); Chaucer, C. T., Group E, 996; in
the Ellesmere and Hengwrt MSS. AS. fana, a small flag; Grein, i.
263.4Du. vaan; Icel. fani; Dan. fane; Swed. and Goth. faza; G.
fahne, MHG. fano. B. Teut. type *fanon-,m. Orig. ‘a bit of
cloth;’ cognate with L. pannus, a cloth, piece of cloth; see Pane.
Der. gon-fan-on or gon-fal-on, q.v. Doublet, pane.

VANGUARD; see under Van (1).

VANILLA, the name of a plant. (Span.—L.) In Todd’s John-
son; Johnson says: ‘the fruit of those plants is used to scent
chocolate.’ Misspelt for vainilla, by confusion with F. vaniile, which
is merely borrowed from Spanish, like the E. word. —Span. vainilla,
a small pod, husk, or capsule; which is the true sense of the word.
Dimin. of vaina, a scabbard, case, pod, sheath.eL. wagina, a
scabbard, sheath, husk, pod.

VANISH, to disappear. (F.—L.) ME. vanissen, Chaucer, tr. of
Boethius, b. iii. pr. 4, 1. 53. The pt. t. appears as vantsshide,
vanysched, vansched, vanshede, in P. Plowman, C. xv. 217. Certainly
derived from OFrench, but the F. word is not recorded as com-
mencing with v. Prob. shortened from the pres. pt. stem (evaziss-)
of AF, evanir, OF. esvanir, to vanish away ; cf. Ital. svanire, to vanish
(where s is from L, ex).—Late L. type *exvanire, for L. éudnescere,
to vanish away.—L. é, ex, away; and wdanescere, to vanish; lit. to
become empty, from udnus, empty; see Vain. Der. e-van-esc-ent.

VANITY, empty pride, conceit, worthlessness. (F.—L.) ME.
uanité (=uanitee), Hali Meidenhad, p. 27, 1. 25.—F. vanité, ‘ vanity ;”
Cot.—L. udnitatem, acc. of uanités, emptiness, worthlessness. = L.
udnus, empty, vain; see Vain.

VANQUISH, to conquer, defeat. (F.—L.) ME. venkisen,
P. Plowman, C, xxi. 106; venkusen, Wyclif, 1 Kings, xiv. 47, earlier
version 3 venguishen, Chaucer, C. T. 4711 (B 291).—AF. venguiss-,
OF. veinguiss-, stem of pres. pt. of AF. venguir, OF. veinguir, occur-
ring in the 14th century as a collateral form of OF. veincre (mod, F.
vaincre) ; cf. F. vainguis, still used as the pt. t. of vaincre, and the
form que je vainguisse,—L. uincere, to conquer; pt. t. uic?, pp. uictus
(stem uic-), —4/WEIQ, to fight, strive ; whence also Goth. wethan,
weigan (pp. wig-ans), OHG. and AS. wigan, to strive, fight, contend.
Bragmann, i. §§ 85, 367. Der. vanguish-er; and see victor.

VANTAGE, advantage. (F.—L.) Common in Shak.; in K,


VANWARD.


John, ii. 550, &c.; spelt vawntage in Palsgrave ; who also gives: ‘I
vauntage one, I profyte him, je vantaige; What dothe it vauntage
you, guest ce quil vous vantage, or aduantage.’ = AF. vantage, advantage ;
Year-books of Edw. I., 1302-3, p. 209; F. avantage, ‘an advantage ;
avantager, to advantage;’ Cot. See Advantage. Thus vantage
is a headless form of F. avantage ; and it is clear from Palsgrave (as
above) that the loss of initial a occurred in F.as well as in E.

VANWARD; see Vaward and Van (1).

VAPID, spiritless, flat, insipid. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674. Prob. directly from L. uapidus, vapid, spoiled, flat, rather
than from F. vapide, ‘ that sends up an ill fume,’ marked by Cotgrave
as a scarce or old word. Allied to L. uappa, wine that has emitted
its vapour, vapid or palled wine; closely allied to L. wap-or, vapour.
B. The L. wap-or is allied to Gk. xamvds, smoke, xamvev, to breathe
forth ; Lithuan. kwdpas, breath, fragrance, evaporation, kwépti, to
breathe, smell, Aweépalas, perfume. Brugmann, i. § 193.—4/QwEP,
to reek, breathe out; cf. Fick, i. 542. Der. vapid-ly, -ness. And
see vapour.

VAPOUR, water in the atmosphere, steam, fume, fine mist,
gas. (F.—L.) ME, vapour, Chaucer, C. T. 10707 (F 393).—F.
vapeur, ‘a vapor, fume ;’ Cot.=L, wapdrem, acc. of wapor, vapour ;
see Vapid. Der. vapour, verb ; vapor-ous, Macb. iii. 5. 24; vapour-
¥ 5 vapor-ise, a coined word ; vapor-is-at-ion, e-vapor-ate.

VARICOSE, permanently dilated, as a vein. (L.) A late word.
[Phillips, ed. 1706, has: ‘ Varix, a crooked vein.’]=L. uaricdsus,
varicose, = L. waric-, stem of uarix, a dilated vein. Perhaps allied to
L. uarus, a blotch, a pimple.

VARIEGATE, to diversify. (L.) ‘ Variegated tulips ;’ Pope,
Moral Essays, ii. 41.—L. uariegatus, pp. of uariegare, to make of
various colours. = L. wari(o)-, for varius, of divers colours ; and -igdre,
due to agere, to drive, cause, make ; agere being used to form verbs ex-
pressive of an object (see Agent), See Various. Der. variegat-
zon, in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.

VARIETY, difference, diversification, change, diversity. (F.—
L.) In Shak., Antony, ii. 2. 241.—F. varieté, ‘ variety;’ Cot.=—
L. uarietatem, acc. of warietis, variety.—L. uarius, various; see
Various.

VARIOUS, different, several. (L.) ‘A man so various ;’
Dryden, Absalom and Achitophel, 545. Englished from L. warius,
variegated, diverse, manifold; with suffix -ous., Der. various-ly;
varie-gate, varie-ty; also, vary, q.v.3 vair, q.v.

VARLET, a groom, footman, low fellow, scoundrel. (F.—C.)
In Spenser, F. Q. ii. 4.40. ‘Not sparyng maisters nor varlettis ;’
Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. i.c. 16 (R.).—OF. varlet, ‘a groom;
also, a yonker, stripling, youth;’ Cot. He notes that ‘in old time
it was a more honourable title; for all young gentlemen, untill they
come to be 18 years of age, were tearmed so.’ B. An older spell-
ing was vaslet (Godefroy), which became varlet, vailet, valet. We
also find the AF. spelling vadle¢ in the Liber Albus, ed. Riley, p. 46,
where d stands for an older sd, as in medlar, medley; which again
proves that vaslet was the orig. form. y. Vaslet is for *vasalet, the
regular diminutive of OF. vasal, vassal, a vassal; so that a varlet
was orig. a young vassal, a youth, stripling; hence, a servant, &c. ;
and finally a valet, and a varlet as a term of reproach. OF, vaslet
became *vasdlet, vadlet in AF.; also varlet, vallet, valet, See
Vassal. Doublet, valet.

VARNISH, a kind of size or glaze, a liquid employed to give a
glossy surface. (F.) ME. vernisch, ‘ Vernysche, Vernicium ;’ Prompt.
Parv. In P. Plowman, A. vy. 7o, the Vernon MS. wrongly reads
vernisch for vergeous (verjuice) ; still, this shows that the word was
already known before A. D. 1400. =F. vernis, ‘ varnish, made of linseed
oyle and the gumme of the juniper-tree;’ Cot. Hence the verb
vernisser, ‘to sleeke or glaze over with varnish;’ Cot. Cf. Span.
berniz, barniz, varnish, lacquer; barnizar, to varnish, lacquer; Ital.
vernice, varnish; vernicare, verniciare, to varnish. B. Of doubtful
origin; but compare the MGk. Bepvixn ; see Schade, O. H.G. Dict.,
p- 1439. Wedgwood says: ‘ It seems to me probable that it is from
Gk. Bepovixn, Bepvixn, amber, applied by Agapias to sandarach, a gum
rosin similar in appearance to amber, of which varnish was made;
Gk. Bepyimidew, to varnish; Ducange, Greek Glossary. Cf. mod.
Gk. Bepvixi, varnish.’ But the MGk. Bepvixn seems to be merely
a Gk. form of Ital. vernice. Ducange givesa Late L. form vernicium
(A. D. 1243). Der. varnish, verb; Palsgrave has: ‘I vernysshe a
spurre, or any yron with vernysshe, je vernis ;’ which exemplifies the
MF. verb vernir, late by-form of vernisser.

VARSOVIENNE, a dance in imitation of a Polish dance. (F.
—Polish.) F. Varsovienne, a dance (about 1853); lit. ‘ belonging
to Warsaw.’ =F. Varsovie, Warsaw. = Pol. Warszawa, Warsaw.

VARY, to alter, change. (F.—L.) ME. varien, Prompt. Parv.;
pres. part. variande, Pricke of Conscience, 1447.—F. varier, ‘to
vary ;’ Cot.—L. wariare, to diversify, vary.—L, warius, various; see


VAULT


Various. Der. vari-able, spelt varyable in Palsgrave, from F. vari-
able, ‘variable,’ Cot., from L, uariabilis ; variable-ness, vari-abil-i-ty ;
vari-at-ion, ME. variacioun, Chaucer, C. T. 2590 (A 2588), from F.
variation, ‘a variation,’ from L. acc. uariatidnem ; vari-ance, Chaucer,
C. T. 8586 (E 710), as if from L. *uariantia. And see vair, mine-ver.

VASCULAR, consisting of vessels, as arteries, veins, &c. (L.)
In Todd’s Johnson. Formed, with suffix -ar (from L. -aris) from L.
uascul-um, a small vessel ; formed with the double dimin. suffix -cu-lu-,
from was, a vessel; see Vase. Der. vascular-i-ty.

VASE, a vessel, particularly an ornamented one. (F.—L.) In
Pope, Rape of the Lock, i. 122,.—F, vase, ‘a vessel ;’ Cot.—L.
uasum, a vase, vessel; a collateral form of uds (gen. uas-is), a vessel ;
the pl. uasa is common, though the sing. uaswm is hardly used.
B. L. udsum resembles Skt. vasana-, a receptacle, box, basket, water-
jar; also, an envelope, cover, cloth; the orig. sense being perhaps
‘case’ or protecting cover. Perhaps allied to Vest. Der. vas-cu-
lar 3 vessel.

VASELINE, a semi-fluid greasy substance, used in ointments,
&c. A fanciful name; given by the maker. Said to have been
suggested by G. wass(er), water, and Gk. €A(aov), oil; with F. suffix
-ine. (Cent. Dict.)

VASSAL, a dependent. (F.—C.) In Spenser, Daphnaida, 181.
Certainly in early use; the ME. vassal, however, is rare, though the
derivative vasselage (vassalage) is in Chaucer, C. T. 3056 (A 3054),
where it means ‘ good service’ or prowess in arms; it has the same
sense in Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 86, 1. 21, and in Gower
(as cited in Richardson). [The word vassayl, cited by Richardson
from Rob. of Glouc., means wassail.]}—=AF. vassal, Philip de
Thaun, Livre des Creatures, 1. 698; F. vassal, ‘a vassall, subject,
tenant;’ Cot. (Cotgrave well explains the word.) The orig. sense
is ‘seryant;’ and the word is of Celtic origin, Latinised (in Low
Latin) as vassallus, in which form it is extremely common. We also
find the shorter form uassws or wasus, a servant ; which occurs in the
Lex Salica, ed. Hessels and Kern, coll. 55, 56.—OBret. uuas=was,
Bret. gwaz, a servant, vassal; W.and Corn. gwas, a youth, servant.
Cf. Olrish foss, a servant. All from Celtic type *wassos, a servant ;
Stokes-Fick, p. 278, Cf. L. verna, a home-born slave. See Ver-
nacular. Der. vassal-age; also varlet, valet.

VAST, great, of great extent. (F.—L.) We possess this word in
two forms, viz. vast and waste, both being from French; the latter
being much the older. They are generally used with different senses,
but in the Owl and Nightingale, 1. 17, we have: ‘in ore waste pikke
hegge’=in a vast thick hedge, ina great thick hedge. We may,
however, consider vast as belonging to the 16th century ; it does not
seem to be much older than the latter part of that century. ‘ That
mightie and vaste sea;’ Hakluyt’s Voyages, vol. iii. p. 822.=F.
vaste, ‘vast;’ Cot.—L. uwastum, acc. of wastus, vast, of large extent.
See further under Waste. Der. vast, sb., Temp. i. 2. 327, Wint.
Tale, i. 1. 33 ; vast-ly, vast-ness ; also vast-y, adj., Merch. Ven. ii. 7. 41.
Also de-vast-ate.

VAT, a large vessel for liquors. (E.) ME. fat. ‘ Fate, vesselle ;’
Prompt. Parvy. Palsgrave has fatte; and the A. V. of the Bible has
fats (Joel, ii. 24) and wine-fat (Mark, xii. 1). The difference between
the words fat and vat is one of dialect; vat is Southern English,
prob. Kentish. The use of v for f is common in Devonshire,
Somersetshire, and in Old Kentish ; the connexion of the word with
Kent may have been due to the brewing trade; cf. vane, vetch. AS.
fat (pl. fatu), a vessel, cask; Mark, iii. 27.4-Du. vat; Icel. fats
Dan. fad; Swed. fat; G. fass; MHG. vaz. _B. All from the Teut.
type *fatom, n.,a vat, a barrel. From the Teut. base *fat-, to catch,
take, seize, comprehend, contain; cf. OFries. fatia, EF ries. faten,
Du. vatten, to catch, take, contain, G. fassen, to seize, also to con-
tain; so that the sense is ‘that which contains.’ Der. wine-fat or
wine-vat.

VATICAN, the palace of the pope. (F.—L.) F. Vatican. —L.
Vaticanus (mons), the Vatican hill in Rome.

VATICINATION, a prediction, prophecy. (F.—L.) ‘This so
clear vaticination ;’ Jeremy Taylor, Works (1835); ii. 333.—MF.
vaticination, ‘a prophecying;’ Cot.—L. acc. udaticinatio


arp 8 oe


685


stem. of wdtes, a prophet; and -cin-, weak grade of can-ere, to sing.
Cf. Wood (2).

VAUDEVILLE, VAUDEVIL, a lively satirical song ; a kind
of drama. (F.) Spelt vaudevil in Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—F.
vaudeville, ‘a country ballade, or song; so tearmed of Vaudevire, a
Norman town, wherein Olivier Bassel [or Basselin], the first inventor
of them, lived ;? Cot. Olivier de Basselin was a Norman poet of the
15th century, and his songs were called after his native valley, the
Vau (or Val, i.e. valley) de Vire; see Wale, Vire is a town in
Normandy, to the S. of Bayeux.

VAULT (1), an arched roof, a chamber with an arched roof, esp.


686 VAULT


one underground, a cellar. (F.—L.) The spelling with 7 is com-
paratively modern ; it has been inserted, precisely as in fazt, from
pedantic and ignorant notions concerning ‘ etymological’ spelling.
The ME. form is voute, also vowte; in King Alisaunder, 7210, it is
spelt vawte. ‘ Vout under the ground, woute;” Palsgrave. ‘ Vowte,
lacunar; Vowtyd, arculatus; Vowtyn, or make a vowte, arcuo;’
Prompt. Parv.—MF. voute (also voulte, with inserted J as in English),
“a vault, or arch, also, a vaulted or enbowed roof;’ Cot. OF.
volte, voute, vaute, a vault, cavern; Burguy (mod. F. vovte) ; where
volte is a fem. form, from OF. volé, vaulted, lit. bent or bowed.

Volte is the same word as Ital. volta, ‘a time, a turn or course; a
circuit, or a compasse; also, a vault, cellar, an arche, bow;” Florio.
B. The OF. volt answers to L. wol’tus, and the OF, volte, Ital.
volta, to L. uol’ta; these are abbreviated forms of wolitus (fem.
uolita), pp. of woluere, to roll, turn round; whence the later sense of
bend round, bow, or arch. Similarly we have volute, in the sense
of a spiral scroll. y. Thus a vault means an arch, an arched roof;
hence, a chamber with an arched roof, and finally a cellar, because
it often has an arched roof, for the sake of strength. See Voluble.
Der. vault, verb, to overarch, ME. vouten, as above; vault-ed,
Cymb. i. 6. 33; vault-y, concave, Romeo, iii. 5. 22; vault-age, a
vaulted room, Hen. V. ii. 4. 124.

VAULT (2), to bound, leap. (F.—Ital.—L.) ‘ Vaulting am-
bition ;* Macb. i. 7. 27.— MF, volter, ‘to vault;’ Cot.—MF. volte,
‘a round or turn; and thence, the bounding turn which cunning
riders teach their horses ; also a tumbler’s gamboll ;’ id. = Ital. voléa,
‘the turn that cunning riders teach their horses ;’ Florio. The same
word as Ital. volta,a vault; both from the orig. sense of ‘ turn;’ see
further under Vault (1). Der. vault, sb. ; vault-er, vault-ing-horse.

VAUNT, to boast. (F.—L.) ‘I vaunte, I boste, or crake, Je me
vante;’ Palsgrave. [It is remarkable that the ME. form was
avaunten or auaunten, from OF. avanter, to boast (Godefroy), in
which the a- (from L. ad) was intensive, or may have been due to
confusion with F. avant, before, and avancer, to advance. This ME.
auaunten occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 5985 (D 403), and at least twice
in Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. i. met.1, 1. 21, b. 1, pr. 4, 1. 1583; and
hence the sb. auaunt, avaunt, auant, in Chaucer, C. T. 227. How-
ever, the prefix is to be neglected. Cf. avauntour, a vaunter, Chaucer,
Troilus ii. 724.]—F. vanter ; ‘ se vanter, to vaunt, brag, boast, glory,
crack ;’ Cot.— Late L. vanitare, to speak vanity, flatter (Ducange) ;
so that se vanter=to speak vainly of oneself. (Diez remarks that
vanitare, to boast, occurs in S. Augustine, Opp. i. 437, 761.) This
verb is a frequentative formed from L. wanus, vain. See Vain; and
cf. L. wdnitas, vanity. Der. vaunt, sb.. ME. auaunte; vaunt-er,
formerly avauntour (as above), or avaunter, Court of Love, 1219.

VAVASSOR, a vassal not holding immediately from the
sovereign, but from a great lord, having inferior vassals under him,
(F.—Late L.—C.) ‘A worthy vavasour ;’ Chaucer, C. T., prol. 360.
=—OF. vavassour.— Late L. vassus vassdrum, lit. ‘ vassal of vassals.’
The Late L. vassus is of Celtic origin; see Vassal.

VAWARD, another spelling of vanward or vanguard. (F.—L.
and G.) In Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. i. c. 209 ; and vanward, in
Drayton, Battle of Agincourt, st. 218. Spelt vaward, in Lydgate,
Assembly of Gods, 1. 602. See Wan (1).

VEAL, the flesh of a calf. (F.—L.) ME. veel, Chaucer, C. T.
9294 (E 1420).—OF. veél, later veau, ‘a calfe, or veale;’ Cot.—L.
uitellum, acc. of uitellus, a little calf, allied to witulus, a calf.-Gk.
iradés, the same (little used). Allied to Skt. vatsa-, a calf, vatsatara-,
a steer, vatsala, a cow anxious for her calf. . All from Idg.
*wetos,a year, as in Gk. éros, a year. See Wether. Hence the
sense of Skt, vatsa- was really ‘a yearling calf ;’ and the same sense
of ‘ yearling’ was the orig. one of L, uitulus, . From the same
sense of ‘year,’ differently applied, we have L. uetws, old in years,
aged, wetulus, a little oldman. See Veteran. Der. vell-um, q.v.

VEDA, knowledge; one of the ancient sacred books written in
Skt. (Skt.) Skt. véda-, ‘knowledge; the generic name for the
sacred writings of the Hindus, esp. the 4 collections called rig-véda,
yajur-veda, sama-veda, and atharva-véda ;’ Benfey, p. 900. Formed
by gradation (Skt. @€=Gk. o.=AS, @) from vid, to know, cognate
with E. Wit, q.v. The Skt. nom. case is védas.

VEDETTE, VIDETTE, a cavalry sentinel. (F.—Ital.—L.)
Modern; not in Todd’s Johnson.—MF, vedette, ‘a sentry; any
high place from which one may see afar off;’ Cot.—Ital. vedetia, a
horse-sentry ; also a sentry-box; formerly a watch-tower, a beacon,
a peeping-hole (Florio). An altered or dimin. form of Ital. veduia,
‘a high prospect’ (Florio); orig. fem. pp. of vedere, to see.—L.
uidére, to see; see Vision. See Korting, § 10156. @ Diez
takes it to be an Ital. corruption of veletta, a sentry-box; due to
confusion with vedere, to see (pp: veduto), from which vedetta cannot
(he thinks) be derived. Veletta is a dimin. of veglia, a watch,
watching, vigil; just as Span. veleta, a weather-cock (lit. a watcher),


VELOCIPEDE


is a dimin. of Span. vela, a watching, vigil (Diez). —L. uigilia; see
Vigil. But, as Korting notes, the dimin. of veglia would have been
veglietta, not veletta.

VEER, to turn round, change direction, swerve. (F.—L.) ‘ Vere
the main shete ;’ Spenser, F. Q.i.12. 1; ‘and vereth his main sheat,”
id. v.12. 18. ‘Vere the shete;’ Reliquize Antique, i. 2 (15th
cent.). [The spelling with e or ee is hard to explain; but it
may have been due to the confusion hetween the sound of ee in
late ME. and that of F. i. Sir P. Sidney writes wire; see
Nares.]=—F..virer, ‘to veer, turne round, wheele or whirle about ;’
Cot. B. The F. virer is the same word as Span. virar, birar, to
wind, twist, tack, or veer, Port. wirar, to turn, change, Prov. virar,
to turn, to change (Bartsch). Allied words are Port. viravolta, a cir-
cular motion, Ital. virolare, ‘ to scrue,’ i.e. twist round (Florio) ; &c.
The orig. sense is to turn round, and it appears as Late L. virare,
which is rather an old word (Diez) ; it appears also in F. en-vir-on,
round about, in a circle (whence E. environs), in F. vir-ole (whence
E. ferrule), and in MF, vir-ol-et, ‘a boy’s windmill,’ Cot. y. The
key to this difficult word lies in the sense of ‘ring’ or ‘ circle’ as
appearing in environ and-ferrule; the Late L. virola, a ring to bind
anything, answers to L. wiriola, a bracelet, dimin. of wiria, an
armlet, large ring, gen. used in the pl. form uiria. —4/WETI, to twist,
wind round; see Ferrule, Withy. @ The Du. vieren, to
veer, is merely borrowed (like our own word) from F. virer. The
old derivation of virer from L. gyrare cannot possibly be sustained ;
even the above solution is doubtful. See Diez; and Korting,
§ 10135. The latter refers (but obscurely) Late L. viradre to 4/WEL.
Der. (from L. uir-ia), en-vir-on, ferr-ule.

VEGETABLE, a plant for the table. (F.—L.) Properly an
adj., as used by Milton, P. L. iv. 220. The pl. vegetables is given
(both as E. and F.) in Supp. to Palsgrave, p. 1053. [Instead of
vegetables, Shak. has vegetives, Pericles, iii. 2. 36; and Ben Jonson
has vegetals, Alchemist, i. 1. 40.]—MF. vegetable, ‘vegetable, fit or
able to live;’ Cot.—L. uegetabilis, animating; hence, full of life.
Formed, with suffix -bilis, from L. wegeta-re, to enliven, quicken. =L.
uegetus, lively.—L. wegére, to excite, quicken, arouse; allied to wig-il,
wakeful, and uig-ére, to flourish. See Vigil, Vigorous. Der. (from
uegetare) veget-ate; veget-at-ion, from F. vegetation, ‘a giving of life,’
Cot. ; veget-at-ive (Palsgrave), from F. vegetatif, ‘ vegetative, lively,’
Cot.; veget-al (as above), from MF. vegetal, ‘ vegetall,’ Cot. ; veget-ar-
i-an, a modern coined word, to denote a vegetable-arian, or one who
lives on vegetables (though it should rather mean ‘ vigorous’) ; veget-
ar-i-an-ism,

VEHEMENT, passionate, very eager. (F.—L.) In Palsgrave.
= MF. vehement, ‘ vehement ;’ Cot. = L. wehementem, acc. of uehemens,
passionate, eager, vehement. Vehe- has been explained as equiva-
lent to wé-, ‘apart from,’ as in wé-cors, senseless; cf. Skt. vahis,
apart; cf. E, de-ment-ed. For mens, the mind, see Mental. Der.
vehement-ly ; vehemence (Levins), from MF. vehemence, ‘vehemence,’
from L. wehementia.

VEHICLE, a carriage, conveyance. (L.) ‘Alms are but the
vehicles of prayer ;* Dryden, Hind and Panther, 1. 1400. Englished
from L. uehiculum, a carriage.—L. weh-ere, to carry; with double
dimin. suffix -cu-lum.=—4/WEGH, to carry; whence also Skt. vak, to .
carry, Gk. 6x-os, a chariot. Brugmann, i. § 128. Der. vehicul-ar,
from L. uwehicularis, adj. And see veil, con-vex, in-veigh, vex, vein,
via-duct, voy-age.

VEIL, a curtain, covering, cover for the face, disguise. (F.—L.)
ME. veile, Ancren Riwle, p. 420.—OF. veile (Burguy), later voile,
‘a vayle;’ Cot.=mL. uélum, a sail; also, a cloth, covering. The
orig. sense was sail or ‘propeller’ of a ship; Curtius, 1. 237.—
Vélum is for *uexlum=*uec-slum; cf. uexillum, a standard. Brug:
mann, i. § 883.—L. weh-ere (pt. t. wex-i), to carry, bear along ; see
Vehicle. But Walde derives it from 4/ WEG, to weave; as seen in
Olrish fig-im, I weave; cf. W. gwe, a web of cloth. Der. veil, verb.

VEIN, a tube conveying blood to the heart, a small rib ona
leaf. (F.—L.) ME. veine, Gower, C. A. iii. 92 (bk. vii. 245);
Chaucer has veine-blood, C. T. 2749 (A 2747).—F. veing, a vein ;’
Cot.—L. uéna, a vein. For *uwecsna; perhaps (like wué-lum, see
Veil) from L. uweh-ere, to carry; a vein being the ‘conveyer’ of
blood. =4/WEGH, to carry; see Vehicle. Der. vein-ed. :
VELDT, an open grassy tract of country. (Du.) A term used in
S. Africa.—=MDu. veldt, ‘a field, or a campaine, Hexham; Du.
veld. ‘The same word as AS, feld, a field; see Field.
VELLUM, prepared skin of calves, &c., for writing on. (F.—L.)
ME. velim, Lydgate, Minor Poems, p. 204; spelt velyme in Prompt.
Pary., and velym in Palsgrave.—F. velin, ‘ vellam;’ Cot. Mod. F,
vélin. (For the change of final to m, compare venom.) —L,
uitulinus, adj., belonging to a calf.—L. uitulus, a calf; see Veal,
Cf. Late L. uitulinium, or pellis uitulina, vellum.
VELOCIPEDE, a light carriage for one person, propelled by


VELOCITY


the feet. (L.) Modern; coined from L. zélaci-, from uélox, swift ;
and ped-, stem: of pés, the foot, cognate with E. Foot. Thus the
sense is ‘swift-foot,’ or ‘ swift-footed.’: See Velocity.

VELOCITY, great speed. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave. — MF.
velocité, ‘velocity ;’ Cot. — L. acc. zéldcitatem, acc. of wuélécitas,
swiftness, speed.=L. wéldci-, decl. stem of wélox, swift; with suffix
-tis. The lit. sense of wélox is ‘ flying;’ if it be allied to wol-are,
to fly ;see Volatile.

VELVET, a cloth made from silk, with a close, shaggy pile;
also made from cotton. (F.—L.) ‘ Velvet, or velwet, Velvetus ;’
Prompt. Parv. Chaucer has the pl. velwéttés. (four syllables), C. T.
10958, F 644; whilst Spenser has vellet, Shep. Kal., May, 185.
[Again, the form vellure occurs in Holinshed, Descr. of England,
b. iii. c. 1 (R.); which is borrowed from F. velours, ‘ velvet,’ Cot.]
But velvet, velwet, velouet, vellet are from AF. velwet, veluet, Late L.
velluétum; from a Romanic type *villiitettum. Allied to Mltal.
veluto, ‘veluet,’ Florio; mod. Ital. velluto. B. The Ital. velluto
answers to a Late L. type *villitus, shaggy, allied to L. willdsus,
shaggy; whilst F. velours (OF. velous, the r being unoriginal)
answers to L. uillésus directly. —L. uillus, shaggy hair, a tuft of
hair; so that velvet means ‘ woolly’ or shaggy stuff, from its nap.
Allied to uellus, a fleece; see Wool. Der. velvet-y, velvet-ing.
VENAL, that can be bought, mercenary. (F.—L.) In Pope,
Epistle to Jervas, 1. 2.—MF. venal, ‘ vendible, saleable ;’ Cot. = L.
uéndlis, saleable, for sale.—L. uén-us, or uén-um, sale. Allied to
Gk. dvos, price, avy, a buying; Brugmann, i. § 329. Der.
venal-i-ty, from MF.  venalité, ‘venality, Cot.; from L. acc.
uénalitatem.

VEND, to sell. (F.—L.) ‘ Twenty thousand pounds worth
of this coarse commodity is yearly .. vended in the vicinage;’
Fuller, Worthies, Yorkshire. = F. vendre, ‘to sell;’ Cot. = L.
uendere, to sell; contracted from uénundare, to sell, which again
stands for wénum dare, to offer for sale, a phrase which occurs in
Claudian, &c.—L. uwénxum, sale; and dare, to give, offer;. see
Venal and Date (1). Der. vend-er or vend-or ; vend-ible, Merch.
Ven. i. I. 112, from F. vendible, ‘ vendible,’ Cot., from L. uendibilis,
saleable; we also find vend-able, a spelling due to MF. vendable
(Cot.), formed from the F. verb vendre ; vend-ibl-y, vend-ible-ness.
VENDETTA, a blood-feud; esp. in Corsica. (Ital.—L.) Ital.
vendetta, lit. ‘ vengeance, revenge.’ = L. vindicta, revenge; see Vin-
dictive.

VENEER, to overlay or face with a thin slice of wood. (G.—F.
—OHG.) This curious word, after being borrowed by French from
Old German, was again borrowed back from French, as if it had been
foreign to the G. language. It is not old in E., and the sense has
changed. It was orig. used with reference to marquetry-work.
‘ Veneering, a kind of inlaid work ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. Johnson
(quoting from Bailey) describes to veneer as signifying ‘to make a
kind of marquetry or inlaid work, whereby several thin slices of fine
wood of different sorts are fastened or glued on a ground of some
common wood.’ Also formerly spelt fanneer, as in Old Farming
Words (E.D.S.), Part I; and jfixeer, Smollett, France and Italy,
let. 28 (Dayies). The E. verb (older than the sb.) is borrowed
from G. furniren, to inlay, to veneer, lit. ‘to furnish’ or provide
small pieces of wood; from the careful arrangement of the pieces, =
F. fournir, ‘to furnish, supply, minister, find, provide of [i.e. with],
accommodate with ;” Cot.. A word of OHG. origin; see Furnish.
Der. veneer, sb., veneer-ing. Doublet, furnish.

VENERABLE, worthy of reverence. (F.—L.) In Shak. As
You Like It, ii. 7. 167.—MF. venerable, ‘venerable;’ Cot.—L.
uenerabilis, to be reverenced.—L. uenerari, to reverence, worship,
adore. = L, uener-, for *uenes-, stem of uenus, love ; allied to Skt. van,
to serye, to honour.—4/WEN, to love, to win; Fick, i. 768;
Benfey, p. 812. See Venereal, and Win. Der. venerabl-y,
venerable-ness; also (from pp. uenerdtus) venerate, Geo. Herbert,
The Church Porch, st. 45.; veneration, from MF. veneration, ‘ vener-
ation,’ Cot., from L. acc. ueneratidnem.

VENEREAL, pertaining to sexual intercourse. (L.) Spelt
veneriall in Levins. Coined, with suffix -al, from L. Venereus (also
Venerius), belonging to Venus. [The MF. word is venerien (Cot-
grave), whence venerean in Chaucer, C. T. 6191 (D 609),J—L.
Vener-, for *uenes-, stem of Venus, Venus, love. Allied to Skt. van,
to love. See Venerable and Win. Der. venery, sb., spelt venerie
in Levins, from L. Venerius,

VENERY, hunting, the sport of the chase. (F.—L.) ME.
venerie, Chaucer, C. ‘T. 166.—MF, venerie, ‘a hunt, or hunting;’
Cot. —MF. vener, ‘to hunt;’ id.—L. uénari, to hunt ; see Venison.
VENESECTION, blood-letting. (L.; and F.—L.) According
to Richardson, it is spelt ven@section in Wiseman’s Surgery, b. i.
c. 3.=L, uéne, uénae, gen, case of uéna, a vein; and F. section, See
Vein and Section.


VENT. 687
VENEW, VENUE, VENEY, a thrust received at playing


with weapons; a turn or bout at fencing. (F.—L.) In Merry

Wives, i. 1. 296; L.L.L. v. 1. 62.—MF. venué, ‘a coming, arrivall,
also a venny in fencing, a turn, trick;’ Cot. The sense is ‘an
arrival,’ hence a thrust that attains the person aimed at, one that
reaches home. Venue is the fem. of venu, pp. of venir, to come. —
L. wenire, to come, cognate with E. Come, q.v. Doublet,
venue, q.v.

VENGEANCE, retribution, vindictive punishment. (F.—L.)
ME. vengeance, vengeaunce; but spelt vengaunce, King Alisaunder,
4194.—F. vengeance, ‘vengeance;’ Cot.—F. venger, ‘to avenge,’
id.; with suffix -ance (<L. -antia). Cf. Span. vengar, Ital. ven-
giaré. = L, uindicare, to lay claim to, also to avenge ; cf. F. manger
<L. mandiicare. See Vindicate. Der. a-venge, re-venge (from
F. venger); also venge-ful, i.e. avenge-ful, Tit. Andron. v. 2. 51 $
venge-ful-ly.

VENTIAL, excusable, that may be pardoned. (F.—L.) ME.
uenial (=venial), Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 16, 1.9; P. Plowman, B. xiv.
92.—OF, venial (Littré).—L. uenialis, pardonable. = L. uenia, grace,
favour, kindness ; also, pardon. Allied to Skt. van, to love. —4/WEN,
to love, win; see Venerable and Win. Der. venial-ly, venial-ness
or venial-i-ty.

VENISON, the flesh of animals taken in hunting, esp. flesh of
deer. (F.—L.) ME. veneison; spelt weneysun, Havelok, 1726,
veneson, Rob. of Glouc. p. 243, 1. 101.—OF. veneisun (Burguy),
later venaison, ‘ venison, the flesh of (edible) beasts of chase, as the
deer, wild boar,’ &c., Cot. —L. uénatidnem, acc. of uéndtio, the chase ;
also, that which is hunted, game; cf. uéndtus, pp. of uénari, to hunt.
See Gain (2). Der. (from L. uénar2) venery, q.v.

VENOM, poison. (F.—L.) ME. venim; spelt venyme, King
Alisaunder, 2860; venym, Rob. of Glouc. p. 43, 1. 1010.—OF.
venim, ‘venome,’ Cot. Wealso find OF. velin; mod. F. venin, = L.
uenénum, poison. (For change of x» to m, cf. vellum.) Perhaps
uenénum is for *uenesmum, a love-potion; from *wenes-, *uenos-; cf.
uenus, love. Der. venom-ous, ME. venimous, Ayenbite of Inwyt,
p. 203, 1. 17, from F. venimeux, ‘ venomous,’ Cot., from L. wenéndsus,
poisonous ; venxomous-ly, -ness.

VENOUS, contained in a vein. (L.) Modern; not in Todd’s
Johnson. Englished from L. uéndsus, belonging to a vein. — L. uéna,
a vein; see Vein.

VENT (1), an opening for air or smoke, an air-hole, flue. (F.—
L.) ‘A vent, meatus, porus; To vent, aperire, euacuare;’ Levins.
Halliwell gives Somerset vent-hole, a button-hole in a wristband. It
is most likely that the word has been connected in popular etymology
with F,. vent, the wind, as if it were a hole to let wind or air in;
but the senses of ‘ aperture’ and ‘ wind’ are widely different. The
older spelling was fent or fente, used in the sense of slit in a garment,
whence the notion of ‘ button-hole.’ The Prompt. Parv. gives: ‘ Fente
of a clothe, fibulatorium,’ on which Way notes that ‘the fent or vent,
in the 13th cent., appears at the collar of the robe, . . being a short
slit closed by a brooch, which served for greater convenience in put-
ting on a dress so fashioned as to fit closely round the throat ;’ see
the whole note. ‘The coller and the vente;’ Assemblee of Ladies,
526. ‘Fent of a gowne, fente;’ Palsgrave. The sense was easily
extended to slits and apertures of all kinds, esp. as the F. original
was unrestricted. =F. fente, ‘a cleft, rift, chinke, slit, cranny ;’ Cot.
A participial sb. from the verb fendre, to cleave.—L. jindere, to
cleave; see Fissure. Der. vent, verb, to emit from an orifice, as
in ‘can he vent [emit] Trinculos ?’ Temp. ii. 2. 111 ; but it is tolerably
certain that the use of this verb was influenced by F. vent, wind; see
Vent (3). And see Vent (2).

VENT (2), sale, utterance of commodities, and hence, generally,
utterance, outlet, publication. (F.—L.) ‘ The merchant-adventurers
likewise. . did hold out bravely; taking off the commodities..
though they lay dead upon their hands for want of vent ;’. Bacon,
Life of Henry VII, ed. Lumby, p. 146, 1. 6. ‘ Vent of utterance of the
same,” viz. of ‘spices, drugges, and other commodities;’ Hakluyt’s
Voyages, i. 347. ‘ Find the meanes to haue a vent to make sales ;’
id. i, 356.—F. vente, ‘a. sale, or selling, an alienation, or passing
away for money,’ &c.; Cot. Vente is a participial sb. from the F.
vendre, ‘to sell, Cot. =L. uendere, to sell; see Vend. Der. vent,
to utter, as in: ‘when he found ill money had been put into his
hands, he would never suffer it to be vented again,’ Burnet, Life of
Hale (R.); but it is tolerably certain that the use of vent as a verb
has been largely influenced by confusion with Vent (1) and Vent (3),
and it is extremely difficult to determine its complete history without
very numerous examples of its use.

VENT (3), to snuff up air, breathe, or puff out, to expose to air.
(F.—L.) ‘See howe he [a bullock] venteth into the wynd ;’ Spenser,
Sheph. Kal. Feb. 75. Explained by ‘snuffeth in the wind’ in the


-Glosse, but more likely it means to puff out or exhale. In Spenser,


688 VENTAIL


F. Q. iii. 1. 42, we are told that Britomart ‘ vented up her umbriere,
And so did let her goodly visage to appear.’ Here the poet was
probably thinking of F. vent, the wind, and of the part of the helmet
called the ventail or aventail, which was the lower half of the movable
front of a helmet as distinct from the upper half or visor, with which
it is often confused; see my note on awentaile in Chaucer, C. T.
Group E, 1204. If we had a large collection of quotations illustra-
tive of the use of vent as a verb, I suspect it would appear that the
connexion with the F. vent, wind, was due solely to a misunder-
standing and misuse of the word, and that it is etymologically due
to Vent (1) or Vent (2), or to confusion of both; and, in par-
ticular, to inability to account for Vent (1), shown above to be
used in place of ME. fente. That writers used the word with
reference to air is certain; we have: ‘there’s none [air] abroad so
wholesome as that you vent;’ Cymb. i. 2. 5; also: ‘which have
poisoned the very ar of our church wherein they were vented ;’ Bp.
Hall, Ser. Eccl. iii. 4 (R.); and hence the sbs. ventage, venting-hole
(see below). =F. venter, ‘ (the wind) to blow or puffe,’ Cot.—F. vent,
the wind.=L. wentum, acc. of uentus, wind, cognate with E. Wind,
q.v. Der. vent-age, the air-hole of a flute (app. a coined word),
Hamlet, iii. 2. 373; vent-ing-hole, an outlet for vapour, Holland,
tr. of Pliny, b. xxxi. c. 3. § last. And see vent-ail, vent-il-ate.

VENTAIL, the lower half of the movable part of the front
of a helmet. (F.—L.) In Spenser, F. Q. iii. 2. 24, iv. 6. 19. ME.
ventaile, Early E. Wills, ed. Furnivall, p. 19, 1. 4 (1411); also
auentaile, Chaucer, C. T. 9080 (E 1204), which is the same word
with the addition of F. prefix a- (<L. ad-).—AF. ventaile, Lang-
toft, ii. 428; MF. ventaille, ‘the breathing-part of a helmet.’=—F.
venter, ‘to blow or puffe,’ Cot.; with suffix -aile<L. -d-cu-lum.=F.
vent, wind.=L. uentum, acc. of wentus, wind; see Vent (3),
Ventilate: and Wind.

VENTILATE, to fan with wind, to open to air, expose to
air or to the public view. (L.) Spelt ventylate in Palsgrave. Venti-
late is used as a pp. by Sir T. Elyot, The Governour, b. i. c. 25, § 3;
and in Trevisa, il. 141, 299 (later text). — L. uentilatus, pp. ofuentilare,
to blow, winnow, ventilate. From an adj. *wentilus (not used), from
uentus, wind, cognate with E. Wind. Der. ventilat-or, from L.
uentilator, a winnower; ventilat-ion, MF. ventilation, ‘ a ventilation,
breathing,’ Cot., from L. acc. wentilatidnem.

VENTRAL, belonging to the belly. (L.) Added by Todd to
Johnson.=L. uentralis, belonging to the belly. —L. uentr-, for uenter,
the belly. Der. ventri-cle, q. v.; ventri-loquist, q. v.

VENTRICLE, the stomach; a part of the heart. (F.—L.)
In Cotgrave; and in Lanfrank, Cirurgie, p. 113.—F. ventricule, ‘the
ventricle, the place wherein the meat sent from the stomack is
digested, some call so the stomack itselfe;’ Cot.=L. uentriculum,
acc. of uentriculus, the stomach, also a ventricle of the heart. A
double dimin. (with suffix -cu-lu-) from uentri-, decl. stem of uenter,
the belly; see Ventral. Der. ventricul-ar.

VENTRILOQUIST, one who speaks so that the voice seems
to come from a distance or from some one else. (L.) ‘ Ventriloguium,
a speaking in the belly ;? Ady, Discovery of Witches (1661), p. 77.
In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674 ; but Phillips has ventriloquus, ‘a person
that speaks inwardly ;’ this is the true L. word, whence ventrilogu-ist
has since been formed, by adding the suffix -ist (L. -ista, Gk. -torns).
=L. uentriloguus, a ventriloquist, lit. one who speaks from (or in)
the belly. = L. wentri-, decl. stem of wenter, the belly ; and Jogu-z, to
speak; see Ventral and Loquacious. Der. ventrilogu-ism.

VENTURE, chance, luck, hazard. (F.—L.) Common in Shak.
both as sb. and vb.; as sb., Merch. Ven. i. 3.92; asa verb, id. iii. 2.
to. It is a headless form of ME. aventure or auenture, which also
took the form Adventure, q.v. Der. ventur-ous, Mids. Nt. Dr. iv.
I. 39, short for ME. auenturous, later adventurous; ventur-ous-ly,
ness. Also venture-some, in Strype, Eccles. Mem., Henry VIII, an.
1546 (R.), where the suffix -some is English.

VENUE, the same as Venew, q.v. (F.—L.) As a law-term,
it is the place where the jury are summoned to come; from F, venué,
‘a coming, arrival, approach, a passage, accesse,’ Cotgrave; which
is merely another sense of venew, as above. B. Blackstone has:
‘a change of the venue, or visne (that is, the vicinia or neighbourhood
in which the injury is declared to be done) ;7 Comment. b. iii. c. 20.
His interpretation of visne as having the same sense as L. wicinia is
right; but that has nothing to do with the etymology of venue,
which is, of course, a different word. Der. a-venue.

VENUS, the goddess of love. (L.) In Chaucer, C. T. 1538
(A 1536).—L. Venus; see Venereal.

VERACIOUS, truthful. (L.) A late word; Phillips, ed. 1706,
has only the sb. veracity. Coined from L. uéraci-, decl. stem of
uérax, truthful; with suffix -ows.—L. uér-us, true. B. The orig.
sense is ‘credible;’? see Very. Der. verac-i-ty, Englished from L.
wéracitas, truthfulness.


VERGE


VERANDA, VERANDAH, a kind of covered balcony.
(Port. —L.?) Modern; added by Todd to Johnson; it should be
spelt varanda. ‘The other gate leads to what in this country
[India] is called a veranda or feranda, which is a kind of piazza or
landing-place before you enter the hall or inner apartments ;’
Archeologia (1787), viii. 254. — Port. varanda, a balcony. Marsden,
in his Malay Dict., 1812, p. 30, has: ‘bardndah (Portuguese), a
yaranda, balcony, or open gallery toa house ;’ but the Malay word is,
as Marsden says, adapted from the Portuguese. Cf. OSpan. varanda,
in the sense of balustrade or stair-railing ; as early as A.D. 1505; see
the quotation in Yule. Perhaps from Port. and Span. vara, a
rod; from L. wdara,a forked pole. Cf. Port. varal, the shaft of a
post-chaise. Dryden has vare, a rod; Absalom, i. 595. 4 Hence
also mod. Skt. varanda, a portico; the Skt. (or Hind.) word being
quite modern. Minsheu’s Span. Dict. (1623) has ‘ Vara, a rod;’
and ‘ Varanda, railes to leane the brest on.’

VERB, the word; in grammar, the chief word of a sentence.
(F.—L.) ME. verbe (15th cent.), Relig. Antique, ii.14. Palsgrave
gives a ‘Table of Verbes.’ =F. verbe, ‘a verbe ;’ Cot. =—L. uerbum,
aword,averb. f. Here the L. 0} represents an Idg. dh (>Teut. d) ;
and uerbum is cognate with E. Word, q.v.—4/WER, to speak ;
cf. Gk. elp-ew (<Fép-yev), to speak; Fick, i. 772. Der. verb-al
(Palsgrave), from F, verbal, ‘ verball,’ Cot., from L. uerbalis, belong-
ing to a word; verbal-ly; verbal-ise, to turn into a verb, a coined
word; verbal-ism; verb-i-age, wordiness, not in Johnson’s Dict., but
used by him on April 9, 1778 (Boswell), from F. verbiage, a late F.
word, coined (according to Littré) from OF. verboier (*verbier), to
talk; verb-ose, wordy (Phillips), from L. uerbdsus; verb-ose-ly, verb-
ose-ness, verb-os-i-ty. Also verbatim, t Hen. VI, iii. 1. 13, from L.
uerbatim, adv. word by word.

VERBENA, vervain. (L.) See Vervain.

VERDANT, green, flourishing. (F.—L.)
g. 13. Coined as if froma F. *verdant, substituted for F. verdissant,
pres. part. of verdir, ‘to flourish, to wax green;’ Cot.—F. verd,
green.=L, uiridem, acc. of uiridis, green. See Vert. Cf. also OF.
verdoyant, becoming green (Supp. to Godefroy). Der. verdant-ly,
verdanc-y; also verd-ure, Temp. i, 2. 87, from F. verdure, ‘ verdure,’
Cot.; also verdur-ous (Nares). And see farthingale, verdigris,
verjuice.

VERDERER, a wood-ward, forester. (F.—L.) ‘ Forresters,
verderers;’ Howell, Famil. Letters, vol. iv. let. 16. Formed by
adding -er (needlessly) to AF. verder, which is glossed by ‘ wode-
ward’ in W. de Bibbesworth; Wright’s Voc. i. 164.—Late L.
viridarius, a forester (Ducange).=—L. wirid-is, green (above).

VERDICT, the decision of a jury, decision. (F.—L.) Lit. ‘a
true saying.’ The true word is verdit, pedantically altered to the
mongrel form verdict, to bring the latter half of it nearer to the L.
spelling. ME. verdit, Chaucer, C. T. 789 (A 787).—OF. verdit, a
verdict ; see verdict in Littré, the mod. F. form being borrowed again
from English. =—L. uéré dictum, truly said, which passed into Late L.
verédictum, with the sense of true saying or verdict, occurring
A.D. 1287 (Ducange). Formed similarly to bene-diction, male-diction.
=L. wéré, truly, adv., from uérus, true; and dictum, a saying, orig.
neut. of pp. of dicere, to say; see Very and Diction.

VERDIGRIS, the rust of bronze, copper, or brass. (F.—L.)
Spelt verdgrese in Arnold’s Chronicle (1502), repr. 1811, p. 743
verdegrees, Chaucer, C. T. 16258 (G 790). Cf. MF. verd de gris,
‘ verdigrease, Spanish green,’ Cot.; spelt verte grez in the 13th cent.
(Littré). But the Prompt. Parv. has: ‘ Verte grece, viride grecum, flos
eris.’ Soalso: ‘ Viride grecum, verdegrece;’ Wright’s Voc. 619. 35.
Hence the sense is ‘Greek green,’ or ‘green of Greece’; and we
may explain ME. verte grece as from AF. vert de Grece, for which
see Vie de S. Gile, 853. See Verdant. See Academy, no, 1118,
Oct. 1893.

VERDITER, a green pigment. (F.—L.) Adapted from MF.
verd de terre, a green pigment; Cot.—L. acc. wiridem, green (see
Verdant); dé, of; terra, earth.

VERGE (1), a wand of office, extent of jurisdiction, edge, brink.
(F.—L.) In the sense of edge or brink it is quite a different word
from verge, to incline (see below), though some late writers may
have confused the words, as indeed is done in Johnson’s Dict. The
sense of ‘edge’ follows at once from the use of verge (as a law-
term) to mean a limit or circuit, hence a circle, Rich. II, il. 1. 102;
cf. i. 1.93. In the sense of ‘ wand,’ it is best known by the deriva-
tive verger, a wand-bearer. ME. verge. ‘Verge, in a wrytys
[wright’s] werke, Virgata;’ Prompt. Parv. Here it must mean a
yard (in length); cf. verge le roy, a standard length; Liber
Albus, p. 278.—F. verge, ‘a rod, wand, stick; also, a sergeant’s
verge or mace; also, a yard;..a plaine hoope, or gimmal, ring;
also, a rood of land;’ Cot.—L. uirga, a twig, rod, wand. Der.
verg-er, a wand-bearer, ‘that bereth a rodde in the churche’ (Pals-


In Spenser, F. Q. i.


VERGE


grave), from MF, verger, ‘ one that beares a verge before a magistrate,
a verger,’ Cot., from Late L. wirgdrius, an apparitor, occurring
A.D. 1370 (Ducange),

VERGE (2), to tend towards, tend, slope, border on. (L.)
‘Verging more and more westward;’ Fuller, Worthies, Somerset-
shire (R.).—L. wergere, to bend, turn, incline, verge towards, incline.
Allied to Skt. vyjana-, crooked, vyj, to exclude (of which the orig.
sense seems to be to bend, Benfey).—4/WERG, to bend, turn,
force; Fick, i. 772. 4 The phrase ‘to be on the verge of’ is per-
haps connected with this verb by many writers; but belongs to
Verge (1). Der. con-verge, di-verge.

VERIFY, to show to be true, confirm by evidence. (F.—L.)
‘I verifye, Je verifie;’ Palsgrave. = MF. verifier, ‘ to verifie;’ Cot. =
L. uérificare, to make true.—L. uéri-, for uérus, true; and -ficare,
for facere, tomake; see Very and Fact. Der. verifi-er, verifi-able,
verific-at-ion, from MF. verification, ‘a verification, verifying,’ Cot.

VERILY, adv. ; see Very.

VERISIMILITUDS, likelihood. (F.—L.) In Holland, tr.
of Plutarch, p. 845 (R.).—MF. verisimilitude, ‘likelihood ;” Cot. =
L. uérisimilitudo, likelihood. =L, uéri similis, likely, like the truth.
= L. uéri, gen. of uérum, the truth, orig. neut. of wérus, true; and
similis, like; see Very and Similar.

VERITY, truth, a true assertion. (F.—L.) Spelt verytie in
Levins. = MF. verité, ‘ verity;’ Cot.—L. uérititem, acc. of uéritis,
truth. —L. wérus, true; see Very. Der. verit-able, spelt verytable in
Palsgrave, from MF. veritable, ‘true,’ Cot., a coined word.

VERJUICEH, a kind of vinegar. (F.—L.) ME. vergeous, verious,
P. Plowman; A. v. 70 (footnote).—F. verjus, ‘verjuice, esp. that
which is made of sowre, and unripe grapes;’ Cot. Lit. ‘green
juice.’ =F’. vert (spelt verd in Cotgrave), green; and jus, juice; see
Verdant and Juice.

VERMETL, vermilion. (F.—L.) ‘A vermeil-tinctured lip ;’
Milton, Comus, 752.—F. vermeil, vermilion; see Vermilion.

VERMICELLI, dough of wheat flour formed into thin worm-
like rolls. (Ital.—L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706. = Ital. vermicelli, lit.
‘little worms;’ from the shape. It is the pl. of vermicello, a little
worm, which is the dimin. of verme, a worm.—L,. wermem, acc. of
uermis, a worm, cognate with E. Worm.

VERMICULAR, pertaining toa worm. (L.) Phillips, ed.
1706, has: ‘ Vermiculares, certain muscles, &c.; Vermicularis,
worm-grass, lesser house-leek; Vermiculated, inlaid, wrought with
checker-work ; Vermiculation, worm-eating ;’ &c. Allare derivatives
from L. wermiculus, a little worm, double dimin. of wermis, a worm ;
see Worm, Der. So also vermi-form, worm-shaped; from
uermi-, decl. stem of wermis, and form; also vermi-fuge, a remedy
that expels a worm, from L. -fugus, putting to flight, from fugare,
to put to flight; see Fugitive. And see vermilion, vermin,
vermicelli,

VERMILION, a scarlet colouring substance obtained from
cochineal, &c. (F.—L.) ‘ Vermylyone, minium ;’ Prompt. Parv. ;
spelt vermyloun, Wyclif, Exod. xxxix. 1 (later version). =F. vermillon,
‘vermillion; . . also,a little worm;’ Cot.—F. vermeil, ‘ vermillion ;’
id. —L. wermiculus, a little worm; double dimin. of wermis, a worm;
see Vermicular and Worm. { For the reason of the name,
see Crimson and Cochineal; but vermilion is now generally
made of red lead, or various mineral substances, and must have been
so made at an early date; it was perhaps naméd merely from its
resemblarice to crimsoz.

VERMIN, any small obnoxious insect or animal. (F.—L.)
ME. vermine, Chaucer, C. T. 8971 (E1095).—F. vermine, ‘ vermine ;
also little beasts ingendred of corruption and filth, as lice, fleas, ticks,
mice, rats;’ Cot. As if from a L. adj. *werminus, formed from


uermi-, decl. stem of wermis, a worm; see Wermicular and:


Worm.

VERNACULAR, native. (L.) ‘In the vernacular dialect ;’
Fuller, Worthies, General (R.); and in Phillips, ed. 1706. Blount
has vernaculous. Formed with suffix -ar (L. -aris) from L. werna-
cul-us, belonging to home-born slaves, domestic, native, indigenous ;
double dimin. of L. werna, a home-bom slave. . Verna is for
*yes-ina, dwelling in one’s house, from 4/WES, to dwell, live, be;
see Was. Brugmann, ii. § 66. Der. vernacular-ly.

VERNAL, belonging to spring. (L.) Spelt vernall in Minsheu,
ed. 1627. —L. werndlis, vernal; extended from L. wernus, belonging
to spring. L. wer, the spring.4-Gk. éap (for *Féoap), the spring ;
Russ. vesma, the spring; Lithuan. wasara, summer; Icel. var; Dan.
vaar; Swed. var. B. All from 4/WES, to brighten, dawn; cf. Skt.
vasanta-, spring, ush, to burn, L. auréra, dawn; Olrish fair, W.

wawr, dawn. Fick, i. 780.

VERNIER, a short scale made to slide along a graduated instru-
ment for measuring intervals between its divisions. (F.) So named
from its inventor (1631). ‘Peter Vernier, of Franche Comté; in-


VERY — 689


ventor of scale, born 1580, died Sept. 14, 1637;’ Hole, Brief Bio-
graphical Dictionary.

VERSATILE, turning easily from one thing to another. (F.—
L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706. =F, versatil, ‘ quickly turning ;’ Cot. = L.
uersatilis, that turns round, movable, versatile.=L. uersdre, to turn
often, frequentative of uertere, to turn (pp. wersus); see Verse.
Des. versatil-i-ty.

VERSE, a line of poetry, poetry, a stanza, short portion of the
Bible or of a hymn. (L.) In very early use, and borrowed from Latin
directly, not through the F. vers. ‘ Veerce, verse, Versus;’ Prompt.
Parv. Spelt fers in the Ormulum, 11943. AS. fers, a verse, a line
of poetry ; ‘ht man todalv pa fers on r&dinge’= how one divides the
verse in reading; Ailfric’s Grammar, ed. Zupitza, p. 291, 1. 2.—
Late L. versus, a verse; L. wersus, a turning, a line, row; so named
from the turning to begin a new line. [Vanitek separates wersus, a
furrow, which he connects with uerrere, to sweep.|=—L. wersus, pp.
of wertere, to turn. —4/WERT, to turn; whence also E. worth, verb,
to become; see Worth (1). Der. vers-ed, Milton, P. R. iv. 327,
only in the phr. versed in=conversant with, and used (instead of
versate) as a translation of L. uersdatus, pp. of uersari, to keep turn-
ing oneself about, passive form of the frequentative of uertere; and
see vers-i-fy, vers-ion, &c. Also (from wuertere), ad-vert, ad-verse,
ad-vert-ise, anim-ad-vert, anni-vers-ary, a-vert, a-verse, contro-vert,
con-vert, con-verse, di-vert, di-vers, di-verse, di-vers-i-fy, di-vorce, e-vert,
in-ad-vert-ent, intro-vert, in-vert, in-verse, mal-vers-at-ion, ob-verse,
per-vert, per-verse, re-vert, re-verse, sub-vert, sub-vers-ion, tergi-vers-
at-ion, trans-verse, tra-verse, uni-verse, vers-at-ile, vert-ebra, vert-ex,
vert-ig-o, vort-ex; and see verst.

RSIFY, to make verses. (F.—L.) ME. versifien, P. Plow-
man, B, xv. 367.—F. versifier, ‘to versifie,’ Cot.=L. uersificare, to
versify, = L. uwersi-, for wersus, a verse ; and -ficare, for facere, to make;
see Verse and Fact. Der. versific-at-ion, in Holland, tr. of
Plutarch, p. 977 (R.), from F. versification (omitted by Cotgrave),
from L. acc. uersificatidnem; versifi-er, Sidney, Apology for Poetrie,
ed. Arber, p. 49.

VERSION, a translation, statement. (F.—L.) Formerly used
in the sense of turning or change; Bacon’s Essays, Ess. 58 (Of Vicis-
situde). = F. version, a version, a translation (not given in Cotgrave).
— Late L. uersidnem, acc. of versio, regularly formed from wers-, as in
uers-us, pp. of wertere, to turn.

VERST, a Russian measure of length. (Russ.) In Hakluyt’s
Voyages, i. 388, 1. 30.— Russ. verséa, a verst, 3,500 Eng. feet, a verst-
post; also,age. For *vert-t@; from 4/WERT, asin Russ. vertiet(e),
to turn. Brugmann, ii. § 79.

VERT, green, in heraldry. (F.—L.) In Blount, ed. 1674. From
F. vert, green; formerly verd, Cot.=—L. uiridem, acc. of uiridis, green.
Cf. L. uirére, to be green.4-W. gwyrdd, green; Corn. guirt. Or (if
these Celtic words are borrowed from L.) perhaps allied to vivid ;
cf. Skt. ji-ra-, active, j2-va-, living. Brugmann, ii. § 74.

VERTEBRA, one of the small bones of the spine. (L.) In
Phillips, ed. 1706.—L. uertebra, a joint, a vertebra.—L. wert-ere, to
turn; see Verse. Der. vertebr-al, a coined word; vertebr-ate,
vertebr-at-ed, from L. uertebratus, jointed.

VERTEX, the top, summit. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706; the
adj. vertical is in Cotgrave.—L. uertex, the top, properly the turning-
point, esp. the pole of the sky (which is the turning-point of the
stars), but afterwards applied to the zenith. —L. wertere, to turn; see
Verse. An older form of uertex was uortex. Brugmann, i. § 144.
Der. vertic-al, from F. vertical, ‘ verticall, Cot., from L. wertic-dlis,
vertical, from uertic-, stem of vertex. Hence vertical-ly, Doublet,
vortex.

VERTIGO, giddiness. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706. —L. uertigo
(gen. wertigin-is), a turning or whirling round, giddiness. = L. wertere,
to turn ; see Verse.

VERVAIN, a plant of the genus verbena. (F.—L.) ME. ver-
veyne, Gower, C. A. ii. 262 (bk. v. 4039). =F. verveine, ‘ verveine;’
Cot. =—L. uerbéna, used in pl. werbéne, sacred boughs, usually of olive,
laurel, or myrtle. Allied to werber, a rod, properly a twig, shoot.

VERVE, spirit, energy, enthusiasm. (F.—L.) ‘If he... is
resolved to follow his own verve, as the French call it;’ Dryden,
Ded. of the Aineid.—F. verve, ‘a brawling, jangling, jarring; also,
an odd humour in a man;’ Cot. Supposed to represent a Late L.
*yerva, for L. uerba, lit. ‘words,’ i.e. talk, a neut. pl. treated as a
fem. sing. ; pl. of L. werbum, a word; see Verb. (So Hatzfeld).

VERY, true, real, actual. (F.—L.) ME. verrai, verrei; ‘ verrey
charite’=true charity, P. Plowman, B. xvii. 289; ‘ verrei man’? =
true man, id. C. xxii. 153. It occurs as verray in An Old Eng.
Miscellany, p. 27, 1. 26, in the O. Kentish Sermons (about A. D. 1240).
=OF. verai, later vrai (in Cotgrave vray), true. Cf. Prov. verai,
true. It answers toa Late L. type *véracus, not found; similarly,
Scheler compares F, Cambrai, Douai from L. Cameracum, Duacum,


Le


690 VESICLE


Cf. Schwan, § 56. This *vérdcus is a by-form of L. uérax (stem
uérdc-), truthful, extended from wérus, true (represented in OF. by ver,
veir, voir, true). B. The orig. sense of wérus is ‘existing.’ For
*yes-ro-; from 4/WES, to be.--W. gwir, Olrish fir, true; cf. Russ.
viera, faith; G. wahr, true; AS. wér, true. Brugmann, i. § 367;

§ 818 (note 3). Der. very, adv., as in ‘very wel,’ i.e. truly well,
Sir T. More, Works, p. 108 h; veri-ly, adv., ME. verraily, veraily,
Chaucer, C. T. 13590 (B 1850). Also (from L. wérus) veri-fy, veri-
similar, veri-ty, ver-ac-ious ; ver-dict; a-ver.

VESICLE, a small tumour, bladder-like cell. (L.) Phillips, ed.
1706, has: ‘ Vesicula, a vesicle, or little bladder.’ Englished from
L. wésicula, a little bladder; dimin. of wésica, a bladder. Allied to
Skt. vasti-, the bladder. Der. vesicul-ar, adj. ; also vesic-at-ion, the
raising of blisters on the skin.

VESPER, the evening star; the evening; pl. vespers, even-song.
(L.) In the ecclesiastical sense, the word does not seem to be old,
as the E. name for the service was eve-song or even-song. Vespers
occurs in Bp. Taylor, vol. ii.ser..7 (R.) ; and see the Index to Parker
Soc. Publications. But we already find vesper, in the sense of evening-
star, in Gower, C. A. ii. Tog (bk. iv. 3209).—L. wesper, the evening-
star, the evening; cf. wespera, even-tide. Hence OF. vespre (F.
vépre), ‘the evening,’ Cot., and vespres, ‘ even-song,’ id.-Gk. éomepos,
adj. and sb., evening, €onepos dornp, the evening star; éomépa, even-
tide; Olrish fescor, W. wcher, evening. Brugmann, i. §§ 329,
565 (3); Stokes-Fick, p. 278.

VESSEL, a utensil for holding liquids, &c., a ship. (F.—L.)
ME. vessel, Chaucer, C. T. 5682 (D 100). —AF. vessel, a vessel, OF.
vaissel, veissel, a ship (Burguy) ; later vaisseau, ‘a vessel, of what kind
soever ;’ Cot.—L. wascellum, a small vase or urn; dimin. of uds, a
vase, whence also the dimin. wasculum ; see Vascular, Vase.

VEST, a garment, waistcoat. (L.) In Milton, P. L. xi. 241.—L.
uestis, a garment; orig. the act of putting on clothes (Bréal).
Formed (with Idg. suffix -#i-) from 4/WES, to clothe, protect ; cf.
Skt. vas, to put on (clothes), Gk. ev-vupe (<Féo-vupr), I clothe,
éo-0ns, clothing, Goth. gawasjan, to clothe, wasti, clothes ; Curtius,
i. 470. Der. vest, vb., formerly used in such phrases as to vest one
with supreme power, and (less properly) ¢o vest supreme power in one ;
see Phillips, ed. 1706; hence vest-ed, fully possessed. And see vest-
ment, vest-ry, vest-ure. Also di-vest, in-vest, tra-vest-y.

VESTAL, chaste, pure. (F.—L.) As adj. in Shak. Romeo, iii.
3. 38; as sb., a Vestal virgin, priestess of Vesta, Antony, iii. 12. 31.
=F, vestal, a Vestal virgin; see Cotgrave.=—L. Vestalis, belonging to
a Vestal, also (for Vestalis uirgo), a priestess of Vesta.—L. Vesta, a
Roman goddess; goddess of the flocks and household.+-Gk. ‘Eovia,
daughter of Chronos and Rhea, goddess of the domestic hearth. =
WES, to dwell (Walde). See Was.

VESTIBULE, a porch. (L.) In. Swinburne, Travels in Spain,
p. 216. Phillips has only the L. form vestibulum, Englished from
L. uestibulum, a fore-court, entrance-court, entrance. Lit. ‘ that
which forms a part of the abode.’ Perhaps from L. *wes-ti-, a
dwelling; with suffix -bulum, as in sessi-bulum, a seat. Cf. Skt.
vasta-, vastu-, a house, OHG. wist, an abode; from 4/WES, to
dwell (Walde).

VESTIGEH, a foot-print, a trace. (F.—L.) In Blount’s Gloss.,
ed. 1674.—F. vestige, ‘a step, foot-step, track, trace;’? Cot.—L.
uestigium, a foot-step, track. B. Of doubtful origin ; see Walde.

VESTMENT, a garment, long robe. (F.—L.) ME. vestiment ;
pl. vestimenz, Ancren Riwle, p. 418. This form occurs as late as in
Spenser, F. Q. iii. 12. 29 ; whilst the Prompt. Parv. has both vest-
ment and vestymente.=OF. vestement, ‘a vestment,’ Cot. (Mod. F.
vétement).=L, uestimentum, a garment.=L. westi-re, to clothe.=L.
uesti-, decl. stem of westis; see Vest.

VESTRY, a place for keeping vestments. (F.—L.) ME.
vestrye, Prompt. Parv. Slightly altered from OF. vestiairie, whence
MF. vestiaire, ‘the vestry in a church ;’ Cot.—L. westidrium, a ward-
robe; orig. nent. of uestidrius, adj., belonging to a vest or robe. =L,
uesti-, decl. stem of uestis, a garment; see Vest.

VESTURE, dress, a robe. (F.—L.) In P. Plowman, B. i. 23.
= OF. vestéure, MF. vesture, ‘a clothing, arraying;’ Cot.—Late L,
uestitura, clothing. =L. westit-us, pp. of uestire, to clothe.=L. uesii-,
decl. stem of westis; see Vest. Cf. E. in-vestiture.

VETCH, a genus of plants. (F.—L.) The same as fitch; pl.
Jitches, Isaiah xxviii. 25, Ezek. iv.g (A.V.). In the earlier of Wyclif’s
versions of Isaiah xxviii. 25, the word is written jicche, and in the
later fetchis, Baret (Alvearie) gives: ‘ Fitches, Vicia . . Plin. Bimor;
A vinciendo, vt Varroni placet ;’ Bible Word-book, ed. Eastwood and
Wright. For the variation of the initial letter, cf. fane and vane, fat
and vat; the variation is dialectal, and in the present case the right
form is that with initial v. The correct ME. spelling would be
veche; we actually find ‘ Orobus, veck’ in Voc. 599. 26; also ‘ Hec
uicia, Anglice feche’ in Voc. 664. 24, in a vocabulary strongly marked


VICE


by Northern forms ; feche being the Northern form corresponding to


the Southern veche.=ONorth. F. veche: (Walloon veche), OF. vece,-
MF. vesce, a vetch. Palsgrave has: ‘ Fetche, a lytell pease, wesse,
ueche, lentille;’ whilst Cotgrave has: ‘ Vesce, the pulse called fitch
or vitch.’=L. wicia, a vetch; whence also G. wicke, Du. wikke.
B. As the vetch has tendrils, Varro’s derivation is perhaps to be
accepted ; viz. from the base WEIK, to bind, as appearing in uincire,
to bind, winca, a plant (orig. a climbing one). Cf. 4/WEJ, to wind,,
whence L. wi-tis, a vine, ui-men, a pliant twig. See Withy.

VETERAN, experienced, long exercised in military life. (L.)
In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —L. weterdnus, old, veteran, experienced ;
as sb., a veteran.—L. ueter-, for *wetes-, stem of uetus, old, aged ; lit.
‘advanced in years.’ Cf. Gk. éros (=Fét-os), a year, Skt. vatsa-, a
year. See Veal. Der. veteran, sb. From the same base are veter-
in-ar-y, in-veter-ate, veal, wether.

VETERINARY, pertaining to the art of treating diseases of
domestic animals. (L.) ‘ Veterinarian, he that lets horses or mules
to hire, a hackney-man, also a horse-leech or farrier ;’ Blount’s
Gloss., ed. 1674. Sir T. Browne has veterinarian as a sb., Vulg.
Errors, b. iii. c. 2, § 1.—L. weterinarius, of or belonging to beasts of
burden ; as sb., a cattle-doctor.—L. weterinus, belonging to beasts of
burden; pl. weterine (sc. bestie), beasts of burden. B.-Lhe) ds:
ueterina probably meant, originally, an old animal, one that was no
longer fit for anything but carrying burdens; from the same base as
that which occurs in wetus (gen. weter-is), old; see Veteran and
Veal. Andsee Wether. Der. veterinari-an, as above.

VETO, a prohibition. (L.) Not in Todd’s Johnson.—L. xeto,
I forbid; hence, the saying of ‘I forbid,’ i.e. a prohibition. OL.
uoto. Der. veto, verb.

VEX, to harass, torment, irritate. (F.—L.) ME. vexen, Prompt..
Parv. =F. vexer, ‘to vex;’ Cot. L. uwexdre, to vex, orig. to shake;
of doubtful origin. Der. vex-at-ion, from F. vexation, ‘ vexation,’
Cot., from L. acc. wexdtidnem ; vex-at-i-ous, vex-at-i-ous-ly, vex-at-i-
ous-ness. .

VIADUCT, a road or railway carried across a valley or river.
(L.) Not in Todd’s Johnson. Englished from L. uia ducta, a way
conducted across; from L. wia, a way, and ducta, fem. of ductus, pp.
of diicere, to lead, conduct; see Duct, Duke. Prob. coined in
imitation of aqueduct, B. L. wia was formerly written wea, and
some connect it with E. way; which can hardly be right. Der.
uiaticum, a doublet of voyage, q. v.; also con-vey, con-voy, de-vi-ate,
de-vi-ous, en-voy, im-per-vi-ous, in-voice, ob-vi-ate, ob-vi-ous, per-vi-ous,
pre-vi-ous, tri-vi-al.

VIAL, PHIAT, a small glass vessel or bottle. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Phial is a pedantic spelling; the spelling vial is historically more
correct, as we took the word from French; another (French) spelling
was viol. ‘ Vyole, a glasse, fiolle, wiole;’ Palsgrave. ME. viole ;
pl. violis, Wyclif, Rev. v. 8, where the A. V. has vials. = OF. viole,
jiole, fiolle (for which forms see Palsorave above), later phiole,
‘a violl, a small glass bottle;’ Cot. Mod. F. fiole.=L. phiala, a
saucer, a shallow drinking-vessel (the form of which must have been.
altered). Gk. pidAn, a shallow cup or bowl.

VIAND, food, provision. (F.—L.) Usually in pl. viands. (F.—
L.) ‘“Deintie viande;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 6 b.=F. viande, .
‘meat, food, substance;’ Cot. [The same as Ital. vivanda, victuals,
food, eatables.]—L. wiwenda, neut. pl., things to live on, provisions ;
considered as a fem. sing., by a change common in Late L.=L.
uiuendus, fut. pass. of wiuere, to live; see Victuals.

VIBRATE, to swing, move backwards and forwards. (L.)
Phillips, ed. 1706, has vibration ; the verb is perhaps a little later, =
L. uibratus, pp. of uibrare, to shake, swing, brandish. = WEIB,.
variant of 4/WEIP, to shake, agitate; cf. Skt. vep, to tremble, Icel.
veifa, to vibrate, wave. Brugmann,i.§ 701. See Sweep, Waive.
Der. vibrat-ion, vibrat-or-y. 2

VICAR, lit. a deputy; the incumbent of a benefice. (F.—L.)
ME. vicar, a deputy, Chaucer, Parl. of Foules, 379; also vicary, a
vicar, id. C. T. 17333 (I 22). —F. vicaire, ‘a vicar, or vice-gerent, also
the tenant or incumbent who, in the right of a corporation or church,
is to pay duties, or do services, unto the lord of the land ;’ Cot.—L..
uicarium, acc. of uicdrius, a substitute, deputy; orig. an adj., sub-
stituted, deputed, said of one who supplies the turn or place of
another.—L. wic-, stem of uicis (gen.), a tum, change, succession. =
oa WEIQ, to yield, give way ; hence to succeed in another’s turn: cf.
Gk. «ix-ev, to yield, G. wech-sel, a turn. Brugmann,i. § 701. Der.
vicar-age, spelt vycrage in Palsgrave (prob. a misprint for vycarage) ;
vicar-i-al ; vicar-i-ate, sb., from F. vicariat, ‘a vicarship,’ Cot. Also
vicar-i-ous, Englished from L. uicdrius, substituted, delegated, vicari-
ous (as above) ; vicar-i-ous-ly. And see vice-gerent, vic-iss-i-tude,

VICE (1), a blemish, fault, depravity. (F.—L.) ME. vice, vyce,
Rob. of Glouc., p. 195, 1. 4025.—F. vice, ‘a vice, fault ;’ Cot.—L.


uitium, a vice, fault. Der. vici-ous, from F. viciewx, ‘ vicious,’ Cot.,


. VICE


from L. uitidsus, faulty ; vici-ous-ly, vici-ous-ness, spelt vyciousnesse in
Palsgrave ; viti-ate, spelt viciate in Cot. (to translate F. vicier), from
L. uitidtus, pp. of uitiare, to injure ; viti-at-ion.

VICE (2), an instrument, tightened by a screw, for holding any-
thing firmly. (F.—L.) ME. vice, vyce, in Wyclif, 3 Kings, vi. 8,
where it means ‘a winding-stair ’ (see the A. V.), the orig. sense being
‘ascrew.’ A vice is so called because tightened by ascrew. =F. vis,
“the vice, or spindle of a presse, also a winding-staire ;’ Cot. OF.
viz; Burguy.—L. uitis, a vine, bryony, the lit. sense being ‘that
which winds or twines;’ hence the OF. viz (=vits), where the
suffixed s represents the termination -is of the L. nom. sing. or -és of
the L. nom. pl.—4/WEI, to wind, bind, or twine about; cf. E.
withe, withy, L. ui-men, a pliant twig, &c. Cf. Ital. vite, ‘the vine,
also a vice or a scrue,’ Florio.

VICH-GERENT, having delegated authority, acting in place of
another. (F.—L.) In Shak. L. L. L. i. 1. 222.—F. vicegerent, ‘a vice-
gerent, or deputy;’ Cot.=—L. uice, in place of; and gerent-, stem of
pres. part. of gerere, to carry on, perform, conduct, act, rule. Here
uice is the abl. from the gen. wicis, a turn, change, stead (the nom. not
being used) ; see Vicar. For gerere,see Gesture. 4 With the
same prefix vice- (F. vice, L. wice, in place of) we have vice-admiral,
vice-chancellor; also vice-roy, Temp. iii. 2. 116, where roy=F. roi,
from L. régem, acc. of rex, a king; vice-regal ; and see vis-count.

VICINAGE, neighbourhood. (F.—L.) Vicinage is a pedantic
spelling of voisinage, due to an attempt to reduce the F. word to a
L. spelling ; both forms are given in Blount’s Gloss.,ed. 1674. Bp.
Taylor has the spelling voisinage more than once, in Episcopacy
Asserted, § 21 (R.), and Rule of Conscience, b. i. c. 4 (R.). =F.
voisinage, ‘neighbourhood ;” Cot.—F. voisin, ‘neighbouring,’ id. =
L. uicinum, acc. of utcinus, neighbouring, near, lit. belonging to the
same street. —L, wic-us, a village, street (whence the AS. wic, E. wick,
a town, is borrowed).4-Gk. olxos, a house, dwelling-place ; Russ.
ves(e),a village; Skt. vega(s), a house, entrance. =4/WEIK, to come
to, enter, enter into; Skt. vig, to enter. Der. vicin-i-ty, from MF.
vicinité, ‘ vicinity, Cot., from L. acc. uicinitatem, neighbourhood.
Der. (from Gk. ofxos), par-ish, par-och-i-al.

VICISSITUDE, change. (L.) In Bacon, Essay On Vicissitude
of Things.—L. wicissitiido, change. Allied to wicissi-m, by turns;
where the suffix -sim may be compared with pas-sim, reces-sim, 8c. =
L. uicis (gen.), a change; see Vicar.

VICTIM, a living being offered as a sacrifice, one who is perse-
cuted. (F.—L.) In Dryden, tr. of Virgil, Ain. xii. 1. 319.—F'. vic-
time (not in Cotgrave).—L. wictima, a victim. Allied to Goth.


weihan, to consecrate, weths, holy. Brugmann, i. § 606. Der.
victim-ise, a coined word.
VICTOR, a conqueror. (L.) In K. John, ii. 324; and in


Trevisa, i. 239.—L. wictor, a conqueror ; see below.

VICTORY, success in a contest. (F.—L.) ME. victorie. In
King Alisaunder, 7663.—OF. victorie (Burguy), later victoire, ‘ vic-
tory, Cot.—L. wictdria, conquest; L. wictor, a conqueror; cf.
uict-us, pp. of uincere, to conquer (pt. t. wic-i).—4/WEIQ, to fight ;
whence also Goth. weigan, weihan (pp. wigans), to strive, contend ;
AS. wig, war. Brugmann, i. § 367. Der. victori-ous (Palsgrave),
from F. victorieux, L. uictdridsus, full of victory ; victori-ous-ly. Also
(from uincere) victor, as above ; vanquish, vinc-ible ; con-vince, con-vict,
e-vince, e-vict, in-vinc-ible.

VICTUALS, provisions, meat. (F.—L.) The sing. victual is
little used now, but occurs in Exod. xii. 39 (A.V.), and in Much
Ado, i. 1. 50. The word is misspelt, by a pedantry which ignores
the F. origin; yet the true orthography vittle fairly represents
the pronunciation still commonly used by the best speakers.
ME. vitaille, Chaucer, C. T. 248.—OF. vitaille (Burguy), later
victuaille (with inserted c, due to pedantry); Cot. gives ‘ victuailles,
victualls,’ but Palsgrave has ‘ Vytaile, uitaille, uiures; Vytaylles,
mete and drinke, zowte maniere de uitailles.’=—L. wictudlia, neut. pl.,
provisions, victuals. —L. uictualis, belonging to nourishment.=L.
uictu-, for uictus, food, nourishment; with suffix -dlis,—L. uict-us,
pp. of wiuere, to live; allied to wiwus, living. —4/GwEI, to live; cf.
Skt. jiv, to live, Gk. Bi-os, life, Russ. jit(e), to live ; and see Quick.
Brugmann, ii. § 488. Der. victwal, verb, As You Like It, v. 4. 198;
victuall-er, spelt vytailer in Palsgrave. Also (from the same root)
vi-and, vi-tal, viv-ac-i-ous, viv-id, viv-i-fy, vivi-par-ous, vivi-section ;
con-viv-i-al, re-vive, sur-vive; also bio-graphy, bio-logy; quick; but
hardly viper, wyvern.

VICUNA, a quadruped of the camel tribe. (Span.—Peruy.)
‘Those beastes, which at Peru they call .. Vicunas;’ E. G., tr. of
Acosta’s Nat. Hist. (1604); bk. i. c. 21; p. 70.—Span. vicufia ;
Minsheu (1623). Of Peruvian origin; Monlau gives the form as
vicunna; see Garcilasso de la Vega (bk. viii. c. 17).

VIDELICET, namely. (L.) In Mids. Nt. Dr. v. 330. In old
MSS. and books, the abbreviation for L. -e¢ (final) closely resem-


VIKING 691


bled a z. Hence the abbreviation viz.=viet., short for videlicet. =
L. uidélicet, for uidére licet (like scilicet=scire licet), it is easy to
see, it is manifest, hence plainly, to wit, namely. —L. widére, to see;
and licet, it is allowable, hence, it is easy. See Wision and
License.

VIDETTE, another spelling of Vedette, q.v.

VIE, to contend, strive for superiority. (F.—L.) ME. vien, a
contracted form of ME. envien, due to the loss of the initial syllable,
as in story for history, fence for defence, &c. In Chaucer, Death of
Blaunche, 1. 173, we have: ‘To vye who might slepe best,’ ed. Thynne
(1532), and so also in the Tanner MS, 346; but MS. Fairfax 16 has:
“To envye who myght slepe best,’ where To envye=Tenvye in pro-
nunciation, just as Chaucer has ¢abiden=to abiden, &c. B. This
ME. envien is quite a different word from envien, to envy ; it is really
a doublet of invite, and is a term formerly used in gambling. = OF,
“envier (au iew), to vie;’ Cot.—L. inuitare, to invite; see Invite.
y. This is proved by the Span. and Ital. forms; cf. Span. exvidar,
‘among gamesters, to invite or to open the game by staking a certain
sum,’ Neuman ; Ital. inwitare (al giuoco), ‘to vie or to reuie at any
game, to drop vie; inuito, a vie at play, a vie at any game; also, an
inviting, proffer, or bidding;’ Florio. See plentiful examples of
vie, to wager, and vie, sb., a wager, in Nares; and remember that
the true sense of with is against, as in with-stand, fight with, &c., so
that to vie with=to stake against, wager against, which fully explains
the word. Much more might be added; Scheler’s excellent ex-
planation of F. a@ ’ envi is strictly to the point ; so also Wedgwood’s
remarks on E. vie. In particular, the latter shows that the OF.
envier also meant ‘to invite,’ and he adds: ‘From the verb was
formed the adv. expression 4 l’envi, E. a-vie, as if for a wager: “‘ They
that write of these toads strive a-vie who shal write most wonders of
them,” Holland, tr. of Pliny ; [b. xxxii.c. 5].’ Doublet, invite.

VIEW, a sight, reach of the sight, a scene, mental survey. (F.—
L.) Very common in Shak.; see Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 1. 144, iil. 2. 377,
&c. Levins has the verb to vewe.= AF. view, Liber Albus, p. 182;
vewe, Stat. Realm, i. 192 (1323); MF. vewé, ‘the sense, act, or
instrument of seeing, the eyes, a glance, a view, look, sight,’ &c.;
Cot. Properly the fem. of vew, ‘ viewed, seen,’ pp. of veoir (mod. F.
voir), ‘to view, see;’ id.—L. uidére, to see; see Vision. Der.
view, verb; viewer; re-view; view-less, invisible, Meas. for Meas.
iii. I. 124.

VIGIL, the eve before a feast or fast-day. (F.—L.) Lit. ‘a
watching ;’ so named because orig. kept by watching through the
night. ME. uwgile, Ancren Riwle, p. 412, 1. 23; Chaucer, C. T. 379
(A 377).—F. vigile, ‘a vigile, the eve of a holy or solemn day;’
Cot.—L. wigilia, a watch, watching. =L. wigil, awake, lively, vigi-
lant, watchful.—L. wigére, to be lively or vigorous, flourish, thrive ;
allied to wegére, to arouse.-+-Irish feil, W. gwyl, a festival (lit. vigil).
=4/WEG, to be strong, to wake; see Vegetable. Der. vigil-ant,
t Hen. IV, iv. 2. 64, from F. vigilant, ‘vigilant,’ Cot., from L. wigi-
lant-, stem of pres. part. of uigilare, to watch; vigil-ance, Temp. iil.
3. 16, from F. vigilance, ‘ vigilancy,’ Cot., from L. wigilantia. From
the same root are veg-etable, vig-our, in-vig-or-ate, re-veillé, sur-veill-
ance; also wake, watch, wait.

VIGNETTE, a small engraving with ornamented borders. (F.
—L.) So called because orig. applied to ornamented borders in
which vine-leaves and tendrils were freely introduced. In the edition
of Cotgrave’s Dict. published in 1660, the English Index (by Sher-
wood) has a title-page with such a border, in which two pillars are
represented on each side, wreathed with vines bearing leaves, tendrils,
and bunches of grapes. ME. vinettes, vine-branches ; Lydgate, Siege
of Troy, fol. F 5, col. 2.—F. vignette, ‘a little vine; vignettes,
vignets, branches, or branchlike borders or flourishes, in painting or
ingravery ;’ Cot. Dimin. of F. vigne, a vine; see Vine.

VIGOUR, vital strength, force, energy. (F.—L.) ME. vigour ;
spelt vigor, King Alisaunder, 1. 1431.—OF. vigur, vigor, later
vigueur, ‘vigor ;’ Cot.=L. uigdrem, acc. of uigor, liveliness, activity,
force.= L. wigére, to be lively or vigorous; see Vigil. Der. vigor-
ous, spelt vygorouse in Palsgrave, from F. vigoureux, ‘vigorous,’ Cot. ;
vigor-ous-ly, vigor-OUus-ness,

ING, a Northern pirate. (Scand.) The form wicing occurs
in AS., but viking is borrowed from Scandinavian.=—Icel. vikingr,
a freebooter, rover, pirate, used in the Icel. Sagas esp. of the bands
of Scand. warriors who, during the 9th and roth centuries, harried
the British Isles and Normandy. [Wrongly explained as ‘a creek-
dweller,’ one of the men who haunted the bays, creeks, and fjords. =
Icel. vik, a creek, inlet, bay; with suffix -ingr (AS. -ing) in the
sense of ‘son of’ or belonging to. Cf. also Swed. vik, Dan. vig, a
creek, cove.] Explained also as ‘a warrior ;” for *vigningr (where
ign >ik); allied to Icel. vig, war, Goth. weihan, to fight, L. uincere,
to conquer; see Victor. (So Noreen, § 252; Sweet, Hist. E. Sounds,
§ 319). AS. wicing, the same.


Yy2


692 VILE


VILE, abject, base, worthless, wicked. (F.—L.) ME. vil, Rob.
of Glouc. p. 488, 1. 10003.—F. vil (fem. vile), ‘ vile, abject, base,
low, meane, . . good cheape, of small price;’ Cot.—L. wilem, acc.
of uilis, of small price, cheap, worthless, base, vile.-- W. gwael, vile ;
Stokes-Fick, p. 259. Der. vile-ly, vile-ness ; vil-i-fy, a coined word,
to account vile, defame, properly to make vile, as in Milton, P. L.
xi, 516; vil-i-fi-er, vil-i-fic-at-ion, re-vile.

VILIPEND, to despise. (L.) Spelt vilepende in Skelton;
i. 202.—L. wilipendere, to hold cheap. = L. wili-, for utilis, vile, cheap ;
and pendere, to weigh, esteem. See Poise.

VILLA, a country residence or seat, a house. (L.) In Dryden, tr.
of Lucretius, b. iii. 1. 283.—L. uwilla, a farm-house; lit. ‘a house in
a village.’ Perhaps for *uic-sla, i.e. ‘dwelling ;’ from uic-us, a vil-
lage; see Vicinage. Der. vill-age, Chaucer, C. T. 12621 (C 687),
from F. village, ‘a village,’ Cot., from L. adj. willdticus, belonging
to a villa; villag-er, Jul. Ceesar, i. 2.172; villag-er-y, a collection
of villages, Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 35. And see vill-ain.

VILLAIN, a clownish or depraved person, a scoundrel.
(F.—L.) ME. vilein, vileyn, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 18,17. ‘ For
vilany makith vilein;’? Rom. of the Rose, 2181.—OF. vilein, ‘ser-
vile, base, vile;’ Cot. He also gives vilain, ‘a villaine, slave,
bondman, servile tenant.’—Late L. willainus, a farm-servant, serf;
the degradation by which it passed into a term of reproach is well
stated by Cotgrave, who further explains vilain as meaning ‘a
farmer, yeoman, churle, carle, boore, clown, knave, rascall, varlet,
filthie fellow.=—L. willa, a farm; see Villa. Der. villain-ous,
Merry Wives, ii. 2. 308 ; villain-ous-ly; also villain-y, ME. vileinie,
Chaucer, C. T. 70, Ancren Riwle, p. 216, from OF. vilenie (or
vilanie), ‘villainy,’ Cot.

VINCIBLE, that can be conquered. (L.) Rare. In Bp. Taylor,
Of Repentance, c. 3. § 3 (R.).=—L. wincibilis, easily overcome. =L.
uincere, to conquer; see Victor. Der. vincibil-i-ty ; in-vincible.

VINCULUM, a link. (L.) Modern; chiefly used as a mathe-
matical term.=—L. winculum, a bond, fetter, link.=L. uincire, to
bind, fetter. Brugmann, ii. § 631. See Vetch.

VINDICATE, to lay claim to, defend, maintain by force. (L.)
In Milton, P. R. ii. 47.—L. uindicatus, pp. of uindicaire, to lay legal
claim to, arrogate, avenge.—L. uindic-, decl. stem of windex, a
claimant, maintainer. Orig. ‘one who favours or protects a friend ;’”
from uen- (as in uen-ia, favour, cf. AS. win-e, a friend), and dic-are, to
appoint, dicere, to say; cf. the suffixin 7t-dex,a judge. See Walde.
Der. vindicat-or, vindic-able, vindic-at-ion ; vindic-at-ive, i.e. vindictive,
Troil. iv. 5. 107 ; vindic-at-or-y; and see vindic-tive, vengeance.

_  WINDICTIVE, revengeful. (F.—L.) Vindictive is merely a
shortened form of vindicative, obviously due to confusion with the
telated L. uindicta, revenge. Bp. Taylor, in his Rule of Conscience,
b. iii. c. 3, speaks of ‘ vindicative justice,’ but in the same work, b. ii.
c. 2, of ‘ vindictive justice ;’ if Richardson’s quotations be correct.
Shak. has vindicative=vindictive, Troil. iv. 5. 107.—F. vindicatif,
‘ vindicative, revenging,’ Cot. Formed with suffix -if (L. -iuus)
from windicat-um, supine of uindicare, (1) to claim, (2) to avenge ; see
Vindicate. Der. vindictive-ly, -ness.

VINE, the plant from which wine is made. (F.—L.) ME. vine,
vyne; Wyclif, John, xv. I.—F. vigne, ‘a vine;’ Cot.—L. winea, a
vineyard, which in late L. (see Lewis) also had the sense of ‘ vine,’
for which the true L. word is uitis. Vinea is properly the fem. of
adj. wineus, of or belonging to wine.=L. uinum, wine.4+Gk. oivos,
wine ; allied to oivn, the vine, oivds, the vine, grape, wine. Cf. L.
uitis, the vine.—4/WEI, to twine; as seen in L. wiére, to twist
together, wi-men, a pliant twig, ui-tis, the vine, &c. Brugmann,
ii. § 66. And see Curtius, i. 487, who notes that the Gk. words
were used ‘by no means exclusively of the drink, but just as much
of the vine. Pott very appropriately compares the Lithuan. ap-vy-
nys, a hop-tendril. ... The fact is therefore that the Indo-Germans
had indeed a common root for the idea of winding, twining, and
hence derived the names of various pliant twining plants, but that it
is only among the Greeco-Italians that we find a common name for
the grape and its juice. The Northern names (Goth. wein, &c.) are
undoubtedly to be regarded (with Jac. Grimm, Gramm. iii. 466) as
borrowed.’ See the whole passage. To which we may add that
the L. uinum also meant ‘a vine,’ and the E. vine-yard=AS. win-
geard=wine-yard, which identified wine with the vine itself. Der.
vine-dress-er ; vin-er-y, occurring in ‘the vynery of Ramer,’ in
Fabyan’s Chronicle, John of France, an. 8 (ed. Ellis, p. 511), a
word coined on the model of butt-er-y, pant-ry, brew-er-y ; vine-yard,
ME. vyneyerd, Trevisa, i. 337, AS. win-geard, Matt. xx. I ; vin-ous,
a late word, from L. uwindsus, belonging to wine. Also vin-egar, vin-
t-age, vin-t-ner, which see below. From the same root are withe or
withy, wine; cf. vetch, vinculum.

GAR, an acid liquor made from fermented liquors.
(F.-L.) ME. vinegre, vynegre, Wyclif, Mark, xv. 36. Lit. ‘sour


VIOLET


wine. =F. vinaigre, ‘ vineger;’ Cot.—F. vin, wine; and AF. egre,,
F. aigre, sharp, sour; see Vine or Wine, and Eager.

VINEWED, mouldy. (E.) In mod. edd. of Shak. Troil. ii. 1.
15, we generally find vinewed’st, where the folios have whinid’st.
Minsheu, ed. 1627, has finewed, as equivalent to ‘mustie;’ and also
the sb. vinewedness ; and see vinewed, finewed, fenowed in Nares. Cf.
prov. E. vinewed (West), Halliwell. The form jizewed answers to the
pp. of AS. jfinegian, fynegian, to become mouldy or musty, occurring
in the Canons of Alfric, § 36; in Thorpe, Ancient Laws, ii. 360, 1. 7.
It is a verb formed from an adj. jinig or fynig, mouldy, occurring in
the same passage. We also find the pl. finie (for finige) in Josh. ix. 5,
where it is used of mouldy loaves. The true form is fynig (with y,
mutation of ~); the adj. is from the sb. fyze, mouldiness, Voc.
183.19. From a Teut. base *fun-; allied to Du. vuns, rank, ME.
vunstigh, ‘ mustie (as hay);” Hexham. Cf. Foul.

VINTAGE, the gathering or produce of grapes, time of grape-
gathering. (F.—L.) ‘Tyll they had inned [gathered in] all their
corne and vyntage;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. ii. c. 22 (R.).
Vintage is for ME. vindage, Wyclif, Levit. xxv. 5, or vendage,
P. Plowman, B. xviii. 367, which was also pronounced as ventage, as
shown by the various readings in P. Plowman, C. xxi. 414. And
again, ME. vendage is for vendange, the unfamiliar ending -ange
being turned into the common suffix -age; it is clear that the word
was confused with vint-ner, vint-ry; see Vintner.—AF. ven-
denge, Statutes of the Realm, i. 331 (1353); F. vendange (MF.
vendenge in Cotgrave), ‘a vintage;’ Cot.—L. uindémia, a vintage.
=—L. win-um, (1) wine, (2) grapes; and dém-ere, to take away;
so that win-démia =a taking away of grapes, grape-gathering.
B. For L. uinum, see Vine, Wine. The L. demere is for *dé-imere,
to take away; from dé, prep., off, away, and emere, to take : see De-
and Redeem.

VINTNER, a wine-dealer, tavern-keeper. (F.—L.) ‘ Vynte-
mere, Vinarius;’ Prompt. Parv. Thus vininer is short for vintener ;
and again, vintener.is an altered form of vineter or viniter, which is
the older form. It occurs, spelt viniter, in Rob. of Glouc., p. 542,
1, 11226, in a passage where we also find viniterie, now shortened to
vintry, and occurring as the name of a house in London (Stow,
Survey of London, ed. Thoms, p. 90).—AF. vineter, Bozon, p. 19 3.
MF. vinetier, ‘a vintner, taverner, wine-seller;’ Cot.—Late L.
vinétarius, a wine-seller (occurring A.D. 1226). Really derived
from L. winétum, a vine-yard, but used with the sense of L. utndrius,
a wine-seller.—L. uinum, grapes, wine; see Vine and Wine.

VIOL, a kind of fiddle, a musical instrument. (F.— Prov. — Late L.)
In Shak. Rich. II, i. 3. 162.—MF. viole (also violle), ‘a (musical)
violl, or violin ;? Cot.—Proy. viula, a viol; see Bartsch. Cf, Ital.,.
Span., and Port. viola (Diez). Diez takes the Prov. uviula (a tri- _
syllabic word) to be the oldest form, derived from Late L. vitula,
vidula, a viol, which was first transposed into the form *viudla (cf.
Prov. veuza from L, uidua, teune from L. tenuis), and then became
*viulla, viula, viola, ‘ Vidulatores dicuntur a vidula, Gallice, viele ;*
John de Garlande, in Wright’s Voc. i. 137, 1. 4 from bottom. The
AS. fidel, OHG. fidula, E. fiddle appear to be the same as Late L.
vitula, vidula; see Fiddle, which may be a doublet. [The z in
vitula was short (Ducange); connexion with L. witulari, to rejoice, |
is doubtful.] Der. viol-in, Spenser, Shep. Kal. April, 1. 103, from
Ital. violino, dimin. of viola, a viol; vtol-in-ist, a player on the
violin ; viol-on-cell-o, a bass violin, from Ital. violoncello, dimin. of
violone, a bass-viol, augmentative form of viola. Also bass-viol,’
Comedy of Errors, iv. 3. 23. Doublet, fiddle.

VIOLATE, to injure, abuse, profane, ravish. (L.) In Shak.
L. L. L. i. 1. 21.—L. uioldtus, pp. of uiolére, to violate. Orig. ‘to
treat with force;’ formed as if from an adj. *ziolus, due to zi-s,
force. B. Allied to Gk. is, strength, force; cf. Skt. vayas, youth.
See Brugmann,i. § 91. Der, violat-or, from L. uiolator; viola-ble,
from L. uiolabilis; violat-ion, from F. violation, ‘a violation,’ Cot.,
from L. acc. uiolatidnem. Also viol-ent, q.v.; (from the same root).
per-vi-cac-i-ous.

VIOLENT, vehement, outrageous, very forcible. (F.—L.) In
Chaucer, C. T. 12801 (C 867).—F. violent, ‘violent, Cot.—L.
uiolentus, violent, full of might. Formed with suffix -entus from an
adjectival form *wiolus, due to wis, strength; see above. Der.
violent-ly; violence, Chaucer, C. T. 16376 (G 908), from F. violence,
‘violence,’ Cot., from L. sb. wiolentia. f

VIOLET, a flower ; a light purple colour. (F.—L.) ME. violet,
vyolet, Prompt. Pary.; Trevisa, i. 261. ‘Tunicam de wyolet ; iy York
Wills, i. 23 (1346).—_MF. violet, m., also violette, fem., ‘a violet ;
also, violet-colour;’ Cot. Dimin. of MF. viole, ‘a gilliflower,’
Cot. ; it must also have meant a violet.—L. wiola, a violet. Formed
with dimin. suffix -/a from a base wio-, cognate with Gk. io-, base of
iov (for *fiov), a violet. See Iodine. Der. violet, adj., violet-
coloured.


VIOLIN, VIOLONCELLO


“VIOLIN, VIOLONCELLO; see under Viol.

VIPER, a poisonous snake. (F.—L.) In Levins, ed. 1570. —F.
vipére, ‘the serpent. called a viper;’ Cot.—L. wipera, a viper.
Usually explained as the serpent ‘that produces living young;’
Buffon says that the viper differs from most other serpents in being
much slower, as also in excluding its young completely formed, and
‘bringing them forth alive. As if uipera were short for uiuipara, fem.
of uiuiparus, producing live young ; see Viviparous. B. Walde
prefers a derivation from the 4/WEIP, to wind round, as in Goth.
biwaibjan, to wind round; from the viper’s coils. Der. viper-ous,


Cor. iii. 1, 287 ; viper-ine, Blount, from L. uiperinus, adj. Doublet,
wyvern.
VIRAGO, a bold, impudent, manlike woman. (L.) In Stany-


hurst, tr. of Virgil, Amn. b. i, ed. Arber, p. 34,1. 2. ‘ This [woman]
schal be clepid virago,’ Wyclif, Gen. ii. 23.—L. wirago, a manlike
maiden, female warrior; extended from wir,a man. See Virile.

VIRELAY, an old French form of poem, running on two
times. (F.) Chaucer has: ‘roundels, virelayes;’ C. T., F 948
(Frank. Ta. 220).—OF. virelait, MF. virelay, ‘a virelay, round,
freemans song;’ Cot.—OF. virer, to turn, change the direction of
(see Veer); and OF. lai, a lay, song (see Lay).

WIRGATE, an (old) measure of land. (L.) Also formerly
called a yardland ; see Blount, who says :—‘ This Yardland, Bracton
(lib. 2. cap. to and 27) calls virgatam terre} but expresseth no
certainty what it contains. It is called a verge of land, anno 28
Edw. I’ =Late L. virgata, a fem. pp. form, from L. wirga, a rod.
See Verge (1).

VIRGIN, a maiden. (F.—L.) In early use; the pl. virgines
occurs in St. Katharine, l. 2342. —OF. virgine (Burguy). = L. uirginem,
acc. of wirgo, a virgin. Root uncertain (not allied to wir, a man, or
uirére, to flourish, as the base is wirg-, not uwir-). Der. virgin-i-ty,
ME. uirginitee, Chaucer, C. T. 5657 (D 75), from F.. virginité,
‘virginity,’ Cot., from L. acc. virginitatem. Also virgin-al, spelt
virginall in Levins, ed. 1570; an old musical instrument, also
named the virginals, ora pair [set] of virginals, and so called because
played upon by virgins (Blount, Nares); cf. ME. virginal, adj.,
Hoccleve, Reg. Princes, 3584; from F. virginal, ‘ belonging to a
virgin,’ Cot., from L. adj. wrginalis. Also Virgo (L. uirgo), the
Virgin, a zodiacal sign.

VIRIDITY, greenness. (L.) Little used; in Blount’s Gloss., ed.
1674, and added to Johnson’s Dict. by Todd, who gives an example
from Evelyn. Englished from L. wiriditas, greenness. —L. uiridis,
green. See Verdant.

VIRILE, male, masculine, manly. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave. =F.
viril, ‘virile, manly;” Cot.—L. wirilis, manly.—L. wir, a man, a
hero. W. gwr, Olrish fer, Irish fear, a man; Goth. wair, a man;
AS. wer;Icel. verr; OHG. wer. See Werwolf. Further allied
to Skt. vira-s, sb., a hero; adj., strong, heroic; Zend vira, a hero
(Fick, i. 786). Der. viril-i-ty (Blount), from F. virilité, ‘ virility,’
Cot., from L. acc. uirilitatem, manhood. Also (from L. wir) vir-ago,
q.V., vir-tue, q.Vv.3 decem-vir, trium-vir.

VIRTUE, excellence, worth, efficacy. (F.—L.) ME, vertu,
Ancren Riwle, p. 340, 1. 9.—F. vertu, ‘ vertue, goodnesse;’ Cot.—
L. uirtutem, acc. of uirtus, manly excellence. =L. wir, a man; see
WVirile. The spelling has been changed from vertu to virtue to
bring it nearer to Latin. Der. virtu-ous, ME. vertuous, Chaucer,
C. T. 251, from F, vertuéux, ‘ vertuous,’ Cot., from Late L. uirtudsus,
full of virtue (Ducange) ; virtu-ous-ly; virtu-al, having effect, in Bp.
Taylor, Dissuasive from Popery, § 3 (R.), from F. virtuel (Littré),
as if from a L. form *uirtudlis; virtu-al-ly. Also virtu, a love of the
fine arts, a late word, borrowed from Ital. virtu (also verti), shortened
form of virtute, virtue, excellence, used in the particular sense of
learning or excellence in a love of the fine arts, from L. acc. uirti-
tem; whence virtu-os-o, Evelyn’s Diary, Feb. 27, 1644, from Ital.
virtuoso, lit. virtuous, learned, esp. a person skilled in the fine arts.

VIRULENT, very active in injuring, spiteful, bitter in animosity.
(F.—L.) Lit. poisonous. ‘ The seed of dragon is hot and biting,
and besides of a virulent and stinking smell;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny,
‘b. xxiv. c. 16. ME. virulent, Lanfrank, Cirurgie, p. 80.—F. virulent,
omitted by Cotgrave, but in use in the 16th century (Littré) ; and
prob. much earlier.=L. wirulenius, poisonous, virulent.—L. uiru-,
for wirus, slime, poison; with suffix -lentus.4-Gk. ids (for fecds),
poison; Skt. visha-m, poison, Allied to Irish fi, poison, W. gwy,
fluid; and to E. Wizen. Der. virulent-ly; virulence, from F.
virulence, ‘stench, ranknesse, poison,’ Cot., from L. uirulentia. The
sb. virus, borrowed immediately from Latin, is now also in use.

VISAGE, the face, mien, look. (F.—L.) ME. visage, King
Alisaunder, 7652.—F. visage, ‘the visage, face, look ;’ Cot. Formed
with suffix -age (<L. -dticum) from MF, vis, ‘ the visage, face,’ Cot.
—L. uisum, acc. of uisus, the vision, sight; whence the sense was
transferred to that of ‘look’ or mien, and finally to that of ‘face ;’


VISOR, VIZOR, VISARD, VIZARD 693


perhaps (as Scheler suggests) under the influence of G. gesicht, the
face, lit. the sight.=—L. wisws, pp. of uidére, to see; see Vision.
Der. visag-ed, as in tripe-visaged, 2 Hen. IV, v. 4. 9.

VISARD, the same as Visor, q. v.

VIS-A-VIS, in a position (that is) face to face. (F.—L.) F.
vis & vis, ‘face to face, directly opposite;’ Cot. The F. wis repre-
sents the L. acc. wisum; see Visage. The F. 2 is from L. ad, to,
towards.

VISCACHA, VIZCACHA, a South-American rodent mam-
mal. (Span.—Peruy.) Span. viscacha, vizcacha, ‘a creature like a
hare ;” Pineda. = Peruy. viskacha, ‘conejo de la tierra ;’ Peruv. Dict.

VISCERA, the entrails. (L.) A medical term. =L. wiscera, neut.
pl., the entrails; from nom. sing. wiscus. Perhaps allied to L. wiére,
to twist together. Der. viscer-al (Blount), e-viscer-ate.

VISCID, sticky, clammy. (F.—L.) ‘Viscid, or Viscous, clammy,
fast as glue;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674. —F. viscide, ‘clammy,’ Cot.
=L. uiscidus, clammy, like birdlime. = L. uiscum, the mistletoe, also
birdlime.+-Gk, igds, igia, mistletoe, the mistletoe-berry, from which
birdlime was made. Der. viscid-i-ty, from F. viscidité, ‘ visciditie,
Cot. So also visc-ous, Lanfrank, Cirurgie, p. 178, from L. uiscdsus,
clammy ; visc-os-i-ty, from F. viscosité, ‘ viscositie,’ Cot.

VISCOUNT, a title; an officer who formerly supplied the place
of a count or earl. (F.—L.) The s (in the E. word) is not pro-
nounced; the usual E. spelling was formerly vicounte (pronounced
with 7 as in F., whence the mod. E. vicount, pronounced with i as in
modern E.); spelt vicounte in Fabyan, Chron. c. 245. But we also
find AF, visconte, a sheriff, Stat. Realm, i. 28 (1275).—F. vicomte,
‘a vicount, was at the first the deputy or lieutenant of an earle,’ &c.,
Cot.; OF. viscomte (12th cent.).—L. uice, in place of; comitem, acc.
of comes, count. In the 12th century the word was spelt visconie
(Littré), a traditional spelling which we still retain, though the s was
early lost in F., and ceased to be sounded in E. The prefix was also
written vice, as in MF. vice-admirall, ‘a viceadmirall,’ vice-conte, a
vicount,’ Cot.; Roquefort notes the OF. vis-admiral, a vice-admiral.
See Vicegerent and Count (1). Der. viscount-ess, from OF. vis-,
prefix, ‘ vice-,’ and Countess.

VISH, another spelling (chiefly American) of Vics (2), q. v.

VISE, an endorsement made upon a pass-port. (F.—L.) Modern.
=F. visé, ice. ‘examined, pp. of viser, to view, inspect. —Late L.
*visare, used for L. uisere, to behold ; from uidére (pp. wisus), to see;
see Visit. 4 The true F. word is visa, sb.

VISIBLH, that can be seen. (F.—L.) Spelt vysyble in Palsgrave.
F. visible, ‘visible ;? Cot.—L. zistbilis, that may be seen. = L. wisus,
pp. of uidére, to see. See Vision.

VISITER, the same as Vizier, q. v.

VISIGOTH, one of the West Goths. (Late L.—Teut.) The
Goths were divided into Ostro-Goths and Visi-Goths, i.e. Eastern
and Western Goths. See Gibbon, Roman Empire, cap. 36.— Late L.
Visigotht or Visigothe, pl., the Visigoths. Of Teut. origin; from
Teut. west, West ; and Teut. *Gutds or *Gutans, pl.; only found in
Gothic in the comp. Gut-thiuda, the Gothic people.

VISION, sight, a sight, dream. (F.—L.) ME. visioun, vistun,
Cursor Mundi, 4454.—F. vision, ‘a vision, sight ;” Cot. —L. wistonem,
acc. of uisio, sight; cf. uisus, pp. of uidére, to see.-Gk. id-ety (for
Fidetv), to see, infin. of efSov, I saw, a 2nd aorist form; whence perf.
t. of6a (I have seen), I know (=E. wo#).+-Skt. vid, to know; Goth.
witan, to know; AS. witan. | B. All from 4/WEID, to see, know;
see Wit, verb. Der. vision-ar-y, adj., Dryden, Tyrannick Love, Act
i.sc. I (R.), a coined word ; also vision-ar-y, sb., one who sees visions,
or forms impracticable schemes. Also (like L. wisus) vis-age, q.v.,
vis-ible, q. V., vis-or, q. V. Vis-it, q. V., vis-ta, q. V., vis-u-al, q.v.3 also
ad-vice, ad-vise, de-vice, de-vise, im-pro-vise, pre-vis-ion, pro-vis-ion, pro-
vis-0, pro-vis-or, re-vise, super-vise. Also (from L. uidére), en-vy, e-vid-
ence, in-vid-i-ous, juris-pr-ud-ence, pro-vide, pro-vid-ent, pr-ud-ent, pur-
vey, re-view, sur=vey, vide-licet, view. And see veda,

VISIT, to go to see or inspect, call upon. (F.—L.) ME. visiten,
Ancren Riwle, p. 154, 1. 8.—F. visiter, ‘to visit, or go to see ;” Cot.
= L. uisitare, to go to see, visit; frequentative of wisere, to behold,
survey, intensive form of uidére (pp. uisus), to see; see Vision.
Der. visit, sb. ; visit-at-ion, from F, visitation, ‘a visitation, visiting.’
Cot., from L. acc. uisitationem; visit-ant, Milton, P. L. xi. 225, from
L, uisitant-, stem of pres. part. of wisitare; visit-or, Timon, 1. I. 42
(for visitour), from F. visiteur, ‘a visitor, searcher, overseer,’ Cot.,
the true L. word being wisitator ; visit-or-i-al.

VISOR, VIZOR, VISARD, VIZARD, a mask, part ofa
helmet. (F.—L.) In the forms visard, vizard, the final d is excre-
scent and unoriginal. It is variously spelt in Shak. Romeo, i. 4. 30,
L.L. L. v. 2. 242, Macb. iii. 2. 34, &c. ME. visere; ‘ Vysere, larva,”
Prompt. Parv.= AF. visere (A. Neckam), in Wright, Vocab. i. 1133;
MF. visiere, ‘ the viser, or sight of a helmet ;’ Cot. Formed from
F. vis, the face; and so called from its protecting the face, In the


694 VISTA


same way, the vizard was named from its covering the face ; cf. faa
visage, ‘a maske, or vizard,’ Cot.; lit. a false face.=—L. wiswm, acc.
of uisus, the sight; see further under Vision. Der. visor-ed; spelt
vizard-ed, Merry Wives, iv. 6. 40.

S'TA, a view or prospect, seen as through an avenue of trees.
(Ital.—L.) In Pope, Moral Essays, iv. 93. —Ital. vista, ‘the sence
of sight, seeing, a looke, a prospect, a view;” Florio. —Ital. vista,
fem. of visto, seen, one of the forms of the pp. of vedere, to see; the
other form being veduto.=L, uidére, to see; see Vision.

VISUAL, used in sight or for seeing. (F.—L.) ‘ Visual, belong-
ing to, or carried by the sight; extending as far as the eye can carry
it;’ Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—F. visual, ‘visuall, Cot.—L.
uisudlis, belonging to the sight.=—L. wisu-, for wisus, the sight ; with
suffix -alis.—L. uisus, pp. of uidére, to see; see Vision.

VITAL, containing life, essential. (F.—L.) ME. vital, Chaucer,
C. T. 2804 (A 2802). =F. vital, ‘vitall;’ Cot.—L. witalis, belonging
to life.=L. wita, life. Allied to uiuere, to live; cf. Bios, life.—
GwEI, to live; see Victuals. Der. vital-ly; vital-i-ty, in Blount,
Englished from L. uttalitais, vital force; vitalise, to give life to, a
coined word. Also vital-s, parts essential to life, coined in imitation
of L. uitalia, parts essential to life, neut. pl. of witalis, vital.

VITIATE, see under Vice.

VITREOUS, pertaining to glass, glasslike. (L.) In Ray, On the
Creation, pt. ii. § 11, where he speaks of ‘the vitreous humor’ of the
eye (R.). Englished (by change of -us to -ouws, as in arduous, 8&c.)
from L. uitreus (also uitrius), glassy.—L. witri-, for uitrum, glass.
B. The z of witrwm is short in Horace (Odes, iii. 13. 1), but may
have been orig. long, as in Propertius, iv. 8. 37 5 and wi-trwm may be
for *uid-trum, i.e. an instrument or material for seeing with. —L.
uidére, to see; see Vision. (But this is doubtful).. Der. vitri-fy, from
F, vitrifier, ‘to turn or make into glasse,’ formed as if from a L. verb
*uitrificare ; hence also vitrific-at-ed, Bacon, New Atlantis, ed. 1631,
P- 34; vitrific-at-ion, Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 5, pt. 25
vitrifi-able; also vitri-ol, q.v.

VITRIOL, the popular name of sulphuric acid. (F.—L.) ME.
vitriole, Chaucer, C. T. 16276 (G 808).—F. vitriol, ‘vitriol,
copperose;’ Cot. Cf. MItal. vitriolo, ‘ vitrioll or coperasse,’ Florio.
Said to be so called from its glassy look.—Late L. *witriolus,
answering to L. uitreolus, glassy, made of glass.—L. witreus, glassy.
=—L. uitrum, glass; see Vitreous. q It is not improbable that
vitriol was supposed to be made from glass; from the popular belief
that glass was poisonous ; see Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. ii. c. 5.
Der. vitriol-ic.

VITUPERATION, blame, censure, abuse. (F.—L.) Spelt
vituperacyon in The Boke of Tulle of Old Age, c. 8 (Caxton) ; cited
in the Appendix to Richardson’s Dict. Also in Cotgrave.=—F. vitu-
peration, ‘a vituperation, or dispraising ;’ Cot. Cf. L. uituperatus, pp.
of wituperdre, to censure, abuse. The orig. sense is ‘to get ready a
blemish,’ i.e. to find fault. L. witu-, for uiti-, base of uitium, a vice,
fault, blemish ; and parare, to get ready, furnish, provide. See Vice
and Parade. Der. vituperaie (from L. pp. uituperdtus), used by
Cot. to translate MF. vituperer ; vituperat-ive, -ly.

VIVACITY, liveliness. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave. Also formerly
used to mean ‘longevity;’ see Trench, Select Glossary. =F. vivacité,
‘ vivacity, liveliness ;’ Cot.—L. wtudcititem, acc. of uiudcitas, natural
vigour.—L. uiwdci-, decl. stem of uiuax, tenacious of life, vigorous.
=L. uiuus, lively; see Vivid. Der. (from L. wiudci-), vivaci-ous,
-ly, -ness.

VIVANDIERE, a sutler, 2 woman attached to French and
other continental regiments, who sells provisions and liquor. (F.—
L.) F.vivandiére, fem. form of vivandier, ‘a victualler, sutler;’ Cot.
= L. wiuenda, viands, provisions; see Viands.

VIVID, life-like, having the appearance of life, very clear to
the imagination. (L.) In Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—L. uiuidus,
animated, true to life, lively. —L. wiwus, living; allied to uiuere, to
live; see Victuals, and Quick. Cf. Skt. jiva-, living; Lith.
gywas, living; Russ. jivoi. Der. vivid-ly, -ness,

VIVIF'Y, to quicken, endue with life. (F.—L.) Bacon has
vivifie and vivification, Nat. Hist. § 696.—F. vivifier, ‘to quicken;’
Cot.—L. uiuifictre, to vivify, make alive. =—L. wiui-, for uiuus, living ;
and -ficare, for facere, to make; see Vivid and Fact. Der.
vivific-at-ion.

VIVIPAROUS, producing young alive. (L.) In Sir T.
Browne, Vulg. Errors, b. iii. c. 21, part 2. Englished from L. wizi-
parus, producing living young. — L. wiui-, for wiuus, alive; and parere,
to produce, bring forth. See Vivid or Victuals, and Parent.

VIVISECTION, dissection of a living animal. (L.) Modern.
From vivi-, as seen in Viviparous ; and Section.

VIXEN, a she-fox, an ill-tempered woman. (E.) Vixen is the
same as fixen, occurring as a proper name (spelt Fixsen) in the Clergy
List, 1873. Spelt vixen, Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 324. That false


VOID.


jfixen;’ Gammer Gurton, A. iii. sc. 2, Halliwell quotes ME. jixene
fox, i.e. vixen-fox, from MS. Bodley 546. Cf. AS. jixenhyd, vixen
hide, AS. Leechdoms, i. 342; fyxan dic, Kemble, Cod. Dipl. ii. 29,
1, 1. It is the fem. form of fox ; and by the ordinary laws of vowel-
change, the AS. fem. form isfyx-en; cf. AS. gyd-en,a goddess, from god,
a god. From the Teut. type */whs-in7a, fem. ; cf. Teut. type *fuhs-,
a fox; see Fox. The Southern E. form vox for fox is common, as
in Ancren Riwle, p. 128, 1. 5 ; so also vane for fane, and vat for fat.
+G. fiichsin, fem. of fuchs, a fox; similarly formed. The fem. suffix
occurs again in G, kéniginn, a queen, &c. Cf. L. rég-ina, Faust-ina, 8c.

VIZ., an abbreviation for Videlicet, q. v. :

VIZARD, a mask; see Vizor.

VIZIER, VISITER, an oriental minister or councillor of state.
(Arab.) ‘The Gran Visiar ;? Howell, Foreign Travel, Appendix;
ed, Arber, p. 85. —Arab. wazir, ‘a vazir, counsellor of state, minister,
a vicegerent, or lieutenant of a king; also, a porter;’ Rich. Dict.
p.1642. The sense of ‘ porter’ is the orig. one ; hence it meant, the
bearer of the burden of state affairs.— Arab. root wazara, to bear a
burden, support, sustain; id. p. 1641. Doublet, al-gwazil, q.v.

VOCABLE, a term, word. (F.—L.) ‘This worde aungell is a
vocable or worde sygnifyinge a minyster ;’ Udall, on Hebrews, c. 15
fol. 206, back.—F. vocable, ‘a word, a tearm ;’ Cot.—L. uwocabulum,
an appellation, designation, name.—L. uocd-re, to call; allied to
udx, voice; see Voice. Der. vocabul-ar-y, from F. vocabzulaire, ‘a
vocabulary, dictionary, world of words,’ Cot., from Late L. wocabu-
larium,

VOCAL, belonging to the voice, uttering sound. (F.—L.)
‘ They'll sing like Memnon’s statue, and be vocal;’ Ben Jonson,
Staple of News, Act iii. sc. 1 (Lickfinger).—F. vocal, ‘ yocall ;’ Cot.
=- L. wdcalis, sonorous, vocal. L. udc-, stem of wdx, the voice; see
Voice. Der. vocal-ise, from F. vocaliser; Cotgrave has vocalizé,
‘vowelled, made a vowel ;’ vocal-is-at-ion, vocal-ist ; vowel.

VOCATION, a calling, occupation. (F.—L.) In Levins, ed.
1570.—F., vocation, ‘a vocation,’ Cot. = L. uocdtidnem, acc. of uocdtio,
a bidding, invitation; cf. xocdtus, pp. of wocare, to call, bid ; see
Vocable. Der. vocat-ive, Merry Wives, iv. 1. 53, lit. the calling
case, from L. wocdtiuus, the vocative case.

VOCIFERATION, a loud calling, noisy outcry. (F.—L.)
‘Of Vociferation;’ Sir T, Elyot, Castel of Helth, b. ii. c. 35 (mis-
printed 25 in ed. 1561). — MF. vociferation, ‘ vociferation ; * Cot.—L.
uociferationem, acc. of udciferatio, a loud outcry; cf. udciferdtus, pp.
of udciferare, commonly wdciferari, to lift up the voice ; lit. ‘to bear.
the voice afar.’ = L. wdci-, for wox, the voice; and fer-re, to bear, cog-
nate with E. Bear. See Voice. Der. vociferate, from L. pp.
udciferatus ; vocifer-ous, -ly,

VODKA, a Russian strong liquor. (Russ.) Russ. vodka, brandy ;
a dimin. of voda, water, which is cognate with E. water; see Water.

VOGUE, mode, fashion, practice. (F.—Ital.—Teut.) We now
say to be im vogue, i.e. in fashion. Formerly vogwe meant sway,
currency, prevalent use, power, or authority. ‘The predominant
constellations, which have the vogue ;’ Howell, Foreign Travel, sect.
6, ed. Arber, p. 34. ‘Considering these sermons bore so great a vogue
among the papists;’ Strype, Eccl. Mem., 1 Mary, an. 1553.—F. vogue,
‘ vogue, sway, swindge, authority, power; a cleer passage, as of a
ship in a broad seas’ Cot. B. The orig. sense is ‘the swaying
motion of a ship,’ hence its sway, swing, drift, or course; or else the
sway or stroke ofan oar. It is the verbal sb. of F. vogwer, ‘ to saile
forth, set saile;* Cot.—Ital. voga, ‘ the stroke of an oare in the water
when one roweth,’ Florio; verbal sb. of vogare, ‘to rowe in a gallie
or any bote,’id. (So also Span. boga, the act of rowing; estar en
boga, to be in vogue.) Of Teut. origin. =G. wogen, to fluctuate, bein
motion ; MHG. wagen.—MHG. wag, OHG. wac, a wave (G. woge).
+AS. wég, Goth, wégs,a wave; Teut. type *w&goz, m. ; from *weg,
3rd stem of Teut. *wegan, to move. See Weigh. q Thus the
idea of vogue goes back to that of ‘movement,’ as exhibited in the
‘wave’ or swaying of the sea,

VOICE, sound from the mouth, utterance, language. (F.—L.)
The spelling with ce (for s) is adopted to keep the hard sound of s.
ME, vois, voys, King Alisaunder, 3864.—OF. vois (Burguy), later
voix, ‘a voice, sound;’ Cot.—L. wocem, acc. of woe, a VOICe.=
ow WEQ, to resound, speak; cf. Skt, vakya-m, speech, also vacha-s,
speech, cognate with Gk. éos, a word. Brugmann, i. § 678. Der,
voice, verb, Timon, iv. 3. 81; voice-less. From L, wow (stem udc-)
or from L. uocdre (stem woc-) we also have voc-al, voc-able, voc-at-ion,
voci-fer-at-ion, ad-voc-ate, a-voc-at-ion, ad-vow-son, a-vouch, con-voc-at~
ion, con-voke, equi-voc-al, e-voke, in-voc-ate, in-voke, ir-re-voc-able, pro-
voke, re-voke, uni-voc-al, vouch, vouch-safe, vow-el. And see ep-ic.

VOID, empty, unoccupied, unsubstantial. (F.—L.) ME. voide,
Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. ii, pr. 5,1. 127.—OF. voide (Burguy),
MF. vuide, ‘void, empty,’ Cot. Mod. F. wide. The OF. voide isa


| fem. form; masc. void, vuit, Due to a supposed Romance *voc-i-tus,


VOLANT


related to L. uac-uus, empty, void. Korting, § 10280, Der. void,
verb, ME. voiden, to empty, King Alisaunder, 373, from OF. voider,
MF. vuider, ‘to void,’ Cot. Also void-able, void-ance (cf. MF. vuidange,
“a voidnesse,’ Cot.) ; void-ness; a-void.

VOLANT, flying, nimble. (F.—L.) Rare. ‘In manner of a
star volan¢ in the air ;’ Holland, tr. of Plutarch, p. 525 (R.).—F.
volant, pres. part. of voler, ‘ to flye, Cot.—L. uoldre, tofly. Formed
from the adj. *xolus, flying, occurring only in uéli-uolus, flying on sails.
Allied to Skt. garut, a wing, garudga-, a mythical bird ; Brugmann,
i. § 663. Der. vol-at-ile, Ben Jonson, Alchemist, Act ii, sc. 1
(Subtle), from F. volatil, ‘flying,’ Cot., from L. uoldtilis, flying,
from xoldtus, flight, which from uoldius, pp. of uolare. Hence
volatile-ness, volatil-i-ty, volatil-ise, volatil-is-at-ion. Also volley, q. v.

VOLAPUK, a kind of world-speech. (E.) An artificial lan-
guage for international speech, invented about 1879 by J. M.
Schleyer, of Constance, Baden. Properly written Volupiik, This
form was suggested by E. world (here turned into vola) and E. speak
or speech (here turned into piik).

VOLCANO, a burning mountain. (Ital—L.) ‘A vulcano or
volcano ;’ Skinner, ed. 1691. Spelt volcan, J, Frampton, Joyfull
Newes, fol. 31 (1577). Borrowed from Italian, because the chief
burning mountain known to sailors was that of AXtna. = Ital. volcano,
‘a hill that continually burneth ;” Florio.=L. Volcdnum, Vulcinum,
acc. of Volceanus or Vulcanus, Vulcan, the god of fire, hence fire,
B. The true form is Volcdnus (with 0). Allied to Skt. wlka, a fire-
brand, fire falling from heaven, a meteor. Der. volcan-ic ; and see
vulcan-ise,

VOLE, a field-mouse. (Scand.) A word that reached us from the
Orkney Islands. A shortened form of vole-mouse ; see Jamieson, who
quotes from the Edin. Maga., July, 1819, p. 505; and from Barry’s
Orkney, p. 314 (ed. 1805), who says:—‘ with us it has the name of
the vole-mouse.’ So also vole-mouse is given in Edmondston’s Shetland
and Orkney Words. Of Norse origin; from an unrecorded (prob.
colloquial) Norw. *vollmus, field-mouse; for the word is known in
Iceland in the colloquial form vallarmis (E.Magnusson). The former
element is the Norw. voll, Swed. vail, Icel. véllr,a plain, field ; which
is cognate with E. wold; see Wold. There are many compounds
with Norw. voll (and the like); cf. Norw. voll-gras, field-grass, voll-
héy, meadow-hay, Icel. vallar-garér, a paddock-fence, vall-humall,
milfoil; Swed. vall-hund, a shepherd’s dog; Swed. dial. vall-gas,
wild goose.

VOLITION, the exercise of the will, (F.—L.) ‘ Consequent to
the mere internal volition ;’ Bp. Taylor, Rule of Conscience, b. iv.
c. i= F. volition, found in the 16th century (Hatzfeld); we find
cognate terms in Span. volicion, Ital. volizione, volition. All these
answer to a Late L. volitidnem, acc. of *volitio, volition; a word
not recorded by Ducange, but prob. a term of the schools. Itis a
pure coinage, from L. wol-o, I wish; of which the infinitive is welle ;
see Voluntary.

VOLLEY, a flight of shot, the discharge of many fire-arms at
once. (F.—L.) In Hamlet, v. 2. 363. See Nares.—F. volée, ‘a
flight, or flying, also a whole flight of birds;’ Cot. [Cf. Ital. volata,
a flight, volley.]|—L. woldta, orig. fem. of woldtus, pp. of uoldre, to
fly; see Volant.

VOLT, a bound, a leap; the same as Vault (2), q.v.

VOLTAIC, originated by Volta. (Ital.) Applied to Voltaic
electricity, or galvanism ; the Voltaic pile or battery, first set up about
1800, was discovered by Alessandro Volta, of Como, an experimental
philosopher, born 1745, died March 6, 1826; see Haydn, Dict. of
Dates, and Hole, Brief Biograph. Dict. Der. (from Voléa) volt, a
unit of electromotive force.

VOLUBLE, flowing smoothly, fluent in speech. (F.—L.) In
Shak. Comedy of Errors, ii, 1.92.—F. voluble, ‘ yoluble, easily rolled,
turned, or tumbled; hence, fickle, . . glib;’ Cot.—L. uolibilem,
acc. of wolubilis, easily turned about ; formed with suffix -bilis from
uolu-, as seen in woltitus, pp. of uoluere, to roll, turn about.+4Goth.
walwjan, to roll; Gk. eiAvew, to roll; from a base *welu- (*wolu-).
The shorter base WEL occurs in Lithuan. welti, to full, Russ.
valit(e), to roll, Skt. val, to move to and fro; cf. AS. weallan, to boil,
Icel. valr, round, Gk. €Acg, a spiral, éA-iocev, to turn round. See
Helix. Der. volubl-y, volubil-i-ty ; also (from L. uoluere), vault (1),
vault (2), vol-ume, vol-ute, circum-volve, con-volv-ul-us, con-vol-ut-ion,
de-volve, e-volve, e-volu-t-ion, in-volve, in-volu-t-ion, in-vol-ute, re-volt,
re-volu-t-ion, re-volve. From the same root are valve, wale, helix.

VOLUME, a roll, a book, tome. (F.—L.) ME. volume,
Chaucer, C. T. 6263 (D 681).—F. volume, ‘a volume, tome, book ;’
Cot.—L xzolimen, a roll, scroll; hence, a book written on a parch-
ment roll. —L. zoli-, as seen in uoli-tus, pp. of woluere, to roll. See
Voluble. Der. volum-ed; volumin-ous, Milton, P. R. iv. 384, from
L. uoliminésus, full of rolls or folds, from uolimin-, decl. stem of
uolimen ; volumin-ous-ly.


VOW, 695
VOLUNTARY, willing, acting by choice. (F.—L.) Spelt


voluntarie in Levins, ed. 1570.—MF. voluntaire, also spelt volon-
taire, ‘voluntary, willing, free, of his owne accorde;’ Cot.=—L.
uoluntarius, voluntary.—L,. uoluntds, free will. Formed, with suffix
-tas, from a present participial stem *wolunt-,a variant of uolent-, from
uolens, willing, from wolo, I will; infin. zelle.4-Lithuan. weliti, Goth.
wiljan; Skt. vy, to select, choose. Brugmann, ii. §§ 102, 493. See
Will. Der. voluntari-ly, voluntari-ness ; also volunteer, Drayton,
Miseries of Qu. Margaret, st. 177, from F. voluntaire (used as a sb.),
‘a voluntary, one that serves without pay or compulsion,’ Cot.;
hence volunteer, verb. And see vol-up-tu-ous, vol-it-ion; bene-volent,
male-volent.

VOLUPTUOUS, sensual, given up to pleasure. (F.—L.)
ME. voluptuous, Chaucer, Troil. iv. 1573. [Gower has voluptuosite,
sb., C, A. iii. 280; bk. viii. 156.] =F. voluptuéux, ‘ voluptuous,’ Cot.
=—L. uoluptudsus, full of pleasure.—L. woluptu-, akin to uoluptas,
pleasure. =—L. uolup, uolupe, ady., agreeably. —L. uol-o, I wish ; xelle,
to wish; see Voluntary. Cf. Gk. éAmis,hope. Der. voluptuous-ly,
-ness (Palsgrave) ; volup-tu-ar-y, from L. uoluptudrius, uoluptarius,
devoted to pleasure. Hence prob. the vulgar goluptious.

VOLUTE, a spiral scroll on a capital. (F.—L.) Spelt voluta in
Phillips, which is the L. form.—F. volute, ‘the rolling shell of a
snail; also, the writhen circle that hangs over the chapter of a
pillar ;’ Cot.—L. uolita, a volute (Vitruvius). Orig. fem. of uoliitus,
pp. of woluere, toroll; see Voluble. Der. volut-ed.

VOMIT, matter rejected by, and thrown up from the stomach.
(L.) ME. vomite, vomyte, sb.; Prompt. Parv. Palsgrave has vomyt,
verb.=L. uomitus, a vomiting, vomit; whence zomitare, to vomit
often. =L. somitus, pp. of uomere, to vomit.+Gk. épueiy, to vomit ;
Skt. vam, to vomit, spit out; Lithuan. wemti.—4/WEM, to spit out;
Fick, i. 769. Der. vomit, vb. ; vomit-or-y, causing to vomit. And
see em-et-ic.

VORACITY, eagerness to devour. (F.—L.) In Cotgrave.=F.
voracité, ‘ voracity;’ Cot.—L. uwordcitatem, acc. of wordcitas, hungri-
ness.=—L. wordaci-, decl. stem of uorax, greedy to devour. —L. wor-are,
to deyour. = L. -vorus, adj., devouring; only in compounds, such as
carni-uorus, flesh-devouring. B. The L. -uorus stands for *guorus,
as shown by the allied Skt. -gara-, devouring, as seen in aja-gara-,
a boa constrictor, lit. ‘ goat-devouring,’ from aja-,a goat. Cf. also Gk.
Bopés, gluttonous, Bopa, meat, BiBpworev, to devour.—4/GwER,
to swallow down. Brugmann, i. § 653. Der. voraci-ous, from L.
uordact-, decl. stem of worax, greedy to devour ; voraci-ous-ly. From
the same root are gramini-vorous, carni-vorous, omni-vorous, &c., also
de-vour.

VORTEX, a whirlpool, whirlwind. (L.) In Phillips, ed. 1706.
=L. uwortex (also uertex), a whirlpool, whirl, eddy.—L. uertere, to
turn, whirl; see Verse. The pl. is vortices, as in Latin.

VOTH, an ardent wish, the expression of a decided wish or
opinion, expressed decision. (L.) In Selden, Table-talk, Bishops in
the Parliament, § 4.—L. uwdtum,a wish; orig. a vow.—L. udtum,
neut. of udtus, pp. of uduere, to vow; see Vow. Der. vot-ive, from
L. udtiuus, promised by a vow; votive-ly. Also vot-ar-y, a coined
word, L, L. L. ii. 373 vot-ar-ess, Pericles, iv. prol. 4; vot-ress, Mids.
Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 1233 vot-ar-ist, Timon, iv. 3. 27.

VOUCH, to warrant, attest, affirm strongly. (F.—L.) ME.
vouchen, Gower, C. A. ii. 24; bk, iv. 668.—MF. voucher, ‘to vouch,
cite, pray in aid or call unto aid, inasuit,’ Cot. Marked by Cotgrave
as a Norman word; cf. Norm. dial. vocher, to call (Moisy).—L.
uocare, to call, call upon, summon. See Vocable. Der. vouch-er ;
vouch-safe, q. Vv.

VOUCHSAFS, to vouch or warrant safe, sanction or allow
without danger, condescend to grant. (F.—L.) Merely due to the
phr. vouch safe, i. e. vouch or warrant as safe, guarantee, grant. The
two words were run together into one. ME. vouchen safe, or saue.
‘The kyng vouches it saue;’ Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 260.
‘ Vowche sauf pat hissone hire wedde;’ Will. of Palerne, 1449; ‘sauf
wol I fouche,’ id. 4152. See Vouch and Safe.

VOUSSOIR, a stone forming part of an arch, the key-stone being
the central one. (F.—L.) F. voussoir, OF. volsoir, a stone for an
arch (Godefroy). = Late L. type *volsdrium ; from *volsum, equivalent
to L. woluitum, neut. pp. of uolwere, to roll. See Volute.

VOW, a solemn promise. (F.—L.) ME. vow, vou; pl. vowes,
P. Plowman, B. prol. 71. [The ME, avow is commoner; it is a
compound word, with prefix a- (<L.. ad), but is frequently mis-
printed a vow; Tyrwhitt rightly has ‘min avow,’ Chaucer, C. T,
2239 (A 2237); ‘this avow,’ id, 2416 (A 2414).]—OF. vou, vo, ver
(mod. F, vex), a vow. =L. udtum, a vow, lit. ‘a thing vowed ;’
neut. of udtus, pp. of uduere, to promise, to vow. (N.B. Another
avow answers to F. avouer, L. aduocare, and is a doublet of avouch.)
Der. vow, verb, ME. vowen, Prompt. Parv. Also (from L, xdtum),
vote, q.V.


696 VOWEL


VOWEL, 2a simple vocal sound ; the letter representing it. (F.—
L.) Spelt vowell in Levins, ed. 1570; and in Palsgrave, b. i. c, 2.—
OF. vouel, voiel; F. voyelle, ‘a vowell;’ Cot.—L. udcalem, acc. of
ubcalis (sc. littera), a vowel. Fem, of udcalis, adj. sounding, vocal,
=L,. wdc-, stem of wdx, a voice; see Vocal, Voice.

VOYAGE, a journey, passage by water. (F.—L.) ME. viage,
Chaucer, C. T. 4679, 4720 (B 259, 300); veiage, Rob. of Glouc.
p- 200, 1, 4112. The later form voyage (asin Caxton, Siege of Troy,
fol. 120) answers to the 15th cent. spelling of the F, word.—AF.
veiage; OF, voiage, later voyage, ‘ voyage ;’ Cot.—L. uidticum, pro-
visions fora journey, money or other requisites for a journey ; whence
also Ital. viaggio, Span. viage, Prov. viatge; see Ducange.=L.
widticus, belonging to a journey.=L. wia, a way, journey. Der,
voyage, verb, from F. voyager, ‘to travell, goe a voyage,’ Cot. ;
voyag-er, Also (from L. wa), via-duct, and related words given
under Viaduct.

VULCANISE, to combine caoutchouc with sulphur, by heat.
(F.—L.) Modern ; F. vulcaniser (1878). Formed with suffix -ise (F.
-iser, from Gk. -i¢ev) from L. Vulcdn-us, god of fire, hence fire; see
Voleano. Der. vulcan-ite, vulcanised caoutchouc.

VULGAR, used by the common people, native, common, mean,
rude. (F.—L.) In Cor. i. 1. 219. —F. vulgaire, ‘vulgar, common ;’
Cot.=L. wlgaris, vulgar.—L. uulgus, the common people; also
spelt wolgus. The lit. sense is ‘a throng, a crowd; allied to Skt.
varga-s, a troop; Olrish folc, abundance (Stokes); W. gwaia, ful-
ness ; Bret. gwalch, repletion. Stokes-Fick, p. 286. Der. wigar,
sb., L. L. L, i. 2. 51, from F. valgaire, sb., Cot. ; vulgar-ly, vulgar-ise,
vulgar-ism, vulgar-i-ty. Also vulg-ate, the E. name for the Latin
version of the Bible known as the Editio Vulgata (see publications of
the Parker Society, &c.); where wulgata is the fem. of uulgatus, pp.
of uulgare, to make public, to publish.

VULNERABLE, liable to injury. (L.) In Macb. v. 8. 11.—
L. uulnerabilis, wounding, likely to injure ; but also (taken in the
pass. sense) vulnerable (in late Latin).—L. waulnerare, to wound. =
L. uulner-, stem of wulnus,a wound; OL. wolnus. Allied to wellere
(pt. t. wed-st), to pluck, pull, tear.4-Gk. odAn, W. gweli, Corn. goly,
Skt. vraza-, a wound. Stokes-Fick, p. 285. Der. valner-ar-y, from
F, vulneraire, ‘vulnerary, healing wounds,’ Cot., from L. uulnerarius,
suitable for wounds. And see vul-ture.

VULPINE, fox-like, cunning. (F.—L.) ‘The slyness of a
vulpine craft;’ Feltham, pt. i. Res. ro, Blount, ed. 1674, has:
‘ Vulpinate, to play the fox.’=— MF. vulpin, ‘ fox-like.’ Cot.—L, uulp-
inus, fox-like.=—L. uwulp-, base of uulpes, a fox; with suffix -tnus,
Allied to Wolf (see Darbishire, Reliquize Philologicz, p. 92).

VULTURE, a large bird of prey. (L.) In Mach. iv. 3. 74.
ME. vultur, Wyclif, Job, xxviii. 7, later version.—L, wultur, a
vulture ; OL. wolturus; lit. ‘a plucker’ or ‘tearer.’—L. wul- (wol-),
as seen in wzl-si, pt. t. of wellere, to pluck; with suffix -twr denoting
the agent. See Vulnerable. Der. vultur-ine, from L. uulturinus,
vulture-like,


DEN ye it!


WABBLE, WOBBLE, to reel, move unsteadily. (E.) ‘Wabble,
to vacillate, reel, waver;’ Brockett. A voiced form of *wapfle,
equivalent to prov. E. wapper, ‘to move tremulously, Somerset ;’
Halliwell. Both wabble and wapper are frequentatives of wap in the
sense ‘to flutter, beat the wings’ (Halliwell), whence also wapping,
quaking, used by Batman, 1582 (id.), There are several verbs which
take the form wap, but the one now under consideration is properly
whap, a by-form of ME. guappen, to palpitate; see Quaver. Cf.
quabbe, a bog, quagmire (Halliwell). So also Low G. wabbeln or
guabbeln, to wabble ; EF ries. wabbeln, kwabbeln, to wabble ; Swed. dial.
vabbla, to move food to and fro in the mouth, which is given as
a sense of wobble intheE,D.D. Cf. AS. wapol,foam. See Whap,

WACKE, a kind of soft rock. (G.) Modern; geological.=G.
wacke, * a sort of stone, consisting of quartz, sand, and mica ;’ Fliigel,
MHG, wacke, OHG. waggo, a kind of flint.

WAD, a small bundle of stuff, a little mass of tow, &c. (Scand.)
Nares (ed. Halliwell) cites ‘a wadde of hay,’ a bundle of hay, from
the poet Taylor’s Works, 1630. ‘ Make it [lupines] into wads or
bottles ;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xvii. c. 9; cf. the phrase ‘a bottle
of hay.’ —Swed. vadd, wadding ; MSwed. wad, clothing, cloth, stuff
(thre); Icel. vadr, stuff, only in the comp. vadmal, a plain woollen
stuff, wadmal; cf. MSwed. wadmal, Dan, vadmel. Cf. G. watte, wad-
ding, wad, a large fishing-net ; watten, to dress cloth, to wad ; also wat,
cloth (Fliigel), Hence Dan, vat, F, ovate, wadding. | f, The


WAFT


stuff called wadmal was formerly well known in England; in
Arnold’s Chronicle (repr. 1811), p. 236, we find, among imports,
notice of ‘ Rollys of wadmoll’ and ‘curse [coarse] wadmoll.’ ‘ Pann’
grisei qui voca[n]tur wadmal ;’ (1326), Wardrobe Acc. 20 Edw. II.
26. 3.Q. R. Halliwell gives: ‘ Wadmal, a very thick coarse kind of
woollen cloth; coarse tow used by doctors for cattle is also so
called.’ It may be that our wad is nothing but a shortened form of
wadmal in the sense of coarse tow, or coarse stuff; it brings us, how-
ever, ultimately, tothe same source. [The Icel. vadr properly means
‘a fishing-line,’ just as the G. watte means a fishing-net.] The Icel.
vadmal (from mal, a measure=E. meal (2)) is for vadmal; from
Icel. vad, vd5, vod, a piece of stuff, cloth as it leaves the loom, which
is again allied to E. weed, a garment, as used in the phr. ‘a widow’s
weeds,” y. From Teut. base *wéd, 3rd grade of Teut. root WED, asin
Goth. ga-widan, OHG. wetan, to bind together. This base accounts for
wad, stuff wound together<Icel. vad, stuff bound or woven together,
whilst the 2nd grade *wad accounts for G. watte, a fishing-net (because
twined together), and Icel.vadr,a fishing-line (becausetwisted together).
See further under Weed (2), 6. The Russ. vata, F. owate, wad-
ding, Span. huata, Ital. ovata, may be of Tent. origin, the last form
being due to an attempt to giye it a sense from Ital. ovo, an egg.
It is quite unnecessary to suppose (as Diez, not very confidently,
suggests) that the whole set of words allied to wad are derived from
the L. duum, an egg. Der. wadd-ing ; wad-mal, as above. (The
prov. E. woadmel shows that the Olcel. form was vadméal.)

WADDLE, to walk with short steps and unwieldy gait. (E.) In
Shak. Romeo, i. 3.37. The frequentative of Wade, q.v. Der.
waddl-er.

WADE, to walk slowly, esp. through water. (E.) ME. waden,
Chaucer, C. T. 9558 (E 1684). AS. wadan, pt. t. wod, to wade,
trudge, go; ‘wadan ofer wealdas,’ to trudge over the wolds, Genesis,
ed. Grein, 2886; see Grein, ii. 636.4-Du. waden, to wade, ford ; Icel.
vada, strong verb, pt. t, dd, to wade, to rush through, whence vad,
sb., a ford; Dan..vade; Swed. vada; OHG. watan, pt. t. wuot; the
mod. G, waten is only a weak verb. B. All from the Teut. base
WAD, to go, press through, make one’s way; Idg. 4/WADH, to
go; whence also L. wddere, to go, uadum,a ford. Der. wadd-le,
q.v. ; wad-er ; and compare (from L. wadere) e-vade, in-vade, per-vade,

WADI, WADY, a water-course, river. (Arab.) From Arab,
wadi, a water-course, channel, river-bed; Rich. Dict., p. 1624.

WADMAL, WADMALL:; see under Wad.

WAFER, a thin small cake, usually round, a thin leaf of paste.
(F.—OLow G.) ME. wafre, pl. wafres, Chaucer, C. T. 3379;
P. Plowman, B. xiii. 271. We find Low L. gafras, glossed by
wafurs,in John de Garlande; Wright’s Voc. i, 126, 1. 14.=AF.
wafre, Liber Custum. p. 473; OF. waufre, mod. F. gaufre, a wafer.
The form waufre occurs in a quotation, dated 1433, given by Roque-
fort in his Supplement, s.v. Audier; cf. waufret in Godefroy. (The
more usual OF. form was gawfre, or goffre,in which g is substituted
for the orig. w.) In this quotation we have mention of un fer a
waufres, an iron on which to bake wafers. Cf. Walloon wafe,
wauffe, a wafer. B. The word is of Low G. origin; Hexham gives
MDu. waeffel, ‘a wafer ;’ waeffel-yser, ‘a wafer-yron to bake wafers
in,’ of which fer a waufres is a translation; mod. Du. wafel, a wafer,
wafel-ijzer, a wafer-iron. So also Low G. wafeln, pl. wafers ; wafel-
isern, a wafer-iron. Webster's Dict. gives waffle and waffle-iron as
E. words; they are obviously borrowed from Dutch immediately,
and seem to be modern. Cf. also G. waffel, a wafer, waffel-eisen,
a wafer-iron; Dan, waffel, Swed. vdfia; from Low G. wafel.
y. The wafer (dotted regularly with small indentations) was named
from its resemblance to a piece of honey-comb or cake of wax in a
bee-hive ; from a Low G. form allied to G. wabe, a honey-comb,
cake of wax, a derivative from the Teut. base *wed (2nd grade *wad),
to weave, Fick, iii. 289 ; the comb constructed by the bees being, as
it were, woven together. The f appears in Icel. vaf, a weft, Swed.
vaf, a web, AS. wefan, to weave; see Weave. The spelling with
ae (in Hexham) of the MDu. word suggests a derivation from *wéb,
the 3rd grade of the root. The form waeffel is a diminutive. Der.
wafer, verb; wafer-er, a wafer-seller, Chaucer, C. T. 12413 (C 479);
ME. wafr-estre, a female wafer-seller, P. Plowman, B, v. 641.

WAF'T, to bear along through air or water, (E.) ‘ Neither was
it thought that they should get any passage at all, till the ships at
Middleborough were returned, .. » by the force whereof they might be
the more strongly wafted ouer;’ Hakluyt’s Voyages, i, 175. Shak.
has it in several senses; (1) to beckon, as by a wave of the hand,
Merch. Ven. v. 11; Timon, i. 1. 70; (2) to turn quickly, Wint. Tale,
i. 2, 3723 (3) to carry or send over the sea, K, John, ii. 73, 2 Hen.
VI, iv. 1. 114, 116; 3 Hen. VI, iii. 3. 253; v. 7.41. He also has
waftage, passage by water, Com. Errors, iv. I. 95 ; wafture (old edd.
wafter), the waving of the hand, a gesture, Jul. Cees. ii. 1.246. We
must also note, that Shak. has waft both for the pt. t. and pp.;.see-


WAG


Merch. Ven. v. 11; K. John, ii. 73. [Rich. cites waft as a pt. t.,
occurring in Gamelyn, 785, but the best MSS. have fast; so that this
is nothing to the point. ] B. The word waft is not old, and does
not occur in ME.; it seems to be nothing but a variant of wave, used
as a verb, formed by taking the pp. and pt. t. waved (shortened to
waft by rapid pronunciation), as the infinitive mood of a new verb.
This is by no means an isolated case; by precisely the same process
we have mod. E. hoist, due to hoised, pp. of Tudor Eng. hoise, and
mod. E. graft, due to graffed, pp. of Tudor Eng. graff’; while
Spenser actually writes waift and weft instead of Waif,q.v. By
way of proof, we should notice the exact equivalence of waved and
waft in the following passages. ‘Yet towardes night a great sort
[number of people] came doune to the water-side, and waued us on
shoare [beckoned us ashore] with a white flag;’ Hakluyt’s Voyages,
vol. ii. pt. ii. p. 34 (also on p. 33). ‘And waft [beckoned] her love
To come again to Carthage;’ Merch. Ven. v.11. And again, we
must particularly note Lowland Sc. waf’, to wave, shake, fluctuate,
and as a sb., a hasty motion, the act of waving, a signal made by
waving (Jamieson) ; this is merely the Northern form of wave. ‘And
therfore schall y waffe it away;’ York Plays, p. 301. In Gawain
Douglas’s translation of Virgil (/Eneid, i. 319), we have, in the
edition of 1839, ‘ With wynd waving hir haris lowsit of tres,’ where
another edition (cited by Wedgwood) has waffing. So also, in
Barbour’s Bruce, ix. 245, xi. 193, 513, we have the forms vafand,
vaffand, wawand, all meaning ‘ waving,’ with reference to banners
waving in the wind. y. We thus see that waft is due to waft or
waved, pp. and pt. t. of waff or wave; cf. AS. wafian, to wave with
the hand, and see further under Wave (1). Der. waft-age, waft-
ure, as above; waft, sb., waft-er,

WAG, to move from side to side, shake to and fro. (Scand.) ME.
waggen, introduced (probably) as a Northern word in Chaucer,
C. T. 4037 (A 4039); cf. P. Plowman, B. viii. 31, xvi. 41. Earlier,
in Havelok, 89.—MSwed. wagga, to wag, fluctuate; whence
wagga, a cradle, wagga, to rock a cradle (Ihre); Swed. vagga, a
cradle; or as verb, to rock a cradle; Norw. vagga, to wag.
Cf. Icel. vagga, a cradle; Dan. vugge, a cradle, also, to rock a
cradle; AS. wecgan, to wag, OHG. weggen, Goth. wagjan. Closely
allied to AS. wagian, to move, vacillate, rock (Grein, il. 637), which
became ME. wawen, and could not have given the mod. form wag.
In Wyclif, Luke, vii. 25, the later version has ‘waggid with the
wynd,’ where the earlier version has wawid. B. The AS. wagian is
a secondary weak verb, from the strong verb wegan (pt. t. weg, pp.
wegen), to bear, move, carry (weigh), Grein, ii. 655; and similarly
the MSwed. wagga is from the 2nd grade *wag of Teut. *wegan-,
cognate with L. wueh-ere, to carry, from Idg. 4/WEGH, to
carry; see Weigh, Waggon. Der. wag, sb., a droll fellow,
L.L.L. v. 2. 108, as to which Wedgwood plausibly suggests that it
is an abbreviation for wag-halter, once a common term for a rogue
or gallows-bird, one who is likely to wag in a halter (or rather, to
wag or sway a halter), see Nares ; and cf. ‘little young wags . . these
are lackies;’ Holinshed, Descr. of Ireland, ed. 1808, p. 683; also
‘Oh! thou crafty wag-string!’ Heywood, Eng. Traveller, Act iv
(near end); ‘a wag-halter page, Ford, The Fancies, A. i. sc. 2.
Hence wagg-ish, wagg-ish-ly, wag g-er-y (formed like knav-er-y). Also
wagg-le, q.v.; wag-tail, q.v.; wag-moire, a quagmire, Spenser,
Shep. Kal. Sept. 130. And see wedge.

WAGE, a gage, pledge, stake, pay for service; pl. Wages, pay
for service. (F.—Teut.) ME. wage, usually in the sense of pay,
Rob. of Brunne, p. 319, 1. 19; for which the pl. wages occurs only
two lines above. ‘ Wage, or hyre, Stipendium, salarium ;’ Prompt.
Pary. We now usually employ the word in the plural. AF. wage,
a prize, Langtoft, i. 222; wages, pl., Fr. Chron. of London, p. 83; OF.
wage, also gage,a gage, pledge, guarantee (Burguy) ; hence it came to
mean a stipulated payment. The change from initial w to gu (and
even, as here, to g) is not uncommon in OF. A verbal sb. from
OF. wager, gager, gagier, to pledge; cf. Walloon wager, to pledge.
=Low L. wadiare, to pledge.mLow L. uadium, a pledge. = Goth.
wadi, a pledge; whence gawadjon, to pledge. B. The Goth. wadi
is cognate with AS. wedd, a pledge; see Wed (1). Der. wage,
verb, ME. wagen, to engage or go bail, P. Plowman, B. iv. 97, from
OF. wager, verb, as above. Also wag-er, q.v.3 en-gage, q.V.
Doublet, gage (1). ¢ To wage war was formerly to declare war,
engage in it, not merely to carry it on, as now; cf. the phr. ‘wager
of battle ;? see Wedgwood,

WAGER, a pledge, bet, something staked upon a chance.
(F.—Teut.) ME. wageour, Assembly of Ladies, st. 55, 1. 383; spelt
waiour, Polit. Songs, ed, Wright, p. 218, 1. 19, in a song dated 1308.
= OF, wageure, orig. form of OF, gageure, ‘a wager,’ Cot.— Low L.
wadiatura, sb. formed from the pp. of wadiare, to pledge, also to
wager (as shown in Ducange); see Wage. Der. wager, verb,
Hamil. iv. 7. 135; wager-er.


WAINSCOT 697


WAGGLE, to wag frequently. (Scand.) Shak. has waggling,
Much Ado, ii. 1.119. The frequentative of Wag, q.v. Another
frequentative form (with -er instead of -el or -le) appears in ME.
wageren, to tremble, in Wyclif, Eccles. xii. 3, early version ; the later
version has tremble. Cf. Swed. dial. vagla, to totter; also G.
wackeln (whence Swed. vackla) ; Pomeran. waggeln, to waggle ; Low G.
wigel-wageln, to wiggle-waggle; Du. waggelen, to totter.

WAGON, WAGGON, a wain, a vehicle for goods. (Du.) The
spelling with double g merely serves to show that the vowel a is
short. We find the spelling waggon in Romeo, i. 4. 59 (ed. 1623);
wagon, Spenser, F. Q.i.5.28. The word is not very old, and not E.,
being borrowed from Dutch. (The E. form is wain.) ‘They
trussed all their harnes in waganes;’ Berners, tr. of Froissart, vol. i.
c. 62 (R.); ‘charyotts or waggans;’ Cavendish, Life of Wolsey,
p. 88.—Du. wagen, ‘a wagon, or a waine, Hexham.+AS, wegn,
a wain; see Wain. @= The mod. F. wagon is borrowed from
English. Doublet, wain. Der. waggon-er, Romeo, i. 4. 64.

WAGTAIL, the name of a bird. (Hybrid; Scand. and E.) In
King Lear, ii. 2. 73; and in Palsgrave. Formerly called a wag-start
(start meaning fail); ME. wagstyrt, Voc. 763.2. From Wag and
Tail. Cf. Swed. vippstjert, a wagstart or wagtail; from vippa, to


wag.

W AIF, anything found astray without an owner. (F.—Scand.)
ME. waif, weif; the pl. is wayues or weyues (with u=v), P. Plowman,
B. prol. 94; C.i. 92, A Norman-French law-term.—AF. wayf,
Lib. Custumarum, 434, 775; OF. waif, later gaif, pl. waives, gaives.
Godefroy gives gaif, a thing lost and not claimed; choses gaives,
things lost and not claimed; also wayve, a waif, which is a feminine
form, evolved from a pl. form wayves, of which the sing. would
be wayf or waif. Cotgrave has: ‘ Choses gayves, weifes, things for-
saken, miscarried, or lost,’ &c. Waif is an old Norman-French
term, and of Norse origin. —ONorse *weif, Icel. veif, anything
flapping about, applied, e. g. to the fin of a seal; veifan, a moving
about uncertainly, whence veifanar-ord, ‘a word of wafting,’ a
rumour; from veifa, to vibrate, moye about, whence veifi-skati, a
spendthrift, lit. one who squanders coin. B. The ONorse v was
sounded as E. w, and thus *weifa (Icel. veifa) is the source of E.
waive, vb., whence waif seems to have been derived as a verbal sb.
Cf. Norw. veiva, to swing about. A waifis a thing tossed loosely
abroad, and then abandoned, See further under Waive. y. We
may also note that Spenser writes wai/t, F. Q. iv. 12. 31; weft, id.
v. 3- 27, where the ¢ is unoriginal (just as in waft), and due to the
pp. waived, The E. weft (from weave) is a different word. So
also is wave, though easily confused with waive, when used as a verb.

WAIL, to lament. (Scand.) ME. weilen, wailen, Chaucer, C. T.
1297 (A 1295); Wyclif, Matt. xxiv. 30. —Icel. vela (formerly *wela),
to wail; also spelt vala, mod. Icel. vola; Swed. dial. vala, to wail;
Dan. dial. velle, to wail, vel, a wail; Norw. veia, to bleat. Orig.
‘to cry woe;’ from ve, vei, woe! used as an interjection; cf. the
curious ME, waymenten, to lament, Prompt. Parv., formed from the
same interjection with the F. suffix -ment, and apparently imitated
from L. lamentare.4-Ital. guajolare, to wail, cry woe; from guat,
woe! a word of Teut. origin; cf. Goth. wai, woe! whence Goth.
wajamérjan, to lament. See Wo. Der. wail-ing.

WAIN, a waggon, vehicle for goods. (E.) ME. wain; written
wayn, Rob. of Glouc. p. 416, 1. 8596. AS. wegn,a wain; also used
in the contracted form wz, Grein, ii. 644.4-Du. wagen (whence E.
wagon was borrowed in the 15th or 16th century) ; OSax. wagan ;
Icel. vagn; Dan. vogn; Swed. vagn; G. wagen, OHG. wagan.
B. The AS. wegn soon passed into the form wen by the loss of g
(sounded as y), just as AS. regn became réz, mod. E. rain; cf. hail,
nail, tail, in which g similarly disappeats; so also E. day from AS.
deg, &c. Hence it is impossible to regard wagon as a true E. word.
y. All the above forms are from Teut. *wagnoz, m.,a wain, carriage ;
from the 2nd grade (*wag’) of Teut. *wegan-, to carry; from Idg.
“WEGH, to carry, whence E, vehicle. From the same root we
have L. weh-iculum, Skt. vahana-, a vehicle, Skt. vah-ya-, Gk. dx-os,
a car, Olrish féx, a car, Russ. voz’, a load. See Vehicle.
Doublet, wagon or waggon. And see weigh.

WAINSCOT, panelled boards on the walls of rooms. (Du.) In
Shak. As You Like It, iii. 3. 88. Applied to any kind of panelled
work. I find: ‘a tabyll of waynskott with to [two] joynyd tres-
tellis;? Bury Wills, ed. Tymms, p. 115, in a will dated 1522; also
“a rownde tabyll of waynskott with lok and key,’ id., p. 116; also ‘a
brode cheste of wayneskott, id. p. 117. Still earlier, I find waynskot
in what appears to be a list of imports; Arnold’s Chron, (1502), ed.
1811, p. 236, 1. 4. And much earlier ‘c du bord appelle weynscott,’
Liber Albus, p. 238. Hakluyt even retains something of the Dn.
spelling, where he speaks of ‘ boords [boards] called waghenscot ;’
Voyages, i. 173.— Du. wagen-schot, ‘wainscot ;’ Hexham, Low G.
wagenschot, the best kind of oak-wood, well-grained and without


|


caside ;


698 WAIST


knots. Cf. Low G. békenschot, the best kind of beech-wood, with-
out knots, in which the former part of the word is Low G. boken,
beechen, adj. formed from book, a beech. (We may here remark that
E. wainscot, in the building trade, is applied to the best kind of oak-
timber only, used for panelling because it would not ‘ cast’ or warp ;
see Wainscot in Trench, Select Glossary.) B. The Du. schot (like
E. shof) has numerous senses, of which one is ‘a closure of boards,’
Hexham. It also meant ‘a shott, a cast, or a throwe, the flowre of
meale, revenue or rent, gaine or money, ashot or score to pay for any
things,’ id. Sewel also explains schot by ‘a wainscot, partition, a
stop put to anything, the pace (ofa ship), a hogs-sty.’ See Shot.
y. The mod. Du. wagen-schot is an altered form, due to popular
etymology; as if the derivation were from Du. wagen, a wain or
waggon; see Wain. But the older form is MDu. waeghe-schot
(without 2, Kilian); which some (see Ten Kate, Aenleiding, &c.
(1723), ii. 507) wrongly take to be connected with MDu. weech,
weegh, Du. weeg, a wall, cognate with AS. wah, OFries. wich, OSax.
wég, a wall, and allied to Icel. veggr, Goth. waddjus, a wall. See
the article by J. B. Vinckers, in Taalstudie, dated Oct. 7, 1882, from
which I quote: ‘ Dutch shipwrights still use a very remarkable term
wageren, meaning ‘‘to cover the inside of a ship with boards,” from
which is derived the pl. noun wageringen, the inside boards.’
8. A better theory is that given in Kilian, which connects waeghe-
with MDu. waeghe (G. woge, AS. wg, Goth. wégs), a wave; with
reference to the waving grain appearing upon the cleft wood. This
suits the phonology better. e. Hexham also has want-schot, wain-
scot, from want, a wall; and explains wantschotten by ‘to wainscott
walls.’ Der. wainscot, verb.’

WAIST, the middle part of the human body, or of a ship. (E.)
Spelt wast in Palsgrave. ME. wast, called waste of a mannys myddel
or wast of the medyl in Prompt. Parv. ‘The dat. waste isin Gower,
C. A. ii. 373, 1.13. The right sense is ‘growth,’ hence the thick
part or middle of the body, where the size of a man is developed ;
we find the spelling wacste (dat. case) with the sense of ‘ strength,’ in
O. Eng. Homilies, i. 77,1. 3. It answers toan AS. form *wehst,
*west, not found, though the nearly related westm, growth, also
fruit, produce, is a very common word; see Grein, ii. 650. Indeed,
the AS. westm became wastme, wesime in later English, and it is by
no means improbable that the mod. E. waist was suggested by it.
In Genesis and Exodus, 1910, Joseph is described as being ‘ brictest
of waspene,’ certainly miswritten (in the MS.) for ‘ brictest of wasteme,
i.e. fairest of form or shape, ‘ well-waisted.’ = AS. weaxan, to grow,
to wax ; from Teut. base *wahs- (as in Goth. wahsjan, to wax) ; whence
AS. *wehs-t,*west; cf. AS, westm, formed like b1d-stma (E. blossom)
from bléwan, to flourish. See Wax (1). So also Goth. ws-vahsts,
out-growth, wahsjan, to grow; OHG. wahst, wast, growth, wahs-an,
to grow. Further allied to Goth. wahstus, growth; Icel. véxir,
stature, also shape, vaxa, to grow; Dan. vext, Swed. vadxt, growth,
size. Der. waist-band; waist-coat, spelt wast-coate in Browne,
Britannia’s Pastorals, b..i. s. 5, 1. 106 from the end; and see Nares.

W AIT, to watch, stay in expectation, abide, lie in ambush. (F.—
Low L.—OHG.) ME. waiten, P. Plowman, B. v. 202; Havelok,
512.—AF. wayter, to watch, Langtoft, i. 448; OF. waiter, waitier,
also gailer, gaitier (Godefroy), later guetter,‘ to watch, warde, mark,
heed, note, dog, stalk after, lie in wait for;’ Cot. Cf. Walloon weitier,
tospy. Adenominative verb. — AF. wayte, Liber Albus, p. 646 ; OF.
waite, gaite (Godefroy), a guard, sentinel, watchman, or spy; later
guet, ‘watch, ward, heed, also the watch, or company appointed to
watch ;” Cot.—Low L. wacta, a guard; whence wactare, to guard,
Ducange (>OF. waiter).—OHG. wahia, MHG. wahte, G. wacht, a
guard, watch; whence was formed G. wachter, a watchman. (The
Icel. vakta, to watch, is merely borrowed from G., not a true Scand.
word.) B. The sb. wah-ta answers to a Teut. type *wah-ton-, m.,
for *wak-ton-, a watcher, one whois awake; from Teut. *wak-an-, to
wake; see Wake (1). Der. wait-er, ME. waitere, a watchman,
Wyclif, 4 Kings ix. 17 (one MS. of later version). Also wait, sb.,
chiefly in the phr. ‘to lie in wait,’ Acts, xxiii. 21. The ME. waite
«properly signifies a watchman or spy, as in Cursor Mundi, 11541,
from OF. waite, as above, andis really an older word than the verb,
as above shown ; it only remains to us in the phrase ‘ the Christmas
waits,’ where a wait is ‘ one who is awake,’ for the purpose of playing
music at night; cf. ‘ Wayte, a spye; Wayte, waker, Vigil;’ Prompt.
Pary. ‘ Assint etiam excubie vigiles [glossed by OF. veytes veliables],
cornibus suis strepitum et clangorem et sonitum facientes ;’ Wright's
Voc. i. 106, 1. 1. Also wait-ing’, wait-ing-woman, K. Lear, iv. 1. 65 ;
-a-wait, vb., q. Vv.

WAIVE, to relinquish, abandon aclaim. (F.—Scand.) Chiefly
in the phr. ‘to waive a claim, as in Cotgrave (see below). ME.


waiuen, weiuen (with u=v), a difficult and rather vague word, chiefly |
in the sense ‘to set aside’ or ‘shun,’ also ‘to remove’ or ‘ push.
see P, Plowman, B. v. 611 (where the MS. may be read.


>


WAKEN


wayne); id. B. xx. 167; Chaucer, C. T. 4728, 9357, 10298, 17127,
17344 (B 308, E 1483, 2424, H 178, I 33), Troil. ii. 284; Gower,
C. A. i. 276, bk. ii. 3469.—AF. weiver, to waive, Year-Books of
Edw. I (1292-3), pp. 39, 53) 55, 2053 OF. gaiver (Godefroy), to
cede, abandon; later guesver, ‘to waive, refuse, abandon, give over,
surrender, resigne;’ Cot. The AF. waif, sb., is in the Liber Custu-
marum, pp. 151, 434, 486; OF. gaif in Godefroy; see Waif.
Ducange gives Low L. wavidre, to waive, abandon, wayvium, a waif,
or a beast without an owner, vayvus, adj., abandoned as a waif, which
are merely Latinised forms of the F. words; and he remarks that
these words are of common occurrence. B. The sb. seems to be
from the vb.—ONorse *weifa, Icel. veifa, to vibrate, swing about,
move to and fro in a loose way; Norw. veiva, to swing about, to
turn a grindstone, Swed. vefva, to wind ; cf. Low G. weifen, to swing
about, to toss (Schambach). Hence the sense ‘to cast loose.’
OHG. weibin, MHG. weiben, waiben, to fluctuate, swing about ;
cf. Goth. bi-weibjan, to wind about ; Skt. vép, to shake. (4/WEIP.)

@ > Distinct from wave, despite some similarity in the sense; but
the words have been confused.

WAKE (1), to cease from sleep, be brisk. (E.) ME. waken,
strong verb, pt. t. wook, Chaucer, C. T. Group A, 1393 (Six-text);
where Tyrwhitt, 1. 1395, prints awook; also wakien, weak verb, to
keep awake, pp. waked, Havelok, 2999. Corresponding to these
verbs, we should now say ‘ he woke,’ and ‘he was waked.’ [They are
both distinct from ME, waknen, to waken; which see under
Waken.] AS. wacan, to arise, come to life, be born, pt. t. wdc,
pp. wacen ; also wacian, to wake, watch, pt. t. wacode, wacede; Grein,
ii. 635.4-Goth. wakan, pt. t. wok, pp. wakans, to wake, watch ;
whence wakjan, weak verb, only in comp. uswakjan, to wake from
sleep; Du. waken (weak verb); Icel. vaka (weak); Dan. vaage ;
Swed. vaka; G. wachen. B. All from Teut. base WAK, to be
brisk, be awake, allied to Idg. 4/WEGw, to be vigorous, whence
Vigil, Vegetable, q.v. Brugmann, ii. § 804. Der. wake (weak
verb), to rouse, answering to AS. wacian, as above; wake, sb., a
vigil, ME. wake, Ancren Riwle, p..314, 1. 2 from bottom, from AS.
wacu, occurring in the comp. niht-wacu, a night-wake, Grein, ii.
286,1.5. Also wake-ful, Spenser, F. Q. iii. 9. 7, substituted for AS.
wacol or wacul (allied to L. uigil), Voc. 315. 26; hence wake-ful-ly,
wake-ful-ness, Also wak-en, q. v., watch, q.v.

WAKE (2), the track of a ship. (Scand.) ‘In the wake of the
ship (as ’tis called), or the smoothness which the ship’s passing has
made on the sea ;’ Dampier’s Voyages, an. 1699 (R.). ‘Wake, (among
seamen) is taken for that smooth water which a ship leaves astern
when under sail, and is also called the ship’s way ;’ Phillips, ed. 1706.
‘In Norfolk, where the broads [large tarns] are mostly frozen over,
the spaces of open water are called wakes ;’ Wedgwood. Like many
other E. Anglian words, wake is of Scand. origin. It was originally
applied to an open space in half-frozen water, and esp. to the passage
cut for a ship in a frozen lake or sea ; thence it was easily transferred
to denote the smooth watery track left behind a ship that had made
its way through ice, and at last (by a complete forgetfulness of its
true use) was applied to the smooth track left behind a vessel when
there is no ice at all. And even, in prov. E., rows of green damp
grass are called wakes (Halliwell).—Icel. vék (stem vak-, gen. sing.
and nom. pl. vakar),.a hole, opening in ice; draga eir skipit milli
vakanna=to drag their ship. between [or along] wakes (Vigfusson) ;
Swed. vak, an opening in ice; Norw. vok, the same, whence vekkja,
to cut a hole in ice, ‘especially to hew out a passage for ships in
frozen water’ (Aasen); NFries. wak, Dan. vaage, the same. The
mod. Du. wak (like E. wake) is merely borrowed from Scandinavian.
The orig. sense is a ‘moist’ or wet place; and it is allied to Icel.
vokr, moist, vokva, to moisten, to water, vdkva, moisture, juice, whence
Lowland Sc. wak, moist, watery; so also Du. wak, moist. Teut.
type *wakwoz, moist (Franck) ; Teut. base WEQ, to wet, answering
to Idg. root WEGw, to wet, whence Gk. ty-pds, L. ti-midus, wet;
see further under Humid. Brugmann, i. § 658 (b). B. The F.
ouaiche, formerly also ovage, now usually houache, the wake of a ship,
is clearly borrowed from English, as Littré says. y. The connexion
between wake, a wet track through ice, and proy. E. wake, a row of
damp grass, is. sufficiently clear. Cf. Homer’s iypd «éAevda, Od.
iii. 71. From the same root is quaff, q.v.

WAKEN, to awake. (E.) This verb is of considerable gram-
matical importance, and should be carefully studied, being one of a
class not very common in mod. E., and peculiarly liable to be mis-
understood. The point is, that it was orig. intransitive, whereas in
Shak. it is transitive only, 3 Hen. VI, iv. 3. 19, Romeo, iii. 1.28,
iv. 4. 24, Oth. ii, 1. 188; &c. In mod. English, verbs in -ex, by a
singular change, are mostly transitive, such as. strengthen, embolden,
&e. ; but this is just contrary to the older usage, not only in ME. and
AS. but in the Teut. languages generally. The subject is discussed
in Grimm’s Grammar, ed. 1837, iv. 23, where he shows that Goth.


WALE, WEAL


auk-a, I eke, or increase, answers to Gk. avéavw, whereas aukna (=I
eke-n) answers to Gk. adédvoya, in the middle voice; and there was
even in Gothic a third form aukada=Gk. avfdvopa in the passive
voice. B. The ME. form is waknen or wakenen, intransitive. ‘So
pat he bigan to wakne’=so that he began to waken (or be aroused
from sleep), Havelok, 2164. AS. wecnan, to arise, be aroused, be
born; Grein, ii. 642. The formative -z- in wec-n-an is due to the
pp. suffix -ex (Teut. -anoz) seen in AS. wacen, pp. of wac-an, to wake ;
so that wec-n-an orig. meant ‘to become awake.’ Allied to AS.
wacan, to wake; see Wake.-+Icel. vakna, to become awake; allied
to vaka, to wake; Swed. vakna, allied to vaka; Dan. vaagne, allied
to vaage; Goth. gawaknan, allied to wakan; whence pres. part. pl.
gawaknandans =becoming awake, Luke, ix. 32. Der. a-waken.
WALE (1), WEAL, the mark of a stroke of a rod or whip upon
the flesh, a streak, a ridge, a plank along a ship’s side. (E.) Some-
times spelt wheal, but a wheal is properly a blister; see Wheal (1).
‘ The wales, marks, scars, and cicatrices;’ Holland, tr. of Plutarch,
p- 459 (R.). ‘The wales or marks of stripes and lashes ;’ id. p. 547
R.). ME. wale. ‘ Wale, or strype,’ Prompt. Parv. ‘ Wyghtly on
the wale [gunwale] thay wye vp thair ankers;’ Morte Arthure, 740.
AS. walu (pl. wala), a weal, mark of a blow, occurring 4 times in
glosses ; also, a ridge (Toller), Wealso find AS. wyrt-wala (-walu),
properly the shoot or stem of a root, as when the root of a tree pro-
jects from the ground, hence used for ‘root’ simply; cf. ‘dt
plantudest wyrttruman hys’=thou plantedst his roots, Ps. 1xxix. 10,
ed. Spelman, where the Trinity MS. has ‘ 3 wyrtwalodes (sic) wirt-
waloda, the last word being corruptly written for wyrtwala. The
orig. sense was ‘ rod,’ hence the rounded half-buried side-shoot of a
root (as above), or the raised stripe or ridge caused by the blow of a
rod or whip. Hence also the sense of ridge or plank along the edge
of a ship, as in the comp. gun-wale, q. v.-OFries. walu, a rod,
wand ; only in the comp. walubera, walebera, arod-bearer, a pilgrim ;
EFries. wale, a weal; NFriesic waal, a staff, rod (Outzen); Icel.
volr (gen. valar), a round stick, a staff; Swed. dial. val, a round stick,
cudgel, flail-handle (Rietz); Goth. walus, a staff; Luke, ix. 3.
B. All from the Teut. types *walon-, *wald, *waluz, a round stick, so
named from its roundness; the sense of ‘rounded ridge’ still lingers
in mod. E. wale; cf. Icel. valr, round, EFries, walen, to turn round,
Russ. val’, a cylinder, valiat(e), to roll; allied to L. woluere, to turn,
Gk. éAiooey, to turnround, (4/WEL). See Volute. Der. gun-wale.
W ALE (2), choice; as a vb., tochoose. (Scand.) Obsolete ; except
in N. dialects. ME, walen, to choose, Wars of Alexander, 4655 ; from
wale, sb., choice, Allit. Troy-book, 11952.—Olcel. *wal, Icel. val,
choice; Swed. val; MDan. val.4--OHG. wala, choice; G. wahl.
Hence Icel. velja,to choose, Swed. valja, Dan. velge; cf. Goth. waljan, to
choose, Skt. varaya, to choose, causal form of vv, to choose. From
Teut. *wal, Idg. *wol, and grade of 4/WEL, todesire. See Will (1).
WALK, to move along on foot without running. (E.) ME.
walken, formerly a strong verb, pt. t. welk, pp. walken, The pt. t.
welk occurs in the Pricke of Conscience, ll. 4248, 4390; the pp. is
spelt walke, King Horn, ed. Lumby, 953. AS. wealcan, pt. wéolc,
pp: wealcen, to roll, to toss oneself about, rove about, esp. used of
the movement or flow of water; Grein, ii. 669. Thus the orig.
sense was ‘to roll,’ much as in the proverb ‘a rolling [moving]
stone gathers no moss.” Hence the ME. walker, Wyclif, Mark, ix. 2
(earlier version), lit. a roller, a term applied to a fuller of cloth (from
his stamping on or pressing it); AS. wealcere=L. fullo, Voc. 407.
29; Walker is still common as a proper name.4Du. walken, to
work or make a hat; MDu. walcken, ‘to presse, to squeeze, or to
straine ;’ walcker, ‘a fuller;? Hexham; Icel. valka, volka, to roll,
to stamp, to roll oneself, to wallow; valk, a tossing about; Swed.
valka, to roll, to full, to work; Dan. valke, to full, to mill; G.
walken, to full, OHG. walchan, to full, also to roll or turn oneself
round, to move about; hence G. walker, a fuller. B. All from
Teut. base WALK, to roll about, answering to Idg. WALG, whence
Skt. valg, to go by leaps. Der. walk, sb., Tw. Nt. i. 3. 138; walk-
ing-staff, Rich. II, iii. 3. 151 ; walk-ing-stick. Also walk-er, a fuller,
P. Plowman, C.i. 222. And see wallow.
* WALL, a stone fence, a fence of stone or brick, a rampart. (L.)
ME. wal, appearing as walle, Chaucer, C. T. 8923 (E 1047). AS.
weal, weall, a rampart of earth, a wall of stone; Grein, ii. 671.
Not a Teut. word, but borrowed from the famous L. wallum, a ram-
part, whence also W. gwal, a rampart, as well as Du. wal, Swed.
vall, G, wall, &c. B. The L. wallum is a collective sb., signifying
a row or line of stakes.—L. wallus, a stake, pale, palisade; lit. a
protection. Allied to Olrish fal, a hedge; Stokes-Fick, p. 276.
@ The true AS. word for ‘ wall’ was wah, Grein, ii. 643 (where the
accent is wrongly omitted), whence ME. wowe, P. Plowman, B. iii.
61 (obsolete). Der. wall, verb, ME. wallen, Rob. of Glouc, p. 51,
‘1, 1169; wall-flower, wall-fruit; also wall-newt, K, Lear, iii. 4. 135.
#& No connexion with wall-eyed,


WALRUS 699


WALLA, WALLAH, short for Competition-walla. (Hind.—
Skt.) A competition-walla is an Anglo-Indian term, applied, after
1836, to one who entered the Civil Service by the competitive system
then established. See Yule, who explains that the Hind. -wala is
properly a Hindi adjectival suffix, with a similar value to that of
Lat. -arius, or E. -er; so that competition-walla=competition-er, i. e.
competitor. Cf. Hind. gwala, a cow-herd ; for *gd-wala; from go,
a cow.=Skt. -vala-, suffix ; as in vid-vala-, clever, from vid, to know;
Brugmann, ii. § 76, note 1.

WALLABY, a smail kangaroo. (Australian). ‘ Wallaby, a
name used for the smaller kinds of kangaroos;’ E. E. Morris,
Austral, Dict.; q.v. From the native Austral. walla, to jump.

WALLET, a bag for carrying necessaries, a budget. (E.?) ME,
walet (with one 7), Chaucer,C. T.683 (A681) ; P. Plowman, C. xi. 269,
where for ‘ bag-full’ some MSS. have watel-ful and others have walet-
ful. In the latter passage we have the probable solution of the
word; the ME, walet being apparently a corruption of watel. In
the same way, wallets, used by Shakespeare for bags of flesh upon
the neck (Temp. iii. 3. 46), may be the same as wattles, ‘ teat-like
excrescences that hang from the cheeks of swine,’ Brockett. That
watile should turn into wallet is not very surprising, for J is near akin
to r, and a similar shifting of r is a common phenomenon in English,
as in AS, irnan=rinnan, to run, ME. brid=a bird, ME. burd=a
bride, &c.; so also neeld, a needle, mould= model ; wordle for worlde,
i, e. world, P. Plowm. C. i. 10, &c. We even find fadock for fagot,
Old Plays, ed. Hazlitt, vi. 77; and maddock with the same sense as
maggot. At any rate, the very special use of wallets =watiles=
fleshy bags, is remarkable, as well as the equivalent use of walet and
watel in the MSS. of P. Plowman. B. The E. wattle commonly
means ‘ hurdle,’ but ME. watel appears to have also meant a basket,
and hence a bag. See further under Wattle. It is perhaps worth
while to add that we find, in Voc. 656. 9, the entry ‘ Hic pero,
wolyng,’ which Mr. Wright explains as ‘a leathern sack.’ This ME,
wolyng, having no obvious etymology, is perhaps a contraction of
watling (the dimin. of watel), by loss of 4. (Doubtful ; some assume
an OF. *walet, bag; as if from OHG. waillén, to go on pilgrimage.)

WALL-EYED, with glaring eyes, diseased eyes. (Scand.) In
Shak. K. John, iv. 3. 49, Titus, v. 1. 44. Spenser has whally eyes,
F. Q.i. 4. 24. ‘ Glauciolus, An horse with a waule eye ;’ Cooper’s
Thesaurus, ed. 1565. Nares writes it whally, and explains it from
whaule or whall, the disease of the eyes called glaucoma; and cites:
‘ Glaucoma, a disease in the eye; some think it to be a whal eie;’
A. Fleming’s Nomenclator, p. 428. Cotgrave has: ‘ Oeil de chevre,
a whall, or over-white eye ; an eie full of white spots, or whose apple
seems divided by a streak of white.’ But the spelling with & is
wrong. ME. wald-eyed, Wars of Alexander, 608; wolden-eighed,
King Alis. 5274. Also wawil-eyed, Wars of Alexander, 1706. = Icel.
vald-eygdr, a corrupted form of vagl-eygr, wall-eyed, said of a horse.
—Icel. vagl, a beam, also a beam in the eye, a disease of the eye (as
in vagl & auga, a wall in the eye); and eygr, eygdr, eyed, an adj.
formed from auga, the eye, which is cognate with E. Eye. B. The
Icel. vagl is the same as Swed. vage/, a roost, a perch, also a sty in
the eye; vagel pa ogat, ‘a tumor on the eyelid, a stye on the eyelid,’
Widegren. Cf. Norweg. vagl, a hen-roost, Aasen. The lit. sense
is ‘a perch,’ or ‘a small support;’ closely allied to Icel. vagn, a
wain. =4/WEGH, to carry, asin Skt. vah, L. wehere (whence wec-tis,
a pole); see Wain. See Notes on E. Etym., p. 316.

WALLOP, to boil; see Potwalloper and Gallop.

WALLOW, to roll oneself about, as in mire. (E.) ME. walwen,
Chaucer, C. T. 6684 (D 1102). AS. weaiwian, to roll round, A‘lfred,
tr. of Boethius, c. 6 (b. i. met. 7).+-Goth. walwjan, to roll, in
comp. atwalwjan, afwalwjan, faurwalwjan; L. uoluere, to roll. See
Volute.

WALNUT, lit. a foreign nut. (E.) ME. walnote, spelt walnot,
P. Plowman, B. xi. 251. OMerc. walh-hnutu, a walnut; Voc. 452.
34. Lit. ‘foreign (i.e. Gaulish) nut..—OMerc. walk, AS. wealh,
foreign; and kuutu,anut. The pl. Wealas means ‘strangers,’ i.e.
the Welsh; but in mod. E. it has become Wales.4- Du. walnoot, MDu.
walnote (Hexham); Icel. valhnot; Dan. valndd; Swed. valnot; G.
wallnuss; also Wéailsche nuss, i.e. foreignnut. B. For the latter
element, see Nut. The former element is AS. wealh, foreign,
OHG. walah, a foreigner, whence G. Wailsch, Italian. The sense
‘foreign’ is inexact; the AS. Wealh meant a Celt, either of Wales
or Gaul. It answers in form to ‘one of the tribe of Volce, who
occupied Southern Gaul; Cesar, Bellum Gallicum, vii. 7.

WALRUS, a kind of large seal. (Du.—Scand.) In Ash’s Dict.,
ed. 1775.— Du. walrus, ‘a kind of great fish with tusks ;” Sewel, ed.
1754. Hence also the modern Scand. forms; as Swed. valiross,
a morse, walrus; Dan. hvalros. The name is very old, since the
word ross (for horse) is no longer in use in Swedish and Danish,
which languages now employ hast, hes¢ in its stead; but we find the


700 WALTZ


right word, in an inverted form, in Icel. hross-hvair, a walrus, lit. a
horse-whale; the name being given (it is suggested) from the noise
made by the animal, somewhat resembling a neigh. So also AS. hors-
hwel, a horse-whale or walrus. B. The Swed. vall, Dan. hval,
TIcel. hvalr, are cognate with E. Whale. The Swed. ross, Dan.
ros, Icel. kross or hors, are cognate with AS. hors (the r in which
has shifted); see Horse. 4 The name morse, q.v., is of Finnish
origin.

WALTZ, the name of a dance. (G.) Introduced in 1812}; see
Byron’s poem on ‘The Waltz.’ A shortened form of G. walzer
(with z sounded as ¢s, whence the E. spelling), ‘a jig, a waltz;’
Fliigel.—G. walzen, ‘to roll, revolve, dance round about, waltz ;’
id.+AS. wealtan. to roll, twist; see further under Welter. Der.
waltz, verb.

WAMPUM, small beads, used as money. (N. American Indian.)
‘ Wampum, small beads made of shells [sometimes white], used by
the N. American Indians as money, and also wrought into belts, &c.
as an ornament;’ Webster. Modern; not in Todd’s Johnson.
From the Narragansett wompi, white, and -ompeag, a suffix to denote
a string of money; whence the compound wampumpeag, or briefly,
wampum ; Notes and Queries, 9 S. x. 226. Cf. Algonkin wab, white
(Cuoq); Massachusetts wémpi, Delaware wapi, white (Mahn). See
Wapiti.

WAN, colourless, languid, pale. (E.) ME. wan, Chaucer, C. T.
2458 (A 2456). AS. wann, wonn, dark, black, Grein, ii. 638. It
occurs as an epithet of a raven, and of night ; so that the sense of the
word appears to have suffered a remarkable change ; the sense, how-
ever, was probably ‘dead’ or ‘colourless,’ which is applicable to
black and pallid alike. Hence Ettmiiller derives it from AS. wann,
2nd grade of winnan, to strive, contend, toil (whence E. win); so
that the orig. sense would have been ‘ worn out with toil, tired out,’
from which we easily pass to the sense of ‘worn out’ or ‘ pallid
with sleeplessness’ in the mod. E. word. (Cf. Goth. wunns,
affliction; from the weak grade wunn-.) So also in Stokes-Fick,
Pp. 259, who takes it to be cognate with Irish fann, W. gwan, feeble,
weak, faint. It seems to be distinct from Wane, confusion with
which has affected its sense. See further under Win, Der. wan-ly,
Wwan-ness,

WAND, a long slender rod. (Scand.) ME. wand, Pricke of Con-
science, 5880; Ormulum, 16178. =—Icel. véndr (gen. vandar), a wand,
a switch, whence vandahis, a wicker-house; MSwed. wand (Ihre) ;
Dan. vaand.+Goth. wandus,a rod, 2 Cor. xi. 25. B. The Teut.
type is *wanduz,m. It was perhaps named from its pliancy and use
in wicker-work, the orig. sense being a lithe twig, that could be
wound into wicker-work. From Teut. *wand, 2nd grade of *windan-,
to wind; see Wind (2). But some give it the sense of ‘ weapon,’
and connect it with Wound.

WANDER, to ramble, rove. (E.) ME. wandrien, wandren,
P. Plowman, B. vi. 304. AS. wandrian, to wander, A‘lfred, tr. of
Boethius, lib. iv. met. 1 (cap. xxxvi. § 2). The frequentative form
of wend, to go; hence it means ‘to keep going about.’ From wand-,
base of *wand-jan, the orig. form of wend. See Wend.+EFries.
wandern, wandeln; Swed. vandra, Dan. vandre (from Low G.); Du.
wandelen, ‘to walke,’ Hexham; G. wandeln, to wander, travel, walk.
Der. wander-er. Also Vandal, q. v.

WANDEROO, a large Cingalese and Malabar monkey.
(Cingalese.—Skt.) Spelt waxderow in 1681 (Yule).—Cing. wanderu;
cf. Hind. bandar, an ape.—Skt. vanara-, vanara-, a monkey. Lit.
‘forest-dweller.’ = Skt. vana-, forest. Allied to Goth. winja, pasture ;
cel. vin, meadow; orig. free space or ‘ pleasure-ground;’ and
allied to Winsome and Win. (4/WEN.)

WANE, to decrease (as the moon), to fail. (E.) ME. wanien,
wanen, Chaucer, C. T. 2080 (A 2078). AS. wanian, wonien, to
decrease, grow less; Grein, ii. 639.—AS. wan, won, deficient, id.
638.+Icel. vana, to diminish, from vanr, lacking, wanting; also
van-,in composition. Cf.OHG. and MHG. wandn, wanén, to wane,
from wan, deficient, appearing in mod. G. compounds as wahn-. So
also Du. wan-, prefix, in wanhoop, despair (lit. lacking hope). Also
Goth. wans, lacking. B. All from Teut. type *wa-noz, adj.,
deficient ; perhaps orig. a pp. Allied to the Gk. edvis, bereaved,
Skt. wa-s, wanting, lessened, inferior. Der. want, wan-ton; and
prob, wan-i-on, q. v.

WANTON, in the phrase with a wanion. (E.) In Shak. Per. ii.
1.17; the phr. with a wanion means ‘ with a curse on you,’ or ‘ with
bad luck to you,’ or ‘to him,’ as the case may be. Explained by
Wedgwood, Phil. Soc. Trans. 1873-4, p. 328; the connexion with
the verb 4o wane was pointed out by Nares. There is no doubt
(1) that it stands for waniand, and (2) that waniand was taken to be
a sb., instead cf a pres. part, Rich. quotes from Sir T. More: ‘He
would of likelyhod binde them to cartes and beate them, and make
theim wed in the waniand,’ Works, p. 306 h; which means, I suppose,


WAPENTAKE


he would flog them at the cart’s tail (a common expression), and
make them marry in the waning moon, i.e, at an unlucky time. So
also: ‘in woo to wonne [dwell], ix the wanyand,’ York Plays, p. 124.
‘It was in the waniand’ [in an unlucky time]; Minot, ed. T. Wright,
i. 87. And-even in AS. we have: ‘Ealle eordlice lichaman béod
fulran on weaxendum monan ponne on wanigendum ;’ i.e, all earthly
things are fuller in the waxing than in the waning moon; Pop.
Treatises on Science, ed. T. Wright, p. 15. Halliwell gives ‘ wani-
and, the wane of the moon,’ without any authority ; but compare the
following. ‘So myghte he wel sey, that ix the crook [crescent] of
the mone com he thiderward, and in the wylde wanyande [{i.e.
waning] wente homward;’ A Chronicle of London, ed. Sir H.
Nicolas, 1827, p. 122; see note to Tale of Beryn, ed. Fumivyall,
1, 398. So that the first and last quarters of the moon were both un-
propitious. 8. Waniand is the Northern form of the pres. part. of
ME. wanien, to wane, also used actively in the sense to lessen, deprive
(see below). The confusion of the pres. part. with the sb. in -ing is
so common in English that many people cannot parse a word ending
in -ing. Thus in the waniand came to mean ‘in the waning, and
with a wanion means with a diminution, detriment, ill-luck. On
‘the fatal influence of the waning moon, .. general in Scotland,’
see Brand’s Popular Antiquities, chapter on The Moon, The Icel.
vana, to wane, is commonly transitive, with the senses ‘to make to
wane, disable, spoil, destroy,’ which may have influenced the super-
stition in the North, though it is doubtless widely spread. Cf.
‘wurred uppe chirches, oder wanied hire rihtes, oder letted’ = war
upon churches, or lessen their rights, or hinder them; O. Eng.
Homilies, ed. Morris, ii. 177, 1.6. See Wane.

WANT, lack, deficiency, indigence, need. (Scand.) ME. want,
first in the Ormulum, 14398, where it is spelt wannt, and has the adj.
sense of ‘deficient ;’ spelt wonze, and used as a sb., Ancren Riwle,
p. 284, 1. 2.—JIcel. vant, neuter of vanr, adj., lacking, deficient.
This neuter form was used with a gen. case following; as, var eim
vettugis vant = there was lacking to them of nothing, i.e. they wanted
nothing. [The Icel. sb. for want is vansi.] B. Thus the final z
was orig. merely the termination of the neut. gender (as in E. 7-¢,
tha-t, thwar-t); but the word vant was in common use, and even the
verb vanta, to want, to lack, was formed from it, which is the origin
of E. want as a verb. y. The Icel. vanr, adj., is explained under
Wane, q.v. Der. want, verb, ME. wanten, spelt wonten in Ancren
Riwle, p. 344, 1.14; from Icel. vanta, verb, as above. Also want-
ing, pres. part., sometimes used as adj.

WANTON, playful, sportive, unrestrained. (E.) The true
sense is unrestrained, uneducated, not taken in hand by a master;
hence, licentious. ME. wantoun, contracted form of wantowen ; spelt
wantoun, Chaucer, C. T. 208; spelt waniowen, wantowne, wanton,
P. Plowman, C. iv. 143, where it isapplied to women. Compounded
of wan-, prefix, and fowen, pp. 8B. The prefix wan- signifies ‘lack-
ing, wanting,’ and is explained under Wane. Incomposition it has
sometimes the force of wx- (to which it is not related), but also gives
an ill sense, almost like Gk. dus-. y. The pp. towen stands for
AS. togen, pp. of téon, to draw, to educate, bring up, Grein, ii. 527.
The change from AS. g to ME. w (after a, 0, or z) is seen again in
AS. mugan=ME. mowen, to be able, and is regular. The AS. togen
is cognate with G. gezogen, so that E. wanton, ill-bred, corresponds
very nearly to G. ungezogen, ‘ ill-bred, unmannerly, rude, uncivil,’
Fliigel. For anaccount of AS. téox, see Tow (1). Mr. Wedgwood
well cites wel i-towune, well educated, modest, Ancren Riwle, p. 204,
l. 17; vntowune, licentious, id. p. 342, 1. 26. So also ful itowene,
foully (badly) educated; id. p. 140, 1. 26. Der. wanton-ly ; wanton-
ness, ME. wantounesse, Chaucer, C. T. 266 (A 264). Also wanton, sb.

WAPENTAKE, an old name for a hundred or district. (Scand.)
‘Fraunchises, hundredis, wapentakes;’ Arnold’s Chron. (1502), ed.
1811, p. 183. ‘ Candred . . isa contray pat conteynep an hundred
townes, and is also in Englische i-cleped wepentake ;’ Trevisa, ii. 87;
spelt wapentake, Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 145, 1. 16. The
word occurs in the AS. Laws, but was merely adapted from Norse;
the AS. t&can does not mean ‘to touch,’ but ‘to teach,’ and is
altogether removed from the word under discussion. It is remark-
able that various explanations of this word have been given, seeing
that all the while the Laws of Edward the Confessor fully explain
the orig. sense. AS. w¥pengetece, dat. case, a district, wapentake,
Secular Laws of Edgar, § vi,in Thorpe, Ancient Laws, vol. i. p. 2743
we also find wépentake, dat. case, id. p. 292. The nom, is w&pen-
getec or wepentac, Latinised as wapentac or wapentagium, Laws of
Edw. Conf. § xxx, in Thorpe, i. 455, where we also read: ‘ Quod
alii vocant hundredum, supradicti comitatus vocant wapentagium, et
hoc non sine causa; cum enim aliquis accipiebat prefecturam wapen-
tagii, die constituto, conveniebant omnes majores contra eum in loco
ubi soliti erant congregari, et, lescendente eo de equo suo, omnes assur-
gebant contra eum, et ipse erigebat lanceam suam in altum, et omnes


- WAPITI


de lanceis suis tangebant hastam ejus, et sic confirmabant se sibi.
Et de armis, quia arma vocant wappa, et taccare, quod est confirmare.’
To which another MS. adds: ‘ Anglice vero arma vocantur wapen, et
taccare confirmare, quasi armorum confirmacio, vel ut magis expresse,
secundum linguam Anglicam, dicamus wapentac, i.e. armorum tactus :
wapen enim arma sonat, tac ¢actus est. Quamobrem potest cognosci
quod hac de causa totus ille conventus dicitur wapentac, eo quod per
tactum armorum suorum ad invicem confoederate (sic) sunt.’ We
may then dismiss other explanations, and accept the one above, that
when a new chief of a wapentake was elected, he used to raise his
weapon (a spear), and his men Zouched it with theirs in token of fealty.
However the word (as above said) is Norse: —=Icel. vapnatak, lit. a
weapon-taking or weapon-touching ; hence, a vote of consent so ex-
pressed, and lastly, a subdivision of a shire in the Danish part of
England, answering (somewhat) to the hundred in other parts; the
reason for this being as above given. =Icel. vapna, gen. pl. of vapn,
a weapon, cognate with E. weapon; and tak, a taking hold, a grasp,
esp. a grasp in wrestling (here used of the contact of weapons), from
taka, to take, seize, grasp, also to touch. See Weapon and Take.
@ As the Icel. taka means ¢o touch as well as to take, it will be seen
that the explanation ‘ weapon-grasping ’ in the Icel. Dict. is insuffi-
cient ; it means more than that, viz. the clashing of one spear against
another. ‘ Si placuit [sententia], frameas concutiunt ; honoratissimum
assensus genus est armis laudare, Tacitus, Germania, chap. 11 ; &c.
Cf. Lowland Sc. wapinschaw (weapon-show), an exhibition of arms
made at certain times in every district ; Jamieson. ;

WAPITI, the American elk. (Amer. Indian.) From the Cree
wapitik, ‘white deer;’ cf. Delaware wapi, white. See Wampum,
q@ The name is misapplied, as the wapiti is not white; it was first
given to the Rocky Mountain goat (Haplocerus montanus) ; and then
transferred to the wapiti, which does not much resemble it. See
Century Dict.

WAR, hostility, a contest between states by force of arms. (F.—
Teut.) ME. werre (dissyllabic), Chaucer, C. T. 47. It occurs in the
A.S, Chron. an. 1119, where it is spelt wyrre, but a little further on,
an, 1140, it it spelt wwerre (=werre). But we also find ¢‘armorum
oneribus, quod Angli war-scot dicunt? in the Laws of Cnut, De
Foresta, § 9; Thorpe, Anc. Laws, i. 427 (evidently from a MS. of
later date). The word is really French ; the usual AS. word is wig ;
we also find hild, winn, gid, &c. The derivatives warrior and
warraye (to make war on, Spenser, F. Q. i. 5. 48), respecting which
see below, are also of F. origin. OF. werre, war (Burguy, Roque-
fort), whence mod. F. guerre. Of Teut. origin. From the sb. seen
in MDu. werre, ‘warre,’ Hexham; OHG. werra, broil, confusion,
strife. —OSax. and OHG. werran, str. vb., to confuse, embroil ; cf.
mod, G. verwirren. The Teut. base is *werr-, for older *werz-, *wers-,
meaning ‘to confuse.’ Prob. allied to worse; see Worse. Der.
war, verb, late AS. werrien, A. S. Chron. an. 1135, formed from the
sb. werre. Also war-fare, properly ‘a warlike expedition ;’ ‘he was
nat iz good poynt to ride a warfare, i.e. on a warlike expedition,
Berners, tr. of Froissart’s Chron. vol. ii. c. 13 (R.); see Fare.
Also war-like, K. John, v. 1. 713 warr-i-or, ME. werreour, Rob. of
Brunne, tr. of Langtoft, p. 166, 1. 5, from OF. *werreiur, not recorded,
old spelling of OF. guerreiur (Burguy), a warrior, one who makes
war, formed with suffix -wr from OF, werreier, guerreier (spelt werrier
in Supp. to Godefroy, s.v. guerreier), to make war, borrowed by E.
and appearing as ME. werreien or werreyen, Chaucer, C. T. 1546,
10324 (A1544, F 10), and in Spenser as warray or warrey, F. Q.
i, 5. 48, li. 10. 21; so that warrior is really a familiar form of warrey-
our ; cf. guerroyeur, ‘a martialist, or warrior,’ Cot., from guerroyer,
“to warre,’ id.

WARBULE, to sing as a bird, chirp, carol. (F.-_MHG.) ME.
werblen, spelt werbelen, Gawain and the Grene Knight, 2004 ; the sb.
werble occurs in the same, 119.—OF. werbler, to quaver with the
voice, speak in a high tone (Burguy). —MHG. *wirbeln (not given),
or *werbelen, mod. G. wirbeln, to whirl, to run round, to warble, fre-
quentative form of MHG. werben, OHG. hwerban, to be busy, to set
in movement, urge on (whence mod. G. be-werben, to sue for, er-
werben, to acquire), the orig. sense being to twirl oneself about, to
twirl or whirl. See Whirl, which is, practically, a doublet. Der.
warble, sb., ME. werble, as above ; warbl-er.

WARD, a guard, a watch, means of guarding, one who is under
a guardian, &c. (E.) 1. ME. ward, dat. warde, P, Plowman, B.
xvili. 320; pl. wardes, guards, King Alisaunder, 1977. AS. weard, a
guard, watchman, Grein, ii. 673. This isa masc. sb. (gen. weardes) ;
we also find AS. weard, fem. (gen. wearde), a guarding, watching,
protection ; id. Both senses are still retained. Both sbs. are formed
from the Teut. base WER, to watch; see Wary. Thus the orig.
sense of the masc. sb. is ‘a watchman,’ and of the fem. sb. is ‘a
watching.’ 4-Icel. vérdr, gen. vardar, (1) a warder or watchman, (2) a
watch; G. wart, a warder; Goth. -wards, masc, sb., a keeper, only


WARISON


in the comp. dauwrawards, a door-keeper. All these are from the
same root, 2. From this sb. was formed the verb to ward, AS,
weardian, to keep, to watch, Grein, ii. 674; cognate with which aré
Icel. varda, to warrant, G. warten, and OSax. wardén, to watch,
from the last of which were derived the OF. (and AF.) warder, to
guard, whence E, ward-en, and (through the French) E. guard.
Der. ward-er, Spenser, F. Q. v. 2. 213 ward-room, ward-ship. Also
ward-en, q.v., ward-robe, q.v. Also bear-ward, door-ward, hay-ward
(=hedge-ward, from AS. hege, a hedge) ; ste-ward,q. v. Doublet,
guard, sb. and verb.

-WARD, sufix. (E.) A common suffix, expressing the direction
towards which one tends. AS, -weard, as in 16-weard, toward; see
Toward, where the suffix is fully explained. It occurs also as
Tcel. -verdr, Goth. -wairths, OHG. -wert, -wart; and cf. L. uersus,
towards, from the same root. We also have -wards, AS. -weardes,
where -es is a genitival suffix giving an adverbial force. Der. after-
ward, back-ward, east-ward, for-ward, fro-ward, hind-ward, hither-ward,
home-ward, in-ward, nether-ward, north-ward, out-ward, south-ward,
thither-ward, to-ward, up-ward, west-ward. To most of these s can
be added, except to froward. See also way-ward, wool-ward, verse,
prose, suzerain.

WARDEN, a guardian, keeper, one who keeps guard. (F.—
OSax.) Though the verb ¢o ward is English, and so is its deriva-
tive warder, the sb. warden is F., as shown by the suffix. ME,
wardein, Ancren Riwle, p. 272, 1. 4.—AF. wardein, Liber Albus,
p-2473; OF. wardain (Godefroy), old spelling of OF. gardein, gardain,
a warden, guardian. Cf. Low L. gardianus, a guardian; showing
that OF. wardein was formed from OF. ward-er by help of the L.
suffix -i-dnus. See Ward.

WARDON, WARDEN, a pear. (E.) A wardon was ‘a
large coarse pear used for baking,’ Voc. 717, note 1, where we find
it spelt wardun, in a Nominale of the 15th century; it is spelt
warden in Voc. 629. 7, and in Shak. Wint. Tale, iv. 3. 48. By
popular etymology, a keeping pear (see Nares) ; Cotgrave has ‘ poire
de garde, a warden, or winter pear, a pear which may be kept very
long ;’ but the adj. gardien, ‘keeping, warding, guarding,’ answering
to Low L. gardianus (for *wardzanus), had an active sense, and is
therefore inappropriate. The better spelling is wardon, as in Pals-
grave, the Prompt. Parv., and the Catholicon; in Two Cookery
Books, ed. Austin, we find wardon, wardone, wardoun. In Lydgate,
Minor Poems, p. 15, the pl. wardouns rimes with two sbs. ending
with -ouns, showing that the form wardon (-oun, -un) is right. Cf.
‘medlers and wardones;’ Excerpta Historica, p. 115 (1498). So
named from Wardon (<AS. Weard-din) in Beds. The arms of
Wardon (or Warden) Abbey were argent, three wardon-pears, or;
see Privy Purse Expenses of Princess Mary, ed. Madden, p. 272.

WARDROBE, a place to keep clothes in, (F.—Teut.) ME.
warderobe ; ‘Jupiter hath in his warderobe bothe garmentes of ioye
and of sorowe,’ Test. of Love, b. ii. ch. ix. 140. — OF. warderobe, old
spelling of garderobe; see Godefroy. ‘The spelling garderobe is in
Palsgrave, s.v. wardroppe. Cotgrave spells it garderobbe, ‘a ward-
robe, also a house of office’ [see wardrope in Halliwell].=—OF.
warder, to ward, keep, preserve; and robe, a robe; both words being
of G. origin. See Ward and Robe.

WARE (1), merchandise. (E.) ME. ware (dissyllabic), Chaucer,
C. T. 4560(B 140). AS. waru, ware ; ‘ Merx, waru ;’ Voc. 311. 35.
We also find AS. waru, protection, guard, care, custody, which is
tolerably common; Grein, ii. 641. These words are doubtless
related; the sense of wares appears to have been ‘things kept in
store;’ cf. Icel. varnadr, (1) protection, (2) wares.-- Du. waar, a ware,
commodity; pl. waren, wares. Cf. MDu. waren, ‘to keepe or to
garde,’ Hexham; Low G. ware, Icel. vara, pl. vorur, wares; Dan.
vare, pl. varer; cf, vare, care; Swed. vara, pl. varor ; cf. vara, care;
G. waare, pl. waaren; cf. wahre, care, wakren, to guard. Teut. type
*warad, fem. ; from the Teut. base WER, to guard; as distinct from
the base WER, to watch. See Weir (1) and Worth. Der. ware-
house (Palsgrave).

WARE (2), aware. (E.) ‘ They were ware of it,’ Acts, xiv. 6; so
also in Romeo, i. 1. 131, ii. 2. 103, &c. See further under Wary.

WARE (3), sea-weed. (E.) The Northern form; see Jamieson,
who quotes from G. Douglas, tr. of Virgil. Prov. E. wore, waur.
AS. war, sea-weed. ‘Alga, waar;’ Voc. 5. 1.+MDu. wier, ‘sea-
grasse;’ Hexham. Perhaps from 4/WEI, to twine ; see Withy.

WARK (4), pt.t. of Wear, q. v.

WARFARE, WARLIKE; see under War.

WARILY, WARINESS; see under Wary.

WARISOJW, protection, reward. (F.—Teut.) ME. warisoun,
protection, Rob. of Brunne, p. 198, 1. 1. This is the true sense ; but
it is much more common in the sense of help or ‘reward ;’ see
Will. of Palerne, 2259, 2379, Barbour, Bruce, ii. 206, x. 526, xx. 544.
The usual sense of mod. F. gwérison is ‘recovery from illness,’ which


701


702 WARLOCK


is yet a third sense of what is really the same word. Cf. ME.'| Ancient Laws, i. 476, 477, the AF. spelling is guarant, and the Low }


warisshen, to cure, P. Plowman, B. xvi. 105.—OF. warison, garison
(Godefroy), surety, safety, provision, also healing. Cot. has guarison,
‘health, curing, recovery.’ = OF. warir, garir, to keep, secure, also
to heal (Godefroy); mod. F. guérir. B. Of Teut. origin; from
the verb appearing as Goth. warjan, to defend, forbid, keep off from,
whence the sense ‘secure ;’ and in OHG. werjan, to keep off, AS.
werian, to defend; Teut. type *warjan-, to keep off. Allied to Gk.
épvc0a, to keep off ; see Weir. y. We may note that the OF.
garison corresponds to the mod. E. garrison in form; but the sense of
garrison is such as to link it more closely with OF. garnison, another
sb. from a different 4/WER, for which see Ware (1). And see
Garrison. @ Sir W. Scott, Lay of the Last Minstrel, iv. 24,
uses warrison in the sense of ‘ note of assault,’ as if it were a warry
(warlike) sound. This is a singular blunder.

WARLOCK, a wizard. (E.) In Jamieson’s Scot. Dict. ‘[A‘neas]
was no warluck, as the Scots commonly call such men, who they
say are iron-free or lead-free ;’ Dryden, Dedication to tr. of Virgil’s
fEneid; § 28. The final ck stands for an orig. guttural sound, just as
most Englishmen say lock for the Scottish loch; the suffix was prob.
confused with that of hem-lock or wed-lock. ME. warloghe, a wicked
one, a name for the devil, Destruction of Troy, 4439. Spelt warlagh,
a warlock, devil, Cursor Mundi, 8915; warlau, id. 725; warlawe,
a deceiver, P. Plowman’s Crede, 1. 783. AS. wérloga, a traitor,
deceiver, liar, truce-breaker, Grein, ii. 650. Lit. ‘ one who lies
against the truth’=—AS. wér, truth (as in wériéas, false, lit.
‘truthless,’ Grein), cognate with L. uérum, truth; and Joga, a liar,
from log- (Teut. *Jug-}, weak grade of léogan (pp. log-en), to lie,
Grein, ii. 176,194. See Verity and Lie (2).

WARM, moderately hot. (E.) ME. warm, Chaucer, C. T. 7409
(D 1827). AS. wearm, Grein, ii. 675.44Du. warm; Icel. varmr;
Dan. and Swed. varm; G. warm. Cf. Goth. warmjan, to warm; the
adj. warms does not occur. B. The Teut. is type *war-moz, warm,
Fick, iii. 292. It is usual to connect this with L. formus, Gk. beppos,
hot, Skt. gharma-s, heat, from the ,/GwHER, to glow; with labio-
velar gh. y. But this is not very satisfactory. On this account,
Fick (ii. 465) connects warm with Russ. varite, to boil, brew, scorch,
burn, Lithuan. werdu, I cook, seethe, boil (infin. wirt?), and hence
infers a 4/WER, to cook or boil, common to Teutonic and Slavonic.
So also Brugmann, i. § 680; cf. § 650. Der. warm-ly, warm-ness ;
also warm, verb, AS. wearmian, Grein, ii. 675, whence warm-er,
warm-ing-pan ; also warm-th, sb., ME. wermpe, O. Eng. Homilies, ed,
Morris, i. 37, 1. 33 (not found in AS., which has wearm-ness).

WARN, to caution against, put on one’s guard. (E.) ME.
warnien, warnen, Chaucer, C. T. 3535. AS. wearnian, warnian,
(1) to take heed, which is the usual sense, Luke, xi. 35 ; (2) to warn,
Gen. vi. 6; cf. warnung, a warming, Gen. xli. 32. Cognate with
OHG. warnén, to provide for oneself against, used reflexively,
whence G. warnen, to warn against, to caution against. Further
allied to beware and wary; see Wary. 4 Distinct from the AS. sb.
wearn, a refusal, denial (Grein), an obstacle, impediment (Bosworth) ;
the orig. sense being a guarding of oneself, a defence of a person on
trial, as in Icel. vorn, a defence; cf. Icel. varna, to warn off, refuse,
abstain from. Der. warn-ing, And see garn-ish, garr-i-son (for
garn-ison). Also fore-warn, pre-warn,

WARP, the thread stretched lengthwise in a loom, to be crossed
by the woof; a rope used in towing. (E.) Lit. ‘that which is thrown
across;’ see Nares. ME. warp; ‘ Warp, threde for webbynge ;’
Prompt. Parv. AS. wearp,a warp; ‘Stamen, wearp, Voc. 48. 33.
+Low G. warp (Danneil) ; Icel. varp, a casting, throwing, also the
warping of anything; Dan. varp, only as a naut. term; Swed. varp,
a warp; OHG. warf, a warp. Teut. type *warpom, n. ff. All
from the Teut. base *warp, 2nd grade of Teut. *werpan-, to throw,
as seen in AS. weorpan, G. werfen, Goth. wairpan, to throw. If the
Teut. *werp is for an older *werg, from Idg. 4/WERGw, we may
compare Russ. verg-at(e), to throw. @ The ME. werpen, to throw,
pt. t. warp, pp. worpen, occurring in Havelok, 1061, &c., is obsolete.
Der. warp, verb, to pervert, twist out of shape (cf. cast in the sense
of to twist timber out of shape); Palsgrave has: ‘I warpe, as bordes
do.’ This is not the ME, werpen (as above), but a derived weak
verb, and is of Scand. origin; ME. warpen, Prompt. Parv., from
Icel. varpa, to throw, cast; cf. varp, sb., a casting, also a warping.
Cf. Swed. varpa, Dan. varpe, to warp a ship, from Swed. varp, the
draught of a net, Dan. varp, a warp; Dan. varpanker, a warp-anchor
or kedge.

WARRANT, a voucher, guarantee, commission giving authority.
(F.—OHG.) ME. warant, Havelok, 2067, St. Marharete, ed.
‘Cockayne, p. 8, 1. 10.—OF. warant, guarant (Burguy, Supp. to
Godefroy), later garant, ‘a vouchee, watrant; also, a supporter,
defender, maintainer, protector;” Cot. Cotgrave also gives the
spelling garent, ‘a warrenter.’ In the Laws of Will. I, in Thorpe’s


WAS, WAST, WERE, WERT


L. warantum and warrantum. ‘The suffix -ant is clearly due to the
-ant- used as the suffix of a present participle; so that the orig.
sense of OF. war-ant was ‘certifying’ or ‘securing.’ —-OHG.
werént-, stem of pres. pt. of weréx (G. gewdhren), to certify, to
warrant. Allied to OFries. wera, to warrant. Of uncertain origin ;
Schade suggests connexion with OHG. and AS. wer, a man; as if
‘to offer oneself as a surety.” Der. warrant, verb, ME. waranten,
K. Alisaunder, 2132 (cf. Walloon waranti, to warrant); warrant-er,
warrant-or, warrant-able, warrant-abl-y, warrant-able-ness. Also
warrant-y, from OF. warantie, later garantie, ‘ garrantie, warrantie,
or warrantise,’ Cot., orig. fem. of pp. of warantir, later garantir,
to warrant, guarantee. Also guarant-ee (error for guarant-ie), q. v.

WARREN, a preserved piece of ground, now only used of a
place where rabbits abound, not always a preserved place. (F.—
OHG.) ME. wareine, P. Plowman, B. prol. 163.—OF. warenne,
varenne, varene (Roquefort) ; warenne, garenne, garene (Godefroy) ;
later garenne, ‘a warren of connies [conies], also a certain, orlimited
fishing in a river;’ Cot. The orig. sense was ‘a preserve.’ Cf.
Low L. warenna, a preserve for rabbits, hares, or fish, occurring
A.D. 1186 (Ducange). Formed (with Low L. suffix -exna) from
OHG. warjan (>OF. warir), to protect, keep, preserve; see
Warison. Cf. Du. warande, a park; borrowed from OFrench.
Der, warren-er, contracted to warner, P. Plowman, B. v. 316; which
explains the name Warner.

W ART, a small hard excrescence, on the skin, or on trees. (E.)
ME. werte (dissyllabic), Chaucer, C. T., A 555 (Six-text edition,
where one MS. has wrete); spelt wert in Tyrwhitt, 1. 557. AS.
wearte, pl. weartan, Cockayne’s A. S. Leechdoms, i. 130, 1. 20,
‘Papula, wearte;’ Voc 37. 9.4-Du. wrat; MDu. warte, wratte
(Hexham) ; Pomeran. wratie; Icel. varta ; Dan. vorte; Swed. varia;
G. warze. B. All from Teut. type *wartén-, f. Perhaps the orig.
sense is ‘growth,’ hence out-growth or excrescence; and closely
allied to Wort\(1), q.v. Some connect it with AS. wearr, a
callosity, L. uerriica, a wart, from an allied root *wers, to rise.
Brugmann, i. § 380. Der. wart-y.

WARY, WARE, guarding against deception or danger, cautious.
(E.) The ME. form is war ; war-yis a comparatively late formation ;
perhaps the -y was subjoined as in murk-y from ME. mirke, merke,
and swarth-y from swart. In Meas. for Meas. iv. 1. 38. ME. war,
Chaucer, C. T., A 309 (Six-text ed.), misspelt ware in Tyrwhitt,
1. 311. AS. wer, cautious, Grein, ii. 649.4-Icel. varr; Dan. and
Swed. var; Goth. wars; G. gewahr, aware. . All from Teut. type
*waroz, cautious. From Teut. base *war, answering to Idg. *wor,
as in Gk. épaw, I perceive, look out for, observe, 2nd grade of Idg.
oa WER, to watch, regard, as in L. ueréri, to regard, respect, dread.
Der. wari-ly, wari-ness ; a-ware, be-ware. And see war-d, guar-d;
ware (1); re-vere; pan-or-a-ma, di-or-a-ma.

WAS, WAST, WERE, WERT, used as parts of the verb ¢o
be. (E.) ME. pt.t. sing. was, wast, was; pl. weren or were. AS.
wesan, infin. to be; whence pt. t. indic. sing. wes, wére, wes; pl.
weran, wéron, or wérun; pt. t. subj. sing. wére (for all persons), pl.
wéren or wéron (for all persons). See Grein, ii. 664. B. As to
the use of was in the Ist and 3rd persons, there is no difficulty.
y. As to the 2nd person, the AS. form was wére, whence ME. were,
as in ‘thou were betraied,’ Chaucer, C. T. 14690 (B 3570). In
Wyclif, Mark, xiv. 67, where 7 MSS. read were, one MS. has was,
and another has wast; no doubt was-t was formed (by analogy with
hast) from the dialectal was, which was prob. Northern. When you
came to be used for ¢hou, the phrase you was took the place of thou
was, and is very common in writings of the 18th century. Cf. J has,
Barbour, Bruce, xiii. 652; I is, ye is (Northern dialect), Chaucer,
C.T. 4043 ; thou is, id. 4087 (A 4045, 4089). In the subj. mood, the
true form is were; hence wer-t (by analogy with wast), K. John, iii.
TI. 43, ed. 1623. 5. In the first and third persons singular of the
subjunctive, and in the plural, the true form is were; but the use of
were in the singular is gradually becoming obsolete, except when
the conjunction 7f precedes. The forms if I were, if he were, if I be,
if he be, if he have, exhibit the clearest surviving traces of a (grammati-
cally marked) subj. mood in mod. English; and of these, if he have is
almost gone. Some careful writers employ if he do, if it make, and
the like; but it is not improbable that the subjunctive mood will
disappear from the language; the particular phrase if I were will
probably linger the longest.4-Du. infin. wezen; indic. sing. was,
waart, was; pl. waren, waart, waren; subj. sing. ware, waret, ware ;
pl. waren, waret, waren; Icel. infin. vera; indic. sing. var, vart, var,
pl. varum, varut, viru; subj. sing. vera, verir, veri; pl. verim,
verit, veri; Dan. infin. vere; indic. sing. and pl. var; subj. sing. and
pl. vere; Swed. infin. vara; indic. sing. var; pl. voro, voren, voro;
subj. sing. vore; pl. vore, voren, voro; Goth. wisan, to be, dwell, re-
main; pt. t. indic. sing. was, wast, was; dual, wésu, wesuts; pl.


j


os Ale


WASH


wésum, wesuth, wesun ; subj. sing. wésjau, wéseis, wesi ; dual, wéseiwa,

weseits; pl. wéseima, wéseith, wéeseina; G. pt. t. sing. war, warest or
warst, war; pl. waren, waret, waren ; subj. sing.. ware, warest or warst,
wire; pl. waren, waret, waren. B. All from 4/WES, to dwell; cf.
Skt. vas, to dwell, temain, live; Gk. éo-ria, a hearth, do-rv, a
dwelling-place, city; L. wer-na (for *wes-na), a household slave;
Ves-ta, goddess of the household; Irish feis-im, I remain. Der.
wass-ail, q.v. And see ver-na-c-ul-ar.
. WASH, to cleanse with water, overflow. (E.) Formerly a strong
verb; hence uz-washen, Mark, vii. 2. ME. waschen, weschen, pt. t.
wesch, wosch, pp. waschen. The pt. t. is wesshk in Chaucer, C, T.
2285 (A 2283), misprinted wesshe by Tyrwhitt. AS. wascan, Grein,
ii, 641. Just as we find dxian (=dcsian) as well as ascian, so also
wascan appears as waxan ; the pt. t. is wosc or wox; the pp. is wascen
or wescen. ‘* Hig hira réaf woxon’ =they washed their robes, Exod.
xix. 14.4-Du. wasschen; Icel. and Swed. vaska; Dan. vaske; G.
waschen, pt.t. wusch, pp. gewaschen. B. The Teut. type is *waskan-,
to wash, prob. for *wasskan-, *wat-skan-, to rinse in wet or in water,
where *wat is allied to E, wat-er, wet. Brugmann, i. § 942. Der.
wash, sb., as In The Wash (place-name) ; wash-er, wash-er-woman,
wash-y,

WASP, a stinging insect. (E.) ME. waspe, P. Plowman’s Crede,
1, 648. Cf. prov. E. waps, wops. AS. weps. ‘ Vespa, weps;’ Voc.
121.14. In avery old AS. glossary of the 8th century, we find:
‘Fespa, wefs, Voc. 21. 42..4-OHG. wefsa, wafsa; G. wespe;
Bavarian webes, a wasp; OLow G. wepsia (Gallée). Contracted
from a Teut. type *wadis-, answering to Idg. *wobhes- (whence Russ.
osa, a wasp, Lith. wapsa, a gadfly); from *wobk, 2nd grade of
a/ WEBH, to weave (whence L. wespa, a wasp, for *uepsa, *uebsa),
from the nests which they construct. See Weave. Brugmann, i.
§ 918. Cf. Skt. arza-vabhi-, a spider, lit. ‘ wool-weaver,’ in Mac-
donell’s Dict. Der. wasp-ish, As You Like It, iv. 3. 9 ; wasp-ish-ly,
r7ess,

W ASSAIL, a festive occasion, a carouse. (AF. — Teut.) See Brand’s
Popular Antiquities, vol. i. p. 2, where also Verstegan’s ‘ etymology’
(from wax hale) and Selden’s (from wish-hail) and other curiosities
may be found. In Macb.i. 7.64; Hamlet,i. 4. 9,&c. ME. wasseyl,
washayl, Rob. of Glouc. p. 117, 118, ll. 2514, 25223 and see Hearne’s
Glossary, p. 731, and Layamon. The story is that Rowena pre-
sented a cup to Vortigern with the words was heil, and that Vortigern,
who knew no English, was told to reply by saying drinc heil. What-
ever truth there be in this, we at any rate learn that was heil and
drinc heil were phrases used at a drinking-bout. The former phrase
is a salutation, meaning ‘ be of good health,’ lit. § be hale ;’ the latter
phrase is almost untranslateable, meaning literally ‘drink, hale!’
i.e. ‘drink, and good luck be with you.’ B. These forms are not
AS., but Norman; Wace, describing the night before the battle of
Hastings, gives the forms weisseil and wesse heil (error for wes heil).
The latter represents the OSax. wes hél, Olcel. *wes heill (Icel. ver
heill). The corresponding AS, (Wessex) form of salutation was
wes pi hal, occurring in Beowulf, 407; or hal wes du, Luke, i. 28.
It occurs in the plural in Matt. xxviii. g; ‘hale wese gé’ = whole be ye,
or peace be unto you; from AS. wes, wes, be thou, imperative sing., 2nd
person, of wesan, to be; and hal, whole. See Was and Whole.
y- In the Icel. Dict. we find similar phrases, such as kom heill,
welcome, hail! (lit. come, hale!) ; far heill, farewell! (lit. fare, hale !),
sit heill, sit hail! (lit. sit, hale!) ; the last of these fully explains drinc
heill, Wemay also notice Icel. heill, sb., good luck; and we even
find AS. h&l (as a sb.), health, salvation, Luke, xix. 9. See
Hail (2). Explained by me in N. and Q. 10S. iii. 455. Cf.
ONorthumbrian wes hal, whence mod. Yorks. wessal, a wassail.

WASTH, desert, desolate, unused. (F.-OHG.—L.) ME, wast,
Rob. of Glouc. p. 372, 1. 7667.—OF. wast, in the phr. faire wast, to
make waste (preserved in E. as lay waste), Roquefort; later form
gast. He also gives waster, to waste; see also gast, gaster, in
Godefroy. We find AF. wast, adj., and wastee, pp. fem., in Stat.
Realm, i. 48 (1278).—MHG. waste, sb., a waste; wasten, to lay
waste; whence also Ital. guastare, to waste, F. gater, to spoil. Not
a Teut. word; but simply borrowed from L, wastus, waste, desolate,
also vast, whence the verb uastare, to waste, lay waste. Allied to
Olrish fas, empty; Idg. types *wastos, wastios; Brugmann, i. § 317.
B. It is remarkable that we should have adopted this word from
French, since we had the word already in an AS. form as wéste; but
it is quite certain that we did so, since wéste would have been weest
in mod. E. ; besides which, there are ‘wo ME. forms, viz. wast (from
F.) and weste (from AS.), of which the latter soon died out, the
latest example noted by Stratmann being from the Owl and
Nightingale, 1. 1528. And the result is remarkably confirmed by
the ME. wastour for waster (see below). C. The history of the
word in G, is equally curious. There also the OHG. has wuosti,
adj., empty, wuost?, sb., a waste, and wuostan. to waste; yet, in


WAVE


addition to these, we also find waste, sb., wasten, verb, borrowed
from Latin, as shown above. But in G. the native form prevailed,
as shown by mod. G. wiist, waste, wiiste, a waste, wiisten, to waste.
Cf. also OHG. wuosti, AS. wéste, OSax. wosti, Du. woest, adj. waste,
empty; Teut. type *wdstjoz, Idg. type *wdstios (as above).
@ Hatzfeld derives OF. waster from L. uastare, explaining the w as
due to OHG. influence. It comes to much the same thing. See
Vast. Der. waste, sb., ME. waste, Gawain and the Grene Knight,

2098 ; waste, verb, ME. wasten, Layamon, 22575, from OF. waster
<OHG. wasten, from L. wastare; wast-er, ME. wastour, P. Plowman,
B. prol. 22, vi. 29, where the suffix -owr is French. Also waste-ful,
K. John, iv. 2, 16; waste-ful-ly, -ness; waste-ness, Zeph. i. 15.
(A. V.) Doublet, vast.

WATCH, a keeping guard, observation. (E.) ME. wacche,
P. Plowman, B, ix. 17. AS. wecce, a watch, Grein, ii. 641.— AS.
wacian, to watch; Matt. xxvi. 40; AS. wacan, to wake; see Wake
(1). Der. watch, verb, ME. wacchen, Gower, C. A. i. 163; bk. ii.
110; watch-er; watch-ful, Two Gent. i. 1. 31, watch-ful-ly, -ness3
watch-case, a sentry-box, 2 Hen. IV, iii. 1. 17; watch-dog, Temp.
i, 2. 383; watch-man (Palsgrave); watch-word, 2 Hen. IV, iii.


703


2.231.

WATCHET, light blue. (F.) Cotgrave has: ‘pers, watchet,
blunket, skie-coloured.’ Nares gives exx. of watchet from Browne,
Lily, Drayton, and Taylor; and Richardson from Beaum. and
Fletcher, Hakluyt, Spenser, Ben Jonson, and Chaucer. ‘ Watchet
eyes;’ tr. of Juvenal, Sat. xiii. (not by Dryden). ‘AI in a kertell
of a liht wachett ;’ Chaucer, C. T., A 3321; Lansdowne MS. The
Camb. MS. has vachet, the Harl. MS. has wachet; the rest waget,
wagelt.—OF. wachet, a sort of stuff (Godefroy); cf. wache, wasce,
the same. Perhaps from OHG. wat, clothing; see Wadmal. As
with blunket (see N.E.D.), the difficulty is to know whether the
stuff gave name to the colour or conversely.

WATER, the fluid in seas and rivers. (E.) ME. water, Chaucer,
C. T. 402 (A 400). AS. weter, Grein, ii. 651.4-Du. water; OSax.
watar; G. wasser, OHG. wazar, wazzar. B. From the Teut.
type *watrom, n., water. There is also a Teut. type *waton-,
water, appearing in Icel. vatn, Dan. vand, Swed. vatten, Goth.
watd (pl. watna), water. Allied words are Russ. voda, Gk. vdwp,
L, unda, Lithuan. wandi, Skt. udan, water; Olrish fand, a tear. All
from the 4/ WED, to wet; see Wet. Der. water, verb, AS. wetrian,
Gen. ii. 6, 10; water-ish, K. Lear, i. 1. 261; water-y, AS. weterig,
Voc. 147. 6. Also water-carriage, -clock, -closet ; -colour, 1 Hen. 1V,
v. I. 80; -course; -cress, ME, water-kyrs, Voc. 643. 26 ; -fowl ; -gall,
a rainbow, Shak. Lucrece, 1588; -level; -Jily, ME. water-lylle, Voc.
644. 1; -line, -logged, -man, -mark, -mill (Palsgrave), -pipe; ~pot,
Chaucer, C. T. 8166 (E 290); -power, -proof, -shed (modern), -spout,
-tight, -wheel, -work; &c., &c.

WATTLE, a twig, flexible rod, usually a hurdle; the fleshy part
under the throat ofa cock or turkey. (E.) In all senses, it is the same
word. The orig. sense is something twined together; hence it came
to mean a hurdle, woven with twigs, a basket; hence, a bag; also,
the baggy flesh on a bird’s neck. (It also appears in the corrupt
form wallet; see Wallet.) ME. watel, a bag, P. Plowman, C. xi.
269; see further under Wallet. Hence ME. watelen, verb, to
wattle, twist together or strengthen with hurdles, P. Plowman, B. xix.
323. AS. watel,a hurdle, covering; also watul. ‘ Teges, watul ;’
fElfric’s Grammar, ed. Zupitza, p. 52, 1.13. Watelas, pl., coverings
of a roof, tiles, Luke, v. 19; also in the sense of twigs or hurdles,
fElfred, tr. of Beda, b. iii. c. 16. Allied to AS. weila, a bandage.
There appear to be no cognate words, and the root is unknown.
Der. wattle, verb, ME. watelen, as above. Doublet, wallet.

WAUL; see under Wawl.

WAVE (1), to fluctuate, to move or be moved about with an
undulating motion or up and down. (E.) ME. wazen, Lydgate,
Minor Poems, p. 256. The pres. part. is spelt vafand, vaffand,
Barbour, Bruce, ix. 245, xi. 193, 513; the scribe constantly writes v
for w. AS. wafian, to wave (with one’s hand), Leechdoms, ii. 318;
filfric’s Saints’ Lives, xxvii. 151. The sense also comes out in the de-
rived adj.wefre, wavering, restless, Grein, ii.642; see Waver.-+Olcel.
*vafa, cited by E. Miiller and Stratmann ; the Dict. gives the deriva-
tives vafra, vafla, to waver, vaff, hesitation (which presuppose an
orig. verb *vafa) ; also vafa, vofa, vofa, to swing, vibrate. Cf. also
MHG. waberen, wabelen, to move about, to stir; Bavarian wabern, to
sway to and fro; see Wabble. Der. wave, sb., a late word, occur-
ring in the Bible of 1551, James, i. 6; it is due to the verb, and took
the place of ME. wawe, a wave, Wyclif, James, i. 6, which is not
the same word, but allied to E. Wag, q. v. (cf. Icel. vagr, Dan.
vove, G. woge, a wave). Also wave-less; wave-let, a coined word,
with double dimin. suffix ; wave-offering, Exod. xxix. 24; wave-worns
Temp. ii. 1. 120; wav-y. Also wav-er, q.v.3 and waft. > Dis-
tinct from waive, waif.


704 WAVE


WAVE (2), the same as Waive, q. v.

WAVER, to vacillate. (E.) ME. waueren (=waveren), Prompt.
Parv. p. 518. Barbour has waverand, wandering about ; Bruce, vii.
112, xiii, 517, cf. vii. 41. ‘ Wauerand wynd’=a changeable wind,
Wallace, iv. 340; waferyng, wavering, York Plays, p. 39, 1. 111.
[Apparently a Northern and E. Anglian word; and perhaps of
Scand. origin; cf. Icel. vafra, to waver, Norw. vavra.] If a native
word, it was suggested by AS. wefre, adj., wandering, restless, Grein,
ii, 652.4-Icel. vafra, to hover about; Norw. vavra, to flap about ;
OHG. wabar- (in compounds), wavering. _B. It is the frequentative
form of Wave, q.v. Der. waver-er.

WAWL, WAUL, to cry as a cat, cry, squall. (E.) Cotgrave
has: ‘ houaller, to yawl, wawl, cry out aloud.’ It is the frequent.
form of waw, as in ME. waw-en ; see a-cater-wawed in Chaucer, C. T.,
D 354; and the note. A more usual old form is wrawl, frequent. of
wraw-en; cf. ‘he [a cat] began to wrawen,’ Caxton, Reynard the
Fox, ch. x; ed. Arber, p. 22. Of imitative origin ; see Wail. Cf.
also Swed. urdla, to bellow, Dan. vraale, vrelle, to squall; Norw.
raala, to cry as a cat; also Icel. vala, to wail.

WAX (1), to grow, increase, become. (E.) ME. waxen, wexen,
a strong verb, pt. t. wox, wex, pp. woxen, waxen, wexen; Wyclif, Matt.
xiii. 30 ; Luke, ii. 40, xxiii. 5, 23; Matt. xiii. 32. AS. weaxan, pt. t.
wéeox, pp. geweaxen, Grein, ii. 676.4-Du. wassen, pt. t. wies, pp. ge-
wassen; Icel. vaxa, pt. t. dx, pp. vaxinn; Dan. vexe; Swed. vaxa ;
G. wachsen, pt.t. wuchs, pp. gewachsen ; Goth. wahsjan, pt. t. wohs, pp.
wahsans.  . All from Teut. base *waks-, to grow; from Idg.
oy WEKS, to grow; whence Gk. défew, avfe, avfavev, to wax, Skt.
vaksh, to wax, grow. Extended from 4/WEG, to be strong, be lively
and vigorous; cf. Skt. vaj, to strengthen, L. augére, to increase,
uigére, to flourish, &c. When extended by the addition of s, the form
*wegs became *weks. Brugmann, i. § 635; ii. § 657. See Eke (1),
Vigour, Vegetable, Augment, Auction. Der. waist, q. v.

W AX (2), a substance made by bees; other substances resembling
it. (E.) ME. wax, Chaucer, C. T. 677 (A 675). AS. weax, Grein,
ii. 676.4-Du. was; Icel. and Swed. vax ; Dan. vox; G. wachs; Russ.
vosk’; Lithuan. waszkas. Root unknown. Some (wrongly) connect
it with L. wiscum, birdlime; see Viscid. Der. wax, verb; wax-
cloth, wax-work ; wax-en, Rich. II, i. 3. 75; wax-y.

WAY, a road, path, distance, direction, means, manner, will. (E.)
ME, wey,-way, Chaucer, C. T. 34. AS. weg, Grein, il. 655.4-Du.
weg; Icel. vegr; Dan. vei; Swed. vig; G. weg; OHG. wec; Goth.
wigs. B. All from Teut. type *wegoz. Further allied to Lithuan.
weza, the track of a cart, from wészzi, to drive, or draw, a waggon;
L. uwia (?), a way; Skt. vaha-, a road, way, from vah, to carry. All
from 4/WEGH, to carry; see Wain, Viaduct, Vehicle.
@ Under way is from the Du. onderweeg, on the way. Der.
al-way, al-ways, q. v.; length-ways, side-ways, &c.; also way-faring,
i.e. faring on the way, spelt wayvaring, Trevisa, v. 449; cf. AS.
weg-férend, Matt. xxvii. 39, where férend is the pres. part. of féran,
to fare, travel, Grein, i. 285, a derivative of the more primitive verb
faran, to go (see Fare); way-far-er ; way-lay, Tw. Night, iii. 4.176;
way-mark, Jer. xxxi. 21 (A. V.)3 way-worn; way-ward, q. Vv.

WAYWARD, perverse. (E.) ME. weiward; ‘if thin ize be
weiward (L. nequam], al thi bodishal be derk,’ Wyclif, Matt. vi. 23;
used as an adj., but orig. a headless form of awaiward, ady., Owl and
Nightingale, 376, Layamon, 8878, 21464; Reliq. Antique, i. 292,
ii. 9; cf. aweiwardes, ina direction away from, Layamon, 22352,
Will. of Palerne, 2188. In Trevisa, ii. 215, we find: ‘man is euere
faillynge and aweyward,’ where Caxton prints wayward. Thus way-
ward is away-ward, i.e. turned away, perverse. A parallel formation
to fro-ward, q.v. It is now often made to mean bent on one’s way.
Cf. ¢ ouerthwartlie waiwarded’ = perversely turned away, Holinshed,
Descr. of Ireland, ed. 1808, p. 274. Der. wayward-ness, ME.
weiwardnesse, Wyclif, Rom. i. 29.

WE, pl. of the rst pers. pronoun. (E.) ME. we, Chaucer, C. T.
29. AS. wé; Grein, ii. 652.4-Du. wij; Icel. vér, ver; Dan. and
Swed. v1; G. wir; Goth. weis. Cf. Skt. vay-am, we.

WEAK, yielding, soft, feeble. (E.) [A. The verbal form has ousted
the AS. wic, which became ME. wook, spelt wooc in Genesis and
Exodus, ed. Morris, l. 1874; and would have given a mod. E. woak,
like oak from AS. ae. We also find ME. weik, waik, whence the pl.
weike, for which Tyrwhitt prints weke, Chaucer, C. T. 889; but see
Six-text ed., A 887; the pl. is spelt wayke, Havelok, 1. 1012. This
is a Scand. form; from Icel. veikr, veykr, weak, Swed. vek.4- AS. wii,
pliant, weak, easily bent, Grein, ii. 635; Du. week, tender, weak;
G. weich, pliant, soft. All from the Teut. type *waikoz, weak ;
from *waik, 2nd grade of Teut. *weikan-, as in AS. and OSax. wican,
G. weichen, to yield, give way. From an Idg. base WEIGw, a by-
form of 4/WEIQ, as in Gk. e/xev, to yield, Brugmann, i. § Yor.]
B. But the mod. E. weak is a back-formation from the verb to weaker,
Chaucer, Troil. iv. 1144 (in Thynne’s ed.), from AS, wécan ; for


WEAR


*wacian, formed by mutation from AS. wdc, weak, adj. (above).
Der. weak-ly, weak-ness, Also weak-en, in which the suffix is added
as in length-en, &c.; cf. ME. weken, Chaucer, Troil. iv. 1144, AS.
wecan, wacian, Grein, ii. 641, 636, Icel. vetkja-sk, to grow ill; as
above. Also weak-ly, adj., used by Ralegh (Todd’s Johnson, no
reference) ; weak-l-ing, 3 Hen. VI,v. 1. 37, with double dimin. suffix,
as in gos-l-ing. And see wick (3), wicked, wick-er.

WHEAL, prosperity, welfare. (E.) ME. wele, Chaucer, C. T.
3103, 4595 (A 3101, B175). AS. wela, weala, weola, weal, opulence,
prosperity ; Grein, ii. 656.44-OHG. wela, wolo, G. wohl, welfare ; cf.
Dan. vel, weal, welfare; Swed. val. |B. The orig. sense is a ‘ well-
being,’ welfare, and (like the words well-being, wel-fare, wel-come,
fare-well) it is allied to AS. wel, well, ady., the notion of condition
being expressed by the nominal suffix -a. See Well (1). And see
Wealth.

WEALD, a wooded region, an open country. (E.) The peculiar
spelling of this word is not improbably due to Verstegan, who was
anxious to spell it so as to connect it at once with the AS. form, for-
getting that the diphthong ea was scarcely ever employed in the 13th
and 14th centuries. Minsheu, in his Dict., ed. 1627, has: ‘ Weald of
Kent, is the woodie part of the countrey. Verstegan saith that wald,
weald, and wold signifie a wood or forrest ; a Teut. Wald, i. sylua, a
wood.’ This fashion, once set, has prevailed. — B. It also appears
that two words have been confused, viz. wald and wild. Wald (now
also wold) was sometimes spelt weld, as in Layamon, 21339; hence
it passed into weld or weeld. Caxton, in the preface to his Recuyell
of the Histories of Troye, tells us that he was born in Kent, ‘ in the
weeld,’ In the reprint of this book by Copland, this phrase appears
as ‘in the wilde.’ Lyly, in his Euphues and his England, says: ‘I
was borne in the wylde of Kent ;’ ed. Arber, p. 268. Shak. has ‘ wilde
of Kent,’ 1 Hen. IV, ii. 1. 60, ed. 1623. y- For the further ex-
planation of ME, wald, see Wold. For the further explanation of
wild, see Wild. Both words are English. Der. weald-en, adj.,
belonging to the,wealds of the S. of England ; a term in geology.
For the suffix -en, cf. gold-en.

WEALTH, prosperity, riches. (E.) ME. welthe (dissyllabic),
P. Plowman, B.i. 55. Spelt welde, Genesis and Exodus, 1.796. Not
in AS. A longer by-form of weal (ME. wele), made with the suffix
-th, denoting condition or state; cf. heal-th and heal, dear-th and
dear, &. See Weal,+Du. weelde, luxury ; from wel, ady., well;
OHG, welida, riches. Der. wealth-y, spelt welthyin Fabyan, Chron.
c. 56; wealth-i-ness, spelt welthines in Fabyan, in the same passage.

WEAN, to accustom a child to bread, &c., to reconcile to a new
custom. (E.) The proper sense is to ‘ accustom to;’ we also use it,
less properly, in the sense of to ‘disaccustom to,’ These opposite
senses are easily reconciled; the child who is being accustomed to
bread, &c. is at the same time disaccustomed to, or weaned from,
the breast. Cf. G. entwohnen, lit. to disaccustom, also to wean; where
ent- is equivalent to E, wn- as a verbal prefix ; so that ent-wohnen=
un-wean. ME. wenen. ‘* Wene chylder fro sokynge [sucking], Ab-
lacto, elacto,” Prompt. Parv. AS. wenian, to accustom, Grein.
ii, 660. Hence dwenian, answering to G. entwohnen; ‘Xr ponne
peet acennede bearn fram meolcum Gwened si=before the child that
is born be weaned from'milk; Aélfred, tr. of Beda, li. c. 27, ed.
Wheloc, p. 88. ‘ Ablacto, to awenye ;’ Voc. 560. 8.4-Du. wennen, to
accustom, inure 3 afwennen, to wean; Icel. venja, to accustom; Dan.
venne, to accustom; venne fra Brystet, to wean; Swed. vanja, to
accustom; vdnjaaf,to wean; G.gewohnen, to accustom, OHG. wenjan,
wennan, MHG, wenen ; whence entwohnen, to wean.  B. All from
a Teut. weak verb *wanjan, to make accustomed, accustom ; from
the adj. *wanoz, wont, accustomed, used to, as in Icel. vanr, Swed.
van, accustomed, allied to Icel. vani,a usage. From Teut. *wan,
and grade of 4/ WEN, to desire, earn ; see Win and Wont.

WEAPON, an instrument for offence or defence. (E.) ME.
wepen, Chaucer, C. T,, A591. AS. w&épen, a weapon, shield, or sword;
Grein, ii. 648.-+4-Du. wapen; Icel. vapn; Dan. vaaben; Swed. vapen ;
G. waffe, OHG. wafan (also wappen, borrowed from Dutch or Low
G.); Goth. wépna, neut. pl., John, xviii. 3. B. All from the Teut.
type *wépnom, n.,a weapon. A by-form (with & for p) is found in
MSwed. wakn, a weapon (Ihre). Der. weapon-ed, Oth. v. 2. 2265
weapon-less. Also wapen-shaw, wapen-take. wu

WEAR (1), to carry on the body, as clothes; to consume by use,
rub away. (E.) The pt. t. wore, now in use, is due to analogy with
bore, pt. t. of bear ; the word is not really a strong one, the ME. pt. t.
being wered. We also find pt. t. ware, Luke, viii. 27. (A. V.) ME.
weren, pt. t. wered, Chaucer, C. T. 75. AS. werian (pt. t. werode),
Exod. xxix. 29. (Quite distinct from AS. werian, to defend; Grein.)
+Icel. verja, to wear (quite distinct from verja, to defend) ; OHG.
werian; Goth. wasjan, to clothe ; pp. wasids, Matt. xi. 8. B. From
the Teut. and Idg. 4/ WES, to clothe ; the standing for s (by Verner’s
law), as shown by the Gothic form. Hence also L. westis, clothing;


WEAR


Gk. éo-6ns, clothing ; Skt. vas, to put on clothes. See Vest. Der.
wear, sb., As You Like It, ii. 7. 34; wear-able; wear-er, Antony,
et Zany ts All the senses of wear can be deduced from the
carrying of clothes on the body; it hence means to bear, to carry;
also to consume or use up by wear, destroy, tire, efface; also, to
become old by wearing, to be wasted, pass away (as time); to wear
well=to bear wear and tear, hence to last out, endure. There is no
connexion with the sense of AS. werian, to defend.

WEAR (2), the same as Weir, q. v.

WEAR (3), in phr. ‘to wear a ship;’ the same as Veer, q. v.

WHEARISH, insipid, weakly. (E.) ‘A wretched wearish [weak]
elfe ;” Spenser, F. Q.iv. 5. 34. ‘ Werysshe, as meate is that is nat
wel tastye;’ Palsgrave. Prov. E. wairsh, wairish, weerish, insipid,
squeamish, weak. See Wearish in Nares, whose explanation is con-
jectural. The orig. sense may have been ‘watery;’ from AS. wer,
the sea; cf. Icel. ver, the sea, orig. ‘water.’ Cf. also Skt. var, vari,
water; Gk. otpov; Swed. var, pus. See Urine.

WEARY, exhausted, tired, causing exhaustion. (E.) ME. wer,
wery, Chaucer, C. T. 4232 (A 4234). (The e is long, as in mod, E.)
AS. wérig, tired; Grein, ii. 663 ; woerig, O. E. Texts.4-OSax. worig,
weary ; in the comp. sid-worig, fatigued with a journey; Heliand,
660, 670, 678, 698, 2238; cf. OHG. wuorag, intoxicated. B. The
long @ is (as usual) due to a mutation of long 6, as shown by the cog-
nate OSaxon form. It is, consequently, connected with AS. wérian,
to wander, travel, Gen. iv. 14; Numb. xiv. 33; Grein, ii. 736.
y-. This verb is a weak one, formed from the sb. wor, which probably
meant a moor or swampy place; so that wdrian was orig. ‘to tramp
over wet ground,’ the most likely thing to cause weariness. Hence
AS. wor-hana, a moor-cock, O. E. Texts, p. 465. Not allied to
Wear (1). 8. Prob. allied to Skt. var, water; the prime grade
appears in AS. wer, sea. Der. weari-ly, -ness; weary, verb, Temp.
ili. I. 19 ; weari-some, Two Gent. ii. 7. 8; weari-some-ly, -ness.

WEHASAND, WESAND, the wind-pipe. (E.) Spelt wesand
in Spenser, F. Q. v. 2. 14; he also has weasand-pipe, id. iv. 3. 12.
ME. wesand; spelt wesande, Voc. 676. 243 waysande, id. 635. 19.
AS. wasend, Voc. 157. 45; 264. 19; used to translate L. riimen, the
gullet. The mod. E. weasand answers rather to a by-form wésend ;
whilst the AS. wasend answers to proy. E. wosen, the wind-pipe
(Halliwell).4+-OF ries. wasende, wasande. Cf. Bavar. waisel, the gullet
of animals that chew the cud; MHG. weisant, OHG. weisunt,
weasand, cited by E. Miiller. The formis like that of a pres. part.

WEASEL, a small slender-bodied quadruped. (E.) ME. wesele,
wesel, Chaucer, C. T. 3234. AS. wesle, Voc. 119. 6; oldest forms,
weosule, wesulae; O. E. Texts.-Du. wezel ; Icel. visla (given in the
comp. hreysivisla); Dan. vesel; MSwed. wisla; Swed. vessla; G.
wiesel; OHG. wisala, wisela, wisula. B. The Teut. type seems to
be *wisalén- or *wisulén-, f. (Franck); evidently a dimin. form.
Root uncertain ; cf. Gk. aiéAoupos, aiAoupos, a weasel ; perhaps allied
to aiddos (for *dFtodAos?), nimble.

WEATHER, the condition of the air, &c. as to sunshine or
rain. (E.) ME. weder, P. Plowman, B. vi. 326; Chaucer, C. T.
10366, where Tyrwhitt prints wether, but the MSS. mostly have
weder, asin all the six MSS. in the Six-text edition, Group F, 1. 52.
The mod. E. ¢h for ME. d occurs again in ME. fader, moder, and
is prob. due to dialectal influence. AS. weder, Grein, ii. 654.-4-Du.
weder; Icel. vedr; Dan. veir (a contracted form) ; Swed. vader, wind,
air, weather; G. wetter; OHG. wetar; cf. G. gewitter, a storm,
B. All from the Teut. type *wedrom, n., weather, storm, wind; allied
words appear in G. gewitter, as above, and in Icel. /and-vidri, a land-
wind, heid-vidri, bright weather. Further allied to Lithuan. wétra, a
storm, OPruss. wetro, wind; Russ. vieter’, vietr’, wind, breeze; Skt.
vatara-, adj. windy. y. To be divided as *we-drom, where the
suffix (asin fa-ther, mo-ther) answers to Idg. -trd-, denoting the agent ;
and the base is *we, weak grade of 4/WE, to blow, which occurs in
Gothic waian, to blow, Skt. va, to blow; cf. Gk. dyue (for dfn-p),
I blow ; whence also E. wi-nd; see Wind (1). 8. Thus weather
and wind mean much the same, viz. ‘ that which blows,’ and they are
constantly associated in the E. phrase ‘wind and weather.’ ‘ Wind
liged, weder bid feeger ;’ Phoenix, ed. Grein, 1.182. A weather-cock
means a wind-cock. Der. weather, verb, Spenser, F. Q. v. 4. 42;
weather-board, cf. Icel. vedrbord, the windward side; weather-bound ;
weathér-cock, ME. wedercoc, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 180, 1. 27, and
in Wright, Voc. i. 115 (12th cent.), so called because formerly often
in the shape of a cock, as some are still made (cf. Du. weerhaan=
wederhaan, from haan, a cock) ; weather-fend, i.e. to defend from the
weather, Temp. v. 10, where fend is a clipped form of defend (see
Fence); weather-gage, weather-side; weather-wise, ME. wederwis,
P. Plowman, B. xv. 350. And see weather-beaten, wither.

WEATHER-BEATEN, WEATHER-BITTEN, haras-
sed by the weather. (E.or Scand.) Weather-beaten, lit. beaten by the
weather, or beaten upon by the weather, makes such good sense that


WEDNESDAY 705


T do not know that we can disallow it as being a genuine phrase ; it
occurs in 1 Hen. IV, iii. 1. 67, in Spenser, F. Q. ii. 1. 2, and in Nich.
Breton, ed. Grosart (see the Index), Cf. also prov. E. weather-bet,
i.e. ‘weather-beaten;’ E.D.D. B. At the same time there can be
little doubt that, in some cases, the right word is weather-bitten, i. e.
bitten by the weather, as in Shak, Wint. Tale, v. 2. 60. The latter
is a true Scand. idiom. We find Swed. vdderbiten, lit. weather-bitten,
but explained in Widegren as ‘ weather-beaten ;’ so also Norweg.
vederbiten, which Aasen explains by Dan. veirbidt, also as ‘ tanned in
the face by exposure to the weather,’ said of a man; he also gives
the expressive Norw. vederslitten, weather-worn (lit. weather-slit),

WEAVE, to twine threads together, work into a fabric. (E.)
ME. weuen (for weven) ; pt. t. waf, Gower, C. A.iie 320; bk. v. 5770;
Pp. wouen (=woven), spelt wouun, Wyclif, John, xix. 23. AS. wefan,
pt. t. wef, pp. wefen; Grein, ii. 654.4-Du. weven; Icel. vefa, pt. t.
vaf, pp. ofinn; Dan. veve; Swed. vefva; G. weben, to weave, pt. t.
wob, pp. gewoben; also as a weak verb. BB. All from Teut. type
*weban-, to weave; from Idg. 4/WEBH, to weave, which further
appears in Gk. i¢-7, p-os, a web, td-aiv-ev, to weave, and Skt.
urna-vabhis, a spider (lit. a wool-weaver), Brugmann, i. § 562. Der,
weav-er, weav-ing; also web, q.v., wef-t, g.V., woof, q.Vv., waf-er,
wasp, weevil.

WEB, that which is woven; a film over the eye, the skin be-
tween the toes of water-birds. (E.) ME. web, Wyclif, Job, vii. 6;
also webbe, P. Plowman, B, v. 111. AS. webb, gen. written web, Voc.
50. 28.4-Du. web; Icel. vefr (gen. vefjar); Dan. vev; Swed. va/;
G. ge-webe, OHG. weppi, wappi. 8B. All from the Teut. type *wad-
jom, n., a web; from *wad, 2nd grade of *weban-, from 4/WEBH, to
weave; see Weave. Der. webb-ing, webb-ed, web-foot-ed. Also
ME. webbe, Chaucer, C. T. 364 (A 362), AS. webba, a weaver, Voc.
188. 10, where the suffix -a denotes the agent (obsolete, except in
the name Webb); ME. webster, Wyclif, Job, vii. 6, AS. webbestre,
a female weaver, used to translate L. textrix, Voc. 188. 11 (obsolete,
except in the name Webster) ; for the suffix -ster, see Spinster.

WED, to engage by a pledge, to marry. (E.) ME. wedden,
Chaucer, C. T. 870 (A 868). AS. weddian, lit. to pledge, engage,
Luke xxii. 5.—AS. wed, sb., a pledge, Grein, ii. 653.-4-Du. wedden, to
lay a wager, from MDu. wedde, ‘a pledge, a pawne,’ Hexham ; Icel.
vedja, to wager, from ved, a pledge; Dan. vedde, to wager; Swed.
vadja, to appeal, from vad, a bet, an appeal; G. wetten, to wager,
from wette, a wager; Goth. ga-wadjon, to pledge, betroth, from
wadt, a pledge. B. All from the Teut. type *wadjom, n., a
pledge. Further allied to Lithuan. wadsii, to redeem a pledge; L.
uas (gen. uad-is), a pledge.—4/WEDH, to carry home, to marry,
Fick, i. 767 ; cf. Lithuan, weésti, pres. tense wedw, to marry, take home
a bride, wadas, a conductor, guide, leader by the hand, Russ. vesti,
to lead, conduct; Olrish fed-im, I carry off, W. dy-weddio, to wed;
Skt. vadhi-, a bride. Der. wedd-ed ; wedd-ing, AS, weddung, Gospel
of Nicodemus, c, 7; also wed-lock, q.v. Also see wage, wager, gage
(1), en-gage.

WEDGE, a piece of metal or wood, thick at one end and sloping
to athin edge at the other. (E.) Also used to denote simply a mass
of metal, as in Rich. III, i. 4. 26. ME. wegge, Chaucer, On the
Astrolabe, pt. i. § 14, 1. 3. AS. wecg, a mass of metal; Sweet,
A.S. Reader. ‘Cuneus, wecg;” Voc. 216. 12.4-Du. wig, wigge, a
wedge; Icel. veggr; Dan. vegge ; Swed. vigg; OHG. wekki, MHG.
wecke, a wedge; G. wecke, a kind of loaf, from its shape (cf. prov. E.
wig, a kind of cake).  B. All from Teut. type *wag-joz, m., a
wedge; from Teut. base *wag-=Idg. *wogh, with velar gh, as shown
by the cognate Lithuan. wagis, a bent wooden peg for hanging things
upon, also a spigot for a cask, also a wedge. See Brugmann, i.
§§ 367, 654. Der. wedge, verb.

WEDLOCK, marriage. (E.) ME. wedlok (with long o), written
wedloke, P. Plowman, B. ix. 113, 119 ; where some MSS. have wedlok.
AS. wedlac, in the sense of pledge; * Arrabo, wedlac,’ Voc. 115. 42.
—AS. wed, a pledge; and Jac, a sport, also a gift, in token of
pleasure. ‘Thus the sense is ‘a gift given as a pledge, and in token of
pleasure ;* hence, the gift given to a bride. It was usual to make a
present to the bride on the morning after marriage; cf. G. morgengabe,
a nuptial (lit. morning) gift. However, -Jac is also used as a mere
suffix, with but slight meaning. See Wed. And see Knowledge,
which has a like suffix.

WEDNESDAY, the fourth day of the week. (E.) ME. wednes-
day, P. Plowman, B. xiii. 154, where one MS. has wodnesday. AS,
Wodnes deg, rubric to Matt. v. 25. The change from é to @ is the
usual vowel-change, when the vowel i follows ; this vowel appears
in the OFries. Wernisdei, for *Wéednisdet; cf. OFries. Weda,
Woden (Weigand, s. v. Wotan), NFries. Weensdi, Outzen, p. 38; so
that the é for dis Friesian. ‘Wodnes deg’ means ‘day of Woden or
Wodin,’ after whom it was named; see Day. Cognate words are
Du. woensdag, Icel. ddinsdagr, Swed. Dan. onsdag (for odensdag), The

ZZ


706 WEE


G. name is simply mitwoch (mid-week). _ B. The AS. Woden is cog-
nate with Icel. Odinn, OHG. Wotan, Wuotan. The name signifies
‘the furious,’ or rather ‘the divinely inspired;’ being apparently
closely related to L. udtes (stem wati-), a prophet, a seer, and to
Olrish faith (Celtic stem *wati-),a singer, minstrel. Also, to AS.
wod, raging, mad (cognate with Icel. ddr, Goth. wads), whence ME.
wood, mad, a word which occurs as late as in Shakespeare, Mids. Nt.
Dr. ii. 1, 192; see Wood (2). @ It is remarkable that the
Romans, whilst looking upon Woden as the chief divinity of the
Teutonic races, nevertheless identified him with Mercury; hence dies
Mercurii was translated into AS. by Wodnesdeg. Cf. ‘k6dlludu peir
Pal Odin, en Barnabas Por’ =they called Paul Odinn, but Barnabas
Thor ; Icel. Bible, Acts, xiv. 12.

WEE, small, tiny. (E.) ‘A little wee face;’ Merry Wives, i. 4.
22. ME. we, only as a sb. a bit. ‘A little we,’ a little bit, fora
short space; Barbour, Bruce, vii. 182, xiii. 217. ‘And behynd hir
a litill we It fell’=and it fell a little way behind her ; id. xvii. 677.
In all three passages it occurs in the same phrase, viz. ‘a little we;’
and in the last case we should now say ‘a little way.’ So also: ‘a
litill wee ;’ G. Douglas, tr. of Virgil, Ain. bk. x. ch. 6; cf. ‘in a litel
wei,’ ina short time, Cursor Mundi, 12531; ‘ He ne es yitt bot a littel
wei, he is yet but young; id. 8419. Andas it is a sb., I believe it is
nothing but the Northern form of E.way. See Way. 4 That the
constant association of little with we (=way) should lead to the
supposition that the words little and wee are synonymous, seems
natural enough; and we have the evidence of Barbour that the word
is Northern. The above solution is strongly corroborated by the fact
that way-bit is still in use, in the North, in the sense of wee bit or little
bit; see Halliwell, and wee in E. D. D.; also Way-bit in Davies,
Supp. Glossary. ‘In the North parts, wher ther is a wea-bit to every
mile ;’ Howell, Letters, bk. iv. let. 28.

WEHED (1), any useless and troublesome plant. (E.) ME. weed,
Prompt. Parv. p. 519. AS. wéod, wiod; Grein, ii. 676.4+-OSax.
wiod ; whence Du. wieden, vb., to weed. Teut. type *weudom, n.
Root unknown. Der. weed, verb, ME. weeden, Palladius on Hus-
bandry, ii. 289; cf. Du. wieden, Low G. wéden, to weed. Der.
weed-y, Hamlet, iv. 7. 175.

WEED (2), a garment. (E.) Chiefly in the phr. ‘a widow’s
weeds,’ i.e. a widow’s mourning apparel. Common in Shak. as a
sing. sb., in the sense of garment, Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 256, &c. ME.
wede (dissyllabic), Havelok, 1.94. AS. wéde, neut., also wéd, fem.,
a garment; Grein, ii. 642.4-OFriesic wéde, wed; OSax. waidi; MDu.
wade, ‘a garment, a habit, or a vesture,’ Hexham; Icel. vad, a piece
of stuff, cloth; also, a garment; OHG. wat, wét, clothing, armour ;
O. Low G, wad, a coverlet (Gallée). B. All from the Tent. base
*wéd-, a garment, perhaps‘ something woven ;’ cf. Skt. vé, to weave.
‘Others connect it with Goth. ga-widan, pt. t. gawath, Mark, x. 9,
OHG. wetan, to bind, yoke together. Cf. Skt. vi-vadha-, a yoke for
carrying a burden. See Wad.

WEEK, a period of seven days. (E.) The vowel, in ME., is
very variable; we find weke, wike, on the one hand, and wouke, woke,
wuke on the other. In Chaucer, Six-text, Group A, 1539, we have
weke, wike, as well as wouke; Tyrwhitt, C. T. 1541, prints weke.
1. The forms weke, wike (together with mod. E. week) answer to AS.
wice, wicu, of which the gen. wican occurs in Thorpe, Ancient Laws,
ii. 438, 1. 23 (Eccl. Institutes, § 41). 2. The forms wouke, woke,
wuke, answer to AS. wuce, wucu, Grein, ii. 744. We find the same
change in AS. widu, later form wudu, wood.4+-Du. week; Icel.
vika ; Swed. vecka; OHG. wecha, wehha; but the MHG. form is
woche, which is also the mod. G. form. Cf. Dan. uge (=vuge), a
week. B. The prevalent Teut. type is *wikdn-, f. The Goth.
wiké occurs only once, in Luke, i. 8, where the Gk. év TH Tage rijs
épnpepias abrot (L. in ordine uicis suze) appears in Gothic as in wikdn
kunjis seinis=in the order of his course. It is by no means clear
what is the precise force of this Goth. wikd (which exactly answers
in form to E. week), and some have (wrongly) supposed that it was
borrowed from L. wicis, which is, however, equivalent in this passage
to kunjis, not to wikd. y. It is usual to consider week as a true
Teut. word, and allied to AS, wice, an office, duty, function ; perhaps
it meant ‘ succession ’ or ‘ change,’ being related to Icel. vikja, to turn,
return ; from Teut. *wik-, weak grade of *wikan-, to yield, give way,
give place to. Cf. Icel. vixl, a change, vixling, a changeling, G.
wechsel, a change ; a week corresponds to a phase of the moon. Cf.
also Skt. wij, to tremble; and see Weak. Der. week-day, Icel.
vikudagr ; week-ly.

WEEN, to suppose, imagine, think. (E.) ME. wexen, Chaucer,
C. T, 1655. AS. wénan, to imagine, hope, expect ; Grein, ii. 658.—
AS. wén, expectation, supposition, hope; id.4Du. wanen, to fancy,
from waan, conjecture; Icel. vana, to hope, from van, expectation ;
G. wihnen, from wahn, OHG. wan, sb.; Goth. wénjan, to expect,
from wéns, expectation. |B, From the sb. of which the Teut. type


WEIRD


is *wé&niz, f., expectation, hope. Perhaps it meant orig. ‘a striving _
after,’ and hence an expectation of obtaining. Some compare it with
L. uénGri, to hunt after; and with Teut. *w&x, 3rd grade of Teut. ©
*wenan-, to crave, desire; cf, L. uen-us, desire, Skt. van, to crave.
See Win.

WEEP, to wail, lament, shed tears. (E.) ME. wepen, orig. a
strong verb, pt. t. weep, wep, Chaucer, C. T. Six-text ed., Group D,
1. 588, where only one MS. has wepte (dissyllabic), for which Tyrwhitt
erroneously prints wept, C.T. 6170. AS. wépan, pt. t. weop; Grein,
ii. 661. The lit. senseis to cry aloud, raise an outcry, lament loudly ;
wépan (for *wopian) is regularly formed, with the usual vowel-change,
from wop, a clamour, outcry, lament, Grein, ii. 732.4+OSax. wopian,
to raise an outcry; wdp, sb.; Goth. wodpjan, to cry out; OHG.
wuofan, to lament, weep, str. vb.; also wuoffan, weak vb., wuof,
wuaf, an outcry; Icel. epa, to shout, cry; 2p, a shout. B. All from
the Teut. base *wdp-, appearing in *wdpoz, m. (AS. wap), an
outcry, loud lament. @ This AS. wép is quite distinct from E.
whoop, in which the initial w is unoriginal, but the hessential. Der,
weep-er, weep-ing’.

WEET, to know; the same as Wit (1), q.v.

WEEVIL, a small kind of beetle very destructive to grain. (E.)
ME. weuel, wiuel (with u=v), spelt wevyl, wyvyl in Prompt. Parv.,
PP: 523, 531. AS. wifel, to translate L. scarebius (sic), Voc. 261. 13 ;
spelt widil in a very early gloss of the 8th century, where it translates
L. cantarus, i. e. cantharis, a beetle; Voc. 11. 28. We even find the
older form wibba; ‘Scarabeus, scern-wibba,’ Voc. 319. 2; where
scern means dung.+Icel. -yfll, in comp. tordyfill, a dung-beetle ;
MDu. wevel, ‘a little worme eating corne or beanes, or a wevill,’
Hexham ; OHG. wibil, MHG. wibel; G. wiebel, B. The Teut. type
is *webiloz,m., a beetle ; a dimin. form of Teut. *wedjon-, m., whence
AS. wibba. From the Teut. *web-an-, to weave; from the filaments
spun for the larva-case. See Weave. y. Further allied to
Lithuan. wdbalas, a chafer, winged insect.

WEFT, the. threads woven into and crossing the warp. (E.)
ME. weft, Wyclif, Exod. xxxix. 3, earlier version, where the later
version has warp. AS. weft, wefta; ‘Deponile, weft, vel wefta;’
Voc. 187. 32; and again ‘ Deponile, wefta’ in a gloss of the 8th
century, id. 17. 6.4+Icel. veftr; also vipta, vifta. B. The Teut.
types are *weftoz, m., *wefton-, m., lit. ‘a thing woven ;’ formed
with participial suffix -to- from *web-an-, to weave, whence AS.
wef-an, to weave; see Weave and Woof.

WHIGH, to balance, ponder, to have weight, be heavy. (E.)
ME. weghen, wejen, weyen, weien, Chaucer, C. T. 456 (A 454). AS.
wegan, str. vb., pt. t. weg, to carry, bear; also, intrans., to move;
Grein, ii. 655. From the sense of ‘ carry’ we pass to that of ‘ raise’
or ‘ lift,’ as when we say ‘to weigh anchor;’ so also Cowper says:
‘Weigh the vessel up,’ Loss of the Royal George, st. 7. From the
sense of raising or lifting, we pass to that of weighing.4-Du. wegen,
to weigh; Icel. vega, to move, carry, lift, weigh; Dan. veze, to weigh ;
Swed. vaga, to weigh; vaga upp, to weigh up, to lift; G. wegen, to
move, wiegen, to move gently, rock, wiagen, to weigh; OHG.,
wegan, to move, bear, weigh. Cf. Goth. gawigan, to shake about.
B. The AS. wegan is a strong verb; pt. t. weg, pp. wegen; so also
is the Icel. vega; pt.t. va, pp. veginn. All from the Teut. type
*wegan-, pt. t. *wag, pp. *weganoz, to carry, move, weigh, answering
to Idg. 44 WEGH, to carry, as in Skt. vah, L. wehere; see Vehicle.
Der. weigh-t, ME. weght, P. Plowman, B. xiv. 292, also spelt wight,
Chaucer, Troilus, ii. 1385, AS. ge-wiht, Gen. xxiii. 16, cognate with
MDu. wicht, gewicht (Hexham), Du. gewigt, G. gewicht, Swed. vigt;
cf. Icel. vett, Dan. vegt. Teut. type *weg-tom, n., which became
*weh-tom ; and AS. *weht became wiht by palatal mutation (Sievers) ;
whence weight-y, spelt wayghty in Palsgrave ; weight-i-ly, -ness. Also
wag, q.V.; wagg-on, wain, wey, wight, whit.

WEIR, WEAR, adam inariver. (E.) ME. wer; dat. were,
Chaucer, Parlament of Foules, 138. AS. wer, a weir, dam, A‘lfred,
tr. of Gregory’s Past. Care, c. 38, ed. Sweet, p. 278, 1. 16; the pp.
gewered, dammed up, occurs in the line above. ‘The lit. sense is
“defence,” hence a fence, dam; closely allied to AS. werian, to defend,
protect, also (as above) to dam up, Grein, ii. 662.-4-Icel. vorr, a
fenced in landing-place, ver, a fishing-station; G. wehr, a defence ;
cf. wehkren, to defend, also to check, constrain, control; miuhl-wehr,
a mill-dam; MDu. weer, ‘a palissado, or a rampard,’ Hexham, Cf.
also Goth. warjan, to defend, Icel. verja; allied to Skt. vv, to cover,
varaya, to stop, hinder, keep off, vartra-, a dam, embankment
(Macdonell); Gk. ép-vc@a, to ward off. From the «WER, to
protect.

WEIRD, fate, destiny. (E.) As an adj. in Shak. Macb. i. 3. 325
i. 5. 8; ii 1.20; iii, 4. 133; iv. 1. 136, where it means ‘subservient
to destiny.’ But it is properly asb. ME. wirde, wyrde; ‘ And out
of wo into wele 3oure wyrdes shul chaunge’ = and out of woe into weal
your destinies shall change; P. Plowman, C. xiii. 209. AS. wyrd,


WELCOME


also wird, fate, destiny, also one of the ‘Norns’ or Fates, an ex-
tremely common word in poetry, Grein, ii. 760. Teut. type *wurdiz, f.
Formed, by vowel-change from «to y, from Teut. *wurd- (with *wurd-
<*wurp, by Verner’s Law), weak grade of Teut. *werthan->AS.
weorpan, to be, become, take place, happen, come to pass; see
Worth (2). The lit. sense is ‘that which happens,’ or ‘that
which comes to pass;’ hence fate, destiny.4Icel. uwrdr, fate, one of
the three Norns or Fates; cf. urd-, stem of pt. t. pl. of verda, to
become ; OSax. wurd, fate; ONG. wurt, (4/WERT.)

WELCOME, received gladly, causing gladness by coming.
(Scand.) Now used as an adj., and derived from well, adv., and
the pp. come of the verb zo come; and hence of Scand. origin. =Icel.
velkominn, welcome; cf. Dan. velkommen, Swed. valkommen, = Icel.
vel, well; and kominn, pp. of koma, to come. Hence also the AF.
verb welcomer, to welcome (Godefroy). B. Substituted for AS.
wilcuma, masc. sb., one who comes so as to please another, Grein, ii.
4705.=— AS. wil-, prefix, allied to willa, will, pleasure; and cuma, a
comer, one who comes, formed, with suffix -a of the agent, from
cuman, to come; Grein, ii. 706; i. 169. See Will and Come.
Hence AS, wileumian, to welcome.

WELD (1), to beat metal together. (Scand.) The final d is
excrescent, like d after Z in alder, a tree, elder, a tree, and Shake-
speare’s alder-liefest for aller-liefest, 2 Hen. VI, i. 1. 28. It is only
a particular use of the word well, verb, to spring up as a fountain,
lit. to boil up. It meant (1) to boil, (2) to heat to a high degree,
(3) to beat heated iron. We find this particular use in Wyclif,
Isaiah, ii. 4; where the earlier version has ‘thei shul bete togidere
their swerdes into shares,’ the later version has ‘ thei schulen welle
togidere her swerdes in-to scharris.’? See further under Well (2).
The word is apparently Scand., not E.; for (1) the Swed. vdilla (lit.
to well) is only used in the sense ‘ to weld,’ as in valla jarn, to weld
iron (Widegren) ; the sense ‘ to well’ appearing in the comp. uppvdlla,
to boil up; (2) Sweden exports large quantities of iron and steel.
Cf. Dan, velde (with excrescent @), to well up; Pomeran. wellen, to
weld iron; prov. E. well, to weld. In Icel. and Norw., a distinction
is made between vella, intr., to well, pt.t. vall (str. vb.), and vella, tr.,
to cause to boil (wk. vb.); the Swed. véilla, to weld, answers to
the latter. 4 ‘The process of welding iron is named, in many
languages, from the word for boiling; cf. Illyrian variti, to boil,
weld iron, Lettish warit, to boil, sawdrit, to weld, &c.; Wedg-
wood.

WELD (2), dyer’s weed; Reseda luteola. (E.) ME. welde;
‘“Madyr, welde, or wood’=madder, weld, or woad; Chaucer, A‘tas
Prima, l. 17. ‘ Welde, or wolde;’ Prompt. Parv. pp. 520, 532.
According to Cockayne, A. S. Leechdoms, iii. 349, it is spelt wolde
in MS. Harl. 3388. In Lowland Scotch, it is wald; see Jamieson.
It appears to be an E. word, Cognate with Low G. wolde, weld
(Liibben), Du. wouw, MDu. wouwe (for *wolde) ; also G. wau, Swed.
Dan. vau (from Du.). We also find Span. gualda, F. gaude (of
Teut. origin). Prob. allied to AS. weald, a wood, as if ‘ belonging
to the wood or wold;’ see Wold. Cf. OSax. sin-weldi, a great
wood. @ Quite distinct from Woad.

WELFARE, prosperity. (E.) Lit. a state of faring or going on
well. ME. welfare, Chaucer, C. T. 11150 (F 838); compounded of
wel, ady. well, and fare=AS. faru, sb., lit. a journey, from faraz,
to fare, go. See Well (1) and Fare. Cf. Icel. velferd, a well-
doing.

WHLKIN, the sky, the region of clouds. (E.)’ In Shak. Merry
Wives, i. 3. 101, &c. ME. welkin, as printed in Tyrwhitt’s edition
of Chaucer, C. T. gooo, where the MSS. have welkne, welken, welkine,
walkyn, Six-text, Group E, 1124. In P. Plowman, B. xvii. 160, we
have welkne, wolkne, Je welkene, welken in the various MSS. It thus
appears that welkne is a mutated form of wolkne, which is an older
spelling ; in Layamon, 4574, 23947, we have wolkne, wolcne, weolcene,
prob. a pl. form, and signifying ‘the clouds.’ AS, wolcnu, clouds,
pl. of wolcen, a cloud, Grein, ii. 731,.4-OSax. wolkan, a cloud. Du.
wolk, Low G. wulke; G. wolke, OHG, wolka, f., wolkan, n., a cloud.
Teut. base *wulk(e)no-. |B. Some have connected it with AS.
gewealc, a rolling about, as in Yda gewealc, the rolling of the waves,
Grein, i. 477; from wealcan, to roll, walk; see Walk. There is no
proof of this; if it were true, wolcen would mean ‘that which rolls
about ;’ cf. AS. wealca, a wave, billow. y. Or else connected
with OHG, welk, moist, damp; Russ. vlaga, moisture ; Lith. wilg-ytz,
to wet, moisten; from an Idg. 4/WELG.

WELL (1), in a good state, excellently. (E.) ME. wel, Chaucer,
C. T. 106; weel, 4728 (B 308). AS. wel, Grein, ii. 656; also spelt
well.+-Du. wel; Icel. vel; Dan. vel; Swed. val; Goth. waila.+G.
wohl, wol; OHG, wela, wola. B. The Goth. waila answers to a
Teut. type *wela. The orig. sense is ‘ agreeably,’ or suitably to one’s
will or wish; from the Idg. 4/WEL, to wish; cf. L. uol-o, I wish,
uel-le, to wish, Russ. vol-ia, sb., will, W. gwell, better, Skt. vara-,


WELTER 707


better, vara-, a wish, prati varam, according to a wish; see Will.
Der, well-behaved, Merry Wives, ii. 1. 593; -beloved, Jul. Ces. iii. 2.
180 ; -born, -bred, -disposed; -favoured, Two Gent. ii. 1. 54; -meaning,
Rich, II, ii. 1. 1285 -meant, 3 Hen. VI, iii. 3.67; -nigh; -spoken,
Rich. III, i. 1. 29; -won, Merch, Ven. i. 3. 51; and numerous other
compounds, And see wel-come, wel-fare; also weal, weal-th.

WELL (2), a spring, fountain of water. (E.) ME. welle (dis-
syllabic), Chaucer, C. T. 5689 (D 107). AS, wella, also well,
Grein, ii, 657; also spelt wylla, wylle, wyll, id. 756. Teut. type
*walljon-, m.; allied to AS, weallan (strong verb, pt. t. wéoll, pp.
weallen) , to well up, boil, id. 672; the mod. E. verb zo well being
derived, not from this strong verb, but from the sb.; so that the pt. t.
in mod. E. is welled,+-Icel. vell, ebullition ; from vella, to well, boil,
pt. t. vall, pp. ollinn (strong verb); whence also vella, weak verb, to
make to boil; Du. wel, a spring; Dan. veld (for veil), a spring; G.
welle, a wave, surge; cf. wallen, to undulate, boil, bubble up, of
which the OHG, pt. t. was wial, 8B. All from the Teut. *wallan-,
str. vb., to boil up, undulate; from the Idg. 4/WEL, to tum round,
roll, as in Skt. val, to move to and fro, Russ. valiate, to roll. See
further under Helix. From the weak grade we have Goth. wulan,
to boil; cf. also AS. wielm, wylm, a boiling, and Skt. armi-, a wave.
Der. well, verb, ME. wellen, verb, in P. Plowman, B. xix. 375, from
AS. wellan, wyllan ; we find ‘ Ferueo, ic welle,’ AElfric’s Grammar, ed.
Zupitza, p. 156, 1. 14,in the Royal MS. (see the footnote), though
most MSS. have ie wealle. Der. wellspring, ME, wellespring, Genesis
and Exodus, 1. 1243. And see weld (1).

WELLAW AY, an exclamation of great sorrow. (E.) In Spenser,
F. Q. ii. 8. 46. ME. weilawey, Chaucer, C. T. 13048 (B 1308) ; the
MSS. have weylawey, weilaweie, and (corruptly) well awaye, wele
away, showing that some scribes mistook it to mean ‘ weal [is] away,’
i.e. prosperity is over! ‘ Weilawei, and wolowo’=alas! and alas!
Ancren Riwle, p. 88, 1.7; wetlawei, id. p. 274,1. 2. ‘Wois us pat
we weren born! Weilawei!’ Havelok, 462; cf. 1. 570, Written
weila wei, Layamon, 8031 ; wala wa, 7971; also wela, wola (without
wei or wa following), 3456. It stands for wei la wei or wa lai wa
(wo lo wo), AS. wa l& wa, written wala wa, alas! lit. ‘woe! lo!
woe!’ Atlfred, tr. of Boethius, c. xxxix. § 1 (b. iv. met. 4); wei la
wei, id., c. xxxv. § 6 (b, iii. met. 12); we also find wala, Mark, xv.
29, and simply wa, Mark, xiv. 21.—AS. wa, woe; la, lo; wa, woe.
See Woe and Lo. 4 The expression was early misunderstood ;
and was even turned into wella-day, Merry Wives, iii. 3. 106; in
which unmeaning expression, though intended as an exclamation of
sorrow, we seem to have well in place of wo, and day introduced
without any sense; perhaps alas! the day also owed its existence
to this unmeaning corruption.

WELSH, pertaining to Wales. (E.) Welsh properly means
‘foreign.’ ME, walsh, P. Plowman, B. v, 324; Walsh is still in use
as a proper name. AS. welisc, welisc; ‘pa welisce menn’=the
foreigners, i.e. Normans, A. S. Chron. an. 1048 ; see Earle’s edition,
p- 178, 1. 15; ‘pa welisce men,’ ibid. 1. 24; and see the note.
Formed, with suffix -isc (>E. -ish) and vowel-change, from AS.
wealh, a foreigner; orig. a Celt. (From the pl. Wealas we have
mod. E. Wales, now the name of a country.) The Teut. form
*Walh- answers to L. Velc-, i.e. ‘one of the tribe of Volce,’ who
occupied Southern Gaul. See Walnut. Der. Welsh-rabbit, a
Welsh dainty, i.e. not a rabbit, but toasted cheese ; this is a mild joke,
just as a Norfolk-capon is not a capon at all, but a red-herring
(Halliwell). There is no authority for the assertion that rabbit is a
corruption of rare bit; which renders Welsh pointless.

WELT, a narrow strip of leather round a shoe. (E.) The old
sense seems to be hem or border. Cotgrave explains F. orlet by ‘a
little hemme, selvidge, welt, border;’ and the verb orler by ‘to
hemme, selvidge, border, welt the edges or sides of” ‘ Take care of
the skirts, fringes, and welts of their garments,’ Holland, tr. of Pliny,
b. vii.c. 51. ‘ Welt of a garment, ourelet [F. orlet]; Welte of a shoe,
oureleure;’ Palsgrave. ME. welte, ‘ Welte of a schoo, Incucium,
vel intercucium;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘Hec pedana, Anglice wampay
{a vamp]; Hoc intercucium, Anglice weltte;’ Voc. 664. 34, 35.
Palsgrave also has the verb ; ‘I welte, as a garment is, je ourle:, This
kyrtell is well welted, ce corset icy est bien ourlé? Lowl. Sc. waut,
ME. walte, a welt, walte, to welt; Cathol. Anglicum. The pl.
waltys occurs as a gloss to intercucia, in John de Garlande; Wright’s
Vocab. i. 125. Lit. ‘a hem,’ or ‘strip turned over;’ cf. Norw,
velt, a card turned up as atrump; allied to AS, wyltan, gewelian,
to roll, Icel. velta, to roll over; see Welter and Wale. We
also find W. gwald, a hem, welt, gwaltes, the welt of a shoe; gwaldu,
to welt, hem; Gael. balt, a welt of a shoe, a border; Irish bait,
a welt, border ; all (apparently) borrowed from E, Der. welt, verb.

TER, to wallow, roll about. (Scand.) Surrey has ‘ wal-
tring tongs,’ i. e. rolling or lolling tongues of snakes, tr. of Virgil’s
féneid, bk. ii, 1. 266. ‘I walter, I tumble, je me voystre; Hye


ZZ 2


708 WEN


you, your horse is walteringe yonder, hastez vous, vostre cheval se
voystre la;’ Palsgrave. ‘1 welter, je verse; Thou welterest in the
myer, as thou were a sowe;’ Palsgrave. ME. weltren, to wallow ;
Cursor Mundi, 4503; prob. of Scand. origin; cf. Swed. vdlira, to
roll, to wallow. Walter and welter are frequentative forms, with
the usual suffix -er, from ME. walten, to roll over, overturn, hence
to totter, fall, throw, rouse, rush, &c.; Destruction of Troy, 1956,
3810, 4627, 4633, 4891, pt. t. welt, id. 4418, 4891, &c. This ME.
walten is from the AS. *wealtan, weltan, a strong verb, of which
the pp. gewelten (for gewealten) occurs in the Lindisfarne MS., in
the ONorthumb. translation of Matt. xvii. 14, where cnéum
gewelteno occurs as a gloss on genibus prouolutis; hence the
secondary verb wyltan, to roll round, Grein, ii. 757, also the adj.
unwealt, steady, lit. ‘not tottering, A. S. Chron. an. 897, ed. Earle,
p- 95, 1. 14, andthe note. Cf. Low G, weltern, waltern, to roll over;
Icel. veltask, to rotate, to roll over, as a horse does, from velza, pt. t.
vait, to roll; Dan. velte, to roll, overturn; Swed. vdiltra, to roll,
wallow, welter, frequentative of valta, to roll; G. walzen, to roll,
wallow, welter, from walzen, to roll; Goth. us-waltjan, to subvert.
See Waltz, Wallow. From Idg. base *wel-d-, extended from
4/ WEL, to turn; see Well (2).

WEN, a fleshy tumour. (E.) ME. wenne; ‘Wenne, veruca,
gibbus,’ Prompt. Parv. AS. wenn; acc. pl. wennas, A.S. Leechdoms,
ili, 12, 1, 22; nom. pl. wennas, id. 46, 1. 21.4-Du. wen; Low G.
ween ; ween-bulen [wen-boils]; prov. G. wenne, wehne, wahne, cited
by E. Miiller; Dan. dial, van, a wen, wart. B. The orig. sense
was prob. ‘pain,’ or painful swelling; Teut. type *anjoz, m.
Prob. from *wann, 2nd grade of the Teut. str. vb. seen in Goth.
winnan, to suffer, as in aglons winnan=to suffer afflictions, 1 Tim.
v. 103 cf. wunns, affliction, suffering, 2 Tim. ili. 11. So also Icel.
vinna, though cognate with E. win, means not only to work, labour,
toil, but also to suffer, and vinna @ is to do bodily harm to another.
See Win.

WENCH, a young girl, vulgar woman. (E.) Common in prov.
E. without any depreciatory intention ; as, ‘a fine young wench.’
‘Temperance was a delicate wench,’ Temp. ii. 1. 43. ME. wenche,
Chaucer, C. T. 3254; P. Plowman, B. v. 364. We also find the
form wenchel, Ancren Riwle, p. 334, note &. B. It is to be par-
ticularly noted that wenchel is the earlier form; Stratmann gives no
references for wenche earlier than Will. of Palerne, 1. 1901, Wyclif,
Matt. ix. 24, and Poems and Lives of the Saints, ed. Furnivall,
xvi. 98, where, however, the form printed is wenclen. But wenchel
(spelt wennchell) occurs in the Ormulum, 3356, where it is used of a
male infant, viz. in the account of the annunciation of Christ’s birth
to the shepherds, ‘The orig. sense was simply ‘ infant,’ without
respect of sex, but, as the word also implies ‘ weak’ or ‘ tender,’ it was
naturally soon restricted to the weaker sex. The ME. wenche resulted
from wenchel by loss of 2, which was doubtless thought to be a dimin.
suffix; yet in this particular instance, itis not so. The sb, wenchel,
an infant, is closely allied to the ME. adj. wankel, tottery, unsteady,
Reliquice Antique, i. 221, AS. wencel, a child, a daughter (Toller) ;
pl. winclo, children (of either sex), Exod. xxi. 4. Allied to wencel,
wencele, weak, Grein, ii. 659 ; wancol, woncol, unstable, Alfred, tr. of
Boethius, c. vii. § 2 (b. ii. pr. 1). y. The lit. sense of wancol is
‘tottery,’ whence the senses unstable, weak, infantine, easily followed.
Formed, with AS. suffix -ol, from Teut. base *wank-, to bend sideways,
nod, totter, as in G. wanken, to totter, reel, stagger, waddle, flinch,
shrink ; cf. MHG. wenken (causal form), to render unsteady.-MHG.,
wankel, OHG. wanchal, unstable; mod. G. (provincial) wankel,
‘tottering, unsteady,’ Fliigel. The base *wank- is the 2nd grade of
Teut. *wenkan- ; see further under Wink,

WEND, to go, take one’s way. (E.) Now little used, except in
the pt. t. went, which is used in place ofthe pt. t. of go. When used,
it is gen. in the phr. ‘to wend one’s way;’ but Shak. twice has
simply wend, Com. of Errors, i. 1. 158, Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 2, 372.
ME. wenden, Chaucer, C. T. 16. AS. wendan, (1) trans. to turn;
(2) intrans. to turn oneself, proceed, go; common in both senses,
Grein, ii..659. The pt. t. was wende, which became wentein ME., and
is now went. ‘The lit. sense was orig. ‘to make to wind,’ and it is
the causal of wind; formed, by vowel-change of a to e, from Teut.
*wand, 2nd grade of *wendan-, windan-, to wind.4-Du. wenden, to
turn, to tack, causal of winden; Icel. venda, to wend, turn, change,
causal of vinda; Dan. vende, caus. of vinde; Swed. vanda, caus. of
vinda; Goth. wandjan, caus. of windan; G. wenden, caus. of winden.
See Wind (2).

‘WERE, pl. of was; also as subj. sing. and pl. See Was.

WERGILD, in AS. law, a fine paid for manslaughter or crime
against the person. (E.) See Blount’s Nomolexicon. AS. wergild,
the price set upon a man according to his rank (Toller).— AS. wer,
a man; and gild, a payment, from gildan, gieldan, to pay. See
Werwolf and Yield.


WHALE


WERWOLEF, a man-wolf. (E.) On the subject of werwolves,.
i.e. men supposed to be metamorphosed into wolves, see pref. to
William of Palerne, otherwise called William and the Werwolf,
p. xxvi; where the etymology isdiscussed. Cf. Gk. AvedvOparros, i. e.
wolf-man. ME. werwolf, Will. of Palerne, 80, &c. AS. were-wulf,
a werwolf; as an epithet of the devil (meaning fierce despoiler).
Laws of Cnut, § 26, in Thorpe, Ancient Laws, i. 374. Usually
explained as from AS. wer, a man; and wulf,a wolf.4-G. wahrwolf,
a werwolf; MHG. werwolf; as if from MHG. wer, a man, and wolf,
a wolf. This was Latinised as garulphus or gerulphus, whence OF.
garoul (Burguy), mod. F. loup-garow, i.e. wolf-man-wolf, the word.
loup being prefixed because the sense of the final -ow had been lost.
For the latter syllable, see Wolf. For the AS. wer, see Virile.
B. Klugethinks this is uncertain ; for the AS. prefix were- (answering
to OHG. weri- in Weri-wolf, a man’s name) suggests connexion with
AS. weri-an, to wear clothes; cf. Icel. alf-hamr, lit. ‘ wolf-skin,’
applied to the skin of a werwolf. But it is easy to reply that the
AS. wergild (certainly derived from AS. wer, a man) is also spelt
weregild ; the OHG. forms being weragilt, werigelt. Hence the
usual explanation ‘man-wolf’? may certainly be accepted. See
Wergild. Cf. O. Low G. weregild (Gallée).

WEST, the quarter where the sun sets. (E.) ME. west, P, Plow>
man, B. xviii. 113. AS. west, Grein, ii. 667, where it occurs as an
adv., with the sense ‘ westward ;’ we also find westan, adv., from the
west, id. 668; west-d#l, the west part, west-ende, the west end, west~
mest, most in the west.4-Du. west, adj. and adv.; Icel. vesétr, sb.,.
the west; Dan. and Swed. vest, sb.; G. west (whence F. ouest)
B. All from Teut. base *wes-t-, west. Prob. allied to Gk. éo-zepos,
L. wes-per, evening. See Vesper. Der. west-ward, AS. weste-weard,
adj., Allfred, tr. of Boethius, c. xvi. § 4 (b. ii. met. 6): west-ern ;.
west-er-ly (short for west-ern-ly).

WET, very moist, rainy. (E.) ME. wé¢ (with long e), spelt weet
in The Castle of Love, 1. 1433 (Stratmann); whence pl. wéte (dis-
syllabic), Chaucer,.C. T. 1282 (A 1280), riming with gréte, pl. of
grét, great. AS. wéi, Grein, ii. 651.4-Icel. vatr ; Dan. vaad; Swed.
vat; NFries. weet.  B. All from Teut. type *wétoz, wet ; from the
same root as E, water. From Teut. *w#t-, 3rd grade of *wet, Idg.
“/ WED, to wet, or spring up (as water). See Water. Der. wet,
verb, AS, wétan (Grein); wet, sb., AS. w@ta (Grein); wett-ish,
wet-ness; wet-shod, P. Plowman, B. xiv. 161. From the same root
are ott-er, und-ul-ate, hyd-ra, hyd-raul-ic, hyd-ro-gen, &c.

WETHER, a castrated ram. (E.) ME. wether, Chaucer, C. T.
3249. AS. weder, Ps. xxviii, 1, ed. Spelman (marginal reading).-
OSax, wethar, withar; Kleinere Altniederdeutsche Denkmiler, ed.
Heyne, p. 186; Icel. vedr; Dan. veder, vedder; Swed. vidur; G.
widder, OHG. widar; Goth. withrus, a lamb, John, i. 29. B. All
from Teut. type *wethruz, m. The orig. sense was doubtless ‘a
yearling,’ as the word corresponds very closely to L. uitulus, a calf,
Skt. vatsa-, a calf, allied to Skt. vatsara-, Gk. éros, a year. See
Veterinary and Veal. 4 We may note the distinction between
weather and wether by observing that the former is wea-ther (with Idg.
suffix -tro-), whilst the latter is weth-er (with suffix -ro-), the th
answering to the ¢ in wit-ulus.

WEY, a heavy weight. (E.) The weight varies considerably,
from 2 cwt. to 3 cwt. ME. weye, P. Plowman, B. v.93. The lit.
sense is merely ‘weight.’ AS. wége; ‘Pondus, byrden odde wge,”
i.e. burden or weight ; Atlfric’s Grammar, ed. Zupitza, p. 58, 1. 17.
Allied to AS. w&g-, stem of pl. of pt. t. of wegan, to bear, carry,
weigh ; so that the sb. is from Teut. *wég-, 3rd grade of *wegan-, to.
carry. See Weigh.


WH


WH. This is distinct from w, just as th is from ¢. The mod E,
wh is represented by kw in AS., and by hv in Icelandic ; it answers.
to L. qu, Gk. 7, 7, #3; Idg. kw.

WHACK, to beat. (E.) See Thwack, which is supposed to be
the same word. But it is rather a variant, i.e. a similarly sounding
imitative word, Cf. EFries. and Westphalian wack-eln, to beat, to
cudgel; prov. G. (Thiitingen) wackeln, walken, to beat (Hertel).

WHALE, the largest of sea-animals. (E.) ME. wheal, Chaucer,
C. T. 7512 (D 1930); qual, Havelok, 753. AS. hwal, Voc. 94. 15.
+Du. walvisch, i.e. whale-fish; Icel. hvalr; Dan. and Swed. hval ;
G. wal, wallfisch. B. The Teut. type is *hwaloz, m. The name:
was orig. applied to any large fish, including the walrus, grampus,
porpoise, &c. Thus Atlfric explains hwel by ‘ balena, vel cete, vel
pistrix.? Cf, G. wels, a catfish; OPruss. halis, a catfish. Perhaps.


WHAP


it meant ‘roller,’ from the rolling of porpoises; cf. Icel. hvel, a
wheel, OPruss, kelan, a wheel ; Gk. éAwp, a monster, méAos, a pivot ;
see Pole (2), and Wheel. @ Whale and balena have nothing
in common but the letter 7, and cannot be compared. Der.
whale-bone, formerly whales bone, Spenser, F. Q. iii. 1. 15, where the
reference is to the ivory of the walrus’ tusk, ME. whales bon, Layamon,
2363; whal-ing, whal-er, Also wal-rus, q.v.

WHAP, to beat, flutter. (E.) Sometimes spelt whop; and wap.
Halliwell has wap, ‘to beat; to flutter, to beat the wings, to move
in any violent manner ;’ also wappeng (for whapping), ‘ quaking, used
by Batman, 1582.’ ‘A whapp, a blow; York Plays, xxxil. 199.
‘The waters wappe,’ i.e. lap; Malory, Morte Arthur, bk. xxi. c. 5.
A variant of guap; animitative word. Cf. ME. guappen, to palpitate,
Chaucer, Troil. iii. 57, Legend of Good Women, 865 ; Wyclif, Tobit,
vi. 4, earlier version. From a base *kwap, to throb; see Quaver.
Allied to Low G. quabbeln, to palpitate, with which cf. E. wabble.
Note also W. chwap, a sudden stroke, chwapio, to strike, to slap;
EFries. wappen, to swing, torock; wip-wap,a swing. Der. wabb-le.
And see whip.

WHARF (1), a place on the shore for lading and unlading goods.
(E.) Spelt warf in Fabyan’s Chron. an. 1343, where we read that
*the maior wente to the woode-warfes, and solde to the poore people
billet and faggot,’ because of the severe frost. Palsgrave has whar/e.
ME. Wharfe, in Liber Custumarum, p. 447 (1343); cf. pp. 62, 150.
Blount, ed. 1694, explains wharf as meaning, not only a landing-
place, but also ‘ a working-place for shipwrights ;’ see below. AS.
hwerf, a dam or bank to keep out water; ‘ ba gyrnde he peet hé
moste macian foran gén Mildrype eker &nne hwerf wid pon wodan
to werianne,’ which Thorpe translates by ‘then desired he that he
might make a wharf over against Mildred’s field as a protection
against the ford, where ‘ ford’ is a conjectural translation of wodan ;
Diplomatarium A‘vi Anglo-Saxonici (A. D. 1038), p. 384; and again,
“pat land and Sane wearf Sarto’ =the land and the wharf thereto;
id. (an. 1042), p. 361. The orig. sense seems to have been a bank
of earth, used at first as a dam against a flood; the present use is
prob. of Dutch or Scand. origin. The lit. sense is ‘a turning,’
whence it came to mean a dam, from its turning the course of water ;
the allied AS. Awearfnot only means ‘a returning,’ but also ‘ a change,’
and even ‘a space or distance,’ as in the ONorthumb. tr. of Luke, xxiv.
133 also ‘a crowd,’ Grein, ii. 118; ef. hwearfan,toturn about. A
good example is seen in the comp. mere-hwearf, the sea-shore, Grein,
il. 233. It corresponds, as to form, with AS. hwearf, pt. of hweorfan,
to turn, turn about, Grein, ii. 119.4-Du. werf, a wharf, yard; also a
turn, time; Hexham has werf, ‘a wharfe, or a working-place for
shipwrights or otherwise ;’ Icel. hvarf, a turning away, also, a
shelter; cf. hwarf, pt.t. of hverfa, to turn; Dan. verft, a wharf, a
dock-yard ; Swed. var/, a shipbuilder’s yard; MSwed. hwarf, skeps-
hwarf (ship’s wharf), the same (Ihre). The MSwed. hwarf also
meant a turn or time, order, stratum, or layer; Ihre, i. 945; from
hwerfwa, to turn, return. B. It thus appears that, even in AS.,
this difficult word, with a great range of senses, meant not only a
turning, reversion, but also turning-place, dam, shore, space, dis-
tance. Cf. prov. E. wharfstead, a ford in a river (Halliwell). In
Swedish and Dutch it had a narrower sense, that of ‘ ship-builder’s
yard,’ so called from its being situate on a shore. And from this
sense to that of ‘landing-place’ the step is not alongone. C. The
AS. strong verb hweorfan, answering to Goth. hwairban, to turn
oneself xbout (hence to walk), and to Icel. hverfa, answers to a Teut.
type *hwerfan-, pt. t. *hwarf, to turn, turn about. Cf. Gk. xapm-ds,
the wrist (from its turning). @ Not allied to G. werfen, to throw,
which is allied to E. warp. Der. wharf-age, Hakluyt’s Voyages,
i. 135; wharf-ing-er, which occurs (according to Blount, ed. 1674)
anno 7 Edw. VI, cap. 7,a corruption of wharfager, just as messenger
is of messager.

WHARF (2), the bank of a river. (E.) In Shak. Hamlet, i. 5.
33; Antony, ii. 2. 218. The occurrence of mere-hwearf, the sea-
shore (for which see Grein, ii. 233), justifies Shakespeare’s spelling,
and shows that the present word is only a peculiar sense of Wharf
(1), q.v. Hence perhaps the river-name Wharfe.

WHAT, neuter of Who, q.v. (E.) We find the form whatsom-
euer in Dictes and Sayings, pr. by Caxton, fol. 18, back, 1. 2. Der.
what-ever, what-so-ever; what-not, a piece of furniture for holding
anything, whence the name.

WHAUP, the curlew. (E.) Prov. E. whaup; Lowl. Sc., qguhaip,
in 1551 (Jam.). Prob. the same as AS. huilpa (for hwilpa) in The
Sea-farer, 1. 21. Of imitative origin.

WHEAL (1), a pimple. (E.) Not to be confused with weal,
another spelling of wale, the mark caused by a stripe ; for which see
Wale. A wheal is a swelling, pimple, caused by ill-health. It
occurs frequently in Holland, tr. of Pliny, b, xxii. c. 25, where is
mention of ‘pushes, wheals, and blains,’ and of ‘ pushes and angry


WHELK 709


wheales,’ &c.; a push being a pustule, still in use in Cambs. ME.
whele; ‘ Whele, whelle, wheel, or whelke, qwelke, soore, Pustula ;’
Prompt. Parv. Cf. pl. whelkes, Chaucer, C. T. 634 (A 632). AS.
hwele, a wheal; an unauthorised word, due to Somner. [Ettmiiller
cites AS. hweal, with a reference to /®lfric’s Glossary; but Wright
prints it weal; ‘ Lotium, weal,’ Wright’s Voc. i. 46, 1. 7; and the
word is very doubtful.} There is also a verb hwelian, to turn to pus
or matter (Toller), also to pine away, as in sect. 15 of the Liber
Scintillarum : ‘ Unde bonus proficit, inde inuidus contabescit,’ glossed
by ‘ panon pe se goda framad, panon se andiga hwelad.’? The pp. is
gehweled, inflamed. Cf. W. chwiler,a maggot, wheal, pimple. The
ta whelke, a pimple, is clearly a dimin. form; hence whelk, Hen. V,
iii. 6. 108.

WHEAT (2), a mine. (C.) Still common in Cornwall, = Corn.
hwel, a work, a mine; also written wheal, whel, wheyl; Williams,
Com. Dict. Williams compares it with W. chwyl, a turn, a course,
a while, chwylo, to turn, revolve, run a course, bustle; cf. also W.
chwel, a course, turn. Stokes-Fick, p. 324.

WHEAT, the name of a grain used for making bread. (E.) ME.
whete, Chaucer, C. T. 3986 (A 3988). AS. Awete; Grein, ii. 117.
Du. wette, weit; Icel. hveiti; Dan. hvede; Swed. hvete; G. weizen;
Goth. Awaiteis. (The Lithuan. kwétys, wheat, is borrowed from
Teutonic.) B. Allfroma Teut. type *hwaitjo-, wheat ; from *hwait,
and grade of *hweit-; so named from the whiteness of the meal.
See White. Der. wheat-en, AS. hw&ten, John, xii. 24; wheat-fly;
buck-wheat.

WHEAT-EAR, the name of a small bird. (E.) In Phillips;
formerly wheatears (with final s), in T. Fuller, Worthies of England,
ii. 382 (see Palmer, Folk-Etymology); as to which Smollett says:
‘this is a pleasant corruption of white-a—e, the translation of their
French name cul blanc, .. for they are actually white towards the
tail;’? Travels, letter iii. Swainson, in his Bird-names (E. D.S.),
gives the name white ass [ =white-arse] as in use in Cornwall, and
white-rump in Norfolk; while Cotgrave has: ‘Cul blanc, the bird
called a whittaile,’ i.e. white tail. Hence the etymology is from
white and arse. Cf. Du. wit-staart, ‘a white-tail, white-ear;’
Calisch ; MDan. hvid-stjert (Kalkar).

WHEEDLE, to cajole, flatter. (E.?) In Butler, Hudibras,
pt. ili. c. 1, 1. 760. In Dryden, Kind Keeper, Act i. sc. I, we find:
‘I must wheedle her.’ Blount, ed. 1674, notes it as a new word,
saying ; ‘ Wheadle in the British tongue signifies a story, whence
probably our late word of fancy, and signifies to draw one in by fair
words. or subtil insinuation, &c. He is referring to W. chwedl, a
saying, sentence, fable, story, tale, chwedla, to gossip, chwedlu, to
tell a fable; but this is not a satisfactory explanation, nor does it
account for the long e. But we should note his spelling with ea
(from an open é). It seems more likely that the word should be
weadle, and that it was a prov. E. word, answering to AS. wédlian,
to beg. ‘Mé sceamabp pet ic w&dlige,’ to beg I am ashamed, Luke,
xvi. 3. The orig. sense of wedlian was ‘to be poor;’ from wedl,
poverty, indigence, w¥dla, poor. Cf. ME. w&dle, poor; Ormulum,
5638. Der. wheedl-er,

WHEEL, a circular frame turning on an axle. (E.) ME. wheel,
Wyclif, James, iii. 6. AS. wéol, Grein, ii. 119. Hwéol is a short-
ened form of kweowol, Ps. Ixxxii. 12, ed. Spelman; it is also spelt
hweogul (Toller), and hkweohl, Ailfred, tr. of Boethius, c. xxxix. § 7
(b. iv. pr. 6).-4-Icel. Aja; Dan. hiwl; Swed. hjul; MSwed. hiughl
(Ihre). Teut. type *kwegwidm, n., for *hwehwlim, Idg. type *geg/d,
as in Skt. chakrd-, Gk. wvxAos, a wheel. The Idg. *ge-glo- is a
reduplicated form, from 4/QwEL, to drive; whence Gk. 7éAos, an
axis, Russ. koleso, Icel. hvel, a wheel. See Cycle and Pole (2).
Brugmann, i. § 658. Cf. Calash. Der. wheel, verb; wheel-er ;
wheel-barrow, spelt whelebarowe in Le Bone Florence, 1. 2031, pr. in
Ritson’s Met. Romances, iii. 86; wheel-wright (see Wright).

WHEEZHE, to breathe audibly and with difficulty. (E.) ME.
whesen, Towneley Mysteries, 152 (Stratmann); rare. AS. hwésan,
to wheeze, A. S. Leechdoms, iii. 365 (glossary). [The 3rd pers. pres.
sing. hwést occurs in the same volume, p. 126, 1. 9, according to
Cockayne; but perhaps hwést is here for hwésted, from hwostan, ta
cough, which is a related word, but not quite the same thing.] The
only sure trace of the verb. is in Alfric’s Homilies, i. 86, where we
find the strong pt. t. hwéos = wheezed (mistranslated by Thorpe, but
rightly explained by Cockayne). As @ is the mutation of 6, the
Teut. base is *zwds-, whence also AS. hwds-ta, a cough, proy, E.
hoast, a cough, Du. hoest, G. husten. Teut. base *hwos- = Idg. *gas-, as
in Skt. kas, to cough; 2nd grade of Idg. 4/QAS, to cough, as in
Irish cas-achdach, W. pas, a cough; cf. Lith. host’, to cough. See
Pose (3). Brugmann, i. § 675. Connexion with Icel. huesa, to
hiss, is doubtful.

WHELK (1), a mollusc with a spiral shell. (E.) The k is
unoriginal, and due to confusion with the word below; the right


710 WHELK


(etymological) spelling is welk or wilk. Spenser has ‘ whelky pearles’ |
=shelly pearls, pearls in the shell; Virgil’s Gnat, 1. 105. ME.


wilk; spelt wylke, Prompt. Parv.; and in Voc. 642.6. Pl. welkes,
Liber Albus, pp. 179, 244, 6c. AS. wiloc (8th cent.), Voc. 13. 40;
also weoluc, weluc, id. 261. 22, 187. 10.4-Du. walk, also spelt welk,
wilk, willok, wullok (Franck). Cf. ‘inuolucus, wadloc,’ Corpus Gloss.
1115; prov. E. wulk, wullok. Prob. named from its convoluted
shell; cf. Gk. €argé (for FeA-i€), a volute; see Helix. Andcf. Walk.
Der. Hence prob. welk-ed, K. Lear, iv. 6. 71, spelt wealk’d, i.e.
convoluted, in the first folio; cf. ‘welked horns,’ in Golding’s Ovid,
pp- 60 b, 107b, 122b.

WHELK (2), a small pimple. (E.) The dimin. of Wheal (1),


cays
“WHELM, to overturn, cover over by something that is turned
over, overwhelm, submerge. (Scand.) ‘Ocean whelm them all;’
Merry Wives, ii. 2. 143. ME. whelmen, to turn over; Chaucer,
Troilus, i. 139. ‘ Whelmyn, a vessel, Suppino,’ Prompt. Parv.; on
which Way cites Palsgrave: ‘I whelme an holowe thyng over an
other thyng, He mets dessus; Whelme a platter upon it, to save it
from flyes.’ He adds: ‘in the E. Anglian dialect, to whelm signi-
fies to turn a tub or other vessel upside down, whether to cover any-
thing with it or not; see Forby.’ ‘Whelm, to turn upside down,
cover over,’ E.D.D.; whichsee. The Lowland Sc. form is guhemle,
whemmle, or whommel, to turn upside down; ovir guhemlit=did
overturn, occurs in Bellenden’s Chron., prol. st. 2 (Jamieson).
Jamieson gives Sibbald’s opinion (which is correct) that the Lowl.
Sc. whemmle is due to E. whelm, the letters being transposed to make
the word easier of utterance; but he afterwards assumes the Lowl.
Sc. word as the older form, in order to deduce its etymology from
MSwed. Awimla, to swarm (=G. wimmeln), which he explains
wrongly. f. The word presents some difficulty ; but it is obvious that
whelm and overwhelm must be closely related to ME. wheluen (whelven)
and overwheluen (overwhelven), which are used in almost precisely
the same sense. Wheluen is also spelt hwelfen; ‘He hwelfde at pare
sepulchre-dure enne grete ston’=he rolled (or turned) over a great
stone at the door of the sepulchre; O. Eng. Miscellany, p. 51, 1. 513.
‘ And perchaunce the overwhelve’ =and perchance overwhelm thee ;
Palladius on Husbandry, b. i. 1. 161. Cf. AS. a-hwylfan; as in:
‘ a-hwylfte Pharaones cratu,’ (the sea) overwhelmed Pharaoh’s
chariots ; Exod. xiv.27. sy. The only difficulty is to explain the final
-m; this is due to the fact that whelm, verb, is really formed from a
substantive whelm; and the sb. whel-m stands for whelf-m, in which
the f was dropped; the suffix -m being substantival, as in doo-m,
bloo-m. This appears from MSwedish; Ihre gives the verb hwalma,
to cock hay, derived from hwalm, a hay-cock ; and he connects hwalm
with hwalfwa, to arch over, make into a rounded shape, and hwalf;
an arch, a vault. So also Rietz gives Swed. dial. hvalm, a hay-
stack, from hvdlva (pt. t. Avalv); cf. Swed. vdlma, to cock hay,
valm, a hay-cock (which have lost the h); hvdlfva, to arch, kvalf,
anarch. Cf. Dan. hvelve, to arch, vault over. Thus the orig. sense
of whelm was to arch over, vault, make of a convex form; hence, to
turn a hollow dish over, which would then present such a form;
hence, to upset, overturn, which is now the prevailing idea. 68. We
conclude that whelm (for *whelf-m) is from the strong verb appear-
ing in Swed. dial. hudlva (for *hvelva), pt.t. hvalv, Norw. kvelva (for
*hvelva), pt.t. kvalv, MHG. welben (pt. t. walb), to distend oneself into
a convex form, swell out, become convex, answering to the Teut. base
HWELF, to become convex. Derivatives are seen in AS. hwealf, adj.
convex, sb. a vault (Grein, ii. 118); d-hwylfan, to overwhelm; be-
hwylfan, to vault over (Grein) ; Icel. kvalf, half, a vault, hvalfa, hdlfa,
to‘ whelve’ or turn upside down, overwhelm or capsize a ship, hvelfa,
to arch, vault, to turn upside down, &c.; mod. G. wélben, to arch
over. All from Idg. 4/QwELP; whence also OPruss. po-quelb-ton,
eng Gk. «6Amos, bosom, a hollow. See Prellwitz. Der. over-
whelm.

WHELP, a puppy, young of the dog or lion. (E.) ME. whelp,
Chaucer, C. T. 10805 (F 491). AS. hwelp, Matt. xv. 27.4-Du.
welp ; Icel. hvelpr; Dan. hvalp; Swed. valp; MSwed. hwalp (Ihre) ;
MHG. welf. B. The Teut.types are *hwelpoz, *hwalpoz,m. Root
unknown. Der. whelp, vb., J. Caesar, ii. 2. 17.

WHEN, at what time, at which time. (E.) ME. whan, Chaucer,
C.T. 5, 169 ; whanne, Ormulum, 133. AS. hwenne, hwonne; Grein,
li. 115.44MDu. wax (Hexham); Goth. hwan; G. wann; OHG.
hwanne. . Evidently orig.a case of the interrogative pronoun; cf.
Goth. kwana, acc. masc. of hwas, who; see Who. So also L,
quan-do, when, quis, who; W. pan, when; Olrish can. Der. when-
ever, when-so-ever ; and see when-ce.

WHENCKH, from what place. (E.) ME. whennes (dissyllabic),
Chaucer, C. T. 12269 (C 335). This form whenn-es, in which the
suffix imitates the adverbial -es (as in ¢wi-es, twice, wed-es, of necessity),
was substituted for the older form whanene, written wonene in Laya-


WHIFFLE


mon, 1. 16. The suffix -es was orig. a genitive case-ending, as im
deg-es, of a day. B. The form whanene is from AS. hwanan, also
hwanon, hwonan, whence, Grein, ii. 114. This is closely connected
with AS. hwenne, when ; the suffix -az being used to express direction,
as in AS, sad-an, from thesouth. See When.+G. wannen, whence ;
allied to wann, when. @ Compare hen-ce, similarly formed from
ME. henn-es, AS. heon-an, hence; see Hence. Also Thence.
Der. whence-so-ever.

WHERE, at which place. (E.) ME. wher, Chaucer, C. T.
4918 (B 498). AS. hwar, hwé#r, Grein, ii. 116.4-Du. waar; Icel.
hvar; Dan. hvor; Swed. kvar.4-OHG. hwar, whence MHG. war, wa,
G. wo; cf. G. war- in war-um, why, lit. about what; Goth. hwar.
Evidently allied to AS. hwa, who, and to when. Cf. Lithuan. kur,
where? Skt. Aar-hi, at what time? Der. where-about, where-about-s,
where-as, where-at; whereby, ME. whar-bi, Will. of Palerne, 2256;
where-fore, ME. hwarfore, Ancren Riwle, p. 158, note g; where-in;
where-of, ME. hwarof, Ancren Riwle, p. 12, l. 12; where-on, ME.
wher-on, Layamon, 15502; where-so-ever ; where-to, ME. hwerto, St.
Marharete, p. 16, l. 29; where-unto, Cymb. iii. 4. 109; where-upon,
K. John, iv. 2. 65; wher-ever, As You Like It, ii. 2. 153 where-
with, ME. hwerwid, Hali Meidenhad, p. 9, 1. 19; where-with-al,
Rich. II, v. 1.55.  @@ These compounds were prob. suggested as
correlative to the formations from there; see There.

WHERBRY,a shallow, light boat. (E.) ‘ A whyrry, boate, ponto;”
Levins, ed. 1570. The pl. is wheries in Hakluyt, Voyages, ili. 645.
In use on the Thames in particular. Spelt whirry in Latimer,
Seven Sermons, ed. Arber, p. 170. ‘A whery, cymbe,’ Du Wez,
appendix to Palgrave, p. 916, col. 3. Cf. Lowl. Sc. whirry, to whir,
to hurry; prov. E. whirry, dizzy; see Whir. Perhaps named from
its lightness. Cf. Icel. hverr, shifty, crank (said of a ship); Norw.
kverv, crank, also swift of motion. See Wharf.

WHET, to sharpen, make keen. (E.) ME. whetten, Prompt.
Pary. AS. hwettan, to sharpen, Grein, ii, 118. For *hwatjan;
from *hwat-, as in AS. hwet, keen, bold, brave; ibid.-Du. wetten,
to sharpen; cf. OSax. hwat, sharp, keen; Icel. Avetja, to sharpen, to
encourage; cf. hvatr, bold, active, vigorous; Swed. vattja, to whet ;
G. wetzen, OHG. hwazan; cf. OHG. hwaz, sharp. B. All from
Teut. type *hwatoz, sharp, keen; allied to Skt. chdd-ana-m, an in-
citing. @ Not allied to L. cds, a whet-stone, which is related to
E. hone and cone. Der. whet, sb.; whett-er ; whet-stone, AS. hwetstan,
fElfred, tr. of Orosius, b. iv. c. 13. § 5.

WHETHER, which of two. (E.) ‘ Whether of the twain ;’
Matt. xxvii. 21. ME. whether, Chaucer, C. T. 1858 (A 1856). AS.
hweéer, which of two; Grein, ii. 114.4Icel. hvarr (a contracted
form); MHG. weder, OHG. hwedar, adj., which of two; Goth.
hwathar, adj. Formed, with comparative suffix -ther (Idg. -tero-),
from the base of who; see Who. Cf. Lith. katras, Gk. métepos,
Kétepos, Skt. katara-, which of two. Der. whether, conj., AS.
hweder, Grein, ii. 115. Also neither, nor.

WHEY, the watery part of milk, separated from the curd. (E.).
Lowland Sc. whig, see Jamieson; andsee Nares. ME. whey, Prompt.
Parv. AS. hw#g; ‘Serum, hweg,’ Voc. 46. 28.4-MDu. wey; Du.
wei. Cf. W. chwig, ‘ whey fermented with sour herbs;’ chwig, adj.
fermented, sour. B. In the Bremen Worterbuch, v. 161, we find -
various Low G. words for whey, which are not all related; the re-
lated forms are the Holstein waje and the Ditmarsch hei, heu, which
(like Du. hui) are from a weaker grade (*hujo-) of the base (*kwajo-)
of AS. hwég. Der. whey-ey, whey-ish ; whey-face, Mach. v. 3. 17.

WHICH, a relative and interrogative pronoun. (E.) ME. which,
formerly used with relation to persons, as in Chaucer, C. T. 16482
(G 1014); spelt guhi/k in Barbour, Bruce, i. 77. AS. hwile, hwelc,
hwylc, Grein, ti. 121. A contracted form of AS. hwi-lic, of what
form.= AS. hwi-, allied to hwa&, who; and Jic, like. See Who and,
Like.+OSax. hwilik ; OF riesic hwelik, hwelk, hwek; Du. welk ; Icel.
hvilikr, of what kind; Dan. hvilk-en, masc., hvilk-et, neut.; Swed.
hvilk-en, hvilk-et; G. welcher; OHG. hwelih; Goth. hwileiks, Also
Goth. kwéleiks; from hwé, instrumental case of hwas, who, and letks,
like. Allied to L. gwa-lis, of what sort, lit. ‘what-like;’ Gk.
mmaAixos. Brugmann, ii. § 88. Der. which-ever, which-so-ever; also
(from L. qualis) quali-ty, q.v.

WHIFF, a puff of wind or smoke. (E.) In Hamlet, ii. 2. 495.
ME. weffe, vapour; Prompt. Parv. An imitative word; cf. puff,
pipe, fife. Cf. W. chwiff, a whiff, puff; chwiffio, to puff; chwaff,
a gust; Dan. vift, a puff, gust; Lowl. Sc. wheef, a fife. Cf. G. pif
paff, to denote a sudden explosive sound; also Icel. kwida, a puff;
AS. hwida, a breeze; Voc. 175. 21. Der. whiff, verb, whiff-le,


Vv.
: WHIFFLE, to blow in gusts, veer about as the wind does,
(E.) ‘But if the winds whiffle about to the south;’ Dampier,
Discourse of Winds, c. 6 (R.). Whifffe is the frequentative of whiff,
to puff, and was specially used of puffing in various directions ; hence


WHIG


it came to mean to trifle, to trick (Phillips). See Whiff. Der.
‘whiffl-er, Henry V, v. chor. 12, orig. a piper or fifer, as explained by
Phillips, who-says that ‘it is also taken for a piper that plays on
a fife in -a company of foot-soldiers;’ hence it meant one who
goes first in a procession; see Whifflein E. D. D., and Whiffler in
Nares, whose account is sufficient.


WHIG, one of a political party. (North E.) First about 1678 |


(Haydn). ‘Wit and fool are consequents of Whig and Tory;’
Dryden, Pref. to Absalom and Achitophel (1681). See the full
account in Todd’s Johnson and Nares. The standard passage on
the word is in b. i. of Burnet’s Own Times, fully cited by Johnson ;
it is to the effect that whig is a shortened form of whiggamor, ap-
plied to certain Scotchmen who came from the west in the summer
to buy corn at Leith ; and that the term was given them from a word
whiggam, which was employed by those men in driving their horses.
A march to Edinburgh made by the Marquis of Argyle and 6,000
men (in 1648) was called ‘the whiggamor’s inroad,’ and afterwards
those who opposed the court came in contempt to be called whigs.
The term had been applied previously (in 1667) to the Scottish
Covenanters (Lingard). [There seems no reason to doubt this
account, nor does there seem to be any foundation for an assertion
made by Woodrow that Whigs were named from whig, sour whey,
which is obviously a mere guess.] PB. The Glossary to Sir W. Scott’s
novels has whigamore, a great whig; also whigging, jogging rudely,
urging forward; Jamieson has ‘ whig, to go quickly; whig awa’, to
move at an easy and steady pace, to jog (Liddesdale) ; to whig awa’
with a cart, remarks Sir W. Scott, signifies to drive it briskly on.’
I suspect that whig should be wig, and that these words are con-
nected with Lowland Sc. wiggle, to wriggle (or rather to keep
moving about) and with EFries. wiggen, Norw. vigga, to rock. Cf.
Low]. Sc. wig, to wag, shake, move (E.D.D.); and E. Wag.
Der. whigg-ish, -ish-ly, -ism, -ery.

WHILE, a time, space of time. (E.) ME. whil, while, P. Plow-
man, B. xvii. 46. AS. hwil, sb. a time, Grein, ii, 120.4Icel. Avila,
only in the special sense of a place of rest, a bed; Dan. hvile, rest ;
Swed. hvila, rest; G. weile, OHG. hwila; Goth, hweila, a time,
season. B. The Teut. types are *hwila, f., *hwildn-, f., a time,
test, pause, time of repose. Prob. allied to L. gui-es, rest; see
Quiet; and to Skt. chi-ra-, long-lasting, Idg. 4/QwEI.  Brug-
mann, i. § 675. Der. while, adv., from some case of the sb., prob.
from the acc. or dat. hwile; whil-es, Matt. v. 25, ME. whiles, Chaucer,
C. T. 35 (in the Harleian MS.), where whiles is the gen. case (m. or
n.) used adverbially, as in ¢wi-es, twice, ned-es, needs, &c. [but note
that the AS. genitive was hwile, the sb. being feminine]; hence
whil-s-t, Spenser, F. Q. ii. 2. 16, with added excrescent ¢ after s
(as in amongs-t, amids-t). Also whil-om, spelt whylome in Spenser,
F. Q. ii. 2. 13, from AS. hwilum, instr. or dat. pl. of hwil, signifying
‘at times.’ Also mean-while, see Mean (3); while-ere, Temp. iii.
2. 127. Also whiling-time, the ‘waiting a little before dinner,’
Spectator, no. 448, Aug. 4, 1712; whence ‘to while away time;’
prob. with some thought of confusion with wile.

WHIM, a sudden fancy, a crotchet. (Scand.) ‘With a whym-
wham Knyt with a trym-tram Upon her brayne-pan;’ Skelton,
Elinour Rummyng, 75.—Icel. hvima, to wander with the eyes, as
a silly person; Norweg. kvima, to whisk or flutter about, to
trifle, play the fool (Aasen) ; cf. Swed. dial. hvimmer-kantig,, dizzy,

iddy in the head; Icel. vim, Norw. kvim (Ross), giddiness, folly.
8. This etymology is verified by the derived word whimsey, a whim,
Ben Jonson, The Fox, iii. I. 4, pl. whimsies, Beaum. and Fletcher,
Women Pleased, iii. 2, last line; from the allied Norweg. kvimsa,
Dan. vimse, to skip, whisk, bustle, Swed. dial. Avimsa, to be un-
steady, giddy, dizzy. y. All from a base *hwim, to move briskly.
Der. whim-wham, a teduplicated word, as above; whims-ey, as
above; whims-ic-al, whims-ic-al-ly; whim-ling (Nares). Also
wim-ble (2), q.v.

WHIMBREL, a bird, a sort of curlew. (E.) Willughby says
the bird was described to him under this name by Mr. Johnson of
Brignal (N. Riding of Yorkshire). See also Swainson, Provincial
Bird-names, E.D.S., p. 199. It is easily analysed as standing for
whim-b-r-el ; where -b- is excrescent after m, -r- is frequentative, -el
is the suffix of the agent, and whim- (allied to whine) is imitative.
It means the bird that repeats the cry imitated by whim; ef. Lowl.
Sc. whimmer, E, whimper and whine, G. wimmern. See Whimper.

WHIMPER, to cry ina low, whining voice. (E.) ‘ Liue in
puling and whimpering and heuines of hert;’ Sir T. More, p. go b.
And in Palsgrave. A frequentative form, from whimpe. ‘There
shall be intractabiles, that will whympe and whine ;’ Latimer, Seven
Sermons (March 22, 1549), ed. Arber, p. 77, last line. In both words,
the p is excrescent, as is so common after m; whimper and whimpe
stand for whimmer and whim; cf. Scotch whimmer,to whimper. And
further, whim is an imitative word allied to whine, so that Latimer


WHIPPLE-TREE 711
joins the words naturally enough. See Whine.+Low G. wemern,
to whimper; G. wimmern. Der. whimper-er.

WHIN (1), gorse, furze. (Scand.) ‘ Whynnes or hethe, bruiere;’
Palsgrave. ‘ Whynne,Saliunca;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘With thornes, breres,
and moni a guyn;’ Ywain and Gawain, 159; in Ritson, Met.
Romances, i. 8. Prob. from Norw. hvin, hven, purple melic grass,
hvene, bent-grass, coarse grass (Larsen); cf. Norw. Avein, thin and
stalky, Aveinutt, stunted (Ross); kveina, used of grass-stalks and
trees that are thin and stand alone (Ross); Swed. hven, bent-grass;
Norw. kveinen, adj., said of birch-trees and branches with long
thin twigs. Hence also (probably) W. chwyn, weeds; cf. Bret.
chouenna (with guttural ch), to weed. Der. whin-bush.

WHIMWN (2), a kind of hard rock. (E.) G. Douglas has ‘ane cald
hard quhyn,’ Lat. duris cautibus, Virgil’s En. iv. 366. ME. quin,
hard stone, Cursor Mundi, 7531. [AS. form not recorded. ]

WHINE, to utter a plaintive cry. (E.) ME. whinen, said of
a horse, Chaucer, C. T. 5968 (D 386). AS. kwinan, to whine,
Grein, ii, 122.4-Icel. kvina, to whiz, whir; Dan. hvine, to whistle,
to whine; Swed. hvina, to whistle. B. All from the Teut. base
*hwein-, *hwin-, to make a discordant noise. Cf. Icel. kveina, to
wail; Goth. kwaindn, to mourn. And see Whimper. Der.
whine, sb., whin-er, whin-ing; also whinn-y, Drayton, The Moon-
calf, 1. 119 from end, which is a sort of frequentative. And see
whimp-er.

WHINYARD, a sword. (Scand. ; with F. suffix.) Nares,
following Minsheu, explains whinyard as a hanger, i.e. a kind of
sword. Minsheu, in 1627, spells it whinneard; but it is usually
whinyard, as in the play of Edw. II], i. 2. 33; and in Ram Alley
(1611), pr. in Hazlitt’s Dodsley, x. 363. Cotgrave explains MF.
braquemar as ‘a wood knife, hanger, whineyard;’ but Skelton has
simply whynarde, Bowge of Court, 363. From Icel. kvina, to whizz,
as an arrow or a gust of wind; Swed. hvina, Dan. hvine, to whistle,
shriek; with a suffix which simulated E. yard, a rod. It really
arose from the suffix -ard (as in drunk-ard), which is of F. origin.
The sense is ‘a thing that whizzes through the air,’ or that cuts the
air with a whizzing sound. Also called a whinger, from an imi-
tative form whinge, which is a variant of whine; cf. whinger, a
whining person; E.D.D. See Whine.

WHIP, to move suddenly and quickly, to flog. (E.) ‘I whipt
me behind the arras,’ Much Ado, i. 3. 63; ‘ Whips out his rapier,’
Hamlet, iv. 1. 10. This seems to be the orig. sense, whence the
notion of flogging (with a quick sudden stroke) seems to have been
evolved. [The AS. hweop, a whip, and hweopian, to whip, scourge,
are given by Somner, but are unauthorised; the AS. word for
‘scourge’ being swipe, John, ii. 15.] Another sense of whip is to
overlay a cord by rapidly binding thin twine or silk thread round it,
and this is the only sense of ME, whippen noticed in the Prompt.
Pary., which has: ‘ Whyppyn, or closyn threde in sylke, as sylke-
womene [do], Obvolvo.’ But G. Douglas has ‘ wyppit with bendis,’
to translate L. uitta comptos in Virgil, Atn. vili. 128. The sb. whippe,
a scourge, occurs in Chaucer, 5757, 9545 (D175, E 1671); it is
spelt guippe in Voc. 811. 36; wyppe, Voc. 665.16 ; wippe, Nominale,
ed, Skeat, 194, 886. All from the notion of rapid movement. The
word is presumably English, and is preserved in the nearest cognate
languages. Cf. Du. wippen, to skip, to hasten, alsoto give the strap-
pado, formerly ‘to shake, to wagge,’ Hexham; Du. wip, a moment,
a swipe, the strappado, MDu. wippe, ‘a whipe or a scourge,’
Hexham; Low G. wippen, wuppen, to go up and down, as on a
see-saw ; wips! quickly; Mid. Dan. huip, a jump, hvippe, to jump,
to whip (Kalkar); Dan. vippe, to see-saw, rock, bob, vips/ pop!
vipstiert, a wag-tail, lit. ‘ whip-start,’ where start=tail; Swed.
vippa, to wag, to jerk or give the strappado; vippgalge, a gibbet,
lit. ‘whip-gallows,’ vips/ quick! G. wippen, to move up and down,
balance, see-saw, rock, to draw up a malefactor at a gibbet, and
drop him again, to give the strappado; wipp-galgen, a gibbet.
B. The Du. wippen, to skip, also to wag, is regarded as being a
secondary verb allied to OHG. wifan, to turn round, to reel (G.
weifen), Goth. weipan, to crown, wipja, a crown; which may be
connected with L. uibrare, to vibrate, swing. Cf. also Goth. i-
waibjan, to wind round, which may be compared with Skt. vép, to
tremble, vibrate. Perhaps even the E. form ought to be wip (not
whip). @ The Gael. cuip, a whip, W. chwip, a quick turn,
chwipio, to move briskly or nimbly, are borrowed from English,
and have taken up different senses of the E. word. Der. whip, sb.,
as above ; whip-cord, -hand, -lash; whipper ; whipp-er-in, one who
keeps the hounds from wandering, and whips them in to the line of
chase; whipp-ing, -ing-post; also whip-ster, Oth. v. 2. 244; whip-
stock, i.e. whip-handle, Tw. Nt. ii. 3. 28, and in Palsgrave; and see
whipp-le-tree. And see wisp, wipe. Cf. whisk, for wisk.

WHIPPLE-TREE, aswing-bar, to which traces are fastened
for drawing a carriage, &c. (E.) In Forby’s Norfolk Glossary


712 ~WHIR


(1830). Spelt whypple-tree in Palsgrave, where it is left unexplained. |


As in the case of swingle-tree, the word means ‘ piece of swinging
wood,’ and is composed of tree in the sense of timber (as in axle-
tree, &c.) and the verb whipple, frequentative of whip, to move about
quickly, to see-saw. See Whip and Tree ; and see Swingletree.

@ ME. whippeltree, in Chaucer, C.'T., A 2923, is the cornel-tree ;
cf. Mid. Low G. wipel-bom, the cornel-tree, Low G. wepe (Liibben).

WHIR, to buzz, whirl round with a noise. (Scand.) In Shak.
Pericles, iv. 1. 21. ME. (Northern), whirr, guirr, to rush out, hurl;
Wars of Alexander, 1556, 2226. Probably to some extent imi-
tative, like whiz.=Dan. hvirre, to whirl, twirl; Swed. dial. hwirra,
to whirl (Rietz). Cf. Icel. hverfa, to turn round; the frequentative
is Whirl, And see Whiz.

WHIRL, to swing rapidly round, to cause to revolve rapidly, to
rotate quickly. (Scand.) ME. whirlen, Chaucer, Parl. of Foules,
1. 80. In Wyclif, Wisdom, v. 24, the earlier version has ‘ whirle-puff
of wind,’ and the later version ‘whirlyng of wind.’ This word is
not a mere extension of whir (which is not found till a later date),
but is a contraction for whirf-le, frequentative of the verb equivalent
to ME. wherfen, to turn (Stratmann); and it is of Scand. origin
rather than directly from AS. Aweorfan.=—Icel. hvirfla, to whirl, fre-
quent. of hverfa (pt. t. hvarf), to turn round; Mid. Dan, hvirle, the
same as Dan. huirvle, to whirl; Swed. hvirfla, to whirl; cf, hvarf,
atum; MDu. wervelen, ‘to whirle,” Hexham; G. wirbeln, to whirl;
also, to warble. 8, But the verb is really a denominative one,
from the sb. found as ME. whirl, as in the compounds whirl-
bone (Prompt. Parv.), whirl-wind (welow) ; cf. Icel. hvirfill,a ring,
Dan, hkvirvel, Mid, Dan. hvirlen, a whirl, a whirlpool, Swed.
hvirfvel (the same), Du. wervel, a hasp, wervel-wind, whirlwind, G.
wirbel, a turning round, OHG. wirbil; Teut. type *hwirfiloz, m.;
with i-mutation of e to i. From Teut. base *hwerf, as in AS.
hweorfan, Goth. hwairban, to turn; see Wharf. Der. whirl-wind,
‘spelt whyrle-wynde, Prompt. Parv., from Icel. hvirfilvindr, a whirl-
wind, Dan. hvirvelvind, Swed. hvirfvelvind, Mid. Dan. hvirrelvind ;
whirl-pool, spelt whirl-pole in Palsgraye, and applied to a large fish,
from the commotion which it makes. Also whirl-i-gig, spelt whirly-
gigge (toy to play with) in Palsgrave; see Gig. Doublet, warble.

WHISK, to sweep round rapidly, to brush, sweep quickly, move
quickly. (Scand.) ‘The proper sense is merely ‘to brush or sweep,’
esp. with a quick motion, then to flourish about as when using a
dight brush; then (as in our phrases ¢o brush along, to sweep along’) to
whisk is to move quickly, esp. with a kind of flourish. The & is in-
trusive, and probably due to confusion with whiz, whirl, &c, It
should rather be wisk. ‘He winched [winced] still alwayes, and
whisked with his taile;’ Gascoigne, Complaint of the Grene Knight,
Works, ed. Hazlitt, i. 403. ‘The whyskynge rod;’ Skelton, Why
Come Ye Nat to Courte, 1. 1161. ‘ Whisking his riding-rod;’
Beaum. and Fletcher, Noble Gentleman, Act ii (Gentleman). ‘ As
she whisked it’ [her tail]; Butler, Hudibras, pt. ii. c. 3. 1. 897. Cf.
prov. E. whisk, to switch, beat, wisk, to switch, move rapidly
(Halliwell). G. Donglas translates Virgil’s bacchatur (En. iv. 301)
by ‘She wiskis wild.’ The verb is from ME. wisk, sb., a swift
stroke, Barbour, Bruce, v. 641. The sk (as in many words) indi-
cates a Scand. origin. — Dan. viske, to wipe, rub, sponge, from visk,
sb., a wisp, a rubber; Swed. viska, to wipe, to sponge, also to wag
(the tail), from viska, a whisk. Widegren’s Swed. Dict. gives viska,
“a small broom, whisk ;’ and the example hunden viskar med swansen,
‘the dog wags his tail,’ which precisely shows the sense of the E.
word in old authors. The sb. appears further in Icel. visk, a wisp
of hay or the like, lit. something to wipe with.4-G. wischen, ‘to
wipe, wisk (sic), rub,’ Fliigel; from the sb. wisch, ‘a whisk, clout, wisp,
malkin,’ id. B. The sb. which thus appears as Icel. and Dan.
visk, Swed. viska, G. wisch, meant orig. ‘a wisp;’ and perhaps wis-k
is a related form to wis-p. See Wisp. Cf. also AS, weoxian (for
*wiscian), to wipe. Der, whisk, sb. (as above, really a more orig.
word). Hence whisk-er, sb., from its likeness to a small brush ; ‘ old
Nestor put aside his gray beard and brush’d her with his whiskers,’
Dryden, Troilus and Cressida, Act iv. sc. 2 (R.); whisker-ed. Also
whisk-y, a kind of light gig, from its being easily whisked along; it
occurs in Crabbe, Tales of the Hall, b. viii (R.). @ Note MDan,
hviske, for Dan. viske.

WHISKEY, WHISKY, a spirit distilled from grain, &c.
(Gaelic.). In Johnson’s Dict. Spelt whisquy-beath in Sinclair’s
Statistical Acct. of Scotland (1791-9), iii. 525; Brand, Pop, Antiq.
ji, 285.—Gael. uisge-beatha, water of life, whisky; the equivalent
of F. eau de vie. We have dropped the latter element, retaining
only uisge, water. See Usquebaugh.

WHISPER, to speak very softly, or under the breath. (E,)
ME. whisperen; ‘ Whysperyn, mussito;’ Prompt. Parv. In Wyclif,
Ecclus. xii. 19, ‘ whispering’ is expressed by whistrende or whistringe.
ONorthumbrian hwisprian; the L. murmurdbant is glossed by


WHITE


hwispredon in the Rushworth MS., and by huuéstredon in the Lin-
disfarne MS.; Luke, xix. 7. Again, the L. murmur is glossed by
hwisprunge in the Rushworth MS., and by huéstrung in the Lind.
MS.; John, vii. 12. We see, then, that hwisprian and hwé#strian
were parallel forms, and hwéstrian is evidently closely allied to AS.
hwistlian, to whistle. Whisper and whistle are allied words, both of
an imitative character; further, they are frequentatives, from the
bases whisp- and whist- respectively ; and these are extended from an
imitative Teut, root *hweis- (weak grade *hwis-), Cf. wheeze,
which is likewise imitative; also whiz.4-MDu. wisperen, wispelen,
to whisper, Hexham; G. wispeln. So also (from the base whisk or
hwisk) we have Icel. hviskra, Swed. hviska, Dan. hviske, to whisper.
Der. whisper, sb., whisper-er.

WHIST, hush, silence; a game at cards. (1. Scand.; 2. E.)
The game was at first called whisk by Taylor the Water-poet in
1630, who is said to be the earliest writer to mention it; see Nares.
It was so named from the sweeping up or whisking off the cards
from the table; see Whisk. B. But about 1709, whisk was cor-
rupted into whist (Compleat Gamester, p. 86); and a new etymo-
logy was found for it, viz. that it was so named from the silence
requisite to play it attentively. The old verb whist, to keep silence,
also to silence, had whisted for its past tense, but whist for its pp.
‘So was the Titanesse put down and whist,’ i.e. silenced ; Spencer,
F.Q. vii. 7. 59. ‘All the companie must be whist,’ i.e. silent ;
Holinshed, Descr. of Ireland, ed. 1808, p. 67. ‘ They whisted all’
=they all kept silence, Surrey, tr. of Virgil, Ain. ii. 1. ME. whist,
interj., be silent! Wyclif, Judges, xviii. 19 (earlier version), where
the later version has Be thou stille, and the Vulgate has face. It is
thus seen to have been orig. an interjection, commanding silence.
See Hist and Hush. Cf, L. st/ hist! G. st/ dst! pst! hist, hush,
stop! ‘The orig. intention of the utterance is to represent a slight
sound, such as that of something stirring, or the breathing or
whispering of some one approaching. Something stirs; listen; be
still;’ Wedgwood. By way of further illustration may be quoted:
‘J. .made a contenaunce [gesture] with my hande in maner to
been huisht,’ i.e. to enjoin silence ; Test. of Love, b. ii. ch. vii. 122.
@ Whisk occurs in Pope, 2nd Epist. to Mrs. Blount (1715), 1. 24, and
in Thomson’s Autumn (1730), 1. 524; modern editions have whist.

WHISTLH, to make a shrill sound by forcing the breath through
the contracted lips. (E.) ME. whistlen, P. Plowman, B. xv. 467.
AS. hwistlian, to make a hissing noise (Toller); also found in
derivatives; as hwistlere, a whistler, piper, Matt. ix. 23; ‘ Sibilatio,
hwistlung? Voc. 162. 443 ‘ Fistula, wistle,’ id. 406. 23. A frequen-
tative verb, from a base hwist-, meant to imitate the hissing sound
of whistling, and extended from the Teut. base *hwis-, weak grade
of *hweis-; see Whisper.+Icel. hvisla, to whisper ; hviss, whew !
to imitate the sound of whistling; Dan. hvisle, to whistle, also to
hiss; Swed, hvissla, to whistle. Der. whistle, sb.; whistl-er, AS.
hwistlere, as above.

WHIT, a thing, a particle, a bit. (E.) The & is in the wrong
place; whit stands for wiht=wight, and is the same word as wight,
a person. We find ‘neuer a whyt’ in Palsgrave, p. 881, col. I.
ME. wight, a person; also a thing, a bit. ‘For she was falle aslepe
a little wight’ = for she had fallen asleep a little whit; Chaucer,
C. T. 4281 (A 4283). ‘A lutewiht’=a little bit, for a short time, ©
Ancren Riwle, p. 72, 1. 24. AS. wiht, (1) a wight, person, (2)
a whit, bit ; see abundant examples in Grein, ii. 704. The latter
sense is particularly conspicuous in awiht=aught, i.e. ‘one whit,’
and nawiht =naught, i.e. ‘no whit.’ See further under Wight (1).
Der. aught, q.v.; naught, q.v. ; not.

WHITE, of the colour of snow, very pale. (E.) ME. whit (with
long 7), whyt; pl. white, Chaucer, C. T..90, AS. hwit; Grein, ii.
122.4+-Du. wit; Icel. hvitr; Dan. hvid; Swed, hvit; Goth. hweits;
G, weiss; OHG. hwiz.  B. All from Teut. type *hweitoz, *hwitoz,
white, shining; further allied to Skt. ¢gvéta-, white, ¢vit, gvind, to be
white, to shine. The Skt. gvéta is from 4/K WEIT, to shine, whence
also Russ. svietluii, light, bright, svtetit(e), to shine, give light, OLithuan.
szweitu, later form szweicziu, I make white, I cleanse. Brugmann,
i. § 319; as to the final dental, cf. § yor, note 2. Der. white-ly;
white-ness, spelt whytnesse in Prompt. Parv. Also white, verb, ME.
hwiten, used intransitively, to become white, Ancren Riwle, p, 150,
l. 73 whit-en, ME. whitenen, to make white, Early Eng. Psalter,
Ps. 1. 9, but properly intransitive, from Icel. hvitna, to become white
(see note on Waken). Also whit-ing, a fish with delicate white
flesh, spelt whytynge in Prompt. Parv.; it also means ground chalk.
Also whitish, whit-ish-ness; white-bait, a fish; white-faced, K. John,
ii, 23 3 white-heat; white-lead, spelt whyte led in Prompt. Parv. ; white-
limed, spelt whitlymed, P. Plowman, B. xv. 111; white-livered, i.e.
cowardly, Hen. V, iii. 2. 343 white-wask. Also whit-leather, leather
dressed with alum; Beaum. and Fletcher, Scornful Lady, v. 1; whit-
ster, a bleacher, Prompt. Parv.; whit-tawer, a worker in white


WHITHER


leather, And see wheat, wheat-ear, Whit-sunday, whitt-le (3).
it But not whit-low.

WHITHER, to what place. (E.) ME. whider; spelt whidir,
Wyclif, Mark, xiv. 12, whidur, id. xiv. 14. (Cf. ME. fader for father,
moder for mother.) AS. hwider, hwyder, Grein, ii, 120.4-Goth.
hwadré, whither, John, vii. 35. Closely allied to Whether, and
formed from the Teut. base *hwa-, who, with a compar. suffix allied
to Idg. *ter-; see Whether. Cf. hither, thither. Der. whither-
ward, ME, whiderward, Chaucer, C. T. 11814 (F 1510) ; whither-so-
ever.

WHITLOW, a painful swelling on the fingers, (Scand.) Nothing
but a careful tracing of the history of the word will explain it; it
seems to be an alteration of guick-flaw, i.e. a flaw or flaking off of
the skin in the neighbourhood of the quick, or sensitive part of the
finger round the nail. The word is properly Northern, and of Scand.
origin. It is still preserved in the North E. whickflaw, a whitlow
(Halliwell). Here whick is the well-known (and very common)
Northern form of quick, in the sense of ‘alive’ and ‘ quick’ part of
the finger. Thisis why the sore was called paronychia. ‘ Paronychia,
a preternatural swelling or sore, wader the root of the nail, in one’s
finger, a felon or whitlow;’ Phillips, ed. 1706. ([Der. from Gk.
map-, for mapa, beside, and dvuxi-, from dvvg, the nail.] And this is
also why horses were subject to whitlows ; in farriery, it is a disease
of the feet, of an inflammatory kind, occurring round the hoof, where
an acrid matter is collected (Webster) ; the hoof of the horse answer-
ing to the nail of aman. Cf. ‘ Quick-scab, a distemper in horses,’
Bailey, vol. i. (1735). B. If so, quick was replaced by whit-, under-
stood as white; ‘some doth say it is a white fiawe under the nayle;’
A. Boorde, Breviary of Health, c. 265 (Palmer). Cotgrave explains
poil de chat by ‘whitlow;’ but Palsgrave has: ‘ Whitflowe in ones
fyngre, poil de chat.’ The spelling whitflaw occurs repeatedly in
Holland’s tr. of Pliny (see the index), and is once spelt white-flaw,
showing that the former syllable was already confused with the adj.
white. ‘ Whitflawes about the root of the nails,’ Holland, tr. of Pliny,
b. xxiii. c. 4. § 13 &c., &c. ‘Paronychia... by the vulgar people
amongst us it is generally called a whitflaw;’ Wiseman, Surgery,
b. i. c. 11 (R.).. Both parts of the word are properly Scandinavian.
—Icel. kuika, ‘the quick under the nail or under a horse’s hoof;’
otherwise kvikva, ‘ the flesh under the nails, and in animals under the
hoofs ;? and Swed. flaga, a flaw, crack, breach, also a flake, Icel.
jiagna, ‘to flake off, as skin or slough. See Quick and Flaw;
and see White. @ Whick easily turned to whit, which was
naturally interpreted as white (from the words whit-tawer, whitster),
the more so as the swelling is often of a white colour; the true sense
of the word was thus lost, and a whitlow was applied to any similar
sore on the finger, whether near the quick or not. Low may have
been suggested by proy. E. Jow, ‘fire;’ with the idea of ‘inflamma-
tion.’

WHITSUNDAY, the seventh Sunday after Easter, commemo-
rating the day of Pentecost. (E.) Lit. white Sunday, as will appear.
The word is old. In the Ancren Riwle, p. 412, 1. 13, we have
mention of hwitesunedei immediately after a mention of holi Jursdei.
Again, we find: ‘pe holi goste, pet pu on hwite sune dei sendest’=
the Holy Ghost, whom thou didst send on Whit-sunday; O. Eng.
Homilies, i. 209, 1. 16. In Layamon, 1. 31524, we already have
mention of white sune tide (=whit-e sun-e tid-e, in six syllables), i. e.
Whitsun-tide, which in the later version appears in the form Witson-
time, showing that even at that early period the word White was be-
ginning to be confused with wit; hence the spelling witsondai in
_ Wycliffe’s Works, ed. Arnold, ii. 158, 159, &c., is not at all sur-
prising. In the same, p. 161, we already find witson-weke, i.e.
Whitsun week. In the Cursor Mundi, the word ‘white’ is written
wijt (where the 7j=2); and, accordingly, we there find the form wzt
sundai, 18914. Cf. Wit-sonentid, S. Legendary, p. 115, 1.297. AS.
hwita Sunnan-deg; only in the dat. case hwitan sunnan deg, A. S.
Chron. an. 1067, However, the AS. name is certified, beyond all
question, by the fact that it was early transplanted into the Icelandic
language, and appears there as hvztasunnu-dagr. In Icelandic we
also find hwita-daga, lit. ‘white days,’ as a name for Whitsun week,
which was also called hvitadaga-vika=whitedays week, and hvita-
sunnudag’s-vika= Whitsunday’s week. B. All these names are
unmistakeable, and it is also tolerably certain that the E. name
White Sunday is not older than the Norman conquest; for, before
that time, the name was always Pentecoste (see Pentecost). We
are therefore quite sure that, for some reason or other, the name
Pentecost was then exchanged for that of White Sunday, which came
into common use, and was early corrupted into Wit-Sunday, proving
that white was soon misunderstood, and was wrongly supposed to
tefer to the wit.or wisdom conferred by the Holy Ghost on the day
of Pentecost, on which theme it was easy for the preacher (to whom
etymology was no object) to expatiate. Neyertheless. the truer


WHO 713


spelling has been preserved to this day, not only in English and in
modern Icelandic, but in the very plainly marked modern Norwegian
dialects, wherein it is called Kvitsunndag, whilst Whitsun-week is
called Kvitsunn-vika, obviously from kvit, white (Aasen). See, there-
fore, White and Sunday. B. But when we come to consider
why this name was given to the day, room is at last opened for con-
jecture. Perhaps the best explanation is Mr. Vigfusson’s, in the Icel.
Dict., who very pertinently remarks that even Bingham gives no
reference whatever to Icelandic writers, though, from the nature of
the case, they know most about it, the word having been borrowed
by Icelandic whilst it was still but new to English. He says: ‘The
great festivals, Yule, Easter, and Pentecost, but esp. the two latter,
were the great seasons for christening : in the Roman Catholic church
especially Easter, whence in Roman usage the Sunday after Easter
was called Dominica in Albis; but in the Northern churches, perhaps
owing to the cold weather at Easter-time, Pentecost, as the birth-day
of the church, seems to have been esp. appointed for christening and
for ordination ; hence the following week was called the Holy Week
(Helga Vika). Hence, Pentecost derived its name from the white
garments, &c. See the whole passage, and the authorities cited.
The W. sulgwyn, Whitsuntide, is translated from English ; cf. W. sud,
sun, and gwyn, white. Hexham’s MDu. Dict. has: ‘ Witten Donder-
dagh, Holy Thursday ; Witten Sondagh, Palme Sunday ; Witte-brodt,
white bread ;’ ed. 1658. Kalkar’s Mid. Dan. Dict. has: ‘ Hvideson-
dag, (1) the first Sunday after Easter; (2) the first Sunday in Lent ;
from hvid, white, and soxdag, Sunday. It is clear that white Sunday
was a name not confined to the day of Pentecost. 4 It deserves to
be recorded, as a specimen of English popular etymology, that many
still prefer to consider AS. hwita sunnan (occurring in the A. S.
Chronicle) as a corruption of the mod. G. pfingsten (which is acknow-
ledged to be from the Gk. mevryjxooTn). Seeing that pfingstex is a
modern form, and is an old dative case turned into a nominative, the
MHG. word being pfingeste, we are asked to believe that pfingeste
became hwita su, and that xxan was afterwards luckily added!
Comment is needless. Der. Whitsun-week, a shortened form for
Whitsundays week (as shown by Icel. hvitasunnudags-vika) ; and
similarly, Whitsun-tide. Also Whit-Monday, Whit-Tuesday, names
coined to match Whit-Sunday; formerly called Monday in Whitsun-
week, &c.; Wycliffe, Works, ii. 161. @ Cf. Palmson, Lowson, as
contractions of Palmsunday, Lowsunday. See Oxford Dict.

WHITTLE (1), to pare or cut with a knife. (E.) In Johnson’s
Dict. A mere derivative from the sb. whittle, a knife, Timon, v. 1.
183. And whittle is the same as ME, fwitel, thwitel, a knife,
Chaucer, C. T. 3931 (A 3933). Lit. ‘a cutter;’ formed, with suffix
-el of the agent, from Awit-, weak grade of AS. Awitan, to thwite,
to cut, to pare; whence the verb which is spelt by Palsgrave both
thwyte and whyte. See Rom. of the Rose, 1. 933. @ The alleged
AS. hwitel, a knife, is a mere myth; see Whittle (3).

WHITTLE (2), to sharpen. (E.) Used as a slang term; ‘ well
whittled and thoroughly drunk ;’ Holland, tr. of Plutarch, p. 387 (R.).
‘Throughly whitled’=thoroughly drunk; Holland, tr. of Pliny,
b. xiv. c. 22. The lit. sense is, sharpened like a whittle or knife;
see Whittle (1). It may have been confused with whet, the fre-
quentative of which, howeyer, could only have been whettle, and does
not occur.

WHITTLE (3), a blanket. (E.) ME. whitel, P. Plowman,
C. xvii. 76. AS. hwitel, a blanket, Gen. ix. 23. Lit. ‘a small white
thing. = AS. hwit, white. See White.+Icel. Avitill, a whittle,
from hvitr, white; Norweg. kvitel, from kvit, white (Aasen). Cf. E.
blank-et, from F. blanc, white. [ Somner gave ‘ knife’ as one sense
of AS. hwitel; he was clearly thinking of whittle (1), which happens
to be a corruption of ¢hwitel; see Whittle (1). His mistake has
been carefully preserved in many dictionaries.

WHIZ, to make a hissing sound. (E.) ‘The woods do whiz ;’
Surrey, tr. of Afneid, b. ii, 1. 534. An imitative word, allied to
Whistle, q.v. Cf. Icel. Avissa, to hiss, to run with a hissing sound,
said, e.g., of a stream; and cf. E, whis-per, hiss, whir.

WHO, an interrogative and relative pronoun. (E.) ‘ Formerly
who, what, which, were not relative, but interrogative pronouns;
which, whose, whom occur as relatives [misprinted interrogatives] as
early as the end of the twelfth century, but who not until the 14th
century, and was not in common use before the 16th century ;’ Morris,
Hist. Outlines of E. Accidence, § 188. AS. kwd, who (interrogatively),
masc, and fem. ; hwet, neuter; gen. hwes, for all genders ; dat. kwam,
hwm, for all genders; acc. masc. hwone, fem. hwone, neut. hwet;
instrumental hwi, hwy (mod. E. why); Grein, ii. 113; Sweet, A. S.
Reader. We now have wkho= AS, hwa; what =hwet; whose=hwes,
with a lengthening of the vowel, to agree with the vowel of other
cases (seldom used in the neuter, though there is nothing against it) ;
whom=dat, hwam, but also used for the accusative, the old acc.
hwone being lost ; why =inst. hwi; see Why.+Dnu. wie, who; wat,


WHOLE


what; wiens, whose; wien, whom (dat. and acc.); Icel. hverr, hver,
who ; hvat, what ; hvers, whose; kverjum (masc.), whom; pl. hverir,
&c.; Dan. hvo, who; hvad, what; hvis, whose; hkvem, whom (dat.
and acc.); Swed. kvem, who, whom (nom. dat. and acc.); hvad,
what ; hvems, hvars, whose; G. wer, who; was, what; wessen, wess,
whose; wem, to whom; wen, whom (acc.); Goth. nom. hwas, hwo,
hwa (or hwata); gen. hwis, hwizds, hwis; dat. hwamma, hwizai,
hwamma ; acc. hwana, hwo, hwa (or hwata) ; instr. hwé; pl. hwai, &c. ;
Trish and Gael. co; W. pwy; L. quis, que, quid; Russ. kto, chto, who,
what; Lithuan. kas, who; Skt. kas, who (masc.), Aim, what; kam,
whom (acc.). . All from the Idg. interrogative base QO (Teut.
HWA), who? The neuter has the characteristic neut. suffix -d
(L. gui-d), Teut. -¢ (E. wha-t, Goth. hwa-ta), as in the words :-t,
tha-t. Brugmann, ii. § 411. Der. who-ever, who-so, who-so-ever.
Also whe-n, whe-re, whe-ther, whi-ch, whi-ther, why. Also quidd-i-ty,
qua-li-ty, qua-nti-ty, quillet.

WHOLE, hale, sound, entire, complete. (E.) The orig. sense is
‘hale,’ or in sound health; hence the senses entire, complete, &c.,
have been deduced. ‘The spelling with initial w is curious, and
points back to a period when a w-sound was initially prefixed in some
dialect and afterwards became general; this pronunciation is now
again lost. We have other examples in whot=hot, Spenser, F. Q.
ii, I. 58, ii. 9. 29, &c.3 in whore=hore; in whoop=ME. houpen,
where the w is still sounded; and in mod. E. wun as the pronuncia-
tion of one, where the w is not now written. I believe the spelling
with w is hardly older than about A.D, 1500; Palsgrave, in 1530,
still writes hole. ‘A wholle man;’ Golden Booke, c. 29; first
printed in 1534. ‘The whole neade not the visicion;” Tyndale, tr.
of Matt. ix. 12 (1526). Richardson cites the adv. wholly from
Gower; but Pauli’s edition (vol. ii. p. 4, 1. 21) has holy (for holly) ;
so also in Macaulay’s edition, i. 303, 1.91. ME. hol, hool, Wyclif,
John, v.6. AS. hal, whole; whence ME. hool by the usual change
from AS. @ to ME. long o, as in AS. stan >ME. stoon, a stone;
Grein, ii. 6.4-Du. heel; Icel. heill; Dan. heel; Swed. hel; G. heil;
Goth. hails. B. Allfrom Teut. type *hailoz, Idg. type *koilos, hale,
whole; allied to W. coel, an omen; OSlav. célu, wholly, Russ. ¢szel-
it(e), to heal. See Stokes-Fick, p. 88. Der. whol-ly, ME. holly, holy,
in Gower, as above, Chaucer, C. T. 601 (A 599) ; whole-ness (modern).
Also whole-some, ME. holsum, holsom, Chaucer, Troilus, i. 947, spelt
halsumm in the Ormulum, 2915, not in AS., but suggested by Icel.
heilsamr, salutary, formed from heill, whole, with suffix -samr corre-
sponding to E. -some; hence whole-somely, whole-some-ness. Also
whole-sale, used by Addison (Toda), from the phrase by whole sale, for
which see Hakluyt, Voy. i. 471 (1. 6 from bottom), as opposed to
retail. Also heal, q.v.; hol-y, q.v. Doublet, hale. ¢ > If we
write whole for hole, we ought to write wholy for holy: ‘ For their
wholy conversacion;” Roy, Rede Me and be not Wroth, ed. Arber,
P- 75, 1]. 24.

WHOOP, to shout clearly and loudly. (F.—Teut.) Here, as in
the case of whole, whot for hot (Spenser), and a few other words, the
initial w is unoriginal, and the spelling should rather be hoop. The
spelling with w dates from about A.D. 1500. Palsgrave, in 1530,
has: ‘I whoope, I call, je huppe;’ yet Shakespeare (ed. 1623) has
hooping, As You Like It, iii. 2. 203. [The derivative whoobub is,
conversely, now spelt hubbub; see Hubbub.] ME. howpen, to call,
shout, P. Plowman, B. vi. 174; Chaucer, C. T. 15406 (B 4590).
=F. houper, ‘to hoop unto, or call afar off;’ Cot. From F. houp!
an exclamatory interjection. Of Teut. origin; cf. EFries. hup / up !
Pomeran. hup-hei! a cry of joy (Schambach); G. hopsa, heyday!
(Fliigel). Der. whoop, sb.; whoop-ing-cough or hoop-ing-cough ;
hubb-ub. Doublet, hoop (2), which is a mere variation of spelling,
and exactly the same word.

WHORE, a harlot. (Scand.) As in the case of whole, q. v., the
initial w is not older than about A.D. 1500. Palsgrave, in 1530, still
has hore. ‘The whoores beleved hym;’ Tyndale, tr. of Matt. xxi. 32
(1526). In Bale’s Kynge Johan, ed. Collier, p. 26,1. 21, we find
horson, but on p. 76, 1. 12, it is wkoreson. [It is remarkable that the
word hoar, white, as applied to hair, also occurs with initial w at
perhaps an earlier period. ‘The heere of his hedd was whore’ =
the hair of his head was hoar; Monk of Evesham, c. 12; ed. Arber,
Pp: 33- Spelt also whore in Lydgate, Assembly of Gods, 400.] ME.
hore, King Alisaunder, 1. 1000; P. Plowman, B. iv. 166. The word
is not AS., but Scandinavian. [The AS. word was miltestre, Matt.
xxi. 31.] In the Laws of Canute (Secular), § 4, we find hor-cwene, an
adulteress, where the Danish word has the AS. cwene (a quean) added
to it; Thorpe, Ancient Laws,i. 378.—Icel. hdra, an adulteress, fem.
of hérr, an adulterer (we also find hdr, neut. sb., adultery); Dan.
hore; Swed. hora.4-Du. hoer, G. hure, OHG. huora; Goth. hors,
masc., an adulterer, Luke, xviii. 11. B. The Teut. types are *hdroz,


714


m., and *hérd, f.; Idg. types *garos, m., and ga@ra, f, {The Church-'


Slavonic kuruva, an adulteress, Polish kurwa, are from Teutonic.]


WICK


Cf. L. carus, dear, orig. ‘loving ;’ Irish caraim, I love, Skt. charu-,
agreeable, beautiful, &c. sy. Ifthis be right, the word prob. meant
at first no more than ‘lover,’ and afterwards descended in the
scale, as so often happens. Brugmann, i. § 637. q Not allied
to the verb fo hire. Der. whore-dom, ME. hordom, Ancren Riwle,
p- 204, 1. 20, from Icel. hdrddmr, Swed. hordom; whor-ish, Troil.
iv. I. 63, whor-ish-ly, -ness; -master, K. Lear, i. 2. 137, spelt hore-
maister in Palsgrave ; -monger, Meas. for Meas. ili. 2. 373 -son, in
Bale, Kynge Johan (as above).

WHORL, a number of leaves disposed in a circle round the stem
of a plant. (E.) It is closely allied to wharl, which is the name for
a piece of wood or bone placed on a spindle to twist it by. The
latter is also called a wharrow, a picture of-which will be found in
Guillim, Display of Heraldry, 1664,-p. 289: ‘The round ball [disc]
at the lower end serveth to the fast twisting of the thread, and is
called a wharrow.’ “The likeness between a wharl on a spindle and a
whorl of leaves is sufficiently close. Palsgrave has: ‘ Wharle for
a spyndell, peson.’ Wharl, whorl are contracted forms for wharvel,
whorvel. * Whorlwyl, whorwhil, whorle of a spyndyl, Vertebrum,
Prompt. Parv.; where whorlwyl is clearly an error for whorwyl
(=whorvil). The AS. name for a wharrow was hweorfa; we find
‘Vertellum [sic], hweorfa’ in a list of spinning-implements, Voc.
294.6; this is clearly an allied word, but without the suffix -el, and
the etymology is from the strong verb kweorfan, to turn ; see Whirl
and Wharf. B. The particular form whorl may have been bor-
rowed from MDu., and introduced by the Flemish weavers ; cf. MDu.
worvel, ‘a spinning-whirle,’ Hexham; also worvelen, ‘to turne, to
reele, to twine,’ id.; these words are from the weak grade of the
same root, and help to account for the vowel o. Cf. AS. hworf-en,
pp: of hweorfan.

WHORTLE-BERRY, a bilberry. (E.)  ‘ Airelles, whurtle-
berries;’ Cot. But the w seems to be unoriginal, as in whole, whoop,
whore (above). Older form hurtilberye, J. Russell, Book of Nurture,
1. 82 (ab. 1460), Again, hurtil-berye is an extension of hurt-berye,
also (simply) hurt. ‘Strawberyes or hurtes;’ Boorde, Dyetary, xiii.
(1542, ed. 1870) 267(N.E.D.). The last form answers to AS. horta,,
a whortle-berry, pl. hortan ; see Napier’s Glosses, 2. 433 (note), and
cf. ‘ Facinia [i. e. vaccinia], hortan, Voc. 234.37. 4 In Dorsetsh..,.
bilberries are called hart-berries, which answers to AS. heorot-bergan,.
pl. of heorot-berge ; cf. ‘ Mora, heorotberge,’ Corpus Gloss. 1333; but
this is an unrelated name. The AS. form of ME. hurtil must have
been *hyrtel. In America, hurtleberry has become huckleberry.

WHY, on what account. (E.) Why is properly the instrumental
case of who, and was, accordingly, frequently preceded by the prep.
for, which (in AS.) sometimes governed that case. ME. whi, why,
Wyclif, Matt. xxi. 26 ; for whi= on which account, because, id. viii. 9.
AS. hwi, hw, hwig, instr. case of hwa, who; for hwig, why ; Grein,
ii. 113. See Who.+lIcel. hvi, why; allied to hverr, who, hvat,
what; Dan. hui; Swed. hvi; Goth. hvé, instr. case of hvas, who.
B. The word how is closely related. See How.


WI-WY


WICK (1), the cluster of threads of cotton in a lamp or candle.
(E.) Spelt weeke, in Spenser, F. Q. ii. 10. 30. ME. wicke, P.
Plowman, C. xx. 205; weyke, id. B. xvii. 239; wueke, O. Eng. Homi-
lies, ii. 47, 1.30. There seem to be at least two distinct forms. E.
wick=ME. wicke; and ME. weke, Voc. 592. 30, whence Spenser's.
weeke, The ME. wicke answers to AS. wice (Sweet), and weke to AS.
weoce, Voc. 126. 29, 439. 363 cf. ‘Funalia, vel funes, candel-weoca ;”
Voc. 154. 143 pl. candel-weocan, id. 404. 22.4-MDu. wiecke, ‘a
weeke of a lampe, a tent to put into a wounde;’ Hexham; Low G.
weke, lint, to put toa wound; whence Dan. vege, a wick; Norw.
veik ; Swed. veke, a wick, Widegren.4Bavarian wichengarn, wick-
yarn, Schmeller, 835; he also gives various G. forms, viz. OHG.
wieche, weche, with a reference to Graff, i. 728; Schade gives OHG.
wioh and wike. The orig. sense was prob, ‘ twist,’ or ‘thing woven ;’
cf. Irish jig-im, I weave (base *weg-); Stokes-Fick, p. 268; and
Skt. vag-urd, a net. pur

WICK (2),a town. (L.) AS. wic, a village, town ; Grein, ii. 688.
Not E., but borrowed. —L. uicus, a village; see Vicinity.

WICK (3), WICH, a creek, bay. (Scand.) In some place-
names, as in Green-wich, &c.=Icel. vik, a small creek, inlet, bay;
Olcel. *wik. From vik-ja, to recede; see Weak. It is not
easy, in all cases, to distinguish between this and the word above.
Ray, in his Account of Salt-making (E. D. S., Gloss. B. 15, p. 20),


oC en


oo


4


-
b
D
L
4
B
z
hy
‘


WICKED


mentions Nant-wich, North-wich, Middle-wich, Droit-wich ; here wich
=brine-pit, apparently a peculiar use of Icel. vik above.. See Wych,
a salt-work, in Nares. .

WICKED, evil, bad, sinful. (E.) The word wicked was orig.
a past participle, with the sense ‘ rendered evil,’ formed as if froma
verb *wikken, to make evil, from the obsolete adj. wikke (dissyllabic),
evil, once common, Again, the adj. wikke is allied to AS. wicca,
masc., a wizard [wicce, fem., a witch]. Hence the adj. wikke is allied
to Weak, q.v. From the weak grade *wic-, of AS. wican (Icel.
vikja, G. weichen), to yield, give way. Andsee Witch. We also
find ME. wikked, as in the adv. wikked-ly, Chaucer, C. T. 8599 (E 723);
spelt wickede, def. form of wicked, Layamon, later text, 14983, where
it takes the place of swicfulle (deceitful) in the earlier text. This is
prob, the earliest instance of the word. _B. The shorter form wikke
is common; it occurs in Havelok, 688; P. Plowman, B. vy. 229;
Chaucer, C. T. 1089, 5448, 15429 (A 1087, B 1028, 4613); cf.
‘wicei red, i.e. wicked counsel, A. S. Chron. an. 1140; as if for
*wicc-ig, an adj. from wicca, a wizard. It became obsolete in the
15th century as an adj., but the fem. sb. is still in use in the form
witch. Der. wicked-ly ; wicked-ness, ME. wikkednesse, P, Plowm. B.
Vy. 290.

WICKER, made of twigs. (Scand.) ‘A wicker bottle,’ Oth. ii. 3.
152 (folios, twiggen bottle). Wicker is properly a sb., meaning a
pliant twig. ME. wiker, wikir ; ‘ Wykyr, to make wythe baskettys, or
to bynde wythe thyngys [i. e. to make baskets with, or bind things
with], Vimen, vituligo;’ Prompt. Parv. ‘ Wycker, osier;’ Palsgrave.
The AS. form does not appear; and perhaps E. wicker may have
been borrowed from Scandinavian. We find MSwed. wzka, to bend,
whence weck, a fold, wickla, to fold, wrap round (Ihre) ; also Swed.
dial. vekare, vekker, vikker (which is our very word), various names
for the sweet bay-leaved willow, Salix pentandra, lit. ‘the bender,’
from veka, to bend, to soften, allied to Swed. vika, to fold, to double,
to plait (Widegren). Wicker-work means, accordingly, ‘ plaited
work,’ esp. such as is made with pliant twigs, according to the
common usage of theword. The word is closely allied, in the same
way, to Dan. veg, pliant (with g for #, as usual in Danish), in con-
nexion with which Wedgwood cites, from various Danish dialects,
voge, vogger, vegre, a pliant rod, a withy (lit. a wicker), vogrekurv,
vegrekurv, a Wicker-basket, veger, vegger, a willow (=Swed. dial.
vekare above); cf. Skt. vag-ura@,a net. Cf. Weak, Wick (1),
Wick (3). And see Witch-elm.

WICKET, a small gate. (F.—Tent.) ME. wiket, P. Plowman,
B. v. 611 ; Rom. of the Rose, 528.—AF. wiket, Tristan, ed. Michel,
ii. 101; cf. Supp. to Godefroy, s. v. guichet ; he also has guischet, and
Litiré’s quotations give us the forms wisket and viquet; mod. F.
guichet, a wicket. Littré also cites the Walloon wichet, Norman
viquet, Prov. guisquet, all of them deduced from the common form
wisket. It is supposed that the s is radical; and it has been derived
from OHG. wisk-en, to wipe, to whisk; and intr., to move quickly,
to slip aside. Hence, perhaps, it meant a postern-door, to slip out
at. It was esp. used of a small door easily opened and shut. Cf.
MDnu. wicket, a wicket, Hexham ; also wincket, ‘ a wicket,’ id.; prob.
from OF. Cf. EFries. wisken, to wipe, also to move quickly ; Norw.
viska (the same) ; Swed. dial. viska, to throw, to swing ; also Norw.
viskjen, light and quick (Ross). See Whisk. Korting, § 10171.
B. In the game of cricket, the wicket was at first (A. D. 1700) lit. a
small gate,’ being 2 feet wide by 1 foot high; but the shape has so
greatly altered that there is no longer any resemblance. See the
diagrams in the Eng, Cyclop. div. Arts and Sciences, Supplement ;
&. v. Cricket.

WIDKH, broad, far extended. (E.) ME. wid (with long 2); pl.
wide (dissyllabic), Chaucer,C. T. 28. AS. wid, wide; Grein, ii. 690.
+Du. wid; Icel. vidr; Swed. and Dan. vid; G. weit, OHG. wit.
B. All from Teut. type *witdoz, wide; perhaps for *wi-doz, orig. a pp.
from 4/WEI; cf. Skt. vi-taram, farther (Macdonell). Der. wide-ly,
-ness ; wid-en, verb, Cor. i. 4. 44, with which cf. ME. widen, Prompt.
Parv., imperative wide, Palladius on Husbandry, iii. 923, though the
mod. suffix -en is not the same as the ending of the ME. infin. widen
(see this explained under Waken). Also wid-th, not an old word,
used in Drayton’s Battle of Agincourt, st. 142, as equivalent to the
older sb. wideness; formed by analogy with leng-th, bread-th, &c. ;
cf. Icel. vidd, width.

WIDGEON, the name of a kind of duck. (F.—L.) ‘A wigion,
bird, glaucea ;’ Levins, ed. 1570. Spelt wygeon, Sir T. Elyot, Castel
of Health, b. ii. ch. 13.- The suffix and form of the word show that
it is certainly French ; and it is clear that the E. word has preserved
an older form (presumably *wigeon) than can be found in French.
Littré gives the three forms vigeon, vingeon, gingeon, as names of the
‘whistling duck’ (canard siffieur). Prob. from L. uipionem, acc. of
uipio, used by Pliny, bk. x. c. 49, to meanakind of smallcrane. Cf.
Ital. vipione, a small crane (Torriano), There is a by-form dibio ; |


715


(For the


WIGHT


probably bibio, wipio are of imitative origin, like L. pifio.
letter-changes, cf. E. pigeon from L. acc. pipidnem.)

WIDOW, a woman whose husband is dead. (E.) ME. widewe,
widwe, Chaucer, C. T. 255, 1173 (A253, 1171). AS. widwe, weoduwe;
also wudwe, wuduwe, wydewe, Grein, ii. 692.4-Du. weduwe; G. wittwe,
OHG. wituwa, witewa, witiwa; Goth. widuwo, widows. B. The
Teut. types are *widewa, *widowa, fem. sb., a widow; Idg. types
*widhewa, *widhowa. Further cognate with L. uidua, fem. of uiduus,
deprived of, bereft of (which gave rise to Ital. vedova, Span. viuda,
F. veuve, a widow) ; also with Irish feadhb, OlIrish fedb, W. gweddw,
Russ. vdova, Skt. vidhava, a widow. y. Here the L. d, as in other
cases, answers to Skt. dk, and the root is 4/WIDH, to lack, want,
hence, to be bereft of. This root is preserved in the Skt. vindh, to
lack (not in Benfey), for which see the St. Petersburg Dict. vol. vi.
1070. Brugmann, ii. § 64. Cf. also Gk. #ieos (for *}-Fi0--Fos), a
bachelor, one who is unmarried. Der. widow, verb, Cor. v. 6. 153;
widow-hood, ME. widewehad, Holi Meidenhad, p. 23, 1.20; widow-er,
ME. widewer, widwer, P. Plowman, A. 10. 194, B. 9. 174, formed by
adding -er; cf. G, wittwer.

WIELD, to manage, to use. (E.) ME. welden, to govern, also
to have power over, to possess, Wyclif, Matt. v. 4, Luke, xi. 21,
xvili, 18. AS. geweldan, gewyldan, to have power over, Gen. iii. 16;
Mark, v. 4. This is a weak verb, answering to ME, welden, and
mod. E, wield, which are also weak verbs; all are derivatives from
the strong verb wealdan (pt. t. wéold, pp. wealden), to have power
over, govern, rule, possess.-Icel. valda, to govern (pt, t. olli); G.
walten, OHG, waltan, to dispose, manage, rule; Goth. waldan, to
govern. B. The Icel. pt. t. olli is for *wolJi (Noreen, § 215), and
the Idg. base was *walz, whence Celtic *wlat-is, Olrish faith, dominion
(Stokes-Fick, 262). Hence it is supposed that Russ. vladiet(e), to reign,
tule, possess, make use of, Lithuan. wa/dyti, to rule, govern, possess,
are early loans from Teutonic. But W. gwlad, a region, is a cognate
word. Some connect it with the 4/WAL, to be strong; cf. L.
ualére, to be strong. See Valiant. Der. wield-er, un-wield-y.

WIFE, a woman, a married woman. (E.) ME, wif (with long 2),
wyf, Chaucer, C. T. 447, 1173 (A 445, 1171); pl. wyues (wyves), id.
234. AS. wif, a woman, wife, remarkable as being a neuter sb.,
with pl. wif like the singular. Du. wijf, woman, wife, fem. ; Icel. vif,
neut, a woman; only used in poetry; Dan. viv, fem.; G. wezb, neut.
a woman; OHG. wip. B. The Teut. type is *widom, n. The
form of the root is *weth=Idg. 4/WEIP; in accordance with which
we find OHG, weibdn, weipon, to waver, be irresolute, L. uibrare, to
quiver, Skt. vep, to tremble; but the real origin of the word remains
obscure. @ It cannot be allied to AS. wefan, to weave. Der.
wife-like, Cymb. iii. 2. 8, fish-wife, i.e. fish-woman; mid-wife, q.v.;
house-wife (see House) ; wive, v., AS. wifian, Luke, xx. 34. Also
WO-Man, Q. Ve

WIG, a peruke. (Du.—F.—Ital.—L.) Wig occurs frequently in
Pope; Moral Essays, iii. 65, 295, &c.,and is merely a shortened form
of periwig, which is much older, and occurs in Shakespeare. Cf. bas
for omnibus, See further under Periwig and Peruke. Der. wigg-ed.

WIGHT (1), a person, creature. (E.) ME. wi3t, wight, Chaucer,
C. T. 848 (A 846). AS. wiht (very common), a creature, animal,
person, thing ; also spelt waht, wyht, and used both as fem. and neut.;
Grein, ii. 703.4-Du. wicht, a child ; Westphalian wich, a girl; Icel.
vetir, a wight; vetta, a whit; Dan. vette, an elf; G. wicht; Goth.
waihts, fem., waiht, neut., a whit, a thing. B. It is probable that
the fem. and neut. sbs. were orig. distinct, but they were early con-
fused. The Teut. base *weh-t- may perhaps be connected with AS.
weg-an, to move; if so, itmay have meant a moving object ; orig. ‘a
thing carried’ (L. wectum) ; or (in the imagination of the spectator),
an elf or demon. Cf. the Celtic type *wekta, f., a movement, a
course, a time; as in Irish feachd, Olrish fecht, a course, turn, time,
W. gwaith (the same) ; Stokes-Fick, p. 266. Whit is nothing but
another spelling of wight. Doublet, whit.

WIGHT (2), nimble, active, strong. (Scand.) ‘He was so
wimble and so wight ;’ Spenser, Shep. Kal. March, 91. ME. wight,
wi3t, valiant, P. Plowman, B. ix. 21; Layamon, 20588. —Icel. vigr,
in fighting condition, serviceable for war; the final ¢ seems to have
been caught up from the neut. vigt, which was used in certain
phrases; ‘peir drapu karla pa er vigt var at’=they smote the men
that might be slain, i.e. the men who were serviceable for war ; refer-
ring to the rule not to slay women, children, or helpless men. See
Icel. Dict. For similar instances of final ¢ from Icelandic, see
Want, Thwart. The same word as Swed. vig, nimble, agile,
active (whence vigt, nimbly), allied to AS. wiglic, warlike. B. From
the sb. which appears as Icel. vig, AS. wig, war. The Icel. vig, war,
is derived from Icel. vega, to fight, smite (quite distinct from vega,
to move, weigh), allied to Goth. weigan, weihan (pt. t. waih, pp.
wigans), to fight, strive, contend. Teut. base WEIH, to fight ; Fick,
iii. 303. Allied to L. zincere, to fight, conquer; see Victor, Also


716 WIGWAM


to Olrish jich-im, I fight, Lith. wik-rus, active, wight, wéta, strength,
OSlav. véku, strength, Russ. viek’, life.

W1IGW AM, an Indian hut or cabin. (N. American Indian.) In
books relating to N. America. ‘ They built a long wigwam ;’ I. Ma-
ther, Remarkable Providences (1684); repr. by Offor, p. 31. In
Eliot’s Indian Grammar, 1666, p. 11, Eliot gives the pronominal
forms of the Massachusetts word for ‘house’ as follows: ‘ Week, his
house; Weekou, their house ; weekit, in his house, wekuwomut, in his
[read their] house. Against wekuwomut he has a note—hence we
corrupt this word wigwam.’—J. Platt (in N. and Q., 9 S. x. 446).
S. T. Rand, in his Dict. of Micmac (a language of the Algonkin
family) has: ‘ wigwom, a house.’ Cuoq gives Algonkin mikiwam,
also wikiwam, a house (pp. 221, 438).

WILD, self-willed, violent, untamed, uncivilised, savage, desert.
(E.) In Barbour’s Bruce, we find will of red = wild of rede or counsel,
at a loss what to do, i. 348, iii. 494, xiii. 478; will of wane =wild of
weening or thought, at a loss, i. 323, ii. 471, vii. 225. The form will,
here used as an adj., is simply due to the fact that the Icel. form for
‘wild’ is villr, which stands for *vilAr by the assimilation so common
in Icelandic. By themselves, these passages would not by any means
prove any connexion between wild and will; nevertheless, the con-
nexion is real, as appears from a consideration of the words cognate
with wild, (See further below.) ME. wilde, rarely wielde, though
we find ‘a wielde olyue-tre’ in Wyclif, Rom. xi. 17; spelt wylde,
Rob. of Glouc. p. 57, 1. 1322. AS. wilde (Toller). Grein gives
the examples: se wilda fugel=the wild bird; wilde déor = wild deer
or animals.4+Du. wild, proud, savage; Icel. villr (for *vilfr), wild ;
also astray, bewildered, confused; Dan. and Swed. wild; G. wild,
OHG, wildi; Goth. wiltheis, wild, uncultivated, Mark, i.6; Rom.
xi. 17.° B. All from Teut. type *welthjoz, astray, wild; the Goth.
form wil-theis is important, because the Goth. -th- answers to L. -t-,
used as a suffix with pp. force (cf. L. rectus, right, orig. a pp. form).
The orig. sense is perhaps indicated by the Icel. villr and by the
common E. use of the word, viz. ‘actuated by will;’ to act wildly is
to act wilfully. Cf. the Celtic type *wel-tos, as in W. gwyllt, wild ;
Stokes-Fick, p. 277. - Perhaps from 4/WEL, to will, to wish. See
Will (1). Cf. W. gwyllys, the will. Others connect Goth. wiltheis
with Russ. vil-iai(e), to run hither and thither. Der. wild, sb.,
Merch. Ven. ii. 7. 41, ME. wilde, Rob. of Glouc. p. 553, 1. 115393
wild-ly; wild-ness, spelt wyyldnesse in the Prompt. Parv.; wildfire,
ME. wylde fur, Rob. of Glouc. p. 410, 1. 8485; wild-ing, a wild
or crab-apple, Spenser, F. Q. iii. 7.17. Also be-wild-er,q.v.; wild-
€r-NeSS, q.Ve

WILDERNESS, a wild or waste place. (E.) ME. wilder-
nesse, Ancren Riwle, p. 158, 1. 18. Wéldernesse first appears in
Layamon, 30335; and stands for wildern-nesse. It is formed by
adding the ME. suffix -nesse to the shorter word wildern, which was
used in the same sense. Thus, in the Ancren Riwle, p. 160, 1. 7,
one MS. has wilderne in place of wildernesse. So also in Layamon,
1. 1238: ‘ par is wode, par is water, par is wilderne muchel’ =there is
wood, there is water, there isa great desert. This ME. wilderne, a
desert, is formed with the adj. suffix -z (-ev) from the AS, sb. wilder,
wildor, a wild animal (Grein), a neuter sb. answering to Teut. type
*wilthos, allied to wild (Teut. *welthjoz). See Sievers, § 289.4
MDnu. wildernisse. And see be-wilder.

WILE, a trick, a sly artifice. (E.) ME. wile (dissyllabic), Chaucer,
3403. AS. wil, a wile, A. S. Chron. an. 1128, This AS. wil is
late; it prob. represents AF. *wile, answering to OF. guile, guile;
see Guile. Moder E. wile is rather a shortened form of AS. wigl,
‘divination,’ in Napier (see the note on p. 159, 1. 165). Cf. His
[the devil’s] wizeles, deceits, Ancren Riwle, p. 300. The AS. wilung
(for *wiglung), divination, occurs in the Kentish Glosses, 554.
Divination was regarded as heathen, and a deceit of the devil. The
verb is AS. wiglian, to divine; cf. MDu. wijchelen (Hexham), Du.
wigchelen, wichelen, to divine, practise augury; whence OF. guiler.
A primary form occurs in AS. wig, a sanctuary, allied to Goth.
weihs, holy. Cf. L. uictima, Der. wil-y, ME. wili, wely, Cursor
Mundi, 11807 ; wil-i-ness. Doublet,guile; whence be-guile. 4 Note
the spelling wyhyl in the Play of Mary Magdalen, 1. 377 (15th c.).

WILFUL, obstinate, self-willed. (E.) ME. wilful, Life of Beket,
ed. Black, 1. 1309 (Stratmann). Formed with suffix -ful (= full)
from AS. will, will; see Will (2). Der. wilful-ly, ME. wilfulliche,
in the sense ‘willingly,’ O. Eng. Homilies, i. 279, 1. 8; wilful-ness,
ME. wilfulnesse, O. Eng. Homilies, ii, 73.

WILL (1), to desire, be willing. (E.) ME. willen, infin. ;
pres, t. wol, Chaucer, C, T. 42; pt. t. wolde (whence mod. E, would),
id. 257. AS. willan, wyllan, Grein, ii. 708. Pres, sing. 1 and 3 p.
wile, wyle (whence ME, wl, wol), wille, wylle; 2 p. wilt; pl. willaéd,
wyllad; pt. t. wolde, 2 p. woldest, pl. woldan, woldon, or woldun.+-
Dn. willen ; Icel. vilja, pt.t. vilda; Dan. ville; Swed. vilja; G. wollen,
pr. t. will, pt. t. wollte; Goth. wiljan, pt. t. wilda, Teut. type


WIN


*weljan-.4Lithuan, weliti; L. welle, pr. t. wolo, pt. t. uolui; Skt. vy,
to choose, select, prefer. B. All from 4/WEL, to choose; whence
also G. wahl, choice, E. well, adv., will, sb., &c. The Goth. waljan,
to choose, is a causal form, from *wol, 2nd grade of “WEL. Der.
will-ing, orig. a pres. part. ; will-ing-ly ; will-ing-ness. Also will (2),
q-v. Also will-y-nill-y, answering either to will I, nill I, i.e. whether
I will or whether I nill (will not), or to will he, nill he, i.e. whether
he will or whether he nill (will not), as in Hamlet, v. 1.18; we also
find will we, nill we, Udall, on 1 St. John, cap. 2; will you, nill you,
Tam. Shrew, ii. 1. 273; cf. AS. zéllan (short for ne willan), not to
wish, Grein, ii, 296, cognate with L. nolle (short for ne uelle); and
see Hobnob. From the same root are well (1), wil-ful, weal, wild,
vol-unt-ar-y, vol-upt-u-ous.

WILL (2), sb., desire, wish. (E.) ME, wille, Wyclif, Luke, ii.
14. AS. willa, will, Grein, ii. 706.— AS. willan, verb, to wish; see
Will (1).4+Dnu. wil; Icel. vili; Dan. vilje; Swed. vilja; G. wille;
Goth. wilja. Teut. type *weljon-, m.4-Russ. volia. Cf. L. uoluntas.
Der. wil-ful, q. v.

WILLOW, a tree, with pliant branches. (E.) ME. wilow, wilwe,
Chaucer, C. T. 2924. AS. welig; ‘Salix, welig;’ Voc. 269. 36.4
Du. wilg; MDu. wilge (Hexham); Low G. wilge (another Low G.
name is wichel); MHG. wilge; OLow G. wilgia, B. The Low G.
wichel is clearly allied to E. wicker and to AS. wican, to give way,
bend; the tree being named from the pliancy of its boughs. Perhaps
the name willow has a similar origin, as proy. E. willy not only
means a willow, but also a wicker-basket, like the weele or fish-
basket of which an illustration is given in Guillim, Display of
Heraldry (1664), p. 316. The AS. wel-ig may be from the 4/WEL,
to turn, wind, roll, appearing in G. welle, a wave (lit. that which
rolls), and in Gk. éA-iooev, as the willow-twigs can be wound to form
baskets; cf. Gk. éA-évn, a wicker-basket. It may therefore have
meant ‘pliant.’ See Helix. y. A much commoner name for
the tree in AS, is widig, mod. E, withy, with a like sense. See
Withy. Andcf. Wicker.

WIMBERRY, the same as Winberry, q.v.

WIMBLE (1), a gimlet, an instrument for boring holes. (E.?)
ME. wimbil, spelt wymbyl in the Prompt. Parv., where we also find
the verb wymbelyn, or wymmelyn, to bore. ‘A Frenssh wymble,’
Palladius, xi. 85 ; spelt wymbul, Nominale, ed. Skeat, 517. Of E.
or Low G. origin; cf. MDu. wemelen, ‘to pearce with a wimble,’
from weme, ‘a wimble,’ Hexham; Low G. wemel, wemmel, a wimble,
whence wemelen, to bore (Liibben). Also Dan. vimmel, an augur,
tool for boring; borrowed from Low G. Apparently from a Teut.
base *wem-, to turn; see Wimble (2). Cf. Shropsh. wim-wam, a
turn-stile. Der. gimlet.

WIMBLE (2), active, nimble. (Scand.) ‘He was so wimble
and so wight;’ Spenser, Shep. Kal. March, 91. Cf. North E.
wheamow, nimble (Ray). The true sense is full of motion, skipping
about. Spenser perhaps picked up the word in the North of Eng-
land. The bd (as often after 2) is excrescent, and due to stress. =
Swed, vimmel-,in comp. vimmelkantig, giddy, whimsical ; Swed. dial.
vimmla, to be giddy or skittish; cf, Swed. dial. vimmra, the same,
whence vimmrig, skittish, said of horses. The verbs vimmla, vimmra,
are frequentatives of Swed. dial. vima, to be giddy, allied to Icel.
vim, giddiness, from *wim, by-form of *whkim; see Whim. So also
Dan, vimse, to skip about, vims, brisk, quick.4-Du. wemelen, to move
about, or ‘to remove often,’ Hexham; a frequentative verb from a
Teut. base *wem-, perhaps meaning toturn. See Wimble (1). Cf,
MG. wimmen, to stir oneself quickly (Schade).

WIMPLE, a covering for the neck. (E.) In Spenser, F, Q.i. 12.
22; hence wimpled, id.i. 1. 4; Shak. L. L. L. iii. 181. ME. wimpel,
Chaucer, C. T. 151 ; Rob. of Gloue. p. 338, 1.6941; hence ywimpled,.
Chaucer, C. T. 472 (A 470). AS. winpel, the same. ‘ Ricinum,
winpel, vel orl,’ Voc. 107. 37; ‘Anabola, winpel,’ id. 125. 8.-4-Du.
wimpel, a streamer, a pendant; Icel. vimpill; Dan. and Swed. vimpel,
a pennon, pendant, streamer ; G. wimpel, a pennon (whence F, guimpe,
E. gimp). B. The AS, win-pel was doubtless a compound ; prob. for
*wind-pel, where *wind- is from windan, to wind; and perhaps -pel
is for AS. pell, peil (Latin palliwm),a covering. Cf. OHG.wim-pal,
a summer garment, head-dress, pennon. And see Gimp.

WIN, to gain by labour or contest, earn, obtain. (E.) The orig.
sense was to fight, struggle; hence to struggle for, gain by struggling.
ME. winnen, pt. t. wan, won, Chaucer, C. T. 444 (A 442); pp.
wonnen, id. 879 (A 877). AS. winnan, to fight, labour, endure,
suffer; pt. t. wann, pp. wunnen, Grein, ii. 715.4+Du. winnen, pt. t.
won, pp. gewonnen ; Icel. vinna, pt. t. vann, pp. unninn, to work, toil,
win; Dan. vinde (for vinne); Swed. vinna; G. gewinnen, OHG.
winnan, to fight, strive, earn, suffer; Goth. winnan, pt. t. wann, pp.
wunnans, to suffer, . All from Teut. type *wennan- (pt. t. *wann),
to work, suffer, strive.—4/WEN, to desire, hence to strive for;


whence’ Skt. van, to ask, beg for, also to honour, L. Ven-us, desire, —


WINBERRY, WIMBERRY


love, wen-er-dri, to honour; W. gwéz,asmile. Der. winn-er, winn-
ing ; also win-some, q.v. From the same root are wean, ween, won-t,
wi-sh; also ven-er-e-al, ven-er-ate.

WINBERRY, WIMBERRY, a whortleberry. (E.) Whortle-
berries are called, in some parts, wimberries or winberries. The latter
form, in Halliwell, is the more correct. ME. winberis, grapes,
Cursor Mundi, 4468, AS. win-berie, win-berige, a grape; lit. a wine-
berry, Matt. vii. 16; Luke, vi. 44. See Wine and Berry.

WINCE, WINCH, to shrink or start back. (F.—MHG.) ME.
wincen, winsen, winchen. ‘It isthe wone of wil to wynse and to kyke’
=it is the wont of Will (wilfulness) to wince and to kick, P. Plow-
man, C. v. 22. ‘Weyncyn, Calcitro;’ Prompt. Parv. Spelt wynche,
Allit. Morte Arthure, 2104.—OF. *wencir, not found, but necessarily
the older form of OF . guincir (Godefroy) ; (note AF. guincer, Toynbee,
x. 96, to escape); North F. variant of OF. gwenchir, to flinch, wince
(Godefroy), MF. guinchir, ‘to wrigle, writhe, winche a toe-side’
[i.e. on the one side, aside]; Cot. Roquefort gives guincher, guinchir,
to wince; also guencher, guenchir, guencir, the same; Burguy gives
ganchir, guenchir, guencir.—OSax. wenkian; cf. MHG. wenken,
wenchen, to wince, start aside; cf. also wanken, OHG. wankdn, weak
verb, thesame. Teut. type *wankjan-, a causal form. = Teut. *wank,
and grade of *wenkan-, asin MHG. winken, to move aside, to nod,
the same as G. winken, to nod; cognate with E. Wink, q.v. Wéince
is, in fact, merely the causal verb formed from wink. Cf. G. wanken,
to totter, waver, stir, budge, flinch, shrink back.

WINCH, the crank of a wheel or axle. (E.) ME. winche;
spelt wynche, Palladius on Husbandry, b, i. 1. 426. (Cf. prov. E.
wink, a periwinkle, also a winch; Halliwell. KE. Cornwall wink,
‘the wheel by which straw-rope is made;* E.D.S.] AS, wince.
‘ Gigrillus, wince, Voc. 416. 6 ; here Gigrillus is an error for girgillus,
a winch; see Ducange. The connexion with winkle is obvious (see
Winkle); and both winch and winkle are derivatives from Teut.
base WENK, to bend sideways, nod, totter, &c.; see further under
Wink. A winch was simply ‘a bend,’ hence a bent handle; cf. AS.
wincel, 2 corner (Somner); MHG. wenke, a bending or crooking ;
Lithuan, winge, a bend or turn of a river or road. And cf. Norman
dial. vinche, ‘ guindeau; ’ Le Héricher. Andsee Winkle, Wench.

WIND (1), air in motion, breath. (E.) ME. wind, wynd, Wyclif,
Matt. xiv. 24. AS. wind, Grein, ii. 712.4-Du. wind; Icel. vindr;
Dan. and Swed. vind; G. wind, OHG. wint; Goth. winds, winths.
B. All from the Teut. type *wenddz, m., wind. Cognate with L.
uentus, W. gwynt, Breton gwent, wind. Orig. a pres. part., Idg.
*weénto-, signifying ‘blowing.’ From,4/AWH, toblow. Hencealso
Skt. va, to blow, vata-s, wind, Goth. waian, to blow; Russ. vietat(e), to
blow, vieter’, wind, Lithuan. wéjas, wind; as well as L uentus and
E. wind. See Brugmann, i. § 420. And see Weather. Der.
wind, to blow a horn, pp. winded, Much Ado, i. 1. 243, oddly cor-
rupted to wound (by confusion with the strong verb fo wind), Scott,
Lady of the Lake, i. 17. 1; &c.; wind-age, a coined word; wind-
bound, Milton, Hist. of Britain, b. ii, ed. 1695, p. 44; wind-fall, that
which falls from trees, &c., being blown down by the wind, hence, a
piece of good fortune that costs nothing, Beaum. and Fletcher, The
Captain, ii. 1 (Fabritio), also used in a bad sense (like downfall),
Bacon, Essay 29, Of Kingdoms; wind-mill, ME. wind-mulle, Rob. of
Glouc. p. 547, 1. 11383; wind-pipe, spelt wyndpype in Palsgrave;
wind-row, a tow of cut grass exposed to the wind, Holland, tr. of
Pliny, b. xviii. c. 28; wind-ward; wind-y, AS. windig, Grein, ii. 713;
wind-i-ness, And see wind-ow, winn-ow, vent-il-ate.

WIND (2), to turn round, coil, encircle, twist round. (E.) ME.
winden, pt. t. wand, wond, pl. wonden, P. Plowman, B. ii. 220, pp.
wunden, spelt wnden, Havelok, 546. AS. windan, pt. t. wand, wond,
pp- wunden; Grein, ii. 713.4-Du. winden; Icel. vinda, pt. t. vatt (for
vand), pp. undinn; Dan, vinde, Swed. vinda, to squint; G. winden,
pt. t. wand, pp. gewunden; OHG. wintan; Goth. -windan, only in
compounds such as biwindan, dugawindan, uswindan; pt. t. -wand;
pp. -wundans. B. All from Teut. type *wendan- (pt. t. *wand, pp.
*~yundanoz), to wind or bind round, hence to turn. Perhaps ulti-
mately allied to4/WEI, to twine; see Withy. Streitberg, §§ 68,
203, note 2, Der, wind-ing, sb.; also wind-lass, q.v.; wend, q.V. }
wand-er, q.v.3; wond-er, q.v.; wand, q.v.

WINDLASS (1), a machine with an axle, for raising heavy
weights. (Scand.) The spelling windlass is a by-form, encouraged
by popular etymology (as if the word were from wind, verb, and
lace), of the shorter word below. ME, windelas, windlas, Prompt.
Parv., p. 529.—Icel. vindil-dss, a windlass (still in use, see Notes on
E. Etym., p. 321).—Icel. vindill, a winder; and dss, a beam.
B. But the commoner ME. form was windas, Chaucer, C. T. 104098
(F 184); Rich. Cuer de Lion, 1. 71; Allit. Poems, ed. Morris,
C. 103. ‘Weyndace for an engyn, guyndas;’ Palsgrave.=—Icel.
vindass, a windlass; lit. a winding-pole, i.e. a rounded pole (like an
axis) which can be wound round. =Icel. vind-a, to wind; and dss, a


WINK


pole, main rafter, yard of a sail, &c. sy. Here vinda is cognate
with E. wind; see Wind (2). The Icel. dss is cognate with Goth.
ans, a beam, Luke, vi. 41 (the long a showing a loss of n), The
root of dss is not known; it has nothing to do with awis or axle, as
some suggest.4-Du. windas, a windlass; MDu. windaes, ‘a winds
lasse or an engine,’ Hexham; where aes (Icel. dss, a beam) is
distinct from MDu. asse (mod. Du. as), an axis.

WINDLASS (2), a circuit, circuitous way. (F.—Teut.?) Shak.
has windlasses, Hamlet, ii. 1.65. ‘ Bidding them fetch a windlasse
a great way abont;’ Golding, tr. of Cesar, fol. 206 (R.). * And
fetched a windlasse round about ;’ Golding, tr. of Ovid (see Wright’s
note on Hamlet). ‘I now fetching a windlesse,’ Lyly, Euphues, ed.
Arber, p. 270. Apparently compounded of wind (verb) and Jace ;
but it was prob. a popular alteration of ME. wanlace, a trick,
subtlety, artifice. Golding has the form wizlas, for L. gyrum, Ovid,
Metam. vil. 784. Wanlace is used by Rob. of Brunne, Handlyng
Synne, 4378, 12016.—OF. wanelace, perfidy, deceit (Godefroy) 3
also spelt wenelat (id.). Hence the ME. wanelasour, wandlessour,
one who drives game (Stratmann). Prob. a hunting term, of Teut.
origin. See Gloss. to Toynbee’s Specimens of Old French. Per-
haps allied to MHG. wandelat, change, alteration, OHG. wantalén,
G, ver-wandeln, to change, OHG, wanta, a turning, a small (green)
path; all connected with Wind, verb, and Wander.

WINDOW, an opening for light and air. (Scand.) The orig.
sense is ‘ wind-eye,’ i.e. eye or hole for the wind to enter at, an
opening for air andlight. [The AS. word was égJyrl (=eye-thrill),
Joshua, ii. 15 ; also éagdura (=eye-door), according to Bosworth. }
ME. windou, Cursor Mundi, 1683; windoge, Genesis and Exodus,
ed. Morris, 1. 602; windohe, Ancren Riwle, p. 50, note a; windowe,
P. Plowman, B. iii. 48; Wyclif, Acts, xx. 9.—Icel. vindauga, a
window ; lit. ‘ wind-eye.’—Icel. vindr, wind; and auga, an eye,
cognate with AS, éage, an eye; Dan. vindue, a window; (cf. vind,
wind, and die, an eye) ; but Dan. vindueis from a Low G. *wind-ooge
(wind-eye). See Wind (1) and Bye. q Butler has windore,
Hudibras, pt. ic. 2. 1. 214, as if from wind and door; but this is
nothing but a corruption.

WINE, the fermented juice of the vine. (L.) ME. win (with
long i), Chaucer, C. T. 637 (A 635). AS. wiz, Grein, ii. 712.—L.,
uinum, wine (whence also Goth, wein, G. wein, OHG. win, Du. wijn,
Icel. vin, Swed. vin, Dan. viin).4-Gk. ofvos, wine, allied to oivy, the
vine. = 4/WEI, to twine; see Withy. 8. § The Northern names,
Goth. wein, G. win, &c. are undoubtedly to be regarded (with Jac.
Grimm, Gramm. iii. 466) as borrowed ; so also Olrish fiz, wine, &c.
Pott very appropriately compares the Lith. apwynys, hop-tendril, pl.
apwynei, hops. The Skt. vézi-, a braid of hair, also belongs here.
We cannot see why the fruit of the twining plant should not itself
have been called originally ‘twiner.’? The Lith. word offers the
most striking analogy. The fact is, therefore, that the Indo-
Germans had indeed a common root for the idea of winding, twining,
and hence derived the names of various twining plants, but that it is
only among the Greeco-Italians that we find a common name for
the grape and its juice;’ Curtius, i. 487. See Brugmann, i. § 204,
li. § 66. @ Not of Semitic origin ; rather, the Heb. yayin, wine,
Arab. waynat, black grape, are borrowed from the Idg. type *wozno-,
The early L. uinum meant ‘vine.’ Der. wine-dibber, Matt. xi. 19;
see Bib.

WING, the limb by which a bird flies, any side-piece, flank.
(Scand.) ME. winge (dissyllabic), Chaucer, C. T. 1966 (A 1964) ;
the pl. appears as kwingen, Ancren Riwle, p. 130, last line, Layamon,
29263; we also find wenge, whenge (dat. case), P. Plowman, BL
xii, 263; ‘wenge of a fowle, Ala, Prompt. Parv.; pl. wenges,
Ormulum, 8024. It is clear that the form wenge is Scand.; and, as
there does not seem to be any authority for an alleged AS. winge, it
is simplest to suppose winge to result from wenge. [The AS. word
for ‘wing’ is feder.|—Norw. vengja (for ON. *wengja); Icel. vengr,
a wing; Dan. and Swed. vinge; North Fries. winge. Teut. type
waingt-, allied to Goth. waian, to blow (cf. Du. waatjer, a fan); Skt.
va, to blow, vajin-, winged (Macdonell); from 4/WE, to blow.
Der. wing, verb, to fly, Cymb. iii, 3. 28; wing-ed, Chaucer, C. T..
1387 (A 1385); wing-less.

K, to move the eyelids quickly. (E.) 1. ME. winken, pt. t.
winked, P. Plowman, B.iv.154. AS. wincian,to wink. ‘Conniveo,
ic wincige;’ Voc. 140.17. 2. But winken also occurs as a strong
verb, pt. t. wank, Ancient Met. Tales, ed. Hartshorne, p. 79 (Strat-
mann) ; also wonk, Lancelot of the Laik, ed. Skeat, 1. 1058; and
we may certainly conclude that there was also a strong verb, viz.
AS. *wincan, with pt. t. *wanc, pp. *wuncen. This is verified by AS..
wancol, wavering, and. E, wench, q.v.; as well as by the cognate
forms.+MDu. wincken (Hexham) ; also wencken, ‘to winke, or to
give a signe or token with the eyes;’ id. Allied to MDu, wanck,


awe


a moment, an instant,’ id. (lit. the twinkling of an eye) ; wanckel,


718 WINKLE


unsteady; Icel. vanka, to wink, to rove; Dan. vinke, to beckon; cf.
vanke, to rove, stroll; Swed. vinka, to beckon, wink; cf. vanka, to
rove, vankelmodig, fickle-minded ; G. winken, to nod, make a sign;
OHG. winkan, strong vb., to move aside, stir, waver (see Schade).
B. Teut. type *wenkan-, pt. t. *wank, pp. *wunkanoz. Further
allied to Lithuan. wengti, to shirk work, to flinch, wingis, a bend of
a river, wangus, idle. Der. wink, sb., Temp. ii. 1. 285. Also
(from the same root) wench, wince, winch, winkle, peri-winkle (the sea-
snail). Cf. vacillate.

WINKLE, a kind of sea-snail. (E.) Holland, tr. of Pliny,
b. ix. c. 32, uses winkles to denote shell-fish and also snails. AS.
-wincla, occurring in wine-wincla, a winkle ; see A. S. Leechdoms,
ii. 240;-misprinted pinewinclan, as a gloss to torniculi in /Elfric’s
Colloquy; Voc. 94. 14. Named from the convoluted shell; allied
to Winch, q.v., and to Wink, Der. periwinkle (2), q.v-

WINNOW, to fan grain, so as to separate the chaff from it. (E.)
Winnow stands for window, if we may so write it ; 2 being put for
nd (but without reference to the sb, window). ME. windewen,
Wyclif, Jer. xlix. 36, to translate L. wentilaire; some MSS. have
wynewen, showing that the d was being lost just at this time. AS.
windwian, less correctly wyndwian, Ps. xliii. 7, ed. Spelman; to
translate L. uentilare.— AS. wind, wind; with formative suffix -w-.
See Wind. Cf. Goth. winthi-skauré, a winnowing-fan ; diswinthjan,
to disperse, grind to powder ; from *winths, collateral form of winds,
wind. So also OHG. wintdn, to winnow, from wint, wind; Icel.
vinza, to winnow, from vindr, wind; L. wentilare from uentus; see
Ventilate. Der. winnow-er, winnow-ing-fan.

WINSOME, pleasant, lovely. (E.) ME. winsom, with the sense
‘propitious,’ Northumb. Psalter, Ps. lxxviii. g; also ‘pleasant,’ id.
Ps. Ixxx, 3. AS. wynsum, delightful, Grein, ii. 759; formed with
suffix -swm (E. -some) from wynn, joy, id. ii. 757. Wynn is formed
(by vowel-change from z to y), from wunn-, weak grade of winnan,
to desire, win; see Win. Cf. OSax. wunnia, G. wonne, joy (from
winnen) ; Icel. unadr, joy, unadsamr, winsome ; Skt. vani-, desire.

TER, the cold season, fourth season of the year. (E.)
ME. winter, orig. unchanged in the plural; ‘a thousand winter’ =
a thousand winters, i.e. years ; Chaucer, C. T. 7233 (D 1651). AS.
winter, a winter, also a year; pl. winter, or wintru.4-Du. winter ;
Icel. vetr; Olcel. vettr, vitir, assimilated form of vintr; Dan. and
Swed. vinter; G. winter, OHG. wintar; Goth. wintrus. B. All
from Teut. type *wintruz, for older *wentruz, winter, Fick, iii. 284;
where -rzv- is evidently a suffix. Origin doubtful, but the suggestion
in Fick is a good one, viz, that it meant ‘ wet season,’ and is a
nasalised form allied to E. wet. This is made more probable by
the fact that we find nasalised forms of this root in L. unda, a wave,
Lithuan. wandi#, water, Skt. und, to wet, moisten; whilst, on the
other hand, we find E. water with a similar suffix, but without the
nasal sound. See Wet, Water. Der. winter, verb, to pass the
winter ; wintr-y (for winter-y) ; winter-ly, Cymb. iii, 4. 13; winter-
quarters,

WIPE, verb, to cleanse by rubbing, to rub. (E.) ME. wipen,
Chaucer, C. T. 133. AS. wipian, to wipe; A‘lfric’s Homilies, i. 426,
1. 30; ‘ Tergo, ic wipige,’ Atlfric’s Gram. ed. Zupitza, p. 172, 1. 8.
This is a weak verb, meaning to rub over with a wisp, or to use
a wisp of straw ; formed, with the usual casual suffix -iaz, from a sb.
*wip, a wisp of straw, which does not occur in AS, But it is pre-
served in EFries. wip, Pomeranian wiip, Hamburg wype, a twist or
wisp of straw, and in Low G, wiep, a wisp of straw, or a rag to
wipe anything with, Bremen Worterbuch, v. 269; and the common
E. wisp is related to it. Cf. Goth. waip-s, a wreath, from the strong
verb weipan, to crown (orig. to twine); cf. OHG. wifan, to wind
round. See Wisp. Der. wipe, sb., sometimes in the sense of
sarcasm or taunt, Shak. Lucrece, 537; wip-er.

WIRE, a thread of metal. (E.) ME. wir, wyr (with long :);
dat. wyre, P. Plowman, B.ii. 11. AS. wir, a wire, Grein, ii. 717.4
Low G. (Hamburg) wyren, pl., wires; Icel. virr, wire; cf. Swed.
vira, to wind, twist. Cf. OHG. wiara, MHG. wiere, an ornament of
refined gold. Orig. a thread of metal, properly a ‘twisted’ thread
or an ornament of twisted metal-wire; cf. Icel. viravirki, filagree-
work, lit. ‘wire-work ;’ L. wrie, armlets of metal. Formed with
suffix -ro- from 4/WEI, to twist, twine; see Withy. Der. wire-
draw, verb, to draw into wire; wire-draw-ing; wire-work; wir-y.
And see ferrule.

WIS; for this fictitious verb, see Y wis.

WISE (1), having knowledge, discreet, learned. (E.) ME. wis
(with long 7), wys, Chaucer, C. T. 68. AS. wis, wise ; Grein, ii, 718.
+Du. wijs; Icel. vass; Dan. viis; Swed, vis; G. weise, OHG. wis;
Goth. -weis, in comp. unweis, unwise. B. All from Teut. type
*wisoz; for *witsoz; from Teut. base *wit-, answering to Idg.
YWEID, to know; see Wit (1). Thus wise=‘knowing;”’ cf.
cunning, adj.; Brugmann, i. §§ 759, 794. @ Otherwise explained


WISTFUL


as for *wissoz<*wittoz; formed from *wit-, Idg. *wid-, weak grade
of 4/WEID (as above). Der. wise-ly; wis-dom, AS. wisdom, Grein,
ii. 719 (where dim=E. doom, i.e. judgement) ; wiseman (one word),
As You Like It, i. 2. 93, &c. ; wise-ness, Hamlet, v. 1. 286. Also
wise (2). (But not wiseacre, q. v.)

WISE (2), way, manner, guise. (E.) ME, wise (dissyllabic),
Chaucer, C. T. 1448 (A 1446). AS. wise, Grein, ii. 719.-4-Du. wijs ;
Icel. -vis, in the comp. ddruvis, otherwise; Dan. viis; Swed. vis;
G. weise; OHG. wisa (whence, through French, E. guise).  B. All
from Teut. type *wisdn-, f. Allied to AS. wisian, to show the way,
direct, orig. ‘to make wise, to instruct; from wis, adj. wise. See
Wise (1). Cf. L. uisus, sb., appearance. Der. like-wise, other-
wise. Doublet, guise.

WISEACREH, a wise fellow (ironically), a fool. (Du.—G.) In
Blount’s Gloss., ed. 1674.—MDnu. wijs-segger, as if ‘a wise-sayer,
whence wijs-seggen (Hexham), a verb wrongly used as if equivalent
to the more usual MDu. waerseggen, ‘to sooth-say,’ id., whence
waersegger, ‘a diviner, or a soothsayer,’ id. (from MDu. waer, true).
But the MDu. word is merely borrowed from G. weissager, a sooth-
sayer, as if it meant ‘a wise-sayer;” cf. weissagen, to foretell,
prophesy, soothsay. B. Not only is the E. form a travesty of the
G. word, but the latter has itself suffered from the manipulation of
popular etymology, and is a corrupt form, having originally nothing
to do with the verb ¢o say, nor even precisely containing the word
wise. This appears from the older forms; the G. weissagen is the
MHG. wizagon, to prophesy, corrupted to wizsagen, wissagen, by
confusion with sagen, to say. This MHG. verb was unoriginal,
being formed from the sb. wizago, a prophet, which was itself
afterwards corrupted into weissager. y. Now wiz-ag-o is exactly
parallel to AS. wit-eg-a or wit-ig-a, a prophet (Grein, ii. 726) ;
both words are formed (with adj. suffix -ag (-ig) and sb. suffix -o (-a),
denoting the agent) from the verb which appears as OHG. wizan,
AS. witan, to see; from 4/WEID, to know; see Wit. 6. It
follows that the s is for G. z, the equivalent of E.¢; whilst the un-
meaning suffix -acre is no worse than the corrupt G. suffix -sager.
Moreover, the sense ‘wise-sayer’ is merely an erroneous popular
interpretation; the true sense is simply seer (= see-er).

WISH, to have a desire, be inclined. (E.) ME. wisshen, wischen ;
P. Plowman, B. v. 111. AS. wyscan, to wish;. Grein, ii. 766; less
correctly wiscan, id. The long 9 shows a loss of n, and wyscan re-
presents Teut. type *wunskjan-, to wish; a verb formed from the
Tent. sb. *wunsko-,a wish. Cf. Du. wenschen; Icel. eskja, with the
usual loss of initial v, and written for eskja; Dan. dnske; Swed.
éuska; G. wiinschen; OHG. wunscan. B. The AS. sb. is wise,
a wish, very rare, in /tlfred, tr. of Beda, b. v. c. 19, ed. Smith,
p- 638, l. 40, where it is misprinted wiisc ; whence wyscan, vb., with
the usual change from @ to y. Cognate words to the sb. are found
in MDu. wunsch (Hexham); Icel. dsk; G. wunsch; OHG. wunse;
the Teut. types being *wanskoz, m., *wunska, f. All from Teut.
*wunsk-, weak grade of *wen-sk-, formed with verbal suffix -sk-
(L. -scd) from 4/ WEN, to desire, strive after, appearing in Skt. van,
to ask, and in E. win; see Win. Cf. Skt. vaachh, to desire, wish,
from van, to ask. Der. wish, sb., merely from the verb, and not the
same as the more orig. ME. wusch, Prompt. Parv. p. 535, which
answers to AS. wiisc, as above. Also wish-er, well-wish-er ; well-
wish-ed, Meas. for Meas. ii. 4. 27; wish-ful, i.e. longing, 3 Hen. VI,
iii. 1. 143 wish-ful-ly, wish-ful-ness. And see wist-ful.

WISP, a small bundle of straw or hay. (E.) ME. wisp, wips;
spelt wispe, wips, P. Plowman, B. v.351; wysp, wesp,wips, id. A. v.195;
the Vernon MS. has ‘Iwipet with a wesp’ = wiped with a wisp. Asin
other cases where sp and gs are interchanged, the spelling with fs is
the older; cf. kasp, clasp, &c. The AS. form would be *wips, but it
does not occur; and the final s is formative, wip-s being closely con-
nected with the verb to wipe. We find also Low G. wiep, a wisp;
Norweg. vippa, a wisp to sprinkle or daub with (also a swape, or
machine for raising water); Swed. dial. vipp, an ear of rye, also
a little sheaf or bundle; Goth. waips, a crown, orig. a twisted
wreath (where -s is merely the suffix of the Goth. nom. case).
B. Thus the Teut. base is *wip-, weak grade of *weipan-, as seen in
Goth. weipan, to crown, to. wreathe, OHG. wifan, to wind round
(hence, to twist). See Wipe. It has probably been confused with
whisk, as in Dan. visk, a wisp, a rubber; but the two words are from
different roots; see Whisk. Cf. MSwed. wisp, a wisp; mod. Swed.
visp, a whisk, a twirling-stick.

WIST, knew, or known; see Wit (1).

WISTFUL, eager, earnest, attentive, pensive. (E.) The word


‘appears to be not very old, and it has almost supplanted the word


wishful, which was once common. The orig. sense seems to have
been ‘silent’ or ‘hushed;’ as in ‘the sweet dale and the wistfull


‘hill,’ W. Browne, Britannia’s Pastorals, bk. ii. song 2. 544 (see Cent.
‘Dict.).. If so, it stands for whist-ful, from whist, silent, hushed; see


18 i


Whist. It would naturally be associated with the adv. wistly,
attentively, earnestly, used 4 times by Shakespeare, which may
likewise have arisen from whist, silent. The quartos read wishtly
(whistly ?) for wistly in Rich. II, v. 4. 7; see also Venus and Adonis,
343, Lucrece, 1355, Pass. Pilgrim, 82. B. As regards wishful, &c.,
we find wishful in 3 Hen. VI, iii. 1. 14; ‘There be certain
Women that can kill with their eye-sight whom they look wishfully
upon ;’ Ady, Discovery of Witches (1661), p. 97. ‘ O. Hoard. I long
to have a smack at her lips. Hoard. And most wiskfully, brother,
see where she comes;’ Middleton, Trick to Catch the Old One,
A.v.sc. 2. ‘I sat looking wishfully at the clock,’ Idler, no. 67 (R.) ;
‘We looked at the fruit very wishfully,’ Cook, First Voyage, b. iii.
c. 7; ‘i was weary of this day, and began to think wishfully of
being again in motion,’ Boswell, Tour to the Hebrides, p. 98 (Todd) ;
‘T looked at them wishfully,” Boswell, Life of Johnson, Sept. 1,1773.
y: Examples of wistful occur in : ‘ Lifting up one of my sashes, [I] cast
many a wistful melancholy look towards the sea,’ Swift, Gulliver,
bk, ii. ch. 8; ‘Why, Grubbinol, dost thou so wistful seem? There’s
sorrow in thy look,’ Gay, Pastorals, Friday, 1. 1. 5. Note that
wishly (=wishfully) occurs in the Mirrors for Magistrates, p. 863
(Todd). Also, that Sir T. More seems to use wishely nearly in the
sense of ME. wisly, certainly, which suggests a possibility that
wis(t)ly arose from that form: ‘To putte on his spectacles, and pore


‘. better and more wishely with his olde eyen vpon Saynt Iohns


ghospell;” Sir T. More, Workes, p. 1134 (R.). Der. wistful-ly,
WIT (1), to know. (E.) This verb is ill understood and has
suffered much at the hands of grammarians and compilers of dic-
tionaries. Wit is the infin. mood; ¢o wit (as in ‘ we do you fo wit’)
is the gerund; wot is the 1st and 3 pers. of the present indicative, the
3rd person being often corruptly written wotteth; wost (later form
wottest) is the 2nd pers. sing. of the same tense; wiste, later wist, is
the pt. t.; and wist is the pp. [The adv. ywis or Iwis, certainly,
was often misunderstood, and a verb wis, to know, was evolved,
which is wholly unsanctioned by grammar; see Ywis.] ME. witen,
infin.; pres. t. wot, wost, wot, pl. witen; pt. t. wiste, pp. wist; see
Chaucer, C. T. 1142, 1158, 1165, 8690, 9614 (A 1140, 1156, 1163,
E 814, 1740), &c. [There was also ME. witen, to see (with long?) ;
see Stratmann, who puts wot under this latter verb, as if have seen=
I know. It makes little difference, since AS. witan, to know, and
witan, to see, are closely connected; I follow the arrangement in
Grein.] AS. witan, to know; pres. t. ic wat, J& wast, hé wat, pl.
witon ; subj. sing. wite, pl. witon; pt. t. wiste (sometimes wwisse), 2 p.
wisses, pl. wiston; pp. wist; Grein, ii. 722. Allied to AS, witan,
to see; pt. t. wat, pl. witon; id. ii. 724. It is clear that ic wat is
really an old past tense (of witax) used as a present; causing the
necessity of creating a new past tense wisse or wiste, which is, how-
ever, of great antiquity. Similar anomalous verbs are found in E.,
viz. can, may, shall, &c. The gerund is 26 witanne, whence mod. E.
to wit. The form weet, in Spenser, F. Q. i. 3. 6, is nothing but a
corruption of wit.4-Du. weten, pt. t. wist, pp. geweten; Icel. vita,
pr. t. veit, pt. t. vissa, pp. vitadr ; Dan. vide, pr. t. veed, pt. t. vidste,
pp. vidst ; Swed. veta, pr.t. vet, pt. t. visste, pp. veten; G. wissen,
pr. t. weiss, pt. t. wusste, pp. gewusst; Goth. witan, pr. t. wait, pt. t.
wissa. B. All from Teut. type *witan-, to know, pr. t. *wait, the
base being *weit-, orig. ‘to see. Further allied to Lithuan.
weizdéti, to see, Russ. vidiet(e), to see, L. uidére, to see, Gk. ideiy,
to see, ofa, I know, Skt. véda, I know, orig. I have seen (=E.
wot), Skt. vid, to perceive, know, orig. to see.=4/WEID, to see,
perceive, know. Der. wit (2), q.v., wit-ness, q.v., t-wit (for at-
wit); witt-ing-ly, knowingly, Haml. v. 1. 11. Also, from the
same root, wise, guise; vis-ion, vis-ible, &c. (see Vision) ; id-ea,
id-ol, and the suffix -id in rhombo-id, &c.; ved-a, And see wiseacre,
wizard,

WIT (2), understanding, knowledge, the power of combining
ideas with a happy or ludicrous effect. (E.) ME.>wit, Chaucer,
C. T. 748 (A 746). AS. witt, knowledge, Grein, ii, 722.—AS.
witan, to know; see Wit (1).-+4Icel. vit; Dan. vid; Swed. vett ;
Goth, -witi, in comp. un-witi, n., lack of wisdom; allied to G. witz.
Teut. type *witjom, n. Der. wit-less, wit-less-ly, wit-less-ness; wit-
l-ing, a pretender to wit, with double dimin. suffix -l-ing ; witt-ed, as
in blunt-witted, 2 Hen. VI, iii. 2. 2103; witt-y, AS. witig or wittig,
Grein, ii. 726; witt-i-ly, witt-i-ness. Also witt-i-c-ism, used by Dryden
in his pref. to the State of Innocence, with the remark that he
asks ‘pardon for a new word’ (R.); evidently put for witty-ism,
the c being introduced to avoid the hiatus, and being suggested by
Galli-cism, 8c. :

WIT (3), a. wise man, witty fellow. (E.) ME. wite; AS. wita,
lit. ‘one who knows.’ =AS. witan, to know. Der. witena gemédt,
a meeting of ‘ wits,’ a parliament.

WITCH, a woman regarded as having magical power. (E.)
Formerly used also of a man, Comedy of Errors, iv, 4. 160, Antony,


WITHERS 719


i. 2. 40; but this is unusual. ME. wicche, applied to a man,
P. Plowman, B. xviii. 69 ; also to a woman, Sir Percival, 1, 826 (in
the Thornton Romances). AS. wicca, masc. a wizard; wicce, fem.
a witch, ‘Ariolus, wicca;’? Voc. 183. 31. ‘Phytonyssa, wycce,’
Voc. 313. 5-. The pl. wiccan, occurring in the Laws of Edward and
Guthrum, § 11, and Laws of Cnut, Secular, § 4 (Thorpe, Anc. Laws,
i. 172, 378), may refer to either gender. B. Wicce is merely the
fem. of wicca; and wicca is a sb., denoting the agent, allied to
wiccian, to practise sorcery, EFries. wikken.4-MDu. wicker, ‘a sooth-
sayer,’ Hexham ; Low G. wikken, to predict (see wicken, to practise
sorcery, in Schade). Cf. Norw. vikja (1) to turn aside, (2) to con-
jure away, exorcise. This links it with Icel. vikja (pp. vik-inn),
to move, turn, push aside; Dan. vige, as in vige bort, Sdtan! ‘get
thee behind me, Satan!’ Cf. AS. wican, to give way ; whence E.
weak, Perhaps wiccian meant ‘to avert;’ and wicca, ‘an averter.’
B. Also explained as a variant of AS. witga, shortened form of
witega, a wise man, a prophet, a soothsayer; cf. Icel. vitki, a wizard,
allied to vita,to know. For AS. witega, see Wiseacre. Der. witch-
craft, AS. wiccecreft, Levit. xx. 27, from wicce, a witch, and creft
craft, art. Also witch, verb, AS. wiccian, Thorpe, Ancient Laws,
ii, 274, sect. 39 ; hence witch-er-y, a coined word, Browne, Britannia’s
Pastorals, b. ii. s. 1,1. 412. Also be-witch, q.v.

WITCH-ELM, WYCH-ELM, a kind ofelm. (E.) Spelt
weech-elm, Bacon, Nat. Hist. § 475. There is also a. witch-hasel.
ME. wyche, wiche; ‘ Wyche, tre, Ulmus;’ Prompt. Parv. AS. wice,
occurring in a list of trees. ‘ Virecta, wice; Cariscus, wice;’ Voc.
269. 16,19. The sense is ‘drooping’ or ‘ bending ;’ and it is de-
rived from AS. wic-, weak grade of wican, to bend; see Wicker.
The ¢ in the word is superfluous, and due to confusion with the word
witch above. ‘Some varieties of the wych-elm have the branches
quite pendulous, like the weeping-willow, thus producing a most
graceful effect; Our Woodlands, by W. S. Coleman.

WITH, by, near, among. (E.) ME. with, Chaucer, C. T. 1.
AS. wid, governing gen., dat., and acc.; Grein, ii. 692. It often
has the sense of ‘against,’ which is still preserved in to fight with=to
fight against, and in with-say, with-stand.+Icel. vid, against, by, at,
with ; Dan. ved, by, at; Swed. vid, near, at, by. B. From Teut.
type*wi-th-, against, shortened from AS. wi-der, against; see Withers.
@ We must observe that with has to a great extent taken the place
of AS. and ME. mid, with, which is now obsolete. Der. with-al,
wit it, with, Temp. iii. 1. 93, ME. withalle, Chaucer, C. T. 14130
(B 3314), compounded of with, prep., and alle, dat. case of al, all,
and used in place of AS. mid ealle, with all, wholly, Grein, i. 238, 1. 12.
Also with-in, ME, with-inne, Wyclif, Matt. ii. 16, AS. widinnan, on
the inside, Matt. xxiii. 26; with-out, ME. with-uten, with-outen,
Chaucer, C. T. 463 (A 461), AS. widuian, on the outside of, Matt.
Xxili, 25; and note that AS. zznan and aan are properly adverbial
formations, extended from zw and a respectively. And see with-
draw, with-hold, with-say, with-stand ; also with-ers.

WITHDRAW, to draw back or away, to recall. (E.) ME.
withdrawen, to draw back, take away, Ancren Riwle, p. 230, last line.
Not found in AS. From With and Draw; where with has the
old sense of ‘ towards,’ hence towards oneself, and away from another.
Der. with-draw-al, with-draw-ment, late and coined words. Also
withdrawing-room, a retiring-room, esp. for ladies (see example in
Todd’s Johnson, and in Scott, Fortunes of Nigel, ch. ix.), now un-
meaningly shortened to drawing-room !

WITHE, WITH, a flexible twig ; see Withy.

WITHER, to fade. (E.) Palsgrave has: ‘I wydder, as a floure
dothe ;’ and ‘I wydder, I drie up.’ ME. widren, not an old form.
‘ Now grene as leif, now widderit and ago;’ Test. of Creseide, 1. 238.
This ME, widren is nothing but a variant of ME. wederen, to ex-
pose to the weather, so that widred=wedered, exposed to weather.
‘ Wederyn, or leyn or hangyn yn the weder, Auro ;’ Prompt. Parv.
And the verb wederen is from ME. weder, weather; see Weather.
For the z, cf. AS. ge-wider, weather, temperature; Icel. haf-vidri, a
sea-breeze. Cf. G. ver-wittern, to decay by exposure to the atmo-
sphere ; from wetter, weather, storm. @ It follows that wither
is properly transitive, as in ‘Age cannot wither her,’ Antony, ii.
2. 240; but the intrans. use is much more common.

WITHERS, the ridge between the shoulder-blades of a horse.
(E.) In Hamlet, iii. 2. 253. Skelton has: ‘Ware gallyng in the
widders;’ i, 24. So called because it is the part which the
horse opposes to his load, or on which the stress of the collar
comes in drawing. Cf. Cleveland withers, the barbs of an arrow-
head, which oppose its being drawn backwards (Atkinson). The
lit. sense is ‘things which resist ;’ formed from ME. wider, re-
sistance. ‘ Wider com to-3enes’=resistance (or an adverse wind)
came against me; Layamon, 4678. Hence widerful, full of re-
sistance, hostile, O. Eng. Homilies, ii. 51, 1.19; wideren, widerien,
to resist, id. ii. 123, last line; and see Stratmann. Cf. AS, wider


720 WITHHOLD


(only in gen. widres), resistance; Beowulf, 2953.—AS. wider,
against, Grein, ii. 697; common in composition. Sometimes shortened
to wid, against, also used in the sense of ‘ with;’ see With. The
AS. wider, also widere, is cognate with Du. weder, Icel. vids, Dan.
and Swed. veder, G. wieder, Goth. withra, signifying against, or again.
This very prefix is represented by gwer-in Guerdon, q.v. B. The
Goth. withrais to be divided as wi-thra, a comparative form ; cf. Skt.
vi-taram, away, further, from vi, away, apart. Brugmann, ii. § 75.
The above etymology is verified by the similar word found in G.
widerrist, the withers of a horse, from wider, old spelling of wieder,
against, and rist, which not only means wrist or instep, but also an
elevated part, the withers of a horse.

WITHHOLD, to hold back, keep back. (E.) ME. withholden,
pp. withholdé, Chaucer, C. T. 513 (A 511); and see Ancren Riwle,
p- 348, l. 22. From With, in the sense of ‘ back,’ or ‘towards’
the agent, and Hold. Cf. with-draw.

WITHIN, WITHOUT; see under With.

WITHSAY, to contradict. (E.) ME. withseien, Chaucer, C. T.
807 (A 805); withsiggen, Ancren Riwle, p. 86, 1. 7.— AS. wid, against ;
and secgan, to say; see With and Say.

WITHSTAND, to stand against, resist. (E.) ME. withstonden,
Wyclif, Rom. ix. 19. AS. widstandan, to resist, Grein, ii. 699.—
AS. wid, against ; and standan, to stand ; see With and Stand.

WITHY, WITHE, a flexible twig, esp. of willow. (E.) Spelt
withes or withs, pl,, Judg. xvi. 7. ME. widi, widde, &c.3 spelt
wythe, witthe, wythth, Prompt. Parv. p. 531; withthe, K. Alisaunder,
4714; widi, Ancren Riwle, p. 86,1. 15. AS. widig, a willow, also
a twig of a willow. ‘Salix, widig;’ Voc. 139. 30. Also AS.
widde, a thong; Voc. 183. 16.4-MDnu. wiede, ‘a twigge, a willowe,’
Hexham; Icel. vidja, a withy; vid, a with (showing the different
forms) ; vidir, a willow; Dan. vidje, a willow, osier; Swed. vide, a
willow, vidja, a willow-twig; G. weide, a willow; OHG. wida.
B. All from a Teut. base *with-, *weith-, Idg. base *weit-. We find
allied words in Lithuan. Zi/-wittis, the gray willow (used for basket-
work), Gk. iréa (for Firéa), a willow, a wicker-shield ; alsoin Russ.
vitsa, a withe, Lith. wytis,a withe, W. gwden, a withe, L. witis, a
vine. The application is to plants that twine or are very flexible;
and all these words are from the 4/WEI, to twine, plait, as in
Russ, vit(e), to twine, plait, L. wi-ére, L. ui-men, a twig, wi-tis, a
vine, wi-num, wine (orig. vine). Brugmann, ii. §§ 685, 789. From
the same root we have vetch, wire, ferrule (for virole), wine, vine.

WITNESS, testimony ; also, one who testifies. (E.) Properly
an abstract sb., like all other sbs. in -mess. ME. witnesse, Ancren
Riwle, p. 68, 1. 3. AS. witnes, testimony, Luke, ix. 5; also ge-
witnes, Mark, i. 44. [The use of the word in the sense of ‘ wit-
nesser’ is unoriginal ; it occurs in Wyclif, Matt. xxvi. 60; so also
ONorthumb. gewitnes, Mark, xiv. 63; and in AS.]—AS. wit-, as in
wit-an, to know; with suffix -nes; see Wit (1); thus the orig.
sense was ‘knowledge’ or ‘consciousness.’ Cf. ME. witnen, to
testify, Ancren Riwle, p. 384; for *witen-en, from witen,; pp. of witan,
to know; cf. Icel. vitna, Dan. vidne, to testify. Also Goth. weit-
wods, a witness, Der. witness, vb., ME. witnessen, P. Plowman,
B. prol. 191.

WITTOL, a cuckold. (E.) In Merry Wives, ii, 1.3. Notan old
word in this sense. It occurs also in Ben Jonson, The Fox, Act v.
sc. 1 (Mosca); and in Beaum. and Fletcher, Knight of Malta, iii. 2
(Gomera). ‘Fannin, a wittall, one that knows and bears with, or
winks at, his wife’s dishonesty;’ Cotgrave. (It does not mean
‘know-all.’) It has been explained as equivalent to ME. witele, know-
ing, a rare word, occurring once in Layamon, 18547. And this again
has been supposed to represent the AS. witol, adj., wise, sapient ;
formed with suffix -o/ (as in sprec-ol, talkative), from wit-an, to know.
In that case, the word would mean wise or knowing ; or, ironically,
a simpleton, a gull. B. But all this is due to popular etymology ;
the AS. witol is rare, occurring in the comp. wn-wittol, Liber Scintil-
larum, p. 80, 1. 12; fore-witol, A. S. Chron. an. 1067; and is hardly
known in ME. Hence Wedgwood’s suggestion is worth notice ; viz.
that a wittol is the bird commonly called in olden times a witwaill.
Indeed, Bp. Hall uses this very form: ‘ Fond wit-wal, that wouldst
load thy witless head With timely horns, before thy bridal bed ;’
Satires, i. 7.17. Florio explains Ital. godano by ‘the bird called
a witwal or woodwall;’ ed. 1598. In a later edition, according to
Wedgwood, this appears as: ‘ Godano, a wittal or woodwale;’ and
Torriano has ‘Wittal, becco contento,’ i.e. a cuckold. The corruption
from witwall to wittal is easy and natural. y- An older spelling is
wetewold; for which see Skelton, Garl. of Laurel, 187; Lydgate,
Assembly of Gods, 7ro. With this form compare MDu. weduwael,
‘a kinde of a yellow bird,’ Hexham; OHG., witewal, a woodwale.
8. Witwall itself is the same word as wodewale, an old name usually
given to the green woodpecker, but also to the oriole; in any case, it
appears that the witwall (like the cuckoo and the Late L, curruca) were


WOLF


the subjects of ribald jests. ‘Curruca est avis, vel ille qui, cum credat
nutrire filios suos, nutrit alienos ;’ Supp. to Ducange, by Diefenbach.
On which Wedgwood remarks: ‘ the origin of this name [wittol] is
undoubtedly from the fact that the bird known under the name of
curruca is one of those in the nest of which the cuckoo drops its.
egg.’ See further under Woodwale. Cf. gull, (1) a bird, (2) one
who is deceived.

WIVERN$ see Wyvern.

WIZARD, WISARD, one who practises magic, a magician.
(E.; with F. suffix.) ME. wisard; spelt wysard, wysar, Prompt.
Parv. It was simply formed by adding the AF. suffix -ard, as in
cow-ard, lagg-ard, to the ME. wis, wise. Thus it merely meant
‘ wise-like.’ The F. suffix -ard, due to OHG. suffix -hart, is merely
G. hart, i. e. strong, confirmed in (=E. hard).

WIZEN, to shrivel or dry up. (E.) Added by Todd to Johnson.
ME. wisenen, to become shrivelled ; see quotation in Halliwell, s. v.
wisened. AS, wisnian, to become dry, John, xv. 6 (in the Lindisfarne
and Rushworth MSS., both Northumbrian). We find also AS. for-
wisnode, to translate L. emarcuit, Voc. 394. 5.4-Icel. visza, to wither.
B. This is an intransitive verb, with formative -z-, giving it the sense
“to become;’ so that the orig. sense was ‘to become dry ;’ see this
suffix explained under Waken. The Icel. wis-n-a is derived from
vis-inn, wisened, withered, palsied, dried up, which, by its form, is
the pp. of an old lost strong verb *visa (pt. t. *veis, pp. visinn); cf.
risa, to rise (pt. t. reis, pp. risinn). The Icel. visinn is cognate with
Dan. and Swed. vissen, withered; cf. also Swed. vissua, to fade,
OHG. wésanén, to dry up. All from a lost Teut. strong verb
*weisan-, *wisan-, pt. t. *wais, pp.* wisanoz; from Idg. 4/WEIS.
Hencealso L. wir-us (for *vis-us), poison, Gk. ids, Skt. vish-a-, poison ;
see Virulent. Cf. also AS. weornian, to pine away ; from the same
root; answering to a Teut. type *wiznon (see Learn). Der. wizen,
adj., dried up, orig. the pp. of the strong verb.

WO, WOK, grief, misery. (E.) ME. wo, Chaucer, C. T. 353,
1458 (A 351, 1456). AS. wa, wo, used as interj. and adv., some-
times with dat. case, Grein, ii. 635 ; wéa, wo, sb., id. 668.4-Du. wee,
interj. and sb.; Icel. vei, interj., used with dat. case; Dan. vee, interj.
and sb.; Swed. ve, interj.; G. weh, interj. and sb.; Goth. wa?, interj.
B. Further allied to L. wae, wo! W. gwae, wo. Orig. an exclama-
tion; hence, a cry of pain, a pain, &c. Idg. types *wai, interj.,
*waiwa, sb. (whence AS, wéa, wawa,wo, OHG. wéwa, wo). Der. wo-
ful, ME. woful, Chaucer, C. T. 2058 (A 2056); wo-ful-ly, -ness.
Also wo-begone, spelt woe-begon, Spenser, F, Q. iii. 7. 20, i.e. sur-
rounded with wo, from ME. wo begon, Chaucer, C. T. 5338 (B 918),
where begon is the pp. of ME. begon, to go about, surround, equivalent
to AS. began, compounded of be, prep. (E. by) and gan, to go; see
further in Stratmann, s.v. bigaz. Also wo worth, wo be to; for
which phrase see Worth (1). Also wai-/, q. v.

WOAD, a plant used as a blue dye-stuff. (E.) ME. wod (with
long 0), Chaucer, Aitas Prima, 1. 17, pr. in Chaucer’s Works, ed.
Skeat, vol. i. AS. wad, waad; ‘Sandix, wad; Fucus, waad;’ Voc.
136. 25, 26. The OF. name is spelt waisde in a Vocab. of the 13th
century; id. 556. 14; cf. F. guéde.4Du. weede; (Dan. vaid, veid,
Swed. veide, from German]; G. waid, MHG. weit; whence OF.
waide, waisde, gaide, mod. F. guéde. Root unknown; allied to L.
uitrum, woad, Gk. iodris (<*Firodris) woad. q Distinct from
weld (2).

WOLD, a down, plain open country. (E.) Spelt old in Shak.
K. Lear, iii. 4. 125; wolde, woulde in Minsheu, ed. 1627. ME. wold,
Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, 938; the dat. case is spelt walde in
one text of Layamon, 20842, but wolde in the other; it is thus seen
to be the same word as ME. wald, a wood, which was, however,
more commonly used in the sense of waste ground, wide open
country (as in Norse) ; in Layamon, 21339, where one text has weld,
the other has fé/d, field, in the sense of open country. AS. weald,
wald, a wood, forest, Grein, ii. 669.44OSax. and OFries. wald, a
wood; NFries. wold; G. wald, OHG. walt; Icel. vollr, gen. vallar’
(<valthar), a field, plain; Du. woud. B. All from Teut. type
*walthuz,m., a wood. It has been compared with Skt. va/a-s, an
enclosure ; and with E. wild. Neither connexion is at all certain.
Doublet, weald, q.v. Der. vole. z

WOLF, a rapacious beast of prey. (E.) ME. wolf; pl. wolues
(=wolves), Wyclif, Matt. x. 16. AS. wulf, pl. wulfas, Grein, ii. 750.
+Du. and G. wolf; Icel. alfr (for vulfr); Dan. ulv; Swed. uf;
Goth. wulfs. B. All from Teut. type *waulfoz,m. Further allied
to Lith. wilkas, Russ. volk’, Gk. Adios, L. lupus, Skt. vrka-, a wolf;
the common Idg. type being *walgos, y. The sense is ‘ tearer,’ or
‘render,’ from his ravenous nature.—4/WELQ, to tear; Lithuan.
wilkti, to pull, &c. @ The suggested connexion with L. ualpés, a
fox, is doubtful. Brugmann, ii. § 60. Der. wolf-ish, wolf-ish-ly ;
wolf-dog. Also wolv-er-ene, or wolv-er-ine, a coined word; appar-_
ently suggested by MHG. wilfelin, a little wolf; spelt wulverin in


WOMAN


Hakluyt, Voy. i. 477, and in Cotgrave, s. v. louviere; a name given
to an American animal resembling the glutton, a name sometimes
incorrectly given to the wolverene also.

WOMAN, a grown female. (E.) That woman is an altered form
of AS. wifman, lit. wife-man, is certain; and it must be remembered
that the AS. man (like L. homo) was used of both sexes. To show
this, it is best to trace the word downwards. The AS, form is
wifman, a woman, Grein, ii. 700. By assimilation, this form became
wimman in the 10th century, In Judges, iv. 17, we have the dat. sing.
wifmen, but in the very next verse (and in verse 22) Jael is called séo
wimman=the woman. [Similarly, the AS. hlafmesse (loaf-mass)
became Jammas; see Lammas.] By way of further illustration, see
Mark, x. 6, where the various MSS. have wyfman, wifmon, wimman.
B. The pl. of wifman was wifmen, which was similarly reduced to
wimmen, as in Gen, xx. 17, and this form has held its ground, in the
spoken language, tothe presentday. y. But the sing. form suffered
further alteration ; we still find wifmon (later text wimmon) in Laya-
mon, |. 1869, wimman, Havelok, 1. 1168, wyfman, Ayenbite of Inwyt,
p- 11,1. 1 [as late as A.D. 1340; the pl. being both wyfmen, p. 10,
last line but one, and wymmen, according to Morris]; but we also
find wummon, Ancren Riwle, p. 12,1. II, wumman, Rich. Cuer de
Lion, 3863; wommon, Rob. of Glouc. p. 9, 1. 211, P. Plowman, B.
i. 71, ii. 8; so also in Chaucer, C. T. Group D, 66 [1. 5648], where
5 MSS. have womman, and one has woman ; after which the spelling
womanis common. Thus the successive spellings are wifman (wifmon),
wimman (wimmon), wumman (wummon), womman ; and lastly woman,
asat present. In some dialects, the pronunciation wumman [glossic
wum-‘un] is still heard. Some have thought that popular fancy con-
nected the word with womb, as if the word were womb-man; but the
change of vowel was due to the preceding w, just as in AS. widu,
later form wudu, a wood; see Wood, For further discussion, see
Wife and Man, @ Note also the word leman, which was suc-
cessively léof man, lemman, leman ; here we have a similar assimila-
tion of fm to mm, and a considerable change in sense; see Leman.
Der. woman-hood, ME. womanhede, wommanhede, Chaucer, C. T.
1750 (A 1748), the corresponding AS. word being wifhad, Gen. i. 27 ;
woman-ish, K. John, iv. 1. 363; woman-ish-ly, -ness; woman-kind,
Tam. Shrew, iv. 2. 14 ; women-kind, Pericles, iv. 6. 159; woman-like,
woman-ly, ME. wummonlich, Ancren Riwle, p. 274, 1. 9; woman-li-
NESS.

WOMB, the belly, the place of conception. (E.) Lowl. Sc. wame,
the belly; Burns, Scotch Drink, st. 5. ME. wombe, Wyclif, Matt.
xv. 17; wambe, Pricke of Conscience, 4161. AS. wamb, womb, the
belly, Grein, ii. 637. ‘Venter, wamb;’ Voc. 306. 34.-4-Du. wam, the
belly of a fish; Icel. vémb, the belly, esp. of a beast ; Dan. vom ;
Swed. vamb, vimm ; G. wampe, wamme, OHG. wampa ; Goth. wamba.
B. The Teut. type is *wambdn-, f., the belly, paunch. Root unknown.
@ Quite distinct from L. uenter.

WOMBAT, a marsupial mammal, found in Australia, (Austra-
lian.) In Webster. A corruption of the native Australian name
womback or wombach, ‘The wombat, or, as it is called by the na-
tives of Port Jackson, the womback;’ Collins, New South Wales
(1802), quoted in the Penny Cyclopedia. ‘The mountain natives
call it wombach ;’” letter from Governor Hunter, dated Sydney, 1798 ;
in Bewick’s Quadrupeds. See E.E. Morris, Austral English,

WON, to dwell, remain. (E.) In Milton, P. L. vii. 457. Prac-
tically obsolete, though occurring in Sir Walter Scott, Lady of the
Lake, iv. 13. ME. wonen, Chaucer, C. T. 7745 (D 2163). AS.
wunian, to dwell.+-Icel. wna, to dwell ; see further under Wont.

WONDER, a strange thing, a prodigy, portent, admiration. (E.)
ME. wonder; pl. wondris, Wyclif, Mark, xiii. 22, AS, wundor, a
portent, Grein, ii. 751.4-Du. wonder ; Icel. undr (for *wundr) ; Dan.
and Swed. under; G. wunder, OHG. wuntar. B. The Teut. type
is *wundrom, n., a wonderful thing. Perhaps allied to AS. wandian,
lit. to turn aside from, but usually to turn from through a feeling of
fear or awe, to respect, to revere. ‘ Pi ne wandast for nanum men’
=thou respectest, or dreadest, no man; Matt. xxii, 16; Luke, xx. 21.
Grein explains wandian by ‘ pre metu sive alicujus reverentia omit-
tere;-cunctari;’ ii. 638. Hence ME. wonden, to conceal through
fear, to falter, &c.; Will. of Palerne, 4071 ; Gower, C. A. i. 332, bk.
iii. 1569; Chaucer, Legend of Good Women, 1. 1187. Perhaps
further allied to Wend and Wind (2). Der. wonder, verb, AS.
wundrian, Grein, ii. 7533 wonder-ful, ME. wonderfol, Layamon, 1, 280,
later text, used in place of AS. wanderlic, lit. wonder-like, Grein,
ii. 7533 wonder-ful-ly, -ness. Also wondr-ous, q. Vv.

WONDROUS, wonderful. (E.) Spelt wonderouse in Palsgrave,
and prob. not found much earlier; it is a corrupt form (like righteous
for rightwise), and took the place ofthe older word wonders, properly
an ady., but also used as an adj. ‘Ye be wonders men’=ye are
wondrous men; Skelton, Magnificence, 90. ‘ Where suche a solempne
yerely myracle is wrought so wondersly in the face of the worlde;’


WOOD 721


Sir T. More, Works, p. 133 h. Earlier as an ady., as ‘wonders
dere,’ i.e. wonderfully dear, Test. of Love, b. ii. ch. 3, 1. 45.
B. Wonders is formed by adding s (an adv. suffix, as in meed-s) to
wonder used as an adv or adj.; Chaucer has ‘ wonder diligent, C. T.
485 (A 483); Gower has ‘such a wonder syhte,’ C. A. i. 121, bk,
i, 235. Wonder became an adj. through the use of the AS. wunderlic,
adj., wonderful, as an adverb; thus Chaucer has ‘ wonderly deliver,’
C. T. 84; so also ‘so wonderly sore,’ Tale of Gamelyn, 266 (late
editions, wondrously). y- Hence the history of the word is clear ;
the AS. wunderlic, adj., became ME, wonderly, adv., whence ME,
wonder, adj. and adv., lengthened to wonders, adv. and adj., and to
wondersly, ady.; the double use of -ly, both as an adjectival and
adverbial suffix, being a lasting cause of confusion. q@ The spuri-
ous poem called Chaucer’s Dream has the word wondrous, 1. 1898, but
the MSS. are of late date. Hence wondrous-ly, wondrous-ness.

WONT, used or accustomed. (E.) In Anglia, xi. 493, Hupe
suggests that the phr. wont to (accustomed to) arose from the ME.
phr. wone to, where wone was properly an adj. (AS. gewun, adj.,
gewuna, adj.), with the sense of ‘accustomed.’ This ME. wone occurs
(without zo) in Genesis and Exodus, 1530, Havelok, 2297; but in
Cursor Mundi, 3646, where 3 MSS. have wont to, the Cotton MS. has
wonto (sic). At the same time, it is clear that ME. wone, adj., was
confused with ME. woned, the pp. of wonen, to dwell, to be used to.
We also find that wont came to be used as a sb.; and then, by way
of distinction, a new form wozé-ed was evolved, to keep up the pp.
use. Hence won-t-ed (=won-ed-ed) has the suffix -ed twice over!
[For wont, sb., and wont-ed, see the end of the article.] ‘As they
were woont [accustomed] to dooe ;’ Sir T. More, Works, p. 1195 g.
‘ She neuer was to swiche gestes woned’ =she was never accustomed
to such guests, Chaucer, C. T. 8215 (E 339). ‘Thou were ay wont
eche lover reprehende ;’=thou wert ever wont to reprehend each
lover, Chaucer, Troilus, i. 510. Woned is the pp. of ME. wonen,
wonien, to dwell, be accustomed to ; in Chaucer, C. T. 7745 (D 2163),
it means simply ‘to dwell,’ but the sense ‘to be accustomed’ was
easily (in AS. times) introduced from the related adj. wone (above).
Cf. AS. wunod, pp. of wunian, to dwell, remain, continue in, Grein,
ii. 7533 also gewunian, to dwell, to be accustomed to. ‘Swa swa he
gewunade’=as he was accustomed (lit. as he wont), Mark, x. 1; cf.
‘whom we wont to fear,’ 1 Hen. VI,i. 2.14. A weak verb, allied to
the sb, wuna, custom, use, wont, commonly spelt gewuna, Luke,i.g,
ii. 27. Allied to AS. wunn-, weak grade of winnan, to strive after,
orig. to desire ; see Win. Wont, sb.,is ‘a thing desired,’ a habit due
to acquiescence in what seems pleasant. B. Cf. Icel. vanr, adj.,
accustomed, used (to a thing), van, a usage, whence vandi, a custom,
habit, venja, to accustom (pt. t. vandi, vandi, pp. vandr, vannin) =E.
wean; see Wean. So also (in connexion with MHG. gewinnen) we
find MHG. gewon, OHG. giwon, adj., accustomed to, MHG. gewon,
OHG. giwona, usage, MHG. gewonen, to be used to, geworlich,
customary ; G. gewohnen, to be used to, pp. gewohnt, wont, wohnen,
to dwell. See Fick, iii. 287. Der. wont, sb., Hamlet, i. 4. 6, em-
ployed in place of ME. womne, sb., by confusion with wont above.
Also wont-ed, used as a pt. t. by Surrey instead of wont ; ‘ Of me, that
wonted to rejoice,’ Complaint of the Absence of her Louer, 1. 5, in
Tottell’s Misc., ed. Arber, p. 15; so also Palsgrave gives wont as a
verb, ‘I wonte or use; it is no wysdome to wont a thing that is nat
honest ;’ and hence wonted as a pp. or adj., Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 113,
ili. 2. 369.

WOO, to sue, court, ask in order to marriage. (E.) Spelt wo in
Palsgrave ; but Spenser retains the old spelling wowe, F. Q. vi. 11. 4.
ME, wo3en, King Horn, ed. Lumby, 546; later wowen (by change of
3 to w), P. Plowman, B. iv. 74. AS. wogian, to woo, occurring in
the comp. awégian, to woo, Atlfric’s Saints’ Lives, vii. 14 (E.E.T.S.).
Hence the sb, wagere, a wooer ; ‘ Procus, wogere,’ Voc. 171. 6. The
lit. sense is simply to bend, incline; hence to incline another to-
wards oneself. AS. wok (declensional stem wég-, pl. woge), bent,
curved, crooked; Grein, ii. 731. Cf. woh, sb., a bending aside,
turning aside, iniquity; wdohk-bogen, bowed in a curve, bent; id.
B. The AS. woh (Teut. type *wanxoz), bent, is cognate with Goth.
waihs, bent, only occurring in wn-wahs, straight, blameless, Luke,
i.6.—4/WANK, to go tortuously, be crooked; whence also Skt.
vank, to go tortuously, be crooked; cf. also vakra-, crooked, L.
uacillare, to vacillate, and perhaps OSax. wah, evil, W. gwaeth,
worse. See Vacillate. Der. woo-er, ME. wowere, P. Plowman,
B. xi. 71, AS. wogere, as above.

WOOD (1), a collection of growing trees, timber. (E.) ME. wode,
Chaucer, C. T. 1424 (A 1422). AS. wudu, Grein, ii. 745; but the
orig. form was widu; id. 692.4Icel. vidr, a tree, wood; Dan. ved ;
Swed. ved; MHG. wite, OHG. witu. B. The Tent. type is
*widuz, wood. Cf. also Olrish fd, Irish fiodh, a wood, a tree;
fiodais, shrubs, underwood ; Gael. fiodh, timber, wood, a wilderness,
jiodhach, shrubs, W. gwdd, trees, gwyddeli, bvshes, brakes, See


3A


722 wooD


Stokes-Fick, pp. 265, 280. Der. wood-bine or wood-bynd, spelt
wodbynde in Palsgrave, wodebynde in Chaucer, C. T. Six-text, 1508
(1510 in Tyrwhitt), AS. wudebinde, used to translate hedera nigra in
Voc. 137.5; so called because it binds or winds round trees; cf.
AS. wuduwinde, lit. wood-wind, used to tr. vivorna, id. 270. 16.
Also wood-coal; wood-cock, AS. wuducoc, Voc. 258. 5 (note
Guernsey video, a woodcock) ; wood-craft, ME. wodecraft, Chaucer,
C. T. 1103 wood-cut 3; wood-dove, ME. wode-douue, Chaucer, C. T.
13700 (B 1960); wood-engraving; wood-land, ME. wodelond, Layamon,
1699; wood-lark 3 wood-man, Cymb. iii. 6. 28, spelt wodman in Pals-
grave; wood-nymph ; wood-pecker, Palsgrave ; wood-pigeon ; wood-ruff,
q.v. Also wood-ed ; wood-en, i.e. made of wood, K. Lear, ii. 3. 10 ;
wood-y, Spenser, F.Q. i. 6. 18.

WOOD (2), mad, furious. (E.) In Mids. Nt. Dr. ii. 1. 192. ME.
wood, wod (with longo), Chaucer, C. T. 184. AS. wéd, mad, raging,
Grein, ii. 730; whence wédan (<woddian), to be mad, 653.-+-Icel.
d6r, raging, frantic; Goth. wads, mad. And cf. Du. woede, G. wuth,
MHG. wuot, madness. B. The Teut. type is *wddoz, adj., wood,
frantic. Perhaps allied, as Fick suggests (iii. 308), to L. uates, a
prophet, poet, one who is filled with divine frenzy, OlIrish faith,
a prophet. Hence (perhaps) the name Woden, applied to the
highest of the Teutonic divinities. Der. Wed-nes-day, q. Vv.

WOODRUFF, the name of a plant. (E.) Spelt woodrofe in
Palsgrave. ME. wodruffe, Voc. 712. 28; woderofe, 566. 20. AS.
wuderofe, id. 133. 30; also wudurdfe. See Cockayne’s Leech-
doms, ii. 412, where it is shown that it was not only applied to the
Asperula odorata (as at present), but also to Asfodelus ramosus ; and
it is also called astula (hastula) regia in glosses. The former part
of the word is AS. wudu, a wood; the sense of rdfe is uncertain, but
the 6 was long; compare the sound of blood from AS, bléd, and note
the form woodroofin Britten’s Plant-names. As AS. 6 answers to
OHG. wo, the AS. rdfe is equivalent to OHG., ruofe, adj. fragrant,
Hence the probable sense was ‘fragrant wood-plant;’ well
answering to the L. name Asferula odorata, which alludes to its
sweet scent. So does the F. name muguwet,

WOODWALE, the name of a bird. (E.) Also called witwall

and even wittal; see Wittol. Cotgrave explains F. oriol or oriot
as fa heighaw or witwall. {The form witwall was not borrowed
from G., but stands for widwall; the old form of AS. wudu being
widu.| ME. wodewale, the same as wodehake (i.e. wood-hatch or
wood-hack, a woodpecker), Prompt. Parv.; Rom. of the Rose, 658 ;
used to translate OF. oriol, W. de Bibbesworth, in Wright, Voc.
i. 166 (13th century) ; Owl and Nightingale, 1657. Not found in
AS.+-MDnu. weduwael, ‘a kinde of a yellow bird ;’ Hexham; G.
wittewal, a yellow thrush; MHG. witewal, an oriole (Schade).
B. The former element is certainly AS. widu, wudu, ME. wode, a
wood; just as MHG. witewal is from MHG. wite,a wood. Cf. ME.
wodehake, above, and E. woodpecker. But the sense of the latter
element has not been explained; it may mean ‘stranger,’ from AS.
wealh. Schade suggests the same sense of ‘stranger in the wood
from the South’ for the OHG. name. The MDu. wedu-wael may
be compared with MDu. Wael, a Celt, the same word as AS.
Wealh, and therefore ‘ stranger.’ Doublet, wittol, q.v.
WOOF, the weft, the threads crossing the warp in woven cloth.
(E.) In Shak. Troil. v. 2.152. A corruption of ME. oof, due to
a supposed connexion (which happens to be right, but not in the
way which popular etymology would suggest) with the vb. to weave
and the sb. weft. ‘Oof, threde for webbynge, Trama, stamen,
subtegmen ;’ Prompt. Parv. Soalsoin Wyclif, Levit. xiii. 47, earlier
version (cited in Way’s note). AS. dwef,a woof. ‘Cladica, wef,
vel Gwef 5’ Voc. 13. 23 (8th century). Cladica is the dimin. of Late
LL. clada, a woven hurdle, and wef is clearly a variant of weft; so
that there can be no doubt as to the sense of dwef. Somewhat
commoner is the parallel form dweb or Gweb, frequently contracted to
ab; and this word has precisely the same sense. ‘Subtimen, dweb’
immediately follows ‘ Stamen, wearp,’ i.e. the warp, in Voc. 262. 20;
«Trama, vel subtemen, dweb, vel 6b ;’ id. 188. 12; ‘ Linostema, linen
wearp, vel wyllen [woollen] ab,’ id. 151. 18; where Mr. Wright adds
the note: ‘the yarn of a weaver’s warp is, I believe, still called an
abb.” [For warp we should doubtless read woof.] B. The words
dwef, and dweb or dweb are compounds, containing the prefix @ (as
in G-wefan, to weave, see A- (4) and Weave) or 0-, short form of
on, prep. Also wef and web are both sbs., meaning ‘ web,’ from
wefan, to weave. ‘Thus the word woof, for oof, is short for d-wef or
on-wef, i.e. on-web, the web that is laid on or thrown across the first
set of threads or warp. See On and Weave.

WOOL, the short thick hair of sheep and other animals. (E.)
ME. wolle, P. Plowman, B. vi. 13. AS. wull, wal. ‘Lana, wul;’
Voc. 294. 19; wull, id. 190. 25.4-Du. wol; Icel. ull (for vull) ; Dan.
ald (for ull or wull) ; Swed. ull; G. wolle, OHG. wolla; Goth. walla.
B. The Teut. type is *wolla, f., which is certainly an assimilated


WORK


form for *wolna, with Idg. suffix -na@, asshown by the cognate words,


viz. Lithuan. wilna, Russ. volna, Skt. urna, wool; cf. also Olrish


olann, W. gwlan; and perhaps Gk. Ajjvos (for FAjvos), L. lana, wool.
Brugmann, i. §§ 317, 524 (2); Stokes-Fick, p. 276. The same
assimilation appears in L. willus, shaggy hair, uellus,a fleece, Der.
wooll-en, ME. wollen, P. Plowman, B. v. 215, AS. wyllen (with the
usual yowel-change from «to y), Voc. I5I. 17; wooll-y, Merch,
Ven. i. 3. 84; wool-monger, ME. wolmongere, Rob. of Glouc. p. 539,
l. 11173; woolpack, ME. wolpak, same page, 1. 18; wool-sack,
1 Hen. IV, ii. 4.148, ME. wollesak, Gower, C. A. i. 99; bk. i, 1692.
Also wool-gathering (Halliwell), idly roving (said of the thoughts),
asif gathering wool scattered on the hedges. Also woolward, q.v.

WOOLWARD, clothed in wool only. (E.) ‘I have no
shirt, I go woolward for penance;’ L. L. L. v. 2. 717; on which Dr.
Schmidt says; § Woolward, in wool only, without linen, a dress often
enjoined as a penance by the church of Rome.’ ME. wolward,
wolleward, P. Plowman, B. xviii. 1; Pricke of Conscience, 3514;
P. Plowman’s Crede, 788. See four more examples in Nares, and
his note upon the word. ‘To goo wulward and barfott;” Arnold’s
Chron. ed. 1811, p. 150. Palsgrave has, in his list of adverbs :
‘ Wolwarde, without any lynnen nexte ones body, sans chemyse.’ I have
elsewhere explained this as ‘ with the wool next one’s skin;’ I should
rather have said ‘ with the skin against the wool,’ though the result
is practically much the same. This is Stratmann’s explanation ; he
gives: ‘ wolwarde, cutis lanam uersus.’ Cf. home-ward, heaven-ward.
See Wool and Ward. A like phrase occurs in French. ‘ Assez
sovent lessa le linge Et si frotta le dos au lange ;’ i.e. Very often she
left off her linen [chemise], and rubbed her back against her woollen
garment; Rutebuef, ii, 157, cited by Littré, s.v. lange. q To
the above explanation, viz. that wool-ward=against the wool, with
reference to the skin, which agrees with all that has been said by
Nares and others, I adhere. In an edition of books iii and iv of
Beda’s Eccl. History, by Mayor and Lumby, Cambridge, 1878,
Pp: 347, is a long note on this phrase, with references to Bp. Fisher’s
Works, ed. Mayor, pt. i. p. 181, 1. 13; Burton, Anatomy of Melan-
choly, pt. iii. sect. 4. memb. 1. subsect. 2, and subsect. 3 ; Christ’s
Own Complaint, ed. Furnivall (E. E. T.S.), 1. 502 ; Myrour of Our
Lady (E. E.T.S.), p. lii, where we read of St. Bridget that ‘she
neuer vsed any lynen clothe though it weer in tyme of sykenes but
only vpon hir hed, and next hir skyn she weer euer rough and sharpe
wolen cloth.’ The note further corrects my explanation ‘ with the
wool towards the skin,’ because this ‘ would only suit with a clothing
made of the fleece as it came from the sheep’s back ;’ and I have
amended my explanation accordingly. It then goes on: ‘ward is
wered, the pp. of AS. werian, to wear, and woolward means ‘‘ wool-
clad,” just as in Beowulf, 606, sweg/wered means “clad in bright-
ness ;” scirwered and ealdawered may be cited as other examples of
this pp. in composition. It has fared with woolward, when it
became a solitary example of this compound, as it did with rightwise
under similar circumstances. The love for uniform orthography
made this latter word into righteous, and woolwered into woolward to
conform to the shape of forward, &c. The use of go is the same as
in to go bare, naked, cold, &c. This is ingenious, but by no means
proven, and I beg leave to reject it. The suffix -wered is extremely
tare; sweglwered and scirwered each occur only once, and only in
poetry, and even Grein can only guess at the sense of them; whilst
ealdawered has nothing to do with the matter, as it means ‘ worn out
by old age,’ Ettmiiller, p. 4. There is no such word as wullwered
in AS., or wolwered in ME.; and it is a long jump of many
centuries from these doubtful compounds with -wered in AS. poetry
to the first appearance of wolwarde (always so spelt) in the r4th
century.

WOON, a governor, officer. (Burmese.) Burm. wun, a governor,
or officer of administration; lit. ‘a burden,’ hence presumably the
‘ bearer of the burden’ (Yule).

WORD, an oral utterance or written sign, expressing thought ;
talk, message, promise. (E.) ME. word, pl. wordes, Chaucer,


C. T. 315 (A 313). AS. word, neut. sb., pl. word, Grein, ii. 732.-F,


Du. woord; Icel. ord (for *word) ; Dan. and Swed. ord; G. wort;
Goth. waurd.
Lithuan. wardas, a name, L. werbum (base uerdh), a word, a verb;
the Idg. type being *wardhom, n. From 4/WER, to speak ; whence
Gk. eipew, to speak ; so that the lit. sense is ‘a thing spoken.’ Cf.
Gk. ff-rwp, a speaker, from the same root. Der. word, vb., to
speak, Cymb. iv. 2. 240, ME. worden, P. Plowman, B. iv. 46; word-
less, Lucrece,112 3; word-ing; word-y, ME. woordi, Wyclif, Job, xvi. 21
(earlier version); word-i-ness. Also word-book, a dictionary, prob.


imitated from Du. woordenboek, G. worterbuch. And see rhetoric.


Brugmann, i. § 589. Doublet, verb.
WORK, 2 labour, effort, thing done or written. (E.) ME. werk,
Wyclif, Mark, xiv..6; Chaucer, C. T. 481 (A 479). AS. weores


B. The Teut. type is *wordom, n. Cognate with


WORLD.


werc, Grein, il. 677.4-Du. werk; Icel. verk; Dan. verk; Swed.
verk ; G, werk, OHG. werch, werah. B. All from Teut. type
*werkom, n., work; which from Teut. base WERK, Idg. 4/WERG,
to work. Hence also Gk. é-opy-a, I have wrought, pecev (= Fpéy-
yew), to do, work, épyov, a work, épyavoy, an instrument, organ,
opya, orgies; Zend vareza, a working, varezana, a making (cited
by Fick); cf. Pers. warz, gain, profit, acquisition, habit, warzad,
he studies or labours, warz-kar, a ploughman (lit. work-doer),
warz-giw, an ox for ploughing (lit. work-cow), warzahk, agricul-
ture; Rich. Dict. p. 1638. Der. work, verb, ME. werchen, wirchen,
Chaucer, C. T. 2761 (A 27509), pt. t. wroughte, id. 499 (A497),
pp. wrought, id. 16800 (G 1332), from AS. wiercan, wyrcan (wit
the usual vowel-change to ze or y), pt. t. worhte, pp. geworht,
Grein, ii. 759; cognate with Goth. waurkjan, Teut. type *work-jan-,
from Idg. *worg, second grade of 4/WERG; cf. Organ. Also
work-able (from the verb) ; and (from the sb.) work-day, ME. werk-
edei (trisyllabic), Ancren Riwle, p. 20, 1. 7, AS. weorc-deg, Wright’s
Voc. i. 37; work-house, AS. weorc-his (L. officina), Voc. 185. 3;
work-man, ONorthumb. wercmonn, Matt. x. 10 (Lindisfarne MS.) ;
work-man-like; qwork-man-ship, ME. werkemanship, P. Plowman,
B. x. 288 ; work-shop. Alsowright,q.v. And see ex-erg-y, lit-urg-y,
metall-urg-y, chir-urg-eon, s-ur g-eon, organ.

WORLD, the earth and its inhabitants, the system of things,
present state of existence, a planet, society. (E.) ME. werld,
Genesis and Exodus, 1. 42; world, worlde, P. Plowman, B, prol. 19;
also spelt wordle, Ayenbite of Inwyt, p. 7,1. 10; werd, Havelok,
1290; ward, Lancelot of the Laik, 3184. AS. weoruld, weorold,
woruld, worold, world, Grein, li. 684.4+Du. wereld ; Icel. vercld (gen.
veraldar) ; Dan. verden (for verld-en, where en is really the post-
posed def. article); Swed. verid; G. welt, MHG. werlt, OHG.
weralt, B. The cognate forms show clearly that the word is a
composite one. It is composed of AS. wer, cognate with Icel. verr,
OHG, wer, Goth. wair, aman, L. wir, aman; and OMerc. eldu (AS.
ieldu), cognate with Icel. d/d, Goth. alds, anage ; see Virile and Eld.
Thus the sense is ‘ age of man’ or ‘course of man’s life,’ whence it
came to mean lifetime, course of life, experience of life, usages of
life, &c. ; its sense being largely extended. The sb. eld is a deriva-
tive from the adj. old, as shown s.v. ; and is well. exhibited also in
the curious Dan. hedenold, the heathen age, heathen times, from
heden, a heathen, y. We may compare AS. weoruld with wer
and eldu; Icel. veréld with verr and éld; OHG., weralt with wer and
a sb. formed from alt, old; hence the word is a very old one,
formed in times previous to all record of any Teutonic speech ;
really from a Teut. type *wer-aldi-. Der. world-ly, AS. weoruld-
lic, Grein, ii. 687; world-li-ness; world-ly-mind-ed, world-ly-mind-
ed-ness ; world-l-ing, with double dimin. suffix, As You Like It,
Te lads

WORM, a small creeping animal. (E.) Formerly applied toa
snake of the largest size ; cf. blind-worm. ME. worm; pl. wormes,
Chaucer, C. T. 10931 (F 617). AS. wyrm, a worm, snake, dragon ;
Grein, ii. 763.4-Du. worm ; Icel. ormr (for *wormr) ; Dan. and Swed.
orm (for *worm); G. wurm: Goth. waurms.  B. The Teut. type is
*wurmiz, Idg. type *warmis; cf. L. uermis,a worm. Brugmann, i.
§ 3713 ii. § 97. Prob. allied to Gk. fdpos (for *Fpdyos), an earth-
worm. Der. worm, verb; worm-y. Allied words are verm-ine, verm-
icular, verm-icelli, (But not wormwood.)

WORMWOOD, a very bitter plant. (E.) The suffix -wood is
corrupt, due to confusion with wood, in order to make it sound more
intelligible. We find the spelling wormwod as early as the 15th
century. ‘Hoc absinthium, wormwod;’ Voc. 711. 24. But only a
little earlier (early 15th century), we find wermode, id. 645. 35. AS.
wermod; ‘ Absinthium, wermdd, in a glossary of the 8th century ;
Voc. 2. 15.4-Du. wermoet, ‘worm-wood ;’ Hexham; G. wermuth,
MHG. wermuote, OHG, werimuota, wermuota. _B. It is thus evident
that the word is doubly corrupt, and has no more to do with worm
than it has with wood; the G. forms show clearly that the division of
the AS, word is wer-mdd. [It is quite distinct from AS. wyrmwyrt,
worm-wort, Sedum album or villosum; Cockayne’s A. S. Leechdoms,
ii. 411.] Mr. Cockayne, Leechdoms, i. 217, supposes AS. wermdd to
mean ‘ ware-moth, i. e. that which keeps off moths; but méd is not
¢a moth,’ and words like ‘ ware-moth,’ in which the former part is
verbal, are not found in AS. y. The fullest forms are AS. were-méd,
Voc, 296. 24; OHG. weri-muota, weri-muot, as if the sense were
‘manly courage;” see Werwolf. But the orig. sense remains
unknown.

WORRY, to harass, tease. (E.) The old sense was to seize by
the throat, or strangle, as when a dog worries a rat or sheep. ME,
worowen, wirien; also wery, Rom, of the Rose, 6264; also wyrwyn
or worowen, and explained by ‘ strangulo, suffoco, Prompt. Parv. ;
worow, used of lions and wolves that worry men, Pricke of Conscience,
1229 ; pp. werewed, wirwed, Havelok, 1915, 1921. The theoretical


WORT 123


ME. type is *wurjen (Stratmann), which passed, as usual, into
wurwen, Worwen, Or wirwen, and other varieties; the second w is
usually due (in such a position) to an older 3, and answers to AS. g.
The various vowels point back to AS. y, so that the AS. form must
have been wyrgan. AS. wyrgan, found in the gloss: ‘ strangulat,
wyrged;’ Corpus Gloss. 1926.4-Du. worgen, to strangle, whence
worg, quinsy ; OFries. wergia, wirgia, to strangle; Low G. worgen;
G. wiirgen, OHG. wurgan, to strangle, suffocate, choke ; as in Wolfe
wiirgen die Schafe, wolves worry the sheep, Fliigel. B. These
verbs are secondary forms, due to the Teut. str. verb *wergan-, found
in MHG, wergen, ir-wergan, to strangle, The Teut. base is *werg,
from Idg. 4/WERGH; asin Lithuan. wersz-ti, to strangle,to oppress ;
cf. Slay. base verz-, to bind fast, in Miklosich. Brugmann,-i. § 624.
Cf. Wring.

WORSE, comp. adj. and adv., more bad; WORST, superl. adj.
and ady., most bad. (E.) 1. ME. wurs, wors, wers, ady. 3 wurse,
worse, werse (properly dissyllabic), adj. ‘ Now is my prison wersé
than before ;” Chaucer, C. T. 1226 (A 1224). [Hence perhaps the
suggestion of the double comp. wors-er, Temp. iv. 27.] ‘Me is the
wrs’ =itis the worse for me; Owl and Nightingale, 1.34. We find
also ME. werre, worse, spelt also worre, Gawayn and the Grene
Knight, 1588; this is a Scand. form, due to assimilation. AS. wyrs,
adv. ; wyrsa, wirsa, adj.; Grein, ii. 765.4--OSax. wirs, adv. 3 wirsa,
adj.; OF ries. wirra, werra, adj. (for *wirsa, *wersa, by assimilation) ;
Icel. verr, adv. ; verri, adj. (for *vers, *versi) ; Dan. verre, adj. ; Swed.
varre, adj.; MHG, wirs, adv.; wirser, adj.; Goth. wairs, adv.;
wairsiza, adj. _B. In Gothic, -iza is a common suffix in compara-
tives, as in hard-iza, hard-er, from hard, hard ; and it answers to mod.
E. -er. The common Tent. type is *wersizon-, adj., where -izon- is
the comparative suffix. The base is *wers-, perhaps to twist, en-
tangle, confuse; whence also OHG. werran, G. wirren, to twist,
entangle. See War. y- The same base *wers (assimilated to
*werr) occurs perhaps in L, uerrere, pt. t. uerri, pp. wersus, to whirl,
toss about, drive, sweep along, sweep; cf. Lucretius, v.1226. 2. The
super]. form presents no difficulty. ME. worst, werst, adv. ; worste,
werste, adj., Gower, C, A. i. 253 prol. 641. AS. wyrst, adv., wyrsta,
adj. (Grein); this is a contracted form of wyrsesta, which appears as
wyrresta (by assimilation) in Matt. xii. 45.4-OSax. wirsista, adj. ; Icel.
verst, ady., verstr, adj.; Dan. verst; Swed. virst; OHG. wirsist,
wirsest, contracted form wirst. The Teut. type is *wers-ist-oz.
@ It is now seen that the s is part of the base or root; worse really
does duty for wors-er, which was in actual use in the 16th century;
and wors-t is short, for wors-est. Der. worse, verb, Milton, P. L.
vi. 440, ME, wursien, Ancren Riwle, p. 326, AS. wyrsian, properly
intrans., to grow worse, A. S. Chron. an. 10853 wors-en, verb, to
make worse, Milton, Of Reformation in England, b. i (R.) $3 wors-en,
to grow worse (Craven dialect). Also worst, verb, to defeat, Butler,
Hudibras, pt. i. c. 2. 1. 878; this answers to ME. wursien above
(AS. wyrsian), and is a form due to the usual excrescent ¢ after s (as
in among-st, whil-st, &c.) rather than formed from the superlative.

WORSHIP, honour, respect, adoration. (E.) Short for worth-
ship; the ¢hk was not lost till the 14th century. Spelt worschip,
P. Plowman, B, iii. 332; but worfssipe (=worpshipe), Ayenbite of
Inwyt, p. 8, 1. 8 (A.D. 1340). AS. weordscipe, wyrdscipe, honour;
Grein, ii. 683. Formed with suffix -scipe (E. -ship) from AS. weord,
wurd, adj., worthy, honourable; cf. L. dignitas from the adj. dignus.
See Worth (1). Der. worship, verb, ME. worthschipen, spelt
wurdchipen in St. Katharine, 1. 55 (so in the MS., but printed wurd-
schipen) ; not found in AS, Also worship-ful, spelt worPssipuol; Aven-
bite of Inwyt, p. 80, 1. 22; worship-ful-ly.

WORST, adj. and verb; see under Worse.

WORSTED, twisted yarn spun out of long, combed wool. (E.)
ME. worsted, Chaucer, C. T. 264 (A 262). So named from the town
of Worsted, now Worstead, not far to the N. of Norwich, in Norfolk.
Probably not older than the time of Edward III, who invited over
Flemish weavers to improve our woollen manufactures. It is men-
tioned as early as 13483; see Archeologia, xxxi. 78. Chaucer is
perhaps the earliest author who mentions it. ‘ Worsted; these first
took their name from Worsted, a village in this country ;’ Fuller,
Worthies; Norfolk (R.).  B. Worstead stands for Worthstead ; this
we know from Charter no. 785 in Kemble, Codex Diplomaticus,
iv. 111, where the name appears as Wrdestede, and w=1wu, as in other
instances. The AS, wurd, weord, worth, value, was also used in the
sense of ‘estate’ or ‘manor,’ and appears in place-names, such as
Sawbridge-worth, Rickmans-worth; however, in the sense of ‘estate,
the usual form is weordig, and this may suit the AF. form Wrédestede,
if the former erepresents an earlier -ig. The AS. stede= mod. E. stead,
or place. Hence Worstead means ‘the place of an estate;” see
Worth and Stead.

WORT (1), a plant. (E.) Orig. the general E. name for ‘ plant; ’
plant being a Latin word. ME. wort; pl. wortes, Chaucer, C. ‘T.

ZA


724 WORT


15227 (B 4411). AS. wyrt, a wort; Grein, ii. 765.4OSax. wurt ;
TIcel. urt (for *wurt); also spelt jurt, borrowed from Low G.; Dan.
urt; Swed. drt; G. wurz; Goth, wauris, B. All from Teut. type
*wurtiz, f.; Idg. type *wardis. Allied to W. gwreiddyn, a root;
Olrish frem, a root; also to Icel. rat, a root, L. radix, Gk. pi{a, a
root ; 6a8-ayvos, a young shrub. Brugmann, i. §§ 350, 529; a plant,
herb, Fick, iii. 294. See further under Root (1). Der. mug-wort,
and other plant-names in which wort is suffixed; also wort (2).
Allied to radix, liquorice, &c.

WORT (2), an infusion of malt, new beer unfermented or while
being fermented. (E.) ME. wort or worte, Chaucer, C. T. 16281
(G 813). ‘Hoc idromellum, Anglice wurte;’ Voc. 772.2. AS.
-wyrt, in the comp. mdax-wyrt, lit. mash-wort, an infusion of worts ;
A. S. Leechdoms, ii. 216, 399. Here wyrt seems to be a peculiar use
of the wyrt given under Wort (1); but the G. wiirze (below) is
derived from wurz, a wort. Cf. also MDu. wort, ‘wort, or new
beere before it be clarified,’ Hexham; worte,‘a root or a wort,
id.; Low G. wort. Also Icel. virtr; Norweg. vyrt, vort, Aasen;
Swed. vort; G. bier-witrze, beer-wort, allied to wurz, a wort, herb,
whence wiirze, seasoning, spice, wiirzsuppe, spiced soup, &c. B. The
Icel. virtr, MHG. wirz, which differ in the vowel, are from a Teut.
base *werti-, which differs in gradation from *wurtiz, a wort, but is
closely related to it.

WORTH (1), equal in value to, deserving of; as sb., desert,
price. (E.) ME. wurd, worp, worth, adj., worthy, honourable, Will.
of Palerne, 2522, 2990; Rob. of Glouc. p. 364, 1.7547. Also wurf,
worp, ill-spelt worthe in P. Plowman, B. iv. 170 ; but wurf in Rob. of
Glouc. p. 373, 1.3674. AS. wyrde, adj., a mutated by-form of weorf,
adj., valuable ; wyrd, by-form of weorf, sb., value.4- Du. waard, ad). ;
waarde, sb.; Icel. verdr, adj.; verd, sb.; Dan. verd, adj. and sb.;
Swed. vard, adj.; varde, sb.; G. werth, MHG. wert, adj. and sb. ;
Goth. wairths, adj. and sb. B. All from Teut. type *werthoz, adj.,
valuable. This word is probably to be divided as *wer-thoz; note
also Lith. wer-tas, worthy (probably borrowed from Teutonic).
Also cf. W. gwerth (type “wer-tos), value, price; allied to L. uer-
éri, to respect. Prob. from4/WER, to guard, keep; see Ware (1).
Der. worth-y, spelt wurrfi, Ormulum, 2705, wurrfiz, id. 4200,
AS. wyrdig, adj., Alfred, tr. of Orosius, vi. 2 (the AS. weordig or
wordig only occurs as a sb. meaning an estate); hence worthi-ly,
worthi-ness ; worth-less, worth-less-ly, -ness. Also wor-ship.

WORTH (2), to become, to be. (E.) Now only in the phr. wo
worth the day !=evil be to theday. ME. worfen, to become ; formerly
common. In P. Plowman’s Crede, a short poem of 850 (long) lines,
it occurs 8 times; as ‘schent mote I worfen’=I must be blamed,
1.9; ‘wo mote 30u worfen’=may evil be (or happen) to you; and
see P. Plowman, B. prol. 187, i. 186, ii. 43, iii. 33, v. 160, vi. 165,
vii. 51. AS. weordan, to become, also spelt wurdan, wyrdan; pt. t.
weard, pl. wurdon ; Grein, ii. 678.4-Du. worden, pt. t. werd, pp. ge-
worden ; Icel. verda, pt. t. vard, pp. ordinn, to become, happen, come
to pass; Dan. vorde; Swed. varda; G. werden, OHG. werdan ; Goth.
wairthan, pt. t. warth, pp. waurthans. B. All from Teut. type
*werthan- (pt. t. *warth, pp. *wurthanoz), to become, turn to; allied
to L. uertere, to turn, werti, to turn to.—4/WERT, to turn; see
Verse. Der. wierd, q. v.

WOT, I know, or he knows; see Wit (1).

WOULD; see Will (1).

WOUND, a hurt, injury, cut, bruise. (E.) ME. wounde, Chau-
cer, C, T. 1012 (A roto). AS. wund, Grein, ii. 750.4-Du. wond, or
wonde ; Icel. und (for *wund); Dan. vunde; G. wunde; OHG. wunta.
B. All from Teut. type *waunda, f.,a wound. We find also an older
type in the Teut. adj. *wundoz, wounded, appearing in G. wund,
OHG, wunt, Goth. wunds, wounded. B. The type *wun-ddz seems
to answer to an Idg. type *wan-tdés, formed with a pp. suffix from
*wun(n)-, weak grade of Teut. *winnan- (for *wennan-), a verb signi-
fying ‘to fight’ or ‘ suffer,’ represented in AS. by winnan, to strive,
fight, suffer, pp. wunnen. See Win. Der. wound, verb, AS.
wundian, Grein, ii. 751. Cf. wen.

WOURALTI, OURALI, OORALI, OURARI, CURARI,
a resinous substance, extracted from the Strychnos toxifera, used for
poisoning arrows, &c. (Guiana). ‘The hellish oorali;’ Tennyson,
In the Children’s Hospital, 1. 10. And see Waterton’s Wanderings.
From ‘ourali, written also wourali, urali, urari, curare, &c., according
to the pronunciation of the various tribes;’ W. H. Brett, Indian
Tribes of Guiana, 1868, p. 140. Itis spelt wowrara in Stedman’s
Surinam (1796), i. 395; owrari in Hakluyt, Voy. iii. 689, last col.

WRACK, a kind of sea-weed ; shipwreck, ruin. (E.) Wrack, as
a name for sea-weed, merely means ‘that which is cast ashore,’ like
things from a wrecked ship. This is well shown by mod. F. varech,
which has both senses, (1) sea-weed cast on shore, and (2) pieces of
a wrecked ship cast on shore; this F. word being merely borrowed
from English. Cotgrave has F. varech, ‘a sea-wrack or wreck,


Der. not (2).


WREATH.


all that is cast aland by chance or tempest.’ Shak, has wrack;
shipwreck, destruction, ruin, Merch. Ven. iii. 1. 110; Macb, i. 3.
114, &c. ME. wrak, a wreck, Chaucer, C. T. (Six-text edition),
Group B, 1. 513; where Tyrwhitt prints wrecke, 1. 4933. AS. wrec,
‘what is driven,’ Lat. ‘actuarius;’ O. E. Texts, p. 37; cf. wrec,
banishment, exile, misery, Grein, ii. 738. From *wrak, 2nd grade
of Teut. *wrek-an-; the sense is immediately due to the orig. verb,


AS. wrecan (pt. t. wrec), to drive, expel, cast forth; so that wrec,


is here to be taken in the sense of ‘that which is driven ashore.’


The AS, wrecan also means to wreak, punish; see Wreak. And


see Wreck.4+Du. wrak, sb., a wreck; adj., cracked, broken; cf.
wraken, to reject ; cf. Icel. rek (for vrek), also reki, anything drifted
or driven ashore, from reka (for vreka), to drive. Cf. Dan. vrag,
wreck, vrage, to reject, Swed. vrak, wreck, refuse, trash; all from
Dutch. Doublets, wreck, rack (4).

WRAITH, an apparition. (E.) ‘ Wraith, an apparition in the
likeness of a person, supposed to be seen soon before, or soon after
death, . . . Theapparition called a wraith was supposed to be that
of one’s guardian angel ;’ Jamieson. He adds that the word is used
by King James I (Demonology; Works, p. 125). G. Douglas
translates jigiiras (Ain. x. 641) by ‘wraithis of goistis;’ and wmbre
(Ain. x. 593) by wrathis (also written wrethis). Note that the
wraith of Aineas was formed of a cloud (Ain. x. 636); and wraith or
wreth may be the same word as wreath; cf. prov. E. snow-wreath, a
mass of drifted snow. Cf. Milton, P. L. vi. 58. See Wreath.
B. The Ayrshire warth, an apparition, may be a different word, and
allied to the curious Norw. vardyule [=ward-evil ?], a guardian or
attendant spirit, a fairy or sprite said to go before or follow a man,
also considered as an omen or a boding spirit (Aasen) ; which seems
to be allied to E. ward, to guard. But there is also a prov. E.
swarth, with the same sense.

WRANGLE, to dispute, argue noisily. (E.) ME. wranglen, a
various reading for wraxlen (to wrestle), in P. Plowman, C. xvii. 80.
The sb. wranglyng is in P. Plowman, B. iv. 34. A frequentative
formed from AS. wrang, 2nd grade of Teut. *wreng-, as seen in AS.
wringan, to press. Thus the orig. sense was to keep on pressing, to


urge ; hence to argue vehemently. Cf. Low G. vrangeln, to wrestle


(Schambach) ; G. rizgen, to wrestle; Dan. vringle, to twist, entangle ;
Norw. rangla, to begin to quarrel. See Wring. Der. wrangle,


sb. ; wrangl-er, a disputant in the schools (at Cambridge), now applied’


(till 1909) toa first-class man in the mathematical tripos; wrangl-ing.

WRAP, to fold, infold, cover by folding round. (E.) ME.
wrappen, Chaucer, C. T. 10950; Will. of Palerne, 745. [We also
find a form wlappen, Wyclif, Luke, ii. 7, John, xx. 7, now spelt lap;
see Lap (3).] Cf. Proy. E. warp, to wrap up, Somersetshire
(Halliwell), also to weave; also, to lace together the ends of a fishing-


net (E.D.D.); warple, to entangle, id. Not found in AS. Cf


North Friesic wrappe, to press into, to stop up. B. The form of
the word suggests a connexion with Warp, q.v. G. Douglas has
warpit about (L. cingit) to translate Virgil, Ain, i. 112; warpit (L.


euinctus), Ain. y. 774; warpit my head=wrapped up my head, Prol..


to Ain. vii. 95. Perhaps the sense was due to the folding together
of a fishing-net ; cf. Icel. varp, the cast of a net, varpa, a cast, also
the net itself; skdvarp, lit. ‘a shoe-warp,’ the binding of a shoe;
Swed. dial. varpa, a fine herring-net (Rietz). Der. wrapp-er, sb.
WRATH, anger, indignation. (E.) ME. wraffe, wratthe, P.
Plowman, B. iv. 34; wraththe, Wyclif, Eph. iv. 31.
syllabic.
Luke, xxi. 23; John, iii. 36 (both in the Lindisfarne and Rushworth
MSS.). Teut. type *wraithithd, f., from the adj. *wraithoz, AS.
wrad. The sb, is somewhat rare, but the adj. wrad, wroth, from
which it is formed, is common ; see Wroth.4Icel. reidi (for *wreidi),
wrath, from redr, adj., wroth; Dan. and Swed. urede, from vred,.
adj. Der. wrath-ful, King John, ii. 87; wrathful-ly, -ness. :
WREAK, to revenge, inflict (vengeance) on. (E.) ME. wreken,
Chaucer, C. T. 963 (A 961); formerly a strong verb; pt. t. wrak,
Tale of Gamelyn, 1. 303 ; pp. wroken, wroke, wreken, P. Plowman,
A. ii. 169, B. ii. 194. AS. wrecan, to wreak, revenge, punish, orig.
to drive, urge, impel, Grein, ii. 741; pt. t. wrec, pp. wrecen.+-Du.
wreken, to avenge; Icel. reka (for *wreka), pt. t. rak, pp. rekinn, to
drive, thrust, repel, toss, also, to wreak vengeance; G. rachen, to’
avenge; OHG. rechen; Goth. wrikan, to-wreak anger on, to perse-
cute. B. All from Teut. type *wrekan-, pt. t. *wrak; orig. to.
press, urge, drive; Fick, iii. 308. Further allied to Lithuan.’
wargti, to suffer affliction, wargas, affliction; Russ. vrag’, an
enemy, foe (persecutor); L. urgére, to press, urge on, Gk. eipyew,
for *€Fépyeyv, to shut in. All from 4/WERG, to press, urge;
Fick, i. 773. Der. wrack, q.v.; wreck, q.v., wretch, q.v.
WREATH, a garland. (E.) ME. wrethe, Chaucer, C. T. 2147
(A 2145). AS. wr#d, a twisted band, a bandage; gewriden mid
wrede=bound with a bandage, Aélfred, tr. of Gregory’s Pastoral


Properly dis-
AS. and ONorthumbrian wr&d0, wr®dd0, Mark, iii. 21 3


eee ae


- WRECK


Care, ed. Sweet, cap. xvii. p. 122, 1. 16. Formed (with vowel-
change from @ to #) from AS. wrdd, 2nd grade of wridan, to writhe,
twist; see Writhe. Der. wreathe, verb; ‘together wreathed sure,’
Surrey, Paraph. of Ecclesiastes, c. iv. 1. 34.

WRECK, destruction, ruin, remains of what is wrecked. (E.)
Formerly wrack, as in Shak. Temp. i. 2. 26. ME, wrak, Chaucer,
C. T. 4933 (Group B, 1. 513), where Tyrwhitt prints wrecke. In
a glossary of E. Law-terms, written in the 13th c., and pr. in Reliq.
Antiquze, i. 33, we find: ‘ Wrec, truvure de mer,’ i.e. what is cast
up by the sea ; also wrek, Stat. Realm, i. 28 (anno 1275); also ship-
wrek, Thorpe, Cod. Diplom. p. 382. AS. wrec, expulsion, banish-
ment, misery; Grein, ii. 738. The peculiar use may be due to Scand.
influence; see Wrack.+Dy, wrak, wreck; cf. wrak, adj., broken ;
Icel. rek (for *wrek), also reki, anything drifted or driven ashore,
from reka, to drive; [Dan. vrag, wreck, Swed. vrak, refuse, trash,
wreck, from] Low’G. (Hamburg) wrack, a broken bit, a battered ship
(Richey) ; Guernsey rec. B. The lit. sense ‘ that which is drifted
or driven ashore;’ hence it properly meant pieces of ships drifted
ashore, also wrack or sea-weed. Secondly, as the pieces thus driven
ashore were from ships broken up by tempests, it came to mean
fragments, refuse, also destruction, or ruin caused by azy kind of
violence, as in Shakespeare and Milton. The orig. sense of AS.
wrecan was to impel, drive, persecute, expel, wreak ; hence wrec in
AS. poetry commonly means banishment or misery such as is en-
dured by an exile. Der. wreck, verb; also wrack, Temp. i. 2. 236;
wrack-ful, Shak. Sonnet 65; wreck-ful, Spenser, F. Q. vi. 8. 36;
wreck-er, one who plunders wrecks. And see wretch.

WREN, a small bird. (E.) ME. wrenne, Gower, C. A. iii. 349;
bk. viii. 2227. AS. wrenna, wrenna; Voc. 131. 333; 286.16. Cf.
Icel. rindill, a wren; OLow G. wrendo, wrendil, a wren (Gallée).

WRENCH, a twist, sprain, side-pull, jerk. (E.) ‘I wrenche
my foote, I put*it out of joynt;’ Palsgrave. He also spells it
wrinche. ME. wrench, sb., in the metaphorical sense of perversion,
guile, fraud, deceit. ‘ Withouten eny wrenche’=without any guile,
Rob. of Glouc. 1. 1264. Cf. wrenk, wrench, a trick, Cursor Mundi,
13336, 29307. AS. wrenc (dat. wrence), guile, fraud, deceit, Grein,
li, 742. B. It is obvious that mod. E. has preserved the orig.
sense, and that the AS. and ME. uses are merely metaphorical.
So also G. rank (pl. ranke), a cognate form, means an intrigue,
trick, artifice, but provincially it means ‘crookedness,’ Fliigel;
hence MHG. renken, G. verrenken, to wrench. [On the other hand,
mod. E. only uses the allied word wrong in the metaphorical sense
of perverse, bad.] ‘Teut.. type *wrankiz, lit. ‘a twist? From
*wrank, 2nd grade of *wrenk-, for which see Wrinkle, Der.
wrench, verb, AS. wrencan, to deceive, Grein, ii. 742; so also’ AS.
bewrencan, to obtain by fraud, A. S. Apothegms, no. 34, pr. in
Salomon and Saturn, ed. Kemble, p. 262.

WREST, to twist forcibly, distort. (E.) ME. wresten, in the
sense to wrestle, struggle, Ancren Riwle, p. 374, 1. 7; Cursor
Mundi, 19353. AS. wrestan, to twist forcibly, Grein, ii. 7403 cf.
Salomon and Saturn, ed. Kemble, p. 140, 1. 191. We also find
AS. wré#st, adj., firm, strong (Grein) ; the orig. sense of which is
supposed to have been tightly twisted, or rather (as I should sup-
pose) tightly strung, with reference to the strings of a harp when
tightened by the instrument called a wrest; see Shak. Troil. iii. 3. 23;
and note that the word strong itself merely means strung.+Icel.
reista, to wrest; MDan. vreste, to wrest, Dan. vriste. B. The
form wrest is closely allied to wr#d, a wreath or twisted bandage,
and stands (probably) for Teut. *wraith-t-joz; from Teut. *wraith-,
as in AS. wrdd, and grade of wridan, to writhe or twist; see
Writhe. Andsee Wrist. Der. wrest, sb. (asabove) ; wrest-le, q.v.

WRESTLE, to struggle, contend by grappling together. (E.)

ME. wrestlen, Gower, C. A. iii. 350, bk. viii. 2240; wrastlen,
Ancren Riwle, p. 80, 1. 7. The frequentative of Wrest, q.v.
The AS. wre#stlian, to wrestle, is rare; the form more commonly
found is wraxlian, Gen. xxxii. 24, whence ME. wraxlen, P. Plow-
man, C, xvii. 80, where we also find the various readings wraséle,
wraskle. Still, we find: ‘Luctatur [read Luctator], wréestlere;
Luctatorum, wr#stliendra;’ Voc. 431. 25, 26.44+MDu. wrastelen,
worstelen, ‘to wrestle or to struggle,’ Hexham. Der. wrestl-er,
wrestl-ing.

‘ WRETCH, a miserable creature. (E.) Orig. an outcast or
exile. ME. wrecche, Chaucer, C. T. 933 (A 931), where Tyrwhitt
prints wretched wight, and omits which, AS. wrecca, an outcast,
exile, lit. ‘one driven out,’ also spelt wrecca, wreca, Grein, ii. 739.
Cf. AS. wrec, exile. AS. wrecan, to drive out, also to persecute,
wreak, avenge ;see Wreak. Cf. Lithuan. wargas, affliction, misery.
‘Der. wretch-ed, ME. wrecched, Chaucer, C. T. 923 (A 921), lit.
“made like a wretch;’ wretch-ed-ly, wretch-ed-ness.

- WRETCHLESSNESS, a misspelling of recklessness, i.e. reck-
dessness; see Reck, vl


WRIST 725.


WRIGGLE, to move along by twisting to and fro. (E.) ‘ With
their much winding and wrigling;’ Holland, tr. of Pliny, b. xxxii.
c.2.§1. The frequentative of wrig, to move about; ‘ The bore his
tayle wrygges,’ Skelton, Elinour Rumming, 1.177. Allied to ME.
wrikken, to twist to and fro, Life of St. Dunstan, 1. 82; see Spec. of
Eng., ed. Morris and Skeat, p. 22. Not found in AS., but a Low G.
word as well as Scand., and preserved in mod. E. wrick, to twist.
B. We find the closely related AS. wrigian, to impel, move towards,
but this became ME. wrien (with loss of g), whence mod. E. wry,
adj.; see further under Wry and Wring. ME. wrikken and AS.
wrigian. are closely related forms.4-Du. wriggelen, to wriggle; fre-
quentative of wrikken, ‘to move or stir to and fro,’ Sewel ; whence
onwrikbaar, immovable, steady; Low G. (Westphalian) vriggeln,
to wriggle, to loosen by moving to and fro; (Hamburg) wrickeln, to
wriggle ; Low G. wriggein, to wriggle (Danneil); wrikken, to turn,
move to and fro, wriggle; Dan. vrikke, to wriggle; Swed. vricka,
to turn to and fro, whence vrickning, distortion. y. The orig.
sense seems to have been ‘ to bend’ or ‘turn;’ and we may deduce
the orig. sense of E. wriggle as having been ‘to keep on bending
or twisting about.’ See also Rig (2). Der. wriggl-er. Also
rick-ets, q.V.

WRIGHT, a workman. (E.) ME. wrighte, Chaucer, C. T.
3145 (A 3143). AS. wyrhta, a worker, workman, maker, creator;
Grein, ii. 763; with the common shifting of r.—AS. wyrht, a deed,
work ; formed, with suffix -¢, from wyrc-an, to work. (The AS.
wyrht occurs in ge-wyrht, a work, Grein, i. 489, where the prefix ge-
makes no appreciable difference; and it stands for *wyrc-t, with the
usual substitution of ht for ct).-OSax. wurhtio, a wright, from
wurhi, a deed; OHG. wurhto, a wright, from OHG. wuruht, wuraht,
a work, merit. B. The AS. gewyrht, OSax. wurht, OHG. wuruht,
are all from Teut. *wurk-, weak grade of *werk- ; see Work. Der.
cart-wright, ship-wright, wheel-wright.

WRING, to twist, force by twisting, compress, pain, bend aside.
(E.) ME. wringen; pt. t. wrang, wrong, Chaucer, C. T. 5026
(B 606) ; pp. wrungen, wrongen. AS. wringan, to press, compress,
strain, pt. t. wrang, Gen. xl. 11, pp. wrungon.4-Du. wringen ; Low G.
wringen, to twist together; G. rizgen, to wring, wrest, turn, struggle,
wrestle ; a strong verb, pt. t. rang, pp. gerungen; OHG. hringan
(for *wringan), strong verb. B. All from Teut. type *wreng-an-,
pt. t. *wrang, pp. *wrunganoz; a nasalised form from a base *wreg=
*werg ; for which see Worry. And cf. Wriggle. Der. wrang-
le, wrong; probably allied to wrench, wrink-le, wrigg-le, wry.

WRI HE (1), a small ridge on a surface, unevenness. (E.)
ME. wrinkel or wrinkil. ‘ Wrynkyl, or rympyl, or wrympyl, Ruga;
Wrynkyl, or playte [pleat] in clothe, Plica;’ Prompt. Parv. [Here
the spelling wrympyl stands for *hkrympyl ; wrinkle and rimple are from
different roots, as shown under ripple (2). Elsewhere, we find, in
Prompt. Parv. p. 434, the spelling rympyl, given under R.] ‘The pl.
wrinclis occurs, in the various readings of the later version, in Wyclif,
Gen. xxxviii. 14. Somner gives AS. wrinclian, to wrinkle ; the pp.
ge-wrinclod occurs in Kemble, Cod. Dipl. iv. 34; 1.9. Froma sb.
*wrincel. B. Evidently a dimin. form from a base *wrenk, prob.
allied to Teut. *wreng-an-, to wring, to twist. See Wring; and
see Wrinkle (2).4-MDu. wrinckel, ‘a wrinckle;’ wrinckelen, ‘to
wrinckle, or to crispe;’ prob. allied to wringen, ‘to. wreath [i.e.
writhe, twist] or to wring;’ Hexham. Perhaps further allied to
Goth. wraigs, crooked, Luke, iii. 5 ; L. werg-ere, to bend ; Skt. vyj-
ina-, crooked; Gk. far8-ds, crooked, féuB-ev, torevolve. Brugmann,
i. §§ 371, 677. See Rhomb. @ Dan. rynke, a wrinkle, pucker,
gather, fold, ryxke, to wrinkle, Swed. rynka, both sb. and vb., and
Icel. hrukka (for *hrunka), a wrinkle, are all forms due to the weak
grade of an old str. vb. *hrenkan-, and are related rather to Ruck (1).
Der. wrinkle, vb. ; wrinkl-y.

WRINKLIBBE (2), a hint, small piece of advice. (E.) Prov. E.
wrinkle, a new idea (Halliwell). It means ‘a new idea’ imparted
by another, a hint; but the lit. sense is ‘a small trick,’ or ‘little
stratagem. ‘ Havinglearned .. . euery wrinckle;’ Lyly, Euphues,
p- 389 (ed. Arber). And see Polit. Poems, ed. Wright, ii. 45; 1. 7.
It is the dimin. of AS. wrenc, a trick; for which see Wrench.
Allied to Wrinkle (1).

WRIST, the joint which turns the hand. (E.) The pl. is spelt
wrestes in Spenser, F. Q.i. 5.6. ME. wriste or wrist; also wirst, by
shifting of r. ‘Wryst, or wyrste. of an hande;’ Prompt. Pary, AS.
wrist. We find ‘08 pa wriste’ =up to the wrist ; Laws of Athelstan,
pt. iv. § 7, in Thorpe, Ancient Laws, i. 226,1.17. The full form was
hand-wrist, i.e. that which turns the hand about. We find ‘ betwux
elboga and handwyrste’=betwixt elbow and handwrist; Voc. 158.
to. Cf. ‘geniculi, cneow-wyrste,’ i.e. knee-joints, Voc. 160. 17.
Prob. for *wrid-t, and formed with suffix -t from wrid-, weak
grade of wridan, to writhe, to twist; see Writhe. Cf. Wrest,
from the same verb.-+-OFries. wriust, wrist, werst; whence hondwriust,


726 WRITE


hand-wrist, fotwriust, foot-wrist or instep ; Low G, wrist; Icel. rist,
the instep ; cf. rid-inn, pp. of rida, to twist; Dan. and Swed. vris?,
the instep; cf. vride, vrida, to twist ; G. rist, instep, wrist. Cf. also
Westphal. werste, the instep, vrist, the ankle; Low G. (Hamburg)
wristen, pl., wrists, ankles. Der. wrist-band, the band of the sleeve
at the wrist.

WRITE, to form letters with a pen or pencil, engrave, express in
writing, compose, communicate a letter. (E.) The orig. sense was
‘to score,’ i.e. to cut slightly, as when one scores letters or marks on
a piece of bark or soft wood with a knife; it also meant to engrave
runes on stone. ME. writen, pt. t. wroot, Chaucer, C. T. 5310
(B 890); pp. writen (with short 7). AS. writan, pt. t. wrat, pp.
writen, to write, inscribe (orig. to score, engrave), Grein, ii. 743.--
OSax. writan, to cut, injure, also to write ; Du. rijten, to tear, split ;
Icel. rita, pt. t. reit, pp. ritinn, to scratch, cut, write; Swed. rita, to
draw, delineate ; G. reissen, pt. t. riss, pp. gerissen, OHG. rizan, to
cut, tear, split, draw or delineate. Cf. Goth. writs, a stroke made
with a pen. B. All from the Teut. type *wreit-an-, pt. t. *wrait,
pP- writ-anoz, to cut, scratch, hence to engrave, write. Der. writ, sb.,
AS. ge-writ, also writ, a writing, Grein, i. 486, ii. 743, from writ-,
weak grade of writan, to write. Also writ-er, AS. writere, Matt. ii. 4 ;
writ-er-ship, writ-ing.

WRITHE, to twist to and fro. (E.) Spelt wrethe in Palsgrave.
ME, writhen, spelt wrythen in Chaucer, tr. of Boethius, b. vy. pr. 3,
1. 15; pt. t. wroth (with long 0), Gawain and the Grene Knight,
1. 1200; pp. writhen (with short 7), P. Plowman, B. xvii. 174. Cf.
writhing in Chaucer, C. T. 10441 (F 127). AS. wridan, to twist,
wind about, pt. t. wrad, pp. wriden, Grein, ii. 743.-4-Icel. rida (for
*wrida), pt. t. reid, pp. ridinn; Dan. vride; Swed. vrida, to wring,
twist, turn, wrest; OHG. ridan, MHG. riden, a strong verb, now
lost. B. All from Teut. type *wreith-an-, pt. t. *wraith, pp.
*writh-anoz, to twist. Der. wrath, wroth, wreath, wri-st, wre-st.

WRONG, perverted, unjust, bad; also as sb., that which is
wrong or unjust. (Scand.) ME, wrong, adj., Will. of Palerne, 706;
sb., P. Plowman, B. iii. 175. Late AS. wrang (a passing into o
before x), occurs as a sb. in the A.S. Chron. an, 1124. Properly
an adj. signifying ‘ a wrong thing,’ a thing perverted or wrung aside ;
compare the use of wrong nose, for ‘ crooked nose,’ in Wyclif, Levit.
xxi. Ig (later version). Not E., but Scand. =—ONorse *wrangr ; as in
Icel. rangr, awry, metaphorically, wrong, unjust; Dan. vrang,
wrong, adj.; Swed. wrdng, perverse. All from Teut. *wrang, 2nd
giade of *wrengan-, to wring, twist;see Wring. Der. wrong, verb,
to injure, as in ‘to wrong the wronger,’ Shak. Lucrece, 819 ; wrong-er
(as above); wrong-ly; wrong-ful, Wyclif, Luke, xii. 58 (earlier
version); wrong-ful-ly, -ness; wrong-head-ed, i.e. perverse. Also
wrong-wise, ME, wrongwis, O. Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, i.175,1. 256
(Swed. vrdngvis, iniquitous), now obsolete, but remarkable as being
the converse of E. righteous, formerly right-wise; Palsgrave actually
spells it wrongeous !

WROTH, full of wrath, angry. (E.) ME. wroth, Chaucer,
Parl. of Foules, 1. 504. AS. wrad, wroth, Grein, ii. 737. —AS.
wrad, 2nd grade of wridan, to writhe; so that the orig. sense was
twisted or perverted in one’s temper.-++ Du. wreed, cruel; Icel. reidr ;
Dan. vred; Swed. vred; OHG. reid, reidi, only in the sense of twisted
or curled, All from Tent. *wraith, 2nd grade of *wreithan-. See
Writhe and Wrath.

WRY, twisted or turned to one side. (E.) ‘ With visage wry ;’
Court of Love, 1. 1162 (a late poem, perhaps 16th century). But the
verb wrien, to twist, bend, occurs in Chaucer, C. T. 17211 (H 262);
and answers to AS. wrigian, to drive, impel, also to tend or bend
towards. ‘ Hlaford min... wrigad on wonge’= my lord [i.e.
master of a plough] pushes his way along the field ; Codex Exoni-
ensis, ed. Thorpe, p. 403 (Riddle xxii, 1. 9). Ofa bough bent down,
and then let go, it is said: ‘ wrigad wip his gecyndes’=it moves
towards its kind, i.e. as it is naturally inclined; Aélfred, tr. of
Boethius, b. ili. met. 2 (cap. xxv). This AS. base wrig- is preserved
in the frequentative Wriggle,q.v. See further under Awry. Der.
a-wry,q. V.; wry-neck, a small bird, allied to the woodpecker, so called
from ‘the writhing snake-like motion which it can impart to its neck
without moving the rest of its body ;’ Engl. Cycl. Also wry-ness.

W YCH-ELM ; see under Witch-elm.

WYVERN, WIVERN, in heraldry, a kind of flying serpent or
two-legged dragon. (F.—L.) The final x is excrescent after r, as
in bitter-n, q.v. ME. wivere, a serpent, Chaucer, Troilus, iii. toro.
=—AF. wyvre (also guivere) ; see Notes on E. Etym. p. 470; OF.
wivre, a serpent, viper, esp. in blazon; see Roquefort and Burguy ;
mod. F. givre,a viper. Burguy says it was also formerly spelt vivre,
and that it is still spelt voivre in some F. dialects. = L. uipera, a. viper ;
see Viper. 4 The spelling with win OF. was due to Germanic
influence; as if from an OHG. *wipera, borrowed from L. wipera.
Doublet, viper.


YANKEE


XEBEC, a small three-masted vessel used in the Mediterranean.
(Span.—Turk.) In Ash’s Dict. ed. 1775.—Span. xabegue, a xebec.
So also Port. zabeco, F. chebec.= Turk. sumbaki, written sunbaki,
‘a kind of Asiatic ship;’ Rich. Dict. p. 852. He also gives Pers.
sumbuk, a small ship; Arab. sumbuk, a small boat, a pinnace. See
Devic, Supp. to Littré, s. v. chebec, which is the F. form; he notes
also Port. xabeco, Ital. zambecco, the latter form retaining the nasal m,
which is lost in the other languages. He adds that the word sum-
beki is given in the first ed. of Meninski’s Thesaurus (1680) ; and that
the mod. Arab. word is shabbak ; see Dozy, Glossaire, p. 352.

XYLOBALSAM, the wood (or dried twigs) of the balm-of-
Gilead tree. (L.—Gk.) ‘The Indians doe call it Xilo, and we do
call the same Balsamo;° Frampton, tr. of Monardes, fol. 7, back.
Evidently an error, as the word occurs in Pliny. Spelt «ylobalsamum
in Holland, tr. of Pliny.—L. xylobalsamum; Pliny, Nat. Hist. b. xii.
c. 25.— Gk. fvAoBdAcapoy, the wood of the balsam tree. = Gk. gvAo-,
for fvAov, wood; and BdAcapor, resin of the BadAcapos, or balsam-
tree, a word of Semitic origin; see Balsam, From fvAov we also
have xylo-graphy, engraving on wood.


Ng


Y-, prefix. (E.) This prefix is nearly obsolete, being only retained
in the archaic words y-clept (called), y-wis (certainly), The ME.
forms are y-, i-; the latter being frequently written J (as a capital),
— AS. ge-, an extremely common prefix, both of sbs. and verbs. [In
verbs it was prefixed, not only to the pp. (as in mod. G, and in
Middle-English), but also to the past tense, to the infinitive, or indeed
occasionally to azy part of the verb, without appreciably affecting the
sense. In the word y-wis, certainly, many editors have ignorantly
mistaken it for the pronoun J; see Ywis. It appears as e- in the
word e-zough; and as a- in the word a-ware,|4+Du. ge-, prefix; G.
ge-; OHG. ha-, ki-; Goth. ga-. As regards usage, it resembles L,
com-, con-, for cum, with; but the forms can hardly be reconciled.

YACHT, a swift pleasure-boat. (Du.) Pron. yot. ‘One of his
yachts ;’ Evelyn’s Diary, Oct. 1, 1661, In Phillips, ed. 1706; also
in Blount’s Gloss., ed, 1674, where itis badly spelt yatcht ; Bailey has
yatch, = Du. jagt, formerly spelt jacht; ‘ een Iacht, ofte [or] See-roovers
Schip, a pinace, or a pirate’s ship,’ Hexham. ‘ fagt, a yacht;”
Sewel. Named from its speed; cf. Du. jagten (formerly jachten), to
speed, to hunt; jag¢ (formerly jackt), a hunting. Du. jagen, ‘to
hunt or to chase deere, hares, &c.;’ Hexham.+G. jagen, to hunt.
Der. yacht-er, yacht-ing.

YAK, the name of a bovine quadruped. (Thibet.) In a Thibetan
Dict., by H. A, Jaschke, p. 668, we are told that the Thibet. word
is yyag, a male yak, the female being called po-yyag. The symbol
¥ is used to denote a peculiar Thibetan sound.

YAM, a large esculent tuber, resembling the potato. (Port.—W.
African.) Mentioned in Cook’s Voyages (Todd); ed. 1777, i. 146 ;
and by H. Pitman in 1689, in Arber’s Eng. Garner, vii. 367-
=Port. ixhame, a yam; not given in Vieyra, but noted in Webster
and in Littré. Littré gives the F. form as igname, which he says is
borrowed from the Port. inhame; and adds: ‘ it was the Portuguese
who first found the yam used as an object of culture, first on the
coast of Africa, afterwards in India and Malacca, and gaye it its name 5
but the language whence it was taken is unknown.’ It is really
W. African ; see Hakluyt’s Voyages (1599), v. ii. pt. 2. p. 129 3 where
the African name is given as inamia, in Benin; under the date 1588.
Called Zames in Minsheu’s Span. Dict. (1623). See Notes on E. Etym.
p- 323. ‘ The country [Benin] abounds with yams ;’ Voyages, 17455
ii. 707. The Malay name is ub2 ; Marsden, Malay Dict. p. 21.

YANKEE, a citizen of New England, or (later) of the United
States. (Dutch?) The word occurs as early as 1765. Webster
cites: ‘From meanness first this Portsmouth Vankee rose, And still to
meanness all his conduct flows,’ Oppression, A Poem by an American,
Boston, 1765. We also find in the same: ‘Commonly considered to
be a corrupt pronunciation of the word English, or of the F. word
Anglais, by the native Indians of America. According to Thierry,
a corruption of Yankin, a dimin. of Fokn, a nickname given to the
English colonists of Connecticut by the Dutch settlers of New York,’,
[which may be partly correct]. Note that a Captain Vanky, com~
manding a Dutch ship, is mentioned several times in Dampier’s
Voyages, ed. 1699, i. 38, 39. Again, a Dutch boat seems to have


YAP


been called a yanky by Smollett, Sir L. Greaves, ch. iii (Davies).
B. Dr. Wm. Gordon, in his Hist. of the American War, ed. 1789,
vol. i, pp. 324, 325, says it was a favourite cant word in Cambridge,
Mass., as early as 1713, and that it meant ‘excellent;’ as, a yankee
good horse, yankee good cider, &c. He supposes that it was adopted
by the students there as a by-word, and, being carried by them from
the college, obtained currency in the other New England colonies,
until at length it was taken up in other parts of the country, and
applied to New Englanders generally as a term of slight reproach.
Cf. Lowland Sc. yankie, a sharp, clever, forward woman ; yanker, an
agile girl, an incessant speaker; yanker, a smart stroke, a great false-
hood, a bounce; yank, a sudden and severe blow, a sharp stroke;
yanking, active, pushing (Jamieson). Without the nasal, there is
also Lowland Sc. yack, to talk precipitately and indistinctly, yazke, a
stroke or blow. y. The reference in 1765 may well be to Ports-
mouth in New Hampshire, not far to the N. of Boston ; and Thierry
may be right in supposing it to be a Dutch nickname. I accept the
suggestion made by Dr. H. Logeman, that Yankee was formed (like
Chinee from Chinese, &c.) from the Du. Fax Kees, a familiar form of
Sohn Cornelius. Both Fan and Kees are very common Du. names,
and both were familiarly used as terms of contempt; see N. and Q.
10S. iv. 509, v. 15. Cf. EFries. Yan, John, and Kés, Cornelius
(Koolman). The EFries. #és also meant ‘ cheese ;’ and it is remark-
able that Ascham uses John Cheese as a term of contempt; as in—
‘Away, good Peek-goos! hens, Fokn Cheese!’ The Scholemaster,
ed. Arber, bk. i. p. 54.

YAP, to yelp, bark. (E.) ‘The yapping of a cur;’ L’Estrange,
tr. of Quevedo, p. 243 (Todd). Yap is imitative ; so also yaup, the
Lowland Sc. equivalent of yelp (Jamieson). The Lowland Sc. yaff
also occurs, which is a variant of yap. The F. japper, ‘to bark, to
yawle,’ Cot., is of similar origin. Cf. EFries. and Low G. jappen,
to gasp; Norm. dial. japer, to yap (Duméril).

YARD (1), an enclosed space. (E.) ME. yerd, Chaucer, C. T.
15181 (B 4365). AS. geard, an enclosure, court; Grein, i. 493.-+
Du. gaard, a yard, garden; Icel. gardr (whence prov. E. garth) ;
Dan. gaard; Swed. gérd; Goth. gards, a house; allied to Goth.
garda, a field, OHG. gart, garto, whence G. garten.4Russ. gorod’,
a town; L. hortus; Gk. xépros, a court-yard, enclosure; Olrish
gort, a field. B. From the Teut. type *gardoz, m.; Idg. type
*ghortos, a yard, court, enclosure. But the connexion with Gk.
xopros is uncertain. See Gird (1). Der. court-yard, orchard. From
the same root are garden, gird (1), gird-le; horti-culture ; as well as
cohort, court, curt-ain, &c. Doublets, garden, prov. E. garth.

YARD (2), a rod, an E, measure of 36 inches, a cross-beam on a
mast for spreading square sails. (E.) ME. 3erde, yerde, a stick,
Chaucer, C. T. 149; also a yard in length, id. 1052 (A 1050). AS.
gyrd, gerd, a stick, rod; Grein, i. 536.4-Du. garde, a twig, rod; G.
gerte, a rod, switch; OHG. gerta, kerta. Teut. type *gardja, f.
Allied to O. Bulgarian Zridi (Russ. jerde), arod. But not to Goth.
gazds,a goad. See Streitberg, § 125 (4). Der. yard-arm, the arm
(i. e. the half) of a ship’s yard, from the mast to the end of it.

YARH, ready. (E.) As adj. in Temp. v. 224; as adv., readily,
quickly, Temp. i. 1. 7. ME. 3are, Will. of Palerne, 895, 1963,
3265 ; yare, Rob. of Glouc. p. 52, 1.1213. AS. gearu, gearo, ready,
quick, prompt; Grein, ii. 493.4+Du. gaar, done, dressed (as meat) ;
gaar, ady., wholly; Icel. gorr, adj., ready; gorva, gerva, gjorva,
adj., quite, wholly ; OHG. garo, karo, prepared, ready; G. gar, adv.,
wholly. ~B. Teut. type *garwoz, adj., ready (Fick, iii. 102). Allied
to Gear. Der. yare-ly, adv., Temp. i. 1. 43 also gear, garb (1),
gar (2). Also (perhaps) yarr-ow, q. v.

YARN, spun thread, the thread of a rope. (E.) ME. yarn, 3arn;
‘3arne, threde, Filum;’ Prompt. Pary. p. 536. AS. gearn, yarn,
Voc. 238. 27.4+-Du. garen; Icel., Dan., and Swed. garn; G. garn.
B. All from the Teut. type *garnom, n., yarn, string, Fick, iii. ror.
Further allied to Gk. xop67, a string, orig. a string of gut; cf. Icel.
gorn, or garnir, guts (i.e. strings or cords); Lith. Zarnos, guts; L.
haru-, in haru-spex, inspector of entrails. See Cord, Chord. Cf.
Brugmann, i. § 605.

YARROW, the plant milfoil. (E.) ME. 3arowe, 3arwe ; Prompt.
Parv. p. 536. AS. g@eruwe, explained by ‘ millefolium ;’ Voc. 133. 32;
spelt gearwe, id. 32. 36.4-Du. gerw; G. garbe; MHG. garbe, garwe,
OHG. garawa. B. Perhaps there is a reference to the old beliefin the
curative properties of the yarrow, which was supposed to be a great
remedy for wounds; in Cockayne’s A. S. Leechdoms, i. 195, we are
. told that Achilles was the first person who applied it to the cure of
sword-wounds; hence, indeed, its botanical name of Achillea mille-
folium. Ifso, we might connect it with the verb gearwian, to make
ready, from the adj. gearo, ready, yare;see Yare. Thus yarrow=
that which makes yare, or restores. But this is uncertain.

YATAGHAN, ATAGHAN, a dagger-like sabre, with doubly
curved blade. (Turk.) Spelt ataghan in Byron, Giaour ; see note 27.


YEAN, EAN 727


Spelt yataghan or ataghan in F. also.— Turk. yataghan, a yataghan ;
see Devic, and Pavet de Courteille, Dict. du. Ture Oriental ; spelt
yataghan, yataghan, Zenker’s Dict. pp. 947, 958.

YAW, to go unsteadily, bend out of its course, said of a ship.
(Scand.—Du.) In Hamlet, y. 2. 120. The sense is to go aside,
swerve, bend out of the course; see Phillips. —Icel. jaga, properly,
to hunt; but used in the peculiarly specialised sense ‘to move to
and fro;’ see Vigfusson. For the sound aw, cf. the derivation of
mod. E. awe from Icel. agi. Cf. Dan. jage, Swed. jaga, to hunt. =
Du. jagen, to hunt, drive, chase. See further under Yacht.

YAW4L (1), a small boat. (Du.) In Anson’s Voyages, b. ii. c. 3
(R.). ‘Barges or yauds of different kinds ;’ Drummond’s Travels
(Letter, dated 1744), p. 87 (Todd). ‘Like our Deal yalls;’ W.
Dampier, A New Voyage, 1. 429. The word is common at Lowes-
toft.=— Du. jol, a yawl, skiff; Sewel explains jol as ‘a Jutland boat.’
Cf. Dan. jolle ; Swed. julle,a yawl. Hexham records MDnu. iolleken,
‘a small barke or boate.’ The mod. Icel. form is jula. | B. Prob.
of Low G. origin. The Low G. forms are jelle, jolle, jiille (Scham-
bach); also gelle, golle, jolle (Koolman, s.y. julle); of which the
forms gelle, gélle seem older than the rest. A borrowing from L.
galea seems possible. See Galley.

YAWHL (2), to howl. (E.) ‘There howling Scyllas, yawling
round about;’ Fairfax, tr. of Tasso, b. iv. st. 5. Also spelt yole,
yowl (Halliwell), ME. goulen, Havelok, 164 ; 3oulen, Chaucer, C. T.
Group A, 1278 (Six-text ed.) ; Wyclif, Micah, i. 8; 3aulen, Gawain
and the Grene Knight, 1453. Of imitative origin. Cf, EFrties.
jaueln, Low G. jaueln, to yawl; Du. jolen, to groan.4Icel. gaula,
to low, bellow ; Norweg. gaula, to bellow, low, roar (Aasen) ; Swed.
dial. géla, gjéla. Of imitative origin, like yell. See Yell.

YAWN, to gape. (E.) Spelt yane in Palsgrave. ME, geonien,
Ancren Riwle, p. 242; whence E, yawn, by lengthening of o to open
long 0; cf. E. frost, broth. [Cf. also ME. ganien, Chaucer, Six-text
ed., Group H, 1. 35; where Tyrwhitt (1. 16984) has galpeth.] AS.
geonian; tr. of Beda, Hist. iv. 19; variant of ginian, tr. of Orosius,
iii. 3. From gin-, weak grade of -ginan (pt. t. -gan), in comp.
be-ginan, to yawn (Grein). Cf. AS. ganian, to yawn; Grein, i. 370.
+OHG. ginén, to yawn. Cf. Icel. gina, to gape, pt. t. gen; MDu.
gienen, ‘to yawne, Hexham; Du. geewwen, to yawn. From Idg.
a GHEI, whence also L. hi-Gre, to gape; Slay. root zi-, to gape,
in Miklosich. Der. yawn-ing. From the same root, hi-at-us,

YH, the nom. pl. of the 2nd personal pronoun, (E.) Thenom. pl.
is properly ye, whilst the dat. and acc. pl. is you; the gen. pl. is
properly your, now only used as a possessive pronoun. But in mod.
E. ye is almost disused, and you is constantly used in the nominative,
not only in the plural, but in the singular, as a substitute for thou.
‘Vein me, and I in you; John, xiv. 20; this shows the correct use.
ME. ye, 3e, nom. ; your, jour, gen. ; you, Jou, yow, dat. and acc. AS.
gé, nom. ; edwer, gen.; edw, dat. and acc.; Grein, i. 263, 375.4-Du.
gij, ye; u, you; Icel. é, ier, ye; yar, your; ydr, you; Dan, and
Swed. 7, ye (also you); G. hr; OHG. tr, ye, iuwar, iuwer, your, iu,
you; Goth. jus, ye; izwara, your; izwis, you. We also have the
AS. dual form git, ye two. B. The common Idg. base is yu-,
whence also Lithuan. jis, ye, Gk. d-pets, ye, Skt. yii-yam, ye. See
Brugmann, ii. § 436.

YEA, an affirmative adverb ; verily. (E.) The distinction between
ME. 3e, 3a, yea, and 3is, 3es, Jus, yes, is commonly well marked; the
former is the simple affirmative, giving assent, whilst the latter is
a strong asseveration, often accompanied by an oath; see Will. of
Palerne, &c. Spelt ye, Chaucer, C. T. 9219 (E1345). OFries. je,
AS. géa, ged, yea; John, xxi. 15.4Du., Dan., Swed., and G. ja;
Icel. 74; Goth. ja, jai; W. ie; Gk. #, truly. Der. ye-s, q.v.
YEAN, EAN, to bring forth lambs, (E.) ‘ The new-yean’d lamb ;”
Beaum. and Fletcher, Faithful Shepherdess, iii. 1. Spelt ean in
Shak. Merch. Ven. i. 3. 88; ME. enen; ‘Enyn, or brynge forthe
kyndelyngys, Feto;’ Prompt. Parv. p. 140. The difference between
ean and yean is easily explained ; in the latter, the prefixed y repre-
sents the very common AS. prefix ge-, readily added to any verb
without affecting the sense; see Y-, prefix, above. AS. éanian, to
ean, Lambeth Psalter, Ps. Ixvii. 70; ge-@anian, to yean, of which the
only clear trace appears to be in the expression ge-éane eowa=the
ewes great with young, Gen. xxxiii. 13. B. The AS, éa answers to
Germanic az, and the suffix -iax to Germ. -djan (Sievers, Gr. § 411) ;
so that the Germ. type is *aundjan; a type which also appears in
Dutch dial. oonen, to ean; see Franck. This appears to be derived
from a form *au-no-, meaning ‘lamb ;’ which some consider as being
allied to Goth, aw-is, L. ou-is,a sheep, AS. eowu, aewe. See Ewe,
Scheller, in his Bavarian Dict. p. 1, cites the forms den, auen, duwen,
to. yean, produce lambs, which are immediately derived from a, aw,
duw,aewe. Cf. Kluge, s.v. Schaf. sy. But Kluge and Lutz (Eng.
Etym.) consider Teut. *auzo- as equivalent to *agwno-, correspond-
ing to L. agnus, alamb, and to Celtic type *ogzos, a lamb, as seen


728 YEAR


in Olrish wan, W. 0en, Bret. oax, a lamb. So also Swed. dial. dina,
dna, to yean; from 6z, a lamb (Rietz, p. 114). Also Manx eayney,
to yean, from eayn,a lamb, Thus the sense is merely ‘to produce
lambs.’ Brugmann, i. §§ 671, 704. Der. yean-ling, a new-born
lamb ; with double dimin. suffix -l-ing.

YEAR, the time of the earth’s revolution round the sun. (E.)
ME. 3eer, yeer, 3er, yer; Chaucer, C. T. 601, where it appears as a
plural. This sb. was formerly unaltered in the plural, like sheep,
deer; hence the mod. phrase ‘a two-year old colt.’ The pl. year is
common in Shak. Temp. i. 2. 53, &c. AS. géar, gér, a year; pl.
géar; Grein, i. 496.4-Du. jaar; Icel. Gr; Dan. aar, pl. aar; Swed.
ar; G. jahr; OHG. jar; Goth. jer. B. All from Teut. type *yérom,
n., a year. Further allied to Gk. dpos, a season, a year; Mpa, a
season, an hour.=4/YE, to go, pass; an extension from 4/EI, to go;
whence also Skt. yatu-, time. See Hour. Brugmann, i. § 308,
ii. § 587. Der. year-ly, adj. and adv.; year-ling, an animal a year
old, with double dimin. suffix -J-ing. Allied to hour.

YEHARN (1), to desire strongly, be eager for. (E.) ME. 3ernen,
P. Plowman, B. i. 35. Cf. AS. giernan, to yearn, be desirous ;
later gyrnan, Grein, i. 537; formed (by the usual change of eo to ie)
from AS. georn, adj., desirous, eager, id. i. 500. Cf. also georndon,
desired; A. S. Chron. an. 1011; which better agrees with the ME.
form.+-Icel. girna, to desire; from gjarn, eager; Goth. gairnjan, to
long for, from -gairns, desirous, only in the comp. faihu-gairns,
covetous, lit. desirous of money. B. The verb answers to a Teut.
type *gernjan-, from the adj. *ger-noz, desirous of. Again, the
adj. is formed (with Idg. suffix -zo) from the base GER, appear-
ing in OHG. gern, kerdn, mod. G. be-gehren, to long for. 4/GHER,
to desire; whence also Gk. yaipey, to rejoice, xapa, joy, L. hor-ior,
I urge, Skt. ary, to desire. Der. yearn-ing,-ly. > Not connected
with earnest (1), but with hor-tatory.

YEARN (2), to grieve. (E.) This verb, not often well explained,
occurs several times in Shak.; and it is remarkable that Shak. never
uses yearn in the sense ‘to long for,’ i.e. he never uses it in the sense
of the verb yearn (1) above. It is often spelt earn or ern in old
editions. The proper sense is intransitive, to grieve, mourn, Hen. V,
ii. 3. 3, ti. 3.6; Jul. Cees. ii. 2. 129; it is also transitive, to grieve,
vex, Merry Wives, ili. 5. 45; Rich. II, v. 5. 76; Hen. V, iv. 3. 26.
Other authors use it besides Shakespeare; as in the following ex-
amples. ‘I must do that my heart-strings yearn [mourn] to do;’
Beaum. and Fletcher, Bonduca, ii. 4 (Judas); and see Richardson.
Nares gives yernful, grievous, melancholy; so also prov. E. ernful
(Halliwell, Pegge). B. In the form yern or yearn, it is prob. the
same as yearn (1) above; with a change of sense from ‘desire’ to
‘regret.’ y. In the form ern or earn it answers to AS. eorn- as
found in eorn-igende, murmuring, eornfullnes, anxiety, Matt. xiii. 22.
From a verb eornian, which seems to be a mere variant of geornian,
to yearn for, desire. If so, yearn (2) is merely yearn (1) with a
change of sense. Cf. ‘ His heart did earne (i.e. yearn) To proue his
puissance;’ Spenser, F, Q.i. 1. 3. | @ Possibly influenced by ME.
ermen, to grieve; see Gloss. to Chaucer.

YEAST, the froth of malt liquors in fermentation, a preparation
which raises dough. (E.) ME. 3eest. ‘ Zeest, berme, Spuma;’
Prompt. Parv. p. 537. AS. gist; spelt gyst, A. S. Leechdoms, ed.
Cockayne, i. 118, 1. 10.-4-Du. gest; Icel. jast, jastr ; Swed. jast; [ Dan.
gjer|; G. gascht, gischt, MHG. jest, gest, gist. B. The Teut. type
is *yes-t-, formed (with suffix -t-) from the base YES, to ferment,
appearing in MSwed. gasa, OHG. jesan, MHG. jesen, gesen, gern,
whence mod. G. gahren (causal).—4/YES, to foam, ferment; whence
Skt. zir-yasa-, exudations of trees, Gk. ¢éew, to boil, (eards, fervent.
Der. yeast-y, spelt yesty in Shak. Macb. iv. 1. 53, Hamlet, v. 2. 199,
just as yeast is also written yest, Wint. Tale, iii. 3. 94; the sense is
‘frothy.’ [Not allied to AS. ys¢, a storm. }

YEDE, went. (E.) Obsolete. Also spelt yode, Spenser, F. Q. ii.
7. 2, Spenser, unaware that yede and yode are varying forms of the
same past tense, and that the verb is only used in the past tense,
wrongly uses yede or yeed as an infinitive mood (!); F. Q.i. 11. 5;
li. 4.2. ME. 3ede, yede, Chaucer, C. T., G 1141, 1281; yode, Sir
Eglamour (Thornton Romances), 531; 3eode, ede, King Horn, ed.
Lumby, 381, 1025; eode, jeode, Rob. of Glouc. pp. 53, 79; ll. 1217,
1766. ‘The proper form is eode (Stratmann) ; it is probable that the
forms yede, yode answer rather to AS. ge-éode, with prefixed ge-, as
in the case of yean and ean, see Yean. AS. éode, went, only in the
past tense ; pl. éodon ; Grein, i. 256. PB. The pl. éodon may be com-
pared with the Goth. pl. iddjédun, they went. The Goth. iddja,
sing., answers to Skt. ayat, he went; from the base yd, to go, allied
to EI, to go, as in Gk. ef-yu, I shall go. See iddja in Uhlenbeck ;
Streitberg, § 190; Brugmann, i. § 309 (2); ii. § 478. Cf. Yeas.

YELK, the same as Yolk, q.v.

YELL, to utter a loud noise, to howl. (E.) ME. 3edlen, yellen,
Chaucer, C. T. 2674, 15395 (A 2672, B 4579). AS. gellan, giellan,


YES


gyllan, to yell, cry out, resound; Grein, i. 423.4-Du. gillen; Icel.
gella; also gjalla (pt. t. gall) ; Dan. gjelle, gjalde (for gialle) ; Swed.
galla, to ring, resound; G. gellen, to resound. fB. All from the
Teut. type *gellan-, pt. t. *gall; allied to Teut. type *galan-, to sing,
as seen in Icel. gala, to sing (pt.t. gal, pp. galinn), AS. galan (pt. t.
gol), OHG. galan, to sing; see Nightingale. Der. yell, sb., Oth.
i. 1. 753 also stan-iel, q.v.

YELLOW, of a bright golden colour. (E.) ME. yelow, Chaucer,
C. T. 2168, 2172 (A 2166, 2170). Also spelt 3elu, zeoluh, &c.;
Stratmann. AS. geolo, geolu (acc. fem. geolwe), Grein, i. 497.4Du.
geel; G. gelb, OHG. gelo. B. The Teut. type is *gelwoz; Idg. type
*ghelwos, Fick, iii. 103. Further allied to L. heluws, light yellow;
Russ. zelenuii, green, Gk. xAdn, young verdure of trees, xAwpds,
green, Skt. hari-, green, yellow. Further allied to Gall (1). Der.
yellow-ness; yellow fever, a malignant fever that often turns the skin
yellow; yellow-ish, spelt yelowysshe in Palsgrave; yellow-ish-ness.
Also yellow-hammer, q.v.; yel-k, yol-k.

YELLOW-HAMMER, YELLOW-AMMER, « song-
bird, named from its yellow colour. (E.) In Ash’s Dict., ed. 1775.
Spelt yellow-hamer, Harrison, Desc. of England, bk. iii. ch. 2 (end).
Beyond doubt, the # is an ignorant insertion, due to substitution of
a known for an unknown word, irrespective of the sense. Yet the
name is E., and very old. The former part of the word (yellow) is
explained above; the latter part is the AS. amore. Ina list of birds,
we find: ‘Scorellus, amore,’ Voc. 260. 27. Much older forms are
AS. omer, Corpus gloss., 1810; emer, Epinal.gloss., gog. Cognate
words occur both in Du. and G.4+MDu. emmerick, emmerlinck, ‘a
kind of merlin or a hawke,’ Hexham ; Low G. geel-emerken, a yellow-
ammer; G. gelb-ammer, gold-ammer, yellow-ammer, gold-ammer;
also emmerling, a yellow-ammer; OHG. amero, an ammer.

YELP, to bark, bark shrilly. (E.) ME. 3elpen, gelpen, only in
the sense to boast, boast noisily; but it is the same word. ‘I kepe
not of armes for to yelpe3’? Chaucer, C. T. 2240 (A 2238). AS.
gilpan, gielpan, gylpan, to boast, exult; orig. to talk noisily; Grein,
i. 509. A strong verb; pt. gealp, pp. golpen; whence gilp, gielp,
gelp, gylp, boasting, arrogance, id.+Icel. gjalpa, to yelp; cf. gjalfra,
to roar as the sea; MHG. gelfen. B. From a base GELP, to make
a loud noise. allied to Yell. Andcf. Yap. Der. yelp, sb.

YEOMAN, a man of small estate, an officer of the royal house-
hold. (E.) ME. 3eman, yeman, oman ; in Chaucer, C. T. ror, the
Lansdowne MS. has 3oman, whilst the rest have jeman or yeman. In
Sir Amadas (pr. in Weber’s Met. Rom. vol. iii), 1. 347, it is written
yomon ; but the usual spelling is jeman, as above, and as in Allit.
Poems, ed. Morris, A. 534 (or 535). In Will. of Palerne, 1. 3640,
however, we have jomen, pl.; and joman, yoman, sing., Cursor
Mundi, 3077, 7822. I know not where to find an example earlier
than the 13th century. B. The variation of the vowel in the ME.
forms is curious, but we find other examples almost as remarkable ;
thus we find ME. chésen, to choose, from AS. céosan, and mod. E.
choose, answering to AS. cedsan, with the stress on 6, instead of é.
So also AS. géar, E. year, as compared with AS. geara, E. yore.
And the AS. scéotan gives both ME, shéten and mod. E. shoot.
y. The word does not appear in AS.; but it would (judging by the


foregoing examples) take the form *géa-man, regularly corresponding —


to OF riesic ga-man, a villager; and, as the AS. éa (OFr. @) answers
to G. au, the first syllable is cognate with G. gau, Goth. gawi. [The
alleged AS. ga is incorrect. Kemble, Saxons in England, b. i. c. 3,
treats of the gd or district, though he gives no reference to show
where the word occurs; Leo (A. S. Glossar). gives ga, a district,
as in Ohtgaga, Noxgaga, but we cannot draw such an inference
from these examples.| It will be observed that the AS. assumed
form *géa would produce ME. yé-, whilst the form *gea would
produce yé-; as in year, yore. 5. And in fact, we find AS.
Sudri-géa, i.e. Southern district, in the A. S. Chron. an. 836, 8553
as well as other examples, for which see H. M. Chadwick’s Studies
in O. English, p. 147, in Trans. Camb. Phil. Soc. 1899, vol. iv. pt. 2.
Cf. OFriesic ga, gd (nom. pl. gae), a district, village; whence
gaman, a villager; gafolk, people of a village. Also Du. gouw,
gouwe, a province; MDu. gouwe, ‘a hamlet where houses stand
scattered, a countrie village, or a field ; goograve or gograef, a field-
judge; goy-lieden or goy-mannen, arbitratours, or men appointed to
take up a businesse betwenee man and man;’ Hexham, Also
Low G. goé, gohe, a tract of country, go-griive, a judge in one of
the 4 districts of Bremen, Brem. Worterbuch; Bavarian gau,
whence gaumann, a peasant. Cf. also G. gau, a province, OHG.
gowi, gewi, Goth. gawi. Der. yeoman-ry, where -ry is used as a
collective suffix; spelt yomanry, Dictes of the Philosophers, pr. by
Caxton, fol. 42 b.

YERK, in Shak. Hen. V, iv. 7. 83 ; equivalent to Jerk, q.v.
YES, a word denoting affirmation. (E.) A much stronger form
than yea, and often accompanied, in old authors, by an oath. ME,


YESTERDAY


jus, is, P. Plowman, B. v. 125; ‘3s, be marie,’ Will. of Palerne,

1567; ‘3s, bi crist,’ id. 5149. AS. gise, gese; ‘ gise, la gese’=yes,
O, yes; Alfred, tr. of Boethius, b. ii. met. 6; cap. xvi. § 4. Pro-
bably contracted from géa swa, yea, so; cf. AS. nese, a form of
denial, for ne swa, not so.

YESTERDAY, the day last past. (E.) ME. 3istirdai, Wyclif,
John, iv. 52. AS. geostra, giestra, gystra (yester-), Grein, i. 501 ;
and deg, a day; commonly in the acc. geostran deg, yesterday.+
Du. gisteren, dag van gister; G. gestern; Goth. gistra-dagis, to-
morrow. B. Cf. L. hester-nus, adj. belonging to yesterday,
where the syllable hes- is cognate with Icel. ger, Dan. gaar, Swed.
gar, L. heri, Gk. x@és, Skt. hyas, yesterday. The suffix -ter- is a
comparative form, as in in-ter-ior, ex-ter-ior, &c. Brugmann,
i. §§ 624, 923. Der. Similarly, yester-night.

YET, moreover, besides, hitherto, still, nevertheless. (E.) ME.
zit, et, yet, Chaucer, C. T. 565 (A 563). AS. git, get, giet, gyt;
Grein, i. 511.4+OFries. deta, eta, ita, yet; mod. Fries. jiette (Rich-
tofen) ; MHG. iezuo, ieze; whence G. jetzt, now. Origin obscure.

YEW, an evergreen tree. (E.) Spelt yowe in Palsgrave. ME.
ew, Chaucer, C. T. 2925 (A 2923). AS. iw, to translate L. taxus,
Voc. 138. 14; spelt imu, 49. 38.4Icel. yr; G. etbe; OHG. twa.
B. The Teut. type is *twa, f., or iwoz, m. The Celtic type is *iwo-,
as in Olrish eo, W. yw, Corn. hiuin, Bret. ivin, yew (Stokes-Fick,
p. 46). Of unknown origin. @ Distinct from ivy.

YX, to hiccough. (E.) Prov. E. yex (Halliwell) ; spelt yeske in
Palsgrave. ME. 3exen, esken, oxen, Chaucer, C. T. 4149 (A 4151).
‘3yxyn, yexen, Singulcio, Singulto;” Prompt. Parv., p. 539. AS.
giscian, to sob, sigh; Atlfred, tr. of Boethius, b. i. met. I. c. 2.
Cf. OLow G. geskon, to yawn (Gallée). Probably an extension from
the Tent. base *gi-, weak grade of *ge7-, base of gi-nan, to gape; just
as L, hiscere, to yawn, gape, is extended from L. hi-dre. See Yawn,
Hiatus.

YIELD, to resign, grant, produce, submit, give way. (E.) The
orig. sense was ‘to pay.’ ME. gelden, 3elden, yelden ; a strong verb;
pt. t. yald, pp. yolden. Chaucer has un-yolden, C. T. 2644 (A 2642).
In P. Plowman, B. xii. 193, we have both yald (strong) and _ 3elte
(weak), as forms of the pt.t. AS. gieldan, geldan, gildan, to pay,
restore, give up; pt.t. geald, pl. guldon, pp. golden, Grein, i. 508.
+Du. gelden; Icel. gjalda, pt. t. galt, pp. goldinn; Dan. gjelde;
Swed. géilla (for *galda), to be of consequence, be worth; G. gelten,
to be worth, pt. t. galt, pp. gegoltexn; Goth. -gildan, only in the
compounds fra-gildan, is-gildan, to pay back. B. All from
Teut. type *geld-an-, to be worth, to pay for, repay. Allied to
Olrish gell, a pledge; gedl-aim, I promise, engage (Stokes-Fick,
p- 113). Der. yield, sb., yield-ing, -ly; also guild or gild; but
hardly guilt.

YOKE, the frame of wood joining oxen for drawing, a similar
frame for carrying pails, a mark of servitude, a pair. (E.) ME. 3ok,
yok, Chaucer, C. T. 7989 (E113). AS. geoc, gioc, ioc, a yoke;
Grein, i. 497.4+Du. juk; Icel. ok; Dan. aag; Swed. ok ; Goth. juk ;
G. joch, OHG. joh. Teut. type *yokom, n.; Idg. type *yugom, n.-+-
W. iau; L. iugum (whence Ital. giogo, Span. yogo, F. joug)) ; Russ.
igo; Lithuan. jungas; Gk. (uvyév; Skt. yuga-, a yoke, pair, couple.
6 All from the Idg. type *yug-om, a yoke; lit. ‘that which joins.’
From *yug-, weak grade of 4/YEUG (Teut. YEUK), to join; see
Join. Der. yoke, verb, Two Gent. i. I. 40; yoke-fellow, companion,
K. Lear, iii. 6. 39.

YOKAEL, a country bumpkin. (E.) ‘ This was not done by a
yokel ;? Dickens, Oliver Twist, ch. 31. Lowl. Sc. yochel, a stupid,
awkward person (E. D.D.); prov. E. yokel, the plough-boy who
does the day’s ploughing or yoking ; W. Yksh. (id.); from yoke, the
time during which a ploughman and his team work at a stretch (id.).
Cf. ME. 30k, to attach a team toa cart, Barbour’s Bruce, x. 215.
Note yokelet, an old name (in Kent) for a little farm or manor;
noticed by Somner in his A. S. Dict., s. v. Zoclet.

YOLK, YELK, the yellow part of anegg. (E.) Spelt yelke in
Palsgrave. ME. jolke, Morte Arthure, 3283; 3elke, Prompt. Parv.
p- 537- AS. geolca, gioleca, the yolk; Grein, i. 497. Lit. ‘the
yellow part.’ = AS. geolu, yellow; see Yellow.

YON, at a distance. (E.) Properly an adj., as in prov. E., in
which such phrases as ‘yon house’ and ‘yor field’ are common.
Common in Shak., Mids. Nt. Dr. iii. 2. 188, &c. ME. 302, P. Plow-
man, C. xxi. 149 (also 3eon, and even ond, jeond, see the footnote).
AS. geon, yon; ‘td geonre byrg’ =to yon city; Atlfred, tr. of
Gregory’s Past. Care, ed. Sweet, p. 443, 1. 25 ; where geon-re is the
dat. fem.+-Icel. exz, the (orig. that), used as the def. art., and often
miswritten hinn ; see Vigfusson’s remarks on finn; Goth. jains, yon,
that; G. jexer, MHG. gener, yon, that. B. The Teut. types
appear to be *yainoz, *yinoz; which render difficult a relation to
Skt. yas, who, that; cf. Brugmann, i. § 308. Der. yond, adv.,
Temp. i. 2. 409 (also incorrectly used instead of yon, Temp. ii. 2. 20),


YULE 729


from AS. geond, adv., but often used as a prep., Grein, i. 497; cf.
Goth. jaind, adv., there, John, xi. 8. Hence be-yond, q.v. Also
yond-er (not in AS.), ME. yonder, adv., Chaucer, C. T. 5438
(B 1018); cf. Goth. jaindré, adv., yonder, there, Luke, xi. 37.

YORE, in old time, long ago. (E.) ME. 3ore, yore, Chaucer,
C.T. 4594 (B 174). AS. gedra, formerly (with the usual change
from @ to long o, as in stdén>stone); Grein, i. 496. Orig. géara,
gen. pl. of géar, a year, so that the sense was ‘ of years,’ i.e. in years
a wr ne case pete ee used to express the time when, as in

leges=by day, &c. See Year.

YOU, pl. of second pers. pronoun; see Ye. Der. you-r, q.v-

YOUNG, not long born, new to life. (E.) ME. 30ng, yong,
yung. In Chaucer, C. T. 79, we have the indef. form yong (mis-
printed yonge in Tyrwhitt) ; whilst in 1. 7 we have the def. form yongé
(dissyllabic). AS. geong, giung, iung (and even geng, ging),
young; Grein, i. 499.--Du. jong; Icel. ungr, jungr; Dan. and
Swed. ung; G. jung; OHG. junc; Goth. juggs (written for jungs).
B. All from a Teut. type *ywngoz, a contracted form of *ywwungoz,
answering to the cognate Olrish dac, W. iewanc, young, and to the
L. form dtd an extension (with Idg. suffix -kos) from iuuen-is,
young. y. The base *yzwen-, young, occurs in L, iuuenis, youn
Skt. ywvan, young, Russ. nes donee Lithuan. jaunas, vane
[The lit. sense is perhaps ‘ protected, from 4/YEU, to guard; cf.
Skt. yu, to keep back, L. iuudre, to aid, help; Fick, i. 732.]
Brugmann, i. § 280. Der. young, sb.; young-ish; young-ling,
Spenser, F. Q. i. 10. 57, ME. 30nglyng, Wyclif, Mark, xvi. 5, with
double dimin. suffix -l-ing ; young-ster, as to which see Spinster.
Also younker, Spenser, F. Q. iv. 1. 11, and in G. Douglas, tr. of
Virgil, bk. viii, 1. 11; borrowed from Du. joxker, also written
jonkheer, compounded of jong, young, and heer, a lord, sir, gentle-
man; Hexham has MDu. jonck-heer or joncker, ‘a young gentleman
or ajoncker’ (sic), Also you-th, q.v.

YOUR, possess. pron. of 2nd person. (E.) Properly the possess.
pron. of the 2nd person plural, but commonly used instead of thy,
which was considered too familiar, and has almost passed out of use
in speech. ME. jour, your; Chaucer, C, T. 2251 (A 2249). Orig.
the gen. pl. of the 2nd pers. pronoun ; a use which occurs even in
ME., as: ‘ich am 3oure aller hefd’ =I am head of you all, P. Plow-
man, C. xxii. 473; where aller=AS. ealra, gen. pl. of eaill, all.
AS. edwer, your; orig. gen. of gé, ye; see Ye. Der. your-s, ME.
youres, Chaucer, C. T. 13204 (B 1464), from AS. edwres, gen. sing.
are nee af), of edwer, poss. pronoun; Grein, i. 263. Also your-
self (see Self).

YOUTH, early life. (E.) ME. youthe, Chaucer, C. T. 463
(A 461); older forms 3uwede, Ancren Riwle, p. 156, 1. 22; 3u ede,
Layamon, 6566; 3e03ede, id. 19837. AS. geogud, giogud, youth,
Grein, i. 502. [The middle g first turned to w or 3, and then
disappeared. |]-+-OSax. jugud; Du. jeugd; G. jugend, OHG. jugund ;
we also find OHG. jungedi. Cf. Goth. junda, youth. B. The AS.
geogud stands for *geogiid<*geogund, Teut. type *yugundiz, for
*yuwunpiz, f.; from Idg. base *yuwan-ti-, which is from *yuwen-,
young; see Young. Cf. L. iuuwenta, Skt. yuvataé, youth. We also
find a later ME. form 3ungthe, youth, Prompt. Parv. p. 539,
ean yclif, vie . va iG), youth-ful, -ly, youth-ful-ness.

; a variant of Yawl (2); q.v.

YUCCA, a genus of Ae shicernc laa ous plants. (Span.—
Caribbean). ‘ They have also another kynde of rootes, whiche they
call Iucca;’ R. Eden, First Three E. Books on America, ed. Arber,
p- 67; where they refers to the people of Hayti. Spelt yuca, tr. of
Acosta, bk. iv. c. 17.—Span. yuca, yucca. From the old (Carib-
bean) language as spoken in Hayti. See Notes on E. Etym.,


‘p- 340.


YULE, Christmas. (E.) ‘Vu-batch, Christmas batch ; yu-block
or yule-block, Christmas block; yu-gams or yule-gams, Christmas
games ;’ Ray’s Gloss. of N, Country Words. Here yz is short for
yule. ME. 3ole; ‘ the feste of 3ole,’ Rob. of Brunne, tr. of Langtoft,
p- 65, 1.6; whence 3ole-stok, a yule-stock or yule-log, Voc. 657. 6.
AS, iula, gedla. Spelt iula, Grein, i. 148. Spelt gedla in the
following: ‘Se mona’ is nemned on Leden Decembris, and on
tire gedeode se &rra gedla, forsan 62 mondas twegen syndon nemde


num naman, Oder se &rra gedla, Oder se eftera, forpan Se hyra Oder


gange® beforan Séra [read S€re] sunnan &rpon pe héo cyrre hig to
Ses deeges lenge, dder efter,’ i.e. This month is named Decembris
in Latin, and in our tongue the former Yule, because two months
are named with one name; one is the former Yule, the other the
after Vule, because one of them comes before the sun, viz. before it
turns itself about [at the winter solstice] to the lengthening of day,
whilst the other [January] comes after; MS. Cotton, Tib. B. 1,
quoted in Hickes, Thesaurus, i. 212. Beda, De Temporum Ratione,
cap. 13, has the same account (but in Latin), and calls the Yule-
months Menses Giuli; i.e. he Latinises Yule as Giulus, Spelt geol,


730 YWIS


gehkhol, gehhel, Laws of /Elfred, § 5, and § 43; in Thorpe, Ancient
Laws, i. 64, note 54; i. 92, note 4; geohol, tr. of Beda, bk. iv. c. 19.
The AS. form appears to represent a Teut. type *yeh-ol-oz, or
*yehw-loz, m.+Icel. j61 ; Dan. jual ; Swed. jul. We may also note
that, in a fragment of a Gothic calendar (pr. in Massmann’s Ulfilas,
p- 590), November appears to be called fruma Fiuleis, which seems
to mean ‘the first Yule;’ a name not necessarily inconsistent with
the AS. use, since November may once have also been reckoned as
a Yule-month. This Goth. form answers to Icel. ylir, December.
@ Origin unknown; for guesses, see Uhlenbeck, Goth. Dict. The
usual attempt to connect this word with E. wheel, AS. hwéol, Icel.
hjol, with the far-fetched explanation that the sun twras at the winter
solstice, cannot be admitted, since an initial # or hw makes all the
difference, Besides Yule did not denote the shortest day, but a season.
Brugmann, i. § 681. Der. jolly.

YWIS, certainly. (E.) In Spenser, F. Q. ii. 1. 19. ME. ywis,
Chaucer, C. T. 3277; iwis, Ancren Riwle, p. 270, 1.11. - AS. gewis,
adj., certain, gewislice, adv., certainly, Grein, i. 483. The adj. came
to be used adverbially.4-Du. gewis, adj. and adv., certain, certainly ;
Icel. viss, certain; Dan. vis, certain; vist, certainly; Swed. viss,
certain; visst, certainly ; G. gewiss, certainly. B. The ge- is a
mere prefix; see Y-. The adj. answers to a Teut. type *wissoz,
Idg. type *wid-tos, an old pp. signifying ‘known,’ hence ‘sure ;’
from *wid-, weak grade of 4/WEID, to know. See Wit, verb.
Cf. Goth. wissa, 1knew. Brugmann, i. § 794e. @ It is particu-
larly to be noted that the commonest form in MSS. is iwis, in which
the prefix (like most other prefixes) is frequently written apart from
the rest of the word, and not unfrequently the 7 is represented by
a capital letter,so that it appears as J wis, Hence, by an extra-
ordinary error, the Z has often been mistaken for the Ist pers. pron.,
and the verb wis, to know, has been thus created, and is given in
many dictionaries! Butit is a pure fiction, and the more remarkable
because there actually exists a ME. causal verb wissien, or wissen,


but it means to teach, show, instruct. We should distinguish be- |


tween the ME. words wit, wot, wisté, wist, I wissé, and 7-wis.


1h,

ZAMINDAR, ZEMINDAR, a land-holder, occupant of land.
(Hind.—Pers.) Spelt zeminder in 1778 (Yule). Hind. zamindar,
vernacularly jamindar, corruptly zemindar, an occupant of land, a
jand-holder; Wilson, Ind. Terms, p. 562.— Pers. zamin, earth, land,
soil ; dar, holding, possessing, Rich. Dict. pp. 782,646. Here Pers.
zamin is allied to L. humus, ground; and Pers. dar to Skt. dhy, to
hold; see Homage and Firm.

ZANANA, ZENANA, female apartments. (Hind.—Pers.)
Spelt zunana in 1761 (Yule). Hindustani zandna, vernacularly
janana, incorrectly zenana, the female apartments ; sometimes, the
females of a family.— Pers. zandn, women; pl. of zan, a woman.
Allied to Gk. yuvj, a woman, and E. guean. H. H. Wilson, Gloss.
of Indian Terms, p. 564; Rich. Dict. p. 783; Horn, § 668.
.GANY, a buffoon, a mimic. (Ital. —Gk.—Heb.) In L.L.L.v. 2.
463 ; and in Beaum. and Fletcher, Cupid’s Revenge, ii. 6 (Bacha). =
MiItal. Zane, ‘the name of Iohn, also a sillie Iohn, a gull, a noddie ;
used also for a simple vice, clowne, foole, or simple fellowe in a
plaie;’ Florio. Mod. Ital. Zanni; cf. OF. zani (Godefroy). Zane
and Zanni are familiar forms of Giovanni, John. —Gk. “Iwavyns ;
John, i. 6,—Heb. Vokhanan, i.e. the Lord graciously gave.— Heb.
Yo, the Lord; and khanan, toshow mercy. Der. zany, verb, Beaum.
and Fletcher, Qu. of Corinth, i. 2 (Crates).

ZARIBA, ZAREEBA, ZEREBA, a temporary camp, fenced
round with bushes, &c. (Arab.) Chiefly used in the Soudan. = Arab.
zariba(t), ‘a fold, a pen; an enclosure for cattle; den, or haunt of
wild beasts; lurking-place of a hunter;” Rich. Dict. p. 775.

ZEAL, fervour, ardour, (F.—L.—Gk.) Spelt zele in Palsgrave ;
zeele in Caxton, Godfrey of Bologne, prol. p. 2, 1. 8.—MF. zele,
‘zeale,’ Cot. Mod. F. zéle.—L. zélum, acc. of zélus, zeal.—Gk.
¢jAos, zeal, ardour. Doric (ados; Idg. type *yalos ; perhaps from ya,
to drive, as in Skt. ya-tv, a driver (Prellwitz), Der. zeal-ous, L.L.L.
v. 2.116; zeal-ous-ly, Also zeal-ot, Selden’s Table-Talk, s. v. Zealot,
from MF. zelote, ‘jealous, or zealous,’ Cot., from L. zéldtés, Gk,
(ndwrns. And see jealous,

ZEBRA, astriped animal of the horse kind. (Port.—W. African.)
Added by Todd to Johnson. Described in Purchas’s Pilgrimage
(1617), bk. vi. ch, i. § 2,—Port. zebra. (Also Span. zebra, cebra.)
The animal is a native of S. Africa, and the name originated in Congo;
see N. and Q.9 S.v. 480, According to Littré, it is Ethiopian ; he


ZIRCON


cites: ‘Pecora, congensibus zebra, dicta,’ Ludolph, Histor. Ethiop.
i. 40. But Littré is mistaken as to the true source.

ZEBU, the humped domestic ox of India. (F.—Thibet.) See
Zebu in Yule.—F. zébu, a name taken by Buffon from the exhibitors
of such a beast at a French fair. A perversion of zobo, a name fora
male hybrid between a yak-bull and a hill-cow (Yule). — Thibet. mdzo-
po, the male of madzo, a mongrel bred of a yak-bull and a common
cow ; the female mongrel is called mdzo-mo.

ZECCHINO, a gold coin of Venice. (Ital.— Arab.) The pl.
zecchins occurs in Sandys, Travels (1632), p. 3.—Ital. zecchino, a se-
quin.=Ital. secca, a mint (Florio).—Arab. szkka(t), pron. sikkah, a
die for coins. Doublet, segzin.

ZED, the name of the letter Z. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. K. Lear,
ii. 2. 69.—F. zéde.—L. zéta.—Gk. (fra. Doublet, izzard, q. v.

ZEDOARY, an East-Indian root resembling ginger. (F.—Low
L.—Pers.) ‘Zedoary, a spicy root, very like ginger, but of a
sweeter scent, and nothing near so biting; it is a hot and dry plant,
growing in the woods of Malabar in the E. Indies;’ Phillips, ed.
1706. Spelt zedoari, Hakluyt, Voy. vol. ii. pt. 1. 277; col. 1. [In
old F., the name was corrupted to citoal, citoual, citouart (Roquefort);
whence the ME. cetewale, Chaucer, C. T. 13691 (B 1951), on which
see my note.] = MF. zedoaire, ‘an East-Indian root which resembleth.
ginger ;’ Cot.=Low L. zedodria.—Pers. zadwar, zidwar, zedoary;
Rich. Dict. p. 771 ; or jadwar, zedoary,id.p. 794. The initial letter
is sometimes the 13th, sometimes the 14th letter of the Pers. alphabet ;
see Palmer, Pers. Dict., col. 314.

ZEMSTVO, a local elective assembly. (Russ.) Russ. zemstvo,
collective sb., the county-courts (Reiff).

ZENITH, the point of the heavens directly overhead. (F.—
Span.—Arab.) ME. senith, Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, i. 18. 4.—
OF. cenith (Littré); mod. F. zénith.—Span. zenit, formerly written
zenith, as in Minsheu’s Span. Dict.— Arab. samt, a way, road, path,
tract, quarter; whence samt-ur-ras, the zenith, vertical point of the
heavens, also as-samt, an azimuth; Rich. Dict. p. 848. Samé was
pronounced semt, of which Span. zenith or zenit is a corruption; in
the sense of zenith, it is an abbreviation for samt-ur-ras or semt-er-ras,
lit. the way overhead, from ras, the head, Rich. Dict. p. 715. The
word azimuth, q.v., is from the same source. See Devic, Supp. to
Littré.

ZEPHYR, a soft gentle breeze. (F.—L.—Gk.) In Shak. Cymb.
iv. 2.172. Chaucer has the form Zephirus, directly from the Latin,
C. T. 5.—MF. zephyre, ‘the west wind, Cot.; F. zéphyr.=—L.
zephyrum, acc. of zephyrus, the west wind. = Gk. (épupos, the west wind.

ZERO, a cipher, nothing, denoted by o. (F.—Ital.—Low L.—
Arab.) A late word, added by Todd to Johnson. — MF. zero, ‘ acypher
in arithmetick, a thing that stands for nothing,’ Cot.; F. zéro. = Ital.
zero, ‘a figure of nought in arithmetike;’ Florio. A contracted form
of zefiro or *zifro, parallel form to zifra, ‘a cifre, i.e. cipher ; Florio.
= Low L. zephyrum (Devic). — Arab. sifr (with initial sad), a cipher;
Rich. Dict. p. 937. See Cipher. See Devic, Supp. to Littré; he
explains that the old Latin treatises on arithmetic wrote zephyrum for
Arab. sifr, which became, in Italian, zefiro, and (by contraction) zero.
Doublet, cipher.

ZEST, something that gives a relish or a flavour. (F.—L.—Gk.)
In Skinner’s Dict., ed. 1671. Phillips explains zest as a chip of
orange or lemon-peel, used for flavouring drinks. — MF. zest, ‘the
thick skinne or filme wherby the kernell of a wallnut is divided ;’
Cot. Mod. F. zeste, a piece of the skin of a citron or lemon,
whence zester, ‘to cut up lemon rind;’ Hamilton. The E. sense is.
due to the use of lemon or citron-peel for flavouring. = L. schistos
(schistus), cleft, divided, used by Pliny [bk. xix. c. 6]; according to
Diez, who notes that L. schedula became, similarly, F. cédule; there
must have been a transference of sense from ‘ divided’ to ‘ division.’

=—Gk. oxiords, divided. =Gk. cxifer, to cleave. See Schism.
(Very doubtful ; but no other solution has been proposed.)

ZIGZAG, having short, sharp turns. (F.—G.) In Pope, Dun-
ciad, i. 124.—F. zigzag.—G. zickzack, a zigzag; whence zickzack
segeln, to tack, in sailing. [We also find Swed. sicksack, zigzag
(Widegren, 1788).] Reduplicated from zacke, a tooth, with reference
to zacken-werk, notched work ; so that zickzack means ‘ in an indented
manner.’ Cf. EFries. takken,to notch (whence zack, in sailing). See
Tack. Der. zigzagg-ery, Sterne, Tristram Shandy, bk. iii. c. 3.

ZINC, a whitish metal. (G.) In Locke, Elements of Nat. Phi-
losophy, c. 8 (R.).—G. zink, zinc; whence also F. zinc, &c. Origin
uncertain ; see Schade, The name der Zinck occurs in Paracelsus
(died 1541); see Weigand.

ZIRCON, the name ofa mineral. (Arab.—Pers.) The F. form is
jargon. Zircon represents the Arab. zargin, not a true Arab. word,
but from Pers. zargiin, of the colour of gold; Rich. Dict. p. 774.—
Pers. zar, gold (allied to Skt. kari-, yellow, and E. yellow); and gin,
colour ; id. pp. 771, 1247. See Devic.


‘ ZITHER


ZITHER, a cittern, kind of guitar. (G.—L.—Gk.) A modern
form; from G. zither.—L. cithara.—Gk. «0dpa, a kind of lyre. See
Cithern, Cittern, Guitar, Kit (2).

ZODIAC, an imaginary belt in the heavens, containing the twelve
constellations called signs. (F.—L.—Gk.) ME. zodiac, zodiak,
Chaucer, On the Astrolabe, prol. 70.—F. zodiaque, ‘the zodiack,’
Cot.—L. zddiacus.—Gk. (wbd:axés, adj., of or belonging to animals,
whence 6 (wd:axds, the zodiac circle; so called from containing the
twelve constellations represented by animals.—Gk. (@d:ov, a small
animal; dimin. of (Gov, a living creature, an animal. B. Gk. (@ov
is from (wés, adj., living ; allied to (wy, life, and (dew, (jv (Ionic
(wewv), to live. Allied to Zend ji, to live; from 4/GwEI, to live.
See Victuals. Brugmann, ii. § 488. Der. zodiac-al, adj.

ZONE, a belt, one of the great belts into which the earth is divided.
(F.—L.—Gk.) In Hamlet, v. 1. 305. ‘Their zone is milde ;’
Higgins, Mirror for Mag., Fulgentius, st. 4.—F. zone, ‘a girdle,
zone ;’ Cot.—L. zdna, a girdle, belt, zone.—Gk. (avn, a girdle. Put
for *(wovn.—Gk. Cavvum (=*(wo-vupe), I gird. =4/YOS, to gird ;
whence also Lithnan. jdsta, a girdle, josti, to gird (Nesselmann),
Brugmann, i. § 167. Der. zon-ed.

ZOOLOGY, the natural history of animals. (Gk.) See Pennant’s


ZYMOTIC 731


British Zoology, London, 1766. Coined from Gk. (@o-, for (aor, a
living creature ; and -Aoyia, allied to Adyos, a discourse, from A€yeuv,
to speak, See Zodiac and Logic. Der. zoologi-c-al, zoolog-ist.
@ Pronounced zo-o-, the o’s being separate.

ZOOPHYTE, an animal plant, a term now applied to corals,
&c. (F.—Gk.) In Johnson’s Dict.=F. zoophyte, pl. zoophytes, ‘ such
things as be partly plants, and partly living creatures, as spunges,
&c.;’ Cot.=Gk, (wépuroy, a living being; an animal-plant, the
lowest of the animal tribe, Aristotle, Hist. Anim. xviii. 1. 6.—Gk.
(wé-, for (wds, living; and guréy, a plant, that which has grown,
from pve, to produce, also to grow, from 4/BHEU, to grow, exist,
be. See Zodiac and Be.

ZOUAVE, one of a body of soldiers in the French service, orig.
Arabs, but now Frenchmen in Arab, dress. (F.—N. African.)
Modern; since the conquest of Algeria by the French in 1830;
Haydn, Dict. of Dates.=F. Zouave.mN. African Zuawa,a tribe of
Kabyles living among the Jurjura mountains in Algeria (Mahn, Littré).

ZY MOTIC, a term applied to diseases, in which a poison works
through the body like a ferment. (Gk.) Modern. =Gk. (upwrikds,
causing to ferment.—Gk. (vpéw, I leaven, cause to ferment. = Gk.
Gon, leayen. Allied to L. iis, broth; see Juice.


APPENDIX


ers TOF


The following is a list of the principal Prefixes in English, showing
their origin. It is not quite exhaustive, but contains all of any
consequence. For further information, see the etymologies of adown,
&c., in the Dictionary.

A- (1); in a-down, a-kin, a-new, a-thirst. (E.) See Of- (below).

A- (2); in a-back, a-baft, a-bed, a-blaze, a-board, a-bout,
a-bove, a-broach, a-broad, a-cross, a-drift, a-far, a-float, a-foot,
a-fore, a-gape, a-ground, a-head, a-jar, a-kimbo, a-like, a-live, a-loof,
a-main, a-mid, a-miss, a-mong, a-round, a-skew, a-slant, a-sleep,
a-slope, a-stern, a-stir, a-thwart, a-way, a-work, now-a-days; &c.
(E.) See On- (below).

A- (3); ina-long. (E.) See An- (5).

A- (4); in a-bide (1), a-bide (2), a-ghast, a-go, a-light, a-maze,
a-rise, a-rouse, a-wake, a-waken. (E.) AS. G-, intensive prefix to
verbs. Seenote on Arise. And see Ac- (3), Af- (3).

A- (5); in a-bandon, a-base, a-bate, a-bet, a-beyance, a-bridge,
a-but, a-chieve, a-mass, a-merce, a-mort, a-mount, a-vail, a-valanche,
a-venge, a-venue, a-ver, a-vouch, a-vow (1), a-vow (2), a-wait.
(F.—L.) F. 4a, a-; from L.ad. See Ad-. So also L. a- for ad
before gn, as in a-gnate; or before sc, sp, st; as in a-scend, a-spect,
a-stringent.

A- (6); in a-vert, a-vocation. (L.) See Ab- (1).

A- (7); in a-bash, a-mend, a-void. (F.—L.) See Ex- (1).

A- (8); in a-las. (F.—L.) OF. a, interj.; from L. ah! inter).
Cf. a-lack.

A- (9); in a-byss, a-catalectic, a-cephalous, a-chromatic, a-
damant, a-gnostic, a-maranth, a-methyst, a-mnesty, a-neroid, a-orist,
a-pathy, a-pepsia, a-pteryx, a-sbestos, a-sphyxia, a-sylum, a-symptote,
a-taxy, a-theism, a-tom, a-tomy, a-trophy, a-zote. (Gk.) See
An- (2).

A- (10); ina-do. (E.) For at do.

A- (11); in a-ware. (E.) ME. i-, y-, prefix; AS. ge-. See
Af- (2), Y-.

A- (12); in a-pace, a-piece. (E.) For a pace, a piece; a for an,
indef. article. See An- (6).

A- (13); in a-vast. (Du. or Span.) Du. hou vast, hold fast ; or
Span. a-basto. (Doubtful.)

A- (14); in a-pricot. (Arab.) Arab. al, the; def. article. See
Al- (4).

A- (15); in a-colyte. (Gk.)
together with.

A- (16); in a-fraid.
Ex- (1).

Ab- (1); in ab-dicate, ab-duce, ab-erration, ab-hor, ab-ject, ab-
jure, ab-lative, ab-lution, ab-negate, ab-normal, ab-olish (?), ab-
ominate, ab-origines, ab-ortion, ab-ound, ab-rade, ab-rogate, ab-
tupt, ab-scind, ab-solute, ab-solve, ab-sorb, ab-surd, ab-undance,
ab-use. (L.; or F.—L.) L. ab, from, orig. form ap, for which see
Aperient, p. 25; lengthened to abs- in abs-cond, &c.; cf. Gk. dip.
E. of; Gk. ard; Skt. apa, away from. This prefix also appears as
a- (6), adv-, av-, v-; as in a-vert, a-vocation, adv-ance, av-aunt,
v-anguard.

Ab- (2); in ab-breviate. (L.) Used for L. ad; see Ad-.

Abs-; in abs-cess, abs-cond, abs-ent, abs-tain, abs-temious,
abs-tention, abs-tract, abs-truse. (L.; or F.—L.)  L. abs- (F. abs-),
extended form of ab-; see Ab- (1).

Ac- (1); in ac-cede, ac-celerate, &c. (L.; or F.—L.) The
form assumed by L. ad before the following c; see Ad-. So also
before gu- ; as in ac-quaint, ac-quiesce, ac-quire, ac-quit.

Ac- (2); in ac-knowledge. (E.) ME. a-; from AS. on. Used
in place of A- (2).

Ac- (3); in ac-cursed.
place of A- (4).

Ad-; in ad-age, ad-agio, ad-apt, &c. (L.; or F.—L.) L. ad,
to, at, for.4-Goth. at; AS. et; E. at. This prefix appears also as


Gk. d-, with; cf. Skt. sa-,
(F.—L.) For af-frayed; see Af- (4),


(E.) For ME. a-; AS. ad-; used in


PREFIXES


a- (5), ab- (2), ac- (1), af- (1), ag-, al-(2), an (1), ap- (1), ar- (1),
as- (1), at-(1); as in a-bandon, ab-breviate, ac-cede, af-fix, ag-gress,
al-lude, an-nex, ap-pend, ar-rogate, as-sign, at-tract.

Adv-; in adv-ance, adv-antage. For av-; F. av- from L. ab; see
Ab- (1). c

Af- (1); in af-fable, af-fect, af-feer, af-fiance, &c. The form
taken by L. ad before f; see Ad-. So also af- for ME. a- (F. a-
<L. ad) ; as in af-fair.

Af- (2); in af-ford. (E.) ME. a-; for 7-, y-, from AS. ge-. See
A- (11) and Y-.

Af- (3); in af-fright. (E.) ME. a-; from AS. a-; see A- (4).

Af- (4); in af-fray. (F.—L.) OF. ef-; from L. ex; see
Ex- (1).

Af- (5); in af-fair. See Af- (1) above.

After-; in after-math, after-most, after-ward. (E.) ME. after;
AS. efter. See After, p. 9.

Ag-; in ag-glomerate, ag-glutinate, ag-grandise, &c.
F.~L.) The form taken by L. ad before g; see Ad-.

Al- (1); in al-mighty, al-most, al-one, &c. (E.) For all; see
All, p. 14.

Al- (2); in al-lege, al-leviate, &c.
taken by L. ad before7; see Ad-.
<L. ad); as in al-legiance.

Al- (3); in al-ligator.
ille, he.

Al- (4); in al-batross, al-cayde, al-chemy, al-cohol, al-coran,
al-cove, al-embic, al-gebra, al-guazil, al-kali. (Arab.) Arab. al,
def. art. This also appears as a-, ar-, as-, el-, l-. Ex.: a-pricot,
ar-tichoke, as-sagai, el-ixir, l-ute. See L- (2).

Al- (5); in al-legiance ; see Al- (2).

Am- (1); inam-bush. (F.—L.) F. em-.—L. im-, for in, prep.;
see In- (2). Cf. am-buscade.

Am.- (2); inam-brosia. (Gk.) See An- (2).

Amb-; in amb-assador. Of Celtic origin; see Ambassador,
p- 17. And see Ambi- below, and Emb-.

Ambi-, Amb- ; in ambi-dextrous, amb-ient, amb-iguous, amb-
ition. (L.; or F.—L.) L. ambi-, on both sides, around.+-Gk.
adupi. See below. '

Amphi-, (Gk.) Gk. audi, on both sides, around.L. ambi-;
see Ambi-. ;

An- (1); for L. ad before x ; see Ad-.

An- (2), A- (9), negative prefix; in an-gemia, an-zesthetic, an-
archy, &c. (Gk.) Gk. dv-, d-, neg. prefix. Hence am- in am-
brosia; a- in a-byss.4-L. in-, E. un-; see In- (3), Un- (1), A- (9).

An- (3); see Ana-.

An- (4); in an-oint. (F.—L.) For F. en-.—L. in, prep. ; see
In- (2). It appears as anm- in ann-oy.

An- (5); in an-swer. (E.) AS. and-, in reply to, opposite
to. Goth. and-; Du, ent-; G. ent-; Gk. dvri. Shortened to a- in
a-long ; allied to u#- in verbs. See A- (3), Anti-, Un- (2).

An- (6); inan-other. (E.) E.an; AS.an. The indef. article.
See A- (12).

An- (7); in an-ent, an-on, an-vil. (E.) ME. an; for AS. on,
prep. See On-, A- (2), Ann-.

An- (8); inan-cestor. (F.—L.) See Ante-. ist

Ana-, An- (3); in ana-baptist, ana-chronism, &c.; an-eurysm.
(Gk.) Gk. dvd, upon, on, up.-- AS. on, Goth. ana. See On-.

Anei-; in anci-ent. (F.—L.) See Ante-.

Ann- (1); in ann-eal. (E.) See Anneal, p. 22.

Ann- (2); in ann-oy ; OF. an-, F. en; see An- (4).

Ant- ; in ant-agonist, ant-arctic. (Gk.) See Anti-.

Ante-. (L.) L. ante, before. Also anti-, ant-, anci-, an-; as
in anti-cipate, ant-erior, ant-ler (cf. antique, antic); anci-ent,
an-cestor. :

Anuth-; in anth-em. (Gk.) See below.


(ia wor.


(L.; orF.—L.) The form
So also al- for ME. a- (F. a-


(Span.—L.) Span. el, def. art.—L.


eo


LIST OF PREFIXES


Anti- (1), Ant-. (Gk.) Gk. .av7i, against, opposite to. Also
ant-, anthe-, as in ant-agonist, antearctic, anthe-m. See An- (5),
Un- (2).

Anti- (2); see Ante-.

Ap- (1); in ap-paratus, ap-pend, ap-petite, &c. (L.; or F.—L.)
The form taken by L. ad before p; see Ad-, and Ap- (2).

Ap- (2); in ap-pall, ap-panage, ap-parel, &c. (F.—L.)
stituted for OF. a-, when derived from L. ad followed by .

Ap- (3); in ap-erient. (L.) L. ap, ab; see p. 25.

Aph- ; in aph-zresis, aph-orism ; cf. aph-elion; see below.

Apo-. (Gk.) Hence aph- in aph-eresis. Gk. dnd, from, off.--
L, ab; AS. of; see Ab- (1), Of- (1).

Ar- (1); in ar-rogate ; the form taken by L. ad- before r. Often
appearing as a- in OF., as in ar-raign (OF. a-rainier), &c.; see Ad-.

Ar- (2); in ar-tichoke; see Al- (4). !

Arch-, Archi-, Arche- ; in arch-bishop, arch-angel, archi-tect,
arche-type. (Gk.) Gk. dpyi-, chief. = Gk. apxeuv, to be first.

As- (1); in as-severate, as-siduous, as-sign, &c. (L.; or F.—L.)
The form taken by L. ad- before s; see Ad-. Cf. as-certain.

As- (2) ; in as-sagai; see Al- (4).

As- (3); inas-tonish. (F.—L.)
ex; see Hx- (1). Cf. as-sart.

At-(1); in at-tempt, at-tend, &c. (L.; or F.—L.) The form
taken by L. ad- before ¢. Often appearing as a- in OF.; as in
at-tend (OF. a-tendre) ; see Ad-.

At- (2); inat-one. (E.) E. at, AS. et.

Auto-, Auth-, self. (Gk.) Gk. avro-s, self.
auth-entic ; eff- in eff-endi.

Av-; inay-aunt. (F.—L.) F.av-; from L. ab; see Ab- (1),


Sub-


ME. as-, for OF. es-; from L.


Hence auth- in


Ba-3 in ba-lance; see Bi-.

Be-. (E.) AS. be-, bi-, the same as 6%, by, prep.; E. dy.

Bi- (1), double. (L.) L. 6-, double, from an earlier form duwi-,
related to duo, two.4-Gk. &-, double, allied to dw, two; Skt. dui-,
allied to dva, two; E. twi- in twi-bill. Hence F. 6/- in bi-as, F. ba-
in ba-lance; and see below.

Bi- (2); in bi-shop. (Gk.) AS. bi-, for Gk. éni; see Epi-.

Bin-; in bin-ocular. (L.) Lz. bin-i, collective form allied to
bi- (1) above.

Bis-3 in bis-cuit. (F.—L.) F. bis, L. bis, twice; extended from
bi- (1). See Dis-. Also L.; in bis-sextile.

By-; in by-path, by-way, by-word. (E.) AS, bi; see By, p. 83.


Cat-; in cat-echism ; see Cata-.

Cata-, down. (Gk.) Gk. «ard, down, downwards. Hence cat-,
cath-, in cat-echism, cath-olic.

Cath- 3 in cath-olic; see below.

Circum-, round, (L.) L. circum, around, prep. Hence circu-
in circu-it.

Co- 3; see Com-.

Coi-3 see Com-.

Col-3 see Com-.

Com-. (L. or F.—L.) L.com-, together, used in composition
for cum, prep. together. It appears as co-, col-, com-, comb-, con-, cor-,
coun-3; ex.: co-agulate, col-lect, comb-ustion, com-mute, con-nect,
cor-rode, coun-cil. Also as co- in co-st, co-stive, co-venant, co-ver,
co-vin; ascou-incou-ch, cou-sin; as.coi-incoi-l; as cv- in cu-rfew,
cu-stom; as cur- in curry (1); and even as ke- in ke-rchief.

Con-3 in con-nect; see Com-,

Contra-, against. (L.) L. contra, against. It becomes contro-
in contro-versy; and loses final a in Ital. contr-alto. Hence F.
contre, against, as in contr-ol; but the F. form is usually written
counter in English. Hence also countr-y.

Cor- ; in cor-rode ; see Com-.

Cou-3; in cou-ch, cou-sin ; see Com-.

Coun-; in coun-cil, coun-sel, coun-t (1), coun-t (2), coun-tenance;
see Com-.

Counter-. (F.—L.) See Contra-.

Cu-3 in cu-rfew, cu-stom ; see Com-.

Cur-; in cur-ry (1); see Com-.


Cf. co-gnate, co-gnisance, co-gnition.


D-; in d-affodil; see Daffodil, p. 152.

_ De- (1); in de-scend, de-bate. (L.; or F.—L.) L. dé, down,
downward. Used with an oppositive sense in-de-cipher, de-merit, de-
form; with an intensive sense in de-clare, &c. Changed to di- in
di-stil. Distinct from the prefix below.

De- (2) ; in de-bar, de-bark, de-bauch, de-bouch, de-but, de-camp,
&e. (F.—L.) F. dé-, OF. des-, from L dis-, apart; see Dis-.
Distinct from the prefix above.

De- (3); in deluge. (F.—L.) OF. de-; L. di-, for dis-; see
Dis-. And see above.


733


De- (4); in de-vil; see Dia-.

Dea- ; in dea-con; see Dia-.

eek. half. (F.—L.) F. demi.=L. dimidius, half; see Demi-,
p. 162.

Des-; in des-cant; see Dis-.

Di- (1), double. (Gk.) Gk. &-, double, allied to dis, twice,
and vo, two; see Bi-. Ex. di-lemma. And see Dia-.

Di- (2), apart, away; in di-lute. (L.) See Dis-.

Di- (3); in di-stil; see De- (1).

Dia-. (Gk.) Gk. 8:4, through, between, apart; allied to Di-
(1). Shortened to di- in di-zresis, di-ocese, di-optrics, di-orama, di-
uretic; appearing as de-, dea-, in de-vil, dea-con.

Dif-; see Dis-.

Dis-, apart, away. (L.; or F.—L.) L. dis-, apart, in two,
another form of bis-, double; dis- and bis- are variants from an
older form duis-, double, also used in the sense in two, apart; see
Bis-, Dis- becomes des- in OFrench, also dé- in later F.; but the
OF. des- is sometimes altered to dis-, as in dis-cover. The various
forms are di-, dif-, dis-, des-,de-, and even s-; as in di-gest, di-ligent,
di-lute, di-mension, di-minish, di-missory, di-varicate, di-verge, &c. ;
dif-fer, dif-ficulty, dif-fident, dif-fract, dif-fuse; dis-pel, &c.; des-
cant, des-habille, des-patch ; de-bar, de-bark, de-bauch, &c. ; s-pend,
s-tain. See De- (2), De- (3), S- (2).

Do- 3 in do-zen; see Duo-.

Dou-3; in dou-ble; see Duo-.

Duo-, Du-, two, double. (L.) L. duo, two; cognate with E.


two, Only in duo-decimo, duo-denum; shortened to dw- in du-al,
du-el, du-et, du-plicate, &c. Appearing as douw- in dou-ble, dou-
bloon, dou-bt; and as do- in do-zen, ®


Dys-, badly. (Gk.)
connect it with To- (2).


Gk, dvs, badly, with difficulty. Some


E- (1); in e-ducate, e-lapse, e-normous, &c.; see Ex- (1).

E- (2); in e-nough; see Y-.

E- (3); ine-lope. (AF.—L.)
See Elope, p. Ig!.

E- (4); in e-squire. (F.) This e- is a F. addition, of purely
phonetic value, due to the difficulty which was experienced in pro-
nouncing initial sg-, sc-, st-, sp-. So also in e-scalade, e-scarpment,
e-scritoire, e-scrow, e-scuage, e-scutcheon; e-spalier, e-special,
e-spouse, e-spy ; e-stablish, e-state, e-stop, e-stovers; cf. e-paulette ;
to which add e-schew.

Hie-; in ec-centric, ec-clesiastic, ec-lectic, ec-lipse, ec-logue,
ec-stasy, ec-zema. (Gk.) Gk. é«, also éé, out; see Bx- (2).4L. ex,
Lithuan. isz, Russ. iz’, out; see Ex- (1), Also el-, em-, as in
el-lipse, ex-odus.

Hf-; see Ex- (1).

Eff-; in eff-endi; see Auto-.

El- (1); in el-lipse; see Ee-.

El- (2); in el-ixir; see Al- (4).

Em.- (1); in em-balm, em-bank, &c. (before); cf. em-bargo,
from Spanish) ; also in em-pale, em-panel, em-ploy, &c. (before ).
(F.—L.) F. em-; L. im-, for in; see In- (2).

Em.- (2); in em-phasis (before ph); em-piric, em-porium, em-
pyreal (before p); see En- (2).

Emb- ; in emb-assy ; see Amb-.

Ein- (1); in en-able, &c. (F.—L.) F. en-; L. in-; see In- (2).

Hin- (2); in en-ergy. (Gk.) Gk. év, in.-L. in; AS. in. See
Em- (2), In- (1), In- (2).

Hin- (3); in en-emy. (F.—L.) Negative prefix ; see In- (3).

Endo-, within. (Gk.) Gk. évdo-y, within; extended from év,
in; see En- (2), and Ind-. Ex.: endo-gen.

Einter-; in enter-tain. (F.—L.) F. entre.—L. inter, among ;
see Inter-. Shortened to evér- in entr-ails.

Eip-, Eph-3 see below.


AF, a-, for OF. es-; see Es-.


Epi-, upon. (Gk.) Gk. éni;upon.+Skt. api; allied to L. ob-.
See Ob-. It appears as ep-, eph-, in ep-och, eph-emeral, &c.

Hs- ; in es-cape, &c.; see Ex- (1).

Hso-, within. (Gk.) Gk. gow, within; from és, eis, into. Ex. :
eso-teric.


Hu-, well. (Gk.) Gk. ed, well; neut. of é’s, good. Written ev-
in ey-angelist.

Eiv-; in ev-angelist ; see above.

Ex- (1), out of, very. (L.; or F.—L.) L. ex, also @, out of;
also used intensively.Gk. é, é«, out. See Ec-, and see below.
It appears as a-, e-, ef-, es-, ex-, iss-, s-, in a-mend, e-normous, ef-fect,
es-cape, ex-tend, iss-ue, s-ample, &c. Also as af (a-), in af-fray
(a-fraid) ; see Af- (4), A- (16), H- (1). And see As- (3).

Ex- (2), out of, away. (Gk.) Gk. é, out; as in ex-arch,
ex-egesis, ex-odus, ex-orcise; and (through TF.) ex-ergue. See
above,


734 LIST OF PREFIXES


Ex- (3); inex-cise. (Du.—F.—L.) Du. ak-; for F. ac-; from
L. ac-, for ad. See Ad-.

Exo-, without. (Gk.) Gk. éw, outside, without; adv. from éé,
out; see Bx- (2).

Extra-, beyond. (L.) A comparative abl. form, from L. ex,
out; see Ex (1). Cf. exter- in exter-ior, exter-nal, It appears
also as stra- in stra-nge; cf. estra-nge.


For- (1), in place of. (E.) E. for, prep.; in for-as-much, for-
ever, which might just as well be written as separate words instead
of compounds, Allied to Para- (1), Per-, Pro-.

For- (2); in for-give. (E.) AS. /for-, intensive prefix. +4 Icel.
for-, Dan. for-, Swed. for-, Du. G. ver-, Goth. fra-, Skt. para, See
p- 221. See Fore- (2). ey

For- (3); in for-feit. (F.—L.) F. for-, prefix.—L. foris, outside,
out of doors. Also in for-close, sometimes spelt fore-close ; and see
Sore-judge (2).

For- (4); in for-ward. AS. fore-weard; see below.

Fore- (1), before. (E.) AS. fore, for, before, prep. ; fore, adv.
Allied to For- (1).

Fore- (2); in fore-go. (E.) A bad spelling of for-go; see
For- (2).

Forth-. (E.) Only in forth-coming, forth-with. AS. ford,
forth.+-Gk. mpds, Skt. prati, to-wards; L. por- ; see Por- (1).

Fro-; in fro-ward. (Scand.) Icel. fra, from. See p. 227.


Gain-, against. (Scand.) Icel. gegn, against. Ex.: gain-say.


Hemi-, half. (Gk.) Gk. jme-, half.4L. sémi-, half; see Semi-.
Shortened to me- in me-grim.
Hetero-, other. (Gk.) Gk. érepo-s, other.
Holo-, entire. (Gk.) Gk. dAo-s, entire.
Homo-, same. (Gk.) Gk. dyué-s, same; cognate with E. same.
a he to homeo-, Gk. dSpoo-s, like, in homceo-pathy (homeo-
athy ).
: Hyper-, above, beyond. (Gk.) Gk. imép, above; see Super-.
Cf. Over-.
Hypo-, Hyph-, Hyp-. (Gk.) Gk. imé, under. L. sub,
under ; see Sub-. Hence hyph- in hyph-en ; Ayp- in hyp-allage.


I-$ in i-gnoble, i-gnominy, i-gnore. L. @, for iv-, not, before gn;
see In- (3).

Il- (1); in il-lapse, il-lation, il-lision, il-lude, &c.; see In- (2}.

Tl- (2); in il-legal; see In- (3).

Im- (1) ; in im-brue, im-mure, im-pair, (F.—L.) Here im- is
for em-, the OF. form derived from L. iz, in. See In- (2).

Im- (2); in im-bed. For E. in, as if for in-bed. But really due
to the influence of Im- (1).

Im- (3); in im-bue, im-merge, im-pel, &c. (L.) L. im-, for in,
in ; when 8, m, or p follows.

Im- (4), negative prefix. (L.; or F.—L.) For L. in-, neg.
prefix ; when m or p follows. See In- (3).

In- (1); inin-born. (E.) AS. ix, prep.

In- (2); in in-clude. (L.; or F.—L.) L., iz, in. Gk, éy, in;
AS. in. See In- (1), En- (2). It appears as am-, an-, em-, en-, il-,
im-, in-, ir-, in am-bush, an-oint, em-brace, en-close, il-lude, im-
mure, in-clude, ir-ritate, &c. Also as azn- in ann-oy.

In- (3), negative prefix. (L.) L. in-, neg. prefix.4-Gk. dv-, d-,
neg. prefix; KE, wn-, before nouns. See An- (2), A- (9), Un- (1).
It appears as en-, i-, il-, im-, in-, ir-, in en-emy, i-gnoble, il-legal,
im-mortal, in-firm, ir-regular, &c.

Indi-, Ind-, as in indi-genous, ind-igent. (L.) OLat. ind-u,
within. +Gk. évdoy, within; see Endo-.

Intel-; see below.

Inter-, between. (L.) L. inter, between. A comparative form,
allied to L. inter-ior, within; cf. L. inter-nus, internal. It appears
as intel- in intel-lect, enter- in enter-tain; and cf. entr-ails. Closely
allied are L. intré-, within, intra-, within.

Intra-, within; see Inter-,

Intro-, within; see Inter-.

Ir- (1); in ir-radiate, ir-rigate, ir-rision, ir-ritate, ir-ruption; for
L. in, prep. before r; see In- (2).

Ir- (2); in ir-rational, ir-reclaimable, &c.; for L. in-, negative
prefix, before r; see In- (3).

Iss-; in iss-ue. (F.—L.) F. iss-, from L. ex; see Bx- (1).


Juxta-, near. (L.) L. iuxta, near.
L- (1); in ]-one. (E.) Short for all; 1-one=al-one. See Al- (1).


L- (2); in l-ute. (Arab.) Short for Arab. al, the, def. art. See
Al- (4).


Male-, Mal-, Mau-, badly. (L.; or F.—L.) L. male, badly,
ill; whence F. mal, which becomes. also mau- in mau-gre.

Me-; in me-grim; see Hemi-.

Meta-, Meth-, Met-, among, with, after; also used to imply
change. (Gk.) Gk. peta, among, with, after.4-AS. mid, G. mit,
Goth. mith, with. It appears also as meth- in meth-od, mef- in
met-empsychosis, met-eor, met-onymy.

Min-; in min-ster; see Mono-.

Mis- (1); in mis-deed, mis-take, &c. (E. and Scand.) AS. mis-,
wrongly, amiss.+Icel. Dan. Du. mis-; Swed. miss-; Goth. missa-,
wrongly. Allied to miss, vb.

Mis- (2), badly, ill. (F.—L.) OF. mes-, from L. minus, less;
used in a depreciatory sense. Appearing in mis-adventure, mis-
alliance, mis-chance, mis-chief, mis-count, mis-creant, mis-nomer,
mis-prise, mis-prision. Quite distinct from Mis- (1).

Mono-, Mon.-, single. (Gk.) Gk. pévo-s, single, sole, alone.
Hence mon-k, min-ster.

Multi-, Mult-, many. (L.;0r F.—L.) From L. multus, much,
many.


- (1); in n-ewt, n-ickname, n-once, n-uncle. (E.) A newt=an
ewt, where the prefixed z is due to the indef. article. A n-ickname=
an eke-name. My nuncle=mine uncle, where the x is due to the
possessive pronoun. In n-once, the prefixed z is due to the dat, case
of the def. article, as shown.

N- (2), negative prefix. (E. or L.) In n-aught, n-ay, n-either,
n-ever, N-0, n-one, n-or, n-ot (1), and in hob-n-ob, the prefixed x is
due to AS, ze, not. In z-ull, it is due to the cognate L. ze, not.
See Ne-.

Ne-, Neg-. (L.) L. me, not; neg- as in neg-ligere, not. In
od neg-ation, neg-lect, neg-otiate, ne-scient, ne-uter, See
N- (2).

WNon-, not. (L.; or F.—L.) L. non, not; OLat. noenum, for *ne
oinum, i.e. ne Unum, not one; see above. It appears as wm- in um-
pire, for xumpire.


O-; in o-mit; see Ob-.

Ob-. (L.; or F.—L.) L. 08, near; allied to Gk. émi, upon, near;
Skt. api, moreover; Oscan op. See Epi-. The force of od-
is very variable ; it appears as 0-, 0b-, oc-, of-, op-, also as extended
to os- (for ops); as in o-mit, ob-long, oc-cur, of-fer, op-press, os-
tensible.

Oc-; in oc-casion, oc-cident, oc-ciput, oc-cult, oc-cupy, oc-cur ;
see Ob-.

Of- (1) ; in of-fal.. (E.)_ AS. of, of, off, away. This word is
invariably written off in composition, except in the case of offal,
where its use would have brought three /’s together.4-L. ab, Gk.
dnd; see Ab- (1), Apo-. It appears as a- in a-down, a-kin, a-new,
a-thirst ; see A- (1).

Of- (2); in of-fend, of-fer; see Ob-.

Off-; see Of- (1).

On-, on, upon. (E.) AS. on, on.4-Gk. dvd. From a pronominal
base. See Ana-. It often appears as a-, as in a-foot, a-sleep, &c.
See A- (2).

Op-; in op-pilation, op-ponent, op-portune, op-pose, op-posite,
op-press, op-probrious, op-pugn; see Ob-.

Or- (1); in or-deal, or-ts. (E.) AS. or-; cognate with Du.
oor-, OSax. and G. ur-, Goth. us, away, out of.

Or- (2); in or-lop. (Du.) Short for Du. over, cognate with E.
over ; see Over-.

Os-; in os-tensible; see Ob-.

Out-. (E.) AS. a, E. out, prep.4+-Goth. ut, G. aus, Skt. ud,
out. Shortened to wéz- in utt-er; and to w¢- in ut-most.

Outr-; in outr-age. (F.—L.) F. outre=L. ultra, beyond; see
Ultra-.

Over-. (E.) AS. ofer, E. over, prep.4-Goth. ufar, L. s-uper,
Gk. imép, Skt. wpari, above. A comparative form from Up, q.v.
See Hyper-, Super-, Or- (2).


Pa-; in pa-lsy ; see Para-.

Palin-, Palim-, again. (Gk.) Gk. madw, back, again, It
becomes palim- in palim-psest.

Pan-, Panto-, all. (Gk.) Gk. may, neut. of mas, all; mav7o-,
declensional form of the same, occurring in panto-mime.

Par- (1); in par-amount, par-amour, par-boil, par-don, par-son,
par-terre, par-venu; see Per-.

Par- (2); in par-agon, par-allel, par-egoric, &c.; see Para-.

Par- (3); in par-get. (F.—L.) OF. par-, por-; from L. pro;
see Pro- (1).

Para- (1), beside (Gk.) Gk. mapa, beside. Allied to E. for, L. per,
also to Gk. epi. See Per-, Peri-, and For- (1). It becomes pa-


LIST OF PREFIXES


in pa-lsy; par- in par-ody, &c. Quite distinct from para- in
para-chute, para-pet, para-sol, from F.. parer.

Para- (2); in para-dise. Zend pairi=Gk. repi.
par- in par-vis-

Pel-; in pel-lucid; see Per-.

Pen-; in pen-insula, pen-ultimate, pen-umbra, (L.) L, pen-e,
almost.

Per-, through. (L.; or F.—L.) L. per, through, Allied to
Para- and For- (1). It appears also as par- in par-son, par-don,
&c.; as pel- in pel-lucid; and as pil- in pil-grim, See Par- (1).

Peri-, around, (Gk.) Gk. wepi, around.+Skt. pari, round about.
Allied to Para-, &c.

Pil-; in pil-grim; see Per-.

Po-, in po-sition, po-sitive. (L.)
L. *ap, original form of ab (Walde).

Pol- 3; in pol-lute; see Por- (1).

Poly-, many. (Gk.) Written for Gk, moAv-, decl. form of zoAv-s,
much, many. Allied to E. full.

Por- (1); in por-tend. (L.) L. por-, allied to L. per, through
(Walde). It appears as fol- in pol-lute. The origin of pos- in pos-
sess is doubtful; but may be allied.

Por- (2); in por-trait; see Pro- (1).

Pos-; in pos-sess; see Por- (1).

Post-, after. (L.) L. fost, after, behind. Hence F. puis, appear-
ing as pu- in pu-ny.

Pour-; in pour-tray; see Pro- (1).

Pr- (1); in pr-ison, pr-ize (1); see Pre-.

Pr- (2); in pr-udent ; see Pro- (1).

Pre-, Pre-, before. (L.) L. pre-, for pre, prep., before; for
*prai, an old locative case. Allied to Pro-. This prefix occurs
also in pr-ison, pr-ize (1); and is curiously changed to pro- in
pro-vost.

Preter-, beyond. (L.) L. preter, beyond; comparative form of
pre, before. See above.

Pro- (1), before, instead of. (L.; or F.—L.) L. pré-, before, in
front, used as a prefix; also L. prd, for prod, abl. case used as
a preposition, which appears in prod-igal. Allied to Gk. mpé, before,
Skt. pra, before, away ; also to E. for. See below; and see For- (1).
It appears also as pour-, por-, pur-, pr-, in pour-tray, por-trait,
pur-vey, pr-offer, pr-udent; where pour-, por-, pur- are due to the
F. form pour.

Pro- (2), before. (Gk.) Gk. mpd, before; cognate with Pro- (1).
In pro-boscis, pro-blem, pro-em, pro-gnostic, pro-gramme, pro-
lepsis, pro-logue, pro-phet, pro-scenium, pro-thalamium, &c.

Pro- (3); in pro-vost; see Pre-. ;

Prod-; in prod-igal; see Pro- (1).

Pros-, in addition, towards. (Gk.) Gk. mpés, towards. Allied to
Forth-.

Proto-, Prot-, first. (Gk.) From Gk. mp@ro-s, first; superl.
form of mpd, before; see Pro- (2). Shortened to prof- in prot-oxide.

Pu-; in pu-ny ; see Post-.

Pur-; in pur-chase, pur-loin, pur-port, pur-pose (1), pur-pose
(2), pur-sue, pur-vey, pur-view. (F.—L.) See Pro- (1).


Shortened to


L. po-, short for *apo, allied to
See Ab- (1).


R-; in r-ally; see Re-.

Re-, Red-, again. (L.) L. re-, red- (only in composition), again,
back. Red- occurs in red-eem, red-integrate, red-olent, red-ound,
red-undant, red-dition; and is changed to ren- in ren-der, ren-t.
In re-ly, re-mind, re-new, it is prefixed to purely E. words; and in
re-call, re-cast, to words of Scand. origin. It appears as r- in r-ally
(1); and as ru- in tu-nagate. 2. Re- is frequently prefixed to other
prefixes, which sometimes coalesce with it, so that these words re-
quire care. For example, rampart=re-em-part; cf. also re-ad-apt,
re-col-lect, re-con-cile, re-sur-rection, &c. Also ransom, rascal.

Rear-; see Retro-.

Red-, Ren-3 see Re-.

Rere-; in rere-ward ; see Retro-.

Retro-, backwards, behind. (L.) L. retrd-, backwards, back
again; a comparative form from re-, back; see Re-. The prefixes
year-, rere-, in rear-guard. rere-dos, rere-ward, are due to L. retro,
and are of F. origin.


S- (1); ins-ure; see Se-.

S- (2); in s-pend, s-pite, s-play, s-tain; see Dis-.

S- (3); in s-ample; see Ex- (1).

S- (4); in s-ombre ; see Sub-.

Sans-, without. (F.—L.) F. sans, without.<L. size, without ;
see Sine-.

Se-, Sed-, away, apart. (L.) L. sé-, apart; OLat. séd-, apart,
which is probably retained in sed-ition. The orig. sense was
probably ‘ by oneself.’ It appears as s- in s-ure; cf. sober.


735


Semi-, half. (L.) L. sémi-, half.--Gk. jui-, half; see Hemi-.
It appears as sin- in sin-ciput.

Sin-; in sin-ciput ; see above.

Sine-, without. (L.) L. size, without; lit. if not.—L. si, if; xe,
not. Hence F. sans, without.

So- (1); in so-journ; see Sub-.

So- (2); in so-ber. (L.) L. sd-, apart, allied to sé-, apart;
see Se-.

Sover-, Sopr-; see Super-.

Stra-; in stra-nge; see Extra-.

Su-; in su-dden, su-spect; see Sub-.

Sub-, under. (L.) L. sub, under, (sometimes) up. Allied to Gk.
ém6, under ; Skt. wpa, near, under; also to E. up and of. See Hypo-,
Of-, Up-. Sub also appears as s-, so-, su-, suc-, suf-, sug, sum-, sup-,
sur-, in s-ombre (?), so-journ, su-dden, su-spect, suc-ceed, suf-fuse,
sug-gest, sum-mon, sup-press, sur-rogate. It is also extended to sus-
(for sups-) ; as in sus-pend, And cf. suzerain.

Subter-, beneath. (L.) L. subter, beneath; comparative form
from sub, under. See Sub-.

Suc-, Suf-, Sug-, Sum-, Sup-; see Sub-.

Super-, above, over. (L.) L. super, above; comparative form
of L. sub, under, also up.4+-Gk. imép, over, beyond; AS. ofer, E.
over, See Hyper-, Over-; alsoSub-. Hence supra, beyond, orig.
abl. feminine. Reduced to supr- in supr-eme. Note also sover- in
sover-eign, which is a F. form; and sopr- in sopr-ano, which is an
Ital. form. Also F. sur-<L. super; see Sur- (2).

Supra-, beyond; see above.

Sur- (1); in sur-reptitious, sur-rogate; see Sub-.

Sur- (2); in sur-cease, sur-charge, sur-face, sur-feit, &c.; see
Super-.

Sus-; in sus-pend; see Sub-.

Sy-, Syl-, Sym-3; see Syn-.

Syn-, with, together with. (Gk.) Gk. ody, with. Allied to L.
cum, with; see Com-. It appears as sy-, syl-, sym-, and syn-, in
sy-stem, syl-logism, sym-metry, syn-tax, &c.


T- (1); t-wit. (E.) Twit is from AS. et-witan, to twit, reproach ;
taus ¢- is here put for E, az.

T- (2); t-awdry. (F.—L.) Tawdry is for Saint Awdry; thus ¢ is
here the final letter of sain-t.

T- (3); t-autology. (Gk.) Here #- represents Gk. 7d, neuter of
the def. article.

Thorough-, through. (E.) Merely another form of E. through.

To- (1), in to-day, to-morrow. (E.) AS. 7d, to.

To- (2), intensive prefix. (E.) Obsolete, except in ¢o-brake.
AS. 76, apart, asunder; prob. allied to L. dis-, apart. See Dis-.
@ Some connect it with Gk. dus-; see Dys-.

Tra-, Tran-; see below.

Trans-, beyond. (L.) L. trans, beyond. Shortened to zraz- in
tran-scend ; and to ¢ra- in tra-duce, tra-verse, &c. Hence F. tres-,
occurring in tres-pass ; and ¢re- in tre-ason. And see tranc-e, trans-
om, tres-tle.

Tre- (1), Tres-. (F.—L.) See above.

Tre- (2) ; in tre-ble. (F.—L.) See below.

Tri- (1), thrice. (L.) L. éri-, thrice; allied to #rés, three.
Hence tri-ple, tre-ble, 8c. ; also (perhaps) ¢ra- in tra-mmel.

Tri- (2), thrice. (Gk.) Gk. zpi-, thrice; allied to pia, neut. of
tpeis, three. Hence tri-gonometry, &c.

Twi-, double, doubtful. (E.) AS. fwi-, double; allied to zwa,
two. Hence twi-bill, twi-light.


U-; in u-topian. (Gk.) Gk. od, not; see p. 682.

Ultra-, beyond. (L.) L. ultra, beyond; allied to OLat. wlter,
adj., appearing in ulter-ior, which see in Dict. Hence F. outre,
beyond, appearing in outr-age; also in E. utter-ance (2), corruption
of F. outr-ance.

Um-; in umpire; see Non-.

Un- (1), negative prefix to nouns, &c. (E.) AS. uwn-, not; cog-
nate with L, iz-, not, Gk. dy-, not. See An- (2), In- (3).

Un- (2), verbal prefix, signifying the reversal of an action. (E.)
AS. ua-, verbal prefix; allied to Du. ont-, ent-, G. ent-- OHG.
ant-, Goth. and-, and E. an- in an-swer; see An- (5), Anti-.

Un- (3); in un-til, un-to. (E.) See un-to in Dict., p. 680.

Un- (4), Uni-, one. (L.) L. ain-us, one; whence uni-vocal,
with one voice; un-animous, of one mind; &c. Cognate with
E. one.

Under-. (E.) AS. under, E. under, prep.

Up-. (E.) AS. up, E. up, prep. Allied to Of-, Sub-, Hypo-.

Ut-, Utt-. (E.) See Out.

Utter-. (F.—L.) Only in utter-ance (2).


F. outre, L, ultra ; see
Ultra-. :


736. LIST OF PREFIXES


V-; in v-an (1), v-anguard. (F.—L.) See Ab- (1).
Vice-, Vis-, in place of. (L.; or F.—L.) LL. wice, in place of,
whence OF. vis, the same. The latter appears only in vis-count.


Wan.-, negative prefix; see wan-ton in Dict. °

With-, against. (E.) A shortened form of AS. wider, against ;
see withers in Dict. The sense is preserved in with-stand. In with-
hold, with-draw, it signifies ‘ back.’


Y-; in y-wis, y-clept. (E.) AS. ge-, prefix; ME. :-, y-. This
prefix appears as a- in a-ware; as i- in i-wis (the same as y-wis) ;
and as e- in enough. See A- (11), H- (2).


A. Summary. A few of the Prefixes given above, such as al-
in al-mighty, are rather true words that can be used alone; for al- is
merely a spelling of all. Omitting these and some forms that are
mere variants, the list may be reduced to the following.

A- (with several values), ab-, abs- (see Abscond), ad-, al-
(Arabic), ambi- or amb- (see Ambidextrous), amphi-, an-, ana-,
ante-, anti- or ant-, aph- or apo-, be-, bi- or bis-, cata-, circum-,
co- (com-, con-), contra-, counter-, de-, di-, dia-, dis-, dys- (see
Dysentery), e-, em- (see Embark), en-, endo-, epi-, eso-, ex-, €xo-,
extra-, for- (2), for- (3), fore-, forth, fro-.

Gain- (see Gainsay), hemi-, hyper-, hypo-, i-, il- (1), il- (2), im-
(1), im- (2), im- (3), in- (1), in-'(2), in--(3), indi-, inter-, intra-,
intro- (see Introduce), ir- (1), ir- (2), juxta- (see Joust).

Meta-, mis- (1), mis- (2), ne- (see No (1)), non-, ob-, on-, or- (see
Ordeal, Ort, Orlop), out-, over-, palin- (see Palindrome), pan-
(panto-), para-, per-, peri-, pol- or po- (see Pollute, Position), por-
(see Portend), post-, pre-, preter-, pro-, pros-, pur-, re-, red-,
retro-.

Se- (sed-), semi-, sine- (see Sinecure), sub-, sub-ter, super-, supra-,
sur- (1), sur- (2), sus-, syn-, to- (1), to- (2), trans-, ultra-, un-
(1), un- (2), un- (3), under-, up-, with-, y-.

ome of these prefixes assume various shapes in accordance
with phonetic laws. Of these, the most important are the follow-
ing :—

(a) The Lat. prep. ad appears as a-, ab-, ac-, ad-, af-, ag-, al-,
an-, ap-, ar-, as-, at-.

(6) The Lat. prep. cum appears as co-, col-, com-, comb-, con-, cor-.
Also (through F.) as co-, coi-, cou-, coun-, cu-, cur-.

(c) The Lat. prefix dis- appears as de-, des-, di-, dif-, dis-, and
even S-.

(d@) The Lat. prep. ex appears as a-, as-, e-, ef-, es-, ex-, and even
iss- and s-. é

(e) The Lat. prep. iz appears as am-, an-, em-, en-, il- (1), im-
(1, 3), in- (2), ir- (1).

(f) The Lat. negative prefix in- appears as en-, i-, il- (2), im- (4),
in- (3), ir- (2).

(g) The Lat. prep. ob appears as o-, ob-, oc-, of-, of-; We even
find os-.

(h) The Lat. prep. sub appears as s- (in s-ombre?), so- (in so-
journ), su-, sub-, suc-, suf-, sug-, sum-, sup-, sur-.

(7) The Greek prefix apo- (476) also appears as aph- ; cata- (kara),
also as cat-, cath- ; en- (év), also as em-3 epi- (én), also as ep-, eph- ;
hypo- (816d), also as hyp-, hyph-; syn- (adv), also as sy-, syl-, sym-.

These very common variations should be observed and learnt For
this purpose. I suggest a study of the following words :—


(a) A-chieve, ab-breviate, ac-cede, ad-mire, af-fix, ag-gress, al-lude,


an-nex, ap-pend, ar-rogate, as-sign, at-tract.


(b) Co-agulate, col-lect, com-mute, comb-ustion, con-nect, cor-


rode ; also co-st, coi-l, cou-ch, coun-cil, cu-ll, cur-ry (1).

(c) De-feat, des-cant, di-verge, dif-fuse, dis-pel, s-pend.

(d) A-mend, as-tonish, e-normous, ef-fect, es-cape, ex-tend, iss-ue,
s-ample,

(e) Am-bush, an-oint, em-bellish, en-close, il-lude, im-mure, im-
merge, in-clude, ir-ritate.

(f) En-emy, i-gnoble, il-legal, im-mortal, in-firm, ir-regular.

(g) O-mit, ob-long, oc-cur, of-fer, op-press, os-tensible.

(4) S-ombre, so-journ, su-dden, sub-mit, suc-ceed, suf-fuse, sug-
gest, sum-mon, sup-press, sur-rogate. :

(2) Apo-logy, aph-zresis; cata-logue, cat-echism, cath-olic; en-
ergy, em-phasis ; epi-logue, ep-och, eph-emera; hypo-thesis, hyp-
allage, hyph-en ; syn-onymous, sy-stem, syl-logism, sym-metry.

It may be noted here that more than one prefix may be placed at
the beginning of a word, as in re-im-burse, ram-part (=re-em-part),
in-ex-act, 8c.

C. Some prefixes exhibit such unusual forms in certain words that
they can only be understood upon a perusal of the etymology of the
word as given in the Dictionary. I note here a few curious
examples.

A- replaces e- (Lat. e, for ex) in a-mend.

AlI-, the Arabic definite article, appears at the beginning of al-cohol,
a-pricot, ar-tichoke, as-segai, el-ixir, J-ute. But the al- in al-ligator
is the Span. e/, Lat. dle.

The Latin ab has actually become adv- in the word adv-antage;
whilst in v-an-guard it appears as v-. But, in ab-breviate, the prefix
is ad-. The Latin cum- appears in co-st, co-stive, coi-l, cou-ch, cou-sin,
cur-ry (1), cu-ll, cu-stom.

The dea- in dea-con represents the Greek 5:4; so also de- in
de-vil,

The e- in e-lope represents the AF. a-, OF. es-, L. ex.

The e- in e-sguire, e-scutcheon, &c., is purely phonetic, as ex-
plained.

The ev- in ev-angelist is for Gk. eu-, as in eu-logy.

The or- in or-deal and or-t is a Teutonic prefix.

The outr- in outr-age represents the Latin wltra ; cf. utter-ance (2).

The s- in s-uwre (Lat. sé-ctirus) represents the Latin sé-.

The #- in ¢-wit represents the AS. e¢; but in ¢-awdry it is the last
letter of saint.

D. Numerals are peculiarly liable to sink into apparent prefixes ;
such are Lat. timus, duo (adverbially, bis), trés, &c.; hence un-
animous, du-et, bin-ary, bi-sect, bis-cuit, ba-lance, dou-ble, tre-ble,
tri-ple, &c.

Other noteworthy Latin words are dimidium, male, pene, sémi-,
vice ; whence demi-, mal-treat, mau-gre, pen-insula, semi-circle, vice-
admiral, vis-count.

As in Latin, the Greek numerals are peculiarly liable to sink into
apparent prefixes ; hence di-cotyledon, from 5is, twice; tri-gonometry,
tetra-hedron, penta-gon, hex-agon, hepta-gon, octa-gon, nona-gon,
deca-gon, &c. Other noteworthy Greek words are dpxi-, chief
(archi-pelago, arche-type, arch-bishop); avrés, self (auto-graph,
auth-entic, eff-endi); 7yu-, half (hemi-); €repos, other (hetero-) ;
ddos, entire (holo-); éyés, same (homo-); pévos, single (mono-) ;
may, _ (pan-, panto-); moAvs much, many (poly-); mpa7os, first
(proto-).


Ties Ul Pees


The number of suffixes in modern English is so great, and the
forms of several, especially in words derived through the French
from Latin, are so variable that an attempt to exhibit them all
would tend to confusion, The best account of their origin is to be
found in Brugmann, Grundriss der Vergleichenden Grammatik der
Indogermanischen Sprachen. An account of Anglo-Saxon suffixes
is given at p. 119 of March, Comparative Grammar of the Anglo-
Saxon Language. Lists of Anglo-Saxon words, arranged according
to their suffixes, are given in Loth, Etymologische Angelsachsisch-
englische Grammatik, Elberfeld, 1870. Simple accounts of English
suffixes in general are given in Morris, Historical Outlines of English
Accidence, pp. 212-221, 229-242; in Nesfield, Historical English and
Derivation, pp. 185-252; and in the two series of my Principles of
English Etymology; to which the reader is referred. See also


Koch, Historische Grammatik der Englischen Sprache, vol. iii. pt. 1,
pp- 29-77. It is clearly established that the Indo-germanic languages
abound in suffixes, each of which was originally intended slightly to
modify the meaning of the root to which it was added, so as to
express the radical idea in a new relation. The force of many of
these must, even at an early period, have been slight, and in many
instances it is difficult to trace it; but in some instances it is still
clear, and the form of the suffix is then of great service. The
difference between Jov-er, lov-ed, and lov-ing is well marked, and
readily understood. One of the most remarkable points is that
most of the Indo-germanic languages delighted in adding suffix
to suffix, so that words are not uncommon in which two or more
suffixes occur, each repeating, it may be, the.sense of that which
preceded it. Double diminutives, such as parti-c-le, i.e. ‘a little


... SUFFIXES


little part,’ are sufficiently common. The Lat. superl. suffix -is-si-
mus is an example of the use of a treble suffix, which really expresses
no more than is expressed by -mus alone in the word pri-mus. The
principal Indo-germanic suffixes, omitting feminine forms, are these :
-0, -i, -u, -yo (written -jo), -wo, -mo, -mi, -men (-mon), -meno, -no,
-tno, -ni, -nu, -en (-on), -ent (-ont), -lo, -li, -lu, -ro, -ri, -ru, -er (-or),
~es (-os), -to, -men-to, -ti, -ti-On, -td-ti, -tu, -tu-ti, -ter (-tor, -tr),
-tiiro, -tro, -tlo, -id, -d, -d-en (-d-on), -tu-den, -go, -go, -ko, -k, -sko,
-bho. But these can be readily compounded, so as to form new
suffixes; so that from -men-to was formed -mento (as in E. argu-
ment).

One common error with regard to suffixes should be guarded
against, viz. that of mis-dividing a word so as to give the suffix
a false shape. This is extremely common in such words as logi-c,
civi-c, belli-c-ose, where the suffix is commonly spoken of as being -ic
or -ic-ose. This error occurs, for instance, in the elaborate book on
English Affixes by S. S. Haldemann, published at Philadelphia in
1865 ; a work which is of considerable use as containing a very full
account, with numerous examples, of suffixes and prefixes. The
truth is that civi-c (Lat. ciuicus) is derived from Lat. ciui-, declensional
stem of ciuis, a citizen, with the suffix -cus (Idg. -ko); and logi-c
is from Gk. Aoyixds, from Aoy-, for Aoyo-, declensional stem of
Aédyos, a discourse, with the suffix -sos, as before. Compare Lat.


115 ba le 9 Wy Urbs lB


Homonyms are words spelt alike, but differing in use. Ina few
cases, I include different uses of what is either exactly, or nearly,
the same word, at the same time noting that the forms are allied ;
but in most cases, the words are of different origin.


Abide (1), to wait for. (E.)

Abide (2), to suffer for a thing. (E.)

Air (1), the atmosphere, (F.— L. —Gk.

Air me demeanour; tune. (F.—L.—Gk.) From Air (1).

Allow (1), to assign, grant. (F.—L.)

Allow (2), to approve of. (F.—L.)

Along (1), lengthwise of. (E.)

Along (2), iz ‘along of? (E.) Allied to Along (r)-

Amice (1), a piece of linen. (F.—L.

Amice (2), a hood for pilgrims. (F.—Span.—Teut. ?)

An (1), the indef. article. (E.)

An (2), if. (E.) Shortened from and.

Ancient (1), old. (F.—L.)

Ancient (2), a banner, standard-bearer. (F.—L.)

Angle (1), a bend, corner. (F.—L.)

Angle (2), a fishing-hook. (E.)

Arch any construction of stone or wood, &c., in a curved form,
(F.-L.

Arch (2), roguish, waggish, sly. (L.—Gk.) From Arch- below.

Arch-, chief; used as a prefix. (L.—Gk.)

Arm (1), s., the limb extending from the shoulder to the hand. (E.)

Arm (2), verb, to furnish with weapons. (F.—L.)

Art (1), 2 p. s. pres. of the verb substantive. (E.)

Art (2), skill, contrivance. (F.—L.)

Ay! interj. of surprise. (E.)

Ay, Aye, yea, yes. (E.)

Aye, ady., ever, always. (Scand.)


Baggage (1), travellers’ luggage. (F.—Scand.)

Baggage (2), a worthless woman. (F.—Scand.) From Baggage (1).
Bail (1), security, to secure. (F.—L.)

Bail (2), a bucket. See Bale (3).

Bale (1), a package. (F.—MHG.)

Bale (2), evil. (E.)

Bale (3), to empty water out of a ship. (F.—Late L.)

Balk (1), a beam; a ridge, a division of land. (E.)

Balk (2), to hinder. (E.) Allied to Balk (1).

Ball (1), a dance. (F.—Late L.)

Ball (2), a spherical body. (Scand.)

Band (1), also Bond, a fastening. (Scand.)

Band (2), a company of men, (F.—G.) Allied to Band (1).
Bang (1), to beat violently. (Scand.)

Bang (2), a narcotic drug. (Port.— Hind. —Skt.)

Bank (1), a mound of earth. (Scand.)


737


ctui-tas, Gk. Xoyo-payia. Of course, words in -i-c are so numerous
that -ic has come to be regarded as a suffix at the present day, so
that we do not hesitate to form Volta-ic as an adjective of Volta;
but this is English misuse, not Latin etymology. Moreover, since
both -i- and -ko are Indo-germanic suffixes, such a suffix as -t-xos,
-i-cus, is possible both in Greek and Latin; but in the particular
words above cited it is clearer to take the -i- as due to the de-
clensional stem.

One more word of warning may perhaps suffice. If we wish to
understand a suffix, we must employ comparative philology, and
not consider English as an absolutely isolated language, with laws
different from those of other languages of the Indo-germanic family.
Thus the -th in tru-th is the -6 of AS. ¢réow-0, gen. case tréow-de,
fem. sb. This suffix answers to that seen in Goth. gabaur-ths, birth,
gen. case gabaur-thais, fem. sb., belonging to the -:- stem declension
of Gothic strong substantives. The true suffix is therefore to be
expressed as Teut. -thi, cognate with Idg. -ti, so extremely common
in Latin; cf. dd-ti-, dowry, men-ti-, mind, mor-ti-, death, mes-st-
(<met-ti-), harvest, that which is mown. Hence, when Horne
Tooke gave his famous etymology of truth as being ‘ that which
a man ¢roweth, he did in reality suggest that the -#- in Lat. mor-ti-
is identical with the -¢ in mori-t-ur or in ama-t; in other words, it
was a mere whim.


HOMONYMS


Bank (2), a place for depositing money. (F.—Ital.—G.) Allied to
Bank (1).

Barb (1), the hook on the point of an arrow. (F.—L.)

Barb (2), a Barbary horse. (F.— Barbary.)

Bard (1), a poet. (C.)

Bard (2), armour for a horse. (F.—Scand.)

Bark (1), Barque, a sort of ship. (F.—Ital. —Late L.)

Bark (2), the rind of a tree. (Scand.)

Bark (3), to yelp as a dog. (E.)

Barm (1), yeast. (E.)

Barm (2), the lap. (E.)

Barnacle (1), a species of goose. (F.—Late L.) Hence Barnacle (2).

Barnacle (2), a sort of small shell-fish. (F.— Late L.)

Barrow (1), a burial-mound. (E.)

Barrow (2), a wheelbarrow. (E.)

Base (1), low, humble. (F.—L.)

Base (2), a foundation. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Basil (1), a kind of plant. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Basil (2), Bezel, a bevelled edge. (F.)

Basil (3), a tanned sheep-hide. (F.—Span.— Arab.)

Bass (1), the lowest part in a musical composition. (F.—L.)

Bass (2), Barse, Brasse, a fish, (E.)

Baste (1), vb., to beat, strike. (Scand.)

Baste (2), to pour fat over meat. (F.—Prov.—Late L.)

Baste (3), to sew slightly. (F.-OHG.)

Bat (1), a short cudgel. (E.)

Bat (2), a winged mammal. (Scand. )

Bate (1), to abate, diminish. (F.—L.)

Bate (2), strife. (F.—L.) Allied to Bate (1).

Batten (1), to grow fat; to fatten. (Scand.)

Batten (2), a wooden rod. (F.—Late L.)

Batter (1), to beat. (F.—L.) Whence Batter (2).

Batter (2), a compound of eggs, flour, and milk. (F.—L.)

Bauble (1), a fool’s mace. (F.)

Bauble (2), a plaything. (F.) See Bauble (1).

Bay (1), a reddish brown. (F.—L.)

Bay (2), akind of laurel-tree. (F.—L.)

Bay (3), an inlet of the sea. (F.—L.)

Bay (4), a division in a barn. (F.—L.)

Bay (5), to bark asa dog. (F.—L.)

Bay (6), in phr. at bay. (F.—L.) Allied to Bay (5).

Beam (1), a piece of timber. (E.)

Beam (2), a ray of light. (E.) The same as Beam (1).

Bear (1), to carry. (E.)

Bear (2), an animal, (E.)

Beaver (1), an animal. (E.

Beaver (2), the lower part of a helmet. (F.)

Beaver (3), Bever, a short repast. (F.—L.)

Beck (1), a nod or sign. (E.)

Beck (2), a stream. (Scand.)


Nomi?


738


Beetle (1), an insect, (E.) Allied to Beetle (3).

Beetle (2), a heavy mallet, (E

Beetle (3), to jut out and hang over. (E.)

Bend (1), to bow, to curve. (E.) Hence Bend (2).

Bend (2), a slanting band; in heraldry. (F.—G.)
Bestead (1), to assist, avail. (#.)

Bestead (2), situated, beset. (Scand.) Allied to Bestead (1).
Bid (1), to pray. (E.)

Bid (2), to command. (E.)

Bile (1), secretion from the liver. (F. —L.)

Bile (2), a boil. (E.)

Bill (1), a chopper, battle-axe, sword. (E.)

Bill (2), a bird’s beak. (E.)

Bill (3), a writing, account. (F.—L.)

Billet (1), a note, ticket. (F.—L.)

Billet (2), a log of wood. (F.)

Bit (1), a small piece, a mouthful. (E.)

Bit (2), a curb for a horse. (E.) Allied to Bit (1).
Blanch (1), v., to whiten. (F.—OHG.)

Blanch (2), v., to blench, (E.)

Blaze (1), a flame; to flame. (E.)

Blaze (2:), to proclaim. (Scand.)

Blazon (1), a proclamation; to proclaim. (Scand.) See Blazon (2).
Blazon (2), to pourtray armorial bearings. (F.—Teut.)
Bleak (1), pale, exposed. (Scand.)

Bleak (2), a kind of fish. (Scand.) The same as Bleak (1).
Blot (1), a spot, to spot. (F.—Teut.)

Blot (2), at backgammon. (Du.)

Blow (1), to puff. (E.)

Blow (2), to bloom, flourish as a flower. (E.)

Blow (3), a stroke, hit. (E.)

Bluff (1), downright, rude. (Dutch.)

Bluff (2), to cow by bragging. (Low G.)

Board (1), a table, a plank. (E.) Hence Board (2),
Board (2), to approach, to accost. (F.—Teut.)

Boil (1), to bubble up. (F.—L.)

Boil (2), a small tumour. (E.)

Boom (1), to hum, buzz. (E.)

Boom (2), a beam or pole. (Dutch.)

Boot (1), a covering for the leg and foot. (F.—Late L.)
Boot (2), advantage, profit. (E.)

Bore (1), to perforate. (E.)

Bore (2), to worry, vex. (E.) The same as Bore (1).
Bore (3), a tidal surge in a river. (Scand.)

Botch (1), to patch, a patch. (E.)

Botch (2), a swelling. (F.—G.)

Bottle (1), a hollow vessel. (F.—Late L.)

Bottle (2), a bundle of hay. (F.—OHG.)

Bound (1), to leap. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Bound (2), a boundary, limit. (F.—C.)

Bound (3), ready to go. (Scand. )

Bourn (1), a boundary. (F.)

Bourn (2), Burn, a stream. (E.)

Bow (1), vb., to bend. (E.)

Bow (2), a bend, (E.) Allied to Bow (1).

Bow (3), a weapon to shoot with. (E.) ‘Allied to Bow (1).
Bow (4), the bow of a ship. (Scand.)

Bowl (1), a round wooden ball. (F.—L.)

Bowl (2), a drinking-vessel. (E.)

Box (1), the name ofa tree, (L.—Gk.)

Box (2), a case to put things in. (L.—Gk.) See Box (1).
Box (3), in ‘ to box the compass.’ (L.—Gk.) See Box (2).
Box (4), to fight with fists; a blow. (E.)

Brake (1), a machine for breaking hemp, &c. (OLow G.)
Brake (2), a bush, thicket, fen. (E.)

Brat (1), a cloak, rough mantle. (C.)

Brat (2), a child. (C.) From Brat (1).

Brawl (1), to quarrel, roar. (E.)

Brawl (2), a sort of dance. (F.)

Bray (1), to bruise, pound. (F.—Teut.)

Bray (2), to make a loud noise, as an ass. (F.—C.)
Braze (1), to harden. (F.—Scand.)

Braze (2), to ornament with brass. (E.) Allied to Braze (1).
Breeze (1), a gadfly. (E.)

Breeze (2), a strong wind. (F.)

Breeze (3), cinders. (F.—Scand.)

Brief (1), short. (F.—L.)

Brief (2), a letter, &c. (F.—L.) The same as Brief (1).
Broil (1), to fry, roast over hot.coals. (F.—Teut,)

Broil (2), a disturbance, tumult. (F.)

Brook (1), to endure, put up with. (E.)_


LIST OF HOMONYMS


Brook (2), a small stream. (E.)

Buck (1), a male deer or goat. (E.)

Buck (2), to steep clothes in lye. (E.)

Budge (1), to stir, move from one’s place. (F.—L.)
Budge (2), a kind of fur. (F.)

Buff (1), in ‘ blindman’s buff.’ (F.—Teut.)

Buff (2), a pale yellow colour. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Buffer (1), a foolish fellow. (F.) Allied to Buffer (2). :
Buffer (2), a cushion with springs used to deaden concussion. (F-) -
Buffet (1), a blow; to strike. (F.)

Buffet (2), a side-board. (F.)

Bug (1), Bugbear, a terrifying spectre. (C.)

Bug (2), an insect. (E.)

Bugle (1), a wild ox; a hor. (F.—L.)

Bugle (2), a kind of ornament. (F.—L.) See Bugle (1).

Bugle (3), a plant. (F.—Late L.)

Bulk (1), magnitude, size. (Scand.)

Bulk (2), the trunk of the body. (Dutch.)

Bulk (3), a stall of a shop. (Scand.)

Bull (1), a male bovine quadruped. (E.)

Bull (2), a papal edict. (L.)

Bump (1), to thump, beat; a blow, knob. (E.)

Bump (2), to make a noise like a bittern. (E.) ;
Bunting (1), the name of a bird. (Scand. ?)

Bunting (2), a thin woollen stuff, of which ship’s flags are made. (E.?)
Burden (1), Burthen, a load carried. (E.)

Burden (2), the refrain of a song. (F.—Late L.)

Burn (1), to set on fire. (E.)

Burn (2), a brook. (E.) See Bourn (2).

Bury (1), to hide in the ground. (E.)

Bury (2), a town, as in Canterbury. (E.) Allied to Bury (1).

Bush (1), a thicket. (Late L.)

Bush 67? the metal box in which an axle works. (Du.—L.—Gk.)
Busk (1), to get oneself ready. (Scand.)

Busk (2), a support for a woman’s stays. (F.)
Buss (1), a kiss, to kiss. (E.)

Buss (2), a herring-boat. (F.)

But (1), prep. and conj., except. (E.)

But (2), to strike; a but-end. See below.

Butt (1), an end; a thrust; to thrust. (F. —OLow G.)
Butt (2), a large barrel. (F.—Late L.)

Butt (3), a thick end. (E.)

Butt (4), a kind of flat fish. (E.)


Cab (1), an abbreviation of cabriolet. (F,—Itai.—L.)

Cab (2), a Hebrew measure, 2 Kings vi. 25. (Heb.)

Cabbage (1), a vegetable with a large head. (F.—L.)

Cabbage (2), to steal, (F.—Prov. —Late L.—L.)

Calender (1), a machine for pressing cloth. (F.— Late L.—Gk.)
Calender (2), a kind of wandering monk. (F.—Pers.)

Calf (1), the young of the cow. (E.)

Calf (2), a part of the leg. (Scand.) See above.

Can (1), I am able. (E.)

Can (2), a drinking vessel. (E.)

Cannon (1), a large gun. (F.—Ital.—L.—Gk.)

Cannon (2), a stroke at billiards. (F.—Span.)

Canon (1), a rule, ordinance. (L.—Gk.) Hence Canon (2).
Canon (2), a dignitary of the church. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Cant (1), to talk hypocritically. (L.)

Cant (2), an edge, corner. (Dutch —L.—Gk.)

Cape (1), a covering for the shoulders. (F.—Span. —Late L.)
Cape (2), a headland. (F. —Ital.—L.)

Caper (1), to dance about. (Ital.—L.)

Caper (2), the flower-bud of the caper-bush. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Capital (1), relating to the head; chief. (F.—L.) )
Capital (2), wealth, stock of money. (F.—L.)
Capital (3), the head of a pillar. (F.—L.)

Card (1), a piece of paste-board. (F.—Ital. —Gk.)
Card (2), an instrument for combing wool. (F.—L.)
Carousal (1), a drinking-bout. (F.—G.) -

Carousal (2), a kind of pageant. (F. —Ital.)

Carp (1), a fresh water fish. (F.— Late L.—Teut.)
Carp (2), to cavil at. (Scand.)

Case (1), that which happens ; an event, &c. (F.—L.)
Case (2), a receptacle, cover. (F.—L.

Cash (1), coin or money. (F.—Ital.—L.)

Cash (2), an Indian coin. (Tamil—Skt.)

Celt (1), a name given to the Gauls, &c. (C.)

Celt (2), a primitive chisel. (L.)

Chap (1), to cleave, crack; Chop, to cut. (E.)

Chap (2), a fellow; Chapman, a merchant. (E.) — 2


Allied.


LIST OF HOMONYMS 739


3 Char (1), to turn to charcoal. (E.) ; Counterpane (2), the counterpart of a deed. (F.—L.)
Char (2), a turn of work. (E.) Court (1), a yard, enclosed space, tribunal, &c. (F.—L.)
Char (3), a kind of fish. (C.) Court (2), to woo, seek favour. (F.—L.) From Court (1).
Charm (1), a song, a spell. (F.—L.) Cow (1), the female of the bull. (E.)
Charm (2), a blended noise of voices. (E.) Cow (2), to subdue, dishearten. (Scand.)
Chase (1), to hunt after, pursue. (F.—L.) Cowl (1), a monk’s hood, a cap, hood. (L.)
Chase (2), to enchase, emboss. (F.—L.) Allied to Chase (3). Cowl (2), a vessel carried on a pole. (F.—L.)
Chase (3), a printer’s frame for type. (F.—L.) See Case (2). Coy (1), modest, bashful, retired. (F.—L.)
Chase (4), the cavity of a gun-barrel. (F.—L.) See Case (2). Coy (2), a decoy for wild duck. (Du.—L.)
Chink (1), a cleft, crevice. (E.) Crab (1), a common shell-fish. (E.)
Chink (2), to jingle. (E.) Crab (2), a kind of apple. (E.)
Chit (1), a whelp, cub, brat. (E.) Crank (1), a bent arm, for turning an axis. (E.)
Chit (2), a shoot, a sprout. (E.) Crank (2), liable to be upset, said of a boat. (E.) > Allied,
Chop (1), to cut suddenly, strike off. (E.) Crank (3), lively, brisk. (E.)
Chop (2), to barter, exchange. (E.) Crease (1), a wrinkle, small fold. (F.—L.)
Chuck (1), to strike gently ; to toss. (F. -OLow G.) Crease (2), Creese, a Malay dagger. (Malay.)
Chuck (2), tocluck asahen. (E.) Cricket (1), a shrill-voiced insect. (F.—Du.)
Chuck (3), a chicken. (E.) Allied to Chicken. Cricket (2), a game with bat and ball. (F.—Du.)
Clam (1), to adhere, as something viscid. (E.) Croup (1), an affection of the larynx. (E.)
Clam (2), a kind of clamp or vice. (E.) Croup (2), the hinder parts of a horse. (F.—Teut.)
Cleave (1), strong verb, to split asunder. (E.) Crowd (1), to push, press, squeeze. (E.)
Cleave (2), weak verb, to stick, adhere. (E.) Crowd (2), a fiddle, violin. (W.)
Clip (1), to cut off, to shear. (Scand.) Cue (1), a tail, a billiard-rod. (F.—L.)
Clip (2), to embrace, to grip. (E.) Cue (2), a direction for an actor's appearance. (F.—L.)
Close (1), to shut in, shut, make close. (F.—L.) Whence Close (2). | Cuff (1), to strike with the open hand. (Scand.)
Close (2), adj., shut up, confined, narrow. (F.—L.) Cuff (2), part of the sleeve. (L. ?)
Clove (1), a kind of spice. (F.—L.) Culver (1), a dove. (E. or L.)
Clove (2), a bulb or tuber. (E.) Culver (2), another form of Culverin. (F.—L.)
Clove (3), a denomination of weight. (F.—L.) Cunning (1), skilful, knowing. (E.)
Club (1), a heavy stick, a cudgel. (Scand.) Cunning (2), knowledge, skill. (Scand.) See Cunning (1).
Club (2), an association of persons. (Scand.) ¢ Allied. Curry (1), to dress leather. (F.—L. and Teut.)
Club (3), one of a suit at cards. (Scand.) Curry (2), a kind of seasoned dish. (Tamil.)
Clutter (1), to coagulate, clot. (E.) Hence Clutter (2). Cypress (1), a kind of tree. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Clutter (2), a confused heap ; to heap up. (E.) Cypress (2), Cypress-lawn, crape. (F.—L.— Gk.)
Clutter (3), a noise, great din. (E.)
Cob (1), a round lump, or knob. (E.) Dab (1), to strike gently. (E.)
Cob (2), to beat, strike. (E.) Allied to Cob (1). Dab (2), expert. (E.)
Cobble (1), to patch up. (E.) Dab (3), a fish. (E.)
Cobble (2), a small round lump. (E.) Dam (1), an earth-bank for restraining water. (E.)
Cock (1), the male of the domestic fowl. (E.) Dam (2), a mother, chiefly applied to animals. (F.—L.)
Cock (2), to stick up abruptly. (E.) Dare (1), to be bold, to venture. (E.)
Cock (3), part of the lock of a gun. (E.) Dare (2), a dace. (F.—OLow G.)
Cock (4), a small pile of hay. (Scand.) Date (1), an epoch, given point of time. (F.—L.)
Cock (5), Cockboat, a small boat. (F.—L.—Gk.) Date (2), the fruit of a palm. (F.—L.—Gk.—Semitic.)
Cockle (1), a sort of bivalve. (F.—L.—Gk.) Deal (1), a share, division ; a quantity. (E.)
Cockle (2), a weed among corn; darnel. (E.) Deal (2), to distribute, to traffic. (E.) Allied to Deal (1).
Cockle (3), to be uneven, pucker up. (Scand.) Deal (3), a thin plank of timber. (Du.)
Cocoa (1), the cocoa-nut palm-tree. (Port.) Defer (1), to put off, delay. (F.—L.)
Cocoa (2), corrupt form of Cacao. (Span. — Mexican.) Defer (2), to submit, submit oneself. (F.—L.)
Cod (1), a kind of fish. (E.) Defile (1), to make foul, pollute. (Hybrid; L. and E.)
Cod (2), a husk, shell, bag, bolster. (E.) Defile (2), to pass along in a file. (F.—L.)
Codling (1), a young cod. (E.) Demean (1), to conduct; reff. to behave. (F.—L.)
Codling (2), Codlin, a kind of apple. (C.; with E. suffix.) Demean (2), to debase, lower. (Hybrid; L. and E.)
Cog (1), a tooth on the rim of a wheel. (Scand.) Desert (1), a waste, wilderness. (F.—L.)
Cog (2), to trick, delude. (Scand.) Desert (2), merit. (F.—L.)
Coil (1), to gather together. (F.—L.) Deuce (1), a two, at cards or dice. (F.—L.)
Coil (2), a noise, bustle, confusion. (F.—L.) From Coil (1). Deuce (2), an evil spirit, devil. (F.—L.) From Deuce (1).
Colleague (1), a coadjutor, partner. (F.—L.) Die (1), to lose life, perish. (Scand.)
Colleague (2), to join in an alliance. (F.—L.) Die (2), a small cube, for gaming. (F,—L.)
Colon (1), a mark printed thus (:). (Gk.) Diet (1), a prescribed allowance of food. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Colon (2), part of the intestines. (Gk. Diet (2), an assembly, council. (F.—L.—Gk.) See Diet (1).
Compact (1), close, firm. (F.—L.) Allied to Compact (2). Distemper (1), to derange the temperament. (F.—L.)
Compact (2), a bargain, agreement. (L.) Distemper (2), a kind of painting. (F.—L.) From Distemper (1).
Compound (1), to compose, mix. (L.) Dock (1), to cut short, curtail. (E.)
Compound (2), an enclosure of a factory. (Malay.) Dock (2), a kind of plant. (E.)
Con (1), to enquire into, observe closely. (E.) Dock (3), a basin for ships. (Du.)
Con (2), used in the phrase pro and con, (L.) Don (1), to put on clothes. (E.)
Contract (1), to draw together, shorten. (L.) Allied to Contract (2). | Don (2), a Spanish title. (Span. —L.)
Contract (2), a bargain, agreement. (F,—L.) Down (1), soft plumage. (Scand.)
Cope (1), a cap, hood, cloak, cape. (Late L.) Down (2), a hill. (C.) Whence Down (3).
Cope (2), to vie with, match. (F.—L.—Gk.) Down (3), adv. and prep., in a descending direction. (AS.; from C.)
Cope (3), to buy. (Dutch.) Dowse (1), to strike in the face. (Scand.)
Corn (1), grain. (E.) Dowse (2), to plunge into water. (Scand. )
Corn (2), an excrescence on the foot. (F.—L.) Dowse (3), to extinguish. (E.)
Corporal (1), a subordinate officer. (F.—L.) Drab (1), a low, sluttish woman. (E.)
Corporal (2), belonging to the body, (F.—L.) | Drab (2), of a dull brown colour. (F.—Late L.)
Cotton (1), a downy substance. (F.—Span.— Arabic.) Dredge (1), a drag-net. (E.)
Cotton (2), to agree. (F.—Span.—Arab.) From Cotton (1). Dredge (2), to sprinkle flour on meat, &c. (¥.—Late L.—Gk.)
Count (1), a title of rank. (F.—L.) Drill (1), to pierce, to train soldiers. (Du.)
Count (2), to enumerate, compute. (F.—L.) Drill (2), to sow corn in rows. (Low G.)
Counterpane (1), a coverlet for a bed. (F.—L.) | Drone (1), to make a murmuring sound. (E.)


3B2


740 LIST OF HOMONYMS


Drone (2), a non-working bee. (E.) Allied to Drone (1).
Duck (1), a bird. (E.) From Duck (2).

Duck (2), to dive, bob the head. (E.)

Duck (3), a pet, darling. (E.) From Duck (1).

Duck (4), light canvas. (Du.)

Dudgeon (1), resentment. (F.?)

Dudgeon (2), the haft of a dagger. (Unknown.)

Dun (1), of a dull brown colour. (C.)

Dun (2), to urge for payment. (Scand.)


Ear (1), the organ of hearing. (E.)

Ear (2), a spike, or head, of corn. (E.)

Ear (3), to plough. (E.)

Earnest (1), eagerness, seriousness. (E.)

Earnest (2), a pledge, security. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.)


Egg (1), the oval body from which chickens are hatched. (Scand.)


Egg (2), to instigate. (Scand.)

Eke (1), to augment. (E.)

Eke (2), also. (E.) From Eke (1).

Elder (1), older. (E.)

Elder (2), the name of a tree. (E.)

Embattle (1), to furnish with battlements. (F.)
Embattle (2), to range in order of battle. (F.—L.)
Emboss (1), to adorn with raised work. (F.)
Emboss (2), to shelter in a wood. (F’.)

Endue (1), to endow. (F.—L.)

Endue (2), to clothe. (L.) For Indue (1).
Entrance (1), ingress. (F.—L.)

Entrance (2), to put into a trance. (F.—L.)

Exact (1), precise, measured. (L.)

Exact (2), to demand, require. (F.—L.) From Exact (1).
Excise (1), a duty or tax. (Du.—F.—L.)

Excise (2), to cut out. (L.)


Fair (1), pleasing, beautiful. (E.)

Fair (2), a festival, market. (F.—L.)
Fallow (1), untilled; said of land. (E.)
Fallow (2), pale brown; said of deer. (E.)
Fast (1), firm, fixed. (E.)

Fast (2), to abstain from food. (E.) ¢ Allied.
Fast (3), quick, speedy. (Scand.)

Fat (1), stout, gross. (E.)

Fat (2), a vat. (North E.)

Fawn (1), to cringe to. (E.)

Fawn (2), a young deer. (F.—L.)

Fell (1), to cause to fall, cut down. (E.)
Fell (2), a skin. (E.)

Fell (3), cruel, fierce. (F.— Late L.—L.)
Fell (4), a hill. (Scand.)

Ferret (1), an animal of the weasel tribe. (F.—Late L.—L.)
Ferret (2), a kind of silk tape. (Ital.—L.)
Feud (1), perpetual hostility, hatred. (E.)
Feud (2), a fief. (Low L.—F.—OHG.)
File (1), a string, line, list. (F. —L.)

File (2), a steel rasp. (E.)

File (3), to defile; in Shakespeare. (E.)
Fine (1), exquisite, complete, thin. (F.—L.)


Fine (2), a tax, forced payment. (Law L.) Allied to Fine (1).


Firm (1), steadfast, fixed. (F.—L.)

Firm (2), a partnership. (Span.—L.) From Firm (1).
Fit (1), to suit; as adj., suitable. (Scand.)

Fit (2), a part of a poem; a sudden attack of illness. (E.)
Flag (1), to droop, grow weary. (E.)

Flag (2), an ensign. (E.) Allied.

Flag (3), a water-plant, reed. (E.)

Flag (4), Flagstone, a paving-stone. (Scand.)

Fleet (1), a number of ships. (E.)
Fleet (2), a creek, bay. (E.)
Fleet (3), swift. (E.)

Fleet (4), to move swiftly. (E.)
Flight (1), the act of flying. (E.)
Flight (2), the act of fleeing away. (E.)

Flip (1), to fillip, jerk lightly. (E.)

Flip (2), a mixture of beer with sugar, &c. (E.)
Flock (1), a company of birds or sheep. (E.)
Flock (2), a lock of wool. (F.—L.)

Flounce (1), to plunge about. (Scand.)

Flounce (2), a plaited border on a dress. (F.—L.)
Flounder (1), to flounce about. (Scand.)

Flounder (2), the name of a fish. (F.—Scand. )
Flue (1), an air-passage, chimney-pipe. (F.—L.)


Allied to Fleet (4).


Flue (2), light floating down. (E. ?)

Fluke (1), a flounder, kind of fish. (E.)

Fluke (2), part of an anchor. (E.)

Flush (1), to flow swiftly. (E.)

Flush (2), to blush, to redden. (E.)

Flush (3), level, even. (E.) Perhaps from Flush (1).
Flush (4), a term in playing cards. (F.—L.)

Fly (1), to move or float in air. (E.)

Fly (2), a vehicle. (E.) From Fly (1).

Fob (1), a pocket for a watch. (OLow G.)

Fob (2), to cheat, deceive. (Low G.)

Foil (1), to disappoint, defeat. (F.—L.)

Foil (2), a set-off, in the setting of a gem. (F.—L.)

Fold (1), to double together, wrap up. (E.)

Fold (2), a sheep-pen. (E.)

Font (1), a basin for baptism. (L.) Allied to Font (2).
Font (2), Fount, an assortment of types. (F.—L.

Fool (1), a silly person, a jester. (F.—L.) Hence Fool (2).
Fool (2), a dish of crushed fruit, &c. (F.—L.)

For (1), in the place of. (E.)

For- (2), only in composition. (E.)

For- (3), only in composition. (F.—L.)

Forbear (1), to hold away or abstain from. (E.)

Forbear (2), an ancestor, lit. ‘ fore-be-ér.’ (E.)

Force (1), strength, power. (F.—L.)

Force (2), to stuff fowls, &c. (F.—L.)

Force (3), Foss, a waterfall. (Scand.)

Fore-arm (1), the fore part of the arm. (E.)

Fore-arm (2), to arm beforehand. (Hybrid ; E. and F.)
Forego (1), to relinquish ; better Forgo. (E.)

Forego (2), to go before. (E.)

Forejudge (1), to judge beforehand. (Hybrid; E. and F.)
Forejudge (2), to deprive by the judgement of a court. (F.—L.)
Foster (1), to nourish. (E.)

Foster (2), a forester. (F.—L.)

Found (1), to lay the foundation of. (F.—L.)

Found (2), to cast metals. (F.—L.)

Fount (1), a fountain. (F.—L.) Allied to Fount (2).
Fount (2), an assortment of types. (F.—L.) See Font (2).
Fratricide (1), a murderer of a brother. (F.—L.)
Fratricide (2), murder of a brother. (L.) Allied to Fratricide (1).
Fray (1), an affray. (F.—L.)

Fray (2), to terrify. (F.—L. and OHG.)

Fray (3), to wear away by rubbing. (F.—L.)

Freak (1), a whim, caprice. (E.)

Freak (2), to streak, variegate. (E.?) ~

Fret (1), to eat away. (E.)

Fret (2), to ornament, variegate. (F.)

Fret (3), a kind of grating. (F.—L.?) See Fret (4).
Fret (4), a stop on a musical instrument. (F.—L.)

Frieze (1), a coarse, woollen cloth. (F.— Du.)

Frieze (2), part of the entablature of a column. (F.—L.)
Frith (1), a forest, a wood. (E.)

Frith (2), Firth, an estuary. (Scand.)

Fritter (1), a kind of pancake. (F.—L.)

Fritter (2), a fragment. (F.—L.)

Frog (1), a small amphibious animal. (E.)

Frog (2), a substance in a horse’s foot. (E. ?)

Fry (1), to dress food over a fire. (F.—L.)

Fry (2), the spawn of fishes. (F.—L.)

Full (1), filled up, complete. (E.)

Full (2), to full cloth, to felt. (F.—L.)

Fuse (1), to melt by heat. (L.)

Fuse (2), a tube with combustible materials. (F.—L.)
Fusee (1), a fuse or match. (F.—L.) See Fuse (2).
Fusee (2), a spindle ina watch. (F.—L.) From Fusee (1).
Fusil (1), a light musket. (F.—L.)

Fusil (2), a spindle, in heraldry. (¥.—L.)

Fusil (3), easily molten. (L.)

Fust (1), to become mouldy or rusty. (F.—L.) From Fust (2).
Fust (2), the shaft of a column. (F.—L.) Ag


Gad (1), a wedge of steel, goad. (Scand.)

Gad (2), to ramble idly. (Scand.) From Gad (1) ?

Gage (1), a pledge. (F'.—Teut.)

Gage (2), to gauge. (F.—Low L.)

Gain (1), profit, advantage. (F.—Teut.)

Gain (2), to acquire, get, win. (F.—Teut.) From Gain (1).
Gale (1), a strong wind. (Scand.)

Gale (2), a plant; the bog-myrtle. (E.)

Gall (1), bile, bitterness. (E.)


Gall (2), to rub a sore place, to vex. (F.—L.)
Gall (3), gaa a vegetable excrescence produced by insects.
F.-L.

oat (1), a series of beds of clay and marl. (Scand.)

Galt (2), a boar-pig. (Scand.)

Gammon (1), the pickled thigh of a hog. (F.—L.)

Gammon (2), nonsense, a jest. (E.)

Gang (1), a crew. (Scand.) From Gang (2).

Gang (2), to go. (Scand.)

Gantlet (1), the same as Gauntlet, a glove. (F.—Scand.)

Gantlet (2), also Gantlope, a military punishment. (Swed.)

Gar (1), Garfish, a kind of pike. (E.)

Gar (2), to cause. (Scand.)

Garb (1), dress, manner, fashion, (F,—Ital.—OHG.)

Garb (2), a sheaf. (F.—OHG.)

Gate (1), a door, opening, way. (E.)

Gate (2), a street. (Scand.)

Gauntlet (1), the same as Gantlet (1).

Gauntlet (2), the same as Gantlet (2).

Gender (1), kind, breed, sex. (F.—L.)

Gender (2), to engender, produce. (F.—L.) Allied to Gender (1).

Gill (1), an organ of respiration in fishes. (Scand.)

Gill (2), a ravine, yawning chasm. (Scand,)

Gill (3), with g asj; a quarter of a pint. (F.—L. ?)

Gill (4), with g as 7; a woman’s name; ground-ivy. (F.—L.)

Gin (1), to begin ; pronounced with g hard. (E.)

Gin (2), a trap, snare. (F.—L.)

Gin (3), a kind of spirit. (F.—L.)

Gird (1), to enclose, bind round, surround, clothe. (E.)

Gird (2), to jest at, jibe. (E.)

Glede (1), the bird called a kite. (E.)

Glede (2), a glowing coal; obsolete. (E.)

Gleek (1), a scoff, jest. (F.— Du. ?)

Gleek (2), a game at cards. (F.—Du.)

Glib (1), smooth, slippery, voluble. (E.)

Glib (2), a lock of hair. (C

Glib (3), to castrate ; obsolete. (E.)

Gloss (1), brightness, lustre. (Scand.)

Gloss (2), a commentary, explanation. (L.— Gk.)

Gore (1), clotted blood, blood. (E.)

Gore (2), to pierce, bore through. (E.)

Gore (3), a triangular piece let into a garment; a triangular slip of
land. (E.) Allied to Gore (2).

Gout (1), a drop, a disease. (F.—L.)

Gout (2), taste. (F.—L.)

Grail (1), a gradual, or service-book. (F.—L.)

Grail (2), the Holy Dish at the Last Supper. (F.—L.)

Grail (3), fine sand. (F.)

Grate (1), a framework of iron bars. (Late L.—L.)

Grate (2), to rub, scrape, scratch, creak. (F.—Teut.)

Grave (1), to cut, engrave. (E

Grave (2), solemn, sad. (F.—L.)

Graze (1), to feed cattle. (E.)

Graze (2), to scrape slightly, rub lightly. (E.)

Greaves (1), Graves, the sediment of melted tallow. (E.)

Greaves (2), armour for the legs. (F.)

Greet (1), to salute. (E.)

Greet (2), to weep, cry, lament. (E.)

Grig (1), a small lively eel. (Scand.)

Grig (2), a cricket. (E.)

Grit (1), gravel, coarse sand. (E.)

Grit (2), coarse oatmeal. (E.) Allied to Grit (1).

Gull (1), a web-footed sea-bird. (C.)

Gull (2), a dupe. (Low G.)

Gum (1), the flesh of the jaws. (E.)

Gum (2), the hardened juice of certain trees. (F.—L.—Gk. — Egypt.)

Gust (1), a sudden blast or gush of wind. (Scand.)

Gust (2), relish, taste. (L.)

Guy (1), a hideous creature, a fright. (F.—Ital.—Teut.)

Guy (2), a rope used to steady a weight. (F.—Teut.)


Hack (1), to cut, chop, mangle. (E.)

Hack (2), a hackney. See Hackney. (E.)

Hackle (1), Hatcbel, an instrument for dressing flax. (E.)
Hackle (2), long shining feathers on a cock’s neck. (E.)
Haggard (1), wild, said of a hawk, (F.—G.)

Haggard (2), lean, hollow-eyed, meagre. (F.—G.) See above.
Haggle (1), to cut awkwardly, mangle. (Scand.)

Haggle (2), to be slow in making a bargain. (Scand.) See above.
Hail (1), frozen rain. (E.)

Hail (2), to greet, call to, address. (Scand.)


LIST OF HOMONYMS


741


Hail! (3), an exclamation of greeting. (Scand.) See Hail (2).

Hale (1), whole, healthy, sound. (E.)

Hale (2), Haul, to drag, draw violently. (F.—OHG.)

Halt (1), lame. (E.)

Halt (2), a sudden stop. (F.—G.)

Hamper (1), to impede, hinder, harass. (E.)

Hamper (2), a kind of basket. (F.—G.)

Handy (1), dexterous, expert. (E.)

Handy (2), convenient, near. (E.) Allied to Handy (1).

Harrier (1), a hare-hound. (E.)

Harrier (2), a kind of falcon. (E.)

Hatch (1), a half-door, wicket. (E.)

Hatch (2), to produce a brood by incubation. (E.)

Hatch (3), to shade by minute lines. (F.—G.)

Hawk (1), a bird of prey. (E.)

Hawk (2), to carry about for sale. (OLow G.)

Hawk (3), to clear the throat. (E.)

Hay (1), grass cut and dried. (E.)

Hay (2), a hedge. (E.)

Heel (1), the part of the foot projecting behind. (E.)

Heel (2), to lean over, incline. (E.)

Helm (1), the instrument by which a ship is steered. (E.)

Helm (2), Helmet, armour for the head. (E.)

Hem (1), the border of a garment. (E.)

Hem (2), a slight cough to call attention. (E.)

Herd on a flock of beasts, group of animals. (E.)

Herd (2), one who tends a herd. (E.) From Herd (1).

Heyday (1), interjection. (G. or Du.)

Heyday (2), frolicsome wildness. (E.)

Hide (1), to cover, conceal. (E.)

Hide Ry a skin. (E.) Allied,

Hide (3), to flog, castigate. (E.)

Hide (4), 2 measure of land. (E.)

Hind (1), the female of the stag. (E.)

Hind (2), a peasant. (E.)

Hind (3), adj., in the rear. (E.)

Hip (1), the haunch, upper part of the thigh. (E.)

Hip (2), also Hep, the fruit of the dog-rose. (E.)

Hob (1), Hub, the nave of a wheel, part of a grate. (E.)

Hob (2), a clown, a rustic, a fairy. (F.—OHG.)

Hobby (1), Hobby-horse, an ambling nag, a favourite pursuit.
(F.—OHG.)

Hobby (2), a small species of falcon. (F.—Dnu.)

Hock, (1), Hough, back of the knee-joint. (E.)

Hock (2), the name of a wine. (G.)

Hold (1), to keep, retain, defend, restrain. (E.)

Hold (2), the ‘hold’ of a ship. (Du.) Allied to Hole.

Homicide (1), manslaughter. (F.—L.)

Homicide (2), a man-slayer. (F.—L.) Allied to Homicide (1).

Hoop (1), a pliant strip of wood or metal bent into a band. (E.)

Hoop (2), to call out, shout. (F.—Teut.)

Hop (1), to leap on one leg. (E.)

Hop (2), the name of a plant. (Du.)

Hope (1), expectation; as a verb, to expect. (E.)

Hope (2), a troop; in the phr. ‘ forlorn hope.’ (Du.)

Host (1), one who entertains guests. (F.—L.) From Host (2).

Host (2), an army. (F.—L.)

Host (3), the consecrated bread of the eucharist. (L.)

How (1), in what way. (E.)

How (2), a hill. (Scand.)

Hoy (1), a kind of sloop. (Du.)

Hoy (2), interj., stop! (E.)

Hue (1), show, appearance, colour, tint. (E.)

Hue (2), clamour, outcry. (F.— Tent.)

Hull (1), the husk or outer shell of grain or of nuts. (E.)

Hull (2), the body of a ship. (Du.) Cf. Hull (1), Hold (2),

Hum (1), to make a low buzzing or droning sound. (E.)

Hum (2), to trick, to cajole. (E.) From Hum (1).


Il- (1), a form of the prefix in- = L. prep. in. (L.; or F.—L.)
Il- (2), a form of the prefix zz- used negatively. (L.; or F.—L.)
Im- (1), prefix. (F.—L.) Hence Im- (2), prefix.

Im- (3), prefix. (L.)

Im- (4), negative prefix. (F.—L.; or L.)

In- (1), prefix, in, (E.)

In- (2), prefix, in. (L.; or F.—L.)

In- (3), prefix with negative force. (L.; or F.—L.)

Incense (1), to inflame. (L.) Hence Incense (2).

Incense (2), spices, odour of spices burned. (F.—L.)

Inch (1), the twelfth part of a foot. (L.)

Inch (2), an island. (Gaelic.)


742 LIST OF HOMONYMS


Incontinent (1), unchaste. (F.—L.)

Incontinent (2), immediately. (F.—L.) Due to the above.
Indent (1), to notch. (Law L.)

Indent (2), to make a dint in. (E.)

Indue (1), to invest or clothe with, supply with. (L.)
Indue (2), a corruption of Endue, q.v. (F.—L.)

Ingle (1), fire. (C.)

Ingle (2), a darling, paramour. (Du. —L.—Gk.)

Interest (1),-profit, premium for use of money. (F.—L.)


Interest (2), to engage the attention. (F.—L.) Allied to Interest (1).


Intimate (1), to announce, hint. (L.)

Intimate (2), familiar, close. (L.) Allied to Intimate (1).
Ir- (1), prefix; for ix before r. (L.; or F.—L.)

Tr- (2), negative prefix. (L.; or F.—L.)


Jack (1), a saucy fellow, sailor. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.)
Jack (2), a coat of mail. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.) From Jack (1).
Jade (1), a sorry nag, an old woman. (Scand. ?)

Jade (2), a hard dark green stone. (F.—Span.—L.)

Jam (1), to press, squeeze tight. (E.) Hence Jam (2).

Jam (2), a conserve of fruit boiled with sugar. (E.)

Jar (1), to make a discordant noise, creak, clash, quarrel. (E.)
Jar (2), an earthen pot. (F.—Span,—Arab.)

Jet (1), to throw out, fling about, spout. (F.—L.)

Jet (2), a black mineral, used for ornaments. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Jib (1), the foremost sail of a ship. (Du.)

Jib (2), to shift a sail from side to side. (Du.) Allied.
Jib (3), to move restively, as a horse. (F.—Scand.)

Job (1), to peck with the beak, as a bird. (EK. ?)

Job (2), a small piece of work. (F.—C.)

Jump (1), to leap, spring, skip. (Scand. )

Jump (2), exactly, just, pat. (Scand.) From Jump (1).
Junk (1), a Chinese three-masted vessel. (Port.— Malay.)
Junk (2), pieces of old cordage. (Port.—L.)

Just (1), righteous, upright, true. (F.—L.)

Just (2), the same as Joust, to tilt. (F.—L,)


Kedge (1), to warp a ship. (F.—L.)

Kedge (2), Kidge, cheerful, lively. (E.)

Keel (1), the bottom ofa ship. (Scand.)

Keel (2), to cool. (E.)

Kennel (1), a house for dogs, pack of hounds. (F.—L.)
Kennel (2), a gutter. (F.—L.)

Kern (1), Kerne, an Irish soldier. (Irish.)

Kern (2), the same as Quern, a hand-mill. (E.)

Kind (1), sb., nature, sort, character. (E.)

Kind (2), adj., natural, loving. (E.) From Kind (1).
Kindle (1), to set fire to, inflame. (Scand.)

Kindle (2), to bring forth young. (E.)

Kit (1), a vessel, milk-pail, tub; hence, an outfit. (Du.)
Kit (2), a small violin. (F. —L.— Gk.)

Kit (3), a brood, family, quantity. (Du.) From Kit (1).
Knoll (1), the top of a hill, a hillock, mound. (E.)
Knoll (2), Knell, to toll a bell. (E.)


Lac (1), a resinous substance. (Hind. —Skt.)

Lac (2), a hundred thousand. (Hind.—Skt.) Allied to Lac (1).
Lack (1), want. (E.)

Lack (2), to want, be destitute of. (E.) From Lack (1).
Lade (1), to load. (E.)

Lade (2), to lade out water, drain. (E.) Same as Lade (1).
Lake (1), a pool. (F.—L.)

Lake (2), a colour, a kind of crimson, (F.—Pers. —Skt.)
Lama (1), a high priest. (Thibetan.)

Lama (2), the same as Llama, a quadruped. (Peruvian.)
Lap (1), to lick up with the tongue. (E.)


Lap (2), the loose part of a coat, an apron, part of the body covered


by an apron, a fold, flap. (E.)
Lap (3), to wrap, involve, fold. (E.) From Lap (2).
Lark (1), the name of a bird. (E.)
Lark (2), a game, sport, fun. (E.) From Lark (1).
Lash (1), to fasten firmly together. (F.—L.)


Lash (2), a thong, flexible part of a whip. (F.—L.) From Lash (1).


Last (1), latest, hindmost. (E.)

Last (2), a mould of the foot on which shoes are made, (E.)
Last (3), to endure, continue. (E.) From Last (2),

Last (4), a load, large weight, ship’s cargo. (E.)

Lathe (1), a machine for ‘ turning’ wood and metal. (Scand.)
Lathe (2), a division of a county. (E.)

Launch (1), to lance; to send into the water. (F.—L.)
Launch (2), a kind of long-boat. (Span. — Port. ~ Malay.)


Lawn (1), a smooth grassy space of ground. (F.—C.)

Lawn (2), a sort of fine linen. (F.—C.

Lay (1), to cause to lie down, place, set. (E.)

Lay (2), a song, lyric poem. (¥.—OHG.)

Lay (3), Laic, pertaining to the laity. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Lea (1), Ley, Lay, a tract of open ground. (E.)

Lea (2), Ley, Lay, fallow land, pasture-land. (E.)

Lead (1), to bring, conduct, guide, precede, direct. (E.)
Lead (2), a well-known metal. (E.)

League (1), a bond, alliance, confederacy. (F.—Ital,—L.)
League (2), a distance of about three miles. (Prov.—L.—C.)
Lean (1), to incline, bend, stoop. (E.)

Lean (2), slender, not fat, frail, thin. (E.) From Lean (1).
Lease (1), to let tenements for a term of years. (F.—L.)
Lease (2), to glean. (E.)

Leave (1), to quit, abandon, forsake. (E.)

Leave (2), permission, farewell. (E.)

Leech (1), a physician. (E.)

Leech (2), a blood-sucking worm. (E.) Same as Leech (3).
Leech (3), Leach, the edge of a sail at the sides. (Scand.)
Let (1), to allow, permit, suffer, grant. (E.)

Let (2), to hinder, prevent, obstruct. (E.) Allied to Let (1).
Lie (1), to rest, lean, lay oneself down, be situate. (E.)

Lie (2), to tell a lie, speak falsely. (E.)

Lift (1), to elevate, raise. (Scand.)

Lift (2), to steal, (E.) From Lift (1).

Light (1), illumination. (E.)

Light (2), active, not heavy, unimportant. (E.)

Light (3), to settle, alight, descend. (E.) From Light (2).
Lighten (1), to illuminate, flash. (E.)

Lighten (2), to make lighter, alleviate. (E.) See Light (2).
Lighten (3), to descend, settle, alight. (E.) See Light (3).
Like (1), similar, resembling. (E.)

Like (2), to approve, be pleased with. (E.) From Like (1).
Limb (1), a member of the body, branch. (E.)

Limb (2), the edge or border of a sextant, &c. (L.)

Limber (1), flexible, pliant. (E.)

Limber (2), part of a gun-carriage. (F.)

Lime (1), viscous substance, mortar, oxide of calcium, (E.)
Lime (2), the linden-tree. (E.)

Lime (3), a kind of citron. (F.—Span.— Arab. — Malay.)
Limp (1), flaccid, flexible, pliant, weak. (E.)

Limp (2), to walk lamely. (E.) Compare Limp (1).

Ling (1), a kind of fish. (E.)

Ling (2), heath. (Scand.)

Link (1), a ring of a chain, joint. (Scand.)

Link (2), a torch. (Scand.)

List (1), a stripe or border of cloth, selvage. (E.)

List (2), a catalogue. (F.—G.) Allied to List (1).


List (3), gen. in pl. Lists, space for a tournament, (E.) See


List (1).
List (4), to choose, to desire, have pleasure in. (E.)


List (5), an inclination (of a ship) to one side. (E.) Cf. List (4).


List (6), to listen. (E.)

Litter (1), a portable bed. (F.—L.) Hence Litter (2), (3).
Litter (2), materials for a bed, a confused mass. (F.—L.)
Litter (3), a brood. (F.—L.)

Live (1), to continue in life, exist, dwell. (E.)

Live (2), adj., alive, active, burning. (E.) Allied to Live (1).
Lock (1), an instrument to fasten doors, &c. (E.)

Lock (2), a tuft of hair, flock of wool. (E.)

Log (1), a block, piece of wood. (E.)


Log (2), a thin quadrant of wood, loaded, and fastened to a line,


for measuring the rate ofa ship. (E.) The same as Log (1).
Log (3), a Hebrew liquid measure. (Heb.)
Long (1), extended, not short, tedious. (E.)
Long (2), to desire, yearn ; to belong. (E.)
Loom (1), a machine for weaving cloth. (E.)
Loom (2), to appear faintly, or at a distance. (Scand.)
Loon (1), Lown, a base fellow. (E.)
Loon (2), a water-bird, diver. (Scand.)
Low (1), inferior, deep, mean, humble. (Scand.)
Low (2), to bellow as a cow or ox. (E.)
Low (3), 2 hill. (E.)
Low (4), flame. (Scand.)
Lower (1), to let down, abase, sink. (E.)
Lower (2), to frown, look sour. (E.)
Lumber (1), cumbersome or useless furniture. (F.—G.)


Lumber (2), to make a great noise, as a heavy rolling object. (Scand.)


Lurch (1), to lurk, dodge, steal, pilfer. (Scand.)
Lurch (2), the name of a game. (F.—G.)


ee,


eS ee eee


,


LIST OF HOMONYMS


Lurch (3), to devour ; obsolete. (F. ?—G. ?)

Lurch (4), a sudden roll sideways, (Scand.) See Lurch (1).
Lustre (1), splendour, brightness. (I. —Ital.—L.)

Lustre (2), Lustrum, a period of five years. (F.—L.)


Lute (1), a stringed instrument of music. (F.—Prov.—Span. — Arab.)


Lute (2), a composition like clay, loam. (F.—L.)


Mace (1), a kind of club. (F.—L.)

Mace (2), a kind of spice. (F. —L.—Gk.)

Mail (1), steel network forming body-armour. (F.—L.)
Mail (2), a bag for carrying letters. (F.—OHG.)

Mail (3), Black, a forced tribute, (Scand.)

Main (1), sb., strength, might. (E.) Allied to Main (2).
Main (2), adj., strong, great. (Scand.)


Mall (1), a wooden hammer or beetle. (F.—L.) Hence Mall (2).


Mall (2), the name of a public walk. (F. —Ital.—OHG. and L.)
Mangle (1), to render maimed, tear, mutilate. (F.—G.)

Mangle (2), a roller for smoothing linen. (Du.—Late L.—Gk.)
March (1), a border, frontier. (F.—OHG.)

March (2), to walk with regular steps. (F.—L.? or G.?)
March (3), the name of the third month. (F.—L.)

Mark (1), a stroke, outline, trace, line, sign. (E.

Mark (2), a march, limit, boundary. (E.) Cf. Mark (1).

Mark (3), the name of a coin. (Scand.) From Mark (1).
Maroon (1), brownish crimson. (F.—Ital.)


Maroon (2), to put ashore on a desolate island. (F.—Span.—
k.


L.—G
Marrow (1), soft matter within bones. (E.)
Marrow (2), a companion, partner. (Scand.)
Martlet (1), a kind of bird, a martin. (F.)
Martlet (2), a swift; in heraldry. (F.—L.)
Mass (1), a lump of matter, quantity, size. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Mass (2), the celebration of the Eucharist. (L.)
Mast (1), a pole to sustain the sails of a ship. (E.)
Mast (2), the fruit of beach and forest-trees. (E.)
Match (1), an equal, a contest, game, marriage. (E.)
Match (2), a prepared rope for firing a cannon. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Mate (1), a companion, comrade, equal. (Low G.)
Mate (2), to check-mate, confound. (F.— Pers.— Arab.)
Matricide (1), a slayer of his mother. (F.—L.) See below.
Matricide (2), a killing of one’s mother. (F.—L.)
Matter (1), the material part of a thing, substance. (F.—L.)


Matter (2), pus, a fluid in abscesses. (F.—L.) Same as Matter (1).


May (1), I am able, I am free to act, I am allowed to. (E.)
May (2), the fifth month. (F.—L.)

Mead (1), a drink made from honey. (E.)

Mead (2), Meadow, a grass-field, pasture-ground. (E.)
Meal (1), ground grain. (E.)

Meal (2), a repast, share or time of food. (E.)

Mean (1), to have in the mind, intend, signify. (E.)

Mean (2), common, vile, base, sordid. (E.)

Mean (3), coming between, intermediate, moderate. (F.—L.)
Meet (1), fitting, according to measure, suitable. (E.)

Meet (2), to encounter, find, assemble. (E.)

Mere (1), a lake, pool. (E.)

Mere (2), pure, simple, absolute. (L.)

Mere (3), a boundary. (E.)

Mess (1), a dish of meat, portion of food. (F.—L.)

Mess (2), a mixture, disorder. (F.—L.) Same as Mess (1).
Mew (1), to cry asa cat. (E.)

Mew (2), a sea-fowl, gull. (E.)

Mew (3), a cage for hawks, &c. (F.—L.)

Might (1), power, strength. (E.)

Might (2), was able. (E.) Allied to Might (1)

Milt (1), the spleen. (E.)

Milt (2), soft roe of fishes. (MDu.)

Mine (1), belonging to me. (E.)

Mine (2), to excavate, dig for metals. (F.—C.)

Mint (1), a place where money is coined. (L.)

Mint (2), the name of an aromatic plant. (L.—Gk.)

Mis- (1), prefix. (E. and Scand.)

Mis- (2), prefix. (F.—L.)

Miss (1), to fail to hit, omit, feel the want of. (E.)

Miss (2), a young woman, a girl. (F.—L.)

Misty (1), nebulous, foggy. (E.)

Misty (2), used for Mystic. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Mite (1), a very small insect. (E.)

Mite (2), a very small portion. (F.—Du.) Allied to Mite (1).
Mob (1), a disorderly crowd. (L.)

Mob (2), a kind of cap. (Dutch.)

Mole (1), a spot or mark on the body. (E.)


743
Mole (2), a small animal that burrows, (E.)

Mole (3), a breakwater. (F.—Ital.—L.)

Mood (1), disposition of mind, temper. (E.)

Mood (2), manner, grammatical form. (F.—L.)

Moor (1), a heath, extensive waste ground. (E.)

Moor (2), to fasten a ship by cable and anchor. (E.)
Moor (3), a native of North Africa. (F.—L.)

Mop (1), a implement for washing floors, &c. (F.—L.)
Mop (2), a grimace ; to grimace. (E.)

Mortar (1), Morter, a vessel in which substances are pounded. (L.)
Mortar (2), cement of lime, &c. (F.—L.) Allied to Mortar (1).
Mother (1), a female parent. (E.)

Mother (2), the hysterical passion. (E.) p Allied.

Mother (3), lees, sediment. (E.)

Mould (1), earth, soil, crumbling ground. (E.)

Mould (2), a model, pattern, form, fashion. (F.—L.)

Mould (3), rust, spot. (E.) See Mole (1).

Mount (1), a hill, rising ground. (L.)

Mount (2), to ascend, (F.—L.) From Mount (1).

Mow (1), to cut down with a scythe. (E.)

Mow (2), a heap, pile of hay or corn. (E.)

Mow (3), a grimace; obsolete. (F.-MDu.)

Muff (1), a warm cover for the hands. (Walloon—F.—Late L.)
Muff (2), a silly fellow, simpleton. (E.)

Mullet (1), a kind of fish. (F.—L.)

Mullet (2), a five-pointed star. (F.—L.)

Mum (1), an interjection, imposing silence. (E.)

Mum (2), a kind of beer. (Low G.)

Muscle (1), the fleshy part of the body. (F.—L.)

Muscle (2), Mussel, a shell-fish. (L.) The same as Muscle (1).
Muse (1), to meditate, be pensive. (F.—L.)

Muse (2), one of nine fabled goddesses. (F. —L.—Gk.)

Must (1), part of a verb implying ‘ obligation.’ (E.)

Must (2), new wine. (L

Mute (1), dumb. (L.)

Mute (2), to dung; used of birds. (F.—MDu.)

Mystery (1), anything kept concealed, a secret rite. (L.—Gk.)
Mystery (2), Mistery, a trade, handicraft. (F.—L.)


Nag (1), a small horse. (MDu.)

Nag (2), to worry, tease. (Scand.)

Nap (1), a short sleep. (E.)

Nap (2), the roughish surface of cloth. (MDu.)
Nave (1), the central portion or hub of a wheel. (E.)
Nave (2), the middle or body of a church. (F.—L.)
Neat (1), black cattle, an ox, cow. (E.)

Neat (2), tidy, unadulterated. (F.—L.)

Negus (1), a beverage of wine, water, sugar, &c. (E.)
Negus (2), an Abyssinian title. (Abyssinian. )

Net (1), an implement for catching fish, &c. (E.)
Net (2), clear of all charges. (F.—L.)

Nick (1), a small notch, a cut. (E.)

Nick (2), the devil. (F.—L.—Gk.)

No (1), a word of refusal or denial. (E.)

No (2), none. (E.)

Not (1), a word expressing denial. (E.)

Not (2), I know not, or he knows not. (E.)

Not (3), to crop, to shear closely. (E.)


O (1), Oh, an interjection. (E.)

O (2), a circle. (E.)

One (1), single, undivided, sole, (E.) Hence One (2)
One (2), a person, spoken of indefinitely. (E.)

Or (1), conjunction, offering an alternative. (E.)

Or (2), ere. (E.)

Or (3), gold. (F.—L.)

Ought (1), past tense of Owe. (E.)

Ought (2), another spelling of Aught, anything. (E.)
Ounce (1), the twelfth part of a pound. (F.—L.)
Ounce (2), Once, a kind of lynx. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Own (1), possessed by any one, belonging to oneself, (E.)
Own (2), to possess. (E.). From Own (1).

Own (3), to grant, admit. (E.) From Own (2).


Pad (1), a soft cushion, &c. (E.)

Pad (2), a thief on the high road. (Du.)

Paddle (1), to finger; to dabble in water. (E.)

Paddle (2), a little spade, esp. for cleaning a plough. (E.)
Paddock (1), a toad. (Scand.)

Paddock (2), a small enclosure. (E.)

Page (1), a young male attendant, (F.— Low Lat.—Gk. ?)


744

Page (2), one side of the leaf of a book. (F.—L.)
Pale (1), a stake, enclosure, limit, district. (F.—L.)

Pale (2), wan, dim. (F.—L.)

Pall (1), a cloak, mantle, archbishop’s scarf, shroud. (L.)

Pall (2), to become vapid, lose taste or spirit. (F.—L.)

Pallet (1), a kind of mattress or couch. (F.—L.)

Pallet (2), an instrument used by potters, &c. (F.—Ital.—L.)
Pap (1), food for infants. (E.)

Pap (2), a teat, breast. (E.) Allied to Pap (1).

Parricide (1), the murderer of a father. (F.—L.)

Parricide (2), the murder of a father. (F.—L.) See above.
Partisan (1), an adherent of a party. (F.—Ital.—L.)

Partisan (2), Partizan, a kind of halberd. (F.—Ital.—L.?)

Pat (1), to strike lightly, tap. (E.)

Pat (2), a small lump of butter. (E.) Allied to Pat (1).

Pat (3), quite to the purpose. (E.) Allied to Pat (1).

Patch (1), a piece sewn on a garment, a plot of ground. (E. ?)
Patch (2), a paltry fellow. (E.) From Patch (1).

Pawn (1), a pledge, security for repayment of money. (F.)

Pawn (2), one of the least valuable pieces in chess. (F.—L.)
Pay (1), to discharge a debt. (F.—L.)

Pay (2), to pitch the seam of a ship. (F.—L.)

Peach (1), a delicious fruit. (F.—L.—Pers.)

Peach (2), to inform against. (F.—L.) For Impeach.

Peck (1), to strike with something pointed, snap up. (E. ?)

Peck (2), a dry measure, two gallons. (F.—Low G. ?)

Peel (1), to strip off the skin or bark. (F.—L.)

Peel (2), to pillage. (F.—L.)

Peel (3), a fire-shovel. (F.—L.)

Peel (4), a small castle. (F.—L.)

Peep (1), to cry like a chicken. (F.—L.)

Peep (2), to look through a narrow aperture, look slily. (F.—L.)
Peer (1), an equal, a nobleman. (F.—L.)

Peer (2), to look narrowly, to pry. (E. ?)

Peer (3), to appear. (F.—L.)

Pellitory (1), Paritory, a wild flower. (F.—L.)

Pellitory (2), Pelleter, the plant pyrethr-m. (Span. —L.—Gk.)
Pelt (1), to throw or cast, to strike by throwing. (L.)

Pelt (2), a skin, esp. of a sheep. (F.—L.)

Pen (1), to shut up, enclose. (L.)

Pen (2), an instrument used for writing. (F.—L.)

Perch (1), a rod for a bird to sit on; a measure. (F.—L.)

Perch (2), a fish. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Periwinkle (1), a genus of evergreen plants. (L.)

Periwinkle (2), a small univalve mollusc. (E.; with Gk. prefix.)
Pet (1), a tame and fondled animal or child. (F. ?)

Pet (2), a sudden fit of peevishness. (F.?) From Pet (1).

Pie (1), a magpie; mixed printer’s type. (F.—L.) Hence Pie (2).
Pie (2), a book which regulated divine service. (F.—L.)

Pie (3), a pasty. (F.—L.?)

Pile (1), a tumour; in the pl. Piles. (L.)

Pile (2), a roundish mass, heap. (F.—L.)

Pile (3), a large stake to support foundations. (L.)

Pile (4), a hair, fibre of wool. (L.)

Pill (1), a little ball of medicine. (L.)

Pill (2), to rob, plunder. (F.—L.)

Pine (1), a cone-bearing, resinous tree. (L.)

Pine (2), to suffer pain, be consumed with sorrow. (L.)

Pink (1), to pierce, stab, prick. (E.)

Pink (2), half-shut, applied to the eyes. (Du.)

Pink (3), the name of a flower and of a colour. (E.) See Pink (1).
Pink (4), a kind of boat. (Du.)

Pip (1), a disease of fowls. (Du.—L.)

Pip (2), the seed of fruit. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Pip (3), a spot on cards. (F.—L.?)

Pitch (1), a black, sticky substance. (L.)

Pitch (2), to throw, fall headlong, fix a camp, &c. (E.)
Plane (1), a level surface. (F.—L.) Hence Plane (2).
Plane (2), a tool; also to render a surface level. (F.—L.)
Plane (3), Plane-tree, the name of a tree. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Plantain (i), the name of a plant. (F.—L.

Plantain (2), a tree resembling the banana. (F.—Span.—L.)
Plash (1), a puddle, a shallow pool. (E.)

Plash (2), another form of Pleach, to intertwine. (F.—L.)
Plat (1), Plot, a patch of ground. (E.)

Plat (2), to plait. (F.—L.)

Plight (1), a condition, promise; as vb., to pledge. (E.)
Plight (2), to fold; as sb., a fold, condition, state. (F.—L.)
Plot (1), a conspiracy, stratagem. (F.—L.)

Plot (2), Plat, a small piece of ground. (E.)

Plump (1), full, round, fleshy. (E.)


a a NR SSN RR SS


ce a ee


LIST OF HOMONYMS


Plump (2), straight downwards. (F.—L.)

Plump (3), to fall heavily down. (E.)

Poach (1), to dress. eggs. (F.—OLow G.)

Poach (2), to intrude on another’s preserves of game. (F.—OLow
G.) Allied to Poach (1).

Point (1), a dot, a prick. (F.—L.)

Point (2), a sharp end. (F.—L.) From Point (1).

Poke (1), a bag, pouch. (Scand.)

Poke (2), to thrust or push, esp. with something pointed. (E.)

Pole (1), a stake, long thick rod. (L.)

Pole (2), a pivot, end of the earth’s axis. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Pool (1), a pond, small body of water. (E.)

Pool (2), the receptacle for the stakes at cards. (F.—L.)

Pore (1), a minute hole in the skin. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Pore (2), to look steadily, gaze long. (E. ?)

Port (1), demeanour, carriage of the body. (F.—L.)

Port (2), a harbour, haven, (L.)

Port (3), a gate, port-hole, (F.—L.)

Port (4), a dark purple wine. (Port.—L.)

Porter (1), a carrier. (F.—L.)

Porter (2), a gate-keeper. (F.—L.)

Porter (3), a dark kind of beer. (F.—L.)

Pose (1), a position, attitude. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Pose (2), to puzzle, perplex by questions. (F.—L. and Gk.)

Pose (3), a cold in the head. (C.)

Post (1), a stake set in the ground, a pillar. (L.) Allied to Post (2).

Post (2), a military station, a stage on a road, &c. (F.—L.)

Pounce (1), to seize with the claws, as a bird, to dart upon.
(F.-L.)

Pounce (2), fine powder. (F.—L.)

Pound (1), a weight, a sovereign. (L.)

Pound (2), an enclosure for strayed animals. (E.)

Pound (3), to beat, bruise in a mortar. (E.)

Pout (1), to look.sulky or displeased. (E.)

Pout (2), a kind of fish. (E.) Cf. Pout (1).

Prank (1), to deck, adorn. (E.)

Prank (2), a trick, mischievous action. (E.) From Prank (1).

Pregnant (1), pressing, urgent, cogent. (F.—L.)

Pregnant (2), fruitful, with child. (F.—L.)

Present (1), near at hand, in view, at this time. (F.—L.)

Present (2), to give, offer, exhibit to view. (F.—L.)
Present (1).

Press (1), to crush strongly, squeeze, push. (F.—L.)

Press (2), to hire men for service. (F.—L.)

Prig (1), to steal. (E.)

Prig (2), a pert fellow. (E.) Allied to Prig (1).

Prime (1), first, chief, excellent. (F.—L.) Hence Prime (2).

Prime (2), to make a gun quite ready. (F.—L.)

Prior (1), former, coming before in time. (L.) Hence Prior (2).

Prior (2), the head of a priory or convent. (F.—L.

Prize (1), a thing captured or won. (F.—L.)

Prize (2), to value highly. (F.—L.)

Prize (3), Prise, to open a box. (F.—L.) From Prize (r).

Prune (1), to trim trees, &c. (F,—L.)

Prune (2), a plum. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Puddle (1), a small pool of muddy water. (E.)

Puddle (2), to close with clay, to work iron. (E.) From Puddle (1).

Puke (1), to vomit. (E.?)

Puke (2), the name of a colour; obsolete. (MDu.)

Pulse (1), a throb, vibration. (F.—L.)

Pulse (2), grain or seed of beans, pease, &c. (L.)

Pump (1), a machine for raising water. (F.—Teut.)

Pump (2), a thin-soled shoe. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Punch (1), to pierce with a sharp instrument. (F.—L.)

Punch (2), to beat, bruise. (F. — L.)

Punch (3), a beverage. (Hindi—Skt.)

Punch (4), a hump-backed fellow in a puppet-show. (Ital.—L.)

Puncheon (1), a steel tool for stamping; a punch. (F.—L.)

Puncheon (2), a cask, a measure of 84 gallons. (F.—L.

Punt (1), a ferry-boat, a flat-bottomed boat. (L.—C.)

Punt (2), to play at basset. (F. —Span.—L.)

Pupil (1), a scholar, a ward. (F.—L.) Allied to Pupil (2).

Pupil (2), the central spot of the eye. (F.—L.)

Puppy (1), a whelp. (F.—L.)

Puppy (2), a dandy. (F.—L.) Allied to Puppy (1).

Purl (1), to flow with a murmuring sound. (Scand.)

Purl (2), spiced or medicated beer or ale. (F.—L. ?)

Purl (3), to form an edging on lace. (F.—L.)

Purl (4), to upset. (E.) Allied to Purl (1).

Purpose (1), to intend. (F.—L.—Gk.; with F. presix.)

Purpose (2), intention. (F.—L.)


Allied to Port (1).


Allied.


From


LIST OF HOMONYMS


‘Quack (1), to make a noise like a duck. (E.)

Quack (2), to cry up pretended nostrums. (Du.) From Quack (1).
Quail (1), to cower, shrink, fail in spirit. (F.—L.)

Quail (2), a migratory bird. (F.—Low L.—Low G.)

Quarrel (1), a dispute, brawl. (F.—L.

Quarrel (2), a square-headed cross-bow bolt. (F.—L.)

Quarry (1), a place where stones are dug for building. (F.—L.)
Quarry (2), a heap of slaughtered game. (F.—L.)

Quill (1), a feather of a bird, a pen. (E.)

Quill (2), to pleat a ruff. (F.—L.; or E.)

Quire (1), a collection of so many sheets of paper. (F.—L.)
Quire (2), a choir, a band of singers. (F.— L.—Gk.)

Quiver (1), to tremble, shiver. (E.)

Quiver (2), a case for arrows. (F.—OHG.)


Race (1), a trial of speed, swift course, swift current. (E.)

Race (2), a lineage, family, breed. (F.)

Race (3), a root. (F.—L.)

Rack (1), a grating above a manger, instrument of torture. (MDu.)

Rack (2), to torture on the rack. (MDu.) From Rack (1).

Rack (3), light vapoury clouds, the clouds generally. (Scand.)

Rack (4), to pour off liquor from the lees. (Prov.)

Rack (5), a short form of Arrack. (Arab.)

Rack (6), &c. We find (6) prov. E. rack, a neck of mutton; from
AS. hracca, neck, according to Somner. Also (7) rack, for reck,
to care; see Reck. Also (8) rack, a pace of a horse (Palsgrave) ;
perhaps a rocking pace; see Rock.(2). Also (9) rack, a track,
cart-rut ; cf. Icel. reka, to drive ; see Rack (3).

Racket (1), Raquet, a bat with a blade of net-work. (F.—Span. —
Arab.)

Racket (2), a noise. (E.)

Rail (1), a bar of timber, an iron bar for railways. (F.—L.)

Rail (2), to brawl, to use reviling language. (F.—L.)

Rail (3), a genus of wading birds. (F.)

Rail (4), a woman’s wrap or night-dress. (E.)

Rake (1), an instrument for scraping things together. (E.)

Rake (2), a wild, dissolute fellow. (E.) From Rake-hell.

Rake (3), the projection of the extremities of a ship beyond the keel;
the inclination of a mast from the perpendicular. (Scand.)

Rally (1), to gather together again, reassemble. (F.—L.)

Rally (2), to banter. (f.—Teut.)

Rank (1), a row or line of soldiers, class, grade. (F.—-OHG.)

Rank (2), adj., coarse in growth, strong-scented. (E.)

Rap (1), to strike smartly, knock. (E. or Scand.)

Rap (2), to snatch, seize hastily. (Scand.)

Rape (1), a seizing by force, violation. (L.)

Rape (2), a plant nearly allied to the turnip. (L.)

Rape (3), a division of a county, in Sussex. (E.)

Rash (1), hasty, headstrong. (E.)

Rash (2), a slight eruption on the body. (F.—L.)

Rash (3), to pull, or tear violently. (F.—L.)

Rash (4), a kind of inferior silk. (F.—L.)

Rate (1), a proportion, allowance, price, tax. (F.—L.)

Rate (2), to scold, chide. (F. —L.)

Raven (1), a well-known bird. (E.)

Raven (2), to plunder with violence, devour. (F.—L.)

Ray (1), a beam of light or heat. (F.—L.)

Ray (2), a class of fishes, such as the skate. (F.—L.)

Ray (3), a dance. (MDu.)

Reach (1), to attain, extend to, arrive at, gain. (E.)

Reach (2), Retch, to try to vomit. (E.)

Real (1), actual, true, genuine. (L.)

Real (2), a-small Spanish coin. (Span.—L.)

Rear (1), to raise. (E.)

Rear (2), the back part, last part, esp. of an army.

Rear (3), insufficiently cooked. (E.)

Reef (1), a ridge of rocks. (Du.)

Reef (2), portion of a sail. (Du.)

Reel (1), a small spindle for winding yarn. (E.)

Reel (2), a Highland dance. (Scand. ?)

Reeve (1), to pass a rope through a ring. (Du.)

Reeve (2), a steward, governor. (E.)

Reeve (3), the female of the ruff. (E.)

Refrain (1), to restrain, forbear. (F.—L.)

Refrain (2), the burden of a song. (F.—L.)

Relay (1), a fresh supply. (F.—L.)

Relay (2), to lay again. (Hybrid; L. and E.)

Rennet (1), a substance for coagulating milk. (E.)

Rennet (2), a kind of apple. (F.—L.)

Rent (1), a tear. (E.)

Rent (2), annual payment. (F.—L.)


(Bien)


745


Repair (1), to restore, mend. (F.—L.)

Repair (2), to resort, go to. (F.—L.)

Rest (1), repose. (E.)

Rest (2), to remain; remainder. (F.—L.)

Rid (1), to free, to deliver. (E.)

Rid (2), to clear land. (Scand.)

Riddle (1), an enigma. (E.)

Riddle (2), a large sieve. (E.)

Rifle (1), to plunder, rob. (F.—Teut.)

Rifle (2), a kind of musket. (Low G.)

Rig (1), to fit up a ship. (Scand.—Low G.)
Rig (2), a frolic. (E. ?)

Rig (3), a ridge. (E.)

Rime (1), Rhyme, verse. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Rime (2), hoar-frost. (E.)

Ring (1), a circle. (E.)

Ring (2), to tinkle, resound. (E.)

Ripple (1), to pluck the seeds from flax. (E.)
Ripple (2), to show wrinkles. (E.)

Ripple (3), to scratch slightly. (Scand.) Allied to Rip.
Rob (1), to plunder, steal, spoil. (F.—OHG.)
Rob (2), a conserve of fruit. (I. —Span.— Arab.— Pers.)
Rock (1), a mass of stone. (F.)

Rock (2), to cause to totter, to totter. (E.)
Rock (3), a distaff. (Scand.)

Rocket (1), a kind of fire-work. (Ital.—G.)
Rocket (2), a plant. (F.—Ital.—L.)

Roe (1), a female deer. (E.)

Roe (2), spawn of fishes. (Scand.)

Rook (1), a kind of crow. (E.)

Rook (2), a castle, at chess. (F.— Pers.)

Root (1), part of a plant. (Scand.)

Root (2), Rout, to grub up. (E.) From Root (1).
Rote (1), routine. (F.—L.)

Rote (2), an old musical instrument. (F.—G.—C.)
Rouse (1), to excite. (Scand. )

Rouse (2), a drinking-bout. (Scand.)

Row (1), a line, rank, series. (E.)

Row (2), to propel with oars. (E.)

Row (3), an uproar. (Scand.)

Ruck (1), a fold, crease. (Scand.)

Ruck (2), a heap. (Scand.)

Rue (1), to be sorry for. (E.)

Rue (2), a bitter plant. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Ruff (1), a kind of frill. (E.)

Ruff (2), a bird. (E. ?)

Ruff (3), a fish. (E.)

Ruff (4), a game at cards. (F.)

Ruffle (1), to wrinkle, disorder a dress. (E.)
Ruffle (2), to be turbulent, to bluster. (MDu.)
Rum (1), a kind of spirit. (E.)

Rum (2), strange, queer. (Hindi.)

Rush (1), to move forward violently. (E.)
Rush (2), a plant. (E.)

Rut (1), a wheel-track. (F.—L.)

Rut (2), to copulate, as deer. (F.—L.)


Sack (1), a bag. (L.—Gk.— Heb. — Egypt.)

Sack (2), plunder; to plunder. (F.—L.—Gk.—Heb.—Egypt.)
From Sack (1).

Sack (3), an old Spanish wine. (F.—L.)

Sage (1), discerning, wise. (F.—L.)

Sage (2), a plant. (F.—L.)

Sallow (1), Sally, a willow. (E.)

Sallow (2), of a wan colour. (E.)

Sap (1), juice of plants. (E.)

Sap (2), to undermine. (F.—Late L.)

Sardine (1), a small fish. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Sardine (2), a precious stone, (L.—Gk.)

Sash (1), a frame for glass. (F.—L.)

Sash (2), a scarf, band. (Pers.)

Saw (1), a cutting instrument. (E.)

Saw (2), a saying, maxim. (E.)

Say (1), to speak, tell. (E.)

Say (2), a kind of serge. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Say (3), to essay. (F.—L.)

Scald (1), to burn with hot liquid. (F.—L.)

Scald (2), scabby. (Scand.)

Scald (3), a poet. (Scand.)

Scale (1), a shell. (F.—OHG.)


Scale (2), a bowl of a balance. (F.—Teut.) Allied to Scale (1).


746 : LIST OF HOMONYMS


Scale (3), a ladder, gradation. (L.)
Scape (1), a leafless stalk. (L.)
Scape (2), short for Escape. (F.—L.)
Scar (1), mark of a wound. (F. —L.—Gk.)

Scar (2), Scaur, a rock. (Scand.)

Scarf (1), a light piece of dress. (Du.— Low G.)

Scarf (2), to join timbers together. (Scand.)

Scarf (3), a cormorant. (Icel.)

School (1), a place for instruction. (F.—L.— Gk.)

School (2), a shoal of fish. (Du.)

Sconce (1), a small fort. (F.—L.)

Sconce (2), a candle-stick. (F.—L.) Allied to Sconce (1).
Scour (1), to cleanse by hard rubbing. (L.)

Scour (2), to run hastily over. (F.—L.)

Scout (1), a spy. (F.—L.)

Scout (2), to ridicule an idea. (Scand.)

Scout (3), a projecting rock. (Scand.)

Screw (1), a mechanical contrivance. (I’.—L. ?)

Screw (2), a vicious horse. (E.)

Scrip (1), a small wallet. (E.)

Scrip (2), a piece of writing. (F.—L.)

Scrub (1), brushwood. (Scand.)

Scrub (2), to rub hard. (Scand.) “From Scrub (1).

Scull (1), Skull, the cranium. (Scand.)

‘Scull (2), a small, light oar. (Scand.) Allied to Scull (1).
Scull (3), a shoal of fish. (Du.)

Scuttle (1), a shallow vessel. (L.)

Scuttle (2), an opening in a ship’s hatchway. (F.—Span.—Teut.)
Scuttle (3), to hurry along. (Scand.)

Seal (1), a stamp for impressing wax. (F.—L.)

Seal (2), a sea-calf. (E.)

Seam (1), a suture. (E.)

Seam (2), a horseload. (Late L.—Gk.)

See (1), to behold. (E.)

See (2), the seat of a bishop. (F.—L.)

Sell (1), to deliver for money. (E.)

Sell (2), a saddle. (F.—L.)

Sere (1), withered. (E.)

Sere (2), the catch of a gun-lock. (F.—L.)

Set (1), to place, fix, plant. (E.)

Set (2), a number of like things. (F.—L.)

Settle (1), a long bench. (E.)

Settle (2), to adjust a quarrel. (E.)

Sew (1), to fasten together with thread. (E.)

Sew (2), to follow. (F.—L.)

Sewer (1), a large drain. (F.—L.)

Sewer (2), an officer who arranged dishes. (I*.—L.)

Share (1), a portion. (E.)

Share (2), a plough-share. (E.) Allied to Share (1).
Shed (1), to part, scatter, spill. (E.)

Shed (2), a slight shelter. (E.)

Sheer (1), bright, clear, perpendicular. (E.)

Sheer (2), to deviate from a course. (Du.)

Shingle (1), a wooden tile. (L.)

Shingle (2), coarse round gravel. (E.)

Shiver (1), to tremble, to shudder. (E.)

Shiver (2), a splinter, small piece of wood. (E.)

Shoal (1), a troop, crowd, multitude of fishes. (E.)

Shoal (2), shallow; a sand-bank, (E.)

Shock (1), a violent concussion. (E.)

Shock (2), a pile of sheaves. (E.)

Shock (3), a shaggy-coated dog. (E.)

Shore (1), the strand. (E.)

Shore (2), Shoar, a prop. (E.)

Shore (3), Sewer, a sewer. (F.—L.)

Shrew (1), a scolding woman. (E.) The same as Shrew (2).
Shrew (2), Shrewmouse, a quadruped. (E.)

Shrub (1), a low dwarf tree. (E.)

Shrub (2), a beverage. (Arab.)

Size (1), a ration; magnitude. (F.—L.

Size (2), weak glue. (Ital.—L.) Allied to Size (1).

Skate (1), a large flat fish. (Scand.)

Skate (2), a contrivance for sliding on ice. (Du.—F.— Low G.)
Skink (1), to serve out wine. (Scand.)

Skink (2), a kind of lizard. (Gk.)

Slab (1), a thin slip of timber, &c. (F.—Teut.)

Slab (2), viscous, slimy. (Scand.)

Slate (1), a stone easily split. (F.— Teut.)

Slate (2), to set on a dog, to damage, abuse. (E.)

Slay (1), to kill. (E.)


Slay (2), Sley, a weaver’s reed. (E.) From Slay (1).


Slop (1), a puddle. (E.) oe

Slop (2), a loose garment. (Scand.)

Slot (1), a broad, flat wooden bar. (Du.)

Slot (2), the track of a deer. (AF.—Scand.)
Slough (1), a muddy place, a mire. (E.)

Slough (2), the cast-off skin of a snake. (Scand.)
Smack (1), taste, savour. (E.)

Smack (2), a sounding blow. (Scand.)

Smack (3), a fishing-boat. (Du.)

Smelt (1), to fuse ore. (Scand.)

Smelt (2), a kind of fish. (E.)

Snite (1), to wipe the nose. (E.)

Snite (2), a snipe. (E.) Allied to Snipe.

Snuff (1), to sniff, draw in air. (Du.)

Snuff (2), to snip a candle-wick. (4.)

Soil (1), ground, mould, country. (F.—L.)

Soil (2), to defile... — L.)

Soil (3), -to-feed cattle with green grass. ('.—L.)
Sole (1), the under side of the foot. (L.)

Sole (2), a flat fish. (F.—L.) Allied to Sole (1).
Sole (3), alone, only. (F.—L.)

Sorrel (1), a plant. (F.—MHG.)

Sorrel (2), of a reddish-brown colour. (F.—Teut.)
Sound (1), whole, perfect. (E.)

Sound (2), a strait of the sea. (E.)

Sound (3), a noise. (F.—L.)

Sound (4), to try the depth of. (F.—Scand.) From Sound (2).
Souse (1), pickle. (F.—L.)

Souse (2), Sowse, to swoop down upon. (F.—L.)
Sow (1), to scatter seed. (E.)

Sow (2), a female pig. (E.)

Spade (1), an instrument to dig with. (I.)

Spade (2), a suit at cards. (Span. —L.— Gk.)
Spar (1), a beam, rafter. (E.)

Spar (2), a kind of mineral. (E.)

Spar (3), to box with the hands ; to wrangle. (F.—Teut.)
Spark (1), a small particle of fire. (E.)

Spark (2), a gay young fellow. (Scand.) Allied to Spark (1).
Spat (1), a blow, aslap. (E.)

Spat (2), the young of shellfish. (E.)

Spell (1), an incantation. (E.)


Spell (2), to tell the letters of a word. (F.—Teut.) From Spell (1).


Spell (2), a turn of work. (E.)

Spell (4), Spill, a splinter, slip. (E.)

Spike (1), a sharp point, a large nail. (Scand.)
Spike (2), an ear of corn. (L.)

Spill (1), Spell, a splinter, slip. (E.)

Spill (2), to destroy, shed. (Scand.)

Spire (1), a tapering sprout, a steeple. (E.)

Spire (2), a coil, wreath. (F.—L.—Gk.)

Spit (1), a pointed piece of wood or iron. (E.)
Spit (2), to eject from the mouth. (E.)

Spittle (1), saliva. (E.)

Spittle (2), a hospital. (F.—L.)

Spray (1), foam tossed by the wind. (Low G.)
Spray (2), a sprig of a tree. (E.)

Spurt (1), Spirt, to spout, jet out as water. (E.)
Spurt (2), a violent exertion. (Scand.)

Squire (1), an esquire. (F.—L.)

Squire (2), a carpenter’s rule. (F.—L.)

Stable (1), a stall for horses. (F.—L.)

Stable (2), firm, steady. (F.—L.) Allied to Stable (1).
Stale (1), too long kept, vapid. (F.—Teut.)

Stale (2), a decoy, snare. (E.)

Stale (3), Steal, a handle. (E.)

Stalk (1), a stem. (E.)

Stalk (2), to stride along. (E.) Allied to Stalk (1).
Staple (1), a loop of iron, (E.)

Staple (2), a chief commodity. (F.—Low G.) From Staple (1).
Stare (1), to gaze fixedly. (E.)

Stare (2), to shine. (E.) The same as Stare (1).
Stay (1), to remain. (F.—MDu.)

Stay Sy a large rope to support a mast. (IZ.)
Steep (1), precipitous. (E.)

Steep (2), to soak in a liquid. (Scand.)

Steer (1), a young ox. (E.)

Steer (2), to direct, guide, govern. (E.)

Stem (1), a trunk of a tree. (E.)

Stem (2), prow of a vessel. (E.) From Stem (1).
Stem (3), to check, resist. (E.)

Stern (1), severe, harsh. (E.)


LIST OF HOMONYMS


Stern (2), the hinder part of a ship. (Scand.)
Stew (1), to boil slowly. (F.—Teut.)
Stew (2), a fishpond. (Du.)
Stick (1), to stab, pierce; to adhere. (E.)
Stick (2), a small staff. (E.) From Stick (1).
Stile fs” a set of steps for passing a hedge. (E.)
Stile (2), the correct spelling of Style (1). (L.)
Still (2), motionless, silent. (E.)
Still (2), to distil; apparatus for distilling. (L.)
Stoop (1), to bend the body, condescend. (E.)
Stoop (2), a beaker, also Stoup. (Scand.)
_ Story (1), a history, narrative. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Story (2), the height of one floor in a building, (F.—L.)
Strain (1), to stretch tight. (F.—L.)
Strain (2), race, stock, breed. (E.)
Strand (1), the beach of a sea or lake. (E.)
Strand (2), part of a rope. (F.—OHG.)
Stroke (1), a blow. (E.)
Stroke (2), to rub gently. (E.) Allied to Stroke (1).
Strut (1), to walk about pompously. (Scand.)
Strut (2), a support for a rafter. (Scand.) Allied to Strut (1).
Stud (1), a collection of horses and mares. (E.)
Stud (2), a nail with a large head, rivet. (E.)
Sty (1), an enclosure for swine. (E.)


Sty (2), a small tumour on the eye-lid. (E.) Allied to Sty (1).


Style (1), a mode of writing. (F.—L.)

Style (2), the middle part of a flower’s pistil. (Gk.)
Summer (1), a season of the year. (E.)

Summer (2), a cross-beam. (F.—Late L.—Gk.)
Sur- (1), prefix ; for L. sub. (L.)

Sur- (2), prefix; for F. sur, L. super. (F.—L.)
Swallow (1), a migratory bird. (E.)

Swallow (2), to absorb, engulf. (E.)

Swim (1), to move about in water. (E.)

Swim (2), to be dizzy. (E.)


Tache (1), a fastening. (F.— Tent.)

Tache (2), a spot, blemish. (F.—Teut.) Allied to Tache (1).
Tail (1), a hairy appendage. (E.)

Tail (2), a law-term, applied to an estate. (I*.—L.)

Tang (1), a strong taste. (Scand.)


Tang (2), part of a knife or fork. (Scand.) Allied to Tang (1).


Tang (3), to make a shrill sound. (E.)

Tang (4), sea-weed. (Scand.)

Tap (1), to knock gently. (F.—Teut.)

Tap (2), a plug to take liquor from a cask. (E.)
Taper (1), a small wax-candle. (E.)

Taper (2), long and slender. (E.) From Taper (1).
Tar (1), a resinous substance. (E.)

Tar (2), a sailor; short for Tarpauling. (KE. avd L.)
Tare (1), a vetch-like plant. (E.)

Tare (2), an allowance for loss. (F.—Span. — Arab.)
Tart (1), acrid, sour, sharp. (E.)

Tart (2), a small pie. (F.—L.)

Tartar (1), an acid salt; a concretion. (F.—Low L.— Arab.)
Tartar (2), a native of Tartary. (Tatar.)

Tartar (3), Tartarus, hell. (L.—Gk.)

Tassel (1), a hanging ornament. (F.—L.)

Tassel (2), the male of the goshawk. (F. —L.)
Tattoo (1), the beat of a drum. (Du.)

Tattoo (2), to mark the skin with figures. (Tahiti.)
Taw (1), Tew, to curry skins. (E.)

Taw (2), a game at marbles. (Gk.)

Tear (1), to rend, lacerate. (E.)

Tear (2), a drop of fluid from the eyes. (E.)

Teem (1), to be fruitful. (E.)

Teem (2), to think fit. (OLow G.)

Teem (3), to empty, pour out. (Scand.)

Temple (1), a fane, divine edifice. (L.)

Temple (2), the flat part above the cheek-bone. (F',—L.)
Temporal (1), pertaining to time. (F.—L.)
Temporal (2), belonging to the temples. (F.—L.)
Tend (1), to aim at, move towards, (F.—L.)

Tend ss to attend to, (F.—L.) Short for Attend.
Tender (1), soft, delicate. (F.—L.)

Tender (2), to proffer. (F.—L.) Allied to Tend (1).


Tender (3), an attendant vessel or carriage. (F.—L.) For Attender.


Tense (1), a part of a verb. (¥.—L.)
Tense (2), tightly strained. (L.)
Tent (1), a pavilion. (F.—L.)

Tent (2), 2 roll of lint. (F.—L.)


Tent (3), a kind of wine. (Span.—L.)

Tent (4), care, heed. (F.—L.) Allied to Tend (2).
Terrier (1), a kind of dog. (F.—L.) Allied to Terrier (2).
Terrier (2), a register of landed property. (F.—L.)
The Bi def, article. (E.)

The (2), in what (or that) degree. (E.) From The (1).
Thee (1), personal pronoun. (E.)

Thee (2), to thrive, prosper ; obsolete. (E.)

There (1), in that place. (E.)

There- (2), as a prefix, (E.) Allied to There (1).
Thole (1), Thowl, an oar-pin. (E.)

Thole (2), to endure; provincial. (E.)

Thrum (1), the end of a weaver’s thread. (E.)

Thrum (2), to play noisy music. (Scand.)

Thrush (1), a small singing-bird. (E.)

Thrush (2), a disease in the mouth. (Scand.)

Tick (1), an insect infesting dogs. (E.)

Tick (2), part of a bed. (L.—Gk.)

Tick (3), to beat as a watch. (E.)

Tick (4), to touch lightly. (E.)

Tick (5), credit. (F. —G.)

Tiff (1), to deck, to dress out. (F.—OLow G.)

Tiff (2), a fit of ill humour. (Scand.)

Till (1), to cultivate. (E.)

Till (2), to the time when, (E.) Allied to Till (1).
Till (3), a drawer for money. (E.)

Tilt (1), the cover of a cart. (E.)

Tilt (2), to ride in a tourney. (E.)

Tine (1), the tooth of a fork or harrow. (E.)

Tine (2), to light or kindle. (E.)

Tine (3), to lose. (Scand.)

Tip (1), the extreme top. (E.)

Tip (2), to tilt over. (E.)

Tire (1), to exhaust, fatigue. (E.)

Tire (2), a head-dress. (.—Teut.) Same as Tire (3).
Tire (3), a hoop for a wheel. (F.—Teut.)

Tire (4), to tear a prey. (F.—Late L.)

Tire (5), a train. (F.—Late L.)

Tit (1), a small horse or child. (Scand.)

Tit (2), a teat. (E.)

To- (1), prefix, in twain. (E.)

To- (2), prefix, to. (E.)

Toast (1), roasted bread. (F.—L.) Hence Toast (2).
Toast (2), a person whose health is drunk. (F.—L.)
Toil (1), labour, fatigue. (F.—L.)

Toil (2), a net, a snare. (F.—L.)

Toll (1), a tax. (L.—Gk.)

Toll (2), to sound a bell. (E.)

Toot (1), to peep about. (E.)

Toot (2), to blow a horn. (Scand.)

Top (1), a summit. (E.)

Top (2), achild’s toy. (F.—G.)

Tow (1), to pull a vessel along. (E.)

Tow (2), the coarse part of flax. (E.)

Trace (1), a mark left, footprint. (F.—L.) Allied to Trace (2).
Trace (2), a strap to draw a carriage. (F.—L.)

Tract (1), a region. (L.)

Tract (2), a short treatise. (L.) Allied to Tract (1).
Trap (1), a kind of snare. (E.)

Trap (2), to adorn, decorate. (F.— Tent.)

Trap (3), a kind of igneous rock. (Swed.) Allied to Trap (1).
Trepan (1), a small cylindrical saw. (F.—L.—Gk.)
Trepan (2), Trapan, to ensnare. (F.— Tent.)

Trice (1), a short space of time. (Low G.) From Trice (2).
Trice (2), Trise, to haul up, hoist. (Low G.)

Trick (1), a stratagem. (F.—L.)

Trick (2), to dress out. (F.—L.) Allied.

Trick (3), to emblazon arms. (Du).

Trill (1), to shake, to quayer. (Ital.)

Trill (2), to turn round. (Scand.)

Trill (3), to trickle. (Scand.)

Trinket (1), a small ornament. (F.—L. ?)

Trinket (2), the highest sail ofa ship. (F.—Ital.—L.)
Truck (1), to barter. (F.— WFlem.— Du.)

Truck uy a small wheel. (L. — Gk.)

Trump (1), a trumpet. (F.—G.—Slav.)

Trump (2), one of the highest suit at cards, (F.—L.)
Trunk (1), the stem of a tree, box for clothes. (F.—L.)
Trunk (2), the proboscis of an elephant ; error for Trump (1).
Tuck (1), to fold or gather in a dress. (OLow G.)
Tuck (2), a rapier. (J*. —Ital. —G.)


747


748 LIST OF HOMONYMS


Tuck (3), beat of a drum. (F.— Tent.) Wear (3). A form of Veer.

Tuft (1), a small knot, crest. (F.—Teut.) Weed (1), a useless plant. (E.)

Tuft (2), Toft, a clump of trees, (F.—Teut.) Weed (2), a garment. (E.)

Turtle (1), a turtle-dove. (L.) Weld (1), to beat (metal) together. (Scand.)
Turtle (2), a sea-tortoise. (L.) Confused with Turtle (1). Weld (2), a plant; dyer’s weed. (E.)

Twig (1), a sma!l branch of a tree. (E.) Well (1), in a good state. (E.)

Twig (2), to comprehend. (E.) Well (2), a spring of water. (E.)


Wharf (1), a place for lading and unlading vessels, (E.)

Wharf (2), the bank of a river; in Shakespeare. (E.) The same as
Wharf (1).

Wheal (1), a swelling, a pimple. (E.)

Wheal (2), a mine. (C.)

Whelk (1), a mollusc with a spiral shell. (E.)

Whelk (2), a small pimple. (E.)


' Un- (1), negative prefix. (E.)
Un- (2), verbal prefix. (E.)
Un- (3), prefix in un-to, (E.)
Union (1), concord, harmony. (F.—L.)
Union (2), a large pearl. (F.—L.) Allied to Union (1).
bas ay ary ee Geni ee Whittle (1), to pare with a knife. (E.)
Utter (Gy abe (BE) tee Whittle (2), to sharpen. (E.) The same as Whittle (1).
; . (E. : :
Utter (2), to put forth. (E.) Allied to Utter (1). ceed a oir ea (E)
Utterance (1), a putting forth. (E.) Jenne Pe


Utterance (2), extremity. (F.—L.) ae ‘39. a eh Sree


Wight (1), a creature, person. (E.)


Vail (1), Veil, a slight covering. (F.—L.) Wight (2), nimble. (Scand.)

Vail (2), to lower. (F.—L.) Will ete desire, to be willing. (E.)

Vail (3), a gift to a servant. (F.—L.) Will (2), desire, wish. (E.) From Will (1).
Van (1), the front of an army, (F.—L.) Wimble (1), a kind of auger. (E.)

Van (2), a fan for winnowing. (F.—L.) Wimble as quick, active. (Scand.)


pee re faravan. (Bete oe) Wind (1), air in motion, breath. (E.)

Vault (1), an arched roof, (F.—L.) : Wind (2), to turn round, coil. (E.)

Vault (2), to leap or bound. (F.—Ital.—L.) Allied to Vault (1). Windlass (1), a machine for raising weights. (Scand.)
Vent (1), an opening for air. (F.—L.) Windlass (2), a circuitous way. (F.—Teut.)


Vent (2), sale, utterance, outlet. (F.—L.) Wise (1), having knowledge. (E.)
Vent (3), to snuff up air. (F.—L.) Wise Sy way, raves (E) Se ae Wise (1).
Verge (1), a wand of office. (F.—L.) Wit (1), to know. (E.)
ee (2), eres Se Wit (2), insight, knowledge. (E.) From Wit (1).
es Pines soni. (P.-L. Wit (3), a witty fellow. (E.) | From Wit (1).
Vice (2), an instrument for holding fast. (F.—L.) Wood (1), a collection of trees, (E.)
Wood (2), mad. (E.)
Wake (1), to cease from sleep. (E.) Wort (1), a plant, cabbage. (E.) é
Wake (2), the track of a ship. (Scand.) Wort (2), an infusion of malt. (E.) From Wort (1).
Wale (1), Weal, the mark of a blow. (E.) Worth (1), value. (E.)
Wale (2), choice; to choose. (Scand.) Worth (2), to be, become. (E.)
Ware (1), merchandise. (E.) Wrinkle (1), a slight ridge on a surface. (E.)
Ware (2), aware. (E.) Wrinkle (2), a hint. (E.) Allied to Wrinkle (1).
Ware (3), sea-weed ; provincial. (E.)
Wave (1), to fluctuate, undulate. (E.) Yard (1), an enclosed space. (E.)
Wave (2), a form of Waive. (F.—Scand.) Yard (2), a rod or stick. (E.)
Wax (1), to grow, increase. (E.) Yawl (1), a small boat. (Du.)
Wax (2), a substance in a honeycomb. (E.) Yawl (2), to howl, yell. (E.)
Wear (1), to carry on the body, to consume by use. (E.) Yearn (1), to long for. (E.)
Wear (2). A form of Weir. Yearn (2), to grieve. (E.) The same as Yearn (1).


IVs ELS Teor) D Ovspaeea lS


Doublets are words which, though apparently differing in form, are nevertheless, from an etymological point of view, one and the same,
or only differ in some unimportant suffix. Thus aggrieve is from L. aggraudre; whilst aggravate, though really from the pp. aggraudatus,
is nevertheless used as a verb, precisely as aggrieve is used, though the senses of the words have been differentiated. In the following
list, each pair of doublets is entered only once, to save space, except in a few remarkable cases, such as cipher, zero. When a pair of
doublets is mentioned a second time, it is enclosed within square brackets.


abbreviate—abridge. announce—annunciate. assay—essay. baton—batten (2).

abet—bet. ant—emmet. assemble—assimilate. bawd—bold.

acajou—cashew. anthem—antiphon. assess—assize, vb. beadle—bedell. :
adamant—diamond. antic—antique. assoil—absolve. beaker—pitcher. fs
adventure—venture. appal—pall (2). attach—attack. beef—cow.

advocate—ayvouch, avow (1). appeal, sb.—peal. attire—tire (2), tire (3). beldam—belladonna.
aggrieve—aggravate. appear—peer (3). bench—bank (1), bank (2).
ait—eyot. appraise—appreciate. bale (1)—ball (2). benison—benediction.
alarm—alarum. apprentice—prentice. balm—balsam. blame—blaspheme.
allocate—allow (1). aptitude—attitude. band (1)—bond. boil (1)—bile (2).
ameer—emir (omrah). arc—arch (1). banjo —mandoline. boss—botch (2).
amiable—amicable. army—armada. barb (1)—beard. bough—bow (4).

an—one. arrack—rack (5), raki. base—basis. bound (2)—bourn (1).


ancient (2)—ensign. asphodel—daffodil. bashaw—pasha. bower—byre.


bowl (1)—bull (2).
box (2)—pyx, bush (2).
brave—bravo,
breve—brief.
brother—friar.
brown—bruin.

buff (2), buffalo.


cadence—chance.
caitiff—captive.

caldron, cauldron—chaldron.
caliber—caliver.
calumny—challenge,
camera—chamber.
cancer—canker.

cannon (1)—canon.
caravan—van (3).

card (1)—chart, carte.

case (2)—chase (3), cash (1).
cask—casque.
castigate—chasten.
catch—chase (1).
cattle—chattels, capital (2).
cavalier—chevalier.
cayalry—chivalry.
cess—assess.

chaise—chair.

chalk—calx.
champaign—campaign.

[ chance—cadence. |
channel—canal, kennel (2).
chant—cant (1).
chapiter—capital (3).
charge—cark, cargo.
chateau—castle.
cheat—escheat.

check, sb.—shah.
chicory—succory.
chief—cape (2).
chieftain—captain.
chirurgeon—surgeon.
choir—chorus, quire (2).
choler—cholera.
chord—cord.

chuck (1)—shock (1), shog.
church—kirk.

cipher—zero,

cist—chest.


cithern—guitar, gittern, kit (2).


cive—chive.
clause—close, sb.
climate —clime.
coffer—coffin.
coin—coign, quoin.
cole—kail.
collect—cull, coil, vd.
collocate—couch.
comfit—confect.
commend—command.
commodore—commander.
complacent—complaisant.
complete, vb.—comply.
compost—composite.
comprehend—comprise.
compute—count (2).
conduct, sb.—conduit.
confound—confuse.
construe—construct.
convey—convoy.
cool—gelid.
[cord—chord. ]

corn (I)—grain.

corn (2)—horn.
coronation—carnation (2).
corral—kraal.
corsair—hussar. 2
costume—custom.
cot—cote.
[couch—collocate. |
couple, vb.—copulate.
[cow (1)—beef. |


LIST OF DOUBLETS


coy (1)—quiet, quit, quite.
coy (2)—cage.
crape—crisp.
cream—chrism.

crease (1)—crest.
crevice—crevasse.
crib—cratch.
crimson—carmine.
crop—croup (2).

crowd (2)—rote (2).
crypt—grot.

cud—quid.

cue (1)—queue.
{cull—collect, coil, vd.]
curari—wourali.
curricle—curriculum.
curtle-axe—cutlass.
cycle—wheel.


dace—dart, dare (2).
dainty—dignity.


dame—dam (2), donna, duenna.


dan—don (2), domino.
dauphin—dolphin.
deck—thatch,
defence—fence.
defend—fend.
delay—dilate.
dell—dale.
demesne—domain.
dent—dint.
deploy—display, splay.
depot—deposit, sb.
descry—describe.
desiderate—desire, vb.
despite—spite.

deuce (1)—two.
devilish—diabolic.
{diamond—adamant. ]
die (2)—dado,

direct, vb.—dress.
dish—disc, desk, dais.
[{display—deploy, splay. ]
disport—sport.
distain—stain.
ditch—dike.
ditto—dictum.
diurnal—journal.
doge—duke.
doit—thwaite.
dole—deal, sb.
dominion—dungeon.
doom— -dom (suffix).
dragon—dragoon.
dropsy—hydropsy.
due—debt.
dune—down (2).


eatable—edible.
éclat—slate (1).
elf—oaf, ouphe.
élite—elect.
emerald—smaragdus.
emerods—hemorrhoids.
[emmet—ant. ]
employ—imply, implicate.
endow—endue (1), indue (2).
engine—gin (2).
{ensign—ancient (2).]
entire—integer.
envious—inyidious.
escape—scape.
eschew—shy, vb.
escutcheon—scutcheon.
especial—special.

ESPY SPY
esquire—squire (1).
[essay—assay. }
establish—stablish.
estate—state, status.
estimate—esteem.


estop—stop.
estreat—extract.
etiquette—ticket.
example—ensample, sample.
exemplar—sampler.
extraneous—strange.
[eyot—ait. ]


fabric—forge, sb.
fact—feat.
faculty—facility.
fan—van (2).
fancy—fantasy, phantasy.
fashion—faction.
fat (2)—vat.
fauteuil—faldstool.
fealty—fidelity.
feeble—foible.

fell (2)—pell.
[fence—defence. |

{ fend—defend.]}
fester, sb.—fistula.
feud (2)—fief, fee.
feverfew—febrifuge.
fiddle—yiol.
fife—pipe, peep (1).
finch—spink.
finite—fine (1).
fitch—yvetch.

flag (4)—flake, flaw.
flower—flour.

flush (4)—flux.
foam—spume.

font (1)—fount.
force (2)—farce.
foremost—prime.
foster (2)—forester.
fragile—frail (1).
fray (1)—affray.
(friar—brother. |
fro—from.
frounce—flounce.
fungus—sponge.
furl—fardel.


gabble—jabber.

gad (1)—ged.
gaffer— grandfather.
gage (1)—wage.
gambado—gambol.
game—gammon (2).
gaol—jail.
garth—yard (1).
gear—garb (1).

[ gelid—cool.]
genteel—gentle, gentile.


genus—kin.
germ—germen.
gig—Jig-


{gin (2)—engine. |

gin (3)—juniper.

gird (2)—gride.
girdle—girth.
glamour—gramarye.
{grain—corn (1).]
granary—garner,

grece, grise—grade.
[grot—crypt. ]

guarantee, sb.—warranty.
guard—ward.
guardian—warden.
guest—host (2).
guile—wile.

guise—wise (2).

{ guitar—cithern, gittern, kit (2). ]
gullet—gully.

gust (2)—gusto.
guy—guide, sb.
gypsy—Egyptian.


hackbut—arquebus.


749


hale (1)—whole.
hamper (2)—hanaper.
harangue—ring, rank (1), rink.
hash, vb.—hatch (3).
hatchment—achievement.
hautboy—oboe.
heap—hope (2).
heckle—hackle, hatchel.
hemi- —semi-.
{hemorrhoids—emerods. |
hent—hint.
history—story (1).
hock (1)—hough.
hoop (2)—whoop.
{horn—corn (2).]
hospital—hostel, hotel, spital,
spittle (2).
[host (2)—guest. |
hub—hob (1).
human—humane.
{ hussar—corsair. ]
hyacinth—jacinth.
hydra—otter.
{hydropsy—dropsy. |
hyper- —super-.
hypo- —sub-.


illumine—limn.
{imply—implicate, employ.]
inapt—inept.

inch (1)—ounce (1).
indite—indict.
influence—influenza,
innocuous—innoxious,
{integer—entire. ]
[invidious—envious. |
invite—vie.
invoke—invocate.
lota—jot.
isolate—insulate.


[jabber—gabble. }

{ jacinth—hyacinth. ]
jaggery—sugar.
{jail—gaol. }
jealous—zealous.
[jig—gig. ]
jinn—genie.
joint—junta, junto.
jointure—juncture,
[jot—iota. ]

{ journal—diurnal. ]
jut—jet (1).
jutty—jetty.


[kail—cole.]

[kennel (2)—channel, canal.]
ketch—catch.

{kin—genus. |
{kirk—church. ]

[ kraal—corral. |


.label—lapel, lappet.


lac (1)—lake (2).
lace—lasso.
lair—leaguer.

lake (1)—loch, lough.
lateen—Latin.
launch, lanch—lance, verb.
leal—loyal, legal.
lection—lesson.
lib—glib (3).
lieun—locus.

limb (2)—limbo.
limbeck—alembic.
({limn—illumine. }
lineal—linear.
liquor—liqueur.

list (5)—lust.
load—lode.
lobby—lodge.


750


locust—lobster.
lone—alone.
losel—lorel.
Jurch (1)—Ilurk.


madam—madonna.
major—mayor.
male—masculine.
malediction—malison.
mandate—maundy.

{ mandoline—banjo. |
mangle (2)—mangonel.
manceuvre—manure.
march (1)—mark (2), marque.
margin—margent, marge.
marish—morass.
maul—mall (1).
mauve—mallow.
maxim—maximum.
mazer—mazzard.

mean (3)—mesne, mizen.
memory—memoir.
mentor—monitor.
metal—mettle.

milt (2)—milk.
minim—minimum.,
minster—monastery.

mint (1)—money.
mister—master.

[mizen, mesne—mean (3). |
mob (1)—mobile, movable.
mode—mood (2).
mohair—moire.


moment—momentum,movement.


monster—muster.
morrow—morn.
moslem—mussulman.
mould (2)—module.
munnion—mullion.
musket—mosquito.


naive—native.
naked—nude.
name—noun.
natron—nitre.
naught, nought—not.
nausea—noise.

neat (2)—net (2).
nias—eyas.
noyau—newel.


{oaf, ouphe—elf. ]
obedience—obeisance.
Loboe—hautboy. |
octave—utas.

of—o

[one—an. }
onion—union (2).
oration—orison.
ordinance—ordnance.
orpiment—orpine.
osprey—ossifrage.

[ otter—hydra. ]
otto—attar.
ouch—nouch.

[ounce (1)—inch (1). ]
outer—utter (1).
overplus—surplus.


paddle (2)—spatula.
paddock (2)—park.
pain, vb.—pine (2).
paladin—palatine.


pale (2)—pallid; cf. fallow (2).


palette—pallet (2).
paper—papyrus.

parade—parry.
paradise—parvis.
paralysis—palsy.
parole—parable, parle, palaver.
parson—person.


LIST OF DOUBLETS


[pasha—bashaw. ]
pass—pace.
pastel—pastille.
pasty—patty.
pate—plate.
patron—pattern.
pause—pose (1).
pawn (1)—pane, vane.
paynim—paganism.
| peal—appeal, sb. |
[peer (3)—appear. |
peise—poise.
pelisse—pilch.
{ pell—fell (2).]
pellitory (1)—-paritory.
penance—penitence.
peregrine—pilgrim.
peruke—periwig, wig.
pewter—spelter.
phantasm—phantom.
| phantasy—fancy. ]
piazza—place.
pick—peck (1), pitch, verd.
picket—piquet.
piety—pity.
pigment—pimento.
pike—peak, pick,
sb., spike.
[pipe—fife, peep (1).]
pippin—pip (2).
pistil—pestle.
pistol—pistole.
[ pitcher—beaker. ]
plaintiff—plaintive.
plait—pleat, plight (2).
plan—plain, plane (1), llano.
plateau—platter.
plum—prune (2).
poignant—pungent.
point—punt (2).
poison—potion.
poke (1)—pouch.
pole (1)—pale (1), pawl.
pomade, pommade—pomatum.
pomp—pump (2).
poor—pauper.
pope—papa.
porch—portico.
posy—poesy.
potent—puissant.
poult—pullet.
pounce (1)—punch (1).
pounce (2)—pumice.
pound (2)—pond,
pound (3)—pun, vd.
power—posse.
praise—price.
preach—predicate.
premier—primero,
| prentice—apprentice. ]
priest—presbyter.
| prime—foremost. |
private—privy.
probe, sb.—proof.
proctor—procurator.
prolong—purloin.
prosecute—pursue.
provide—purvey.
provident—prudent.
punch (2)—punish.
puny—puisne.
purl (3)—profile.
purpose (1)—propose.
purview—proviso.
[pyx—box (2), bush (2).]


sb., pique,


quartern—quadroon.
queen—quean.

[ queue—cue. ]

[ quid—cud. ]


| [quiet, quit, quite—coy.]


) [quoin—coin, coign.]

raceme—raisin.

rack (3)—wrack, wreck.

[rack (5)—arrack, raki.]

radix—radish, race (3), root (1),
wort (1).

raid—road.

rail (2)—rally (2).


| raise—rear (1).


ramp—romp.
ransom—redemption.
rapine—ravine, raven (2).
rase—raze.
ratio—ration, reason.
ray (1)—radius.
rayah—ryot.
rear-ward—rear-guard.
reave—rob.
reconnaissance—recognisance.
regal—royal, real (2).
relic—relique.
renegade—runagate.
renew—renoyate.
reprieve—reprove.
residue—residuum.
respect—respite.
revenge—revindicate.
reward—regard.
rhomb, rhombus—rumb.
ridge—trig (3).
{ring, rank (1), rink—harangue. ]
[road—raid. }
rod—rood.
rondeau—roundel.
[root eta radish, race (3),
wort (1).]
rote (1)—route, rout, rut (1).
[rote (2)—crowd (2 ). ]
round—rotund.
rouse (2)—row (3).
rover—robber.


sack (1)—sac.
sacristan—sexton.
[sample—example, ensample. ]
[sampler—exemplar. |

saw (2)—saga.
saxifrage—sassafras.
scabby—shabby.

scale (1)—shale.
scandal—slander.
[scape—escape.]

scar (2), scaur—share.

scarf (1)—-scrip (1), scrap.
scatter—shatter.

school (2)—shoal (1), scull (3).
scot(free)—shot.
screech—shriek.
screed—shred.

screw (2)—shrew.
scur—scour (2).
[scutcheon—escutcheon. ]
scuttle (1)—skillet.

sect, sept, set (2)—suite, suit.
[semi- —hemi-.]
sennet—signet.
separate—sever,
sequin—sicca.

sergeant, serjeant—servant.
settle (1)—sell (2), saddle.
[shah—check, sb. |
shammy—chamois.
shark—search.

shawm, shalm—haulm.
sheave—shive.

shed (2)—shade.

shirt—skirt.

[shock (1)—chuck (1), shog.]
[shot—scot.]

{ shred—screed. ]
{shrew—screw (2).]


- shrub Emel syrup. —


shuffle—scuffle.

sicker, siker—secure, sure.

sine—sinus.

sir, sire—senior, seignior, sefior,
signor.

size (1), size (2)—assise (2).

skewer—shiver (2).

skiff—ship.

skirmish — scrimmage,
mouch.

slabber—slaver.

[slander—scandal. ]

[slate (1)—éclat.]

sleight—sloid.

sleuth—slot (2).

slobber—slubber.

sloop—shallop.

[smaragdus—emerald. ] -

snivel—snuffle.

snub—snuff (2).

soil (1)—sole (1), sole (2).

soprano—sovereign.

sough—surf.

soup—sup.

souse—sauce.

spade (1)—spade (2).

[spatula—paddle (2).]

[special—especial. ]

species—spice.

spell (4)—spill (1).

spend—dispend.

[spink—finch.]

spitit—sprite, spright.

[spite—despite. |

[spittle (2), spital — hospital,
hostel, hotel. |

[splay—display, deploy. |

[sponge—fungus. }

spoor—spur.

[sport—disport. ]

spray (2)—sprig ( perhaps aspa-
ragus

sprit—sprout, sb.

sprout, vb.—spout,

spry—spark (2).

[spume—foam. ]

[spy—espy. ]

squall—squeal.

squinancy—quinsy.

[squire (1)—esquire. ]

squire (2)—square.

[stablish—establish. ]

| stain—distain. |


scara~


stank—tank.
[state—estate, status. ]
stave—staff.


steer (1)—Taurus.

still (2)—distil.

stock—tuck (2).

[story (1)—history.]
stove—stew, sb.

strait—strict.
[strange—extraneous. ]
strap—strop.

stress—distress.

[sub-, prefix—hypo-, prefix]

[ succory—chicory. | ‘
[suit, suite—sect, sept, set (2).]
[super-, prefix—hyper-, prefix.)
superficies—surface. te
supersede—surcease,
suppliant—supplicant.
{surgeon—chirurgeon. }
sweep—swoop.

[syrup—shrub (2), sherbet]


tabor—tambour.
tache (1)—tack.
taint—attaint. |


| tamper—temper,


‘LIST OF DOUBLETS


|tank—stank. ]


5 town—down.
tarpauling—tar (2). track—trick (1).
task—tax. tract (1)—trait.


tradition—treason.
travail—travel.
treble—triple.
trifle—truffle.
tripod —trivet.
triumph—trump (2).
troth—truth.

tuck (1)—tug.
{tuck (2)—stock. ]
tuck (3)—touch.
tulip—turban.
tweak—twitch.
[two—deuce (1).]


taunt—tempt, tent (2).
tawny—tenny.
tease—tose.

tee—taw (2).
teind—tithe, tenth.
tend (1)—tender (2).
tense (2)—toise.
tercel—tassel (2).
[thatch—deck.]
thread—thrid.

thrill, thirl—drill.
[ticket—etiquette. ]
tine (1)—tooth.
tippet—tape.

[tire (2), tire (3)—attire. |
tit (2)—teat.
[tithe—tenth, teind. ]
title—tittle.


umbel—umbrella.
[union (2)—onion.]
unity—unit.
ure—opera.


to—too. [utas— octave. }
ton—tun. [utter (1)—outer.]
tone—tune. ;

tour—turn. vade—fade.


tow (1)—tug, vair—vyarious,


751


valet—varlet.

{van (2)—fan.]
[vane—pane, pawn (1). |
vantage—advantage.
vast—waste.

[vat—fat (2).]
vaward—vanguard,
veal—wether.
veldt—field.
veneer—furnish.
venew, veney—venue,
verb—word,
vermeil—vermilion.
vertex—vortex.
veryain—verbena.
[vetch—fitch. ]
viaticum—yoyage.
{vie—invite. |

{ viol—fiddle. ]
viper—wyvern, wivern.
visor—vizard.

vizier, visier—alguazil.
vocal—vowel.


wale (1)—weal.

[ward—guard. |

[warden—guardian. |

[ warranty—guarantee. |

[waste—vast. |

wattle—wallet.

weet—wit (1).

[wether—veal. |

whirl—warble.

[whole—hale (1).]

[whoop—hoop (2). ]

| wig—peruke, periwig. ]

wight (1)—whit.

[wile—guile. |

[wise (2)—guise. ]

wold—weald.

{word—yerb. ]

[wort—root (1), radix, radish,
race (3). ]

[wrack—wreck, rack (3). |


yelp—yap.


[zealous—jealous. ]
[ zero—cipher. |


[wage— gage (1).]
wain—wagon, waggon.


Veto lh OP IT NDOGERMANE@.ROOUS


__ THE following is a brief list of the principal Indogermanic roots
that have English derivatives. Those of which examples are either
scanty or doubtful are not noticed. Many of the roots here given
are of some importance and can be abundantly illustrated. I have
added, at the end of the brief account of each root, several miscel-
laneous examples of derivatives; but these lists are by no means
exhaustive, nor are they arranged in any particular order beyond
the separation into groups of the words of Greek, Latin, and
Teutonic origin.

Many of these roots (but given in forms which are no longer
generally accepted) may be found in ‘ Fick, Vergleichendes Worter-
buch der indogermanischen Sprachen,’ in Curtius, ‘ Greek Etymology,
English edition, translated by Wilkins and England,’ and in ‘ Vaniéek,
Griechisch-Lateinisches Etymologisches Worterbuch, Leipzig, 1877.’
More correct forms are frequently cited by Brugmann and Uhlenbeck,
and are here adopted. The chief modern improvements are the
substitution of e or o for a in many instances, of ei for 7 and of ew for
u likewise in many instances, and in the treatment of the gutturals.

The account of each root is, in each case, very brief, and mentions
only a few characteristic derivatives. Further information may be
obtained in the above-mentioned authorities. The English examples
are accounted for in the present work. Thus, under the word
Agitate, a cross-reference is given to Agent; and under Agent is
cited the 4/AG, to drive; with a reference to Brugmann, i. § 175.

Instead of giving Grimm’s Law in the usual form, I omit the
Old High German modifications, and use the word ‘ Teutonic’ as
inclusive of all other Germanic forms, thus reducing the number of
varying bases, as due to ‘sound-shifting’ of the consonants, from
three totwo, This being premised, I give a short and easy method
for the conversion of ‘Indogermanic’ roots into the corresponding
‘ Teutonic’ ones; though it must be remembered that each language
has ways of its own for representing certain original sounds. Some
of these modifications are noticed below.

Let the student learn by heart the following scheme.

Dentals; viz. dh, d, t, th.

Labials; viz. bh, b, p, f.

Gutturals; viz. gh, g, k, h.

This is all that need be remembered; it only remains to explain
what the scheme means.

It is to be read in the following manner. When a dental sound
occurs (especially at the beginning of a word, for in other positions
the rule is liable to exception), an Idg. dk becomes a Teut. d [for
dh is followed in the scheme by d]; an Idg. d becomes a Teut. 7


[for a like reason]; and an Idg. ¢ becomes a Teut. #A (as in
English).

In practice, inevitable modifications take place, some of the
principal ones being these (I do not give them all).

For dh, as above, Skt. has dh; Gk. has 0; Latin has f (or if the
dh be not initial, d or 6).

For bh, as above, Skt. has bh; Gk. has #; and Latin has / (or if
the bh be not initial, ).

For gh, as above, Skt. has gh or h; Gk. has x; and Latin has f or
h (or if the gh be not initial, g, gw, x).

Note the threefold value of the Latin f, which may stand, initially,
for dh, bh, or gh. Also, that Latin uses ¢ for #, but the c is always
hard, having the sound of k before all vowels.

A few selected examples are here noted.

Dentals. Lat. facere, to do, to put, is allied to Gk. 7i-On-,
I place, and to E. do. From 4/dhé, to place, put; Sanskrit has
dha, to put. Skt. dva, Gk. dw, Lat. duo, are cognate with E. two.
Gk, tpets, Lat. trés, are cognate with E. three.

Labials. From the 4/bher, to bear, we have the Skt. bhar, to
bear; Gk. pépev, Lat. ferre, to bear; E. bear. Examples of the
change from the classical p to E. b are very scarce; compare the
Lat. Jabiwm with the E. lip, Gk. mods (stem mod-); Lat. pés (stem
ped-); E. foot.

Gutturals. From the s/ghel, to be yellow, we have the
Gk. xod7, gall; Lat. fel, gall, heluus, light yellow; E. gall. The
Gk. yévos, Lat. genus, race, is allied to the E. kin; and the Gk.
kapdia, Lat. cor, to the E. heart. It is now recognised, however,
that there are really three series of gutturals, sometimes named the
palatal gutturals, the middle gutturals, and the labialised velar
gutturals. Some further information on the more elementary points
of comparative philology will be found in my Primer of Classical
and English Philology.

I denote the palatal gutturals by GH, G, K; the middle gutturals
by G(w)H, G(w), Q; and the labialised velar gutturals by GwH, Gw,
and Qw. They cannot always be distinguished, and I am not sure
that I have always given them correctly.

The list of Roots given below is arranged in alphabetical order.
They may be regarded as elementary bases (usually monosyllabic)
which underlie all the various forms that are given by way of
example. Each of them may be regarded, to use Brugmann’s words,
as ‘the nucleus (so to speak) of a whole system of word-forms ;’
and are of much service in grouping words together. But they do
not afford any very sure indications of what the primitive Indo-


752


germanic was like; ‘it must not (says Brugmann) be supposed that

the roots, which we in ordinary practice abstract from words, are

at all to be relied upon as representing the word-forms of the root-
eriod.,’

4 By way of further illustration, I give a fuller treatment of the first

root on the list.

The form AG (AK) means that the Indogermanic root AG takes
the form AK in Teutonic, by the ‘sound-shifting’ of g to & already
noticed above. ‘The sense of the root seems to have been ‘to drive,
urge, lead, conduct,’ and the like. The Skt. form (originally ag’)
has been palatalised to aj, which is the base of the verb ajamu,
‘I drive;’ the third person singular is ajati, ‘he drives;’ and the
form ajatéi is taken in Uhlenbeck’s Etymological Dictionary of
Sanskrit to represent this verb. The Greek infinitive is dye, and
the Latin infinitive is agere. (It is further represented by the Old
Irish agaim, ‘I drive.’) The chief representative of this root in
Teutonic occurs in the Icel. aka, to drive (pt. t. ok); the corre-
sponding AS. form acan (pt. t. 6c) took up a new sense, viz. ‘ to give
pain,’ as in mine éagan acad, ‘my eyes give pain,’ or in modern
English, ache. I give, as characteristic examples, the words agony
and axiom, from Greek; agent, agile, and axis, from Latin; and
acre, acorn, and ache, from Anglo-Saxon. How each of these words
is connected with the root AG, is explained in the Dictionary.

But these are not the only English derivatives from this root. The
Latin agere had the pp. actus, whence the E. act, active, actor, actual,
actuate, actuary, counteract, enact, exact, transact; while from the
base ag- we have also agitate, cogitate, ambiguous, coagulate, cogent,
exigent, examine, prodigal. In connexion with the Gk. agony we
may further cite antagonist. And it is very likely that another
native English derivative is axle; for the addition of s to the base
ag would give a base ags, which would necessarily become aks,
accounting for the Gk. déwy and the Lat. axis (see Axis); and
this new base aks would become aks in Teutonic, by the usual
‘sound-shifting’ from Idg.k to E.h. But the Teutonic ks becomes
x in Anglo-Saxon, so that there is no difficulty in connecting the
AS. eax, an axle, with the Latin axis ; see further under Axle.

Similarly, many other roots have often more derivatives than it
seemed to me at all necessary to indicate.


AG (AK), to drive, urge, conduct. Skt. aj, to drive; Gk. dy-ev,
L. ag-ere, to drive ; Icel. ak-a (pt. t. dk), to drive. Ex. agony, axiom,
synagogue, hegemony; agent, agile, axis; acre, acorn, ache.

AGH (AG), to pull tight (?). Gk. dy-opat, I am vexed, dx-os,
anguish; Goth, ag-is, fright, awe. Ex. ail, awe. Cf. ANGH.

AIDH (AID), to kindle. Skt. indh, to kindle; édh-as, fuel;
Gk. aid-av, to burn; aié-yp, upper air; L. aed-és, orig. a hearth,
aestus, heat; AS. ad, a funeral pile, dst, a kiln. Ex. ether; edify,
estuary ; oast-house.

AK (AH), to be sharp, to pierce. Gk. dx-pos, pointed; dx-dv7n,
whetstone; dx-y7y, edge; L. ac-us, needle, ac-were, to sharpen, ac-iés,
edge; AS. ecg, edge. Ex. acacia, acme, aconite, acrobat, acrostic;
acid, acumen, acute, acrid, ague, aglet, eager; ear (2), edge, awn,
egg (2); and cf. paragon.

AL, to nourish, raise. L. al-ere, to nourish; ad-ol-escere, to grow
up; al-tus, raised; Goth. al-an, to nourish; al-ds, an age. Ex. ali-
ment, altitude, adolescent, adult, exalt ; old.

AN, to breathe. Skt. az, to breathe; Gk. dv-epos, wind; L. an-
imus, spirit; Goth. ws-anan, to breathe out, expire. Ex. anemone;
animal, animosity, animadvert.

ANGH (ANG), to choke, strangle. Gk. dyy-ev, to strangle;
L. ang-ere, to choke, anx-ius, anxious; Icel. angr, grief. Ex. guinsy
(for quin-anc-y) ; angina, anguish, anxious; anger.

ANQ (ANH, ANG), to bend. Skt. afich, to bend, curve; Gk. ay«-
vpa, an anchor; Gk, dyx-iv, a bend; L. uwne-us, curved, ang-ulus,
an angle; AS, ang-el, a hook. Ex. anchor; angle (1); angle (2).

AR, to plough. Gk, dp-dewv, L. ar-are, AS. er-ian, to plough.
Ex. arable; ear (3).

AR, to fit. Skt. ar-as, spoke of a wheel; Gk. dp-pevos, fitted,
dp-Opov, joint; dp-pds, joint, shoulder; L. ar-mus, ar-tus, a limb;
ar-mda, arms, ar-s, art; Goth. ar-ms, an arm, Ex. harmony; arms,
art, article; arm (1),

ARG, to shine. Skt. arj-unas, white (cf. raj-atam, silver) ;
Gk. dpy-és, white, dpy-vpos, silver, L. arg-entum, silver, arg-illa,
white clay ; arg-were, to make clear. Ex. argent, argillaceous, argu-
ment. Also Argonaut.

ARQ, to protect, keep safe. Gk, dpx-eiv, to keep off; L. arc-
ére, to keep off, arc-a,a box. Ex. arcana, ark.

AUG(w) (AUK), toincrease. Apparently allied to AWEG(w),
WEG(w); seeWHG(w). Skt. ug-ra(s), very strong, dj-as, strength
(cf. vaj, to strengthen); L. aug-ére, to increase; Goth. auk-an, to
eke. Hence AUG(w)-S, AUQ-S, as in Gk. avf-dveyv, to increase,


LIST OF INDOGERMANIC ROOTS


L. aux-ilium, help. Ex. augment, august,
auxiliary ; eke (1), eke (2).

AWES, to shine; see EUS, WES. ;

BHA [=bh4], to speak, declare. Gk. py-pi, say, p7-u7, report,
pa-ris, a saying, pw-v7, clear voice; L. fa-ri, to speak, fa-ma, fame,
fa-bula, a narrative, fa-teor, I confess, Ex. antiphon, anthem, pro-
phet, euphemism, euphony, phonetic; fate, fable, fairy, fame, affable,
confess. See BHAN (below).

BHAN (BAN), to speak, declare. Skt. bhan, to speak, de-
clare; AS. ban-nan, to proclaim. Ex. ban, banns.

BHA [=bha], to shine, to be clear. Skt. bha, to shine.
the extended forms BHAL, BHAN, BHAW.

BHAL, to shine. Skt. bhal-am, lustre, Lith. bal-ti, to be
white, Gk. pad-ids, white. Breton bal, a white streak in an animal’s
face, AS. b#1, a blaze. Ex. bald, bald-faced; also bale-fire, beltane.

BHAN, to show, display clearly. Gk. paivey (for *pav-yetv),
to show, fay-ra¢ew, to display, ¢a-o1s, appearance, phase; Irish
ban, white. Ex. fancy, hierophant, sycophant, phantom, phenomenon,
phase. Also pant.

BHAW, to glow. Gk. ¢a-os (for *pa-os), pas, light; pa-
é0e.v, to shine, glow. Ex. phaeton, phosphorus.

BHEID (BEIT), to cleave; bite. Skt. bhid, to cleave; L.
jindere (pt. t. fid-i), to cleave; AS. bit-an, to bite; Icel. beita, to
make to bite, to bait. Ex. fissure; bite, bitter, bait, abet, bet. (Cf.
bill (1), which Walde refers to an Idg. type *bhid-lom.)

BHEIDH (BEID), to persuade, trust. Gk. eié-w, I persuade;
L. fid-ere, to trust, fid-es, faith, foed-us, a treaty. Ex. affiance,
confide, defy, faith, fealty, fidelity, infidel, perfidious, federal, con-
federate. Perhaps bid (1). Perhaps bide (disputed).

BHELGH (BELG), to bulge, swell out. Icel. bolg-inn,
swollen, from a lost strong verb; Irish bolg-aim, I swell, bolg,
a bag, budget, belly, pair of bellows; Goth. balg-s, a bag; AS.
belg-an, to swell with anger. Ex. bulge, bilge, budget; bag (?),
belly, bellows, billow, bolled. Cf. bulk (1).

BHELS (BELL), to resound. Lith. bals-as, voice, sound;
AS. bell-an, to make a loud noise. Cf. Skt. bhash (for *bhals), to
speak (Uhlenbeck). Ex. bell, bellow, bull (1).

BHENDH (BEND), to bind. Skt. bandh (for *bhendh), to
bind; Pers. band, a bond; Gk. metopa (for *révé-cpa), a cable; L.
of-fend-ix, a knot, band; Goth. dind-an, to bind. Ex. bind, bend,
bond, bundle.

BHER (BER), to bear, carry. Skt. bhy, to support, bhra-tar-,
a brother, friend; Gk. dép-w, L. fer-o, I bear; for-s, chance (which
brings things about) ; fur, a thief (cf. Gk. pup). Ex. fertile, fortune,
fortuitous, furtive; bear (1), burden, bier, barrow, bairn, barm (2),
birth, brother; bore (3).

BHER (BER), to cut, bore. Zend bar, to cut, bore; Pers.
bur-enda, sharp, cutting; Gk. pap-dw (for *pap-aw), I plough, pap-ayé,


auction, author, also-


Hence


a ravine, ¢dp-vyé, gullet; L. for-dre, AS. bor-ian, to bore. Ex,
pharynx; perforate; bore (1), bore (2).
BHERG, BHLEG (BERK, BLEK), to shine, burn. Skt.


bhraj, to shine; Gk. pAéy-erv, to burn, L. fulg-ére, to shine, ful-men
(*fulg-men), thunder-bolt, flag-rare, to burn, flam-ma (*flag-ma),
flame ; Goth. bairh-ts, bright. Ex. phlox; refulgent, fulminate, flag-
rant, flame; bright. Also blink, blank, (

BHERS (BERS), to be stiff or bristling. Skt. bhysh-ti-, a point;
Icel. brod-dr (*broz-dr), a spike; AS. byrs-t, a bristle, bears, bers,
a perch (fish). Ex. brad, bristle, bass (2).

BHEU (BEU), to dwell, become, be. Skt. bhi, to be; bhav-
ana(m), a dwelling, house; Gk. é-@v, he was; L. fu-i, Iwas; AS.
béo-n, to be; bo-ld, a house; Goth. bau-an, to dwell; Lith. bu-ti, to
be. Ex. physic, euphuism, imp; future ; be, boor, booth, busk (1), bower,
byre, by-law, burly, build.

BHEUDH (BEUD), to awake, inform, bid, command. Skt:
budh (*bhudh), to awake, understand, bddh-aya, to inform; Gk.
mevo-opat, I search, ask; AS, béod-an, to bid. Ex. bid (2), beadle,
bode.

BHEUQw, BHEUGw, (BEUHw), to bow, bend, turn about.
Skt. bhuj, to bend, stoop; Gk. ¢evy-erv, to flee; L. fug-ere, to flee;
AS. biig-an, to bow, bend, bog-a, a bow. Ex. fugitive, fugue, refuge,
subterfuge; bow (1), bow (2), bow (3), bight, bout, buxom. See
Brugmann, i. § 658; who adds boil (2). bag

BHLE (=bhlé), Teut. BLE (=blé), to blow. L. fla-re, AS.
bla-wan, to blow. Ex. flatulent; blow (1), blaze (2), blast, bladder.

BHLEG, to shine, burn; see BHERG. ;

BHLO (=bhlo), Teut. BLO (=bl6), to blow as a flower, to
flourish. L, fld-s, a flower, fld-rére, to flourish; AS. b/d-wan, to
blow, bld-ma, bloom. Ex. floral, flourish; blow (2), bloom, blossom,
blood, bleed, bless. :

BHOG, bhog (BAK, bok), to bake or roast. Gk. pwy-av, to
toast, bake ; AS. bacean (pt. t. bdc), to bake. Ex, bake, ;


LIST OF INDOGERMANIC ROOTS


. BHREG (BREK), to break (with a cracking noise), L. frang-
ere (pt. t. frég-i), to break; frag-ilis, fragile; Goth. brik-an, AS.
brec-an, to break. Ex. fragile, fragment, frail; break, brake (1),
brake (2). Perhaps brook (2).
- BHREQ, to crowd close, fence round, shut in. Gk. ppaccev
(*ppax-yerv), to shut in, make fast, ppdy-pa, a fence; L. fregu-ens,
crammed ; farc-ire, to stuff full. Ex. diaphragm; frequent, farce,
Jorce (2).

BHREU (BREU), to decoct. L. dé-fru-tum, new wine boiled
down; Thracian Bpt-roy, beer; Olrish bruith, cooking; AS, bréo-
wan, to brew. Ex. brew, broth, brose, bread. Allied to the above
words are, further, Gk. #vp-ev, to mix up, mingle together, Skt.
bhurazya, to be active, L. fur-ere, to rage. Ex. fury; also purple.
Also L. feru-ére, to boil, to be fervent, fermentum, leaven; AS.
beorma, yeast. Ex. fervent, ferment; barm (1).

BHREUG (BREUK), to enjoy, use. L. fru-or (for *friig-uor),
pp. fruc-tus, I enjoy, frig-és, fruit, fri-mentum (*friig-mentum),
oe bric-an, to use. Ex. fruit, frugal, furmity, fructify ;
brook (1).

BUQ, to bellow, snort, puff; of imitative origin. Skt. bukk, to
sound; L. buce-a, the puffed cheek. Ex. disembogue, debouch, em-
bouchure.

DAK (TAH), to bite, tear, hold fast. Skt. dag, to bite; Gk.
dax-vew, to bite; Goth. tahk-jan, to rend; AS. tang-e, a pair of tongs.
Ex. tang (1), tang (3), tongs.

DAM (TAM), to tame. Skt. dam, to tame; Gk. dap-dev, to
tame; L. dom-are, to tame; Goth. ga-tam-jan, to tame. Ex, ada-
mant, diamond; daunt; tame.

DE (=d6), to bind. Gk. d€-w, I bind, 8:4-5y-ya, fillet. Ex. diadem.

DEIK (TEIH), to show, point out. Skt. dig, to show; Gk.
deix-vupi, I show, dix-n, justice; L. in-dic-Gre, to point out, dic-ere,
to tell; Goth. ga-teih-an, to teach, tell; AS. téon (*tih-an), to accuse.
Ex, syndic ; indicate, dedicate, diction, &c.; dight, index, judge, judi-
cious, 8&c. 5 verdict, vindicate; teen, token, teach.

DEIW (TEIW), to shine. Skt. div, to shine; dév-a(s), God,
div-ya(s), brilliant, divine; Gk. Zevs (stem Aif-), Zeus, 5¢-os, heavenly,
L. de-us, God, diu-us, divine, di-és, day; AS. Tig (gen. Tiwes), the
god of war. Ex. Zeus; Fupiter, deity, divine, dial, diary, meridian,
jovial; Tuesday.

DEK, to honour, think fit. Sk. dag, to honour, worship; Gk.
dox-e@, it seems fit, dd¢-a, opinion; L. dec-et, it is fit, doc-ére, to
teach, discere (*di-dc-scere), to learn, Ex. paradox, dogma, didactic ;
decent, decorum, docile, disciple.

DEM (TIM), to build. Gk. dep-etv, to build, 56u-0s, a building;
L. dom-us, a house; Goth. tim-rjan, to build: Ex. dome, major-
domo, domestic, domicile (also despot); timber. Perhaps L. dom-inus,
a master, with its derivatives, is from the same root.

DER (TER), to tear, rive. Skt. dy-naimi, I burst open, tear
asunder; Gk. d5ép-euv, to flay, 5ép-va, skin; Goth. ga-tairan, to break,
destroy, AS. ter-an, to rend. Ex, epidermis, pachydermatous ; tear (1),
tire (1), tire (4); perhaps tree, dar, larch.

DERBH (TERB), toknit together. Skt. drbh, to bind, darbh-
a(s), matted grass; AS, turf, turf. Ex. turf.

DEU (TED), to work, prepare. Skt. di-ta(s), a messenger (?);
Goth. tau-jax, to do; AS. taw-ian, to prepare, to scourge; ?d-/
(*tou-l), a tool. Ex. taw, tew, tow (2), tool. (Hence the final -¢ in
herio-t.)

DEUK. (TEUH), to lead, conduct. L. ditc-ere, to lead;
Goth, tiuh-an, AS. téo-n, to draw, pull. Ex. duke, ad-duce, &c.,
conduit, doge, douche, ducal, redoubt, educate; tow (1), tug, tuck (1),
tuck (3), tie, touch, tocsin, team.

DHE (=dh6), weak grade dhe (Teut. *dé, *dé), to put, place,
set, do. Skt. dha, to place, put; Gk. 7i-On-y, I place, set, 0€-pa,
a thing proposed, é-o1s, a placing, 0é-yus, law, On-cavpéds, treasure ;
L. fa-c-ere, to do, fa-c-tlis, easy to do; AS. dé-d, a deed, dé-m,
judgement, dé-man, to judge. Ex. anathema, hypothec, theme, thesis,
epithet, treasure, tick (2); fact, suffix -fy in magni-fy, &c.; -ficent;
do (1), deed, doom, deem. Alsocreed. See note to DO (above).

. DHEGwH (DEG), to burn. Skt. dak (for *dhagh), to burn;
L. fau-illa, hot ashes; Lith. deg-u, I burn; Goth. dag-s, day. Ex,
day. Cf. foment, from L. fou-ére.

DHEI (=dhé6i), to suck, Skt. dhé, to suck; Gk. 67-A7, the


breast; L. fé-lare, to suck, fé-mina, woman, /fi-lius, son, OlIrish —


di-nim, I suck. Ex. female, feminine, filial.


DHEIGH (DEIG), to smear, knead, mould, form. Skt. diz |
(*dhigh), to smear; Gk. re¢x-os, a wall (orig. of earth) ; L. jing-ere |
pp. jic-tus), to mould, form, feign, fig-ulus, a potter; Goth. deig-an, |


dig-an, to knead, daig-s, a kneaded lump. Ex. paradise; fiction,
fictile, feign, figure; dough, dairy, lady.

DHER, to support, hold, keep. Skt. dhy, to bear, support,
maintain, keep, hold, retain; Gk. @pd-vos, a. support, seat; Aup-ag,


| Goth. kius-an, to choose, kus-tus, taste.


753


a breast-plate (keeper); L. fré-tus, relying on, 7ir-mus, secure. Ex,
throne, thorax; firm, farm. cee hs

DHERS (DERS), to dare. Skt. dvsh, to dare; Gk. Oapo-ety, to
be bold, @pac-vs, bold; Goth. dars, I dare, daurs-ta; I durst. Ex.
thrasonical ; dare, durst. i

DHEU (DED), to run, to flow. Skt. dhav, dhaiv, to run, to
flow; Gk. 0é-ew, to run (fut. dev-copar); AS. déaw, dew. Ex. dew.

DHEWU (DEV), to agitate, fan into flame. Skt. dhi, to agitate,
fan into flame; dhti-ma(s), smoke; Gk. 6v-ew, to rush, rage, sacrifice,
Ov-os, incense; 9v-pos, Ov-yov, thyme; L..fu-mus, smoke; AS, di-st,
dust. Ex. tunny, thyme; thurible, fume; dust.

DHEUB (DEUP), to be deep, to be hollow. Lith, dub-as,
deep, dib-ti, to be hollow; Goth. diup-s, deep. Ex. deep, depth, dip.
Variant DHEUP (DEUF). Russ, dup-lo, hollow, AS. djf-an, to
dive into, AS. diife-doppa, a diving-bird. Ex. dive, dove.

DHEUBH (DEUB), to fill with smoke or mist. Skt. dhiip-a(s),
vapour; Gk. tip-os (*60p-os), smoke, gloom, stupefaction ; Tud-Ads,
blinded, dark; Goth. daub-s, deaf, (perhaps) dumb-s, dumb, Ex.
typhoon, typhus; deaf, dumb? Allied to DHEU, to agitate.

DHREN (DREN), to make a droning noise. Skt. dhraz, to
sound; Gk. Op7jv-os, lamentation, Opwv-af, a drone-bee; Goth.
drun-jus, a sound; OSax. dran, a drone. Ex. threnody; drone (1),
drone (2).

DHWEL (DWEL), to be confused or troubled. Gk. @0A-epés,
troubled, thick, muddy (as water), @0A-ds, mud; Goth. dwal-s, foolish;
Icel. dwel-ja, to hinder, delay, dwell; AS. dol, foolish. Ex. dull,
dwell, dwale. Perhaps allied to DH HU, to agitate.

DHWES (DWES), to breathe, inspire. Gk. 0éc-faros, spoken
by God, inspired, O¢-ds (*0Feo-ds), God; Lith. dwes-it, I breathe,
dwasé, breath, spirit, ghost, dus-éti, to breathe hard; Goth. dius,
a wild animal (cf. L. animal from anima); AS. déor, a deer. Ex.
theism, theology; deer.

DO (=d6o),togive. Skt. da, to give; Gk. di-5w-yu, I give, 56-o1s,
a gift, dose; L. dd-num, a gift, do-s, dowry, da-re, to give. Ex,
dose; donation, dower, dowry, date (1), dado, die (2), render, rent (2),
traitor, treason. | The verbs con-dere, cré-dere, and some others
ending in -dere are usually referred to the root *dhé.

DRE (=dré), weak grade dor, to sleep. Skt. dra, to sleep.
Gk. Sap-Oavew, L. dor-mire, to sleep. Ex. dormitory, dormant,
dormer-window,

DREM, to run. Skt. dram, to run; Gk. é-dpap-ov, Lran, dpdp-os,
arunning. Ex. dromedary,

ED (ET), to eat. Skt. ad, to eat; Gk, €5-e.v, L. ed-ere, AS. et-an,
to eat. Ex. edible, eat, fret, ort. Perhaps tooth, dental.

EI, to go; whence y6, to go, to pass. Skt.7, to go; ya, to go;
Gk. ef-y1, I shall go, L. i-re, to go; AS. é-ode, I went. Ex. proem;
ambient, circuit, commence, count (1), exit, eyre, initial, issue, itinerant,
obit, perish, pretor, preterite, sedition, sudden, &c. Also yede.

EL, to drive, Gk. éA-atvev, to drive; L. al-acer, brisk. Ex,
elastic ; alacrity, allegro.

ERE, eré (r6), to row. Skt. ari-tra(s), a rudder, Gk. épe-rpods,
an oar; Lith. ir-t2, to row; L. ré-mus, an oar; AS. rd-wan, to row.
Ex. trireme; row (2), rudder.

BS, to dwell, to be. Skt. as, to exist, be; Gk. éo-pi, ei-pi, lam;
L. es-se, to be, s-um, I am; ab-s-ens, being away; AS. is, is, s-00,
true (orig. being). Ex. suttee; paleontology; absent, present, essence,
entity; am, art, 1s, are, sooth.

GEN (KEN), to generate, produce, Skt. jan, to beget; Gk.
yév-os, race, yi-yv-ovat, I am born, L. gi-gn-ere (pt. t. gen-ui), to
beget, gen-itor, father, gn-ascor, I am born, gen-us, kin; Goth.
kun-i, kin. Ex. Genesis, endogen, cosmogony; genus, genius, gentile,
benign, cognate, indigenous, natal, native, nature; kin, kind (1), kind (2),
kindred, kith.

GEN (KEN), to know; alsogna, gn6(kna). Skt. jud, to know;
Gk. yi-yvw-oxev, to know; yvw-rdés, known; L. gnd-scere, nd-scere,
to know, i-gnd-rare, not to know, gud-rus, knowing (whence zarrare,
to tell); Goth. kann, know; AS. cxa-wan, to know. Ex. gnostic,
gnomon ; ignorant, narrate, noble; can (1), ken, know, cunning, keen,
uncouth.

GER (KER), to grind, to crumble with age. Skt. jir-za(s),
decayed, pp. of gri, to wear out; jar-as, decrepitude; Gk. yép-wv,
old man; L. gra-num, corn; AS. cor-n, corn. Ex. grain; corn,
kernel.

GERPH. (KERF), to carve, write. Gk. ypdg-ev, to incise,
write; AS. ceorf-an, to carve. Ex. graphic, autograph, &c., diagram,
&c., grammar, programme 3 carve.

GEUS (KEUS), to choose, taste. Skt. jushk, to like, enjoy;
Gk. yev-opai, I taste, yevo-7és, to be tasted; L. gus-tare, to taste;
Ex. gust (2), disgust ;
choose; choice.


GLEU (KLEU), to draw together, conglomerate. Skt. glaw,
3C


754


a lump (Macdonell); L. glu-ere, to draw together, glo-mus, a clew,
glo-bus, a ball; AS. cléo-we, aclew. Ex. globe, conglomerate; clew
clue), :

‘ GLEUBH (KLEUB), to cleave, to split asunder. Gk. yAvq-euv,
to hollow out; L. glib-ere, to peel, gli-ma (*glib-ma), a husk;
AS, cléof-an, to cleave, split. Ex. glyptic, hiero-glyphic; glume;
cleave (1), cleft.

G(w)EL (KEL), to be cold. L. gel-u, frost; gel-idus, cold ;
Goth, kal-ds, cold; AS. cdl, cool, ceal-d, cold. Ex. gelid, jelly,
congeal; cool, cold, keel (2).

(w)ER, to assemble. Gk. d-yelpew (*d-yép-yerv), to assemble,
d-yop-d, an assembly; L. grew (stem gre-g), a flock. Ex. category,
paregoric; gregarious, egregious.

G(w)ER (KER), to cry out (perhaps imitative). Skt. gir,
voice; Gk. yép-avos, a crane, yfjp-us, speech; L, gr-us, a crane,
gar-rire, to talk; Gael. gair, a shout, sluagh-ghairm, a battle-cry,
slogan; AS. cear-u, care, lament. Ex. geranium, garrulous ; pedigree ;
slogan; care, crane, jar (1), jargon.

G(w)LEL (KLE), to stick to.
gum; L. gli-ten, glue; AS. clé-g, clay, cli-fan, to stick to.
glue; clay, cleave (2).

GwEI (QEI), to live ; also in the form GwEIW (QEIW). Skt.
jiv, to live, jiv-a(s), living, life; Gk. Bi-os, life, also ¢a-w (for
*o(w)ye-yo), I live, (@-w, I live; L. uiu-ere, to live, wui-ta, life;
Goth. kwius, quick, living, active, AS. cwic, alive, quick, Ex.
biology, zoology ; vivid, vital, victuals; quick. Also usquebaugh, azote,
zodiac.

GwEM (QEM), to come, to go, walk. Skt. gam, to go; Gk.
Baivay (*Bdv-yew), to go, Ba-ows, a going; L. uen-ire, to come;
Goth. kwim-an, AS. cum-an, to come. Ex. base (2), basis ; venture,
advent, avenue, convene, &c.; come.

GwHER, to devour, swallow greedily. Skt. aja-gar-a(s), lit.
goat-swallower; Gk. Bop-a, food, Bop-ds, gluttonous; L. wor-dare,
todevour. Further allied to Skt. gal-a(s), throat; L. gula, gullet,
throat, gl-utire, to gulp down. It seems to be reduplicated in Skt.
gar-gar-a(s), a whirlpool (which may be partly imitative); Gk.
yap-yap-iCew, to gurgle; L. gur-gés, a whirlpool. Ex. voracious ;
also gullet, gully, glut, glutton; also gargle, gurgle, gorge, gorget,

orpeous.

GHA (GA), to gape, yawn. Gk. xd-0s, yd-opa, abyss, xaivew
(for *xa-v-yerv), to yawn; xnv,a goose; L. anser,a goose; G. gans,
AS. gdés, a goose. Ex. chasm, chaos; goose, gannet, gander, See
GHEI.

Base GH AID (GAIT), to sport, skip.
Lith. Zaid-ziu, I play, sport; AS. gat, a goat.

GHEI (GEI), to yawn. L.
26-gin-an, str. vb., to gape open.
(2). See GHA,

Base GHEI-M- (GEI-M-), cold, winter. Skt. hi-m-a(s),
cold, ki-m-a(m), frost, snow; Gk. xe-yu-wy, winter; L. hi-em-s,
winter, hi-bernus, wintry. Ex. hibernal, hibernate; prov. E. gimmer,
a one-year-old (winter-old) ewe (Icel. gymor).

GHEIS (GEIS), to be hostile (?). Skt. héd, to disregard,
héd-a(s) (for *hézd-a(s), anger, wrath (of the gods); Lith. zZeid-zZiu,
I wound; Goth. ws-gais-jan, to terrify, Icel. geis-a, to rage; AS.
gas-t, a spirit, ghost ; g#s-tan, to terrify. Ex. ghost, aghast.

GHEL (GEL), to be green or yellow. Skt. har-it, green; Gk.
xOA-os, XoA-7, gall, yAd-n, verdure, xAw-pds, greenish, yellowish;
L. hel-uus, light yellow; AS. geol-o, yellow, gol-d, gold. Cf. L.
fel, gall. Ex, chlorine, choler ; yellow, yolk, gold, gall.

GHEL (GEL), to yell, cry out, cry as a bird. Gk. xed-1ddv,
a swallow; AS. gell-an, to yell, sing; stan-gella, a staniel; gal-an,
to sing. Ex. nightingale, staniel, yell.

Base GHEM- (GEM-), from GHZEM.-, earth, the ground.
Skt. Asham-a@, earth, Gk. xay-ai, on the ground; Russ, zem-lia,
earth, land; L. hum-i, on the ground, kum-us, earth, hom-o, man
(son of earth), Goth. gum-a, man. Ex. chameleon, chamomile; hom-
age, humble, humane, exhume, Cf. bridegroom.

GHENG(w)H (GENG), to go, stride along. Skt. jazgh-a,

the leg; Lith. Zeng-iu, I go, march; Icel. gang-a, to go. Ex.
gang.
” GHER (GER), to desire, to yearn. Skt. har-y, to desire; Gk.
Xalpev (*xdp-yev), to rejoice, xap-4, joy, xdp-is, favour, grace; L.
hor-tari, to exhort; AS. geor-n, desirous, Ex. eucharist, chervil ;
hortatory, exhort ; yearn,

GHER (GER), to seize, grasp, hold, gird. Skt. hy, to seize,
har-ana(s), the hand; Gk, xeip (gen.. xeup-ds, xep-ds), hand; xop-ds,
a dance in a ring or enclosure, xép-ros, an enclosure, yard; L.
hor-tus, yard, garden; AS. gear-d, yard. Further allied to yop-d57,
a cord, a string of guts, Lith. Zar-nos, Icel. gar-nir, guts, AS. gear-n,
yarn. Ex. cheiromancy, surgeon, chorus, choir; horticulture, cohort,


Gk, yAor-ds, sticky substance,
1s


L. haed-us, a kid;
Ex. goat.

hi-Gre, to gape, yawn; AS.
Ex. hiatus; yawn. Perhaps gill


LIST OF INDOGERMANIC ROOTS


court; yard (1), garth, gird (1), girth. Perhaps also chord, cord;
yarn. ,

GHERS (GERS), to bristle. Skt. kysh, to bristle; L. horr-ére
(*hors-ére), to bristle; cf. hirs-utus, bristling, Cf. Gk. ynp, L. ér,
a hedgehog; Gk. xap-docev, to scratch. Ex. horrid, hirsute; per-
haps gorse. Cf. urchin, character. i

GHEU (GEV), to pour. Whence also GHEUD (GEUT), to
pour. Gk. xé-ev (fut. xev-ow), to pour, xv-p0s, xu-Ads, juice ;
L. fu-tis, a water-vessel, re-fiu-tare, to refute (pour back), fu-zilis,
easily emptied, futile; also fund-ere (pt. t. fid-i), to pour; AS.
géot-an, to pour; Icel. gjd-sa, gii-sa, to gush. Ex. chyme, chyle (cf.
alchemy) ; confute, refute, futile, refund, found (2), fuse (1), confuse,
diffuse; ingot, gut; gush, geysir.

GHREM (GRIM), to make an angry noise. Gk. xpep-i¢ew,
xpep-erivav, to neigh; AS. grim, fierce. Ex. grim, grumble. ;

G(w)HAIS, to stick,adhere. L. haer-ére (pt. t. haes-7), to stick;
Lith. gatsz-ti, to delay, tarry. Ex. adhere, cohere, hesitate.

G(w)HEND (GET), to seize, get. Gk. xavd-avew (2 aor.
é-ya5-ov) ; L. prae-hend-ere, to grasp, seize, hed-era, ivy, praeda (for
*prae-hed-a), booty, prey; Goth. bi-git-an, to find, AS. giet-an,
to get. Ex. prehensile, apprehend, prey, predatory; get, beget,
Sforget. :

G(w)HES (meaning unknown). L. hos-tis, orig. a stranger,
a guest ; also a stranger, an enemy; Goth. gas-ts, AS. ge@s-t, gies-t,
a guest. Ex. host (1), host (2), ostler, hotel, hospice; guest.

G(w)HLEU (GLEU), to rejoice (?). Gk. xAev-n, sport;
Tcel. glau-mr, glee; AS. gléo, glee. Ex. glee.

G(w)HRADH (GRAD), to step, walk, go, L. grad-i, to
step, go; grad-us, a step; Goth. grid-s, grip-s, a step. Ex. grade,
gradient, gradual, graduate.

GwHEN, to strike. Skt. han, to strike, wound; Gk. Oeivew
(*Oev-yev), to strike, slay (cf. pt. t. mé-pa-ra); L. of-fend-ere, to
strike against; cf. OHG. gund, Icel. gunnr, AS. gud, war. Ex.
defend, offend, infest, fence, fend, Also gonfalon, gonfanon, gun.

GwHER, to.glow. Skt. ghy, to shine; ghar-ma(s), heat, hot
season; Gk. Oep-uds, warm, Oép-os, summer heat; L. for-mus, warm,
for-nax, furnace. Ex. thermometer; furnace, fornicate, Perhaps
warm,

ts For forms not found under K, see under Q.

KAM (HAM), to cover over. Gk. xap-apa, a vaulted place
(whence L. camera); «ap-tvos, an oven; Goth. ga-ham-dn, to cover
with clothes; Icel. ham-r, a covering. Ex. chamber, chimney; cf.
chemise.

KAN (HAN), to sing. Gk. xav-axn, a ringing sound; L can-
ere, to sing; AS. han-a, a cock (singer). Ex. chant, canto, accent,
incentive, 8&c.; hen.

KET, to lie down, repose. Skt. gi, to recline, rest; Gk. xet-par,
Tlie down, Hence also Skt. ¢é-va(s), kind, friendly ; L. c?-uis, fellow-
citizen; OHG. hi-wo, husband; AS. hi-wan, household servants.
Ex. cemetery; civil, city; hind (2).

KEL (HEL), to hide. Olrish cel-im, I hide; L. cel-la, a hut;
AS. hel-an, to hide, hel-m, a covering; heal-l, a hall, hell-e, hell.
L. oc-cul-ere, to hide; Gk. «ad-1d, a hut, xad-vmrew, to cover; Goth.
huljan, to hide; AS. hol, a hole; L. cél-dre, to hide. Ex. eucalyptus ;
cell, conceal; helm, hall, hell, hole, hollow. Or QE, q.v.

KENQ (HENH), to waver, to hang, Skt, gazk, to hesitate;
L. cunc-tari (for *conc-itari), to delay; Goth. hahan (*hanhan),
to hang, AS. hang-ian, to hang. Ex. hang, hank, hanker, hinge.

KER (HER), to project, stand up (?). Skt. gir-as, head ;_ Pers,
sar, head; Gk. xdp-a, head; xép-as, a horn; L. cer-ebrum, brain.
Closely allied to Skt. ¢v-nga(m), a horn (Gk. «ép-vuBos, highest
point), L. cor-nu, horn, cer-uus, stag; AS. hor-n, horn, heor-ut, hart.
Ex, ginger; sirdar; corymb; cerebral, corner, cornet, cervine, serval;
hart, horn, hornet. t

Base KERD (HERT), heart. Gk. xapd-ia, xfjp, heart; L. cor
(gen. cord-is), heart; Lith. szird-is, Irish cridhe, W. craidd, Russ,
serdtse, AS. heort-e, heart. Ex. cardiac; cordial, accord, concord, dis-
cord, record, courage, quarry (2); heart. :

KERS (HERS), to run. L. curr-ere (pp. curs-us), to run;
Olrish carr, a car; AS. hors, a horse; Icel. kross, a horse, Ex.
current, curricle, course, cursive, concur, &c.; car; horse.

KEU (HEU), to swell out; also, to be hollow. Skt. gu-na(s),
swollen, gi-nya(s), void, hollow; Gk. «¥-ap, a cavity, «v-etv, to be
pregnant, «d-ya, a wave (swelling); L. cau-us, hollow, Ex. cave,
cavern, cage, gabion ; maroon (2). ;

KEUDH (HEUD), to hide. Gk. ev6-ev, to hide; W. cuddio,
to hide; AS. hyd-an, to hide. Cf. L, cus-tds, a custodian, Goth.
huz-d, a hoard. Ex. custody; hide (1), hoard. Cf. house, husk. ;

KLEI (HLEI), to lean. Gk. «Ai-vew, to incline, lean, xAt-pag,
a ladder, «Al-pa, situation, climate (slope); L. in-clt-nare, to make
to lean; AS. hli-nian, to lean, hilg#-ne, frail, lean, kla-w, a hill,


LIST OF INDOGERMANIC ROOTS


declivity. Ex. climax, climate, clinical; incline, decline, acclivity,
declivity ; lean (1), lean (2), low (3), ladder.

EU (HLEU), to hear, listen to. Skt. gru, to bear; Gk.
xdv-ev, L. clu-ere, to hear; AS. Ali-d, loud, hly-st, hearing. Ex.
loud, listen. (The derivation of client from L. cluere is doubtful.)

KLEU(D), to wash, cleanse. Gk, «Av(ew (**Avd-yerv), to cleanse,
xAvo-THp, a Clyster, syringe; cf. L. clu-ere, to cleanse. Ex. clyster.

KWEID (HWEIT), to gleam, to be white; allied to KWHIT,
with the same sense. Skt. gvind, to be white; gvit, to be white;
gvet-a(s), white; Russ. sviet-ite, to shine; AS. hwit, white, hwét-e,
wheat. Ex. white, wheat.

KWERP (HWERF), to turn round. Gk. xapz-és, the wrist
(that turns the hand); Goth. kwairb-an, to turn round. Ex. whirl,
wharf, warble.

KWES (HWES), to pant, sigh, wheeze. Skt. gvas, to pant,
snort, hiss; L. quer-or (pp. ques-tus), I complain; AS. kwésan (not
hw#san), to wheeze. Ex. querulous ; wheeze. (See Brugmann, i. § 355.)

LAB (LAP), to lap with the tongue. L. Jambere, to lap; AS.
lap-ian, to lap. (Root */a@b; Brugmann, ii. § 632.) Ex. lambent,
lap (1).

LAS, to desire. Skt. /a-las-a(s), ardent, desirous, ash, to desire ;
Gk. Ar-Aaiopar (*At-Ado-youa), I desire; L. das-c-iwus, lascivious ;
AS. lus-t, desire. Ex. lascivious; lust, lusty, list (4).

LAU (+18), to acquire as spoil; see LEU.

LED (=16d), Teutonic 1ét, to let go, leave free. LL. las-sus (for
*lad-ius), tired, Gk. And-etv, to be tired (see Brugmann, i. § 478);
Goth. Jét-an, to let, let go; AS. let, slow, late. Ex. lassitude;
Jet (1), late, lass.

LEG, to collect; hence, to put together, to read. Gk. A€y-erv,
to collect, read; L. leg-ere, to read, de-lec-tus, choice, lec-tus,
chosen. Ex. logic, eclogue, syllogism, and the suffix -logy; legend,
legion, elect, delight, 8c.

LEGH (LEG), to lie down. Gk. Aéx-os, a bed; L. lec-tus
(*leg-tus), a bed; Goth. lig-an, to lie down, lig-rs, a couch; Icel.
lag-r, lying low, lag, a stratum, Jog, a law. Ex. litter (1); lie (1),
Jay (1), low (1), law, lair, log (1); ledger, beleaguer.

LET; see REI.

LEIGH (LEIG), to lick. Skt. lik, rih, to lick. Gk. Acix-ev,
to lick; L. ling-ere, to lick; Goth. bi-laig-dn, to lick; AS. licc-ian
(from *ligh-n-), to lick. Ex. lichen (?); electuary (?) ; lick.

LEIP (LEIF), to smear, cleave, remain. Skt. lip, to smear,
anoint; Gk. d-Aeip-ewv, to smear, Aim-os, fatness; L. lip-pus, blear-
eyed; Lith. lip-t2, to stick, cleave; Goth. 07-leib-an, to remain
behind, bi-laib-jan, to leave behind, Jaib-a, remnant ; Icel. lif-a, to
remain, to live; AS, libb-an (for *lif-jan), to live. Ex. synalepha;
life, live, leave (1).

LEIQw (LEIHw), to leave, lend. Skt. rich, to leave; Gk.
Acin-ew, to leave; L. lingu-ere, to leave, re-ligu-us, remaining ;
Goth. leihw-an, AS. lih-an, to lend. Ex. relinquish, relic, relict;
lend, loan.

LEIS, to trace, follow a trace. L. lir-a (for *liz-a), a trace,
furrow, de-lir-adre, to leave the furrow, become mad; Goth. lais
(I have followed up the trace), I know, Jais-ts, a trace, track, AS.
l#r-an, to teach, leor-nian, to learn, lar, lore. Ex. delirious; last (2),
last (3), lore, learn.

LENGwH (LENG), to leap over (hence, to go lightly), Skt.
langh, to leap over, laghu(s), light; Gk. é-Aay-vs, light, small;
Lith. lengw-as, light; L. leu-is, light; Russ. legk-ii, light; legk-oe,
lung; AS. lung-en, lung, lung-re, quickly. Ex. levity, alleviate ;
light (2), lights, lungs.

P, to peel. Gk. Aém-erv, to peel, Aen-is, a scale, Aé€m-pa,
leprosy; L. lib-er, bast of a tree (Brugmann, i. § 499), a book.
Ex. lepidoptera, leper ; library.

LEU, to cut off, separate, loosen. Skt. la, to cut off; Gk.
Av-ev, to loosen; L. so-lu-ere, pp. so-lu-tus, to loosen, solve; Goth.
Taus, Icel. lauss, AS. léas, loose, free from; AS. los-ian, to become
loose. Ex. solve, solution, dissolve, resolve ; loose, lose, leasing (false-
hood), and suffix -less,

LEU, to gain, acquire (as spoil). Prellwitz gives the form of
the root as law. Gk. Acia, booty, Ion. Aniy (for *AGFid); dmo-Aav-
ev, to enjoy; L. Jii-crum, profit, lucre; Goth. lau-n, OHG. lé-n,
pay, reward. Ex. lucre; guerdon.

LEUBH (LEUB), to desire, love. Skt. Jubh, to covet, desire;
L. lub-et, lib-et, it pleases, lub-ido, lib-ido, lust ; Goth. liub-s, dear,
ga-laub-jan, to believe; AS. léof, dear, luf-u, love. Ex. libidinous;
lief, love, leave (2), furlough, believe, leman.

LEUQ (LEUH), to shine. Skt. ruch, to shine; Gk. Aevk-és,
white; L. lac-ére, to shine, lux (gen. Jiuc-is), light; li-men (for
*leuc-men), light, lii-na (for *louc-sna), moon; Goth. liuk-ath, light,
AS. léoh-t, light, Ex. lucid, luminous, lunar, lustre (1), illustrate,
illustrious ; light (1), lea. Also lucubration,


755


LOW (LAW), to wash. Gk. Aov-eiv, to wash; L. ab-lu-ere, to
wash off, lau-dre, to wash, lu-strum, a lustration ; Icel. Jau-g, a bath;
AS. léah, lye, léa-dor, lather. Ex. ablution, alluvial, deluge, dilute,
laundress, lave, lotion, lustre (2), lustration, lute (2); lye, lather.

MAGH (=magh), Teut. (MAG), to bestrong ; also in the form
MAG (MAK). 1. Skt. mah-ant-, great, large; Gk. pax-0s, means,
expedient, “nx-avyj, a machine; Goth. mag, I may, mah-ts, might,
AS. meg-en, might, main. 2. Skt. majman, strength; Gk. péy-as,
L. mag-nus, great; AS. mic-el, great. Ex. Magi, magic; machine;
maxim, May, major, mayor, main (2), master ; may (1), maid, main (1),
ey al much.

(=m6), to measure; also MED (MET). Skt. ma, to
measure, Gk. p7j-r1s, counsel ; L. mé-tior, I measure. Also L. med-itari,
to consider about, mod-us, a measure ; AS. met-an,to mete. Ex. metre;
meditate, mode, moderate, modern, modest, measure, mensuration; mete,
meal (2), moon, month; also firman.

MET, to diminish. Skt. mi, to hurt, diminish; Gk. pi-vvdev, to
diminish, pei-wv, less; L. mi-nwere, to diminish ; mi-n-or, less; Goth.
mi-n-s, less. Ex. minor, minute, minim, diminish, minister, minnow,
mis- (2), prefix. See below.

MET, to change, exchange; also as MEI-T (MEITH), to ex-
change, to change for the worse, deprave. L. com-mii-nis (Old L.
com-moi-nis), common, mutual, AS. ma-n, wickedness ; Lith. mai-nas,
barter; MHG. mei-n, false. Hence Gk. potr-os, thanks (good
return), L. miit-adre (Old L. moit-dre), to exchange; Goth. maid-jan,
to alter, deprave, ge-maith-s, maimed; AS. ge-m#d, troubled in
mind, mad. Also Skt. mith-as, mutually, mith-ya, falsely (hardly
L, mit-tere, to send away, OHG. mid-an, to avoid) ; Goth. missa-
(prefix), mis-, wrongly. Ex. common, mutable, mutual, community,
moult; mean (2), mis- (1), miss (1), mad. See above.

MEIGH (MEIG), to wet. Skt. mh, to sprinkle, méh-a(s), urine;
Gk. 6-utx-é€w, L. ming-o, AS. mig-a, I make water; Goth. maih-stus,
dung, AS. meox, dung. Ex. mistle-toe, missel-thrush, mixen.

METK (MEIH) ; also MEIG, to mix. Skt. mig-ra(s), mixed,
mik-sh, to mix; Gk. ply-vyju, I mix, ployew (*yly-cx-eiv), to mix;
L. misc-ére (*mic-se-ére), to mix; AS. mi-sc-an, to mix. Ex. mis-
cellaneous, mix, mixture; mash.

MEIT ; see MEI (2) above. MEIT (Teutonic); see mite (1).

MEI (MEL), to stain. Skt. mal-a-, dirty; Gk. pod-dvey, to
sully, péA-as, black; L. mui-lus, red mullet. Ex. melancholy;
mullet, (But not mole (1).)

MEL, to grind; whence MEL-D (MEL-T). Skt. mila, to be
worn down, myd-u(s), soft; Gk. pad-ards, soft, wad-ay7, mallow ;
Gk. d-pad-és, soft, d-ywadd-vvev, to soften; L. mol-ere, to grind,
moll-is (for *mold-uis), soft; Olrish mel-im, I grind; AS. mel-u,
meal, melt-an, tomelt. Also MEL-DH (MEL-D). Gk. padd-axéds,
soft, tender, mild; AS. mild-e, mild; Goth. muld-a, mould; AS.
mold-e, mould. Ex. malachite; molar, mill, mollify, mauve; meal (1),
mellow ; mallow ; melt, malt ; mild, mould (1). Cf. mole (2), s-melt (1).

MELG (MELK), to milk. Skt. mzj, to rub, wipe, stroke; Gk.
d-péry-ev, to milk; L. mulg-ére, to milk, AS. melc-an, to milk.
Der. milk ; cf. milt (2).

MEN, to remember, to think. Skt. man, to think, mind, under-
stand, man-as, mind, mna, to remember ; Gk. pév-os, spirit, courage,
pé-pov-a, I wish, pav-ia, madness, pé-pvn-par, I remember, pryj-pwr,
mindful; L. me-min-i, I remember, men-s, mind, mon-ére, to remind ;
Goth. mun-an, to think, AS. ge-myn-d, memory. Ex. automaton,
amnesty, mania, mnemonic, mental, monition, monster, monument, com-
ment, reminiscence ; man, mind; cf. mean (1).

MEN, toremain. Gk. pév-ew, to remain ; L. man-ére, to remain.
Ex. mansion, manor, manse, menial, menagerie, messuage, permanent,
remain, remnant.

MEN, to project. L. émin-ére, to jut out, L. men-tum, the chin,
mon-s, mountain, min-@, things ready to fall, threats; (perhaps)
Goth. mun-th-s, AS. mud, mouth. Ex. eminent, prominent, mountain,
mount (1), mount (2), amount, promontory, menace, commination,
amenable, demeanour, mound. Perhaps mouth.

MER, to die. Skt. my-ta(s), dead ; Gk. du-Bpo-ros (for d-ppo-Tos),
immortal; L. mor-s, death, mor-i, to die, mor-bus, disease; AS.
mor-6, death, mord-or, murder. Ex. amaranth, ambrosia, mortal,
morbid; murder.

MER, to remember ; see SMER.

MEUK, to wipe away. Skt. muck, to loosen, free, shed; Gk.
dmo-piccev (*-puryew), to wipe away, pux-THp, nose, snout, pga
(*pue-ca), nozzle of a lamp; L. miic-us, mucus, é-mung-ere, to wipe
away. Ex. match (2) ; mucus.

MU, to make a suppressed noise (imitative). Skt. mi-kas,
dumb; Gk. pv, wo, a sound of muttering, uv-ev, to close lips or
eyes; L. mu-ttum, mii-tum, a slight sound, mu-ttire, mi-tire, to
mutter, mu-tus, dumb; E. moo, to low; cf. mum, a slight sound.
Similarly, Gk. pv-o-rns, one whois initiated, wv-o-rnptov, a mystery,

302


756


secret (thing muttered). Cf. L. mur-mur-are, to murmur. Ex. myth,


mystic, mystery ; mute, mutter, motto, Cf. mumble, murmur.

MUS, or mis, to steal. Skt. mush, to steal; miish-as, a stealer,
rat, mouse; Gk. wos, a mouse, L. and AS. mis. Ex. mouse, muscle,
niche. And see musk.

NE, to bind together, to spin; see SNE.

(E)NEBH (eNEB), to swell out, to burst (?) Skt. zabh, to burst,
taken as the root of nabh-i-, the hub, nave of a wheel, 2abh-il-a(m),
navel; Gk. éud-adds, navel, boss of a shield; L. umb-o, boss of
a shield, wmb-il-icus, navel; AS. naf-u, nab-u, nave, naf-el-a, nab-ul-a,
navel. Ex. umbilical; nave (1), navel; auger (for nauger).

(#)NEBH, to burst forth (?), to spread(?), Perhaps the same
as the above. Skt. xabh-as, cloud, mist, vapour; Gk. véd-os, cloud;
L. neb-ula, cloud; G. neb-el, cloud. Ex. nebula, nimbus.

NEDH,to bind, tie. Skt. nah (for *nadh), to bind, pp. zaddha-s,
bound, tied; L. xdd-us, a knot. Ex. mode, nodule.

WEK, to perish, die. Skt. mag, to perish ; Gk. véx-us, a corpse,
vek-pos, dead; L. mec-are, to kill, noc-ére, to hurt, Ex. necromancy;
internecine, pernicious, noxious, nuisance.

(E)NEK, (E)NENK, to attain to. Skt. zag, to attain to; Gk.
é-veyx-elv, to bear, put up with; L. manc-isct (pp. mac-tus), to ac-
quire ; Goth. ga-nah, it suffices, ga-ndh-s, enough. Ex. enough.

NEM, to allot, share, take. Gk. véu-ev, to portion out, vép-os,
pasture, vdy-os, custom, law; L. mem-us, grove, num-erus, number ;
Goth. zim-an, to take. And perhaps L. em-ere, to buy (orig. to
take). Ex. Nemesis, nomad, numismatic; number; nimble numb,
Perhaps exempt, example, redeem, assume, &c.

NEU, to nod. Gk. vev-ew, to nod; L. nu-ere, to nod, nit-tare,
to nod. Ex, nutation.

NEUD (NEUT), to enjoy, profit by, use. Lith. naud-a, use;
AS. néot-an, to enjoy, use, employ, zéat, domestic cattle. Ex.
neat (1).

oNOG(w)H (NAG); base of the sb. ‘nail.’ Skt. xakh-a-, nail,
claw (an abnormal form); Gk. ovué (stem évvx-), nail, claw; L.
ung-uis, nail; Lith. nag-as, nail; AS. neg-el, nail. Ex. onyx; nail.

NOGw (NAKW); base of the adj. ‘naked.’ Skt. nag-na(s),
naked ; L. na-dus (*nog(w)edos), nude; Russ. xag-o1, naked ; Goth.
nakw-aths, AS. nac-od, naked. Ex. nude; naked.

OD (6d, od), to smell. Gk. dew (for *65-yerv), to smell, pt. t.
05-wd-a; L. od-or, smell, ol-ere (*od-ere), to smell. Ex, ozone;
odour, olfactory, redolent,

OID (AIT), to swell.
oats. Ex, oats.

OQw (AH), tosee. Gk. d0-ce (for «-ye), the two eyes; dpopat
(*6r-copat), fut. tense, I shall see, dm-wm-a, pt. t., I have seen;
6p-9arpos, eye, d~-is, sight ; L. oc-ulus, eye ; Russ. ok-0, eye. Perhaps
Goth. aug-0, AS. éag-e, eye (it is suggested that the diphthong is due
to association with Goth. aus-6, AS, éar-e, ear). See Brugmann, i.
§ 681(c). Ex. optics, ophthalmist, canopy; ocular, oculist, antler;
perhaps eye.

PA (pa), Teut. FA (f6), to feed, nourish. Gk. ma-réopa, I feed
upon; L. pa-scere (pt. t. pa-wi), to feed, pa-nis, bread ; Goth. fd-d-
jan, to feed, AS. f0-da, food, fé-dor, fodder. Ex. pastor, pastern,
pester, pannier, pantry, pabulum, company; food, fodder, feed, foster.
Perhaps father.

PAK, PAG (=pak, pag) (FAH), to fasten, fix, hold, secure.
Skt. pag, to bind; Gk. maoaados (*mde-yados), a peg; L. pac-isc?, to
stipulate, agree, pax (“pac-s), peace; Goth. fag-rs, AS. feg-er, fair.
Also Gk. mny-vupt, I secure, fasten, L. pang-ere, pp. pac-tus, to fasten,
pag-ina, a page (perhaps pro-padg-adre, to peg down, propagate by
layers) ; Gk. mny-és, firm, strong (and perhaps L. pag-us, a village).
Ex. pact, propagate (?), page (2), compact, pale (1), impinge, peace,
pay (1), &c. ; fair, fain, fang.

PAU (FAU), to cease, leave off. Gk. mav-opna:, I cease, mav-ev,
to make to cease, 7av-o1s, a pause, mav-pos, small, L. pau-cus, small,
pau-per (providing little), poor; Goth. faw-ai, pl., few. Ex. pause,
pose (with re-pose, com-pose, &c.) ; pauper, poor ; few.

PED (FET), to go, fetch. Skt. pad, to fall, go to, obtain, pad-a(m),
a step, trace, place, abode; pad-a(s), a foot; Gk. mé5-oy, ground,
méd-n, a fetter, wovs (gen. m0d-ds), a foot; L. pés (gen. ped-is), foot,
ped-ica, a fetter; AS. fot, foot, fet-ian, to fetch, fet-or, fetter. Ex.
tripod, parallelopiped ; pedal, pedestal, pedestrian, pawn (2), pioneer,
oppidan, impede, expedient ; foot, fetter, fetch, fetlock.

PHI (FEI), to hate. Skt. piy, to revile, scoff; Goth. fi-jands,
hating, fai-an, to blame. Ex. fiend, foe, feud (1).

PEI (FEI), to swell, to be fat. Skt. pi-van, swelling, full, fat ;
Gk. mi-wy, fat; Icel. fei-tr, fat, AS. f@-tt, fat. Ex. fat,

PEIK, PEIG, to scratch, cut, adorn, paint. Skt. pig, pime, to
cut, prepare, adorn; Gk. mox-idos, variegated, parti-coloured. Also
L. ping-ere (pp. pic-tus), to paint. Ex. picture, pigment, paint, orpi-
ment, orpine ; depict, pimento, pint,


Gk. oi5-dvew, to swell; AS. Git-an, pl.


LIST OF INDOGERMANIC ROOTS


PETS, to pound, stamp. Skt. pish, to pound, bruise; Gk. mic-os,
a pea (cf. rric-ua, peeled grain) ; L. pins-ere, to pound, grind (pp.
pis-tus), pi-lum (for *pins-lum), a pestle ; pis-tillum, a small pestle,
Ex. pea, pestle, piston, pistil.

PEK (FEH), to comb. Gk. méx-ew, to card wool; méx-os,
wool; L. pec-tere, to comb; OHG. jfahk-s (AS. fex, feax), hair.
Ex. pectinal ; and cf. pax-wax.

PEL (FEL), to flay, skin (?). Gk. -edas, skin, in épvot-med-as,
inflammation of the skin; L. pel-lis, AS. fel-l, skin. Ex. erysipelas ;
pell, pellicle, pelisse, pilch, surplice, peel (1) ; pillion; fell (2), film.

PEL, to fill; see PLE.

PELT (FELTH), to fold. Gk. mAdo-cew (for *mAdr-yev), to
form, mould, shape ; 8i-mAdo-10s, two-fold; Goth. falth-an, AS.
feald-an, to fold. Ex. plastic, cataplasm ; fold.

PEQw, to cook, to ripen. Skt. pack, to cook; Gk. réooev,
to cook, mém-ros, cooked, mén-wy, ripe; L. cogu-ere (for *pegu-
ere), to cook; Russ. pech(e), tobake. Ex. pepsine, dyspeptic, pip (2),
pippin, pumpkin ; cook, kitchen, precocious, apricot.

PER (FER), to go through, experience, fare, travel. Skt. py,
to bring across, causal par-aya, to conduct across; par-as, beyond,
further, par-d, away; Gk. mep-dw, I press through, pass through,
mép-os, a way, mwop-Ops, ferry, mop-evw, I convey, mop-evopat, I travel,
metpa (*rép-ya), an attempt; also mpd, before, mp@-ros, first, mép-av,
beyond, map-a, beside, mép-t, around, over; L. per-itus, experienced,
ex-per-iri, to try, per-i-culum, danger ; por-ta, gate, por-tus, harbour ;
also pré, before, per, through; AS. far-an, to go, fare, fér, panic,
fear; also for, for, for-e, before, fyr-st, first. Ex. pirate, pore (1) ;
peril, experience, port (1), port (2), port (3), port (4); fare, far, fear,
ford, frith (2). Also peri-, prefix, para-, prefix ; pro-, prefix, pre-,
prefix, prime ; for, fore, first, for- (1), for- (2), from.

PER, to produce, afford, allot. Gk. é-sop-ov, I brought, gave;
L. par-ere, to produce, bring forth, re-per-ire, to find ; (probably)
par-s, a part, por-tio, a portion. Ex. parent, parturient, repertory,
part, portion.

PET (FETH), to fall, to fly, to hasten towards, seek, find.
Skt. pat, to fly, fall upon, pat-ra(m), a wing, feather, leaf; Gk.
met-opat, I fly, mi-nt-ev, to fall; wr-épvé, a wing; L. pet-ere, to
seek, im-pet-us, attack (falling upon, flying at), penna (*pet-sna),
awing; AS. fed-er,afeather. Ex. peri; asymptote, symptom, diptera,
coleoptera, lepidoptera ; compete, impetus, perpetual, appetite, petition,
propitious, pen (2) ; feather.

PET (FETH), to spread out, lie flat. Gk. wer-avvupt, I spread
out, mér-adoy, flat plate, leaf, wa7-dyn, flat dish ; L. pat-ére, to lie
open, pat-ulus, spreading, pat-ina, dish ; AS. fxd-m, fathom. Ex.
petal, paten ; patent. Prob. also expand, pass, pace, &c., from L.
pand-ere, to spread, which seems to be allied to patére.

PEU, to beget. Skt. pu-tra(s), son; Gk. mais (*aF-is), son ;
L. pu-er, boy. Ex. pedagogue; puerile. (Perhaps L. pu-pus, boy,
belongs here ; cf. pupa, pupil, puppet.)

PEU (FEU), to cleanse, purify. Skt. pa, to cleanse, purify,
piu-ta(s), pure, pav-aka(s), purifying, (also) fire; Gk. 7d-p, fire;
L. pi-rus, pure, pu-tus, cleansed, pu-tare, to prune, clear up, reckon;
AS. /y-r, fire. Ex. pyre, pyrites ; pure, purge, compute, &c. ; fire.

PI, pi (fi), imitative; to chirp, pipe. Gk. m-mi-Cev, to chirp,
L, pi-p-ire, pi-p-are. Ex. pipe, pibroch, pigeon. Cf. fife.

PLAQ, PLAG(w) (FLOH, FLOK), to strike, strike down,
strike flat. Lith. plak-u, I strike ; Gk. mAdé (gen. mAax-és), a flat sur-
face, mAak-os, a flat cake; also mAny-7, a stroke, mAnocey (mAnK-yeLv),
to strike ; L. plac-enta, a flat cake, planc-a, a plank (cf. Gk. mAdK-
.v-os, made of boards) ; also plag-a, a stroke, plang-ere, to strike, to
lament ; Goth. fidk-an, to lament ; G. flach, flat; AS. floc, a fluke,
flat fish. Ex. placenta, plank; plague, plaint, complaint; fluke (1),
perhaps fluke (2). Cf. flay.

PLAT (=plat), to spread out. Skt. prath, to spread out;
prthu-, broad; Gk. mAat-vs, broad, flat, mAdav-os, breadth, mAdt-n,
blade of an oar, plate, tAdr-avos, a plane-tree ; L. plat-essa, a plaice,
plant-a, sole of the foot, spreading shoot, plant. Ex. plate, place ;
plaice, plant, plantain, plane (3). Cf. field. Allied to flat.

PLE (=plé), lengthened form of PEL (FEL), to fill. Skt. pr,
to fill, purza(s), filled, pur-u-,much ; Gk. wip-mAn-pe, I fill, rAq-pys,
full, wA7-0w, Iam full, woA-vs, much; L. plé-re, to fill, plé-nus, full,
plé-bes, throng, people, pli-s, more, po-pul-us, people, mani-pul-us,
a handful; AS. fal-l, full, fyl-lan, to fill. Ex. plethora, polygon ;
plenary, plebeian, plural, popular, mani ple, implement, complete, replete ;
full, fill, fulfil.

PLEK (FLEH), to plait, weave, fold together. Gk. mAéx-ew;
to plait, mAox-7, a plait; L. plec-tere, to plait, plic-are, to fold;
Goth. flah-ta, a plaiting of hair; OHG. flah-s, AS. fleax, flax. Ex.
plait, pleach, plash, ply (1), with compounds, complex, simple, duplex,
triplicate, explicate, supplicate, suppliant, supple; flax.

PLEU (FLEU), to swim, float, flow. Skt. plu, to swim, fly,


LIST OF INDOGERMANIC ROOTS


jump, plav-aya, to inundate; Gk. mAé-ev (fut. mAev-copat), to sail,
float, wAv-vev, to wash; L. plu-it, it rains, plu-wia, rain; AS.
fid-wan, to flow, jld-d,a flood. Also AS. fléo-t-an, to float, fléo-t,
a fleet, flo-t-ian, to float. Ex. pluvial, plover; flow, float, fleet
(in all senses), flit, flutter, flotsam.

PNEU (FNEU-S), to blow, breathe. Gk. mved-pa, breath ;
AS. fnéos-an, to breathe hard, fnor-a, a sneezing. Ex. pneumatic,
neeze, s-neeze ; Cf. s-nore.

PREI (FREI), to love. Skt. pri-ya(s), dear, beloved; Russ.
pritatele, a friend ; Goth. fri-jon, AS. fré-on, to love, whence the
pres. part. fri-jonds, fré-ond, loving, a friend; AS. fréo, free, fri-0,
security ; Fri-g, the wife of Woden. Ex. friend, free, frith (1),
Friday.

PREK (FREH), to pray, ask, demand. Skt. prachh, to ask ;
L. prec-Gri, to pray, proc-us, a wooer; poscere (*pore-scere), to
demand, postulare (from poscere), to demand; Goth. fraih-nan, to
ask. Ex. pray, precarious, imprecate, postulate.

PREUS (FREUS), to burn ; also, to freeze. Skt. prush, to
burn; L. pruina (for *pruzwina), hoar-frost, prir-ire (*prisire>
*prizire), to itch ; AS. fréos-an, to freeze. Ex. prurient ; freeze,
Frost.

PU, pu (FU, fi), to be foul or putrid. Skt. pi-ti-, pii-ti-ka-,
foul, pity, to stink, piy-as, pus; Gk. md-ov, pus; L, pi-s, matter,
pi-rulentus, purulent, pu-tidus, stinking, pu-tridus, putrid ; AS. fu-l,
foul. Ex. pus, purulent, putrid; foul, file (3), filth.

QATL (HAL), to cry ont. Skt. kal-a-s, low sounding ; Gk.
xad-éw, I summon; L. cal-dre, to proclaim, cla-mare, to cry out;
OHG. hal-én, to call, G. hell, clear-sounding; AS. hld-wan, to low.
Ex, calends, clamour, claim, clear, council; haul, hale (2), low (2).

QAP (HAF), to seize, hold. Gk. xwm-n, a handle; L, cap-ere,
to seize ; Goth. hafjan, AS. hebban,to lift, heave ; AS. haf-oc, hawk,
lit. ‘ seizer’ (cf. Late L. cap-us,a hawk). Ex. capacious, capable, &c. ;
heave, hawk, haft; perhaps behoof. Also captive, capsule, case (2),
cater ; and numerous derivatives of L. capere. (For the initial g in
*gap, see Brugmann, i. § 635.)

QAR, to sing, cry aloud. Skt. #ar-u-,a singer ; Gk. xap-kaipey,
to resound, xnp-vé, a herald; L. car-men,asong. Ex. charm.

QAR (HAR), to love. Irish car-aim, I love; L. car-us, dear;
Goth. hér-s, anadulterer. The initial g is suggested by Lettish kars,
desirous; Brugmann, i. § 637.

QAS, to cough. Skt. kas, to cough; Lith. fos-t/, to cough ;
AS, hwos-ta, a cough ; Irish cas-achdas, a cough; W. pas, a cough
(whence AS, ge-pos, a pose, a cough). Ex. pose (3).

QETI, to be lucky(?). W. coel, an omen; Hesychius quotes
Gk. xoiAv: 76 xadév3 Olrish cél, an omen; Goth. hail-s, AS. hal,
whole. Ex. whole, hale, holy, heal, health. (For initial q see
Brugmann, i. § 639.)

QEL (HEL), to raise up. Lith. #él-ti, to lift; Gk. xoA-wvds,
wod-wvn, a hill; L. ex-cel-lere, to surpass, cel-sus, high, cul-men,
a summit, col-lis, a hill; AS. hyl-l, a hill, hol-m, billow. Ex.
colophon ; culminate, column, excel; hill, holm. (For initial g see
Brugmann, i. § 633.)

QEL (HEL), to drive on. Skt. kal-aya, to drive, kal-aya, to
drive on; Gk. «#éA-Aev, to drive, «éA-ys, a runner; Bov-1dd-os,
a herdsman (ox-driver) ; L. cel-er, swift. Ex. bucolic ; celerity.

QEL (qgél), Teut. HEL, to hide, cover. Gk. xad-id, a shelter,
hut, «aA-vé, calyx; L. oc-cul-ere, cél-are, to hide, cal-ix, a cup,
cel-la, a cell, cl-am, secretly; AS. hel-an, to cover, hide. Ex. calyx ;
conceal, occult, cell, clandestine; (perhaps supercilious) ; hell, hole,
hull (1), hall, helmet, holster. (On the initial g see Brugmann, i.
§ 641.

seep, to shine; L. cand-ére ; see SQHND.

QER, to make. Skt. kv, to make ; kar-man, work, deed; Gk.
xpé-wv, ruler; L. cre-dre, to make, create, cre-sc-ere, to grow, OLat.
cer-us, creator, Cer-es, goddess of the growth of corn. Ex. create,
cereal, crescent, increase, concrete, accretion, accrue, crew, &c.

QERP (HERF), to cut. (Probably for SQERP; see SQER, to
shear.) Skt. ky-paza(s), sword ; Lith. kerp-u, I cut, shear; Gk.
xapr-ds, fruit, xpwn-vov, sickle; L. carp-ere, to pluck fruit; AS.
herf-est, harvest. Ex. harvest. Cf. carp (2).

QERT, to bind together. Skt. kat-a(s), for (*kar-tas), a mat ;
chyt, to fasten together; Gk. xdpt-ados, a (woven) basket; L.
crat-és, a hurdle; AS. hyrd-el, a hurdle. Cf. Skt. kvé, to spin.
Ex. hurdle. (For the initial g see Brugmann, i. § 633.)

QEUQ (HEUH), to bow out, to hunch up. Skt. kuch-as, the
female breast; Lith. fawk-ara, a hill; Goth. kauh-s, high; Icel.
haug-r,ahill. Ex. high, how (2). Cf. huge.

OU (HAU), to strike, to hew. L. cti-dere, to strike, in-ci-s,
an anvil; Russ. fov-ate, to hammer; G, hau-en, AS. héa-wan, to
hew. Ex. hew, hoe, hay.

. QREU (HREU), to wound. Skt. krav-i-, raw flesh, krii-ra(s),


757


wounded, raw; Gk. xpéas (*xpéfF-as), raw flesh; L. crii-dus, raw,
cru-or, blood; Lith. krau-jas, blood; AS. hréa-w, raw. Ex. crude,
cruel; raw. Perhaps rue (1).

QwEI (HWE), to rest. Skt. chi-ra(s), long-lasting, long;
OChurch Slav. po-éi-7, to rest ; L. gui-és, rest, tran-quillus, tranquil ;
AS. hwi-l, a while (quiet time), Goth. hwei-la, rest. Ex. quiet,
tranquil, coy, quit; while, whilom, whilst.

QwEI, to expiate, pay for, Skt. apa-chi-ti-, expiation; Gk.
dné-r1-o1s ; also moi-v7y (L, poe-na), a penalty, ti-vw, I pay a penalty.
Ex. penalty, pain, pine (2), penance. (See Brugmann, i. § 652.)

QwEL (HWEL), to move, go round, turn, drive. Skt. char,
chal, to move; Gk. méA-e1v, to be in motion, mdA-os, pole, axis
of revolution; L. col-us, a distaff, col-ere, to till, ix-col-a, inhabitant,
dweller in; OSlav. kol-o, a wheel; AS. hwéol, a wheel (which see).
Ex, pole (2); colony; calash; wheel. Cf. L. collum (for *col-sum),
neck (from its turning); whence E. collar.

QwEP (=q(w)ép), to breathe, toreek. Lith. Awép-ti, to breathe,
reek, kwdép-as, breath, vapour; L. wap-or, vapour; Gk. xan-vés,
smoke. Ex. vapid, vapour, (See Brugmann, i. § 193.)

RAD (RAT), to gnaw. Skt. rad, to scratch, gnaw; L. rad-ere,
to scrape; rodd-ere, to gnaw; AS, rett, arat. Ex. rase, rash (2),
rasorial, razor, abrade, erase, rodent; rat.

RE (= ré), to think upon; whence REDH (rédh), Teut. RED
(= réd), to provide, accomplish. L. ré-ri, to consider (pp. ra-tus) ;
Skt. radk, to achieve, accomplish, prepare; Goth. ga-réd-an, to
provide; AS. r@d-an, to counsel, interpret, read. Ex. rate (1), ratify,
ratio, ration, reason, arraign; read, riddle (1).

REBH (REB), to cover. Gk. é-pép-ev, to cover, 0-pop-os, a
roof; OHG. raf-o, rav-o, a beam, Icel. raf, a roof, rap-tr (=raf-t-r),
arafter. Ex. raft, rafter. (Not roof.)

REG (REK), to stretch, stretch out, reach, straighten, rule. Skt.
vj, to stretch; Gk, 6-péy-ev, to stretch; L. reg-ere, to rule, é-rig-ere,
to erect, set upright, rectus (*reg-ius), right, réx (gen. rég-is), king,
tuler ; Goth. uf-rak-jan, to stretch out, raih-ts, right, AS. rihk-t, right.
Ex, rajah 3 regent, regal, regulate, reign, rule, &c.; right, rack (1),
ratch, rake (3). Also rich. Perhaps rogation.

REI, to distil, flow. Skt. rz, to distil, drop; L. ri-uus, a stream,
ri-tus, a custom, rite (cf. Skt. ri#i-, a going, way, usage). (Some
connect Goth. riznan, torun.) Ex, rivulet, rival, rite. Perhaps run.
A parallel form is LEI, to melt, to besmear. Skt. 7, to melt, dis-
solve; L. li-nere, to besmear, li-mus, mud; AS. Ji-m, lime, la-m,
loam. Ex. lime (1), loam.

REIDH (REID), to ride, be conveyed. Olrish riad-aim, I drive,
tide; AS. rid-an, to ride. Ex. ride, road, raid, ready.

REIP (REIB), to tear down, tear. Gk. é-peim-ecOa1, to be torn
down, to fall in ruins; L. rip-a, bank (with steep edge) ; Icel. rzf-a,
to rive, totear. Ex, river; rive, rift, riven.

RET, to run along, rotate. Olrish reth-tm, 1 run; Lith. rit-a,
Troll; Skt. rath-a(s), a chariot, car; L. roé-a, a wheel. Ex. rotate,
rotary, round, roll, rouleau, rotund, &c. Also barouche, roué.

REU, to hum, bray, roar; imitative. Skt. ru, to hum, bray,
roar; Gk. &-pv-oua, I howl; L. ru-mor, a noise, report; cf. also
ru-gire, to bellow, rié-men, the throat. Ex. rumour, ruminate 3
rumble, Cf. raucous.

REUD (REUT), to weep, bewail, wet with tears. Skt. rud, to
weep, bewail; rdd-ana(m), weeping, tears; L. rud-ere, to cry out;
AS. réot-an, to weep, Icel. *rjot-a, to wet, only in the pp. rotinn;
rotten, orig. ‘soaked.’ Ex. rot, rotten, ret. Extended from REU.

REUDH (REUD),tobered. Skt. rudh-ira(s), red, rudh-ina(m),
blood; Gk. é-pev@-ev, to redden, é-pv6-pds, blood, L. rub-er, red;
AS. réad, red. Ex. erysipelas; rubric, rubescent, rubicund, rissole,
rouge, russet ; red, ruddy, rust.

REUP (REUF), to break, seize, pluck, rob, Skt. rup, to feel
spasms, Jup, to break, injure, spoil, seize, rob; ldp-tra(m), booty,
loot; L. rump-ere (pp. rup-tus), to break ; Goth. b:-raub-6n, to rob,
AS. réof-an, to break, réaf, spoil. Ex. loot; rupture, eruption, &c.;
route, rout (1), rut (1), rob, robe; reave, bereave.

SA (=sa),tosatiate. Gk. d-pevar (*od-pevar), to satisfy; a-d-nv,
enough; L, sa-t, sa-t-is, enough, sa-t-ur, full; Lith. sa-t-ds, sated,
full; Goth. sa-th-s, full; AS. se-d, sated. Ex. sated, satiate, satisfy,
satire, assets; sad.

SAG (=sag), Teut. 86k, to perceive. Gk. 7y-€ona, I guide,
I suppose; L. sdg-ire, to perceive by the senses ; Goth. sok-jan, AS.
séc-an, to seek. Ex. sagacious, sagacity; seek. Probably allied to
sake and soke.

SAL, to leap. Gk. GA-Aopa: (*odA-youa), I leap, spring; L.
saleio, I leap, sal-to, I dance. Ex. salient, salmon, assail, saltation,
desultory, exult, insult, result, resilient, sally, saltire.

SAUS, to become dry, to wither. Skt. gusk (for *swsh), to be-
come dry; Gk. ai-ev (*cavo-ev), to become dry, wither ; ava-rnpds,
harsh; AS, séar, sere, withered. Ex. austere; sear, sere.


758


- SE (=s6), to cast abroad, sow, scatter. Gk. i-7- (for *ci-on-p), |


I cast, send forth; L. se-rere (pt. t. sé-wi), to sow, sé-men, seed ;
Goth. sai-an, AS. sd-wan, to sow, s@-d, seed. Ex. season, secular,
Saturnine, seminal ; sow (1), seed.

SED (SET), to sit. Skt. sad, to sit; Gk. €Copa: (for *o€5-yopar),
I sit; L. sed-ére, to sit; AS. sit-tan, to sit, pt. t. set; Russ. sied-lo,
Polish siod-lo, a saddle. Ex. cathedral, chair, chaise, polyhedron;
sedentary, see (2), sell (2), size (1), size (2), also assiduous, assess, 8c. ;
sit, set, seat, settle (1), settle (2). Also zest, saddle, soot.

SEGH (SEG), to bear, endure, hold in. Skt. sah, to bear, endure,
overcome, restrain; sak-as, power, victory; Gk. é€x-ev (*céx-ev),
to hold, have (fut. ¢y-jow), ox-jua, form, ox-0A7, stoppage, leisure ;
Goth. sig-is, victory. Ex. epoch, hectic, scheme, school ; perhaps sail.

SELQ (SELH), to draw along. Gk. €da-ew (*oéAx-ev), to
draw, 6Ax-ds, a heavy ship, hulk, 6Aa-ds, a furrow; L. sulc-us,
furrow; AS. sulh, plough.- Ex. hulk; sulcated.

SEQ (SEG), to cut, cleave. L. sec-dre, to cut; Russ. siek-ira, an
ax; OHG. seg-ense (G. sense), a scythe; AS. sag-a, a saw, sig-de,
si-Je, a scythe; secg, sedge. Ex. section, segment, secant, saxifrage,
sickle; saw (1), scythe, sedge.

SEQw, to follow, accompany. Skt. sach, to follow; Gk. €r-opat,
I follow; L. segu-z, to follow, sec-undus, following, soc-ius,a com-
panion. Ex. sequence, &c.; sect, second, sue, suit, suite, social,
associate,

SER, to string, put ina row. Gk. efp-ew (for *cép-yewv) to string
(as beads); L. ser-ere, to join together (pp. ser-tus) ; Icel. sor-vt,
a necklace. Ex. series, assert, concert, desert (1), dissertation, exert,
insert.

SERP,, to slip along, glide, creep. Skt. sv, to creep, sarp-a(s),
a snake; Gk. €pm-ew (*oépm-ev), to creep; L. serp-ere, tocreep. But
hardly rép-ere (*srép-ere ?), to creep. Ex. serpent. Probably not reptile.

SEU, to beget, produce. Skt. si, to generate, sii-nu(s), a son,
sti-kara(s), a hog; Gk. od-s, U-s, a sow, v-ids, a son; L. si-s, pig,
su-inus, belonging to pigs; AS. su-gu, sow, sw-in, swine, su-ni,
.ason; cf. Olrish sw-th, birth, fruit. Ex. sow (2), swine, son.

SEUG, SHUQ, to suck. (Both forms occur; the former answers
to Teut. SEUK.) —s 1. L. saig-ere, to suck; Olrish stig-im, I suck ;
AS. stic-an, to suck. 2. L. siic-us, juice; AS. stig-an,to suck. Ex.
suction ; suck, soak; also sowans. Also succulent.

SIEKQU, to sew, stitch together. Skt. siv, to sew, syi-ti-, sewing;
Gk. «ao-od-ev, to stitch together, d-yyv, hymen; L. su-ere, to sew;
Goth. siu-jan, AS. séow-an, siw-tan, to sew. Ex. hymen; suture ;
sew, seam, Perhaps hymn.

SKAG (SKAK), to shake. Skt. khaj (for *skaj, *skag’); to
move to and fro; AS, scac-an, sceac-an, to shake. Ex. shake, shock (1),
shog; perhaps jog.

Ss I, to shine. Skt. chha-ya, shade, image, reflected light;
splendour ; Gk. om-d, shade; Goth. skei-nan, AS. sci-nan, to shine.
Ex. shine, shimmer, sheer (1).

SKHUBH (SKEUB), to agitate, to shake. Skt. kshubh, to be
agitated; kshobh-aya, to shake; Goth. af-skiub-an, to push away;
AS. sciif-an, to shove, push. Ex. shove, sheaf.

SKEUD (SKEUT), to shoot. Lith. szaud-yti, to shoot; AS.
scéot-an, to shoot. Ex. shoot, sheet, shot, shut, shuttle; scot-free,
skittish, skittles.

SKHED (SKET), to cleave, to scatter. Skt. skhad, to cut,
kshad, to carve; Gk, oxed-avyvju, I scatter, disperse, oxé5-n, a tablet
(slice); L. scand-ula, a shingle; AS. scat-erian, to scatter, shatter.
Ex, schedule; shingle (1); scatter, shatter.

SKHEI, whence SKHEID, SKHEIT, to cleave, part, shed.
1. Skt. chhid, to cut, divide; Gk. oxifeyv (*oxid-yev), to split;
L. scind-ere, to cleave. 2. Goth. skaid-an, AS. scead-an, to shed,
separate, part, scid, a thin slip of wood. Ex. schism, schist, zest;
_ Shed (1), shide, skid; sheath.

SKLAUD (sklaud), to shut. L. claud-ere, to shut; OFries.
sklit-a, slut-a, to shut; G. schliess-en, to shut, Du. sluit-en. We also
find SKLEU; as in Gk. KAeis, Doric #Ad-is, a key; L. clau-is, a
key; L. clau-us,a nail. Ex. close (1), close (2), enclose, clause, in-
clude, &c.: slot. Also clavicle, clove (1), cloy.

SLEB (=sléb), Teut. SLEP (=slép), to be relaxed ; hence, to
sleep. L. /ab-i, to glide, /ap-sare, to slip, lapse, lab-dre, to totter ;
Russ. slab-uii, slack, weak ; AS. slép-an, to sleep, LowG. slapp, lax,
relaxed. Ex. lapse, elapse, collapse, illapse, relapse; sleep.

SLEG (=slég), tobe slack. Gk. Any-ev, to leave off, Aay-apds,
slack; L. laxus (*lag-sus), lax, lang-wére, to be weak; AS. slec,
slack, loose. Ex. lax, relax, leash, lease (1), lessee, relay (1), release,
relish; slack, And see lag, languish.

SMETI, to smile, laugh. Skt. smi, to smile, smé-ra(s), smiling;
Gk. pet-daw, I smile; L. mi-rus, wonderful, mi-rari, to wonder at;
Swed. smi-la, to smile. Ex. admire, marvel, miracle, mirage, mirror ;
smile.


LIST OF INDOGERMANIC ROOTS


SMELD (SMELT), to melt. Gk. péAd-ev, to melt; Swed.
smalt-a, to smelt. Ex. smelt, smalt. See MEI.

SMER, to remember. Skt. smy, to remember, record, declare ;
Gk. pép-tuva, sorrow, regret; pap-rus, a witness; L. me-mor-ia,
memory, remembrance, me-mor, mindful; AS. mur-nan, to mourn.
Ex. martyr ; memory, remembrance, commemorate, memoir; mourn.
Cf. demur.

SMER, to rub over, smear. Gk. optp-is, emery for polishing,
pup-ov, ointment; Icel. smjor, grease, butter; AS. smer-u, fat, grease,
smir-ian, to smear. Ex. smear, besmear, smirch.

SMERD (SMERT), to pain, cause to smart. Skt. mrd, to rub,
grind, crush; Gk. opepd-adéos, terrible; L. mord-ére, to bite; AS..
smeort-an, to smart. Ex. mordacity, morsel, remorse; smart. Cf.
muzzle,

SNA (=sna, snau), to bathe, swim. Skt. sxd, to bathe; Gk.
vn-xewv, to swim, va-pds, liquid, vn-pés, wet, va-ev, vav-ev, to flow,
va-is, va-ids a naiad, vad-s,a ship; L. na-re, na-tare, to swim, nau-ta,
sailor, nau-igare, to navigate, sail, ndu-is,a ship. Ex. aneroid, naiad ;
nave (2), naval, navigate, navy, nausea, nautical, nautilus, navuy,
natation,

SNE (= sn6), to bind together, fasten (with thread). Skt. sna-
yu-, tendon, muscle, string, szd-va-, sinew, tendon; Gk. vé-w, I spin,
vn-pa, thread; L. né-re, to spin; Olrish snd-th, thread, sna-that,
a needle ; Goth. é-thla, a needle; AS, snd-d, a fillet. Cf. also Gk.
vev-poy (from *snéuz), nerve, sinew, cord. Also, from a base SNER,.
Gk. vdp-«n, cramp, numbness; L. ner-uus, nerve, sinew; perhaps
AS. near-u, narrow (closely drawn), snear-e, a noose, snare. Ex.
neuralgia, narcotic, narcissus; nerve; snare, snood, narrow. And see
sinew,

SNEIGwH (SNEIW), to snow. Gk. veid-e, it snows, vip-a,
accus., snow; L. ningu-it, it snows, miu-em, accus., snow; Irish
sneach-d, snow; Goth. svaiw-s, AS, snaw, snow. Ex, snow.

SNER, SNEU (snéu); see under SNE.

SPH (=spé), to increase, have room, prosper. Skt. sphay, to
swell, increase, sph@-ti-, increase; L. spa-tium, room, space, pro-sper,.
prosperous, spé-s, hope; AS. spd-wan, to succeed. Ex. space,
prosperous, despair, desperate; speed.

SPEK (SPEH), to spy, observe, see. Skt. spag-a(s), a spy;
Gk. oxén-toua (for *orex-ropa), I see, oxom-ds, a spy, an aims
L. spec-ere, to see, spec-iés, appearance, spec-tare, to behold; OHG.
speh-on, to watch. Ex. scope, sceptic, bishop; species, special, spectre,
speculate, spectator, suspicion, espy, spy, 8c.

SPER, SPHER, to struggle, kick, jerk. Skt. sphur, to throb,
struggle; Gk. omatp-e.v, d-onaip-ew, d-onap-iCew, to struggle con-
vulsively, opaip-a, a ball (to be tossed); L. sper-nere, to spurn,
despise ; AS, spor-nan, to spurn, kick against; perhaps G. sich sper-
ren, to struggle, fight. Ex. sphere; spurn, spur, spoor ; perhaps
spar (3). Cf. sparrow,

SPER, to scatter, sow. Gk. omeipev (*omép-yev), to scatter,
sow. Ex. sperm, sporadic. See below.

SPHERG, Teut. SPERK, SPREK, to burst noisily, crackle,
scatter abroad. Skt. sphirj, to crash, burst forth, be displayed ;
Gk. ofapay-os, a cracking, crackling, d-omdpay-os, asparagus, shoot
of a plant; (perhaps) L. sparg-ere, to scatter; AS. spearc-a, a spark
of fire, Icel. sprak-a, to crackle (cf. AS. sprec-an, to speak), AS.
sprec, a shoot, a spray. Ex. asparagus; speak, spark (1), sparkle,
spark (2), spray (2). Perhaps sparse (and derivatives). Cf. spray
(1). See above.

SPIW, SPIEQU, to spit out, vomit. Skt. skthiv, to spit; Gk.
mrv-ev (from *omyu-yev), to spit; L. spu-ere, AS. spiw-an, Goth.
speiw-an. Ex. spue, spew. (Of imitative origin; so that the form of
the root is indeterminate.)

SQAP (SKAF), to dig, scrape, shave; SQAB (SKAP), to cut,
scrape, shape. 1. Gk. oxam-rew, to dig, cxan-avn, a spade; Goth.
skab-an, AS. scaf-an, to shave. 2. L, scab-ere, to scrape; Lith.
skab-tis, cutting, sharp; Goth. ga-skap-jan, to shape, Ex. shave,
scab, scabious, scabby, shabby, shaft. Also shape, capon.

SQEL, to cleave, split, divide. Gk. oxad-Aev, to hoe; Lith.
skel-i, I split; ONorse skil-ja, to sever, separate; Goth. skal-ja,
a tile; AS. scell, shell. Ex. scale (1), scale (2), scall, scald (2), skill,
shell. See shelf, shield. ey

SQEND, to spring up, climb. Skt. skand, to jump up, ascend ;
Gk. oxdv5-adov, the spring of a trap; L. scand-ere, to climb, sca-la
(for *scand-sla), aladder. Ex. scandal, slander ; scan, ascend, descend,
scale (3), escalade. E

SQEND, to shine, glow. Skt. chand, gchand, to shine,
chand-ra(s), moon, chand-ana(s), sandal-wood tree; L. cand-ére, to
shine, cand-idus, white. Ex. candle, candid, incense, candour, chandelier,
chandler, incendiary, &c. Also sandal-wood.

SQER (SKER), to shear, cut, cleave. Gk. welpew (uép-yewv), tor
shear, cut; Lith. ker-wis, an ax; AS, scer-an (pt. t. sc@r, pp. scor-en),


LIST OF INDOGERMANIC ROOTS


to shear. Ex. shear, share, sheer (2), shard, scar (2), scare, shore.
Cf. scorpion, sharp, scarp, scrape. And see QERP, SEQ.

- SQEU (SKEDU), to perceive, observe, beware of. Skt. kav-i-,
wise, a seer, prophet, poet; Gk. xoéw, I mark, @vo-oxd-os, an in-
spector of an offering ; L. cau-ére, to beware, cau-tio, caution; AS.
scéa-wian, tolook, behold. Ex. caution, caveat; shew, show, scavenger,
Sheen.

SQEU (SKEU), to cover, shelter. Skt. sku, to cover; Gk.
oKv-Tos, Kv-Tos, skin; L. cu-tis, skin, scii-tum, a shield, ob-sci-rus,
covered over, dark; OHG. skiu-ra, a shed, stable; Icel. shjé-l,
a shelter, cover; AS. Ay-d, hide, skin; Icel. sky, a cloud. Ex.
cuticle, obscure, escutcheon, esquire, squire, equerry; hide (2), scum,
skim, sky, sheal, shieling, scowl.

SREBH, to sup up, absorb. Gk. pop-éev, to sup up; L. sorb-
ére, to sup up; Lith. sréb-ti, to sup up. Ex. absorb,

SREU ‘STREU), to flow. (Observe the insertion of T in
Teutonic.) Skt. srw, to flow, srd-ta(s), a stream; Gk. péew (fut.
pev-copa), to flow, fed-pa, flood, fu-Ouds, rhythm (musical flow) ;
Trish sru-aim, stream; AS. stréa-m, stream. Ex. rheum, rhythm,
catarrh, diarrhea, emerods ; stream, streamer.

STA (= sta); see STHA.

STAQ (STAH), to be firm. Skt. s¢ak, to resist, Zend. stay-ra-,
strong, firm ; OPruss. panu-stac-la-, steel for kindling fire; OHG.
stah-al, OMere. stél-i, steel. Ex, steel.

STEBH; seeSTEMBH.

STEG(w), also TEG(w) (TEK), to cover, thatch. Skt. sthag,
to cover; Gk. oréy-ev, to cover, oréy-os, Téy-os, roof; L. teg-ere,
to cover, teg-wla, tile, tog-a, garment ; Irish tigh, a house; AS. Jac,
thatch; Du. dak, thatch, dek-ken, to cover. Ex. protect, tegument,
toga, tile; thatch, deck ; also shanty (old house).

STEIG(w) (STEIK), to prick, pierce, stick, sting. Skt. zi, to be
sharp, Zend. tigh-ra-, sharp, tigh-ri-, an arrow; Gk. oriev (*orly-
yew), to prick, oriy-pa, a prick; L. in-stig-are, to instigate ; Goth.
stik-s,a point; AS, stic-e, stitch (in the side). Ex. stigma; instigate ;
allied to instinct, distinguish, stimulate, style (1); cf. tiger, stick (1),
stitch, sting.

STEIG(w)H (STEIG), to stride, to climb. Skt. stigh, to
ascend; Gk. oveix-ev, to go, march, orix-os, a row, oTolx-os,
a row; Lith. staig-us, hasty; AS. stig-an, to climb. Ex. acrostic,
distich, hemistich ; sty (1), sty (2), stile (1), stair, stirrup.

STEMBH, STEBH (STEMB, STEB), to make firm, set fast ;
STEMB (STEMP), to stamp, step firmly. Skt. stambh, to make
firm or hard, stop, block up ; stambh-a(s), a post, pillar, stem, stabh,
to fix, prop; Gk. d-orepd-ns, fixed, fast, oréuB-ev, to stamp; AS.
stef, a staff, prop, stef-n, stem-n, a stem of a tree; AS. stemp-an, to
stamp, stap-ul, a post, pillar, step-pan, to step. Ex. staff, stave,
stem (1), stem (2); also stamp, step, staple (1), staple (2); perhaps
stump.

STEN, TEN (THEN), to groan, to stun, to thunder. Skt. stan,
to sound, sigh, thunder; Gk. orév-ew, to groan; Srév-rwp, Stentor
(loud-voiced) ; Lith. sten-é¢i, to groan, AS. stun-ian, to make a din.
Also Skt. tax, to sound; L. ton-are, tothunder; AS. Aun-or, thunder.
Ex. detonate ; stun, thunder ; astonish, astound.

STER, whence STREHU, to strew, scatter, lay down. Skt.
star-a-, a layer, bed; stv, to scatter, spread ; ¢ar-as, pl. stars; Gk.
arép-vupi, I spread out; L. ster-nere, to scatter, spread out (pp.
stra-tus), stru-ere, to lay in order, heap up, build; Goth. strau-jan,
to strews; AS. streow-ian, to strew, scatter, streaw, straw. Ex.
asterisk, asteroid ; street, structure, instrument, consternation, stellar,
stratum; strew, straw, star.

STER, to be firm or rigid. Skt. sthira(s), firm, fixed; Gk.
otep-cos, solid, stiff, oretpa (*orep-ya), a barren cow; Goth. stair-d,
a barren woman; L. ster-ilis, sterile, barren. Ex. stereoscope,
stereotype, sterile; and cf. stark, starch.

STEU, probably for STH BU, to fix firmly. Skt. sthav-ira(s),
fixed, firm; Gk. o7d-Aos, a pillar, oro-d, a porch, orav-pés, an
upright pole or stake; L. in-stau-r-dre, to construct, build, restore ;
Goth. stiu-r-jan, to establish, OHG. stiu-r-a, a prop, staff, paddle,
rudder; AS. stéo-r, a paddle or rudder. Ex. stoic; star-board,
steer (2); store, restore. Cf. steer (1). Allied to STHA.

STEUD (STEUT),to strike. Skt. id, to push ; L. tund-ere (pt. t.
tu-tud-t), to strike, beat; Goth. staut-an, to strike. Ex. contuse,
obtuse ; stutter; perhaps stot, stoat. And see toil (1).

STHA, STA (= stha, sta), to. stand, stand fast. Skt. stha,
to stand; Gk. &o7n-v, I stood, t-orn-pi, I set, place; L. sta-re,
to stand, si-st-ere, to-set ; G. steh-en, to stand. Further allied to
Goth. standan, AS. stondan (pt. t. std-d), to stand, AS. sted-e, a place,
stead; from a Teut. base STA-D. Also to AS. std-w, a place. Ex.
statics, apostasy, &c.; stage, stamen, stamina, station, statute, &c.;
stand, stead, stow, stall, And cf. stammer, stem (3), stool, stud (1),
stud (2).


759


SWAD (SWAT), to please the taste. Skt. svad, to taste well,
to season ; svad-u-, savoury, sweet; Gk. 45-vs, sweet; L. sud-uis (for
*suad-uis), sweet; O.Sax. swdt-i, sweet; AS. swét-e, sweet. Ex.
suave, suasion, persuade, assuage; sweet.

SWEID (SWEIT), to sweat. Skt. svéd, to sweat; svéd-a(s),
sweat; Gk. id-pds, sweat; L. siid-adre, to sweat, siid-or, sweat;
AS. swat, sweat. Ex. sudorific ; sweat.

SWEN, to resound, sound. Skt. svan, to sound; svan-a(s),
sound; L. son-dre, to sound, son-us, sound; AS. swin-sian, to
resound. Ex. sound (3), sonata, sonnet, person, parson, sonorous, unison,
&e. Cf. swan.

SWEP (SWEF), to sleep. Skt. svap, to sleep; Gk. dz-vos,
sleep ; L. sop-or, sleep, somnus (for *swep-nos), sleep; AS. swef-n,
adream. Ex. hypnotise ; soporific, somnolence.

SWER, to murmur, hum, speak. Skt. svv, to sound, svar-a(s),
sound, voice, tone; L. sw-swr-rus, murmur, whisper; AS. swer-ian,
pt. t. swor, to affirm, swear; swear-m, a swarm of bees. Ex. swear,
answer, swarm.

TAK, to be silent. L. ¢ac-ére, Goth. thah-an, to be silent.
Ex, tacit; taciturn, reticent.

TAU (= tau), Teut. (thaw), to melt, thaw. Skt. ¢0-ya-, water ;
Gk. 7H-Kew, to melt; L. 2a-bés, decay; AS. Aa-wian, to thaw. Ex,
tabid, thaw.

TEHG(w), to cover; see STEG(w).

TEK (THEH), to beget. Gk. rex-civ, 2 aor. inf. of rixray,
to beget; AS. Jeg-en, a thane; orig. boy, servant. Ex. thane.

TEKTH (tekp), to fit, prepare, hew out, weave. Skt. taksh, to
form, prepare, cut, hew; Gk. téx-vn, art, réx7-wv, carpenter;
L. tex-ere, to weave ; OChurch Slay. ¢es-ati, to hew. Ex. technical,
architect; text, subtle, toil (2). (For the form of the root, see
Uhlenbeck, Skt. Dict.)

TEL (THEL), to bear, tolerate, lift. Skt. zal, to lift, ¢ul-a,
a balance, weight; Gk. TeA-apwy, belt for shield or sword, 7dA-avTov,
balance, talent, TA-var, to endure; L. ¢ol-lere, to bear, la-tus (for
(tlatus =TAn-T6s), borne ; tol-erare, to endure ; AS. fol-ian, to endure.
Ex. talent, atlas, tantalise; extol, tolerate, trot, elate, prelate, relate,
oblate, prolate, dilate, delay, collation, legislator, translate; thole (2).

TEM, to be dark. Skt. zam-as, gloom; L. éem-ere, in the dark,
blindly, rashly ; ¢ex-ebrx, darkness. Ex. tenebrious, temerity.

TEM, to cut. Gk. réu-vev, to cut, Tou-7, a cutting, Tdp-os,
part of a book (section), réz-evos, sacred enclosure, Tév-d-erv, to
gnaw; L. tem-plum, sacred enclosure, ton-d-ére, to shear. Ex,
anatomy, tome ; tonsure, temple.

TEN (THEN), to stretch. Skt. ¢az, to stretch, ¢an-u-, thin
(stretched out), ¢an-tu-, a thread; Gk. reivey (*rév-yev), to stretch,
tév-os, tension, tone; L. ten-d-ere, to stretch, ten-ére, to hold tight,
ten-uis, thin; Goth. éhan-jan, to stretch out; AS. Ayn-ne, thin. Ex.
hypotenuse, tone ; tenacious, tender, tenuity, tend, tense (2), tent (1),
tendon, tendril, tenor, tempt, tentative, toise, &c.; thin; dance.

TENG, to dip, steep. Gk. réyy-ew, L. ting-ere, to dip; OHG.
thunch-on, G. tunk-en, to dip. Ex, tinge, tincture, tint, stain.

TENG (THENK), to consider, ponder on. L. tong-ére, to
think ; Goth. ¢hagkjan (=*thank-jan), to think. Ex. think, methinks,
thanks, thought.

TENQ (THENH), to be strong, grow thickly. Skt. tazch, to
contract; Pers. zang, tight; Lith. texk-u, I have sufficient, tank-us,
close, tight; Goth. theih-an, AS. ge-péon (pp. ge-ung-en), to
thrive; ONorse ét-tr, tight. Ex. thee (2), tight.

TEP, to be hot. Skt. tap, to be warm; Russ. ¢op-ite, to heat ;
L. tep-ére, to be warm. Ex. tepid.

TER (THER), to pass through, reach; go through, rub, turn.
(Two roots of the form TER, ‘to go through,’ and ‘to rub, turn,’ have
probably coalesced.) 1. Skt. tar-a(s), a passage, ferry, tar-a(s), pene-
trating ; ¢ar-aya, to take across, ¢ir-as, prep., across, through, over ;
Gk. rép-pa, goal, end; in-tra-re, to pass into, ¢rd-ns, going through,
across ; Goth. thair-h, through ; AS. Ayr-el, ahole. Ex. avatar; enter,
term, transom, trestle, through, thrill, thirl, thrum. 2. Gk. Tpfj-o1s,
a boring through, rép-erpov, a borer; L. ¢er-ere, to bore, rub; ¢or-
nare, to turn. Ex. turn; trite, tribulation, detriment.

TERQ (THERH), to twist, turn round. Skt. ¢ark-u-, a spindle ;
Gk. d-tpax-ros, a spindle; L. torqu-ére, to twist. Compare also
(from Teut. THWERH) AS. Aweork, perverse, transverse, Icel.
Averr, perverse. Ex. torment, torture, torch, nasturtium, torsion, tort,
tortoise. Cf. thwart, athwart, queer.

TERS (THERS), to be dry, to thirst. Skt. ¢sh, to thirst; Gk.
répo-opa, L become dry; L. ¢orr-ére (for *tors-ére), to parch, pp.
tos-tus, terr-a (for *ters-a), dry ground; Goth. ‘haurs-jan, to thirst,
thaurs-tei, thirst. Ex. torrid, torrent, terrace, tureen, toast, terrier,
inter, fumitory ; thirst, Perhaps test,

TEU (THEU), to be thick or fat. Skt. év, to increase, be
powerful, tav-a(s), strong; Gk. tv¥-Aos, TV-An, a hard swelling;


760


L. tuem-ére, to ‘swell up, ti-ber, a round root, ¢um-ulus; a mound,
tum-ultus, uproar ; Lith. tau-kas, fat of animals, 7u-k-ti, to be fat;
AS. féo-h, thigh, Ai-ma; thumb, Jéa-w, muscle. Ex. tumid, tumult,
tumulus, protuberance ; thigh, thumb, thews.

TEUD (THEUT), to strike; see STEUD.

TRE = tré (THRE, thré), to: twist ; from TER, to turn. AS.

ra-wan, to twist, throw; Jre-d, thread. Ex. throw, thread.

TREM, also TRES, to tremble. Skt. ¢ras, to tremble; Gk.
Tpé-ew, (for *rpéo-ery), to tremble; L. terr-ére (for *ters-ére), to
scare, cause to tremble. Also Gk. tpép-ev, L. trem-ere, Lith. trim-ti,
to tremble. Ex. terror; also tremble, tremulous, tremendous.

TREUD (THREUT), to push, crowd, urge. L. triid-ere, to
push, urge; Goth. us-thriut-an, to vex greatly, G. ver-driess-en ; AS.
préot-an, to afflict, vex, urge. Ex. abstruse, extrude, intrude, obtrude,
protrude ; threat, threaten, Cf. thrust.

UL, to howl (imitative). Skt. uwl-tika-, an owl; Gk. tA-daa,
I howl, 6A-oA-v(w, I shriek; L. w/-ul-a, an owl; AS. al-e, an owl.
Ex. owl, howl.

WADH (WAD), to walk slowly, to wade. L. udd-ere, to go;
uad-um, a ford; AS. wad-an,to wade. Ex. evade; wade.

WAQ (WAH), to swerve, go crookedly, totter; also WAG
(WAK), to bend, totter. Skt. vak-ra(s), crooked, bent, vazch, to go
crookedly, totter, waver; L. wac-illare, to waver, reel; AS. woh,
crooked, bent. Also L. wag-us, wandering, going aside; Lith.
wing-is, a bend of a river, weng-ti, to flinch, to shirk work, OHG.
wink-an, to move aside, to waver; AS. wanc-ol, wavering, weak.
Ex. vacillate, vague; wench, woo. Cf. wink, winch.

WAN (= wa-n), to fail, lack, be wanting; from the root WA
(wa), with the same sense. Skt. a-z-a(s), inferior, wanting; Gk.
ed-v-is, bereft; L. ud-n-us, vain; Goth. wa-n-s, deficient. Ex. vain ;
wane, wanion, want, wanton. Cf. vacant.

WE (= We), to blow. Skt. va, to blow; vd-ta(s), wind; Gk.
d-n-pe (&-Fn-w), IL blow; L. we-ntus, wind; Goth. wai-an, to blow,
wi-nds, wind; Lith. wé-jas, wind; Russ. vie-iat(e), to blow, vie-ter’,
wind ; AS. wi-nd, wind, we-der, weather. Ex. ventilate, fan; wind (1),
weather.

WEBH (WEB), to weave. Skt. arma-vibh-i-, a spider, lit.
‘wool-weaver’; Gk. ip-aivew, to weave; G. web-en, AS. wef-an, to
weave. Ex. weave, web, weft, woof, weevil. Cf. wafer, wasp.

WED (WET), to wet, moisten. Skt. ud-an-, water, und, to
moisten; Gk, #5-wp, water; L. und-a, wave; Russ, vod-a, water;
Goth, wat-d, water, AS. wet-er, water, wét, wet. Ex. hydrogen,
hydra; undulate, abound, redundant, surround; wet, water, otter ; vodka.

WEDH (WED), to redeem a pledge, to pledge. L. was (gen.
wad-is), a pledge; Goth. wad-i, AS. wed-d, a pledge; Lith. wad-oti,
to redeem a pledge. Ex. wed; wage, wager, gage (1), engage.

WEG (WEK), to be vigorous or watchful, to wake; hence the
extended form WEKS (WEHS), to increase; hardly allied to
AUG(w). Skt. vaj-ra(s), thunder-bolt (from its strength) ; vaj-a(s),
vigour; L. ueg-ére, to excite, arouse, wig-ére, to be vigorous, wig-il,
watchful; AS. wac-an, to come to life, wac-ian, to watch. Also
Skt. vaksh, to grow, Goth. wahs-jan, to wax, AS. weax-an, to wax,
Ex. vegetable, vigour, vigilant; wake (1), watch, Also wax (1).

WEG(w) (WEK), to be moist or wet. Gk. ty-pds, moist ;
(perhaps) L. a-dus, moist, %-mor, moisture; Icel. vok-r, moist. Ex.
hygrometer; wake (1), Perhaps humid, humour ; and see ox.

WEGH (WEG), to carry, convey, remove. Skt. vak (for
*vagh), to carry, vah-a(s), a vehicle; Gk. 6x-os (*Fdx-os), a chariot ;
L. ueh-ere, to carry, convey ; wé-na, a vein (duct); AS. weg-an, pt.t.
weg, to bear, carry, weg, a way, wecg,a wedge (mover), weg-n,
a wain. Ex. vehicle, vein; weigh, way, wain, waggon, wey, wag.
Perhaps vehement.

WEI, to bind, wind, plait. Skt. va, vay-a, to weave, vi-ta(s),
wound, vé-tasa(s), a kind of reed; Gk. i-réa, a willow; L. ui-tis,
a vine, wi-men, a twig, ui-ére, to bind; AS. wi-r, a wire, wi-dig,
a willow, withy. Ex, vine, ferrule, vice (2); wire, withe, withy, wine,
And see wind (2).

WEID (WEIT), to know, to wit; orig. to see. Skt. vid, to
know, véd-a(s), knowledge; Gk. ¢f5-ov (for *fei5-ov), I saw, of5-a
(for *Foté-a), I know; L. wid-ére, to see, ui-sere, to go to see, Visit ;
Goth. wit-an, to know, wait, 1 know. Ex. Veda; history, idol, idea;
vision, visit, Sc. ; wit (1), wit (2), witness, wiseacre; ywis, wise.
Also advice, 8c.

WEID, to sing. Gk. d-eiS-ay (for d-Feid-ev), to sing; do.d-7,


wod-n, a song; cf. Olrish faed, W. gwaedd, an outcry, shout. Ex.
ode, epode, palinode,
WEIG (WEIK), and WEIQ (WEIK), to give way. (1) Skt.


vij, to fear, veg-a-s, speed, haste; Goth. wik-d, succession; AS,
wic-an, to give way, wdc, weak, wéc-an, to weaken ; wic-u, a week
(change of phase of the moon) ; wic-e, a wich-elm. (2) Gk. etx-ew
(for *Feix-ew), to give way; L. wic-is (gen. case), change; OHG,


LIST OF INDOGERMANIC ROOTS


weh-sal, G. wech-sel, change.
vicar. ;

WHEIK (WEIH), to come to, to enter. Skt. vig, to enter,
vég-a(s), a settler, a neighbour, vég-man, a house; Gk. ofx-os (for
*Foik-os), a house; L. uic-us, a village, uic-inus, neighbouring; Goth.
weth-s, a village. Ex. economy, diocese; vicinage, wick (2), bailiwick.

WEIP (WEIF), to tremble, shake, vibrate. Skt. vép, to tremble ;,
cf. L. wib-rare, to tremble; ONorse veif-a, to vibrate, flap, flutter.
Ex. waif, waive; cf. vibrate.

WEIQ (WEIH), to fight, conquer. L. winc-ere, pt. t. uic-i,
to conquer; Goth. weih-an, to contend; AS. wig, war. Ex. van-
quish, victory, convict, evince, convince, 8c.

WEIQ (WEIH), to give way; see WEIG.

WEL, to will, to choose, like. Skt. vv, to choose, select,
prefer, var-a(s), a wish; L. uel-le, to wish; Goth. wil-jan, to wish,
will, wil-ja, will, wal-jan, to choose, wail-a, well. Ex, voluntary,
voluptuous; will (1), will (2), well (1), weal, wealth, welcome, welfare.

WEL, to wind, turn, roll; well up (as a spring). Skt. val,
to turn here and there, turn round, val-ana(m), a turning, agitation ;
Gk, €A-1£, a spiral, €A-igoev, to turn round; OHG. wel-la, a billow,
AS. wel-la, a well or spring. Also in the form WEL-W ; cf. Gk.
eiAv-ety, to enfold, L. wolu-ere, to roll, Goth. af-walw-jan, to roll
away. Ex. helix; voluble, volute, revolve, &c.; valve; well (2),
wallow, waltz, welter. Also wale; cf. walk.

WEM, to vomit. Skt. vam, Gk. éyu-civ, L. vom-ere, to vomit.
Ex. emetic; vomit.

WEN, to honour, love, strive for, seek to get. Skt. van, to
serve, honour, ask, beg; L. en-us, love, wen-erari, to honour, uen-ia,
favour; AS. win-nan (pt. t. wann), to fight for, labour, endure
(whence E. win). Hence also Skt. vaiichh, to wish, AS. wise,
a wish. Ex. venerable, venereal, venial; win, also winsome, wish.
Allied to wean, ween, wont; and to won (to dwell).

WEQw, to cry out, to speak. Skt. vach, to speak, vach-as,
speech ; Gk. ém-os, a saying, a word; L. wow (gen. udc-is), voice,
woc-are, to call. Ex. epic; voice, vocal, avouch, advocate, invoke, &c.

WER, to cover, surround, defend. Skt. v7, to screen, cover,
surround, v7-ti-, an enclosure, var-aya, to keep off; Gk. ép-va6at, to
protect; Goth. war-jan, AS. wer-ian, to protect. Ex. warren,
warison, garret; weir. Cf. aperient, cover.

WER, to be wary, observe, see. Gk. dp-dw (*Fop-aw), I observe,
see; L. wer-éri, to guard against, tofear; AS. wer, wary. Ex. revere,
reverend ; beware, wary. Also,ward, guard. Perhaps also ware (1),
worth (1).

WER, to speak, say. Gk. etp-ew (for Fep-yew), to say; py-Twp
(*Fpy-Twp), a speaker, orator. Hence WERDH, tosay. O. Irish
ford-at, they say (Stokes-Fick, p. 274); L. uerb-um, a word; AS.
word, a word. Ex. verb, word; also rhetoric.

WERG (WERK), to work. Gk. épy-oy (*fFépy-ov), work ;
épy-avoy, an instrument; Goth. waurk-jan, to work; AS. weore,
work. Ex. organ, orgy, chirurgeon, surgeon ; work, wrought, wright.

WERGH (WERG), to strangle, choke. Lith, wersz-ti, to
strangle; MHG. ir-werg-an, to strangle; AS. wyrg-an, to strangle,
worry. Ex. worry.

WERT (WERTH), to turn, become.


Ex. weak, week, wich-elm; vicissitude,


Skt. uvt, to turn, turn


oneself, exist, be; L. werf-ere, to turn; Goth. wairth-an (pt. t.


warth), to become; AS. weord-an, to become. Ex. verse, vertex,
vortex, prose, avert, averse, converl, &c.; worth (2), weird, -ward
(suffix). Also verst,

WHS, to clothe, put on clothes. Skt. vas, to put on clothes;
Gk. é0-00s (*Feéo-00s), clothing, evyup (*Féo-vupt), I clothe; L.
ues-tis, clothing, garment; Goth. was-jan, to clothe; AS. wer-ian, to
wear clothes. Ex. vest, invest, divest, vestment ; wear (1); gailer.

WHS, to dwell, live, be. Skt. vas, to dwell, to pass the night,
to live, vas-tu, a house, vas-ati-, a dwelling-place; Gk. ég-tia,
a hearth, dor-v, acity; L. Ves-ta, goddess of the household, uer-na,
a home-born slave; Goth. wis-an, AS, wes-an, tobe. Ex. vernacular,
Vesta, vestal 5 was, wast, were, wert. Cf. wassail.

WES, to shine; also as AWES, AUS (Awes, aus), to
shine. Skt. vas, uchchh, to shine; ush, to burn; vas-antas, spring;
Gk. €-ws, 7-ws, Holic av-ws, dawn, é-ap (for *Féo-ap), spring; L.
aur-or-a (for *aus-ds-a), dawn, uér (for *ues-r), spring, aus-ter, south
wind; AS. éas-t, adv., in the east. Ex. vernal; east, Easter, |

WIDH, to lack. Skt. vidh, vindh, to lack, be in want of
(Macdonell) ; Gk. %-0-eos, unmarried; Skt. vidh-ava, bereft of,
a widow; L. uid-ua, a widow; AS. wid-uwe, a widow. Cf. L
di-uid-ere, to divide (pp. di-ui-sus). Ex, widow; also divide, division,

YAG (yag, yag), to worship, reverence. Skt. yaj, to sacrifice,
worship, yaj-yu(s), worshipping, pious; Gk. ay-vos, holy. Ex,
hagiographa. y : :

YES, to ferment. Skt. yas, to exert oneself, yésh, to bubble,
seethe; Gk. (é-ew (perf. mid. é-eo-par), to seethe, (éo-ua, a decoc-


DISTRIBUTION OF


tion, (eo-rds, sodden; éx-(e-ua, a pustule; AS. gis-t, yeast. Ex.
eczema; yeast.

YEU, to drive away, preserve from. Skt. yw, to drive away,
preserve from, keep aloof, yav-aya, to drive away; L. iu-udre (pp.
itt-tus), to assist. Ex, adjutant, aid, coadjutor.

YEU, to bind, to mix. Skt. yu, to bind, to fasten, join, mix;
yu-sha-, pease soup ; L. ‘u-s, broth; Gk, (v-yn, leaven. Ex, zymotic;
juice. See YEUG, YOS.


WORDS (ENGLISH)


YEUG, to join, to yoke together. Skt. yzj, to join, connect
yug-a(m), a yoke; Gk. (evy-vupu, I yoke, (vy-dv, yoke; L, iung-ere,
to Ubi eae a yoke, con-iux, a spouse, ivx-ta, near; AS. geoc,
a yoke. Ex. syzygy; jugular, conjugal, join, junction, joust, jostle;
pag Ce pai fae hoa Maa Caen Ma ey ;

YOS (= yos), to gird. Zend yas-ta-, girt; Gk. (avvvps (for
*Cho-vupt), I gird, (w-vn, a girdle, (wo-rnp, a girdle; Lith, jos-ta,
a girdle. Ex. zone. See YHU (2).


761


Vir DISTRIBUEIONGOr WORDS


The following is an attempt to distribute the words in the English
language so as to show the sources to which they originally be-
longed. The words selected for the purpose are chiefly those given
in large type in the dictionary, to the exclusion of mere derivatives
of secondary importance, The English list appears short in pro-
portion, chiefly because it contains a large number of these secondary
words, such as happiness, hearty, helpful, and the like.

T have no doubt that, in some cases, the sources have been wrongly
assigned, through ignorance. Some indulgence is requested, on
account of the difficulty of making the attempt on a scale so com-
prehensive. The account of some words has been altered, by way
of correction. Some words, not given in the ordinary lists, will be
found among the Hybrid Words at the end.


ENGLISH. With the exception of some words of imitative
origin, most of the following words (or their origins) can be found
in Anglo-Saxon or in Middle English of the earliest period.

a, aback, abaft, abed, abide (1), abide (2), ablaze, aboard, abode,
about, above, abreast, abroad, accursed, ache, acknowledge, acorn,
acre, adder, addled, ado, adown, adrift, adze, afar, afford, affright,
afloat, afoot, afore, afresh, aft, after, aftermath, aftermost, after-
ward, afterwards, again, against, agape, aghast, agnail, ago, agone,
aground, ahead, ahoy, ail, ait, ajar, akin, alack, albeit, alder, alder-,
alderman, ale, alight (1), alight (2), alike, alive, all, allay, al-
mighty, almost, alone, along (1), along (2), aloud, already, also,
although, altogether, alway, always, am, amain, amaze, amid,
amidst, among, amongst, an (a), an (if), and, anent, anew, angle (2),
an-hungered, ankle, anneal (1), anon, another, answer, ant, anvil,
any, ape, apple, are, aright, arise, arm (1), aroint thee, arrow,
arrow-root, arse, art (1), as (1), ash, ashamed, ashes, ashore, aside,
ask, asleep, aslope, aspen (asp), astern, astir, astride, asunder, at,
athirst, atone, auger, aught, awake, awaken, aware, away, awl,
awork, awry, axe (ax), ay!, ay (aye).

baa, babble, babe, back, backgammon, bad, bairn, bake, bale (2),
bale-fire, balk (1), balk (2), ban, bane, banns, banter, bare, bark (3),
barley, barm (1), barm (2), barn, barrow (1), barrow (2), barton,
bass (2) (barse), bast, bat (1), batch, bath, bathe, be- (prefix), be,
beach, beacon, bead, beam (1), beam (2), bean, bear (1), bear (2),
beard, beat, beaver (1), beck (1), beckon, become, bed, bedabble, be-
dew, bedight, bedim, bedizen, bedridden, bedstead, bee, beech, beer,
beetle (1), beetle (2), beetle (3), befall, before, beforehand, beget,
begin, begone, behalf, behave, behaviour (with F. suffix), behead, be-
hest, behind, behold, behoof, behove, belch, belie, believe, bell, bellow,
belly, belong, beloved, below, bemoan, bench, bend (1), beneath,
benighted, bent-grass, benumb, bequeath, bequest, bereave, berry,
berth, beseech, beseem, beset, beshrew, beside, besides, besom, besot,
bespeak, best, bestead (1), bestow, bestrew, bestride, beteem, be-
think, betide, betimes, betoken, betroth, better, between, betwixt,
beware, bewilder, bewitch, bewray, beyond, bicker?, bid (1), bid (2),
bide, bier, biestings (beestings), bight, bile (2), bill (1), bill (2),
bind, birch, bird, birth, bisson, bit (1), bit (2), bitch, bite, bitter,
blab, black, bladder, blade, blain, blanch (2), blare, blast, blatant,
blay, blaze (1), bleach, blear, blear-eyed, bleat, bleb, bleed, blench,
bless, blight, blind, blindfold, blindman’s buff, bliss, blithe, blood,
blossom, blow (1), blow (2), blow (3), blubber, blunt, blurt, blush,
bluster, boar, board (1), boat, bob, bode, bodice, body, boil (2),
bold, bolster, bolt, bone, bonfire, book, boom (1), boot (2), bore (1),
bore (2), borough, borrow, bosom, botch (1), bother, bots ?, bottom,
bough, bounce, bounden, bourn=burn (2), bow (1), bow (2),
bow’ (3), bower, bowl (2), bowline, bow-window, box (4), boy,
boycott, brabble, bracken, braid (1), braid (2), brain, brake (2),
bramble, brand, branks, bran new, brass, brawl (1), braze (2), breach,
bread, breadth, break, breast, breath, breech, breeches (breeks),
breed, breeze (1), brew, briar (brier), bridal, bride, bridegroom,
bridge, bridle, bright, brill, brim, brimstone, brine, bring, bristle,
brittle, broad, brood, brook (1), brook (2), brooklime, broom,


broth, brothel, brother, brow, brown, bruise, bubble, buck (1),
buck (2), bucket, buckwheat, bud, bug (2), build, bull (1), bulrush,
bum, bumble-bee, bumboat, bump (1), bump (2), bumper, bunch,
bundle, bunting (2)?, burden (1) (burthen), burial, burke, burly,
burn (1), burn (2), burr (bur), burrow, burst, bury (1), bury (2),
buss (1), busy, but (1), butt (3), butt (4), buttock, buxom, buy,
buzz, by, byre.

cackle, calf, calve, can (1), can (2), care, carve, cat, caterwaul,
catgut, cave in, caw, chafer (cock-chafer), chaff, chaffer, chaffinch,
champ, chap (1) (chop), chap (2) (chapman), chaps (chops),
char (1), char (2), charcoal, charlock, charm (2), chary, chat,
chatter, chaws, cheap, cheek, cheep, chert, chew (chaw), chicken,
chide, chilblain, child, chill, chin, chincough, chink (1), chink (2),
chip, chirp, chit (1), chit (2), chitterlings, choke, choose, chop (1),
chop (2), chough, chub, chubby, chuck (2), chuck (3), chuckle,
chump, churl, churn, cinder, clack, clam (1), clam (2), clammy,
clank, clap, clash, clasp, clatter, claw, clay, clean, cleat, cleave (1),
cleave (2), cleek, clench, clever, clew (clue), click, cliff, climb,
clinch, cling, clink, clinker-built, clip (2), clod, clot, cloth, clothe,
cloud, clough, clout, clove (2), clover, cluck, clump, cluster, clutch,
clutter (1), clutter (2), clutter (3), coal, coax, cob (1), cob (2),
cobble (1), cobble (2), cobweb, cock (1), cock (2), cock (3),
cock-eyed, cockle (2), cockney, cockshut time, cod (1), cod (2),
codling (1), cold, collie, collier, collop, colly (1), colly (2), colt,
comb, comb (coomb), come, comely, con (1), coo, cool, coomb,
coot, corn (1), cosset, cot (cote), couch-grass, cough, could, cove,
cow (1), cowslip, coxcomb, crab (1), crab (2), crabbed, crack,
cradle, craft, crake (corn-crake), cram, crane, crank (1), crank (2),
crank (3), crave, craw, creak, creep, cress, crib, crick, crimp, cringe,
crinkle, cripple, croak, croft, crop, croup (1), crow, crowd (1),
crumb, crumpet, crumple, crunch, crutch, cud, cudbear, cuddle,
cudgel, cudweed, culver (1), cunning (1), cur, curd, curse ?, cushat,
cuttle, cuttle-fish.

dab (1), dab (2), dab (3), dabble, dad, daft, daisy, dale, dam (1),
damp, dare (1), dark, darkling, darksome, darling, darn, daughter,
daw, dawn, day, dead, deaf, deal (1), deal (2), dear, dearth, death,
deed, deem, deep, deer, deft, dell, delve, den, dent, depth, derring
do, dew, dib, dibber, dibble, did, didapper, diddle, dike, dill, dim,
dimple, din, ding, ding-dong, dingle, dingy, dint, dip, distaff, dit,
ditch, dive, dizen, dizzy, do (did, done), dock (1), dock (2), docket,
dodder, dodge, doff, dog, dog-cheap, dogger, doggerel, dole, dolt,
don (1), donkey, doom, doomsday-book, door, dor, dot, dotage
(with F. suffix), dotard (with F. suffix), dote, dough, doughty, dont,
dove, dovetail, dowse (3), drab (1), draff, draft, draggle, drain,
drake, draught (draft), draw, drawl, dray, dread, dream (1),
dream (2), drear, dreary, dredge (1), drench, dribble, drift, drink,
drive, drivel, drizzle, drone (1), drone (2), drop, dross, drought,
drove, drowse (drowze), drudge, drunkard (with F. suffix), drunken
(drunk), dry, dub, duck (1), duck (2), duck (3), dug, dull, dumb,
dump (1), dumpling, dung, dunlin, dup, dust, dwarf, dwindle, dye,
dyke.

each, ear (1), ear (2), ear (3), earl, early, earn, earnest (1), earth,
earwig, east, Easter, eat, eaves, ebb, eddy, edge, eel, eery, eft, eh,
eight, either, eke (1), eke (2), elbow, eld, elder (1), elder (2),
eldest, eleven, elf, elk, ell, elm, else, ember-days, embers, emmet,
empty, end, English, enough, ere, errand, erst, eve (even), even,
evening, ever, every, everywhere, evil, ewe, eye, eyot.

fag, fag-end, fain, fair (1), fall, fallow (1), fallow (2), falter, fang,
far, fare, farrow, farther, farthest, farthing, fast (1), fast (2), fasten,
fastness, fat (1), fat (2), father, fathom, fawn (1), fear, feather, eed,
feel, feeze (pheeze), fell (1), fell (2), felly (felloe), felt, fen, fern,
ferry, fetch, fetter, few, fey, fickle, fiddle?, field, field-fare, fiend,
fight, file (2), file (3), fill, fillip, film, filth, fin, finch, find, finger,
fire, firk, first, fish, fist, fit (2), five, flabbergast, flabby, flag (1),
flag (2), flag (3), flap, flash, flax, flay, flea, fledge, flee, fleece,
fleet (1), fleet (2), fleet (3), fleet (4), flesh, flicker, flight (1),


762 DISTRIBUTION OF


flight (2), flint, flip (2), flirt, flitch, float, flock (1), flood, floor,
flop, flow, flue (2), fluke (1), fluke (2), flurry, flush (1), flush (2),
flush (3), flutter, fly (1), fly (2), foal, foam, fodder, foe, fold (1),
fold (2), folk, follow, fond, food, foot, footy, fop, for (1), for- (2),
forbear (1), forbear (2), forbid, ford, fore, fore-arm (1), forebode,
fore-father, fore-finger, fore-foot, forego (1), forego (2), foreground,
forehand, forehead, foreknow, foreland, forelock, foreman, foremost,
forerun, foresee, foreship, foreshorten, foreshow (foreshew), fore-
sight, forestall, foretell, forethought, foretoken, foretooth, foretop,
forewarn, forget, forgive, forgo (forego), forlorn, former, forsake,
forsooth, forswear, forth, fortnight, forty, forward, foster (1),
fother, foul, foumart, foundling, four, fowl, fox, fractious, frame,
fraught (Friesic), freak (1), freak (2), free, freeze, fresh, fret (1),
Friday, friend, fright, frith (1), frog (1), frog (2)?, from, frore,
frost, froward, fulfil, full (1), fulsome, furlong, furrow, further,
furthest, furze, fuss, futtocks, fuzz-ball, fylfot.

gabble, gag, gaggle, gale (2), gall (1), gallow, gallows, gamble,
game, gammon (2), gander, gannet, gar (1), garfish, garlic, gate
(1), gather, gavelkind, ghastly, ghost, gibberish, gibe, giddy, gift,
giggle, gild, gin (1), gird (1), gird (2), girdle, girl, give, glad,
gladsome, glare, glass, glaze, gleam, glede (1), glede (2), glee,
glib (1), glib (3), glide, glimmer, glimpse, glisten, glister, gloaming,
gloom, glove, glow, glower, glum, gnarl, gnarled, gnat, gnaw, go,
goad, goal, goat, god, goddess (with F. suffix), godfather, godhead,
godmother, godwit, goggle-eyed, gold, good, goodbye, goodman,
goose, gooseberry, gorbellied, gorcrow, gore (1), gore (2), gore (3),
gorse, goshawk, gosling, gospel, gossamer, gossip, grab, grasp,
grass, grave (1), gray, graze (1), graze (2), great, greaves (1), greedy,
green, greet (1), greet (2), greyhound, gride, grig (2), grim, grin,
grind, grip, gripe, grisly, grist, gristle, grit (1), grit (2), groan, groats,
groin, grope, ground, groundling, grounds, groundsel, groundsill,
grout, grove, grow, grub, grunt, guest, guild (gild), guilt, gulp,
gum (1), gush, gut, gyves ?

ha, hack (1), hack (2), hackle (1), hackle (2), hackney, had-
dock?, haft, hag, hail (1), hair, hairif, hale (1), half, halibut,
halidom, halimote, hall, hallow, halt (1), halter, halve, halyard
(halliard), ham, hame, hammer, hamper (1), hand, handcuff,
handicap, handicraft, handiwork (handywork), handle, handsome,
handy (1), handy (2), hang, hanker, hansom, hard, hardock, hards,
hare, harebell, hark, harm, harp, harrier (1), harrier (2), harrow,
harry, hart, harvest, hasp, hassock, hat, hatch (1), hatch (2), hatchel,
hatches, hate, hatred, haugh, haulm (halm, haum), have, haven,
haw, hawk (1), hawk (3), hay (1), hay (2), hazel, he, head,
headlong, heal, health, heap, hear, hearken, hearsay, heart, hearth,
heart’s-ease, hearty, heat, heath, heathen, heather, heave, heaven,
heavy, heckle, hedge, heed, heel (1), heel (2), heft, heifer, heigh-ho,
height, hell, helm (1), helm (2), helmet, help, helve, hem (1),
hem (2), hemlock, hen, hence, henchman, hent, her, herd (1),
herd (2), here, heriot, herring, hest, hew, hey, heyday (2), hiccough
(hiccup, hicket), hide (1), hide (2), hide (3), hide (4), hie, higgle,
high, highland, hight, hilding, hill, hilt, him, hind (1), hind (2),
hind (3), hinder, hindmost, hinge, hint, hip (1), hip (2) (hep), hire,
his, hiss, hist (or Scand.), hitch, hithe (hythe), hither, hive, ho (hoa),
hoar, hoard, hoarhound (horehound), hoarse, hoary, hob (1), hobble,
hobbledehoy?, hobnail, hobnob (habnab), hock (1), hockey, hog,
hogshead, hold (1), hole, holibut, holiday, holiness, hollow, holly,
hollyhock, holm-oak, holt, holy, home, homestead, hone, honey,
honeycomb, honeymoon, honeysuckle, hood, -hood (-head), hoof,
hook, hoop (1), hop (1), hope (1), hopple, horn, hornet, horse, hose,
hot, hough (hock), hound, house, housel, hover, how (1), howl,
hox, hoy (2), hub, huckle-berry, huckle-bone, huddle, hue (1), huff,
hull (1), hull (2), hum (1), hum (2), humble-bee, humbug, hum-
drum, hummock (hommock), hump, hunch, hundred, hunger, hunt,
hurdle, hurdy-gurdy, hurst, hurtleberry, hush, husk, husky, hussif,
hussy, huzzah.

I, ice, icicle, idle, if, ilk, im- (2), imbed, imbitter, imbody, im-
bosom, imbower, imbrown, impound, in, in- (1), inasmuch, inborn,
inbreathed, inbred, income, incony, indeed, indent (2), indwelling,
infold, ingathering, ingot, inland, inlay, inlet, inly, inmate, inn,
innermost (inmost), inning, inroad, inside, insight, insnare, inso-
much, instead, instep, inthral, into, intwine, inward, inweave,
inwrap, inwreathe, inwrought, irk, iron, ironmonger, is, island, it,
itch, ivy, iwis.

jam (1), jam (2), jar (1), jerk, jingle, job (1), jog, jole, jolt, jowl
(jole), jumble.

kedge (2) (kidge), keel (2), keen, keep, kelp, kemb, kern (2),
kernel, kersey, key, kidney, kill, kin, kind (1), kind (2), kindle (2),
kindred, kine, king, kingdom, kipper, kiss, kite, kith, knack,
knacker, knag, knap, knar, knave, knead, knee, kneel, knell (knoll),
knick-knack, knife, knight, knit, knob, knock, knoll (1), knoll (2),
knop, knot, know, knowledge, knuckle, knurr, kythe.


WORDS (ENGLISH)


lack (1), lack (2), lad, ladder, lade (1), lade (2), ladle, lady,
lag, lair, lamb, lame, Lammas, land, lane, lank, lap (1), lap (2), lap.
(3), lapwing, larboard ?, lark (1), lark (2), last (1), last (2), last (3),
last (4), latch (1, 2), late, lath, lathe (2), lather, latter, laugh, lawyer,
lay (1), layer, lea (1), lea (2) (ley, lay), lead (1), lead (2), leaf,
lean (1), lean (2), leap, learn, lease (2), lease (3), leasing, least,
leat, leather, leave (1), leave (2), ledge, ledger, ledger-, leech (1),.
leech (2), leek, leer, leet, left, leman (lemman), lend, length,
lent, less, -less, lest, let (1), let (2), letch, lew, lewd, ley, lib, lich-
gate, lick, lid, lie (1), lie (2), lief, life, lifelong, lift (2), light (1),
light (2), light (3), lighten (1), lighten (2), lighten (3), lightning,
lights, like (1), like (2), lilliputian, limb (1), limber (1), lime (1),
lime (2), limp (1), limp (2), linch-(pin), lind, linden, ling (1),
linger, linsey-woolsey, lip, lisp, lissom, list (1), list (4), list (5), list
(6), listen, listless, lists, lithe, lither, little, live (1), live (2), livelihood,
livelong, lively, liver, lo, load, loaf, loam, loan, loath, lock (1),
lock (2), lode, lodestar (loadstar), lodestone (loadstone), log (1),
log (2), loggerhead, loll, lone, long (1), long (2), looby, look,
loom (1), loon (1) (lown), loose, vb., loosen, lop, lord, lore, lorn,
lose, losel (lorel), loss, lot, loud, louse, lout, love, low (2), low (3),
lower (1), lower (2), lubber, luff, lukewarm, lull, lung, lust, -ly,
lyddite, lye, lynch.

mad, madder, maggot, maid, maiden, main (1), make, malm,
malt, mamma, man, mandrill, mane, manifold, mankind, many,
maple, mar, mare, mark (1), mark (2), marrow (1), marsh, mash,
mast (1), mast (2), match (1), mattock, maw, may (1), may-weed,.
maze, me, mead (1), mead (2), meadow, meal (1), meal (2),
mean (1), mean (2), mean (4), measles, meat, meed, meet (1),
meet (2), mellow, melt, mere (1), mere (3), mermaid, merry, mesh,
mete, methinks, mew (1), mew (2), mich, mickle, mid, middle,
midge, midriff, midst, midwife, might (1), might (2), milch, mild,
mildew, milk, milksop, milt (1), mind, mine (1), mingle, minnow,
mirth, mis- (1) (also Scand.), misbecome, misbehave, misbelieve,
misdeed, misdeem, misdo, misgive, mislay, mislead, mislike, mis-
name, miss (1), misselthrush (mistlethrush), misshape, mist, mis-
time, mistletoe, misty (1), misunderstand, mite (1), mixen, mizzle,
moan, mole (1), mole (2), molten, Monday, mongrel, month,
mood (1), moon, moor (1), moor (2), moot, mop (2), mope,
more, Mormonite, morn, morning, morrow, moss, most, mote, moth,
mother (1), mother (2), mother (3), mould (1), mould (3), mourn,
mouse, mouth, mow (1), mow (2), much, mud, muddle, muff (2),
mugwort, mum (1), mumble, munch, murder (murther), must (1),
mutter, my.

nail, nailbourn, naked, namby-pamby, name, nap (1), nape,
narrow, naught (nought), nave (1), navel, neap, near, neat (1),
neb, neck, need, needle, neese (neeze), negus (1), neigh, neighbour,
neither, nesh, ness, nest, net (1), nether, nettle, never, new, new-
fangled, news, newt, next, nib, nibble, nick (1), nickname, nigh,
night, nightingale, nightmare, nightshade, nimble, nine, ninny, nip,
nipple, nit, no (1), no (2), nobody, nod, noddle, nonce, none, nook,
nor, north, nose, nostril, not (1), not (2), not (3), nothing, not-
withstanding, noule (nowl, nole), now, noway, noways, nowhere,
nowise, nozzle, nugget, numb, nut, nuzzle.

O (1), (oh), O (2), oak, oakum, oar, oast-house, oath, oats,
of, off, offal, offing, offscouring, offset, offshoot, offspring, oft, often, —
old, on, once, one (1), one (2), only, onset, onslaught, onward,
onwards, ooze, ope, open, or (1), or (2), ordeal, ore, ort, other,
otter, oubit, ought (1), ought (2), ouphe, our, ousel, out, outbid,
outbreak, outburst, outcome, outdo, outdoor, outer, outgo, outgrow,
outhouse, outlandish, outlast, outlay, outlet, outlive, outlook, out-
lying, outreach, outride, outright, outroad, outrun, outset, outshine,
outside, outstretch, outstrip, outward, outweigh, outwent, outwit,
outworks, oven, over, Overalls, overbear, overboard, overburden,
overcloud, overcome, overdo, overdraw, overdrive, overflow, over-
grow, overhang, overhead, overhear, overlade, overland, overlap,
overlay, overleap, overlie, overlive, overload, overlook, overmatch,
overmuch, overreach, override, overrun, oversee, overset, over-
shadow, overshoot, oversight, overspread, overstep, overstock, over-
throw, overtop, overweening, overweigh, overwhelm, overwise, over-
work, overworn, overwrought, owe, owl, own (1), own (2), own (3),
ox, oxlip. oe

pad (1), paddle (1), paddle (2), paddock (2), padlock, pan,
pang, pap (1), pap (2), park, pat (1), pat (2), pat (3), patch (1) ?,
patch (2)?, path, patter, paxwax, pebble, peck (1), peddle, peddler
(pedlar), peer (2)?, peevish, peg, periwinkle (2)?, pewet (pewit,
peewit), pick, pickle ?, pig, piggin, pike, pilchard, pinder (pinner),
pinfold, pink (1), pink (3), pish, pitapat, pitch (2), pith, plash (1),
plat (1), play, plight (1), plod, plot (2), plough, pluck, plump (1),
plump (3), pock, pod, poke (2), pollock, pond, pool (1), pop, pore
(2), pot, pother, potter, pound (2), pound (3), pout (1), pout (2),
pox, prance, prank (1), prank (2), prick, pride?, prig (1), prig (2),


» DISTRIBUTION OF WORDS (LOW GERMAN)


prong, prop, proud ?, pshaw, puck, pudding, puddle (1), puddle (2),
puff, puffin, pug, puke (1)?, pull, pun, purl (4), purr, puss, put,
puttock.

quack (1), quaff, quagmire, quake, quaker, qualm, quaver, quean,
queen, quell, quench, quern, quick, quicken, quid, quill (1), quill (2) ?,
quiver (1), quiz, quoth.

race (1), rack (7), rack (8), racket (2), raddle, rafter, raid,
rail (4), rain, rake (1), rake (2), rakehell, ram, ramble, ramsons,
rank (2), rape (3), rash (1), rasher, rat, rath, rather, rattle, raught,
raven (1), raw, reach (1), reach (2), read, ready, reap, rear (1),
rear (3), rearmouse, reave, reck, reckon, red, redgum, reechy,
reed, reek, reel (1), reest, reeve (2), reeve (3), reft, rend, rennet
(1), rent (1), reremonse, rest (1), retch (reach), rib, rich, rick,
rickets, rid, riddle (1), riddle (2), ride, ridge, rig (2)?, rig (3),
right, rim, time (2), rimer, rimple, rind, ring (1), ring (2),
rink, ripe, ripple (1), ripple (2), rise, rivel, road, roar, robbins,
rock (2), rod, roe (1), rood, roof, rook (1), room, roost, root
(2) (rout), rope, rot, rother, rough, roun (rown, round), row (1),
tow (2), rowlock (rullock), rub, rudd, rudder, ruddock, ruddy, rue
(1), ruff (1), ruff (2), ruff (3), ruffle (1), rum (1), rumble, rummage
(with F. suffix), rumple, run, rune, rung, runnel, rush (1), rush (2),
Tust, rye.

sad, saddle, sail, sake, sale, sallow (1) (sally), sallow (2), salt,
salve, same, sand, sand-blind, sandwich, sap (1), Saturday, saw
(1), saw (2), say (1), scatter, scold, scoundrel, scramble, scrawl,
screed, screw (2), scrip (1), scythe, sea, seal (2), seam (1), sear
(sere), sedge, see (1), seed, seek, seem, seer, seesaw, seethe,
seldom, self, sell (1), send, sennight, set (1), settee, settle (1),
settle (2), seven, sew (1), shabby, shackle, shad, shaddock, shade,
shadow, shaft, shag, shake, shall, shallow, sham, shamble, shame,
shamefaced, shank, shape, shard, share (1), share (2), sharp,
shatter, shave, shaw, she, sheaf, shear, sheath, sheave, shed (1),
shed (2), sheen, sheep, sheet, sheldrake, shelf, shell, shelter, shelve,
shepherd, sherd (shard), sheriff, shide, shield, shift, shilling, shilly-
shally, shimmer, shin, shine, shingle (2), ship, shire, hirt, shive,
shiver (1), shiver (2), shoal (1), shoal (2), shock (1), shock (2),
shock (3), shoddy, shoe, shog, shoot, shop, shore (1), shore (2),
shot, shoulder, shout, shove, shovel, show (shew), shower, shrapnel,
shred, shrew, shrewd, shriek, shrift, shrike, shrill, shrimp, shrink,
shrive, shrivel, shroud, shrub (1), shun, shunt, shut, shuttle, shuttle-
cock, sib, sick, side, sieve, sift, sigh, sight, sill, sillabub, silly, silver,
simmer, sin, since, sinew, sing, singe, sink, sip, sippet, sister, sit, sith,
six, slabber, slack, slade, slake, slap?, slate (2), slay (1), slay (2)
(sley), sledge-hammer, sleep, sleeper, sleet, sleeve, slide, slime, slink,
slip, slit, sliver, slobber, sloe, slop (1), slope, sloth (1), sloth (2),
slough (1), slow, slow-worm, sludge, slumber, slump, slums,
smack (1), small, smart, smash, smear, smell, smelt (2), smew,
smirch, smirk, smite, smith, smock, smoke, smolt, smooth, smother,
smoulder, smut, snail, snake, snare, snarl, snatch, sneak, sneeze,
snite (1), snite (2), snood, snore, snot, snout, snow, snuff (2), so,
soak, soap, sob, soc, sod, soft, soke, some, -some, son, song, soon,
soot, sooth, soothe, soothsay, sop, sore, sorrow, sorry, sot, soul,
sound (1), sound (2), sounder, sour, south, sow (1), sow (2), spade,
span, spancel, spangle, spank, spar (1), spar (2), sparable, spare,
spark (1), sparrow, spat (1), spat (2), spats, spatter, spawl, speak,
spear, speck, speech, speed, speir, spell (1), spell (3), spell (4),
spew, spider, spile, spill (1), spin, spindle, spinster, spire (1),
spit (1), spit (2), spittle (1), splutter, spoke, spokesman, spoon,
spot, spout, sprat, sprawl, spray (2), spread, sprig, spring, springal,
sprit, sprout, spry, spur, spurn, spurt (1) (spirt), sputter, squeeze,
squint, squirt, staff, stair, staithe, stake, stale (2), stale (3), stalk (1),
stalk (2), stall, stalwart, stammer, stamp, stand, staple (1), star,
starboard, starch, stare (1), stare (2), stare (3), stark, stark-naked,
starling, start, starve, stave, stay (2), stead, steadfast (stedfast),
steady, steal, steam, steed, steel, steelyard, steep (1), steeple, steer
(1), steer (2), stem (1), stem (2), stem (3), stench, step, stepchild,
sterling, stern (1), steward, stick (1), stick (2), stickleback, stickler,
stiff, stile (1), still (1), sting, stingy, stink, stint, stir, stirrup, stitch,
stoat, stock, stocking, stone, stool, stoop (1), stork, storm, stove,
stow, straddle, straight, strain (2), strand (1), straw, stream, strength,
stretch, strew (straw), stride, strike, string, strip, stripling, stroke (1),
stroke (2), strong, stub, stubborn, stud (1), stud (2), stun, stutter,
sty (1), sty (2), such, suck, suds, sulky, sultry (sweltry), summer (1),
sun, sunder, sup, surf, surly, swaddle, swallow (1), swallow (2),
swamp, swan, swan-hopping, swap, sward, swarm, swart, swarthy,
swash, swath, swathée, sway, sweal, swear, sweat, sweep, sweet,
sweetheart, swell, swelter, swerve, swift, swill, swim (1), swim (2),
swine, swing, swinge, swingle-tree, swink, swipe, swivel, swoon,
swoop, sword.

tab, tadpole, tail (1), tale, talk, tall?, tallow, tame, tang (3),
tap (2), taper (1), taper (2), tar, tare (1), tarre, tarry, tart (1),


763


tattle, taut, taw (tew), tawdry, teach, teal, team, tear (1), tear (2),
tease, teasel, tee, teem (1), teen, tell, ten, tether, tetter, tew.

than, thane, thank, that, thatch, thaw, the (1), the (2), thee (1),
thee (2), theft, then, thence, there (1), there- (2), these, thews,
thick, thief, thigh, thill, thimble, thin, thine, thing, think, third,
thirl, thirst, thirteen, thirty, this, thistle, thither, thole (1) (thowl),
thole (2), thong, thorn, thorough, thorp (thorpe), those, thou,
though, thought, thousand, thrash (thresh), thread, threat, three,
threshold, thrice, thrid, thrill (thirl), throat, throb, throng, thropple
(thrapple), throstle, throttle, through, throw, thrum (1), thrush (1),
thud, thumb, thump, thunder, thus, thwack, thwite, thy.

tick (1), tick (3), tick (4), tickle, tide, tidy, tie, till (1), till (3),
tiller, tilt (1), tilt (2), tilth, timber, time, tin, tind, tinder, tine (1),
tine (2), tingle, tinker, tinkle, tip (1), tip (2), tire (1), tit (2), tit for
tat, tithe, titter, tittle-tattle, to, to- (1), to- (2), toad, today, toddle,
to-do, toe, together, token, toll (1), toll (2), tomorrow, tongs,
tongue, tonight, too, tool, toot (1), tooth, top (1), topple, topsy-
turvy, totter, tough, touse, tout, tow (1), tow (2), toward, towards,
town, trade, tramp, trample, trap (1), tray, tread, tree, trend, trickle,
trim, troth, trough, trow, truce, true, trust, Tuesday, tumble, turf,
tush, tusk, tussle, tut, twaddle, twain, twang, tweak, twelve, twenty,
twibill (twybill), twice, twig (1), twig (2), twilight, twill, twin,
twine, twinge, twinkle, twinter, twire, twist, twit, twitch, twitter, two-

udder, un- (1), un- (2), un- (3), uncomeatable (with F. suffix),
uncouth, under, under-, undern, understand, uneath, unkempt, unless,
unto, up, up-, upbraid, upholsterer, upon, upside-down, upstart,
upward, upwards, us, utmost, utter (1), utter (2).

vane, vat, vinewed, vixen, Volapiik.

wabble (wobble), waddle, wade, waft, wain, waist, wake (1),
waken, wale (weal), walk, wallet, wallow, walnut, wan, wander,
wane, wanion, wanton, ward, -ward, wardon, ware (1), ware (2),
ware (3), warlock, warm, warn, warp, wart, wary (ware), was, wast,
wash, wasp, watch, water, wattle, wave (1), waver, wawl, wax (1),
wax (2), way, wayward, we, weak, weal, weald, wealth, wean,
weapon, wear (1), wearish, weary, weasand (wesand), weasel,
weather, weather-beaten, weather-bitten ?, weave, web, wed, wedge,
wedlock, Wednesday, wee, weed (1), weed (2), week, ween, weep,
weet, weevil, weft, weigh, weir (wear), weird, weld (2), welfare,
welkin, well (1), well (2), wellaway, Welsh, welt, wen, wench,
wend, were, wert, wergild, werwolf, west, wet, wether, wey.

whack, whale, whap, wharf (1), wharf (2), what, whaup, wheal
(1), wheat, wheatear, wheedle ?, wheel, wheeze, whelk (1), whelk (2),
whelm, whelp, when, whence, where, wherry, whet, whether, whey,
which, whiff, whiffle, whig, while, whimbrel, whimper, whin (2),
whine, whip, whipple-tree, whisper, whist, whistle, whit, white,
whither, Whitsunday, whittle (1), whittle (2), whittle (3), whiz,
who, whole, whorl, whortleberry, why.

wick (1), wicked, wide, widow, wield, wife, wight (1), wild,
wilderness, wile, wilful, will (1), will (2), willow, wimble (1),
wimple, win, winberry (wimberry), winch, wind (1), wind (2), wink,
winkle, winnow, winsome, winter, wipe, wire, wise (1), wise (2),
wish, wisp, wist, wistful, wit (1), wit (2), wit (3), witch, witch-elm
(wych-elm), with, withdraw, wither, withers, withhold, within,
without, withsay, withstand, withy (withe), witness, wittol, wizard
(with ¥. suffix), wizen, wo (woe), woad, wold, wolf, woman, womb,
won, wonder, wondrous, wont, woo, wood (1), wood (2), woodrnff,
woodwale, woof, wool, woolward, word, work, world, worm, worm-
wood, worry, worse, worship, worst, worsted, wort (1), wort (2),
worth (1), worth (2), wot, would, wound, wrack, wraith, wrangle,
wrap, wrath, wreak, wreath, wreck, wren, wrench, wrest, wrestle,
wretch, wriggle, wright, wring, wrinkle (1), wrinkle (2), wrist,
write, writhe, wrong, wroth, wry.

y-, yap, yard (1), yard (2), yare, yarn, yarrow, yawl (2), yawn, ye,
yea, yean (ean), year, yearn (1), yearn (2), yeast, yede, yell, yellow,
yellow-hammer (yellow-ammer), yelp, yeoman, yerk, yes, yesterday,
yet, yew, yex, yield, yoke, yokel, yolk (yelk), yon, yore, you, young,
your, youth, yowl, Yule, ywis.

From place-names: canter, carronade, dunce, galloway, jasey,
jersey, kersey, lyddite, wardon, worsted (and others). From personal
names: bowie-knife, boycott, brougham, burke, congreve, doily,
kit-cat, lobelia, lynch, negus, orrery, pinchbeck, sandwich, shad-
dock, shrapnel, spencer (and others).

To the above may be added some words that appear in a foreign
form, yet seem to have been originally of English origin. Examples :
brogues, burglar, dodo, gyves, pewter, poteen, shebeen.


LOW GERMAN. Some of the words in the following list
may be of native origin, but their history is often obscure. They
appear to be Low German in form, and to have been introduced from
the Netherlands or Friesland or Hanover at various dates.

askew, bluff (2), bout, cranberry, cringle, dandle, dowel, drill (2),


764


doxy, dude, fib, fob (1), fob (2), frampold, frill, fuddle, grime,
groat, gull (2), haze, hawk (2), hawker, huckaback, huckster,
jerkin, kails, lazy, mate (1), mink, minx, mug, mum (2), pack,
package (with F. suffix), packet (with AF. suffix), paigle?, peak,
poll, prate, prowl, punk, queer, rantipole, rifle (2), rill, rustle (per-
haps E.), shudder, slight, smug, smuggle, spelter, spray (1), tackle,
teem (2), trice (1, 2), tub, tuck.

French from Low German: award, booty, brick, butt (1), button,
buttress, butty, chuck (1), dace, dart, fudge, fur, goffer, grape,
grapnel, grapple, gruel, hackbut, hamlet, heinous, lampoon, massa-
cre, maund (1), peck (2), pledge, poach (1), poach (2), posnet, putty,
rogue, scatches, slender, staple (2), stout, tampion, teat, tetchy
(techy), tiff (1), touchy, trundle, tybalt, wafer.

Dutch from French from Low German: skate (2).

French from Low Latin from Low German: callet, filter, quail (2).

Dutch from Low German : scarf (1), sloop.

Scandinavian from Low German: rig (1), scone (scon).

tar See also under Dutch and Teutonic.


DUTCH. aardvark, avast ?, belay, beleaguer, blot (2), bluff
(1), boom (2), boor, bouse (boose), brack, brackish, brandy,
bruin, bulk (2), bully, bumpkin, burgher, burgomaster, caboose,
cam, catkin, clamp, clinker, clipper, cope (3), dapper, deal (3),
delf, derrick, dirk ?, dock (3), doit, drill (1), drum, duck (4), duffel,
easel, freebooter, frolic, fumble, furlough, gas, geck, golf, groove,
gruff, guilder, heyday (1), hoarding, hold (2), holland, hop (2),
hope (2), hottentot, hoy (1), hustle, inkle?, isinglass, jib (1),
jib (2), keelhaul, kink, kit (1), knapsack, knickerbockers, kopje,
laager, land-grave, landscape, laveer, leaguer, lighter, linstock
(lintstock), litmus, loiter, margrave, marline, maulstick, minikin,
mob (2), mump, mumps, mutchkin, ogle, orlop, pad (2), pink (2),
pink (4), placket, plug, pompelmoose, quack (2), quacksalver,
rant, reef (1), reef (2), reeve (1), roster, rover, runt, schiedam, school
(2), seull (3), selvage (selvedge), serif, sheer (2), skipper, sled,
sledge, sleigh, slim, slot (1), sloven, smack (3), snaffle, snap, snip,
snuff (1), spelicans, splice, split, spoor, sprinkle, steenbok, stew (2),
stipple, stiver, stoker, stripe, sutler, swab, tattoo (1), toy, trick (3),
trigger, uproar, veldt, wagon (waggon), wainscot, yacht, Yankee ?,
yawl (1).

From Dutch or Flemish place-names ; cambric, dornick, spa.

Middle Dutch. brake (1), crate, creek, croon, deck (1), deck
(2), doxy, firkin, foist, fruamp, hod, hoiden (hoyden), hoist, lollard,
luck, milt (2), nag (1), nap (2), nock, puke (2), rabble, rack (1),
rack (2), ravel, ray (3), ret, ruffle (2), skew ?, slur, spool, swingle.

French from Dutch (or Middle Dutch): arquebus, bodkin?, clin-
quant, clique, cracknel, cricket (1), cricket (2), dig, droll, drug-
get, fitchet, frieze (1), friz (frizz), gleek (1), gleek (2), hoarding ?,
hobby (2), hotchpot (hodge-podge), manikin, mite (2), mitrailleuse,
mow (3), mummer, mute (2), placard, plack, plaque, shallop,
socket ?, staid, stay (1).

Spanish from French from Dutch: filibuster.

Walloon from Middle Dutch: rabbit.

Flemish from Dutch: fribble, ruammer.

German from Dutch: schnapps.

Scandinavian from Dutch: yaw.

Flemish: pamper.


SCANDINAVIAN. akimbo?, aloft, amiss, anger, angry,
aslant, auk, awe, awn, axle, aye.

bag, bait, balderdash, ball (2), band (1) (bond), bang (1), bank
(1), bark (2), bask, baste (1), bat (2), batten (1), bawl, beck (2),
bellows, bestead (2), big, billow, bing, bitts, blaze (2), blazon
(1), bleak (1), bleak (2), blend, blink, bloat, bloater, bloom,
blunder, blur, bole, bolled, bond, boon, booth, bore (3), both,
boulder, bound (3), bow (4), brad, brae, brag, brand- (brant-),
brinded, brindled, brink, brunt, bulk (1), bulk (3), bulwark, bungle,
bunk, bunting (1), busk (1), bustle (1), bustle (2), by-law.

cake, call, carp (2), cart, cast, clamber, cleft, clift, clip (1), clog,
clown, club (1), club (2), club (3), clumsy, cock (4), cocker, cockle
(3), cog (1), cog (2), coke?, cosy, cow (2), cower, crash, crawl,
craze, crook, cruse, cub, cuff (1), cunning (2), curl, cut, cutter

daggle, dairy (with F. suffix), dandriff?, dangle, dank, dapple,
dash, dastard (with F. suffix), dawdle, daze, dazzle (with E. suffix),
die (1), dirt, douse, dowdy, down (1), dowse (1), doze, drag, dregs,
drip, droop, drown, drumble, duds, duffer, dump (2), dumps, dun
(2), dusk, dwale, dwell.

egg (1), egg (2), eiderduck.

fadge, fast (3), fell (4), fellow, fetlock, fidget, filch, filly, fir, firth,
fit (1), fizz, flag (4), flagstone, flake, flare, flat, flaunt, flaw, fleck,
fleer, flimsy, fing, flip (1), flippant, flit, flounce (1), flounder (1),


DISTRIBUTION OF WORDS (DUTCH, SCANDINAVIAN, GERMAN)


| fluster, fog, force (3),
fulmar, fun ?.

gaby, gad (1), gad (2), gainly, gait, gale (1), galt (1), galt (2),
gang (1), gang (2), gape, gar (2), garish (gairish), garth, gasp, gate
(2), gault, gaunt, gaze, gear, ged, geld, get, gewgaw?, gig, giglet
(with F. suffix), gill (1), gill (2), girth, glade, glint, glitter, gloat,
gloss (1), gnash, goosander, gowan, gowk, grig (1), griskin, grovel,
gruesome, guess, gun, gust (1).

haggle (1), haggle (2), hail (2), hail (3), hake, handsel (hansel),
hank, hap, happen, harbour, harsh, hawse, hit, holm, hoot, how (2),
hug, hurl, hurry, husband, hustings.

ill, inkling, intake, intrust (with E. prefix).

jade (1), jersey, jolly (boat), jump (1), jump (2). .

keel (1), keelson (kelson), keg, ken, kick, kid, kidnap, kilt,
kindle (1), kitling.

lass, lathe (1), law, leak, lee, leech (3) (leach), leg, levin, lift (1),
liken, lilt, ling (2), link (1), link (2), loft, loom (2), loon (2), loose,
adj., low (1), low (4), lug, lumber (2), lump, lunch, luncheon,
lurch (1), lurch (4) ?, lurk.

mail (black), main (2), mark (3), marrow (2), mawkish (with E.
suffix), meek, midden, mire, mis- (1) (and E.), mistake, mistrust,
mouldy, muck, muggy, murky (mirky).

nab, nag (2), narwhal, nasty, nay, neif (neaf), niggard, niggle,
noggin ?, Norse, nudge.

oaf, odd, outlaw.

paddock (1), palter, paltry, pash, piddle, pimple, pixy, poke (1),
prawn ?, prod, pucker, purl (1). queasy.

rack (3), raft, rag, raise, rake (3), ransack, rap (1), rap (2), recall
(with L. prefix), recast (with L. prefix), reel (2) ?, rid (2), riding, rife,
rift, rip, ripple (3), rive, roan-tree (rowan-tree), rock (3), roe (2),
root (1), rotten, rouse (1), rouse (2), row (3), rubble, ruck (1), ruck
(2), rug, rugged, rump, ruth.

sag, saga, scab, scald (2), scald (3), scall, scalp, scant, scar (2)
(scaur), scare, scarf (2), scathe, schooner, scoff, score, scotch, scout
(2), scout (3), scowl, scrabble, scraggy, scrannel, scrap, scrape,
scratch, scream, screech, screes, scrub (1), scrub (2), scruff, scud,
scuffle, scuft (scruff), sculk (skulk), scull (1), scull (2), scum, scurf,
scurvy, scuttle (3), seat, seemly, sheal, sheer (1), shrug, shuffle, shy,
silt, simper, skate (1), skerry, skewer, skid, skill, skim, skimp, skin,
skink (1), skip, skirt, skittish, skittles, skua, skull (scull), sky, slab
(2), slam, slang, slant, slattern, slaughter, slaver, sleek, sleight, slick,
sling, slop (2), slouch, slough (2), slubber, slug, slush, slut, sly,
smack (2), smattering, smelt (1), smile, smudge, snag, sneap, sneer,
sniff, snipe, snivel, snob, snooze, snort, snub, snug, sough, span-new,
spark (2), spick and span-new, spike (1), spill (2), spink, splint
(splent), sprack (sprag), spree, spud, spurt (2), squab (1 and 2),
squabble, squall, squander, squeak, squeal, squib, squid, stab, stack,
stag, stagger, stang, steak, steep (2), stern (2), stifle, stilt, stith,
stook, stoup (stoop), straggle, streak, struggle, strum, strut (1),
strut (2), stumble, stump, stunted, swagger, swain, swirl.

tag, take, tang (1), tang (2), tangle, tarn, tat, tatter, ted, teem (3),
teg, teind, tern, their, them, they, thrall, thrave, thrift, thrive, throe,
thrum (2), thrush (2), thrust, Thursday, thwaite, thwart, tidings,
uff (2), tiffin, tight, tike, till (2), tine (3), tipple, tipsy, tit (1),
titling, tod, toft, toom, torsk, toss, tram, trash, trill (2), trill (3),
tug, tup, tussock, twiddle, twirl.

ugly. Valhalla, Valkyria, Viking, vole.

wad, wadmal, wag, waggle, wail, wake (2), wale (2), wall-eyed,
wand, want, wapentake, welcome, weld (1), welter, whim, whin (1),
whinyard (with F. suffix), whir, whirl, whisk, whitlow, whore, wick
(3)=wich, wicker, wight (2), wimble (2), windlass (1), window,
wing.

Icelandic: geysir, scarf (3).

Swedish : dahlia, gauntlet (2) (gantlope), kink, slag, sloid, trap (3),
tungsten.

Norwegian : fiord, lemming. Danish: floe, siskin.

French from Scandinavian: abet, baggage (1), baggage (2),
barbed, bet, blemish, boast, boisterous, bondage, braise, brandish,
brasier, brawl (2), braze (1), breeze (3), brisket, bun, elope, equip,
faggot, flatter, flounder (2), frown, gable, gauntlet (1), gawk,
gormandize, gourmand, grudge, haggis, jangle, jape, jib (3), jolly,
lagan, locket, Norman, pouch, rivet, rorqual, rubbish, scoop, scup-
per, scutch, slot (2), sound (4), strife, strive, target, tryst, waif,
waive.

Dutch from Scandinavian: ballast, doit, walrus.

Russian from Scandinavian: knout.

Late Latin from Scandinavian: scorbutic.


foss, freckle, frith (2) (firth), fro, froth,


GERMAN. (The number of words borrowed directly from
German is but small.) 7:
aurochs, bantling, bismuth, cobalt, dachshund, Dutch, fahrenheit,


DISTRIBUTION OF WORDS (TEUTONIC, CELTIC, ROMANCE LANGUAGES)


feldspar, fugleman, gneiss, hamster, heyday (1), hock (2), hurrah,
lager-bier, lammergeyer, landau, mangel-wurzel, meerschaum, mes-
merise (with F. suffix), minnesinger, plunder, poodle, quartz, ratch,
shale, sleazy, spitchcock, swindler, thaler, trull, wacke, waltz, zinc.

From personal names: camellia, fuchsia.

Dutch (or Low German) from German: crants, dollar, etch,
gemsbok, holster, rix-dollar, skellum, switch, wiseacre.

Scandinavian from German : nickel, quirk, sleave (silk).

Polish from German: hetman,

French from German: abut, band (2), bandy, bawd,
bawdy, belfry, bend (2), bistre?, bivouac, block, botch (2), brach,
brunette, carouse, carousal (1), chamois, coat, etiquette, franc,
grumble, haggard (1), haggard (2), halt (2), hamper (2), hanaper,
hash, hatch (3), hatchet, haversack, hoe, Huguenot, lansquenet,
latten, lattice, lecher, lickerish (with E. suffix), list (2), lumber (1),
lurch (2), lurch (3) ?, lure, mangle (1), marquee, mignonette, motley,
popinjay, raffle, roast, schorl, shammy (shamoy), spruce, tan, ticket,
top (2), zigzag.

French from Provengal from German: marque (letters of).

Italian from German : rigol, rocket (1).

French from Italian from German; bank (2), banquet, burin,
group, tuck (2).

Low Latin from German: lobby, morganatic.

French from Low Latin from German: carline, fauteuil, goblin,
lodge, marchioness, marquis, mason ?,

Scandinavian from Middle High German: bunt.

tz See also under Teutonic.

French from Middle High German: baffle, bale (1),
brewis (brose), browze, burgess, demarcation, gonfanon (gonfalon),
grisette, grizzly, grizzled (with E. suffix), halberd (halbert), jig,
marquetry, rebut (with L. prefix), sorrel (1), warble, wince.

French from Old High German: agraffe, allegiance,
arrange, await, bacon, balloon, banish, baste (3), blanch (1),
blank, blanket, blue, boss, bottle (2), brawn, bream, burnet,
burnish, butcher, carcanet, chine, cratch, crayfish (craw-fish),
dance, egret, ermine, eschew, espy, fee, feoff, feud (1),
fief, filbert, flange, flank, flawn, flinch, flunkey, franchise, frank,
franklin, freight, frisk, furbish, furnish, gaiety, gallant, galloon,
garb (2), garbage, garret, gay, giron (gyron), grilse, guarantee
(guaranty), guise, habergeon, hale (2) (haul), hanseatic, harangue,
harass, harbinger, hardy, hauberk, haul, haunch, herald, hernshaw
(2), heron, hob (2), hobby (1), hobgoblin, hut, jay, lay (2), liege,
mail (2), maim, malkin, march (1), marshal, mazer, mazzard, minion,
morel, mushroom, orgulous, ouch (nouch), perform (with L. prefix),
quiver (2), range, rank (1), rappee, rasp, rasp(-berry), riches, rob,
robe, robin, rochet, Salic (Salique), saloon, scale (1), scorn, seize,
skirmish, slice, spy, stallion, strand (2), tarnish, towel, vagrant,
wait, warrant, warren.

German from French from Old High German: veneer.

French from Low Latin from Old High German: abandon, equerry,
faldstool, install, sturgeon.

Spanish from Old High German: guerilla (guerrilla).

French from Spanish from Old High German : rapier.

Italian from Old High German: ballot, fresco, smalt, stucco.

French from Italian from Old High German: gala, garb (1), skiff.

French from Austrian ; cravat.


TEUTONIC. This is here used as a general term, to show
that the following words (derived through French, Spanish, &c.)
cannot quite certainly be referred to a definite Teutonic dialect,
though clearly belonging to the Teutonic family.

French from Teutonic: attach, banner, banneret, bartisan,
beadle, bedell, blazon (2), blister, blot (1), blotch, board (2),
boulevard, brattice, bray (1), broider, broil (1), brush, buff (1),
burgeon, choice, coterie, cotillion, cramp, crewel, croup (2), cruet,
crupper, crush, dally, epergne, escrow, feuter, gaff, gage (1), gain
(1), gain (2), gaiter, gallop, gambeson, gardant, garden, garland,
garment, garnish, garrison, gimlet, gimp, glissade, grate (2), grimace,
growl, guard, guide, guidon, guile, guillemot, guipure, guy (2), harlot,
haste, hasten, havoc, hoop (2), hovel, hue (2) huge?, label, louver
(loover), merlin, moat, moraine, parquetry, patrol, patten, paw,
pheon, pickax, picket, picnic, picotee, pique, piquet, pocket,
porridge, porringer, pottage, pottle, rally (2), ramp, random, reynard
(renard), ribald, riffraff, rifle (1), roach, romp, scabbard, scale (2),
scallop (scollop), scavenger, screen, scroll, seneschal, slab (1), slash,
slat, slate (1), sorrel (2), soup, spar (3), spavin, spell (2), stale (1),
stew (1), stroll, sturdy, supper, tache (1), tack, tankard, tap (1),
tawny, tenny, Tibert, tic, tier, tire (2), tire (3), toper, touch, track,
trap (2), trawl, trepan (2) (trapan), trip, troll, truck (1), trudge ?,
tuck (3), tucker, tucket, tuft (1), tuft (2), turbary, tweezers (with


765


KE. suffix), wage, wager, war, warden, wardrobe, warison, wassail,
whoop, wicket, windlass (2).

Late Latin from French from Teutonic : corrody, feud (2), feudal.

Dutch from French from Teutonic : morass.

Te from Teutonic: flotilla, gabardine, picador, ranch, stam-
pede.

French from Spanish from Teutonic: amice (2), bandoleer, pic-
cadill, scuttle (2).

Italian from Teutonic: arpeggio, balcony, bandit, bunion, loto
(lotto), lottery, scherzo, stoccado (stoccata), strappado.

French from Italian from Teutonic: attack, bagatelle, escarpment
(with L. suffix), guy (1), ruffian, scaramouch, scarp, tirade, yogue.

Late Latin from Teutonic: allodial, Goth, saponaceous, Saxon,
Teutonic, Vandal, Visigoth.

French from Low Latin from Teutonic: border, carp (1), forage,
marten, pandour, ratten.

Latin from Greek from Teutonic: bison.


CELTIC. This is a general term for the languages now repre-
sented by Irish, Gaelic, Welsh, Breton, Manx, and (till very recently)
Cornish. Some of the words are from old Celtic forms, which it is
not always possible to trace clearly.

bald, bard, beltane, bin, bog, boggart, boggle, brat, brock,
brogues (from English?), bug (1), bug (2) ?, bugaboo, bug(bear),
cairn, Celt (1), char (3), coble, combe, crag, crock, Culdee,
doe?, down (2), down (3), dulse, dun (1), duniwassal, galore, gillie,
glen, glib (2), gull (1), hubbub, ingle (1), kelpie, kex, kibe, linn,
loop, peat, penguin ?, pose (3), shamrock, strath, tall?, ton (tun),
tump, twig (2) ?, wheal (2).

Welsh: bragget, coracle, cromlech, crowd (2), eisteddfod, flannel,
flummery, metheglin.

Gaelic; airt, capercailzie, cateran, clachan, clan, claymore, coro-
nach, corrie, duan, fillibeg, inch (2), loch, mackintosh, ptarmigan,
slogan, sowans, spleuchan, tocher, whiskey.

Irish: banshee, colleen, cosher, Fenian, gallowglass, kern (1)
(kerne), lough, mavourneen, ogham, omadaun, orrery, rapparee,
shanty, shillelagh, skain (skene), spalpeen, tanist, Tory, usque-
baugh,

Breton: dowlas, menhir, poldavy.

French from Cellic (or Breton): barter, beak, bijou, bilge,
bound (2), bourn (1), brail, bran, bray (2), budget, bulge, car,
cloak, clock, dolmen, galliard, garter, gobbet, gobble (with E,
suffix), gravel, grummet (2), harness, javelin, job (2), lawn (1),
lockram, mavis, mien, mine (2), mineral, musit, mutton, petty ?,
piece, quay, skein, truant, tunnel, valet, varlet, vassal.

Spanish from Celtic: garrote (garrotte).

French from Spanish from Celtic: bracket.

French from Dutch from Celtic: dune.

Latin from Celtic : carucate.

French from Late Latin from Celtic: arras, artesian, career, cark,
carpenter, carrack, carry, charge, chariot, druid, embassy, feuterer,
gouge, pontoon, vavasour.

Provencal from Late Latin from Celtic: league (2).

Spanish from Late Latin from Celtic: cargo.

Tialian from Late Latin from Celtic: caricature.

French from Italian from Late Latin from Celtic: ambassador,
caroche, carriole. ;

French from German from Celtic: rote (2).


ROMANCE LANGUAGES. These languages, which
include French, Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian, are, strictly
speaking, unoriginal, but we cannot always trace them back to
the source. A large number of the words belonging to these
languages will be found under the headings Celtic, Latin, Greek,
&c., which should be consulted. Those here enumerated are words
of which the origin is imitative, local, or obscure.

French. abash, aery, agog, andiron, attire, avens, average, baboon,
badge, badger, bar, bargain, barrator, barrel, barren, barrier, basket,
battlement, bauble (1), bauble (2), bavin, bayonet, beaver (2), beg,
begonia, beguine, bevel, bice, biggin, bigot, billet, billiards, blond,
blouse, bludgeon, bobbin, boudoir, bourd, bourn (1), breeze (2),
bribe, broil (2), buckram, budge (2), buffer (1), buffer (2), buffet (1),
buffet (2), buffoon, busk (2), buss (2), cachalot, caddis, cadger, cajole,
cantilever, carbine, caul, Chablis, chagrin, cheval-de-frise, chicanery,
chiffonier, cockade, crare, cretonne, curlew, debar, demijohn, disease,
disembarras, doily, dolomite, drug, drugget, dupe, eagre, ease, em-
battle (1), embay, emblazon, emboss (1), emboss (2), embrasure, em-
broider, embroil, ergot, eyry, flout, flute, fret (2),furbelow, gallimaufry,
gallon, gasconade, gibbet, giblets, gill (3), glean, gobelin, grail (3),
greaves (2), grebe, groom, grouse, grummet (1), guillotine, gusset,
guzzle, haberdasher, haha, halloo, haricot (1), haricot (2), harridan,


766


haunt, hurt, hurtle, izard, jabber?, jag?, jaunt, lanner, lanyard,
lawn (2), lees, lias, limber (2), loach, loo, lorgnette, magnolia,
maraud, martin, martinet, martlet, Médoc, mitten, mortise, muffin,
mullein, mullion, Nicotian, ogre, paduasoy, partlet, pawn (1), pelf,
pet (1), pet (2), pilfer, pillory, pinch, pirouette, piss, pittance, pooh,
poplin, race (2), racy, rail (3), rampion, rascal, ratlines, riband
(ribbon), riot, rock (1), rococo, ronyon, roquelaure, ruff (4), sabot,
Sauterne, savoy, sedan-chair, shalloon, silhouette, soho, sparver,
tarlatan, Trappist, tripe, troop, Troy (weight), Tulle, valise, varnish,
vaudeville, vernier, virelay, watchet.

Anglo-French: kiddle.

Provengal: rack (4).

French from Provengal: charade, flageolet, gavotte, martingale.

Italian, adagio, agio, andante, bergomask, bravo, cameo,
galvanism, imbroglio, mantua, marsala, milliner, polony, rebuff,
regatta, sienna, tarantella, trill (1), voltaic.

French from Italian: avocet, bamboozle?, barracks, bergamot (2),
bezonian, brave, brigade, brigand, brigandine, brigantine (brig),
brisk, brusque, bust, carcase, carousal (2), casemate, catafalque,
caviare, charlatan, faience, frigate, garboil, gazette, harlequin, jean
(jane), maroon (1), pasquin, pasquinade, pavise, pistol, pistole,
ravelin, regale, rodomontade, theorbo, tirade, tontine, traffic.

Spanish. adobe, anchovy, bilbo, bilboes, bravado, cachucha,
cigar, cinchona (chinchona), cockroach, cura¢ao, curassow, fandango,
galleon, picaninny, quixotic, rusk, sarsaparilla.

French from Spanish: barricade, bizarre, calipash, calipee?,
cannon (2), caracole, carapace, chimer (chimere), cordwainer,
fanfare, morion (murrion),

Portuguese. dodo, emu, sargasso.


GATIN. ab-, abbreviate, abdicate, abdomen, abduce, aber-
ration, abhor, abject, abjure, abnegate, abominate, aborigines, abor-
tion, abrade, abrogate, abrupt, abs-, abscess, abscind, abscond,
absolute, absolve, absorb, abstemious, abstract, abstruse, absurd,
accede, accelerate, access, acclaim, acclivity, accommodate, accre-
tion, accumulate, accurate, acid, acquiesce, acquire, acrid, acumen,
acute, adapt, add, addict, adduce, adept, adequate, adhere, adipose,
adit, adjacent, adject, adjudicate, adjunct, adjure, adjutant, admit,
adolescent, adopt, adore, adorn, adult, adulterate, adumbrate, ad-
vent, advert, advocate, zedile, seruginous, affidavit, afflict, agent,
agglomerate, agglutinate, aggravate, aggregate, agitate, agnate,
agrarian, agriculture, alacrity, album, albumen, alias, alibi, alleviate,
alligation, alliteration, allocate, allocution, allude, alluvial, alp,
altar, alter, alternate, alveolar, amanuensis, amatory, ambi- (amb-),
ambidextrous, ambient, ambiguous, ambulation, amicable, amputate,
ancillary, angina, anile, animadvert, animal, animate, annihilate,
anniversary, annotate, annular, annunciate, anserine, ante-, ante-
cedent, antedate, antediluvian, antennze, antepenultima, anterior,
anticipate, anus, anxious, aperient, apex, apiary, apparatus, ap-
parent, applaud, apposite, appreciate, apprehend, appropriate,
approximate, apt, aquatic, arbiter, arbitrary, arbitrate, arboreous,
arduous, area, arefaction, arena, argillaceous, arid, ark, armament,
arrogate, articulate, ascend, ascititious, ascribe, aspect, asperse,
assert, asseverate, assibilation, assiduous, assimilate, associate, as-
suasive, assume, astriction, astringe, astute, atrabilious, attenuate,
attest, attract, attribute, auction, augur, august, aureate, auricular,
aurora, auscultation, auxiliary, ave, avert, aviary, avocation, avul-
sion, axil, axis.

bacillus, basalt, beet, belligerent, belt, benefactor, bi-, bib, bien-
nial, bifurcated, bilateral, binary, binocular, binomial, bipartite,
biped, bisect, bissextile, bitumen, bland, boa, bract, bull (2), bus.

cachinnation, cack, cadaverous, caducous, czsura, calcareous,
calceolaria, calculate, calefaction, calendar, calends, callow, calo-
tific, calx, campestral, cancer, candelabrum, candidate, candle,
canine, canorous, cant (1), canticle, capacious, capillary, capitol,
capitular, capitulate, Capricorn, capsicum, carbolic, carbuncle,
carburet, cardinal, caries, carnal, carnivorous, castigate, castle,
castrate, catenary, caudal, caveat, cede, celebrate, celibate, cell,
censor, cent, centenary, centennial, centesimal, centigrade, cento,
centrifugal, centripetal, centurion, cere, cereal, cerulean, cervine,
chalk, cheese, ciliary, cincture, cinerary, circum-, circumambient,
circumambulate, circumcise, circumference, circumflex, circum-
fluent, circumfuse, circumjacent, circumlocution, circumnavigate,
circumscribe, circumspect, circumvallation, circumvent, circum-
volve, circus, cirrus, civic, civil, clang, coadjutor, coagulate,
coalesce, coction, coefficient, coerce, coeval, cogent, cogitate, cog-
nate, cognition, cognomen, cohabit, cohere, coincide, coition, cole,
collaborator, collapse, collateral, collide, collimate, collocate, collo-
quy, collude, column, com-, combine, comity, commemorate, com-
mend, commensurate, comminution, commissary, commit, commix,
commute, compact (2), compensate, compete, competitor, compla-


ar


DISTRIBUTION OF WORDS (LATIN)


cent, complement, complete, complex, complicate, component, com-
pound (1), comprehend, compute, con (2), con-, concatenate, concede,
conciliate, concinnity, conclude, concoct, concomitant, concrete,
concur, condole, condone, conduce, conduct, confabulate, confect,
confederate, confer, confide, confiscate, conflation, conflict, confluent,
congener, congenial, congenital, congeries, conglobe, conglomerate,
conglutinate, congratulate, congregate, congress, congrue, conjuga-
tion, conjunction, connate, connatural, connect, connote, connubial,
consanguineous, conscionable, conscious, conscript, consecrate, conse-
quent, consolidate, consort, conspicuous, constipate, constitute, con-
strue, consuetude, consul, consume, consummate, contact, contami-
nate, contemplate, contemporaneous, context, contiguous, contingent,
continuous, contort, contra, contract (1), contradict, contribute,
contuse, convalesce, convenient, convent, converge, convex, con-
vince, convivial, convoke, convolve, convulse, cook, coop, co-operate,
co-ordinate, copulate, cornea, cornucopia, corolla, corollary, coro-
nation, corpuscle, correct, correlate, corroborate, corrugate, corrupt,
cortex, coruscate, costal, coulter, cowl (1), crass, create, creed,
cremation, crenate, crepitate, crepuscular, crescent, cretaceous,
crinite, crisp, cristate, crude, crural, cubit, cucumber, cuff (2), culi-
nary, culm, culminate, cultivate, cumulate, cuneate, cup, cupel,
cupid, cupreous, curate, curricle, cursive, cursory, curt, curule,
curve, cusp, custody, cuticle.

de-, debenture, debilitate, decapitate, December, decemvir, de-
cennial, deciduous, decimate, declaim, decoct, decorate, decorum,
decrement, decrepit, decretal, decurrent, decussate, dedicate, deduce,
deduct, defalcate, defecate, defect, deflagration, deflect, defluxion,
defunct, degenerate, dehiscent, deject, delate, delegate, delete, de-
liberate, delicate, delineate, delinquent, deliquesce, delirious, delude,
demented, demonstrate, demulcent, denary, denominate, dense,
dental, dentated, denticle, dentist, dentition, denude, denunciation,
depict, depilatory, depletion, deponent, depopulate, deprecate, de-
preciate, depredate, depress, dereliction, deride, derogate, describe,
desecrate, desiccate, desiderate, desk, desolate, despond, desqua-
mation, destitute, desuetude, desultory, detect, deter, deterge, dete-
riorate, detonate, detraction, detrude, devastate, deviate, devious,
devolve, devote, dexter, di- (1), dial, diary, dicker, dictate, diffident,
diffract, diffuse, digest, dight, digit, digress, dijudicate, dilacerate,
dilapidate, dilute, dimissory, dire, direct, dirge, dis-, disafforest, dis-
connect, disconsolate, discriminate, discursive, discuss, disincline,
disinfect, disingenuous, disjunction, dislocate, dismiss, dispassionate,
dispel, disperse, dispirit, disquiet, disquisition, disruption, dissect,
disseminate, dissent, dissertation, dissident, dissipate, dissociate,
dissolute, dissolve, distend, distort, distract, distribute, disunite,
diurnal, divaricate, diverge, divest, divide, divulsion, dominate,
dormitory, dual, dubious, duct, duodecimo, duodenum, duplicate,
duration.

edict, educate, educe, effeminate, effervesce, effete, efficacy, effigy,
effluence, effulgent, effuse, egotist, egregious, egress, ejaculate, eject,
elaborate, elapse, elate, elect, element, elevate, elicit, elide, eliminate,
elision, elocution, elude, emaciate, emanate, emancipate, emasculate,
emendation, emerge, emigrate, eminent, emit, emotion, emulate, en-.
due (2), enervate, entity, enucleate, enumerate, enunciate, equal,
equation, equestrian, equi-, equilibrium, equine, equivocal, era,
eradicate, erase, erect, erratum, erroneous, erubescent, eructate, eru-
dite, eruption, esculent, estimate, estuary, esurient, evacuate, evanes-
cent, evaporate, event, evict, evince, eviscerate, evoke, evolve,
evulsion, ex-, exacerbate, exact (1), exaggerate, exasperate, excerpt,
excise (2), exclude, excogitate, excommunicate, excoriate, excrement,
excruciate, exculpate, excursion, exeat, execrate, exert, exfoliate,
exhaust, exhibit, exhume, exigent, exiguous, exist, exit, exonerate,
exordium, expand, expatiate, expatriate, expect, expectorate, ex-
pedite, expel, expend, expiate, expletive, explicate, explicit, exponent,
export, expostulate, expunge, expurgate, exquisite, extant, extempore,
extend, extenuate, exterminate, external, extinguish, extirpate, extol,
extort, extra, extract, extramundane, extraneous, extraordinary,
extravasate, extricate, extrude, exude, exult, exuviae.

fabricate, fac-simile, fact, factitious, factotum, feeces, fallible,
family, fan, fane, farina, farrago, fascinate, fastidious, fatuous, fauces,
faun, February, feculent, feline, femoral, fennel, feracious, feral (1),
feral (2), ferment, ferreous, ferruginous, ferule, festive, fetus, fever,
fiat, fibula, fiducial, figment, filial, fimbriated, fine (2), finial, finite,
fistula, flagellate, flagitious, flamen, flog, floral, florid, floscule, fluc-
tuate, fluent, fluor, focus, font (1), foraminated, forceps, forensic,
fork, formic, formula, formulate, fornicate, fortuitous, forum, fran-
gible, fratricide (2), frigid, fritillary, frivolous, frond, frustrate, frus-
tum, fulcrum, fulgent, fuliginous, fuller, fulminate, fulvid, fulvous,
fumigate, funambulist, fungus, funicle, furcate, furfuraceous, fuscous,
fuse (1), fusil (3), fustigate. }

galeated, gallinaceous, garrulous, gelid, Gemini, generate, generic,
geniculate, genius, genuine, genus, gerund, gesticulate, gesture, gib-


DISTRIBUTION OF WORDS (LATIN)


bose glabrous, gladen (gladden), gladiator, glomerate, glume,
glutinous, gradient, gradual, graduate, grallatory, gramineous,
granary, grandiloquent, granule, gratis, gratuitous, gratulate, gre-
various, gust (2).

- habitat, hallucination, hastate, hebetude, hereditary, hernia,
hesitate, hiatus, hirsute, histrionical, hoopoe, horrid, horrify, hor-
tatory, horticulture, host (3), humane, humeral, humiliate.

i-, ibex, identical, il- (1), il- (2), illapse, illegal, illegitimate,
illimitable, illision, illiterate, illogical, illude, illuminate, illustrate,
im- (3), imbricated, imbue, imitate, immaculate, immanent, im-
mature, immerge, immigrate, imminent, immit, immoderate, im-
molate, impact, impeccable, impecunious, impede, impel, impend,
impersonate, imperturbable, impervious, impetrate, impetus, im-
pinge, implicate, impolite, imponderable, imprecate, impregnate, im-
press, impropriate, improvident, in-(2), in- (3), inaccurate, inadequate,
inadvertent, inane, inanimate, inapplicable, inappreciable, inappro-

riate, inarticulate, inartificial, inaudible, inaugurate, inauspicious,
incalculable, incandescent, incantation, incarcerate, incautious, in-
cendiary, incense (1), incentive, inceptive, incessant, inch (1), in-
choate, incipient, include, incoherent, incombustible, incommen-
surate, incomplete, incompressible, inconclusive, incondite, incon-
gruous, inconsequent, inconsistent, inconsumable, incontrovertible,
inconyertible, inconvincible, incorporate, incorrupt, incrassate, in-
crement, incubate, incubus, inculcate, inculpable, inculpate, incum-
bent, incur, incurvate, indeclinable, indecorum, indefensible, inde-
finable, indefinite, indemonstrable, independent, indescribable, in-
destructible, indeterminate, index, indicate, indigenous, indigested,
indiscernible, indiscriminate, indispensable, individual, indoctrinate,
indolence, indomitable, indorse, induce, induct, indue (1), indurate,
inebriate, inedited, ineffective, inelegant, inert, inexact, inexhausted,
inexpressible, infant, infatuate, infinite, infirm, infix, inflate, inflect,
inflict, influx, informal, infrequent, infringe, infuriate, ingenuous,
ingratiate, ingress, inguinal, inhale, inherent, inhibit, inimical, initial,
jnitiate, inject, injunction, innate, innocuous, innovate, innoxious,
innuendo (inuendo), innutritious, inobservant, inoculate, inodorous,
inordinate, inquire (enquire), insane, inscribe, insecure, insensate,
insert, insessorial, insignia, insignificant, insinuate, insolvent, in-
somnia, inspect, inspissate, instigate, institute, instruct, insubordinate,
insufficient, insular, insuppressible, insurgent, intact, intangible, in-
teger, integument, intense, inter-, intercalate, intercommunicate,
interdict, interfuse, interim, interior, interjacent, interline, interlude,
interlunar, interminable, intermit, intermix, internal, internecine,
interpolate, interregnum, interrogate, interrupt, intersect, intersperse,
interstellar, ntestate, intimate (1), intimate (2), intra-, intramural,
intransitive, intrepid, intricate, intro-, introduce, intromission, in-
trospection, intrude, inundation, invecked, inveigh, invert, inverte-
brate, investigate, inveterate, invidious, invigorate, inviolate,
invocate, involuntary, involute, ir- (1), ir- (2), irradiate, irrational,
irreducible, irresolute, irresponsible, irrigate, irritate, italics, item,
iterate, itinerant.

January, jejune, jilt, jocose, jocular, joke, jubilation, jugular,
junction, juncture, June, junior, juniper, juridical.

kail, kiln, kirtle (with E. suffix), kitchen. 2

labellum, labial, labiate, laboratory, laburnum, lacerate, lachry-
mal (lacrimal), lacteal, lacuna, lacustrine, lambent, lamina, lanceo-
date, languid, laniferous, lanuginous, lapidary, lapse, larva, lascivious,
latent, lateral, laud, laureate, laurustinus, lavatory, lax, legislator,
legitimate, lemur, lenient, lens, leporine, levigate, liberate, liber-
tine, librate, libration, licentiate, lictor, ligneous, ligule, limb (2),
limbo, limbus, limpet, line, lineal, linear, linen, lingual, linguist,
lining, lint, liquescent, liquidate, litigation, littoral, lobster, locate,
locomotion, locus, locust, longevity, loquacious, lotion, lubricate,
lucid, lucubration, ludicrous, lugubrious, lumbago, lumbar, lunar,
lurid, lustration, lustrum, lymph.

macerate, maculate, magisterial, magnanimous, magnate, magni-
ficent, magniloquence, magnitude, major, majuscule, malefactor,
malevolent, malic, mallow, mamillary, mammalia, mandible, mani-
pulate, manse, manumit, manuscript, marcescent, margin, mass (2),
mat, matriculate, matrix, mature, matutinal, maxillar (maxillary),
maximum, mediate, medical, medicate, medieval, meditate, mediter-
ranean, medium, medullar (medullary), meliorate, mellifluous,
meniento, mendacity, mendicant, menses, menstruous, mensuration,
mephitis, mere (2), meretricious, merganser, merge, mica, migrate,
mile, militate, militia, mill, millennium, minor, mint (1), minus,
minuscule, minute, miscellaneous, miser, missal, missile, mission,
mitigate, mittimus, mix, mob (1), moderate, modicum, modulate,
molar, molecule, mollusc, monetary, monger, morose, mortar (1)
(morter), moult, mount (1), mucus, mulct, multangular, multifarious,
multiple, muriatic, muricated, muscle (2) (mussel), must (2), mutable,
mute (1), mutilate.


nascent, nasturtium, natation, nebula, nefarious, neglect, negotiate, _


767


nemoral, nescient, neuter, nigrescent, nihilist, nimbus, nincompoop,
node, nomenclator, nominal, nominate, non-, nondescript, nonentity,
nones, nonplus, noon, normal, nostrum, notation, notorious,
November, noxious, nucleus, nude, nugatory, numeral, nun, nutation,
nutriment, nutritious,

ob-, obdurate, obese, obfuscate, object, oblate, obliterate, obloquy,
obnoxious, obscene, obsecrate, obsequious, obsidian, obsolescent,
obsolete, obstetric, obstinate, obstreperous, obstriction, obstruct,
obtrude, obverse, obviate, obvious, occiput, occult, octangular,
octant, October, octogenarian, octoroon, ocular, odium, offer,
officinal, olfactory, omen, omentum, omit, omnibus, omniscient,
omnivorous, operate, oppidan, opponent, opprobrious, optimism
(with Gk. suffix), oral, orc, ordinal, ordinate, oscillate, osculate,
osseous, ossifrage, ostensible, otiose, oviform.

pabulum, pact, pagan, pageant, pall (1), palliate, pallid, pallor,
palm (2), palpitate, palustral, panicle, papilionaceous, papillary,
par, parietal, parse, participate, parturient, passerine, pastor, patera,
patrician, pauper, pax, pea, pear, peccable, pectinal, peculate,
pedal, pedestrian, pediment, peduncle, pejorative, pelt (1), pelvis,
pen (1), penates, pendulous, pendulum, penetrate, peninsula, penny
(with E. suffix), pent, penultimate, penumbra, per-, perambulate,
percolate, percussion, perennial, perfidious, perfoliate, perforate,
perfunctory, periwinkle (1), permeate, permit, per, etrate, perquisite,
perspicuous, pervade, pervicacious, pervious, pessimist, petulant, pia-
cular, pica, picture, pigment, pilch, pile (1), pile (3), pile (4), piles,
pillow, pin, pine (1), pine (2), pinnate, pipe, pipkin (with E. suffix),
Pisces, pistil, pit, pitch (1), placable, placenta, plangent, plant, plan-
tigrade, plandit, plausible, plenary, plenipotentiary, plumbago, plu-
perfect, plurisy (misformed), pole (1), pollen, pollute, ponder, pope,
poppy, populate, porcine, port (2), portend, posse, possess, post (1),
post-, post-date, posterior, posthumous (postumous), post-meridian
(pomeridian), post-mortem, post-obit, postpone, postscript, postulate,
potation, potent, pound (1), pour, Preetor (Pretor), pre-, pre-
carious, precentor, precession, precinct, preclude, precocious, pre-
cursor, predatory, predecessor, predicate, predict, predominate,
pre-emption, pre-exist, prehensile, premature, premeditate, pre-
mium, preponderate, prepossess, preposterous, prescribe, preter-,
pretermit, preternatural, prevaricate, prevent, previous, primeval,
prior (1), private, pro-, probe, proclivity, proconsul, procrastinate,
procreate, proctor, procumbent, produce, proficient, profligate,
profuse, prog?, prohibit, prolate, proletarian, prolocutor, pro-
miscuous, promontory, promote, promulgate, propagate, propel,
propensity, propitious, propound, propulsion, proscribe, prosecute,
prospect, prosperous, prostitute, prostrate, protect, protract, pro-
trude, protuberant, prove, provide, proviso, provost, prurient,
publican, pugilism, pugnacious, pulmonary, pulsate, pulse (2),
punctate (punctated), punctuate, puncture, pungent, punt (1), pupa,
puritan, pus, pusillanimous.

quadragesima, quadrant, quadrate, quadrennial, quadrilateral,
quadrillion, quadruped, quandary, quarto, quaternary, quaternion,
querimonious, querulous, query, quibble, quiddity, quidnunc, quies-
cent, quiet, quillet, quinary, quincunx, quinquagesima, quinquan-
gular, quinquennial, quintillion, quip, quorum, quota, quotient (or


rabid, radial, radiant, radius, radix, rancid, ranunculus, rapacious,
rape (1), rape (2), rapid (or F.—L.), rapt, raptorial, rapture,
rasorial, ratio, raucous, re-, red- (or F.—L.), real (1), rebus, recant;
recede, recess, recession, recipe, reciprocal, recline, recondite, re-
criminate, recrudescence, rectilineal (rectilinear), recumbent, re-
cuperative, recur, redact, redintegration, reduce, redundant, redupli-
cate, refel, reflect, refluent, refract, refragable, refrigerate, refulgent,
refund, regalia, regenerate, regimen, regnant, regress, regular, re-
juvenate, relapse, relax, relegate, reluctant, remit, remonstrate,
remora, remote, remunerate, renovate, repel, repine, reprehend,
reprobate, reproduce, repudiate, repulse, requiem, requiescence,
resilient, resolve, resonant, resplendent, resuscitate, retaliate, reticent,
retina, retro- (or F. from L.), retrocession, retrograde, retrospect,
reverberate, revolve, ridiculous, rigid, rite, rivulet, rodent, rostrum,
rotary, rugose, ruminate,

sacrament, sagacious, Sagittarius, salient, saliva, saltation, salu-
brious, salute, sanatory, sanctity, sane, sapid, satiate, saturate, savin
(savine, sabine), scale (3), scalpel, scan, scape (1), scapular, sciolist,
scour (1), scribe, scrofula, scrutiny, scurrile, scutage, scuttle (1),
se-, sebaceous, secant, secede, seclude, secure, sedate, seduce,
sedulous, segment, segregate, select, semi-, seminary, senary, senile,
senior, sensual, separate, September, septenary, septennial, septua-
genary, serene, series, serrated, serum, service (tree), sexagenary,
Sexagesima, sexennial, sextant, sextuple, shambles, shingle (1),
short, shrine, sibilant, sicker (siker), sickle, sidereal, silex, silvan
(sylvan), simile, simious, simulate, simultaneous, sinciput, sine, sine-
cure, single, sinister, sinus, sir-reverence, situate, sock, solar, sole (1),


768


sol-fa, solicitous, soliloquy, solve, somnambulist (with Gk. suffix),
somniferous, sonorous, soporiferous, soporific, sparse, species,
specimen, spectator (or F. from L.), specular, spelt, spend, spike (2),
splendor (splendour, or F. from L.), sponsor, spontaneous, spoom,
spume, spurious, squalid, stagnate, stamen, stannary, status, stellar,
sternutation, stertorous, still (2) (or F.—L.), stimulate, stipend,
stolid, stop, strap, stratum, street, strenuous, striated, strict, strident,
strigil, stringent, strop, student, stultify, stupendous, sub- (or
F.—L.), subacid, subaqueous, subdivide, subjacent, subjugate,
subjunctive, sublunar, submit, subordinate, subpoena, subscribe,
subsequent, subserve, subside, substratum, subtend, subter-, sub-
terranean, subterraneous, subtract, succinct, succuba, succumb,
sudatory, suffix, suffocate, suffuse, suggest, sulcated, sulphur, sump-
tuary, super-, superadd, superannuate, supercilious, supereminent,
supererogation, superficies, superfluous, superstructure, supervene,
supervise, supine, supplicate, suppress, suppurate, supra-, supra-
mundane, sur- (1), surd, surreptitious, surrogate, sus-.

tabid, tacit, tact, tamarisk, tandem, tangent, Taurus, tedious, teeto-
tum (totum), tegument, telluric, temple (1), temper, temulent, tena-
cious, tenet, tense (2), tentacle, tentative, tepid, ternary, terrene, ter-
restrial, terrific, terse, tertiary, tesselate, testaceous, testimony, textile,
tibia, tile, timorous, tincture, tinge, tint, tintinnabulation, tiro (tyro),
toga, tolerate, torpedo, torpid, torque, tract (1), tract (2), tractable,
tradition, traduce, trans-, transcend, transcribe, transept. transfer,
transfix, transfuse, transient, translucent, transmarine, transmit,
transmute, transom, transpicuous, transpire, transverse, tri- (or
Gk.; or F. from L. or Gk.), tricentenary, triennial, . trifoliate,
triforium, triform, trilateral, trilingual, triliteral, trine, trinomial,
tripartite, triplicate, trireme, trisect, trite, triturate, triumvir, Triune,
trivet, truncate, tuber, tumid, tumulus, tunic, turbid, turgid, turtle
(1), turtle (2), tutelage (with F. suffix), tutelar.

ulterior, ultimate, ultra-, ultramundane, umbel, unanimous, uncial,
undulate, unguent, uniliteral, unite, univocal, urbane, urge, ursine,
ut, uvula, uxorious,

vaccinate, vacuum, vagary, valediction, vapid, varicose, varie-
gate, various, vascular, vehicle, velocipede, venereal, venous, ven-
tilate, ventral, ventriloquist, Venus, veracious, verbena, verge (2),
vermicular, vernacular, vernal, verse, vertebra, vertex, vertigo,
vesicle, vesper, vest, vestibule, veteran, veterinary, veto, viaduct,
vibrate, vicissitude, victor, videlicet, vilipend, villa, vincible, vin-
culum, vindicate, violate, virago, virgate, viridity, viscera, vitreous,
vivid, viviparous, vivisection, vomit, vortex, vote, vulnerable,
vulture.

wall, wick (2), wine.

French from Latin. abase, abate, abatis, abeyance, ability,
ablative, able, ablution, abolish, abound, abridge, absent, abstain,
abstention, abundance, abuse, accent, accept, accident, accompany,
accomplice, accomplish, accord, accost, account, accoutre, accredit,
accrue, accuse, accustom, acerbity, acetous, achieve, acquaint,
acquit, act, adage, address, adieu, adjoin, adjourn, adjudge, adjust,
administer, admire, admonish, adroit, adulation, advance, advan-
tage, adventure, adverb, adverse, advertise, advice, advise, advow-
son, affable, affair, affect, affeer, affiance, affiliation, affinity,
affirm, affix, affluence, affront, affy, age, aggrandise, aggress, ag-
grieve, agile, agistment, aglet, agree, ague, ah, aid, aim, aisle, alas,
alb, alien, align (aline), aliment, aliquot, allege, alley, allow (1),
allow (2), alloy, ally, altercation, altitude, alum, ambition, amble,
ambry (aumbry), ameliorate, amenable, amend, amends, amenity,
amerce, amiable, amice (1), amity, ammunition, amorous, amort,
amount, ample, amulet, amuse, ancestor, ancient (1), ancient (2),
andiron?, angle (1), anguish, animosity, annals, annates, anneal (2),
annex, announce, annoy, annual, annul, anoint, antique, antler,
apart, appal, appanage, apparel, appeal, appear, appease, append,
appertain, appetite, apply, appoint, apportion, appraise, apprentice,
apprize, approach, approbation, approve, appurtenance, April,
apron, apropos, aquiline, arable, arbour, arc, arch (1), archer,
ardent, aréte, argent, argue, arm (2), armature, armistice, armour,
arms, army, arraign, arrant, arrears, arrest, arris, arrive, arson,
art (2), article, artifice, artillery, ascertain, ashlar (ashler), asperity,
aspire, assail, assart, assault, assay, assemble, assent, assess, assets,
assign, assist, assize (1), assize (2), assoil, assort, assuage, assure,
astonish, astound, atrocity, attain, attaint, attemper, attempt,
attend, attrition, auburn, audacious, audience, augment, aunt,
auspice, austral, author, autumn, avail, avalanche, avarice, avaunt,
avenge, avenue, aver, avidity, avoid, avoirdupois, avouch, avow (1),
avow (2).

bail (1), bailiff, bails?, baize, balance, barb (1), barbel, barber,
barberry, barnacles, baron, base (1), bass (1), bassoon, bate (1),
bate (2), batter (1), batter (2), battery, battle, bay (1), bay (2),
bay (3), bay (4), bay (5), bay (6), bayard, beagle?, beast, beatify,
beatitude, beau, beauty, beaver (3) (bever), beef, beldam, belle,


DISTRIBUTION OF WORDS (LATIN, FRENCH FROM LATIN)


benediction, benefice, benefit, benevolence, benign, benison, bestial, —
beverage, bevy, bezel?, bias, bile (1), bill (3), billet (1), billion,
biscuit, bivalve, blandish, boil (1), bonny, bounty, bowel, bowl (1),
breve, brief (1), brief (2), broach, brochure, brocket, broker, brooch,
bruit, brute, buckle, buckler, budge (1), bugle (1), bugle (2), bul-
lace, bullet, bullion, bustard, buzzard. ;

cabbage (1), cable, cage, caitiff, calamity, calcine, caldron
(cauldron), calk (caulk), calkin, callous, caloric, calumny, camp,
campagnol, campion, canal, cancel, candid, .candour, canker,
capable, capital (1), capital (2), capital (3), capitation, capsule,
captain, captious, captive, carbon, card (2), careen, Carfax, caril-
lon, carminative, carnage, carnation (1), carnation (2), carpet,
carrion, cartilage, case (1), case (2), casement, casket, cassation,
catch, catchpole, cater, cater-cousin, caterpillar, cates, cattle,
caudle, cauliflower, cause, causeway, caution, cave, cavil, cease,
ceil (ciel), celerity, celestial, cement, censer, centipede (centiped),
centuple, century, cerebral, ceremony, certain, certify, cervical, cess,
cessation, cession, chafe, chain, chaldron, chalet, chalice, challenge,
chamfer, champagne, champaign, champion, chance, chancel, chan-
cellor, chancery, chandelier, chandler, change, channel, chant,
chapel, chaperon, chapiter, chaplain, chaplet, chapter, charity,
charm (1), charnel, chase (1), chase (2), chase (3), chase (4),
chaste, chasten, chastise, chasuble, chateau, chatelaine, chattels,
chawdron, cheat, cherish, chevalier, cheveril, chevin, chevron,
chief, chieftain, chignon, chisel, chivalry, chive, chum, cicatrice,
cinque, circle, circuit, circumstance, cit, cite, citizen, city, cive,
claim, clamour, clandestine, claret, clarify, clarion, class, clause,
clavicle, clear, clef, clement, clerestory, client, cloister, close (1),
close (2), closet, clove (1), clove (3), cloy, coarse, coast, coddle, code,
codicil, cognisance, cohort, coign, coil (1), coil (2), coin, coistrel,
collar, collation, colleague (1), colleague (2), collect, college,
collet, colony, Colour, colporteur, columbine, combat, combus-
tion, comfit, comfort, comfrey, command, commence, comment,
commerce, commination, commiseration, commission, commodious,
common, commotion, commune, compact (1), company, compare,
compass, compassion, compatible, compatriot, compeer, compel,
compendious, competent, compile, complain, complaisant, com-
plexion, complicity, compline, comport, composition, compost,
compress, comprise, compromise, compunction,.concaye, conceal,
conceit, conceive, concentre, conception, concern, concise, conclave,
concord, concordant, concordat, concourse, concubine, concupiscence,
concussion, condemn, condense, condescend, condign, condiment,
condition, conduit, confess, configuration, confine, confirm, con-
flagration, conform, confound, confraternity, confront, confuse, con-
fute, congé (congee), congeal, congestion, conjecture, conjoin, con-
jugal, conjure, connive, connoisseur, conquer, conscience, consecutive,
consent, conserve, consider, consign, consist, console (1), console (2),
consonant, conspire, constable, constant, constellation, consternation,
constrain, consult, contagion, contain, contemn, contend, content,
contest, continent, continue, contract (2), contrary, contrast, contravene,
contretemps, contrite, control, controversy, contumacy, contumely,
convene, convention, converse, convert, convey, convoy, cony (coney),
copious, copperas, copy, corbel, corby, cordial, corduroy, core,
cormorant, corn (2), cornelian, corner, cornet, coronal, coroner,
coronet, corporal (1), corporal (2), corps, corpse (corse), corpulent,
correspond, corrode, corset, corslet (corselet), corvée, costive, couch, —
council, counsel, count (1), count (2), countenance, counter, counter-
balance, counterfeit, countermand, counterpane (1), counterpane (2),
counterpart, counterpoint, counterpoise, countersign, countervail,
country, country-dance, county, couple, courage, course, court (1),
court (2), courteous, courtesy, courtier, cousin, covenant, cover,
coverlet, covert, covet, covey, covin, coward, cowl (2), coy (1),
cozen, cranny, crape, craven, crayon, crease (1), creel, cresset, crest,
crevice, crew, crime, crinoline, crone, crucial, crucify, cruel, crust,
cry, cuckold, cuckoo, cue (1), cue (2), cuisses, cull, cullion, cullis
(1), cullis (2), culpable, culprit, culture, culverin, cupidity, curb,
cure, curfew, curious, current, curtail, curtain, curtilage, cushion,
custard, custom, cutlass, cutler, cutlet.

dainty, dam (2), damage, dame, damn, damsel, dan, dandelion,
danger, date (1), daub, daunt, dean, debate, debonair, debouch,
debt, decadence, decamp, decay, decease, deceive, decent, deception,
decide, decimal, decision, declare, declension, decline, declivity,
decollation, decomposition, decrease, decree, decry, decuple, de-
face, defame, default, defeasance, defeat, defence, defend, defer (1),
defer (2), defile (2), define, deflour (deflower), deforce, deform,
defraud, defy, deglutition, degrade, degree, deify, deign, deity,
delay, delectable, delicious, delight, deliver, deluge, demand,
demean (1), demeanour, demerit, demesne, demi-, demise, demolish,
demoralise, demur, demure, demy, denier, denizen, denote, denoue-
ment, denounce, dentifrice, deny, deodand, depart, depend, deplore,
deploy, deport, deposit, deposition, depot, deprave, deprive, depute,


DISTRIBUTION OF WORDS (FRENCH FROM LATIN)


derive, descant, descend, descry, desert (1), desert (2), deserve, desha-
bille, design, desire, desist, despair, despise, despite, despoil, dessert,
destine, destroy, detail, detain, detention, determine, detest, detri-
ment, deuce (1), deuce (2), devest, device, devise, devoid, devoir,
devour, devout, diction, die (2), differ, difficulty, dignify, dignity,
dilate, diligent, dime, dimension, diminish, dine, dinner, disadvantage,
disagree, disallow, disappoint, disarm, disaster, disavow, discern,
disciple, disclaim, disclose, discolour, discomfit, discomfort, dis-
concert, discontinue, discord, discount, discountenance, discourage,
discourse, discourteous, discover, discreet, discrepant, disdain, dis-
enchant, disfigure, disgorge, disgrace, disgust, dishevel, dishonest,
dishonour, disinterested, disjoin, disjoint, disloyal, dismal, dismantle,
dismember, dismount, disobey, disoblige, disorder, disparage, dis-
parity, dispense, dispeople, displace, displant, display, displease, dis-
port, disposition, dispossess, dispraise, disproportion, disprove, dispute,
disqualify, dissemble, disservice, dissever, dissimilar, dissimulation,
dissonant, dissuade, distain, distant, distemper (1), distemper (2),
distil, distinct, distinguish, distrain, distress, district, disturb, ditty,
diverse (divers), divert, divine, divorce, divulge, docile, doctor,
doctrine, document, dolour, domain, domestic, domicile, dominical,
dominion, donation, dormant, dorsal, double, doublet, doubt,
douceur, dowager, dower, dowle?, dozen, dress, ducal, duchess,
duchy, ductile, due, duke, dulcet, dungeon, duplicity, durance,
duration, dure, duress, duty.

eager, eagle, ebriety, ebullition, echelon, eclaircissement, edify,
edition, efface, effect, efficient, efflorescence, effort, effrontery,
eglantine, eisel, elecampane, elegant, eligible, élite, eloign, elo-
quent, em-, embattle (2), embellish, embezzle?, emblements,
embonpoint, embouchure, embowel, embrace, emmew, emol-
lient, emolument, empale, empanel, emperor, empire, employ,
empower, empress, emprise, emulsion, en-, enable, enact, enamour,
encamp, encase, enceinte, enchain, enchant, enchase, encircle, en-
cline, enclose, encompass, encore, encounter, encourage, encumber ?,
endanger, endeavour, endorse, endow, endue (1), endure, enemy,
enew, enfeeble, enfilade, enforce, engender, engine, engrain, engross,
enhance, enjoin, enjoy, enlace, enlarge, enmity, ennoble, ennui,
enormous, enounce, enquire, enrage, enrich, enrol, ensample, en-
sconce, ensign, ensue, ensure, entablature, entail, enter, enterprise,
entertain, entice, entire, entitle, entrails, entrance (1), entrance (2),
entreat, entrench ?, envenom, environ, envoy, envy, equanimity, equi-
nox, equipoise, equipollent, equity, equivalent, erode, err, errant,
error, escape, escheat, escritoire, escuage, escutcheon, especial,
espouse, esquire, essay, essence, establish, estate, esteem, estovers,
estrange, estreat, eternal, etiolate, evade, evasion, evident, ewer, exact
(2), exalt, examine, example, excavation, exceed, excel, except, ex-
cess, exchange, excite, exclaim, excrescence, excretion, excuse, execute,
exemplar, exemplify, exempt, exequies, exercise, exhale, exhort,
exile, exorbitant, experience, expert, expire, explain, explode, ex-
ploit, explore, exposition, expound, express, exterior, extradition,
extravagant, extreme, extrinsic, exuberant, eyas, eyre.

fable, fabric, face, facetious, facile, faction, faculty, fade, fail,
faint, fair (2), fairy, faith, falcon, fallacy, false, fame, famine,
fanatic, fantigue, farce, farcy, farm, farrier, fascine, fash, fashion,
fate, fatigue, faucet, fault, favour, fawn (2), fay, fealty, feasible,
feast, feat, feature, febrile, fecundity, federal, feeble, feign, felicity,
female, feminine, fence, fend, fenugreek, ferocity, ferrule, fertile,
fervent, fescue, fess, festal, fester, festival, féte, fetid, fibre, fiction,
fidelity, fie, fierce, figure, filament, file (1), fillet, final, finance,
fine (1), finish, firm (1), firmament, fiscal, fissure, fitz, fix, flaccid,
flagrant, flail, flambeau, flame, flatulent, flavour, fleur-de-lis,
flexible, flock (2), floss, flounce (2), flour, flourish, flower, flue (1),
fluid, flush (4), fluviatile, flux, foible, foil (1), foil (2), foin, foison,
foliage, follicle, folly, foment, font (2), fool, for- (3), force (1), force
(2), foreclose, foreign, forest, forfeit, forge, forjudge, form, formidable,
fort, fortify, fortitude, fortress, fortune, fosse, fossil, foster (2), found
(1), found (2), founder, fount, fraction, fracture, fragile, fragment,
fragrant, frail (1), frail (2), franion, fraternal, fraternity, fratricide (1),
fraud, fray (1), fray (3), frequent, fret (3), fret (4), friable, friar,
fricassee, friction, frieze (2), fringe, frippery, fritter (1), fritter (2),
front, frontal, frontier, frontispiece, frontlet, frounce, fructify, frugal,
fruit, fruition, frumenty (furmenty, furmety), frush, fry (1), fry (2),
fuel, fugitive, full (2), fume, fumitory, function, fund, fundament,
funeral, furious, furnace, furtive, fury, fuse (2), fusee (1), fusee (2),
fusil (1), fusil (2), fust (1), fust (2), fusty, futile, future.

gall (2), gall (3), gammon (1), gaol (jail), garner, garnet, gaud,
gem, gender (1), gender (2), general, generous, genial, genital,
genitive, genre, genteel, gentian, gentile, gentle, gentry, genuflection
(genuflexion), germ, german (germane), gestation, gibbous, gill (4),
gimbals, gin (2), gin (3), gingerly, gist, gizzard, glacial, glacier,
glacis, glair, glaive, glance, gland, glebe, globe, glory, glue, glut,
glutton, goblet, gorge, gorgeous, gourd, gout (1), gout (2), grace,


769


gradation, grade, grail (1), grail (2), grain, gramercy, grampus,
grand, grandeur, grange, grant, gratify, gratitude, gratuity, grave (2),
gravy, grease, grece, griddle (gridiron), grief, grieve, grill, grocer,
grog, grogram, gromwell, gross, grume, gules, gullet, gully, gutter,
guttural.

habiliment, habit, habitable, habitant, habitation, habitude,
haslets, hatchment, haughty, haut-gotit, hawser, hearse, heir, herb,
heritage, hibernal, hideous, homage, homicide, honest, honour,
horrible, horror, hospice, hospitable, hospital, host (1), host (2),
hostage, hostel, hostler (ostler), hotel, human, humble, humid,
humility, humour.

ides, ignition, ignoble, ignominy, ignore, iliac, illation, illegible,
illiberal, illicit, illusion, illustrious, im- (1), im- (4), image, imagine,
imbecile, imbibe, imbrue (embrew), immaterial, immeasurable,
immediate, immemorial, immense, immobility, immodest, immoral,
immortal, immovable, immunity, immure, immutable, impair, im-
pale, impalpable, imparity, impart, impartial, impassable, impas-
sible, impassioned, impassive, impatient, impeach, impearl?, im-
penetrable, impenitent, imperative, imperceptible, imperfect, imperial,
imperil, imperishable, impersonal, impertinent, impiety, impious,
implacable, implant, implead, implore, imply, import, importable,
importune, imposition, impossible, impotent, impoverish, impreg-
nable, imprint, imprison, improbable, impromptu, improper,
improve, imprudent, impudent, impugn, impure, impute, in- (2),
in- (3), inability, inaccessible, inaction, inadmissible, inalienable,
inanition, inapproachable, inapt, inattention, incage, incapable,
incapacity, incarnation, incase, incense (2), incertitude, incest, inci-
dent, incircle, incise, incite, incivil, inclement, incline, inclose,
incommensurable, incommode, incommunicable, incommutable, in-
comparable, incompatible, incompetent, incomprehensible, incon-
ceivable, inconsiderable, inconsolable, inconstant, incontestable,
incontinent (1), incontinent (2), incontrollable, inconvenient, in-
correct, increase, incredible, incrust, incumber, incurable, incursion,
indebted, indecent, indecision, indefatigable, indefeasible (AF.),
indelible, indelicate, indemnify, indemnity, indict, indiction, indif-
ferent, indigent, indignation, indirect, indiscreet, indisputable, in-
dissoluble, indistinct, indite, indivisible, indocile, indubitable, indue
(2), indulgence, industry, ineffable, ineffaceable, inefficacious, in-
eligible, ineloquent, inept, inequality, inestimable, inevitable, inex-
cusable, inexorable, inexpedient, inexperience, inexpert, inexpiable,
inexplicable, inextinguishable, inextricable, infallible, infamy, infect,
infelicity, infer, inferior, infernal, infest, infidel, infirmary, infirmity,
inflame, inflexible, inflorescence, influence, inform, infraction,
infrangible, infuse, infusible, ingender, ingenious, inglorious, in-
grain, ingratitude, ingredient, inhabit, inherit, inhospitable, inhuman,
inhume, inimitable, iniquity, injudicious, injure, injustice, innavigable,
innocent, innumerable, inoffensive, inofficial, inoperative, inop-
portune, inquest, inquietude, insatiable, inscrutable, insect, insen-
sible, inseparable, insidious, insincere, insipid, insist, insobriety,
insolent, insolidity, insoluble, inspire, instability, instance, instate,
instil, instinct, instrument, insubjection, insufferable, insult, insuper-
able, insupportable, insure, insurmountable, insurrection, intellect,
intelligence, intemperance, intend, intent, inter, intercede, intercept,
interchange, intercostal, intercourse, interest (1), interest (2), inter-
fere, interjection, interlace, interlard, interlocution, intermeddle,
intermediate, intern, interpellation, interposition, interpret, interstice,
interval, intervene, interview, intestine, intituled, intolerable, intract-
able, intreat (with E. prefix), intrench (with E. prefix), intrinsic,
introit, intuition, intumescence, inure, inurn, inutility, invade,
invalid, invaluable, invariable, invasion, inveigle (AF.), invent,
inverse, invest, invincible, inviolable, invisible, invite, invoice,
invoke, involve, invulnerable, ir- (1), ir- (2), ire, irreclaimable,
irreconcilable, irrecoverable, irrecuperable, irredeemable, irrefrag-
able, irrefutable, irregular, irrelevant, irreligious, irremediable, irre-
missible, irremovable, irreparable, irreprehensible, irrepressible,
irreproachable, irreprovable, irresistible, irrespective, irretrievable,
irreverent, irrevocable, irrision, irruption, isle, issue, ivory.

jail, jamb, jargon, jaundice, jaunty, jaw, jeer ?, jelly, jeopardy,
jesses, jest, jet (1), jetsam, jetty, jewel, jocund, (john) dory, join, joint,
joist, jostle, journal, journey, joust (just), jovial, joy, judge, judicature,
judicial, judicious, juggler, juice, July, jurisdiction, jurisprudence,
jurist, juror, jury, jury(mast)?, just (1), just (2), justice, justify,
justle, jut, juvenile, juxtaposition.

kedge (1), kennel (1), kennel (2), kerchief, kestrel, ketch, kick-
shaws, kitten.

laborious, labour, lace, lacrosse, lake (1), lament, lamprey, lance,
lancet, language, languish, languor, larceny, lard, large, largess,
lash (1), lash (2), lassitude, latchet, lateen, Latin, latitude, launch (1)
(lanch), laundress, laurel, lave, lavish, laxative, leal, lease (1), leash,
leaven, lectern, lection, lecture, legacy, legal, legate, legend, leger-
demain, legible, legion, legist, legume, leisure, lenity, lentil, lentisk,


3D


770


lesion, lesson, lethal, letter, lettuce, levee, level, lever, leveret, levity,
levy, liable, liaison, liane, libation, libel, liberal, liberty, libidinous,
library, licence, license, licentious, lien, lieu, lieutenant, ligament,
ligature, limit, limn, limpid, line, lineage, lineament, liniment,
linnet, lintel, liquefy, liqueur, liquid, liquor, literal, literature,
litigious, litter (1), litter (2), livery, livid, lizard, local, loin,
longitude, lorimer, loriot, lounge, lovage, loyal, luce, lucre, luminary,
luminous, lunatic, lune, lunge, iupine, luscious?, lush, lustre (2),
lute (2), luxation, luxury, lym.

mace (1), madam, mademoiselle, magistrate, magnanimity,
magnify, mail (1), mainour, maintain, majesty, maladministration,
maladroit, malady, malapert, malcontent (malecontent), male,
malediction, malformation, malice, malign, malison, mall (1),
mallard, malleable, mallet, maltreat, malversation, manacle, man-
chet ?, manciple, mandate, mandrel, mange, manger, manifest,
maniple, manner, manceuyre, manor, mansion, mantel, mantle,
manual, manufacture, manure, map, marble, march (2)? (or G.?),
March (3), marine, marish, marital, maritime, market, marl, mar-
moset, marry, mart, martial, martlet (2), marvel, mascle, masculine,
master, mastery, material, maternal, matins (mattins), matricide,
matrimony, matron, matter (1), matter (2), maugre, maul, maundy,
mauve, maxim, may (2), mayor, meagre, mean (3), measure, meddle,
mediation, mediator, medicine, mediocre, medley, melée, member,
membrane, memoir, memory, menace, mend, meniver (minever,
miniver), -ment, mental, mention, menu, mercenary, mercer, mer-
chandise, merchant, mercury, mercy, meridian, merit, merle, mesne,
mess (I), mess (2), message, messenger, messuage, mew (3), milfoil,
millet, million, mince, minim, minish, minister, minstrel, minuet,
miracle, mirage, mirror, mis- (2), misadventure, misalliance, mis-
chance, mischief, miscount, miscreant, miserable, misgovern, mis-
judge, misnomer, misprise (misprize), misprision, miss (2), missive,
Mister (Mr.), mistress, misuse, mobile, mock, mode, modem,
modest, modify, moiety, moil, moist, molest, mollify, moment,
money, monition, monster, monument, mood (2), Moor (3), mop (1),
moral, morbid, mordacity, Morian, morsel, mortal, mortar (2),
mortgage, mortify, mortmain, mortuary, motet, motion, motive,
mould (2), mound, mount (2), mountain, move, mucilage, mule,
mulled, mullet (1), mullet (2), multiply, multitude, multure,
mundane, municipal, munificence, muniment, munition, mural,
murmur, murrain, muscle (1), muse (1), mustard (with Teut. suffix),
muster, mutiny, mutual, muzzle, mystery (2) (mistery).

naive, napery, napkin (with E. suffix), narration, nasal, natal,
nation, native, natty, nature, naval, nave (2), navew, navigable, navi-
gation, navy, neat (2), necessary, negation, negligence, nephew,
nerve, net (2), newel, nias, nice, niece, noble, nocturn, noisome
(with E. suffix), nonage, nonchalant, nonpareil, notable, notary,
notch, note, notice, notify, notion, notoriety, noun, nourish, novel,
novice, noyau, nuance, nuisance, null, number, numbles, numeration,
numerous, nuncupative, nuptial, nurse, nurture, nutritive.

obedient, obeisance, obey, obit, objurgation, oblation, oblige,
oblique, oblivion, oblong, obscure, obsequies, observe, obstacle,
obtain, obtest, obtuse, occasion, occident, occupy, occur, octave,
octroi, odour, offend, office, ointment, omelet, omnipotent, omni-
present, onerous, onion, opacity, opaque, opinion, oppilation,
opportune, opposite, oppress, oppugn, optative, option, opulent,
or (3), oracle, oration, orator, orb, ordain, order, ordinance,
ordinary, ordination, ordnance, ordure, oriel, orient, orifice, Ori-
flamme, origin, oriole, orison, orle, ormolu, ornament, orpiment,
orpine (orpin), osprey, ostentation, ostler, ounce (1), oust, outrage,
oval, ovation, overt, overture, oyer, oyes (oyez).

pace, pacify, page (2), pail, paint, painter, pair, palace, palate,
palatine, pale (1), pale (2), palette, palisade, pall (2), pallet
(1), palliasse, palm (1), palpable, pane, panel (pannel), pan-
nage, pannier, pansy, pantler, pantry, papa, papal, papiermaché,
parachute, paraffine, paramount, paramour, parboil, parcel, par-
cener, pardon, pare, parent, parget, parity, parlous, parricide,
parry, parsimony, parsnep (parsnip), parson, part, parterre, partial,
participle, particle, partition, partner, party, parvenu, pass, pas-
sage, passion, passive, passport, pastern, pastille, pate, patent,
paternal, patient, patois, patrimony, patron, pattern, paucity,
paunch, pave, pavilion, pawl, pawn (2), pay (1), pay (2), paynim
(painim), peace, peach (2), peal, pearl, peasant, peccant, pectoral,
peculiar, pecuniary, pedicel (pedicle), pedigree, peel (1), peel (2),
peel (3), peel (4), peep (1), peep (2), peer (1), peer (3), peise
(peize), peitrel, pelerine, pelisse, pell, pellet, pellicle, pellitory (1)
(paritory), pell-mell, pellucid, pelt (2), pen (2), penchant, pencil,
pendant, penitent, pennon (pennant), penny-royal, pensile, pension,
pensive, penthouse, penury, people, peradventure, perceive, perch (1),
perchance, perdition, perdurable, peregrination, peremptory, perfect,
perforce, perfume, peril, perish, perjure, perk, permanent, permu-
tation, pernicious, peroration, perpendicular, perpetual, perplex,


DISTRIBUTION OF WORDS (FRENCH FROM LATIN)


perry, persecute, persevere, persiflage, persist, person, perspective,
perspicacity, perspiration, persuade, pert, pertain, pertinacity,
pertinent, perturb, pervert, pest, pester, pestilent, pestle, petard,
petiole, petition, petronel, pie (1), pie (2), pie (3), Piepowder
Court, pierce?, piety, pigeon, pile (2), pill (1), pill (2), pillage,
pillar, pimp, pimpernel, pinion, pinnacle, pioneer, pious, pip (3),
pity, placid, plagiary, plague, plaice, plain, plaint, plaintiff, plain-
tive, plait, plan, plane (1), plane (2), plank, plantain (1), plat (2),
plate, plateau, platform, platitude, platoon, platter, plea, pleach
(plash), plead, please, pleasure, plebeian, plenitude, plenty, pliable,
pliant, pliers, plight (2), plot (1), plover, plumage, plumb, plume,
plummet, plump (2), plunge, plural, plush, pluvial, ply, poignant,
point, poise, poison, poitrel (peitrel), polish, pomegranate, pommel,
ponent, poniard, pontiff, pony, pool (2), poor, poplar, popular,
porch, porcupine, pork, porpoise (porpess), port (1), port (3),
portcullis, Porte, porter (1), porter (2), porter (3), portesse (portos,
portous), portion, portrait, portray, position, positive, possible,
post (2), posterity, postern, postil, posture, potable, potch, potion,
poult, poultice, pounce (1), pounce (2), pourpoint, pourtray,
poverty, powder, power, prairie, praise, pray, pre- (or L.), preach,
preamble, prebend, precaution, precede, precept, precious, precipice,
precise, preconceive, predestine, predetermine, predilection, pre-
eminence, pre-engage, preface, prefect, prefer, prefigure, prefix,
pregnant (1), pregnant (2), prejudge, prejudice, prelate, preliminary,
prelude, premier, premise (premiss), premonish, prentice, pre-
occupy, preordain, prepare, prepay, prepense, preposition, pre-
rogative, presage, prescience, presence, present (1), present (2),
presentiment, preserve, preside, press (1), press (2), prestige, presume,
pretend, preter- (or L.), preterit (preterite), pretext, prevail, prey,
prial, price, pride ?, prim, prime (1), prime (2), primitive, primo-
geniture, primordial, primrose, prince, principal, principle, print,
prior (2), prise (prize), prison, pristine, privet?, privilege, privy,
prize (1), prize (2), prize (3), pro- (or L., or Gk.), probable, pro-
bation, probity, proceed, proclaim, procure, prodigal, prodigy,
profane, profess, proffer, profit, profound, progenitor, progeny,
progress, project, prolific, prolix, prolong, promenade, prominent,
promise, prompt, prone, pronoun, pronounce, proof, proper, pro-
pinquity, proportion, proposition, propriety, prorogue, prose, protest,
provender, proverb, province, provision, provoke, prowess, prox-
imity, proxy, prude, prudent, prune (1), pry, puberty, public,
publication, publish, puce, puerile, puisne, puissant, pule, pullet,
pulp, pulpit, pulse (1), pulverise, pumice, pummel, punch (1),
punch (2), puncheon (1), puncheon (2), punctual, punish, puny,
pupil (1), pupil (2), puppet, puppy, pur-, purchase, pure, purfle,
purge, purify, purity, purl (2), purl (3), purlieu, purloin, purport,
purpose (2), purslain (purslane), pursue, pursy, purtenance, puru-
lent, purvey, purview, push, pustule, putative, putrefy, putrid.
quadrangle, quadruple, quail (1), quaint, qualify, quality,
quantity, quarrel (1), quarrel (2), quarry (1), quarry (2), quart,
quartan, quarter, quartern, quash, quatrain, quatrefoil, quest, ques-
tion, queue, quilt, quintain, quintessence, quintuple, quire (1), quit,
quite, quoin, quoit (coit)?, quote, quotidian, quotient (or L.).
rabbet, race (3), raceme, radical, radish, rage, ragout, rail (1),
rail (2), raisin, rally (1), ramify, rampart, rancour, ransom, rapid
(or L.), rapine, rare, rase, rash (2), rash (3), rash (4), rate (1),
rate (2), ratify, ration, ravage, rave, raven (2), ravine, ravish,
ray (I), ray (2), raze, razor, re-, red- (or L.), realm, rear (2),
reason, reasty, rebate, rebel, rebound, rebuke, receive, recent, re-
ceptacle, recheat, recite, reclaim, recluse, recognise, recoil, recollect,
recommend, recompense, reconcile, reconnoitre, record, recount,
recourse, recover, recreant, recreation, recruit, rectangle, rectify,
rectitude, recusant, reddition, redeem, redolent, redouble, redoubt-
able, redound, redress, refection, refer, refine, reform, refrain (1),
refrain (2), refuge, refuse, refute, regal, regent, regicide, regiment,
region, register, reglet, rehearse, reign, rein, reins, reject, rejoice,
rejoin, relate, relay (1), release, relent, relevant, relic, relict, relieve,
religion, relinquish, reliquary, relique, relish, rely, remain, remand,
remedy, remember, reminiscence, remnant, remorse, remount, remove,
renal, rencounter (rencontre), render, rendezvous, rennet (2), re-
nounce, renown, rent (2), renunciation, repair (1), repair (2),
repartee, repast, repay, repeal, repeat, repent, repercussion, reper-
tory, repetition, replace, replenish, replete, reply, report, repository,
repoussé, represent, repress, reprieve, reprimand, reprint, reproach,
reprove, reptile, republic, repugnant, repute, request, require, re-
quite, reredos, rescind, rescript, rescue, research, resemble, resent,
reserve, reside, residue, resign, resist, resort, resound, resource, re-
spect, respire, respite, respond, rest (2), restaurant, restitution, restive,
restore, restrain, result, resume, resurrection, retail, retain, retard,
retention, reticule, retinue, retort, retract, retreat, retrench, retri-
bution, return, reveal, reveillé, revel, revenge, revenue, revere,
reverie (revery), reverse, revert, review, revile, revise, revisit, revive,


DISTRIBUTION OF WORDS (FRENCH FROM LATIN)


revoke, revulsion, rinse ?, risible, rissole, rival, river, roam, robust,
rogation, roil (rile) ?, roistering, roll, romance, romaunt, rondeau,
rosemary, rote (1), rotundity, roué, rouge, rouleau, roulette, round,
roundel, rout (1 avd 2), route, routine, rowel, royal, rubasse, rubric,
ruby, rude, ruin, rule, rumour, runagate, rundlet (runlet), rupture,
rural, ruse, russet, rustic, rut (1), rut (2).

sacerdotal, sack (3), sacred, sacrifice, sacrilege, sacristan (sexton),
safe, sage (1), sage (2), sainfoin, saint, salary, saline, sally, salmon,
saltier, salutary, salyage, salvation, sample, sanctify, sanctimony,
sanction, sanctuary, sanguine, sanicle, sans, sapience, sash (1),
satellite, satin, satire, satisfy, saturnine, sauce, saunter, sausage,
savage, save, savory, savour, saxifrage, say (3), scabious, scald (1),
scamper, scape (2), scarab, scarce, scent, science, scintillation, scion ?,
scissors, sconce (I), sconce (2), scorch, scour (2), scourge, scout (I),
screw (1), scrip (2), script, scripture, scrivener, scroyles, scruple,
scullery, scullion, sculpture, scur, scutcheon, scutiform, seal, séance,
search, season, second, secret, secretary, sect, section, secular,
sedentary, sediment, sedition, see (2), seel, seignior, sejant, sell (2),
semblance, seminal, sempiternal, senate, sennet, sense, sentence,
sentiment, sentry, sepal, sept, sepulchre, sequel, sequence, sequester,
sere (2), serf, sergeant (serjeant), serious, sermon, serpent, serried,
serve, session, set (2), seton, sever, severe, sewer (1), sewer (2),
sex, shark, shingles, shirk, siege, sign, signal, signet, signify, silence,
‘similar, similitude, simnel, simple, simpleton, sincere, singular, sir,
sire, site, sizar, size (1), skillet, sluice, soar, sober, sociable, soil (1),
soil (2), soil (3), soirée, sojourn, solace, solder, soldier, sole (2),
sole (3), solemn, solicit, solicitude, solid, soliped, solitary, solitude,
solstice, soluble, solution, sombre, somnolence, sorb, sorcery, sordid,
sort, sortie, sou, sound (3), source, souse (1), souse (2), souvenir,
sovereign, space, spandrel, spawn, special, specify, specious, spectacle,
spectre, spencer, spice, spine, pinney, spiracle, spirit, spite, spittle
(2), splay, spoil, spoliation, sport, spouse, sprain, sprite (spright),
spurge, square, squash, squat, squire (1 and 2), stable (1), stable (2),
stage, stain, stamin (tamine, taminy, tamis, tammy), stanch (staunch),
stanchion, standard, stank, state, station, statue, stature, statute,
stencil, sterile, stipulation, store, story (2), stover?, strain (1),
strait, strange, stray, stress, structure, strumpet?, stubble, study,
stuff, stupefy, stupid, style (1), suasion, suave, subaltern, subdue,
subject, subjoin, sublime, submerge, suborn, subsidy, subsist, sub-
stance, substitute, subterfuge, subtle, suburb, subvention, subvert,
succeed, succour, succulent, suction, sudden, sudorific, sue, suet,
‘suffer, suffice, suffrage, suicide, suit, suite, sullen, sully, sum, summit,
summon, sumptuous, superabound, superb, superexcellent, super-
intendent, superior, superlative, supernal, supernatural, super-
numerary, superscription, supersede, superstition, supplant, supple,
supplement, suppliant, supply, support, supposition, supreme, sur-
(2), surcease, surcingle, sure, surface, surfeit, surge, surloin, surmise,
surmount, surpass, surplice, surplus, surprise, surrejoinder, surrender,
surround, surtout, surveillance, survey, survive, susceptible, suspect,
suspend, sustain, suture, suzerain.

tabard ?, tabernacle, table, tail (2), tailor, taint, tally, talon,
tamper, tangible, tantamount, tardy, tart (2), task, tassel (1),
taste, taunt, tavern, tax, teil, temerity, tempest, temple (2), tem-
poral, tempt, tenable, tenacity, tenant, tench, tend (1), tend (2),
tender (1), tender (2), tender (3), tendon, tendril, tenebrous (tene-
brious), tenement, tennis, tenon, tenor, tense (1), tent (1), tent (2),
tent (4), tenter, tenuity, tenure, tercel, tergiversation, term, termi-
nation, termite, terreen (tureen), terrible, terrier, territory, terror,
tertian, test, testament, tester, testicle, testify, testy, text, texture,
tierce (terce), timid, tinsel, tiny?, tissue, titillation, title, tittle,
toast (1), toast (2), toil (2), toil (2), toilet (toilette), toise, tonsil,
tonsure, torch, torment, tormentil, torrent, torrid, torsion, tort,
tortoise, tortuous, torture, total, trace (1), trace (2), trail, trail-
baston, train, trait, traitor, trajectory, trammel, trance, tranquil,
transaction, trans-alpine, transfigure, transform, transgression, trans-
late, transmigration, transparent, transpierce, transplant, transport,
transposition, transubstantiation, travail, trave, travel, traverse,
travesty, treachery, treason, treat, treble, trefoil, trellis, tremble,
trench ?, trental, trepidation, trespass, trestle (tressel), tret, trey,
triangle, tribe, tribulation, tribune, tribute, trick (1), trick (2),
tricolor, trident, trifle, trillion, Trinity, trinket (1) ?, triple, triumph ?,
trivial, tron, trot ?, trouble, trounce, trowel, truculent, truffle, tramp
(2), trumpery, truncheon, trunk (1), trunnion, try, tube, tuition,
tuly, tumefy, tumult, turbine, turbot, turbulent, turmoil ?, tumpike ?,
turpitude, turret, tutor. ;

ubiquity, ulcer, umbilical, amble-pie, umbrage, umpire, uncle,
unction, unicorn, uniform, union (1), union (2), unique, unison,
unit, unity, universal, urbanity, urchin, ure, urine, urn, use (1),
use (2), usher, usurp, usury, utas, utensil, uterine, utilise, utility,
utterance (2).

vacation, vacillation, vagabond, vague, vail (1), vail (2), vail (3),


771


vain, vair, valance, vale, valentine, valerian, valetudinary, valiant,
valid, valley, valour, value, valve, vambrace, vamp, vamplate, van
(1), van (2), vanish, vanity, vanquish, vantage, vapour, variety,
vary, vase, vast, Vatican, vaticination, vault (1), vaunt, veal,
veer, vegetable, vehement, veil, vein, vellum, velocity, velvet,
venal, vend, venerable, venery, venew (venue, vyeney), vengeance,
venial, venison, venom, vent (1), vent (2), vent (3), ventail, ventricle,
venture, venue, verb, verdant, verderer, verdict, verdigris, verditer,
verge (1), verify, verisimilitude, verity, verjuice, vermeil, vermilion, ver-
min, versatile, versify, version, vert, vervain, verve, very, vessel, vestal,
vestige, vestment, vestry, vesture, vetch, vex, viand, vicar, vice (1),
vice (2), vice-gerent, vicinage, victim, victory, victuals, vie, view,
vigil, vignette, vigour, vile, villain, vindictive, vine, vinegar, vintage,
vintner, violent, violet, viper, virgin, virile, virtue, virulent, visage,
vis-a-vis, viscid, viscount, visé, visible, vision, visit, visor (vizor,
vizard, visard), visual, vital, vitriol, vituperation, vivacity, vivandiere,
vivify, vocable, vocal, vocation, vociferation, voice, void, volant,
volition, volley, voluble, volume, voluntary, voluptuous, volute,
voracity, vouch, vouchsafe, voussoir, vow, vowel, voyage, vulcanise,
vulgar, vulpine.

widgeon, wyvern (wivern),

Late Latin from French from Latin: crenellate.

Provencal from French from Latin: sirrah.

Italian from French from Latin: oboe.

Spanish from French from Latin: platina.

Dutch from French from Latin: abele, cashier, commodore, cost,
domineer, excise (1), foy, vade.

Provengalfrom Latin: battledoor, capstan, colander, funnel,
lingo, muckinder, musty, noose, spigot, ullage.

French from Provengal from Latin: amadou, badinage, caisson,
cardoon, casern, fad, fig, goitre, gurnard, lozenge, ricochet, somer-
sault, soubrette.

Spanish from Provengal from Latin: flamingo.

Italian from Latin: allegro, alto, antic, askance ?, attitude,
belladonna, broccoli, canto, canzonet, caper (1), casino, cicerone,
contralto, contrapuntal, cupola, curvet, dado, dilettante, ditto, doge,
duel, duet, ferret (2), granite, gurgle, incognito, influenza, infuriate,
intaglio, isolate, Jerusalem (artichoke), lagoon (lagune), lava, lira,
macaroni (maccaroni), madonna, manifesto, maraschino, mezzotinto,
miniature, motto, nuncio, opera, petto, piano, pianoforte, piazza,
pilgrim, portico, presto, profile, punch (4), punchinello, quartet
(quartette), rallentando, salvo, semibreve, semolina, seraglio, sfor-
zando, signor (signior), size(2), soda, solo, sonata, soprano, stanza,
stiletto, terra-cotta, travertine, trio, tufa, ultramarine, umbrella,
vendetta, vermicelli, vista, volcano.

French from Italian from Latin: accolade, alarm (alarum), alert,
apartment, arcade, artisan, basement, belvedere, bronze, bulletin,
burlesque, cab (1), cabriolet, cadence, campaign, cape (2), caprice,
capriole, caress, carnival, cascade, cash (1), cassock, cavalcade, cava-
lier, cavalry, citadel, colonel, colonnade, compartment, concert, cor-
nice, corridor, corsair, cortege, costume, countertenor, courier, cour-
tesan, couvade, cuirass, dome, douche, ducat, escort, esplanade, facade,
festoon, filigree, florin, fracas, fugue, gabion, galligaskins, gambado,
gambit, gambol, gelatine, imprese, improvise, incarnadine, infantry,
intrigue, junket, league (1), levant, lustre (1), lutestring, macaroon,
mall (2), manage, manege, mercantile, mizen (mizzen), model, mole
(3), musket, niche, ortolan, paladin, pallet (2), parapet, parasol,
partisan (1), partisan (2), pastel, periwig, peruke, pilaster, pinnace,
piston, poltroon, pomade (pommade), poop, populace, porcelain,
postillion, preconcert, quarantine, redoubt, reprisal, revolt, risk, rocket
(2), salad, sallet, salmagundi, saveloy (cervelas), sentinel?, soffit,
sonnet, spinet, spontoon, squad, squadron, termagant, terrace, tra-
montane, trinket (2), ultramontane, umber, vault (2), vedette (vidette),

Low German (or Dutch) from French from Italian from Latin : mon-
key, wig.

Spanish from Italian from Latin: contraband.

German from Italian from Latin: barouche.

Spanish from Latin: albino, alligator, armada, armadillo,
assonant, binnacle, bolero ?, bonito, booby, brocade, canary, capsize,
carbonado, cask, chinchilla, contango, cork, corral, cortes, despatch,
disembogue, domino, don (2), duenna, firm (2), funambulist, grandee,
hacienda, hidalgo, junta, junto, lariat, lasso, llano, mallecho, matador,
merino, morris, mosquito, mulatto, mustang, negro, olio, peccadillo,
peseta, primero, punctilio, quadroon, real (2), reata, renegade, salver,
seguidilla, sherry, sierra, siesta, sombrero, stevedore, tent (3),
toreador, tornado, vanilla.

French from Spanish from Latin: calenture, casque, chopine,
comrade, creole, crusade, doubloon, escalade, farthingale, grenade,
jade (2), jonquil, manchineel, nigger, ombre, parade, pint, plantain
(2), punt (2), quadrille, roan, sassafras, spaniel.

Italian from Spanish from Latin: comply, majolica.


3 D2


772


French from Italian from Spanish from Latin: compliment.

Portuguese from Latin: auto-da-fe, ayah, caste, cobra de
capello, joss, junk (2), madeira, milreis, moidore, molasses, peon,
pimento, port (4), tank, verandah ?

French from Portuguese from Latin: chamade, corvette, fetich
(fetish), serval.

Dutch from Portuguese from Latin: kraal.

French from Romaunsch from Latin: marmot.

‘ German from Hungarian from Servian from Late Greek from Latin :
ussar.

Dutch from Latin: anker, bung, buoy, cornel, coy (2), cruise,
‘pip (1), tafferel (taffrail).

Scandinavian from Latin: kettle.

German from Latin: drilling, larch.

French from Old High German from Latin: pitcher, waste.

French from Middle High German from Latin: baldric, coif, fife,

uoif.
; Russian from Teutonic from Latin : czar.

Celtic from Latin: bannock, caber, cross, pillion, plaid, quaich.

Gaelic from English from Latin : pibroch.

French from Portuguese from Arabic from Greek from Latin:
apricot.

French from Italian from Arabic from Latin: garble.

French from Stanish from Arabic from Latin : quintal.

Italian from Spanish from Arabic from Latin: mandilion.

Dutch from French from Spanish from Arabic from Latin : kilderkin.

Late Latin: barrister, bosky, bush (1), calamanco, campani-
form, cap, capital (3), celt (2), clary, cope (1), crucible, edible,
elongate, elucidate, fine (2), flask, fortalice, grate (1), hoax, hocus-
pocus, implement, indent (1), intimidate, machicolation, pageant,
plenary.

French from Late Latin: almanack, ambush, bachelor, bail (2),
bale (3), ball (1), barge, barnacle (1), barnacle (2), basin, basnet,
bastard, baste (2), baton, batten (2), betony, bittern, boot (1),
bottle (1), bouquet, branch, bugle (3), burden (2), burganet, burl,
butler, butt (2), buttery, chape, chemise, crochet, crocket, croquet,
ctosier, crotchet, crouch, cumber, drab (2), drape, fell (3), felon,
ferret (1), flagon, frock, gallery, galley, gauge (gage), gown, hutch,
identity, lavender, mackerel, marjoram, mastiff, menagerie, menial,
muffle, oleander, osier, tire (4), tire (5).

Walloon from French from Late Latin: muff (1).

French from Provengal from Late Latin : ballad, bastile. cabbage
(2), cabin, viol.

French from Gascon from Late Latin: cad, cadet.

French from Italian from Provengal from Late Latin: bastion.

Italian from Late Latin: fiasco.

French from Italian from Late Latin: ballet, barcarolle, bark (1),
battalion, capuchin, catacomb, falchion, gallias, pivot.

Spanish from Late Latin; ambuscade, bastinado, embargo, galleon.

French from Spanish from Late Latin; caparison, cape (1).

French from Portuguese from Late Latin: bayadere.

French from German from Late Latin: spurry.


GREEK. a-, acacia, acatalectic, acephalous, achromatic,
acme, acotyledon, acoustic, acropolis, acrostic, actinic, esthetic,
agnostic, allopathy, amazon, ambrosia, amorphous, amphi-, amphi-
bious, amphibrach, amphitheatre, an- (a-), ana-, anabaptist, ana-
chronism, anzesthetic, anapest (anapzest), anemone, aneroid, aneurism,
anhydrous, anomaly, anonymous, anthology, anthracite, anthropology,
anti-, anticlimax, antinomian, antiseptic, antithesis, antitype, aorist,
apepsia, aphelion, aphis, apo-, apocrypha, apophthegm (apothegm),
apteryx, archzology, archaic, archaism, areopagus, aristocracy,
arsis, arthritis, asbestos, ascetic, ascidian, asphodel, asphyxia,
asterism, asteroid, asthma, asymptote, ataxy, atheism, athlete, atlas,
atmosphere, autobiography, autocracy, automaton, autonomy,
autopsy, azalea.

barometer, barytes, bathos, belemnite, bibliography, bibliolatry,
bibliomania, biography, biology, bromine, bronchial.

cacophony, caligraphy (calligraphy), calisthenics (callisthenics),
calomel, carotid, caryatides, cata-, cataclysm, catalepsy, catarrh,
catastrophe, category, cathartic, catoptric, ceramic, chiliad, chiro-
graphy, chlorine, chromatic, chrome, chromium, chronology,
chronometer, chrysalis, church, cissoid, clematis, climax, clime,
coleoptera, collodion, colocynth, coloquintida, colon (1), colon (2),
colophon, colophony, coma, coprolite, coracoid, cosmetic, cosmic,
cosmogony, cosmography, cosmology, cosmopolite, cotyledon, crasis,
creosote, cricoid, crisis, crony ?, croton, cryptogamia, cyanogen.

dandy ?, decagon, decahedron, decasyllabic, deleterious, demotic,
dendroid, derm, di- (2), dia-, diabetes, diacritic, diagnosis, dia-
phanous, diaphoretic, diastole, diatonic, dicotyledon, didactic,
digamma, digraph, dimorphous, dicecious, dioptrics, diorama,


DISTRIBUTION OF WORDS (GREEK)


aa


a


diphtheria, dipsomania, diptera, dodecagon, dedecahedron, dogma,
doll, drastic, dynamic.

eclectic, eczema, elastic, empyreal (empyrean), encrinite, endemic,
enema, enteric, enthusiasm, entozoon, eocene, ephemera, epi-,
epiglottis, episode, eponymous, erotic, esoteric, eu-, eucalyptus,
euphemism, euphony, euphrasy, euphuism, Euroclydon, euthanasia,
exegesis, exogen, exoteric. 4

glossographer, glottis, glyptic, gnostic, Gordian, gynarchy.

Hades, hagiographa, hector, hegemony, heliocentric, helminthology,
hemi-, hendecagon, hendecasyllabic, heptagon, heptahedron, hept-
archy, hermeneutic, hermetic, hesperian, heterodox, heterogeneous,
hierophant, hippish, hippocampus, histology, homeopathy (homceo-
pathy), homogeneous, homologous, hoplite, hyades, hydatid, hy-
drangea, hydrodynamics, hydrogen, hydropathy, hydrostatics, hyp-
notism.

ichor, ichthyography, iconoclast, icosahedron, idiosyncrasy, iodine,
iota, isochronous, isothermal.

kaleidoscope, kerosene, kinematic, kinetic, kirk, kleptomania.

lepidoptera, leucoma, lexicon, lithography, logarithm, lycan-
thropy.

macrocosm, mzenad, malachite, mastodon, megalosaurus, mega-
therium, melanite, meningitis, meniscus, mentor, meso-, meta-, meta-
phrase (metaphrasis), metastasis, metempsychosis,
miasma, microscope, miocene, misanthrope, misogamy, mnemonics,
mono-, monocotyledon, monody, monomania, monotony, morphia,
morphine, myopia, myriad, myth.


necrology, neology, nepenthe (nepenthes), neuralgia, nomad,


nosology.

octagon, octahedron, omega, onomatopeia, ontology, ophidian,
ophthalmia, opodeldoc (partly); ornithology, ornithorhyncus, or-
thoepy, orthopterous, osmium, osteology, ostracise, oxide, oxygen,
oxytone, ozone.

pachydermatous, pzdobaptism, paleography, paleology, pale-
ontology, palimpsest, palindrome, pan-, pandemonium, panic,
panoply, panorama, pantheism, para-, parallax, parenthesis, Parian,
paronymous, parthenogenesis, pathos, pedobaptism, pelargonium,
peri-, perianth, pericarp, perihelion, peritoneum, petal, philander,
philharmonic, phlox, pholas, phonetic, photography, phrenology,
phyllophorous, phytoid, picric, pleiocene, pleistocene, plesiosaurus,
pneumonia, polemical, polyglot, polyhedron, polysyllable, polythe-
ism, pro- (or L.; or F. from L.), pros-, prosthetic, pterodactyl,
pytetic, pyrotechnic.

saurian, schist, septic, skeleton, skink (2), sporadic, spore, statics,
stenography, stentorian, stereoscope, stereotype, stethoscope, strophe,
strychnine, style (2), synchronism, systole, syzygy.

tactics, tantalise, taw (2), taxidermy, technical (with L. suffix),
telegraph, telescope, tetrahedron, thaumaturgy, theism, theocracy,
theodolite, thermometer, threnody, thyroid, tonic, toxicology, toxo-
philite, trigonometry, trilobite, triphthong, triptych.

Utopian. zoology, zymotic.

Latin (or Late Latin) from Greek: abacus, abyss, acan-
thus, zgis, aerial, allegory, alms, aloe, amaranth, amethyst, am-
phisboena, amphora, anzemia, anathema, anchor, anodyne, antagonist,
anthem, anthropophagi, antichrist, antipathy, antiphon, antiphrasis,
antipodes, antistrophe, aorta, aphzresis, apocalypse, apocope,
apology, apostle, apostrophe, apotheosis, apse, arch (2), arch-,
archi-, archimandrite, argonaut, arnica?, aroma, artery, arum,
asphalt, aster, asterisk, astral, asylum, atomy (1), axiom,

bacchanal, bacterium, barbarous, basilica, basilisk, basis, bishop,
blaspheme, bolus, Boreas, box (1), box (2), box (3), bronchitis,
bryony, bucolic, bursar, butter.

cacoethes, cactus, cadmium, caduceus, calyx, camera, canister,
canon (1), capon, cardamom, carpus cartulary, castor, catapult,
cataract, catechise, cathedral, caustic, cedar, cemetery, cenobite
(ccenobite), centaur, cetaceous, chalcedony, chalybeate, chameleon,
chaos, character, chart, chasm, chervil, chest, chimzera (chimera),
chord, chorus, Christ, chrysanthemum, chrysoprase, chyme, cist,
cistus, cithern (cittern), clepsydra, clyster, colchicum, colophony,
colossus, colure, comma, conch, copper, crambo, cranium, crapulous,
crater, critic, crocus, crypt, cyclamen, cyclops, cynic, cynosure, cyst.


dactyl, deacon, deuteronomy, devil, diabolic, diabolical, dizeresis, —


diagram, diapason, diarrhoea, diatribe, dilemma, diploma, diptych,
disc (disk), dish, distich, dithyramb, doxology, drama, dryad,
dysentery, dyspepsy.


ecclesiastic, echinus, echo, eclogue, ecumenic (ecumenical), elec-


tric, electuary, eleemosynary, ellipse, elysium, emetic, emphasis,


i


methylated, -


I


emporium, enclitic, encomium, encyclical, encyclopzedia, enigma, —


enthusiasm,epic, epicene, epicure, epidemic, epidermis, epithalamium,
epithet, epitome, epoch, erysipelas, esophagus, ether, ethic, ethnic,
etymon, eucharist, eulogy, eunuch, euphorbia, eustachian, exarch,
exodus, exorcise, exotic.


DISTRIBUTION OF WORDS (LATIN FROM GREEK)


ganglion, gastric, genesis, Georgic, geranium, gigantic, glaucous,
gloss (2), glossary, gnomon, goby, Gorgon, graphic, gymnasium,
gyre.

halcyon, hamadryad, hebdomadal, heliacal, helix, helot, hemi-
stich, hemp, hermaphrodite, heteroclite, hexagon, hexameter, hiero-
glyphic, hippopotamus, history (story), holocaust, holothurian,
homonymous, hulk, hyaline, hybrid, hydra, hydrophobia, hyena,
hymen, hypallage, hyper-, hyperbole, hyphen, hypo-, hypochondria,
hypostasis, hypothesis.

iambic, ichneumon, idea, idyl (idyll), iliad, imp, impolitic (with
L. prefix), impracticable (with L. prefix), intoxicate (with L. prefix),
iris, isosceles, isthmus.

laconic, laic, laical, larynx, lemma, lemniscate, lethe, lichen,
ligure, lily, lithotomy, lotus, lynx.

Magnesia, mania, marsupial, martyr, masticate, mausoleum,
meander, medic, mesentery, metamorphosis, metaphysics, metathesis,
metonymy, metropolis, mimic, minotaur, minster, mint (2), moly,
monad, monastery, monk, monogamy, monogram, monopoly, mu-
seum, myrmidon, mystery (1).

naiad, narcissus, nauseous, nautical, nautilus, nectar, nemesis,
neophyte, neoteric, Nereid, numismatic.

obolus, octopus, octosyllabic, cesophagus, oleaginous, oleaster,
Olympian, onyx, opium, opoponax, orchestra, orchis, oread, orphan,
orthodox (or F. from L. from Gk.), oxalis, oxymel.

Pean, palestra, palladium, panacea, pancreas, pander (pandar),
panegyric, pantheon, paraclete, paragoge, parallelopiped, paralysis,
paraphernalia, pard, paregoric, parergon, parhelion, parochial,
parody, Pean, peltate, pentameter, pentateuch, Pentecost, peony,
pericardium, pericranium, perimeter, peripatetic, periphery, peri-
phrasis, petroleum, phalanx, phallus, pharynx, phase (phasis),
phenix (phoenix), phenomenon, philanthropy, philippic, philology,
philomel, phocine, phosphorus, phthisis, plaster, plastic, plectrum,
pleiad, pleonasm, plethora, plinth, plum, pneumatic, poly-, poly-
anthus, polygon, polypus, presbyter, pretty ?, priest, prism, pro-
boscis, prolepsis, propine, proscenium, prosopopceia, Protean, pro-
thalamium, psalm, psychical, purse, pygarg, pylorus, pyramid,
pyre, pyrethrum, pyrites, python, pyx.

rhinoceros, rhododendron, rhombus.

sapphic, sarcophagus, sardine (2), sardius, sardonyx, scalene,
scene, scheme, scirrhous, scoria, seam (2), sepia, sibyl, siren, soam,
spatula, sphinx, spleen, spondee, stoic, stole, storax, strangury,
sybarite, sycophant, symposium, syn-, synzeresis, synaloepha, synco-
pate, synecdoche, synopsis, syntax, synthesis, system,

tenia, tape, tartar (3), tautology, terebinth, teredo, tetanus,
tetrarch, theogony, theorem, thesaurus, thesis, theurgy, thorax,
thrasonical, thurible, thyrsus, tick (2), tippet, Titan, topiary,
trachea, trapezium, tribrach, triglyph, trigon, trimeter, tripod (or
Gk.), triton, trochee, trope, trout, truck (2), truckle, turn, tym-
panum, typhus.

xylobalsam.

French from Latin (or Late Latin) from Greek:
abnormal, academy, acclimatize, ace, acolyte, aconite, adamant,
agaric, agate, agony, agrimony, air, alabaster, almond, almoner,
amass, amnesty, anagram, analogy, anarchy, anatomy, anchoret,
anecdote, angel, anise, antarctic, antelope, anther, antidote, apathy,
apogee, apologue, apoplexy, apostasy, apostate, apothecary, arche-
type, architect, archives, arctic, arithmetic, asp, aspic, astrology,
astronomy, atom, atomy (2), atrophy, attic, austere, authentic,
autograph,

baptize, base (2), basil (1), besant, blame, bolt (boult), bombard,
bombardier, bombast, bombazine, bound (1), brace, bracelet, bras-
sart, buff (2), bugloss, bulb, burbot, bureau, bushel.

calamint, calender (1), calm, calumet, cane, canon (2), cantle,
canvas, canvass, caper (2), cardiac, carol, carrot, carte, catalogue,
cataplasm, catholic, cauterise, celandine, cenotaph, centaury, centre,
cephalic, ceruse, chair, chaise, chamber, chamomile, charter, cheer,
chemist, cherry, chestnut (chesnut), chicory, chime, chimney, chi-
rurgeon, choir, choler, chrism, chronicle, chrysolite, chyle, cis-
tern, citron, clergy, clerk, clinical, cock (5), cockatrice, cockboat,
cockle (1), cocoon, coffer, coffin, colic, comedy, comet, cone, con-
ger, cope (2), coppice, coppy, copse, coquette, coral, cord, coriander,
corymb, costmary, coupon, cream, crétin, crocodile, crown, crystal,
cube, currant, cycle, cygnet, cylinder, cymbal, cyme, cypress (1),
cypress (2).

daffodil, dais, dauphin, decade, decalogue, democracy, demon,
despot, diachylon, diaconal, diadem, diagonal, dialect, dialogue,
diameter, diamond, diaper, diaphragm, diet (1), diet (2), dimity,
diocese, diphthong, dissyllabic, dittany, diuretic, dolphin, dragon,
dragoon, dram (drachm), dredge (2), dromedary, dropsy, drupe,
dynasty.

eccentric, eclipse, economy, ecstasy, elegy, emblem, embrocation,


773


emerods, empiric, encaustic, energy, entomology, epaulet, epicycle,
epigram, epilepsy, epilogue, epiphany, episcopal, epistle, epitaph,
epode, evangelist.

fancy, fleam, frantic, frenzy.

galaxy, galoche (golosh), gangrene, gargle, gargoyle, gash,
genealogy, geography, geometry, germander, giant, gillyflower,
gittern, glamour, gloze, govern, graft (graff), gramarye, grammar,
grammatical, griffin (griffon), gudgeon, guitar.

halo, harmony, harpoon, harpy, hecatomb, hectic, heliotrope,
hellebore, hematite, hemisphere, hemorrhage, hemorrhoids (emerods),
hepatic, heresy, heretic, hermit, hero, heroine, hilarity, homily,
horizon, horologe, horoscope, hour, hyacinth, hydraulic, hydropsy,
hymn, hypocrisy, hypogastric, hypoteiinse, hypothec, hysteric.

idiom, idiot, idol, imposthume, ingraft (engraft), inharmonious,
ink, irony.

jacinth, jalousie, jealous, jet (2). kit (2).

labyrinth, laity, lamp, lantern, lay (3), leopard, leper, leprosy,
lethargy, licorice (liquorice), litany, litharge, litre, liturgy, lobe,
logic, lyre.

mace (2), machine, magnet, mandrake, mangonel, mass (1),
mastic (mastich), match (2), mathematic, mechanic, medlar, me-
grim, melancholy, melilot, melody, melon, metal, metallurgy,
metaphor, method, metre (meter), mettle, microcosm, misty (2),
mitre, monarchy, monochord, monosyllable, mosaic, murrey, muse
(2), music, myrobalan (mirobalan), mystic, mythology.

necromancy, Nick (2), noise ?, nymph.

obelisk, ocean, ochre, ode, oil, oligarchy, olive, orach (orache),
organ, orgies, origan (origanum), orthodox (or L.-Gk.), ortho-
graphy, ounce (2), oyster. i

page (1), pain, palinode, palsy, pamphlet, pandect, pant, pan-
ther, pantomime, parable, paradigm, paradox, paragraph, parallel,
parallelogram, paralogism, paralyse, paraphrase, parasite, parch ?,
parchment, parish, parley, parliament (with F. suffix), parlour (with
F. suffix), parole, paroxysm, parrot, parsley, partridge, paste, pasty,
paten, patriarch, perigee, patriot, patronymic, patty, pause, peda-
gogue, pelican, penal, penance, pentagon, perch (2), perigee, period,
pew, phaeton, phantasm, phantom, pharmacy, pheasant, phial,
philosophy, philtre, phiz, phlebotomy, phlegm, phrase, phylactery,
physic, physiognomy, physiology, pier, pilcrow, pip (2), pippin?,
pirate, place, plane (3) (plane-tree), planet, pleurisy, poem, poesy,
poet, pole (2), police, policy, polygamy, pomp, pore (1), porphyry,
pose (1), posy, practice, pragmatic, problem, proem, prognostic,
programme (program), prologue, prophecy, prophet, propose, prose-
lyte, prosody, protocol, protomartyr, prototype, prow, prune (2),
psaltery, pulley ?, pump (2), pumpion (pumpkin), purple, purpose
(1) (with F. prefix), pygmy (pigmy).

quince, quire (2).

rankle, recoup (with L. prefix), resin (rosin), rhapsody, rhetoric,
rheum, rhomb, rhubarb, rhythm, rime (1), rue.

salamander, samite, sap (2)?, sarcasm, sardine (1), sardonic,
satyr, say (2), scammony, scandal, scantling (with L. prefix), scar
(1), scarify, sceptic, sceptre, schedule, schism, school (1), sciatic,
scorpion, seine, shawm (shalm), sinople, siphon, slander, solecism,
sophist, spasm, spay, sperm, sphere, spire (2), sponge, squill,
squirrel, stavesacre, stomach, story (1), strangle, stratagem, styptic,
succory, summer (2), sumpter, surgeon, surgery, syllable, syllogism,
symbol, symmetry, sympathy, symphony, symptom, synagogue,
syndic, synod, synonym, syringe.

talent, tansy, tapestry, tetragon, tetrasyllable, theatre, theme,
theology, theory, therapeutic, throne, thyme, tiffany, timbrel, tomb,
tome, tone, topaz, topic, topography, tour, tournament, tourniquet,
tower, tragacanth, tragedy, treacle, treasure, trepan (1), trephine,
tress, tressure, triad, trisyllable, triumph ?, troglodyte, trophy, tropic,
trousers, trousseau, trover, truss, tune, turpentine, type, tyrant.

vial. zeal, zed, zephyr, zest, zodiac, zone.

Low Latin from Latin from Greek: intone.

French from Provengal from Latin from Greek: tunny.

Italian from Latin from Greek: biretta, buffalo, eryngo, grotto,
madrigal, orris, piazza ?, sbirro, torso.

Spanish from Italian from Latin from Greek : melocoton.

French from Italian from Latin from Greek: baluster, balustrade,
banisters, buskin, cannon (1), canopy, canteen, canton, cartridge,
celery, espalier, grot, grotesque, manganese, medal, piastre.

Dutch from Italian from Latin from Greek: sketch.

Spanish from Latin from Greek: chigo, paraquito, pellitory (2)
(pelleter), sambo, silo, spade (2).

French from Spanish from Latin from Greek: bomb, castanets,
cochineal, ensilage, maroon (2), rumb (rhumb).

Portuguese from Latin from Greek : palaver.

French from Portuguese from Latin from Greek: marmalade.

Provencal from Latin from Greek : troubadour.


774


Dutch from Latin from Greek: bush (2), cant (2), ingle (2),
mangle (2).

German from Latin from Greek : zither.

French from German from Latin from Greek: petrel (peterel).

Scandinavian from Latin from Greek: beaker.

Celtic from Latin from Greek: sporran, spunk.

French from Greek: acrobat, amalgam, analyse, aphorism,
azote, botany, carpel, climacter, climate, demagogue, dose, embol-
ism, embryo, endogen, epact, exergue, glycerine, gnome, hierarchy,
hygiene, izzard, kilogramme, kilometre, malmsey, melodrama,
meteor, microbe, monologue, narcotic, oolite, ophicleide, optic,
oxygen, patristic, pentacle, pepsine, periapt, polytechnic, prophylac-
tic, pseudonym, quinsy, rhizome, semaphore, stalactite, stalagmite,
stearine, steatite, stigmatise, sylph, trilogy, zoophyte.

Spanish from French from Greek : platina.

Italian from Greek: archipelago, banjo, barytone, gondola, scope.

French from Italian from Greek: caloyer, caravel, card (1),
emery, gulf, mandolin, moustache (mustache), pantaloon (1), panta-
loons, paragon, pedant?, pilot.

Spanish from Italian from Greek: cedilla.

French from German from Greek: sabre.

Arabic from Greek: elixir, typhoon.

French from Arabic from Greek: alchemy.

Spanish from Arabic from Greek: talisman, tarragon.

Portuguese from Spanish from Arabic from Greek: albatross.

French from Spanish from Arabic from Greek: alembic, limbeck.

French from Italian from Arabic from Greek; carat.

Hebrew from Greek : sanhedrim,.

Turkish from Greek: effendi.


SLAVONIC. This general term includes Russian, Polish
Bohemian, Servian, &c.

French from Slavonic : sable.

French from German from Slavonic: calash, trump (1), trumpet,
trunk (2).

Italian from German from Slavonic : trombone,

French from Dutch from Slavonic : pram.

Scandinavian from Slavonic : sark.

Dutch from Low German from Slavonic : siskin.

French from Latin from Greek from Slavonic: slave.

French from Hungarian from Slavonic: shako.

Dalmatian: argosy.

French from Dalmatian : dalmatic.

German from Bohemian: howitzer.

French from German from Servian: vampire.

Russian: copeck, drosky, mammoth, permian, rouble (ruble),
samovar, steppe, verst, vodka, zemstvo,

French from Russian: ukase.

Polish: britska, mazurka, polack, polka.

French from Polish: varsovienne.


>


LITHUANIAN. Of Aryan origin, like Slavonic.


Dutch from German from Lithuanian : eland.


ASIATIC ARYAN LANGUAGES.

Persian : bakshish, bashaw, bazaar, bulbul, caravansary, car-
boy, dervish, divan, durbar, firman, mohur, nargileh, nylghau,
Parsee, pasha, peri, pillau, sepoy, serai, shah, shawl.

Latin from Greek from Persian : asparagus, cinnabar (cinoper),
Iandanum, Magi, naphtha, parasang, rose, tiara ?.

French from Latin from Greek from Persian: jujube, magic,
eae musk, myrtle, nard, paradise, parvis, sandal, satrap,

iger.

Italian from Latin from Greek from Persian: martello.

French from Italian from Latin from Greek from Persian: mus-
cadel (muscatel), musk, rice.

Spanish from Latin from Greek from Persian: pistachio (pistacho),

Dutch from Slavonic from Latin from Greek from Persian: gherkin.

French from Latin from Persian: peach (1), zedoary.

Italian from Persian: giaour, scimetar ?.

French from Italian from Persian: mummy, orange, taffeta (taffety).

French from Spanish from Persian: saraband.

Portuguese from Persian: lascar, pagoda.

French from Persian: bezique?, calender (2), caravan, jasmine,
khedive, roc, rook (2), scarlet, tutty, van (3).

Arabic from Persian: tarboosh, zircon.

Greek from Arabic from Persian: arsenic.

Low Latin from Arabic from Persian: borax.

French from Low Latin from Arabic from Persian; balas (ruby).

Italian from Arabic from Persian: tazza.

French from Italian from Arabic from Persian : jargonelle.


DISTRIBUTION OF WORDS (SLAVONIC, PERSIAN, SANSKRIT, HEBREW)


French from Spanish from Arabic from Persian : calabash, julep,
lilac, rob (2), spinach, tabour (tabor) ?, tambour ?, tambourine ?.

French from Portuguese from Arabic from Persian: bezoar.

French from Arabic from Persian: azure, check, checker, checkers,
chess, exchequer.

Turkish from Persian: jackal, padishah.

French from Turkish from Persian: kiosk.

French from Italian from Turkish from Persian : tulip, turban.

Cape Dutch from Malay from Persian: sjambok.

Hindustani from Persian: cummerbund, pajamas (pyjamas),
sirdar, zamindar, zanana (zenana).

Sanskrit. avatar, brahmin (brahman), maharajah, pundit,
rajah, Sanskrit, suttee, Veda.

Latin from Greek from Sanskrit ; bdellium, beryl, pepper.

French from Latin from Greek from Sanskrit : brilliant, saccharine.

French from Spanish from Latin from Greek from Persian from
Sanskrit : indigo.

French from Latin from Sanskrit : opal, sendal (cendal),

Persian from Sanskrit: nuphar.

French from Persian from Sanskrit : lake (2), nenuphar.

French from Latin from Greek from Persian from Sanskrit:
sandal (wood).

French from Spanish from Arabic from Persian from Sanskrit :
aniline, sugar.

Portuguese from Sanskrit: banyan.

Arabic from Sanskrit : kermes.

French from Arabic from Sanskrit: crimson.

Spanish from Arabie from Sanskrit: carmine.

French from Italian from Arabic from Sanskrit : candy.

Hebrew from Sanskrit: algum.

French from Latin from Greek from Hebrew from Sanskrit ; sap-
phire.

Hindi from Sanskrit: hackery, juggernaut, loot, punch (3).

Hindustani from Sanskrit: bandanna, champak, cheetah, chintz,
cowry, crore, deodar, ghee, gunny, jaconet, jungle, lac (1), lac (2),


| pawnee, punkah, rajpoot, ranee, rupee, wallah.


Portuguese from Hindustani from Sanskrit : bang (2), palanquin.

French from Portuguese from Hindustani from Sanskrit: lacquer
(lacker).

Hindustani from Prakrit from Sanskrit : nautch.

Bengali from Sanskrit : jute.

Tamil from Sanskrit; cash (2), corundum,

Portuguese from Canarese from Sanskrit : jaggery.

Portuguese from Malay from Sanskrit ; mandarin.

French from Portuguese from Malay from Sanskrit : tombac.

Cingalese from Sanskrit : wanderoo.


EUROPEAN NON-ARYAN LANGUAGES.

French from Finnish; morse.

Hungarian : tokay.

French from Hungarian: coach.

Turkish: aga (agha), bey, bosh, caftan, yataghan.

French from Turkish: caique, caracal, chibouque, dey, odalisque,
shagreen,

Italian from Turkish: chouse.

French from Italian from Turkish; bergamot (1), janizary.

Spanish from Turkish: xebec.

German from Polish from Turkish: ublan.

French from German from Hungarian from Turkish ; dolman.


SEMITIC LANGUAGES.

The principal Semitic languages are Arabic, Hebrew, and Ara-
maic, which includes Chaldee and Syriac.

Hebrew: abigail, behemoth, cab (2), cherub, cor, corban,
davit, ephod, gopher, hallelujah, hin, homer, Jehovah, jug, log (3),
Messiah, mishnah, Nazarite (with Gk. suffix), purim, Sabaoth,
Satan, selah, seraph, shekel, Shekinah, shibboleth, teraphim, thum-
mim, urim,

Greek from Hebrew: delta, hosanna, iota.


Latin from Greek from Hebrew: alphabet, alleluia, amen, cade, +3


cassia, cinnamon, cumin(cummin), gehenna, Jacobite, Jesus, jordan,
jot, Levite, manna, Pasch, rabbi (rabbin), sabbath, Sadducee, syca-
mine, sycamore, ‘Tom.

French from Latin from Greek from Hebrew: camel, cider, earnest
(2), ebony, elephant ?, Hebrew, hyssop, jack (1), jack (2), jacket,
Jacobin, jenneting, Jew, jockey, lazar, marionette, maudlin, nitre,
shallot, simony, sodomy. Also date (2): of Semitic origin.

French from Spanish from Latin from Greek from Hebrew: Jesuit.

French from Spanish from Arabic from Greek from Hebrew:
natron.


DISTRIBUTION OF WORDS (ASIATIC, AFRICAN AND AMERICAN LANGUAGES) 775


Italian from Greek from Hebrew: zany.

Latin from Hebrew; leviathan.

French from Latin from Hebrew: cabal, jubilee.

Celtic from Latin from Semitic: ass.

Latin from Greek from Sanskrit from Hebrew: smaragdus.

French from Latin from Greek from Sanskrit from Hebrew: emerald.

Syriac: Maranatha.

Latin from Greek from Syriac ; abbot, mammon.

French from Latin from Greek from Syriac : abbess, abbey, damson.

Italian from Latin from Greek from Syriac; damask.

French from Italian from Syriac: muslin,

Chaldee: raca, talmud, targum.

French from Latin from Greek from Aramaic: pharisee.

French from places in Palestine: bedlam, gauze.

French from Latin from Greek from Chaldee : sackbut.

French from Latin from Greek from Phenician ; scallion.

Arabic. afreet, alcoran, alkali, attar (of roses), azimuth,
cadi, dahabeeyah, drub, emir, ghazal, hadji, hakim, harem,
hashish, hegira, henna, hookah, imam (imaum), islam, jerboa,
jereed, jinn, jubbah (jibbah), khalif, koran, mahdi, Mahometan
(Mohammedan), maund (2), mohair, moslem, muezzin, mufti,
mullah, nadir, otto, rack (5), ramadan, rayah, salaam, sash (2),
shadoof, sheik, sherbet, shrub (2), simoom, sofa, taraxacum, visier
(vizier), wadi, zariba.

Latin from Greek from Arabic; balsam, gypsum, saracen.

French from Latin from Greek from Arabic; balm, endive ?, jasper,
myrth.

French from Greek from Arabic : civet.

French from Italian from Greek from Arabic: dragoman.

French from Latin from Arabic : sarcenet, turmeric ?.

Low Latin from Arabic : alcohol, algebra, antimony.

French from Low Latin from Arabic : tartar (1).

Italian from Arabic: botargo, felucca, senna, sirocco, zecchino.

French from Italian from Arabic: arabesque, baldachin, caliber,
calipers, caliver, magazine, sequin, zero.

French from Spanish from Italian from Arabic: benzoin.

Spanish from Arabic: alcayde, alguazil, atabal, caraway (carra-
way), maravedi, minaret.

French from Spanish from Arabic; alcove, amber, basil (3), car-
afe, cassolet, cid, cipher, cotton (1), cotton (2), cubeb, fardel, fives,
furl, gazelle, genet, giraffe, hazard, jennet (gennet), jar (2), lackey
(lacquey), marcasite, mask (masque), masquerade, matrass, mosque,
nacre, ogee (ogive), racket (1) (raquet), realgar, ream, saker, skirret,
sumach, syrup (sirup), tabby, talc, tare (2), tariff, zenith.

Italian from Spanish from Arabic: arsenal.

French from Provencal from Stanish from Arabic : lute (1).

French from Portuguese from Spanish from Arabic: marabou
(marabout).

Portuguese from Arabic : albacore.

Dutch from Portuguese from Arabic : monsoon.

French from Arabic; admiral, arrack, assassin, bedouin, borage,
burnouse, calif (caliph), camlet, carob (tree), faquir (fakir), housings,
japon, Mamaluke (Mameluke), mattress, naker, ottoman, razzia,
rebeck, saffron, sultan.

French from English from Arabic: moire.

Persian from Arabic: ghoul, havildar, mussulman, sophy.

Hindustani from Persian from Arabic: khidmutgar (kitmutgar),
nizam, ‘sicca.

Turkish from Persian from Arabic: kismet.

French from Persian from Arabic: houri, mate (2).

Turkish from Arabic ; coffee, kavass, raki.

Hindustani from Arabic: houdah (howdah), moonsnee. nabob,
omrah, ryot, sahib.

Portuguese from Moorish : assagai.

French from North African: zouave.


ASIATIC NON-ARYAW LANGUAGES (not SEMI-
TIC). (N.B. Some of the Indian words may be of Aryan origin.)

Hindustani: anna (ana), bangle, chutny, coolie, cutcherry, dacoit,
dawk, ghaut, mahout, nullah, puggery, shampoo, thug, tulwar,

E, Indian place-names: avadavat, bungalow, calico, cashmere
(kerseymere, cassimere).

French from Low Latin from Hindustani ; bonnet.

Balti : polo. Gipsy : pal. Hindi; rum (2).

Bengali: dinghey (dingey), tomtom,

Marathi: pice. —

Malayalam : coir, teak.

Portuguese from Malayalam : betel.

Frenoh from Latin from Greek from Sanskrit from Malayalam: ginger.

Tamil: catamaran, cheroot, curry (2), mulligatawny, pariah.

Latin from Greek from Persian from Tamil: pea- (in peacock).


French from Spanish from Latin from Persian from Tamil: payin
(pavan).

Spanish from Portuguese from Malay from Tamil: mango.

Telugu: bandicoot, mungoose (mongoose).

Portuguese from Canarese: areca.

French from Dravidian: patchouli.

Cingalese : anaconda.

French from Cingalese: tourmaline.

Malay: amuck, babirusa, bamboo, caddy, cajuput (cajeput),
cassowary, catechu, cockatoo, compound (2), crease (2) or creese,
dugong, durian, gecko, gong, gutta-percha, ketchup, lory (lury),
mango, mangosteen, muck (amuck), orang-outang, paddy, pangolin,
pikul, proa, rattan, rusa, sago, sarong, sumpitan, tael, tripang, upas.
Also lorikeet (with Span. suffix).

French from Malay: gingham, ratafia, toffy.

Portuguese from Malay : junk (1).

Spanish from Portuguese from Malay: launch (2).

French from Late Latin from Persian from Malay: lemon.

French from Spanish from Persian from Malay : lime (3).

French from Malagasy : aye-aye.

French from Late Latin from Arabic from Malay: camphor.

Chinese: bohea, china, Chinese, congou, hyson, nankeen,
pekoe, souchong, tea.

Latin from Greek from Arabic from Persian from Chinese : galingale.

Latin from Greek from Chinese: silk.

French from Latin from Greek from Chinese: serge.

Malay from Chinese: sampan.

Portuguese from apanese from Chinese: bonze.

Japanese; harakiri, japan, jinriksha, mikado, soy.

Annamese: gamboge. Burmese : woon.

Fava: bantam.

Tatar: tartar (2).

French from Turkish from Tatar: horde.

Persian from Tatar: khan.

Russian from Tatar : cossack.

French from Russian from Tatar : koumiss.

French from Latin from Tatar : tartan, turquoise.

French from Tatar: turkey.

Mongolian ; mogul.

Persian from Mongolian; tomaun.

Thibetan: lama (1), yak.

French from Thibetan: zebu.

Australian: boomerang, kangaroo, wallaby, wombat.

New South Wales; dingo, parramatta.

Maori: kiwi, pah.

Tahitian: tattoo (2).

Polynesian : taboo.

Maldive Islands: atoll.


AFRICAN LANGUAGES.

Hebrew from Egyptian: ephah, shittah (tree), shittim (wood).

Latin from Greek from Hebrew from Egypticn: sack (1).

French from Latin from Greek from Hebrew from Egyptian: sack (2),
satchel.

Greek from Egyptian: ammonite.

Latin from Greek from Egyptian; ammonia, ibis, Leo, oasis,
papyrus.

French from Latin from Greek from Egyptian: bible ?, gum (2),
gypsy, lion, paper.

French from Italian from Egyptian ; fustian.

Morocco: morocco. French from Barbary; barb (2)s

French from Morocco: fez.

Abyssinian: negus (2).

West African: baobab, chimpanzee, guinea; also gorilla (Old
African).

Portuguese from West African: banana, yam, zebra.

Kaffir: gnu, quagga.


From a negro name: quassia.


AMERICAN LANGUAGES.

North American Indian: caucus, hickory, hominy, manito,
moccasin (mocassin), moose, musquash, opossum, pemmican, per~
simmon, racoon (raccoon), sagamore, skunk, squaw, toboggan,
tomahawk, totem, wampum, wapiti, wigwam.

French from North American Indian: carcajou, caribou.

Eskimo: kayak.

Mexican: axolotl, jalap, ocelot, teocalli.

Spanish from Mexican: cacao, chilli, chocolate, copal, coyote,
tomato.

Cuban: maguey.

Caribbean (or West Indian): cassava, cayman, hammock.


776


Spanish from West Indian: cacique, cannibal, canoe, guava,
iguana, hurricane, papaw, savannah; from Hayti: barbecue, guiacum,
maize, manatee, potato, tobacco, yucca.

French from West Indian: buccaneer, caoutchouc, cavy, colibri,
pirogue.

Peruvian: charqui, inca, jerked (beef), llama, puma.

Spanish from Peruvian: alpaca, coca, condor, guano, oca, pampas,
vicuna, viscacha.

French from Spanish from Peruvian: quinine.

Guiana : wourali (curari).

Brazilian: ai, capibara, cayenne, coaita, coati-mondi, jabiru,
jacana, jaguar, macaw, tamandua, tapir.

French from Spanish from Brazilian : agouti.

Portuguese from Brazilian: ananas, copaiba, ipecacuanha, manioc,
tapioca.

French from Portuguese from Brazilian: petunia.

French from Brazilian: acajou, cashew (nut), couguar, jacamar,
sapajou, toucan.

South American. araucaria, mahogany, tolu.

Spanish from Araucan; poncho.

French from Caribbean: peccary.


HYBRID WORDS. English abounds in hybrid words,
i.e. in words made up from two different languages; and the two
languages compounding the word are often brought into strange
conjunction, as in the case of interloper, which is half Latin and half
Dutch. The complexity thus caused is such as almost to defy
classification, and, as the words are accounted for in the body of the
work, each in its due place, I content myself with giving a list of
them, in alphabetical order.

abroach, across, affray, affreightment, aitch-bone, allot, allure,
aloof, altruism, ampersand, apace, apiece, appoggiatura, arblast,
architrave, around, arouse, array, asafcetida, astray, athwart, attorney,
attune, avadavat (amadavat), awkward.

bailiwick, bandog, bandylegged, bankrupt, barbican, bashful,
bay-window, becalm, because, bechance, beefeater, befool, beguile,
begum, belabour, besiege, betake, betray, bewail, bicycle, biffin,
bigamy, bilberry, blackguard, blaeberry, blunderbuss, boatswain,
bressomer, briar-root, brickbat, bulk-head, bum-bailiff, butterfly. »

calthrop, camelopard, candytuft, cannel-coal, castor-oil, cesspool,
chamberlain, Christmas, cockloft, codling (2), colza oil, commingle,
compose, contour, contradistinguish, contrive, co-parcener, coster-
monger, counteract, counterscarp, country-dance, court-cards, cox-
swain, cupboard, curmudgeon, curry (1).

Daguerrotype, darnel, dastard, daywoman, debar, debark, debase,
debauch, debris, debut, decant, decipher, decompose, decoy, defile
(1), demarcation, demean (2), depose, derange, detach, dethrone,
detour, develop, disable, disabuse, disaffect, disannul, disappear,
disapprove, disarrange, disarray, disband, disbelieve, disburden,
disburse, discard, discharge, discommend, discommon, discompose,
discontent, discredit, disembark, disembroil, disencumber, disengage,
disenthrall, disentrance, disfranchise, disguise, dishearten, disinherit,
disinter, dislike, dislodge, dismask, dismay, disown, dispark, dispose,
disregard, disrelish, disrepute, disrespect, disrobe, dissatisfy, dissimi-
litude, distaste, distrust, disuse, doleful, dormer-window, dormouse,
dulcimer.

eclat, embalm, embank, embark, ember-goose, embody, em-
bolden, embosom, emboss (1), emboss (2), embower, enamel,
encroach, endear, enfeoff, enfold, enfranchise, engage, engrailed,
engrave, engulf, enkindle, enlighten, enlist, enliven, enrapture, en-
shrine. enslaye, ensnare, entangle, enthral, enthrone, entomb, entrap,


DISTRIBUTION OF


WORDS (HYBRID)


entrust, entwine, entwist, envelop?, enwrap, escarpment, essoin,
exhilarate, expose, eyelet-hole.

feckless, flotsam, fore-arm (2), forecast, forecastle, foredate, fore-
front, forejudge (1), forenoon, fore-ordain, forepart, forerank, fore-
taste, forfend (forefend), frankalmoign, frankincense, fray (2).

gaffer, gainsay, gallipot, gammer, gamut, gier-eagle, grateful,
greengage, grimalkin, guelder-rose, guerdon, gunwale, gyr-falcon.

Hallowmass, hammercloth, harpsichord, hautboy, heirloom,
hobbyhorse, horse-courser, huggermugger, hurly-burly.

imbank, imbark, imbitter, imbody, imbosom, imbower, imbrown,
impark, impose, impunity, Indiaman, Indian rubber, indisposed,
ingulf, inorganic, inshrine, instal (install), interaction, interleave,
interlink, interloper, intermarry, intermingle, interpose, intertwine,
interweave, intomb, intone.

jackanapes, jemadar, jolly-boat, jury-mast. kerbstone. _

lancegay, lapis lazuli, lay figure, ledger-line, life-guard, lign-
aloes, lime-hound, linseed, lugsail.

macadamise, madrepore, magpie, malaria, malinger, mangrove,
marigold, Martinmas, Michaelmas, misapply, misapprehend, mis-
appropriate, misarrange, miscalculate, miscall, miscarry, misconceive,
misconduct, misconstrue, misdate, misdemeanour, misdirect, misem-
ploy, misfortune, misguide, mishap, misinform, misinterpret, mis-
place, misprint, mispronounce, misquote, misrepresent, misrule,
misspend, misterm, monocular, mountebank, mulberry, muscoid,
mystify.

natterjack, nonconforming, nonjuror, nonsense, nonsuit, notpated,
nunchion, nutmeg.

oppose, orchard, ostrich, outbalance, outcast, outcry, outfit, out-
line, outpost, outpour, outrigger, outskirt, outvie, outvote, overact,
overarch, overawe, overbalance, overcast, overcharge, overcoat,
overdose, overdress, overhaul, overjoyed, overpass, overpay, overplus,
overpower, overrate, overrule, overstrain, overtake, overtask, over-
turn, overvalue.

paletot, palfrey, Pall-mall, partake, pastime, peacock, peajacket,
pearl-barley, pedestal, pentroof, perhaps, peruse, petrify, pettitoes,
piebald, piecemeal, pink-eyed, pismire, planisphere, pole-axe, pole-
cat, polynomial, pomander, portly, pose (2), posset, potwalloper,
predispose, prehistoric, press-gang, presuppose, prewarn, propose,
purblind, puzzle.

raiment, rearward, re-echo, refresh, regain, regard, regret, reim-
burse, reindeer (raindeer), relay (2), remark, remind, renew, replevy,
repose, rest-harrow, retire, retrieve, retroussé, reward, rigmarole,
rinderpest, rummage.

saltcellar, saltpetre, samphire, sax-horn, scaffold, scapegoat,
scaup-duck, scotfree, scribble, seamstress (sempstress), seraskier,
Shrovetide, Shrove-Tuesday, skewbald, smallage, snubnosed, sobri-
quet, solan-goose, somnambulist, spikenard, spindrift, sprightly,
sprucebeer, squeamish, statist, sublease, sublet, submarine, sub-
section, subsoil, supercargo, superexcellent, superfine, superhuman,
suppose, surcharge, surcoat, surname.

tamarind, tarpaulin, tea-poy, tee-totaller, teil-tree, titlark, tit-
mouse, tocsin, tomboy, tomtit, touchwood, train-oil, transpose,
Troy-weight, turnip.

unaneled, undertake, ungainly, unruly, until.

vaward, venesection. wagtail.


ETYMOLOGY UNKNOWN. awning, bamboozle, beagle,
coke, conundrum, culvert, dhow, dudgeon (1), dudgeon (2), jade (1),
kelp, prawn, privet, Yankee.

Of many other words the ultimate origin is very obscure, and the
solutions offered must be admitted to be doubtful.


SUPPLEMENT


I here subjoin a few corrections and additions. The words marked with an asterisk do not appear at all in the preceding pages.


*ADMIX, to mingle with something else. (L.) The vb.
admix is no older than 1533 (N.E.D.), and is really a back-forma-
tion from the form admixt, which was used as a pp. much earlier,
as it occurs in Palladius on Husbandry, bk. i. st. 9, 1. 60 (ab. 1420).
—L. admixt-us, pp. of admiscére, to mix with.—L. ad, to, with;
and miscére, to mix. See Mix; and Commix (below).

ANON; line 7. For Grien read Grein.

ATTAINT. The N.E.D. explains the word fully, and notes
how it was falsely Latinised as attinctus, as in Blackstone. I here
make the note that an early example of the mistake occurs in the
attainder of George, Duke of Clarence, in 1477. In the 17th
Edw. IV, the order for his execution was made out, because he had
been ‘convictus et attinctus.’ But the true pp. of L. attingere was
attactus. Hence E. taint; see Taint (below).

BAMBOO. Of Malay origin; not from Canarese, as suggested
at p. 45; the Canarese form is merely from the later Portuguese
form bambu. But the quotations in Yule and in the N.E.D., s.v.
mambu, show that the older form was mambz, both in Portuguese
and English, the E. form being borrowed from the Port. mambu,
which occurs in Garcia (1563); see Yule. There can be no doubt
that this mambu is metely a clipped form of the Malay sémdmbi,
sémambi, or s’mdmbi, in which the first syllable is unstressed and
was easily lost. This samambi is really a kind of rattan (not the
grass Bambusa), but its superficial likeness to the ordinary bamboo
is such that the difference would only be apparent to those familiar
with the Malay region and its products. In fact, Yule notices the
use of bamboo-cane, and Stedman, in 1796, speaks of a bamboo-rattan
(N.E.D.).

BAWD. Prof. Weekley (Phil. Soc. Trans., 1909) shows that
the ME. baud is, probably, merely a shortened form of ME. ribaud,
and therefore a doublet of ribald.

BEAVER (2). Cf. ‘ the helme, the visere, the two bauters,’ 8c. ;
Hall’s Chron. (1548); King Henry IV, first year; § 9.

BOOTY. In the N.E.D. the earliest quotations for botye and
butin are from Caxton. But in some Ordinances for the use of the
English army made in 1419, printed in Excerpta Historica, p. 43,
there is an ordinance ‘for theim that Sault [assault] ..to make
theim boty.’ It begins :—‘ Also that all men make them boty, vij or
v to-gader, that alway iij of the vij, or ij of the v, be assigned to
wayte, and not to departe from the standers’ [standards], &c. Cf.
‘ijl aura sa part du buttin (v.r. butin) ;? Black Book of the Admiralty,
154375

BRANKS. Prof. Weekley (Phil. Soc. Trans., 1909) shows
that brank answers to the OF. branque, the equivalent, in the Norman
dialect, of OF. branche, whence E. Branch. See branch (iv. 11) in
N.E.D.

CABRIOLET.
etymology shows.

CHEEK. The N.E.D. duly gives cheek, ‘insolence, jaw;’ the
earliest example being in 1840; at which date is also recorded the
phrase to give cheek, ‘ to be insolent.’

The origin of this phrase is not quite obvious. Perhaps it be-
comes a little clearer if we note that the Bremen Worterbuch, in
the Supplement, p. 405, gives the equivalent keek, cheek, as a
Liibeck word, in the phrase holé de keek, lit. hold your cheek, in the
sense ‘hold your mouth,’ hold your jaw, shut up! The date is
1771; nearly 70 years earlier than the date above.

Thus the original idea was that of too much use of the cheek or
mouth in talking; hence, chatter, prattle, unasked advice, and the
like; exactly as in the case of ‘jaw.’

COCKNEY. It is suggested by Prof. Weekley that there
were ¢wo words of this form, which have coalesced. 1. It represents
coken-ey, ‘ egg of cocks,’ as explained at p. 118 (above), in P. Plow-
man, and in the Tournament of Tottenham ; but this usage appears
to be obsolete. 2. In the sense of ‘an effeminate person,’ it does
not represent an OF, *coguiné (as I proposed in the First Edition of
the present work (viz. in the Supplement, at p. 785), but is to be
taken as representing (with loss of initial a-, which is quite common)
an OF. acoquiné, which actually occurs, and meant ‘spoiled,’ or
‘self-indulgent.’ Cotgrave has :—‘ Acccguiné, made tame, inward,
familiar ; also, grown as lazy, sloathfull, idle, asa beggar.’ Also:—


Not (F.—L.), but (F.—Ital.—L.); as the


‘ Accoquiner, to make tame, inward, familiar ;’ and ‘ S’accoquiner, to
wax as lazie, become as idle, grow as sloathfull, as a beggar.’
The OF. acoguiné, with loss of initial a, is closely represented by the
ME. cokeney or cokenay. ‘The original sense of this OF, word would
be ‘addicted to frequenting a kitchen,’ or ‘frequenter of a kitchen.’
Allied to L. coguinare, to cook, coguinus, pertaining to a kitchen,
and coguina, a kitchen (Lewis), All from L. coguere, to cook; see
Cook. As to the ME. suffix -ey (-ay), we may compare attorney,
from OF. atorné. As to the various senses of the word, see the
exhaustive discussion by Prof. Weekley (Phil. Soc. Trans., 1909).
Hence the word is to be marked as (F.—L.).

COMMTX. For (Hybrid; L. and E.) read (L.). The N.E.D.
shows that commix was a back-formation from the earlier word
commixt. Commix is not found before 1519 ; and commixt was taken
immediately from L. commixtus, pp. of commiscére, to mix together;
from com-, together, and miscére, to mix. See further under Mix
(p. 380). And see Admix (above).

CONVEX. Itis now held that L. conuexus has nothing to do
with the verb conuehere; but rather answers to a compound of con-
with *uacsus, from the root wac- which also appears in uac-illare, to
stagger. The sense would be ‘bent;’ cf. Skt. vak-ra-s, bent,
crooked, vavich, to waver, totter, go crookedly. Closely allied to
AS, woh, bent, crooked, from a Teut. base *wanh answering to Idg.
*wank, nasalised form of *wak, to bend. See Woo, and Wench,

COSSACK. The earliest quotation for Cossack (spelt Cassack)
given in the N.E.D. is dated 1598. The pl. Cassacks occurs three
times in the Antiquarian Repertory (1808), vol. ii, 399, which
quotes at length A Letter sent from the Great Turck to the Queenes
Maiestee in anno 1590. The Letter speaks of ‘the Theeues called
Cassacks, and other like facinerous persons.’

DANDLE. Cf. also Low G. dendeln, to sport; used as F.
dandiner. It occurs in the Supp. to the Bremen Worterbuch, with
the note that it means, in particular, to dandle a child in one’s
arms, Berghaus gives the Low G. dandelken, dandeln, dannken, the
same as G, tandeln.

DAWDLE. Cf. also Low G. (Hamburg) daudein, to waste
one’s time (Richey). Quoted in the Bremen Worterbuch (Supple-
ment). According to C. Schmidt, the Strassburg dialect has dadle,
to dawdle, to lounge.

DODGE. Ross hasthe Norw. dogga, to maintain one’s place in
an open sea against wind or waves by small movements of sail or
oar. This may very well be a related word. The E.D.D. gives
dadge and dodge, to walk slowly and clumsily ; and here again we
may compare (from Ross) Norw. dagga, to go very slowly and easily.

DOG, a fire-dog, andiron. (E.) The form jire-dog is modern
(1840). ‘ One paire of dogges in the chymly ;’ Unton Inventories,
p- 5 (1596). Dogge is the ME, form of dog, an E. word. But the
idea was suggested by MF. chenets, ‘andirons;’ Cot. The OF,
chenet occurs in 1317, and is a dimin. of OF. chen, a dog (from L,
canis). Hatzfeld says that the heads of andirons often represented
the heads of dogs.

DUB. So also Low G. dubben, to knock at a door; Supp. to
Bremen Worterbuch. Berghaus has Low G. dubben, to beat ; dubber,
a knocker ; dubbern, to strike repeatedly, to hammer.

FABRIC; 1.5. For DHAB read DHABH.

FERRULE. Spelt virole about 1410. ‘La virole le mambre
garde, The virole the haft kepeth;’ i.e. holds fast the haft of a
knife; Femina, ed. W. Aldis Wright, 48. 20.

FINIAL. It is remarked in the N.E.D. that jizial is a variant
of final, and, apparently, of English origin. The earliest quotation,
from the Chester plays, is of uncertain date, but of about A.D. 1400.
Whether it was, at the first, ‘king’s English’ or not, we are at
any rate sure that it was king’s French. For in 1404 we find
Henry IV using the expression ‘a jiniale destruccioun de son povre
estat,’ i.e. to the final destruction of his poor estate. See Royal
Letters of Henry IV (Rolls Series), ed. Hingeston, i. 310.

FLANK. For (F.—G.) read (F.—OHG.).

FOLD (2). The orig. sense of AS. falod, falud, was a cowshed
or ox-stall, or a shelter ‘made with boards;’ from the AS. fala, a
board, plank, bar. This AS. fala is not explained in the Dictionaries,
but it may be found in the Epinal Glossary. See the facsimile,


778


p. 27, col. 1, 1. 11, which has: ‘ abula, fala,’ This is the source of
the glosses in which ‘ tabula’ is misspelt ‘tubolo;’ as in ‘ tubolo,
fala,’ Voc. 52.11; Corpus Glossary, ed. Hessels, p. 117, 1. 321;
Leiden Glossary, ed. Hessels, note on p. 208, s. v. tubolo, The AS.
falaed is explained as ‘ bobellum’ or ‘ stabulum.’

FOREHEAD. The oldest AS. form is foran-héafod;
Sweet, O. E. Texts, p. 611.

FRAIL (2). AF. frael, W. de Bibbesworth, in Wright, Voc. i,
172; spelt fraie/ in A¥., and frayel in ME.,in Femina, ed. W. Aldis
Wright, 79. 4-6.

FRIEZE (1). We find ‘des draps appellez Friseware’ in
1376-7 ; Statutes of the Realm, i. 398.

GAIN (2). The derivation of the OF. word from OHG. is well
illustrated by the occurrence of the AF. weiner, to gain. Cf.
‘ chevaux et armes, or et argent weine;’ i.e. they had gained horses
and arms, silver and gold; Excerpta Historica, p. 71, 1. 60.

GIBBON, a name for the long-armed ape. (E.) ‘The Gibbon,
or long-armed ape... . is a native of the East Indies ;’ tr. of Buffon
(1792), i. 327. The name was conferred on this ape by Buffon,
who, according to Hatzfeld, had it from Dupleix. It was alleged to
be an Indian word, but has not been found in any Indian language.
Dupleix was in India from 1720 to 1754; and it is probable enough
that he imagined gibbon to be the Indian name for the creature.
I suggest that the ‘Indian language’ in which the name arose was
certainly English, with whom the French at that time were in
frequent contact and conflict. How the name came into existence
we cannot tell, but that it was suggested by an Englishman (perhaps
as a jest referring to a comrade) can hardly be doubted. The
Prompt. Parv. has:—‘ Gybonn or Gylberde (Gybbon or Gylbert),
propyr name, Gilbertus.’ Hence Gibbon is merely an extension of Gib,
the usual pet name for Gilbert. Gib was also a familiar name for a
cat ; cf. ‘ Gibbe our cat,’ Romaunt of the Rose, 6204. And to this day
Gib (with hard g,as in Gilbert) is a familiar name for a tom-cat
in many E. dialects (E.D.D.). Any Englishman who knew this might
easily suggest that, if Gib meant ‘ cat,’ Gibbon would do for ‘ape.’

GRAZE (2), to touch lightly, &c. The N.E.D, suggests that
the right reading [in my l. 4] is ‘like to the bullets grazing,’ where
bullets is plural; the sense being :—‘like the bullets that graze the
ground.’ There can be no doubt that the original sense was ‘ to
cut the grass,’ or ‘ to score the grass.’ Schambach gives, as a sense
of Low G. grasen, ‘to cut grass.’ The quotations in N.E.D. show
that the special sense arose from the ricocheting of cannon-balls
along grass. There is a passage in Chapman, Revenge of Bussy
D’Ambois, A. iv. sc, 1, that is particularly helpful :—‘And as a
great shot from a town besieged At foes before it flies forth black
and roaring—But they too far, and that with weight oppress’d—As
if disdaining earth, doth only graze, Strike earth, and up again into
the air, Again sinks to it, and again doth rise,’ &c.

HACKNEY. ME. hakeney is certainly from ME. Hakeney,
i.e. Hackney, in Middlesex. The OF. haquenée and MF, hacquenée
(Cotgrave) and all the foreign forms are simply borrowed from
English, which had the word first. See Fitzstephen’s description of
London, temp. Henry II, in Stowe’s Survey of London, ed. Thoms,
pp. 211,212. The great horsemart was in Smithfield, which is
still connected with Hackney by Hackney Road and Mare Street;
and the pastures for horses were to the North of London (p. 209),
of which Hackney Downs and London Fields are still remnants.
The ME. Hakeney represents AS. Hacan ieg, ‘ Haca’s settlement
beside a stream.’ Cf. Hacan pundfald, ‘Haca’s pound,’ in a
charter dated 961.

*HOGMANAY, an old name for New Year’s Eve. (L.) The
N.E.D. says : ‘ Hogmanay corresponds exactly in sense and use to
the OF. aguillanneuf, the last day of the year, new year’s gift, the
festival at which new year’s gifts were given and asked with the shout
of aguillanneuf. Of this Godefroy gives many variants.’ See also
the E.D.D. From the OF. hoguinané, hoguinono (Godefroy); also
aguilan, guillanneu, aguilloneu, haguilennef, aguillanneuf, &c.—L.
hoc in anno, lit. ‘in this year;’ which was the original burden or
chorus sung upon the occasion. In the Norman Glossary by
Edélestand and Duméril (Caen, 1849), we find hoguinétes, new year’s
presents, or rather, presents given on new year’s eve; called hogui-
lanno at Caen, and hoguilanne at Saint-Lo. De Brieux has pre-
served for us a sort of song, without rime, which was still sung, in
his time, when Jes hoguinétes were asked for, hoc in anno.

Si vous veniés a la depense...
On vous serviroit du rost—
Hoquinano !
Donnez-moi mes haguignétes . ..
Mais il est encore a payer
Haguinelo !
Here, in the very song itself, we first find hoc in anno spelt hoguinano,


see


SUPPLEMENT


and then repeated in the corrupt form haguinelo; as it was sung by
children ignorant of Latin. Thus hoc in became aguin-, and further
corruption was easy ; anno was supposed to mean an neuf (new year).
Hoguinané is for hoc in année; and so on. The Spanish form (bor-
rowed from F.) is aguilando, otherwise aguinaldo. ‘The form hog-
manay may be due to the F. form hoguinané, shortened to hog’nané,
with a stress on the last syllable. Jamieson quotes the Scotch form
as being so pronounced; as in—‘ The cottar weanies, glad and gay,
Wi’ pocks out owre their shouther, Sing at the doors for hégmandy.’

HOGSHEAD. I find an early spelling not noted in the
NtE.D. ‘In duobus hogsheveds vini albi,’ occurring in 1437; see
Brand, Pop. Antiquities (1849), ii. 75, note. The spelling heved
affords a clear proof that the latter element is really the mod. E.
head.

HUZZA! The earliest quotation in the N.E.D. is dated 1573.
There is an instance twelve years earlier in the second edition (1807)
of Grose’s Antiquarian Repository, vol. i, p. 236. We there find
a speech made at a dinner given at Norwich in 1561. It is said that
on that occasion one Johnny Martin; of Norwich, proposed the
health of the mayor whilst he could still ‘speak plain English,’ and
before the beer, which ‘is pleasant and potent . . . catch us by the
caput, and stop our manners. And so huzza for the Queen’s Majesty's
grace, and all her bonny-browe’d dames of honour! Huzza for
Master Mayor, and our good dame Mayoress!’

ISING-GLASS. The earliest quotation in the N.E.D. is dated
1545. Itoccurs in 1528 in some accounts printed in Excerpta Antiqua,
by J. Croft, p. 84; and againin 1530, in the same, p.g!1. Thesame
substance is mentioned by the name of husblass (which is nearer to
the original) as early as 1371 (N. and Q, 10S. x. 411).

KERSEY. Thestatement in the N.E.D, that there is nothing to
connect cloth-making with Kersey, in Suffolk, is due to oversight.
The fact is, rather, that there was once a large cloth-trade carried on
in the south of Suffolk. In A Breviary of Suffolk, by Robert Reyce,
written in 1618, and edited by Lord F, Harvey, stress is laid upon
‘the excellent commoditie of clothing, which of long time hath here
flourished . , . hee who maketh ordinaryly twenty broad clothes
every weeke, cannot sett so few a-worke as 500 persons,’ In Hall’s
Chronicle (Henry VIII, year 17, § 8) we read how an attempt to
raise a heavy subsidy failed, owing to the opposition of the ‘ riche
Clothiers’ of Suffolk, who told ‘their Spinners, Carders, Fullers,
Weuers, and other artificers’ that they would be unable to pay them
wages if the subsidy was granted; so that the men of ‘Lanam
[Lavenham], Sudbury, Hadley, and other townes aboute’ (which would
include Lindsey and Kersey) rebelled to the number of ‘ foure
thousand men.’ In Skelton’s Why Come Ye Nat to Courte, 1. 128,
he refers to ‘a webbe of lylse-wulse’ (see note on Linsie- Woolsey
below) ; and at 1. 930, he speaks of ‘ Good Sprynge of Lanam,’ i. e.
Lavenham, who ‘must counte what became Of his clothe makynge.’
Dyce’s note on the latter line refers to Stowe’s Annales, ed. 1615,
p- 525, where we read that ‘the rich clothiers, Spring of Lanam and
other, had given over occupying,’ i.e. had ceased to employ men,
when the disturbances arose in 1525 (as above).

LASCAR. Not directly from Persian; but Portuguese from
Persian. ‘The Port. formis lascar or lascarim (Vieyra).

LECHER, The OF. lecheor (Godefroy) was Latinised as lecca-
tor, lit. ‘a licker of dishes,’ hence a ‘ribald’ or ruffian, one of the
unscrupulous hangers-on who attached themselves to medieval
households and were of ill repute. Cotgrave has Jescheur, ‘a licker,
a licorous companion.’ Cf. MDu. leckaert, ‘a licker of dishes ;’
lecker, ‘a liquorish or a daintie-mouthed man;’ Hexham. See
leccator in Ducange.

LINSIE-WOOLSEY. Probably named after the stuff called
Linsey, spelt lynesey as early as 1435-6. In any case, linsie-woolsey
(and probably also dinsey) was really named from the place now
called Lindsey, in Suffolk, which is but two miles from Kersey, whence —
Kersey cloth took itsname. This is proved by the fact that Skelton,
in Why Come ye Nat to Courte, 1. 128, has the form Lylse-qwulse ;
and Dr. Copinger, in his Collections for Suffolk, gives Lynsey, Lylsey,
and Lelesey as old forms of Lindsey. The form Lelesey occurs in
Inquis. post Mortem, anno 1314-15. See note just above, on Kersey.

MAKE, verb. The AS. macian, a weak verb, seems to be a de-_
rivative from an adj. of which the Teut. type is *makoz, ‘suitable,
fitting,’ or ‘joined together,’ as seen in AS. gemec, Icel. makr, suit-
able; whence also AS, maca, a companion, and E, match. See
Match (1).

MALL (2). For (F.—L.) read (F.—Ital.—L.).


MANCHET. Also spelt mainchet ; Caxton, in his Reynard the — a


I accept the
etymology proposed in N.E.D., viz. from maine, an epithet of bread
of the finest quality, and chet, an epithet of bread of second or
ordinary quality ; see Cheat, sb. (2) in N.E.D. Perhaps both forms


Fox, ed. Arber, p. 68, has ‘a copel of maynchettis.’


SUPPLEMENT


are docked. Maine is short for demaine, as in pain demaine, repre-
senting L. panis dominicus, ‘lord’s bread ;’ see my note on Chaucer,
C, T., B 1915. Chet occurs in ‘Manchet and chet bred;’ Babees
Book, p. 315, 1. 501, and perhaps means ‘ bought bread,’ as dis-
tinguished from home-made bread; from OF. achet, ‘a bargain or
purchase, or thing bought or purchased;’ Cot. Thus ‘ manchet
bread’ may be the best quality of bought bread. See further under
Demesne and Cates.

MARMATADE. The oldest quotation for marmalade in the
N.E.D, is dated 1533; but there is a note to say that it is referred
to in 1524. But we have a clear example of its occurrence in I514.
In the Rutland Papers (Camden Soc., 1842), at p. 27, we find,
among the provisions made for the marriage of Princess Mary,
daughter of Henry VII:—‘Item, a boxe of Codignac chare de
qwynce marmelade.’

MAT. See matta in Walde’s Lat. Etym. Dict., where it is sug-
gested that the Semitic form is exemplified by the Heb. mattah
[where the z is ¢eth], a portable bed, lit. ‘a thing spread out ;’ from
the verb atah, to spread out. The form of the root may account for
the by-form natta,

*MOUCH, to play truant, to loiter. (F.—Teut.) The N.E.D.
quotes from Mabbe’s tr. of Aleman’s Guzman de Alfarache (1622),
ii. 289 :—‘ Wee . .. runne a-mouching eyther to our Aunts house,
or to our grandfathers.’ =ONorth F. muchier, mucher; MF. mucer,
musser, ‘to hide, keep close, lurke, skowke, or squat in a corner,
Cot. ; mod. F. musser.—=OHG. mihhon, to hide, to lie in wait for
and steal ; cf. prov. G. maucheln, to conceal, cheat, G. meuchel-morder,
a secret murderer. Idg. root *meug, to hide ; as in Olrish for-muig-
the, hidden. See Mich.

MUMMER. The statement, in 1. 6, that mommerye and mom-
mynge occur in Trevisa, is mistaken. They occur in Caxton’s trans-
lation of Higden, which is later than Trevisa’s, viz.ab. 1482. How-
ever, mummynge occurs in the Prompt. Parv. (1440).

NESS, a promontory, The AS. ess or ness answers to a Teut.
type *nas-joz. The long grade occurs in L. nds-us, nose; the weak
grade occurs in the Teut. type *nas-a, AS. zosu, nose. See Streit-
berg, Urgerm. Gr., p. 69. See Nose.

NOT The etymology of L. nota is doubtful. Walde rejects
all connexion with L. noscere, and, seeing that xofa sometimes has an
ill sense, as meaning ‘a mark of infamy,’ proposes to connect it (as
Prellwitz does) with the Gk. évorés, évocrés, blameworthy, and
évoTatw, dvoya, I blame.

OBLITERATE. The earliest example in N.E.D. is dated
1600. But it occurs in Hall’s Chronicle (half a century earlier),
according to Ellis’s reprint. ‘ Neither fyre, rust, nor frettyng tynne
[error for tyme] shal amongst Englishmen ether appall his honoure
or obliterate his glorye..—King Henry V, roth year, last paragraph.

OBSCENE. Walde gives a simple derivation of the Latin
obscaenus from obs-, prefix, ‘near,’ and caenum, ‘mud;’ so that it
meant ‘ muddy,’ or ‘ covered with mud.’ The prefix obs- occurs in
os-tendere, where os- stands for ops, the original form of obs.

OFFICE. Walde explains L. officium as from opi-ficium (for
*opi-faciom) ; from opi- (for opus), work, and fac-ere, to do. In fact,
the spelling opificium occurs (Lewis and Short); as well as opificina
(for officina) ; cf. opi-fex, a worker. See Operate.

ORTED, a recess (with a window) ina room. (F.—L.—Gk.)
From OF. oriol, a porch, gallery, corridor (Godefroy). Prof. Weekley
(in Phil. Soc. Trans., 1909) makes the excellent suggestion that the
OF. form represents the Late L. auleolum, which Ducange gives as a
derivative from L. aula, a court of a house, and (in Late L.) a hall.
Ducange explains azleolum as ‘sacellum,’ a small chapel. We
might well suppose that awleolum could mean ‘a recess in a hall ;’
and it would pass into OF. as oriol, by natural dissimilation from
*oliol or *oleol. If this be right, orie/ is ultimately from L. azla,
which is not a true L. word, but borrowed from Gk. avA7, a court-
yard, hence a court, a hall.

OSTRICH. The very form ostriché occurs in Old French ; see
Poems of W. Mapes, ed. Wright, Camden Soc., p. 319, col. 1,
st. 2. ‘

PAINTER Gee p. 423). It seems certain, from the examples
in the N.E.D., that painter is a mispronunciation, due to association
with the ordinary word signifying ‘one who paints.’ The right form
is penter, asin 1671. It is from the OF. pentoir, also spelt pentour ;
the latter form is given by Ducange under the L. form pentorium,
which is short for Late L. penditorium, orig. a perch to hang clothes
upon to dry (Ducange) ; from L. pendére, to hang, Godefroy gives
OF. pendoir, pendoer, pentoir, a perch to hang clothes on, a sus-
pender for keys, a suspender of a sword from a sword-belt, a pot-
hook, a strong rope. Moisy gives Norm. dial. pentoir, one of two
poles placed at the two sides of a window to hang clothes on that
have just been dyed. That fenter is the right E. form is corroborated


779


by the fact that it is accurately represented (as a borrowed word) by
the Norw. penta, a sprit with which a sail is spread ont, a rope or
a cord to fasten a sail with. This has the double sense, viz. of the
Norm. dial. pentoir, and of the OF. pentoir, a strong rope; see
Aasen. Ross explains Norw. penta as a rope attached to the side of
a sail for keeping the sail close-hauled. Godefroy further gives, in
his Supplement, under the heading pendeur (though both of his ex-
amples have pentoir), the explanation—a marine term, ropes sup-
porting a pulley, tackle. Thus we see that the sense was transferred
from that of ‘ clothes-perch ’ to ‘ clothes-line,’ and thence to a cord
for various uses. It is now the E. painter, commonly restricted in
sense to the cord that hangs down from the bow of a boat, and is
used for securing it. It has nothing to do with the ME. panter, as
suggested at p. 423.

PATE, It has been suggested to me that the substitution of
pate for plate may have been due to Walloon influence, since (near
Lille) they say patel for platel; note that De Bo givesthe W. Flemish
form pateel for Du. plateel, a dish; and Remacle gives the Walloon
form pu for F. plus. Hexham, on the contrary, gives MDnu. plattijnen
as a by-form of pattijnen, inthe sense of ‘ wodden shoes or pattens.’

PIER. The AS. per, pere (nom. per, acc. peran), is in a late MS.,
and merely used to represent a Late L. pera (ab. 1150). The latter
is merely the AF. pere, a stone, done into Latin. ‘The statement in
the N.E.D. that the derivation of pera from OF. piere does not satisfy
the phonetics is beside the mark; for the AF. form is really pere,
a stone, from L, petra. La pere means stones from a quarry; see
Chardry, La Vie des Set Dormans, 1018. Cf. ‘les murs de haut pere
taile;’ and again—‘ Et des gros peres ge urent assez plente;’” Ex-
cerpta Historica, p. 73, ll. 121, 125. And the pl. peres, stones,
occurs thrice on one page; see Langtoft, i, 124. See six more
examples in the Vie de S. Auban.

POLONY. The derivation from Bologna is made quite certain
by a passage in the old play entitled Lord Cromwell, A. iii. sc. 2 ;
pr.in 1602. ‘The scene is laid at Bononia, i.e. Bologna; and in the
course of the scene Hodge reads out a letter :—‘ I am at this present
writing among the Polonian sasiges,? Chapman refers to ‘ Bologna
sausages’ in A. iii. of his play called The Ball.

PONY. Well illustrated by comparing the MF. poulener, ‘to
fole as a mare ;’ Supplement to Palsgrave, p. 952, col. 3.

POUR. For (F.—L.) read (L.), The OF. purer would only
give pure, not pour. The difficulty as to the vowel-sound is solved
at once by the supposition that pour was not borrowed from OF.,
but taken immediately from the Late L. pirare; i.e. that it was
a word of direct monkish origin. The monks were skilled in simple
culinary arts, The development is precisely like that of E. dour from
L. dius, hard (N.E.D.); or of E. sour from AS. sur. Hence the
old pronunciation of pour was really power, as in Pope and Gay
(p. 469). So also scour, from L. excurare; see Scour (1).

PRIMROSE. Cf. ‘Ou de quyler la primerole, other to gadere
the primerose ;’ Femina, ed. W. Aldis Wright, 47. 19.

PRIVET. The statement (in ll: 10-13) that the form primet
occurs in the Grete Herball, turns out to be due to a mistake; for
no such form occurs there. This leaves the etymology very uncertain ;
the word cannot be said to be satisfactorily accounted for.

PRUNE (1), to trim trees. The last section (§ y) of the article
is wrong. No doubt prune is derived (as said) from the OF. proignier
(Godefroy), to prune, Norman dial. progner (Moisy); but there we
must stop. Godefroy is wrong in identifying these with F. provigner,
as that is quite another word, with the very different sense of ‘to ex-
tend by layers, to propagate;’ from the F. sb. provin, as said at
p- 487. Sir James Murray has pointed this out to me, and gives the
probable origin of the OF. proignier in the N.E.D. Most likely, it
represents a Late L. form *prévineGre, to tend a vineyard; from the
prefix prd- and Late L. vinedre, to plant a vineyard (Ducange), from
vinea, a vine-yard, a vine. See Vine.

QUILL (2). The note on in the quill is illustrated by the
occurrence of the AF, gillir (written for qguillir) as a variant of OF.
cuillir, to collect. It occurs in the Assault of Massoura, 1. 346; see
Excerpta Historica, p. 80.

*RATHE, a cart-rail; see N.E.D. (E.) Also rade; and even
rave (with v for voiced #hk). Cf. AS. wn-gehrado, translating
‘tabula plaustri;’ Voc. 267. 33. Probably allied to Hurdle and
Crate.

RIMHE (1). The N.E.D. gives the earliest spelling with rz from
Cooper’s Thesaurus (1565), which has: ‘ Rhythmus, . . . meeter,
rhime.” The earliest example of the spelling rhyme is dated 1610;
the spelling rythme occurs earlier, ab. 1557. All later than 1550.
As late as 1660, an edition of Cotgrave translates F. rithme by
‘ Rime, or meeter ;’ and Sherwood’s Index to the same has—‘ A rime
or meeter, Rime, rithme, ryme;’ and again—‘ To rime, rimer, rith-
mer, rymer, rimonner, rimoyer.


780


RUSH (2). The common word rush, as the name of a water-
plant, is of doubtful origin. I cannot accept the usual explanation,
which quotes the AS. form as rysc, and tells us that it is no native
word, but a mere adaptation of the Latin ruscwm, which means
“butcher’s broom.’

It is difficult to see why we should resort to Latin for the name of
a plant so extremely common; nor is it at all easy to see why the
butcher’s broom should have been selected as a type of it.

But the fact is, that the AS. rysc, though it accounts for the modern
rush, is by no means the only orthe commonest form. The forms in
the dialects are very variable ; besides rush, we find also rash, resh,
and rish, and the Southern forms rax and rex. There is no possi-
bility of extracting rash, resh, and rish out of a single form such as
ruscum. The very variableness of the forms suggests a Teutonic
gradation, such as we find in the AS. brecan, to break, with its pt. t.
brec, pp. brocen, and the derivative which appears in ME. as brukel
and brokel. I would propose to connect it with the adjective rash,
and to explain it as ‘the plant which quickly springs up and is of
slender growth.’ For it is very remarkable that this adjective
likewise shows similar changes of form. The Ger. rasch appears in
- OHG. not only as rasc, but varies in MHG. to resch and _risch, and
even to rosch. The oldest form of ‘rush’ in AS. is actually rise (as
in OE. Texts) ; and this I would set beside the E. Friesic adj. risk,
which Koolman explains by ‘ risch, aufrecht, gerade, schlank, frisch,’
i.e. quick, upright, straight, slender, fresh ; the very qualities of the
common rush. Cf. Hannover risch, a rush, Liibben actually gives
the Low G. rusch, explained by ‘ rasch, schnell ;’ also rusch, a rush.

RUSTLE. Probably a native word; cf. OMercian ruxlende (or
rixlende), ‘ making a noise ;’ Matt. ix. 23 (Rushworth gloss). For
*hruxlende; allied to AS. kryscan (or hryscan), to roar; see under
Rush (1). Cf. AS. gehruxl (or gehriixl), a tumult (Bosworth) ;
also Goth. hrukjan, to crow; Gk. xpavyn, clamor. See L. cornix in
Walde. See the long note by Max Forster on AS. gehriiw/, tumult ;
in Englische Studien, xxxix. 344.

SASH (2). But according to the N.E.D., the word is not of
Persian, but of Arabic origin; viz. from Arab. shash, muslin, turban-
sash (Dozy). Gesenius gives Heb. shesh, fine linen (Gen. xli. 42) ;
which he supposes to be of Egyptian origin.

SCURF. The corresponding native E. word appears in ME.
shorf, occurring as a gloss to AF. royne, F. rogne; Femina, ed.
W. Aldis Wright, 50. 5.

SHARK. A good example of the North F. cherquier or cherquer
occurs in the future tense cherqueray, in the Vows of the Heron, pr.
in Political Poems, ed. Wright, i. 16.

SKILLET (1), a small pot. (Scand.; with F. suffix.) The
derivation of this word, as given at p. 566, is probably wrong,
though it has been frequently given. Prof. Weekley points out that
it was rightly explained by the editor of the Catholicon Anglicum
(dated 1483). At p. 341 of that work we find :—‘ Skele, [h }emica-
dium ;’ and the note says that skele is the same as the prov. E. skeel,
a milk-pail, a dairy-vessel (see E.D.D.). ‘ From this word we have
the dimin. skillet, a little pot or pan, also still in use.’ At p. 240
of the Catholicon we find:—‘ A. milke-skele, mulgarium, multrale,
multrarium.’? The mod. E. ee (ME. 2) answers to AS. éo and Icel.
j@; hence the derivation is from Icel. skjola, a pail, bucket, of which
Vigfusson notes that it is the same as ‘the North E. and Scot. skeel or
skeil, a milk-pan. Skillet (also skellet) is a diminutive; the F.
dimin. suffix -et may easily have been suggested (as Prof. Weekley
says) by association with the word posnet, also a dialectal word with
the sense of ‘iron pot’ or ‘saucepan.’ The Icel. skjdla appears in
the Swed. dialects as skjula and shyla (Rietz). The form of the root
is SKEU; so that skeel cannot be in any way allied to scale and
shell.

SKILLET (2), SKELLAT, a little bell, a hand-bell, an iron
rattle. (F.—Teut.) See E.D.D. and Jamieson. OF. esquilette (cited
by Prof. Weekley), variant of eschelette, ‘a little hand-bell, such as
cryers use,’ Cotgrave. Dimin. of OF. esquille, esquelle, eschele, a bell
(Godefroy). Of Teut. origin; from OHG. scella, MHG. schelle,
a bell, which is from the strong verb scellan, skellan, to resound; cf.
MDnu. schelle, ‘a small bell’ (Hexham), schellen, toring a bell; Icel.
skella, a rattle to scare horses, skella, to clash; allied to the Icel.
strong verb skjalla, AS. scellan, to resound, clash. All from Teut.
SKEL, to resound.

SQUASH. It is satisfactory to find that the AF. esquasser
had the sense of crush or squash, and suffices to account for the
modern form. In ‘ The Assault of Massoura,’ ]. 128, we read how
the Saracens attacked some English knights, ‘et des marteaux
pesaunz les noz esquasserent,’ i.e. and beat our men down with heavy
hammers. See the Excerpta Historica, p. 73.

SQUIRT. The quotation from de Bibbesworth, viz. bilaggid
wit swirting, means, literally, dirtied with splashing. In the No-


:


SUPPLEMENT


minale, 1. 408, the corresponding passage has besguireid, a scribal
error for besquirted ; for there is also a corresponding passage in
Femina, ed. W. Aldis Wright, 78. 13, which reads al by-squyrt, and
(four lines below) he hath many of squyrtis, i.e. of splashes,

*STALEMATE, a position (in chess) in which a player, whose
king is not in check, is unable to move any piece. (F.—OHG.)
First explained by me in Phil. Soc. Trans., 1906. ‘They stand at
a stay; like a stale at Chesse, where it is no mate, but yet the game
cannot stirre ;’ Bacon, Essay 12. ‘For under cure I gat sik chek
Quhilk I micht nocht remuif nor nek [prevent] Bot [without] eythir
stail or mait ;? Montgomery, Cherrie and the Slae, 216 (1597). Cf.
ME. sfal, a fixed position; Layamon’s Brut, 1. 1671. From OF.
estal, a fixed position, as in prendre estal, to take up a fixed position
against attack; cf. en estal, & estal, in the same place, in a firm
position, estre & estal, to stand firm. See Chanson de Roland, 1108,
2139.—OHG. sal, a stall, fixed place; cognate with E. stall; see
Stall and Mate (2).

*STANIBEL, a kestrel, a kind of hawk. (E.) It occurs in Lady
Alimony, sign. B 1 (Nares) ; and has been proposed as a reading in
Twelfth Night, ii. 5.124. Prov. E. stannel, stanyel, stanchel, stone-
gall (E.D.D.).. Corruptly, stand-gale, from its hovering in the wind ;
for whigh reason it is also called wind-hover. AS. stan-gella, lit.
‘yeller from the rock.’ It frequents rocks, and has a resonant voice.
See Stone and Yell. ‘

STRAND (2), part of a rope. Add, that the spelling strand
also occurs in Hakluyt, Voyages, ili. 847. ;

SULLEN. Prof. Weekley regards sullen asa doublet of solemn ;
for reasons which do not convince me. I can find no connexion of
form between the ME. solein, soulein, solitary (as in ‘ In sodlein place,
be miselve,’ Gower, C. A., vi. 135) and the ME. solémpne, sollémpne
(as in ‘ With a sollémpne sacrifise’ in the same, vii. 4703). Nor do
I regard the OF. solemne, solenne, ‘solemn,’ as a ‘learned’ form ; cf.
Ital. solenne, solemn, which could not have a doublet of the form
solano. More light is,no doubt, desired; but I adhere (for the
present) to a connexion between sullen and the L, sdlus, ‘sole.’ For
examples of AF. soulein, solein, soulain (four times), meaning ‘ alone,’
and soule, ‘alone,’ see Gower’s French Works, ed. Macaulay.

TAINT, a stain; to stain, infect. (F.—L.) ‘The various senses
are best understood by observing the note upon Aféaint in the N.E.D.,
in place of which ¢aint was frequently used. ‘Afttaint, pp., ME.
ateynt, ataynt, adapted from OF. ateint, ataint, pp. of OF. ateindre,
to attain; formed like teindre, pp. teint, joindre, pp. joint, and not
from L. attactus. Hence, erroneously Latinised in med. L. as
attinctus, and referred (in England at least) to L. tinctus, “ dyed,
stained,” an etymological fancy which warped the meaning of the
word and its derivatives.’ We may say that ¢aint may almost always
be ultimately referred to this Late L. attinctus, and is therefore from
the verb to attain, i.e. from L. attingere, compounded of ad and tan-
gere. But we cannot leave L. tinctus out of the account, because there
is no instance in which the original verb attain has the sense ‘to
infect.’ See the note on Attaint (p. 777).

TARN. Properly a ‘separate’ pool, without inlet or outlet.
Cf. W. darn, a fragment, piece torn off, from the 4/DER, to tear.

*TARRIER, TERRIER, a kind of auger, (F.—C.) Halli-
well gives ‘ Terrier, an auger. In London, a ¢arrier (in the oil
trade) is a kind of triple auger, resembling three tapering corkscrews
united at the tops and arranged so that each is at an angle of 120
degrees from the other; used for extracting shives (or wooden bungs)
from barrels of turpentine. MF. ¢ariere, ‘an augar ;’ Cot.; derriere,
‘a terrier, or augar;’ id. Cf. OF. taredre, later tarere ; tarere is in
the Supplement to Godefroy ; taredre is in ‘ Les Gloses Frangaises
de Gerschom de Metz,’ par L. Brandin, Paris, 1902; no. 101, at
p- 70. From Low L. taratrum (Ducange). = Olrish tarathar, ‘ tere-
bra,’ Windisch ; cf. W. ¢aradr, an augur. A genuine Celtic word,
cognate with L. terebra, Gk. réperpov, a borer, from L. terere, to
bore, Gk. 7etpew, to rub away.

TESTAMENT. The L. testis, a witness, has lost an r, and
stands for *#restis ; as shown by the Oscan éristaamentud, ‘testamento.’
Allied to *tristos, parallel to Olrish tress, ‘ third,’ ordinal of éré, three.
The orig. sense was therefore ‘third man’ or ‘odd man;’ see Um-
pire. (So Brugmann, Walde).

TOMAHAWK. ‘From Renape of Virginia ¢amahak, an apo- —
copated form of tdmiéhakan, (what is) used for cutting, a cutting —
utensil ; from ¢améhakeu, he uses for cutting, from ¢aémaham, he cuts.
A name applied by the Renape Indians, among whom the English
settled in 1607, to a stone ax or hatchet employed as a weapon and
as an implement for chopping wood.—W. R. Gerard, in -The
American Anthropologist, Vol. 10, no. 2; 1908.

WORSTED. Mentioned as early as 1293. In the Camden
Miscellany, vol. ii. p. 13, we find ‘Pro xj. ulnis de wrstede,’ under
the date Friday, May 1, 1293.


Skeat, Walter W. (Walter
William), 1835-1912.

An etymological dictionary of
English 1


int eh PETA ANAT aT SS la


lL asettbetds


=o! s = Sa ss Set SS .


ee te CE Co a been GD diversas eis


PIERS Heh Re ES de Hee SOREN ORE HOKE He iho Mero G LOU RE IRS BIE ENTIRE He Sa Ime ee di
