USE AND ABUSE 
"8; \ 

FREE-MASONR v. 

- ti 
USE AN p AB US E 

o F 
PF REE-MAS ONE Ty 
A Work of the greateſt UTILITY 
TS FF HSs 
BRETHREN or THE SOCIETY, 
X jo Me 
MANKIND in GENERAL, 

AND To THE 

LADIES in PARTICULAR. 

By Carer. GEORGE SMITH, 

Inſpector of the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich ; 
Provincial Grand-maſter for the County of 

Kent; and R.A. 

1 TP 
WJ Va 

* 7 4 
1h 
GD 

F * 
| I 
JD A. 
= Dun“ Jehovah 
= , 
= Ely / | 
_ P27 OED. 5 \ by 
2 1 = * 3 Ar. Y . * 
ZZ LE lohu mm | DD 
, 
2 Ra 
D I 
OO 1 AI 

LONDON: Printed for the AuTawor ; 
And Sold by G. KearsLEY, Ne 46, Fleet-ſtreet, 2783. 

AE 

Publiſhed by the ſame Author, 

1. Engelſche en Nederduitſche Spraakkonſt, 
Utrecht, 1758, in 8vo. 

2. Mey's Commercial Letters ; tranſlated from the 
German. Bremen, 1767, in 8vo. 

3. Univerſal Military Dictionary, or a Copious 
Explanation of the Technical Terms, &c. 
uſed iu the Equipment, Machinery, Move- 
ments, and Military Operations of an Army. 

Londen, 1779 35 

Or, a Catalogue of Ancient "and Modern Military 
Books, in every Language in Europe; with Hiſtorical 
Critical, and Explanatory Notes, Fe, 

TY 
HIS MAJESTY 
FREDERICK THE SECOND, 
KING OF PRUSSIA, 

ACHES T2 
Of Brandebourg, 

ARCH-CHAMBERLAIN AND PRINCE ELECTOR 

Of Nether Sileſia ; 

SOVEREICN PRINCE 
Of Orange, Neufchatel and Valengin; 
| D U K E 
Of Gueldre, of Magdebourg, Cleves, Juliers, Bergue, 

Stettin, Pomerania, the Caſubes, and Vandales, 
of Mecklenbourg, as alfo of Croſne; 

BURGRAVE 
Of Nurenbourg 

FAYE T2. 
Of Halberſtadr, of Minde, Camen, Vandalia, Surein, 
of Ratzebourg, Eaſt Frieſlagd, and Meurs ; 

a COUNT 

V1 B@EZDICATION. 

| r 

Of Hohenzollern, of Ruppin, of the Mark, 
of Ravenſbourg, Hohenſtein, Tecklen- 

bourg, Suerin, Lingen, Bühren, and 
Leerdam; 

„ 

Of Ravenſtein, of Roſtock, Stargard, Lauenbourg, - 
Biitau, Arley, and Breda, c. 

PROTECTOR OF FREE-MASONS. 

May it pleaſe your Majeſty, 

A8 FakE-MuASONRx flouriſheth 
more, is more reſpectable, 
and more ſucceſsful in the vaſt em- 
pire of Germany, in the kingdoms 
of Great Britain and Ireland, than 
in any other part of the globe; to 
whom 

* 

- DEDICATE@ M Vi 

whom then can a treatiſe on the 
Royar ArT be more juſtly dedi- 
cated, than to the two firſt Maſons 
in Europe; the King or Pruss14, 
Protector of the Society, and His 
Royal Highneſs the Dux® or Cuu- 

BERLAND, Grand-maſter ? 

As the author had the honour 
to learn the firſt rudiments of war 
in your Majeſty's ſervice, during 
ſeven inſtructive campaigns, and is 
connected with ſome of the moſt 
ancient and noble families in the 
Pruſſian dominions ; is thereby in- 
duced to offer this work as a tri- 
bute of his unfeigned duty and 
reſpe& to the greateſt of Kings, to 
the moſt valiant of Heroes, the 
greateſt Philoſopher, Poet, and 
Politician the world ever beheld. 

a 2 Trar 

vi DEDICATION. 

TraT your Majeſty may long 
reign over ſo warlike, ſo happy, 
and ſo hoſpitable a people, is the 

fincere with of 

Your MajesTyY's 

moſt obedient 
humble ſervant, 

GEORGE SMITH. 

Royal Mihtary Academy, 
20th June 1783. 

TO HIS 

ROYAL HIGHNESS 
HENRY FREDERICK, 

Duke of CUMBERLAND and STRATHERN, 
EARL OF DUBLIN, 

RANOER of WinpsorR GREAT PARK, 

ADMIRAL of the WHITE SQUADRON, 

AND 
Kx1GHnT of the Moſt Noble Order of the GCanTAn; 

Preſent GRAND-MASTER of MasoNs in England. 

May it pleaſe your Royal Highneſs, 

A 
O whom can a treatiſe on Free- 
maſonry be more properly in- 
ſcribed, than to your Royar Hicn- 
NESS, who preſides over the Society in 
England? a Society calculated to inſpire 
the 

- —— — — Wn 

— — — 

* DEDICATION. 

the human heart with principles of the 
moſt exalted benevolence, and to im- 
prove it in the practice of every ſocial 
virtue, cannot, in ſtri& propriety, - be 
faid to derive any additional merit from 
the reputation of an individual, how- 
ever converſant in the myſtical know- 
ledge of the Royal Art; yet, when we 
behold our firſt offices filled by kings, 

princes, and nobles in every nation, we 

cannot but be ſenſible, that our princi- 

ples and practice are thereby ſtrongly 
recommended to the favourable opinion 
of thoſe, who are not yet ſufficiently 
inſtructed in them by their own expe- 

nence. 

Tux appointment of your Royar 
HIGHNESsSs to the firſt Maſonic office 

in the world, created in me a particular 

pleaſure 

DEDICAT:1I©:N: 3 

pleaſure, as well as our numerous Bre- 
thren, and alſo a ſtrong defire to teſ- 
tify our ſatisfaction at ſuch an event, 
Hence I truſt, that the honourable ap- 
pellation I bear in the Society, will in- 
duce you to eſteem this declaration of 
my ſentiments, which might otherwiſe 
be regarded as preſumption, in the 
light of a becoming mode of expreſſing 
my duty and unfeigned reſpect to your 

ROYAL HIGENEss. 

As heaven, Sir, has inſpired you 
with a peculiar regard for the arts and 
ſciences; and as you not only ſtudy 
them in theory, but frequently conde- 
ſcend to honour the practical part (in 
which Free-maſonry is included) with 
your preſence and particular favour, I, 
am thereby encouraged to lay myſelf, and 

the 

xi DEDICATION. 

the following work, at your Royar 
HiGHNEss's feet; and at the ſame 
time beg leave to expreſs my unfeigned 
veneration for your perſon, being with 

the moſt profound reſpect, 

Your Royar HiGnness's 
molt obliged, 
and moſt obedient 
humble Servant, 

GEORGE SMITH. 

Woo wien, 
acth June 2783. 

P R E- 

. 

O men ſincerely intereſted in the wel- 

fare of ſociety and of their country, it 
muſt be particularly agreeable to reflect on 
the rapid progreſs, and general diffuſion of 
the royal art through almoſt every part of the 
habitable world; for, where learning and ci- 
vility is found, there maſonry alſo flouriſhes 
and in particular within the preſent age, has 
taken ſure footing in Great Britain. What- 
ever may be the caſe in ſome other kingdoms 
of Europe, Aſia, Africa, and America, we, in 
this iſland, may boaſt of our ſuperiority to 
thoſe illiberal prejudices, which not only cramp 
the genius, but as it were ſout the temper of 
man, and diſturb all the agreeable intercourſe 
of ſociety. Among us, Free-maſonry is no 
longer confined within the ſchools of the phi- 
loſophers, or the courts of princes, but, like 
all the greateſt advantages which heaven has 
beſtowed on mankind, it is become as unt- 
yerſal as it is uſeful. 

b Tris 

— — 

yy — — — 
— 

adn —— — 

xiv 1 

Tx1s general diffuſion of maſonic know- 
ledge is one effect of that happy conſtitution 
of government, which towards the cloſe of the 
laſt century was confirmed to us, and which 

conſtitutes the peculiar glory of the nation, 

In other countries the great body of the peo- 
ple poſſeſs little wealth, have little power, and 
conſequently meet with little reſpect ; except 
among the extenſive body of Free-maſons, who 
are not only a molt reſpectable community, 
but are univerſally eſteemed in all foreign 
parts; in Great Britain the people are opu- 
lent, have great influence, and claim of courſe 
a proper ſhare of attention, except among the 
ſociety, where very little regard is paid them, 
owing to their interior rank in life and abili- 
ties. To their improvement in the maſonic 
art, therefore, men of letters have lately di- 
rected their ſtudies; as the great body of 
maſons, no leſs than the dignified, the learned, 
or the wealthy few, have an acknowledged 
title to be amuſed and inſtructed. Books 
are of little uſe in the ſcientific part of maſonry, 
but they are the grand out- lines of maſonic 
morality, and the ſuperſtructure of the noble 
art. Hence, to promote and advance this 

improvement, is the principal deſign of this 
| Pre- 

c | ERS 0 
3 DNN 3 e b n e 2 Py „* 
5 BY 4, Wn & 4 75 3 983888 PIE > N 
EA BK SID CUE OI N * — * 
- N WER —_— 7 4 5 a - 
* By "OT ES 1 2 

* 
* 
0 
4 
4 
* 
a 
Mi 
By 
4 
2 
EA 
£24 
Fe 

P2274 e% :w 

preſent undertaking. No ſubject appears more 
intereſting than this we have choſen, and none 

ſcems capable of being handled in a manner 
that may render it more generally uſeful. 

Tux knowledge of Free-maſonry, or to ſpeak 
more extenſively, the knowledge of the ma- 
ſonic world, and of its inhabitants; its uſe 
and abuſe, its riſe and progreſs, will be ex- 
plained in this work, or at leaſt promiſe the 
beſt aſſiſtance for attaining this knowledge. 

In the execution of our deſign, we have 
all along endeavoured to obſerve order and 
perſpicuity. Elegance we have ſacrificed to 
brevity. Happy to catch the leading features 
which diſtmguiſh the characters of Free- 
maſons, and by a few ſtrokes to hit off, though 
not completely to finiſh, the picture of the 
ſociety in ancient and modern times. 

Wuar has enabled us to compriſe ſo many 
ſubjects within the narrow bounds of this 
work, is the omiſſion of many immaterial cir- 
cumſtances, which are recorded in other per- 
formances of a ſimilar kind, and of all thoſe 

incoherent accounts or deſcriptions which, to 
b 2 the 

xvi . 

the diſgrace of the human underſtanding, ſwell 
the works of maſonic authors; though the 
falſity of them, both from their own nature 
and the concurring teſtimony of the moſt en- 
lightened and beſt informed travellers and 
hiſtorians, be long ſince detected. 

As to the particular part of the work, we 
have been more or leſs diffuſe, according to 
their importance to us as men, as maſons, and 
as ſubjects of Great Britain. Our own coun- 
try, in both reſpects, deſerved the greateſt 
ſhare of our attention. Great Britain, though 
ſhe cannot boaſt of a more luxuriant ſoil or 
happier climate than many other countries, 
has advantages of another and ſuperior kind, 
which make her the delight, the envy, and 
the miſtreſs of the world: theſe are the equity 
of ſome of her laws, the freedom of her poli- 
tical conſtitution, and the moderation of her 
religious ſyſtem. Hence, with regard to Free- 
maſonry in the Britiſh empire, we have been 
ſingularly copious. 

5 
Nxxr to Great Britain, we have been moſt 

particular upon the other ſtates of Europe; 
| and 

z 

PN B Ac xvii 

and always in proportion as they preſent us 
with the largeſt field for maſonic reflection. 
By comparing together our accounts of the 
European nations, an important ſyſtem of 
practical maſonic knowledge is inculcated, 
and a thouſand arguments will appear in fa- 
vour of a mild region, a free government, and 
an extended, unreſtrained commerce. 

Evroee having occupied ſo large a part of 
our volume, Ala next claims our attention; 
which, however, though in ſome reſpects the 
moſt famous quarter of the world, offers, when | 
compared to Europe, extremely little for our 
entertainment in maſonic reſearches. In Ala, 
a ſtrong attachment to ancient cuſtoms, and 
the weight of tyrannical power, bears down 
the active genius of Free-maſonry. 

In Africa the human mind ſeems ſo much 
degraded below its natural ſtate, conſequently 
maſonry has made but a flow progreſs in that 
vaſt extent of country, a country ſo immerſed 
in rudeneſs and barbarity, as to be in a man- 
ner deprived of all arts and ſciences, without 
which the human mind remains torpid and 
inactive, diſcovering no great variety in man- 

ners 

viii P R E F & C E. 

ners or character. A gloomy ſameneſs almoſt 
every where prevails, except among the Eu- 
ropean factories, with whom maſonry flouriſhes. 

AunRIcA, whether conſidered as an im- 
menſe continent, inhabited by an endleſs va- 
riety of different people, or as a country inti- 
mately connected with Europe, by the ties of 
commerce, government, and friendſhip, has 
not been any- ways back ward in promoting 
and eſtabliſhing Free maſonry, as the great 
number of lodges teſtify. 

Havi thus treated on the hiſtory and 
antiquity of Free- maſonry in the four grand 
diviſions of the globe, we next proceed to in- 
veſtigate the manner of laying the foundation 
ſtone of Free. maſons Hall, its dedication, com- 
pletion, government, and furniture, Sc. The 
comprehenſiveneſs of Free- maſonry, its de- 
fence againſt all foreign and unjuſt attacks, 
together with a general vindication, demands 
our next attention. Laſtly, we treat on ma- 
ſonic ſecreſy, oaths, lodges, furniture, apparel, 
jewels, Ic. together with maſonic hierogly- 
phics, and the ancient and modern reaſons 

why the ladies have never been admitted into 
the 

P R E F ACE. xix 

the ſociety, cloſing the hiſtory with maſonic 
charity. 

Tuvs maſonry has withſtood the ravages 
of the times; unſhaken, unpolluted, and with- 
out the leaſt variation in its ſecrets, cuſtoms, 
and uſages; when even the tombs: and monu- 
ments, ſtructures raiſed by maſonic hands, 
which ſhould perpetuate our memories, are 
crumbled into duſt; and the proudeſt pyra- 
mid of them all, which wealth and ſcience 
have erected, has loſt its apex, and ſtands 
obtruncated in the traveller's horizon. King- 
doms and provinces, and towns and cities, 
have they not had their periods? and when 
thoſe principles and powers, which at firſt 
cemented and put them together, have per- 
formed their ſeveral revolutions, they fall back. 
Where is Troy, and Mycene, and Thebes, and 
Delos, and Perſepolis, and A-rigentum ? What 
is become of Nzneveh, and Babylon, of Cyzi- 
cum, and Miylene ? the faireſt towns that ever 
the ſun roſe upon, are now no more; the 
names only are left, and thoſe (for many of 
them are wrong ſpelt) are following them- 
ſelves by piece- meals, to decay, and in length 
of time will be forgotten; but Free-maſonry 

will 

XX EE FA CE 

will remain, ſurvive, and flouriſh until time is 
no more. 

Hence, in treating of ſuch a variety of 
ſubjects, ſome leſs obvious particulars, no 
doubt, muſt eſcape our notice. But if our 
general plan be good, and the out-lines and 
chief figures ſketched with truth and judg- 
ment, the candour of the learned, we hope, 
will excuſe imperfections which are unavoid- 
able in a work of this limited kind. 

GEORGE SMITH. 

Ar 
J 4089 

— = 

— ä — 

CON. 

GON TIEN MT 

of HE uſe and benefit of ſociety in general. 3 
Antiquity of Free-maſonry in general. 22 

Antiquity of Free-maſonry in Great Britain. 49 

Ceremony obſerved at laving the foundation 
one of Free-maſons Hall. - 81 

Inſcription depe/ited within the foundation 
tone, both in Latin and Engliſb. 82 

Anthem ſung at laying the foundation flone, 
compoſed by Henry Dagge, % — 85 

Mr. Bottomley's oration at laying the foun- 

dation ſtoue. — | — 86 
Ceremony obſerved at the dedication of Free- 

Grand- architects ſpeech at the dedication of 
Free-maſons Hall. — — 101 
Grand- chapiain's oration at the dedication 
of Free-maſons Hall. — — 104 
New Ode, by a member of the Royal Alfred 
©. Lodge at Oxford, as performed at the 
+. dedication of Free-maſons Hall. 128 

0 Expla- 

xxii Err 

Page 
Explanation of the Oxford Ode, by the 
author. — _ 132 

Rev. Daniel Turner's Ode, intended for the 
ſame occaſion. — — 135 
The authors letter that accompanied the Ode. 139 
Mr. Williamſon's Ode, intended for the 
fame occaſion. — — 141 
Deſcription of Free-maſons Hall in London. 148 
Hiſtory and Antiquity of Free- maſonry in 
foreign countries. Firſt in France, 163 
Deſcription of Free-maſons Hall at Mar- 
ſeilles. — — 165 
Count T , Speech at the initiation of 
bis fon into maſanry. -— — 172 
Hiſtory and Antiquity of Free-maſonry in 
Germany. — — 177 
Compa#tt with the grand lodge of Germany. 186 

I Hiſtory and Antiquity of Free-maſonry in 
Holland. — — 193 

Hi iftory and Antiquity of Free-maſonry in | 
Denmark and Sweden. — 199 

The Runic inſcriptions on rocks in Denmark, 
fuppoſed to be maſonic hieroghypbies. 200 1 

Ei 

CONTENTS. xxiii 
Page 
IIiſtory and Antiquity of Free-maſonry in 
Ruſſia, — — 201 
Hiſtory and Antiquity of Free. maſonry in 
Spain, Portugal, and Italy, — 203 
The caſe of brothers Mouton and Couſtos, 
ſent priſoners to theinquiſition at Liſbon |. 
for being Free-maſons, —— 204 
The caſe of brothers Alincourt and Pragaò, 
ſent to priſon in the iſland of Madeira 
for being Free-maſons. — — 206 
The Pope's Bull againſt the ſociety of Free- 

. maſons. — — . 
An edi of Rome againſt the Free- maſons. 210 
A decree of Rome, condemning to the flames 

a book in French, intitled, The Hiſ- 
tory of and an Apology for the So- 
ciety of Free- maſons.— — ib. 
Hiſtory and Antiquity of Free- maſons in 
Switzerland, Hungary, and Poland. 213 

The ordinance of the city of Berne, aboliſhing 
the ſociety of Free-maſons from the 

republic. — — 215 
Hiſtory and Antiquity of Free- maſonry in 
Bohemia. —— — 221 

C 2 Hſe 

, * of — ana eas wes 
— —— Via. — ——— — — 

xxiv CONTENTS 

Page 

Hiſtory and Antiquity of Free-maſonry in 
Flanders and Brabant. — 223 

Hiſtory and Antiquity of Free-maſonry in 
Aſia, — — 225 

Sir John Day's leiter to the Nabob of the 

Carnatic, accompanying an apron and 
book of conſtitutions, as a preſent from 
the grand-lodge of England. — 229 

The Nabot's anſwer to the Grand maſter. 231 
Hiſtory and Antiquity of Free-maſonry in 
Africa. — — 235 
Hiſtory and Antiquity of Free- maſoury in 
America and the Welt Indies. — 239 
Number of lodges and maſons in the world. 243 
Defence of Maſonry in general, Sc. — 245 
Vindication of Free-maſonry from all general 

aſperſions. — — 265 
Members expelled the ſociety for unſufferable 

crimes. — — 273 
On maſonic Secrecy. — 28 5 
On maſonic Oaths. — — 295 

On Free- maſons lodges; their furniture, 
apparel, jewels, &c. — 307 

A Prayer 

CONTENTS. xx} 

Page 

A Prayer uſed at opening the lodge. 318 
A Prayer uſed at the reception of a new 

brother. — — ib. 

A Prayer uſed at cloſing the lodge. — 319 

The furniture of the lodge. ws ib, 
On the apparel and jewels of Maſons. 327 
On maſonic Hieroglyphics. — 337 

Ancient and modern reaſons why the Ladies 

have never been admitted into the ſociety 
of Free-maſons. — — 349 

On maſonic Charity, — — 367 
Charity fund conſtituted. — 373 
The caſe of a foreign Nobleman who applied 
for charity, — _ 374 
The brethren of Oporto relieve a diſtreſſed 
maſter of a ſhip. — — 377 
The brethren of Liſbon relieve a diſtreſſed 
family. — — ib. 

The lodge at Marſeilles relieve two officers. ib. 
The lodges at the Hague relieve an Engliſh 

cabinet maker. _ — 378 
The brethren in France afſiſt all maſonic 
Priſoners of war. — — 153. 

The 

N 0 — — Ju k 
on — — 
— — — — _— — — 

xxvi CONTENTS. 

Page 
The lodges in Germany grant penſions to 
reduced maſonic families. — 379 
The lodges in Germany, Denmark, and 
Sweden eſtabliſh ſchools for the educa- 
tion of poor Free-maſons children. 380 

A lodge at Eiſenach has eftabliſhed a ſchool 

for poor children in the country, where 
upwards of oo have already been 

educated, — — 381 
The brethren in Courland have ęſtabliſped a 
publit library at Mietau. — 382 

The lodge at Caſſel bas erected a ſchool for 
the education of poor Maſons children. ib. 

A lodge at Emden in Ealt Friefland, cele- 
brate the feſtival of St, John in a 
public manner, — — 383 

The lodges of Dreſden, Leipzig, and Gor- 
litz heave founded à ſchool for cbil- 
dren of every denomination in the elec- 
torate of Saxony. — — is. 

An Addreſs to the ſubſcribers of the above 
ſchoot, by a brother, on its opening. 384 

The lodge of Fortitude, at Maidſtone, give 
additional premiums to thoſe offered by 

the 

CONTENT S. xxvii 
Page 

the Humane Society, to increaſe that 
laudable inſtitution in Kent. -— 389 

The author's addreſs to the Lodge of Forti- 

tude on ſo commendable an under- 

taking. _ — 391 
Mr. Shipley' inventions. — — 394 
Other benevolent acts performed by the Lodge 

of Fortitude. — — 39% 

Ss. MA F- 

Page 6r, line 26, for under mild, read under the mild. 
188, 21, for annua, . annual. 
2223 12, for Glaſgow, r. Glogow. 
315, 5, for ſymboliſation, r. ſymbolization, 

361, 2, for objections, v. obligations. 
362. Ty for of, read for, 

- 

To the PuBLic. 

THOSE Gentlemen who have 
| honoured my work by their ſubſcrip- 
| tions, will be pleaſed to excuſe my 
not printing their names; the liſts being 
ſo very imperfect, and ſeveral gentle- 
men in the country having neglected 
to ſend theirs, added to the neceſſity I 
was under to publiſh before the proro- 
gation of parliament, will, I hope, be 
a ſufficient excuſe. 

* 

» \ 7 71 
> 134 59 

3 
USE ANY BENEFIT 
o F 
SOCIETY IN GENERAL 

TT HAT man is a being formed for ſociety, 

and derives from thence his higheſt feli- 
city and glory, needs no proof ; nay, indeed, 
the hiſtory of mankind might well be conſidered 
as the hiſtory of ſocial life ; perpetually and 
invariably tending more and more to perfec- 
tion. If we duly confider man, we ſhall find 
him a ſocial being; and in effect, ſuch is his 
nature, that he cannot well ſubſiſt alone : for 
out of ſociety he could neither preſerve life, 
diſplay or perfect his faculties and talents, nor 
attain any real and ſolid happineſs. 

SoctETY naturally reſults from population, 
and government is a part of the ſocial ſtate, 
A. From 

He 

From conſidering the few wants that men 
have, in proportion to the reſources which 
nature affords them; the little aſſiſtance and 
happineſs they find in the civil ſtate ; in com- 
pariſon of the wants, pains, and evils they 
accumulate in it; their inſtinct for indepen- 
dence and liberty, common to them with all 
other living beings, together with a number 
of reaſons drawn from their natural conſtruc - 
tion; for, conſidering all theſe things, it has 
even ſometimes been doubted, whether ſocia- 
bility was ſo natural to mankind as it has ge- 
nerally been thought to be. 

Bur, on the other hand, the helpleſſneſa 
and duration of man's infancy; the nakedneſs 
of his body, not covered either with hair or 
feathers; the tendency of his mind to perfec- 
tion, the neceſſary conſequence of the length 
of his life; maternal fondneſs, which is in- 
ercaſed with cares and fatigues ; which after 
it has carried the child in the womb for nine 
months, ſuckles it, and bears it in its arms for 
whole years; the reciprocal attachment ariſing 
from this habit between two beings that re- 
lieve and careſs each other, the numerous 

marks of intercourſe in an organization, that 
adds 

ES 

adds to the accents of the voice, common to 
ſo many animals, the language of the fingers, 
and of geſtures that are peculiar to the hu- 
man race; natural events, which in a hundred 
different ways may bring together, or recon- 
cile wandering and free individuals; accidents 
and unforeſeen wants, which oblige them to 
meet for the purpoſes of hunting, fiſhing, or 
even of defence; in a word, the example of 
ſo many creatures that live in herds, ſuch as 
amphibious animals and ſea-monſters, flights 
of cranes and other birds, even inſects that are 
found in columns and ſwarms : all theſe facts 
and reaſonings ſeem to prove, that man by 
his nature tends to ſociability, and he is 
the ſooner diſpoſed to enter into it, as he 
cannot populate much under the torrid zone, 
without being collected into wandering or ſe- 
dentary tribes ; nor ſpread himſelf much un- 
der the other zones, without aſſociating with 
his fellow creatures, for the prey and the 
{poils which the wants ef food and cloathing 
require. 

Hap not the God of nature intended man 
for ſociety, he never would have formed him 

ſubject to ſuch a variety of wants and infirmi- 
A 2 ties. 

141 | 

ties. This would have been highly inconſif- 
tent with divine wiſdom, or the regularity of 
omniſcience : on the contrary, the very neceſ- 
ſities of human nature unite men together, and 
fix them in a ſtate of mutual dependence on 
one another. For ſelect the moſt perfect and 
accompliſhed of the human race, a Hercules 
or a Sampſon, a Bacon or a Boyle, a Locke or a 
Newton, nay we need not except even Solo- 
mon himſelf, and ſuppoſe him fixed alone, even 
in this happy iſland, where nature, from her 
bounteous ſtores, ſeems to have formed ano- 
ther Eden, and we ſhould ſoon find him de- 
plorably wretched ; and by being deſtitute of 
a ſocial intercourſe, deprived of every ſhadow 
of happineſs. 

THEREFORE for the eſtabliſhment of our 
felicity, Providence in its general ſyſtem with 
regard to the government of this world, has 
ordained a reciprocal connection between all 
the various parts of it, which cannot ſubſiſt 
without a mutual dependence; and from the 
human ſpecies, down to the loweſt parts of 
the creation, one chain unites. all nature. 
This is excellently obferved, and moſt beau- 

| tifully 

a = 

tifully deſcribed, by a late celebrated poet, in 
the following lines : 

God in the nature of each being founds 

Its proper bliſs, and ſets its proper bounds ; 
But as he form'd a whole, the whole to bleſs, 
On mutual wants built mutual happineſs. 

So from the firſt eternal order ran, 

And creature link'd to creature, man to man, 

Under theſe circumſtances, men muſt of 
neceſſity form aſſociations for their comfort, 
friendſhip, and defence, as well as for their 
very exiſtence, Had revelation been ſilent on 
this head, yet we might by the mere light of 
nature have eaſily diſcovered it to be our duty 
to be kindly affectionated one to another. No 
ſyſtem can be more agreeable to the common 
ſentiments of mankind, nothing built upon 
ſurer terms of equity and reaſon, than that I 
ſhall treat my fellow creature with the ſame 
candour and beneyolence, with the ſame at- 
fection and ſincerity I ſhould expect myſelf. 
It is true, this was not delivered in expreſs 
words till the time of Moſes, nor ſo fully ex- 
plained and underſtood as at the coming of 
the prophets, Yet we have great reaſon to 

belieye 

1 

believe that it was the firſt law revealed to 
Adam, immediately upon his fall, and was a 
genuine precept of uncorrupted human nature. 
That every one is naturally an enemy to his 
neighbour, was the malevolent aſſertion of a 
non-maſonic philoſopher, Hobbes: one who 
vainly thinking himſelf deeper verſed in the 
principles of man than any before him, and 
having miſerably corrupted his own mind by 
many wild extravagancies, concluded, from 
ſuch acquired corruption, that all men were 
naturally the ſame. How to reconcile a tenet 
of this kind with the juſtice and goodneſs of 
a ſupreme being, ſeems a taſk too difficult for 
the moſt learned perſon to execute; and what 
that gloomy philoſopher of Malmeſbury was 
contented barely to lay down, without the 
leaſt ſhew of argument in its defence. That 
God ſhould be a being of infinite juſtice, creat- 
ing us in a neceſſary ftate of dependence on, 
and at the {ame time bring us into the world 
with inclinations of enmity and cruelty to- 
wards each other, is a contradiction ſo palpa- 
ble, as no man can aſſert conſiſtently with a 
reverential notion of his divine Maker. And 

were there no ſufficient proofs againſt it, even 
| from 

17 

from our imperfect ideas of the Creator, the 
very laws of nature would confute it. 

By the law of nature, I would be under- 
ſtood to mean, that will of God which is diſ- 
coverable to us by the light of reaſon with- 
out the aſſiſtance of revelation. Now nothing 
is more evident than this grand maxim, that 
whatever principles and actions have an inſe- 
parable connection with the public happineſs, 
and are neceſſary to the well-being of ſociety, 
are fundamental laws of nature, and bear the 
ſtamp of divine authority. 

Tuis will evidently appear from the fol- 
lowing conſideration : when the grand archi- 
tect of the univerſe had, with the greateſt wiſ- 
dom and molt exact proportion, formed this 
globe, and repleniſhed it with every thing ne- 
ceſſary for life and ornament, he laſt of all 
created may, after his own image, enduing 
him with rational and immortal powers, ade- 
quate to the preſent and future happineſs for 
which he was deſigned, 

Bur 

a * —— — — 4 
py 4 — - *.- I 
TY — — 
— — —q — 
— — — — 

1 

Bor though he found himſelf in Paradiſe; 
where every thing abounded for his ſuſte- 
nance and delight, yet for want of a creature 
of the ſame rational nature with himſelf, his 
felicity was incomplete; ſo much did the in- 
nate ideas of ſociety poſſeſs and influence the 
human mind from its firſt exiſtence, that the 
higheſt enjoyments without participation were 
taſteleſs and unaffecting; 

(Our grandſire Adam, e' er of Eve poſſeſt, 
Alone, and &en in paradiſe unbleſt, 

With mournful look the bliſsful ſcene ſurvey'd 
And wander d in the ſolitary ſbade; 

The Maker ſaw, took pity, and beftow'd 
Woman, the laſt, the beſt reſerve of God! ) 

A ftrong proof that even in the original ſtate 
of human nature, ſelfiſh and narrow princi- 
ples had no ſhare; and that to communicate 
bleſſings was to increaſe them. To gratify 
his wiſhes, enlarge his mind, and eſtabliſh his 

| happineſs, which before was very imperfect, 

God created an helpmate for him. Moman, 
his loſt beſt gift; thereby enabling him to ex- 
change the ſolitary for the ſocial life; an im- 

perfect for a perfect bliſs! Now the human 
mind 

r 

mind began to expand; a new chain of ideas 
and affections ſucceeded; its joys were in- 
creaſed, and its wiſhes accompliſhed. Theſe 
diſpoſitions were continued with the ſpecies, 
and man has ever ſince had recourſe to ſociety, 
as an eſſential means to humanize his heart 

and meliorate the enjoyments of life. 

Bur, alas! he being created free in the ex- 
ertion of the faculties, both of body and mind, 
and theſe faculties being vitiated by ſin in our 
firſt parents, the taint became hereditary, 

and ſoon broke out in ſymptoms which fore- 
boded deſtruction to the peace and happineſs 
of the world. Cain furniſhed an early and 
terrible inſtance of the truth of this aſſertion, 
when of the firſt two brothers that ever were 
on earth, one fell a victim to the envious 
fury of the other, and demonſtrated that a 
train of new paſſions had taken poſſeſſion of 
the human heart. Envy, hatred, and re- 
venge now made their firſt 'appearance, and 
bloodſhed and diſcord followed. Ties of con- 
ſanguinity firſt cemented mankind ; but after 
the ſons of Næab had rendered the earth more 
populous, and the confuſion of languages had 

B {epa- 

(77 

ſeparated one family from another, vice and 
impiety boldly raiſed their heads. Therefore 
to remedy theſe dreadful evils, and avert then 
conſequences, the uniting various men and 
different orders, in the bonds of friendſhip, 
ſeemed the beſt and ſureſt method; and was 
indeed the greateſt and moſt effectual defence 
againſt the univerſal depravity of corrupted 
human nature: it was here alone protection 
could be had, from the attacks of violence, 
or the inſinuations of fraud, from the force 
of brutal ſtrength, or the ſnares of guilty 
deſign. 

FurTHERX to promote theſe ends, and ſe- 
eure ſuch bleſſings, laws were now neceſſarily 
introduced for the ſafety and advantage of 

every individual; and of their good effect, we 

in this nation ought to be better judges than 
the whole world beſides, for ours, we may 
extol, as St. Paul expreſſes himſelf, in confi- 
dence of boaſting. 

Ir we confine ourſelves to particular parts 

of ſociety, and treat on bodies of men, who, 

though members of, and ſubordinate to the 

general ſyſtem, unite themſelves into diſtinct 

COIN» 

* 

communities, for their own immediate adyan- 
tage, and relatively for the public benefit, we 
ſhall find ſome entering into ſuch affociations 
upon different views, and to anſwer various 
purpoſes. We of this nation in particular fear 
no enemy at our gates, though at preſent ſo 
much boaſted of, nor no violence from our 
neighbours, and I hope no treachery from our 
friends or brethren; but afſemble with men 
of ſimilar opinions and manners, not out of 
neceſſity for the preſervation of our lives; but 
to render them more beneficial to others and 
pleaſing to ourſelves; by enabling us to per- 
form thoſe duties, and afford that aſſiſtance 
to each other in a united capacity, which as 
individuals we were unable to do. 

To this kind of aſſociations, I ſhall con- 
fine myſelf in the following work; and ſhall 
treat on the 2 and abuſe of the ancient inſti- 
tution of Free and Accepted Maſons in particu- 
lar; an eſtabliſhment founded on the benevo- 
lent intentions of extending and confirming 
mutual happineſs, upon the beſt and trueſt 
principles of moral and ſocial virtue. 

B 2 For 

1 

Fox among many inſtances of the above 
truth, apparent to every intelligent perſon, 
let us reflect, that in all ſocieties and govern- 
ments there are ſome indigent and miſerable, 
whom we are taught to regard as objects of 
our compaſſion and our bounty; it is therefore 
our indiſpenſable duty, both as men and as 
Free Maſons, to aid ſuch with our counſel, 
commiſerate their afflictions, and relieve them 
in their diſtreſs. | 

*Tis what the happy to th unhappy ewe, 
For what man gives, the gods on him beſtow. 

Tris principle is the bond of peace, and the 
cement of true maſonic alfection. Free-maſong 
eſteem it as a virtue of the moſt diffuſive na- 

ture, not to be confined to particular perſons, 

but extending to the whole human race; ta 
adminiſter aſſiſtance to the needy is their high- 
eſt pride and their utmoſt wiſh, eſtabliſhing 
friendſhip and forming connections, not by 
receiving, but conferring benefits. As ſoon 
might the builder alone work through each 
tedious courſe of an edifice without the aſſiſt. 
ance of his fellow-craftſmen, as poor, helpleſs, 

Un- 

(321 

unaſſiſted man toil through each chequered 
ſtage of human lite. 

Trz Almighty has therefore furniſhed men 
with different capacities, and bleſſed them 
with various powers, that they may be mutu- 
ally beneficial and ſerviceable to each other; 
and indeed, wherever we turn our eyes and 
thoughts, we ſhall find ſcope ſufficient to 
employ thoſe capacities, and exerciſe thoſe 
powers, agreeable to the celebrated maxim of 
the great Socratic diſciple, that we are not born 
for ourſelves alone. 

Taar we may not be too much elevated 
with the contemplation of our own abun- 
dance, we ſhould conſider, no man comes 
into this world without imperfections; that 
we may not decline being ſerviceable to our 
fellow-creatures, we ſhould reflect, that all 
have their portions for improvements; that 
we may not be remiſs or reluctant in good 
offices, we ſhould remind ourſelves, however 
affluent our fortunes may be, we are not en- 
tirely independent of others, and where much 
is given, much will be required; we are com- 
manded to be fruitful in good works; and 
| | through- 

EF ods i 

throughout the whole creation we ſhall find 
no precedent for inutility or indolence ; for 
he that contributes neither ſtudy, labour, or 
fortune to the public, is a deſerter to the com- 
munity. All human affections, if directed by 
the governing principle of reaſon, tend to 
promote ſome uſeful purpoſe. Compaſſion, if 
properly exerted, is the moſt beneficent of 
all human virtues, extending itſelf to a greater 
number of objects, exciting more laſting de- 
grees of happineſs, than any other. Some 
affections are indeed more fierce and violent, 
but their action, like a ſudden exploſion of 
prepared military combuſtibles, is no ſooner 
begun than its force 1s ſpent, 

Tux rational, the manly pleaſure, which 
neceſſarily accompanies compaſſion, can only 
be known to thoſe who have experienced its 
effects; for who ever relieved the indigent, 
and did not at the ſame time receive the 
higheſt gratification ? To ſee a fellow- creature 
labouring in agony and pain, or ſtruggling 
under the oppreſſive burthen of helpleſſneſs 
and want, or ſuffering under the inhumanity 
of law and lawyers, thouſand times worſe 
thag the ravages of war or the barbarian's cru- 

elty, 

L's: } 

elty, preſently raiſes pity in the human breaſt, 
induces us to ſympathize with the object in 
his diſtreſs and misfortunes, and inſpires us 
with the tender maſonic diſpoſitions of charity 

and kind affiſtance, 

Ir our pleaſure was to be eſtimated in pro- 
portion to its extent and duration, that of do- 
ing good muſt rival and outfhine all others 
the mind 1s ſuſceptible of, being both from 
its nature, and the variety of objects on which 
it acts, greatly ſuperior to the fleeting and un- 

ſatisfactory enjoyment ariſing from the ſatiſ- 

fying our ſenſual appetites. Hence compaſſion, 
both on account of its duration, from its 
pleaſing effects, and its unbounded utility to 
the world, ought to be highly valued and duly 
cultivated by all who conſult their own telicity, 
or the proſperity and intereſt of that country, 
fociety, or people to which they belong. 

Ir would be abfurd to dwell longer on this 
head, as I am addreſſing a fociety who in 
every age, from the earlieſt times to this pre- 
ſent day, have been juſtly celebrated for their 
diſintereſted liberality, and whoſe proceedings 
have been conſtantly directed by the deſires 

of 

— — 

L207 7 

of doing good to, and promoting the happi⸗ 
neſs of every individual. 

From the above conſiderations, the neceſ- 
ſity of conſtituting particular ſocieties; is ſtrik- 
ingly obvious : for next to the veneration of 
the ſupreme Being, the love of mankind feems 
to be the moſt promiſing ſource of real ſatiſ- 
faction. It is a never-failing one to him, who, 
poſſeſſed of this principle, enjoys all the means 
of indulging it; and who makes the ſuperi- 
ority of his fortune, his knowledge, or his 
power, ſubſervient to the wants of his fellow- 
creatures, It is true, there are few whoſe 
abilities or fortunes are ſo adapted to the ne- 
ceſſities and infirmities of human nature, as 
to render them capable of performing works 
of univerſal beneficence, but a ſpirit of univerſal 
benevolence may be exerciſed by all; and the 
bounteous Father of nature has not propor- 
tioned the pleaſure to the greatneſs of the 
effect, but to the greatneſs of the cauſe. Here 
Jet not my meaning be miſtaken, I would not 
be underſtood to infinuate that we are abſo- 
lutely ſo obliged to be bountiful, that no- 
thing will excuſe us; for it is an univerſal 
maxim among Free-maſons, that, juſtice my 

precede 

„ 

precede charity; and except where the exigen⸗ 
cies of the diſtreſſed call for immediate relief, 
we ſhould always recollect our abilities, and 
our natural connections and debts to the 
world, whenever our diſpoſitions may prompt 
us to beſtow any ſingular bounty. And give 
me leave to obſerve, it is not the idle, indo- 
lent, extravagant, or unworthy, but the in- 
duſtrious and deſerving, though diſtreſſed 
brother, who has a juſt title to our extraor- 
dinary beneficence and charity; a circum- 
ſtance that ought always, and on all occaſions 
to direct the exertion of the above virtue. 

Having thus, in ſome meafure, deduced 
the nature and real neceſſity of /ociety, and in 
a great meafure ſhewn the duties incumbent 
upon us as members of it; may we as men 
and upright Free. maſons faithfully diſcharge 
the duties of our various ſtations in the /ociety ; 
and above all, be ever ready to do to others 
as we conld in their circumſtances reaſonably 
wiſh to be done unto, 

Tnty who move in a higher ſphere, have 
indeed a much larger province wherein to do 
good; but thoſe of an inferior degree will be 

| C as 

— CI > 2 0 H 

[ 18 ] 

as eminently diſtinguiſhed in the manſions of 
bliſs (if they move regularly, and if they are 
uſeful members of ſociety) as the higheſt. 
He who performs his part beſt, not he who 
perſonates an exalted character, will meet with 
_ applauſe. For the moon, though ſhe bor- 
rows her light from the ſun, alſo ſets forth 
the glory of God; and the flowers of the field 
declare a providence equally with the ſtars of 
the firmament. 

To conclude then, let me exhort all my 
worthy brethren to be diligent in the culti- 
vation of every moral and ſocial virtue, for 
ſo long only do we act conſiſtently with the 
principles of our venerable inſtitution. Then 
what has been ſaid, though on an occaſion far 
more important to mankind, may not impro- 
perly be appropriated as the badge of our re- 
ſpectable order. By this ſhall all men know 
that you belong to the brethren, if your hearts 
glow with affection (not to Maſons alone, but) 
to the whole race of mankind. And well, 
indeed, may ours be called a happy inſtitu- 
tion! whoſe ſupreme wiſh is founded on the 
trueſt ſource of felicity, and whoſe warmeſt 
endeavours are ever exerted in cementing the 

dies 

19 

ties of human nature by acts of benevolence, 
charity, and ſocial affection: and who, amidſt 
the corruption and immorality of the latter 
ages, have maintained their aſſemblies, their 
genuine principles, and unſullied reputation 
acquired and eſtabliſhed in the firſt. 

WaiLsT qualities like theſe direct your 
proceedings and influence your actions, Free- 
maſonry muſt ever be revered and cultivated, 
by the juſt, the good, and the exalted mind, 
as the ſureſt means of eſtabliſhing peace, har- 

mony, and good will amongſt men. 

C 2 =_ 

> 1 — ——— q ꝗ p —— 7 

L 21 }Þ 

ANI IE 

O F 

F R E E-M As ON R v 
IN GENERAL. 

HE antiquity and great utility of this 
noble and moſt praiſe · worthy ſociety 
being generally acknowledged in moſt parts 
of the habitable world, it would be as abſurd 
to conceive it required any new aids for its 
ſupport, as for him who has the uſe of ſight 
to demand a proof of the apparent riſing and 
ſetting of the ſun, Nevertheleſs, I ſhall lay 
before my readers ſome uſeful ſtrictures on 
the origin, nature, and deſign of this moſt 
uſeful inſtitution; and with certainty, though 
with prudent reſerve, confute and avert the 
many ſhameful and idle falſhoods, which 
have for ages paſt, and at preſent, been in- 
duſtriouſly propagated by its enemies, the 
better to inform the candid and well meaning, 
who might not know how to inveſtigate the 

truth, 

— 

- 2 ˙ oor men me 

180 
truth, or may want leiſure, capacity, and 
opportunity for that purpoſe. 

Wirn this view I have made it my buſi- 
neſs for many years to collect a great num- 
ber of paſſages from writers eminent for their 
learning and probity, where I thought they 
might ſerve to illuſtrate my ſubject. The 

' propriety of ſuch proceeding is too obvious 

to need any apology. 

Ax here permit me to obſerve, that the 
brighteſt titles ſuffer no diminution of luſtre; 
nay, that nobility itſelf derives diſtinction 
from the ſupport and countenance of an in- 
ſtitution ſo venerable. For if antiquity rherits 
our attention, and demands our reverence, 
Where will the ſociety be found, that hath an 
equal claim? Free- Maſons are well informed 
from their own private and interior records, 
that the building of Solomon's Temple is an 
important æra, from whence we derive many 
myſteries of our art. Now, be it remem- 
bered, that this great event took place above 
a thouſand years before the Chriſtian era; and 
conſequently more than a century before 
Homer, the firſt of the Grecian poets, wrote; 

and 

SA » 2 

and above five centuries before Pyrbagorat 

brought from the Eaſt his ſyſtem of zruly 
maſonic inſtruction, to illuminate the Weſtern, 
world. 

Bur, remote as is this period, we date 
not from thence the commencement of our 
art: for though it might owe to the wiſe and 
glorious king ſome of its many myſtic forms 
and hieroglyphic ceremonies, yet certainly 
the art itſelf is coeval with man, the great 
object of it. Nay, it may be well ſtiled 
coeval with creation; when the ſovereign Ar- 
chitelt raiſed on maſonic principles the beau- 

teous globez and commanded that maſter- 

ſcience Geometry to lay the planetary world, and 
to regulate by its laws the whole ſtupendous 

ſyſtem, in juſt, unerring proportion rolling 
round the central ſun ! 

Ir our firſt parent and his offspring had 
continued in the terreſtrial paradiſe, they 
would have had no occaſion for mechanic 
arts, or any of the ſciences now in uſe; 
Adam being created with all thoſe perfections 
and bleſſings, which could either add to his 
dignity, or be conducive of his real weltare. 

In 

f 44 J 

In that happy period he had no propenſity ts 
evil, no perverſeneſs in his heart, no darkneſs 
or obſcurity in his underſtandings for had 
he laboured under thoſe maladies, he would 
not have been a perfe& man, nor would there 
be any difference betwixt man in a ſtate of 
innocence, and in a ſtate of degeneracy and 
corruption. It was therefore in conſequence 
of his wilful tranſgreſſion that any evils came 
upon him; and having loſt his innocence, he in 
that dreadful moment, forfeited likewiſe his 
ſupernatural lights, and infuſed knowledge, 
whereby every ſcience (as far as human nature 
is capable of) was rendered familiar to him 
without the tedious labour of ratiocination, 
requiſite to make men even of the greateſt 
abilities, whoſe ideas after al remain weak 

and imperfect. 

From this remarkable and fatal æra, we 
date the neceſſity and origin of ſciences. Firſt 
aroſe divinity, whereby was pointed out to 
fallen man, the ways and will of God, the 
omnipotence and mercy of an offended creator? 
Then law, for no ſooner had Adam tranf- 
preſſed the divine command, than we find 

him cited to appear before the Almighty Judge. 
When 

———ñ— 
— — — 

L 23 J 

When ſelf. accuſed, after hearing his defence, 
ſentence was pronounced upon him. The 
7oyal art was beyond all doubt coeval with 
the above ſciences, and was carefully handed 
down by Methuſelab, who died but a few 
days before the general deluge, and who had 
lived 245 years with Adam, by whom he was 
inſtructed in all the myſteries of this ſublime 
ſcience, which he faithfully communicated to 
his grandſon, Noah, who tranſmitted it to 
polterity ; and it has ever been preſerved with 
a veneration and prudence ſuitable to its great 
importance, being always confined to the 
knowledge of the worthy only, or ought ſo 
to be. This is confirmed by many inſtances, 
which men of reading and ſpeculation (eſpe- 
cially ſuch as are of this ſociety) cannot ſuffer 
to eſcape them, 

Ar firſt mankind adhered to the leſſons of 
nature; ſhe uſed neceſſity for the means, 
urged them to invention, and aſſiſted them 
in the operation, Our primitive fathers, 
ſeeing the natural face of the earth was not 
ſufficient for the ſuſtenance of the animal 
creation, had recourſe to their faithful tutoreſs, 
who taught them how to give it an artificial 

| D face, 

1 26 J 

face, by erecting habitations and cultivating 
the ground; and thefe operations among other 
valuable effects led them to ſeareh into, and 
contemplate upon the nature and properties 
of lines, figures, ſuperficies, and ſolids; and 
by degrees to form the ſciences of geometry and 
architecture, which have been of the greateſt 
utility to the human ſpecies. Hence we were 
firſt taught the means whereby we might at- 
tain practice, and by practice introduce ſpe- 
culation. 

From the Flood to the days of king Solomon, 
the liberal arts and ſciences gradually ſpread 
themſelves over different parts of the globe; 
every nation having had ſome {hare in their 
propagation; but according to their different 
manners, fome have cultivated them with 
more accuracy, perſeverance, and ſucceſs than 
others; and though the ſecrets of the royal 
art have not been indiſcriminately revealed, 
they have nevertheleſs been communicated in 
every age to ſuch as were worthy to receive 
them, 

Bur I am not at liberty publicly to un- 
draw the curtain, and openly to deſcant on 
this 

— — ̃ꝓͥ— — - 

———é— — —— 

. 
this head; it is ſacred, and ever will remain 
ſoz thoſe, who are honoured with the truſt, 
will not reveal it, except to the truly qualified 
brother, and they who are ignorant of it 
cannot betray it. 

I sHaLiL however obſerve, that is art was 
called royal, not only becauſe it was originally 
practiſed by kings and princes, who were the 
firſt profeſſors of it, but likewiſe on account 
of the ſuperiority which ſo ſublime a ſcience 
gave its diſciples over the reſt of mankind. 

Tx1s ſupreme and divine knowledge being 
derived from the Almizhty Creator to Adam, 
its principles ever ſince have been, and ſtill 
are, moſt ſacredly preſerved and inviolably 
concealed, For as all things in proceſs of 
time are liable to decay and corruption, the 
ancient profeſſors wiſely foreſeeing the great 
abuſes which their exalted myſteries might 
ſuſtain, if generally made known, determined 
to confine the knowledge of them only to 
ſelect brethren, men whom they had found 
by long experience to be well verſed in the 
general principles of the ſociety, and who 

D 2 were 

( 28 J 

were eminent for their piety, learning, and 
abilities. 

Hexee it is that a man may be ſufficiently 
able to acquit himſelf in every teſt that 1s 
laid down by our preſent inſtitution, to prove 
his regular initiation therein, and alſo to ſhew 
that he is not unacquainted with its general 
principles, and yet at the ſame time he may 
be totally ignorant and undeſerving of the 
more valuable parts of this ancient ſociety. 
Theſe, like the adyta of the ancient temples, 
are hid from the vulgar eyes. It is not 
every one that is barely initiated into Free- 
maſonry, that is entruſted with all the myſ- 
teries thereto belonging; they are not attain- 
able as things of courſe, nor by every capacity : 
for as our famous Mr. Locke juſtly obſerves, 
(ſpeaking of this ſociety) though all have a 
right and opportunity (if they be worthy and 
able to learn) to know all the arts and myf- 
teries belonging to it, yet that is not the caſe, 
as ſome want capacity and others induſtry to 
acquire them. Nevertheleſs, ſuch is the real 
felicity, neceſſarily refulting from a know- 
ledge and practice of the general principles 

of this fraternity, as alone was ever found 

ſufficient 

L 3 

ſufficient to entitle it to a preference of all 
other inſtitutions, 

| From the earlieſt ages of antiquity, the 
royal art was ever taught with the greateſt 
circumſpection, not in ſchools or academies 
to a promiſcuous audience, but was confined 
to certain families; the rulers of which in- 
ſtructed their children or diſciples, and by 
this means conveyed their myſterious know- 

ledge to poſterity. 

AFTER the Flood, the profeſſors of this art 
(according to ancient tradition) were firſt diſ- 
tinguiſhed by the name of Noachidz, or ſons 
of Noah, afterwards by that of ſages or wiſe 
men (men inſtructed as Moſes in all the wiſdom 
of the Egyptians) Chaldeans, philoſophers, 
maſters in 1/rael, &c. and were ever venerated 
as ſacred perſons. They conſiſted of men of 
the brighteſt parts and genius, who exerted 
their utmoſt abilities in diſcovering the various 
myſteries of nature from whence to draw im- 
provements and inventions of the moſt uſeful 
conſequences. Men, whoſe talents were not 
only employed in ſpeculation, or in private 
acts of beneficence ; but who were alſo pub- 
lic 

—_—. 

_ on 
—— — 

— — 

— 
2 . 
rr e ew 
— 8 — 

—— 

— — 

—— 

1 1 

lic bleſſings to the age and country in which 
they lived, poſſeſſed with moderate deſires, 
who knew to conquer their paſſions ; prac- 
tiſers and teachers of the pureſt morality, ever 
exerting. themſelves to promote the harmony 
and felicity of ſociety. They were therefore 
conſulted from all 'parts, and venerated with 
that ſincere homage which 1s never paid but 
to real merit; and the greateſt and wiſeſt po- 
tentates on earth eſteemed it an addition to 
their imperial dignities, to be inrolled among 
ſuch bright ornaments of human nature, 

A erixcrPpaL excellence which rendered 
them famous among men, was faciturnity, 
which in a peculiar manner they practiſed and 
inculcated, as neceſſary for concealing from 
the unworthy, what few were qualified to 
learn, and ſtill fewer to teach. 

Ix thoſe times, when the preſent rules and 
maxims of our profeſſion of Free- maſonry had 
their beginning, the minds of men were poſ- 
ſeſs'd of allegories, emblems, and myſtic 
devices, in which peculiar ſciences, manners, 

inſtitutions, and doctrines in many nations 

were wrapt up. This was an invention of 
| the 

a 

the earlieſt ages. The prieſts in Egypt ſee 
creted the myſteries of their religion - from 
the vulgar by ſymbols and hieroglyphics, 
comprehenſible alone to thoſe of their own 
order. The prieſts of Greece and Rome prac- 
tiſed other ſubtleties by which the art of 
divination was enveiled, and their oracles 
were intelligible only to their brethren, who 
expounded them to the people, 

Taxsz examples were wiſely adopted for 
the purpoſes of concealing the myſteries of 
maſonry, like the bil's leaves, the ſecrets of 
the brotherhood would appear to the world 
as indiſtin&t and ſcattered fragments, whilſt 
they convey to maſons an uniform and well 
connected ſyſtem. 

Ix the forming of this ſociety, which 1 
believe was originally both religious and civil, 
great regard has been given to the firſt know- 
ledge of the God of nature, and that accept- 
able ſerviee wherewith he is well pleaſed. - 

Trrs was the firſt ſtage on which our ori- 
ginals thought it expedient to place the foun- 
dation of maſonry; they had experienced, 
| that 

L203 

that from religion all civil ties and obliga- 
tions were compacted, and that thence pro- 
ceeded all the bonds which could unite man- 

— kind in ſocial intercourſe : hence it was, that 

they laid the corner ſtone of the ediſice on the 
boſom of religion. 

In the firſt ages of the world, ſcience was 
in a low ſtate ; becauſe the uncultivated man- 
ners of our forefathers rendered them in ge- 
neral incapable of that knowledge which their 
poſterity have ſo amply enjoyed: the pro- 
feſſors of the royal art, therefore, found it 
abſolutely requiſtte, to exchude the more un- 
worthy and barbarous part of mankind from 
their aſſemblies, and to conceal their myſte- 
ries under ſuch allegorical figures; as they 
alone could explain (even with us at this day, 
it is indiſpenſable to prevent future bad con- 
ſequences, by concealing from vulgar eyes, 
the means uſed to unfold ſuch myſteries) 
wherefore the greateſt caution was ever ob- 
ſerved at their meetings, that no unqualified 
perſon might enter amongſt them ; and every 
method was employed to Hie them ſecurely, 
and conceal the real intent and deſign of their 

convocations. 
Iv 

L 33 1 

| ts order to render their proceedings more 
edifying and more extenſively uſeful, charges 
were delivered at certain times, as well for 
regulating the conduct of the fraternity, as 
preſerving that mark of diſtinction; which 
their ſuperior merit juſtly entitled them to. 

Tux ſecond ſtate of Free-maſonry is ground- 
ed on this period; the Temple at Feruſalem 
owns the probation of the craft/men. Hence, 
it is not to be preſumed, that we are a ſociety 
of men, profeſſing religious principles con- 
trary to the revelations and doctrines of the 
ſon of God, reverencing a deity by the deno- 
mination of the God of nature, and denying 
that mediation which is graciouſly offered to 
all true believers. The members of our ſociety 

at this day, in the third ſtage of maſonry, con- 

feſs themſelves to be Chriſtians : the veil of 
the temple is rent; the builder is ſinitten, and 
we are raiſed from the tomb of tranſgreſſion. 
Hence, how Mahometans, Jews, Sc. can 
prevail on themſelves to be initiated into this 
ſociety, is to me a ſurprize. Nevertheleſs I 
know many of them to be very good Maſons. 

E. I nun- 

*S 
+ 

3 
1 E 4 » 
5 

6 

L 34 J 

I nvmBLY preſume it is not to be under- 
ſtood, that the name of Free- maſon, in this 
ſociety, denotes that the origin or riſe of ſuch 
ſociety was ſolely from builders, architects, 
or mechanics; for at the times in which 
Mofes ordained the ſetting up of the ſanc- 
tuary*, and when Solomon was about to build 
the Temple of Jeruſalem, they ſelected from 
out of the people, thoſe men who were en- 
lightened with the true faith, and being full 
of wiſdom and religious fervor, were found 
proper to conduct theſe works of piety. It 
was on thoſe occaſions that our predeceſſors 
appeared to the world as architects, and were 
formed into a body, under ſalutary rules, for 
the government of thoſe who were employed 
in theſe great works: ſince which period 
builders have adopted the name of Maſons. 
I am induced to believe the name of Maſon 
has its derivation from a language, in which 
it implies ſome ſtrong indication, or diſtinc- 
tion, of the nature of the ſociety ; and that it 

has not its relation to architects. The French 

word Maiſon ſignifies a family or particular 
race of people. It ſeems as if the name was 

Exodus, ch, 31. v. 2, 7. ch. 36. v. 1, 2. 
| com- 

L 485 I 

compounded of Maw-Euaxy, gur ſalutem; and 
the title of Maſonry no more than a corruption 
of Meozpavtu, ſum in medio cel, or MaGz5ood, 
na celeſtia +, which conjectures are ſtrength- 
ened by our ſymbols. 

The titles therefore of Maſon and Maſonry 
moſt probably were derived from the Greek 
language, as the Greek idiom is adopted by 
them in many inſtances, The Druids, when 
they committed any thing to writing, uſed the 
Greek alphabet; and I am bold to aſſert, the 
molt perfect remains of the Druids rites and 
ceremonies are preſerved in the cuſtoms and 
ceremonies of Maſons, that are to be found 
exiſting among mankind, My brethren may 
be able to trace them with greater exactneſs 
than I am at liberty to explain to the public. 
The original names of Maſons and Maſonry 
may probably be derived from, or corrupted 
of Mug por, res arcana, myſteries, and Mopns, 
ſacris initiatus myſta, thoſe initiated to ſacred 

myſteries. 

+ Job, ch. 38. v. 32. Exod. ch. 11. v. 4, 6. 
E 2 AFTER 

— 

1 36 ] 

Arrzx this conciſe and general account 
of the ancient profeſſors of the royal art, and 
and its original names, and the ſublime truths 
which they were poſſeſſed of, and were by 
them tranſmitted down to poſterity in the 

manner before deſcribed, we will proceed to 

the building of that glorious edifice, at which 
period this fociety became a regular and uni- 
form inſticution, under the denomination of 
Free and Accepted Maſons, whoſe cuſtoms and 
proceedings I ſhall deſcribe, as far as I am 
permitted, 

Trovcn the Almighty and eternal Jehovah 
has no occaſion for a temple, or houſe to 
dwell in, for the heayen of heavens is not 
capable of containing his immenſity, yet it 
was his divine will, that a tabernacle ſhould 
be erected for him in the wilderneſs by Moſes, 
and afterwards a temple, by Solomon, at Fe- 
ruſalem, as his ſanctuary; both of which were 
to be conſtructed, not according to human 
invention, but after the pattern which the 
Lord himſelf had given. The whole model 
of the tabernacle was ſhewn to Moſes on mount 

Sinai; 

. 

00 51 

Sinai *; and the pattern of the femple was alſo 
given to David by the hand of the Lord, and 
by him delivered to Solomon his ſon . 

Tux zabernacle might be conſidered as the 
palace of the moſt High, the dwelling of the 
God of Iael; wherein the Mraelites, during 
their peregrination in the wilderneſs, performed 
the chief of their religious exerciſes, offered 
their ſacrifices, and worſhipped God. The 
tabernacle was erected about A. L. 2513. 
It was 3o cubits in length, 10 in breadth, and 
10 in height Þ; it was divided into two par- 
titions, the firſt was called The Holy Place, 
which was 20 cubits long and 10 wide; here 
was placed the table of ſhew-bread, the golden 
candleftick, and the golden altar of incenſe. The 
ſecond was called the Moft Holy Place, whoſe 
length was 10 cubits and breadth 10 cubits, 
wherein, before the building of the temple, 
the ark of the covenant was kept. The Moſt 
Holy Place was divided from the Holy Place, 
by a veil of very rich cloth ||, which hung 

upon four pillars of Shittim. wood, that were 
coyered with plates of gold. 

* Exod. ch. 25. v. 9. +1 Chron. ch. 2. 8. v. 11, &c. 
1 Cubit= 1 foot, 5.406 inches. 

} Exod. ch, 26. v. 31. Heb. ch. 9. v. 23, 

1 38 J 

Tux temple erected by Solomon (which was 

built after the model of the tabernacle) at Je- 
ruſalem, had its foundation laid in the year of 
the world 2992; before Chriſt 1008 before 
the vulgar æra 1012; and it was finiſhed 
A. L. 3000; and dedicated 3001; before 
Chriſt 999; before the vulgar æra 1003, 
The glory of this temple did not conſiſt in 
the magnitude of its dimenſions, for though 
it was twice as long and capacious every way 
as the fabernacle, yet alone, it was but a ſmall 
pile of building. The main grandeur and 
excellency were in its ornaments; the work - 
manſhip being every where exceeding curious, 
and the overlayings prodigious; it was built 
of new large ſtones, he wn out in the moſt cu- 
rious and ingenious manner; its out- buildings, 
which were large, beautiful, and ſumptuous; 
but, ſtill more admirable in this majeſtic build- 
ing, were thoſe extraordinary marks of divine 
favour with which it was honoured, viz. The 
ark of the covenant, in which was put the tables 
of the law, and the mercy-ſeat, which was upon 
it; from whence the divine oracles were given 
out, with an audible voice, as often as God 
was conſulted in behalf of his people; the 

Schechinah, or the divine preſence, manifeſted 
by 

<< ny YU a x — 9 

1 

by a viſible cloud reſting over the mercy- 
ſeat; the urim and thummim, by which the 
high- prieſt conſulted God in difficult and mo- 
mentous caſes, relating to the public intereſt 
of the nation; the holy fire which came down 
from heaven upon the altar, at the conſecra- 
tion ; theſe indeed were excellencies and beau- 
ties derived from a divine ſource, diſtinguiſh- 
ing and exalting this ſacred ſtructure above 
all others“. David, filled with the hopes 
of building this Zemple, declared his inten- 
tions to Nathan the prophet +; but this was 
not permitted him, becauſe his reign had been 
attended with wars, bloodſhed, and flaugh- 
ter, and he ſtill had to contend with many 
powerful enemies; but though forbid to ex- 
ecute this divine and glorious work, he made 
conſiderable preparations for that purpoſe ; 
which having done, and drawing towards his 
latter end, he aſſembled all the princes and 
chief perſons of the kingdom, and ordered 
and encouraged Solomon publicly, and in their 
preſence, to purſue ſuch his intention , and 
delivered the pattern or ſcheme of all the 

* 1 Kings, ch. 18. v. 38. + 2 Sam, ch. 7. v. 1, 3. 
T 1 Chron. ch. 29. v. 1, 10. 

houſcs, 

[0 3 

houſes, &c. * the courſes of the prieſts and 
Levites +, and likewiſe the pattern of the che- 
rubims 4, earneſtly exhorting his ſervants, in 
regard to the tender age of his ſon Solomon, 
who was yet but very young, to yield him 
their councils and aſſiſtance, in erecting a pa- 
lace, not deſigned for man, but for the Lord 
God, David himſelf gave towards this build- 
ing of the temple, out of his own treaſures, 
3000 talents of gold of Ophir, and 7000 ta- 

lents of. ſilver. 

Tux princes of this kingdom followed the 
glorious example of their king, and gave 5000 
talents and 10,000 drachmas of gold, 10,000 
talents of ſilver, 18,000 talents of braſs, and 
100,000 talents of iron, as alſo a great many 
of the moſt precious ſtones. 

Wurd David the king was dead, and Solo- 
mon was eſtabliſhed on his throne F, he reſolved 
to carry into execution his fathet's deſign, 
and erect a temple to his great Creator. For 
which purpoſe, he applied to Hiram, king of 

* x Chron, c. 28; v. 11, 12. + V. 11, 13, 
1 V. 18. $ A. L. 2989. 

Tyre, 

* r 1 
rr OE Re 
5 

L 4 ]) 

Tyre for aſſiſtance; and having readily ob- 
tained a promiſe of what he deſired, and pro- 
cured from thence, and other parts, men 
and materials ſufficient for his intentions, he 
began that great and majeſtic fabric; and as 
method and order are known and confeſſed to 
be eſſentials requiſite in conducting all great 
deſigns, he proceeded in the following man- 
ner; yiz. he numbered and claſſed his men 
according to their abilities; viz. princes and 
rulers, 300; overſeers, that were expert maſter 
maſons, 3, 300; ſtone- ſquarers, poliſhers and 
ſculptors, all of which were expert fellow- 
crafts, 80,000; the levy out of 1/rael, ap- 
pointed to work in Lebanon, one month in 
three, 10,000 each month, under the direc- 
tion of noble Adoniram, who was the junior 
G. W. 30, ooo. Whole number employed, ex- 
cluſive of the two G. W. and men of burthen, 
not numbered among maſons, were 113,600. 

SoLomon likewiſe partitioned the fellow-crafts 
into certain lodges , appointing to each, one 
to preſide as maſter, aſſiſted by two others 

* A lodge is the place where maſons meet to tranſ- 
act the buſineſs of the ſociety, and to expatiate on 
the craft. 

F as 

— — 

[42 ] 

as guardians +, that they might receive com- 
mands in a regular manner, take care of the 
Jewels, and be duly paid, fed, and cloathed, 
&c. 

TR ESE neceſſary regulations being pre- 
viouſly ſettled, to preſerve. that order and 
harmony which would be abſolutely requiſite 
among ſo great a number, in executing ſa 
large a work, he alſo took into conſideration 
the future agreement and proſperity of the 
craft, and deliberated on the beſt means ta. 
ſecure them by a laſting cement, 

Now brotherly love and immutable fidelity 
preſented themſelves to his mind as the moſt 
proper baſis for an inſtitution, whoſe aim and 
end ſhould be to eſtablith permanent unity 
among its members, and to render them a 
ſociety, who, while they enjoyed the moſt. 
perfect felicity, would be of conſiderable uti- 
lity to mankind. And being deſirous to 
tranſmit it under the ancient reſtrictions as a 
bleſſing to future ages, So/amen decreed, that 
whenever they ſhould aſſemble in their lodges 

+ See Book of Conſtitutions, p. 21, &C, 
to 

— — — 

C a3 J 

to diſcourſe upon, and improve themſelves in 
the arts and ſciences, and whatever elſe ſhould 
be deemed proper topics to increaſe their 
knowledge, they ſhould likewiſe inſtruct each 
other in ſecrecy and prudence, morality and 
pood fellowſhip; and for theſe purpoſes he 
eſtabliſhed certain peculiar rules and cuſtoms 
to be invariably obſerved ih their converſa- 
tions, that their minds might be enriched by 
a perfect acquaintance with, and practice of, 
every moral, ſocial, and religious duty; leſt, 
While they were ſo highly honoured by being 
employed in railing a ztempl? to the great 
Jznov an, they ſhould neglect to ſecure to 
themſelves an happy admittance into the celeſ- 
tial lodge, of which the temple was only to 
be a type. 

Tnus did our wiſe grand maſter contrive 4 
plan, by mechanical and practical alluſions, 
to inſtruct the craft/men in principles of the 
moſt ſublime ſpeculative philoſophy and mo- 

ral maſonry, tending to the glory of God, 
and to ſecure to them temporal bleſſings 
here, and eternal life hereafter; as well as to 
unite the ſpeculative and operative maſons; 
thereby forming a two-fold advantage from 
F 2 the 

| [ 44 ] 

the principles of geometry and architecture. 
on one part, and the precepts of wiſdom and 
ethics on the other. The next circumſtance 
| which demanded Solomon's attention was, the 
1 readieſt and moſt effectual method of paying 
the wages of ſo vaſt a body of men, accord- 
ing to their reſpective degrees, without error 
1 or confuſion, that nothing might be found 
1 among the maſons of Sion, ſave harmony and 
peace ®. This was ſettled in a manner well 
known to all regular made maſons, and there- 
fore is unneceſſary, as alſo improper, to be 
mentioned here. 

_—_— 
— — — —— — — 

Tuxsg arguments being adjuſted, the noble 
ſtructure was begun r, and conducted with 
ſuch grandeur, order, and concord, as afforded 
Solomon the moſt exalted ſatisfaction, and 
filled him with the ſtrongeſt aſſurance, that 

Kings, ch. 6, v. 7. 

It was erected in Mount Moriabh, in the month 
Zif, which anſwers to our April, being the ſecond 
month of the ſacred year, A. L. 2992, and was car- 
ried on with ſuch prodigious expedition, that it was 
completely finiſhed in little more than ſeven years, in 
the month Bul, which anſwers to our Ofober, A. L. 
2999, and was dedicated the year following. 

| | . 

1 

the royal art would be further encouraged in 
future ages, and amongſt various nations, 
from the excellencies of this temple, and the 
fame and ſkill of the yaelites, in the beauty 
and ſymmetry of the architecture therein diſ- 

played. 

He was likewiſe ſenſible, that when the 
building ſhould be completed, the crafiſinen 
would diſperſe themſelves over the whole 
earth; and being deſirous to perpetuate in 
the moſt effectual manner the harmony and 
good fellowſhip already eſtabliſhed among them, 
and to ſecure to themſelves, their future pu- 
pils, and their ſucceſſors, the honour and 
reſpect due to men whole abilities were fo 
great, and would be ſo juſtly rewarded, in 
conjunction with Hiram, king of Tyre, and 
Hiram Abiff, the deputy grand maſter, con- 
certed a proper plan to accompliſh his inten- 
tions; in which it was determined, that in 
conformity to the practice of che original pro- 
feſſors of the royal art general diſtinguiſhing 
characteriſtics ſhould be eſtabliſhed, for a 
proof of their having been fellow-labourers 
in this glorious work, to deſcend to their ſuc- 
ceſſors in all future ages, who ſhall in a peculiar 

manner 

| 
( 46 J 

manner be qualified to cultivate. the ſublime 
principles of this noble eſtabliſhment z and 
ſuch were adopted and received accordingly, 

Wirn reſpect to the method which would 
be hereafter neceſſary for propagating the 
principles of the ſociety, Solomon purſued the 
uniform and ancient cuſtom in regard to the 
degrees of probation and junctions to ſecrecy; 
which he himſelf had been obliged to comply 
with before he gained a perfection in the royal 
art, or even arrived at the ſummit of the 
ſciences; therefore, though there were no 45. 
prentices employed in the building of the tem- 
ple, yet as the craftſmen were all intended to 
be promoted to the degree of maſters, after 
its dedication; and as theſe would ſecure 
a ſucceſſion, by receiving apprentices, who 
might themſelves in due time become nat ers, 
it was determined, that the gradations in' the 
ſcience ſhould conſiſt in three diſtinct degrees, 
to each of which ſhoald be adapted a par- 
ticular diſtinguiſhed 7%, which 16%, together 
with the explication, was accordingly ſettled 
and communicated to the fraternity, previous to 
their diſperſion, under a neceſſary and ſolemn 
injunction to ſecrecy; and they have been 

moſt 

=, 

moſt cautiouſly preſerved and tranſmitted 
down to poſterity by faithful brethren, ever 
ſince their emigration. Thus the center of 
union among Free-maſons was firmly fixed; 
their Cabala* regulated and eſtabliſhed; and 
their principles directed to the excellent pur- 
poſes of their original intention. 

* Cabala, from the Hebrew word 22D. a ſecret 
ſcience of the ancient Jews, 

ANTI 

4] 

n 

O F 

F R E E-M AS ON R V 

INC 

r NIA 

T TISTORY is ſilent how long the poſte- 
H rity of Japbet, in the north and weſt 
of Europe, had loſt their original fine ſkill that 
they brought with them from the plains of 
Shinaar ; or how the knowledge thereof came 
firſt into the Britiſh Jes; the moſt early 
hiſtories of our country being ſo interlarded 
with fables, and perplexed with contradic- 
tions, that authors are at a loſs where to 
begin, how to go on, or where to end. Still, 
notwithſtanding the obſcurity which envelopes 
the maſonic hiſtory of the early ages of our 
country, various circumſtances contribute to 
prove that Free- maſonry was introduced into 
Britain by the firſt inhabitants about 1030 
years before Chriſt; and though many ancient 
records of this inſtitution were either loſt or 

G deſtroyed 

fm J 

deſtroyed in the wars of the Saxons and 
Danes, yet we are till poſſeſſed of one, 
which teſtifies, that ſo far back as the reign 
of king Atbelſtone, anno 926, this fraternity 
were reſtored to, and confirmed in their an- 
cient rights and privileges by a new charter 
or royal grant of that king, which is recorded 
in the old conſtitution, and relates, that king 
Athelſtone, the grandſon of Alfred the Great, 
a mighty architect, the firſt anointed king of 
England, and who tranſlated the Holy Bible 
into the Saxon tongue; when he had brought 
the land into reſt and peace, built many 
great works, and encouraged many maſons 
from France, who were appointed overſeers 
thereof, and brought with them the charges 
and regulations of the lodges preſerved ſince 
the Roman times, who alſo prevailed with the 
king to 1mprove the conſtitution of the Eng- 
liſb lodges, according to the foreign model, 
and to encreaſe the wages of the working 
maſons. That the ſaid king's brother, prince 

Edwin, being taught maſonry, and taking 

| * Several valuable MSS. burnt by ſome ſcrupulous 
brethren about the year 803, and again in 1720. Seg 
Free Maſons Calendar for 1778, 

upon 

upon him the charge of a maſter-maſon, for 
the love he had to the ſaid craft, and the 
honourable principles whereon 1t was founded, 
purchaſed a free charter of his brother for the 
maſons to have a correction among themſelves 
(as it was anciently expreſſed) or a freedom 
and power to regulate themſelves, to amend 
what might happen amiſs amongſt the craft, 
and to hold a yearly communication, and ge- 
neral aſſembly, 

Tnar accordingly prince Edwin ſummoned 
all the maſons in the realm to meet him at 
York, in June, A. D. 926, who came and 
compoſed a grand lodge, of which he was grand 
maſter * and having brought with them all 
the old writings, ſome in Greek, ſome in 
Latin, ſome in Saxon, ſome in French, and 
other languages, from the contents thereof, 
that aſſembly framed the conſtitutions and 
charges of an Engliſh lodge, made a law to 
preſerve and keep the ſame in all time com- 
ing, and ordained good pay for the working 
maſons. 

* The firſt Grand Lodge was convened by St. 
Alban, A. D. 287. Vid. Free Maſons Cal. 1778. 

G 2 AT 

nl 

Ar this time the craft was greatly encou- 
raged by the Saxon and Daniſh monarchs, and 
other eminent and wealthy perſonages in ſuc- 
ceeding ages, and wholeſome laws and regu- 
lations were occaſionally made and eſtabliſhed 
to promote and render permanent the proſpe- 
rity, honour, and harmony of the fraternity. 
For it is alſo recorded, that in the glorious 
reign of king Edward the third *, who became 
the patron of arts and ſciences, the charges 
and regulations of maſons * were reviſed and 
meliorated, and ſeveral new regulations were 
ordained ; from which time, to the reign of 
king Henry the ſixth, maſonry continued in a 
flouriſhing ſtate ; lodges and communications be- 
ing more frequently held than ever, and tran- 
quillity, joy, and felicity univerſally abounded 
amongſt them F. 

Tuts happy ſituation of the ſociety proved 
a ſufficient incitement with the commons of 
that day to attempt its overthrow, by a genes 
ral ſuppreſſion of their lodges and communi- 
cations ꝓ; and taking advantage of the king's 

* Reviſes the conſtitution, in 1358. 
+ Reviſes the conſtitution, in 1420, 
1 This happened in the year 1429. 

miniſtry, 

S = 

miniſtry, in the third year of his reign, and 
the fourth of his age, an a& was paſſed to pro- 
hibit their confederating in chapters or congreg a- 
tions, But the prudent and upright deport- 
ment of the brotherhood in thoſe days, and the 
excellence of their principles, precepts, and 
regulations, had gained them ſuch univerſal 
eſteem and good-will, that this ſevere edict, 
the effect of envy and malevolence in this ar- 
bitrary ſet of men, was never once executed, 
nor did it in the leaſt intimidate the maſons 
from holding their aſſemblies, or cauſe them 
to take any ſteps to get it repealed ; conſcious 
of their own integrity, they dreaded not its 
force; on the contrary, we find, that in the 
minority of the ſame king, a very reſpectable 
lodge was held at Canterbury*, under grand- 
maſter Chicheley, where Thomas Stapylton 
preſided as maſter, 7obn Morris, cuſtos de 
la loge lathamorum or warden of the lodge, 
with 15 fellow-crafts, and three entered ap- 
prentices, all there named +; and that a coat 
of arms, much the ſame with that of the Lan- 
don company of Free-maſons, was uſed by 

In the year 1429. 
+ Manuſcript of William Molart, prior of Canter- 

bury, p. 88. 
- them 

[ 34 ] 

them; whence it is natural to conceive, that 
the ſaid company is deſcended of the ancient 
fraternity; and that in former times, no man 
was made free of that company, until he was 
initiated into ſome lodge of Free and Accepted 
Maſons, as a neceſſary qualification, which at 
this day is practiſed in Scotland. And it not 
only appears, that before the troubles which 
happened in the reign of this unfortunate 
prince, Free-maſons were univerſally eſteemed, 
that even king Heury himſelf was made a 
maſon in the year 1442, with many lords and 
gentlemen of his court, who ſolicited and ob- 
tained admiſſion into the fraternity. And by 
what follows, we fina how very intent this 
prince was to acquire ſome knowledge of the 
fundamental principles, hiſtory, and traditions 
of the royal art, even before he was initiated; 
and from whence may alſo be gathered many 
of the original principles of the ancient ſociety 
on which the inſtitution of Free- maſonry was 

ingrafted. 

In length of time the royal craft ſuffered 
negle&, by the bloody wars of the houſe of 
York and Lancaſter, and afterwards by other 

means, till the union of the two kingdoms, 
when 

er 
18, 

13 J 

when true architecture began again to dawn 
in the weſtern part of the world; and the pro- 
greſs would have been more rapid, if queen 
Elizabeth had not diſcouraged the ſtudy of 
architecture. And hearing alfo that the ſociety 
of Free-maſons had ſome ſecrets which they 
could not or would not reveal to her, became 
jealous of their aſſemblies, ſent an armed force 
to break up their annual communication at 
York *; but Sir Thomas Sackville, grand-maſter, 
took care to ſend ſome of the great officers of 
the queen, that were ma/ons, who then joined 
the afſembly, made honourable report to her 
majeſty, who ever after eſteemed them as cul- 
tivators of peace, friendſhip, brotherly love, 
arts, and ſciences, never meddling with them 
afterwards. 19 

On the death of Elizabeth the crowns of 
England and Scotland were united in her ſuc- 
ceſſor James VI. of Scotland, who was pro- 
claimed king of England, Scotland, and Ireland 
on the 25th of March 1603. At this period 
maſonry flouriſhed in both kingdoms, and the 
lodges were convened under the royal patron- 

* On St, John's day, Dec, 27, 1561, 
age, 

191 

age. Jnigo Jones was elected grand. maſter; 
and his election being ratified by the king, he 
laid the foundation ſtone of that noble ſtruc- 
ture the banqueting-houſe, in the royal pre- 
ſence, A. D. 1607. In this reign the beſt 
architects reſorted to England from all parts, 
and met with great encouragement. - Under 
the patronage of the grand-maſter lodges were 
conſtituted with excellent bye-laws. The 
quarterly communication of the grand lodge 
of maſter and wardens were revived, as was 
alſo the general aſſembly. and feaſt on St, 
John's Day, at which rige Jones was annu- 
ally rechoſen till 1618, when William earl of 
Pembroke was elected his ſucceſſor. At this 
time maſonry flouriſhed greatly, and the myſ- 

teries of the order were highly revered. James 

died in 1625, and Charles aſcended the throne. 
The earl of Pembroke continued to preſide 
over the fraternity till 1630, when he reſigned 
in favour of Henry Danvers earl of Arundel, 
the progenitor of the Norfolk family. In 
1635, Francis Ruſſel earl of Bedford accepted 
the government of the ſociety; but as Inigo 
Jones had, with indefatigable aſſiduity, con- 
tinued to patronize the lodges, he was re- 

elected 

FEE 

4 5 1 x” ö ” y 
TRI In SEED e =, Cs 
3 K * * a 24 

ur oy ra atten 

3 io 

elected the following year, and continued in 
office till his death in 1646, 

Taz breaking out of the civil wars ob- 
ſtructed the progreſs of maſonry in England 
for ſome time ; however, after the Reſtoration 
it began to revive under the patronage of 
Charles IT. who had been received into the 
order while on his travels. On the 27th of 
December 1663, a genera] aſſembly was held, 
at which Henry Fermyn earl of Saint Alban's 
was elected grand-maſter, who appointed Sir 
Fohn Denham, knight, his deputy, and Mr, 
(afterwards Sir) Chriſtopher Wren and Jobn 
Webb his wardens. Several regulations were 
made at this aſſembly, and the greateſt har- 
mony prevailed among the ſociety. 

In 1666, Thomas Savage earl of Rivers was 
elected grand-maſter, who appointed Sir Chriſ 
topher Wren his deputy, and Mr. John Webb 
and Grinlin Gibbons his wardens. The fire of 
London happened this year. On the 23d of 
OZober 1667, the king in perſon laid the foun- 
dation ſtone of the Royal Exchange. His ma- 
jeſty alſo laid the foundation ſtone of St. 
Paul's, in preſence of the grand-maſter and 

H his 

1 8) 

his officers, the lord mayor and aldermen, 
the biſhops and clergy, and ſeveral of the 
nobility and gentry, amidſt the acclamations 
of a number of ſpectators. This ſuperb 
ſtructure was begun, carried on, and finiſhed 
by the fraternity, under the direction of Sir 
Chriſtopher Wren, after his own deſign; as 
was alſo Chelſea hoſpital and Greenwich palace. 
Several lodges were conſtituted about this 
time. In 1674, George Villiers duke of Buck- 
ingham was elected grand-maſter, who left the 
care of maſonry to Sir Chriſtopher, who ſtill 
continued to act as deputy. In 1679, the 
duke reſigned in favour of Henry Bennet earl 
of Arlington, but he, being deeply engaged 
in ſtate affairs, neglected his duty; the lodges, 
however, continued to meet under his ſanction. 

On the death of Charles, A. D. 1685, 
James II. ſucceeded, but the royal art was 
much neglected in his reign. The Earl of 
Arlington dying this year, the Iodges met in 
communication, and elected Sir Chriſtopher 
Wren grand-maſter, who appointed Mr, Ga- 
briel Cibber and Mr. Edward Strong his war- 
dens. Though maſonry continued in a de- 

clining ſtate for many years, ſeveral lodges 

were held occaſionally in different places. 

- 

7 
: 
47 

„,, A 4. 9%, 

L 59 J 

Ar the Revolution, maſonry was ſo much 
reduced, that there were no more than ſeven 
regular lodges in London and its ſuburbs, of 
which two only are worthy of notice; the old 
lodge of St. Paul's, over which Sir Cbriſto- 
pher preſided, during the building of that 
ſtructure; and a lodge at St. Thomas's hoſ- 
pital, Southwark, over which Sir Robert Clay- 
ton, lord-mayor of London, preſided, 

In 1694 king William was privately initiated 
into maſonry, He approved of the choice of 
Sir Chriſtopher Wren as grand-maſter, and pa- 
tronized the lodges, particularly one at Hamp- 
ton Court, which he held during the building 
of the new palace at that place. He built 
Kenſington palace, and finiſned Chelſea hoſpital *, 
In 1697 a general aſſembly and feaſt of the 
Free-maſons was held, at which many noble 
and eminent brethren were preſent. At this 
feaſt Charles duke of Richmond and Lenox was 
elected grand-maſter, who engaged Sir Chri/- 

* This year king William and queen Mary dined 
in great form at that magnificent room called the 
Small Armory, in the Tower of London, having all 
the warrant workmen to attend them, dreſſed in white 
aprons and gloves, the badges of the order, 

H 2 tophey 

| 
| 
| 
| 

o 
. . Ir nn > WI nr on n———— Re — * 

( 60 ] 

topher Wren to act as his deputy, and ap- 
pointed Edward Strong ſenior and Edward 
Strong junior his wardens, in which ſtate ma- 
ſonry remained till the king's death, which 
happened in 1702. 

Dvurixc the following reign maſorry was 
at a very low ebb ; Sir Chriſtopher's age and 
infirmities withdrawing his attention from the 
lodges, they gradually decreaſed, and the an- 
nual feſtivals were entirely neglected. The 
old lodge at St. PauPs, and a few others, con- 
tinued to meet, but thefe conſiſted of few 
members. It was then reſolved, that the pri- 
vileges of maſonry ſhould no longer be limited 
to architects and operative maſons, but that 
men of different profeſſions might be ad- 
mitted, who would agree to ſupport the dig- 
nity of the order as an ancient and moſt re- 
ſpectable ſociety. 

On the acceſſion of George I. the lodges re- 
ſolved to cement under a new grand-maſter, 
to be annually elected as in former times, to 
revive the communications and feſtivals of the 
fociety, to regulate the ancient uſages and cul- 
toms of the fraternity, and to eſtabliſh ſuch 

modes 

les 

[ 61 1 

modes only as might correſpond with the 
practices of the members of which the ges 
were now principally compoſed. Accordingly, 
on the feſtival of St. John the Baptiſt, in 
1717, a general aſſembly of the fraternity 
was convened. Four lodges attended in form, 
and a grand lodge was conſtituted. The oldeſt 
maſter preſent being in the chair, the bre- 
thren proceeded to elect a grand-maſter for 
the enſuing year, when the choice fell upon 
Anthony Sayer, gent. who was declared duly 
elected. Mr. Sayer was ſucceeded the follow- 
ing year by George Payne, eſq. this gentleman 
was particularly attentive to the duties of his 
office; he carefully collected many old papers 
and manuſcripts relating to maſonry, of which 
ſeveral were afterwards digeſted, and pro- 
perly arranged by Dr. James Anderſon, in a 
book, intitled The Conſtitutions of the Ancient 
and Honourable Society of Free and Accepted 
Maſons. Printed, London, 1723. From this 
ra we may date the revival of maſonry in 
England, the lodges daily increafing, both in 
the quantity and quality of their members 
under mild and careful adminiſtration of Mr. 
Payne and Dr. Deſaguliers, L. L. D. F. R. S. 

who 

( 62 J 

who ſucceeded Mr. Payne in 1719, In 1721 
the duke of Montague accepted the office of 
grand-maſter, and the ſociety has continued to 
flouriſh under the auſpices of the nobility ever 
fince. The duke was regularly inſtalled on the 
24th of June 1721, at Stationers Hall, in the 
preſence of ſeveral noblemen and other very 
reſpectable brethren, The regular meeting 
of the grand lodge at this time, the conſtant 

attendance of the grand-maſter, and the num- 

ber of gentlemen of family and fortune daily 

initiated, ſoon eſtabliſhed the reputation of 

the ſociety, and revived the ancient ſplendour 
of maſonry in England, 

Ar a general aſſembly and feaſt, held in the 
beginning of 1722, the duke of Montague 
was re-eleted grand-maſter for the enſuing 
year, at which the duke of Vbarton and many 
of his friends were highly diſpleaſed. This 
nobleman having been flattered with the pro- 
ſpect of being elected, had accepted the office 
of maſter of a lodge, to qualify him for his 
new dignity; but the grand-maſter's re- 
election entirely fruſtrated his expectations, 
ſo that he was not a little chagrined at the diſ- 

appointment. On the 24th of June he ſum- 
moned 

1 

moned a meeting of the fraternity at St ationers 
Hall to celebrate the feſtival of St. John the 
Baptiſt, where he ordered an elegant enter- 
tainment to be provided. By this means he 
thought to ſecure the intereſt of the brethren 
in his favour, and influence them to ſet aſide 
the election. It was repreſented at this meet- 
ing that the re- election of the duke of Mon- 
tague was an injudicious and impolitic ſcheme 
in the preſent circumſtances of the ſociety, 
and if ever admitted as a precedent, would 
not only obſtruct the progreſs of maſonry, but 
diſcourage other noblemen from ſtrengthen- 
ing the ſociety by their intereſt and connec- 
tions. The duke of Vbarton's inclination to 
preſide over the fraternity was communicated, 
and no pains ſpared on the one hand to diſ- 
play the advantages that would reſult to ma- 
ſonry from his grace's patronage, and on the 
other, the probability of the ill conſequences 
that would attend his diſappointment, The 
arguments made uſe of were cogent and 
powerful, and had the wiſhed for effect. 
They made a deep impreſſion on the ſociety. 
It was therefore reſolved at all events, to ſup- 

port the duke of Vharton in his election, in 

oppo- 

41-66 11 

oppoſition to the determination of the grand 

lodge. His grace was immediately nominated 
grand-maſter by his friends, and elected with 

the general conlent of the brethren preſent. 
The regular lodges diſapproved of theſe 
proceedings at the next grand lodge, voted 
them 'to be irregular and unconſtitutional, 
The brethren who had eſpouſed the intereſt 
of the duke of J/harton were ſtrenuous in ſup- 
port of their patron, while the friends of the 
duke of Montague were equally aſſiduous in 

his favour. On this occaſion a diviſion muſt 

inevitably have enſued, if the grand-maſter's 
prudence had not effected a reconciliation, 
On receiving intelligence of the animoſity his 
re- election had raiſed, he immediately con- 
vened a general aſſembly, in order to gain the 
opinion of the brethren; and finding the op- 
poſition againſt him greater than he expected, 
he wiſely reſigned in favour of his antagoniſt, 
who acknowledged his error, and promiſed 
obedience to the laws in future, was ſoon after 

inſtalled in the preſence of the repreſentatives 

of 25 lodges. Thus harmony was in ſome 
degree reſtored, and the ſociety continued to 
increaſe. The number of new lodges conſti- 

tuted 

, _ 5 A — — —— _— ah. _ 

[ 65 ) 
tnted ſoon rendered the correſpondence of the 
ſociety ſo extenſive, that it was found expe- 
dient to appoint a ſecretary to diſcharge that 
duty, which had been hitherto executed by 
the deputy grand-maſter. To this office Wil- 

liam Cowper, elq. then clerk of parliament, 
was appointed, 

In June 1723, the duke of Wharton nomi- 
nated the duke of Buccleugh his ſucceſſor; 
who, being approved, was inſtalled by proxy 
at Merchant Taylors-hall, in the preſence of 
near 400 brethren. During his preſidency no 
remarkable occurrence happened, 

THz duke of Richmond ſucceeded the duke 
of Buceleugh in the following year, and by the 
joint endeavours of theſe two noblemen the 
ſociety continued in a flouriſhing ſtate, By 
them the ſcheme of raiſing a general fund, 
by voluntary contributions from the lodges, 
to relieve diſtrefſed maſons and their families, 
was planned; and it was under the auſpices of 
the duke of Richmond that the committee of 
charity was firſt eſtabliſhed. Lord Paiſley 
having greatly diſtinguiſhed himſelf in promot- 
ing this new eſtabliſhment was pitched upon 

3 a8 

1 

as a proper perſon to ſucceed the duke of Rich- 
mand. He was accordingly elected, and care- 
fully diſcharged the duties of his office. By his 
vigilance the fund of charity was conſiderably 
increaſed. His deputy, Dr. Deſaguliers, who 
was no leſs active in encouraging the brethren 
to ſend in their contributions. He viſited 
the lodges, and, by an affable and engaging 
carriage, gained the affections of all the bre- 
thren. 

Ix the beginning of 1726, the earl of Incbi- 
guin obtained the direction of the craft. In 
this adminiſtration the office of Provincial 
grand-maſters were firſt eſtabliſhed. Several 
patents having been granted to conſtitute 
lodges in the country of England, at a con- 
ſiderable diſtance from the metropolis; and it 
being found inconvenient for the deputy 
grand-maſter to ſuperintend their proceedings, 
the grand lodge reſolved to inveſt the grand- 
maſter, with a power to appoint a fkilful 
maſter in the different provinces where theſe 
lodges met, to inſtruct them in the rules of 
maſonry, and to enforce an obſervance of the 
laws and regulations of the ſociety. This 
new-appointed officer was to be the imiyediate 

repre- 

D wy wr YR Om 

4. 8 - I 

E 

repreſentative of the grand - maſter in his pro- 
vince, and was to be impowered to conſtitute 
lodges, grant diſpenſations, and hold commu- 
nications within his juriſdiction. All their 
proceedings, however, were to be ſubject to 
the controul of the grand lodge. The earl of 
Inchiquin granted the two firſt deputations 
for their appointment, and there are now 45 
under the conſtitution of Exglaud. 

TowaRDs the cloſe of the year 1727, lord Cole- 
raine was elected grand-maſter, who conſtituted 
ſeveral lodges during his preſidency. At this 
time the authority of the grand lodge of Eng- 
land was univerſally acknowledged throughout 
Europe, and an extenſive correſpondence com- 
menced. A deputation was ſent to Madrid in 
Spain to conſtitute a lodge in that city under 
his lordſhip's auſpices, and which continued 
under the juriſdiction of the grand lodge of 
England till the year 1779, and ſtill meet 
under their own authority. To remedy the 
inconveniences attending the public feaſts of 
the ſociety, it was reſolved to inſtitute a board 
of ſtewards to regulate theſe matters, who 
were to be annually nominated, and their 

numbers to be reſtricted to twelve, as at pre- 
12 ſent; 

—— 2 —— — 

19 

ſent; the ſociety at this time being both nu- 
merous and reſpectable. 

Loxp Coleraine was ſucceeded by lord King- 
ſton, who, ſoon after his election, iſſued a 
patent for conſtituting a lodge in the Eaſt 
Indies. This proved the firſt introduction of 
maſonry into that part of the world. As a 
teſtimony of his lordſhip's attention and at- 
tachment to the ſociety, he gave ſome genteel 
preſents to the grand lodge, and, before the 
expiration of his office, prevailed on the duke 
of Norfolk to be his ſucceſſor, who was in- 
ſtalled with great pomp in the beginning of 
1730. During the adminiſtration of this 
peer, the lodges vied with each other in pro- 
moting the honour and reputation of the ſo- 
ciety. While his grace reſided in England, 
he always honoured the grand lodge with his 
preſence; and when his private affairs called 
him abroad, he ſhewed no leſs attention to 
the duties of his office, He commanded a 
regular account of the proceedings of the ſo- 
ciety to be ſent to him, and tranſmitted from 

Venice, among ſeveral other rich preſents for 
the uſe of the grand Iodge, the preſent grand- 
maſter's ſword of ſtate, which did formerly 

belong 

— — — — — — — —— 7—o——_— 

_ — — — — — —— 

( 69 ] 
belong to Guflavis Adolphus, king of Sweden, 

and after him worn by the brave Bernard, 
duke of Saxe-Weimar, having both their 
names on the blade; it is further enriched 
with the arms of the Norfolk family, in ſilver 
and gold on the ſcabbard. Under his gracc's 
patronage lodges were conſtituted both in 
Germany and America. 

Lord Lovell, afterwards earl of Liicefter, 
ſucceeded the duke of Norfolk, and was in- 

| ſtalled in Mercers-hall in Merch 1731. While 

his lordſhip preſided over the fraternity, a 
patent was ſent from Enyland to the Hague, 
in Holland to form a lodge tor the initiation of 
the late emperor of Germany, who was there 
received into the firſt degree of the order; and 
ſoon after coming into England was advanced 
to the ſuperior degrees at an occaſional grand 
lodge convencd for that purpole. 

In April 1732, lord viſcount Montacute was 
elected grand-maſter, and conſtituted ſeveral 
lodges both in Exgland and France. In Junę 
1733, his lordſhip was ſucceeded by the earl 
of Strathmore, in whoſe preſidency maſonry 
flouriſhed both at home and abroad. 

Tus 

— — — — IE wn ener eons 

— — — 

1 

Tux earl of Crawford was elected grand- 
maſter in March 1734. The quarterly 
meetings of the grand lodge being much 
neglected in the former part of this noble- 
man's reign, to atone for the omiſſion, before 
his office expired, he ſeemed very attentive to 
the intereſt of the craft, and convened the 
brethren ſeveral times in communication. At 
one of theſe meetings the grand ſtewards ap- 
plied for certain privileges, which were granted 
to them, and which they have retained ever 
ſince. Theſe principally reſpected their cloath- 
ing, and voting in the grand lodge. An order 
was likewiſe given to re- print the Book of 
Conſtitutions, with additions, under the in- 

ſpection of Mr. Ander ſon. 

Loxp Weymouth ſucceeded the earl of Craw- 
ford, and was inſtalled in April 1735. Under 

his lordſhip's patronage the ſtewards were 

conſtituted into a lodge of maſter maſons. 

This lodge was empowered to ſend twelve re- 
preſentatives to the grand lodge, and inveſted 
with ſome other privileges. From this lodge 
all grand officers, the grand - maſter excepted, 
are to be choſen, unleſs ten guineas are paid 
into the general fund of charity, when any 

bro- 

an 

brother may be exempted from ſerving the 
office of ſteward, 

Is April 1736, the earl of Loudon was 
elected, who, in the nomination of his officers, 
gave offence to a few individuals, which was 
afterwards productive of much irregularity 
and confuſion, Notwithſtanding theſe ani- 
moſities maſonry extended to Africa under 
his lordſhip's auſpices, and a lodge was con- 
ſtituted there by virtue of a patent from 

England. 

Tux earl of Darnley ſucceeded the earl of 
Loudon, and endeavoured to reconcile the dif- 
ferences which had begun in the adminiſtra- 
tion of his predeceſſor, but in vain, The 
diſcontented brethren at laſt withdrew from 
the ſociety, and a temporary peace was re- 
ſtored. During his lordſhip's preſidency an 
occaſional lodge was convened at Kew for the 
reception of the late prince of Wales, his 
preſent majeſty's father, 

Tux marquis of Carnarven, afterwards 
duke of Chandos, being elected grand-maſter 
in April 1738, the buſineſs of the ſociety was 

regu- 

FRF 

regularly and amicably conducted. By his 
care and prudence, harmony ſeemed to pre- 

vail in all the public meetings of the frater- 

nity. His lordſhip was a zealous friend to 
maſonry, and honoured the grand lodge with 
many kind prefents. From this period till 
his death, which happened in 1773, he ſeldom 
neglected to attend the grand feaſt. 

Lord Raymond was elected grand-maſter in 
May 1739. In the preſidency of this noble- 
man freſh diſturbances aroſe. Information 
was given to the grand lodge that the bre- 
thren, who had withdrawn from the ſociety 
about two years before, had aſſembled in the 
character of maſons, and, without any power 
or authority from the grand-maſter, had ini- 
tiated feveral perſons into the order on ſmall 

and unworthy conſiderations; the grand lodge 

juſthy conſidering theſe proceedings as an in- 
fringement on the original laws, an encroach- 
ment on the privileges, and an impoſition on 
the charitable fund of the ſociety. It was 
therefore reſolved to diſcountenance theſe al- 
ſemblies, and to enforce the laws againſt all 
the brethren who were aiding or aſliſting in 

the clandeſtine reception of any perſon into 
ma- 

173 1 

maſonry, at any of theſe illegal conventions. 
This irritated the brethren who had incurred 
the cenſure of the grand lodge; inſtead of 
returning to their duty, and renouncing their 
error, they perſiſted in their contumacy, and 
openly refuſed to pay allegiance to the grand- 
maſter, or obedience to the mandates of the 

grand lodge. In contempt of the ancient 
and eſtabliſhed laws of the order, they ſet up 
a power independent, and taking advantage 
of the ignorance and weakneſs of their aſſo- 
ciates, inſiſted that they had an equal autho- 
rity with the grand lodge to make, pals, and 
raiſe maſons * Under the fictitious ſanction 
of the ancient York maſons and their conſti- 
tution, which was entirely dropt at the reviyal 
of the Engliſh grand lodge in 1717, they pre- 
ſumed to claim the right of conſtituting 
lodges. This illegal and unconſtitutional 
meaſure obliged the regular maſons to adopt 
freſh meaſures more e ffectually to detect theſe 

* No private lodge at this time had the power of 
paſſing or raiſing maſons ; nor could any brother be 
advanced to either of theſe degrees but in the grand 
lodge, with the unanimous conſent of all the bre- 
thren in communication aſſembled, It was to be 
wiſhed the ſame caution was taken now. 

K im- 

2 K«Ü ?—?r nr —— _ — . — ̃ — — — — — 

1 1 

impoſtures, and debar them and their abet- 
tors from the countenance and protection of 
the regular lodges. To accompliſh this pur- 
poſe more effectually, ſome variations were 
made in, and additions to, the eſtabliſhed 
forms. The ancient land marks were pre- 
ſerved entire, and no change admitted but 
fuch as the moſt ſcrupulous would approve. 
This, however, gave riſe to one ſubterfuge, 
at which the refractory brethren readily 
graſped. They proclaimed themſelves ene- 
mies to all innovations, inſiſting that they 
alone preſerved the ancient uſages of the 
order, and that the regular lodges, on whom 
they conferred the appellation of Modern Ma- 
ſons, had adopted new meaſures illegal and 
unconſtitutional. This artifice ſtrengthened 
their party. To ſupport their aſſumed power, 
they immediately determined to intercept the 
regular mode of ſucceſſion to the office of 
orand-maſter, which had been obſerved ever 
fince the revival of the grand lodge, and to 
elect a chief ruler under that deſignation from 
their own body. They framed a code of 
laws for their government, they iſſued patents 
for new lodges, and exacted certain fees of 

con- 

E 

conſtitution, from which they hoped to raiſe 
a fund ſufficient to eſtabliſh their uſurped dig- 
nity. For ſome time they ſucceeded in their 
new plan, and were really acknowledged by 
many perſons to be the ancient and regular 
ſociety of Free and Accepted Maſons. Some 
gentlemen of family and fortune entered 
among them on that ſuppoſition ; and even 
many of the regular maſons were ſo ignorant 
of the laws of the ſociety, as to acknowledge 
their power, and, by attending their lodges, 
to give a tacit ſanction to their proceedings. 

Or late years, however, they have not been 
ſo ſucceſsful. The laws of the ſociety being 
more generally known, the impropriety of 
countenancing their meaſures has been more 
clearly diſcovered, and their meetings have 
not only been leſs encouraged, but many of 
their beſt members, and even ſeveral whole 
lodges, have deſerted them. Thus, in a few 
years, we may hope to ſee all ſeparate intereſts 
in maſonry diſſolved, union effected, and 
peace and harmony reſtored. The moſt de- 
ſerving of the fraternity will chearfully join in 
accompliſhing this union; while thoſe who 
are obſtinate, and refuſe to acquieſce in theſe 

K 2 con- 

3 — — — — * 

18 :1 

conciliating meaſures, will ſink into their orl- 
ginal oblivion, and ſuffer the cenſure which 
their conduct juſtly deſet ves. 

Loxp Raymond, during the whole of his ad- 
miniſtration, ſpared no pains to bring about a 
reconciliation; but all his endeavours were 
ineffectual. His lordſhip's ſucceſſor, the earl 
of Kintore, imitated his example in regard to 
effecting a compromiſe, but in vain. The 
laws of the grand lodge were therefore ſtrictly 
enforced, and every means uſed to diſcourage 
theſe irregular conventions. Still, however, 
they gained ground, and, by the- inattention 
of the regular mafons themſelves, found new 
patrons. All theſe diſturbances did not ob- 
ſtruct the progreſs of maſonry. The lodges 
in Barbadoes, Hamburgh, and Lower Saxony, 
applied to the earl of Kintore for provincial 
grand-maſters, and gentlemen were nominated 
for each of theſe places, as well as for Ruſſia, 

where a lodge was conſtituted under a warrant 
from his lordſhip, 

TRE earl of Morton ſucceeded the earl of 
Kintore in March 1741, and was inſtalled in 
the preſence of a reſpectable company of the 

bre- 

na, 

| of 
d in 

bre · 

n * 2 * -, a * * * ad * Tad * n 8 2 ' * * £2 3 * 4 n 
2 n A 8 * 5 3 ” We oof G 
E © 

E 33 3 

brethren. His lordſhip was active in tram- 
ing ſeveral-good laws for the government of 
the ſociety ; and the irregular lodges met with 
little encouragement during his preſidency. 
Many of the nobility and foreign miniſters 
were initiated under his lordſhip's auſpices. 

In April 1742, lord Ward was elected 
grand-maſter. This noblemen thoroughly 
underſtood the nature and government of the 
ſociety. There was no office which he had 
not filled. From the ſecretary of a private 
lodge he had gradually attained to the chief 
direction. The privileges of the order were 
ſafely lodged in fo experienced a ruler. His 
zeal for maſonry continued to his death in 
1774, for he never omitted regularly to at- 
tend the annual feaſt. During his preſidency 
the lodges flouriſhed, and harmony reigned 
among the brethren. He conſtituted ſeveral 
new lodges in perſon, and appointed provin- 
cials over different countries. After govern- 
ing the ſociety with care and vigilance two 
years, he reſigned in favour of the earl of 
Strathmore, in whoſe adminiſtration the buſi- 
neſs of the grand lodge was carried on under 
the inſpection of the deputy grand- maſter and 
grand- 

— — —＋—— _ — 

ä———— — —— 
2 

whoſe preſidency a new edition of the book 

8 1 

grand-wardens, About this time an order was 
iſſued to diſcontinue all public proceſſions on 
feaſt days, on account of a mock proceſſion 
which had been planned at a conſiderable 
expence by ſome prejudiced perſons, with a 
view to ridicule theſe public cavalcades. 

In April 1745, lord Cranſton was elected 
grand-maſter, and after continuing in office 
two years, was ſucceeded by lord Byron, wha 
was inſtalled in Drapers Hall in April 1747, 
the laws of the committee of charity were re- 
viſed, printed, and diſperſed among the lodges 
by his lordſhip's command ; and the fund 
conſiderably enriched by the diligence and 
aſſiduity of the deputy grand-maſter and 
grand-ſecretary, Lord Byron preſided up- 
wards of four years, when lord Carysford ac- 
cepted the office of grand-maſter. The lodges 
alſo flouriſhed under the auſpices of this no- 
bleman, whole affability and condeſcenſion 
were univerſally applauded, He viſited the 

lodges in perſon, and diſcharged the duties of 

his office with fidelity during the courſe of 
two years. He was ſucceeded by the mar- 
quis of Carnarvon, now duke of Chandos, in 

of 

* * 7 7 . IS 
, : a * * 5 : | * * * 3 5 5 e * 
N of . 2 yg * * A | wt 4 eta ht "ws "+ As g „ 
9 . i >. 12 8 2 "0" . 
Qs? * Weg HO 8 " 4 

— Ir res EEE 

= = 

of conſtitutions was publiſhed, under the in- 
ſpection of the Rev. Dr. Entick. The mar- 
quis continued at the head of the fraternity 
till 1757, when lord Aberdour was elected, in 
whoſe adminiſtration 14 brethren were ex- 
pelled for countenancing irregular lodges. 
Lord Aberdour was ſucceeded in 1762 by earl 
Ferrers, who continued in office two years. 
In 1764, lord Blaney was elected, in whoſe 
adminiſtration the buſineſs of the ſociety was 
carefully executed, by colonel (now general) 
Salter, his deputy. The dukes of Glouceſter 
and Cumberland, brothers to his preſent mas 
jeſty, were initiated under his lordſhip's au- 
ſpices. 

In 1767, the duke of Beaufort accepted 
the office of grand-maſter, and governed the 
craft with care and vigilance five years. Du- 
ring his preſidency, a bill to incorporate the 

ſociety was brought into the houſe of com- 

mons by the Hon. Charles Dillon, then de- 
puty grand-maſter, which was twice read; 
but on the third reading the conſideration of 
it was poſtponed ine die. A ſcheme was like- 
wiſe formed in OFober 1768, to raiſe a fund 
to build a hall for the uſe of the grand lodge, 

which 

1 8 |} 

which met with ſome oppoſition at firſt, but 
was at laſt generally approved, and upwards 
of oO l. raiſed for that purpoſe. It alſo 
implies that. every grand-maſter ſhall pay an- 
nually 201. deputy grand-maſter five guineas, 
ſenior grand-warden three guineas, junior 
grand-warden two guineas, grand-treaſurer 
and grand-ſecretary each three guineas, and 
the grand- ſwordbearer one guinea, That 
every provincial grand-maſter ſhall pay one 
guinea for regiſtering his name, and half a 
guinea for drawing out his deputation on 

| parchment z but if a provincial chuſes to have 
his patent curiouſly drawn with the uſual 
embelliſhments on vellum, ſhall pay five 
guineas, That every lodge to be hereafter 
conſtituted, ſhall pay one guinea for being 
regiſtered, and half a guinea for drawing the 
conſtitution, but when embelliſhed on vellum 
to pay five guineas. That from and after 
the 28th of October 1768, for every perſon 
made a maſon in any regular lodge, the ſum 
of five ſhillings ſhall be paid for regiſtering 
his name in the books of the grand lodge, 
And that for every perſon who had been made 
a maſon in a regular lodge, prior to the ſaid 

28th of Odlober, and who ſhall atterwards 
Join 

c ion 2 of 

(8 J 

join or become a member of any other lodge 
or lodges, the ſum of half-a-crown ſhall be 
paid for regiſtering his name in the grand 
lodge books, ſo often, and for every ſuch 
lodge as he ſhall join or become a member of. 

Loxp Petre ſucceeded the duke of Beaufort 
in 1772, who preſided over the ſociety five 
years to the general ſatisfaction of the bre- 
thren. Under his lordſhip's auſpices maſonry 
was diligently cultivated both at home and 
abroad. To this nobleman it has been re- 
ſerved to lay the foundation ſtone of the hall 
for the grand lodge in the preſence of 160 
ladies, and upwards of 400 brethren, 

Ceremony obſerved af laying the Foundation 
Stone of FREE-MASONS HALL. 

On Monday the 1ſt of May 1775 the right 
hon, lord Petre, accompanied by his officers 
and a numerous and brilliant company of 
maſons, laid the foundation ſtone of Free- 
maſons-hall in Great Queen- ſtreet, Lincoln's- 
inn- fields, in ſolemn form. About twelve 
o'clock the proceſſion entered the ground, 
where the hall was to be erected, in the fol- 

lowing manner: Two tylers with drawn ſwords 
L —an 

— — — — eee nan 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

( 82 J 

—an excellent band of martial muſic the 
brethren who were not in office two and two, 
properly cloathed the grand - ſtewards in 
their regalia, with white rods, two and two 
Provincial grand-maſters in their regalia 
paſt grand - officers properly cloathed - preſent 
grand-officers with their badges and cloathing. 
In this form the proceſſion continued three 
times round the ground; then the preſent 
grand- officers, preceded by Thomas Sandby, 
eſq. the architect, entered a trench, which 
had been cut for the occaſion, and proceeded 
to the north-eaſt corner of the ground; the 
other grand officers and brethren, with the 
mulic, were ranged on each fide the trench 
on ſcaffolding. After a ſolemn piece of muſic 
had been played, the grand-ſecretary read 
aloud the following inſcription, which "was 
engraved on a plate, and depoſited within the 
foundation ſtone: 

Anno Regni Tertii Quindecimo, 
Salutis Humanæ MDCC LXXV. Menſis 
Maii Die Primo 
Hunc Primum Lapidem. 
Aulae Latomorum 
(Anghce, Free and Accepted Maſons ) 
| Poſuit 

i oy 3 

Poſuit 
Honoratiſſimus Rob. Edv. Dom. PE TRE, 
Baro PET RE de Writtle, 
Summus Latomorum Angliae Magiſter; 
Aſſidentibus 
Viro Ornatiſſimo Rowlando Holt, Armigero, 
Summi Magiſtri Deputato; 
Viris Ornatiſſimis 
Joh. Hatch et Hen. Dagge, 
Summis Gubernatoribus; 
Plenoque coram Fratrum concurſu. 

Quo etiam tempore regum, principum que 
favore ſtudioque ſuſtentatum maximos per 
Europam honores occupaverat 

Nomen Latomorum. 

Cui inſuper nomini ſummum Angliz conven- 
tum præeſſe fecerat univerſa Fratrum per 
orbem multitudo, | | 

E Ccelo deſcendit. 
IN AGI ZTEATT ON. 

Tho. Sandby, Arm. Architecturæ Prof. R. A. A. 

Architectus. 

A TRANSLATION of the above inſcription 
was likewiſe read by the grand ſecretary ; 
and 1s as follows ; 

L 2 In 

1 

In the 15th year of the reign of George the 
Third. On the Iſt day of May in the year of 
Man's Redemption 1775. This Firſt Stone of 
Maſons-hall was laid by the Right Hon. Ro- 
bert Edward Lord Petre, Baron of Writtle, 
Grand-maſter of the Maſons of England, ac- 
companied by the Worſhipful Rowland Holt, 
Eſq. Deputy Grand-maſter, the Worſbipful John 
Hatch and Henry Dagge, Grand-Wardens, 
with the whole fraternity of Free-maſons. At 
which time the Name of Maſonry was highly 
honoured throughout Europe, being protefied 
and encourazed by the particular Favour and Re- 
gard of Kings and Men of high Rank. And 
the Maſons Lodge in England was by the whole 
Brotherhocd, throughout the World, made to 
preſide over Maſonry. 

From Heaven it deſcended. 
Know THYSELF., 

Thomas Sandby, Eig. Profeſſor of Arcbilecture, 
and A. R. A. Architect. | 

Taz grand-maſter then depoſited the foun- 
dation ſtone with the uſual formalities. After 
which the deputy grand-maſter preſented the 
ſquare to the grand-maſter, when his lord- 
ſhip tried the corners of the ſtone, and then 

returned 

L 85 J 

returned it to the deputy, who gave it to the | 
architect. The ſenior grand- warden next | 
preſented the level to the grand-maſter, who 1 
therewith tried the ſtone horizontally, and re- 

turned it as before, The junior grand-warden | 
then preſented the plumb-rule to the grand- | 
maſter, who applied it properly, and returned 
it as before, His lordſhip then ſtruck the 
ſtone three times with a mallet, on which the 
grand-treaſurer waved his wand, and the bre- | 
thren joined in the grand honours of maſonry. i 
The following anthem was then ſung, com- l 
poſed for the occaſion by Henry Dagge, eſq. 1 

VIZ, 

To Heav'n's high Architect all praiſe, 
All praiſe, all gratitude be given, 

Who deign'd the human foul to raiſe, 
By myſtic ſecrets ſprung from Heav'n. 

Cnorus. Thrice repeated. 

Sound aloud the great Jenovan's praiſe, 
To him the dome, the temple raiſe. 

Tux following was ſelected by Dr. Dodd, 
and fet to muſic by Mr. Fiſher : 

CHORUS, 

[ 86 

CHORUS. 
Behold, how good and joyful a thing it is, 
brethren, to dwell together in unity; 

AIX. 

It is like the dew of Hermon, which fell 
upon the hill of Sion: for theſe the Lord pro- 
miſed his bleſſing, and life for evermore.— 
Pſalm 133. 

RECITATIVE. 

Oh, pray for the peace of Jeruſalem! They 
ſhall proſper that loye thee, 

CHORUS. 

Yea, becauſe of the houſe of the Lord, I 
will ſeek to do thee good! 

Tuts concluded with a grand and ſolemn 
chorus; when brother Bottomley, maſter of 
the ſtewards lodge, pronounced the follow- 
ing oration; viz, 

BRETHREN | 
Mankind having loſt their native innocence, 
and forfeited their Creator's ſpecial favour and 

protection; the inclemency of the revolving 
ſeaſons, 

( 1 

ſeaſons, the rapacity of ferocious animals, 
and that unfriendly hoſtile diſpoſition, one 
towards another, which too ſoon ſprung forth 
as a natural fruit of their own depravity, 
rendered it neceſſary for them to build ſuch 
places of ſafety for their reſidence and repoſe, 
as the different circumſtances of time and 
place, the different materials and qualifications 
in the art of building they were then in poſſeſ- 
ſion of, gave opportunity and ability to build. 

Tuus came the univerſal ſcience of Free- 
maſonry into uſe, which, though at firſt 
without regularity and order, though crude 
and indigeſted, as it needs muſt be, very 
early comprized in it, all, or moſt, of the 
liberal ſciences, 

As the art of building became uſeful to 
individuals and to families for the purpoſes 
of conveniency, preſervation, and ſafety, fo 
did it become uſeful to larger ſocieties in pro- 
moting their mutual intereſt, their grandeur, 
and their fame. For it is obſervable, that 
the erecting public buildings to promote ſpe- 
cial public ends, hath generally helped on 
conſiderably thoſe ends for which they were 

built. 

: - — - 

. — DT 

7 

2222. ——— —Ay, . — 

— — _- 
— 

1 88 ] 
built. How: did the tabernacle in the wil- 
derneſs animate the heavy-footed I aelites, 
and ſpur them on in their career of victory? 
How did it raiſe the fervour of their devo- 
tions, and attach them cloſer to their God, 
How did the Temple at Feruſalem cement 
the ties of friendſhip and religion, after it 
was built? How did its glory and magnifi- 
cence excite the attention of the wondering 
world, and, magnet like, draw all the curious 
great of every country to behold its ſplen- 
dor? How did 1t often pave the way for Him 
who had placed his. name there, to obtain a 
reſidence in their hearts? Whilit ſtruck with 
wonder at the art, the coitlineſs and beauty of 
that houſe, many were led to contemplate 
upon the all-wiſe Contriver, and to become 

the grateful, willing ſeryants, and pious wor- 

ſhippers of the Almighty Owner, of whom 
aforetime they had heard but little, and 
known much leſs ! 

InpttD fo uſeful have ſtately public.build- 
ings in all ages been, in promoting the par- 
ticular views and purſuits of thoſe who have 
built them, that the raiſing ſuperb and mag- 
nificent ſtructures hath been common to all 

numerous 

—_ y es. Docs I ws - 
n b 82 3 * % 4 
* 2 * : 

# 
r 

[ 89 ] 

numerous ſocieties, as well religious as ſcien- 
tific, as well military as commercial. This 
was diſcovered ſo early as the days of Nimrod; 
for the Babel builders under him are found 
to ſay ®, Let us build us a city and tower 
Let us make us a name —leſt we be ſcat- 
c tered abroad.” Innumerable other inſtances 
hiſtorians have recorded of ſocieties, as ſoon 
as they were able, having built themſelves 
magnificent edifices for their public aſſemblies 
and for other purpoſes; and frequently ac- 
cording to the magnitude and grandeur of 
ſuch ſtructures, they have flouriſhed and been 
eſteemed, 

On this ſelf-ſame principle Free-maſons 
have long ardently wiſhed to build themſelves 
a hall, wherein they might with honour, equal 
to the occaſion, hold their general meetings. 
It may be remembered, the endeavours to 
effect this noble work, to gratify this long de- 
fire, have been much oppoſed by many; tho? 
I think rather from ſome unfavourable or in- 

judicious meaſures in the firſt attempt, than 

from a mature diſapprobation of the thing 

* Geneſis, ch. 11. v. 4. 

M 

i 
| 
! 
: 

> 3 

attempted : however, that oppoſition has now 
happily ſubſided, we ſeem all to have joined 
hands to further this glorious work, and to 
effect the ſame, © are united all as one.” To 
your kind patronage, my lord“, and to the 
patronage of your noble predeceſſor +, is this 
bleſſing under Providence chiefly owing, and 
as a return for ſo much kindneſs, the honour 
of laying this foundation ſtone has, by Pro- 
vidence, been reſerved for you. To ſee this 
work ſo promiſingly begun, my brethren, 
mult fill each zealous maſon's mind with an 
unuſual joy—muſt raiſe our ſanguine hopes 
of encreaſing glory to the craft.— Tis this 
that tunes the mind for feſtive ſong—'tis this 
inſpires me to make this feeble effort in be- 
half of this great work—'tis this that gives 
unuſual powers to my tongue! 

Ar laying the foundation ſtone, and at the 
completion of public buildings, it has been 
no unuſual cuſtom to hold a feſtival, and 
obſerve the ſame by every poſlible mark of 
Joy: thus did Solomon at the completion of 
his temple——To God did he dedicate the 

* Lord Petre. + Duke of Beaufort. 
ſame, 

. --? 

E921] 

ſame, with moſt coſtly ſacrifices and oblations. 
And they who returned from captivity to 
build the ſecond temple (as if unable to con- 
tain themſelves, to the completion of that 
great and truly glorious work, for joy at 
their return, and that they were permitted to 

begin the work) when the builders laid the 

foundation—They ſet the prieſts in their ap- 
parel, with trumpets, and the Levites with 
cymbals to praiſe the Lord—and they ſung 
together praiſing and giving thanks—and all 
the people ſhouted with a great ſhout, when 
they praiſed the Lord—and the noiſe was 
heard afar off. Though not alike worthy 
and important with the occaſion I here allude 
to, is the preſent occaſion; yet, the preſent 
is fit cauſe of feſtive joy and mirth to all who 

wiſh a proſperous ſtate to maſonry. It is like- 

wiſe worthy of the tongue of the moſt cele- 
brated orator to ſpeak on this occaſion; for 
the moſt voluble tongue of the learned and 
moſt eloquent, could not in the time propor- 
tioned to this occaſion expreſs half its praiſe, 

IT is not needfyl to dwell hiſtorically on 
our order, nor have I time to enlarge thereon 

* Ezra, chap, 3. 

M 2 in 

"= Se. VT mw_— CCR 

© By 

in a ſcientific way; ſufficient it is to ſay, It 1s 
founded upon ſcience, upon morality, upon 
friendſhip and benevolence. Whatſoever is 
great and good meets with a plaudit here— 
whatſoever is virtuous—whatſoever deſerveth 
praiſe—maſons are called to meditate upon, 
and practiſe in their lives, 

Masonry expands itſelf to all of every 
party—of every people—preſerves good fel- 
lowſhip, on the broad bottom of good man- 
ners and good morals. Men of all perſuaſions 
may here unite, hold intercourſe and friend- 
ſhip—aſliſt and be aſſiſted by each other: and 
herein is it as ſome have ſung, no unfit “ type 
« for future bliſs,” agreeable to the celebrated 
Young in his deſcription of the heirs of future 
bliſs 3 | 

« Chriſtians and Jews, and Turks and Pagans fand 
& One blended throng, one undiſtinguiſhed band,” 

Friendſhip, that heaven-born paſſion, unites 
us to each other, and levels all diſtinction. 
It emboldens the poor to look upwards to 
the rich with modeſt confidence, and inclines 
the rich to embrace the poor with courteſy 

and 

nd 

des 
JN, 

to 
nes 
ey 
and 

rut 

and affection . Great are the benefits that 

flow from hence to thoſe who are in want of 
a friend; and, who is the man, that never 
wants one? Where elſe can they of low de- 
gree eſtabliſh ſuch connection? Where elſe 
obtain acceſs to friends ſo ſuperior in ſitua- 
tion +? | 

* The epithet of Brother, like muſic, has a charm 
to ſooth the ſavage breaſt—it diſſolves the diſtance 
too frequently kept up between high and low : though 
the poor and low, thus favoured by the rich and 
great, under the influence of the true maſonic prin- 
ciple, ſhould never forget their real eſtate—ſhould 
not be rude, or aſſuming upon their brotherhood, but 
gratefully acknowledge the honour done them by 
Free-maſonry itſelf, and by thoſe, who are made 
thereby to condeſcend io ſtretch out to them the hand 
of fellowſhip and friendſhip, 

+ Religion, indeed, inculcates friendſhip by the 
moſt endearing and engaging motives ; but alas, its 
effects are ſcarcely found among its profeſſors by 
far too ſeldom among its moſt ſanguine and zealous 
votaries, Why in maſonry it is more common, is 
hard to tell; perhaps the convivial glaſs, as it ex- 
hilarates the ſpirits, it warms the affections; and ſuch 
is the nature of man, that he does more from paſſion, 
than from perſuaſion. And let me hence obſerve, that 
we ought to be very cautious who we recommend as 
candidates for admiſſion into our aſſemblies; and very 

cir- 

_ — ne ——— 

_ — — 
— — — > 

( 94 J 

BznxvOLENCE, the cape ſtone of our myſtic 
dome that God-like virtue, that ennobles hy- 
man nature, and gives luſtre to the chriſtian z 
ſhines moſt conſpicuous in the maſon—by it, 
we deal with liberal hand bread to the hungry 
—by it, we ſooth the troubled heart—alleviate 
the diſtreſſes of the afflicted pour balm upon 
the wounded - provide a phyſician for the 
ſick, adminiſter comfort to the priſoner, and 
ſometimes ſet him free ſuch are the genuine 
fruits of maſonry. | 

SecRECY is another virtue moſt forcibly in- 
culcated by free- maſonry. It indeed may be 
called a diſtinguiſhing characteriſtic of our 
order, and is of great utility to mankind, 
While the babbler and tale-bearer are diſ- 

circumſpect in admitting them: treacherous deſigning 
men, when once admitted among us, may ſoon engage 
the affection of the unwary and unſuſpecting amongſt 
the brotherhood, may abuſe their friendſhip by artifice 
and cunning, may make them an eaſy prey to fraud 
and couſenage ; in ſhort, as friendſhip is the bond and 
cement of our order, no brother ought to recommend 
any one to become a brother and companion, but 
ſuch as he himſelf would wiſh to make a friend and a 
partaker of his own friendſhip. 

turbers 

( 95 J 

turbers of public peace, and peſts to ſociety $ 
by our attention to, and practice of, ſecrecy, 
we naturally contract habits of filence and 
prudent reſerve, which in a thouſand inſtances 

contribute to peace and quiet, good neigh- 
bourhood and good-will. 

Tar order and decorum of our reſpective 
aſſemblies, ſhould not on this occaſion efcape 
my notice, this deſerves particular applauſe ; 
for even this itſelf, if there was nothing elſe 
in maſonry of diſtinguiſhed worth, even this 
itſelf renders our ſociety (if conſidered only 
as a matter of amuſement) ſuperior to all 
others of that kind. But, it may with truth 
be ſaid, that prudence, manly fortitude, tem- 
perance, the ſtricteſt juſtice, and indeed what- 
ſoeyer things are true, whatſoever things are 
honeſt, juſt, pure, lovely, of good report, if 
there be any virtue, any thing deſerving praiſe, 
theſe things are repeatedly recommended, en- 
forced and impreſſed upon the mind, by be 
principles and uſages of our ancient inſtitution. 

We have now laid this foundation ſtone ; 
let it remain a perpetual memento of the ho- 
nour 

1 
{ 
7 
9 
[| 
4 ö 
; 
IN 

1 ] 
nour the craft enjoyed, under the auſpices of 
ſuch a noble patron; and of that amity and 
friendſhip, that at this æra ſubſiſts among the 
brethren. As the houſe to be erected on this 
foundation bids fair to cement us more, as well 
as to aggrandize our fame, let us exert our- 
ſelves to put it in the power of our ingenious 
architect to ſpare no needful coſt, to make it 
ſtrong, to make it rich and beautiful; that in 
future ages (if no fatal cataſtrophe ſhould be- 
fall it) the wondering beholder may have cauſe 
to ſay, ſure ſomething great and good is in 
this maſonry, that its votaries have with ſuch 
profuſion expended treaſure, have diſplayed 
ſuch art, ſuch grandeur, and ſuch elegance in 
adorning this their houſe ; but as no coſt, no 
art, no fame, or numbers, can make us truly 

great except ourſclves are good, let us, whilſt 

we are ſtriving to raiſe this ſtructure, as an 
emblem of our intrinſic worth and goodneſs, 
keep pace with the workmen who are carry- 
ing on this emblem, by a daily progreſs in 
eternal virtue. If maſonry ſhines refulgent 

by the ſplendour of her building, let maſons 

alſo ſnine, by their virtue, their benevolence, 
and charity. As the walls here to be erected 

will often circumſcribe our ſocial band, let 
| friend- 

* 
3 
o 
% 
1 

& A 2 * 
. - 

L 99 53 

friendſhip unite our hearts by every virtuous 
tiez and, as we do not now ſo much apply 
ourſelves to the ſtudy of the liberal arts, as 
thereby to raiſe our fame and greatneſs, let us 
convince the world, that we attend to virtue— 
let us eſtabliſh our houſe and fame in truth 
and righteouſneſs. 

Tur oration being ended, the grand-trea- 
ſurer again waved his wand, and the grand 
honours were given as before. A grand piece 
of muſic was then performed by the inſtru- 
ments, and an ode on maſonry rehearſed ; 
after which the grand officers left the trench, 
and the proceſſion was reſumed, and conti- 
nued three times round as before, 

Tur whole ceremony was conducted with 
the greateſt order and decorum. The grand- 
maſter and the reſt of the brethren then pro- 
ceeded through the city in proceſſion in their 
carriages, without expoſing any of the En/ignia 
of the order, to Leather-ſellers Hall, where an 
elegant entertainment was provided, and the 
evening concluded with great joy and feſti- 
vity. 

N Cx- 

? 

— 

— — 

L 98 J 

CrRTMOoxv obſerved at the Dedication of 
FREE-MASONS HALL. 

ON Thurſday the 23d of May 1776, the 
right hon. lord Petre, the grand-maſter and 
his officers, with a very numerous and very 
brilliant company of palt grand officers and 
brethren of eminence and diſtinction, with the 
members of the hall committee and their at- 

ſiſtants, aſſembled in the committee room ad- 

Jacent to the hall, where the grand lodge was 
opened in ample form about 12 O clock. 
Upwards of 200 ladies, who were compli- 
mented with tickets to ſee the ceremonies 
and hear the muſical performers, attended, 
and were introduced by the aſſiſtants to the 
hall committee into the galleries of the hall, 
In the upper part of the hall the orcheſtra 
was built, where above 60 inſtrumental and 
30 vocal performers were placed, The mal- 
ter and wardens of lodges, and private bre- 
thren, were arranged in particular ſeats {et 
apart for their reception in the hall. The 
proceſſion was formed in the committee room, 
and conſiſted only of preſent and paſt grand- 

officers, grand-ſtewards, members of the 
hall 

SL 

e S N 2 

L 99 J 

kall committee and their aſſiſtants, and the 
maſters of the ſeven oldeſt lodges preſent. At 
half paſt twelve the proceſſion entered the 
hall in the following order: 

GRAND Tyler, with a drawn ſword— four 
tylers, carrying the lodge covered with white 
ſattin—maſter of the ſeventh lodge, carrying 
two filver pitchers, containing wine and oil— 
the maſter of the ſixth lodge, carrying a gold 
pitcher, containing corn—aſliſtants to the hall 
committee, with white rods, two and two— 
members of the hall committee, who were 
not grand-officers, two and two—the brethren 
from the lodge of Alfred in Oxford in their 
academical dreſs, two and two— grand-[tew- 
ards, two and two—the firſt light carried 
by the maſter of the fifth lodge—wardens of 
the ſtewards lodge—maſter of the ſtewards 

lodge — paſt grand-ſword-bearer—archite&t, 
carrying ſquare, level, and plumb- rule — 
maſter of the fourth lodge, carrying the bible, 
f compaſſes, and ſquare, on a velvet cuſhion— 
| grand-chaplain—grand-ſecretary, with the bag 
—grand-treaſurer, with the ſtaff—provincial 

grand-maſters, juniors walking firſt the ſe- 

cond light carried by the maſter of the third 
N 2 lodge 

h 
\ 
[4 
| 
| 
1 

[ 100 J 

lodge: paſt junior grand-wardens, juniors walk. 
ing firſt—paſt ſenior grand-wardens, juniors 
walking firſt—the third light carried by the 
maſter of the ſecond lodge—junior grand- 
warden—ſenior grand-warden—deputy grand- 
maſter—maſter of the ſenior lodge, carrying 
the book of conſtitutions—grand-ſword- bearer, 
carrying the ſword of ſtate—grand-maſter. 

ON the proceſſion reaching the grand- 
maſter's chair, the brethren who formed the 
proceſſion were proclaimed, and from that 
{tation walked round the hall three times; at 
the end of the third proceſſion, the preſent 
and paſt grand-officers repaired to their ſeats 
on a platform at the upper part of the hall, 
and the other grand-officers to the upper part 
of the front ſeats on each fide of the lodge; 
and the grand-ſtewards and members of the 
hall committee to the lower part of the ſame 
ſeats. Immediately on the grand-maſter being 
proclaimed, the muſic began to play, and con- 
tinued to perform a grand piece till all the 
members in the proceſſion were ſeated ; the 
lodge was then placed in the centre of the 
hall, and the three lights, with one gold and 
two ſilver pitchers, containing corn, wine, and 

oil, 

C. wr |] 

oil, were placed thereon; the bible, com- 
paſſes, ſquare, and book of conſtitutions, on 
a velvet cuſhion, being placed on the pedeſtal, 
the foundation ſtone anthem (p. 85) was 
then ſung; after which an exordium on ma- 
ſonry was pronounced by the grand-ſecretary, 
and we are exceedingly ſorry it cannot be in- 
ſerted; but muſt refer our readers to the elo- 
gium given of it in Dr. Dodd's Oration *, 
concluding with the architect's deſire to return 
the implements intruſted to his care at laying 
the foundation ſtone, on which the architect 
addreſſed the grand-maſter as follows: 

Mosr worſhipful and right hon. grand- 
maſter! on laying the foundation ſtone of 
this moſt magnificent building, your lordſhip 

was pleaſed to intruſt theſe implements to my 
care. I have uſed them, and I truſt with ſome 

degree of credit, in raiſing this maſonic ſtruc- 
ture, now ready for dedication, which, though 
far from being finiſhed, has obtained the ap- 

probation of ſo great a judge in architecture 

as your lordſhip, our greateſt artiſts in ge- 
neral, and the whole body of maſons in parti- 

* Quarto edition, p. 11. 
cular. 

| 

U - com: 1] 

cular, I now beg leave to return theſe (ſquare, 
level, and plumb-rule) having in the firſt in- 
ſtance uſed them to advantage. The orna- 
mental part, I hope to be able to finiſh in 
that elegant and delicate ſtile the fraternity 
wiſhes, ſtrictly adhering to the moſt correct 
rules in architecture. Moſt excellent grand- 
maſter, grand-officers, grand-ſtewards and 
brethren, be pleaſed to accept of my moſt 
grateful thanks, in preferring me to any other 
to raiſe your maſonic hall, and which I hope, 

when finiſhed, will give you all ſatisfaction. 

Hrs lordſhip expreſſed his approbation of 
the architect's conduct, and commanded the 
proper officers to receive back the implements 
which had been delivered him at laving the 
foundation ſtone, A ſolemn piece of muſic 
was next performed, during which the ladies 
withdrew to tea and coffee, and ſuch of the 
muſicians who were not inaſons, retired to 
accompany them. The grand-maſter then 
ordered the hall to be tyled, on which the 
lodge was uncovered, .and the grand-ſecretary 
informed the grand-maſter, that it was the 
deſire of the ſociety to have the hall dedicated 

to maſeury;, on which the grand-maſter com- 
manded 

E 

manded the grand- officers to aſſiſt in that ces 
remony, during which the organ kept play- 
ing ſolemn muſic. The grand-officers then 
walked round the lodge in proceſſion three 
times, ſtopping each time for the ceremony of 
dedication : at the end of the firſt proceſſion, 
the organ was ſilent, and the grand-maſter 
declared in ſolemn form the hall dedicated to 
maſonry, which being proclaimed by the 
grand-ſecretary, the grand honours were given: 
at the end of the ſecond proceſſion, the organ 
was ſilent, and the grand-maſter in ſolemn 
form declared the hall dedicated to virtue, 
which being proclaimed, the grand honours 
were given as before: at the end of the third 
proceſſion, the organ was filent; and the 
grand- maſter in ſolemn form declared the hall 
dedicated to univer/al charity and benevolence, 
which being proclaimed, the grand honours 
were glven as before: the lodge was then co- 
yered, and the ladies introduced amidſt the 
acclamations of the brethren : next a grand 
anthem (p. 86) .was ſung. The following 
oration on maſonry was then delivered by 

William Dodd, L.L.D. grand-chaplain. 

Mosr 

= _ Sis AC "xz —_— — — — 8 _ —_ 2 

[ 104 J 

Mos worſhipful grand-maſter and brethren 
all! there never was a ſtranger paradox ad- 
vanced, than that, which the gloomy philoſo- 
pher of Malmeſbury hath laboured to ſupport, 
againſt the ſociability of man. Every feeling 
of the human heart, every trait in the human 
character, — every line in the hiſtory of civi- 
lized nature ſerves to explode the idea; and to 
convince us, that man is a being formed 
for ſociety, and deriving from thence his higheſt 
felicity and glory.” Nay, indeed, the hiſtory 
of mankind might well be conſidered as < the 
« hiſtory of ſocial life; perpetually and inva- 
« riably tending more and more to perfec- 
« tion.” 

W N — 
„ 
- * TW" "Me 

Ir is not to be doubted, that the mighty 
maſter-hand, which with ſa much faciliiy 
created from the duſt of the earth the 7209 
firſt inhabitants of it, could, with equal eaſe, 

have created thouſands of the ſame ſpecies, 
and have given them all the means and ad- 

vantages of perfect civilization. But He me. 
thought good to create wo only, with an evi- * ; 
dent purpoſe to a gradual population of the Stor 
earth which he had formed; and to a gradual hay 

and 

advancement of thoſe improvements, for which 

He 

— it 

( 205 ] 

He wiſely fitted the human mind; and in 
which He as wiſely determined to keep that 
mind continually occupied. 

Hence, we perceive, that from this fertile 
and unexhauſted ſtorehouſe of human intelli- 
gence and invention, arts, ſciences, and cul- 
ture of every kind have proceeded, with gra- 
dual progreſs; and Max,—peculiarly diſtin- 
guiſhed as he is from the whole animal crea- 
tion, by his boundleſs capability of invention 
and improvement Max hath till gone on to 
cultivate and adorn ſocial life: and to beau- 
tify and bleſs that life with all which Utility 
could aſk ; which Reaſon could approve ; nay, 
or even the luxuriance of Fancy itſelf, with 
charmed eyes, could delight in and admire! 

ImMorTALITY and glory crown the men 
thoſe truly great and diſtinguiſhed worthies, 
who have nobly added to the advance- 
ment of human happineſs, by the advance- 
ment of civilization who, by the invention 
or improvement of arts and ſciences Hof reli- 
gion and laws, by human or civil culture,. — 
have been inſtrumental to exalt the dignity, 
and to enlarge the comforts of their ſpecies ! 

O Kings 

Co ul i PRIEST TS. att + kg 

& 

Kings of the earth !—who have furled with 
exulting triumph your ſtandards, crimſon'd 
in fellow-creatures blood !——mighty conquerors! 
ho have proudly built your fame on wide- 
ſpread ruin, and fearful devaſtation how 
doth your falſe honour fade, and ſink into 
darkneſs and obſcurity, before the ever-living 
luſtre of their genuine glory—thoſe fathers, 
friends, and benefactors of mankind—thoſe 
true heroes, who, like their juſt emblem, e 
Sun, have perpetually diffuſed life, bleſſing, 
beneficence; have exiſted only to inſtruct, im- 
prove, and humanize the world ! 

TRESE—IIluſtricus Heorers! are the men, 
whom we exult to call BRETHREN: and of 
this truly honourable fraternity it is, that 
MasoNRy, throughout all ages, hath been 
compoſed : an inſtitution, — not, as the igno- 
rant and uninſtructed vainly ſuppoſe, founded 
on unmeaning myſtery, and ſupported by mere 
good. felloteſbip: but © an inſtitution founded 
« on eternal reaſon and truth; whoſe deep 
« baſis is the civilization of mankind; and 
„ whole everlaſting glory it is, to have the 
„ immoveable ſupport of thoſe two mighty 
e pillars, Science and Morality !” 

Is 

Wi 

In proof of what I advance, permit me 
juſt to touch, with a paſſing pencil, —as the 
time, — not as the unlimited nature of my ſubjef 
will admit;—juſt to touch upon—(1.) the 
ANTIQUITY ;—(2.) the ExTEnT;—(3.) the 
CoMPREHENSIVENESS;z—(4.) the EXCELLENCE 
and UTiL.1TY of our Royal Art; of whoſe 
daily advancing progreſs, highly flouriſhing 
fate, and unqueſtionable merit, who can doubt 
a moment that beholds this ſplendid Epi- 
ric; that conſiders this lovely, honourable, 
and illuſtrious aſſemblage ? 

1. And permit me to obſerve, that the 
brighteſt title ſuffer no diminution of luſtre 
nay, that Nobility itſelf derives diſtinction, 
from the ſupport and countenance of an inſti- 
tution ſo venerable. For, if Ax TIdurry 
merits our attention, and demands our reve- 
rence, where will the ſociety be found, that 
hath an equal claim ?=Maſons are well in- 
formed from their own private and interior 
records, that the building of Solomon's Temple 
is an important æra, from whence they derive 
many myſteries of their art. Now, be it re- 

membered, that this great event took place 

above a thouſand years before the Chriſtian 
O 2 era; 

2 — A, A — 

EC. 4 

era; and conſequently more than a century 
before Homer, the firſt of the Grecian poets, 
wrote; and above five centuries before Pytha- 
goras brought from the Eaſt his ſublime 
ſyſtem of truly maſonic inſtruction, to illumi- 
nate our weſtern world. 

Bur, remote as is this period, we date not 
from thence the commencement of our art, 
For though it might owe to the wiſe and glo- 
rious king of Iſrael ſome of its many myſtic 
forms and hieroglyphic ceremonies, yet cer- 
tainly the art itſelf is coeval with Man, the 
great ſubject of it. Nay, it may be well ſtiled 
coeval with Creation; when the Sovereign AR- 
CHITECT raiſed on maſonic principles this 
beauteous globe; — and commanded that 
maſter-ſcience Geometry to lay the rule to the 
planetary world, and to regulate by its laws 
the whole ſtupendous ſyſtem, in juſt unerring 

proportion rolling round the central Sun 

2. And as Maſonry is of this remote anti- 
quity, ſo is it, as might reaſonably be ima- 

See Dacier's Life of Pythagoras. 
oined, 

% 

Wa 

= OE 

gined, of boundleſs ExTexnT. We trace its. 
| footſteps in the moſt diſtant, the moſt remote 

ages and nations of the world, We find it 
amongſt the firſt and moſt celebrated civilizers 
of the Eaſt *, we deduce it regularly, from the 
firſt aſtronomers on the plains of Chaldea, to 
the wiſe and myſtic kings and prieſts of 

The beauty and fertility of thoſe climes (the 
* Ealtern)* ſays Abbé Reynall, © hath ever engendered 
*a moſt numerous race of people, as well as abun- 
dance of fruits of all kinds. There, laws and arts, 
the offspring of genius and tranquillity, have ariſen 
from the ſettled ſtate of government; and luxury, 
* the parent of every enjoyment that attends induſtry, 
* has ſprung out of the richneſs of the ſoil. India, China, 
Perſia, and Egypt, were in poſſeſſion not only of all 
* the ſtores of nature, but alſo of the moſt brilliant 
inventions of art. War has frequently obliterated 
every monument of genius in theſe parts, but they 
* revive again out of their own ruine, as well as man- 
* kind. Not unlike thoſe laborious ſwarms we ſee pe- 
« riſh in their hives by the wintry blaſt of the north, 
and which reproduce themſelves in ſpring; retain=- 
ing ſtill the ſame love cf toil and order. There are 
certain Aſiatic nations, which have till preſerved 
the arts of luxury with their materials, notwithſtand- 
ing the incurſions and conqueſts of the Tartars.“ 
Yol, iv. p, 489, 

Egypt 

a 

Egypt ; — the ſages of Greece, the philoſo- 
phers of Rome:—nay, and even to the rude 
and Gothic builders of a dark and degenerate 
age; whoſe vaſt temples ſtill remain amongſt 
us, as monuments of their attachments to the 
Maſonic arts, and as high proofs of a taſte, 
which, however irregular, muſt always be 
eſteemed awful and venerable +. 

Is truth, in no civilixed age or country hath 
Maſonry been neglected : the moſt illuſtrious 
characters, — lings and nobles, — ſages and le- 
giſlators, authors and artiſts, - have thought 
it their glory to protect and to honour it, And, 
at the preſent hour, while we find the brotber- 
good ſucceſsfully eſtabliſhed in every kingdom 

*The regal and ſacerdotal offices, in the ancient 
world, were frequently united; Melchizedec was king 
and prieſt; and Virgil ſpeaks of Anius under the ſame 
characters: 

Rex Auius, rex idem hominum Phabigue ſacerdos. 
En. iii. 80. 

+ So Abbe Reynall obſerves,.— The Gothic ages 
£ have left us ſome monuments, the boldneſs and ma- 
* jeſty of which ſtill ſtrike the eye amidſt the ruin of 
$ taſte and elegance.“ p. 526. 

of 

P . 
9 * ** Ls KW FOX N 6 5 1 * 

1 

of the earth, we are happy to rank in that 
liſt many names, which do honour to their 
own, - would have done honour to any age. 
To enumerate them would be a taſk abundantly 
pleaſing; but the time allows me not. It 
would, however, be inexcuſable to omit par- 
ticulariſing that Hero-King, that bright and 
northern ſtar, whom the admiring world al- 
lows to be one of the greateſt princes, and of 
whom we may juſtly boaſt as one of the firſt 
and moſt diſtinguiſhed friends and lovers of 
our Art! }—that ancient, honourable Art, for 

whoſe 

t- I cannot with-hold from my reader the following 
eulogium on the king of Pruſſia, by the hiſtorian ſo 
often quoted, and whoſe work alone would confer 
immortality. The king of Pruſſia alone hath in- 
* vented a new method of diſciplining armies, of head- 
ing battles, and of gaining victories. This prince, 
* who would have been better ſerved by another nation, 
* and certainly better commended than he could poſ- 
* fibly be by his own ; who hath not had, ſince Alex. 
ander, his equal in hiſtory, for extent and variety 
* of talents ; who, without having been himſelf formed 
by Greeks, hath been able to form Lacedzmonians ; 
© he, in a word, who hath deſerved, beyond all others, 
* that his name ſhould be recorded in his age, as a 
* diſtinction vying in greatneſs with thoſe of the fineft 
* ages of the world: this ſame king of Pruſſia hath 

* totally 

s 

whoſe promotion and dignity Lopes are 
opened in every quarter of the globe. For 

I cannot but remark with peculiar pleaſure, 

that in whatſoever elſe men may diſpute and 
diſagree, yet they are all unanimous to reſpect 
and to ſupport a ſingularly amiable inſtitution, 
which annihilates all parties; conciliates all 
private opinions; and renders thoſe who by 
their Almighty Father were made of one blood, 
to be alſo of one heart and one mind; Bre- 
THREN, bound, firmly bound together by that 
indiſſoluble tie the love of their Gov, and 
<« the love of their Rind.“ 

3. Tris alone might well be judged a ſuf- 
ficient reaſon for the extent, and, if we may 

totally changed the principles of war, by giving in 
«* ſome meaſure to the legs an advantage over the arms; 
© that is to ſay, that by the rapidity of his evolutions 
and the celcrity of his marches, he hath always ex- 
© celled his enemies, even when he hath not conquered 
them. All the nations of Europe hath been obliged 
© to imitate his example, in order not to be obliged 
© ro ſubmit to him. He will enjoy the glory, ſince 
« it is one, of having raiſed the art of war to a degree 
of perfection, from which, fortunat?!y, it cannot 
but degenerate.* p. 452. 

10 

E 089-71 

ſo ſay, univerſality of the Craft. But, when 
to this we farther add, the COoMPREHENSIVE- 
x Ess of the inſtitution, and the vaſt circle of 
arts and ſciences which it takes in, we ſhall no 
longer wonder at that extent; but be ſatisfied, 
That Masengry muſt and will always keep 
« pace, and run parallel with the culture 
« and civilization of mankind.” Nay, we 
may pronounce with ſtrict truth, That where 
Maſonry is not, civilization will never be 
found. And ſo in fact it appears: for, in 
ſavage countries, and barbarous climes 
where operative Maſonry never lays the ine, 
nor ſtretches the compaſs where ſkilful Ar- 
cbitecture never plans the dome, nor rears the 
well-ordered column;——on thoſe benighted 
realms, liberal Science never ſmiles, nor does 
ingenuous Art exalt, refine, embelliſh, and 

ſoften the mind *! 

Bur, give Masonky once to exert her 
heaven-deſcended talents, even in realms like 

* Ovid's famous line is ſo well known, and become, 
as it were, ſuch a general axiom, that it is ſcarce need- 
ful even to hint at it; 

* Ingenuas didiciſſe, &c.” 

P thoſe 

„ 

thoſe; let her rear the dwelling, and teach 
the lofty temple to emulate the clouds; — ſee 
what a train of Arts immediately enter, and 
Join, in ample ſuite, to give their patron Ar- 
chitefture completion and glory“ I- Lo! at 

their 

* © The Genius,“ ſays Abbe Reynall, which 

© preſides over Deſign raiſed three of theſe arts at 
© once; I mean Architecture, Sculpture, and Paint- 
© ing. Architecture, in which convenience of itſelf 
* regulated thoſe proportions of ſymmetry that con- 
© tribute to give pleaſure to the eye; Sculpture, 
© which flatters princes, and is the reward of great 
* men; and Painting, which perpetuates the remem- 
© brance of noble actions, and the inſtances of mutual 
love.“ And ſpeaking of the union and dependence 
of the arts and manufactures, he goes on, Manu- 
factures contribute to the advancement of know- 
* ledge and of the ſciences. The torch of induſtry 
* ſerves at once to enlighten a vaſt horizon. No 
« art is ſingle: the greater part of them have their 
© forms, modes, inſtruments, and elements, in com- 
mon. The mechanics themſelves have contributed 
« prodigicuſly to extend the ſtudy of mathematics. 
Every branch of the genealogical tree of ſcience 
has unfolded itſelf with the progreſs of the arts and 
* handicrafts. Mines, mills, cloth-works, dying, have 

« enlarged the ſphere of philoſophy and natural hif- 

* tory. Luxury has given riſe to the art of enjoyment, 

* which is entirely dependent on the liberal arts. As 
« ſoon 

C mg 

oO AG MAGE BT x 

1 

their head, Sculpture with his animating chiſſel 
bids the forming marble breathe See Paint- 
ing with his vivid pencil ſteal Nature's faireſt, 
tints, while the glowing canvas ſtarts beneath 
his touch into beauty and life !—See the long 
labours of the loom; the ſtoried tapeſtry, and 
the rich wrought ſilk, employed to decorate 
the habitation which every art and every ex- 
ertion of the manufacturer and mechanic are 
buſied to complete ! 

BuT not the manual arts alone attend : 
hark! through the finiſhed dome divine 

© ſoon as Architecture admits of ornaments wich- 
* out, it brings with it decorations for the inſide of 
our houſes ; while Sculpture and Painting are at the 
* ſame time at work for the embelliſhment and adorn- 
ing of the edifice. | The art of Deſign is employed 
in our dreſs and furniture. The pencil, ever fertile 
in novelty, is varying without end its ſketches and 
* ſhades on our ſtuffs and our porcelain, The powers 
* of genius are exerted in compoſing at leiſure maſter- 
pieces of poetry and eloquence, or thoſe happy ſyſ- 
* tems of policy and philoſophy, which reſtore to the 
people their natural rights, and to ſovereigns all 
their glory, which conſiſts in reigning over the heart 
* and the mind, over the opinion and will of their 
ſubjects, by the means of reaſon and equity.” P. 492. 

P 2 Muſic 

f- $66 } 

Myfic pours her ſoul-commanding ſounds with 
her artful hand and finely-varied tones ſweetly 
enforcing the lofty and inſtructive leſſons of 
heaven-born Poefy /—which, whilſt it wraps the 
delighted mind in deep contemplation, gives 
birth and being to thoſe ſage, thoſe civil, thoſe 
legiſlative and moral plans; or, in one word, 
to all that round of ſpeculative Maſonry, which 
ſecures, adorns, and dignifies ſociety ; and 
repreſents in ſtrong contraſt the ſavage, and 
the civilized man 

* See the hiſtories of the Savages: in America, 
Kamſchatzca, Greenland, &c. The ingenious author 
of The View of the internal Evidence of the Chriſ- 
tian Religion? (to whom I am happy in an oppor- 
tunity to pay my feeble tribute of thanks for his 
uſeful, well-timed, and irrefragable work) obſerves, 
* That if we turn our eyes to thoſe remote regions of 
the globe, to which ſupernatural aſſiſtance has never 
yet extended, we ſhall there ſee men, endued with 
© ſenſe and reaſon not inferior to our own, ſo far from 
being capable of forming ſyſtems of religion and 
* morality, that they are at this day totally unable to 
make a nail or a hatchet; From whence we may 
* ſurely be convinced, that reaſon alone is fo far from 
being ſufficient to offer to mankind a perfect reli- 
gion, that it has never yet been able to lead them 
to any degree of culture or civilization,” P. 116, &c. 

Tuvs 

1a 

Tnus comprehenſive is the noble Art we 
boaſt; and ſuch are the triumphs of Architec- 
ture alone, in whoſe ample graſp are contained 
ſuch numberleſs benefits to human nature, 
and which may juſtly be deemed the peculiar 
and favourite child of civizilation, as well as 
the unerring mark and criterion of that civili- 
zation, and of the progreſs of the fine arts 
in every. ſtate, Were I to proceed—or had 
I aſſumed for my proof that wonderful, all- 
informing ſcience on which Maſonry is built; 
nay, and which—proud Miſtreſs of Arts! 
iſſues forth her commanding laws, not only 
to thoſe arts, but even to wature—even to 
nature's ampleſt round—the ſolar ſyſtem itſelf: 
—had Geometry been my theme—the time 

would have failed me to have recounted even 

a part of that comprehenſive extent and reach 
of inſtruction; that inexhauſted fund of in- 
formation and knowledge, of improvement 
and advantage, which it imparts to its ſtu- 
dious votaries. Happy votaries—adepts in 
true Maſonry—ever the zealous and moſt ar- 
dent admirers of natural and moral beauty ! 
tor they are eſpecially ſenſible of the beauties 
of that world, which, amongſt the intelligent 
Greeks, knew no other name, And well in- 

deed 

—— —— EI Nc Eäʒ—E—ä — 
- — 5 — = 

— —ů— __ — m — — 

BY: 

deed might it be ſtyled Koopes, eſſential 
« BEAUTY; for it excels, at once, in all 
the regularity of order, the exactneſs of pro- 
portion, the glow of colouring, the force of 
expreſſion, and the ſtrength of deſign. 

4. Bur future and more extenſive diſcuſ- 
ſions of this high and entertaining theme may, 
perhaps, through your honourable ſanction 
engage my pen. For the preſent—after what 
hath been already advanced, can any man 
doubt a moment of * the ExctLLENCE and 
„ uTIiLITY of MasonRy,” thus deep in an- 
tiquity, boundleſs in extent, and univerſal in 
its comprehenſion of ſcience, operative and 
ſpeculative; thus, in its wide boſom, em- 
bracing at once the whole circle of Arts and 

Morals? 

To attempt its encomium (particularly 
after what has been already ſo ably, ſo ele- 
gantly advanced by my worthy brother +) 
would be“ waſteful and ſuperfluous exceſs;“ 

* The author did not live to publiſh any thing more 
on Maſonry, 

+ Mr. HEssELTINEZ, the Grand-ſecretary, whoſe 
Exordium was not more elegant and inſtructive, than 

ably and eloquently delivered. 
would 

(- 20g] 

would be, in the fine language of our firſt 
and ſublimeſt of Bards, 

« To gild refined gold, to paint the lily, 

« To throw a perſume on the violet; 

« To ſmooth the ice; to add another hue 

« Unto the rainbow; or, with taper-light 

« To ſeek the beauteous eye of Heav'n to garniſh.” 

For who, in this poliſhed, this improving 
age, is inſenſible of the attraction, the excel- 
lence, the utility of the Fine Arts, the Li- 
beral Sciences“? Who, in this peculiarly 

humane 

It is a pleaſure to remark, that while our country 
has equalled Rome in arms, ſhe is every day advanc- 
ing, and we truſt will rival Greece in Arts; —ſo 
that Virgil's fine compliment to both theſe countries, 
we may hope, will be completely applicable to her: 

* Excudent alii ſpirantia mollius zra 
Credo equidem, vivos ducent de marmore vultus; 
* Orabunt cauſas melius, cœlique meatus 
* Deſcribent radio, & ſurgentia ſidera dicent : 
Tu regere imperio populos, Romane, memento ! 
* Hz tibi erunt artes; paciſque imponere morem, 
* Parcere ſubjectis, & debellare ſuperbos. 
En. vi. 847. 
Biſhop Hall, in his Quo Vadis (p. 644) ſpeaking 
of England, ſays, The double praiſe which was of 
* old 

— —— — PE —— — 
—— 121 ——— —ů— 

18 

humane and philanthropic æra, is cold to the 
call of BENEVvOLENCE—that never failing 
attendant on the ingenuous Arts;—that all- 
pervading, all-performing virtue, which in 
one ſhort and eaſy word, Thou ſhalt love thy 
neigbbour as thyſelf, comprizes all duty, and 
conſummates the round of moral perfection. 

IxpEED, the celebrated Eulogy which C1- 
CERO paſſeth on philoſophy, may with equal 
propriety be applied to Maso Rx, duly prac- 
tiſed and rightly underſtood, For in that 
view it will be found eminently “ the im- 
% provement of youth, and the delight of 
« old age. The ornament of proſperity, the 
ce refuge and ſolace of adverſe hours: it 
e pleaſes at home; is no incumbrance abroad: 
« it lodges with us; travels with us; and 
« adds amuſement and pleaſure to our rural 

c retirement . 

WITH 

old given to two great nations, that 7ralie could not 
be put downe for armes, nor Greece for learning, 
is happily met in our one Iland. Thoſe therfore 
that croſs the ſeas to fill their braine, doe but tra- 
vell northward for heat, and ſeeke that candle 
which they carry in their hande.“ 

+ © Hzc ſtudia adoleſcentiam alunt, ſenectutem 

oblectant; ſecundas res ornant; adverſis perfugium 
ac 

- - a o - 

268. 

Wirn heart-felt zeal and ſincerity, allow 
me then, right noble and worthy Brethren, to 
congratulate you on the advancement, the 
progreſs, and preſent ſtate of our uſeful, ex- 
cellent, antique, and myſtic Lore] more par- 
ticularly allow me to congratulate you on this 
great and feſtive day; on this ſolemn pepica- 
TION with high pomp and ſong, of an zp1- 
FICE, which does equal credit to its architect, 
and to the craft; and which promiſes a long 
line of ſtability and glory to Maſonry, in this 
its favourite land! 

Axp while by our ſincere good-will and 
friendly regard each for the other; —while by 
our liberal and merciful relief of the Brethren 
in diſtreſs; while by the eſtabliſhment of an 
univerſal language and communication, for 

ac ſolatium præbent; delectant domi; non impe- 
* diunt foras; pernoctant nobiſcum; perigrinantur; 
* ruſticantur.” And ſo alſo Vitruvius, in his Preface, 
P- 14, finely obſerves, « Dottum (hac in ſcientia) 
* folum ex omnibus, neque in alienis locis pere- 
* grinum eſſe, neque, amiſſis familiaribus & neceſſariis 
© inopem amicorum; ſed in omni civitate civem cen- 
* ſeri, adyerſoſque fortunz caſus poſſe deſpicere.” 
Vitruv. Præfat. L. vi. 

Q the 

1 

the attainment of thoſe two purpoſes through- 
out the earth, under the ſeal of moſt ſacred 
and inviolable ſecreſy;—whilſt thus, we ſeem 
to have amply provided for the intereſts of 
BENEVOLENCE : fo let us, by every method, 
and by every encouragement in our power, 
court the LIBERAL ARTS to come and dwell 
amongſt us: let the means of their cultiva- 

tion and improvement be the frequent ſubject 

of our beſt and moſt ſerious diſquiſitions: let 
us endeavour to hold forth every engaging al- 

lurement, that they may approach and apply 

their elegant and wonder- working fingers, to 
finiſh the beauties of this well ordered dome; ; 
and to make it, what we wiſh, the diſtin- 
guiſhed reſidence of immortal MASsONRY! 

An #ra, which cannot be far diſtant: for 
the magnificence of our building, in ſo ſhort 
a period, thus wonderfully grown up before 
us, ſpeaks in emphatic language, at once the 
zeal and the ability of its friends; and ſti- 
mulates—with a force far beyond all the 
cloquence of the moſt perſuaſive orator ;— 
ſtimulates every noble heart to a gallant emu- 
lation, and mult inſpire a wiſh to contribute 

| towards 

10 1 

towards the perfection of ſo beautiful and 
elegant a deſign, 

Non can the brilliant and generous ex- 
ample of that illuſtrious NoBLEMan, who ſo 

honourably prefides over us, want its due et- 
fet;—a Nobleman—you, my Brethren, all 

agree with me—not more diſtinguiſhed as a 
Maſon than as a Man! whoſe love of liberal 
Arts, and whoſe regard for moral virtue, are 
not confined to the Lodge, but accompany and 
adorn him in all the walks of life! Under 
ſuch auſpices may the Craft reſt happy and 
ſecure, and flouriſh for ever as the Palm! 
and may this HALL, awtully dedicated to 
Maſonry, to Virtue, to Benevolence*, ſtill and 
for ever behold each ennobling ſcience, each 
ingenuous Art, ſmile and triumph, ſoften and 
civilize beneath its roof ! May private 
friendſhip and public virtue dignify and dif- 
tinguiſh the heart and character of every 
Maſon, who here ſhall form and fill the myſ- 
tic Lodge ! 

| ® See the Ceremonial of Dedication, 

Q 2 AND 

— — — — 

—— —-—-— — 
2 E — 

* r 
ke" K — a” 
_ * by, 

— — 4 

124 ] 

Aud when the ſacred folemn rites are 
done, when feſtive Hilarity aſſumes his ſocial 
ſeat, may decent politeneſs, and ſweetly- ſmil- 
ing innocence, for ever wreathe the chaplet 

for his brow, crown his bowl, and command 
his /ong / 

AnD, while amidſt the ſcientific labours of 
the Lodge, elevated ſchemes of improving 
Art engage and enrapture our Minds ; while 
holy and ancient myſteries warm the imagina- 
tion with improvement's kindred glow ; — 
while in the mournful inveſtigation of a Bro- 
ther's wants pleading pity melts our eye, and 
generous compaſſion ſwells the feeling breaſt ; 
ile amidſt the chearful exertions of 
inoffenſive mirth, of heart-enlarging, friendly 
communication reflection ſhall be enabled 
to look back with pleaſure, and impartial 
conſcience ſhall find nothing to diſapprove: 
then, my Brethren, may we, with comfort 
and with confidence, lift up our adoring 
hearts : 

AND WE DO LIFT Thau UP To Thee, Great 
Nature's adorable and wonderous Geometri- 
cian! Almighty Parent of the World! wiſe 

| Former 

N 
Former of Man l- imploring on this, and on 
all our other laudable undertakings, thy favour, 
thy bleſſing, thy aid, without which, vain and 
fruitleſs are all the efforts of feeble men 
*Tis from Thee, beneficent Founder of our 
frame, that we have received, the heart to 
feel; the hand to labour; the eye to behold ; 
the ear to hear; the tongue to proclaim; and 
all the faculties which make us ſuſceptible of 
moral, partakers of natural good! —Teach us, 
then, to delight in them, to improve them as 
thy bleſſing; and through the beauty, order, 
and excellence of created things, to view, con- 
template and adore thy uncreated excellence 

and beauty ! 

Long 

ForMED as thy Temple, and enriched with 
the ornaments of thy creative wiſdom, — 
conſummate Architect of thy maſter building, 
Man!—we look up to Thee, to inſpire us 
with underſtanding, with ſcience, with virtue, 
with all which can dignify, refine, and exalt 
our nature, and render the temple at leaſt not 
wholly unworthy of its ſacred inhabitant !— 
To this end, direct us to make the BLESSED 
VOLUME of thy inſtructive wiſdom, the never- 

| . erring 

C an&,} 

erring ſquare to regulate our conduct +; the 
compaſs within whoſe circle we ſhall ever walk 
with ſafety and with peace; the infallible 
plumb-line and criterion of rectitude and truth! 
Enable us to fill up every ſphere of duty with 
exactneſs and honour; and by our amiable 
attention to all the ſweet and bleſſed offices, 
the endearing charities of ſocial life in parti- 
cular, teach us to win the love of thoſe who 
unite in thoſe tender offices with us: and as | 
fathers, huſbands, friends,——as worthy men 
and worthy Maſons,—to diſtinguiſh and exalt 
the profeſſion which we boaſt ! 

AnD, while through thy bounty—rich Diſ— 
penſer of every bleſſing - our cups overflow 
with plenteouſneſs, and wine, and corn, and 
oil *, delight and cheer our boards: Oh, may 

+ Shakeſpeare—that. all comprehending genius, — 
in his play of Antony and Cleopatra puts a ſpeech 
into the mouth of Antony, act 11, ſcene 3. which plain- 
ly ſhews that immortal bard was one of our brethren ; 
«© My Octavia, 
« Read not my blemiſhes in the world's report, 
« f have not kept my /quare; but that to come 
« Shall all be done by rule.” 

* See the Ceremonial of the Dedication, 

our 

(_ 189 |] 

our full hearts never be wanting in gratitude, 
and in the voice of thankſgiving to Thee 
in liberal ſentiments and ſuccour towards every 
laudable undertaking; in the quickeſt ſenſi- 
bility, and readieſt relief we can give to the 
woes and diſtreſſes of our fellow- creatures 
of all mankind—of every being, univerſal Lord! 
who bears thy image, and looks up to thy 
providence; who is fed by thy hand, hopes 
for thy future and all comprehending mercy, 
and can and will triumphantly unite with us, 
—with the general voice of Maſons and of 
Men,—earneſtly and emphatically ſaying, 

« Father of All! in every age, 
« Tn every clime ador d; 
% By Saint, by Savage, and by Sage, 
“ Jehovah, Jove, or Lord ! 
« To Thee, whoſe temple is all ſpace, 
« Wheſe altar, earth, ſea, ſkies ; 
& One chorus let all Being raiſe, 
« All Nature's incenſe riſe ! 

AFTER 

128 J 

ArTER this the Coronation Anthem was 
fung, viz. 

Zadocł the prieſt, and Nathan the prophet, 
anointed Solomon king. And all the people 
rejoiced, and ſaid, God ſave the king, long 
live the king, may the king live for ever, 

Amen. Hallelujah ! 

Hallelujab—For the Lord God omnipotent 
reigneth. The kingdom of this world is be- 
come the kingdom of our Lord and of his 

Chriſt, and he ſhall reign for ever and ever, 
King of Kings, Lord of Lords. Hallelujah ! 

- AFTER which, donations from ſeyeral re- 
ſpectable brethren were proclaimed. Then 
the following New Ode, written by a mem- 
ber of the Royal Alfred Lodge at Oxford, and 
ſet to muſic by Mr. Fiſher, was performed, 
viz. 

STROPHE. 
AIR. 
WHAT folemn ſounds on holy Sinai rung, 
When heav'nly lyres, by angel-fingers ſtrung, 
According to th' immortal lay, 

That hymn'd creation's natal day. 
; Reci- 

20 

1 

"BY 

RecirarTive, accompanied. 

Twas then the ſhouting ſons of morn 
Bleſs'd the great omnific word. 
« Abaſh'd hoarſe jarring atoms heard, | 
« Fotgot their pealing ſtrife, | 
« And ſoftly crowded into life,” | 
When order, law, and harmony were born; 

CHORUS, 
The mighty maſter's pencil warm 
Traced out the ſhadowy form, 

And bade each fair proportion grace 

Smiling nature's modeſt face. 

Air. 

Heaven's rareſt gifts were ſeen to join 
To deck a finiſh'd form divine, 
And fill the ſov'reign artiſt's plan; 
Th Almighty's image ſtamp'd the glowing frame, 
And ſeal'd him with the nobleſt name, 
Archetype of beauty, Man. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

SEMI-CHORUS and CHORUS. 
Ye ſpirits pure, that rous'd the tuneful throng, 
And loos'd to rapture each triumphant tongue, 
* Again, 

10 +] 

Again, with quick inſtinctive fire, 

Each harmonious lip inſpire : 
Again bid ev'ry vocal throat 

Diffolve in tender votive ſtrain, 

AlR. 
Now while yonder white-rob'd train 
Before the myſtic ſhrine 
In lowly adoration join, 
Now ſweep the living lyre, and ſwell the melt. 
ing note. 

REciTATIVE. 
Yet ere the holy rites begin 
The conſcious ſhrine within, 
Bid your magic ſong impart. 

AIR. 
How within the waſted heart 
Shook by paſſion's ruthleſs power, 
Virtue trimm'd her faded flower, 

To op'ning buds of faireſt fruit. 

* How from majeſtic nature's glowing face 

She caught each animating grace, 
Aud planted there th immortal root. 

[| Alluding to the Brethren in their white aprons, &. 
*'The lines in Italic are omitted in the muſic. 

EPODE. 

xc. 

E 
EPODE. 
ReciTATIvE, accompanied. 

Daughter of Gods, fair virtue, if to thee, 
And thy bright ſiſter, univerſal love, 

Soul of all good, e'er flow'd the ſoothing harmony 
Of pious gratulation—from above 

To us, thy duteous votaries, impart 
Preſence divine. 

AlR. 

The ſons of antique art, 
In high myſterious jubilee, 
With Pæan loud, and ſolemn rite, 
Thy holy ſtep invite, 
And court thy liſPning ear, 
To drink the cadence clear 
That ſwells the choral ſymphony. 

Cnorvs, 

To thee, by foot profane untrod, 
Their votive hands have rear'd the high abode. 

RECITATIVE. 

Here ſhall your impulſe kind 
Inſpire the tranced mind, 

R 2 AlR, 

1 

1 

AIR. 

And lips of truth ſhall ſweetly tell 
What heavenly deeds befit, 
The ſoul by wiſdom's leſſon ſmit : 
What praiſe he claims, who nobly ſpurns 
Gay vanities of life, and tinſel joys, 

For which unpurged fancy burns, 

Crorvs, 
What pain he ſhuns, who dares be wiſe 
What glory wins, who dares excel, 

Taz following is an explanation on the 
Ode, by the author, in a letter directed to 
James Heſeltine, eſq. viz, 

Dear Sir, 

INCLOS'D I have tranſmitted to you an 
Ode, compoſed in conſequence of the requeſt 
of the grand-maſter (which we conſider as a 
command) by one of the brethren of the lodge 
of Alfred, for the conſecration of the oreat 
hall. I preſent it with all ſubmiſſion to the 
judgment of our brethren, they are at full 
liberty to employ or reje& it, to alter or cor- 
| rect 

( 193 J 

rect it as they pleaſe. The author deſires to 
remain in obſcurity ; it is his firſt attempt in 
the path of lyric poetry, and he 1s not a can- 
didate for fame, where he thinks he has ſo 
little reaſon to hope for the prize. If his com- 
poſition proves acceptable to his brethren of 
the grand lodge, or even if it only ſhews his 
diſpoſition to attend at all times to their re- 
queſts, that is the higheſt fatisfaction he hopes 
from this undertaking. He is concerned, that 
the nature of the ſubject obliged him to be 
more obſcure than he might perhaps other- 
wiſe have been; the following outlines will 
ſufficiently explain to you the author's plan— 
how it is executed you will judge. 

Tux Ode is deſigned to be ſung at the 
conſecration of a maſonic hall; it is therefore 
addreſſed to thoſe angelic beings, who ſhouted 
for joy at the creation of the world: they are 
invited to attend the conſecration of a build- 
ing dedicated to the ſervice of virtue, and 
ſacred to the duties of charity and benevo- 
lence. The ode is divided into ſtropbe, anti- 
ſtrophe, and epode, agreeable to the manner 
of the Grecian lyrics. In the Rrophe, the au- 
thor paints the ſcene of the creation, and de- 

ſcribes 

Li 336. } 

ſcribes the harmony which then reſounded 
through the univerſe, eſpecially at the forma- 
tion of man. In the ſecond part, the anti- 
ſtropbe is the addreſs to the angelic beings 
who are invited to attend a ſolemnity, to ce- 
lebrate the conſecration of our building, and 
to inſtruct the ſurrounding crowd, that virtue 
alone could make the human form the real 
image of the divine, or bring it to a corre- 
ſpondent beauty with the other parts of nature; 
and therefore the leaſt part, the epode, is more 
particularly addreſſed to virtue and benevo- 
lence invoking their attendance on this ſolemn 
occaſion, and dedicating to their future pro- 
tection and ſervice this temple of maſonry, 

Taz author has given his opinion how he 
thinks it ſhould be ſet to muſic, but that he 
leaves to the better judgment of your muſical 
compoſer, 

I sHouLD be obliged to you for your opinion 
on the ode. 

I am with great reſpect, 
your humble ſervant and brother, 
New Coll. Oxon. 
Monday, April 1, 1776. 
AFTER 

Is 

ER 

t 21208] 

AFTER which the proceſſion was reſumed, 
and marched round the hall three times, pre- 
ceded by tylers carrying the lodge as at 
entrance, during which the muſic continued 
playing a grand piece. The proceſſion being 
returned to the committee-room, the grand 
lodge was cloſed in ample form, Cc. 

Many other brethren exerted their talents 
in compoſing odes on ſo important an occa- 
ſion ; among which the following, viz. 

ODF for the Dedication of the FREE. 
MASONS NEW HALL, | 

By the Rev. Brother Daniel Turner, A.M. 
Iookwich, Kent. 

STROPHE. 

Recir. and Chokus. 
What ſacred ſounds on Zion's top were heard, 
When riſing light t'illume new worlds appear'd! 
Seraphic bands all join'd the lay, 
And hail'd creation's natal day. 

_ Recir. accompanied. 
*T was then old Chaos ſtood amaz'd, 
Before the Almighty's face, 
Heav'n and earth afſum'd their place. 

—I< — XI: — moo 

Wh 

_ Th all pervading hand, 
Divided fea and land, 
Then beauty, grace, and order firſt were rais'd! 

Cnokus. 
The mighty architect deſign'd, 
An emblem of his ſpotleſs mind: 
Perfection glow'd throughout the whole, 
And harmony was nature's ſoul. 

Air. 
Unfiniſh'd ſtill the great intent, 
Once mote th* Almighty word was ſent, 
To fill the wond'rous plan : 
The new-form'd duſt in majeſty aroſe, 
And with his Maker's image glows, 
Prince of creation, Man. 

ANTISTROPHE. 
Recirt. and Chokus. 

Celeſtial ſpirits loudly ſounding, 
Holy harps through heav'n reſounding, 
Sweep the ſtrings with touch divine, 
Maſons will the concert join ! 
While the notes in higheſt ſtrain, 
Wake all nature to a ſong! 

Ain. 

7 

AIR. 

Praiſe to maſons doth belong, 
Maſons, ſons of art reveal'd 
Tenets pure, though deep conceal'd, 
The craft and maſter extoll, 
While truth and life remain. 

REec1ITATIVE. 

Concord's each peculiar ſon, 
Sure will baneful paſſion ſhun; 
Unity's the ſtrongeſt power, 

Air; 

Unity can bleſſings ſhower, 

O'er a happy band and free; 

Such as 1s fam'd Maſonry. 
Benevolence each heart expands, 

AI continued, and at the end CHoRus. 

Philanthrophy extends the willing arm, 
To feed—to ſhelter - and to warm, 
Each who in need of pity ſtands, 

S EPODE: 

— — — —— 
— : 

( 138 J 

EPODE. 
REciT. accompanied. 

Virtue, all hajl! before thy ſhrine we bow; 

Exalt our minds with emulation's fire, 
To tread the paths of heroes let us now 

Attempt—and after laſting fame aſpire. 
To our endeavours, aid divine impart, 
And grace the works myſterious of our art, 

Air. 

Science ! gaudieſt plume of reaſon, 
Now to thee in this their dwelling, 
Maſons all mankind excelling, 
Yield the palms of grateful praiſe, 
And a joyful chorus raiſe, 

Which ſhall laſt through ev'ry ſeaſon. 

Cryorvus. 

Long may the ſocial bond remain, 
While arts and virtue grace its reign, 

RECITATIVE. 

Its influence ſhall hold, 
Till death doth all unfold. 

AIR. 

— — — ——— 

1 

AIR. 
Tread gently o'er this ſacred ground, 
Here the dome aſpiring, 
Breaſts maſonic nobly firing, 
| Leads to honour, merit, glory; 
From deep foundations noble ſtructures riſe, 
Such as bear renown in ſtory. 

Firſt Corus, 

May bliſs, eternal pleaſures fair, 
Crown the compaſs, and the ſquare. 

Grand Cnrorvs. 

Happy—happy—happy he, 
Who taſtes the joys of Maſonry. 

Tuis Ode was accompanied with the fol- 
lowing letter directed to the hall- committee: 

Wookwich, April 17, 1776. 
GENTLEMEN, 

ALONG with this I preſent to your exa- 
mination the haſty production of a few hours, 
for the ſhortneſs of time allotted me, and the 
nature of my confined ſituation allowed no 
more. I confeſs the ſubject to be capable of 
a greater number both of philoſophic, ma- 

S 2 ſonic, 

——— > ———— —_——_ <> 

[ aq 7 

ſonic, and poetic beauties, which ſhould have 
been wrought into the piece, had you ſooner 
adviſed me of it. If any other brother fur- 
niſh you with a better, the rejecting of mine 
will give me pleaſure; but ſhould mine be 
approved, permit me to aſk a favour, nay to 
claim a right, which true maſons will never 
deny a brother. 

Trovcn I am not unknown to the world 
in a literary character, yet I have always been 
in obſcurity, owing to the want of patronage 
among, the great or affluent : whatever there- 
fore tends to make me better known, is a 
real ſervice to me. To aſſiſt the weak is the 
glory of humanity, but the duty of a maſon. 
As I am a teacher as well as a clergyman, 
the printing my name and preſent place of 
reſidence to the ode may be of advantage to 
me. Such an acknowledgment, I hope, will 
not be thought extravagant for me to aſk, 
who I may ſay lives by my pen, nor beneath 
you to grant, I have the honour to be with 
profound reſpect, 

Gentlemen, 
your moſt obedient humble ſervant, 

DANIEL TURNER, 

ODE on raiſing a HALL ſacred to MA- 
SONRY, by Brother Joux WiLLiamsoN 
of London. 

No more of trifling themes or vain, 
My Muſe again ſhall ſing, 
Urania claims a nobler ſtrain, 
A more expanded wing, 
To Maſonry exalt the joytul ſong, 
Soft as the infant morn—yet as the ſubject 
ſtrong. 

Behold! the ſacred ſtructure riſe, 
On firm foundation laid, 
Where Solomon the great and wile, 
His bounty firſt diſplay'd; 
The Syrian king materials brought 
To aid the grand deſign, 
And Hiram Abiff*s happy thought 
Completed it divine, 
In wiſdom, ſtrength, and beauty ſec 
The three grand orders hap'ly agree. 
From hence, what bleſſings may ariſe 
By ev'ry brother's friendly aid; 
The faireſt offspring of the ſkies, 
Kind Charity! all-charming maid! 

Shall 

[142 J 

Shall ſtretch her hand the poor to bleſs, 
And raiſe them up from deep diſtreſs; 
Baniſh each ſorrow from the breaſt, 
And, like the good Samaritan--balm impart, 
Hail, Maſonry! to thee we raiſe 
The ſong of triumph, and of praiſe 
For ſurely unto thee belongs 
The higheſt notes, the nobleſt ſongs, 
Whoſe arts with happineſs delight, 
And each like brethren unite. 
To noble PETRE raiſe the ſtrain, 
He bids the temple riſe again, 
Him future Grands“ ſhall joyful own, 
Who laid the firſt foundation ſtone; 
Let us hands together join, 
Maſonry is art divine; 
Harmony ſupports the whole, 
Fills the heart, exalts the ſoul. 
Thrice hail again this noble art! 
Which cah ſuch myſtic joys impart; 
The ſun which ſhines ſupreme on high, 
The ſtars that gliſter in the ſky,] 
The moon that yields her ſilver light, 
And vivifies the lonely night, 

*The ancient maſons always call the grand-maſter 
the Grand, 
Muſt 

1 

Muſt by the courſe of nature fade away, 
And all the earth alike in time decay; 
But, while they laſt, ſhall Maſonry endure, 
Built on ſuch pillars, ſolid and ſecure: 
And at the laſt, again ſhall riſe 
In brotherly affection to the ſkies. 
To Maſonry exalt the lay, 
Each brother raiſe his voice, 
Let ſmiles around diffuſive play, 
And heartily rejoice. 
Since noble PETRE grac'd this pile, 
Both wiſdom, ſtrength, with beauty ſmile, 

N 18, High Holborn, J. W. 
May 1776. 

Directed to Capt. George Smith at Moelwiebh, with a 
requeſt to lay it before the Hall-committee. 

Tavs ended one of the grandeſt ceremo- 
nies of Maſonry ever exhibited in this or any 
other age. 

Unoxr lord Petre's auſpices maſonry flou- 
riſhed both at home and abroad in the moſt 
conſpicuous manner; for in the year 1772 
the maſons at Barbadoes built an elegant hall 
for their meetings, In 1773 the Hall-com- 

mittee 

— 
OO ͤ——U— ——— — 
1 — — 

l 144] 

mittee was firſt appointed by the grand- 
lodge, who had the ſole care of that build- 
ing, and ſtill continue to have the ſole go- 
vernment of the hall-fund, as well as of every 
thing belonging to that ſtructure and its ap- 
purtenances, &c. This committee gonſiſts 
of all preſent and paſt grand-officers, and of 
the following brethren; viz. brother Fame; 
Harriſcn, brother John Yeamons, and brother 
Redmond Simpſon. They are ſubject to the 
controul of the grand-lodge, to whom all re- 
ports of proceedings are made; neither can 
any thing be paſſed into a law without the 
approbation of the grand-lodge aſſembled in 
quarterly communication. Each member has 
been honoured with a ſilver medal, on which 
1s repreſented the implements of maſonry with 
this motto, Vide, Audi, Tace, and on the re- 
yerſe, a ſun, with the name and number of 
the owner, with this inſcription; Free Ma- 

ſons Hall. 

In the ſame year an alliance was formed 
with the grand-lodge of Germany, held at 
Berlin, under the patronage of his preſent 

Pruſſian majeſty, who in the year following 
(namely, 

% Aa RX AU a 

— 145 J 

(namely, 1774) incorporated the ſociety of 
Free- maſons throughout all his dominions *. 

In 1775 the office of grand-chaplain was 
revived in the perſon of the learned, but un- 
fortunate Dr. Dodd, L. L. D. ſince whoſe 
death the place has remained vacant, 

Duklxo his lordſhip's reign all paſt grand- 
officers were permitted to wear the jewel of 
their reſpective offices in a circle, pendant to 
a blue riband, at all the public meetings of 
the ſociety, In the ſame reign an appendix 
to the Book of Conſtitutions was ordered to 
be printed under the inſpection of the Hall- 
committee, 

In 1776 the maſons at Sunderland built 
an elegant room for the meetings of the King 
George's, and the Sea Capiains lodges, which 
was dedicated in an ample form. In ſhort, 
during lord Petre's reign the ground was pur- 
chaſed in London tor building a Hall for the 
grand-lodge of England; the foundation ſtone 

* See the Hiſtory and Antiquity of Free-maſonry in 
Germany, 

. i was 

1 — 
— — 

e 
T 

L 146 ] 

was laid; the building erected, dedicated, and 
finiſhed. 

In 1777 the duke of Mancheſter accepted 
the office of grand-maſter, and governed the 
craft with care and vigilance five years. Dur- 
ing his preſidency thoſe perſons, who aſſemble 
in London and elſewhere, in the character as 
maſons, calling themſelves Ancient Maſons, by 
virtue of an authority from a pretended grand- 
lodge in England, ſaid to be under the pa- 
tronage of the duke of Athol; are forbid to 
be countenanced and acknowledged as maſons 
by any regular lodge or maſon, under the 
conſtitution of England, This cenſure doth 
not extend to any lodge or maſon made in 
Scotland or Ireland, or to any lodge or maſon 
made abroad, and in alliance with the grand- 
lodge of England. Under his grace's reign 
the law, which ſpecifies, that no perſon ſhall 
be made a maſon for a leſs ſum than on- 
guinea, be repealed, and-no perſon be made 
for a leſs ſum than wo guineas. That no con- 
ſtitution for a town lodge be granted for a 
leſs ſum than / guineas, or for a country 
lodge for a leſs ſum than four guineas, exclu- 
five of the other uſual fees. It was alſo 
. enacted, 

E ] 

enacted, that each lodge ſhall pay for every 
perſon made a maſon the ſum of five ſhillings , 
for regiſtering his name in the books of the 
grand-lodge, and for every maſon becoming 
a member of any lodge or lodges, the ſum 
of two ſhillings and ſixpence. Many other 
wife and uſeful laws were eſtabliſhed during 
his grace's adminiſtration, 

In 1783 his royal highneſs the duke of 
Cumberland ſucceeded the duke of Mancheſter, 
and was inſtalled in the uſual manner. Ar 
this ceremony the greateſt harmony prevailed 
in all the meetings of the ſociety : hence we 
have every reaſon to ſuppoſe the ſociety will 
flouriſh under our Roya! Grand Maſter more 
than in any former reign. And for the better 
ſupport and dignity of the fraternity, it was 
judged convenient and neceſſary, not only 
for the dignity of the inſtitution, but for the 
more immediate eaſe of his royal highneſs, to 
appoint the right honourable the earl of 
Effingham, acting grand-maſter. Thus ma- 
ſonry flouriſhes in England at preſent, 

p = hy DESCRIP- 

1 — — - — — —_— — 
* 
— 
— -—_———— — 
— — — — 
— 2 8 = — — * = _ 
8 * 933 * 

„„ 

DESCRIPTION or FREE-MASONS 
HALL. 

Turs building is ſituate on the ſouth ſide 
of Great Yueen-ftreet, Lincoln Sinn- fields; a 
ſtreet very ſpacious and commodious for car- 
riages to and from the Hall on days of ſo- 
lemnity. The houſe and garden, where now 
the Hall is erected, is freehold, and was pur- 
chaſed by the ſociety of Free-maſons for re 
thouſand two hundred pounds, with ſome intereſt 
due thereon, The houſe itſelf was built by 
the renowned brother Inigo Jones, which, after 
various alterations and amendments, is now 
uſed as an elegant tavern and coffee-houſe; 
though the major part of the upper rooms 
are occaſionally uſed by the ſociety ; ſome for 
committee-rooms, others for the meetings of 
the Reyal Arch Chapter, the Grand-flewards, 
and other lodges of eminence; but the Hall 
1s built where the garden formerly was, behind 
the houſe; the length of which was 99 feet, 
and breadth 43 feet, and the whole length of 
the building from front to rear 1s 200 feet. 

Tux foundation of this moſt magnificent 
building was laid on Monday the 1ſt of May 

1775: 

3 

L 149 J 

1775, by the right hon. lord Petre, then 
grand-maſter, accompanied by his officers and 
a very numerous and brilliant company of 
maſons and ladies“, and it was dedicated on 
Thur/doy the twenty-third of May 1776, by 
the ſame nobleman, aſſiſted by the proper 
officers, with a very numerous and genteel 
company of paſt grand-officers and brethren 
of eminence and diſtinction, at which upwards 
of four hundred ladies were preſent : for 

As ſolid happineſs we prize, 

Within our breaft this jewel lies, 
And they are fools who roam; 

The world has nothing to beſtow, 

From our own ſelves our joy muſt flow, 
And this building our home. 

Tux entrance into the Hall is from the 
committee- room, through a ſmall gallery, on 
the right of which is a commodious flight of 
ſteps leading to the under- croft, or ground 
apartments, and on the left a ſmall room 

* See ceremony obſerved at laying the Foundation 
ſtone, page 81, &c. 

+ See ceremony obſerved at the Dedication of Free- 
maſons Hall, page 98, &c, 

ap- 

26 J 

appropriated for the reception of wines on 
grand feſtivals: above this is a large muſic 
gallery, capable of containing three hundred 
ſpectators, excluſive of the band of muſic, 
ſupported by pillars and pilaſters of the com- 
poſite order. The length of this building 
within the walls is 92 feet, it is 43 feet 
broad, and upwards of 60 feet high. At the 
upper end of the Hall there is a place allotted 
for the grand- officers and their attendants, when 
the grand- lodge meet, which takes up about 
one-fourth of the whole length, and which is 
higher than the reſt by two ſteps; at the 
extremity of which is a very beautiful alcove 
of a ſemicircular form, to hold the grand- 
maſter's chair. On the right and left of this 
elevated place are two galleries, ſupported 
by beautiful fluted pillars of the Corinthian 
order, either for muſic, or to admit ladies to 
the ſight of ſuch ceremonies as the laws of 
the ſociety will permit. The remaining part 
of the Hall is for the uſe of the grand- ſtew- 
ards, and brethren 1n general, when the grand- 
lodge aſſembles. The pilaſters on each ſide 
of the Hall are fluted, and otherwiſe mo! 
beautifully decorated. Between theſe pilaſ- 

ters there are places appropriated for the re- 

ception 

E 

ception of full-length paintings of the grand- 
officers in their maſonic dreſs, and above 
them are places for ſuch hiſtorical paintings 
as have ſome affinity to the royal art, or are 
expreſſive of the virtues of Free- maſonry. 
All the other intermediate ſpaces are moſt 
elegantly decorated with the moſt beautiful 
emblematical, ſymbolical, and hieroglyphical 
figures and repreſentations of the myſteries 
of the royal art. The delighted eye, glanc- 
ing over all theſe ſplendid objects, would reſt 
with complete ſatisfaction on this beautiful 
fabric, to which they ſerve as embelliſhments, 
if the whole of the front building had been 
equal in beauty and elegance to the Hall: For 

Example is a living law, whoſe ſway 
Men more than all the written laws obey; 
We 1o curſelves may all our wiſhes grant, 
For nothing coveting, we nothing want. 

Rouny the top of the ſide walls runs a 
{mall balluſtrade, or rather a kind of orna- 
mented iron paliſades, capable of holding a 
vaſt number of ſpectators; above which a 
number of ſemicircular windows are placed, 
ſo contrived, as to open and ſhut with the 

greateſt 

— 152 J 

greateſt eaſe and facility to let in freſh air as 
often as may be required. The reaſon why 
the windows are placed ſo high, is, that no 
ſpectators from the adjacent houſes might 
view our maſonic ceremonies. 

Tux roof of this magnificent Hall is in all 
probability the higheſt finiſned piece of 
workmanſhip in Europe, having gained uni- 
verſal applauſe from all beholders, and has 
raiſed the character of the architect (Richard 
Cox) beyond expreſſion. In the center of this 
roof a moſt ſplendid ſun is repreſented in bur- 
niſhed gold, ſurrounded by the twelve ſigns 
of the Zodiac, with their reſpective charac- 
ters; viz. 

Aries, . Taurus, g. Gemini, 0, 

Cancer, S. Leo, g. Virgo, m. 

Libra, . Scorpio, u. Sagittarius, . 
Capricorn, . Aquarius, . and Piſces, 3c. 

The emblematic meaning of the fun is well 
known to the enlightened and inquiſitive Free- 
maſon, and as the real ſun is ſituated in the 
center of the univerſe, ſo is this emblematic 
ſun fixed in the center of real maſonry. We 

all know that the ſun is the fountain of light, 
| the 

1 153 } 

the ſource of the ſeaſons, the cauſe of the vi- 
ciſſitudes of day and night, the parent of ve- 
getation, and the friend of man; hence, the 
ſcientific free-maſon only knows the reaſon 
why the ſun is thus placed in the centre of 
this beautiful Hall. 

Wuzxeves the grand - lddge aſſemble, this 
Hall is further ornamented with five brilliant 
and rich cut-glaſs chandeliers, the moſt mag- 
nificent of which hangs above that part of 
the Hall allotted for the grand-officers ; the 
other four are diſtributed in pairs, at equal 
diſtances. Theſe luſtres, with a ſufficient 

number of ſconces, in which only wax lights 

burn, illuminate the Hall with a brilliancy 
that far ſurpaſſeth the ideas of all that have 
not beheld it in this blaze of day. 

Hail ! heavenly lights, ſupremely fair! 

Whoſe ſmiles can balm the horrors of deſpair. 
Bids in each breaji unuſual tranſport flow, 

And wipe the tears that ſtain the cheek of woe : 
How bleſt the man who quits each meaner ſcene, 

Like thee + exalted, ſmiling and ſerene l 

+ Free-maſonry. 

U IV hoſe 

— " — 
W „„ 
a 12 

1 

— u— SH o_—_— 

[ +854 - 

Whoſe riſing ſoul purſues a nobler flight , 
Whoſe boſom melts with more reſin d delight; 
Whoſe thoughts, elate with tranſports all ſublime, 
Can ſoar at once beyond the views of time : 

Till loos'd from earth, as angels unconfin'd, 

I flies aerial on the darting wind; 

Free as the keen-ey'd eagle, bears away, 

And mounts the regions of eternal day. 

Wi the ſociety is aſſembled in this Hal 
the maſonic tables are placed in the follow- 
ing order, viz. The grand-officers table, 
which forms an exact ſemi- circle, is placed 
at the upper part of the Hall, being elevated 
about three feet higher than the other tables, 
At the vertex of this half-round the grand- 
maſter is ſeated, and on his right and left the 
grand- officers, and twelve grand- ſtewards who 
attend the grand-maſter : within the conca- 
vity of this table, maſons of birth and diſtinc- 
tion are placed, as likewiſe the grand- ſword- 
bearer, who ſits facing the grand- maſter, and 
all foreign viſitors of rank. Parallel to theſe 
ſteps, the table belonging to the grand- 
ſtewards is placed, extending from ſide to 
ſide, leaving only a paſſage for the attendants 
to paſs and repaſs; at this table none but the 

mem- 

— 155 J 

members of the ſtewards lodge are permitted 
to ſit, except foreign ſtewards by invitation. 
Perpendicular to this table, and parallel to 
the ſide walls, five tables for the reſt of the 
brethren are placed, extending the whole 
length of the Hall, unoccupied by the other 
tables before · mentioned; they are placed at 
ſuch diſtances as to have ſufficient room for 
the ſervants to attend on every occaſion. 
Theſe tables are all of mahogany, and ſo 
made, that they can be placed and replaced 
in a very little time, and with the greateſt eaſe 
and convenience. 

This Hall loves peace, and honours virtue's cauſe, 

Checks crimes, hates vice, and preſerves good laws, 

Azove the grand-maſter's chair a beautiful 
dial is placed, by which maſonic time 1s 
meaſured, and was the preſent of brother 
Martin, clock-maker in London. At the ex- 
tremity of the Hall, two very commodious 
water cloſets are ſituated, which are ſo con- 
trived, that a ſtranger ſuppoſes they are en- 
trances into other apartments. 

2 Tux 

— — 

1 

Tux furniture of this magnificent Ha} 
correſponds in every reſpect with the build- 
ing, and the jewels worn by the grand-officers 
are gold of the moſt curious workmanſhip, 
pendent to blue garter ribbon. 

Tus ſtructure was raiſed by a contribution 
from the brethren, and coſt upwards of eve 
thouſand pounds; it is the property of the ſo- 
ciety at large, and inveſted in the hands of 
truſtees, together with the fee-ſimple and in- 
heritance, right and intereſt of and in the ſe- 
veral meſſuages, garden, and hereditaments 
of the ſaid ſociety, ſituate as aforeſaid, with 
their appurtenances, together with the Hal 
erected in the ſaid garden, and all other erec- 
tions and improvements to be hereafter built 
and made upon, or to the premiſes, has been 
granted and conveyed by the truſtees of the 
faid ſociety to the following perſons in truſt 
for and in behalf of the brethren at large; 
to wit, | 

The right hon. Thomas lord viſc. Wentworth, 
Sir Peter Parker, knight. 
Tobn Crofts, elq. 

Lieutenant-colonel Fobn Deaken, 
cp Bn | | The. 

f 9 ) 

Thomas Parker, eſq. 

Henry Dagge, eſq. 

Charles Frederick, eſq. 

William Hodgſon, eſq. 

William Atkinſon, apothecary. 
Fohn Allen, attorney at law. And 
James Heſeltine, proctor. 

Tnar as often as any of the ſaid truſtees 

ſhall happen to die, or decline the truſt, a 

new truſtee or new truſtees ſhall be nominated- - 

——————___—— 

= 

and appointed by the ſubſcribers to the Ten- 

tine, or their repreſentatives, or the major 
part of them, aſſembled at a meeting to be 
for that purpoſe called at the Hall, which 
meeting of ſubſcribers, at leaſt 10 days pre- 
vious notice ſhall be given in the London 
Gazette, and one or more other public London 
newſpaper, 

THAT the ſaid truſtees, or the major part 
of them, ſhall, from time to time, meet to- 
gether at the Hall for the purpoſe of carrying 
into execution, and managing the buſineſs 
of the truſt repoſed'in them as aforeſaid, and 
ſhall have power from time to time to adjourn 
as occaſion may require; which aſſembly or 

meet- 

= 

6 258 1 

meeting is called The Tontine Committee; and 
ſhall from time to time be convened by ſum- 
mons or notice left at the ſeveral places of 
abode of the ſeveral truſtees, at leaſt ſix days 
previous to every ſuch committee. 

THrarT this Tontine Committee, five of whom 
ſhall make a quorum to tranſact buſineſs, ſhall 
have power to appoint a chairman, an auditor 
or ſecretary, and ſuch other officers, and at 
ſuch ſalary. or ſalaries, as to them ſhall ſeem 
meet: and the committee, or five of them, 
aſſembled as aforeſaid, ſhall have the ſole ma- 
nagement and direction of the affairs relative 
to the truſt aforeſaid; and the determination 
of all doubts, diſputes, or difficulties that 
ſhall or may ariſe touching any of the matters 
aforeſaid. 

Trar ſuch ſalary or ſalaries as aforeſaid, 
and all other reaſonable. charges and expences 
that may ariſe in the management of the bu- 
ſineſs, not exceeding in the whole the annua 
ſum of ol; ſhall be defrayed by the grand- 
treaſurer for the time being, out of the ſaid 
grand fund, 

Ir 

Lp 

Ix is further, under the government of a 
committee, called The Hall committee, conſiſt- 
ing of all preſent and paſt grand-officers, and 
ſome of the brethren. The great induſtry of 
this committee, who generally aſſemble every 
14 days, have made maſonic buſineſs their 
pleaſure, and conſidered labour as an amuſe- 
ment, | 

—— — Nature lives by toil: [world, 
Beaſt, bird, air, fire, the heavens, and rolling 
All live by action; nothing lies at reſt, 

But death and ruin; man is born to care; 
Faſhiown'd, improv'd by labour : this of old 

Wiſe ſtates obſerving, gave that happy law, 
Which doom'd the rich and needy, ev'ry rank, 
To manual occupation, and oft called | plough, 
Their chieftains from the ſpade, or furrowing 
Or bleating ſheepfold. Hence utility 

Thro* all conditions; hence the joys of health ; 
Hence ſtrength of arm, and clear judicious thought ; 
Hence corn, and wine, and oil, and all in life 
Delectable. What ſimple nature yields 

(Aud nature does ber part) are only rude 
Materials, cumbers on the thorny ground; 

Tis' toil that makes them wealih, 

Tuts 

+ a 7 

* 

Tuis beautiful and moſt magnificent buikl- 
ing was upwards of three years in ſiniſhing, 
and may now, without the leait degree of 
partiality, be called the completeſt maſonic 
Hall in the world. It was built from a plan, 
and under the ſole direction of Thomas Sandby, 
eſq. profeſſor of architecture to the royal aca- 
demy, and now grand architect to the ſociety 
of Free and Accepted Maſons. 

Tux intention of the fraternity, at ſome 
future period, is to erect a ſplendid and mag- 
nificent front, agreeable to the moſt auguſt 
and ſtately rules of architecture, with a grand, 
commodious, and beautiful entrance, deco- 
rated and embelliſhed with every invention 
ſuitable to Free-maſonry ; which will then be 
a laſting monument of the liberality and mu- 
nificence of the brotherhood; who, without 
oſtentation, ſing, 

May this fam'd fabric ſtand until the day, 
That ver the world its owners gain the ſway. 
implying the author's wiſh that Free-maſonry 
may become univerſal. In ſhort, the builders 
ſeem to have had in view the excellent maxims 
of deſign, which our inimitable poet Mr. 
Pope has thus elegantly verſified: > 
0 

(266+ 1] 

To build, to plant, whatever you intend, 

To rear the column, or the arch to bend, 

To ſwell the terras, or to ſink the grot, 

In all, let nature never be forgot. 

But treat the goddeſs like a modeſt fair, * 
Nor over-dreſs, nor leave her wholly bare. 
Let not each beauty ev'ry where be ſpy'd, 
Where half the ſkill is decently to hide. 

He gains all points, who pleaſingly confounds, 
Surprizes, varies, and conceals the bounds, 

Hence the grand-lodge of England will no 
longer be under the neceſſity of hiring halls 
for their maſonic meetings and public feſti- 
vals of inferior communities, or reſorting to 
taverns to tranſact the buſineſs of their ſociety, 

= — — PIT JE OE —_ 

m 
ne 
fe 

I 163 ] 

HISTORY any ANTIQUITY 
O F 

F R E E- MAS ON R V 
3 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES. 

FIRST, IN FRANCE. 

* * * 

. furniſhes us with a very im- 
perfect ſtate of free- maſonry in France; 
however we are pretty well aſſured that the 
royal art flouriſhed there as early as the year 
A. D. 126. Many of which came to England 
about the year 2 54, and many more in the 
year 680. Under the ancient Gallic and 
Norman princes, maſonry received very ex- 
traordinary marks of indulgence; there is no 
doubt but that the ſkill of maſons, which 
was always tranſcendently great, even in the 
moſt barbarous times, their wonderful kind- 
neſs and attachment to each other, how dif- 
ferent ſoever in condition, and their inviola- 
X 2 ble 

[ 164 } 

ble fidelity in keeping religiouſly their ſecrets, 
muſt expoſe them in ignorant, troubleſome, 
and ſuperſtitious times, to a vaſt variety of 
adventures, according to the different fate of 
parties, and other alterations in government, 
It is, however, to be remarked, that maſons 
have always been loyal, which frequently 
expoſed them to great ſeverities, when power 
wore the trappings of juſtice, and thoſe who 
committed treaſon, puniſhed true men as 
traitors *. | 

In the year 1737, France followed the ex- 
ample of Holland in diſturbing the repoſe of 
the ſociety; though many of the greateſt 
perſonages in that kingdom had defended the 
lodges of maſons, and intereſted the court in 
their behalf, yet they were decreed to the ſame 
fate as the United Provinces, by reaſon, that 
under the pretence of the inviolable ſecrets of 
their order, they might cover ſome danger- 
ous deſign, which might in the end be to the 
diſadvantage, not only of religion, but even 
of the kingdom's peace. But theſe days have 
been. At this time there are none ſo ſcrupu- 

* Manuſcript in the Britiſh Muſeum. 
lous 

[ 165 } 

lous in regard to maſonry, as they were ſome 
years ago. It is well known that the prince | 
of Conti, that illuſtrious hero, glories in hav- | 
ing been made a maſon ; who frequently lays 

alide his warlike habiliments, to wear the 

maſonic apron, and work with ſurprizing di- 

ligence and aſſiduity in carrying on the grand 

deſign. 

NoTw1THSTANDING all this the ſociety have 
built a very magnificent hall at Marſeilles, in- 
titled The Lodge of St. John. It is 58 feet 
long, 3o broad, and 42 feet high. 

Ar the bottom of the hall, under a gilded 
canopy, the valences of which are blue, fringed 
with gold, is a painting which repreſents the 
genius of maſonry, ſupporting the portrait of 
the king of France, upon a pedeſtal, with this 
c inſcription : Dilectiſimo Regi Monumentum 
Amoris Latomi Maſjilienſis ; that is, The 
maſons at Marſeilles have erected this monu- 
ment of their affection to their moſt beloved 

king. 

@ 8 

A cen1vs ſeated below the pedeſtal, pre- 
ſents with one hand this inſcription, and with 
18 the 

[ 166 1 

the other the arms of the lodge, with theit 
motto: Deo, Regi, et Patriæ, Fidelitas; that 
is, Fidelity to God, our king, and country, 
Above this is a genius which crowns the king. 

To the right of this painting is placed ano- 
ther, reprefenting the wiſdom of Solomon, with 
this inſcription above it; Prudentia, i. e. 

Prudence. 

To the left is another, repreſenting the 
courage of St. John the Baptiſt, in remonſtrat- 
ing with Herod upon his debaucheries, with 
this inſcription ; Fortitudo, i. e. Fortitude, 

Tu right ſide of the hall is ornamented 
with paintings of equal grandeur. The firſt 
repreſents Joſeph acknowledging his brethren, 
and pardoning them for the ill uſage he had 
received from them, with this inſcription ; 
Venia, i. e. Pardon, 

Tur ſecond repreſents Job upon the dung- 
hill, his houſe deſtroyed, his fields laid waſte 
by ſtorm, his wife inſulting him, and himſelf 
calm, lifting his hands towards heaven, with 
this inſcription ;- Potientia, 1, e. Patience. 

Tur 

ivy 

. 

Taz third repreſents St. Paul, and St, 
Barnabas, refuſing divine honours at Lyſra, 
with this inſcription 3 Humilitas, i. e. Humi- 

lity. } 

Tre fourth, Jonathan, when he warned 
David to keep from the city, in order to 
avoid the danger which threatened his days, 
with this inſcription z Amicitia, i. e. Friend- 

ſhip. 

Tur fifth, Solomon ſurveying the works of 
the temple, and giving his orders for the exe- 
cution of the plan, which his father David 
had left him of it, with this inſcription ; 
Pietas, i. e. Piety. 

Tux ſixth, St. Peter and the other apoſtles 
paying tribute to Cæſar, by means of the 
piece of money found miraculouſly in the 
belly of a fiſh, with this inſcription; Fidelitas, 
i. e. Fidelity. 

Tux ſeventh, the charity of the good 
Samaritan, with this inſcription z Charitas, 

i. e. Charity. 

THE 

F 168 J 

| Tux left fide of the hall contains three 
paintings: The firſt, Tobias curing his father, 
with thefe words for the inſcription ; Filiale 
Debitum, i. e. Filial Debt. 

Tux fecond, the father of the prodigal 
ſon, when he embraces him, and pardons his 
offences, with this inſcription; Obedientia, i. e. 
Obedience. 

Ox each ſide the door are two paintings of 
equal grandeur: one repreſents the Apaſtles 

giving alms in common, the inſcription; þ 
| Eleemoſyna, i. e. Alms-giving. 0 
ö Txz other repreſents Lot receiving the 65 
angels into his houſe, believing them to be Pi 
ſtrangers, the inſcription is Hoſpitalitas, i. e. Re 
Hoſpitality. 

Tux four corners of the hall are decorated 4 
2 ; vh 
with four allegorical paintings; in one are | 
en 

repreſented two geniuſes holding a large 
. = a Cudl 
medal, on which are painted three pillars of 1 
a gold colour, with this motto; Hic poſuere a, 
Vir 

locum, Virtus, Sapientia, Forma; i. e. Here 
virtue, wiſdom, beauty fixed their ſeat. In 
another 

1 169 ] 

another two geniuſes equally ſupporting a 
large medal, on which are repreſented three 
hearts ſet on fire by the ſame flame, united 
by the bond of the order, with this motto; 
Pedlora jungit Amor, Pietaſque ligavit Amantes, 
i. e. Love joins their hearts, and piety the tie. 
The two others are in the ſame taſte, but 
{ſupported by one genius only, being a ſmaller 
ſize, The medals repreſent as follows; the 
firſt, three branches; one of olive, another 
of laurel, and another of myrtle; with this 
motto; Hic Pacem mutuo damus, accipimuſque 
diciſim, i. e. Here peace we give, and here 
by turns receive. The other, a level in a hand 
coming from heaven, placed perpendicularly 
upon a heap of ſtones of unequal forms and 
ſizes, with this motto; Egua Lege ſortitur 
infrnes et imos, 1, e. One equal law of high 
and low the lot. 

AlL theſe paintings are upon a line; thoſe 
which are placed oppolite the windows are 
entirely in front. Over the inner door of 
entrance is this inſcription, in a painting diſ- 
played by a child; S. T. O. T. A. Varia hæc 
FVitutum Exempla, Fraterne Liberalitatis Monu- 

$ menta 

1 170 J 

menta D. V. and C. Latomi Maſſilienſes, Fra- 
tribus que aſſequenda, præbent, Anno Lucis 5765. 
The letters 8. T. O. T. A. ſignify, Supremo 
Totius Orbis Terrarum Architecto; i. e. The 
maſter, vice-maſter, and whole body of free- 
maſons at Mar/zilles have erected theſe different 
examples of the virtues and monuments of the 
fraternal liberality, propoſed to the imitation 
of their brethren, to the honour of the ſu- 

preme architect of the whole world, in the 
year of light 5765. 

Eacn painting bears below it the arms and 
blazon of the brethren who cauſed them to 
be painted. Every ſpace from one column to 
another forms an intercolumniation. Upon 
the middle of each pilaſter, being 24 in num- 
ber, are raiſed corbals, in form of antique 
guaines, upon which are placed the buſts of 
the great and virtuous men of antiquity. 

Tak curtains to the gilded canopy are in 
the Italian taſte, and are four in number. 
Three great branches of chryſtal light this 
YN GE | hall 

E 
hall at all maſonic meetings, and ſerve as an 
additional ornament. 

Taz lodges in France at preſent are both 
numerous and elegant, for their grand-lodge 
actually conſiſts in the following grand- 
officers, viz. Grand-maſter, adminiſtrator-gene- 
ral, grand-conſervator, repreſentative of the 
grand. maſter, ſenior grand-warden, junior grand- 
warden, grand-orator, grand-ſecretary, grand- 
treaſurer, ſenior grand-expert, junior grand- 
expert, grand-ſeal-keeper, grand-record-keeper, 

grand- architect, grand-maſter of the ceremonies, 

grand-introduftor, grand-hoſpitaler, and grand- 
almoner. Theſe are at preſent all noblemen, 
and their different E/ignia are beyond expreſ- 
fon rich and beautiful, 

| In the grand-lodge of France there are alſo 
deputy or acting officers appointed for diffe- 
rent juriſdictions, who are all gentlemen of 
conſequence, and do honour to their ſtations, 

LT. 3 The 

C90 J 
The SPEECH of Count T, at jhe 

Initiation of his Son into Maſonry 29th Nov. 
1773, tranſlated from the French. 

Dear Son, 

I conNGRATULATE you on your admiſſion 
into the moſt ancient and perhaps the moſt 
reſpectable ſociety in the univerſe. To you 
the myſteries of maſonry are about to be re- 
vealed, and ſo bright a ſun never ſhed its 
luſtre on your eyes. In this awful moment, 
when proſtrate at this holy altar, do you not 
ſhudder at every crime, and have you not 
confidence in every virtue? May this reflec- 
tion inſpire you with noble ſentiments; may 
you be penetrated with a religious abhorrence 
of every vice that degrades the dignity of hu- 
man nature; and may you feel the elevation 
of ſoul which ſcorns a diſhonourable action, 
and ever invites to the practice of piety and 
virtue ! 

THesE are the wiſhes of a father and a 
brother conjoined. Of you the greateſt hopes 
are raiſed; let not our expeCtations be de- 
ceived. You are the fon of a maſon who 
glories in the profeſſion; and for your zeal 

and 

Et 299 1 

and attachment, your ſilence and good con- 
duct, your father has already pledged his 
honour, 

Yov are now as a member of this illuſtri- 
ous order, introduced a ſubject of a new coun- 
try, whoſe extent is boundleſs. Pictures are 
open to your view, wherein true patriotiſm 
is exemplified in glaring colours, and a ſeries 
of tranſactions recorded, which the rude hand 
of time can never eraze. The obligations 
which influenced the firſt Brutus and Manlius 
to ſacrifice their children to the love of their 
country, are not more ſacred than thoſe which 
bind me to ſupport the honour and reputation 
of this venerable order. 

Tris moment, my ſon, you owe to me 
a ſecond birth; ſhould your conduct in life 
correſpond with the principles of maſonry, 
my remaining years will paſs away with plea- 
fure and ſatisfaction. Obſerve the great ex- 
ample of our ancient maſters, peruſe our hiſ- 
tory and our conſtitutions. The beſt, the 
moſt humane, the braveſt, and moſt civilized 
of men have been our patrons. Though 
the vulgar are ſtrangers to our works, the 
greateſt 

E 274 J 
greateſt geniuſes have ſprung from our order; 
The moſt illuſtrious characters on earth have 
laid the foundation of their moſt amiable 
qualities in maſonry. The wiſeſt of princes 
planned our inſtitution, at raifing a temple 
to the eternal and ſupreme ruler of the uni- 

verſe. 

Swzar, my ſon, that you will be a true 
and faithful maſon. Know from this moment 
that I center the affection of a parent in the 
name of a brother and a friend. May your 
heart be ſuſceptible of love and efteem, and 
may you burn with the ſame zeal your father 
poſſeſſes. Convince the world by your new 
alliance you are deſerving our favours, and 
never forget the ties which bind you to ho- 
nour and to juſtice, View not with indif- 
ference the extenſive connections you have 
formed, but let univerſal benevolence regulate 
your conduct. Exert your abilities in the ſer- 
vice of your king and your country, and 
deem the knowledge you have this day at- 
tained, the happieſt acquiſition of your life. 

REcaLL to memory the ceremony of your 
initiation; learn to bridle your tongue, and to 
| | govern 

t 9 3 
govern your paſſions; and ere long you will 
have occaſion to ſay, © In becoming a maſon 
I truly become the man; and while I breathe 

will never diſgrace a jewel that kings may 
prize,” 

Ir I live, my ſon, to reap the fruits of this 
day's labour, my happineſs will be complete. 
I will meet death without terror, cloſe my 
eyes in peace, and expire, without a groan, 
in the arms of a virtuous and a worthy free- 

maſon . 

t Diſcours prononce a Poccaſion de Fete de Saint f 
Jean, 24 Juin 1776, dans la Loge Frangoiſe éẽtablie 1 
a Brunſwig ſous les glorieux Auſpices de Monſeigneur | 
le Duc Regnant de Brunſwig et de Lunebourg, et de 
Monſeigneur le Duc Ferdinand ſon Frere, 8vo. 2 

HI S- 

— — — — 
— ͤ— — . —˙L ü (w m -- 

—— — 

1 177 J 

HISTORY axv ANTIQUITY 
O F 
F RE E- MAS ON R Y 
1 N | 

922 MA: 04 

M* SONRY is of very early date in 
Germany, but only firſt revived in 

1738, and the firſt lodge formed in Brunſwick 
that year under the patronage of the grand- 
maſter of Scotland. In this lodge the preſent 
king of Pruſſia, when prince royal, was ini- 
tiated on the 15th Aug. A. D. 1738. The 
prince approved of the proceedings of the 
ſociety, and ſoon after ordered a new lodge to 
be formed at Berlin, for which purpoſe ano- 
ther patent was obtained from Scotland. In 
conſequence of this event, maſonry began to 
flouriſh through all the Pruſſian dominions, 
under the royal auſpices, and ſeveral other 
lodges were conſtituted, 

2 Ix 

4 ꝗ ͤ—'Téæ—⁴Æœœ᷑œ29W2⸗iñĩ·— 

L178 J 

Is the year 1740, his majeſty, on aſcending 
the throne, expreſſed, that it would give him 
great pleaſure if the ſociety would eſtabliſh a 
lodge of free-maſons at Berlin. In conſe- 
quence of which Baron Bielefeld and the privy 
counſellor Jordan took that charge upon them, 
and formed a lodge under the denomination 
of the Three Gloves. Their conſtitution bore 
date in the month of June 1740, and in the 
month of 7uly, in the ſame year, prince Wil. 
liam, margrave Charles, and the duke of Hol- 
ſtein Beck were initiated in that new lodge. So 
that in a few years upwards of 50 lodges were 
eſtabliſhed, who acknowledged this lodge as 
the ſupreme grand-lodge of Germany. When 
Baron Bielefeld, who had all this time acted 
as grand-maſter, left the king of Prufſia's do- 
minions, margrave Charles was elected grand- 
maſter of the order, but on his unfortunately 
being killed in the wars, the ſociety elected 
for his ſucceſſor Frederick Auguſtus prince of 

Brunſwick. In the year 1775, the grand- 
lodge of Berlin ſent a deputy to the grand- 
aſſembly which was held at Brunſwick, who 
admitted a certain approved ſyſtem, planned 
by nine princes of the empire, agreeable to 

which 

* —— —— — —— 

I 3 

which all the German lodges were requeſted 
to work; however, only 41 entered into this 
aſſociation, who choſe prince Ferdinand of 
Brunſwick for their grand-maſter. On this 
occaſion a curious gold medal was preſented 
by the above-mentioned 41 reunited lodges to 
their new grand-maſter, on one ſide of which 
was repreſented the buſt of the prince, with 
this inſcription round it; FERDINAND Dux 
Bruns. ET LuNEB. Sc. with this exergue 
OrMm. iv GERM. Unit. Lis. Mara. Sup. 
MopkRaTOR. On the other ſide there is a 
lion ſleeping under the eye of Providence, 
under which are theſe words; Vip1, Vic, 
Qu1zxsco, and under thoſe the following words; 
Os. Flic. Reunion. Murar. LIBEROR. 
GERMAN. 

Tn ſociety, however, was not free from 
perſecutions in Germany, occalioned by the 
oreat jealouſy of ſome ladies belonging to the 
court, who having endeavoured by various 
artful and crafty devices, to get ſome of their 
tools and agents into many of the lodges, 
though without any effect ; then they attempted 

to inflame the mind of Maria Theręſia, the 

2 2 em- 

180 ] 

empreſs queen, againſt the ſociety, and carried 
it ſo far with that princeſs, as to get an order 
for ſurprizing them all in their. lodges, to re. 
venge themſelves in as open a manner as poſ- 
ſible, for ſome affronts they imagined had 
been given them by the fraternity. But the 
ſucceſs of their undertaking aid not by any 
means anfwer the intentions of their diligence 
and induſtry; for no leſs a perſon than the 
late emperor Joſephus I. the firſt maſon in 
Europe, inſtantly put a ſtop to all their pro- 
ceedings, by declaring himſelf ready to an- 
ſwer for their conduct, and to redreſs any plea 
that could with truth be alledged againſt 
them; but that the ladies or their abettors 
muſt find ſome better foundation for com- 
plaint, before he ſhould enter into the merits 
of the cauſe, as what had already appeared 
was only falſhood and miſrepreſentation. 

Tuis event might probably be the reaſon 
that no more lodges appear to have been eſta- 
bliſhed in Pruſſia, under the Engliſb conſtitu- 
tion, previous to the year 1767, when a pa- 
tent was obtained from the duke of Beaufort 
to conſtitute a ma at Berlin, under the ap- 

prongs 

E 

pellation of Le Royale Tork; which name was 
adopted in honour of his late royal highneſs 
the duke of York, who was there initiated into 
maſonry, while on his travels. 

In 1769 a lodge was conſtituted at Brunſ- 
wick by virtue of a patent from England, 
which may properly be called the chief lodge 
in this part of Germany. The work of maſonry 
is here couducted alternately in the French and 
German languages, agreeable to the Engliſh 
forms. This lodge was inſtituted a grand- 
lodge in the end of the year 1770, on which 
occaſion a very numerous and ſplendid com- 
pany of maſons attended. The annual con- 
tributions of this lodge for charitable pur- 
poſes are very extenſive, 

His ſerene highneſs prince Ferdinand of 
Brunſwick generouſly conſented to be the 
patron of this lodge, and accepted the office 

of maſter; ſince which time he has received 

a deputation from England, empowering him 
to preſide as provincial grand-maſter over all 
the lodges in Lower Saxony. Under his high- 
neſs, a deputy grand-maſter is appointed to 
ſuperintend the government of the lodges. 
5 I HAVE 

—_— oy IR ETC 

— . —— . I — — 

C os 1} 

T nave now a German book of ma- 
ſonry before me, printed by the ſociety's 
authority in 1777, which calls the king 
of Pruſſia protector of all maſons in Ger- 
many, Ferdinand duke of Brunſwick and Lu- 
nenburgh, &c, elected grand-maſter of all the 
united lodges in Germany. His ſerene high- 
neſs duke Charles, reigning duke of Brunſwick, 
protector. His moſt ſerene highneſs Frederick 
Auguſtus, prince of Brunſwick and Lunenburgh, 
provincial grand-maſter of all united lodges 
in the Pruſſian dominions. His molt ſerene 
highneſs prince Maximilian Fulius Leopold of 
Brunfwick and Lunenburgh, deputy provincial 
grand-maſter. His moſt ſerene highneſs prince 
Charles, landgrave of Heſſe-caſſel, provincial 
' grand-maſter in Denmark, and protector of the 
united lodges in Hamburgh, Abſalom, Sz. George 
and Emanuel. His royal highneſs Charles 
Chriſtian Joſeph, duke of Courland, protector 
of maſons in Courland, &c. 

Since the principal ſovereign princes, and 
moſt of the nobility and perſons of eminence 
and diſtinction in Germany, have long ſtood 
forth, and at this moment are protectors and 

patrons of the ſociety of free maſons, it is 
not 

Ot 

L 7 

not ſurprizing that the order flouriſhes in 
particular manner throughout that extenſive 
empire. The harmony of the brotherhood 
has notwithſtanding been greatly diſturbed a 
ſecond time, by the introduction of principles 
and conceits quite new in maſonry. The pro- 
pagators of theſe novelties firit appeared at the 
concluſion of the laſt war in Germany, and 
moſt of them being neceſſitous perſons, they 
in a manner ſubſiſted upon the ſpoils of their 
deluded adherents. They pretended to a ſu- 
perior knowledge in the ſcience of maſonry, 
and took upon themſelves the appellation of 
The Reform of the North, under which name 
they aſſembled for ſome time; but at laſt 
their principles were enquired into by the true 
brethren, and found to be inconſiſtent with 
true and good malonry, at laſt fell to the 
ground, and is now no more, 

In 1768 the free-maſons in Germany ob- 
tained a charter, empowering them legally to 
convene their lodges, and to tranſa& the buſi- 
neſs of their ſociety, from the king of Pruſſia, 
who accepted the office of grand-maſter, the 
elector of Saxony, and the queen of Hungary 
and Bohemia, This charter was afterwards 

ratl- 

„% — — 

1 184 J 
fatified and confirmed by the greateſt maſon 
in Europe, the late emperor himſelf, Theſe 
crowned heads had long experienced the great 
utility of the ſociety, in relieving the poor and 
needy in their ſundry dominions; in erecting 
ſchools and ſeminaries of learning for father. 
leſs and deſerted children; and in eſtabliſhing 
funds for the ſupport of thoſe parents whoſe 
narrow circumſtances would not permit them 
to provide for their offspring, or give then 
ſuch an education as was neceſſary to render 

them fit and uſeful members of ſociety, 

ImMmEDiaTELY after this charter was ob- 
tained, maſonry aſſumed a new form in Ger- 
many, The greateſt part of the lodges anni- 
hilated all their foreign ' conſtitutions, and 
erected a new grand-Jodge at Berlin, where a 
freſh code of laws and regulations were formed, 
This lodge aſſumed the name of Mother Lodpe, 
and granted many conſtitutions under the ge- 
neral title of Strife Obſervants, i. e. The ſtrict 

obſervance. Several lodges were conſtituted 

in different provinces, and a provincial grand- 
lodge nominated for each province. All the 

tranſactions of the ſubordinate lodges in each 

diſtrict were ordered to be ſent to the provin- 
clal 

185 ] 

cial lodge, and from thence tranſmitted to the 
grand-lodge at Berlin, at ſtated times. Printed 
copies of the laws and regulations of their 
new eſtabliſhment were delivered to all the 
provincial lodges, who diſtributed them among 
the lodges in the ſeveral provinces under their 
juriſdiction. By theſe laws it was enacted, 
that no perſon ſhould be made a maſon unleſs 
his character was unimpeachable, and his 
manner of living or his profeſſion reſpectable; 
that he ſhould pay 25 rix- dollars for his initi- 
ation into the firſt degree; 50 rix-dollars on 
his being received into the ſecond ; and 100 
rix-dollars on his being made a maſter maſon *; 
that he ſhould remain at leaſt three months in 
each degree, and that two-thirds of every ſum 
received ſhould be ſent quarterly to the pro- 
vincial lodges, and from thence annually to 
the grand- lodge; that the remaining third 
ſhould be appropriated to defray the expences 
of each particular lodge, and this accumulating 
fund to be employed in granting penſions to 
reduced free- maſons, according tc their ſeveral 
circumſtances. It is greatly to be wiſhed that 

That is, 41. 38. for the firſt degree; 8], 6s. for the 
ſecond ; and, 161, 128. for the maſter's degree. 

A a ſuch 

— ——— ꝰ —â — 

1 

ſuch modes of proceeding were adopted in 
England, the royal art would then be on a 
much more reſpectable footing than at pre- 
ſent, where every one is admitted that can 
but pay the ſtipulated expences. 

Tuxsx great and ſpreading innovations in 
maſonry induced the grand- lodge of England 

to form a compact with the prince of Heſe 

Darmfiadt, then grand- maſter of a lodge held 
at Berlin, under the title of The grand- lodge 
of Germany. 

SUBSTANCE or ru COMPACT, 

To all, Se. 

KNOW Ve— That whereas the ſupreme 
orand-lodge of the moſt ancient and honour- 
able ſociety of free and accepted maſons, 
ſituate at London, of which the moſt noble and 
right - honourable Robert Edward Petre, lord 
Petre, baron of Mritile, in the county of Eſſex, 
js at preſent grand-maſter, has received au- 
thentic teſtimony of the great merit of many 
reſpectable brethren in the empire of Germany, 
who ſome few years ſince (after making the 
neceſſary progreſs in the ancient ſcience) for 

the 

( 283 J 

the well governing and better carrying on the 
bulineſs of the ſociety in thoſe parts, con- 
vened together the maſter and wardens of 12 
lodges, and eſtabliſhed in due form, accord- 
ing to the ancient regulations of the order, a 
lodge in the city of Berlin, under the title of 
The grand-lodge of Germany, which they have 
fince conducted agreeably to the principles of 
true maſonry. And whereas his ſerene high- 
neſs George Charles, prince of Heſe Darmſtadt, 
the preſent grand-maſter, and others the grand- 
officers of the ſaid grand-lodge at Berlin, have, 
through the fraternal aſſiſtance of brother 
Charles Hanbury of Hamburgh, requeſted of 
the grand- lodge ot London, a confirmation of 
their title as grand-lodge of the empire of Ger- 
many, under ſuch reſtrictions and regulations 
as may be agreed upon by both parties; 
which requeſt the grand- lodge at Londen hath, 
of its very high reſpect for his ſaid ſerene high- 
neſs the prince of Heſſe Dermſtadt, and other 
the grand-officers of the {aid grand-lodge at 
Berlin, and in order, as far as may be, to pro- 
mote the honour and univerſality of the ma- 
ſonic order, agreed to comply, under the re- 
ſtrictions and upon the conditions herein: after 
mentioned, viz. 

Aa 2 1ſt, 

1 188 J 

ift, Tux ſupreme grand. ladge at London 
doth hereby confirm the power and authority 
already by them committed to his ſerene 
highneſs the prince of Brunſwick and Lunen- 
burgh, and the territories thereto belonging, 
within which diſtrict the grand-lodge at Berlin 
is not to have or exerciſe any maſonic autho- 
rity. 

2d. Tur grand-lodge at London doth con- 
firm and referve in like manner the power 
and authority committed to Joh Peter Goge!, 
eſq. as provincial grand-maſter for Franconia, 
and the Upper and Lower Rhine, and doth give 
to the ſaid ohn Peter Gogel full power alſo to 
act under the authority of the grand- lodge of 
Berlin, ſhould he at any time be deſirous of 
ſo doing. | 

3d. Tur grand-lodge at London doth hereby 
abrogate, annul, and make void all power 
and authority committed from hence to Gad- 
fried Jacob Jeniſh, medicinæ doctor, as provin- 
cial grand-maſter for Hamburgh and Lower 
Sexony ; and alſo all power and authority com- 
mitted to count De. Wertbern, as provincial 

orand-maſter tor Upper Saxony ; and likewiſe 
all 

—— —U[— 
8 ———— ͤ ꝗ — 

189 J 

all power and authority committed to major 
Agdello, as provincial grand-maſter for the 
Electorate of Saxony; allo all power and au- 
thority committed to baron Hammerſtein, as 
provincial grand-maſter for VWeſiphalia; and 
all power and authority at any time commited 
to any other perſon as provincial grand- 
maſter within the empire of Germany (except 
as aforeſaid). 

4th. Thar the Eleckorate of Hanover ſhall 
remain free, and each of the contracting grand- 
lodges ſhall exerciſe maſonic juriſdiction at 
pleaſure within the ſaid Electorate. 

5th. THAT in conſideration of the premiſes, 
and ſeeing an injury may thereby ariſe to the 
fund of charity of the grand-lodge of England, 
the grand-lodge of Germany doth voluntarily 
promiſe to pay to the grand-lodge of England 
ſuch a ſum of money annually, as the circum- 
ſtances and ſituation of the ſaid grand-lodge of 
Germany may enable them conveniently to 
pay towards the general fund of charity, or 
other maſonic fund in London, and ſuch an- 
nual payment is not to be leſs than the ſum 

of 251, ſterling. 
6th, 

E * 

6th. Tus grand. lodge at London doth there: 
fore hereby acknowledge the grand-lodze at 
Berlin to be the grand lodge of the whole empire 
of Germany, including his Prufſian majeſty*s do- 
minions; and doth hereby promiſe and agree 
not to conſtitute any new lodges, or grant any 
other maſonic power from the date hereof, 
within the empire of Germany, except only 
within thoſe diſtricts reſerved as aforeſaid, 
during the authority of the preſent provincial 
grand-maſters thereof; but with ſaid diſtricts, 
at the expiration of the prelent patents, either 
by deceaſe of the preſent holders or otherwiſe, 
are then to come under the juriſdiction of the 

grand- lodge at Berlin. 

7th. TR grand-lodge of Germany doth hereby 
agree to, and confirm in every part, the ſeve- 
ral regulations before mentioned to be ob- 
ſerved, performed, and kept by each of the 
contracting grand-lodges jointly and ſeverally, 
-agreeable to the true meaning and intenc 
thereof. 

sth. Tat grand-lodge of Germany doth allo 
hereby promiſe and agree, in conſideration 

of the premiſes, not to conſtitute any new 
lodges, 

C. we [3 

lodges, or grant any other maſonic power or 
authority from the date hereof, except within 
the empire of Germany, and in ſtrict conformity 
to this agreement, 

Laſtly, Tue ſaid two contracting grand- 
lodges do hereby mutually agree to keep a 
regular amicable correſpondence with each 
other, and to afford all poſſible aſſiſtance, 
each to the members of the other grand-lodpe, 
to do and tranſact whatever may be found moſt 
likely to contribute to the true intereſt and 
honour of the ſociety, and particularly to uſe 
their endeavours to deſtroy all ſchemes in ma- 
ſonry, and more eſpecially that ſect of maſons 
who call themſelves the rid obſervance, and 
whoſe principles are inconſiſtent with true 

maſonry. Sealed with the ſeal of the grand- 
lodge. 

London, the goth Nov. 

Berlin, the 20th OA. 

A. M. 5773. A. D. 1773. 

Witneſs Petre, G. M. 
J. Heſeltine, Charles Dillon, D. G. M. 
G. S. 7. Croft, S. G. W. 

Joſ. Ferd. Gillic, J. G. W. 
Tris 

— OT. RES 

— — gr bñ— 

k 192 J 

Tunis compact being approved of by the 
preſent king of Pruſſia, was thereupon moſt 
graciouſly- pleaſed to create the grand lodge at 
Berlin a body corporate. 

8 

HIS 

& : 19g; ] 

HISTORY axy ANTIQUITY 
O F 

F R E E- MAS ON R V 
1 N 

YU L a A MX DM 

REE-MASONRY is without doubt of 
F very ancient ſtanding in the Netherlands, 
as lying ſo commodiouſly near both France 
and Germany; but we can only inform our 
readers that the royal art was very flouriſhing 
in the year 1725, and continued ſo until the 
year 1733, when the States general were the 
firſt among the powers of Europe who took 
notice of the Free-maſons : finding that they 
held their lodges in almoſt every great town 
under their government, they began to be ex- 
ceedingly alarmed. It was judged impoſſible 
that architecture could be the only motive of 
their aſſociations; they therefore were deter- 

mined to diſcover, if poſſible, the real inten- 

Bb tion 

( 194 J 

tion of their meetings. Accordingly, in the 
year 1535, an edict was iſſued by the States, 
intimating, that though they had not diſco- 
vered any thing in the behaviour or practices 
of the fraternity called Free-maſons, contrary 
to the peace of the republic, or to the duty 
of good ſubjects, they were reſolved never- 
theleſs to prevent any bad conſequences that 
might enſue from ſuch conventions ; and there- 
fore commanded that theſe congregations and 
aſſemblies ſhould be entirely aboliſhed. Not- 
withſtanding this ordinance, a lodge compoſed 
of ſeveral very reſpectable gentlemen conti- 
nued to meet at a private houſe in Amſterdam. 
The magiſtrates getting intelligence of it, or- 
dered the whole lodge to be arreſted. The 
day following the magiſtrates aſſembled at the 
Stadi-honſe *, and ordered the maſter and war- 
dens of the lodge to be brought before them; 
who ſolemnly declared upon oath, that Hes 

* Town-houſe, where all the courts of juſtice are 

held, and where the magiſtrates meet on every public 
occalion, and anſwers in every reſpect to the Guildhall 

of Londen. This name is given to all public build- th 
ings in Holland, where juſtice is impartially diſtri- or, 
buted, 

maſons 

an: 

maſons were the moſt peaceable ſubjects, faith- 
ful to their prince, and true to their country; 
that the greateſt union prevailed among them 
that they were ſtrangers to hypocriſy and de- 
ceit; that pleaſure reciprocally communicated 
in their ſeveral aſſemblies by the cheerful ob- 
ſervance of every obliging office; and that 
the inſtitution was truly venerable. They in- 
formed the magiſtrates, that they could not 
explain their particular ſecrets and ceremo- 
nies; but that they could aſſure them they 
were neither contrary to moral or divine laws. 
That they would willingly receive any of 
their order among them, who would, no 
doubt, be ready and willing to ſatisfy them 
more particularly in regard to what they had 
explained. Upon this the brethren were diſ- 
charged, and the town ſecretary was appointed 
to attend the lodge. He was accordingly ini- 
tiated; and on his return to the Stadt- houſe 
gave ſuch a ſatisfactory account in favour 
of the ſociety, that in a ſhort time after the 
whole body of the magiſtracy became free and 
accepted Maſons, and continue to be ſo to 
this day, having a lodge ſolely of their own 
order. 

Bb 2 In 

( 196 J 

Is 1738, a lodge was inſtituted at the 
Hague, in which William IV. prince of Orange, 
was accepted. In 1740, maſonry was again 
moſt furiouſly attacked by the whole body 
of the Dutch clergy, who reſolved at all 
events to ſuppreſs the ſociety, but their en- 
deavours proved abortive. The following 
anecdote will ſhew to what a pitch they car- 
ried their malice : Two young officers of very 
good families, who were maſons, applied to 
the miniſter of the pariſh, in which they re- 
ſided, to examine them in certain points of 
religion, agreeable to the cuſtom of the coun- 
try, and according to the Heidelburgb Cali. 
chiſm, and then to grant them a certificate to 
entitle them to receive the holy ſacrament, 
After the examination was over, and thi 
prieſt ſatisfied in regard to their capacity; he 
aſked them, if they were Free-maſons ? Being 
anſwered in the affirmative, he refuſed to grant 
them their certificates, which in that country 

is an expulſion from the communion, This 
tranſaction raited an uproar in Holland, and 
numbers of pamphlets were publiſhed both 
for and againſt moſonry, Ar laſt the grand 
aſſembly of the States- general took it into their 
conſideration, and ordered, that for the future 

no 

= 1 

no clergyman ſhould alk either that or any 
other queſtion concerning maſonry, in the ex- 
ecution of his eccleſiaſtical duty; and ordered 
the prieſt, before whom the two officers had 

been examined, immediately to grant them 
their certificates. 

Tunis proved a very favourable introduc- 
tion to the progreſs of maſonry in Holland, 
lo that in a few years a number of lodges were 
conſtituted throughout the ſeven United Pro- 
dinces; lome under the patronage of England, 
but many more under that of Scotland. How- 
ever, in 1779, the grand-lodge of Holland, 
held at the Hague, entered into a compact 
with the grand-lodge of England, by virtue of 

which the grand-lodge of Holland grant con- 

ſtitutions in their own dominions both at home 
and abroad, and have provincial grand-maſters 
in each province, as alſo in India, Cape of Good 
Hope, St. Euſtatlia, Saba, St. Martin, and 
Surinam, &c. 

Ir may be juſtly remarked of the German, 
Dutch, and French lodges, that many of them 
far ſurpaſs in elegance and ſplendour the 
oreateſt part of the lodges under the Engliſh 

con- 

— —— — 

L 198 J 

conſtitution: on their public feſtivals no ex- 
pence is ſpared to ſupport the honour of ma- 
ſonry. Their halls are furniſhed in the moſt 
ſuperb taſte, and are hung round with the 
richeſt tapeſtry. The places ſet apart for the 
reception of maſons are covered with crimſon 
velvet; and the throne on which the maſter 
| 1s ſeated 1s enriched with embroidery and gold; 
| but on the: reception of a fellow-craft to the 
degree of a maſter maſon, the lodges are hung 
round with black velvet. In ſhort, it is dif- 
| ficult to conceive the magnificence of their 
decorations, The dreſs of the members 1s 
ſuitable to the grandeur of the lodge, and 
their polite behaviour would not diſgrace the 
firſt court in Europe. On theſe occaſions, ma- 
ſonty is illuſtrated in pathetic orations, deli- 
vered by men of genius and learning; and 
this, added to the harmony of ſome pieces of 
muſick, executed by ſeveral different bands of 
the beſt performers, ſtrike the audience with 
awe, and impreſs the mind with a juſt idea of 

the dignity of maſonry, 

— — —— — 

H I 5- 

HISTORY axnv ANTIQUITY 

oO F 

FREE-MASON RY 

&. 

DENMARK and SWEDEN. 

FI HOUGH maſonry was not introduced 

into theſe northern kingdoms ſo early 
as into thoſe already deſcribed ; yet the royal 
art has flouriſhed, and the lodges are at pre- 
tent numerous in the cities of Copenhagen and 
Stockholm. The firſt lodge in Copenhagen was 
inſtituted by a patent from Scotland in the year 
1743, Which 1s now the grand-lodge of that 
kingdom. The ſociety meet in a ſuperb hall 
richly ornamented, built for the purpoſe, A. D. 
1761 *. The firſt lodge in Stockholm was like- 
wiſe by patent from Scotland, in the year 1754, 

* There are alſo many lodges in the Daniſh Ger- 
man dominions, acting under conſtitutions from the 
grand-lodge of Copenhagen. 

which 

het NO OT a 4a 2 — EE 22 

[ 200 J 

which is now the grand- lodge of that king- 
dom; from whence many new lodges have 
been conſtituted, where the buſineſs of the 
ſociety is regularly and amicably conducted, 
in both kingdoms. In ſhort, maſonry is con- 
ducted in theſe northern regions in that elegant 
manner it is in Germany, where none but men 
of merit can be admitted. This is the reaſon 
that they have few poor brethren, conſequently 
the better enabled to relieve the wants of all 
ſtrangers who apply in a very ample manner, 

A Dan1sn gentleman of learning and vera- 
city aſſured me that the ancient inſcriptions 
upon rocks, as mentioned by antiquaries and 
hiſtorians, are maſonic hieroglyphics; gene- 
rally thought to be the old and original man- 
ner of writing, before the uſe of paper of any 
kind, and waxen tables were found. Theſe 
characters are Runic, and ſo imperfectly un- 
derſtood by the learned theniſclves, that their 
meaning is very uncertain, but they are ima- 
gined to he hiſtorical ; ſhould they prove to 
be maſonic hieroglyphics, as my friend ima» 
gines, and is no ways improbable, maſonry 
muſt bear a much earlier date in Scandinavia 

than is mentioned above, 
H I S- 

th 

( 208 J 

HISTORY axvv ANTIQUITY 

O F 

FREE-MA-SON EY 

I N 

ee 

HE country now comprized under the 
name of Ruſſia is of greater extent than 
all the reſt of Europe, or than the Roman em- 
pire in the zenith of its power, or the empire 
of Darius ſubdued by Alexander, or both put 
together; but free-maſonry has always kept 
pace with the cultivation of arts, ſciences, and 
civilization, 

Tux firſt regular lodge ever formed in this 
extenſive empire was in the year 1739, in 
the reign of lord Raymond, and a ſecond called 
The Lodge of Perfect Union, in St. Peterſburgh, 
conſtituted in June 1771; the maſter and moſt 

of the members in this lodge were Engliſh mer- 
Cc chants 

= 

chants reſident there, who ſupported this new 
eſtabliſhment with great regularity and ſpirit, 

As many of the Ruſſian nobility and gentry 
were free-maſons at the time of the eſtabliſh. 
ment of the above lodge, ſome of them in the 
year-1772 applied for, and obtained a patent 
from the grand-lodge of England, appointed 
his excellency John Yelaguine, ſenator, privy 
counſellor, member of the cabinet, Ec. to her 
imperial majeſty the empreſs of Ruſſia, and 
knight of the Poliſh orders of the White Eagl: 
and St. Staniſlaus, provincial grand-maſter for 
the empire of Ruſſia; and ſuch has been the 

attention of that nobleman to the duties of his 

office, that ſeveral excellent lodges have been 

_ eſtabliſhed at Peterſburgh, Moſcow, Riga, Yaſj, 

and in various parts of Courland, which is ſub- 
ject to Ruſſia; where the firſt nobility in the 
empire not only countenance the royal art, 
but act as officers of the grand and private 

| lodges; and the provincial grand-lodge of 

Rufſia, though ſo lately eſtabliſhed, has, in 
imitation of the grand-lodge of England, built 
a hall for the purpoſe of holding their general 
aſſemblies. | | x 

H1S- 

L 203 J 

HISTORY AND ANTIQUITY 
O0 F 

r R E E- M AS OO NR V 
I N 

SPAIN, PORTUGAL, and ITALY. 

HE firſt, and I believe the only lodge ever 

eſtabliſhed in Spain, was by a deputation 
ſent to Madrid, to conſtitute a lodge in that 
city, under the auſpices of lord Coleraine, A.D. 
1727, which continued under Exgliſbʒ juriſ- 
diction till the year 1776, when it refuſed that 
ſubordination ; but ſtill continue to meet under 
its own authority. 

SEVERAL lodges exiſted in Liſbon by con- 
ſtitutions from France ſo early as the year 
1727; and in 1742 the inquiſition“ of that 

country 

* The inquiſition is a tribunal of pretended juſtice, 
diſgraceful to human nature; and which, of late 
CE £3 Years, 

L 204 J 

country impriſoned brother Alexander Jamey 
Mouton, a French artiſt, and John Couſtos, a 
native of Bern in Switzerland, for being free. 
maſons; the father of the latter came into 
England in 1716, and was naturalized. The 
crimes brought againſt them by that horrid 
inquiſition were, viz. That they had infringed 
the Pope's orders, by their belonging to the 

ſect of free-maſons; which ſect was a horrid 

compound of ſacrilege, fodomy, and many 
other abominable crimes z of which the inyi. 
olable ſecreſy obſerved therein, and the exch- 
fion of women, were but too manifeſt indi. 
cations; a circumſtance that gave the highel 
offence to the whole kingdom: and the fail 
Mouton and Couſtos having refuſed to diſcover 
to the inquiſitors, the true tendency and deſign 
of the meetings of free-maſons, and perſiſting 
on the contrary, in aſſerting that free-maſonry 
was good in itſelf, wherefore the proctor af 
the inquiſition requires, that the ſaid priſoners 

years, is almoſt exti nguiſned in moſt Romiſh coun- 
tries; but though diſuſed, it is not entirely abro- 
gated; only the eccleſiaſtics and their officers can 
carry no ſentence into execution without the royal 

authority. 
may 

17 

{ nog 3 

may be proſecuted with the utmoſt rigour z 
and for this purpoſe, deſires the court would 
exert its whole authority, and even proceed 
to tortures, to extort from them a confeſſion, 
viz. that the ſeveral artieles of which they ſtand 
accuſed, are true. Brother Couſtos underwent 
the ſevereſt tortures three times, and on his 
confeſſing nothing, was ſentenced to walk in 
the proceſſion of the Auto de Fe, and to be a 
calley-flave four years; when, his majeſty 
GeorGe II. ever attentive to the felicity of his 
ſubjects, through the kind offices of the duke 
of Newcaſtle, commands were diſpatched to 
Mr. Compton, the Britiſh miniſter at Liſbon, 
to demand his liberty of the king of Portugal, 
in his Britannic majeſty's name; which accord- 
ingly was obtained in Oober 1744, after a 
diſmal confinement of two years and eight 
monfhs; but what became of brother Mouton 
I could never learn, 

Tus proceedings cauſed ſuch a terror 
amoneſt the brethren, that they aſſembled al- 
ternately at the private houſes of choſen friends, 
and not at taverns as was uſual, where they 
dined together, and practiſed the ſecrets of 
free-maſonry. 

Is 

a 
— — — En — — 

f 206 } 

In the year 1776, major Frangois d Alincourl. 
a French gentleman, and Don Oyres de Ornellas 
Praga, a Portugueſe nobleman, were ſent to 
priton by the governor of the iſland of Madeira 
for being free- maſons; they were afterwards 
ſent priſoners to Liſbon, and confined in a 
common gaol for 14 months; where they 
would abſolutely have periſhed, had not the 
brethren of Li/bon generouſly ſupported them, 
by whoſe interceſſion with Don Mariinio de 
Mello, they were at laſt releaſed. Nevertheleſs 
there is ſtill a very reſpectable lodge in Liſbon, 
one at Oporto, and a third at Setuval. 

In the year 1738, the court of Rome, in- 
ſtigated by the impoſitions of evil-minded 
perſons, poured out its Bulls * and Decrees 
againſt the fociety of free-maſons, whereby 
they were condemned in a more ſevere and 
tyrannical manner (the peculiar characters of 
the inquiſition) than they had ever yet under- 
gone in any nation, and that without the leaſt 
foundation for ſuch proceedings ; his holineſs 
the Pope being utterly ignorant of what was 

Bulli are letters publiſhed by the Pope, having 
the ſame power as an edit or law in other countries. 

ſo 

1 

ſo zealouſly to be interdicted. The words of 
the ſaid Bull are in part as follows, viz. 

Ir has come to our knowledge, even from 
public report, that certain ſocieties, compa- 
nies, meetings, aſſemblies, clubs, or conven- 
ticles, commonly called De Liberi Muretori, 
or free-maſons, or by whatſoever name the 
ſame in different languages are diſtinguiſhed, 
ſpread far and wide, and are every day increaſ- 
ing; in which perſons, of whatever religion 
or ſect, contented with a kind of an affected 
ſhew of natural honeſty, confederate together 
in a cloſe and inſcrutable bond, according to 

laws and orders agreed upon between them; 

which likewiſe, with private ceremonies, they 
enjoin and bind themſelves, as well by ſtrict 
oath taken on the bible, as by the impreca- 
tion of heavy puniſhments, to preſerve with 
inviolable ſecreſy: 

Wr therefore reſolving in our mind the 
great miſchiefs which generally accrue from 
theſe kind of ſocieties or conventicles, not only 
to the temporal tranquillity of the ſtate, but 
to the ſpiritual health of ſouls; and that there- 
fore, they are neither conſiſtent with civil nor 

Cano- 

_— — 
— 

— ——k 

 acod -J. 

canonical ſanctions; ſince we are taught by 
the divine word to watch, like a faithful ſer- 
vant, night and day, leſt this ſort of men 
break as thieves into the houſe, and like foxes 
endeavour to root up the vineyard; leſt they 
ſhould pervert the hearts of the ſimple, and 
privately ſhoot at the innocent : that we might 
ſtop up the broad way, which from thence 
would be laid open for the perpetration of 
their wickedneſs with impunity, and for other 
Juſt and reaſonable cauſes to us known; have, 
by the advice of ſome of our venerable bre- 
thren of the Roman church, the cardinals, and 
of our own mere motion, and from our cer- 
tain knowledge and mature deliberation, by 
the plenitude of the apoſtolical power, ap- 
pointed and decreed to be condemned and 
prohibited, and by this our preſent ever-yalid 
conſtitution, we do condemn and prohibit the 
ſame ſocieties, companies, meetings, aſſem- 
blies, clubs, or conventicles, De Liberi Mu- 
retori, or free-maſons, or by what other name 
they are diſtinguiſhed or known. 

WHEREFORE all and ſingular the faithful 
in Chriſt, of whatever ſtate, degree, condition, 
order, dignity, and pre-eminence, whether 

laity 

1 809 J 

laity or clergy, as well ſeculars as regulars, 
worthy all of expreſs mention and enumera- 
tion, we ſtrictly, and in virtue of holy obedi- 
ence, command that no one, under any pre- 
text or colour, dare or preſume the aforeſaid 
ſocieties De Liberi Muretori, or free-maſons, or 
by whatever other manner diſtinguiſhed, ta 
enter into, promote, favour, admit, or con- 
ceal in his or their houſes, or elſewhere, or be 
admitted members of, or be preſent with the 
ſame, or be any-wiſe aiding and aſſiſting to- 
wards their meeting in any place; or to ad- 
miniſter any thing to them, or in any means 
publicly or privately, directly or indirectly, 

by themſelves or others, afford them counſel, | 
help, or favour; or adviſe, induce, provoke, 
or perſuade others to be admitted into, joined, 
or be preſent with theſe kind of ſocieties, or 
in any manner aid and promote them ; but 
that they ought by all means to abſtain from 
the ſaid ſocieties, under the penalty of all that 
act contrary thereto, incurring excommunica- 
tion ipſo facto, without any other declaration; 
from which no one can obtain the benefit of 
abſolution from any other but us, or the Ro- 
man Pontiff for the time being, except at the 

point of death, Sc. 
D d DaTED 

1 } 

DarTev from Rome at St. Mary's the Greater, 
in the year of the incarnation of our Lord 
1738, the 4th of the calends of May, (28th 
April, N. S.) in the 8th of our pontificate. 

A. Card. vice-detory, 

C. Amatus, vice- ſecretary. 

Viſa de Curia N. Antonellus, 
(place of the leaden- ſeal). 

J. B. EUGENIUS. 

Tux Edidt bore date 14th day of January 
1739, and is of the ſame ſtamp with the above 
Bull, adding a fine of 1000 crowns in gold, 
beſides other grievous puniſhments, the gal- 
lies not to be excepted, to be inflicted at plea- 
ſure, on being made, or on having any man- 
ner of connection with the free-maſons, &c. 

Tre Decree bore date Feb. 18th 1739, con- 
demning a certain book written in French, 
jimall in its ſize, but moſt wicked in regard 
to its bad ſubject, intitled, The hiſtory of, and 
an apology for the ſociety of free-maſons, by 
J. G. D. M. F. M. printed at Dublin 1739. 
This book was ordered to be burnt publicly 
by the miniſters of juſtice in the ſtreet of St. 

Mary 

WW 
Mary ſupra Minervam, on the 25th Feb. 1739. 

In 1777 ſeveral free-maſons were impriſoned 
at Naples, but afterwards releaſed through the 
interceſſion of ſeveral foreign princes, and the 
juſtice of their cauſe was exemplified by an 
Lalian advocate, 

NoTwITHSTANDING theſe abominable in- 
fractions upon human liberty, and being thus 
oppreſſed in the eccleſiaſtical ſtate, the frater- 
nity found, and till finds a ſafe retreat in many 
parts of 7taly, who being better enlightened 
than thoſe of Rome, did not by any means 
oppoſe the ſpreading and propagating an art, 
founded on the molt exalted maxims of ſound 
morality, and which could not but tend to 
the greateſt advantage of every , ingdom. 

Ar preſent moſt of the Ialian nobles and 

dignified eccleſiaſtics are free-maſons, who 
hold their meetings generally in private houſes, 
though they have eſtabliſhed lodges at Naples, 
Leghorn, Venice, Verona, Turin, Meſſina in the 
iſland of Sicily, Genoa, and Modena, who are 
exceedingly liberal to the poor and needy tra- 
veller of every country. 

D d 2 IIS. 

L 213 J 

HISTORY axyv ANTIQUITY 

SS F 
FREE-MASONR Y 
IN 

SWITZERLAND, HUNGARY, and 
POLAND. 

T a time when the ſociety of Pree and 

41 Accepted Maſons enjoyed peace and tran- 
quillity in Switzerland to the utmoſt of their 
wiſhes, all at once a cloud aroſe in a certain 
quarter, that threatened a heavy ſtorm; nor 
was It leſs than to root out and extirpate the 
hitherto unſhaken and immoveable founda- 
tions of maſonry, and at once to overthrow 
the ſuperb ſtructure, that had been erected 
for many ages. None can be ignorant, that 
after the example of moſt part of Europe, the 
Swiſs Cantoons received the free-maſons amongſt 
them, and afforded them the moſt civil treat- 
ment equal to their merit, The eagerneſs 
with 

— 214 J 

with which all ranks of people applied them. 
ſelves to what might aggrandize that illuſtri. 
ous body, has ſerved as a pattern for all other 
nations in Zurope, who value themſelves for 
the brightneſs of their underſtanding, or love 
for the liberal arts. What fatal deſtiny, what 
fanatical fury, could tranſport the magiſtrates 
of Berne to become the enemies of maſonry; 
the enemies of a ſociety who had never done 
them wrong, or impeached of one unworthy 
deed? Is it then, that innocence, capable 
every where of curbing the moſt fierce and 
maliznant diſpoſitions, can make no imprel- 
ſion upon the callous hearts of theſe ſage re- 
publicans? No. The cruel prejudices with 
which they armed themſelves againſt the noble 
craft has cauſed them to publiſh an ordinance 
for their abolition, containing aſſertions as un- 
juſt as ill founded againſt the peaceable ſoci- 
ety of free-maſons, who, as they aſſerted, had 
fiyly and artfully crept into that country. On 
reading this, who could reſtrain the fervency 
and zeal with which he muſt be enflamed for 
the honour and reputation of this ancient and 
venerable ſociety. 

Tur 

L 2253 

THe ORDINANCE Is AS FOLLOWS, viz. 

We the advoyer, the little and great coun- 
cil of the city and republic of Berne, make 
known to all men by theſe preſents : having 
learnt that a certain ſociety, called Free-maſons, 
ſpreads itſelf every day more and more into 
all the cities and towns under our govern- 
ment, and that the perſons who have joined 
the ſaid ſociety are received under various 
ſolemn engagements, and even by oath : where- 
fore, having ſeriouſly reflected upon the con- 
ſequences thereof, and conſidered that ſuch 
meetings and aſſociations are directly contrary 
to the fundamental laws and conſtitutions of 
our country, and 1n particular to the protec- 
ton required on our part to diſcountenance 
any aſſemblies under our government, with- 
out our knowledge and expreſs permiſſion : 
moreover, 1t has appeared to us, that if an ef- 
fectual remedy was not immediately taken, 
the conſequence of that neglect might be dan- 
gerous to the ſtate, For theſe reaſons, and 
through our paternal affection, as much for 
the public good as the private advantage of 
all our citizens and ſubjects, wes have found 
it abſolutely neceſſary to diſſolve and totally 

aboliſh 

— — I 

2 —— 222„ͤ„%„„% „r — — 

3 — — = 

— —— — 

=D 

I — 
be ————— 

216 J 

aboliſh the ſaid ſociety, which we do by theſz 
preſents, and henceforth for ever we forbid, 
annul, and aboliſh it in all our territories and 
diſtricts, to all perſons that now are, or ſhall 
hereafter come into our dominions; and we 
do in the firſt place ordain and decree, that all 
thoſe, our citizens and ſubjects, who are ac- 
tually known to be fſree-maſons, ſhall be obliged 
immediately to abjure, by oath, the engage. 
ments they have taken in the ſaid ſociety, be- 
fore the bailiff or officer of the diſtrict where 
they live, without delay. And as to our ci. 
tizens and ſubjects who actually are free-maſon;, 
and not publicly known to be ſuch, and who 
nevertheleſs at preſent reſide in our domi- 
nions, or may hereafter come under our obe- 

dience; our ſovereign will and pleaſure is, aff 
that thole who ſhall be found in our domi. * 
nions, ſhall be bound to renounce their obl:- bl; 
gation in the ſpace of one month from the 
: 2 
date hereof; and thoſe who are abſent mull 
, . wh 
ſubmit to the ſame terms, to be reckonel be 
| r 
from the day of their return; not only to bl 
i f 
accuſe themſelves, but to abjure and renounce = 
e 
their engagements; thoſe who preſent them- - 
k ; * 10 
ſelves in our capital city to the reigning 4d. 
plad 

Toyer, and in other cities, or in the country 
t0 

( 2109 J 

to the bailiff of the place; and from thence 
they ſhall receive aſſurances of ſafety to their 
perſons, if they abjure and renounce their 
obligations without delay, in the ſame form 
as all other maſons are obliged to do. 

Urom failure in any part hereof, they ſhall 
all undergo the puniſhment hereafter declared. 
But to the end that no perſon ſhall dare for 
the time to come to entice, tempt, ſolicit, or 
be ſo enticed, tempted, or ſolicited to engage 
him or themſelves into this ſame ſociety of 
fee maſons, we have thought fit to ordain as 
follows : 

Tur all thoſe maſons who ſhall hold their 
aſemblies in our dominions, or who ſhall en- 
tice, tempt, or ſolicit others into their aſſem- 
blies or aſſociations, as well as all our citi- 
zens and ſubjects in our dominions, and elſe- 
where, as alſo thoſe who have been ſet at li- 
berty, ſhall for the future frequent ſuch aſſem- 
blies, they ſhall all and every of them be ſub- 
ject to the fine of 100 crowns without remiſ- 
lion; and likewiſe be deprived of whatever 
place, truſt, benefir, or employment he ſhall 

E e now 

— . 7 

1 260 J 

now hold; and if they have no preſent em- 
ployment or office, ſhall be rendered incapa- 
ble of holding any ſuch for the time to come. 

Ax touching the place or lodge, where 
this kind of aſſembly is held for the future, 
the perſon or perſons who ſhall let or furniſh 
them with a houſe, room, or place for the 

holding of ſuch lodge, ſhall be ſubject to the 
ſame fine of 100 crowns ; one-third of which 
to the informer, one-third to the bailiff of the 
place, and one-third to the hoſpitals, or fund 
of the poor where ſuch aſſembly ſhall be held, 
Let it be well underſtood, that all offenders 
that ſhall leave our dominions, in order to 
ſatisfy the payment of the ſaid fine, ſhall be 
baniſhed from our dominions for ever, or till 
they ſhall have paid the ſaid fine; and ſhall 
not return again until they have paid it, on 
pain of death. We moreover reſerve, at plea- 
ſure, to puniſh with more or lets rigour, ac- 
cording to the caſe of the perſon ſo rendering 
himſelf up to our ſovereign pleaſure, or thoſe 
who, notwithſtanding their abjuration, ſhall 

have again entered into the ſocicty, or frequent 
any of their aſſemblies. 

We 

_ i ea: Ms A. 

ri 

i 

. 

Wx do finally ordain and command, that 
all our bailiffs and miniſters of juſtice do cauſe 
theſe preſents to be publiſhed in all churches, 
and to be fixed up in the accuſtomed places, 
and to ſee that theſe our orders are ſtrictly 
and faithfully executed. 

Given in our Great Council 
the 3d of March 1745. 

THERE are ſeveral lodges at preſent both 
in Switzerland, Hungary, and Poland, but 
none of them are acting under an Engliſb con- 
ſtitution; neither can I learn by whoſe autho- 
rity they act; but ſuppoſe from circumſtances, 
that they all act under conſtitutions from 
Berlin and Brunſwick, 

Ee 2 H I S» 

ä —— = = 

—— — 

221 } 

HISTORY any ANTIQUITY 
O F 

F R E E- MAS ON R Y 

I 'N 

3 © 26-44 

HERE are ſeveral lodges in Prague, but 
they are all under the conſtitution of 
Scotland, or at leaſt, they call themſelves 
Scotch Maſens. The firſt that we know of 
commenced A. D. 1749. Mot of the leading 
men and men in powes in the famous and an- 
cient city of Prague, are free-maſens, they are 
exceedingly tenacious who they admit among 
them, by which means they are probably as 
ſelect as any ſet of maſons in the world. A 
Scotch officer in the Prufſian ſervice, who un- 
fortunately was taken priſoner at the battle of 
Lutzen, who with 378 more were conveyed 
to Prague; the Scotchman made himſelf known 
as a maſon, was immediately releaſed from 
con- 

L 222 J 

confinement; had the honour to dine daily 
at the tables of the moſt diſtinguiſhed of the 
ſociety, was always requeſted to aſſiſt at their 
meetings, and deſired to think himſelf a free. 
maſon and not a priſouer of war. On the ex- 
change of priſoners, which happened about 
three months after the engagement, the Scotch 
gentleman was in the politeſt manner pre- 
ſented with a purſe of „ty ducats, to defray 
his expences to the regiment “ 

» This circumſtance was communicated to the author 
by a letter from the gentleman himſelf, dated G/afpow, 
13 May 1760, 

1118. 

L ay 1 

HISTORY anv ANTIQUITY 

&S 'F 

FREE-MASONRY 
I N 

FLANDERS and BRABANT, 

ONSIDERING the vicinity of theſe 

places to France and Holland, maſonry 
does not flouriſh there, as might be expected ; 
the firſt lodge eſtabliſhed on record was in 
the city of Ghent, A. D. 1730. There are 
ſeveral other lodges, ſome acknowledging Eng- 
land, ſome Scotland, ſome France, and ſome 
Holland, from whence they have their conſti- 
tutions. In ſhort, Flanders and Brabant are 
almoſt the only places in Europe, where free- 

maſonry does not flouriſh in proportion to 
other countries, 

HIS. 

L 228 

HISTORY axv ANTIQUITY 

O F 
FRSEAEE-MAS OO MEYT 
ſw 

A 8 I A, 

T was in Alia, according to the ſacred 
records, that the all-wiſe Creator planted 
the garden of Eden, in which he formed the 
firſt man and firſt woman, from whom the 
race of mankind, and conſequently free- 
maſons, were to ſpring. Aſia became again 
the nurſery of the world after the deluge, 
whence the deſcendants of Noah diſperſed their 
various colonies into all other parts of the 
globe. It was in Ala that God placed his 
favourite people the Hebrews, whom he en- 
lightened by revelations delivered by the pro- 
phets, and to whom he gave the oracles of 
truth. It was here that the great and mer- 

citul work of the redemption was accom- 
Ff pliſhed 

L 226 J 

pliſhed by his divine Son; and it was from 
hence that the light of the glorious goſpel was 
carried with amazing rapidity into all the 
known nations by his diſciples and followers, 
Here the tabernacle was firſt ſet up, and the 
temple of Solomon erected. It was in Alia that 
the firſt edifices were reared, and the firſt 
empires founded, while the other parts of the 
olobe were inhabited only by wild animals, 
Conſequently it was here that free-maſonry had 

its origin, and travelled from Eaſt to Weſt. 

Here the firſt pair in Paradiſe were plac'd, 
IWith heav*nly innocence, and beauty gracd : 
And here, by ſinful diſobedience wrought, 
The race of man was to deſtruction brought : 
Hence we might execrate the baleful ground, 
Had it not given the ſalve as well as wound 
For here the Saviour of the world had birth, 
To purge our ſouls, and ſave a guilty earth; 7 
The goſpel firſt in ASla's regions ſpread, | 
And for mankind the bleſt Redeemer bled : 
Here cities firſt were built, and ſtatutes made, 
And of vaſt empires the foundation laid: 
Here Masoxs firſt their ſecrets did impart, 
And to mankind revea”d their ſacred art; 

PA two ane. 1 

The 

The 

L an J 

The Jews, God's choſen people, here were great, 
Till fin reduc'd them to an humble ſtate; 

Bold in their crimes, and to conviction blind, 
They murder'd him who came to ſave mankind: 
Here the ark reſted when the flood was ver, 
And from the heav'ns the torrents ceas'd to pour. 
Sum up the whole, and As la then you'll find, 
Deſerves the admiration of mankind, 

For Maſons firſt in Asia ſaw the light, 

In ASIA, man by fin was loſt in night; 

In ASIA, in the ark, a remnant pent, 

To various realms the world's forefathers ſent; 
In As1a Chriſt was born, and comfort brought ; 
In AS1a dy'd, and our ſalvation wrought. 

Tas firſt modern lodge of free-maſons was 
eſtabliſhed by a patent from England, in Ben- 
gal, A.D. 1740. There are beſides ſeveral 
lodges in Bengal, Madraſs, Bombay, Bencoolen, 
Fort George, Tortolla, China, Fort Marlborough 
in the Eaſt Indies, Batavia, Ceylon, Calcutta, 
Chandanagore, Patna, Burdwan, Dacca, Max- 
adavid, &c. From the firſt inſtitution granted 
to form a lodge at Bengal in Afia, Anno 1740, 
maſonry has flouriſhed in that extenſive grand 
diviſion of the globe in a very extraordinary 
manner, principally under the authority of 

F f 2 the 

1 

the grand lodge of England. ſome few under 
that of France, and ſeveral ſubject to Holland. 
The great harmony, good behaviour, and 
rectitude of life amongſt the brethren, has 
induced ſome of the mighty princes of the Eaſt 
to become free-maſons ; for at a quarterly com- 
munication, held at Free-maſons Hall on the 
5th day of Feb. 1777, brother Graham, from 
the lodge of Trichinopoly, near Madraſs, re- 
ported that his highneſs Omdit ul Omrab Ba- 
baudre, eldeſt fon of the Nabob of the Carnatic, 
had been initiated into maſonry at Triching- 
poly, and profeſſed a great veneration for the 
ſociety. 

Ir was thereupon reſolved, That a com- 
plimentary lecter be ſent to his highneſs, ac- 
companied with a maſonic apron, elegantly de- 
corated, and a book of conſtitutions, bound in a 
moſt ſuperb manner, 

Tux letter and preſent were intruſted to 
the care of Sir John Day, then going out as 
advocate-general to Bengal, who executed his 
commiſſion to the univerſal ſatisfaction of the 
ſociety, and the following letter was by him 

written to his highneſs as an introduction : 
May 

. r a. © _ ds 

[ 229 J 

May it pleaſe your Highneſs, 

THE underwritten (having been honoured 
with the commands of the grand-lodge of 
maſons of Great Britain to convey to your 
highneſs an apron and book of conſtitutions, a 
teſtimony of their reſpe& for you, and your 
illuſtrious father, the ſtedfaſt friend and ally 
of their ſovereign, as well as of the ſatisfaction 
they feel at ſeeing fo exalted a name enrolled 
among their order) intended to have executed 
the commiſſion with which he is charged in a 
manner that might beſt anſwer the intentions 
of his conſtituents, and the dignity and im- 
portance of the occaſion. 

Ir ſo happens, however, that the late diſ- 
ſentions in this ſettlement have ſo rent aſunder 
every link of ſocial life, and have ſo effectu- 
ally diſtolved the ties of amity and confidence 
which once {ubſiſted among them, that even 
the fraternal bond of maſonry has been anni- 
hilated in the genera] wreck. 

Fox this reaſon the lodge has fo long diſ- 
continued its meetings, that it may be ſaid 

10 be now extinct, 
In 

[ 230 J 

In this ſituation of things, it being impoſ. 
ſible to inveſt your highneſs in full lodge, and 
with the ſplendour and ſolemnity ſuited to the 
dignity of your character, and the importance 
of the commiſſion he is honoured with; the 
underwritten hopes your highneſs will conde- 
ſcend to accept (in the only manner that re- 
mains) the pledge of amity and reſpect from 
the maſons of Great Britain, that accompanies 
this, and remains with the moſt profound 

reſpect, 
Your Highneſs's moſt humble 
and devoted ſervant, 

JOHN DAY. 

His highneſs has ſince returned an anſwer 
to the grand-lodge in the Perſian language, 
elegantly decorated, and incloſed in cloth of 
gold. The original is framed and glazed, and 
hung up in Free-maſons Hall; of which the 

following 1s a tranſlation : 

— ty ww 

To ihe right worſhipful his grace the duke of 
MaNcaEesTER, grand-maſter of the illuſtrious 
and benevolent fraternity of FREE AND Ac- 
CEPTED Masoxs, under the conſtitution of 
England, and the grand. lodge thereof. 

Much honoured fir and brethren, 

AN early knowledge and participation of 
the benefits ariſing to our houſe from its inti- 
mate union of councils and intereſts with the 
Britiſb nation, and a deep veneration for the 
laws, conſtitution, and manners of the latter, 
have for many years of my life led me to 
ſeize every opportunity of drawing the ties 
ſubliſting between us {till cloſer and cloſer. 

By the accounts which have reached me 
of the principles and practices of your fra- 
ternity, nothing can be more pleaſing to the 
Sovercign Ruler of the univerſe, whom we all, 
though in different ways, adore, or more ho- 
nourable to his creatures, for they ſtand upon 
the broad baſis of indiſcrinunate and univerſal 
benevolence. 

Unper 

Rare its. AA. —— — 

I 232 J 

UxpkEx this conviction, I had long wiſhed 
to be admitted of your fraternity; and now 
that I am initiated, I conſider the title of an 
Engliſh maſon as one of the molt honourable [ 
poſſeſs, for it is at once a cement to the friend- 
ſhip between your nation and me, and con- 
firms me the friend of mankind, 

I rave received from the advocate-general 
of Bengal, Sir John Day, the very acceptable 
mark of attention and eſteem with which you 
have favoured me; it has been preſented with 
every circumſtance of deference and reſpect, 
that the ſituation of things here, and the tem- 
per of the times would admit of; and I do 
aſſure your grace and the brethren at large, 
that he has done ample juſtice ro the com- 
miſſion you have confided to him, and has 
executed it in ſuch a manner as to do honour 
to himſelf and me. ; 

I SHALL avail myſelf of a proper oppor- 
tunity to convince your grace and the reſt of 
the brethren, that Omdit ul Omrah Babaudre 

is not an unfeecling brother, or heedleſs of the 

precepts he has imbibed ; and that while he 

teſtifies his love and eſteem for his brethren, 
by 

(00s: 

by ſtrengthening the hands of humanity, he 
means to miniſter to the wants of the diſ- 
treſſed. 

May the common Father of all, the one 
omnipotent and merciful God, take you into 
his holy keeping, and give you health, peace, 
and length of years, 

Prays your highly honoured 

| and affeionate brother 

OMPIT UL OMRAH BAHAUDRE. 

Madraſs, 29th Sept. 1778. 

G g H 1 S- 

t 235 J 

HISTORY and ANTIQUITY 
0 F 

FREE E-MAS ON ET 

RV 

7 RICA, the third grand diviſion of 

the globe, is a peninſula of a prodigious 
extent, joined to A/ia only by a neck of land, 
about 60 miles over, between the Red Sea 
and the Mediterranean, uſually called, The 
Itkmus of Suez. Africa once contained ſeveral 
kingdoms and ſtates, eminent for the liberal 

arts, for wealth and power, and the moſt ex- 
tenſive commerce. The kingdoms of Egypt 
and Ethiopia, in particular, were much cele- 
brated; and the rich and powerful ſtate of 
Carthage, that once formidable rival to Rome 
elf, extended her commerce to every part 
of the known world; even the Br:/i/þ ſhores 

Gg 2 were 

236 } 

were viſited by her fleets, till 7uba, who was 
king of Mauritania, but tributary to the re. 
public of Carthage, unhappily called in the 
Romans, who, with the aſſiſtance of the May. 
ritanians, ſubdued Carthage, and by degrees, 
all the neighbouring kingdoms and ſtates. 

THovcn it is beyond diſpute that the Greeks 
derived all their knowledge from the ancient 
Egyptians, yet ſcarce a veſtige of it remains 
among their deſcendants. - This is owing to 
the bigotry and ignorance of their Mahometan 

maſters; but here it is proper to make one ob- 

ſervation which is of general uſe. The 
Califfs or Saracens who ſubdued Egypt, were 
of three kinds, The firſt, who were the im- 
mediate ſucceſſors of Mahomet, made war from 
conſcience and principle upon all kinds of li- 
terature and knowledge, excepting the Alcoran; 
and hence it was that when they took poſſeſ- 
ſion of Alexandria, which contained the moſt 
magnificent library the world ever beheld, its 
valuable manuſcripts were applied for ſome 
months in cooking their victuals, and warm- 
ing their baths. The ſame fate attended upon 

the other magnificent Egyptian libraries. The 
Califi 

L an 3 

Califfs of the ſecond race were men of taſte 
and learning, but of a peculiar ſtrain. They 
bought up all the manuſcripts that ſurvived 
the general conflagration relating to aſtronomy, 

medicine, and ſome parts of philoſophy, but 

they had no taſte for the Greek arts of archi- 
tecture, ſculpture, painting, and poetry, and 
learning was confined to their own courts and 
colleges, without ever finding its way back 
to Egypt. The lower race of Calif, eſpecially 
thoſe who called themſelves Calif of Egypt, 
diſgraced human nature; and the Turks have 
riveted the chains of barbarous ignorance 
which they impoſed. Thus, among them, 
many valuable remains of Egyptian maſonry 
have been deſtroyed ; nevertheleſs, we are in 
ſome meaſure indebted to the ancient Egyptians 
for many of our myſteries and cuſtoms. 

Unpzs the auſpices of the earl of Loudon 
modern maſonry extended to Africa, and a 
lodge was conſtituted at James Fort, A. D. 
1736, by virtue of a patent from England. 
There 1s allo a lodge at the Cape of Good Hope, 
conſtituted from the Hague in 1773. There 
is a French lodge in the iſland of Mauritius; 

a Dutch 

— — 
27 

MF... 

a Dutch lodge in the iſland of Madagaſcar ; 
and one at St. Helena, under a Scotch conſti. 

tution. 

| IIS. 

r 

HISTORY any ANTIQUITY 

- © 
FREE-MASONRY 
I N 

AMERICA and the WEST-INDIES. 

HE diſcovery of America, if we conſider 
its conſequences as maſons, 1s the moſt 
important event in the hiſtory of mankind. 
The gold and ſilver imported from the new 
world into Spain, entirely changed, in a few 
years, the value of money, and the price of 
labour all over Europe. The colonies, eſpe- 
cially thoſe of England, planted in the Ame- 
rican iſlands and on the continent, have in- 
creaſed the number of the civilized part of 
the human ſpecies: they have ſupplied the 
inhabitants of our quarter of the globe with 
a variety of commodities, formerly unknown, 
or very rare, which contribute to the more 

Com- 

( 240 

comfortable enjoyment of life, as well as to 
the extenſion of trade; and by the conſump. 
tion of European manufactures, they have fur- 
niſhed a ſubſiſtance to many thouſand Euro- 
pean citizens and maſons, who could not other- 
wiſe have found employment. The number 
of mariners was ſuddenly increaſed, the ſcience 
of navigation was perfected, and double the 
former number of ſhips have long navigated 
the ocean, laden alternately with the commo- 
dities of each hemiſphere. Europeans engroſſed 
the trade of the earth, and maſonry began to 

flouriſh, 

Bur as the ſpirit of independency has broke 
out with ſuch violence in the Britiſh ſettle- 
ments, and ſpread over the whole American 
continent, the ſtate of commerce muſt un- 
dergo a total revolution, and in all probadi- 
lity the royal ars will accompany ſuch a change. 
The colonies, inftead of depending on the 
mother-countries, will aow become themſelves 
manufacturers; unreſtrained by commercial 
laws, they will watt their commodities to 
every quarter of the globe, and receive what 
they want in exchange; they will now become 

our 

— 241 } 

our rivals in the markets of Europe, and alſo 
in the trade of the Eaſt and Weſt-Indies. The 
treaſure of Mexico and Peru will now no 
longer flow 1nto Spain, but will circulate 
through that continent where they have their 
ſource; and this circulation will give activity 
to every branch of trade, and vigour to every 
ſpecies of induſtry, in which chain free- ma- 
ſonry is annexed; while the commerce of 
Europe, deprived of its vivifying principle, 
will ſink into a ſtate of expiring languor. Her 
luxurics, unfed by the fountain that produced 
them, will prey upon her vitals; and her pre- 
ſent lucrative trade to India, now that of 
America is loſt, will prove not only unprofi- 
table but ruinous. The gold and ſilver of 
the weſtern world alone can enable us to pur- 
chaſe the precious commodities of the eaſt. 

Ar this criſis, when new republics are 
forming, and new empires buriting into birth, 
the maſonic hiſtory of America becomes peculi- 

rly intereſting. The new world has not 
only opened a new ſource of wealth to the 
buſy and commercial part of Europe, but an 
extenſive field of ſpeculation to the philoſo- 

H h pher 

L 242 J 

pher and hiſtorian, who would trace the cha- 
racter of man under various degrees of refine- 
ment, and obſerve the movements of the khy- 
man heart, or the operations of the human 
underſtanding, when tutored by ſcience, and 
untainted by corruption. And as maſonry mult 
and will always keep pace, and run parallel 
with the culture and civilization of mankind; 
it is no wonder then that the royal art found 
its way into this vaſt continent under the au- 
ſpices of lord viſcount Montacute, who granted 
a patent for the firſt American lodge to be held 
at Boſton in New England, A. D. 1733, ſince 
which lodges have been eſtabliſhed in South 
Carolina, North Carolina, Georgia, Antigua, 
Jamaica, Barbadoes, St. Chriſtopher's, St. Eu- 
ftatia, Nova Scotia, Virginia, Monſerrat, . 
Croix, Rhode Iſland, New York, Bermudas, 
Quebec , Montreal, Grenadoes, Maryland, Ca- 
nada, Dominica, Demerary, &c. In ſo far, 
that lodges are almoſt as numerous on the 
great continent of America, and her iſlands, as 
in England; they are moſtly under the juriſ- 
diction of the grand-lodge of England, ſome 
under that of Scotland, and a few ſubject to 
Frauce and Holland. So that maſonry flou- 

r'ſhes 

ot! 

L 243 J 

riſhes in America in a very ſingular manner. 
They are far more hoſpitable and more 
extenſive in their charity than the lodges in 
England, and who will, in all probability, 
ſooner or later ſhake off their allegiance to the 
mother-lodge, the ſame as they have done to 
the laws of their mother-country. 

In 1774 the free-maſons of Antigua built a 
large hall, with other conveniences, in that 
iſland, and applied to the grand-lodge of Eng- 
land to be ſtyled The great Lodge of St. Jobn's 
in Antigua, which was granted. 

Hence lodges are opened in every part of 
the globe; for there are now no leſs than 
1247 regular lodges in Europe, 
187 ditto in America, 
76 ditto in Alia, and 
13 ditto in Africa. 

1523 lodges that now exiſt in the world); 
which, on eitimating the lodges one with an- 
other at 30 members in each, makes 45,690 
Maſons in all. 

H h 2 D E- 

— ͤ ——AU—ã— bot — CT — 2 4 FRI — 
— p ns => ————— — 

1 

— 

L 

. i Ma. 

3 

5 

EUT IN PARTICULAR, 

Againſt Epicts, Burris, Decrets, Cox- 
DEMNATIONS, ©, by ſeveral Powers 
in EUROPES®. 

DO not intend to aſſert that princes have 

not the right to forbid their ſubjects from 
entering into any ſociety or company, but 
really to ſhew the contrary by unexception- 
able arguments. All ſovereigns have the au- 
thority to determine the actions of their ſub- 
jects, provided they are by a neceſſity, as well 
natural as moral, or by the fundamental laws 

* See the Hiſtory and Antiquity of Free- maſonry 
in Spain, Portugal, and Italy. 

— 246 J 

of the place, capable of an obvious determi. 
nation. The exerciſe of free-maſonry, then, 
comes not under the number of theſe deter- 
minable actions, which by neceſſity or funda- 
mental laws are exempted from the ſovereign 
authority. Princes may act as they think fit, 
with reſpect to the exerciſe of maſonry; yet, 
let it be well noticed, that what is here aſ- 
ſerted will more frequently accord with the 
abſolute power of a ſovereign, than with the 
common and natural rights of mankind and 
ſtri& juſtice, which are frequently of a direct 
contrary tendency. The ordinance of the 
Canton of Berne 1s not to be attacked on the 
ſide of ſovereign power, but in the unjuſt 
motives, ſuppolitions, and groundleſs impu- 
tations, that occaſioned the over-haſty magiſ- 
trates to accompliſh the extirpation of the fra- 
ternity. This event has however anſwered 
one ſalutary end, of clearing up the integrity 
of the free- maſons, and ſetting their innocence 
and ſufferings, their noble and unexception- 
able demeanour, and other their admirable 
deeds, in a proper point of view; which ſhin- 
ing merits it ſhould have been thought might 
have produced the higheſt praiſe, inſtead of 
unworthy and unjuſtifiable reproach. The 

ordi- 

E467} 

ordinance ſets forth, © that if an effectual remedy 
was not immediately taken, the conſequence of 
that negleft might be dangerous to the ſtate,” 
Is it poſſible that the clear-ſighted republicans 
of Berne could diſcover ſuch groſs ignorance, 
and afford their countenance and attention to 
the mean and baſe ſurmiſes every where induſ- 
triouſly propagated, and ſerved up to the 
higher powers againſt the ſociety of free- 
maſons? What dangerous conſequence could 
enſue, if they were not afraid of the frater- 
nity's ſtirring up ſedition and rebellion againſt 
the government? The ſuppoſition is worthy 
the ſuppoſers. The aboliſhing of ſupreme 
power, let it be exerciſed by whomſoever it 
will; by kings, or by particular perſons, 
lords, or magiſtrates inveſted with ſovereign 
power, covld tend to no other end than ſub- 
verting all order in civil ſociety, create con- 
fuſion, and involve the country in deſtruc- 
tion. The ſtate or government, ſay the ene- 
mies of maſonry, ought to examine narrowly 
into and aboliſh the fraternity, becauſe it 
ſpreads all over the world, and its members 
are united by obligations, ſo much the more 
ſtrong and durable, as they are leſs expoſed 
to 

— — 

— — — 

1 248 J 

to open day and vulgar eyes, a word can call 
them together; wound one and you maim the 
whole body, one common intereſt unites them 
all as brethren; their myſteries muſt then 
cover ſome ſcheme for a revolution, which 
muſt be prevented: as they poſſeſs an indiſ- 
criminate obedience to their grand-maſter, and 
his officers, all the world is threatened with 
being reduced to ſlavery and bondage by them, 
if they are not immediately extirpated with- 

out any diſtinction, Every one will readily 

perceive the folly and impertinence of theſe 
frivolous and pitiful ſuggeſtions, as it re- 
quires but a ſmall portion of common ſenſe 
to-diſcern both its malice and ignorance, 

Ir the conduct of maſonry be examined in 
every place where they have yet been eſta- 
bliſhed, it is utterly impoſſible to ſuppoſe 
maſonry ſo pernicious or ſo deſtructive in its 
deſigns and tendency ; and to have nothing 
in view but the ſubverſion of the civil power, 
which they are ready to own comes immed!- 
ately from God. How can it be thought cre- 
dible, that they ſhould admit not only magiſ- 
trates, but noblemen, great and powerful 
princes, and even crowned heads to the my!- 

terics 

[ 249 J 
teries of an order, the end of which was only 
to ſubvert and deſtroy their power ? Can ſuch 
a thought as this enter into the mind of man, 
endowed with the leaſt ſhare of common ſenſe? 
It is no where to be found in the earlieſt hiſ- 
tories, from the firſt eſtabliſnment of maſonry 
to this day, that they ever bore a part in the 
intrigues and troubles that have been the fore- 
runners of moſt cruel revolutions in many 
kingdoms and ſtates of the world, Even with 
us in England, a kingdom of all others the 
moſt ſubje& to theſe convulſions, the frater- 

nity always appeared with the greateſt luſtre; 

witneſs the late riots in London and Weſtmin- 
fer *, yet ſuch was the decorum they obſerved 

there, 

® Theſe riots commenced June 2, at ten in the fore- 
noon, when ſeveral thouſands aſſembled in St. George's 
Fields, headed by lord George Gordon, proceeded 
to both houſes of parliament, where they inſulted the 
iords ſpiritual and temporal in the moſt rude manner. 
That night, and the next day, they attacked the cha- 
pels and dwelling-houſes of the Roman catholics ; 
{tript their houſes of furniture, and the chapels not 
only of the ornaments and inſignia of religion, but 
tore up the altars, pews, and benches, and made fires 
of them, leaving nothing but the bare walls. On 

me 4th, 5th, and 6th the riots were dreadful, for you 
I 1 beheld 

— — cn ———_——_ — C—_—_— —q— 

| 
| 
' 
| 
| 

( 250 J 

there, that none can diſcern the leaſt ſhadow 
or pretence that might cauſe them to be ſuf. 
pected in having any hand in the riots, or of 
what 1s generally called amongſt us party fac. 
tion; a thing directly contrary to the preſer. 
vation and continuance of the ſacred tie which 
unites us all, upon our becoming brethren, 
From the ſame motives it 1s, that we are en- 
Joined in all our aſſemblies, on no account to 
ſpeak of religion or political affairs, not only, 
that no umbrage may be given to the civil 
powers, but that no diſſentions of that kind 
may ariſe in the lodges, which too often has 
ſown the ſeeds of diſcord and hatred among 
the moſt intimate friends. Againſt this che 
oath we take is ſo ſacred, that it is held (as 
indeed all other oaths ought to be) as the moſt 
heinous crime to violate it. Who can there- 
fore ſuſpect the maſons of engaging in plots, 

beheld at the ſame inſtant the flames aſcending and 
rolling in clouds from the King's Bench and Fleet 
Priſons ; Newgate, the New Priſon, Clerkenwell, turn- 
ing out all the priſoners, New Bridewell, the toll- 
gates on Black-friars Bridge, and from houſes in every 
quarter of the town. As ſoon as the regulars and 
militia took an active part, upwards of 458 loſt their 
lives. See Annual Regiſter 1780. 

which 

bu 

ha 
cot 

ich 

1 } 

which rarely have ended, but by bringing 
the moſt flouriſhing kingdoms to the brink of 
deſtruction ? Surely neither the religion nor 
policy of a ſtate or kingdom had ſo often 
ſhaken, or ſuch ſeas of blood been ſpilt, if 
thoſe who governed had been free-maſons, or 
at leaſt had put in practice what they account 
as a crime, Far from degrading the autho- 
rity of ſovereigns, maſons are, have been, and 
ever will be faithful, ſteady, and zealous de- 
tenders of it. 

From what has been ſaid, it muſt appear 
plainly to all that will throw aſide partiality 
and imaginary prejudices, that the grave ma- 
giſtrates of Holland and Berne, the thunder- 
ing bull of the pope, or the horrible tortures 
of the inquiſition, have been the moſt miſ- 
taken of any people in the world, in the 
pretenſions of their decrees and ordinances, to 
think that any dangerous conſequences could 
accrue to them from the aſſemblies of free- 
maſons; a ſociety that has no other intentions 
but to promote peace, love, union, harmony, 
and friendſhip among all men; and who might 
have flattered themſelves, not only with being 
cordially received, but protected in every ſtate, 

It 2 as 

1 252 J 

as they propagated nothing but what would 
make every one happy, who are willing to 

be ſo. 

Another article of the ordinance runs thus: 
& All thoſe who are actually known for free- 
maſons, ſhall be obliged to abjure by oath th; 
engagements they have taken in the ſaid ſociety.” 
This matter deſerves a minute examination, to 
ſee if the gentlemen of Berne, &c. had a right 
to puſh their ill- will to this great extremity, 
and to oblige their ſubjects to take this un. 
heard-of ſtep, and accuſe themſelves, which 
will appear the more violent from the conſi- 
derations that follow. 

Tux reception or 1nitiation of a new bro. 
ther is, by an expreſs agreement, made be- 
tween the maſter of the lodge and the per. 
ſon who requeſts to be admitted: by this 
agreement or compact, not only the lodge of 
which he is maſter, but even the whole order ot 
free-maſons acquire a well grounded right, which 
obliges this new-made brother to an exact and 
faithful obſervance of the laws of the frater- 
nity, and to ſet his hand thereto; and alſo not 
to commit any action that may ever fo remotely 

tend 

C a6 

tend to the diſcredit or diſgrace of the brother- 
hood in general. This no prince or magiſ. 
trate (not belonging to the ſociety) would ever 
have known, and in courſe could not have 
deprived them of; but that the exerciſe of 
free-maſonry not being before interdicted, en- 
joying not only in Berne, but in other parts 
of Switzerland, perfect liberty and freedom, 
rendered it of no moment to make public. 
The ſubjects in becoming maſons have not 
done any thing contrary to the laws of the 
country under whom they live, and of courſe 
cannot, with the leaſt appearance of juſtice, 
be taxed or puniſhed at all, not having com- 
mitted any crime. But to force a maſon to 
abjure by oath the ſolemn and harmleſs en- 
gagements he has entered into by his own free 
choice, and withaut ſolicitation, would be the 
moſt ſhameful breach of human liberty, the 
ſevereſt infliftion, and the greateſt diſgrace 
that ever befel a maſon. No, death itſelf 
would be more welcome to him, than ta be 
neceſſitated to commit ſo baſe an action: and 
ſurely it may be inferred, that the magiſtrates 
of Berne can never be ſo cruel as to attempt 
putting this infernal article into execution, it 
not being contradictory to natural juſtice, than 

to 

E 254 ] 

than to the ſacred obſervance and only tie 
among men, an oath. 

IT may be deemed ſuperfluous to ſay, that 
a voluntary renunciation is the moſt ridicu- 
lous thing that could be required of a maſon. 
It is nevertheleſs ſet forth, that they are not 
only to accuſe themſelves, but in conſequence 
of that accuſal or renunciation, they muſt ab- 

. Jure their engagements without delay. A volun- 

tary renunciation is acknowledging they have 
done wrong, or that they have offended againſt 
ſome laws of the country, Therefore in order 
to induce maſons to confeſs they are in the 
wrong, the Canton of Berne muſt prove the 
rectitude of their proceedings from laws of 
more ancient date, than their ſaid gracious 
ordinance z which they never will be able 
to do, 

But to the end that no perſou ſhould dare 19 
enter into ihe ſociety of free-maſons, we ordain, 
&c. | 

THarT is to ſay, the magiſtrates of Berne, 
having been ſo grievouſly miſinformed of the 

real end and deſigns of the fraternity, not to 
know 

L 255 ] 

know what was moſt for their welfare; be- 
cauſe by their ordinance they have deſtroyed 
the endeavours which only tended to make 
their ſubjects happy; jealouſy and envy has 
taken abſolute poſſeſſion of the hearts of theſe 
republicans, and carry with them a moſt cruel 
characteriſtic, becauſe they ſacrificed an ad- 
vantage worthy of being envied, and which 
many other provinces received with open arms. 
They have ſtrove hard that the happy effects 
attending their ſubjects ſhould be enjoyed by 
ſtrangers. Inſtead of repining at their con- 
duct, the fraternity, without regret, left this 
ſavage and ungrateful country, the frightful 
mountains, and dreadful precipices, to pro- 
cure to themſelves a more delightful and more 
pleaſant retreat, where they may enjoy the de- 
lights of maſonry, true peace, and the good 
things of this life, without diſcontent or per- 
ſecution. 

Ir is grievous to be obliged to make theſe 
gentle and condeſcending reflections; but they 
are our enemies, have put the ſword into our 
hands, and the law of nature directs every man 
to defend himſelf, when he is unjuſtly attacked. 
The liberty we profeſs and ayow makes us look 

upon 

. 256 ) 

upon the aſſaults of theſe miſcreants with con: 
tempt ; all the revenge we ſeek, for the inju- 
rious reflections they caſt upon us, is to de- 
mean ourſelves every where, ſo as to gain the 
eſteem of all who chuſe to be guided by ſound 
reaſon. There 1s really very little in the pom- 
pous ordinance worthy of notice, but what 
vaniſhes in ſmoke; unleſs the boaſting title 

Ne eee et.... ĩͤ „ — 

ſeem to tell you the contrary. Should it not 
ſeem to be a work of more than ordinary wil. 
dom againſt maſons, ſince the magiſtrates of 
Berne were ſo good as to let the world know 
| they had condemned what they never either 
1 ſaw or knew; that is to ſay, a true deſcrip- 
| tion of free-maſorry, and a picture of a real 
maſon? They muſt then be indulged : it is 

- a — — — : . - 
— —— — E222 ů ˙ — 4 — 
—— 8 

Il however to be hoped they will not be offended a 
if at having the portrait of a maſon drawn for 8 
| them, to convince them, 1f poſſible, of the 7 
error into which they have unfortunately 1 
_ plunged themſelves. But having in the be- t 
ginning of this chapter given a diſtant view * 
of maſonry, we ſhall here trace out its effects 1 

upon the conduct of human life. 

1 

Free- maſonry always affords inward peace, 
but a peace not in the leaſt tending to a care- 
lefs inactivity; it is productive of the beſt 
actions, preſerving ſuch an evenneſs and tran- 
quillity, under all diſcouraging events, as 
places them far above the little trifling inci- 
dents that affect the human race in their pur- 
ſuits of happineſs. They know that bitter- 
neſs and remorſe of conſcience ever attend the 
doing wrong, and are the greateſt reproach 
to the probity they have ever maintained, and 
therefore endeavour to enlarge the good con- 
duct they fo rigidly impoſe, to avoid reproach 
from their enemies, and to ſhew that the 
practice of real goodneis 1s the only thing 
that can make a good and true maſon, They 
are taught to hope moderately, to ſuffer pati- 
ently, to take pleaſure in what they enjoy, 
to hope for little, and that little to be needful. 
Their duty is their good-will to mankind, and 
they live not ſo much for themſelves as for 
others ; their eſchewing evil and doing good 
exalts their underſtanding, renders pleafure 
more pleaſing, and makes them more happy 
in happineſs, and leſs Miſcrable in trouble. 
In a word, if truly noble inſtitutions, backed 
with all the force and ſtrength of reaſon and 

K K refined 

— —— — 

„„ 
refined taſte, if that which is ſolidly happy, 

and truly virtuous, deſerves any praiſe, maſons 
have a juſt claim to it, in ſpite of the mean 
efforts of thoſe men and wicked perſons, the 
fautors of falſhood, who are eternally exclaim- 
ing againſt the vices, the paſſions, and im- 
perfections of men, and are the firſt to commit 
what they condemn, though under the co- 
vering of puritanical ſanctity. 

Masoxky is the daughter of heaven; and 
happy are thoſe who embrace her! By it 
youth 1s paſſed over without agitation, the 
middle age without anxiety, and old age 
without remorſe. Maſonry teaches the way 
to content, a thing almoſt unknown to the 
oreateſt part of mankind, In ſhort, its ult:- 
mate reſort is to enjoy in ſecurity the things 
that are, to reject all meddlers in religion and 
ſtate affairs, or of a trifling nature, to em- 
brace thoſe of real moment, and worthy ten- 
dency, with fervency and zeal unfeigned, as 
jure of being unchangeable, as ending in hap- 
pineſs. They are rich without riches, intrin- 
ſecally poſſeſſing all deſirable good; and, in 
ſhort, have the leſs to wiſh for, by the enjoy- 
ment of what they have. Liberty, peace, 

and 

L 259 J 

and tranquillity, are the only objects worth 
their efforts, trouble, and diligence. Undiſ- 
cerning mortals think to procure theſe by 
heaping up riches; and riches are the only 
obſtacles againſt what they with ſo much dili- 
gence and induſtry deſire to attain, What 
is more common, than to ſee men argue leſs 
reaſonably, when they pretend to have moſt 
reaſon ? Is 1t reaſonable to be exclaiming at 
all times, and in all places, againſt the fickle- 
neſs and inſtability of fortune, making idle 
and impertinent reflections on paſt events, 
and either give themſelves up to continual 
murmuring for the preſent, or to the moſt 
frightful apprehenſions for the time to come? 
The reaſonable man, it may be faid the good 
maſon, 1s contented in his ſituation, finds his 
tzmper ſweetened, and his manners refined, 
happy in the time preſent, and thinks of the 
time to come without any dread of it; he 
knows ſo well how to enjoy it, as not to be 
led away with empty and vague purſuits: in- 
kead of troubling the public with his thoughts 
and reflections, he only ſtudies to accompliſh 
the defirable end of public utility, by pri- 
vately inculcating every neceſſary duty. He 
chooſes a way of life ſuited to his fortune, 

K k 2 makes 

— —— — 

260 ] 

makes choice of friends conformable to his 
own character; and, by acting thus, he gives 
no mean proof of his wiſdom and taſte of true 
virtue, ſo much talked of, and ſo ſeldom 
found among thoſe mean and gloomy ſouls, 
who think that the greateſt piety conſiſts in 
making ſcruples of all kinds, in having the 
holy leer and hypocritical cant of a narrow- 
minded chriſtian, who, not having diſcern- 
ment enough to ſce any thing as it ſhould be, 
would repreſent the Almighty like unto them- 
ſelves, for ever with the brand of deſtruction 
in his hand, | 

Faze-Masons deteſt this infernal ſpirit, 
wiſhing nothing but peace and union to all 
mankind, which, together with the rectitude 
of their lives, enables them to hope for all 
the peace and reſt that is to come. Strict 
among themſelves, not judging the faults of 
others, regular and attentive to all neceſſary 
duties, modeſt in proſperity, calm in adver- 
ſity, always as ready to be taught as to teach 
another, equally incapable of all baſeneſs, ill- 
grounded complaints, and, above all things, 
of offending a brother, ſpeaking well of him 
both publicly and privately, and doing all 

things 

[ 261 J 

things according to the ſtricteſt juſtice. Such 
is the true maſon! ſuch maſonry, it may be 
hoped, is not only in Switzerland, but every 
where upon the face of the earth, where the no- 
ble ſociety is entertained! O glorious architec- 
ture ! which never fails amply to recompence 
all who attach themſelves to thee. O de- 
lightful ſociety! no greater liberty can be on 
earth than in thee, nor truer peace and content 
than under thy banners. 

Lew any one judge, after ſuch ample proof, 
whether the conduct of the magiſtrates of 
Berne can be juſtified ; and whether there is 
the leaſt appearance of truth in their ſuggeſ- 
tions of dangerous conſequences to the ſtate z 
or whether they had any authority to force the 
maſons to abjure their engagements: on the 
contrary, it beſpeaks the greateſt abſurdity to 
force them to renounce the ſociety. Every 
man who judges impartially, or without being 

prejudiced againft Free maſons, will, without 

doubt, acknowledge the natural picture of a 
prince, who on all occaſions has at heart the 
happineſs of his ſubjects, and who has been 
ſo far from baniſhing maſons his dominions, 
that he finds himſelf bound in conſcience to 

gain 

== Ix 

gain their love, and protect them in all things 
that depend on him. 

As much has been ſaid of the injuſtice done 
to the brotherhood of Free- maſons, it will not 
here be amiſs to mention the proceedings of 
the furious and horrible inquiſition of Spain, 
Portugal, and Italy, which, in direct oppoli- 
tion to reaſon, juſtice, and humanity, endea- 
voured to extort from maſons the ſecrets of 
their art, by the moſt cruel torments, and 
finally by fire and faggot. Oh! what in— 
humanity! Dare they in a Chriſtian country 
attack the innocent in ſuch a manner as bar- 
barians would look upon with horror! Falſe 
devotees accuſtom themſelves to infuſe into 
the minds of the credulous multitude a bane- 
ful poiſon againſt every thing that they ima- 
gine may affect their reveries, and particularly 
againſt the moral virtues, which they only 
know by theory : from them the fraternity 
may expect the moſt dreadful conſequences, 
Still full of that blind zeal, which ſtirred up 
the irantic Pagans to perſecute the primitive 
Chriſtians, they think that maſons mult be like 
victims to their vengeance. It is from hence that 

Rome, that tender mother, who has often uſed 
bar- 

1 8 11 

— 

aq mm um 

n 
tl 

le 

( 263 }] 

barbarities to her beſt children, came to ex- 
rend her favours to maſons, who neither love 
nor fear her threats, She falſely perſuades 
herſelf that in maſons' lodges they not only 
act contrary to good manners, but commit 
the moſt enormous crimes; form plots againſt 
the holy church; and, in ſhort, that the 
grand-lodge is the head quarters of Satan, 
and the theatre of atheiſm. They credit theſe 
well- grounded motives, and look no farther, 
though it be ſpread abroad by the moſt in- 
fernal calumniator. In the mean time the 
good maſon quietly enjoys the religion in 
which he was born; 1s obliged to be faithful, 
juſt, and true to his country; and the en- 
gagements he enters into, does not by any 
means diſpenſe with the obligations that he 
owes to God and his ſovereign : but this de- 
claration will not appeaſe our enemies, they 
require ſomething more than being innocent 
of all the charges alledged againſt them. 

BuT what 1s really wonderful, and what 
will render the glory of the fraternity im- 
mortal, 1s, that all theſe pretended revealers 
themſelves, do them the juſtice to give a to- 
lerable clear idea of their manners, their duty 

to 

I 264 } 

to princes, and their remoteneſs to every 
thing that might create diſcord among man- 
kind: though all this had been owned and 
publiſhed by Free-maſons; yet the revealers 
found the way of making it be believed. 
Though innocence is a bitter root, it never 
fails of producing ſweet and delicious fruit : 
the wrongs which it endures, tend to its ho- 
nour and reputation in the end; the troubles 
which it undergoes end in joy; the load of 
injuſtice produces praiſe; and every means 
made uſe of for its deſtruction, renders the 
overcoming of all the more triumphant. 
Supported by patience and hope, and divine 
juſtice to plead its cauſe, all the malice, and 
all the efforts of wicked and defigning men, 
but tend to raiſe it ſo much the higher in 
glory. As the application is eaſy, the candid 
and unprejudiced reader is left to his reflec- 
tions thereon. 

V I N» 

L 263 J 

©: 0.1 C©:&A'F-:3:0-38 

O F 

e 

FROM ALL 

GENERAL ASPERSIONS. 

T is a very eaſy taſk to trace from reaſon, 
and the nature of things, the wiſe ends 
and deſigns of the ſacred conſtitution of ma- 
ſonry; which not only cultivates and improves 
a real and undiſguiſed friendſhip among men, 
but teaches them the more important duties of 
ſociety. Vain then is each idle ſurmiſe againſt 
this ſacred art, which our enemies may either 
meanly cheriſh in their own boſoms, or 1gno- 
rantly promulgate to the unintereſted world. By 
deſcrying maſonry they derogate from human 
nature itſelf, and from that good order and wiſe 
conſtitution of things, which the Almighty au- 

thor of the world has framed for the govern- 
L1 ment 

[ 266 J 

ment of mankind, and has eſtabliſhed as the 
baſis of the moral ſyſtem; which, by a ſecret, 
but attractive force, diſpoſes the human heart 
to every ſocial virtue. Can friendſhip or 
ſocial delights be the object of reproach? 
Can that wiſdom, which hoary time has ſancti- 
fied, be the object of ridicule? How mean, 
how contemptible muſt theſe men appear, 
who vainly pretend to cenſure or contemn 
what they cannot comprehend! The generous 
heart will pity ignorance fo aſpiring and in- 
ſolent. 

I SHALL now proceed, and conſider in what 
ſhape maſonry is of univerſal utility to man- 
kind, how eit is reconcilable to the beſt po- 
licy, why it deſerves the general eſteem, and 
why all men are bound to promote it. 

ABSTRACTING from the pure pleaſures 
which ariſe from a friendſhip fo wiſely con- 
ſtituted, and which it is ſcarce poſſible that 
any circumſtance or occurrence can eraſe; let 
us conſider, that maſonry is a ſcience con- 
fined to no particular country, but diffuſed 
over the whole terreſtrial globe, Where arts 
flouriſh, there it flouriſhes too. Add to this, 

that 

L 267 J 

that by ſecret and inviolable ſigns, carefully 
preſerved among ourſelves throughout the 
world, maſonry becomes an univerſal lan- 
guage. By this means many advantages are 
gained: men of all religions and of all na- 
tions are united. The diſtant Chineſe, the 
wild Arab, or the American ſavage will em- 
brace a brother Briton; and he will know, 
that, beſides the common ties of humanity, 
there is ſtill a ſtronger obligation to engage 
him to kind and friendly actions. The ſpirit 
of the fulminating prieſt will be tamed, and 
a moral brother, though of a different per- 
ſuaſion, engage his eſteem. Thus all thoſe 
diſputes, which embitter life, and four the 
tempers, are avoided ; and every face is clad 
with ſmiles, while the common good of all; 
the general deſign of the craft, is zealoully 

purſued. 

Is it not then evident that maſonry 1s an 
univerſal advantage to mankind ? for ſure, un- 
leſs diſcord and harmony be the ſame, it mult 
be ſo. Is it not likewiſe reconcilable to the 
beſt policy? for it prevents that heat of paſ- 
ſion, and thoſe partial animoſities, which dif- 
ferent intereſts too often create. Maſonry 

9 teaches 

. 
— — 2 „. — — 
— - — r * — 
- 

— — 
— -v 

— —ůů x ͤͤꝗ 
—— —Ü—ͤU 
S- — 

| 86 } 

reaches us to be faithful to our king, and true 
to our country; to avoid turbulent meaſures, 
and to ſubmit with reverence to the deciſions 
of legiſlative power. It 1s ſurely then no mean 
advantage, no trifling acquiſition, to any com- 
munity or ſtate, to have under its power and 
juriſdiction, a body of men who are loyal 
ſubjects, patrons of ſcience, and friends to 
mankind. 

Doks not maſonry therefore of itſelf com- 
mand the higheſt regard ? Does 1t not claim 
the greateſt eſteem ? Does 1t not merit the moſt 
excluſive patronage? Without doubt, If all 
that is good and amiable, if all that is uſeful 
to mankind or ſociety, be deſerving a wiſe 
man's attention, maſonry claims it in the 
higheſt degree. What beautiful ideas does it 
not inſpire ? How does it open and enlarge the 
mind? And how abundant a ſource of ſatiſ- 
faction does it afford? Does it not recom- 
mend univerſal benevolence, and every virtue 
which can endear one man to another ? And 
is it not particularly adapted to give the mind 
the moſt diſintereſted, the moſt generous 
notions ? 

An 

us 

[ 269 J 

Ax uniformity of opinion, not only uſeful 
in exigencies, but pleaſing in familiar life, 
univerſally prevails among maſons, ſtrengthens 
all the ties of their friendſhip, and equally 
promotes love and eſteem. Maſons are bre- 
thren, and amongſt brothers there exiſts no 
invidious diſtinctions. A king is reminded, 
that though a crown adorns his head, and a 
ſcepter his hand, yet the blood in his veins 
are derived from the common parent of man- 
kind, and 1s no better than that of the meaneſt 
of his ſubjects. Men in inferior ſtations are 
taught to love their ſuperiors, when they ſee 
them diveſted of their grandeur, and conde- 
ſcending to trace the paths of wiſdom, and 
follow virtue, aſſiſted by thoſe of a rank be- 
neath them. Virtue is true nobility, and wiſ- 
dom is the channel by which it is directed and 
conveyed. Wiſdom and virtue, therefore, are 
the great characteriſtics of maſons. 

Masoxkx inculcates univerſal love and be- 
nevolence, and diſpoſes the heart to particular 
acts of goodneſs. A maſon, poſſeſſed of all 
this amiable, this god-like diſpoſition, is 
ſhocked at miſery under every form or ap- 

PEArance, 

= 

pearance. His pity is not only excited, but 
he is prompted, as far as is conſiſtent with the 

rules of prudence, to alleviate the pain of the 
ſufferer, and cheerfully to contribute to his 
relief, For this end our funds are raiſed, and 
our charities eſtabliſhed on the firmeſt foun- 
dation. When a brother is in diſtreſs, what 
heart does not ache? When he is hungry, do 
we not convey him food ? Do we not clothe 
him when he is naked ? Do we not fly to his 
relief when he is in trouble? Thus we evince 
the propriety of the title we aſſume, and de- 
monſtrate to the world that the term or en- 
dearing name of brother among maſons is not 
merely nominal. a 

Ir theſe acts are not ſufficient to recommend 
ſo great and generous a plan, ſuch a wiſe and 
good ſociety, happy in themſelves, and equally 
happy in the poſſeſſion of every ſocial virtue, 
nothing but which is truly good can prevail. 
The man who reſiſts arguments drawn from 
ſuch topics, muſt be callous to every noble 
principle, and loſt to all ſenſe of honour. 

NEeveRTHELEss, though the faireſt and the 

beſt ideas may be thus imprinted in the mind, 
there 

L +9151] 

there are brethren who, careleſs of their own 
reputation, diſregard the inſtructive leſſons of 
our noble ſcience, and by yielding to vice and 
intemperance, not only diſgrace themſelves, 
but reflect diſhonour on maſonry in general. 
It is this unfortunate circumſtance which has 
given riſe to thoſe ſevere and unjuſt reflections, 
which the prejudiced part of mankind have ſo 
liberally beſtowed upon us. But let theſe 
apoſtate brethren know, and let it be pro- 
claimed to the world at large, that they are 
unworthy of their truſt, and that whatever 
name or deſignation they aſſume, they are 
in reality no maſons. It is as poſſible for a 
mouſe to move a mountain, or a man to calm 
the boiſterous ocean, as it 1s for a principled 
maſon to commit a diſhonourable action: 
maſonry conſiſts in virtuous improvement, in 
cheerful and innocent paſtime, and not in lewd 
debauchery or unguarded excels, 

BuT though unhappy brethren thus tranſ- 
greſs, no wiſe man will draw any argument 
trom thence againſt the ſociety, or urge it as 
an objection againſt the inſtitution. If the 
wicked lives of men were admitted as an ar- 
gument, the religion which they confeſs, Chriſ- 
tianity 

—— — ’!wY— — 

—. fect... 

* 
— =. — — —— * 
x — — 

— 

— 66 

* 1 
tianity itſelf, with all its divine beauties, would 
be expoſed to cenſure. Let us therefore en- 
deavour ſtrenuouſly to ſupport the dignity of 
our characters, and by reforming the abuſes 
which have crept in among us, diſplay maſonry 
in its primitive luſtre, and convince mankind 
that the ſource from which it flows 1s truly 

divine. 

Ir is this conduct which can alone retrieve 
the ancient glory of the craft, Our-generous 
and good actions muſt diſtinguiſh our title to 
the privileges of maſenry, and the regularity of 
our behaviour diſplay their influence and uti- 
lity. Thus the world will admire our ſanc— 
tity of manners, and effectually reconcile our 
uniform conduct with the incomparable tenets 

we profeſs and admire, 

As our order is founded upon harmony, 
and ſubſiſts by regularity and proportion; fo 
our paſſions ought to be properly reſtrained, 
and be ever ſubſervient to the dictates of right 
reaſon. As the delicate pleaſures of friendſhip 
harmonize our minds, and exclude rancour, 

malice, or ill- nature; ſo we ought to live 
like 

1 

like brethren bound by the ſame tie, always 
cultivating fraternal affection, and reconciling 
ourſelyes to the practice of thoſe duties, which 
are the baſis on which the ſtructure we erect 
muſt be ſupported. By improving our minds 
in the principles of morality and virtue, we 
enlarge our underſtandings, and more effectu- 
ally anſwer the great ends of our exiſtence, 
Such as violate our laws, or infringe our good 
order, we mark with a peculiar odium; and 
if our mild endeavours to reform their lives 

| ſhould not anſwer the good purpoſes intended; 

we expel them our aſſemblies, as unfit mem- 
bers of ſociety “. 

Governor Van Teylizzen, a paſt grand-ſteward, 
expelled the ſociety in 1772, for crimes of the moſt 
abominable nature. 7o/eph Baylis, expelled in 1775, 
for an attempt to commit a deteſtable and unnatural 
crime, William Brand, expelled in 1774, for injur- 
ing a girl of 14 years of age, the ſaid girl being under 
his care as a ſcholar, Several brethren have been ex- 
pelled for leſs crimes; and many more have been 
expelled for acting in a maſonic character, contrary 
to the eſtabliſhed laws of the ſociety, 

M m TRIS 

1 274 J 

Tus is the practice which ſhould univer. 
ſally prevail among maſons. Our outward 
conduct being directed by our inward princi- 
ples, we ſhould be equally careful to avoid 
cenſure and reproach. Uſeful knowledge 
ought to be the great object of our deſire, 
for the ways of wiſdom are beautiful, and 
lead to pleaſure, We ought to ſearch into 
nature, as the advantages accruing from ſo 
agreeable a ſtudy will amply compenſate our 
unwearied aſſiduity. Knowledge mult be at. 
tained by degrees, and 1s not every where to 
be found. Wiſdom ſeeks the ſecret ſhade, the 
lonely cell deſigned for contemplation ; there 
enthroned ſhe ſits, delivering her ſacred or- 
cles: there let us ſeek her, and purſue the 
real bliſs; for though the paſſage be difficult, 
the farther we trace it, the eaſier it will be. 
come. 

GxoMETRY, that extenſive art, we ſhouli 
particularly ſtudy, as the firſt and nobleſt cf 
{ciences. By geometry we may curiouſly tract 
nature, through her various windings, to her 
moſt concealed receſſes. By it we may il T 
cover the power, the wiſdom, and the good 
neſs of the grand Artificer of the univerk, 
an 

an 

uld 
t of 
race 
her 

di. 

o0(- 

erle, 
al 

( 275 J 

and view with amazing delight the beautiful 

proportions which connect and grace this vaſt. 

machine. By it we may diſcover how the 
planets move in their different orbs, and ma- 
thematically demonſtrate their various revolu- 
tions. By it we may rationally account for 
the return of ſeaſons, and the mixed variety of 
ſcenes which they diſplay to the diſcerning eye. 
Numberleſs worlds are around us, all framed 
by the ſame divine artiſt, which roll through 
the vaſt expanſe, and are all conducted by 
the ſame unerring laws of nature. How muſt 
we then improve? with what grand ideas muſt 
ſuch knowledge fill our minds? and how wor- 
thy is it of the attention of all rational beings, 
eſpecially of thoſe who profeſs themſclves pro- 
moters of our grand inſtitution ? 

IT was a ſurvey of nature, and the obſer- 

vation of its beautiful proportions, that firſt 

determined man to 1mitate the divine plan, 
and to ſtudy ſymmetry and order, This gave 
riſe to ſocieties, and birth to every uſeful art. 
The architect began to deſign, and the plans 
which he laid down, improved by experience 
and time, produced fome of thoſe excellent 

Mm 2 works 

— — — . ——— — — — — — 
— K—¾ 

( 276 ] 

works which will be the admiration of future 
ages. 

Ir we are united, our ſociety muſt flouriſh, 
let us then promote the uſeful arts, and by 
that means mark our diſtinction and ſuperi. 
ority ; let us cultivate the ſocial virtues, and 
improve in all that is good and amiable; let 
the genius of maſonry preſide, and under her 
ſovereign {way let us endeavour to act with 
becoming dignity, 

FREE-MASONRY is undoubtedly an inſtitu- 
tion of the moſt beneficial and amiable na- 
ture, ſince its profeſſed deſign is the extenſion 
and confirmation of mutual happineſs, by the 
moſt perfect and effectual method; the prac- 
tice of every moral and ſocial virtue. Ir is a 
ſalutary inſtitution, wherein bad men, if they 
chance, as they ought not on any conſidera- 
tion to be admitted, are moſt generally re- 
ſtrained in their moral retrogradation, or down- 
hill progeſs in vice ; whilſt the good are taught 
and excited to aſpire at higher degrees of 
virtue and perfection. A good man and a 
good maſon are ſynonimous terms; ſince a good 
man muſt neceſſarily make a good maſon, and a 
good 

To» 

good maſon can never be a bad man: and, as 
the better men are, the more they love each 
other, and on the contrary, the more they 
love each other, they become more perfe& 
maſons, 

Trost who have the honour and happi- 
neſs of being regular members of this moſt 
excellent ſociety, are ſtrictly bound to practiſe 
its duties and precepts, and to preſerve its 

dignity. 

ForEMosT in the rank of our duties ſtands 
our obligation to obey the laws of the great 
Architect of the univerſe, to conform to his 
will, to promote his honour, and to conduct 
ourſelves as under the inſpection of his all-ſee- 
ing eye. For as in him we live, move, and 
have our being, partake of his goodneſs, and 
depend on his favours ; ſo whatever we think, 
ſpeak, or do, ought all to be ſubſervient, and 
capable of being referred to his glory, ; 

Txr1s primary and fundamental duty of 
obedience to the ſupreme Being, from whence, 
as from their fountain, all other duties with 
reſpect to ourſelves and our neighbours flow; is 

evi- 

TI $98 } 

evidently taught by reaſon, confirmed by re- 
velation, and enforced by free-maſonry. Sub- 
ordinate and conſequent to this our grand 
obligation, is the important and indiſpenſable 
duty of brotherly love, which delights in, and 
ought always to demonſtrate itſelf in real acts 

of genuine beneficence. 

FrEE-MaSONRY has not only united its 
worthy members and genuine ſons in the moſt 
indiſſoluble bands of confidence, concord, 
and amity ; it has even cauſed Chriſtianity 
to ſhine forth with renewed luſtre, and intro- 
duced its ſpirit, which the royal craft has 
ſtrongly imbibed in every nation, and perſua- 
ſion, wherein it has gained admittance ; and it 
produces the moſt benevolent and charitable 
ſet of men, in proportion to its number, of 
any ſociety whatever throughout the terreſ- 
trial globe. Thus ineſtimable is free-maſonry 
for its manifold and moſt uſeful qualities. It 
ſupereminently excells all other arts by the 
bright rays of truth which it ſheds on the 
minds of its faithful votaries, illuminating 
their underſtandings with the beams of a more 
reſplendent light than is to be derived from 

the aſſemblage of all other arts whatſoever ; 
of 

( 279 J 

ot which the new initiated brother begins to 
participate, when he is girded with the em- 
blem of innocence, more ancient than the 
tower of Babel, more honourable than the im- 
perial dignity. As it excels all other arts in 
its vaſt and admirable extent, ſo it far ſur- 
paſſes them in its pleaſing and effectual modes 
of communicating its inſtructions. But of 
this the enlightened brother alone can form a 
judgment, or make the compariſon. We that 
have happily made the experiment, are con- 
vinced of its tranſcendent excellence in this 
particular. The unenlightened by maſonry 
can only form vague and uncertain conjec- 
tures of the utility of the royal craft, or of 
the modes of initiation into its various de- 
grees; or of the ſubſequent, different, de- 
lightful, and beneficial inſtructions reſpec- 
tively communicated. 

As it is highly becoming every member of 
this ſociety to preſerve the dignity of our noble 
inſtitution, I conceive one of the beſt methods 
of doing it is, in acting as worthy free-maſons 
ourſelves; and in admitting among us only 
thoſe who in all probability will demean them- 
ſelves as werthy members. Theſe two me- 

thods 

| 280 } 

thods ſeem to us naturally connected together. 
For if we are in reality worthy free · maſons 
ourſelves, we ſhall have a ſtrong averſion to 
the admiſſion of any perſon, who would reflect 
the leaſt diſgrace upon our reſpectable frater- 
nity; and conſequently in the moſt effectual 
manner we ſhall preſerve its dignity. Whereas 
if we become unworthy members ourſelves, it 
will of courſe be a matter of indifference to 
us whom we admit; and thus we ſhall entail 

upon it double diſgrace. 

As we ought to be irreproachable in our 
own demeanour, ſo we ought to be certified 
that our candidates for free-maſonry have the 
requiſite qualifications, which indiſpenſably 
ought to be a good reputation, an honeſt me- 
thod of living, ſound morals, and a compe- 
tent underſtanding. 

No member that has the honovr of the 
ſociety, or even his own, fincerely at heart, 
will preſume to nominate any that are not 
poſſeſſed of theſe valuable qualities. In that 
caſe it would, be incumbent upon every wor- 
thy brother to give a negative, and reprobate 

ſuch indecorous nomination, 
IT 

tan 1 

IT is to be ſuppoſed, at leaſt among our- 
ſelves, that, as enlightened free maſons, we 
have more juſt, ſublime, and comprehenſive 
ideas, with reſpect to virtue, decorum, and 
the dignity of human nature, than the gene- 
rality of the miſled maſs of mankind, It is 
to be apprehended, that we grant admiſſion 
to none but men of principle, of virtue, ho- 
nour, and integrity; leſt the royal! craft, in- 
ſtead of being an object of deſerved venera- 
tion, fall into diſeſteem, and become a ſubject 
of ridicule. It is therefore to be expected, 
that not the wealth, the ſtation, or the power 
of any man, ſhall procure from us his admiſ- 
ſion into our reſpectable lodges ; but his pro- 
priety of conduct, his uprightneſs, his good- 
neſs. Such indeed as anſwer this deſcription 
will be an honour to our ſublime craft, and 
are beſt qualified to reap from it every deſira- 
ble advantage. And altho' it is a maxim with 
us to ſolicit none to enter into our ſociety, 
yet we ſhall be always exceedingly glad to en- 
roll ſuch worthy perſons in the honourable 
liſt of our numerous members. Theſe are 
egregiouſiy deceived, and may they ever be 
diſappointed in their application for admit- 

N n tance 

11 

tance as free-maſons, who conſider us in the 
light of a Bacchanalian ſociety, or under any 
ſimilar ignoble idea. Our aſſociation indeed 
admits of all becoming cheerfulneſs, feſtivity, 
and gaiety of temper, at ſuitable ſeaſons, and 
intervals; but indeed our aſſemblies are prin- 
cipally convened for the moſt beneficial and 
exalted purpoſes : for purifying the heart, cor- 
recting the manners, and enlightening the un- 
derſtanding. Thus the uſeful and the agree- 
able are by us happily united; inſtruction and 
pleaſure are blended together. Order, deco- 
rum, concord, and complacency are conſtant 
attendants upon our lodges *, 

Now is maſonry ſo good, ſo valuable a 
ſcience ? Does it tend to inſtruct the mind, 
and tame each unruly paſſion ? Does it expel 
rancour, hatred, and envy ? Does it recon- 
cile men of all religions and of all nations? 
Is it an univerſal cement, binding its followers 
to charity, good-will, and ſecret friendſhip ? 

* Smith's charge to the lodge of Friendſhip, on the 
fellival of St. Johu the Evangeliſt, December 27th, 
1778, at Dover, 

Is 

L 283 ] 

Is it calculated to promote the trueſt freedom ? 

Does it teach men to lead quiet lives? In 

ſhort, are not 1ts precepts a complete ſyſtem 
of moral virtue? Then, hail, thou glorious 
craft, bright tranſcript of all that is amiable ! 
Hail, thou bleſt moral ſcience, which ſo beau- 
tifully exemplifies virtue! Welcome, ye de- 
lightful manſions, where all enjoy the plea- 
ſures of a ſerene and tranquil life]! Welcome, 
ye bleſt retreats, where ſmiling friendſhip ever 
blooms, and from her throne diſpenſes plea- 
ſure with unbounded liberality ! Welcome, 
lacred habitations, where peace and innocence 
tor ever dwell! “ 

* Rev. Delanoy's ſermon, preacked before the pro- 
rincial grand-lodge of Kent, on the feltival of St. 
John the Evangeliſt 1781, at Maidſtone, 

L 265 J 

O N 

8 

a ET. 

ANY are the charges brought againſt 
the ſociety, on account of ſecrecy 
one of their grand characteriſtics; and the in- 
nocent cauſe of moſt of the perſecutions and 
reproaches they ſuffer. 

We are condemned for keeping the eſſen- 
tials of our inſtitution from the knowledge of 
thoſe who are not members of it; which it is 
ſaid, muſt ſufficiently prove them to be of a 
very bad nature and tendency, elſe why are 
they not made public for the ſatisfaction of 
mankind, 

Ir ſecrecy be a virtue (a thing never yet 
denied) can that be imputed to us as a crime, 
which 

© 

which has always been conſidered as an ex- 
cellence in all ages? Does not Solomon, the 
wiſeſt of men, tell us, He that diſcovers ſecrets 
7s a traitor, but a man of a faithful ſpirit con- 
cealeth the matter ? 

In conducting all worldly affairs, ſecrecy is 
not only eſſential, but abſolutely neceſſary; 
and was ever eſteemed a quality of the greateſt 

worth, 

Tnus we find the great Fenelon makes Ulyſſes, 
in the ſyſtem of the education which he deli- 
vers to his friends for his fon Telemachus, par- 
ticularly enjoining them, above all, to render 
him juſt, beneficent, ſincere, and faithful in 
keeping ſecrets ;, a precept that afterwards pro- 
duced the beſt of conſequences to the young 
prince, of whom it is recorded, that with this 
great excellence of taciturnity, he not only di- 
veſted himſelf of that cloſe myſterious air, fo 
common to the reſerved, but alſo conſtantly 
avoided telling the leaſt untruth in ſupport of 
this part of his character. A conduct highly 
worthy the imitation of every one to whom 
ſecrets are entruſted, affording them a pattern 

of opennels, eaſe, and ſincerity; for while he 
ſcemed 

WM. 

ſeemed to carry his whole heart upon his lips, 
communicating what was of no importance, 
yet he knew how to ſtop juſt in the proper 
moment, without proceeding to thoſe things 
which might raiſe any ſuſpicion, or furniſh 
even a hint to diſcover the purpoſes of his 
mind. 

Ir we turn our eyes to antiquity, we ſhall 
find the ancient Egyptians had ſo great a re- 
gard for fence and ſecrecy in the myſteries of 
their religion, that they ſet up the god Harpo- 

crates *, to whom they paid peculiar honour 

and veneration, who was repreſented with his 
right hand placed near the heart, and the left 
down by his ſide, covered with a ſkin before 
full of eyes and ears, to ſignify, that of many 
things to be {cen and heard, few are to be 

publiſhed. 

Ann among the ſame people, their great 
Is, the Minerva of the Greeks, had always 

* Imagines deorum a vincentio chartario, See 
alſo the chapter on Maſonic Hiercg!yphics, 

an 

L 288 J 

an image of a Sphinx + placed at the entrance 
of her temples, to denote that ſecrets were 
there preſerved under ſacred coverings, that 
they might be kept from the knowledge of 
the vulgar, as much as the riddles of that 

creature. 

JauBLIcus, in his life of Pythagoras, con- 
firms the above opinion, by obſerving, that 
from the myſterious knowledge of the Egyp- 
tians, that philoſopher drew the ſyſtem of his 
ſymbolical learning and inſtructive tenets, ſee- 
ing that the principles and wiſe doctrines of 
this nation were ever kept ſecret among them- 
ſelves, and were delivered down, not in writ- 
ing, but only by oral tradition. And indeed 
ſo cautious and prudent were they in theſe 
matters, that every diſciple admitted to their 
wiſe and ſcientific myſteries, was bound in 
the ſame ſolemn manner to conceal ſuch myſ- 
teries from the vulgar, or thoſe whoſe ideas 
were not ſufficiently exalted to receive them. 
As a proof of this, we need only recollect the 

+ The Sphinx was a famous monſter in Egypt, hav- 
ing the face of a virgin and the body of a lion; it 
was hewn out of the rock, and about thirty ſeet high, 
and placed near one of the pyramids. 

ſtory 

ot 

[ 289 ] 

ſtory of Hipparchus, a Pythagorean, who hav- 
ing, out of ſpleen and reſentment, violated 
and broke through the ſeveral engagements 
of the ſociety, was held in the utmoſt deteſ- 
tation, expelled the ſchool as one of the moſt 
infamous and abandoned, and as he was dead 
to the principles of virtue and philoſophy, had 
a tomb erected for him, according to their 
cuſtom, as though he had been naturally dead, 
The ſhame and diſgrace that juſtly attended 
ſo great a breach of truth and fidelity, drove 
the unhappy wretch to ſuch deſpair, that he 
proved his own executioner z and ſo abhorred 
was even his memory, that he was denied the 
rights and ceremonies of burial uſed to the 
dead in thoſe times; inſtead of which, his 
body was ſuffered to lie upon the ſhore of the 
iſle of Samos. 

Among the Greek nations, the Athenians 
had a ſtatue of braſs, which they awfully re- 
vered; this figure was without a tongue, by 
which ſecrecy was intimated. 

Tur Romans had a goddeſs of filence, named 
Angerona, repreſented with her fore finger on 
Oo her 

* 
ll 
1 
; 
[ 
4 
2 
: 
| 
1 
| 

#9 
——_—— 

- wow 
© ——— 
———— — 

. 290 J 

her lips, as a ſymbol of prudence and taci- 
turnity *. 

ANNACARCHUsS, who (according to Pliny) 
was apprehended in order to extort his ſecrets 
from him, bit his tongue off in the midſt, and 
afterwards ſpit it in the tyrants face, rather 
chuling to loſe that organ, than to diſcover 
thoſe things which he had promiſed to conceal, 

We read likewiſe that Cato, the cenlor, 
often ſaid to his friends, of three things which 
he had good reaſon to repent, the principal 

was divuiging a ſecret. 

Tue Druids in our own nation (who were 

the only prieſts among the ancient Britons) 
committed nothing to writing, And Cæſar 
obſerves, that they had a head or chief, who 
exerciſed a ſort of excommunication, attended 
with dreadful penalties, on thoſe who either 
publiſhed or prophaned their myſteries. 

* Danet's dictionary of Greek and Roman antiqui- 
ties—7amblichus de Vita Pythag. 

THERE» 

11 

E- 

— 291 J 

TnzREFORE, ſince it evidently appears from 
the foregoing inſtances (among many others) 
that there ever were ſecrets among mankind, 
as well reſpecting ſocieties as individuals, and 
that the keeping thoſe inviolable was always 
reputed an indiſpenſable duty, and attended 
with an honourable eſtimation; it muſt be 
very difficult to aſſign a ſufficient reaſon why 
the ſame practice ſhould be at all wondered at, 
or leſs approved of among the Free and Ac- 
cepted Maſons of the preſent age, than they 
were among the wiſeſt men, and the greateſt 
philoſophers of antiquity, 

THe general practice and conſtant applauſe 
of the ancients, as well as the cuſtoms of the 
moderns, one would naturally imagine ſhould 
be ſufficient to juſtify maſons againſt any 
charge of ſingularity or innovation on this ac- 
count ; for how can this be thought ſingular, 
or new, by any one who will but calmly allow 
himſelf the ſmalleſt time for reflection? 

Do not all incorporated bodies among us 
enjoy this liberty without impeackment or 

cenſure ? An apprentice is bound to keep the 

ſecrets of his maſter; a freeman is obliged 
Oo 2 to 

| 
' 
: 
4 
, 
/ 
" 

L 292 J 

to conſult the intereſt of his company, and not 
to proſtitute in common the myſteries of his 
profeſſion; ſecret committees and private 
councils are ſolemnly enjoined not to publiſh 
abroad their debates and reſolutions. In courts- 
martial, the members are bound to ſecrecy, 
and in many caſes, for more effectual ſecurity, 
an oath is adminiſtered *. 

As in ſociety in general, we are united to- 
gether by our indigences and infirmities, and 
a vaſt variety of circumſtances contributing 
to our mutual and neceſſary dependence on 
each other, (which lays a general foundation 
for terreſtrial happineſs, by ſecuring general 
amity and the reciprocation of good offices in 
the world) ſo, in all particular ſocieties, of 

whatever denomination, they are all enjoined 

by a ſort of cement; by bonds and laws which 
are peculiar to each of them, from the higheſt 
aſſemblies to the loweſt. Conſequently the in- 
junctions to ſecrecy among free-maſons can be 
no more unwarrantable, than in the ſocieties 
and cales already pointed out: and to report, 

See my Military Dictionary at the word CouRT- 

Martial, & ſeq. 
Or 

1 

Or 

1 

or even to inſinuate, that they are, muſt argue 
a want of candour, a want of reaſon, and a 
want of charity. For by the laws of nature, 
and of nations, every individual, and every 
ſociety, has a right to be ſuppoſed innocent 
till proved otherwiſe. 

YeT notwithſtanding the myſteries of our 
profeſſion are kept inviolable, none are ex- 
cluded from a full knowledge of them in due 
time and manner, upon proper application, 
and being found capable and worthy of the 
truſt. To form other deſigns and expecta- 
tions, is building on a ſandy foundation, and 
will only ſerve to teſtify, that like a raſh man, 
their diſcretion 1s always out of the way when 
they have moſt occaſion to make ule of it. 

ON 

[ 295 J 

T is but too frequently alledged by the 
objectors to free-maſonry, that upon the 
initiation of a member into this myſtery, he 
lays himſelf under a ſolemn obligation by an 
oath, with very ſevere penalties. This by 
them 15 pronounced an unwarrantable pro- 
ceeding. Certainly theſe perſons are as igno- 
rant as they are ungenerous, and for want of 
better judgments form erroneous notions, and 
from falſe premiſes draw falſe concluſions. 
To obviate this objection, I will trace the 
origin of ſwearing, and obſerve the different 
cuſtoms adapted by the ancients on this head : 
after examining the nature of the oath, ſup- 
poſing that one is required as ſet forth by the 
ad- 

[ 296 J 
adverſaries of maſonry, I will conſider how 

far it is, or is not, warrantable in the pre- 
ſeat caſe. 

Wr are informed by ſacred hiſtory, what 
was the cuſtom of ſwearing among the He- 
brews, who ſometimes ſwore by ſtretching 

forth their hands +, ſometimes the party ſwear. 

ing put his hand under the other's thigh f; 
which was the manner or adminiſtration uſed 
by Abraham and Jacob ſtanding before the 
altar*, as we read in Kings; which was alſo 
the cuſtom of the Athenians ||, the Carthagi- 
niaus &, and the Romans C. 

Tur Fews chiefly ſwore by Feruſalem, by 
the temple, by the gold of the temple, by the 
altar, and the gift on the altar. 

Tus Greets eſteemed it an honour paid their 
deities, to uſe their names in ſolemn con- 
tracts, promiles, and aſſeverations; and call 

+ Gen. ch. 14. v. 27. 1 Gen. ch. 24. v. 3 & 9. 
Ch. 47. v. 29 & 31, * 1 Kings, ch. 8. v. 31. 
Alex. ab. Alex. I. 5. ch. 10. Livius, dec. 3. I. 1. 
¶ Juven. Sat. 3. alſo Val. Max. I. 9. ch. 3. 

them 

1 

1.297 J 

them to witneſs men's truth and honeſty, or 
to puniſh their falſhood and treachery. This 
was reputed a kind of religious adoration, 
being an acknowledgment of the omnipotence 
and omnipreſence, and by conſequence of the 
divinity of the being thus invoked: and the 
inſpired writers, for the ſame reaſon forbid to 
ſwear by the pagan deities, and commanded to 
ſwear by the true God. Thus in Deutero- 
nomy *, Thou ſhalt fear the Lord thy God, and 
ſerve him, and ſwear by his name. And in 
Jeremiah +, How ſhall I pardon thee for this? 

thy children have forſaken me, and ſworn by 
them that are no gods; and to forbear other 

inſtances, the worſhippers of the true God are 
by David repreſented to ſwear by him; that 
ls, by invoking his name. 

Trz antiquity of ſwearing, as well as the 
manner of adminiſtering an oath, having been 
ſufficiently ſhewn, I will in the next place, 
as far as may be neceſſary, take notice of the 
fundamental principles of this eſtabliſhment, 
as the propereſt method to form a right judg- 

” Ck: &G Vo $o tz. + Ch. 53. v. 7. 152m: 
Ch, 30. v. 15. Gen. ch. 24. v. 3. 
P p | ment 

„ — ̃ K ̃ ͤuͤuvÄ..̃² m 

— — a en ROT 
—ͤ— — — — ͤů ———— j 

1 298 

ment of it; and then, in anſwer to the pre- 
ſent objection, I will examine how far an 04 
would, or would not be juſtifiable, on the 
initiation of a maſon, and ſuppoſing it to be 
required even under ſuch penal ſanctions as 
have been pretended, 

Ir we examine the laws and regulations of 
free-maſonry, it will appear that the end and 
purport of it is truly laudable, being calculated 
to regulate our paſſions, to aſſiſt us in acquir- 
ing knowledge of the arts and ſciences, and 
to promote morality and beneficence, as well 
as to render converſation agreeable, innocent, 
and inſtructive; and ſo to influence our prac- 
tice, as to make us uſeful to others, and happy 
in ourſelves. With regard to the relation we 
have (as members) to the ſociety in general, 
it will appear equally evident from the ſame 
regulations, that a free-maſon is to be a peace- 
able ſubject, conforming cheerfully to the go- 
vernment under which he liyes, 1s to pay a 
due deference to his ſuperiors ; and from his 
inferiors 1s to receive honour rather with rc- 
luctance than to extort it. He muſt be a man 
of univerſal benevolence and charity, not te- 

nacious of his abundance, when the exigencies | 

Ol 

— 299 J 

of his fellow creatures lay the juſteſt claim to 
his bounty. 

Masoxs not only challenge, but have ever 
ſupported that character among the honeſt 
and candid part of mankind, whoſe equity and 
reaſon would never ſuffer them to entertain 
ill-grounded prejudices. 

Taz great Mr. Locke appears to have been 
ſo delighted with ſome of our principles, that 
he tells Lady Maſham (to whom he was writ- 
ing on the ſubject) that it was his wiſh they 
were communicated to all mankind, ſince there 
is nothing more true than what maſons teach; 
that the better men are, the more they love 
one another; virtue having in itſelf ſomething 
ſo amiable as to charm the heart of all who 
behold it *, 

Ap another writer, ſpeaking of free- 
maſonry, lays, no abule is tolerated among 
them, no intemperance allowed; modeſty, 
union, and humility are ſtrongly recommended. 
This ſociety is no ways offenſive to religion, 

* MS. in the Britiſh Muſeum, 
Pp 2 good 

[ 300 ] 

good manners, or political government; it 
has and does ſtill flouriſh in Great Britain 
and Ireland, and the dominions thereof, under 
the protection of the greateſt perſonages, even 
princes of the royal blood . 

Mz. CnamBtxrs the famous lexicographer, 
alſo teſtifies F, that Free and Accepted Maſons 
are a very ancient ſociety, ſo called either from 
ſome extraordinary knowledge of maſonry or 
building, which they were ſuppoſed to be mal- 
ters of, or becauſe the firſt founders of their 
ſociety were of that profeſſion. 

THrxy are very conſiderable both for num- 
ber and character; being found in every 
country in Europe, and conſiſting principally 
of men of merit and conſideration. As to an- 
tiquity they lay claim to a ſtanding of ſome 
thouſand years, and it is ſaid can trace up 
their original as early as the building of Sch. 
mon's temple. 

Waar the end of their conſtitution is, 
ſeems {till to be a ſecret, though as much of 

+ Vid. Rol. Caſt. vol. 6. fol. 134. 

4 Cyclopædia, word Maſon, Pree-maſon. 
11 

5 

f 

it as is known, appears laudable, and it tends 
to promote friendſhip, ſociety, mutual aſſiſ- 
tance, and good fellowſhip, 

Tut brethren of this family are ſaid to be 
poſſeſſed of a number of ſecrets, which have 
been religiouſly obſerved from age to age. 
Be their. other good qualities what they will, 
it is plain they are maſters of one, in a very 
great degree, namely Secrecy, 

Ma. DucartL ſays of free-maſons, that 
they are an aſſociation of religious, who en- 
gaged in the founding and erecting of 
churches and religious houſes in Paleſtine +. 

Now let us calmly aſk, if a number of per- 
ſons, who have formed themſelves into a 
body with a deſign to improve in uſeful 
knowledge, to promote univerſal benevolence, 
and to cultivate the ſocial virtues of human 
life, and have bound themſelves by the ſulemn 
obligation of an oath, to conform to the rules 
of ſuch inſtitution, where can be the impiety, 
jmmorality, or folly of ſuch proceeding? Is 

+ Anglo-norman Antiquitiess Religious Cere- 
monies of all Nations, : 
1t 

1. e 

it not the cuſtom of moſt communities, in the 
ſtate, amongſt the learned bodies, in com- 
merce, c. a caſe too commonly known to 
require a recital of particular inſtances, I 
ſhall therefore content myſelf with adding this 
obſervation, viz. That biſhop Saunderſon, an 
eminent caſuiſt, in his lectures on the ſubject 
of oaths, very judiciouſly aſſerts, that when a 
thing is not by any precept or interdi& human 
or divine, ſo determined, but every man may 
at his choice do, or not do, 'as he ſees expe- 
dient, let him do what he will, he ſinneth 
not +. As if Caius ſhould ſwear to ſell his land 
to Titus, or to lend him an hundred crowns; 
the anſwer is brief, an oath in this caſe is both 

lawful and binding 4. 

 Axnp as the principles of this inſtitution 
are truly praiſe worthy, containing thoſe valu- 
able perquiſites which will ever ſecure the 
eſteem and admiration of all good men (as well 
as moſt aſſuredly the envy of the bad) we will 
put this plain queſtion; Is not the deſign of 
it of equal importance to the public, with 
the lending of an hundred crowns to a private 

+ 11 Chron. ch. 15. v. 14 K 15. 1 Prælect. 3. ſect. 1 5. 
man? 

( 6p 1 

man ? the anſwer and the conſequences are 
both evident; that an oath on the ſubject of 
ſree-maſonry, if required, is both lawful and 
obligatory. 

As for the terror of a penalty, it is a miſ- 

taken notion to imagine that the ſolemnity of 
an oath adds any thing to the obligation ; or 
that the oath is not equally binding without 
any penalty at all. 

I SHALL add a few more quotations from 
the ſame excellent caſuiſt, and leave the ex- 

planation and application to the intelligent. 

A $SOLEMN oath of itſelf, and in its own 
nature, is not more obligatory than a ſimple 
one; both becauſe the obligation of an oath 
ariſeth from this, that God is invoked as a 
witneſs and avenger, no leſs in the ſimple one 
than in the ſolemn and corporal; for the invo- 
cation is made preciſely by the pronuncia- 
tion of the words (which is the ſame both in 
the ſimple and ſolemn) and not by any cor- 
poral motion or concomitant ſign, in which 
the ſolemnity of the oath conſiſts +, 

+ Prælect. 5. ſect. 12. 
AND 

W —— — ͤ ͤU——ͤ 

— — — 
— K — 
. a CIS tr BP” at 

[304 } 

Axp it is a matter well worthy the conſi- 
deration of every man, that as the obje& of 
a lawful oath is God alone, ſo it contains a 
ſolemn confeſſion of his omnipreſence, that he 
is with us in every place; of his omniſcience, 
that he knoweth all ſecrets of the heart ; that 
he is a maintainer of truth and an avenger of 
falſehood ; of his juſtice, that he is willing; 
and of his omnipotence, that he is able to pu- 
niſh thoſe that by a diſregard to their oaths 
ſhall diſhonour him. 

IT is therefore of a very dangerous ten- 
dency for perſons who have once taken an 
oath, to trifle and play with the force of it, 
even ſuppoſing the occaſion of ſuch obliga- 
tion was actually of ſmall moment in itſelf, 
And this is poſitively determined by the ſame 
writer, in the following words, and ought to 
be a caution to all not to violate an oath, leſt . 
they incur the fatal conſequences of real 

as. 
A voLUNTARY oath is the more binding 

for being voluntary, becauſe there is no ſtricter 

obligation than that we take willingly on 
our- 

1 305 J 

ourſelves *, And in another place he is more 

particular, where à matter is ſo trivial, that it 
is not worth while, or the deliberation of a 
wiſe man, nor ſignifies a ſtraw whether it be 
done or not done, as to reach up a chip, or 
to rub one's beard ; or for the ſlightneſs of it 
is not ſo much to be eſteemed, as to give a 
boy an apple, or to lend a pin: an oath is 
binding in matters of the leaſt moment; be- 
cauſe weighty and trivial things have a like 
reſpect unto truth and falſehood ; and further, 
becauſe every party ſwearing is bound to per- 
form all he promiſed, as far as he is able, and 
as far as it is lawful; to give an apple to a 
boy is both poſſible and lawful, he is bound 
therefore to perform it; he ought therefore to 

fulfil his cath . 

Tris is likewiſe confirmed by Moſes +: if 
a man ſwear an oath to bind his ſoul with a 
band, he ſhall not break his word; he ſhall 
do according to all that proceedeth out of his 
mouth. And ||, it is threatened that every 

* Prgledt. 4. ſect. 11. Prælect. 3. ſeR. 15. 
+ Numb. ch. 30. v. 2. Deut. ch. 23. v. 21, 24. 
Zech. ch. 5. v. 3 and 4, &c. 

Qq one 

— Toro ae yr I gr——— 

— — 

[ 306 ) 

one that ſweareth falſely, ſhall be cut off by the 
curſe, I will bring it forth, ſaith the Lord of 
Hoſts, and it ſhall enter into the houſe of him 
that ſweareth falſly by my name; and it ſhall 
remain in the midſt of his houſe, and ſhall 
conſume it, with the timber thereof, and the 
ſtones thereof. 

Tux objectors being thus anſwered with 
reſpe& to the lawfulneſs of an oath, ſuppoſing 
one to be required on the initiation of a free. 
maſon, as the certainty of which conjecture is 
their only ſupport, 

ON. 

L 3907 | 

O N 

FREE-MASONS LODGES; 

THEIR 

FURNITURE, APPAREL, 

AND 

JEWELS, &c. 

LODGE is the place where all buſineſs 
concerning the ſociety is tranſacted, and 
where maſons meet to expatiate on the craft, 
When the lodge is revealed to an entering 
maſon, it diſcovers to him a repreſentation of 
the world; in which, from the wonders of na- 
ture, we are led to contemplate her great ori- 
ginal, and worlhip him from his mighty 
works; and we are thereby alſo moved to ex- 
erciſe thoſe moral and ſocial virtues, which 
become mankind, as the ſervants of the great 
Architect of the world; in whoſe image we 
were formed in the beginning. 

Qq + Tux 

| 
' 
| 
| 

' 

308 J 

Tx Creator, deſigning to bleſs man's eſtate 
on earth, hath opened the hand of his divine 
benevolence with good gifts ; he hath ſpread 
over the world the illumined canopy of heaven: 
the covering of the tabernacle, and the vail 
of the temple at Jeruſalem, were repreſenta- 
tions of the celeſtial hemiſphere, and were of 
blue, of crimſon, and purple; and ſuch is the 
covering of our lodges ®. As an emblem of 
God's power, his goodneſs, omnipreſence, and 
eternity, the /odges are adorned with the image 
of the ſun ; which he ordained to riſe from 
the Eaſt, and open the day ; thereby calling 
forth the people of the earth to their worſhip, 
and exerciſe in the walks of virtue. 

REMEMBERING the wonders in the begin- 
ning, we claiming the auſpicious countenance 
of heaven on our virtuous deeds, aſſume the 
figures of the ſun and moon, as emblematical 
of the great light and truth diſcovered to the 
firſt man; and thereby implying, that as true 
maſons we ſtand redeemed from darkneſs, and 
are become the ſons of /ight : acknowledging 

* 2 Chron, ch. 3. v. 14. Alſo Joſephus, lib. 5. 
+ Pſalm 104. v. 1, 2, 3, and 4. 

in 

L 309 ] 

in our profeſſion, our adoration of him who 
gave light unto, his works. Let us then by 
our practiee and conduct in life ſhew, that 
we carry our emblems worthily; and as the 
children of light, that we have turned our 
backs on works of darkneſs, obſcenity, and 
drunkenneſs, hatred and malice, ſatan and his 
dominions; prefering charity, benevolence, juſtice, 
temperance, chaſtity, and brotherly love, as the 
acceptable ſervice on which the great Maſter of 
all, from his beatitude, looks down with ap- 
probation, 

Tur ſame divine hand, pouring forth 
bounteous gifts, which hath bleſſed us with 
the ſights of his glorious works in the hea- 
vens, hath alſo ſpread the earth with a beau- 
teous carpet: he hath wrought it in various 
colours; fruits and flowers, paſtures and meads, 
golden furrows of corn, and ſhady dales, moun- 
tains ſkirted with nodding foreſts, and valleys 
flowing with milk and honey : he hath wrought 
it as it were in Moſaic work, giving a pleaſ- 
ing variety to the eye of man: he hath poured 
upon us his gifts in abundance ; not only the 
neceſſaries of life, but alſo wine to gladden the 

heart of man, and oil to give him a checrful 

cCOuUn- 

it 

© 
— —— 
— — — 
— — 
— — — 

1999 

countenance: and that he might ſtill add 
beauty to the ſcene of life wherein he hath 
placed us, his highly favoured creatures, he 
hath ſkirted and bordered the earth with the 
ocean; for the wiſe Creator having made man 
in his own image, not meaning in the likeneſs 
of his perſon, but ſpiritually, by breathing 
into his noſtrils the breath of life, and inſpir- 
ing him with that reſemblance of the divinity, 
an intellectual ſpirit ; he ſkirted the land with 
the ocean, not only for that ſalubrity, which 
ſhould be derived from its agitation, but alſo 
that to the genius of man, a communication 
ſhould be opened to all the quarters of the 
earth; and that by mutual intercourſe, men 
might ſo unite in mutual good works, and all 
become as members of one ſociety. Theſe 

ſubjects are repreſented in the flooring of the 

lodge. 

Tux univerle is the 7emple of the deity whom 
we ſerve: wiſdom, ſtrength, and beauty are 
about his throne, as the pillars of his works; 
for his wiſdom is infinite, his ſtrength is in 
omnipotence, and beauty ſtands forth through 

all his creation in ſymmetry and order: he 
hath 

- 

1 

hath ſtretched forth the heavens as a canopy, 
and the earth he hath planted as his footſtool; 
he crowns his temples with the ſtars, as with 
a diadem, and in his hand he extendeth the 
power and the glory; the ſun and moon are 
meſſengers of his will, and all his law is con- 
cord, The pillars ſupporting the lodge are 
'repreſentative of the divine power. 

A Lobo where perfect maſons meet, or are 
aſſembled, repreſents the works of the deity. 

We place the ſpiritual lodge in the vale 
of , Fehoſophat, implying thereby, that the 
principles of maſonry are derived from the 
knowledge of God, and are eſtabliſhed in the 
judgment of the Lord; the literal tranſlation of 
the word Jehoſophat, from the Hebrew tongue, 
being no more than thoſe expreſs words. The 
higheſt hills and loweſt vallies were from the 
earlieſt times eſteemed ſacred, and it was ſup- 
poſed the ſpirit of God was peculiarly diffuſive 
in thoſe places. Upon the. top of the moun- 
tain, the whole limit thereof round about ſhall 
be holy, 

* Ezekiel, ch. 43. v. 12. 

Tax 

— 312 J 

Tus maſter of each lodge ſhould found his 
government in concord and univerſal love; for 
as the great Architect moves the ſyſtems with 
his finger, and touches the ſpheres with har- 
mony, ſo that the morning ſtars together ſung 

the ſongs of gratitude, and the floods clap 

their hands, amidſt the invariable beauties or 

order; ſo ſhould we, rejoicing, be of one ac- 

cord, and of one law; in unanimity, in cha- 
rity, and in affection; moving by one un- 
changing ſyſtem, and actuated by one princi- 
ple, in rectitude of manners. 

A MuAsox, ſitting the member of a lodge, 
claiming theſe emblems, as the teſtimonies of 
his order, ought at that inſtant to transfer his 
thoughts to the auguſt ſcene which is imi- 
tated; and remember that he then appears 
profeſſing himſelf a member of the great temple 
of the univerſe, to obey the laws of the mighty 
Maſter of all, in whoſe preſence he ſeeks to 

be approved. 

Ax ancient record expreſſes, that the firſt 
maſons received their knowledge from God; 
by which means they are endowed with the 

due underſtanding of what is pleaſing to him, 

and 

L 2081 

and the only true method of propagating their 
doctrines *. 

As we derived many of our myſteries and 
moral principles from the doctrines of Pytha- 
goras, who had acquired his learning in Egypt, 
and others from the Phenicians, who had re- 
ceived the Egyptian theology in an early age, 
it is not to be wondered that we ſhould adopt 
Egyptian ſymbols, to repreſent or expreſs the 
attributes of the Divinity. 

Tur Pythagorean ſyſtem of philoſophy alſo 
points out to us a reaſon for the figure of the 
ſun being introduced into the lodge, as being 
the centre of the planetary ſyſtem which he 
taught, as well as the emblem of the Deity 
which he ſerved. This grand M:ozpaviu was a 
ſymbol expreſſing the firſt and greateſt prin- 
ciple of his doctrines. This was allo a repre- 

* Hutchin/on's Spirit of Maſonry, p. 98, &c. Alſo 
MS. in the poſſeſſion of Mr. Vilhn, of Broombead in 
Tork/hire, written in the reign of K. Henry VIII. 

Rr ſentation 

2 aa tes >» Pi a 

Lap 3 

ſentation of the Abrax which governed the 
ſtellary world and our diurnal revolutions Þ 

In the books of Hermes Triſmegiſtes, who 
was an Egyptian, and ſaid to be cotemporary 
with Abraham's grand-father, is this remark- 
able paſſage; ſpeaking of the Deity he ſays, 

But if thou wilt ſee him, conſider and under- 

ſtand the ſun, conſider the courſe of the moon, 

t APęa ga, Abrac, or Abracar, was a name which 
Baſilidcs, a religious of the ſecond century, gave to 
God, who he ſaid was the author of 365. The author 
of this ſuperſtition is ſaid to have lived in the time 
of Adrian, and that it had its name from Abra/arn or 
Abraxas, the denomination which Bafilides gave to 

the Deity. He called him m, Koc. Os, i. e. Jehovah 
del Dominus, the ſupreme God, and aſcribed to him 
ſeven ſubordinate powers or angels, who preſided over 
the heavens, and alſo according to the days in the 
year, he held that 365 virtues, powers, or intelli- 
gences exiſted as the emanations of God ; the value, 
or numerical diſtinctions, of the letters in the word, 
according to the ancient Greet numerals, made 365 — 

r | = 355. 
„ 3, 100, 1, 00, 1, 200. 

Cicero, De Nat. Deor. lib, 3.—Lucan, lib. 6. 

CON=- 

L 265 [1 

conſider the order of the ſtars. Oh thou un- 
ſpeakable, unutterable, to be praiſed with 

flence | 

From hence we are naturally led to per- 
ceive the origin of the Egyptian ſymboliſa- 
tion, and the reaſon for their adopting thoſe 
objects, as expreſſive of the mighty majeſty, 
and omnipreſence of the Deity. 

PosTERITY, to record the wiſe doctrines 
and religious principles of the firſt profeſſors 
of the true worſhip, have adopted theſe de- 
ſcriptions of the lodge in which they aſſemble; 
and maintain thoſe religious tenets which na- 
ture dictates, gratitude to him under whom 
we exiſt; and working in the acceptable ſer- 
vice of him, who rejoiceth in the upright 

man, 

As ſuch it is to be a free-maſon, as ſuch is 

a lodge of maſons, as ſuch are the principles of 
this ſociety, as theſe were the original inſtitu- 
tions of our brotherhood, let the ignorant laugh 
on, and the wicked ones ſcoff. And that 
theſe are true ſolutions of our emblems, I am 
convinced myſelf; and with humble defe- 
Rr 2 rence 

r —V — — roo 
K 1 

L 3 

rence to the reſt of my brethren, offer them 
for their attention. 

Ix every regular aſſembly of men, who 
are convened for wiſe and uſeful purpoſes, 
the commencement and termination of buſi- 
neſs is attended with ſome form. Though 
ceremonies are in themſelves of little impor- 
tance, yet as they ſerve to engage the atten- 
tion and to impreſs the mind with reverence, 
they muſt be conſidered as neceſſary on ſo- 
lemn occaſions. They recall to memory the 
intent of the aſſociation, and baniſh many of 
thoſe trifling amuſements which too frequently 
intrude on our lels ſerious moments. 

THE opening and clo/ing of our lodges may 
be traced from the moſt remote period of an- 
tiquity. Being founded on a rational baſis, 
the more refined improvements of modern 
education have not altogether diſregarded it, 
on the contrary, the cuſtom ſeems {till to pre- 
vail in every civilized country of the world. 

Tur veneration due to antiquity, ſetting 
aſide the reaſonableneſs of the practice, would 
ot itſelf recommend it. To enlarge on the 

Pro- 

Law 

propriety of obſerving it in this ſociety, which 
has received the ſanction of the earlieſt ages, 
as well as the patronage of the wiſeſt men in 
more recent periods, would, I apprehend, be 
equally needleſs and unimportant, 

Tu ceremony uſed at the opening of our 
aſſemblies reminds the maſter of the dignity 
of his character, and the brethren of fidelity 
to their truſt. Theſe are not the only advan- 
tages reſulting from it; a reverential awe for 
the Deity 1s inculcated, and the great end of 
the creation demonſtrated. Here we are 
taught to adore the God who made us, and 
to ſupplicate his protection on our well- 
meant endeavours. 

Tre cl:;fjug of our meetings teaches us to 
offer up the proper tribute of gratitude to 
the beneficent Author of life; and here the 
leſs important duties of the ſociety are not 

paſſed over unobſerved. By this ceremony 

we are taught how to ſupport the regularity 
of our aſſemblies, and the neceſſary degree of 
ſubordination which takes place in the govern- 
ment of our lodges. Such is the nature of 

thele 

WAA 

theſe ceremonies, and their utility, that it be- 
comes our duty never to omit them. 

A Prayer uſed at Opening the Lodge. 

MAY the favour of Heaven be upon this 
our happy meeting; may it be begun, carried 
on, and ended with order, harmony, and bro- 
therly love. Amen. 

A Prayer uſed at the Reception of a new Brother, 

MOST holy and glorious Lord God, thou 
great architect of heaven and earth, who art the 
giver of all good gifts, and haſt promiſed that 
when two or three are gathered together in thy 
name, thou wilt be in the midſt of them: in 
thy name we aſſemble and meet together, moſt 
humbly beſeeching thee to bleſs us in all our 
undertakings, that we may know and ſerve thee 
aright, that all our doings may tend to thy 
glory and the ſalvation of our ſouls. And 
we beſeech thee, O Lord God, to bleſs this 
our preſent undertaking, and grant that this 
candidate for maſonry may dedicate his life to 
thy ſervice, and be a true and faithful brother 

among us; endue him with a competency of 
thy 

319 J 

thy divine wiſdom, that he may, with the 
ſecrets of free-maſonry, be able to unfold the 
myſteries of godlineſs to the honour of thy 
great and holy name, This we humbly beg 
in the name and for the ſake of Jeſus Chriſt 
our Lord and Saviour. Amen. 

A Prayer uſed at Cloſing the Lodge. 

MAY the bleſſing of Heaven be with us, 
and all regular maſons, to beautify and cement 
us with every moral and ſocial virtue, Amen. 

The Furniture of the Lodge. 

IT is with pleaſure I proceed to give ſolu- 
tions of the myſteries in maſonry; which, to 
minds inattentive to the real import of the 
objects in their view, might remain undiſco- 
vered; and the profeſſor of maſonry might 
pals on, without receiving a juſt ſenſe of thoſe 
dignities which he has aſſumed, 

I vave defined what is intended to be re- 
preſented by a lodge, and its origin and na- 
ture; it is now my duty to diſcover to my 
readers the import of the furniture of a lodge. 

As 

00-3 

As Solomon at Feruſalem carried into the 
Fewiſh temple all the veſſels and inſtruments 
requiſite for the ſervice of Jenovan, accord- 
ing to the law of his people; ſo we maſons, as 
workers in moral duties, and as ſervants of 
the Great Architect of the world, have placed 
in our view, thoſe emblems which ſhould con- 
ſtantly remind us of what we are, and what 
is required of us. 

Tux third emanation of Abrax*, in the 
Gnoſtic hierarchy, was Phronæ ſis, the emblem 
of prudence, which is the firſt and moſt ex- 
alted object that demands our attention in the 
lodge: it is placed in the centre, ever to be 
preſent to the eye of the maſon, that his heart 
may be attentive to her dictates, and ſtedfaſt 
in her laws; for prudence is the rule of all 
virtues; prudence is the path which leads to 
every degree of propriety; prudence is the 
channel where ſelf-approbation flows for ever; 
ſhe leads us forth to worthy actions, and, as 
a blazing ſtar, enlighteneth us through the 
dreary and darkſome paths of this lite. 

* See the note, p. 314, 

VIR- 

— 321 J 

VIR Tux, by maſons and moraliſts, is defined 
to be that ſtedfaſt purpoſe and firm will of 
doing thoſe things which nature hath dictated 
to us, as the beſt and moſt ſalutary; a habit 
of the ſoul by which mankind are inclined to 
do things which are upright and good, and to 
avoid thoſe that are evil. In ſhort, virtue is 
moral honeſty and good principles. 

Or the virtues of which prudence is the rule, 
three are called cardinal virtues, of which, 
moſt properly a maſon ſhould be poſſeſſed, 
are fortitude, temperance, and juſtice; tor with- 
out theſe, the name of maſon is an empty title, 
and but a painted bubble, 

TrarT fortitude muſt be the characteriſtic 
of a maſon J need not argue; by which, in the 
midſt of preſſing evils, he is enabled always 
to do that which is agreeable to the dictates 
of right reaſon. 

TzMPERANCE allo muſt be one of his 
principles, being a moderating and reſtrain- 
ing of our affections and paſſions, eſpecially 
in ſobriety and chaſtity, We regard temperance 
under the various definitions of moraliits, as 

82 con- 

232 — Ä — - — 

( 322 J 

conſtituting honeſty, decency, and baſhful. 
neſs; and in its potential parts, inſtituting 
meekneſs, clemency, and modeſty, 

We profeſs juſtice as dictated to us to do 
right to all, and to yield to every man what 
belongeth to him, 

Tux cardinal virtues, prudence, fortitude, 
temperance, and juſtice, hold in their train 
the inferior powers of peace, concord, quiet- 
neſs, liberty, ſafety, honour, felicity, piety, 
and charity, with many others which were 
adored by the ancients in thoſe ages, when 
they confounded mythology with the worſhip 
of the Divinity. Within the ſtarry girdle of 

prudence all virtues are enfolded. 

As the ſteps of men are trod in the various 
and uncertain incidents of life; as our days 
are chequered with a ſtrange contrariety of 
events, and our paſſage through this exiſtence, 
though ſometimes attended with proſperous 
circumſtances, is often beſet by a multitude 
of evils ; hence is the lodge furniſhed with Mo- 

* 
” 

ſaic work, to remind us of the precariouſnels 

of 

——— — 

1 

of our ſtate on earth; to- day our feet tread in 
proſperity, to-morrow we totter on the uneven 
paths of weakneſs, temptation, and adverſity. 
Whilſt this emblem 1s before us, we are in- 
ſtructed to boaſt of nothing; to have com- 
paſſion and give aid to thoſe who are in ad- 
verſity; to walk uprightly, and with humi- 
lity; for ſuch is the exiſtence, that there is 
no ſtation in which pride can be ſtably founded : 
all men in birth, and in the grave, are on the 
level, Whilſt we tread on this Moſaic work, 
let our ideas return to the original which it 
copies, and let every maſon act as the dictates 
of reaſon prompt him, 10 live in brotherly love. 

As more immediate guides for a free-maſon, 
the lodge is furniſhed with unerring rules, 
whereby he ſhall form his conduct; the book 
of his law is laid before him *, that he may 
not ſay through ignorance he erred ; whatever 
the great Architect of the world hath dictated 
to mankind, as the mode in which he would 
be ſerved, and the path in which he 1s to tread 
to obtain his approbation; whatever precepts 
he hath adminiſtered, and with whatever laws 

The holy bible, 
88 2 he 

* 

—— — — — — — 

5 

he hath inſpired the ſages of old, the ſame are 
faithfully comprized in the book of the law of 
maſonry T. That book, and the former, are 
never cloſed in any lodge, for they reveal the 
duties which the great Maſter of all exacts from 
us; open to every eye, comprehenſible to every 
mind; then who ſhall ſay among us, that he 
knoweth not the acceptable ſervice ? 

Bur as the frailty of human nature wageth 
war with truth, and man's infirmities ſtruggle 
with his virtues; to aid the conduct of every 
maſon, the GRAND MASTER holdeth the con- 
paſs, limiting the diſtance, progreſs, and cir- 
cumference of the work: he dictateth the 
manners, he giveth the direction of the de- 
ſign, and delineateth each portion and part of 
the labour; aſſigning to each his province and 
his order. And ſuch is his maſterſhip, that 
each part, when aſunder, ſeemeth irregular 
and without form; yet, when put together, 
like the building of the temple at Jeruſalem, 
is connected and framed in true ſymmetry, 
beauty, and order. The moral implication 
of which is, that the maſter in his lodge fits 

+ The book of conſtitutions. 

dic- 

— f Fm, . 

at 

mn, 

1C- 

SS 3 

diftating thoſe ſalutary laws, for the regula- 
tion thereof, as his prudence directs; aſſign- 
ing to each brother his proper province li- 
miting the raſhneſs of ſome, and circumſcrib- 
ing the imprudence of others; reſtraining all 
licentiouſneſs and drunkenneſs, diſcord and 
malice, envy and reproach; and promoting 
brotherly love, morality, charity, benevolence, 
cordiality, and innocent mirth ; that the aſ- 
ſembly of the brethren may be with order, 
harmony, and love. 

To try the works of every maſon, the ſquare 
is preſented, as the probation of his life, prov- 
ing whether his manners are regular and uni- 
form. This inſtrument is worn by all maſters 
of lodges *; for maſons ſhould be of one prin- 

* It is generally believed the /qzare was the figure 
which firſt engaged the attention of geometricians; 
for in all ages, and mongſt all nations, of which we 
have any knowledge, the /qzare has always been that 
in planime;ry, which the unit is in arithmetic, The 
ſquare was the figure under which the /raz/ites formed 
their encampments in the wilderneſs, and under which 
they fortified or defended the holy tabecnacle, ſanRi- 
fied with the immediate preſence of the Divinity. 
The «are or oblong is likewiſe the form of all lodges. 

ciple 

[ 326 ) 

ciple and one rank, without the diſtinctions 
of pride and pageantry; intimating, that from 
high to low, the minds of maſons ſhould be 
inclined to good works, above which no man 
ſtands exalted by his fortune, 

Bur ſuperior to all, the lodge is furniſhed 
with three /aminaries ; as the golden candle- 
ſtick in the tabernacle of Moſes was at once 
emblematical of the ſpirit of God, whereby 
his choſen people were enlightened, and pro- 
phetical of the churches; or otherwiſe as Jo- 
ſephus ſays, repreſentative of the planets and 
the powerful works of God; ſo our three 
lights ſhew to us the great ſtages of maſonry, 
or otherwiſe our /z2hts are typical of the Holy 

Trinity. 

Sucn is the furniture of the lodge : ſuch are 
the principles dictated to us as maſons ; let us 

+ The particular attention paid by the ancients to 
the element of fire, 15 in no wiſe to be wondered at, 
when we conſider, that whenever the Deity deigned 
to reveal himſelf to the human fenſes, it was under 
this element. See Exod, ch. 3. v.2 & 4,—ch. 13. v. 21. 
—Ch. 19. v. 16 & 18,—ch. 24. v. 17.—ch. 29. v. 43. 

Numb. ch. 9. v. 16. Deut. ch. 5. v. 4 to 26. 
e- 

t 903: 1 

rejoice in the exerciſe of thoſe excellencies, 
which ſhould ſet us above the rank of other 
men ; and prove that we are brought out of 
darkneſs into light. And let us ſhew our 
cood works unto the world, that through our 
light ſo ſhining unto men, they may glorify 
the great Maſter of the univerſe ; and therefore, 
do juſtice, love mercy, and walk humbly with 
their God. 

The Apparel and Jewels of Maſons. 

MASONS, as one of their firſt principles, 
profeſs innocence: they put on white apparel, 
as an emblem of that character, which be- 
ipeaks purity of ſoul, guiltleſſneſs, and being 
harmleſs J. 

Tux ancients were alſo wont to put a white 
garment on the perſon baptized, to denote his 
having put off the luſts of the fleſh, and his 
being cleanſed from his former ſins. Accord- 
ingly the baptized are both by the apoſtle and 

t Formerly maſons uſed to be cloathed in white du- 
ring lodge hours, which practice is ſtill followed in 
many lodges in Germany, France, and Holland; but in 

England the white apron 1s only remaining. 
the 

1 328 ] 

the Greek fathers frequently ſtiled pale, 
the enlightened, becauſe they profeſs to be the 
children of light, and engaged themſelves 
never to return again to the works of dark- 
neſs T. This white girment uſed to be deli. 
vered to them with this ſolemn charge; Re- 
ceive the white and undefiled garment, and pro- 
duce it without ſpot before the tribunal of our 
Lord Jeſus Chriſt, &c. 4. 

Wulst the apron with which we are 
cloathed indicates a diſpoſition of innocence, 
and belies not the wearers heart, let the igno- 
rant deride and ſcoff on: ſuperior to the ridi- 

+ Biographia Eccleſiaſtica. 

t Vaiab, ch. 9. v. 2. The grand lodge of England 
wear Blue, the grand ſtewards red, and all other maſons 
"white aprons. Numb. ch. 4. v. 6, 7,9, 11 & 12. But 
why this diſtinction (though very neceſſary) in all 
lodges under the Exgliſb conſtitution, I could never 
learn; as there is no law, either ancient or modern, 
that enforces it. Free-maſons in all foreign countries 
wear ſuch coloured aprons as their fancy dictate, many 
of which are richly embroidered and decorated with 
gold and ſilver fringe; even ſome are beautifully em- 
belliſhed with the various inſignia of the order, and 
other maſonic emblems. 

cule 

( 329 J 

cule and malice of the wicked, we will enfold 
ourſelves in the garb of our own virtue; and 
ſafe in our ſelf-approving conſcience, ſtand 
unmoved againſt the perſecutions of adverſity. 

Tas raiment, which truly implies the in- 
nocence of the heart, is a badge more honour- 
able than eyer was deviſed by kings; the 
Roman eagle, with all the orders of knight- 
hood, are thereto inferior: they may be proſ- 
tituted by the caprice of princes; but inno- 
. cence is innate and cannot be adopted. 

To be a true maſon, is to poſſeſs this prin- 
ciple; or the apparel which he wears is an in- 
famy to the apoſtate, and only ſhews him forth 
to ſname and contempt. 

Tnar innocence ſhould be the profeſſed 
principle of a maſon, occaſions no aſtoniſh- 
ment, when we conſider that the diſcovery of 
the Deity leads us to the knowledge of thoſe 
maxims Wwherewith he may be well pleaſed. 
The very idea of a Gop is ſucceeded with 
the belief, that he can approve of nothing that 
is evil; and when firſt our predeceſſors pro- 
feſſed themſelves ſervants of the great Archi- 

12 | tet 

330 

tect of the world, as their indiſpenſable duty, 
they profeſſed innocency, and put on white 
raiment, as a type and characteriſtic of their 
conviction, and of their being devoted to his 
will. The Druids were apparelled in white, 
at the time of their ſacr.fices and ſolemn of- 
fices. The Egyptian prieſts of Qſris wore 
ſnow- white cotton. The Grecian, and moſt 
all other prieſts, wore white garments *, As 
maſons, we regard the principles of thoſe who 
were the firſt worſhippers of the true God, 
imitate their apparel and aſſume the badge or 
innocence, 

Our jewels or ornaments imply, that we 
try our affections by juſtice, and our actions 
by truth, as the ſquare tries the workmanſhip 
of the mechanic; that we regard our mortal 
ſtate, whether it is dignified by title or not, 
whether it be opulent or indigent, as being of 
one nature in the beginning, and of one rank 
in its cloſe. In ſenſations, paſſions, and plea- 
ſures; in infirmities, maladies, and wants, all 
mankind are on a parallel; nature has given 
us no ſuperiorities; it is wiſdom and virtue 

See Montfaucon's Antiq. vol. II. 
that 

L I 

that conſtitute ſuperiority. From ſuch maxims 
we make eſtimates of our brother, when his 
calamities call for our council or our aid: 
the works of charity are from ſympathetic 
feelings, and benevolence acts upon the level, 
The emblem of theſe ſentiments is another 
of the jewels of our ſociety, 

— To pity human coe, 
7 what the happy to the unhappy owe. 

To wall uprightly before heaven and be- 
fore men, neither inclining to the right or to 
the left, is the duty of a maſon, neither be- 
coming an enthuſiaſt or a perſecutor in reli- 
gion, nor bending towards innovation or infi- 
delity. In civil government, firm in our al- 
liance, yet ſtedfaſt in our Jaws, liberties, and 
conſtitution. In private life, yielding up every 
propenſity, inclining neither to avarice or in- 
juſtice, to malice or revenge, to envy or con- 
tempt with mankind ; but as the builder raiſes 
his column by the plane and perpendicular, 
ſo ſhould the maſon carry himſelf towards the 

world. 

To rule our affections by juſtice, and our 
actions by truth, is to wear a jewel which 
110 would 

L 332 ] 

would ornament the boſom of the higheſt po. 
tentate on earth; human nature has her im- 
pulſes from deſires, which are often too inor- 
dinate: love binds with prejudices, and reſent- 
ment burns with fevers; contempt renders us 
incredulous, and covetouſneſs deprives us of 
every generous or human feeling. To ſteer 
the bark of life upon the ſeas of paſſions, 
without quitting the courſe of rectitude, is 
one of the higheſt excellencies to which human 
nature can be brought, aided with all the 
powers of philoſophy and religion. 

Ver merely to act with juſtice and truth, 
is not all that man ſhould attempt; for even 
that excellence would be ſelfiſhneſs : that duty 
1s not relative, but merely proper : it is only 
touching our own character, and doing no- 
thing for our neighbour z for juſtice is an in- 
diſpenſable duty in each individual: we were 
not born for ourſelves alone, only to ſhape 
our courſe through life in the tracks of tran- 
quillity, and ſolely to ſtudy that which ſhould 
afford peace to the conſcience at home, but 
men were made as mutual aids to each other ; 
no one among us, be he ever ſo opulent, can 
ſubſiſt without the aſſiſtance of his fellow- 

crea- 

[. 208 } 

creatures. Nature's wants are numerous, and 
our hands are filled with very little of the war- 
fare of neceſſity; our nakedneſs muſt be 
cloathed, our hunger ſatisfied, our maladies 
viſited, Where ſhall the proud man toil for 
ſuſtenance, if he ſtands unaided by his neigh- 
bours? When we look through the varied 
| ſcene of life, we ſee our fellow creatures at- 
tacked with innumerable calamities ; and were 
we without compaſſion, we ſhould exiſt with- 
out one of the fineſt feelings of the human 
heart. To love and to approve are move- 
ments in the ſoul of man which yield him 
pleaſure; but to pity, gives him heavenly 
ſenſations; and to relieve is divine. Charity 
there has its exiſtence; its riſe is from the 
conſciouſneſs of our ſimilarity in nature; the 
level on which morality was created in the 
beginning; its progreſs is in ſympathetic feel- 
ings, from che affections of the heart, breath- 
ing love towards our brother, coupled with 
the touch of original eſtimation in our minds, 
which proves all our ſpecies to be brethren of 
one exiſtence, Its concluſion is, from com- 
pariſon producing judgment, we weigh the 
neceſſities of our ſuffering fellow-creatures by 
our natural equality, by compaſſion, our 

ſym- 

— ry — 

— RA 

L 334 J 

ſympathy and our own abilities, and diſpenſe 
our gifts from affection, Pity and pain are 
ſiſters by ſympathy. 

To be an upright man, is to add til 
greater perfections to the maſon's character: 
to do juſtice and to have charity, are excel- 
lent ſteps in human life; but to act uprightly, 
gives a ſuperlative degree of excellence; for 
in that ſtation we ſhall become examples in 
religious, in civil, and in moral conduct. It 
is not enough that we are neither enthuſiaſts 
nor perſecutors in religion, neither bending 

towards innovation or infidelity; not to be in 

the paſſive only, but we ſhould appear in the 
active character: we ſhould be zealous prac- 
tiſers of, and ſtedfaſt members in, religious 

duties. In civil matters we ſhould not only 

ſubmit to, but execute, the laws of our coun- 
try; obey all their ordinances, and perform 
all their precepts; be faithful to the conſtitu- 
tion of the realm, and loyal to our king; true 
ſoldiers in the defence of our liberty, and of 

his crown and dignity, In morality, it re- 

quires of us, not only that we ſhould not err, 

by injuring, betraying, or deceiving, but that 

we 

1 

we ſhould act in every capacity in that ſtation 
of life, wherein kind Providence has placed us. 

By ſuch meets let the maſon be proved; and 
teſtify that his emblematical jewels are enſigns 
only of the inward man: thence he will ſtand 
approved before heaven and before men, pur- 
chaſing honour to his maſonic profeſſion, and 
felicity to the maſonic profeſſor . 

t See Griindliche Nachricht von Orden der Frey- 
miurer. Frankf, 1768, in 8vo. See alſo, VEtoile 
Fl-mboyante, ou la ſocieté des Franc-magons, con- 
fideree ſous tous les aſpects. En deux tomes, 8vo. 
Frankf. 1766. See alſo, De Plichten, Wetten, of Al- 
gemiene, Regelen der Vrye-metzelaren. Haag. 1778, 
in 8 vo. I am ſorry to ſay that Exgliſ maſons do not 
always act agreeable to the principles ſet forth in 
this chapter, See brother William Preſton's flate of 
fa&s, 1778, eſpecially from p. 82 to the end. 

ON 

— 

: 

g 
| 

= — — — — + * _—_ -— _ — — * _ — — - — — — * 
— — 1 — — — ——— IT — —— — — — ——— — 
— — ß — — — 8 — v— — 4 — . — g—_—_ _ nM 2 2 * — 
— — —— 2 „ 1 2 
— — a * — —— — 

dA 8 W N Hz © 

HIEROGLYTPHICS. 

HE GYPT,. from whence we derive many of 
our myſteries, hath always borne a diftin- 
guiſhed rank in hiſtory, and was once cele- 
brated above all others for its antiquities, 
learning, opulence, and fertility, Such, how- 
ever, 1s the mutability of all ſublunary things, 
that its preſent has no reſemblance of its for- 
mer ſtate; and thoſe who read the ancient and 
modern accounts of Egypt, can ſcarce believe 
that they appertain to the ſame country. Its 
learning and maſonic myſteries is changed into 
ignorance, its opulence to poverty, and its 
fertility to frequent ſcarcity. Nevertheleſs, 
Egypt affords ample matter for admiration 
and pity; the explorer of nature and the 
royal art, as well as the admirer of antiqui- 
ties, may both gratify the moſt boundleſs cu- 
Uu rioſity, 

( 338 J 

rioſity, in contemplating the wonderful pro- 
ductions of nature, and the ſtupendous re- 
mains of antiquity, | 

TRE noble and ſublime ſecrets of which we 
are poſſeſſed, are contained in our traditions, 
repreſented by hieroglyphic figures, and in- 
timated by our ſymbolical cuſtoms and cere- 
monies ; whereby ſeveral uſeful leſſons are in 
culcated for the more ample extenſion of 
knowledge, and promotion of virtue and ma- 
ſonry. 

Tux general depravity, and incapacity of 
mankind, have made it expedient to Hie, 
and ſecurely conceal our myſteries, or ſublime 
truths, by hieroglyphic and ſymbolical repre- 
ſentations to prevent their becoming familiar, 
common, and contemptible. For this reaſon 
the Egyptians, in the remoteſt antiquity, 
adapted, both in their writings and inſcripti- 
ons, the uſe of hieroglyphics or myſtical cha- 

* 7lc or tile is a technical maſonic term, and means 
no more than to guard the lodge from any one enter- 
zog, who is not a maſon ; hence, the perſon who per- 
forms this duty 1s called a Tyler, 

racters 

= =» 

raters and ſymbols, conſiſting of various ani- 
mals, the parts of human bodies, and mecha- 
nical inſtruments, by means of which they 
wrapped up, and concealed their doctrines 
from the vulgar and unlearned. Hence alſo, 
and for the ſame reaſon, the wiſeſt nations 
have ever employed ſymbolical figures, or 
occult, alluſive repreſentations, to conceal 
their myſteries. In our Hing, or caſting a 
veil over our myſteries, we imitate the wiſdom 
of the moſt enlightened periods, and nations. 
To diſtinguiſh a true brother from an im- 
poſtor, certain teſts have been wiſely and ju- 
dictouſly invented, Thele are matters, how- 
ever, which can by no means be ſpecified, or 
particularly mentioned, but to the qualified 

and worthy free-maſon. 

Tre Egyptian prieſts regulated the proper 
ſymbols, and at the ſame time the moſt ex- 
preſſive of the divine attributes; and of the 
effects of divine Providence in every part of 
tke univerſe, they ſtudied with great applica- 
tion and care, not only the peculiar properties 
of thoſe animals, birds and fiſhes, herbs and 
plants, which Egypt produced, but allo the 
geometrical properties of lines and figures; by 

Uu 2 a re- 

> OOO — — —— — — 

1 340 J 

a regular connection of them in various orders, 
attitudes, and compoſitions, they formed the 
whole ſyſtem of their theology and philo- 
ſophy, which was hidden under hieroglyphic 
figures and characters, known only to them- 
ſelves and to thoſe who were initiated into 
their myſteries, 

In this ſyſtem their principal hero- gods, Qſiris 
and J/ic, theologically repreſented the ſupreme 
Being, and univerſal nature; and phyſically 
ſignified the two great celeſtial luminaries, the 
ſun and moon, by whoſe influence all nature 
was actuuted *. In like manner the inferior 
heroes repreſented the ſubordinate gods, who 
were the miniſters of the ſupreme ſpirit; and 
phyſically they denoted the mundane elements 
and powers. Their ſymbols repreſented, and 
comprehended under them, the natural pro- 
ductions of the Deity, and the various bene- 
ficial effects of divine Providence in the works 
of creation; and alſo the order and harmony, 
the powers and mutual influence of the ſe- 
veral parts of the univerſal ſyſtem. _ 

* The experienced brethren of the ſociety are well 
informed-what affinity theſe ſymbols bear to maſoury, 
and why they are uſed in all maſonic lodges, 

Tr1s 

L948 ] 

Tuis is the ſum and ſubſtance of the Egyp- 
lian learning, ſo nearly connected with Free- 
maſonry, ſo famed in ancient times throughout 
the world. And in this generai ſyſtem the 
particular hiſtory of their hero-gods, together 
with the myſtical knowledge of our ſociety, 
was, and 1s contained, and applied to phy- 
ſical cauſes and theological ſcience, The 
hieroglyphic ſyſtem was compoſed with great 
art and ſagacity; and was ſo univerſally eſ- 
teemed and admired, that the moſt learned 
philoſophers of other nations came into Egypt 
on purpoſe to be inſtructed in it, and to learn 
the philoſophy and theology conveyed by theſe 
appoſite ſymbols. 

In this hieroglyphic ſyſtem the hero-gods 
not only repreſented, and were ſymbols of the 
ſupreme Gods and ſubordinate deities, but 
they had each their animal ſymbol to re- 
preſent their peculiar power, energy, and ad- 
' miniſtration; and their figures were com- 
pounded of one part or other of their ſymbols 
to expreſs more ſenſibly the natural effects of 
divine energy attributed to them. 

Tus 

18 3 

Tnvs Ofr:s, when he repreſented the power 
and all- ſeeing providence of the ſupreme 
Being, had a human body with a hawk's 
head, and a ſceptre in his hand, and decorated 
with the other regalia, or enſigns of royalty, 
Under the ſame form he alſo repreſented the 
ſun, the great celeſtial luminary; and, as it 
were, the ſoul of the world; his ſymbol now 
was a bull, and the ſcarabæus, or beetle, which 
expreſſed the ſun's motion, by rolling balls 
of dung, containing its feed, backwards, or 
from eaſt to weſt, his face being towards the 
eaſt. The ſymbolic bull was likewiſe of 2 
particular form and make, to denote the va- 
rious influences of the ſun, 

Isis was formed with many breaſts, to re- 
preſent the earth, the univerial mother, and 
with a cornucopia in her hand, denoting the 
nutritive and productive powers of nature: 
her ſymbol was a cow, part black and part 
white, to repreſent the enlightened and dark 

parts of the moon. 

Hermes had a dog's head, which was his 
ſymbol, to denote his ſagacity in the inven- 

tion of arts and ſciences; eſpecially in his 
watchful 

(. 463] 

watchful diligence in the culture of religious 
rites and ſacred knowledge; at the ſame time 
he ſymbolically repreſented the divine Provi- 
dence, was worſhipped as the chief counſellor 
of Saturn and Cris; he who communicated 
the will of the gods to men, and by whom 
their ſouls were conducted into the other 
world. He was likewiſe repreſented by the 
Ibis, and with the head of this bird, which 
was, at the ſame time, his ſymbol, to convey 
his energetic literature to the Egyptians, which 
they believed was done under the form of this 
bird, and confined to their nation only, as 
the bis was not known to live any where but 

in Egypt. 

Taz vniverſal foul itſelf was beautifully 
repreſented by a winged globe, with a ſerpent 
emerging from it. The globe denoted the 
infinite, divine eſſence, whoſe center, to uſe 
the expreſſion in the Hermetic writings, was 
every where, and circumference no where 
the wings of the hawk repreſenting the divine, 
all- comprehenſive intellect; and the ſerpent 
denoted the vivitying power of God, by which 
life and exiſtence are given to all things, 

Orvs 

—— . — 
— — 

34 J 
Orvs was a principal deity of the Egyp- 
tians, and, according to his hieroglyphic 

forms and habits, ſignified ſometimes the ſun, 

and ſometimes the harmony of the whole 
mundane ſyitem ; at the ſame time, being the 
offspring of O/iris and Js, he was always re- 
preſented young. In his hieroglyphic figure 
he was repreſented with the ſtaff, on the top 
of which the head of the Upupa, to ſignify, 
by the variegated feather of that bird, the 

beautiful variety of the creation, In one of 

his hands he held a /z/uus, to denote the har- 
mony of the ſyſtem; and a gnomon in the 
other, to ſhew the perfect proportion of its 
parts. Behind him was a triangle, inſcribed 
in a circle, to ſignify that the world was 
made by the unerring wiſdom of God. He 
had ſometimes a cornucopia in his hand, to 
denote the fertility and production of the 

earth. 

HarPocRaTEs was deſcribed holding one 
of his fingers on his lips, to denote the myſ- 
terious and infallible nature of God, and that 

* This deſcription muſt ſtrike the learned maſon, 
but more particularly the informed rovyal-arch com- 

* 

panion. 
the 

L 345 J 

the knowledge of him was to be ſought after 
with profound and ſilent meditation. 

Ueon the whole, almoſt all the Egyptian 
deities and ſymbols centered in two, namely, 
Ofiris and 1/is, who repreſented, under various 
hieroglyphic forms, both the celeſtial and 
terreſtrial ſyſtem, together with all the divine 
attributes, operations, and energy, which 
created, animated, and preſcrved them. 

Trae Egyptians likewiſe concealed their 
moral philoſophy under hieroglyphic ſymbols; 
but theſe were not the ſubjects of the hiero- 
glyphics delineated on obeliſks. And as hie- 
roglyphic and ſymbolical figures were very 
ancient in Egypt, and firſt invented, at leaſt 
formed into a ſyſtem there, ſo they were 
thence carried into other countries, and ini- 
tiated in all religious and maſonic myſteries, 

as well as in political and moral ſcience, 

Tus the preceding ſymbolical figures, 
making the ſubſtance of hieroglyphics, and 
belonging to Ofiris, his family and cotem- 
poraries, they were probably formed into a 
ſyſtem ſoon after the death of the hero-gods, 

XX by 

| 
{ 
| 

[ 346 } 

by ſome who had been inſtructed in the art 
of hieroglyphics, by Hermes, the inventor of 
them. The firſt he formed himſelf, and the 
others were probably added by his leatned 
ſucceſſors, who had been inſtructed by him in 
all his myſterious learning. 

Tuis hieroglyphic ſyſtem was in its begin- 
ning more ſimple, and leſs compounded, than 
afterwards; for it had been improved for ſe- 
veral ages before it appeared on the obeliſks 
of the temples. And hence we may infer 
the time of the firſt Egyptian hieroglyphic 
ſymbols; for, in all probability, they were 
not older than the time of the famous Hermes, 
who flouriſhed in the reign, and ſome time 
after the death of Ofiris. 

Taz hieroglyphic ſymbols were in early 
times carried into Greece, and gave the firſt 
occaſion to the fables of the poets with regard 
to the metamorphoſes of the gods, which 

they improved from inventions of their own; 

and from the knowledge of them the Greeks 
aſcribed peculiar arts and inventions to their 
gods, whoſe names they firſt received from 
Egypt. 

THE 

[ 407 21 

Tux Egyptians being thus more worthy of 
maſonic attention than any other nation of an- 
tiquity, their hiſtory being more intereſting to 
us than any other; hence it is from them, by 
an uninterrupted chain, all the moſt polite and 
beſt conſtituted nations of Europe have re- 
ceived their firſt principles of their laws, arts, 
and ſciences. The Egyptians inſtructed and 
enlightened the Greeks, who performed the 
ſame beneficent office to the Romans; and 
theſe lords of the world were not aſhamed to 
borrow from the Greeks the knowledge which 
they wanted, which they afterwards commu- 
nicated to the reſt of mankind, and of which 
we are in poſſeſſion to this day. 

Tu Egyptians in the earlieſt ages conſti- 
tuted a great number of /odges, but, with 
aſſiduous care, kept their ſecrets of maſonry 
from all ſtrangers. They wrapt up their myſ- 
teries in diſguiſed alluſions, enigmas, fables, 
and allegories; from whence aroſe our various 
obſcure queſtions and anſwers, and many 
other myſtic obſcurities, which lead to the 
royal craft; the true ſenſe of which are prac- 
tiſed by thouſands, though underſtood but by 

few, Theſe ſecrets have been imperfectly 
XxX 2 ; handed 

L 348 J 

handed down to us by oral tradition only, and 
ought to be kept undiſcovered to the labour- 
ers, craftſmen, and apprentices, till by good 
behaviour and long ſtudy, they become better 
acquainted in geometry and the liberal arts, 
and thereby qualified for maſters and wardens; 
which is ſeldom or ever the caſe with Enzlif 
maſons. 

ANCIENT 

L 349 J 

ANCIENT AN DP MODERN 
= EE A EO NW 

oy 

The LADIES have never been admitted 
into the Society of Free-maſons &. 

A RDUOUS is the taſk I am now en- 
tering upon, and very difficult indeed 

is it to eradicate opinions which have been fo 
ſtrongly impreſſed upon the people's minds 

* Doubtful of my own abilities in addrefling the 
moſt beautiful part of the creation on ſo important. a 
ſubject as Free- maſonry, though a favourite topic to 
ſome, it probably may not be thought ſo to all. Thus 
circumſtanced, my fair readers, I communicated the 
manuſcript to a lady of great erudition and profound 
judgment; to one whoſe heart is ſuſceptible of the 
moſt refined friendſhip, and endowed with every pe- 
culiarity that can add worth and dignity to the female 
mind, and who may with the greateſt propriety be called 
the Britih Anna Maria a Scheurman. This lady was 
pleaſed to make ſome amendments much for the 
better, and for which I think myſelf highly honoured. 
The name alone (had I the liberty to mention it) 
would add a ſanction to the whole, 

(and 

2 RE ew — — — 

— . — — — 

[ 350 J 

(and eſpecially thoſe of the fair ſex) for ages 
paſt : however, the reaſons and arguments 
that I ſhall lay down, I hope will remove thoſe 
grounded opinions, and prove highly fatiſ- 
factory to my fair readers; as I am ſure when 
they conſider ſeriouſly upon maſonry, and but 
for a moment reflect that its inſtitution is for 
the improvement of the mind and morals of 
mankind they will allow them to be juſt 

In the firſt inſtance; and it muſt be allowed 

a truth beyond the power of contradiction, that 
no ſociety, or body of men upon earth, can 
venerate, adore, and eſteem the fair ſex more 
than free-maſens do; we cannot but reckon it a 
very great misfortune, that the ladies ſhould be 
offended at their non-admiſſion into this order; 
and the more ſo, as they learn with what 
moderation free-maſors comport themſelves in 
their aſſemblies : but without knowing the rea- 
ſons why they are not admitted, ſome indeed 
cenſure us with all the ſeverity their delicate 
minds are capable of; others again are as 
liberal and unreſtrained in praiſe of the ſo- 
ciety. This we muſt beg leave to ſay, is 
entirely owing to miſtaken prejudice, becauſe 
a little reflection would convince them, that 
their 

188 J 

their not being received into this inſtitution 
is not in the leaſt ſingular, as ſome maſonic 
authors alledge, who ſay, They ſtand in 
the ſame predicament with reſpect to the prieft- 
hood, and many other ſocieties; the folemn 
aſſemblies of the ancients, the ſenates of Pagan, 
and the conclaves of Papal Rome, all national 
ſenates and ecclgſiaſticai ſynods, univerſities, and 
ſeminaries of learning, &c. &c.” with which 
they might with equal propriety be offended. 

OTHERs again aſſert, that the reaſon why 
ladies were excluded this ſociety, was to take 
away all occaſion for calumny and reproach, 
which thoſe ſhallow geniuſes ſeem to think 
would have been unavoidable, had they been 
admitted. And again, that ſince women had 
in general been always conſidered as not very 
well qualified to keep a ſecret *, becauſe the 
woman of Tamnath, whom Solomon took to 
wife, betrayed the ſecret of the riddle, which 
he intruſted her with, to the Philiſtines Þ. 
Likewiſe, becauſe Dalilab, after repeated ſtra- 

* Some men are equally as unqualified to keep a 
ſecret, as the women are here repreſented to be. 

+ Judges, ch. 14. 
tagems 

© 344 | 

tagems and art, perſuaded Sampſon to inform 
her where his great ſtrength lay; which he 
had no ſooner done, but ſhe betrayed him to 
the Philiſtines, who bound him, and put out 
both his eyes *. I think it exceedingly unjuſt 
to exclude the fair ſex from benefiting by our 
ſocieties on account of Dalilab's behaviour; 
becauſe it is not known, whether ſhe was a 
woman of J/rael, or one of the daughters of 
the Philiftines, whether ſhe was Sampſon's 
wife, or only a harlot, ſacred hiſtory has not 
told us. However this be, her whole beha- 
viour ſpeaks her a mercenary woman, who 
would do any thing for money; and accord- 
ingly 7oſephus calls her a common proſtitute | 
to the Philiſtines . 

My fair readers will pleaſe to recollect, 
that in the moſt early ages of antiquity, 
women's minds were not ſo enlightened as in 
the preſent age; that they were only con- 
ſidered in the days of king Solomon as hand- 
maids, and not as companions and aflociates 
to men employed in ſo learned, fo uſeful, and 
{o myſterious a ſociety as maſonry, as there are 

* Judges, chap. 16. 

+ Joſephus, lib. vii; chap. 10, &c, 
| many 

ny 

' 

many tranſactions in the royal art, which are 
far beyond that knowledge which women in 
general attain *, At the firſt inſtitution of 
maſonry, it was thought proper to exclude 
the fair ſex, and as old cuſtoms are but too 
ſeldom laid aſide, their expulſion has been 
handed down to us. And as we are ſuch 
ſtrict obſervers of its ancient manners and 
cuſtoms, ſo tranſmitted to us by our fore- 
fathers, theſe I hope will be ſufficient reaſons, 
both ancicnt as well as modern, why that moſt 
amiable part of the creation have hitherto been 
excluded, 

Many of the fair ſex, I am truly ſenſible, 
would be the greatelt ornament to maſonry, 

The moſt ancient inhabitants of the Eaſt were 
little acquainted with the ſtrongeſt paſſions of the 
ſoul. They never ſhewed the leaſt marks of attention 
or tenderneſs for that ſex ſo much courted by the 
modern frez-maſons. They confidered their wives 
rather in the light of ſlaves than of companions; they 
did not even ſuffer them to eat with them always, 
and had uſurped the right of divorcing them, with- 
out permitting the indulgence of marrying again. 
The women then felt themſelves born to obey, and 
ſubmitted patiently to their fate, 

Yy and 

| 
: 
| 
: 
| 
, 
'S 

— — — Y —— ů ee — nol, Yong en] * 
— Fs 1 ——— — 
— 
— 

| 
| 
: 
1 

[ $946 3 

and am exceedingly ſorry that our pretended 
laws and inſtitutions exclude them. However, 
what I ſhall now advance will be allowed, 
eſpecially among thoſe of my fair readers that 
are united in the ſacred inſtitution of marri- 
age with free maſons, who I flatter myſelf are 
convinced of its truth. And as free-maſons 
by the obligations of their order, pay a far 
greater attention to the moral and ſocial du- 
ties of life, than the generality of mankind, 
they are inſpired with a far greater deſire and 
reverence for the moſt ſacred and happy of all 
inſtitutions, marriage; they of all others beſt 
know to love, to cheriſh, to value the dear 
companion of their fortunes, who, by her kind 
participation and affectionate regard, ſoftens 
and alleviates every diſtreſs and worldly care, 
and adds ſweetneſs and comfort to all the plea- 

ſures of life. She is the molt pleaſing com- 

panion in the gay and cheerful hour of pro- 
ſperity, and his chief friend and adviſer in the 
dark and diſmal day of adverſity. She is the 
tender and careful preſerver of his health, and 
the ever- anxious and ſoothing attendant on 
his ſickneſs. She is the watchful, cautious, 
and prudent manager of all his domeſtic 
concerns. 

Nor 

=. 2 

Nor let the dear maid 
Our myſteries dread, 
Or think them repugnant to love; 
To beauty we bend, 
Her empire defend, 
An empire deriv'd from above. 

FrEE-MASONS declare there is nothing which 
affords ſo pleaſing a proſpect of human na- 
ture, as the contemplation of wiſdom, virtue, 
and beauty; the latter is the peculiar gift of 
heaven, to that ſex we call fair; but wiſdom, 
virtue, and beauty, are attributes too celeſtial 
to be frequently found united in one form. 
We too often find beauty capricious, ſelf- 
ſufficient, negligent of adorning itſelf with 
any other ornaments than ſuch as are conveyed 
by the hands of faſhion and folly. If this 
moſt beautiful part of the creation would 
but for a moment conlider how much their 
charms are heightened and their empire pre- 
ſerved, by an accompliſhed mind and man- 
ners, they would neglect no opportunity of 
obtaining thoſe more laſting charms, which 
will be engraved on the hearts of their huſ- 
bands, when the tranſient flower of beauty 

will be no more, 
Ay 3 And 

+ i 
{| 
| 
: 
l 

| 

181 

And thus the libertine, who builds a name 
On the baſe ruins of a woman's fame, 

Shall own the beſt of human bleſſings lie, 

In the chaſte honours of the nuptial tie. 

T here dwells the homefelt ſweet, the dear delight, 
There peace repeſes, and their joys unite. 
And female virtue was by heav'n defign'd 

To charm, to poliſh, and to bleſs mankind. 

FREE-Masoxs well know, and weigh the 
great importance of marriage, both as a ſacred 
and a moral duty ; they well know, it is a 
ſtate that colours all their future days with 
happineſs or miſery. 

Wuxw ever a good maſon's fancy and judg- 
ment has agreed in the choice of a partner 
for life, he will ſupport the authority and 
dignity of a huſband, with that wiſdom, mode- 
ration, tenderneſs, and affection, that ſhall 
render him honoured and beloved; for the 
maſon, above all others, well knows, that if 
happineſs is not found in the narrow circle of 
his own home, it will be ſought for in vain: 
in ſhort the fair ſex will ever find in a maſon, 
a warm and paſſionate admirer, a moſt ſincere 
friend, an affectionate and tender huſband, as 
well as an indulgent father : they will ever 

find 

L 9-3 

find a maſon the protector of innocence, and 
at all times and ſituations attentive to every 
delicacy and decorum, they ſo juſtly claim 
trom all mankind, and will more particularly 
experience from maſons, who love and adore them. 

uus - further add, that in the moſt ſo- 
lemn and ſerious moments of the aſſembled 
free-maſons in open lodge, and at the recep- 
tion of a brother, the ancients, and even the 
moſt part of modern free-maſons, always preſent 
the new initiated brother with two pair of 
<vhite gloves, one pair for himſelf, and the 
other pair for a lady, with a ſtrict charge to 
preſent them to that female, for whom he has 
the greateſt regard: and even in our hours of 
relaxation from labour, when innocent mirth 
abounds, we never forget Milton's words, viz. 

Grace was in all her fleps, heaven in her eye, 
In every geſture dignity and love. 

And in another place, 

ſo abſolute ſhe ſeems, 
And in herſelf complete, ſo well to know 

Her own, that what ſhe wills to do or ſay, 
Seems wiſeſt, virtusuſeſt, diſcreteſt, beſt 

Al! 

— 

L $88 3 

All higher knowledge in her preſence falls 
Degraded, wiſdom in diſcourſe with her 
Loſes, diſcountenan'd, and like folly ſbotus; 
Authority and reaſon on her wait, 

As one intended firſt, not after made 
Occaſionally ;, and to conſummate all, 
Greatneſs of mind and nobleneſs their ſeat 
Build in her lovelieſt, and create an awe 
About her, as a guard angelic placd. 

OF the numerous ſocieties which mankind 
have been led to form for the purpoſes of mu- 
tual advantage, none is of more importance 
to individuals or the public than that of mar- 
riage. The very nature of this ſociety re- 
quires it to be perpetual; as indeed it is ſo 
among married maſons, more than among any 
other ſer of people. During the virtuous 
times of the Roman commonwealth, this union 
was regarded as fo inviolable (as it is now with 
maſons) as to give riſe to a tradition, that for 
the firſt ive hundred years not a ſingle exam- 
ple of divorce was known; nor doth the an- 
nals of our ſociety mention ſuch a circum- 
ſtance, Obſerving what Milton enjoins in the 
praiſe of women: 

O faireſt 

339 J 

O faireſt of creation, laſt and beſt 

Of ail God's works, creature in whom excell d 
Whatever can to ſight or thought be form'd, 
Holy, divine, good, amiable, or ſweet, 

Ap the famous Dean Swift, in his well 
known maſonic ſong, has this verſe, viz. 

Were true and ſincere, 
And juſt to the fair, 
They'll truſt us on any occaſion ; 
No mortals can more 
The ladies adore, 
Than a Free and an Accepied Maſon. 

Ax anonimous author of reputation ob- 
ſerves, that though men are more reſerved, 
and ſecret in their friend's concerns than their 
own; women on the contrary keep their own 
and friend's ſecrets better than men. Mo- 
deſty in a woman ſuppoſes all other virtues; 
immodeſty, all other vices. Momen generally 
take greater care of their reputation than men 
do of theirs: Why then do we account them 
the weaker ſex? Hence, virtue makes a beau- 
tiful woman appear more beautiful, ſo beauty 
makes a virtuous F mman really more virtuous, 

The 

| 
| 
| 
| 

as — ES 

—— — — ——ñä— — 

= 
| 

1 360 J 

The ladies claim right to come into our light, 
Since the apron, we know, is their bearing; 
[ tongues ftill, 
They can ſubject their will, they can keep their 
And let talking be changed into hearing. 
This difficult taſt is the leaſt we can aſh, 
To ſecure us on ſundry occaſions ; 
If with this they'll comply, our utmoſt we'll 47, 
To raiſe loages for Lady Free-maſons. 

On many occaſions of late the ladies have 
been admitted to ſundry parts of our cere- 
monies, viz. At laying the foundation ſtone 
of Free-maſon's Hall; dedication of the ſamc. 
At Royal-arch proceitions ; private and public 
Maſonie- orations, Sc. at one of which the 
ladies were thus addreſſed by the orator * : 

« YOU have heard, ladies, our grand prin- 
ciples explained, with the inſtructions given 
to the brethren; and I doubt not but at other 
times you have heard many diſreſpectful 
things ſaid of this ſociety. Envy, malice, and 
uncharitableneſs will never be at a loſs to de- 
cry, find fault, and raiſe objections to what 

* Thomas Dunchkerley, eſq. provincial grand-maſter 

for Eflex, Wiltſhire, and Dorſerſhire. 
they 

19 1 

they do not know. How great then are the 

objections you lay on this lodge +! with what | 
reſpect, ſuperior eſteem, and regard are we 
to look on every lady preſent, that has done | 

us the honour of her company this evening. 
To have the ſanction of the fair is our higheſt 
ambition, as our greateſt care will be to pre- 
ſerve it. The virtues of humanity are pecu- 
liar to your ſex; and we flatter ourſelves, the 
moſt ſplendid ball could not afford you greater 
pleaſure, than to ſee the human heart made 
happy, and the poor and diſtreſſed obtain 
preſent relief,” 

Hauen, as there is no no law law ancient or mo- 
dern t that forbids the admiſſion of the fair ſex 
amongſt the ſociety of Free and Accepted 
Maſons, and cuſtom only has hitherto pre- 
vented their initiation ; conſequently all bad 
uſages and cuſtoms ought to be annihilated *, 

and 

Lodge of Concord, N“ 400, held at Southampton. 

»I beg leave to inſert in the words of the learned | 
matron in Zra/mus, Quid mibi citas vulgum, peſſimum 
rei gerendæ auttorem ? Quid mihi conſuetudinem, om- 
nium malarum rerum magiſtram? Optimis aſſueſcendum : 
ita fiet ſolitum, quod erat in/olitum ; et ſuave fiet, qu 
& er atk 

1 

and ladies of merit and reputation admitted 
into the ſociety; or at leaſt be permitted to 
form lodges among their own ſex, in imita- 
tion of thoſe in Germany and France. I his is 
a plan that the unfortunate Dr. Dodd had 
much at heart, and had ſo far ſucceeded in, 
as to be ripe of execution, had his untimely 
death not prevented it. 

i xnow there will be many prejudices en- 
tertained againſt the character of maſonic 
ladies, and, perhaps, if ladies lodges were as 
numerous as thoſe of the other ſex, ſome in- 
conveniencies might ariſe from it; but I mult 
own it does not appear to me, that a woman 
will be rendered leſs acceptable in the eyes of 
the world, or worſe qualified to perform any 
part of her duty in it, by employing a ſmall 
allotment of her time in the cultivation of her 

erat inſuave; fret decorum, quod widebatur indecorun. 
i. e. Why dv you tell me of the generality of people, 
the very worſt pattern of conduct? Why do you talk 
to me of the cultom, the teacher of all that is bad? 
Let us accuſlom ourſelves to that which we know is 
beſt. So that will become uſual which was unuſual ; 
and that will become agreeable which was diſagree- 
able, and that faſhionable that appeared unfaſhionable, 

mind 

L 9; 7] 

mind by ſtudying Free- maſonry. Time enough 
will remain, after a few hours in a week ſpent 
in the ſtudy of the royal art, for the improve- 
ment of the perſon, for domeſtic concerns, and 
the acquiſition of the uſual accompliſhments. 
With reſpect to theſe accompliſhments, I will 
not preſume to direct the method of purſuing 
them; I will not ſo far intrude on a province 
which by no means belong to us. The ladies 
themſelves, and their inſtructors, want no di- 
rections in matters of external ornament, the 
end of which is to pleaſe on intuition. How- 
ever arrogant the men have been in their claims 
of ſuperiority, they have always allowed the 
ladies the poſſeſſion of the moſt refined and 
delicate taſte in the improvement and per- 
ception of all kinds of beauty. 

FEMALE minds are certainly as capable of 
improvement as thoſe of the other ſex. The 
inſtances that might be brought to prove this, 
are too well known to admit of citation. The 
ſtudy of maſonry will open a new ſcene for 
female improvement; their minds, if they 
have been ſucceſsful in this courſe, will have 
imbibed an elegance, which will naturally 
diffuſe itſelf over their converſation, addreſs, 

| Z 2 2 and 

— — — — — remoapa cz - = 

L 364 J 

and behaviour; and they will ultimately be- 
come our inſtructors in an art we have taken 
ſo much pains to hide from their knowledge +, 
It js well known, that internal beauty con- 
tributes much to perfect external grace. I 
believe it will alſo be favourable to promote 
virtue, and will operate greatly in reſtraining 
from any conduct groſsly indelicate, and ob- 
viouſly improper. Much of the profligacy of 

female manners has proceeded from a levity 

occaſioned by a want of employment and 3 
ſuitable education. This the ſtudy of maſonry 
will effectually move, for ſhe that has no 
taſte for well-written books, will often be at 
a loſs how to ſpend her time; and the conſe- 
quences of ſuch a ſtate are too frequent not 
to be known, and too fatal not to be avoided, 

+ He of whom antiquity boaſts itſelf as of the 
wiſeſt of mortals, was inſtructed in many elegant and 
profound ſubjects of learning by a lady, AoTtacoia 
At ve. 7 To@n Love robg g. dio Mg r enroę. d 
AOYWw!, 1, e. Ajpa/ia, the learned lady, was the precep- 
treſs of Socrates in rhetoric. ATaenzus. And 
Tl\arwv Tov Ewnxporny Tuxp auT1s nos Ed 14 
ro r N, i. e. Plato ſays that Secrates learned * 
of her. HARPOCRATION, 

F ROM 

1 365 J 

From what has been advanced, not one 
doubt remains but the ladies may, and have 
an undoubted right to be admitted as mem- 
bers of the moſt ancient, and moſt honour- 
able ſociety of Free and Accepted Maſons ; nei- 
ther can any brother or ſet of brethren be ac- 
cuſed of violating his or their obligation, in 
aiding or aſſiſting at the initiation of the ladies, 
or in forming female lodges. Hence, many 
advantages will ariſe to the ſociety in general, 
and among the reſt, that of aſſiſting the wi- 
dows and orphans of deceaſed free-malons, to 
which the grand-lodge of England gives no 
relief. 

THEREFORE let all free-maſons unanimouſly 
ſing aloud 3 

Open ye gates, receive the Fair who ſhares 
IWith equal ſenſe our happineſs and cares: 
Then, charming Females, there bebold 
What maſſy ſtores of burniſid gold, 
Zet richer is our art; 
Not all the orient gems that ſhine, 
Nor treaſures of rich Ophir's mine, 
Excell the maſon's heart; 

True 

— I room erm 8 

L 366 J 

N True to the F air, he honours more 
' Than glitibring gems, or briphteſt ore, 

T he plighted pledge of love; 

To ev'ry tie of honour bound, 

In love and friendſhip conſtant found, 
And favoured from above, 

ON 

[ 367 

O N 

* 

Ka 3 a2 

F 

HARITY is the chief of every ſocial 

virtue; it includes not only a ſupreme 
degree of love to the great Creator and Go- 
vernor of the univerſe, but an unlimited af- 
fection to beings of all characters and every 
denomination ; which laſt duty is forcibly in- 
culcated by the example of the Deity himſelf, 
who ſo liberally diſpenſes his beneficence to 
unnumbered worlds J. 

Tur bounds of the greateſt nation, or the 
moſt extenſive empire, cannot circumſcribe 
the generoſity of a liberal mind, Mankind, 
in whatever ſituation they are placed, are ſtill, 

+ x Cor. ch. 13. v. 1. 

in 

LCF 

in a great meaſure, the ſame; they are expoſed 
to ſimilar dangers and misfortunes, and con- 
ſtantly the whole human ſpecies are proper 
objects for the exerciſe of this glorious virtue. 
Beings who partake of one common nature, 
ought ever to be actuated by the ſame motives 
and intereſts. Hence to ſooth the unhappy, 
by ſympathiſing with their misfortunes; and 
to reſtore peace and tranquillity to agitated 
minds, eonſtitute the general and great ends 
of our inſtitution. This humane, this gene- 
rous diſpoſition, fires the breaſt with the moſt 
manly feelings, and enlivens that ſpirit of com- 
paſſion, which is the glory of the human 
frame, and which not only rivals, but out- 
ſhines, every other pleaſure the mind is capa- 
ble of enjoying. Charity 1s here repreſented 
to be the principal ſtep by which we are to 
arrive at the ſummit of maſonry. 

Hail! brighteſt attribute of God above, 

Hail! pureſt eſſence of celeſtial love, 

Hail! ſacred fountain of each bliſs below, 
Whoſe ſtreams in ſympathy unbounded flow. 

Jig thine, fair CHRaRITY | with lenient pour 

79 ſooth diſtreſs, and cheer the gloomy hour; 
BY To 

U 369 ] 

To reconcile the dire embitter'd foe, 

And bid the heart of gall with friendſhip glow ; 

To ſmooth the rugged paths of thorny life, 
And jli!l the voice of diſſonance and ſtrife: 
Abaſh'd, the vices at thy preſence fly, 

Nor ſtand the awful menace of that eye; 
Hate, envy, with revenge, in anguiſb bleed, 
And all the virtues in their room ſucceed ; 
Attemper'd to the bloom of virgin grace, 

See modeſt innocence adorn that face, 

To failings mild, to merit ever true, 

See candour each ungen rous thought ſubdue ! 
See patience ſmiling in ſevereſt grief, 

See tender pity ſtretching forth relief! 

See meek forgtveneſs bleſs the hoſtile mind, 
See faith and hope in ev'ry flate reſjgn'd ! 
Happy! to whom indulgent heau'n may give, 
In ſuch ſociety as this to live. 

Rev. Hzn. Crna. CHRIST. NEWMAN, 

In what character Char:!y is, and ſhould be 
received among maſons, is now my purpoſe 
to define, as it ſtands limited to our own 

ſociety. 

. . — — — 

370 J 

As being ſo limited, we are not through 
that ſubject to be impoſed on by falſe pretences; 
but ought to be certain of the proper and me- 
rited adminiſtration of it. It is hence to be 
hoped, that Charity exiſts with us without dil- 
ſembling or hypocriſy, and lives in ſincerity and 
truth: that benefits received impreſs a lively 
degree of gratitude and affection on the minds 
of maſons, as their bounties ſhould be received 
with cheerfulneſs, and unacquainted with the 
frozen finger of reluctance: the benevolence 
of our ſociety ſhould be ſo mutual and bro- 
therly, that each ought to endeavour to ren- 
der good offices, as ready as he would receive 
them. 

Is order to exerciſe this virtue, both in the 
character of maſons and in common life, with 
propriety, and agreeable to ſuch principles, 
we ſhould forget every obligation but affec- 
tion; for otherwile it were to confound Charity 
with Duty. The feelings of the heart ought 
to direct the hand of Charity, To this pur- 
poſe we ſhould be diveſted of every idea of 
ſuperiority, and eitimate ourſelves as beings 
of the ſame rank and race of men: in this diſ- 
poſition of mind we may be ſuſceptible of 
thoſe 

( ant 3 

choſe ſentiments which Charity delighteth in, 
to feel the woes and miſeries of others with a 
genuine and true ſympathy of ſoul. 

Teach me to feel another's wee, 
And hide the faults ] ſee ; 
That mercy I to others ſhew, 

That mercy ſhew to me. 
Pope. 

Compaſſien is of heavenly birth: it is one of 
the firſt characteriſtics of humanity, peculiar 
to our race, it diſtinguiſhes us from the reſt 
of the creation. 5. 

THAT maſon whole boſom is locked up 
againſt compaſſion is a Barbarian; his man- 
ners muſt be brutal, his mind gloomy and 
moroſe, and his paſſions as ſavage as the 

beaſts of the foreſt. 

Wuar kind of maſon is he, who loaded 
with opulence, and in whoſe hand abundance 
overflows, can look on virtue in diſtreſs, and 
merit in miſery, without pity? Who could 

* 1 Corinth, ch. 13. v. 1 to 13 incluſive. 

Aa a 2 behold 

— 
7 _ — A 
rt 

L 332 J 

behold without tears, the deſolate and forlorn 
ſtate of a widow, who in early life, having 
been brought up in the boſom of a tender 
mother, without knowing care, and without 
taſting of neceſſity, was not befitted for ad- 
verſity; whoſe ſoul was pure as innocence, 
and full of honour; whoſe mind had been 
brightened by erudition under an indulgent 
father; whoſe youth untutored in the ſchool 
of ſorrows, had been flattered with the pro- 
ſpect of days of proſperity and plenty; one, 
who at length by the cruel adverſity of winds 
and ſeas, with her dying huſband, is wrecked 
in total deſtruction and beggary ; driven by 
ill fortune from peace and plenty; and from 
the bed of eaſe, changes her lot to the dank 
dunghill, for the relief of her wearineſs and 
pain; grown meagre with neceſſity, and ſick 
with woe; at her boſom hanging her famiſhed 
infant, draining off the dregs of parental life 
for ſuſtenance ; beſtowed from maternal love, 
yielding exiſtence to ſupport the babe. Hard- 
hearted covetouſneſs, can you behold ſuch an 
object dry eyed ? Can avarice graſp the mite 
which ſhould ſuſtain ſuch virtue? Can high 
life lift its ſupercilious brow above ſuch ſcenes 

in 

L209 13 

in human life; above ſuch miſeries ſuſtained 
by a fellow- creature? If perchance the voice 
of the unfortunate and wretched widow is 
heard in complainings, when wearying pati- 
ence and relaxed reſignation breaths a ſigh, 
whilſt modeſty forbids her ſupplication; is 
not the groan, the ſigh, more pathetic to your 
ear, you rich ones, than all the flattering pe- 
titions of a cringing knave, who touches 
your vanity and tickles your tollies ; extort- 
ing from your weakneſſes the proſtituted por- 
tion of Charity. 

Tur preſent committee of Charity of the 
grand- lodge of England was conttituted in 
1725, in conſequence of an old regulation 
eſtabliſhed at the revival of the grand-lodge 
in 1717. It 1s compoſed of all preſent and 
paſt: grand-officers, and the maſters of all re- 
gular lodges, which hath contributed to the 
charity fund within twelve months. It meets 
three and ſometimes four times a year, by vir- 
tue of a ſummons from the grand-maiter or his 
deputy. The petitions of the brethren who 
apply for charity, are conſidered at theſe 
meetings; if the petitioner is found to be a 
deſerving object, he is immediately relieved 

with 

| 

| 

L 374 ] 

with five pounds; if the circumſtances of his 
cale are of a ſingular nature, as being reduced 
by ſome unexpected misfortune from a ſtate 
of affluence to poverty, or being burdened 
with a numerous family, and incapable of 
provid ng for them, his petition is referred ta 
the next communication, where he 1s relieved 
with any ſum the committee may have ſpeci- 
fied, not exceeding twenty guineas at one 
time *, 

Since this eſtabliſhment many thouſands 
of pounds have been given to charitable pur- 
poſes, excluſive of fifty pounds diſtributed 
among the diſtreſſed maſons in prince Ferdi- 
nand's army in Germany, 24th January 1760. 
Alſo one hundred pounds ſent to Halliſax, 
N-va Scotia, to relieve the ſuffering maſons 
by the rebellion in 1777. Likewiſe one hun- 
dred pounds ſent to Barbadoes to relieve the 
ſufferers by the great fire in that iſland in 

1767. 

NEVER THEL ESS, the apparent ſums given 
by the grand- lodge of England to diſtreſſed 

See Free-maſons Calendar for 1780, where the 
laws and rules are explained at large. 

bre- 

t-$99 4 

brethren, is generally given to the diſtreſſed 
of our own nation, and not to be compared 
to the ſums given by moſt foreign lodges z 
for inſtance, In the year 1778, a foreign no- 
bleman was diſtreſſed in London for a ſum of 
money ſufficient to defray his expences home; 
being a maſon, he applied by petition to the 
grand-lodge, who relieved him with five 
pounds, Now, judge readers what ſervice 
five pounds could be to a gentleman circum- 
ſtanced as that brother was; it carried him to 
Amſterdam, where he was more ſucceſsful in 
his application to two lodges only, viz. the 
lodge La bien Aimee, and La Charité, who 
jointly aſſiſted him with one hundred and fifty 
ducats, a moiety of which was ſent to London 
to redeem ſome cloaths and diſcharge his lodg- 
ings; the remainder was ſufficient to carry 
him to Mietau in Courlaud, his place of reſi- 
dence. In ſix months after the money was 
returned by a bill of exchange, accompanied 
with a letter of thanks, couched in the moſt 
polite terms, and in ſuch pathetic language, 
that the moſt obdurate and inflexible heart 
muſt have burſt into tears, on hearing the 
letter read. 

Tux 

if 
| 

L200 ] 

Tre great number of maſonic poor in 
England, but more particularly in London, 
is owing to the very little attention paid to 
candidates for initiation, The major part of 
lodges rarely enquire into the character of the 
perſon propoſed, if he can but pay the two 
guineas for his reception, that is all that is 
required or even thought of f. Theſe are 
the ſet of men (for maſons they cannot be 
called) who almoſt immediately, or as ſoon as 
the laws of the fund of charity will permit, 
become a perpetual burden to the ſociety. 
On the contrary, moſt all foreign lodges are 
ſo particularly ſtrict, and ſo uncommonly ac- 
curate, who they admit amongſt them, that at 
preſent none but men of the faireſt characters, 
in good circumſtances, and in a very repu- 
table way of living; men of birth and for- 
tune, and men of learning, can by any means 
obtain admiſſion into the ſociety of Free 
and Accepted Maſons, Hence, foreign lodges 
are not embarrafſed with a numerous poor, 
conſequently have it more 1n their power to 
aſſiſt the itinerant maſon in a more effectual 
manner. Truth, which ought to be the cha- 

+ Sce the ſecond note, p. 93. 
racteriſtic 

— — — —— 
1 ER. OY 

(000 1:1] 

racteriſtic of every hiſtorian, obliges me to 
ſay, that the greateſt part of begging maſons 
abroad are Enghſp. They have eaſily found 
out, that the name of a Britiſb brother in 
want, was ſufficient to ſecure a very ample 
and liberal gift from the firſt lodge they came 
to. In 1768, the brethren at Operto in Por- 
. tugal (though few in number) gave twenty- 
ſeven moidores to the maſter of a merchant- 
man, who was caſt away on ſailing 1nto the 
haven of that place, In 1769 the brethren 
at Liſbon aſſiſted a Britiſh maſonic family, 
newly come from the Meſt Indies in diſtreſs, 
with thirty moidores. In 1771 the lodges at 
Naples in Italy aſſiſted an Engliſb artiſt in diſ- 
treſs with eighty cheguins . In 1779 the 
lodge at Marſeilles in France gave twenty louis 
d'or to an officer of the Britiſh infantry, who 
applied to them for ſome aſſiſtance; and in 
1781 the ſame lodge gave 15 louis d'or more 
to an officer of the Britiþ navy, So that 
free-maſons may ling with the greateſt truth; 

We help the poor in time of need, 
The naked cloath, the hungry feed, 
It's our foundation ſtone : 

* That is about 361. 
Bbb We 

(378 ] 

We build upon the nobleſt plan, 
For friendſhip rivets man to man, 
And makes us all as one, Sc. 

Iv 1758 the lodges at the Hague in Holland 
made a purſe of upwards of 1000 florins* 
for the immediate relief of an Engliſb cabinet- 
maker, whoſe houſe and effects had been de- 
ftroyed by fire at Leydſen-dam, a village be- 
tween Leyden and the Hague, where he had lived 
many years in credit and reputation, and was 

very much eſteemed both as a man and a 

maſon. Theſe are facts that have come to 
my knowledge, conſequently many more muſt 
have happened, of which I could have no 
manner of intelligence. 

Wirz honour to the maſons of France be 
it ſaid, that during this laſt war people were 
employed along the coaſt to find out who 
were free-maſons among the priſoners of war; 
and thoſe, who were fortunately found to be 
ſuch, were immediately taken out of confine- 
ment, had free liberty to walk in the city 
where they pleated, and were moſt generouſly 

That is about 1001, 

ſupplied 

* 

1999 ] 

ſupplied with every thing they in their different 
ſtations ſtood in need of“. 

Tux lodges in Germany, eſpecially thoſe who 
belong to the Stricte ob/ervantz, have eſtabliſh- 
ed a laſting fund for the perpetual maintenance 
and ſupport of ſuch of their brethren, who by 
unavoidable misfortunes, or unforeſeen acci- 
dents, are reduced from affluence to want; 
by allowing them an annual penſion according 
to the character they had formerly lived in, 
even as far as 500 Rix-dellars, and never 
under 30 Rix-dollars a year, This fund is 
ſupported by donations from princes, no- 
bles, and wealthy brethren of the ſociety, as 
well as from the initiation fee, which has been 
augmented for that purpoſe, from 25 to 175 
Rix-do!lars; two-thirds of which is tranſmitted 
to the penſion fund tg. I wiſh no one could 

be made a maſon in England for a leſs ſum; 
for 

* This meritorious piece of intelligence was com- 
municated to me by Mr. T. K. y, an Engliſb of- 
ficer, a gentleman, who 1s not only an ornament to 
his profeſſion, but a brother maſon deſerving the 

higheſt encomiums. 
+ See Die Freymairerey, der grade weg zur Glück- 

ſeligkeit, Leipz. 1769, in 8yo, Alſo, Die uniber. 
Bbb 2 windliche 

[ 380 ] 

for that, and that only, will diminiſh the 
number of indigent and needy free-maſons in 
London. In the country the number of poor 
maſons are very few, owing to a greater at- 
tention being paid who they admit, than the 
brethren do in town; conſequently the lodges 
have it oftener in their power to relieve the 
itinerant brother; eſpecially the lodges in 
Kent, who are ſo happily ſituated for the re- 
lief of foreigners paſſing and re- paſſing to and 
from the continent, and who never fail in ex- 
tending their charity to all deſerving objects; 
recommending them by a letter to the next 
lodge, which letter gives an account of the 
traveller, and what ſum the laſt lodge had 
beſtowed. Thus the diſtreſſed biother is, ag 
it were, handed from one to the other, and 
relieved by all, until he reaches the me- 
tropolis. 

Maxx lodges in Germany, Denmark, and 
Sweden have eſtabliſned ſchools for the educa- 

windliche Freymaiirer, Halle 5767, in 4to. Alle, 
Geſammlete Nachrichten von den Armen Einrichtun- 
gen der Freymaürer. Dreſden 1772, in 8vo. 

N. B. 25 Rix-dellars equal to £4 3s, and 175 Rix- 
dollars equal to £29 1s, 

tion 

( 381 J 

tion of free-maſons children, whoſe parents 
were thought incapable of doing it; viz. the 
lodge Jonathan aux trois Colonnes at Brunſwick 
have eſtabliſhed a ſchool for poor maſonic chil- 
dren, where they are taught languages, arith- 
metic, and various parts of the mathematics 
by brethren of the ſociety. Theſe children 
are greatly encouraged by the frequent viſits 
of his ſerene highneſs the duke of Brunſwick, 
who, on examination, diſtributes premiums 
to the deſerving. 

Tux lodge Des trois Claives at Eiſenach 
have eſtabliſhed ſeveral ſchools for poor chil- 
dren in the country, with a fixed falary for 
ſchoolm aſters to teach reading, writing, and 
arithmetic, Theſe ſchools have educated up- 
wards of 700 children already, and are now 
in a yery flouriſhing ſtate. Nothing can equal 
the purity of manners, the mild and tender 
zeal, and the paternal kindneſs of the teachers; 
each of which may be as truly called the fa- 
ther, as he is the guide of the riſing generation 
under his care, Their authority is not felt, 
becauſe they command, forbid, and puniſh 
nothing, but what is commanded, forbid- 
den, and puniſhed by that religion they all 

reverence 

* 

382 

reverence and love, and by the wiſe rules and 
regulations which the ſociety have eſtabliſhed. 

Tux brethren in Courland have at their 
own expence eſtabliſhed a library of books, 
in Mietau; depoſited in a building erected 
for that purpoſe, with an annual ſtipend for 
its encreaſe. This library is open every day 
for public utility, 

Ix the year 1773 the brethren at Prague 
built a large and extenſive workhouſe for 
poor maſonic children, and orphans, and called 
it Saint John the Baptifl's workbouſe, Here 
the children are educated in the duties of re- 
ligion, and in reading, writing, and arith- 
metic. The boys in particular are taught the 
different ſorts of writing uſed in Germany, 
likewiſe univerſal geography, with ſuch parts 
of drawing as are neceſſary in arts, trades, and 
agriculture; and the girls are taught houſe- 
wifery, ſpinning, knitting, ſowing, and every 

other neceſſary female occupation. 

In 1771 the lodge Au Lion Couronne at 
Caſſel, erected a ſchool for educating the chil- 

dren of poor maſons belonging to the land- 
oraviate 

(209 +1 

graviate of Heſſe Caſſel, which is now in a 
very flouriſhing condition, though 245 chil- 
dren have already been brought up, from 
eight years of age, until they could in ſome 
meaſure provide for themſelves. 

In 1775 the lodge Pax et Concordia, in 
Embden in Eaſt Friezland, celebrated the feſ- 
tival of Saint John in a very pompous and 
magnificent manner, by a public proceſſion 
from the grand-maſter's houſe to the large 
room of baron de Kalckreith, where a public 
oration was pronounced by Dr. Haffner in the 
preſence of a very reſpectable audience. The 
ceremony concluded with a ſplendid ball in 
the evening, at which people of the firſt rank 
were preſent. On this occaſion the brethren 
collected among themſelves 87 rix-dollars, 
which they ſent to the churchwardens of the 
Catviniſts, the Lutherans, and the Popiſb 
churches, requeſting them to diſtribute the 
ſame amongſt the poor of their reſpective 
pariſhes. 

In 1773 the united lodges of Dreſden, 
Leipzig, and Gorlitz came to a reſolution to 
raiſe a fund for the ſupport and education of 

poor 

[ 384 J 

poor children of every denomination in the 
eleftorate of Saxony; for which purpoſe they 
purchaſed the large and commodious houſe 
belonging to Count Brubl, ſituate in Fried- 
richſtadt, and converted it into a ſeminary 
of learning. The maſonic ſubſcriptions for 
this laudable purpoſe amounted in the firſt 
year to 17,000 rix- dollars and upwards *. 
This ſchool is now in the moſt flouriſhing 
ſtate, having a ſufficient fund to maintain it; 
inſomuch, that in the ſpace of five years 
1, 100 children had been educated therein, the 
major part of whom muſt have remained to- 
tally illiterate, and of little uſe the ſtate, bur 
which are thereby made uſeful ſubjects. 

Ag the opening of this new ſeminary of edu. 
cation, one of the brethren adareſſed the ſubſcribers 
in the following manner : You will not fail, 
therefore, my worthy brethren, to concur 
with thoſe philanthrophic endeavours, and to 
take into your kind protection this infant under- 
taking! You will foſter it by your generous 
charity, and rear it to manhood by your con- 
tinual favour and benevolence ! It hath every 

* {2833—and upwards, 
claim 

L 385 J 

claim to your favour; and is in every reſpect 
of view worthy your moſt liberal donations. 

As worthy Free- maſons, as good citizens, as 
true friends to your country, you cannot 
withhold your approbation and your aid from 
a plan ſo evidently calculated to promote the 
public weal, by giving ſupport, cloaths, and 
education to the infant poor: it is rearing up 
an order of men more eſpecially, who in an 
eminent degree, will in all probability con- 
tribute to the public weal, in a country like 
ours ſupported by commerce, agriculture, and 
manufactures. Indeed the welfare and glory 
of a ſtate conſiſting in the multitude of its 
inhabitants, all real patriots muſt joyfully 
concur in every plan calculated to increaſe, 
ſupport, or preſerve their number. 

2 

IT is an incumbent duty, my worthy bre- 
thren, on all thoſe, who in eaſe and affluence 
enjoy the fruits of their labours, to contri- 
bute all they can to their preſervation and 
ſuccour. For as all men compoſe but one 
great family, the rich and the powerful ſhould 
conſider all others as their brethren, of whom 

Ccc they 

L200: ] 

they are conſtituted the protectors and guar- 
dians. 

Bur not as maſons or citizens only, as men, 
we are peculiarly intereſted in this labour of 
love! In various other charitable inſtitutions, 
many who liberally contribute to them, can 
contemplate only at a diſtance the miſeries 
they ſympathetically relieve, nor come within 
the leaſt probability of deriving any advantage 
from the works they ſo generouſly ſupport, 
But in the preſent caſe, to bring it near to us 
all, not an individual perhaps among us, but 
may at ſome time or other experience or blels 
its fortunate eſtabliſhment, For neither high 
nor low, rich nor poor, young nor old, are, 
or can be entirely exempt from ſuch accidents 
as require the aſſiſtance of ſuch an inſti- 
tutioeh, O bleſt ſociety ! glorious eſtabliſh- 
ment! which in this pathetic caſe ſteps forth 
as a huſband to the widow, and as a father to 

the fatherleſs! For ſee, by its benign influence 
the work of humanity is begun ! the means 
are applied! 

Yet ſtill it hath another call upon you, 
and demands your further aid, not only as 
| maſons, 

18 

maſons, as citizens, and as men, but as chriſtians 
alſo; as perſons not ſingly intereſted in the 
concerns of this life, but as contemplating 
that life, extended to futurity, and deſtined 
to an immortality of happineſs or miſery! 
Liberally then throw in your donations to the 
ſupport and enlargement of the inſtitution— 
an inſtitution, whoſe ſphere of good is re- 
markably extenſive : for while other chari- 
ties originate from the miſeries and the miſ- 
fortunes of life, ſtrive, and humanely ſtrive 
to remedy and relieve them ; this, by a well- 
timed care, ſupports, whilſt a good education 
gives them the means of providing future ſub- 
ſiſtence. And if, as all the world allows, it is 
commendable to alleviate thoſe miſeries of po- 
verty and diſtreſs, how much more ſo mult it 
be to ſave that lite, by timely nurſing it ffem 
infancy to manhood ? You therefore, who are 
convinced, from your own happy exiſtence, 
of its comforts and its conſequence, will, in 
juſtice, in gratitude to God, and in fincere 
love to your fellow- creatures, give yourſelves 
the ſublime, the heart- felt ſatisfaction of con- 
tributing as far as you are able, to the ſup- 
port of an inſtitution, calculated to ſave, to 
reſtore, to give that glorious, that ineſtimable 

See bleſſing, 

Ea 

bleſſing, education, which, as obſerved, may 
be the foundation of everlaſting life ! 

Go on then, my worthy brethren, founders, 
directors, and guardians of this uſeful plan 
go on with confidence and comfort in the ſup- 
port, promotion, and enlargement of it! The 
hand of Providence is and will be with you; 
and many orphans, or neglected children, the 
offspring of the unfortunate, or the unthink- 
ing part of the community, who being deſerted 
or left by their parents without money, friends, 
education, or principle, ſaved through your 
means, will have cauſe to bleſs you, we 
truſt, through endleſs ages! Thus by your 
humanity, the helpleſs poor are prevented 
from early aſſociating with the dregs of man- 
kind, and the propenſities to vice, ſo ingrafted 
in Human nature, being under no controul, 
are ſoon inured to a ſeries of vicious habits. 
Nurſed under the tuition of ſuch inſtructors, 
they herd in ruinous manſions, infeſt the ſtreets, 
frequent the highways, and in proportion to 
the detriment they commit upon thoſe who 
unfortunately fall into their hands, are ap- 
plauded by their aſſociates. Thus the peace 
of ſociety is diſturbed by a vagrant banditti, 

who 

39 1 * 

who are the terror of the capital, and the re- | 
proach of the nation. All theſe diſaſters and 
grievances are happily prevented by this inſti- 
tution. In wiſer and better days a civic crown 
would have adorned your brows! Nay, and 
even in theſe, the calm voice of reaſon and 
religion will applaud and honour you. And 
what is far preferable, the calm and quiet 
voice of conſcience will ſpeak peace and ap- 
plauſe to your hearts; ſure and bleſſed anti- 
cipation of that applauſe, which the God of 
mercies, and father of all compaſſion, will 
beſtow upon you, and upon all, who labour 
to ſave the helpleſs poor, to ſave even life, 
and to make that life happy kere, and bleſſed 
hereafter * ! 

Ix 1782, the Lodge of Fortitude, at Maid- 
fone in Kent, came to a refolution (in imitation 
of many foreign lodges) to render ſervice to 
mankind in general, by ſome ſingular tranſac- 
tion, more than the bulk of maſonry in Eng- 
land are accuſtomed to do, viz. The mari- 

* Tranſlated from à diſcourſe, called, Vorleſung 
gehalten in dem beyden vereiningten Lodgen zu 
Dreſclen, den zten May 1773, den Friedrichſtädtſchen 
Armen einrichtungen betriffend. 

time 

of 

time ſituation of Kent, a country from its na- 
ture and ſituation in an eſpecial manner liable 
to accidents by water, and to which, in con- 
ſequence of theſe circumſtances, the Humane 
Society owes its riſe! An inſtitution ſo coin- 
cident with all the fineſt feelings of humanity, 
and fo immediately intereſting to the public 
welfare, by faving the lives of an order of 
men, who in an eminent degree contribute to 
the public weal, in a maritime and commercial 
ſtate like ours; who occupying their buſineſs 
in the great waters, are conſequently more 
liable to accidents upon it, The Lodge of For- 
titude maturely conſidering this, have diſtri- 
buted numbers of hand- bills through the 
county, containing the methods of treatment 
preſcribed by the directors and medical aſſiſ- 
tants; generouſly offer an addition to the 
rewards paid by that ſociety, when life is re- 
ſtored, in unſucceſsful attempts (provided the 
mode of treatment laid down by the ſociety 
has been uſed) to the publicans or other per- 
ſons who receive the bodies readily into their 
houſes; and to the perſon who firſt brings the 
news of an accident to the neareſt medical aſ- 
ſiſtant. In ſhort, the lodge propoſe to purſue 

every method which will enable them to be 
| more 

= 

more uſeful in ſaving the lives of their fellow- 
creatures. 

PermiT me now, my worthy brethren, as 
father of the lodge (being inſtituted by me in 
1779) to addreſs you on ſo laudable and 
praiſe-worthy an undertaking, being the firlt 
attempt in England of a free-maſons lodge ren- 
dering general utility to mankind, What 
pleaſure muſt you feel by contemplating the 
hundreds of caſes that have happened in our 
country alone, ſince the inſtitution of the 
Humane Society in 1774, conſider that they re- 
late to ſuch a number of perſons, who for a 
time were counted amongſt the dead; and 
who owe the prolongation of their days (under 
the favour of that Providence which executes 
its deſigns by the intervention of ſecond 
cauſes) to the means employed to ſave the 
latent remains of life, which in all probabi- 
lity in a few minutes would have been de- 
ſtroyed beyond recovery: conſider that theſe 
perſons had all of them parents and friends 
intereſted in their reſtoration, and ſome of 
them tenderly intereſted : reflect but a mo- 
ment upon the various ſervices they may have 
rendered, and are yet in a ſtate to render unto | 

lociety ; 

L 20 - 

ſociety z upon the opportunities they have er 
Joyed, and ſtill enjoy, of informing and pu- 
rifying their minds, and fecuring eternal feli- 
city: and you will ſhare with me the inen. 
preſſible joy with which ſucceſs may crown 
your well meant endeavours: you will join 
with me in aſcribing praiſe and thankſgiving 
to the great and only Author of every good 
and perfect gift; you will therefore ardently 
wiſh and contribute all in your power, that ſo 
beneficent a deſign may be univerſally en- 
couraged and proſecuted with zeal, 

Look, thou affectionate parent, look upon 
the child, ſource of all thy joys, and dearer to 
thee than even life itſelf ! Imagine that beloved 
one, by fatal chance, ſuffocated in the waters, 
and borne a lifeleſs corpſe to thy melancholy 
home! his lovely eyes, late ſpeaking every 
pleaſure, now cloſed in death ! his late ac- 
tive limbs flaccid and unable to move, and 
every ſign of total deprivation upon him 
Parent, with all thy tenderneſs, thou can'ſt 
not ſay, thou couldſt not defcribe a thou- 
ſandth part of thoſe emotions which would 
ſwell thy heart, ſhouldſt thou behold, 

as by God's blefling ſoon thou mayſt, the 
little 

(. 803 ] 

little ſpark of almoſt-extinguiſhed life begin 
to revive, through the ſkilful efforts of thoſe 
inſtructed by this inſtitution to reſtore and 
to ſave! Parent, thou canſt not deſcribe what 
thy tender foul would feel on hearing the firſt 
ſob, the firſt recovering ſigh of thy beloved 
child, 'on beholding the object of thy deareſt 
care, opening once more his affectionate eyes 
upon thee, caſting his little arms around thy 
neck, and burſting with thee into tears of 
gratitude and joy! Parent, thou canſt not tell 
what deep ſenſations would almoſt burſt thy 
heart on bearing in thy arms the dear reco- 
vered child, and preſenting it to the half - diſ- 
tracted partner of thy care to the mother, 
frantic with deſpair and grief, the ſon, who cwas 
dead and is alive again, was loſt and is found ! 
doubly dear for his imagined death; infinitely 
more valued from his ſuppoſed irreparable loſs. 

Bur where ſh:1l I find words ſufficient to 
paint the anguiſh, or lament the deplorable 
ſituation of the wife, - in one fad moment 
plunged from the height of happineſs into the 
deepeſt woe, herſelf a widow, and her children 
fatherleſs ! For lo! amidſt the honeſt purſuits 
of induſtry and ſupport, the huſband, the 

Ddd father, 

394 J 

father, luckleſs moment! is whelmed beneath 
the devouring waves, and loſt to her and to 
them. Wretched widow! Who now ſhall 
give thee comfort? Who ſhall ſuccour thy de- 
folate orphans, and ſhield both them and thee? 
poor unprotected ones—from all the diffi- 
culties of an 1njurious world! You, my wor- 
thy brethren, have embraced the means, and 
Providence will bleſs the undertaking, 

A worRTHY member of this very reſpec- 
table lodge, (Thomas Shipley, Eſq. of Maid- 
ſtone) whoſe time is entirely ſpent in acts of 
public utility, has found out a cheap ſoup 
that will not diſgrace the tables of the rich, 
the quality being ſo excellent; nevertheleſs, 
ſixpence is ſufficient to make this ſoup for ſix 
people, and ſo in proportion for any number. 
It was univerſally uſed amongſt the ſoldiers 
at Coxheath camp, being calculated for the 
benefit of poor families in times of ſcarcity. 
The author ſpares no pains or expence to make 
it known. 

As a very curious mechanic, he has in- 
0. . 

vented many very uſeful inſtruments for the 

purpoſes of real utility in common life, viz. 

meat 

[ 6395 ] 

An inſtrument whereby the largeſt piece of 
meat can be either boiled or roaſted to the 
very centre, equally the ſame as on the out- 
ſide. Another inſtrument called a fire-feeder, 
by which a ſmall quantity of coals will anſwer 
the purpoſe of a much larger quantity, it even 
burns the aſhes and ſmoke into a vehement 
fire. Allo an inſtrument for weeding gardens 
without ſtooping, by which one hand can do 
as much work as hve or ſix in the uſual way. 

Tuis brother's inventions are numerous, 
and the expence of having them made very 
trifling. In ſhort, the lodge of Fortitude is a 
ichoo] of univerſal utility, and a worthy ex- 
ample to other lodges, 

Tur provincial grand-lodge of Kent has 
met every St. John's day ſince the year 1777, 
in different parts of the county, not only to 
celebrate that feſtival by a ſermon, a proceilion, 
and a diſtribution of money to the poor of 
the pariſh where the ſermon was preached, but 
to ſhew a good example to the world in ge- 
neral, of the rectitude, moralicy, and virtue 
of the ſociety, by Their decent and ſuitable de- 
portment. At theſe meetings the brethren are 

Dd d 2 the 

[ 396 J 

acquainted with the tranſactions and laws of 
the grand-lodge, which are always read and 
explained to them, together with the bye-Jaws 
of the provincial grand-lodge *, and in order 
that the different lodges in that county ſhould 
be well inſtructed in their ſeveral duties as 
maſons, Laws, Rules, and Regulations for the 
good government thereof, are printed every two 
years, and diſtributed amongſt the lodges and 
provincial grand-officers T. This method has 
had fo good an effect, that the Kentiſh Free- 
maſons are not only the moſt experienced, but 
the moſt hoſpitable, humane, and charitable 
(probably) of any in England. 

In the year 1772, the lodges in Saxony, eſ- 
pecially in Dreſden, Leipzig, and Sachenfeld, 
at a time when all kind of proviſions were 
ſo exceeding dear, that the poorer ſort of peo- 
ple could ſcarcely procure any, and a famine 
was apprehended; in thoſe days of calamity 
free-maſons opened a ſubſcription for the relief 

* Nehemiah, ch. 8. 

+ Smith's Laws, Rules, and Regulations for the 

good government of the P. G. L. of Kent, in 42m, 
1731. 

ſix 

( 397 J 

of the poor unfortunate ſufferers, which in 
ſix months time amounted to 2874 rixdollars, 
by which they were enabled to relieve upwards 
of two thouſand poor families, who otherwiſe 

in all probability muſt have periſhed through 
want. 

In imitation of thoſe, moſt of the lodges in 
Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Holland, and Ruſ- 
| fia have, and are continually eſtabliſhing ſe- 
minaries of learning for the education of youth 
of both ſexes ; not only for free-maſons children, 
but for the poor of every denomination, 

Hence, by the liberality of maſons they 
enjoy a kind of foretaſte, and an anticipation 
of the joys above; whilſt they are more and 
more fitting and preparing themſelves by the 
uniform practice of virtue, eſpecially of cha- 
rity and fraternal kindneſs, for the beatific vi- 
ſion, or the enjoyment of the auguſt preſence 
of the ſupreme Grand-maſter of us, and all 
things: where may we all meet to love, praiſe, 
and glorify him for ever. 

t Upwards of 5741. 

Charity 

[ 398 3 

Charity decent, modeſt, eaſy, kind, 

Softens the high, and rears the abjet? mind : 
Knows with juſt reins and gentle hand to guide 
Betwixt vile ſhame and arbitrary pride. 
Not ſoon provek'd, ſhe eaſily forgives, 

And much ſhe ſuffers, as ſhe much believes; 
Soft peace ſhe brings, wherever ſhe arrives; 
She builds our quiet, as ſhe forms our lives; 
Lays the rough paths of peeviſh nature tven, 
Aud opens in each heart a little heaven. 

Each other gift which God on men beſtows, 
His proper bound, and due reſtriction Knows ; 
To one fixt purpoſe dedicates its power, 

And finiſhing its aft, exiſts no more. 

Thus, in obedience to what heaven decrees, 
Knowledge fhall fail, and prophecy ſhall ceaſe - 
But laſting Charity's more ample ſway, 
Nor bound by time, nor ſubjett to decay, 
An happy triumph ſhall for ever live, 
And endleſs good diffuſe, and endleſs praiſe receive, 

NN 

6908 GELLERT, 

Ts 

3 
To heaven's high Arc. ũtect all praiſe, 
All gratitude be given; 

Who deign'd the human foul to raiſe 
By ſecrets ſprung from heaven. 

Solomon's Temple.
